i a . 
eae 


Perce ah yt 


fete 


. 
a Dvamacraugh gta 


ELtpasapeesere 
eect 


ANSP eS te 


Notes on the book 
of 


PROVERBS 


by 
H. A. IRONSIDE 


People in every generation since Solo- 
mon have turned to the book of Proverbs 
for wisdom and refreshment. They have 
found in its plain, wholesome sayings 
wonderful depths of meaning. 


The book of Proverbs with its common- 
sense epigrams might seem to need little 
explanation or comment; but often, as 
every Christian will admit, these practi- 
cal truths have little practical effect in 
our living. This book by Dr. Ironside is, 
as he explains in the foreword, “An at- 
tempt to press home upon the heart and 
eonscience, with a view to the increase 
of everyday Godliness, this distinctively 
practical portion of the Word of God.” 


Using the outline of the book of Proy- 
erbs itself, Dr. Ironside’s commentary is 
divided into 31 chapters. Each proverb 
is printed in poetic form with the com- 
ment following, forming a remarkably 
illuminating verse-by-verse exposition. 
Often the example of a Bible character 
is used to illustrate one of the proverbs. 


You will especially enjoy chapter 30 
which emphasizes the importance God 
places on “little things,” and chapter 31, 
which shows how the Hebrew alphabet 
is used to illustrate one of the proverbs. 
praise of the virtuous woman. 


LoIzeEAux BroTHERS, BisLE TRUTH DeEpor 


Neptune, New Jersey 


$4.00 


100 NVLLSIHHO 3SOf NV 


yuan 30a 


te 
¥ LNs 


William Jessup University — 
| Library 
_ 333 Sunset Blvd. 

Rocklin, Ca 95765 


San Jose, California 9511? 


SAN JOSE CHRISTIAN COLLEGE LIBRAR 
790 S. 12th Street | pe 


SAN JOSE CHRISTIAN COLLEGE LIBRAn | 
790 S. 12th Street 
San Jose, California 9511? 


NOTES ON THE BOOK 
OF 


PROVERBS 


By 
H. A. IRONSIDE 


tai fe 


LOIZEAUX BROTHERS 
Neptune, New Jersey 


SAN JOSE CHRISTIAN COLLEGE LIBRA) 
790 S. 12th Street 
San Jose, California 9514? 


FIRST EDITION, JANUARY 1908 
SEVENTH PRINTING, JANUARY 1964 


PUBLISHED BY LOIZEAUX BROTHERS, Ine. 
A Nonprofit Organization, devoted to the Lord’s Work 
and to the Spread of His Truth 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


TABLE OF CHAPTERS 


Page 
PREFATORY NOTE - - - - 5 
INTRODUCTION Ee OT TP 7 
CHAPTER ONE SEN ER A 13 
. Two se Ee ete 28 
As THREE SUK th eeO hs 35 
cs Four - - - - - 48 
2 FIvE EEE ES IM « 56 
a3 SIx SEES. Tee et 62 
nL SEVEN Sips STE WI 73 
4 EIGHT ~-  - ‘+ + -- PG 
es NINE She AR eee 87 
My TEN Be Dg | a at eo se 93 
sf ELEVEN - - - - 110 
a: TWELVE eee He om LOL 
“e THIRTEEN mit Re, These 143 
ae FOURTEEN - - - - 156 
s FIFTEEN - - -— - 175 
SIXTEEN Peed met LOD 


es SEVENTEEN - - - 206 


CHaPpTreR EIGHTEEN - 


NINETEEN” - 

7 WENTY - 
TWEnNTy -ONE 
TWENTY - Two 
TWENTY - THREE 
TWENTY - Four 
TWENTY - FIvE 
TWENTY - SIx 
TWENTY -SEVEN 
TWENTY - EIGHT 
TWwEnty - NINE 
THIRTY - 


THIRTY-ONE 


Page 
Zao 


241 
259 
280 
298 
317 
330 
344 
361 
377 
394 
414 
433 
466 


PREFATORY NOTE 


| Be the general reader, the book of Proverbs, 

with its common-sense epigrams and sen- 
tentious aphorisms, might seem to be the last por- 
tion of Scripture requiring any attempt at eluci- 
dation. Butit is just because its chapters abound 
in pithy truisms that the marrow is often lost 
sight of by those who have been accustomed to 
hearing or reading them all their lives. 

The present work is an attempt to press home 
upon the heart and conscience, with a view to the 
increase of every-day godliness, this distinctively 
practical portion of the word of God. 

The ‘‘ Authorized” Version is used in the text, 
save where a uniform rendering of certain words 
seemed conducive to clearness, and where some 
other translation better expressed the thought of 
the original. Wherever changes have been made, 
the reader may rest assured competent authorities 
have been consulted, the marginal readings of the 
Englishman’s Hebrew Bible being generally pre- 
ferred, The poetical arrangement has been used, 
as more capable of clearly manifesting the con- 
trasts, as well as the parallelisms, so abundant in 
this great storehouse of practical instruction. 

Throughout, an effort has been made to bring 
to the reader’s attention some Scriptural exam- 
ples of the proverbial statements. This feature 
of the work will, it is sincerely hoped, be a means 
of stimulating the reader to more careful, earnest 
Bible study. 

H. A. IRONSIDE. 


August 1, 1907 


Notes on the Book of Proverbs 


INTRODUCTION 


[PH royal preacher, in the book of Ecclesias- 

tes, after relating so graphically the story 
of his weary search for happiness “under the 
sun,” with its disappointing result, leading to 
the oft-repeated lament, ‘“‘ Vanity of vanities; 
all is vanity and vexation of spirit,’ directs 
those who would escape the devious paths he 
had himself trodden to the consideration of the 
collection of proverbs which he had “sought 
out, and set in order.” The last seven verses of 
Ecclesiastes form a fitting introduction to the 
book which in our Bibles immediately _pre- 
cedes it. 


Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher, all is vanity. 

And, moreover, because the Preacher was wise, he 
still taught the people knowledge. 

Yea, he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in 
order many proverbs. 

The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words: 

And that written was upright; words of truth. 


8 Notes on Proverbs 


The words of the wise are as goads, 

And as nails fastened by the masters of assemblies, 
Having been given from one Shepherd. 

And further, by these, my son be admonished : 

Of making many books there is no end; 

And much study is a weariness of the flesh. 

Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: 


Fear God, and keep His commandments: 
For this is the whole duty of man. 


For God shall being every work into judgment, 
it every secret thing, whether 1t be good or whether 
it be evil. —Ecc. 12: 8-14. 

In these words we have the divine reason for 
the book of Proverbs. God would save all who 
heed what is there recorded from the heart- 
‘breaking experienc experiences es and aimless wanderings of 
the man who was chosen to write them. 

There are two ways of learning the emptiness 
of the world and the true character of sin. One, 
and by far the commonest way, is to tread the 
thorny path each for himself. To do so is to 
taste to the full the bitterness of departure from 
God. The only right way is to learn it all in 
His presence, accepting His word regarding it; 
and thus enabling the obedient disciple to say, 
“Concerning the works of men, by the word of 
Thy lips I have kept me from the paths of the 
destroyer” (Psa. 17: 4). 

The bitter disappointments, the skeptical 
darkness, and the weary heart of Solomon as 


Introduction 9 


a result of his trusting to his own wisdom, so 
strongly delineated in the record of the tempests 
of his soul, need never be the portion of the child 
of God who orders his steps in the truth. 

Human collections of wisdom and instruction 
are, after all, but the thoughts of men like our- 
selves. In the wisdom-literature of the Bible, 
we have, as everywhere else in Scripture, the 
very breathings of the Spirit of God. And this 
is amazing grace: to think that He who spoke 
worlds into being, who wrought out redemp- 
tion when man had fallen, who shall eventually 
bring in a new heaven and a new earth, wherein 
dwelleth righteousness; to think, I repeat, that 
He, the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eter- 
nity, should stoop in grace to give instruction 
for the very details of His creatures’ lives down 
here, is cause for worship and admiration for- 
ever. 

What an importance attaches to all that I do 
if the God who created me and redeemed me 
does not consider it beneath His notice to in- 
struct me concerning my behavior in the fam- 
ily, my place in society, and my methods in 
business. All are under His eye; and ifI act in 
accordance with the book of Proverbs, I shall 
‘behave myself wisely, in a perfect way,” in ev- 
ery relationship of life. 

To some who prate much of heavenly truth 


10 Notes on Proverbs 


while failing to enter into its intensely practical 
side, it may seem a far cry from Pauline flights 
to the commonplaces of Solomon; but to the 
Christian who would not be like Ephraim, “‘a 
cake not turned,’”’ but would hold the balance 
of truth, the precepts and warnings of Proverbs 
will have their place along with the precious 
truths of Ephesians. 

The ‘‘ribbon of blue” on the border of the pi- 
ous Israelite’s garment set forth the heavenly 
character of the believer’s habits. Such an az- 
ure ribbon is the book of Proverbs, when the 
light of the New Testament revelation shines 
upon it, making known the behavior suited to 
the one who is dead, buried and risen with 
Christ. True, these glorious doctrines will not 
be found stated in the Old Testament: they be- 
long to the special unfolding of truth revealed 
through the apostle Paul. But as ‘‘the right- 
eous requirement of the law is fulfilled in us who 
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit,” so 
the soul that most deeply enters into the reality 
of new creation will most appreciate the instruc- 
tion of the great practical book of the Old Tes- 
tament. 

Like all other Scripture, it has been “ written 
for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the 
ages have arrived.” 


Introduction. JJ 


To turn, then, to the structure of the book: it 
did not attain its present fulness till the days 
of Hezekiah; that is, though all equally God- 
breathed, it did not exist in the form of one 
book until that date, as chapter 25: 1 makes 
plain. 

The main divisions would seem to be as fol- 
lows: 

Chapters 1 to 9, inclusive: Wisdom and Folly 
contrasted. 

Chapters 10 to 24: A collection of proverbs 
written by Solomon and set in order by him- 
self. 

Chapters 25 to 29: “Also proverbs of Solo- 
mon, which the men of Hezekiah king of Judah 
copied out.”’ 

Chapter 30: The burden, or oracle, of an oth- 
erwise unknown sage named Agur the son of 
Jakeh. 

Chapter 31: Instruction given to king Lemuel 
by his mother. This name was probably be- 
stowed upon Solomon as a child by Bath-sheba. 
In that case, the description of the virtuous 
woman given by one who had herself, at one 
time, been betrayed from the path of virtue, is 
worthy of the God of all grace. _It is an acros- 


tic_ poem, arranged according to the letters of 
the Hebrew alphabet. 


12 Notes on Proverbs. 


Such is the arrangement of the book we pur- 
pose studying. As a part of “‘all Scripture,” 
we may rest assured we shall find it “ profitable 
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for 
instruction in righteousness,” helping to perfect 
the man of God unto all good works. 


13 


CHAPTER ONE 


“T_T HE first four verses would seem to justify 
the title given long since to this remark- 
able collection of sayings—‘‘ The Young Man’s 


Book.”’ 


The proverbs of Solomon the son of David, king 


of Tsrael : 
2 To know wisdom and instruction ; 


To perceive the sayings of intelligence ; 

3 To receive the instruction of understanding, 
Righteousness, and judgment, and equity ; 

4 To give prudence to ae simple, 
To the young man knowledge and discretion. 


There are ten words used in this brief intro- 
ductory portion, which, inasmuch as most of 
them recur again and again in the course of the 
book, should be well weighed in beginning its 
study. None are mere synonyms used pedantic- 
ally, and therefore idly; but as ‘‘every word of 
God is pure,’’ so these terms throughout are em. 
ployed with admirable precision. 

The “‘ wisdom ”’ of verse 2 is ‘‘skilfulness ’’—the 
ability to use knowledge aright. It occurs 
thirty-seven times in this one book. 

7? . ‘Instruction”’ in the same verse, as also in the 


14 Notes on Proverbs 


one following, is used to translate a Hebrew 
word which occurs twenty-six times in Prov- 
erbs, and is once rendered ‘“‘chasteneth,” and 
once ‘“‘chastening”’ (chaps. 13: 24; 3:11). Itis 
so translated in Job 5:17, and in Isa. 26: 16. 
The meaning is, ‘‘to teach by discipline.” 

2 “Intelligence”? in verse 2, rendered “under- 
staldag ate A. V., has practically the mean- 
ing which in English we attach to the word 
“discernment.” 

an. Understanding” in the 3d verse (‘‘ wisdom”’ 
in the A. V.) is a word seldom found in Scrip- 
ture, and has the force of ‘“‘to bereave,” or “‘to 
miscarry.”” The ‘sayings of bereavement” 
might not exactly express the thought; but it 
conveys the idea of learning through the un- 
happy experiences of others, or of oneself. 

S . “Righteousness” of verse 3 (‘‘justice,’’ A. V.) 
refers to conduct, and might be rendered “right 
ee 

‘ft _ “Tudgment ’’ is equivalent to ‘‘decisions.” It 
= , the ability. ability to “try the things that differ.” 

7. “Equity” refers to principles, rather than 
conduct. It is uprightness, or n moral integrity. 
% . “ Prudence”’ dieu betiyys A.V.) in verse 4 is 
in the original ‘‘craftiness.”” As used here it 
conveys the ability to detect that in others. 
“Wise as serpents’? answers to it in the New 

Testament. 


Chapter One 15 


G . “Knowledge” is “information of a sound 
character.” 

[ 0, “Discretion” is “thoughtfulness,” a charac- 
teristic in which the young are generally lack- 
ing, but which becomes manifest in one who 
feeds upoa the word of God. 

In these ten words we have the description of © 
of a well-rounded character, and it is important 
to remember that the study and practice of 
God’s truth alone can produce it. To the young 
man this part of Holy Scripture especially ap- 
peals therefore, giving him needed furnishing for 
his path through the world. 


5 A wise man will hear, and will increase learning ; 
And a man of intelligence shall attain unto wise 
counsels : 


6 To understand a proverb, and the interpretation: 
The words of the wise, and their dark sayings: 


It is only the self-confident blusterer who con- 
giders himself superior to instruction. Readi- 


ness to learn is ever characteristie of the truly 
wise. That which is worthy of our contempla- 
tion is not always simply expressed; for God 
would have the senses exercised to discern both 
good and evil. It must be evident to any tyro 
that were it God’s desire but to impart infor- 
mation to His creatures concerning the way to 
heaven and Christian responsibility, He could 


16 Notes on Proverbs 


have done so in a much simpler way than that 
through which He has chosen to give us His 
truth. But this would have done away with 
that exercise which is both for our blessing and 
for His glory. Hence the exhortation, “Study 
to show thyself approved unto God, a work- 
man that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly 
dividing the word of truth” (2 Tim. 2:15). 
“Dark sayings’? become luminous when the 
man of God studies them having eyes anointed 
with the eye-salve of the Spirit of truth. 


(7)The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowl- 
edge: 


But fools despise wisdom and instruction. 


Thus on the threshold of this treasure-house of 
wisdom we are presented with one of the sharp 
contrasts with which the book abounds. There 
is no true knowledge apart from the fear of the 
Lord. All that pretends to the name, and ig- 
nores Him, is but folly. It is well for “the 
young man”’ to bear this in mind when meeting 
the many pseudo-scientific theories now abroad. 
Philosophers and savants have cast to the 
winds the fear of the Lord, and ruled Him out 
of His own creation. ‘‘ Professing themselves 
to be wise, they became fools.’”” Hence the 
abounding absurdities that are readily accepted 
by the ignorant as science and true philosophy. 


Chapter One 17 


Science means exact knowledge. To call by 
such a name the wild guesses of evolutionists 
and infidel biologists is but word-prostitution. 
Hypotheses, however original and erudite, are 
not science. There never has been, and never 
will be, a conflict between the Bible and science. 
The conflict comes in between the Bible and un- 
believers’ vain theorizing; as, also, between re- 
ligious notions unsupported by Scripture and 
scientific facts. 


8 My son, hear the instruction of thy father, 
And forsake not the law of thy mother: 
9 For they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy 
ead, 


And chains about thy neck. 


Throughout the Bible obedience to parents is 
coupled with subjection to God. Those expos- 
itors who see in the ten commandments four 
precepts Godward and six manward would 
seem, therefore, to have missed the mind of the 
Spirit. The view would appear unquestionably 
correct which gives five ordinances to each ta- 
ble. ‘Honor thy father and thy mother: that 
thy days may be long upon the land which the 
Lord thy God giveth thee’’ is the last of the 
first series. It is the recognition of Divine au- 
thority and the subject place belonging to the 
creature. 


18 Notes on Proverbs 


Nor does responsibility as to this become less 
in the case of such as ‘‘are not under law, but 
under grace.” In Eph.6: 1 we read, ‘‘ Children, 

obeys your, pareriterinxthedverd >) cteni ees 
right.” And immediately attention is drawn 
to the preeminent character of this precept in 
the law. It is ‘‘the first commandment with 
promise.” Col. 3: 20 is similar: ‘‘ Children, 
obey your parents in all things: for this is well 
_pleasing unto the Lord.” 

Believing children should be patterns of filial 
obedience, that thus they may adorn the doc- 
trine of Christ. Young people professing allegi- 
ance to the Lord, who are impudent and insub- 
ject to those over them in the home are a sad 
reproach to the name of Him whom they are 
supposed to serve. To hear a father’s instruc- 
tion and to cleave to a mother’s law; these are 
the choice ornaments that beautify the young 
saint. 

Disobedience to parents the apostle classes 
among the evidences of the last-day apostasy 
(2 Tim.3:1-5). It is the crying sin of the pres- 
ent lawless times, and presages the awful hour 
of doom soon to strike. The Scriptural ‘“ Chil- 
dren, obey your parents” has almost univer- 
sally been superseded by ‘Parents, obey your 
children.” It is a sowing of the wind. The 
whirlwind will yet have to be reaped. The hu- 


Chapter One 19 


man will disdains being brooked in any way. 
Terrible will be the outcome when, having cast 
off all parental authority, men will throw aside 
every vestige of allegiance to Divine authority 
likewise, and will rush upon the thick bosses of 
the Almighty, as portrayed in the solemn chap- 
ters of the closing book of the Bible. 


(10)My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not. 
If they say, Come with us, let us lay wait for blood, 
Let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause : 
12 Let us swallow them up alive as sheol; 
And whole, as those those that go down to the pit- 
13 We shall find all precious substance, 
We shall fill our houses with spoil : 
14 Cast in thy lot among us; > 
Let us all have one purse: 
My son, walk not thou in the way with them; 
Refrain thy foot from their path: 
or their feet run to evil, 
— And make haste to shed blood. 
17 Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any 
se ird. 
18 And they lay wait for their own blood ; 
They lurk privily for their own lives. 
19 So are the ways of every one that is greedy of 


gain ; 

Which taketh away the life of the owners thereof. 
__Two things the young man is solemnly warn- 
ed against here: evil companionships and ‘‘cov-_ 
etousness, which is idolatry.” 

The line of demarcation between the children 


20 Notes on Proverbs 


of God and the children of wrath is sharply 
drawn in the inspired Word. ‘‘Come out from 
among them, and be ye separate,’’ is the com- 
mand of the Lord. If sinners entice, appealing 
to the lust of the human heart, turn away from 
them. Their entreaties are only defiling. Noth- 
ing pleases them better than to have the young 
man cast in his lot with them, all having one 
purse; but it is an ungodly fellowship, in which 
the believer can have no part. ‘O my soul, 
come not thou into their secret; unto their as- 
sembly, mine honor, be not thou united”’ (Gen. 
49 : 6). 

The only safe course is to part company at 
once. ‘Walk not thou in the way with them.” 
Clean-cut separation from the world in all its 
forms is the path of blessing. Many a young 
Christian makes shipwreck because of dallying 
with the world on the plea, perchance, of im- 
proving it. Such a course is folly, and a great 
mistake. ‘Refrain thy foot from their path: 
for their feet run to evil;”’ and if you venture 
first to “walk” in their way, you will soon be 
“running ”’ with them. 

Nor can you plead ignorance in the day of 
your spiritual and moral breakdown; for God’s 
word had cast a light on your way, disclosing 
the net spread now in plain sight, and warning 
you against the treacherous wiles of the devil. 


Chapter One 25 


In contrast to the entreaty of the wicked, the 
next section gives the voice of Wisdom, plead- 
ing that she be heard and heeded. 


20 Wisdom crieth without ; 
She uttereth her voice in the streets : 
21 She crieth in the chief place of concourse, 
In the openings of the gates: uth, 4: 
= satan she uttereth her sayings, 
ow long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity ? 


And [ye] scorners delight in your scorning, 


And [ye] fools hate knowledge ? 
23 Turn you at my reproof : 
$% Behold, I will pour out m 0 x 


\ y” “Twill make known my words unto you. 


Throughout this first division, including chap- 


ters 1 to 9, Wisdom is personified. She is ever 


seeking to turn the steps of the young man from 
the door of folly and ignorance to the temple of 
knowledge and blessing. Here she is presented 
as one crying in public places, eagerly seeking 
to attract the attention of the passers-by. In 
the marts of commerce, at the gates of justice, 
in the centres of population, among the idlers on 
the streets ; everywhere she pleads and entreats, 
beseeching the simple to obey her voice. She is 
met by, not always positive refusal, but, what 
is far more common and equally as dangerous: 
procrastination. ‘Until when,” she cries, ‘“‘ye 
simple ones, will ye cleave to your folly?” But 
there is no response. 


22 Notes on Proverbs 


Others definitely refuse to listen to her voice. 
Scornfully rejecting her testimony, they delight 
in their fancied independence of mind, and mani- 
fest their true character by their hatred of 
knowledge. 

To all such she addresses a warning of com- 
ing calamity, when it will be too late to heed 
her gracious invitation. 


24 Because | have called, and ye refused ; 
I have stretched out my hand, and no man at- 
tended ; 
25 But ye have set at naught all my counsel, 
And would none of my reproof : 
26 I also will laugh at your calamity, 
I will mock when your fear cometh ; 
27 When your fear cometh as a tempest, 
And your destruction cometh as a whirlwind ; 
When distress and anguish cometh upon you. 
28 Then shall they call upon me, but I will not an- 


swer ; 
They shall seek me early, but they shall not find 
me: 
29 For that they hated knowledge, 
And did not choose the fear of Jehovah: 
30 They would none of my counsel: 
They despised all my reproof. 
31 Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own 


way, 
And be filled with their own devices. 

32 For the turning away of the simple shall slay them, 
And the prosperity of fools shall destroy them. 


Chapter One 23 


33 But whoso harkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, 
And shall be quiet from fear of evil.* 


It must be evident to all how like this is to 
the gospel call, with its attendant warning of 
coming judgment if despised. On the face of it, 
it is the Old Testament way of saying, “Be: not 


deceived ; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a 


man soweth, that shall he also reap. For he 
that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap 
corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit 
shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting” (Gal. 6: 
7,8). The principle abides whether applied to 
sinners or saints. But surely in Wisdom’s cry 
the “‘ ministry of reconciliation’’ may be readily 
recognized. It is | 


“God beseeching, man refusing 
To be made forever glad.” 


* These words must ever possess a tender and pre- 
cious interest for the writer. It was through having 
learned them as a lad in the Sunday-school that ] 
was, when fourteen years of age, truly awakened by 
the Spirit of God to see the awful result of rejecting 
the call of the gospel. Unable to shake off the vivid 
impression of God’s righteous wrath if I longer refused 
His grace, I fell down before Him confessing myself 
a lost, undone sinner, and found in John 3: 16 the 
solace my conscience needed: ‘For God so loved the 
world, that He gave His only begotten Son, that who- 
soever believeth in Him should not perish, but have 
everlasting life.” It was a night to be remembered 
forever! 


24 Notes on Proverbs 


And what must the inevitable result be? 

Ah, dear, unsaved reader, if into the hands of 
such a one these pages fall, remember there is 
not only a world in which you can say ‘‘No” 
to God, the God of all grace; there is also a 
world in which He will say ‘‘No” to you, if you 
meet Him as the God of judgment. There is 
not only a scene in which Wisdom’s cry can be 
despised ; there is also a scene where your cry 
shall be despised if you enter it a rejecter of the 
message of grace. There is not only a place 
where you, in your folly and carelessness of 
heart, can laugh at the entreaties of Wisdom; a 
day comes on apace when Wisdom shall laugh 
at your calamity and mock your bitter an- 
guish. 

Mark well; it is not God as such who will 
ever laugh at the grief of one of His creatures, 
however abandoned and iniquitous: it is Wis- 
dom who speaks. That Wisdom which you 
now despise will then mock your hopeless 
wails. 

What can be worse for a lost soul than to 
have to remember, in the abyss of woe, gospel 
messages once indifferently listened to, the 
Word of God once treated as a subject unfit for 
serious consideration; and then to have to cry 
in despair, ‘Jesus died, yet I’m in hell! He 
gave Himself for sinners. He provided a way 


Chapter One 25 


of salvation for me, but, like the fool that I was, 
I spurned His grace till grace was withdrawn, 
the door of mercy was closed, and now I am to 
be on the wrong side of that closed door for- 
ever!’? Thus will Wisdom laugh at your ca- 
lamity, if you go out into eternity in your sin. 
Nor can any blame God that it has fared so ill 
with them. All shall own that it was because 
they hated knowledge and chose not Jehovah’s 
fear. Turning away with the simple, they are 
slain; prospering in their folly, they are de- 
stroyed. So shall it be with all who despise 
Wisdom and ignore her entreaties. 
But all who harken shall dwell safely, forever 
quiet niet from fear of evil. ‘Many sorrows shall 
be to the wicked: but he that trusteth i in the 
Lord, mercy shi shall compass him about” (Psa. 
32:10). 

Nor must we think only of the warning to the 
unconverted. Even to those who are secure for 
eternity an apostle had to write, ‘‘See then that 
ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, 
redeeming the time, because the days are evil. 
Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding 
what the will of the Lord is” (Eph. 5: 15, 17). 
It is true of saints as of sinners that we reap as 
we sow. The believer cannot take his own way 
with impunity. If he turns away from the 
house of Wisdom, to pursue the path of folly, he 


= 


Is Notes em Phowerts 
Water wirh be hed Gaeit deme The 
Giasceemest ef tte Lend mast imamadir BE 


Tes umpertaat 22 rember Giec Se treme 


axe it Cire Jews” (Rem. S:2h Bee that 
‘Sey memest, ins ~easbiite as & Ged hax 
ing te Ge with ins Paster bem: ami Stan San 
Tes, “untheat cemet ef pees jigedh an 
cording te every man’s werk” (2 Pee E27 

ESs new remessheit @eags Gear 2S 2ew 
Saf dead indeei umte Sa, bet alike ance Gas 
Threeg® Jess Chess eer Ler? (Rem, G22) 
E be Sas @ de GS and allews hime te be 
cumme mmdifitrest ap the will ef Gag be mest 
Smew tte ed of Eis Gieopiine. 

“Tae Lert Srewee? tow 22 Geiver Ste gedie 
eat of Rempeaies, ami 2 meres Ge anise 
(2 Pee 2:2) Eikin SS wer tat te Ge 
tam & dealt with fie bs Sake The ummse 
wil be dealt with it thar Gar efwrati: thee: 
ewem Bere sum ngs suiltene it ther ease an 
wel, 


a 


—, 


——s 


Chapter One. 27 


Let us remember, then, that “the time is 
come that judgment must begin at the house of 


God: and if it first begin at us, what shall the 
end be of them that know not the gospel of 
God? And if the righteous scarcely be saved, 
where shall the ungodly and the sinner ap- 
pear?” (1 Pet. 4:17, 18). 


28 


CHAPTER TWO 


[* the opening verses the secret that so many 
have sought in vain is made known: how 
to find the knowledge of God. After all, there is 
very little mystery about it. The Christian 
need not be scholarly and profound to under- 
stand the Scripture of truth. It is condition of 
soul, rather than a well-furnished mind, that is 
required. God has given His word. He ex- 
horts us to search it in dependence upon His 
Holy Spirit, who is now come to guide us into 
all truth. 
1 My son, if thou wilt receive my sayings, 
And lay up my commandments with thee; 
2 So that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, 
And apply thy heart to understanding ; 
3 Yea, if thou criest after knowledge; 
And liftest up thy voice for understanding ; 
4 If thou seekest her as silver, 
And searchest for her as for hid treasures; 


5 Then shalt thou understand the fear of Jehovah, 
And find the knowledge of God. 


It is no careless reading of the Scriptures that 


aiemenpee 


than a cursory examination of them. The say- 


Chapter Two 29 


ings of God must be received into the heart. 
And there they are to be “‘laid up,’ or “hid- 
den.” The ear must be inclined to wisdom; the 
heart applied to understanding; while the 
mouth cries after knowledge, and the voice is 


lifted wu | up for. that which will give spiritual i in- 
‘telligence. _ The whole being i is thus devoted to 
the search for the truth. As men dig deep for 
silver and make diligent effort to locate hidden 
treasure, so the earnest seeker must dig into the 
word of God, and be not content with surface 
findings. When thus esteeming the words of 
His mouth as more than one’s necessary food, 
the result is certain: ‘‘Then shalt thou under- 
stand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowl- 
edge of God.” 

It is to be feared that even among those who 
hold and value much precious truth, diligent 
Bible study is on the wane. It is well to re- 
member that reading books about the Bible is a 
very different thing to searching the Word for 
oneself. Notes and expositions may be helpful. 
If the writer did not so believe, he would not 
now be putting pen to paper. But if these 
works of uninspired men be permitted to take 
the place of the sure Word of the living God, the 
result can only be baneful in the extreme. The 
result of such one-sided study will be that men 
will draw their thoughts from one another, in 


30 Notes on Proverbs 


place of from the great reservoir of truth itself. 
This will result in a dry intellectuality which is 
the very opposite of a fresh, vigorous spiritu- 
lality. 
6 For Jehovah giveth wisdom ; 
Out of His mouth cometh knowledge and under- 
standing. 
7 He layeth up sound wisdom for the nghteous ; 
He is a buckler to them that walk uprightly. 
8 He keepeth the paths of judgment, 
And preserveth the way of His saints. 
9 Then shalt thou understand righteousness, and judg- 
ment, 
And equity; yea, every good path. 

Intimately connected, ever, must be the search 
for truth and the walking in it when received. 
Where there is a single eye and a true heart, 
characterized by earnest desire to live in the 
power of the truth revealed to the soul, He 
whose truth it is will be a buckler, or defence, 
for His own, keeping them safely as they tread 
the paths of judgment; thus preserving their 
way. Itis by so walking that one shall daily 
increase in the knowledge of righteousness, 
judgment, and equity; yea, every good path. 
Very different is this from mere mental adhesion 
to a certain theological system, or a particular 
school of biblical lore. It is not so much “hold- 


ing the truth,” as being held by that truth. Be- 


tween the two states there is a vast difference. 


Chapter T-wo- 31 


“Vain talkers and deceivers’”? abound, who 
speak “great swelling words,’ and boast of 
their knowledge of prophetic and dispensa- 
tional teaching, or of ecclesiastical truth, whose 
unguarded ways and careless walk bring re- 
proach upon the solemn and precious things 
they profess to glory in. They seem to chew 
the cud, but fail to manifest the divided hoof. 
Such a course persisted in sears the conscience 
and hardens the heart, till the most searching 
ministry fails to make any impression upon 
them. 

The proper attitude for one who really holds 
the truth, and its blessed results, are set forth 
in the following verses: 


10 When wisdom entereth into thy heart, 
And knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul; 
11 Discretion shall preserve thee, 
Understanding shall keep thee: 
12 To deliver thee from the way of the evil man, 
From the man that speaketh froward things; 
13 Who leave the paths of uprightness, 
To walk in the ways of darkness; 
14 Who rejoice to do evil, 
And delight in the frowardness of the evil one; 
15 Whose ways are crooked, 
And perverse in their paths. 


Wisdom and knowledge entering into the 
heart and becoming pleasant to the soul, give 
that discretion which preserves from evil; and 


32 Notes on Proverbs. 


the understanding, or discernment that keeps 
from false ways. Two enemies are seen beset- 
ting the feet of the young man. Here it is the 
evilman; in the next few verses, the strange 
woman. The evil man is the man who walks 
in the pride of his heart and in independence of 
God. This, to the young, seems very attrac- 
tive, appealing to the natural mind. But to 
follow the evil man is to “leave the paths of 
righteousness’? and to ‘‘walk in the ways of 
darkness.”’ The truth of God possessing the 
reins will deliver from this, keeping the recip- 
ient of it from the self-willed ways of the evil 
one and pointing out his crooked and perverse 
paths. But this is not the only enemy seeking 
to beguile the simple. The word of God is also 
given 
16 To deliver thee from the strange woman, 

Even from the stranger which flattereth with her 

sayl ing S;3 


17 Which ‘iredketi the guide of her youth, 
And forgetteth the covenant of her God. 


Again and again we catch glimpses of this 
strange woman flitting in and out in the pages 
of our book. Who is she? Does she speak of 
anything more than impurity and uncleanness? 
Unquestionably the primary meaning is clear 
on the face of the passages that concern her. 
She is the ensnaring enemy of morality and vir- 


Chapter Two 38 


tue, who to-day, as in Solomon’s time, pursues 
her nefarious traffic in the bodies and souls of 
the young and unwary. Forsaking the guide 
of her youth, forgetting the covenant of her 
God, she gives herself up to impure pleasures 
and soul-destroying lusts. 


18 For her house inclineth unto death, 
And her paths unto the dead. 


19 None that go unto her return again 
Neither attain they to the paths of life. 

So true is this that those who have been en- 
snared and fallen into ways of uncleanness go 
through life under a blight from which they 
never recover. The memory of unholy revels, 
of filthy pollutions, will abide and prove a source 
of shame and grief to the end. The more sin- 
cere the repentance, the more truly will this be 
the case. 

But having considered all this, is there not 
another meaning also to be taken from these 
many warnings concerning the strange woman? 
In a secondary sense it seems evident that as in 
the evil man we have set forth independency of 
God—rationalism run riot; so in the strange 
woman we see false religion as eventually to be 
headed up in Babylor the Great, the mother of 
harlots and abominations that be upon the face 
of the earth. How devious are her ways! How 
subtle and deceptive her solicitations! And 

3 


34 Notes on Proverbs 


how truly can it be said that “ her house inclin- 
eth unto death, and her paths unto the dead!” 

Qnly the word of God can preserve the soul 
from her corruptions and keep the feet in the 
paths of life. — 


20 That thou mayest walk in the ways of the good, 
And keep the paths of the righteous. 

21 For the upright shall dwell in the land, 
And the perfect shall remain in it. 

22 But the lawless shall be cut off from the earth, 
And the transgressors shall be rooted out of it. 


It is not the heavenly but the earthly hope 
that here comes before us. The book of Pro- 
verbs, like all the rest of the Old Testament 
speaks of earthly things. The heavenly things 
were as yet unrevealed. So it is the portion of 
the godly Israelite that is here presented to us. 
He shall dwell in the land in the day when the 
lawless Gentiles and the transgressors among 
the chosen people shall be rooted out of it. 
Ours is a far better portion. We have an inher- 
itance reserved for us in heaven, whither Christ 
the Forerunner has for us entered! 

How much greater is our responsibility to see 
that our steps are ordered according to the 
Word of the living God! 


35 


CHAPTER THREE 


1 My son, forget not my law; 
But let thy heart keep my commandments: 


2 For length of days, and long life whuke crmmpbte 


And peace, shall they add to thee. 


ERE weare still on Jewish ground, but the 
exhortation is of all importance to us as 

well as to those who see in long life an evidence 
of the special blessing of the Lord. For there is 
that in the exhortation which should appeal to 
all. “‘Let thy heart keep my commandments,” 
is a much-needed word. This is far more than 
submission to duty; it is loving devotion to 
the will of God. “Thy word,”’ said the Psalmist, 
‘have I hid in my heart that I might not sin 
against Thee’ (Psa. 119: 11). And of Ezra it 
is recorded that he ‘‘ prepared his heart to seek 
the law of the Lord, and to do it, and to teach 
in Israel statutes and judgments.” (Ez. 7: 10). 
This preparation of the heart in man which is 
so truly from the Lord is what is sadly lack- 
ing among many whose outward ways testify 
to the slight hold the truth they profess really 
has upon them. Love is the spring of true ser- 
vice to the Lord. “If ye love Me keep My com- 


Life 


36 Notes on Proverbs 


mandments” (Jno. 14: 15) are His own 
words; and He goes even deeper when He says, 
“Tf a man love Me he will keep My sayings” 
(Jno. 14: 23). This is the heart delighting to 
run in His ways if His mind be but made 
known, whether there be positive command or 
not. 


3 Let not lovingkindness and truth forsake thee: 
Bind them about thy neck; 
Write them upon the table of thy heart: 

4 So shalt thou find favor and understanding 
In the sight of God and man. 


‘The law was given by Moses, but grace and 
truth came by Jesus Christ’ (Jno. 1:17). The 
law was truth, but it was truth without grace. 
This latter having come by Jesus Christ the 
believer is exhorted to be speaking the truth in 
love” (Eph. 4: 15) “Speaking the truth” is 
one word in the original, and is a participle. 
Mr. J. N. Darby suggested coining a word to 
express it; “‘truthing.”” It is not merely speak- 
mg the truth. Itis being characterized by the 
truth; but all must bein love. A hard and fast 
intolerant spirit that makes the truth like a 
series of legal enactments, and is censorious 
toward those who see not eye to eye with one- 
self; this is far removed from the Spirit of truth. 
Lovingkindness will commend the truth, when 
an acrimonious, judging spirit, will deter the 


Chapter Three 37 


timid from its reception. They are to be bound 
about the neck, in this way displayed in the 
sight of man; and written upon the heart, thus 
finding favor with God. on ae 
5 Trust in Jehovah with all thy heart; ear bgt) 2) 
And lean not unto thine own understanding. Ler4 ¢s Ws 
6 In all thy ways acknowledge Him, Meio Law 
And He shall direct thy paths. 
Solemn the admonition, and precious the 
assurance here for all who would be guided in 
the way of peace. ‘He that trusteth in His 
own heart is a fool”’ (chap. 28: 26), but happy 
is the man whose trust is in the Lord. Confi- 
dence in self is like leaning on a broken reed. 
Weir ies once weaeeadenn ee 
detail of life that thus our sanctification might 
be by the Truth, and it is therefore inexcusable 
to lean upon our own poor finite intelligence. 
If He be acknowledged in all our ways we 
shall not want guidance, for He is faithful who 
has promised to direct our paths. ‘If thine eye 
be single, thy whole body shall be full of light” 
(Matt. 6: 22). 
7 Be not wise in thine own eyes: ° 
Fear Jehovah, and depart from evil. 
8 It shall be healing to thy sinew 
And moistening to thy bones. 
To be wise in our own eyes is the very opposite 
to leaning not unto our own understanding. 


38 Notes on Proverbs 


Where the Lord is truly feared, evil will be 
hated and departed from. ‘Let every one that 
nameth the name of the Lord depart from in- 
iquity” (2 Tim. 2:19). So shall strength and 
freshness characterize the soul. To go on with 
God while walking in that which His word con- 
demns is impossible. The path of blessing is 
the path of obedience. If He has spoken, the 
subject soul will not stay to question but obey 
implicitly. 
9 Honor Jehovah with thy substance, 
And with the firstfruits of all thine increase. 
10 So shall thy barns be filled with plenty, 


And thy presses shall burst out with new wine. 


Having learned to depart from evil, the Lord 
becomes the object of the heart. It is not giv- 
ing Him the frst place merely. It is a poor 
thing when Christ has but the first place in the 
soul, He must have all if one is to go on with 
Him in holy joy and unhindered communion. 
The Israelite brought the first fruits as a token 
that He acknowledged Jehovah’s sole owner- 
ship of the land of Canaan. He had said, ‘‘ The 
land shall not be sold forever; the land is Mine”’ 
(Lev. 25: 23). The giving of the firstfruits was 
the recognition of this. So, as the believer hon- 
ors Him with his substance, he gladly owns 
that all is the Lord’s to be used as He directs. 

But so great is His goodness that when He is 


Chapter Three 39 


thus honored, He pledges Himself to see that 
there is no lack in barn nor press for the one 
who owns himself His steward. Many a saint 
goes on in comparative poverty because of his 
indifference to the principle here laid down. All 
comes from God; yet He graciously receives 
from those He has redeemed and delights to 
ever be Himself the greatest giver. None shall 
find Him in their debt. 
11 My son, despise not the chastening of Jehovah; 
Neither be weary of His correction: 
12 For whom the Lord loveth He correcteth; 

Even as a father the son in whom he delighteth. 

These words form the text for the apostle’s 
exhortation on the Lord’s discipline, in Heb- 
rews xii. He has expounded them by the inspir- 
ation of the Holy Ghost; so to that precious 
portion of the word we would turn. We need 
not trust our own thoughts, however much we 
seek to be subject to Scripture, when we have 
the mind of the Spirit fully revealed. 

After having traced the path of faith down 
through the pages of the Old Testament, the 
apostle bids us lay aside every weight, every- 
thing that would hinder progress; thus enabling 
us to distance sin which ever would beset our 
steps, while we run with patience the race set 
beforeus. Christ Himself is put before the soulas 
faith’s Author and Perfecter. God would have 


40 Notes on Proverbs 


the heart occupied with Him who, Hisown path 
of shame and suffering over, is now “‘set down 
on the right hand of God.”’ To‘‘consider Him” 
is the antidote for weariness and faintness. 

He goes on to show that trial and difficulty 
must not be accounted a strange thing. All 
are but a part of our discipline. And thereupon 
he cites the passage we have now come to in 
the book of Proverbs. The difference of word- 
ing results from his quoting from the Septua- 
gint, the Greek version generally in use at that 
time. 

‘My son, despise not thou the chastening of 
the Lord, 
Nor faint when thou art rebuked of Him. 


For whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth, 
And scourgeth every son whom He receiveth.”’ 


In the book of Joba similar word is found, 
credited to Eliphaz the Temanite, “ Behold, 
happy is the man whom God correcteth: there- 
fore despise not thou the chastening of the 
Almighty” (Job. 5:17). 

It was no new truth that the Lord exer- 
cised discipline among His saints. In fact, it 
is because they are His own that He does cha- 
sten. This word has not necessarily the sense 
of “punish,” though, unquestionably, chasten- 
ing is often directly retributive. But the pri- 
mary meaning is discipline. God is a God of 


Chapter Three AJ 


order. His family must be under His discipline. 
Therefore the apostle says, “If ye endure cha- 
stening, God dealeth with you as with sons; 
for what son is he whom the father chasteneth 
not?” Itis no evidence that the heart of God 
is not towards me that I am left to suffer afflic- 
tion. Allis but part of that discipline which an 
all-wise Father sees to be necessary. In fact, af 
Iam not the subject of this disciplinary train- 
ing, lam not one of His at all! ‘‘Butif ye be 
without chastisement, whereof all (that is, all 
sons) are partakers, then are ye bastards, and 
not sons.” 

Nor is the Lord’s discipline of the selfish or 
uncertain nature that ours often is, in regard to 
our own households. ‘‘We have had fathers of 
our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them 
reverence: shall we not much rather be in sub- 
jection to the Father of spirits, and live? For 
they verily for a few days chastened us after 
their own pleasure (or, as seemed good to 
them); but He for our profit, that we might be 
partakers of His holiness.’”? Not always have 
earthly parents the direct good of their children 
in view when they discipline them. How often 
we may be moved more by the disturbance of 
our personal comfort than by the sense of the 
child’s need of correction! In such a case we 
chasten after our own pleasure. Our God and 


42 Notes on Proverbs 


Father never so deals with us. He has our 
profit ever before Him. But though this is so, 
we are certain to prove that “‘no chastening for 
the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous: 
nevertheless, afterward it yieldeth the peaceable 
fruit of righteousness unto them which are exer- 
cised thereby’ (Heb. 12: 7-11). Thus we have 
briefly outlined the Scripture teaching as to the 
Lord’s discipline. 

May grace be given to reader and writer nei- 
ther to faint beneath the chastening as though 
some strange thing happened to us, nor yet to 
despise it, thus ignoring the Lord’s hand in it 
all; but rather to be exercised thereby, that it 
may indeed yield in us and in our ways the 
peaceable fruits of righteousness, and so we 
shall be partakers of His holiness. Thus shall 
we enter into the blessedness of the following 
verses: 

13 Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, 
And the man that getteth understanding. 
14 For the merchandise of it is better than the mer- 
chandise of silver, 
And the gain thereof than fine gold. 
15 She is more precious than rubies: 
And all the things thou canst desire are not to be 
compared unto her. 
16 Length of days is in her nght hand; 
And in her left hand riches and honor. 
17 Her ways are ways of pleasantness, 
And all her paths are peace. 


Chapter Three 43 


18 She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her; 
And happy is every one that retaineth her. 

Men will brave untold dangers and exhaust 
human ingenuity in their search for precious 
metals and sparkling jewels; but in following 
Wisdom’s ways treasures are to be found which 
all the costly gems of earth could never equal in 
value. Length of days, riches and honor she 
offers to those who find her; and coupled with 
these, she gives what earthly stores often de- 
tract from: peace and quietness of soul. The 
ways of Wisdom are the ways that be in Christ; 
the ways into which the word of God would 
guide the feet of the subject soul. Such ways 
are indeed ‘‘ ways of pleasantness, and all her 
paths are peace.” To thus find the true wis- 
dom, is to feed on the tree of life. No happiness 
such as men in the flesh enjoy, is to be compared 
with this. 

It is the same wisdom by which Jehovah 
founded the earth that He offers to us, to be 
our guide on our pilgrim pathway. Of this the 
next section reminds us. 


19 Jehovah by wisdom hath founded the earth; 

By understanding hath He established the heavens. 
20 By His knowledge the depths are broken up, 

And the skies drop down the dew. 


Surely it is grace immeasureable that thus 
‘eads the One who upholds all things by the 


44, Notes on Proverbs 


word of His power, to concern Himself about 
the steps of His creatures. The word of God 
is but another expression of the wisdom that 
spoke worlds into existence, and it is “ written 
for our learning, that we through patience and 
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.” 
21 My son, let them not depart from thine eyes: 

Keep sound wisdom and discretion; 
22 So shall they be life unto thy soul, 

And grace to thy neck. 
23 Then shalt thou walk in thy way safely, 

And thy foot shall not stumble. 
24 When thou liest down, thou shalt not be afraid: 

Yea, thou shalt lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet. 

Some one has said, ‘It is not enough that one 

hold the truth, if the truth hold not him.” To 
so take hold of what God has revealed as to 
have it control the heart and life, is what is 
continually insisted on in this most practical 
of all books. Thus, to ‘“‘keep sound wisdom 
and discretion,” gives one to lay hold on what 
is really life, and ornaments the neck with 
grace. The foot, too, will be kept from stum- 
bling, and the disciple will be guided in the way 
of truth. Rest and refreshment become likewise 
the portion of all who esteem the word of God 
above all the thoughts of men. 
25 Be not afraid of sudden fear, 


Neither of the desolation of the lawless, when it 
cometh. 


Chapter Three 45 


26 For Jehovah shall be thy confidence, 
And shall keep thy foot from being taken. 

It is the obedient soul who can lay hold of the 
precious promises of Scripture. The wilful and 
lawless have no such title. If walking in subjec- 
tion to the truth, neither sudden fear nor the 
desolation of the wicked need affright, for Jeho- 
vah, whose truth it is, will be the confidence of 
all who walk uprightly, and will keep the feet 
of His saints. 

God thus being given his place, man will have 
what belongs to him. Of this the next portion 
treats. 

27 Withhold not good from its owners, 
When it is in the power of thy hand to do it. 
28 Say not unto thy neighbor, 
‘Go, and come again, and to morrow I will give,’ 


When thou hast it by thee. 


To owe no man aught but love is a command 
that is binding on every child of God. To with- 
hold another’s due when able to pay, evidences 
the fact that covetousness is in the heart and 
is being permitted to gain ascendency over 
the life. Often the poor are made to suffer 
by thoughtlessness in this respect. Payments 
looked forward to for the supplying of the nec- 
essaries of life are needlessly deferred by those 
more blessed with earth’s goods than they; 
and real suffering results, often leading to bit- 


46 Notes on Proverbs 


terness and hatred. Such conduct on the par 
of a Christian is in every way to be deplored 
Money owing to another is not mine. To use 
it for my own purposes is dishonesty. God’s 
eye sees every such action, and He has said, “‘ Be 
sure your sin will find you out!” 


29 Devise not evil against thy neighbor, 
Seeing he dwelleth confidently by thee. 


The abuse of trust is, in the sight of the Holy 
and the True an abominable thing. Confidence 
misplaced has ruined many. How dreadful the 
testimony if the one who has abused that confi- 
dence be a professor of Christianity! It is 
things like these that turn the ignorant to skep- 
ticism, and ruin the influence of those who 
might, if faithful, be used in blessing to many. 


30 Strive not with a man without cause, 


If he hath done thee no harm. 


And even if he have harmed me, One greater 
than Solomon has said, “‘I say unto you that 
ye resist not evil.”” Under law, it was a sin to 
strive with another without adequate ground; 
but under grace, as God has dealt with me, so 
am I to deal with my debtors. 
31 Envy thou not the violent man, 
And chose none of his ways. 


32 For the froward is abomination to Jehovah; 
But His secret is with the righteous. 


Chapter Three 47 


33 The curse of Jehovah is in the house of the lawless; 
But He blesseth the habitation of the just. 

34 Surely He scorneth the scorners; 
But He giveth grace unto the lowly. 

35 The wise shall inherit glory; 
But shame shall be the promotion of fools. 

Asaph was envious at the foolish, when he 
saw the prosperity of the wicked, until he went 
into the sanctuary of the Lord, where he was 
given to understand their end. Then his heart 
was grieved, and he owned his folly (Psa. 73). 
Seeking to satisfy their souls with the evanes- 
cent things of earth, they remain in igno- 
rance of the counsels of Jehovah, which are 
known only to the righteous. Their end will be 
anything but enviable, for the curse of the Lord 
is in their houses, and He scorns their haughty 
pretensions. His blessing abides upon the hab- 
itation of the just, and ‘‘He giveth grace unto 
the lowly.”’ Those who are content to thus 
abase themselves and walk inthe steps of Him 
who was ever the humble, dependent One down 
here will be despised by those who are wise in 
their own conceit; but they shall inherit true 
glory at last, when the false glitter of worldly 
fame has faded away forever, and “shame shall 
be the promotion of fools.” 


48 


CHAPTER FOUR 


1 Hear, ye children, the instruction of a father, 
And attend to know understanding. 
2 For I give you good doctrine; 
Forsake ye not my law. 
3 For I was my father’s son, 
Tender and only [beloved] in the sight of my mother. 
4 He taught me also, and said unto me, 
Let thy heart retain my words: 
Keep my commandments and live. 


OLOMON’S own early training is here touch- 
ingly alluded to. His mother’s only son, 
tenderly loved and cared for; the object of his 
father’s heart, he had been solicitously instruct- 
ed in the law of the Lord, and had profited 
thereby. 

It is only necessary to read the unhappy his- 
tory of his half-brother Adonijah, whose father 
had never displeased him in saying, ‘‘ Why hast 
thou done so?”’ to realize how much Solomon 
was indebted to his mother’s counsel and his 
father’s instruction. The value of parental dis- 
cipline cannot be overestimated. To be brought 
up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord 
is a blessing beyond our ability to appreciate. 


Chapter Four 49 


Strange that David could so differently treat 
two sons as in the cases instanced above! 

But it is not the responsibility of the parents 
that is here dwelt on. It is that of the children 
rather, who are thus nurtured and cared for. 
He who, whatever his aberrations, knew so 
well the value of wise and godly instruction, 
says: 

5 Get wisdom ; get understanding : 
Forget it not; neither decline from the sayings of 
my mouth. 
6 Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee: 
Love her, and she shall keep thee. 
7 Wisdom is the principal thing ; 
Therefore get wisdom: 
And with all thy getting get medeandiae? 


It is not knowledge merely which the soul 
needs, but the wisdom and intelligence to use 
knowledge aright. This is the principal thing, 
and this he impresses on the young. Wisdom 
will preserve from folly, and if truly loved will 
keep the feet of her disciple. 

8 Exalt her, and she shall promote thee: 

She shall bring thee to honor, when thou dost em- 
brace her. 
9 She shall give to thy head a chaplet of grace: 
A diadem of beauty shall she deliver to thee. 

In the previous chapter it is stated that 

“shame shall be the promotion of fools.”” Wis- 


dom brings to honor and true promotion. Even 
4 


50 Notes on Proverbs. 


in the world is this true, however much iniquity 
may abound; but among the children of God 
how valuable is a man of wisdom! Mere 
knowledge may puff up and render the pos- 
sessor thereof contemptible; but the word of 
wisdom is always in season; and though oft- 
times rejected, is at least appreciated: the con- 
science assenting to what the unspiritual man 
may be determined upon refusing. 
(10) Hear, O my son, and receive my sayings; 

‘And the years of thy life shall be many. 
11 I have taught thee in the way of wisdom; 

I have led thee in nght paths. 
12 When thou goest, thy steps shall not be straitened ; 

And when thou runnest, thou shalt not stumble. 


The book of Ecclesiastes, as already noted in 
our introductory chapter, portrays the wrong 
paths into which the royal writer had wan- 
dered when, for the time being, he forsook that 
Word which had been the guide of his youth, 
and gave himself up to commune with his own 
heart and to seek out a way of pleasure for 
himself. It is not necessary to follow him in 
paths of folly to learn their end. The book now 
before us marks out right paths, the way of 
wisdom. All who walk therein shall find their 
steps unstraitened, and shall be enabled to run 
without stumbling. How needful, then, to heed 
the exhortation that follows] 


Chapter Four 5J 


13 Take fast hold of instruction; let her not go: 
Keep her; for she is thy life. 

14 Enter not into the path of the lawless, 
And go not in the way of evil men. 

15 Avoid it, pass not by it, 
Turn from it, and pass away. 

16 For they sleep not, except they have done evil; 
And their sleep is taken away unless they cause 

some to fall. 

17 For they eat the bread of lawlessness, 
And dnnk the wine of violence. 

The principle here enunciated is of prime im- 
portance, and cannot be too often insisted on. 
The child of God is called to separation from all 
evil-doers. He who knoweth what is in the 
darkness has described their unholy ways. We 
need not mistake them. Called to holiness, we 
are to avoid their path. To trifle and tempo- 
rize with them is most deleterious, and will 
greatly hinder soul-progress. The true pilot 
may not know every rock or reef, but his wis- 
dom consists in taking the safe channel: so the 
Christian need not make himself aware of all 
the evils of the day. He is to simply take the 
safe path described in the verse that follows: 
18 But the path of the just is as a shining light, 

That shineth more and more unto the perfect day. 


19 The way of the lawless is as darkness: 
They know not at what they stumble. 


Marked is the difference thus presented. The 


52 Notes on Proverbs 


path of the righteous, leading onward and up- 
ward to that city where the glory of God doth 
lighten it, and the Lamb is the lamp thereof, 
shines brighter and brighter as the uncreated 
glory from that city of bliss illumines it with 
splendor. Who would not cry, “‘ Let me die the 
death of the righteous; let my last end be like 
his’? A far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory is at the end of that path. 

Alas! how great the contrast when we turn 
to the way of the lawless. As their road nears 
the pit of woe, darkness begins to envelop it; 
the awful Stygian smoke of the abyss obscuring 
even the light of nature and revelation alike: 
so that men stumble blindly on, knowing not 
what causes them to fall. The end we well 
know—eternal banishment from the presence of 
God. 

With two such paths to choose between, the 
admonition that immediately follows may well 
be borne in upon the soul. 

20 My son, attend unto my words; 
Incline thine ear unto my sayings. 

21 Let them not depart from thine eyes; 
Keep them in the midst of thy heart. 


22 For they are life unto those that find them, 
And healing to all their flesh. 


The Spirit of Christ in the psalmist could say, 
“Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might 


Chapter Four 53 


not sin against Thee” (Psa. 119: 2). It is the 
heart controlled by Scripture that assures a 
walk in the truth. God desires truth in the in- 
ward parts: the very reins of our being should 
be the seat of wisdom. When this is the case, 
the words of knowledge indeed become life and 
health to the one who keeps them. 

The word that follows but emphasizes this 
all-important principle. 
(23)Keep thy heart above all keeping : 


For out of it are the issues of life. 


Here is displayed a scientific knowledge and 


accuracy far beyond the times in which Solo- 
mon wrote. The great discovery of Harvey, 
‘the circulation of the blood, which revolution- 
ized medical thought, is here calmly taken for 
granted, and used to set forth, or illustrate, a 
spiritual truth. Just as the heart is the centre 
of the physical system, whence flow the issues 
of life, so, in a moral and spiritual sense, the 
heart, used as a synonym for the soul, is that 
which must be jealously guarded, that thence 
may go forth that which is for the upbuilding 
of the child of God. 


24 Put away from thee a froward mouth, 
And perverse lips put far from thee. 


As it is out of the heart’s abundance that the 
mouth speaks, mouth and heart are here inti- 


54 Notes on Proverbs. 


mately connected. A froward mouth and per- 
verse lips bespeak one who is not in subjection 
to God. Where His Word has its place in the 
soul, the lips manifest it. 
25 Let thine eyes look night on, 

And let thine eyelids look straight before thee. 
26 Ponder the path of thy feet, 

And let all thy ways be established. 
27 Turn not to the nght hand nor to the left: 

Remove thy foot from evil. 


It is not the mouth only that shows the state 
of the heart. The feet likewise will walk accord- 


ing to the condition of the soul. Forgetting 
the things behind, we are exhorted to press on 
to the prize of the calling of God on high. The 
eye is to be fixed on the goal, looking straight 
before. For us, this is Christ. As the plowman 
cuts a straight furrow when the eye is on a dis- 
tant point directly before him, so the Chris- 
tian’s path will be that of the just, when the 
eye of the heart is fixed on the Lord Jesus, now 
ascended to glory. But this involves likewise 
earnest concern about one’s ways, that all may 
be established in accordance with the truth. 
Evil is to be judged and departed from, the foot 
turning neither to the right hand nor the left. 
The mind of God once known is to be faithfully 
acted upon, irrespective of self-interest or the 
thoughts of others who discern it not. 


Chapter Four a) 


To walk with God necessarily means to be 
misjudged and misunderstood by unspiritual 
persons who are ignorant of the power of God 
and the value of His truth. But if one has His 
approbation, there need be no consulting with 
flesh and blood, but implicit obedience to what 
He has said in His Word. 


56 


CHAPTER FIVE 
HE warning of Chapter Two against the 


strange woman is in this portion reverted 
to, and additional instruction given. It is a 
subject of deep solemnity if this unholy siren be 
seen to picture false religion, with its snares and 
seductions; while, of course, looked at in its 
simple, primary meaning, it is of great impor- 
tance. If any are entrapped, it is not for lack 


of warning, but for wilful neglect gf instruction, 


nw 


Cand 


| My son, attend unto{ my wisdom.) one ad: 


And bow thine ear to mine understanding ; 


2 That thou mayest regard discretion, { { th. 


And thatlthy lips)may keep knowledge. 
Throughout the book, the need of more than 
casual attention to the words of wisdom is en- 
forced. To hear with no thought of heeding, is 
not what is contemplated; but the bowing of 
the ear to understanding, in order that discre- 
tion may be regarded and knowledge kept. 
That servant which knew his Lord’s will and 
did it not was to be beaten with many stripes. 
When God stoops to make known His will, it 
should be esteemed, not merely as duty, but as 
privilege, to obey. 


Cin trun 


{be 


Chapter Five 57 


3 For the lips of a strange woman drop as a honeycomb, 
And her mouth is smoother than oil: 

4 But her end is bitter as worm-wood, 
Sharp as a two-edged sword. 

5 Her feet go down to death; 


Her steps take hold on(sheol,) - whe. ioerE 
ath of : 


6 Lest thou ponder the p life, 
Her ways are moveable that thou canst not know them. 
Fair and plausible are the words of the stran- 
ger-temptress; dark and terrible the ending of 
association with her. She plies her awful avo- 
cation to-day as of old, and thousands are her 
victims. Like the harlot-church of the closing 
book in our Bibles, she seduces and deceives, 
turning the heart away from the simplicity of 
the paths of truth, and leading to death and 
sheol. Many are her devices to delude the un- 
wary; movable her ways, that their evil direc- 
tion may not be known. Nothing is more at- 
tractive to the refuser of Wisdom’s words than 
the specious pleas of this deceptive system. The 
only safety is in cleaving to the words of God; 
hence the admonition in the verses that follow. 
7 Hear me now therefore, O ye sons, 
And depart not from the sayings of my moaeaE Ae 
8 Remove thy way far from her, 
And come not nigh the entrance of her house : 
9(Lest}thou give thine honor unto others, 
And thy years unto the cruel ones: ak mem 


10 Lest strangers he filled with thy wealth; 
And thy labors be in the house of a stranger; 


58 Notes on Proverbs ete 
@ 


© eh 2 
ia 11 And thou mourn at the last, 
SY When thy flesh and thy body are consumed, 
‘ 12 And say, How have I hated instruction, 
“ye And my heart despised reproof ; 
Pu 13 And have not harkened to the voice of my teachers, 
Nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed me! 
, 14 I was almost in all evil (et Sete G4 S- 1+ poo 
In the midst of the congregation and assembly. fr trpheor 
To learn by painful experience, if the word of 
God is not bowed to, is a bitter and solemn 
thing. God is not mocked; what is sown must 
be reaped. The unsteady hand, the confused 
brain, the bleared eye, premature age and weak- 
ened powers; with days and nights of folly to 
look back on with regret that can never be 
banished from the memory: such are a few of 
the results of failing to heed the advice of wis- 
dom in the natural world. And in the spiritual 
we have what answer to all these—inability to 
try the things that differ, weakened spiritual 
susceptibilities, unsteadiness of behavior, loss 
in time and loss at the judgment seat of Christ; 
such are some ofthe sad effects of refusing the 
path of separation from apostate religion in 
this day of Christ’s rejection. 
Throughout this collection of Proverbs, the 
strange woman is looked upon as an intruder 
from the outside, not a daughter of Israel who 
has been betrayed from the path of virtue. The 
law declared there was to be no harlot among 


Chapter Five 59 


the woman of the chosen people. It was from 
the surrounding countries the temptresses en- 
tered to seduce the young men of the separated 


nation. Hence the ‘‘strange woman”: not 
‘“‘strange”’ in the sense of peculiar; but the 
stranger-woman who plied her meretricious 


arts to deceive those who should be holy to the 
Lord. But so low had become the moral state 


of Israel, that even the daughters of the people 
of God had fallen into the degradation of the 
heathen, as is evident from the words already 
noticed in chap. 2: 17. Though called a 
“stranger” or ‘‘foreigner,”’ she had ‘forsaken 
the guide of her youth, and forgotten the cove- 
nant of her God.’’ Hence she is viewed as an 
outsider, having no place in the congregation 
of the Lord. 

Sanctified wedded love, in contrast to the 
loose and godless ways of what has been pre- 
sented, we now have brought before us. 


15 Drink waters out of thine own cistern, | 
And running waters out of thine own well. 


16 Let thy fountains be Sau abroad i. ae 
And nivers of waters in thy streets. : 

17 Let them be only thine own, Chisdrar~ 
And not strangers’ with thee. 

18 Let thy fountain be blessed ; 
And rejoice with the wife of thy youth. 

19 Let her be as the loving hind and pleasant roe; 
Let her breasts satisfy thee at all times; 


60 Notes on Proverbs 


And be thou ravished always with her love. 
20 And why wilt thou, my son, be ravished with a 
strange woman, 
And embrace the bosom of a stranger? 


For us, marriage represents the mystic union 
between Christ and the Church. Every Chris- 


tian home should be a little picture of the rela- 
tionship of our glorified Head with the members 
of His body. How holy then is that earthly 
association which speaks of such exalted heav- 
enly mysteries. ‘Marriage is honorable in all, 
and the bed undefiled: but fornicators and 
adulterers God will judge” (Heb. 13:4). How 
much precious teaching in the New Testament, 
particularly the epistolary portion of it, flows 
from this truth. Husbands and wives are urged 
to dwell together according to knowledge that 
their prayers be not hindered. (See 1 Peter 3: 
1-7). What a test is this! When husband 
and wife are so living before each other that 
with joy and confidence they can kneel and 
pray together, the home will be what God de- 
sires; but where the ways and words of either 
or both hinder such seasons of communion with 


each other and the Lord, there is something 
radically wrong. 


21 For the ways of man are before the eyes of Jehovah, 
And He pondereth all his goings. 


ie fact is just what the soul needs to seer 


Bree qrrraclf Ae tga ae Ne 
km | 


Chapter Five 6) 


in mind, to realize the solemnity of being in this 
world for God. His eyes are on all our ways. 
Nothing escapes that holy gaze. All is naked 
and open before Him with whom we have to 
do. He weighs and ponders every thought and 


word and action. Nothing is too insignificant 
for His notice; nothing too great for His atten- 
tion. At the judgment-seat of Christ He will 


make manifest His estimate of it all. In that 

day how many of us would give worlds, did we 

possess them, if we had only been more truly 

faithful in all our ways in this scene! 

22 His own iniquities shall take the lawless himself, i078 
And he shall be holden with the cords of his sins.-“*”" =‘ 

23 He shall die without instruction; era oe 
And in the greatness of his folly he shall go astray. 


Certain retribution will follow the lawless. 
The very sins in which he now delights are the 
links he is forging to make the chain that shall 
bind him forever. Having refused instruction 
in life, he shall die without it; left to go astray 
in the folly his soul loved. Dying in his sins, he 
goes out into the darkness, where the light he 
refused in time shall never shine upon him 
again | 


62 


CHAPTER SIX 


E-YEN the unregenerate, did they but order 
their lives and their business methods in 
accordance with the instruction here given, 
would be saved many a failure and loss. Sure- 
tyship has been the downfall of many who, 
avoiding it, might have been comfortable and 
prosperous. Here the one so-ensnared is urged 
to deliver himself if possible, ere the penalty has 
to be paid. 
n, if thou be surety for thy friend, 
he (ipa ya hast sebed Mand ua) a stranger, 
2 Thou art snared with the sayings of thy mouth, 
Thou art taken with the sayings of thy mouth. 
3 Do this now, my son, and deliver thyself, 
When thou art come into the hand of thy friend; 
Go, humble thyself, and make sure thy friend. 
4 Give not sleep to thine eyes, 
Nor slumber to thine eyelids. 


5 Deliver thyself as a roe from the hand of the hunter, 
And as a bird from the hand of the fowler. 


Unlikely as it may seem on the face of it, pride 
is generally the incentive to suretyship. A desire 
to be thought well of, to be accounted in easy 
circumstances, has led many a man to “strike 


Chapter Six 63 


hands,” or go on another’s bond, who was 
quite unable to assume so serious a responsibil- 
ity and yet discharge his obligations to those 
properly dependent on him. With others it is 
an easy-going disposition that leads one to 
thoughtless pledges, the performance of which 
would be ruinous. In either case, if thus en- 
trapped, it is well if the command here given is 
heeded; and humbling though it may seem to 
be, the confession made that one has under- 
taken more than righteousness and foresight 
would advise. Far better a little temporary 
embarrassment and misunderstanding, even ill- 
will, than to find out later that others have to 
suffer for the maintenance of a foolish and sin- 
ful pride. 

Prudence and forethought (not to be con- 
founded with the anxiety of the morrow con- 
demned by the Lord in His discourse on the 
mount) are commendable virtues, to teach 
which even so feeble a creature as the ant may 
well serve. 


@Go to the ant, thou sluggard; 


Consider her ways, and be wise: 

(7) Which having no guide, overseer, or ruler, 
{8)Provideth her meat in the summer. 
d_gathereth her food in thé harvest. 


A lesson for eternity as well as for time is 
taught by the ant, which however we reserve 


64 Notes on Proverbs 


until we reach the thirtieth chapter, where it is 
again brought before us as one of four wise 
things, each of which teach spiritual truths. 
The temporal lesson is of grave importance. 
Improvidence is not faith; itis the grossest pre- 
sumption to act the part of the sluggard and 
then to expect divine provision in the hour of 
need. In this as in all else sowing follows reap- 
ing. Diligence and carefulness are commanded 
and commended by the Lord, and both honor 
Him; while slothfulness on the part of one of 
His is a reproach upon Hisname. To arouse 
such to a sense of duty, is the object of the 
verses that follow. In the spiritual, as in the 
natural things, “‘the diligent soul shall be made 
fat” (chap. 13:6.) 

It has become the fashion for certain wise- 
acres to sneer at ‘‘Solomon’s grain-eating ant”’ 
who stores her food in the harvest for future 
use. Solomon is supposed to have mistaken the 
eggs of the ant for grains. But it is now fully 
demonstrated that he was wiser than his critics. 

In Palestine there is a species of ant which is not 
carnivorous, but feeds on grain and does indeed 
store its food in harvest time as he declared. 
Scripture here, as always, is correct and exact. 

How much more fitting it would be if, in 
weighing the words of the Omniscient, poor 
short-sighted man would own his limitations 


Chapter Six 65 


and at least take it for granted the Bible is 
right until proven otherwise! 
9 How long wilt thou sleep, O sluggard > 

When wilt thou arise out of thy sleep? 

10 Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, 
A little folding of the hands to sleep: 

11 So shall thy poverty come as one that traveleth, 
And thy want as a man with a shield. 


Sleeping in time of labor is out of place ina 
scene where man has been commanded to eat 
his bread by the sweat of his face. No one has 
a right to count on God to undertake for him 
in temporal matters, who is not himself charac- 
terized by energy and wakefulness. Poverty 
and want follow slothfulness; as in a spiritual 
sense, endless woe must follow the one who 
sleeps on in this the day of grace, refusing to be 
awakened. ‘A little more sleep, a little more 
slumber,’’ says Judson, ‘“‘and thou shalt wake 
in hell to sleep no more forever !”’ 


12 A man of Belial, a wicked man, 
Walketh with a froward mouth. 
1? He winketh with his eyes, 
He speaketh with his feet, 
He teacheth with his fingers ; 
14 Perverseness is in his heart, 
He deviseth mischief continually; he soweth (or, 
casteth forth) discord. 
15 Therefore shall his calamity come suddenly ; 
Suddenly shall he be broken without remedy. 
5 


66 Notes on Proverbs 


The one who is careless as to his own affairs, 
is likely to interfere altogether too much with 
those of others. Having nought to occupy his 
time, he becomes an idling busybody, every part 
of his being devoted to folly. His mouth is 
froward; his eyes belie the words his lips 
give utterance to; feet and hands are used to 
call attention to what were better left unno- 
ticed; for in his heart is frowardness and mis- 
chievous devices. He becomes thus a sower of 
discord, scattering evil words as one might 
scatter thistledown, to bring forth a harvest 
of sorrow that can never be fully destroyed. 
There were such among the Thessalonian saints, 
against whom the apostle warns, and bids the 
godly keep no company with them that they 
may be ashamed. 

16 These six things doth Jehovah hate; 
Yea, seven are an abomination of His soul: 
17 Haughty eyes, a lying tongue, 
And hands that shed innocent blood ; 
18 A heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, 
Feet that be swift in running to mischief, 
13 A false witness that speaketh lies, 
_ And he that soweth discord among brethren. 
In no uncertain terms Jehovah’s judgment of 
: the evil speaker is set forth. Seven things are 
ae ‘\ abominable, six he hates in addition to the one 
/ ( already noticed. It is put in as though the 
worst of them all. 


dude gid otune wf) awe wrt KW: 
Prov 30: is, 18, 21,29 5 Qo $:19 
Ono [: 7” 4 H¥3,23 


Chapter Six 67 
0) A_proud look He ever detested. Haughty 


eyes belong not to the one who has been a 
learner at His feet who is ‘‘meek and lowly in 
heart.”” The twelfth Song of Degrees gives the 
utterance of one who has thus been discipled 
into His school. ‘Lord, my heart is not 
haughty, nor mine eyes lofty; neither do I 
exercise myself in great matters, or in things 
too high for me” (Psa. 131: 1). This is the 
state that is well-pleasing to Him who has said, 
“To this man will I look, even to him that is 
poor (or, lowly) and of a contrite spirit, and 
trembleth at My word” (Isa. 66: 2). 

A lying tongue! How opposed to Him who 
is Himself the Truth, and who desireth truth in 
the inward parts. False words bespeak a de- 
ceitful heart. 

With these evidences of the activity of a cor- 

/rupt nature He joins ‘‘ hands that shed innocent 
blood.” For he is of one ilk who would with 
his tongue destroy the good name of another 
with him who would with wicked hands take 
his brother’s life. 

Cc) “A heart that deviseth wicked imaginations” 
is the spring of all the rest. Out of the heart 
proceed all unholy words and doings. So ‘‘feet 

G)that be swift in running to mischief” are at 


once mentioned. T hey follow where the heart 


ty has already gone. The last two are often found 


6 


68 Notes on Proverbs 


y . 
together. “A false witness that speaketh lies 


and he that soweth discord among brethren.” 


Good and pleasant it is in the eyes of our God 
when brethren dwell together in unity. The 
talebearer, who, by spreading abroad evil in- 
sinuations and accusations, mars that happy 
unity, is abhorred of the Lord. 

If we would, any of us, having all a common 
nature, be kept from these hateful ways, there 
must be an earnest cleaving to God and His 
Word that we may thus be sanctified by the 
truth. 

20 My son, keep thy father’s commandment, 
And forsake not the law of thy mother: 

21 Bind them continually upon thy heart, 
And tie them about thy neck. 

Subjection to parental discipline is subjection 
to God. If the parents are themselves godly 
and seek to bring up those committed to their 
care in “the nurture and admonition of the 
Lord,” they are laying a solid foundation upon 
which all the superstructure of the after-life can 
safely rest. 


22 When thou goest, it shall lead thee; 
When thou liest down, it shall keep thee; 


Practical and precious will the instruction of 


wisdom thus become. Abroad or at home, in 


activity or in the place of repose, the word shall 
be alike sweet and shall keep from stumbling. 


Chapter Six 69 


And when thou awakest, it shall be thy meditation. 
23 For the commandment is a lamp; 
And the law is light; 
And reproofs of instruction are the way of life: 
24 To keep thee from the evil woman, 
From the flattery of the tongue of the strange woman. 
Once more is the young man’s particular 
snare referred to. The purifying influence of 
the word of God will, above all else, be his pro- 
tection from the flattering lips of the false 
stranger who would allure him from the path of 
truth and virtue to falsity and ruin. Earnestly 
is he warned to beware of her fascinations. 
25 Lust not after her beauty in thy heart; 
Neither let her take thee with her eyelids. 
26 For by means of a harlot a man is brought to a 
piece of bread: 
And the adulteress will hunt for the precious life. 


Again are we reminded that it is the heart 


which must be kept or guarded if the feet would 
be preserved from forbidden paths. Sorrow and 


poverty —spiritual and natural—will be the 
dread result if there is any tampering with un- 
cleanness. With her fascinating glances the 
adulteress will endeavor toentrap. Unhappy 
then the one whose heart is not garrisoned by 
the sanctifying truth of God! To trifle here is 
to be overcome, as the next verses strongly urge. 


27 Can a man take fire into his bosom, 
And his clothes not be burned ? 


70 Notes on Proverbs 


28 Can one go upon hot coals, 
And his feet not be scorched ? 

29 So he that goeth in to his neighbor's wife; 
Whosoever toucheth her shall not be innocent.” 

How many a dreadful blot upon an otherwise 
upright and honored life has resulted from 
what at first was a thoughtless familiarity, 
which led on step by step to the awful over- 
throw of uprightness and virtue, culminating in 
life-long sorrow. No other sin, unless it be the 
taking of human life which is often its fearful 
result, leaves so dreadful a stain behind, as wit- 
ness David’s case. 

30 Men do not despise a thief, 
If he steal to satisfy his soul when he is hungry; 
31 But if he be found, he shall restore sevenfold; 
He shall give all the substance of his house. 
32 But whoso committeth adultery with a woman lack- 
eth understanding : 
He that doeth it destroyeth his own soul. 
33 A wound and dishonor shall he get; 
And his reproach shall not be wiped away. 
34 For jealousy is the rage of a man; 
Therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance. 
35 He will not regard any ransom; 
Neither will he rest content though thou givest 
many gifts. 

How faithful is the God who thus condescends 
to point out in language severely plain and 
clear the awful consequences of the sin that 
brought the flood, and yet shall bring the fire! 


Chapter Six 71 


Other wrongs men may forgive and forget. 
This one is never forgotten. A thief stealing to 
satisfy his hunger excites no one’s abhorrence. 
Yet, if arrested, restitution is demanded. 
Jehovah’s law said he should restore it in the 
principal and add the fifth part. Human law, 
according to verse 31, demands even up to 
seven-fold,and may indeed involve the culprit in 
utter ruin, causing him to forfeit “all the sub- 
stance of his house.’’ But at least it is possi- 
ble to make amends, though it take all one 
has. But there is a sin for which amends can 
never be made, either to the wronged husband, 
or the partner of the folly. Repentance toward 
God will not efface the reproach. The marks of 
the wound and the dishonor will remain to 
haunt one through the years. The rage of the 
rightly jealous man who has been so terribly 
incensed will not be appeased by gifts however 
great, or protestations however earnest and 
sincere. 

He who, with warnings such as these before 
him, deliberately goes on trifling with sin is 
without excuse. The only safe course is to gird 
up the loins of the mind; to bring every sinful, 
wandering thought into subjection; that thus 
the truth of God may control the heart and 
reins. Only thus shall one be enabled to “‘flee 
also youthful lusts,’’ which are elsewhere de- 


72 Notes on Proverbs 


scribed as ‘‘fleshly lusts that war against the 


soul.” In this way Joseph stood in circum- 


_stances far more tempting than those in which 
David fell. ‘Shall I do this great evil, and sin 
against God?’’ This was what preserved him. 


This alone will preserve any similarly tempted 
one. 


73 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


Oe alone can estimate aright the depravity 
of the human heart. Knowing its per- 

verseness and the need of continued warning, 
another entire chapter is devoted to the subject 
which we have already been considering. That 
there may be no stone unturned to save the 
youth from the strange woman’s snare, her 
ways and behavior are graphically delineated. 
If he turn after her now, he does so with his 
eyes fully opened. 
1 My son, keep my words, 

And lay up my commandments with thee. 
2 Keep my commandments and live; 

And my law as the apple of thine eye. 


3 Bind them upon thy fingers, 
Write them upon the table of thy heart. 


It is this constant dwelling upon the word of 


God that preserves from sin, Notice how upon 
both hand and heart that Word is to be bound 


and written. This involves far more than cur- 
sory reading of the Scriptures. Itis the making 
it one’s own, the daily feeding upon it, that pre- 
serves the soul. 


4 Say unto Wisdom, thou art my sister; 
And call Understanding thy kinswoman: 


74 Notes on Proverbs 


5 That they may keep thee from the strange woman, 
From the stranger that flattereth with her sayings. 


Satan has no more powerful weapon for the 
overthrow of the young than flattery. Wisdom 
and understanding are needed to preserve from 
this snare. They will teach me to mistrust and 
to judge myself, and thus to estimate aright the 
lying words of any who would seek to effect my 
ruin by means of the vanity of my heart. 

The balance of the chapter requires little com- 
ment. With the perspicuity of an eye-witness, 
a scene is brought before us which has been du- 
plicated not only by the thousands, but millions 
of times, and is as true to-day as in the days of 
Solomon. The young man may well ponder it 


with care, and thus be warned of the dangers 
besetting one who, trusting in his own heart, 


departs from the living God and forsakes the 
counsel of his mother and the guide of his 
_youth. 
6 For at the window of my house 
I looked through my lattice, 
7 And | beheld among the simple ones, 
I discerned among the youths, a young man void of 
understanding, 
8 Passing through the street near her corner; 
And he went the way to her house, 
9 In the twilight, in the evening of the day, 
In the black and dark night: 
10 And, behold, there met him a woman 


Chapter Seven 75 


With the attire of a harlot, and subtil of heart. 
11 (She is loud and stubbom; 
Her feet abide not in her house: 
12 Now is she without, now in the streets, 
And lieth in wait at every corner.) 
13 So she caught him, and kissed him, 
And with an impudent face said unto him, 
14 Ihave peace sacrifices with me; 
This day have I paid my vows. 
15 Therefore came I forth to meet thee, 
Diligently to seek thy face, and I have found thee. 
16 I have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry, 
With carved works, with fine linen of Egypt. 
171 have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and 
cinnamon. 
18 Come, let us take our fill of loves until the morning: 
Let us solace ourselves with loves. 
19 For the goodman is not in his house, 
He is gone a long journey: 
20 He hath taken a bag of money with him, 
And will come to his house at the day of the new 
moon. 


The reverent student of this solemn portion 
of the word of God will see at once how apt an 


illustration this religious-appearing woman is 
of the false, apostate church. Loud and stub- 


born, moveable too have been her ways, so 
that she might ensnare those who otherwise 
would never seek association with her. The 


vision of Rev. 17 may well be studied in connec- 
tion with this chapter. 


Returning to the narrative, we learn the dire- 


76 Notes on Proverbs 


ful fate of the youth who foolishly took the way 
to her house and weakly followed where she led. 
21 With her much fair speech she caused him to yield, 
With the flattering of her lips she forced him. 
22 He goeth after her straightway, 
As an ox goeth to the slaughter, 
Or as a fool to the correction of the stocks; 
23 Till a dart strike through his liver; 
As a bird hasteth to the snare, 
And knoweth not that it is for his life. 


Such is the end of the path of sin and folly. 


Death, with shame unutterable, must be the sad 


result of refusing instruction and listening to 
the words of the flatterer. 


24 Harken unto me now therefore, O ye sons, 
And attend to the sayings of my mouth. 
25 Let not thy heart decline to her ways, 
Go not astray in her paths. 
26 For she hath cast down many wounded; 
Yea, many strong men have been slain by her. 
27 Her house is the way to sheol, (Grave) 
Going down to the inner chambers of death. 

What enduring patience that thus continues 
to instruct all who have an ear to hear and who 
desire to have an understanding heart! In such 
a passage as this, as in all Scripture, we hear 
the very voice of God, and find every word prof- 
itable. Happy the youth who keeps the instruc- 
tion here given, that he may be preserved from 
the bitterness of remorse which so many have 
proven | 


77 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


HAT relief it is to the soul to turn from 
contemplation of the folly and sin 
against which the young man is warned in the 
previous chapter, to meditate now upon Wis- 
dom’s ways, especially when the anointed eye 
discerns under this name the Uncreated Word, 
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Wisdom of God]! 
For though the feminine form is used through- 


out, it is nevertheless clear that in the latter 
part of the chapter it is He who is before us. 

Wisdom is first presented as one seeking to 
draw the simple from paths of error to the tem- 
ple of knowledge and understanding. 


1 Doth not Wisdom cry? 
And Understanding put forth her voice? 
2 She standeth in the top of high places, 
By the way, in the places of the paths. 
3 She crieth at the gates, at the entry of the city, 


At the coming in at the entrances. 


Not for men to seek her does Wisdom wait. 
With yearning heart she takes her stand in the 
marts of commerce, the paths of pleasure, the 
courts of judgment, and the schools of learning. 
Anywhere and everywhere that men are to be 


78 Notes on Proverbs 


found, there is she—her cry and entreaty sound- 


ing above all the bustle of life. (See_chap. 1: 


20-23). 
4 Unto you, O men, I call; 
And my voice is to the sons of man. 
5 O ye simple, understand prudence: 
And, ye fools, be of an understanding heart. 
6 Hear, for I will speak of excellent things; 
And the opening of my lips shall be nght things. 
7 For my mouth shall speak truth ; 
And lawlessness is an abomination to my lips. 


As Wisdom incarnate is to be found in our 
Lord Jesus Christ, the living Word, so are the in- 
structions of Wisdom to be found in the written 
Word. Itis by means of that precious volume 
which “‘holy men of God wrote as they were 
moved by the Holy Ghost,” that the only true 


and lasting wisdom and knowledge are to be 
found. ‘Right things” and ‘‘truth”’ alone are 


taere recorded. Even when the sins of men and 
women are sharply delineated in all their gross- 
ness and hideousness, it is that we may thereby 
be admonished. 

Man may cavil; infidelity may sneer; pseudo- 
scholarship may reject; but He who cannot lie 
has declared ‘‘ the Scripture cannot be broken.” 
There alone is perfect wisdom found. Unhappy 
the man who turns from it to the vagaries of 
the human mind] 


Chapter Eight 79 


8 All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; 
There is nothing twisted or perverse in them. 

9 They are all plain to him that understandeth, 
And right to them that find knowledge. 

This is faith’s answer to the caviler who 
prates of contradictions and errors in the in- 
spired word of God. Modesty alone might sug- 
gest the thought that the fault might be in the 
reader—not in the Word. But man’s vanity 

and pride will not brook such a conclusion. 
Yet so it shall soon be proven to be; for ‘“‘not 
one yod or tittle’’ (the smallest letter, or vowel- 
point) “shall pass from the law till all be ful- 
filled.””, How soon difficulties vanish when faith 
is in exercise! Seemingly insuperable objeetions 
are swept away in a moment when the light of 
heaven shines into the soul and on the page of 
Scripture. Jesus, in resurrection, opened both 
the Scriptures and the understanding of the 
two with whom He walked to Emmaus. It is 
this double enlightenment that causes difficul- 
ties to vanish like mist before the rays of the 
sun. ‘They are all plain to him that under: 
standeth,”’ for ‘“‘the secret of the Lord is with 
them that fear Him.” 
10 Receive my instruction, and not silver, 

And knowledge rather than choice gold. 
11 For wisdom is better than rubies; 


And all things that can be desired are not to be 
compared to it. 


80 Notes on Proverbs 


Alone in the sacred Scriptures, in our times so 
relentlessly assailed by supercilious egotists and 
unspiritual divines, is this treasure to be found. 


The best writings of the best men are not to be 


compared | with it, for here we turn from all the 
reasonings of man’s heart to the very breath- 


ings of God. In the 28th chapter of Job we 
have the account of the patriarch’s search for 
wisdom. All the precious metals and jewels of 
earth are not to be compared to it, ‘‘for the 
price of wisdom is above rubies.”” He finds it 
when he turns from everything on or under the 
earth to God Himself. 

12 | Wisdom dwell with Prudence, 

And find out knowledge of witty inventions. 

As noted above, wisdom here is looked at as 
an essential part of Deity; further down, as 
Him who has been now revealed as the Wisdom 
_of God, the Eternal Son. 

13 The fear of Jehovah is to hate evil: 
_ Pride, and arrogancy, and the evil way, and the 
mouth of perversions do | hate. 


It is thus wisdom is manifest. It is the very 
character of God—that character all told out in 


Christ. Evil, pride, folly; all are hateful to Him 
who is light, and cannot abide the darkness. 
14 Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom: 
I am understanding; | have strength. 
15 By me kings reign, 
And princes decree justice, 


Chapter Eight 8} 


16 By me princes rule, and nobles, 


Even all the judges of the earth. 


It is not that rulers always act according to 
understanding, but that none rule at all save 
by the appointment of infinite wisdom. ‘The 
Most High ruleth in the kingdoms of men, and 
He giveth them unto whomsoever He will.” 
This gives perfect rest to the man of faith in the 
midst of all the changing political scenes of 
earth. Let the form of the government be what 
it may; the chief magistrate be of whatever 
character he will; faith can bow in obedience, 
owning that ‘‘the powers that be are ordained 
of God.” 

17 I love them that love me; 
And those that seek me early shall find me. 

Wisdom sought, as in Solomon’s case, in early 
youth, delights to reward the seeker. It is im- 
portant to bear in mind that it is wisdom— 
and not God as such—that is here referred to. 
“He,” too, ‘is the rewarder of them that dili- 
gently seek Him;”’ but it would be very faulty 
to limit His love alone to those who return 
that love. Itis love in activity on the part of 
Wisdom we have here before us. To the one 
who loves her she gives the treasures enumera- 
ted in the following verses: 


18 Riches and honor are with me; 
Yea, durable riches and righteousness. 
s 


82 Notes on Proverbs. 


19 My fruit is better than gold; yea, than fine gold; 
And my revenue than choice silver. 


Unspeakably precious, and beyond all human 
valuation, are the gifts bestowed by Wisdom 
with lavish hand upon the diligent seeker, who 
has learned to love her for her own sake. 
Apart from her the feet will stray in folly’s 


paths. She can say— 


20 I lead in the way of righteousness, 
In the midst of the paths of judgment: 
21 That I may cause those that love me to inherit sub- 
stance ; 


And I will fill their treasuries. 
From this point on, the anointed eye loses 


_sight of all else, and is fixed upon Christ; for He 


it is who is now presented for the contempla- 
tion of our souls. It is Christ as the Uncreated 


Word, yet the Begotten Son by eternal genera- 
tion; words admittedly paradoxical, but after 
all distinctly Scriptural. Some there are who 
have supposed the term Only-begotten necessa- 
rily implied a period, however remote, when the 
Son was not. This John’s Gospel clearly re- 
futes, for ‘‘the same was in the beginning with 
God.”’ He was begotten, not in the sense of 
having beginning of life, but as being of one na- 
ture and substance with the Father. Never 
was there a moment in the past Eternity when 
He reposed not in the bosom of Infinite Love. 


Chapter Eight 83 


To explain the mystery is impossible, as the 
apostle himself declares. 
“No man knoweth the Son but the Father.” 
Hence the devout heart can rest and adore 
where the skeptic seeks in vain for rational ex- 
planations of a mystery beyond human ken. 
22 Jehovah possessed me in the beginning of His way, 
Before His works of old. 
23 I was set up from everlasting, 
From the beginning, ere ever the earth was. 
Far back of the beginning of Gen. 1:1, to that 
‘“‘anbeginning beginning” of John 1:1, does the 
Spirit here carry us. There, in the past eternity, 
“when anything that ever. had beginning be- C alld le 
gan, the Word was,”’* and that Word was the { fe & Anes 
eternal Wisdom of God. It is a scene of fellow- ” 
ship to which we are introduced—Jehovah pos- hare os 
sessed Him. ‘‘The Word was with God, and neler T 


User ptt Nees eee LS Vaasa ae SB eee eee eaten 
the Word was God ;”’ and love ineffable was the apes * 


enfolding robe of Deity, for Wisdom was the ob- 


ject of Jehovah’s delight from everlasting. 
24 When there were no depths, I was brought forth ; 
When there were no fountains abounding with 
water. 
25 Before the mountains were settled, 


Before the hills was I brought forth: 


*F, W. Grant, in ‘‘The Crowned Christ :’’ a marvellous 
unfolding of the truth as to the person and varied offices of the 
Lord Jesus. (Price 20 cents.) To be had from the same 
Publishers. 


84 Notes on Proverbs 
26 While as yet He had not made the earth, nor the 


fields, 


Nor the beginning of the dust of the habitable world. 


The figure of generation, as already noted, im- 
plies unity of nature. ‘‘God so loved the world, 
that He gave His Only-begotten Son.” God’s 
thoughts are above ours. Our best human lan- 
guage is a poor vehicle indeed for the expression 
of truths so wondrous. Christ is eternally the 

Son, yet truly the Begotten. 


27 When He established the heavens, I was there: 
When He set a circle upon the face of the depth; 
28 When He established the skies above; 
When He strengthened the fountains of the deep; 
29 When He gave to the sea His decree, 
That the waters should not pass His commandment; 
When He appointed the foundations of the earth; 
30 Then I was by Him, as one brought up with Him: 
And I was daily His delight, rejoicing always be- 
fore Him; 
31 Rejoicing in the habitable part of His earth; . 
And my delights were with the sons of men. ( e~ 2) 


Creation is elsewhere ascribed to sewhere ascribed to the Son. Son. 


“Without Him was not was not anything made that made that 


was made.” ‘All things were created by Him 
and for Him, and in Him all things consist.’’ 


He is “‘the first-born of all creation,’’ superior 
to all, because by Him the Father brought all 
things into being. Daily His delight, He shared 
in that manifestation of power “‘as one brought 


Chapter Eight 85 


) 66 


up with Him,” “rejoicing always before Him.” 
But, amazing grace! His delights were with the 
fallen sons of men. The love of His heart was 
set upon those who deserved it not. Itis not 
of Adam unfallen He speaks, but of his sons— 
therefore sinners lost and guilty. 


‘Ere God had built the mountains, 

Or raised the fruitful hills ; 

Before He filled the fountains, 
That feed the running rills; 

In Thee, from everlasting, 
The wonderful I AM 

Found pleasures never wasting, 
And Wisdom is Thy name. 


‘‘ When, like a tent to dwell in, 
He spread the skies abroad, 
And swathed about the swelling 
Of Ocean’s mighty flood, 
He wrought by weight and measure; 
And Thou wast with Him then: 
Thyself the Father’s pleasure, 
And Thine, the sons of men. 


**‘ And couldst Thou be delighted 
With creatures such as we, 
Who, when we saw Thee, slighted 
And nailed Thee to a tree? 
Unfathomable wonder! 
And mystery divine! 
The voice that speaks in thunder 
Says, ‘Sinner, I am thine.’ ”—(CowPER) 


86 Notes on Proverbs 


32 Now, therefore harken unto Me, O ye sons: 
For blessed are they that keep my ways. 

33 Hear instruction, and be wise, 
And refuse it not. 


Upon the declaration of Wisdom’s love for 
and delight in men is this entreaty based. To 
refuse instruction and spurn the ways of under- 
standing is to trample on divine affection and 


to harden the heart against divime grace. 
34 Blessed is the man that heareth me, 
Watching daily at my doors, 
Waiting at the posts of my entrances. 
35 For whoso findeth me findeth life, 
And shall obtain favor of Jehovah. 
36 But he that sinneth against me wrongeth his own 


soul: 
All they that hate me love death. 


How strong the incentives presented to heed 
the voice of Wisdom! Blessing and life, the lor- 


ing favor of the Lord, are the portion of those 
who so do. The one who refuses to listen, sins 
against his own soul, for he seals his own de- 
struction. 


87 


CHAPTER NINE 


N concluding the section that has been hith- 
erto claiming our attention, a final contrast 
between Wisdom and Folly is set forth. The 
figure of the previous chapter is still adhered to. 


Wisdom is likened to a prudent woman inviting 
the wayfarer to enter her home, where true 


knowledge is imparted to all who seek it in sin- 
cerity. Folly takes her stand in a similar way, 
urging all to turn in to her, offering ‘‘the pleas- 


ures of sin for a season”’ to those who yield to 


her entreaties. 


1 Wisdom hath builded her house; 
She hath hewn out her seven pillars: 
2 She hath killed her beasts; 
She hath mingled her wine; 
She hath also furnished her table. 


Abundant provision has been_made for the 
instruction and blessing of all who will heed, 
Such a temple of Wisdom is the word of God as 
a whole, and this book of Proverbs in particu- 
lar. Here is to be found all that man requires 
for his guidance through the mazes of his life on 


88 Notes on Proverbs 


earth. A well-furnished table, at which millions 
have been feasted, but inexhaustible still, is that 
which is spread before all who desire spiritual 
sustenance and cheer. 

Nor does Wisdom wait for men to seek her 
out. 

3 She hath sent forth her maidens: 

She crieth upon the highest places of the city, 
4 Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither : 

To him that wanteth understanding she saith, 
5 Come, eat of my bread, 

And drink of the wine which | have mingled. 
6 Forsake the foolish, and live; 

And go in the way of understanding. 

In the present dispensation of grace God is by 
His ambassadors beseeching men to be recon- 
ciled to Himself; not waiting till they begin to 
pray, but actually deigning to pray them to 
turn from their sin to His beloved Son. So, 
here, the handmaids of Wisdom are found in the 


places of public concourse, entreating the simple, 
_and those who and those who lack true character to turn in 
and partake of the bread that strengthens, the 
wine that cheers. Happy the man who obeys 
the gracious invitation and forsakes the way of 
the foolish, thus laying hold on that which is 
really life. 

Only the truly exercised will heed, however. 
The scorner will be pleaded with in vain. 
Empty, pompous, and self-satisfied, he pursues 


Chapter Nine. 89 


his own way until the judgment, long derided, 
falls at last, and he is crushed beneath it. 

7 He that reproveth a scorer getteth to himself shame: 

And a5 ‘oe rebuketh a lawless man getteth himself 
a blot. 
8 Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee: 
Rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. 
9 Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet 
wiser : 
Teach a just man, and he will increase in learning. 

So it ever is. The more shallow and empty a 
man is, the less willing is he to listen to godly 
counsel; whereas, the truly wise are glad to 
learn from any who can correct and instruct. 
The less a man knows, as a rule, the more he 
thinks he knows. The more he really does 
know, the more he realizes his ignorance and 
his limitations. Hence the value of counsel and 
help from those who seek to walk with God, 
and to be exercised by His word. Reproof will 
only be wasted on the scorner. He will take de- 
light in holding up to ridicule all who, actuated 
by the purest of motives, endeavor to turn him 
from his folly. 

These three verses would seem to be paren- 
thetical, explaining the reason why the invita: 
tion of Wisdom’s maidens meets with such op- 
posite responses. 

Their cry is evidently continued in the three 
verses that follow: 


90 Notes on Proverbs 


10 The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom: 

And the knowledge of the Holy is understanding. 
11 For by Me thy days shall be multiplied, 

And the years of thy life shall be increased. 
12 If thou be wise, thou shalt be wise for thyself: 

But if thou scornest, thou alone shalt bear it. 

However the scorner may prate of advanced 

knowledge because of his freedom from godly 
restraint, true wisdom is only to be found in 
the fear of the Lord, and true understanding in 
the knowledge of holy things. (The word is in 
the plural.) This alone makes for what is really 
life. Apart from the knowledge of God, it is but 


a _mere existence at the best, with eternal dark- 
ness beyond it. 

Nor are men putting God in their debt when 
they attend to the call of Wisdom; as though 
it were condescension on their part so to do. If 
they be wise, it is for their own advantage—not 
His. He is seeking their happiness and blessing. 
True it is that, such is the love of His heart, He 
finds joy in the gladness of His children; but, 
nevertheless, it is for his own good that man 
should heed the call of Wisdom. 

Neither will God be the loser if the scorner 
persists in his senseless and foolhardy course. 
He alone shall bear it. Both in this life and the 
next, his folly shall be made manifest to himself 
and others. 

The unhappy contrast to the portion we have 


Chapter Nine 9f 


been considering is set forth in the remaining 
verses of the chapter. Folly, too, has her tem- 
ple, and, alas, many are her devotees! 


13 A foolish woman is clamorous ; 
She is simple, and knoweth nothing. 
14 For she sitteth at the entrance of her house, 
On a seat in the highplaces of the city, 
15 To call passengers who go right on their ways: 
16 Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither: 
And as for him that wanteth understanding she saith 
to him, 
17 Stolen waters are sweet, 
And bread of secrecies is pleasant. 
18 But he knoweth not that the dead are there, 
And her guests are in the depths of sheol. 


Alas, so ready are men to give heed to Folly, 
that she needs none to go about entreating them 
to enter her house. She is represented as sitting 
at the entrance, enticing those who go right on 
their way to turn in to her abode of sin and 


shame. Many are the guests who enter; few few 


indeed the number that return: for her Fated is 
but an entr entry-way to the pit. “The dead are 
there, and her guests are in the depths of hell.” 
Illicit pleasures charm for a time, and ensnare 
the simple. The end is the wormwood and the 
gall, when the anguished soul, bowed in bitter- 
ness that shall never be alleviated forever, is 
forced at last to confess how dreadful has been 


92 Notes on Proverbs 


the mistake of turning from the call of Wisdom 
to seek the deceitful allurements of Folly. 
One who tried them to the full wrote, ere he 
died,— 
‘“‘ My days are in the yellow leaf; 
The flower, the fruit of life is gone. 
The worm, the canker, and the grief, 
Are mine alone.”—ByRon. 


23 


CHAPTER TEN 


WE now enter upon the second division of 
the book, which brings us to the strictly 
proverbial portion. Hitherto we have been lis- 
tening to Wisdom’s exhortation to enter the 
house and avail ourselves of the mass of instruc- 
tion gathered together for our enlightenment as 
to suited behaviour in all circumstances. From 
this the syren voice of Folly would turn us aside. 
Happy the man—particularly the young man— 
(for again be it remembered this is the book for 
the direction and guidance of youth)—who re- 
fuses the latter, and, attracted by the former, en- 
ters and seeks conscientiously to make his own 
what is here recorded. 

As Scripture itself abounds with illustrious ex- 
amples of almost every proverb we are to have 
before us, a reference will generally be given in 
the notes to some person or circumstance man- 
ifesting the truth of the saying in question. By 
referring to these in connection with the reading 
of the pages that follow, it is hoped the reader 
will be impressed as never before both with the 
fulness and richness of the word of God, and 


94 Notes on Proverbs 


with the remarkable manner in which every part 
of it is linked up with the book of Proverbs. 


1 The proverbs of Solomon. 


A wise son maketh a glad father; 
But a foolish son is the heaviness of his mother. 


In these words the key-note is struck, to be 
again and again referred to throughout the 
book, and returned to in the final chapter. The 
son who is characterized by wisdom, causes his 
father to rejoice as in the case of Solomon him- 
self (1 Chron. 22:12; 2 Chron. 1: 7-12). On 
the other hand it is the mother who feels most 
keenly the folly of her child. See Esau in Gen. 
26: 34, 35 and 27: 46. 


2 Treasures of lawlessness profit nothing : 
But righteousness delivereth from death. 


God has not abdicated His throne as the mor- 
al governor of the universe; hence sowing fol- 
lows reaping,as surely as night follows day. “‘As 
the partridge sitteth on eggs and hatcheth them 
not; so he that getteth riches and not by right, 
shall leave them in the midst of his days and at 
his end shall be a fool” (Jer. 17:11). On the 
other hand righteousness, however much one 
may be called upon to suffer for it in a world 
like this, ‘‘delivereth from death,’? when that 
death, as in the case of the flood and many lesser 
incidents, is an evidence of God’s judgment. In 


«a%e 


Chapter Ten 95 


the book of Esther Haman is the exemplifica- 
tion of the former, and Mordecai of the latter. 
3 Jehovah will not suffer the soul of the righteous to 


famish: 
But He casteth away the desire of the lawless. 


Let the outward circumstances be as they 
may the soul of the righteous is lifted above 
them all and finds cause to rejoice in the midst 
of tribulation. The lawless have no such con- 
fidence; their desire, when they seem just about 
to comfortably enjoy it, is often taken away in 
amoment. The triumphant song of Habakkuk 
(3: 17-19) fitly illustrates the first clause, and 
the fate of the rich fool (Luke 12: 16-21) the 
second. 


4 He becometh poor that dealeth with a slack hand: 
But the hand of the diligent maketh rich. 


Scripture never countenances slothfulness ; but 
commands on the part of the Christian that he 
be ‘‘not remiss in zeal.’’ This, the disorderly 
among the Thessalonians had evidently for- 
gotten (2 Thess. 3: 7-12), and the apostle has 
to write urging them “that with quietness they 
work, and eat their own bread.’”’ Faith and lazi- 
ness do not mingle. What is sometimes miscalled 
faith is really presumption. Diligence is the fit 
companion of the former, as beautifully set forth 
in Ruth, the Moabitess, who takes the place of 


96 Notes on Proverbs 


the poor and the stranger among the gleaners 
in the fields of Boaz, to be exalted in due time 
(Ruth 2 to 4). 


5 He that gathereth in summer is a wise son: 
But he that sleepeth in harvest is a son that causeth 
shame. 


The principle abides whether in relation to 
time or eternity. The hour of opportunity if 
improved bespeaks wisdom; if neglected tells of 
present folly and future shame. It is of the ut- 
most importance that one set a proper value on 
the God-given present; “‘ redeeming the time for 
the days are evil.”’ Let the laborer in the har- 
vest-fields of the Lord heed the word here given. 
Now is the time to gather precious sheaves 
which will be cause for rejoicing in the day of 
the soon-coming ‘‘harvest-home.’”’ He who 
sleeps in the present reaping season will suffer 
shame and loss at the judgment-seat of Christ. 
What an example of the diligent laborer is to 
be found in Paul, throughout his life of cease- 
less activity and concern for a dying world. 
Demas was one who, charmed by the love of the 
present world, went off to sleep and left the ser- 
vice for other hands. His shame abides to this 
day (2 Tim. 4: 10). 

6 Blessings are upon the head of the just: 
But violence covereth the mouth of the lawless. 


7 The memory of the just is blessed : 
But the name of the lawless shall rot. 


Chapter Ten 97 


Not more different is the esteem in which the 
righteous and the wicked are held in life than is 
their memory after death. Of Paul we have just 
written above. In 2 Tim. 4: 17 we find him 
standing for judgment before Nero, whom he 
there denominates “the lion,’ from whose 
mouth he was at that time delivered. Surely, 
despite his loneliness and his apparently des- 
picable condition, blessings were even then 
upon the head of Christ’s doughty servant. On 
the other hand, how truly did violence cover 
the mouth of his oppressor; leaving him with- 
out excuse before the bar of man and of God. 
Both have long since passed from this scene. 
Let the centuries witness whose memory has 
rotted, and whose is still cause for thanksgiv- 
ing | 

8 The wise in heart will receive commandments: 

But a prating fool shall fall. 

Wisdom, as we have seen, begins with the fear 
of the Lord. Those so exercised are ready in- 
deed to bow to His word and to receive His 
commandments. For the Christian, this is the 
way in which his love for Christ is manifested. 
The prating word-mouthed fool, who is too 
wise in his own conceit to require instruction, 
must learn by coming to grief. In Nebuchad- 
nezzar and Belshazzar we see the two con- 
trasted. See Daniel 5: 18-23. 

*h 


98 Notes on Proverbs 


9 He that walketh in integrity, walketh surely: 
But he that perverteth his ways shall be known. 

To walk in integrity is to walk with God. 
Whatever misunderstanding there may be at 
times, the one who so lives shall be shown to 
have walked surely at last. Men of the world 
confess that ‘‘ Honesty is the best policy.”’ For 
the man of God, uprightness is not policy, but 
the delight of his heart; and by it he brings even 
wicked men to acknowledge that his ways are 
above reproach, as was manifested in Joseph, 
after being so sorely tried (Gen. 40 and 41). 
On the contrary, he whose ways are perverse, 
though he may cover them for a time, must in- 
evitably be discovered at last. See Ziba’s case 
(2 Sam. 16: 1-4; 19: 24-27). 


10 He that winketh with the eye causeth sorrow: 
But a prating fool shall fall. 


Winking with the eye, from time immemorial, 
has been construed as giving the lie to what 
the lips utter. He whose words and intentions 
are opposed, is a source of grief to others, and 
shall fall himself. The kiss of Judas was an 
action of this nature. Note last clause here is 
as in verse 8. 


11 The mouth of a righteous man is a well of life: 
But violence covereth the mouth of the lawless. 


When the life is ordered in accordance with 


Chapter Ten 99 


righteousness, the words of the mouth will be 
for blessing and refreshment to others. It is by 
carelessness here that many who attempt to 
minister the gospel are powerless and barren in 
their service. The testimony of the lips is not 
backed up by the testimony of the life. Hence, 
power and usefulness are lacking. Mere ‘‘sound 
words”’ are not necessarily used in blessing. But 
if such come from a heart in touch with God, 
witnessed to by ways that be in Christ, then 
indeed shall they prove a well of life to the 
hearers who are truly athirst. Such was the 
ministry of Samuel in the dark days subsequent 
to the death of Eli. For last clause see verse 6. 
12 Hatred stirreth up stnifes: 

But love covereth all sins. 

The latter part of this verse is quoted in the 
New Testament. In 1 Peter 4: 8, it is written, 
‘“‘and above all things have fervent charity 
among yourselves: for charity shall cover the 
multitude of sins.’’ It is not, as some have fool- 
ishly supposed, that kindliness and benevolence, 
on the part of one otherwise guilty before God, 
will atone for his transgressions, thus covering 
them in the day of judgment. Other’s faults, 
not my own, I am called upon to cover. Not 
by indifference to evil, but by faithfully, in love 
and grace, showing my brother his sin, and seek- 
ing to exercise his conscience in the presence of 


100 Notes on Proverbs 


God, that confession may be made, and thus the 
sin be covered. Where love is lacking, it is a 
common practice to play the part of a tale- 
bearer, which only tends to add to the evil; for 
the repeating of sin is defiling, and often leads 
to life-long unhappiness and misunderstandings. 
In Doeg the Edomite we have a sample of the 
hatred that stirreth up strife; in Nathan’s deal- 
ing with David, a lovely exemplification of the 
love that covereth (1 Sam. 22: 9-19; 2 Sam. 
12: 1-14). See the notes on chap. 11: 13. 


13 In the lips of him that hath understanding wisdom 
is found: 


But a rod is for the back of him that is void of heart. 


None have, perhaps, exhibited in their own 
decisions, the contrast of this verse so markedly 
as Solomon himself and hisson Rehoboam. The 
former, having been under exercise before God, 
had been given a wise and understanding heart 
(1 Kings 3: 5-28). The latter trusted his own 
wisdom and the counsel of the companions of 
his youth, and found a rod for his back in con- 
sequence (1 Kings 12: 8-19). 

14 Wise men lay up knowledge: 
But the mouth of the foolish is near destruction. 


None perceive their own limitations so clearly 
as the truly wise. Humility and a willingness 
to learn from all who can instruct them is char- 


Chapter Ten 101 


acteristic of such. The conceit of the foolish 
knows no bounds. With their own mouths they 
proclaim it in the ears of all men of sound judg- 
ment. Their prating but invites destruction. 
Timothy, “from a child” followed the ways of 
the first-mentioned (2 Tim. 3: 14, 15). The 
magician Elymas is an illustration of the last- 
described (Acts 13: 6-11). 


15 The rich man’s wealth is his strong city: 
The destruction of the poor is their poverty. 


For Time alone, and in an era of peace, does 
this apply; for “riches profit not in the day of 
wrath’’: neither does temporal poverty inter- 
fere with future glory. See Dives and Lazarus 
(Luke 16: 19-31). 


16 The labor of the righteous tendeth to life : 


The produce of the lawless is sin. 


It is an Old Testament way of stating the 
truth of Rom. 8: 6, “‘ For to be carnally minded 
is death; but to be spiritually minded is life and 
peace.” The righteous man is the spiritual 
man. His labor is in accordance with the mind 
of God, and consequently tends to life. All that 
the wicked produces is but sin in the sight of in- 
finite holiness; because the sinner is polluted, 
like a poisoned well, which may give forth wa- 
ter cold and sparkling, but only to be dreaded 


102 Notes on Proverbs 


after all. The first two offerers, Cain and Abel, 

exemplify the truth here stated (Gen. 4: 5-8). 

17 He is in the way of life that keepeth instruction: 
But he that refuseth reproof erreth. 

It is only when man learns to mistrust him- 
self and to rely alone upon the unerring word 
of God, unfolded by the Holy Spirit, that his 
feet walk in the way of life. Itis not a question 
of eternal life or final salvation. But the way 
of life is the divinely-marked-out path for all 
the children of God. Such cannot afford to re- 
fuse reproof. It is the greatest kindness an- 
other saint can show me, to direct my atten- 
tion to any portion of the truth of God which I 
am failing to practically own. Let me gladly, 
then, receive correction, that thus I may be pre- 
served from dishonoring the One who has re- 
deemed me to Himself. Saul refused reproof 
and lost his kingdom (1 Sam. 15: 23). In Da- 
vid, whatever his failures at times, we see one 
who was characterized by keeping instruction, 
and who therefore trod the path of life. 

18 He that hideth hatred with lying lips, 
And he that uttereth a slander is a fool. 

Hypocrisy and tale-bearing are alike detest- 
able. To dissimulate—feigning love and friend- 
ship while the fire of hatred burns in the heart— 


and to spread evil stories, are most reprehen- 
sible. 


Chapter Ten 103 


It is a matter much to be deplored, that there 
is by no means the concern about evil-speaking 
among the saints of the Lord that there should 
be. In His Word He has over and over again 
expressed His abborrence of it in unmistakable 
terms. In the law it is written, “Thou shalt 
not go up and down as a talebearer among thy 
people” (Lev. 19: 16). The tales might be 
true; but that could not excuse the bearer of 
them. If a brother or sister had sinned, there 
was a far different way to deal with the matter 
than in spreading the story of his or her shame 
through the camp of Israel. The following 
verse delineates the godly way to deal with 
such a case: “ Thou shalt not hate thy brother 
in thy heart: thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy 
neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him” (ver. 
17). 

This is most searching and solemn. If untrue, 
I am bearing false witness if I repeat evil. If 
true, lam defiling others and injuring the soul 
of the wrong-doer, who might be delivered from 
his error if I went to him in the spirit of meek- 
ness. Itis an “ungodly man” (who) “diggeth 
up evil.” A man of God will seek to cover it, by 
leading the sinning one to repentance and self- 
judgment. . 

Joah’s dealing with Abner (2 Sam. 3: 27) was 
of the character described in the first clause; 


104 Notes on Proverbs 


the accusers of Jeremiah, in the last (Jer. 37: 
11-15). 


19 In the multitude of words there wanteth not sin: 
But he that refraineth his lips is wise. 


It is remarkable how large a portion of the 
Scriptures God has seen fit to devote to the 
subject of His creatures’ words. Readiness of 
speech is seldom to be found where sin does not 
creep in. To refrain the lips is often difficult, 
but it is the part of true wisdom. In the epistle 
of James an entire chapter is devoted to ‘“‘the 
tongue,” that small but most unruly member. 
The man of God will weigh his words, remem- 
bering that for every idle one he must give an 
account, for it is written, “‘By thy words thou 
shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt 
be condemned.”’ (See Eccl. 5: 1-7.) 


20 The tongue of the just is as choice silver: 
The heart of the lawless is of little worth. 


Tongue and heart seem to be used here al- 
most synonymously, for the one is controlled 
by the other. The tongue of the just bespeaks 
a heart in subjection to God. Therefore the 
words uttered are of value. The heart of the 
lawless is made known by his idie and perverse 
conversation. It was so in the case of Simon 
Magus, while his reprover displayed the aptio- 
site (Acts 8: 23). 


Chapter Ten 105 


21 The lips of the nghteous feed many: 
But fools die for want of heart. 


It is not only that the righteous man’s con- 
versation is without foolishness and slander- 
ous statements, but it is positively for profit. 
When he speaks, it is for edification: others are 
blessed: his lips feed many. Not so with the 
fool. His speech is worthless, and he lacks the 
heart to learn from those who could instruct. 
Samuel and Saul again come to mind. The 
words of the former were a means of blessing 
to thousands, but the unhappy man he had 
anointed failed himself to Pert thereby. See 
also vers. 31, 32. 


22 The blessing of Jehovah, it maketh rich, 
And He addeth no sorrow with it. 


How unspeakable the folly that would lead 
one to turn from “‘ pleasures forevermore”’ and 
riches imperishable, untainted by sorrow, for 
the vain baubles offered by the world and Sa- 
tan, which leave only pain and disappointment 
at last! The blessing of the Lord is found in 
the pathway of obedience. Even Christians 
often miss it by laxity, and indifference to moral 
and doctrinal evil. Such can only blame them- 
selves when, walking by the light of their own 
fire and the sparks that they have kindled, they 
lie down in sorrow. 


106 Notes on Proverbs 


It is not that the blessing of the Lord insures 
freedom from tribulation in a world like this; 
but whatever the trial, all can be received as 
from a loving Father’s hand, and thus no sor- 
row will be known. Habbakuk and Paul, in 
large measure, had entered into the blessing 
here spoken of (Hab. 3: 17-19; Phil. 4: 11-13). 


23 It is as sport to a fool to do mischief: 
But a man of understanding hath wisdom. 

What the wise man would shrink from with 
horror, the fool will practice, not only with 
complacency, but with positive fiendish delight. 
The man of understanding, whose heart and 
mind are controlled by the fear of the Lord, will 
behave himself wisely in a perfect way. Sucha 
fool was Balaam; and Phinehas was a man of 
understanding, whose wisdom stayed the ven- 
geance of the Lord (Num. 31:16; 25: 6-13). 


24 The fear of the lawless, it shall come upon him: 
But the desire of the righteous shall be granted. 

25 As the whirlwind passeth, so is the lawless no more: 
But the nghteous is an everlasting foundation. 


The two proverbs are really one, contrasting 
the expectation and end of the righteous and 
the wicked. The lawless, however bold his ap- 
pearance, has ever a gnawing fear at his heart 
of impending calamity. He may well dread the 
future, for it has judgment unsparing for his 


Chapter Ten 107 


portion. The desire of the righteous will as 
surely be granted—even blessing forevermore. 
Soon, as the whirlwind passeth, will the 
wicked pass away and be no more, so far as 
this world is concerned. It is no question of ex- 
tinction of being. He will be gone from earth 
into a dark and grief-filled eternity. An ever- 
lasting foundation is that of the righteous— 
even God’s imperishable truth. Daniel and his 
accusers illustrate the two sides (Dan. 6: 4-24). 


26 As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, 
So is the sluggard to them that send him. 


As a strong acid sets the teeth on edge, and 
smoke inflames the eyes, so is it beyond meas- 
ure irritating to place confidence in a man who 
is really indifferent to the success or failure of 
his commission. How often have the Lord’s 
sent ones proven to be sluggards, dallying with 
the world, turning aside for any trifle, instead 
of pursuing their path with purpose of heart! 
See the unfaithful servant in Luke 19: 20-26. 


27 The fear of Jehovah prolongeth days: 
But the years of the lawless shall be shortened. 
28 The hope of the righteous shall be gladness: 
But the expectation of the lawless shall perish. 
29 The way of Jehovah is strength to the perfect: 
But destruction [shall be] to the workers of iniquity. 
30 The righteous shall never be removed: 
But the lawless shall not inhabit the earth. 


108 Notes on Proverbs 


Again, in all four verses, though each a dis- 
tinct proverb, we have the righteous and the 
lawless in contrast, both as to the present and 
the future. Not greater will be the difference 
between the two classes in eternity than in 
time. Now, the fear of the Lord prolongs life; 
for the indiscretions and iniquities of the law- 
less break their physical constitutions and 
shorten their days. In eternity, gladness shall 
be the fulfilled hope of the righteous, while the 
vain hope of the wicked shall perish, and his 
portion be endless judgment. 

Strength is found in the way of Jehovah; de- 
struction and woe shall be to those who tread 
the paths of sin. In the age to come, the portion 
of the righteous shall abide; he shall never be 
removed: but the evil-doer will have no inherit- 
ance in the glorious kingdom then to be estab- 
lished. For both worlds the lawless are not 
gainers, but losers, by their wilful rejection of 
the Word of Life; while “‘ godliness is profitable 
in all things, both in the life that now is, and 
that which is to come.”’ A host of testimony- 
bearers on each side come up to confirm the sol- 
emn truths here enumerated so pithily. Cain 
and Abel; Noah and the antediluvian world; 
Abraham and his idolatrous kin; Isaac and 
Ishmael; Jacob and Esau; Joseph and his accu- 
sers; all in the first book of the Bible, with a 


Chapter Ten 109 


vast number throughout its remaining books, 
witness the great contrast which the testimony 
of experience in all ages has but confirmed. 
With two additional proverbs on the tongue 
the chapter closes. They are intimately con- 
nected, and should be considered together: 


31 The mouth of the righteous bringeth forth wisdom: 
But the froward tongue shall be cut out. 

32 The lips of the nghteous know what is acceptable: 
But the mouth of the lawless speaketh frowardness. 


The way and end of the two classes we have 
noticed. Again we are instructed as to the dif- 
ference in their speech, which but makes bare 
the state of the heart. Wisdom and acceptable 
words proceed from the lips of the righteous, 
like limpid streams from a pure fountain. Fro- 
wardness, like a filthy torrent, is poured forth 
by the tongue of the wicked, soon to be silenced 
in judgment. Jezebel is a solemn beacon, de- 
claring the truth of this word in regard to the 
wicked. Elijah, whom she hated, may be cited 
as an instance on the other side, 


130 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 


IGHTEOUSNESS and lawlessness in con- 
trast is the subject of this chapter, as of 
the major part of the last. It is as though God 
would, in the wonders of His grace, use every 
opportunity to warn the young and inexperi- 
enced of the dangers and sorrows to be encoun- 
tered when the heart rebels against His Word; 
and to put before them the blessings and de- 
lights, both temporal and spiritual, to be found 
in subjection to wisdom and truth. 


1 A false balance is abomination to Jehovah : 
But a perfect weight is His delight. 


The balances of earth our God would have 
regulated by the balances of the sanctuary. Ab- 
solute integrity is His delight. A deceitful bal- 
ance indicates lack of uprightness in heart. 
Man may never be cognizant of the error; but 
where the fear of God is before the eyes, He will 
be considered, and every transaction will be 
conducted in His presence. It is a solemn thing 
when Christians follow the world in the slip- 
shod business methods of the day. How the 
name of Christ is dishonored when shams and 


Chapter Eleven i 


false weights are discovered in the case of such] 
It is well to often call to mind what is written 
in the law, “Thou shalt not have in thy bag di- 
vers weights, a great and a small: thou shalt 
not have in thy house divers measures, a great 
and a small: but thou shalt have a perfect and 
just weight, a perfect and just measure shalt 
thou have: that thy days may be lengthened in 
the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee” 
(Deut. 25: 13-15). Such was God’s standard 
for an earthly people. How shameful when a 
heavenly people fall below it! It may seem a 
trifling thing that a yardstick is slightly short, 
or a pound weight not up to the standard; and 
one may try to ease his conscience by saying 
that it is customary, and that people know 
what to expect; but these are the things that 
indicate character, and tell of a good conscience 
put away. A Zaccheus may well cause such to 
blush (Luke 19: 8). 


2 When pride cometh, then cometh shame: 
But with the lowly is wisdom. 


Nothing is more detestable in God’s sight 
than pride on the part of creatures who have 
absolutely nothing to be proud of. This was 
the condemnation of the devil—self-exaltation. 
In another, how hateful we instinctively see it 
to be; but in ourselves, how readily and almost 


112 Notes on Proverbs 


unconsciously is it tolerated! In any case, it 
indicates a lack of brokenness and self-judgment 
before God. Lowliness of mind is an indication 
of true wisdom. It bespeaks the man who has 
learned to judge himself aright in the presence 
of God. In Nebuchadnezzar we have a striking 
illustration of the two opposite states mani- 
fested at different times in the same person 
(Dan. 4). 

3 The integrity of the upright shall guide them: 

But the perverseness of the treacherous shall destroy 
em. 

When there is purpose of heart to walk in the 
truth, the Spirit of God can be counted upon 
for guidance and direction. When the heart is 
treacherous, destruction will assuredly follow. 
The principle here laid down is far-reaching and 
of vast importance. It enters into every detail 
and ramification of a believer’s path and serv- 
ice. It is not so much intelligence that is 
lacking among the mass of saints as real in- 
tegrity of heart. There will often be found 
true devotedness to Christ coupled with very 
little knowledge of Scripture, and yet remark- 
able ability to try the things that differ, and 
to use what little one has for tke glory of God. 
On the other hand, great intelligence has fre- 
quently been found coupled with gross careless- 
ness and treachery of heart, leading to a moral 


Chapter Eleven 113 


and spiritual breakdown eventuaily. A tender 
conscience, subject to the guidance of the Word 
and Spirit of God, is the great desideratum. 
Contrast Obadiah and Ahab (1 Kings 18: 3,4; 
21: 25). 
4 Riches profit not in the day of wrath : 
But righteousness delivereth from death. 


How empty and vain the confidence of the 
wealthy who trust in uncertain riches, in the 
day of wrath; whether it be when God suffers 
such a day to overtake men on earth, or wheth- 
er we think of the full outpouring of His wrath 
upon the wicked dead! See Rey. 6:12-17; 
and 20: 12-15. 

Righteousness alone delivereth from death: 
righteousness of which man in his natural state 
is bereft. Declared righteous by faith when 
God’s testimony is believed, practical righteous- 
ness flows from the impartation of the new na- 
ture when born again. Noah, found righteous 
when the rest of the world had lapsed into vio- 
lence and corruption, is an apt illustration of 
the truth here stated (Gen. 6). 


5 The righteousness of the perfect shall make straight 


is way: 
But the lawless shall fall by his own lawlessness. 
6 The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them: 
But transgressors shall be taken in their own naughti- 
ness. 
8 


114 Notes on Proverbs 


7 When a lawless man dieth, his expectation shall 
perish : 
And the hope of unjust men perisheth. 
8 The nghteous is delivered out of trouble, 
And the lawless cometh in his stead. 

Retribution, a manifest law of God both for 
this world and the next, is the great lesson of 
these verses, which connect intimately with 
verses 27 to 30 of the preceding chapter. ‘God 
is not mocked: whatsoever a man soweth, that 
shall he also reap’’; whether of the flesh unto 
corruption, or of the Spirit unto life eternal. 
“The Lord is a God of judgment, and by Him 
actions are weighed.”’ Nothing escapes his no- 
tice. All shall receive a just recompense of re- 
ward. The path of righteousness leads to end- 
less glory; that of lawlessness, to sorrow and 
woe. He who seeks to ensnare the upright will 
fall into the meshes of his own gin. No better 
example is to be found of the instruction of this 
section than the book of Esther in its entirety.* 
Daniel’s experience with his accusers, as before 
noticed, emphasizes the same principle. God’s 
retributive justice is swift and sure. It is in 
vain to seek to turn aside His holy and right- 
eous governmental dealing. 


* Those who have paid little attention to the moral instruc- 
tion contained in the book referred to, might find profit in con- 
sulting ‘‘ Notes on the Book of Esther,’’ by the same Author. 
To be had of the same Publishers, 


aan cme, 


Chapter Eleven — 15 


_9 A hypocrite with his mouth destroyeth his neighbor: 
But a knowledge shall the nghteous be de- 
ivered. 


The hypocrite has but one thought before his 
mind—to cover his own baseness, whatever the 
consequences to others: hence a readiness to 
falsely accuse and destroy the peace of the in- 
nocent in order to maintain the mask of right- 
eousness for one’s self. But the upright can af- 
ford to leave all in the hands of God, who in His 
own way and time will vindicate His servant. 
The case of Potiphar’s wife and Joseph might 
have been in Solomon’s mind as he penned the 
words (Gen. 39 et al.). 


10 When it goeth well with the righteous, a city re- 
joiceth: 
And when the lawless perish there is shouting. 
11 By the blessing of the upright, a city is exalted: 
But it is overthrown by the mouth of the lawless. 


Whatever may be the sins or evil propensities 
of men individually, collectively they realize, in 
some measure at least, the value of national 
and municipal righteousness. Therefore they 
hail with delight rulers who are wise and good; 
for through such, a city is lifted up; while evil 
rulers are detested because of the manifest un- 
happy results of their oppression. Thus men 
rejoiced over the downfall of Abimelech (Judges 


136 Notes on Proverbs 


9: 58-57), and, in a later day, upon the exalta- 
tion of David (2 Sam. 19:14). 


12 He that is void of heart, despiseth his neighbor; 
But a man of understanding holdeth his peace. 

When another would stir up strife, it is well if 
he be met by one who has been instructed in the 
school of Him ‘who, when He was reviled, re- 
viled not again; when He suffered, He threat- 
ened not, but committed Himself to Him that 
judgeth righteously.” If railing and unkindness 
be met with contempt or anger, however well 
deserved, it is but adding fuel to the flame. To 
go quietly on, as David when cursed by Shimei, 
committing all to God, is the course of wisdom 
and blessing. See notes on chap. 20: 22. 


13 A talebearer goeth about revealing secrets: 
But he that is of a faithful spirit concealeth a matter. 


Talebearing, even though the tales be true, is 
most mischievous. If there be a fault, to lov- 
ingly adinonish in private, and then conceal 
from all others, is in accordance with the mind 
of God. 

There is an instructive word in this connec- 
tion in the 37th of Exodus. Vers. 17 to 24, in- 
clusive, relate to the making of the candlestick, 
or lampstand, for the tabernacle. Among the 
accessories to it, we read in ver. 23 that Moses 
‘‘made his seven lamps, and his snuffers, and 


Chapter Eleven 117 


ais snuff-dishes, of pure gold.’ There is that 
here that is intensely interesting, and unspeak- 
ably precious. 

No lamp will long burn well without occa- 
sional snufing. Hence God has made provis- 
ion even for so apparently insignificant a mat- 
ter as this. To the mind of man it might seem 
of trifling importance as to how a light was 
snuffed, and what was done with the black 
snuff afterwards. In God’s eye, nothing is triv- 
ial that concerns the glory of His Son, or the 
welfare of His people. 

The snuffers were made “of pure gold ’”’—that 
which symbolizes the divine glory, and speaks, 
too, of perfect righteousness. It may often hap- 
pen that some saint of God is losing his bright- 
ness, and no longer shining for Him as he once 
did. Itis the priest with the golden tongs to 
whom is entrusted the delicate task of ‘snuff- 
ing.” ‘Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a 
fault, ye who are spiritual restore such a one in 
the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest 
thou also be tempted” (Gal.6:1). Thus will 
the “‘snufing”’ be accomplished according to 
God, and the restored brother’s light burn all 
the brighter for it. 

But what then? Is the evil to be spread 
abroad, and made a matter of common knowl- 
edge? Ah, there were not only the snuffers, but 


118 Notes on Proverbs 


the snuff-dishes; and they too were of pure 
gold! The priest was to put carefully away, in 
these golden receptacles, the black, dirty snuff 
which he had removed from the wick. To have 
gone about spreading the filth upon the spot- 
less garments of other priests would have been 
to defile them all. It must be hidden away in 
the presence of God! Is not this where we often 
fail? 

How much grief and sorrow might have been 
prevented in many an assembly if the golden 
snuff-dishes had been more often used! On ev- 
ery hand we hear of strife and discord brought 
about through evil speaking; and it is remark- 
able how ready we are to listen to that which 
we know can only defile. Oh that there might 
be more ‘‘angry countenances’”’ among us when 
the backbiter is out seeking to spot and blacken 
the snowy garments of God’s holy priests! See 
chap. 25: 23. 

In the New Testament the divine way of deal- 
ing with a brother’s fault is clearly defined: 
“Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against 
thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and 
him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast 
gained thy brother” (Matt. 18:15). If breth- 
ren would sternly refuse to listen to complaints 
against others until this first condition has 
been complied with, it would go far to do away 


Chapter Eleven 119 


with evil speaking. Many a brother would be 
won if approached in priestly nearness to God 
by one who carried with him the golden snuff- 
ers and the snuff-dish. 

But if he refuse to hear? Then “take with 
thee one or two more;”’ and if stilb wilful, as a 
last resource, ‘‘tell it unto the church.” But 
this not till the other means have failed. 

By thus acting in accordance with the word 
of God, much shame and misery might be 
spared innocent persons, and many wandering 
ones recovered who, through backsliding, are 
driven deeper into the mire. God, too, will be 
glorified, and the Lord Jesus honored; for He 
has said, “If I then, your Lord and Master, 
have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash 
one another’s feet. . . . If ye know these things, 
happy are ye if ye do them” (John 13:14, 17). 


14 Where no management is, the people fall : 
But in the multitude of counsellors there is safety. 


To depend entirely upon one’s own judgment 
is the height of folly. Even the wisest and god- 
liest are often given to blunders and errors of 
discernment; for infallibility is a dream in- 
dulged in concerning one man alone. To weigh 
a matter in the presence of God; to invite the 
counsel of those whose experience and spiritual- 
ity evidence ability to try the things that differ, 


120 Notes on Proverbs 


is the course of wisdom. Rehoboam lost the 

major part of his kingdom by neglect of this im- 

portant truth; and many a one has suffered 

grievous loss for the same disdain of counsel 

and help. 

15 He that is surety for a stranger shall smart for it: 
And he that hateth suretyship is sure. 

These words were written centuries before the 
Cross to warn men of what is still a very com- 
mon ground for failure and ruin in business life. 
To go surety for a stranger is a most danger- 
ous thing, as thousands have learned to their 
sorrow. 

But there was One who knew to the full what 
all the consequences of His act would be, and 
yet, in grace, deigned to become ‘‘Surety for a 
stranger.”” ‘Ye know the grace of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, that, though He was rich, yet for 
your sakes He became poor, that ye through 
His poverty might be rich” (2 Cor.8:9). He 
was the stranger’s Surety. 

A surety is one who goes good for another. 
Many a man will do this for a friend long 
known and trusted; but no wise man will so 
act for a stranger. But it was when we were 
““strangers and foreigners,” ‘“‘enemies and alien- 
ated in our minds by wicked works,” that Jesus 
in grace became our Surety. He “died, the Just 
for the unjust, that He might bring us to God.” 


Chapter Eleven 121 


All we owed was exacted from Him when He 
suffered upon the tree for sins not His own. He 
could then say, ‘‘I restored that which I took 
not away’’ (Psa.69:4). Bishop Lowth’s beau- 
tiful rendering of Isa. 53: 7 reads, ‘‘It was ex- 
acted, and He became answerable.’ This is the 
very pith and marrow of the gospel. 

How fully He proved the truth of the words 
we are considering when He suffered on that 
cross of shame! How He had to ‘smart for 
it,”” when God’s awful judgment against sin fell 
upon Him! But He wavered not. In love to 
God and to the strangers whose Surety He had 
become, “‘He endured the cross, despising the 
shame.” 

His sorrows are now forever past. He has 
paid the debt, met every claim in perfect right- 
eousness. The believing sinner is cleared of 
every charge, and God is fully glorified. 


“He bore on the tree the sentence for me; 
And now both the Surety and sinner are free.” 


None other could have met the claims of 
God’s holiness against the sinner and have 
come out triumphant at last. He alone could 
atone for sin. Because He has settled every 
claim God has raised Him from the dead, and 
seated Him at His right hand in highest glory. 

There He sits—the glo: ified One, administer- 


122 Notes on Proverbs 


ing grace and blessing to all who see in Him 
the stranger’s Surety, and trust Him for them- 
selves. 
16 A gracious woman retaineth honor: 

And strong men retain riches. 

As strength of body enables a man to retain 
his wealth against those who would assail it, 
so strength of character is evidenced even in the 
weaker vessel by the ability to yield, in grace, 
rather than to stand for what might be 
thought her rights; and thus she retains honor. 
Many are fearful of forfeiting the admiration of 
others by kindliness and humility, and so wrap 
themselves in a haughty, chilling dignity which 
after all makes them but the objects of scorn, if 
not of disgust. Nothing is so truly lovely and 
admirable as a gracious, conciliatory spirit, 
whether in the home, the assembly, or in our 
dealings with the world. How brightly does 
this shine out in Abigail (1 Sam. 25)! 

17 The merciful man doeth good to his own soul: 
But the cruel troubleth his own flesh. 

It is the same kindly, forgiving spirit that is 
here lauded. Not only others, but one’s own 
self, will be blessed and helped thereby; while 
hardness and cruelty will inevitably come back 
on the one who so acts. He cannot but be un- 
happy in his own soul; and then, with what 
measure he metes, it shall be measured to him 


Chapter Eleven 123 


again. Joab was a man of this stamp (1 Kings 
2: 5,6); in Isaac we see the opposite (Gen. 26). 
18 The lawless worketh a deceitful work: 
But to him that soweth righteousness shall be a sure 
reward. 
19 As righteousness tendeth to life: 
So he that pursueth evil [tendeth] to his own death. 
20 They that are of a froward heart are abomination 
to Jehovah: 
But such as are upright in their way are His delight. 


21 Though hand join in hand, the evil-doer shall not be 
unpunished : 
But the seed of the righteous shall be delivered. 

Sin and righteousness are set in sharp con- 
trast again. Deceit and lawlessness go togeth- 
er. They shall be to the eternal undoing of 
those who practice them, because all such are 
an abomination to the Lord. 

In the upright He delights, therefore their re- 
ward is sure. Itis in vain for men to attempt 
to ward off the certain judgment coming by 
confederating together to defeat the justice of 
the Almighty. Vengeance will inevitably follow 
their iniquitous course; but deliverance shall 
come in due time to the righteous. Sennacherib 
and Hezekiah are the central figures in a solemn 
scene that sets forth the great and important 
principle of these verses (2 Chron. 32). 


22 As a jewel of gold in a swine’s snout, 
So is a fair woman that is without discretion. 


124 Notes on Proverbs 


Utter incongruity! Beauty allied to virtue is 
incomparably lovely. Bereft of discretion, it is 
sad indeed. See Jezebel’s melancholy history. 


23 The desire of the righteous is only good: 
But the expectation of the lawless is wrath. 


“Thoughts of peace and not of evil” fill the 
heart of the righteous. His desire shall be more 
than met; for ‘‘all things work together for 
good to them that love God, who are the called 
according to His purpose.” The expectation of 
the wicked is only judgment. He heaps up 
wrath for himself against the day of wrath. 
Note chap. 10: 28, and see Jeremiah and Zede- 
kiah (Jer. 17:16; 34: 1-3). 


24 There is that scattereth and yet increaseth: 
And there is that witholdeth more than is meet, 
but it tendeth to poverty. 
25 The liberal soul shall be made fat: 
And he that watereth, shall be watered also himself. 


Bunyan’s quaint rhyme, propounded as a rid- 
dle by Old Honest, and explained by Gaius, is in 
itself a suited commentary on these verses: 


“A man there was, though some did count him mad, 
The more he cast away, the more he had.” 

“He that bestows his goods upon the poor 
Shall have as much again, and ten times more.” 


It is the divine plan for increase and enlarge- 


Chapter Eleven 125 


ment. Like the Egyptian farmer who scatters 
his seed upon the retreating waters of the Nile, 
to reap a rich harvest ‘‘after many days,” so 
the one who is in touch with the philanthropy 
of the heart of God will find true increase later 
by scattering now; while he who greedily seeks 
to keep all for himself will find his course has led 
to utter ruin. In 2 Cor.9: 6—10 the Holy Spirit 
takes this up as a divine principle, and applies 
it to the grand subject of Christian benevolence. 
St. Paul there quotes the latter part of ver. 24 
and the beginning of ver. 25. ‘‘ But this I say, 
He which soweth sparingly shall reap also 
sparingly ; and he which soweth bountifully 
shall reap also bountifully. Every man accord- 
ing as he purposeth in his heart, so let him give; 
not grudgingly, or of necessity: for God loveth 
a cheerful giver.”” And he goes on to assure 
them that He who notes all done for His glory 
will minister in abundance to them who thus 
freely use the substance committed to them for 
the blessing of others. The Philippian assem- 
bly had tasted of the joy of thus ministering to 
the Lord (Phil. 4: 10-19). In Nabal of old 
we learn the folly of greed and self-occupation 
(1 Sam. 25: 10, 11, 38). 


26 He that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him 
But blessing shall be upon the head of him that sel- 
leth it. 


126 Notes on Proverbs 


- To hold in store that which would feed the 
multitude while people are dying for need of it, 
with a view to extortionate charges later, is 
conduct that deserves the curses it draws forth. 
The story of the medieval bishop of Rouen who 
so acted has made his name for centuries to be 
execrated and detested. We have just seen such 
a case in Nabal, who, living in prosperity him- 
self, refused to share with David and his follow- 
ers when persecuted by Saul. In Joseph, the 
husbander of Egypt’s resources for the good of 
the famine-stricken world, we see behavior such 
as is commended in the last clause. 

If in this world the curses of the dying shall 
fall wpon the withholder of corn, what shall be 
said of him, who, being in possession of the 
bread of life, having the knowledge of the pre- 
cious grace of God, is yet quite unconcerned as 
to the need of the vast multitudes on every 
hand who are going on to the second death, the 
lake of fire? It is in vain to plead that they 
know, and do not heed. The Christian is re- 
sponsible to warn, to preach, to entreat the lost 
to be reconciled to God. We are debtors to all 
men because of the treasure committed to us. 
Sad indeed will be the accounting for such as 
live to themselves, withholding the corn which 
alone can meet the dire need of the spiritually 
famine-stricken. Blessings shall be on the head 


Chapter Eleven 127 


of those who are as earnest in offering to men 
the free grace of God, as are the men of business 
in seeking sales for their wares. 


27 He that diligently seeketh good procureth favor: 
But he that seeketh mischief, it shall come upon him. 


It is again the retributive justice of God that 
is brought to our notice. The seeker after good 
shall be rewarded according to his faithfulness 
in endeavoring to bring joy and cheer to his fel- 
lows. But the mischief-maker, who rejoices in 
iniquity and desires the undoing of his neigh- 
bor, shall be undone himself. The confession of 
Adoni-bezek is a striking case in point (Judges 
1: 5-7). Caleb well illustrates the first clause 
(Josh. 14: 6-13). 


28 He that trusteth in his riches shall fall : 
But the nghteous shall flourish as a branch. 


Those who prosper in the world are very apt 
to ‘“‘trust in uncertain riches;’’ hence the need 
of being continually reminded of the evanescent 
character of all that this scene affords. See the 
rich fool of Luke 12: 16-21. 

The genuine riches are moral—not material. 
It is the righteous—not the moneyed man—who 
is truly wealthy. See the blessed man of Psa. 1. 


29 He that troubleth his own house shall inherit the 
wind: 
And the fool shall be servant to the wise in heart. 


{28 Notes on Proverbs 


To trouble one’s own house is, I take it, to so 
walk as to leave an evil example for those com- 
ing after to follow. Jehovah visits the iniqui- 
ties of the fathers upon the children to the third 
and fourth generation. Itis not merely physi- 
cal ills handed down in judgment, as in the case 
of the drunkard’s child being born with an inhe- 
rent tendency to disease; but the father’s ways 
are copied by the children. This is what is so 
prominent in the case of Jeroboam the son of 
Nebat, “‘ which made Israel to sin.”’ 

The fool, though superior in station, will be 
the servant to the wise in heart. Itis not the 
outward trappings and insignia of office that 
make a man to be truly great. When Daniel 
and Belshazzar met face to face, or when Paul 
and Festus confronted each other, who were the 
superior persons? 

30 The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life; 
And he that is wise winneth souls. 

A tree of life to those who perish—such is the 
fruit of the righteous. Refreshment and glad- 
ness are shed forth, that those who languish 
may enter into blessing. Thus,‘‘he that is wise 
winneth souls.”” It is not merely, as in the 
A.V., that “‘he that winneth souls is wise”; 
but all who are truly wise according to God 
will be channels of blessing to others—winners 
of souls. Searching is the truth here stated. 


Chapter Eleven. 129. 


Wisdom consists not in the knowledge of Scrip- 
ture, or divine principles, precious as such are 
and must be; but in the ability to walk in the 
power of these things, and to so minister to 
men and women, yea, and children too (preemi- 
nently, one might say), that they shall be won 
for Christ and His truth. Tested by this, how 
few are the wise! It is evident that soul-win- 
ning is not the slipshod business many would 
make it out to be—the mere hit-or-miss ministry 
that is socommon to-day. On the contrary, it 
is a divine science, requiring much earnest prep- 
aration of heart in the presence of God; careful 
study of the need of the souls of men and of the 
truth of the Scriptures as given to meet that 
need. Paulis again, of all merely human soul- 
winners, the great example here, “‘made all 
things to all men, if by any means he might 
save some.” This is the wisdom so much 
needed in turning men from the power of Satan 
unto God (1 Cor. 9: 19-23). 


31 Behold, the righteous shall be recompensed in the 


earth: 
Much more the lawless and the sinner, 


This is the passage quoted by the apostle 
Peter (though from the Septuagint version) in 
the 4th chapter of his first epistle, where he 
says, ‘‘ The time is come that judgment must be- 
gin at the house of God: and if it first begin at 

9 


130 Notes on Proverbs 


us, what shall the end be of them that obey not 
the gospel of God? And if the righteous scarcely 
be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner 
appear?” (vers. 17, 18). By comparing this 
18th verse, in its transposed form, with the 
proverb itself, much light is shed on the quo- 
tation as used by Peter. The righteous being 
scarcely, or with difficulty, saved, refers to their 
salvation on earth, not their entrance into 
heaven. Here, in this scene, righteous and wick- 
ed are subjects of God’s government. If, then, 
the godly shall be visited and recompensed here 
for the evil they may do when the heart turns 
away from the Lord, what of the wicked and 
the openly profane? Dire indeed will be their 
judgment. In a national way, we see this in 
the case of Israel, the righteous nation, punished 
in measure for their sins; so was Edom, the 
proud, defiant persecutor, who had cast off all 
fear of God. See the prophecy of Obadiah. 

God never spares His children when they wil- 
fully follow their own ways. ‘‘ Whom the Lord 
loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every 
son whom He receiveth.”” How impious the 
thought that the wicked can defy Him as they 
please, and yet go unpunished at last! Judg- 
ment may linger, but it is certain to be executed 
eventually. ‘‘ They shall not escape.” 


131 


CHAPTER TWELVE 


1 Whoso loveth instruction, loveth knowledge: 
But he that hateth reproof is brutish. 


“THE man who loves instruction for its own 

sake values true knowledge, let it come 
through what channel it may. What he desires 
is the truth, not the ability to display his ac- 
quirements. The mere vain pedant hates re- 
proof, and, like a brute beast, values not correc- 
tion (chap. 10:17). He prefers his own unbri- 
dled will, however contrary his thoughts and 
ways may be to sound instruction. This was 
the great characteristic of the world before the 
flood (Job 22:15,17). Josiah, the godly young 
king of Judah, is a fine example of the opposite 
(2 Chron. 34). 

2 A good man obtaineth favor of Jehovah: 
But a man of wicked devices will He condemn. 


3 A man shall not be established by lawlessness: 
But the root of the righteous shall not be moved. 


In the very nature of things, the face of the 
Lord cannot but shine upon the good man. 
His root shall be firmly established. ‘‘He shall 
be holden up, for God is able to make him 


132 Notes on Proverbs 


stand.” But that same divine character which 
makes Him delight in uprightness necessitates 
His condemnation of a man of wicked devices. 
He shall never be established. ‘‘The ungodly 
shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in 
the congregation of the righteous.”” See Hushai 
and Ahithophel (2 Sam.15 : 32; 16: 15-23; 17, 
et al.). 


4 A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband : 
But she that maketh ashamed is as rottenness in his 
bones. 


It would be a grave mistake to limit the word 
virtuous to the thought of chastity. The virtu- 
ous woman is one in whom all noble qualities 
shine, as set forth fully in the last chapter. 
Such a woman is indeed a crown to her hus- 
band. One who by folly and slothfulness makes 
ashamed is like the sudden coming on of old 
age. Contrast Sarah (Gen. 18:12 and 1 Peter 
3: 1-6) with Job’s wife (Job 2: 9, 10). 


5 The thoughts of the righteous are just: 
But the counsels of the lawless are deceit. 

6 The words of the lawless are to lie in wait for blood: 
But the mouth of the upright shall deliver them. 

7 The lawless are overthrown, and are not: 
But the house of the righteous shall stand. 


Right thoughts result in right words and 
right actions, and shall be rewarded by Him 


Chapter Twelve 133 


whose delight is in righteousness. But evil 
thoughts have their fruitage likewise in evil 
words and deeds, and they too shall receive a 
just recompense of reward. The judgment of 
God is according to truth, as every soul of man 
shall own at last. Contrast Absalom and 
David. 


8 A man shall be commended according to his wis- 
dom: 
But he that is of a perverse heart shall be exposed 
to contempt. 


Even among natural men wisdom is a com- 
mendation, while a vain and foolish spirit but 
exposes to contempt. The world can appreci- 
ate sobriety and spiritual intelligence, though it 
may refuse or even persecute it. But to pretend 
to either, while bereft of both, is to draw forth 
the disgust of all reasonable men. Note the dif- 
ference in the estimation formed by their fellows 
of Gideon and Abimelech (Judges 7 to 9). 


9 He that is despised, and hath a servant, 
Is better than he that honoreth himself and lacketh 
bread. 


The Douay version renders the final 1ine some- 
what differently: ‘‘ Better is the poor that pro- 
videth for himself.” The thought evidently is, 
that the one who is looked down upon as 
lowly, but whose needs are met, is far happier 


134 Notes on Proverbs 


and more to be envied than he who delights in 
making a pompous display while feeling the 
pinch of hunger and distress. See Jacob and 
Esau (Gen. 25 : 27-34). 


10 A righteous man regardeth the life of his beast: 


But the tender mercies of the lawless are cruel. 


A truly righteous man cannot act inconsist- 
ently with his character even in regard to a 
dumb beast. The very dependence of the crea- 
ture upon his consideration will but tend to stir 
his compassions, so that he will treat it with 
the kindliness proper to all noble souls. The 
wicked, or lawless, on the other hand, becomes 
only the more brutal as he recognizes his own 
title to control the lower creation. Cruelty and 
unrighteousness go hand in hand. Contrast 
Jacob with Balaam. See Gen. 33:13, 14 and 
Num. 22: 23-31. 


11 He that tilleth his land shall be satisfied with bread . 


But he that followeth vain persons is void of heart. 


The diligent husbandman is abundantly re- 
warded for his toil, while the trifling, idling 
companion of reckless coxcombs is but mani- 
festing his lack of intelligence. This is a search- 
ing word for young Christians. God’s word is 
a field well worth our tilling. Those who obey 
the apostolic injunction conscientiously, “Study 


Chapter Twelve 135 


to show thyself approved unto God, a work- 
man that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly 
dividing the word of truth,” are invariably re- 
paid for every hour earnestly devoted to the 
consideration of this precious field. Many, alas, 
waste much time in idle folly, companying with 
empty, frivolous worldlings, and neglecting 
their Bibles, to the serious detriment of their 
spiritual life. Such often wonder how it is that 
other Christians can discover so much that is 
new and edifying in the Scriptures. They see 
no such lovely lessons and helpful suggestions. 
No; because they do not really ‘‘till the land.” 
If they did, they too would be satisfied with 
bread. 

Incalculable is the loss those who so act must 
suffer, both in time and eternity. This neglect 
of the Bible is the root of much backsliding, 
coldness of heart, and departure from God. 
Where the believer makes it a daily practice to 
‘‘dig”’ into the Book for himself, and then seeks, 
by the Spirit’s power, to walk in the truth 
learned, growth in grace and in the knowl- 
edge of the things of God soon becomes most 
marked. Timothy is a fine pattern for all young 
saints on this point (2 Tim. 3: 14-17), while 
the ungodly Jehoiakim is a warning beacon for 
allin danger of taking the opposite course to 
that we have been outlining (Jer. 36 : 22-32). 


136 Notes on Proverbs 


12 The lawless desireth the fortress of evil : 
But the root of the righteous yieldeth fruit. 

13 The evil is snared by the transgression of the lips: 
But the just shall come out of trouble. 


The wicked would surround his very soul 
with evil, while hoping to escape in the day of 
retribution; but he is snared with the words 
of his mouth, and worse are the calamities to 
which he is exposed than those which he sought 
to ward off. Vide Gehazi (2 Kings 5: 20-27). 

The righteous, with holy confidence, places his 
trust in God, and bears fruit to His glory. In 
the day of his trouble he has a Deliverer near at 
hand. See Elisha (2 Kings 6:17). 


14 A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of 
his mouth: 
And the recompense of a man’s hands shall be ren- 
dered unto him. 


We have seen over and over again in this 
book that it is a principle of the divine gov- 
ernment, which no man may turn aside, that 
““whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also 
reap.’ To every man will recompense be made 
according to his doings. The Christian is not 
superior to this law of the kingdom of God. He 
the rather bows his head and owns its justice. 
See the parable of the unmerciful servant (Matt. 
18 : 24-35). 


Chapter Twelve 137 


15 The way of a fool is right in his own eyes: 
But he that harkeneth unto counsel is wise. 
16 A fool’s wrath is presently known: 
But a prudent man covereth shame. 


Two things are here stated as being charac- 
teristic of the man who is denominated a fool; 
that is, one who lacks divine wisdom. He is 
proud and self-confident, refusing to brook cor- 
rection: on the other hand, he is intolerant of 
others’ faults, manifesting his indignation read- 
ily, and making worse the wound in place of 
binding up. The wise and prudent man is in 
every way the contrast to all this. He is hard- 
est on himself; consequently. readily accepts 
counsel, willingly owning that others may be 
wiser than he; and he is ever ready to cover the 
shame of another, rather than to tell it abroad. 
It is the same contrast that existed in the days 
of Noah, when Ham unblushingly related the 
tale of his father’s shame, as though himself su- 
perior to his sire; while Shem and Japheth went 
backwards to cover their dishonored parent 


(Gen. 9). 
17 He that speaketh truth showeth forth righteousness : 


But a false witness, deceit. 

18 There is that speaketh like the piercings of a sword: 
But the tongue of the wise is health. 

19 The lip of truth shall be established forever: 


But a lying tongue is but for a moment. 


138 Notes on Proverbs 


20 Deceit is in the heart of them that imagine evil: 
But to the counsellors of peace is joy. 


21 There shall no evil happen to the just: 
But the lawless shall be filled with mischief. 


22 Lying lips are an abomination to Jehovah: 
But they that deal truly are His delight. 


The six verses are all occupied with the same 
general theme—lips of truth contrasted with a 
lying tongue. The latter is an abomination 
to Him who is Himself the Truth. The former 
He delights in because in accord with His own 
nature. 

Honest speech manifests integrity of heart: 
falsity declares unerringly the lack of truth in 
the inward parts. The one who hesitates not 
at deliberate lying scatters pain and sorrow on 
every side; his venomed words piercing like a 
sword the hearts of sensitive and gentle souls. 
To these the tongue of the wise is health and up- 
building. But the day of reckoning is coming, 
when the lip of truth shall be established for- 
ever, and the lying tongue go into oblivion. 

It is well to remember that it is intentional 
deceit that is here in question. One is often 
pained to hear good men recklessly charge oth- 
ers with lying because they have uttered an un- 
truth in the innocency of their hearts. A state- 
ment may be false as to fact, which is true as to 
intent ; just as a statement may be true as to 


Chapter Twelve 135 


fact, which was uttered with the intent to de 
ceive. Itis the deceit in the heart that causes 
the lips to utter a lie. None should be so 
charged unless the evidence makes it clear there 
was intention to prevaricate. 

The just shall be preserved from evil, even as 
they have sought the good of their fellows: but 
to the lawless, judgment without mercy shal! be 
meted out; for God cannot but make manifest 
His hatred of that which is false, and His ap- 
probation of truth and righteousness. Con- 
trast Nehemiah and Sanballat (Neh. 6: 5-9). 


23 A prudent man concealeth knowledge: 
But the heart of fools proclaimeth foolishness. 


The man who has least worth saying is gen- 
erally the man who says the most. The pru- 
dent man is not forever airing his knowledge; 
the fool loses no opportunity to proclaim his 
empty folly. See Jeremiah and Hananiah (Jer. 
28: 1-11). 


24 The hand of the diligent shall bear rule: 
But the slothful shall be under tnbute. 


It is not ability only that causes one to suc- 
ceed, and secures advancement. There must be 
earnest endeavor, otherwise talent and bril- 
liancy count for nothing. The slothful, how- 
ever much he may have the advantage of an- 


140 Notes on Proverbs 


other in natural gifts and intelligence, will in 
the end be inferior to the patient plodder. This 
is what some one has called ‘the gospel of 
work.” It is all-important, both in the natural 
and the spiritual sphere. Contrast Gideon and 
Barak (Judges 6: 11, 12; 4: 4-9). 

25 Heaviness in the heart of a man maketh it stoop: 

But a good word maketh it glad. 


‘‘How forcible are right words,” bringing 
comfort, cheer and encouragement to those in 
grief of soul and bitterness of spirit! See Nehe- 
miah and Artaxerxes (Neh. 2: 2-8). 


26 The righteous searcheth out his neighbor: 
But the way of the lawless seduceth them. 


The man whose own ways are clean, and 
whose conscience is free, will be able to sound 
and search his neighbor in a godly way to his 
edification and restoration to God, if his steps 
have gone astray. ‘‘He that is spiritual dis- 
cerneth all things.” The insubject, lawless man 
has not his brother’s good at heart, but rather 
his undoing; hence his words are seductive and 
ensnaring. Nathan is an illustration of the 
first; the wise woman of Tekoa, of the second 
(2 Sam. 12: 1-14; 14: 1-20). 

27 The slothful man roasteth not that which he took in 
hunting : 
But the substance of a diligent man is precious. 


Chapter Twelve 14J 


Some men can bestir themselves for a time, 
but soon fall back into their customary slothful 
manner. Many are they who attend the minis- 
try of the Word but fail afterwards to meditate 
upon and make their own what they hear. 
Their course is like one who goes forth to the 
field or forest, and while the excitement of the 
hunt is upon him spares no pains, but turns 
his prey to no true account afterwards. The 
way of the diligent is very different. He uses 
what he has, and thus more is given, as in the 
parable of the talents. Ruth, who gleaned all 
day and at even “beat out that which she had 
gleaned,” is a striking illustration of this (2: 
17). The servant who hid his pound in a nap- 
kin pictures the contrary spirit. 


28 In the way of righteousness there is life; 
And in the pathway thereof there is no death. 


The way of righteousness is that path of the 
just that shineth more and more unto the per- 
fect day. Passing through a scene of death, it 
goes on to the land of life; and that eternal life 
is now the precious possession of all who, by 
the straight gate, have entered upon it. What 
men call death, real and true as it is to every 
one who treads the path of sin, for the just is 
but the end of the way opening into the glad- 
ness and glory of the Father’s house. “This 


142 Notes on Proverbs 


God is our God forever and forever. He will be 
our guide even over (not, as in the A. V., unto) 
death.” Happy the portion of all who tread 
the way of holiness, through a world of sin, up 
to the city of God! 


143 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 


N the first verse of this portion we are again 

reminded that it is the wise who are grate- 

ful for counsel and help; the foolish scorner 
will not accept rebuke. 


1 A wise son heareth his father’s instruction: 
But a scorer heareth not rebuke. 


It is the part of true wisdom to own that the 
more experienced may save me much by in- 
structing me as a result of what has been 
learned of a road already trodden, and which 
to me is all new ground. The self-confident 
scorner will pass on, indifferent to the words of 
the wise, to learn for himself by bitter experi- 
ence of the snares and pitfalls he might have 
been saved from, had he been humble enough to 
accept counsel from those competent to teach. 
Contrast Isaac (Gen. 26) with Simeon and Levi 
(Gen. 34: 25-31). 


2 A man shall eat good by the fruit of his mouth: 
But the soul of the transgressors shall eat violence. 
3 He that keepeth his mouth keepeth his life : 
But he that openeth wide his lips shall have de- 
struction. 


144 Notes on Proverbs 


The evil speaker is but laying up trouble and 
sorrow for himself in the future; as the one into 
whose lips grace is poured shall surely find 
grace when in need himself. To control the lips 
is to keep the life. The perfect man is the one 
who has his tongue in subjection. He who 
lacks wisdom in this respect will bring sure de- 
struction upon himself. Of this Shimei is a sol- 
emn warning (1 Kings 2: 8); while David, 
when tempted greatly to speak for himself, illus- 
trates the opposite (1 Sam. 17: 28, 29). 


4 The soul of the sluggard desireth, and hath nothing: 
But the soul of the diligent shall be made fat. 


The New Testament reiterates the principle 
here declared, that ‘‘if a man will not work, nei- 
ther shall he eat.” It is as true in the things of 
the spiritual life as of the natural. The diligent 
seeker after the precious truths laid up in the 
word of God is the one who is made to rejoice 
over that Word as one that findeth great spoil. 
The sluggard’s portion is leanness of soul and 
dissatisfaction continually. Contrast Ezra 7: 
10 with the returned captives (Hag. 1: 2-6). 


5 A righteous man hateth lying: 
But a lawless man is loathsome, and cometh to shame. 
6 Righteousness keepeth him that is-perfect in the way: 
But lawlessness overthroweth the sinner. 


Chapter Thirteen 145 


Truth in the inward parts is the secret of 
practical righteousness. That which is false is 
necessarily hateful to the one who is in the way 
of holiness. He has judged iniquity, and his 
concern is to so walk in secret before God as to 
glorify His name in this world, where it has 
been so terribly dishonored. The insubject man 
makes himself odious, and is overthrown by his 
own sin, being put to shame even here, and 
whose future portion is to be cast into outer 
darkness for eternity. Contrast Jehoiada and 
Athaliah (2 Kings 11). 

7 There is that feigneth himself rich, yet hath nothing : 

There is that feigneth himself poor, yet hath great 
riches. 

It is the nature of fallen man to act the hyp- 
ocrite. The poverty-stricken will pretend to 
wealth; the wealthy will feign poverty. He 
who has nothing desires to be esteemed as one 
who has much; and he who has great riches 
ofttimes considers his safety to lie in being con- 
sidered one who has little or nothing. The first 
is proud and vain; the last, mean and miserly. 
The one is the spirit of Laodicea (Rev. 3: 17): 
the other we see carried out by the wily Gibe- 
onites, to deceive Joshua and the army of Israel 
(Josh. 9). 

8 The ransom of a man’s life are his riches: 


But the poor heareth not rebuke. 
10 


146 Notes on Proverbs 


The verse is confessedly ambiguous. Various 
renderings give little help. The thought seems 
to be that riches are the confidence of their pos- 
sessor. He therefore can haughtily scorn the 
one who would reprove him. But the indigent 
is crushed by a rebuke, having no spirit left to 
enable him to stand against it. Both are natu- 
ral men, apparently. 


9 The light of the righteous rejoiceth: 
But the lamp of the lawless shall be put out. 


Brightly burns the flame of testimony when 
fed with the oil of grace, which the righteous 
alone possess. The lamp of the lawless may 
flare for a moment, but the true state of affairs 
will soon be manifested. He lacks the oil, so 
the light must fail. Compare the ten virgins 
(Matt. 25). 


10 Only by pride cometh contention: 
But with the well-advised is wisdom. 


What a commentary on the subtle pride in all 
quarters are the many bitter contentions be- 
tween individual saints and collective bodies 
meeting in the name of Christ! Only by pride 
cometh strife. It is well that this solemn word 
be kept in mind. If pride were judged, and the 
sin of it frankly owned before God, how soon 
would much that has been contended for be 


Chapter Thirteen 147 


seen in its true light, as contrary to the Scrip- 
tures, and hence opposed to the spirit of Jesus 
Christ! It is an old saying, that “it takes two 
to make a quarrel.’’ Where the effort to main- 
tain a foolish dignity prevails, or covetousness 
leads the heart to desire what belongs to an- 
other, contention speedily is stirred. But if met 
by lowliness and grace on the part of the of- 
fended one, how soon must the strife cease! 
With the well-advised is that wisdom which en- 
ables him to give the soft answer that turneth 
away wrath. In the matter of the strife be- 
tween the herdmen of Abram and Lot, we see 
how pride was at the root. . Most effectually 
did Abram meet it, when he offered first choice 
to the man who had no title whatever to the 
land which Jehovah had given to the other 
(Gen. 13). 


11 Wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished : 
But he that gathereth by labor shall increase. 


That which comes easily, easily slips away. 
It is treasure for which one has toiled that he 
really values, and is careful in the use of. The 
principle abides when applied to the true riches, 
the precious truth of God. Some, like a sponge, 
readily absorb, but as readily give out under 
pressure. That which is valued is what has 
been won by labor. ‘Study to show thyself ap- 


148 Notes on Proverbs 


proved unto God, a workman that needeth not 
to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of 
truth.’’? Wealth such as this is surely worth 
the self-sacrifice and devotion required to ob- 
tain it; and when so obtained, it shall abide, 
and increase. See Ziba (2 Sam.16:4; 19: 29), 
as contrasted with Caleb (Josh. 14: 6-14). 


12 Hope deferred maketh the heart sick: 
But the desire that cometh to pass is asa tree of life 


The ever unsatisfied longing of a hungry soul 
results in faintness of spirit and sickness of 
heart. Such is the hopeless hope of the Christ- 
less. How blessed the contrast in the case of 
the Christian! He, too, at times is sick with 
longing; longing to behold the Beloved of his 
soul: but soon shall his desire be accomplished, 
and precious as the tree of life shall be its fulfil- 
ment. David once was sick with yearning de- 
sire. He would taste the water of the well of 
his childhood. But when his desire was met 
and the water was brought, it was too precious 
for him to taste: he poured it out before the 
Lord (1 Chron. 11: 15-19). 


13 Whoso despiseth the word shall be destroyed: 
But he that feareth the commandment shall be re- 
warded. 
14 The law of the wise is a fountain of life, 
To depart from the snares of death. 


Chapter Thirteen 149 


15 Good understanding giveth favor: 
But the way of transgressors is hard. 


To despise the word of instruction, which is 
the law of the wise (giving favor with God and 
man, as so abundantly proven by both Joseph 
and Daniel, and a host of others), is to expose 
oneself to shame now, and eternal ignominy 
hereafter. But he that feareth the command- 
ment, recognizing in it a fountain of life, will be 
preserved from the sorrows attendant upon the 
way of the transgressor, and the dark outlook 
beyond. Pharaoh despised the word, and fell 
beneath the avenging hand of the Lord. Saul 
despised the word, and was put to grief before 
the Philistines. The last three kings of Judah 
despised the word, and learned to the full, when 
too late, the terrible mistake made. Would 
that the solemn example of these, and many 
more whose lives are recorded in both sacred 
and secular history, would speak loudly to 
those bent on taking their own way and ignor- 
ing the commandment of the Lord, who has 
said, ‘‘To this man will I look, even to him 
that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trem- 
bleth at My word” (Isa. 66: 2). 


16 Every prudent man dealeth with knowledge: 
But a fool layeth open his folly. 


It is the part of ordinary prudence to lay to 


150 Notes on Proverbs 


heart what we have been considering. Fools 
alone will refuse it, and thereby manifest their 
folly. Alas, that so large a number of those 
who as to this world are wise, should be fools 
as to the next! And yet, after all, true wisdom 
for the life that now is, is manifested by subjec- 
tion to God and dealing with the knowledge 
His word imparts. It is the sinfully foolish one 
who turns a deaf ear to the voice of truth. 
Contrast Moses and Aaron with Korah and 
his company (Num. 16). 

17 A lawless messenger falleth into mischief: 

But a faithful ambassador is healing. 

The messenger who runs unsent, waiting not 
for his commission from his master, will but fall 
into and produce mischief. The one who faith- 
fully goes forth as the ambassador of another 
carries health and blessing. In the work of the 
gospel this is all-important. We live in a day 
of great restlessness and activity. But few are 
the servants who wait to get the mind of the 
Lord as revealed in His Word. The result is 
much mischievous teaching and faulty instruc- 
tion, that bewilders and perplexes the hearers. 
Precious is the message of the faithful ambassa- 
dor as he goes forth beseeching men to be rec- 
onciled to God (2 Cor. 5: 20). 


18 Poverty and shame shall be to him that refuseth in- 
struction : 


Chapter Thirteen 151 


But he that regardeth reproof shall be honored. 


Men may foolishly consider it beneath them 
to bow to instruction, and learn from those 
competent to teach; but lasting honor comes 
to the one who is humble enough to receive help 
from whoever can impart true knowledge; 
while ignominy and poverty shall be the por- 
tion of the self-sufficient soul. See Johanan and 
the captains (Jer. 42. Comp. chap. 12:1). 

19 The desire accomplished is sweet to the soul : 
But it is abomination to fools to depart from evil. 


20 He that walketh with wise men shall be wise: 
But a companion of fools shall be destroyed. 


When the heart’s desire is’ attained, the soul 
rejoices. But the only desire of the fool is the 
gratification of his unbridled passions. He re- 
fuses to entertain the thought that iniquity is 
to be shunned. ‘‘ Evil communications corrupt 
good manners.’”’ Association with the wise 
tends to wisdom. Companionship with vain 
persons is condueive to further vanity, and re- 
sults in moral and spiritual ruin. Contrast Re- 
hoboam with the young king Josiah (1 Kings 
12:8; 2 Kings 22). 

21 Evil pursueth sinners : 
But to the righteous good shall be repaid. 
22 A good man leaveth an inheritance to his children’s 


children: 
And the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just. 


$52 Notes on Proverbs 


Again and again throughout this book the 
principle of retributive justice, even in this life, 
is insisted on. The sinner pursues evil, but only 
to find evil pursue him; while the righteous 
man who extends his goodness to others is re- 
paid in kind. And when at last called away 
from this world, the good man, whether he 
leaves a fortune in material things behind him 
or not, yet bequeaths to his descendants an 
honored name and a holy example—an inherit- 
ance of incalculable value. That which the evil- 
doer has laid up is soon dissipated, and passes 
into hands better able to use it aright. Con- 
trast Jonadab the Rechabite (Jer. 35 : 6-11) 
with Coniah (Jehoiachin, Jer. 22 : 24-30). 


23 Much food is in the tillage of the poor: 
But there is that is destroyed for want of judgment. 


The poor husbandman will, if diligent, use 
every corner of his little plot, producing an 
amount and a variety of food that is often as- 
tonishing to his wealthier neighbor, many of 
whose broad acres are allowed to lie fallow, 
and much of whose crop may, through careless- 
ness, be permitted to run to waste and be de- 
stroyed. 

The man of small opportunities often makes 
the most of what he has, while the one of large 
privileges becomes slothful and neglectful. 


Chapter Thirteen. 153 


We may see a needed lesson here as to spirit- 
ual things? Is it not frequently the case that a 
brother or sister with much leisure for study 
and prayer, boundless opportunities for the 
enjoyment of ministry, oral and written, and 
gifted in large measure, will be found to be ta- 
king his or her ease in a careless, lethargic spirit, 
gaining very little real food daily, and giving 
out little to others? On the other hand, how 
much more common a thing is it to find one 
whose daily toil occupies most of his waking 
hours, and whose talents and education are 
alike of a mean order, yet devoting himself ear- 
nestly to using what he has, letting scarcely 
a moment slip by wasted, and so gathering reg- 
ularly much food for his own soul, and con- 
stantly imparting refreshment and blessing to 
his brethren! 

The lack of spirituality is not the result ofa 
lack of time to cultivate the things of God; but 
it betrays failure to use the opportunities pre- 
sented. 

We have heard of a blacksmith blowing a bel- 
lows, with a leaf of God’s word before him upon 
the wall, that he might glean a little for his soul 
as he attended to his forge; and of a cobbler 
pegging shoes with his Testament in front of 
him, from which ever and anon he snatched a 
precious morsel for his spiritual upbuilding. It 


154 Notes on Proverbs 


was the tillage of the poor; but life and conver- 
sation proved there had been much food in it. 

“No time for God” generally means “No 
heart for God,” if the full truth were told. The 
diligent soul will make time, and often proves 
that a small portion of Scripture, or a few min- 
utes of prayer, bear rich fruit, when heart and 
conscience are truly exercised. See the prayer 
of Jabez (1 Chron. 4: 9, 10). 


24 He that spareth his rod hateth his son: 
But he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes. 


Family discipline should be patterned after 
the divine discipline of Heb. 12. Itis not love, 
but the lack of it, that leaves a child to himself; 
to develop, unchecked, tendencies and propensi- 
ties which shall result in future sorrow. Ours 
is a day of great laxity on this point. The com- 
ing generation will reap the bitter fruit of the 
absence of restraint and the evident aversion 
to chastening, so manifest in the majority of 
homes. A sickly sentimentality, supposedly wi- 
ser and more compassionate than God Himself, 
has made it fashionable to decry the use of the 
rod, as a relic of a barbarous age; but the dif- 
ference in the character of children and the home 
is certainly in the favor of Scripture, as any one 
may see who will. 

It is even worse where, among Christians, 


Chapter Thirteen 155 


government is ignored on the plea that graee is 
reigning. Grace never sets aside government. 
The two principles are not opposed, or antago- 
nistic. In the divine ways, they go on side by 
side, as they should in the home. Contrast Eli 
(1 Sam. 3: 13,14) with Abraham (Gen.18:19). 


25 The nghteous eateth to the satisfying of his soul: 
But the belly of the lawless shall want. 


The portion of the righteous may be small, 
but enjoyment is with it, for heart and con- 
science are at rest. But the lawless, though he 
riot in pleasure and plenty for a time, finds no 
real satisfaction; and his recklessness _ shall 
bring him to want at last. How much happier 
the portion of Lazarus at the gate of the rich 
man, with Abraham’s bosom awaiting him, 
than that of the lawless prodigal of the previ- 
ous chapter (Luke 16 and 15). 


156 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 


fe HE wise and the foolish woman are brought 
before us in vivid contrast in the opening 
verse: 


| Every wise woman buildeth her house: 


But the foolish plucketh it down with her hands. 


The wise woman, by counsel and example, 
will lead her household in the right way, direct- 
ing their steps in accordance with the word of 
the Lord. Thus her house is established on an 
immovable foundation of righteousness. The 
foolish, through her evil behavior and unwor- 
thy instruction, lays up sorrow for herself and 
grief for her offspring by her unholy influence. 
Contrast the mothers of Moses and of Ahaziah 
(Ex. 2; 2 Chron. 22: 2, 3). 


2 He that walketh in his uprightness feareth Jehovah: 
But he that is perverse in his ways despiseth Him. 


It is the life that proves whether one is really 
walking before God or not. The testimony of 
the lips, if contradicted by the behavior, is of 
little worth. The one who fears the Lord will 
be characterized by godliness and faithfulness. 


Chapter Fourteen 157 


‘‘He that saith he abideth in Him ought himself 
also so to walk even as He walked.” 

If the ways are perverst, and opposed to His 
revealed will, it is proof that God is really de- 
spised, and not feared: He wants reality. To 
talk of reverence while obeying the dictates of a 
selfish, carnal nature, is but hypocrisy. This 
was Saul’s snare. Samuel declared the answer 
to it all when he said, ‘‘ Behold, to obey is better 
than sacrifice, and to harken than the fat of 
rams” (1 Sam. 15:22). The testimony of the 
people themselves proves the prophet to have 
walked before them in the fear of God (1 Sam. 
12). . 

3 In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride: 
But the lips of the wise shall preserve them. 


Out of his own mouth the fool, by his vain 
boasting, condemns himself; but the words of 
the wise declare the state of their hearts. Able 
to give the soft answer that turneth away 
wrath; slow to speak and swift to hear—their 
conversation manifests the wisdom that is in 
them. See Goliath and David (1 Sam. 17: 
41-49). 

4 Where no oxen are, the crib is clean: 

But much increase is by the strength of the ox. 

It would be a drastic measure indeed to slay 

the oxen in order to have a clean stable. The 


158 Notes on Proverbs 


purpose would surely be attained, but at what 
a cost] 

The strength of the ox adds to the wealth of 
the farm, and makes it well worth the use ofa 
little time spent regularly in cleansing the stall. 
‘““Doth God take care for oxen, or saith He 
it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes, 
doubtless, it is written.’”’ It is cause for lamen- 
tation to notice the readiness with which as- 
semblies sometimes resort to getting rid of 
troublesome saints, thus cutting off much in- 
crease and blessing which might have ensued 
had patience and grace but been exercised. Too 
often it is taken for granted that the great ob- 
ject of discipline in the house of God is to get rid 
of the offender; whereas the truth is just the 
opposite. Earnest endeavor to recover the err- 
ing one should be the first thing thought of. 
Much crying to God, and identifying ourselves 
with the sin of one who has misbehaved, will 
accompany this, if we are before Him about it 
as we should be. Finally, if all is in vain, and 
the evil-doer persists in his sin, refusing to re- 
pent, excision is the last sad acknowledgment 
that the case must be left in the hands of God. 

To bring the matter before the saints, and 
take summary action, before every available 
means has been used with a view to his recov- 
ery. mav indeed cleanse the assembly; but it 


Chapter Fourteen 159 


will be to the loss of all. We need one another. 
It is when we have the effectual working of 
every part, by that which every joint supplieth, 
that there is blessing and increase of the whole. 
How much better is it to cleanse by leading an 
erring brother to repentance, thus covering his 
sin, than by excommunicating him before all 
possible means have been exhausted in seeking 
his restoration to God! See Judges 20: 35-48; 
21:1-3). 
5 A faithful witness will not lie: 
But a false witness will utter lies. 

The faithful testimony-bearer gives forth 
words of truth and soberness. A false witness 
cannot be depended on, for he has committed 
himself to the declaration of what he knows is 
untrue. The Christian is called to be a follower 
of Him who is preeminently “‘the faithful and 
true witness.” Refusing to handle the word of 
God deceitfully, he is to speak what he knows 
on the authority of divine revelation. To give 
out the vaporings of the human mind, with its 
idle speculations, will be to utter lies instead of 
truth. See Paul before Festus and Agrippa 
(Acts 26: 25); and note the sad contrast in the 
case of Peter in the corridor of the council-room 
(Luke 22 : 55-62). 


6 A scorner seeketh wisdom, and findeth it not: 
But knowledge is easy unto the intelligent. 


160 Notes on Proverbs 


The scorner may inquire, but he sets not his 
heart upon the answer. Therefore wisdom he 
fails to find. But to the intelligent who are ac- 
tuated by a sincere desire to know the truth, 
even if it mean to be obliged to judge them- 
selves and their ways thereby, knowledge is 
easy. 

It is so, preeminently, with the attainment 
of the understanding of the Scriptures. The 
mocker is continually finding cause for objec- 
tions and foolish quibbles in the word of God. 
The devout and upright soul sees only light 
where the other sees darkness. If a man has 
dificulty in accepting the truth of the Bible, it 
will almost invariably be found that it is be- 
cause he is clinging to and persisting in some 
unholy course that the Word condemns. When 
sin is judged, and iniquity repented of, all be- 
comes clear. Pilate was one who asked, ‘‘ What 
is truth?”’ but was not concerned enough to 
tarry for a reply, though Truth Incarnate stood 
before him. Daniel, long pefore, had proven 
that all is plain to the spiritually intelligent. 


7 Go from the presence of a foolish man, 
When thou perceivest not in him the lips of knowl- 
edge. 
8 The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way : 
But the folly of fools is deceit. 


Chapter Fourteen 16} 


9 Fools make a mock at sin for, at the trespass-offering]: 
But among the righteous there is acceptance. 


When it becomes evident that a man is bent 
on folly, with no concern about righteousness, 
it is best to leave him to himself. To argue or 
reason with such a one is useless. It is defiling 
to the wise, and but gratifying to the pride of 
the fool. “From such turn away.” 

The prudent has wisdom given him to guide 
him aright. For this the fool has no desire. 
His heart is utterly false, and deceit is on his 
lips. At sin, and the offering for it, he mocks. 
He has never realized the heinousness of the one, 
nor the need of the other. Consequently it is in 
vain to try to turn him from his lawless course. 
The righteous find acceptance because they have 
judged themselves, and bowed to God’s just and 
holy sentence. Owning their true estate, they 
find abetter one. Walking in obedience to God, 
they are acceptable to Him. 

Let none gather from this that Scripture 
teaches that acceptance, in the sense of salva- 
tion, is on the ground of legal works. Far from 
it. Not until a man is justified by faith, as 
Abraham, does he do the works of righteous- 
ness. Good deeds are not the procuring cause 
of justification and new birth, but the result of 


these great and important blessings. 
11 


162 Notes on Proverbs. 


For an example of the fools who make a mock 
at sin, and refuse instruction, see Jer. 44: 15-19, 
where the remnant in Egypt defy the word of 
the Lord spoken through His prophet. 


10 The heart knoweth its own bitterness; 
And a stranger doth not intermeddle with its joy. 


Every heart has its secret of joy or sorrow 
that no other ever shares. Hidden deep down 
from the sight of the nearest and the dearest 
are, often, griefs too deep for utterance, or joys 
too great for words. How truly was this the 
case with our blessed Lord Himself! Who ever 
sounded the depths of the anguish of His soul, 
or who can estimate aright His joys? 

To such a High Priest we can go with our 
own heaviest sorrows, and with Him we can 
share our inmost thoughts of exultation and 
delight. 


11 The house of the lawless shall be overthrown: 
But the tent of the upright shall flourish. 

12 There is a way which seemeth night unto a man, 
But the end thereof are the ways of death. 

13 Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful; 


And the end of that mirth is heaviness. 


If the ‘young man” who gives his attention 
to the wisdom of Solomon perish at last, as a 
result of missing the path of life, it will not be 
for lack of warning, and a paucity of instruc. 


Chapter Fourteen 163 


tion. Clearly and unmistakably, the two classes 
are again contrasted. 

We read first of the house of the lawless and 
the tent of the righteous. The house might 
seem by far the more stable, but it shall be over- 
thrown; for its foundations shall be destroyed 
because built upon sinking sand. The pilgrim’s 
tent wherein the upright tabernacles as he jour- 
neys through a foreign scene,—foreign to the 
new nature within him,—will abide and flourish 
till tenting days are over. 

Man naturally chooses his own way—a way 
that seemeth right unto himself. But it ends in 
death, for it is opposed to the truth of God. 
“The labor of the foolish wearieth every one of 
them, because he knoweth not how to go to the 
erty’ (Ecce: 10: 15): 

There is a city which the most sinful and vile, if 
believing in a future state at all, cannot but long 
to enter—that city discerned afar off by Abra- 
ham, and described by John as the New and 
Holy Jerusalem, of which the Lamb who died is 
the Centre and Lamp from whom shines all the 
glory of God. He Himself said, while on earth, 
“Tam the Way.” By His name alone is salva- 
tion proclaimed to sinners lost and guilty. 
There is none other name, and no other way. 
that will lead to the city of light. 

A way there is—yes, many such; but none can 


164 Notes on Proverbs 


rightly be designated the way save Jesus only. 
The end of a way that seemeth right is death— 
death moral, death spiritual, death eternal, yet 
death conscious forever] 

Those who refuse the Way, to tread a way of 
their own choosing, find no true joy or confi- 
dence. ‘They, being ignorant of God’s right- 
eousness, and going about to establish their 
own righteousness, have not submitted them- 
selves unto the righteousness of God” (Rom. 
10:3). Hence their way is one of doubt and 
uncertainty. Though they laugh, the heart is 
not at rest, and their mirth is destined to end in 
madness. See Micah in Judges 17 and 18 : 14— 
26.* 

Happy those who refuse every way of man’s 
devising, and turn to Him who is the Way, the 
Truth, and the Life! 


14 The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own 
ways: 
And a good man shall be satisfied from himself. 


The word “‘backslider”’ occurs in this verse 
only. Elsewhere in the Bible it is never used. 
“Backsliding”’ is found a number of times in our 
English version, fifteen in all (generally as an 


* A gospel address on this solemn passage can be found in 
the Author’s ‘‘Only Two Religions’; to be had of the same 
Publishers, 


Chapter Fourteen 165 


adjective, though also as a participle, and sev- 
eral times as a noun), but only in the books of 
Jeremiah and Hosea. It is well to notice that 
neither form of the word occurs in the New Tes- 
tament. 

A backslider is one who has given up ground 
once taken for God. Many a soul gives up in 
heart long before it is manifested in the life. 
The conscience becomes defiled ; and if self-judg- 
ment does not follow, the truth begins to lose 
its power over the heart. The sad result of a 
broken-down testimony soon follows, till he is 
filled with his own ways. Itis important, how- 
ever, to carefully distinguish between backslid- 
ing and apostasy. The backslider is one who 
fails in practically carrying out the truth. The 
apostate, on the other hand, gives up the truth 
entirely, even denying the Lord that bought 
him; thus proving his unreality, whatever his 
previous profession may have been. It is to 
such that John refers in his first epistle, chap. 2: 
19, as also Paul in Heb. 6 and 10. Needless to 
say, no true believer ever becomes an apostate. 

The good man—that is, the man who is reai 
for God—shall be filled from what is in himself. 
The testimony of the Lord controls the reins of 
his being. His life will be in accord therewith. 

Peter was a backslider in heart long before he 
fell; so, we may rest assured. was David. In 


166 Notes on Proverbs 


the faithful stand of Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abednego, we see men whose hearts were under 
the sway of divine principles when in seclusion, 
and who therefore overcame in public (Dan. 3). 
15 The simple believeth every word: 

But the prudent man looketh well to his going. 
16 A wise man feareth, and departeth from evil: 

But the fool rusheth on, and is confident. 
17 He that is soon angry dealeth foolishly : 

And a man of wicked devices is hated. 
18 The simple inherit folly: 

But the prudent are crowned with knowledge. 


19 The evil bow before the good; 
And the lawless at the gates of the righteous. 


Wise and simple are relative terms, referring 
not so much to mental condition as to the fear 
of the Lord on the one hand, and indifferent self- 
sufficiency on the other. 

The simple are ready with amazing incredu- 
lity to believe anything given forth by men as 
foolish as themselves, while stumbling over the 
clearest truths of revelation. No one has such 
strong faith in the greatest absurdities as the 
very man who quibbles over the truth of God. 
The unbeliever can believe unhesitatingly that 
he is the descendant of a long line of lower ani- 
mals ranging all the way from protoplasm to 
ape, while he sneers at the Christian who re- 
ceives by faith the divine record that ‘God 
hath made man upright, but they have sought 


Chapter Fourteen. 167 


out many inventions.”’ The prudent man mis- 
trusts himself, and trusts the word of the living 
God. Ordering his steps in that Word, he looks 
well to his going. 

Fearing the Lord, the wise man departs from 
evil. The fool, heeding no one, led by his lustful 
desires, rushes on in vainglorious self-confidence 
to his own destruction. If opposed in his fol- 
lies, he rages in anger, but finds himself the ob- 
ject of the hatred of his fellows, because of his 
wicked devices. In searching for lawless pleas- 
ures he shall inherit folly, and at the end, when 
his wild race is run and his years of recklessness 
are past, in his decrepitude and poverty he shall 
bow at the gates of the righteous, forced at last 
to own that they had chosen the better part. 
Having devoted themselves to the acquisition 
of wisdom, the good are crowned with knowl- 
edge, and honored, when the simple are de- 
spised. Contrast Saul and David. 


20 The poor is hated even of his own neighbor: 
But the rich hath many friends. 
21 He that despiseth his neighbor sinneth : 
But he that is gracious to the afflicted, happy is he. 
22 Do they not err that devise evil? 
But loving kindness and truth shall be to them that 
devise good. 


In a world like this, where covetousness rules, 
the rich will always have many to laud and ad- 


168 Notes on Proverbs 


mire them; while the poor will be despised and 
oppressed. To so act is to greatly err, for hath 
not God chosen ofttimes the poor of earth to be 
rich in faith? The eye of God is beholding all, 
and He will reward those who are gracious and 
kindly in their dealings with the lowly. He will 
see that loving-kindness and truth are meted 
out to them in return. Contrast the princes 
of Judah with Ebed-melech (Jer. 38: 1-13; 39: 
15-18). 

23 In all labor there is profit: 

But the talk of the lips tendeth only to penury, 


Labor is profitable, both because of what is 
produced, and in that it fills the hands and occu- 
pies the mind, thus greatly lessening the danger 
of giving way to a corrupt nature. But mere 
talk, empty boasting, and foolish vaunting of 
oneself, results in material and spiritual pov- 
erty. How suited the prayer for fallen crea- 
tures, ‘Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth: 
keep the door of my lips” (Psa. 141:3)! See 
the parable of the two sons, one of whom la- 
bored to profit; the other said, and went not: 
it was the talk of the lips alone (Matt. 21: 
28-31). 

24 The crown of the wise is their riches: 
But the foolishness of fools is folly. 


Whether poor or wealthy in this world’s 


Chapter Fourteen 169 


goods, the wise are always rich, because pos- 
sessing treasure that can never fade away. The 
fool, whatever his possessions, is but filled with 
folly, and nothing shall profit him eventually. 
Of Nabal, Abigail had to say, ‘“‘Nabal (a fool) 
is his name, and folly is with him.’”’ And the 
words are true ofall his class. Amnon is a fit 
illustration of this unhappy company (2 Sam. 
13:13). For the lasting portion of the wise, 
see Dan. 12: 3. 

25 A true witness delivereth souls: 

But a deceitful witness speaketh lies. 

In verse 5 we had a faithful witness; here, a 
true witness. Such a one will deliver souls. 
Our Lord presents Himself in the double charac- 
ter of the ‘‘ Faithful and True Witness” to Lao- 
dicea. He itis, in a day of lukewarmness and 
laxity, who abides the Faithful Testimony- 
bearer, maintaining the truth; and the True 
Witness, delivering all who bow in repentance. 
A deceitful witness is in every way the contrary 
of this—playing fast and loose with the teach- 
ing of the Scriptures, to the eternal loss of those 
who credulously accept his unholy speculations. 
“‘Tf the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into 
the ditch.”” Contrast Moses with Jannes and 
Jambres (2 Tim. 3: 8). 

26 In the fear of Jehovah is strong confidence : 
And His sons have a place of refuge. 


170 Notes on Proverbs 


27 The fear of Jehovah is a fountain of life, 
To depart from the snares of death. 


To teach the fear of Jehovah was the object 
of the Holy Spirit in inspiring Solomon to pen 
the Proverbs. He who has learned it finds 
strong confidence and a place of refuge. It is 
not the slavish fear of an abject bondman, but 
that filial reverence which all His children love 
to render Him. Such rejoice to have found a 
fountain of life, and instruction as to their path 
on earth, so that they may avoid the snares of 
death. ‘Sons,’ or ‘‘children” (A. V.), is used 
here in a moral sense. Relationship to God, as 
we now know it, was not revealed before the 
coming of the Son of God into the world to 
make known the Father. But those who truly 
feared the Lord were manifested as His children 
though they had not received the Spirit of adop- 
tion, enabling them to cry, ‘‘Abba, Father.” 
See Cornelius (Acts 10). 


28 In the multitude of people is the king’s honor: 
But in the want of people is the destruction of a 
prince. 

Rank and title avail nothing if there be not 
those who own the authority of a monarch. 
When the Lord Jesus “in His own times shall 
show, who is the blessed and only Potentate, 
King of kings, and Lord of lords,”’ all redeemed 


Chapter Fourteen 171 


creation shall own His benign sway. David 
and Ish-bosheth illustrate the verse (2 Sam. 3 
and 4). 


29 He that is slow to wrath is of great understanding: 
But he that is hasty of spirit exalteth folly. 


The man of God will have the ability to rule 
his spirit. Controlling himself, he manifests 
great understanding; for he who lacks self-con- 
trolis little able to profit others. A hasty spirit 
but exalts folly and hinders the reception of 
what may be set forth, even though it be right 
and true. Bad temper is always a sign of weak- 
ness. The man who knows he has the mind of 
God can afford to quietly wait on Him. See 
Micaiah and Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah 
(1 Kings 22: 24, 25). 

30 A sound heart is the life of the flesh: 


But envy the rottenness of the bones. 


A sound heart is the heart of one who is bro- 
ken before the Lord, and has learned not to 
think of himself more highly than he ought to 
think. Envy manifests at once the lack of self- 
judgment, and, on the part of a Christian, be- 
speaks a coming breakdown of his discipleship, 
if he fails to humble himself in secret. This was 
the hidden cause of Asaph’s unhappiness, “ un- 
til he went into the sanctuary of the Lord”’ 
(Psa. 73). 


172 Notes on Proverbs 


31 He tnat oppresseth the poor, reproacheth his Maker: 
But he that honoreth Him, is gracious to the needy. 


To deal hardly with those in poverty is to re- 
proach God who made both rich and poor, and 
whose inscrutable wisdom permits some to be 
in affliction, while others have more than heart 
can wish. He who honors God will view the 
needy as left to test the hearts of those in more 
comfortable circumstances, and will value the 
privilege of ministering to them as far as able, 
thus showing them the kindness of God. See 
the case of Mephibosheth (2 Sam. 9). 


32 The lawless is driven away by his evil-doing: 
But the righteous is confident, even in his death. 


The deaths of lawless and righteous stand 
out, like their lives, in vivid contrast. The 
wicked is taken away in and by his iniquities, 
and goes out into a hopeless eternity to face his 
guilty record at the bar of Omnipotent Justice. 
The upright in heart, who in life has faced his 
sins in the presence of the Holy One, dreads no 
judgment after death, so falls on sleep with 
trustful hope of coming joy and bliss. Balaam 
wished for such a death, but found the opposite 
(Num. 23:10; 31:8). Stephen knew the confi- 
dence referred to, and could kneel down and die 
with a prayer for the forgiveness of his murder- 
ers on his lips (Acts 7: 59, 60). 


Chapter Fourteen 173 
33 Wisdom resteth in the heart of him that hath under- 


standing : 
But that which is in the foolish is made known. 


The intelligence and sagacity of the man of 
understanding make known the wisdom that is 
in his heart; while the senseless behavior of 
fools tells all too plainly what is within. See. 
note on verse 24. 


34 Righteousness exalteth a nation: 
But sin is a reproach to any people. 


History is but the perpetual illustration of 
what is here declared. Nations, like individu- 
als, are judged according to their ways. No 
country has prospered long that forsook the 
path of national righteousness. When pride 
and vanity, coupled with greed and cruelty, 
have been in the ascendant, the hour of hum- 
bling was not far away. Israel will ever be the 
great object-lesson for all people. When the 
word of God was esteemed, and His will hon- 
ored, they prospered. When sin and neglect of 
God triumphed, they became a reproach. He 
was right who said, “Israel is the pillar of salt 
to the nations, crying to all people, ‘Remem- 
berl 2. 


35 The king’s favor is toward a wise servant: 
But his wrath is against him that causeth shame. 


174 Notes on Proverbs 


Nothing causes one in authority to set value 
upon the services of a minister of state so much 
as the display of wisdom and discretion; but let 
his counsel prove disastrous, and evil result 
from accepting his advice, the king’s indigna- 
tion will know no bounds. May those who 
seek to serve a greater King be characterized 
by that wisdom which shall make them of real 
value in the work He has committed to them. 
See Darius and Daniel, in contrast with Ahasu- 
erus and Haman (Dan. 6: 3; Esth. 7: 7-9). 


\75 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 


I? is impossible for man to estimate aright 
the power for good or evil that lies in the 
tongue. A kindly, gracious word will often dis- 
arm a most ill-tempered and wrathful man; 
while a sharp, cutting remark has frequently 
separated friends dear to each other for years, 
until some trivial circumstance arose which 
might have been turned to an occasion for grace 
and forbearance on the part of each had love 
been ruling. . 
1 A soft answer turneth away wrath: 
But grievous words stir up anger. 


2 The tongue of the wise useth knowledge aright: 
But the mouth of fools poureth out foolishness. 


It is considered unmanly by many not to re- 
sent an insult, and to allow wrathful words to 
pass unchallenged; but it takes far more true 
character to meet an angry man in quietness of 
spirit, and to return cool, calm words for heat- 
ed, hasty ones, than it does to give railing for 
railing, or malice for malice. The latter be- 
speaks a man who does not yet know how to 
rule his spirit; the former, one who has his per- 
sonal feelings in subjection. Grievous words 


176 Notes on Proverbs 


but add fuel to the flame, while a gracious de. 
meanor will go far towards cooling the angry 
passions of another. 

The wise man knows how to use knowledge 
so that it shall be for profit; knows, too, when 
to speak and when to be silent. The fool is al- 
ways ready with a retort, whether it be fitting 
or not. : 

In Gideon’s answer to the men of Ephraim we 
have a precious example of the soft answer that 
turneth away wrath, and the wisdom that uses 
knowledge aright. 

In Jephthah’s reply to the same people we are 
given to see a sad illustration of the folly of 
using in such a case the grievous words that 
stir up anger (Judges 8: 1-3; 12: 1-6). 


3 The eyes of Jehovah are in every place, 
Beholding the evil and the good. 


How comforting is this truth to the weary 
heart, who, like poor Hagar in the desert, feels 
abandoned by all save One, but can say with 
assurance, ‘‘Thou, God, seest me’?! To know 
that His eyes are on all our ways is sweet in- 
deed when there is confidence and hope in Him. 
But for the wicked to know that he can never 
hide from those all-seeing eyes is perhaps the 
most terrible thing he has to face. Nor need it 
be wondered at, when it is remembered that He 


Chapter Fifteen 177 


who beholds all is the Holy and the True! It 
is sin unrepented of that makes it so dreadful a 
thing to be under the eye of God. He who ac- 
knowledges his guilt, and bows in repentance 
before Him, need no longer fear, for sin con- 
fessed is sin removed, through the atonement of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. David’s musings in Psa. 
139 form a precious commentary on this verse. 


4 A healing tongue is a tree of life: 
But perverseness therein is a breach in the spinit. 


How much more common is the tongue of 
perversity than the healing tongue! The one 
separates brother from brother, and makes 
breach upon breach; the other binds together, 
giving cheer and gladness, and is as a tree of 
life to those who meditate upon its utterances. 
The healing tongue is the tongue of the peace- 
maker. The perverse tongue belongs to him 
who sows discord among brethren. May it be 
ours to covet the former and flee the latter. 

Abraham possessed the tongue of healing 
when he said, ‘‘ Let there be no strife, for we be 
brethren’’ (Gen. 13:8). Sheba the son of Bichri 
by his hasty tongue caused division and dissen- 
sion in Israel and brought judgment on his own 
head (2 Sam. 20). 


5 A fool despiseth his father’s instruction: 
But he that regardeth reproof is prudent. 
12 


178 Notes on Proverbs 


The young man is very apt to consider his 
knowledge superior to that of his father, forget- 
ting that you cannot leap over many years’ ex- 
perience. It isthe part of folly not to learn 
from one who has been over the path before 
you. To regard reproof and thankfully accept 
correction is an evidence of true wisdom. Con- 
trast Manasseh with his father Hezekiah (2 
Kings 18 to 21). 


6 In the house of the righteous is much treasure: 
But in the revenues of the lawless is trouble. 


See note on chap. 14: 24. The true riches are 
found in the house of the righteous. Whatever 
other revenue may accrue to the evil-doer, he 
shall have trouble and sorrow in large measure. 
See Achan (Josh. 7: 19-26). 


7 The lips of the wise disperse knowledge: 
But the heart of the foolish doeth not so. 


In place of idle jests and unkind speeches, the 
lips of the wise spread abroad what is for profit 
and blessing—the true knowledge that edifies 
the hearer. The foolish can only utter what 
is in his heart and benefits no one, but really 
harms. Paul and Elymas at Paphos fitly illus- 
trate both sides (Acts 13: 6-12). 

8 The sacrifice of the lawless is an abomination to 
Jehovah : 
But the prayer of the upright is His delight. 


Chapter Fifteen 179 


9 The way of the lawless is an abomination to Jehovah: 
But He loveth him that followeth after righteousness. 
“They that are in the flesh cannot please 
God.” The sacrifice of the wicked, together 
with all their ways, is but evil in His sight. 
Before He can accept aught from the sinner, 
there must be repentance—a bowing of soul be- 
fore Him—seeking His face in sincerity. When 
there is integrity and uprightness of heart He 
will manifest His favor, for He delights in those 
who follow righteousness. 

It is of all importance that the sinner be 
brought to realize that, having gone out of the 
way, he has become altogether unprofitable. 
The Lord asks nothing from him, can accept 
nothing from him, till he first receives the gift 
offered him from heaven—the Lord Jesus Christ. 
When He has been received by faith the whole 
life will be changed, and loving service to God 
will be most acceptable and very precious in 
His sight. But it will be the fruit of the new 
life, not the labor of one toiling for that life. 

It will be seen at once, in the light of the 
verses before us, how contrary to Scripture it is 
to ask unconverted men to give of their means 
to support the work of the Lord, or to make 
sacrifices for Christ’s sake. All they can do or 
give will be stained with sin and unfit for His 
holy presence. See Psa. 66: 18. 


180 Notes on Proverbs 


10 Correction is grievous unto him that forsaketh the way: 
And he that hateth reproof shall die. 

11 Sheol and destruction are before Jehovah: 
How much more then the hearts of the sons of men? 

12 A scorer loveth not one that reproveth him: 
Neither will he go unto the wise. 


“All things are naked and open before the 
eyes of Him with whom we have to do,” and 
‘“‘He is a discerner of the thoughts and intents 
of the heart.’’ The unseen world, which to man 
is dark and hidden, is all open before Him. He 
alone searches the hearts of men, and tries the 
reins. When they refuse correction His eye is 
observing their perversity, and He will see that 
they are judged according to their works. It is 
only the scorner who resents correction and re- 
proof, and hence avoids the wise, lest his evil 
ways be called in question. But One he cannot 
avoid. With Him he must have to do whether 
he will or no. Solemn indeed will be the ac- 
counting for opportunities refused, instruction 
neglected, and grace despised. See the wise and 
foolish builders of Matt. 7: 24-27. 


13 A glad heart maketh a cheerful countenance: 
But by sorrow of heart the spirit is broken. 


The happy man is the one who has a heart at 
rest, and who can therefore rejoice at all times. 
Such a one is the soul who has found in Christ 
not only a Saviour, but a daily portion. He 


Chapter Fifteen 18} 


who casts all his cares upon Him, who has 
learned to commit all his affairs into His hand, 
will ever have a glad heart and a cheerful coun- 
tenance. A burdened heart is the portion of the 
one who tries to carry his own sorrows and 
daily cares, and fails to turn all over to Him 
who so delights to bear them for us. Nothing 
breaks the spirit like hidden grief; but such need 
not be the portion of any saint who will allow 
the Lord Jesus to be not only his Sin-bearer, 
but his Burden-bearer too. See Paul in Phil. 4. 


14 The heart of him that hath understanding seeketh 
knowledge: 
But the mouth of fools feedeth on foolishness. 


Our food has much to do with making us 
what we are. The same is true of us morally. 
We become like that on which we feed; and we 
feed on what our hearts crave. The man of 
understanding values knowledge, and devotes 
himself to its pursuit. The fool cares not for 
that which would build true character and 
draw him from his evil ways, but feeds on folly 
and vanity, thus becoming all the time more 
empty and foolish than before. 

Let the young Christian ponder this well. 
Have you learned to know Christ? Then leave 
behind forever the flesh-pots of Egypt. Do not 
attempt to feed the new life on the world’s 


182 Notes on Proverbs. 


trashy literature and its sinful pleasures. If 
you do, there will be no real growth, and a 
moral and spiritual breakdown is sure to fol- 
low. But if you set the Lord before you, and 
find your food in His Word and what is for edi- 
fication, you shall grow in grace and in the 
knowledge of the truth. Imitate David (Psa. 
119: 103, 104), Jeremiah (Jer. 15:16), and Job 
(chap. 23:12). Do not allow yourself to fall 
into the ways of the mixed multitude (Num. 11: 
4—9), who lost their appetite for angels’ food 
by lusting after Egyptian dainties. 


15 All the days of the depressed are evil: 
But he that is of a cheerful heart hath a continual 
feast. 


This connects intimately with the thirteenth 
verse. One who is depressed and gloomy him- 
self sees every day full of causes for grief and 
dismal foreboding. It is a wretched way to 
live, and indicates lack of confidence in God. 
When the heart is cheerful, all days are bright, 
and the soul has a continual feast. This is not 
frivolity, but that holy joy which results from 
tracing everything that is permitted to come 
upon me back to God. Habakkuk entered into 
it in large measure (Hab. 3: 17, 18). 


16 Better is little with the fear of Jehovah, 
Than great treasure and trouble therewith. 


Chapter Fifteen 183 


17 Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, 


Than a stalled ox and hatred therewith. 


The one who has found his joy in the Lord 
can well understand the dear old saint who 
spread upon his humble board a bit of bread, 
an onion, and a glass of water, and then joy- 
fully thanked God for ‘“‘all this and Jesus”’! 
Better, far better, is it to have little on earth, 
and to know Him and abide in His fear, than 
to have great treasures and varied luxuries, 
coupled with trouble and hatred. So thought 
Daniel and his companions when they refused 
to defile themselves with the king’s meat 
(Dan. 1). 


18 A wrathful man stireth up contention, 
But he that is slow to anger appeaseth strife. 


Of this the first verse of our chapter has al- 
ready reminded us; but we may well have it 
brought before us again, for we take so long tc 
learn. A wrathful man is of necessity a proud 
man; otherwise he would not be so easily 
stirred by what touches himself. A lowly man 
will be slow to anger, for he has learned not to 
think of himself more highly than he ought to 
think, and therefore will not readily resent in- 
sults and offences. Contrast the spirit dis- 
played by Saul and David (1 Sam. 20: 30-34; 
24: 8-22). 


184 Notes on Proverbs 


19 The way of the sluggard is as a hedge of thorns : 
But the path of the upright shall be made plain. 


Difficulties abound in the mind of the slothful 
man. His way seems hedged up by thorns, and 
he has all manner of excuses for not acting at 
once according to what he knows is right and 
suited. The upright, learning his duty, presses 
on, and finds his way made plain before him as 
he takes one step after another. 

If God commands, I have simply to obey. He 
makes Himself responsible to clear the obstacles 
from my path, or to give me the ability to over- 
come them. Hear David’s notes of triumph in 
Psa. 18: 29 and 2 Sam. 22:30. How unhappy 
the contrast in the case of the ten spies! (Num. 
13.) 


20 A wise son maketh a glad father : 
But a foolish man despiseth his mother. 


Compare with chap. 10:1. A wise son glad- 
dens the heart of his father by heeding instruc- 
tion and practicing virtue. A foolish man con- 
siders himself superior to his mother, and ig- 
nores her loving advice and helpful counsel. See 
chap. 30; 17. 


21 Folly is joy to him that is destitute of heart: 
But a man of understanding walketh uprightly. 


Delighting in iniquity, determined to have his 


Chapter Fifteen $85 


own way despite every warning and entreaty, 
the fool plunges on, rejoicing in his folly. The 
man of integrity, subjecting himself to the fear 
of God, walks in uprightness, refusing to be 
decoyed by sinful pleasures and fascinations. 
See notes on vers. 16 and 18 in the previous 
chapter. 


22 Without counsel purposes are disappointed : 
But in the multitude of counsellors they shall be es- 
tablished. 

See the note on chap. 11:14, and compare 
24: 6. 

He is a wise man indeed who cannot well af- 
ford to counsel with men of intelligence and ex- 
perience concerning matters of moment, partic- 
ularly where others are likely to be widely con- 
cerned. See Paul and Barnabas in Acts 15. 


23 A man hath joy by the answer of his mouth: 


And a word spoken in season, how good is it! 


The answer that leaves no regrets will be a 
word spoken in its season. True words are not 
necessarily seasonable ones. Many a sorrow 
and heartache has been caused, both to the 
speaker and others, by repeating what in itself 
was true enough, but which should never have 
been passed on to a third party. But a word 
in season is precious and helpful, refreshing to 
the hearer, and giving joy to the one who utters 


186 Notes on Proverbs 


it. After the idle speculations of the three 
friends of Job, how seasonable was the answer 
of Elihu! 


24 The way of life is above to the understanding, 
That he may depart from Sheol beneath. 


Sheol is the world of spirits—the unseen. It 
refers not to the place of future punishment 
only, but to what was, even to the children of 
God, before the Cross, a land of darkness be- 
yond the grave. And, inasmuch as long life 
was a blessing promised to the faithful He- 
brew, an early cutting off from this present life 
was a calamity to be dreaded. Hence the way 
of life could be said to lead away from Sheol be- 
neath. Those who trod it would be preserved 
to an honored old age in the land given by God 
to His earthly people. Hezekiah’s case aptly 
illustrates the state of mind in regard to death 
which was common among truly pious persons 
in the past dispensation. See Isaiah 38 and 
2 Kings 20. 


25 Jehovah will destroy the house of the proud: 
But He will establish the landmark of the widow. 


“Though the Lord be high, yet hath He re- 
spect unto the lowly: but the proud He know- 
eth afar off’? (Psa. 138: 6). His face is ever set 
against those who exalt themselves; but from 


Chapter Fifteen 187 


of old He has been the support of the fatherless 
and the widow who confided in His love and 
care. He would have His needy people trust 
His grace more implicitly, assured that His 
heart is ever towards them. But the haughty 
and self-inflated have no title to His considera- 
tion and loving-kindness. Their house shall fall, 
and their pride be withered up. Contrast the 
judgment on Coniah’s house (Jer. 22: 30) with 
the Lord’s care of the widow of Zarephath 
(1 Kings 17: 10-16). 


26 The thoughts of the evil are an abomination to Je- 
hovah : 
But the words of the pure are pleasant sayings. 


Already we have considered the Lord’s esti- 
mate of the sacrifice and way of the lawless. 
We now learn that the very thoughts of the 
evil-doer are also an abomination to Him “‘ who 
is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity.” But 
the conversation of the pure is pleasant in His 
sight, as being the outflow of a heart exercised 
unto godliness. We see both classes in John 6: 
68-71. 


27 He that is greedy of gain troubleth his own house : 
But he that hateth gifts shall live. 


Bribe-taking has been a snare to which those 
whose place it is to sit on the judicial bench, 


188 Notes on Proverbs 


and those called as witnesses, have ever been 
exposed. Greed and covetousness have proven 
the undoing of many such, to the ruin of them- 
selves and the shame of all who bear their 
name. The hater of gifts—that is, the one who 
resolutely refuses to be bought (for in such a 
case the ‘‘gift”’ is really his price)—shall live. 

The soldiers who guarded the tomb of our 
Lord were silenced by bribes, to their eternal 
dishonor (Matt. 28: 11-15). Samuel could 
challenge Israel to testify to his integrity on 
this very line (1 Sam. 12: 3, 4). See chap. 
29: 4. 


28 The heart of the righteous studieth to answer: 
But the mouth of the lawless poureth out evil things. 


The man who walks in the fear of God will 
weigh his words, lest by a hasty utterance he 
dishonor his Lord and hinder where he desires 
to help. The wicked has no such consideration, 
and speaks whatever comes to his lips, let it do 
what harm it may. People often actually pride 
themselves on being, as they suppose, frank 
and outspoken, when in reality they are simply 
manifesting the unexercised state of their con- 
sciences: for, if truly aroused to the value of 
words, they would weigh them well ere giving 
them out, and thus save much mischief and sor- 
row. Because a thing is true, it is not necessa- 


Chapter Fifteen 189 


rily a fit subject to be discussed, and passed on 
from one to another. The righteous will con- 
sider carefully its bearing for good or ill before 
uttering what can never be fully recalled. Con- 
trast Elisha with the sons of the prophets at 
Jericho (2 Kings 2: 15-18). 

29 Jehovah is far from the lawless: 

But He heareth the prayer of the righteous. 


The lawless have no title to expect anything 
from Jehovah; He makes no pledge to heed 
their cry. When the day of their distress comes 
they find none on whom to call. Of old, when 
idolatrous Israel turned to Him in their trou- 
bles, He refused to be entreated of them and 
referred them to the gods they had served, in 
order that they might realize what it meant to 
have turned the back upon Him. 

But He has pledged Himself to hear the prayer 
of the righteous; and with Him to “‘hear’’ is to 
answer. The man who delights himself in God 
when all is bright will find Him a Friend nigh 
at hand when darkness enshrouds the soul. 
But let him not forget that it is written, “If ye 
abide in Me, and My words abide in you, ye 
shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto 
you.” (John 15: 7). See Joshua at Gibeon 
(Josh. 10: 12-14). 


30 The light of the eyes rejoiceth the heart: 
And a good report maketh the bones fat. 


190 Notes on Proverbs 


The gospel of the glory of the blessed God is 
such a “good report.’’ ‘‘ Faith cometh by hear- 
ing (by, a report), and hearing (or, the report) 
by the word of God”? (Rom. 10:17). Precious 
as light to the eye when one has been groping 
in darkness, is this grand report to a soul that 
has been longing for deliverance from a bur- 
dened conscience. 

The good report sent from heaven to men in 
their sins, is concerning God’s Son, Jesus Christ, 
‘‘who was delivered for our offences, and raised 
again for our justification.” It is a Person who 
is presented to man in the gospel. When He is 
trusted, and His work apprehended, it does in- 
deed rejoice the heart, ‘‘making the bones fat.”’ 
See the jailer of Philippi (Acts 16: 29-34). 


31 The ear that heareth the reproof of life 
Abideth among the wise. 

32 He that refuseth admonition despiseth his own soul: 
But he that heareth reproof getteth understanding. 

33 The fear of Jehovah is the admonition of wisdom; 
And before honor is humility. 


See note on verse 10. He who is humble 
enough to be thankful for correction when go- 
ing astray, shall remain among those whom 
Jehovah esteems as wise. 

The instructed of earth are often too proud to 
receive an admonition. Fancying themselves 
superior to him who would, in the fear of God, 


Chapter Fifteen 19} 


reprove them when in error, they disdainfully 
turn away; but in so doing show that they des- 
pise their own souls. 

It is only those who hear reproof who get un- 
derstanding. Abiding in the fear of the Lord 
they own it is the part of wisdom to acknow- 
ledge their mistakes and faults, and so to re- 
ceive admonition as coming from Himself, for 
“before honor is humility.’’ He who takes the 
lowly self-forgetful place will be lifted up in due 
time. See Joseph’s remarkable history (Gen. 
37-50). 


192 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 


“THE human proverb, ‘“‘Man proposes, but 
God disposes,” finds its far earlier counter- 
part in the first verse. 


| The purposes of the heart are of man: 
But from Jehovah is the answer of the tongue. 


“Tt is not in man that liveth to direct his 
way.’ He may plan and arrange, but when 
the time arrives to speak or act it is from 
Jehovah the answer comes. See Balaam (Num. 
23 and 24). 


2 All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes: 
But Jehovah weigheth the spirits. 


Ever since the Fall it has been second nature 
with man to justify himself. Till brought into 
the light of God’s holiness there is nothing of 
which he is generally so certain as the defensi- 
bleness of his own conduct. His ways are clean 
in his own eyes, but he is not to be trusted in his 
own judgment, for the heart is deceitful above 
all things and desperately wicked. Jehovah 
weigheth the spirits. His balances are exact. 


Chapter Sixteen. 193 


His judgment is unerring; and He it is who so- 
lemnly declares, ‘‘Thou art weighed in the bal- 
ances, and art found wanting!” 

Thus man is shut up to the salvaticn provided 
through the finished work of the Son of God on 
Calvary’s cross. Otherwise condemnation alone 
can be his portion. See Belshazzar (Dan. 5: 
25-30). 


3 Commit thy works unto Jehovah, 
And thy thoughts shall be established. 


The word “commit’’ might be rendered “ roll.’”’ 
He who rolls his affairs over upon the Lord, 
will find Him ever ready to take charge of them 
all, and to carry them on to a proper comple- 
tion and establishment. But it must be borne 
in mind that if I thus commit all to Him, I no 
longer choose for myself as to what the out- 
come should be, but say with confidence, ‘‘ Thy 
will be done.’”’ He would have every desire told 
out in His ear, and then left in faith that He 
may act according to His love and unerring 
wisdom. See Hannah (1 Sam. 1: 9-20). 


4 Jehovah hath made all things for himself: 
Yea, even the lawless for the day of evil. 
5 Every one that is proud in beat is an abomination 
to Jehovah: 
Though hand join in hand, shall not be acquitted. 
13 


194 Notes on Proverbs 


All things shall redound at last to the glory 
of God. Earth's long tale of sin and sorrow 
will only result in magnifying His love and His 
holiness eventually. Those saved by His grace 
will be to His praise forever; but the wicked 
will also own His justice in the day of their con- 
demnation. He detests pride; and all who 
walk therein (let them endeavor by confedera- 
tion to resist His power as they may) shall be 
broken before Him and brought in guilty when 
He sits on the throne of judgment. How much 
better now to bow in repentance, while He is 
on a throne of grace! See His word as to Sod- 
om and Gomorrah (Jude 7; 2 Pet. 2: 6). 


6 By loving-kindness and truth iniquity is purged ; 
And by the fear of Jehovah men depart from evil. 


Atonement is made for iniquity by loving- 
kindness and truth—so far as putting things 
right with man is concerned. It is not a ques- 
tion here of expiating sin before God. No 
amount of kindly deeds and truthful words can 
purge the conscience of guilt and give accept- 
ance with Him. But if man has been sinned 
against, the manifestation of repentance lead- 
ing to putting right what was wrong as far as 
possible, and consideration and thoughtful care 
in the future, will go far towards clearing his 
mind of the past evil. It is the fear of Jehovab 


Chapter Sixteen 195 


that leads to departure from what is unholy 
and contrary to sound doctrine. So when one 
is in the fear of God he will endeavor to have a 
conscience void of offence both towards Him 
and towards his fellow-men. See the apostle 
Paul (Acts 24: 16). 


7 When a man’s ways please Jehovah, 
He maketh even his enemies to be at peace with 
him. 


This is a far-reaching statement, which is 
much less pondered over than it should be. It 
allows of no exceptions. If a man’s ways are 
pleasing to the Lord, his enemies will be unable 
to say one word against his character. They 
may hate him, but they are compelled to own 
that God is with him. 

If therefore my enemies are not at peace with 
me, is it not time I was asking myself, ‘“‘Do 
my ways really please Him?” Doubtless I 
shall soon be reminded of something needing te 
be judged in His presence. 

One thing that is very conducive to closing 
the mouths of enemies is, just going on quietly 
“through evil report and good report,” bent on 
pleasing One alone, wasting no time in self-vin- 
dication, but committing all to Him who judges 
righteously. A holy, humble walk must silence 
even my worst foes. See Daniel (Dan. 6: 4,5). 


196 Notes on Proverbs. 


8 Better is a little with righteousness 
Than great revenues without right. 


Integrity of heart is better than thousands of 
silver and gold. How poor and mean is the 
man who piles up his millions, but sacrifices his 
conscience to do it! A bare living, with the 
mind and heart at rest, and a walk in accord- 
ance with righteous principles, is infinitely to be 
preferred to a large income coupled with covet- 
ousness and unholy practices. See Naboth and 
Ahab (1 Kings 21). 

9 A man’s heart deviseth his way : 
But Jehovah directeth his steps. 


Compare with verse 1. See note. People fre- 
quently think they are having their own way, 
when in reality the Lord is leading them with 
“bit and bridle,” through strange paths, for 
their discipline and blessing at last. See Naomi 
(Ruth 1: 21). 


10 A sure decision is in the lips of the king: 
His mouth transgresseth not in judgment. 
11 A just weight and balance are Jehovah's: 
All the weights of the bag are His work. 
12 It is an abomination to kings to commit lawlessness : 
For the throne is established by righteousness. 
13 Righteous lips are the delight of kings; 
And they love him that speaketh right. 
14 The wrath of a king is as messengers of death; 
But a wise man will pacify it. 


Chapter Sixteen 197 


15 In the light of the king’s countenance is life ; 
And his favor is as a cloud of the latter rain. 


It is the ideal king that is contemplated. Oc- 
casionally have earthly monarchs been raised 
up who hated iniquity and loved righteousness, 
but this world still groans for the coming and 
reign of the true King, who shall judge the na- 
tions with equity, and in whose mouth the vile 
person shall be contemned. 

It is God’s Anointed alone whose throne will 
be established by righteousness, and to whom 
lawlessness of every kind is an abomination. 
In His lips is there a sure decision, for His 
mouth transgresseth not in judgment. 

For all human rulers He is the grand pattern. 
In the measure that they are imitators of Him 
do they properly maintain the kingly glory. 

Whatever is right and true among men is 
from God. All baseness and dishonest trickery 
are detestable in His eyes. So we have the 
weights and balances introduced in the midst 
of this section, relating to kingly dignity. For 
it is the same integrity that directs the decision 
of the upright king and the measures of the 
poorest of his subjects. 

The king delights in lips of truth, and loves 
sound speech. His anger is as a death-sentence, 
but wisdom will pacify it. In his favor is life 
and refreshing. If of the light of a man’s coun- 


198 Notes on Proverbs 


tenance this can be said, how much more of the 
King of kings! ‘In Thy presence is fulness of 
joy.” 

See David (2 Sam. 3: 36). 


16 How much better is it to get wisdom than gold! 
And to get understanding rather to be chosen than 
silver! 
17 The highway of the upright is to depart from evil: 
He that keepeth his way preserveth his soul. 


Compare chap. 2: 1—9, and see notes. 

The man of wisdom and understanding has 
his fortune made for both worlds. But it is 
easy to be deceived by a counterfeit wisdom 
which descendeth not from above, being earth- 
ly, sensual, devilish. That which does not be- 
gin with the fear of the Lord, and keep from the 
highway of iniquity, is but Satan’s counter- 
feit, let it be vaunted as it may by wiseacres 
who know not to depart from evil. See Daniel 
(Dan. 5:11). 


18 Pride goeth before destruction, 
And a haughty spirit before a fall. 

19 Better is it to be of a humble spirit with the lowly, 
Than to divide the spoil with the proud. 


Pride was an archangel’s ruin, as it has been 
the destruction of untold myriads of men and 
women on earth. It is the sure precursor of a 
fall, for the High and Lofty One who inhabits 


Chapter Sixteen 199 


eternity cannot permit self-exaltation, on the 
part of a creature, to go unchecked. 

Far better is it to be little in one’s own eyes, 
and to find happy fellowship with the lowly, 
than to share the pursuits and treasures of the 
proud in spirit. 

It is when one sees pride in another that its 
hideousness is clearly revealed. How often we 
will complacently tolerate in ourselves what, 
when we behold it in some one else, fills us with 
disgust. But God takes note of the least begin- 
ning of unjudged haughtiness in each heart. 
What mind can conceive how hateful it must all 
be to Him! May writer and reader look to it 
that this baneful sin be checked in His presence, 
ere it master us to our lasting sorrow! See 
Haman (Esth. 5 to 7). 


20 He that handleth a matter wisely shall find good: 
And whoso trusteth in Jehovah, happy is he. 
21 The wise in heart shall be called prudent : 
And the sweetness of the lips increaseth learning. 
22 Understanding is a well-spring of life to him that 
hath it: 
But the instruction of fools is folly. 
23 The heart of the wise maketh wise his mouth, 
And addeth learning to his lips. 
24 Pleasant words are as a honeycomb, 
Sweet to the soul, and healing to the bones. 


The five verses form a series of epigrams on 
the value of applied wisdom in the various 


200 Notes on Proverbs 


affairs of life. To proceed wisely in a case pre- 
senting difficulties not readily overcome, is an 
earnest of coming good. Only those do so, in 
the full sense, who confide in Jehovah, and find 
their happiness in His fear. 

When wisdom possesses the reins the beha- 
vior will be discreet, and kindly lips will mani- 
fest a lowly heart and willingness to be in- 
structed. This is true understanding ; which, 
like a spring of living water, dwells in the pos- 
sessor of it, and flows forth to bless others. 
Of fools the opposite is true. Their folly is 
manifested to any person of discernment. 

It is the condition of the heart that is of prime 
importance. If all be right there, the words of 
the lips will accord therewith; so that in place 
of the speculative vaporings of the worldly ped- 
ant there will be the counsel of the wise, who 
knows how to give forth what is profitable as 
well as pleasant and cheering. Note the char- 
acteristics of the wisdom that is from above in 
James 3: 17, and see the confession of the queen 
of Sheba (1 Kings 10: 6-9). 


25 There is a way that seemeth right unto a man, 


But the end thereof are the ways of death. 


This verse repeats the statement of chap. 14: 
12, as though to emphasize the danger of refu- 
sing the path of wisdom for self-chosen ways 


Chapter Sixteen 205 


which can only end in death. See note on that 
verse. 


26 The soul of him that laboreth, laboreth for himself; 
For his mouth urgeth him on. 


It is because of his desire to be satisfied with 
the fruits of his toil that the laborer pursues his 
occupation. His appetite craves it of him, and 
so he presses on in his service. This is as God 
ordained when the fall had shut man out of the 
garden of delight, and in the sweat of his face 
he was commanded to eat his bread. Wealth 
gotten without labor is generally a very dan- 
gerous acquisition. He who knows the weari- 
ness of honest toil will be careful how he uses 
that which results therefrom. Ponder the cases 
of Ruth (Ruth 2) and of Gideon (Judges 6: 11, 
12). 


27 An ungodly man [or, a man of Belial] diggeth up 
evil: 
And in his lips there is as a burning fire. 
28 A froward man soweth strife : 
And a whisperer separateth chief friends. 


See notes on chapter 11:13, and 17:9. It 
would be well if every one addicted to the sin- 
fully cruel habit of talebearing would ponder 
carefully these words. It is an ungodly man 
who digs up evil, whose lips seem to be set on 
fire of hell. Such a one will go about scatter- 


202 Notes on Proverbs 


ing the seeds of strife as one might sow thistle- 
down, or the pods of other noxious weeds, to 
result in a harvest of grief and anguish to many 
a soul. 

There is no question that whispering and 
backbiting is one of the greatest curses among 
Christians. By means of this detestable vice 
the dearest friends are alienated, misunder- 
standings of all kinds are created, and many 
are defiled by the recital of tales which a godly 
person would seek to cover and forbear ever to 
repeat. See what mischief was brought about 
by the talebearing of Doeg the Edomite, and 
see that you follow not in the steps of so unsa- 
vory a wretch (1 Sam. 22: 9-19). 


29 A violent man enticeth his neighbor, 
And leadeth him into the way that is not good. 
30 He shutteth his eyes to devise froward things : 
Moving his lips he bringeth evil to pass. 


Many an otherwise kindly and gracious soul 
has been misled by the energy and apparent 
earnestness of a violent man, and led on to join 
him in things that were quite opposed to his 
own more mature judgment, had he not al- 
lowed his eyes to be blinded. But the other’s 
fair speech, coupled with what men call a mag- 
netic presence, have often won the day, and led 
one, who would never have gone if left to him- 


Chapter Sixteen. 203 


self, into a way that was not good. It is well 
not to be too easily persuaded. Before making 
a decision, take time to get the mind of God, 
that thus you be not partaker of other men’s 
sins. Neglect of this led Jehoshaphat, a most 
amiable man, into many a snare (2 Chron. 18: 
1, and 20: 35-37). 

31 The hoary head is a crown of glory, 

[If] it be found in the way of nghteousness. 


Probably the last line should read simply, “It 
shall be found in the way of righteousness.’’ The 
verse does not say the hoary head will never be 
found in the paths of wickedness; for, alas, 
often white hairs crown the sinner’s head. But 
it is characteristic of the way of righteousness; 
and when found there, it is indeed a diadem of 
honor. Riotous living in youth generally means 
decrepitude in middle age, and premature death. 
Temperance and righteousness tend to strength 
of body and length of days. Hear the testi- 
mony of Caleb, who wholly followed the Lord 
(Josh. 14: 11); and note what is written of 
Moses (Deut. 34: 7). 

32 He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; 
And he that ruleth his spint than he that taketh a 
city. 

Self-mastery is the greatest of all victories. 
Men have subdued kingdoms who were defeated 


204 Notes on Proverbs 


in the effort to control themselves. A bad tem- 
per is often excused on the ground of natural 
infirmity, but it is rather the evidence of un- 
judged pride and impatience. ‘Learn of Me,” 
said Jesus, ‘“‘for Iam meek and lowly in heart.” 
The meek man is not a spiritless man, but he is 
slow to anger. He can be righteously stirred 
when occasion requires, but not when it is his 
own dignity that is in question. ‘Add to pa- 
tience self-control” is a word for us all. It is 
generally a sign of weakness when one allows 
himself to become angry and excited in the face 
of opposition. Note the calmness of spirit and 
dependence on God manifested by Nehemiah, 
throughout the book that bears his name, when 
meeting the irritating sneers and downright 
opposition of the enemies of Jerusalem. 


33 The lot is cast into the lap; 
But the whole disposing thereof is of Jehovah. 


There is no such thing as chance, though it 
seems so to the man who looks only “under the 
sun’’ (Eccl. 9:11). But a supreme Intelligence 
is over all things, controlling even when unseen 
and unrecognized. 

Casting lots was a method frequently resort- 
ed to among the ancients for determining vexed 
questions. By this means Canaan was divided 
among the tribes, and it was used on many oc- 


Chapter Sixteen 205 


casions to detect guilty persons. The last men- 
tion of its use in Scripture is in connection with 
the election of Matthias to the vacant apostle- 
ship of Judas. It would seem that, as of old, 
God gave judgment, and so the company of the 
twelve was kept complete. Paul evidently was 
never numbered with them. He was the mes- 
senger of the glory of Christ to the nations, 
while the twelve were connected primarily with 
the Jewish testimony. 

For instances of God’s giving judgment by 
the lot, see the cases of the two goats of Lev. 
16:8; the land (Num. 26: 55, and Josh. 18: 
10); Achan (Josh. 7: 16-18) ; Jonathan (1 Sam. 
14: 41); and Matthias (Acts 1: 26). In the 
book of Esther we find the lot (called Pur) used 
by Haman to determine a fortunate day for the 
destruction of the Jews. 


206 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 


E are carried back to verses 16 and 17 of 
chapter 15, as we take up the first of the 
wise sayings in the present section: 


1 Better is a dry morsel, and quietness therewith, 
Than a house full of sacnfices with strife. 


It will be remembered that portions of the 
peace offerings were eaten by the offerer and his 
friends. These are the sacrifices referred to. 
Such a feast would be supposed to indicate 
great piety on the part of the host and his inti- 
mate associates; but if marred by discord and 
contention, it lost all its precious character. A 
dry morsel with peace and quietness was much 
to be preferred to such an unbecoming celebra- 
tion. 

In some such manner had the Corinthians 
misused the Lord’s Supper, making it an occa- 
sion for a common feast, where strife and party 
spirit raged. The apostle, rebuking them, bids 
them eat their own meals in quietness at home, 
that they come not together to condemnetion 
(1 Cor. 11: 17-22). 


Chapter Seventeen 207 


2 A wise servant shall have rule over a son that caus- 
eth shame, 
And shall have part of the inheritance among the 
brethren. 


A dependable servant is better than a misbe- 
having son. The latter can only rightly blame 
himself if his wronged father give him but an 
insignificant allowance, or cut him off alto- 
gether; while the servant who has been faithful 
in the performance of his duties is remembered 
as one of the household. But after all no hired 
servant can give the joy to the heart of a father 
that is afforded by an obedient son. See Eliezer 
(Gen 16-72, °3): 

3 The fining pot is for silver, 


And the furnace for gold : 
But Jehovah trieth the hearts. 


Trials and afflictions are, for the saints of 
God, what the fining pot and furnace are in 
the purifying of precious metals. ‘‘ Wherein ye 
greatly rejoice, though now for a season, if need 
be, ye are in heaviness through manifold temp- 
tations: that the trial of your faith, being much 
more precious than of gold that perisheth, 
though it be tried with fire, might be found 
unto praise and honor and glory at the appear- 
ing of Jesus Christ” (1 Pet. 1: 6, 7). 

The refiner of silver and the purifier of gold 
know just what heat is necessary to purge 


208 Notes on Proverbs 


away all dross, and will take care that just the 
right amount be permitted. So with our God 
and Father. He desires to free us from the base 
things of earth, and He allows us to pass 
through the fires of affliction for that end. But 
it is precious indeed to know that He sits by 
the fining pot, waiting till His own image be 
reflected in the soul; and He walks in the fur- 
nace with His persecuted children. See the sons 
of Levi and the three Hebrew children (Mal. 3: 
3; Dan. 3: 19-26). 


4 A wicked doer giveth heed to false lips; 
And a liar giveth ear to'a naughty tongue. 


When the heart hides iniquity, the ear readily 
gives heed to lying lips and an eviltongue. The 
upright in heart learn to know the voice of the 
deceiver, and to refuse his words; but the unjust 
and false soul readily falls in with those who 
are like himself. See the people of Judah and 
the lying priests and prophets (Jer. 5: 30, 31). 


5 Whoso mocketh the poor reproacheth his Maker: 
And he that is glad at calamities shall not be held 


innocent. 


Compare with chap. 14: 21. The Lord has 
left the poor always with us that we might be 
stirred thereby to kindness and consideration 
for those in less agreeable circumstances than 


Chapter Seventeen 209 


our own. To mock and lightly esteem them be- 
cause of their poverty is to reproach Him who 
has permitted our circumstances to be so di- 
verse. 

When calamity comes upon another, if, in 
place of loving sympathy, we cherish gladness 
in our hearts because of their griefs, an impar- 
tial Judge is looking on who will see that we 
are visited in our turn. God’s complaint as to 
Edom was his rejoicing over Israel’s punish- 
ment. Asa result, he too was to be dealt with 
in judgment. See Obad. 12-16. 


6 Children’s children are the crown of old men; 
And the glory of children are their fathers. 


God sets the solitary in families. The aged 
find their youth renewed in their children’s chil- 
dren; while the young revere their fathers, and 
honor them by obedience to their instructions. 
This is the ideal household, where government 
is administered according to God, and love rules 
all hearts. Happy the home where the divine 
pattern is exemplified. See Jacob and the sons 
of Joseph (Gen. 48 : 8-22). 


7 Excellent speech becometh not a fool : 
Much less do lying lips a noble. 


Good words from the mouth of an evil man 
are distasteful and out of place, for the life fails 
14 


210 Notes on Proverbs 


to back them up. There is a sense of dissimula- 
tion about them that is very repugnant to an 
upright soul. On the other hand, noblesse 
oblige (rank imposes obligation). Falsehood 
coming from one who is looked up to as a 
leader of the people is even more to be decried. 
Men feel instinctively that he who leads others 
should be real himself. They will overlook lack 
of ability, an absence of brilliancy, or of natural 
or acquired talent; but unreality they will 
never forgive. It was this sense of the fitness 
of things that made men ask in derision, “‘Is 
Saul also among the prophets?’’ when his lips 
uttered ‘excellent things’’ (1 Sam. 10: 10-12). 
The same feeling has caused the unconverted to 
remember with scorr Abraham’s denial of his 
wife. The very fact of his exalted position 
causes his sin to be the more marked (Gen. 20: 
1-13): 


8 A gift is a stone of grace in the eyes of him that 
hath it: 
Whithersoever it turneth, it prospereth. 


A gift presented as a token of pure affection 
and esteem will be highly valued by its pos- 
sessor, and will pave the way for much that is 
of value. He who would find love, should be a 
giver—not a mere receiver. But see verse 23. 
Jonathan’s gifts to David cemented their friend- 


Chapter Seventeen 211 


ship by expressing the love that was in his 
heart (1 Sam. 18: 3, 4). 

Spiritually, we are reminded that Christ has 
ascended on high and given gifts unto men— 
not to be used for self-aggrandizement, but to 
be of service to the Church. Rightly employed, 
however, the gift truly will be a store of grace, 
giving acceptance to him who has it, among 
those who value what is of God. 


9 He that covereth a transgression seeketh love ; 
But he that repeateth a matter separateth very 
friends. 


See remarks on chapters 10:12; 11:13; and 
25:23. He who covers transgression is an im- 
itator of God, and will be loved by all. He who 
repeats a matter to the detriment of another, 
takes for his pattern that evil spirit who is 
called ‘‘ the accuser of our brethren.”’ 

To cover a transgression, however, does not 
mean to make light of sin and allow iniquity to 
go unrebuked in another. It is, on the con- 
trary, to go to the erring one personally in ten- 
derness and brotherly kindness; to seek to exer- 
cise his conscience as to that in his course which 
is bringing dishonor upon his Lord. If such a 
mission is successful, the sin should never again 
be mentioned. It is covered, and none other 
need know of it. 


232 Notes on Proverbs 


Alas that this is so seldom carried out among 
us! Evilis spread abroad; backbiting goes on 
in secret; and thus many are defiled, love wanes, 
and fellowship is destroyed. 

The one who goes about repeating things for 
which there is no real necessity, is in a wretched 
business indeed. He separates true friends by his 
detestable practices, and casts reproach upon 
the name of the Lord. It is a pity the people of 
God are not more awake to the evil character 
of the talebearer. He should be shunned as a 
polluted leper who will defile all who listen to 
him. 

God alone can safely hear the sad story of a 
brother’s shame. Into His ear it can all be 
poured, coupled with earnest prayer for the res- 
toration of the one who has gone astray. To 
persist in retailing accounts of evil-doing to fel- 
low-saints is but to distress and injure those 
who are persuaded to listen. Few indeed are 
the men who can eat the sin offering in the holy 
place, and who, hearing of a brother’s wrong- 
doing, will take it to heart, and make it an oc- 
casion for self-judgment and confession on their 
own part to the Lord. 

Some one has said, that, if tempted to relate 
unsavory things of an absent person, it is well 
te ask mentally three questions: Is it true? Is 
it kind? Is it necessary? To these a fourth 


Chapter Seventeen 233 


might well be added: Have I told him about 
it personally? We fancy the effect of this would 
be to shut off an immense amount of sinful gos- 
siping. 

Nathan was one who could reprove in the fear 
of God, and cover when repentance was mani- 
fest (2 Sam. 12). In Sanballat we see the typi- 
cal whisperer endeavoring to separate Nehe- 
miah and his brethren by shaking their confi- 
dence in his integrity (Neh. 6). 


10 A reproof entereth more into a wise man 
Than a hundred stripes into a fool. 


Chastise the fool severely, and he maintains 
his self-complacency still; but gently reprove a 
wise man, and he will take it to heart. The one 
is so thoroughly enamored of his own poor 
judgment that he can conceive of none more ca- 
pable than himself. The other realizes his own 
limitations, in measure at least, and is thankful 
for advice and correction. Contrast Abimelech 
and Herod (Gen. 21: 25, 26; Luke 3: 19). 


11 An evil man seeketh only rebellion: 
Therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against 
him. 
12 Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a man, 
Rather than a fool in his folly. 
13 Whoso rewardeth evil for good, 
Evil shall not depart from his house. 


214 Notes on Proverbs 


Nothing galls a haughty, insubject man more 
than to be held in restraint by lawful author- 
ity. He breathes the air of treason and rebel- 
lion; therefore he must be dealt with in sever- 
ity. To contend with him is like battling with 
an enraged beast that has been robbed of its 
offspring. He will repay good with evil; there- 
fore evil shall not depart from his house. ‘‘ He 
that doeth wrong shall receive for the wrong 
which he hath done: and there is no respect of 
persons.” 

Note the ways and doom of Joab when he 
became lifted up in his own eyes (1 Kings 2: 
28-34). 


14 The beginning of strife is as when one letteth out 
water: 
Therefore leave off contention before it becometh 
vehement. 


A leak in a dike that could be stopped witha 
pebble, if noticed at the beginning, will, if neg- 
lected, grow greater and greater until, at last, 
the inrushing waters will carry all before them. 
So it is with strife. How many a lifelong con- 
tention has begun with a few hasty words, 
which, if repented of and apologized for at once, 
would have been healed immediately, and years 
of sorrow averted. The Spirit of God has said, 
“Be ye angry, and sin not: let not the sun go 


Chapter Seventeen 255 


down upon your wrath” (Eph. 4: 26). If this 
simple rule were literally obeyed, what untold 
heartaches would be avoided! Happy the man 
who lays his head upon his pillow nightly with 
the knowledge that there are no hasty actions 
or angry words unrepented of and unconfessed 
to any who have been offended, and who might 
have been alienated forever if the breach had 
not been made up at once in the fear of God. 
When days and weeks of charges and counter- 
charges are succeeded by months of crimination 
and recrimination, reconciliation is a hard and 
difficult matter to bring about. Far better is 
it to humble oneself and take wrong, if need be, 
at the beginning, than to grieve the Holy Spirit 
of God and lacerate the hearts of beloved saints 
by a long period of un-Christlike wrangling 
which will leave wounds that never can be 
healed; or, if healed, scars that never can be 
effaced. See Paul and Barnabas (Acts 15: 
35-40). 


15 He that justifieth the lawless, 
And he that condemneth the just, 
Even they both are abomination to Jehovah. 


To justify the wicked and to condemn the 
righteous is to call evil good, and good evil 
(Isa. 5: 20). Jehovah would have judgment 
according to truth. What is opposed to this is 


216 Notes on Proverbs 


an abomination. Observe that to justify neces- 
sarily means to clear, or to declare righteous; 
not, as some theologians would have it, to 
make righteous. God justifies the ungodly on 
the basis of Christ’s finished work; that is, He 
clears guilty sinners of every charge when they 
trust His Son, turning to Him in repentance. 
Making such to be practically upright in their 
lives is a different thing. It results from justifi- 
cation, but it is not that in itself. This is a dis- 
tinction of vast importance if we would under- 
stand aright the Christian doctrines of grace as 
set forth in the letters to the Romans and the 
Galatians. 

Here, to justify the lawless is to wink at sin 
and to pass by iniquity without a suited atone- 
ment; while to condemn the just is to impute 
evil where it is not found. To so do is intoler- 
able in the sight of Him who is the righteous 
Judge. This was Pilate’s dreadful sin, when, in 
order to please the people, he released Barabbas 
and condemned Jesus, albeit declaring His inno- 
cence a few moments before (Matt. 27: 24-26). 


16 Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to 
get wisdom, 
Seeing he hath no sense (lit., heart) ? 


It is useless for one who does not set his heart 
upon the acquisition of wisdom to endeavor to 


Chapter Seventeen 217 


learn it by rote. No price can purchase it, if the 
senses be not exercised to discern between good 
and evil. A fool may grasp certain forms of 
knowledge, by dint of study and intellectual ap- 
plication ; but this is a very different thing from 
having the reins of the being possessed by un- 
derstanding. We only know truth as we walk 
init. See Simon Magus (Acts 8: 18, 19). 


17 A friend loveth at all times, 
And a brother is born for adversity. 


Involuntarily the Christian’s heart turns from 
any human example, however true and devoted, 
and calls up one Friend whose love the many 
waters of judgment could not quench, neither 
could the floods of wrath drown it. Our Lord 
Jesus Christ is that Friend, whose love changes 
not, and who is preeminently a Brother born 
for adversity. 

In thus writing of Him, one would not for a 
moment countenance the mawkish sentimental- 
ity which so forgets the dignity of His person 
as to call Him our ‘Elder Brother,"’ and apply 
to Him similar unscriptural titles. But as a 
devoted brother can be depended on in the day 
of adversity, so can He be ever counted upon in 
the hour of need and trial. ‘‘ Having loved His 
own which were in the world, He loved them 
unto the end” (John 13:1). 


218 Notes on Proverbs 


“His is an unchanging love, 
Higher than the heights above ; 
Deeper than the depths beneath, 
True and faithful, strong as death.” 


It is unspeakably precious for the soul to 
abide in His love. If one doubt come in to ob- 
scure the full splendor of His undying affection, 
joy and peace will give place to gloom and fore- 
boding. But when nothing is permitted to hin- 
der the enjoyment of that perfect love that cast- 
eth out fear, life is sweet indeed, and communion 
with Him dearer far than any human friend- 
ship can afford. 

There is no question but that many saints 
have trusted Him as their Saviour, who do not 
really know Him as a living, loving Friend—One 
who enters into all their griefs and would share 
all their joys. It is when He is known in this 
character that the difficulties of the pilgrim 
path can be faced with equanimity, and the 
heart can confide in Him in every hour of trial. 
See chap. 18: 24. 


18 A man bereft of heart striketh hands, 
And becometh surety for his friend. 


See notes on chaps. 6: 1-5; 11:15. Itis the 
lack of sound judgment that leads one to go 
surety for another in the light of the repeated 
warnings of the word of God; unless, indeed, he 


Chapter Seventeen. 219 


is quite prepared to lose, and can well afford it. 
“Heart” is used throughout this portion of the 
Scriptures very much as, in every-day language, 
we speak of common sense. It must be so un- 
derstood here. (See verse 16, above.) Paul 
went surety for Onesimus, as Judah did for Ben- 
jamin; but each had counted the cost, and was 
ready to pay the uttermost farthing (Phile. 18, 
19; Gen. 42: 37; 44: 32). 


19 He loveth transgression that loveth a quarrel : 
And he that exalteth his entrance seeketh destruc- 


tion. 
20 He that hath a froward heart findeth no good: 
And he that hath a perverse tongue falleth into mis- 
chief. 


There are those who delight in contention, 
and who thereby manifest their love for their 
own ways, being impatient of restraint. In 
their haughtiness, they make high their gates, 
thus inviting destruction; for, exalting them- 
selves, they are near to a fall. Having a fro- 
ward heart, they find only evil, their perverse 
tongues continually stirring up mischief. Ha- 
nun, proud and defiant, had to prove this to 
the full, as narrated in 2 Sam. 10. 


21 He that begetteth a fool doeth it to his sorrow : 
And the father of a fool hath no joy. 


Such a verse requires no comment. It is an 


220 Notes on Proverbs 


unhappy fact; so patent, that all may realize 
it. David’s grief over Absalom is proof of its 
truthfulness (2 Sam. 18: 33). See also ver. 25. 


22 A merry heart doeth good like a medicine: 
But a broken spirit dneth the bones. 


See chap. 15:13, 15. Nothing breaks the 
system like gloom and melancholy. When the 
heart is filled with joy, the whole being is re- 
freshed thereby. The merriment of the Chris- 
tian is far more real than the mere frivolity of 
the worldling. He is able in all circumstances 
to rejoice in the Lord, and thus be lifted above 
what would depress and weigh down the soul. 
Then, in place of manifesting his happiness in 
the empty ways of the world, he can sing and 
make melody in his heart unto the source and. 
object of his gladness. ‘“‘Is any merry? let him 
sing psalms”’ (James 5:13). The man of the 
world has to resort to various expedients to re- 
lieve his uneasiness and rouse his spirits. Hence 
his eager participation in all kinds of diver- 
sions; the object of which is to enable him, for 
the time being, to forget. On the contrary, it is 
when the child of God remembers his place and 
portion in Christ that his joy overflows. Con- 
trast the different states of the unknown writer 
of psalm 116 when occupied with himself, and 
when faith soared up to God. 


Chapter Seventeen 221 


23 A lawless man taketh a bribe out of the bosom, 
To pervert the ways of judgment. 


Secretly the lawbreaker, conscious of his evil- 
doing, would endeavor, by a gift, to bribe those 
who are called to sit in judgment on his crimes. 
Such a course is a tacit acknowledgment of 
guilt. It is hard indeed to deal faithfully with 
a man to whom one is indebted for a favor. 
Therefore the need of sternly refusing ought 
from those who are bent upon a sinful course. 
It was when the king of Babylon sent letters 
and a present to Hezekiah that even so godly a 
king as he was taken off his guard, and acted 
without seeking counsel of Jehovah, as he had 
so readily done when it was a letter of blasphe- 
my he had received (Isa. 39:1, and contrast 
chap. 37: 14). 

24 Wisdom is before him that hath understanding : 
But the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth. 


Concentration of mind upon the one great ob- 
ject of gaining the knowledge of the Lord, and 
walking with Him ;—this is the wisdom that 
absorbs the man of understanding. The fool, 
with no settled purpose, wanders aimlessly here 
and there, tasting of various theories, getting a 
smattering of everything, but all to no purpose. 
Of such are those against whom Paul warned 
Timothy, men who ‘“‘heap to themselves teach- 


222 Notes on Proverbs 


ers, having itching ears,” but who, after all, 
have no heart for the truth of God (which alone 
is wisdom), so are turned unto fables, “ever 
learning, and never able to come to the knowl- 
edge of the truth.’’ The very opposite was that 
which characterized the great apostle himself, 
who could say, ‘“‘One thing I do!”’ (See Phil. 
3:13.) 


25 A foolish son is a grief to his father, 
And bitterness to her that bare him. 


See chap. 10:1, and notice verse 21, above. 
The young man is not the only, nor by any 
means the greatest, sufferer, when he throws 
discretion to the winds, and plunges into folly 
and vice. 

The poignant grief of his father’s heart, and 
the bitter disappointment of his mother, are 
sorrows too deep for words to express. To 
have brought into the world one who despises 
their love, and overleaps all restraint, is terri- 
ble indeed. Alas, that it so little affects the 
haughty, stubborn heart of the wayward youth 
who plunges recklessly on, adding grief to grief, 
and woe to woe! See the stubborn and rebel- 
lious son of Deut. 21: 18-20. 


26 Also to punish the just is not good, 
Nor to strike nobles because of uprightness. 


Chapter Seventeen 223 


The perversion of justice on the part of the 
prince who punishes the good man, or on the 
part of the subject who strikes the noble be- 
cause of his uprightness, are alike evil. Neither 
is rare in this world, for it has been a common 
thing to take vengeance on innocent men in or- 
der to shield guilty ones, and to revolt against 
God-fearing princes because their peaceable 
ways were opposed to the lawless, restless 
spirit of the age. See the account of Ishmael’s 
assassination of the upright prince, Gedaliah, 
and then his massacre of the fourscore men from 
Shechem, Shiloh, and Samaria, lest they make 
his crime known (Jer. 41: 1-7). 


27 He that hath knowledge spareth his words: 
And a man of understanding is of a quiet spirit. 
28 Even a fool, when he holdeth his peace, is counted 
wise : 
And he that shutteth his lips is esteemed a man of 
understanding. 


See notes on chaps. 12: 23 and 15:2. It is 
the simpleton who is always babbling. The 
man who has knowledge will not be continually 
airing his acquirements. He is of a quiet spirit, 
and can bide his time. A man who must al- 
ways be talking is generally one whose grasp 
of things in general is very slight; and, among 
Christians, an ever-running tongue certainly is 
no commendation to the discerning. He whose 


224 Notes on Proverbs 


knowledge is limited is esteemed wise when his 
words are few. One who lives in the fear of 
God sets a value upon words that the careless 
soul cannot understand ; for he remembers that 
‘for every idle word that men shall speak they 
shall give account thereof in the day of judg- 
ment.’’ Even that which he has experienced of 
God’s love and favor is not always to be told 
lightly to others. Paul seems to have kept for 
fourteen years the secret of his having been 
caught up to the third heaven, till a seasonable 
time came to relate it (2 Cor.12: 1-7). Note the 
self-control of Elisha in this respect when going 
out after Elijah (2 Kings 2: 3). 


225 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN. 


NOTHING is more clearly taught in the 
Scriptures than the need of a separation 
between the clean and the unclean, between 
those who love the truth and those who walk 
contrary toit. Separation from evil is impera- 
tive, and he who would honor God must bow 
to it, whether it be to separate from evil friends, 
from ecclesiastical evil, or from evil in a business 
way. The word is plain: “Come out from 
among them, and be ye separate, saith the 
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I 
will receive you” (2 Cor.6:17). To walk apart 
from all that is unholy, and to refuse fellowship 
to those who by their endorsement are parta- 
kers of the sins of others, is the only proper 
course for a Christian who desires the Lord’s 
approbation above all else. 
But there is a separation that is very different 
from this, and which the same Scriptures un- 
qualifiedly condemn. Of this we now learn. 


1 A man having separated himself for his own pleas- 
ure, 
Rageth against all sound wisdom. 
15 


226 Notes on Proverbs 


There is a vast difference between one who in 
lowliness and subjection to God separates him- 
self from evil, and another who, through pride 
and self-importance, separates himself from 
those who refuse evil, in order to do his own 
pleasure. This is the heretic of whom we read 
in Jude’s epistle: ‘‘ These be they who separate 
themselves, sensual, not having the Spirit” (ver. 
19). Men of this stamp are ‘‘murmurers, com- 
plainers, walking after their own lusts; and 
their mouth speaketh great swelling words, 
having men’s persons in admiration because of 
advantage” (Jude 16). It is most unhappy in- 
deed when, as is sometimes the case, real Chris- 
tians fall into the same ways as these false pro- 
fessors. 

How often do we find men who are no doubt 
born of God, and unquestionably gifted by Him, 
but in whom nature is strong, who are unbro- 
ken and wilful! Men like these go on with their 
brethren as long as their mandates are bowed 
to and their authority owned. But let there be 
an unwillingness to follow their advice implic- 
itly, and their pride will brook no refusal. Ei- 
ther they must have their way, or they will 
leave the assembly and begin something more 
to their own taste. These are the class who 
separate, not for the Lord’s glory, but for their 
own pleasure; and having so done, storm and 


Chapter Eighteen. 227 


rage against all wisdom, railing against those 
who will not have their dictum to be supreme. 

To separate from apostasy is right and Scrip. 
tural. To separate from what is of God is 
schism and heresy. It is the human will setting 
itself up to choose—and ignoring the authority 
of the word and Spirit of God. 

Even where there are unhappy things among 
those who seek to be guided by Scripture—things 
which are hard to get at,—and which make cau- 
tious, godly men move slowly, to turn the back 
on what God has formed is very wrong. It is 
an egregious blunder to excommunicate myself 
because I fancy another should be disciplined. 
Where one is of a lowly spirit, such occasions 
will but furnish opportunities for waiting pa- 
tiently upon God and seeking to exercise the 
consciences of fellow-saints. It is only the 
headstrong and wilful who will take matters 
into their own hands, and, if unable to override 
tender consciences, will separate themselves and 
rage against their brethren. Alexander the cop- 
persmith was evidently a man of this stamp, 
if, as seems likely, he is the companion of Hy- 
menzus mentioned in 1 Tim. 1:20. Having 
given up the truth, he became the bitter oppo- 
nent of those who stood for it (2 Tim. 4: 14,15). 


2 A fool hath no delight in understanding, 
But that his heart may discover itself. 


228 Notes on Proverbs 


See note on chap. 15:14. Nothing is more 
characteristic of the fool than his contempt for 
instruction and his lack of concern about intel- 
ligence. He discovers to the most casual ob- 
server the folly that is in his heart by the tri- 
fling words that trip lightly from his lips. Con- 
sider our Lord’s rebuke to the Pharisees who 
had no delight in understanding (Matt. 23: 
17-19). 

3 When the lawless cometh, there cometh also con- 

tempt, 
And with ignominy reproach. 


The casting off of restraint and acting in self- 
will results in shame and reproach. He who 
would have the confidence of his brethren, and 
be esteemed by his friends, must manifest a 
spirit of subjection, on his own part, that be- 
speaks a sober-minded, thoughtful man, and 
one who values integrity. The opposite spirit 
results in ignominy at last, however high the 
head may be carried for a time. See Pashur 
(Jer. 20: 1-6). 

4 The words of a man’s mouth are as deep waters, 

And the well-spring of wisdom as a flowing brook. 


The heart is the well, or fountain, whence 
these waters flow forth. In our Christian dis- 
pensation the Holy Spirit dwells in every be- 
lever, and forms a more wondrous well-spring 


Chapter Eighteen 229 


of wisdom than the wisest could have in the 
past age. He it is of whom our Lord spake 
when He said, “‘If any man thirst, let him come 
unto Me, and drink. He that believeth on Me, 
as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall 
flow rivers of living water” (John 7: 37, 38). 
Commentators have searched in vain for the 
scripture referred to; but may it not be that 
the very passage which we are considering was 
(perhaps with others) in the Lord’s thoughts 
when He spoke? The thirsty soul finds in Christ 
the Wisdom of God, and, trusting in Him, re- 
ceives that Divine indwelling which causes wis- 
dom, as a flowing brook of living water, to go 
out from his being for the refreshment and joy 
of other needy ones. 

It was the general testimony of the Scriptures 
to which Jesus called attention; but in this 
proverb we find the very same figure used that 
He took up to picture the truth He was declar- 
ing. See Stephen (Acts 6: 8, 10). 


5 It is not good to accept the person of the lawless, 
To overthrow the righteous in judgment. 


How constantly the righteous Judge insists 
on impartial justice on the part of those set to 
represent Him in the tribunals of men! And if 
He so plainly declare His abhorrence of false 
and biased decisions in the courts of the world, 


230 Notes on Proverbs. 


how doubly jealous must He be concerning the 
judgments of His saints! See His word through 
Moses, and the later revelations through Paul 
(Deut. 1:16, 17; 16: 18-20; 1 Cor. 6: 1-7). 


6 A fool’s lips enter into contention, 
And his mouth calleth for strokes. 
7 A fool’s mouth is his destruction, 
And his lips are the snare of his soul. 
8 The words of a whisperer are as dainty morsels, 


And they go down into the depths of the soul. 


See chap. 26: 20-22. The fool is ever ready 
for strife, and his mouth utters hasty and bitter 
words on the slightest pretext. His conten- 
tious lips call for severe rebuke, and shall be his 
own destruction, if he be not brought to repent- 
ance. In slander and scandal he delights, roll- 
ing evil tales as choice dainties under his tongue, 
and filling his heart with what is unholy and 
perverse. To the whisperer he readily gives ear, 
and as readily imitates his ways. Of this spirit 
were Korah, Dathan, and Abiram (Num. 16). 


9 He also that is slothful in his work, 


Is brother to him that is a great waster. 


The latter wastes his goods, the former wastes 
his time. Both come to poverty, as did the 
prodigal of Luke 15; and the disobedient son of 
Matt. 21: 30 was clearly on the same road. 


Chapter Eighteen 231 


10 The name of Jehovah is a strong tower: 
The righteous runneth into it, and is safe. 


The name of Jehovah stands for the Lord 
Himself. To run into it, as into a strong tower, 
is therefore to confide in Him in the time of 
trouble. Such is the blessed privilege of every 
true saint. “ Be careful for nothing; but in 
everything by prayer and supplication with 
thanksgiving let your requests be made known 
unto God. And the peace of God, which passeth 
all understanding, shall keep (i.e., garrison) 
your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus” 
(Phil.4:6,7). All that perplexes and oppresses 
the spirit can be poured into Hisear. Then the 
soul can leave it all with Him, and can confide 
in His love. Thus the heart shall be at peace, 
protected as in a garrisoned tower, let the ene- 
my rage ashe may. See a lovely picture of this 
in the tower of Thebez (Judges 9 : 50-57). 


11 The rich man’s wealth is his strong city; 
And as a high wall in his own conceit. 


How different from what we have just been 
considering is the fortress of the man who, 
knowing not the name of the Lord, trusts in his 
wealth, fondly fancying, in his conceit, that he 
is forever secure. Riches soon vanish away, 
and leave him, who had made them his confi- 
dence, desolate and forsaken. How often did 


232 Notes on Proverbs 


the Saviour, when on earth, have to rebuke 

those who trusted in uncertain riches! See espe- 

cially Luke 6: 24 and Mark 10: 24. 

12 Before destruction the heart of man is haughty; 
And before honor is humility. 

See note on chap. 16:18. Itis needful that 
creatures so given to pride be again and again 
<eminded of its dire result. It is a sure precur- 
sor of destruction. Humility, on the other 
hand, is the forerunner of honor. God delights 
to exalt the lowly. 

The Hindu word for humility is said to be 
“the dust’’; for it is a proverb among them 
that “you can walk on the dust forever and it 
never answers back.’’? Humility is self-forgetful- 
ness—the spirit of meekness, that, in the sight of 
God, is of great price. Weigh well His word to 
Barak (Jer. 45:5), and notice how the first 
clause of the verse before us is exemplified in Uz- 
ziah (2 Chron. 26: 16), and the latter in his son 
Jotham (2 Chron. 27: 6). 


13 He that answereth a matter before he heareth it, 
It is folly and a shame unto him. 


Rash judgments, founded on one-sided evi- 
dence, or formed by jumping at conclusions, ex- 
pose the unwise one to shame when the case is 
thoroughly investigated, and he is found to 
have spoken without proper proof. Such judg- 


Chapter Eighteen 233 


ments have not been uncommon, even among 
Christians, who may well learn from this verse. 
But it is perhaps the young man who is espe- 
cially exposed to this snare, particularly where 
there is boundless self-confidence. See David’s 
erroneous judgment as to Ziba and Mephibo- 
sheth, already referred to (2 Sam. 16:1—4,; 19: 
24-30). 


14 The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity ; 
But a broken spirit who can bear ? 


It was when Jehoshaphat put the singers in 
the forefront of the army that victory hovered 
over his host. When the spirit of praise fills the 
soul, one is enabled to rise above the infirmities 
of the body and the trials of the way. But let 
the joy be lost and the spirit be broken, then 
defeat is certain. The saint can rejoice in the 
Lord, whatever his circumstances, if the line of 
communication is unbroken, and the conscience 
is free. This will make a victor of the feeblest. 
See Nehemiah’s word to the returned remnant 
(Neh. 8: 10). 


15 The heart of the prudent getteth knowledge ; 
And the ear of the wise man seeketh knowledge. 


Emphasize the ‘‘getteth’’ and the ‘“‘seeketh.” 
It is because he seeks for knowledge, that the 
wise and prudent man gets it. It is no haphaz- 


234 Notes on Proverbs 


ard accumulation of varied lore, but an earnest, 
daily search for true science—that is, absolute 
truth, as revealed in the word of God—that re- 
sults in the enlightenment of the man of godly 
probity. See Ezra (Ezra 7: 10). 


16 A man’s gift maketh room for him, 
And bringeth him before great men. 


Contrast chap. 25:14. We may consider this 
verse from two standpoints: the natural, and 
the spiritual. Looked at from that of the first, 
its meaning is plain. A man, by bestowing fa- 
vors upon subordinates, easily works his way 
into the presence of their master. This is a 
common method of procedure on the part of 
those who desire audiences where they are 
themselves unwanted. We need not dwell 
on it. 

If, however, we think of gift in the way it is 
used in the epistles, as that which the ascended 
Christ bestows upon His servants for the edify- 
ing of His mystical body, it brings before us an 
important lesson. A gifted man needs not to 
force himself forward. His gift will make room 
for him as truly as in the world of nature and 
in the case of a material gift. In other words, 
the man who has had a ministry committed to 
him by the Lord Himself need never be a time- 
serving truckler to the present age: let him go 


Chapter Eighteen 235 


on quietly in faithfulness, and the Master he 
serves will bring him to the front in due time if 
He would have him there at all. Self-assertive- 
ness is the last thing that should be found in a 
servant of Christ. Lowly obedience to his Lord, 
coupled with the loving desire to serve in His 
name, and for His sake, should distinguish the 
gifted man above all else. See the prophet 
Amos (Amos 7: 14, 15). 


17 He that is first in his own cause seemeth just ; 


But his neighbor cometh and searcheth him. 


See verse 13, above. It is most unwise to 
hear but one side of a story (particularly when 
it is a matter that is troubling the saints of 
God), and give judgment upon what has been 
presented. Even with the most conscientious 
there is always the likelihood of but a partial 
account having been told. Therefore the wis- 
dom of hearing, not only both parties, but, if 
possible, of having them face to face. Most men 
can make out a good case for themselves, if left 
alone; because it has been natural for fallen 
man to justify himself since the day that Adam 
sought to throw the blame of his sin back upon 
God. Therefore, to decide a case on one-sided 
testimony is almost certain to result in a mis 
carriage of justice. See Saul and Samuel (1Sam. 
15: 13, 14). 


236 Notes on Proverbs 


18 The lot causeth contentions to cease, 
And parteth between the mighty. 


See note on chap. 16:33. When argument 
was in vain, and differences seemed irreconcila- 
ble, the lot was resorted to as a final settlement. 
This was in a time when the written word of 
God was not completed, nor the Holy Spirit 
abiding in His children. It is that word, minis- 
tered in the power of the Spirit, that is given us 
for a court of final resort in this dispensation of 
grace. Because of her sin Jerusalem was left 
with none to cast a lot to determine matters of 
controversy. Justice had been trampled on, 
and would no more be found (Micah 2: 5). 
There is a warning for us in this, lest, if our 
ways be unrighteous, we turn to the word of 
God in vain for guidance. ‘‘The meek will He 
guide in judgment; the meek will He teach His 
way.” 


19 A brother offended is harder to be won than a strong 
city : 
And their contentions are like the bars of a castle. 


See note on chap. 17:14. No tangles are so 
hard to straighten out as those in which breth- 
ren are concerned who once were knit heart to 
heart in true affection. To win back a brother 
who has been offended is more difficult than to 
subdue a walled city. Each is likely to view all 


Chapter Eighteen 237 


that the other does with suspicion and mis- 
trust, once a lack of confidence possesses the 
soul. Entrenched behind the bars of wounded 
pride, and unwilling to view the matter in re- 
lation to God, it will be impossible for either 
party to be overcome by grace and lowliness. 

How much easier is it to humble oneself at 
first than after months or years of strife! There 
are few quarrels that could not be settled in a 
very short time, were both parties ready to 
meet quietly before the Lord to look into their 
differences; but the opportune hour, passed 
by, may not recur for a long season. Remem- 
ber, when tempted to perpetuate strife, the dis- 
honor that must thereby accrue to the name of 
the Lord, and be warned by the unbrotherly ex- 
ample of contention between the men of Judah 
and of Israel, with its sad consequences (2 Sam. 
19 :41-43). 


20 Man’s being shall be satisfied with the fruit of his 
mouth ; 
And with the increase of his lips shall he be filled. 


21 Death and life are in the power of the tongue : 
And they that love it shall eat the fruit thereof. 


He who sows with his lips shall reap an abun- 
dant harvest, whether of sin unto death, or of 
righteousness unto life. Words seldom fall idly 
to the ground. Uttered often in thoughtless- 


238 Notes on Proverbs 


ness, they take root in congenial soil and come 
to fruition most unexpectedly. Often has a 
chance word, dropped casually to a stranger, 
been the means of untold blessing, rejoicing the 
soul of the one who uttered it, when at last he 
is apprised of its blessed result. The man of 
God may well be encouraged to steadily pursue 
his way, sowing beside all waters the precious 
gospel of God, assured that “‘ with the increase 
of his lips shall he be filled.” 

But if the words be evil, the harvest is just as 
certain; and it is well known that weeds and 
noxious plants will flourish where nourishing 
fruits and grains cannot come to perfection. 
The man of unholy lips shall find abundant re- 
sult from his reckless words, and shall as truly 
as the other ‘“‘eat the fruit thereof.” 

Contrast the false teachers of 2 Peter 2 with 
the ambassadors for Christ of 2 Cor.5. Both 
shall yet be rewarded according to their sow- 
ing. 

22 Whoso findeth a wife findeth a good thing, 
And obtaineth favor from Jehovah. 


It is not blind chance that unites congenial 
partners in the bonds of holy matrimony. A 
wife (not merely a woman) is from the Lord, 
and is an expression of His loving favor. This 
being so, itis of gravest moment that the young 


Chapter Eighteen, 239 


man, ere he permits his affections to go out to 
a maiden, should seek to be guided, as to the 
proper object of his attention, by the Lord Him- 
self. There would be fewer incompatible mar- 
riages if His mind was more often sought, and 
mere fancy less frequently allowed to direct. 
Let the young Christian consider well whether 
such a marriage as he is contemplating is likely 
to prove an unequal yoke, or a hindrance to 
soul-progress in place of a help. See Boaz and 
Ruth (Ruth 4: 9-12). Note chap. 19: 14 (last 
clause). 


23 The poor useth entreaties ; 
But the rich answereth roughly. 


There is an evil genius in connection with 
great wealth that, if it be not closely watched 
against, dries up the milk of human kindness 
and hardens the heart against the needy. Let 
those whose temporal riches place them in the 
position to succor the poor, remember that the 
ear of God notes every unheeded cry of the pov- 
erty-stricken, and His eye beholds every ungra- 
cious action on the part of those who could re- 
lieve, but do it not. See the parable of the im- 
placable servant (Matt. 18 : 23-35). 


24 A man that hath friends must show himself friendly: 
And there is a friend that sticketh closer than a 
brother. 


240 Notes on Proverbs 


None complain so loudly of the lack of love 
and friendliness on the part of others as those 
who manifest very little of either themselves. 
He who busies himself to show love will receive 
it back again. He who is himself a friend will 
find friends to reciprocate his kindness. But 
the true Friend, as we saw in chap. 17:17, is 
ever such. His heart is unchanged by the slights 
of the objects of his devotion. ‘‘There is a 
Friend that sticketh closer than a brother.” 
He always manifested love and grace in a world 
where all by nature were estranged from Him. 

Let those who complain of lack of love on the 
part of fellow-saints imitate His holy example. 
Be concerned, not about receiving kindness, 
but about manifesting it, and ‘“‘good measure, 
pressed down, shall men repay into your bo- 
som.’’ See the good Samaritan (Luke 10: 
29-37). 


243 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 


HE first three proverbs are intimately con- 
nected, and we therefore consider them 
together. 


1 Better is the poor that walketh in his integrity, 
Than he that is perverse in his lips, and is a fool. 
2 Also, that the soul be without knowledge, is not 


good ; 
And he that hasteth with his feet sinneth [or, ma- 
keth false steps]. 
3 The foolishness of man perverteth his way: 
And his heart fretteth against Jehovah. 


It is the contrast between the path of truth 
and the way of self-will and ignorance. Far 
better is it to be poor and unknown, and yet 
walk before God in uprightness and integrity 
of heart, than to be loud in speech but given to 
folly and perverseness. 

Ignorance is not to be admired. The worldly 
axiom, ‘“‘ Where ignorance is bliss, ’tis folly to 
be wise,”’ is false and foolish. To be bereft of 
knowledge is undesirable. Mere zeal will not 
suffice to keep one right. One may be in ear- 
nest, but earnestly wrong, as was Saul of Tar- 

16 


242 Notes on Proverbs. 


sus before his conversion (Acts 26:9). He who 
runs on without learning the will of God, adds 
sin to sin. His foolishness leads him astray, 
and his deceitful heart is irritated against the 
Lord. He is bent on his own way, and can 
brook no correction. Compare Jonah when 
acting in self-will (Jonah 1: 3; 4: 8, 9). 


4 Wealth maketh many friends; 
But the poor is separated from his neighbor. 


The well-to-do will always have many to 
claim friendship with him; while the indigent 
will often find his poverty a means of separa- 
ting his neighbors from him; for, though a 
glamour may be thrown about it by the easily- 
satisfied optimist, this is a cold, feelingless 
world after all. 

But there is a legitimate sense in which friends 
may be made by means of wealth. Our Lord 
has bidden His disciples ‘‘make to yourselves 
friends by the mammon of unrighteousness, that 
when ye fail they may receive you into everlast- 
ing habitations.” Riches, if used for the allevi- 
ation of misery and in reference to the coming 
age, may be the means of much blessing. When 
at last the one who has so used them passes 
away, he will find a host of friends, who have 
been the objects of his Christlike benefactions 
on earth, waiting to welcome him into the ever- 


Chapter Nineteen 243 


lasting home of the redeemed. Notice verses 6, 
7,and 17. The just man will not regard the 
rich more than the poor. See Job 34:19, and 
James 2: 1-9. 


5 A false witness shall not be acquitted ; 
And he that breatheth out lies shall not escape. 


The judgment of God is according to truth. 
He will see that every transgression and diso- 
bedience shall receive a just recompence of re- 
ward. A lie may seem to triumph for the time 
being, but the truth shall be eventually supreme. 
See the witnesses against Naboth (1 Kings 21: 
8-13). Note verse 9. 


6 Many will entreat the favor of a prince: 
And every man is a friend to him that giveth gifts. 
7 All the brethren of the poor do hate him: 
How much more do his friends go far from him ? 
He pursueth them with words, yet they are wanting 
to him. 


See note on verse 4, above. There are always 
multitudes to wait upon a noble, and to play 
the part of friends to one who can be their bene- 
factor. How different the spirit of Him who 
was charged with receiving sinners, and eating 
with them; who sought not the smiles of the 
great, nor feared their frowns! By His Spirit 
He has bidden those who would follow in His 
steps to be characterized bv ‘‘ minding not high 


244 Notes on Proverbs 


things, but going along with the lowly” (Rom. 
12:16). 

It is like the world to prefer the rich and great 
to the destitute and outwardly ignoble; but let 
the Christian remember that his Lord appeared 
on earth as one of the poor whom His brethren 
despised, and whose friends went far from Him, 
though He pursued them with tender entreaties. 
Surely those who are now, by grace, linked up 
with Him in blessing must ever cherish a loving 
concern for the needy. 


8 He that getteth heart loveth his own soul : 
He that keepeth understanding shall find good. 


The A. V. reads ‘“‘ wisdom’? where we have 
used the literal rendering, ‘“‘heart.’”’ The word 
so used is a Hebraism, standing for sound judg- 
ment, or common sense. See chap. 15: 21. 

To follow after moral probity, and to cleave 
to understanding, bring true peace and lasting 
happiness. See Timotheus (2 Tim. 3: 14, 15). 


9 A false witness shall not be acquitted ; 
And he that breatheth out lies shall perish. 


The passage is not exactly a repetition of 
verse 5. There, we are reminded that the liar 
shall not escape. Here, we are told what his 
doom shall be. He shall perish. He shall be de- 
stroyed. That is, his hopes shall be cut off, and 


Chapter Nineteen 245 


he shall go out into the darkness; broken be- 
neath the judgment of God, to endure the un- 
speakable woes of the liar’s eternity (Rev. 
2A 28.) 


10 Luxury is not seemly for a fool; 
Much less for a servant to have rule over princes. 


Both are out of place. The servant ruling 
over princes, and the fool nursed in the lap ot 
luxury, bespeak conditions that are opposed 
to what is right and orderly. Circumstances 
may arise in which a prince is helpless, and 
obliged to rely upon the judgment of one of 
lesser place; but the wise servant will use his 
powers with discretion, and keep the subject- 
place, though all be under his hand. See Joseph 
(Gen. 47 : 14-20). 


11 The discretion of a man deferreth his anger ; 
And it is his glory to pass over a transgression. 


See note on chap. 14: 29. An uncontrolled 
temper, manifested in hasty anger unjudged, be- 
speaks a man who has never learned, in the 
school of God, the great lesson of self-govern- 
ment. Itis the pompous, conceited pedant who 
cannot overlook an injury done to him, but must 
vent his wrath upon the offender whenever an 
occasion presents itself. A man of sound judg- 
ment and discretion has learned to pass lightly 


246 Notes on Proverbs 


over offences and seeming insults which would 
goad the one who is bereft of wisdom to intense 
indignation. In this, whatever his failings oth- 
erwise, even Esau approves himself when he 
greets his brother Jacob (concerning whose 
transgression there could be no question) with 
such grace and magnanimity (Gen. 33: 4-9). 


12 The king’s wrath is as the roaring of a lion; 
But his favor is as dew upon the grass. 


Because ‘‘in the word of a king there is pow- 
er,’’ his wrath is to be dreaded, and his gracious 
favor eagerly sought. How much more fully 
may the words be applied to the coming King, 
the Lion of the tribe of Judah! When the great 
day of His wrath has come, how wretched will 
be the estate of all who know not His grace, 
which to the repentant soul is indeed like dew 
upon the grass! Both aspects are illustrated 
in Pharaoh’s dealing with his chief butler and 
his chief baker (Gen. 40). 


13 A foolish son is the calamity of his father: 
And the contentions of a wife are a continual drop- 
ping. 

The first line connects with chap. 17: 25. 
How unhappy the home where both a foolish 
son and a contentious wife are found! They are 
very likely to be together; for where the wife 
disputes her husband’s authority, and takes 


Chapter Nineteen 247 


sides with the children, in opposition to his 
proper discipline, the effect upon them will be 
anything but good. 

It is a very common thing to see parents dis- 
puting and wrangling before their household, 
with the baneful result that the sons and 
daughters learn to despise the father’s author- 
ity and to defy the mother’s correction, when 
she does attempt it; thus growing up in a law- 
less, insubject spirit, bent upon having their 
own way and persisting in their refusal to sub- 
mit to proper discipline. Christian parents 
may well ponder the instructions given to each 
in Eph. 5, Col. 3, and 1 Peter 3. The conten- 
tious wife has her unhappy illustration in Mi- 
chal, the daughter of Saul (2 Sam. 6: 16-23, 
and 1 Chron. 15: 29). 


14 House and riches are an inheritance from fathers : 
But a prudent wife is from Jehovah. 


See chap. 18: 22. One may inherit house and 
wealth, but none can give a prudent wife but 
the Lord. It is God who joins together, and 
therefore forbids man to put asunder. He who 
said at the beginning, “It is not good for man 
to be alone; I will make him a help meet for 
him,” is still concerned about His people’s hap- 
piness. Therefore the man of faith can safely 
trust Him to give a suited life-partner. It is 


248 ‘Notes on Proverbs. 


when, unwilling to wait on God, one chooses 
for himself, relying alone on his poor human 
judgment, that bitter mistakes are made, which 
are often irremediable. To marry in Christ is 
not necessarily to marry in the Lord. Any mar- 
riage between Christians would be in Christ. 
Only when the will is subject, and the mind of 
God has been learned, will marriage be in the 
Lord. See Rebekah’s case, and note how mark- 
edly Jehovah ordered all (Gen. 24). 
15 Slothfulness casteth into a deep sleep; 

And an idle soul shall suffer hunger. 

See notes on chaps. 12: 24,and 13:4. Many 
of us fail to realize that idleness is sin. Time 
wasted is time to be accounted for at the judg- 
ment-seat of Christ. Needed rest is, of course, 
very right and proper. Jesus Himself had to 
say to His disciples, “‘ Come ye yourselves apart, 
and rest awhile.’’ But idleness is quite differ- 
ent. Slothfulness is trifling away opportunities 
that will never return. It is failing to appreci- 
ate the value of time. In a natural sense, the 
sluggard is made to feel the pinch of want; and 
spiritually, the same is also true. He who, for 
lack of godly energy, does not bestir himself to 
procure suited sustenance for his soul, will come 
to want, and know the pangs of famine. See 
Paul’s words to both the Ephesian and Colos- 
sian saints (Eph. 5: 16; Col. 4:5). 


Chapter Nineteen 249 
16 He that keepeth the commandment keepeth his own 


soul; 
But he that despiseth His ways shall die. 


This is a truth frequently presented in Scrip- 
ture. It is, so to speak, a kindness to oneself to 
obey the commandment of the Lord. The word 
is a word of life. To forsake it is to die. There- 
fore he is short-sighted indeed who despises the 
ways of God and chooses for himself. He is but 
sealing his own destruction, and bringing down 
well-merited wrath upon his own head. See 
Shimei (1 Kings 2: 36-46). 


17 He that hath pity upon the poor lendeth to Jeho- 
vah ; 
And We which he hath given will He pay him 


again. 


It is truly precious to contemplate Jehovah as 
the patron of the poor. He has left such in the 
world to test the hearts of those who are better 
provided for, and He accepts what is done with 
compassion, to relieve the needy, as so much 
done for Himself. Money and goods bestowed 
with loving pity on those in distress are not 
gone forever. He takes note of every mite, and 
makes Himself responsible to see that all shall 
be repaid ; and we may be sure the interest will 
be greater far than could be realized in any 
other way. Genuine philanthropy is the result 


250 Notes on Proverbs 


of true love to God. When His love is shed 
abroad in the heart by the Holy Spirit, there 
will be a corresponding concern for all men. To 
do good and to communicate is well-pleasing to 
the Lord, and shall in no wise lose its reward, 
even though it be the giving of but a cup of cold 
water in His name. The widow of Zarephath 
was none the poorer for ministering to Elijah 
in his distress, but found instead an unfailing 
cruse of oil and an unending supply of meal 
(1 Kings 17: 10-16). 


18 Chasten thy son while there is hope, 
But set not thy soul upon slaying him. 


Discipline, firm but gracious, should charac- 
terize the home. Brutal punishments, even to 
endangering the life of the one chastised, are 
very wrong, and opposed to the Spirit of God. 
Conduct such as this can only harden, in place 
of recovering, a wayward son. ‘Ye fathers, 
provoke not your children to wrath,” is a need- 
ed admonition in many families. Unreasonable 
demands, and punishments all out of propor- 
tion to the offence committed, should be sedu- 
lously avoided. Many a child who might have 
been saved by careful, godly training in his ear- 
liest years, has been left to grow up in untram- 
meled freedom until the father, at last, thought 
he was old enough for chastisement, when he 


Chapter Nineteen 251 


has become the subject of severe treatment that 
has filled his heart with anger and alienated 
him for life from his well-meaning but exceed- 
ingly unwise parent. ‘‘The iron hand in the 
velvet glove”’ has long been the symbol of strict 
discipline administered in grace. To leave a 
child to himself is to manifest a cruel indiffer- 
ence to the fate of one committed to our care. 
To be heartless and unnecessarily severe in cor- 
recting him is to err on the other side. The 
happy medium is what the word of God teaches, 
and brings the desired results. It is well if the 
child is made to realize that it is his good which 
is sought, not the venting of an irate father’s 
spleen, which has caused many a one to lose the 
respect of an observing youth. See Saul’s un- 
wise treatment of Jonathan, thereby alienating 
his heart, in place of winning his confidence 
(1 Sam. 20: 30). 


19 A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment: 
For if thou deliver him, yet thou must do it again. 


It is useless to shield a man given to uncon- 
trolled anger; for though by the intercessions 
of his friends he may be again and again deliv- 
ered from the unhappy consequences which 
would naturally have followed his ebullitions 
of temper, he is likely at any time to be as bad 
as ever, and to draw down righteous retribu- 


252 Notes on Proverbs 


tion on his own head, and involve those who 
undertake to defend him in common trouble and 
perhaps ruin. See chap. 22:24. Such a man 
is manifestly unbroken, and lacking in the grace 
of self-judgment. He should be left to himself 
till he learns by punishment what he would not 
receive otherwise. Samuel found it hard to bow 
to this lesson, and only gave Saul.up at last 
when the Lord distinctly called upon him to 
separate himself from him (1 Sam. 16: 1). 


20 Hear counsel, and receive instruction, 
That thou mayest be wise in thy latter end. 
21 There are many devices in a man’s heart; 


Nevertheless the counsel of Jehovah, that shall 


stand. 


To despise counsel is to play the part of the 
fool. He who is wise values instruction, espe- 
cially when it is of an authoritative character. 
He knows that whatever man may plan, and 
however wisely he may scheme, the counsel of 
the Lord is certain, and shall be duly carried 
out. God has said, ‘‘ My counsel shall stand; I 
will do all My pleasure.” How vain the man 
who would dare to set himself in opposition to 
it! Happy is he who, waiting on God for in- 
struction, obeys implicitly His counsel, and 
therefore works for and with Him. See Josh- 
ua’s commission (Josh. 1: 5-9). 


Chapter Nineteen 253 


22 The charm of a man is his kindness: 
And a poor man is better than a liar. 


A kindly, benevolent spirit appeals to all men, 
and charms by its unselfishness and thoughtful- 
ness for others. But to promise large things 
while unable to perform them is reprehensible. 
It is far better to be poor and frankly admit 
one’s inability to do what the heart might de- 
sire,than to promise largely and be at last proven 
untrustworthy. To be what you are, and not 
to pretend to be what you are not, is a sound 
principle, the carrying out of which gains the 
esteem of any whose good opinion is worth 
seeking. See Peter and the lame man (Acts 
3:6). 

23 The fear of Jehovah tendeth to life: 


And he that hath it shall rest satisfied; 
He shall not be visited with evil. 


It is a synoptic statement of the precious 
truth unfolded in the 91st psalm—the portion 
of the man who dwells in the secret place of the 
Most High, abiding under the shadow of the 
Almighty. Resting in the enjoyment of His om- 
nipotent power and unchanging love, he who 
fears the Lord has no anxious concern as to his 
affairs. Hecan rest satisfied, knowing that he 
cannot be visited with evil, for all things must 
work together for the good of one in such a 


254 Notes on Proverbs 


case. What seems to be evil will become but a 
means of blessing, by causing the heart to cleave 
more truly to the God of all grace. See Paul’s 
song of triumph in Rom. 8: 28-39. 


24 A slothful man burieth his hand in the dish, 


And will not so much as bring it to his mouth again. 


Having the very means of sustenance before 
him, the sluggard is too lethargic to avail him- 
self thereof. The figure used may seem almost 
absurdly hyperbolic, but it is meant to picture 
a most extreme case; where, though seated at 
the table with nourishing food in his hand, the 
eater is overcome by drowsiness, and prefers to 
abandon himself to ease and sleep rather than 
bestir himself to take his meal. The word of 
God is such a dish; but, alas, many are the slug- 
gards who, with abundant opportunity to feed 
upon its precious things, are too indifferent to 
search and find its treasures for themselves. 
Eglon, king of Moab, appears to have been 
largely a man of the stamp described (Judges 
3: 17-25). 


25 Smite a scorner, and the simple will beware: 
And reprove one that hath understanding, and he 
will understand knowledge. 


To allow the scorner to go unrebuked would 
often be to put a snare before the feet of the sim- 


Chapter Nineteen 255 


ple, who might conclude that the gainsaying 
was irresistible because unanswered. It is there. 
fore right and proper to punish him who op. 
poses the truth by exposing before all the falla- 
cies of his position. Ifa wise man, it will be no 
hardship to be reproved; for the truth itself is 
of greater value in the eyes of him who has un- 
derstanding than his own dignity. See Paul’s 
word to Timothy regarding those who are per- 
verted (1 Tim. 5: 20). 
26 He that ruineth his father, and chaseth away his 
mother, 
Is a son that causeth shame and bringeth reproach. 

See verse 13 above. Bitter indeed are the sor- 
rows brought upon his parents by a rebellious 
son. Such a one is a very incarnation of selfish- 
ness. He will ruin his father, spending all his 
substance for self-gratification; and will in his 
stubbornness even drive his mother from him, 
refusing all correction. Ignominy and obloquy 
are thereby brought upon their name; but to 
all this he is supremely indifferent. Determined 
to be free from all restraint, he recklessly plunges 
on to his doom. Itis a sad, sad picture, often 
duplicated in this unhappy scene, and is espe- 
cially characteristic of the last days, in which 
we now live (2 Tim. 3: 2). 


27 Cease, my son, to hear the instruction 
That causeth to err from the words of knowledge. 


256 Notes on Proverbs 


This is a far-reaching command, of vast im- 
portance. Itis an evidence of youthful pride for 
one to suppose he can listen to all kinds of the- 
ories, good and evil, but be defiled by none. 
Spiritual eclecticism may seem to savor of 
breadth of mind and liberality ; but it generally 
ends in making shipwreck of the faith. You can 
only recognize and avoid error when the truth 
of God is known and delighted in. Therefore 
the need of earnest, diligent study of the Scrip- 
tures. When another gives out what is con- 
trary to God’s revealed word, it is time to re- 
fuse him and his teaching. You cannot afford 
to trifle with unholy doctrine. 

Remember that what is opposed to the teach- 
ing of the unerring word of the Lord is directly 
from Satan. To dabble with it is to expose 
yourself to its powerful influence. Therefore re- 
fuse to hear it. 

One simple question is all that needs to be 
propounded to any one taking the place of an 
instructor in divine things, in order to detect 
the bias of his doctrine. It is this: ‘‘ What 
think ye of Christ?” He who is unsound here 
is wrong throughout. If the true deity, or di- 
vinity, of the Lord Jesus be denied; if the aton- 
ing efficacy of His blood be explained away; if 
the sinlessness of His spotless humanity be in 
any way clouded, the system is wrong at the 


~ 


Chapter Nineteen 25h, 


foundation, and it will prove to be unsound in 
ail else. 
““«What think ye of Christ?’ is the test 
To try both your state and your scheme. 


You cannot be right in the rest, 
Unless you think rightly of Him.”—(J. NEwron.) 


For a Christian to continue to hear, or to sup- 
port, a man who blasphemes his Lord, is trea- 
son of the darkest hue. If any bring not the 
doctrine of Christ, he is to pe refused, and no 
fellowship shown him, because he abides in the 
darkness ; and “‘ what fellowship hath light with 
darkness?’”’ See the Spiritualists of Isaiah’s 
day (Isa.8:19, 20), and the Judaizers and Gnos- 
tics of the apostolic period (Titus 1: 10,11; Col. 
2:8; 2John 9,10). All these classes are to be 
found in our times, multiplied a thousandfold. 
“From such turn away.” 


28 A witness of Belial scorneth judgment: 

And the mouth of the lawless devoureth iniquity. 
29 Judgments are prepared for scorners, 

And stripes for the back of fools. 

Belial seems in a veiled way to stand for Sa- 
tan. It really means that which is worthless, 
but is generally used as that which is opposed 
to God. So that a witness of Belial would be 
one who is ungodly, and who therefore scorns 
judgment and correction. His mouth devours 
iniquity. It is his food; he lives upon it. 

17 


258 Notes on Proverbs 


But a solemn accounting is before him. Inde- 
pendent though he may be now, he will at last 
have to learn that judgments have been by God 
prepared for such as he, and stripes for his back. 
Deceit and transgression may seem to go un- 
checked for a time, but the blow will soon fall 
that shall give the worthless witness to realize 
that God cannot be trifled with forever. See An- 
anias and Sapphira (Acts 5: 1-11). 


CHAPTER TWENTY 


WH can tell the woes, the broken hearts, 

the blasted lives, the lost souls, that have 
been the result of failure to heed the warning of 
the verse with which this chapter opens? 


1 Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging: 
And whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise. 


No other vice has so cursed the world, and 
caused such awful misery and suffering, as 
intemperance. Those who sneer at the lurid 
tales of a Gough or a Murphy have only to go 
about after nightfall through the. dark courts 
of our large cities to find the most dreadful 
pictures human eloquence have painted many 
times outdone. The wretched victims of the 
wine-cup have been numbered in hundreds of 
millions, and yet Satan has no difficulty in 
persuading thousands of reckless youths to 
daily start upon the same fearful road that has 
lured these untold hosts to ruin. 

Like every other creature of God, wine has its 
place. Scripture recognizes its medicinal virtue, 
and a lawful use of it also when needed (1 Tim. 


260 Notes on Proverbs 


5: 23). But how easily it becomes a snare that 
destroys the will and wrecks the life. 

‘“‘Wine is a mocker,” tempting the youth to 
his undoing, and deceiving him who with rash- 
ness supposes he can indulge as he pleases, and 
then, when he desires, set it aside. Even godly 
men have been deluded thereby to their shame 
and grief. See Noah, and Lot (Gen. 9: 20, 21; 
19: 30-36). Consult notes on chap. 23: 29-35. 


2 The fear of a king is as the roaring of a young lion: 
Whoso provoketh him to anger sinneth against his 
own soul. 

See note on chap. 19:12. ‘The powers that 
be are ordained of God.” Hence the necessity 
of recognizing their authority and submitting 
to every ordinance of man for the Lord’s sake. 
To resist the power is to resist Him who ap- 
pointed it, and is to provoke the king to anger, 
and thus to sin against one’s own soul; for his 
wrath will be poured out upon the rebellious. 

We may apply the words to the King of whom 
every other should be a type. Who can meas- 
ure the power of His wrath when all His grace 
has been despised and He sits on His royal 
throne to execute judgment ? 

Hanun had to prove ‘“‘the wrath of a king” 
when he refused his kindness (2 Sam. 10). 


3 It is an honor for a man to cease from strife: 
But every fool will be meddling. 


Chapter Twenty 263 


See note on chap. 17:14. How strange the 
pride that makes a man dread to own he has 
been wrong, or unwilling to back down gra- 
ciously for the sake of peace, even though he 
may feel he is in the right—providing no divine 
principle is at stake. ‘Let your yieldingness 
be known unto all men” (Phil. 4: 5) is a needed 
word. A man of God will be ready to give up 
his fancied rights rather than to prolong strife; 
but a fool will persist in contention and meddle 
with matters in which he should have no part. 
Even so devoted a man as Josiah failed for lack 
of having learned this lesson (2 Chron. 35 : 20- 
24). 


4 The sluggard will not plow by reason of the winter; 
Therefore shall he beg in harvest, and have nothing. 


Ready upon any pretext to abandon his labor, 
the sluggard neglects the cultivation of his fields 
when others are at work. Therefore when har- 
vest-time arrives, his fields are bare, and he is 
found begging of (as he would put it) his more 
fortunate neighbors. The fact is, fortune has 
nothing to do with it. Their diligence has 
brought its own reward, and his slothfulness 
its natural consequence. Compare chap. 19: 
15, 24. 


5 Counsel in the heart of man is like deep water; 
But a man of understanding will draw it out. 


262 Notes on Proverbs 


See note on chap. 18:4. We have already 
been reminded more than once that it is only 
the fool who blatantly pours forth a stream of 
words upon every occasion (see chap. 17: 27, 
28 and18:7). With the prudent man itis quite 
otherwise. His words are few, unless there be 
occasion for them; and this not because of his 
lack of sound knowledge and the ability to in- 
struct; but he prefers to bide his time. Deep in 
his heart, as in a well, he hides counsel and wis- 
dom. Because of his sobriety, the simple may 
think him inferior to themselves; but a man of 
understanding will be able to draw forth what 
shall be for profit, at the suited period. See Jo- 
seph and Pharaoh (Gen. 41). 


6 Most men will proclaim every one his own good- 
ness: 
But a faithful man who can find? 
7 The just man walketh in his integrity; 
His children are blessed after him. 
8 A king that sitteth in the throne of judgment 
Scattereth away all evil with his eyes. 
9 Who can say, I have made my heart clean, 
I am pure from my sin? 
10 Divers weights, and divers measures, 
Both of them are alike abomination to Jehovah. 
1] Even a child is known by his doings, 
Whether his work be pure, and whether it be right. 


12 The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, 
Jehovah hath made beth of them. 


Chapter Twenty 263 


There is evidently a moral connection between 
each proverb in this section, all being more or 
less occupied with the question and the test of 
purity. Most men are ready to declare their 
own uprightness and kindness, as was Job be- 
fore he saw the Lord. But faithful men, who 
will justify God though all others be found liars, 
are few indeed. In Elihu we see such a one as he 
speaks on God’s behalf. See Job 29-31 for his 
defence of himself. In chaps. 32-37 we get Elihu 
justifying God. 

The man who is really just (made such by 
grace) manifests it by his walk; not by the dec- 
larations of his lips. The children of such a 
man are blessed after him. Abraham is a shin- 
ing example of this (Gen. 17: 1-9). 

If any are righteous, it should surely be the 
king who sits on the throne of judgment, and 
scatters away evil with his eyes. But even 
among such (or among men at large), who is 
there who will dare to say, ‘‘I have made my 
heart clean. I am pure from my sin”’? 

Unequal measures testify to the lack of integ- 
rity on the part of many. All such are evil in 
the eyes of the Lord (see chap. 16: 11, and note 
verse 23 below). 

Even in the case of a child, his ways and do- 
ings declare what he is, as in the instance of 
little Samuel in the tabernacle (1 Sam. 3: 18- 


264 Notes on Proverbs 


21). What shall be said of those older in ane 
with added responsibilities ? 

Manifestly, then, no man is pure in himself. 
But Jehovah gives to those who wait upon Him 
the seeing eye and the hearing ear, that they 
may behold and do His will, and hear His voice. 
When all pretense to purity in oneself is given 
up, it is found in Christ, for those who receive 
Him. 


13 Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty: 
Open thine eyes, and thou shalt be satisfied with 
bread. 


See verse 4 above, and note chaps. 6: 9-11; 
24: 33,34. Abundant are the warnings against 
slothfulness and self-indulgence. ‘‘ Drowsiness 
shall clothe a man with rags.”’ It is the active 
and diligent who are rewarded for their toil. 
“Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from 
among the dead, and Christ shall shine upon 
thee.’”’ Such are the stirring words addressed 
by the Holy Ghost to Christians who are sleep- 
ing in a world where all should be aroused to a 
sense of the value of time, so rapidly passing 
away. ‘‘See then that ye walk circumspectly, 
not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, 
because the days are evil” (Eph. 5: 15, 16). 

It was by taking his ease that David fell into 
his grievous sin (2 Sam. 11:1, last clause). 


Chapter Twenty 265 


14 Bad! bad! saith the buyer; 
But when he is gone his way, then be boasteth. 


How common is the deceit here mentioned ! 
It is the characteristic falsehood of the bar- 
gainer. Depreciating the article his heart de- 
sires, in order to procure favorable terms, when 
at last his price is acceded to, he goes his way, 
rejoicing in his shrewdness, and boasting of his 
ability to purchase at low rates. But a holier 
eye than that of man was looking on, noting 
every action, word, and thought; and the day of 
accounting draws rapidly nearer. See Ephraim 
(Hosea 12: 7, 8). 


15 There is gold, and a multitude of rubies: 
But the lips of knowledge are a precious jewel. 


--« Gold and gems are of no value as compared 
with the lips that keep knowledge. No price 
can be set upon the precious truth of God, the 
wisdom that cometh from above. See chap. 2: 
1—5, and consider Psa. 119: 72. 


16 Take his garment that is surety for a stranger: 
And take a pledge of him for a strange woman. 


See notes on chaps.6:1-5; 11:15. Ruin and 
disaster dog the steps of him who unwisely goes 
surety for another, or who has any traffic with 
astrange woman. To keep clear of both is the 
only path of safety. To temporize is generally 


266 Notes on Proverbs 


to invite defeat. The man who can say “No,” 
and stand by it, when tempted to one side or 
the other, alone is secure. He who will not heed 
must learn for himself in bitterness of soul. See 
Judah (Gen. 38). 


17 Bread of deceit is sweet to a man; 


But afterwards his mouth shall be filled with gravel. 


It is only for the passing moment that deceit 
seems to prosper and to promise well. The fuil 
result is far otherwise. In place of a sweet and 
delectable dainty, the mouth will be filled with 
gravel, hard and disappointing. Compare chap. 
9:17, 18,and see Matt. 26: 14-16 and 27: 3-5. 


18 Every purpose is established by counsel: 
And with good advice make war. 


Rashness and unthinking precipitation are to 
be deplored. Before beginning what may not 
readily be ended, it is well to count the cost, and 
to counsel with some who are known to be wise 
and prudent. Our Lord expands and amplifies 
this proverb when He says, ‘“‘ What king, going 
to make war against another king, sitteth 
not down first, and consulteth whether he be 
able with ten thousand to meet him that com- 
eth against him with twenty thousand? Or 
else, while the other is yet a great way off, 
he sendeth an ambassage, and desireth condi- 


Chapter Twenty 267 


tions of peace” (Luke 14: 31, 32). See Reho- 
boam and Shemaiah (2 Chron. 11: 1-4). 


19 He that goeth about as a talebearer revealeth se- 


crets : 
Therefore meddle not with him that flattereth with 
his lips. 

See notes on chaps. 11: 13; 18: 8, and 25: 23. 
He who flatters to the face will as readily scan- 
dalize behind the back. By soft, sinuous words 
and ways he will gain the confidence of his vic- 
tim, appealing to his pride and love of approba- 
tion, and thus loosening his tongue, till he re- 
lates things far better left unsaid. When he has 
thus lured him on to unbaring his heart, he will 
go to others, and pour into their ears what he 
has just learned, flattering them in the same 
way, and giving them to suppose that they 
alone are the recipients of hisfavor. No charac- 
ter is more detestable. Utterly lacking in moral 
principle, and destitute of godliness, when such 
a person gets in among a Christian assembly, 
he can do untold mischief. The safe plan is to 
refuse altogether to listen to “him that flatter- 
eth with his lips.” By so doing, much sorrow 
may be averted. The one who praises his lis- 
tener while he backbites another, deserves to be 
treated in the spirit that David manifested to- 
ward the Amalekite who brought him news of 
Saul’s death (2 Sam. 1: 1-16). 


268 Notes on Proverbs 
20 Whoso revileth his father or his mother, 


His lamp shall be put out in obscure darkness. 


See note on chap. 19: 26. No parents are per- 
fect in all their ways, but, like civil authorities, 
they are to be honored because of their position. 
They stand to children in God’s stead. To 
honor the father and mother is to honor Him 
who has created us and established the home, 
setting the solitary in families. Therefore he 
who reviles his parents shall find his light put 
out, and be left in the darkness. Even though 
a father or mother fail grievously, a son whose 
Spirit is as it should be will seek to cover and 
hide their shame. Only an ungrateful and fool- 
ish child will spread it abroad. This was the 
error of Ham (Gen. 9: 22). 


21 An inhentance may be gotten hastily at the begin- 
ning ; 
But the end thereof shall not be blessed. 


See chaps. 21:6 and 28:20. Treasure rap. 
idly accumulated at the expense of conscience 
and honor will yield little comfort; for “the 
blessing of the Lord that maketh rich and add- 
eth no sorrow with it” cannot be uponit. ‘As 
the partridge sitteth on eggs, and hatcheth 
them not; so he that getteth riches, and not by 
right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, 
and at his end shall be a fool” (Jer. 17:11). 


Chapter Twenty 269 


They who set out with the determination to 
gather wealth at all cost will learn in bitter- 
ness of soul that they have missed the true and 
lasting treasure which would have given heart- 
satisfaction and joy in its possession. See God’s 
word to the rich who have gained their fortunes 
by oppression of the poor (James 5: 1-6). 


22 Say not thou, I will recompense evil; 
But wait on Jehovah, and He shall save thee. 


No lesson is harder for some of us to learn 
than that of confiding all our affairs to the 
hands of the Lord, especially when we feel we 
have been wronged and ill-treated. Yet it is 
plain from Scripture that the saint can make 
no greater mistake than to take charge of his 
own affairs in such a case. Nothing could be 
clearer than the injunction, ‘‘ Recompense to no 
man evil for evil. ... Dearly beloved, avenge 
not yourselves, but rather give place unto 
wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is Mine; I 
will repay, saith the Lord” (Rom. 12: 17-19). 
To set about meting out evil for evil in the face 
of words like these is to act in direct disobedi- 
ence to God, and we need not wonder if we 
make a terrible botch of it all. He who, owning 
that all has been allowed by the Lord for his 
good, bows his head and bends before the blast, 
will find God ever ready to interfere at the 


270 Notes on Proverbs 


needed moment. To look away from the human 
instrument of our grief, however vindictive he 
may be, and to see, behind it all, the purposes 
of our Father working out, gives rest and com- 
fort to the sorely-tried soul. It was this that 
sustained David when Shimei cursed and stoned 
him. The whole passage is so tender and strik- 
ing, I cannot forbear quoting it in full: “And 
when king David came to Bahurim, behold, 
thence came out a man of the family of the 
house of Saul, whose name was Shimei, the son 
of Gera: he came forth, and cursed still as he 
came. And he cast stones at David, and at all 
the servants of king David: and all the people 
and all the mighty men were on his right hand 
and on his left. And thus said Shimei when he 
cursed, Come out, come out, thou bloody man, 
and thou man of Belial: the Lord hath returned 
upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul, in 
whose stead thou hast reigned; and the Lord 
hath delivered the kingdom into the hand of Ab- 
salom thy son: and, behold, thou art taken in 
thy mischief, because thou art a bloody man. 
Then said Abishai the son of Zeruiah unto the 
king, Why should this dead dog curse my lord 
the king? let me go over, I pray thee, and take 
off his head. And the king said, What have I to 
do with you, ye sons of Zerniah? so Jet him 
curse, because the Lord hath said unto him, 


Chapter Twenty 271 


Curse David. Who shall then say, Wherefore 
hast thou done so? And David said to Abishai, 
and to all his servants, Behold, my son, which 
came forth of my bowels, seeketh my life: how 
much more now may this Benjamite do it? Let 
him alone, and let him curse; for the Lord hath 
bidden him. It may be that the Lord will look on 
my affliction, and that the Lord will requite me 
good for his cursing this day” (2Sam.16: 5-12). 

It is doubtful if, in all David’s spiritual his- 
tory, he ever reached a higher height of holy con- 
fidence in God than at this time of deep, deep 
trial. Shimei’s spiteful cursing in so public a 
manner, and at so sorrowful a time, must have 
deeply lacerated his already wounded spirit. 
But he bows his head in submission; and in- 
stead of executing vengeance on Shimei, and 
seeking self-vindication from the charges made, 
“through evil report and good report” he 
holds on his way, in submissive confidence, say- 
ing, “Let him curse,” and taking all from the 
Lord Himself. 

Shimei was but an instrument, inspired by 
Satan, yet really permitted of the Lord, for Da- 
vid’s chastening and discipline. As such he 
views him, and looks not at second causes, but 
at the great First Cause Himself. This is most 
blessed! Would that every tried saint could fol- 
low his example! 


272 Notes on Proverbs 


The day came that Shimei was a cringing sup- 
pliant at the feet of the man he had cursed ; pub- 
licly owning that he had acted perversely, and 
confessing ‘‘thy servant doth know that I have 
sinned” (2 Sam. 19: 16-23). David’s royal 
clemency was extended in forgiveness—a far 
greater victory than vengeance would have 
been. Afterwards, in God’s righteous govern- 
ment, he was put to death for the treachery 
that ever characterized him, in the reign of Sol- 
omon. ‘He that doeth wrong shall receive for 
the wrong which he hath done: and there is no 
respect of persons” (Col. 3:25). With judg- 
ment I have not to interfere. Be it mine to bow 
in submission to all God’s ways, owning His 
hand in everything that would otherwise dis- 
quiet me. 


23 Divers weights are an abomination to Jehovah; 
And a false balance is not good. 


See verse 10 above. Divers weights are differ- 
ent tests for different things, according as they 
relate to oneself or not. One standard of right- 
eousness, a true balance, with honest weights, 
should characterize the Christian. Frequently 
one finds these various weights applied in esti- 
mating the conduct of certain persons. We ex- 
cuse in one, particularly in ourselves, what calls 
for severe judgment in the case of another. But 


Chapter Twenty 273 


in the scales of the sanctuary both are tested 
by the same weights. God would have our bal- 
ances patterned after His, and the opposite is 
an abomination in His sight. See the half 
shekel (Ex. 30: 15). 


24 Man’s goings are of Jehovah; 


How can a man then understand his own way? 


The prophet Jeremiah attests the same sol- 
emn truth. ‘“O Lord,” he says, “‘I know that 
the way of man is not in himself: it is not in 
man that walketh to direct his steps.’”’ So he 
adds, ‘‘O Lord, correct me, but with judgment; 
not in Thine anger, lest Thou bring me to noth- 
ing” (Jer. 10: 23, 24). Concerning every one 
of us, it can be said, ‘‘ Ye have not passed this 
way heretofore.” This is true every step of our 
journey through this world. Each day we enter 
upon new scenes and new experiences; therefore 
the folly of depending on our poor, finite wis- 
dom in order to understand our way. One 
alone knows the end from the beginning. With 
Him, allis one eternal Now. Who else but He 
can direct our steps? Happy the soul who can 
commit all his ways unto Him, and sing with 
confidence and holy restfulness, ‘‘ My times are 
in Thy hand.” To such He has said, “I will 
instruct thee and teach thee in the way which 
thou shalt go: I will guide thee with Mine eye”’ 

18 


274 Notes on Proverbs 


(Psa. 32:8). But this daily guidance is only 

the portion of the subject, obedient believer. 

Others must know the bit-and-bridle direction 

of circumstances and tribulations. See Israel at 

the Jordan (Josh. 3: 4). 

25 It is a snare to a man rashly to say, It is hallowed; 
And after vows, to make inquiry. 

Two things, yet very closely connected, seem 
to be here referred to, with a keen, underlying 
touch of irony that is meant to go home to the 
conscience. To say rashly of anything that it 
is holy, before one has investigated, or to make 
a vow concerning some matter which has to be 
inquired into later; these are foolish and dan- 
gerous things, and may result in much sorrow 
and trouble. Elsewhere Solomon speaks of the 
same blunder. ‘‘ When thou vowest a vow unto 
God, defer not to pay it; for He hath no pleas- 
ure in fools: pay that which thou hast vowed. 
Better is it that thou shouldest not vow, than 
that thou shouldest vow and not pay. Suffer 
not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; neither 
say thou before the angel, that it was an error: 
wherefore should God be angry at thy voice, 
and destroy the work of thy hands?” (Ecc. 5: 
4—7). The practice of making vows seems to 
be clearly contrary to the spirit of the Christian 
dispensation, in which grace is reigning. Under 
law, when God was asking something of man, 


Chapter Twenty 275 


it was quite in keeping to make such particular 
pledges. The vow of Paul was evidently that 
of a Nazarite, taken prior to his conversion 
(Acts 18:18). It would therefore be of all-im- 
portance to make sure that such a promise was 
according to the mind of God before making it. 
See Jephthah’s rash vow, and its terrible conse- 
quences (Judges 11 : 30-40). 


26 A wise king scattereth the lawless, 
And bringeth the wheel over them. 


No throne is established in peace when lawless- 
ness and violence are rampant among the peo- 
ple. It is necessary, for the preservation of 
society, the peace of the righteous, as well as the 
stability of government, that those who op- 
pose it be destroyed. So, ere the millennial 
kingdom shall be set up, the wicked will be 
rooted out of the earth. See Isa. 63 and Rev. 19. 


27 The spin of man is the lamp of Jehovah, 
Searching all the depths of the soul. 

The spirit of man is not mere breath, or some 
impersonal idea. God ‘‘formeth the spirit of 
man within him” (Zech.12:1). It is by the 
spirit he is enabled to think and plan, to weigh 
evidences, and to understand things both mate- 
rial, moral, and spiritual. ‘‘What man know- 
eth the things of a man, save the spirit of man 
which is in him?’’(1 Cor. 2:11.) Here itis evi- 


276 Wotes on Proverbs 


dent that the spirit is the seat of intelligence. 
How would it sound to substitute “ breath” for 
“spirit”? in either of these scriptures, making 
them declare God formed man’s breath as an 
entity within him, and that by his breath he ap- 
prehended the things that concerned him? Spite 
of all that casuists and sophists may allege to 
the contrary, the Bible clearly teaches the true 
individuality of the spirit.* 

It is here called the lamp of Jehovah. Notice, 
it is not the light of Jehovah. The lamp is the 
vessel that holds the light, which itself is divine, 
proceeding from God. But man’s spirit can be 
a light-receiver and light-retainer, illuminating 
every part of his moral being. This it is that 
gives him preeminence over all the lower crea- 
tion. What an immeasurable gulf there is be- 
tween the lowest type of man, with all his capa- 
bilities of divine enlightenment, and the highest 
type of brute, who must be forever insensible 
to spiritual instruction | + 


* For an exhaustive treatment of the Scripture doctrine as to 
the spirit and soul, I know nothing better than the erudite and 
painstaking work of the late F. W. Grant, ‘‘ Facts and Theories 
as to a Future State.’”’ ‘To be had of the same Publishers. 

TIn so writing I do not forget the Scripture declaration that 
“there is none that seeketh after God.’’? The savage gropes 
after Him, because of his fear, and desires to propitiate His 
supposed anger and hatred. He has no desire to love and serve 
Him because of what He has done and is. 


Chapter Twenty 277 


The most degraded savage gropes after God, 
for his spirit is the lamp of Jehovah, dimly 
though the light may shine. But take the 
beast, and train him to the highest point of 
brute-intelligence, he manifests no recognition 
of responsibility to a Creator, no sense of spirit- 
ual conceptions. This fact alone is enough to 
forever destroy the agnostic theory of evolution 
as taught by Darwin and Huxley, and eagerly 
received by so many who are ever ready to run 
after what seems to be new and novel, particu- 
larly if it appears to eliminate God from His 
own universe. 

Through the spirit God has to say to man. 
Thereby He pours His light into every chamber 
of his being. This it is that produces a sense of 
need, a yearning after Himself. For in his nat- 
ural state ‘“‘there is none that seeketh after 
God.”’ When His testimony is received, and the 
soul is bowed before Him in repentance, His 
Holy Spirit, through the Scriptures of truth, 
witnesses with our spirits that we are His 
children. See Elijah and the still small voice 
(1 Kings 19: 11-13). 


28 Loving-kindness and truth preserve the king: 
And his throne is upheld by loving-kindness. 


In verse 26 we saw that it was the king’s wis- 
dom to execute judgment upon his foes. Here 


278 Notes on Proverbs 


we are reminded of the other side of his charac- 
ter. His throne rests on righteousness, but it is 
upheld by loving-kindness. The two are essen- 
tial—loving-kindness and truth. ‘‘Grace and 
truth came by Jesus Christ.’”? When He reigns, 
both shall be displayed in perfection (Isa. 32). 


29 The glory of young men is their strength: 
And the beauty of old men is the gray head. 


See note on chap. 16:31. In the economy of 
nature, as of grace, there is u time and season 
for all things. Youth delights in deeds of prow- 
ess, and glories in physical strength. Age is the 
time for meditation and sobriety, and of this 
the gray head is a reminder, beautiful indeed in 
its place. In his first epistle, the apostle John 
takes up the same thoughts in a spiritual sense. 
The young men are those who are strong in the 
faith, in whom the word of God abides, and 
who have overcome the wicked one. To the 
fathers, he simply writes, ‘‘ Ye have known Him 
that is from the beginning.” It is that experi- 
mental knowledge of Christ which is enlarged 
and deepened by the passing of the years (1 John 
2:18, 14). 

30 The blueness of a wound cleanseth away evil: 
So do stripes the depths of the soul. 


Added suffering is often required to purge the 
system of poisonous matter; therefore the skill- 


Chapter Twenty 279 


ful surgeon is not always concerned to immedi- 
ately heal a wound. There is often a probing, 
and consequent inflammation, that is very pain- 
ful, but good in result. So it is with God’s deal- 
ings when unholiness has been tolerated by His 
children. Stripes and sorrows may be laid upon 
them, but only that the inner parts of the being 
may be purged of all hidden evil by self-judg- 
ment and full confession in His presence. The 
unnamed author of the psalm of the laver is not 
the only one who could say, “‘ Before I was af- 
flicted I went astray: but now have I kept Thy 
word” (Psa. 119: 67). As he would be an un- 
wise patient who objected to the pain caused 
by the surgeon while he endeavored to free the 
wound from impurities that might effectually 
hinder healing, and which, if unremoved, might 
poison the whole system, so is the saint foolish 
indeed who repines under a Father’s chastening 
hand, and seeks to free himself from the stripes 
rather than to ‘‘hear the rod, and Him who 
hath appointed it.” 


280 


CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE 


HE great truth that the prophet Daniel 
sought to bring to bear upon the con- 
science of the impious Belshazzar on the last 
night of his reign at Babylon is that which the 
opening verse presents, 11 a slightly different 
way. Daniel endeavored to impress the Chal- 
dean king with his duty to acknowledge ‘the 
God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose 
are all thy ways;”’ but he would not be hum- 
bled. Here we are told that 


| The king’s heart is in the hand of Jehovah, as the 


rivulets of water: 
He turneth it whithersoever He will. 


See chap. 20:24. There is no monarch so 
great that he can act in independence of God. 
Whether he owns it or not, Jehovah is controll- 
ing him as He controls the flow of the water- 
brooks. He who “hath His way in the whirl- 
wind and the storm” can make the wrath of 
man to praise Him, and restrain the remainder 
thereof. As already noted,* the book of Esther 


* See remarks on chap. 11: 8. 


Chapter —Twenty-One 281 


is the fitting illustration of this, especially chap. 
6:1-10. Jehovah’s word to Cyrus, written 
long ere that ruler was born, is another striking 
case in point. See Isa. 45: 1-7. 


2 Every way of a man is right in his own eyes: 


But Jehovah pondereth the hearts. 


See chap. 20: 6. Self-righteousness is perhaps 
the most human of all sins. Men will excuse 
and explain away in themselves what in others 
would be censured with severity. The Lord be- 
holds the heart, and takes notice of the pride 
gnawing like a worm at the root. Not he who 
commends himself, but he who is commended 
by God, is approved. See Paul (1 Cor. 4: 4). 


3 To do righteousness and judgment 
Is more acceptable to Jehovah than sacrifice. 


It was a common thing for men to forget that 
sacrifices and offerings were not pleasing to the 
Lord when uprightness was lacking. He ever 
placed righteousness and equity above ceremo- 
nial observances, as, we may rest assured, He 
does to-day. The Lord witheringly rebuked the 
Pharisees, when He was on earth, for their at- 
tention to ritualistic details while justice and 
integrity were lacking. “I will have mercy, 
and not sacrifice’? was His word. Isaiah sets 
forth the same truth, of the supreme importance 


282 Notes on Proverbs 


of the execution of righteousness, when con- 
trasting the ceremonial fasts with what Jeho- 
vah really delighted in (Isa. 58:5-14). See 
Samuel’s word to Saul (1 Sam. 15: 22). 


4 A high look, and a proud heart, 
And the tillage of the lawless, is sin. 


As long as man persists in rebellion against 
God, he can do nothing that will be acceptable 
in His sight. Not only are lofty eyes and a 
proud heart evil, but even what might other- 
wise be meritorious is sin while man refuses to 
bow in repentance before Him. 

Let a province rebel against its lawful ruler, 
the inhabitants may carry on many useful occu- 
pations and labor diligently in them, but all are 
tainted with sedition, so cannot be considered 
profitable or right. When they ground their 
arms at the feet of the king, and own his sway, 
these same occupations become pleasing and 
proper in his sight. So it is with man away 
from God, and with those who turn to Him in 
contrition of heart. See the Holy Spirit’s esti- 
mate of Israel while God’s Anointed is rejected 
(Rom. 10: 1-3). 

5 The thoughts of the diligent tend only to plenteous- 
ness ; 
But of every one that is hasty only to want. 
6 The getting of treasures by a lying tongue 
Is a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death. 


Chapter T'wenty-One 283 


7 The robbery of the lawless shall destroy them; 
Because they refuse to do judgment. 


Riches accumulated by means of honest, 
wholesome toil give pleasure and a measure of 
satisfaction to their possessor. But the hasty 
gathering of wealth by lying and deceit, often 
coupled with downright robbery, will bring sor- 
row and shame in their wake. One may pos- 
sess boundless stores of gold and silver, and yet 
be as needy as the Arab lost in the desert, who, 
when almost dead for want of food, found in 
the track of a caravan a package, which he 
opened with trembling eagerness, hoping it 
might be dates. He dropped it in dire disap- 
pointment, as he groaned, ‘‘It’s only pearls!" 
Those pearls were worth thousands of dollars, 
but they could not feed a starving man. So 
with wealth illegally gotten. It cannot satisfy. 
He who possesses it will be in deepest and most 
abject poverty after all. Life will be a weary 
round of vexation and disappointment, and he 
will be left to groan at last, “Allis vanity, and 
pursuit of the wind.”” See Ecc. 5: 10-17. 


8 The way of a guilty man is very crooked: 
But as for the pure, his work is right. 


Like the trail of the serpent are the ways of a 
guilty man. Itis invariably a sign that some- 
thing is radically wrong at bottom when a per- 


284 Notes on Proverbs 


son’s path is crooked, and he has to be continu- 
ally excusing and explaining. He who walks 
with God will be above reproach; for he will 
shun every form of evil. The work of the pure 
is right. His life is like an open book, which ex- 
plains itself, and shuts the lips even of enemies. 
Daniel was of this character; so that when the 
presidents and princes sought to find occasion 
against him concerning the kingdom, “they 
could find none occasion nor fault; forasmuch 
as he was faithful, neither was there any error 
or fault found in him” (Dan. 6:4). Ahab’s 
history is a solemn illustration of the crooked 
ways of a guilty man (1 Kings, chaps. 16-22). 


9 It is better to dwell in a corner of the housetop, 
Than with a brawling woman in a wide house. 


See note on chap. 19:13. Happy must the 
family be where the lovely order of God’s word 
is recognized as to the various relationships of 
each one. If the husband render unto the wife 
due benevolence, and the wife be adorned by the 
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, the chil- 
dren are likely to be in godly subjection, and the 
home a sweet foretaste of that eternal one for 
which we wait. But where a brawling woman 
seeks to rule, and will not be content unless she 
has things her own way, it is most unpleasant. 
A quiet corner on the housetop is better far 


Chapter T-wenty-One 285 


than to dwell in a palatial residence with such 
company. Both Job and David found it so at 
times (Job 2:9,10; 2 Sam. 6: 20-23). See 
verse 19, below. 


10 The soul of the lawless desireth evil : 
His neighbor findeth no favor in his eyes. 


We generally find in others what we look 
for. The man who seeks in his neighbor good- 
ness and virtue is almost certain to find some- 
thing worthy of praise; but he who goes about 
looking for evil can readily find that in most 
people which he can gloat over. None find fa- 
vor in his eyes, even though he have to admit 
their superiority to himself.’ Of this ilkk was 
Sanballat of old (Neh. 6: 5-9). 


11 When the scorner is punished, the simple is made 
wise: 
And when the wise is instructed, he receiveth 
knowledge. 


When he who resists the truth is permitted 
to go unrebuked, it strengthens his position in 
the eyes of the ignorant. For this reason, we 
are told, ‘“‘ Them that sin rebuke before all, that 
others also may fear” (1 Tim. 5:20). They 
are likely keenly to feel and bitterly to resent 
the correction; but this only emphasizes their 
need of it; for a wise man would profit by in- 
struction, and receive knowledge. See the re- 


286 Notes on Proverbs » 


sult of Paul’s rebuke to Elymas the sorcerer, as 
contrasted with his withstanding of Peter and 
Barnabas (Acts 13: 8-12; Gal. 2: 11-16). 


12 The righteous man wisely considereth the house of 
the lawless: 
He overthroweth the lawless because of their evil. 


It is the final triumph of the righteous over 
the lawless that is referred to, judge. The just 
man will not be unduly depressed, and certainly 
not anxious, when he sees the present prosperity 
of the wicked. He knows their joys are empty 
indeed, and their days of boasting few at the 
best. Soon he shall tread them down; for so 
has God ordained it. The verse might be easier 
understood by a Jew than a Christian; but in 
either case it abides true. Iniquity cannot 
flourish long. The just shall overthrow the 
house of those given to evil. Even a Jehu 
can thus be an instrument in God’s hand 
(2 Kings 9). 


13 Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, 
He also shall cry himself, but shall not be answered. 


In chap. 19: 17 we had a positive statement 
regarding the Lord’s assurance that he who 
had pity on the poor should be richly repaid. 
The negative is equally true. He who heeds not 
the bitter cry of the needy shall in due time cry 


Chapter T'wenty-One 287 


himself, and be unheard. The destitute and af- 
flicted have a faithful Friend in the God who 
created them. His concern is very real, and He 
takes note of all done for or against them. Es- 
pecially is this so when they are of the house- 
hold of faith. See the pre-millennial judgment 
of the nations of the earth, as pictured by our 
Lord Himself in Matt. 25 : 31-46. 


14 A gift in secret pacifieth anger: 
And a reward in the bosom, strong wrath. 


Nothing so readily vanquishes hatred and 
wrath as doing good to one who cherishes ill- 
will, providing it be done quietly and unpreten- 
tiously, so that others are not made aware of 
it. For there is danger that well-meant kind- 
nesses, done openly in the sight of all, may be 
mistaken for unreal acting, designed to deceive 
onlookers. But what passes between two par- 
ties in private cannot be so construed, if men- 
tion be not made of it afterwards. It was thus 
that Jacob sought to turn aside the assumed 
wrath of Joseph (Gen. 43 : 11-14). 


15 It is joy to the just to do what is right: 
But it is ruin to the workers of iniquity. 
16 The man that wandereth out of the way of under- 
standing 


Shall abide in the assembly of the dead. 


When a man is himself righteous, he delights in 


288 Notes on Proverbs 


righteousness; whereas, in the mind of the un- 
just, moral rectitude seems to be the certain 
road to ruin. Take a business man who has 
learned to order his ways in public and private 
in integrity and honesty :—to depart from prin- 
ciples such as these, would be, in his eyes, pain- 
ful, and cause for grief and sorrow. But with 
too many it is accepted as an axiom that one 
cannot prosper in a business way and maintain 
the right. To attempt to do so seems to them 
to foreshadow certain and speedy failure. The 
young man launching out in life is very apt to 
be leavened with this unholy and utterly false 
idea; whereas the experience of multitudes has 
but confirmed the testimony of Scripture that 
the only true and lasting success results from 
righteous dealing. 

He who wanders away from the paths of 
sound wisdom will remain in the congregation 
of the dead. ‘She that liveth in pleasure is 
dead while she liveth” (1 Tim. 5:6). That 
which is really life is only enjoyed by the upright 
who set the Lord always before them. Con- 
trast Judas (Acts 1:18). 


17 He that loveth pleasure shall be a poor man: 
He that loveth wine and oil shall not be rich. 


The spendthrift and the self-indulgent are not 
in the way to future wealth and comfort. It is 


Chapter T'wenty-One 289 


the frugal and self-denying who, by present care- 
fulness, pave the way to easier circumstances in 
years tocome. The young man who spends his 
time in folly, seeking dubious pleasures with un- 
wise companions, is laying up misery and want 
for his after life. He who pampers his appetite 
with costly dainties in youth, is likely to be 
brought to coarse fare in old age; while those 
who were wise enough to forego present indul- 
gences, which would only have been baneful in 
their early days, will be in a position later on 
rationally to enjoy what, by dint of labor and 
carefulness, they have been enabled to lay by. 
The intemperate lover of folly and pleasure is 
likely soon to reach the depths to which sank 
the prodigal of Luke 15. 


18 The lawless shall be a ransom for the righteous, 
And the treacherous for the upright. 


This is intrinsic justice. But when grace was 
being made known in Christ Jesus, the Right- 
eous became a ransom for the lawless, and the 
Upright for the treacherous! Justice demands 
the punishment of the guilty, in order that the 
cuiltless may be delivered; but love gave the 
Guiltless to die that the guilty might be justi- 
fied. An illustration of the proverb is seen in 
the siege and deliverance of Abel of Beth-maa- 
chah (2 Sam. 20: 14-22). 

1e 


290 Notes on Proverbs. 


19 It is better to dwell in a desert land 
Than with a contentious and an angry woman. 


See verse 9 above. No creature is more lovely 
than a woman who exhibits the precious graces 
of the Spirit of God. Even natural graces 
adorn and beautify her beyond all that the 
foolish fripperies and vanities of her oft-times 
artificial life can do. But a woman bereft of 
thoughtfulness and kindliness seems almost to 
be a misnomer. A contentious and angry wo- 
man is beyond all words disagreeable, and can 
by her tongue and her wretched ways produce 
untold misery. A tent in a wilderness alone, is 
to be preferred to a palace in her company. 
Athaliah was evidently of this unhappy class, 
who, violent and treacherous, would stop at 
nothing to accomplish her unholy ends (2 Kings 
T1). See chaps 27:15; 16. 


20 There is desirable treasure and oil in the dwelling 
of the wise; 
But a foolish man swalloweth it up. 


See verse 17 above. The wise man does not 
live for the present but prudently considers the 
coming years when strength will fail, and he 
will be unable to labor as in his youth and 
prime. Therefore when his days of rest from 
toil come, he has costly store laid by for the 
sustenance of those dependent still upon him. 


Chapter T'wenty-One 291 


The foolish thinks only of the passing moment 
and spends with a lavish hand; but shall come 
to want at last. Consider Paul’s word as to 
parents providing for their children (2 Cor. 12: 
14). 

21 He that followeth after righteousness and loving- 

kindness, 
Findeth life, nghteousness and honor. 

To steadily pursue righteousness and loving- 
kindness, exemplifying both in the walk and 
ways, this is the sure road to what all men 
desire—life and honor. They are linked to- 
gether by uprightness. The empty glory of 
this world, the plaudits of the carnally-minded, 
are worth little after all. But to be honored 
by God, and by those who love Him,—this 
abides forever. He delights to bestow His 
blessing upon those who esteem His Word and 
yield obedience to His truth. For the truth 
was not given to be a source of intellectual 
enjoyment alone, though it is that; but that it 
might be manifested in the life, as it was to the 
full in our Lord Jesus Christ. Coupled with 
moral rectitude He would have that gentle 
lovingkindness which commends the truth to 
those who might, by severity on the part of its 
adherents, be driven therefrom. When grace 
and truth thus together control the being, life, 
righteousness, and honor must be the happy 


292 Notes on Proverbs 


result. See Asa, king of Judah, and note how 
he ever prospered as he sought what was pleas- 
ing to God. His only recorded errors but em- 
phasize this (2 Chron. 14-16). 


22 A wise man scaleth the city of the mighty, 
And casteth down the strength of the confidence 
thereof. 

Brute force and heavy fortifications are of 
no avail against superior wisdom. It is not 
might alone that counts, but science and ability. 
Seemingly impregnable positions have often been 
taken by the exercise of sagacity and strata- 
gem. Jebus and Babylon were supposedly 
proof against every assault, but both fell before 
men of wisdom and sagacity (1 Chron. 11: 
4—6; Jer. 51: 27-33). The lesson is important 
when it is against spiritual foes we are called 
to fight. For the overcoming of the powers 
of evil, that wisdom is greatly needed which 
comes from acquaintance with God and His 
Word. See Eph. 6: 10-18. 


23 Whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue, 
Keepeth his soul from troubles. 


Again we are directed to the subject that is 
so often brought to the fore in this book: the 
control of the tongue. Unwise words, however 
true they may sometimes be, are often the cause 
of grave trouble and disaster. To keep the 


Chapter Twenty-One 293 


mouth and the tongue as with an armed guard 
is to avoid many a grief and bitter memory. 
See James 3: 2-12 and compare the notes on 
chaps. 11:13; 15:1; 17: 20 and 18: 6-8. 


24 Proud and haughty scorner is his name, 
Who dealeth in proud wrath. 


An arrogant, self-willed spirit is manifested 
by unbridled words and uncontrolled anger. A 
humble man is a gentle man; he will not be 
given to ebullitions of wrath or outbursts of 
indignation. Of course the ‘dealer in proud 
wrath” is to be distinguished from one who on 
extreme occasions loses control of his temper 
and utters hasty words under strong provoca- 
tion. Such an one may afterwards be plunged 
in deepest sorrow and humiliation over his sin; 
but it is otherwise with the proud and haughty 
scorner. He has no compunction of conscience 
because of his wrong spirit, but persists in a 
course of action that is in every way contrary to 
meekness and forbearance, forgetting that the 
wrath of man works not the righteousness of 
God. See Simeon and Levi (Gen. 49: 5-7). 


25 The desire of the slothful killeth him; 
For his hands refuse to labor. 

26 He coveteth greedily all the day long; 
But the righteous giveth and spareth not. 


Like a drone in the hive, the slothful man 


294 Notes on Proverbs 


covets the fruits of labor but detests the work 
which produces them. He is occupied with 
himself, full of desire, but opposed to effort. 
Selfishness is his strongest characteristic. The 
righteous man is a producer. He loves to 
acquire, but only in order that he may “ pro- 
vide things honest in the sight of all men,” 
properly meeting the need of those dependent 
upon him, and having plenty to give to any 
who are in need. In this he is an imitator of 
God ‘‘who giveth to all men liberally and up- 
braideth not.’’ Contrast the spirit manifested 
by Achan (Josh.7: 21), and the Philippian assem- 
bly (2 Cor. 8: 2). See notes on chaps. 12: 27; 
13:4; 19: 24; 20: 4. 
27 The sacrifice of the lawless is abomination: 

How much more, when he bringeth it with a wicked 

purpose! 

See notes on chaps. 15: 8, 9,26 and 21: 4. 
The sacrifice of the lawless is ever detestable 
and unacceptable in the eyes of God; but espe- 
cially so when it is but a cover for hypocrisy. 
To carry on so-called religious duties to be seen 
of men and to hide a life of wickedness, is ini- 
quity of the most revolting character. It was 
this that caused our Lord so sternly to rebuke 
the scribes and Pharisees of His day. They were 
punctilious in observing the law and the added 
directions of the Talmud in regard to the 


Chapter Twenty-One 275 


temple-offerings; they made broad their phy- 
lacteries; they loved to pray standing on the 
street-corners to be seen of men; but meantime 
they profited at the expense of poor widows 
and were characterized by coveteousness and 
wickedness of the vilest description. Their 
moral descendants are many in our own day, 
who can put on a devout expression, use pious 
words, and ostentatiously give of their wealth, 
to public charities; but whose inner lives are 
black and iniquitous. For a time they may 
cover from the eyes of men, their true condition, 
but in God’s sight their sacrifice is abominable. 


28 A false witness shall perish: . 

And a man that heareth shall speak constantly. 
29 A lawless man hardeneth his face: 

But as for the upright, he establisheth his way. 

The false witness may carry his point for the 
moment but his destruction is certain to come. 
He who testifies according to his hearing and 
knowledge will be able to maintain consistently 
his position, and speak constantly, or unchal- 
lenged. Such was the good confession wit- 
nessed before Caiaphas and Pontius Pilate by 
our Lord Jesus Christ, when the testimony of 
the lying witnesses agreed not one with the other 
(Matt. 26: 59-64; 27: 11-14). 

He who has no regard for law, human or 
divine, will harden his face and persist in his 


296 Notes on Proverbs 


false words and ways; but the upright by his 
consistent speech and actions establishes his 
purpose. 
30 There is no wisdom, nor understanding, 

Nor counsel against Jehovah. 
31 The horse is prepared against the day of battle, 

But safety is of Jehovah. 

The trusting soul rests on the fact that the 
counsel of the Lord will never be defeated. 
Therefore he fears not the wisdom or under- 
standing or the plots of his foes. What can 
man do to harm the one who is covered by the 
wings of Jehovah? ‘Though a host encamp 
against me,” said David, “‘yet will I not fear.” 

It is not numbers or superior accoutrements 
that ensures victory; but to have the God of 
our salvation going before us. This was the 
confidence of Asa when confronted by the vast 
army of Zerah the Ethiopian at the battle of 
Mareshah. ‘Asa cried unto the Lord his God, 
and said, Lord, it is nothing with Thee to help, 
whether with many, or with them that have no 
power: help us,9 Lord our God; for we rest 
on Thee, and in Thy Name we go against this 
multitude. O Lord, Thou art our God; let not 
man prevail against Thee” (2 Chron. 14: 11). 
This is delightful to contemplate. With Asa it 
was not a question of the relative strength and 
prowess of the hordes of Africans and the army 


Chapter Twenty-One 297 


of Judah; but it was simply a question of the 
power of God and the puny ability of weak, 
mortal men. ‘Let not man prevail against 
Thee,’’ was his plea. He chooses a word for 
man that emphasizes his insignificance and 
lack of strength. 

In the Hebrew language there are various 
words which he might have used. Ahdahm is 
the ordinary term which links man with his 
first father, from a root meaning red clay. 
Geber is man in his might, from a root mean- 
ing to be strong. Ish is man in his dignity; 
whereas the word used by Asa is Enosh, from 
a root signifying frail and incurable. It is man 
in his low estate as fallen and mortal. 

This then was all the great Ethiopian host 
meant to Asa. All were as nothing in con- 
trast to the mighty power of the God who was 
leading on the army of Judah and Benjamin. 
The result was certain, ‘‘The Lord smote the 
Ethiopians before Asa and before Judah; and 
the Ethiopians fled . . . for they were destroyed 
before the Lord, and before His host; and they 
carried away very much spoil” (vers. 12, 13). 

May each tried saint cast himself upon the 
same Omnipotent Saviour-God in every time 
of apparently overwhelming trouble, and thus 
prove for himself that ‘‘safety is of the Lord.” 


298 


CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO 


HERE is that which is far to be preferred 
to earthly treasure, though often it is for- 
feited to obtain the other. 


| A [good] name is rather to be chosen than great 
riches, 
And loving favor rather than silver and gold. 


The adjective ‘‘good”’ does not occur in the 
original text. But ‘‘a name’ is used in the 
sense of a character of renown, as elsewhere in 
Scripture, notably in Gen. 11: 4, ‘‘let us make 
us aname;”’ Deut. 26: 19, “make thee high... 
inname;” 2 Sam. 7:9, 23; 8: 13; and many 
other passages. In this sense then a name is 
far preferable to vast wealth, and to be kindly 
esteemed than immense revenues. It isa great 
mistake for the young to suppose that such an 
honored name is easiest found on the battle- 
field, in the halls of government, the ranks of 
great writers, or in the marts of world-wide 
commerce. No name is more lasting and endur- 
ing than that won by him who lives for God, 
and for the sake of the Lord Jesus Christ counts 
all earth has to offer as dung and dross. It 


Chapter Twenty-Two 299 


was devotion to David that caused Abishai 
and Benaiah to win immortal names (2 
Sam. 23: 18, 22) and devotion to Christ has 
caused many to be remembered forever who 
otherwise would long since have fallen into ob- 
livion. Who had heard in after years of the 
twelve apostles, had they not left all and fol- 
lowed Jesus? What would have been the glory 
of the name of Saul, the rabbi of Tarsus, com- 
pared with that of Paul the missionary of the 
cross? 


2 The rich and poor meet together; 
Jehovah is the maker of them all. 


The fatherhood of God and the brotherhood 
of man is a Scriptural doctrine if rightly used. 
In fact, it is alone from Scripture that men are 
given to know that God “hath made of one 
blood all nations of men, for to dwell on all the 
face of the earth” (Acts 17:26). Human rea- 
son, apart from divine revelation, would never 
have discovered this wonderful secret. Universal 
brotherhood, the union of all the races and na- 
tions of men in one great family, springing from 
one common stock, despite manifest physical 
and ethnological differences, was never dreamed 
of by philosophers until enlightened by the in- 
spired word of God. The fraternity of the higher 
races was more or less proudly owned by the 


300 Notes on Proverbs. 


sages of old; but to see in a despised and ignor- 
ant slave of inferior caste a brother, was some- 
thing that the human mind revolted against. 
But the Hebrew Scriptures testify throughout 
to the fact that all men sprang from one com- 
mon father, Adam, and are linked together by 
ties that cannot be dissolved. This, the Chris- 
tian Scriptures emphasize ; and seeing in Adam 
the son of God, declare that God is ‘‘ the Father 
of spirits,’ therefore in a creatorial sense, the 
Father of all men. 

But let it be remembered that universal father- 
hood in this aspect is a very different thing to 
the precious truth of the family of God as made 
known by our Lord and His apostles. Man by 
the fall lost the divine likeness and became a 
sinner ruined and alienated. Hence the need of 
redemption and regeneration. By new birth 
those who by nature were children of wrath 
and by practice sons of disobedience, are made 
children of God and partakers of the divine na- 
ture. A new life, eternal life, is imparted and 
the Holy Spirit given. Thus they cry, “Abba, 
Father.’’ It is such persons alone who form the 
new creation brotherhood, because possessors 
of a common life and nature. 

The distinction here made needs to be kept in 
mind in our day of looseness and laxity, when 
men rebel against the truth of the fall, and 


Chapter T'wenty-T wo 305 


would fain call God their Father apart from 
new birth, and link up saint and sinner in one 
great family. 

The Christian unhesitatingly and freely owns 
that Jehovah is the maker of all, and that His 
heart goes out to every creature He has called 
into being; but he sees two families throughout 
Scripture, ‘‘the children of God and the children 
of the devil”” (1 John 3:10). These are char- 
acteristic terms. Of course none is definitely 
called a child of the devil till he manifestly 
proves himself to be such by opposing the truth 
and rejecting Christ. 


3 A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hideth him- 
self: 
But the simple pass on, and are punished. 


These solemn words are designedly repeated 
in chap. 27:12. It is an evidence of God’s ex- 
ceeding love that He has so faithfully warned 
us of the terrible consequences that follow the 
refusal to bow before Him in repentance, and to 
receive the grace He offers through Christ Jesus. 
The wise man sees the evil afar off and hides 
himself in the refuge God has provided. But 
the simple harden the heart and refuse to 
harken, thus ensuring their own destruction. 

‘‘A man shall be as a hiding-place from the 
wind, and a covert from the tempest; as rivers 


302 Notes on Proverbs. 


of water in a dry place; as the shadow ofa great 
rock in a weary land” (Isaiah 32:2). Faith 
sees the fulfilment of these precious words in 
‘“‘the Man Christ Jesus’; and fleeing to Him 
exclaims, ‘“‘Thou art my hiding-place” (Ps. 
32:7). If He be rejected and His grace despised, 
certain and eternal judgment must follow. 
Contrast the Philippian jailer with the Roman 
magistrates (Acts 16: 25-40). 

4 The recompense of humility and the fear of Jehovah 

Are riches, honor and life. 
5 Thorns and snares are in the way of the perverse: 


He that doth keep his soul shall be far from them. 

How different are the paths and the ultimate 
rewards of the godly and the perverse! Heaven 
and hell are not more diverse than the roads 
leading thereto. The godly man is marked out 
from his fellows by a meek and contrite spirit, 
and the fear of the Lord. The ungodly is insub- 
ordinate and selfwilled. The way of the former 
leads to true riches, the honor that cometh from 
God, and life everlasting. The steps of the lat- 
ter soon became entangled amid thorns and 
snares from which he who keeps his soul, by 
obedience to the word of Jehovah, shall be pre- 
served. Contrast Hezekiah and his son Manas- 
seh, before he was humbled (2 Chron. 29-33). 


6 Initiate a child concerning the way he should go: 
And when he is old he will not depart from it. 


Chapter T'wenty-Two 303 


To start the child right is of all importance. 
The saying of the Jesuit, “Give me your child 
till he is twelve, and I care not who has charge 
of him afterwards,” has passed into a proverb. 
The tree follows the bent of its early years, and 
so with our sons and daughters. If taught to 
love the world, to crave its fashions and follies 
in childhood, they are almost certain to live for 
the world when they come to mature years. 
On the other hand if properly instructed as to 
the vanity of all that men of this present evil 
age live for, from the beginning, they are in little 
danger of reversing that judgment as they grow 
older. Parents need to remember it is not 
enough to tell their little ones of Jesus and His 
rejection, or to warn them of the ways of the 
world; but they must see to it that in their own 
lives they exemplify their instruction. This will 
count above all else in the training of the young. 
To speak piously of separation to Christ while 
manifesting the spirit of the world in dress, the 
arrangement of the home, and the company 
sought and kept, will readily be set down by 
observing little ones as dissimulation and hypo- 
crisy; and we need not then wonder if they 
grow up to cast all our words behind them, and 
to love what our ways proclaimed to be the real 
object of our hearts. 

But where a holy, cheerful atmosphere per- 


304 Notes on Proverbs 


vades the home, and godly admonition is coupled 
with godly living, parents can count on the 
Lord to keep their households following in the 
right way. See Timothy (2 Tim. 1:5). 


7 The rich ruleth over the poor, 
And the borrower is servant to the lender. 


He who heeds the Scriptural injunction to 
“Owe no man anything, but to love one an- 
other” (Rom. 13: 8), will escape the awful 
bondage of the debtor. The rich almost invari- 
ably lord it over the poor, save where grace 
comes in to check the latent pride of the human 
heart. Therefore it is but natural that he who 
lends should consider himself superior to the 
borrower. The latter destroys his own free- 
dom by his neglect of the divine command. It 
is better far to be in straightened circumstances 
and cast upon God, than to have plenty for the 
time being but to know that it belongs to an- 
other. Nothing so crushes the spirit of a man 
as debt, if he have any conscience about it at 
all. The Christian should fear it and flee from 
it as from the effort of the enemy to subvert his 
peace and destroy his sense of dependence upon 
the Lord. 

There is by no means the concern about this 
matter, among saints, that it demands; people 
think little or nothing of running bills and bor- 


Chapter T-wenty-T wo 305 


rowing money without proper security, which 
afterwards may cause them deep grief and bring 
dishonor on Christ. He who would be alone 
the Lord’s servant and in bondage to no man 
will shun debt in every form. Many a one by 
carelessness as to this, has left his family in as 
dire distress as did the son of the prophet whose 
decease is mentioned in 2 Kings 4:1. 


8 He that soweth iniquity shall reap vanity: 
And the rod of his wrath shall fail. 

9 He that hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed; 
For he giveth of his bread to the poor. 


The two verses are in striking and intentional 
contrast; again reminding us of the certainty 
of a harvest like unto the character of the 
sowing. 

He who sows iniquity will reap a dreadful 
crop of vanity; and though he take a lordly 
position and vent his anger against what is of 
God, his rod shall fail and his rule come to a 
derisive end, as in the case of the unhappy 
Pharaoh of the Exodus. 

But the kindly, benevolent soul who plants 
the seed of thoughtfulness for others will reap 
a bountiful harvest of consideration and of 
blessing for himself. Bread cast upon the waters 
returns after many days. See Ebed-melech (Jer. 
38 : 7-12; 39:16—18). 

20 


306 Notes on Proverbs 


10 Cast out the scorner, and contention shall go out ; 
Yea, stnfe and reproach shall cease. 


See note on chap. 21:11. The scorner of this 
book is practically the same as the railer of 1 
Cor. 5. Such a man can work untold mischief 
among a company of the Lord’s people. His 
wretched evil-speaking, coupled with his con- 
tempt for all godly restraint, like the leaven 
placed in the meal, will, if unchecked, go on 
working till the whole is leavened. Therefore 
the necessity of obeying the word of God, “ Put 
away from among yourselves that wicked per- 
son” (1 Cor. 5: 11-13). 

The law knew no mercy for such a character. 
One who scorned the God of Israel and troubled 
His people, was, at the mouth of two or three 
witnesses to be put to death that the evil might 
be put away from among them (Deut. 17: 2-7). 

In this dispensation of grace such an extreme 
measure is not commanded; but the saints are 
called upon to put him away from their com- 
pany, in order that the rest may be saved from 
falling into his unholy ways, and thus the Name 
of Christ be kept from further dishonor. Out- 
side, he is in the place where God can deal with 
him. Inside, he is a source of grief to the as- 
sembly and a reproach to the Lord. See Hyme- 
naeus and Alexander (1 Tim. 1:20). 


Chapter Twenty-T'wo 307 


11 He that loveth pureness of heart, 
Upon whose lips is grace, the king is his friend. 


A righteous ruler delights in a man of pure 
heart and gracious words. And to such a one 
the King of kings is indeed a Friend. It is the 
pure in heart who see God, and they who are 
truly such will manifest it by obedience to the 
word, ‘‘Let your speech be always with grace, 
seasoned with salt.” A bitter, acrimonious and 
fault-finding tongue belongs not to the pure- 
hearted man of God, but is generally the evi- 
dence that one is far from being right himself. 
Note what is said of Mordecai (Esther 10: 2, 3). 


12 The eyes of Jehovah guard knowledge, 
But He overthroweth the words of the treacherous. 


The Lord’s eye is upon His own truth, which 
is the only real knowledge. He guards it day 
and night, and will never let it fall to the ground. 
When spoken by His servants, His eye is behold- 
ing and He will see that it shall accomplish that 
whereunto He sends it. 

But the false words of the unfaithful shall 
come to naught. The Lord Himself will over- 
throw them. Error cannot always prosper. 
It may seem to thrive for the moment, but it 
shall be destroyed eventually. Contrast Mica- 
iah and the prophets of Baal (1 Kings 22). 


308 Notes on Proverbs 


13 The slothful man saith, There is a lion withour, 
] shall be slain in the streets! 


See notes on chaps. 12:27; 15:19; 19:24; 
21:25. Many are the excuses devised by the 
sluggard to account for his supineness and utter 
lack of energy. Where no dangers or difficulties 
exist he imagines them; and where they really 
are he exaggerates them to such a degree that 
they appear to be insurmountable. He who 
goes forth in the strength of faith finds the lions 
have been rendered powerless to destroy. Con- 
trast with the slothful man of this verse, Bena- 
iah the son of Jehoiada, one of David’s mighty 
men (2 Sam. 23:20). See chap. 26:13. 


14 The mouth of strange women is a deep ditch: 


He that is abhorred of Jehovah shall fall therein. 


See notes on chap. 2: 16-19; 6: 23-35; 7: 
4—27. Itis with her flattering words that the 
strange woman allures him who stops to listen, 
to his destruction. None who walk with God 
will be taken by her; but he whose ways dis- 
please the Lord will readily fall a victim to her 
seductions, stumbling into sin and its fearful 
consequences as a blind man into a deep pit. Of 


this, Judah becomes a terrible example in Gen. 
38. 


15 Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child; 
But the rod of correction shall drive it far from him. 


Chapter Twenty-Two 309 


See notes on chap. 13: 24 and 19:18. To 
leave a child to itself is to ensure its ruin, for 
folly is bound up in its heart. Discipline, pro- 
perly administered will correct the natural ten- 
dency to goastray. The rod is, of course, not 
necessarily strictly such. Corporal punishment 
is not always required, and might at times be 
very unwise. But firm, yet kindly, discipline 
is what the passage declares the importance 
of. The rod, throughout Scripture, speaks of 
authority and power; in this case that parental 
restraint to which the child owes so much. It 
was the lack of this that was responsible in 
large measure for the evil ways of both Absa- 
lom and Adonijah (2 Sam. 14; 1 Kings 1: 6). 


16 He that oppresseth the poor to increase his riches, 
And he that giveth to the rich, shall surely come to 
want. 


The one is as foolish as the other. To seek to 
accumulate wealth by oppression of the needy, 
or to endeavor to curry favor by gifts to those 
who need them not because of their riches; both 
courses are precursors of want instead of solid 
increase. 

For the moment, he who practises what is 
here condemned, may seem to prosper and flour- 
ish; but his end will manifest the truth of God’s 
word. He shall not be able to find the happi- 


310 Notes on Proverbs 


ness he sought, and will at last be obliged to 
own that his purpose has been utterly defeated, 
because of the iniquity of his heart. See what 
is said in James 5 of the rich who oppress the 
poor and withhold their wages. 


17 Bow down thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, 
And apply thy heart unto my knowledge. 
18 For it is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within 
thee; 
They shall withal be fitted together in thy lips. 
19 That thy trust may be in Jehovah, 
I have made known to thee this day, even to thee. 
20 Have not I written to thee excellent things 
In counsels and knowledge, 
21 That I might make thee know the certainty of the 
words of truth; 
That thou mightest answer the words of truth to 
them that send unto thee?” 


We now have a challenge reminding us of 
that seven times repeated in Rev. 2 and 3, “‘He 
that hath ears to hear, let him hear.”” Many 
have been the words of wisdom to which we 
have been listening; many more are to follow. 
The soul may become so used to them as to fail 
to discern their excellent character. What is 
needed is that the heart be applied to the know- 
ledge thus imparted. For it is of all importance 
that they be kept within and fitted to the lips 
of the hearer, whose trust must be in Jehovah, 
if he is to exemplify them in his life. 


Chapter T-wenty-Two 3h 


The expression,‘‘Have not I written to thee 
excellent things,” is a peculiar one. In the 
original, it is literally “have I not set them 
before thee in three ways” or, ‘‘a third time.” 
This is evidently in a superlative degree. ‘‘The 
excellent things in counsel and knowledge”’ are 
things of the highest value, beyond mere human 
wisdom. It is God Himself marking out the 
safe and right way in which His children should 
walk. Thus will they “‘know the certainty of 
the words of truth,’”’ and be enabled to use them 
aright in reply to all who inquire. Blessed it is, 
in a day of doubt and skepticism, to be able to 
rest the soul on the very words of the Living 
God, knowing their true and precious character. 

In the New Testament we find four inspired 
apostles quoting unhesitatingly from this book 
as that which, like all other Scripture, was God- 
breathed. Paul quotes from it in Rom. 12:19, 
20, and Heb. 12: 5,6; James in chap. 4:6 of 
his epistle; Peter twice in his first, and once in 
his second letter, namely 1 Pet. 4: 8,17, 18; 2 
Pet. 2: 22; and Jude, in the twelfth verse of his 
trenchant arraignment of the false teachers 
already creeping in among the saints. 

But what is of deepest interest to the believer, 
our Lord Himself, in His address at the table 
of the Pharisee, as recorded in Luke 14, uses 
this treasury of proverbial truth as His text- 


352 Notes on Proverbs 


book, and quotes approvingly from three verses 
of its 25th chapter (vers. 6-8). Added to this 
we find allusions and references to its teaching 
throughout the later books of the Old Testa- 
ment and all parts of the New. God has linked 
this plain and intensely practical portion—these 
‘‘words of truth’ —inseparably with all the rest 
of His holy book. As we pursue our study, may 
it be with a fuller sense of the sacred character 
of the homely admonitions and hints as to daily 
life which are to come before us. 


22 Rob not the poor, because he is poor, 
Neither oppress the afflicted in the gate; 

23 For Jehovah will plead their cause, 
And spoil the soul of those that spoiled them. 


This is a warning word to those who sit in 
the place of judgment, to which the gate refers. 
If the ways of justice are perverted, let him who 
renders a false and oppressive sentence, remem- 
ber that the supreme Judge is looking on, and 
He will render to every man according as his 
work has been. Righteous judgment is pre- 
cious in His sight because it then reflects the 
integrity of His own throne—a great white 
throne, unsullied by :niquity. If wrong is per- 
petrated upon the needy now, Jehovah Himself 
will appear as their Advocate in that highest 
court of all, when dreadful indeed will be the 


Chapter Twenty-T'wo 313 


portion of those who have used the judgment- 
seat on earth for the furtherance of iniquity. 
What will be the state of the Herods and 
Pilates when dragged before that bar of in, 
finite holiness? 


24 Make no friendship with an angry man; 
And with a furious man thou shalt not go: 
25 Lest thou learn his ways, 
And get a snare to thy soul. 


A man is known and formed by the company 
he keeps. ‘‘ Evil communications corrupt good 
manners.”’ Therefore the importance of consid- 
ering carefully the question of intimate associa- 
tion and companionship, not to say fellowship. 
To keep company with a man given to wrath 
and fury is to be contaminated by his hasty 
ways, and to bring a snare upon one’s own 
soul. Anger and malice are the works of the 
flesh. With such the Christian should have no 
association, for we are too easily defiled by such 
things; and to go on with one displaying such 
evidences of unjudged carnality is to endanger 
one’s own walk and testimony. A Saul is no fit 
friend for a David. See chap. 21: 24. 


26 Be not thou one of them that strike hands, 
Or of them that are sureties for debts. 
27 If thou hast nothing to pay, 
Why should he take away thy bed from under 
thee ? 


314 Notes on Proverbs 


See notes on chap. 6: 1-5, and 11:15. Some 
there are who will never learn by precept. 
Therefore they must be taught by bitter experi- 
ence. It would not be difficult to find numerous 
examples of persons who have read Proverbs 
all their lives, but who, despite its many warn- 
ings as to suretyship, have lost nearly all they 
had through endorsing notes or going on the 
bond of men who turned out unworthy of their 
confidence. How much that is painful, and 
shameful too, might have been avoided had 
such a passage as this been heeded! 

When grace was reigning, they who ‘had 
nothing to pay”’ were frankly forgiven all their 
debt (Luke 7: 40-43); but when stern justice 
has to be dispensed, he who has not the means 
to meet his self-imposed obligation is in danger 
of losing his very bed from under him. 


28 Remove not the ancient landmark 


Which thy fathers have set. 


This is almost a repetition of that which 
the Lord, of old, had spoken through Moses: 
“Thou shalt not remove thy neighbor’s land- 
mark, which they of old time have set in thine 
inheritance, which thou shalt inherit in the land 
that the Lord thy God giveth thee to possess 
it” (Deut. 19: 14). 

Each Israelite had received his portion di- 


Chapter I'wenty-T wo 315 


rectly from Jehovah. Its bounds were marked 
out by ciearly-indicated landmarks, which all 
were commanded to respect. He who removed 
them forcibly, or in secret, would have to do 
witb God for his transgression. 

In this dispensation of grace the portion of the 
people of God is heavenly, not earthly. Their 
inheritance is in the precious truth which He 
has committed to us. To remove the land- 
marks—the great distinguishing doctrines of 
Scripture—will be to incur the divine displeas- 
ure. Yet, alas, this is the wretched business in 
which many learned doctors and wiseacres are 
engaged to-day. Nothing is too sacred for 
their irreverent handling. Precious truths like 
those of Atonement and Justification by Faith 
—yea,even the mystery of the Holy Trinity and 
the Person of the Lord Jesus Christ—are, in their 
eyes, but common things, which they may dis- 
miss or ignore as they please. But a day of 
reckoning is coming, when God will judge them 
in righteousness, and when those who have 
been misled by their removal of ancient and 
venerable landmarks will curse them for the loss 
of their souls. Terrible will be the accounting 
of men who, while posing as instructors of the 
flock of Christ, have all the while been Satan’s 
instruments for overthrowing the saving truths 
of Scripture. See Paul’s warning word to Tim- 


316 Notes on Proverbs 


othy (2 Tim. 1: 8-13, and 4: 1-5). Compare 
chap. 23: 10, 11. 


29 Seest thou a man diligent in his work ? 
He shall stand before kings; 


He shall not stand before mean men. 


Reward is sure for the diligent. He who ap- 
plies himself with earnestness to his appointed 
labor will work his way into notice, and be rec- 
ognized because of his ability. How much more 
when it is unto the Lord he labors, seeking His 
approbation, rather than that of his fellows! 
‘“‘Not slothful in business ; fervent in spirit ; serv- 
ing the Lord,” is the canon for the ordering of 
the believer’s daily service (Rom.12:11). Often, 
one fears, we act as though it read, ‘‘ Fervent 
in business; slothful in spirit; serving your- 
selves.” 

He who would stand before the King, and en- 
joy the sunshine of His approval by and by, 
must labor now to be well-pleasing to Him. In 
this the faithful life of Daniel may well speak to 
us. He was a man who, whatever the changes 
of government, always came to the front, stand- 
ing before kings. 


337 


CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE 


OTHING that concerns His creatures is of 

too small moment for the Creator to take 

note of. Therefore, in the opening words of 

this chapter we have a section devoted to the 

suited behavior of a man who dines with one of 
higher station than himself. 


1 When thou sittest to eat with a ruler, 
Consider well who is before thee: 

2 And put a knife to thy throat, » 
If thou be a man given to appetite. 

3 Be not desirous of his dainties; 
For they are deceitful meat. 


Self-restraint at the table of one in power 
who has invited, is what is here inculcated. To 
presume on the lasting favor of one in high 
station, and to accept privileges accorded by 
him, as though deserved, is unwise on the part 
of one of lesser rank. There is a quiet deference 
which is consistent at such times. A blase’ man- 
ner soon excites disgust, and readily draws 
down indignation and ill-will. Daniel and the 
Hebrew children manifested a commendable 
spirit when honored with the king’s dainties. 


318 Notes on Proverbs 


Though not sitting with him exactly, yet they 
may fittingly be referred to in this connection 
(Dan. 1). 


4 Labor not to be rich: 
Cease from thine own wisdom. 

5 Wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not ? 
For [riches] certainly make themselves wings; 
They fly away as an eagle toward heaven. 


Many are the warnings in Scripture against 
making the accumulation of wealth the object 
ofthe heart. The man who, trusting in hisown 
wisdom, ignores divine instruction as to this, 
will find, when too late, that he has set his eyes 
upon that which is fleeting and evanescent; for 
earthly treasure is often dissipated far more 
easily than collected. Riches seem possessed 
with wings. Like eagles, they fly away, leav- 
ing him whose mind was set upon them, disap- 
pointed and heart-sick. 

But, though God has thus faithfully set forth 
the folly of the mad chase after wealth, how 
slight has been the impression produced thereby 
upon the mind of saint or sinner. In the world, 
men will strain every nerve and exhaust every 
scheme to become possessed of money which 
they can never enjoy ; and it is plain, that many 
of the children of God are contaminated by 
the same covetous spirit. Weare slow to learn, 
therefore the need of the Lord’s discipline which 


Chapter Twenty-Three. 319 


many of us have to experience all our days. See 
Paul’s word as to the dangers of making haste 
to be rich (1 Tim. 6: 6-10, and note verses 17,18. 


6 Eat thou not the bread of him that hath an evil eye, 
Neither desire thou his dainty meats: 

7 For as he thinketh in his heart, so is he: 
Eat and drink, saith he to thee; 
But his heart is not with thee. 

8 The morsel which thou hast eaten shalt thou vomit up 
And thou wilt have wasted thy sweet words. 


Eating and drinking are once more reverted 
to. Here the warning is against accepting the 
hospitality of an insincere person. He may 
speak fair and profess to delight in your 
company; but safety consists in shunning him 
and refusing his advances. If entrapped by ap- 
petite, depend upon it, all his delicacies will 
prove unsatisfying, and pleasant agreeable 
words will be wasted: for in one way or an- 
other he will see that his favors are returned. 
To do good, and give, “hoping for nothing 
again,” is not his thought. He will seek to use 
for his own advantage, those who, by accepting 
his pretended kindnesses, put themselves under 
obligation to him. However bland his smile, 
‘Cas he thinketh in his heart, so is he.’’ Covet- 
ousness and sel{-seeking are there, and his ways 
are shaped accordingly, See the old prophet of 
Bethel (1 Kings 13). 


320 Notes on Proverbs 


9 Speak not in the ears of a fool, 
For he will despise the wisdom of thy sayings. 


To seek to instruct him whose heart is set on 
folly and waywardness is but wasting one’s 
breath, or like casting pearls before swine. 
When there is no desire for wisdom, but know- 
ledge and understanding have been deliberately 
trampled under foot, it is useless to waste 
words. See chap. 26:4. Jotham’s remonstrance 
with the followers of Abimelech is a case in 
point (Judges 9:7-21). 


10 Remove not the old landmark; 

And enter not into the fields of the fatherless: 
11 For their Redeemer is mighty; 

He shall plead their cause with thee. 


See note on chap. 22: 28. He who, because 
of their apparent helplessness, invades the field 
of the widow or the orphan, in order to enlarge 
his own possessions, will learn to his sorrow 
that they have a Goel, or Kinsman-Redeemer, in 
Jehovah Himself. He will espouse their cause, 
and manifest His power on their behalf. Let 
those who are wronged commit their affairs to 
Ilim, knowing that He cannot fail any who 
trust His love and count upon His intervention. 
It is refreshing and uplifting to see how David 
referred all his concerns to this mighty Pleader, 
when misjudged and oppressed. See Psa. 35. 


Chapter T'wenty-Three 325 


12 Apply thy heart to instruction, 
nd thine ears to the words of knowledge. 


This is another reminder of that which was 
set before the young man so fully in the nine 
opening verses of chap. 2. Only when the heart 
is applied to instruction, and the ear bent upon 
hearing right and profitable words, will there 
be progress in divine things. A careless learning 
by rote will never profit. It is when the whole 
being is occupied with the truth, that Wisdom 
makes her abode in the soul of him who seeks 
her. An aged Christian was said to have ‘‘ med- 
itated the Bible through three times”’ in his life. 
This is very different from merely reading the 
Scriptures. It implies patient, careful study 
of each portion perused. Only by some such 
means will there be true spiritual growth. Lis- 
ten to Jeremiah (Jer. 15: 16). 


13 Withhold not correction from the child: 
For if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not 


die. 
14 Thou shalt beat him with the rod, 
And shalt deliver his soul from Sheol. 


See note on chap. 19:18. Discipline, admin- 
istered seasonably (not in harshness, or undue 
severity), is for the profit of the child. In this 
way, by means of present suffering, he will be 
preserved from the ruin and wretchedness which 

21 


322 Notes on Proverbs © 


are bound to follow a life of self-seeking and 
unsubdued, perverse will. Sheol is not exactly 
hell. It is the world of spirits; here used as 
that to which a vicious life will soon lead. 
Chastisement will correct these evil tendencies. 
It were well if all parents had the concern as 
to the ordering of their children that Manoah 
manifested (Judges 13: 8-12). 


15 My son, if thy heart be wise, 
My heart shall rejoice, even mine. 
16 Yea, my reins shall exult, 


When thy lips shall speak right things. 


We may hear, in these words of a father ad- 
dressed to his son, the desire of our Father, God, 
that His children walk in the truth. It is pre- 
cious indeed to be thus afforded the holy privi- 
lege of giving joy to His heart by loving wis- 
dom and speaking right things. See 3 John 
3, 4. 


17 Let not thy heart envy sinners ; 
But be thou in the fear of Jehovah all the day long. 
18 For surely there is a latter end (or, a reward); 
And thine expectation shall not be cut off. 


To envy those who seem to prosper in wick- 
edness is not wise, for their day of retribution 
is coming. However righteousness may suffer 
in the present age, it will be proven at last that 
they had the better part who daily lived in the 


Chapter T wenty-Three 323 


fear of the Lord. It seems certain that in the 
latter verse of this pair the doctrine of future 
retribution is more than hinted at. Newberry 
suggests ‘‘ Verily there is a hereafter” as an ad- 
equate rendering of the original. The thought 
appears to be that there is a time coming when 
present conditions shall be reversed, and right- 
eousness shall triumph. Then he who has 
walked in integrity and the fear of God will be 
rewarded for all his sufferings here. See the last 
two beatitudes in our Lord’s so-called sermon 
on the mount (Matt. 5: 10-12). 


19 Hear thou, my son, and be wise, 
And guide thy heart in the way. 
20 Be not among winebibbers; 
Among riotous eaters of flesh: 
21 For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to 
poverty ; 
And drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags. 


Intemperance in eating and drinking bespeaks 
a heart uncontrolled by wisdom. The Christian 
is bidden to be temperate in all things, that by 
sobriety and careful behavior he may commend 
the gospel of God, keeping under his body and 
bringing it into subjection, not being ruled by 
its carnal appetites. He who heeds not words 
like these must bear his just punishment. This 
was the sin of the stubborn and rebellious son 
of Deut. 21: 20. See verses 29 to 35 below. 


324 Notes on Proverbs 


22 Harken unto thy father that begat thee, 
And despise not thy mother when she is old. 


Exuberant youth, self-confident, and resource- 
ful, is likely to forget the reverence due to par- 
ents when age enfeebles the once bright and act- 
ive mind. Let the young give them that filial 
consideration which they will desire for them- 
selves when years have destroyed early vigor 
and mentality. Esther’s obedience to her aged 
cousin Mordecai is a lovely sample of what is 
here inculcated (Esth. 2: 20). 


23 Buy the truth, and sell it not ; 


Also wisdom, and instruction, and understanding. 


See note on chap. 4: 7-9. An important word 
this for our Laodicean and latitudinarian age. 
We may well cry, with the prophet, ‘‘ Truth has 
fallen in our streets.”” But he who desires the 
approval of God above the praise of men will 
value it nevertheless, and be ready to purchase 
it at the cost of friends, reputation, possessions, 
yea, life itself. Nor will he part with it what- 
ever the suffering that may result from contend- 
ing earnestly for the faith once for all delivered to 
the saints. Rationalists may sneer, and the su- 
perstitious persecute; but he who possesses the 
truth will find with it wisdom, instruction and 
understanding such as all the wise men after the 


Chapter Twenty-Three 325 


flesh are strangers to. Who exemplified what 
is here inculeated more than the one-time rabbi 
of Tarsus? See Phil. 3: 7-11. 


24 The father of the nghteous shall greatly rejoice: 
And he that begetteth a wise son shall have joy of 


im. 
25 Thy father and thy mother shall be glad, 
And she that bare thee shall rejoice. 


See second clause of chap. 10:1. Righteous- 
ness and wisdom in their children fill the hearts 
of parents with a joy beyond telling. To see 
those for whose salvation from folly and in- 
iquity they have toiled and prayed, walking in 
uprightness and prudence through a world of 
abounding snares, cannot but yladden and 
greatly cheer. How little the young at times 
reflect upon the effect of their ways for good or 
ill upon their fathers and mothers. Many will 
declare that they love tenderly those who have 
lavished such unremitting affection upon them 
all their lives, while yet by their actions they 
are wounding their spirits and breaking their 
hearts. Consider verses 15 and 16 above. See 
Jacob and Joseph (Gen. 46—48). 


26 My son, give me thy heart, 
And let thine eyes delight in my ways. 


It is again, as in verse 15, a greater than 


326 Notes on Proverbs 


Solomon who speaks. To the lawless the words 
are not addressed. Such have no heart for God, 
nor can their eyes find in His ways, anything 
in which to delight. But to His sons, He says 
‘““Give Me thy heart.” It is His right, and 
surely the child of His grace will rejoice in thus 
being able to give Him what He craves. It is 
not mere service as in Martha’s case, but heart- 
occupation with Himself that he yearns for, as 
illustrated in Mary. Who that has known the 
preciousness of redemption by the blood of 
Christ will not gladly say, 
‘Take my poor heart, and let it be 
Forever closed to all but Thee. 


Take my love, my Lord; I pour 
At Thy feet its treasure-store.” 


He is worthy of the best we have to give. To 
Him we rightly yield the citadel of our deepest 
affections. It is only when He possesses the 
heart that His ways will be delighted in. See 
the living sacrifice of Rom. 12:1, 2. 


27 For a harlot is a deep ditch; 


And a strange woman is a narrow pit. 
28 She also lieth in wait as for a prey, 
And increaseth the transgressors among men. 


Compare chap. 7; see the notes. Ifthe young 
man would be preserved from impurity and en- 
snarement of soul, God must have his heart. 


Chapter Twenty-Three 327 


None are safe who allow their affections to be 
fixed on objects ‘‘ under the sun.”” Everywhere 
are there to be found those who would decoy 
from the paths of truth and virtue. In the Lord 
alone is there strength and deliverance. Likea 
deep ditch, hidden until one hasstumbled into it, 
is the unholy woman who has been so frequently 
warned against. He who pleases God shall 
escape from her. How terribly was Samson 
made to suffer through one like this! (Judg.16). 


29 Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? 
Who hath contentions? who hath anxiety? 
Who hath wounds without cause? who hath red- 
ness of eyes? 


Six questions are now asked, to be answered 
in the verses that follow. Woe, sorrow, conten- 
tions, anxiety (or perhaps, mutterings), needless 
wounds, and inflamed eyes are characteristic of 
him who is about to be described. 

The abrupt inquiries fix the mind and focus 
the attention upon the terrible and vivid descrip- 
tion of the drunkard that is at once presented 
in reply. 


30 They that tarry long at the wine; 
They that go to seek mixed wine. 

31 Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, 
When it giveth its color in the cup, 
When it goeth down smoothly. 


328 Notes on Proverbs 


32 At the last it biteth like a serpent, 
And stingeth like an adder. 
33 Thine eyes shall behold strange women, 
And thy heart shall utter perverse things. 
34 Yea, thou shalt be as he that lieth down in the 
heart of the sea, 
Or as one that lieth upon the top of a mast. 
35 They smote me [shalt thou say], and I was not sick; 
They have beaten me, and I knew it not: 
When shall | awake? I will seek it yet again. 


Indulgence in the pleasures of the wine-cup to 
inebriation, is a prolific cause of human sorrow. 
Drunkenness is one of the greatest curses of the 
ages, yet itis asin that seems ever seductive and 
attractive to the convivially inclined. Throw- 
ing to one side all restraint, such a one is allured 
by the sparkle of the bubbling liquor. But the 
results beggar all description. What seemed so 
delightful and innocent becomes like a venomous 
reptile taken into the bosom, whose bite sets 
the veins on fire. Immorality is linked with 
drunkenness, as effect with cause. All self-respect 
goes when the brain is controlled by the deadly 
poison. Lust and license possess the being. 

The inebriate is like a man endeavoring to lie 
down in the heart of the waves of the sea, or 
like one who tries to sleep upon the mast head. 
Recovering a measure of consciousness there is 
the sense of bruising and wounding, but after all 
no determination to flee the cause that has, in 


Chapter —Twenty-Three 329 


a great measure, destroyed the will. The unna- 
tural craving which possesses the being leads 
him to seek again the means of his destruction. 
See Nabal (1 Sam. 25:36-38). 

It becomes the child of God to flee these 
things, and by sobriety and self-control, to be 
an example to those who are weaker. “It is 
good, neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor 
anything whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is 
ensnared, or is made weak. Hast thou faith? 
have it to thyself before God. Happy is he that 
condemneth not himself in that thing which he 
alloweth”? (Rom. 14:21, 22). To play fast 
and loose with what has ruined so many myr- 
iads of our fellow-men is certainly not to walk 
charitably. ‘‘ We that are strong ought to bear 
the infirmities of the weak, and not to please 
ourselves”” (Rom. 15:1). Careless indulgence 
in that which is to others like the poison of the 
adder is most inconsistent and thoughtless. 


330 


CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR 


TES chapter completes the first part of the 

book ; the proverbs arranged directly by the 
wise king, and evidently put into circulation 
before his death. 

The first one is a warning against falling into 
the snare that so distracted the godly Asaph, 
until he went into the sanctuary of the Lord 
(Psalm 73). 


1 Be not thou envious of evil men, 
Neither desire to be with them. 

2 For their heart studieth destruction, 
And their lips talk of mischief. 


See note on chap. 23:17,18. It was when 
he saw the end of the wicked, that Asaph felt 
every envious yearning vanish from his bosom. 
How could a saint of God begrudge the poor 
worldling his evanescent pleasures when judg- 
ment, like a dark and gloomy cloud, is lowering 
over their heads! 

Nor is that the only thing that makes their 
lot wretched. Their hearts and lips are alike 
concerned in destruction and mischief. Who 
could be happy when so engaged? Disappoint- 


Chapter Twenty-Four 333 


ment and grief must ever be their portion, who 
hope through iniquity to find happiness. See, 
out of many instances with which Scripture 
abounds, the wretched life of Jehoram, king of 
Judah (2 Chron. 21). 
3 Through wisdom is a house builded; 
And by understanding it is established : 
4 And by knowledge shall the inner-chambers be filled 
With all precious and pleasant niches. 


Storing the mind and heart with wisdom, 
knowledge, and understanding, is like building a 
mansion on a solid foundation, and beautifying 
and enriching it with costly treasures that gra- 
tify the beholder, and add to the enjoyment of 
the occupants. He can never be poor who has 
the wisdom that cometh down from above. 
See Jas. 3:17, 18. 

5 A wise man is strong; 

Yea, a man of knowledge increaseth strength. 


6 For by wise counsel thou shalt make war for thyself; 
And in the multitude of counsellors there is safety. 


See notes on chap. 20:18. Intimate is the 
connection between these verses and those just 
preceding. Wisdom makes strong its possessor, 
however inferior he may be in other respects to 
his adversaries. 

The sense of the expression ‘“‘make war for 
thyself” is evidently “‘ make successful warfare,” 
or “war to thine advantage.” 


iz 


332 Notes on Proverbs 


7 Wisdom is too high for a fool: 
He openeth not his mouth in the gate. 


The wise man is not rash. As he goes out to 
meet the enemy, he avails himself of the counsel 
and experience of others. He is not an egoist. 
His safety is in his willingness to hear what 
others soberly present. Our Lord may have 
had these words in mind, as also those of verse 
27, when He instructed His disciples as to the 
importance of counting the cost, ere beginning 
to build or going forth to a conflict (Luke 14: 
28-32). See the poor wise man of Ecc. 9:14—-16. 

Unable to attain to wisdom, because unwil- 
ling to repent of his evil-doing, the fool will be 
speechless ‘‘in the gate,’’ that is, when the hour 
of his judgment has come. See the man who 
ignored the wedding garment (Matt. 22: 
11-13). 

How rich the grace that led the Eternal Wis- 
dom to be as a lamb, dumb before the shearers, 
when He stood ‘‘in the gate,’ that judgment 
for His own might be exhausted upon Him. 
(Isa. 53:7). 


8 He that deviseth to do evil | 
Shall be called a mischievous person. 
9 The thought of folly is sin; 


And the scoffer is an abomination to men. 


Evil thoughts, says our Lord, come from the 


Chapter Twenty-Four 333 


heart, indicating therefore the moral pollution 
of the entire being. He who allows his mind to 
riot in evil devices is full of mischief. His 
thoughts of folly, whether put into execution or 
not, are sinful; for thoughts as well as deeds 
shall be judged when the secrets of men’s hearts 
are laid bare. For them, as also for words and 
actions, men shall give account. The scoffer is 
one who permits the foolishness of his heart to 
control his lips. He rails at holy things, as did 
Pharaoh when he asked, ‘‘ Who is the Lord that 
I should obey His voice” (Ex. 5: 2). 


10 If thou faint in the day of aeevetety, 
Thy strength is small. 


It is the hour of trial that manifests whatever 
strength one really has. To faint, or become 
disheartened then, is to show that one has not 
been truly counting upon God for deliverance. 
The hour of trial and opposition will only find 
the trusting soul more confident still, for he 
knows where the source of all power is to be 
found. Contrast Elijah when threatened by 
Jezebel, with David when the people spake of 
stoning him (1 Kings 19: 2-4; 1 Sam. 30:6). 


11 If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto 
death, 


And those that are ready to be slain; 


334 Notes on Proverbs~ 


12 If thou sayest, Behold we knew it not; 
Doth not He that pondereth the heart consider it? 
And He that keepeth thy soul, doth not He know it? 
And shall not He render to every man according to 
his works > 

In these solemn questions reference seems to 
be made to a mode of execution, once prevalent 
in Syria and Palestine. Muenscher says, “‘ When 
a criminal was anciently led to execution, a 
crier went before, who proclaimed the crime of 
which he had been convicted, and called upon 
any one who could say anything in behalf of the 
condemned culprit, to come forward; in which 
case, he was led back to the tribunal and the 
cause was re-heard.”” To have the information, 
which, if declared, would save the condemned 
man, but to selfishly withhold it and allow him 
to be slain, would be to take common ground 
with Cain, and ask, ‘““AmI my brother’s keeper?” 
But the great Judge of all, who ponders the heart, 
would be witness against the one who acted so 
perfidiously and would assuredly render accord- 
ingly. 

What shall be said of Christians who can see 
thousands daily of their fellow men passing on 
to eternal woe, and hear of millions more, yet 
scarcely ever bestir themselves to make known 
God’s message of justification for guilty sinners 
through the Lord Tesus Christ ? 


Chapter Twenty-Four 305 


Appalling is the thought that, albeit nineteen 
centuries have almost gone since Jesus said, ‘‘Go 
ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to 
every creature,” we have to-day to face the fact 
that over five hundred million members of the 
human race are still awaiting the first proclam- 
ation of the gospel; and this, not because these 
millions live in inaccessible regions, but because 
there is so little heart, on the part of those so 
richly blessed, to carry the word of reconcilia- 
tion to the regions beyond where Christ has not 
been named. 

Even in instances where men have been ready 
to go, so amazing is the lethargy among those 
who could well afford to assist them, that it is 
only by exercise of the greatest self-denial they 
can get to, and remain in, the needy fields, white 
_ already to the harvest. 

Let us not forget that for all these things we 
shall yet have tosay to God. He will not lightly 
pass by the self-seeking, the worldly-mindedness, 
the positive indifference of His people which has 
led them to neglect to so large an extent the 
carrying of His gospel “‘into all the world.” 

The cry of those who are ready to be slain is 
going up into His ear day and night; while 
they wait for a deliverer. Be it ours, then, not 
to say ‘‘we knew it not,” but to rise to our 
privileges, and, in every way we can, help to 


336 Notes on Proverbs 


spread abroad the saving word. See Ezekiel, 
the watchman to Israel (Ezek. 33:1-12). 


13 My son, as thou eatest honey, because it is good; 
And the honeycomb, because it is sweet to thy taste: 

14 So shall the knowledge of wisdom be to thy soul; 
When thou hast found it, then there shall be a reward, 
And thine expectation shall not be cut off. 


As honey is delightful to the palate, so shall 
Wisdom be to the soul of her devotee. In chap. 
5:3 we found the strange woman simulating 
this; but though her lips ‘‘drop as the honey- 
comb,”’ they who follow her pernicious ways 
shall have bitterness in the latter end. On the 
contrary, Wisdom promises an assured reward 
—an expectation which shall not result in dis- 
appointment. The earnest seeker after under- 
standing shall never be put to shame. See Cor- 
nelius (Acts 10). 


15 Lie not in wait, O lawless man, against the dwell- 
ing of the righteous; 
Spoil not his resting-place. 
16 For a nghteous man falleth seven times, and riseth 
up again; 


But the lawless shall be overwhelmed with mischief. 


The wicked rejoice in iniquity, and are glad at 
the calamities of the righteous. But though the 
just man stumble frequently, he shall be lifted 
up again, for ‘God is able to make him stand.” 


Chapter Twenty-Four 337 


The sevenfold fall may refer, I judge, either to 
what are commonly called misfortunes, or to 
moral lapses brought on through unwatchful- 
ness; for, let the saint of God become careless, 
and he is as weak as other men. But where 
grace has wrought in the soul, there will be re- 
covery; while, as for the mere empty professor, 
he will return like a dog to his vomit, or like a 
sow to her wallowing in the mire, thus becom- 
ing overwhelmed with evil. Contrast Peter with 
Judas (Matt. 26: 75; 27: 3-5). Compare Psa. 
34: 18-22. 


17 Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, 
And let not thy heart be glad when he stumbleth; 
18 Lest Jehovah see it, and it be evil in His eyes, 
And He turn away His wrath from him. 


Love does not gloat over the sorrows of oth- 
ers, even though richly deserved, and although 
the one who is suffering has been a bitter foe. 
Remembering that he is himself a subject of 
grace, the humble, contrite soul walks softly, 
having tears, not sneers, for the afflictions of his 
enemies. When it is otherwise, the eye of Jeho- 
vah will note it; He will see that he who is glad 
at calamities shall not be unpunished. This was 
what provoked His wrath against Edom (Oba. 
12-16). Therefore His anger turned away from 
Jacob to Esau. See notes on chap. 17: 5. 

22 


338 Notes on Proverbs 


19 Fret not thyself because of evil men, 
Neither be thou envious of the lawless; 

20 For there shall be no reward to the evil man. 
The lamp of the lawless shall be put out. 


See verse 1 above. There is no reason to be 
either disquieted because of evil men, or to envy 
their present estate. They have no power or 
might, unless it be for a brief space delegated 
by the God of the righteous: and as for their 
wealth and prosperity, it is only for a moment, 
and will soon vanish away forever, leaving 
them poorer than the poorest. No reward for 
all their toil on earth awaits them in eternity. 
Their lamp shall go out in darkness as they go 
down beneath the awful judgment of the God 
whose holiness they have despised, and whose 
grace they have refused. See Herod (Acts 12: 
20-23). 

21 My son, fear thou Jehovah and the king; 

And meddle not with them that are given to change: 
22 For their calamity shall rise suddenly ; 

And who knoweth the ruin of them both? 


Subjection to God, and therefore to the pow- 
ers that be, by Him ordained, should be charac- 
teristic of all who know the Lord. To meddle 
with them who are given to change would be to 
associate with or assist men who by rebellion 
and intrigue disturb the peace and order of soci- 
ety, delighting in revolutions and plots against 


Chapter Twenty-Four Oo 


the established government. In the Church too 
such men arise, who would subvert all godly or- 
der and disquiet the minds of the saints. If left 
severely alone, their capacity for evil is greatly 
hindered. In worldly commonwealths, Chris- 
tians are subjects, not rulers. Therefore it be- 
comes all such to render to Cesar what belongs 
to him, not interfering with political changes 
and social upheavals. To fail thus to obey the 
word of God will involve the unwise saint in 
many a snare; and when the overthrow of the 
revolutionary leader comes suddenly, ‘who 
knoweth the ruin of them both?’’—that is, of 
the upstart and his followers. See Theudas and 
Judas of Galilee (Acts 5 : 36, 37). 


23 These things belong also to the wise. 
It is not good to have respect of persons in judgment. 
24 He that saith unto the lawless, Thou art righteous; 
Him shall the people curse, 
Nations shall abhor him: 
25 But to them that rebuke him shall be delight, 
And a good blessing shall come upon them. 
26 All shall kiss his lips who giveth a just sentence. 


From verse 23 to the end of the chapter seems 
to be a kind of appendix to the book as origi- 
nally sent forth. This is indicated by the intro- 
ductory sentence, ‘‘ These things telozg also to 


340 Notes on Proverbs 


the wise.” Four subjects are taken up in this 
additional section, all of which have been previ- 
ously treated of, but are now, in two instances 
at least, somewhat amplified. The topics are, 
the evil of respect of persons in judgment; 
counting the cost; prejudiced witness; and 
slothfulness. 

Of the first, the verses quoted treat. He who 
justifies the wicked makes himself rightly ab- 
horred. He will draw down upon his head the 
indignation of the upright. But he who re- 
bukes, or condemns, the guilty, will earn the es- 
teem of the people, and receive their blessing. 
All will ‘kiss his lips’? who gives a right sen- 
tence. The kiss, among Eastern nations, was a 
symbolical act, denoting affection and esteem. 

Solomon himself is perhaps the best illustra- 
tion in Scripture of the righteous judge, until 
“He shall come whose right it is to reign, and 
to execute justice throughout the whole earth”’ 
(1 Kings 2, and 3: 16-28). 

27 Prepare thy work without, 
And make it fit for thyself in the field; 
And afterwards build thy house. 

We have already noticed that the discourse of 
our Lord recorded in Luke 14: 28-30 seems to 
have had reference to the principle enunciated 
in verse 6 above. This 27th verse appears to 
have been also before Him. The one was illus- 


Chapter Twenty-Four 34] 


trated in His words about the king going out 
to battle. This finds its counterpart and fuller 
explanation in the warning drawn from the ac- 
count of the man who began to build, and was 
not able to finish. It is the part of wisdom to 
count the cost, lest the undertaking be too 
great, and prove but a monument of folly in the 
end. Such a reminder was the tower of Babel, 
which overconfident men began sacrilegiously 
to build, but were unable to complete (Gen. 11: 
1-9), 

28 Be not a witness against thy neighbor without cause; 

And deceive not with thy lips. 


29 Say not, I will do so to him as he hath done to me: 
I will render to the man according to his work. 


See note on chap. 20:22. To appear as a 
witness against one’s neighbor, with the deceit- 
ful purpose of accomplishing his ruin, because of 
real or fancied wrong, and in order to procure 
revenge, is opposed to the holiness that becomes 
a saint of God. The man of faith need not be 
concerned about defending his good name, and 
certainly will not be found falsely accusing his 
neighbor, however much he may have suffered 
through him. He can quietly leave all in the 
hands of Him who will ever vindicate His faith- 
ful servants. 

It is an important point reached in the expe- 
rience of a believer when he learns to look back 


342 Notes on Proverbs. 


of all second causes to God Himself. Only then 
can he say, ‘‘I have learned, in whatsoever state 
I am, to be content” (Phil.4:11). The trans- 
lators’ addition of the italicized word “ there- 
with” really mars the beauty of this lovely ex- 
pression of subjection to the will of God. Content 
to know His will is being carried out, despite all 
efforts of the enemy to thwart it; such is the 
condition of mind and soul described by the 
apostle. This is a wonderful victory gained 
over the natural propensity to see in persons 
and things around us cause for complaint and 
dissatisfaction, and to be goaded on with a de- 
sire for revenge. 

See the remarks as to David’s behavior to- 
wards Shimei, in the notes on chap. 20: 22. 


30 1 went by the field of the slothful man, 

And by the vineyard of the man void of under- 
standing ; 

31 And, lo, it was all grown over with thorns, 
And nettles had covered the face thereof, 
And the stone wall thereof was broken down. 

32 Then I saw, and considered it well; 

I looked upon it, and received instruction: 

33 Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, 

A little folding of the hands to sleep: 

34 So shall thy poverty come as one that traveleth, 

And thy want as an armed man! 


See notes on chaps. 6: 10, 11, and 20: 4. 
Graphic is the portrayal of the sluggard’s 


Chapter Twenty-Four 343 


field, as by an eye-witness who stood sadly ga- 
zing upon it, and pondered as he viewed its des- 
olation. Thorns and nettles flourishing, but 
fruit absent; the wall broken down; and every- 
thing speaking of lack of care, and slothful indif- 
ference. May we too gaze upon it, and consider 
it well] 

Verses 33 and 34 are the musings of his heart 
as he meditated upon the unhappy scene. Sleep- 
ing when he should have been laboring, the hour 
draws nigh when, aroused by poverty coming 
like a man on a journey, and want like a soldier 
in full armor, the sluggard will be awakened too 
late to realize that his wasted opportunities 
have gone beyond recall. 

The spiritual lesson has already been animad- 
verted upon in the notes on the portions re- 
ferred to above. 

With this warning against sloth and laziness, 
the book, as first set forth, was brought to a 
close, unless the chapters attributed to Agur 
and Lemuel were then part of it. Ifso, the next 
section was inserted in its present place, by di- 
vine guidance we cannot doubt, when the work 
was issued in its final complete form, 


344 


CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE 


1 These are also proverbs of Solomon, which the men 


of Hezekiah king of Judah copied out. 


A® already intimated, we now enter upon a 
portion of this book, which did not form 
any part of it until the days of Hezekiah, nearly 
three centuries after the death of Solomon him- 
self. Certain unnamed scribes, called in the 
Septuagint, ‘‘the friends of Hezekiah,” rescued 
from oblivion the maxims which form the five 
next chapters. We know from 1 Kings 4: 32 
that the wise king ‘‘spake three thousand pro- 
verbs: and his songs were a thousand and five.”’ 
Of the latter we know little. We have the Song 
of Songs, the dirge of Ecclesiastes; and it seems 
likely that psalm 127 and perhaps others were 
from his pen. The rest of his songs God has 
not seen fit to preserve. In the book of Proverbs 
we have already had before us over four hun- 
dred sayings which he collated and handed 
down to future generations. 
In the portion we now take up we find many 
additional proverbs; but whether transmitted 
orally or in writing, from his days to the times 


Chapter Twenty-Five 345 


of Hezekiah, we are not able to definitely decide. 
The rendering ‘‘copied out’? would be in favor 
of the latter thought, but as the word is as 
correctly translated ‘“‘collected”’ (according to 
well-informed Hebraists), we cannot be positive 
as to either position. All the Christian needs 
to enable him to be certain of their divine in- 
spiration is the well-known fact that they formed 
part of the Old Testament Scriptures when Jesus 
authenticated all of the three great divisions of 
the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms. 


2 It is the glory of God to conceal a thing; 
But the honor of kings is to search out a matter. 
3 The heaven for height, and the earth for depth, 
And the heart of kings is unsearchable. 


More than once is our attention called, in the 
Bible, to the inscrutableness of God’s counsels 
and designs. See Deut. 29: 29, and Rom. 11: 
33, 34. As the heavens are high above the 
earth, so, we are told, are His thoughts above 
ours. It therefore becomes Him to conceal from 
prurient curiosity His wondrous purposes. 

But though He so acts, He would have those 
in authority search earnestly His word that 
they may find out His mind and will. This is 
good and profitable exercise. 

As they delve into His hidden things, so He 
also searches out the secret chambers of their 


346 Notes on Proverbs 


hearts which to their subjects are unknown. 
He keeps His own secrets, even as they theirs, 
revealing the same only to a chosen few. 

Now all saints are kings unto God. There- 
fore He would communicate His mind to each 
one who studies to shew himself approved unto 
Him. May it be ours to be elec kings 
in this happy sense]! 

See the words of the angel of the Lord to 
Manoah and his wife (Judges 13: 17, 18). 

4 Take away the dross from the silver 
And there shall come forth a vessel for the finer. 

5 Take away the lawless from before the king, 

And his throne shall be established in righteousness. 

See note on chap.17: 3. As, by the removal 
of all dross from melted silver, there is produced 
that which suits the finer, so by the taking 
away of evil counsellors and lawless men from 
before'a king, his throne is established in right- 
eousness. Notice,in Solomon’s history, the 
many evil-doers who had to be judged ere he 
could occupy his throne in safety and in quiet- 
ness. See 1 Kings 2 throughout. 

The same principle abides in regard to the 
coming kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. ‘The 
wicked shall be destroyed and all the trans- 
gressors rooted out of the land when He returns 
in triumph to usher in the great day of the 
Lord (2 Thess. 1 and 2; Rev. 19). 


Chapter Twenty-Five 347 


6 Display not thyself in the presence of the king, 
And stand not in the place of great men. 
7 For better is it that it be said unto thee,—Come up 
hither, 
Than that thou shouldst be put lower 
In the presence of the prince whom thine eyes have 
seen. 


Our Lord’s parable in Luke 14: 7-11 is the 
same in meaning and similar in language. Un- 
doubtedly He set high value upon this precious 
collection of wise and helpful sayings. 

That pride and love of approbation which 
leads one unduly to put himself forward in the 
presence of the great is almost certain to have 
a crushing rebuke. He who places his own 
estimate upon his importance and takes his 
place accordingly, will likely rate himself far 
higher than others would, and so be forced in 
shame to give place to abler and better men. 
The man who is content with the lowly seat 
may be called to a higher one if found to be 
deserving of such recognition. See David, chosen 
as king when but a shepherd-lad (1 Sam. 16). 


8 Go not forth hastily to strive, 
Lest thou know not what to do in the end thereof, 
When thy neighbor hath put thee to shame. 


See notes on chap. 24: 5,6, and 27. Only 
when the matter is clearly of the Lord should 


348 Notes on Proverbs 


one ‘‘go forth to strive.” Too often saints are 
found like king Josiah meddling in matters that 
do not concern them, to their shame and deep 
grief. How significant the words ‘After all 
this,” by which the unhappy account of his 
failure in going out against Pharaoh-necho is 
introduced, after a life-time of carefulness and 
of devotion to God; he “‘goes forth hastily”’ to 
take part in what he should never have inter- 
fered with,and so meets a dishonored death 
(2 Chron. 35: 20-24). 

Compare our Lord’s words in Luke 12: 57-59 
and 14: 31-33. 


9 Debate thy cause with thy neighbor himself; 
And discover not a secret to another: 
10 Lest he that heareth it put thee to shame, 
And thine infamy turn not away. 


Much trouble and mischief might be avoided 
if people were careful to keep their differences to 
themselves, in place of spreading abroad inform- 
ation as to their shameful quarrels. If the 
simple scriptural rule, ‘Tell him his fault be- 
tween thee and him alone,” were more generally 
acted upon, how many misunderstandings 
might be put right at once, in place of dragging 
on for long seasons and involving an ever-in- 
creasing circle of persons who should properly 
never even have heard of the case. 


Chapter Twenty-Five 349 


To go direct to one with whom there is danger 
of a quarrel, and debate the matter in a gracious 
spirit with him in secret, carefully keeping the 
matter from sharp ears and prying eyes,—this 
is what the proverb commends. Nor is it only 
something commended. It is directly com- 
manded by God Himself. Happy shall His 
people be when it is taken to heart and conscien- 
tiously acted upon! See Matt. 5:25, 26. 


11 As apples of gold in pictures of silver, 
So is a word fitly spoken. 


The imagery has puzzled most of the com- 
mentators. Just what apples of gold might be 
is a question with many. One supposes em- 
broidery of golden apples among picture-work 
of silver. 

The explanation that seems most reasonable 
and commendable is that, by golden, we are to 
understand a rich yellow or orange color merely; 
not that the apples are actually of gold. It 
might be citron fruit, or oranges upon a silver 
platter; and many so understand it. 

But the writer witnessed one day a most un- 
usual occurence in the chief orange-growing 
district of southern California; something, in. 
deed, that none remembered as having taken 
place previously. A fairly heavy fall of snow oc- 
curred during the height of the orange har- 


350 Notes on Proverbs 


vest. The trees everywhere were covered with 
the silvery down, and as the lovely view spread 
out before me, and I noticed the great yellow 
globes hanging among the whitened boughs and 
leaves, I exclaimed involuntarily, ‘Apples of 
gold in pictures of silver!” 

May not Solomon have gazed upon just such 
a scene? Oranges, in his time, were plentiful in 
Palestine; and the citron, a large fruit of the 
lemon variety abounds there still. It is not un- 
likely that he had beheld a similar view, some 
wintry day, to that which I have attempted to 
describe. 

The effect would be lovely beyond all powers 
of pen to make known, but equally lovely are 
right words spoken at the proper time. See the 
words of Boaz to Ruth, the Moabitess (Ruth 
2: 8-13). 


12 As an earring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, 
So is a wise reprover upon an attentive ear. 


A rebuke kindly administered by a wise man 
should, in place of arousing indignation, be 
esteemed as of greater value than a costly pres- 
ent. Such were the words of Oded the prophet 
to the host of Judah, and we find them acted 
upon as a message from God (2 Chron. 28: 
9-15). 


Chapter Twenty-Five 353 


13 As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, 
So is a faithful messenger to them who send him: 
For he refresheth the soul of his masters. 


In ancient times, snow was used in Palestine, 
very much as ice isamong us. In winter it was 
carefully put away so as to be available for 
cooling drinks in the heat of summer. The simile 
therefore is very easy to understand. As the 
cold snow refreshes the reapers in the warm 
harvest days, so does a dependable messenger 
refresh the soul of his masters. See Jahaziel 
in 2 Chron. 20: 14-17. 


14 Whoso boasteth himself of a false gift 


Is like clouds and wind without rain. 


See the contrast in chap. 18:16. When clouds 
are seen in the sky, in a period of drought, men 
hope for showers and are disappointed if they 
do not come. So when one talks of making 
gifts but fails to fulfil his promises, he disap- 
points in the same way. 

But Jude refers to this passage in regard to 
those who profess to be gifted as teachers of the 
truth of God, but who in reality have nothing 
for the souls of their hearers. It is a common 
thing to see such men, self-confident and positive 
as to their abilities and spiritual insight, but 
who are bereft of all true godly discernment. 


352 Notes on Proverbs 


See the full description of such false gifts in 
Jude 11-13. 


15 By long forbearing is a prince persuaded, 
And a soft tongue breaketh the bone. 


Continued kindness and forbearance are pow- 
erful agents in overcoming obstinacy and angry 
passion, which seem as unyielding as a bone. 
The latter, is a hard, inflexible thing, but a soft 
tongue is said to break it; that is, mild, persua- 
sive language can overcome where heated terms 
and wrathful expressions would only arouse 
deeper resentment. See David’s words to Saul 
after he had spared that monarch’s life a second 
time (1 Sam. 26: 17-25). 


16 Hast thou found honey > 
Eat so much as is sufficient for thee, 


Lest thou be filled therewith, and vomit it. 


See note on chap. 24:13, 14. To eat honey 
in moderation is good and healthful. Taken to 
excess it may be very deleterious. The same is 
true of what it signifies. 

Throughout the Old Testament, honey seems 
to illustrate mere natural sweetness, hence it 
was forbidden to form part of the meat-offering 
which typified Christ in His perfect sinless hu- 
manity (see Lev. 2). He never sought solace in 
natural things, however pleasant or agreeable. 


Chapter Twenty-Five 355 


For us, they are permitted in their measure, but 
we need to beware of making them the chief ob- 
ject before our souls. 

Wives and husbands need to watch lest their 
affection for each other, sweet and lovely as it 
is, crowds out the things of God. So with the 
various joys and pleasures of life. What is legit- 
imate and wholly proper in its place, may prove 
very detrimental to all spiritual growth if it be 
permitted to become the supreme controlling 
power of the life. A little honey on the end of 
the pilgrim’s rod is desirable and helpful. Its 
abuse is another thing altogether. See Jonathan 
(1 Sam. 14: 27). 

So too, from the very difficulties of the way, 
if met and overcome in the fear of God may 
honey be extracted; but to go about searching 
for it, is far different to receiving it thankfully, 
when found in the carcass of a lion slain in the 
power of faith. See Samson (Judges 14: 5-9, 
14). Notice verse 27 below. 


17 Let thy foot be seldom in thy neighbor’s house; 
Lest he be weary of thee, and hate thee. 


The lesson is simple and important, but one 
which many of us are slow to learn. The heart 
of the proverb is expressed in one of our own, 
“Familiarity breeds contempt.’”’ This is one 


form of the honey, a too free indulgence in which 
23 


354 Notes on Proverbs 


the verse above warns us. Even in the case of 
the best of friends it is well that there should 
be some delicacy as to continually visiting and 
intruding, for it is an easy thing to wear out 
one’s welcome. Few of us can stand minute, 
daily inspection without its being very much to 
our disadvantage. It frequently happens that 
they who were the best of friends become the 
bitterest enemies, because of neglect of so simple 
a Scripture as this. 

More time spent in secret with God, and less 
spent in gadding about among men, would re- 
sult in far greater profit to our souls and bring 
much more glory to our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Consider the error to which “the younger wid- 
ows” were prone, and be warned thereby (1 
qums5216): 

18 Aman that beareth false witness against his neighbor 
Is a battle-hammer (or,war-club), and a sword, and 
a sharp arrow. 

How little the slanderer considers the grief oft- 
times caused to the innocent objects of his vicious 
tongue! As war-like weapons, carrying pain and 
anguish in their wake, are the hateful and cruel 
words they recklessly utter, often destroying all 
peace of mind and arousing just indignation. 
On the other hand, it is well for the injured one 
to take all to the Lord Himself and leave it at 
His feet, accepting it as part of the discipline of 


Chapter Twenty-Five 355 


the path. To remember that nothing can come 
to a believer but what divine love can use in 
blessing, is to rise triumphant above the tongue 
of slander and every other evil. 

Nothing is harder for a wounded spirit and a 
sensitive soul than to endure uncomplainingly 
untrue accusations. Indignation against the 
false accuser, a determination to clear oneself at 
all costs, if possible; to avenge oneself on the 
evil-doer—how natural are all these things to 
the human heart! But to go on, serenely look- 
ing to God for grace to so live that all shall see 
the falsity of the charge; to commit the keeping 
of my reputation to Him who permitted the 
trial for my humbling; to own the righteous- 
ness of His ways as I reflect on the many occa- 
sions upon which I have dishonored His name, 
however innocent I may be now;—these are 
healthful exercises indeed. Thus I am kept from 
taking things into my own hand, and can count 
upon God to act for me, as of old He did for 
Job, for David, for Daniel, and a host of others 
who had learned to commit all to Him whose 
love is unchanging, and who never permits a 
trial unless He discerns in the state of soul a 
‘“‘needs be”’ for the affliction which His govern- 
ment permits. See verse 23 below. 


19 Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble 
Is like a broken tooth, and a foot out of joint. 


356 Notes on Proverbs: 


What is more trying on the nerves and wear- 
ing on the spirit than a broken tooth, or a dis- 
located foot? Anxiety and inconvenience are 
ever present. Soisit when dependence is placed 
upon a faithless man, who deserts his post in 
time of trouble. See John Mark (Acts 13:13; 
15: 37, 38). 


20 As he that taketh away a garment in cold weather, 
And as vinegar upon soda (natron), 
So is he that singeth songs to a heavy heart. 


The natron of the ancients is not the nitre or 
saltpetre of our times, but was a native mineral 
soda of Palestine, which, when put in contact 
with an acid, would foam. 

To take away a garment in cold weather 
would add to the person’s discomfort, arousing 
indignation, even as vinegar poured upon na- 
tron would effervesce. So one who sang light 
frivolous songs to him who was of a heavy 
heart, would only increase his distress and 
cause his anger to be stirred. 

There is a time for all things. The merry- 
hearted love to sing; the sad and grief-stricken 
prefer loving sympathy. See Judah by the waters 
of Babylon (Ps. 137 : 1-4). 


21 If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat; 
And if he be thirsty, give him water to drink: 


Chapter Twenty-Five 357, 


22 For thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head, 
And Jehovah shall reward thee. 

These are the verses quoted, with the excep- 
tion of the last clause, by the apostle Paul in 
Rom. 12:21. He there takes them verbatim 
from the Septuagint. 

It is certainly worthy of note that when a line 
of conduct suited to Christians, who have en- 
tered into the precious truths unfolded in Ro- 
mans 3 to 8 inclusive, is in question, the Holy 
Ghost should quote from this portion of the 
Old Testament. This but bears out the remark 
made in the introduction that here we have the 
behaviour which becomes the man of God bask- 
ing in the full blaze of present truth. 

Vengeance is to be far from the thoughts of 
the saint. He is toshow grace and compassion 
even to his enemies, losing no opportunity to 
minister to their need. By so doing, the fire of 
love will soften their angry feelings, and the 
Lord’s reward will be upon the soul who thus 
imitates his Master, who said, ‘‘ Love your en- 
emies, bless them that curse you, do good to 
them that hate you, and pray for them which 
despitefully use you, and persecute you” (Matt. 
5:44). It would be the greatest incongruity 
for one who was himself the object of grace to 
attempt to deal in judgment with those who 
had wronged him. See Stephen (Acts 7 : 60). 


“358 Notes on Proverbs 


23 The north wind driveth away rain: 
So doth an angry countenance a backbiting tongue. 


The receiver of stolen goods is as guilty as the 
thief. So is it with the one who gives encour- 
agement to another to relate scandalous stories. 
Nothing is more conducive to strife and sorrow 
among the people of God than the repeating of 
matters that cannot profit, and that bring pain 
to the one of whom they are related. But there 
is no surer way to encourage the backbiter than 
by giving ear to his tales. If met by ‘‘an angry 
countenance,” and reproved in the fear of God, 
the mischief might often be nipped in the bud. 

When people come with unsavory tales about 
absent persons it would be well to meet them in 
the spirit that David manifested towards Re- 
chab and Baanah, for such people are character- 
assassins (2 Sam. 4: 5-12). 


24 It is better to dwell in the corner of the housetop, 
Than with a brawling woman in a wide house. 


This is a repetition of chap. 21:9. It is not 
by mere chance that the words are repeated, nor 
that several times the wretchedness of dwelling 
with an insubject and contentious woman is re- 
ferred to. God has established an order in crea- 
tion which is not broken with impunity. See 
Eph. 5 : 22-24. 


Chapter “'wenty-Five 359 


25 As cold waters to a thirsty soul, 
So is good news from a far country. 

The glorious gospel of the blessed God is, 
above all else, that good news from a far 
country, which is to the thirsty soul like a 
draught of clear sparkling water from a cold 
spring. When, weary, famished, and ready to 
perish, the poor sinner quaffs the living water, 
it becomes in his inmost being a fountain spring- 
ing up unto everlasting life. See the woman of 
Samaria (John 4: 6-29). 

26 A troubled fountain, and a defiled well, 


Is a righteous man giving way before the lawless. 


To the thirsty traveller a troubled fountain 
or an evil spring defiled with filth andimpurities 
is a cause for grief and vexation. So will a 
godly and upright man be disappointed and 
pained to behold a righteous person set at 
naught, or oppressed by those who have no 
principle and who refuse to subject themselves 
to law, either divine or human. See Gedaliah 
and Ishmael ( Jer. 41: 1-3).* 

27 It is not good to eat much honey ; 
So to search after one’s own glory is wearisome. 

See note on verse 16 above. The immoder- 
ate use of honey is pernicious. Much more so 


*For a fall exposition consult ‘‘The Weeping Prophet; Re- 
flections on the Prophecy and Lamentations of Jeremiah.”’ 
The same author and publishers. 


360 Notes on Proverbs 


is inordinate ambition. He who lives but to 
glorify himself, will be wearied in the search 
after vanity. Of this the entire book of Eccles- 
iastes is witness. Also see God’s message to 
Baruch the son of Neriah ( Jer. 45:6). 
28 He that hath no rule over his own spint 
Is like a city that is broken down and without walls. 
See note on chap. 16:32. Self-control is ever 
important. This is the temperance of the New 
Testament. Paul made it his object to keep his 
body under, that thus he might make manifest 
the fact that he was not a reprobate or cast- 
away (1 Cor. 9: 26, 27). Lack of this control 
of himself sadly dishonored Noah, and that 
shortly after world-government had been com- 
mitted to him (Gen. 9: 20,21). Moses, too, of 
all men the meekest, failed in self-government 
when angered at Meribah (Num. 20). May we 
have grace given to hold our spirits in godly 
subjection, that thus we become not like a city 
exposed to the ready assaults of its enemies! Even 
when one is clearly in the right, nothing so pre- 
judices his case as losing control of his temper, 
and uttering heated, hasty words. Others are 
prone to forget the minor points of the evidence 
at such a time, and to judge by the spirit mani- 
fested. Therefore the importance of exemplify- 
ing in our words and ways “the meekness and 
gentleness of Christ.” 


363 


CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX 


““T~“HE fool,” so frequently mentioned, fur- 

nishes the subject for the first twelve ver- 
ses. Itshould be born in mind that the term as 
used here has no reference to one mentally weak 
or incapable through simplicity. Fool and folly 
are almost synonymous with sinner and sinful- 
ness, though the added thought of wilfulness is 
needed to fully understand many of the warn- 
ings and threatenings. Fools are those who 
make a mock at sin, rejoicing in iniquity, and 
refusing to heed the voice of wisdom. 


1 As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, 
So honor is not seemly for a fool. 


All are out of place and may cause serious in- 
convenience. Snow in summer is injurious be- 
vause it retards growth. Rain during harvest 
greatly interrupts the reaper and may even ruin 
the crop. Soa fool in the place of honor is un- 
suitable and may cause much damage. He 
knows not how to order his conduct and fulfils 
the passage, “‘ Man being in honor abideth not, 
but is as the beasts that perish.’’ See Nebuchad- 
nezzar before his repentance (Dan. 4). 


362 Notes on Proverbs 


2 As the sparrow in wandering, as the swallow in 
flying, 
So a curse causeless shall not come. 

Fools are ever ready to curse and anathema- 
tize, often to the great anxiety of ignorant and 
timid souls who live in dread of the fulfilment 
of their maledictions. But as the sparrow and 
swallow cleave the air and pass quickly from 
view, so shail it be with a curse uttered with- 
out cause. 

A second interpretation is suggested by some 
who conceive the meaning to be that no curse 
shall come upon any one unless there be reason 
for it, but this really seems involved in what is 
suggested above. Compare Goliath’s curse (1 
Sam. 17: 43). 


3 A whip for the horse, a bridle for the ass, 
And a rod for the back of fools. 


See notes on chaps. 10:13 and 19:29. To 
some the order here will seem strange. We 
think of the horse as requiring the bridle to 
check it, and the ass, the whip to spur it on. 
But in Syria it is just the opposite. Horses are 
not much used and are often exceedingly stub- 
born, while the ass is apt to be too ready and 
needs to be held in by bit and bridle to keep 
it at a proper gait. The fool is likely to err on 


Chapter T-wenty-Six 363 


either side, and therefore must know the rod of 
correction for his wilfulness. The psalmist 
warns against failing to render due obedience 
and therefore requiring bit and bridle guidance 
(Ps.-32:: 9). 


4 Answer not a fool according to his folly, 
Lest thou also be like unto him. 

5 Answer a fool according to his folly, 
Lest he be wise in his own eyes. 


Though giving opposite directions, the two 
verses are too closely connected to allow even 
cavillers to raise the charge of contradiction. 
Time and manner need to be taken into con- 
sideration when one is in conversation with a 
fool. To answer him in the same scofing and 
egotistical spirit that he manifests, would be to 
sink to his level. If he rails, to rail in return 
would be but to follow his evil example. But 
on the other hand to allow foolish, unlearned 
statements to go unchallenged without rebut- 
tal, will but strengthen him in his self-assurance 
and conceit. To expose his shallowness, and 
reply convincingly to his folly may at least 
humble him and give him to feel the need of 
fuller investigation. When the men of Hezekiah 
answered not a word to the vapid blasphemies 
of Rab-shakeh they obeyed the first of these 
instructions (2 Kings 18: 36). When Nehemiah 


364 Notes on Proverbs 


replied so brusquely to the wretched pretensions 
of Sanballat he acted according to the second 
(Neh. 6: 8). 


6 He that sendeth a message by the hand of a fool, 
Cutteth off the feet, and drinketh damage. 

7 As the legs of the lame are not equal, 
So is a proverb in the mouth of fools. 

8 As the binding of a stone in a sling, 
So is he who giveth honor to a fool. 

9 Asa thorn-branch in the hand of a drunkard, 


So is a proverb in the mouth of fools. 


The same general subject is alluded to in each 
of these couplets. To entrust a fool with an 
important message is like cutting off the feet, 
or drinking a baneful draught. The purpose 
will be thwarted, for the messenger cannot be 
depended on. His feet might as well be ampu- 
tated, so far as his carrying the word correctly 
is concerned. Or it may be that we are to think 
of the sender rather than the one sent. In that 
case it would be as sensible to cut off his own 
feet or to drink what is injurious as to entrust 
a message to a fool. Looked at from either 
standpoint, it conveys the thought of vexation 
and delay. Jonah played the part of such an 
envoy before he was brought to see his sin 
(Jonah 1). 

The lame because of their unequal legs walk 
with a halting uncertain gait. When he who 


Chapter Twenty-Six 365 


is not himself a child of wisdom attempts to 
use her speech, he too halts and by his uncertain 
words and ways makes known his folly. Such 
was Saul among the prophets (1Sam.19: 24). 

The first part of verse 8 is somewhat ambi- 
guous, and has been variously rendered. The 
margin of our English Bibles suggests, ‘‘As he 
that putteth a precious stone into a heap of 
stones,’’ which implies that to honor a fool is 
like casting a costly jewel among the common 
stones by the wayside—it is unvalued. Others 
read “‘ putting into a purse a stone of the heap.”’ 
That is,as it would be foolish to put carefully 
into one’s purse a useless bit of stone, it is 
equally foolish to bestow honor upon one who 
does not deserve it. 

Both the above would be true enough; but 
many scholars do not think that either of them 
is intended or implied here. The common ver- 
sion would seem to mean that it is as senseless 
to honor a fool as to bind a stone in a sling 
and then try to throw it. This seems well-sup- 
ported, and appears to be the proper interpre- 
tation. See Herod (Acts 12: 20-23). 

A thorn-branch when in the hand of a drunk- 
ard is almost certain to prove harmful to him- 
self and others. The same is true when a fool 
sets up to teach. He will but destroy himself 
and those who give heed to him. Consider 


366 Notes on Proverbs 


what God has said as to Shemaiah the Nehela- 
mite (Jer. 29: 30-32). 
10 The great God that formed all things 

Both rewardeth the fool, and rewardeth transgressors. 

Scholars are very far from agreement among 
themselves as to the exact meaning of the 
Hebrew in this text. For want of better au- 
thority we keep to the authorized version, 
which at least expresses a solemn truth that is 
often insisted on in the word of God. Judg- 
ment, though it seem to tarry,is sure for all 
fools and transgressors. Nothing can turn this 
aside. God shall render to every man accord- 
ing to his deeds. Stuart and Muenscher read 
“As an arrow that woundeth every one, so is 
he that hireth a fool, and he who hireth way- 
farers.’”’ That is, to hire wicked or unknown 
persons is to invite disaster. 

The rendering of the R. V. is practically the 
same as this: ‘“‘As an archer that woundeth all, 
so is he that hireth a fool and he that hireth 
them that pass by.’’ There seems to be little 
clearness in the A. V. margin: “A great man 
grieveth all, and he hireth the fool, he hireth 
also transgressors.” 

J. N. Darby reads, ‘‘A master roughly worketh 
every one: he both hireth the fool and hireth 
passers by.” He owns ina note that it is a 
‘difficult verse.’’ His rendering is ambiguous, 


Chapter T wenty-Six 367 


but seems to convey the thought that, to a 
master, it is asmall matter whom he hires, so 
long as he gets the work accomplished. 


11 As a dog returneth to his vomit, 
So a fool repeateth his folly. 


The horrible habit of the dog that eats again 
the filthy food it has ejected from its stomach, 
is a suited picture of him who leaves his folly 
for a time, only to return to it with eager zest 
later. 

The apostle Peter applies the proverb to those 
who, having professed to know the saving grace 
of Christianity, go on for a time in an upright 
way, but when exposed to their old temptations, 
not only fall into their former sins, but turn 
back to them with avidity and delight, thereby 
manifesting that the heart had not really been 
renewed. Such persons are often supposed to 
have been children of God, but now are consid- 
ered to have lost the salvation they once enjoyed, 
and to have become again children of wrath. 
Such teaching as this is unknown in Scripture. 
All who come to Christ receive eternal life and 
shall never perish. They are forever linked up 
with Himself. The precious life such have 
received is ‘eternal life’’—non-forfeitable.* 


* See ‘Concurrent Blessings’’ in ‘*The Only Two Religions”’ 
by the same author, and to be had of the same publishers. 


368 Notes on Proverbs 


Peter refers to persons who only had out- 
wardly reformed their lives, but who were never | 
truly converted to God, as a careful study of 
his words will make evident. He says, ‘For if 
after they have escaped the pollutions of the 
world, through the knowledge ( or, acknow- 
ledgement ) of the Lord and Saviour Jesus 
Christ, they are again entangled therein and 
overcome, the latter end is worse with them 
than the beginning. For it had been better for 
them not to have known the way of righteous- 
ness, than, after they have known it, to turn 
from the holy commandment delivered unto 
them. But it is happened unto them according 
to the true proverb, The dog is turned to his 
own vomit again; and the sow that was 
washed to her wallowing in the mire” (2 Pet. 
2: 20-22). Now if the previous part of the 
chapter be looked at, it will at once be seen 
that he has been writing of false teachers 
and false profession throughout: persons who 
would take up Christianity as a system, even 
with a view to pervert it, but who had never 
known its power. Such people might go on for 
a time as though really born of God, but their 
true state would at last be manifested. Giving 
up their unsatisfactory profession and relapsing 
into their old ways, they would become apt 
ilJustrations of the truth of this proverb. 


Chapter Twenty-Six 369 


Be it noted that a dog in Scripture never illus- 
trates a believer, but is often used to picture a 
false teacher. See Paul’s warning in Phil. 3: 2 
and notice Isaiah’s description in chap. 56: 10— 
12 of his prophecy. It is these dogs who turn 
to their vomit again, even as a sow that has 
been washed goes back, when opportunity pre- 
sents itself, to her wallowing in the mire. Had 
the sow been changed into a sheep (the type of 
a Christian) it would no longer delight in mud 
and filth. A sheep may fall into the mire, but 
if so, it will never be at rest again till it is free 
from it. A sow finds in it its natural element. 
This marks the difference between a real saint 
of God and a mere reformed hypocrite. Peter 
and Judas aptly picture the two classes. The 
look of Jesus broke Peter’s heart and resulted 
in his restoration. Judas was controlled by 
his covetous spirit to the last, until remorse 
set in, but no repentance toward God. See the 
notes on chap. 14: 14. 


12 Seest thou a man wise in his own eyes? 
There is more hope of a fool than of him. 


See verse 5 above. Arrogant self-assumption 
and fancied superiority to all instruction place 
a man hopelessly beyond the reach of help. The 
out-and-out fool, who does not pretend to any- 
thing better than his folly and iniquity, is easier 

24 


370 Notes on Proverbs 


delivered than the pedantic egotist who makes 
a great profession of knowledge and piety but 
is thoroughly in love with his own ways. 
Against this wretched state we are warned in 
Rom. 12: 16. 

Having considered the fool in various aspects, 
the sluggard is next held up to view; the four 
following verses having to do with him. 

13 The sluggard saith, There is a lion in the way; 
A lion is in the streets. 
14 As the door turneth upon its hinges, 
So doth the sluggard upon his bed. 
15 The sluggard hideth his hand in the dish; 
It is wearisome to him to bring it to his mouth. 
16 The sluggard is wiser in his own eyes 
Than seven men that can render a reason. 

See notes on chaps. 13: 4; 15:19; 19:15; 
20:4; 21:25, 26; 24: 30-34. The sluggard 
is the man we are all familiar with; one who 
means well, but accomplishes nothing, because 
of continued procrastination. If there are no 
real difficulties, he will imagine them, and they 
then become as real to him as if actually exist- 
ent. He cannot go out upon the streets because 
there is a lion in the way, though others see no 
danger. The man of determination would go 
forth in the strength of the Lord, and rend the 
lion as Samson did; but not so with the sloth- 
fulman. Any paltry excuse will keep him within 
doors. Compare chap. 22:13. 


Chapter T wenty-Six 373 


In olden times doors were not hung upon 
hinges, but turned upon pivots, thus moving 
frequently, but never going anywhere. They 
turned on the pivot, but did not move from it. 
So with the sluggard; he is constantly expect- 
ing to be up and doing, but remains upon his 
bed, tossing from side to side. 

Even when seated at the table, he is almost 
too lazy to carry his food from the dish to his 
mouth. It is the extreme of slothfulness, but in 
warm climates is not an untrue description. 
See chap. 19: 24. 

Despite his lack of purpose and determination, 
he is wiser in his own eyes than any number of 
men who are characterized by tact and energy. 
He can invent excuses and plausible arguments 
in unlimited quantities to justify his disgraceful 
behavior; and neither the disgust nor the anger 
of better men than himself will affect him. 

This lack of purpose is sometimes found 
among young saints, and can only result in the 
breakdown of their testimony. Rather be over- 
zealous than play the part of the sluggard. See 
Joash king of Israel, and Elisha the prophet 
(2 Kings 13: 14-19). 


17 He that passeth by, and meddleth with strife belong- 
ing not to him, 
Is like one that taketh a dog by the ears. 


372 Notes on Proverbs 


To meddle with other people’s quarrels is al- 
ways foolish, and often dangerous. Dogs in 
Syria are wild and savage. To take one by the 
ears would be to needlessly expose oneself to in- 
jury and suffering. Itis the part of wisdom to 
let them severely alone, a custom that is com- 
monly followed. In the cities they swarm in 
great packs, and are useful as scavengers; but 
no one pretends to control or interfere with 
them. 

So when others are in strife, it is well for the 
passer-by to avoid interference, and to let people 
settle their own differences between themselves, 
unless he be appealed to by those who are dis- 
puting, when he may be able to act the part of 
a peacemaker. Moses found his brethren bit- 
terly to resent his unasked-for mediation when 
they strove together (Ex. 2: 13, 14). 


18 As one who feigneth himself mad,— 
Who casteth about darts, arrows and death; 
19 So is the man that deceiveth his neighbor, 
And saith, Am not I in sport? 


To wantonly perpetrate unkind tricks upon 
one, and then, after having caused serious incon- 
venience, and perhaps heavy loss, to attempt to 
laugh it off as mere amusement is to act like a 
man pretending to madness and finding his 
sport in working injury upon others. Deceit in 


Chapter T-wenty-Six 373 


the name of pleasure is as much to be decried 
as in anything else. Sobriety and a concern for 
the welfare of one’s neighbors will cause such 
things to be sedulously avoided. Amusement 
at the expense of another’s suffering, none but a 
most thoughtless and selfish person will engage 
in. See chap. 10: 23, and 2 Peter 2: 13. 


20 Where no wood is, there the fire goeth out; 
So where there is no talebearer, contention ceaseth. 
21 As coals are to burning coals, and wood to fire, 
So is a contentious man to kindle strife. 
22 The words of a talebearer are as dainty morsels, 
And go down into the inner chambers of the soul. 


See notes on chaps. 11:13; 16: 27, 28. Al- 
ready we have had our attention frequently 
directed to the evil of talebearing. But because 
we are so slow to learn, we have added instruc- 
tion in regard to what has become in many 
places a blighting curse among the people of 
God. Happy is the assembly of saints that does 
not number a backbiter or talebearer among its 
members! As fire goes out for want of fuel, 
when there is no wood to add to it, so, many 
difficulties disappear when there is no whisperer 
to go about perpetuating strife. But, as when 
coals are added to burning coals, so is a conten- 
tious man to cause ill-feelings to be inflamed, and 
malice and hatred to burn more strongly than 


374 Notes on Proverbs 


ever. It is a wretched business, going about 
from one to another, stirring up unholy pas- 
sions, and making unhappy matters all the 
more difficult to adjust. For the words of a 
talebearer are by many devoured as though 
they were choice titbits, which go down into 
the depths of the being, and are often ineradica- 
ble. See chaps. 12: 15, and 18: 8. 


23 Burning lips and a wicked heart 
Are like a potsherd covered with silver dross. 
24 He that hateth, dissembleth with his lips, 
And layeth up deceit within him; 
25 When he maketh his voice gracious, believe him not; 
For there are seven abominations within his heart. 
26 His hatred is covered by deceit, 
But his wickedness shall be disclosed before the 
congregation. 
27 Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein: 
And he that rolleth a stone, it will return upon him. 
28 A lying tongue hateth those who have been crushed 
by it; 
And a flattering mouth worketh ruin. 


One who makes fervent protestations of love 
and affection, while all the time his heart is bent 
on evil, is like a cheap earthen vessel that has 
been veneered with a coating of drossy silver. 
Such an article appears to be of value, but is 
really worthless. So with the hypocritical pro- 
fessions of the flatterer. His burning words are 


Chapter Twenty-Six 375 


only uttered to cover the corruption of his pur- 
poses. Hating the object of his attentions, he 
will endeavor to deceive by fair speech; but his 
heart is full of abominations, and he is not to 
be trusted. He endeavors to cover his malice 
by falsehood, and for a time may succeed; but 
eventually his true character shall be manifested 
openly. 

Having digged a pit for his neighbor, he shall 
fall into it himself, as did the fawning sycophant 
Haman, who by flattery and apparent zeal for 
the honor of Ahasuerus won from him permis- 
sion to destroy all the Jews, but was discovered 
in his perfidy, and hanged on the gallows he had 
made for Mordecai. He was as one who had 
rolled a stone up a hillside, which, breaking 
loose, returned with crushing force upon him. 
The courtiers who by similar means induced 
Darius to promulgate the decrees which they 
thought would result in Daniel’s destruction, 
were brought, in the end, to the fate which they 
hoped would have been his. 

The last verse expresses a truth which has 
long been recognized among all nations, and is 
preserved in proverbial form among many peo- 
ples. “It is common for men to hate those 
whom they have injured”’ is the English render- 
ing of the saying of Tacitus. Conscious of hav- 
ing wronged another, and being determined not 


376 Notes on Proverbs 


to confess it, the dissembler will store his heart 
with hatred against the object of his wrong- 
doing. 

He who has debtors may graciously forgive 
them; but he who is in debt is very apt to cher- 
ish the bitterest animosity against the one from 
whom he has borrowed. One may readily over- 
look an injury, while he who has done another 
a favor will often be hated for his kindness, and 
ill-will be added to displeasure. This is so com- 
mon among fallen men that it hardly needs 
comment. 

To hide his wretched feelings, such a one will 
flatter with his lips while all the time he is plot- 
ting the ruin of his victim. Itis the sin which 
in Judas Iscariot became, as it were, incarnate] 
May every Christian learn to avoid it as most 
revolting and disgusting, and altogether op- 
posed to the transparency of the spirit of 
Christ. 


377 


CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN 


PROCRASTINATION is a snare which often 
results in ruin. Against this error the first 
verse solemnly warns every reader. 


1 Boast not thyself of to-morrow ; 
For thou knowest not what a day may bring forth. 


The present is given man in order that he may 
act in view of the future. To defer until the 
morrow what should be attended to to-day is 
the sad mistake which has destroyed untold 
thousands. The old Spanish proverb says, 
“The road of by and by leads to the house of 
never ;’”’ while another trite saying reads, ‘‘ The 
way to hell is paved with good intentions.” 
The English are fond of quoting, ‘‘ Procrastina- 
tion is the thief of time;” and it is likely that 
every nation has some maxim intended to re- 
mind one of the warning of our verse. Yet, alas, 
how prone we all are to leave for to-morrow 
matters which should be settled at once] 

In nothing is this more manifest than in re- 
gard to the great question of the salvation of 
the soul. Again and again Scripture presses 
upon men the importance of an immediate set- 


378 Notes on Proverbs 


tlement of this matter of tremendous moment. 
‘To-day if ye will hear His voice, harden not 
your hearts.’ ‘Behold, now is the accepted 
time; behold, now is the day of salvation.” 
““Come now, and let us reason together, saith 
the Lord’”’.(Heb. 3: 7,8; 2 Cor..6: 2; Isa: 2: 
18). These are but a few of many such calls to 
instant decision. Yet what is more common 
than to find people putting off a final settlement 
till, like Festus, they have a “‘more convenient 
season,” which in many instances is never found | 
The uncertainty of health, reason, and of life 
itself, all alike loudly cry, “‘ Boast not thyself of 
to-morrow.” 

Pharaoh said ‘‘To-morrow,’’ when he should 
have said ‘‘To-day,’”’ and the morrow found 
his heart as hard as the nether millstone, be- 
yond the reach of repentance or concern (Ex. 
8:10); 

If the reader is unsaved, let me remind him of 
five important reasons why he should not delay 
in coming to Christ. 

First—Every day spent in sin is a day lost. 
The only true life is that which is lived for God. 
Those who are saved always regret not having 
turned to the Lord earlier, because they find 
such true joy and peace in the path of the just, 
which shines ever brighter and brighter unto the 
perfect day. 


Chapter T'wenty-Seven 379 


Second—Every day spent in procrastination is 
adding to the terrible number of things you can 
never undo. It is often forgotten by the young 
that even though saved and forgiven at last, 
there are consequences of their sins which will 
never be blotted out. We have an influence on 
others, for good or ill, that a future change of 
ways can never utterly destroy. Then, sin 
leaves its effect upon our minds and bodies—an 
effect that lasts through alltime. It was this a 
father meant to impress upon his son when he 
bade him drive a handful of nails part way into 
a clean, smooth post. With great delight the 
lad did as he was bidden. ‘‘ Now, my boy,”’ said 
the father, ‘“‘draw them out.’’ This was soon 
successfully accomplished. ‘‘Now take out the 
holes,”’ was the next command. ‘ Why, father,” 
exclaimed the child, “‘thatis impossible!’ So we 
may think of the forgiveness of our sins as a 
drawing out of the nails; but, let us never forget, 
the marks remain. Therefore the wisdom of 
ceasing at once to do what can never be un- 
done. 

Third—It is possible that at any moment con- 
viction of sin may pass away from the troubled 
soul, and that God may cease to speak to you 
any longer by His Holy Spirit. Many a man, or 
woman, has, by long resisting the Holy Ghost, 
reached a point where, like Pharaoh, the heart 


380 Notes on Proverbs 


refused to respond to further entreaties or 
warnings. Such people are often said to be 
‘‘gospel-hardened”’; and the designation is all 
too correct. 

Fourth—Ere to-morrow, Death may claim you 
for his prey. Even as you read these lines, he 
may be feeling for your heart-strings. David 
said, “‘There is but a step between me and 
death”’; and so itis with any of us. Before to- 
morrow, sinner, your lips may be silent, your 
heart be still, your form be cold, and your soul 
in hell! 

Last of all, you should not forget that the 
Lord Jesus Christ is coming again. He may re- 
turn from heaven to call all His redeemed away 
(according to 1 Thess. 4: 138-18) ere you lay 
down this book. No event has to transpire, no 
prophecy to be fulfilled, before that great and 
solemn moment arrives. ‘In such an hour as 
ye think not,” the day of grace may be brought 
to a close, and the days of vengeance begin for 
all who have rejected, or merely neglected, so 
great a salvation. 

Knowing not what a single day may bring 
forth, it is surely the part of wisdom to turn at 
once to God, owning your sins and trusting His 
grace] 


2 Letanother man praise thee, and not thine own mouth; 
A stranger, and not thine own lips. 


Chapter T’'wenty-Seven 381 


Self-praise always bespeaks ill-breeding and a 
lack of realization of the fitness of things. If 
others extol, go on, humbly looking to God to 
keep you in a spirit of meekness and lowliness; 
for you know far more about your own failings 
than any other can. Boasting in your attain- 
ments or abilities is obnoxious, and opens the 
door to criticism of a severe character. See 
the men of Ephraim and Manasseh (Josh. 17: 
14, 15). 


3 A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty ; 
But a fool’s wrath is heavier than them both. 


It is because of its unreasonableness that a 
fool’s wrath is so heavy. He will listen to no 
explanations, and will view with malice and 
suspicion all attempts to appease him. Better 
far to leave such a man to himself than to strive 
with him, for he is incapable of sound judgment. 
Treat him as Hezekiah commanded his nobles 
to act towards Rab-shakeh (Isa. 36: 21). 


4 Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous; 
But who is able to stand before jealousy ? 


After all, wrath, of which the previous verse 
has spoken, is a brief tempest of the mind, and 
anger a passing emotion. Both are to be 
dreaded while they last; but jealousy far more, 


382 Notes on Proverbs 


for it abides when all outward evidence of it has 
disappeared. ‘Jealousy is as cruel as sheol.” 
See the brothers of Joseph (Gen. 37). 


5 Open rebuke is better than secret love. 
6 Faithful are the wounds of a friend; 


But the kisses of an enemy are deceitful. 


True love will lead me to be faithful with my 
brother if his steps are declining from the path 
of rectitude. While avoiding a captious, fault- 
finding spirit, I will seek to recover his soul if 
he has gone astray. In so doing, I may have 
to wound, but such pains are faithful, and re. 
proof in grace is better far than love kept con- 
cealed, which forbids my drawing his attention 
to his faults. An enemy may lavish kisses and 
tokens of affection at such a time, overlooking 
the evil and bolstering the wrong-doer up in his 
unrighteous cause, but they are deceitful mani- 
festations, like the kiss of Judas. How faithful 
was Paul to Peter and Barnabas, and to the be- 
loved Galatians, dear as all assuredly were to 
him! (Gal. 1 and 2). 


7 The full soul tramples on a honeycomb; 
But to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet. 


The verse has been paraphrased as follows: 
“The pampered glutton loathes even luxurious 
food ; but he who is really hungry, will eat even 


Chapter T-wenty-Seven 383 


indifferent food with a high relish.”’ It is need 
that gives appetite and enjoyment for what 
would otherwise be despised. To many, the 
word of God is one of these bitter things ; but 
when the soul is hungry it becomes sweet as 
honey. See the little books eaten by Ezekiel 
and John (Ezek. 3: 1-4; Rev. 10:9, 10). 


8 As a bird that wandereth from her nest, 


So is a man that wandereth from his place. 


The Lord has given “‘to every man his work,” 
and we may also say, to every man his place. 
“But now, hath God set the members everyone 
of them in the body, as it hath pleased Him” 
_ (1 Cor, 12:18). He who, in dependence on the 
Lord fills his appointed niche and maintains 
his proper place, shall find rich blessing; but as 
a bird that wanders from its nest exposes itself 
to danger and suffering, so is it with him who 
turns away from his sphere. 

Looking at it in another way, we may apply 
the principle to assembly life. There is a place 
where God would have all Hischildren gathered, 
—to the peerless Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. 
He who, having known the joy and blessedness 
of this, wanders from it because of fancied 
slights, or any cause whatever, is like a home- 
less bird that has forsaken its nest. See Demas 
(2 Tim. 4:10). 


384 Notes on Proverbs 


9 Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart; 
So doth the sweetness of a man’s friend by hearty 


counsel. 
10 Thine own friend, and thy father’s friend, forsake not; 
And go not into thy brother's house in the day of thy 
calamity : 
For better is a friend that is near, than a brother far 
off. 

Loving, solicitous counsel on the part of a 
true friend is as refreshing and stimulating to 
the soul as oil and perfume are to the body. In 
a warm,dry atmosphere and an enervating cli- 
mate like that of Palestine, it was, and is, very 
soothing and invigorating to be anointed with 
oil; while sweet and stimulating perfumes are 
employed to rouse the dormant sensibilities and 
are found to be exceedingly grateful and refresh- 
ing. Happy is the man who hasa friend ofthis 
character. It was such a one that David found 
in Jonathan. 

When grief and calamity fall suddenly, it is far 
better to have a tried friend like this to turn to, 
than to be dependent on relations, however 
near, who may after all lack the heart and affec- 
tion that marks the other. Time and distance 
are powerful forces for the weakening of family 
ties, as many have learned to their sorrow. 
Well it is for each to know that Friend who 
sticketh closer than a brother! See notes on 
chaps. 17:17 and 18: 24. 


Chapter Twenty-Seven 385 


11 My son, be wise and make my heart glad, 
That I may give an answer to him that reproacheth 
me. 

The obedience and careful behavior of a wise 
son will reflect glory upon his solicitous parent. 
When there is wilfulness and disobedience the 
father will be reproached with not having 
properly trained his offspring. For us, who are 
“sons of God, through faith in Christ Jesus,” 
the admonition is important. By walking 
worthy of Him who hath called us, we shall 
glorify before men our Saviour-God and Father. 
How often do wicked men reproach Him for the 
follies of His children! David’s sin gave occa- 
sion for the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, 
and therefore it was that the child of Bathsheba 
had to die (2 Sam. 12:14). 


IZA ae man foreseeth the evil, and hideth him- 
self ; 
But the simple pass on and are punished. 

It is a repetition of chap. 22:3. See previous 
notes. How great must be the concern of the God 
you are neglecting, unsaved one, that again He 
should remind you of the importance of looking 
well to the future and hiding yourself in Christ 
ere the evil fall, and there be no remedy! If after 
this second warning you pass carelessly on to 
your well-deserved doom, ‘‘ What wilt thou say 
when He shall punish thee?”’ (Jer. 13: 21). 

2 


386 Notes on Proverbs 


13 Take his garment that is surety for a stranger, 
And take a pledge of him for a strange woman. 


This too is a repetition of a proverb given in 
the first great division of our book. See chap. 
20:16. Weare not to suppose that it is mere 
chance that caused the friends of Hezekiah to 
duplicate several of Solomon’s wise sayings in 
this way. It is rather that God would by this 
means bring home to our attention, in a special 
manner, the importance of the instruction they 
contain. He who neglects such full testimony 
is verily guilty, and deserves no sympathy when 
he has to reap as he sowed. 


14 He that blesseth his friend with a loud voice, rising 


early in the morning, 
It shall be counted a curse to him. 


There is a vein of easily perceived irony in 
these words. He who makes it a point to de- 
clare his protestations of affection and interest 
beneath one’s window, with loud, garrulous 
tones, early in the morning, when the object of 
his attentions would fain rest, makes himself 
utterly obnoxious, and his blessing becomes 
rather a curse. Blatant uncalled-for words of 
praise are always to be dreaded. They generally 
manifest insincerity of heart and a lack of fine 
sensibilities, that are most repugnant to a per- 
son of the onposite temperament. The Italians 


Chapter T-wenty-Seven, 387 


say, ‘‘He who praises you more than he is wont 
to do, either has deceived you, or is about to do 
it.””. See Absalom and tie men of Israel (2 Sam. 
15: 1-6). 
15 A continual dropping in a very rainy day, 

And a contentious woman are alike; 


16 Whosoever hideth her hideth the wind, 
And the ointment of his right hand which bewrayeth 
itself, 

See notes on chap. 21:9, 19. No better com- 
ment could be written on the first of these verses 
than Dr. Thompson’s description of a Palestine 
rain-storm. He says: ‘Such rains as we have 
had thoroughly soak through the flat earthen 
roofs of these mountain houses, and the water 
descends in numberless leaks all over the room. 
This continual dropping—tuk, tuk—all day and 
all night, is the most annoying thing in the 
world, unless it be the ceaseless chatter of a 
contentious woman.’’ He who endeavors to 
hide from others the annoying fact that sucha 
disagreeable person shares his home, is like one 
who tries to hide the wind, or who seeks to keep 
people from detecting the fragrance when his 
right hand is anointed with perfumed oil. Ahas- 
uerus considered Vashti as having offended in 
this way when she shamed him before all his 
nobles by defying his command (Esther 1 : 
10-20). 


388 Notes on Proverbs 


17 As iron sharpeneth iron, 
So a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend. 


As by friction, one iron instrument is sharp- 
ened and polished by contact with another, so 
we may be a help to each other by interesting 
and profitable intercourse and exchange of 
thought. A recluse is always a very one-sided 
man. He who would be a blessing to his fel- 
lows must mingle with them that he may learn 
to understand their needs and their sorrows, as 
well as that he may find gain by what in them 
is superior to his own knowledge or virtues. 
Among Christians, fellowship one with another 
is precious indeed, and becomes increasingly 
sweet as the days grow darker. How profitable 
to a Timothy the association with a Paul! (2 
dio.-3 £10, 27). 


18 Whoso keepeth the fig-tree shall eat the fruit thereof ; 
So he that regardeth his master shall be honored. 


Fidelity, in whatever service one may be en- 
trusted with, assures its reward in due time, even 
as the caretaker of the figtree would be duly en- 
titled to partake of its fruit. Let the Christian 
remember that his Master is in heaven, and 
that he who regards Him and keeps His word in 
this the day of His rejection, shall be honored 
when the day of Christ has come. Meantime 


Chapter Twenty-Seven 389 


let him labor on, strong in faith, giving glory to 
God, and the reaping-time is sure, as with the 
husbandman of 2 Tim. 2:6. 


19 As in water face answereth to face, 
So the heart of man to man. 


Of all mirrors, clear water is perhaps the 
most primitive. As the reflected image answers 
to the face of him who is looking into it, so does 
one man’s heart answer to another’s. ‘‘ There 
is no difference.’”?’ However much men may seem 
to differ through hereditary characteristics, edu- 
cation, or the lack of it, environment, or experi- 
ence; the fact remains, that all have the same 
evil corrupt heart, which is deceitful above all 
things and desperately wicked. No one has 
ground for boasting over another. All are sin- 
ners needing a Saviour. 

Therefore, if I would show aman his sinfulness, 
I need but to describe in a measure the evil of 
my own heart, and he is likely to think I have 
been privately informed as to his faults and am 
exposing him publicly! How often have men 
thus reasoned when some faithful preacher was 
declaring the terrible nature of the centre of 
man’s moral being, while yet altogether ignor- 
ant of the actual state and behavior of his 
auditors]! 

Blessed it is that,if all are alike sinners, for 


390 Notes on Proverbs 


all a Saviour has been provided. See the ‘‘No 
difference’? gospel as expounded by the Holy 
Spirit in Rom. 10: 5-18. 


20 Sheol and destruction are insatiable, 
So the eyes of man are never satisfied. 


This verse but helps to seal the truth of the 
previous one. In this all men are the same. 
The natural heart will not permit the eyes to 
be satisfied. There is in man a capacity likened 
to sheoland destruction. Let him get all he may, 
he still yearns for more. Thisis the great lesson 
of the book of Ecclesiastes. There, we find a 
man with a heart so large that all the world 
could not fill it. In the Canticles, on the other 
hand, we have an Object so great that the heart 
cannot hold it, but the cry goes up, ‘I am sick 
of love.” It is Christ alone who can thus meet 
every craving of the soul, and more than satisfy 
all who find in Him the object of their deepest 
affections. See chap. 30:15, 16. 


21 As the fining-pot for silver, and the furnace for gold, 
So is a man tried by his praise. 


There is no hotter crucible to test a man than 
when he is put through a fire of praise and adu- 
lation. To go on through evil report, cleaving 
to the Lord, and counting on Him to clear one’s 
name is comparatively easy, though many 


Chapter Twenty-Seven 395 


faint in such circumstances; but to humbly 
pursue the even tenor of his way, undisturbed 
and unlifted up by applause and flattery, marks 
a man as being truly with God. 

Hundreds have prospered in soul when in 
adversity, who have failed grievously through 
prosperity. Gideon becomes a warning to all 
who are in danger of being carried away by un- 
due appreciation (Judges 8 : 22-27). 


22 Though thou pound a fool in a mortar among wheat 
with a pestle, 
Yet will not his foolishness depart from him. 


Folly is bound up in the heart of the fool, and 
after long years of wilfulness has become part 
of his very being. To beat him as one beats 
grain in a mortar will not deliver him from his 
wickedness. In childhood the correction prop- 
erly administered might have had good effect 
(chap. 22:15), but having permitted his char- 
acter to develop itself, it is now too late to 
seek to eradicate the foolishness by corporal 
punishment. Nor will moral suasion effect the 
desired result, for the fool is deaf to all entreaties 
and cares for nothing but doing his own pleas- 
ure. Itis a dreadful state to bein. God alone 
can awaken such a one to a sense of his guilt 
and his danger, and turn him from his folly. 
See Jer. 13: 23. 


392 Notes on Proverbs 


23 Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks, 
And look well to thy herds: 
24 For riches are not forever; 
Not even the crown from generation to generation. 
25 The hay appeareth, and the tender herbage showeth 
itself ; 
And the herbs of the mountains are gathered in. 
26 The lambs are for thy clothing, 
And the goats are the price of the field: 
27 Thou shalt have goat’s milk enough for thy food, 
For the food of thy household, 


And for the maintenance of thy maidens. 


Faithful shepherd-service results in suited pro- 
vision for oneself and those dependent upon 
him. Wealth is fleeting and riches soon pass 
away. See note on chap. 23:4,5. Therefore 
the importance of earnest persistent endeavor 
and careful adherence to duty. Even acrown 
endureth not forever. Dynasties rise and fall in 
this world of changes. But he who plods on, 
husbanding his resources and wisely attending 
to the care of his flocks will have both food and 
clothing thereby; and what more does the 
wealthiest enjoy? 

We may see in these verses also a picture of 
pastoral care among the sheep and lambs of 
Christ’s flock. His word to Peter was “Feed 
my lambs,” and ‘‘Shepherd my sheep.’? Where- 
ever He has implanted the pastor’s heart this 
will be the result. Such a one will look well 


Chapter Twenty-Seven 393 


to the state of the flock; not, however, with a 
view to pecuniary profit, nor as lording it over 
his own possessions, but out of pure love for 
the members of Christ. Nor will he be without 
reward. Itis sure to come in the end, though 
he labor not for it. ‘‘When the chief Shepherd 
shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory 
that fadeth not away.” See Peter’s word to 
the elders in his first epistle, chap.5:1-4. In 
Jacob’s defence to Laban we are reminded of 
what this shepherd-service may mean if carried 
out conscientiously (Gen, 31:40), 


394 


CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT 


ONE are so cowardly as those who are 
carrying about a guilty conscience. Such 

are terrified by their own thoughts and take 
fright at a shadow. Of them the first verse 
treats, and contrasts them with the righteous. 


The lawless flee when no man pursueth; 
But the righteous are bold as a lion. 


Sin keeps men in continual dread; but the 
consciousness that one is seeking to please God, 
and walk in righteousness before Him and be- 
fore men, inspires with holy confidence and al- 
most superhuman courage. No lion was kolder 
in facing his foes than have been naturally weak 
and timid men and women when martyred for 
Christ’s sake. Contrast the army of the Syri- 
ans with Elisha the prophet (2 Kings 7:6, 7; 
and 6: 8-17). 


2 For the transgression of a land many are its princes; 
But by a man of understanding and knowledge its 
stability shall be prolonged. 


Transgression here seems to bear the sense of 
rebellion against lawful authority. When a 


Chapter Twenty-Eight 395 


people refuse to own the powers that be as or- 
dained of God, they are likely, in a disrupted 
state of society, to be exposed to the evil machin- 
ations of various leaders, each one jealous of 
the other; hence their princes or rulers are 
many, and continually changing. 

In contrast to so unsettled a state, that land 
is happy indeed which is ruled over by a wise 
and understanding governor, who long occupies 
his seat of authority. 

Among the Arabs, a dreadful malediction is 
implied in the words, ‘“‘May God multiply your 
sheiks.” No people or country can prosper 
when exposed to frequent alterations in the exe- 
cutive power. The state of Judah, after the 
carrying away of Zedekiah, is an apt illustra- 
tion of this, as also much of the history of the 
Judges. 


3 A poor man who oppresseth the poor, 
Is like a sweeping rain that leaveth no food. 


Obscure men, when suddenly elevated to posi- 
tions of trust and confidence, are likely to be 
far harder on those of their own former class 
than one born in a different station of life. Such, 
often, seem utterly bereft of pity and compas- 
sion, and may well be likened to a sweeping 
rain, which instead of helping the crop to ma- 
ture, washes away all the seed and leaves no 


396 Wotes on Proverbs 


food. It was this that made the publicans of 
our Lord’s day to be so detested by the popu- 
lace. Members of the chosen race themselves, 
hated and despised therefore by the Roman 
power; they yet took service under that very 
authority and used their positions as a means 
of oppressing their poor countrymen. See the 
protestation of Zaccheus, who declares he had 
not acted according to the ordinary custom 
(Luke 19:8). 


4 They that forsake the law praise the lawless; 
But such as keep the law contend with them. 
5 Evil men understand not judgment; 
But those who seek Jehovah understand everything. 


It is natural that men who have themselves 
forsaken the law should praise those who follow 
in the same crooked path. When a man is al- 
ways ready to excuse unrighteousness in others 
it generally bespeaks an uneasy conscience as to 
his own ways. They who walk uprightly are 
able to convict those who do not. There isa 
corresponding moral state which enables them 
to weigh matters aright. 

Evil men are blind to true justice, because of 
the iniquity of their own lives. Those who put 
the Lord always before them, and who are exer- 
cised concerning His glory, are enabled to under- 
stand everything; that is not in an unlimited 


Chapter Twenty-Eight 397, 


sense, but everything pertaining to rectitude of 
life and just judgment. See the Spirit-anointed 
ones of 1 John 2: 20, 27. 


6 Better is the poor that walketh in his uprightness, 
Than he that is perverse in his ways, though he be 
rich. 


The honest poor may take comfort in the 
estimate that God puts upon them. In His 
sight they are far to be preferred to the perverse 
rich. Poverty is indeed a sore trial and often 
entails much sorrow, but it is not to be com- 
pared, to the unhappiness of the godless wealthy 
man, who sows the wind to reap the whirlwind. 
Contrast Dives and Lazarus (Luke 16: 19-31). 


7 He who keepeth the law is an intelligent son: 
But he that is a companion of riotous men shameth 


his father. 


Great is the joy a father finds when blessed 
with a careful, faithful son, who seeks to keep 
the commandments of God and the salutary or- 
dinances of men for the Lord’s sake. He thereby 
manifests true intelligence. The father of a wild, 
reckless lad who finds his companions among 
riotous men, is put to shame by his son’s evil 
behavior. How rich the grace that led the 
father in Luke 15, to go out to meet such a son 
“while he was yet a great way off.” Itisa 


398 Notes on Proverbs 


precious picture of the joy that fills the Father’s 
heart above, when one poor wanderer returns, 
who has long shamed the God who brought 
him into being, by his wretched, sinful life. 


8 He that by usury and unjust gain increaseth his sub- 
stance, 


He shall gather it for him that shall pity the poor. 


Extortion and covetousness are alike detest- 
able in the sight of God. The putting of money 
out to usury, charging the needy a high and 
ruinous rate of interest, may seem to be good 
business in the eyes of unprincipled men; but 
treasure so earned will not profit the owners. 
Taken away in the midst of their days they 
shall leave it for those who are concerned about 
the poor. See God’s word to the rich men of 
the last days (Jas. 5: 1-6). Note also Jeremiah 
iby ane Bile 


9 He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law, 
Even his prayer shall be an abomination. 


God has never promised to hear prayer if the 
heart is not upright before Him. The psalmist 
says, “If ] regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord 
will not hear me” (Ps. 66:18). This solemn 
fact, the verse we are now considering attests. 
It is in vain to look for answers to prayer, 
when refusing to obey what God has caused to 


Chapter Twenty-Eight 399 


be written for our instruction. He has revealed 
His holy will in His word. Everything necessary 
for the believer’s instruction in righteousness is 
there made known. Where He is truly feared, 
that Word will have its due weight, and the sub- 
ject soul will order his steps accordingly. When 
this is the case, prayer will be acceptable and 
will obtain a ready answer; but when the 
Word is refused or despised, what passes for 
prayer is but an abomination to the Lord. See 
Ezekiel’s message to the self-willed elders of 
Israel who came to inquire of Jehovah (Ezek. 
20 :1-3). 


10 Whoso causeth the righteous to go astray in an evil 


way, 
He shall fall into his own pit: 
But the upright shall have good things in possession. 


See note on chap. 26: 27. To deliberately turn 
the steps of the righteous from the path of 
rectitude, is to incur the divine displeasure in a 
most solemn and awful form. The Lord Jesus 
has said, ‘‘ Whosoever shall stumble one of 
these little ones that believe in Me, it were bet- 
ter for him that a millstone were hung about his 
neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of 
the sea” (Matt. 18:6). How dreadful must be 
the iniquity ofthe heart, when one could, with full 
intention, plot to turn any away from obeying 


400 Notes on Proverbs 


the voice of the Lord! Yet many have so of- 
fended and been made to know the indignation 
of a holy God, who gives good things to the up- 
right, but metes out judgment to him who 
would lead them astray. Balaam was guilty 
of this heinous offence, and his doom was swift 
and sure (Rev. 2:14; Num. 31:16). 


11 The rich man is wise in his own eyes, 
But the poor that hath understanding searcheth him 
out. 


Pride and conceit often accompany great 
wealth. (See first clause of chap.10:15). It 
gives a certain sense of security and independ- 
ence of God, and environment that is ruinous to 
the unhumbled soul. But understanding is of 
far more value than great possessions. He whn 
hasit, though in poverty, 1s after all the superior 
of his well-to-do neighbor. It is not the great, 
the rich, the mighty, or the noble, that God has 
chosen; but ‘‘the poor of this world, rich in 
faith.”” See 1 Cor. 1: 26-28. 


12 When righteous men triumph, there is great glory: 
But when the lawless rise, men hide themselves. 


See notes on chaps. 11:10; 29:2, and verse 
28 below. The triumph of the righteous inspires 
joy and confidence in the breasts of those who are 
concerned about the stability and welfare of a 


Chapter Twenty-Hight 403 


state. But when the evil-doers bear rule, there 
is a corresponding fear and anxiety, which leads 
even trustworthy men to conceal themselves, 
lest they become the objects of political hatred 
and enmity. 

Long have men waited and groaned in pain 
for the coming triumph of the righteous One, 
whose kingdom shall be ushered in with great 
glory, when all the earth shall come into bless- 
ing. Till then, the kingdoms of this world must 
be subject to vicissitudes and overturnings, be- 
cause of the rejection of the true King. Saul’s 
wretched reign is a figure of the present time; 
the reigns of David and Solomon, of the coming 
glorious reign of Christ. 


13 He that covereth his transgressions, shall not prosper: 
But whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall vbtain 
mercy. 


It is the greatest mistake a soul can be guilty 
of, to attempt to cover sin and transgression. 
Yet men invariably shrink from coming out 
frankly with a confession of their true state and 
actions. It seems to be natural to fallen man 
(ever since the day that our first parents, by 
fig-leaf aprons, sought to hide their naked- 
ness,) to endeavor to cover his shame, hoping 
thereby to avoid the just consequences of his 
sin. But God’s word clearly makes known the 

26 


402 Notes on Proverbs 


fact that he who justifies himself can only be 
condemned at last. It is the one who sides with 
God, and condemns himself, who is justified from 
all things. 

Confession is the divinely-appointed method 
of securing conscience-rest; confession not to 
some human mediator, but to God Himself. “If 
we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to 
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all 
unrighteousness”? (1 John 1:9). The ground 
upon which He can so act is the atonement of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. Because He, in rich 
grace, bore the sinner’s judgment upon Calvary, 
and shed His precious blood to put away sin, 
God can ‘“‘be just and the justifier of him who 
believeth in Jesus.” 

Of course, by confession is not meant a gen- 
eral acknowledgment of sinfulness and wicked- 
ness of life, uttered as a kind of soul-ease. True 
confession involves genuine repentance and self- 
judgment. Therefore we are here told, ‘“‘He 
that confesseth and forsaketh them shall have 
mercy.”’ The repentant man no longer hugs the 
chains that bind him, but longs for full deliver- 
ance from them. He comes to God with real 
concern about his unholy ways and thoughts 
and words, earnestly seeking grace to cease 
from them, and to walk uprightly before the 
Lord. But this he cannot do in himself. It is 


Chapter Twenty-Eight 403 


only when he rests in simple faith in the finished 
work of Christ, and yields himself unto God as 
one now alive from the dead, that he is able to 
rise above the sins that have blighted his life 
and almost damned his soul. 

David most preciously portrays the change 
that comes over a man when he ceases to hide, 
or cover, his iniquities, and comes out into the 
light of God’s presence, confessing them before 
Him. It is only such a one who knows the 
blessedness of transgressions forgiven and sins 
covered. See Psa. 32. 

When a man attempts to cover his own sin, 
he is but adding to the dreadful list, for he is re- 
fusing to heed the command which goes out to 
all men everywhere, calling upon them to re- 
pent. 

But when God covers sin, it is done effectually 
and perfectly, and shall never be interfered with 
for eternity. 


14 Happy is the man that feareth always, 
But he that hardeneth his heart shall fall into mis. 


chief. 


See note on chap. 23:17. This verse most 
appropriately follows the one we have just been 
considering. He who is forgiven, who rejoices 
in the knowledge of sins covered, is now respon- 
sible to act and walk ever in the fear of God. 


404 Notes on Proverbs 


He who grows careless and prayerless, who 
neglects the word of God, or hardens his heart 
against discipline, persisting in taking his own 
way, will fall into grievous trouble and sorrow; 
for ‘‘whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth.”’ 

He who feareth always will be delivered from 
vainglory and self-confidence. He will walk in 
accordance with God’s revealed will. Fearing 
no longer to be judged for his sins, he will fear 
lest he grieve the Holy Spirit of God within him, 
and lest he dishonor the name of Him whom he 
delights to own as Saviour and Lord. It was 
this salutary fear that kept Joseph when ex- 
posed to a temptation which would have over- 
come any who trusted in their own hearts (Gen. 
BOT): 


15 As a roaring lion, and a ranging bear; 
So is a lawless ruler over the poor people. 


16 The prince that wanteth understanding is also a 
great oppressor ; 


But he that hateth covetousness shall prolong his 
days. 


See verse 12 above, and connected passages. 
A lawless ruler is one who, set in the place of au- 
thority, owns not the higher Power that has 
permitted him to occupy his honored position. 
He cares only to gratify his personal inclina- 
tions, as Ahab when he possessed himself so un- 


—— 


Chapter Twenty-Eight 405 


righteously of the vineyard of Naboth (1 Kings 
21). Oppressing the poor, and causing judg- 
ment to miscarry, such a prince is like a wild 
beast let loose among the populace. 

Wanting true intelligence, he fails to see that 
the security of his throne is bound up with the 
welfare of his subjects; therefore he bears rule 
with a heavy hand till all hearts are alienated 
from him. It is covetousness, and a desire for 
self-aggrandizement, that is the root from which 
such conduct springs. He who hates and re- 
fuses to be controlled by this evil passion en- 
sures the stability of his house and prolongs his 
days. Contrast Saul and David. 


17 A man laden with the blood of any person shall flee 
to the pit: 
Let no man stay him. 


To be consciously guilty of having wilfully de- 
stroyed, or abetted the destruction of, an inno- 
cent man, is to bear on the conscience a fearful 
load, that drives one on to suicide. This would 
be especially so in Israel. Unable to find a shel- 
tering city of refuge, the guilty assassin would 
rather die by his own hand than meet the aven- 
ger of blood. The unhappy traitor Judas exem- 
plified the proverb to the full. 


18 Whoso walketh uprightly shall be saved: 


But he that is perverse in his ways shall fall at once. 


406 Notes on Proverbs 


It is not the salvation of the soul that is here 
contemplated. None by walking uprightly can 
blot out past sin, and be justified before God. 
This we have already noticed in our comments 
on verse 13. But itis salvation in a practical 
sense, day by day, from failure and sin, together 
with the sorrows resulting therefrom, that is re- 
ferred to. The one who with purpose of heart 
cleaves to the Lord, walking uprightly before 
Him, will be saved from much that he would 
otherwise have to endure if taking his own 
way. He who refuses the correction of the word 
of God, and independently pursues his own 
course, walking in the pride and self-sufficiency 
of his heart, will have a sudden fall. His per- 
verseness will result in unexpected disaster. 
How many a saint has proven this to his sor- 
row! but alas, how slow are we to learn, either 
from what God Himself has revealed, or from 
the failures of others! Among the prophets, 
Daniel and Jonah stand out in vivid contrast 
as illustrations of the two statements in this 
couplet. 


19 He that tilleth his land shall have plenty of bread: 
But he that followeth after vain persons shall have 
poverty enough. 


See notes on verse 7 above, and chap. 12:11. 
In the original Hebrew there is a striking paral- 


Chapter Twenty-Eight 407 


lelism here. Muenscher gives the rendering, “‘ He 
who tilleth his land shall be satisfed with 
bread; but he who followeth vain persons shall 
be satisfied with poverty.” The one, by dili- 
gence, shall be filled with what is needful to his 
building up; the other, because of his folly and 
neglect, shall be filled with woe, and be as needy 
as his neighbor is wealthy. It is not chance 
that thus makes one to prosper, while the other 
fails. It is simply the difference between pa- 
tient, steady-going adherence to duty, and the 
casting-off of restraint and following after the 
worthless. The two classes are everywhere 
about us. 

In the spiritual realm they are likewise found. 
Two young men confess Christ. From the day 
of his conversion, one conscientiously separates 
himself from the world, in its various forms, 
and devotes himself to faithful tilling of the 
fields of Scripture. The result is, he grows in 
grace and in knowledge; his soul is fed; and, 
satisfied with bread himself, he has that which 
he can impart to the needy about him. The 
other, having the same opportunities, tempor- 
izes at first with the world, follows after its vain 
company, neglects his Bible, and becomes spirit- 
ually starved. At last he breaks down entirely 
in his discipleship, and never amounts to any- 
thing for God. It is a grave question if he ever 


408 Notes on Proverbs 


was saved at all. People wonder at the differ- 
ence between the two; but there is nothing per- 
plexing to the man of God who notes their re- 
spective courses. A semi-worldling never devel- 
ops into a Timothy. Itis the faithful, uncom- 
promising young man who becomes a power for 
God, and is satisfied with good things. 


20 A faithful man shall abound with blessings: 
But he that maketh haste to be rich shall not be 
acquitted. 


See notes on chap. 23:4; also 22:1, 16; 27: 
24. A faithful man is not likely to accumulate 
vast wealth in a world like this; but he will be 
rich in heavenly treasure and shall abound with 
blessings even in a temporal sense, for he who 
acts for God can count on God to act for him. 
If the getting of riches is made his life’s object 
he will not be acquitted when called to account 
for his methods and sharp practices. Fraudulent 
schemes may seem to triumph over steady-going 
industry, but the end will prove the value of the 
latter and the worthlessness of the former. To 
become rich quickly is almost certain evidence 
of injustice somewhere. The Christian may well 
shun such acourse. It is far better to be com- 
paratively poor, but to maintain a good consci- 
ence, than to make haste to be wealthy and lose 
the sense of communion with God. See Isaiah’s 


Chapter Twenty-Hight 409 


message to the conscienceless capitalists of his 
day, who seemed to know as much as money- 
lovers in our times, concerning the advantages 
to themselves, of the trust system (Isa. 5: 8— 
10). Notice verse 22 below. 


21 To have respect of persons is not good : 
Even for a piece of bread that man will transgress. 


See notes on chap. 18:5. Dishonest and thor- 
oughly unprincipled, he who-has respect of per- 
sons in judgment, looks only to his own gain, 
and will defeat the ends of justice for the merest 
trifle, if it be for his apparent advantage. For 
‘* pieces of bread”’ the false prophetesses of the 
scattered Israelites were showing respect of 
persons in their messages, when Ezekiel was 
commanded to prophesy against them (Ezekiel 
13:17-19). 

22 He that hasteth to be rich hath an evil eye, 
And knoweth not that poverty shall come upon him. 


See notes on chap. 20: 21, and verse 20 above. 
An evil eye is a covetous eye, and bespeaks the 
state of the heart. Such a man, hasting to be 
rich, forgets the sure calamities which in God’s 
righteous government are certain to overtake 
him. Ponder Micah 6:12 and Matt. 19: 23, 24. 


23 He that rebuketh a man shall afterwards find more 
favor 
Than he that flattereth with the tongue. 


410 Notes on Proverbs 


See notes on chap. 19:25; 20:19; 26:28; 
27:6. For the moment, the flatterer may please 
the object of his praise; but one who is faithful 
in reproving will be more valued when there has 
been time for reflection. It is no kindness done 
a person when his faults are glossed over, and 
he is made to feel comfortable in his wrong- 
doing. He who goes to a wrong-doer in the 
fear of the Lord, meekly seeking to exercise him 
as to his unholy ways, may arouse anger and 
indignation at first; but he has time and consci- 
ence on his side. The result will be that he will 
find more favor than the other. Peter could 
write of “‘our beloved brother Paul’’ after the 
searching ordeal he underwent in Antioch (2 
Péter $215). 


24 Whoso robbeth his father or his mother, and saith, 
It is no transgression ; 
The same is the companion of a destroyer. 


See notes on chap. 19:13,26. The youth 
who (pretending that he was entitled to the 
possessions of his parents, or that he had no re- 
sponsibility towards their care, when become a 
wage-earner), spent all on himself, and boldly 
declared his innocence of transgression, was 
acting like the veriest criminal who destroys 
what belongs to others. The Pharisees, with 
all their religiousness, were violating the letter 


Chapter Twenty-Eight AJ 


and spirit of this word by their Corban law 
(Mark 7:11). 


25 He that is puffed up in soul exciteth contention : 
But he that putteth his trust in Jehovah shall be 
made fat. 
26 He that trusteth in his own heart is a fool: 
But whoso walketh wisely shall be delivered. 


See notes on chaps. 13:10 and 18:12. A man. 
who is puffed up in soul, readily stirs up strife. 
Haughty and self-confident, he boldly antagon- 
izes persons more to be depended on than him- 
self; and will give them no rest unless he be per- 
mitted to have hisown way. Proud, haughty 
and self-reliant, never having learned the lesson 
of no confidence in the flesh, by his unbending 
spirit, and arbitrary ways, he will often cause 
untold mischief among the people of God. His 
course is the very opposite to that of one who 
has learned of Him who is meek and lowly in 
heart, and who can therefore be trusted with 
prosperity, and exemplifies in his life the fact 
that he is spiritually-minded and devoted to the 
Lord. He alone knows the human heart and 
He puts no reliance upon it whatever (Jer. 17: 
9,10). A man who walks humbly will walk 
wisely, and will be delivered from many a snare. 
See the Lord’s estimate of the heart as portrayed 
in John 2: 23, 25. 


412 Notes on Proverbs 


27 He that giveth unto the poor shall not lack: 
But he that hideth his eyes shall have many a curse. 


See notes on chaps. 14: 21; 21:13; and verse 
8 above. It is one of the evidences of the inter- 
ference of a benevolent providence in the affairs 
of men, that he who has pity upon the needy is 
never the loser thereby, while he who refuses to 
see their sad estate, and who hoards all his 
possessions for himself, finds them to be a cause 
of grief and anguish in the end. God makes 
Himself responsible to repay with interest all 
that is given to the poor. They are left in this 
world to test the hearts of those in more fortun- 
ate circumstances. A blessing is upon the phil- 
anthropic, and a curse upon the man who thinks 
only of his own enjoyment and leaves others 
suffer for need that he could relieve, had he the 
heart for it. See the rich young ruler (Luke 18. 
18-27). Compare with chap. 11: 25. 


28 When the lawless rise, men hide themselves: 
But when they perish, the righteous increase. 


See verse 12 above. When evil men are in the 
place of power, life and property are alike inse- 
cure, and men of peace and quietness conceal 
themselves, dreading to be brought into public 
notice. But when the unrighteous are over- 
thrown, the upright are everywhere vis:bly in- 


Chapter T'wenty-Eight AS3 


creased, having confidence in the safety of their 
households and goods. See the condition of the 
Israelites in the days of the Philistine domina- 
tion, and their altered estate when Jonathan 
overthrew their wicked oppressors (1 Sam. 13: 
6; 14:22). 


414 


CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE 


RREVOCABLE and crushing judgment will 

be his portion who, despising all wise coun- 

sel and refusing all godly reproof, plunges on in 

his sin until the patience of the Lord is ex- 
hausted. 


1 He that being often reproved hardeneth his neck, 
Shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without 


remedy. 


Hardening the neck is a figure taken from the 
manner in which a refractory bullock turns 
away from and avoids the yoke. In this way, 
men, in their obstinacy, persistently refuse to 
heed reproof, and set their wills stubbornly 
against what would be for their own best in- 
terests; thus insuring their destruction. 

God is gracious and long-suffering, slow to 
anger, and doth not afflict willingly, nor grieve 
the children of men. Yeteven His patience with 
the unrepentant comes to an end at last. He 
will plead, and strive, and warn, till it is mani- 
fest the heart is fully set upon having its own 
way. Then He leaves the hardened soul to its 
doom, giving it up to sudden destruction. Many 


Chapter I'wenty-Nine 445 


are the scriptural examples of this, but I only 
remind the reader of Korah, Dathan, and Abi- 
ram, of Belshazzar and of Jezebel. 


2 When the righteous are increased, the people rejoice: 
But when the lawless beareth rule, the people mourn. 


See notes on chap. 28:12, 28. However much 
men, as individuals, prefer sin to holiness, col- 
lectively, they rejoice when the righteous are in 
authority, and mourn when evil isin high places. 
Even the vilest know the comfort of the protec- 
tion to person and property, enjoyed when 
the upright flourish. The unbeliever who hates 
Christianity and makes it the butt of his cheap 
ridicule, nevertheless prefers to live in a land 
where the teachings of the Bible are generally 
held and where the Christian faith is respected. 
In the measure that the principles of the New 
Testament control the minds of the men who 
administer civil government, peace and prosper- 
ity prevail; as none know better than the openly 
skeptical. The same was true in Israel in regard 
to the Law and the Prophets. The reign of a 
Josiah or a Hezekiah was much to be preferred 
to that of an Ahab or a Manasseh. 


3 Whoso loveth wisdom rejoiceth his father : 
But he that keepeth company with harlots spendeth 
his substance. 


A416 Notes on Proverbs 


See note on chap. 28: 7. Loose living is a snare 
to which young men are peculiarly exposed. He 
who is wise will shun it as he would a viper 
about to strike. Immorality is ruinous alike to 
body and soul. Its awful consequences beggar 
all powers of description. ‘Flee also youthful 
lusts” is a most salutary word. See 1 Cor. 6: 
15-20. 


4 The king by judgment establisheth the land; 
But he that receiveth gifts overthroweth it. 


When David sang of ‘A righteous ruler over 
men; a ruler in the fear of God,”’ he had to own 
‘“‘My house is not so.” It is Christ who will be 
manifested as the king who, by judgment, will 
establish the land. A sceptre of righteousness 
will be the sceptre of His kingdom. Meantime 
it is the privilege of every earthly sovereign to 
endeavor to be a fitting type of God’s anointed 
Ruler. The receiver of gifts or bribes is far from 
this. His evil example results in the corruption 
of the entire body politic. See this in Samuel’s 
sons (1 Sam. 8:3). 


“5 A man that flattereth his neighbor 
Spreadeth a net for his feet. 


See notes on chap. 28:23; and connected pas- 
sages. True praise, the honest recognition of 
merit in another, is right and proper in its place, 


Chapter Twenty-Nine 447 


and may be the means of cheering and encourag- 
ing a deserving person, when perhaps well-nigh 
cast down. But flattery—saying, what the 
heart does not mean in order to mislead, or to 
curry favor, is a net and a snare for the feet of 
the one who listens. Insincere remarks of an 
adulatory character are most dangerous. The 
lowly man will turn away in fear from any who 
approach him in this way. The heart is too 
prone to think well of self, as it is, without listen- 
ing to the flattering words which are but as 
fuel to the fire of pride. How solemn the warn- 
ing which the doom of Absalom would sound in 
our ears! None were so praised as he, and few 
princes have failed more terribly (2 Sam. 14:: 25). 


6 In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare; 
But the righteous shall sing and rejoice. 

7 The nghteous considereth the cause of the poor: 
But the lawless regardeth not to know it. 


The evil man is overthrown by his own trans- 
gressions. His very iniquities, in which he de- 
lighted, prove to be his undoing. When the up- 
right shouts and sings for joy, the wicked is 
pierced through with many sorrows. The latter 
lives only for himself. He regards not the cry 
of the needy. The former, recognizing his own 
indebtedness to sustaining and preserving grace, 
is quick to show compassion to the indigent 

27 


438 Notes on Proverbs 


who cry for help. In this he becomes an imita- 
tor of Him who ever “‘ went about doing good.” 
Contrast the spirit of Peter and John with that 
of the unscrupulous Pharisees (Acts 3:1-8; 
Matt. 23 : 23-28). 


8 Scornful men bring a city into a snare: 
But wise men turn away wrath. 


The first part of this couplet is rendered by 
J. N. Darby, ‘‘Scornful men set the city in a 
flame.” When acrisis arises and the populace 
are stirred, the ruler who meets them with cold 
sarcasm or stinging scorn, only adds to their 
anger and causes their passions to burn more 
fiercely than ever. Rehoboam’s answer to the 
men of Israel is an exemplification of this (1 
Kings 12:13, 14). The counsel of the wise 
men, had it prevailed, would have conciliated 
the people and averted their indignation. 


9 If a wise man contendeth with a foolish man, 
Whether he rage or laugh, there is no rest. 


It is in vain to endeavor to convince a fool of 
his errors. Proud in heart, admiring himself 
and his opinions above all else, to strive with 
him will yield no good result. Whether he grow 
heated and wrathful, or whether he seem for 
the moment to accept advice cheerfully, laugh- 
ing pleasantly or mocking in amused scorn, it all 


Chapter Twenty-Nine 419 


comes to the same thing: there will be no happy 
end to the affair, because the fool will refuse to 
brook correction. Nehemiah’s controversy with 
the sometimes affable but generally openly-an- 
gry Sanballat illustrates well what is meant 
(Neh. 2:10, 19; 4: 1-10; 6: 1-9). 


10 Men of blood hate the perfect: 


But the just seek (or, care for) his soul. 


Because of the very difference in their lives, 
bloodthirsty men hate those who are upright, 
even as ‘‘Cain, who was of that wicked one, 
and slew his brother . . . because his own works 
were evil, and his brother’s righteous”’ (1 John 
3:12). Holiness and godliness invariably pro- 
voke the malice of wicked men, who see in what 
is right and good the condemnation of their 
own vile ways. 

The just, on the other hand, are glad to be 
what Cain was not—their brother’s keeper— 
seeking to preserve his life and care for his soul. 
This concern for the blessing of those about him 
is one of the first and strongest evidences that a 
man has been born of God. 


11 A fool uttereth all his mind (spirit): 


But a wise man keepeth it back. 


Mind and spirit are used synonymously for 
the seat of intelligence. A fool readily pours 


420 Notes on Proverbs 


forth all he knows, regardless of the effect it may 
have for good or evil. A wise man discreetly 
guards his tongue, knowing the impropriety of 
hasty speech. 

It is not that the fool is more frank and open 
than he; but mere frankness, apart from care 
as to what is uttered, is not at all to be com- 
mended. It is what makes that pest of society, 
the gossip and the talebearer. Our Lord Him- 
self, who knew all things, does not at once man- 
ifest His full acquaintance with the solemn 
events in which He had been the central figure; 
but asks the disciples, on their way to Emmaus, 
“What things?”’ when they express their won- 
der at His apparent ignorance. He wished to 
test their hearts; and all was for their blessing, 
as afterwards so preciously proven (Luke 24: 
13-32). Joseph, in his dealings with his breth- 
ren, maintains the same reserve, until the mo- 
ment arrives when the revelation, ‘‘I am Jo- 
seph!”’ will do its proper work (Gen. 42-45). 


{2 If a ruler harken to lies, 
All his servants are lawless. 


In the apocryphal book of Ecclesiasticus there 
is a passage which seems to explain this prov- 
erb. ‘‘As the judge of the people is himself, so 
are his officers; and what manner of man the 
ruler of the city is, such are all that dwell there- 


Chapter Twenty-Nine 425 


in.” A corrupt ruler will surround himself with 
corrupt men, his own evil example acting pow- 
erfully upon the formation of the characters of 
his dependents. Therefore the importance of 
integrity and uprightness on the part of those 
who occupy positions of trust and honor. It 
was a Sad period in the history of Judah when 
their pastors, or rulers, were their examples in 
disobedience to God (Jer. 2: 8; 10: 21). 


13 The needy and the oppressor meet together: 
Jehovah enlighteneth the eyes of them both. 

14 The king that faithfully judgeth the poor, 
His throne shall be established forever. 


See notes on chap. 22:2. Itis greatly to be 
lamented that there are any to oppress the 
needy, seeing both are so dependent on the same 
common Benefactor, who ‘‘maketh His sun to 
rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth 
rain on the just and on the unjust” (Matt. 5: 
45). His eye is over all His works, and He 
notes the need as well as the behavior of all His 
creatures. He makes the eyes of the poor and 
those who lord it over them alike to sparkle 
with life and intelligence. 

A faithful king will be thoughtful of the weak, 
and will judge the poor in uprightness, thus 
patterning his actions after the Most High who 
rules over all in righteousness. Therefore his 


422 Notes on Proverbs 


throne shall be established in peace. ‘‘ Forever” 
is often used in what might be called a limited 
sense, as when, in law, we speak of transferring 
property “to him and his heirs forever;” that 
is, to perpetuity. See what is said as to the 
throne of Solomon, a type of the reign of Christ 
(Psa. 89: 19-29). 


15 The rod and reproof give wisdom; 
But a child left to himself bringeth his mother to 


shame. 


See notes on chap. 19:18, and 23:13,14. An 
undisciplined child will bring shame upon his 
mother and ruin upon himself. ‘To refuse to 
chasten him because of personal repugnance 
to causing temporary pain, is to manifest ha- 
tred instead of love. Correction and reproof, 
properly administered, are for the child’s best 
interests, and open his heart to wisdom. Let 
the over-indulgent parent be warned by the fate 
of Adonijah. It is not for nothing that God has 
caused the unhappy fact to be left on record 
that “‘his father had not displeased him at any 
time in saying, Why hast thou done so?” No 
wonder he became a rebel! (1 Kings 1; 2: 
13-25). 


16 When the lawless are multiplied, transgression in- 
creaseth: 


But the righteous shall witness their fall. 


Chapter T'wenty-Nine 423 


See verse 2 above, with connected passages. 
It is a principle in God’s moral government 
that although lawlessness may seem, like the 
flood, to prevail over the highest mountains, it 
shall surely retreat and righteousness hold sway 
at last. When the wicked are in power, trans- 
gression flourishes and uprightness is crushed ; 
but this can only be for a time. ‘‘ The triumph- 
ing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the 
hypocrite is but for a moment,’ as Zophar 
rightly observed, though he did wrong in apply- 
ing it to Job when he sought the cause of his af- 
fliction (Job 20: 5). 

Throughout the past and the present dispen- 
sations, in large measure the wicked have been 
in power, permitted by God to try most severely 
at times the patience of the righteous. But 
their overthrow is near, when God’s King shall 
take to Him His great power and reign, and the 
world-kingdom of our God and His Christ shall 
come. Then shall the upright ‘have dominion 
in the morning”—a morning without clouds, 
when righteousness and the knowledge of the 
Lord shall cover the earth as the waters cover 
the sea (Isa. 11:9; Hab. 2: 14). 


17 Correct thy son, and he shall give thee rest; 
Yea, he shall give delight unto thy soul. 


See verse 15 above. What wisdom does a 


424 Notes on Proverbs 


parent need that correction may be properly ad- 
ministered, and his household brought up in the 
fear of God! Nothing, perhaps, so causes one 
to realize his own failures and shortcomings as 
to see them duplicated in his children; and noth- 
ing, therefore, makes one feel more keenly the 
need of divine grace and wisdom in dealing with 
them. But the word is sure. Let the father 
and mother exercise a firm but kindly discipline, 
and God has pledged Himself that it shall bear 
goodly fruit. The son corrected shall give rest 
to the heart and delight to the soul. This was 
manifested in Isaac, whose lovely obedience did 
not flinch when it meant to permit himself 
to be bound upon the altar. And it is note- 
worthy that God had foreseen in Abraham 
the ability to control his household before he 
made him the depositary of the promises (Gen. 
18k U9). 


18 Where there is no vision, the people will become 
lawless : 
But he that keepeth the law, happy is he. 


By vision is meant spiritual enlightenment 
and insight into divine things. A reference to 
1 Sam. 3:1 will make this clear. ‘The word 
of the Lord was precious in those days; there 
was no open vision.”” To meet this need God 
raised up Samuel, who was appropriately called 


Chapter Twenty-Nine 425 


“‘the Seer’’—the man with opened eyes—as Ba- 
laam described himself. 

It is of all importance that there be among 
the people of God in all ages this open vision. 
‘““Would God that all the Lord’s people were 
prophets,”’ having the eyes of the heart enlight- 
ened, that they might discern clearly what is of 
God, and what is opposed to His mind. It was 
this that the apostle Paul put before the carnal 
Corinthians when he wrote urging them to 
covet earnestly the best gifts, but rather that 
they might prophesy. The prophet is one who 
enters into what is of the Lord, and gives it out 
in freshness and power, meeting the actual need 
of the time. He does not necessarily foretell fu- 
ture events, but he tells forth what reaches the 
conscience and quickens the affections. 

When ministry of this nature is lacking among 
the people of God and the assemblies of His 
saints, they soon become lawless, substituting 
for the Spirit’s energy the mere busy meddling 
of nature, and opening the door to what is sim- 
ply of man in the flesh. 

But we would not forget the second part of 
the couplet. Even let ministry of an edifying 
character be rarely known, yet where the word 
of God controls there will be blessing. He who 
keeps it will be happy amidst the existing con- 
fusion, enjoying fellowship with Him who in- 


426 Wotes on Proverbs 


spired it. When leaving the Ephesian elders at 
Miletus, it was not to gifted ministers that Paul 
commended them, in view of evil teachers soon 
to arise, but to God, and the word of His grace, 
which was able to build them up. This abides 
to-day, and remains to comfort and direct the 
saints in all circumstances. But the anointed 
eye is needed to discern what has been therein 
revealed. Lack of vision will be manifested in a 
cold, dry, theological, or philosophical, treat- 
ment of the Scriptures, as though given to exer- 
cise the intellect, rather than the heart and the 
conscience. Paul’s prayer for the Ephesians 1s 
one applicable for all Christians while in this 
scene of trial and testing (Eph. 1: 15-23). 


19 A servant will not be corrected by words; 
For though he understand, he will not answer. 


The Septuagint reads, ‘‘a stubborn servant,” 
which seems to convey the right thought. Cor- 
rection by words alone would avail little with 
such a one if unprincipled and self-willed. There- 
fore strict discipline would be required if he be 
made to render proper service, which is here im- 
plied in answering. Is it not so with those of 
us who have been made servants of our Lord 
Jesus Christ? Have we not often failed to heed 
His word, refusing its correction, therefore hav- 
ing to know the pains of chastisement? Itis a 


Chapter Twenty-Nine 427 


lesson slowly learned. Most of us are more or 
less patterned on the order of Jonah, who was 
only rendered obedient by serious grief and 
trouble. 


20 Seest thou a man hasty in his words ? 
There is more hope of a fool than of him. 


In chap. 26:12 this statement is made con- 
cerning a man who is wise in his own eyes. 
The two things are likely to be found in the 
same person. He who is filled with self-conceit 
is very liable to be hasty in his words. Of God 
it is said, ‘‘He will not call back His words”’ 
(Isa. 31: 2); and He needs not to do so, for 
“the words of the Lord are pure words: as sil- 
ver tried in the fire, purified seven times”’ (Psa. 
12:6). But the self-confident man is continu- 
ally uttering words which he has to recall, be- 
cause of his reckless impatience and his ready 
exaggeration. There is little hope of checking 
such a man, unless there be true self-judgment 
and repentance for what is a grave sin, though 
often treated as a mere infirmity for which he 
is to be pitied rather than blamed. Hasty 
speech betokens an unbroken spirit. It was 
characteristic of King Saul, and on a notable 
occasion would have caused the death of Jona- 
than had the people not interfered and rescued 


428 Notes on Proverbs 


him (1 Sam. 14). Jephthah too is a solemn 
warning as to hasty speech (Judges 11). 


21 He that delicately bringeth up his servant froma 
child 
Shall have him become as a son in the end. 


In a note, J. N. Darby states that “‘son”’ is, 
literally, ‘‘son of the house’’; and explains it as 
meaning that he gets into possession of his mas- 
ter’s goods. It was this that pained Abraham; 
for, much as he valued the service of Eliezer ot 
Damascus, he could not bear the thought of a 
servant inheriting in the place of a son. God’s 
servants are His sons, and so shall be His heirs, 
and joint heirs with the Lord Jesus Christ in 
glory. 

22 An angry man stirreth up strife, 
And a furious man aboundeth in transgression. 


See note on chap. 28: 25. A man of unbridled 
temper provokes continual contention, and had 
best be avoided. His fury can only spring from 
an evil nature unchecked, and therefore he 
abounds in violations of alllaw, human or di 
vine. None can walk in communion with the 
Lord Jesus Christ and manifest a wrathful and 
passionate spirit. The two things do not go 
together. See the elder son in the parable, 
whose unreasonable anger was the only jarring 


Chapter Twenty-Nine 429 


note in the merriment occasioned by his broth- 
er’s return (Luke 15: 28). 


23 A man’s pride shall bring him low; 
But honor shall uphold the humble in spirit. 


Pride precedes destruction. Itis a sure pre- 
cursor of coming judgment. But he who is ofa 
meek and humble spirit shall obtain honor. 
Seeking it not, it shall be thrust upon him; 
while he who makes it his object, shall fail mis- 
erably to obtain what he desires. Contrast 
Haman and Mordecai throughout the deeply- 
interesting book of Esther. 


24 Whoso is partner with a thief hateth his own soul: 
He heareth the adjuration, but will not confess. 


To share the plunder with a robber is to make 
oneself partaker of his evil deeds, and draw 
down upon one’s head the same sentence. He 
acts against his own best interests, even viewed 
from a worldly standpoint. Put under oath, he 
is afraid to testify the full truth, and therefore 
brings himself under condemnation for abetting 
and concealing a theft. See Lev. 5:1. 

It is a serious thing indeed to be thus a parta- 
ker of other men’s sins. The Holy Ghost warns 
the believer against it, showing that association 
with evil, or condolence of it, necessarily defiles 
him who thus acts. See 2 John 10, 11; and 


430 Notes on Proverbs. 


1 Tim. 5:22. This is a principle often forgot- 
ten in our day, but one of vital importance for 
all who seek to maintain regard for the holiness 
of God’s house on earth. 


25 The fear of man bringeth a snare ; 
But whoso putteth his trust in Jehovah shall be safe 
(or, set on high). 


In the 14th verse of the preceding chapter we 
were reminded of the happiness of the man who 
feareth alway. Here we learn that there is a 
fear to be avoided as dangerous and soul-en- 
snaring. The fear of God is most becoming to 
a saint. The fear of man is destructive of his 
spiritual life and testimony. How many a one 
has been ruined thereby ! 

Safety and security are his portion whose 
trust is in the Lord alone. He who fears God 
will not fear man. He who fears man does not 
fear God as he should. See Paul, in Gal. 1:10; 
and compare Luke 12: 4,5, and Jno. 12:43. 


26 Many seek the ruler’s favor; 
But a man’s right judgment is from Jehovah. 


This but adds to what the previous verse has 
brought to our notice. They who seek the ru- 
ler’s favor are such as fear the face of man, and 
will have to learn by sad experience the vanity 
of putting their trust in princes. 


Chapter Twenty-Nine - 43} 


It is the Lord whose judgment is ever right- 
eous. When Wolsey cried, ‘‘Had I but served 
my God as faithfully as I served my king, He 
would not have cast me off in my old age,” he 
uttered a great truth. 

While the man of God will be obedient to ru- 
lers, he will never fawn upon them. He sees in 
earthly potentates but the representatives and 
servants of the Most High, who ruleth in the 
kingdoms of men. Elijah is a splendid example 
of such a one, when confronting the ungodly 
Ahab, as narrated in 1 Kings 18. 


27 An unjust man is an abomination to the just : 
And he that is upnght in the way is abomination to 
the lawless. 


The two families are forever opposed. The 
just detest what the wicked love, and vice versa. 
So it-has ever been since Cain strove with Abel, 
and slew him. So shall it be till the devil and 
all who do his bidding are cast into the lake of 
fire. There can be no truce, no treaty of peace, 
between the hosts of good and evil. Incessant 
warfare must be waged until righteousness 
shall dwell undisturbed in the new heavens and 
the new earth, and God he all in all in the uni- 
verse of bliss. 

Till then, let those who know their God shrink 
not from the conflict; but. grasping the sword 


432 Notes on Proverbs 


of the Spirit, clad in the panoply of heaven, go 
forth valiantly to meet the foe, depending upon 
His might who says, “All power is given unto 
Me in heaven and in earth... . And, lo, lam 
with you alway, even unto the completion of 
the age’’ (Matt. 28 : 18-20). 


This chapter concludes the collection of prov- 
erbs copied out, or collected, by the men of Hez- 
ekiah, and marks the end of the sayings dis- 
tinctly attributed to Solomon. The next two 
chapters, which close the book, are credited to 
Agur the son of Jakeh, and to King Lemuel. 
The latter, I judge, is but a pseudonym for the 
wise king; but Agur, as we shall see, is evi- 
dently a different personage. 

The question of inspiration is not touched, 
whoever these men may be, for the very simple 
reason that in the times of our Lord Jesus 
Christ the book was composed of the various 
parts which now go to make it up; and when 
He said,‘‘ the Scripture cannot be broken,’’ He 
necessarily included each portion of the Proverbs. 

Whether Solomon himself, or a later editor, 
collected them into one volume, we have no 
means of knowing, save, of course, in regard to 
the five chapters we have just been considering: 
they never formed part of the book until the 
reign of the great reformer Hezekiah. 


433 


CHAPTER THIRTY 


WE now take up the study of the words of 

Agur, a wise man who keenly felt his ig- 
norance, as is generally the case with the truly 
enlightened. In the first verse we learn all we 
are permitted to know as to his parentage. 


| The words of Agur the son of Jakeh; 
The prophecy that man spake unto Ithiel, 
Even unto Ithiel and Ucal. 


The first two proper names in this passage 
have been read by some as common nouns; in 
which case we would have to understand, ‘‘ The 
words of a gatherer, the son of [the] pious.” 
This might imply that the contents of the chap- 
ter have been gathered by an editor from vari- 
ous sources, that they might be preserved for 
our instruction. It is evident, however, that 
neither our translators nor the Masoretic 
scribes so understood it. In the Chaldee and 
Syriac translations the capitalized words are 
found as given in the text of our Authorized 
Bibles. 

One learned Hebraist,* by changing the vowel- 


* Prof. Stuart. 
28 


434 Notes on Proverbs 


points, renders the whole verse thus: “The 
words of Agur, the son of her who was obeyed 
in Massa. Thus spake the man: I have toiled 
for God, I have toiled for God, and have ceased.” 

Some commentators have supposed Agur to 
stand for Solomon, and Jakeh for David; but 
the more sober accept what seems the most 
straightforward explanation, that Agur was an 
inspired man of whom we have no record else- 
where in Scripture; while his father’s name gives 
no clue to his family or tribe in Israel. Ithiel, 
which is taken to mean “God is with me”’; and 
Ucal, ‘‘able,” are apparently his companions, or 
possibly persons who received instruction from 
him. 

He begins his oracle by declaring his own ig- 
norance, apart from divine enlightenment—that 
“vision” of chap. 29:18 which is essential to 
fit a man to be a teacher of holy things. 


2 Truly I am more stupid than any man, 
And have not the understanding of a man. 
3 I neither learned wisdom, 


Nor have the knowledge of the Holy. 


It is not affectation and prudery that causes 
him to use such language as this, but a deep 
sense in his soul of his limitations and lack of 
intelligence in the great matters about which he 
is exercised. He has been compared with Amos, 


Chapter Thirty 435 


who was no prophet, nor yet the son of a 
prophet, but was taken up by the Lord when 
engaged in his ordinary occupation and given 
the gift that enabled him to be even a rebuker 
of kings. Agur was a plain, simple man, of lit- 
tle natural ability, perhaps even below the aver- 
age of human intelligence; yet the Lord opened 
his understanding, revealing to him great and 
precious things, and giving him the wisdom to 
impart them to, not only Ithiel and Ucal, but 
untold thousands who have found, and still 
find, them to be of great profit. He was one of 
those holy men of God of whom Peter tells us, 
who “spake as they were moved by the Holy 
Ghost.”’ Inspiration is just God’s taking up a 
poor, feeble instrument, and so controlling his 
mind, tongue and pen as to cause him to give 
forth the very words of the Eternal One. 


4 Who hath ascended up into heaven, or descended ? 
Who hath gathered the wind in His fists > 
Who hath bound the waters in a garment ? 
Who hath established all the ends of the earth 2 
What is His name, and what is His Son’s name? 


[Tell me,] if thou knowest. 


How vast the ignorance of the most learned 
man, when confronted with questions like these! 
We are at once reminded of the Lord’s challenge 
to Job, in the 38th and 39th chapters of the 
wonderful book that bears his name. At the 


436 Notes on Proverbs 


best, human knowledge is most circumscribed 
and contracted. No man, apart from divine 
revelation, could reply to the questions here 
asked. The first never found an answer until 
the words of our Lord concerning Himself, as 
recorded in John 3:13: ‘‘And no man hath as- 
cended up to heaven, but He that came down 
from heaven, even the Son of Man which is in 
heaven.’ He it was who descended likewise, as 
it is written, ‘‘Now that He ascended, what is 
it but that He also descended first into the lower 
parts of the earth? He that descended is the 
same also that ascended up far above all heav- 
ens, that He might fill all things”’ (Eph. 4: 
9°10): 

How much there is for the believer in the pre- 
cious truth connected with the Lord’s descent 
and ascension! Because of our sins He died 
upon the cross, bearing the righteous judgment 
of God. There He drank the dreadful cup of 
wrath which we could never have completely 
drained to all eternity. But because of who 
He was, He could drink the cup, and exhaust 
the wrath, leaving naught but blessing for all 
who trust in Him. He died, and was buried, 
but God raised Him from the dead, and in tri- 
umph He ascended to glory. Enoch was trans- 
lated that he should not see death. Elijah was 
caught up in a flaming chariot, and carried by 


Chapter Thirty 437 


a whirlwind to heaven. But neither of these 
went up in his own power. Jesus, His work fin- 
ished, and His ministry on earth accomplished, 
ascended of His own volition, passing through 
the upper air as easily as He had walked upon 
the water. 

The fact of His having gone up and having 
been received by the Shekinah—the cloud of di- 
vine Majesty—testifies to the perfection of His 
work in putting away forever the believer’s 
sins. When on the tree, ‘‘Jehovah laid on Him 
the iniquity of us all.”” He could not be now in 
the presence of God if one sin remained upon 
Him. But all have been righteously settled for 
and put away, never to come up again: there- 
fore He has gone in, in the power of His own 
blood, having accomplished eternal redemption. 
‘Wherefore He saith, When He ascended up on 
high, He led captivity captive, and gave gifts 
unto men” (Eph. 4:8). He had ‘destroyed 
Him that had the power of death, that is, the 
devil,” that He might ‘deliver them who, 
through fear of death, were all their lifetime 
subject to bondage”’ (Heb. 2: 14, 15). 

The trembling, anxious sinner is pointed by 
the Holy Ghost, not to Church or sacraments, 
not to ordinances or legal enactments, not to 
frames or feelings, but to_a risen and ascended 


Christ seated in highest glory! ‘‘ The righteous- 


438 Notes on Proverbs 


ness which is of faith speaketh on this wise, 
Say not in thy heart, Who shall ascend into 
heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down from 
above:) or, Who shall descend into the deep? 
(that is, to bring up Christ again from the 
dead.) But what saith it? The word is nigh 
thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart: that 
is, the word of faith which we preach; that, if 
thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord 
Jesus, and shalt believe in thy heart that God 
hath raised Him from the dead, thou shalt be 
saved. For with the heart man believeth unto 
righteousness; and with the mouth confession is 
made unto salvation ”’ (Rom. 10:6-10). Christ 
bore our sins on the cross. He died for them. 
He has been raised from the dead in token of 
God’s infinite satisfaction in His work. He has 
ascended up to heaven, and His place on the 
throne of God as a Man in glory, is proof posi- 
tive, that our sins are gone forever. This it is 
that, believed, gives deep and lasting peace. 
When the believer realizes that all has been 
done in a way that suits God; that He who ac- 
complished it is one with the Father; that man 
as a fallen creature had no part in that work 
save to commit the sins for which the Saviour 
died: then, and not till then, does the majesty 
of the work of the cross dawn upon the soul. 
The question, ‘‘ What is His name, and what 


Chapter Thirty 439 


is His Son’s name?’ followed by the challenge, 
“Declare, if thou canst tell,” finds its answer in 
the New Testament revelation of the Father 
and the Son. 


5 Every word (or, saying) of God is pure (or, tried): 


He is a shield unto them that put their trust in Him. 


6_Add thou not unto His words, 


Lest He reprove thee, and thou be found a liar. 


There are two great facts enunciated in these 
verses. The first is the perfection, and the sec- 
ond, the all-sufficiency of the words, or sayings 
of God. The Scriptures, as a whole, are called 
the word of God. Any portion taken separately 
is a word, or saying of God. Now just, as “‘all 
Scripture is God-breathed,” so is every part of 
it, yea, every yod and tittle, divinely-inspired. 
It is therefore pure and perfect in itself. All 
who rest upon it, find its great Author a shield 
and refuge for their souls from the enemy’s as- 
saults. He will be the protection of those who 
confide in Him; but no one really trusts Him 
who doubts, or casts reflections upon the in- 
tegrity of His words. 

To attempt to add unto what He has caused 


to be written is to deny the all-sufficiency of 
Scripture to meet and provide for every cir- 


cumstance of life, and to enlighten as to all 
that belongs to the faith once delivered to 


440 Notes on Proverbs. 


the saints. There have not been wanting, in 
every age, vissionaries and enthusiasts, as well 
as frauds and charlatans, who have sought 
to supplement the Bible with revelations and 
compilations of their own, claiming for their 
wretched productions divine authority. But 
as compared with all these poor attempts, the 
Holy Scripture shines forth like a diamond of 
beauty and value surrounded by worthless bits 
of glass and paste. It alone is the truth. All 
imitations are but lies that deceive and befog 
him who credits and follows them. 

The apocryphal books to both Testaments 
are, at the best, but of this class; particularly is 
this the case in regard to the wild legends of 
Tobit and Judith, the apocalyptic visions of 
Hermes, and the ghostly records of the pseudo- 
gospels of the Infancy, St. Thomas, Nicodemus, 
and such like. 

The Jewish Talmud and the vagaries of the 
Kabbalah belong to the same kind, “‘ teaching 
for doctrines the commandments of men.” 

In the Christian era, especially in the last two 
centuries, many imitations have been palmed 
off on the credulous as of the same character as 
Holy Scripture, but judged by this text, we un- 
hesitatingly declare them to be lies of Satan. 
Of this number are the pretended revelations 
and wild hallucinations of Emanuel Sweden- 


Chapter Thirty 44} 


borg; the Book of Mormon and kindred works 
of Joseph Smith and his followers; the Flying 
Roll of the Jezreelites ; the prophecies and visions 
of Ellen White, regarded by the Seventh-day 
Adventists as of equal authority with the Bible; 
the unchristian and unscientific theories of Mary 
Baker Eddy, as set forth in “Science and 
Health,’’ which professes to be a key to the 
Scriptures; to which may be added any and 
every book or teaching that claims a divine 
origin, but has not been included in the Law, the 
Prophets, the Psalms, or the New Testament. 
In this grand collection, God has made known 
His holy will and revealed all that He will reveal 
as to Himself, His purpose, and His ways, until 
the ushering in of the glory for the saints, and 
the day of doom for those who refuse His sure 
testimony, trampling it beneath their feet, or 
adding to it the poor thoughts of sinful man! 

Compare psalms 12:6 and 119 in its entirety ; 
as also Deut. 4:2; 12:32; Col. 1:25 and Rev. 
22: 18,19. 


7 Two things have I required of Thee ; 
Withhold them not from me before I die: 
8 Remove far from me vanity and lies ; 
Give me neither poverty nor riches; 
Feed me with food convenient for me : 
9 Lest I be full, and deny Thee, 
And say, Who is Jehovah? 


442 Notes on Proverbs 


Or, lest I be poor, and steal, 
And take the name of my God in vain. 

This prayer of Agur appeals to the heart of 
the saint in all dispensations. Like the touching 
prayer of Jabez recorded in 1 Chron. 4:10, to 
which it has a strong resemblance, it is a suited 
utterance for any child of God, even though 
grace has taught the soul to say, “I have 
learned in whatsoever state I am, to be con- 
tent. I know both how to be abased, and 
I know how to abound: everywhere, and 
in all things, I am instructed both to be 
full, and to be hungry, both to abound and 
to suffer need’ (Phil. 4:11, 12). It is only as 
the heart is occupied with Christ that one can 
thus triumph over all circumstances. He who 
knows himself understands well why Agur 
could pray for moderate circumstances, if it 
were the will of God. He did not distrust 
divine power to keep him in any state. He did 
distrust himself. 

The first of the “‘two things”? which he re- 
quired of the Lord, was to be kept from iniquity. 
He desired that vanity and lies be far removed 
from him. The man of God fears sin and hates 
it. The new nature within him makes it impos- 
sible that he should be happy while walking in 
an evil way. Holiness is his joy and delight, 
therefore he groans for full deliverance from the 


Chapter Thirty 443 


flesh, that lawless principle within his breast 
that wars against the new nature. He who, 
professing to be a Christian, yet finds pleasure 
in vanity and lies, manifests thereby his true 
condition, and makes it plain to every Spirit- 
taught soul that he is still a stranger to the 
new birth. This detestation of iniquity and 
yearning to be delivered, not only from its 
power, but from its very presence, is one of the 
surest evidences that a work of God has been 
wrought in the soul, even though there may be 
great darkness, and little understanding of the 
precious, peace-giving truths of the gospel. The 
youngest saint, and the oldest, may therefore 
very properly take up the cry of Agur, ‘“‘ Remove 
far from me vanity and lies.” 

The second petition has to do with temporal 
things, and is worthy of careful notice. We can 
well understand a man praying against poverty, 
but it is most unusual to find one who dreads 
wealth and prays to be kept from riches. He 
dreaded abject poverty, lest in his weakness, 
it afford occasion for the working of the flesh, 
causing dishonesty, and bringing reproach upon 
the name of his God. But riches, too, were 
equally to be feared, because it is a common 
thing for men to grow more and more independ- 
ent of God as their worldly goods are increased : 
“Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked ”’ (Deut. 32, 


444 Notes on Proverbs 


15). The wealthy are exposed to many a snare 
that those in moderate circumstances know 
little of. This, Agur had observed ; therefore he 
would not desire to revel in luxury, but would 
be fed with food befitting his station in life, and 
would choose, if such were the will of God for 
him, to occupy a middle position between the 
two extremes of deep need and overflowing 
abundance. The wisdom and piety that sug- 
gested such a petition become increasingly evi- 
dent, the more it is considered. 


10 Accuse not a servant to his master, 
Lest he curse thee and thou be found guilty. 


The lot of a servant in the East, who was often 
a slave, was hard enough at the best. There- 
fore he who took it upon himself to accuse such 
an one to his master, whether the accusation 
were true or false, was likely to be hated by the 
poor wretch he had informed upon; and if he 
were proven to have had no just grounds for his 
charge he should be put to shame by one of in- 
ferior station. Applying the principle to Chris- 
tians, we are reminded of the impertinence and 
lack of thoughtfulness and care, one for another, 
which would lead one saint to judge the service 
of his fellow-laborer. ‘‘ Who art thou that judg- 
est another man’s servant? To hisown Master 
he standeth or falleth.” ‘Let us not therefore 


Chapter Thirty 145 


judge one another any more; but judge this 
rather, that no man put a stumbling-block or 
an occasion to fall in his brother’s way”’ (Rom. 
14:4, 13). 
11 There is a generation that curseth their father, 

And doth not bless their mother. 


12 There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, 
Yet are not washed from their filthiness. 

13 There is a generation—oh how lofty are their eyes! 
And their eyelids are lifted up. 

14 There is a generation, whose teeth are as swords, 
And their jaw-teeth as knives, 
To devour the poor from off the earth, 


And the needy from among men. 


The word generation is here used, as in many 
other parts of Scripture, to describe a particular 
class of mankind having certain characteristics 
in common; as when our Lord spoke of the 
Jews as anevil and adulterous generation, and 
declared that that generation should not pass 
away prior to His return from heaven. To sup- 
pose He meant a generation of thirty to forty 
years is to throw the entire prophecy into con- 
fusion. The so frequent use-of the word in the 
sense indicated above, might have suggested 
to any sober reader the true teaching of the 
passage. 

It is the generation of the children of pride 
that Agur so graphically sketches for our in- 
struction and warning. Self-sufficient, they 


446 Notes on Proverbs. 


recognize no indebtedness to father and mother, 
but curse the one and do not bless the other. 
Contaminated with the horrible pollution of 
their sins, they are nevertheless pure in their 
own sight, declaring every one his own good- 
ness. See chap. 20:6. 

Lifting up their eyes and elevating their eye- 
brows, they manifest their supercilious insolence 
and haughtiness; while, if any seek to correct 
them, or make them conscious of their true con- 
dition in the sight of God, they turn angrily 
upon him, as wild beasts, ready to rend with 
their teeth, which are like swords and knives. 
Even where there is no provocation, they can 
be cruel and treacherous, devouring the poor 
and the needy. See chaps. 6:17 and 21:4. 

It is the generation afterwards headed up in 
the typical Pharisee, coldand proud, outwardly 
correct and pious, while secretly devouring 
widows’ houses, and heeding not the cry of the 
poor. 

Such is man in his self-righteousness. Such 
would be characteristic of all, had not the 
matchless grace of God made some to differ! 


15 The horse-leech hath two daughters ; 
Give! Give! [are their names]. 
There are three things that are never satisfied, 
Yea, four things say not, It is enough: 


Chapter Thirty 447 


16 Sheol; and the barren womb; 
The earth that is not filled with water; 
And the fire that saith not, It is enough. 


Proud and self-sufficient though he be, yet the 
heart of man is never satisfied. ‘“ Like a leech 
voracious of his food,” he never feeds to satiety. 
The two daughters are perhaps simply a sym- 
bolical way of declaring this characteristic of 
the blood-sucker of Arabia. But I have followed 
Prof. Noyes and Prof. Stuart in regarding the 
words “Give! Givel” as their names. The 
name is the index to their wretched habits. 

Notice the peculiar yet exact use of the num- 
bers three and four. Three things are never 
satisfied, namely, the unseen world, into which 
disembodied spirits are constantly descending ; 
the barren womb; and the earth upon which 
rain falls incessantly somewhere. But four 
things say not, “It is enough.” Therefore to 
the three already given, he adds the fire. It de- 
vours until all that it can reach has been de- 
stroyed, when it has to cease, and is, in a sense, 
satisfied, but only because it must be; for were 
there more material to feed upon, it would go 
on destroying still. 

All of these are but pictures of the restless 
yearning, implanted in man’s bosom by the Fall. 
The world and all that it contains is not enough 
to fill and satisfy it. ‘‘Thou hast made us for 


448 Notes on Proverbs 


Thyself,” said Augustine of Hippo, ‘and our 
hearts will never be at rest, until they rest in 
Thee.”? How slow we are to learn the lesson! 


17 The eye that mocketh at his father, 
And despiseth to obey his mother, 
The ravens of the valley shall pick it out, 
And the young eagles shall eat it. 


See verse 11 above. It is a well-known fact 
that ravens, eagles, and many other birds of car- 
rion and of prey begin their attack upon either 
a carcase or a living animal, or person, by 
plucking out the eyes. Instinct seems to tell 
them that, the power of sight gone, their 
victims are quite disabled. ‘‘ The crow shall one 
day pick out thine eyes!”’ is an Eastern impre- 
cation of dire import, which may indeed be 
founded upon this very proverb. 

The disobedient mocker shall come to grief in 
a similar way to what is here described. Sud- 
denly, but surely, he shall be bereft of the power 
of vision, and stumble in the darkness, vainly 
trying to beat off the foes that have destroyed 
his happiness, and would further ruin his life. 
It is the law of retribution which all have to 
bow to. How many a parent, when shamed 
and heart-broken, because of the waywardness 
of an unfilial son or daughter, has remembered 
in an agony of remorse similar disobedience on 


Chapter Thirty 449 


his own part, when parents, long since departed, 
were harrassed and distressed by his refusal to 
be controlled. These things come back in later 
years with crushing force. 


18 There be three things too wonderful for me, 
Yea, four which I know not: 

19 The way of an eagle in the air; 

he way of a serpent upon a rock; 

The way of a ship in the midst of the sea; 
And the way of a man with a maid. 

20 Such is the way of an adulterous woman, 
She eateth, and wipeth her mouth, 
And saith, I have done no wickedness. 


Again we have a three and a four carefully 
distinguished. All the causes of wonder are 
beyond a man’s ability to explain, but only 
three are impossible for him. The several ways 
or paths of an eagle in the air, a serpent on a 
rock, or a ship in the sea, he cannot trace. The 
way of a man with a maid—completely control- 
ling her mind and will—though none may ex- 
plain it, there are yet too many examples of 
it, to permit its being considered as too wonder- 
ful for him. 

Such is the way of an adulterous woman. 
Hardened in conscience, she lives in her sin, but 
like the eater who wipes his mouth, and removes 
all evidence of his eating, she hides her guilt and 
boldly says, “‘I have done no wickedness.” 

29 


450 Notes on Proverbs 


“Lest any of you be hardened by the deceit- 
fulness of sin,” is a word to be profitably kept 
in mind. Sin is often excused as though it were 
something for which men were not morally ac- 
countable. People are fond of considering it 
more as a mental and physical disease, than as 
iniquity for which the wrong-doer shall be called 
to account. But God has declared plainly, He 
will “bring every work into judgment, with 
every secret thing, whether it be good, or 
whether it be evil’? (Ecc. 12:14). 


21 For three things the earth is disquieted, 
And for four, which it cannot bear: 

22 For a servant when he reigneth; 
And a fool when he is filled with meat; 

23 For an odious woman when she is mamied; 
And a handmaid that dispossesseth her mistress. 


The first three of these obnoxious things are 
very disquieting. The fourth completely over- 
turns the order of the household. 

A servant reigning is like the sweeping storm 
of chap. 28:3. It was not an unfrequent occur- 
rence in the East for a slave or a servant to be, 
through some remarkable turn of events, sud- 
denly elevated to great power; sometimes 
through treachery, as in the case of Zimri (1 
Kings 16:1-20), or through favoritism as in 
that of the undeserving Haman. Persons of 


Chapter Thirty 45} 


low birth so exalted are often far harder on the 
populace than those born in high station. One 
has said that a servant ruling becomes “the 
most insolent, imperious, cruel, and tyrannical 
of masters.”” Equally disquieting is a fool ora 
churl who is filled with meat; that is, has all 
that heart can wish. Rolling in plenty, he de- 
spises the needy, and considers that his posses- 
sions entitle him to respect, though he be bereft 
of every virtue, as was Nabal the husband of 
Abigail to whom we have before referred. 

A fitting completion to this wretched trinity 
is an odious woman when married. Unamiable 
and vindictive in her disposition, she destroys 
the peace and happiness of her husband and de- 
pendents. 

The fourth instance, however, is more to be 
dreaded than all, so far as interfering with the 
order of the home is concerned. The Septuagint 
renders the clause ‘‘A handmaid when she hath 
supplanted her mistress.’? When it happens 
that one taken into the home as a menial, wins 
the husband’s affections, alienating his wife and 
children, utter ruin has come in. Unhappily, 
such instances are far from rare, and have 
wrecked thousands of families. 

How important it is to watch for the first be- 
ginnings of an unholy familiarity that may 
result so fatally | 


452 Notes on Proverbs 


24 There are four things which are little upon the earth, 
But they are exceeding wise: 
25 The ants are a people not strong, 
Yet they prepare their meat in the summer; 
26 The conies are but a feeble folk, 
Yet make they their houses in the rocks; 
27 The locusts have no king, 
Yet go they forth all of them by bands; 
28 The lizard taketh hold with her hands, 
And is in kings’ palaces. 


In these four wise things, as many have long 
since noticed, we have a beautiful gospel-picture. 

We have already remarked the provident 
habits of the grain-eating ant of Palestine, in 
the notes on chap. 6:6-8. We are therefore 
prepared at once to recognize the fact that its 
wisdom consists in making due preparation for 
the future. Taught by instinct to make use of 
present opportunities, in order to supply com- 
ing needs, it carefully stores away that which 
will be its food when the bright days of summer 
are past and gone, and the cold of winter 
renders it too late to go out and search for pro- 
vision to sustain life. 

In material things, man readily shows the 
same wisdom as this tiny creature. He, too, 
provides against the coming days when ill 
health or old age will forbid his going forth to 
labor. But is it not an amazing thing that men 
who display remarkable foresight in regard to 


Chapter Thirty . 453 


matters that pertain to this life, will yet forget 
altogether to make due preparation for that 
unending eternity to which every moment bears 
them nearer? 

Forgetful of the ages to follow this short life 
on earth, they allow golden opportunities to 
slip by, never to return, and rush carelessly on, 
ignoring the need of their souls and the fearful 
danger that lies just beyond death. “As it is ap- 
pointed unto men once to die, but after this the 
judgment; so Christ was once offered to bear 
the sins of many; and unto them that look for 
Him shall He appear the second time, without 
sin, unto salvation”’ (Heb. 9:27, 28). Here we 
learn of the fast-approaching danger, as also of 
the One who alone can give deliverance from it. 
But the majority of mankind are so insanely 
concerned about the fleeting present that they 
utterly ignore the everlasting future. 

To all such, the insignificant little ant preaches 
loudly, crying in the ears of any who will listen, 
‘“‘Flee from the wrath to come; prepare to meet 
thy God!” It is a practical preacher too, for it 
teaches by action. Refusing to idle away the 
golden hours of summer, like human triflers on 
every hand who allow childhood, youth, and 
middle age to slip by, leaving them still unpre- 
pared for eternity, the ant faithfully uses the 
present in view of the future. 


454 Notes on Proverbs 


This is wisdom indeed, and pictures what all 
may well take to heart. If the reader is un- 
saved, if he has not yet settled his eternal mat- 
ters by coming to Christ, let me shout in his ears 
the cry of the shipmaster to the runaway pro- 
phet: ‘‘What meanest thou, O sleeper? Arise, 
call upon thy God!”’ (Jonah 1:6). If you are 
not awakened soon, you will be aroused too 
late; only to learn that preparation-days are 
over and eternity has begun with your soul still 
unsaved, and to abide Christless forever! 

To him who desires to escape coming judg- 
ment the ‘“‘coney”’ has also a message telling 
of the only safe refuge. Properly speaking, 
the little animal of the 26th verse is not a coney 
at all, but a very timid defenseless creature of the 
marmot type, known to naturalists as the 
Syrian hyrax. The true coney belongs to the 
rabbit family, and does not seek a habitation in 
the rocks. But the hyrax does. It is described 
as ‘‘a small animal found in Lebanon, Palestine, 
Arabia Petra, Upper Egypt, and Abyssinia. It 
is about the size, figure, and brownish color of 
the rabbit, with long hind legs adapted to leap- 
ing, but is of a clumsier structure than that 
quadruped. It is without a tail, and has long 
bristly hairs scattered over the general fur; as 
to its ears (which are small and roundish in- 
stead of long, like the rabbit), its feet, and snout, 


Chapter Thirty . 455 


it resembles the hedge-hog. From the structure 
of its feet, which are round, and of a soft, pulpy, 
tender substance, it cannot dig, and hence is not 
fitted to live in burrows like the rabbit, but in 
the clefts of the rocks. It lives in families; is 
timid, lively, and quick to retreat at the ap- 
proach of danger; and hence is difficult to cap- 
ture. In its habits it is gregarious, and feeds on 
grain, fruits and vegetables.”’ In the Hebrew it is 
called Shaphan, and is included in the lists of un- 
clean animals in Lev. 11:5 and Deut. 14: 7, be- 
cause, though its jaws work with a cud-chewing 
motion, it does not divide the hoof. In Ps. 104: 
18 the same fact is referred to that is brought 
to our attention here in the Proverbs: “The 
high hills are a refuge for the wild goats, and 
the rocks for the conies.”’ 

Feeble and defenseless in the presence of its 
enemies, unable too to burrow and make a 
house for itself, the hyrax finds in the clefts of 
the rocks a suitable dwelling-place where it is 
safe from the power of the marauder and pro- 
tected from the fury of the elements. Surely the 
picture is plain. ‘‘ That Rock was Christ,” says 
the apostle, when writing of the rock from 
which flowed the living water in the wilderness. 
Here too the rock speaks of Him; for He alone 
is the sinner’s refuge. The little unclean hyrax, 
weak and feeble, flees to the rocks and is safe. 


456 Notes on Proverbs 


So, too, the helpless unclean sinner, awakened 
to a sense of his dire need and aroused by the 
signs of the storm that is soon to break over 
the heads of all who neglect God’s salvation, 
flees for refuge to the Lord Jesus Christ, and 
finds in Him a safe and blessed shelter where no 
foe can ever reach him and judgment can never 
come. 

It is in the clefts of the rock that the hyrax 
hides, and it is in a Saviour, pierced for our sins 
and bruised by the awful vengeance of the Holy 
One, that the believing soul finds a hiding-place. 


“On Him almighty vengeance fell, 
Which would have sunk a world to hell; 
He bore it for a chosen race 
And thus became their hiding-place.” 


Has my reader found a refuge in Him? Oh, be 
persuaded, I pray you, if still exposed to the 
wrath of God, to cease from all effort to save 
yourself (which can only result in bitter disap- 
pointment in the end) and flee to Jesus, while 
He still sounds out the peace-giving invitation, 
“‘Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are 
heavy-laden, and I will give you rest” (Matt. 
11: 28). 

The third of these wise things is the locust. 
Having no visible head, no leader, yet they go 
forth by bands, like soldiers in their respective 


Chapter Thirty 457 


regiments. So methodical are they that they seem 
to be acting under definite instructions and in 
strictest discipline. To those who have found a 
refuge in Christ they furnish an example of that 
subjection one to another, and to our unseen 
Head in heaven, that might well shame us as 
we contemplate the broken, scattered condition 
of the people of God, and reflect upon our share 
in the terrible ruin. 

To the world and the world-church, the body 
of Christ must seem like a heterogeneous, mis- 
cellaneous company, with no leader and no 
bond of union; but the same Jesus who died for 
His people’s sins is now seated in highest 
glory, and made by God the Head of all who 
have been redeemed by His precious blood. The 
Holy Spirit, sent down from heaven upon His 
ascension there as Man, is now indwelling every 
believer, thus binding all together in one great 
company, every one ‘‘members one of another.”’ 

This is most blessed, and when the soul enters 
into it, will lead to judgment of all that is op- 
posed to the truth of the Church as revealed in 
Scripture. If ‘‘there is one body,’’ and the Word 
of God knows no other, I should own my mem- 
bership in that alone, and by obedience to the 
truth, walk worthy of the vocation wherewith 
I am called. 

The locusts all act together, and this it is that 


458 Notes on Proverbs 


declares their wisdom. So should it be with 
the body of Christ. Divisions and schisms are 
declared plainly to be sinful and works of the 
flesh. ‘‘For ye are yet carnal; for whereas there 
is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, 
are ye not carnal, and walk as men?” (1 Cor. 
Sa): 

Earnestly the saints are exhorted to walk to- 
gether in love and fellowship, “‘ striving together 
for the faith of the gospel.”” Throughout the 
letter to the Philippians this precious unity is 
ever insisted on; and in 1 Corinthians likewise. 
In chap. * 10 of the latter epistle, the apostle 
writes: ‘‘Now I beseech you, brethren, by the 
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak 
the same thing, and that there be no divisions 
among you; but that ye be perfectly joined 
together in the same mind and in the same 
judgment.’ Such is the lesson of the locusts. 
May we have grace to learn it in the presence of 
God. 

It is now pretty generally acknowledged that 
the Hebrew word shemameth in verse 28 refers 
not to the spider, but to a little house-lizard 
called the gekko, which is very common in Pal- 
estine, and has a peculiar idiosyncrasy for fine 
hangings and palatial homes. It uses its fore- 
eet very much as though they were indeed 
‘“hands,”’ catching its food, chiefly flies and spi- 


Chapter Thirty 459 


ders, therewith, and securely holding them while 
it devours them. On the under side of each toe 
is a tiny sponge-like sac, containing an adhe- 
sive liquid. As it runs up marble walls, or out 
upon tesselated ceilings, this substance oozes 
out, and enables it to “take hold with its 
hands” upon the smooth, slippery surfaces, 
whence it is not easily dislodged. 

May it not speak to us of the power of faith, 
which is indeed the hand by which the believing 
sinner takes hold of the precious truth of God, 
thus entering into the blessing He would have 
all His own enjoy? This itis that gives us to 
be at home in the King’s palace, and ensures an 
eternal abode in the Father’s house. 

Amazing is the grace which gives to all who 
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ a place by 
faith even now in ‘“‘the heavenlies”’; yet such is 
our happy portion. For “God who is rich in 
mercy, for His great love wherewith He loved 
us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quick- 
ened us together with Christ, (by grace are ye 
saved;) and hath raised us up together, and 
made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ 
Jesus: that in the ages to come He might show 
the exceeding riches of His grace, in his kindness 
toward us, through Christ Jesus” (Eph. 2: 4-7). 
Now we are there in Him. He has gone up on 
high as our representative. Soon we shall be 


460 Notes on Proverbs 


there with Him, to enjoy His companionship for 
eternity | 

Happy is the soul who has learned aright the 
message of these four wise things! * 

Passing on from them, we next are instructed 
as to the Christian’s walk and behavior, in the 
four comely things that follow: 


29 There be three things that go well, 
Yea, four that are comely in going: 

30 A lion, that is strongest among beasts, 
And turneth not away for any; 

31 A [beast] girt in the loins; a he-goat also; 
And a king, against whom there is no rising up. 


It is quite proper to speak of the first three 
creatures as going well, or excelling in going; 
though it would hardly apply to a king. Ma- 
jestic and glorious, he is comely in his goings- 
forth, and therefore comes under the second 
head. 

The lion is characterized by unflinching bold- 
ness, and speaks of that holy courage which 
should mark the Christian soldier as he con- 
tends earnestly for the faith once delivered to 
the saints. In his faith, he is to have virtue (true 


* Mr. J. B. Gottshall has recently issued an excellent little 
volume in the ‘‘ Nature in the Light of Scripture” series, enti- 
tled ‘‘ The Ant, the Coney, the Locust, and the Lizard,””? which 
contains much that is helpful and suggestive. To be had of 
the same Publishers, 


Chapter Thirty 461 


courage), that he may withstand in the evil 
day, and turn not aside for any. It is not mere 
natural forwardness, or dogged determination, 
that is contemplated, but “‘ the irresistible might 
of weakness” that leans upon God, that led 
Paul to write, ‘‘When I am weak, then am I 
strong.” 

The second in the series has been variously 
understood as the greyhound, the girded horse, 
the zebra, and even the cock! The latter is pre- 
ferred in the Septuagint, Syriac, Vulgate, and 
Chaldee versions. But the word simply means, 
girded as to the loins, according to the best au- 
thorities, and may therefore be applied to any 
slender creature characterized by swiftness. The 
translators of the Authorized Version preferred 
greyhound, as most fully expressing the idea of 
an animal adapted to running. It matters little 
what beast is signified. The lesson for us is 
clear enough. As a loin-girt animal rests not 
till it reaches its prey, or the goal to which it is 
running, so the saint is to press swiftly on, re- 
fusing to be turned aside by the attractions of 
this world. It is as the racer he is viewed in 
Phil. 3: ‘Brethren, Icount not myself to have 
apprehended: but this one thing I do, forgetting 
those things which are behind, and reaching 
forth unto those things which are before, I press 
toward the mark for the prize of the calling of 


462 Notes on Proverbs 


God on high in Christ Jesus” (vers. 13, 14). 
This should ever be the Christian's attitude. 
Having here no continuing city, he halts not to 
dally with the trifling things of earth, but, with 
girded loins and the eye fixed on Christ, he hast- 
ens on to the judgment-seat where the prize is 
to be awarded. ‘‘ Wherefore, seeing we also are 
compassed about with so great a cloud of wit- 
nesses, let us lay aside every weight, and sin 
which doth so easily beset us, and let us run 
with patience the race that is set before us, look- 
ing unto Jesus the author and finisher of faith; 
who for the joy that was set before Him en- 
dured the cross, despising the shame, and is set 
down at the right hand of the throne of God”’ 
(Heb. 12:1, 2). He was the great pattern-pil- 
grim, ever “‘girt in the loins,” passing through 
this world as a stranger; finding here only sor- 
row and grief, but whose joy is now full in 
glory! 

The he goat is the “‘climber.’”’ Refusing the 
low and often unhealthful valleys, he mounts 
up, higher and higher, to the rocky hills and the 
peaks of the mountains, as we have already 
been reminded in the psalm (10418). Breathing 
the exhilarating air of ‘‘the top of the rocks,”’ 
he finds both pleasure and safety in his retreat. 
The lesson is simple. It is the Christian who, 
like Habakkuk, walks upon the high places, that 


Chapter Thirty 463 


will be able to rejoice in the day of trouble, and 
joy in the God of his salvation when everything 
of earth seems to fail (Hab. 3:17-19). From 
the soul of the climbing saint there will ever be 
melody “‘for the Chief Singer on the stringed in- 
struments.” 

Heavenly-mindedness lifts the soul above all 
the mists of this poor world, and enables one to 
view all from God’s standpoint. ‘If ye then be 
risen with Christ, seek those things which are 
above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand 
of God. Set your mind on things above, not on 
things on the earth. For ye have died, and your 
life is hid with Christ in God” (Col. 3: 1-3). 
This is the lesson of the he goat. Would that 
every believer did enter into it! 

The last in the list of these comely things is 
the king going forth in his might, against whom 
there is no rising up. Itis the overcomer, the 
man of faith, made unto God a king, whose dig- 
nity is never greater than when he walks in low- 
liness and meekness through this scene, draw- 
ing his supplies from above, not from below. 
Great is the honor conferred upon all who 
have been redeemed. No longer children of the 
night, but of the day, they are called to over- 
come the world in the power of the truth 
made good to the soul by faith. Such a “‘king”’ 
was Abraham as he went from Melchizedek’s 


464 Notes on Proverbs. 


presence to meet Sodom’s fawning monarch, 
whom he vanquished in a different way from 
that in which he had defeated the confederacy 
headed by Chedorlaomer (Gen. 14). Such would 
God have every saved one to be; but if we 
would enter into it, we must take sides with 
Him, counting the richest treasures of earth as 
dung and dross. ‘This is the victory that over- 
cometh the world, even our faith” (1 John 5: 4). 
Strong in faith, the man of God views the pres- 
ent in the light of the future, and so, even though 
accounted as sheep for the slaughter, can ex- 
claim, ‘“‘Nay, in all these things we are more 
than conquerors, through Him that loved us’”’ 
(Rom. 8: 37). 


32 If thou hast done foolishly in lifting up thyself, 
Or if thou hast thought evil, lay thy hand upon thy 


mouth. 

33 Surely the churning of milk bringeth forth butter, 
And the wringing of the nose bringeth forth blood : 
So the forcing of wrath bringeth forth strife. 


Having depicted in parable the dignity of the 
saint, and the behavior that becomes him, 
Agur’s last word is an exhortation to self-judg- 
ment, in case any have so far forgotten their 
holy calling as to foolishly exalt themselves, or 
have spoken or acted with evil intent. If the 
thoughts be not pure, speech is exceedingly dan- 


Chapter Thirty 465 


gerous; it is better far to lay the hand upon the 
mouth than to persist in what is unrighteous. 

It is so easy to force wrath; that is, to pro- 
voke another to anger. To do so betrays a soul 
out of communion with God, and a spirit insub- 
ject to His Word. As butter is produced by 
churning, and blood by pressing the nose, so 
strife results from unnecessary provocation. 
“The servant of the Lord must not strive.’’ He 
is exhorted to meekness and that fine courtesy 
which marked all that Jesus said and did. 
Coarse, ungenerous words and ways are very 
unbecoming in one who is a subject of divine 
clemency, and who is therefore expected to 
manifest towards even his enemies the compas- 
sions of Christ. 


With this message Agur’s ministry for us 
comes to aclose. Unknown though he be, save 
for this precious collection of wise sayings pre- 
served for our edification in this one chapter, 
how much should we have lost if the Spirit of 
God had not included his ministry in the sacred 
volume! 


466 


CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE 


THE final chapter of the book is occupied 
with what is designated as 


1 The words of King Lemuel, 
The prophecy that his mother taught him 


That Lemuel was his mother’s name for Solo- 
mon is generally believed, and seems likely to be 
true. There was no King Lemuel among those 
who sat on the thrones of either Judah or Is- 
rael; nor do we have any record of one of that 
name among the surrounding nations. It oc- 
curs only in this chapter, and is probably in- 
tended for the son of David and Bathsheba. 
The word simply means “‘ Unto God,” or, “‘ With 
God.” 

It is most interesting and deeply affecting to 
be permitted to listen to a part of the instruc- 
tion given by his mother to the young prince. 
Precious is it also to note how grace had 
wrought in her soul, if she be indeed identical 
with Bathsheba; so that she, whose history 
had been so sadly blotted, could be her son’s 
guide and counsellor in matters of such great 


Chapter Thirty-One 467 


moment. No doubt the loss of her first-born, 
taken away in the Lord’s discipline, made him 
who had been called Jedediah, ‘‘ Beloved of Jeho- 
vah,”’ all the dearer to her heart (2 Sam. 12: 24, 
25). He was probably brought up to be much 
in her company, learning to value greatly her 
instruction and her loving care. How much he 
was indebted to her for that godliness which 
marked his early reign, will never be known 
until the records are read out at the judgment- 
seat of Christ. The influence of a God-fearing 
mother is beyond all telling. 

The opening verse of her prophecy, or oracle, 
seems to imply her deep concern that she give 
just the counsel needed. 


2 What, my son? and what, O son of my womb? 
And what, O son of my vows? 


The thrice-repeated ‘‘what’’ has the force of 
‘““what shall I say?’’ She desired to have the 
mind of God as to that which she endeavored 
to impress upon his young heart. Words, with 
Lemuel’s mother, were sacred things; for she 
felt keenly the need of instructing her son aright, 
and feared lest she in any way should mislead 
him. 

The expression, “‘son of my vows,” speaks 
volumes. Like Hannah, she had doubtless been 
much in prayer for her child both before and 


” 


468 Notes on Proverbs 


after his birth. Humbled and repentant, deeply 
exercised over the so-recent sin in which she had 
participated, there would be cause for much 
concern as to the future of the child whose 
mother had so sadly failed. This she would feel 
keenly, and it would seem to have resulted in 
pious vows concerning the one to be entrusted 
to her. That the vows themselves would not 
be in keeping with the Christian revelation does 
not touch the point. They were right and 
proper in the dispensation of law, and expressed 
the purpose of her heart to bring up her child in 
the fear of God. 

Some might seek to use such a passage as 
authority for making vows now, and especially 
baptismal and confirmation pledges. But all 
this is wide of the mark, though none can doubt 
the sincere piety and the good intentions of 
many who thus bind themselves. Such a prac- 
tice, however, is thoroughly opposed to the 
letter and spirit of the New Testament. Ina 
legal age, when God was dealing with the re- 
sponsible man as such, it was quite in keeping 
with His ways, and He gave full instruction 
concerning vows and the necessity of paying 
them; making known also how a wife, or a 
minor might be released from them, if on the 
day of the promise; the husband, or father, dis- 
allowed them. See Lev. 27. But nothing like 


Chapter Thirty-One 469 


this is known in the Epistles written to unfold 
the doctrine and practice pertaining to the 
Church of God. 

Undoubtedly, Christian parents can, and 
should, bring their children to God in prayer, 
seeking divine wisdom to bring them up in the 
nurture and admonition of the Lord. This an- 
swers, in the present age of grace, to the vows 
and pledges made by godly parents of old. 

Before dismissing this subject of vows, I just 
remind the reader that if one has been, through 
ignorance and legality, betrayed into making a 
vow which he afterwards learns is unscriptural 
and opposed to the truth of God, he should go 
at once to the Lord in contrition of heart con- 
fessing his error. To go on as though he had 
really bound his soul thereby, would be a grave 
mistake. For instance, a Romish priest takes a 
vow of celibacy. Should he in after years, 
discerning more clearly the will of God, leave 
the apostate system wherewith he has been con- 
nected, his bad vow is in no sense binding, once 
he repents. Such a case is contemplated in 1 
Cor. 7:25-28, 36. He who has pledged him- 
self to perpetual virginity, if he finds later that 
he has made a mistake and put himself under 
grievous bondage, is free to marry, and the word 
says, ‘‘He sinneth not.” The solemn words of 
Ecc. 5: 4-6 do not affect the question at issue, 


470 Notes on Proverbs 


as what is there contemplated is a vow made in 
accordance with the law, in the legal dispensa- 
tion. ‘Ye are not under law, but under grace.” 


3 Give not thy strength unto women, 
Nor thy ways to that which destroyeth kings. 


Faithfully was Lemuel warned against the 
snare of licentiousness. How well would it have 
been for Solomon if he had ever persevered in 
the path of temperance and sobriety here indi- 
cated, remembering the word, ‘‘He shall not 
multiply wives to himself’? (Deut. 17:17). His 
early life seems to have been marked by obedi- 
ence to this command of God and by heeding 
his mother’s warning, but in his later years he 
cast discretion to the winds, and the sad result 
was, ‘“‘his wives turned away his heart.” 


4 It is not for kings, O Lemuel, 
It is not for kings to drink wine, 
Nor for princes to desire strong drink: 
5 Lest they drink and forget the law, 
And pervert the judgment of any of the afflicted. 
6 Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, 
And wine unto those that be of heavy hearts: 
7 Let him drink, and forget his poverty, 
And remember his misery no more. 
8 Open thy mouth for the dumb 
In the cause of all such as are appointed to destruc- 
tion. 
9 Open thy mouth, judge righteously, 
And plead the cause of the poor and needy. 


Chapter Thirty-One 47} 


He who would rule well over a nation, must 
first be master of himself. It was here that Noah 
failed when set over the renewed earth. Earn- 
estly Bath-sheba warns her son of the evil effects 
that follow intemperate indulgence in wine and 
strong drink. It is not for kings to be given to 
inebriation; for drunkenness befogs the mind, 
and benumbs the faculties. Drinking immoder- 
ately, they are likely to forget the law, and thus 
be rendered unfit to try a case in righteousness. 

The king of old was the representative not 
merely of the executive power but, in a large 
sense, of the judicial and the legislative sides of 
government. The afflicted and the oppressed 
would not receive justice from a besotted king, 
therefore the importance of temperance and the 
clearness of mind that accompanies abstinence 
from what would inflame the brain and cloud 
the understanding. 

If any drink to intoxication let it be those 
who are ready to perish and those who are 
disheartened and bitter of soul. There is a 
tinge of undisguised irony in the sixth and 
seventh verses that must not be overlooked. 
Strong drink might help the despondent to for- 
get their poverty and to remember their misery 
no more; but the true remedy is for the judge of 
the oppressed to hear their cause patiently and 
render a decision in righteousness, as he cannot 


= 


472 Notes on Proverbs 


do if under the power of wine. He is to open 
his mouth for those who cannot speak for them- 
selves, and deliver any who would be in danger 
of destruction which has not been deserved. 
See chap. 24: 11, 12. 


From verse 10 to the end of the chapter, the 
subject is the virtuous woman. This section is 
an acrostic poem, each verse beginning, in the 
original, with one of the letters of the Hebrew 
alphabet as indicated in the text here used, 
though not seen in our authorized Bibles. It 
was a favorite form of composition among the 
Hebrews, and is used frequently in the Psalms 
and in the Lamentations of Jeremiah. 


10 (Aleph.) Who can find a virtuous woman? 
For her price is far above rubies. 
11 (Beth.) The ns of her husband doth safely trust 
in her, 
So that he shall not lack gain. 
12 (Gimel.) She will do him good and not evil 
All the days of her life. 


) Virtuous is used in the sense of thrifty and 


devoted. The thought of chastity is of course 
included, because the devoted wife would be 
faithful to her husband; but it is not that which 
is particularly before the mind. The virtuous 
woman is a dependable woman; one who can 
be counted on in every emergency. Capable and 


Chapter Thirty-One 473 


energetic, with a high sense of the dignity and 
importance of administering the affairs of the 
home, her worth is not to be compared with 
that of jewels, however valuable. 

\\-\L In such a wife the heart of her husband may 
safely confide, for he finds in her love and un- 
selfish affection treasure so vast, that, let his . 
circumstances be as they may, he can never be 
in poverty. Her influence is for good and not 
evil all the days of her life. It is a lovely picture 
of the mutual relationship of Christ and the 
Church: the latter owning Him as Head and 
delighting to love and serve Him; while He finds 
His joy in her and beholds in her an inheritance 
of untold value! 


13 (Daleth.) She seeketh wool and flax, 
And worketh willingly with her hands 
14 (He.) She is like the merchants’ ships, 
She bringeth her food from afar. 
15 (Vau.) She riseth also while it is yet night, 
And giveth meat to her household, 
And a portion to her maidens. 


Finding her deepest joy in loving service, the 
virtuous wife takes delight in weaving with her 
own hands the wool and the flax which are to 
be the clothing for her household. The picture 
is an Eastern one, but none the less lovely to 
Western eyes. Kitto says, ‘In the state of so- 
ciety to which this description belongs, every 


474 Notes on Proverbs 


kind of drapery for the person, the tent, or the 
house, is manufactured at home by the women, 
who make it a matter of pride to be able to 
boast that their husbands and children are en- 
tirely clad by the labor of their hands; and the 
man’s robe clings the more sweetly to him,—is 
warmer in winter, and cooler in the heat, from 
his knowledge of the dear hands by which every 
thread has been prepared.”’ 

Dainty delicacies or coarse fare when provided 
by her hands become sweet indeed to the objects 
of her solicitude. She is not content with slip- 
shod service but is constantly bringing forth 
“‘things new and old,” as the ships of the merch- 
ants bring to our doors the treasures of distant 
lands. 

Slothfulness she shames by her early rising, 
even before the first beams of the sun begin to 
light the horizon. In Syria, the women are up 
long before the dawn to prepare the morning 
meal, ‘‘ grinding at the mill,” according to our 
Saviour’s description, in order that the men may 
go forth early to labor, and thus be enabled to 
rest during the sultry part of the day. 

It is only love that can render service like this 
sweet and delightful. Where that is lacking, it 
must be the veriest drudgery. So Paul could 
write of himself and his fellow-laborers as bond- 
servants of Jesus Christ. This should be the 


Chapter Thirty-One 475 


Church’s happiness—to serve the living and 
true God, while waiting with eager expectancy 
for His Son from heaven. 

The wife here described serves in the conscious- 
ness of her true estate. Unless that be settled 
all would be fear and anxiety. So with the 
Christian. Service springs from the knowledge 
of an established relationship. It is not as a 
price paid to win the favor of an unreconciled 
God. But believers, on their part, having been 
reconciled to Him, who needed not to be recon- 
ciled to them, serve in newness of the spirit, not 
in the oldness of the letter. Thus all uncertainty 
is gone, and willing hands work as a result of 
the power of Christ’s constraining love. 


16 (Zain.) She considereth a field, and buyeth it: 
With the fruit of her hands, she planteth a vine- 


yard. 
17 (Cheth.) She girdeth her loins with strength, 
And strengtheneth her arms. 
18 (Teth.) She perceiveth that her merchandise is good: 
Her candle goeth not out by night. 


Unlike the unfaithful servant, who wrapped 
his talent in a napkin and hid it away where he 
could not use it, the prudent wife is continually, 
by her economy and foresight, adding to her 
husband’s possessions. Like Jabez, she enlarges 
her coast, and becomes also keeper of a vine. 


476 Notes on Proverbs. 


yard, a joyful service; for the fruit of the vine 
throughout Scripture speaks of gladness. The 
bride in the Canticles has to acknowledge, 
‘mine own vineyard have I not kept,” but it is 
blessedly otherwise with her whose varied 
{abors we are here called to contemplate with 
admiration. 

The girding of the loins for service may well 
remind us of that subjection to the truth of 
God which ever marks out the devoted soul; for 
it is with the truth the loins are to be girded; 
and this both for strength and fitness to take 
up the daily tasks. No believer can render prop- 
er service unless the loins of the mind are thus 
controlled by the unerring word of the Lord. 
The virtuous woman girds her loose flowing 
garments tightly about her, drawing them up 
to leave the feet free, as she goes about her 
work, doing with her might what her hands 
find to do. 

In her labor she finds profit, nor does her 
lamp go out by night, for she realizes the im- 
portance of being ever watchful as well as ener- 
getic. How many a soul has sadly failed be- 
cause, while there was great activity, the corres- 
ponding watchfulness was not maintained] 
The lamp of testimony has been allowed to burn 
very dimly, or to die out; and forgetting the 
place and portion of children of light, the care- 


Chapter Thirty-One 477 


less soul has been found, as though a child of 
darkness, sleeping among the dead. 


19 (Yod.) She layeth her hands to the spindle, 
And her hands hold the distaff. 
20 (Caph.) She stretcheth out her hand to the lowly, 
Yea, she reacheth forth her hands to the needy. 
21 (Lamed.) She is not afraid of the snow for her 
household, 
For all her household are clothed with scarlet. 


The nineteenth verse has reference to the an- 
cient custom, which is still prevalent among 
some Eastern peoples, of spinning without the 
use of a wheel. They hold the distaff in one 
hand and twirl their long wool spindles with 
the other, stopping to wind the thread upon 
them as fast as it is drawn out. Thus, by dili- 
gence and economy, the virtuous woman is able 
to minister, with loving care to the lowly and 
the needy. Nor is hers the charity which fails 
to begin at home, for she watches solicitously 
for the comfort of her family; by her own skill 
making scarlet garments of the warm wool for 
their covering in time of cold and snow. 

Some prefer the rendering ‘‘double-garments” 
to “scarlet,” as they do not see what the color 
has to do with keeping out the cold; but the 
word is never so translated elsewhere in Scrip- 
ture. Itis the scarlet obtained from the Tola, 


478 Notes on Proverbs 


a cochineal-like insect, which, being crushed, 
produces a fine deep red, or rich crimson dye, 
much admired by the Orientals. It isthe “‘worm”’ 
of psalm 22:6, to which our Lord likens Him- 
self, He who was bruised and slain that all His 
redeemed might be clothed in splendor for eter- 
nity. 

It is noteworthy that, to the present day, 
the mountain Nestorians, and other Eastern 
tribes clothe their households in a scarlet or 
striped stuff, much like Scotch tartan in texture 
and material. It is to garments such as these 
that the text refers. Even in the smallest details 
the word of God is absolutely correct. 


22 (Mem.) She maketh herself coverings of tapestry, 
Her clothing is fine linen and purple. 
23 (Nun.) Her husband is known in the gates, 
When he sitteth among the elders of the land. 
24 (Samech.) She maketh linen [ garments ], and selleth 
[them], 
And delivereth girdles unto the merchant. 


The authorized version reads “‘silk’’ in de- 
scribing the clothing of verse 22, but it is now 
well-known that not until the reign of Justinian 
was silk brought to the Levant from China. 
Fine, white linen, glistening like silk, such as the 
bride is arrayed with in Rev. 19, is what is un- 
doubtedly intended; as elsewhere in Scripture 


Chapter Thirty-One 479 


purple and fine linen are used together as the 
attire of the well-clothed. See Luke 16:19. 

The purple was obtained from ‘the juice of a 
certain species of shell-fish found on the eastern 
shores of the Mediterranean Sea. The juice of 
the entire fish was not used, but only a little of 
its liquor, called the flower, contained in a white 
vein, or vessel, in the neck.” 

Typically, the fine linen and purple picture, as 
in the tabernacle hangings, practical righteous- 
ness and royal glory. In the rich man referred 
to above, we see how one could be outwardly 
covered with what spoke of uprightness and 
privilege, while actually ‘poor, and wretched, 
and blind, and miserable, and naked.”’ The vir- 
tuous wife is robed in what bespeaks her true 
character and dignity. 

Her husband too is honored and esteemed. 
His place as sitting among the elders of the land 
implies that he occupied a seat in the gate of the 
city, as a judge, ora magistrate. See notes on 
chaps. 22:22 and 24:7. His wife’s thrift and 
good judgment reflect credit upon him, adding 
to the esteem in which he is held. Such a spouse 
is indeed ‘‘a help meet for him.” 

Not only has she sufficient to clothe her house- 
hold and herself, but her unwearying industry 
enables her to produce linen garments and gir- 
dles for the caravan-merchants, who readily 


480 Notes on Proverbs. 


purchase the work of her hands, to carry them 
to distant places. ‘fhus she is “‘ bearing fruit in 
good works,” and her abundant labors provide 
clothing for those far-removed from her own 
dwelling. 

The spiritual lesson is easily seen. She who 
is faithful in ministering at home, and clothes 
herself in a garment of practical godliness and 
righteousness, will have enough and to spare 
for the blessing of others in ‘‘the regions be- 
yond.” 


25 (Ayin.) Strength and honor are her clothing; 
And she shall rejoice in time to come. 
26 (Pe.) She openeth her mouth with wisdom ; 
And on her tongue is the law of kindness. 
27 (Tsaddi.) Lan looketh well to the ways of her house- 
° 


And estat not the bread of idleness. 


Every clause here is of the deepest importance. 
The fine linen and purple are really explained 
symbolically in verse 25—“‘Strength and honor 
are her clothing.” That is, of course, strength 
of character, or, as already noted, uprightness 
of heart and conduct, coupled with that gra- 
cious dignity which belongs to one who walks 
with God. No wonder it is written, ‘‘She shall 
rejoice in time to come.” Godliness and joyful- 
ness are inseparable. ‘The joy of the Lord is 
your strength.’”’ There is no real happiness 


Chapter Thirty-One 481 


apart from righteousness, and vice versa. 
Where the conscience is at rest, the heart sings 
for joy. When David sinned, he lost, not salva- 
tion, but the joy of it, which was never his 
again until all was out in the presence of God, 
and he became once more “‘a man in whose 
spirit there is no guile.” Then he could call 
upon the upright in heart to join with him in 
songs of rejoicing. Contrast psalms 51 and 32. 

As long as the soul has any controversy with 
God,—if persisting in any known sin, refusing 
to confess evil-doing, or failing to walk in any 
truth revealed in the Word, there will be only 
unrest and lack of peace and joy. The secret of 
a happy Christian life is very simple. It con- 
sists in walking in the power of an ungrieved 
Spirit. Let there be any compromise with un- 
holiness, and the Spirit of God, who dwells in 
every believer, is grieved. In such a case, it is 
impossible that there should be either peace of 
mind or joy of heart. But when all that is contra- 
ry to His holy willis dragged out into the light, 
and judged, then it is that the confiding saint, 
arrayed in clothing of ‘strength and honor,” 
can lift up the voice in song and make accompa- 
nying melody unto the Lord in the heart. Nor 
will this gladness fade away while daily reckon- 
ing oneself to be ‘‘ dead indeed unto sin, but alive 


unto God in Christ Jesus our Lord.” 
31 


482 Notes on Proverbs 


Fittingly the next verse shows that into the 
lips of such a one grace is poured; nor is the 
salt of righteousness lacking. Like Priscilla in- 
structing Apollos, she opens her mouth with 
wisdom, and the law of kindness is on her 
tongue. What a contrast to the shrewish and 
contentious woman, several times contemned in 
the earlier chapters. See notes on chaps. 21: 
19 and 27: 15,16. Because of the pureness of 
her heart, her tongue delights to utter words 
of grace and truth. See chap. 22:11. Who 
does not prize a season of fellowship with such 
a rare saint as this! When, instead of petty 
complaints and wretched, slanderous tales, the 
lips pour forth words of loving-kindness, and 
declare their joy in the precious truth that pos- 
sesses the reins and the soul, conversation be- 
comes profitable indeed; when, by such well- 
directed wisdom and tenderness, the hearers are 
edified and refreshed. 

The twenty-seventh verse emphasizes some- 
thing which in a wife and mother is unspeak- 
ably precious. She looks well to the ways of 
her household. Solicitously she notices the hab- 
its and actions, as well as marking the speech, 
of her children. Without nagging and ill-tem- 
per, she yet exercises a firm but loving discipline 
over each one; checking here and encouraging 
there, as she sees either to be needed. Never too 


Chapter Thirty-One 483 


busy to seek to win an erring one from the 
snares of worldliness and pride, she eats not the 
bread of idleness, but by both example and pre- 
cept endeavors to guide her offspring in the way 
of peace. Having a mother like this, how poig- 
nant must be the grief of heart, how strong the 
reprovings of conscience, if the feet of any of her 
household go astray for a time in paths of sin] 


28 (Koph.) Her children rise up, and call her blessed ; 
Her husband also, and he praiseth her, [ saying, | 


29 (Resh.) Many daughters have done virtuously, 
But thou excellest them all. 

Realizing in later life (what may not always 
be so clear to them in childhood or early youth) 
the wisdom and love manifested in her firm 
but tender discipline, her children arise up and 
shower encomiums upon her, attributing their 
well-being and blessing to her godly training 
and instruction; while her husband, rejoicing in 
such a partner of his joys and sorrows, exclaims 
in honest praise, ‘Many daughters have done 
virtuously, but thou excellest them alll’? He 
has found in her what the heart ever craves— 
one whose comeliness of soul and mind excel 
even beauty of face and form. 

May we not see in his admiration and delight 
a picture of the tender love with which our 
heavenly Bridegroom shall regard His Bride, the 
Church, when He presents her to Himself, in the 


484 Notes on Proverbs 


soon-coming day of glory, ‘‘not having spot, or 
wrinkle, or any such thing!”’ 
30 (Schin.) Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain: 
But a woman that feareth Jehovah, she shall be 
raised, 
31 ( Tau.) Give her of the fruit of her hands ; 


And let her own works praise her in the gates. 


Here we have the secret of her devoted, virtu- 
ous life. She fears the Lord. This, which our 
book has declared to be the beginning of wis- 
dom, is her abiding characteristic. Her words, 
her ways, her dress, and her household disci- 
pline, are all ordered as in His presence. 

Others may pride themselves on their beauty, 
or endeavor to obtain favor by winning words 
and pleasing manners; but if there be no true 
character behind such charms, the day will soon 
come when praise will give place to contempt; 
while she who fears Jehovah will be honored by 
all who appreciate virtue and excellence of spirit. 
Her beneficent labors too will receive their pub- 
lic and well-merited recognition. 

But we who have the light of New Testament 
revelation can see in this last verse more than a 
a hint of the coming manifestation at the judg- 
ment-seat of Christ. When the mists of earth 
have gone forever, when its pride and folly and 
iniquity are eternally past, such a one as the 
mother of Lemuel has been describing, shall ap. 


Chapter Thirty-One 485 


pear in her Lord’s own presence with rejoicing, 
bearing her sheaves with her. At His feet she 
will cast down the fruit of her hands and the 
works His grace has wrought in and through 
her, to have all surveyed by Himself. How 
sweet to hear His words of approbation in the 
gate, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant! 
Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.” 

Who then will regret days of toil and nights 
of watching? Who then would exchange the 
saint’s path and portion, with all its responsi- 
bilities as well as privileges, for a place of ease 
and careless enjoyment of a few fleeting hours 
onearth? Not one. 

Living in view of that sacred hour when all 
our works shall be inspected and passed upon 
by Him who has won our deepest affections, 
may we have purpose of heart and earnestness 
of soul to cleave to Himself, holding fast His 
faithful word, and not denying His Name, while 
waiting here for His return. 

If these notes and meditations shall assist 
any so to do, they will have accomplished the 
author’s most cherished desire. 


wa 5 iat ee 
a ae edhe beet Fe 
= eae lori eck Re wish bevatr , fhe 
inch con ggena bes Abani sreiei &) oda: tenet yaw: 
Ber Ty a ‘oie isd ni we” pecitoq bats: afi 3 
es foe tegaonlg: tt argal ge Paes 
~ eeisotk aenage & 25 deapencnatns 2 ‘ 
“) Geletra aang Aen se) ! ere ths eat 

Whe nedog iebiet. Mieke » anal wolves 

= -awtvbseasg benciietes; lt of Shaky aha 
ofenis thi gee étion anid abhor: 
- = amavis: Sead tinad Wivengeiue: wre 
cal mre litesdsh yeretdeliad «MM patentee: zee, oe hip 
at alten wiqued yooh tal bpg sow lh 
pe eng hoot, In oo Grassi args 


; £ Shedine acdnty iene hte eetor. sesh we 
2d: are lela: ~yid Tew hire chanel. ¥. 
_ * -* ain ees sores | “etieido decency ® 
; ie Au Thien fry = 
~ i : atc 
a Ny = ' ye! y 
. ‘ ae pil h 
— ~~ ics i” fey RNS 45 Pies + 
ie cen eeOR MS AR. OCS. he 
my : 
; 8. ee BY Se | dene Rev 
ar 


i , _— at 
. = 
> 7 vk ok ee 


‘oar 


SAN JOSE CHRISTIAN COLLEGE LIBRAD 
7ON S ity 


y ape 


AN JO 


William Jessup University 
Library 
333 Sunset Blvd. 
Rocklin, CA 95765 


0 
Be 
=] 
mi 
o 
= 
m 


% 
= 
( 
& ~| 
~ 
CR 


4 


El = 
& fe) 
& 


S 
E 


=x 
i 
Pe] 
ee 
_ 


Demco No. 62-0549 


os ween ee Oe I Se bebe Ee GPa OF UE 8 


AONE 


Jcc 61873 


About the Author... 


| 


H. A. IRONSIDE, internationally be- 
loved Bible teacher and preacher, was 
author of more than 60 volumes as well 
as many pamphlets and articles on Bible 
subjects. His writings include addresses 
or commentaries on the entire New 
Testament, all of the prophetic books 
of the Old Testament, and a great many 
volumes on specific Bible themes and 
subjects. 


Countless thousands of readers testify 
to Dr. Ironside’s helpful faculty of get- 
ting to the heart of any Scripture, and 
his clear, easily grasped outlines of even 
the most complex passages make the 
Bible easier to study and to understand. 
He wrote as simply and as directly as 
he spoke—no one who has heard him 
preach will forget how vividly he made 
Bible texts come to life and linger in the 
memory and in the heart. 


For 18 of his 50 years of ministry, 
Dr. Ironside was pastor of the famous 
Moody Memorial Church in Chicago. In 
October 1948 he resigned to devote him- 
self to further writing and conference 
speaking. He went to be with the Lord 
on January 15, 1951. 


a] 


JAN JOSE CHRISTIAN COLLEGE LIBRAR 


SH? 


790 S, 12th Street 
San Jose. Caltornia 


LEE7! 


=~ 


LRPPL AOL 


7K 
RA 


2 i TAT Taek rene) 


taaianense 
pererity hen eed pyurnien 


i Drone 


y tit 
: be y erie 
SErrepetcecpurabnnnsese cee 
Ne iera rests s! <P “ f 
LSS f 3 = 7 


(rr 
is 
eh rtat 


Raise tt 


. 
con 


