Withee sisrsseanttren 
- 


eke a 


x 
Seeipantues 


erst : oes ne Se : ea 


ea 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2025 


https://archive.org/details/notesonbooksofezO000hair_p4l9 


Notes on the Books of 


EZRA 
NEHEMIAH 
and ESTHER 
by 
H. A. Ironside, Litt. D. 


LOIZEAUX BROTHERS, INC. 
Neptune, New Jersey 


FIRST EDITION, EZRA 1913 
FIRST EDITION, NEHEMIAH 1914 
FIRST EDITION, ESTHER 1905 


COMBINED EDITION 1941 


PUBLISHED BY LOIZEAUX BROTHERS, ING. 


A Nonprofit Organization Devoted to the Lord’s Work 
and to the Spread of His Truth 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


Page 
Prefatory Note . : . ; ¢ 5 2 5 
Chapter I. — Separated Vessels. ; epee Gane: 


Chapter Ii. — Back to the Place of the Name . 18 
Chapter III.— The Altar and the House : 26 
Chapter IV.— The Adversaries . : “ : 38 
Chapter V.— Prophetic Ministry ‘ : 5 . 46 
Chapter VI.— The House Completed . ° 53 
Chapter VIJ.— A Second Awakening. : 1.04 
Chapter VIII.—The March of Faith . é : 72 
Chapter IX.— The Break-aown by Amalgamation. 82 


Chapter X.— Humiliation and Lifting Up : 95 


Prefatory Note 


AT the book of Ezra contains much-needed 

truth for the present time is my firm belief. 
A re-affirmation of early principles is necessary 
on account of the attempt on the part of many 
to set aside “that which is written’ as to the 
gathering and fellowship of children of God in 
separation from evil; and this, because of break- 
downs on the part of some who sought, through 
grace, to take a scriptural position years ago. 
Corporate failure has been supposed (in some 
way incomprehensible to one who would be 
guided alone by the word cf God) to sanction 
individual turning from the path of the truth, 
and thus excuse and palliate what the late W. 
Kelly very appropriately called “nothingarianism 
in Church relations.” 

No amount of failure alters divine truth. We 
to-day are as responsible as our fathers were to 
go back to “that which is written” and act in 
faith upon it. 

It is true difficulties and perplexities abound 
as might be expected, because of the near close 
of the dispensation. But “God and the word 
of His grace” are still all-sufficient for every 
peril or disaster. A careful study of the books 


6 Prefatory Note 


of Ezra and Nehemiah would, I feel certain, pre- 
serve from a gloomy pessimism as to the carry- 
ing out of the truth of gathering to the Name 
of the Lord and furnish many needed warnings 
against the abounding snares of the last times. 

This little book has been written far away 
from the opportunities of consulting the writ- 
ings of others, while laboring in the gospel 
among the Pueblo Indians. Here in the wilder- 
ness the same blessed work is going on among 
our red-skinned fellow-believers, of making 
Christ the one only Centre. The principles put 
before them, and blessed to the souls of many, 
are, in this brief exposition, presented for the 
consideration afresh of those older in the truth. 

I should add that while, as noted above, una- 
ble now to consult the works of others, I have 
in times past read several expositions of Ezra 
with profit, and, no doubt, much suggested in 
their writings now appears in this work. ‘‘ We 
can do nothing against the truth, but for the 
truth.’”” That what is of God may prevail, is 
my earnest desire; and to forward this, is my 
only object in sending out these unpretentious 
pages, which are now committed to the care of 
“the Spirit of truth” in the worthy name of the 
Lord Jesus Christ, 


H. A. IRONSIDE. 
Casa Blanca, New Mexico. 


NOTES 


ON 


THE BOOK OF EZRA 


CHAPTER. | 


Separated Vessels 


HERE are seven Old Testament books 
most intimately linked together;—three 
historical, three prophetic and one both histori- 
cal and prophetic. I refer to Ezra, Nehemiah 
and Esther in the first group; Haggai, Zechariah 
and Malachi in the second; and Daniel standing 
alone as the third.* All have to do largely with 
a special work of God, subsequent to the close 
of the seventy years’ captivity predicted by 
Jeremiah in which the land of Palestine was to 
make up her lost sabbatic years (Jer. 25: 11-14; 
2 Chron. 36: 21; Dan. 9: 2). During this period 
of desolation her people were in bondage to the 


* IT have previously sent forth a little book called ‘‘ Notes on 
the Book of Esther,’’ and have published a volume of ‘‘ Lec- 
tures on the Book of Daniel.’’ The three post-captivity 
prophets are in measure expounded in my ‘‘ Notes on the 
Minor Prophets.’’ If God will,a volume on ‘‘ Nehemiah”? wiil 
follow the present work. 


8 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


king of Babylon first, and after his overthrow, 
to the king of Persia. Babylon was the fountain- 
head of idolatry, and in its false worship, demon- 
inspired, was found in germ every evil teaching 
that Satanic ingenuity has ever devised for the 
turning away of unbelieving men from the reve- 
lation given by God in His holy Word. 

It was to cure the people of Judah of their 
deeply-rooted love for idolatry that Jehovah gave 
them up to serve the Chaldeans, ‘‘that bitter 
and hasty nation.” Dwelling in the midst of the 
heathen, surrounded on all sides by the detesta- 
ble creations of the human mind energized by 
wicked spirits, they learned to the full the folly 
and wretchedness of forsaking ‘“‘the Guide of 
their youth” for the ‘‘gods many and lords 
many” of the nations. Their experiences in 
this stronghold of paganistic corruption cured 
them effectually of the worship of images, and 
resulted in a gracious revival under God’s good 
hand which gave to His word a place of impor- 
tance in their souls that it had not previously 
held. Unhappily, this blessed work of God’s 
Spirit soon lost its power and degenerated into a 
mere cold intellectual bibliolatry, in which the 
letter of the Word was clung to tenaciously while 
the spirit was quite ignored. So devoted were 
the Pharisaic successors of ‘‘the men of the 
great synagogue” (as Ezra and his companions 
were afterwards called) to the study of the sacred 


Separated Vessels 9 


‘writings, that they even counted the words and 
letters of the law, while a great body of exposi- 
tory literature was produced, most of it pedantic 
and imaginative in the extreme, but all testify- 
ing to the veneration in which the Scriptures 
were held. Yet when He who is Himself the 
Spirit of the entire Old Testament, and of whom 
Moses and all the prophets wrote, appeared in 
their midst, He was not discerned by faith and 
was rejected and crucified by the descendants of 
the very remnant whose zeal for God is com. 
mended in the book of Ezra. Though He came 
in fulfilment of the very writings they read every 
Sabbath in public, and often in private, as the 
Babe of Bethlehem Ephrata, the Light of Galilee 
of the nations, and the lowly Prince of Peace rid- 
ing upon an ass, they fulfilied other prophecies 
in rejecting Him and spurning His claims, 

As a result of this stupendous blunder, ina day 
yet to come and now undoubtedly drawn very 
near, the mass of the Jews are to sink to a lower 
form of idolatry than ever, when they receive 
and own the Antichrist of the future as Messiah 
of Israel and minister of ‘‘a god whom their fa- 
thers knew not,” the Roman Beast who will be 
worshiped by the apostate Jews and Christendom 
alike as ‘‘the god of forces” (Dan. 11: 36 to end; 
Rev. 13). 

This perversion of the word of God and insen- 
sibility to the Spirit’s work is exceedingly solemn, 


10 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


and may well have a voice for saints of God in 
this last end of the present dispensation of His 
grace, who have been largely delivered from 
Romish abominations and Protestant miscon- 
ceptions of Scripture, and brought again to own 
in simplicity the headship of Christ, the presi- 
dency of the Holy Spirit in the Church, and the 
authority of the written Word over the con- 
sciences of all who call upon the name of the 
Lord. Here also there is grave danger of hold- 
ing fast the letter, while losing sight of the tre- 
mendous importance of walking in the Spirit in 
living, realized fellowship with the Lord Jesus 
Christ, to whose peerless name God would gather 
all His own. Already a declension of no slight 
character has come in, and against those who seek 
to hold fast the Word and not deny the one only 
Name, the world, the flesh and the devil have 
combined to render powerless the testimony 
to the failure of the Church at large, and the 
abiding unity of the body of Christ. 

It cannot therefore be other than salutary to 
prayerfully trace again some of God's dealings 
with a remnant of old, that we may learn afresh 
His mind for His people to-day. In this spirit 
we would turn to the record of Ezra the scribe, 
a portion of Holy Scripture of intensely practical 
character, and abounding with suggestive teach- 
ing for believers in all ages. 


Separated Vessels li 


The first two and a half verses of chapter one 
are ‘{uoted from the ending of 2 Chron., thus sug- 
gesting that Ezra was, perhaps, the chosen in- 
strument to complete the earlier record, and 
which God would not have concluded without a 
pledge of restoration. 

But these first verses of Ezra are not really 
the beginning of the work of God of which he 
treats. The true starting point will be found in 
the 9th of Daniel. There we find a man of God 
on his knees over the word of God—a lovely sight 
and one that ever foretells coming blessing. 
There are three 9th chapters in this series of 
books that are in large measure of the same 
character, namely, the 9th of Ezra, of Nehemiah 
and of Daniel. In all three alike we have men, 
each one whose heart is under the power of the 
truth for his times, in the place of confession be- 
fore God. Such an attitude of soul well becomes 
all who recognize in any degree the advancing 
apostasy and the growth of the spirit of insub- 
jection to the Holy Scriptures now so prevalent. 

In Daniel’s case, ‘‘ he understood by books” that 
the seventy years of affliction were very nearly 
run. He was a student of prophecy, and as he 
pored over Jeremiah’s serious messages, he rec- 
ognized that the time for their fulfilment of the 
Word as to the restoration had drawn near. What 
is the result? It drives him to his knees. He 
was no mere intellectual Bible student like so 


12 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


many to-day. The Scriptures had power over 
his soul and brought him to prayer and confes- 
sion. He made the approaching deliverance a 
matter of earnest supplication coupled with a 
self-judgment that was the outcome of being in 
the realized presence of God. He confessed his 
own sin and the sin of his people. There was 
no harsh criticism of others while congratulating 
himself on his own faithfulness. He had been 
faithful, no doubt, but he does not claim any: 
thing on that ground. He confesses the failure 
of the nation to which he belongs and acknowl- 
edges their sin as his own. ‘‘We have sinned” 
is his cry, not ‘‘zkey have sinned.” 

And what is the happy outcome of all this? 
We get it in the beginning of Ezra. ‘‘ Now in 
the first year of Cyrus, king of Persia, that the 
word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah 
might be fulfilled, the Lord stirred up the spirit 
of Cyrus, king of Persia” (ver. 1). Thus had 
God begun to hear and answer His servant's 
prayer, in fulfilment of His own word given 
through Jeremiah. 

People are often stumbled as to the relations 
of prayer and the purpose of God. If God has 
counseled, shall He not bring it to pass, whether 
we pray or not? The answer is that prayer is 
a part of God’s purpose. He has willed to act 
when His people pray; and one of the first evi- 
dences that He is about to perform a certain 


Separated Vessels 13 


thing is that the spirit of prayer and supplication 
is poured out upon His people in regard to that 
particular work. Here He moves the heart of 
a king in his palace to accomplish His word, 
after Daniel has made it a matter of prayer. 

Cyrus issues a decree saying, ‘‘The Lord God 
of heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the 
earth; and He hath charged me to build Him a 
house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Who is 
there among you of all His people? His God 
be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, 
which is in Judah, and build the house of the 
Lord God of Israei (He is the God), which is in 
Jerusalem. And whosoever remaineth in any 
place where he sojourneth, let the men of his 
place help him with silver, and with gold, and 
with goods, and with beasts, beside the freewill 
offering for the house of God which is in Jeru- 
salem” (vers. 2~4). 

In the beginning of this proclamation we see 
how evidently Cyrus was inspired of the Lord 
in the very title given to Jehovah. He is the 
‘*God of heaven.” This is the name by which 
He is largely known in the series of books indi- 
cated above. It was a title He took when His 
throne was removed from the earth,and He gave 
His people into the hands of the Gentiles. He 
went and ‘‘returned to His place,” as Hosea puts 
it. He forsook the temple at Jerusalem, dissolved 
the theocracy and became ‘‘the God of heaven.” 


14 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


Such He is still to His ancient people, and so He 
will remain till He returns to Jerusalem to esta- 
blish His throne again as ‘‘the Lord of the whole 
earth.” 

It is likewise of note that Cyrus issues no com- 
mand for any one to return toJerusalem. There 
is to be nothing legal in this movement. It must 
be the result of grace working in the soul. So 
the king gives permission, and all who have heart 
for it are free to go up to the place where of old 
the Lord had set His name. 

For nature there was little indeed to attract 
any one to Jerusalem. It lay a burned, ruined 
heap in the midst of a land of desolation. But 
for faith there was an attraction which nature 
could not understand. It was the city of God,the 
place of the Name,—the only place on earth to 
which a grateful people could scripturally bring 
their offerings and where the guilty could bring 
a sacrifice for sin. 

For believers now there is no such hallowed 
spot in this scene; ‘‘ Neither in Jerusalem, nor at 
this mountain” is our place of worship. But our 
Lord has said: ‘‘ Where two or three are gathered 
together unto My name, there am Jin the midst.” 
Where He is acknowledged as sole Head and Lord 
and His redeemed are gathered to Himself, is 
what answers to the place where He set His name 
of old. Asso gathered He leads His saints into 
the heavenly sanctuary, and there draws out their 


Separated Vessels 15 


hearts to offer the sacrifice of praise and thanks- 
giving. To get back to this simplicity, as it was 
at the beginning, may well be the desire of our 
hearts. Ever since the rising light of the Re- 
formation there have been such stirrings of heart 
and conscience among the children of God;— 
yearnings after more of the simplicity of early 
days, with a larger appreciation of Christ, a sep- 
aration from the unholy and profane. | 

It would be a grave blunder to make the scenes 
of Ezra typical of any one movement in Chris- 
tendom. It rather has suggestive lessons by 
which saints may profit when any special work 
of gathering back to Christ in the Spirit’s power 
is going on. And this is one of the first and most 
important lessons. Such a movement must be of 
the working of grace. It cannot be a legal thing 
or all its freshness and power are lost. Hence the 
unwisdom of trying to force people into a position 
where grace has not been drawing them. 

It is customary in some quarters to rail against 
human systems and to put the leaving them on 
people’s consciences as a matter of duty. By 
this means many take an outward place of sep- 
aration who are not really drawn to Christ. It 
follows that such are very likely to be hard and 
legal in their ways and words, and will know 
little of that stirring of heart and attraction to 
the Lord Himself that we have pictured here in 
Ezra. The sth verse tells us that certain of the 


16 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


chief of the fathers of Judah and Benjamin, to- 
gether with priests and Levites, and ‘‘all them 
whose spirit God had awakened,” arose ‘‘to go 
up to build the house of the Lord which is in 
Jerusalem.” This was most precious to God. 
The voluntariness was a lovely evidence of grace 
working in their souls. 

Some there were, perhaps the majority, who 
did not go up, and it is not for us to judge them 
as to this; for we cannot tell what natural hin- 
drances there may have been. But the book of 
Esther is witness that God did not take the same 
pleasure in those who remained as in the com- 
pany who ‘‘for the Name’s sake”’ ascended to Je- 
rusalem. He watched over them still, but He 
did not link His name openly with them as He 
did with the rest. 

There was no enmity or spirit of judgment be- 
tween the two classes. Those who remained 
helped their brethren who went up ‘‘ with ves- 
sels of silver, with gold, with goods, and with 
beasts, and with precious things beside all that 
was willingly offered” (ver. 6). 

The action of Cyrus to which our attention is 
next directed, in separating the vessels that had 
of old belonged to Jehovah’s temple, from the 
treasure of the kings devoted to the heathen 
deities, is most suggestive, reminding us of the 
word of the Lord in 2 Tim. as to separating be- 
tween vessels to honor and vessels to dishonor. 


Separated Vessels 17 


What was of and for God must be purged out 
from the mixture. And this remains true for 
to-day. 

The separated vessels are all numbered and 
committed to Sheshbazzar, called generally 
Zerubbabel (a stranger in Babel) the prince of 
Judah. It is noteworthy that this prince of Da- 
vid’s line claims no honors by virtue of his illus- 
trious descent. It was a day of weakness and of 
small things. Zerubbabel therefore takes his 
place as one whose faith others can follow, but 
he claims nothing as David’s son and heir. 

This may speak to the hearts of those who to- 
day are exercised as to the lack of sign-gifts and 
who desire something great that the eye may see. 
The time for great things is over, the dispensa- 
tion is closing in failure on man’s part as to all 
committed to him. It becomes those who really 
‘“thave understanding of the times” to be through 
with pretension, and in simplicity to go along 
with the lowly. ‘‘ The meek will He guide in 
judgment; the meek will He teach His way.” 


18 


CHAPTER II. 
Back to the Place of the Name 


T is toa sample-page from the books of eter- 
nity that we are next introduced. A leafout 

of God’s memorial record is spread before us for 
our inspection. Similar specimen lists are given 
us in other parts of the book of God. Gen. 49 is 
one. The two accounts of David’s mighty men, 
as set forth in 2 Sam. and in 1 Chron., are of the 
same character. In Neh. 3 (and also in 7, where 
this end of Ezra is duplicated), God shows how 
carefully He was taking note of each individual, 
each family, and the work they accomplished for 
Him. Rom. 16 is much on the same line, though 
at first sight only a chapter of apostolic greetings, 
and in Heb. 11 we have an honor-roll that shall 
yet be consulted at the judgment-seat of Christ. 
There is something peculiarly solemn about 
records such as these. Many, yea, most of the 
names in them are for us only names, but God 
has not forgotten one of the persons once called 
by these names on earth, and ‘‘in that day” He 
will reward according to the work of each. Some 
too must ‘‘suffer loss” for opportunities neglected, 
or half-hearted service. Nothing of good or ill 
shall be overlooked by Him who seeth not as man 
seeth, who looks not on the outward appearance 
but on the heart. How little did any of these 


Back to the Place of the Name 19 


devoted Jews of Ezra’s day think that God would 
preserve a registry of their names and families 
for future generations to read, and thus to learn 
how highly He values all that is done from de. 
votion of heart to Himself and for the glory of 
His name! 

‘* Now these are the children of the province 
that went up out of the captivity, of those which 
had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar 
the king of Babylon had carried away unto Baby- 
lon, and came again unto Jerusalem and Judah, 
every one unto his city” (ver. 1). And then 
follows the long list of forty-two thousand three 
hundred and sixty, besides their servants and 
two hundred choristers (vers. 64, 65). Even the 
number of their beasts of burden is recorded, for 
God takes note of all that may be connected with 
His people, if only in a temporal way (vers. 66, 67). 

As one’s eye runs down the list of Hebrew 
names, there are many that stand out in a special 
way, and some have most suggestive comments 
attached. 

In verse 2 we read both of a Nehemiah and a 
Mordecai: but the first must not be confounded 
with the writer of the next book, who came up 
later, after the re-building of the temple, and in 
accordance with the ‘‘commandment to restore 
and build Jerusalem,” mentioned as the starting 
point of the seventy heptads of Dan. 9: 24. Nor 
should the record be identified with the aged 


20 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


consin of Queen Esther, who remained in the 
city of Shushan, and so far as we know, never 
went up to Jerusalem after being carried away 
as a child (Esther 2: 5, 6). 

‘*The men of Anathoth,” of verse 23, recalls 
Jeremiah’s purchase of the field of Anathoth, so 
long before, and the sealed title-deeds awaiting 
their lawful claimant. It looked like the height 
of folly to purchase a field in a doomed district; 
but faith looked on to the restoration, and now 
the long-expected day had come when the sealed 
scroll would prove of real value (Jer. 32). 

It is noticeable that so few Levites went up 
at this time (ver. 40). Only seventy-four! A 
small company indeed, and what wonder if we 
look only at the human side of it. They were to 
have no inheritance save in the Lord. He alone 
must be their portion. But it took genuine faith 
to enable these dear servants of God to count 
upon His abundant resources at a time when 
neither wealth nor prestige were found among 
His remnant people. That a time of testing had 
soon to be faced we may see by consulting Neh. 
13: 10. If God’s people are going on with Him 
His servants will not be neglected, however little 
there may seem to be for sight to look upon. 
And on the other hand, if the people of the Lord 
do prove forgetful, it is for the servant to realize 
the more his dependence on God Himself—not 
on saints, however amiable and benevolent. 


Back to the Place of the Name 21 


There were more of the children of Asaph, the 
temple singers, than of the Levites in Zerubba- 
bel’s company (ver. 41). Of them one hundredand 
twenty-eight went up. The spirit of praise sup- 
ports the soul and easily passes over rough ways. 

Some there were who could not show their 
genealogy. ‘‘These were they that went up 
from Tel-melah, Tel-harsa, Cherub, Addan and 
Immer: but they could not show their father’s 
house and their seed, whether they were of Is- 
rael: the children of Delaiah, the children of 
Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six hundred 
fifty and two”’ (vers. 59, 60). They formed a 
large company, but there was an uncertainty 
about their origin which was perplexing indeed. 
And, alas, of how many in Christendom to-day is 
this the case! Characterized by zeal and earnest- 
ness often, they are yet quite unable to givea 
clear, scriptural answer for the hope that is in 
them. We need to beware of passing hasty 
judgment on such people; but, on the other 
hand, a degree of care and caution is needed, 
that is often resented, but which godly concern 
for what is dear to Christ demands. 

Even of the priests, of whom more than a 
thousand went up (vers. 36-39), were there 
found some who could not fully establish their 
title to serve in Jehovah’s temple. ‘‘Of the 
children of the priests: the children of Habaiah, 
the children of Koz, the children of Barzillas, 


22 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


who took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai the 
Gileadite, and was called after their name: these 
sought their register among those that were 
recorded by genealogy, but they were not found: 
therefore were they, as polluted, put from the 
priesthood, and the Tirshatha (Governor) said 
unto them, that they should not eat of the most 
holy things, till there stood up a priest with Urim 
and with Thummim”’ (vers. 61-63). These were 
not declared positively to be laying false claim to 
the priestly title; they were simply set to one side 
because they could not prove it, until an inspired 
priest should rise up who could speak with 
authority. 

So we may well treat some now, who cannot 
trace their genealogy, but nevertheless insist on 
the Christian place as rightfully theirs. We dare 
not say they are not born of God—and those who 
do so essay to speak are guilty of gross presump- 
tion; but we cannot own them as such till they 
can give clear evidence of being indeed of the 
priestly company and partakers of the divine 
nature. Wecan in such case but fall back upon 
the word, ‘‘The Lord knoweth them that are 
His,” and wait until our Great Priest shall Him- 
self pronounce authoritatively as regards them. 
Till then, we dare not give them the full Chris- 
tian place; and if they resent the seeming dis- 
courtesy, it but indicates a state of soul that calls 
for self-judgment and repentance. 


Back to the Place of the Name 23 


The 68th and 69th verses show that God was 
taking note of what was given with a willing 
heart ‘‘for the house of God to set it up in its 
place.” And when the journey was ended, and 
the returned company stood upon the site of the 
ruined city where the Lord had set His name, 
the desolation did not lead to despair, but stirred 
afresh the hearts of ‘‘some of the chief of the 
fathers.” who ‘‘ gave after their ability” of both 
silver and gold and garments for the priests. 
And all this ere even the altar had been set 
upon its base. It was a gracious work, surely, 
and evidenced the healthful spiritual state of 
these aged men, who longed to see the temple 
rise from its ashes ere being called hence. 

It is to be feared that very few Christians are 
faithful in giving after their ability. The rule 
laid down in 1 Cor. 16: 2, ‘‘ Upon the first day of 
the week, let each one of you lay by him in store 
as God hath prospered him,” is one that seldom 
claims a second thought with many. At the 
weekly gathering a coin is dropped in the box, 
often with no previous forethought, and certainly 
not as a result of a prayerful laying by at home 
according as God has prospered the giver during 
the past week. Were this generally acted upon, 
there would be no dearth of means to carry on 
the work of the Lord in the home and foreign 
fields, nor any lack of provision for the poor 
among the saints. God will never forget that 


24 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


these fathers of old gave according to their abil- 
ity. Will He forget that many have done nothing 
of the kind? 

Verse 70 closes the chapter with the statement 
that the priests and Levites, the singers and 
porters, and the Nethinims* dwelt in their cities, 
‘¢and all Israel in their cities.”” Who would have 
expected to read of ‘‘all Israel” at such a time 
as this! Yet God sees in this weak and feeble 
remnant a company occupying the ground of all 
Israel, and He refuses to consider the nation 
other than in its unity. 

So to-day, it is not possible to re-gather the 
whole Church of God in one outward visible 
unity. Butit zs possible fora feeble few to meet 
on the ground of the Church of God, refusing all 
sectarian names and ways, ‘‘endeavoring to 
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of 
peace.”” The last phrase must never be forgot- 
ten. When strife and discord come in, the unity 
of the Spirit is at once violated. It can never be 
forced. It is a practical thing, maintained alone 
as believers walk in the Spirit and recognize in 
each other all that is of God, while each one in- 
dividually seeks to ‘‘ follow peace with all men, 
and holiness, without which no man shall see the 
Lord.” 


* A word of uncertain meaning; they are supposed by many 
to be the descendants of the wily Gibeonites. 


Back to the Place of the Name 25 


In no other way can the unity of the Spirit be 
truly kept. The unity of the body of Christ is 
in no sense in our keeping. ‘‘There zs one 
body ’’—only one; and no failure on man’s part 
can alter that. But we are responsible to act on 
the ground of that one body, in accordance with 
the Word, ‘‘ The loaf which we break is it not the 
communion of the body of Christ?” (1 Cor. to: 
16.) Thus in the very act of breaking bread at 
the table of the Lord, we set forth our unity as 
members of the one body. Why should we then 
recognize any other body—any narrower circle? 

In principle, christian fellowship, to be scrip- 
tural, must embrace all believers; but just as of 
old there were those whose register could not 
be found, so now there are many whom one dare 
not say are not believers, with whom those 
who would maintain the truth of God cannot 
have fellowship, because of their doctrine or 
manner of life. And under this latter heading 
must be included the being partakers of other 
men's sins, by associating with what is unholy 
and defiling. It is here that faith is tested; for 
only godly discernment can enable saints to act 
consistently without human rules and regula- 
lations, owning all fellow-members of Christ’s 
body, but walking only with those who, following 
‘‘righteousness, faith, love, peace, callon the Lord 
out of a pure heart” (2 Tim, 2; 19-22), 


26 


CHAPTER III 


The Altar and the House 


HERE is an evident hiatus to be under- 

stood between chapter 2 and 3; but of how 
long a time we have norecord. Doubtless there 
were weeks, or possibly months, of earnest labor, 
in which the returned remnant builded homes 
for themselves, and made preparations for the 
re-building of the desolated temple by clearing 
away the rubbish and debris that marked the im- 
piety of the Babylonian conqueror. 

At last the seventh month, the month in which 
the Feast of Tabernacles was celebrated of old, 
had been reached, and it was decided to set up 
the altar of Jehovah at once, and with the word 
of God as their only guide to seek to carry out 
the instructions as to its observance. There 
could be nothing so grand nor so stable as of old, 
but it would be of the same order; and the 
Word was as truly sufficient for direction and 
‘instruction in righteousness ” as in the palmiest 
days of the fathers. 

There was no thought of substituting human 
expediency for what God had spoken through 
Moses in the distant past. No one was called on 
for ideas or suggestions as to the most suitable 
way to act in these their adverse circumstances, 
and under such different conditions to those of 


The Altar and the House 27 


old. They simply searched the Scriptures, and 
when ‘‘they found it written,” that was an end 
of controversy. The Bible was their authority; 
expediency was barred out. 

This is a principle of all importance to any who 
to-day value the divine approbation above the 
approval of carnal men. The Scriptures are all- 
sufficient still. They contain all the instruction 
needed for the guidance of those who wouid 
be faithful to God in any particular period 
of the Church’s history. The moment expedi- 
ency usurps the place of subjection to the re- 
vealed will of the Lord, the whole principle of 
faith is given up, and a walk by sight takes its 
place. For we cannot walk by faith except as 
we yield unhesitating obedience to the word of 
God, which leaves no place for human will or 
human arrangements. 

In the first verse of this lovely chapter we 
have a beautiful picture of that unity which 
should ever characterize the children of God. 
‘‘And when the seventh month was come, and 
the children of Israel were in their cities, the 
people gathered themselves together as one man 


to Jerusalem.”’ This is indeed blessed. ‘‘ Be- 
hold how good and how pleasant a thing it is for 
brethren to dwell togetherin unity! . . . There 


the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for 
evermore ” (Ps. 133). It is of this we have an 
example, delightful to contemplate, in the case 


28 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


before us. The people were gathered together 
as one man to the place of the Name; andin full 
accordance with the psalm just quoted from, 
‘The Lord commanded the blessing.” Of this the 
balance of the chapter affords ample proof. It 
was fulfilled again in wondrous measure at the 
beginning of the Church's history: ‘‘ When the 
day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all 
with one accord in one place”’ (Acts 2:1). And 
what was the happy result? Nothing less than 
the outpouring of the Holy Spirit, the baptism 
whereby the one body was formed, the conver- 
sion of three thousand persons, and the edifica- 
tion of the whole company, while the name of 
the crucified Jesus was with great power magni- 
fied and lauded. 

When we look back to the Church’s natal day, 
and contrast the sweet and holy unity then mani- 
fested, with the heart-breaking divisions and 
cruel separations now seen among Christians, we 
may well weep and cry, ‘‘O Lord, how long?” 

Heal all these schisms we cannot; but we can 
judge the whole thing as of the flesh, and, turn- 
ing from all we learn to be contrary to the mind 
of God, cease to own any narrower body than the 
body of Christ; refuse allegiance to any other 
head than Him who sits at God’s right hand; and, 
while gathering back to the one only Name— 
turning away from all that bears the Babylonian 
trade mark—open our hearts, ‘‘to all who call 


The Altar and the House 29 


upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both 
theirs and ours,” and thus, in obedience to the 
word of God, we may yet ‘‘endeavor to keep the 
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.” 

So stirring a theme tempts us to wander from 
our subject, but space and time alike forbid; so 
we turn back to consider what is further pre- 
sented for our learning and admonition in the 
verses that follow. 5 

The altar of the God of Israel (not of the few 
re-gathered ones, be it noted—but of the whole 
nation which, though scattered and peeled, is 
seen by faith in its integrity), was rebuilt by 
Jeshua the son of Jozadak and his brethren the 
priests, together with Zerubbabel and his breth- 
ren of the Davidic line. The testimony is both 
priestly and royal, even as Christians, whatever 
their weakness, are called of God a holy and roy- 
al priesthood, to worship in reverence and to show 
forth the praises of Him who has called us by 
His glories and virtue. 

The rebuilding of the altar answers to the 
establishment of believers in the fundamental 
truths connected with the person and work of 
the Son of God. ‘‘We have an altar whereof 
they have no right to eat who serve the taber- 
nacle’’ (Heb. 13: 10). Christ Himself is our altar, 
for as of old it was the altar that sanctified the 
gift, so was it the perfection of Christ personally 
that gave all the value to His work. Therefore, 


30 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


in any true recovery of the Spirit’s inditing, it 
will always be found that Christ Jesus and His 
atonement are magnified. True revival there 
cannot be if He is not the soul’s object. 

The altar established upon its basis—answer- 
ing to the truth as to Christ and His work, set 
forth in accordance with the Word of God—the 
morning and evening sacrifices or burnt offerings 
were, without any delay, re-instituted. Now the 
burnt offering speaks of Christ offering Him- 
self without spot unto God, an offering and sacri- 
fice of a sweet-smelling savor, as contrasted with 
the sin and trespass offering, wherein Christ 
made sins is set forth. As the highest offering, 
it speaks of the believer’s heart-felt appreciation 
of what Christ and His work were and are to God, 
leading to worship in spirit and in truth. Surely 
all is here in perfect and lovely accord. If 
the Lord Jesus be Himself before the soul, 
and His work be rested in, there can but be un- 
ceasing worship and adoration ascending in His 
name to the Father. 

For the Christian, the Lord’s table should ever 
be linked with thoughts such as these. It is ina 
most distinctive way the eucharistic feast—a 
festival of thanksgiving in grateful acknowledg- 
ment of what our Lord in infinite grace has 
accomplished, and of the Spirit’s delight in con- 
templating the excellencies of His glorious per- 
son. Where this is indeed the case, participation 


The Altar and the House 31 


in the Lord’s supper can never be a matter of 
legal, ritual, or lifeless form. It will be with a 
holy, chastened joy that the redeemed of the 
Lord will be found gathered by the Spirit to the 
precious name of Jesus, now made Lord and 
Christ, to remember Him. 

The alacrity with which the remnant of Judah 
set about re-establishing the daily offerings and 
the set feasts is most refreshing to contemplate. 
There was a holy eagerness, a godly enthusiasm, 
to walk in the old paths which is delightful to 
dwell upon. 

The feast of tabernacles was kept ‘‘as it is 
written,” and ail the appointed burnt offerings 
made ‘‘according to the custom, as the duty of 
every day required” (ver. 4). There were ap- 
parently none to object that it was folly at so late 
a day to attempt to pattern all ‘‘according to the 
custom” of the early days of their glorious his- 
tory. Had there been such an one, he would 
have been met by the firm, decided answer and 
rebuke, ‘‘It is written.” And for each believer 
this should ever be enough, outweighing all 
carnal suggestions, modern notions and unscrip- 
tural innovations. 

The continual burnt offering, the special sacri- 
fices of the new moons, and all the set feasts 
were properly provided for; and when willing 
hearts suggested at any time special thank offer- 
ings to the Lord, priestly hands were ever ready 


32 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


to attend to the temple requirements as Moses 
in the book of the law had given commandment. 

And all this before the house itself was built, 
even as there must first be true appreciation of 
Christ Himseif and delight in His work ere 
there can be any proper entering into the truth 
of the house of God. The offerings began on the 
first day of the seventh month, but the work had 
not yet progressed far enough for the laying of 
the foundation of the house of the Lord. Indeed 
some nine months must have elapsed ere this 
house was properly begun (see ver. 8). But 
conjointly, we judge, with the setting up of the 
altar on its bases, money was given to the ma- 
sons and carpenters, and full provision made to 
care for the temporal needs of those who were to 
bring cedartrees and rebuild the house, ‘‘accord- 
ing to the grant that they had of Cyrus, king of 
Persia” (ver..7). 

In the 8th verse, the date of the laying the 
foundation is given. It is said to be ‘‘in the 
second year of their coming to the house of God at 
Jerusalem, in the second month,” that the work 
of setting forward the house of the Lord began. 
They had come ‘‘to the house of God,” though 
to sense and sight there was only a blackened 
ruin before them! What a withering rebuke is 
this to man’s unbelief. All that is of God abides, 
however we may fail in maintaining it. 

We often speak, and rightly, of the truth as to 


The Altar and the House 33 


the Church being lost for over a thousand years 
after Romish usurpation and Judaistic legality 
had made the special ministry of Paul to be all 
but forgotten. But though the truth might be 
lost, so far as man’s apprehension of it was con- 
cerned, the fact of the Church—both as the body 
of Christ and the house of God—remained, though 
only to be recovered to the knowledge and heart 
of God’s people when faithful men turned from 
human traditionalism to Christ Himself, and 
from human authorization to the Word alone. 
Then how soon did the Spirit begin to work in 
revealing the long-lost truth as to God’s habi- 
tation, ‘‘The house of God, which is the Church of 
the living God, the pillar and ground of the 
truth.” / 

The truth as to all this can never be known in 
power in one’s soul so long as practices and 
systems contrary to God’s revealed will are toler. 
ated or endorsed. Hence is it true that the best 
view of all ecclesiastical systems is to be had 
outside of them, when the believer can take his 
stand in simplicity with God’s Word open in hig 
hand and discern what is according to His mind, 
and what is but the product of the human will 
and fleshly energy. Then also can the outlines 
of the foundations of the house of God be dis- 
cerned, and grace found to act in accordance 
with the truth now learned. 

For we are not called to rebuild the Church. 

3 


34 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


Such has been the vain dream of more than one 
great mind, only to result in a rude awaken- 
ing as the ruin became worse than ever. We are 
simply called to get back to what is written, and 
act on the truth as though the ruin had never 
come in, while yet recognizing our feebleness 
and dependence. 

Where there is fellowship in this, it is most 
blessed; and this leads us to notice a word for 
our times, found in this and the next chapter. I 
refer to the fellowship-word ‘‘ together,” which 
we have already noticed in verse 1. Inverse 9 
we read: ‘‘ Then stood Jeshua with his sons and 
his brethren, Kadmieli and his sons, the sons of 
Judah, together, to set forward the workmen in 
the house of God.” Here are ‘‘ laborers to- 
’ Then in verses 1o and 11, after telling 
of the priests, Levites, and the sons of Asaph 
standing in rank in their apparel, ‘‘ when the 
builders laid the foundation of the temple of the 
Lord,” we learn that ‘‘they sang fogether by 
course in praising and giving thanks unto the 
Lord; because He is good, for His mercy endur- 
eth forever toward Israel."’ Here they are 
praising together, each heart as one with every 
other, employed in exalting the loving-kindness 
of the Lord. 

In the next chapter, verse 3, Zerubbabel and 
the rest, in answer to the Samaritans’ offer of 
assistance, say: ‘‘We ourselves ‘¢ogether will 


gether. 


The Altar and the House 35 


build unto the Lord.” Thus they are builders 
together, raising the walls of the temple in holy, 
happy fellowship, and in separation from the 
unclean. And so would God ever have His peo- 
ple going on together, remembering that they 
have been ‘‘called unto the fellowship of His 
Son, Jesus Christ our Lord” (1 Cor. 1: 9). 

Turning again to verse 11, we note how the 
people were stirred when at last the foundation 
of the house of the Lord was laid. In their godly 
exaltation at this slight measure of recovery, 
they ‘‘shouted with a great shout.” 

But all were not so exuberant, for ‘‘many of 
the priests and Levites and chief of the fathers, 
who were ancient men, that had seen the first 
house, when the foundation of ¢hzs house was 
laid before their eyes, wept with a loud voice; 
and many shouted aloud for joy: so that the 
people could not discern the noise of the shout 
of joy from the noise of the weeping of the peo- 
ple: for the people shouted with a loud shout, 
and the noise was heard afar off” (vers. 12, 13). 

Youth is the period of enthusiasm and exuber- 
ance of spirit, while age is the time of sobriety 
and serious contemplation. Young men are apt 
to be over-sanguine looking on to the future; 
aged men, on the other hand, are likely to be 
reminiscent and unduly occupied with the past. 
It is often difficult for youth to comprehend the 
fears of the old and experienced regarding any 


36 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


new work in which they are involved. It is 
equally hard, frequently, for the elder men to 
recognize any special work of God entrusted 
chiefly to the young and in which they cannot 
share for long. They are too apt to forget their 
own youth; and as they think of ruined hopes 
would put the brake on any who do not now 
occupy their standpoint. Hence much patience 
is ever needed in a movement such as we have 
been tracing. The young need grace to profit by 
the godly, sober counsels of the fathers, who, in 
their turn, need grace to rejoice in what God is 
doing through those as yet immature. 

Critical, fault-finding old men, even though 
devoted saints, may be a great hindrance to 
young brethren, ardent in faith and love till 
chilled by continual carping or objecting on the 
part of their elders. On the other hand, cheery, 
fatherly brethren, who are ever ready to see 
God’s leading in any fresh work of His Spirit, 
who have grown old gracefully, and are ‘‘ mel- 
lowing for heaven,” as one has put it, can be 
both helpers and counsellors of great value to 
their younger brethren. 

There is room both for the weeping and the 
shouting. As we think of the failure of man to 
carry out, and hold fast, the truth committed to 
him, we may well shed tears. As we note the 
matchless grace of God, rising above all failure, 
and ever raising up a fresh testimony to His 


The Altar and the House 37 


truth in times of declension, we may well shout 
aloud for joy. The two are not discordant, but 
blend in one majestic strain, of which the treble 
is carried by the joyous, youthful shouters, and 
the bass by the weeping patriarchs—all alike to 
the praise and glory of the God of all grace, who 
is also the God of infinite holiness and intrinsic 
righteousness, 


38 


CHAPTER IV 
The Adversaries 


HE first discordant note in connection with 

this gracious symphony is struck in the 
chapter we are now to be occupied with, not 
however, at first from within, but from without; 
then affecting those within, so that the song of 
joy is silenced and a brief season of apathy super- 
venes. 

There were those who, all along, had watched 
with a jealous eye the work of restoration going 
on at Jerusalem. They were the Samaritans, the 
descendants of the mixed races settled in the 
land by heathen kings after the capture of the 
ten tribes, who had long ago been carried away 
to Assyria, and have since been lost so far as 
positive identification by man is concerned. 

We learn something of these conscienceless 
people by turning back a few pages in our Bibles, 
to 2 Kings, chap. 17; from ver. 24 to the end we 
have the record of these men who were brought 
from the various parts of the Assyrian dominions 
and settled in the land. At first they made no 
pretence at being anything but idolaters; but up- 
on becoming alarmed by wild beasts increasing 
among them, they concluded they needed to know 
‘the manner of the God of the land.” Entreating 
the king of Assyria for help, he sent unto them 


The Adversaries 39 


some of the captive priests of Jeroboam’s order, 
who‘‘taught them how they should fear the Lord.” 
But the unreality of it all is seen in verses 32 and 
33: ‘‘So they feared the Lord, and made unta 
themselves of the lowest of them, priests of 
the high places, who sacrificed for them in the 
houses of the high places: They feared the Lord, 
and served their own gods after the manner of 
the nations whence they had been carried away.” 
And their subsequent degraded state is depicted 
in the closing verse, in contrast to what God 
required of His people Israel. 

These Samaritans were largely of the same 
character as thousands in this day of grace who 
make a profession of Christianity but have never 
even pretended to own Christ as Lord, and who 
know nothing of the saving value of His blood. 
They, too, fear the Lord, but serve their own 
gods; and it is a sad mistake for the believer to 
be linked up with such in Church fellowship. 
Such ‘‘ Christians” as these will ever prove a 
snare and a hindrance, like ‘‘the mixed multi- 
tude”” who came up with the children of Israel 
out of Egypt. 

In the case before us, we learn that ‘‘ when 
the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard 
that the children of the captivity builded the 
temple unto the Lord God of Israel, then they 
came to Zerubbabel, and to the chief of the 
fathers, and said unto them, Let us build with 


40 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


you: for we seek your God, as ye do; and we do 
sacrifice unto Him since the days of Esar-haddon, 
king of Assur, who brought us up hither”’ (vers. 
1, 2). Their words sounded friendly, but their 
true character is given in the opening clause— 
they were adversaries. They sought the ruin of 
the little company to whom they made such fair 
protestations. These were indeed ‘‘ the wiles of 
the devil.” Had they once gotten a foothold in 
the city of God they would have destroyed 
everything that bore the sign of His approval. 
To have received and encouraged them would 
have made the remnant company numerically 
stronger, but actualiy much weaker. It would 
have been admitting the enemy within the for- 
tress. The safety of the people of God was in 
separation. They were set apart to Him whose 
name they bore. To mingle with the nations 
could but insure ruin and disaster. 

Note the profession of these Samaritans. They 
declared that they too served the God of Israel, 
——but they could not go back far enough. They 
knew nothing of redemption by blood, nothing 
of Jehovah’s covenant-sign; they had not known 
God’s mighty works. What they knew was mere 
hearsay, and based on that was an empty ac- 
knowledgment of His power, while ignorant of 
His grace, and no subjection of heart to His will. 
How like the empty professions one so frequently 
hears. Men talk glibly of serving the Lord and 


The Adversaries 4| 


having made a start for the kingdom, who know 
nothing of repentance toward God and faith in 
our Lord Jesus Christ. Till such are brought to 
self-judgment before God, and heart-confidence 
in Christ as Saviour, they are only a hindrance 
to any Christian company, and will be adversa- 
ries to everything that is really of the Holy Spirit. 
Yet the flesh hates to be accounted unfit to 
take part in what is of God. Natural men, how- 
ever little place they have for the truth in their 
souls, resent being given the place the truth 
puts them in. So here, when Zerubbabel and 
Jeshua and the ancient men of Judah refused the 
help of these unholy Samaritans, great indigna- 
tion was aroused. The leaders in Israel said: 
“Ye have nothing to do with us to build a house 
unto our God; but we ourselves together will 
build unto the Lord God of Israel, as king 
Cyrus, the king of Persia, hath commanded us” 
(ver. 3)). The last words show how plainly they 
recognized their servitude, and felt the differ- 
ence of present conditions from those of old. 
But withal there is a splendid boldness, an un- 
equivocal declaration of adherence to the princi- 
ple of separation, the neglect of which in the 
past had been responsible for all their troubles. 
It is the spirit of the 50th psalm—taking sides 
with God, who says to the wicked, ‘‘ What hast 
thou to do to declare My statutes, or that thou 
shouldst take My covenant in thy mouth?” 


42 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


This is divine independence; and only as be- 
lievers learn to take this attitude toward the 
Christless profession around them, will they be 
maintained in integrity and uprightness before 
God. As a testimony for Him in the world, 
amalgamation with the ungodly cannot help 
them, and will only hinder saints. ‘*‘ Wherefore 
come out from among them, and be ye separate, 
saith the Lord; touch not the unclean, and I will 
receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and 
ye shall be My sons and daughters, saith the 
Lord Almighty” (2 Cor. 6: 17, 18). 

But this always provokes the ire of the wicked, 
who will ever be ready to make unsubstantiated 
charges of pride and pharisaism against those 
who would be faithful to God at whatever cost. 
So we read: ‘‘The people of the land weakened 
the hands of the people of Judah, and troubled 
them in building, and hired counsellors against 
them, to frustrate their purpose ’—and this not 
for a brief season, but persistently, ‘‘all the days 
ot Cyrus ... even until the reign of Darius,” in- 
cluding the years of Ahasuerus (probably Xerxes). 

Thus their real nature is made manifest. If 
they cannot have a hand in the work, they will 
do their best (or, their worst) to ruin it. They 
cannot brook the refusal of their offer of fellow- 
ship; so, by spreading evil reports and misrepre- 
senting the motives and actions of the separated 
company, they will hinder all they can. A letter 


The Adversaries 43 


is even drawn up and dispatched to the king, 
who is here called Artaxerxes, in which there is 
just enough truth to make it likely to accomplish 
its purpose, while the question at issue is not 
touched upon at all. 

From chap. 4:6 to chap. 6: 18 the language 
used is Chaldean, or Aramaic; so we have here 
undoubtedly transcripts of the actual letters that 
passed between the kings and their subjects. 

It is significant that the first letter proceeds 
not exactly from the ‘‘nations”’ but from the 
socteties settled in Canaan. (See vers. 9, 10.) The 
various names used are rather the names of clans, 
or guilds, than national designations. The little 
Jewish company’s exclusiveness drew out their 
hatred. . 

In their epistle they profess great concern for 
the king’s interests, and grave fears lest his 
revenues or honor be touched. They charge the 
Jews with rebuilding Jerusalem, with having set 
up its walls and joined the foundation (ver. 12). 
Now all this was flagrantly false, as Nehemiah’s 
record proves. No permission had yet been 
granted ‘‘to restore and build Jerusalem; ” and 
this was not the work in which the remnant were 
engaged. They were rebuilding the house, or 
temple——not the city—of God; and their work is 
wilfully misrepresented. 

The past history of Jerusalem is briefly re- 
viewed, at least such part of it as would serve 


44 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


their purpose, and the charge is confidently 
made that the restoration of ‘‘the rebellious 
city’ will mean the destruction of Persian power 
‘fon this side the river” (ver. 16). 

The cunningly worded document accomplished 
its purpose, and a messenger soon returned with 
an imperial mandate declaring that search had 
been made, and all the evil accusations against 
Jerusalem as a centre of rebellion and sedition 
established. Then an order is given to ‘‘cause 
these men to cease, and that this city be not 
builded until another commandment shall be 
given from me” (vers. 17-21). 

With this official communication in their 
hands, Rehum and Shimshai and their compan- 
ions made a hasty visit to Jerusalem and caused 
the work to cease by force and power. Yet, 
clearly they acted with no real authority what- 
ever, inasmuch as the matter of carrying out the 
decree of Cyrus as to the building of the fem- 
ple had not been touched at all. That edict 
remained unrepealed, and had there been the 
energy of faith the work of restoring the house 
of God would have gone on despite the wrath of 
Rehum and his allies. 

But already, first love had begun to wane, and 
we are told, ‘‘Then ceased the work of the house 
of God which is at Jerusalem. So it ceased unto 
the second year of the reign of Darius king of 
Persia” (ver. 24). 


The Adversaries 45 


During the interval a period of apathy came 
in, so that the first energy for what was of God 
declined, and each one began to think rather 
of his own comfort and the comforts of his 
family. They turned to building their own ceiled 
houses, to storing up goods, and to attending 
carefully to their own interests. Of this the 
prophet Haggai accuses them. For, it should be 
noted, the ministry of both Haggai and Zechariah 
comes in here. The reader might with profit 
turn from the present account and read thought- 
fully the two books bearing their names, ere 
going on with Ezra’s record. 

There is no hint of any suffering inflicted by 
the adversaries of the Jews while they were 
attending to their own interests. It was what 
was of God these wicked workers hated. To be- 
hold those gathered to His name devoting their 
time and strength to building for themselves 
excited no enmity, and the enemies’ purpose to 
stop the building of the house of God succeeded. 

So it ever is, the world and the world-church 
are quite content to see Christians prospering in 
temporal ways. The line of demarkation soon 
goes down when riches increase and self-interest 
prevails. It is the spzrztual prosperity, the en- 
ergy of faith, that offends the world; for when 
the light shines brightly, it exposes the selfish. 
ness, the pride, the hypocrisy of those who have 
a name to live but are dead. 


46 


CHAPTER V 
Prophetic Ministry 


T has often been said, and truly, that it is one 
thing to occupy a right posztzon, and quite 
another to be ina right conditzon. The remnant 
of Judah were in the right position when gath- 
ered back to the place of the Name. But we 
have just seen that they had dropped from the 
happy state in which they were when they first 
returned to Jerusalem, and had lapsed into a 
condition that made them easily disheartened. 
What then was the remedy? Give up all and 
go back to the place they had left? Not at all; 
for they had God’s word for remaining where they 
were, and He could be depended on tosend them 
suited ministry to arouse and revive that they 
might thus reach a healthier state. 

Yet how often do we see the opposite of this. 
People learn certain lines of truth from the 
Word of God, and seek grace to walk in them. 
To do so involves a special position as gathering 
alone to the name of the Lord Jesus in separa- 
ration from what is unholy. But by and by the 
freshness of early days passes away, and a period 
of lethargy and apathy succeeds. The love of 
many waxes cold, and the dew of their youth is 
gone. What should those do who would be 
right with God? Forsake the position and go 


Prophetic Ministry 47 


back to what they once left for Christ’s sake? 
Surely not; but in the position cry to God for the 
Spirit’s ministry that there may be revival and 
blessing. Maintain the right position at all costs 
and cease not looking up to the Head for what 
each member needs. 

But God’s eye was on His discouraged people, 
and in gracious concern for their state, He 
raised up among them Haggai and Zechariah, 
both ‘‘the Lord’s messengers in the Lord’s mes- 
sage” (Hag. 1: 13). Inthe name of the God of 
Israel these two devoted servants exhorted the 
remnant to consider their ways, and be strong, 
or courageous, for they were directly under Je- 
hovah’s care as brands plucked from the fire. 
Haggai dealt more especially with the con- 
sciences of the people. His are stirring, cutting 
words. Zechariah was commissioned to speak 
more to their hearts, enthusing them to holy 
boldness in view of the coming glory. Both 
lines of ministry were needed; for God’s people 
are possessed of conscience and heart, and each 
must be appealed to. 

The immediate result was the stirring of spirit 
among the leaders. ‘‘Then rose up Zerubbabel the 
son of Shealtiel,and Jeshna the son of Jozadak, and 
began to build the house of God which is at Je- 
rusalem: and with them were the prophets of 
God helping them” (ver. 2). Such was the hap- 
py effect of this Spirit-given ministry. 


48 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


And, as might have been expected, their in- 
solent adversaries are once more immediately 
active. Hardly have trowel and hammer begun 
to be used in the work of rebuilding or complet- 
ing the house, when Tatnai, the Samaritan gov- 
ernor, and Shethar-boznai (mew names to us), 
and their companions appear, and indignantly 
enquire, ‘‘Who hath commanded you to build 
this house?” (ver. 3.) Toexplain to men like 
these would have been useless, and would have 
been but casting pearls before swine. ‘‘ The 
secret of the Lord is with them that fear Him,” 
and with no one else. Natural men could not 
understand a divine call and divine authorization. 
Therefore Zerubbabel and his helpers made no 
reference to the prophetic messages which had 
so stirred their own souls, but simply answered 
those fools according to their folly. ‘‘ What are 
the names of the men that make this building ?”’ 
they asked in their reply. This was but another 
way of saying that the business they were con- 
cerned in was one in which their questioners had 
no part or responsibility. 

And though persuasion and threats were evi- 
dently used, ‘‘ the eye of their God was upon the 
elders of the Jews, that they could not cause 
them to cease, till the matter came to Darius;” 
and then Godso directed the king’s heart that he 
gave an answer of peace and encouragement. 

The Darius here mentioned should not be con- 


Prophetic Ministry 49 


founded with the king of the same name in 
Daniel 6. This was evidently the successor to 
Xerxes the Great, while the other was but a 
vice-king under Cyrus. The splendid reign of _ 
Artaxerxes, as he is called in this record, had 
come to an end, and Darius ascended the throne. 
To him therefore the enemies of the Jews ad 
dressed themselves in a lengthy epistle which, at 
first sight, is of a much more straightforward 
character than the one drawn up by Rehum and 
Shimshai. No false evidence as to rebuilding 
the czty is manufactured, but the simple facts 
stated that ‘‘the house of the great God” was in 
process of construction, and ‘‘the work goeth 
fast on and prospereth.” One point is probably 
a falsification, in that they say, ‘‘ We went into 
the province of Judea,” and beheld these things, 
as though their going there was only casual, 
without malice aforethought ; whereas, as we 
know, it was deliberate hostility to the Jews 
that led them to thus trespass in a district where 
they had no authority; they were but evil-minded 
busy-bodies. This they skilfully endeavor to 
cover, and write as though a mere accident had 
given them to see what made them fear for the 
the king’s honor. 

It is a question whether in the light of verse 4, 
already noted, they are not drawing on a prev- 
ious knowledge in putting the lengthy answer 
into the mouths of the elders which is given in 

4 


50 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


verses 11 to 16. All this was actually done, but 
it hardly seems likely that it was made known to 
Tatnai and his friends at this particular time. 
It was, rather, what they had heard when the 
work first began—the very thing that had ran- 
kled in their minds for so long. 

They tell how they had questioned these 
elders as to who had commanded them to build 
these walls; and then, for very shame, in place 
of the abrupt and contemptuous reply of the 
Jews, they tell that (which Zerubbabel apparently 
did not say) which would have a great effect 
upon Darius, in throwing him back upon the 
unalterable decrees of the Persian king. 

They declare that an answer was given to this 
effect: That these builders were the servants of 
the God of heaven and earth* and were restoring 
the house which a great king of Israel (whose 
name is evidently unknown to these plotters) 
had set up. But after their fathers had pro- 
voked the God of heaven unto wrath, He had 
permitted the Babylonian captivity, under Neb- 
uchadnezzar, by whom the house was destroyed 
and the people carried away. But declaration 
had been made of what, to their minds, was evi- 
dently a most unheard of and preposterous thing: 
namely, that in the first year of Cyrus a decree 


* Their addition of the words ‘‘and earth’? shows their 
ignorance of God’s relation with Israel at that time. 


Prophetic Ministry 51 


had been given to rebuild this house of God; and 
that the vessels of that old and destroyed temple 
had been restored to these Jews with acommand 
given to Sheshbazzar (the Persian name of 
Zerubbabel), who was reported to have been 
made governor, to take these vessels and carry 
them to the temple that is in Jerusalem, and 
‘‘let the house of God be builded in his place.” 
Accordingly the said Sheshbazzar had come to 
Jerusalem and laid the foundation, and (here 
followed clear prevarication) ‘‘since that time 
even until now hath it been in building” (as 
though in contravention of the decree of Artax- 
erxes, which they supposed fully covered the 
case), ‘‘and yet it is not finished.” 

These busy-bodies evidently felt sure that this 
entire report was without authentic foundation, 
so they urged that search be made to see if such 
a decree had ever been issued by king Cyrus, 
and loyally concluded, ‘‘ Let the king send his 
pleasure to us concerning this matter” (ver. 17). 

And so their letter was drawn up and de- 
spatched; and doubtless they felt assured that 
the king’s reply would put an effectual guzetus 
upon the work of these obnoxious Jews, and for- 
ever stop the erection of a building which was as 
a sermon directed against their evil and idola- 
trous ways. 

Meantime the work went right on, ‘‘for the 
people had a mind to build,” as we elsewhere 


52 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


read and the prophets of the Lord encouraged 
them in carrying out His revealed will, in holy 
independence of their active and crafty adver- 
saries. 

The result could not be in doubt, for God never 
fails faith. He always makes bare His arm on 
behalf of those who acknowledge the authority 
of His Word. He has said, ‘‘ Them that honor 
Me I will honor, and they that despise Me shall 
be lightly esteemed.” 

All that is needed is the faith that fears not 
the face of man, because the fear of the Lord, 
which is the beginning of wisdom is upon the 
soul. 


53 


CHAPTER VI 
The House Completed 


HAT God never fails an obedient and trust- 

ing people is preciously exemplified in this 
stirring chapter of His ways with the separated 
remnant of the Jews. 

As when, in the book of Esther, the search of 
the royal records but vindicated Mordecai and 
led to the confusion of Haman, so here, when 
‘*search was made in the house of the rolls, where 
the treasures were laid up in Babylon, there was 
found at Achmetha, in the palace that is in the 
province of the Medes, a roll,” in which was 
found the record of king Cyrus, containing the 
very decree cynically referred to in the epistle 
of Tatnai and Shethar-boznai. There the com- 
mand that the house be builded was plainly de- 
clared, together with the specifications and plans, 
and the order for returning the vessels of the 
house of God from among the pollutions of 
heathen idolatry te their proper home in Jerusa- 
lem, the city where Jehovah had put His name 
(vers. 1-5). 

King Darius accordingly wrote at once warning 
Tatnai and his confederates to ‘‘let the work of 
this house of God alone; let the governor of the 
Jews and the elders of the Jews build this house 
of God in his place” (vers. 6, 7). 


54 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


This stinging rebuke was all that these ene- 
mies of the Jews and professed loyalists to the 
king got for their pains. Nay, there was even 
greater humiliation than this for them. The de- 
cree went on to command what they should do to 
further this work: ‘‘That of the king’s goods, 
even of the tribute beyond the river, forthwith 
expenses be given unto these men, that they be 
not hindered; and that which they have need of, 
both young bullocks and rams and lambs for the 
burnt offerings of the God of heaven, wheat, salt, 
wine, and oil, according to the appointment of 
the priests that are at Jerusalem, let it be given 
them day by day without fail: that they may 
offer sacrifices of sweet savors unto the God of 
heaven, and pray for the life of the king, and of 
his sons” (vers. 8-10). Moreover, it was directed, 
that if any one dared in any way to contravene 
this decree, his house was to be made a dunghill, 
and he himself hanged upon a scaffold made of 
its timbers (ver. 11). 

We must remember that all this was the de- 
cree of a king, who, whatever the measure of his 
enlightenment (as a Persian disdaining the idols 
of the Babylonians), nevertheless gives no evi- 
dence of that direct inspiration of God which is 
declared to have been the case in regard to 
Cyrus and his commandment; he was definitely 
raised up of God, and designated before his birth 
by name (Isa. 44: 28), and as “‘ the righteous man 


The House Completed 55 


from the east” who was to fulfil Jehovah’s will as 
to the restoration of His people (Isa. 41: 2). With 
Darius it was otherwise. He writes as one who 
had great respect for the decrees of his prede- 
cessors, and he will therefore invoke fearful pen- 
alties on any who venture to act contrary to 
them. 

The last part of his letter is such as we might 
expect from a king of his character, under the 
circumstances that had arisen: ‘‘And the God 
that hath caused His name to dwell there destroy 
all kings and people, that shall put to their 
hand to alter and to destroy this house of God 
which is at Jerusalem” (ver. 12). It is a solemn 
fact that this curse was literally fulfilled in every 
instance. Antiochus defiled this house and died 
unnaturally under the anger of God. Herod 
presumed to alter and enlarge it for his own 
aggrandizement, and died under divine dis- 
pleasure. ‘The Romans utterly destroyed it 
when the days of grace for Israel had expired; 
but in doing so, sealed their own doom, and their 
mighty empire is to-day but a memory. 

The celerity with which the humbled and 
astonished Tatnai and his friends undertook to 
carry out the provisions of the decree must have: 
been a great relief to the hitherto despised 
Jews. It reminds one of the Lord’s words to 
another feeble remnant, the church of Phila- 
delphia, who had a little strength and kept 


56 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


Christ’s word, not denying His name. To them 
them He says: ‘‘Behold, I will make them of the 
synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews and 
are not, but do lie; behold, I will make them to 
come and worship before thy feet, and to know 
that I have loved thee” (Rev. 3: 9). 

What is really of God may be despised for the 
moment by the unsubject and hypocritical, but 
the day of manifestation ever shows where the 
Lord has found His pleasure. Not always does 
this manifestation take place on earth, but in the 
day of Christ all that God has owned will be 
made plain. Yet, even here, often He shows 
where He has set the seal of His approval, to 
the discomfiture of haughty pretenders to an 
authority and spirituality they do not possess. 

Happily, we see no evidence of carnal exulta- 
tion or of haughtiness of spirit on the part of 
Zerubbabel and his fellow-laborers over the ex- 
posure and humbling of theiropponents. Rather 
do we see asincere cleaving to the Lord and re- 
joicing in Him who has made their mountain to 
stand strong. It was His work they were con- 
cerned in, not their own vindication. So, in holy 
serenity, ‘‘the elders of the Jews builded, and 
they prospered through the prophesying of Hag- 
gai the prophet and Zechariah the son of Iddo” 
(ver. 14). 

I would call the reader's attention to the des- 
ignations given these servants of God, now for 


The House Completed 57 


the second time. Haggai is called ‘‘the prophet” 
as though pre-eminently that, while his compan- 
ion-servant is simply declared to be ‘‘the son of 
Iddo.” Yet, as men generally speak, the latter 
it is who possesses the fullest claim to the pro- 
phetic office; for he unfolds in a wonderful man- 
ner the future in store for Israel and Judah. 
And this opening up of the unseen future is 
what is generally called prophecy. But it is 
otherwise in the word of God. The true prophet 
is the one whose words come from heaven to 
men on earth, searching the heart, reaching the 
conscience and exposing the evil that may have 
come in. ‘‘He that prophesieth speaketh unto 
men to edification, and exhortation (or stirring up) 
and comfort (or encouragement)” (1 Cor. 14: 3). 
Now this was exactly what Haggai did. His 
pungent, conscience-arousing messages were dis- 
tinctly of this character, and so he is pre-emin- 
ently ‘‘the prophet.” Zechariah’s needed min- 
istry of future things was equally of God, but it 
was subservient to the rousing words of his 
brother prophet, whose ministry was in view of 
the state of soul in God’s people. 

A ministry like Zechariah’s will more probably 
be enjoyed than one of the character of Haggai’s. 
Carnal believers often find great pleasure in lis- 
tening to dispensational and eschatological dis- 
courses, in attending what are often mis-called 
‘prophetic ” conferences; but what such really 


58 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


need is the trumpet-like call to consider their 
ways, rather than eloquent and beautiful discour- 
ses about things to come. The Haggais may not be 
so popular with the mass as the Zechariahs, but 
their ministry is ever a much needed one. He 
who goes on with God will welcome truth, and 
will thus hold the truth in its right proportions. 

At last the house was finished, in the sixth 
year of Darius the king—a long time indeed 
since the work had been begun. But persistent 
effort had eventually prevailed, and the temple, 
whose foundations had been laid with praise and 
weeping, and whose walls had been erected with 
faith and prophecy, was now ready to be dedica- 
ted to the service and worship of the Lord God 
of Israel. 

If one goes back and compares, or contrasts, 
the account of the dedication of the temple of 
Solomon with that of this house of the captivity, 
he cannot but feel how meagre was the service 
of the latter; but, on the other hand, one cannot 
but recognize it as of the same character. It 
was, in very deed, a going back to that which 
was from the beginning. The hundred bullocks, 
two hundred rams, and four hundred lambs fora 
peace offering, were few indeed as compared 
with the twenty-two thousand oxen, and the one 
hundred and twenty thousand sheep offered by 
Solomon; but all spoke of the same Christ who, 
“having made peace by the blood of His cross ” 


a 


The House Completed 59 


is now the ground of the soul’s communion with 
God. 

In solemn contrast with the sweet savor offer- 
ings, alone mentioned in connection with Solo- 
mon’s dedication, we here read of twelve he- 
goats as a sin-offering for all Israel, according to 
the number of the tribes of Israel (ver. 17). This 
was eminently fitting, for all Israel had sinned; 
and on behalf of all Israel, the remnant confessed 
and judged the sin in which all had participated. 
Only an active conscience, truly in the light, 
could have led to this blessed result. The dedi- 
cation was kept, we are told, with joy, and ‘‘ they 
set the priests in their divisions, and the Levites 
in their courses, for the service of God which is 
at Jerusalem; as it is written in the book of Mo- 
ses”’ (ver. 18). 

And so, once again, we are reminded of the 
only way to learn the mind of God, even to con- 
sult His holy Word, in dependence on the Spirit 
who inspired it. ‘‘As it is written” would settle 
many a needless controversy among Christians 
if there were only grace to ‘‘search the Scrip- 
tures’’ and to obey what is found therein. With 
‘‘Itis written,” Jesus mei every assault of Satan; 
and when he, for his own ends, misquoted, or 
partially quoted, from the same Word, conceal- 
ing an important phrase, he was met with ‘‘It is 
written again,” to silence his impious sugges- 
tions. This is the path of safety for each saint, 


60 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


only let none suppose that a mere slavish adher- 
ence to ‘‘ book, chapter and verse,’’ is what is 
here indicated. This there cannot always be; 
but the tenor of Scripture, the broad prin. 
ciples enunciated and exemplified therein, are 
what one needs to be familiar with. There was 
no specific scripture that instructed Zerubbabel 
to offer on this particular occasion twelve goats 
as asin offering for all Israel. But it was fully 
in accord with the word of God so to do; it was 
in the sfzrit of the law He had given through 
Moses, and therefore well-pleasing to Him. 

And, in the next place, in obedience to the 
same Word, ‘‘ The children of the captivity kept 
the passover upon the fourteenth day of the first 
month” (ver.19). Great was thé care exercised 
that all should be as God had directed. ‘‘The 
priests and the Levites were purified together; all 
of them were pure, and killed the passover for all 
the children of the captivity, and for their breth- 
ren the priests, and for themselves. And the 
children of Israel who were come again out of 
captivity, and all such as had separated them- 
selves unto them from the filthiness of the na- 
tions of the land, to seek the Lord God of Israel, 
did eat” (vers. 20, 21). 

All this is most instructive and enlightening, 
furnishing a helpful principle for those to act 
upon in any age, who would please the Lord in 
their public feasts of love, and their fellowship 


The House Completed 6i 


one with another. The passover was the great 
central feast of Israel. It was to them what the 
Lord’s supper is to Christians. In fact, our Lord 
links the two most intimately, in that it was 
during the celebration of the one that He institu- 
ted the other. The loaf in His hand was the 
unleavened Passover bread, while the cup was 
the Passover cup, for which Scripture gives no 
direct authority, but which was a natural accom- 
paniment of a Jewish meal. Both spoke of the 
same blessed event—the death of Christ. The 
one set forth that death in prospect, the other de. 
clares that death as already having taken place. 
‘‘For as oft as ye eat this bread and drink this 
cup, ye do show (or announce—it might even be 
rendered, preach) the Lord’s death till He come” 
(@.Cotn 11226), 

In the beginning all confessing Christ’s name 
had their place at that holy table. Then divine 
instruction was given not to eat with any one, 
called a brother, whose life was wicked. Teach- 
ers of false doctrine were likewise debarred from 
all Christian fellowship, which could not but in- 
clude participation in the communion supper. 
With this, God has also warned lest any be par- 
takers of other men’s sins, by going on with 
those unfitted for fellowship, thereby unfitting 
themselves. And so, with these broad principles 
to guide, it may be confidently asserted that God 
has not left believers to decide for themselves 


62 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


the grave question of who is to be received and 
who refused at the table of the Lord. The un- 
holy have no place there. Being the Lora’s table, 
it implies subjection to Him as such. Hence, 
we see the priests all purified together. To-day 
all believers are priests. This then is the scrip- 
tural ideal of a Christian gathering—‘‘all of 
them were pure.” 

To this company were received ‘‘all such as had 
separated themselves from the filthiness of the 
nations of the land to seek the Lord.” What an 
enlightening word is this! There are those who 
object to an expression long current among cer- 
tain believers: ‘‘Separation from evil is God's 
principle of unity.” But is not that exactly what 
we have here? Were not these dear Israelites 
one as a separated company from the abomin- 
ations of the people of the land? Only as so 
separated could they cleave together. And in 
any dispensation, | apprehend, the same prin- 
ciple abides for faith. ‘There can be no true 
practical unity save as evil is refused, and Christ 
becomes the object of each soul. And separa- 
tion from evil involves turning to the Lord alone, 
for He is the one only centre, apart from all the 
evil. Given His rightful place, the incongruity 
of endeavoring to cling to what is unholy while 
seeking to please God, is at once made manifest. 

But argument avails little here. This truth, 
like all others, has to be learned through 


The House Completed 63 


the conscience. Men may reason and contend 
about what to faith is most simple, if there be 
activity of conscience, enlightened by the word 
of God. The feeble few of Zerubbabel’s day 
were far beyond some now, who, despite greatly 
increased light, are quite unable to discern the 
mind of God because persons are before them 
instead of the glory of Christ. Much grace is 
needed if any truth be apprehended that it may 
be held inthe Spirit’s power; and this is especially 
true as to what Scripture reveals in regard to 
gathering to the name of the Lord Jesus. 


CHAPTER VII 


A Second Awakening 


E reach a new beginning, as it were, in 

the present chapter, when Ezra for the 
first time, is definitely identified with the move- 
ment for returning to the place where God had 
set His name. 

Another Artaxerxes is now on the throne, and 
in his reign God revives the spirits of many who 
had hitherto remained in Babylon, and fills their 
hearts with a desire to go up to Jerusalem. Of 
these Ezra himself is the leader. He was a di- 
rect lineal descendant of Phinehas, the man 
whose javelin had turned aside the wrath of the 
Lord in the days of Baal-peor, when Balaam 
taught Balak how to seduce Israel by unholy al- 
liances with the daughters of Moab (Num. 25). 
To him had been granted an everlasting priest- 
hood, and of this pledge Ezra is witness. 

He was, we are told, ‘‘a ready scribe in the 
law of Moses,” and one who had the confidence 
of the king; so when he preferred a request to be 
permitted to lead another company up from 
Babylon to the city of God, his petition was heard, 
and full permission given, ‘‘according to the 
good hand of the Lord his God upon him.” This 


A Second Awakening 65 


expression is characteristic. In all his ways 
Ezra recognized ‘‘the good hand of the Lord,” 
and to that alone he attributes every forward 
step. 

With Ezra went up a considerable company of 
the children of Israel, including priests, Levites, 
singers, porters and Nethinim, who left Babylon 
in the seventh year of Artaxerxes, and in about 
four months arrived in Jerusalem to join the 
former company, and there to set forward the 
work of the Lord. 

Of Ezra we read that he ‘‘had prepared his 
heart to seek the law of the Lord, and to do it, 
and to teach in Israel statutes and judgments” 
(ver. 10). His was just the ministry now needed 
among the returned company, and ‘‘the good 
hand of the Lord” supplied it. A competent, 
sober man of sound judgment, a man mighty in 
the Scriptures, and an able instructor of his 
brethren; how invaluable he would be at this 
time. 

Not a mere intellectual student of the word 
of God, nor one teaching others what had not 
gripped his own heart and controlled his ways, 
was Ezra. He had begun by earnestly preparing 
his own heart to seek the lawof the Lord. ‘‘The 
preparation of the eart in man is of the Lord.” 
This Ezra recognized. So it is not said that he 
prepared his head—but his heart. His inmost 
being was brought under the sway of the truth 


66 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


of God. His affections were controlled by the 
Scriptures. He might have said, with Jeremiah; 
‘“‘Thy words were found, and I did eat them. 
and Thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing 
of my heart.’’ He was personally right with 
God, and so was prepared to help set others 
right. Then there was more than inward prepar- 
ation. Having learned the mind and will of 
God, he undertook to do it. He did not preach 
truth that he was not living. When under the 
good hand of God the king granted him all his 
requests, to leave Babylon and go to Jerusalem 
for the sake of the Name, he considered not cir- 
cumstances (which might well have held him 
where he was, in place of going up to a desola- 
ted land and a ruined city), but he at once pre- 
pared to go forth trusting ‘‘ the good hand of the 
Lord upon him.” 

One reason there is so little power with much 
of the preaching and teaching of the day is a 
lack of consistently dozwg the truth ere proclaim- 
ing it. Men preach the Lord's near coming, 
who give no evidence that the ‘‘ blessed hope ” 
has moulded their ways. Men teach the truth 
of the mystery of the one body, who yet, for 
filthy lucre’s sake, or because of other circum- 
stances, abide in what practically denies it. Men 
proclaim the heavenly calling who have never 
learned to walk on earth as strangers and pil- 
grims. Is it any wonder their words are without, 


A Second Awakening 67 


power and their ministry but as clouds without 
water? The path of blessing is dozme—then 
teaching. It was thus with the true Servant. 
Luke writes ‘‘of all that Jesus began both to do 
and to teach” (Acts 1: 1). Woe be to any man, 
however able and gifted, who ventures to neglect 
the first while carrying on the second. Ezra 
was a pattern man in this respect. He under- 
took to do what he found written; then ‘‘to 
teach in Israel statutes and judgments.” Let 
every servant of God lay this roth verse to heart, 
and ask himself: Am I thus serving my Master? 
No doubt such a question will at once bring be- 
fore every conscientious soul much that calls for 
self-judgment; and Ezra himself, doubtless, would 
have felt the same. But the aim, the bent of 
the life, is what I refer to—the endeavor to carry 
out the order here indicated. 

A copy of the letter of Artaxerxes is given in 
verses 12 to 26, and, as in the case of the prev- 
ious decrees, this passage is reproduced in Ara- 
maic or Chaldean, directly transcribed from the 
Persian records. There is something very beau- 
tiful in the salutation of this letter: ‘Artaxerxes, 
king of kings, unto Ezra the priest, a scribe of 
the law of the God of heaven, perfect peace,” 
and so forth (ver. 12). How marked the contrast 
between the two. How different their titles. 
And, in God’s sight, how much higher was 
Ezra’s rank than that of him who vain-gloriously 


68 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


designated himself by a title that properly be- 
longs alone to the Lord Jesus Christ: ‘‘ Who, in 
His own times shall show, who is that blessed 
and only Potentate, King of kings and Lord of 
lords!” 

Who that lived in those olden days would have 
supposed that in the course of the centuries the 
name and achievements of Artaxerxes would be 
almost unknown by millions to whom Ezra’s name 
and work would be as familiar as if he had lived 
but yesterday! There are many such contrasts 
in the word of God. Ahasuerus is not even cer- 
tainly identified to-day, but Mordecai is known 
wherever the word of God has been carried. 
The Pharaoh of the Exodus has been supposed 
to be one of half a dozen different monarchs, 
but no one makes a mistake as to Moses. Gama- 
liel is only remembered as the teacher of the 
devoted apostle Paul, and because of his moder- 
ation in treating the despised Nazarenes. And 
so with many more. Better far is it to be a child 
of God and to walk with Him than to wear 
earth’s proudest diadem or have the widest repu- 
tation among carnal men. 

Nor, in writing thus, would I reflect adversely 
upon Artaxerxes. His letter gives good evi- 
dence of sincere regard for the glory of the God 
of heaven. But he takes the place of a patron, 
Ezra of a servant. And between the two there 
is a vast difference. 


A Second Awakening 69 


The decree is largely after the order of that of 
Cyrus. As in the former, so here, stress is laid 
upon the voluntariness of the project. Permis- 
sion is given to any or all of the people of Israel 
‘*that are minded of their own free will to go 
up to Jerusalem,” to go with Ezra. God would 
have no coercion, but .He removes every legal 
barrier for those who have the heart to take the 
arduous journey and to retrace their fathers’ 
steps back to the place where His house is estab- 
lished. 

Silver and gold, a free-will offering from the 
king and his counsellors, as well as from the 
people, for the habitation of God, Ezra is bidden 
to carry up to Jerusalem for sacrificial offerings, 
to be offered on Jehovah’s altar in Jerusa- 
lem; while full liberty was granted to use any 
superfluity in any way that seemed best ‘‘after 
the will of their God” (vers. 16-18). Goodly 
vessels were also supplied for the service of the 
house of God out of the king’s own treasure; 
and assurance was given that if more were 
needed, they would be forthcoming (vers. 19, 
20). 

Commandment was likewise laid upon the 
king’s treasurers beyond the river to help forward 
the work by giving ‘‘ whatsoever Ezra the priest, 
the scribe of the God of heaven,” might require, 
‘‘unto a hundred talents of silver, and to a hun- 
dred measures of wheat, and to a hundred baths 


70 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


of wine, and to a hundred baths of oil, and salt 
without prescribing how much” (vers. 21, 22). 

All that they needed for the service of ‘‘the 
God of heaven” wasto be done; and His priests 
and servants were to be freed from all toll or 
tribute. Besides all this, Ezra was commissioned 
to establish order throughout the province, by 
appointing magistrates and judges, and teach- 
ing the law of God to all ignorant of it (vers. 24, 
25). And the decree closed as did that of Darius 
by denouncing severe penalties upon any who 
were hardy enough to act contrary to its pro- 
visions (ver. 26). 

Ezra’s heart was filled with rejoicing as he re- 
ceived and perused the letter. He recognized 
it was a greater King who had thus moved Ar- 
taxerxes so to favor His people. In holy exulta- 
tion of spirit he cries, ‘‘ Blessed be the Lord God 
of our fathers, who hath put such a thing as this 
in the king’s heart, to beautify the house of the 
Lord which is at Jerusalem: and hath extended 
mercy unto me before the king and his counsel- 
lors, and before all the king’s mighty princes.” 
Thus had the king’s gracious act produced 
thanksgiving to God, and joy of heart in the 
breast of His servant. 

Again Ezra speaks of ‘‘the hand of God.” He 
was a man who seemed never to look at mere 
human instrumentality, but, back of the hand of 
man, he saw the guiding, or controlling, hand of 


A Second Awakening 7\ 


the Lord. ‘‘I was strengthened,” he says, ‘‘as 
the hand of the Lord my God was upon me, and 
I gathered together out of Israel chief men to 
go up with me” (ver. 28). 

Of the going up we have already had a brief 
epitome in verses 6 to 9, but we are tohavea 
fuller description, to learn something of the 
difficulties to be overcome, the perils to be faced, 
and the testings of faith, as also its glorious tri- 
umph in the next chapter. ‘ 

Every work that is really of God will have to 
be tried; but to the man of faith, instructed in 
the mind of the Lord, difficulties are never in- 
surmountable; but he will be able in holy con- 
fidence to say with Paul, ‘‘ None of these things 
move me.” Of such a spirit was Ezra the scribe, 
and of such must be all who would count for God 
in a day of ruin. 


72 


CHAPTER VIII 


The March of Faith 


HAT I would especially press upon the 
conscience of my reader at this juncture 

is this: Albeit the movement in which Ezra and 
his company were participants was distinct from 
that of Zerubbabel, Jeshua and their brethren, 
there were no new principles involved than 
those the former company had already learned 
from the word of God. No new centre was ever 
thought of. No new place to gather was sug- 
gested. Jerusalem was the one only place and 
Jehovah the one only Name. He had set His 
name at Jerusalem: consequently thitherward 
were the faces of all Ezra’s company turned. 
They were soon to learn that those who had pre- 
ceded them had ‘‘ made amess and a failure”’* of 
the whole thing; but that did not set them in- 
quiring if it would not be wise to gather else- 
where, to give up the principle of separation, to 
step aside from the movement and contentedly 
go back to Babylon. Not at all. God's word 
remained. God's centre remained. God’s Spirit 


*T quote by memory from J. N. D. [Failure in what is of 
God calls for suited ministry—for exhortation and correction 
unto righteousness. But false principles and false position 
leave no divine basis for recovery. The false principles or 
position of necessity must be abandoned. ]—Ed. 


The March of Faith 73 


remained. And for this fresh company there 
was nothing to do, as guided by that Spirit, but 
to return to and continue to own the one centre 
in accordance with the unchanging Word. 

Surely in this we may learn a lesson which 
some are fast letting slip—a lesson which really 
learned would save from much discouragement 
as well as from many a blunder here and from 
much loss at the judgment-seat of Christ. 

We turn now to our chapter, and here again 
we have a table of the chief of the fathers—a 
table that God delighted to put on record, and 
which, like the former one, stands on the books 
of eternity. All will be forever remembered 
by Him who never overlooks anything done in 
faith and subjection to His Word. Had one of 
these turned back to Babylon He would have 
noted it too; and had any stopped half way be- 
tween the land of Shinar and the city of God, His 
eye would have discerned it and His hand re- 
corded it. Solemn considerations are these for 
any who might be disposed to trifle with divine 
truth. 

Not one of the names here listed may be other- 
wise known to us; but all stand in God’s sight 
for distinct living personalities, all of whose acts 
and words are as clear in His mind as though 
they still tabernacled in flesh and blood, and 
walked the earth as strangers and sojourners, 
servants of the God of heaven, cleaving to His 


74 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


name in the midst of ruin. It is for us to occupy 
this very position to-day, as though in their 
place; and, if faithful in it, rest assured, He who 
forgets not one of them will pass by nothing in 
our history that He can reward in that day. 
When the whole company were assembled to- 
gether by Ezra’s orders, by ‘‘the river that 
runneth to Ahava,” they abode in tents—the 
sign of pilgrimage—for three days, the period 
of full display or testimony; and then all were 
reviewed before their priestly leader, who soon 
observed that the sons of Levi were sadly con- 
spicuous by their absence. Not one was found 
among the pilgrim band. What did it mean? 
Evidently it was harder for these men whose 
whole portion must be in God, to rise to the 
blessedness of such a place, than for those who 
expected to have an inheritance in their ancient 
home. The Levites were settled in a large 
measure of comfort in the land of the stranger. 
To forsake it all and go forth in simplicity to the 
place of the Name, meant more to them than to 
some others.* But, on the other hand, how 


* Similar tests occur now-a-days. I know a clergyman 
who, years ago, was convinced of the unscripturalness of his 
position ; but, opposed by his family when contemplating 
“‘ooing forth, for His name’s sake, outside the camp,’’ said : 
“Wor my children’s sake I will remain where I am, but will 
preach the truth as far as Ican.’’ He lived to see his son a 
convicted felon outlawed by the State; his daughter, an actress 


The March of Faith 75 


much greater the blessing, when one thus puts 
God to the test and finds Him ever the all- 
sufficient One anticipating every need, and lead- 
ing the soul out in a way that others seldom know. 

Ezra at once sent a deputation of faithful men 
to lay before the Levites and the Nethinims, 
who were of old appointed by David to the ser- 
vice of the Levites, to lay before them the im- 
portance of going forth with them, ‘‘ That they 
should bring unto us ministers for the house of 
our God” (vers. 15-17). And thus it was that a 
number of both classes were, as Ezra so beauti- 
fully puts it, ‘‘ by the good hand of our God upon 
us,” led to join their company. Among these 
one is especially mentioned as ‘‘a man of under- 
standing.” Valuable indeed in any movement 
of God’s Spirit are such men; like those of old, 
who ‘‘had understanding of the times, to know 
what Israel ought to do.” 

The company was now, one might have sup- 
posed, ready to go up to the house of God at Je- 
rusalem. But Ezrahasother thoughts. He knows 
the way is long and lonely. Dangers abound. 
There are perils of robbers and perils of wild 
beasts. A safe convoy is surely needed, and 


on the world’s unholy stage; and he himself made practical 
shipwreck of the faith. 

Not in vain has God said, ‘‘Them that honor Me I will 
honor, and they that despise Me shall be lightly esteemed ;”’ 
and again, ‘‘ The Lord is with you while ye be with Him.’ 


76 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


where shall such be found but in the living God ? 
‘The angel of the Lord encampeth round about 
them that fear Him and delivereth them.” Soa 
fast is proclaimed by the river-side, and all the 
people are urged to humble themselves before 
God, to entreat of Him ‘‘a prosperous way for 
us, and for our little ones, and for all our sub- 
stance’ (ver. 21). What a lovely sight in the 
eyes of the Lord was that self-judged, fasting 
company, in the dust before Him, crying to Him 
to be their Guide and Deliverer. No ark, borne 
on the shoulders of anointed priests, was there 
to lead them now. No pillar of cloud by day and 
of fire by night was there to guide. But they 
knew that He who of old had led them through 
the wilderness changeth not; and they sent up 
their petition to Him to be indeed their Shep- 
herd, preserving them from every danger and 
meeting every need, all along their march of faith. 

It would have been easy to have applied to 
their royal patron, Artaxerxes, for a convoy, but 
this would have given the lie to the profession 
Ezra had made in his presence. It stirs the 
heart to read his reasons, so artlessly given in 
verse 22, for turning alone to God. ‘‘ For I was 
ashamed,” he says, ‘‘to require of the king a 
band of soldiers and horsemen to keep us against 
the enemy in the way; because we had spoken 
unto the king, saying, The hand of our God is 
upon all them for good that seek Him; but His 


The March of Faith 73 


wrath is against all them that forsake Him.” 
This is most blessed. Alas, how little is the 
spirit of Ezra entered into in our time-serving 
age, when almost any means are adopted for 
carrying on what is called the work of the Lord, 
and any help is greedily sought, even from the 
unholy and profane,. with no thought of the 
awful dishonor done to the name of the Lord 
Jesus Christ. Money is begged from all sources; 
patronage desired from the ungodly, if they 
have but wealth and influence—and this by pro- 
fessed followers of Him who said, ‘‘If I were 
hungry I would not tell thee;’’ and whose ser- 
vants in apostolic days ‘‘went forth, for His 
name’s sake taking nothing of the Gentiles.” 
Ezra’s faith and godliness might well put all 
such to shame. His stand contrasts with the 
dreadiul lowering of the standard so prevalent 
throughout Christendom. 

Having borne faithful testimony to the king, 
he and his company turned to God in fasting and 
prayer, beseeching Him to lead them forth as of 
old; and, the record adds, ‘‘He was entreated 
of us” (ver. 23). And so will He ever be where 
there is faith to count upon Him, and holiness to 
refuse all that would compromise His glory. 

Not only did Ezra thus honor God’s name be- 
fore the powers of the world, but he was equally 
careful in caring for what belonged to the house 
of God, the treasure committed to him, ‘‘that 


78 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


good deposit” consisting of the gold and silver 
given by his brethren as an offering unto the 
Lord’s house, and the vessels entrusted to him 
by the king. All were carefully weighed and 
tabulated, and delivered for safe-keeping to 
twelve of the priests, who were especially sepa- 
rated for this particular trust. To them Ezra 
gave a solemn charge, reminding us of Paul’s 
charge to his son in the faith, Timothy, in the 
first chapter of his second epistle. ‘‘Ye are 
holy unto the Lord,” Ezra says to them, ‘‘the 
vessels are holy also; and the silver and the gold 
are a free-will offering unto the Lord God of 
your fathers. Watch ye, and keep them, until 
ye weigh them before the chief of the priests 
and the Levites, and chief of the fathers of Israel, 
at Jerusalem, in the chambers of the house of 
the Lord” (vers. 28, 29). These were earnest 
and serious words, and must have made each of 
the twelve feel intensely the sacredness of the 
trust committed to them. So to us has a deposit 
of holy things been entrusted, even the truth of 
which God has seen fit to make us stewards. We 
are to safe-guard this holy treasure all through 
our journey, until we reach the place of mani- 
festation, when all will be weighed once more in 
the balances of the sanctuary. Well will it be for 
us then if we have lost nothing on the way, but 
have held fast, like the beloved apostle Paul, all 
that has been committed unto us. 


The March of Faith 79 


The priests and the Levites duly witnessed 
and tabulated the amount of gold and silver and 
the weight of the vessels, and the appointed 
guardians took all in their charge, after which 
the journey was begun. 

On the twelfth day of the first month the car- 
avan left the river of Ahava, seven days after 
Ezra’s first start (chap. 7: 9), a week having 
passed in needful preparation. All along the 
journey the hand of God was upon them, and 
Ezra testifies, ‘‘ He delivered us from the hand 
of the enemy and of all such as lay in wait by 
the way” (ver. 31). What indeed had they to 
fear from the hand of the enemy when under the 
protecting care of the hand of God. And what 
has any saint to fear when that same almighty, 
yet infinitely tender Hand is ever upon him for 
good. It has well been said that God is all that 
we take Him for. The great trouble with many 
of us is we are so straitened in ourselves, and 
thus we limit the Holy Oneof Israel. ‘‘Able to 
do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask 
or think” is the unlimited resource available to 
faith. 

At last Jerusalem was reached, and for three 
days the pilgrims rested after their long and 
arduous journey. Then came the day of reckon. 
ing, when account was to be made of the treasure 
conveyed by the twelve appointed priests. The 
gold and silver and the vessels were all weighed 


80 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


in the house of God by Meremoth, Eleazar, 
Jozabad and Noadiah, four men, upon the fourth 
day. The number in each case is significant, for 
throughout Scripture four speaks of testing. 
‘“‘By number and by weight of every one,” the 
test is made, and all recorded in the priestly 
record, and found intact. The twelve had ful- 
filled their trust in a way that you and I, my 
reader, will be glad indeed to have done, if the 
day of reckoning give us as clean a sheet as they 
obtained. 

The accounting rendered in a rightful manner, 
the newly arrived company now flock about the 
altar of God as a band of worshipers, with a great 
number of burnt offerings; and, as at the dedi- 
cation of the temple, with ‘‘twelve he-goats as a 
sin offering for all Israel.” They take their stand 
with their brethren as part of a failed people, 
acknowledging their iniquity and the iniquity of 
their fathers, but counting on the covenant- 
mercy of their faithful God (ver. 35). 

It was a scene of great moral beauty, and must 
have deeply affected the whole company, as once 
more they were permitted to approach God at 
the appointed place, and sing the Lord’s song 
about His altar and in His house. Often had 
they longed for this hour when ‘‘by the rivers 
of Babylon they sat down and wept when they 
remembered Zion” (Ps. 137). There they had 
cried, “If I fomret thee, O Jerusalem, let my 


The March of Faith 81 


tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I pre- 
fer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.” Now 
they were actually in the place where Jehovah 
had caused His name to dwell of old, and the 
sweet savor of a multitude of burnt offerings 
ascended to His throne to testify to the gladness 
of their hearts; while the sin offering, burned to 
ashes, told how fully they recognized the evil of 
having departed from Him who should ever have 
been the joy of their souls; the God of their fath- 
ers, now fully recognized as their God, despite 
their feeble condition. 

It has been supposed by many, on the authority 
of Jewish tradition, that the ‘‘Songs of degrees”’ 
(Ps. 120 to 134) were sung by Ezra and his com- 
pany at various stages of the way, until at last 
they stood in the house of the Lord and could 
lift up their hands in the sanctuary and bless 
Jehovah. These psalms, read in this connection, 
are, at least, very suggestive, and lead the soul 
along the way from the tents of darkness to the 
house of God most blessedly. 

The last verse of our chapter tells us that the 
king’s commissions weré duly delivered to the 
authorities beyond the river, as a consequence 
of which they dared no longer hinder; but in 
accordance with their instructions ‘‘they fur- 
thered the people and the house of God.” So 
had the wrath of man been made to praise Him, 
and the remainder been restrained. 


82 


CHAPTER IX 


The Break-down by Amalgamation 


HERE is perhaps no greater trial a man 

can be called upon to face, than to take, 
through grace, a position he has seen from the 
word of God to be scriptural, and then to be 
rudely awakened to the realization that the peo- 
ple who were in that position before him, are 
not what he had hoped to find them. Yea, that 
they are even less spiritual, less devoted, less 
zealous for God, than some he has left behind 
him in systems where quasi-darkness prevailed. 
Then indeed one needs to be firmly held by 
the truth, or he is likely to be altogether over- 
come and completely disheartened. Many an 
unstable soul has, by such a test, been utterly 
swept away from his moorings. Such often go 
back in despair to the unscriptural positions they 
had abandoned, ard give out a bad report of the 
land, thus hindering others from following the 
light vouchsafed to them. While some, with 
too much conscience to build again the things 
they had destroyed, become what one might call 
spiritual free lances—and sometimes, alas, spirit- 
ual Ishmaelites, their hand against every man, 


The Breaz-down by Amalgamation 83 


and every man’s hand against them; criticizing, 
fault-finding, restless and unhappy; occupied 
with evil, lamenting the conditions of the times; 
bewailing the unfaithfulness of anybody and 
everybody but themselves; and so falling into a 
spirit of Pharisaism that is helpful to no one, and 
a hindrance to all they come in contact with. 

Now all this results from occupation with per- 
sons instead of with Christ. It is suppased that 
because people occupy a position of peculiar 
favor, and have been blessed with special light, 
they must needs be personally more to be relied 
on than the generality of Christians, and that the 
flesh is less likely to act in them than in others. 
Often one hears of people ‘‘coming out to cer. 
tain brethren,” or “Goining” this or that company 
of saints. All this is bound to result in disaster. 

_It is to Christ alone we are called to go forth, 
without the camp, bearing His reproach. Ae, 
blessed be God, never disappoints. If the eye 
be fixed on Him—if the heart be occupied with 
Him-—if He be recognized as the one only Centre 
—then, let saints be what they may as to their 
spiritual state, there can be no lasting disappoint- 
ment, for Christ abides. 

If I see it to be according to Scripture to gather 
with fellow-believers to the name of the Lord 
Jesus, owning that ‘‘there is one body, and one 
Spirit,” the behaviour of those already so gath- 
ered cannot alter the truth for one moment. 


84 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


Rather does it call for exercise of soul on my 
part that I may be a help to them, stirring them 
up to fresh devotedness and renewed zeal in self- 
judgment. 

It is far easier to stand aside and point out the 
low state of the rest—even to withdraw alto- 
gether from their company—-than to emulate 
Ezra who, by his personal faithfulness, lifted the 
whole company to a higher plane. There will be 
less trouble, less perplexity, less concern, if one 
simply turns away and leaves the rest to go on 
as they will; but God is not thereby glorified nor 
are failing saints recovered. 

The position of gathering to the name of the 
Lord in simplicity as members of the one body, 
is not one in which there is no trouble. Far 
from it. But it is a place where all trouble can 
be set right and every difficulty met dy the word 
of God alone; and this is what cannot be said of 
any sect in Christendom. There human ingen- 
uity, man-made regulations, carnal laws and 
ordinances are relied on to keep things in order 
and to settle disputes. But those who turn, in 
faith, from all this to Christ alone as Centre and 
the Word alone for guide and disciplinary in- 
struction, find that Word all-sufficient if there be 
but obedience to its principles. Of all this the 
present and the last chapters furnish us with a 
most blessed illustration. 

The first burst of praise and worship over, for 


The Break-down by Amalgamation 85 


Ezra there came this rude awakening to which I 
have referred above. One can imagine the awful 
disappointment, the poignant grief that were his 
when the sad state of affairs that had developed 
among the separated Jews was revealed to him. 
No description can bring it before us more 
vividly than his own words. 

‘‘Now when these things were done, the 
princes came to me, saying, The people of Is- 
rael and the priests and the Levites have not 
separated themselves from the peoples of the 
lands, doing according to their abominations, 
even of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Periz. 
zites, the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moab, 
ites, the Egyptians and the Amorites. For 
they have taken of their daughters for them- 
selves, and for their sons; so that the holy seed 
have mingled themselves with the peoples of 
those lands: yea, the hand of the princes and 
rulers hath been chief in this trespass: and when 
I heard this thing, I rent my garment and my 
mantle and plucked off the hair of my head 
and of my beard, and sat down astonied” (vers. 
1-3). 

Devoted and faithful steward of God! How 
our hearts are moved by his bitter grief when he 
is thus brought to realize the low condition of 
the people who are in the only right position. 
Could one be astonished if he had turned heart. 
sick away from them all, and in lofty seclusion of 


86 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


spirit endeavored to go on alone with God, giv 
ing up all hope of corporate testimony? 

But this he does not do. In faithfulness to 
God he cannot forego the position, and he loves 
the people of the Lord too much to give them up. 

One thing is encouraging to begin with. While, 
alas, ‘‘the nobles and princes were chief in this 
trespass,” yet there were princes who were, 
clearly, not of the mind of the rest, but ‘‘ who 
sought and cried because of the abominations 
done in their midst.”” The very fact that these 
men sought Ezra out to lay the true condition of 
affairs before him, was evidence of their desire 
to help and deliver the rest. 

It is pitiable indeed when among those out- 
wardly separated, links are formed and main- 
tained that deny the integrity of that separation; 
and it is unspeakably sad when the leaders fail 
in this very thing and thus encourage the simple 
in departure from God. More than once have 
we seen people who would not tolerate an eccle- 
siastical yoke with unbelievers, yet uniting with 
the world in business, even in marriage, and in 
kindred ways. This is similar to what we have 
here in Ezra. 

The people were out of Babylon as to their 
bodies, but the spirit of Babylon possessed them 
still. This it was led to amalgamation with 
the uncircumcised nations of the land. The same 
evil principle frequently works in a directly op- 


The Break-down by Amalgamation 87 


posite way. Often have we seen those who were 
supposed to have judged the sin of sectarianism 
and left human systems, yet maintain as sec- 
tarian a spirit when gathered out as any could 
possibly have who contended for the most rigid 
denominationalism. It is related of Luther that 
he saidin the beginning he had spent much time 
in denouncing the people of Rome, until he 
found ‘‘every man had a greater pope in his own 
heart than ever sat in the papal chair.” ‘This is 
the fruit of legality; while what we have in our 
chapter is rather an unholy license—a ‘‘turning 
the grace of God into lasciviousness ’—an utter 
misuse of that grace. 

Almost heart-broken, Ezra manifested all the 
signs of deepest distress of ‘spirit, and sat down 
in bitter astonishment. That such things pre. 
vailed in Babylon would not have amazed him. 
That they could be tolerated among those gath- 
ered to the place of the Name, dumbfounded 
him. 

But at once the newsof his grief spread among 
the people with a blessed and soul-cheering re- 
sult. That all were not in sympathy with the 
looseness that had come in soon became evident. 
‘‘Then were assembled unto me,” he tells us, 
‘every one that trembled at the words of the 
God of Israel, because of the transgression of 
those that had been carried away; and I sat 
astonied until the evening sacrifice’”’ (ver. 4). 


88 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


God had said, long before, by Isaiah, ‘‘ To this 
man will I look; to him that is humble and of a 
contrite spirit, and that trembleth at My word” 
(Isa. 66: 2). Such there were still among the 
remnant, and upon them the Lord could look in 
blessing. These men and Ezra, acting with God, 
would be a majority, however few in number. 
Such men are likely to be regarded by the un- 
spiritual as troublers and ‘‘old fogies;” but 
where there is real exercise of soul, God can be 
depended on toshow whom He recognizes, in due 
time. 

It was ‘‘at the evening sacrifice” that Ezra 
arose from his heaviness and was uplifted in 
spirit above the depressing circumstances that 
had so bowed him with grief. The evening sacri- 
fice speaks of the cross. It was ‘‘the continual 
burnt offering ’—Christ the holy One doing the 
will of God even unto death—‘‘a sacrifice of a 
sweet smelling savor.” As this blessed odor 
greets Ezra’s nostrils, he is delivered from his 
speechless anguish and enabled to pour out his 
soul in confession and prayer. 

And is it not everthus? As Christ and His 
cross are before the soul one is raised above 
vecupation with evil and depression of spirit be- 
cause of failure on the part of one’s brethren. 

Falling upon his knees, and spreading out his 
hands—‘‘ holy hands, without wrath and doubt- 
ing ’’—before God, he opened his mouth in a 


The Break-down by Amalgamation 89 


petition that is most affecting in its humility, 
its regard for God’s holiness and truth, and the 
wonderfully blessed way in which he, personally 
pure (as Daniel, in A4zs ninth chapter, and Ne. 
hemiah’s companions in /zs), identifies himself 
with the people in all their failure and sin. 

The balance of the chapter is entirely devoted 
to this prayer; it will repay the closest study 
and meditation: ‘*‘O my God, I am ashamed and 
blush to lift up my face to Thee, my God: for 
our iniquities are increased over our head, and 
our trespass is grown up unto the heavens. 
Since the days of our fathers have we been in a 
great trespass unto this day; and for our in- 
iquities have we, our kings, and our priests, 
been delivered into the hand of the kings of the 
lands, to the sword, to captivity, and to a spoil, 
and to confusion of face, as it is this day ” (vers. 
6,7). In these words, observe, how far back 
Ezra goes in tracing the present evil to its 
source. It was the sin that had resulted in the 
captivity which had never been really judged, 
and had been the parent sin of all the rest. The 
low state of the whole nation affected even the 
returned remnant. And so it is in Christendom. 
We have sinned since the days of our fathers. 
First love was left at the very beginning and true 
recovery there has never been. Who has really 
felt the sin of the Church in turning from her 
glorified Head and linking herself with the 


90 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


world? Here and there the Spirit of God pro- 
duces contrition and some sense of the failure, 
but who has fully fathomed it? Yet ever and 
anon God works in revival, drawing a few back 
in heart to Christ; but declension almost invari- 
ably follows. It has been said that ‘‘eternal 
vigilance is the price of liberty,” and it is as true 
in spiritual things asin carnal. 

Ezra details before God the work His grace 
had wrought; only the more to emphasize the 
insubordination that had misused that grace so 
sadly. ‘‘And now for a little space grace hath 
been showed from the Lord our God, to leave us 
a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in His 
holy place, that our God may lighten our eyes, 
and give us a little reviving in our bondage. For 
we are [not were] bondmen; yet our God hath 
not forsaken us in our bondage, but hath ex- 
tended mercy unto us in the sight of the kings of 
Persia, to give us a reviving, to set up the house 
of our God, and to repair the desolations thereof, 
and to give us a wallin Judah and Jerusalem ” 
(vers. 8, 9). The reference to the ‘‘nail” is 
doubtless a recognition of Isaiah’s prophecy of 
the ‘‘nail in asure place,’’ upon which Jehovah's 
glory was to hang, which is, in the full sense, 
Christ Himself (Isa. 22: 21-25). A partial fulfil- 
ment had already been given; God had acted in 
great grace in thus giving a ‘‘ little reviving,” 
though they were still bondmen; for they share 


The Break-down by Amalgamation 91 


in the failure of the whole nation. It was no 
time for fleshly exultation, no time for pride of 
position; but only for lowliness of spirit and hu- 
miliation of soul because of the dark record of 
evil in which all had their share. 

Ezra next recalls the special sin of the remnant, 
and here again he confesses all as his sin. ‘‘And 
aow, O our God, what shall we say after this? 
for we have forsaken Thy commandments” (yet 
he who so speaks had possibly been less than a 
week among them. What an example for any 
who would walk with God to-day, and what a re- 
buke to the Pharisaism that would coldly point 
out the failure of others, while professing to 
have no part in it oneself!)—-‘‘we have forsaken 
Thy commandments, which Thou hast command- 
ed by Thy servants the prophets, saying, The 
land unto which ye go to possess it, is an unclean 
land with the filthiness of the peoples of the 
lands, with their abominations, which have filled 
it from one end to another with their unclean- 
ness. Now, therefore, give not your daughters 
unto their sons, nor seek their peace or their 
wealth forever; that ye may be strong, and eat 
the good of the land, and leave it for an inherit- 
ance to your children forever” (vers, 10-12). 
Thus had God spoken. Alas, how had this word 
been forgotten by those who had in other re- 
spects honored His truth, by returning to the 
divinelv-appointed Centre. Separation would 


92 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


have been their strength. Amalgamation was 
likely to be but their ruin; unless, indeed, the 
evil were judged and put away from their 
midst. And this snare of amalgamation with 
the ungodly is ever a lurking danger to the chil- 
dren of God. I do not fora moment speak of 
the coming together of believers, who have been 
kept apart by dissension and unscriptural judg- 
ments, as amalgamation. God forbid! When 
that which is of the same nature flows together, 
it is not amalgamation but unity. Things differ- 
ent in character are amalgamated to form a 
union which can never be a true unity. It is 
against such amalgamation we are warned in 
2 Cor. 6: ‘‘Be ye not unequally yoked together 
with unbelievers: for what fellowship hath 
righteousness with unrighteousness ? and what 
communion hath light with darkness? and what 
concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part 
hath a believer with an unbeliever? and what 
agreement hath the temple of God with idols? 
For ye are the temple of the living God, as God 
hath said: I will dwell in them, and walk in 
them; and I will be their God and they shall be 
My people” (vers. 14-16). In the beginning 
‘*God divided the light from the darkness,” and 
it has been the business of the devil ever since 
{ov seek to link the twain together. 

Feeling in his soul the seriousness of so un- 
holy a union, Ezra goes on to own God’s justice 


The Break-down by Amalgamation 93 


in visiting them with His displeasure. ‘‘And 
after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, 
and for our great trespass, seeing that Thou, 
our God, hast punished us less than our iniquities 
deserve, and hast given us such deliverance as 
this, should we again break Thy commandments, 
and join in affinity with the peoples of these 
abominations, wouldst not Thou be angry with 
us till Thou hadst consumed us, so that there 
should be no remnant nor escaping?” (vers. 13, 
14). Light obeyed, resultsin greater light; but 
“if the light that is in thee become darkness 
how great is that darkness.” God must visit 
those in chastisement who trifle with His truth. 
The more truth, the greater the responsibility, 
and the more severe the displeasure of the Lord 
if it be set at naught or spurned. 

Feeling all this deeply, Ezra can only conclude 
with a fuller expression of confession than ever, 
and a throwing himself and the people, in all 
their wretched condition, right into the arms of 
the God they have sinned against. ‘*O Lord 
God of Israel, Thou art righteous: for we re- 
main yet escaped, as it is this day: behold we 
are before Thee in our trespasses: for we cannot 
stand before Thee because of this” (ver. 15). 
And so he concludes his prayer and leaves the 
case in the hands of God, who, though Ezra 
knew it not, had even then begun to work, as 
the concluding chapter gives abundant witness. 


94 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


How much greater might be the blessing in 
many a similar time of distress, were there more 
of such dealing with God and less of appeal to 
man; more humiliation and confession and less 
pnblishing the sorrows abroad; more spreading 
out the hands unto the Lord and less pamphlet- 
eering. Oh for grace to hearken unto the lesson 
here given for our learning! 


95 


CHAPTER X 
Humiliation and Lifting Up 


IGHTILY wrought the Spirit of God in 
the hearts and consciences of the guilty 
people, while Ezra was praying and speaking 
of their fallen condition to the Lord. So much 
so, that the work of recovery was already well 
under way, for when he ‘‘had prayed, and when 
he had confessed, weeping and casting himself 
down before the house of God, there assembled 
unto him out of Israel a very great congre- 
gation of men and women and children: for 
the people wept very sore” (ver. 1). These 
were gracious tears indeed, and told of stirrings 
of soul that could only lead to blessing. How 
different might the after-history of these people 
have been had Ezra turned coldly away from 
them in disgust or despair, and left them to go 
on in their low estate. Such conduct could not 
have helped, and might only have provoked the 
flesh in them; but the sight of this newly-arrived 
man of God on his face in agony of spirit over 
their carelessness and unscriptural ways, brought 
them to their senses, giving them to realize, per- 
haps for the first time, something of the gravity 
of their sin. 
Shechaniah, one of the sons of Elam, became 
the mouthpiece of the now repentant wrong- 


96 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


doers, confessing unreservedly the failure, and, 
in a manner beautiful in its season, seeking to 
comfort the heart of Ezra. ‘‘We have tres- 
passed against our God,” is his frank acknowl- 
edgment, ‘and have .aken strange wives of the 
people of the land. This was in direct viola- 
tion of the prohibition in the law of Moses. They 
had not consulted in this grave matter ‘‘that 
which was written;” hence a grievous error 
had been committed which now bore sorrowful 
fruit indeed; for there must be many a heart- 
break ere matters were put right; and, in fact, 
against the poor ignorant heathen women, wrong 
had been done that could never be righted on 
earth. But Shechaniah dares to count on God's 
mercy and adds: ‘‘ Yet now there is hope in Is- 
rael concerning this thing” (ver. 2). But this 
hope of future blessing is based on one condition 
only, and that, complete judgment of the evil, 
manifested in putting away all the strange wives. 
He calls on all who have sinned to enter into 
covenant with God to be obedient in this matter, 
and bids Ezra be of good courage and act as a 
judge in each case that shall arise (vers. 3, 4). 
The latter exacted an immediate pledge of the 
chief priests, the Levites and all Israel, that 
they would do as Shechaniah had said; and hard 
as it must have been for many of them, they 
sware to be obedient. 

Refusing all physical refreshment because of 


Humiliation and Lifting Up oF 


the travail of his soul, ‘‘Ezra rose up from before 
the house of God, and went into the chamber of 
Johanan the son of Eliashib,” there to mourn in 
secret over the sin that now made such drastic 
and heart-rending action necessary if the people 
would be right with God (ver. 6). 

Word was immediately sent to ali the children 
of the captivity that they should gather together 
at Jerusalem within three days; otherwise, any 
refusing so to do would be cut off, or ‘‘separated 
from the congregation of those that had been 
carried away,” and all his substance forfeited 
(ver. 8). To refuse now to obey the Word would 
show a hardness of conscience that could not be 
tolerated and a wilfulness of spirit that proved 
the culprit altogether unfit to go on with his 
brethren. 

At the appointed time all the men of Judah 
and Benjamin gathered themselves together 
to Jerusalem. It was the twentieth day of 
the ninth month, in the rainy season, and ‘‘all 
the people sat in the street of the house of God, 
trembling because of this matter and for the 
great rain” (ver. 9). A dismal company surely, 
but a determined one, ready to carry out the 
word of the Lord at all costs. 

Faithfully Ezra the priest placed their sin be- 
fore them, abating nothing of their guilt, and 
commanding them how to act if truly repentant. 
They had transgressed. There had been a direct 

7 


98 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


violation of God’s revealed will, in taking strange 
wives to add to the already heavy load of Israel's 
trespass. He, therefore, called on them to 
‘‘make confession unto the Lord God of your 
fathers, and do His pleasure: and separate your+ 
selves from the peoples of the land, and from 
the strange wives” (vers. 10, 11). 

The wrenchings of heart this would occasion 
tan be better imagined than described, but 
firmly the whole congregation answered, ‘‘ As 
thou hast said, so must we do” (ver. 12). There 
was no caviling, no trying to avoid the result of 
their unequal yokes, but a whole-hearted deter- 
mination to obey the word of God at all costs. 
Had conscience only been active a few years be- 
fore, what pangs of anguish might now have 
been avoided! Thus it ever is, when men at- 
tempt to play fast and loose with the will of the 
Lord. 

But all must be done in an orderly and lawfu: 
way, so they asked for time to arrange every 
thing as humanely as possible. ‘‘ But the people 
are many, and it isa time of much rain, and we 
are not able to stand without, neither is this a 
work of one day, or two; for we are many that 
have transgressed in this thing. Let now our 
rulers of all the congregation stand, and let all 
them that have taken strange wives in our cities 
come at appointed times, and with them the 
elders of every city, and the judges thereof, 


Humiliation and Lifting Up 99 


until the fierce wrath of our God for this matter 
be turned from us” (vers. 13, 14). This was no 
mere carnal expedient to gain time, but ex- 
pressed the earnest desire of the people that, in 
the sad puttings-away that must ensue, all things 
should be done decently and in order. Doubt- 
less there also entered into it the wish to avoid 
any wrong being done to any lawful wife who 
was really of the seed of Israel. z 

Chief priests and Levites assisted Ezra in the 
matter, and in the space of three months the in- 
iquity had been dealt with throughout the land, 
all the heathen women and their offspring being 
set aside (vers. 15-17). Heart-rending must 
some of the experiences have been; but all were 
the fruit of departure from God and acting in 
self-will. 

The chapter closes with a third list of names— 
this time of most solemn import. It is the ree- 
ord of those who ‘‘ had taken strange wives; and 
some of them had wives by whom they had chil 
dren” (ver. 44). God, who before had noted the 
faithfulness of many of these very men in coming 
up from Babylon, now took cognizance of the 
failure of each one just as particularly. For this 
they must suffer loss at the day of Christ. 

On the part of those so near to God as the 
priests, this sin was especially obnoxious, and 
we are therefore definitely informed that ‘‘ they 
gave their hands that they would put away their 


100 Notes on the Book of Ezra 


wives; and being guilty, they offered a ram of 
the flock for their trespass” (ver. 19). Thus the 
breach was made up, and they were restored to 
their forfeited privileges. 

With this record the bookof Ezraends. He had 
been used of God to bring His separated people 
to a realization of the way they had failed in re- 
gard to maintaining the trust committed to them; 
self- judgment had resulted, and now the way 
was open for happy fellowship and helpful min- 
istry. In using the word fellowship in this in- 
stance, I am not forgetful of the fact that it is a 
word that belongs entirely to the New Testa- 
ment. I use it here rather as ideal and expres- 
sive of what was typified than that the thing 
itself was then truly known and enjoyed. 

Fellowship is the result of the Holy Spirit's 
descent to earth and His indwelling of all be- 
lievers. He thus brings us into the fellowship 
of God’s Son. Where separation from evil is 
maintained and saints hold the Head, there is 
communion one with another in the Spirit’s 
power. This is characteristic of the present dis- 
pensation of the mystery, and is an advance on 
anything known in Old Testament times. 

Where Christians do not thus go on with God, 
walking in the Spirit, there may be a certain 
kind of fairly agreeable, and even enjoyable 
companionship, but genuine fellowship will be 
unknown. 


Humiliation and Lifting Up 101 


With this remark we close, for the present, the 
instructive and searching book of Ezra. For 
further information of an equally important 
character as to the returned remnant and their 
priestly minister, we must turn to the following 
book in our Bibles, written by another equally 
devoted servant, though a manof more soldier- 
like character, Nehemiah; while in the book of 
Esther we find recorded God’s care over those 
who remained in Babylon when they might 
have gone to Jerusalem, and with whom He does 
not openly connect His name. 

‘‘Now unto Him that is able to guard you 
from stumbling, and to present you faultless be- 
fore the presence of His glory with exceeding 
joy, to the only wise God our Saviour, through 
Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory and majesty, 
dominion and power, both now and ever, Amen!” 
(Jude 24, 25—1911 Version). 


: a f Bi ie bie ~~ ‘ee 
— .¢ Axor uk ee one 
| reas 5 HA 

are 
“gt marl Fe | on 
Bt Cipen Fae Fah 
- FAR era, Piste Sel a 


; we (agg? sit 54 ee etl 
" ROIS pan, oes ae eae 
Sig lan in 18 ery eee a 
hone? oH eryy 4g, ae Eats ew se 


a : g ~ "4 
gece Liana pot LoeNR ARPES A 
wat ene wer — me . Tr Pa ial} tal. =) 
x ia (. Baas 7 ae Ay A. 


it ae ivact ie ¥,48 . Lae at : Ms wis 
ee ee ee 
_ Peer wr 


2 E - i ond or ES. 9 Py 
¥ ~ eS ‘ 
_ 4 he yA ry i- 


Je ; 
im. 
. Tye @ EN ! 
; v 
ae coeulior bY CO Oey 
. . lvias T we Se a - ae : 
~~ wal ww Ht a ee 
=~ 


e jyy’ i@ «@ . pitch i 
a, 12, ng 
dic wigan tatty a 


‘Naeem ae, 


7 13 Sa 


aoe. 


NOTES 


ON THE 


Book or NEHEMIAH 


PREFACE 
TO THE SECOND EDITION 


IN going over these pages again after the lapse 
of nearly twelve years I feel more than ever the 
importance of the truths on which they insist. 
The need for holy separation from the world and 
worldly Christianity is more evident with each 
passing day, as the dispensation nears its close. 
On the other hand the need of increasing large- 
ness of heart toward God’s beloved people strug- 
gling against the evil and crying for light and for 
help becomes more manifest. To all such I send 
forth this little book again on its mission of love. 


H. A. IRONSIDE. 


June, 1925. 


PAGE 
Introduction is des cieveeciatee ove Bi FOCI CRIS OCIA CRIOO COCO I a 


Chapter J. — An Exercised Man .......scceccccvcces AL 
Chapter II. — The Failed Testimony......0..seceees 15 


Chapter III. -—- The Gates of Jerusalem ........s000- 24 
Chapter IV. — Soldier-Servants: ...6.sclescssecccseea OO 
Chapter V.— Internal Strife .........00. Sosopooos ait 
ChaptersVI6== PlotsyandU Snares Peter elctclciet cleleislelate stele 68 
Chapter VII. — Restoring Order .......... coccccees TT 
Chapter VIII. — The Great Bible-reading ........ SOO COS t 
Chapter IX. — The Word and Prayer ........eseeees 99 
Chapter X.— The New Start ..... seielolove sie eletera ei ols OL 
Chapter XI. —- A Willing People........cccccesecces 109 


Chapter XII. — The Dedication of the Wall .........118 
Chapter XIII. — Vigilance versus Declension .........119 


PREFATORY NOTE 


THE little book now before the reader has been 
in contemplation ever since its companion-exposi- 
tion, ‘“Notes on the Book of Ezra,” was published. 
If read in connection with that work and also the 
writer’s “Notes on Esther” (the three issued se- 
parately, also in one volume), and the “Notes on 
Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi” in the volume on 
“The Minor Prophets,” a connection will be traced 
throughout. 

As heretofore, no attempt has been made to 
write for scholars or to produce a literary work. 
But in the simplest way I have sought to em- 
phasize important truths that are being neglected 
in many places where they need to be pressed more 
insistently than ever. 

The Lord watch over all for His name’s sake. 


H. A. IRONSIDE. 
Nov., 1913. 


NOTES 


ON THE 


BOOK of NEHEMIAH 


INTRODUCTION 


N the book of Ezra, we see a remnant peo- 
ple gathered back to the place where the 
Lord had set His name, after a long period of 
bondage and exile in Babylon, the centre of the 
false religious system of that day. Nehemiah 
pursues the further history of this company for 
some years afterwards, but is especially devoted 
to the work of guarding the place of privilege, 
as indicated in the large space given to the nar- 
ration of events in connection with the building 
of the wall of Jerusalem. This was a wall both 
of protection and exclusion, and doubtless speaks 
to us to-day of principles which may easily be > 
abused where self-judgment and spirituality are 
lacking, but which are nevertheless of supreme 
importance if any scriptural testimony is to be 


8 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


maintained in a day of declension. It is con- 
sidered a mark of liberality and brotherly kind- 
ness with many, to declaim against all exclusive- 
ness on the part of believers in the Lord Jesus 
Christ. But it is to be feared numbers object to 
a term they neither understand nor see the reason 
for. 

A word in the book of Deuteronomy might help 
as to this. In chapter 22:8 we read: “When 
thou buildest a new house, then thou shalt make 
a battlement for thy roof, that thou bring not 
blood upon thy house if any man fall from thence.” 
The battlement surrounding the flat root of the 
Israelite’s dwelling conveys much the same 
thought as the wall enclosing Jerusalem. The 
roof was to the oriental the place of communion 
and retirement (1 Sam. 9: 25; Prov. 21: 9), of 
prayer (Acts 10:9), and of testimony (Matt. 10: 
27). It was commonly used very much as both 
the parlor and the study of the occidental. There 
the family would commune together, and there 
they would entertain friends. But if there were 
no protecting wall about this favored place, it 
would be one of danger to the young and to any 
inclined to be careless. Therefore the divine in- 
struction that a battlement be built to completely 
surround the house-top; otherwise the owner of 
the house was held responsible if any one fell from 
thence, and so was slain. 

The house-top is a fitting picture of assembly 
privilege. For, as gathered to the name of the 


Introduction 9 


Lord Jesus, believers are in the place of retire- 
ment from the distracting things of the world, of 
communion with the Father and the Son, and with 
one another, in the Spirit’s power, and this is 
likewise the place of prayer and of testimony. 
But hallowed as such a place is, there are always 
the young in Christ and those weak in the faith 
to be considered. Pre-eminently for their sakes 
it is imperative that the wall of separation (not 
only from the world, but from worldly Chris- 
tianity) be maintained, otherwise many of these 
little ones will fall from this hallowed sphere of 
privilege into which grace has brought them. 
And here I desire to quote the words of a 
brother beloved, written in a private letter some 
time since, but which I feel are of value for all 
believers desiring so to walk as to please God, 
not only individually, but in corporate testimony: 
“By some an attempt is being made to pull down 
the barriers of truth and make us give up what 
we have. If the younger men among us, who are 
soon to take the lead, if the Lord tarry yet a 
while, are not true in practice to the truth, not 
only of the gospel but also of the Church of God, 
the truth itself will slip away from them. As I 
see the developments all around, I burn with 
jealousy for the truth we have. It makes us, in 
its practice, a people rejected by all, but who 
have the bread that all need. If we keep sepa- 
rated from every movement which leaves out what 
hurts in the truth; if we just live out in prac- 


10 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


tice what the truth is, we will remain no doubt a 
small, unpopular people, but we will be to the 
end God’s vessel of truth to His whole Church cn 
earth; and that will be ten thousand times better 
throughout eternity than to have been on popular 
lines for greater access to men. 

“Our assemblies, if kept truly pure, are little 
fortresses for the defence and sallying out of 
truth. Let us build them up strong, solid and 
faithful. ..Principles of independency annul the 
constitution of the Church of God as laid down in 
Ephesians, and make it impossible for us there- 
fore to carry out its by-laws, as I may call them, 
given us in Corinthians.’’* 

These are sound and seasonable words, and form 
a fitting introduction to the special lines of divine 
truth emphasized in this instructive portion of 
the word of God, the book of Nehemiah. 

The years that have passed since they were 
written have witnessed the rapid development of 
apostasy in the form of Modernism, making it 
more imperative than ever that real believers 
should walk in separation from those who deny 
every fundamental] truth of Scripture. 


* Hxtracted from a letter by P. J. Loizeaux. 


CHAPTER I 


AN EXERCISED MAN 


N the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, king of 
Persia, his cup-bearer, Nehemiah, the son of 
Hachaliah, was in deep exercise of soul concern- 
ing the condition of the re-gathered remnant, 
whose history we have been studying, as related 
by Ezra the Scribe.* Nehemiah means comfort 
or consolation of Jehovah, and he is one whose 
name expresses his character, as is so often the 
case in Scripture, when names were not given by 
any means so carelessly as now. Like Paul, he 
was to comfort others with the comfort wherewith 
he himself was comforted ot God (2 Cor. 1:4). 
This is a weighty principle in God’s ways with 
His servants. Many a saint is permitted to go 
through deep waters, to pass through severe trial 
both of body and mind, not only for his own profit, 
but that he may be the better fitted to be a channel 
of blessing to his brethren when cast down and 
in distress. Happy is the saint who is thus sub- 
ject to the will of God and enabled to be His agent 
in consoling his discouraged fellows and restoring 
them, through a ministry received in times of sor- 
row, when they are backslidden and disheartened. 


* See “Notes on the Book of Ezra,” by the same. 


12 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


The station of Nehemiah was one of worldly 
prosperity. It is true he was a servant; prob- 
ably a bondman, but so were all his people; and 
he dwelt in a royal palace, and seems to have 
been a favorite with the king. But, like Moses, 
his heart was with his lowly brethren, and his 
spirit was zealous for the testimony of the Lord. 

To him, Hanani, one of his brethren, and other 
Jews came, whom he questioned closely concern- 
ing the remnant who had gone up to Jerusalem. 
The report was not encouraging. They replied: 
“The remnant that are left of the captivity there 
in the province are in great affliction and re- 
proach; the wall of Jerusalem also is broken 
down, and the gates thereof are burned with fire” 
(ver.3). That Hanani felt this keenly there can 
be no doubt, but that he, or his companions were 
before God about it, as was Nehemiah, seems 
scarcely probable. It is one thing to shake the 
head and sigh over the vicissitudes of the con- 
gregation of the Lord, it is quite another to look 
up to Him to give deliverance, and to put His 
truth and testimony above every other interest. 
This latter Nehemiah did. 

His brethren’s unhappy report caused him 
deepest searching of heart and contrition of spirit, 
so that he gave himself to fasting and prayer 
with many tears; for, like Paul in a brighter 
dispensation, he knew much of what it was to 
weep over the failures of the people of God. To 
Him who had forsaken His city and given His 


An Exercised Man 13 


people up to captivity, but who had granted a 
little reviving in their bondage, Nehemiah turned 
in prayer. He uses the same title so fre- 
quently found in the record of Ezra, “the God 
of heaven.” This indicated the removal of God’s 
throne from earth to heaven. In deepest humilia- 
tion he joins with Ezra and Daniel in confessing 
his sin and the sin of his people. “We have 
sinned,” he cries ; and again, “Both I and my 
father’s house have sinned ;” and once more, “We 
have dealt very corruptly.” Genuine confession 
like this reaches the ear of God. It indicates a 
soul able to look at matters from God’s standpoint. 
Nehemiah is no carping critic, no self-satisfied 
Pharisaic looker-on upon the failure of others. “I 
thank Thee that I am not as other men” would 
never come from his lips. Instead, he bows his 
head in common confession with his brethren, and 
brokenly cries, “We have sinned.” 

But he is a man of faith as well as a man of 
prayer, and so he at once proceeds to remind 
God, as it were, of His own word; how He had 
declared in Lev. 26: 40-45 and Deut. 4: 23; 30: 1-6 
that even though He might scatter His people be- 
cause of their transgression, yet if in the strang- 
er’s land they would turn unto Him, keep His 
commandments, and do them, He would gather 
them again, though it were from the uttermost 
parts of the earth, and bring them back to the 
place He had chosen, “to set His name there.” 
This promise Nehemiah pleads, and touchingly 


14 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


cries: “Now these are Thy servants and Thy 
people, whom Thou hast redeemed by Thy great 
power and by Thy strong hand. O Lord, I be- 
seech Thee, let now Thine ear be attentive to the 
prayer of Thy servant, and to the prayer of Thy 
servants who desire to fear Thy name: and pros- 
per, I pray Thee, Thy servant this day, and grant 
him mercy in the sight of this man” (vers. 10, 11). 
“This man” was none other than the great Arta- 
xerxes himself; but to Nehemiah he was just a 
man, and he desired that his heart might be con- 
trolled by God for the furtherance of His purpose 
of grace towards His people. 

In other circumstances he could and did give 
honor to whom honor was due. But in the pres- 
ence of the great King of kings this puissant 
monarch was but a man, and such is he in Nehe- 
miah’s reckoning. He had, in large measure, 
learned to put not his trust in princes, but to 
cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils. 
To the living God he looked; on His compassion 
and omnipotence he reckoned; and the sequel 
shows that he was not disappointed. 


CHAPTER II 


THE FAILED TESTIMONY 


iG pleased the God of heaven, in bringing about 
an answer to His servant’s petition, to attract 
the attention of the Persian ruler to the grief- 
stricken face of Nehemiah. Kindly the monarch 
inquires after the cause of this change of counten- 
ance, for the son of Hachaliah had been wont to 
exhibit a cheerful mien, as became one whose 
confidence was in the Lord. “Why is thy coun- 
tenance sad,” asks the king, “‘seeing thou art not 
sick? This is nothing else but sorrow of heart.” 
Fearful of his sovereign’s displeasure, his cup- 
bearer replies, “Let the king live forever: why 
should not my countenance be sad, when the city, 
the place of my father’s sepulchres, lieth waste, 
and the gates thereof are consumed with fire?” 
(ver. 23). Nehemiah could not be indifferent to 
a matter of this kind. He was no misanthropical 
pessimist—rather indeed the very opposite—but 
he could not be unmoved by the terrible break- 
down on the part of his loved people and the de- 
solate condition of that city that should have been 
the glory of the whole earth. 

But, observe, he did not stand aside and write 
pamphlets on the failure of his brethren or simply 
denounce them for their backslidings while doing 
nothing to help them reach a better state; nor 


16 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


did he wash his hands of the whole matter and 
conclude that because the failure had indeed come 
in, he was justified in giving up all concern about 
the testimony committed to Judah. Not at all. 
His was a grief deep and genuine; but it was one 
that led to exercise before God, and an earnest 
desire to be an instrument in the hand of the Lord 
for the establishment of the truth, and the re- 
covery and encouragement of the feeble few who 
had broken down so sadly in the very place where 
Jehovah had set His name. 

And so when the king inquired, “For what dost 
thou make request?” he did not answer till he had 
“prayed to the God of heaven.” What an atmo- 
sphere of prayer surrounds this man! It is his 
constant resource throughout all his varied ex- 
periences. He walked with God because he talked 
with God. Now, assured of the Lord’s mind, he 
made request for permission to visit the land of 
Judah and the city of Jerusalem, that he might 
“build it.” This was morally very lovely. He 
desired to build, to edify. Any one with a small 
measure of discernment can stand off and either 
bewail or criticize the failures of others, but one 
must needs be in touch with God to be a true 
builder. Such an one was Paul, “a wise master- 
builder,” and he, by the Spirit, directs that “all 
things be done unto edifying.” ‘Knowledge,” he 
tells us, “puffeth up, but love edifieth” (or, build- 
eth up). This is an all-important truth. 

Many there are who entered on the path of 


The Failed Testimony 17 


separation with high hopes and fond expectations; 
eagerly they drank in the precious truths the 
Holy Spirit of God was making known in the 
place where He had liberty to work as He would. 
But to-day, alas, alas! many of these have turned 
away disheartened, and that because of break- 
down on the part of brethren whom these others 
deem less clear of sight, less devoted and less 
intelligent than themselves. So they stand off 
and bewail the divided condition, the worldliness, 
the cold-heartedness that has come in among those 
who sought to walk together in separation from 
the prevailing apostasy. But to what end? Such 
a course profits neither those who so judge, nor 
those judged. Better, a thousand times better, to 
rise up in the spirit of Nehemiah, and throw 
oneself in the breach as a builder. The heart may 
be grieved and the countenance sad, but there wiil 
be a deep-toned joy in seeking thus to enlighten, 
instruct, and edify weaker brethren: endeavoring 
in the fear of God to keep the Spirit’s unity in the 
bond of peace, and occupy saints with the blessed 
Gatherer Himself instead of the failure of those 
gathered. 

Yes, as the days darken and the dispensation 
fast hastens to its close, it is men of the Nehemiah 
stamp who will be of real value to the people of 
God, and who shall thus save themselves and those 
who hear them. 

In the presence of his consort, Artaxerxes gave 
the desired permission, stipulating a defined 


18 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


leave of absence, in which Nehemiah would be 
free to carry out the desire of his heart, and go 
to his brethren as a true prophet to speak words 
of exhortation, edification and encouragement 
(ver. 6). All that may be needed for the work of 
building is granted by the king, even as the King 
of kings, who is also head of His body, the Church, 
delights to supply His willing workers with all 
things that pertain to the ministry committed to 
them. And here we note that Ezra and Nehemiah 
were men of like mind in tracing every blessing 
to the good hand of God (ver. 8). 

The intervening journey soon completed (for 
a burning love urged him on), Nehemiah crosses 
the river and presents the king’s letters to the 
governors of the mixed Samaritan people, who 
had been settled in the land of the ten tribes 
since the days of Esar-haddon. At once we read 
of two men who are grieved and displeased; they 
were Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the Am- 
monite, called contemptuously, Tobiah the ser- 
vant. When they heard of his arrival, “it grieved 
them exceedingly that there was come a man to 
seek the welfare of the children of Israel” (ver. 
10). As these men caused Nehemiah much trouble 
and concern later on, it will be well to inquire 
here as to who or what they might represent, and 
to ask if any such adversaries are likely to be 
encountered to-day in connection with the defence 
of the “present truth.” 


The Failed Testimony 19 


Sanballat is called a Horonite, generally sup- 
posed to mean a native of Horonaim, a city of 
Moab. Of Tobiah’s ancestry we are left in no 
doubt. We have therefore in these two foes rep- 
resentatives of those hostile races of whom it was 
written, “The Moabite and the Ammonite should 
not come into the congregation of God forever,” 
as we are reminded later in chapter 13:1. The 
prohibition in Deut. 23: 3-6 gives the reason for 
this: “An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter 
into the congregation of the Lord; even to their 
tenth generation shall they not enter into the con- 
gregation of the Lord forever: because they met 
you not with bread and water in the way, when 
ye came forth out of Egypt; and because they 
hired against thee Balaam the son of Beor of 
Pethor of Mesopotamia, to curse thee. Neverthe- 
less. ..the Lord thy God turned the curse into a 
blessing unto thee, because the Lord thy God loved 
thee. Thou shalt not seek their peace nor their 
prosperity all thy days forever.” 

Reading such a command, we naturally ask why 
such a doom upon Moab and Ammon for refusing 
aid to Israel when about to enter the land of 
promise? Why should it have been expected of 
them and not of others? The answer is very 
simple. There were ties of blood that gave Israel 
right to expect their assistance, but these ties were 
utterly repudiated. Moab and Ammon were the 
natural sons of Lot, but by his own daughters! 
They were really then “bastards, and not sons” 


20 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


(Heb. 12:8). They surely speak to us of those 
professing to be children of God, but not born 
of the Spirit. And so they ever, as born only of 
the flesh, persecuted the spiritual seed. They are 
the representatives of fleshly religion, of carnal 
profession, and as such they detest reality, and 
hate the truth that, “Except a man be born again 
he cannot see the kingdom of God.” They feel 
they have as much right to the ordinances of God, 
and as much liberty to participate in His service 
and worship as any; but they are only natural 
men with a veneer of religiousness, and such have 
ever been the bitterest opponents of what really 
honors Christ and glorifies God. They abound 
to-day as they have abounded all down the cen- 
turies, and their object is still, as ever, to corrupt 
if they can, and to destroy if they cannot corrupt. 

Leaving Sanballat and Tobiah for the present, 
enashing their teeth in their rage and vexation, 
we follow Nehemiah to the city of God. Reaching 
Jerusalem, he rested three days. Then, confer- 
ring not with flesh and blood, but taking a few 
men with him, though telling none what God had 
put in his heart, he arose in the night and went 
out to view in silence the ruin that had come in. 
This night journey around the walls of the city is 
deeply pathetic. Who that has any real care for 
the people of God has not known something of 
it? The nobles and rulers and all the people are 
wrapt in slumber, but this lonely man, whose heart 
God has touched, keeps his midnight vigil, and 


The Failed Testimony 21 


goes from gate to gate and tower to tower, noting 
with deepest sorrow and concern the breaches sin 
has made. “I went out by night,” he says, “by 
the gate of the valley, even before the dragon 
well, and to the dung port, and viewed the walls 
of Jerusalem, which were broken down, and the 
gates thereof were consumed with fire. Then I 
went on to the gate of the fountain, and to the 
king’s pool: but there was no place for the beast 
that was under me to pass. Then went,I up in the 
night by the brook, and viewed the wall, and 
turned back and entered by the gate of the valley, 
and so returned” (vers. 18-15). It was no carping 
critic viewing with indifferent feelings the de- 
fencelessness of his brethren; but a man of pur- 
pose and prayer, beholding what stirred his soul 
to its depths, with the desire to build up what 
carnal ease and self-seeking had permitted to fall 
into ruin. 

It was not till after this night view that he 
called the people, with their rulers and the priests 
of the Lord together, to give them cognizance of 
his mission. He does so most delicately. There 
are no reproaches, no Pharisaic and odious com- 
parisons or contrasts, but he identifies himself 
fully with them and says: “Ye see the distress 
that we are in; how Jerusalem lieth waste, and 
the gates thereof are burned with fire: come, and 
let us build up the wall of Jerusalem, that we be 
no more a reproach” (ver.17). Such an one is a 
God-sent and Spirit-qualified leader. He does not 


pad Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


say, “You are in distress;” but “We are.” He 
does not command, “Go, and build,” but he en- 
treats, “Let us build.” He does not say, “You are 
a reproach,” but he pleads, “Let us be no more 
a reproach.” And then he tells of the good hand 
of his God upon him, and of the king’s commission. 

The people are aroused and encouraged, and cry 
at once, “Let us rise up and build;” and so they 
join hands with God’s dear servant for the work 
he has planned. No doubt there was not the 
exercise of soul in all that conditions called for; 
but the work must be done nevertheless, and there 
will be more exercise as they go on. 

And now we hear of Sanballat and Tobiah 
again; and with them a third adversary, Geshem 
the Arabian. This man is either an Edomite or 
an Ishmaelite, more probably the latter; but in 
either case he speaks of the flesh warring against 
the Spirit. Both Ishmael and Esau were types 
of the natural man—hence of the flesh—and were 
opposed to Isaac and Jacob, the seed of promise. 
Geshem is elsewhere in this book called Gashmu. 
When this unworthy trio hear of the work con- 
templated at the place of the Name, they indulge 
in sarcastic merriment. Nehemiah noted that, 
“They laughed us to scorn, and despised us, and 
said, What is this thing that ye do? will ye rebel 
against the king?” (ver. 19). 

Heretofore the line of demarcation between the 
outwardly separated Israelites and these mixed 
nations had been almost obliterated; hence there 


The Failed Testimony 23 


was peace and quietness. But now a man has 
come who contemplates rearing afresh the wall 
of exclusion, and this is bitterly resented, though 
at first they attempt but to laugh down the de- 
termination of the remnant. To all their sneers 
Nehemiah calmly replies: “The God of heaven, 
He will prosper us; and therefore we His ser- 
vants will arise and build: but ye have no por- 
tion, nor right, nor memorial, in Jerusalem!” 
(ver. 20). He has thrown down the gauntlet and 
declares his uncompromising attitude in a man- 
ner not to be misunderstood. Henceforth he will 
be hated as only those can hate who resent hav- 
ing their false religious claims made nothing of! 
The out-and-out worldling does not hate what 
is truly of God so bitterly as the Christless pro- 
fessor who has a name that he lives but is dead. 
Such an one cannot bear spiritual realities; for 
when confronted with them the hollowness of his 
profession is exposed, like Dagon when the ark of 
Jehovah was set down before it. This explains 
the bitterness with which these adversaries op- 
posed the work of God going on at Jerusalem. 


CHAPTER III 


THE GATES OF JERUSALEM 


HE work at once began, and it is to be noted 
what a thoroughly individual thing it was. 
Nehemiah is the servant used to stir up the rest; 
but they are stirred up, and “To every man his 
work” is the motto that might well describe the 
busy scene. This chapter is like a page from the 
books of God’s record of service, and will doubt- 
less be opened at the judgment seat of Christ, 
when each will be rewarded for his own work— 
and some who shirked, alas, will then suffer loss. 
For both the workers and the shirkers are here 
mentioned, and here their names shall stand till 
the Lord Himself has pronounced His judgment 
upon all. Such records are deeply instructive, and 
deserve to be pondered with care that they may 
stir up our minds by way of remembrance. 

In the New Jerusalem there are to be twelve 
gates (Rev. 21:12), and each several gate of one 
pearl; so that, look upon the city from which- 
ever standpoint one may, he will be reminded 
of the precious truth that Christ “loved the 
Church, and gave Himself for it” (Eph. 5: 25). 
He came from heaven as a merchantman seeking 
goodly pearls; and having found one pearl of great 
price, He bought it, at the cost of all that He 


The Gates of Jerusalem 25 


had; ‘though He was rich, for our sakes He be- 
came poor,” that we might be rich. And that 
heavenly city, of which Christ is the centre and 
the lamp for the display of God’s glory, has “a 
wall great and high,” speaking, as did the wall 
of the earthly city, of security and exclusion. 

Jerusalem in Nehemiah’s day seems to have 
had twelve gates also, though only ten are men- 
tioned in this chapter: but in chapter 8:16 we 
read of “‘the gate of Ephraim,” and in 12:39 of 
“the prison gate.” The ten mentioned in the 
present portion remind us of the number that, it 
has been well said, sets forth responsibility to- 
wards God and man, of which the ten words in 
the law were the measure; while the twelve of the 
heavenly city (and note how many twelves there 
are in Rev. 21), as some have suggested, would 
set forth perfect administration, or governmental 
completeness, only to be known in the day that 
the kings of the earth bring the glory and the 
honor of the nations unto it. 

I have thought there might be divine lessons 
for us in the names and order of these gates. 
That there is danger always of being fanciful, 
I realize. An insubject imagination is only “evil 
continually” (Gen. 6:5), in the things of the Lord 
as well as in all else, and one would therefore 
seek to avoid it. But, in looking at these gates, 
it is not so much my thought to seek to give the 
interpretation of them as to make a practical 
application of truth which, I am convinced, is 


26 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


much needed in this Laodicean day. We shall 
therefore take them in their order, as we go 
through the chapter, noting likewise the interest- 
ing and instructive points brought out in connec- 
tion with service as we go from port to port. 

We begin, then, with 


THE SHEEP GATE, 


of which we read in the first verse: ‘“‘Eliashib 
the high priest rose up with his brethren the 
priests, and they builded the sheep gate; they 
sanctified it, and set up the doors of it; even unto 
the tower of Meah they sanctified it, unto the 
tower of Hananeel.” 

This was priestly work indeed, for through this 
gate the beasts were led whose death and blood- 
shedding were to picture the one Offering of the 
ninth of Hebrews. They pointed on to the per- 
fect sacrifice of that unnamed One of Isaiah 53, 
who was “led as a lamb to the slaughter, and as 
a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so He open- 
eth not His mouth.” 

Thankful we are that for us it is not necessary 
to ask, as did the eunuch, “Of whom speaketh 
the prophet this? of himself, or of some other 
man?” (Acts 8: 34). The other Man is well known 
indeed to those of us who have been brought 
to trust the Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a 
ransom for all. In Him we have beheld the Lamb 
of God who taketh away the sin of the world 
(John 1: 29). 


The Gates of Jerusalem ao 


The Sheep Gate clearly speaks to us, then, of 
the Cross. It was at the Sheep Gate the Lord 
met the palsied man and healed him, as recorded 
in John 5, as it is at the Cross the helpless sinner 
finds life and peace. Here the remnant of old 
began to build the wall, priestly hands piling stone 
upon stone, and setting up the beams and bars. 
And here every one must begin who has really 
to do with God, other than in judgment. The 
wall, we have already seen, speaks of holiness, 
which must shut out evil; but what evil is, we can 
never rightly know until we have understood in 
some measure the meaning of the Cross. It was 
there that all the iniquity of man’s heart was 
fully revealed; there too that the absolute holi- 
ness of God’s character was declared in an even 
more marked way than it will be made known 
in the lake of fire. In the Cross it was that mercy 
and truth met together, and that righteousness 
and peace kissed each other (Ps. 85:10). 


Tis in the cross of Christ we see 
How God can save, yet righteous be.” 


The most important truth of Scripture is, that 
on the cross the judgment of a holy God against 
sin fell upon His spotless Son, when He “suffered, 
the Just for the unjust, that He might bring us 
to God” (1 Pet.3:18). There is nothing like the 
apprehension of this to give peace to a troubled 
soul. I have been awakened to see myself a lost, 
guilty sinner. Perhaps for years I have been go- 


28 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


ing about to establish my own righteousness, and 
trusting that all would surely be well with me 
because of fancied merit in myself. I have de- 
luded myself with the notion that God, who is 
love, must therefore allow sin to pass unpun- 
ished, or that my sin was, at any rate, of weight 
so light it would never sink me down to the pit 
of woe. But now all is changed. I have learned 
that I am a lost man! My sins, which once 
seemed like trifles, insignificant as molehills, now 
rise before my terrified vision as dark, shapeless 
mountains, which I fear will bury me beneath 
their awful weight in the nethermost depths of 
the abyss of divine wrath. I look on my right 
hand, but I find no helper. Refuge fails me- In 
my despair I cry out, “No man cares for my soul!” 
(Ps. 142: 4) ; and in the hour of my deepest dis- 
tress there comes to me One with feet beautiful 
upon the mountains, a messenger, one among a 
thousand, who tells me the good news that God, 
the God whom I have so grievously sinned against 
and so flagrantly dishonored, has found a ransom, 
and can thus deliver me from going down into the 
pit (Job 88:24). My sins and guilt have all been 
laid on Jesus. My judgment has fallen upon His 
holy head, and thus I can go righteously free. 

Well does such a message deserve the name of 
“gospel!”? Good news indeed! More welcome than 
cold water to a thirsty soul! 

As of old, when Noah took of every clean beast 
and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt-offer- 


The Gates of Jerusalem 29 


ings upon the altar (Gen. 8: 20), so now Jehovah 
has looked upon the work of His beloved Son and 
“smelled a sweet savor,” which is truly a “‘savor 
of rest”’ (margin) ; for sin is thus canceled, and 
God can be just and the Justifier of him that be- 
lieveth in Jesus. Christ thus becomes the Door 
of the sheep, as He said: “I am the door; by Me 
if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall 
go in and out, and find pasture” (John 10:9). 

Of all this, and more also, may the Sheep Gate 
remind us. A gate of judgment it is too; for of 
judgment, in Scripture, the gate often speaks, as 
in Oriental cities it was there that justice was ad- 
ministered. But here it is judgment falling, not 
upon the guilty, but upon the guiltless One who 
voluntarily stood in the place of the sinner. ‘He 
was delivered for our offences, and raised again 
for our justification; therefore being justified by 
faith, we have peace with God through our Lord 
Jesus Christ” (Rom. 4: 25; 5:1). 

All thus justified are now the sheep of the Good 
Shepherd who died, the Great Shepherd who lives 
in glory, the Chief Shepherd who is coming again. 
As His sheep, they have title to enter in through 
the gate into the city. It is saved souls, and they 
alone, who here on earth are gathered by the 
Spirit to the name of the Lord Jesus in separation 
from the world and its evil, and it is such alone 
who will be within that wall of jasper gathered 
around the Lamb in the glory. 

Let me press it upon the reader—has al] this 


30 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


been made good to your soul? Is your confi- 
dence for eternity based upon the work of Christ? 
Are you trusting alone in Jesus, who in those 
solemn hours of deeper than Egyptian darkness, 
“fought the fight alone,” vanquished Satan’s 
power in resurrection, and is now exalted at God’s 
right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour? 

Oh, be persuaded! If you are resting on any- 
thing short of this, your soul is in peril most 
grave and fearful; for it is only “the blood of 
Jesus Christ, God’s Son, that cleanses from all 
sin” (1 Jno.1:7). If, however, this is the ground 
of your confidence, if you are saved and know it, 
if the lesson of the Sheep Gate has been truly 
learned in the presence of God, I ask you to pass 
on with me now to 


THE FISH GATE. 


But on the way there is a small portion of the 
wall being built by the men of Jericho. Jericho 
was the city of the curse, but “Christ hath re- 
deemed us from the curse of the law, being made 
a curse for us; as it is written, Cursed is every 
one that hangeth on a tree.” So these happy 
Jericho men are now in the place of blessing, and 
serving in newness of spirit. Next to them builds, 
apparently alone, Zaccur, the son of Imri, but 
God’s eye is upon him, and he shall find his name 
on the honor roll in the day of Christ. Then we 
read: “But the Fish Gate did the sons of Has- 
senaah build, who also laid the beams thereof, 


The Gates of Jerusalem 31 


and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof and 
the bars thereof” (ver. 3). 

The name of this port at once brings to mind 
the word of the Lord addressed to Simon and 
Andrew when He found them “casting a net into 
the sea.” “He saith unto them, Follow Me, and 
I will make you fishers of men.” Precious it is 
to learn that, without a word as to delay, they 
“straightway left their nets and followed Him” 
(Matt. 4: 17-20). ; 

It is a weighty truth, often I fear forgotten in 
this pushing, restless age, that the great business 
of those already saved should be to bring others 
to Christ. Alas, alas, the indifference as to this 
among many of the people of God is most ap- 
palling! The Fish Gate is closed, or fallen in 
ruins, and there are no devoted “‘sons of Has- 
senaah” who are enough in earnest about the con- 
dition of the lost to build it up again. Is it not 
a shame, a crying shame, that it should ever be 
true of saints going to heaven, that they are un- 
concerned about sinners going to hell? And God 
has said, “He that withholdeth corn, the people 
shall curse him.” 

Oh, the heartlessness of it! Souls perishing 
under one’s very eyes, and no voice raised to pro- 
claim God’s message of love to the lost! Brothers, 
sisters, be honest with God! Face the question in 
His presence, What are you doing for souls? Will 
friends, neighbors, relatives, rise up in that day 
and say: “I lived beside him for years; he knew 


32 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


I was going to hell; he never warned me, nor told 
me of a way of escape.” I beseech you, don’t 
turn it aside with pious expressions about, “So 
much fieshly energy,” and ‘‘the need of building 
up the saints.”” Words like these from men who 
lift not a finger to keep others from going down 
to eternal ruin, are disgusting indeed; yea, they 
are worse; they are actually wicked and abhorrent 
in the ears of Him who saith, “He that is wise 
winneth souls” (R. V.). 

Build up the Fish Gate, brethren; go out after 
the lost, and bring them inside the wall, where, 
having been saved, they will be cared for and 
helped in the things of God. 

I know all have not the same gift; all cannot 
preach to thousands. But surely it is not gift 
that is lacking so much as grace. It takes no 
special gift to distribute gospel tracts, or speak 
a loving word in season to needy souls. If you 
have “gift” enough to spend hours talking about 
the weather, or the various questions of domes- 
tic, business, or political life, you have all the gift 
that is needed to drop a tender, warning message 
in the ear of a careless one, or to point an anxious 
person to Christ. 

Let none shirk this work, for the day of mani- 
festation draws on apace. Then His eyes that 
are as a flame of fire will pierce into every hid- 
den motive, every unworthy, selfish thought, and 
bring all to light. In verse 4 we read of three 
who repaired the stretch of wall adjoining the 


The Gates of Jerusalem 33 


Fish Gate, and then we read of the Tekoites; 
and the Holy Ghost has noted that “their nobles 
put not their necks to the work of their Lord” 
(ver.5). They will have to face this record at 
the judgment-seat of Christ; and I fear there are 
some God-made, and many self-made, “nobles” 
among the people of the Lord to-day who mani- 
fest as gross indifference to the work of God. 

That, on the other hand, mere fleshly zeal will 
not be owned of God, I quite admit; and this 
brings before us the need of enforcing the lessons 
suggested by the next five gates. 


THE OLD GATE. 


“Moreover the old gate repaired Jehoiada the 
son of Paseah, and Meshullam the son of Beso- 
deiah; they laid the beams thereof, and set up 
the doors thereof, and the locks thereof, and the 
bars thereof.” 

One would not try to be too insistent on the 
special meaning of this gate. I had thought of 
it as the old used in the new, the place of nature 
in the economy of grace; for our bodies, with all 
their marvelous members, belong to the old crea- 
tion still; but He who will glorify them by and 
by finds use for them in His own service even 
now in the day of their humiliation. 

But the suggestion of another that the old gate 
would be the port of entry for the old path seems 
a clearer and higher thought. It is in Jeremiah 
6:16 that we read: “Thus saith the Lord, Stand 


34 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, 
where is the good way, and walk therein, and 
ye shall find rest to your souls.” And so the Old 
Gate might speak of subjection to the revealed 
will of God—abiding in that which was from the 
beginning. This still impresses upon us the great 
truth that we are called to recognize in all things 
the Lordship of Christ, and to hold every power 
we possess at His command, serving with grace in 
the heart. 


“Naught that I have mine own I call, 
I hold it for the Giver; 
My heart, my strength, my life, my all, 
Are His and His forever.” 


Evil is not in natural things themselves, but is 
in the abuse of them. Every talent we have is to 
be used for His glory. Woe to the man who hides 
one of them away, under pretence that nature, in 
this sense, is opposed to grace! 

This is what the Holy Spirit presses upon us 
when He says: “I beseech you therefore, breth- 
ren, by the mercies of God, that you present your 
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, 
which is your reasonable service” (Rom. 12:1). 
The child of God should remember that he has 
been bought with a price. His body is purchased 
with the blood of Christ. He is not merely called 
to “consecrate” himself, as people put it to-day, 
but to gladly own that he is already consecrated by 
the death of the Lord Jesus. The blood and the 


The Gates of Jerusalem 35 


oil have been placed on the ear, the hand and the 
foot—he belongs to Christ. The ear, to listen for 
His commandment; the hand, to do His bidding; 
the foot, to run in His ways (see Lev. 14: 14-18, 
25, 28, 29). 

Can anyone truly enter into this, and yet be 
careless in regard to service? Impossible. You 
are not only saved from hell, but purchased to be 
the bondman of Jesus Christ. 

There is a depth of meaning in that word “‘pres- 
ent,” as noted above. Your body is His already. 
He might simply demand His own; but in grace 
He says, “I beseech you...present your body.” 
Have you done so? Have you, in other words, 
owned His claims upon you? If not, will you 
longer delay? O beloved, yield yourself unto Him, 
that thus you may bring forth fruit unto God. 
“Herein is My Father glorified, that ye bear much 
fruit” (John 15: 8). 

I do not press it that the Old Gate was meant 
to teach this special truth, and I trust none will 
find fault over an application. 

Whatever the meaning one more spiritually- 
minded may discern, the fact remains that “Ye 
are not your own; ye are bought with a price.” 
It is this I seek to emphasize, for it is with many, 
well-nigh forgotten. Vast numbers of Christians 
live as though their only thought was to enjoy the 
present scene, “on the east of Jordan ;” pampering 
every whim of their blood-purchased bodies, and 
looking forward to going to heaven at last without 


36 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


having ever known the toil and conflict—yet the 
deep, hidden joy—of the servant’s path. 

Especially is this often so of those in comfort- 
able and easy circumstances. The willing workers 
of verse 8 might well rebuke such. ‘‘Next unto 
him repaired Uzziel the son of Harhaiah of the 
goldsmiths. Next unto him also repaired Hananiah 
the son of one of the apothecaries.” I question if 
goldsmiths’ and apothecaries’ sons had known 
much of downright hard labor, but here we see 
them hard at work helping to fortify Jerusalem. 
God has not forgotten that their soft white hands 
became hardened and sun-burned as they used 
trowel and mortar on the walls of the holy city. 

Nor would I pass over the Gibeonites, Melatiah 
and the men of Gibeon (ver. 7), whether by these 
we are to understand descendants of the once 
wily deceivers who entrapped Joshua into diso- 
bedience, or Israelites indeed, dwelling in the 
ancient city. In either case, we may be reminded 
of what we once were, and what grace has made 
us. 
After the goldsmiths and the apothecaries, re- 
paired Rephaiah, the son of Hur, ruler of half 
of Jerusalem. He did not hire a servant to do 
the work for him, but though a man of wealth 
and power, he labored with his hands, and the 
Lord took note of his devotedness. 

In verse 10 we read of a man whose sphere of 
labor was very circumscribed but very necessary. 
Jedaiah repaired ‘“‘over against his house.” This 


The Gates of Jerusalem 37 


is noteworthy. Many of God’s people can do little 
in a public way in His service, but they can each 
be concerned about maintaining the wall over 
against their own houses. And this is tremend- 
ously important. It is useless to talk of separation 
in the assembly, if there be not separation main- 
tained at home. If the children are allowed to go 
into the world, or to bring the world into the 
home, depend upon it, the public testimony will 
avail for little. Godly words in the meeting and 
worldly ways in the house, will soon disgust neigh- 
bors and friends, and prove the undoing of the 
household. 

Another edifying spectacle is afforded us in 
verse 12: “Next unto him repaired Shallum the 
son of Halohesh, the ruler of the half part of 
Jerusalem, he and his daughters.” It must have 
been a grand sight to behold this ruler and his 
daughters so zealously affected in a good thing. 
Our sisters have here a bright example of devo- 
tedness to the Lord. Would that it might be fol- 
lowed by thousands more! 

Oft-times, one fears, where the truth is known 
that women are called upon to be in subjection, 
and not to lead in public work (after the fashion 
of the day), there is a settling down on the part 
of many sisters to a life of inaction and spiritual 
desuetude. But all work is not of a public char- 
acter, as we have already had occasion to observe. : 
There are many ways and abundant opportun- 
ities afforded godly women to labor, both in the 


38 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


gospel and in building up the wall of protection 
and exclusion of evil, without appearing on the 
platform and usurping authority over the man. 
Let there be but a willing mind, and it will not 
be necessary to bewail the lack of opportunities 
for women’s service in a scriptural way. 

But if any are to be used of God, there must 
be not only this recognizing of His claims upon 
us, but also that lowliness of spirit that ever com- 
mends a servant. So we pass on to 


THE VALLEY GATE. 


“The valley gate repaired Hanun, and the in- 
habitants of Zanoah” (ver. 138). 

This surely suggests humility—a willingness 
to take a lowly place that thus the Lord may be 
exalted. One fears it is a gate little used by many 
of us nowadays. 

Pride is ever characteristic of fallen creatures, 
who have nothing to be proud of; for “what hast 
thou that thou hast not received?” Even in con- 
nection with service for the Lord, how this un- 
holy thing creeps in, leading one servant to be 
jealous of another, instead of catching the Mas- 
ter’s voice as He says, “What is that to thee? 
Follow thou Me!” 

What Cowper says of sin in general may be 
predicated of pride in particular: 


“It twines itself about my thoughts, 
And slides into my prayer.” 


The Gates of Jerusalem 39 


It is indeed the root-sin of all. By it Satan him- 
self fell, and one “being lifted up with pride, falls 
into the condemnation of the devil.” 

God has said, “To this man will I look; to him 
that is humble, and of a contrite spirit, and that 
trembleth at My word.” It ig perhaps merely 
a truism to write that only as one walks humbly 
before Him, is he ina condition of soul to be 
safely used in service. I do not mean that God 
cannot overrule all things, and in a sense use 
even the basest of men. The devil himself has 
to serve. God used Balaam, and others equally 
ungodly. But in such cases it is to the condem- 
nation of the very one used. 

To go on preaching and handling the truth of 
God while the heart is lifted up and the eyes 
lofty is one of the most dangerous courses one 
can take, and certain to end in ruin and dis- 
aster. 

We have much cause, as we contemplate our 
coldness and indifference, and the appalling power 
of the world over us, to be on our faces before. 
God, instead of walking in pride, only to learn 
eventually that He “is able to abase”’ us, as in the 
gease of Babylon’s haughty king. If we humble 
not ourselves, He must humble us in His own 
way, for it is part of His purpose to “hide pride 
from man.” 

Keeping this, then, before our minds, we pass 
on to the solemn and much-needed lesson of 


40 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


THE DUNG GATE. 


“But the dung gate repaired Malchiah the son 
of Rechab, the ruler of part of Beth-haccerem” 
(ver. 14). Humbling work this, for a ruler, but 
necessary labor surely. 

The Dung Gate was the port whence they car- 
ried forth the filth, that the city might not be 
defiled. And so we read, “Having therefore these 
promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves 
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfect- 
ing holiness in the fear of God” (2 Cor. 7:1). 

Real blessing there cannot be if this is forgot- 
ten; but if we have truly learned the lesson of 
the Valley Gate, that of the Dung Gate will be 
no difficulty. As saints and servants we are called, 
not to uncleanness, but to holiness. We are to 
cleanse ourselves; that is, to judge, in the presence 
of God, and turn away from, all filthiness—let its 
form be the grosser one of the flesh, or the less 
objectionable (in the eyes of men) of the spirit. 

In the first three chapters of Romans we have 
sharply delineated the naked hideousness of the 
filthiness of the flesh. In the first three chapters 
of 1st Corinthians and in the 2nd of Colossians, 
we have unveiled the filthiness of the spirit: a 
mind exalting itself against God and His Christ 
—a wisdom that is earthly, sensual, devilish. So 
we read elsewhere of the “desires of the flesh 


The Gates of Jerusalem 41 


and of the mind,” in which we once walked. (See 
Eph. 2.) 

From all these things we are now called to 
cleanse ourselves. Body and mind alike are to 
be preserved free from impurity, for the glory 
of God. 

“Flee also youthful lusts” is a much-needed 
word. In the world about us, men live to pander 
to the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, 
and the pride of life. It should be otherwise with 
the Christian, and must be otherwise if he is to 
be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet for 
the Master’s use, and prepared unto every good 
work. Down with the bars of the Dung Gate, 
brethren; out with the filth! “Be ye clean that 
bear the vessels of the Lord.” 

Thus we pass on our journey round the walis, 
and come next to 


THE GATE OF THE FOUNTAIN. 


“The gate of the fountain repaired Shallun the 
son of Col-hozeh, the ruler of part of Mizpah” 
(ver. 15). 

To the woman at the well, the Lord Jesus spoke 
of a fountain (nct merely a well) of living water. 
Again in John 7 He cried, “He that believeth on 
Me...out of his inward parts shall flow rivers 
of living water.” The fountain of living water is 
a type, or symbol of the Holy Spirit who indwells 
all believers. 

It has been asserted by many that until the 


42 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


Christian surrenders himself fully to God, he does 
not receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. This isa 
mistake. “If any man have not the Spirit of 
Christ, he is none of His” (Rom.8:9); ‘After 
that ye believed, ye were sealed with that Holy 
Spirit of promise” (Eph.1:13)—sealed, too, “until 
the day of redemption” (Eph. 4:30); “‘Because 
ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of 
His Son into your hearts” (Gal. 4:6). 

But that there is often in the experience of 
many what looks, indeed, like a ‘‘second blessing,” 
no observant believer can deny. What is really 
meant by it? Simply this: that though the Holy 
Spirit indwells all children of God in this dis- 
pensation, yet, in many, worldliness and self- 
pleasing are so characteristic, that He who should 
control us for Christ, and fill us with freshness 
and power as He ministers Christ to our souls, 
is become like a fountain choked with stones 
and rubbish, and thus the life is barren and the 
testimony powerless. Awakened at last to see the 
folly of such a life of uselessness to God and re- 
proach to Christ, the saint humbles himself in 
self-judgment, the filth is put away, and now the 
once-choked fountain is running over, and the 
Spirit of God in power takes control of the be- 
liever to use him for the Lord’s glory, and to 
make him a vessel of refreshment to others. There 
is a fountain of living water within, and out of 
his inward parts flow rivers of living water for 
others (John 7: 38). 


The Gates of Jerusalem 43 


“Be ye filled with the Spirit” is a word the 
importance of which cannot be over-estimated. 
May every child of grace go on to know more of 
it in power as he walks in obedience to the word 
of God! For there are two things that in Scrip- 
ture are practically inseparable—I refer to the 
Spirit and the Word. A Spirit-filled Christian 
will be a Scripture-filled Christian. 

In verses 16 to 25 we read of many persons 
who repaired that portion of the wall extending 
from the fountain gate to the water gate. There 
are fine shades and significant expressions used 
in several instances that we do well to notice. 
Of one and another we only read that they re- 
paired such and such a portion. In verse 20, of 
Baruch we are told that he “earnestly repaired 
the other piece, from the turning of the wall,” etc. 
It is not for nothing God inserted that adverb. 
Three are mentioned in verse 23 who repaired over 
against their houses, and we can be sure every 
detail was precious to God. But passing on to 
verse 26 we reach 


THE WATER GATE. 


“Moreover the Nethinim dwelt in Ophel, unto 
the place over against the water gate toward the 
east, and the tower that lieth out.” 

The Nethinim were servants, and it is meet 
that they should have the care of this gate, for 
water is very generally a type of the word of God. 
“Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? 


44 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


By taking heed thereto according to Thy word” 
(Ps 11959): 

We do not read of any repairs being made 
here, only that the Nethinim dwelt over against 
the water gate. Possibly this port needed none. 
At any rate, we know that of which it speaks 
needs not to be repaired, for the word of God 
liveth and abideth forever. All vain man’s as- 
saults upon it have left it uninjured and un- 
changed. We are called upon to defend it, con- 
tending earnestly for the faith once for all de- 
livered to the people of God, but it would be im- 
piety to attempt to patch or improve it. 

The water of the Word it is that Christ uses 
to wash His disciples’ feet and to keep them free 
from defilement (Jno. 18:1-16; 15:3). It is writ- 
ten: ‘Christ also loved the Church and gave Him- 
self for it, that He might sanctify and cleanse it 
by the washing of water by the Word,” etc. (Eph. 
5: 25, 26.) 

It is remarkable that what in Ephesians is con- 
nected with the Spirit, is in Colossians linked with 
the Word. Compare Eph. 5: 18-20 with Col. 3: 
16. Both alike are a source of joy and blessing. 
And we need not wonder at this similarity in 
effect, for of the Word it is said, ‘““Holy men of 
God spake as they were moved by the Holy 
Ghost.” 

In chapter 8 of this book (Nehemiah) we see all 
the people gathered together “as one man into the 
street that was before the water gate,” there to 


The Gates of Jerusalem 45 


listen to the reading of the word of God. The 
result is joy and blessing. 

O fellow-believer, I beseech you, “meditate on 
these things, give thyself wholly to them,” and 
thus shall your profiting appear to all, as you “let 
the word of Christ dwell in you richly,” for, “All 
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is 
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correc- 
tion, for instruction in righteousness, that the 
man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished 
unto all good works” (2 Tim.3:16,t7). This, 
then, is the servant’s furnishing. He is to study 
to show himself “approved unto God, a workman 
that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing 
the word of truth.” 

And this means far more than reading books, 
however helpful, written on the Bible. It neces- 
sitates diligent, painstaking study of the sacred 
Word itself. Other books may help, often, to lead 
out the mind on certain broad lines, but the Book 
must supersede them all if there is to be real 
growth in the knowledge of God. 

By this alone will you overcome the wicked 
one, if “the word of God abideth in you” (1 John 
ola} 

Another company of Tekoites repaired between 
the water gate and that which next claims our 
attention, namely: 


THE HORSE GATE. 


“From above the horse gate repaired the 


46 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


priests, every one over against his house” (ver. 
28). 

The horse is used with striking frequency in 
Scripture as a figure of the warrior. 

It is so described in Job 39: 19-25, where, ‘“‘He 
saith among the trumpets, Ha, ha! and he smell- 
eth the battle afar off.” In Zechariah 1:8, and 
in Rev. 6, we read of four symbolic horses, which 
speak of warrior powers; and when the eternal 
Word of God, clad in blood-dipped vesture, de- 
scends from heaven to the battle preceding the 
awful supper of the great God, at the beginning 
of the Millennium, He is seen in vision riding on 
a white horse, and the saints are seen similarly 
mounted. 

The ass is the symbol of peace; the horse, of 
war. When the Prince of Peace rode into Jeru- 
salem of old, it was on the ass. When He comes 
to judgment, it is on the horse. 

The Horse Gate may speak, then, of soldier- 
service in a world opposed to God and His truth. 
It bids us ‘“‘earnestly contend for the faith once 
for all delivered to the saints” (Jude 3, R. V.). 

The truth has been given to us at great cost, 
not only to the One who is Himself “the Truth,” 
but for its preservation, and recovery when lost 
at times, myriads of warrior-saints have suffered 
and died. 

Alas that we, children of such glorious sires, 
should so lightly value what to them was dearer 
than life! We live in a day not of open perse- 


The Gates of Jerusalem AT 


cution, but of laxity and latitudinarianism. We 
are affected much by the spirit of the times; hence 
there are few among us who, like that mighty 
man of old, grasp the sword of the Spirit to 
defend the truth of God, and fight till the hand 
cleaves to the very weapon it holds. (See 2 Sam. 
23:9,10.) But God’s Eleazars will have rich 
reward in the day when many, we fear, will be 
saved but so as by fire. 


Let me quote here the words of another, which 
might well be written in letters of living fire: 


“Renounce all the policy of the age. Trample 
upon Saul’s armor. Grasp the Book of God. Trust 
the Spirit who wrote its pages. Fight with this 
weapon only and always. Cease to amuse, and 
seek to arouse. Shun the clap of a delighted 
audience, and listen for the sobs of a convicted 
one. Give up trying to please men who have only 
the thickness of their ribs between their souls 
and hell; and warn, and plead, and entreat, as 
those who feel the waters of eternity creeping 
upon them.”* 

And remember, beloved, as you fight, that the 
day of testimony for God is fast passing away. 
It will soon be too late to stand for the truth, 
and too late to minister Christ to needy souls. 
“The night cometh when no man can work” (John 
UA). 


*Archibald Brown, of London. 


48 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


Of this we are reminded as we pass on to 
THE EAST GATE. 


“After him repaired also Shemaiah the son of 
Shechaniah, the keeper of the east gate” (ver. 
Z9)% 

The gate of the sunrising points on—does it 
not ?—to the morning without clouds, when He 
shall come down like rain upon the mown grass, 
and as clear shining after rain. 

Having shone forth as the Bright and Morning 
Star, and as such gathered His redeemed to Him- 
self in the clouds, He will be manifested to Israel 
and the nations that are spared as the all-glorious 
Sun of Righteousness, with healing in His wings. 
This is the special character in which He is pre- 
sented to Israel and the earth, but the two are 
only different aspects of His one coming again. 

For that glad morning weary saints all along 
have waited and longed, straining their eyes to 
catch the first glimpse of the Bright and Morning 
Star. Wicked servants have said, “My Lord de- 
layeth His coming;” but He “is not slack, as 
some men count slackness, but is long-suffering 
to usward, not willing that any should perish” 
(2 Pet.3:9). “The night is far spent, the day is 
at hand.” It is high time to be aroused from our 
lethargy, for already the long-expected midnight 
cry is ringing through the world, “Behold, the 
Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet Him!” 
The shout of the Lord, the voice of the arch- 


The Gates of Jerusalem 49 


angel, and the trump of God, will soon resound 
through the vaulted heavens, announcing the re- 
turn of the long-absent One, and ushering in the 
morning. But for many it will be the beginning 
of the darkest night earth has ever known. 

Oh, let us be up and doing while it is called 
to-day, that we may not be ashamed before Him 
at His coming. “Even so, come, Lord Jesus.” 

Only a small part of the wall remains to be 
noticed, but among the workers upon it there is 
one we must not cursorily pass by. Meshullam 
the son of Berechiah repaired, we learn, “over 
against his chamber” (ver. 30). Here was a man 
who probably had no house, no real home. He 
was but a lodger; but even so, he was faithful to 
Him who appointed him to glorify God in that 
narrow place. He went to work with energy and 
repaired over against his one little room. And 
thus he becomes a bright example for every one 
in like circumstances, bidding such remember that 
“he that is faithful in that which is least, is faith- 
ful also in much.” 


THE GATE MIPHKAD 


is the last in order. “After him repaired Mal- 
chiah the goldsmith’s son unto the place of the 
Nethinim, and of the merchants, over against the 
gate Miphkad, and to the going up of the corner” 
(ver. 31). 

The word Miphkad, according to the diction- 
aries, means review, or appointment (for judg- 


50 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


ment). It was doubtless the gate where contro- 
versies were tried, after the Eastern fashion. How 
solemn is this! For it is when the Lord comes 
that “we must all appear before the judgment- 
seat of Christ.” That will be the Gate Miphkad 
for the believer. There will be the last great 
review. Every detail of the saint’s life will come 
up for inspection. It may be then that, 


“Deeds of merit, as we thought them, 
He will show us were but sin; 
Little acts we had forgotten, 
He will tell us were for Him.” 


Oh, the unspeakable solemnity of it! All our 
ease-loving and self-seeking brought to light then! 
All our pride and vanity manifested! Everything 
put on its own proper level. All our works in- 
spected by Him who seeth not as man seeth. How 
many of us will wish we had been more true and 
real in our work down here. Things we valued 
highly on earth, how lightly will they weigh up 
there !—as the very small dust of the balance; yea, 
lighter even than that—altogether, lighter than 
vanity! 

And those things we have neglected and fool. 
ishly ignored in the days of our pilgrimage, how 
much more precious than gold will they appear 
in the light of that judgment-seat! 

O beloved, shall we not seek to be now what 
we shall then wish we had been? Let us do now 
what we shall then wish we had done; turn now 


The Gates of Jerusalem 51 


from what we shall then wish we had judged. 
The Lord grant that His people be awakened to 
the reality of these things, and the importance of 
living for eternity! 

And thus we have traveled round the wall from 
one part to another, and have, I trust, been blessed 
in doing so. We might close our meditations here, 
only that God does not end in this way, for in the 
last verse we come back agzin, having made the 
circuit, to that with which we began— 


THE SHEEP GATE. 


“And between the going up of the corner unto 
the Sheep Gate repaired the goldsmiths and the 
merchants.” 

It is as though God would not have us turn 
away without reminding us that the Cross with 
which we began will be before our souls for eter- 
nity. After all has been gone into at the judg- 
ment-seat, we sha!l turn from it to the Judge Him- 
self, who is our Redeemer and Bridegroom. We 
shall see Him as a Lamb that had been slain. At 
His once-pierced feet we shall fall in adoration, 
and forever sing praises “unto Him that loveth 
us, and hath washed us from our sins in His own 
blood.” 

We shall never get beyond the Cross. It will 
be the theme of our praises throughout all the 
ages to come. Oh, to ever live in the light of it 
now! It speaks of sins ferever put away, and 


52 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


also of a world under judgment for the rejection 
of God’s Son. Our place, then, is outside of it 
all. “Let us go forth therefore unto Him out- 
side the camp, bearing His reproach. For here 
have we no continuing city, but we seek one to 
come” (Heb. 13:13, 14). 


CHAPTER IV 


SOLDIER-SERVANTS 


HE work which was so precious in the eyes 
of the Lord was but a theme for mockery 
and scorn in the mind of the mixed people, whose 
overtures of participation on common ground had 
been refused. Sanballat’s rage is stirred; but for 
the present it takes outwardly the form of con- 
temptuous' sneering: ‘‘What do these feeble 
Jews?” he asks his Samaritan brethren. “Will 
they fortify themselves? will they sacrifice? will 
they make an end in a day? will they revive the 
stones out of the heaps of rubbish which are 
burned?” And Tobiah the Ammonite joins in the 
mockery, exclaiming with a lightness he evidently 
did not feel, “Even that which they build, if a 
fox go up, he shall even break down their stone 
wall” (vers. 1-3). Yet he and all his ilk were to 
prove later that, when guarded by Jehovah’s sub- 
ject servants, it was too strong a wall for such 
foxes as they to break through. 

In the name of the Lord, Nehemiah and his 
companions built steadily on, and that Name was 
to prove a strong tower into which the righteous 
might safely retreat from the malignity of their 
foes. When the people of God cleave to His Word 
and exalt His name, they need fear no enemy, 


54 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


human or supernatural. It is themselves who are 
responsible for any breaches made in the wall. 
It is unbelief and self-will in the people of God 
that weaken or destroy those battlements against 
which the enemies outside might batter in vain. 

Realizing this in some measure, the people of 
Judah lift up their hearts to the One whose they 
were and whom they served. ‘Hear, O our God; 
for we are despised,” they cry; “and turn their 
reproach upon their own head, and give them 
for a prey in the land of captivity; and cover not 
their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out 
from before Thee; for they have provoked Thee 
to anger before the builders” (vers. 4,5). If any 
feel the difference between this prayer and such 
as are suited to the Christian in this dispensation 
of grace, the explanation is involved in the ques- 
tion. That was not the time when grace and 
sufferance were enjoined. The dispensation of 
law was still in force, and we must view these 
utterances from that standpoint. The important 
thing for us to observe is the way in which the 
remnant cast themselves wholly upon God. San- 
ballat, Tobiah, and the rest are His enemies, not 
merely theirs, and they count on Him to deal 
with them. 

And so they prayed and builded, for such is 
the force of “So built we the wall,” in verse 6. 

Thus with the help of God the breaches were 
repaired, for willing hands made light work, and 
“the people had a mind to work.” 


Soldier-Servants 55 


But soon the opposition took a different form. 
When the united nations (notice the lengthened 
list — Sanballat, Tobiah, the Arabians and the 
Ammonites, and the Ashdodites) heard that the 
work was actually nearing completion, and that 
the wall was being repaired in a substantial man- 
ner, their indignation became greater than ever. 
They had hoped the rubbish would impede the 
progress of the work to such an extent as to 
completely dishearten the Jews; but bit by bit 
this had been cleared away, and the stones un- 
covered and set in their places. Hence these 
enemies of what is of God realize something more 
than mockery is required if they would not soon 
be effectually shut out of the holy city. 

As one reads such a record, it is almost impos- 
sible not to observe how accurately the history 
of old fits a later work of God—even that of the 
present time. Asa result of centuries of darkness 
and superstition, practically every precious truth 
of the Scriptures was overwhelmed by the eccle- 
siastical rubbish gradually accumulated. When 
at iast the reformers were raised up to recall 
God’s people to God’s own Word, they found 
themselves confronted by just such a task as that 
which Nehemiah had to face; and ever since, 
when there has been a settling down on the part 
of God’s people, the rubbish has accumulated 
again at an alarming rate, human tradition soon 
swamping what was of God; and so the need of 
persistent, devoted, prayerful toil, to separate 


56 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


the precious from the vile has been ever mani- 
fest. Carnal professors will mock, so-called lib- 
erals will demonstrate their bitter hatred of every- 
thing holy, but they who wait upon the Lord shall 
renew their strength, and find all needed grace 
to stand in the evil day, and to distinguish be- 
tween what is really divine and what is but of 
man in the great mounds of mingled truth and 
error, lying all about the ruined wall that once 
separated Church and world. Every fresh at- 
tempt to “try the things that differ” will provoke 
the ire of the worldly-religious mass; but what is 
of God is of too much value to be surrendered at 
the behest of fleshly foes. 

The adversaries of Judah determined upon a 
sudden onslaught on the remnant, and so “con- 
spired all of them together to come and fight 
against Jerusalem, and to hinder it” (ver.8). 
This was but a call to “watch and pray,” and so 
it was recognized by Nehemiah and his fellow- 
laborers. The language of verse 9 is most in- 
structive: “Nevertheless we made our prayer unto 
our God, and set a watch against them day and 
night, because of them.” This was holding things 
in the right proportion. Prayer alone would have 
been presumption. But they watch against the 
enemy at the same time that they call upon God. 

In verse 10 we have the first note of discour- 
agement from within. Constant toil and watch- 
ing have worn upon the spirits of the Jews, and so 
the report comes to Nehemiah: ‘The strength 


Soldier-Servants 57 


of the bearers of burdens is decayed, and there is 
much rubbish; so that we are not able to build 
the wall.” But to these disheartening words Ne- 
hemiah vouchsafes no reply, save to labor on. 
The adversaries continue their plotting without 
and the people grow faint within, but the Tir- 
shatha continues to look up and count upon the 
living God. 

The third trial is mentioned in verse 12. There 
were scattered Jews living among the Samari- 
tans. They “came unto us ten times,” says Ne- 
hemiah, warning of the preparations for an as- 
sault, and declaring the utter inability of the 
remnant to stand against such powerful foes. 

It was certainly discouraging to one who re- 
lied on a fleshly arm, but the man of faith could 
count on God through it all. Heretofore the peo- 
ple had labored, prayed, and watched. Now they 
must be prepared for conflict. So the governor 
set the people after their families in the vantage- 
places upon the wail, armed with swords, spears 
and bows. But he would not have them put their 
confidence in the weapons, but in the living God: 
“Be ye not afraid of them; remember the Lord, 
which is great and terrible, and fight for your 
brethren, your sons, and your daughters, your 
wives and your houses” (ver. 14). This was to be 
their battle-cry, ‘““Remember the Lord!” 

Many a merely human conflict has been won by 
the inspiration of a watch-word recalling some 
past great event. In our own day, again and again, 


58 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


Spanish troops were repulsed as the American 
soldiery drove all before them with the cry, “Re- 
member the Maine!” So Napoleon often inspirited 
his troops: by causing them to remember some 
former victory. But what could stir the soul of 
an Israelite indeed more than such a cry as this, 
“Remember the Lord!’ Similarly when pressing 
upon Timothy the need of devotedness in the 
Christian warfare, Paul cries, ““‘Remember Jesus 
Christ!” (2 Tim. 2: 8).* 

This is faith’s resource. The God who gave His 
Son for our redemption, who raised Him from 
the dead and set Him at His own right hand in 
highest glory, can be counted on in every time of 
trial to supply all needed grace for seasonable help. 

When Nehemiah’s enemies knew that their 
plans were known, and the citizens of Jerusalem 
armed and watchful, they gave up all hope of 
hindering by open warfare; while the remnant 
rejoiced that “God had brought their counsel to 
nought ;’’ and so they returned every one with 
confidence to the work. 

But this deliverance did not cause them to be 
any the less careful. Henceforth Nehemiah divided 
his own servants into two companies, one of which 
wrought in the work and the other stood guard 
heavily armed; while the builders and burden- 


* The verse is really an exclamatory rather than a de- 
clarative sentence: “Remember Jesus Christ, of the seed 
of David, raised from the dead according to my gospel!” 


Soldter-Servants 59 


bearers themselves labored, each with his sword 
girded by his side, or with a trowel in one hand 
and a weapon in the other. Both alike speak of 
the Word. The trowel is the Word used for edi- 
fication, the sword is the Word used to contend 
earnestly for the faith once for all delivered to 
the saints. Significant are the words that close 
verse 18, after this vivid description of soldier- 
laborers: ‘‘And he that sounded the trumpet was 
by me.” The trumpet stands for the ministry of 
the Word, and it was meet that the trumpeter 
should abide with the ruler and get his instruc- 
tions directly from him. So does the servant of 
Christ need to abide in Him that he may speak 
as the oracles of God, and then the trumpet gives 
no uncertain sound. 

Scattered as the workers and soldiers were upon 
the whole length of the wall, it was important 
that all should be subject to one voice, the voice 
of Nehemiah, and this was expressed by the trum- 
pet. Wherever the loud blast was heard, there 
all were to gather, counting upon God to fight for 
them (vers, 19, 20). 

“So,’* continues the inspired record, “we la- 
bored in the work: and half of them held the 
spears from the rising of the morning till the 
stars appeared.” 

There was much work to be done and time was 


* This little word “so” is quite characteristic of Ne- 
hemiah. It is found about twenty times. 


60 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


pressing, so they dared not take their ease while 
there was light enough to labor. And at night 
all lodged within the wall, that they might be a 
defence to their brethren, though many had homes 
outside the city. 

In all this devoted service, Nehemiah and his 
guard were ensamples to the rest, for so contin- 
uously were they on duty that they did not so 
much as remove their clothes, save for washing. 
It was a time to try men’s souls, but the testing 
only proved how zealously affected in a good 
thing were the governor and his helpers. In this 
they shine as examples for us, bidding us hold 
fast what God has committed to us, and hold 
forth the word of life to others, while refusing 
all compromise with the unholy spirit of the age 
in which we live. 


CHAPTER V 
INTERNAL STRIFE 


UTSIDE foes may rage, but they cannot 
really injure the people of God if there be 

love and harmony within. “Only,” writes the 
apostle, “let your conversation (the conduct) be 
as it becometh the gospel of Christ; that whether 
I come and see you, or else be absent, I may 
hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one 
spirit, with one mind striving together for the 
faith of the gospel; and in nothing terrified by 
your adversaries: which is to them an evident 
token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and 
that of God” (Phil. 1: 27,28). The contrary is 
involved in the warning given by James: “Where 
envying and strife is, there is confusion and every 
evil work” (James 3:16). And this Paul also set 
before the Galatians, when he wrote: “If ye bite 
and devour one another, take heed that ye be not 
consumed one of another” (Gal. 5:15). The sheep 
of the Lord’s flock need to keep close to the 
Shepherd and to one another if they would be 
guarded from the prowling wolves who ever seek 
their destruction. But how sad, and what shame 
it is when they fall to devouring one another, 
thus giving place to the devil. Of this we are 


62 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


warned in the happenings narrated for our in- 
struction in this chapter. 

The opening verses are like Acts 6:1: “There 
was a great cry of the people and of their wives 
against their brethren the Jews. For there were 
that said, We, our sons and daughters, are many, 
and we must procure corn for them that we may 
eat, and live. Some also there were that said, We 
have mortgaged our lands, vineyards and houses, 
that we might buy corn in the dearth. There were 
also that said, We have borrowed money for the 
king’s tribute, and that upon our lands and vine- 
yards. Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our 
brethren, our children as their children; and, lo, 
we bring into bondage our sons and our daugh- 
ters to be servants, and some of our daughters are 
brought into bondage already; neither is it in our 
power to redeem them; for other men have our 
lands and vineyards” (vers. 1-5). 

What a pitiable state of affairs is portrayed 
here by the simple narrative of the complaints 
of the people against their own brethren! The 
worst of it all was, that the accusations were 
true; and the demands of the usurers were, so far 
as business principles are concerned, such as all 
nations recognize as legitimate. But God’s peo- 
ple were not to be guided by such principles. 
From the beginning He had told them not to 
exact usury of their brethren, but rather to make 
provision for the poor, as giving unto Him. They 
had all been in poverty once, and He had en- 


Internal Strife 63 


riched them according to the grace of His heart, 
not according to their deserts. Alas, how soon 
had they forgotten this when it came to dealing 
with one another. 

And what sorrows have come upon the chil- 
dren of God in all dispensations because of this 
very thing! The full manifestation of grace in 
the present age has not hindered the same mer- 
cenary spirit often appearing among those who 
owe ali to the mercy of God. We have already 
referred to Acts 6; and the conditions prevailing 
in the assembly at Corinth, long after, were the 
fruit of a similar state. Brother dragged brother 
to law, and that before the unjust—men who, 
whatever their reputation in the world, were not 
suited to deal with things in the Church. How 
incongruous are such conditions with the grace 
of Christianity ! 

Nor is it only in connection with temporal 
things that such a spirit has been manifested, 
but, alas, in fancied zeal for the holy things of 
God how often has the same evil principle of 
exaction prevailed. Questions have arisen in Chris- 
tian assemblies, often of the most perplexing char- 
acter, concerning which an almost instantaneous 
judgment has been demanded; and if tried souls 
and weak gatherings have not been able to bow 
to the ipse dixit of certain carnal leaders, excision 
or excommunication have been resorted to, in 
defiance of the word of God and the Spirit of 
Christ. What is all this but the same thing pre- 


64 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


vailing in spiritual matters which wrought so 
much havoc in these temporal affairs? 

Oh for more men who, instead of tacitly ac- 
quiescing in these unholy conditions, are stirred 
to a righteous anger by such un-Christlike ways! 
Nehemiah’s upright and unselfish soul was moved 
to indignation, and with the assurance that came 
from knowing he sided with God, he rebuked the 
nobles and the rulers for thus exacting usury of 
their brethren. The matter was brought up for 
open consideration in a “great assembly,” and 
the guilt of the leaders charged home upon their 
consciences before all the people. ‘We,’ he says, 
“after our ability, have redeemed our brethren 
the Jews, which were sold unto the heathen; and 
will ye even sell your brethren? or shall they be 
sold unto us?” They were speechless; what an- 
swer could they make? 

Apply it to conditions such as I have refer- 
ed to above. Think of the toil and labor that 
have been expended by devoted servants of Christ 
to bring lost sinners to His feet. Think of the 
ministry exercised afterwards to lead on these 
young converts and establish them in the truth. 
Think of the pastoral care exercised by earnest, 
faithful men who knew them as individual mem- 
bers of the flock of Christ—not as a mass with- 
out heart or conscience—and then think of the 
spirit of exaction that can press some test-ques- 
tion on such saints, and ruthlessly cut off and 


Internal Strife 65 


cast out souls for whose blessing others have 
labored so persistently —and this by men who 
profess to act for God and to seek His glory! 

Oh, brethren, let us listen to the words of Ne- 
hemiah and bow our head in the dust if we have 
been parties to such unholy ways. “It is not good 
that ye do: ought ye not to walk in the fear of 
our God because of the heathen our enemies? I 
likewise, and my brethren, and my servants, might 
exact of them money and corn: I pray you, let us 
leave off this usury. Restore, I pray you, to them, 
even this day, their lands, their vineyards, their 
oliveyards, and their houses, also the hundredth 
part of the money, and of the corn, the wine, and 
the oil that ye exact of them” (vers. 9-11). 

These are suited words for the present solemn 
time when God has been exercising many as to 
the very things of which we have been speaking. 
It is not a time to demand the uttermost farth- 
ing of one another, but rather to heed the word, 
“T pray you, let us leave off this usury.” If we 
have been guilty of robbing any of our brethren 
of their blood-bought privileges, let us hasten to 
restore what we can ere the Lord arise as their 
champion and we be put to shame. For He has 
said, “Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble 
at His word; Your brethren that hated you, that 
cast you out for My name’s sake, said, Let the 
Lord be glorified; but He shall appear to your 
joy, and they shall be ashamed” (Isa. 66: 5). Cut- 
ting and comforting words are these mingled by 


66 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


the Lord Himself. Oh, for a heart to take heed 
to them ere it be forever too late! 

On the part of the rulers in Judah there was 
an instant response when the words of Nehe- 
miah had moved them to repentance. “Then said 
they, We will restore them, and will require noth- 
ing of them; so will we do as thou sayest” (ver. 
12). And this was sealed with an oath, and 
further confirmed by a graphic action on the part 
of the Tirshatha. He shook his lap and said, “So 
God shake out every man from his house, and 
from his labor, that performeth not this promise, 
even thus be he shaken out, and emptied.” And 
this was attested by the solemn “Amen!” of the 
congregation, who praised the Lord for the mercy 
shown. It was the same spirit that led the apostle 
Paul, long afterwards to write: “I would they 
were even cut off that trouble you!” 

In the closing verses, Nehemiah contrasts his 
own behaviour with that which he had so severe- 
ly censured. One is again reminded of Paul. It 
was an occasion where he was compelled to “speak 
as a fool” that he might close the mouths of any 
gainsayers. He relates how that from the day of 
his appointment as governor he had never availed 
himself of the perquisites of his office, that he 
might not be burdensome to the people whose 
blessing he sought. 

Former governors had felt free to do this, but 
the fear of God restrained him from doing the 
same. Instead, he had kept open house for a 


Internal Strife 67 


hundred and fifty of the Jews and rulers, besides 
strangers from the surrounding villages. He was 
one who had learned that “it is more blessed to 
give than to receive,” and he acted accordingly. 

The people might forget all this—alas, too often 
do; but he cries, “Think upon me, my God, for 
good, according to all that I have done for this 
people” (ver.19). This may seem to savor of 
self-complacency, but who of us would dare judge 
so devoted a servant? And again we need to 
remind ourselves that the dispensation of grace 
had not yet dawned. Law was still in the ascen- 
dant, and the spirit shown by Nehemiah is so 
beyond his age that we can only give thanks for 
what God had wrought in the soul of His dear 
servant, while we pray for wisdom and grace to 
serve His people in our own generation unsel- 
fishly, and in the Spirit of Christ, leaving all ques- 
tion of appreciation or reward to be settled at 
His judgment-seet. 


CHAPTER VI 
PLOTS AND SNARES 


GAIN our attention is directed to the op- 
position of Sanballat, Tobiah, and Geshem 
(or Gashmu) with the rest of Judah’s enemies. 
Every move within the city was reported to them 
without, and no doubt they had felt a sense of 
deep satisfaction when the news of internal strife 
had reached them. This may account for our 
having heard nothing of them in the last chapter. 
If God’s people get quarrelling among themselves, 
the enemy from without can afford to rest in his 
tents, but as soon as things get right within he 
actively bestirs himself. 

Word having reached the adversaries that the 
wall was builded and no breach left in it (although 
the doors had not yet been set up on the gates), 
Sanballat and Geshem sent an apparently friend- 
ly message to Nehemiah, saying, “Come, let us 
meet together in some one of the villages in the 
plain of Ono” (ver.2). They would lure him 
unto neutral ground, outside the wall, as though 
to confer on matters of importance; but he re- 
cognized the evil purpose of their hearts; he in- 
wardly knew their thought was to do him mis- 
chief. 

His reply is worthy of the man, and should 


Plots and Snares 69 


have a voice for any in our day who are tempted 
to take neutral ground where the truth of Christ 
is in question. “I am doing a great work, so 
that I cannot come down: why should the work 
cease, whilst I leave it, and come down to you?” 
He had been entrusted by God with a commis- 
sion “to restore and build Jerusalem,” and he 
would brook nothing: that would for a moment 
turn him aside from this. A separated man, he 
would have no part in the surrounding confusion 
where the word of God was rejected and His peo- 
ple despised. Notice here: it was no question of 
ministering to, or caring for the children of God 
scattered abroad that was before him. We may 
be sure Nehemiah would have been as ready to 
help the dispersed of Israel as those in Jerusalem. 
But these Samaritans were the enemies of God’s 
truth,while pretending to serve Him. “‘They feared 
the Lord, and served their own gods” (2 Kings 
17:33). They represent, as we have seen, unreal 
professors, yet presuming to have full title to the 
name and place of worshipers. With such the 
faithful servant can have no fellowship. He must 
maintain and guard what has been committed to 
him, and if he attempts to mix with these “de- 
ceitful workers” he will only lose what he him- 
self has. 

Four times Sanballat and Geshem sent to Ne- 
hemiah “after this sort,’ and four times he re- 
turned the same answer. 

Then they changed their tactics. They had tried 


70 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


conciliatory methods and failed to corrupt him. 
Now they would use a scandalous report with 
intent to intimidate him. There is nothing new 
under the sun. Satan’s wiles are such that the 
man of God must not be ignorant of his devices. 

The fifth time Sanballat sends his servant with 
“an open letter in his hand.” Oh, these “open 
letters!” How often, while fairly worded, have 
they been penned only to gender strife. This one 
contained a covert insinuation to the effect that 
all Nehemiah’s work had been unauthorized, and 
a direct charge that his object was self-aggran- 
dizement and rebellion against the king. Them- 
selves in rebellion against God, they charge God’s 
servant with their own sin. The “open letter” 
reads somewhat graciously, but the object of its 
writer was to occupy the Jews with his apparently 
gracious spirit in order to poison their minds 
against Nehemiah. “It is reported among the 
nations, and Gashmu saith it, that thou and the 
Jews think to rebel: for which cause thou buildest 
the wall, that thou mayest be their king, according 
to these words. And thou hast also appointed 
prophets to preach of thee at Jerusalem, saying, 
There is a king in Judah; and now shall it be 
reported to the king according to these words. 
Come now, therefore, and let us take counsel to- 
gether” (vers.6,7). Such were the contents of 
the open letter, and we are not told what impres- 
sion, if any, it made on the Jews. It was so 
worded as to intimate that Sanballat’s only de- 


Plots and Snares Ri 


sire was to clear Nehemiah of the charges whis- 
pered about, and yet so cunningly phrased that 
any disaffected ones within might readily charge 
the governor with fearing an investigation if he 
did not go down to confer with Sanballat. 

But Nehemiah is not at all concerned about 
this. He knows he is personally right with God 
and he fears not suspicion and idle tales. “There 
are no such things done as thou sayest,” he re- 
torts boldly, “‘but thou feignest them out of thine 
own heart.” : 

So was it also when evil workers sought to un- 
dermine the apostle Paul’s influence, and so has 
it ever been when the truth was hated. To dis- 
credit, by fair means or foul, the messenger, is 
one of Satan’s cunning devices in order to dis- 
credit the message. To do this, his tools often 
affect great humility themselves; and pretending 
to be zealous for the liberty of the people of God, 
they cry “Pope!” “Diotrephes!”’ ‘Heretic!’ when 
any servant of Christ and the Church seeks to 
stand steadfastly against iniquity, hoping there- 
by to throw dust in the eyes of simple believers, 
in order to gain their own unrighteous ends. 

Trials like these are not easy to bear. To 
have one’s good evil-spoken of, to be called a 
“Jord over God’s heritage” when trying to serve 
in lowliness, is painful indeed to any sensitive 
soul. But it is well not to retaliate, nor even to 
explain, but just to refuse the cowardly charge 
and leave results with God. 


72 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


Nehemiah’s conscience was free, so he could 
throw the accusation back upon the man who made 
it; and knowing it was only done to weaken their 
hands from the work, he looks heavenward and 
cries, “Now therefore, O God, strengthen my 
hands” (ver. 9). 

But Satan has not yet exhausted his ammuni- 
tion. A man is found within the city to act for 
Sanballat and Tobiah, upon the payment of a 
bribe. Shemaiah, the son of Delaiah, is said to 
have been “shut up.” This probably means that 
he was ill, or confined to his house, and unable 
to take his place among the workers on the wall. 
Such a man, if not in fellowship with God as to 
His then present ways, would prove a ready tool 
for the conspirators. Nehemiah called upon him, 
and Shemaiah warned him with pretended sin- 
cerity of danger to his life, counselling that he 
should flee to the temple, there to seek security 
by hiding in the sanctuary. To do so would have 
at once spread fear and distrust among the peo- 
ple, and this was just what Sanballat desired. 

But God’s devoted servant again rose, strong in 
faith, superior to the situation. “Should such a 
man as I flee?” he asks, ‘‘and who is there, that, 
being as I am, would go into the temple to save 
his life? I will not go in” (ver.11). To desert 
the rest and act as though panic-stricken, would 
ill become one in his position, one who also 
had confessed his faith in God so boldly. He 
realized that he was again face to face with evi- 


Plots and Snares 73 


dence of the plots of his enemies, and that God had 
not sent Shemaiah with such a message, but that 
he was hired by Tobiah and Sanballat to give this 
unworthy counsel. With these were others who 
shared in the conspiracy; one, a prophetess named 
Noadiah, and several unnamed men, also in the 
prophetic office. Sad and solemn it is when those 
who take the place of speaking for God are found 
in sympathy with the adversaries of His truth, 
thus hindering the work He has committed to His 
loyal servants. ; 

Nehemiah, in his customary way, brings the 
whole matter at once to God, and puts the case 
in His hands. “My God,” he prays, “think Thou 
upon Tobiah and Sanballat according to these 
their works, and on the prophetess Noadiah, and 
the rest of the prophets, that would have put me 
in fear” (ver.14). It is no longer a matter be- 
tween Nehemiah and the conspirators but it is 
now an affair between God and these unholy plot- 
ters. And in His own time He can be depended 
upon to settle all righteously. 

At last, despite every effort to frustrate the 
work, “the wall was finished” in fifty-two days 
from the time they began to labor. When this was 
manifest to the surrounding nations “‘they were 
much cast down in their own eyes: for they per- 
ceived that this work was wrought of our God” 
(ver.16). With what different feelings would 
the Jewish remnant contemplate the completed 
wall! Praise and thanksgiving would well up in 


74 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


their breasts, that Jerusalem was once more a 
protected city. 

No doubt the enemy hated such “narrow ex- 
clusiveness,” and would search eagerly for some 
small breach whereby to force an entrance, or 
pass in by night. Judah’s exclusiveness was their 
security. So long as the spirit of the people with- 
in answered to the strong wall without, they were 
safe. Their position was now clearly defined. The 
next question was, Would their condition answer 
to it? Alas, the very next verse manifests a bad 
state. With some at least, the separation was only 
outward—not of heart and conscience. How often 
has this been repeated in the history of God’s 
people! 

A position may be taken which outwardly is 
fully in accord with Scripture; yet the heart may 
not go with it at all. People talk of separation, 
priding themselves on being in a certain eccle- 
siastical circle, apart from sects of man’s devis- 
ing, while yet in their homes and in business- 
life going on with the world as though never 
separated at all. This is of the very essence of 
Phariseeism—an outward position rigidly main- 
tained, while inwardly corruption holds sway. 

Inside the walls of Jerusalem it was far from 
being in accord with the position taken. ‘More- 
over in those days the nobles of Judah sent many 
letters unto Tobiah, and the letters of Tobiah 
came unto them. For there were many in Judah 
sworn unto him, because he was the son-in-law 


Plots and Snares 75 


of Shechaniah the son of Arah; and his son Jo- 
hanan had taken the daughter of Meshullam the 
son of Berechiah. Also they reported his good 
deeds befcre me, and uttered my words to him. 
And Tobiah sent letters to put me in fear” (vers. 
17-19). It was a complete overturning of divine 
order. God had said, “The people shall dwell 
alone, they shall not be reckoned among the na- 
tions.” And to so abide was to be strong and be 
under His protecting hand. But the unequal yoke 
had been entered into. Mixed marriages, despite 
the bitter lesson in Ezra’s day, were still tolerated 
and excused; and so conscience was broken down 
and the nobles of Judah lost all power of dis- 
crimination. The wall might separate between 
them and ungodly Tobiah, but there was no se- 
paration in spirit, so they easily found means of 
communication with the haters of God’s truth. 

To Nehemiah they prated of the good qualities 
and benevolence of “brother Tobiah,” and to the 
latter they spoke complainingly of the unneces- 
sary strictness of the governor. They were trait- 
ors and hinderers, though occupying positions of 
prominence among the Jews. “Discerning of 
spirits” is a gift to be coveted; for dullness of 
sight is becoming increasingly characteristic of 
many who once were counted upon as able to dis- 
cern between good and evil. 

When the heart goes with the world and worldly 
religiousness, all kinds of excuses will be made 
for those who go on with the mixed condition. 


76 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


Their position and actions—no matter how un- 
scriptural—will be palliated and explained away; 
while those who truly go on with God will be sub- 
jected to the extremes of criticism, and every 
word and deed viewed as unfavorably as possible. 
Hence the need of being deeply exercised as to the 
inward state, as well as carefully walking in the 
path outlined in the word of God. 

The chapter we have been considering is full 
of warnings for our own times. Happy those who 
have ears to hear and hearts to understand. 

Mere outward separation, with its accompani- 
ment of breaking bread in scriptural simplicity on 
the first day of each week, will avail for nothing, 
if there be not heart-detachment from the world 
and heart-attachment to the Lord Jesus Christ, 
leading to holiness of life and self-judgment. Only 
thus can we keep in any measure the unity of the 
Spirit in the bond of peace. 


CHAPTER VII 
RESTORING ORDER 


HE greater part of this chapter from verse 

6 to the end, consists of the register of the 

genealogy, which has already been considered in 

our study of the book of Ezra (chap. 2), and which 
we need not again go over here. 

This might seem to leave very little that is 
new for our present concern; but a careful ex- 
amination of the five opening verses will reveal 
much on which we may meditate with profit, as 
being of marked importance at the present seri- 
ous moment of our history as saints and servants 
of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ. The more 
Nehemiah’s record is examined, the more it will 
be seen that every sentence is pregnant with in-~ 
struction for these closing days of the dispensa~ 
tion of grace. ‘Written aforetime,” they were, 
nevertheless, ‘written for our learning;” and we 
shall be blessed indeed if we carefully appropriate 
and earnestly practise the lessons they convey 
to us. 

“Now it came to pass, when the wall was built, 
and I had set up the doors, and the porters and 
the singers and the Levites were appointed, that 
I gave my brother Hanani, and Hananiah the 


78 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


ruler of the palace, charge over Jerusalem; for 
he was a faithful man, and feared God above 
many” (vers.1,2). There are several matters 
of moment to occupy us in these two verses. The 
wall, we have seen, speaks of separation—both 
from the world and its evil, and to the Lord, the 
God of Israel. The gates speak, not of unscrip- 
tural exclusion that has no heart for those who 
are of the one family, but of fellowship, admit- 
ting to the privileges to be enjoyed within the 
walls all who have divine title to enter, and bar- 
ring out all others. And this suggests the im- 
portance of Nehemiah’s appointment of porters, 
or gate-keepers. He was not indifferent as to 
who came or went. The business of the porters 
was to act as watchmen of the gates, permitting 
only such to come inside as could give evidence of 
their right so to do. 

In applying this to the ordering of the Chris- 
tian assembly, it is easy to see what an important 
place the porter occupies. Suppose a company of 
believers, gathered to the name of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, in separation from worldly and ecclesias- 
tical evil: how long will its purity and holy char- 
acter be maintained if people are allowed to come 
and go as they will without true, godly care as to 
their new birth, their behavior, the doctrines that 
they bring, or the associations they go on with? 
Hence the need of the sometimes unpleasant ser- 
vice of the porter. 

I do not mean that certain ones should be ap- 


Restoring Order 79 


pointed as inquisitors of those applying for fellow- 
ship; rather, that all should be duly exercised be- 
fore God as to who are received to the holy and 
exalted privileges of Christian fellowship. In the 
breaking and eating of the loaf, and the drinking 
of the cup, we not only set forth the Lord’s death, 
and fellowship with Him who thus gave Himself 
for us, but we thereby manifest our communion 
or fellowship with those participating with us in 
this solemn observance. And how can there be 
fellowship if there be not confidence and unity? 
‘Therefore the folly of declaring that, ““We examine 
no one: each must judge himself: none are ac- 
countable to others.” 

Such principles are subversive of Christian com- 
munion. We are called upon to discern those who, 
with us, partake at the table of the Lord. “If 
any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, 
or covetous, or an idolator, or a railer, or a drunk- 
ard, or an extortioner, with such an one” we are 
commanded “not to eat” (1 Cor.5:11). But must 
we not then examine those called brothers if we 
are to be obedient to this scripture? And again, 
“If there come any unto you, and bring not this 
doctrine” (i.e., the doctrine of Christ), we are 
told to “receive him not into your house, nor greet 
him, for he that greeteth him is partaker of his 
evil deeds” (2 John 10,11, N.T.). Butif the gates 
be left wide open, and the porter asleep, or off 
duty, who shail hinder persons—either themselves 
bringing the evil teaching, or contaminated by 


80 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


known association with it—forcing their way in, 
to the defilement of the whole company? Hence 
the need of godly care in receiving to Christian 
fellowship. | 

It is sometimes said, “We receive all who are 
Christ’s.” But do any really mean this? Who 
dares pronounce as to those who are Christ’s? 
“The Lord knoweth them that are His” (2 Tim. 2: 
19). We make a great mistake when we attempt 
to give oracular decisions as to so momentous a 
matter. We are only called upon to examine the 
profession, the life, the doctrine, and, as a mat- 
ter of course, the associations of the applicant for 
fellowship. Even then, when all due care has been 
exercised, a self-deceived one, or a deceiver, may 
be unwittingly permitted to creep in (Jude 4), to 
cause serious trouble later; but if there were no 
porter-service at all, who can conceive the state of 
things that would soon exist! The world itself 
is not so foolish as to leave its ports of entry 
unguarded. It is certainly far easier to allow 
any who desire to come in unchallenged; but it is 
neither for their blessing nor the peace of the 
assembly, not to speak of the glory of the Lord. 
So it would have been easier in Nehemiah’s day 
to have opened the gates at dawn and left them 
open till nightfall, with no watchful porter to 
question persons desiring to enter; but in that 
case how much of the work we have been con- 
sidering would have gone for nothing! 

The porter at the gate was therefore a person 


Restoring Order 81 


of great importance in Jerusalem, and only dis- 
creet and cautious men should have performed 
this service. And what answers to this in the 
Christian assembly is the exercise of godly, 
thoughtful care as to who are permitted to share 
in the holy things committed to tne people of 
God. Fellowship is worth too much to be frittered 
away by mere sentimentality. It has been said, 
“Kternal vigilance is the price of liberty’—and 
we might say it of Christian fellowship also, 
which is soon dissipated if the porter’s service is 
overlooked. 

The second order established by Nehemiah was 
that of the singers. And they too may give oc- 
easion for fruitful meditation. The spirit of 
praise is the spirit of power. A rejoicing assem- 
bly will be one where God is free to work, and 
will become a channel of blessing to those with- 
out. In Israel the singers were a distinct com- 
pany, separated from the body of the people. But 
the New Testament contemplates no such incon- 
gruity as a choir—surpliced or otherwise—to lead 
the praises of the assembly. The Lord Jesus 
Himself is the Leader, and all believers are ex- 
horted to “sing with the spirit and with the un- 
derstanding also.” “Speaking to yourselves in 
psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing 
and making melody in your heart unto the Lord; 
giving thanks always for all things unto God and 
the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ” 
{Eph. 5:19, 20). “Let the word of Christ dwell 


82 Notes on the Boot of Nehemiah 


in you richly in all wisdom; teaching and ad- 
monishing one another; in psalms and hymns and 
spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts 
unto the Lord” (Col.3:16). In these verses we 
have clearly set forth the singers, the song, and 
the accompaniment. All believers are the choris- 
ters. The accompaniment is not the grand pipe 
organ or the delightsome orchestra, but some- 
thing sweeter far in the ears of God—the melody 
that rises from a heart filled with His grace. 

We may distinguish psalms from hymns. The 
former would more properly be expressions of 
praise. To praise is to psalm. (See Ps. 105: 2, 
margin). A hymn is rather an ascription of the 
perfections of Deity ; it expresses the highest 
point of worship, magnifying God, not because 
of His works in our behalf, but of His matchless 
perfections. A spiritual song would be different 
from either of these. It might be a recital of 
God’s ways or of the believer’s experience.* 

When gathered in assembly we come together 
as singers. There the Lord takes His place in 
the midst to lead our worship and praise, as it is 
written, “In the midst of the assembly will I sing 
praise unto Thee” (Heb.2:12). Thus, as oc- 
cupied with Him, His death and the fruit re- 
sulting therefrom, praise well becomes each saint. 


* Those who are accustomed to the “Little Flock Hymn 
Book” might see in No. 235 a typical psalm; in No. 150, an 
almost matchless hymn; while No.139 is a good example 
of a spiritual song. 


Restoring Order 83 


This is not to legislate against every other spirit. 
ual exercise, but it is surely what is characteristic. 

And now we turn to consider the third class 
mentioned in the first verse. These are the Le- 
vites, or ministering servants of God. Of old one 
tribe alone were Levites. But in this dispensa- 
tion, just as all gathered saints have porter-re- 
sponsibility upon them, and all are to be singers, 
so all are servants. “To every man his work” is 
the Lord’s word for each. But Levite-service may 
also speak of public ministry, and this of course 
is not general, but a special responsibility placed 
upon those who have been gifted accordingly— 
yea, who are themselves gifts given to the assem- 
bly for the edification of the body of Christ. 

Such service must be exercised in direct re- 
sponsibility to the Lord. . The Church does not 
appoint ministers of the Word. Christ as Head 
alone appoints, and by the Spirit qualifies. The 
Church tests those who come as ministers by the 
message they bring, comparing it with the word 
of God. If it be according to what is there re- 
vealed it must be accepted. If contrary to the 
teaching of Scripture, both teacher and doctrine 
are to be refused. 

There is room in every scripturally-gathered 
company of saints for all divinely-given ministry. 
The true Levite will find a welcome there. But, 
after all is said and done, there is no infallible 
court on earth that can decide whether or no a 
man is a gift to the assembly. The only rule is 


84 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


that of Prov. 18:16: “A man’s gift maketh room 
for him.” Hence, if one fancies he is called to 
expound the Word, and his ministry is not ap- 
preciated, he need not abuse the saints, but should 
rather consider that among them at least his gift 
has not made room. He may be a minister to 
others, but not to them. If assured of his divine 
call, let him patiently go elsewhere; but let him 
also carefully consider whether he may not be 
boasting himself of a false gift, and so cause 
shame at last, because of the emptiness of his 
ministry (Prov. 25:14). To serve as a Levite in 
this special sense, one must be in living touch 
with God, speaking from a full heart of what has 
stirred his own soul; otherwise his ministry will 
be barren and profitless. We shall see the Levites 
doing their God-appointed service in the interest- 
ing scenes of the next chapter. 

In the second verse now before us we read of 
two men placed over Jerusalem. We may be as- 
sured it was not nepotism that led Nehemiah to 
appoint his own brother Hanani as one of these. 
To have done this because of relationship would 
have been most offensive. On the other hand re- 
lationship must not hinder when spiritual qualifi- 
cation is evident. Of Hananiah, his coadjutor 
in this service, it is said that “he was a faithful 
man, and one that feared God above many.” Bless- 
ed words of commendation are these! Would that 
they might be rightfully applied to many more 
of us! What honor could be greater than to be 


Restoring Order 85 


designated faithful by the Lord Himself on His 
judgment-seat. 

These last-mentioned men had authority over 
the porters, and to them Nehemiah commands: 
“Let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened until 
the sun be hot; and while they stand by, let them 
shut the doors, and bar them; and appoint watches 
of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, every one in his 
watch, and every one over against his house” 
(ver. 3). 

Two things concern us here. First:—Entrance 
into the city was to ke in broad daylight. Peo- 
ple were not to be permitted to slip in, in the 
dark. This may have a voice for us. Let all as- 
sembly matters especially as concerning recep- 
tion and excision be open and above-board: noth- 
ing underhanded or hidden should be tolerated. 
Second :—Watchfulness was still required of all. 
It was not enough to have official porters. All 
were to be watchmen for the good of all. ‘What 
I say unto you, I say unto all: Watch!” As long 
as we have anything to maintain for God down 
here we need to be on the watch—never off guard 
for a moment, lest our wily foe introduce what 
will cause lasting sorrow and disaster. 

The city was large and great, we are told— 
that is, the space enclosed by the walls; but the 
people were few, and the houses were not builded. 
The wall enclosed all that had originally been 
marked off as the city of God. But the remnant 
were feeble, and care would be needed to main- 


86 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


tain the place taken. In view of giving each one 
his proper portion Nehemiah now investigates the 
registry made when the first company came up. 
It was no new work he was engaged in. He is 
but carrying on what had been commenced some 
years before. The original record is therefore 
examined, and all ratified by the governor. As 
we have already gone over this register we need 
only refer the reader to the remarks made in the 
notes on the 2nd chapter of Ezra. 

Its appearance here shows how completely Ne- 
hemiah had identified himself with the work which 
the Spirit of God had wrought through Zerubbabel 
and Joshua. He was one with them, and together 
they sought the glory of the God of Israel. Let 
this have a voice for all who have ears to hear. 


CHAPTER VIII 
THE GREAT BIBLE-READING 


N every genuine revival among God’s people 

the revealed Word of the Lord has had a large 
place. It was so in Josiah’s day, and in the awak- 
ening under Hezekiah. It has been so throughout 
the Church period. It was the recovery of the 
Word that brought about the Reformation of the 
16th century, and every true awakening since has 
been based upon Bible study and Bible practice. 
Of no spiritual movement in history could this 
more truthfully be said than of that special work 
of God which began almost simultaneously in 
many parts of Great Britain and Ireland in the 
first half of the 19th century. Here and there 
little companies of devoted believers were found 
gathering together to search the Scriptures, seek- 
ing a right way for themselves and their children 
in the midst of the existing ecclesiastical con- 
fusion and dead formality. To them was revealed 
from the Word that Christ Jesus is the one Centre 
of gathering, that the Church is one body in which 
the Holy Spirit dwells and which He is to guide. 
Thus disowning everything for which they could 
find neither a plain “Thus saith the Lord” nor 
a simple divine principle exemplified in Scripture, 
they turned away from all sects and systems to 


88 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


be known only as brethren in Christ, members of 
His body, seeking to walk in subjection to the 
Holy Spirit. For such, these remnant books are 
full of important and much-needed instruction. 
They have failed—failed grievously and openly— 
as did the restored Jews of old; but the same re- 
source remains for these as for those—the abid- 
ing, unerring word of God. And it is this that 
is so strikingly set forth in our chapter. There 
are seven things here brought to our notice, and 
I desire to write of them in order. 

First, it is a united people waiting on God. This 
is what verse 1 suggests. ‘‘All the people gathered 
themselves together as one man into the open 
place that was before the Water Gate.” We have 
already observed that the Water Gate intimates 
something of the cleansing, refreshing, reviving 
power of the word of God. What more fitting 
place for a company of people to be in who are 
seeking divine instruction than “the open place 
before the Water Gate?” Depend upon it, God 
will never disappoint His saints when thus before 
Him. Of old He said to Moses, ‘Gather the people 
together, and I will give them water” (Num. 21: 
16). And in a higher sense will that word ever 
be fulfilled when His people are with one mind 
and one heart gathered together to learn His will 
from His all-sufficient Word. 

In the second place we hear the cry, “Bring 
the Book!” Verse 1 goes on to say, “And they 
spake unto Ezra the scribe to bring the book of 


The Great Bible-Reading 89 


the law of Moses, which the Lord had command- 
ed to Israel.” People may sneer and call this 
bibliolatry if they will. Worship of the book it 
is not. It is rather the acknowledgement that 
the Author of the Book is the all-wise and all- 
sufficient One who has so given His Word as to 
make it a safe guide in every time of confusion. 
What was it that freed the people of the Lord in 
the middle ages and overthrew the power of 
Rome? It was the response to this same cry, 
“Bring the Book!’ And whenever or wherever 
God’s children are thus ready to hear His Word 
and do it, there must be blessing and divine il- 
lumination. 

Mark, they did not seek Ezra’s opinion, nor the 
ideas of Nehemiah, nor yet those of Zerubbabel. 
They honored these servants of God, and right- 
fully so; they would have despised the Master if 
they had not reverenced His sent ones; but the 
servants were to be ministers of the Word—not 
of science or philosophy, nor yet of theology— 
but of the word of the living God; hence the cry, 
“Bring the Book!’ 

It is a grievous thing when merely human writ- 
ings or words are put upon a level with the 
Book of books. One dreads the use often made 
of esteemed brethren’s writings. Something is 
called in question, and at once there is a great 
effort made to show that Mr. So-and-So taught 
thus, or Mr. Somebody else has written this or 
the other. In this way the authority of the word 


90 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


of God is weakened in men’s souls, and people 
are content if they think they hold what Mr. A. 
or Mr. B. held, even though they are quite unable 
to find authority for it in the book of God. This 
is a snare of which we need to be watchful lest 
we find ourselves once more teaching for doctrines 
the commandments of men. 

Thirdly, we learn that when Ezra brought the 
book, “He read therein before the street that was 
before the Water Gate from the morning until 
midday, before the men and the women, and those 
that could understand; and the ears of all the 
people were attentive unto the book of the law” 
(ver.3). This is most blessed—an attentive peo- 
ple solemnized by the word of God. So great was 
the company that a pulpit of wood was erected 
for Ezra, and on his right and left were com- 
panies of devoted Levites waiting to hear the 
Word and explain it to the people. It was a day 
when books were not easily multiplied. Perhaps 
Ezra had the only Bible there was in all the land; 
but in the manner indicated it was made the com- 
mon property of all the people. 

Subjection to the Word is the fourth point 
that comes prominently before us in verses 5 to 8. 
“Ezra opened the book in the sight of all the peo- 
ple (for he was above all the people) ; and when 
he opened it, all the people stood up: and Ezra 
blessed the Lord, the great God. And all the 
people answered, Amen, Amen, with lifting up 
their hands; and they bowed their heads, and wor- 


The Great Bible-Reading 91 


shiped the Lord with their faces to the ground.” 
Who that has any conscience at all can fail to be 
touched by the reverence thus shown for the word 
of God? Such a Bible-reading was no free and 
easy, carnal coming together to argue over certain 
doctrines or debate intricate questions to the be- 
wilderment of the simple, and the spiritual harm 
of the more advanced. Neither was it a place for 
some leader to shine, and to have his interpre- 
tations received without question as the mind of 
the Lord. This great Bible-reading was marked 
by a holy subjection to God and a hallowed rever- 
ence for His Word that contrasts strikingly with 
modern flippancy and irreverence in handling holy 
things. 

To minister the Word to such a company must 
have been both a great joy and a solemn respon. 
sibility for Ezra and the Levites as they ‘‘caused 
the people to understand the law, and the people 
stood in their place. So they read in the book in 
the law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, 
and caused them to understand the reading” (vers. 
7,8). It needs to be borne in mind that, after 
the captivity, Hebrew, as a spoken language, had 
largely been displaced by Aramaic, hence the need 
of carefully explaining the Hebrew words to the 
waiting people. 

Fifthly, the word of God as a source of joy and 
refreshment. This is what is suggested in the 
next section, verses 9 to 12: “And Nehemiah, 
that is the Tirshatha [or, governor], and Ezra 


92 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


the priest the scribe, and the Levites that taught 
the people, said unto all the people, This day is 
holy unto the Lord your God: mourn not, nor 
weep. For all the people wept when they heard 
the words of the law.” Their awakened con- 
sciences told them how guilty they and their fa- 
thers had been in refusing to obey the word of 
God; but their tears of penitence testified to the 
self-judgment that was going on; and, with God, 
sin judged is sin put away. Hence the cheering 
words of verse 10. ‘Then he said unto them, Go 
your way, eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and 
send portions unto them for whom nothing is pre- 
pared; for this day is holy unto our Lord: neither 
be ye sorry; for the joy of the Lord is your 
strength.” God loves to surround Himselt with a 
holy, happy people; but the two things of neces- 
sity go together. Holiness and happiness are in- 
separable. Who can fail to see in what is here 
before us a striking picture, often fulfilled, when 
God has visited His people in giving them bread? 
Refreshed and edified themselves, they become 
channels of blessing to others, sharing gladly with 
those “for whom nothing is prepared.” 

“So the Levites stilled all the people, saying, 
Hold your peace, for the day is holy, neither be 
ye grieved. And all the people went their way 
to eat and to drink, and to send portions, and to 
make great mirth, because they had understood 
the words that were declared unto them” (vers. 
11,12). How much deeper the joy to-day, in the 


The Great Bible-Reading 93 


light of a full gospel, when saints gather about a 
risen Christ, and His word is brought home to 
each heart in the Spirit’s power, leading to simi- 
lar exercises and lifting-up before God. 

It is of obedience to the Word that the sixth 
section speaks. On the second day the chiefs of 
the people came together again, and the reading 
of the Word was continued. On this occasion a 
notable discovery was made: “They found writ- 
ten...that the children of Israel should dwell 
in booths in the feast of the seventh month” (ver. 
14). Now this was at once recognized as a chal- 
lenge to obedience. Here was something which 
had been unobserved for a thousand years—and 
still it was in the Book! Verse 17 shows us that 
in the palmiest days of David and Solomon no 
attention had been paid to this particular pre- 
cept. “Since the days of Joshua the son of Nun 
unto that day had not the children of Israel done 
so.” To obey it required considerable inconven- 
ience; they might have argued that what Sam- 
uel, David, Solomon and others had overlooked 
was surely non-essential; but “they found it writ- 
ten,” and that settled it for an obedient people. So 
the whole company went out to the mountains, 
and brought olive, pine, myrtle and palm branches 
and made booths, ‘“‘as it is written,’’ and in these 
they dwelt, thus calling to mind the days of God’s 
care for His pilgrim people in the wilderness : 
“And there was very great gladness.” What a 


94 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


lovely example of unquestioning obedience to the 
Word! 

And so we come to the seventh thought, in cios- 
ing our somewhat rapid survey of the chapter: 
The word of God is all-sufficient for every ex- 
perience of life. “Also day by day, from the first 
day unto the last day, he read in the book of the 
law of God. And they kept the feast seven days; 
and on the eighth day was a solemn assembly, 
according to the manner” (ver.18). Those seven 
days looked on to the Kingdom, when the Lord 
shall be surrounded by a happy, redeemed people, 
the eighth day bringing an outlook into eternity. 
Throughout Time the word of God contains all His 
people need for spiritual food and daily guidance. 

Oh, for grace ever to hide that Word in our 
hearts, thus to be kept from sin, and to have our 
steps ordered accordingly, and every thought 
brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ! 


CHAPTER IX 
THE WORD AND PRAYER 


HE relations of the word of God and prayer 

come out vividly in this portion. The seven 
days’ ministry of the Word had had a most blessed 
effect so that “in the twenty and fourth day of 
this month (the same month that was ushered in 
by the great Bible-reading) the children of Israel 
were assembled with fasting, and with sack- 
clothes, and earth upon them. And the seed of 
Israel separated themselves from all strangers, 
and stood and confessed their sins, and the ini- 
quities of their fathers. And they stood up in 
their place, and read in the book of the law of 
the Lord their God one fourth part of the day; 
and another fourth part they confessed, and wor- 
shiped the Lord their God” (vers. 1-3). 

The order here is most instructive. It was first 
the Word, then prayer, confession, and worship. 
The Word had been having its effect in a won- 
derfully real way since the seven days’ feast. 
What that Word judged, they had been judging. 
What that Word commanded they had sought to 
do. Hence we have as a result the remnant reach- 
ing what was probably the highest moral state 
they ever occupied from the Babylonian captivity 
to the coming of Messiah. Their separation was 
complete. “They separated themselves from all 


96 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


strangers.” It was now for the first time that 
position and condition seemed to coalesce. 

And so they come together again desiring to 
learn more of the mind of God that it might lead 
to increased devotedness. So the Bible-reading 
is again prominent. The first quarter of the day 
is spent in hearing the Word. Then the next 
quarter is given up to prayer: “They confessed 
and worshiped the Lord their God.” It is un- 
wise, and may be hurtful, to reverse this order. 
The Word and prayer should ever go together— 
but it should be the Word first; then prayer fol- 
lows intelligently. The believer should be a 
man holding the even balance of learning from 
the Word and cultivating the spirit of prayer. 
We need to hear God speaking to us that we may 
speak rightly to God. 

One who gives himself pre-eminently to the 
Word, neglecting prayer, will become heady and 
doctrinal—likely to quarrel about “points,” and 
be occupied with theoretical Christianity to the 
hurt of his soul and the irritation of his brethren. 
On the other hand, one who gives himself much 
to prayer while neglecting the Word is likely to 
become exceedingly introspective, mystical, and 
sometimes fanatical. But he who reads the word 
of God reverently and humbly, seeking to know 
the will of God, and then gives himself to prayer, 
confessing and judging what the Scriptures have 
condemned in his ways, and words, and thoughts, 
will have his soul drawn out in worship also, and 


The Word and Prayer 97 


thus grow both in grace and in knowledge, be+ 
coming a well-rounded follower of Christ. Apart 
from a knowledge of the Word, prayer will lack 
exceedingly in intelligence; for the objective must 
ever precede the subjective, but not be divorced 
therefrom. 

Here, in Nehemiah 9 (which as we have else- 
where noticed is linked, in confession, with Daniel 
9 and Ezra 9), the Levites lead the people in their 
prayer and praise, standing “on the stairs,” as 
though going up to the heavenly sanctuary. And 
in the prayer that follows—the longest in the 
Bible (Solomon’s dedicatory prayer being consi- 
derably shorter)—there is much blessed instruc- 
tion as we listen to the rehearsal of God’s ways 
with their fathers and the confession of their own 
failure and sin. 

The opening words forainid us of the beginning 
of what is generally called the Lord’s prayer— 
and of what should occupy a pre-eminent place 
in all prayer—‘Hallowed be Thy Name.” The 
Levites called on all the people to stand up and 
bless the Eternal One, their God, whose glorious 
name is exalted above all blessing and praise. 
To Him alone creation is ascribed and, as though 
testifying against the idolatry all about them that 
led the nations to worship and serve the creature 
rather than the Creator, they acknowledge that 
“all the host of heaven worship Him.” He it 
was who had chosen Abram, bringing him out 
of the Chaldees, making him in very deed to 


98 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


answer to his new name Abraham—‘“the father 
of a multitude.” To him the promise of the land 
of Canaan was given which in due course was 
fulfilled in his seed—multitudinous as the sand 
of the sea, brought out of Egyptian bondage, lec 
through the sea and the wilderness by the cloudy; 
pillar, first to the mount of God and then to the 
land of promise (vers. 4-12). The Levites cele- 
brated the giving of the law at Sinai; and it is 
of moment to notice that they declare it was then 
—and not before —that the holy Sabbath was 
made known to them (ver. 14). This would seem 
conclusive evidence that whereas God sanctified 
the seventh day at the completion of His work, 
as recorded in the second chapter of Genesis, 
He did not give it to man by command until He 
had a redeemed people gathered about Himself 
in the wilderness. It was a sign, or reminder, 
not alone of God’s rest after the creative days, 
but of the deliverance of Israel from Egyptian 
bondage, and the pledge of a rest yet to come. 
After celebrating the mighty acts of the Lord, 
the Levites go on to confess the fearful break- 
down of the people, and that from the very first. 
Their fathers dealt proudly, and in place of recog= 
nizing their dependence on this mighty Deliverer 
who had wrought so wondrously on their behalf, 
they hardened their necks and harkened not to 
His commandments—in their rebellion desiring 
even to return to the very land of bondage from 
which He had taken them. Their wilderness his- 


The Word and Prayer 99 


tory was a most humbling record, full of evi- 
dences of their folly, and yet abounding with tes- 
timonies of Jehovah’s faithfulness, who sustained 
them through all those forty years “so that they 
lacked nothing; their clothes waxed not old, and 
their feet swelled not” (vers. 18-21). And when 
at last they reached the land given by covenant 
to Abraham, the nations therein were rooted out 
before them and they themselves planted in their 
place; there they multiplied and grew, rejoicing 
in the abundance of the fruitful fields of Canaan, 
and delighting themselves in the great goodness 
of their covenant-keeping God (vers. 22-25). 

But disobedience and rebellion characterized 
them almost from the days of Joshua, and God’s 
holy law they cast behind their back, despising 
His precepts and slaying His prophets, when such 
were sent to show them their sin and call them 
back to subjection to His word. When, in their 
distresses, they cried to Him He granted them 
deliverance—not for their deserts, but for His 
own name’s sake, according to His mercies; thus 
again and again manifesting His tender love and 
care. 

Yet scarcely had He interposed on their behalf 
than they turned aside as before, sinning against 
His judgments (that is, the testimonies rendered), 
“which if a man do he shall live in them,” thus 
fighting against His Holy Spirit who spake in the 
prophets; until, at last, the kings of Assyria and 
Babylonia were permitted to root them out of 


100 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


their inheritance, carrying them captive to the 
land of the stranger. 

The Levites own the justice of all God’s dealings 
with the nation. “Thou hast done right, but we 
have done wickedly,” is their humble acknowl- 
edgment. And they go on to confess how their 
kings, princes, priests and fathers had not kept 
the law, nor harkened to His commandments, nor 
turned from their wicked works; and so they re- 
mained bondmen to that very day, subject to the 
kings of Persia; even though a little reviving had 
been granted them, and they had been gathered 
once more at God’s centre. Now, bearing in mind 
all the evil consequences of disobedience in the 
past, they made a “sure covenant” (alas, again 
to be soon broken!) and, putting it in writing, 
signed and sealed it; pledging themselves to cleave 
to the Lord, to separate from all strangers, and 
faithfully to do His will (vers. 33-38). 

That they were truly in earnest none can doubt, 
but the future would show once more, as the past 
so often had done, that man is not to be trusted, 
and that were God’s covenant based on human 
faithfulness, instead of divine grace, all hope for 
man’s lasting blessing would be vain. 

Yet it is well to have such seasons of exercise 
as this which we have been contemplating. Un- 
doubtedly, it was for many a step forward, which 
they never retraced, although for the nation, as 
such, there could be no full restoration till the 
advent of God’s Anointed. 


CHAPTER X 
THE NEW START 


T is both true and false (according to the 
thought one has in mind) that God never 
restores a failed testimony. If by this expres- 
sion, frequently heard at the present time, it be 
meant that failure having once blighted a move- 
ment that originally was of God, it will never 
again reach its pristine glory, the statement is un- 
doubtedly true. But if it be meant that, ruin 
having come in, God will not answer the cry of 
repentance with revival and restoration when His 
face is earnestly sought, it is utterly false. It is 
to be feared that it is spiritual lethargy and an 
unwillingness to bestir oneself and seriously face 
existing conditions, which are the real causes why 
many once gathered to the name of Jesus now go 
on in isolation, blaming the divisions and lack of 
spirituality evidenced by others as the reason for 
their having left the path of subjection to God’s 
revealed will as to the corporate testimony of His 
people. 

To such, what we have just been considering 
ought to speak loudly. Things had got indeed 
very low among the remnant. Their actual con- 
dition had become most dishonoring to God. 
Nevertheless their position was a right one, and 


102 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


nothing could be gained by forsaking it. The im- 
portant thing was to remain where they were, 
and seek to put away all that hindered their en- 
joyment of the Lord’s favor, that thus their state 
individually and corporately might be approved of 
Him. 

So we have seen them turning unitedly to the 
Word, earnestly inquiring as to what God had said, 
and when “they found it written,” acting upon 
it, though it meant, as in many instances it did, 
bitter sorrow and painful humiliation. 

Having pledged themselves (in accord with the 
spirit of the legal dispensation) to put away all 
strangers and to walk obediently before God, they 
drew up a written declaration, signing and seal- 
ing it, from Nehemiah the Governor down to the 
lowest in rank of the common people, “all they 
that had separated themselves from the people 
of the lands unto the law of God, their wives, their 
sons, and their daughters, every one having 
knowledge, and having understanding” (vers. 1- 
28). 

It was a serious, solemn and definite thing they 
had undertaken, and it would require purpose of 
heart to carry it out. “They clave to their breth- 
ren, their nobles, and entered into a curse, and 
into an oath, to walk in God’s law, which was 
given by Moses the servant of God, and to ob- 
serve and do all the commandments of Jehovah 
our Lord, and His judgments and His statutes; 
and that we would not give our daughters unto 


The New Start 103 


the peoples of the land, nor take their daughters 
for our sons: and if the peoples of the land bring 
ware or any victuals on the Sabbath day to sell, 
that we would not buy it of them on the Sabbath, 
or on the holy day: and that we would leave the 
seventh year, and the exaction of every debt’ 
(vers. 29-31). 

Notice carefully what it was they had cove- 
nanted to do— 

First: To walk in God’s law; or, in other words, 
to be subject to the Holy Scriptures. Second (and 
of course all that followed was involved in the 
first): To maintain separation from the peoples 
of the land that there be no unequal yoke. Third: 
To honor God by a careful observance of the Sab- 
bath day, not permitting greed or lust for strang- 
ers’ dainties to lead them to violate its sacredness. 
Fourth: To let the land lie fallow every seventh 
year, for disobedience to which command they had 
of old been carried to Babylon, while for seventy 
years the land kept Sabbath. Fifth: To deal gra- 
ciously with each other as brethren, leaving the 
exaction of every debt, not acting in the spirit 
of the usurer. 

Are there not weighty lessons for us in these 
pledges? I mean for those who have sought to 
give Christ His place as Head, and to act on the 
truth of the oneness of the body of Christ, but 
who have so miserably failed to keep the Spirit’s 
unity in the bond of peace. Wherein have we 
missed our way? Has it not been in what is 


104 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


here set forth in Old Testament language? Must 
we not confess that we have not been obedient 
to the word of our God? We prided ourselves on 
having taken a right position—directed thereto 
by the Word—but we have not been careful to 
be individually subject to that Word. Is it not a 
fact that to many the ‘‘voice of the assembly” has 
been louder than the voice of God in Holy Scrip- 
ture? Is it not a fact that the traditions of the 
elders have, in critical times, been more relied on 
than “Thus saith the Lord?” Is it not time then 
that, as individuals and as gathered companies 
of saints, we go back to the simplicity of early 
days, and seek to be guided henceforth alone by 
the word of the Lord which abideth forever? 

And have we not, likewise, greatly missed the 
truth of separation? Have we not often been 
quite satisfied in that we were separated eccles- 
iastically from the world-church, while socially 
and in our business relations we were linked up 
with the world to an even greater extent than 
many not outwardly separated as we? Has not 
the spirit of the world come into our homes and 
assemblies? Is it not manifest in the books we 
enjoy, the clothing we wear, the company we fre- 
quent, the language we use? What is mere ec- 
clesiastical separation if we are otherwise so much 
linked with the world? 

And is it not true that, when we have been 
somewhat aroused as to this, we have enjoined 
strictest separation from saints often more godly 


The New Start 105 


than ourselves, instead of from the spirit of the 
present age of evil? Has it not often happened 
that saints of God have been passed by or coldly 
greeted because of some difference in judgment 
as to a disciplinary question difficult te determine 
righteously, while utter worldlings have been given 
every evidence of affection? These are serious 
questions that had better be faced now than at 
the judgment-seat of Christ. 

We know that, as we are not under law but 
under grace, the Sabbath of a past dispensation 
is now for us fulfilled in Christ, but are we then 
giving Christ His place, and not permitting our 
greed for gain or our lust after earth’s pleasant 
things to break in upon that Sabbath-rest we 
should ever enjoy in Him? Can our business 
affairs always bear the test of His eyes that are 
as a flame of fire? Have we one weight for test- 
ing sacred things and another for what we call 
secular affairs? May there not be cause for ex- 
ercise as to these matters? And may it not be that 
right here is one reason for our leanness? 

And what of the seventh year? It was this 
“leaving the seventh year” that really showed 
that Israel were a people confiding in the living 
God. “To live by faith” is often spoken of as 
though it were the calling or prerogative of those 
separated to the ministry of the Word. But are 
not all believers called to live by faith—to hold 
things here with a loose grasp, but lay hold on 
eternal life as the one thing needful? And have 


106 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


we been largely forgetting this, and contenting 
ourselves with “gathering on divine ground,” 
“scripturally breaking bread,” “maintaining the 
testimony,” and all the rest of what is merely out- 
ward and ecclesiastical, while losing our grip on 
eternal realities and living as though this world 
were by far the more important of the two? Is 
it any wonder then that when matters arise 
among us calling for the exercise of spiritual dis- 
cernment and godly judgment we are found want- 
ing, and what should be for the unifying of the 
saints becomes the means of their scattering? 

And this brings us to the fifth pledge: What 
about the exaction of every debt? Have we not 
been hard and exacting and over-much righteous 
with ohe another, alienating those we ought to 
have drawn with cords of love, and demanding 
of each other what subjects of grace should be 
ashamed to press? Surely, as before intimated, 
it is high time to “leave off this usury.” 

The end of the dispensation is fast approaching. 
The Judge is standing at the door. The Lord is 
looking on, close at hand. The word of God is 
being given up and its truth denied on every 
hand. It is high time that those who love that 
Word cease their exactions one of another, and 
all alike judging everything that has hindered 
fellowship, put away for ever the evil things that 
have wrought such havoc, and so stand shoulder 
to shoulder, heart to heart, and hand in hand, for 
God and His truth with all who seek to be loyal 


The New Start 107 


to Him and His Word in the little time that re- 
mains ere “the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ 
and our gathering together unto Him.” 

On the rest of the chapter I have few remarks 
to offer. Judging the evil, the remnant sought, 
so far as they might, to put things in order in 
regard to providing for and maintaining the ser- 
vice of the house of God, giving of their first- 
fruits and tithes that there might be abundance 
to carry on the ministry and to support the min- 
isters. Depend upon it, if the Lord’s people get 
right individually, that which is corporate will 
flourish, and there will be abundant provision for 
maintaining a visible testimony. Lack of spirit- 
uality closes up hearts and purses. Godliness opens 
both. The poverty of the people was no barrier 
when their consciences were in exercise, and they 
determined ‘‘not to forsake the house of their 
God” (vers. 32-39). And so will it ever be where 
the love of Christ reigns. 

Apart from this all must degenerate more and 
more until all testimony for God is gone. One 
who knew and suffered much as standing for “‘the 
present truth” left behind seasonable words of 
warning with which I bring this portion to a 
close. 


“What is important is not ‘The Brethren,’ but the 
truth they have...God could set them aside, and spread 
His truth by others—would, I believe, though full of 
gracious patience, if they be not faithful. Their place 
is to remain in obscurity and devotedness, not to think 


108 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


of Brethren (it is always wrong to think of ourselves), 
but of souls, in Christ’s name and love, and of His glory. 

“Let them walk in love, in the truth, humble, as little 
(and content to be little) as when they began, and God 
will bless them. If not, their candlestick may go as 
that of others—and oh, what sorrow and confusion of 
face it would be after such grace!... 

“As regards also the activity outside them, it is one 
of the signs of the times, and they should rejoice in it 
...But it does not give their testimony at all...I do not 
believe attacks on anything to be our path. Self-defence 
is every way to be avoided. The Lord will answer for 
us if we do His will...God has no need of us, but He 
has need of a people who walk in the truth, in love, 
and holiness. ‘I will leave in the midst of thee an 
afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the 
name of Jehovah’ (Zeph. 3:12). 

“The gospel we may, and must, rejoice in; yet it only 
makes the testimony of Brethren outside the camp more 
necessary than ever; but it must be real...If brethren 
fall in with the current Christianity inside the camp, 
they would be but another sect with certain truths”’— 
Jo ND. 


In the light of much that has transpired one 
can almost hear the voice of prophecy in such 
words. Beloved brethren, let us one and all heed 
their serious message. 


CHAPTER XI 
A WILLING PEOPLE 


HE Bridegroom in the Canticles says: “I 

went down into the garden of nuts to see 
the fruits of the valley, and to see whether the 
vine flourished, and the pomegranates budded. Or 
ever I was aware, my soul set me among the 
chariots of my willing people’ (Song 6:11, 12; 
1911 Version) ; and in psalm 110: 3 we read, ‘“‘Thy 
people shall be willing (or, a free-will offering) 
in the day of Thy power, in the beauties of holi- 
ness from the womb of the morning: thou hast 
the dew of thy youth.” 

Words like these form a fitting introduction to 
the chapter now soliciting our thoughtful consi- 
deration—a passage that seems to be filled only 
with hard names and meagre details if the im- 
portant truth be passed over that it is God’s own 
inspired honor-roll, never to be forgotten, of His 
willing people. Then indeed we recognize in it such 
a delightful valley as that described in the Song, 
where the vine is flourishing and the fragrant 
pomegranates budding for the delectation of Him 
who rejoices to dwell among His willing-hearted 
saints —made willing by His power working 
among them, manifested in holiness of heart and 
life, engendered and refreshed by the precious 
dews of the Holy Spirit. 


110 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


A free-will offering was made, not now of money 
or other means, but of men devoted to the Lord, 
to dwell in Jerusalem, that the holy city might be 
furnished and defended. “And the rulers of the 
people dwelt at Jerusalem: the rest of the people 
also cast lots, to bring one of ten to dwell in 
Jerusalem the holy city, and nine parts to dwell 
in other cities. And the people blessed all the 
men that willingly offered themselves to dwell at 
Jerusalem” (vers. 1,2). As before they had tithed 
their produce and possessions, so now they tithed 
themselves. But it was not conscription ; for each 
one chosen responded with a free heart, glad thus 
to be especially linked with the defence and up- 
building of the city of the Name. They loved the 
place where God’s honor dwelt, and they were 
pleased to be at home there. 

Of old, in the wilderness, it was the “willing- 
hearted and the wise-hearted” who built the sanc- 
tuary of the Lord; and may we not say that the 
willing-hearted are the wise-hearted? For surely 
it is the evidence of wisdom abiding in the heart 
when the whole life is freely devoted to the service 
of the Lord. And so when the evil had been put 
away from among the remnant of the Jews, and 
the interests of Jehovah had been made paramount 
to every other interest it was the free and loyal 
service of His willing people that gave joy to the 
heart of God. 

To most of us, perhaps, the details that follow 
in the balance of the chapter can, in the very 


A Wilting People 111 


nature of things, possess very little interest. It 
is a mere tabulation of families and individuals 
whose names to us are often well-nigh unpro- 
nounceable, and usually, forgotten almost as soon 
as read. But in the sight of God it is a tabulation 
of great importance, and, like other lists we have 
noticed in these post-captivity books, will be con- 
sulted at the judgment-seat of Christ. For these 
willing offerers shall then learn how good was 
their choice when they accepted loss in this world 
that they might the better care for the city of 
God’s choice. Very little is said of these mem- 
bers of the tribes of Judah and Benjamin (vers. 
4-9), and of Levi also who dwelt in Jerusalem 
(vers. 10-18), but every one is well known to the 
Lord, and every word and act that told their de- 
votedness of heart to Himself will be manifested 
in that day. And, even now, where scholarship 
enables one to read something of the significance 
of these names, there are doubtless helpful lessons 
which for the present most of us fail to see. 

The porters and servants (the ‘“Nethinim’’), 
yea, and the singers too—true sons of Asaph set 
“over the business of the house of God” who had 
their special portion by the king’s commandment 
(vers. 19-23)—will all be called by name when 
Messiah sits upon His throne to reward every one 
who in every dispensation had respect unto the 
coming recompense. For it was just as truly a 
service for some to till the fields and dwell in 
the restored villages, thus holding all the land for 


112 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


God, so far as strength and numbers permitted, 
as it was for their willing-hearted brethren to 
abide in the city of the coming King (vers. 25-36). 
He valued all according to the intention of the 
heart, and He does the same to-day. 

We would not therefore pass carelessly over 
what some might call so “dry” a chapter as this, 
but reading it thoughtfully and prayerfully let us 
challenge our own hearts as to how far we have 
been and are now characterized by the spirit of 
willing, joyous obedience to all that God has been 
pleased to make known to us concerning His holy 
desires. Words need not be multiplied on such a 
theme; but exercise may well be real and deep, 
lest in that day, when the record of owr service 
is opened on high, there be only a blotted story 
of slothful, almost forced obedience, contrasting 
unfavorably indeed with the willing offering of 
these men of old. 

In view of this may we be stirred up to heed 
the Christian poet’s words: 


“Go on; go on; there’s all eternity to rest in, 
And far too few are on the active service list; 
No labor for the Lord is risky to invest in; 
But nothing will make up should His ‘Well 
done’ be missed.” 


CHAPTER XII 


THE DEDICATION OF THE WALL 


T will be remembered that in the duplicate 
lists of those who first came up to Jerusalem 
under Zerubbabel and Joshua the high priest (or 
Jeshua, as he is here called), the families only of 
the priests were mentioned, not the names of the 
chief priests themselves. That lack is supplied 
in the opening verses of the present chapter (vers. 
1-7). God would have these men in everlasting 
remembrance, who so efficiently fulfilled their 
service with true-hearted devotion. The chief of 
the Levites are also mentioned, though of these 
we have read before in chapters 8:7 and 9:4, 5. 
A later generation of priests, serving doubtless in 
the latter days of Nehemiah, is given in verses 
12 to 21, the sons of those referred to above, 
faithful men walking in their fathers’ footsteps, 
and ensamples to the people. 

But in the intervening verses (10 and 11) we 
have a short genealogical list carrying down the 
line of Jeshua for five generations to Jaddua, the 
great and justly-celebrated high priest who held 
this supreme office in the days when the Persian 
dominion was overthrown by Alexander the Great. 


114 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


There can, I think, be no question as to this table 
having been added by a later hand, which the Holy 
Spirit was pleased to use to preserve the record 
of Jaddua’s descent. Verse 22 must have been 
added at the same time, declaring that a faithful 
record of the heads of the Levites had been kept 
to the days of Darius the Persian, whom I take 
to be Darius Codomanus, overthrown by the great 
Macedonian conqueror. It is possible indeed that 
the book of Malachi may have been written about 
that time, and that he may have added to the list, 
or the list itself. His solemn message shows us 
the sad condition into which the children of the 
remnant degenerated after the fathers had died. 

Simple souls will not be confused or perplexed 
at the suggestion we have made above, if they bear 
in mind that the entire Old Testament was in the 
hands of the Jewish doctors in the days of our 
Lord’s sojourn upon earth, and that concerning it 
all He declared, ‘‘The Scripture cannot be broken.” 
It is not necessary therefore to know in each in- 
stance the human author of a book or part of a 
book. We know that “holy men of God spake as 
they were moved by the Holy Ghost,” and thus we 
have in every part a “God-breathed” record, and 
that is enough. 

It is evident from the next table (vers. 23-26) 
that both Nehemiah and Ezra lived through “the 
days of Joiakim the son of Jeshua,” as well as in 
the days of the father, who accompanied Zerub- 
babel in the first emigration from Babylon. Dur- 


The Dedication of the Wall 115 


ing their life-time the people clung to the word 
of God, and, with occasional individual lapses, 
such as we read of in the next chapter, main- 
tained, on the whole, a testimony for the Lord 
who had brought them back, though in feebleness, 
to the place where He had set His name. Of the 
chief of the Levites (ver. 24) it is distinctly said 
that they were appointed both “to praise and to 
give thanks, according to the commandment of 
David the man of God, ward over against ward.” 
The temple might be poor indeed as compared 
with Solomon’s building, “exceeding magnifical,” 
and the people themselves a small and afflicted 
remnant, but they sought to act on the divine in- 
struction as to the service of the house of God 
which had been communicated by David to Solo- 
mon at the beginning. Likewise, whatever the 
feebleness to-day, it is the part of faithfulness to 
go back to “‘that which was from the beginning,” 
and to endeavor, though in weakness, to carry out 
that which is writven in the word of God. 

The present chapter is divided into two almost 
equal parts, the first twenty-six verses belonging 
properly to chapter eleven, as being entirely com- 
posed of genealogical tables similar to those of the 
previous chapter. The second division continues 
the course of the history, and contains the account 
of the feast of the dedication of the now completed 
wall of Jerusalem. This was turned into a great 
occasion of rejoicing and thanksgiving to God, who 
had not only brought the people back from the 


116 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


strangers’ land but had permitted them to sur- 
round His house and His holy city with a separat- 
ing wall, testifying both to friends and enemies 
alike that they were under His care who had once 
scattered their nation because of unjudged sin. 

From every quarter the Levites gathered “to 
keep the dedication with gladness, both with 
thanksgivings, and with singing, with cymbals, 
psalteries, and with harps” (ver.27). It was a 
gladsome occasion indeed, and worthy of being 
joyously commemorated in coming years. 

“The sons of the singers” were gathered to- 
gether all about the city to participate in the 
general rejoicing. Jerusalem’s wall was a sym- 
bol of salvation and her gates of praise. 

After the priests and Levites had concluded a 
ceremony of purification, dedicating the people, 
the gates, and the wall to the Lord, Nehemiah 
brought up the princes of Judah upon the wall 
and divided all into two great companies, stretch- 
ing out on the right and the left “toward the 
Dung Gate.” With trumpets pealing out their 
notes of gladness and voices lifted up in songs of 
praise, the Levites and priests answered one an- 
other in antiphonal chants, after the manner of 
the 24th psalm, Nehemiah leading one company 
and Ezra the scribe the other. Thank-offerings 
were offered upon the altar, and “God made them 
rejoice with great joy”—as He always does when 
His people walk before Him in holiness and truth 
(vers. 31-43). 


The Dedication of the Wall 117 


Nor were the servants of the Lord forgotten, 
for the people brought their tithes into the store- 
house, and out of willing hearts gave abundantly 
for the maintenance of the sons of Aaron, in ac- 
cordance with the Word (vers. 44-47). 

One is reminded of the two-fold offering of 
Heb. 18: 15,16: “By Him therefore let us offer 
the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, 
the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to His name. 
But to do good and to communicate, forget not: 
for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.’ These 
two offerings should never be divorced—thanks- 
giving going up to God from grateful hearts, and 
benevolence flowing forth toward men, the prac- 
tical expression of that gratitude. 

There is no surer indication of a low state in 
God’s people than to find the poor among them 
left to suffer want, and the Lord’s servants per- 
mitted to endure privation. These last are called 
to a path of trial, and must needs learn to be 
abased as well as to abound, to be full and to be 
empty; but whatever blessing they may find as 
they thus share Christ’s sufferings, it is to the 
shame of the people of God, whose debtors they 
are. Were there more conscientious concern about 
this matter in many places, there would be richer 
and fuller ministry vouchsafed by God to His 
people, and more blessing in the assemblies of 
His saints, who often need to be reminded that: 

“Tt never was loving that emptied a heart, 
Nor giving that emptied a purse.” 


118 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


Let God be honored with the first-fruits of our 
substance, and He will soon prove that He will 
be no man’s debtor, but will abundantly confirm 
the word spoken by Malachi the prophet: “Bring 
ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there 
may be meat in my house, and prove Me now 
herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not 
open you the windows of heaven, and pour you 
out a blessing that there shall not be room enough 
to receive it. And I will rebuke the devourer for 
your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of 
your ground; neither shall your vine cast her 
fruit before the time in the field, saith the Lord 
of hosts” (Mal.3:10,11). That this illustrates 
a great spiritual truth is certain. That many have 
proven it to be intensely literal is equally sure. 
And it has been to the eternal loss of greater 
numbers who have failed in this very thing, and 
forgotten that they were only the stewards, not 
the owners, of wealth entrusted to them, to be 
used in view of the everlasting habitations. 


CHAPTER XIII 


VIGILANCE Versus DECLENSION 


HE striking contrast between the praise- 

worthy vigilance of Nehemiah in detecting 
and dealing with various phases of declension, and 
the continual tendency to drift away from obe- 
dience to the written Word, on the part of many 
of the people, is most marked in this closing chap- 
ter. 

That serious evils soon developed is well known 
to the student of Jewish history. These were of 
two characters. On the one hand the separation 
truth of Nehemiah’s day was soon held in a one- 
sided manner, so that position was everything 
and condition quite ignored. This resulted in 
Phariseeism—doctrinally correct in the main, but 
cold, rigid, and heartless—-glorying in separation 
while ignoring the weightier matters of true 
piety and godly benevolence. On the other hand 
there was a re-action against all that savored of 
the puritanism of those days, so that the mass of 
the people became careless and indifferent, and, 
save that idolatry was never reinstated, became 
as impious as their fathers whose sins had brought 
the captivity. In all this we may well read a 
solemn warning, bidding us never separate con- . 
dition from position, nor piety toward God from 
grace toward needy men. 


120 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


Sanctification in its practical aspect is by the 
truth. Hence it is ever gradual—as the truth is 
learned in the fear of God. Of this we have a 
splendid example in the first nine verses. On 
the very day of the dedication of the wall (for so 
I understand the opening phrase), that portion 
of the book of Deuteronomy (chap. 23: 3,4) was 
read, which we have already quoted in our notes 
on chapter two, and which commanded that the 
Ammonite and the Moabite should be excluded 
from the congregation of the Lord forever be- 
cause of their iniquitous course towards Israel in 
the wilderness. This at once led to a closer ap- 
plication of the truth of separation than before. 
They had previously separated from all strang- 
ers ; now they “separated from Israel all the mixed 
multitude” (ver. 8). 

Of Tobiah the Ammonite, who had so bitterly 
resented the building of the wall in the begin- 
ning, and whose wiles had failed to turn Nehe, 
miah aside from his purpose, we have not heard 
for a long time. Now we get the startling in- 
formation that Eliashib the priest, who had the 
oversight of the dwellings of the priests at the 
house of God, had made a secret alliance with 
Tobiah during a hitherto unnoticed absence of 
Nehemiah, in which time he had returned to wait 
upon the king. The vigilant governor’s eye being 
no longer upon him, Eliashib abused his liberty 
by preparing “‘a great chamber” for the ungodly 
Ammonite, which had been formerly used as a 


Vigilance versus Declension azaL 


storehouse for the tithes and offerings. Probably 
this apartment was never occupied by Tobiah, for, 
ere Eliashib’s plan could be fully carried out, Ne- 
hemiah returned. Hearing “of the evil that 
Eliashib did for Tobiah in preparing him a cham- 
ber in the courts of the house of God,’ he was 
sorely grieved, but acted with his accustomed en- 
ergy, thwarting the unholy purpose by casting the 
stuff of Tobiah out of the room and cleansing the 
chambers, into which he again brought the hal- 
lowed vessels with the offerings. What an ex- 
ample for the people; nor do we again read of 
any effort on the part of Tobiah to get a foothold 
in Jerusalem. 

But another evil soon claimed the returned 
governor’s attention. God’s servants were being 
neglected by a self-seeking people, and unable to 
support those dependent upon them, the Levites 
and the singers, who a little before had willingly 
offered themselves for the service of the house 
of God, had gone back to their fields, toiling for 
daily bread. The test, doubtless, revealed a weak- 
ness in these men themselves, but it also showed 
the declining state of the people in neglecting the 
temporalities of the house of the Lord; so Ne- 
hemiah contends with the rulers, and stirs them 
up to attend to the gathering of the unpaid tithes. 
This being accomplished, the Levites could attend 
on their service (vers. 10-14). 

A third sign of declension, encroaching upon 
the former determination to be faithful to God, 


122 Notes on the Bock of Nehemiah 


was evidenced in the laxity of some as to the 
sanctity of the Sabbath, the Lord’s holy day, con- 
cerning which there had been such particular 
pledges made. Nehemiah saw some treading wine- 
presses and engaged in other secular occupations 
on the Sabbath, even buying and selling and carry- 
ing burdens on the day of rest. In vain at first 
he testified against them. Strangers from Tyre 
brought fish and other kinds of produce which they 
offered for sale, and for which they found ready 
buyers on the Sabbath. Thoroughly aroused, Ne- 
hemiah contended with the nobles, the rulers of 
the people, charging this profanation of the holy 
day upon them, and reminding them that it was 
for sin such as this that all the past evil had be- 
fallen the Jews and the city of Jerusalem. ‘‘Yet,” 
he cries, indignantly, “ye bring more wrath upon 
Israel by profaning the Sabbath” (vers. 13-18). 

So, with his accustomed energy, he commanded 
the gates to be shut at sundown, as the Sabbath 
drew on, and not to be opened till it was past, 
while guards were set to see that no burden of 
any kind was brought into the city on that day. 
Once or twice the merchants and hucksters lodged 
all night and all day outside Jerusalem, vainly 
pleading for admission, but Nehemiah’s orders 
were carried out to the letter. Finally, he threat- 
ened them with arrest if they came again with 
their wares on the Sabbath. Seeing the orders 
were meant to be carried out, they came no more 
on that day. 


Vigilance versus Declension 123 


As polluted, the Levites were then commanded 
to cleanse themselves, and henceforth maintain 
a guard over the gates “to sanctify the Sabbath 
day.” Thus for the time the evil was again judged 
and the declension stayed (vers. 17-22). 

But not yet could vigilance be relaxed. The 
flesh was still at work. In spite of all that they 
had heard and seen, some had been marrying 
women of Ashdod, Ammon and Moab. They may 
have excused themselves, as many do now, on 
the plea that they might lead these women to 
know and worship the one true God and learn 
the ways of Israel. But it was all a delusion. 
Children had been born of these unions, and these 
children were witness to the corruption that had 
been brought in. They “‘spake half in the speech 
of Ashdod, and could not speak in the Jews’ lan- 
guage, but according to the language of each peo- 
ple” (vers. 28,24). This is ever the fruit of such 
a yoke in marriage. The children soon follow the 
ways of the unregenerate parent and use the 
language of the flesh. Too late is the error real- 
ized. Too readily they follow the example and 
speech of the parent who knows not God. 

Again Nehemiah’s righteous anger burst forth. 
He contended with these unfaithful Jews and in- 
voked the solemn judgments of the law upon them, 
even smiting some, and demanded of all that they 
swear by God no longer to countenance in any 
way these mixed marriages, from which only evil 
fruit could come. He reminded them how Solomon 


124 Notes on the Book of Nehemian 


himself had failed so miserably because of this 
very thing, and besought them to harken unto 
the law and not expect others to condone their 
offences (vers. 25-27). No doubt some would speak 
of his ways as hard and bitter; but sin is hard and 
bitter; and persistency in it often requires severe 
measures to put things right. It is often not 
a sign of spirituality to be placid and sentimen- 
tally affectionate. Such behavior frequently tells 
of a conscience asleep and a soul unexercised. 
There was a time when the Lord Jesus made a 
scourge of small cords—a bitter whip—to drive 
out the traders from God’s house (John 2:15). 
Paul’s language too was cutting and denunciatory 
when Satan’s emissaries were seeking to over- 
throw divine truth; and God’s wrath too shall be 
poured out without mixture in the cup of His in- 
dignation. 

Another instance of declension closes both the 
chapter and the book. The grandson of Eliashib, 
the high priest, having married a daughter of 
Sanballat, the man of God, Nehemiah, drives him 
away from his presence. His grandfather’s fail- 
ure is brought again to mind in the descendant’s 
defection.* Remembering Eliashib’s intriguing 
with Tobiah, we are not surprised to read of his 
grandson’s association with the family of San- 
ballat. In defiance of all that Nehemiah had been 


*It is not certain, though probable, that Eliashib the high 
priest is the same as Eliashib the chief priest of verse 4. 


Vigilance versus Declension 125 


insisting on, this youth had married the guileful 
Horonite’s daughter. He was the last with whom 
the governor had to deal, and he graphically de- 
clares, “Therefore I chased him from me.” We 
can almost see the indignant countenance of the 
now aged Nehemiah as he learns of the perfidious- 
ness of the son of Joiada, and we cannot but 
admire the energy with which the doughty old 
warrior drives the culprit from his presence— 
even making intercession in the spirit of Elijah 
against those who had defiled the priesthood and 
violated the covenant. Only by such stern mea- 
sures could they be cleansed from all strangers. 

Consistent to the last, Nehemiah appointed “the 
wards of the priests and the Levites, every one 
in his business; and for the wood-offering, at 
times appointed, and for the first-fruits.” Noth- 
ing was too great for his faith, and nothing was 
too insignificant for his consideration if it con- 
cerned the house, the people, or the honor of the 
Lord his God. This was indeed “a faithful man, 
and one that feared God above many”—just such 
an one as the times demanded, and he held on 
his way unflinchingly to the end, neither cajoled 
by flattery nor intimidated by opposition, for to 
him the approbation of the God of Israel was in- 
finitely more than the good opinion of carnal or 
natural men. 

And so with the prayer, ‘“Remember me, O my 
God, for good!” the record comes to an abrupt 
termination, and Nehemiah passes from our view, 


126 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


only to appear again at the manifestation of the 
sons of God. 

If we would learn something of the after-state 
of the Jews we must turn, as previously intimated, 
to the last book of the Old Testament, where we 
learn through Malachi’s stern charges the low 
state into which the remnant had fallen; while 
the Gospels and the Acts give us the solemn sequel 
and show the children of those returned from the 
captivity rejecting both the Son of God come in 
flesh to them, and the Holy Spirit also! 

Well will it be for Christians who may read 
these lines, to lay all to heart, that similar de- 
elension may be through the mercy of God averted 
in the present age of grace. May He grant it 
for His name’s sake and the glory of His beloved 
Son. Amen! 


NOTES 


ON THE 


BOOK of ESTHER 


im? ct Tas 
= ire. grees Maga . 
gate 123 reek: : SS bite Phe 
ean tte 0 £E csQu tee: raat 
ee tet Boe SH ‘deeb OE Ne rotund ti 


ij 
es SAR By 
ce te eu. to, 1@ Oy ‘i 
; *: eae WAR eo jor: Dhtietiany. whe me : 


= Pipe alee eae at ae eet 
E at 2 et te at ret ‘A, Se nr é z r 


= 1h AL 
A 
> 
> Fe 
totem 
; a 
‘i ig 
a ,. 
‘ ~y 
S* > 
+ eee = Se 
—— 
a 
> 


INDEX 


PTOIB VCE OUR fy. Fc. (oo gs yO Oe, Sa ag eee ee 


Preface to the Second Edition. . . ..,....6 


Introduction ... Kae i 7 
CHAPTER I. 

The Royal Feast and the Divorce of Vashti. . . . . 18 
CHAPTER II. 

The Choice of Esther and the Treason Thwarted . . 20 


CHAPTER III. 
The Wrath of the Amalekite and the Decree of Doom . 33 


CHAPTER IY. 
IniSackclotheand Achesuiecssien pons secure aise 


CHAPTER V. 
The Sceptre of Grace, the Banquet, and the Gallows . 57 


CHAPTER VI. 
A Sleepless Night and its Results. . . .... . 66 


CHAPTER VII. 
The Second Banquet and the Amalekite’s End . . . 76 


CHAPTER VIII. 
The Despised Man Exalted and the Decree of Grace . 86 


CHAPTER IX. 1-19. 


The Deliverance ; oF 
CHAPTER IX. 20-82. 
ho Unatitution Of kUurini wai aac ss os lee eed Or 
CHAPTER X., 
Speaking Peace . Se ae 2 216 


Fee ois ‘a 
=~ 2 = Te -' 
ee ree mid yt? ii boi wc 
== & 
= i. olcdig ete: 
¢ ae ty bd : 


ras oe Bae seg = 


06 e < eet gar temenay adel 
ay on See et beetintaned a Rd 


i. « oh eee ee 


_ aD . 7 — 
Nabe coma 
| a en . 
| oe pias gam 
ns 9 


TOE. ties — ay tae we 


PREFACE 
TO THE SECOND EDITION 


NEW edition of this little book being called 

for, I have taken the opportunity to correct 

a few ambiguities, and make occasiona: additions 

to the text. Otherwise, it is ° reprint of the pre- 

vious edition. I have been encouraged by expres- 

sions from many, telling of blessing received 

through its unpretentious pages, and I send forth 

this revised edition, praying God to continue to 

own and biess it for the salvation of the Christ- 
less, and the edification of His beloved people. 


H. A. IRONSIDE. 


Oakland, Calif. 
December, 1921. 


PREFATORY NOTE 


fi ee book of Esther contains principles of great 

value at all times, but especially at the 
present one, when some who delve very little 
into the word of God are liable to wonder at 
some of His ways, and grow discouraged in the 
path of obedience. 

It is needful therefore, that such, and all of us, 
should have detailed before us the fact that 
‘obedience is better than sacrifice, and to hearken 
than the fat of rams.” May God richly bless your 
effort to bring to the surface what His Spirit has 
laid up for us in this little book. 


Yours affectionately in Christ, 


Pau J. Lorzeaux. 


INTRODUCTION 


N° attentive reader can fail to note the great 

distinguishing characteristic of the book of 
Esther: the name of God is not found in it. No 
divine title whatever, nor any pronoun referring 
to God is there in its ten stirring chapters. Neither 
is there any reference to prayer which involves the 
thought of God as the hearer and answerer. At 
first glance it might seem that the book of Esther 
is not unique in this, as the Song of Solomon 
apparently keeps company with it in the omission 
of any title of the Deity. But it is not really so; 
for the name “Jah” (the Eternal) is, in the original, 
found in the last clause of chap. vill. 6. “Jeal- 
ousy is as cruel as the grave; the coals thereof are 
coals of fire which hath a most vehement flame,” 
(literally as noted in the margin, ‘a flame of Jah’). 
And even if this were not the case, still the bride- 
groom is so evidently Jehovah, whose bride Is- 
rael was and shall yet be manifested to be, that 
almost every masculine pronoun may be said to 
refer to Him. The Song of Songs therefore is 
really a perfect contrast with the book of Esther, 
being from end to end full of Jehovah as the 


Bridegroom of Israel. 
7 


8 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


In Esther it is quite different. Neither His 
name, nor any reference to Him, even veiled, is 
found. At least so it is on the page of the En- 
glish version. Whether there may be any divine 
purpose in the reputed fact that the name of Jeho- 
vah (Hebrew I H V H) is found there in acrostics 
four times I do not pretend to say. The passages 
in which they are said to occur are chap. i. 20, 
“all the wives shall give; v. 4, “let the king and 
Haman come this day;” and v. 13, “all this availeth 
me nothing;” and vii. 7, “that there was evil 
determined against him.” Properly speaking God 
is entirely unmentioned: but no believer in the 
plenary inspiration of Scripture would conclude 
from this that His voice speaks not to us in this 
writing as in all the rest of the sacred Oracles. 

One rather asks: Why has He inspired so 
strange a book; and what is His reason for 
omitting His name? 

The answer, as the question, may be a double 
one. First: in this book we have Israel in what 
was really a self-chosen path, for opportunity had 
been given to return to the land of their fathers, 
there to rebuild the city of God, but they preferred 
to remain where they were rather than endure the 
hardship of emigrating to Canaan. They were 
in Persia and Babylon when they might have been 
in Palestine, gathered around God’s centre at Jeru- 
salem. Second: the great subject of Esther is 


INTRODUCTION 9 


evidently the secret providence—a “particular” 
providence too—which is ever watching over the 
scattered nation during all the long-drawn-out “times 
of the Gentiles.” 

In Hosea i. 9, we read of the prophet’s son: 
“Then said God; call his name Lo-ammi (not My 
people) for ye are not My people and I will not be 
your God.” Because of their disobedience, He was 
about to refuse to own them, and to permit them 
to be carried into captivity among the nations. In 
this condition are they found over two hundred 
years later, in the times of Esther and Mordecai. 

He who had borne with their ways for so long 
had at last given them up in chastisement, and 
allowed the Gentile oppressor to destroy the city 
and the temple, and to transport them to Babylon; 
there to learn in affliction what they would not 
learn in years of blessing and forbearance. 

The Babylonian conqueror had however in his 
turn been overthrown by the Persian, under whose 
mild rule the dispersed Jews now were. It had 
pleased the Lord to give a little reviving in the 
midst of their bondage, and a few years before the 
time of the first verse of our book, He had stirred 
up the spirit of Cyrus to issue a proclamation to 
the effect that all who had heart for it might return 
to Jerusalem and “build the house of the Lord 
God of Israel” (Ezra i. 1-3). As a result there 
“rose up the chief of the fathers of Judah and 


IO NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


Benjamin, and the priests and the Levites, with 
all whose spirit God had raised to go to build the 
house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem’ (Ezra 
18 J 

With this remnant, feeble indeed, and few in 
number, the Lord is pleased in grace to connect 
His name, although the Lo-ammi sentence remains 
unrepealed; for we find that if the Name is ab- 
sent in recording His care over those who remained 
in Babylon, it is abundantly present in the books of 
Ezra and Nehemiah, which detail the experiences 
of the remnant to whom the place of the Name was 
precious, as it could not be to those who abode 
elsewhere—even in ease and comparative luxury. 
It is true it is as “the God of heaven’? He makes 
Himself known to them; but what title more suit- 
able when all earthly glory had departed? and to 
heaven they now looked for the coming Anointed 
Deliverer. Among those who went up there was 
much to grieve and sadden; much failure and sin ;— 
yet they were gathered around Himself in His 
own appointed place, in accordance with His own 
Word. Hence, He raises up ministry suited to 
their need, and is not ashamed to link His Name 
with them. 

If Ahasuerus, the great king, be Xerxes, as is 
generally believed, the history of the book of Esther 
would come in, chronologically, between the sixth 
and seventh chapters of Ezra; that is, between the 


INTRODUCTION II 


times when the first company returned to Jerusalem, 
and that when Ezra and his company went up. In 
that case we can well understand the fervent faith 
evidenced by this dear servant of God who “was 
ashamed to require of the king (Artaxerxes Longi- 
manus, successor to Xerxes) a band of soldiers 
and horsemen to keep us against the enemy in the 
way: because we had spoken: to the king, saying, 
The hand of our God is upon all them for good 
that seek Him; but his wrath is against all that 
forsake Him’ (Ezra viii. 22). How signally had 
this been proven but a short time before in the 
triumph of Esther! 

If, as others contend, Artaxerxes himself be the 
Ahasuerus referred to, it might account for the 
stirring of heart that led Ezra and this second com- 
pany to go up in faith to join their brethren in 
the city that was now rising slowly from its ashes. 
In either case, God Himself had wrought in their 
souls, and they went up to the land of their ancient 
patrimony because of their desire to glorify Him. 


ex Seth? 
7 atch tr 
R at es :? Sp 
haw 169 4 
nay kK on Lv r 
Pa. o. < Ay : < 
Sai tah, aitty Y, spa ; 
’ Ser by oF fine 
ee - ie i. & fs ; P : : 
z : my STi 
¥ : ‘a . an Ss ~ Aten y > - 
AB: cia Ley ie iis are TRU 9 
| _ a ¥ a 
‘4 vi 
All Ms = 
ft 1 


—— | rope ai br ‘hod Teint ‘ha ‘% 


L - pas 7 
- “ad el eat eek” hoxflioy Oy ery & om 
us i Ao 3 Risa tite ti an hid iota a 


; ae 
get 


od 


e. 
> 
_ 
of 
- 


5s at yy Heed In 


at hi stir te Pos 
ee hut nip 


Pio c sill Wont 


Oe we. 
Cae 


Yet ve Pg 


~S ast nk V9 Ww Buel att oa a et OY 
th paz Fe oe paigah iad) Yo. Sai 


i ene ws ninety ap - rmereaiiry- svutert ¢ 
et ek pst he kat Cees te i #. | Sok Hz aon 


x £eomeetihligalec iawn at 
= en teh i mer <a 


NOTES ON THE 
BOOK OF ESTHER 


CHATTER! 
THE ROYAL FEAST, AND DIVORCE OF” VASHTI. 


N the opening verses we note the wide extent 

of the Persian dominion. ‘‘Now it came to 
pass in the days of Ahasuerus, (this is Ahasuerus 
which reigned from India even unto Ethiopia, over 
a hundred, seven and twenty provinces,) that in 
those days, when the king Ahasuerus sat on the 
throne of his kingdom, which was in Shushan the 
palace, in the third year of his reign, he made a 
feast unto all his princes and his servants; the 
power of Persia and Media, the nobles and princes 
of the provinces being before him: when he showed 
the riches of his glorious kingdom and the honor 
of his excellent majesty many days, even a hundred 
and fourscore days” (vers. I-4). 

These verses bring before us something of the 
earthly grandeur and glory of the “silver” kingdom, 
which had succeeded the “head of gold,” depicted 
in Nebuchadnezzar’s dream, as recorded in the 

13 


I4 NOTES ON THE BOCK OF ESTHER 


second chapter of Daniel. World-wide dominion 
would be exercised by but four powers till He 
should come whose right it is to reign, and should 
set up a kingdom that shall break in pieces all the 
others, and shall never be destroyed. This was 
what God had pictured to the king in the dream 
of the great image whose head was of gold, with 
breasts of silver, belly and thighs of brass, legs 
of iron, and feet of mingled iron and clay. 

The sphere of lordship is larger in the case of 
each succeeding empire, and yet the metal ever 
deteriorates, from gold to the iron mixed with 
miry clay, or, according to Tregelles, brittle pottery ; 
the reason doubtless consisting in this, that Babylon 
presents to us an absolutely unlimited monarchy, 
while in Persia, Greece and Rome the powers of 
the chief become more or less circumscribed, first, 
by assistant counselors, and at last by a sort of 
union of royalty and democracy, which will even- 
tually result in the election of the final Roman 
emperor yet to come, in the days of the ten toes, 
which will be the last form assumed by the beast 
(Rev, xiii. 1-9) after the Church has been raptured 
away to heaven.* 

It is certainly a splendid scene to which our 


*What Nebuchadnezzar saw as a magnificent image was re- 
vealed to Daniel, the man of God, as a series of wild and fe- 
rocious beasts, the last of which is again made known to 
John in the Apocalypse (Dan. 7 and Rey. 13 and 17). 


ROYAL FEAST, AND DIVORCE OF VASHTI 15 


chapter introduces us, and in a certain sense, no 
doubt, a typical one. But it is clear that all is 
but the glory of this world, though not in the utter 
independence of God that we find in Dan. v. There 
is no mention of impiety connected with the feast 
described in the following verses: “And when 
these days were expired, the king made a feast unto 
all the people that were present in Shushan the 
palace, both unto great and small, seven days, in 
the court of the garden of the king’s palace; where 
were white, green and blue hangings, fastened with 
cords of fine :inen and purple to silver rings and 
pillars of marble: the beds (or couches) were of 
gold and silver, upon a pavement of red, and blue, 
and white, and black marble. . .. And the drink- 
ing was according to the law; none did compel: 
for so the king had appointed to all the officers 
of his house, that they should do according to 
every man’s pleasure” (vers. 5,6,8). 

If in Israel’s subjection to Babylon we get a 
picture of the days of darkness and bondage 
through which the Church passed during the 
ascendency of the papacy, it would seem that in 
the “liberal slavery” during the Medo-Persian 
supremacy, we have foreshadowed the present 
anomalous and outwardly prosperous condition of 
Protestantism. In other words, Babylon might be 
said to find its counterpart in Thyatira, when Satan 
sought to force the children of God to bow the knee 


16 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


to idolatry—to commit spiritual adultery. Sardis 
answers more to the conditions of Esther’s day— 
great outward prosperity, with a faithful few who 
have not defiled their garments, but nevertheless, 
on the part of the vast majority, a complete union 
between the world and the professing body. Phila- 
delphia corresponds well with the returned remnant, 
while Laodicea is suggested by the Pharisaic out- 
growth of gelf-righteousness and formality that 
followed. At least, it is plain that there are many 
striking similarities, which would seem to be more 
than mere coincidences. 

Looking at it from this standpoint, while in 
Ezra and Nehemiah we have a people separated 
to the name of the Lord, gathered around God's 
centre, and, in measure at least, subject to His 
Word; in Esther we have a people equally the 
Lord’s, quite content to go on with the world’s 
patronage; and though here and there some are 
characterized by great devotion, there is in no 
sense the same liberty, blessing and understanding 
of the word of God as might have been theirs had 
they sought His glory more, rather than their own 
convenience. 

This feast, then, is but the general rejoicing in 
the light and liberty afforded by the spread of 
knowledge and civilization—something far dif- 
ferent from the feasts kept at Jerusalem, where 
all pointed to the Lord Jesus Christ—His sufferings 
and His glories. 


ROYAL FEAST, AND DIVORCE OF VASHTI 17 


No doubt the various colors of the hangings 
and furniture of the banquet hall may all have 
some typical meaning, but at present scholars are 
far from agreement as to the meaning of the words 
employed; so we do not attempt to enter into it. 
It is noticeable that “the drinking was according 
to the law: none did compel.’’ What has been 
called “the right of private judgment” was fully 
recognized. The harlot of Rev. xvii, had in her 
hand a golden* cup (for of divine things she pro- 
fessed to speak) full of abomination and filthiness. 
The language used in verse 2 seems to imply that 
she practicaliy forced to the lips of the earth- 
dwellers the wine of her fornication. She would 
brook no objection. All must drink what she pro- 
vided. This is ever the rule of the papacy. It is 
otherwise in Protestantism: you may drink or not, 
as you please. ‘None did compel; and if you 
like not the design of the cup you have, there are 
plenty of others to choose from, all of gold, all 
alike professedly of God, and yet diverse one from 
the other. 

Well it is for those who refuse every cup of 
man’s design, and in lowliness and self-judgment 
are found poring over the word of God in the 
place where He has caused his name to dwell (Neh. 
vied sith): 

*Gold in Scripture is evidently typical or symbolical of the 
divine glory. 


18 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


The wine is “royal wine’ it is true, and it will 
exhilarate and excite and fill one with goodly 
thoughts of flesh and of the glory of earth; but 
it is not the wine that speaks of a Saviour’s precious 
blood shed for guilty sinners, who in His very 
death upon the tree was telling out the judgment 
of this world. That is seen as you stand by the 
altar in the ruined city of God, and behold the 
drink-offering poured out upon the holocaust, 
ascending as a sweet savor to God (Ezra iii. 3). 

The next few verses give us a picture which 
we find difficult to apply. When the feast had run 
on for seven days, the king, evidently inflamed 
by wine, sent for his queen Vashti to appear before 
the people and princes, to display her beauty. She 
had been banqueting with the women in the palace, 
and refused to obey the imperial mandate. Angered 
by her pertinacity, the king took counsel with his 
wise men as to what punishment he should mete 
out to her because she had not heeded his com- 
randment. 

At the suggestion of Memucan, she was put 
away and divorced in order that her example might 
not incite the women of the empire to act as she 
had done when their husbands laid any command 
upon them. 

We are told that “the saying pleased the king 
and the princes; and the king did according to the 
word of Memucan” (ver, 21), and published broad- 


ROYAL FEAST, AND DIVORCE OF VASHTI 19 


cast the official edict that Vashti was to come no 
more into his presence. 

They all had agreed that she had proved untrue 
to her place as the leading woman of the empire, 
and that it must be given to another. One might 
suggest this as an illustration of Rom. xi,—the 
disobedience of the Gentiles giving occasion for 
the restoration of the Jews to the place of favor. 
But, shrinking from any interpretation which might 
not commend itself to the spiritual mind, we intro- 
duce our readers at once to the subject of the next 
chapter. 


CHAPTER II. 


THE CHOICE OF ESTHER AND THE TREASON 
THWARTED 


HEN the days of feasting and excitement 

described in our previous chapter had 
passed away, and the king had opportunity quietly 
to weigh his hasty action, his heart seems to have 
relented, as we are told in the first verse of chapter 1i, 
that, ‘After these things, when the wrath of king 
Ahasuerus was appeased, he remembered Vashti, 
and what she had done, and what was decreed 
against her.” Bound by the law of the kingdom, 
which made it impossible for him to revoke his 
own imperial decree, he seems to have become a 
prey to a measure at least of remorse as he reflected 
on his way towards Vashti, of whom he had been 
so proud. 

His servants, noticing his dejection, make the 
proposal that another be sought to take the place 
of the deposed queen. Accordingly they gather 
together the fairest maidens of all the provinces, 
and bring them to Shushan the palace (identical 
with the Susa of profane history). From this 


company the future queen was to be chosen. 
20 


THE CHOICE OF ESTHER 21 


There is some interesting data afforded by 
profane history on this point, to which we advert 
for a moment. 

In the third year of Xerxes’ reign, he made a 
feast to deliberate concerning the invasion of 
Greece. Four years later he returned discom- 
fited to Susa, where he plunged into all kinds of 
pleasures and excesses to drive from his mind the 
bitter memories of his defeats. His favorite queen 
seems to have been chosen at this time, and her 
name is given as Amestris—which, it will be seen, 
bears a close relation to Esther. All this goes far 
to prove the contention that Xerxes is the great 
king here referred to. The name Ahasuerus 
presents no difficulty, as it is simply an imperial 
title, like Pharaoh, or Agag, which is said to mean, 
according to Sir Henry Rawlinson, ‘Venerable 
King.” It is. noteworthy that in Ezra iv. 6 
Cambyses is called by this name, while in Dan. 
ix. I it is applied, in all probability, to Cyaxares. 
The fact that Amestris was reported to be cruel 
and bloodthirsty would not necessarily militate 
against this view; as it is most unlikely that the 
Persians would think of Esther in any other way, 
after the great slaughter which resulted when 
the enemies of the Jews were routed. She would 
naturally be blamed for the miscarriage of Haman’s 
plan. 

Returning to the Scripture narrative, charming 


22 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


in its simplicity and straightforwardness, we are 
introduced in verse 5 to the stout-hearted Jew 
who is to figure so prominently in future chapters, 
as well as in verse 7, to his beautiful cousin 
Hadassah, or Esther. 

“Now in Shushan the palace there was a certain 
Jew, whose name was Mordecai, the son of Jair, 
the son of Shimei, the son of Kish, a Benjamite; 
who had been carried away from Jerusalem with 
the captivity which had been carried away with 
Jeconiah king of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar the 
king of Babylon had carried away” (vers. 5, 6). 

The Hebrews, and many Christians, have 
gathered from this that Mordecai was a lineal 
descendant of Kish, the father of Israel’s first 
king. Josephus so understood it, for he refers 
to Esther as being “herself of the royal family 
also” (Ant. vi. 1); and as she was cousin to 
Mordecai, both were necessarily of the same lin- 
eage. Kish was, however, a common Hebrew 
name, especially among the Benjamites; but 
standing here, as it does, for the father of a family, 
the presumption is certainly in favor of the above 
view. As we shall see farther on, there would 
appear to be a divine fitness in thus bringing for- 
ward at so crucial a period a member of the failed 
house of Saul. Had that rebellious and obstinate 
king (1 Sam. xv. 22, 23) faithfully performed 
the commandment of the Lord in regard to the 


THE CHOICE OF ESTHER 23 


utter destruction cf Amalek, the book of Esther 
would in all probability never have been written, 
as Israel would never have been exposed to the 
danger therein recorded. We shall see why, 
further on. 

The name Mordecai is said to mean “Little 
man,” and was probably given him for the lack 
of that which made Saul so much admired, namely, 
greatness of stature. 

He must have been very young indeed when 
carried away to Babylon, as the captivity of 
Jeconiah, or Jehoiachin, took place B.c. 599, 
something over eighty years ere our chapter opens. 
This aged patriarch “brought up Hadassah, that 
is, Esther, his uncle’s daughter: for she had neither 
father nor mother, and the maid was fair and 
beautiful: whom Mordecai, when her father and 
mother were dead, took for his own daughter” 
(ver. 7). She, by her grace and beauty, attracted 
the attention of the officers whose business it was 
to find a bride for the king, and she was given 
into the custody of the chamberlain Hegai. ‘And 
the maiden pleased him, and she obtained kindness 
of him; and he speedily gave her her things for 
purification, with such things as belonged to her, 
and seven maidens, which were meet to be given 
her, out of the king’s house: and he preferred her 
and her maids unto the best place of the 
women” (ver. 9). 


24 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


It was a strange position surely for a Jewish 
maiden to occupy, in marked contrast with Moses, 
in whom, however, she no doubt gloried. He, 
picked up as a waif, to be called the son of 
Pharaoh’s daughter, by faith relinquished this 
high place, “‘choosing rather to suffer affliction with 
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures 
of sin for a season.” As one has remarked, “Provi- 
dence had placed him in Pharaoh’s house, but 
faith took him out of it.’ With Esther it was 
otherwise. There can be no question that her posi- 
tion was entirely opposed to the word of God. 
Providence might seem to favor her, but faith 
would assuredly have led her at once to declare 
herself as a despised Jewess, one of the afflicted 
people of Jehovah. This she does not do, Mordecai 
having expressly urged her to carefully conceal 
it. “Esther had not showed her people nor her 
kindred: for Mordecai had charged her that she 
should not show it” (ver. 10). Faithful above 
many, Mordecai yet had not fully entered into God’s 
mind in regard to the complete separation of His 
people from the nations. The law expressly for- 
bade the giving of the daughters of Israel in 
marriage to the Gentiles; but it is very evident 
that both Mordecai and Esther thought they saw 
in the proposed union a means of blessing to their 
people. And so, indeed, it proved to be; but this 


THE CHOICE OF ESTHER 25 


by no means disannulled or made of none effect 
the word of God. 

In the same way people reason concerning much 
that goes on in our day. It is seldom that Chris- 
tians are found who will refuse everything that is 
contrary to the Scriptures, even though it seem 
to be the means of accomplishing much good. But 
to walk in the truth is of more importance than 
busy activity. 

Take the question of female ministry as an 
example. We have often been asked concerning 
the public ministry of women, “If not of God, 
how is it that He so frequently blesses it to the 
salvation of souls? Many women occupying the 
public platform as teachers and preachers are 
assuredly blessed of God: does He not therefore 
set the seal of His approval upon their position?” 
Admitting the premise, which may not always be 
before God as it appears to man, the conclusion 
by no means follows. Clearly and unmistakably 
the Holy Ghost has said, “I suffer not a woman 
to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, 
but to be in silence” (I Tim. ii. 12). And again, 
“Let your women keep silence in the churches 
(assemblies) ; for it is not permitted unto them 
to speak; but they are commanded to be under 
obedience, as also saith the law. And if they 
will learn anything, let them ask their husbands 


26 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


at home: for it is a shame for women to speak 
in the church” (I Cor. xiv. 34, 35). Then, sol- 
emnly, he adds in verse 37, “If any man think 
himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him ac- 
knowledge that the things that I write unto 
you are the commandments of the Lord.” Here 
is the unerring word of God upon the subject. 
If that Word is violated, and still blessing re- 
sults, what does it prove? That God _ has 
changed His mind, or ignores, and would have 
us ignore, His own Word? Ah, no! What 
then? Simply that He is sovereign, and uses 
His truth wherever proclaimed, and by whom- 
soever; but the judgment-seat of Christ will 
manifest all that was contrary to His mind. 

We knew of a man saved in a Roman Catholic 
church while an ungodly priest, as his after-life 
proved, was reading the gospel for the day from 
Luke xv. Are we therefore to reason that the 
Roman priesthood is according to God_ because 
He sets the seal of blessing upon His Word used 
by one of them? Every unprejudiced mind will 
say, No! We give Him glory that, in spite of all 
the failure and disorder of Christendom, His 
love is so great that it breaks every barrier, and 
reaches men and women in their deep, deep need 
by any and all means whereby He can make 
Himself known; but we deprecate all disobedience 
to Him as sin. 


THE CHOICE OF ESTHER 27 


This principle apprehended in the soul will save 
from much confusion of mind. Had Mordecai 
apprehended it, he would never have counseled his 
cousin as he did. The word of God was ignored. 
That He deigned to use the ignorers of it in blessing 
‘o His people was an act of pure grace. 

In marked contrast with Esther's course is 
that of another Israelitish captive—the little 
maid of 2 Kings v, who waited upon Naaman’s 
wife. Her sphere was much more circumscribed, 
Lut how faithfully she glorified God in it! “A 
word spoken in season, how good is it!’ Such 
was her testimony to her heathen mistress, and 
so wonderfully did God own and bless it that 
it brought a proud Syrian captain to confess 
Israel’s God as the only. true God, whom alone 
he would henceforth serve. Oh for grace thus 
to buy up opportunities and to use them to His 
glory while ourselves walking in singleness of 
heart in the path marked out in the Scriptures 
of truth! 

To return to Esther: Daily Mordecai walked 
before the court of the house of the women to 
learn if all was well with her. One after an- 
other, the maidens were presented to the king, 
each vying with the other in the effort to add to 
her natural charms by means of the sweet odors 
and other preparations given her. Esther—to 
her credit be it noted—disdained all these things, 


28 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


save what were officially appointed, and when she 
was presented to the king, “the king loved Esther 
above all the women, and she obtained grace and 
favor in his sight more than all the virgins; so 
that he set the royal crown upon her head, and made 
her queen instead of Vashti” (ver. 17). A signal 
honor, doubtless, but how low had she stooped 
to obtain it! Haw had she lost that character of 
holy separatica to Jehovah which should ever 
have been hers! How truly was she degraded in 
her very exaltation! The favored wife among 
many, and her lord an uncircumcised Gentile! 
How low had the nation fallen when Mordecai, 
one of the noblest of them all, could rejoice in 
such a dubious honor being accorded her! And 
how low spiritually must the Church be, to seek, 
as she does, the patronage of the world! This 
can only be purchased by the loss of the holiness 
and separate character enjoined by the word of 
God. Such is the lesson we would seek to im- 
press upon our reader’s conscience. Far better 
had it been for Esther to have been poor and 
unknown, yet cleaving to the Lord her God 
among the returned captives at Jerusalem, than 
to be thus exalted in the house of the conqueror. 
And so to-day; far better to be little and despised 
in the eyes of a haughty world, and an equally 
haughty Christendom, while seeking to carry out 
the truth as to the Christian’s heaveMly calling, 


THE CHOICE OF ESTHER 29° 


than, through forgetting this, to be made much 
of by those “whose glory is in their shame; who 
mind earthly things.” This is a snare against 
which the Lord’s separated people need to be 
specially warned to-day. The word of Jehovah 
to Jeremiah should be often called to mind: “If 
thou return, then will I bring thee again, and thou 
shalt stand before Me: and if thou take forth the 
precious from the vile, thou shalt be as My mouth: 
let them return unto thee; but return not thou 
unto them’ (Jer. xv. IQ). ; 

The present is a time of great sweeping-away of 
the ancient landmarks. It is a day of marked in- 
difference to evil—of chronic inability to try the 
things that differ. Let us not be carried away with 
the tide, but faithfully guard the treasure committed 
to us, and spurn the patronage of that which is so 
obnoxious to God. 

The account of Esther’s marriage-feast is but 
sorrowful reading ir one be able to detect the sad de- 
parture from the Word which it indicates. ‘Then 
the king made a great feast unto all his princes and 
his servants, even Esther’s feast; and he made a re- 
lease to the provinces, and gave gifts according to 
the state of the king’ (ver. 18). It would seem 
that Mordecai too was advanced to a position of 
trust; for in the next verse we learn that “when the 
virgins were gathered together the second time, then 
Mordecai sat in the king’s gate,” which implies that 


30 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


he became a petty judge, according to the Oriental 
manner of expressing it. One is reminded of 
“righteous Lot,’ who sat in the gate of Sodom; and 
of how many other dear children of God since, who 
have sought and obtained positions of power and in- 
fluence in this poor “Christless world,’ hoping 
thereby to be used in its improvement, only to be 
bitterly disappointed at last, besides being degraded 
themselves. 

Significantly, the next verse tells us again that 
“Esther had not showed her kindred nor her people, 
as Mordecai had charged her; for Esther did the 
commandment of Mordecai, like as when she was 
brought up with him” (ver. 20). 

This, no doubt, would be considered good policy 
on Mordecai’s part, and lovely obedience in Esther, 
but it was real unfaithfulness to God, often dupli- 
cated in our own times. What a contrast with 
Ruth, the converted Moabitess! “Thy people shall 
be my people, and thy God my God” is her bright 
confession. How much more honoring to the Lord 
than the shrewdness of Mordecai and Esther! 

In the last three verses of our chapier an event 
is recorded which becomes of grave importance 
farther on in the book. “In those days, while 
Mordecai sat in the kimg’s gate, two of the king’s 
chamberlains, Bigthan and Teresh, of those which 
kept the door, were wroth, and sought to lay hands 
on the king Ahasuerus. And the thing was knowr 


THE CHOICE OF ESTHER 31 


to Mordecai, who told it unto Esther the queen; 
and Esther certified the king thereof in Mordecai’s 
name. And when inquisition was made of the 
matter, it was found out; therefore they were both 
hanged on a tree: and it was written in the book 
of the chronicles before the king” (vers. 21-23). 

Although in an unscriptural position, God, who 
knows the heart of .His servant, who sees in 
Mordecai and Esther true lovers of Israel, will use 
them signally for His own ends of good to His 
people, whom He truly loved. If they cover 
their nationality, and shame Him so that He hides 
His name too, He will make them nevertheless 
the instruments of His providence. Mordecai 
becomes the means by which a plot against the life 
of the king is thwarted. But for the present no 
notice is taken of him. The conspirators are 
hanged, the service of Mordecai is recorded in the 
records of the kingdom, but he himself is, appar- 
ently, forgotten. Such is the favor of this world! 
In a darker hour, however, One, in whose hand 
is a sleepless night of the king, shall see that the 
overlooked service shall be brought to the monarch’s 
attention, and turn it to account for deliverance 
of that people for whose care His eyes never 
slumber. 

It is of all importance that the saint should 
ever remember that “all things work together for 
good to them that love God, who are the called 


32 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


<< 


according to His purpose.” There may be times 
when God seems to have forgotten; when clouds 
are dark; when one is allowed to be neglected, 
unjustly treated, or coldly set at nought. But rest 
assured all is naked and open before Him with 
whom we have to do. Every purpose shall be 
manifested in its season; and all at last shall be 
cause for eternal thanksgivings. 


CHAPTER III 


THE WRATH OF THE AMALEKITE, AND THE 
DECREE OF DOOM 


AMAN is now brought upon the scene, who 

occupies a large place in the book, and who 
is execrated by all Hebrews to this day: “Haman, 
the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the Jews’ 
enemy,” is his significant title. When his name is 
mentioned even now, orthodox Jews spit and curse 
him, so hateful is his memory. 

“After these things did king Ahasuerus pro- 
mote Haman, the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, 
and advanced him, and set his seat above all the 
princes that were with him” (ver. 1). Agag was 
the name given to the kings of Amalek, the people 
“against whom the Lord hath indignation forever.” 
Haman, then, is a royal Amalekite—the last of 
his proud house to occupy a position of influence 
and power; for with his death, and that of his 
ten sons, the name of Amalek, according to Jeho- 
vah’s word, is blotted out from under heaven. 

In order to understand the reason for Morde- 
cai’s unyielding attitude in regard to Haman, it 
will be necessary to look into the history of this 
warlike and impious people. 

33 


34 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


In Gen. xxxvi. 12 we find the origin of Amalek, 
the progenitor of the tribe afterwards bearing his 
name. “And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz, 
Esau’s son; and she bare to Eliphaz Amalek.” See 
also 1 Chron. i. 36. 

Amalek, then, sprang from Esau, which is Edom. 
Esau is ever a type of the flesh. Even ere the 
birth of the twins Esau and Jacob, they struggled 
together—picture of the flesh lusting against the 
Spirit and the Spirit against the flesh. Esau is 
the first-born, and then Jacob; for “that is not first 
which is spiritual, but that which is natural; and 
afterward that which is spiritual” (1 Cor. xv. 46). 

This is again and again set forth in Scripture, 
the first-born being set aside to make room for 
one who might stand for or set forth the Second 
Man. Cain is set aside, and Abel, revived in Seth, 
is given the pre-eminent place. Ishmael must be 
cast out that Isaac be honored. Manasseh, too, 
gives way to Ephraim, as Joseph had been given 
the place of the first-born in preference to Reuben. 

The author of the notes in the Numerical Bible 
has pointed out the close similarity in sound and 
meaning between Adam and Edom. Edom is but 
old Adam revived, and from him Amalek springs. 

What, then, comes from the flesh? Only un- 
godly lusts and passions. Of these Amalek is 
the type. “Among whom we all had our con- 
versation in times past in the lusts of our flesh, 


THE WRATH OF THE AMALEKITE 35 


fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind; 
and were by nature the children of wrath, even 
as others’ (Eph. ii. 3). 

In Gen. xiv. 7 we first read of the land of the 
Amalekites, the valleys of southern Palestine, in- 
volved in the great conflicts of the Elamite ascend- 
ancy. Who the inhabitants were at that time we 
know not, but the land is called by the name of the 
war-like tribe who occupied it at the time Moses 
wrote the record. : 

It is when next mentioned that we see their true 
character. In the seventeenth chapter of Exodus 
they appear as the first of Israel’s foes, and they 
proved a most persistent enemy ever after. God 
had but recently delivered His people from the cruel 
Egyptian oppressor. Sheltered by blood, they had 
eaten the passover with holy confidence while the 
Lord judged the gods of Egypt and smote the 
first-born of those who despised His word. Re- 
deemed by power, they had been led in triumph 
through the Red Sea, and on the eastern shore 
they sang their song of gladness as they beheld the 
power of the enemy broken, and knew that they 
were Jehovah’s purchased people. He took them 
under His own care, and made Himself respon- 
sible for all their needs. The waters of Marah 
He sweetened, and refreshed them beneath Elim’s 
shade. He gave them bread from heaven, and 
quails when they asked for flesh. 


36 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


But they failed to realize who it was with whom 
they had to do. When they pitched in Rephidim, 
“there was no water for the people to drink.’ They 
murmured against Moses, and charged him with 
having brought them out to slay them with 
thirst. But God, ever acting in pure grace, until, 
in their self-confidence, they put themselves under 
law, said unto Moses, “Go on before the people, 
and take with thee of the elders of Israel; and thy 
rod, wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thy 
hand, and go. Behold, I will stand before thee 
there upon the rock in Horeb; and thou shalt smite 
the rock, and there shall come water out of it, that 
the people may drink. And Moses did so in the 
sight of the elders of Israel” (Ex. xvii. 5, 6). 

A lovely picture, surely, and easily understood 
in the light of two New Testament Scriptures. 
“That Rock was Christ” (1 Cor. x. 4). “Jesus 
stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him 
come unto Me and drink. ... But this spake He 
of the Spirit, which they that believe on Him should 
receive: for the Holy Ghost was not yet given; 
because that Jesus was not yet glorified’? (John vii, 
37, 39). The cross had to come in ere He could 
be glorified as man. That blessed Rock had te be 
smitten with the rod of judgment before the Holy 
Spirit could come to satisfy and fill all who would 
drink. Of this it is that mystic scene at Horeb 
speaks. Israel in type are drinking of the living 


THE WRATH OF THE AMALEKITE 37 


waters. Surely their troubles are over now for- 
ever! Ah, it should have been; but, alas, it was 
not so. It is at this moment that we read, “Then 
came Amalek and fought with Israel in Rephidim.” 
And so the lusts of the flesk would ever hinder 
the believer’s enjoyment of the refreshing influences 
of the Holy Spirit. The Christian is beset by a 
tireless and hateful foe who makes it his busi- 
ness to defraud him, if possible, of the blessing 
that is rightfully his. 

It is to this the word in-Gal. v. 16, EV reierss 
“This I say, then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall 
not fulfill the lust of the flesh. For the flesh lusteth 
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh: 
and these are contrary the one to the other; so 
that ye might not (literal rendering) do the things 
that ye would.” 

How will the saint thus beset find deliverance 
and victory? Only by mortifying his members 
that are upon the earth. But this he cannot do in 
his own power. And so Moses says to Joshua, 
“Choose us out men, and go out, and fight with 
Amalek: to-morrow I will stand on the top of the 
hill, with the rod of God in my hand.” Beautiful 
picture, surely, of our great Intercessor above, 
“who ever liveth to make intercession for us.” 
Aaron and Hur had to hold up the hands of Moses, 
but our blessed Lord needs none to thus assist Him. 
His advocacy is ever going on. His intercessions 


38 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


for His saints are unfailing, and He is thus able to 
save evermore all who come unto God by Him. 
“This is the victory that overcometh the world, 
even our faith’ (1 John v. 4). 

It was on this first occasion of Amalek’s ha- 
tred and attack against His people that “the Lord 
said unto Moses, Write this for a memorial in a 
book, and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua: for 
I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek 
from under heaven. And Moses built an altar, 
and called the name of it Jehovah-nissi: for he 
said, Because of the hand upon the throne of Jah, 
Jehovah will have war with Amalek from generation 
to generation” (Ex. xvii. 14-16—marginal read- 
ing). This was Amalek’s awful sin. He would, 
if possible, tear Jehovah from His throne, and 
usurp His authority. So would the fleshly lusts, 
which war against the soul, dethrone the Holy One 
and reign in His stead. 

In Num. xiv. 44, 45 Israel disobeyed the word 
of the Lord, and presumed to go up unto the 
hill-top in their own strength to meet their foes. 
“Then the Amalekites came down... and dis- 
comfited them, even unto Hormah.”’ The moment 
a saint gets out of God’s order he exposes himself 
to the power of the flesh. There is no safety 
save in obedience to the Word. 

Balaam foretells the doom of this haughty foe 
in Num, xxiv. 20. “When he looked on Amalek, 


THE WRATH OF THE AMALEKITE 39 


he took up his parable, and said, Amalek was the 
first of the nations; but his latter end shall be that 
he perish forever.” Moses too, in his last charge 
to the people, says, “Remember what Amalek did 
unto thee by the way, when ye were come forth 
out of Egypt; how he met the hindmost of thee, 
even all that were feeble behind thee” (it is ever 
such who are a prey to the lusts of the flesh), 
“when thou wast weary; and he feared not God. 
Therefore it shall be . . . that thou shalt blot out 
the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven; 
THOU SHALT NOT FORGET 17” (Deut. xxv. 17-19). 

We will not refer at any length to the woes 
brought upon Israel by Amalek in the days of 
the Judges, only bidding the reader notice that 
whenever the people rose up in the energy of 
faith and the lowliness of self-judgment, all Am- 
alek’s power was broken. It will be a profitable 
exercise to read at leisure and carefully study 
Judges v., vi., and x, on this subject. 

In connection with the commission given to king 
Saul at the mouth of Samuel, in 1 Sam. xv, we 
get the inspired account of God’s command and 
Saul’s failure to carry it out. It is most instruc- 
tive, as well as of special interest, in connection 
with our study of the book of Esther. Saul was 
commanded to “go and smite Amalek, and utterly 
destroy ali that they have, and spare them not.” 

But, alas, though the young king gained a won- 


40 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


derful victory, and “utterly destroyed all the 
people with the edge of the sword,” he spared 
Agag; and Haman is witness that he likewise failed 
to exterminate the rest df the royal family. Had 
Saul been true to God, and yielded implicit obedi- 
ence to His Word, Haman could never have 
appeared on the scene. Saul’s unfaithfulness made 
the plot of “the Jew’s enemy”’ possible, and exposed 
the chosen nation to destruction. What a triumph 
for Satan it would have been if, in place of Amalek’s 
“utter destruction,” Israel had been rooted ou+ from 
among the nations! 

There is a solemn lesson here. Sin unjudged, 
evil propensities unmortified, will result in grave 
trouble later. Is the reader conscious of indulging 
some fleshly desire—something, perhaps, that it 
seems hard to put to death, so dear is it to him, 
and, withal, so insignificant? Rest assured, it will 
be the cause of serious disaster if unjudged. It 
may go on unnoticed for years, but the day will 
come when it, like Haman, will rise in its power; 
and well it shall be then if it be not the cause of 
moral and spiritual shipwreck. Is it a young be- 
liever who sees these lines? Remember the word 
of the Holy Spirit to Timothy, “Flee also youthful 
lusts.” Any unholy desire tolerated in the soul 
must work eventually to the undoing of your 
discipleship, to the breaking-down of your testi- 
mony. 


THE WRATH OF THE AMALEKITE 4I 


Samuel showed Agag no mercy; but some of 
his children—perhaps only one, and that one, may- 
hap, a weak and puny infant—escaped him; and 
behold, nearly six hundred years later, a royal 
Amalekite and a descendant of the house of Kish, 
the father of king Saul, confront each other! 

Haman is advanced before all the princes, for 
well the flesh knows how to work its way to the 
front. All fall down before him and own his 
authority, save one unyielding old man, insignif- 
icant in stature and unknown among the great. 
“And all the king’s servants, that were in the king’s 
gate, bowed and reverenced Haman: for the king 
had so commanded concerning him. But Mordecai 
bowed not, nor did him reverence’ (ver. 2). 

Never was Mordecai’s moral elevation higher 
than at this moment. He is no longer the crafty, 
politic man of chapter two. He shines forth as 
a man who takes his stand upon the word of the 
Eternal, let the consequences be what they may. 
There is no longer a tendency to hide his people and 
his kindred. He lets all know that heisa Jew. As 
such he cannot bow to the blatant enemy of Jehovah. 
The Lord hath indignation against Amalek. So 
also, in substance, says Mordecai. He sides with 
God. From now on he is a character delightful 
to contemplate. 

“Then the king’s servants, which were in the 
king’s gate, said unto Mordecai, Why trans- 


42 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


gressest thou the king’s commandment?” (ver. 3). 
To them it seems the essence of foolhardiness and 
stubbornness. We read not of any other, even of 
his own nation, so unyielding as he. Why not, 
at least, incline his head? Why not go with the 
crowd? Why make himself so unpleasantly con- 
spicuous by his peculiar obstinacy? Better men than 
he, perhaps, bowed to Haman, the king’s prime 
minister. Why should he be too narrow-minded 
to do so? To all this Mordecai might have re- 
plied, God has spoken. He declares He will have 
indignation against Amalek forever. I side with 
Him. It matters not what others do, I have to 
go by what I find written in the book. 

“Now it came to pass, when they spake daily 
unty him, and he harkened not unto them, that 
they told Haman, to see whether Mordecat’s matters 
would stand; for he had told them that he was a 
Jew’ (ver. 4). There is no evasion now: all is 
out at last. The judge in the king’s gate is one 
of the despised captives, and he will risk the loss 
of name and station, yea, of life itself, rather than 
be unfaithful to the truth of God. 

The king’s servants desire to see if Mordecai’s 
matters will stand. Of course they will stand, for 
does not he stand with and for God, who “is able 
to make him stand?” None ever falls who acts 
for God. His power is over all. He may permit 
testing and trial, but ‘‘whatsoever is born of God 


THE WRATH OF THE AMALEKITE 43 


overcometh the world.” He is in the right who 
sides with God. 

When Haman hears of the slight thus put 
upon him, he is “full of wrath.” He must have 
his revenge on the impudent Jew who thus refuses 
to acknowledge his prestige: but “he thought scorn 
to lay hands on Mordecai alone; for they had 
showed him the people of Mordecai: wherefore 
Haman sought to destroy all the Jews that were 
throughout the whole kingdom of Ahasuerus, even 
the people of Mordecai’ (vers. 5, 6). What a 
mess had the obstinate little Jew made of it all 
now! If he must have such strong convictions, 
why could he not keep them to himself, and, by 
getting out of Haman’s way, refrain from making 
himself and all his people obnoxious to him? 
Could not he conform to the customs of the times? 
Did he not know that things were different now 
from what they were in the days of Moses, of the 
Judges, and of Samuel? Is not this the way men 
reason to-day? And, doubtless, many so reasoned in 
the times of Mordecai: but to all he could have given 
the triumphant answer, It is my place to obey God, 
and to honor His Word. I leave all consequences 
with Him. 

This is what characterizes ever the man of God 
in all dispensations. It was this spirit that sus- 
tained Noah in testimony against a corrupt, sin- 
loving world as he built his great ship on dry land. 


44 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


In this energy of faith Moses forsook Egypt; 
Caleb cried, “We are well able to overcome” ; Gideon 
went forth to war with lamps and pitchers; David 
fought an armored giant with a shepherd’s sling 
and stones; Jehoshaphat set singers in the van of 
his army where others would have set mounted 
troops; Daniel opened his windows to pray to the 
God of heaven; and Paul lived his life of devotion 
to the crucified, exalted Lord, and refused to con- 
form to the demands of the men of his day and 
age. In this spirit, too, of subjection to revealed 
truth, Athanasius suffered banishment rather than 
bow to the Arianism of the times; Savonarola 
defied the licentious, gold-hoarding officials of 
church and state; Luther uttered his mighty “No!” 
in the presence of the emperor, the bishops and 
grandees of the empire; Farel tossed venerated im- 
ages into the river in the midst of furious priests 
and populace; Knox caused a queen to tremble; 
and the Covenanters chose rather to be hunted as 
the beasts of the field than own the spiritual 
authority of degenerate kings and bishops; and a 
mighty host, “of whom the world was not worthy,” 
refused to bow the knee or bend the neck to un- 
scriptural, superstitious, and human _ legislation, 
making of none effect the word of God. 

Men of this stamp are certain to be dubbed by 
the time-serving trucklers to the present age as 
schismatics, separatists, and what not. But let 


THE WRATH OF THE AMALEKITE 45 


such be content to know that God is pleased, and 
they fear not the frown, and court not the approval, 
of flesh and blood. 

Haman’s colossal scheme for the annihilation 
of the Jewish race is worthy of its great instiga- 
tor, that old serpent, which is the devil and Satan. 
The proud Agagite was but a mere puppet in his 
hands. Haman desired to obtain revenge for the 
slight put upon his dignity: the devil sought to 
make void the promises of God. The awful foe 
of God and man knew well that Jehovah had de- 
clared that from David’s house should arise the 
One who was to bruise his head—One who is 
to “destroy him that had the power of death, that 
is, the devil, and deliver those who, through fear 
of death, were all their lifetime subject to bondage.” 
That nation destroyed, the promised Deliverer 
could not appear, and the word of God would be 
rendered null and void. Again and again had he 
sought to accomplish this. When the hand of Saul 
threw the javelin at the youthful David, it was 
Satan who inspired it, but God who protected the 
minstrel from the blow, that he might live to be 
the conservator of the promise. When the wicked 
queen Athaliah sought to destroy all the seed royal, 
it was the devil who put the awful thought in 
her mind, but God who nourished the infant Joash 
in the temple courts. 

And so it was the same foul spirit now who 


46 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


would sacrifice a nation to prevent the Redeemer’s 
advent; as in the day when that long-predicted 
event had actually occurred, he sought, through 
Herod, to destroy Him in His infancy by slaying 
the babes of Bethlehem, only to be outwitted once 
more; for God directed His Son to a distant 
land. 

Some idea of Haman’s wealth and influence can 
be gained from the intimacy manifested betwixt 
him and the king in verses 8 to 11, as also the 
immense amount of silver he offered for the accomp- 
lishment of his cherished plans: ten thousand talents 
in that age having about the value of twenty millions 
of dollars now. 

His superstition too is evidenced in verse 7. 
Like many a tyrant before, and since, he was a 
great believer in lucky and unlucky days; so he 
had the wise men—the traffickers in the credulity 
of ambitious courtiers—to cast lots, called in 
Hebrew Pur, to determine a suited day when all 
signs would be propitious for the carrying out of 
his colossal massacre. Armed with what he con- 
sidered to be the favor of the gods (for it is un- 
likely that he, like the Persians, was a monotheist), 
he entered the king’s presence, and, affecting 
concern for the interests of the state, he says, “There 
is a certain people scattered abroad and dispersed 
among the people in all the provinces of thy 
kingdom; and their laws are diverse from 


THE WRATH OF THE AMALEKITE 47 


all people; neither keep they the king’s laws: 
therefore it is not for the king’s profit to suffer 
them.”’ And, as though in a burst of magnanimity, 
he offers to pay ten thousand talents of silver to 
rid the king of subjects so objectionable. Care- 
lessly, without so much as inquiring the name of the 
race referred to, Ahasuerus, with that disregard 
of human life so common in Xerxes, “took his 
ring from his hand, and gave it unto Haman the 
son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the Jews’ enemy,” 
saying, as he did so, “The silver is given to thee, the 
people also, to do with them as it seemeth good to 
thee” (vers. 8-11). 

Acting on this, Haman loses no time, but im- 
mediately summons the king’s scribes, and issues a 
proclamation, sealed with the king’s ring, to be 
“sent by posts into all the king’s provinces, to des- 
troy, to kill, and to cause to perish, all Jews, both 
young and old, little children and women, in one day, 
even upon the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, 
which is the month Adar” (the date determined 
by the lot), “and to take the spoil of the people for 
a prey” (ver. 13). Thus had the entire nation been 
devoted to destruction, and under the unalterable 
laws of the Medes and Persians—the same laws 
that left Vashti still a lonely widow, and which 
would brook of no reversal. 

To every people the news went forth, urging 
them to be ready against that day. “And the 


48 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


King and Haman,” as though the massacre of 
myriads had not just been planned and sealed, “sat 
down to drink; but the city Shushan was perplexed” 
Cvereg). 


CilAL Pens 
IN SACKCLOTH AND ASHES 


66 HEN Mordecai perceived all that was 

done, Mordecai rent his clothes, and put 
on sackcloth and ashes, and went out into the midst 
of the city, and cried with a loud and bitter cry; and 
came even before the king’s gate: for none might 
enter into the king’s gate clothed with sackcloth. 
And in every province whithersoever the king’s com- 
mandment and his decree came, there was a great 
mourning among the Jews, and fasting, and weep- 
ing, and wailing; and many lay in sackcloth and, 
ashes” (vers. I-3). 

In such solemn manner was the decree received 
by the condemned Jews. To Haman, and to the 
king, the slaughter of a nation for the gratification 
of a prince’s vanity might be a thing indifferent; 
but to the people thus devoted, it was the cause 
of heartrending scenes. They believed the word of 
Ahasuerus. The proclamation was sealed with the 
royal signet. They knew they were under sentence 
of death, and their hearts were filled with grief 
and anguish. In this, how like the condition of 
awakened sinners! All unsaved men are under a 

49 


50 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


far worse condemnation than that which darkened 
the sky of every Jew in the Persian dominions. 
Yea, more: because “all have sinned and come short 
of the glory of God” that condemnation is, unlike 
the present instance, an intrinsically righteous one. 
Every honest man must side with the dying robber 
on the cross, and confess, “We indeed justly!” 
“Death passed upon all men, because all have 
sinned.” Therefore “it is appointed unto men 
once to die, and after this the judgment.” 

If this be really true, how is it that men and 
women in general! are so indifferent to the solemn 
fact? Alas, alas! though God has given His 
Word, men will not believe it. Wherever that 
Word is believed the result is prostration of soul 
before the offended Majesty in the heavens, as in 
the case of the repentant publican, who cried from 
the depths of an anguished heart, ‘“O God, be mer- 
ciful to me, a sinner!’ It is because men do not 
believe God they can go on so carelessly with the 
dark clouds of doom gathering ever in greater 
density directly over their heads. 

is my reader one of this class? If so, I pray 
you, receive the testimony of God against yourself 
ere the judgment falls. You have grievously 
sinned, and righteously fallen under the ban of 
the Holy One. He has published broadcast the 
proclamation, “Cursed is every one that contin- 
ueth not in all things that are written in the book 


IN SACKCLOTH AND ASHES 51 


of the law to do them.” You have not so continued. 
Therefore you are under the curse! Do not, I 
beg of you, try to forget it. How foolish would 
it have been for the Jews in the days of Esther 
to have instituted a series of games and popular 
amusements in order to banish from their minds 
the awful fact that their death-warrant had been 
signed, and was about to be put into execution! In 
such manner did the citizens of infidel Paris act 
in the days of the plague. Dancing, revelling and 
debauchery held full sway. The gay carnival went 
on as though all was well; but it was only the 
effort of a terror-stricken people to forget the 
presence of the dreaded and insidious foe. Hun- 
dreds fell, stricken on the ball-room floor; hundreds 
more dropped, grotesquely masked, amid the gayety 
of the romping crowds upon the streets. The fun 
and the forced merriment did not stay the hand 
of the destroyer; the death-cart ever followed the 
carnival parade! And in some such foolish manner 
do men, over whose heads eternal judgment hangs, 
act every day. Oh, the folly of it! Better far 
to join with Mordecai and his weeping country- 
men, and wear the sackcloth and ashes of self- 
condemnation. 


“No room for mirth or trifling here, 
For worldly hope or worldly fear, 
If life so soon is gone: 

If now the Judge is at the door, 


52 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


And all mankind must stand before 
The inexorable Throne!” 


“Because there is wrath, beware lest He take 
thee away with His stroke: then a great ransom 
cannot deliver thee’ (Job xxxvi. 18). 

There was no levity on the part of the wailing 
multitude in our chapter. They were in desperate 
earnestness. They wished to be delivered from the 
condemnation. Nothing else would satisfy them. 
Sackcloth and ashes speak of repentance and self- 
judgment. In this garb Mordecai and the Jews 
arrayed themselves. 

“So Esther’s maids and her chamberlains came 
and told it her. Then was the queen exceedingly 
grieved; and she sent raiment to clothe Mordecai, 
and to take away his sackcloth from him: but he 
received it not” (ver. 4). How little Esther en- 
tered into the terrible circumstances! ‘A physician 
of no value,’ she would fain strip her aged cousin 
of the coarse and ugly garb of repentance and 
robe him in some beautiful court attire, as though 
a change of clothing would assuage his grief. But 
are there not many who deal in a similar manner 
with troubled souls to-day? How common is the 
thought that outward reformation, a change of 
habits, will give peace to an anxious soul! O be 
persuaded, dear reader: no religious ceremonies; 
no ordinances, however scriptural in themselves; 
no turning-over of new leaves will ever give a 


IN SACKCLOTH AND ASHES 53 


sinner peace with God. Something more than an 
outward change is required. Mordecai might well 
have cried, Take away your beautiful garments! 
How can they give peace to a man under the death- 
sentence? Does one find delight in fine raiment 
on the gallows? It is deliverance from condemna- 
tion I want, not a mere change of attire. And 
for the sinner to-day there is no true deliverance 
until he sees the blessed truth that Another has 
borne the wrath, endured the condemnation, ex- 
hausted the judgment of God against his sin,—then, 
and then only, does he find rest and peace. 

“Mordecai received it not ;” so the queen, realizing 
at last that his must be a grief she has failed 
to fathom, sends Hatach the chamberlain to him, 
to learn the cause of his strange behavior. “So 
Hatach went forth to Mordecai unto the street of 
the city, which was before the king’s gate. And 
Mordecai told him of all that had happened unto 
him, and of the sum of money that Haman had 
promised to pay to the king’s treasuries for the Jews, 
to destroy them. Also he gave a copy of the writing 
of the decree that was given at Shushan to destroy 
them, to show it unto Esther, and to declare it 
unto her, and to charge her that she should go 
in unto the king, to make supplication unto him, 
and to make request before him for her people. 
And Hatach came and told Esther the words of 
Mordecai” (vers. 6-9). 


54 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


Nothing but the knowledge that he and his people 
are freed from the ban will satisfy the man into. 
whose soul the iron has so deeply entered. Esther 
is furnished with the evidence of the direful state 
of things, and doubtless well understands at last 
why Mordecai wept so bitterly, and why her fine 
raiment had no charm for him. 

He would have her go in before the king and 
supplicate his favor for her afflicted people. She 
is, however, in a dilemma as to this, being her- 
self, although a queen, subject to the iron-clad laws 
of Persian court etiquette. Doubtless genuinely 
distressed, but apparently helpless, she returns 
answer that ‘“‘All the king’s servants, and the people 
of the king’s provinces, do know, that whosoever, 
whether man or woman, shall come unto the king 
into the inner court, who is not called, there is one 
law of his to put him to death, except such to whom 
the king shall hold out the golden sceptre, that he 
may live; but I have not been called to come in unto 
the king these thirty days. And they told to Mor- 
decai Esther’s words” (vers. I1, 12). 

It has evidently not dawned upon her that the 
king’s proclamation, unwittingly, had included 
herself. But so the word ran: “‘All Jews . . . both 
men and women.” She had kept her nationality 
a secret; therefore, unknown even to Haman, she 
had been included in the bloody edict so soon to 
take effect if a means of deliverance is not discov- 


IN SACKCLOTH AND ASHES 55 


ered. She accordingly hesitates about risking her 
life, by going into the dread sovereign’s presence 
uncalled. 

Mordecai replies with spirit: “Think not with 
thyself that thou shalt escape in the king’s house 
more than all the Jews.” Yet, such is his faith at 
this moment in the certainty of God’s counsels that 
he adds, “For if thou altogether holdest thy peace 
at this time, then shall there enlargement and deliv- 
erance arise to the Jews from another place; but 
thou and thy father’s house shall be destroyed: and 
who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom 
for such a time as this?” 

It is a stirring message, and one that has the 
desired effect upon the queen, for she rises in the 
greatness of utter self-abnegation and devotion; 
and, with the sentence of death now in herself, 
“Esther bade them return Mordecai this answer: 
Go, gather together all the Jews that are present 
in Shushan, and fast ye for me, and neither eat 
nor drink three days, night or day: I also and 
my maidens will fast likewise; and so will I go in 
unto the king, which is not according to the law: 
and if I perish, I perish” (vers. 15, 16). 

A greater than Esther not only took His life 
in His hand, but gave that precious life in order 
to deliver all who would confide in Him from 
the curse of the law and the just judgment of an 
outraged God. But though Esther’s action gives 


56 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


us just the faintest hint of this, it is altogether 
admirable as showing on her part a growing moral 
elevation, hitherto unmanifested by her. That her 
confidence is in the unnamed One is clear, else why 
the summons to fasting in the city, and her own 
abstinence in the palace? It is here one is so struck 
by the absence of all reference to prayer, where 
one would naturally expect it. It is as though she 
has a sense in her soul of the unowned condition 
of herself and her people; so nothing is said about 
crying to the God of her fathers. Yet surely He 
heard the unuttered petition of the heart, and an- 
swered it, too, in His own way and time. 

“So Mordecai went his way, and did according 
to all that Esther had commanded him.’ The ap- 
peal is to be made to the One they dare not mention. 
The sequel will show how deep is His concern for 
the chosen nation, 


CHAPTER 


THE SCEPTRE OF GRACE, THE BANQUET, AND 
THE GALLOWS. 


se days of fasting past, the queen ventures 
into the forbidden presence.. “Now it came 
to pass on the third day, that Esther put on her 
royal apparel, and stood in the inner court of the 
king’s house, over against the king’s house: and the 
king sat upon his royal throne in the royal house, 
over against the gate of the house” (ver. 1). The 
die is cast. The queen has practically forfeited 
her life in order to save her people. If the king 
give it back to her it shall be well. She and all 
hers will see in it the evidence of his grace. If not, 
she can but die, and for that she is prepared. 

Her youth and beauty, as well as her confiding 
trust, draw out her lord’s admiration. ‘And it 
was so, when the king saw Esther the queen stand- 
ing in the court, that she obtained favor in his 
sight: and the king held out to Esther the golden 
sceptre that was in his hand. So Esther drew near, 
and touched the top of the sceptre’” (ver. 2). 

Grace is reigning! Of this the sceptre of gold 
speaks. “The king’s heart is in the hand of the 
Lord, as the rivers of water: He turneth it whither- 

57 


58 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


soever He will” (Prov. xxi. 1). He it is who 
has inclined the proud ruler of the Medes and 
Persians to extend the token of his favor to his 
trembling queen. “The most high God ruleth in 
the kingdom of men” (Dan. iv. 25), whether they 
recognize Him or not, and all power is in His 
hand. He has heard the mute prayer of Esther 
and her people, and from henceforth we are to sce 
how He worketh all things according to the counsel 
of His own will, despite every effort of the enemy 
to thwart His purpose. 


“His purposes will ripen fast, 
Unfolding every hour; 

The bud may have a bitter taste, 
But sweet will be the flower.” 


Knowing that nought but some special guerdon 
desired could have brought his favorite wife thus 
unannounced and unsent for into the throne room, 
the king said unto her, “What wilt thou, queen 
Esther? and what is thy request? It shall be even 
given thee to the half of the kingdom” (ver. 3). 
It is as if a blank check signed were handed her, 
reminding us of the many precious assurances of 
the New Testament: “My God shall supply all your 
need according to His riches in glory through Christ 
Jesus,” for “He is able to do exceeding abun- 
dantly above all that we ask or think.’ He, who 
is neither enriched by withholding nor impover- 


THE SCEPTRE OF GRACE 59 


ished by giving, says to each trusting soul, “What 
is thy request?’ And Omnipotence waits upon 
the petitions of His feeble people; and to faith He 
says: “Be it unto thee even as thou wilt.” May 
we have faith to thus enter into and enjoy His 
wondrous bounty. 

Esther is not slow to proffer her request, though 
at first sight it seems a little thing indeed. “And 
Esther answered, If it seem good unto the king, 
let the king and Haman come this day unto the 
banquet that I have prepared for him” (ver. 4). 

There is nothing that so emboldens a soul, 
burdened with anxiety, and desirous of obtaining 
help from another, like a season of communion 
and fellowship. Such a season Esther desires as 
a prelude to making known her real burden. As 
though to cover all suspicion, Haman, whose pres- 
ence must have jarred terribly at such a time, is 
invited with the king. “So the king and Haman 
came to the banquet that Esther had prepared” (ver. 
5). 

In the house of wine the king affirms again his 
promise to his beloved queen: “And the king said 
unto Esther at the banquet of wine, What is thy 
petition? and it shall be granted thee: and what 
is thy request? even to the half of the kingdom it 
shall be performed.” It is, in its measure, like 
the word of the Lord to “His own” at the “banquet 
of wine” in John xiv. 13, 14, after the traitor had 


60 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


gone out: “And whatsoever ye shall ask in My 
name, that will I do, that the Father may be glori- 
fied in the Son. If ye shall ask anything in My 
name I will do it.” The king puts a limit: “even to 
the half of the kingdom.” Our blessed Lord puts 
a limit too: “in My name’—whatever His holy 
name may rightly be attached to. This is the 
only bound He will put to our asking. This, doubt- 
‘ess, is the secret of many unanswered prayers. 
“Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, 
that ye may consume it upon your lusts” (Jas. iv. 3). 
Such prayer cannot have the name of the Lord 
Jesus attached to it. The expression really means, 
by His authority. One says to another, “Do so 
and so in my name.” All understand he means 
as representing, or having the authority of the 
speaker behind him. And so it is in approaching 
the God of all grace in prayer. There is holy 
confidence when the will has been so truly subdued 
that the heart’s only desire is that the Lord may 
be glorified. Then one can ask “in His name,’ 
and He has pledged His Word to do it. 

We do not profess to say that queen Esther’s 
case is any parallel to this. It but gives us the hint: 
and we turn aside from the narrative to press it 
upon the reader’s attention. because of the great 
importance of the subject. 

True prayer is perhaps much rarer than many 
have any idea of. It can only spring from fel- 


THE SCEPTRE OF GRACE 61 


lowship with God in a practical sense. “If ye 
abide in Me and My words abide in you, ye shall 
ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you” 
(John xv. 7). It is for lack of this that the prayer- 
meeting, and the daily season of reading and prayer 
in the home—not to speak of the sacred moments 
which should be spent in the closet with closed 
doors—often degenerate into a mere lifeless form. 
Souls are conscious of some secret sin indulged; 
some unscriptural thing in business or family life 
being persisted in; and of course there cannot be 
real prayer as long as this is the case. One has 
no title to expect an answer from God if walking 
in any forbidden path. May this be deeply im- 
pressed upon our souls! 

It has been sometimes said that “the prayer- 
meeting is the pulse of the assembly,” and we believe 
the expression to be a correct one. A _ sluggish, 
lifeless prayer-meeting is the indication that, what- 
ever the activity otherwise, things are in a very 
low state indeed. It is quite possible to carry on 
gospel and teaching meetings, and to preserve a 
certain amount of order and decorum at the table 
of the Lord, which deceives many into the belief 
that the Holy Spirit is leading; but it is not possible 
truly to pray out of fellowship with God. This is 
especially true of the secret place. Even in the 
meeting set apart for waiting on God, a loquacious, 
self-confident man may be able to deceive himself 


62 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


and others into the impression that his is really 
the prayer of faith; but a few moments spent in 
the presence of God, alone, will show how things 
really stand. There is no liberty, no power; all 
is a weariness to the flesh if the will is not truly 
subject, and the supreme desire of the soul not 
expressed in the words, “Thy will be done.” 

But we return to our narrative. It would ap- 
pear that Esther has not yet that liberty that would 
lead her to plead her case with assurance; so to 
the king’s question she replies, ‘““My petition and 
my request is, if I have found favor in the sight 
of the king, and if it please the king to grant my 
petition, and to perform my request, let the king 
and Haman come to the banquet that I shall pre- 
pare for them, and I will do to-morrow as the king 
hath said” (vers. 7, 8). To this he evidently 
agrees; but what momentous consequences would 
hang upon that twenty-four hours’ delay! Satan, 
knowing that his time is short, and realizing that 
if his unholy purpose is to be carried out something 
must at once be done, contrives to bring about 
if possible the death of Mordecai at least, ere Esther 
has the appointed opportunity to ask his life with 
the rest. 

“Then went Haman forth that day joyful and 
with a glad heart: but when Haman saw Mor- 
decai in the king’s gate that he stood not up, nor 
moved for him, he was full of indignation against 


THE SCEPTRE OF GRACE 63 


Mordecai” (ver. 9). The apparently triumphant 
Amalekite emerges in greater hauteur than ever 
from the banqueting house. His cup of earthly 
glory seems filled to the brim. Who so honored 
as he? He, alone of all the king’s favorites, had 
been admitted to the queen’s presence. But there 
is one bitter ingredient in that so full goblet. Mor- 
decai, the sackcloth-covered Jew, pays him no atten- 
tion, whatever, as he passes by. The flesh cannot 
brook being thus despised. He is deeply grieved 
and filled with wrath against the only man who 
failed to do him honor. “Nevertheless Haman 
refrained himself: and when he came home, he sent 
and called for his friends, and Zeresh his wife, and 
Haman told them of the glory of his riches, and 
the multitude of his children, and all the things 
wherein the king had promoted him, and how he 
had advanced him above the princes and servants 
of the king” (vers. 10, 11). What a disgusting 
exhibition of vanity and pride! Surely Haman 
is now “set in slippery places.” Even the heathen, 
noting how soon, in the moral government of the 
universe, disaster followed on unbounded self-suff- 
ciency and inordinate self-esteem, had coined the 
proverb, “Whom the gods would destroy they first 
make mad.’ And the one true God had, long ere 
Haman’s day, inspired a man to write, “Pride goeth 
before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a 
fall; and “when pride cometh, then cometh shame: 


64 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


but with the lowly is wisdom” (Prov. xvi. 18 and 
1 2): 

With characteristic ‘conceit the vainglorious 
premier keeps .what he considers the choicest 
morsel to the last. “Haman said moreover, Yea, 
Esther the queen did let no man come in with the 
king unto the banquet that she had prepared, but 
myself; and to-morrow am | invited unto her also 
with the king.” But he cannot conceal his wounded 
vanity in connection with the incident at the gate, 
for he adds bitterly, “Yet all this availeth me 
nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting 
at the king’s gate” (vers. 12, I3). 

In the eyes of his satellites and his equally proud 
and vindictive wife, this is a matter that can readily 
be disposed of. Why should he wait the appointed 
time for the destruction of Mordecai with the rest 
of the Jews? Has he not just shown that none 
have such influence with the king as he? Why 
not, on some trumped-up pretext, despatch the 
insolent Hebrew at once? “Then said Zeresh his 
wife, and all his friends unto him, Let a gallows 
be made fifty cubits high, and to-morrow speak thou 
unto the king that Mordecai may be hanged thereon: 
then go thou in merrily with the king unto the ban- 
quet. And the thing pleased Haman; and he caused 
the gallows to be made” (ver. 14). 

Fifty cubits would be about eighty feet: rather 
unduly high, one would think, for one insignificant, 


THE SCEPTRE OF GRACE 65 


undersized Jew to swing from; but Haman will pub- 
lish his revenge abroad and thus give an object-les- 
son to any other who would dare defy the man of 
the hour. 

And so our chapter closes, with the last nails be- 
ing driven in the gallows in Haman’s court, while 
Mordecai is all unaware of the fate which is purposed 
to be meted out to him on the morrow; and a score 
of hours have yet to run ere the queen will prefer her 
request before the king. 

“Hath God forgotten to be gracious! ?” 


CHAPTER VI 
A SLEEPLESS NIGHT, AND iTS RESULTS 


T has been well said that “although the name of 

God is not in this book, the hand of God is plainly 
to be seen throughout.’ Nowhere is this more 
clearly manifested than in the present chapter, every 
verse of which attests His overruling providence 
and His unfailing love and care for His people, in 
a wrong place though they were. He is behind the 
scenes, it is true; but, to use the expression of an- 
other, He moves all the scenes that He is behind. 

It is not until the last night that He interferes: 


“God never is before His time, 
And never is behind.” 


To all appearances, Satan was to have everything 
his own way, at least so far as Mordecai was con- 
cerned. In Haman’s tessellated courtyard the now 
completed gallows stands fifty cubits high. The 
lofty Amalekite is already gloating over the death 
of the unyielding descendant of Kish, and tosses 
restlessly upon his couch as he waits for the first 
glimmer of the morning for the execution of his 
wrath. He is not, however, the only restless one, 


for “on that night could not the king sleep.” 
66 


A SLEEPLESS NIGHT, AND ITS RESULTS 67 


In itself this was apparently a very trifling thing. 
How many a crowned head before and since has 
turned uneasily on its pillow and courted slumber in 
vain! But in this case, how much that sleepless 
night was to mean to Mordecai, and all his con 
demned brethren! 

In his insomnia, the king, at last despairing oi 
natural rest, called for “the strangest soporific ever 
sought.” ‘He commanded to bring the book of 
records of the chronicles; and they were read before 
the king” (ver. 1). Surely in those bloodstained 
annals there was enough to have driven away sleep 
forever. But One is overruling all, and the august 
Iranian emperor is but as a chess-king in His hand to 
be moved by Him at will. 

As the records of his reign are read aloud in his 
hearing, “it was found written that Mordecai had 
told of Bigthana and Teresh, two of the king’s 
chamberlains, the keepers of the door, who sought 
to lay hands on Ahasuerus” (ver. 2). How well 
had all been timed! He who knows the end from 
the beginning had caused this service to be here re- 
corded. He had also so ordered it that, at the time 
it was rendered, the preoccupied monarch should 
overlook entirely the one to whose faithfulness he 
owed his life. To Mordecai this may have seemed 
at the time like base ingratitude, though we read of 
no word of complaint. Possibly he had learned to 
“endure as seeing Him who is invisible.” At any 


68 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


rate it was now made manifest that there was a di- 
vine reason for the king’s forgetfulness. God had 
timed everything well, and He “makes everything 
beautiful in its season.” 

Do these pages meet the eyes of some tried and 
discouraged saint? Have you been overwhelmed 
at times by a nameless dread as though God had ut- 
terly forgotten you, and you were cast off forever? 
Have you wearied yourself devising one human ex- 
pedient after another, in the vain hope of averting 
threatened disaster by the arm of flesh? Learn, 
then, from God’s dealings with His servant of old 
that His heart and hand are for you still. And “if 
God be for us, who can be against us?’ He has 
heard every sigh; noted, and stored in His bottle, 
every tear; taken account of every cry of anguish; 
heard every confiding prayer. His arm is in no- 
wise shortened; His ear is in no sense deaf to your 
cry. At the appointed time He will awake in your 
behalf, and you shall know that it is “the God of all 
grace” with whom you have to do. Only look up: 
be not cast down, for you are ever on His heart; and 
if you just leave all with Him, He will make 
your affairs His care. “Casting all your care upon 
Him, for He careth for you.” How sweet the 
words! He careth. He, the most high God: 
yea, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ 
careth. He is no indifferent spectator—no callous, 
unconcerned looker-on; but, as no one else can, He 


A SLEEPLESS NIGHT, AND ITS RESULTS 6¢ 


careth for you. Assured of this, may not the 
reader and the writer well cry, “I will trust, and 
not be afraid’’? 

The hitherto neglectful king is at once aroused as 
his memory is refreshed in regard to Mordecai’s ser- 
vice in days gone by. “And the king said, What 
honor and dignity hath been done to Mordecai for 
this? Then said the king’s servants that minis- 
tered unto him, There is nothing done for him” 
(ver. 3). He had shown himself to be_a loyal and 
faithful subject, despite the fact that he was of 
the children of the captivity; but though the king 
had profited by his devotion, he allowed him to go 
utterly unrewarded, while bestowing favors with 
lavish hand on so worthless a character as the sel- 
fish and despicable Haman. Such is the favor of 
princes. “‘Cursed is the man that trusteth in man, 
and maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth 
from the Lord. For he shall be like the heath in 
the desert, and shall not see when good cometh; but 
shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, 
in a salt land, and not inhabited. Blessed is the man 
that trusteth in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord 
is. For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, 
and that spreadeth out her roots by the river, and 
shall not see when heat cometh, but her leaf shall be 
green, and shall not be careful in time of drought, 
neither shall cease from yielding fruit” (Jer. xvii. 
5-8). How sharp the contrast between the time- 


79 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


serving man of the flesh, whose eyes are fixed 
on man for his reward—doomed ever to disap- 
pointment—and the God-fearing man of faith, 
who rises above all creature-help to the Most High 
Himself! Mordecai has left all in His hands. He 
is now about to make his way prosperous. 

And yet even at the last moment how active 
is Satan in his efforts to thwart God’s purpose 
of grace! At this moment a step is heard in the 
outer court of the royal sleeping apartment. “And 
the king said, Who is in the court? Now Haman 
was come into the outward court of the king’s 
house, to speak unto the king to hang Mordecai 
on the gallows that he had prepared for him. And 
the king’s servants said unto him, Behold, Haman 
standeth in the court. And the king said, Let 
him come in” (vers. 4, 5). 

If God is at work, so is the great adversary. 
Haman, still burning with wounded vanity, is early 
on the scene. He would forestall all further 
slights from Mordecai by getting the easily-influ- 
enced and luxurious despot to sign the order for 
the Jew’s execution as soon as he shall rise. Then, 
the hated object out of the way, he will be in 
good humor for the festal board. He is, however, 
but to learn that ‘‘those who walk in pride, God 
is able to abase.” He has reached the highest pin- 
nacle of earthly glory to which he can lawfully 


A SLEEPLESS NIGHT, AND ITS RESULTS Fas 


aspire. He is about to be hurled into the lowest 
depths of shame and ignominy. 

The king’s first words fairly cause his head to 
swim with wild exultation, and seem to point to 
the early fulfilment of his most cherished dreams. 
“What,” asks his royal master, “shall be done unto 
the man whom the king delighteth to honor?’ It 
is hardly to be wondered at that the vainglorious 
prince whose only concern was the advancement 
of his own interests “thought in his heart, To 
whom would the king delight to do honor more than 
to MYSELF?” What a place that same “myself” 
had in this conceited, wretched man’s mind! And 
what a snare is self-occupation, in any form, to 
the saint of God! Pride is distinctly said to be 
the cause of Satan’s fall. “Thy heart was lifted 
up because of thy beauty; thou hast corrupted thy 
wisdom by reason of thy brightness: I will cast 
thee to the ground” (Ezek. xxviii. 17). And when 
giving instruction concerning overseers in the 
house of God, in the New Testament, the Holy 
Ghost says, “Not a novice, lest being lifted up with 
pride he fall into the condemnation of the devil” 
GuiDimnpiinrG), 

When we see pride in another, how hateful a 
thing it is! Haman is the very incarnation of 
it; and how we loathe so despicable a character! 
Yet, alas, how readily we tolerate in ourselves 


72 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


what is so detestable in others. ‘The proud He 
knoweth afar off,’ but “the meek will He guide 
in judgment; the meek will He teach His way.” 
Filled with a sense of his own self-importance, 
Haman replies to the king’s question in the boldest 
manner. He would have the man whom the king 
delights to honor appear before men as king him- 
self in all but name. That, too, might come later 
if the populace but grew used to him appearing 
in royal garb, and the king’s most noble princes 
were made to have a due sense of his power and 
ability. How plainly the Amalekite shows him- 
self! The hand which of old was upon the throne 
of Jah is now stretched out to grasp the throne 
of the world! “And Haman answered the king, 
For the man whom the king delighteth to honor, 
let the royal apparel be brought which the king useth 
to wear, and the horse that the king rideth upon, 
and the crown royal which is set upon his head: 
and let this apparel and horse be delivered 
to the hand of one of the king’s most noble princes, 
that they may array the man withal whom the 
king delighteth to honor, and bring him on horse- 
back through the street ot the city, and proclaim 
before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom 
the king delighteth to honor” (vers. 7-9). Could 
human pretension and ingenuity go farther? In- 
tending all this for himself, can there be any doubt 
regarding his desire to have the people behold him 


A SLEEPLESS NIGHT, AND ITS RESULTs 73 


in all the outward trappings of royalty, in order 
to accustom their minds to a future usurpation 
of imperial power? 

Did the king begin to see beneath the surface? 
Did he already commence to mistrust his favor- 
ite? Or is it only in our imagination that we 
see a touch of genuine irony, meant to cut to the 
very quick, in the brief and pithy command, ‘‘Make 
haste, and take the apparel and the horse, as thou 
hast said, and do even so to Mordecai the Jew 
that sitteth at the king’s gate: let nothing fail of 
all that thou hast spoken.” Did the royal eye detect 
the way the color came and went in Haman’s face? 
Did it note the downcast countenance and the dis- 
appointment too deep for words that marked him 
as he turned away without reply? We do not 
know. But the readiness with which the erstwhile 
favorite is given up to a richly deserved judg- 
ment later in the day, would imply a lack of con- 
fidence already cherished in his heart. 

“Then took Haman the apparel and the horse, 
and arrayed Mordecai, and brought him on horseback 
through the street of the city, and proclaimed before 
him, Thus shall it be done unto the man whom 
the king delighteth to honor” (ver. 11). A terrible 
come-down, surely, and a remarkable turn of events! 
No wonder that we read, “And Mordecai came 
again to the king’s gate. But Haman hasted to 
his house mourning, and having his head covered” 


74 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


(ver. 12). Did Mordecai see in this sudden 
transition from ignominy to honor the pledge of 
his deliverance from condemnation? It would 
seem so, for he made no effort to resist the chang- 
ing of his attire on this occasion. Haman too 
reads a lesson in it all, and in shame and confusion 
of face hurries from the public gaze to the seclusion 
of his own house. He knows it is in vain now for 
him to seek permission to hang Mordecai. The 
gallows stand like a monument to folly and vanity, 
still towering up to heaven, casting a shadow that 
speaks of approaching disaster. 

“And Haman told Zeresh his wife and all his 
friends everything that had befallen him. Then 
said his wise men and Zeresh his wife unto him, 
If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom 
thou hast begun to fall, thou shalt not prevail 
against him, but shall surely fall before him’ (ver. 
13). Little comfort indeed does he find in this, 
which is all too true, as the sequel shows. 

“And while they were yet talking with him, 
came the king’s chamberlains, and hasted to bring 
Haman unto the banquet that Esther had prepared.” 
His enthusiasm is greatly dampened. He would, 
without question, prefer retirement until he has 
regained his accustomed poise and self-confidence, 
but the king’s command must be obeyed. Yester- 
day he would have needed no chamberlains to 
summon him, To-day all is changed. Already 


A SLEEPLESS NIGHT, AND ITS RESULTS 75 


he has been greatly humbled. Ere the remaining 
hours of light pass he shall have more crushing 
experiences still, and shall prove to the full the 
truth of the ominous prophecy of his wife and 
friends. 


CHAPTER VII 


THE SECOND BANQUET AND THE AMALEKITE’S 
END 


T is hardly to be supposed that the remarkable 

happenings of the forenoon had all taken place 
without Esther’s knowledge. We know that she 
was in daily communication, through her chamber- 
lains, with her aged cousin; and there can scarcely 
be any yuestion as to her having been made 
familiar with his sudden elevation to the imperial 
favor. This would account for the lack of hesi- 
tancy and the implicit confidence with which she 
prefers her request when “the king and Haman 
came to banquet with Esther the queen’”’ (ver. 1). 

The feast was not yet concluded when the king 
said, “What is thy petition, queen Esther? and 
it shall be granted thee: and what is thy request? 
and it shall be performed, even to the half of the 
kingdom” (ver. 2). It is the same invitation to 
ask largely with the same assurance, as on the 
previous occasion, that all shall be given. ‘In the 
word of a king there is power.” How much more 
to be relied on is the word of “God that cannot 
lie,” who has said, “Everyone that asketh, 
receiveth ;” and who invites implicit confidence, on 

76 


THE SECOND BANQUET GT. 


the part of His own blood-washed and redeemed 
saints, in His faithful promises. 

“Then Esther the queen answered and _ said, 
If I have found favor in thy sight, O king, and 
if it please the king, let my life be given me at 
my petition, and my people at my request: for 
we are sold, I and my people, to be destroyed, 
to be slain, and to perish. But if we had been 
sold for bondmen and bondwomen, I had held my 
tongue, although the enemy could not_countervail 
the king’s damage” (vers. 3, 4). Knowing that her 
lord’s favor is toward her, she pleads both her own 
cause, and her people’s. She petitions him to 
spare their and her life. 

How surprised must the king have been to hear 
her so speak. Who would dare seek the life of 
his beloved queen? And who could her people be 
who were thus placed in jeopardy of their lives? 
It is to be remembered that Esther’s kindred had 
not yet been made known to the king. He was in 
ignorance of the fact that she was a Jewess. 

Her words must have deeply agitated the already 
toppling son of Hammedatha. Was there not even 
a designed coincidence on her part between the 
decree drawn up by Haman and the queen’s words 
as she said, ‘““We are sold, I and my people, to be 
destroyed, to be slain, and to perish?” How could 
he forget that such had been the language he had 
caused the king’s scribes to write? What an appall- 


78 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


ing discovery to learn that he had included the 
wife of Ahasuerus in his bold scheme of bloodshed 
and revenge! How earnestly he would listen for 
the king’s reply. 

“Then the king Ahasuerus answered and said 
unto Esther the queen, Who is he, and where is 
he, that durst presume in his heart to do so?” 
(ver. 5). He at once makes her enemy his; and 
demands the name of the infamous wretch who 
could dare conceive so fearful a plot. The guilty 
conspirator reclines but a few feet from him. 
His sin is to find him out at last! 

“And Esther said, The adversary and enemy is 
this wicked Haman. Then Haman was afraid 
before the king and queen” (ver. 6). He is 
manifested now in his true character. The fawning 
and politic courtier appears as the deep-dyed vil- 
lain whose perfidy is almost too great to be believed. 
Satan has again been foiled in his attempt to destroy 
the line of promise, and God has once more vin- 
dicated His Word. 

It is easy to cherish a feeling of contempt and 
disgust for so low and vile a character as Haman. 
But it is well to remember, that in every man’s 
heart is found the same evil thing, which when 
brought to its full fruition, appears so abomin- 
able in the ungodly Agagite. “The heart is de- 
ceitful above all things, and desperately wicked,” 
and God asks the question, ““‘Who can know it?” 


THE SECOND BANQUET 79 


He solemnly answers Himself: “I the Lord search 
the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man 
according to his ways, and according to the fruit 
of hisidoings” «(Jer uxil. ;9,,510)si Ituis: Soutsof 
the heart,’ says the Lord Jesus, that all kinds of 
evil things proceed, and He names “evil thoughts, 
murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false wit- 
ness, blasphemies”’ (Matt. xv. 19). “These are 
the things which defile a man,’ He adds; and we 
desire affectionately to remind the reader, lest any 
should be in danger of forgetting it, that it is the 
grace of God alone which makes one man to differ 
from another. 

No amount of education or culture, nay, nor 
self-restraint or religiousness, will eradicate the 
evil. It is the ature that_is wholly and utterly 
corrupt and pernicious. Therefore before one 
can please God there must be a new nature im- 
parted, and this is the result of new birth. “That 
which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which 
is born of the Spirit is spirit.” Nothing but this 
second birth, through receiving the word of God, 
will avail to place any natural man on a different 
footing before the throne of the Majesty on high, 
than that occupied by the Hamans, the Pharaohs, 
and the Herods of the Bible. “There is no differ- 
ence, for all have sinned and come short of the 
glory of God.” 

People often consider it a mark of superior 


80 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


virtue to be shocked and horrified by the crimes 
of others whom they imagine to be worse than 
themselves. It is well to realize that the worst 
acts of the worst men all spring from a nature 
identical with that of all other sons and daugh- 
ters of Adam. It is because of this humbling 
fact our Lord had to tell a religious doctor that 
“except a man be born again he cannot see the 
kingdom of God,” and again, “Marvel not that 
I say unto thee, Ye must be born again.” 

Is my reader certain that he or she is the sub- 
ject of this great change? Have you truly 
turned to the Lord for yourself, and from the 
heart believed the gospel-message which declares 
that “Christ Jesus came into the world to save 
sinners?’ If not, I beseech you, read no further, 
but stop right here and consider, until you have, 
as a guilty, helpless sinner, cast yourself unre- 
servedly upon that blessed One, “who died for all, 
that they which live should not henceforth live unto 
themselves, but unto Him which died for them and 
rose again” (2 Cor. v. 15). 

If truly a Christian, turn with us once more 
to our narrative. The poor discovered wretch 
trembles before the king and the queen; as some 
day men will tremble before the Omnipotent Judge 
when all their secret guilt shall be made known before 
an assembled universe and it will be too late tn 
seek a hiding-place. 


THE SECOND BANQUET Sr 


It would seem that Ahasuerus is dazed for the 
moment, as he begins to realize what Haman had 
obtained his royal consent for. He is, in a very 
grave sense, a party to the proposed indiscriminate 
slaughter of the Hebrews, which would include his 
beloved spouse. We are told that “the king arising 
from the banquet of wine went into the palace 
garden: and Haman stood up to make request for 
his life to Esther the queen; for he saw that there 
was evil determined against him by the king” (ver. 
7). The man who without a twinge of remorse 
could devote a nation to destruction, is in dire dis- 
tress at the thought of himself losing life or liberty. 
He takes the place of suppliant at the feet of the 
now triumphant Esther, cousin to the unbending 
old man he had led through the streets in the 
morning. One is reminded of the word to Phila- 
delphia, “I will make them to come and worship 
before thy feet, and to know that I have loved 
thee” (Rev. iii. 9, last clause). 

In his desperation Haman oversteps the bounds 
of both court etiquette and ordinary decency, by 
throwing himself upon the divan where the queen. 
was reclining. At this juncture “the king returned 
out of the palace garden into the place of the ban- 
quet of wine; and Haman was fallen upon the 
bed where Esther was. Then said the king, Will 
he force the queen also before me in the house? 
As the words went out of the king’s mouth they 


82 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


covered Haman’s face” (ver. 8). His very im- 
portunity, unwise in the extreme, is the means of 
his complete undoing. At a signal from the out- 
raged monarch his face is covered—token of his 
condemnation to death. Hope is gone. He shall 
never see the king’s face again; nor shall he be 
troubled by Mordecai’s uplifted form evermore. 
“Tt is a righteous thing with God to recompense 
tribulation to them that trouble you” (2 Thess. i. 6). 
The ungodly may now be supreme, while to the 
righteous “waters of a full cup” are wrung out; 
“but the triumphing of the wicked is short.’’ God 
is still the moral Governor of the world, to whom 
all men must give an account. He will manifest 
His power eventually when “all the proud, yea, 
and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the 
day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord 
of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor 
branch” (Mal. iv. 1). This passage has no ref- 
erence to judgment after death. It is not the 
unsaved dead being cast into the lake of fire. It 
refers solely and simply to God’s judgments which 
will be meted out to the oppressors of His people 
at the end of this age. Of this Haman’s case 
gives us a hint. 

The chamberlains, quick to discern the mind of 
the king, waste no sympathy on the fallen premier. 
“Harbonah, one of the chamberlains, said before 
the king, Behold, also, the gallows fifty cubits high, 


THE SECOND BANQUET 83 


which Haman made for Mordecai, who had spoken 
good for the king, standeth in the house of Haman. 
Then the king said, Hang him thereon” (ver. 9). 
So certain had the now friendless wretch been in 
the morning of his having no difficulty about getting 
the king’s permission to hang the refractory Jew, 
that he appears to have made no secret of his inten- 
tion. It is evident that Harbonah was quite 
familiar with it, and as it is very unlikely that 
such information had been vouchsafed after the 
procession through the street in the forenoon, it 
would seem that Haman had but added to his own 
discomfiture by explaining the purpose of his early 
visit to some of the chamberlains before being sum- 
moned to the royal presence. The attendant 
mentions now the fact of the gallows having been 
erected, and the reason for it. Mordecai would 
have been strung up there had not Providence 
interfered. The king, hearing of it, utters but three 
words, “Hang him thereon,” and the Amalekite’s 
doom is sealed. 

It is not the only time in Scripture history that 
in God’s governmental dealings such a thing has 
occurred. Daniel furnishes us with a similar 
instance. Saved himself by Almighty power from 
the lions’ jaws, his accusers are cast into the den and 
destroyed. David wrote of the wicked; “Behold 
he travaileth with iniquity, and hath conceived mis- 
chief, and brought forth falsehood. He made a pit 


84 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


and digged it, and is fallen into the ditch which he 
made. His mischief shall return upon his own head, 
and his violent dealing shall come down upon his own 
pate’ (Ps. vii. 14-16). So shall it be with the per- 
sonal Antichrist, “the Jews’ enemy” of the future, of 
whom Haman, if not a type, is at least an illustration. 
At the moment when his power shail seem to be 
supreme, and all hope for deliverance for the Rem- 
nant of Israel, who in that dark day shall cleave to 
the Lord, will have practically fled away, the warrior 
of the 19th of Revelation shall descend and hurl 
the impious usurper alive into the lake that burneth 
with fire and brimstone. 

“So they hanged Haman on the gallows that 
he had prepared for Mordecai. Then was the 
king's wrath pacified” (ver. 10). The sentence, 
as soon as uttered, is carried out. Haman is hanged 
as one “accursed of God.” Thus “the righteous 
is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked cometh 
in his stead” (Prov. xi. 8). “Riches profit not in 
the day of wrath;”’ his wealth and power availed 
him nothing. In one moment all is manifested 
as being altogether lighter than vanity. He has 
gone out into eternity naked and alone; and as a 
later revelation tells us, “It is appointed unto men 
once to die, and after this the judgment” (Heb. ix, 
27). That stark, cold body suspended to the gallows 
preaches loudly, to all who will give heed, of the 


THE SECOND BANQUET 85 


evanescent character of all earth’s baubles, and the 
importance of living for eternity. 

“I have seen the wicked in great power, and 
spreading himself like a green bay tree. Yet he 
passed away, and, lo, he was not: yea, I sought 
him, but he could not be found” (Ps. xxxvii. 35, 30.) 


CHAPTER VIII 


THE DESPISED MAN EXALTED AND THE DECREE OF 
GRACE 


[‘ was not enough that Haman should be put 
to death, Some means must be devised 
whereby the people of the Jews could be saved 
and yet the unalterable laws of the Persians and 
the Medes remain unviolated. Of this the present 
chapter treats. 

“On that day did the king Ahasuerus give the 
house of Haman, the Jews’ enemy, unto Esther 
the queen. And Mordecai came before the king, 
for Esther had told what he was to her. And 
the king took off his ring, which he had taken 
from Haman, and gave it unto Mordecai. And 
Esther set Mordecai over the house of Haman’ 
(wersial, 2). 

The power of the enemy is overthrown. Ha- 
man’s house is presented to Esther and she ap- 
points Mordecai over it. She tells at last what 
relation he bore to her, and there is nothing more 
to hide. 

Her discipline, and his too, had been severe, 
but at last both reach a place where they can 


be used in blessing to their people. There must 
86 


THE DESPISED MAN EXALTED 87 


ever be a divine schooling ere there can be use- 
fulness and enlargement. But although the circum- 
stances are so remarkably altered, the decree con- 
demning “all Jews, both young and old, little 
children and women,” to be slain on the thirteenth 
day of the twelfth month still stands unrevoked. 
Nor can it be revoked—for the laws of the kingdom 
once made were unchangeable. But strong in faith 
that some means would be found whereby the evil 
might be averted, and yet the dignity of the laws re- 
main untouched, we are told that “Esther spake 
yet again before the king and fell down at his 
feet, and besought him with tears to put away 
the mischief of Haman the Agagite, and his device 
that he had devised against the Jews’ (ver. 3). 
The position of her people was strikingly analogous 
to that of unsaved men and women in general; 
conscious of having richly deserved the judgment 
of God, the curse of the broken law hanging over 
their heads: “Cursed is every one that continueth 
not in all things which are written in the book of 
the law to do them” (Gal. iii. 10; Deut. xxvii. 26). 
So runs the unchangeable decree of a holy God. 
All are worthy of death; for all have sinned. None 
have continued in obedience to all the command- 
ments of God. Therefore all are under the curse. 
It will not do to plead ignorance of the law, or 
sorrow for having failed. “The soul that sinneth 
it shall die.’ The law knows no mercy for the 


88 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


violator of it. Neither will it do to promise to 
do better in days to come; to endeavor to obey the 
Word. in the future. A better future, if that were 
to be, could not change the past—and “God requireth 
that which is past” (Eccl. ili. 15). 

If saved at all, it cannot be at the expense of 
God’s character or by the violation of His word in 
any manner whatsoever. 

But it is right here that the gospel comes in. God 
can say, “Deliver him from going down to the 
pit: I have found a ransom” (Job xxxilil. 24). 
The Lord Jesus has borne the sinner’s judgment. 
Yea, “God hath made Him to be sin for us, who 
knew no sin; that we might be made the righteous- 
ness of God in Him” (2 Cor. v. 21). He, ever 
spotless and undefiled, was not under the curse. 
The sentence of condemnation did not hang over 
Him. But in infinite love and mercy He stooped 
vicariously beneath our load, and “bare our sins in 
His own body on the tree” (1 Pet. ii. 24). “He 
was wounded for our transgressions; He was 
bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our 
peace was upon Him; and with His stripes we are 
healed’’ (Isa. litt 5). A righteous basis has now 
been laid, upon which God can act according to the 
love of His heart, and yet in perfect holiness. 
A second decree goes forth, not contradicting or 
annulling the former one; but which, while in perfect 
harmony with it, will provide a means whereby all 


THE DESPISED MAN EXALTED 89 


can be saved who avail themselves thereof. 
So we read, “Christ hath redeemed us from the curse 
of the law, being made a curse for us: for it is 
written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a 
tree” (Gal. iii. 13). The work that saves is finished. 
All can find deliverance from the judgment of God 
who in simple faith receive and act upon the message 
of grace. 

And so, returning to our chapter, it is beauti- 
fully in keeping with this that “the king held out 
the golden sceptre toward Esther.” Grace is 
reigning and upon that ground alone can there be 
deliverance for her people. “So Esther arose, and 
stood before the king, and said, If it please the king, 
and if I have found favor in his sight, and the thing 
seem, right before the king; and I be pleasing in 
his eyes, let it be written to reverse the letters devised 
by Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, 
which he wrote to destroy the Jews which are in 
all the king’s provinces: for how can I endure to see 
the evil that shall come unto my people? or how 
can I endure to see the destruction of my kindred?” 
(vers. 4-6.) 

Tt is a touching plea that she gives utterance 
to. It hangs on this, “If the thing seem right 
before the king, and I be pleasing in his sight.” 
She does not attempt to plead the good works, 
the benevolence, or the loyalty of the Jews. She 
would have him deal with them according to his 


90 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


estimate of her. Like the great apostle of the 
Gentiles who, when entreating Philemon in behalf 
of Onesimus writes, “If thou count me therefore 
a partner receive him as myself’ (Phile. 17). 
And surely we have more than a hint, both there 
and here, of the great and wondrous truth ex- 
pressed in the blessed words of inspiration, ‘He 
hath made us accepted in the Beloved.” Esther had 
risked her life for her people and would now have 
them dealt with according to the king’s thoughts 
of herself. The Lord Jesus Christ gave His life 
a ransom for lost, guilty sinners, and now all who 
trust in Him are dealt with by God according to 
His thoughts of His Son. How tenderly this 
precious truth is expressed in the Lord’s great inter- 
cessory prayer! He says, “I in them, and Thou 
in Me, that they may be made perfect in one; and 
that the world may know that Thou hast sent Me, 
and hast loved them even as Thou hast loved 
Me’ (John xvii. 23). 

Esther’s touching plea avails, and “the king 
Ahasuerus said unto Esther the queen, and Mor- 
decai the Jew, Behold, I have given Esther the 
house of Haman, and him they have hanged upon 
the gallows, because he laid his hand upon the 
Jews. Write ye also for the Jews as it liketh you, 
in the king’s name, and seal it with the king’s 
ring: for the writing which is written in the king’s 
name, and sealed with the king’s ring, may no man 


THE DESPISED MAN EXALTED gI 


reverse” (vers. 7, 8). He who “had the power 
of death’ has been destroyed. The message 
of grace can now be sent out “to deliver those 
who through fear of death” had been subjected to 
so cruel a bondage. 

“Then were the king’s scribes called at that 
time, in the third month, that is the month Sivan, 
on the three and twentieth day thereof; and it was 
written according to all that Mordecai commanded 
unto the Jews, and to the lieutenants, and the 
deputies and rulers of the provinces which are from 
India unto Ethiopia, a hundred twenty and seven 
provinces, unto every province according to the 
writing thereof, and unto every people after their 
language, and to the Jews according to their writing 
and according to their language’ (ver. 9). Less 
than nine months remained ere the decree of Haman 
was due to be put into execution. Short enough 
time if the message of grace was to reach the 
farthest limits of the kingdom ere the day of 
slaughter appointed! The proclamation is as uni- 
versal as the previous one, and is written in every 
langaage of the known world. Its text is given 
in the verses that follow. 

“And he wrote in the king Ahasuerus’ name, 
and sealed it with the king’s ring, and sent letters 
by post on horseback, and riders on mules, camels, 
and young dromedaries: wherein the king granted 
the Jews which were in every city to gather them- 


92 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


selves together, and to stand for their life, to de- 
stroy, to slay, and to cause to perish, all the power 
of the people and province that would assault them, 
both little ones and women, and to take the spoil 
of them for prey, upon one day in all the provinces 
of king Ahasuerus, namely, upon the thirteenth day 
of the twelfth month which is the month Adar” 
(vers. 10-12). It will be seen that this proclama- 
tion in no sense contradicted the one that had gone 
before. The other gave the people command to 
destroy the Jews. This one gave to the afflicted 
nation the privilege of defending themselves. In 
other words it provided a means of salvation which 
they could accept or reject as they chose. It is 
not otherwise with the glad tidings proclaimed in 
the gospel. A Saviour is provided. All who 
avail themselves of God’s gracious interference are 
saved. All who reject the means of His providing, 
do so at their own peril. 

No time is lost in sending out the joyful tidings. 
Would that Christians were as much in earnest 
in making known to all people, far and near, the 
good news of eternal salvation through a crucified 
and risen Saviour! “The copy of the writing for a 
commandment to be given in every province was 
published unto all people, and that the Jews should 
be ready against that day to avenge themselves on 
their enemies. So the posts that rode upon mules 
and camels went out, being hastened and pressed on 


THE DESPISED MAN EXALTED 93 


by the king’s commandment. And the decree was 
given in Shushan the palace” (vers. 13, 14). To 
every corner of the habitable earth, the messengers 
go forth “being hastened” by the monarch’s word, 
reminding us forcibly of another commission given 
by a greater than Ahasuerus: ‘‘And Jesus came and 
spake unto them, saying, All power is given unto Me 
in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore, and teach 
(Gk., “disciple’’) all nations, baptizing them in the 
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things 
whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am 
with you alway even unto the end of the world. 
Amen” (Matt. xxviii. 18-20). His commandment 
was urgent. Men were in danger of something far 
worse than temporal destruction—in danger of the 
eternal judgment of God against sin. Nothing was 
to hinder. ‘Go ye,’ He says. And, commissioned 
by the Lord Himself, they went forth to make 
known to Jew and Gentile the exceeding riches of 
His grace. 

But what lethargy has come in since those 
early days of devotion to His name! What 
millions of heathen are wunevangelized in this 
vaunted century of progress and enlightenment. 
Solemn indeed must be the reckoning with those 
by and by who are so indifferent to “the King’s 
commandment.”’ What would have been thought 
of one of the couriers of Ahasuerus who, forgetting 


94. NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


the urgency and importance of his message, loitered 
among the leafy bowers of the wayside khans, or 
amused himself with the sights of the way; losing 
valuable time; forgetting that hundreds of lives 
depended upon his errand being fulfilled ere the 
thirteenth day of the month Adar. Would such 
an one not have justly deserved the severest censure, 
if not death itself? And what is to be thought 
of Christians who have heard the charge of the 
Lord Jesus, “Go ye into all the world and preach 
the gospel to every creature” (Mark xvi. 15), but 
who, paying no attention to the appalling condition 
of lost souls on every side of them, think only of 
their own pleasure and comfort? “If thou forbear 
to deliver them that are drawn unto death, and those 
that are ready to be slain, if thou sayest, Behold 
we knew it not; doth not He that pondereth the 
heart consider it? And He that keepeth thy soul, 
doth He not know it? And shall not He render 
to every man according to his works?” (Proy. 
XxXiv. I1, 12). These are unspeakably solemn words 
and worthy of being carefully pondered in the 
presence of God by every converted reader of these 
lines. May grace be given to each one to weigh well 
their solemn import, and to seek day by day to faith- 
fully make known the only message which can de- 
liver from the second death. 

“And Mordecai went out from the presence of 
the king in royal apparel of blue and white, and 
with a great crown of gold, and with a garment 


THE DESPISED MAN EXALTED 95 


of fine linen and purple; and the city of Shushan 
rejoiced and was glad” (ver. 15). The condem- 
nation past, Mordecai puts off the sackcloth, to 
be worn no more. Robed now as befits his exalted 
position he goes into the king’s presence. His 
clothing of blue and white and purple may surely 
have a meaning for our hearts to enter into. Blue 
is the color of the heavens, and ever seems to 
speak, in Scripture, of that heavenly character 
which should be manifested by the redeemed soul. 
White is righteousness, and put on as a habit tells of 
the practical righteousness that should adorn the 
child of God. Of this too the fine linen reminds us 
for “the fine linen is the righteousness of saints” 
(Rev. xix. 8). The purple is the color of royalty; 
while the “great crown of gold” would tell of the 
divine glory, in harmony with which Mordecai has 
now been raised from the depths of woe to the 
heights of power and blessing: blessing not for him- 
self alone, but for all who harken to his word. And 
so, from time to time, even in the broken condition 
of things in which we see the professing Church 
to-day, does God raise up men who will honor Him 
in honoring His Word, and who are thus made a 
means of untold blessing to others. 

The king’s message believed brought joy and 
gladness; even as the gospel, believed, brings the 
same to-day. “The Jews had light, and gladness, 
and joy, and honor. And in every province, and 
in every city, whithersoever the king’s command- 


96 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


ment and his decree came, the Jews had joy and 
gladness, a feast and a good day. And many of 
the people of the land became Jews; for the fear 
of the Jews fell upon them” (vers. 16, 17). It is 
important to notice that it was the word of the king 
which brought all the grief and anguish of heart 
described in chapter four. The king had spoken. 
They believed his decree, and they were miserable. 
Now it is his word that gives them peace and hap- 
piness, and drives away their sorrow. Even so, 
God’s word as to man’s lost estate and the judg- 
ment hanging over him brings the soul to cry, “The 
pains of hell gat hold upon me: I found trouble and 
sorrow” (Psa. cxvi. 3). But by the message of 
grace and truth which has come by Jesus Christ, 
truly believed, the gloom is banished, and the exul- 
tant heart cries with joy, “Thou hast delivered my 
soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet 
from falling” (Psa. cxvi.8). It is in neither case a 
question of experience or wrought-up feelings, but 
of faith in the message proclaimed. 

And so God had turned the mourning of His 
people into rejoicing, and the result was that the 
fear of them fell upon the people of the provinces, 
many of whom sought the God of Israel and became 
proselytes, taking their places as members of the 
chosen nation. There is nothing that so appeals to 
the world as a happy, holy company of saints, whose 
spirits have been refreshed by the goodness of the 
Lord. 


CHAPTER IX I--19 
THE DELIVERANCE 


T was faith in the written word of the king that 

gave the Jews joy and gladness, even though the 
formerly dreaded thirteenth of Adar had not yet 
come. So does faith in the written word of God 
give boldness and confidence though the day of 
doom once feared has not yet arrived. The revela- 
tion of His grace and “perfect love’ as revealed 
in the cross ‘‘casteth out all fear,’ for ‘‘faith is 
the substance’”’ (or confidence) “of things hoped for, 
the evidence” (or conviction) “of things not seen” 
(Heb. xi. 1). “We walk by faith, not by sight,” 
for “what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for? 
But if we hope for that we see not, then do we 
with patience wait for it” (Rom. vili. 24, 25). It 
was not an inward emotion or a passing feeling 
that gave to the people of Esther and Mordecai 
the assurance that they would not be destroyed, 
as originally intended by Haman. They had some- 
thing far better than that. Their tears were dried, 
their sorrow assuaged in resting upon the word 
alone. 

This cannot be insisted on too strongly. There 

97 


98 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


are many to-day seeking peace in an utterly wrong 
way. Some hope, because of a restful feeling 
within, that they have at, last been accepted of 
God, and are now on the way to heaven. Others 
trust in the fact that they pray and attend to various 
religious duties; while many more are without any 
confidence at all, but hope at last to have an in- 
ward sense of pardon ere they die. To all of these 
classes we would say, Do not rest in anything short 
of the revealed word of God. That Word believed, 
joy and peace must follow; but it is faith first, peace 
afterwards. 

To go direct to Scripture is the only safe way 
for every soul. For instance: I am a sinner; my 
awakened conscience troubles me about many things 
I had formerly treated as matters of indifference; 
an awful sense of condemnation and wrath hangs 
over me; | long for deliverance. I pray, and groan, 
and weep. Still there is no peace. I try to change 
my ways; break loose from old habits; forsake evil 
companions,—I am miserable even then. I perhaps 
go to church; submit to baptism; partake of the 
Lord’s Supper; give of my means to assist the 
cause of Christ. But alas, alas, all is in vain! I 
am only more and more aware of my true state 
since so great changes seem to be necessary to fit 
me for God’s presence. I have no assurance that 
my sins are forgiven: and it is this I must know 
if I would be at peace. At last, wearied and almost 


THE DELIVERANCE 99 


hopeless, I come to the Word itself. Perhaps such 
a passage as Acts xili. 38, 39 meets my eye: “Be 
it known unto you.” Ah yes, that is it! I want 
to KNow. This awful uncertainty is what is haras- 
sing me and taking from me all rest, and plung- 
ing me into deepest anxiety. What is it that can 
be “known” in this verse? “Be it known unto you 
that through this Man”’—that is, through Jesus— 
not through my prayers, my devotions, my benevo- 
lences, or my changed manner of life! Nor yet 
through the church, her services, her ministers or 
her ordinances. No! blessed be God, I am turned 
from all these things—good as they may be in 
their place; I am turned to “this Man,” to Jesus— 
the Man of Calvary—the Man who is now in the 
glory. “Through this Man is preached unto you,”— 
how intensely personal it is: “known unto you;” 
“preached unto you;’—surely, then I cannot be 
mistaken in appropriating it to myself. ‘‘Preached 
unto you the forgiveness of sins!’ Ah! That is 
what I want so earnestly. This is what I can never 
be happy without. How, then, is this preached 
forgiveness to be really mine,—known and enjoyed 
as mine? Here is the answer: “By Him all that 
believe are justified from all things, from which ye 
could not be justified by the law of Moses.” Here, 
then, is the peace-giving testimony of God’s infallible 
Word. I can rest on that. I believe in the Lord 
Jesus. He died for me. I trust in Him alone. 


I0o NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


God declares all who so believe are “justified from 
all things.’ I can trust His declaration. I have 
sure and perfect peace. “Being justified by faith, 
we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus 
Christ: by whom also we have access by faith into 
this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope 
of the glory of God” (Rom. v. 1, 2). 

Resting on the word of the king, the Jews found 
peace. Now we are to learn how the word of 
the king is actually fulfilled. ‘“‘Now in the twelfth 
month, that is, the month Adar, on the thirteenth 
day of the same, when the king’s commandment 
and his decree drew near to be put into execution, 
in the day that the enemies of the Jews hoped to have 
power over them, (though it was turned to the 
contrary, that the Jews had rule over them that 
hated them,) the Jews gathered themselves together 
in their cities throughout all the provinces of the 
king Ahasuerus, to lay hand on such as sought 
their hurt: and no man could withstand them; for 
the fear of them fell upon all people” (vers. 1, 2). 
The day that had been so dreaded, ere the posts 
brought the message of grace, is now awaited with 
eager anticipation. It is to be a day of triumph 
and rejoicing to the Jews, and a day of overthrowing 
the power of their enemies. The government is 
for, not against, them. This is the reason of their 
gladness. “And all the rulers of the provinces, and 
the lieutenants, and the deputies, and officers of the 


THE DELIVERANCE IorI 


king, helped the Jews; because the fear of Mordecai 
fell upon them. For Mordecai was great in the 
king’s house, and his fame went out throughout all 
the provinces: for this man Mordecai waxed greater 
and greater” (vers. 3, 4). 

How truly had the word been fulfilled which 
says, “Them that honor Me, I will honor; and 
they that despise Me shall be lightly esteemed”! 
It will be remembered that in the beginning, when 
Mordecai sided with God, and refused to bow to 
the haughty enemy of Jehovah, that the king’s 
servants wondered “whether Mordecai’s matters 
would stand.” How has the Lord vindicated His 
servant now! Not only have his matters stood, 
but the despised man who acted for God—although 
that meant at the time to be misunderstood by almost 
every one else—is now waxing greater and greater. 
And so will it ever be that he who sides with God 
will be triumphart at last. It is not to be expected 
that natural men, or carnal Christians, will under- 
stand a man who takes this ground. “He that is 
spiritual discerneth all things; yet he himself is dis- 
cerned of no man” (1 Cor. il. 15—1iteral render- 
ing). Such an one must ever be an enigma to men 
who reason from a human standpoint, and who 
have not the mind of Christ. But God will vindicate 
His servant in His own way and time, if all is 
humbly left in His hands. Of the greatest of all 
servants it is written that ‘‘when He was reviled, 


102 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


He reviled not again; when He suffered, He 
threatened not; but committed Himself to Him that 
judgeth righteously” (1 Pet. ii. 23). And how 
gloriously has He been vindicated and exalted! 
Blessed Lord, may we Thy servants walk in Thy path 
until we see Thy face! 

“Thus the Jews smote all their enemies with the 
stroke of the sword, and slaughter, and destruction, 
and did what they would unto those that hated 
them. And in Shushan the palace the Jews slew 
and destroyed five hundred men” (vers. 5, 6). It 
was the overthrowing of the enemies—not of the 
Jews only, but of the Lord. They impiously lifted 
their hands against the separated nation; and, how- 
ever unfaithful they may have been, He made their 
troubles His own, and delivered their foes into their 
hands. 

The Lord remembers, too, His word as to Am- 
alek spoken in the wilderness so long ago: “I will 
utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from 
under heaven.” Hence we read of the destruction 
of the last of the nation mentioned in Scripture. 
“And Parshandatha, and Dalphon, and Aspatha, and 
Poratha, and Adalia, and Aridatha, and Parmashta, 
and Arisai, and Aridai, and Vajezatha, the ten sons 
of Haman the son of Hammedatha, the enemy of the 
Jews, slew they; but on the spoil laid they not their 
hand” (vers. 7-10). The last of this ungodly race 
have perished. God’s word, whether telling of grace 
or judgment, will be fulfilled to the letter. 


THE DELIVERANCE 103 


As typifying the lusts of the flesh, what comfort 
there is for the Christian in the utter destruction 
of Amalek! The day is not far distant when the 
old nature that dwells in every believer, and is 
the cause of so much of our failure, and sins, and 
sorrow, will be completely removed; and with it 
all lust and pride: yea, everything that hinders 
spiritual enjoyment will be gone forever. This 
never occurs while we are in the body. The dream 
of the eradication of inbred sin, and of perfection 
in the flesh while in this life, is not founded on 
the word of God. As long as we are in this scene 
we have to “mortify” our members which are upon 
the earth; but at “the coming of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and our gathering together unto Him,” we 
shall be fully delivered from our hated foe: “for 
our conversation is in heaven; from whence also 
we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ ; who 
shall change our vile body” (or, transform the body 
of our humiliation), “that it may be fashioned 
like unto the body of His glory” (literal rendering) ; 
“according to the working whereby He is able to 
subdue all things unto Himself” (Phil. iii. 20, 21). 
Then will the remembrance of the fleshly lusts 
that war against the soul, and now trouble us, be 
blotted out from under heaven. 

A striking evidence of subjection to God is 
brought before us at the end of the verses noted 
above: “upon the spoil they laid not their hand.” 
The king had granted “the spoil of them for a 


104 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


prey.” But long before, God had said, when sending 
Saul to smite the Amalekites, that he should “utterly 
destroy all that they had.” They were to take no 
spoil that day. Saul disobeyed the word and 
brought down Divine judgment upon himself and 
his house (1 Sam. xv, throughout). The scattered 
Jews of Esther’s time manifest greater faithful- 
ness. They abhor the spoil and refrain from touch- 
ing it. As it was an Amalekite that had stirred up 
the enmity of the people against them, they class 
all morally in the same category. It is an example 
of disinterested obedience beautiful to notice. They 
overcome the world but do not seek to profit through 
it nor derive benefit by indifference to that which 
they see to be evil. 

The news of the slaughter in the city of Shushan 
is reported to the king at the close of the day. 
“And the king said unto Esther the queen, The Jews 
have slain and destroyed five hundred men in Shu- 
shan the palace, and the ten sons of Haman; what 
have they done in the rest of the king's provinces? 
Now what is thy petition? and it shall be granted 
thee: or what is thy request further? and it shall 
be done” (ver. 12). 

It would seem from Esther's reply that the day 
had closed in the midst of the conflict. There were 
still a large number of persons who were evil dis- 
posed toward the Jews. “Then said Esther, If it 
please the king, let it be granted to the Jews which 


THE DELIVERANCE 105 


are in Shushan to do to-morrow also according unto 
this day’s decree, and let Haman’s ten sons be 
hanged upon the gallows” (ver. 13). It must be 
borne in mind that the decree simply granted the 
Jews the privilege of self-defense. It is no indis- 
criminate massacre that Esther desires, but another 
day of opportunity in which to meet their foes if 
they sought to rise against them. She also desires 
the ten sons of Haman to be hung up before the 
people as accursed according to Deut. xxi, 22, 23. 
“And the king commanded it so to be done: and 
the decree was given at Shushan, and they hanged 
Haman’s ten sons” (ver. 14). 

On the fourteenth day of the month therefore 
the Jews again met any who had the hardihood 
to oppose them, and “slew three hundred men at 
Shushan,” over half the number of the previous 
day. Again we are told that “on the prey they 
laid not their hands’ (ver. 15). They would 
not be enriched at the expense of the enemies of 
the Lord. 

Throughout the rest of the empire they had 
been equally victorious. We read not of the death 
of even so much as one; but they “slew of their 
foes seventy and five thousand, but they laid not 
their hands on the prey” (ver. 16). Truly their 
sorrow had been turned into rejoicing. ‘Weeping 
may endure for a night but joy cometh in the 
morning.” 


106 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


In the outside districts and distant provinces 
the fourteenth day was devoted to feasting and 
gladness, while in the palace-city the day follow- 
ing was so observed. It was a season of thanks- 
giving and congratulations one to another: gifts 
and portions being exchanged. From our record 
of it though, as described in vers. 17-19, it would 
be impossible to prove that they remembered the 
Lord in it all, and gave the glory to Him. This, 
however, is but in keeping with the character of 
the book. There can be no question as to their 
hearts going out in gratitude to the God of their 
fathers who had so mercifully interfered on their 
behalf; but in describing their joy, as in making 
known their former sorrow, His name is unmen- 
tioned in the record, because they are not where He 
can publicly own them. How loudly does this very 
silence speak to every opened ear! God could do 
all we have been noting in our study of this book 
for His people who refused to gather to the place 
where He has set His name (and where a few 
“afflicted and poor’’ ones were trying amidst many 
discouragements to rebuild His ruined temple and 
to order their ways according as “they found it 
written”), but though He so graciously watches 
over them in His providence, and loves them unto 
the end, He nevertheless takes care that the inspired 
record of it all shall not so much as mention His 
name. 


CHAPTER IX 20-32 
THE INSTITUTION OF PURIM 


| een this time, until he disappears from sacred 
history, Mordecai takes the place of a 
judge or a deliverer among his brethren. He has 
proven himself a faithful man in the main, what- 
ever failures he may also have had. In a certain 
sense his position is very similar to that occupied 
by Joseph in Egypt. In position being next to 
the king, he has been the preserver of his people 
and is afterwards their protector. 

He would. have them never forget the great 
deliverance they had known, nor the means whereby 
it had been accomplished. From the twentieth 
verse, it has generally been concluded that he himself 
was the author of this book, and surely no person 
would be more likely to have been chosen for this 
service. He also, in conjunction with Esther the 
queen, established the feast of Purim, or “the lot,” 
as a perpetual commemoration of the overthrowing 
of Haman’s device. 

“And Mordecai wrote these things, and sent 
letters unto all the Jews that were in all the provinces 
of the king Ahasuerus, both nigh and far, to establish 

107 


108 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


this among them, that they should keep the four- 
teenth day of the month Adar, and the fifteenth 
day of the same, yearly, as the days wherein the 
Jews rested from their enemies and the month which 
was turned unto them from sorrow to joy, and from 
mourning into a good day: that they should make 
them days of feasting and joy, and of sending 
portions one to another, and gifts to the poor” 
(vers. 20-22). There is no reason to believe that 
this was a divinely instituted festival, like the seven 
feasts of Jehovah in Lev. xxii. It was simply 
the grateful remembrance of a rejoicing people 
for signal mercy vouchsafed at a time of deepest 
distress. Naturally the Jews in the land did not 
as readily observe it as those scattered among the 
heathen. History tells us that it was some years 
ere it became a universal season of festivity among 
the Hebrews, and many more elapsed before a dis- 
tinctively religious character was given to it. 

But, as commanded by Mordecai and Esther, all 
was in perfect keeping with the times. In full 
accord with their Lo-ammi condition, God’s name 
is in no wise connected with it. It has kept, however, 
the record of their providential deliverance clearly 
before their minds. The exact reason for the name 
of the feast is given in the verses that follow: “And 
the Jews undertook to do as they had begun, and 
as Mordecai had written unto them; because Haman 
the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, the enemy 


THE INSTITUTION OF PURIM I0Q 


of all the Jews, had devised against the Jews to 
destroy them, and had cast Pur, that is, the lot, to 
consume them; but when Esther came before the 
king, he commanded by letters, that his wicked 
device, which he had devised against the Jews, 
should return upon his own head, and that he and 
his sons should be hanged upon the gallows. 
Wherefore they called these days Purim, after the 
name of Pur. Therefore for all the words of 
this letter, and of that which they had seen concern- 
ing this matter, and which had come unto them, 
the Jews ordained, and took upon them, and upon 
their seed, and upon all such as joined themselves 
unto them, so as it should not fail, that they would 
keep these two days according to their writing, 
and according to their appointed time every year; 
and that these days should be remembered and kept 
throughout every generation, every family, every 
province and every city; and that these days of 
Purim should not fail from among the Jews, nor 
the memorial of them perish from their seed’ (vers. 
23-28). 

How truly had they been made to know that 
“the lot is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing 
thereof is of the Lord” (Prov. xvi. 33). No 
device of the wicked against the people of the Lord 
can ever be carried out unless He see fit to permit 
it. Hence the Christian can exultingly cry, “If 
God be for us, who can be against us?” (Rom. viii. 


¥IO NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


31). But, though His care is over all His saints, 
it will always be observed that there is not that 
same direct, manifest interference on their behalf 
when not walking according to His revealed will, as 
when they take the place of absolute dependence 
on Himself in subjection to His Word. Thus also 
in Christendom generally, it is more this distant 
Providential oversight that is known. 

In an indefinite way saints learn to look for 
divine interposition for evidence of the Lord's 
concern. But it is only as one walks with God and 
trembles at His word, manifesting real heart for 
Himself, that the special supervision and intimate 
Fatherly care of which Scripture speaks is entered 
into and enjoyed. This may be seen by turning 
for a little to that exceedingly striking passage in 
2 Cor. vi. 14-18. Believers are here counseled to 
avoid putting their necks into an unequal yoke 
with those who believe not. This would refer to 
every concern of life; whether it be in regard to 
business, marriage, or ecclesiastical associations. 
No child of God can be linked up with an uncon- 
verted man in a business partnership without 
violating this Scripture. Neither could one enter 
into an engagement or marriage with an unsaved 
person and enjoy the approbation of the Lord. An 
old Puritan once wrote, “If you marry a child 
of the devil you can expect to have trouble with 
your father-in-law.”’ Alas, that so many, despising 


THE INSTITUTION OF PURIM Ile 


the Word of truth and the bitter experiences of 
thousands before them, should, with open eyes, 
yet venture on such a course, because through their 
affections they have been ensnared! How many 
Samsons have been thus shorn of their strength! 
And how many Solomons have thus had their hearts 
turned away! 

But there are many who see the nature of the 
business yoke and the family yoke, who seem 
quite unconcerned as to the ecclesiastical-association 
with the world. ‘What agreement hath the temple 
of God with idols? For ye are the temple of the 
living God.” Believers, and believers alone, com- 
prise this spiritual house. ‘Know ye not that ye 
are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God 
dwelleth in you?” (1 Cor. iii. 16). Of no unregen- 
erate soul could this be said. Of those only who are 
born again and sealed with the Holy Spirit can it 
be true. It is therefore of the greatest importance 
that Christians refuse all association with world- 
lings in spiritual things. This is beautifully set 
forth in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah, where 
the faithful remnant, having come up from Bab- 
ylon and Persia, are found not only separate 
from the nations, but, when gathered at the place 
where Jehovah’s name had been set of old, they 
indignantly refuse the help of the uncircumcised in 
building the house of God or the walls of the city. 
For them, despite the fact that the Lo-Ammi 


112 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


sentence remained unrepealed, God could act in 
a more open and manifest way than when He 
interfered for the scattered ones of the proviiices 
who separated not from the nations when they had 
the opportunity presented to them in the imperial 
decree. For this remnant, He raised up suited 
ministry. Haggai and Zechariah were able to give 
with no uncertainty “the Lord’s message.’ When 
failure came in, they were in the place where all 
could be dealt with according to the Book; while 
teachers of the Law, like Ezra and the Levites, 
were given to them to instruct them in what was 
there written. 

And so in the passage we have under consider- 
ation, God says to those who “come out from 
among them,’ and who “touch not the unclean 
thing,” that He will receive them; and He adds, 
“T will be a Father wnto you, and ye shall be My 
sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.” 
This is unspeakably precious. God is the Father 
of all who are born again. All such have life 
eternal—divine life, and can say by the Spirit, 
“Abba Father;”’ but though He is the Father of 
all, He is not able always to act as a Father unto 
all. 

It is the obedient who know His gracious and 
special care spoken of in this sense. Leaving all 
else for Him, they find Him to be more than all 
else to them, even in regard to temporal matters. 


THE INSTITUTION OF PURIM II3 


“He knows, and loves, and cares; 
Nothing this truth can dim: 
He gives the very best to those 
Who leave the choice to Him.” 


Separated to Himself, dependent alone upon 
His omnipotent power, they are given to see His 
hand and to discern His actings in grace as others 
cannot who “‘follow afar off,’ and fear to leave 
all that is contrary to His mind, as revealed in 
His Word. ; 

How blessed is it, on the other hand, that even 
where there is not this devotion to Himself that 
should characterize those redeemed at such cost, 
yet He never forgets His own, nor does He ever 
neglect them. But it is more in the manner of His 
actings in the days of Esther that He watches over 
and cares for them—often unseen and unacknowl- 
edged. ‘‘His mercy endureth forever,” and He who 
walked with His unbelieving people for forty years 
in the wilderness never ceases to care for His 
children now, however little they may realize it. 
“Having loved His own which were in the world, 
He loved them unto the end” (John xiii. 1). 

The feast of Purim, then, witnesses the nation’s 
gratitude, however feebly it may set forth their 
recognition that it was God Himself who had so 
wondrously made their affliction the occasion for 
His acting in grace. 

“Then Esther the queen, the daughter of Abi- 


II4 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


hail” (Father of strength), “and Mordecai the Jew, 
wrote with all authority to confirm this second letter 
of Purim. And he sent the letters unto all the 
Jews, to the hundred twenty and seven provinces 
of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, with words of peace 
and truth, to confirm these days of Purim in their 
times appointed, according as Mordecai the Jew 
and Esther the queen had enjoined them, and as 
they had decreed for themselves and for their 
seed the matters of the fastings and their cry” 
(vers. 29-31). It is not likely that the name of 
God was left unmentioned in the publications they 
thus put forth, for “words of peace and truth” 
clearly connected the humiliation of the people and 
their fasting, with the deliverance God gave them 
at the end. “Their cry’ is also mentioned. To 
whom could it be but to God? Were this narration 
of it then written by mere man, how natural would 
it have been to have added the words “‘to God” 
or “‘to the Lord.” But the pen of inspiration never 
errs. The One whose ways are perfect, is the real 
author of the book, whether Mordecai or some 
unknown one was the writer. 

“And the decree of Esther confirmed these matters 
of Purim; and it was written in the book” (ver. 32). 
To the present day, and for ages past, it has been 
the custom of the Hebrews to read this book at the 
annual observance of the feast; and whenever the 


THE INSTITUTION OF PURIM 115 


name of Haman is uttered, the orthodox Jews hiss, 
and stamp, and curse his memory. 

In the days when our Lord was upon earth, 
the canon of Old Testament Scripture, as we now 
know it, had been long since completed, and was 
composed of “the law, the prophets, and the 
Psalms.” Esther was always included in the latter 
division, called in the Greek version “the Hagio- 
grapha.”’ Jesus spoke of all as Scripture. There- 
fore we cannot question the full inspiration of this 
book, as He set His seal upon it. And yet we shall 
look in vain to find any quotation from or refer- 
ence to it in the New Testament. It is the unique 
evidence of God’s unfailing care to a faithless 
people. 

The feast of Purim is never referred to in the 
Gospels either.. It did not properly belong to the 
people as in the land. While the yearly reminder of 
unchanging grace, it was also the evidence of their 
lack of heart for the One who had so acted towards 
them. At the present time it has degenerated into 
a season of godless merry-making, and is more 
patriotic than devotional in character. 


CHAPTER X 
SPEAKING PEACE 


nd Pe story of Satan’s effort to destroy the 
nation of promise, together with the manner 
in which he was thwarted, having been so minutely 
told, there remains nothing more than to picture the 
changed conditions resultant upon the destruction 
of Haman and his house, and the advancement of 
Mordecai. The far-reaching rule of the Persian 
monarch is first shown in the statement that “‘the 
king Ahasuerus laid a tribute upon the land and 
upon the isles of the sea” (ver. 1). All nations had 
to know and own his power, as soon they shall 
own the sway of God’s chosen King. How blessed 
the day when 


“Jesus shall reign where’er the sun 

Doth his successive journeys run: 

His kingdom spread from shore to shore, 
Till moons shall wax and wane no more.” 


“The powers that be are ordained of God;’ but 
all are merely provisional during the present period 


of the true King’s rejection. Soon shall this groan- 
116 


SPEAKING PEACE 117 


ing scene be changed to one of unmingled joy 
and gladness for the delivered nations when there 
shall be revealed from heaven “a righteous ruler 
over men, a ruler in the fear of God!” This, 
Ahasuerus was not. Consequently his world-wide 
domination soon passed to other hands; but when 
God’s Anointed reigns, His kingdom will never be 
superseded. . 

Let the reader not fall into a mistake very com- 
monly made to-day. The Kingdom is not the 
Church. The latter is the body of Christ, composed 
of all who, in this dispensation, are called out from 
Jew and Gentile, and baptized in the power of the 
Holy Spirit. During the period in which God is 
doing this special work of His grace, the Kingdom, 
properly speaking, is in abeyance. It is true the 
principles of the Kingdom are spreading through the 
world, and all who are born again are, even now, 
in, and morally of it. 

But for all that the reigning time has not yet 
come. It is still “the kingdom and patience of 
Jesus Christ.”” When the Lord returns from heaven 
He will descend “with a shout” into the upper air, 
accompanied by “the voice of the archangel and 
the trump of God.” The Church will then be 
complete and her period of testimony and rejection 
on earth will be accomplished. Therefore “the 
dead in Christ shall rise first: then we which are 
alive and remain shall be caught up together with 


119 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: 
and so shall we be forever with the Lord” (1 Thess. 
iV 16,4977 see alsotr Corser, 51456); 

This will be the end of the Christian dispensation, 
but not the end of the world. There are other 
periods to follow. The first will be very brief, and 
is commonly referred to in Scripture as “the great 
tribulation,” “the hour of trial,” and “the time of 
Jacob’s trouble.” In this season (with which a 
great part of the Scripture is occupied, notably Matt. 
xxiv, and the bulk of the Revelation—chaps. iv-xix 
inclusive), the Jewish nation will once more be 
taken up by God. A remnant of them in their un- 
precedented tribulation will turn to His Word and 
will there see that, on account of their rejection 
of Messiah, they had been given up to partial blind- 
ness “until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in.” 
That time having been reached at the rapture of 
the Church, God will then open their eyes to their 
great sin. They will acknowledge the Crucified as 
the Anointed of Jehovah, and will separate them- 
selves from the ungodly mass to wait for His 
appearing as their deliverer. In the land of 
Palestine one will arise of whom Haman is a fit 
type—the personal Antichrist, referred to in Scrip- 
ture under various titles, as “the king’ of Dan. xi. 
36, who “shall do according to his own will; “the 
idol shepherd” of Zech. xi. 15-17; one who “shall 
come in his own name” in John v. 43; “the wicked” 


SPEAKING PEACE 119g 


or “lawless one’ of 2 Thess. ii, “whose coming 
is after the working of Satan with all power and 
signs and lying wonders;” and the two-horned 
beast of Rev. xili, who has the appearance of a 
lamb, to simulate the Lamb of God, but is betrayed 
by his speech, which is that of a dragon. This fear- 
ful character will be the bitter persecutor of the 
faithful Jews for a short period, but as in the mat- 
ter of Haman and Mordecai, when all seems dark- 
est, the Lord shall appear for the destruction of the 
power of evil and the salvation of His people. Then 
follows the establishment of the kingdom which is 
never to be given to another, when for one thou- 
sand years the Lord Jesus shall reign over all the 
earth. 

Whenever world-wide dominion has been en- 
trusted to man, he has, as in all else, utterly failed. 
But when “He shall come whose right it is,’ He 
will judge the naticas in righteousness and manifest 
Jehovah’s perfect rule on earth. This is the 
Kingdom which is the burden of the Old Testa- 
ment prophecies and which is frequently referred 
to in the New Testament. One passage from this 
latter portion we shall here quote. “Having 
made known unto us the mystery of His will, 
according to His good pleasure which He hath 
purposed in Himself: that in the dispensation of 
the fulness of times He might gather together (or 
head up) in one all things in Christ, both which 


¥20 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


are in heaven and which are on earth; even in 
Him” (Eph. i. 10, 11). When that long-waited- 
for dispensation arrives, “the knowledge of the 
Lord shall cover the earth as the waters cover the 
sea.” The heavenly saints will then be associated 
with their Lord in government, while saints on 
earth will, with rejoicing, own His _ beneficent 
sway. 

Misrule and oppression will have ceased forever. 
Earth’s long wail will have changed to a song 
of unending praise to the Lamb once slain.* We 
cannot forbear referring the reader to one beauti- 
ful passage, this time from the Psalms, ere leaving 
this intensely interesting subject. We refer to 
Psalm Ixxii, where Messiah’s kingdom is described 
most vividly. After telling how “He shall come 
down like rain upon the mown grass,” bringing 
refreshment and blessing to this poor parched 
world, we read that ‘He shall have dominion also 
from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends 
of the earth. They that dwell in the wilderness 
shall bow before Him; and His enemies shall lick 
the dust. The kings of Tarshish and of the isles 
shall bring presents: the kings of Sheba and Seba 
shall offer gifts. Yea, all kings shall fall down 


*The attentive reader who may desire further light on the 
Kingdom and connected themes will find great help in “Plain 
Papers on Prophetic Subjects,” by W. Trotter. $1.50. At 
the same publishers. 


SPEAKING PEACE I21 


before Him: all nations shall serve Him” (vers. 
8-11). No wonder that at the conclusion of the 
recital of His glories the inspired singer writes, 
“The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended’’! 
All will be then as it should be; for the whole 
earth will be full of His glory. 

The evanescent character of human greatness 
and the crumbling kingdoms of earth as contrasted 
with the “stone kingdom” yet to come are well 
brought out in the second verse of our chapter 
in Esther. “And ali the acts of his power and 
of his might, and the declaration of the greatness 
of Mordecai, whereunto the king advanced him, 
are they not written in the book of the chronicles 
of the kings of Media and Persia?’ These books 
are probably lost beyond recall. God has, however, 
preserved His own record of the events of those 
days. Were it not for this, we should never have 
known from secuiar history of Mordecai and of 
God’s intervention for the preservation of His 
people in the land of their exile. 

Ahasuerus’ power was of the fading glory of 
this world. He is gone, and his records have 
perished. Mordecai had the interests of Jehovah at 
heart, despite the peculiar circumstances in which 
he was placed. His faithfulness will be remem- 
bered forever. “For Mordecai the Jew was next 
unto king Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, 
and accepted of the multitude of his brethren, 


I22 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking 
peace to all his seed” (ver. 3). He appears as 
a thoroughly disinterested, unselfish person, who, 
though honored by the proud conqueror, never 
acts now as of old, when he counseled Esther against 
revealing her kindred; but is a guileless man, known 
to all as a Jew, and using his power for the blessing 
of the once jeopardized nation. 

That from time to time, even where there is much 
that is contrary to the mind of God, He manifests 
His unbounded grace by giving to His people such 
deliverers is evident both in Scripture and in the 
dark and sorrowful annals of the Church on earth. 
Let no one conclude from this fact that it is a matter 
of small moment to Him if His saints go on with 
that which is contrary to His revealed Word. It 
is one thing to know a Father’s love and cars, 
even though walking in self-chosen paths; it is 
another thing, like Enoch, to walk with God and 
have the testimony that one is pleasing Him. 

As an evidence of how feebly man enters into 
Divine design in Scripture, I would draw atten- 
tion, ere closing, to the well-known fact that in 
the Septuagint version of the Old Testament, and 
found in English in the Apocrypha, there are a 
number of additions to the book of Esther which 
are commonly supposed to be the work of pious 
Egyptian Jews who were troubled by the omission 
of all reference to God, and therefore supplemented 


SPEAKING PEACE 123 


the book with productions of their own, in which 
the glory would all be given to Him. These inter- 
polations are rightly rejected in our version, as 
they never formed part of the Hebrew text, and 
were written after the voice of prophecy had ceased, 
in the days of Malachi. In one of these added 
portions, Haman is referred to as a Macedonian 
whose desire it was to turn the kingdom to his 
people. This would be quite in keeping with the 
times in which they were written. ‘Fhe Persian 
empire was overthrown, as we know, by Alexander 
the Great, whose Macedonian troops so readily 
routed the luxurious Iranian armies. 

Man cannot tamper with God’s word save to 
his ruin, and to the marring of that which is abso- 
lutely perfect in itself. ‘Ail Scripture is given by 
inspiration of God (literally, God-breathed), and 
is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, 
for instruction in righteousness: that the man of 
God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all 
good works” (2 Tim. ili. 16, 17). 

May writer and reader seek, ever more and more, 
to walk as men of God; thus finding in every 
portion of Holy Writ divine furnishing for our 
path through this scene. 


. saints asset 
eae pas Aayatie: thy: clachaM sho § 

eae - esiqolaralhs. ath tnh, AURBIE TE Hi 
eget seperate ibe amideed 20%. 1 at se 
= oY wie = qa. a top 2d biter, Gh. » 
ere reed. ont. ot RE OEY HE agtt- dcldy pine ; 
$7 Teyranyl 4.,int ail, Of Re, HSS METS geal 
latent maaan rsionhroa soils meth co 


ie ee ooo SPEER moras, oat) bamert 
* hy 9ehay Pow bade, pum, sperm an 

a ee sects tors seem: echt, yx Punk ate 

es < teh a orky vi wnsheiene lbe teat aa rekon 

= fata. A badiasidebes) ee bdo By 

 . >  iptetagel, nO oT nb.2 aid 

- a oe cen altastizseeqeypstiins. ak anteugion 
x He. oon baelatrrauh vit quo‘ uit doabrs ax xprey! 

rar : ‘ J = ak tA ip dite ‘ aoe. f 


~ hy tena, hag, enone TONS HI 3 oe Saat ay 
ie : Kay? * guid cam j fj; fg oa } i>. mapas fit yt 3) 
ag a) ob pidahi whi spiadk ya whokhs Medan a ; 
1 ete * Maite tO pecan els ina 
1S oe * sedition? Hg ihe hayek of ether, s 
hie stele aegypti |e oh eer: 
gy 0 eee. ae 

ne a 


que 


7 ' ~- 
oat i © 
* .- : a <4 & 
——— ~. 
«i? e - a : 
= ; PS 
a2 = ‘ J 
= wv ~ - 
' =e a : : 
} bas | = 
- : ie = 
= Ee 
: — 
> 
, ¥ 
‘ ot 
=i 4 
- A, a os 
_ 7 t 
oe ~ 
cen, 
4 — 
7 in é 
ra 2 0 ~~ 
— ms 4 
= 3 
: = = s 
= ss 
~ ~ é 
— a = 
— 
———— ens 
= ~s. i : : 
* 5" A 
he - 
| ; ae 
= - : ae Ae ie 7 _ 
=~ : . a ae 7 7 y rs) 
% ays Sa, 


ae iL) acer eeeee 
" a nee ~ Ayn 


Fo - ad 


lye i, nant ces 
<~" 


spistinteny SEM Ieee rtern 
citnn ria Seas sate Wed eat at GG 


ES 
nee ES 


Se recss 


Sere 


Tretanyserekraetel megetosett 
baa 


