Lr Pi Mai) 2 UP 12/7 


: Poe. PGI 
zS Liatz IZ 1A -< 


524 
BOY 


1224 ITS SUPERNATURAL DESIGN AND 


SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE. 


BY 


ETHELBERT W. BULLINGER, D.D. 


** The works of the Lord are great, 


Sought out of all them that have pleasure therein." 
PENEKI, 2. 


TO BE OBTAINED OF 


THE AUTHOR, BROMLEY, KENT, 
OR, THROUGH THE TRADE, OF 
MESSRS. EYRE AND SPOTTISWOODE, 
GREAT NEw STREET, LONDON, E.C. 


1894. 


| heology Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 


LONDON: 
EYRE AND SP OTTISWOODE, 
Her Majesty's Printers 
DOWNS PARK ROA AD, HAC ENEY N.B. 


PREFACE. 


— 9 Ó.€—— 


ANY writers, from the earliest times, have called 
attention to the importance of the great sub- 
ject of Number in Scripture. It has been dealt with, 
for the most part, in a fragmentary way. One has 
dealt with some particular number, such as “seven”; 
another has been content with a view of the primary 
numbers, and even when defining their significance, 
has given only one or two examples by way of illus- 
tration; another has confined himself to ‘‘ symbolical 
numbers," such as ro, 40, 666, etc.; another has taken 
up such symbolical numbers in their relation to chro- 
nology or to prophecy ; another has collected examples, 
but has dealt little with their meaning. 

There seemed, therefore, to be room, and indeed a 
call, for a work which would be more complete, em- 
brace a larger area, and at the same time be free from 
the many fancies which all, more or less, indulge in 
when the mind is occupied too much with one sub- 
ject. Anyone who values the importance of a par- 
ticular principle will be tempted to see it where it 
does not exist, and if it be not there will force it in, 
in spite sometimes of the original text. Especially is 
this the case when chronology is dealt with, the greater 
uncertainty of dates lending itself more readily to the 
author's fancy. 

The greatest work on this subject, both chronological 
and numerical, is not free from these defects. But its 


vi PREFACE. 


value is nevertheless very great. It is by the late 
Dr. Milo Mahan, of New York. His work Palmoni,* 
which was republished among his collected works, has 
long been out of print. It greatly increased my interest 
in this subject, and led me to further study, besides 
furnishing a number of valuable illustrations. 

It is too much to hope that the present work should 
be free from these defects, which are inseparable from 
human infirmity. From one point of view it is a 
subject which must prove disappointing, at any rate to 
the author, for illustrations are continually being dis- 
covered ; and yet, from another point of view, it would 
be blasphemy to suppose that such a work could be 
complete; for it would assume that the wonders of this 
mine could be exhausted, and that its treasures could 
be all explored ! 

I must, therefore, be content with the setting forth 
of general principles, and with giving a few examples 
from God's Word which illustrate them, leaving others 
to extend the application of these principles and search 
out illustrations of them for themselves. 

May the result of this contribution to a great subject 
be to stimulate the labours of Bible students; to 
strengthen believers in their most holy faith; and to 
convince doubters of the Divine perfection and inspira- 
tion of the Book of Books, to the praise and glory of 
God. 

E. W. BULLINGER. 

Bromley, Kent, 


November 1894. 


* Not the anonymous Palmoni by an English author, published in London. 


CONTENTS. 


—  Qe—— 


PART I, 
SUPERNATURAL DESIGN. 


CHAPTER I. 
THE Works oF Gop. 
The Heavens ... 
Chronology 
NATE ces 
The Vegetable Eur don 
Physiology 
Chemistry 
Sound and Music 
Colour ... 


CHAPTER II. 

THE WorD or Gop. 
The Books of the Bible 
The Writers A m 
Occurrences of Words in Old oe ses 
Occurrences of Words in New Testament ... 
Occurrences of Words in the Apocalypse ... 
Occurrences of Phrases E 
Evidence as to Authorship of — Bi 2 Peter 


Occurrences of Words and Phrases in Old and New mene 


combined .. 


PART 11, 
SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE. 


One 

Two 

Three 

Four 

Five 

Six 

Seven se 556 "s BEG non 


PAGE 


ONU N 


Ko) 


II 


15 
18 


25 
26 
26 
28 
32 
34 
57 


41 


50 

92 
107 
123 
135 
150 
158 


viil CONTENTS. 


Six and Seven together 
Seven by itself 

Eight 

Eight and Seven elie: 
Eight by itself.. Bac 


Eight and Thirteen sees 


Nune see ves aoc 

Ten nr ode oat GG 
Eleven ... a Bod 
Twelve ... ae obe 
Thirteen 

Fourteen 

Fifteen ... 

Seventeen 

Nineteen 

Twenty ... 

Twenty-two 

Twenty-four... doc 
Twenty-five  ... nee y 
Twenty-seven ... o56 ses 
Twenty-eight ... 

Twenty-nine ... 508 200 
Thirty se ; 
Thirty-one... $6 Z 
Forty... Sac Sc DOO 


Forty-two Soe oe 
Fifty ... ooc oo acc 
Fifty-one uoc anc ao 
Sixty-five ie. a aps 
Seventy... con onc coc 


One hundred and twenty 


One hundred and fifty and three 


Two hundred ... "s “06 
Three hundred and ninety 
Four hundred ... 

Four hundred and thirty 

Four hundred and ninety 

Six hundred and sixty-six 


Additional Miscellaneous lita 


Index of Subjects 
Index of Texts... occ od 


see eee 


NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


PART I. 
3te Supernatural Design. 


CHAPTER’ I. 
DESIGN SHOWN IN THE WORKS OF GOD. 


** Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of His hand ; 
And meted out heaven with a span ; 
And comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, 
And weighed the mountains in scales, 

And the hills in a balance?" (Isa. xl. 12.) 


**'The works of the Lonp are great, 
Sought out of all them that have pleasure therein." (Ps. cxi. 2.) 
HERE can be neither works nor words without number. 
We can understand how man can act and speak 
without design or significance, but we cannot imagine that 
the great and infinite Creator and Redeemer could either 
work or speak without both His words and His works being 
absolutely perfect in every particular. 

* As for God His WAY is perfect” (Ps. xviii. 30). * The 
Law of the Lorp is perfect" (Ps. xix. 7). They are both 
perfect in power, perfect in holiness and righteousness, 
perfect in design, perfect in execution, perfect in their object 
and end, and, may we not say, perfect in umber. 

“The Lorn is righteous in all His ways: and holy in all 
His works " (Ps. cxlv. 17). 

All His works were (and are) done, and all His words 
were spoken and written, in the right way, at the right time, 
in the right order, and in the right number. “He telleth the 
number of the stars” (Ps. cxlvii. 4). He “bringeth out their 
host by number” (Isa. xl. 26). * He weigheth the waters by 
measure " (Job xxviii. 25). 


S 1396. 


2 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


We may, therefore, say with David: * I meditate on all 
Thy works; I muse on the work of Thy hands” (Ps. cxliii. 5). 

In all the works of God we find not only what we call 
“Law,” and a Law-maker, but we observe a Law enforcer. 
We speak of laws, but they are nothing in themselves. 
They have no being; they possess no power; they cannot 
make themselves, or carry themselves out. What we mean 
when we speak of law in nature is simply this: God in 
action; God not merely giving or making laws, but carrying 
them out and enforcing them. 

As He is perfect, so His works and His words also must 
be perfect. And when we see number used not by chance, 
but by design; not at haphazard, but with significance; 
then we see not merely so many works and words, but 
the Living God working and speaking. 

In this first part of our subject we are to speak only of 
design in the use of number; and in.the second part, of 
significance. In this first chapter we will confine our thoughts 
to design as it is seen in the works of God ; and in the second, 
as it is seen in the Word of God. 

When we see the same design in each; the same laws at 
work; the same mysterious principles being carried out in 
each, the conviction is overwhelming that we have the same 
great Designer, the same Author; and we see the same 
Hand, the same seal stamped on all His works, and the same 
signature or autograph, as it were, upon every page of His 
Word. And that, not an autograph which may be torn off or 
obliterated, but indelible, like the water-mark in the paper; 
so impressed upon and interwoven with it that no power 
on earth can blot it out. 

Let us turn first to 

Tur Heavens. 

Here we see number displayed in a remarkable manner. 
The 12 signs of the Zodiac, each with three constellations, 
making 36 in all, which together with the 12 signs make a 
total of 48. There must be a reason, therefore, why the 
number 12 should thus pervade the heavens. Why should 
12 be the predominating factor? Why should it not be LI 
Or 13, 07, or 20? 

Because 12 is one of the four perfect numbers, the number 
of governmental perfection; hence it is associated with the rule 


CHRONOLOGY. 3 


of the heavens, for the sun is given “ to rule the day,” and the 
moon “to govern the night." The significance of this, how- 
ever, must be deferred till we come to consider the number 
“twelve” under this head. It is enough for us now to 
notice the fact here, upon the threshold of our subject, that 
we have one common measure, or factor, which is seen in the 
12 signs of the Zodiac, the 36 (3 x 12) constellations, the 
total 48 (4 x 12); the 360 (12 x 30) degrees, into which the 
great circle of the heavens is divided. No one can tell us 
why the number of degrees was first fixed at 360. It has 
come down to us from ancient times, and is used universally 
without a question. And it is this division of the Zodiac 
which gives us the 12 months of the Zodiacal year. This is 
called also the Prophetic year, for it is the year which is 
used in the prophecies of the Bible.t 

Here, then, is an example of number as it is used in the 
heavens. Twelve is the pervading factor. 


CHRONOLOGY. 


It is not necessary to go into the intricacies of this vast 
part of our subject. Notwithstanding the fact that God 
gave to man these heavenly time-keepers, he has so misused 
the gift (as he has every other gift which God has ever 
given him) that he cannot tell you now what year it 


* There are other modern constellations now: Hevelius (1611-1687) added 
twenty-two ; Halley (1656-1742) added fifteen. But every one knows how 
different these are from the ancient constellations, both in their names, their 
character, and their utter absence of all significance. 

1 It probably arises from the product of the four numbers, 3, 4, 5, 6, which 
arise out of the phenomena which lie at the root of Geometrical and Arithme- 
tical Science. 3 x 4 x 5 x 6 — 360, while 360 x 7 —2520. 

f There are different or relative kinds of years, according as we reckon 
the revolutions of the sun in relation to certain objects, e.g.: (1.) In relation 
to the egzzzoctzal points. The time taken by the sun to return to the same 
equinoctial point is called the Solar year (also the Civ, or Tropical year), 
and consists of 365'2422414 solar days (or 365 days 5 hours 48 minutes 
49:7 seconds). (2.) In relation to the stars. The time taken by the sun to 
return to the same fixed star is called the Sidereal year, and consists of 
365:2563612 solar days (or 365 days 6 hours 9 minutes 9'6.seconds). 
(3-) In relation to his own orbit. The time taken by the sun to return to the 
same point in his own orbit is called the Anomalistic year, and consists of 
36572595981 solar days (or 365 days 6 hours 13 minutes 49:3 seconds). The 
word ‘*Anomalistic” means zrzegu/ar, and this kind of year is so called 
because from it the first irregularities of planetary motion were discovered. 

B2 


4 NUMBER IN SCRIPTUKE. 


really is! No subject is in more hopeless confusion, made 
worse by those who desire the dates to fit in with their 
theories of numbers, instead of with the facts of history. 

We shall, therefore, avoid man's use of numbers. Our 
only concern in this work is with God's use of them. 
Here we shall find both design and significance. Here, 
therefore, we shall find that which is certain and full of 
interest. 

The first natural division of time is stamped by the 
Number seven, On the seventh day God rested from His 
work of Creation. 

When He ordained the ritual for Israel which should 
show forth His work of Redemption, sevez is again stamped 
upon it in all its times and seasons. The seventh day was 
the holy day; the seventh month was specially hallowed by 
its number of sacred festivals; the seventh year was the 
Sabbatic year of rest for the land: while 7 x 7 years 
marked the year of Jubilee (Lev. xxv. 4, 8). 

Thirty jubilees bring us from the Exodus to the open- 
ing of Christ's ministry, when, opening Isa. lxi. 2, He pro- 
claimed “the acceptable year of the Lord” in a seven-fold 
prophecy (see Luke iv. 18-21). 

The great symbolical divisions of Israels history, or 
rather of the times of God's dealings with them, are 
marked by the same number; and if we confine ourselves 
to duration of years rather than to the succession of years 
and chronological dates; with kapós (kairos), season, a defin- 
itely limited portion of time, rather than with xpóvos (chronos), 
time, ¢he course of time in general* (hence our word “ chro- 
nology "),— we shall have no difficulty. 

God’s dealings with His people have to do with actual 
duration of time rather than with specific da/es ; and we find 
"that His dealings with Israel were measured out into four 
periods, each consisting of 490 (70 times 7) years. Thus :— 

The rst. From Abraham to the Exodus. 

The 2nd. The Exodus to the Dedication of Temple. 
The 3rd. From the Temple to Nehemiah's return. 
The 4th. From Nehemiah to the Second Advent. 


* In modern Greek kapós has come to mean weather, and xpóvos, year, 
thus preserving the essential distinction between the two words. 


CHRONOLOGY. 5 


It is clear that these are periods of duration having regard 
only to Israel, and to Jehováh's immediate dealings with 
them. For in each one there is a period of time during 
which He was not immediately governing them, but in which 
His hand was removed, and His people were without visible 


tokens of His presence with them. 
Years. 
I. From the birth of Abraham to the Exodus 


was actually (Gen. xii. 4; xvi 3; and 

xxi. 5) "E ss 505 
But deducting the 15 years gile eee was 

Abram’s seed, delaying the seed of pro- 

mise ... Sea mu T 5 M. I5 


Leaving the first 70 x 7 of years 490 


2. From the Exodus to the foundation of the 


Temple, according to Acts xiii. 20: f 
Years. Years. 


In the Wilderness e m n M 
Under the Judges H, E. .. 450 
Saul de ae "hh T PES" 
David abe e. ws 40 


Solomon (1 Bits Vier 135 E 
= 9595 


* Abraham was 75 years old when the promise (Gen. xii. 4) was made to 
him. The Law was given 430 years after (Exod. xii. go; Gal. iii. 17). But 
430 and 75 make 505 years, or 15 years over the 490. How are we to 
' account for this gap of 15 years as forming part of the 505 years? The 
answer is that at Abraham's departure into Canaan (xii 4) he was 75 years 
old, Ishmael was born ro years after (xvi 3), therefore Abraham was 85 
years old at Ishmael's birth. But he was 100 years old when Isaac was born 
(xxi 5). Therefore it follows that there were 15 years (100 minus 85-15) 
during which Ishmael was occupying and usurping the place of the ** promised 
seed”; and 15 from 505 leaves 490. Here then we have the first of the 
seventy-seven of years, and the first **gap" of 15 years. 

+ The actual number of years was $73, according to Acts xiii 20. But 
I Kings vi 1 says: ‘‘It came to pass in the four hundred and eightieth year 
after the children of Israel were come out of Egypt . . . . he began to build 
the house of the Lorp.” Therefore commentators immediately conclude that 
the book is wrong. It never seems to dawn on them that key can be wrong. 
But they are, because the number is ordinal, not cardinal, and it does not 
say four hundred and eighty years, but *'eightieth year." The 48oth 
from or of what? Of the duration of God's dealings with His people, 
deducting the 93 years while He had ‘‘sold them” into the hands of others. 
Thus there is no discrepancy between 1 Kings vi 1 and Actsxiii 20. In 
the Acts the actual number of years is stated in a cardinal number ; while 


6 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


But from these we must deduct the Captivities 
under 
Cushan (Judg. iii. 8)... ne E 8 
Eglon (Judg. iii. 14) ... T "T eS 
Jabin (Judg. iv. 3) ake T ss mE 
Midianites (Judg. vi. 1) E ie 7 
Philistines (Judg. xiii. 1) * FP xs 40 
s 


Leaving 480 
To this we must add the years during which 
the Temple was in building, for the finish- 

ing of the house (1 Kings vi. 38) ... x 7 
And aż least for the furnishing and ending of 

all the work (1 Kings vii. 13-51) T m 3 


Making altogether the second 70 x 7 of years = 490 


3. From the Dedication of the Temple to 
Nehemiah’s return in the 20th year of 


Artaxerxes us Dos. 4 560 
Deduct the 7o years' Captivity in payi MES 
RXV, an DI NOM uu ia s 70 


Leaving the ¢Aird 70 X 7 of years 490 
4. From Nehemiah’s return to “ cutting off” of 
* Messiah the Prince” (Dan. ix. 24-27) 
The **Seven weeks" (7 x 7) . vw. 49 
The * Threescore and two weeks" 
(02.0208 “as UR dee n wade 


483 


in the Kings a certain reckoning is made in an ordinal number, and a 
certain year in the order of God's dealings with His people is named. And 
yet by some, the inspiration of Acts xiii 20 is impugned, and various 
shifts are resorted to, to make it what man thinks to be correct. The 
R.V. adopts an ancient punctuation which does not after all remove the 
difficulty ; while in the Speaker’s Commentary the words in 1 Kings vi. I are 
printed within brackets, as though they were of doubtful authority. 

* The 18 years of Judg. x. 8 were part of the joint 40 years’ oppression ; om 
the one side Jordan by the Philistines, and on ‘the other side Jordan in the 
land of the Amorites ” by the Ammonites. w 

ł For in 1 Kings viii. 2 it was dedicated in the seventh month, though it 
was finished in the eighth month, Therefore it could not have been the same 


year ; and it may well have required three years for the completion of all the: 
interior work described in 1 Kings vii. 13-51. 


CHRONOLOGY. 7 


“After” this, Messiah was to be “cut off,” 
and then comes this present interval, the 
longest of all, now more than 1890 years, 
to be followed, when God again deals 
with His people Israel, by * One week” ** 7 


490 


Thus the number seven is stamped on “the times and 
seasons" of Scripture, marking the spiritual perfection of the 
Divine Prophecies. 


NATURE. 


We see the same law at work in various departments of 
nature, Sometimes one number is the dominant factor, 
sometimes another. In nature seven is found to mark the 
only possible mode of classification of the mass of individuals 
which constitutes the special department called science. We 
give the seven divisions, with examples from the animal and 
vegetable kingdoms. The one specimen of an animal (the 
dog) and one specimen of a flower (the rose). 


I. Kinepom...  .. Animal ..  .. Vegetable. 
II. Sus-Kincpom ... Vertebrata .. Phanerogamia. 
III. Crass ... .. Mammalia .. Dicotyledon. 
IV. ORDER ..  .. Carnivora .. Rosifloree. 
NMOSPAXXIEY ...  .. Canide ..  .. Rosacia. 
NL GswUS .. ... Dog o u Roa: 
VII. SpecIES ...  .. Spaniel .. ... Tea-rose. 


* This **one week " must be future, because since Messiah was ** cut off”? 
no prince has come and made a covenant with the Jews and in the ** midst of 
the week" caused **the sacrifice and the oblation to cease." This is specially 
stated to be the work of ‘‘the Prince that shall come.” See Dan. viii. 11, 
where it is done by **the little horn" ; xi. 31, where it is the work of ‘the 
vile person ” (different names for the same person) ; and xii. rr. All these four 
passages are the work of the same person, and that person is not Christ, but 
Antichrist. Besides, Messiah was ‘‘cut off” after the **threescore and two 
weeks," że., at the end of the second of these three divisions. This cannot be 
the same event as that which is to take place ‘‘in the midst” of the ZZzzZ of 
these three divisions. In a prophecy so distinct, that the very distinction is 
the essential part of it, it is impossible for us to introduce such confusion by 
violently taking an event declared to take place *'after" the end of the second 
period and say it is the same event which is spoken of as taking place in the 
middle of the ZAird ; and at the same time, out of four distinct descriptions 


8 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


Ture VEGETABLE Kinepom. 

Here all is law and order. Number comes in, in many 
cases determining various classifications. In the Endogens 
(or inside-growing plants) ‘¢hree is a prevailing number ; 
while in Exogens (or outside-growing plants) jive is a pre- 
vailing number. 

The grains in Indian corn, or maize, are set in rows, 
generally straight, but in some cases spirally. These rows 
are always arranged in an even number. Never odd! They 
range from 8, 10, I2, 14, 16, and sometimes as high as 24. 
But never in 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, or any odd number of rows. The 
even number is permanent. Mr. H. L. Hastings tells of one 
farmer who looked for 27 years and could not find a “cob” 
with an odd number of rows. A slave was once offered his 
freedom if he found a corn-cob with an odd number, and one 
day he found one! But he had found it also some time 
before, when it was young; carefully cut out one row, and 
bound it up, so that the parts grew fogether as the corn-cob 
developed, and finally presented the phenomenon of having an 
odd number of rows. This exception proves the rule in an 
interesting manner. 

If we notice how the leaves grow upon the stem of a plant, 
not only is Jaw seen in classifying their nature and character, 
but umber is observed in their arrangement and disposition. 
Some are placed alternately, some opposite, while others are 
arranged spirally. But in each case all is in perfect order. 
After a certain number of leaves one will come imme- 
diately over and in the same line with the first :— 

In the apple it is the fifth leaf, 

In the oak it is the fourth, 

In the peach, etc., it is the sixth, 

In the holly, etc., it is the eighth; but it takes zwo Zurzs of 
the spiral before the eighth leaf stands immediately 
over the first. 

In the larch it is the twenty-first leaf; but it is not until 
after eight turns of the spiral that the twenty-first leaf 
stands directly over the first. 


of the latter event to make one refer to the former and three to the latter 
—thisis simply trifling with the Word of God. A system of interpretation 
which requires such violent and unwarranted treatment of God's Word stands 
self-condemned. 


PHYSIOLOGY. 9 


Examples might be multiplied indefinitely were design in 
nature our only subject. We are anxious to search the Word 
of God, and therefore can touch merely the surface of His 
works, but sufficiently to illustrate the working of Law and 
the presence of the Law-enforcer. 


PuysIoLocy 
-offers a vast field for illustration, but here again the grand 
impress is seen to be the number seven. The days of man's 
years are “Three-score years and ten" (7 x 10). In seven 
years the whole structure of his body changes: and we are 
all familiar with *the seven ages of man." 
There are seven Greek words used to describe these sevez 
ages, according to Philo :— 
1. Infancy (voi&iov, paidion, child). 
2. Childhood (ais, pais, boy). 
3. Youth (uepáxtov, merrakzon, lad, stripling). 
4. Adolescence (veavíaxos, neaniskos, young man). 
5. Manhood (àvýp, anēr, man). 
6. Decline (apeoBurns, presbutes, old man). 
7. Senility (yépov, geron, aged man). 
The various periods of gestation also are commonly a 
multiple of seven, either of days or weeks. 


With Ixsrcrs the ova are hatched from seven half-days (as 
the wasp, bee, etc.) ; while with others it is seven whole 
days. The majority of insects require from 14 (2 X 7) to 
42 (6 x 7) days; the same applies to the Jarva state. 


With Axixars the period of gestation ofÍ— 
The mouse is 21 (3 X 7) days. 
The hare and rat, 28 (4 x 7) days. 
The cat, 56 (8 x 7) days. 
The dog, 63 (9 X 7) days. 
The lion, 98 (14 x 7) days. 
The sheep, 147 (21 x 7) days. 
With Biros, the gestation of— 
The common hen is 21 (3 X 7) days. 
The duck, 42 (6 x 7) days. 
With the Human species it is 280 days (or 40 X 7). 
Moreover, man appears to be made on what we may call 
the seven-day principle. In various diseases the seventh, 


10 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


fourteenth, and twenty-first are critical days; and in others 
seven or 14 half-days. Man’s pulse beats on the seven-day 
principle, for Dr. Stratton points out that for six days out of 
the seven it beats faster in the morning than in the evening, 
while oz the seventh day tt beats slower. Thus the number sever 
is stamped upon physiology, and he is thus admonished, as 
man, to rest one day in seven. He cannot violate this law 
with impunity, for it is interwoven with his very being. He 
may say “I will rest when I please,"—one day in ten, or 
irregularly, or not at all. He might as well say of his eight- 
day clock, *It is mine, and I will wind it up when I please." 
Unless he wound it at least once in eight days, according to 
the principle on which it was made, it would be worthless as 
aclock. So with man’s body. If he rests not according to 
the Divine law, he will, sooner or later, be compelled to 
* keep his sabbaths," and the rest which he would not take 
at regular intervals, at God's command, he has to take at the 
command of man all at once! Even in this case God gives 
him more rest than he can get for himself; for God would 
have him take 52 days' rest in the year, and the few days' 
* change" he is able to get for himself is a poor substitute 
for this. It is like all man’s attempts to improve on God's way. 
It is not always seven, however, which is thé predominant 
factor in physiology or natural history. 
In the case of the Bzz, it is the number Zree which per- 
vades its phenomena— 
In three days the egg of the queen is hatched. 
It is fed for nine days (3 x 3). 
It reaches maturity in 15 days (5X 3). 
The worker grub reaches maturity in 21 days (7 x 3), 
And is at work three days after leaving its cell. 
The drone matures in 24 days (8 x 3). 
The bee is composed of three sections, —head and two 
stomachs. 
The two eyes are made up of about 3,000 small eyes, 
each (like the cells of the comb) having six sides 
(2 X 3). 
Underneath the body are six (2 x 3) wax scales with 
which the comb is made. 
It has six (2 x 3) legs. Each leg is composed of three 
sections. 


CHEMISTRY. T 


The foot is formed of three triangular sections. 
The antenne consist of nine (3 X 3) sections. 
The sting has nine (3 X 3) barbs on each side. 

Is this design? or is it chance? Why should it be the 
number /Aree instead of any other number? No one can 
tell. We can only observe the wondrous working of super- 
natural laws, and admire the perfection of design. 


| CHEMISTRY. 

Here we are met with a field of research in which constant 
discoveries are being made. Chemistry is worthy of the 
name Sczence. Here are no theories and hypotheses, which 
deprive other so-called sciences of all title to the name. 
Science is Sczen/za, knowledge, that which we £zow, and what 
we know is Zru/A which can never alter. Chemistry, for 
example, is not like geology, whose old theories are con- 
stantly being superseded by new ones. If we &£zow the action 
of a certain substance, then our knowledge never changes. 
But side by side with this unchangeable truth there is the 
constant discovery of new truths. 

All matter is made up of certain combinations of various. 
elements, which are its ultimate, indecomposable constituents. 
Not that these elements are absolutely simple, but that hitherto. 
they have not been decomposed. Some of these have been 
known from the most ancient times, while others are of quite 
recent discovery. Hence their number is slowly being in- 
creased. In 1874 there were 64; now there are about 70. 

But though their total number cannot yet be known, the 
law by which they are arranged has been discovered. This 
law is complex, but perfect. 

I. All the elements when magnetized fall into two classes. 
One class immediately ranges itself east and west, at right 
angles to the line of magnetic force (which is north and 
south), and is hence called Diamagnetic (t.e. through or across 
the magnet); while the other immediately ranges itself by 
the side of and parallel to the magnetic pole (ze. north and 
south) and is called Paramagnetic (ie. by the side of the 
magnet). 

2. Further, it is observed that these elements have other 
properties. Some combine with only ome atom of another 
element, and are called Monads; some combine with only 


12 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


zwo atoms of another element, and are called Dads; some 
combine with only ¢hree, and are called Zrzads; while those 
that combine with four are called TZetrads, etc. 

3. Now when the elements are arranged, first on the two 
sides of the dividing line, according to their Diamagnetic and 
Paramagnetic characters; and then placed on lines according 
to their properties as Monads, Dads, etc.; and further, are 
arranged in the order of their atomic egis the result is 
seen in the accompanying illustration, which exhibits the 
presence and working of a wonderful law. 

On carefully examining this table it will be seen, —— 

1. That on either side of the central or neutral line, there 
are alternate groups of seven elements, and that these sevez 
fall into the form of an introversion, Monad answering to 
Monad, Diad to Diad, etc., thus :— 


M. on ad 
l bos 


Triag 
l 


lTetrad 


Dus 


\ 
Monad 

Then, on the other side, the group of seven is arranged in 
the opposite way, but in a corresponding manner :— 


Monad 
d \ 


Triad 
\ 


Tetradı 


| 
Triag 1 
Diaq 


| 
M, Onad 


Thus we have an introversion of seven elements alternated 
throughout the entire series. 


* The atomic weight is the smallest weight according to which different 
elements combine; e.g. hydrogen, whose atomic weight is 2, will combine 
with oxygen, whose atomic weight is 16, forming water. With carbon, whose 
atomic weight is 12, it combines also the same proportion of 2 to 12 (or 
1106). These are what are called the atomic weights, or the ** combining 
Proportions,” 


CHEMISTRY. 13 


Reynold's Curve of the Elements. 
according to the 
Newlands-Mendelejeff Periodic Law. 


Yeterbium 173 _ _ 


ellurium (25 dod 


o 
: 56 
Wed 58.€ 


Beryllium [9 


Diad Triad Tetrad 


A f F 
Tetrad Triad Diad Monad Scale of Monad 


Weights 


Diamagnetic Elements Paramagnetic Elements. 


14 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


2. Next observe that each time the line crosses upward 
from right ło left there is a group of ¢hree neutral ele- 
ments that occur together, near the atomic weights of 60, 
100, and 190. So perfect is the law that the discoverers 
believe that about the points 20 and 155 there are yet 
two sets of three elements to be discovered for the places 
marked € 99, 

3. Also observe that when the lines pass upward from left 
to right there are zo elements whatever on this neutral line, 
and therefore we do not expect any to be discovered. 

4. Further, that there are others which will yet be dis- 
covered to fill in the gaps that are left vacant, above the 
weights 145. A few years ago the number stood at 64. 
The present list contains 69. Some newly-discovered ele- 
ments have been brought under notice while writing these 
words. They are Cerium, 141'5; Neodymium, 140:8; Pra- 
seodunium, 143:6; and “ Ytterbium,” 173. These with others 
that may yet be discovered will fill up some of the gaps 
that remain. 

5. There is an element whose atomic weight is a mul- 
tiple of 7 (or very nearly so) for every multiple up to 147, 
while the majority of the others are either square numbers 
(or multiples of a square number), multiples of 11, or cube 
numbers. Indeed we may say that every zmportant element 
is a multiple of either 4 or 7; gold, the most valuable, for 
example, being 196 (4x 7°); zron, the most useful, 56 
{7 x 2); silver being 108 (4 X 27, or 2? x 3°), copper 63 (7 x9), 
carbon 12 (3 X 4), mercury 200 (4 X 50), bismuth 208 (4 X 52), 
etc, * 

6. Note that all the parts of the image which Nebuchad- 
nezzar saw in his dream are here, and they are all on the 
left or diamagnetic side ; that is to say, they are at cross pur- 
poses with the line of Divine government! The three which 
are pure and unmixed are all on the same line of monads— 
“gold,” “silver,” and “ copper,” —while the fourth, “ iron,” 
is neutral, neither for nor against, like the fourth power, 
which is both religious and at the same time antichristian. 
The heaviest is at the top and the lightest at the bottom, 


* Where the others are not exact multiples of these numbers, they are so 
nearly exact that the slight uncertainty in the accepted weights might account 
for some of the differences, 


SOUND AND MUSIC. 15 


as though to show us that the image being top-heavy is 
not destined to stand. Three have already passed away; 
the fourth is approaching its end; and presently, the 
*power" which was committed to the Gentiles shall be 
given to Him * whose right it is," and the fifth monarchy 
(illustrated by the Rock out of which all the others proceed) 
shall swallow all up when the kingdoms of this world shall. 
become the kingdom of our Lord and of His Christ. 

'Thus the very elements of matter are all arranged accord- 
ing to number and law. When this law was first spoken of, 
it appeared to some chemists to be as absurd as suggesting 
that the alphabetical arrangement could be the scientific or 
natural order. 

But here we have a natural, or rather, we should say, a 
Divine order. For the elements, when arranged according 
to the weights and properties which God has given to them, 
are found to fall into this wondrous order. Here there can 
be no room for human fancy, but all is the result of know- 
ledge, or science truly so called. 


Sounp AND Music. 

Sound is the impression produced on the ear by the vibra- 
tions of air. The pzřch of the musical note is higher or lower 
according as these vibrations are faster or slower. When 
they are too slow, or not sufficiently regular and continuous 
to make a musical sound, we call it zozse. 

Experiments have long been completed which fix the 
number of vibrations for each musical note; by which, of 
course, we may easily calculate the difference between the 
number of vibrations de/ween each note. 

These were finally settled at Stuttgart in 1834. They 
were adopted by the Paris Conservatoire in 1859, but it was 
not till 1869 that they were adopted in England by the 
Society of Arts. The following is the scale of Do showing 
the number of vibrations in a second under each note and 
the differences between them :— 


C D E E G A B x 
Do Re Mi Fa Sol La Si 


—— — 


<= 


264 (33) 297 (33) 330 (22) 352 (44) 396 (44) 440 (55) 495 (33) 528 
(24x11) (27x11) (30X11) (32X1z) (36X12) (40X11) (45x11) (48x11) 


16 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


In the upper row of figures, those immediately under 
each note are the number of vibrations producing such 
note. The figures in brackets, between these numbers, 
show the difference between these vibrations. The figures 
in the lower line are merely the factors of the respective 
numbers. 

On examining the above it will be at once seen that the 
number eleven is stamped upon music; and we may say 
seven also, for there are seven notes of the scale (the eighth 
being the repetition of the first). 

The number of vibrations in a second, for each note, is 
a multiple of eleven, and the difference in the number of vibra- 
tions between each note is also a multiple of eleven. These 
differences are not always the same. We speak of tones 
and semitones, as though all tones were alike, and all semi- 
tones were alike; but this is not the case. The difference 
between the semztone Mi and Fa* is 22; while between the 
other semitone, Sz and Do, it is 33. So with the zones: the 
difference between the tone Do and Re, for example, is 
33; while between Fa and Sol it is 22; between Sol and 
La it is 44; and between Za and Sy it is 55. 

The ‘ear can detect and convey these vibrations to the 
brain only within certain limits. Each ear has within it 
a minute organ, like a little harp, with about ten thousand 


* In using this notation it is worth recording and remembering, in passing 
(though it is hardly relevant to our subject), the origin of what is now called 
Solfeggio. It arose from a Mediæval hymn to John the Baptist which had this 
peculiarity that the first six lines of the music commenced respectively on the 
first six successive notes of the scale, and thus the first syllable of each line 
was sung to a note one degree higher than the first syllable of the line that 
preceded it :— 

Ut gueant laxis 

Re-sonare fibris 

Mi-za gestorum 

Fa-muli tuorum 

Sol-ve polluti 

La-&k reatum 

Sancto Johannes. 
By degrees these syllables became associated and identified with their respec- 
tive notes, and as each syllable ended with a vowel they were found to be 
peculiarly adapted for vocal use, Hence Uz was artificially replaced by ** Do,” 
Guido of Arezzo was the first to adopt them in the 11th century, and 
Le Maire, a French musician of the 17th century, added ‘*.Si” for the seventh 
note of the scale, in order to complete the series, It might have been formed 
from the initial letters of the two words in this line, S and Z, 


SOUND AND MUSIC. 17 


strings. These organs were discovered by an Italian named 
Corti, and hence have been named “the organs of Corti.” 
When a sound is made, the corresponding string of this little 
harp vibrates in sympathy, and conveys the impression to 
the brain. The immense number of these little strings pro- 
vides for the conveyance of every conceivable sound within 
certain limits. In the scale, as we have seen, there is a 
range of 264 vibrations. There is a difference between each 
one, so that there are practically 264 notes in the scale, but 
the ear cannot detect them. The ear of a skilled violinist 
can detect many more than an ordinary untrained ear. The 
mechanical action of a pianoforte can record only twelve of 
these notes. The violin can be made to produce a much 
larger number, and is therefore more perfect as an instru- 
ment, but not equal in this respect to the human voice. The 
wonderful mechanism of the human voice, being created by 
God, far excels every instrument that man can make. 

There are vibrations which the ear cannot detect, so 
slow as to make no audible sound, but there are ‘contri- 
vances by which they can be made vwrsidle to the eye. When 
sand is thrown upon a thin metal disc, to which a chord is 
attached and caused to vibrate, the sand will immediately 
arrange itself in @ perfect geometrical pattern. The pattern 
will vary with the number of the vibrations. These are 
called * Chladni's figures." Moist plaster on glass or moist 
water-colour on rigid surfaces will vibrate at the sound, 
say, of the human voice, or of a cornet, and will assume 
forms of various kinds—geometrical, vegetable and floral; 
some resembling ferns, others resembling leaves and shells, 
according to the pitch of the note. 

The * Pendulograph" is another contrivance for render- 
ing these vibrations visible to the eye; and for exhibiting 
depths of sound which are totally inaudible to the ear. 
The pen is attached to one pendulum and the paper to the 
other, and these are made to oscillate at right angles with 
each other. When each pendulum is set at ze same length 
(making the same number of vibrations in the same time), 
the figure made by the pen will be a perfect circle. But 
when these lengths (or vibrations) vary, the patterns that 
are described are as exquisite as they are marvellous, and 
almost infinite in their variety and design. 


S 1356. 


18 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


Even the organs of Corti are limited in their perception, 
notwithstanding the many thousands of minute vibrating 
chords. When these organs are perfect or well formed 
there is what is called “an ear for music.” But in many 
cases there is “no ear for music.” This means that these 
organs are defective, not fully developed, or malformed, 
in the case of such persons; and that the sounds are not 
accurately conveyed to the brain. 

There is a solemn and important truth therefore in the 
words, “ HE THAT PLANTED THE EAR"! (Ps. xciv. 9). What 
wondrous planting ! 

Not every one has this peculiar (musical) “ear.” And no 
one has by nature that ear which can distinguish the things 
of God. The spiritual ear is the direct gift and plant- 
ing of God. Hence it is written, “He that hath an ear,” 
ze, only he that hath that divinely-planted, God-given ear 
can hear the things of the Spirit of God. “An ear to 
hear" those spiritual things is a far greater reality, and an 
infinitely greater gift, than an ear for music!" Oh won- 
drous ear! It is the Lord that gives “the hearing ear” 
(Prov. xx. 12). He wakeneth the ear to hear (Isa. l. 4); 
It is the Lord that openeth the ear (Isa. l 5). The 
natural ear does not hear spiritual sounds; it cannot dis- 
cern them (Isa. lxiv. 4 and 1 Cor. ii. 9). Thus nature and 
grace illustrate each other, and reveal the great fact that 
there is a secret ear, more delicate than any “organs of 
Corti," that can detect sounds invisible as well as inaudible 
to the senses, and which enables those who possess it to 
say :— 

* Sweeter sounds than music knows 
Charm me in Emanuel’s name; 


All her hopes my spirit owes 
To His birth, and cross, and shame.” 


COLOUR. 


One more step brings us to colour, which is caused by the 
vibrations of ZgA/, as sound is caused by the vibrations of 
a. There is a relation between the two, so that a par- 
ticular colour corresponds to a particular note in music. 

Hence there are seven colours answering to the seven 
musical sounds, and it is found that sounds which harmonize, 


COLOUR. | 19 


correspond with colours that harmonize. While discords in 
colour correspond with discords in music. 

The seven, both in music and colour, are divided into three 
and four. Three primary colours and four secondary, from 
which all others proceed, answer to the three primary sounds 
called the Tri-chord, or common chord, and four secondary. 

The subject is too abstruse to enlarge further upon here. 
Sufficient has been said to show that in the works of God 
all is perfect harmony, order and symmetry, both in number 
and design; and one corresponds with the other in a real 
and wonderful manner. 

The one great question now is, May we not expect to 
find the same phenomena in that greatest of all God’s works, 
viz, His Word? If not the greatest in some senses, yet 
it is the greatest in its importance to us. For if we find in 
it the same corresponding perfection in design, then we 
see throughout the whole of it the same mysterious auto- 
graph. And its truths, and promises, and precepts come to 
us with increased solemnity and power; for the words of 
the book say with the stars of heaven 


“The hand that made us is divine.” 


20 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


CHAPTER II. 


DESIGN SHOWN IN THE WORD OF GOD. 


E now come to the Word of God, which is the greatest, 

and, to us, most important of all God's works. May 

we not look for, and expect to find, number used not only 

with the same wondrous design, but, here, with significance 

also? If there be design, there must be significance. We 

may not always see the reason for the latter in the works of 

creation; but we cannot fail to do so in the great work of 
Divine Revelation. 

In Dan. viii. 13 we read, * Then I heard one saint speak- 
ing, and another saint said unto that certain saint which spake, 
How long shall be the vision concerning the daily sacrifice, 
and the transgression of desolation,” etc.? Here, a revela- 
tion of a certain future prophetic event was made to Daniel, 
by a certain saint or holy one, ze, a holy angel; and “ an- 
other" angel asked a question concerning zumbers—** How 
long," etc.? The name of *that certain saint" is given in 
the Hebrew, and is placed in the margin, with its meaning. 
His name is “ ParxoNr," and it means “the mumberer of secrets, 
or the wonderful numberer.” 

So that there is one holy angel, at least, whose function 
has to do with numbers. Numbers, therefore, and their 
secrets, hold an important place in the words as well as in 
the works of God. “A wonderful numberer" (* Parwowr") 
presides over them, and has his place in making known the 
things of God. 

This certainly looks like design; and, if so—if not only 
the *days" in which revealed events shall take place are 
numbered, but the words also themselves are numbered— 
then we shall have a great and wondrous proof of the Di- 
vine, verbal, and even literal inspiration of the Word of God. 

“It is the glory of God to conceal a thing: but the honour 
of kings is to search out a matter" (Prov. xxv. 2). In search- 
ing out, therefore, the secrets of the Word of God, we are 
doing not only a royal, but an honourable work. 

“The works of the Lorn are great: sought out of all them 


€ 


SUPERNATURAL DESIGN. 228i 


that have pleasure therein" (Ps. cxi. 2). This is quite 
different, of course, from trying to find out what God calls 
His * secret things." 

“The secret things belong unto the Lorp our God; but 
those things which are revealed belong unto us and to our 
children for ever" (Deut. xxix. 29). Our searching must be 
confined to what is revealed. With what God has been pleased 
not to reveal, but to keep secret, not only have we nothing 
whatever to do, but we are guilty of the sin of presumption 
in even speculating about it. If a child of God is observed 
to be much occupied with God’s “secret things,” he will be 
found to be one who neglects the study of the things which 
God has revealed. 

We can have neither words nor works without ‘ number.” 
The question which we have to answer is—Is number used 
with design or by chance? Surely if God uses it, it must be 
with infinite wisdom and with glorious perfection. And so 
it is. Each number has its own significance; and its mean- 
ing is found to be in moral harmony and relation to the 
subject matter in connection with which it stands. This 
harmony is always perfect. Every word of God’s Book is 
in its right place. It may sometimes seem to us to be 
deranged. The lock may be in one place, and the key may 
sometimes be hidden away elsewhere in some apparently 
inadvertent word or sentence. 

A volume might be written in illustration of this fact; and 
it would be a profitable Bible-study to search out these little 
seemingly unimportant keys. 

For example: In Gen. xi. and xii, we see how Abram 
came out of Ur of the Chaldees, but instead of going on at 
once to Canaan, he stops a long time in Haran. The ex- 
planation of this delay is not given there. It is hidden away 
in Acts vii. 4, where we read, “from thence (z.e. from Haran) 
when his father was dead.” From which we learn that Terah 
was the hindrance; and we are taught by the fact, thus 
emphasised, how earthly relationships may sometimes hinder 
our complete obedience. 

Another example is Isa. lii. 4: “My people went down 
aforetime into Egypt to sojourn there; and the Assyrian 
oppressed them without cause." Here is a very difficult 
lock. This verse has greatly puzzled commentators, who 


© 
22 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


assume that two oppressions are spoken of, one in Egypt 
and the other in Assyria. They are therefore at a loss to 
understand and explain why these two oppressions are 
mentioned together in one verse, as though they were 
closely connected, when in fact they were separated by more 
than seven centuries. The key is hidden away in one little 
word in Acts vii. 18, “ There arose another king.” The word 
here translated * another" is not dAAos, another of the same 
kind; but it is érepos, another of a different kind; showing us 
that it was a different dynasty altogether: and the monuments 
now prove that it was a new Assyrian dynasty.* 

Many other examples might be given to show how a 
name, or a word, or a genealogy, or a date, may be found, 
which is seemingly of little or no importance in its context, 
: and yet may throw wondrous light on a passage written else- 
where, and be a key to a difficulty, otherwise inexplicable. 
* But all these worketh that one and the self-same Spirit,” 
whose infinite wisdom is seen inspiring the whole of Divine 
revelation and securing a uniformity in results which would 
be absolutely impossible in a work written separately by 
different writers. 

Let us defer for the present the subject of szezzficance, and 
look at a few facts which show a manifest design pervading 
the whole Bible, by which various agents, writing at different 
intervals, and thus separated both by place, and time, and 
circumstance, are yet made to use certain words a definite 
number of times. 

The actual number depends upon the special significance 
of the word; for the significance of the word corresponds 
with the significance of the number of the times it occurs. 


* The last king of the xvirith dynasty, Amenhotep IV., was succeeded 
by a new race of kings which is called the xixth dynasty, commencing with 
RAMESES I. and his son Seti I., who reigned together, Seti I. surviving as 
the Pharaoh of the “Oppression” (Exod. i. and ii) and dying (Exod. 
ii, 23). His mummy is now in the Boulak Museum. He,was succeeded by 
RAMESES II.—the Pharaoh of the Plagues and the Exodus, who was 
drowned in the Red Sea. The change to this new dynasty is clearly seen 
in the monuments, in the great difference between the round faces, flat 
noses, and thick lips of the xvirith or Egyptian dynasty, and the long 
face, high cheekbones, and aquiline nose of the Assyrian of the x1xth dynasty. 
Josephus speaks of **the crown being come into another family ? (Ant. li. 9). 
The same is implied in the words “a new king” (Exod. i. 8); not wap, 
but Dip. See Deut xxxii 17; Judg. v. 8; Dan. ii 31, 39, 44 ; iii. 24 


SUPERNATURAL DESIGN. 23 


Where there is no such special significance in the mean- 
ing or use of the word, there is no special significance in the 
number of its occurrences. 

But where there is a general importance in the word, apart 
from its direct szew:fcance, then the word occurs according 
to law. 

. All such general and important words—z.e, such words on 
which the Holy Spirit would have us place special emphasis, 
or would wish us to lay special stress—occur a certain 
number of times. These are either— 

(1) A sguare number, or 

(2) A cube, or 

(3) A multiple of seven, or 

(4) A multiple of eleven. 


It is interesting to notice why these numbers should be 
thus associated together. They are significant in themselves, 
for seven is one of the four so-called perfect numbers, 3, 7, 
IO and 12, as we shall see below. 


3 is the number of Divine perfection. 


EE. " Spiritual perfection. 
IO" y 3; Ordinal perfection. 
en a Governmental perfection. 


The product of these four perfect numbers forms the great 
number of chronological perfection, 3 X 7 X 10 X I2 = 2520, 
the times of Israel’s punishment, and the times of Gentile 
dominion over Jerusalem.* 

The association of the numbers 11 and 7 connects this 
arithmetical law with the geometrical, and calls our attention 
to the phenomena presented by the sides of the four primary 
rectilineal forms-— 

In the plane, 
The triangle has 3 sides) _ 
The square has 4 , | 
In the seizd, 
The pyramid has 2 sides 
The cube has NL p 


The number 18 (the sum of NT. 7 + 11) in Scripture and 
in nature is usually thus divided into 7 and 11, or 9 and 9. 


* See Zhe Witness of the Stars (Part 11.), by the same author. 


24. NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


As 7 is to 11, so is the height of a pyramid (whose base is 
a square) to the length of its base. 

As 7 is to 11 expresses also the ratio between the diameter 
of a circle and its semi-circumference; or between a semi- 
circle and its chord. 

Further, as 18 in Scripture and in nature is divided into 
7 and 11, so 7 is divided into 3 and 4 (3 + 4 = 7), and 11 is 
divided into 5 and 6 (5 + 6 = I1). 

These numbers, 3, 4, 5, and 6, are related by a perfect 
arithmetical progression, whose difference is unity (1). 
Their product gives us the well-known division of the circle 
into 360 degrees (3 X 4X 5 X 6 = 360).^ No one can tell 
us why the great circle of the heavens (the Zodiac) should 
be divided into 360 parts, instead of any other number, for 
apart from this it appears to be perfectly arbitrary. This is 
the number, however, which gives us the great Zodiacal, 
Prophetic, and Biblical year of 360 days, which was given 
originally to Noah, and employed by the Babylonians and 
Egyptians. 

It is the multiplication of seven of these great Zodiacal 
circles, or years, by seven, which gives us the great number 
expressive of chronological perfection (360 X 7 = 2520). 

The number 2520 is, perhaps, the most remarkable of all 
others, for 

(1) It is the summary of all the primary rectilinear 
forms. 

(2) It is the product of the four great numbers of 
completion or perfection, as shown above (for 3 x 7 
X IO X 12 = 2520). 

(3) It is the Least Common Multiple (L.C.M.) of all 
the ten numbers from which our system of notation is 
derived ; for the L.C.M. of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, Q, TO, is 
2520. 

Finally, in the musical scale, as we have already seen, we 
again meet with these numbers seven and 11 as the expres- 
sion of the seven primary notes and the 11 semitones. 

What there is of design or chance in all this we must leave 
to the judgment of our readers. 

— o 1: ee —— 


* The number 360 is divisible without a remainder by all the nine digits 
except seven. 


THE NUMBER OF THE BOOKS. 25 


It is sufficient for our purpose now, merely to note that 
these two numbers, seven and 11, have been specially selected 
to play so important a part;* and that there is such a 
remarkable relation between them must be due to design. 

Why should it be these two numbers seven and 11? Why 
not any other two numbers? or why two at all? Why not 
three? We may or may not be able to explain why, but we 
cannot close our eyes to the fact. We are now merely 
observing phenomena and noting the working of laws. Let 
us look first at 


Tue Booxs or THE BIBLE. 
The Old Testament. 

The Authorised Version, and indeed all printed Bibles, 
contain and reckon 39 separate books in the Old Testament. 

The Alexandrian Jews and early Christian Fathers rec- 
koned 22 (2 x 11) books. This number was arbitrarily and 
artificially made by putting certain books together in order 
to make the number of the books agree with the number 
of letters in the Hebrew alphabet. T 

But all these reckonings are of no value, none of them 
being based on any authority, and all of them being against 
the authority of the Hebrew MSS., which is all that we have 
to guide us in the matter. In other words, the number and 
order of the books of the Bible come to us on precisely the 
same authority as its facts and doctrines. 

In the Hebrew MSS. Ezra and Nehemiah are always 
reckoned as one book, with the one name, Ezra. Each of 
the double books is reckoned as one book (e.g. 1 and 2 Sam., 
1 and 2 Kings, and 1 and 2 Chron.), and all the minor 
prophets are also reckoned as one book. This makes 
24 books in all. This is 8 x 3, both factors stamping the 
number with the seal of Divine perfection. (See under the 
numbers Three and Light.) $ 


* Why they should have been so selected we cannot tell. That there must 
be a peculiar adaptation in certain numbers and certain things is clear, even 
according to man’s usage of them. Man speaks of ‘‘three cheers” and 
** forty winks,” but why no other number would do no one can tell. 

+ This number 22 they obtained by arbitrarily reckoning Judges and Ruth 
together as one book, and Jeremiah and Lamentations together, in addition 
to reckoning the double books as one, and Ezra-Nehemiah as one. 

[ For further information on this interesting subject see a pamphlet on 7he 
Names and Order af the Books of the Old Testament, by the same author. 


26 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


The New Testament. 


The New Testament contains 27 separate books (3X3 x3 
or 3°). i 
Of these 27 books, 21 (3 x 7) are Epistles. 


Tur WRITERS. 


If we take the agents employed, we have 28 writers (4 x 7) 
in the Old Testament, and 8 (23) in the New Testament ; or 
together, 36 (6?). 

Of the 21 Epistles of the New Testament 14 (2 X 7) are 
by Paul, and sezez by other writers. 

In this we have an argument for the Pauline authorship 
of the Epistle to the Hebrews; an argument which is con- 
firmed by the numbers of verbal occurrences shown below. 
(See pages 37-41.) 

Not only do we find these phenomena in the books and 
the writers of the Bible, but in the occurrences of important 
words and phrases. 


WORDS IN THE Orp TESTAMENT. 


* Mercy seat ” occurs 27 times (3°). 
“The candlestick ” ae ey) es (CRE 
The “wave offering,’ T 4. 28 «= (Gece 
The “heave-offering”{,, 28 , (4x7 


I Breakin y in Lev. an 
nkincense e 14 21 305 70E 


“Tenth deal," 28 times (4 x 7). 
“ Shittim wood," mW and Dy, 28 times (4 x 7). 


* The following logical reasoning also supports the Pauline agency. There 
are four steps in the argument :— 
I. Peter wrote his First Epistle to the Aiaeopd, the Dispersion. See 
I Eet. i. T. 
2. His Second Epistle was addressed to the same dispersed of Israel. See 
2 Petai. r 
3. To these same he says (2 Pet. iii. 15) ‘our beloved brother Paul... 
hath written unto you.” 
4. Where is this Epistle if it be not the one which is addressed to ** the 
Hebrews ” ? 


1 Only in Exod. and Lev. the A.V. does not translate **wave ” uniformly. 
I In its sacrificial character. 


WORDS. 27 


“Living” (Mm, Chaz): 
Chaldee ... = 7 
eV 35 (5 x 7) 
Bum... 7 
Hebrew ( Deut. ... 21 (3 x 7) 
Sa... 4947 X 7) 
Solomon 56 (7 x 8) 
“Manna,” ie} occurs 14 times (2 X 7). 


1757€ 25), 


Qoheleth, non, * preacher," sevez, all in Ecclesiastes : 
3 at the beginning (i. t, 2, 12). 
1 in the middle (vii. 27). 
3 at the end (xii. 8, 9, ro). 


* Little children," FID: 
In Deut. de 
Rest of Pentateuch a1 taa (61X 7): 
Elsewhere STA 
In God's covenant with Noah (Gen. ix.) the word p3 


Berith, “covenant,” is used seven times ; with Abraham (Gen. 
xv. and xvii.) 14 times. 


Niginah (JJ), “ a song,” etc): 


In Psalm titles 7 i 
14.9 
Elsewhere 7 


* Chief Musician " (X33. Wxatstsach) : + 
In Psalms 15055905 X. I1) 
Hab. iii. 19 (R.V.) 1 } s6 (7 x 8). 


“Blessed” (WN, ashrey) : $ 
Psalms T 2S C5) 
Rest of Old Testament 19 ta (4 X 11). 


—— 


* Seven times in singular :—one in Psalms (lxi), and six elsewhere. Seven 
times in plural (Weginoth) :—six in Psalms (iv., vi., liv., lv., lxvii., Ixx.), and 
one elsewhere (Hab. iii. 49), thus making a double-sevenfold arrangement 
within another ! 

+ The verb occurs 9 times (3?) with other meanings. 

t This word is masculine plural construct, and means literally, O the bisses 
of! O the happinesses of! It is never used in the singular, to show that 
God's blessings cannot be numbered. It is translated 17 times ‘‘ happy” 
and 27 times ** blessed." 


28 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


e VISOn" : 
Im, Cheh-zev (Chald.) 11 
nm ChaA-zon s. 38 (5X7) GS Gees 
nnm, Chiz-zah-yohn ... 9 (37) 
«Branch ” : 
"Ny Neh-tzer* 4 (2) Hh 6 (4). 
MDE, Tsemech t 12 (3 X 27) 
MDD, pah-sach, the verb used of the Passover, seven times. 
MIMD, &UAOÀ-mefh, and koot-toh-neth, “coats,” 28 times 
(1st occ. Gen. iii. 15). 
wo. (lish-shahn) (Chald.), languages, 7 times—all in 
Daniel. 
YT, (zeh-ragh), seed, 224 (7 X 32). 


Worps IN THE New TESTAMENT. 


* The Father " occurs in Matt. . 44times (4 X I1). 


" " Markl] .. 22 ,, Mm 
s y Luke  .. 16 10. 
P 3 John 44 Eel melee) 
" " Rest of NT. v7 M qu 


“The Lamb,” a peculiar word ápvíov (arnion) as used of 
Christ, 28 times 8 (4 x 7). 


pas (phos), light, occurs 72 times (3? x 6) if we add with 
R.V. Eph. v. 9 and Rev. xxii. 5. 


&raé (hapax), once, or once for all, 14 times (2X7), omitting 
1 Pet. iii. 20 with R.V. This is a word used espe- 
cially of Christ's sufferings and death. 


dvagtdows (anastaszs), rising again 12 DET 
resurrection Boc ESO) 
raised to life again (with èk) I ? 42. 
the first that should rise 
(with zpóros èé) ^ ae 


* From ¥) (WaAtsar), to preserve, which occurs 63 (7 x 9) times. 

f Tsemech is used of Christ the Branch 4 (2?) times. 

[ One passage (xi. 26) is disputed, and is omitted in the R.V. The above 
numeration is an argument for its retention. 


§ The Concordance gave 29; but, on examination, one of these was found 
to belong to Antichrist, Rev. xiii. 11. 


WORDS. 19 


apOapros (aphthartos), not corruptible ... 1 
incorruptible ... A | n 
uncorruptible ... 1 id 
immortal ... XT 


“Israelites ” (pl.), 7. 
Koxkos (kokkos), grain 7 


corn I 
Kvpuvo (kurieud), be Lord of ... neo f 
lord... it Tam! 
exercise lordship over ... 1 | a 
have dominion over... 4 


QS) (Odee), a song, 7. 

yaAXuós (psalmos), a psalm, 7. 

Na£ap«0, -per (Nazareth) occurs 12 times (2? x 3) . 
Na£opatos, (Vazarethan) — ,, lx 9 los (5°). 


There is another word Nagapyvós (JVazarene), which 
seems to have not so much a local reference, but 
a moral sense. This word occurs six times,f and 
partakes of the moral significance of the number szx. 

This shows that the other two words refer to the 
city and its inhabitants, as noun and adjective; and 
therefore, that Nafwpatos, in Matt. ii. 23, has special 
reference to the inhabitants of the czy, and means 
* He shall be called a ZVazaretham." (See “the first 
fulfilment of prophecy in the New Testament," under 
the number “ Oze.") 


owveots (sunesis), understanding — ... M 7 
knowledge Eug 


oréppa (sperma), seed, 44 (4 X 11). 


peOeppnvetw (methermeencud), interpret... oe) 26 ) 
be by interpretation 2 7: 


* This is omitting Mark x. 47 and Luke xxiv. 19, where the reading is 
Na(apnvós (Nazarene), according to Lachmann, Tischendorf, Tregelles, Alford, 
Westcott and Hort. For the significance of this number, see under 
** Thirteen." 

j Adding the two passages in the above note, they are Mark i. 24; x. 47; 
xiv. 67; xvi 6; Luke iv. 34; xxiv. 19. 


30 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


“Verily” is shown to be a weighty word. It occurs 
49 times (7?) in the first three Gospels ** and 25 times in 
John (5°). In the Gospel of John, however, it is always used 
double (“ Verily, verily ”), making 50 altogether in John, and 
49 in the other three, or 99 in all (3* x 11). 

If we separate those which were spoken to the Drserples 
and those spoken to o/Zers, we have 


Spoken to Spoken 
the Disciples. to others. 
Matthew — .. 20 (2? X 5) IO (2 X 5) 
Mark s 913) 4 (2) 
Luke ec A 2 


33 (3X 1) — 16(4) 
John ved TOES) 15 (3 X 5) 

* Moses” occurs 80 times in the New Testament (4? X 5) 
(or2? x 10). The Concordance gave only 79, 
overlooking Heb. xi. 23. 


The names of the Apostles conform to this law :— 


Peter Occurs 245 times (7? X 5) 
Simon T (used of Peter)  ,, 50. s (b E 
James (the great) 5 — 21 $. (329 
James (the less) » 201 , Y3 X7) 
john » 49 ” GE) 
Simon Zelotes » 4 » (2) 
Matthew 5 8 , (2) 


Philip » 5 16. e C) 
Paul » 160 s BUE 
Saul (Apostle) » 25 » (5) 


Seven were called before the whole Twelve were ap- 
pointed :— 


John m T ses .. John i. 35-39 
Andrew ... obe n An A 4O 
Peter ASE ae auc Ses 5 Zl AP 
Philip 0 et - T) PEN Ze 
Nathanael (Bartholomew) " » 47-51 
James (son of Zebedee) 2. Matt lver 
Matthew ... T uF T" sc ESO 


* Omitting Matt. vi. 11 and Luke xiii. 35 with R. V. 
+ The Concordance gave in this case one too many, viz, 51, but this was 
found to include Mark iii. 18, which is another Simon (the ** Canaanite"). 


THE TWELVE APOSTLES. eiit 


Then the Twelve appear to have been called at seven 
different times :— 
I. Andrew and John, jt: 35-39 
2. Peter, John i. 41 


3. Philip, John i. 43 . H 
4. Nathanael cniin: Joki ii ^ 51) 7 
5. James (son of Zebedee), Matiy. 21... | 
6. Matthew, Matt. ix. 9 3 


7. The remaining five, Luke vi. 13- 16 

Here the seven is divided as usual into 4 and 3. Four being 
recorded in John's Gospel, and three in the other Gospels. 

It is probable also that they belonged to seven different 
families, but the relationships are too uncertain for us to 
speak positively. At any rate seven were brothers :—Peter 
and Andrew; James and John; James (the less), Judas 
(Lebbzus or Thaddeus), and Simon (Zelotes). 

Side by side with this seven-fold order, marking the number 
.of the Apostles, there is a three-fold division of the twelve 
into fours. 

Altogether there are four (2?) lists of the Apostles’ names; 
three in the Gospels and one in the Acts. In each list the 
order of the names varies, but with this remarkable agree- 
ment, that the first name in each group is the same in each 
list, while the other three, though they are in a different 
order, are never in a different group, thus :— 


| Matt. x. 2—4. ] Mark iii. :6—:9. | Luke vi. r4—:6. | Acts 1. 13. 
1 PETER 
and Andrew and James | and Andrew and James 
James | and John James and John 
and John and Andrew and John and Andrew 
| PHILIP 
and Bartholomew * and Bartholomew * j and Bartholomew * and Thomas 
Thomas and Matthew Matthew Bartholomew 
; and Matthew and Thomas and Thomas and Matthew 


O CAI Au AWUN 


JAMES (son of Alphæus) 


and Thaddæus f | and Simont (Zelotes) 
and Simon f (Can.) | & Judast (br.of Jas). 
and Judas (Iscariot) | and Judas (Iscariot) 


and Simon Ẹ (Zelotes) 
& Judas f (br.of Jas.) 
Vacant. 


ro | and Lebbzus f 
II Simon f (Can.) 
12 | and Judas (Iscariot) 


* A patronymic for Nathanael. See John i, 44-46, where he is joined with 
Philip as here, and John xxi. 2. 

+ Judas the brother of James, to distinguish him from Judas Iscariot. He 
was called Lebbæus or Thaddzeus, words which have a similar meaning, 


courageous. 
I Canaanite, not a Gentile name, but an Aramaic word meaning the same 


as Zelotes. 


32 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


Note (1) that 4 hold the same place in each list, Judas 
Iscariot being always last. 

(2) That in Matthew and Luke the //rs? four are arranged 
in pairs according to their calling and sending out; while in 
Mark and Acts they are placed individually according to 
their pre-eminence. 

(3) The second four are given in Matthew, Luke, and Acts, 
in pairs; while in Mark they are given zzdividually. 

(4) The ZZrd four are in Matthew, again given in groups ; 
while in Mark, Luke, and Acts the order is zzdrviual. 

(5) That each group furnished a penman of the N.T.: from 
the first Peter and John; from the second Matthew; from 
the third James and Jude. 


The illustrations of the working of this law might be 
indefinitely extended. We have given merely a selection 
from our lists, which contain a large number of examples. 
Let us turn to 


The Apocalypse. 


In the Book of the Revelation of Jesus Christ, seven seems 
to be the predominating number, not only used as a numeral, 
but in the occurrences of the important words :— 

“Jesus” occurs 14 times (2 X 7) (seven times alone, and 
seven times with “ Christ "). 

“Lord " * occurs 21 times (3 X 7). 

“Spirit,” 14 times, Hytuua, i 10; 1L 7, 17, 205 MTRO 
13, 22; 1V. 5; V. OF XI, 10; xiv. A 

d£vos (axios), worthy, iii, 4; iv. IY; v. 2, 4, 9, 12; xvi. 6. 

Vmopovi, (hupomonee), patience, i. 9; ii. 2, 3, 19; iii. 10; 
xiii. I0; xiv. 12. 

cáp (sarx), flesh, xvii. 16; xix. 18 (five times), 21. 

deka. képara (deka kerata), ten horns, xii. 3; xiii. 1 (twice); 
Evi. 3, 719 nj 

mpopyrea (propheeteia), prophecy, i. 35 xi. 6; xix. 10; xxii. 
25410, 195, I9. 

oo .— —.  —— AN 

* This word «pis gave some trouble. For the Concordance gave 22, 
This was good enough, being 2 x rr. But being in the Apocalypse we 
expected a multiple of sevez, and this led to a more careful examination, We 


found that the R.V. omitted képios, on due authority, in Rev. xvi 5 and xix. I, 


while it inserted it in xi. 4 instead of the word ** God," thus leaving exactly 
21 as above. 


THE APOCALYPSE. 3B 


onpetoy (seemezon), sign, XV. 1. 
wonder, xii. 1, 3; xiii. 13. 
miracle, xiii. 14; xvi. 14 ; xix. 20. 

áerijp (asteer), star, i. 16, 20 (twice); ii. 1, 28; iii. 1; vi. 13; 
wm. 10; 11,92); ix. 1; xii. I, 4; xxii. 16 (14 times). 

yvy (psuchee), life, viii. 9; xii. 11. 

soul, Vi. O; xvi. 3; xviii. 13, I4; xx. 4. 

katpos (kairos), time (i.e. season), i. 3; xi. 18; xii. 12, 14 
(3 times); xxii. 10. 

cewrpós (sezsmos), earthquake, vi. 12; viii. 5; xi. 13 (twice), 
19; xvi. I8 (twice); seven times elsewhere in N.T., 
making 14 in all. 

éroiudlw (Aetormazo), make ready, xix. 7. 

prepare, viii. 6; ix. 7, 15; xii. 6; xvi. 
12; A. 2. 

Baciredw (basileuo), reign, V. 10; xi. 15, 17; xiv. 6; xx. 4, 
6; xxii 5; 14 occurrences elsewhere, making 21 
in all. 

_tudriov (imation), garment, iii. 45 xvi. 15. 

raiment, iii. 5, 18; iv. 4. 
vesture, xix. 13, 16. 
aBvocos (abussos), bottomless, ix. 1, 2. 
bottomless pit, ix. 11; xi 7; xvii. 8; xx. 
Lag: 

vepédn (nephelee), cloud, i. 7; X. 1; xi. I2; xiv. 14 (twice), 
P5, 46. 

rérapros (tetartos), fourth, iv. 7 ; vi. 7 (twice) ; viii. 12; xvi. 8; 

axied9. 
fourth part, vi. 8. 

Spéravov (drepanon), sickle, xiv. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 (twice), 19. 

Tómos (topos), place, ii. 5; vi. 14; xii. 6, 8, 14; xvi. 16; 
XX TI. 

paxdpwos (makarios), blessed, i. 3; xiv. 13; xvi. 15; xix. 9; 
XO; Xa. 7, 14. 

ófós (oxus), sharp, i. 16; ii. 12; xiv. 14, 17, 18 (twice); 
Xp I5 

Oópos (fhumos), wrath (God's) xiv. 10, 19; xv. I, 7; 

xvi. I. 
fierceness, xvi. 19; xix. 14. 
S 1396. D 


P 


34 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 
ovat (ouai), woe, 8 14* (2 x 7). 
alas, 6 

Bpovrat (brontai), (Nom. pl.), ¢hunders, x. 3, 45 XVL 18. 
thunderings, iV. 5; viii. 5; Xi 


193 xix. 5: 
dxodovbéw (akoloutheo), to follow, vi. 8; xiv. 4, 8, 9, 13; 
xix. 14. 


reach, xviii. 5. 
minto (Prio), to fall down (in worship of God), iv. 10; v. 
8, 14; Vil. I1; xi. 10; XE fO. 
These are some examples, among many others, from one 
book. 


PHRASES OF THE BIBLE. 


nion PON (aleh tol doth), these are the generations, d.e. these 

are the events that time brought forth to him; (from ‘7° 
(yalad), to bring forth); or these are the things or persons 
produced by him. This phrase occurs 14 times in the Bible, 
13 times in the Old Testament and once in the New 
Testament. 

Genesis .. II times, of the Patriarchs, etc. 

Numbers (iii. 1) 1 of Aaron and Moses. 

Ruth (iv. 18) ... 1 of Pharez (David). 


13 
Matthew (i. 1) 1 of Jesus. 


14 

The first and last are used only of the “ first Adam” and 
of the “last Adam.” But these have the additional formula, 
“ This ts the book of," etc. (Gen. v. 1 and Matt. i. 1). 

While the total number is 14, Genesis has 11, which 
divide the book into twelve sections. The first section 
being the Introduction, and the rest consisting of these 
eleven “ Zol’doth,” making twelve divisions in all, in Genesis. 

The eleven Zol’doth in Genesis are as follows :— 

I. ii. 4—iv. 26. The Heavens and the Earth, 
2. V. I—vi. 8. Adam. 
3. vi. 9—ix. 20. Noah. 


* There is another sevez-fold arrangement in connection with this word; for 
while Bruder's Concordance gives 14 times in Revelation as noun and intere 
jection, the word occurs 42 times elsewhere as interjection only. 


PHRASES, 35 


4. X. 1-—xi. 9. The Sons of Noah. 

5. xi. 10—26. Shem. 

6. xi. 27 —xxv. 11, Terah (not Abraham's !) 
7. XXV. 12—18. Ishmael. 

8. XXV. I9—xxxv. 29. Isaac. 

9. xxxvi. I—8. Esau. 

O. xxxvi .9—xxxvii. I. "Esau's posterity. 

I. xxxvii. 2—1. 26. Jacob (not Joseph's). 


I 
I 


The Massorah calls attention to the fact that the word 
Toldoth, in the Old Testament, is spelt in two ways. The 
first and the /as? occurrences (Gen. ii. 4 and Ruth iv. 18) are 


spelt with two Vaus, qv: 30; the other eleven are spelt 


with one Vau qm. Various fanciful explanations of 


the phenomena are indulged in by Jewish Commentators. 
But the simple reason seems to lie in the fact, that the 
spelling of the first and last is called plene, z.e., full or com- 
plete; while the spelling of the other eleven is called defective. 
Thus the eleven which relate to Adam and his posterity 
(v. 1, &c.) are stamped with defect : while the jirs/, which relates 
to the heavens and the earth, tells of the perfection in which 
they were created; and the Jas‘, which relates to Pharez 
(Ruth iv. 18), contains the first mention of the name of Davin, 
and tells of the Perfect One—David’s Son and David's Lord, 
who shall restore perfection to His people as well as to the 
new heavens and the new earth. 

It is instructive to notice these divine divisions, and see 
how different they are from either man's chapters, or man's 
theories as to the Jehovistic and Elohistic sections, accord- 
ing to which some editor is supposed to have pieced to- 
gether a number of separate documents by two different 
authors, one of whom used the word Zlohim (God), and the 
other Jehovah (Lorp). 

As a matter of fact, if we take these divinely marked 
sections, five of them contain eA titles (v7z., the 2nd, 3rd, 
6th, 8th, and 11th); four of them contain zeZer (the 5th, 7th, 
oth, and 10th); only the first has the combined title Jehovah 
Elohim (the Lorp God); and only the Introduction has 
Elohim alone; while “Jehovah” is used by nearly all the 
speakers, except the Serpent, Abimelech (to Abraham, not to 
Isaac), the sons of Heth, Pharaoh, Joseph, and his brethren. 

D2 


4 


36 i NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


Thus, this simple fact to which we are led by the consider- 
ation of design in the employment of numbers, entirely ex- 
plodes the elaborate theories of the so-called “ higher critics " 
concerning the Book of Genesis. 


«In all the land of Egypt" (D'V yN 53D — 
7 times in Genesis. 
13 times in Exodus. 
I time in Jeremiah. 


21 in all (3 x 7). 


“His mercy endureth for ever” 090M nbiyb) :— 
6 times in Chronicles. 
1 time in Ezra. 
34 times in Psalms. 
I time in Jeremiah. 


42'in allis 7). 


* A jealous God," 7. 
«The ends of the earth,” JN DSN (aphse eretz), 14. 
* Behold (or Lo), the days come,” 21. 
“ Thus saith the Lord Gop (or the Lorp),” 126 (7 x 18). 
* As I live, saith the Lord Gop,” 14 (all in Ezek.). 
* Daughter (or Daughters) of Jerusalem," 7 in singular; 
7 plural. 
“The tree: of lifes: 
3 times in Genesis, 
4 times in Proverbs. 


i 


* This is a faithful saying," mords 6 Adyos (pistos ho logos), 
7 (all in Timothy and Titus); 1 Tim.i.15; iii. 1; iv. 
@ 12; 2 Mim. ii. 1i; MELO; liiig. 

“These things saith . . ." (rade Aéye ô . . .), 7 in 
Revelation. 

“Children of Israel," 14 times in New Testament. 

* Son of David," used of Christ, 14 times; 21 (3 x 
with slightly different wording,* 7 ,, } ape 


* Matt. xxii 42; Luke i 32; John vii 42; Rom. i 3; 2 Tim, ii. 8; 
Rev. v. 5 ; xxii. 16. 


PHRASES AND AUTHORSHIP. 37 


“And thou shalt know that I am the Lorn” occurs 7 
times (1 Kings xx. 13; Isa. xlix. 23; Ezek. xvi. 62; 
XXV. 7; XXXii. 16; xxxv. 4, 12. 

We must not, however, multiply these sezez-fold occur- 
rences, because they properly come under our head of 
"significance," and belong to the many illustrations of this 
number of spiritual perfection. We shall treat them more 
fully under the number “ Seven.” We will close these few 
specimens, selected from a long list of over one hundred, 
with the phrase, thus shown to be important :— 


“As it is written ” (kafüs yéyparra, and ds yéypamras) : 
Matthew ... 1 


Mark ue 12 
Luke M 
Romans ... 14 ) 24 with xa6ós (2? x 6). 
Acts E22 


I Corinthians 2 
2 Corinthians 2 
Mark m T 
Luke 2. 1) 4 With ås (23). 
I Corinthians 1 


28 (2? X 7) 


Of these 28, note, that 7 are in the Gospels, and 21 in 
the rest of the New Testament; a sevez-fold arrangement 
within the square numbers. 


EVIDENCE AS TO AUTHORSHIP, 


This law, affecting the occurrence of important words, may 
be used in evidence as to authorship. For example, if 
we take certain words in Paul's Epistles alone, we do not 
find the law operating unless we include the Epistle to the 
Hebrews. If we add the occurrences in Hebrews to those in 
the other Pauline Epistles, the harmony is at once restored. 
Omitting those numbers which have their own special 
significance, such as 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, IO, 12, 13, etc., 


* The tense is perfect, and refers not to the act of writing, or to the fact 
that it was once written, but to the truth that z7 standeth written. 


3 8 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


let us note the following examples of squares, cubes, 7, 
and If :— 


The Pauline Epistles. 


Paul’s 
Epistles. Hebrews. Total. 

dyarnrés (agapeetos), beloved... 27 I 28 (4 X 7) 
dyyedos (angelos), angel 14 13 27 (33) 
àyyéňovs (angelous), angels (acc. 

pl.) ln "nz pu. 2 ri 
érayyéAXew (epangellern), to an- 

"ounce 2. "EE 4 9 (3°) 
&méea. (aperthera), unbelief... — S 2 7 
dyew (agen), to do 7 I 8 (25) 
a&ios (axzos), worthy ... 8 I 9 (3?) 
àyaopós (agiasmos), sanciifi- 

cation eT 8 I 9 (3?) 
aipa (haima), blood ... 12 2T 83 (3 X 11) 
&míg ria, (aprstia), unbelief 5 2 7 
êruo xoveoÜa(epazschunesthaz ), 

to be ashamed els: 2 7 
waparetcOa. ( parateisthar), fo 

shun a 4 3 7 
aiwvios (azonzos), eternal 2I 6 FEH) 
dxovew (akouein), to hear 34 8 T2 (6RD) 
adXos (allos), another 31 2 33 (3X Th) 
dpvetcOar (arneisthat), to deny 6 I 7 
dpros (artos), bread 10 I II 
didBoros (dabolos), the devil... 8 I 9M 
Baowreds (basileus), king 4 8 127 (2) es) 
yevvàv (gennan), to beget 7 4 II 
yn (gee), earth 14 II 25 (5°) 
õvopa, (onoma), name ... 2I 4 2951052) 
ypadew (graphein), to write... 62 I 63 (7 X 9) 
Séopuos (desmios), prisoner... — S 2 7 
Seopds (desmos), bond, fetter... 8 I 9 (3?) 


* The number of judgment. 


+ The number of governmental perfection. 


THE PAULINE EPISTLES. 


€yOeikvva Oa. (endeiknusthar), to 
demonstrate . 
dicaiopa (oma), Nous 
act or requirement + T 
SéxeOar (dechesthaz), to receive 
arodibouar (apodidomar), to pay 
` eübokeiy (eudoxern), to seem good 
eLovoia (exousia), authority 
éAéyxew (elenchein), to convict 
epxeoOan (erchesthaz), 1o come... 
eioépxerGon  (eiserchesthar), to 
enter : 
coxaros (eschatos), T 
mpooeúyeobar ( rm 
to pray 
dvéxea bar Cae), to en- 
dure 
mporéyew ( preschein), to Es 
to . 
Enreô um, a s. S 
cós (theos), God 
áiévas (aphienar), fo send away 
dviordvat (anzstana), £o raise up 
kaÜwrráva, (kathistanar), to set 
down 
kaDapíLew 
purify s 
érukaA cia bar T yy w 
invoke 
kAnpovopia Cues, 
heritance 
kowevía, (koinonia), aaa 
ebAoyév (eulogein), fo praise, 
bless 7 
dtaroyifer ĝa (dialogizesthai » "m 
deliberate 
Aourós (Jozpos), remaining 


eee 


(katharizein), to 


171- 


39 
Paul's 
Epistles. Hebrews. Total. 
9 ES NP 
5 2 7 

13 t — n(2x7) 
8 D II 
II 3 14(2x7) 
27 I 28 (4 X 7) 
8 1 9 (3)) 

72 5 Fi G L DI) 
4 17 21 (3 X 7) 
6 I 7 

20 I 21 (3 X 7) 
10 I II 
5 2 7 

20 I 2:203. 0) 

548 68  616(7 x 85) 
5 2 7 
5 2 7 
3 4 7 
5 4 7 
6 I yi 
5 2 y 

13 I 14 (2 X 7) 
8 6 14 

34 1 35 (5 X 7) 

27 I 28(4x 7) 


* Only in these Epistles. + 


See under the number Nize. 


40 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


Paul's 

Epistles. Hebrews. Total. 
páprvs (martus), witness wœ 9 2 II 
åpaprıa (hamartia), sin "mE 25 88 (8 x 11) 


vópos (nomos), law —— ... <a BO 14 133 (19 X7) 


dvopia (anomia), lawlessness ... 5 2 7 
perávora (metanoa), repentance 4 3 7 
ópâv (horan), to see 4 a 9 
dpos (oros), mountain ... : 3 4 7 
&reiBety. (apezz hein), to TNT 5 2 y 
drurtia (apistia), unbelief 5 2 7 
moreveiv ( pisteuein), to believe 54 2 56 (7 X 8) 
mpaypa (pragma), deed QR paz! 3 7 
mods (polus), many ... Be de 7 88 (8 x 11) 
movs ( fous), foot Ne © i® 4 I4 (2 XE) 
mpatos ( Prófos), first ... oe A 9 21 (3 X 7) 
pila (rhiza), root S uw S6 I 7 
ácÜévea (astheneia), sickness ... 12 4 16 (4) 
onpetov (seemezon), sign Tu I 9 (3?) 
oréppa (sperma), seed ... mec 3 21 o0 
cravpós (stauros), stake (cross) 10 I TN 
&móooXos (apostolos), apostle ... 34 I 35:(5 90m 
owrnpia (sofeerza), salvation ... 18 " 25 (5°) 
émureAéty  (epitelezm), to accom- 

plish 2 9 (3’) 
vios (Tod) Oeod (Auzos Oe um n j 

Son of God sex oo) RED 4 8 (2°) 
veXeióo  (eletoo), to perfect 2 9 II 
àBerety (athetein), to nullify 6 I 7 
Ocuéħos (Zhemelios), foundation 7 2 9 (3?) 
apdleats ( prothesis), setting forth 6 I 7 
togoutos (fosoutos), so great .. 2 5 7 
vimos (tupos), a type 8 I 9 @) 

vids (Auzos), a son 40 24 64 (8?) 

»  » (applied to Cin) 15 II 28 (4 X 7) 
borepety (husterein), fo lack ... 8 3 II 
$wvij (phonee), voice se =, 6 Bo n 
$épew ( pherein), to bear Xem en 5 7 
xwpilew (chorizein), to separate 6 I 5 
"Icaáx (Zsaak), Isaac . T 3 4 7 


This list might be "m extended, especially if we in- 
cluded groups of words from the same root. 


THE EPISTLES OF PETER. AI 


When we consider the same phenomena with regard to 
the other numbers according to their own peculiar signifi- 
cance,9 the evidence is overwhelming as to the so-called 
Pauline authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews. Without 
it the Epistles of St. Paul are only shirteen in number, with 
it they are 14 (2 X 7). This principle governs the occur- 
rences and use of words. 


The same test may be applied to 
The two Epistles of Peter. 


Ist 2nd 

Epistle. Epistle. Total. 
dyws (hagios), holy ... s g 6 14 (2 X 7) 
épapria (hamartia), sin 4s "ME I / x 
dard (apo), from Bee s NB 2 7 
mists ( pistis), faith ... "- 2 7 
iva (hina), that - v de I 14 (2 X 7) 
ôóéa (doxa), glory... a W 5 16 (4°) 
eido (erd), to see i s mW 3 8 (2°) 
éoxaros (eschatos), last "A 2 4 (2?) 
éxw (echo), to have... e. 0E 5 9 (3°) 
xaAév (kaled), £o call ... me ae I 7 
kúpos (kurios), Lord ... — = 138 2% (3 x 7) 
viv (nun), now y ii M 2 7 
ow (oun), therefore TAE I 71 
mepi (peri), for, or concerning 5 2 7 
trove (pored), do, make 3 4 7 
taro (hupo), by ee ee 5 7 


Tue Orp anp New TESTAMENTS COMBINED. 


In the same way we may take both Old and New Testa- 
ments together, and see how marvellously ZAzr£y-szx writers 


* E.g. karéxew (katechein), to hold fast, 10+ 3 —13. See under signifi- 
cance of 13 and the use of this word in connection with the Apostacy. 

f Reading áuaprhua (harmarteema) instead of apapria (hamartia) in 2 Pet. 
i 9 with G., T., Tr., W. and H. 

[ Reading xpívovri (krinontz) with W, H., instead of čxovti npivar (ecbonti 
krinal), 1 Pet. iv. 5. 

§ Omitting 2 Pet. iii 9, with L., T., Tr., A., W. H., and R.V. - N 

|| Omitting with R.V. 1 Pet. ii 13, and 2 Pet. iii 11, and adding it in 
i Pet. v. i. 


42 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


so use their words that when all are taken together we find 
the same law at work! This would be absolutely impossible 
if “one and the self-same Spirit" had not inspired she whole 
so as to produce such a harmonious result. The instances 
are very numerous, and the following words and phrases are 
given merely as examples :— : 


* Hallelujah " : 

24** in Psalms (2? x 6) } ng (2? x 7). 
4 in Revelation (2?) 
“Hosanna”: 

1 in Old Testament vy 7. 

6 in New Testament 


* Shepherd," used of God or of Christ : 
(195), 12 f in Old Test. (2? x 2) | 
(touv) 98 in New Test. (3?) j 21 (3 X 7). 


“Jehovah Sabaoth," translated variously “the Lorn of 
Hosts,” “the God of hosts,” etc. : 
Old Testament, 285 | 
New Testament, 2 j MAL 


“Corban,” an offering: 
Old Testament qa^p) Ay mop 


New Test. (xopBav, Mark vii. 11) 1 )84 (7 X 12), 
3 (xopBavas, Matt. xxvii. 6) I 
“Milk? : 


Old Testament (35, 44 (qox 
New Testament (yáAo), 5 JA 


* Viz, in seven Psalms, once each; in seven Psalms, twice each; in 
one three times, making 24 in all Besides this seven-fold arrangement 
within the square numbers, the total of the squares yields a seven-fold 
result (28). 

1 Psalm cxviii. 25. 

i Gen. xlix. 24; Ps. xxiii. 1; lxxx. 1; Isa. xl. II; Jer. xxxi 10; Ezek. 
xxxiv. I2, 23 (twice) ; xxxvii. 24; Zech. xi. 16 ; xiii. 7 (twice). 

$ Matt. xxvi. 31 ; Mark xiv. 27; John x. 11 (twice), 14, 16; Heb. xiii. 20; 
1 Petey 25; v. 4: 


THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS. 43 


* [Isaac ": 
In Deuteronomy ... w a 
Rest of Pentateuch CRONO 13) 
Elsewhere in Old Test. .. 14(2 X7) )7x 18. 
New Test, Luke and Acts 7 
Bà Paul's Epistles * 7 
"Aaron": 


In Old Testament 443 
In New Testament 5 j mew x 7). 


* Abaddon” (Destruction) : 
In Old Testament 6 
In New Testament 3 i 


Christ spoken of at the right hand of God: 
Old Testament 2 (Ps. cx. I, 5) 
New Testament 19 Jð Jar C7): 


* After the order of Melchizedek” : + 
Old Testament 1 IL 
New Testament 6 J ^' 


«The stone which the builders refused is become the 
head of the corner” :{ 
Old Testament 1 
New Testament 6h? 


“Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself”: 
Old Testament (Lev. xix. 18) I } 7 
New Testament... m 


* Uncircumcision of the heart”: 
Old Testament ... 6 || IL 
New Testament... 1 i 


The half of the important Prophetic period (Daniel's last 
week, or the last of the 70 weeks, Dan. ix. 27) is mentioned 


—— 


* Including the Epistle to the Hebrews. 

T Ps. cx. 4, quoted in Heb. v. 6, 10; vi. 20 ; vii. 11, 17, 2I. 

f Ps cxviii. 22, quoted in Matt. xxi 42; Mark xii 40; Luke xx. 17; 
Acts iv. 1i; 1 Pet. ii. 4, 7. 

$ Matt xix. 29; xxii 39; Mark xii 31; Rom, xii. 9; Gal v. 14; 
James ii. 8. 

|| Lev. xxvi 41; Deut x. 16; Jer. iv 4; ix. 26; Ezek. xliv. 7, 9; 
Acts vii. 51. 


44 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


seven times. This, perhaps, ought to be reserved and con- 
sidered in its significance under the number “ seven.” The 
point, however, now is the manner in which this seven is 
made up; for though the period is given in three different 
languages, ‘wo Testaments, and /hree forms (years, months, 
and days) the number is still seve :— 


Dan. vii. 25, Chaldee, “ Time, and times, and the 
dividing of time” A É 


Dan. xii. 7, Hebrew, “Time, times, and an half" 1 
Rev, xii, 14, Greek, * Time, and times, and half a 

tme” ae = = &. m i 

Rev. xi. 2; xiii. 5, * Forty and two months" ... 2 
Rev. xi. 3; xii. 6, Twelve hundred and sixty 

days 2 

E 


Have we not in all this a design which is far beyond 
nature? A supernaturaldesign? Numbers must occur; and 
the only question is, Shall they be used by design or by 
chance? In order, or disorder? According to law, or 
without law? In the works of God they are used always in 
perfect order. Surely then we ought to look for the same 
order in His Word ; and be surprised if we do not find it. 

If we look at a window of coloured glass, made after the 
modern fashion, with pieces of various colours put in at hap- 
hazard, we see at once that there is no design. But if we 
observe another window in which the pieces of glass are 
arranged in a perfect and intricate geometrical pattern, or 
with human or other forms, we immediately acknowledge 
design, and say that the hand that formed that window must 
have been guided by a head that designed the whole! 

This is our conclusion, then, as to the works and Word of 
God. Neither Moses nor any other person could have 
secured the above results. Moses used a certain word by 
Divine inspiration, not knowing, in all probability, how many 
times he had used it. It is inconceivable that, even had he 
known, he could have told Joshua how many times he was to 
use it; and that Joshua could have arranged with another; 
and that this could have gone on for fifteen centuries and 
ensured that the last writer should use the word only a 


SUPERNATURAL DESIGN. 45 


certain definite number of times so as to secure a particular 
result! Impossible! No! Each writer must have been 
ignorant as to this final result; but each wrote “as he was 
moved by the Holy Ghost"; and hence, each contributed 
such a part as should end in perfecting the original design. 

'This sweeps away as with a flood, all the puny attempts of 
man either in attacking or defending the inspiration of the 
Word of God; for that word has suffered almost as much 
from the unwise defences of its friends, as from the malig- 
nant attacks of its enemies. 


“The Law of the Lon» is perfect." 


We take the high ground of making everything else sub- 
mit to it. Instead of making the Bible agree with science, 
science must agree with the Bible. If it does not, it is only 
because it is * science falsely so-called," and not real science. 
Scientia is the Latin word for knowledge. Whereas very much 
of what goes by the name of “science” to-day is not science 
at all. It is only Aypothesis/! Read man's books on this so- 
called science, and you will get tired of the never-ending 
repetition of such words as “hypothesis,” “ conjecture," “sup- 
position," etc., etc. This is the reason that such theories, 
which are falsely dignified by the name of sczence, are con- 
stantly changing. We talk of the “Science of Geology,” or of 
* Medical Science"; but read books on geology or medicine, 
for example, written fifty years ago, and you will find that 
they are now quite “out of date." But /ru/ cannot change. 
Truth will never be “ out of date.” What we know can never 
alter! This of itself proves that the word sczence is wrongly 
used when it is applied only to Aypotheses, which are merely 
invented to explain certain phenomena. 

It is not for such ZAeorzes that we are going to give up facts. 
It is not for conjectures that we are going to abandon truth. 
Man must offer us something better than Azs own thoughts 
if he wants us to give up the thoughts of God. In the Bible 
we have got something certain and something perfect. 
Every fact and truth which is discovered only helps to prove 
its truth and to exhibit its perfection, No monument that 
has ever been dug up—no manuscript that has ever been dis- 
covered, has ever been other than az evidence of Bible truth | 
We are not afraid of any phenomena which may be observed 


46 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


in the rocks, or of any monuments or tablets which may be 
dug up from beneath them. These are not, and never have 
been, contrary to the Word of God. It'is only man’s interpre- 
zation of them which is against that Word, because it is only 
his zhoughts which oppose it. 


**'The Law of the Lon» is perfect." 


Man, and all his thoughts are imperfect; so imperfect that 
he has failed even to take proper care of God's perfect 
Word. 

Like a beautiful stained glass window which has suffered 
from accident, or fire, or siege, and which man has endea- 
voured to “restore.” We can see how exquisite are its 
colours and patterns; how perfect it once was. Here and 
there is a tiny piece wanting, or misplaced. But it does not 
hinder us from discerning the perfection of the original 
geometrical figure, or from admiring the delicacy of the 
features of the figure pourtrayed. The window is indeed 
marred. And one man has done much to repair the injury 
caused by the negligence of another. We can see the defect 
of the repairs; but we can see also that the design was 
originally perfect, and we praise and admire the wisdom of 
the designer. 

So it is with the Word of God. Nothing can hide the 
perfection displayed in its design. Man has been false to 
his trust. He has not preserved it with the faithfulness 
which should ever characterise a steward. But because man 
has been unfaithful, we are not going to question the faithful- 
ness of God! Because man has not properly cared for this 
precious gift of God, we are not going to question the per- 
fection of that gift! 

But this is what man has done and is doing ;—he is charg- 
ing upon God the result of his own sin, neglect, and folly! 

God has given man this “ bread of life,” and he is analysing 
it instead of eating it! God has given man His Word, and 
he is criticising it instead of believing it! This is the 
“wisdom” of man “up to date.” This is the highest flight 
of his wisdom—“ higher criticism"! Truly “the world by 
wisdom knew not God" (1 Cor. i. 21). It never did and 
never will. Human wisdom ever leads from God. It is so 
with nineteenth century wisdom! It may seem very clever, 


SUPERNATURAL DESIGN. 47 
very daring, very wise, for man to criticise the Word of God, 
but it is still true, as it is written (1 Cor. iii. 19), 


*'l'HgE WISDOM OF THIS WORLD IS FOOLISHNESS WITH Gop.” 


Then away with man’s wisdom! we do not want it. What 
we want is God’s truth, and if man’s science does not agree 
with God’s Book, then so much the worse for his science. 

- We will come to God's Word as those who are foolish in 
the eyes of the world, because we desire to be made wise 
unto salvation (2 Tim. iii. 15); and because we remember 
the words of the Lord Jesus, how He said, “ Ye do err, not 
knowing the Scriptures" (Matt. xxii, 29). 

Whence but from Heaven could men unskilled in arts, 

In several ages born, in several parts, 

Weave such agreeing truths ? or how, or why, 

Should all conspire to cheat us with a lie? 

Unasked their pains, ungrateful their advice, 

Starving their gain, and martyrdom their price.—Dryden. 


48 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


PART II. 


Sts Spiritual Significance. 


INTRODUCTION. 


AVING thus shown and established the supernatural 

design in the use of number, both in the works of God 

and in the Word of God, we now come to the spiritual signifi- 
cance of the numbers themselves. 

We propose to take them in order, and to give under each 
not merely /zs¢s of passages or things, but first to define and 
explain the significance of the number, and then to illustrate 
its meaning, and show its teaching, as applied to its use, to 
numbers of things that are mentioned, the numbers of occur- 
rences of words and things, the numbers of words used for a 
thing, and the numbers formed by the letters of the words 
themselves. This last is called by the ancients Gemaéria. 
This is the use of the letters of the alphabet instead of 
figures. Arabic numerals being a comparatively modern 
invention were not, of course, known to, and could not have 
been used by, the more ancient nations. 


The Hebrews and Greeks, therefore, used their alphabets 
as follows :— 
Tue HEBREW ALPHABET 
consists of 22 (2 X 11) letters, so the 5 finals were added to 
make up three series of 9, or 27 in all: l 
Aleph Ner Yod ¢ = IO Koph p- 100 
Be «4-2 Kaph 5 220 Resh ‘ = 200 
Gimel § = 3 Lamed 5 420 Shin “2 = 300 
Daleth =| = 4 Mem 2 5 = 40 Tau  ^- 400 
He a =p Nun EEO Koph 3 = $00 
Mau $3 =6 Samecht = 60 Mem D co | 
ewm y = 7 Ayin Gi = 7 Nun } = ss 


's[eu 


Cheth M —8 Pe E 50 Pe — 800 
Tes t9 Tsaddi ¥ = 9o Tsaddi y = 900 


SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE. 49 


Tue GREEK ALPHABET. 


The Greek letters were 24, poe the required number, 27, 
was made up by using the final “s” or s (called Szgza) for 6, 
and adding two arbitrary symbols called respectively Koppa, 
for 9o, and Sampsi, for goo. 


Alpha a =1 
Beta B9 =2 
Gamma y = 3 
Delta ò =4 
Epsilone = 5 
Stigma s* = 6 
ZBa i = 7 
Eta gr ES 
Theta 0 =9 


Iota p e ie) 
Kappa x —20 
Lambda A = 30 
Mu p = 40 
Nu y = 50 
Xi é= 60 
Omicron o = 70 
Pi ar = 80 
Koppja G=90 


Rho na oO 
Sigma c = 200 
Tau w oc WS 
Upsilon v = 400 
Phi $ = 500 
Chi x= 600 
Psi y= 700 
Omega w = 800 
Sampst e = 900 


* This letter s (called Sigma) is used for the number 6. Why this letter 
and number should be thus associated we cannot tell, except that both are 


intimately connected with the ancient Egyptian ‘‘ mysteries.” 


The three 


letters S S S (in Greek Z X Z) were the symbol of Zs/s, which is thus connected 


with 666. 


Indeed the expression of this number, XZs, consists of the zzztial 


and final letters of the word Xpiords (Christos), Christ, viz, X and s, with 


the symbol of the serpent between them, X—f—s. 


S 1396. 


50 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


ONE. 


There can be no doubt as to the significance of this 
primary number. In all languages it is the symbol of 
unity. As a cardinal number it denotes uty; as an ordinal 
it denotes primacy. Unity being indivisible, and not made up 
of other numbers, is therefore independent of all others, and 
is the source of all others. So with the Deity. The great 
First Cause is independent of all. All stand in need of Him, 
and He needs no assistance from any. 

“ One” excludes all difference, for there is no second with 
which it can either harmonise or conflict. 

When it is written: “Hear, O Israel, the Lon» thy God is 
one Lorn,” it does not deny the Doctrine of the Trinity, but 
it excludes absolutely another Lord: it excludes, therefore, 
all idolatry. 

Hence the First Commandment declares “ Thou shalt have 
NO OTHER GODS " (Exod. xx. 3). 

It asserts that there is in God a sufficiency which needs no 
other; and an zzdefendence which admits no other. 

It marks the beginning. We must begin with God. All 
our words and works must be characterised by the first words 
of the Bible: *In the beginning GOD." Nothing is right 
that does not begin with Him. “God first" is the voice of 
Scripture. “Seek ye first the kingdom of God and His 
righteousness ; and all these things shall be added unto you" 
(Matt. vi. 33) is the testimony of Christ. “God first" is the 
great proclamation. The angels sang: “Glory to God in 
the highest." This was the beginning of their song. And it 
was after this that they sang of “good-will” towards man. 
This, too, must be the great principle governing all our testi- 
mony and our work. We cannot give * glory to God" 
without doing good to men. And there is no real good-will 
for men which does not spring from a desire to glorify God. 
The rapid declension, which is the great mark of these last 
days, comes from an ignoring of this great principle. God 
is shut out, and man is exalted. Hence *the gospel of God " 
(Rom. i. 16) is being rapidly and almost universally super- 
seded by the gospel of man, which is a gospel of sanitation, 


ONE. T 


and indeed is now openly called * Christian Socialism." But 
it is a socialism Aout Christ. It does not begin with the 
glory of God, and it will not and cannot end in any real good 
to man. It begins with man; its object is to improve the old 
nature apart from God, and to reform the flesh; and the 
measure of its success is the measure in which man can 
-become “good” without “ God." 

Man's ways and thoughts are the opposite of God's. God 
says, “ Seek first." Man says, “Take care of number one." 
He is in his own eyes this * number one," and his great aim 
is to be independent of God. 

Independence, in God, is His glory. Independence in 
man, is his sin, and rebellion, and shame. 

In the Word of God, therefore, God is first, and before all. 


“Thus saith the LORD, the King of Israel, 
And his redeemer the LORD of hosts : 
I am the first, and I am the last ; 
And beside Me there is no God." (Isa. xliv. 6.) 


* Hearken unto Me, O Jacob, and Israel My called ; 

I am He; I am the first, I also am the last. 

Mine hand also hath laid the foundation of the earth, 

And My right hand hath spanned the heavens." 

(Isa. xlviii. 12, 13.) 

* Before Me there was no God formed, 

Neither shall there be after Me. 

I, even I, am the LORD ; 

And beside Me there is no Saviour." (Isa. xliii. 10, 11.) 


*I am Alpha and Omega, 
The first and the last.” QR ETT I7 ib i XXIE 13.) 


Thus Jehovah emphasises this great foundation truth. All 
must be confusion where man refuses to recognise it. All 
must be peace where it is owned. 

The first is the only one. There cannot be wo firsts. Man 
ignorantly speaks of the “two first,” or the “three first," 
when he really means the first two, or the first three, etc. 
The Word of God does not thus ignorantly speak. He is 
the only one. He is first in priority of time. He is first in 
superiority of rank, and He is first in absolute supremacy. 

Redemption and salvation began with God. His was the 
word which first revealed it (Gen. iii. 15). His was the well 

E 2 


[Do NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


which first purposed it (Heb. x. 7). His was the power that 
alone accomplished it. Hence “Salvation is of the Lorn” 
(see Exod. xiv. 13; 2 Chron. xx. 17; Jonah ii. 9; etc.). His 
is the will from which it all proceeds. “Lo, I come to do 
Thy will," said the Redeemer (Ps. xl. 7, 8; Heb. x. 7) when 
He came to do that “ will." 


Tur First RecorpEp Worps or THE Lorn Jesus 


are full of significance. 

Here is another illustration of the significance of number in 
Scripture. The Lord Jesus must have spoken from the time 
that all children spoke; but not one syllable that He uttered 
has the Holy Spirit been pleased to record in the Scriptures, 
until He was twelve years of age. And then only this ome 
utterance from His birth till He entered on His ministry at 
His baptism. Only one sentence out of all those twenty-nine 
years. Surely words thus singled out by the Holy Spirit 
must be full of significance. What were they? They are 
written down for us in Luke ii. 49: ** WIST YE NOT THAT I 
MUST BE ABOUT MY FATHER’S BUSINESS?” Solemn words! 
Significant words! Especially in the light these firsż words 
throw upon His /as/ words, “ Ir 1s FINISHED.” What was 
finished? “The Father’s business.” Yes; it was the Father’s 
will. “Lo, I come to do Thy will, O My God.” “This is 
the Father’s will which hath sent Me, that of all which He 
hath given Me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up 
again at the last day " (John vi. 39). Salvation was no after- 
thought with God. It was part of His “ eternal purpose." 
It originated in His “will.” It was not merely for the good 
of man, but for the glory of God in a thousand ways which 
we see not now or yet. Hence it is that when Jesus was 
delivering up His work back into the Father's hands, He 
could say: *I have glorified Thee on the earth: I have 
finished the work which Thou gavest Me to do" (John 
xvii. 4). 

We may find another illustration of the significance of the 
number “one” or * first" in noticing 


Tur First MiwisrERIAL Worps oF THE Lorn Jesus. 


At His baptism (Matt. iii. 13-17) He was anointed for His 
ministry, and immediately after we read: * THEN was Jesus 


ONE. 85 


led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the 
Devil.” For forty days He fasted and was tempted. Nota 
word that escaped His lips during those forty days is written 
down. But the very first recorded words of His ministry 
are: “It is written.” Three times over: “Jt is written ;" 
“It is written ;” “It is written." 

His official ministry closed with His High-Priestly prayer 
to the Father in John xvii., for at its close He went out into 
the Garden of Gethsemane to His betrayal, and within a few 
hours His death. In those last words of His ministry there 
is the same threefold reference to the Word of God: v. 17, 
“Thy word is truth ;" v. 14, “I have given them Thy word ; " 
and v. 8, *I have given unto them the words which Thou 
gavest Me." 

What does this fact say to us? If we have ears to hear, it 
says The beginning and end of all ministry is the Word of God. Yea, 
it is the whole sum and substance of ministerial testimony. 
The Lord thus exalted the Word of God, and by the signifi- 
cance of His first ministerial words He impresses upon us 
this great lesson. 


Tue First Boox 


of the Bible also affords us another illustration. In Genesis 
we see Divine sovereignty and supremacy. Sovereignty in 
Creation, in giving life, and in sustaining life. 

The name by which God specially revealed Himself to the 
Patriarchs, He says (Exod. vi. 3), was El-Shaddai (God 
Almighty). This Title occurs 


In Genesis 6 times 2 ; 
Rest of Pentateuch 3 men) EIOS. 


nine times in all; the square of ¢hree, the number of Divine 
perfection. 

The frst occurrence of the name “ Almighty " is also full of 
instruction, but we shall consider it under the number * jive.” 

All through this first Book we see this Divine supremacy 
and sovereignty—sovereignty of will in election and calling : 
calling Abram and no other (Acts vii. 2); choosing Isaac 
and not Ishmael (Gen. xvii. 18-21); Jacob and not Esau 
(ibid. xxv. 23, etc.); Ephraim and not Manasseh (m. 
xlviii. 19; Heb. xi. 21). 3g 


54 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


This frs; book is the one book. It contains all the other 
‘books in embryo, and has been well called “the seed plot of 

the Bible.” Its Divine title is “TuE BEGINNING,” z.e. the first: 
“In the beginning God,” z.e., God first. Here is the begin- 
ning of life, the beginning of prophecy (Gen. iii. 15). The 
woman's seed foretold, and the beginning of the enmity 
between her seed and the seed of the serpent. 

The covenant made with Abraham (Gen. xv.) was uncon- 
ditional, because there was only ove contracting party. The 
Law had a mediator, therefore there were ‘wo parties to that 
covenant. “But a mediator is not of one [contracting party *], 
but God is one” (Gal. iii. 20). God alone made this cove- 
nant, hence it is called * the covenant of PROMISE.” 

Then we have the sufferings of Christ, and the glory which 
should follow, foreshown in Joseph. His death as a substi- 
tute is foreshown in Isaac's ram. “The way of Cain” and 
the way of God are seen in Cain's fruits and Abel's lamb, 
showing the true and only ground of access to and worship 
of God. 


Thus in the forefront of revelation we are shown that 
man cannot be saved by works, but by grace alone. The 
foundation of all truth is here. Gospel truth shines brightly 
here. All is in oze book, and that the first. 


Tue First COMMANDMENT. 


“This is the first and great commandment,” Matt. xxii. 37, 
38, or in Mark xii. 29, 30, * Hear, O Israel ; the Lorn our God 
is one Lorp: thou shalt love the Lon» thy God with all thy 
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with 
all thy strength.” 

The reference is to Deut. vi. 4. This is “first” in order, 
first in time, and first in importance. This is therefore the 
* greatest" in necessity, in extent, and in nature. The first 
in the Law, and the greatest in the Law, and hence it was 
one of the four passages written on the phylacteries of the 
Jews. 

The Hebrew words may be variously rendered, but the 
quotation of the Lord Jesus, written by the Holy Spirit in 


* The ellipsis is wrongly supplied in Gal. iii. 20. It is not the werd 
mediator which is to be repeated, but the contracting party from v. 19. 


ONE. 55 


the Gospels, fixes the meaning of the words. In the Hebrew 
the order is, * Hear, O Israel, Jehovah our Elohim, Jehovah 
One.” The Jews repeat it to-day thus, “Hear, O Israel, the 
Lorn our God, the Lorn is One,” and the whole congrega- 
tion repeat the word “ One ” for several minutes.* 

If the Lord had not supplied the verb which fixes the 
meaning, we might well have read it as the Jews do, for this 
fixes (unconsciously to them) the doctrine of the Trinity. For 
the three Persons are named, and then it is declared that 
they are one: “The Lord, our God, The Lord, is one,” że., 
the three, Father, Son, and Spirit, are one. 

But there is a further peculiarity in this passage. In all 
the MSS. and printed texts the last letters of the first and 
last words are always written and printed majuscular, i.e., 
larger than the others ; thus: 


“ShemA Israel, Jehovah, Elohenu, Jehovah, EchaD.” 


In the Hebrew the first of these two larger letters is 
(ayin), and the second is “J (daleth). Rabbi Bochin has this 
remark, “It is possible to confess one God with the mouth, 
although the heart is far from Him. For this reason y and 
*] are majuscuia, from which, with Zsere subscribed, “99 ‘a 
witness, is formed, that every one may know, when. he pro- 
fesses the unity of God, that his heart ought to be engaged 
and free from every other thought, because God is a wetness 
and knows all things." + What may be the true reason, 
however, for these two letters being larger, we do not know. 
The real sense of the words, according to their meaning, is, 
Hear, O Israel, Jehovah (the ever-existing One) our Elohim 
(our Triune God), Jehovah “is one.” 

What is here predicated of Jehovah is not the uzzy of God 
at all, but that it is to Him that the name Jehovah right- 
fully belongs, that He is the one and only God, and that 
there can be no other. It is equally opposed to all forms of 
Theism and Deism, which are the creations of man's ideas, 
as well as to polytheism on the one hand, and national or 
local deities on the other. The whole statement has regard 
to revelation. Israel alone could say, Jehovah is “our God," 


* As “Elohim” is plural we might with much more reason repeat 
** Elohenti for several minutes ! 
+ J. H. Mich., Bibl. Hebr. 


56 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


because He had made Himself known—* His ways unto 
Moses, and His acts to the children of Israel" (Ps. 
eiii. 7). 

With this agrees the choice of the word Æchad, which is 
used for “one.” In the Hebrew there are two words in 
use for the number “ one." TAN (Echad), “one,” unus; and 
"Pm (Yacheed), “an only one," unicus. 

The latter, Facheed (T1), means absolute unity, or unique- 
ness, an only one. It occurs only twelve times in the Old 
Testament (3 X 2°), viz.: 

Pentateuch, 3. 
Rest of Old Testament 9 (3?). 
Gen. xxii. 2, “ Take now thy son, /Azze only son Isaac." 
Gen. xxii. 12 and 16, “Hast not withheld thy son, ZAze 
only son." 
Judg. xi. 34, * She was his ozly child.” 
Ps. xxii. 20, “Deliver. . . my darling” (marg. only one). 
Ps. xxv. 16, * I am desola/e and afflicted." 
Ps. xxxv. 17, “ Rescue . . . my darling (marg. only one) 
from the lions." 
Ps. Ixviii. 6, * God setteth ¢he solztary in families." 
Prov. iv. 3, “I was . . . tender and only beloved in the 
sight of my mother." 
Jer. vi. 26, * Mourning as for an only son.” 
Amos viii. 10, “I will make it as the mourning of an 
only son." 
Zech. xii. 10, * As one that mourneth for his only son.” 


These are all the occurrences of the word Vacheed, and 
here therefore we see the meaning of the word. Zu this 
zs not the word which is used in Deut. vi. 4, and it is never used 
of Jehovah. It is used of the Lord Jesus as the only be- 
gotten Son ; but never of Jehovah—the Triune God. 

But MN (Zchad) is so used because it does not mean 
absolute unity, but a compound unity. Always one of others 
which make up the one. Its first occurrence is :— 


Gen. i. 5, * The first day " (of sezez). 

Gen. ii. 11, * The name of zke first is Pison” (ùe. one of 
four). 

Gen. ii. 21, * He took one of his ribs." 

Gen. ii. 24, “ They two shall be ome flesh." 


ONE. T 


Hence when it is used twice, the word being repeated, 
“one, one," it is translated both ove and zhe other; but it is 
always one where there are others. (Hence sometimes euch, 
as in Num. vii. 85.) 

Gen. xlix. 16, “ As one of the (twelve) tribes of Israel." 
Num. xiii 23, “A branch with oze cluster of (many) 
grapes." 

We even have the plural Echadim (like Elohim), omes. In 
speaking of the two sticks representing the houses of Israel 
and Judah, it says, Ezek. xxxvii. 19, * They shall become 
ones in Thine hand." 

Ps. xxxiv. 20, “ He keepeth all his bones, not oze of them 
is broken." 

In all these and other places “chad is composite. It is one 
of others, and hence it is the word used in Deut. vi. 4. 
Jehovah (the Father) Elohim (the Son), and Jehovah (the 
Spirit) is Zchad :-—One Triune God. 

This is the teaching of the number one as applied to this 
first commandment. There is only one Lord, consequently 
there is no other to divide the heart. Therefore thou shalt 
love the Lord with all thy heart. Thus the ground of the 
claim is first mentioned, and then this first and great com- 
mandment is given, based upon it. 

But this leads to another illustration in Zech. xiv. 9. 


Tue One Mirrzwwiar RULE. 


“ And the LORD shall be King over all the earth ; 
In that day shall there be one LoRD, and His name one.” 


There will in that glorious day be no one to dispute Je- 
hovah’s rule. There will be no difference of law, or will, or 
rule, then. All will be harmony, unity, and agreement. This is 
the secret of Millennial peace. In the Lord’s Prayer the two 
are placed together, one being consequent upon the other. 

«Thy kingdom come." 

“Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.” 

Where there are more wills than one, there can be no 
peace, no rest. There must necessarily be conflict and con- 
fusion. 

This is the secret of all disturbance in families, parties, 
and nations. 


58 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


We sometimes hear of a “Dual Control" but it is a 
fiction. It exists only in words, not in reality ! 


This is the secret of rest for the heart now—“ One will,’”. 
As long as there are two wills there can be no peace. As | 


long as our will is not subject to God's will, we cannot know / 


A 


what rest is. 

This is where the Lord Jesus, as man, found rest in the 
midst of His rejection. In Matt. xi., John the Baptist doubts, 
77. 2, 3; the people of that generation reject Him, vv. 16-19; 
the cities which saw His mightiest works do not believe, 
vv. 20-24. Then we read in the next verses (25, 26), “AT 
THAT TIME Jesus answered and said, I THANK THEE, O 
FarHER, Lord of heaven and earth, because Thou hast hid 
these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed 
them unto babes, Even so FATHER; for so it seemed good 
in Thy sight And then turning to His weary servants, 
the subjects of similar trials and disappointments, He says, 
* Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy-laden, and 
I will give you rest." 

In other words, vest is to be found only in subjection to 
the Fathers will This is the secret of present rest for 
our souls. This is the secret of Millennial peace and blessing 
for the earth. 

How simple! and yet what strangers we are to this rest! 
How the Lord’s servants are rushing hither and thither to 
find this great blessing, and yet do not enter into it! Why 
is this? It is because we do not believe that His will is better 
than our own? If we were occupied with the Lord instead 
of with ourselves, with the Blesser instead of with our 
“blessing,” we should soon have such a sense of His grace 
and glory and power as would convince us that His will is 
better than ours; and then, instead of being busy with our- 
selves and enquiring how we are to give up our will, we 
should see that His is so good that we really loathe our own, 
and desire only His. 

This blessing'is not gained by any “act of surrender" or 
“act of faith,” but our own will simply vanishes in the con- 
templation of His will as we see it to be all-gracious and 
all-good. 

Man's modern methods all begin at the wrong end. They 
begin with ourselves, they occupy us with ourselves, and 


ONE. 59 


hence the failure. The Divine method puts “ God First,” 
and thus the end is assured. 

It is when our hearts are so before God and so with God, 
that we learn the wondrous wisdom of His way, and the per- 
fection, sweetness, and blessedness of His will. We yearn to 
possess it, we long for it, and desire to come into its joy ; 
. and our own will vanishes without an effort, and without our 
knowing it, until we discover afterwards what has happened 
by a happy experience. 

In Millennial days this will be the blessing of the whole 
earth. For in that day there shall be one King, one will, 
* one Lord, and His name one." 


Tue Unity or THE SPIRIT. 


This is the unity of the members of the one body of 
Christ, who are all animated by the same Spirit. It is a 
unity which we cannot make. It is made for us in Christ. 
We can only preserve it, and live in the power of it by the 
Holy Spirit, who is “the bond of peace.” It needs indeed 
carefully preserving, for it is opposed to all man’s ideas of 
unity in churches and sects. It is a spiritual unity. 

In Eph. iv. 4-6 this unity of the body and its members is 
set forth. And note the seven-fold nature of it. It is set 
forth in an panodos, i.e., the sentences are arranged in an 
introversion, where the first answers to the last, the second 
to the next to the last, etc. The Lord is exalted by being 
placed in the centre of the whole. 


A | There is one Bopy, 
B | and one Spirit, 
C | Even as ye are called [also] in one Horz of your 
calling : 
D | ONE LORD, 
C | One FAITH, 
B | One BAPTISM, 


A | One God and Father of all [the members of this Body], 


who is above [or over you] all, and through [or 
with you] all, and in you all. 


Here note, then, in A and A, we have the one Body. In 
B and B, we have the Spirit and His Baptism. In C and C, 


60 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


the graces of “taith” and “hope”; while in D the Lord 
stands out as the great head of this one Body, the keystone 
of this arch of Divine truth. 


First Occurrences OF Worps. 


These are always important. The ancient Jewish com- 
mentators call special attention to them, and lay great stress 
upon them as always having some significance. They ge- 
nerally help us in fixing the meaning of a word or point us 
to some lesson in connection with it. 


Take for example the word— 


** Hallelujah.” 
Where does it first occur? Ps. civ. 35 :— 


“Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, 
And let the wicked be no more. 
Bless thou the LoRD, O my soul, 
HALLELUJAH.” 


And where is the first occurrence in the New Testament? 
Rev. xix. 1-3, “I heard a great voice of much people in 
heaven, saying ALLELUIA; * salvation, and glory, and honour, 
and power f unto the Lord our God; for true and righteous 
are His judgments; for He hath judged the great whore, 
which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath 
avenged the blood of His servants at her hand, and again 
they said ALLELUIA.” f 

In both these cases, in the Old Testament and in the New, 
the first occurrence of the word “ Hallelujah” stands in con- 
nection with judgment. It is for this that praise is given to 
God. This does not accord with the teachings of the false 
charity and the traitorous toleration of the present day. The 
servants of Jehovah, who are imbued with the spirit of the 


Scriptures, are to, and can, praise Him for the destruction of 
His and their enemies. 


* This is the Greek spelling of the Hebrew word ** Hallelujah." 

+ The repetition of this word ‘‘and” is an example of the figure of 
Polysyndeton. 

[ This is an example of the figure of Repetition called Zpanadiplosis, where 
the same word that begins the sentence is repeated at the end, for the sake of 


emphasis, and to call our attention to some important lesson in connection 
with it, 


ONE. 61 


** Prophet.” 


The first occurrence of this word stands in connection with 
Abraham, Gen. xx. 7. God says to Abimelech king of Gerar, 
concerning Abraham and his wife, * Now therefore restore 
the man his wife: for he is a Propuet, and he shall pray for 
thee and thou shalt live." 

We learn from this that the word Prophet does not mean 
merely one who /oretells, but one who witnesses for God as 
His spokesman.* The Hebrew word occurs in Exod. vii. 1, 
* Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet”; while in iv. 16 the 
same word is translated, * he shall be thy spokesman.” This 
is exactly what it means; and the man who spoke for God 
was recognised by the people as God's man, ze, “A man 
of God." 


« Holy?” 


The first occurrence of vp (Ko-desh), holy, is in. Exod. 
iii. 5. Not in the Book of the Beginning (Genesis) ; not until 
Exodus is opened—the Book of Redemption, which records 
how God came down to redeem His people out of Egypt 
(Exod. xv. 13). The creature cannot understand anything 
about Aolemess except on the ground of redemption. 


“ Bride.” 


The first occurrence of the word “ bride,” abs (Kalah), as 
applied to the Bride of Jehovah, is in Isa. xlix. 18. This 
fixes the meaning of the term as applying only to Israel, and 
not to the Church, which is “the Body of Christ,” part of 
* Christ mystical"; in other words, part of the Bridegroom. 
We are thus pointed to the fact that Israel is the Bride. 
Compare Isa. lxi. 10; lxii. 5. 


* The Day of the Lord." 


This important expression occurs first in Isa. ii. 12, and if 
we read the description of it as there given to us by the Holy 
Spirit, and note its character and object, as well as the 
purpose of it, we shall have a clear understanding of its 
meaning. 


* See Zhe Man of God, by the same author. 


62 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


It is the day when the Lorn ariseth to shake terribly the 
earth ; when man shall be humbled and brought low; and 
when God alone shall be exalted. 

Read the whole passage Isa. ii. 10-22, and note how it is 
emphasised, and how its importance is further shown by 
being stamped throughout with two figures, which run side 
by side,—Polysyndeton, the word “and” being used twenty 
times in nine verses, and Syxonymia, t.e., where different words 
of similar meaning are heaped together and repeated. Here 
there are seven words and twenty repetitions of them in order 
to show the /oftimess of man’s natural pride, and the depth to 
which it shall be brought down and humbled in “the Day of 
the Lorp.” 


This is the first occurrence of the expression :— 


“For the day of the LORD of hosts shall be upon every one 
that is proud and lofty, 
And upon every one that is lifted up; and he shail be 
brought low . . .; 
And the LonD alone shall be exalted in that day." (v. 11.) 


Tue First QUESTIONS 
of the Old and New Testaments are also full of instruc. 
tion.* 

Gen. iii. 9, * Where art thou?” 

This question was put by God to the sinner who is hiding 
from His holy presence, to bring him to conviction, to show 
him that he was lost and guilty and ruined. This is the 
object of the Old Testament. The Law it is that gives the 
knowledge of sin, and brings the sinner under conviction. 

The first commandment is, * Thou shalt love the Lorp thy 
God with all thy heart," etc. The impossibility of obeying 
this commandment convicts the sinner of his zmpotence, and 
causes him to thankfully cast himself upon God’s omnipotence, 
and cry out for a Saviour. 

The first question of the New Testament therefore is, in 
Matt. ii. 2, * Where is HE that is born?" Where is this 
Saviour whom I need? He has sought me and brought me 
to conviction. Where is He that I might find Him, and 
know Him, and worship Him, and serve Him? 


* Gen. iii. 1 is not a question, as the margin explains. 


ONE. 63 


Tue First FULFILMENT or PROPHECY IN THE New 


TESTAMENT. 


This opens a vast field of instruction, laying down for us 
the lines, and showing us the principles on which the Holy 
Spirit interprets His own prophecy. It is in the Gospel 
according to Matthew (i. 22, 23): 


A | “Now all this was done that it might be fulfilled 
which was spoken of (óró, dy) the Lord by (êd, 
through) the prophet, saying, 

B | Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall 
bring forth a son, 
B | and they shall call His name Emmanuel, 
A | which being interpreted is, God with us." * 


Here notice, first, that the prophecy is quoted from Isa. 
vii. 14. In Matthew it is specially said to be “spoken by the 
Lord" ; and in Isaiah it is written, “The Lon» Himself shall 
give you a sign." 

Thus the fact is emphasised that “the prophecy came not 
in old time by the will of man ; but holy men of God spake 
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost” (2 Pet. i. 21). 

As this is the first recorded fulfilment of Old Testament 
prophecy in the New Testament, we may expect to find in it 
the generic character of all prophecy, and the grand example 
of the Holy Spirit's own interpretation. 

'The prophecy here said to be fulfilled is thus written in 
Isa. vii. 14: “Behold a virgin} shall conceive and bear a 
son, and shall call His name Immanuel." 


* Note that in this introversion we have, in A and 4, the prophecy and the 
interpretation ; while in B and Z we have the prophecy fulfilled; in B His 
birth, and in Z His name. 

+ The R.V. thus translates it like the A.V., but gives in the margin : “zke 
maiden is with child and beareth.” The verbs occur twice besides, Gen. 
xvi 11 and Judg. xiii. 5, 7; and v. 12 shows that birth was imminent. The 


noun virgin is nporn Ha-almah, and means the ** maiden," or the ‘‘damsel.” 
Almah occurs seven times, Gen. xxiv. 43; Exod. ii. 8; Ps. Ixviii. 25 ; Prov. 
xxx. I9 ; Song i 3; vi. 8; Isa. vii 14, and means **a maid” or ** unmarried 
woman," Here it is ‘‘ the maid," z.e., some particular maid well known to the 
prophet and to Ahaz, but not to us. The Hebrew for virgin in our technical 
sense is gonna, Bethulak (and occurs 50 (2 X 5?) times; the first, Gen. 
xxiv. 16), The truth is that every Bethulah is indeed an Alma% ; but every 


64 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


But there is another prophecy associated with this, which is 
recorded in the next chapter: 


“The king of Assyria . . . shall sweep onward into Judah; 

He shall overflow and pass through... 

And the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of 
thy land, O Immanuel. 

Make an uproar, O ye peoples, and ye shall be broken 
inepieces o o 

Take counsel together, and it shall be brought to nought ; 

Speak the word, and it shall not stand; ` 

For GOD IS WITH US (ow 32/39. Immanu-el).” 


(Isa. viii. 7-10, R.V.) 


Now in this first quotation of prophecy as fulfilled, we note 
the following facts for our instruction :— 


1. Prophecy is, as we have seen, spoken by JEHOVAH, 
and the prophets, so-called, are only the instruments or 
agents. With this agrees 2 Pet. i. 20, 21, where it is said 
that they * spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." 

Now the word Jehovah denotes Him who existed in eternity 
past, and will ever exist in eternity to come. 

In the Old Testament we have the word (Jehovah) which 
implies the zz/erprefatioz. While in the Apocalypse we have 
the zu£erpretation which implies the word “ which is, and which 
was, and which is to come” (i. 4, 8; iv. 8). 

The ame of the “Lord,” or Jehovah, therefore, is the key 
to the understanding of His Word, for He has magnified 
His Word above all His Name (Ps. cxxxviii. 22. His Word, 
therefore, in a still higher sense, will relate to what WAS, 
and IS, and is TO COME. 

Notice, however, that in the New Testament (the Apo- 
calypse) Jehovah Jesus, as the Son of Man, is about to fulfil 
all His holy promise, and carry out all His responsibility. 
Hence His name is— 

In the O. T., He shall be 
In Apocalypse ... "e 


He is 
He is 


He was 
He was 


He is to come. 


Almah is not necessarily a Bethulah. The prophecy does not lose one 
fraction of its Messianic character and force by this admission of the truth, as 
we shall see below. When it was fled in the days of Ahaz it was merely 
Almak ; but when it was fulfilled or Aled full, the Holy Spirit interprets it by 
the Greek word wap@évos, and thus defines her as technically a virgin. 


THE FIRST FULFILMENT OF PROPHECY. 65 


The future has become present, and what was present 
merges into the past. 

The present is, in the Greek, expressed by the participle 
(not the indicative, which is only suitable to a definite begin- 
ning or ending), thus indicating the protracted fulfilment of 
prophecy between the past and the future, running from the 
announcement of the prophecy down to the period of the 
crisis. 

In the Apocalypse the three-fold statement occurs twice 
more (xi 17; xvi. 5). But these refer to the period after 
the Coming of Christ, and hence the /u/ure aspect of His 
name disappears. He is spoken of only as “which art, and 
wast.” € : 

It will then be simply the one “who is and was.” The 
coming is regarded as having taken place, and the Day of 
the Lord inaugurated; therefore nothing future in the name 
remains in relation to the prophetic word. 

Thus the fact that the words were “spoken by Jehovah” 
gives us the first key to their prophetic unfolding. 

2. The subject of the prophecy is Christ, for “the testi- 
mony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy " (Rev. xix. 10). 

3. This prophecy was originally uttered in connection with 
man’s failure as man, in the person of Ahaz (Isa. vii. 10-14). 
just as the prophecy of Gen. iii. 15 was given in connection 
with man's failure in Adam ; and just as the prophets were 
first raised up as a special order of witnesses on Israel's 
failure. The Holy Spirit thus connects in this prophecy the 
fatture of man and the promise of the Messiah, taking the differ- 
ent threads of His various utterances, and combining them 
in one. ‘Thus establishing the principle that prophecy came 
in after man's failure. 

4. On the other hand, He takes the words out of those 
combinations which were the direct cause of their original 
utterance. Thus prophecy is resolved into its elements by 
the Holy Spirit, and by Him the elements are re-combined 
in accordance with His plans. à 


* 'The words **and art to come" were put in by some later copyist from the 
earlier part (i. 4, 8), and have no manuscript authority. They are excluded 
by Griesbach, Lachmann, Tischendorf, Tregelles, Alford, Wordsworth, West- 


cott and Hort, and the R. V. 


F 
S 1396. 


66 NUMBER.IN SCRIPTURE. 


s. He takes up the threads of passages that follow the one 
actually quoted, which explain the reason why the original 
combinations in which the words were written did not allow 
of the complete fulfilment of the prophecy at the time they 
were spoken or written. 

6. He connects meanings of names with prophetic truth ; 
and, seizing the gist of the prophecy rather than the mere 
words, He views in Ahaz the idolatrous and unbelieving Jews 
making a covenant with their Gentile enemy. 

7. He develops, defines, and adds to the original force of 
the Hebrew word Almah, because, in the ultimate fulfilment, 
the woman to bring forth the son would be a virgin. The 
use of Almah in Isaiah made it correct for the historic fulfil- 
ment, but did not thus preclude the /wsurist fulfilment. 

8. The whole prophecy, therefore, of Isa. vii. and viii. can 
receive its fulfilment only by separating that fulfilment into 
three parts, Preteritist, Presentist, and Futurist. Then, as the 
speaker is Jehovah, the Lon», as we have seen, it is inter- 
preted according to the meaning of His name, which em- 
bodies past, present, and future, as the ever-existing and 
eternal God, “which is, and which was, and which is to 
come " (Rev. i. 4, 8). 

It follows, therefore, from this that no interpretation of 
prophecy can be correct which confines itself to only one of 
these three parts, and denies the other two. This is not 
* rightly dividing the word of truth." 

And also it follows that the power thus to divide the pro- 
phecy and re-combine the three divisions must be only that 
of the author of the prophecy, the Lorn the Spirit. 

Interpreters who take up oze of these three principles are 
therefore divided into opposite and hostile camps against 
those who take up another of those principles. But not until 
we grasp the great principle laid down by the Holy Spirit 
here, and apply all of them, and all of them together, can we 
have a true understanding of prophecy. 

Now let us prove these three principles, 


First — The Preterttist. 
Ahaz, being greatly moved at the confederacy of Ephraim 
with Syria, was tempted to make a counter-confederacy with 
the king of Assyria. A sign was given to him that he need 


THE FIRST FULFILMENT OF PROPHECY. 67 


not yield to the temptation, for it would be withdrawn, A 
child would be born to a certain maiden, who would be 
called Immanuel, and before that child would know how to 
distinguish between good and evil, the land that he abhorred 
(zc, Ephraim and Syria, regarded as one) would be forsaken 
of both her kings. 

. In the next chapter another sign was given to Ahaz. 
Again a child would be born, this time to the prophetess, 
and called Maher-shalal-hash-baz, and before he should be 
able to cry “father” or “mother,” both Syria and Ephraim 
should be spoiled by the king of Assyria. 

The words quoted in Matt. i. are taken partly from Isa. 
vii. 14; and they distinctly show that Ahaz had not to wait 
for the birth of Christ to see the promised “sign,” but 
that it must have occurred in his own day. And it was so. 
Herein is the Preserztist interpretation fulfilled in the past. 


Second — The Futurist. 


But part of the quotation in Matt. i, “God with us," is 
taken from Isa. viii. 10, which clearly reaches forward to the 
same time as Ps. ii., when the kings of the earth take counsel 
against Messiah, and is, therefore, exclusively futurist. 


“ The king of Assyria , . . shall sweep onward into Judah : . . . 

And the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of 
Thy land, O Immanuel. 

Make an uproar, O ye peoples, and ye shall be broken 
in pieces : 

And give ear, all ye of far countries : 

Gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces ; 

Gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces. 

Take counsel together, and it shall be brought to nought ; 

Speak the word, and it shall not stand: 

For GOD IS WITH US (Immanu ED. 

For the LoRD spake thus to me with a strong hand, 

And instructed me that I should not walk in the way of 
this people." (Isa. viii. 8-12, RY.) 


This is continued in v. 21, and is evidently futurist, as it is 
the time of darkness, when the judgments of the Apocalypse 
are upon the earth. (See Isa. viii. 8—ix. 7.) 

« She that was in anguish” in ix. 1 is clearly Zion, and it is 
Zion, or the nation, that will at the time of the end say: “ Unto 

F 2 


68 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


us a child is born.” That is the time of Rev. xii. and 
Ps. Ixxxvii., where Christ is seen as born of Zion. It is 
the time when He takes the kingdom and establishes His 
millennial reign (Luke i. 31-33). 

Thus it is certain that a portion of these three chapters 
cannot be fully interpreted except on Futurist lines. 


Third—The Presentist 


lines, or those which run through the ages between the past 
(the prophet’s own day) and the future (the day of the crisis), 
are also clearly discernible. 

In vii. 17 we read the words, immediately following the 
prophecy of the birth of this mysterious child -— 


“The LORD shall bring upon thee, 
And upon thy people, and upon thy father's house, 
Days that have not come, 
From the day that Ephraim departed from Judah ; 
Even the king of Assyria." (Isa. vii. 17.) 


'To understand this, it is necessary to know that Nebuchad- 
nezzar stepped into the heritage of the kings of Assyria. 
Hence the Babylonians were called Assyrians, even so late 
as the times of Xenophon, who so speaks of them in his 
Anabasis. And even Darius, whom we know was a Median, 
is still called *the king of Assyria" in the Word of God. 
(See Ezra vi. 22, and compare 2 Kings xxiii. 29 and 
2 Chron. xxxv. 23.) 

Thus “the Assyrian” of Isaiah’s prophecy, at the time of 
the end, is not necessarily a king of revived Assyria, and we 
are taught that these prophecies of the king of Assyria 
reach through to all the heads of the four Gentile empires 
spoken of in Daniel. 

The prophecy of the king of Assyria spoken of in these 
chapters of Isaiah runs on in protracted presenfist fulfilment, 
covering the whole period of * the times of the Gentiles.” 

Another proof of the necessity of this presentis¢ fulfilment 
is given in Isa. viii. 13 :— 

*'The LORD of hosts, Him shall ye sanctify ; 

And let Him be your fear, and let Him be your dread. 
And He shall be for a sanctuary ; 


But for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offence to 
both the houses of Israel, 


THE FIRST FULFILMENT OF PROPHECY. 69 


For a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 
And many shall stumble thereon, and fall, and be broken 
And be snared and be taken. : 
Bind thou up the testimony, 
Seal the law (or zeaching) among my disciples. 
And I will wait for the LORD, 
That hideth His face from the house of Jacob, 

_ And I will look for Him. 


Behold! I and the children whom the LORD hath given me 

Are for signs and wonders in Israel 

From the LORD of hosts, which dwelleth in mount Zion." 
(Isa. viii. 13-18, R.v.) 

Here we have the present character of the dispensation as 
it is described in Rom. ix.—xi., the period of Israel's blind- 
ness. This is perfectly clear if we compare Isa. viii. 14 with 
Rom. ix. 32, 33. 

Christ is the stumbling-stone and rock of offence to the 
masses; but He is believed on by a remnant of His disciples, 
“the remnant according to the election of grace.” Christ 
and His disciples to day are the Lord's “signs and won- 
ders" to Israel, for the disciples are counted as the Lord's 
* children " :— 


* A seed shall serve him ; 
It shall be accounted to the LORD for a generation." 
(Ps: xxi 30.) * 

This is further set fortn in the meanings of all the names 
employed. The salvation of Jehovah (for such is the meaning 
of the name Isaran) will be accomplished by Jehovah being 
with His people (ImwaNvEL). That salvation is needed and 
brought about in consequence of the Assyrian hasting to make 
a prey and spoil of the nation (MAHER-SHALAL-HASH-BAZ). 
Then the remnant shall return, i.e. repent (SHEAR-JASHUB, 
Isa. vii. 3), and stay upon Jehovah and wait for Him. 

Such is the purport and teaching of the whole Prophecy of 
Isaiah ; for it is but oze prophecy, a whole, complete in its 
parts, the * higher criticism," which would saw him asunder, 
notwithstanding. 

Such, too, is the important lesson taught us by this first 
recorded fulfilment of prophecy in the New Testament, from which 


* It is clear also from Heb. ii. 13, that Isa. viii. 18 had both a preteritist 
and then a futurist fulfilment. 


70 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


we learn that prophecy is only comprehensible as an organic 
whole, when thus subdivided by (and by us under the 
guidance of) the Holy Spirit into its Preteritist, Presentist, 
and Futurist fulfilments according to the meaning of the 
name J'ehovah—': which is, and which was, and which is to 
come.” 


WORDS THAT Occur ONLY ONCE 


are often instructive; they are called by the Greeks dag 
Xeyópevo. (hapax legomena). We give a few examples in detail. 


(1) xpurixds (kritikos), “ critic,” Heb. iv. 12. 

This is the origin of our word “critic.” The Greek is 
kritikos, and “critic” is merely the English spelling of the 
Greek word, which is thus transliterated. It means able zo 
judge or skilled in judging ; and then, simply, a judge, but 
always with the idea of his ability to judge. It occurs only 
in Heb. iv. 12, where it is translated * a discerner." 

The whole passage relates both to the wr7/ten Word, which 
ts a sword (Eph. vi. 17): and to the Z/vzg Word (Christ), 
who das a sword. 

The structure of the two verses distinguishes between God 
and His word :— 

A | 12-. GOD it is whose Word is so wonderful. 
B | -12—. What His Word IS (living, powerful, and a 
| sharp sword). 
-12-— What His Word DOES (piercing and 
dividing asunder, etc.). 
B | -12-. What His Word IS (a skilful judge). 
A | 13. GOD it is who is omniscient. 


C 


Here we have in A and 4, God the omniscient one; and 
in B, C, and B we have His Word. And we learn that the 
Word of God is a judge now, so wonderful that it distin- 
guishes between the ¢houghts and intentions of the heart and 
judges them. 

The Lord Himself bears witness that the same Word will 
be our judge hereafter—John xii. 48, “He that rejecteth 
Me, and receiveth not My words, hath one that judgeth him : 
the Word which I have spoken, the same shall judge him in 
the last day." 


WORDS THAT OCCUR ONLY ONCE. 71 


What a solemn truth. And how much more solemn, when 
man now dares to take this one word “crite” or “judge,” 
which God has thus, by His only once using it, appropriated to 
His Word, and apply it to himself. And what is it that man 
is going to judge? Why, this very Word of God! thus mak- 
ing himself the judge of that Word which isto judge him! If 
the word krz#zkos were of frequent occurrence, and used of 
various things or persons, man might perhaps be led to look 
on himself as a judge of some one of them. But God has 
used it only once, and He has thus confined it to one thing— 
His Word. Therefore it is a daring presumption for man to 
transfer the word to himself. Not only does man do this, 
but he calls his work “higher criticism.” Now there is a 
criticism which is lawful, because it judges not God’s Word, 
but man’s work as to the manuscripts; this is called Textual 
Criticism, which is quite a different thing. But this “higher 
criticism " is nothing but human reasoning; it is nothing more 
than the imagination of man's heart—those very ¢houghis and 
intentions which the Word itself judges! 

What confusion! what perversion! and what folly! for the 
further man’s criticism departs from the domain of evidence 
and enters on the sphere of reason, the “higher” he calls it! 
That is to say, the less like a skilled judge he acts, the higher 
he exalts his judgment! Poor man! Oh that you would 
submit yourself to this Word. For it must either judge you 
now, in this day of grace, and give you conviction of sin; or 
it will be your judge in the last day, when every mouth will 
be stopped, and you will be *speechless" and “without 
excuse." 


(2) kamyAeóo (kapecleud), “ fo corrupt,” 2 Cor. ii. 17. 


This is another word which occurs only once, and it is, like 
all such words, full of instruction. It is derived from xézy, a 
crib or manger, whence kázro, to eat quickly (Latin, capio, fo take). 
Then comes kámņàos, one who sells provisions, esp. a victualler or 
vintner, and the verb xamydevw, which means to be a káryàos, 7o 
Keep a tavern, to sell victuals and drink (esp. wine). Then, like 
so many words which, in the course of their history, witness 
to the fallen nature of man,“ and because all such retailers 


* See page 92 and zote. 


Z2 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


were addicted to adulteration, the verb came to mean, 
simply, zo adulterate. This cannot be more clearly shown 
than by referring to Isa. i. 22, where the Hebrew, 


“Thy silver is become dross, 
Thy wine mixed with water” 


is rendered in the Septuagint, 
* Thy wine merchants (of kanAoi) mix the wine with water.” 


That is exactly what is meant in 2 Cor. ii. 17, where the 
Apostle says * we are not as many which corrupt the Word 
of God,” z.e, who adulterate and * water down” the Word. 

The Holy Spirit, by confining the use of this verb solely to 
the ministration of the Word of God, places the greatest 
possible emphasis upon the practice of the * MANY!" He 
had just been most solemnly declaring that His ministry of 
that Word was to some the savour of death unto death 
(če. resulting in their endless death). The “many” do not 
so declare all the counsel of God, but they water it down, 
and adulterate all such discriminating truth, prophesying 
smooth things, and seeking to please the people instead 
of studying to show themselves approved unto God (2 Tim. 
T. ces 

The margin of the A.V. reads “ deal decettfully with.” The 
R.V., while translating the word “corrupting” in the text, 
waters down the whole truth in the margin by giving the 
alternative rendering, “ making merchandise of," which, while it 
is far below the solemnity of the passage, exemplifies its truth. 


(3) 9oXAóo (doloo), “to handle deceitfully,” 2 Cor. iv. 2. 

This is another word which is used only once, and here 
again it is in connection with the Word of God. Indeed, 
the three might well be compared—Heb. iv. 12; 2 Cor. ii. 17; 
and this word dodéw in 2 Cor. iv. 2. Like some other words 
which occur only once, its meaning is from that very cause 
not so clear or obvious as other words in more general use. 
We have therefore to search for its meaning. First, all 
verbs ending in ów are causative, carrying out the act which 
is proper to the noun. Hence 8odAos (doulos) is a slave, 
therefore 3ovAóo (doulo-0) means fo make a slave of another, 
to enslave: «óXeuos (polemos) is war, therefore modemów ( pole- 
mo-0) means to make war, or to make hostile. 


WORDS THAT OCCUR ONLY ONCE. 73 


Now with regard to this word, the noun 8óXos (dolos) means 
any cunning contrivance for catching by deceit. Homer uses 
it* of the robe of Penelopé, which she used as a means of 
deceiving her many suitors, saying, she must finish the 
making of it before she could make up her mind. He 
uses it also + of the net with which Vulcan catches Mars, 
and of the Trojan horse;{ and of a mousetrap.§ Hence, 
Sokos means any /rzck, or contrivance, or stratagem by which 
another is deceived. 

The verb 8oAóo therefore must mean the act of deceiving 
by a trick, or ensnaring by craft. The Greek writers use 
it of debasing gold, adulterating wine,|| of dyeing garments, 
and of disguising oneself.** 

In this passage, therefore, it means that the Apostle 
declares that he has not acted thus with the Word of God. 
He neither used it as a vintner did his wine, adulterating 
it or watering it down (2 Cor. ii. 17); nor did he use it 
as a juggler or trickster to catch them with it by wile, craft, 
cunning, or stratagem.}f 

An example may be given of the way in which ignorant 
rationalists thus deal with the Word of God. One tt quotes 
Jer. vii. 22 to prove that Jehovah “never gave any directions 
whatever about burnt offerings and sacrifices,” omitting the 
words which define and limit the reference to “the day 
that I brought them out of the land of Egypt.” This is a 
specimen of the jugglery which abounds on all hands either 
through ignorance or malice. 

This “dealing deceitfully” with the Word of God is seen 
most frequently when words are quoted apart from their 


NO" 19. 137. + Od. 8. 276. t Od. 8. 494. 
§ Batr. 116. || Luc. Hermot. 59. T Poll. ** Soph. Phil. 129. 
++ It may be well to note the many words which have had to be used to meet 
man's fallen nature in his various forms of deception : 
mAaváe (planað) is **to lead astray,” used of doctrinal error or religious 
deceit. 
mapadoytCouat (paralogizomat), **to deceive by false reasoning." 
&raráw (apatad), **to delude with false statements.” 
kamqXeio (kapeeleuo), ‘to adulterate by admixture.” 
5oAdw (dolod), **to deceive by stratagem.” 
Wetiw (pseudo), **to deceive by lying.” 
Backalyw (baskaind), “to deceive by witchcraft.” 
1i The author of ** The Policy of the Pope,” in the Contemporary Review for 
April 1894. 


74. ` NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


context, by which, of course, the Bible may be made to 
prove anything. This is a fruitful source of error even with 
those who love and are seeking after the Truth. 

A glaring example of this wilful deceit is seen in a wall- 
text which reads, * Thou shalt not drink wine," thus giving 
as a Divine command that which is uttered as a threat of 
Divine judgment. See Micah vi. 15. 


(4) dprios (artios), “perfect, 2 Tim, iii. 17. 

This is another word which occurs only once, and again 
in reference to the Word of God. It is rendered “perfect,” 
but it means fitted, and has reference to a special apti- 
tude for any given use. The verb, in the same verse, is 
formed from this word, with the preposition eg ow/ pre- 
fixed, ééapri{w (exartiz0), and it means fitted out, as a vessel 
for a voyage, fully equipped, completely furnished. The two 
words are, therefore, cognate, and should be similarly trans- 
lated. They are, moreover, for the sake of emphasis, put 
out of their place, in order to attract our attention; one is 
put at the deginning of the sentence and the other at the end, 
thus :—“ that eguipped may be the man of God, for every 
good work jully equipped”: or fitted . . . thoroughly fitted 
out; or furnished , . . completely furnished. ‘That is to say, 
He who has “learned” and is “assured of” the Word of 
God, having been * made wise unto salvation," and has pro- 
fited by the continued use of the holy Scripture as inspired 
by God, is “a man of God,” ze, a prophet, and therefore 
knows from these Scriptures what he is to say as God’s 
spokesman.* One who studies man’s books will become a 
man of men; but he who studies God’s book will become 
“a man of God." Moreover he will be egupped for every 
emergency, fitted out against every need, ready to meet 
every contingency; just as a vessel when fitted out for a 
long voyage has to be provided for calm and storm, ready 
to help a friend or defeat an enemy, prepared for fire and 
every accident, so the man of God, who truly profits by the 
study of the Scriptures, is equipped and furnished, prepared 
and ready for every emergency. 


* See Zhe Man of God, by the same author. 


WORDS THAT OCCUR ONLY ONCE. 75 


. (5) fyrüs (rheetos), “expressly,” 1 Tim. iv. 1. 

This word pyrds (rheeios) is from fyréds, spoken, or expressed 
in words. The noun rhetor (f5rep) was used of one who 
spoke to the people and advised them; then itis used of a 
hired orator; and zAeoric was used ofthe arts he employed. 
So that it may mean here that the Holy Spirit actually pro- 
“nounced these solemn words of 1 Tim. iv. 1 audibly in the 
Apostle's ears * in order to emphasise their awful solemnity 
and the certainty of their truth. (See the context.) 


(6) Backaivw (askaino), “to bewitch,” Gal. li. 1. 


“QO foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, that you 
should not obey the truth." 

The word means /o fascinate. Indeed the word fascinate 
is derived from it, the initial f in the Latin taking the place 
ofthe 8 in the Greek. Among the heathen this fascination 
was with the eye (Deut. xxxviii. 54, 56; Eccles. xiv. 8; Wisd. 
iv. 12). In Gal. iii. 1 it is used in a wider sense, and by using 
it only once, the Holy Spirit emphasises it and points to a 
danger common to the people of God through all time. 
When they profess that they are “charmed” by this teacher, 
or “ fascinated” by that speaker, they prove themselves to be 
indeed “foolish” (àvógros,| without understanding), because 
they are “fascinated” and deprived of the use of their 
faculties, and are in great danger of being deceived and 
turned away from the truth. 


(7) émuovovs (eproustos), Matt. vi. 11. 


This word efz-oustos occurs only once. It is not merely 
a word that was used only once, but it occurs nowhere else, 
not even in any other Greek writing, for it was coined by 
the Lord Jesus Himself. Hence there is no help to be 
obtained in understanding its meaning but from the Holy 
Spirit. 

It is translated “daily”: “Give us this day our daily 
bread,” Matt. vi. 11. 


* As on other occasions, Acts x. 19, 20; xiii. 2, etc. 
+ Luke xxiv. 25; Rom. i 14; Gal iii 3; 1 Tim. vi 9; Tit iii. 3. 


76 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


It has been variously understood and translated. The 
R.V., in the margin, treats it as an ellipsis, and supplies the 
word “day” :—“ Greek, our bread for the coming day.” But this 
cannot be correct, for it is in direct opposition to verse 34, 
where we are expressly told to “take no thought for the 
morrow!” Besides, “Give us this day our bread for the 
coming day,” is a denial of the great fact that our need is 
supplied day by day. The truth is that we have no stock 
of grace supplied for future use; that which we need on any 
particular day is not supplied by God either before or after, 
but on the very day, yea, at the very moment of our need. 
The R.V. is right in saying that the Greek means “ coming,” 
but it would be still more correct to say “coming upon,” thus 
preserving the force of the preposition èri (epi), upon.™ 

We must expect this peculiar word of the Lord Jesus to 
have such a fulness in it that no one English word is able 
to express it. It qualifies the word “bread.” It is this 
bread which is epzoustos, i.e., coming upon us. It is not the 
bread which perisheth, but the heavenly bread which cometh 
down from heaven (John vi. 32, 33), even Jesus the living Word 
of God. For “man doth not live by bread only, but by 
every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lorp 
doth man live.” In other words, it is not the bread which 
cometh up from the earth which we ask our Father in this 
prayer; but it is the bread which cometh down from heaven, 
even Christ, the living Word, and the Scriptures, the written 
Word. By these alone, we truly live. 


(8) exóXoy (skolops), “a thorn” (2 Cor. xii. 7), 


is another word which occurs only once, in this place. 
“There was given to me a /Aorz in the flesh," or more 
literally, for the flesh (vj capxi). Commentators and ex- 
positors exhaust their ingenuity in trying to explain what 
this “thorn” was, while the true explanation is given by 
the Spirit in the words which follow. That we may make 
no mistake as to what the “thorn” was, it is immediately 


* "Emiovaios cannot be derived from èri, upon, and elu, zo be, because the 
participle would then have been émoósa. It must be from èri and elu, £o go 
or come, for the participle of this is, as here, émotoa, going upon or coming 
upon, 


WORDS THAT OCCUR ONLY ONCE. 27 


added &yyeXos Xarová, “an angel of Satan."* That is to 
say, this “thorn for the flesh" was “an angel of Satan,” 
allowed to come “in order that he might buffet me” (tva pe 
Kodapitn). The word xodapi~w means fo give a blow with the 
fist. No “thorn” could do this. But this evil angel, sent 
by Satan, could do so; and was permitted to do so, and to 
be to the Apostle what a thorn is to the flesh, in order that 
‘he might not be exalted above measure by the abundance 
of the revelations which he had received. 

First, we have the word “thorn,” then we have the ex- 
planation, “an angel of Satan.” Why should we seek to go 
further and explain the explanation already given? Why not 
rest content with what is actually said, instead of seeking 
to introduce something which is not said? The word and 
the phrase occur only in this passage, to show us the import- 
ance of the great lesson which it teaches. 

Thrice the Apostle prayed that “he might depart.” Lite- 
rally, “in order that he might withdraw or go away from 
me” (iva ámoerj da épuo?) But his prayer was refused! 
Why? Because he asked for what he did not need! The grace 
of Christ was all-sufficient. It was needful for him to be 
humbled. To accomplish this the very buffeting of Satan 
was used to defeat his own designs. Satan’s design is to 
lift up the servant of God with pride. Yet, here, the buffet- 
ings of the messenger of Satan were over-ruled to defeat his 
own ends, and Satan was taken in his own craftiness. 


(9) addorpwericxoros (allotrio-episkopos), 1 Per. iv. 15. 

Allotrio-episkopos is a word which occurs only here, not 
being used even by any of the Greek classical writers. It is 
composed of two words, àAAérpws (allofrios), “ belonging to 
another," and éicxomos (episkopos), “an overseer” (bishop). 
According to this, it would mean one who Jakes the supervision of 
affairs which pertain to others and in no wise to himself. Hence it 
is rendered in A.V. “a busybody (R.V. meddler) in other 


* Not **the messenger of Satan.” There is no article, But the nominative 
is placed in apposition, in order to explain the cxóXoy (thorn). In the 
Received Text, the word **Satan" is also in the nominative, but this would 
in that case explain the angel—that the angel was Satan himself. L., T., 
Tr., A., and W. H. read Zaravá, of Satan. 

+ It occurs elsewhere only in Matt. xxvi, 67 ; Mark xiv. 65; 1 Cor. iv. 11; 
1 Pet. ii. 20. 


78 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


men's matters," Butthis is evidently weak, and itis in fact far 
short of the facts referred to in the context. The Christians 
were being exhorted in this Epistle with regard to a great 
persecution, which was even then commencing, and in which 
they were charged with being “murderers,” “thieves,” 
*evil-doers," and “ allotrio-episkopot,” whatever that may 
mean. Now it is clear that something more is meant here 
than a mere “ busybody," or *meddler," by being classed 
among such great criminals. The fact is, that these perse- 
cutions commenced with popular accusations. The “ Chris- 
tians " were regarded with general hatred, and the common 
charges brought against them were murders, incendiarism, 
etc., but chief of all they were charged with hatred of the 
world and hostility to society. The technical term for this 
latter crime was odium humani generis,“ and it meant that 
the Christians were bent on relaxing the bonds which held 
society together, introducing divisions into families, setting 
children against parents, parents against children, and 
accomplishing all this by unlawful and magical arts. This 
charge was absolutely necessary to procure their death; for 
in the Roman Empire the right of inflicting capital punish- 
ment belonged only to a few high officials, and death was 
the punishment of magicians. 

The Roman officials scorned a merely religious charge 
(see Acts xviii. 15-17; xix. 37; etc.). 

It seems clear, therefore, that the word àAXorpioemískorzos 
was coined in order to express in Greek the Roman in- 
dictment of odium humani generis. So elastic an accusation 
could be easily proved in times of popular excitement. 
Christians were charged with breaking up the peace of 
family life, raising discontent and disobedience amongst 
slaves. True, they were hostile to the wices of Roman 
society, and doubtless denounced them. Society, then, must 
destroy these Christians in self-defence! This is the teach- 
ing involved in this word. Itis no mere advice to disregard 
the taunts or jeers of others. It was a solemn exhortation, 
that when persecution came they were to suffer, not as mur- 
derers or thieves, or as being like our agitators—as the 
enemies of society—but as Christians, * Be ready always to 


* Not hatred of human kind; but among the Romans genus hominum 
meant civilised society. 


WORDS THAT OCCUR ONLY ONCE. 79 


give an answer"* (1 Pet. iii. 15). “If ye suffer for righ- 
teousness' sake happy are ye, and be not afraid of their 
terror" (zd. iii. 14). Do not suffer under those terrible 
accusations and false charges, but suffer “as a Christian." 
Be not ashamed of this, but glorify God on this behalf 
(2bed. iv. 12-16). f 

Many Christians are to-day ignorant, and therefore un- 
mindful, of what is meant by this solemn exhortation. As the 
leaders of the people they are taking the place of those 
whom we speak of as “agitators”; and, by preaching what 
is openly called “a social gospel” and “the gospel of the 
people,” are helping forward the enemies of society, and 
are themselves disturbers of the peace, under the guise of 
what they call ** Christian socialism." Such teachers would 
find it difficult to obey the exhortation to make a good 
defence against such charges, for in their case the accusation 
would be true and not false. 


(10) dwoexdpvdrov (dodekaphulon), “ twelve tribes” (Acts xxvi. 7). 


This word dodekaphulon is used by St. Paul in Acts xxvi. 7, 
where, speaking of the hope of resurrection, he says, “ Unto 
which promise our Twelve Tribes, instantly serving God, day 
and night, hope to come.” 

This shows that the idea of the Twelve Tribes being 
** Jost" is a popular fallacy. 

It is true that in the Old Testament prophecies the term 
“Judah” may be used technically of the kingdom of Judah, 
and the term “Israel” of the Ten Tribes; but it does not 
follow that the current popular use of the words is marked 
by the same exactness. We speak to day of all the seed of 
Abraham as “Jews,” but we do not by such a use of the 
word determine the fact that they are belonging only to the 
tribe of Judah! The popular belief is that at the time of 
the crucifixion only the tribe of Judah was in the land, and 
responsible for the death of the Lord Jesus. 

But it is a fact that, at the time of the separation of the 
two kingdoms, there were “children of Israel that dwelt in 
the cities of Judah," 2 Chron. x. 17; and in 2 Chron. xi. 3 we 


* ümoAoyía, apologia, is a strictly legal term for a defence against a formal 
indictment. 
t See Zhe Spirits in Prison, by the same author. 


80 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


read of “ all Israel in Judah.” Long before the dispersion of 
the Ten Tribes and the captivity of Judah, numbers from all the 
tribes joined the kingdom of Judah on account of the idolatry 
introduced by the kings of Israel. 

In 2 Chron. xi. 13,16, 17,“the priests and the Levites that 
were in all Israel resorted to him (Rehoboam, king of 
Judah) out of all their coasts . . . . and after them ou/ ofall 
the tribes of Israel such as set their hearts to seek the Lorp 
God of Israel came to Jerusalem, to sacrifice unto the Lorp 
God of their fathers. So they strengthened the kingdom of 
Judah.” * 

In 2 Chron. xv. 9, Asa, king of Judah, moved by the 
prophet Azariah, made a reformation, “and he gathered 
all Judah and Benjamin and the strangers with them out of 
Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon: for they fell to 
him out of Israel im abundance,t when they saw that the Lon» 
his God was with him.” 

Josephus says (Ans. xi. 5, 7) of the term “Jews,” “that is 
the name they are called by from the day that they came up 
from Babylon, which is taken from the tribe of Judah, which 
came first to these places, and thence both they and the 
country gained that appellation.” But the word soon obtained 
a wider application, and on the return from the captivity in 
Babylon, what we call “Judah” was not confined merely to 
the original ¢rzde, but embraced the old kingdom of Judah 
and Benjamin, together with an “abundance” out of all the 
other tribes of Israel. 

In the Gospels we read of “ Anna, a prophetess, a daugh- 
ter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher” (Luke ii. 36). So that 
here was one of the Ten Tribes who could trace her gene- 
alogy, and was yet living in the land. 

In giving His instructions to the twelve Apostles, the Lord 
particularly enjoined them, “Go not into the way of the 
Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not, 
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel" 
(Matt. x. 5, 6). And of Himself He said, * I am not sent but 
unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel” (Matt. xv. 24). 


* But only for three years did this strength continue. Then they, too, 
fell into idolatry, and were no longer a strength, but a weakness. 

+ The Hebrew is 37, 740v, and means ‘‘ multitude.” See Gen. xvi. 10; 
xxxii 12; Deut. i IO; xxviii 62 ; Josh. xi. 4; Judges vi. 5; vii. 12; etc. 


WORDS THAT OCCUR ONLY ONCE. $1 


The fact is that the whole nation was spoken of by the 
Gentiles as “Jews,” and the terms “Jews” and “ Israelites " 
are not used in the New Testament with the distinction which 
modern usage has given to them. 

It is clear from the Book of Esther that in Persia and 
elsewhere they were known as and spoken of as “ Jews." 

-In Jer. xxxiv. 9, the term “Jew” is co-extensive with the 
term “ Hebrew." 

In Zech. viii, too, which carefully distinguishes between 
“the house of Judah” and “the house of Israel" (v. 13), the 
term “Jew” is clearly used of the whole nation (v. 23). 

We see the same indiscriminate use of the words * Jew" 
and *Israelite" in the New Testament. Peter, on the day 
of Pentecost, addresses them as “men of Judea” (Acts ii. 


I4), and in v. 22, as “men of Israel.” And, again, in 
Acts iv. 8, “Peter, filled with the Holy Ghost, said unto them, 
Ye rulers of the people and elders of Israel . . . . Be it 


known unto you and to all the people of Israel.” 

Further, in Acts iv. 27, we are expressly told that, so far 
from the Jews, as such, being guilty of the death of Jesus, it 
was “all the people of Israel.” 

Peter and James addressed their Epistles to the Dza- 
spora,* the * Dispersion," ze “the Twelve Tribes scattered 
abroad.” 

And, finally, the Holy Spirit, by Paul, speaking of the 
promise of Resurrection made unto the fathers, says (Acts 
xxvi. 7), “ Unto which promise our Twelve Tribes, instantly 
serving God, day and night, hope to come.” We thus see 
that those whom we speak of as “Jews” are identical with 
the * Twelve Tribes." 

Although neither we nor they may be able to separate and 
distinguish them now, we shall alike “ marvel " when the true 
Joseph, who *is yet alive," shall show that He can do so, 
when He causes them to sit in order before Him (Gen. 


xliii. 33). 


These must suffice as examples of the importance of hapax 
legomina, or words that occur only once. There are a large 
number of them, and we append a list (by no means exhaus- 


* The word occurs only in John vii. 35 ; James i. 1; andi Pet. i. 1. 


S 1396. G 


82 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


tive) for the further study of those who desire to follow up 
this interesting branch of Bible study. 

be (dal), Ps. cxli. 3, “the door.” 

MY} (séh-gah), Gen. iii. 19, “ In the sweat of.” 

I) (zar-zecph), Ps. lxii. 6, “ water.” 

"en (chah-phaph), Deut. xxxiii. 12, “shall cover him." 

937 (cha-vav),* Deut. xxxiii. 3, “ he loved.” 

ina (&oA-chan), Isa. xxviii. 16, “tried.” 

H33 (kah-naph), Isa. xxx. 20, “ shall thy teachers.” 


POW (kish-shah-lohn), Prov. xvi. 18, “ a fall.” 

md (Jéh-ach), Deut. xxxiv. 7, “natural force.” 

n (rohn), Ps. xxxii. 7, “songs of." 

SM (rah-hav), Ps. xcix. 10, “their strength." 

wht (tah-phash), Ps. cxix. 70, “is fat.” 

Uam (rah-gash), Ps. ii. 1, “do rage.” 

p (voh-nehk), Isa. liii. 2, “as a tender plant.” 

Vn (rah-géh-dg), Ps. xxxv. 20, “them that are quiet." 
* ( y Iehl), Deut. xxxii. 10, “howling.” 

DY (yeh-meem),t Gen. xxxvi. 24, “the mules.” 

Dp (koh-shet), Ps. Ix. 4, “the truth." 

FIND’ (y’sc0-dah), Ps. Ixxxvii. 1, ** His foundation," 

TNBp (kip-pah-ohn), Zech. xiv. 6, “nor dark." 

nntb3 (d2¢-chah), Isa. xxx. 15, “confidence.” 

np (E'reeaA), Jonah iii. 2, “ preaching." 

mp5 (Elee-mah), Job xxvi. 7, “nothing.” 

D?3 (ah-lam), Ps. xxxii. 9, “ held in." 

WY’ (vah-ghat), Isa. lxi. 10, “he hath covered me.” 

Ies (t2ah-pheen), Ps. xvii. 14, “ with thy hid." 

i33 (kah-mah), Ps. lxiii. 1, “longed.” 


* This is the word from which the name of the great modern Jewish Society 
Qy 221), Chovevei Zion, is taken. It means the Lovers of Zion. The 
verb 220 means to hide in the bosom, to love fervently with a tender protect- 
ing love. ‘The society is formed for the colonisation of Palestine, and has 
adopted a national flag for the restored nation of Israel. 

+ From DY, primarily DYM, Zo. put in commotion, agitate, hence to be hot. 
In Sanscrit, Yamunah is the river of that name; and in Syr. it means 
‘*qwaters.” The A.V. followed the error of the Talmud. The R.V. has it 
correctly **hot-springs." The word for mules is D7). 


WORDS THAT OCCUR ONLY ONCE, 83 


p (/zoA&), Dan. ix. 25, “even in troublous.” 

MII (Qur-kaÀ-rohiA), Isa. lxvi. 20, “and upon swift 
beasts.” 

SLD (pal-moh-nee), Dan. viii. 13, “unto that certain." 
(Marg., * Heb. Palmoni ; or, zhe numberer of secrets; or 
the wonderful numberer.") 

DWLI (moh-shah-oth), Ps. Ixviii. 20, “of salvation." 

MDW WS (moh-sh’koth), Job xxxviii. 31, “the bands of.” 

DUUM (msheey-yàA), Ps. Ixxxviii. 12, “ forgetfulness.” 

7233 (nch-vech), Job xxxviii. 16, “springs.” 


Or coming to the New Testament we may instance :— 


&ypeio (agri), Mark xii. 13, “to catch." 

dyvworos (agnostos),** Acts xvii, 23, “unknown.” 

d8oXos (adolos), 1 Pet. ii. 2, “ sincere." 

aiparexxvota (Aazmatekchusia), Heb. ix. 22, “shedding of 
blood." 

aiper&o (airetizd), Matt. xii. 18, “have chosen." 

dyopws (anomos), Rom. ii. 12, * without law." 

åmapáßaros (aparabatos), Heb. vii. 24, * unchangeable.” 

&márep (apator), Heb. vii. 3, “ without father." 

amwoBAntos (apobleetos), 1 Tim. iv. 4, “to be refused." 

dmavyacpa (apaugasma), Heb. i. 3, * brightness." 

&okAeio (apokleiz), Luke xiii. 25, * hath shut to." 

appnros (arrhectos), 2 Cor. xii. 4, * unspeakable.” 

dpxvro(uxv. (archipoimeen), 1 Pet. v. 4, “chief shepherd.” 

daretpos (apeiros), Heb. v. 13, “ unskilful.” 

droBrérw (apoblepo), Heb. xi. 26, ** have respect.” 

Bor Gos (docethos), Heb. xiii. 6, “helper.” 

BpaBedw (drabeiis), Col. iii. 15, “rule.” 

ywewkápwv (gunatkarion), 2 Tim. iii. 6, “silly women.’ 
(Neuter gender, to include silly women of both sexes !) 

Saxpiw (dakruo), John xi. 35, * Jesus wept.” 

edw (deiliad), John xiv. 27, “let it be afraid.” 

Orov (deepou), Heb. ii. 16, “ verily.” 

Oavvkrepeóo (dianukteriio), Luke vi. 12, “continued all 
night." 

Sixatoxpicia (dikazokrzsia), Rom. ii. 5, “righteous judgment." 

8órgs (dofees), 2 Cor. ix. 27, “ giver.” 


, 


* Whence our word Agzostic, ‘‘ ignoramus. ” 


84 


NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


8vovóqros (dusnoeetos), 2 Pet. iii. 16, “hard to be under- 
stood." 

éykaroiéo (eng katoikeo), 2 Pet. ii. 8, “ dwelling among." 

éyxparys (engkratees), Tit. i. 8, “temperate.” 

elonvorroréw (eireenopoteo), Col. i. 20, * having made peace.” 

eiodexopae (eisdechomaz), 2 Cor. vi. 17, ** will receive." 

éuew (emed), Rev. iii. 16, “ spue." 

éumepiratéw (emperzpateo), 2 Cor. vi. 16, * walk in." 

épvaáo (emphusao), John xx. 22, “breathed on." 

ğrep (eeper), John xxii. 43, “than.” 

Gaia (thauma), Rev. xvii. 6, “admiration.” 

Ücórveva ros. (/heopneustos), 2 Tim. iii. 16, “inspiration of 
God " (ze. God breathed). 

OpdpBos (thrombos), Luke xxii. 44, “ great drops." 

Spas (Aidros), Luke xxii. 44, “sweat.” 

iepovpyéo (hierourged), Rom. xv. 16, “ ministering.” 

ikavórgs (Aikanotees), 2 Cor. iii. 5, ** sufficiency.” 

kaprepéo (Kartereo), Heb. xi. 27, “endured.” 

karaváĝepa (katanathema), Rev. xxii. 3, “curse.” 

korapayOávo (katamanthano), Matt. vi. 28, * consider." 

karáAeusqua, (katalezmma), Rom. ix. 27, “a remnant.” 

Karavicow (katanusso), Acts ii. 37, “ were pricked.” * 

katorrpilopar (Ratopirizomaz), 2 Cor. iii. 18, * beholding as 
in a glass." 

KéAevapa. (keleusma), 1 Thess. iv. 16, “a shout" (Ze. an 
assembling shout). 

Kvýðw (kneetho), 2 Tim. iv. 3, “itching.” 

Aeroupytxds (leifourgikos), Heb. i. 14, “ ministering” (ze. 
worshipping). 

péywrros (megistos), 2 Pet. i. 4, “ exceeding great.” 

perpwmaféo (metriopathes), Heb. v. 2, “ have compassion." 

piacpa (miasma), 2 Pet. ii. 20, “ pollutions.” 

poru (molops), 1 Pet. ii. 24, “ stripes." 

virrw (zuff2), John xix. 34, “ pierced." 

ddorehijs (holotelees), 1 Thess. v. 23, “ wholly." 

ópBoropéo (orthotomed), 2 Tim. ii. 15, “rightly dividing." 

mán (palee), Eph. vi. 12, “wrestle " (ze. the wrestling). 

wopadrayy ( parallagee), James i. 17, * variableness." 


* Note that these were pricked iz their heart, while in Acts v. 33 and 


vii. 54, it is Biampíouat (diapriomai), they were cut zo the heart—which makes 
all the difference. 


WORDS THAT OCCUR ONLY ONCE. 85 


mevixpos ( penichros), Luke xxi. 2, “ poor." 

mepiovovos ( pertousios), Tit. ii. 14, ‘ peculiar." 

mAatvs (platus), Matt. vii. 13, “ wide." 

zÀácpa. ( plasma), Rom. ix. 20, “thing formed.” 

todvmoixiros ( polupotkilos), Eph. iii. 10, “ manifold." 

mokvpepos ( polumeros), Heb. i. 1, “ sundry times." 

groXvrpómos (polutropos), Heb. i. 1, “divers manners." 

mpaos ( praos), Matt. xi. 29, “ meek.” 

mpoBr€rw ( problepo), Heb. xi. 40, “ having provided.” 

mpdodpopos ( prodromos), Heb. vi. 20, ** forerunner.” 

mpoeVvríG;o ( proclpizo), Eph. i. 12, “who first trusted." 

cápkwos (sarkimos), 2 Cor. iii. 3, “fleshy,” indicating the 
nature of the person (made of flesh): while capxixds 
( feshly) indicates the bent of the mind. 

c'eBátopac (sebazomar), Rom. i. 25, “ worshipped.” 

cwid£o (szmiazo), Luke xxii. 31, “ sift.” 

ortypoa. (stigma), Gal. vi. 17, * marks." 

cvvavéávoua,. (sunauxanoma), Matt. xiii. 30, “ grow to- 
gether." 

cwwoivw (sunüdino), Rom. viii. 22, “travaileth in pain 
together." 

cvatevilw (sustenazo), Rom. viii. 22, “ groaneth together.” 

cwppovas (szpAronos), Tit. ii. 12, “ soberly.” 

táypa (tagma), 1 Cor. xv. 23, “ order " (rank). 

taptapow (/ar/aroo), 2 Pet. ii. 4, “cast down to hell." 

qekpýpiov (tekmeerton), Acts i. 3, “infallible proofs." 

reXewTis (¢eliotees), Heb. xii. 2, “ finisher.” 

tpomodopéw (¢ropophored), Acts xiii. 18, “suffered he... . 
manners.” 

iüpororéo (hydropoteo), 1 Tim. v. 23, “drink . . . . water.” 

trrepeiow (Aupereido), Acts xvii. 30, “ winked at.” 

trepxwaw (huperkinad), Rom. viii. 37, “more than con- 
querors." 

bmepwióo (huperupsoo), Phil. ii. 9, “ highly exalted.” 

taréxw (Aupecho), Jude 7, “ suffering." 

$mó0wos (Aupodikos), Rom. iii. 19, “ guilty." 

pia (philia), James iv. 4, “ friendship." 

pirorpwretw (philoproteud), 3 John 4, “loveth to have the 
pre-eminence.” 

duXocodía. ( philosophia), Col. ii. 8, * philosophy." 

QAoyíto (DAlogrz2), James iii. 6, “ setteth on fire." 


86 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


dpvdcow (phruasso), Acts iv. 25, “ did 4... . tages 

Qocdópos ( PAosphoros), 2 Pet. i. 19, * day star." 

xMapós (cAliaros), Rev. iii. 16, “lukewarm.” 

xpós (chros), Acts xix. 12, “ body." 

pevddvupos ( psudonumos), 1 Tim. vi. 20, “falsely so called’ 
( pseudonym). 

Yrixopar ( psuchomaz), Matt. xxiv. 12, “ shall wax cold.” 

òpúopa (druomar), 1 Pet. v. 8, * walking about." 


What is true of words which occur only once is also true 
of 


PHRASES WHICH OccuR ONLY ONCE. 


All these are of the greatest importance. We have 
noticed one above (pp. 76, 77), “ Angel of Satan.” There are 
many others ; we give an example or two. 


nvõpa Xpirrod (pneuma Christou), “ the Spirit of Christ," 
Rom. viii. 9. 

* Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none 
of His." Both the A.V. and R.V. print the word spirit with 
a capital * S," as though it meant the Person of the Holy 
Spirit; and most Commentators so interpret it. 

But avebya Xpwrob is a remarkable expression. 7757 there 
is no article, “the,” either before “Spirit” or “ Christ"; 
and, secondly, this combination of the two words occurs no 
where else. * The expression is stamped therefore with 
special importance, and no help in understanding it can be 
gained from its use in other passages. 

Ilvebga Xpiwro? is, literally, Chrzst-spirdt. It is the “new 
creature," or * new creation," which is created by the Holy 
Spirit in all those who are “in Christ" (2 Cor. v. 17). This 
new nature is called «vebpa (pneuma), or spirit, as opposed to 
that which is only odpé (sarx), flesh. It is said to be “of 
God.” It is called (Rom. viii. 9) mvcipa @cod (pneuma Theou), 
Spirit of God, or Divine Spirit. It is spoken of as “Christ 
in you” (Col. i. 27). It is “eternal life." It is Christ in us, 
indeed; for Christ risen and ascended is “ our life,” and this 
life, regarded in its abstract nature and origin, is called here 
(Rom. viii. 9) mvua Xpurrov (pneuma Christou). The context 


* The apparently similar expression in I Pet.i. 11 has the article, 


PHRASES WHICH OCCUR ONLY ONCE. 87 


supports this exposition, for the very next verse contains a 
conclusion flowing from the statement: “If Christ be in you 
the body [pev, indeed] is dead because of sin; but the spirit 
is life, because of righteousness” (Rom. viii. 10). There 
must be this zveüua Xpiorod in us of the Holy Spirit's creation, 
before He can bear witness with our spirits! Hence this 
Christ-life in us is the subject of this wonderful chapter 
before the Person of the Holy Spirit is spoken of in the 
16th verse. 

Paul never speaks of being “born again," or being “ con- 
verted.” The aveipa Xpwro?, the Christ-spirit in us, implies 
this, and more than this; for being “born again” or “ con- 
verted ” is necessary, even for the earthly portion of the 
kingdom, the ra émiyea (¢a epigera) or earthly things of John 
ite 12. 

When Christ was upon the earth He was, as He is, the life 
of men. But now that He has been raised from the dead 
and exalted to the right-hand of God, He has become our life 
in this especial manner—Resurrection life. And this life is 
mvua Xpiorod, or Christ formed in us by the creative act of 
the Holy Ghost, as the hope of glory. Christ is called “a 
quickening (or life-giving) Spirit” (1 Cor. xv. 46), and he 
that is thus joined to Christ the Lord is one spirit (1 Cor. 
Vio). 

So that we find in Scripture: 

I. That God is Spirit (John iii. 24), rvetua ó Ocós ; 

2. That Christ is Spirit, zveoua (1 Cor. xv. 46) ; 

3. That the Holy Ghost is Spirit, rvedpua; and 

4. That our new nature is also zvedya, for that which is 
born of Spirit is mve&®pa (John iii. 6). 

And thus we are told by our God and Father's wondrous 
grace that we are partakers of the Divine Nature (2 Pet. i. 4). 
It is this Divine Nature which, in Rom. viii. 9, is called 


mvua X purrov."* 


* The word wvedua occurs nearly 400 times in the New Testament, 150 of 
which are in the Pauline Epistles. It is a question worthy of serious con- 
sideration as to what is the meaning of the various usages of mveüue. With 
the article it is of course the Holy Spirit. But without the article and before 
Pentecost, what can mveüua #yiov mean in Luke xi. 13, ** How much rather 
shall My Father give holy and divine spirit to them that ask Him ?" What 
can it mean in John xx. 22? Certainly not the Person of the Holy Spirit, for 
He was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet glorified (John vii. 39). 


88 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


The Church soon became corrupt, and before the Canon ot 
Scripture was complete it had lost the,true teaching con- 
cerning 

1. The “Mystery” (or secret) concerning the Body of 
Christ, the Church of God ; 

2. Justification on the principle of faith alone; and 

3. The work of the Holy Spirit. 

At the Reformation, the second of these was partially re- 
covered. Some sixty years ago the first was recovered, but 
was speedily perverted; while the ZZr4 has never been 
fully or properly recovered. Where is the Commentary on 
the Romans in which “the spirit of life in Christ Jesus " and 
the “spirit of adoption” (ze Sonship spirit) is not con- 
founded with the indwelling of and with the Person of the 
Holy Ghost ? 

All modern sects and all modern spiritual movements 
have in each case added some new and distinct form of false 
teaching concerning the Holy Spirit's work to their special 
and peculiar errors. 

Yet the truth of God remains, and the Word is still the 
Spirit's sword. 


évvopos X purroo * (ennomos Christou), “under the Law to Christ,” 
I Cer. 1X9. 


This is another difficult expression. One thing is certain, 
viz., that there is no article with either of the two words 
“Law” or “ Christ" and that there is nothing about “the” 
Law. The R.V. omits the article, and renders “ under law to 
Christ" Another thing is certain, viz., that there is no “to.” 
The word Xpwo? is in the genitive case, and not the dative 
(according to all the critical texts). 

Gentile Christians are very anxious to put themselves 
under “the Law." But God has never put them there. 
The Law was given by God to Israel by the hand of 
Moses. Gentile Christians have never thus been puż under 
that Law. Indeed, as a Jew, Paul declares distinctly of 
himself and his Jewish brethren in Christ, Rom. vii. 6 (fol- 
lowing the A.V. margin), * Now we are delivered from the 


* The word čvvopos occurs twice (here and Acts xix. 39, lawful), but this 
phrase only once. i 


ONE WORD FOR TRUTH. 89 


Law, being dead to that wherein we were held ;" or, as in 
R.V., “having died to that wherein we were held," ze. as 
Jews they had, in Christ, died to the Law, and on resurrection 
ground their old husband had no more claim upon them. 

Then in 1 Cor. ix. 20, 21, he says, *Unto the Jews I became 
as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them that are under 
the Law as under the Law." Here there is an important 
sentence dropped out by a later scribe, but it is found in all 
the ancient versions and critical texts, and it is restored in 
the R.V.—*NOT BEING MYSELF UNDER THE LAW!” 
Then he goes on to continue his argument: *to them that 
are without Law as without Law” (being not dvouos «ov, but 
fvvouos Xpwrrov); or, being not an outlaw of God, but a 
subject-of-the-Law of Christ; or, being not destitute of 
Divine Law, but under Christ’s Law; z.e. though I am not 
under the Law of Moses, I am under a law of God. How? 
I am under obedience to the commandments of Christ! As much 
as to say, If I keep Christ’s commandments what law shall I 
break? None! For if I walk in the love of Christ I shall 
fulfil the Law of Moses (Rom. xiii. 10). If I walk in love I 
shall * fulfil the Law of Christ " (Gal. vi. 2). 

The conclusion therefore is, that Gentiles who never were 
under the “Law,” and Israelites who were, if they are both 
*in Christ," are not under the Law of Moses, but are under 
obedience to the commandments of Christ, which are far 
higher and far holier. The passage therefore does not 
prove that Gentiles or Christians are under the Law, but are 
** freed from the Law." 

Another phase of this great subject is where 


OnLy One Worp 


is employed to denote a certain thing, though that word 
may be used and occur many times. 

The Hebrew noun for Truth is a remarkable illustration 
of this. Many are the words used for dece! and Jzes,* but 
there is only one word for truth. God's truth is one! Man’s 
lies are almost infinite! The word ApS (Eme/4) means firm- 
ness and stability, perpetuity, security. ‘This is what God is. 
This is exactly what man is not! Man is altogether vanity. 
« All men are liars” (Ps. cxvi. 11). “His mouth is full of 


+ Seepage i73. 


GO NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


cursing, deceit (Heb. pl., decez/s), and fraud; under his tongue 
is ungodliness and vanity" (Ps. x. 7). “They speak vanity 
every one with his neighbour: with flattering lips and a 
double heart do they speak " (Ps. xii. 2). 

Truth is found only in the Word of God, in Christ, who 
says of Himself, the living Word, *I am the truth" (John 
xiv. 6); and of the wri//en Word, the Scriptures, “ Thy word 
is truth” (John xvii. 17). 

Truth is heard only in the Word of God. It is taught only 
by Jesus. Hence it is written (Eph. iv. 20, 21), * Ye have not 
so learned Christ, if so be that ye have heard HIM, and 
have been taught by HIM, as the truth is in Jesus." These 
last words are generally misquoted, as though they said, “the 
truth as it is in Jesus.” But this is quite a different thing! 
This implies that there is some ‘truth to be found apart from 
Jesus! No, it says, “even as the truth is in Jesus” (R.V.), 
z.e., in Him, and no where else. By nature all men are like 
Jacob. He was a deceiver, and in attempting to gain his 
blessings by deceit, he brought sorrows and troubles upon 
himself. Those blessings which God designed for him were, 
and will be, wrought by the “God of truth,” as it is written, 
* Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob” (Micah vii. 20). 

The Rabbins have pointed out that man being pure false- 
hood, God appointed him to death, that with the fear of 
death before his eyes he might be pious and learn the truth, 
Hence out of the word PMAN (Zmwe/A) they made (by the 
rule of JVo/ricom or Acrostic) three words: 


N standing for mN (Aron), “a coffin." 
D » » nM Mia), “a bier." 
n » » DD) (Tachreecheem), “shrouds.” 


Hence they taught that the death of God’s saints was 
* precious in the sight of the Lorp” (Ps. cxvi. 15), for only 
in resurrection can he know what he has lost, viz., the image 
of God, and thus * Truth shall spring out of the earth " (Ps. 
Ixxxv. IT). 

But a more simple fact concerning this remarkable word 
is this, that the first letter, Aleph (N), is the first letter of the 
alphabet; the middle letter, Mem (4), is in the middle of 
the alphabet; while the last letter, Zau (f), is the last letter 
of the alphabet. As much as to say to us, that the Word of 


ONE WORD FOR TRUTH. QI 


the Lorn is altogether truth. From beginning to end every 
letter and every word expresses, and contains, and is the 
Truth of God. While Jesus is Himself the Alpha and the 
Omega,* the first and the last, the beginning and the ending 
of the ways, and works, and words of God (Rev. i. 8, 17). 

We must distinguish between Emeth, truth, and Emunah, 
_ Which means “ faithfulness’; + and also Aman, JON (Ahman), 
which is from a different root, and as an adverb means /ruly, 
certainly, and as an adjective firm or faithful. It is from this 
that the Latins derived their word omen and ominous, because 
they firmly believed in their omens. How much more should 
we believe that to which we put our Amen, when we use this 
selfsame word. 


* These are the first and /ast letters of the Greek alphabet. 

+ Hab. ii. 4. The righteous man believes God, and lives in the firm expec- 
tation that what God has said He will perform. Hence his faith is the proof 
and evidence that God has justified him, and it is thus counted to him for 
righteousness. Hab. ii. 4 is quoted three times in the New Testament, viz., 
Rom. i. 17; Gal. iii. 11; and Heb. x. 38 


92 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


TWO. 


We now come to the spiritual significance of the number 
Two. We have seen that Oze excludes all difference, and 
denotes that which is sovereign. But Two affirms that there 
is a difference—there is another; while One affirms that 
there is not another ! 

This difference may be for good or for evil. A thing may 
differ from evil, and be good; or it may differ from good, 
and be evil Hence, the number Two takes a two-fold 
colouring, according to the context. 

It is the first number by which we can divide another, and 
therefore in all its uses we may trace this fundamental idea 
of division or difference. 

The £o may be, though different in character, yet one 
as to testimony and friendship. The Second that comes in 
may be for help and deliverance. But, alas! where man is 
concerned, this number testifies of his fall, for it more often 
denotes that difference which implies opposition, enmity, and 
oppresston.** 

When the earth lay in the chaos which had overwhelmed 
it (Gen. i. 2), its condition was universal ruin and darkness. 
The second thing recorded in connection with the Creation 
was the introduction of a second thing—Light; and imme- 
diately there was difference and division, for God pivipED 
the light from the darkness. 

So the second day had division for its great characteristic 
(Gen. i. 6). “Let there be a firmament in the midst of the 
waters, and let it DIVIDE the waters from the waters.” 
Here we have Division connected with the second day. 


* Like many other words; e.g., the verb *'*5reven:" meant originally 
for one to get before another. But because whenever one man got before 
another it was always to the hindrance and hurt of that other, the word 
gradually took on the meaning zo hinder, and thus testifies of man's fall, So 
with the word szz/e: it meant originally sincere, open, honest But in 
man’s judgment, any one who so acts is a fool. Hence, man soon came 
to use the word simple as denoting a very foolish person! So in the French 
with the word chef, which means ‘‘chief.” But as man makes ‘‘a god of 
his belly ” he who can best gratify its lusts has a unique claim to this word, 


TWO: DIVISIONS OF THE BIBLE. 93 

This great spiritual significance is maintained throughout 
the Word of God. Of course we cannot recognise any 
human arrangements or divisions of books, chapters, or 
verses, etc. We can take only that division, order, and 
arrangement which is Divine. 

The second of any number of things always bears upon it 
the stamp of difference, and generally of enmity. 

Take the second statement in the Bible. The first is— 

Gen. i. 1: “In the beginning God created the heaven and 
the earth." 

The second is, ** And the earth was (or rather Jecame) with- 
out form and void.” 

Here the first speaks of perfection and of order. The 
second of ruin and desolation, which came to pass at some 
time, and in some way, and for some reason which are not 
revealed.* 


Tue Divisions OF THE BIBLE. 


Then we have seen (pp. 34, 35) that the Book of Genesis 
is Divinely divided into twelve parts (consisting of an Intro- 
duction and eleven Tol’doth), The first of these twelve 
divisions records the perfection of God’s sovereign work. 
The second (Gen. ii. 4—iv. 26) contains the account of the 
Fall; the entrance of a second being—the Enemy—that old 
Serpent the Devil, introducing discord, and sin, and death. 
“Enmity ” is seen first in this second division. “I will put 
enmity” (Gen. iii. 15). We see a second to God in the 
Serpent ; a second creature in the woman, who was deceived 
and “in the transgression”; a second man, in the Seed of 
the woman, the subject of the great primeval promise and 
prophecy. Hence the number /wo becomes associated with 
Incarnation, with the second Person of the ever-blessed 
Trinity, *the second Man," *the last Adam." 

The second “Tol’doth” (Gen. v. I—vi. 8) begins with the 
words, “ The book of the generations of Adam." While of 
“the second Man” it is written (Matt. i. 1) “the book of 
the generation of Jesus Christ." 

If we look at the Pentateuch as a whole, we see, in the 
First book, Divine sovereignty (see p. 53), but the Second 


* See The New Creation and the Old, by the same author. 


94 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 
book (Exodus) opens with “the oppression of the enemy.” 
Here, again, there is “ another,” even the Deliverer and the 
Redeemer, who says, “I am come down to deliver " (Exod. 
iii. 8). To Him the praise is offered in the Song of Moses: 
“Thou in Thy mercy hast led forth the people which Thou 
hast redeemed” (Exod. xv. 13). And thus Redemption is 
introduced into the Bible, and mentioned for the first time in 
this second book, and in connection with the enemy (just as 
was the first promise of the Redeemer in Gen. iii. 15). 

The second of the three great divisions of the Old Testa- 
ment, called Webm, or the Prophets (Joshua, Judges, Ruth, 
1 and 2 Samuel, 1 and 2 Kings, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and 
Ezekiel) contains the record of Israel's enmity to God, and 
of God's controversy with Israel In the first book (Joshua) 
we have God's sovereignty in giving the conquest of the 
land; while in the second (Judges) we see the rebellion and 
enmity in the land, leading to departure from God and the 
oppression of the enemy. Here, again, we have side by side 
with the enemy the *saviours" whom God raised up to 
deliver His people. 

In the third great division of the Old Testament, called 
*the Psalms," because it commences with the Book of 
Psalms, we have in the Hebrew Canon,* as the second Book, 
the Book of Job. Here, again, we see the enemy in all his 
power and malignity opposing and oppressing a child of 
God; and we are taken within the veil to behold the living 
God as the shield of His people, a very present help in the 
needful time of trouble. 

Besides Genesis, the Book of Psalms is the only book 
which is marked by any similar Divine divisions. 

It consists of Five Books : 


The first nes s ESSI Nli. 

The second  ... ve PSS. Silex: 
The third St .. Pss. xi xxxix 
The fourth  ... n ESS. xe CVI. 

The fifth e Pss. cvii.—cl. 


The Second Book of the Psalms commences (as does 
Exodus) with “the oppression of the enemy " (Ps. xli. toe 


* See Zhe Names and Order of the Books of the Old T: estament, by the 
same author. 


TWO: THE SECOND OF BOOKS AND PSALMS. 95 
This is the burden of the whole of this Psalm, and indeed 
of the whole of this second Book! 


Not only is this true of this Second Book, but it is true also 
of the second Psalm of each of the other books! eg. :— 


The second Psalm of First Book (Ps. ii.) :— 


* Why do the heathen rage, 
And [wy] do the people imagine a vain thing ? 
[Why do] the kings of the earth set themselves, 
And [why do] the rulers take counsel together 
Against the LORD and against His anointed ? ” 


But here, again, we have the Deliverer, in verse 6. 


“Yet have I set My King.” 


The Second Psalm of the Second Book (Ps. xliii.) opens with 
*the oppression of the enemy,” repeated in v. 2, together 
with the prophecy of praise for the promised Deliverer. 


The second Psalm of the Third Book (Ps. Ixxiv.) :— 


“Lift up Thy feet unto the perpetual desolations : 

Even all that the ENEMY hath done wickedly in the 
sanctuary, 

Thine ENEMIES roar in the midst of Thy congrega- 
tioni. 

O God, how long shall the ADVERSARY reproach ? 

Shall the ENEMY blaspheme Thy name for ever? ... 

Remember this, that the ENEMY hath reproached, O 
Lorp . 

O let not the oppressed return ashamed... 

Arise, O God, plead Thine own cause . . . 

Forget not the voice of Thine ENEMIES.” 


The second Psalm of the Fourth Book (Ps. xci) would 
have to be quoted as a whole. It describes how the enemy 
shall be finally trodden down by the coming Deliverer. 


The second Psalm of the 77/74 Book (Ps. cviii.) :— 


“That Thy beloved may be delivered: 
Save with Thy right hand, and answer me... 
Give us help from trouble, 
For vain is the help of man. 
Through God we shall do valiantly : 
For He z£ zs that shall tread down our ENEMIES.” 


96 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


The same significance of the number Two is seen in the 
New Testament. Wherever there are two Epistles, the 
second has some special reference to the enemy. 

In 2 Cor. there is à marked emphasis on the power of the 
enemy, and the working of Satan (ii. 11; xi. 14; xii. 7. See 
pp: 76, 77). 

In 2 Thess. we have a special account of the working of 
Satan in the revelation of “the man of sin” and “the lawless 
one.” 

In 2 Tim. we see the church in its ra, as in the first 
epistle we see it in its rule. 

In 2 Peter we have the coming apostacy foretold and 
described. While 

In 2 John we have the “antichrist” mentioned by this 
name, and are forbidden to receive into our house any who 
come with his doctrine.* 

It is impossible even to name the vast number of things 
which are introduced to us in pairs, so that the one may 
teach concerning the other by way of contrast or difference. 

The two foundations of Matt. vii. 24-27: the one which 
* fell not, for it was founded upon a rock" ; the other which 
“fell, and great was the fall of it." The two goats (Lev. 
xvi. 7); the two birds (Lev. xiv. 4-7) ; the two opinions 
(1 Kings xvii. 21); the two masters (Matt. vi. 24); the 
two commandments (Matt. xxii. 40); the two debtors (Luke 
vii. 41); the two covenants (Gal. iv. 24); the two men (Luke 
xviii. 10); the two sons (Matt. xxi. 28, and Luke xv. 11, and 
Galliv: 22), eten ete. 


Tue Lire Tyres or Genesis. 

The second of the seven life-types of Genesis t has the 
same character. 

The first Adam sets forth our first parents in their 
innocence, fall, and expulsion, driven out from the presence 
of God (Gen. iii. 24). How could they again walk with 
God? This is the great problem which is to be solved in 
the words which immediately follow, written on the fore- 


* Brand (Pop. Ant. ii. 145) quotes Numerus Infaustus, in the preface to 
which the author says, ‘‘Such of the kings of England as were the second 
of any name proved very unfortunate persons, William IL, Henry IL, 
Edward IL, Richard IL, Charles II., James IL” 

t See The New Creation and the Old, by the same author. 


TWO: LIFE TYPES OF GENESIS. 97 


front of revelation to set before us the answer to the all- 
important question, * How can TWO walk together except 
they be agreed?” (Amos iii. 3). 

The solution is given in Gen. iv, in the second life-type, 
which is two-fold in the persons of Cain and Abel Here 
are presented and described the Two ways—“ The way of 
God” (Acts xviii. 26) and “The way of Cain" (Jude 11), 
the only ‘wo Religions which the world has ever seen. One, 
the true; the other, the false. 

True religion is one and unchangeable. Its language is— 

* NOTHING in my hand I bring, 
Simply to Thy cross I cling." 

False religion is one and unchangeable. It has many 

varieties; its one language is— 


* SOMETHING in my hand I bring." 


Men quarrel bitterly as to what that something is to be. 
They persecute, and burn, and destroy one another in the 
heat of their controversies about it. But however this ** some- 
thing " may vary, it is ove, in that it is not “the way of God,” 
not the way which God has appointed, but it is “the way of 
Cain," man's way. The one is “ faith," the other is “ works.” 
The one is “grace,” the other is human “merit.” The one 
is “the path of life," the other ends in “the second death." 


Not only have we this contrast or eternal difference in Cain 
and Abel, but others are presented in this manner, in order 
to bring out truths of the deepest significance and solemnity. 


ABRAHAM AND LoT 


are so presented. These two were related as uncle 
and nephew; both descended from Shem through Terah. 
Both started together from Ur of the Chaldees to Haran 
in Mesopotamia (Gen. xi.); they both started together from 
Haran to go into the land of Canaan (Gen. xii. 4); and after- 
wards they both go up together out of Egypt (Gen. xiii. 1). 
But soon the difference between the two was manifested, 
and “there was a strife” between them. The difference was 
manifested. 

Lot, the second of this pair, lifted up his own eyes and 
chose his own portion (xiii. 11); while Abram’s portion 


H 
S 1396. 


98 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


was chosen for him by God (xiii. 14). Thus they were 
“separated ” (xiii. II, 14). 

First, Lot looked and “ deheld” the plain of Jordan with its 
cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, and it seemed to him “as 
the garden of the Lorn” (Gen. xiii. 10); then he “chose” 
this for his portion (xiii. 11); then he “pitched his tent 
towards Sodom ' (xiii. 12); then he “ dwelt in Sodom,” and 
shared in Sodom's troubles and wars, and lost all the trea- 
sure which he had laid up there (xiv. 12). He afterwards 
* sat in the gate of Sodom” (xix. 1) and held office there as a 
judge in spite of his being daily “vexed” with their ungodly 
words and deeds (2 Pet. ii. 6-9) ; and finally he escaped from 
its overthrow, only with his life. 

Abram, on the other hand, had his portion with God. He 
walked by faith; he pitched his tent only where he could 
build his altar (xii. 8; xiii. 3, 4); he held communion with 
God who was his “shield and exceeding great reward” 
(xv. 1). Though he was a stranger on earth, he was “the 
friend of God," and received the secrets of God's purposes 
(Ps. xxv. 14; Amos iii. 7; John xv. 15). Truly there was a 
difference. And this difference was greater in their two wives. 
Sarah was a type of the Heavenly Jerusalem (Gal. iv. 21-31); 
while ** Lot's wife" became a pillar of salt, and remains a 
beacon of warning to be for ever remembered (Luke xvii. 32). 


Isaac AND ISHMAEL 


are presented together. Here the relationship was nearer, 
hal¢ for they were etep-brothers. Both were the sons of Abram, 
Sarah being the mother of Isaac, and Hagar the mother 
of Ishmael. Though the relationship according to the flesh 
was nearer than.that between Abram and Lot, the difference 
was morally and spiritually greater. For it is written, 
“neither because they are the seed of Abraham are they 
all children: for in Isaac shall thy seed be called” (Rom. 
ix. 7). Oh! how great was the difference! Isaac, “born 
after the spirit”; Ishmael, “born after the flesh” (Gal. iv. 
29, 30), and therefore a persecutor, We read of no “just” 
Ishmael, no “righteous” Ishmael, as we do of Lot. Lot's 
descendants were the Moabites and Ammonites, and Ruth the 
Moabitess was an ancestress of Jesus. But Ishmael’s posterity 
were “cast out,” and continue to this day wild and unsubdued. 


TWO: WORDS WHICH OCCUR TWICE. 


Jacos anp Esau 


are presented together. Here the relationship is still 
closer. Not only were they the children of the same 
father (Isaac), but of the same mother (Rebekah). But 
the spiritual difference is still greater. The enmity was 
manifested when the babes “struggled together,” being yet 
unborn (Gen. xxv. 22). And it is written in the Scriptures 
of truth, “Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated " (Mal. 
i. 2,3; Rom. ix. 13). Esau was “a fornicator and a profane 
person,” despising his birthright (Heb. xii. 16, 17); while 
Jacob so loved and prized it that he sinned grievously in 
grasping it. As the difference is seen in the posterity of 
Abraham and Lot, Isaac and Ishmael, so here it is still more 
marked. Israel is Jehovah’s glory, the “everlasting nation” 
(Isa. xliii. 12, 13; xliv. 7) ; while the Edomites were accursed. 
And of the Amalekites Jehovah declared that He would 
“have war with Amalek from generation to generation” 
(Exod. xvii. 16). 


We see the same significance in the 


Worps wHicH Occur Twict. 


A long list of these might be made. We give a few from 
the Hebrew and from the Greek. In all such words we can 
see important instruction: «In dzozAéo (apopleo) we see the 
work of the enemy seducing the very elect, were it possible 
(Matt. xiii. 22), and causing them to err from the faith 
(1 Tim. vi. 10). 

In drorviyo (apopnig0) we see the enemy choking the seed 
(Matt. xiii. 7), and himself choked in the sea (Luke viii. 33). 

In ázóAaveis (afolausis) we have the things which God has 
given us for ezjoymen? (1 Tim. vi. 17), and the enjoyment of the 
pleasures of sin (Heb. xi. 25). 

In ámwokvéo (apokued) we have sin bringing forth death 
(James i. 15), and God Zege/figg us by the word of truth 
(James i. 18). 

In drpls (atmis) we see the difference between earthly life, 
which is but a vapour, compared with life which is eternal 
(James iv. 14; Acts ii. 19). 

In mavoràía (panoplia) (panoply) we see a difference indeed. 
It is not that the word occurs twice (merely as a word), but it 

H2 


100 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


is used in two senses and two places, namely, of the armour 
of Satan (Luke xi. 22), and the armour of God (Eph. vi. 11, 17). 

The armour of the “strong man” is taken from him by 
the * stronger than he," and the soul is delivered, never more 
to be under the dominion of Satan. All the armour in which 
Satan trusted is then taken away from him (Luke xi. 21, 22), 
and the poor sinner who was before in his power is now 
endued with the ** whole armour of God." * 

Similar studies may be made with other words. And even 
where a word may occur often, it may occur only twice in 
connection with another word making a phrase. This may 
be significant. For example, 6 vids rjs modes, the som of 
perdition. Both of these words, “son” and “perdition,” 
occur many times, but only twice together (John xvii. 12 and 
2 Thess. ii. 3, pointing to Ps. cix.). Some have questioned 
from this whether Judas Iscariot will be revealed again as 
the man of sin. 

The following are a few other words which occur only 
twice :— 

"IAN (chvehd), perish, Num. xxiv. 20, 24. 
DIN (vak), to wrestle, Gen. xxxii. 24, 25. 
PTN (egroph), with the fist, Exod. xxi. 18; Isa. lviii. 4. 


NN (col), strength or might, 2 Kings xxiv. 15; Ps. 
Ixxiii, 4. 

ASN (ach-zahv), liar, Jer. xv. 18; Micah i. 14. 

DQ'BDN (asah-meem), storehouses, Deut. xxviii. 8; Prov. 
iil. IO. 

AWN (eA-rev), lie in wait, Job xxxvii. 8; xxxviii. 40. 

rTYNN (e¢z-ah-dah), chains, Num. xxxi. 50; 2 Sam. i. 10. 

MN (aA-raA), to pluck, Ps. lxxx. 12; Song v. 1. 

NTI (4ah-dah), feign, 1 Kings xii. 33; Neh. vi. 8. 

“WA (6aA-zar), scatter, Dan. xi. 24; Ps. Ixviii. 30. 

-b9 (6ah-lak), waste, Isa. xxiv. 1; Nah. ii. 10. 

OYI (dah-gat), to kick, Deut. xxxii. 15; 1 Sam. ii. 29. 


“a (dah-thar), to divide, Gen. xv. 10. 

n o 

* Not so when Satan ‘‘ ves out” of a man of his own accord, For this 
parable is given in immediate connection with the other. Satan is not de- 
spoiled of his armour in this case, He is not ‘cast out." Hence the man 
sweeps his house and garnishes it. He takes pledges, and wears badges, but 
the house is ‘‘empty.”” Satan returns with all his power, and the last state of 
that man is worse than the first (Luke xi. 24-26 ; Matt. xii. 43-45). 


TWO: WORDS WHICH OCCUR TWICE. IOI 


DnA ( gav-hooth), lofty, Isa. ii. 11, 17. 

mT (geo), from falling, Pss. lvi. 13; cxvi. 8. 

PIM (dah-chak), thrust or vex, Judg. ii. 18; Joel ii. 8. 
1371 (dah-mag), weep, Jer. xiii. 17, 17. 

PIM (chah-nak), hanged, 2 Sam. xvii. 23; Nah. ii. 12. 

DDM (chah-sam), muzzle, Deut. xxv. 4; Ezek. xxxix. 11. 

“DIN (cheh-ser), want, poverty, Job xxx. 3; Prov. xxviii. 2. 

DW3Unm (chish-sk’voh-nohth), engines, 2 Chron. xxvi. 15; 
inventions, Eccles. vii. 29. 

WYM (chashash), chaff, Isa. v. 24; xxxiii. 11. 

ne (teen), miry, Dan. ii. 41, 43. 

" (vah-vehn), miry, Ps. xl. 2; mire, Ps. Ixix. 2. 

D" (yaA-rat), perverse, Num. xxii. 32; Job xvi. 11. 

O33 (teh-vel), fetters, Ps. cv. 18; cxlix. 8. 

N193 (£ loo), prison, Jer. xxxvii. 4; lii. 31. 

MDD (kah-sagh), cut down, Ps. lxxx. 16; Isa. xxxiii. 12. 

A9? (J/ah-ehg), mockers, Ps. xxxv. 16; Isa. xxviii. 11. 

mnm (magh-feh-refà), breaking up, Exod. xxii. 2; 
secret search (marg. digging), Jer. i. 34. 

pop (mah-lak), wring off, Lev. i. 15; v. 8. 

TOUW (mas-teh-mah), hatred, Hos. ix. 7, 8. 

mp (mzs-rah), government, Isa. ix. 6, 7. 

133 (zag-gaAgA), push, Exod. xxi. 29, 36. 

P1713 (xah-dah), cast out, Isa. lvi. 5 ; put away, Amos vi. 3. 

Ur (nah-chash), enchantment, Num. xxiii. 23; xxiv. I. 

"13 (neer), to break up, Jer. iv. 3; Hos. x. 12. 

MD} (#’ckoth), precious things, 2 Kings xx. 13; Isa. 
exi 2. 

yp (nah-kag), alienated, Ezek. xxiii. 18; xxii. 28. 

F2» (nah-shaph), to blow, Exod. xv. 10; Isa. xl. 24. 

"gno (sah-chaph), to sweep away, Prov. xxviii. 3; Jer. 
xvn. I5. 

RWD ( pah-rah-shah), sum, Est. iv. 7; declaration, 7d. x. 2. 

D'Y (e nee-neem), thorns, Num. xxxiii. 55; Josh. xxiii. 13. 

tW (kim-mosh), nettles, Isa. xxxiv. 13; Hos. ix. 6. 

ots» (kah-mal), wither, Isa. xix. 6; xxxiii. 9 (marg.) 

WN (rehsh), poverty, Prov. vi. 11; xxx. 8. 

DDT (phas), stamp, Dan. vii. 7, 19. 

SIW (shoh-vehv), backsliding, Jer. xxxi. 22; xlix. 4. 


IO2 i NUMBER LN SCRIPTURE. 


SUE (angeion), vessels, Matt. Xiii. 45; XXV. 4. 

dye (age), to-day, James iv. 13; v. I. 

CUu (agnaphos), new, Matt. ix. 16; Mark ii. 21. | 

&yvocía (agnosia), not the knowledi I Cor; xv 
ignorance, I Pet. ii. 15. 

dyopatos (agoraios), the public place, Acts xvii. 5; baser 
sort, xix. 38; law (áyopoto, public or court days). 

&8ndos (adeelos), appear not, Luke xi. 44; uncertain, 1 Cor. 
xiv. 8. 

dGeopos (athesmos), wicked, 2 Pet. ii. 7 ; iii. 17. 

dOAéw (athleo), strive, 2 Tim. ii. 5; 5. 

aidvidis (aiphnidios), unawares, Luke xxi. 34; sudden, 
I Thess. v. 3. 

dxtivOwos (akanthinos), thorns, Mark xv. 17; John xix. 5. 

dxpacta (akrasia), excess, Matt. xxiii. 25; 1 Cor. vii. 5, 
incontinency. 

ddaldéy (alazon), boasters, Rom. i. 20; 2 Tim. iii. 2. 

Gdoddlw (alalazo), wailed, Mark v. 38; tinkling, 1 Cor. 
Xi d. 

dvaxawéw (anakainoo), renew, 2 Cor. iv. 16; Col. iii. 10. 

dvaxatvwors (anakainosis), renewing, Rom. xii. 2; Titus iii. 5. 

dvdanpos (anapecros), maimed, Luke xiv. 13, 21. 

dvaroAdyntos' (anapologeetos), without excuse, Rom. i. 20; ii. 1. 

ávorpéro (anatrepo), overthrow, 2 Tim. ii. 18; subvert, 
THs 1. 11 

dveEvyviacros (anexichniastos), past finding out, Rom. xi. 33; 
unsearchable, Eph. iii. 8. (The word means that 
which cannot be tracked or traced.*) 

évOpaxtd (anthrakia), the enemy’s fire, John xviii. 18; and 
the friend’s fire, John xxi. 9. 

vota. (anova), madness, Luke vi. 11; folly, 2 Tim. iii. 9. 

àvópos (anomos), without law, Rom. ii. 12 (twice). 

àvóctos (anoszos), unholy, I Tim. 1.9; 2 Timi 2: 

åvráňňaypa (aniallagma), exchange, Matt. xvi. 26; Mark 


viii. 37. 

åvraróðopa (antapodoma), recompence, Luke xiv. 12; Rom. 
Xi 

évryucbia (antimisthia), recompence, Rom. i. 27; 2 Cor. 
vi. I3. 


* Differing from dyetepetynros, (anexereineetos), that MU cannot be 
understood, occurring only once (Rom. xi. 33). 


TWO: WORDS WHICH OCCUR TWICE. IO3 


dvooevjs (anophélees), unprofitable, Titus iii. 9; Heb, 
vii. 18. 

a&ivn (axinee), axe, Matt. iii. 10; Luke iii. 9. 

&reXéo (aperleo), threaten, Acts iv. 17; 1 Pet. ii. 23. 

drrexdvouar (apekduomar), put off, Col. iii. 9; spoil, Col. 
M L5. 

dzoBoXy (apobolee), loss, Acts xxvii. 22; casting away, 
Rom. xi. I5. 

Groxapadoxia. (apokaradokía) earnest expectation, Rom. 
Viialos Phil. 1420. 

&rokvéo (apokueo), bring forth, James i. 15; beget, zb. 18. 

&róAavoets (apolausis), enjoy, 1 Tim. vi. 17; Heb. xi. 25. 

droxwpilowa. (apoechorizoma: ), depart asunder, Acts xv. 39; 


Rev. vi. 14. 
dpoevoxoitns (arsenokoitees), sodomites, 1 Cor. vi. 9; 1 Tim. 
i. 10. 


ågeßéw (asebed), live ungodly, 2 Pet. ii. 6; Jude 15. 

domovdos (aspondos) implacable, Rom. i. 31; truce- 
breakers, 2 Tim. iii. 3. 

agteios (asteios), exceeding fair, Acts vii. 20; proper, 
Heb. xi. 23. 

dorypixros (asteercktos), unstable, 2 Pet. ii. 14; iii. 16. 

aotopyos (astorgos), without natural affection, Rom. i. 21; 
2uDim, iii. 3, 

doxnpovew (ascheemoned), behave unseemly, 1 Cor. vii. 36; 
xiiie5. 

doxnpootvn (aschemosunee), unseemly, Rom. i. 27; Rev. 
xvi. I5. 

&vákros (ataktos), disorderly, 2 Thess. iii. 6, 11. 

órjas (atmis), vapour, Acts ii. I9; James iv. 14. 

áxpetos (achreios), unprofitable, Matt. xxv. 30; Luke xvii. 10. 

&xvpov (achuron), chaff, Matt. iii. 12; Luke iii. 17. 


Not only do we trace this significance where we have the 
number “two,” but where two things are named, though they 
are not numbered. 


For example :— 


Tue Portter’s Two VESSELS or JER. xvi I-4. 


The first vessel which he made was marred ; the second was 
* another " vessel, as it pleased the potter to make it. 


104 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


This is interpreted in the context, of Israel ruined, but to 
be restored; broken off, but to be grafted in again; self- 
destroyed, but finding Divine help. 

The same great difference may be seen in the Two Covz- 
nants. The first marred, not faultless, waxen old, and taken 
away (Heb. viii. 7, 8, 13; x. 9); the second “a better Cove- 
nant,” “new,” and “established” (Heb. viii. 6, 8; x. 9, 
HO, 17). 

The orpinanczs of the Law, “weak” and “unprofitable " 
(Heb. vii. 18; x. 6, 9. The ordinances of grace, the “good 
things to come.” 

* The First Man,” marred (Gen. ii. 7; iii. 19), and of the 
earth, earthy. ‘The second man,” the Lord from Heaven 
(1 Cor. xv. 47). The first Adam condemned to death, the 
last Adam living again for evermore. 

The Bony, marred in the Fall, and made subject to death 
and corruption, but in Resurrection to be made like Christ’s 
own body of glory (1 John iii. 1-3; Phil. iii. 21; Rom. 
viii. 23; 1 Cor. xv. 42-49). 

The Or» Creation under the curse marred and ruined 
(Gen. iii.) ; *The New Heavens and the New Earth" esta- 
blished in righteousness (Rev. xxi. xxii.) ;—a mighty difer- 
ence indeed. “No night there," “no need of the sun,” 
“no more sorrow," “no more curse," no more sin, or 
suffering, or death. Oh, wondrous difference! and this for 
ever and for ever. “He taketh away the first that He may 
ESTABLISH the second.” * Praise the Lorn!” Rebellious 
IsRAxr's heart taken away, and a new heart given. ORDI- 
NANCES Which “ perish with the using " replaced by the Christ 
of God. Maw ruined and lost, but saved with an everlasting 
salvation. The Bopy of humiliation sown in corruption, but 
raised in incorruption. The Heavens anp EARTH passed 
away, and the new heavens and the new earth established 
for ever in glory. l 


But we have seen that where there are two, though there 
is still difference, this difference may be in a good sense. 
It may be for oppression or hindrance, or it may be for asso- 
ciation and mutual help. See Ruth iv. 11, where of Leah 


* See Zhe Resurrection of the Body, by the same author. 


TWO IN TESTIMONY. 108 


and Rachel it is written: * Which two did build up the 
house of Israel.” It may be the proverbial * Two and two " 
of apostleship and service. Or it may be our association 
with Christ in death and resurrection, of which Baptism and 
the Lord’s Supper are the great sign and token. 

Especially does it mark that “other,” the Saviour and 
mighty deliverer, spoken of in Ps. Ixxxix. 19: “I have laid 
-help on one that is mighty." The second person of the 
Trinity partook of /wo natures—perfect God and perfect man. 
Perfect man indeed, but oh, how diferent! “ Two are better 
than one, because they have a good reward for their labour. 
For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow; but woe to 
him that is alone when he falleth, for he hath not another to 
help him up." 

It is still * another," but there is “help” instead of ey. 
No longer the two differing, but the two agreed; for “How 
can two walk together except they be agreed ? " (Amos iii. 3). 

Two ¢estimonies may be different, but yet one may support, 
strengthen, and corroborate the other. Jesus said: “The 
testimony of two men is true. I am one that bear witness of 
myself, and the Father that sent me beareth witness of me" 
(John viii. 17, 18). And it is written in the Law: “At the 
mouth of two witnesses, or three witnesses," shall the matter 
be established (Num. xxxv. 30; Deut. xvii. 6; xix. 15; Matt. 
EUN. 2 Com aa. 1; r Tim. v. 19; Heb. x. 28). The 
whole Law itself hung on “two commandments” (Matt. 
xxii. 40). 


God's own revelation is two-fold. The Old Covenant and 
the New are God's sufficient testimony to man. And yet 
how different. The Law and Grace; Faith and Works! 

We may notice also that it is the second Person of the 
Trinity who is specially called “the Faithful Witness” 
(Rev. i. 5). And we have other examples of the number 
Two in connection with faithful testimony. Caleb and 
Joshua were two faithful witnesses of the truth of God's 
Word. Faithlessness said: * We be not able to go up 
against the people. For they are stronger than we." But 
Faith could say *Let us go up at once, and possess it; for we 
are well able to overcome it" (Num. xiii. 30, 31). And these 
were the two who alone out of 600,000 men did possess 


106 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


their inheritance in the land. To-day, also, it is not numbers. 
The testimony of numbers may be as false to-day as was 
that of the Spies. It is the testimony of the two based on 
God's Word which alone was true. May this encourage us to 
stand firm in these days of apostasy, with ears deaf to the 
words of man, but attentive to the words of Jehovah. Firm, 
even though the whole congregation be against us, and we 
be only the few who are waiting to be caught up to meet the 
Lord in the air. 

Let us have for our seal the faithfulness of Jehovah, and 
say always and ever, “Let God be true, and every man a 
liar." 


It is remarkable that words having special reference to 
Testimony, should occur twice; for example :— 


dAnGevw (aleetheuo), to tell the truth, Gal. iv. 16; to speak 
the truth, Eph. iv. 15. 

dperaberos (ametathetos), immutable, Heb. vi. 18; immu- 
tability, Heb. vi. 17. 

dvaxepadodopar (anakephalaioomar), comprehend, Rom. xiii. 
9; gather together in one, Eph. i. ro. 

BeBaiwors (bebazosrs), confirmation, Phil. i. 7; Heb. vi. 16. 

kepaia (kerata), tittle, Matt. v. 18; Luke xvi. 17. 

vouoÜeréo (nomotheted), received the law, Heb. vii. 11; was 
established, Heb. viii. 6. 

GjrerapeAntos (amefameleetos), without repentance, Rom. xi. 
29; not to be repented of, 2 Cor. vii. 10. 

éyypádo (engrapho), written in, 2 Cor. iii. 2, 3. 

dixaiwors * (drkarosis), justification, Rom. iv. 25 ; v. 18. 


* See under the number Nize, 


(12) 


THREE. 


In this number we have quite a new set of phenomena. 
We come to the first geometrical figure. Two straight lines 
cannot possibly enclose any space, or form a plane figure; 
neither can two plane surfaces form a solid. Three lines are 
necessary to form a plane figure; and three dimensions of 
length, breadth, and height, are necessary to form a solid. 
Hence ¢hree is the symbol of the cufe—the simplest form of solid 
figure. Astwo is the symbol of the square, or plane contents 
(x°), so three is the symbol of the cube, or solid contents (x°). 

Three, therefore, stands for that which is solid, real, substan- 
tial, complete, and entire. 


All things that are specially complete are stamped with this 
number three. 

God's attributes are /Zre : omniscience, omnipresence, 
and omnipotence. 

There are three great divisions completing time--a;/, 
present, and future. 

Three persons, in grammar, express and include all the 
relationships of mankind. 

Thought, word, and deed, complete the sum of human 
capability. 

Three degrees of comparison complete our knowledge of 
qualities. 

The simplest proposition requires three things to complete 
it; viz., the sudyect, the predicate, and the copula. 

Three propositions are necessary to complete the simplest 
form of argument—the major premiss, the minor, and the 
conclusion. 

Three kingdoms embrace our ideas of matter—muneral, 
vegetable, and animal. 


When we turn to the Scriptures, this completion becomes 
Divine, and marks Divine completeness or perfection. 
Three is the first of four perfect numbers. (See p. 23.) 
Three denotes divine perfection; 
Seven denotes spiritual perfection ; 
Ten denotes ordinal perfection ; and 
Twelve denotes governmental perfection. 


108 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


Hence the number /Zre points us to what is real, essen- 
tial, perfect, substantial, complete, and Divine. There is 
nothing real in man or of man. Everything *under the 
sun" and apart from God is “vanity.” “Every man at his 
best estate is altogether vanity" (Ps. cxxxix. 5, II; lxii. 9; 
cxliv. 4; Eccles. i. 2, 4; iil, 17, 20; 1 195 iv. 45 mien 
xu 8; Rom viii. 20). 

Three is the number associated with the Godhead, for there 
are “three persons in one God.” Three times the Seraphim 
cry, “ Holy, Holy, Holy "—one for each of the three persons 
in the Trinity (Isa. vi. 3). The living creatures also in Rev. iv. 8. 


Three times is the blessing given in Num. vi. 23, 24:— 

*'The LoRD bless thee and keep thee (the Father) ; 

The LoRD make His face shine upon thee ; and be gracious 
unto thee (the Son) ; 

The Lorp lift up His countenance upon thee, and give 
thee peace ” (the Holy Spirit). 

Each of these three blessings is two-fold, so that there are 
two members in each, while the name Jehovah occurs ZZree 
times, This marks the blessing as Divine in its source. No 
merit drew it forth; grace was its origin and peace was its 
result. 


In Gen. xvii. 2, the same three persons appear to 
Abraham. Abraham “looked, and, lo, THREE men stood by 
him," But verse 1 declares that it was “Jehovah appeared 
unto him.” It is remarkable that Abraham addresses them 
both as one and as three. We read first that “they said,” 
then “he said," and finally, in verses 13 and 17, 20, etc., “And 
the Lorp said." The whole narrative, which begins with 
the appearance of the Lon», ends (verse 33), “And the Lorp 
went His way." 

As we have in the number oze the sovereignty of the one 
God; and in /we the second person, the Son, the great 
Deliverer; so in *three" we have the third person, the Holy 
Spirit, marking and completing “ the fulness of the Godhead.” 
This word “fulness” is remarkable, occurring only three 
times, and in connection with the Three Persons of the 
Trinity : 

Eph. iii. 19, * The fulness of God.” 
Eph. iv. 13, * The fulness of Christ.” 
Col. ii. 9, * The fulness of the Godhead.” 


THREE: THE THREE MEASURES OF MEAL. 109 


The “fulness” was manifested visibly in Christ, and is 
communicated by the Holy Spirit, for it is a fulness of which 
we receive by His mighty power (John r. 16). 

This is why Abraham brought “three measures of meal" 
for his heavenly guest. This is why “three measures of 
meal" formed the great meal offering; because it set forth 
the perfection of Christs perfect and Divine nature. In 
Leviticus no particular quantity of meal was prescribed, but 
in Num. xv. 9, we read, * Then shall he bring with the 
bullock a meal offering of THREE tenth deals of flour." This 
was the measure for the whole burnt offering, and also for 
great special occasions such as the New Moon and the New 
Year, etc. It was also the special measure for the cleansing 
of the leper (Lev. xiv. 10). The poor leper had several 
gracious blessings beyond others. He alone was favoured 
with the anointing which was given only to the Prophet, 
Priest, and King! He alone had the priestly consecration. 
It is sinners who are zow singled out from the mass of those 
who are lost, and dead in trespasses and sins, to be anointed 
with the Spirit, and made, in Christ, kings and priests unto 
God. 

But there is more in these “three measures of meal" We 
have them in.the parable (Matt. xiii. 33), pointing to Christ 
in all the perfection of His person and His work, when He 
said, * Lo, I come to do Thy will, O God." There are different 
opinions about the “leaven,” but what is the “meal.” This 
is the point on which the interpretation turns. According to 
the popular interpretation, this pure * meal" is the corrupt 
mass of mankind, and the defiling “leaven” is the pure 
Gospel of Christ! Was there ever such an exhibition of 
man's perversity in calling sweet bitter, and bitter sweet? 
Was there ever such a proof that man's thoughts are con- 
trary to God's? No! the “three measures of meal" point us 
to the perfections of Christ and the purity of His Gospel. 
And the hidden “leaven” points us to man's corruption of 
the Truth. A corruption for which we have to look, not after 
the third century, but in the frst / 

No leaven could be put into any sacrifice or offering made 
by fire to the Lorp, because in Christ was no sin; therefore, 
there was to be no leaven. He was, in Himself, “a sweet 


savour to Jehovah." 


LIO NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


True, in ome offering there was leaven. But mark the 
difference and the lesson. In Lev. xxiii. we have a list of 
the Feasts :— 

Ist. The Passover (verse 5), on the 14th day. 

2nd. The wave-sheaf of first-fruits on the morrow after 
the Sabbath (verse 11), which might be burnt on the 
altar as a sweet savour (Lev. ii. 14-16), because un- 
leavened. 

3rd. Then (50 days after) the oblation of the first-fruits 
at Pentecost (verses 15-17). This might not be burnt 
on the altar (Lev. ii. 12), because it was mixed with 
leaven | 


In the antitype of this we see Christ :— 

ist. Christ our Passover sacrified for us. 

2nd. As the wave-sheaf of first-fruits, He was raised 
from the dead and became the first-fruits of them that 
slept (1 Cor. xv. 20), for in Him there was no sin 
(and hence no leaven). 

3rd. Then, after fifty days, on the Feast of Pentecost 
came the oblation of the first-fruits in the descent of 
the Holy Ghost; for “we are a kind of first-fruits of 
His creatures” (James i. 18). But His people are not 
without sin, therefore /izs oblation had leaven mixed 
with it. It could not be offered to the Lorp as a 
“sweet savour” (Lev. ii. 12), It was accepted only 
because a sin-offering was offered with it (Lev. xxiii, 18, 
19), and the Priest waved all together for a wave- 
offering before the Lon». 


This proves that the “leaven ” is a type of error, evil, and 
sin. While the “three measures of meal " with which it was 
mixed and hidden typified the truth and purity of Christ and 
His Truth, and not the corrupt mass of mankind amongst 
whom it was introduced. The popular interpretation reverses 
the types of the meal and the leaven, and makes the leaven 
that which is good, and the meal that which is-evil. But 
the great Teacher made no such mistake. “Church doc- 
trine " is not “ Bible truth," but it is leavened meal. 


The number /hree, therefore, must be taken as the number 
of Divine fulness. It signifies and represents the Holy Spirit 
as taking of the things of Christ and making them real and 


2 


THREE: ILLUSTRATIONS. III 


solid in our experience. It is only by the Spirit that we 
realise spiritual things. Without Him and His gracious 
operation, all is surface work: all is what a plane figure is to 
a solid (John iii. 6). He it is who has wrought all our works 
in us, and by whom alone we can serve or worship (John 
iv. 24). 

Hence it is that the Holy of Holies, which was the central 
' and highest place of worship, was a cube. 


Hence it is that the ¢4zrd Book in the Bible is Leviticus, the 
book in which we learn what true worship is. Here we see 
Jehovah calling His people near unto Himself, prescribing 
every detail of their worship, leaving nothing to their 
imagination or their taste, crowning all with the “MUST” 
of the great rubric of John iv. 24. In true worship we see 
the FATHER seeking these true worshippers (John iv. 23); 
the Sow, the one object of all worship; and the Spirit 
qualifying and enduing the worshippers with the only 
power in which they can worship. Thus in Genesis we have 
sovereignty in giving life—the Father, the beginning of all 
things; in Exodus we have the oppressor and the Deliverer— 
the Son redeeming His people; while in Zewzzuws we have 
the Spirit prescribing, and ordering, and empowering them 
for Divine worship. 


Tue First OCCURRENCE 


of the number is in Gen. i. 13. “The ¢hird day” was the 
day on which the earth was caused to rise up out of the 
water, symbolical of that resurrection life which we have 
in Christ, and in which alone we can worship, or serve, or do 
any “good works." 

Hence /Aree is a number of Resurrection, for it was on 
the /hird day that Jesus rose again from the dead. This was 
Divine in operation, and Divine in its prophetic foreshowing 
in the person of Jonah (Matt. xii. 39, 40; Luke xi. 29; Jonah 
i. 17). It was the ¢hzrd day on which Jesus was “perfected” 
(Luke xiii. 32). It was at the shard hour He was crucified ; 
and it was for /Aree hours (from the 6th to the oth) that 
darkness shrouded the Divine Sufferer and Redeemer. The 
«loud voice” at the end of those twice three hours, when, 
“about the ninth hour," He cried, “ My God, My God, why 


112 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


hast Thou forsaken Me” (Matt. xxvii. 46), shows completely 
that nothing of nature, nothing of the light or intelligence of 
this world, could give help in that hour of darkness. Does 
not this show us our impotence in the matter? Does it not 
prove our incapacity to aid in delivering ourselves from our 
natural condition ? 

With the light at the ninth hour came the Divine declara- 
tion, “It is finished.” So divinely finished, completed, and 
perfected, that now there is no such darkness for those who 
have died with: Christ. Light, uninterrupted light, shines 
upon all who are risen with Him; uninterrupted sunshine— 
even “the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.” That 
three hours’ darkness, therefore, testifies to our complete 
ruin, and our complete salvation, and shows that His people 
are “complete in Him.” 

While we are speaking of the Divine perfections of Christ, 
let us note the many marks and seals of this completeness. 

“The Spirit, the water, and the blood,” are the divinely 
perfect witness to the grace of God on earth (1 John v. 7). 

The three years of His seeking fruit testifies to the com- 
pleteness of Israel's failure (Luke xiii. 7). 

His three-fold “it is written" shows that the Word of God 
is the perfection of all ministry (Matt. iv.). 

The Divine testimony concerning Him was complete in the 
threefold voice from Heaven (Matt. iii. 17; xvii. 5; John 
xii. 28). 

He raised /Zree persons from the dead. 

The inscriptions on the Cross in three languages show 
the completeness of His rejection by Man. 

The perfection of His offices are shown in His being 
Prophet, Priest, and King, raised up from among His 
brethren (Deut. xvii. 15; xviii. 3-5, and xviii. 15). 

The Divine completeness of the Shepherd's care (John 
vi. 39), is seen in His revelation as— 

The “Good Shepherd” in death, John x. t4. 
The * Great Shepherd " in resurrection, Heb. xiii. 20. 
The * Chief Shepherd” in glory, 1 Pet. iv. 5. 

His three appearings in Heb. ix. show that His work will 
not be divinely perfect and complete until He appears again. 

i. He “hath appeared" in the end of the age to “put 
away sin," and to * bear the sins of many " (Heb. ix. 26, 28). 


THREE : ILLUSTRATIONS. 113 


2. “Now to appear in the presence of God for us,” He 
has ascended into Heaven (verse 24). 

3. He “shall appear” again apart from all question of sin 
for those who look for Him (verse 28). 


ABRAHAM'S COVENANT: 


To go back to the Old Testament history we have 
God’s Covenant with Abraham stamped with this number of 
Divine perfection (Gen. xv.). Jt was (like David's, 2 Sam. 
vii.) Divinely “ordered in all things, and sure." God was 
ONE, Ze, the one party to it; for Abraham, who would 
willingly have been the other party, was put to sleep, that 
the Covenant might be unconditional, and “sure to all his 
seed." The Divine seal is seen in the choice of ¢Aree animals, 
each of /iree years old (the heifer, the she-goat, and the ram). 
These, together with the two birds (the dove and the pigeon), 
made fve in all, marking it all as a perfect act of free-grace 
on the part of a sovereign God. 


Tue COMPLETE SEPARATION OF ISRAEL 


is shown in “ zhe three days’ journey into the wilderness" (Exod. 
v. 3), marking the complete separation with which God 
would separate His people from Egypt then, and from thc 
world now. We can understand Pharaoh's objection in first 
wishing them to hold their feast “in the land " (Exod. viii. 25), 
and when that could not be, at last consenting to their going, 
but adding, ‘‘only ye shall not go very far away." So Satan 
now, is well content that we should worship “in the land;" 
and if we must go into the wilderness, that we should be 
within easy reach of the world and its influences. Not so 
Jehovah. He will have no such borderland service; He will 
have a “scientific frontier," a divinely perfect “three days’ 
journey into the wilderness,” completely separating them 
from all their old associations. The difficulty of “drawing 
the line," which so many Christians experience, arises from 
the fact that it is a crooked line, and that it is an attempt to 
include that which cannot be included. Drawn at a proper 
distance it can be ruled straight, and be divinely perfect and 
effectual. 


S 1396. 


I I4. NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


Tue SPIES 
brought ¢hree things which testified to the divinely perfect 
goodness of the land; and the substantial realities proved - 
the truth of Jehovah’s word: “Grapes, figs, and pome- 
granates" (Num. xiii. 23). 


AT THE GIVING or THE Law 


three times Israel said, “All that the Lorp hath spoken we 
will do” (Exod. xix. 8; xxiv. 3, 7), marking the completeness 
of the Covenant-making on the part of Israel; but from that 
very reason foreshadowing its perfect breach, for man has 
never yet kept any Covenant which be made with God. 


Auman, SHESHAI, AND TALMAI, 


were the three children of Anak, marking the completeness 
of the giant power of the enemy (Num. xiii. 22). 


Jorpan 
was three times divided, the perfection of the Divine miracle 
(Josh. iv.; 2 Kings ii. 8, 14). 


Tur Turer Days’ SEARCH ; 
for Elijah was conclusive testimony that he could not be 
found (2 Kings ii. 17). 


Tue TEMPLE 
is marked by ¢hree, as the Tabernacle is by five. The Holy 
of Holies in each was a cube; in the Tabernacle a cube of 
ten cubits; in the Temple a cube of twenty cubits. Each 
consisted of /Aree parts :— The Court, the Holy Place, and the 
Sanctuary The Temple had three chambers round about. 
The Brazen Sea or Laver held ¢hree thousand baths; and 
was compassed by a line of thirty cubits on which were 
300 knops (1 Kings vii. 24). It was supported by twelve oxen 
(3 X4); three looking north, three looking west, three look- 
ing south, and three looking east. This order in naming the 
points of the compass occurs nowhere else. It is the same in 
both accounts of Kings and Chronicles (see 1 Kings vii. 25; 
2 Chron. iv. 4, 5). Why is this? Is it because this was the 
order in which the Gospel was to be afterwards preached 


THREE: DIVINE COMPLETENESS. I15 


throughout the world? Whether this was the reason or not, 
the fact remains that the Gospel was preached first in the north 
. (Samaria, Damascus, Antioch); then in the west (Cæsarea, 
Joppa, Cyprus, Corinth, Rome) ; then in the south (Alexandria 
and Egypt); then in the east (Mesopotamia, Babylon, Persia, 
India). 
Tux Great FEASTS 
were three; Unleavened Bread, Weeks, Tabernacles (Deut. 
xvi. 16). 
THE SHEET 

let down ¢hree times to Peter was the fulness of the testimony 
as to the admission of the Gentiles into the Church (Acts 
E15). 


Tue Orp TESTAMENT 
Testimony was complete and perfect in its ¢hree-fold division— 
Law, Prophets, and Psalms (Luke xxiv. 44).* The same three 
divisions mark its character to the present day. 


«Two or THREE.” 


As three marks completeness and perfection of testimony, 
so it marks the number of spiritual worshippers; and inti- 
mates that true spiritual worshippers would always be few. 


COMPLETENESS OF PEOPLE. 
Shem, Ham, and Japheth. 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. 
Gershom, Kohath, and Merari. 
Saul, David, and Solomon. 
Noah, Daniel, and Job. 
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. 
Peter, James, and John, etc. 


COMPLETENESS OF Apostasy (Jude 11). 
“The way of Cain.” 
* The error of Balaam." 
* The gainsaying of Korah." 


* See Zhe Names and Order of the Books of the Old Testament, by the 
same author. 


12 


116 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


COMPLETENESS or Divine JUDGMENT (Daz. vi. 25-28). 


MENE. God hath NUMBERED thy kingdom and 


finished it. 
TEKEL. Thou art WEIGHED in the balances and found 
wanting. 
PERES. T 


hy kingdom is DIVIDED and given to the 
Medes and Persians. 


Tue THREE GIFTS or GRACE: 


Faith, Hope, and Love, five times repeated. 


Tur Turee-rotp Nature or Man: 


Spirit, and Soul, and Body, the man consisting of neither 
separately, but of the whole three together. 


Tue Turee-rorp Nature or Temptation (1 John ii. 16). 
* The lust of the flesh." 
“The lust of the eyes." 
* The pride of life.” 


These seen in our first parents when Eve saw (Gen. 


iii. 6) that the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil was— 
‘Good for food,” 


* Pleasant to the eyes,” 
* To be desired to make one wise." 


Tue THREE-FOLD CORRUPTION or Gop's Worp 
By taking from, 
adding to, and 
altering. 


This led up to the first sin. 
(1) God had said, *of every tree in the garden thou 


mayest FREELY eat" (Gen. ii. 16). In repeating 


this, Eve omitted the word “freely” (iii. 2), making 
God less bountiful than He was. 


(2) God had said, “ But of the Tree of the Knowledge of 
Good and Evil, thou shalt not eat of it” (Gen. ii. 17). 


THREE : ILLUSTRATIONS. 117 


In repeating this Eve added the words, “NEITHER 
SHALL YE TOUCH IT" (ii. 3), making God 
more severe than He was. 

(3) God had said, “Thou shalt SURELY die” (Gen. 
iii. 17, Pam AY). In repeating this Eve altered 
it to nens. “EEST «ye Wie” (iii. 3) thus 
weakening the certainty of the Divine threat into a 
contingency. 

No wonder that dealing thus with the Word of God she 
listened to the words of the Devil, and became an easy prey 
to his guile with which he deceived her. 

No wonder also that * the second man," *the last Adam," 
when He was tempted by the same tempter, kree times 
repeated the words “It is written”! as though to call atten- 
tion to the occasion of the Fall in the three-fold perversion 
of God's words. “It is written," and I will not oz anything 
from it; “It is written," and I will not add anything to it; 
“Tt is written," and I will not aer it. It is worthy of note 
that both the temptations began in precisely the same way, 
by the Tempter questioning the truth of Jehovah's Word. 
In the former saying, “ Hath God said?” In the latter say- 
ing, “If Thou be the Son of God" (Matt. iv. 3), when the 
voice from Heaven had only just declared, “This IS My 
beloved Son” (Matt. iii. 17). 


Man’s THREE GREAT ENEMIES 


are “the World, the Flesh, and the Devil": 
The World is set over against the Father (1 Johnii. 15, 16). 
The Flesh is set over against the Spirit (Gal. v. 17). 
The Devil is set over against the Son (the Living Word, 
Matt. iv. 1, etc., and 1 John iii. 8; and the Written 
Word, John viii. 44). 


* Asx or Mz." 


To three people did God give this command: 
To Solomon (1 Kings iii. 5). 
To Ahaz (Isa. vii. 11), 
And to the Messiah (Ps. ii. 9). 


118 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


Tue THREE PRAYERS or MARK v. 


form a divinely perfect lesson as to prayer and its answer. 

Xr.) Prayer was made by the Legion of Devis, who 
*pggsoucHT Him, saying, Send us into the herd of 
swine . . . and forthwith Jesus gave them leave" 
(00035, 13). 

(2.) Prayer was made by the Gadarenes, who “ began to 
pray Him to depart out of their coasts " (v.17). Jesus 
granted their request, and departed at once (v. 18). 

(3.) Prayer was made by the man who had just been the 
recipient of marvellous grace and healing, who 
* pRAYED Him that he might be with Him. Howbeit 
Jesus suffered him not" (vv. 18, 19). 

From this we learn the perfect lesson with regard to 
prayer, that “ Wo” is an answer as well as * Fes;" and “No” 
is answered always with the same omnipotent grace, infinite 
wisdom, and perfect love as “Yes.” We hear much about 
* definiteness in prayer.” Surely the knowledge of one's 
intense ignorance as to what is best and wise for us, will 
make us say more definitely than ever, in the words of Him 
through whose merits alone prayer is heard at all, * Thy will 
be done." 


Turee Tunes Prepicatep or Gop 
(in John’s Gospel and Epistles). 
“God is love" (1 John iv. 8, 16). We are therefore to 
* Walk in love" (Eph. v. 2). 
“God is spirit" (John iv. 24, R.V., margin). We are 
exhorted to ** Walk in the spirit" (Gal. v. 16). 


“God is light" * (1 John i. 5). We are to “ Walk in the 
light" (Eph. v. 8). 


* Light, like God, is three-fold. It has three great rays :— 

The Heat ray (red), which is /z//, not seen, witnesses of the Father, 
** whom no man hath seen at any time" (John i. 18 ; 1 John iv. 12). 

The Light ray (yellow), whichis seez, not felt, witnesses of Jesus, who 
hath ** declared the Father" (John i. 18; xii. 45 ; xiv. 9; Col. i. 15; 
HED i 3): 

The Actinic or chemical ray (blue), which is neither seen nor felt, but 
whose presence is revealed by its effects in a chemical action, which 
produces changes, as in Photography. This witnesses of the Holy 
Spirit, who is known by His wondrous operations (John iii. 8). - 


THREE: REVELATION 1. IIO 


There are a multitude of Threes or Triads, and they all 


bespeak the same Divine perfection and completeness wher- 
ever they are found. 


REVELATION I. 
The first or introductory section of the Apocalypse of Jesus 


Christ is specially marked by this great Divine seal stamped 
upon it in chapter i. 


v. I. This Revelation is— 
Divinely gzvez, 
Divinely sent, 
Divinely szgnified. 
v. 2. John bare record of— 
The Divine “ Word of God.” 
The Divine witness (*the Testimony of Jesus 
Christ "). 
The Divine vision (* all things that he saw "). 


v. 3. The Divine blessing on— 
'The reader, 
The hearer, and 
The keeper of this record. 


v2. 4 and 8. The Divine Being— 
Which was, 
And which is, 
And which is to come. 


v. 5. The Coming Lord is presented as— 
The Divine Prophet (“the faithful witness ’’). 
The Divine Priest (*the first-begotten from the 
dead"). 
The Divine King (“the Prince of the kings of the 
earth *’). 


vv. 5, 6. His people are Divinely— 
Loved, 
Cleansed, and 
Crowned. 


vv. 17, 18. Christ is presented as— 
* The first and the last" (Divinely eternal). 
The dead and living One (Divinely living). 
The omnipotent One (Divinely powerful). 


120 


NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE, 


v. 19. The Divine Revelation— 
The things which thou hast seen, 
Which are, and g 
Which shall be after these things. 


Worps THAT Occur TureEe TIMES 


refer also in various ways to some Divinely perfect matter. 


We 


append a few examples, which may be studied in order 


to search out the lessons:— 


“IN (ah-dar), glorious, Exod. xv. 6, 11; Isa. xlii. 21. 

‘DSN (aph-see), beside me, Isa. xlvii. 8, 10; Zeph. ii. 15. 

DNA ( g’moo-lah), recompense, 2 Sam. xix. 36; Isa. 
lix. 18; Jer. li. 56. 

123 (zah-chek), lame, 2 Sam. iv. 4; ix. 3; contrite, Isa. 
Ivi-2. 

py (at-teek), ancient, Dan. vii. 9, 13, 22. 

MINSAN (rphoo-oth), medicines, Jer. xxx. 13; xlvi. II; 
Ezek. XXX. 21. 


aBBa (abba), Father, Mark xiv. 36; Rom. viii. r5; Gal. 
iv. 6. 

aipéopat (haireomaz), to choose, Phil. i. 22; 2 Thess. ii. 13 ; 
Heb. xi. 25. 

amdxpupos (apokruphos), hid, Luke viii. 17; Col. ii. 3; kept 
secret, Mark iv. 22. 

dmopbéyyopar (apopAthengomat ), speak forth, Acts xxvi. 25 ; 
utterance, Acts ii. 4; say, Acts ii. 14. 

axeporoinros (acheiropoieefos), made without hands, Mark 
xiv. 55; 2 Cor. v. 1 Col DE. 

eiw0ia (euodia), sweet savour, 2 Cor. ii. 15; Eph. v. 2; 
Pani; iv. 18. 

xarevÜóvo (kateuthuno), guide or direct, Luke i. 70; 
I Thess. iij. 11.; 2 Thess HN 5. 

poppy (morphee), form, Mark xvi. 12; Phil. ii. 6, 7. 


PHRASES THAT Occur THREE Times 


are also similarly significant. 


“ Before the foundation of the world” (xpd xaraBodjs KOO tov). 


John xvii. 24. “Thou lovedst Me before,” etc. 


THREE: ILLUSTRATIONS AND COMBINA TIONS. 12I 

Eph. i. 4. “ Chosen us in Him before,” etc. 

I Pet. i. 20. * The blood of Christ foreordained before," 
etc. (when it speaks of this blood as *shed" it is 
dzó, from the foundation, etc.). 


The phrase occurs three times, because it is the act of 
Deity, and flows from uninfluenced grace. 


When, however, such acts relate to His work zz us rather 
than for us, the words, even in a similar connection, occur 
seven times, because seven is the number of spiritual perfection. 
Hence the phrase, ** From (áró) the foundation of the world” 
occurs seven times. See under “ seven.” 


“ Walk worthy ” (sepvravév dkiws, peripatein axtds), 
walk worthily. 


This occurs three times, as the Divine and perfect claim 
on our walk. 


** Walk worthily ” 
Of our vocation (Eph. iv. 1), 
Of the Lord (Col. i. 10), 
Of God (1 Thess. ii. 12). 


Tue THarE-Forp COMBINATIONS OF A NUMBER 


denotes the essence of such number, the concentration of the 
significance of the number thus expressed. 


444 is the gematria or number of the word ** Damascus,” 
which is the oldest city in the world; four being the world 
number. (See under Four.) 


666 is the number of maz, and it symbolises fitly, therefore, 
the essence of human wisdom, and also of imperfection. 
(See further under Szx and ** 666.") 


888 is the number or gematria of the name “Jesus.” 
(See under Eight.) 


999 is the number connected with judgment, hence the 
numerical value of the phrase rù ópyij pov (tee orgee mou), my 
wrath, is 999. The same number is very prominent in the 
judgment on Sodom. (See further under Wine.) 


122 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


Tar Tatmup 


has many references, among other numbers, to the number 
three. The Rabbis say that there were 


Three things Moses asked of God. 
(1.) That the Schechinah might rest on Israel. 
(2.) That it might rest on none but Israel. 
(3.) That God’s ways might be known to him. 
(Beracheth, fol. 7, col. 1). 


Three precious gifts were given to Israel. 
(1.) The Law. 
(2.) The Land. 
(3-) The World to come (Ze, the Heavenly Calling). 


Three men 


handed down the ancient wisdom and Divine secrets, viz., 
Adam, Seth, and Enoch. 


Whatever may be thought of these, there can be no doubt 
that in the invariable employment of the number /Zre in the 
Word of God, we have that which signifies Divine perfection. 


( 123 ) 


FOUR. 


We have seen that ¢hree signifies Divine perfection, with 
special reference to the Trinity: The Father, oze in sove- 
.reignty; the Son, the second person, in incarnation and 
salvation, delivering from every enemy; the Holy Spirit, the 
third person, realising in us and to us Divine things. 

Now the number four is made up of three and one 
(3 + I = 4), and it denotes, therefore, and marks that which 
follows the revelation of God in the Trinity, namely, Ais 
creative works. He is known by the things that are „seen. 
Hence the written revelation commences with the words, “ In- 
the-beginning God CREATED." Creation is therefore the 
next thing—the fourth thing, and the number jour always has 
reference to all that is created. It is emphatically the number of 
Creation ; of man in his relation to the world as created; while 
six is the number of man in his opposition to and indepen- 
dence of God. It is the number of things that have a 
beginning, of things that are made, of material things, and 
matter itself. It is the number of material completeness. Hence 
it is the world number, and especially the “ city " number. 

The fourth day saw the material creation finished (for on the 
fifth and sixth days it was only the furnishing and peopling of 
the earth with living creatures). The sun, moon, and stars 
completed the work, and they were to give light upon the 
earth which had been created, and to rule over the day and 
over the night (Gen. i. 14-19). 

Four is the number of the great elements—earth, air, fire, 
and water. 

Four are the regions of the earth—north, south, east, and 
west. 

Four are the divisions of the day—morning, noon, even- 
ing, and midnight. Or in our Lord's words, when He 
speaks of His coming at evening, midnight, cock-crowing, or 
in the morning (Mark xiii. 35). We are never to put off His 
coming in our minds beyond to-morrow morning. 

Four are the seasons of the year—spring, summer, autumn, 
and winter. 

Four are the great variations of the lunar phases. 


124 . NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


In Gen. ii. 10, 11, the one river of Paradise was parted, 
and became into four heads, and “the fourth river is 
Euphrates." Here, as so often elsewhere, the four is made 
up of 3+1. For three of these rivers are now unnamed, 
while one is still known by its original name “ Euphrates." 

Four marks division also. For the river was “ parted.” It is 
the first number which is not a * prime," the first which can 
be divided. It is the first square number also, and therefore 
it marks a kind of completeness as well, which we have called 
material completeness. 

In the next chapter (Gen. iii. 22-24) the cherubim are first 
mentioned. These are four, and they have to do with creation 
always. They are first seen here, keeping, ze, guarding. 
(Gen. ii. 15), the Tree of Life, and thus preserving the blessed 
hope of immortality for creation. They are next seen in 
connection with atonement, showing the only ground on 
which creation could hope for the end of its groaning. They 
are seen on the veil and on the mercy-seat, binding up 
the hope of creation with Him who is called “the Hope 
of Israel" So that there is no hope for a groaning 
creation apart from atonement, apart from Christ, or apart 
from Israel. In the Apocalypse the same four cherubim 
are called Xóe, "the living creatures" (Rev. iv.). These 
announce the Coming One; these sing of creation and of Him 
who created all things, and for whose pleasure they were 
created (Rev. iv. 11). Whenever they speak it is in connec- 
tion with the earth. These call forth and announce the judg- 
ments or plagues (Rev. vi.) which issue in the ejection of the 
Usurper from the earth, and the destruction of them which 
destroy the earth, and in the exaltation and enthronement of 
Him when all the kingdoms of the world become the king- 
dom of our Lord and His anointed, and when the Lorp 
God omnipotent reigneth. 

Hence it was that these four cherubic forms were placed 
in the Signs of the Zodiac, and so placed that they divide it 
into four equal parts, thus uniting in one the twelve signs 
which set forth the blessed hope of a groaning creation, 
which waits for the Promised Seed of the woman to come and 
crush the serpent's head and bring in universal blessing.* 


* See The Witness of the Stars, by the same author. 


FOUR: THE CHERUBIM. 125 


They are the four heads of animal creation: the lion, of 
wild beasts; the ox, of tame beasts; the eagle, of birds; 
and man the head of all. Again we have the four divided 
into 3 + 1: three animal, and one human. 

They mark the purpose of God from the moment the 
curse was pronounced, and are the pledge that it will one 
day be removed. 

Other characteristics mark the cherubim off from all else. 
They are not Divine, for they are never worshipped, and all 
likeness of God was forbidden; moreover the God-head is 
presented at the same time with them, for they are connected 
with His throne. They are distinguished from angels, and 
they are never dismissed on errands. They are distinguished 
from the Church in Rev. v. 9, 10, a passage which is sup- 
posed to prove their identity with it; for in verse 9, the word 
* us" should be omitted, with Lachmann, Tischendorf, Alford, 
Westcott and Hort, and the R.V.; and the words “us” and 
“we” in verse 10, should be “them” and “they” (with all 
the textual and ancient authorities), the verses reading as in 
R.V. :—“ Thou wast slain, and didst purchase unto God with 
Thy blood, men of every tribe, and tongue, and people, and 
nation, and madest them to be unto our God a kingdom 
and priests; and they reign upon the earth." 

The fact, therefore, of the living creatures being four (and 
no other number) marks them as connected with Creation, 
and as a symbolical representation that its hope of deliver- 
ance from the curse is bound up with the blood-shedding of 
the coming Redeemer. 


Tue Four-rotp D:visioN or MANKIND. 


In Gen. x, “the generations of the sons of Noah” are 
comprised in a four-fold description. However the order 
nay be varied, the number is preserved : 


Verse 5. lands, tongues, families, nations. 
» 20. families, tongues, countries, nations. 
» 31. families, tongues, lands, nations. 


In Revelation there are seven similar descriptions, and 
though no two are alike, yet the number four is pre- 


* Note the four-fold description. 


126 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


served. See Rev. v. 9; vii. 9; x. II; xi. 9; xiii. 7 *; xiv. 6; 
xvii. 15. 

The Zhree in Genesis, and seven in Revelation make zen 
such descriptions in all, which is the number of ordinal 
perfection. 


Tur GREAT Propuetic WORLD-POWERS 


are four, and these are divided into 3 + 1, where the one 
stands out in great and marked contrast to the other three. 
The first three wild beasts are zamed (lion, bear, leopard); 
while the fourth is only described and not named (vii. 7, 23). 

So in the image of Nebuchadnezzar's dream, Zire are 
metals; oze is a mixture of metal and mire! 

In Dan. vii. 2, 3 we read, * The FOUR winds of the heaven 
STROVE upon the great sea, and FOUR beasts came up 
from the sea DIVERSE one from another." Such is the 
history of man's power in the world—5s/7z/e and division / 

No sooner are mankind divided in Gen. x., than Abraham 
is called out from them to walk with God (Gen. xi., xii.). 
But he soon finds it to be a world of strife and enmity, for 
Gen. xiv. opens with the names of four kings, and “ these 
made war" with jive others which are named afterwards. 


Tue Fourtn Boox 


of the Bible is Numbers. In Hebrew it is called B’Mdbar, 
i.e., the Wilderness. The gematria of B’Mdidbar is 248 (4 X 62). 

It relates to the earth, which is a wilderness compared with 
Heaven; and to our pilgrimage through it. It tells of 
Meribah and s/rzwng (xx. 13), and records the history of the 
murmurings, rebellions, and wanderings. 


Tue FougnrH Book or THE PsaALMs 


is the Book of the Wilderness. The first Psalm is the 
“Prayer of Moses, the man of God,’—the man of the 
wilderness. All the illustrations and metaphors, etc., are 
drawn from the earth, and this fourth book sets forth 


* In Rev. xiii. 7, the A.V. gives only zžree ; but the R.V., with G., L., T., 
Tr., A, W. & H., give xal Aobv (kai laon), people, thus making four. 
t See A Key to the Psalms, Appendix, by the same author. 


FOUR: THE CONTRAST WITH SEVEN. 127 


Jehovah’s counsels and purposes in relation to the earth. 
(See Psalms xc.—cvi). 

In the First Book of the Psalms (i.—xli), the fourth Psalm 
has to do with earth.* It tells how there is nothing satis- 
fying in it; that apart from God there can be no real pros- 
perity in the earth. 

“Many there be that say, Who will show us any good? 

Lorn, lift Thou up the Hght of Thy countenance upon us. 

Thou hast put gfadness in my heart 

More than they have when their corn and their wine are 

increased.”—(Ps. iv. 6, 7, R.V.) 

We may note also the fourth Psalms of the other Books of 
the Psalms, viz. :—Ps. xlv. (the fourth of the second book), 
Ps. Ixxvi. (the fourth of the third book), Ps. xciii. (the fourth 
of the fourth book), and Ps. cx. (the fourth of the fifth book). 
All these tell of Dominion in the earth, and they speak of the 
coming reign of earth's rightful King and Lord. 

The Fourth Commandment is the first that refers to the 
earth. 

The fourth clause of the Lord's Prayer is the first that 
mentions the earth. 


Four IN CONTRAST WITH SEVEN. 


"Seven stamps everything with spzrztual perfection, for it is 
the number of heaven, and stands therefore in contrast to 
the earth. Hence, when in Rev. v. 12 the heavenly multi- 
tudes praise, they praise with a seven-fold blessing, and say: 

« Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive (1) power, 
and (2) riches, and (3) wisdom, and (4) strength, and (5) 
honour, and (6) glory, and (7) blessing.” 

Whereas in z. 13, when the created earthly beings praise,— 
the creatures that are “on the earth, and under the earth, 
and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them” —when 
these join in ¢hezr ascription, it is only four-fold :—(1) “ Bless- 
ing, and (2) honour, and (3) glory, and (4) power, be unto 
Him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for 
ever and ever.” 


* The first Psalm speaks of Genesis and the counsels of God for man. 
The second tells of Exodus and deliverance from the hand of the enemy, The 
third tells of Leviticus—of Salvation being of the Lord, and how His blessing 
can be upon His people. 


328 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE, 


Tue DEATH AND Lire or CHRIST 


are set forth by a four-fold type and record. 
His death. The four great offerings (Ps. xl. 6).9 


a | “Sacrifice (peace offering), and offering (meal offer- 
ing), Thou wouldest not: 
b | Mine ears hast Thou opened. 
a | Burnt offering and sin offering hast Thou not re- 


quired. 
& | Then said I, Lo, I come,” étc. 


In the four Gospels we have the record of His life and 
obedience unto death. These are divided into 3 + r, the 
three being similar, and hence called “ Synoptic”; while the 
fourth stands out alone, written after the Churches had all 
failed, and presenting Christ not merely as offered and 
rejected by Israel, but as the one and only centre of union 
and unity after His rejection, and in the midst of all the 
failure, confusion, and corruption. 


Tur Seven PARABLES or MATTHEW xi.f 


are divided into four and three; and while the ¢hree are 
spoken inside the house (v. 36) to the disciples, and reveal 
esoteric (or inner explanatory) truth, the four relate to exoferzc 
truth, and concern the outward aspect of things in relation to 
the world, and hence were spoken outside the house (v. 1). 


But it is as composed of 


Three PLUS one 


that we see the most marked illustrations of the ideal 
significance of the number four, the “one” marking an election 
out of the earth. 

Of the four great offerings, three were connected with blood 
and life; while oze was meal. 

Lhe meal offering (Lev. ii.) was either baked in Zree ways 
(oven, flat-plate, or frying-pan); or not at all. 


* Here the alternate structure shows that **b" and **2" relate to the obedi- 
ence of Christ as the fifth great offering to which the four pointed. 
{t See Zhe Kingdom and the Church, by the same author. 


HOUR: THREE PLUS ONE. 129 


The sin offering (Lev. 4) was offered for Zire classes of 
individuals— 
The Priest that is anointed (v. 3), 
TheyRuler (v. 22), 
The Common person (v. 27)— 
or for the whole congregation as one (v. 13). 


_ The materials of the Tabernacle were four, three being metals 
(gold, silver, brass); and one non-metal (wood). 


The coverings of the Tabernacle were four,—three animal 
(goats’ hair, rams’ skins, and badger skins *); and one vege- 
table (fine linen). 

The ornamentations of the curtains were four, three being 


colours (blue, purple and scarlet); while one was a pattern 
(the cherubim.) 


Lhe Priests and Levites were of four orders or persons: one 
was Aaron and his sons (Aaronites) ; the //re were the sons 
of Gershon, Kohath, and Merari (Levites). 


Lhe Manna (Exod. xvi. 14, 31) has a four-fold description, 
three referring to sight or appearance (small, white, round) ; 
and one to taste (swect). 


Of the four prohibited or unclean animals, three chewed the 
cud, but did not divide the hoof (camel, hare, and coney); 
while one divided the hoof, but did not chew the cud (the 
swine); and thus the swine stands out in marked contrast to 
the other three. 

Of the four Houses of God (i.e, erected by Divine plan) in 
the earth, Aree were, or will be, material, vzz., the Tabernacle, 
the Temple (Solomon's) and Ezekiel’s; whilst the owe is a 
Spiritual house (1 Pet. ii. 5). 

Four houses were built by Solomon; three were for himself,— 
his own house (1 Kings vii. 1), the house of the forest of 
Lebanon (v. 2), the house for Pharaoh’s daughter (v. 8); 
while one was the House of the Log» (1 Kings vi. 37). 


* No badgers were ever found so far south as Palestine. The word won 
(ZacAhask) is a word of uncertain meaning, but it refers to an animal the skins 
of which were used (Exod. xxv. 5; xxvi. 14; Num. iv. 6, 8, etc.). The ancient 
versions understand it as a colour (the LXX., Chald., and Syr., as red, 
Arabic, black). It was probably the red or dark skins of the larger sacrificial 
animals ; the two smaller animals are named as being goats and rau.s, 

S 1396. k 


130 NUMBER IN SCRIPTUKE. 


God's four sore judgments in the earth (Ezek. xiv. 21): Aree 
are inanimate (the sword, famine, and pestilence); while oze 
is animate (the noisome beast). 

In Jer. xv. 3, they are still four, but three are animate 
(dogs, fowls, and beasts), and oze is inanimate (the sword). — . 
Of the four kinds of flesh in 1 Cor. xv. 39, three are animals 

(beasts, birds, and fishes) ; while oze is human (man). 

The four glories of 1 Cor. xv. 40, 41: ¢hree are celestial 
and are detailed (the sun, moon, and stars); while oze is not 
detailed and is terrestrial. 

The body is sown and raised (Y Cor. xv. 42-44) in ZAree ways 
that relate to corruptibility: 

sown “in corruption, raised in incorruption” ; 

sown “in dishonour, raised in glory"; 

sown “in weakness, raised in power "; 
while in the oze, *it is sown a natural body; it is raised a 
spiritual body." 

In the parable of the sower (Matt. xiii.) the kinds of soil are 
four; but ¢hree are characterised as being all alike in con- 
trast to the one (viz., the wayside, the stony ground, and 
the thorns). These are all unprepared! while the one is good 
because it is prepared! The essence of the parable lies in 
this. It reduces the four soils to two, and confirms what is 
said of the zwo religions on pp. 96, 97. 

In the Lost Som's welcome (Luke xv.), tree things were 
material (the robe, the ring, and the shoes); while one was 
moral (the kiss). 

“ The Seventy” went forth with a four-fold prohibition 
(Luke x. 4), of which ¢hree related to matters (carry no purse, 
no scrip, no shoes); while one related to action (* salute no 
man by the way”), 

God’s four-fold witness in the earth (Heb. ii. 4): /Aree are 
impersonal (signs, wonders, and miracles), and one personal 
(the gifts of the Holy Ghost). 


Fours or PERSONS. 


The four of the Book of Job :— 


Eliphaz, Bildad, Zophar (friends); and Elihu (mediator). 
The children of Lamech :— 


Jubal, Jabal, Tubal-Cain (sons); and Naamah (daughter). 


FOUR: THREE PLUS. ONE. 131 


The four bound with brass :— 
Samson (Judg. xvi. 21) 
Jehoiachim (2 Chron. xxxvi. 6) . a 
Zedekiah (2 Kings xxv. 7; Jer. lii. 11 
and xxxix.7) . , "e S. 
Manasseh (2 Chien. xxxiii. io. .. liberated. 


not liberated. 


- The four whose names were changed :— 
Abram (Gen. xxvii. 5) ... 

Sarai (Gen. xxvii. 15) ... i blessing. 

Jacob (xxxv. 10; xxxii. 28) 

Pashur (Jer. xx. 3) .. in judgment. 


Four Prophetesses of the Old Testament :— 


Miriam (Exod. xv. 20) ... 
Deborah (Judg. iv. 4) . good 
Huldah (2 Kings xxii. 14) 

Noadiah (Neh. vi. 14) ... bad. 


The four “children " of the Book of Daniel :— 


Daniel ... alone. 
Shadrach 

Meshach l together, 
Abednego 


The four in the furnace: 
Shadrach 
Meshach \ human. 
Abednego 
The son of God, Spiritual.? 


The your kings named in Daniel :— 
Nebuchadnezzar (i.-iv.) 
Belshazzar (v.) M. the first and last of Babylon. 
Darius (vi.) *the Median E na. 
Cyrus (vi. 28; x. 1) “the Persian.” 


The four women in the Lord's genealogy (Matt. i.) :— 
Thamar (Gen. xxxviii. 27, &c.; Matt. i. 3). 
Rahab (Ruth iv. 20; Matt. i. 5). 
Ruth (Ruth iv. 13, 14; Matt. i. 5). 
Wife of Uriah (2 Sam. xii. 24; Matt. i. 6). 


* There is no article. It is literally **a son of God,” ze. an angel. 
K 2 


132 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE, 


Four names of Satan in Rev. xx. 2:— 
The Dragon (rebellious and apostate), 
The Old Serpent (seductive). 

The Devil (accusing). 
Satan (personal), 


The four-fold witness to show Nature's inability to find 
wisdom (Job xxviii. 7, 8) :— 
The fowl. 
The vulture's eye. 
The lion's whelps. 
The fierce lion. 


Four things “little and wise " ** (Prov. xxx. 24-28) :— 
The ant. 
The coney. 
The locust. 
The spider. 


The brazen altar which displayed the Divine judgment is 
four sided, and had four horns. So with the golden altar. 


The camp was /our-square. 


The rainbow, which has special reference to the earth and 
its judgment, is mentioned four times,—twice in the Old 
Testament (Gen. ix. and Ezek. i. 28) and twice in the New 
Testament (Rev. iv. 3; x. I). 


The fulness of material blessing in the earth is described 
in Isa. lx. 17 :— 
For brass I will bring gold. 
For iron I will bring silver. 
For wood I will bring brass. 
For stones I will bring iron. 


The sphere of suffering is four-fold in 2 Cor. iv. 8, 9:— 
Troubled, but not distressed. 
Perplexed, but not in despair. 
Persecuted, but not forsaken. 
Cast down, but not destroyed. 


* See Sunday School Lessons, First series, pp. 37-40, by the same author, 


FOUR : OCCURRENCES OF WORDS. 133 


The prophecy of Zechariah which has special reference to 
the earth :.— 
In ch. i. we have the ma horns or Gentile powers, 
and the /our carpenters to fray them. 
In ch. iv. we have the four chariots with horses of four 
colours, signifying the spirits of the heavens acting 
for God in the midst of the four Gentile powers. 


GEMATRIA, 


This is too large a subject to enter on here, but it is most 
significant that we get the number /our in its concentrated 
form in connection with pias, Damascus, which is the 
oldest city in the world. The number of its name is 444: 
thus-—~ 


g( 444: 


wiv 
ll 
Ww 
[e] 


The name occurs 39 times, z.e., 3 X 13, for the significance 
of which see under the number 13. 


Worps THAT Occur Four Times 


partake also the same significance. We give a few from 
the commencement of the alphabet, and a careful study 
of them and others will bring out much interesting and 
instructive information : 
MSN (avéh-dah), “lost thing," Exod. xxii. 9; Lev. vi. 
See) Deut. xxi. 3. 
"133 (gaA-vaA), “high-look or proud," Ps. ci. 5; Prov. 
xvi jg Bccleso viS; Ezek, xxxi. 3. 
7133 (gzn-naA), “garden,” Est. i. 5; vii. 7, 8; Song vi. 11. 
595 (dah-gal), ** banners," Ps. xx. 6; Song v. 10; vi. 4, 10. 
= (dack), “oppressed or afflicted,” Ps. ix. 9; x 
iexive 21; Prov. XXVI 295 
mann (chah-rah-vah), “dry land,” 8 times (2 x 4). 
Un (cheh-resh), “craftsmen,” Jos. ii. 1 (* secretly," ze 
as craftsmen), 1 Chron. iv. 14, marg.; Neh. xi. 35; 
Isa, iii. 3 (* cunning "). 


134 _ NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


MDW (mas-koh-re?A), “ wages," Gen. xxix. 15; xxxi. 7, 

41; “reward,” Ruth i. t2.* 
. ID) (wah-sach),. “plucked,” Deut. xxviii. 63; “pluck,” 

Ps. lii. 7; “rooted out,” Prov, ii. 22; “destroy, xv 

"NJ (neh-Izer), “branch,” Isa. xi. = xiv. [OG ix 2I 
Dan. xi. 7. 

NW) (zah-shah), “to be in debt,” 1 Sam. xxii. 2; Neh. 
Vo7; Ps. Ixxxix. 22:53. 0x 0080 


dyvoa (agnora), “ignorance,” Acts iii. 17 ; xvii. 30; Eph. 
ive 15; © PEL pa 

aypvmvéo (agrupned), ke watch, " Mark xiii. 33; Luke xxi. 
36; Eph. vi. 18; Heb. xiii. 17. 

airtov (aztzon), “ fault,” Luke xxiii. 4, 14, 22; Acts xix. 40. 

auwós (amnos), “Lamb,” John i. 29, 36; Acts viii. 32; 
Ieri T9. 

dvGos (anthos), “flower,” James i. 10, 11; 1 Pet. i. 24 
(twice). 

asrýp (asteer), “star,” 24 times (4 x 6).+ 

&crpov (asiron), “star,” Luke xxi. 25; Acts vii. 43; xxvii. 
205 E b 42.7; 

dzog'roMj (apostoler), “ apostleship," Acts i. 25; Rom. i. D 
I Cor. 1x22 AGAMASI 


* But **gift" occurs five times. 
t The two words together 28 times (4 x 7), 


( 135 ) 


FIVE. 


we is four pius one (4 +1). We have had hitherto the 

‘three persons of the Godhead, and their manifestation in 
creation. Now we have a further revelation of a People 
called out from mankind, redeemed and saved, to walk with 
God from earth to heaven. Hence, Redemption follows 
creation. Inasmuch as in consequence of the fall of man 
creation came under the curse and was * made subject to 
vanity," therefore man and creation must be redeemed. 
Thus we have: 

1. Father. 

2. Son. 

p. Spirit. 

4. Creation. 

5. Redemption. 

These are the five great mysteries, and jive is therefore the 
number of GRACE. 

If four is the number of the world, then it represents man's 
weakness, and helplessness, and vanity, as we have seen. 

But four plus one (4+1= 5) is significant of Divine 
strength added to and made perfect in that weakness; of 
omnipotence combined with the impotence of earth; of 
Divine /avour uninfluenced and invincible. 

The word “the earth" is yun (Ha- E£retz). 

The gematria of this word is 296, a multiple of four; 
while the word for “the heavens” is Dw" (Ha-shemayeem), 
the gematria of which is 395, a multiple of five. 

The gematria of 4 xápıs (grace) is 725, a multiple of the 
square of five (5? x 29). 

The numerical value of the words * My grace is sufficient 
for thee” ('Apkei cot 7j xápis pov) is 1845, of which the factors 
are 5 X 3! X 41. (See pp. 76, 77.) 

Grace means /avour. But what kind of favour? for favour 
is of many kinds. Favour shown to the miserable we call 
mercy; favour shown to the poor we call pity ; favour shown 
to the suffering we call compassion; favour shown to the 


136 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


obstinate we call patience: but favour shown to the unworthy 
we call GRACE! This is favour indeed; favour which is 
truly Divine in its source and in its character. Light is 
thrown upon it in Rom. iii. 24, “ being justified freely by His 
grace.” The word here translated “freely” occurs again 
in John xv. 25, and is translated “without a cause” (“they 
hated me without a cause"). Was there any real cause why 
they hated the Lord Jesus? No! Nor is there any cause 
in us why God should ever justify us. So we might read 
Rom. iii. 24 thus: “Being justified without a cause by His 
grace." Yes, this is grace indeed, —favour to the unworthy. 

It was so with Abram. There was no cause in him why 
God should have called him and chosen him! There was no 
cause why God should have made an unconditional covenant 
with him and his seed for ever. , Therefore the number fve 
shall be stamped upon this covenant by causing it to be 
made with five sacrifices—a heifer, a goat, a ram, a dove, 
and a pigeon (Gen. xv. 9). See pp. 54, 113. 

It is remarkable, also, that afterwards, when God changed 
Abram's name to Abraham (Gen. xvii. 5), the change was 
made very simply, but very significantly (for there is no 
chance with God), by inserting in the middle of it the fyth 
letter of the alphabet, (Hey), the symbol of the number five, 


and DSN, Abram, became D IN AbraHam (Gen. xvii. 5). 
All this was of grace, and it is stamped with this significance. 
It is worthy of note that this change was made at a particular 
moment. It was when Abraham was called to “walk 
before " God in a very special manner. He was to look for 
the promised “seed” from no earthly source, and thus he 
was to “walk by faith and not by sight.” It was at this 
moment that God revealed Himself for the first time by His 
name of EL SHADDAI, ze. the all bountiful One! able to 
supply all-Abraham's need; able to meet all his necessities ; 
able to do for him all that he required. How gracious! 
How suitable! How perfect! It is the same in 2 Cor. vi, 
17, 18, when we are called, as Abraham was, to “ come out,” 
to * be separate," and walk by faith with God. He reveals 
himself (for the first time in the New Testament) by the same 
wonderful name, “ Ye shall be My sons and daughters, saith 
the Lord ALMIGHTY!”—able to support and to sustain 
you; able to supply all your need. This is grace. 


FIVE : ILLUSTRATIONS.- iaz 


Tue FrrrH Boox or tae Biste (DeuTERONOMY) 


magnifies the grace of God, and in it special pains, so 
to speak, are taken to emphasise the great fact that not for 
the sake of the people, but for God's own Name's sake had 
He called, and chosen, and blessed them. Read Deut. iv. 
Eo, 32997; Vili, IIT, 17, etc. 


Tar FrrrH Book or Psatms 


sets forth the same great fact. Its first Psalm (Ps. cvii.) 
magnifies this, and shows how * He sent His word and 
healed them" (v. 20), and again and again delivered them 
out of all their trouble. 


Tue FrrrH Psarw or THE First Boox 


has also special reference to God's “FAVOUR,” or 
grace, with which He encompasses His people. Ps. v. 12, 
“For thou Lorp wilt bless the righteous; with FAVOUR 
wilt Thou compass him (Heb. crown him) as with a shield.” 


Tue “ Stone” Kinepom 


will be the fyth kingdom, succeeding and comprehending 
the four great world-powers, absorbing all earthly dominion, 
when the kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdom 
of our Lord and of His Anointed, and He shall reign in 
glory and in grace. 


ISRAEL CAME OUT OF EGYPT 


fiveinarank. In Exod. xiii. 18 it says, “The children of Israel 
went up harnessed out of the land of Egypt." In the margin 
it says they went up dy five in a rank, Q3. from tmn, fie. 
It may be zz ranks, i.e. fifties, as in 2 Kings i. 9 and Isa. iii. 5.* 
The point is that they went up in perfect weakness ; help- 


* In Joshua i 14, ‘*Ye shall pass over before your brethren armed." 
` Margin: “ Heb., marshalled by five." This may have some reference to the 
fact that the number fve was specially hateful to the Egyptians, if indeed it 
were not the cause of such hatred. Sir Gardner Wilkinson tells us that even 
down to the present day the number jive is regarded as an evil number in 
modern Egypt. On their watches the f/t# hour, “V,” is marked by a 
small circle, “o.” 


138 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


less, and defenceless; óu/ they were invincible through the 
presence of Jehovah in their midst. - 


* Five SmootuH STONES " 


were chosen by David when he went to meet the giant 
enemy of Israel (1 Sam. xvii. 40). They were significant of 
his own perfect weakness supplemented by Divine strength. 
And he was stronger in this weakness than in all the armour 
of Saul. Itis worthy of note that after all he used only the 
one, not any of the four. That one was sufficient to conquer 
the mightiest foe. 


Ir was THE FirrH Book 


that David's son and David's Lord used in His conflict with 
that great enemy of whom Goliath was the faintest type. 
It was only the Book of Deuteronomy which formed the one 
stone with which he defeated the Devil himself (compare 
Matt. iv. 1-11 and Deut. viii. 3; vi. 13, 16). No wonder 
that this Book of Deuteronomy is the object of Satan’s hatred. 
* No marvel ” that to-day his ministers, * transformed as the 
ministers of righteousness" (2 Cor. xi. 14, 15), are engaged 
in the attempt to demolish this Book of Deuteronomy with 
their destructive criticism. But their labour is all in vain, for 
it is stamped with the number which marks the omnipotence 
of Jehovah's power and grace. 


THE PROMISE. 


“ Five of you shall chase a thousand, and a hundred of you 
shall put ten thousand to flight” (Lev. xxvi. 8), conveys the 
truth elsewhere revealed ;—“ If God be for us who can be 
against us?” (Rom. viii. 31). But note, it does not say “ five 
shall chase a thousand ” ; but “five OF YOU,"—five of those 
whom God has redeemed and delivered, and whom He will 
strengthen with His own might, 


THE PREFERENCE. 


“I had rather speak five words with the understanding, 
than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue” (1 Cor. 
xiv. 19). That is to say, a few words spoken in the fear of 
God, in human weakness, depending on Divine strength and 


FIVE: JEHOVAH’ S DEMAND TO PHARAOH. 139 


blessing, will be able to accomplish that which God has 
purposed; while words without end will be spoken in vain. 
Man may applaud the latter and bestow his admiration on 
their eloquence. But God will own only the former, and 
follow them with this blessing, making them to work effec- 
tually in them that believe (1 Thess. i. 6; ii. na). 


JeHovaH’s DEMAND To PHARAOH 


was five-fold in its nature, because it was the expression 
of His grace in the deliverance of His people. It brought out, 
therefore, five distinct objections from Pharaoh. Jehovah’s 
demand sprang purely from His own spontaneous grace. 
Nothing necessitated it; neither Israel's misery nor Israel's 
merit called it forth. “God heard their groaning, and God 
remembered HIS covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and 
with Jacob. And God looked upon the children of Israel, and 
God had respect unto them” (Exod. ii. 24, 25). It was not 
their covenant with God, as with Israel afterwards at Sinai ; 
but it was God’s covenant which HE had made with their 
fathers. All was of grace. Hence, Jehovah’s demand to 
Pharaoh (in Exod. v. 1) was stamped by the five great facts 
which it embraced : i 


(1.) Jehovah and His Word.—“ Thus saith Jehovah, 
God of Israel.” To this was opposed the objec- 
tion of Pharaoh (v. 2), * Who is Jehovah that I 
should obey His voice ?” 


(2) Jehovah's People.—* Let my people go." To 
this Pharaoh objected (x. 9-11), * Who are they 
that shall go?" Moses said, * We will go with 
our young and with our old, with our sons and 
with our daughters, etc." ‘Not so; go now, 
ye that are men" (x. 11), was Pharaoh's reply. 
In other words, God's people consist of His 
redeemed ; and the enemy will be quite content 
for parents to go and serve God in the wilder- 
ness, provided they will leave their little ones 
behind in Egypt! 


(3. Jehovah's Demand.—* Let my people go.” No. 
said Pharaoh; “Go ye, sacrifice to your God in the 


140 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


land" (viii. 25). And many think to-day that 
they can worship in Egypt, but * Moses said, It 
is not meet so to do" (viii. 26). 


(4.) Jehovah's Feast.—' That they may hold a feast 
unto me." Pharaoh’s objection was (x. 24), “Go 
ye, serve the Lon» ; only let your flocks and your 
herds be stayed." How subtle was the opposi- 
tion! But how perfect was Moses's reply (x. 26), 
“We know not with what we must serve the 
Lorp until we come thither.” We cannot know 
God's will for us until we are on God's ground. 
Light for the second step will not be given until 
we have used the light given for the first. 


(5) Jehovah's Separation.—“In the wilderness.” 
When Pharaoh objected to their going at all, and 
wished them to serve God “in the land,” Moses 
insisted on a separation of “three days’ journey 
into the wilderness" (viii. 27). There must be a 
divinely perfect separation of the redeemed from 
Egypt and all its belongings. See p. 113. 

But now Pharaoh’s objection is more subtle. 
He said (viii. 28), “I will let you go, that ye may 
sacrifice to the Lorp your God in the wilderness ; 
only ye shall not go very far away!" Oh! how 
many yield to this temptation, and are always 
within easy reach of the world. Living within 
the borderland, they are always open to the 


enemy's enticements, and always in danger of his 
snares. 


Behold, here, then, the perfection of grace, manifested in 
the demand of Jehovah for those “whom He hath redeemed 
from the hand of the enemy” (Ps. cvii. 2), Each of its five- 


fold parts was stoutly resisted by the enemy, but the grace of 
Jehovah is invincible. 


Tur TABERNACLE 


had fve for its all-pervading number; nearly every 
measurement was a multiple of jive. Before mentioning 
these measurements we ought to notice that worship itself is 
all of grace! No one can worship except those who are 


FIVE: THE TABERNACLE. I41 


sought and called of the Father (John iv. 23). “Blessed is 
the man whom Thou choosest and causest to approach unto 
Thee, that he may dwell in Thy courts ; we shall be satisfied 
with the goodness of Thy house, even of Thy holy temple " 
(Ps. Ixv. 4). 

The Divine title of the book we call Leviticus is in the 
Hebrew Canon * He CALLED." It is the book of worship, 
showing how those who are to worship must be called by 
God, and showing how He wills to be approached. The 
book opens with the direction that if any man will bring an 
offering to the Lord he shall bring such and such an offer- 
ing. The offerers and the priests are told minutely all that 
is to be done. Nothing is left to their imagination. 

We have seen that Leviticus is the Zr book of the Bible. 
It comes to us stamped with the number of Divine perfec- 
tion. The opening words are, “And Jehovah spake,” an 
expression which occurs in the book 36 times (3? x 2?).* 

Indeed, this third book is unique, consisting, as it does, 
almost wholly of the words of Jehovah. No other book of 
the Bible is so full of Divine utterances. It is fitting, there- 
fore, that the number three should be stamped upon it. 


“I am JEHOVAH " occurs 21 times (3 X 7).T 

«I am THE JEHOVAH yYouR Gop” occurs 21 times 
(3 x 71 

*I JzHovaH am” occurs /hree times (xix. 1; xx. 26; 
xxi. 8); and “I JEHOVAH po" twice (xxi. 15; xxii. 
9), or five times together. 

Here then we have Divine communication, and the number 
of Deity stamped upon it. This might have been brought 
out under the number /Zree, but it is well to have it here in 
connection with worship as springing from the will of God, 
and being founded in grace. 

The Tabernacle has this number of grace (fve) stamped 
upon it. 


SEIKO ET CV 8Y)081,:5, T0245 Viia, 25 3 vill, I; x. 59x11 iR 1; 
SIEICEUVEIE335 XV. L3NXVL I, 2 5 XVH. Ij XVHL I; XiX. I jeux. I5 XXL 
I, 16 ; xxii, I, 17, 26; xxiii. I, 9, 23, 26, 33 ; xxiv. I, 13 ; XXv. I j xxvii. I. 

+ Lev. xi. 45 ; xviii. 4), 629e.. xix. Ig, 14, 16, 18, 28, 30, 32, 37 ; xx. 8; 
3800812585182; 8,191, 32 33 ; Xxv1..2545. 

I Lev. xi 44; xviii. 4, 30 ; xix. 3, 4, 10, 25, 31, 34, 365 xx. J; 245 XS. 
22, 43 ; xxiv. 22 ; xxv. 17, 38, 55 ; xxvi. I, I3, 44. 


Lx 


i 
Alp f 


VICE =~ 


142 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 
- The outer court was 100 cubits long and 5o cubits wide. 
On either side were 20 pillars, and along each end were 
10 pillars, or 60 in all; that is 5 X 12, or grace in govern- 
mental display before the world, 12 being the number of 
the Tribes. ; 

The pillars that held up the curtains were 5 cubits apart 
and $ cubits high, and the whole of the outer curtain was 
divided into squares of 25 cubits (5 x 5). Each pair of 
pillars thus supported an area of 5? cubits of fine white linen, 
thus witnessing to the perfect grace by which alone God's 
people can witness for Him before the world. Their own 
righteousness (the fine linen) is “filthy rags” (Isa. lxiv. 6), 
and we can only say “ by the grace of God I am what I am” 
(1 Cor. xv.)—-a sinner saved by grace. This righteousness is 
based on atonement, for 5 X 5 was also the measure of the 
brazen altar of burnt offering. This was the perfect answer 
of Christ to God's righteous requirements, and to what was 
required of man. 

True, this brazen altar was only 3 cubits high, but this 
tells us that the provision was Divine in its origin, that 
atonement emanates solely from God. 

The building itself was 10 cubits high, 10 cubits wide, and 
30 cubits long. Its length was divided into two unequal 
parts, the Holy place being 20 cubits long; and the Holy of 
Holies 10 cubits, being therefore a perfect cube of 10 cubits. 
It was formed of forty-eight boards, twenty on either side, 
and eight at the end, the front being formed of a curtain 
hung on five pillars. These forty-eight boards (3 x 4?) are 
significant of the nation as before God in the fulness of privi- 
lege on the earth (4 x 12). The twenty boards on each side 
were held together by five bars passing through rings which 
were attached to them. 

The curtains which covered the Tabernacle structure were 
four in number. The first was made of ten curtains of byssus 
in various colours adorned with embroidered cherubim. 
Each curtain was 28 (4 x 7) cubits long and four wide. They 
were hung jive on each side, probably sewn together to form 
one large sheet (20 x 28); the two sheets coupled together 
by loops, and fifty (5 x 10) taches of gold. The second cover- 
ing was formed of eleven curtains of goats’ hair, each 
30 cubits long and four wide, joined together in two sheets 


FIVE: THE TABERNACLE. 143 


fastened by loops and taches -of brass. The ¢hird was of 
rams’ skins dyed red, and the fourth was of zachash (or 
coloured) skins,” of which the dimensions are not given. 

The Entrance Vails were three in number. The first was 
*the gate of the court," 20 cubits wide and 5 high, hung 
on 5 pillars. The second was “the door of the Taber- 

.nacle," ro cubits wide and 10 high, hung like the gate of 
the court on 5 pillars. The /Ad was the “beautiful vail,” 
also 10 cubits square, which divided the Holy place from the 
Holy of Holies. One feature of these three vails is remark- 
able. The dimensions of the vail of the court and those of 
the Tabernacle were different, but yet the area was the same. 
The former was 20 cubits by 5 = 100 cubits; the latter were 
10 cubits by 10, equalling 100 cubits also. Thus while there 
was only one gate, one door, one vail, they each typified Christ 
as the only door of entrance for all the blessings connected 
with salvation. But note that the “gate” which admitted to 
the benefits of a/onement was wider and lower (20 cubits wide, 
and 5 cubits high) ; while the door which admitted to worship 
was both higher and narrower, being only to cubits wide, 
half the width, and.twice the height (10 cubits high); thus 
saying to us, that not all who experience the blessings of 
atonement understand or appreciate the true nature of 
spiritual worship. The highest worship—admittance to the 
mercy-seat—was impossible for the Israelites except in the 
person of their substitute—the high priest; for the beautiful 
vail barred their access. Yet this vail was rent in twain the 
moment the true grace which came by Jesus Christ was 
perfectly manifested. And it was rent by the act of God in 
grace, for it was rent “ from the top to the bottom." 

It is worthy of note, and it is a subject which might well 
be further investigated by those who have leisure, that the 
Gematria of Heb. ix., which gives an account of the Taber- 
nacle, yields the number jive as a factor. Taking each letter 
as standing for its corresponding figure, the value of Heb. ix. 
2-10, describing the Tabernacle and its furniture, is 103,480. 
The factors of this number are all full of significance, viz., 
5 x 8 X 13 X 199; where we have jive the number of grace, 
four the number of the world, the sphere in which it is 


* Probably of a sacrificial animal. See p. 129. 


144 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


manifested, while in /Zzreez we have the number of sin and 
atonement. (See under Thirteen.) 

In like manner the second section of the chapter (Heb. ix. 
11-28), which relates to the application of the type to Christ 
and His atoning work, is a simple multiple of he 
viz., 204,451 (13 X 15,727). 

While the important cee sien in verses 16, 17, and 18, 
amounts to 11,830, which is 13? x 14 X 5, where we have 
the same great important factors. 


Tue Prepositions CONNECTED WITH SUBSTITUTION 


used in connection with atonement, expressing Christ’s death 
on behalf of His people, occur also in multiples of five :— 

rép (kuper), which means on behalf of, in the interests of, 
occurs 585 times, the factors of this being 5 X 13 X 9, we. 
grace, atonement, and judgment. 

mepi (pert), a word of similar sense and usage, meaning 
about or concerming, occurs 195 times, of which the factors are 
5 X I3 X 3, or grace, atonement, and divinity. 


Tue Hory AwoiwTING Oir (Exod. xxx. 23-25) 


was composed of jive parts, for it was a revelation of pure 
grace. This fve is marked by the numbers four and ome. 
For four parts were spices, and one was oil. 
The four principal spzces :— 

1. Myrrh, 500 shekels (5 x 100), 

2. Sweet cinnamon, 250 shekels (5 x 50), 

3. Sweet calamus, 250 shekels (5 x 50), 

4. Cassia, 500 shekels(5 x 100), 

And olive oil, oze hin. 

This anointing oil was holy, for it separated to God; 
nothing else could separate. It was of God, and therefore 
of grace; and therefore the number of its ingredients was 
five, and their quantities were all multiples of five. 

Seven classes of persons or things were consecrated with 
this ps oil :— 

. Aaron and his sons. 
2. The Tabernacle itself. 
3. The table and its vessels. 
4. The candlestick and its furniture. 


FIVE : CONSECRATION. 145 


5. The altar of burnt offering and its vessels. 
6. The altar of incense. 
7. The laver and its foot. 
The word for “consecration ” and the act are so misunder- 
stood that it may be well to make a passing note upon it. 


The Hebrew is Nx) (Mah-leh). It means, /o fill, fill up, 
complete. Its first occurrence is Gen. i. 22, * multiply and 
jul the waters in the seas." So xxi. 19, “she filled the bottle 
with water"; xxix. 21, * My days are fulfilled” ; Exod. xv. 9, 
* My soul shall have its fill of them”; xxviii. 41, “ Thou shalt 
fill their hand." ‘This has been translated consecrate, which is 
a comment rather than a translation. 

When this word is used with the word 5 (yad), hand, it 
means to fill the hand, especially with that which is the sign 
and symbol of office, z.e., zo fill the hand with a sceptre was to 
set apart or consecrate to the office of king. To fill the hand 
with certain parts of sacrifices, was to set apart for the office 
of priest and to confirm their right to offer both gifts and 
sacrifices to God, Exod. xxix. 22-25; xxviii. 41; xxix. 9; 
xxxii 29. (See also Heb. v. 1; viii. 3,4.) A “ram of con- 
secration " (or of filling) was a ram with parts of which the 
hands of the priests were filled when they were set apart to 
their office. 

Whenever the word refers to official appointment, or se- 
paration to a work or dignity, it is the sovereign act of God, 
and the accompanying symbolical act was the filling of 
the hand of the person so appointed with the sign which 
marked his office. Hence the verb means in this usage 
to invest with an office, to communicate a dignity. It is needless 
to say that no man can do this for himself. It must be the 
act of God. 

When the word is used of what man can do it is followed 
by the preposition 5, which means “zo” or “for,” as in 
2 Chron. xxix. 31, /o fill the hand for one, Ze, to bring offer- 
ings (to Jehovah), which is quite a different thing altogether. 
There is no idea here of what is called to-day, “ consecration.” 
It is a simple offering of gifts, which the offerer brings in his 
hands. 

Only Jehovah Himself can invest a man with the privilege 
of any office in His service. “No man taketh this honour 

S 1396. ity 


146 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


unto himself but he that is called of God" (Heb. v. 4). 
Hence the Lord Jesus is specially called “the Anointed,” 
which is in Hebrew Messiah, and in Greek Xpiorós, Christos, 
and in English Céhrist.. Those who vainly talk about “ con- 


| secrating themselves” should read 2 Chron. xiii... 


At the consecration of the priest under the Old Covenant 
in Exod. xxix. 20, the numbers ¢hree and jive accompany 
the act of Divine grace. Three acts, each associated with 
five. The blood, and afterwards the holy oil upon it, was 
put— 

(1) On the tip of the right ear, signifying that the Holy 
Spirit would cause him to hear the Word of God, and 
separating his fve senses for God; 

(2) On the thumb of his right hand (one of the five digits), 
signifying that he was to do and act for God ; 

(3) On the great toe of his right foot (again five), signifying 
that his personal walk was to be conformed to God's Word. 

Thus it is now that the Holy Spirit consecrates all who are 
priests unto God. It is a Divine act, an act of sovereign 
grace. A grand reality when done for the sinner by God 
the Holy Ghost, but a worthless vanity when presumptuously 
done by a mortal man. 


Tue Incense (Exod. xxx. 34) 


also was composed of five parts. Four were “sweet 

spices,” DD (Sa-meem), and one was salt. mbn, to salt, 

being rendered “tempered together.” See v. 35, margin. 
The four * sweet spices" were:— 


I: “ Stacte ^ FDI (Wataph), “to drop"; hence a drop of 
aromatic gum. The LXX. is crar from omateiy, 
“to drop." The Rabbins call it opobalsamum, as 
the R.V. margin. 


2.“ On'ychas nent (SA'cheyleth), “a shell”; Greek 
óvvé, the shell of a species of mussel which burnt 
with an odour of musk. 


3. *Gal’banum,” Dy" (CAel-PnaA), “a fragrant gum." 


FIVE: THE INCENSE. 147 


4. “Frankincense,” -335 (Lbonah), “a bright burning 
gum." 


5. The oze, salt. The verb mot (Mah-lach), “to salt," 
occurs only here and Lev. ii. 13 and Ezek. xvi. 4, 
from which its meaning may be seen. 


This incense was called by various names,—“ pure," “ per- 
petual,” “sweet,” “holy.” No imitation of it was allowed. 
It indicates those precious merits of Christ through which 
alone our prayers can go up with acceptance before God. 
The incense was to symbolise “the prayers of the saints” 
offered by Christ Himself (Rev. v. 3). Our prayers are real 
prayers only when they ascend through His merits. The 
smoke of the incense was always associated with the smoke 
of the burnt offering! It was the fire from the brazen altar 
which kindled the incense on the golden altar! It was fire 
of xo earthly origin. It came down originally from heaven 
(ev mix. 24; judg. vi. 21; 1 Kings xviii. 38; 1 Chron. 
xxi. 26; 2 Chron. vii. 1). Incense kindled with “strange 
fire" was visited with immediate death (Lev. x. 1; Num. 
iii. 4; xxvi. 61). And incense not made of the prescribed 
five ingredients was forbidden to be offered (Exod. xxx. 9). 
Solemn provisions these, when we apply them to our prayers. 
They show us that our own words are nothing, and that 
Christ's merits are everything. David said, “ Let my prayer 
be set forth before Thee as incense; and the lifting up of my 
hands as the evening sacrifice" (Ps. cxli. 2), č.2., as incense 
goes up (Heb. directed) to Thee, and the smoke of the burnt 
offering (the evening sacrifice), so let my prayers be accepted 
through the merits of that sacrifice. 

«There was given unto him much incense that he should 
offer it WITH the prayers of all saints . . . and the smoke 
of ihe incense which came WITH the prayers of the saints, 
ascended up before God out of the angel's hand” (Rev. viii. 3, 4). 
Rome has of course perverted this in her Vulgate Version, 
and in her various translations of it. She reads (Rev. viii.), w 
daret de orationibus sanctorum omnium, i.e., “that he might offer 
the prayers of all the saints." And verse 4, ef ascendit fumus 
Zncensorum de orationibus sanctorum, i.e., “and the smoke of the 
incense of the prayers of the saints ascended.” The incense 
and the prayers are perfectly distinct; the one represents the 

iuo 


148 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


merits of Christ, the other our imperfect prayers. But Rome 
confuses them, and her reason for doing so is shown by the 
notes which she puts in her various versions. The teaching 
of Scripture is clear, that apart from Christ’s merits all our 
prayers are absolutely worthless. Hence the exhortation in 
Heb. xiii. 15, “BY HIM therefore let us offer the sacrifice - 
of praise to God continually; that is, the fruit of our lips 
giving thanks to His name” (See Lev. vii. 12; Ps. li. 12; 
BOs, K1Ve DN NOE 


Worpbs THAT OCCUR Five Times. 


Among many words stamped with this significance are :— 


Ji (Mat-tahn), “gift” (Gen. xxxiv. 12; Num. xviii. 11; 
Prov. xviii. 16; xix. 6; xxi. r4). It isjsuitable gp 
this word should occur five times, for gifts are of 
grace. It is noteworthy that S954 (mas-koh-reth), 
“wages,” occurs four times, for wages are of the 
earth, earthy. 

pa (nik-kah-yohn), “innocency” (Gen. xx. 5; Pss, 
xxvi 6; lxxin 13; Hos. viti. 5; Amos qvo 


mapákXgros (parakleetos), translated Comforter four times 
in the Gospel of John, viz., xiv., 16, 26; xv. 26s7and 
xvi. 7; and Advocate once in the Epistle, 1 John ii. 1. 

What a gracious provision! one Advocate within us 
(the Holy Spirit) that we may not sin (spoken of four 
times) ; and another with the Father for us if we do 
sin—even “Jesus Christ the righteous.” The word 
means one called to one’s side to give any help and to 
meet any need. 7o advocates speaking of the 
enemy which causes our need, and of the Helper who 
supplies it. 
Other words are :— 

dyaňàíaoıs (agalliasis), “gladness” (Luke i. 14; Acts 
ii. 46; Heb. i. 9), *joy" (Luke i. 44), * exceeding joy " 
(Jude 24). 

gS (ado), “to sing” (Eph. v. 19; Col. iii. 16; Rev. v. 9; 
Rives ce, 


FIVE: WORDS AND PHRASES. 149 


dvdmavows (anapausis), “rest” (Matt. xi. 29; xii. 43; Luke 
3182458 6v. iveS; xiv; 11). 

arpadys (asphalees), “certainty” (Acts xxi. 34; xxii. 30; 
xxv. 26; Phil. iii. 1; Heb. vi. 19). 


PHRASES WHICH Occur Five Tris. 


* Bless the Lord, O my soul.”—All in Psalms ciii, and civ., 
MIZONOHL 1, 2, 23 and civ. 1, 35. The Talmud calls 
attention to this and says, * As God fills the earth and 
nourishes it, so He nourishes and blesses the soul." 

* Whosoever hath, to him shall be given" (Matt. xiii. 12; 
xxv. 29; Mark iv. 25; Luke viii. 18; xix. 26).— Ze 
times, telling of the grace which gives. 

“The kingdom of God."— Five times in the Gospel (Matthew) 
which alone speaks of “the kingdom of heaven." The 
latter refers to earth, and the kingdom to be established 
here. While the former relates to the larger kingdom 
of grace, which includes it and the Church and ail 
ipestcer™ (Matt vis 33; xii. 8; xix. 24; xxi. 31 amd 43). 


The Talmud f asks (under Hag. i. 8), “How is it that 
the word *333N, ‘And I will be HE is written with- 
out the final 51 (which stands for five) and is yet read as if 
it had it (A358)? Because it indicates that the second 
Temple lacked jive things that were found in the firs¢ Temple, 
viz. :— 

The Ark that is the mercy-seat of the Cherubim, 
The Fire from heaven on the altar, 

The Shechinah, 

The Spirit of prophecy, and 

The Urim and Thummim." 


This answer is correct as far as it goes, but it is written 
nevertheless, in Hag. ii. 9, “The glory of this latter house 
shall be greater than the former." "True, it lacked the 
Law that was contained in the Ark, but it had the presence 
of Him who was full of grace and truth, and who das that 
Law within His heart. 


* See Christ’s Prophetic Teaching, by the same author. 
+ Yoma, fol. 21, col. 2 


150 ` NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


SIX. 


Six is either 4 plus 2, ze, man’s world (4) with man's 
enmity to God (2) brought in: or it is 5 plus 1, the grace 
of God made of none effect by man's addition to it, or per- 
version, or corruption of it: or it is 7 mizus I, Ze, man's 
coming short of spiritual perfection. In any case, therefore, 
it has to do with max; it is the number of imperfection; the 
human number; the number of MAN as destitute of God, 
without God, without Christ. 

The Hebrew wy (skaish) is supposed to be derived 
from the root WY (shah-dash), but nothing is known about 
its origin or signification. 

At any rate it is certain that maz was created on the s7xth 
day, and thus he has the number szx impressed upon him. 
Moreover, szx days were appointed to him for his labour; 
while one day is associated in sovereignty with the Lord 
God, as His rest. 

Six, therefore, is the number of labour also, of man's I 
as apart and distinct from God's rest. True, it marks the 
completion of Creation as God's work, and therefore the 
number is significant of secular completeness. 

The serpent also was created on the sixth day. 

The Sixth Commandment relates to the worst sin,— 
murder. 

The szxth clause of the Lord's prayer treats of sin. 

Six is the number stamped on all that is connected with 
human labour. We see it stamped upon his measures which 
he uses in his labour, and on the Ze during which he 
labours. And we see this from the very beginning. 

The number szx is stamped upon the measurements of 
the Great Pyramid, the unit of which was the inch and its 
sexagesimal multiples. The first multiple is the foot, 
12 inches (2 X 6); and after this the rises are 18 (3 x 6), 
24 (4 X 6), 30 (5 x 6), and 36 (6 x'6 or 6'— the yard).*t 


* On the other hand, the sacred cubit, though not a round number, was a 
multiple, indeed the square of 5, being 25-3 inches. 


- SLX : ZLLUSTRATIONS. $1 

Corresponding to these measures we have the first division 
of the natural time-spaces which measure man’s Jadour and 
rest,—the day, consisting of 24 hours (4x6), divided into 
the day and night of 12 hours. The multiples and sub- 
divisions are also stamped by the number szx. The months 
being 12; while the hours consist of 60 minutes (6 x 10), 
and the minutes of 60 seconds (6 X 10). 

The base of the Great Pyramid shows that the unit-inch * 
was obtained by a division of the original crew, 36,000 
inches or 1,000 yards. 

On account of the curse (Gen. iii.), the number szx tells not 
only of labour, but of *labour and sorrow," and it specially 
marks all that is “under the sun," all that is “not of God.” 
The true *sabbath-keeping," now, is in reserve; for there 
is no rest apart from *peace with God"; the rest which 
God gives and which we find (Matt. xi. 28). 

But now to turn to the Scripture examples and illustra- 
tions, we note first that 


Cain’s DESCENDANTS 
are given only as far as the szx/A generation. 


IMPERFECTION. 

When /welve (the number -of governmental perfection) is 
divided, it indicates imperfection in rule and administration. 
Solomon’s throne had szx steps (1 Kings x. 19), and his 
kingdom was soon divided. The 12 loaves of the Shew 
Bread were divided into two szxes (Lev. xxiv. 6), and the 
Twelve Tribes were divided tribes. 

Abraham’s szx intercessions for Sodom (Gen. xviii.) marked 
man’s imperfection in prayer, which falls short of that of the 
Divine Intercessor. 


Tue Burnt OFFERING IN GENESIS XXII. 


is mentioned srx times (vv. 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 13) because 
the seventh was that of the Divine Substitute which God 
Himself would provide (v. 8). 


“Tue Man or THE EARTH.” 


In Psalms ix. and x., through which there is a running 
alphabetical acrostic, uniting the two Psalms, szx letters of 


* Differing from the Pyramid inch by only 1 in 40,000. 


152 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE, 


the alphabet are wanting (f3 to V). It is the Scripture which 
describes “the Man of the Earth” (Ps. x. 18), the coming 
Anti-Christ, and the Apostasy which marks his presence, 
called the “times of trouble” (Ps. ix. 9; x. 1). 


Six EARTHQUAKES 


are mentioned :—Exod. xix. 18; 1 Kings xix. 11; Amos 
i. 1 (Zech. xiv. 5); Matt. xxvii. 54; xxviii. 2; Acts xvi. 26. 


Tue Six Years or ATHALIAH’S REIGN 


were six years of usurpation of the throne of David 
(2 Kings xi.; 2 Chron. xxiii). Athaliah slew all the seed- 
royal, as she thought; but God in His providence over-ruled 
events so that one son, Joash, was “rescued from among the 
king's sons that were slain.” He was hid in the house of 
God during the szx years with Jehosheba, who was shut up 
with him, her affections being centred upon him, while 
Jehoiada her husband was occupied for the king, going 
about and securing loyal adherents by his simple repetition 
of Jehovah's promise, “Behold, the king's son shall reign, 
as the Lorn hath said of the sons of David" (2 Chron. 
xxiii 3). This promise was the support of the hearts of 
the faithful during those szx years of usurpation, until the 
seventh year came, and Joash was manifested upon his throne 
and all his enemies destroyed. Which things are a type of 
the King’s son, even Jesus, who was rescued, by resurrec- 
tion, from among the dead, and is now hid in the house of 
God on high. While He is seated and expecting, (Heb. 
X. 12, 13), all who are “in Christ" are hid with Him (Col. 
iii. 3) ; and while, in this aspect, their hearts (like Jehosheba’s) 
are occupied with the person of the King, their activities 
(like Jehoiada’s) are going out for Him, witnessing and 
testifying to the blessed truth that the King is coming again 
and will surely reign, and the seventh year of blessing will come 
at last. Until that moment arrives, the promise of Jehovah 
will be their support, that the Seed of the woman shall in due 
time crush the serpent’s head (Gen. iii. 15). 


Six Times Jesus CHaRGED wiru Havine a Devi. 


I. Mark iii. 22, and Matt. xii. 24, “ He hath Beelzebub." 
2. John vii. 20, ** Thou hast a devil." 


SIX: THE OPPOSITION TO NEHEMIAH. 153 


3. John viii. 48, * Say we not well that . . . Thou hast a 
devil ? " 

4. John viii. 52, “ Now we know that Thou hast a devil." 

5. John x. 20, * He hath a devil, and is mad." 

6. Luke xi. 15, * He casteth out devils by Beelzebub." 


This is most significant. Man's emnity to the Person of 
‘the Lord Jesus is thus branded with man’s number. It will 
repay careful study to note the chronological order of these 
occasions and speakers. The very order and structure is 
important. 

A. | r. Beelzebub, and casting out devils. 

B | 2. A simple charge, ** Thou hast," 
C | 3. Introduced by “ Say we not well," ) Both in 
C | 4. Introduced by “ Now we know." ) John viii. 
B | 5. A simple charge, * He hath." 
A | 6. Beelzebub, and casting out devils. 


Tue Six-Forp OPPOSITION TO THE Work or Gop 


on the part of man is seen in the opposition to Nehemiah. 
It forms a lesson for all time, being enacted every day where 
any, like Nehemiah, begin a work for God. 


There was— 

I. Grief, ii. 10. 

2. Laughter, i. 19. 

3. Wrath, indignation, and mocking, iv. 1—4. 

4. Fighting and open opposition, iv. 7, 8. 

5. Conference, vi. 1, 2.—'* Come and let us meet together.” 
* Let us take counsel together” (v. 7). This attempt 
was to “weaken them from the work” (v. 9). But 
Nehemiah refused to parley with the enemies, or 
meet them in conference. 

6. False friends, vi. 10-14.—Here was the greatest danger 
of all. Satan, “as an angel of light," seeking to 
mar, and hinder, and stop the work. 


The careful study of these szx steps in man's opposition to 
the work of God will yield great spiritual profit, and arm us 
against the wiles of the Devil. 


154 


NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE... 


WORDS. 


Now let us pass to the number, as it concerns words, and 
first note that there are 


Six Worps Usep ror Man 


in the Bible. Four in the Old Testament, and two in the 


New. 


I. 


2. 


DTN (ah-dahm). Man as a human being (Lat. homo), 
having regard to his being created, and to his 
earthly origin. This is the word used of Messiah 
as the * Son of Man.” See a few examples :— 

Gen. i. 26, “ Let us make maz.” 

Gen. ii. 7, “God formed man of the dust of the 
ground." 

Gen. iii. 24, * So He drove out the max.” 

Isa. ii. rr, “The lofty looks of maz shall be 
humbled.” 

Isa. ii. 17, * The loftiness of man shall be bowed 
down." 

Isa. ii. 9, * The mean zaz boweth down." 

Isa. ii. 9, * The great man (Zsh, see next word) 
humbleth himself." 

Isa. v. 15, “The mean man shall be brought 


down." 

Isa. v. 15, “The mighty man (47:7) shall be 
humbled." 

2 Sam. vii. 19, *Is this the manner of zaz, O 
Lon» God?” 


Ps. viii. 4, “What is man (Zzos5, see the third 
word) that Thou art mindful of 
him? and the son of man, that 
Thou visitest him ? " 

WN (Zsh). Man, as strong and vigorous of mind and 
body. Man with some degree of pre-eminence of 
strength and endowment. 

Zech. vi. 12, “Behold the man whose name is 

the Branch.” 

Ps. xxii. 6, * I am a worm, and no man; a reproach 
of men (Adam, see No. 1), and 
despised of the people." 


SIX; WORDS USED FOR MAN. 155 


Ps. xxv. 12, “What man is he that feareth the 
Lorn?” | 

Ps. xxxix. 11, “ When Thou with rebukes dost cor- 
rect man for iniquity: surely every 
man is vanity." 

Ps. xc. Title, * The man of God." 


3. WYN CEnosh). Weak man, as mortal and subject to 
suffering and death; the heir of corruption. 

Ps. viii. 4, * What is man that Thou art mindful of 
him? or the son of man" (Adam, 
see No. 1). 

Ps. lxxiii. 5, “They are not in trouble as other 
men." 

Ps. ciii. 15, “ As for man, his days are as grass.” 


4. ^33 (Gehver), a strong man, a man of might and 
valour. Man as distinct from God (Job xxii. 2), and 
from a woman or wife (Prov. vi. 34). 

Zech. xiii. 7, * Awake, O sword, against . . . the 
man that is My fellow, saith the 
Lorp of Hosts." 

Exod. x. 11, * Go now, ye that are men.” 

Exod. xii. 37, “ Six hundred thousand on foot that 
were men.” 

Ps. lii. 7, * Lo, this is the man that made not God 

. his strength." 

Jer. xvii. 5, ** Cursed be the man that trusteth in 
man " (Adam, see No. 1). 

jer. xvii. 7, “Blessed is the man that trusteth in 
the Lon»." 

Then in the New Testament we have the two words: 


5. dvOporos, which answers to Adam (No. 1), and 
6. dvnp, which answers to Zsh (No. 2). 


It is worthy of note that these four Hebrew words are each 
used of the Messiah, and that the Holy Spirit has revealed a 
blessing for each in and through the man Christ Jesus. 


1. DIN (Adam), Ps. xxxii. 2, “ Blessed is the man unto 
whom the Long» imputeth not iniquity.” 


I56 | NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


2. WN (sh), Ps. i. 1, * Blessed is the man that walketh 
not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in 
the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the 
scornful.” 

3. WISN (Enos), Job v. 17, “ Happy * is the man whom 
God correcteth, therefore despise not thou the chas- 
tening of the Almighty." 

4. "133 (Gehver), Ps. xciv. 12, * Blessed is the man whom 
Thou chastenest, O Lorp, and teachest him out of 
Thy law." 


Tue SERPENT Has Sıx Names. 


The Talmud calls attention to this fact, and gives the 
woo — 
. WMJ (nachash), a shining one (Gen. iii. 1; Job xxvi. 13. 
See also No. 6 Dm 

. DWY (ak-shoov), from W59, “to bend back,” “lie 
in wait.” Translated adder, Ps. cxl. 3. 

"IAN (ephah), any poisonous serpent. Translated 
adder ; also viper (Job xx. 16; Isa. xxx. 6; lix. 5). 
*39 EN. (/szpA-ohnee), a small Azsszmg serpent (Isa. xi. 8; 
lix. 5; Prov. xxiii. 32), from YD, Zo hiss. Translated 

viper. 

yan (Lanneen), a great serpent, or dragon (from the 
root * to stretch out" or * extend”) on account of its 
length (Exod. vii. 9, 10, 12). 

"hz (Saraph) from root “to burn”; a venomous, 
deadly serpent, from the heat and inflammation 
caused by its bite. Translated serpents, Num. xxi. 8; 
Isa. XIV 205 DOE 


to 


WN 


È 


Ca 


D 


Tue Lion Has Sıx Names IN THE OLD TESTAMENT, 
and all are found in the Book of Job (Job iv. 10, 11; and 
xxviii. c 


ON (Aree), the roaring lion (Gen. xlix. 9; Num. 
xxiii. 24 ; xxiv. 9, etc.). 


* The same word as in the other passages, viz, WS (4shraz), blessed. 
Lit. OA, the blessednesses of. 


SIX; OCCURRENCES OF WORDS. 157 


; brw (Shachal), the fierce lion, with special reference to 
his voice (Job iv. 10; x. 16; xxviii. 8; Ps. xci. 13K 
Hos. xiii. 7). 

. SBD (K’pheer), the young lion—not a whelp as in 
Ezek. xix. 2—(Judg. xiv. 5; Job iv. 10; xxxviii. 20: 
DSNUEVIM TS ;"XXXiv. 10). 

; wb (Lah-yish), the old lion—not from age, but brave 
and strong—(Job iv. 11; Prov. xxx. 30; Isa. xxx. 6). 

. N5 (Lahvee), the old Lioness (from root zo roar) (Gen. 
xlix. 9; Num. xxiii. 24; Deut. xxxiii. 20, etc.). 

6. pny (Shachatz), the lion’s whelps (Job xxviii. 8; 

xli. 34 (translated “ of pride’’). 


to 


WwW 


A 


Ur 


Some Worps tHat Occur Sıx Ties. 


TAN (avad-dohn), destruction. 

O19 (moht), bar, staff, or yoke. 

DNDN (mch-tahm), Michtam (Pss. xvi., lvi., Ivii., Iviii., lix., 
and lx.) This word is connected with death, and at 
the same time with resurrection also (3 x 2). It is 
from DNS, /e cut in, engrave (LXX., orndcypadia, a 
sculptured writing ; ari was the word for grave-stone). 
Hence “ Michtam,” like our “ Resurgam,” indicates that 
these sx Psalms, though connected with death, point 
to the hope of resurrection. This is notably true of 
Ps, xvi., and may be traced in the others also. 


aia xivg (aischunee), shame. 

dAAárro (allatto), to change. 

doéBea (asebeia), ungodliness. 

drquáto (atimazo), entreat shamefully. 

Bddrvypa (bdelugma), abomination. Three in Gospels: 
Matt. xxiv. 15; Mark xiii. 14; Luke xvi. 15. Three 
in Revelation: Rev. xvii. 4, 5; xxi. 27. 


For the combinations of 6, 66, and 666, see further under 
the number Six hundred and sixty six. 


158 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. .— 


SEVEN. 


We come now to the great number of spiritual perfection. 
A number which, therefore, occupies so large a place in the 
works, and especially in the Word of God as being inspired 
by the Holy Spirit. 

In the first part of this book we have enlarged somewhat 
onthe importance of this number in Nature and in Grace, 
so that we need not here repeat many of the interesting 
facts already given. 

As a number the actual word and number “SEVEN ” is 
used as zo other number is. Seven and its compounds occur in 
multiples of seven in the Old Testament. 

Seven occurs 287 times, or 7 X 41. 

“« Seventh,” the fractional part, occurs 98 times, or 7 X 14. 

“ Seven-fold," occurs 7 times. 

The above three numbers together are of course a multiple 
of seven, but a very remarkable one, 287 + 98 + 7 = 392, and 
392 is 7? + 73, or 8 times the square of seven (7? x 8). 


Then again sezez, in combination with other numbers, is 
remarkable, such as fifty and seven, a hundred and seven, etc. 
There are 112 of these combinations, or 7 x 16. 

* Seventy” occurs 56 times, or 7 x 8. 

* Seventy," in combination with other numbers, occurs 
ES mes OF. x5. 

It is, however, when we come to consider its significance 
that the true glories of its spzrztual perfection are revealed. 


We have just seen that szx is the number which is stamped 
upon all things Auman, as being emphatically the number of 
man. Let us first observe the use of the two numbers 


SIX AND SEVEN TOGETHER 


as combining and contrasting what is Auman and what is 
spiritual. 
A remarkable illustration of this is seen in 


Tux Two GrwrarLocrss or Jesus CHRIST. 


Note, first, in which two of the four Gospels they are found, 
for this is also significant. 


SIX AND SEVEN: THE TWO GENEALOGIES. I59 


In Matt. God says to us, ** Behold thy King" (Zech. ix. 9). 
In Mark He says, * Behold My Servant" (Isa. xl. 1). 

In Luke He says, ** Behold the Man " (Zech. vi. 12). 

In John He says, “ Behold your God” (Isa. xl. 9). 

Now a servant need not produce his genealogy; neither can 
God have one. It is a King who must have one, and a Man 
who should have one. Therefore it is that we have two 

“genealogies, and not more thantwo. And that is why we 
have one in Matthew giving the Royal genealogy of Jesus as 
King ; and one in Luke giving the Human genealogy of Jesus 
as Man. Hence also it is that Matthew's is a descending 
genealogy, while Luke's is an ascending one. For kings must 
trace their descent, all power in the world being derived 
from God, who says, * By Me kings reign": and man must 
trace his ascent to some particular ancestor. Matthew’s, 
therefore, begins with Abraham, and comes down to Joseph, 
the son of Heli; while Luke’s starts from Joseph, and goes 
up to Adam and God. 

As far as David both the lists agree. But here an impor- 
tant divergence takes place. In Matthew, after David, we 
have his son Solomon; while in Luke we have another son, 
Solomon’s elder brother, Nathan. From this point, there- 
fore, we have two lines. One (Matthew) gives the royal 
and legal line through Solomon ; the other (Luke) gives the 
natural and lineal line through ZVa/Aaw. The former is the 
line according to legal successton; the latter is the line 
according to natural descent. The former was the result of 
the will of God in choosing Solomon, a younger son; while 
the latter was the result of the will of man, and in the order 
of human birth. Both lines meet in Joseph, the son of Jacob 
by birth, and the son of Heli by marriage with Mary, Heli's 
only daughter.* Thus the two lines are united and exhausted 
in Jesus Christ; for by His death they both became extinct, 
and thus He was the King of Israel by right; became, and 


* 'This is supported by the true reading of Luke iii 23, which, according to 
Lachmann, Tischendorf, Tregelles, Alford, Westcott and Hort, and the R. V., 
should read, **Tesus when He began to teach was about thirty years of age, being 
the son, as was supposed, of Joseph, the son of Heli." The verb voul(w (22002720) 
means £o Jay down a thing as law, to hold by custom, or usage, to own as a 
custom, to take for granted. Were it refers not to any supposition as to Jesus 
being Joseph’s son, but to the legal sanction and customary practice which 
reckoned Joseph as Heli's son through marriage with his daughter Mary. See 


160 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


was declared to be, the Son of God by resurrection from the 
dead (Rom. i. 4; Ps. ii. 7; Acts xii) 33; amd Heber. gaa 5 

Now the wonderful fact is that we have in the genealogy 
of Luke iii. exactly 77 names, with GOD at the one end, and 
JESUS at the other. This is indeed stamping it with the 
number of spiritual perfection. l 

On the other hand, although the genealogy in Matthew is 
artificially constructed (according to a recognised custom 
amongst the Jews, instances of which we have in the Old 
Testament), it is so arranged that it contains 42 genera- 
tions, or SIX sevens (6 X 7). 

These 42 generations contain— 

Forty-one* names that are named in Matt.i. 41 


Four which are omitted T ... ES : 4. 
If we add the twenty-one names diste 
Abraham (from Luke iii.) i TE OM 


We have in theroyalline through Solomon 66 names. 


Ruth i 11-13, where Ruth by marriage with Naomi’s son was called her 
daughter; Neh. vii. 63, where Hakkoz by marriage with Barzillai’s daughter 
was ‘‘called after their name”; and Num, Xv, where the daughters of 
Zelophehad, by Divine counsel, ** were married to their father’s brothers’ 
sons... and their inheritance remained in the tribe of the family of their 
father” (vv. 11, 12). This is exactly whattook place with Mary, who, accord- 
ing to the Jerusalem Talmud (Cag. 77, 4), is called the daughter of Heli, and 
by her marriage with Joseph, who was the real son of Jacob, caused Joseph to 
be called, according to custom (voulgw), the son, or rather son-in-law, of Heli, 

* There are only 41 names :—Jechonias being given at the end of the 
second list, and repeated at the beginning of the third. There are z4ree divi- 
sions (the stamp of Divine perfection), with 14 names in the first, 14 names in 
the second, but with r3 names in the third. For the significance of this, see 
under the number ¢Azrtcen, marking Jesus as the Saviour who was made sin for 
His people. 

These ¢hree divisions are in themselves remarkable. The first ezZs with 
the happy condition of the people under David ; the second with ruin; the 
third with the Saviour. 

The firs? begins with Abraham, the recipient of the unconditional covenant 
of the Zand (Gen. xv.), and ends with David, the recipient of the uncon- 
ditional covenant of the Zhrone (2 Sam. vii). The second begins with 
Solomon, and ends with the Captivity ; że., with the building of the Temple 
at the one end, and the destruction of it at the other. The ZAzd begins with 
the Captivity, the promise of the Messiah through Daniel (ch. ix.), and ends 
with His birth in the person of Jesus, 

+ The four names omitted are the three immediate successors of Jehoram, 
between Jehoram and Uzziah. 

(1) Akaziah, or Fehoahaz, 2 Kings viii. 29—x, 27 ; 2 Chron. xxii. 39. 


SIX AND SEVEN: THE GENEALOGIES. 16I 


So that while Jesus is the 77th name in the line which 
comes through Nathan, it is the 66th name in the line which 
comes through Solomon. 


When we remember that six is the human number, and 
seven the Divine, can we doubt that we are thus pointed 


to the fact that Jesus was both Son of God and Son of 
Man? 


His two names have the same significant stamp and 
seal: for 'Igco)s, Jesus, the birth name of His humiliation as 
Man, is composed of six letters; while Xpwrós, Christ, His 
Divine title as the Anointed of God, is composed of seven 
letters. 


On carefully comparing the two genealogies again, we 
find that certain names are common to both lines. Of these 
there are exactly 36, or 6 x 6, ze., the square of 6 (6°). 


The names to David *  ... ae .. 34 names. 
Salathiel and Zerubbabel " .. 2 names. 
36 names. 


Here we have a marvellous interlacing and combination of 
the numbers szx and seven, which serve to stamp both ge- 
nealogies with the Spirit's seal, and to set forth the human 
and Divine natures of Jesus our Lord, as perfect Man and 
perfect God. 


(2) Foash, 2 Kings xi. 2—xii. 20; 2 Chron. xxiv. 1-25. 
(3) Amaztah (or Ahimaaz), 2 Kings xiv. 8-20 ; 2 Chron. xxv. 7-27. 
And one between Josiah and Jeconiah, viz. — 

(4) Fehotakim, 2 Kings xxii. 36— xxiv. 6 ; 2 Chron. xxxvi 5-8. It was 
he who cut to pieces and burnt the roll which contained the words of 
Jehovah (Jer. xxxvi. 23). The Talmud says that the reason why his 
name is not mentioned generally in the genealogies is because it was 
said concerning him (2 Chron. xxxvi. 8), ** And the rest of the acts of 
Jehoiakim, and the abominations which he did, and that which was 
found ON HIM.” Rabbi Jochanan says it means that ‘‘he caused 
an image to be engraved on his body." He was **childless" as to 
the throne ; for though he had seven sons (1 Chron. iii. 17, 18), it 
was his grandson Zerubbabel who became ruler over Israel (2 Kings 
XXV. 29, 30). 


* The names actually named as common to both are 16 (4?) ; viz., from 
Abraham to David are 14 ; Zerubbabel and Salathiel, 2. 


S 1396. M 


162 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


We give the following complete list :— 


Matthew. 


— 


SOLOMON. 
Roboam. 

Abiah, 

Asa. 

Josaphat. 

Joram. 

[Ahaziah or Fehoahaz.] 
[Foash.] 
[Amaziah.] 

Ozias (or Uzziah). 
Joatham. 

Achaz (or Ahaz). 


Matthew and Luke. 


Names tn common. 


Abraham, 
Isaac, 
Jacob. 
Judas. 
Phares, 
Esrom. 
Aram (or Ram). 
Aminadab. 
Naasson. 
Salmon, 
Booz, 
Obed. 
Jesse. 
DAVID. 


Luke. 


Gop. 
Adam, 
Seth. 
Enos, 
Cainan. 
Maleleel. 
Jared. 
Enoch. 
Mathusala. 
Lamech. 
Noe, 
Sem. 
Arphaxad, 
Cainan. 
Sala. 
Heber. 
Phalec, 
Ragau. 
Saruch. 
Nachor. 
Thara, 


NATHAN, 
Mattatha, 
Menan. 
Melea. 
Eliakim. 
Jonan (Menani). 
Joseph, 
Juda. 
Simeon. 
Levi. 
Matthat, 
Jorim. 


SIX AND SEVEN: THE GENEALOGIES. 163 


Matthew. Matthew and Luke. Luke, 
Names in common. 

Ezekias (or Hezekiah). Eliezer. 

Manasses. Jose. 

Amon, Er, 

Josias. Elmodam, 

[Fehoiakim. | Cosam, 

Jechonias. Addi. 

: Melchi. 
Neri, 


Salathiel or Shealtiel 
(the real son of Jechonias, 
the Zega/ son of Neri). | 


| 


Zorobabel 
(the veal son of Pedaiah, 
I Chron. iii. I9, 
the dega/ son of Salathiel, | 


Deut. xxv. 5). 
Abiud. Rhesa. 
Eliakim. Joanna. 
Azor. Juda. 
Sadoc. Joseph. 
Achim. Semei. 
Eliud. Mattathias, 
Eleazar. Maath. 
Matthan. Nagge. 
Jacob. Esli. 
JOSEPH (the real son Naum, 
of Jacob). Amos. 
Mattathias. 
Joseph. 
Janna. 
Melchi, 
Levi. 
Matthat., 
Heli. 
JOSEPH (the Zega/ son 
of Heli). * 


M LÁM————————————————À 
JESUS CHRIST. 


Joseph was the husband of Mary, *of whom was born 
Jesus which is called Christ" (Matt. i. 16). That is to say, 
Joseph, who was the real son of Jacob (for it says “Jacob 
BEGAT Joseph," Matt. i. 16), could become the legal son of 
Heli only by his marriage with Helis daughter Mary. 
Hence it does not say, in Luke iii. 23, that Heli begat 


* See zote, pp. 159, 160. 


164 NUMBER IN SCRIPTUKE. 


Joseph, but that he was “zhe son of Heli," The words, “zhe 
= son’ it will be observed, are in italics, and being thus a 
wider expression, denotes that he was legally the son-in-law 
of Heli, by his marriage with Mary, Heli's real daughter. 

While Jesus, therefore, was the real son of Mary, He 
could be reckoned as the legal son of Joseph, and was 
descended from Nathan through Heli, as well as from 
Solomon through Jacob. 

The number szx is further associated with Christ as the 
Son of Man, in that His birth was announced in the szx/A 
month (Luke i. 26): and the szx¢h hour is specially marked 
at His crucifixion (Matt. xxvii. 45; Mark xv. 33; Luke 
xxiii. 44). 

Tue Sons or Gop. 
Beni-ha- Elohim, “sons of God,” occurs six times :— 
1. Gen. vi. 2. 
2. Job ii. 6. 
3. Job xxxviii. 7. 
a PS. xxix. I. 
5. Ps lxxxix 6. 
6. Dan. iii. 25. 
Bent-El-haz, “sons of the living God,” once :— 
7 FOSTI: 16. 

Seven times in all, but not seven exactly alike. There are 
six in one form (used of angels *), and ome in another (used 
of men), to mark the fact that the sons of God, whether 
angels or men, fell from the spiritual perfection of their 
original position. 

This interesting illustration is not the only example of the 
contrasts presented between these two numbers, six and 
seven. Mr. Samuell f instances others :— 


Surem, Ham, AND JAPHETH. 


The two names Shem and Japheth, who received their 
father’s blessing, occur together seven times ; but szx of these 
are in connection with Ham whose posterity was cursed ! 


Tue Foop or Ecver 
is given in szx items (Num. xi, 5), viz., fish, cucumbers, 
melons, leeks, onions, and garlick; whereas the enumera- 
a SO. — gag o o 


* See The Spirits in Prison, by the same author. 
T Seven the Sacred Number, by Richard Samuell, p. 438. 


SIX AND SEVEN: OTHER ILLUSTRATIONS. 165 


tion of the Divine provision of Emmanuel’s land is marked 
by the number seven (Deut. viii. 8), —wheat, barley, vines, fig- 
trees, pomegranates, olives, and honey. 


IsRAxr's Lovers 


are represented as giving to her sx things (Hos. ii. 5),—bread 
water, wool, flax, oil, and drink; while Jehovah speaks of 
His own precious gifts of love to His people by contrast as 
being seven in number (vv. 8, 9),—corn, wine, oil, silver, 
gold, wool, and flax. 


Tur Days or Creation AND REST. 


In the Creation we have the siy days and the seven. The 
six of labour and the seventh of rest. 


Tur Two Lanps. 


2 Kings xviii. 32: Rabshakeh, in describing the land to 
which he would take the people captive, enumerated szx 
things; but as he mentions them as being like their own 
land, there are seven as well : 


* A Jand like your own land, 
a land of corn 
and wine, 
a land of bread y 
and vineyards, 
a land of oil olive 
and of honey." 


Tuer Dominion or Man. 


Psalm viii. 6-8: Szx sets forth the perfection of human 
authority, and seven marks the fact that the sx defined 
particulars were of Divine gift: 

“Thou hast put all things under his feet : 
all sheep 
and oxen, 
yea, and the beasts of the field ; 
the fowl of the air, B 
and the fish of the sea, 
and whatsoever passeth through 
the paths of the seas." 


166 NUMBER LV SCRIPTURE. 


Tue Seven SPIRITS. 


Isa. xi. 2: Six here marking that Christ would be perfect 
man, and seven that He was perfect God; the first statement 
being marked off from the rest by its form :— 


“The Spirit of the Lon» shall rest upon Him, 
the Spirit of wisdom 
and understanding, 
the Spirit of counsel 7 
and might, 
the Spirit of knowledge 
and of the fear of the Lorn.” 


Tue Spirit Pourrep Our. 


Joel ii. 28, 29: The “all flesh" is the Divine inclusion; 
but sx particulars mark the definition. It need hardly be 
added that this blessing refers (by interpretation) only to 
the house of Israel. 

“I will pour out My spirit upon 

all flesh ; 
and your sons 
and your daughters shall prophesy, 
your old men shall dream dreams, 
your young men shall see visions; 6 7 
and also upon the servants, 
and upon the handmaids, 
will I pour out My spirit.” 


IsRAEL’s ENDOWMENTS. 


Rom, ix. 4: The one defining who they were by Divine 
calling and standing, the szx setting forth what pertained to 
them as men, thus called and blessed :— 

“ Who are Israelites ; 
To whom pertaineth the adoption, | 
and the glory, 
and the covenants, 7 
and the giving of the law, 
and the service [of God], 
and the promises.” 


SEVEN BY ITSELF. 167 


Tue GOLDEN CANDLESTICK 


had szx branches out of one central stem, making seven in all, 
marking, and in harmony with, the fact, that the light was 
the light of God's people in the world, but that its source 
was Divine. 


Tue PawNoPLY or Gop. 


In Eph. vi. 14-18, the Christian's panoply consists of szx 
pieces; but there is a seventh without which they are of no 
avail, and that is “the Spear," which is Prayer :— 

The Girdle of Truth, John xiv. 6; xvii. 17. 

The Breastplate of Righteousness, Jer. xxiii, 6; Phil. 
iii. o. 

The Sandals of the Gospel, Eph. ii. ro. 

The Shield of Faith (¢.e., Faith's shield, which is Christ), 
Gen. xvii. 1; Rom. xiii. 14; Ps. xci. 4. 

The Helmet of Salvation, Ps. xxvii. 1. 

The Sword of the Spirit (Ze, the Spirit's sword, which is 
the Word of God), Rev. xix. 13. 

Prayer—which keeps the armour bright and enables us 
to use it effectually. 


EZEKIEL’S TEMPLE. 


In Ezek. xl. the measurements of God's Temple are given, 
which is yet to be erected in His land. The measuring rod 
used by “the man” was “six great cubits " in length (xli. 8). 
But the great cubit was one cubit and a hand-breadth long 
(xl. 5, R.V.); therefore as six hand-breadths went to one 
cubit, there were really seven ordinary cubits in “the full reed 
of six great cubits.” 


Thus whenever szx and seven are used together the differ. 
ence between their respective significations is most marked, 


SEVEN, BY ITSELF. 


But now turning to the number Seven, we must first con- 
sider the meaning of the word. 
In the Hebrew, seven is YAW (shevah). It is from the root 


yay (savah), to be full or satisfied, have enough of. Hence the 
meaning of the word “seven” is dominated by this root, 


168 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


for on the seventh day God rested from the work of Creation. 
It was full and complete, and good and perfect. Nothing 
could be added to it or taken from it without marring it. 
Hence the word MAW (Shavat), fo cease, desist, rest, and May 


Shabbath, Sabbath, or day of rest. This root runs through 
various languages; e.g., Sanscrit, saptan ; Zend., kapta ; Greek, 
éxrd (hepta) ; Latin, septem. All these preserve the “t,” which 
in the Semitic and Teutonic languages is dropped out; e.g. 
Gothic, shun; Germ., sieben ; Eng., seven. 

It is seven, therefore, that stamps with perfection and com- 
pleteness that in connection with which it is used. Of że, 
it tells of the Sabbath, and marks off the week of seven days, 
which, artificial as it may seem to be, is universal and imme- 
morial in its observance amongst all nations and in all times. 
It tells of that eternal Sabbath-keeping which remains for 
the people of God in all its everlasting perfection. 

In the creative works of God, seven completes the colours 
of the spectrum and rainbow, and satisfies in music the notes 
of the scale. In each of these the egA/A is only a repetition 
of the first. 

Another meaning of the root PAW (Shavagh) is /o swear, or 
make an oath. It is clear from its first occurrence in Gen. 
xxi. 31, * They sware both of them,” that this oath was based 
upon the * seven ewe lambs ” (vv. 28, 29, 30), which point to 
the idea of satisfaction or fulness in an oath. It was the security, 
satisfaction, and fulness of the obligation, or completeness of 
the bond, which caused the same word to be used for both 
the number seven and an oath; and hence it is written, “an 
oath for confirmation is an end of all strife.’ Beer-sheda, 
the well of the oath, is the standing witness of the spiritual 
perfection of the number seven, The number meets us on 


Tue FORE-FRONT oF REVELATION. 


The first statement as to the original Creation in Gen. i. 1 
consists of 7 words, and 28 letters (4 x7).** 


* But we ought to note in passing that the next statement, Gen. i. 2, which 
tells of the ruin into which this Creation fell, though it consists of 14 words, 
yet it has 52 letters. Now 52 is 4 times 13, and 13, as we shall see 
further on, is the number of apostasy. Thus the cause of that ruin is more 
than intimated by the number 13 appearing so significantly in the second 
verse. 


SEVEN: ILLUSTRATIONS. 169 


Tur Worps or JEHOVAH 


are pure words. They are not angelic words (2 Cor. xii. 4, 
I Cor, xiii, 1), not words pertaining to heaven; but words 
used by men on this earth, human words, and therefore they 
have to be perfectly purified, as silver is purified in a furnace. 
In Ps. xii. 6, there is an ellipsis which requires the word 
.* words" to be repeated from the previous clause. Then 
we can take the preposition 5, (Zamed), which means “to,” 
in its natural sense. The A.V. translates it of (“a furnace 
of earth”); and the R.V. renders it oz (“a furnace on the 
earth"). Both are wrong through not seeing and supply- 
ing the ess which would have enabled them to translate 
the 5, to, or pertaining to, literally. Thus :— 


a | The words of Jehovah are pure words, 
b | As silver tried in a furnace: 

a | [ Words] pertaining to the earth, 
6 | Purified seven times. 


Here we have the four lines complete, in which “a” cor- 
responds to “a,” the subject being the words of Fehovah. While 
in “b” and “3” we have the purifying: in “b” of silver, and 
in “6” of the earthly words which Jehovah uses. 

Jehovah takes up and uses words “pertaining to this 
world,” but they require purifying. Some words He does 
not use at all; some He uses with a higher meaning; others 
He uses with a new meaning: thus they are purified. Now, 
silver is refined “seven times.” So these words have to be 
perfectly purified before they can be used as “the words of 


Jehovah.” 


ABRAHAM'S SEVEN-FOLD BLESSING 


in Gen. xii. 2, 3 :— 
*I will make of thee a great nation, 
And I will bless thee, 
And make thy name great ; 
And thou shalt be a blessing ; 
And I will bless them that bless thee, 
And curse him that curseth thee: 
And in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed." 


170 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


With this we may compare 


Jenovan’s SEVEN-FOLD COVENANT WITH IsRAEL 


in Exod. vi. 6-8. Seven times does the expression, “I 
will” occur in these few verses, stamping the whole with 
spiritual perfection. These are preceded by “I have” three 
times repeated (vv. 4, 5), giving the Divine basis on which the 
blessing was based :— 


I have established My covenant with them, etc. 

I have also heard their groaning, etc. 

I have remembered My covenant. 
Then follows the seven-fold blessing :— 

I will bring you out from Egypt. 

I will rid you of their bondage. 

I will redeem you. 

I will take you to Me for a people. 

I will be to you a God. 

I will bring you in unto the land. 

I will give it you. 


* Now HEBRON was Burtt SEVEN YEARS BEFORE ZOAN 
IN Ecvprr" 


(Num. xiii. 22). Egypt was “the house of bondage." Zoan 
was that city in it where its wise men were shown to be fools 
(Isa. xix. 11-13). It was also the place where God's miracles 
were performed which brought out the folly of that human 
wisdom (Ps. Ixxviii. 12, 43). 

But Hebron, which means fellowship, was a place in 
Canaan, the city of Abraham, “the friend of God,” still 
called to-day the city of Æl Khulil, “of the Friend.” — In its 
valley, Eschol, grew the finest fruit of Emmanuel's land. 

* Now Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in 
Egypt." This phrase, thrown in parenthetically, at the 
moment when His people first discovered the existence of 
Hebron, contains the intimation of a deep spiritual truth, as 
shown by the significance of the number sezez. 

It shows that the sphere of Divine friendship and fellow- 
ship and of heavenly delights was established in eternity, 
seven years marking the spiritual perfection of time, before 
the wisdom of this world had any existence or place. (See 


SEVEN: ILLUSTRATIONS. 171 


Ps. xc. 25 ciii. 17 ; Prov. viii. 22-31; Mic. v. 2; John xvii. 5-24 ; 
I Cor. ii. 7; Eph. i. 4—iii. 11; 2 Tim. i, 9; Titus i. 2; 1 Pet. 
i. 19, 20). 


Tue SEVEN-FOLD SPRINKLING 
implies that it was perfectly and spiritually efficacious. 

On the great Day of Atonement the blood was sprinkled 
“on the mercy-seat eastward.” This was Godward, and 
therefore it was once done and on the mercy-seat. But 
* BEFORE the mercy-seat" it was to be sprinkled seven times. 
Before? the mercy-seat seven times, because this was the 
perfect testimony for the people that the atonement for their 
sins was accomplished. 

The directions for the Day of Atonement are given in 
Lev. xvi.; but from other Scriptures we learn that there were 
seven sprinklings on that great day, to mark the perfection of 
accomplished atonement :— 

I. On the mercy-seat (Lev. xvi. 14). 

2. Before the mercy-seat (Lev. xvi. 14). 

3. Before the veil (Lev. iv. 17). 

4. On the horns of the golden altar (Exod. xxx. 10). 

5. On the horns of the brazen altar (Lev. xvi. 18). 

6. Round about upon the altar (Lev. xvi. 19). 

7. The blood that was left poured out at the foot of the 
brazen altar (Lev. iv. 18). 


Tue Psarus 
are in many ways stamped with this number of spiritual 
perfection. 
There are 126 Psalms which have titles. That is 7 X 18. 
There are sezez names mentioned in the titles as the authors 
of these Psalms, viz. :— 
1. David, 56 (7 x 8). 
2. The Sons of Korah, 11 (Pss. xlii, xliv.—xlix., Ixxxiv., 
Ixxxv., Ixxxvii., Ixxxviii). 


* It was *'directly before the Tabernacle” that the blood of the red heifer 
was sprinkled sevez times, Num. xix. 4. The leper also was cleansed in the 
same place with a sezez-fold sprinkling of the blood of the killed bird (Lev. 
xiv. 7, II). 


172 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


3. Asaph, 12 (Pss. l., Ixxiii.—lxxxiii). 

4. Heman the Ezrahite, 1 (Ps. Ixxxviii). 

5. Ethan the Ezrahite, 1 (Ps. Ixxxix). 

6. Moses, 1 (Ps. Xc)» 

7. Solomon, 1 (Ps. Ixxii.). 

There were 14 Psalms (2x7), all David's, which were 

written on historical occasions; viz., Pss. iii, vii. xviii, xxx., 
xxxiv., li., lii, liv, lvi., lvii., lix., Ix., Ixiii., and cxlii. 


Seven Psalms are ascribed to David in the New Testament, 
specifically, by name :— 

(1) Psalm ii. in Acts iv. 25, * Who by the mouth of Thy 
servant Davip hast said, Why did the heathen rage 
and the people imagine a vain thing." 

(2) Psalm xvi. in Acts ii. 25, “For Davrp speaketh 
concerning Him, I foresaw the Lorp always before 
my face, for He is on my right hand that I should 
not be moved.” 

(3) Psalm xxxii. in Rom. iv. 6, “Even as Davin also 
describeth the blessedness of the man unto whom 
God imputeth righteousness without works." 

(4) Psalm xli. in Acts i. 16, “ This Scripture must needs 
have been fulfilled which the Holy Ghost by the 
mouth of Davip spake before concerning Judas.” 

(5) Psalm lxix. in Rom. xi. 9, “And Davin saith, Let 
their table be made a snare, and a trap, and a 
stumbling-block, and a recompence unto them.” 

(6) Psalm xcv. in Heb. iv. 7, “He limiteth a certain 
day, saying in Davin, To-day, after so long a time, 
as it is said, To-day if ye will hear His voice.” 

(7) Psalm cix. in Matt. xxii. 43, “How then doth Davip 


in spirit call him Lord, saying, The Lon» said unto 
my Lord; ete; 


It will be observed that these seven quotations are arranged 
like the golden candlestick, in 2 threes with one in the centre, 
viz. :— 

3 in the Acts, 
I in the Gospels, and 
3 in the Epistles; 


SEVEN : ILLUSTRATIONS. 173 


Or, like the candlestick— 


GOSPEL. 


Matt. xxii 43. 


Acts i, 16. oo Rom. iv. 6. 
Acts ii 25. -- Rom. xi. 9. 
Acts iv. 25. Jae Heb. iv. 7. 


| 


The Seven Quotations from Psalm Ixix. in New Testament 


show that this Psalm is one of great importance, and mark 
its spiritual perfection, in connection with the Lord Jesus. 


(1) Verse 4. The Lord Himself quotes this when the 


Eleven are gathered round Him just after the insti- 
tution of the Supper, after telling them to expect 
the hatred of the world, because He had chosen 
them out of it. John xv. 18-25. 


(2) Verse 9. Again, concerning the Lord, His disciples 


remembered that it was written. John ii. 13-17. 


(3) Verse 9. The Holy Spirit uses it to hold up Christ 


(4) 


as a pattern, even as Christ pleased not Himself. 
Rom. xv. 3. 

Verse 21. At the crucifixion this was fulfilled. 
Matt. xxvii. 34, 48. 


(5) Verses 22 and 23. The Holy Spirit, referring to 


the fact that Israel had not obtained that which it 
sought for, but only the elect remnant, the rest 
being blinded, says Rom. xi. 7-10. 


(6) Verses 24 and 27. Referring to the persecution of 


Christians by the Jews, the Holy Spirit says 
I Thess. ii. 15, 16. 


(7) Verses 25 and 27. The Lord, in His last denuncia- 


tion, closing His testimony against Jerusalem, says 
Matt. xxiii. 29-38. 


174 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


This seven is divided into the usual four and three; four 
of the quotations being in the Gospels, and ¢hree being in the 
Epistles. Further, they occur in the first and last of the 
Gospels, and in the first and last of the Epistles written to 
Churches. - Thus they are stamped by the number of spiri- 
tual perfection. 

In Matthew 2 
In John 2 


In Rom. 2 E ; 
th tl 
In Thess. | a 


a in the Gospels 
7: 


“Man or Gop.” 


There are seven so-called in the Old Testament :— 
Moses, Deut. xxxiii. 1, and 5 other times. 
David, 2 Chron. viii. 14, and twice. 
Samuel, 1 Sam. ix. 6, and 3 times. 
Shemaiah, 1 Kings xii. 22, and once (2 Chron. xi. 2). 
Elijah, 7 times. 
Elisha, 2 Kings iv. 7, and 29 times. 
Igdaliah, once, Jer. xxxv. 4. 
One in the New Testament on Resurrection ground 
(Timothy), making eg altogether. 


Seven Weak Tunes IN JUDGES, 


used by God as instruments of deliverance, marking and 
stamping the spiritual perfection of His work :— 
I. A left handed man (iii. 21),—Ehud delivering from 
Moab's oppression. 
2. An ox-goad (iii. 31) in the hand of Shamgar, deliver- 
ing from the Philistines. 


3. A woman (iv. 4), and delivering from 
4. A tent-peg in the hand of jae} Jabin, king of 
(iv. 21) Canaan. 


5. A piece of a millstone (ix. 53), thrown by another 
woman, and delivering the people from Abimelech’s 
usurpation. 

6. The pitchers and trumpets of Gideon’s 300 (vii. 20), 
delivering from the hosts of Midian. 

7. The jaw-bone of an ass (xv. 16), by which Samson 
delivered Israel from the Philistines. 


SEVEN: ILLUSTRATIONS. 175 


And why all this in connection with the “saviour” 
(ii. 16-18), whom God raised up and used? To show that 
* no flesh shall glory in His presence " (1 Cor. i. 20). 

So in later times, whenever God has *done wondrously," 
He has chosen “the weak things of the world to confound 
the things which are mighty” (1 Cor. i. 27). It was so in 
Apostolic days, and has been so in all ages. It was Luther, 
a miner's son, by whom God “shook the world," It was 
Calvin, a cooper’s son in Picardy, by whom God built up His 
church in the Faith. It was Zwngle, a shepherd’s son in the 
Alps, by whom God established the Reformation in Switzer- 
land. It was John Knox, the son of a plain burgess in a 
country town, who caused Scotland to be known as “the 
Land of Knox.” 

And so through all the ages God has made it clear that it 
is He who is the worker, and that the instruments He 
chooses to use are nothing. He usually rejected man’s first- 
born, and chose a younger son. He took David, the 
youngest, from the sheepfold, to be ruler over His people, as 
He had chosen Gideon, the least member of the poorest 
family in Manasseh, to deliver Israel from the Midianite 
hosts. 


SEVEN-FOLD QUALIFICATION FOR SERVICE. 


This is seen in Gideon, Judg. vi. 
I. Conviction as to his own humiliating condition, v. 11, 
as shown in v. 15. 
2. An exercised heart, v. 13, as caused probably by the 
prophet's testimony, v. 8. 
3. No confidence in the flesh, v. 15. 
4. Peace with God through grace; the peace of God 
through gift, vv. 17, 18, 22, 23. 
5. Worship, v. 24. 
6. Obedience in small things, vv. 25-27. 
7. Power for great things, vv. 33-35 ; and vii. 
A. careful study of Judg. vi. will yield spiritual profit, in- 
structing us as to the ways of God in calling and qualifying 
His servants. 


176 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


Seven Oax TREES 


are mentioned in the Old Testament; the seven being divided 
into four and ¢hree—the first three being connected with 
burial. 

Gen. xxxv. 4. Jacob buried teraphim. 

Gen. xxxv. 8. Rachel’s nurse. 

2 Sam. xxxi. 13. At Jabesh Saul and his sons buried. 

Josh. xxiv. 26. Joshua set up the stones of witness. 

2 Sam. xviii. 9. Absalom's oak. 

Judg. vi. 11. At Ophrah, where the angel appeared. 

1 Kings xiii. 14. Where the man of God sat. 


SEVEN or JessE's Sons 


passed before Samuel (1 Sam. xvi) to show that the perfec- 
tion of nature can yield nothing for God. 


Seven MIRACLES IN Joun’s Gosrsr. 


ii. The water turned into wine. 

iv. 47. The nobleman's son. 

v. 4. At the pool of Bethesda. 

vi. The feeding of the 5,000. 

ix. 1. The man born blind. 

xi. The raising of Lazarus. 

xxi. The draught of fishes. 

These formed the spiritual perfection of the * signs " that 

Jesus was the Christ. 


Tue Seven Wonps TO THE Woman OF SAMARIA 


in John iv. are full of interest, and the perfection of Christ's 
dealings with her is thus stamped. 
(1) v. 7. Attracting her attention by His question, 
* Give Me to drink"? 
(2) v. 10. Leading her to ask it of Him. 
(3) vv. 13, 14. Describing the water which He gives. 
(4) v. 16. The arrow of conviction, “Go,” “call,” and 
Comen 
(5) v. 17. Increasing the conviction. l 
(6) vv. 21-24. Answering her questions and her doubts. 
(7) v. 26. Revealing Himself. 


SEVEN : ILLUSTRATIONS. 177 


Tur SEVEN APPEARANCES OF ANGELS * 


during the life of Jesus on earth. 
1. To the shepherds (Luke ii. 9). 
2. To Joseph (Matt. ii. 13). 
3. To Joseph (Matt. ii. 19). 
4. After the Temptation (Matt. iv. 11). 
5. In Gethsemane (Luke xxii. 43). 
6. At the Resurrection (Matt. xxviii. 2). 
7. At the Ascension (Acts i. 10). 


Tue Seven Turincs wWHICH SPIRITUALLY DEFILE. 


They come “ out of the heart," and complete the picture of 
spiritual defilement, emphasising the fact that spiritual defile- 
ment is caused, not by that which goeth “into the mouth,” 
but by that which cometh “out of the heart ” (Matt. xv. 19). 


There is no end to the mere enumeration of the groups of 
seven things which are to be found in the Bible. Many 
students have noted them, and some have published lists 
of their discoveries. This part of our subject is so well- 
known and well-trodden, that we may here leave it, merely 
noting a few miscellaneous examples. Mr. Samuell f points 
out some curious facts in connection with 


Tue Tren COMMANDMENTS. 


These were written with the finger of God, and would, 
therefore, be specially stamped with this symbol of spiritual 
perfection. 


. Seven of them commence with the word Nb, not. 
. The word D)’, day, occurs seven times. 

. The preposition 9, zz, seven times. 

. The preposition 5, zo, 14 times. 

. “Upon” and “ above " together, seven times. 


me UJ Nm 


* There were ¿Aree appearances before the birth of Jesus :—(1) to Zacharias 
(Luke i. 1) ; (2) to Mary (Luke i. 26); (3) to Joseph (Matt. i. 20). Alto- 
gether there were zen, which completes the perfection of Divine order. It 
would prove a fruitful source of profit to make a close study of all the words 


and sayings of angels. 
f In his work, Seven, the Sacred Number. 


S 1396. 


178 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


6. “Serve,” “servant,” * maidservant," together, seven 
times. 
7. The relationship ef “father,” “mother,” ‘ son,” 
* daughter,” “ wife," together, seven times. 
8. The numbers “third,” “fourth,” “six,” “seventh,” 
and “thousands,” together, seven times. 
g. “Lord” and “ God,” together, 14 times. 
IO. There are seven different pronouns used, in all 
49 times (7). 
11. The 3rd pers. sing. pronoun occurs seven times. 
12 The conjunction “and” seven times in Com, II. 
13. The definite article seven times in Com. IV. 
14. Com. IV. forbids the doing of any work on the 
seventh day to seven persons and things. 
15. Com. X. forbids coveting to seven persons and things. 
16. Com. III. contains 21 (7 X 3) simple words. 
17. Com. IX. contains 7 ; and 
18. Com. X. contains 28 (7 X 4). 


Tue Division or SEVEN INTO Four AND THREE 


is generally noticeable. itis specially so in the Apocalypse. 


The Promises to the Churches 


are seven in number. Each contains the solemn exhortation, 
* He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto 
the churches." In the first ‘Aree epistles the promise (which 
refers to the past in its imagery) follows this exhortation; 
while in the latter four the promise (which has reference to 
future blessings) precedes it. 

Our attention is thus called to this great exhortation. It 
tells us that when these epistles were sent, the Church and 
the churches had all failed in their corporate capacity. They 
are addressed not to the churches, but to individuals; and all 
through, individuals are exhorted. It isthe same with John’s 
Epistles, written, like his Gospel and the Apocalypse, at the 
close of the first century. So that we must not and cannot 
do as we are bidden on every hand,—“ Go back to the first 
three centuries," and “hear the voice of the Church”; for 


* Omitting **thy " before **stranger " (Com. IV.) with LXX, and Vulp. 


SEVEN; MISCELLANEOUS EXAMPLES. 179 


before the close of the first century we are bidden to hear not 
what the church or the churches say, but to “hear what the 
Spirit saith unto the churches.” 


The Seven Seals 


are thus divided; the first four being marked by the com- 
mand “Come,”’* given to the horseman, while the latter 
three are altogether different. 


The Seven Trumpets 


are also divided into three and four, the first four being 
severed from the latter three by the angel flying saying, 
* Woe, woe, woe.” 


The Seven Parables of Matthew xii. 


are also thus marked, as already shown on page 128. 

The division is still further marked by the zł%ree com- 
mencing with the word “Again” (vv. 44, 45, and 47), while 
the four are separated by the word “Another”; thus in- 
dicating that in the four we have four different revelations 
in their relation to the world, while in the ¢hree we have a 
repetition of the one truth in different forms T in its relation 
to God's people. 


MISCELLANEOUS EXAMPLES. 


The seven gifts of Rom. xii. 6-8. 
The seven unities of Eph. iv. 4-6. (See p. 59.) 
The seven characteristics of wisdom, James iii. 17. 
The seven gifts of Christ in John's Gospel : 

His flesh, vi. 51. 

His life, x. 11. 

His example, xiii. 1 5. 

'The comforter, xiv. 16. 

* My peace," xiv. 27. 

His words, xvii. 8, 14. 

His glory, xvii. 22. 


* The verb means “to come,” or “ go." 
+ See The Kingdom and the Church, by the same author, 


N 2 


180 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


The seven “better” things in Hebrews: 
Testament, vii. 22. 
Promises, viii. 6. 
Substance, x. 34. 
Hope, vii. 19. 
Sacrifices, ix. 23. 
Country, xi. 16. 
Thingext. 35. 
The seven titles of Christ in Hebrews : 
Heir of all things, i. 2: 
Captain of our salvation, ii. 10. 
Apostle, iii. I 
Author of salvation, v. 9. 
Forerunner, vi. 20. 
High Priest, x. 21. 
Author and finisher of faith, xii. 2. 


The seven-fold “once,” dma (hapax). Once for all, in 
HebrewsWix: 7; 26, 27, 28; x. 2; xii. 20097). 

The seven exhortations in Hebréws, “Let us," x. 22, 23, 
ZASEX D 28 enti T3 DS. 

The seven graces of 2 Pet. i. 5-7. 


The sevez-fold ascriptions of praise in Rev. v. 12; vii. 12, 
etc. 
The seven “eternal ” things in Hebrews: 
A priest for ever, v. 6. 
Eternal salvation, v. 9. 
» judgment, vi. 2. 
» redemption, ix. 12. 
so SPNG TA: 
» inheritance, ix. 15. 
Everlasting covenant, xiii. 20. 


The seven firstfruits of— 
Resurrection, 1 Cor. xv. 20-23. 
The Spirit, Rom. viii. 23. 
New creation, James i. 18. 
Israel, Rom. xi. 16. 
The * redeemed from the earth," ET NIV. 
Missions, Rom. xvi. 5. 
Ministry, 1 Cor, xvi. 15. 


SEVEN; MISCELLANEOUS EXAMPLES, ISI 


The seven parables of Matt. xiii.* 
The seven-fold “blessed” in Revelation: i. 3; xiv, ine 
EVI XI O; XX. O; XXI. 7, I4. 
The seven “ mysteries " or secrets : 
The kingdom, Matt. xiii. 11; Mark iv. 11; Luke viii. 10. 
The partial blindness of Israel, Rom. xi. 25. 
The Church or Body of Christ, Rom. xvi. 25; Eph. iii. 3, 
AON AVTOR Col, E-26, 27; Rev. i, 20. 
The first Resurrection, 1 Cor. xv. 5r. 
The secret purpose of God, Eph. i. 9; Col. ii. 2; Rev. 
XU 
The secret purpose of the devil, 2 Thess. ii. 7. 
Babylon, Rev. xvii. 5, 7. 
The seven steps in the humiliation of Jesus and the seven in 
His exaltation in Phil. ii. 
The seven words of Jesus from the Cross : 
* Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do," 
Luke xxiii. 34. 
* Verily, I say unto thee to-day : Thou shalt be with Me 
in Paradise," Luke xxiii. 43. 
* My God! my God! why hast thou forsaken Me,” Matt. 
xxvii. 46. 
* Woman, behold thy son . .. . Behold thy mother,” 
john xix. 26. 
a thirst,” JORN ix 28. 
* Father, into Thy hand I commend My spirit," Luke. 
xxiii. 46. 
“Jt is finished,” John xix. 30. 
Seven-fold occurrence of the expression “in Christ," in 
ZEND 0 425 1: 7050£95.31. 12,15. 
The mystery of God is completed in the seventh vial of the 
seventh trumpet of the seventh seal. 
The “ seventh” man “from Adam” “was noi, for God took 
him ” (Gen. v. 24). 
The day of atonement was in the seventh month (Lev. 
XVI. 29). 
The clean beasts were taken into the Ark by sevens (Gen. 
vii. 2). (The others were taken by twos, vi. 19). 
Seven steps lead up to the temple in Ezek. xl. 


* See The Kingdom and the Church, by the same author. 


182 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


The Lord's Prayer contains seven petitions. These are 
divided into four and three. The first three relate to God, 
the four to man. 

Seven washings are typical of our complete spiritual 
cleansing (2 Kings v. 14). 


NUMBERS OF WORDS AND OCCURRENCES. 


Turning now to another department we come to a large 
subject, which has already been touched upon (see pp. 23-44). 
Some writers see seven everywhere and in everything in 
the Bible.* But this is to deny, practically, the significance 
of all other numbers, and to lose all their instruction. Still 
we must admit that in the structure and outward form of 
Holy Writ, as being the specia] work of the Holy Spirit, we 
do see this stamp of spiritual perfection in a very remarkable 
manner. Mr. Samuell calls attention to the number as we 
see: 
1. In the occurrences of single words. 
2. In the occurrences of important phrases. 
3. In groups of words from the same root. 
4. In groups of words from different roots, but with 
similar meaning. 
And this not merely in the Bible as a whole, but some- 
times very markedly : 
i. In the Old Testament. 
2. In the Hebrew or Chaldee portions of the Old Testa- 
ment. 
In the New Testament. , 
In a particular book. 
. In all the books of a particular writer. 
. In a particular section of a book referring to a special 
subject. 
Let us look at a few examples, and first of the number of 
words used for a particular thing. We have already seen an 
example of this under the number six. 


Aw ho 


Seven Womps ror Gorn. 


As brass is symbolical of judgment (seen in the brazen 
altar) so gold is symbolical of glory, and glory is grace 


* See Seven the Sacred Number, by Richard Samuel]. 


SEVEN: NUMBERS OF WORDS. 183 


consummated. “The Lorp will give grace and glory" 
(Ps. Ixxxiv. 11). “ Whom He justified them He also glori- 
fied" (Rom. viii. 30). 

Hence the number of spiritual perfection in the words 
used for gold: 


I. AM (zah-hahv), from root fo shine, glitter, like gold. 
Hence the common name for gold. This is earthly 
gold, than which the Word of God is more to be 
desired (Ps. xix. 7-10). 

2. 35) (pahz), fine or refined gold. “ More to be desired 
are they than gold (3531), yea, than much fine gold 
@5),” Ps. xix. 10. 

“Therefore I love Thy commandments above gold 
(3D; yea, above fine gold (15)," Ps. cxix. 127. 

“Thou settest a crown of pure gold (75) upon 
his head " (Ps. xxi. 3). 

This word is therefore rightly used of the per- 
fections of the living and the written Word. For He 
“knew novsin” (2 Cor, v.21). He “did no sin” 
(t Pet ii. 22). “In Him was no sin" (1 John 
iil 5). 

3. "23 (derzer), Job xxii. 24, 25, and X3 (27zar), gold ore 
or dust, from root 7o dig out or cut of. Hence used 
of gold broken up. 

The sense of Job xxii. 24, 25 is completely lost in 
the A.V. Inthe R.V. it reads, v. 22: 

“Receive, I pray thee, the law from His mouth, 

And lay up His words in thine heart. 

If thou return to the Almighty, thou shalt be built up ; 

If thou put away unrighteousness far from thy tents. 

And lay thou thy treasure (^V 3) in the dust, 

And the gold of Ophir among the stones of the brooks ; 

And the Almighty shall be thy treasure (71 3), 

And precious silver unto thee." 

Hence, if we have His Word abiding in us, He 
Himself is our treasure and our defence.  **His 
truth shall be thy shield " (Ps. xci. 2). 

4- pm (chah-rootz), from pn (charatz), to chop or cut off 
short; then of the instrument which the stone-cutter 
uses; then of the wes cut of. Hence gold in 


184 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


pieces or parts, as preserved in the word carats, 
specially applied to gold.* 

As applied to God's “workmanship " we are cut 
off and 4rd as gold and precious stones, ** When 
He hath tried me I shall come forth as gold" 
(Job xxiii. 10). “The furnace is for gold, but God 
trieth the hearts" (Prov. xvii. 3). 

5. DNS (keh-them), from BAS (kah-tham), to cut in, engrave 
(only in Jer. ii. 22, “Mine iniquity is marked before 
me") As used of gold it implies that it is true and 
sterling, having the stamp or mark graved upon it. 
As a title of the Psalms it is used with the prefix /3, 
mem. DDI (michtam), writing, especially writing cut in 
or engraved with a stylus (like the LXX. ornoypa¢ia, 
“a sculptured writing" E). 395. michtahv, means 
simply a writing.§ A writing of David concerning 
David's Son and David's Lord. 

6. *13D (sgohr) from "3D (sdh-gar), to shut up, enclose, 
used of gold as being solid, 1 Kings vi. 20, “he 
overlaid it with pure (marg., shut up) gold,” ze. gold 
plates, not merely gold leaf or wash. Occurs in 
Job xxviii, 15, “It cannot be gotten for gold,” ze 
the wisdom of God's Word. “Every word of God 
is pure.” ‘Add thou not unto His words." 

7. 3n" (dav, Chald.) meaning same as Jp} (see 
No. 1); occurs only in Ezra and Daniel. 

Thus the fact of there being seven words for gold speaks 
to us of the spiritual perfection of the Word of God, which 
is so often compared to it. 


SEVEN DIFFERENT NAMES FOR PALESTINE. 


In Old Testament only: 
I. “The Holy Land,” Zech. ii. 12 (WPM ADIN, Admath 
Ha-kadosh ; UXX., 4 yì ù &yo ; early Christian writers, 


* Job xli. 30; Ps. Ixviii 13; Prov. ii. I4; vii. 10, 19; xvi. 16 ; Isa 
xxviii. 27 ; xli. 15 ; Dan. ix. 25 ; Joel iii. 14; Amos i. 3; Zech. ix. 3. 

+ It occurs Job xxvii. 16, 19; xxxi 24; Ps. xlv. 9; Prov. xxv. 12; 
Song v. 11 ; Isa. xiii. 12 ; Lam. iv. 1 ; Dan. x. 5. 

I orhan (steelee) was the word for grave-stone. Hence these Psalms point 
to Resurrection, Ps. xvi., lvi., lvii., Iviii., lix., 1x. 

§ See Ex, xxxii, 16; xxxix. 30; Deut. x. 4; 2 Chron. xxi 12; xxxv. 4; 
xxxvi 22; Ezrai. 1; Isa. xxxviii. 9. 


SEVEN: NUMBERS OF WORDS. I85 


Terra sancta) Very common in Middle Ages, now 
used only geographically. 

2. “The Land of Jehovah,” only in Hosea ix. 3. Com- 
pare Lev. xxv. 23; Ps. beexw I; Isa. viii. 8; Joel 
150125 Ter, xvi. 18. 

In New Testament only: 

3. “The Land of Promise,” Heb. xi. 9. This title is 
based of course on the Old Testament and other 
Scriptures. Compare Gen. xii. 15; Deut. xxxiv. 
1-4; Gen. l. 24; Ezek. xx. 42; Acts vii. 5. 

4. Judea, or the Land of Judah, amim ^W. This 
name was at first used only of the territory of the 
Tribe of Judah (2 Chron. ix. r1); but after the 
Captivity it was used of the whole land, even includ- 
ing the East of the Jordan, Luke i. 5; xxiii. 5; 
Matt. xix. 1; Acts xxviii. 2I. 

4n Old and. New Testaments : 

rp. ' The Land," jon, Ha-ahretz, Ruth i. 1; Jer. xii. 11; 
Luke v. 25; Matt. xxvii. 45. This was a strictly 
Jewish name. 

6. “The Land of Israel," Lyse yox- First used in 
I Sam. xiii. I9, and occasionally in later books 
(2 Kin. v. 2; vi. 23). In Ezekiel oftener than in 
all the rest of the Bible. Matt. ii. 21. This name 
is also essentially Jewish. 

7. ‘ Canaan,” 132 (K’naan). So called after the son 
of Ham, by whose descendants it was at first in- 
habited (Gen. ix. 18; x. 15-19). It is therefore the 
oldest name, and was confined to the country west 
of the Jordan. See Exod. vi. 4; xv. 15; Lev. xiv. 34; 
Went. x29; Josh; xiv. 1; Ps. cv. 113. Gen. xvii. 8. 

The name Palestine and Palestina, when the A.V. was made, 
was equivalent to Phzlzstza. See Ps. lx. 8; Ixxxvii. 4; cviii. 9. 
It is never used of the whole land, but only of “ Philistia.” 
See Kitto, vol. iii. p. 386. 


Some Worps wnuicH Occur Seven Times. 
(1) Old Testament. 


"IN (Z4-z0r), a girdle, 14. 
TINN (a2-kah-rah), memorial, 7. 


186 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


SDN (ck-kar), husbandman, 7. 

JN (ah-naph), to be angry, 14. 
“DN (Chald., esahr), a decree, 7 (all in Dan. vi.). 
pas (ah-phak), to restrain, 7. 


"2 (Jah-kar), to search, 7. 


"3 (Zar), clean, 7. 

*i3 (ar) and 93 (bahr), corn, 14. 

9 (ree) and N'I (dah-ree), fat, 14. 

MS (reeth), covenant; 7 in Gen. ix. of God's covenant 
with Noah, and 14 in Gen. xv. and xvii. of God’s 
covenant with Abraham. 

m? (goh-lah), captivity, 42 (7 being in the simple form, 
and 7 with the preposition 23, zz/o, prefixed). 

m3 (gzz2aA), a fleece, 7 (all in Judg. vi. 37-40). 

JA (gan), a garden, 42 (14 being in Genesis, and 28 else- 
where). 

NW" (deh-sheh), grass, 14. 

I} (zah-kak), to refine, 7. 

31 (chah’y), living: In Chaldee, 7. 


In Hebrew, 168, viz. :— 


Leviticus RC: 
Numbers 7 
Deuteronomy... 21) 168 (7 x 8 x 3). 
Samuel TE 
Solomon's  ... 56 


In Chaldee it occurs 7 times (Ezra vi. 10; Dan. ii. 30; 
iv. 17, 34; vi. 20, 26; vii. 12). 
TD (4ee-rah), an enclosure, or castle, etc., 7. 
FID (Zap, little children, 42: 


Deuteronomy MEA) 
Rest of Pentateuch 21)42 (6 x 7). 
Elsewhere ... ES uc 
v. Cy hudee), a Jew (singular) s. re 1 
Jehudi (proper name) xe i p^ 


ads (yah-lad), to beget, 28 in Gen. v. 
pns (yztz-chahk) and pne" (yts-chahk), Isaac, 112: 


Deuteronomy ET 
Rest of Pentateuch 9i j112 (7 x 8 x 2). 
Elsewhere ... RIA 


n2 (Koh-heyn), priest, 7 in Genesis. 


SEVEN: NUMBERS OF WORDS. 187 


1133 (K’hoonnah), the priest's office, 14. 
113132 (/voh-naA), frankincense, 21 (7 being in Leviticus). 
h (mahn), manna, 14. 
NJ (zah), I pray, or vow, 406 (7 x 58). 
MII (m'gee-na), a song, 14: 
In Psalm titles, 7. 
Elsewhere, 7. 


Jj jad (nah-gan), to play on a stringed instrument, 7 in 1 Sam. 


= 


xvi.—xix., all spoken of David. 
D'NYNX (¢zch-‘/zaheem), offspring, 7 in Isaiah. 
DYN (zoom), to fast, 21. 


ron» (ko-he-leth), a preacher, 7, all in Ecclesiastes : 
3 in beginning, i. I, 2, 12. 
I in middle, vii. 27. 
3 at the end, xii. 8, 9, 10. 
DV3 (noh-gam), beauty, Ps. xxvii. 4; xc. 17; Zech. xi. 7, 10: 
pleasantness, Prov. iii. 17: pleasant, Prov. xv. 26; 
xvl. 24. 


Jn (z than), to give or bestow, Ezra iv. 13; vii. 20 twice; 


Daniy: 163 iv. 17, 25, 32. 

"oy (al-mah), a maiden, Gen. xxiv. 43; Exod. ii. 8; Ps. 
ites; Prov. xxx, 19; Song i. 3; vi. 8; Isa. vii. I4. 

rey (sah-raph), fiery serpents, Num. xxi. 6, 8; Deut. 
zu ure vi. 2,6; xiv. 29; xxx. 6. 

mia" (r7m-mah), a worm, 7. 

[po (sah-tahn), Satan, 14 in Job. 

"(n (or), a turtle dove, 14. 

El-Shaddai* (God Almighty), Gen. xvii. 1; xxviii. 3; xxxv. 
Ducum 14; xvin. 3; BxodELh 36; Ezek, x. 5. 


(2) Mew Testament. 


dwilw (agnizo), to purify. 

anp (acer), air, 7. 

dvdoracts (anasfasts), resurrection; 42 times, 21 of which 
have the article, and seven are in the dative case. 

máry (apatee), deceit. 

åre (aprzmz), to be absent, 7. 


* Shaddai (Almighty) without ZZ occurs 48 times (4x 12), a number which 


speaks of perfection of dominion over the earth. (See p. 53.) 


188 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


dpyópiov (argurion), pieces of Mdb d in connection with 
money Judas. 
dornp (asteer), a star, 14 in Revelation. 
apOapros (aphthartos), incorruptible, 7. 
Bactretdw (basileu), to reign, 21 (seven being in Revelation ; 
I4 elsewhere). 
8o0Àos (doulos), servant, 14 in Revelation. 
éerictapar (epistamaz), to know, 14. 
émuotarns (epistatees), master, 7 (all in Luke). 
èmirayý (epetagee), commandment, 7. 
hyéopar (hegeomar), to be chief, 28. 
dpwpos (amomos), 7: 
without blemish, Eph. v. 27; 1 Pet. i. 19. 
without spot, Heb. ix. 4. 
without fault, Rev. xiv. 5. 
without blame, Eph. i. 4. 
faultless, Jude 24. 
unblameable, Col. i. 22. 
vapovaía ( Parousia), presence or coming, 7 times in 1 and 
2 Thess. (4 times in the first Epistle and 3 times in the 
second). 
Xuv (Son), Zion, 7 times. 
pinua (phileema), a kiss, 7. 
won (odee), a song, 7. 
adpos (Psalmos), psalm, 7. 


PHRASES. 
(1) Old Testament. 


NIP Sx (El quannah) 
NIIP bx (El guannoh) 
D'NI DY MN (Hinneh yahmim baheem), Behold, the days 


come, 21.* 

N nb (/ahor hu), he or it (is) unclean, 7 (all in Lev. 
xi. and xiii.). 

NYT ND (amey hu), he or it (is) unclean, 7 in Lev. xiii. 

pb NT NDO (Zamey hu lahkem), he or it is unclean 
unto you, 7 (all in Lev. xi. and Deut. xiv.). 


E E a jealous God. 


* **Lo" in Jer. xxx. 3; Amos iv. 2, instead of ** Behold,” 


SEVEN: NUMBERS OF PHRASES. 189 


THON mm sey (F'bahrek kah Y'hovah Eloheka), the 
Lor» thy God shall bless thee, 7; Deut. xiv. 24, 29; 
XOU RVO, r5; xxi. 20; xxiv. I9.* 

DnwWAWw nmm (F'hovah Ts’baioth), the Loro of hosts, 7 in 
the Psalms and 14 in Haggai. 

939 mMm *3 (Kee F'hovah dibóer) for the Lorn hath 
Sporen, 7; 1 Eüngs Xiv. II; Isa. i. 2; xxii. 25; 
xxv. 8; Jer. xiii. 15; Joel iv. 8; Obad. 18. 

“As I live saith the Lord Gop,” 14 (all in Ezekiel). 

“As I live” (spoken by God), 7; Num. xiv. 28; Isa. 
mH 18; Jem xxii. 24; xlvii 18; Ezek. xvii I9; 
xxxiii. 27; Zeph. ii. 9. 

* Daughter of Jerusalem,” 14 (7 in sing. and 7 in plur.). 

“Rising up early and sending " (spoken of God), 7 (viz., 
2 Chron. xxxvi. 15, and 6 times in Jeremiah). 

* Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego” (Chald.), 14 in 
Dan. ii. 49—iii. 30. 

* The land which [the Lorn] sware unto . . . Abraham, 
to Isaac, and to Jacob," 7; Gen.1.24; Exod. xxxiii. 
INE. cow Ir; Deut 1.8; vi 10; xxx. 20; 
XXXlV. 4. 

et etree of life,” 7 (3 in Gen. lit.; and 4 in Prov., fig.). 

“The voice of the Lorn,” 7 times in Ps. xxix. 

“And it came to pass in the days of" *3*3 *m*"'y (Va- 
Y hee Beemaye), 7 times; always indicating a time of 
sorrow and distress, (7) (VayAe) sounding like 
the Greek otal, woe; Lat., ve), followed by a mani- 
festation of delivering grace. 

(1) Gen. xiv. t. The war which brought sorrow 
to Lot and distress to Abraham ends in the 
blessing of Melchisedek. 

(2) Ruth i. I. The famine and bereavement end- 
ing in blessing, marriage, and redemption. 

(3) 2 Sam. xxi. I. A famine again ending in 
divine deliverance (v. 14). 

(4) Isa. vii. 1. The confederacy against Jeru- 
salem ending in the promise of Messiah's 
birth (v. 14). 

(5) Jer. i.3. The captivity of Judah followed by 
the promise of restoration. 


* Not always translated in the same way. 


190 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


(6) Estheri. 1. The danger and distress of the 
Jewish nation ending in a complete and 
happy deliverance. 

(7) Luke ii. 1. The enrolment of Cæsar Augustus, 
showing that the land and the people were 
tributary to Rome, followed by the birth of 
the Lord Jesus. 

Jehovah is said to * Dwell between the cherubim " 7 
times: 1 Sam. iv. 4; 2 Sam. vi. 2; 2 Kin. xix. 15; 
1 Chron. xiii, 6; Ps. lxxx. 1; xcix. 1; Isa. xxxvii. 16. 


(2) New Testament. 
* As it is written,” ** 28 (4 X 7). 


V Gospels SRI y 
xaÜüs yeypamrot — ++. 24 \ 28 | Romans es I4 
«s yeypamrrat ues Elsewhere ... 7 


“From the foundation of the world," dd KataBodjs 
xécpov (apo katabolees kosmou), 7 times, because re- 
lating to God’s work of grace; while the phrase 
“before the foundation of the world” occurs 3 
times,t because relating to the act of Divine sove- 
reignty. The seven occurrences are 3 in the 
Gospels and 4 elsewhere: Matt. xiii. 35; xxv. 34; 
Luke xi, 50; Heb. iv. 3; ix. 26; Rev. xiii. 8; xvii. 8. 

“The Sabbath day," 7. 

* After the order,” xarà rijv rá£w (kata teen taxin), 7 (all in 
Hebrews). j 

“The first day of the week," ma (rov) ZapßBdrov (mia (ton) 
sabbaton), 7. 

morós (pistos), faithful, followed by 6 Aóyos (ho logos), the 
word or saying, 7 (all in the Pastoral Epistles, 1 Tim. 
1.155 ii 1; 1v.9, 12; 20Min; o HP 

* Children of Israel," 14. 

“There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth," 7. 


* rb bn0év (tö reethen), **that which was spoken,” occurs 12 times (omitting 
Matt. xxvii. 35 and Mark xiii. 14 with R.V.). For the writing was given by 
inspiration of the Spirit (7) ; while the speaking was in Divine sovereignty and 
government. (See p. 37.) 

+ John xvii. 24; Eph. i. 4; 1 Pet. i 20. See pages 120, 121. 

t This '*faithful saying ” does not refer to what follows it, but to what pre- 
cedes it in verses 3-7. The affirmation of this is to be made ‘‘ zx order that 
(fva) they which have believed in God might be careful to maintain good works.” 


SEVEN: NUMBERS OF WORDS, I91 


WORDS FROM THE SAME Root. 
(1) Old Testament. 


TWN (eshed), a stream 1, and PYHU/N (ashedoth), springs, 
6. Total, 7. 

DYJA (g'zaA-zeem), treasuries, 3; a (ginzeen, Chal.), 
treasure, 3; and m (ganzak), a treasury, 1. Total, 7. 

2U/2 (kesev), a lamb, 13; WD (kisdah), a ewe-lamb, 1. 
Total, 14. 

mo (sooph), to have an end, Heb., 8; Chald, 2: 
7D (soph), the end, Heb., 5; Chald., 5: MAID (sufZaA), 
a whirlwind, Heb., 15. 

Total, Hebrew ... 28|... 
Chaldee 7/3 ‘aes 

ops (rahqam), to embroider, 9; mapa (rigmah), broi- 

dered work, 12. Total, 21. 


OLW (skamat), to release, etc, 9; MODY (sk mitta), a 
release, 5. Total, 14. 


(2) New Testament. 


aoryp (asteer), a star, 24; dorpov (astron), a star, 4. Total, 
28. 

Bécavos (basanos), torment, 3; Bacavifw (Dasammo), to tor- 
ment, I2; Bacovopds (basamismos), torment, 5; Bara- 
viotns (basanistees), a tormentor, 1. Total, 21. 

Todaria, Galatia, 4 times: 1 Cor. xvi. 1; Gal. i. 2; 2 Tim. 
iv. 10; I Pet. i. 1. Galatians, once: Gal. iii. 1. Of 
Galatia, twice: Acts xvi.6; xviii. 23. Total, 7. 

éAeí8epos (eleutheros), free, 23; éXevOepía. (eleutheria), free- 
dom, ir; eAevÜepoo (eleutheroo), to set free, 7; are- 
AeiOepos (apeleutheros), a freed-man, 1. Total, 42. 


In Romans : ES, T aeo] 
In St. John's Gospel and Revelation ... 7 le 
Elsewhere A pe e. TE 
nxos (eechos), a sound, 3; ùxéw (eecheo), to sound, 2; 

eénxéopar  (exeecheoma:), to sound forth, 1; xaryxeo 


(kateecheo), to teach by sound (or word of mouth), 8. 
Total sra 


192 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


WORDS FROM A DIFFERENT ROOT, BUT WITH SIMILAR 
MEANING. 


BANS (Frosh), fir ... -— 20,1 

pnma Crotheem), fir... 1 

mA (gath), winepress — ... a 

ap (ye-kev), wine vat 16] > 

DN! (vah-izak), to cast (of metal) ... sea 5195 
mY! (y’/200-kah), a casting... "ls 
ps5 (moo-tzak), a casting ... DEO 
np» (moo-tze-keth), a hollow pipe... 2 


ps (zoo), to pour out, cast T "a \ 
pss (mah-tzook), a pilar — ... "m 


1113 (4ah-vah), to be burned 2 
*5 (kee), burning I 
7113 (E'veey-yaA), burning es c 
man (mk-vak) burning  ... aes 
SY (/zarav), to be burned ... a "EI 
DW Gzah-re-vet&), burning 3 


14 (2X7) 
Sahay (arreen), man |... AS a ene his 
Sany (ae male 


apoevokoirns (arsenokortees), sodomite 


i 
l 


Onàdćw (Zheelazo), to give suck 

05Xv (theelu), female 

apvós (amnos), lamb . d E ES 

Spo (areen), lamb (ake x 3) es ee | je (5X7) - 
ot . e 30 


apviov (arnion), lamb 


6 
20 
OjXea. (theeleia), female... n e En 
3i at 
3 


ydw (gelao), to laugh dm Scr B m 
yédus (gelos), laughter em 1 6 
KaTayeAaw CER to laugh ^ 

scorn A A " 


pouxtypilo (mukteerizo), to co 3 
expuxtypil (ek-mukteeriz0), to dese 2 sf 


* The R.V. with the textual editors read &pony (nezt.) for &ppny in these 
three passages : Rom. i. 27; Rev, xii 5, 13. 
+ Reading rpépw, **to nourish,” in Luke xxiii. 29 with R.V. and editors. 


SEVEN: NUMBERS OF WORDS. 193 
éurailw (empaizo), to mock ... ie AED 
€urrarypos (empaigmos), mocking ... I 
€pmatypovn (empaigmonee), mockery 1* 7 
€umatkrns (emparktees), a mocker ... 2 
x^eváto (chleuazd), to mock Uu s. NM 2 
Total of the four roots ... So 28 (4 X 7) 
pp (hormee), onset... — ... d 2 
óppáw (hormad), to rush 5 
Spynua (hormeema), a mighty fall I (20 
adopyy (aphormee), occasion 7 
kovioprós (koniortos), dust — ... ; ENS 
vaporpóvo (par-otruno), stir up E s I 
21 (3X7) 


Sometimes a single chapter or separate portion may be 


taken and dealt with by itself, and thus form a fruitful 
subject of Bible study. We give an example f of 


Ezekiel xxxvi. 


I. Seven things concerning Israel to-day :— 


I. Unclean in the sight of God (v. 29). 

2. Possessed of stony hearts (v. 26). 

3. Profaning God's holy Name (vv. 20, 22). 

4. Scattered among the heathen (v. 19). 

5. Covered with infamy and shame (vv. 3-6). 

6. Subject to heathen rule (v. 6). 

7. Desolate, forsaken, and a reproach (vz. 3, 4, 30). 


IL. Seven things God will do to Israel's oppressors :— 


I. Speak in jealousy against them (v. 5). 

2. Turn their glory into shame (v. 7). 

3. Dispossess them of their occupation in the land 
(vv. 10, 11). 

4. Give them to Israel for a possession (v. 12). 

5. Break their power to crush Israel (zv. 13, 14). 

6. Vindicate and glorify His own name among them 
(v. 22). 

7. Teach them that He is God (vv. 36, 38). 


^x This word is added by the Textual Editors and R.V. in 2 Pet. iii. 3, which 


would thus read ‘‘scoffers with scoffing.”’ 


t All the authorities read ĉ:axAeváfw in Acts ii. 13. 
I Suggested by Rev. W. H. Walker, jun., in Zhe Faithful Witness. 


S 1396. o 


194 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


III. Seven things God will do for Israel :— 

. Gather them out of all countries (v. 24). 

. Bring them into their own land (v. 24). 

. Cleanse them from filth and idols (z..26). 

. Give them new hearts and minds, and. His spirit 
(vv. 26, 27). 

. Make them again His people (v. 28). 

. Cause them to flourish and multiply (v. 30). 

. Make their end better than their beginning (v. 11). 


A w NN. 


N OVW 


IV. Seven things Israel themselves will do :— 

. Remember their past evil (v. 31). 

. Loathe themselves for their iniquity (v, 31). 

. Be ashamed and confounded (v. 32). 

. Walk in Jehovah’s statutes (v. 27). 

. Keep His judgments (v. 27). 

. Dwell for ever in the land (v. 33). 

. Pray for the accomplishment of all these blessings 


(v. 37). 


GEMATRIA. 


One or two examples may be given of the numbers in 
names, etc., though many more are given elsewhere. 
Enoch, “the seventh from Adam " —84 (7 x 12). 
* Heirs of God,” in the Greek = 1071 (7X 153). 
«The Lamb,” in Greek=651(=7 X93 oF 7X 3X 31). 


Tue MULTIPLES oF SEVEN 


as a rule partake of the same spiritual significance, and 
therefore we have not treated all of them specially, but only 
where they have a peculiar significance arising from the 
power of the other factor, as is the case with 42, 49, 70, 
etc. 

As an example of one of the other multiples we may take 


Tue Ass. 


The * ass" is the only animal that man is compared to: 
see Job xi. 12, * For vain man would be wise, though man 
be born a wild ass's colt." 

In Exod. xiii. 13 the first-born of man is classed with the 
firstling of an ass. Both must be redeemed with a lamb. 


This is repeated in Exod. xxxiv. 20. Nothing less than a 


SEVEN: MULTIPLES OF SEVEN. 


sacrificial redemptive act could bring such a being to God. 


There are 28 (4x7) asses separately spoken of, and with 
may be compared the 28 (4x7) “times” connected 


these 


with * vain man” in Eccles. iii. 1-8. 


I. 
2. 


I 


Balaam’s ass (Num. xxii. 21), “a time to speak." 

Achsah's ass (Josh. xv. 18), *a time to get," when she 
lighted off her ass to make her request and get what 
she asked. 


. Samson’s (Judg. xv. 15), “a time to war.” 


The Levite's (Judg. xix. 28), “a time to be silent,” when 
“none answered,” and he sent his desperate, silent 
message throughout Israel, 


. Abigail’s (1 Sam. xxv. 20) “a time of peace,” when 


she met David and made peace for Nabal. 


. Her second ass (v. 42), “a time to love,” when she went 


to meet David and became his wife. 


. Ahithophel’s (2 Sam. xvii. 23), “a time to die," when he 


saddled his ass and went and hanged himself. 


. The “old prophet's? ass (1 Kin. xiii. 13, 27), “a time 


to kill? when he found *the man of God" killed by 
the lion. 


. The “man of God's" ass (v. 28), “a time to mourn,” 


when the old prophet laid him thereon *to mourn and 
to bury him.” : 

The Shunamite's ass (2 Kin. iv. 24), “a time to heal,” 
when she rode to Elisha, who restored her son. 


. Mephibosheth’s (2 Sam. xix. 26), *a time to embrace,” 


when he would go and salute David. 


. Shimei's (1 Kin. ii. 40), “a time to die.” 
. Jesse's (1 Sam. xvi. 20), *a time to live? (21). 
. Moses's (Exod. iv. 20-26), “a time to kill,” when he in- 


curred the judgment of Gen. xvii. 14. 


. Abraham's (Gen. xxii. 3), “a time to get and a time to 


lose," when God demanded back the son He had given. 


. The Saviour’s ass (Matt. xx. 5), “a time to laugh,” when 


the daughter of Jerusalem rejoiced. 


7. The young, its foal (Matt. xxi. 5). 


18-28. The asses of Jacob's sons (Gen. xliv. 13), filling up 


the other “times.” 


196 J| NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


EIGHT. 


In Hebrew the number eight is 71330 (Sk moneh), from 
the root {DY (Shah’meyn), “to make fat,” * cover with fat,” 
“to super-abound.” As a participle it means “one who 
abounds in strength,” etc. As a noun it is * superabundant 
fertility,” “oil,” etc. So that as a numeral it is the super- 
abundant number. As seven was so called because the 
seventh day was the day of completion and rest, so eghit, 
as the eighth day, was over and above this perfect comple- 
tion, and was indeed the firs¢ of a new series, as well as 
being the eighth. Thus it already represents two numbers 
in one, the first and eighth. Let us first consider the con- 
nection between 


EIGHT AND SEVEN TOGETHER. 


Just as we saw the connection between the numbers six 
and seven together (pp. 158-167), so we must note the remark- 
able connection between seven and eight when used together. 

Seven means, as we have seen, according to its etymology, 
that which is spiritually complete or satisfying ; while egA/ 
denotes that which is superabundant or satiating. Hence 
we often find these two numbers associated with these dis- 
tinctions. 


Jexovan’s COVENANTS WITH ABRAHAM 


were erghi in number; seven before Isaac was offered up, and 
the eighth when he had been received “ina figure” from the 
dead. 

I. Gen. xii. I-3, sovereignty. 

2, Gen. xii, 7, the seed. , 

3. Gen. xiii. 14-17, Divine assurance, rising and walking 

on resurrection ground. 
4. Gen. xv. 13-21, the limits of the land; the 400 years; 
the 4th generation. 

. Gen. xvii. 1-22, invincible grace. 
Gen. xviii. 9-15, human failure and imperfection. 
Gen. xxi. 12, Spiritual blessing headed up in the seed. 
Gen. xxii. 15-18, resurrection blessing. 


PN Nn 


EIGHT AND SEVEN TOGETHER, t97 


The first ‘Aree are marked off from the others by the words 
“after these things," xv. 1. The next four are marked off 
from the eighth by similar separating words, repeated in 


Xxli. I. 


It will be noted that each covenant blessing is stamped 
with the character of its numerical significance. 


‘JosErn’s Tvrrcar COMMUNICATIONS WITH HIS BRETHREN 


were eg! in number. Seven times before Jacob’s death, and 
an eighth time after. 


I, 


2. 


G2 


Own + 


In Gen. xxxvii. 6, he tells his dream about the sheaves 
of wheat (earthly glory). 

His second dream about the sun, moon, and stars 
(heavenly glory, completing the double witness of 
John iii. 12). 


. His message of love to them from his father, when he 


is rejected and cast into the pit, but raised (unknown 
to them) to the right hand of power. 


. They are compelled to go to Joseph, Gen. xlii. 
. Again they go, Gen. xliii. 15. 
. A third time (Gen. xliv. 13), when Joseph proclaims 


himself. Three times they had denied him. Three 
times they have to go to him; and the third time, 
after deep exercise of heart, reach the place of 
blessing. But it is (like the No. 6) incomplete. It 
needs the 


. * And Israel (no longer Jacob) took his journey with 


all that he had” (Gen. xlvi). Nothing more is to 
be desired, so he says, *Now let me die, since I 
have seen thy face," etc. (v. 30). The history is 
spiritually complete; but there remains another 
'communication. 


. Jacob has passed away, and they are face to face 


with Joseph, a type of Christ in resurrection glory 
(Gen. I. 15, etc.). 


EXODUS xxi. 23-25. 


There are eight particulars in connection with punish- 


ment ; 


but seven stand in a different category, not being 


possible if the eighth were inflicted, viz., “ Life for life." 


198 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


. Life for life; 

. Eye for eye; 

. Tooth for tooth, 

. Hand for hand, 

. Foot for foot, 7i 
. Burning for burning, 

. Wound for wound, 

. Stripe for stripe. 


ON Anr d» 09 l9 


Exopvs xr. 
Seven times we have the phrase “As the Lorn commanded 
Moses," * and once (v. 16), “according to all that the Lorp 
commanded him." 


Tue Feast or TABERNACLES 
was the only feast which was kept eight days. The eighth 
is distinguished from the seventh. See Lev. xxiii. 39, and 
compare verses 34-36; Num. xxix. 39, and Neh. viii. 18. 


2 CHRONICLES VI. 

Eight appeals of Solomon for his prayer to be heard. 
Seven times, “Hear Thou from heaven," and once (v. 21), 
* Hear Thou from thy dwelling-place, from heaven." Simi- 
larly in 1 Kings viii., the parallel passage. 


ISAIAH V. I, 2. 


There are eight sentences describing the vineyard, but 
seven give the characteristics, and oze the result. 


Tue Steps IN EZEKIEL’S TEMPLE, 
Seven led into the outer court (xl. 22, 26), and eight led 
from the outer to the inner (xl. 31, 34, 37). 
The seven led from labour to rest, the eight from rest to 


worship. : 
Tur Lorp Jesus was on A MOUNTAIN 


eight times.] Seven times were before the cross, but the 
eighth time after He rose from the dead, 


* Verse 23, **had commanded,” is the same as the other six in the Hebrew. 

+ How many led into the Temple the Hebrew Text does not say. The 
Septuagint says there were ten. See v. 49, R.V. text and margin. 

f Omitting of course the scene in the Temptation. 


EIGHT AND SEVEN TOGETHER. 199 


EpuEsians IV. 4-6. 


Seven unities, but the seventh is two-fold—* God and 
Father "—making eg in all. 


COLOSSIANS Ill. 12, 13. 
There are seven graces, but (v. 14) over all these there is 
“love,” which is the bond of perfectness, the upper garment 
- which completes and unites the others. 


JAMES 111. 17. 
“The wisdom that is from above " is enumerated in seven 
particulars, but the fifth is double, making egA/ in all (* full 
of mercy and good fruits ”). 


AsRAHAM's Sons 
were eight in number; but seven were “born after the flesh,” 
while one, the eighth, was “by promise." 


Tur CONSECRATION OF AARON AND HIS SONS 
was on the egA/A day, after abiding “at the door of the 
‘Tabernacle of the Congregation day and night seven days” 
(Eevavili. 35; ix. 1). 


In Sotomon’s TEMPLE 
there were ergh classes of furniture, while in the Tabernacle 
there were seven :— 


Temple. Tabernacle. 
I Ark. I Ark. 
1 Mercy-seat. I Mercy-seat. 
1 Altar of Incense. I Altar of Incense. 
ro Candlesticks. 1 Candlestick. 


10 Tables of shewbread. 1 Table of shewbread. 

1 Altar of burnt-offering. 1 Altar of burnt-offering. 
IO Lavers. I Laver. 

I Brasen Sea. 


35 (5X7). E 


Tue SABBATH TO BE Kept Hoty. 
There were eight commands in all Seven by Je- 
hovah (Exod. xx. 8; Deut. v. 12, repetition; Sae 12c 


200 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


xxxi. 13; xxxiv. 21; Lev. xix. 3, 30; xxiii. 3: ome by 
Moses, Exod. xxxv. 2). 


DAVID was THE EIGHTH Son or JESSE 


according to 1 Sam. xvi. 6, etc., and 1 Sam. xvii. 12; but 
owing doubtless to the death of one son without issue, and 
hence excluded from the genealogies, David would be called 
in 1 Chron. ii. 15 “ the seventh.” 

These will suffice to show the connection between the 
numbers seven and eight. Let us now consider the number 


EIGHT BY ITSELF. 


It is 7 plus 1. Hence it is the number specially associated 
with Resurrection and Regeneration, and the beginning of a 
new era or order. i 

When the whole earth was covered with the flood, it was 
Noah “the eighth person ” (2 Pet. ii. 5) who stepped out on 
to a new earth to commence a new order of things. “Eight 
souls" (1 Pet. iii. 20) passed through it with him to the new 
or regenerated world. ; 

Hence, too, circumcision was to be performed on the egA/A 
day (Gen. xvii. 12), because it was the foreshadowing of the 
true circumcision of the heart, that which was to be “ made 
without hands," even “the putting off of the body of the sins 
of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ" (Col. ii. 11). This 
is connected with the new creation. 

The first-born was to be given to Jehovah on the eighth 
day (Exod. xxii. 29, 30). But 


RESURRECTION 
is the great truth which is signified. Christ rose from the 
dead on “the first day of the week,” that was of necessity 
the eghth day. And it is remarkable that the Bible contains 
the record of 


Light individual Resurrections 


(other than the Lord and the saints) : 
3 in the Old Testament. 
3 in the Gospels. ls 
22m MESE. and xx. 


J 


EIGHT BY ITSELF: ILLUSTRATIONS. 20I 


The three in the Old Testament correspond to the three 
raised by our Lord, 


I. The son of a widow— 
Zarepta (1 Kings xvii. 17-25) and 
Nain (Luke vii. 11-18), 


2. The child of a rich person— 
Son of the woman of Shunem (2 Kings iv. 32-37), 
The daughter of Jairus (Mark v. 35; Luke viii. 49). 


3. A full grown man... . after burial— 
In Elisha's tomb (2 Kings xiii. 20, 21), 
Lazarus (John xi.). 


Tue Feast or TABERNACLES 


lasted eight days, with a special reference to the Incarnation 
(John i. 14). 


THE TRANSFIGURATION 


also took place on the eighth day (inclusive reckoning) after 
the first announcement of Christ’s “sufferings,” and it was 
the showing forth of the * glory " which should follow at His 
coming again. 


Tue First Cuse. 


Light is the first cuc number, the cube of zwo, 2 x 2 x 2, 
We have seen that ¢hree is the symbol of the first plane 
figure, and that four is the first square. So here, in the first 
cube, we see something of transcendent perfection indicated, 
something, the length and breadth and height of which are 
equal. This significance of the cude is seen in the fact that 
the * Holy of Holies," both in the Tabernacle and in the 
Temple, were cudes. In the Tabernacle it was a cude of 
IO cubits. In the Temple it was a cube of 20 cubits. In 
Rev. xx. the New Jerusalem is to be a cube of 12,000 fur- 
longs. Dr. Milo Mahan is inclined to believe that the Ark 
of Noah, too, had a kind of sacred Shechinah in “the window 


202 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


finished in a cubit above "—a cube of one. If so, we have 
the series of cubes :— 
1 — The Ark. 
10? = 1,000, The Tabernacle. 
20? — 8,000, The Temple. 
12,000? == 1,728,**000,000,000, the New Jerusalem. 


Eisur Sones IN THE OLD TESTAMENT 

outside the Psalms: 
I. Redemption, Exod. xv. 
2. Supply and maintenance, Num. xxi, 17. 
3. Moses witnessing to the grace of God and the un- 

faithfulness of man, Deut. xxxii. 

4. Victory over oppression, Judg. v. 
5$. David, God's elect, delivered from all his foes, 
2 Sam. xxii. 

. The Song of Songs. 

. The song of the well-beloved touching Israel, God's 
vineyard, Isa. v. 

. This (the egAZ/Z) waits to be sung on resurrection 
ground (Isa. xxvi.), for it does not come till after 
* death is swallowed up in victory," xxv. 8. 


sr ON 


oo 


Tue MigacrEs or ELIJAH 


were eight in number, marking the Divine character of his 
mission: 
1. The shutting up of heaven, 1 Kings xvii. 1; James v. 
17 ; Luke iv. 25. 
2. Multiplying the widow's meal, 2 Kings xvii. 14-16. 
3. Raising the widow’s son, zv. 17-23. 
4. Causing fire to come down from heaven, 1 Kings 
xviii. 37, 38. 
5. Causing rain to come down from heaven, vv. 41-45. 
6. Causing fire to come down from heaven, 2 Kings i. 10. 
7* The same, v. 12. 
8. Dividing the Jordan, 2 Kings ii. 8. 


Tuer Mriracres or ELISHA 


were double in number, viz. sixteen, for his request was, “Let 
a double portion of thy spirit be upon me,” 2 Kings ii. 9: 


* This 1728, too, is a remarkable number, viz., 8? x 3°. 


EIGHT: THE DOMINICAL NUMBER, 203 


1. Dividing the Jordan, 2 Kings ii. 14. 

2. Healing the waters, v. 21. 

3. Cursing the young men,* v. 24. 

4. Procuring water for the three kings, 2 Kings iii. 
16-20. 

E Multiplying t the widow's oil, 2 Kings iv. 1-7. 

6. Raising the aid owe Ron. ET. 

7. Healing the deadly pottage, v. 38. 

8. Feeding the hundred men, vv. 42-44. 

9. The healing of Naaman, 2 Kings v. 1-19. 

10. The smiting of Gehazi, vv. 20-27. 

II. Causing the iron to swim, 2 Kings vi. I-7. 

12. Opening the eyes of his servant, v. 17. 

13. Smiting the Syrian army with blindness, v. 18. 

14. Restoring their sight, v. 20. 

is. Arresting the king’s messenger, vv. 30-33. 

16. A dead man raised by touching his bones, 2 Kings 
xiii. 20, 21. 


The use and significance of the number eA in Scripture 
is seen to recur in marvellous exactitude. It may indeed be 
said that 


EIGHT rs THE DOMINICAL NUMBER, 
for everywhere it has to do with the LORD. It is the 


number of His name, IHXZOYZ, Jesus :— 
= io 


MROMHE 4 
i 
Y 
o 


888 


It is the number stamped upon the Old Testament, the 
numbers of its books in all the MSS. being 24 (3 x 8). See 
p25: 

In the book which relates to His great Apocalypse or 
Revelation, there are in the introduction which sets forth the 


* The word is used of Isaac, aged 28; Joseph when 39 ; Rehoboam when 
40 ; Shadrach and his companions in Babylon. 


204 NUMBER IN SCRIPTUKE. 


glory of the Lord, to be revealed in the day of the Lord, 
eight references to the Old Testament on which the claims of 
His Lordship are based. 


Tur Excut REFERENCES TO THE OLD TESTAMENT IN 
REVELATION I. 


It will be noted, moreover, that these are not given 
at haphazard. Our attention is called to their import- 
ance by the order in which they are given. They are 
arranged in the form of an efazodos, the first being from the 
same book as the eighth, the second corresponding in the 
same way to the seventh, the third to the sixth, and the 
fourth to the fifth. Thus the Divine seal of superabundant 
perfection is there set on the Scriptures which declare the 
Lordship of Jesus: 

A, |S. isas Ive. 
B | 7-. Dan. vii. 13. 
C | -7. Zech. xii. 10. 
D | & Isa, xl 4; xliv- Givin 
D |e (sa. xl. 43 xlivs OF xiv, 
Ces Zech. iv 2. 
B | (3=15, Dan, vil. 9, 12:22 x G G, 
A | -16-. Isa. xlix. 2. 


OTHER Dominicat Names or Jesus 


are also marked by gematria and stamped with the number 
eight as a factor: 

Xpirós, Christ, 1480 (8 x 185). 

Koópws, Lord, 800 (8 x 100). 

Kopios ýuðv, Our Lord, 1768 (8 x 221). 

Zwrýp, Saviour, 1408 (8? x 32). 

"EppavovjA, Emmanuel, 25600, (8 x 50). 

Mecaias, Messiah, 656 (8 x 82). 

Yiós, Son, 880 (8 X 110). 


We ought also to note that the other factors, beside the 
prevailing eghé, are full of significance. 

All this speaks to us, if we have “ears to hear,” that 
“God hath glorified His Son Jesus” (Acts iii. 13), and 


EIGHT AND THIRTEEN TOGETHER. 205 


"hath made that same Jesus . . . both Lord and Christ” 
(Acts ii. 36). 
But here we must consider the two numbers 


EIGHT AND THIRTEEN TOGETHER 


that we may afterwards compare and contrast the two. For 
this purpose we must consider the number /Azrfeen here, and 
out of its otherwise proper order. 

As to the significance of ¢hzrteen, all are aware that it has 
come down to us as a number of ill-omen. Many super- 
stitions cluster around it, and various explanations are current 
concerning thern. 

Unfortunately, those who go backwards to find a reason 
seldom go back far enough. The popular explanations 
do not, so far as we are aware, go further back than the 
Apostles. But we must go back to the first occurrence of the 
number ¢hirteen in order to discover the key to its signifi- 
cance. It occurs first in Gen. xiv. 4, where we read “ Twelve 
years they served Chedorlaomer, and the /shirteenth year 
they REBELLED.” 

Hence every occurrence of the number /Z/een, and like- 
wise of every multiple of it, stamps that with which it stands in 
connection with rebellion, apostasy, defection, corruption, disinte- 
gratton, revolution, or some kindred idea. 

The second mention of Zee is in connection with 
Ishmael, Gen. xvii. 25. He was thirteen years old when 
Abraham circumcised him and admitted him into the cove- 
nànt to which he was a stranger in heart, and which ended 
in his rebellion and rejection. 

We see it stamped upon the very fore-front of Revelation. 
For while the opening statement of Gen. i. 1 is composed of 
seven words and twenty-eight letters (4 x 7), the second 
verse consists of fourteen words, but fifty-two letters; fifty- 
two being 4 x 13 tells of some afos/asy or rebellion which 
caused the ruin of which that verse speaks. 

But it is when we come to 


GEMATRIA 


that the most wonderful results are seen. These results may 
be stated thus, briefly: That the names of the Lorp’s 


206 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


people are multiples of egZ/, while the names of those who 
apostatised, or rebelled, or who were in any sense His 
enemies, are multiples of ZZ//ee». This statement, if it be 
proved, is one of the greatest evidences of verbal inspiration 
which the world has yet seen. The discovery of the great 
principle is due, we believe, to the late Dr. Milo Mahan, of 
New York, who has given many examples of it in his work 
already referred to, now long out of print. The effect of this 
law can hardly be estimated in establishing the presence of 
an ever-present working of the Holy Spirit in inditing the very 
words and even the letters of Scripture. No human foresight 
or arrangement could have secured such a result beforehand ; 
no human powers could have carried it out in such perfection, 
No matter where we look, we find the working of the law 
without cessation, without a break, without a flaw from be- 
ginning to end. Only one conclusion is possible, and that is 
that the Bible has but one Author, an eternal, omniscient 
Author, designing, superintending, working, and carrying 
out His own infinite plans. 
Let us take a survey of this wondrous field. 


Tue Seru AND Cain Lines. 


The numerical value of the Seth line of names collectively 
is a multiple of 8; whilst those of the Cazz line collectively is 
a multiple of 43. 


The Seth Line of Names. 


Adam Ve eee tS 
Seth M. ex FOO 
Enos ... " aoa ed] 
Cainan T wo TO 
Mahalaleel ... e A136 
Jared T. .. 214 ) 3168 (8 x 396). 
Enoch oe v NISA 
Methuselah ... ves mH 
Lamech Ta co 
Noah ... $i oss B 
Japheth i a ion OO 


* Japheth was the eldest son of Noah, though Shem was chosen for the 
genealogy of Jesus Christ. 


EIGHT AND THIRTEEN. 207 


‘Taking the Noah group separately, we have: 


Noah T E x3 
Shem A is 240 

HU as 9398 x 9 x 13) 
Japheth Ar wo 490 


Without Ham, the three names, Noah, Shem, and Japheth, 
. equal 888. With Ham they equal 936, as above; but this, 
though it is a multiple of 8, is at the same time a multiple 
of 18, and of 9 also, the number of judgment. 

The gematria of the whole Scripture, Gen. v. 6-24, which 
contains the record of these names, amounts to 62960 (or 
8 x 7870). 


The Cain Line of Names. 


Adam a v MAT 
Cam. «4 M s 8160 
Enoch v te 084 
Irad ... e fen od 
Methusael 1 gy7 |223 di xoxo 
Lamech Sm NC 290 
Jabal... "T v MU 
Jubal... te 20 AO 
Tubal Cain ... 5. $505 
The family of Lamech is also significant if looked at 
separately : 
Lamech and Adah  ... cas vs SOQ 135) 
The two wives, Adah and Zillah ... Orr (18 x 47). 
Jabal, his firstborn, the father of the the No. of 
Bedouin... — ..  ..  ..j[^^| Antichrist. 
. Tubal Cain ... t is .. 598 (18 x 46). 
The whole family, including the 
daughter, Naamah "m — 1924 (or 18 x 148). 


The history of the Cain family is given in Gen. iv. 1-25, 
and spreads over 130 years (18 x 10). See Gen. v. 3. 

Further, the whole Scripture which records the. history, 
Gen. iv. 1-25, yields by gematria 76882 (18 x 5914). There 
is, however, a remarkable exception which * proves the 
rule.” Verse 25 records the birth of Seth, and its value is 
6560 (8 x 820); verse 26, also, which records the birth of his 


208 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


son Enos, and tells how men began then to “call upon the 
name of the Lon»," yields 3064 (8 x 383). 

Contrast this with verse 1, where the numerical value of 
the words *and she eureaived and bare Cain” is 1612 
(43 x 124). 

The years of Adam during the days of Cain, before the 
birth of Seth, were 130 (18 x 10): see Gen. v. 3. While 
after the birth of Seth he lived 800 years (8 x 100), Gen. 


V. 4. 
Tue Gematria OF LawxEcH's SONG 


in Gen. iv. 23, 24, is 4667 (18 x 359) ; while the sentence 
pronounced on Cain in v. 10-13 is 10283 (18 x 791). 


GENESIS VI. 

The record in Gen. vi., which gives the apostasy of man, 
leading up to the judgment of the Flood, is stamped and 
branded throughout with significant numbers : 

Verses 1-3 amount to 7272 (6 x 1212). 

Verse 2 amounts to 3198 (18 x 6 x 41). 

Verse 4, “the same were mighty men which were of old, 
men of renown " = 1703 (43 x 131). 

Verses 5-7, which speak concerning the corruption, 
= 10335 (18 X 795). 

Verses 1-7 = 21672 (6? x 602). 

But now contrast vv. 8-10 concerning Noah—“ But Noah 
found grace in the eyes of the Lorn,” etc., 7008 (8 x 876): 

Verses 11-17, the end of all flesh, the command to build 
the ark, and the threat of the Flood, = 33549 
(13 x 2580). 

Verses 14-16, concerning the ark, — 17668 (4 x 4417). 

Verses 12, 13, and 17 together, concerning the violence 
and corruption, — 13320 (666 x 20). 

Verses 18-22, which speak of the covenant to save Noah 
and his house, while they are stamped with the 
number 13 (which is the number of azonement as 
well as of sz, see below), are stamped also with 
the triple fiv, the 15 of perfect grace by which 
Noah was called, and by the number 2, which tells 
of incarnation and deliverance. The gematria of 
these verses is 15002 (18 x 1154). 


FIGHT AND THIR GEN. 209 


GENESIS x, 15-78. 
The Canaanite names: 


Canaan A s EO 
And a m O 
l Sidon ME. co bea 
Heth... aes e. NS 
The Jebusite one 9 
The Amorite „e BÓ 


The Gisgashite .. 524 ) 3211 (189? x 19). 
The Hivite ... "E es 
The Arkite ... NUS 


The Sinite ... ae LBS 
The Arvadite r.. 22O 
The Zemarite s. BIE 


The Hamathite ... 463 


Tur DzsckwpaNTS or JokraN (Gen. x. 25-29). 
Joktan (the 13th from Shem) ... 169 (1837) 
Peleg (his brother) T n.. ES 
Salah (his grandfather) ... me —339 (1319099 

His 13 sons— 
Almodad ... née 500 XE 85 
Sheleph  ... is: es se HO 
Hazarmaveth or ies ve. FHA 


jerah d n nS e. 2N 
Hadoram ... a iis wo 295 
Uzal ae s age "EE 44 
Diklah T - Ja "EE RO 
Obal T TA se e. 108 


Abimael ... as Am TE 84 
Sheba ane 906 T e. 308 
Ophir E jm 5t ae (287 
Plavilab ... x “rs Sa 59 
Jobab bos E aire "c 20 


2756 (18 x 212). 


The whole passage (Gen. x. 25-29) yields the number 
10647 (1% x 63; Such are the pains taken to emphasise 
the ris o! tne progenitors of the Saracens, for Joktan 
settled in 5. Arabia, while Ishmael settled in Arabia Petrea. 


S 1356. P 


210 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


Tur Line or ArpHaxaD (Gen. xi. 10-27). 


Shem... 340 

Arphaxad 605 

Salah... 338 

Eber > 3.7272 104288 243) 

Peleg? ...5 5113 

Reu m A 3568 (8 X 446). 
Serig DOR 

Nahor: ... 264 


Terah ... 608 eee 29) 


Abram ... 243 


Nauon's FAMILY. 


Nahor .. 264 

Haran ... 255 | 

Lot du NES 

Sarai... 510 1264 (8 X 158). 
Milcah ... 95 

Iscah ... 95 


Thus the entire generation is 4832 (8 X 604). 


THE GENERATIONS OF ABRAHAM. 


Abraham had eight sons. Seven of them were born 
“after the flesh," while the e#ghth was “by promise” (see 
p. 199). 

Abraham 248 (8 x 31) \ 6 (8 
Isaac... 208 (8 x 2 x 18)* 450 (8 X 57). 
Jacob ... 1827 x 2 2099) 


jacos's FAMILY. 
Jacob... 182 
eah .. - 36 486 (80082) 
Rachel ... 238 | i 
Leah’s Six Sons. 
Reuben ... 259 
Simeon ... 466 


Levi s. gab 
ini... 30 1726 (18 x 2 4- 1700). 
Issachar... 830 
Zebulon... 95 


* [saac's household was a divided one, as well as Jacob's ; hence we have 
the 13 as a factor as well as 8. 


EIGHT AND THIRTEEN. 211 


Add parents’ names (Jacob 182, and Leah 36), and we 
have 1944 (8 x 243). 


Aachel's Two Sons.** 


Joseph ... e 156] 


Benjamin T 1388 (7 x 4). 


Rachel’s Maid. 


Bilhah ... w A2 
Dan ite ise 11549690; 
Naphtali.., 17.520 
Leaks Maid, 
Zilpah ... TED 
Gad "t 7 
Asher... seen (SOE 666. 
Add Leah NEZ) 


The whole family of Jacob, including Ephraim (331) and 
Manasseh (395) = 4512 (8? x 4000). 


Tur Twetve TRIBES 
are enumerated in some 18 (3 X 6) different ways, in which 
one is always omitted. For there were 12 tribes; but there 
were also 13, telling of God's design for perfect government, 
and of man's apostasy from that government. 

In Deut. xxxii. Simeon is left out. 

In Rev. vii. Dan and Ephraim are omitted (Joseph and 
Levi being inserted). - 

Generally it is Levi that is omitted. 

Arranged in their 4 camps, as in Num. ii. their value is 
3736 (8 x 467). 

Arranged as in Rev. vii., the value (according to the Greek 
spelling, of course) is 8480 (8 x 1060). 

Arranged as in Num. xiii. 3-16, in connection with the 
rebellion on the return of the 12 spies, we see defection at 
once; for all the representatives of the tribes failed except 
Caleb and Joshua (788). 

The whole passage — 17654 (18 x 1358). 
From verse 4-16 — 12038 (18 x 926). 


* The spelling is taken as in Gen. xxxv. 22-20. 


212 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


To go back, however, to Genesis, we now take 


IsHMAEL’s TwELvE Sons (Gen. xxv. 12-17). 


Now these a, AE 

The generations of s35) 1327 
Ishmael ... Sx uH 
Nebaioth ... vi Oe 

Kedar e 30. 
Abdeel  ... M aus 4836 (18 x 12 X 31). 
Mibsam ... i 352 
Mishmah ... aa TS 
Dumah .. vi. MESES 

Massa  .. c yit 3509 
Hadar... ses 212 

Tema is Bos PA 

jetur i" c a 225 
Naphish ... E ET 
Kedemah... wo TAO) 


Tue Erseven Duxes or Epom. 


Gen. xxxvi. 40-43 is by gematria 9880: thus— 
Verse 40 = 5453 


E ui 670 
a c. 9880 (18 x 760). 
» 43 = 2417* 


The word RON (al-luph), “duke,” amounts to i17 
(18 x 9). 

And eleven times repeated, it is still a mule of 13, viz, 
1287 (13 X 99). 


Tue AsnAHAM-KxruRAH Group (Gen. xxv. 1, 2). 


Abraham we 2409 0821) 

Keturah ove 320 (8 X 40) 

Zimran ... oo Aey 

Jokshan ... «i 2460 

Mean .. ae 2249 (18 X 173). 
Midian ... dom ML 

Ishbak ... ». 412 

Shuah ... mE BA 


* As far as ‘‘ he is Esau.” 


EIGHT AND THIRTEEN, 213 


THEIR DESCENDANTS IN GEN. xxv. 3. 


Shebah ves s. 02 
Dedan ... - e JE (48 x 37). 
Sons of Dedan sve T ZO 
Asshurim ax e 547 
Letushim Ae ee s 1053 (13 x 81). 
Leummim A soo 

Tur Sons or Mipan (Gen. xxv. 4). 
Sons of Midian s. T66 
Ephah ... E v. TOD 
Epher ... sss ae r 
Hanoch ive n ie 936 (13 x 72). 
Abidah ss M M 
Eldaah avs nen 10: 


The phrase which concludes the lists, ‘All these are the sons 
of Keturah," has for its value 468 (13 x 36), making with 
the numbers above 5213 for the whole group, or 13 X 401. 

The whole passage is also a multiple of 13. 


Tue IwcEsrvous CHILDREN or Lor (Gen. xix.). 
Ammon T -= mE 
286 (18 x 22). 
Ammi ... ics os iso ( ) 
Beni-Ammi (children of Ammi) — 182 (18 X 14). 
The whole passage (Gen. xix. 31-38) is a multiple of 13. 


GENESIS XIX. 
* And there came two angels to Sodom at even," 640 
(8 x 80). 
* And Lot sat in the gate of Sodom” * = 1313. 
Verse 1. The whole verse, 4299, significant of Antichrist 
(42) and judgment (9). 
Verses 1-25 = 90441 (18 x 9 X 773). 
Verses 26-29, describing the results of the overthrow 
= 14274 (18 X 9 x 122). 
Verses 1-29, the entire account = 104715 (18 x 9 x 895). 
Lot’s words in verse 7 = 777. 
Verse 25. The work of the Lon» in the overthrow = 2888. 
The account in the Second Epistle of Peter = 6999. 
It will be observed how we have here not only the number 
thirteen, but also the number we, which we shall presently 
see is the number of judgment. 


* Even the expression in 2 Pet. ii. 7, ** and righteous Lot, ” is 1326 (13 x 102). 


214 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


Tue DESTRUCTION OF JERICHO 
is also stamped with the number /Airteen, though not by 
gematria, for the city was compassed once each day for six 
days, and seven times on the seventh day, making 13 times in 
all (64+ 7). Jericho, IM, is 234, which is (48x 2 x 9) 
(nine being the number of judgment; see below, under that 
number). i 
Tur Twetve Jupcxs 

who were raised up as saviours in a time of apostasy and 
rebellion exhibit 20/2 these factors, 8 and 13. 


Othniel ... sam SOR 
Ehud ...° —— 18 
Shamgar s | Lyle) 
Barak ... a 302 
Gideon ... se 2 533 
ANLE C o 
Jephthah «. 498 
Ibzan  .. oo I43 
Elon EU w O% 
Abdon .. ss TBA 
Samson ... = O86 
Abimelech the usurper ( Judg. ix.) by his name 
Ben sx 52d d 4 
Jerubbaal 312 m x ^ ) sees 48): 


The Judges period ends under Samuel, 377 (48 x 29), and 
the last three names which come before us are— 

Eli, Hophni, and Phinehas, which together amount to 462 
EX ILS) 


Tue Saur Group or Names (1 Sam. xiv. 49-51). 


Saul jas HE o) 
Kish ES c 60 
Sons of Saul e 13009 
Jonathan ... Jo HIE 
Ishui T as) Gee 
Melchishua 2209476 nues a 
Ahinoam ... «ce. gS 
Merab fos i. $242 
Michal  ... = 100 


Abner son of Ner 565 


* See under these two numbers for their respective significance. 


EIGHT AND THIRTEEN. 215 


Tuer Jupan ann Israzt Lines or Kines 
are stamped in a remarkable manner with these numbers. 

There are two periods specially marked with regard to 
Israel. 

The number 65 is associated with the separate existence of 

the Ten Tribes in Isa. vii. 8, * Within ZAreescore and five years 
shall Ephraim be broken, that it be not a people." From 
‘that time, that is to say, from the last year of Jeroboam II. 
to the carrying away of Israel was exactly 65 years, or 
5 times 18, which characterised the disintegration which was 
going on in the nation. 

But, more than this, the nulli 390 was also stamped 
upon Israel as being the whole duration of the separate 
existence of the Ten Tribes from the day they rebelled 
against Rehoboam to the day they were led away captive. 
"This we see from Ezek. iv. 4, 5, where the command was 
. given to Ezekiel, “ Lie thou upon thy left side, and lay the ini- 
quity of the house of Israel upon it; according to the number 
of the days that thou shalt be upon it, thou shalt bear their 
iniquity. For I have laid upon thee the years of their iniquity 
according to the number of the days, three hundred and ninety 
days; so shalt thou bear the iniquity of the house of Israel.” 

Now 390 is ¢hirieen times thirty, and the duration of Israel's 
rebellion is sufficiently and appropriately branded upon it. 

On the other hand, when we! turn to Judah we see the 
number 8 pervading it. For the same prophet, in the next 
verse, is commanded to lie on his right side forty days to 
bear the iniquity of the house of Judah—each day for a 
year. We ought to note in passing that the name of Ezekiel, 
who foretells the duration and end of this apostasy, is 156 
(43 x 12); while the words of the prophecy, Ezek. iv. 1-6, 
amount to 36673 (13? x 7 x 31), and the whole passage, 
iv. 1-8, to 42069 (18 x 3313). 

The fulfilment ought also to be noted. The 390 years were 
to signify not only the years of apostasy, but were also to 
signify the 390 days of the siege of Jerusalem; viz., 13 months 
(30 x 48). The siege commenced on the ioth day of the 
ioth month of the oth year of Zedekiah (2 Kings xxv. 1-4), 
and it was taken on the oth day of the 4th month of the 


m Commentators entirely miss the point when they say that 390— IO x 39, 
instead of 13 x 30! 


216 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


11th year of the same king. This gives a period of 
18 months. But the siege was raised for about 5 months 
(see Jer. xxxvii), while Nebuchadnezzar's army was with- 
drawn for fear of Pharaoh, king of Egypt, who had come up 
to meet him. 

Thus we have the two numbers stamped by the history ; 
upon Judah 8, and upon Israel 13. 


Now look at 


Tue List or Jupan’s Kixcs.* 
Rehoboam .,. 320 
Abijam se aS 
Sa d n — mee 
Jehoshaphat ... 410 


Jehoram aa) 201 
Ahaziah ago 37 2424 (8 x 303) 
Athaliah EI CC 
Jehoash 62109822 
Amaziah 2 eo 
Azariah 
(Uzziah)8 ... 292 
Jotham a BO 
Ahaz .. | .. 16 1608 (8 x 76)| ) 4400 (8 x 550). 
Hezekiah a 
Manasseh ... 395 
Amon ... e. 8972. 824 (Bios) 
Josiah ... "mE Be 
Jehoahaz TIE ET 
Jehoiakim — ... 181 
Jehoiachin  ... III S44) 
Zedekiah "E s 


* ‘The spelling, which sometimes varies, is taken according to the first 
occurrence of the name, 

+ In the 39th (3 x 13) year of his reign he forsook the Lorp (2 Chron. 
xvi. 12). 

I Amaziah = 146 or 152 according to the spelling. If 146, then the total 
will be 4394 (13? x 2). But if we add Saul 337, David 14, and Solomon 375, 
itis 5120 (8? x 10). 

§ He had reigned 52 (4 x 13) years when he apostatized (2 Chron. xxvi. 
3, 21). 

|| These three are peculiarly associated in 2 Chron., where their action 
with regard to the house of God is noted :—Jotham (xxvii. I, 2) ‘‘entered not 
into the Temple”; Ahaz (xxviii r, 24) ‘‘shut up the doors”; Hezekiah 
(xxix. 1, 3) ‘* opened the doors of the house of the Lorp.” 


EIGHT AND THIRTEEN, 217 


Tue ISRAELITE Kuwcs. 


Jeroboam I. ... dv 29 
Nadab De cx). 98 
Baasha e 373 


(or 429 (13 X 33) ys 
Elah ... "s as | 36 


Zimri ... A re eee 
Omri... ee ss 320 
Ahab . 3 na id 
ve— ES TRES. 
Jehoram Bs 261 
(or 923 (3 x m) 
jeha. T 22 ?3900 (13 x 300). 


Jehoahaz  .. TA 1m 
Joash ... Sh eran a 2D 


Jeroboam II.. 12202 
(or 676 (132: x n» 
Zachariah  ... cn 2A 


Shallum ae ie. 390 
Menahem  .. a 0035 
Pekahiah  .. "En 
Pekah.. m .. 188 
Hohes E 381 
(or 910 (13 x 70) ) 
Tur LEADERS wHo RETURNED FROM BABYLON. 
Ezra ii. 2. 


Zurubbabel ... wen aui 
Jeshua esi TE UD 
Nehemiah  .. idee BIER 
Seraiah TN ae eG 
Reelaiah "em vs ERIS 
Mordecai... .. 274 (3008 (8 x 47). 
Bilshan m un 1882 
Migpar; ~«... =a ED 
Bigvai "e UNE SS 
Rehum Mis uoce SA 
Baanah at "m esl 


* The alternative numbers are caused by another spelling, but, as it will be 
seen, the result is the same. 

1 In the Hebrew Text 18D, Mizpar, is repeated again after Baanah. If 
we count this in, then the total, instead of 3008, will be 3388, which though 
not a multiple of 8 is very significant. 


218 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE, 


Other chiefs mentioned in other connections are— 
Shesbazzar, the prince of Judah 892. 
Ezra the scribe m 1. 619 9 1624 (8 X 203). 
Nehemiah aise is 2s RES) 

It is difficult to observe a strict order in the presentation 
of these phenomena, because the results are best shown by 
direct contrast. For example, if we take out the names of 
the adversaries who came in direct opposition to the Lord, 
the law will be more clearly seen. 


Tur Apversaries OF Ezra (iv. 7-9). 
Bishlam 


T cael cei 
Mithredath  ... T sve TOJA 
Tabeel.. dis me A2 
* And ilie rest of their com- 3913 (18 x 301). 
panions" ... s .. 989 
Rehum the chancellor «ne os 
Shimshai the scribe .., mE 
These Companions (Ezra iv. 9) are the— 
Dinaites : boc Eo 5m 
Apharsathchites E. ape 272 
Tarpelites 5n coc 499 9930 
Apharsites A De son oA 
Archevites Soc S56 ++» 237 $ 2665 (13 x 205). 
Babylonians... see noo IE 
Susanchites — ... onc -. 687 
Dehavites onc SiC apo HG 
Elamites ses so -ISI 


Together they all make 6578 (48 x 506). 
The men who took strange wives (Ezra x. 17-44) were in num- 
ber 113. The gematria of their names is 38194 (18? x 226). 


THE ADVERSARIES or NEHEMIAH 
as mentioned and named in ii. 19; iv. 7; and xiii. 4: 


Sanballat the Horonite oe 
And Tobiah the servant, the 
Ammonite ... zT em 0 
And Geshem the hea un OBO 2717 (18 x 209). 
And the Arabians  .., ae n 


And the Ammonites .,, — SOT 
And the Ashdodites ... e 1376 
Eliashib the priest ... we 433 


EIGHT AND THIRTEEN. 219 


With this we may note the 6-fold nature of their opposition 
as shown on p. 153. 
DawrEL AND Hrs Companions. 
À (Daniel i. 6.) 
Daniel ni naa OE 


Hananiah ... s GES 
Meet. 2. 3$] 
- Azariah TE pos ACID 


But their Chaldean names, given by Nebuchadnezzar, make 
a number of no significance whatever. 


Tue Enemies or Gop anv His PEOPLE 


as named in Scripture are generally multiples of ¢hirteen. 

Let us begin with the great enemy himself, always re- 
membering that though we may give the English for the 
sake of clearness, the gematria always refers to the original 
Hebrew or Greek: 

Satan, in Hebrew = 364 (13 x 28). 

Satan, in Greek = 2197 (13°). 

* That old serpent, even Satan” (6 dus ó dpxotos . . . Kal ô 
Xaravás) = 2756 (18 x 212). 

* Ha-Seraph " (Num. xxi. 8) — 585 (18 x 45). 

Beelzebub (with art.) — 598 (13 x 46). 

Belial — 78 (13 x 6). 

Apákov (Drakon), Dragon (Rev. xii. 9), = 975 (18 x 75). 

"Odus (Ophis), Serpent, = 780 (18 x 60). 

Murderer = 1820 (18 x 140). 

Tempter — 1053 (18 x 81). 

The Scape-goat = 585 (18 x 45). 

The Lion (Ps. xci. 13) = 338 (18 x 16). 

* As a Lion " (1 Pet. v. 8) — 1885 (18 X 145). 

«The Power of the Enemy" (Luke x. 9) = 2509 (13 
X 193). 

* Your adversary, the Devil, as a roaring lion" — 6032 
(43 x 464). 

Fowler (Ps. xci. 3) — 416 (13 x 32). 

« Who is called the Devil and Satan” (6 xadovpevos d1¢B0A0s 
kai ó Saravás) = 2197 (195). 

* Seven Devils" = 572 (18 x 44). 

“Because the Prince of this world is judged” (John 
xvi. I1) = 5577 (187 x 33). 


220 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


* When he speaketh a lie he speaketh of his own, for he 

is a liar” (John viii. 44) = 7072 (18 X 544), 
Genesis iii., 
where the Devil is first mentioned and revealed. The 
opening words: 

*'The Serpent was more subtle than all the beasts of the 
field" = 1521 (18? x 9). 

The history of the Temptation, vv. 1-7 = 24011 (48 X 
1847). 

The second section (vv. 8-11) = 49478 (18? x 1903). 

The ¢hird section (vv. 22-24), which records the expulsion 
from Eden, = 10894 (13 x 838). 

The whole chapter — 84383 (18 x 6491). 

Eve’s confession (v. 13) = 3692 (13 x 284). 

Verse 8, which describes the act of the Lon» God, is, on 
the contrary, 4064 (8 x 508). 

Verse 21, which records the Divinely prepared clothing 
in grace, = 2850 (2090 8 x 51). 

Verse 15, which we might expect to find significant, 
being the great primeval prophetic promise, is 4266 
(33 X 158); where we have the 42, the 66, of Anti- 
christ, and the 9 of judgment. 

Verse 16, containing the hope of the promised seed, 
added to v. 15 = 8512 (8000 + 8°). 


Isaiah xxvii. I. 
“The piercing Serpent, even Leviathan” = 1170(13 x 90). 
“That crooked Serpent" = 1014 (18? x 6). 
“The Dragon that is in the sea” = 1469 (18 x 113). 


Isaiah xiv. 29. 

“Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina, because the rod of 
him that smote thee is broken: for out of the ser- 
pent’s root shall come forth a cockatrice (marg. 
adder), and his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent” 
= 5369 (18 x 413). 

Psalm lxxv. 15. 

“Thou smotest the heads of Leviathan in pieces, and 
gavest him for meat for the people in the wilder- 
ness " = 3510 (18 x 270; or 18 x 6 Xx 45; or 43 X 
3° X TO) 


EIGHT AND THIRTEEN. 221 


Revelation ix. YI. 
The whole verse = 12090 (18 x 930). 
"he locusts = 351 (48 x 3°). 
“They have a king, the angel of the abyss” = 3978 
(13 x 306). l 
Ephesians ii. 2, 
* According to the course of this world, according to the 
prince of the power of the air” = 9178 * (18 x 76), 
* The power of the air" = 2600 (48 x 200). 


Luke x, 18. 
“Lightning from heaven” = 2626 (13 x 202). 
* And He said, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from 
heaven” = 6903 (18 x 531). 


Ephesians vi. 12. 
* But against principalities, against powers, against the 
rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual 
wickedness in high places" — 16211 (18 x 1247). 


Matthew xvi. 23. 
* An offence unto me" (cxavdaddy pov) = 936 (18 x 72). 


Tur Human ADVERSARIES 


present the same peculiar phenomena: 
Asshur = 169 (48°). 
“The man of sin” = 18062 (18? x 6). 
* The man who took not God for his strength" — 2197 


(18°). 1 
Tue Book or ESTHER 


reveals the same law in operation. Having diligently cas/ 
the horoscope (as Pur, "B, means: see Isa. xlvii. 13), Haman 
found the most favourable time for carrying out his designs 
as “the Jews’ enemy." S 


* Ninety-one hundred being 18 x 700; and 78 being 13 x 6. 

+ Nimrod exhibits a number connected with Antichrist, being 294, or 
7 x 42. 

[ The whole of Psalm lii, = 19572 (42 x 466). 

§ A term applied to none but Haman. See Esth. iii ro; vii. 6; viii. 1; 
iX. IO, I4. 


222 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


Est. iii. 7 tells us that for 12 months the horoscope was 
consulted “in the jrst of the month, . . . from day to day, 
and from month to month, to the /z»e//7 month." Then (v. 12) 
on the shirteenth day of the first month (Ze, the shzrteenth 
month from the time they commenced) the favourable day 
was found. Then (iii. 13) the letters were prepared, and 
upon “one day, even upon the /hirteenth day of the twelfth 
month” (at the end of the second year), the Jews were all 
to be put to death. On that day came the deliverance 
(viii. 12, etc.). Thus we have three ¢hzrteens connected with 
this gigantic effort of the great enemy to destroy the 
Lord’s people, and with them, of course, the promised 
seed. This is the ultimate object of the great enemy i in all 
his designs against God’s people. 

On the other hand, we see the multiples of the dominical 
eight in the Lord’s people: 

Mordecai (ii. 5) 274 


Son'efjax ... 273 
Son of Shimei... 472 }1912 (8 X 239). 
Son of Kish ... 462 
Benjamite so AB 


Q^DN NM mOUMDNO (Ef-Hadassah hee Esther) (ii. 7). 


Eth-Hadassah... 475 
That is Esther 677 | 1152 (8 x 12°). 


Purim (ix. 26), 336 (8 x 42). 
On the other hand we have: 
Bigthan (ii. 21) ... 455 48 x 35). 
Haman the Agagite 117 (13 x 9). 
Zeresh (his wife) ... 507 (18? x 3). 
Haman's sons present a curious phenomenon. In every 
Hebrew manuscript these names are presented thus (ix. 7-9): 


and (veth) Parshandatha. 
and (veth) Dalphon. 

and (veth) Aspatha. 

and (veth) Poratha. 

and (veth) Adalia. 

and (veth) Aridatha. 
and (veth) Parmashta. 
and (veth) Arisai. 

and (veth) Aridai. 


and (veth) Vajezatha. 


EIGHT AND THIRTEEN. 223 


This peculiarity has been preserved not only in all the 
manuscripts, but in every printed edition of the Hebrew 
Text. No scribe or editor has ventured to change this form 
of their presentation. 

Various conjectures have been made both by the ancient 
Jewish and modern commentators as to the reason why these 
names are always presented thus; but no one seems to 
have looked upon the names as an addition sum (regarding 
of course each letter as a figure). Treated thus the sum of 
the names amounts to 10244 or 18 x 788. 


The whole family is 10868 or 13 x 836. 


THE ADVERSARIES OF CHRIST. 


«The Scribes ” = 780 (43 x 60). 
“The Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites” = 2704 


(43? x 16). 

“Woe!” = 481 (18 X 37). 

*Leaven of Pharisees and Sadducees” = 3718 (13? 
x 22). 

«A wicked and adulterous generation” = 1365 
(13 X 105). 


The Scriptures concerning Barabbas. 


Matt. xxvii. 20: “ But the chief priests and eiders per- 
suaded the people that they should ask Barabbas, 
and destroy Jesus " = 10127 (13 x 779). 

The elders = 1352 (18 X 104). 
The multitude = 2340 (43 x 180). 

Matt. xxvii. 16: “ And they had then a notable prisoner, 
called Barabbas " — 2743 (18 x 211). 

Mark xv. 6: “ Now at that feast he released unto them 
one prisoner, whomsoever they desired” = 910 
(48 x 70). 

Luke xxiii. 18: * And they cried out all at once, saying, 
Away with this man, and release unto us Barabbas " 
= 9347 (18 X 719). 


224 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 
John xviii. 40: * Then cried they all again, saying, Not 
this man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a 
robber.” In this verse we have— 
“Then cried they all again" = 2600 (43 x 200). 


* Not this man, but = 1300 (18 X 100). 
Barabbas. Now Barabbas 
was a robber” = 1833 (18 X 141). 


5733 (18 X 411). 


The Scriptures concerning Judas Iscarvot. 

Luke xxii. 3: * Then entered Satan into Judas surnamed 
Iscariot, being of the number of the twelve” = 8359 
(13 x 643). 

Verse 47, * And he that was called Judas, one of the 
twelve " — 3458 (18 x 267). 

John xii. 4: “Judas Iscariot, he that should betray Him” 
= 4811 (18 x 347). 

John xiii. 26: “Jesus answered, He it is to whom I shall 
give a sop, when I have dipped it. And when He 
had dipped the sop, He gave it to Judas Iscariot, 
the son of Simon" — 19435 (18 x 1495). 

The last clause (“ When," etc.) = 7371 (18 x 567). 

Matt. xxvi. 48: “ Now he that betrayed Him gave them 
a sign, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same 
is He; hold Him fast " — 9867 (13 x 759). 

So with Acts i. 16; Mark xiv. 44, 45, and all the corre- 
sponding passages. 


Acts tv. 25-27. 
Verse 25, “ Why did the heathen rage ?” = 1560 (18 x 120). 
Verse 26, “The kings of the earth stood up, and the 
rulers were gathered together against the Lord, 
and against His Christ " = 12467 (18 x 959). 
Verse 27, *Both Herod and Pontius Pilate with the 
Gentiles" — 3926 (18 x 302). 


OTHER ADVERSARIES. 
Simon Magus (with art.) — 1170 (18 x 90). 
Elymas — 676 (18? x 4). 
* Certain sons of one Sceva, a Jew, and chief of the 
priests, seven " (Acts xix. 14) = 4953 (18 x 381). 


EIGHT AND THIRTEEN. 295 


The Adversaries named by St. Paul. 


Hermogenes (2 Tim. i. 15)—481 (18 x 37). 
Philetus (2 Tim. ii. 17) 2 1118 (13 x 86). 


The Whole Group. 


Hymenzeus and Alexander (1 Tim. i. 20) \ 

Phygellus and Hermogenes (2 Tim. i. 15) | 5226 
Hymenæus and Philetus (2 Tim. ii. 17) Í (13 x 402). 
Demas (2 Tim. iv. 10) = p ] 


John in his Epistles and the Apocalypse. 


Rev. ii. 20: “That woman Jezebel " = 1573 (18 x 121). 

Rev. iii. 1: Sardis = 520 (13 x 40). 

I John ii. 18-22: Antichrists = 1651 (18 x 127). 

The Antichrist = 1911 (18 x 147). 

“Tie lasttimes — 2015 (43 x 155). 

«This is that spirit of Antichrist” = 4836 
(13.24.72). : 

I John iv. 3: * And every spirit that confesseth not that 
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God: and 
this is that spirit of Antichrist" — 17329 (18 x 1333). 

Dou iu. 28: “Thet denieth the Father" = 1963 
(48 x 151). 

* But he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ” 
= 4992 (18 X 384). 
2 John 7: “The many deceivers " = 611 (18 x 47). 
« This isthe deceiver? — 2106-(18-x 162). 
“The Antichrist " = 1911 (13 Xx 47). 
mAdvyn (planee), deceiver (5e, error or deception) 
=MG). 


The Apocalypse. 

xiii. 1: ‘“ The sand of the sea” = 1716 (13 x 132). 
“The sea” = 1157 (18 x 89). 
* A beast rise up out of the sea" — 1664 (13 x 128). 
Oxjp (theer), a wild beast = 117 (18 x 9). 

Verse 11, The whole verse = 6318 (13 x 486). 
Onpiov (¢heerion), beast = 247 (18 x 19). 
GAXo Onpiov (hallo theerton), another beast = 378 

(9 X 42). 
S 1396. Q 


NUMBER IN SCRIPTUKE. 


* He had two horns" = 1521 (18* x 9). 
* And he had two horns like a lamb " — 2704 
(13? x 16). 
Verse 15, * The image of the beast” = 1482 a3 x 114); 
Verse 18, “ The mark of the beast ” = 2483 (18 x 191). 
“The number of the beast” (acc. with article) 
= 20074 0g NES 

xvii. 1: * The great whore " = 403 (18 X 31). 

Verse 5, “The mother of harlots” = 2766 (43 x 212); 

** Mystery, Babylon the great, the mother of harlots 
and abominations " — 8138 (18 x 626). 

xix. 20: “The beast . . . and with him the false prophet 

who doeth wonders before him” = 8489 (18 x 653). 

“The harlot, the beast, and the false prophet” 
= 3510 (48 x 270). The false” Trini as 
marked by 3 x 3 X 3 X 10 x 18. 

The whole verse — 25441 (18 x 1957). 

xxii. 15 : “ Dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and 
murderers, and idolaters, and whatsoever loveth and 
maketh a lie" = 8710 (18 x 670). 

Vill, 10: * A great star" es 859 (19 5666): 

viii, 11: * Wormwood” = 1040 (18 x 80). 

xx. 8: “Gog” = 806 (18 x 62). (Greek.) 

“Magog” = 52 (13 x 4). 


Ezekiel s Prophecy of Gog. 
xxxviii. 2: “ The chief prince of Meshech " (the title of 
Gog) = 1222 (13 x 94). 
xxxix. 11: *"Hamon-Gog" (the burying place of Gog) 
= 113. 
* All his multitude” = 156 (4315002). 
The whole prophecy of Ezekiel concerning him (Ezek. 
xxxviii. 2 and xxxix. 29) = 204256 (18 x 15512). 
The last portion, xxxix. 16-29, = 55887 (18 x 4299). 


Jude. 
Verses 3-9 = 230464 (18 x 17728). 
Verses 14 and 15 — 30940 (13 x 1380). 


* In Nom. without article = 1027 (43 x 79). 


EIGHT AND THIRTEEN. 227 


Verse 15, “Judgment” (Kpiow, noun) = 390 (13 x 30). 
* The error of Balaam " * — 1014 (18? x 6). 
Korek p= 195 (18 x 15). 


2 Thessalonians it. 3. 
* The apostasy " — 871 (18 x 46). 
< Dhégnanvofisin = 19653 (18 x 151). 
“The son of perdition” = 1807 (48 x 139). 
“ Son of perdition " with v. 4 = 13182 (18* x 6). 


Thus, no matter in what way we look at the recurrence of 
these two numbers, we see the same law pervading the 
history. A few miscellaneous examples must suffice :— 

In Gen. x. we havethe scattering of the nations, and their 
division through theearth. It happened in the days of Peleg, 
the gematria of whose name is one hundred and ¢hirteen. The 
Scripture recording it (Gen. x. 25-29) — 10647 (18 x 63). 

Salah (Peleg's grandfather) was 338 (13? x 2). 

When Uzziah apostatised (2 Chron. xxvi) it was after 
he had reigned 52 years (4 x 13). 

Jeroboam II. had 40 years of prosperity, and then 12 of 
apostasy — 52 (4 x 13). 

Joash reigned 39 years (3 x 18), and then apostatised 
(2 Chron. xxiii., xxiv.). 

In the 18th year of Josiah, Jeremiah began to prophesy 
against the apostasy of Judah. 

Cain has no chronology, and Saul has none, except the 
last year, which was the first of David's, and of which 13 isa 
factor. 

Solomon was 18 years building his ow house, which was 
so full of apostasy. (But he was 7 years building the 
Lorp’s house.) 


The Number of those who died in Korah’s Rebellion 
was 250 + 14700 = 14950 (13 x 1150). See Num. xvi. 35, 49. 


The Valley of Hinnom 


(or of the son or children of Hinnom) occurs 13 times. It 
was the scene of the idolatrous and inhuman rites of Moloch 


* Compare Josh. xiii 22, Balaam.  ** Did the children of Israel slay with 
the sword among the slain" = 1183 (13? x 7). 
+ Num. xvi. 1-4 = 12909 (18 x 993). 


228 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


introduced by Solomon (1 Kings xi. 7). The casting of 
children into the fire in that valley made it the fit symbol of 
the future punishment of sinners, who are to be cast into the 
lake of fire, and gave rise to the word yeévva (Gehenna), from 
the Hebrew DIM N'3 (Gee-Hinnom), Valley of Hinnom, The 
13 occurrences, which contain the whole history of the valley, 
are worthy of connected study (Josh. xv. 8, 18; xviii. 16, twice ; 
2 Kings xxiii. ro; 2 Chron. xxviii. 3; xxxiii, 6: Nen XD 
Jer. vil. 31, 32; xix. 2565 306909 0d 


Thus the two numbers 8 and 13 are like two threads— 
gold and crimson—which run through the whole of Divine 
Revelation, continually crossing and recrossing each other. 

There is, however, one very important branch of this part 
of our subject still remaining, and that is :— 


Tuer CONNECTION or THE NUMBER THIRTEEN WITH 
SUBSTITUTION AND ATONEMENT. 


The Saviour, though without sin, was ** made sin,” or a sin- 
offering, for His people. He was “wounded for our trans- 
gressions,” and bruised for their iniquities. He was, in fact, 
“NUMBERED WITH THE TRANSGRESSORS ” (Isa. 
MaS) 

Therefore this number is not only the all-pervading factor 
of SIN, but also of siņs atonement., It is not only the 
number which brands the sinner as a rebel against God, but. 
it is the number borne by the sinner’s Substitute, 

His very names in the Old Testament, before the work 
of Atonement was entered on or accomplished, are all mul- 
tiples of 43, just as His names, afterwards in the New Tes- 
tament and when the work of Atonement was carried out, 
are all multiples of 8. See these names on p. 204. 


The Old Testament names are :— 
Jehovah = 26 4a x2). 
Adonai = 65 (18 x 5). 
Ha-Elohim = or (18 x 7). 
Messiah, as given in Psalm ii., a form in which it occurs 
10 times, “His Anointed ” = 364 (13 x 18)—the 
very number of Satan himself (Ha-Shasan). 
But note here the marvellous combination of the other 
factors, 2, 5, and 7, the significance of which we need not 


EIGHT AND THIRTEEN: ATONEMENT. 229 


dwell upon after all that we have said about them as indi- 
cating incarnation, grace, and spiritual per fection, 

Truly, it is written, * Cursed is every one that hangeth on 
a tree.” Hence the numerical value of the very word, dvddena 
(anathema), curse, is 546 (18 x 42), and it occurs 6 times. 


Genesis 1v. A, 
- which records the first type of this Lamb of God, the sinner’s 
substitute, exhibits the number 13. 

* And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock, 
and of the fat thereof. And the Lon» had respect 
unto Abel and his offering." The verse amounts to 
2093 (18 x 160). 

Verse 7, where we have a further reference to this 
offering, = 5421 (18 x 3 x 139). 

Abel suffered; Cain sinned; Seth was the substitute for 
Abel. Hence the three names are :— 


Abel ws AT 
Cain a 160 5892 (19 x 69). 
Seth ex 700 


Their whole history (Gen. iv. 1-25) amounts to 76882 
(18 x 5914). 
Leviticus xvt. 
The great chapter on Atonement is most remarkable. We 
cannot give the whole chapter; but note— 

Verses 2-4, which describe Aaron’s preparations, 
=O (18 x 5 X 7 X 33). 

Verses 5-11, the choosing of the victims, down to the 
sacrificing of the bullock, = 24739 (18 x 1903). 

Verses 12-14, the burning of the sweet incense, and the 
seven-fold sprinkling of the blood before the mercy- 
seat, = 13377 (18x 3 x 7). With this we may 
compare the words in Eph. v. 25, 26, “And gave 
Himself for it, that He might sanctify it” = 4459 
(48 x 7). 

Verses 15, 16, the atonement of the holy place, — 13637 
(18 x 1049). 

Verses 17-34, the high priest entering alone, ending 
with the everlasting statute, = 80613 (189? x 3? x 53). 

Verses 20-23, the scape-goat’s dismissal, = 20670 
(18:505 LOX G 


230 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


Verses 24-27, the purification of the priest and his 
assistants, = 18993 (18 x 3 X 487). 

The latter two together (verses 20-27) = 39663 
(ise 3x Io 

The scape-goat — 585 (18 x 45). 

Verse 20, the choosing of the goat, = 3575 (13 xX 5 X 55). 

Verses 21-23, the driving of the goat, = 17095 (18 X 1315). 

Verses 24-27, the rest of the atonement, — 18993 
(3 X 13 x 487). 


Numbers xxi. 8, Q. 

It may be observed that the serpent (Ha-Seraph) is also 
585, exactly the same number as the scape-goat. 

Verses 6, 7, which speak of the sin, the judgment, and 

the prayer, — 7241 (18 x 557). 
Verse 8. “And the Lon» said unto Moses, make thee a 
fiery serpent ” = 1664 (8 x 8 x 13). i 
* And set it upon a pole; and it shall come to pass 
"that every one that is bitten” = 1430 

(18 x T10). 
Verses 8, 9 — 8886. 


John tit, 14. 
The Lord's own reference to Num. xxi. = 2366 (13? x 14). 


Isaac, 
who was the type of Christ in substitution, has, as the factor 
of his name, 18 as well as 8. It is 208 (43 x B x 2). 
Isaac’s history, too, in Gen. xxii. I-19 (the eighth of the 
Divine interviews and covenants), amounts to 54808, or 
(18 X 8 X 17 x 31). 


The Sacrifice of Job for his Friends. 
job xt. 8 = 6721 (19 49517): 


The Atonement after Korak s Rebellion, 


Num. xvi, * When Aaron stood between the living and the 
dead." 

Verses 45-47 = 8138 (18 x 2 x 313). 

Verses 45-50 — 20501 (13 X 19 x 83). 


EIGHT AND THIRTEEN: ATONEMENT. 22 


Isaiah liri. 
Verses 2-4 = 7995 (18 x 15 X 41). 
Verses 1-5 — 13286 (18 x 1022). 
Verses 6-8 — 8749 (13 x 673). 


lii. 14—liii. 10 = 36582 (18 x 42 x 67). 

lii, 1-12 also equals 36582. Thus the lifting up of the 
voice of joy in Zion, and the lifting up of the Son of 
Man, present the very same number. 

lii. and liii, = 84123 (18 x 9 x 719). 


Jsaiah vit, 7-16. 


Verse 7 = 1391 (48 x 107). 
Verse 8. “ Damascus” = 444. 
Verse 9 = 4017 (18 x 309). 
2490 (2 X 15 X 197). Where the 
Verse IO — 712 No. 2 — Incarnation. 
Verse 11 = 1778 ue 15 — Divine grace. 
No. 197 — Emmanuel. 


The Day of Atonement. 
ev. Xx 20,27, — ©0520 (or 48 x 502, or 18 x 5 + 2 
X 13). 
Pevexxi27, 28, = 5187 (13 X 133). 


Daniel ix. 25-27. 

The three verses —21164 (18 x 4 X 407), or (13 x 1628). 

* Abomination of desolation” = 966 (42 x 23). 

* Abomination” = 546 (42 x 13). 

* Desolation” = 420 (42 X 10). 

Verse 26. Messiah shall be cut off — 988 (18 x 76). 

Verse 25. “ Unto Messiah” = 432 (2 x 8 x 3?). 

Verse 25. ** Messiah the Prince" = 425 (5? x 17). 

Verse 24. “ To anoint the most holy" = 1242. 

Verse 24. “ The most holy” = 858 (13 x 66). 

The entire prophecy = 43554 (42 X 17 X 61*). 
Compare Matt. xxiv. 15 in the Greek. 

* Abomination " = 855 (9 X 19 X 5). 

* Desolation” = 2158 (13 x 166). 


* 61 is the z7eteenth prime number, 


232 


NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE, 


While the phrase, * abomination of desolation” = 2666, 

The whole quotation, *the abomination of desolation 
spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing in the 
holy place " — 932340007 07. 


I Corinthians xv. 3. 
* Christ died for our sins " = 5616 (18 x 8 x 2 x 33). 


2 Corinthians v. 17-21. 
The whole passage is 53365, or (13 x 4105). 


John Xm. 2 ag 
“Now is the Son of Man glorified” = 3887 (13? x 23). 
“God is glorified in Him” = 2197 (48°). 
“God shall glorify Him in Himself” = 3016 (48 x 8 
X 29). 


Romans vi. 6-8. 

Verse 6. “He died for the ungodly” = 1794 
(13 x 6 x 23). 

Verse 8. * We being sinners " = 4290 (18 x 330). 

Verse 9. “Being justified now by His blood” = 4602 
(13. X 3 X 31183). 

Verse 9. “ Erom wrath” = 1040 (13 x 80). 

Verse 9. * Through whom we have now received the 
atonement” = 1989 (48 x 153). 


I Corinthians ii. 2. 
* Him crucified” — som 


Galatians vi, 14. 

“But God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is 
crucified unto me, and I unto the world” = 16367 
(13 x 1259). 


Philippians ar. 
Verse 8. “Obedient unto death, even the death of the 


ChOSS e .4745 (15. 0 ee 73): 
Whole of verse 8 = 11804 (48 x 908). 


EIGHT AND THIRTEEN: ATONEMENT. 233 


Verse 7. “ He made Himself of no reputation” = 1911 
BEX 77. 

Mere “the form of aservant” = 1742 (18 x 134). 

Verses 5-9 — 42328 (18 x B x 407). 


Colossians it. 14, 15. 

The whole of these verses = 22282 (48 x 1714). 

“Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was 
against us” = 4407 (43 x 3 x 113). 

* Which was contrary to us, even it He took out of the 
way, nailing it to His cross; and having spoiled 
principalities and powers" — 13065 (18000 4- 5 x 13). 

* He made a show of them openly, triumphing over them 
in it" — $018 (18 x 386). 


Turning once more to the number egy, it is remarkable 
that :— 


Tue Risen CHRIST 
was seen by 512 persons. And 512 is the cube of 8 (8°). 


Tue NUMBER or THE DISCIPLES S 


gathered in the upper room (Acts i. 15) was 120 (8 X 15). 


I PETER IL 
Verse 20. “A few... 193) = 1480, the 
were saved " 1287 No. oi 6016 (8? x 84). 
* that is eight souls " — 4536 l 
On the other hand we have :— 
“The days of Noah” = 1209 (18 X 31 x 3). 
Verse 22. * Who is on the right hand of God" — 2224 
(8 x 278). 


boae ai, iss 
'The angel's words — 5688 (8 x 711). 
* Nazareth," the scene of the Annunciation, = 464 


(8 x 58). 
But “Jesus of Nazareth” = 2197 (13°). 


234 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


EIGHT IN THE APOCALYPSE. 


We see not only the number sezez stamping the book 
throughout with spiritual perfection, but as it contains 
also the history which leads up to resurrection and the new 
heavens and earth, the number egA/ is also seen. 

There are 24 elders (3 x 8). 

Four beasts, each with six wings, — 24 (3 X 8). 

Twelve thousand from each tribe, 12000 — (8 x 15 X 100). 

144000 for all the tribes = 8? x 15* x 10; the same 
number of virgins who follow the Lamb. 

1600 furlongs, the measure of the wine press (8 x 8 X 25), 
or (8 x 5?). 

The rooo years (8 X 125). 

The 12000 cubits’ length of the “four-square” city 
(8 X 15 x roo). 


Tur NUMBER OF OCCURRENCES 


of the word fvun (zumee), “leaven,” in the New Testament is 
thirteen, and it is significant of its connection with corruption, 
as denoting apostasy from the truth. 

It is surely impossible to explain all this evidence on the 
doctrine of chances. There must be design. And design so 
perfect, so uniform, so significant can only be Divine. And 
being Divine is an unanswerable argument in favour of 
the verbal and even literal inspiration of the Scriptures 
of Truth. 


NIN E. 


The number ze is a most remarkable number in many 
respects. It is held in great reverence by all who study the 
occult sciences; and in mathematical science it possesses. 
properties and powers which are found in no other number.*: 

It is the /as¢ of the digits, and thus marks the end; and is 
"significant of the conclusion of a matter. 

It is akin to the number szx, six being the sum of its factors 
(3 xX 3 =9, and 3 + 3 =6), and is thus significant of the end 
of man, and the summation of all man's works. Wrze is, there- 


fore, À 
Tur NuMBER or FINALITY OR JUDGMENT, 


for judgment is committed unto Jesus as “ the Son of man" 
(John v. 27; Acts xvii. 31). It marks the completeness, the 
end and issue of all things as to man—the judgment of man 
and all his works. 

It is a factor of 666, which is 9 times 74. 

The gematria of the word “Dan,” which means a judge, is 
54 (9 x 6). 

“on dpyn pov” (dee orgee mou), my wrath, —999 (Heb. iii. 11). 

The solemn åuýv (ameen), amen, or “verily,” of our Lord, 
amounts also to 99, summing up and ending His words. 

The sum of the 22 letters of the Hebrew alphabet is 4995 
(5 xX 999). It is stamped, therefore, with the numbers of 
grace and finality. 

The sum of the Greek alphabet is 3999. 


Tue First Contest (Gen. xiv.) 
is a battle between the 4 kings and 5 (= 9).f 


* Among others may be mentioned (1) that the sum of the digits which form 
its multiples are themselves always a multiple of zze; e.g., 2 x 9 = 18 (and 
1+8=9)33%* 9 =27 (and2+7 29); 4 x 9 = 36 (and 3 +6=9);5 x9 
= 45 (and 4 + 5 = 9), etc., etc. ; and so with the larger numbers: 52843 x 9 
= 475587 (and 44+7+5+5+8+7 — 36, and 3 4-6 — 9. (2) Thesum 
of its multiples through the nine digits = 405, or 9 times 45. 

T The Gematria of verses3 and 4, Gen. xiv., which describe the rebellion and 
the atte, is 5655 (13 x 435). And verses 4 and 5, which describe the coming of 
the four kings, = 5590 (13 x 430). Thus the ze2z//ioz; verse binds the war and 
its cause together. Verse 9, also, which describes the 2a//e, is 4732 (13? x 28). 

The swift vengeance of Abram, verses 13-16, = 10738 (13 x 7 x 118). 

The standing of Abram before Melchisedech = 19019 (13 x 7 x II x 19). 
Thus with Abram we find not only the 13, but 7 marking the spiritual character 
of himself and his mission. 


236 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


Sopom. 

Gen. xix., recording the judgment of Sodom, is marked by 
multiples of zine. Verses 4-29 amount to 89550 (9 X 9950, 
oro x 50 x 199). The same is seen if we divide it into 
sections :— 

Verses 4-18. From the riot in Sodom to Lot's plea for 
Zoar is 50733 (9 X 3 X 1879). 

Verses 19-25. From Lot's plea to the overthrow is 24543 
(9 X 9 x 303). 

Verses 26-29. From “Lots wife" to the end of.the 
history i$'14274 (0 x 2595 XOD 

We see the same phenomena in the account as given in the 
Second Epistle of St. Peter. As we do also in the judgment 
pronounced upon Jerusalem. 


Tur SIEGES or JERUSALEM 
have been 27 in number, or three times me, and they are 
stamped with the number of Divine completeness (3) and the 
number of judgment (9). As the significance of other numbers 
is involved and illustrated in these 27, we give a complete 
list of all Jerusalem's sieges. 

1. Bythe children of Judah against the Jebusites (Judg. i. 8) 
about 1425 Bc., and as this is the frs4 we may note the 
solemn words which so vividly stamp, from the first, what was 
to be the after history of the city, —* Now the children of 
judah had fought against Jerusalem, and had taken it, and 
smitten it with the edge of the sword, and set the city on fire." 
This was about 1400 B.c., or 700 years before Rome was 
founded. This siege was only partial, for in David's reign 
we still find the Jebusites occupying the citadel. 

2. By David against the Jebusites (2 Sam. v. 6-10; 1 Chron. 
xii. 23-39), about 1046 s.c. 

3. By Shishak, king of Egypt, against Rehoboam 
(2 Chron. xii. 9; 1 Kings xiv. 25, 26), about 971 z.c. To this 
there was only a feeble resistance, and the Temple was 
plundered. 

* It is interesting to note that in the midst of all this, the words which refer 
to the deliverance of Lot, ‘‘ Haste thee” (v. 22) to ** out of the midst” (v. 29), 
give a multiple of 8, the Dominical Number; it is 25304 (8 x 3163); while 
four of the verses of this section (25-28) are each separately multiples of 8; 


their total sum being 11312 (8 x 1414). Thesum of the whole chapter is a 
multiple of 13. 


NINE: THE SIEGES OF JERUSALEM. 28 


4. By the Philistines, Arabians, and Ethiopians against 
Jehoram (2 Chron. xxi. 16), about 887 s.c. In this siege the 
royal palace was sacked, and the Temple again plundered. 

5. By Jehoash, king of Israel, against Amaziah, king of 
Judah (2 Kings xiv. 13, 14), about 826 B.c. The wall was 
broken down and the city and Temple pillaged. 

6. Rezin, king of Syria, and Pekah, king of Israel, against 
“Ahaz (2 Chron. xxviii.), about 841 B.c. The city held out, but 
Ahaz sought the aid of Tiglath-Pileser, king of Assyria, 
who stripped the Temple. 

7. By Sennacherib, king of Assyria, against Hezekiah 
(2 Chron, xxxii.), about 713 B.c. In this case the siege was 
raised by a Divine interposition, as foretold by Isaiah the 
prophet. (See the significance of this No. below). 

8. Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, against Jehoiakim 
(2 Chron. xxxvi. 7), about 606 s.c, when the Temple was 
partly pillaged. 

9. By Nebuchadnezzar again, against Jehoiachin (2 Chron. 
xxxvi. IO), about 599 B.c., when the pillage of the Temple 
was completed and 10,000 people carried away. 

10. By Nebuchadnezzar, s.c. 590-585, against Zedekiah 
(2 Chron. xxxvi. 17-20), when the overthrow was complete, 
the Temple burnt with fire,* and the city lay desolate for 
soyears. After some 58 years, it was again besieged. 

11. By Ptolemy Soter, king of Egypt, against the Jews 
(320 r.c). More than 100,000 captives were taken to 
Egypt.T 

12. By Antiochus the Great, about 203 s.c. 

13. By Scopus, a general of Alexander, about 199 B.c., who 
left a garrison. 

14. By Antiochus again, 168 s.c. the worst siege since 
No. 10. The whole city was pillaged, 10,000 captives taken, 
the walls were destroyed, the altar was defiled, ancient 
manuscripts perished, the finest buildings were burned, and 


* Tt was in the zz/£ year of Nebuchadnezzar that the house of God was 
burnt; and on the zzztk day of the fourth month that the famine prevailed 
(2 Kings xxv.). It may be noted also here, that it was in the zzzz& year 
of Hosea that the king of Assyria took Samaria, and carricd Israel away 
(2 Kings xvii. 6). 

+ Where the Septuagint Version was afterwards made for Philadelphus, the 
successor of Ptolemy Soter, 


238 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


the Jews were forbidden to worship there. This was the 
Preteritist fulfilment of Daniel’s prophecy (ix. and xi.), and a 
foreshadowing example of what the Fuswrist fulfilment will 
yet be. 

15. By Antiochus again, about 162 B.c., against Judas 
Maccabzeus. This time honourable terms were made, and 
certain privileges were secured. 

16. By Antiochus Sidetes, king of Syria, against John 
Hyrcanus, about 135 B.c. 

17. By Hyrcanus (son of Alex. Jannzeus) and the Priest 
Aristobulus. The siege was raised by Scaurus, one of 
Pompey's lieutenants, about 65 B.c. 

18. By Pompey, against Aristobulus, about 63 B.c. The 
machines were moved on the Sabbath, when the Jews made 
no resistance. Only thus was itthen reduced; 12,000 Jews 
were slain. 

19.* Herod with a Roman army besieged the city in 39 B.C. 
for five months. 

20. By Titus a.D. 70. At this memorable siege the con- 
quest was complete. The Second Temple (Herod's) was 
burnt (in spite of Titus's orders). The tenth legion was left 
to carry out the work of destruction, and for another 50 years 
the city again disappears from history, as it did after the /zg/Z 
siege. 

21. The Romans had again to besiege the city in 135 A.D. 
against the false Messiah, Bar-Cochebas, who had acquired 
possession of the ruins. Not much is known of this, perhaps 
the most awful of all the sieges. So great and severe was 
the struggle, that Hadrian, in announcing to the Roman 
Senate the conclusion of the war, refrained from using the 
usual congratulatory phrase. The city was now obliterated. 
Its very name was changed, and it was renamed Æla Capito- 
linus. A Temple was erected to Jupiter, and a statue of 
Hadrian placed on the site of the Holy of Holies. For 200 
years the city passed out of history, no Jews being permitted 
to approach it. 


* Antigonus, son of Aristobulus, with a Parthian army took the city in 40 B.C. ; 
but there was no siege, the cily was taken by a sudden surprise. 

1 So great was the relief which Rome experienced by this suppression of 
Jerusalem and the Jews, that the toast became common at Roman feasts, 
** Hierosolyma Est Perdita," **Terusalem is destroyed," the guests immedi- 
ately greeting it with the shout Zurra. This is the origin of our ** Hep! 


NINE: THE SIEGES OF JERUSALEM. 239 


This siege was foretold by our Lord in Luke xix. 43, 44 
and xxi. 20-24. 

22. After 400 years of so-called Christian colonization, 
Chosroes the Persian (about 559 a.n.) swept through the 
country; thousands were massacred, and the church of the 
Holy Sepulchre was destroyed. The Emperor Heraclius 
afterwards defeated him, and restored the city and the 
"church. 

23. TheCaliph Omar, in 636-7 A.D., besieged the city against 
Heraclius, and after a feeble resistance, followed by capitu- 
lation on favourable terms, the city passed into the hands of 
the Turks, thus marking one of the most important events 
connected with it and with chronology.* 

24. Afdal, the Vizier of the Caliph of Egypt, besieged the 
two rival factions of Moslems, and pillaged the city in 
1098. 

25. In 1099 it was besieged by the army of the first 
Crusade. 4 

26. In 1187 it was besieged by Saladin for seven weeks. 

27. The wild Kharezmian hordes, in 1244, captured and 
plundered the city, slaughtering the monks and priests. 


It seemed necessary to give this brief outline, because of 
several points which arise out of it. The list was made, in 
the first instance, without any reference whatever to ** Number 
in Scripture." It was not till some time after, in considering 
the number zine as the number of judgment, that we noted the 
fact, that the number of these sieges was 27, or three times 
nine, and thus we saw the significance of the number. 

Then, without looking at the list, we anticipated that there 
would be something peculiar about the numbers 10 and 20, 
ten being the number of ordinal perfection, and marking some 
cycle of completeness. So it proved on examination, for both 
the zenth and zwentieth sieges were marked by the destruction 
ofthe Temple by fire! The zeaźh witnessed the destruction of 
Solomon's Temple by Nebuchadnezzar ; the Zwez£ie/A saw the 
destruction of Herod's Temple under Titus ! 


Hep! Hurrah,” H, E, P, being the abbreviation of the three words, formed 
by their initial letters (on the principle known as Votarica, ox /Votricon). To 
this day Hep or Mi is said by only one person, the rest joining in the shout 
which greets it ! 

* See The Witness of the Stars, by the same author, page 186. 


240 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


It was next felt that sever being the number of spiritual 
perfection, there would be something to mark off the seventh, 
fourteenth, and twenty-first sieges from all the others, and to 
connect them in some way with the perfection of Divine 
Revelation. So it proved on examination. These three were 
each the subject of Divine Prophecy / The seventh in 2 Chron. 
xxxii; the fourteenth in Dan. xi; the swenty-first in Luke 
xix. 43, 44. And there is a siege yet future—a Zwen£y-eig ht 
siege—which is also foretold in Scripture (see Zech. xiv., 
» etc). These four form an epanodos, the first corresponding 
to the fourth (the first and fourth sieges in each case being 
raised by Divine interposition); while the second corresponds 
to the ¢hird in the terrible character of each, thus: 

A | The 7th—Sennacherib. The siege raised by a mi- 
raculous interposition by an angel from heaven. 
(2 Chron. xxxii.) 

The r4th—Antiochus (Dan. xi)—one of the most 
awful. 
B| The 21st—Hadrian (Luke xix. 43, 44)— one of the 
most complete. 

A | The 28th—Antichrist. Yet future. But the siege will 
be raised by a glorious deliverance, not by an angel, 
but by the Lord Himself coming from heaven. (Zech. 
xiv). 

Thus, four are the subjects of prophecy—the 7th, 14th, 21st, 

and 28th. 

Two mark complete cycles—the 1oth and 20th, when the 
Temple was destroyed, each being followed by fifty years 
of silence. 

Fourteen (7 X 2) are recorded in the Scripture. 

Thirteen are non-Biblical, and are recorded only in profane 
history. 

Surely there is something more than chance in the occur- 
rence of these significant numbers. 


B 


Tue JUDGMENTS 
of God in Hag. i. 11 * are enumerated in nine particulars : 
* And I called for a drought upon the land, 
and upon the mountains, 


* Note in this verse an illustration of two figures of language— Zeugma 
and Zolysyndeton. 


NINE: THE NUMBER OF YUDGMENT. 241 


and upon the corn, 

and upon the new wine, 

and upon the oil, 

and upon that which the ground bringeth forth, 
and upon men, 

and upon cattle, 

and upon all the labour of the hands." 


There are nine words used from the root Sy, right or 
Judgment :— 

1. iky (dikee), right, right proceeding, judgment (Acts 
DV. D55exxvil. 4; 2 Thess. 1. 9; Jude 7). 

2. dixatos (dikaios), right, just as it should be, 

3. Stxardw  (dikaroo), to make Sixaws (No. 2), to account 
righteous. 

4. Sixawootyn (dr&arosunee), the state, or quality, or condi- 
tion of him who is à/kewos (dzkazos). 

5. Oates (drkazos), justly, rightly. 

6. kaiwa (dikaioma), a righteous act or requirement.* 

7. Stxaiwors (dikaiðsis), is the action of the judge in pro- 
mulgating a decree, in declaring or recognizing a 
person as dikaws (Rom. iv. 25; v. 18). 


* It is important to distinguish the 10 occurrences of this word, which is 
variously translated, but which should be thus rendered:— 
Luke i. 6, righteous ordinance. 
Rom. i, 32, the righteous sentence of God. 
,. ii 26, the righteous requirement of the Law. 
» V. 16, righteous acquittal. 
» V. 18, righteous act. 
» Viii 4, righteous requirement. 
Heb. ix. 1, Io, righteous ordinances. 
Rev. xv. 4, righteous sentence. 
,, xix. 8, righteous awards given. 
^ The difference between 3uaíega (dibaióma) and dinaorbyn (dikaiosunee) 
points us to the fact that the latter word relates either to the quality, attribute, 
‘or condition of those acceptable before God, or to God's own relative attribute 
of righteousness; while the former word shows that the righteous requirement of 
the Law is fulfilled by those who are not under the Law, either for condem- 
nation or a rule of life, but who are, as the apostle was, évvouos Xpieroü (enno- 
mos Christou), i.e., under obedience to Christ’s commands (see pp. 88, 89, and 
I Cor. ix. 20, R.V., where the Apostle distinctly says he was not ómb vóuov 
(hugo nomon), i.e., under law-principle, the word law not having the article). 
The Law condemned every one under it. But Christians who realize (subjec- 
tively) that they died with Christ and live as those alive from the dead, walking 
in the Spirit and in the power of Christ, carry out practically (though with 
many failures, doubtless) she 7zeAteous requirement of the Law. 


S 1396. R 


242 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


8, &ikao rijs (dikastees) is the judge (Luke xii. 14; Acts vii. 
27, 35): 

9. Sixooxpiota (drkarokrisia) is the righteous judgment of 
the judge (Rom. ii. 5).. 


OccuRRENCES OF WORDS. 

The following words, among others, occur 9 times, and 

are all connected in some way with judgment :— 
&Bvocos (abussos), bottomless pit, or deep. 
doeBns (asebees), ungodly. 
doéAyea (aselgeia), lasciviousness, 
éorpami (astrapee), lightning. 

All calling for, or connected with judgment. 

Enough has been said to show that the signification of the 
number zine is judgment, especially divine judgment, and the 
conclusion of the whole matter so far as man is concerned. 

But zine is the square of three, and ¢hree is the number of 
Divine perfection, as well as the number peculiar to the Holy 
Spirit. It is not surprising, therefore, to find that this number 
denotes /izalzty in divine things. 

* Fruit (not fruits) of the Spirit" comprises nine (3?) graces: 
(1) love, (2) joy, (3) peace, (4) longsuffering, (5) gentleness, 
(6) goodness, (7) faith, (8) meekness, (9) temperance,** while 


Tue GIFTS or THE SPIRIT 


in I Cor. xii, 8-10 are also. zine in number, viz. :— 
'The word of wisdom, 
The word of knowledge, 
Faith, 
Healing, 
The working of miracles, 
Prophecy, 
Discerning of spirits, 
Divers kinds of tongues, 
The interpretation of tongues. 


* It will be noticed that in this fruit of the Spirit **temperance"' is put last; 
while in the ‘‘ works of the flesh” (verses 19-21), which are szxZeez in number 
(42, the earth number), ‘‘drunkenness and revellings" are put last! Truly 
man’s ways are not God’s ways, nor God’s thoughts man’s thoughts (Isa. lv. 8). 


M 


( 243 ) 


TEN. 


It has been already pointed out that ze» is one of the perfect 
numbers, and signifies the perfection of Divine order, commenc- 
ing, as it does, an altogether new series of numbers. -The 
first decade is the representative of the whole numeral 
system, and originates the system of calculation called 
* decimals,” because the whole system of numeration consists 
of so many /ezs, of which the first is a type of the whole. 

Completeness of order, marking the entire round of any- 
thing, is, therefore, the ever-present signification of the 
number zen. It implies that nothing is wanting; that the 
number and order are perfect; that the whole cycle is com- 
plete. j 

Noan 
completed the antediluvian age in the /en‘h generation from 
God. 
Tue Ten COMMANDMENTS 


contain all that is necessary, and no more than is necessary, 
both as to their number and their order, while 


Tue Lorp’s PRAYER 
is completed in zz clauses.* 


Tue Tiruks 


represent the whole of what was due from man to God, as 
marking and recognising God's claim on the whole. 


Tue REDEMPTION Money 


was zen gerahs, and thus was acknowledged both what God 
claimed, and what man was responsible to give. Now ten 


* These clauses have the significance of their respective numbers :— 
The first, God's sovereignty. 
The second, Jehovah’s manifested Name. 
The ZAzrd, the realization of God's kingdom, 
The fourth first mentions the earth. 
The fifth, the gift of grace supplying our need. 
The sixth treats of man’s sin, 
The seventh pleads for spiritual guidance. 
The eighth pleads for final deliverance from all evil. 
The zinth sums up the divine glory (3%), while 
The tenth completes the eternal cycles. 


244. NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


gerahs was half a shekel (Exod. xxx. 12-16; Num. iii. 47). 
Every male that was numbered, over 20 years of age, must 
pay this sum and meet God's claim.* 

But the jirs/-Jorn were to pay ten times as much; for when 
God took the Levites instead of the first-born of Israel, there 
were found 

22,273 first-born males, but only 
22,000 Levites. So that 


273 had to pay the ransom money, 
which amounted to zen times zen gerahs. Thus, though the 
five shekels looked like a variation, the significance of zen 
is sustained, for the five shekels were /ez times the “half 
shekel.” (See Num. iii. 12, 13, 40-51).7 


Tue Ten PracvEs 
were representative of the complete circle of God’s judgments 
on Egypt. Exod. ix. 14, “I wil . . . send all my 
plagues." 
ANTICHRIST’S WORLD-POWER 

is comprised in the zn kingdoms, symbolized by the zen toes 
on the feet of the image of Nebuchadnezzar's dream (Dan. ii. 
41), and by the /ez horns of the fourth beast of Daniel's vision 
(Dan. vii. 7, 20, 24, etc. ; Rey2xIn 3 ; xij; xvin 12). 


Ten Nations 


imply the whole of the nations which are to be the scene of 
Abraham's covenant possessions (Gen. xv. 19). 


ABRAHAM’S FAITH 


was proved by a completed cycle of sen trials : — 
I. His departure from Haran. 
2. His flight to Egypt from the famine. 
3. In the seizure of Sarah. 
4. In his war to rescue Lot. 


* When David zumbered the people (2 Sam. xxiv. and 1 Chron. xxi.), this 
payment was not made and God's claim was not met. Hence the judgment 
which followed. 

+ We may note, in passing, that the number of the males over was 273 
(13 x 21), while the amount of the shekels was 1,365 (13 x 105) (Num. iii. 59). 
For the significance of this, see under the number ‘ Thirteen.” 


TEN: ORDINAL PERFECTION. 245 


. In his taking Hagar. 

In his circumcision. 

. In the second seizure of Sarah at Gerar. 
. In the expulsion of Ishmael. 

. In the expulsion of Hagar. 

. In the offering of Isaac. 


OO ON AN 


be 


Tue Tren REBELLIONS 


of Israel in the wilderness (Num. xiv. 22) mark the completed 
series of Israel's perversities. 


Tue SILVER SOCKETS 


which formed the foundation of the Tabernacle were 10 x 10 
(Exod. xxxviii. 27). These were made of silver, and silver is 
significant of redemption (1 Pet. i. 18, 19).* 


Fire Came Down FROM HEAVEN 


Zen times, szx of which were in judgment :— 
Gen. xix. 24, on Sodom. 
Lev. ix. 24, on the first offerings. 
» X.2,0n Nadab and Abihu. 
Num. xi. 1, on the murmurers at Taberah. 
» Xvi. 35, on Korah and his company. 
1 Kings xviii. 38, on Elijah's offering at Carmel. 
3 Kings i. 10, on Elijah's enemies. 
» » 12, » ” 
1 Chron. xxi. 26, on David’s sacrifice. 
2 Chron. vii. 1, on Solomon’s sacrifice. 


Tren Times THE PEOPLE SHOUTED For Joy. 


Ley. ix. 24, when the fire from heaven consumed the first 
sacrifices. 

Josh. vi. 20, at the taking of Jericho. 

1 Sam. iv. 5, when the Ark was brought into the camp. 
» X. 24, when Saul was chosen king. 
, xvii 20, when Israel went to fight the Philistines. 
T » 52, when pursuing them. 

2 Sam. vi. 15 (1 Chron. xv. 28), when the Ark was brought 
back from the house of Obed-edom. 


* Ten also completed the number of the curtains (Exod. xxvi. 1). 


246 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


2 Chron. xiii. 15, when God smote Jeroboam before Abijah. 
2 Chron. xv. 14, when Asa and the people heard Oded's 
prophecy. 
Ezra iii. 11, when the foundation of the second Temple 
was laid. 
Tue Ten VinGINS. 
represent the whole of the nation of Israel (as distinct from 
the elect remnant, which is the Bride);* while the jive 
denotes those who by grace will be able to say, * This is our 
God, we have waited for Him.” 


Gop's RIGHTEOUS CURSES 
are completed in a series of ten :— 

Gen. iii. 14, 15, on the serpent. 

» o 17, the ground. 

» iv. II, Caim: 

» 1x. 25, Caman. 
Josh. vi.17, Jericho. 

5m 28, | Achan. 

a sen ee) 

» ix. 23, Gibeonites. 
Judg. ix. 57, Shechemites. 
I Kings xvi. 34, Hiel the Bethelite. 
Mark xi. 21, The Fig-tree. 


“I HAVE SINNED.” 

Zen | persons complete the series of those who uttered this 
‘confession, and acknowledged their desert of divine judg- 
ment :— 

Pharaoh, Exod. ix. 27 ; x. 16. 
Balaam, Num. xxii. 34. 


* The popular interpretation of this parable cannot be the correct one, for 
we cannot, in one parable, take two totally different classes of persons as re- 
presenting one and the same person, It is impossible to take she Church as 
represented by both the Ten Virgins and the Bride! Ifthe Church is the Bride, 
then it cannot be the Virgins, Ifthe Church is represented by the Ten Virgins, 
then it cannot be the Bride. The only escape from the dilemma is not to read into 
the Gospel of Matthew that which was the subject of a subsequent revelation 
(Rom. xvi. 25, 26 ; Eph, iii. 1-11; Col. i 26, 27); but to interpret Matthew 
by what was already the subject of previous revelation in the Old Testament 
about the Bride. See under the number Oze, ** First occurrences” (p. 6t). 

t Of these zez, 6 were individual (the number of man), while 4 were on 
behalf of the nation—‘ We.” 


TEN: ORDINAL PERFECTION. 247 


Achan, Josh. vii. 20. 

Saul, 1 Sam. xv. 24, 30; xxvi. 21. 

David, 2 Sam. xii. 13; xxiv. 10, 17; 1 Chron. xxi. 8517; 

Psssnli. 45994. 

Shimei, 2 Sam. xix. 20. 

Hezekiah, 2 Kings xviii. 14 (rendered “ offended”), 

Job vii. 20. 

Micah vii. 9. 

Nehemiah i. 6. 

Tue TABERNACLE 
is spoken of zen times as the “Tabernacle of Witness,” or 
“Tabernacle of Testimony.” Of these, five are 1305 (mish- 
kahn), Exod. xxxviii. 21; Num. i. 50, 53 (twice); x. rr. This 
has special reference to the Tabernacle as the dwelling-place 
of God, from 1907. (shahcan), “to dwell" Mish-kahn means 
the dwelling-place of God (Exod. xxv. 8), and is therefore 
never used by the Holy Spirit of * whole congregation." 
The other five are HN (oh-el), Num. xvii. 7, 8, 10; xviii. 2; 

2 Chron. xxiv. 6. Of-el means simply a tent, and has special 
reference to the meeting-place of the people by appoint- 
ment or at appointed seasons. This is the word which is 
used by the Holy Spirit of the “tent of the congregation." 


Tue Tren Worps or Psarxw cxix. 
complete the cycle of the Divine description of His Word. 
One or other of these zen words occurs in every verse (except 
122), viz., Way, Testimony, Precepts, Commandments, Lay- , Ah s 
ing, Law, Judgment, Righteousness, Statutes, Word. "These, , 
the Massorah says, ‘correspond to the Ten Command- _ 
ments." * 


C 


Tue TENTH GENERATION 
completed and represented the whole existence of the family 
or nation. In Deut. xxiii. 3 we read that “an Ammonite or 
Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of the Lor» ; 
even to their tenth generation shall they not enter into the 
congregation of the Lorn for ever." The reason is given in 
verses 4 and 5. See also Neh. xiii. 1. 


* See A Key to the Psalms, by the Rev. Thomas Boys, edited by the same 
author, p. 122. 


248 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


Tue PARABLES OF THE KINGDOM 


are ten in number in the Gospel of Matthew. Seven in 
ch. xiii., and ¢Aree in chaps. xxii. and xxv. 


Tue UnxriGHTEOUS WHO SHALL NOT ENTER 


the kingdom of God are enumerated in zez particulars (1 Cor. 
vi. 9, IO). 


Tue SECURITY OF THE SAINTS 


is set forth in a ten-fold enumeration, which completes the 
whole cycle of assurance to all who are “in Christ” (see 
under Seventeen), Rom. viii. 38, 39. They are given in two 
fives :— 
* For I am persuaded, that 
(M death, nor life, 
nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers ; 
nor things present, nor things to come, 
liem height, nor depth, nor any other creature." 


Tue Tren I AM’S or Jesus 1n Jonn. 


«I am the Bread of Life” (vi. 35). 

«I am the Bread of Life which came down from heaven” 
(vi. 41). 

“JT am the Living Bread ” (vi. 51). 

“I am the Light of the world” (viii. 12). 

“Tam One that bear witness of Myself” (viii. 18). 

“I am the Door of the sheep " (x. 7, 9). 

* | am the Good Shepherd " (x. 14). 

«I am the Resurrection and the Life" (x-6) 21.25 

“I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life” (xiv. 6). 

*Tamthe True Vine” (via, 5): 


Tue REPEATED * Names. 


Ten completes the perfect cycle of the repeated Names. 
Moreover we shall note that these are divided signifi- 


* The 14 changed names would form a profitable subject of Bible-study, there 
being 10 examples in the Old Testament, and 4 in the New Testament, Of 
these fourteen, 5 were changed by Divine authority, whilst 9 were apparently 
changed by man. See Zhe Repeated Name, by the Rev. James Smith, of Duff- 
town, N.B., published by A. & R. Milne, Aberdeen. 


TEN: ORDINAL PERFECTION. 249: 
cantly. Of these zen, seven are spoken directly to individual 
human beings, while z4ree are spoken by the Lord in differ- 
ent connections. Ofthese seven, four are in the Old Testa- 
ment, and three are in the New Testament. 


I. Abraham, Abraham, Gen. SMU, Tie OE Uzal 
2. Jacob, Jacob, Gen. xlvi. 2. T 
qo est.) by 
3. Moses, Moses, Exod. iii. 4. ) | God 
4. Samuel, Samuel, 1 Sam. iii. 10. (4 to 
5. Martha, Martha, Luke x. 41. New cd 
6. Simon, Simon, Luke xxii. 31. Test. (7) 
7. Saul, Saul, Acts ix. 4. (3) 7 
8. Lord, Lord, Matt. Vila2d, 225 XXV. LI; Luke TEC MESE 
Vi 467 xil, 25. other 
9. Eloi, Eloi, Mark xv. 34; Matt. xxvii. 46; ER. 
ese xxlie I. " 
m stances s 
10. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Matt. xxiii. 37; (3) 
Luke xiii. 34. x 


Womnps AND PHRASES WHICH OCCUR TEN TIMES. 


Among these may be mentioned :— 
“I (zair), the crown of the Ark of the Covenant. 
^3 (keeyor), Laver, zen times in Exodus and Leviticus 
with regard to the Tabernacle; and zez times in 
Kings and Chronicles with regard to the Temple. 
i? (kain), the foot or base of the Laver. 


éyracpos (hagiasmos), holiness. 

dywov (hagton), holy (7 of these are in the plural for the 
Holy of Holies). 

Stxatwya (dikaioma), righteous requirement. (See p. 241). 

cayrokpárop (pantokrator), Almighty, used only of God. 
(9 times in Revelation). 

xatafory Koopov (katabolee kosmou), the foundation of the 
world. (See pp. 120 and 190.) 

Aéye kóptov (legei kurzou), saith the Lord (omitting Heb. 
Soo whitney. T1. Tr, WO&' EL, and R.V.). 


* Each of these three is unique, viz. :— 
In No. 8 it is the name of the Lord by human beings. 
In No. 9 it is the name of God by Jesus. 
In No. 10 it is God's city and people by Jesus. 


250 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


Tue Tatmup 


calls attention to the fact that there are— 

Ten different words used for Idols. 

Ten for Prophet, viz, Ambassador, Faithful, Servant, 
Messenger, Seer, Watchman, Seer of Vision, Dreamer, 
Prophet, Man of God (4vo/A, ch. xxxiv.). 

Ten designations are applied to the Word of God, 
viz., Scripture, Proverb, Interpretation, Dark Saying, 
Oracle, Utterance, Decree, Burden, Prophecy, Vision. 

Ten different words for Joy. 

Ten generations from Adam to Noah; and 

Ten from Noah to Abraham. 

Abraham was tried with /ez trials (Av. d. R.N, 33, Pd. 
R.E. 26), See page 244, 


( 251 ) 


ELEVEN. 


If ¢en is the number which marks the perfection of Divine 
order, then eleven is an addition to it, subversive of and undoing 
that order. If /welve is the number which marks the perfec- 
tion of Divine government, then eleven falls short of it. So that 

Whether we regard it as being 10+ t, or 12—1, it is the 
number which marks disorder, disorganization, imperfection, and 
disintegration. 

There is not much concerning it in the Word of God, but 
what there is is significant, especially as a factor and from 
what we have already seen on pp. 22-44. 


Tur Dukes or Epom 
were eleven in number (Gen. xxxvi. 40-43), and Edom, 
though closely related to Israel, was different from it in order 
and government, while the bitterest hatred existed between 
them. The word for “Duke” is a multiple of 13. See 
pe 202. 
Tue ErrvrN Sons or Jacos 

told of the disintegration and disorganization in Jacob's 
family, which made it possible for it to be said “ one is not.” 


From Hores ro Kapzsu BARNEA 
was a journey of eleven days (Deut. i. 2. One more day 
would have carried them to the complete administration of all 
those wonderful laws which God had given them. 


Err, Hopuni, AND PHINEHAS 
have for their gematria the number 462, the factors of which 
are 11 and 42; both significant of the disorder in Eli's house, 
and of disintegration in Israel. 


JeHorakim REIGNED ELEVEN YEARS, 
when Nebuchadnezzar came up and began his disintegrating 
work on Jerusalem (2 Kings xxiii. 36; xxiv. 1; and 2 Chron. 
xxxvi. 5, 6). 

ZEDEKIAH REIGNED ELEVEN YEARS, 
when Nebuchadnezzar completed the work by putting an 
end to Israel's rule in Jerusalem (2 Chron. xxxvi. t1; Jer. lii. 
1), for “in the eleventh year the city was broken up” (Jer. 
xxxix. 2). 


Se. NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


Tur ELEVENTH YEAR 


in which Ezekiel prophesied against Tyre (Ezek. xxvi. I) 
and against Egypt (xxx. 20 and xxxi 1) was the eleventh 
year of Zedekiah, in which Jerusalem was broken up. And 
the threefold repetition of it is to impress us with the fact that 
Tyre and Egypt should be broken up, as Jerusalem had 
been. 


Tur ELEVEN APOSTLES 


witness of disintegration even amongst the Twelve (Acts 
ii. 14, etc.) ; while 


Tue ErzveNTH Hour 


(Matt. xx. 6, 9) is proverbial as being contrary alike both to 
what is right in order and arrangement. 


Tue Lire or our Lorp on EARTH 


was about 33 years (3 X 11), and then He was “cut off,” and 
“we see not yet all things put under Him " (Dan. ix. 26; Heb. 
ii. 8). 

ErzveN HUNDRED 
occurs only twice, both referring to days of defective ad- 
ministration, marked by the fact that there was “no king" :— 

(1) Judg. xvi. 5, the Philistine bribe which deprived Israel 
of their mighty judge and deliverer, Samson. 

(2) Judg. xvii. 2, etc, connected with the introduction of 
idolatry into Israel, which brought with it trouble 
and disintegration; added to God's order and ordi- 
nances for them ; and in the end caused the ruin and 
loss of all government. 

Dan and Ephraim were the two offending tribes, for Micah, 
who made the image with the eleven hundred shekels, was an 
Ephraimite, and the tribe that stole it and his priest was the 
Tribe of Dan. Both are omitted from the tribes in Rev. vii., 
according to the declaration of Jehovah in Deut. xxix. 18-20, 
that the ** man, woman, family, or tribe" which should intro- 


duce idolatry into Israel, “the Lorp shall BLOT OUT HIS 
NAME.” 


( 253 ) 


TWELVE 


is a perfect number, signifying perfection of government, or of 
governmental perfection. It is found as a multiple in all that has 
to do with rule. The sun which “rules” the day, and the 
moon and stars which * govern" the night, do so by their 
passage through the /welve signs of the "diac which com- 
pletes the great circle of the heavens vi 360 (12 X 30) de- 
grees or divisions, and thus govern the year. 

Twelve is the product of 3 (the perfectly Divine and 
heavenly number) and 4 (the pilis the number of what 
is material and organic). 

While seven is composed of 3 added to 4, twelve is 3 multi- 
plied by 4, and hence denotes that which can scarcely be 
explained in words, but which the spiritual perception can 
at once appreciate, viz., organization, the products denoting 
production and multiplication and increase of all that is 
contained in the two numbers separately. The4 is generally 
prominently seen in the Zve/ze. 


THERE WERE TWELVE PaTRIARCHS 
from Seth to Noah and his family, and swelve from Shem 
to Jacob. 


Tue Twetve Sons or ISRAEL, 

Though actually thirteen in number, there are never more 
than /welve named in any one list. There are about 18 
enumerations altogether, but in each list one or other is 
omitted. Generally it is Levi, but not always. In Rev. vii. 
both Dan and Ephraim are omitted (see p. 211), but the 
enumeration is still swelve, Levi and Joseph being introduced 
for this special sealing of the remnant which shall go un- 
scathed through the great tribulation. 

Then there were zwelve Judges or Saviours (see p. 214). 


Tue TEMPLE or SOLOMON 
has the number /welve as the predominating factor, in con- 
trast with the Tabernacle, which had the number five. This 
agrees with the grace which shines in the Tabernacle, and 
with the glory of the kingdom which is displayed in the 
Temple. 


254 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


When we come to the New Testament we find the same 
great principle pervading the Apostolic government as we 
see in the Patriarchal and National, for we have: 

The Zwelve Apostles. 

The zwelve foundations in the heavenly Jerusalem. 
The Zwelve gates. 

The /welve pearls. 

The /welve angels. 


Tue MEASUREMENT OF THE NEw JERUSALEM 
will be 12,000 furlongs square, while the wall will be 
yga (12 X r2) cubits, ever, 17: 

The number of the sealed in Rev. vii. 4 will be 144,000, 
and all that has to do with the Twelve Tribes is necessarily 
pervaded by this number, such as the stones in the High 
Priest's breastplate, the stones taken out of the Jordan, 
the number of the spies, etc. etc., and therefore we have not 
referred to all such reference in these pages. 


TwrLve PERSONS WERE ANOINTED 
for government of various kinds. Of course, all kings, 
priests, prophets, and healed lepers were anointed; but the 
circumstances of the anointing of /welve individuals is 
specially recorded. Of these, five were priests (Aaron and 
his four sons, Exod. vi. 23) and seven were kings: 
1. Aaron, Exod. xxix. 7, 9, etc. 


2. Nadab -" jo 

3. Abihu 5 vos) Bieststiny 

4. Eleazar 5 2 

5. Ithamar 5 n 

6. Saul, 1 Sam. x. 1 i T 12 
7. David,” 1 Same xvi. I3... 

8. Absalom, 2 Sam. xix. 10 


9. Solomon, 1 Kings i. 39 ... 4. ) Rings (7). 
10, Jehu 2 Kingstixy 6 

11. Joash, 2 Kings xi. 12 

12. Jehoahaz, 2 Kings xxiii. 30 


* David was anointed ¢hree times, viz, : 
by Samucl, 1 Sam. xvi. 13; 
by the men of Judah, 2 Sam. ii. 4; 
by the elders of Israel, 2 Sam. v. 3. 


TWELVE: GOVERNMENTAL PERFECTION, 255 


It will be observed from the above list that Saul, the man 
of man’s choice, is thus stamped with the number 6. David, 
the man of God's choice, is stamped with the number seven, 
For Saul and David are the sixth and seventh respectively 
in order. The words, “aman after God’s own heart,” mean 
simply a man of God's choice, and not, as infidels are never 
tired of asserting, that God approved of all the sins which 
` David fell into. 


TWELVE YEARS 


of age was Jesus when He first appears in public (Luke ii. 42) 
and utters His first-recorded words (see p. 52), 


Twetve Lrcions 
of angels mark the perfection of angelic powers \Matt. 
xxvl. 53). 
Tur Harr or TwELve 
sometimes denotes interruption or defect in human govern. 
ment, while 
Tue NUMBER or OCCURRENCES 
of words agrees with its signification, eg., aj, aulee, 
* palace," occurs /welve times. 


- 


256 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


THIRTEEN. 


This number has been considered in connection with the 
number egA/, to which the reader is referred (see pages 
205-232). 


FOURTEEN, 


being a multiple of seven, partakes of its significance; and, 
being double that number, implies a double measure of 
spiritual perfection. 

The number /o with which it is combined (2 x 7) may, 
however, bring its own significance into its meaning, as in 
Matt. i, where the genealogy of Jesus Christ is divided up 
and given in sets of 14 (2 X 7) generations, ‘wo being the 
number associated with incarnation. 

The same principle may be applied to other multiples of 
seven, and Bible students can find their own illustrations. 


( 257 ) 


FIFTEEN, 


being a multiple of five, partakes of the significance of that 
number, also of the number ree with which it is combined, 
mom 

Five is, as we have seen, the number of grace, and three 
is the number of divine perfection. Fifteen, therefore, 
specially refers to acts wrought by the energy of Divine 
grace. 

Deity is seen in it, for the two Hebrew letters which 
express it are *, Fod (10), and M, Hey (5). These spell the 
ineffable Name of M’, Jah, who is the fountain of all grace. 
The number fifeen is thus made up, by addition, 10+ 5 ; but as 
the Jews would not, by the constant use ofthese two letters, 
profane the sacred name, two other letters were arbitrarily 
used for this number, and a different and artificial com- 
bination was thus formed—p (77) — 9, and } (Vau) = 6. 
The number 9 + 6 would thus represent the number fifteen, 
but without any significance. 

Fifteen being 8 +- 7 as well as 3 x 5, it may also include a 
reference to resurrection, as being a special mark of the 
energy of Divine grace issuing in glory. 

A. few examples may suffice : 

The Ark was borne by the Flood fifteen cubits upwards, 
Gen. vii. 20. 

Hezekiah’s reprieve from death was fifteen years, 2 Kings 
XX. 6. 

The Jews were delivered from death under Esther on 
the fifteenth day of the month (ix. 18, 21). This is 
specially significant, as we have seen (p. 222), 
that their sentence to death was connected with the 
number ZZzrzeen. 

Bethany, where Lazarus was raised, and from whence 
the Lord ascended, was fifteen furlongs from Jerusalem, 
John xi. 18. 

Paul's ship anchored safely in fifteen fathoms on the 14th 
day, after shzrteen days of toil and trial, Acts xxvii. 21. 

On the fifteenth day of the first month was the feast of 
unleavened bread, Lev. xxiii, 6; and 

On the fifteenth day of the seventh month was the feast 
of Tabernacles (v. 34). 

S 1396. S 


258 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


SEVENTEEN 


stands out very prominently as a significant number. It is 
not a multiple of any other number, and therefore it has no 
factors. Hence itis called one of the prime (or indivisible) 
numbers. What is more, it is the seventh in the list of the 
prime numbers. 

The series runs I, 3, 5, 7, II, 13, 17, etc. Thirteen, it will 
be noted, is also a prime number, and is therefore important; 
but it is the szx/A of the series: hence it partakes of the 
significance of the number 6, and is indeed an intensified 
expression of it. 

In like manner seventeen being the seventh of the series, it 
partakes of and intensifies the significance of the number 
seven. Indeed, it is the combination or sum of two perfect 
numbers—seven and /en—seven being the number of spiritual 
perfection, and zen of ordinal perfection. 

Contrasted together the significance of these two numbers 
is clear; and when united in the number seventeen we have 
a union of their respective meanings, wz. spiritual perfec- 
tion, plus ordinal perfection, or the perfection of spiritual order. 

We see a beautiful illustration in 


Romans virt. 35-30, 


which concludes the first great division of that all-important 
Epistle, and sums up the blessings of those who are dead 
and risen in Christ. First we have a series of seven, then a 
series of zen. The seven are marked off by being put in 
the form of a question, while the z» are given as the answer 
to it. 
* Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall 

. Tribulation, 
Or distress, 
. Or persecution, 
Or famine, 
. Or nakedness, 
. Or peril, 

7. Or sword ? 
as it is written, For Thy sake are we killed all the day long; 
we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all 


Qu RUN 


SEVENTEEN: ILLUSTRATIONS. 259 


these things we are more than conquerors through Him that 
loved us. For I am persuaded, that, 

8. Neither death (1), 

9. Nor Wie (2), 

IO. Nor angels (3), 

11. Nor principalities (4), 

12. Nor things present (5), 

I3. Nor things to come (6), 

I4. Nor powers (7), 

15. Nor height (8), 

16. Nor depth (9), 

17. Nor any other creature (10), 
shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in 
Christ Jesus our Lord." 

Thus is set forth the spiritual and eternal perfection of the 
believer's standing in Christ. 

By forming the conclusive answer to the question, and 
giving us the positive assurance (though in a negative form), 
it seems as though the number zen is of more weight than 
seven when thus used together. It is so in 2 Chron. ii., where, 
in v. 7, Solomon sends to Hiram for a cunning workman, and 
seven particulars are specified; and in v. 14 a man is sent 
and his qualifications are enumerated in zen particulars. A 
more important illustration will be found in 


HEBREWS XII. 18-24, 


where the Old Dispensation and the New are thus con- 
trasted : 
* Ye are not come 
1. Unto the mount that might be touched, 
. And that burned with fire, 
. Nor unto blackness, 
. And darkness, 
. And tempest, 
. And the sound of a trumpet, 
. And the voice of words... 
but ye are come 
8. Unto Mount Zion (1), 
9. And unto the city of the living God (2). 
10. The heavenly Jerusalem (3), 


Om Bw S 


N 


v 


260 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. - 


11. And to an innumerable company of angels (4), 

12, To the general assembly (5), 

13. And church of the firstborn which are written in 
heaven (6), 

14. And to God the judge of all (7), 

15. And to the spirits of just men made perfect (8), 

16. And to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant (9), 

17. And to the blood of sprinkling that speaketh better 
things than that of Abel (10).” 

Here again the blessings of the New Covenant are seen to 
be higher than those of the Old, both in number and in im- 
portance. The Old were spzritual (7), but the latter are more 
so, for they are doubly the manifestation of Divine grace, zen, 
or2 X 5. 


PSALM LXXXIII 6-II 


gives us the /e& and the seven in a different order. Verses 
6-9 give us a confederation of /zz enemies for the purpose 
of making Israel extinct, and “to cut them off from being a 
nation"; while vv. 10 and 12 give us an enumeration of 
seven enemies which the Lord had destroyed in the past, 
with the prayer that He would do to the confederacy of the 
ten what He had done to the seven in the past. 

The commentators agree that no such confederacy can be 
found in the past history of Israel, so that we are shut up to 
the conclusion that the Psalm is Proleptic, and speaks of a yet 
future confederacy of which the later Prophets speak more 
particularly. 


Verses 6-9: The /ez-fold confederation :— 
1, Edom, 

. The Ishmaelites, 

Moab. 

. The Hagarenes. 

Gebal. 

Ammon. 

Amalek. 

. The Philistines. 

lyre. 

. Assur (Assyria). 


O0 pug uS 


= 


SEVENTEEN : ILLUSTRATIONS. 261 


Then follow, in vv. 10-12, the seven enemies which had been 
destroyed in days of old: 


II. 
127 
13. 
14. 
I5. 
16. 
17. 


Midianites (1), Judg. vii. 8. 
Sisera (2), Judg. iv. 5, 21. 
Jabin (3), Judg. iv. 5, 21. 
Oreb (4), Judg. vii. 25. 
Zeeb (5), Judg. vii. 25. 
Zebah (6), Judg. viii. 5. 
Zalmunna (7), Judg. viii. 5. 


The number seventeen (not the word merely) has a signifi- 
cance of its own, and therefore an importance which must be 
taken into account wherever it appears in the Word of God 
by itself or as a factor. 

It forms a great factor in the number 153 (see pp. 273, 


274). 


262 | NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


NINETEEN 


is a number not without significance. It is a combination of 
IO and 9, and would denote the perfection of Divine order 
connected with judgment. It is the gematria of Eve and 
of Job. 


TWENTY 


is the double of /z;, and may in some cases signify its concen- 
trated meaning. But its significance seems rather to be 
connected with the fact that it is one short of twenty-one, 
21 — 1 = 20; that is to say, if 21 is the three-fold 7, and 
signifies Divine (3) completion as regards spiritual per- 
fection (7), then Zwes/y, being one short of 21, it would 
signify what Dr. Milo Mahan calls expectancy, and certainly 
we are not without illustrations in support of it : 

Twenty years Jacob waited to get possession of his wives 
and property, Genyxxi. 38, 41. 

Twenty years Israel waited for a deliverer from Jabin’s 
oppression, Judg. iv. 3. 

Twenty years Israel waited for deliverance through 
Samson, Judg. xv. 20; xvi. 31. But his work was 
never much more than “ begun,” Judg. xiii. 25. 

Twenty years the Ark of the Covenant waited at Kirjath- 
jearim, 1 Sam. vii. 2. 

Twenty years Solomon was waiting for the completion of 
the two houses, 1 Kings ix. 10; 2 Chron. viii. 1. 

Twenty years Jerusalem wazted between its capture and 
destruction ; and 

Twenty years Jeremiah prophesied concerning it. 


TWENTY.TWO, 


being the double of eleven, has the significance of that 
number in an intensified form,—drisorgamisafion and disinte- 
gration, especially in connection with the Word of God. For 
the number /wo is associated with the second person of the 
Godhead, the living Word. 

It is associated with the worst of Israel's kings, —Jeroboam 
(1 Kings xiv. 20), and Ahab (1 Kings xvi. 29), each reigning 
22 years. 


TWENTY-TWO 263 


Eleven, we have seen, derives its significance by being an 
addition to Divine order (10), and a suétraction from Divine 
rule (12). These are two of the three ways in which the 
written Word of God can be corrupted—the third being 
alteration, “The words of the Log» are pure words "— words 
pertaining to this world and therefore requiring to be 
purified (see p. 169). But these words have been altered, 
' taken from, and added to by man. Is there anything in 
this which connects it with the fact that the letters of the 
alphabet (Hebrew) are £weny-£wo in number? Does it point 
to the fact that the revelation of God in being committed to 
human language and to man's keeping would thereby be 
subject to disintegration and corruption? 


264 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


TWENTY-FOUR, 


being a multiple of /wel»e, expresses in a higher form the 
same signification (as 22 does of rr). It is the number 
associated with the heavenly government and worship, of 
which the earthly form in Israel was only a copy. We are 
told that both Moses and David ordered all things connected 
with the Tabernacle and Temple worship by direct reve- 
lation from God, and as a copy of things in the heavens, 
Heb. viii. 5; 1 Chron. xxviii. 12, 19. And the sevenfold 
phrase (in Exod. xl.) “as the Lorn commanded Moses x 
witnesses to the Divine ordering of all. It was so with the 
twenty-four courses of priests in the earthly Temple ; these 
were formed on the “pattern of things in the heavens." 
Why is it necessary for us, when God tells us anything, to 
conclude that it means something else? Why, when, in 
Rev. iv, we read of the /wenty-four heavenly elders, are we 
to assume they are anything but what we read, viz. the 
leaders of the heavenly worship? Why seek to make them 
redeemed men, or the symbolical representation of redeemed 
men? Why not leave them alone? It is by such additions 
as these to what is written that the people of God are 
divided up into so many schools and parties. 

Those who regard them as representing the redeemed 
have done so on the supposed authority of Rev. v. 9; but 
they have been misled by some scribe who, in copying 
Rev. v. 9, altered, certain words either to make the passage 
conform to Rev. i. 5, 6 (which is somewhat similar), or to 
support this very view. Thus it has been handed down that 
these twenty-four elders were redeemed, and are therefore 
glorified human beings. 

But it is now known that the ancient and true reading was 
very different. That reading is given in the Revised Version 
thus :—“ And they sing a new song, saying, Worthy art Thou 
to take the book, and to open the seals thereof; for Thou 
wast slain and didst purchase unto God men* of every tribe, 


* The word jas (žeemas), **us," goes out, with the authority of Lachmann, 
Tischendorf, Alford, Westcott and Hort, the Revisers, and the Codex A. 
It is true that the authorities are divided as to this word, but as they are 
unanimous as to the other changes in the verse, this word zecessarily must go 
out as the result. 


TWENTY-FOUR TO THIRTY-ONE. 265 


and tongue, and people, and nation, and madest them ** to be 
unto our God a kingdom } and priests: and they reign f 
upon the earth." 

Thus the ancient and true reading takes away all ground 
for making these elders redeemed men, and leaves them 
the angelic leaders of the heavenly worship. 


TWENTY-FIVE, 


being the square of five (5? or 5 x 5), expresses the essence 
of the signification of five, ze. grace, whether used alone or 
occurring as a factor in larger numbers. The same may be 
said of 


TWENTY-SEVEN, 
being the cube of three. 


TWENTY-EIGHT 


is a multiple, and therefore has the significance of seven. 
Being also the product of 4 x 7 it partakes of the signi- 
ficance of 4. See pp. 194, 195. 


TWENTY-NINE 


is the combination of 20, the number of expectation, and 9, 
the number of judgment. 


THIRTY, 
being 3 x 10, denotes in a higher degree the perfection of 
Divine order, as marking the right moment. CurisT was 
thirty years of age at the commencement of His ministry, 
Luke iii. 23. 
Josrru, His type, was the same age, Gen. xli. 46. 
Davin also, when he began to reign, 2 Sam. v. 4. 


THIRTY-ONE. 


'The Hebrew expression of this is by, £i, the name of God, 
and its signification as a number or factor would be Dezty. 


* The word jas (Aeezas), **us," must be changed for abrobs (autous), 
“them,” with all the critical authorities. 

+ The word Baeixeis (dasileis), *'kings," must be changed for BaciAeíav 
(Basileian), **a kingdom,” with all the critical authorities, 

I The word faciAeósouev (basileusomen), **we shall reign," must be 
changed for Baotdevovow (dasileuousin), ‘‘they reign," with Lachmann, 
Tregelles, Alford, Westcott and Hort, the Revisers, and Codexes A and B. 
Or, for BactAetoovoty (basileusousin), ‘‘they shall reign," with Griesbach, 
Scholz, Tischendorf, Tregelles in margin, and Sinaitic Codex. 


266 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE, 


FORTY 


has long been universally recognized as an important 
number, both on account of the frequency of its occurrence, 
and the uniformity of its association with a period of proba- 
tion, trial, and chastisement—(not judgment, like the number 9, 
which stands in connection with the punishment of enemies, 
but the chastisement of sons, and of a covenant people). It 
is the product of 5 and 8, and points to the action of grace (5), 
leading to and ending in revival and renewal (8). This 
is certainly the case where forty relates to a period of 
evident probation. But where it relates to enlarged dominion, 
or to renewed or extended rule, then it does so in virtue of 
its factors 4 and 10, and in harmony with their signification. 
There are 15 such periods which appear on the surface of 
the Scriptures, and which maybe thus classified :— 
forty Fears of Probation by Trial: 
Israel in the wilderness, Deut. viii. 2-5; Ps. xcv. 10; 
Acts xiii. 18 (the third 40 of Moses’ life, 120 
years). i 
Israel from the crucifixion to the destruction of Jeru- 
salem. 


Forty Fears of Probation by Prosperity in Deliverance and Rest: 
under Othniel, Judg. iii. 11, 
under Barak, Judg. v. 31, 
under Gideon, Judg. viii. 28. 
Forty Fears of Probation by Prosperity in Enlarged Dominion : 
under David, 2 Sam. v. 4, 
under Solomon, 1 Kings xi. 42, 
under Jeroboam II. See 2 Kings xii. 17, 1S; mils 3 
5, 7, 22, 25 ; xiv. 12-14, 23, 28, 
under Jehoash, 2 Kings xii. r, 
under Joash, 2 Chron. xxiv. t. 
Forty Fears of Probation by Humiliation and Servitude : 
Israel under the Philistines, Judg. xiii. 1. 
Israel in the time of Eli, 1 Sam. iv. 18. 
Israel under Saul, Acts xiii. 21. 
Forty Fears of Probation by Waiting : 
Moses in Egypt, Acts vii. 23: 
Moses in Midian, Acts vii. 30. 


FORTY. 267 


Forty Days. 


There are eght of such great periods on the surface of the 
Bible: 

Forty days Moses was in the mount, Exod. xxiv. 18; 
and to receive the Law, Exod. xxiv. 18. 

forty days Moses was in the mount after the sin of the 
Golden Calf, Deut. ix. 18, 25. 

Forty days of the spies, issuing in the penal sentence of 
the 40 years, Num. xiii. 26 ; xiv. 34. 

Forty days of Elijah in Horeb, 1 Kings xix. 8. 

forty days of Jonah and Nineveh, Jonah iii. 4. 

forty days Ezekiel lay on his right side to symbolize 
the 40 years of Judah's transgression.* 

forty days Jesus was tempted of the Devil, Matt. iv. 2. 

forty days Jesus was seen of His disciples, speaking of 
the things pertaining to the kingdom of God, Acts 
i, 2. 


* Thus 40 becomes a number closely connected with Fudah, as 390 
(Ezek. iv. 5) is the number of separated /srae/. The significance of this will 
be seen (on p. 215), for 40 is a multiple of 8, and 390 is a multiple of r3. 
It may also be noted that 65 (5 x 13) is the number of Ephraim, while 70 is 
specially connected with Jerusalem. 


268 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


FORTY-TWO 


is a number connected with Antichrist. An important part 
of his career is to last for 42 months (Rev. xi. 2; xiii. 5), and 
thus this number is fixed upon him. Another number of 
Antichrist is 1260, and this is 30 X 42. 
Its factors are six and seven (6 X 7 = 42), and this shows 
a connection between man and the Spirit of God, and be- 
tween Christ and Antichrist : 
Forty-iwo stages of Israel's wanderings mark their con- 
flict with the will of God. 
Forty-two young men * mocked the ascension of Elijah 
to Elisha, 2 Kings ii. 23, 24. 


Being a multiple of seven, it might be supposed that 
it would be connected with spiritual perfection. But it is 
the product of szx times seven. Six, therefore, being the 
number of Man, and of man’s opposition to God, forty-two 
becomes significant of the working out of man’s opposition 
to God. 

There may be something more in the common phrase 
about things being all “sixes and sevens.” They are so, 
indeed, when man is mixed up with the things of God, and 
when religious “flesh” engages in spiritual things. See 
under “Six and Seven,” pp. 158--167. 


In GEMATRIA 


it is a factor in the number of Nimrod’s name, which is 294, 
or 42 X 7. It will be often found as a factor in the Anti- 
christian names. See under the number Thirteen. 

It does not often appear as a separate number, but when it 
is thus seen as a factor of another number, it always imparts 
its significance to it. 


FIFTY 


is the number of jubilee or deliverance. It is the zssue of 


7 X 7 (7°), and points to deliverance and rest following on as 
the result of the perfect consummation of time. 


* See note on p. 203. 


( 269 ) 


FIFTY-ONE. 


This is the number of Divine revelation, 
for there are 24 books in the Old Testament, 
and 27 books in the New Testament, 


making 51 in all. 


This is, of course, reckoning the Divine separation of the 
books, as exhibited in the MSS., which form our only 
authority, and not reckoning according to man’s manipulation 
of them; for both Jewish and Gentile fancies and reasonings 
make quite a different and conflicting number. See pp. 
25, 26. 


SIXTY-FIVE, 


being a multiple of ¢hzrteen (13 X 5 = 65), is specially asso- 
ciated with Ephraim (see Isa. vii. 8), and marks the apostasy 
of that Tribe. This apostasy, which began in Judg. xvii., 
afterwards extended to the Ten-Tribe kingdom, which is 
frequently spoken of therefore under the name of * Ephraim." 

*Within three-score and five years shall Ephraim be 
broken that it be not a people." 


270 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


SEVENTY 


is another combination of two of the perfect numbers, seven 
and fen. We have seen something of the significance of 
their sum under the number seventeen ; their product is no less 
significant. 

As compared with the sum of two numbers, the product 
exhibits the significance of each in an intensified form. 

Hence 7 x 10 signifies perfect spiritual order carried out 
with all spiritual power and significance. Both sø and 
order are greatly emphasised. 


Tue Seventy Nations 


which peopled the earth are set forth with a particularity 
which shows the importance of the fact (see Gen. x.). 


Tur SEVENTY SOULS or GENESIS XLVI. 


are marked not only by the perfection of spiritual truth, as 
seen by the multiple of 7, but by the perfection of Divine 
order, as seen in the multiple of 10, seventy being 7 x Io. 
We stop not to notice the number given in Acts vii. 14, 
which is different because it refers to a different classification, 
viz, “all his kindred,” which amounted to 75. In Gen. 
xlvi. 26, God is speaking of another class, viz., only those 
«which came out of his loins”; these were seventy in number. 
'This number is made up in a remarkable manner, dis- 
tinguishing the descendants of Leah and her maid from 
Rachel and her maid,* the latter being a more marked 
multiple of 7 :— 
The Children of Leah m n. NEC Xm) 
(Only 32 are named, because one, 
viz., Jochebed,f the mother of 
Moses, though conceived, was 
not born till Egypt was reached 
(Num. xxvi. 59), and therefore 
could not be zaz;ed here.) 


* The gematria of their names is just as remarkable. See pp. 210, 211. 


f The gematria of her name is 42 (6 x 7), for though of Divine calling she 
was very human. 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY. 271 


The children of her maid Zilpah ... 16 (4 x 4) 
Together (though not separately) 


making a multiple of 7 sa — M9: (7 X 7) 
The children of Rachel  ... BOR DIE (au 7) 
The children of her maid Bilhah ... 7 

EE 7) 


Making separately and together 
a multiple of seven  ... Ans 70 (7 X 10) 


These seventy built up the nation of Israel. See Gen. 
xiu225 Exod. 1.5; and Ruth iv. 11. 

Seventy elders furnished Israel's great Tribunal, Exod. xxiv. 
1; Num. xi. 16, afterwards called the Sanhedrim. See be- 
low, under the next number (120). 

Seventy disciples sent out by the Lord prefigure the mighty 
host which followed them (Luke x. r, 17) in spirit and in 
power. 


It is the number specially connected with 


JERUSALEM, 
for the city kept its sabbaths seventy years, while Judah was 
in Babylon, Jer. xxxv. 11. 
And seventy sevens were determined upon it to complete 
its transgression, and bring in everlasting righteousness for 
it, Dan. ix. 24 (see pp. 5, 6, 7). 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY 


is made up of three forties (3 X 40 = 120). Applied to “me 
therefore it signifies a divinely appointed period of proba- 
tion, Gen. vi. 3. 

Applied to persons it points to a divinely appointed number 
during a period of waiting, Acts i. 15. 

It is a factor also in the number of those who returned 
from Babylon, 42,360, being 120 X 353. 

It is also a factor of the number of the men who went up 
out of Egypt, 600,000, being 120 X 5000. 

It is a factor also of the 144,000 who will be sealed from 
the Twelve Tribes of Israel to go unscathed through the 
great tribulation, 144,000, being 120 X 1200. 


272 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


The unanimous voice of Jewish tradition agrees with the 
Talmud * that “the Great Synagogue” (Neh. x. I-10) con- 
sisted of 120 members. “It was called ‘Great’ because of 
the great work it effected in restoring the Divine law to its 
former greatness, and because of the great authority and re- 
putation which it enjoyed.” Its greatest work was in com- 
pleting the Canon of the Old Testament. The Great 
Synagogue lasted about 110 years, from B.c. 410-300, or 
from the latter days of Nehemiah to the death of Simon 
the Just. It then passed into the Sanhedrim, when its whole 
constitution was changed. 


* erusalem Berachoth, ti. 45 Jerusalem Megilla, 1.3 Bab, Meg, 176. 
T See Xitto, vol. iii., p. 909. 


( 373 ) 


ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY AND THREE. 


This is a number which has taxed the ingenuity of some of 
the greatest of Bible students, and that from the earliest 
times. All have felt there must be something deeply signi- 
ficant and mysterious in this number, from the solemn way 
in which it is introduced in John xxi. 11, —* Simon Peter went 
up and drew the net to land full of great fishes, one hundred 
and fifty and three." 

Other miracles are parables in their lessons, and Augus- 
tine * has pointed out the comparison and contrast between 
the two miraculous draughts of fishes, one at the beginning 
and the other at the end of Christ's ministry (after His 
resurrection). He and other Commentators see in this 
number some connection with the saved, as being definite 
and particular down even to the last one, making up nota 
large round number, but a smaller and odd number, 153. 
They saw in this a proof of the fact that the number of the 
elect is fixed and pre-ordained.f . 

Jerome also sees there is some deeper meaning in the 
number, and says that there are 153 sorts of fish, Ze, all 
kinds of men enclosed in the Gospel net. 

Other more surprising suggestions have been made, but 
they are all the outcome of fancy. 

The utmost that can be said is that had it been the round 
number 150, there would have been an absence of all 
definiteness, but as it goes beyond and gives the three by 
which the 150 is exceeded, it does seem to convey the 
impression that we have here, if these fishes are a symbol of 
the saved, an illustration and confirmation of our Lord's 
words, recorded in the same Gospel, *of all that He (the 
Father) hath given Me I should lose nothing" (John vi. 39), 
and “those that Thou gavest Me I have kept, and none of 
them is lost" (John xvii. 12). 

When we come to the way in which the significance of 
this number has been estimated, we find a variety of modes. 
Augustine and Gregory the Great both start with the fact that 


* Tractates on the Gospel according to St. John, cxxii. 
+ So Trench, Notes on the Miracles, p. 194. 
S 1396. T 


274 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE, 


17 is the sum of 10 and 7. For the significance of the num- 
ber 17 (see p. 258). But they deal with the 17 in different ways. 

Gregory simply multiplies 17 by 3 and again by 3 (Ze. 
17 X 3?), and thus arrives at 153. 

Augustine, on the other hand, employs addition, and takes 
the sum of all the digits up to and including 17 as amounting 
to exactly 153. He says, * “For if you add 2 to I, you 
have 3, of course; ifto these you add 3 and 4, the whole 
number makes 10; and then if you add all the numbers that 
follow up to 17, the whole amounts to the aforesaid number 
[153]; that is, if to 10, which you had reached by adding 
all together from 1 to 4, you add 5, you have 15; to these 
add 6, and the result is 21; then add 7, and you have 28; to 
this add 8, and 9, and 10, and you get 55; to this add 11, 
and 12, and 13, and you have 9r; and to this again add 14, 
and r5, and 16, and it comes to 136; and then add to this the 
remaining number of which we have been speaking, namely 
17, and it will make up the number of fishes.” + 

Bishop Wordsworth arrives at his result in a different 
manner. He uses two numbers, and employs both multiplica- 
tion and addition. First he takes the square of 12 (which he 
holds to be the Church number), and then he adds the square 
of 3 (the number of the Godhead), and points out that 
12* ++ 3? = 153, or (12 X 12) -- (3 X 3). 

We might give yet another contribution to these various 
modes as the result of our investigations in numbers, and 
say that 153 — 9 X 17, and see in this number all judgment 
(9) exhausted for the people of God (17) in the person 
of their Surety. 

All, however, agree in the great and blessed fact that 
* Salvation is of the Lord," Divine alike in its source, its 
agency, and its results. 

The same Divine character is stamped upon this miracle 
and its lessons by the number of disciples who were present 
when it was wrought. There were seven, And the seven is 
divided into 3 and 4 as usual—3 being named, and 4 un- 
named, 


* Tractate on Yohn, cxxii. 
t We should express this, now, more scientifically, and sa 
, : y, I+2+3+ 
+5+64+7+8+9+4 10-4174 12413 414-415 -- 16 4-17 = 183 E 
And Gregory's we should express thus: (10 + 7) x (3x 3) = 353: 


ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY AND THREE. 275 


The one lesson that remains is true, namely, that the whole 
number of the redeemed are saved by the power of the 
Triune God. 

We may condense all this by calling 153 simply, 


Tue NUMBER or THE Sons or Gop! 


" The expression pbs ‘32 (Bent Ha-Elohim), “Sons 
of God,” occurs seven times | * 
Now the gematria of this expression is exactly 153. Thus: 
=e 2 
a) = 50 


Í 
O 


30 
S 
10 
40 


153 


1 


po = ine al 
| 


I 


In Greek, the expression exhibits in another form the same 
phenomena, the gematria being 3213, or 3 X 7 X 153. 

It is very remarkable, in connection with this, that in 
Job ii. 1 we have * Beni-ha Elohim with Satan among them.” 
The gematria of this phrase is 1989, and the two factors of 
this number are 153 and 13 (13 X 153 — 1989). 

The word cwkAygpovópot (sun&leeronomo:), * joint-heirs " (Rom. 
viii. 17), amounts to 1071, the factors of which are 153 and 7 
(153 X 7 = 1071). 

The expression cuveAnpovdépor 96 Xpwrro0 (sunkleeronomoi de 
Christou), joint heirs with Christ" (Rom. viii. 17), amounts 
to 2751. Now the factors of 153, as we have seen, are 9 and 
17, and the number 2751 is three times the z;ze hundred, plus 
seventeen, viz., 3 X (900 + 17) = 2751. 

The expression Krisis 0eo0 (KZszs Theou), “the creation of 
(qed, 1s 1224, or 8 X 153: 


* One of them is slightly different, ns 9912 (Beni El-kai), * sons of the 
living God." Thus the human and divine element is seen in the six and 
seven (see p. 164). 

T 2 


276 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


In the record of the miracle itself there are some remark- 
able phenomena :— 
The word for “fishes” ix0ves (zchzÀues), is by gematria 
1224, Or 8 X 153. 


The words for “the net" are 76 ŝikrvov, and by gematria 
this also amounts to 1224, or 8x 153, for it is unbroken, 
and carries the precious freight from “the right side” of 
the ship safely to the shore, and “not one is lost." 


Quite a new thought has recently been given by Lieut.-Col. 
F. Roberts, who finds that amongst the multitudes who re- 
ceived direct blessing from Christ there are recorded exactly 
153 special individual cases! We append his list, with one 
or two alterations: and if any names appear to be missing, it 
will be found on examination that there is good reason for 
omitting them; e.g., Nathanael is the same as Bartholomew; 
while Matthias, and Barsabas (Acts i. 23), Joses, Barnabas 
(Acts iv. 36), Stephen, though they with many others may 
have received blessing from Jesus Himself, and probably 
did, yet z/ zs not so stated. Of course Zacharias, Elisabeth, 
John the Baptist, Joseph, Simeon, and Anna, are not included, 
as they were all in blessing before the birth of Jesus. 


The following is the list :— 


1. The leper ... a ae Matt. vli. o 1 EET 
2. Centurion and servant ... — 5 2 
3. Peter's wife's mother  ... — 14 I 
4. Two possessed with devils — 18 2 
5. Palsied man and bearers — im 2 5 
(Mark ii. 3) 
6. Jairus and his daughter ... — 18 2 
7. Woman with issue of blood — — 21 I 
8. Blind men ... T nei — 27 2 
9. Dumb man EA "m — 32 I 
IO. Eleven Apostles ... nae — X2 II 
Ir. Man with withered hand... — xii. Io I 
I2. Blind and dumb devil ... — 22 I 
13. Brethren of the Lord  ... — xiii. 55 4 
(Acts i. 14) 
14. Syrophoenician woman and 
daughter v ae — xv. 22 2 
15. Lunatic child and father... — XML I4. 5. 02 


ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY AND THREE, 


16. Blind men (leaving Jeri- 
chou e A T 
17. Simon the leper ... Ta 
I8. Mary (sister of Lazarus. 
See Nos. 32 and 47) ... 
I9. Centurion ... : 
20. Salome (mother of Zebe- 
dee's children) 
21. Mary (mother of James, 
and wife of Cleopas) ... 
22. Mary Magdalene ... i. 
23. Joseph of Arimathaea ... 
24. Man with unclean spirit . 
25. Man, deaf and dumb .. 
26. Blind man ... T oa 
27. Son of the widow of Nain 
28. A woman, a sinner es 
29. Joanna and Susanna  ... 
30. A disciple—* follow Me " 
31. The seventy disciples... 
32. Martha  .. - s 
33. Woman with infirmity  ... 
34. Man with dropsy ... T 
35. The ten lepers  ... 55 
36. The blind man T— 
ing Jericho) f ... TD 
37. Zaccheus ... IT ns 
38. Malchus ... ES ae 
(John xviii. 10) 
39. Penitent thief — ... dut 
40. The two disciples at Em- 
maus  .. e a 
41. Nicodemus s xe 
42. Woman of Samaria fs 
43. Nobleman and sick son ... 
44. Impotent man (Bethesda) 
45. Woman taken in adultery 


Matt. xx. 30 
— xxvi. 6 
m ee 7 
— xxvii. 54 
E 57 

Mark i. 23 
—~ vii. 32 
— viii. 22 

Luke vii. 12 
Scart ay 
— viii. 3 
— ix. 59 
— x I 
— xiii. II 
— xiv. 2 
— xvil 12 
— xviii. 35 
— XİX. 2 
— xxii. 5I 
— xxiii. 43 
— XXiV. 13 

John iii. 1 
— iv 4 
T 46 
— wb 
— vill, II 


277 


LEM CMM ME MEM ME MU M i 


70 


— = HN =e m N 


EE Bartimeus being one T them (Mark x. 46), these two being healed as 


Jesus Zz/? Jericho. 


+ The blind man (No. 36) was healed (Luke xviii. 35) ‘‘as He was come 
nigh unto Jericho,” and therefore is additional to the two who were healed as 


He was leaving Jericho (No. 16). 


See Matt. xx. 30; Mark x. 46. 


278 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


46. Man born blind ... es John sse uo T 
47. Lazarus  . AG x — xi. ve a 
48. Mary, mother of Jesus ... — xix.25 ... I 

153 


We give the above not as an alternative solution, but as an 
additional illustration, believing that all may be true; and at 
any rate, that all contribute to, and increase the cumula- 
tive evidence in support of the same great and blessed 
fact, that it is true of the Lord's people as it is of the 
stars, * He calleth them all by their names" (Ps. cxlvii. 4). 
The book of Exodus is the book in which we first hear of. 
redemption (Exod. xv. 12), and the Hebrew and divinely 
canonical name for this book is “ Tue Nawzs," because His: 
people are redeemed by name! 

This is the lesson of the 153 great fishes. 


( 279 ) 


TWO HUNDRED. 


Twenty is the number of expectancy as we have seen 
(p. 262). Here we have it tenfold (20 x 10). 

The significance of this number is suggested by John vi. 7, 
where we read, ‘Two hundred pennyworth of bread is nor 
.SUFFICIENT for them." 

And so we find this number stamping various things with 
insufficiency. . 

Achan's 200 shekels were “not sufficient" to save him 
from the consequences of his sin (Josh. vii. 21). This 
shows us he insufficiency of money (Ps. xlix. 7-9). 

Absalom's 200 shekels weight of hair were “ not suffi- 
cient" to save him, but rather caused his destruction 
(2 Sam. xiv. 26; xviii. 9). This shows us Zhe insufficiency 
of beauty. 

Micah's graven image was purchased for 200 shekels 
(Judg. xvii. 4 and xviii.), and led to the introduction of 
idolatry into Israel and the blotting out of the Tribes 
of Dan and Ephraim from the blessing of Rev. vii., 
showing us ¢he insufficiency of mere religion. 

Ezra’s 200 “singing men and women” (Ezra ii. 65), 
were “not sufficient” to produce “peace with God,” 
true spiritual worship, or joy in the Lord. Only 
God’s word rightly ministered can lead to this (Neh. 
viii. 5-9). This shows ¢he znusufficiency of external things 
in the worship of God, and the impossibility of wor- 
shipping God with the senses. True worship, which alone 
God will accept, “ MUST " (John iv. 24) be spiritual. 


THREE HUNDRED AND NINETY. 


This is the number of Israel (Ezek, iv. 5), being 13 X 30; 
as 65 (5 X 13) is the number of Ephraim (Isa. vii. 8); as 40 
(5 x 8) is the number of Judah (Ezek. iv. 6); and 70 (7 X 10) 
is the number of Jerusalem. See further under these numbers 
respectively, and under 8 and 13 also. 

As a matter of chronology it was 390 years from the 
division of the Tribes to the Captivity, and thus the duration 
of the separate kingdom of Israel was 390 years, as referred 
toin Ezek.iv. See p. 215. 


280 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


FOUR HUNDRED 


is the product of 8 and 50, and is a divinely perfect period. 
From the fulfilment of the promise to Abraham in the 
birth of Isaac to the Exodus was a period of 400 years. 
Stephen mentions it as dating from “his seed” (Acts vii. 6), 
and God dates it from the same point when He says to 
Abraham, * thy seed" (Gen. xv. 13).* 
It is popularly confounded with quite a different period of 


FOUR HUNDRED AND THIRTY 


years, which, though it has the same point as to its termina- 
tion, does not commence at the same point. 

From the call of Abraham, or the “ promise” made to him 
at that call (Gen. xii. 3), unto the Exodus was 430 years. 
This covers the whole period of the “sojourning”; not of 
Abraham’s “ seed," as in Gen. xv. 13 * and Acts vii. 6, but of 
Abraham himself. 'This is what is mentioned in Gal. iii. 17 
as the period from the “promise” to the “Law.” Itis re- 
ferred to also in Exod. xii. 40, where the * sojourning " is the 
nominative case (or subjeci) of the verb, while the sentence, 
“who dwelt in Egypt," is merely a relative clause, defining 
parenthetically an important point concerning them. 


FOUR HUNDRED AND NINETY. 


This is the period of the 70 sevens referred to under the 
head of Chronology (pp. 5,6). We need not therefore fur- 
ther enlarge on it here beyond pointing out the spiritual 
significance of the number itself as being seven times seventy. 

Daniel was praying, and he was concerned about the 


* The structure of this verse rescues it from the way in which it is sadly 

misunderstood :— 
A | “Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in 
a strange land that is not theirs, 
B | and shall serve them ; 
B | and they shall afflict them 
A | four hundred years.” 

The structure places B and B in a parenthesis. A and 4 cover the whole 
time of the sojourn, while B and B refer to the service and sojourn during a 
parenthesis of unnamed length within that time. The structure of Acts vii. 6 
is exactly the same. 


> 


FOUR HUNDRED AND NINETY. 281 


70 years prophesied of by Jeremiah (Dan. ix. 2 and Jer. 
XXV. II, I2; xxix. 10). And the answer meant that though 
those 70 appointed years were about to end in restoration 
and blessing, another period of seven times 70 years had been 
determined (ix. 24-27), and they would commence from the 
very “decree” (Neh. ii.) which should end the former 70 
years. And these should run their course, marked by certain 
‘incidents, before the full and final restoration of Daniel's 
“city” and “ people" should be accomplished. 

The number 490 marks the product of spiritual perfection 
(7) with regard to the working out of Jerusalem's number 
(70). For 7 times 70 is 490. 


282 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


SIX HUNDRED AND SIXTY SIX 


is “the number of a name” (Rev. xiii. 17, 18). When the 
name of Antichrist is known its gematria will doubtless be 
found to be the number 666. But this number has, we be- 
lieve, a far deeper reference to and connection with the 
secret mysteries of the ancient religions, which will be again 
manifested in connection with the last great apostasy.* 

Many names may be found, the numerical value of whose 

“letters amounts to 666. We have a list of about forty such 
gematria. Most of them are ridiculous, inasmuch as instead 
of the gematria being confined to Hebrew and Greek (which 
have no Arabic or other special signs for figures), the prin- 
ciple is extended to names in English, French, and other 
modern languages, on the assumption that they would have 
been spelt in exactly the same way; whereas we know that 
names both of persons and places are not simply trans- 
literated in various languages. It is absurd therefore 
to attempt to take words from the modern European lan- 
guages which use Arabic figures. 

Gematria is not a means by which the name is to be dis- 
covered; but it will be a ¢es¢ and a proof by which the name 
may be identified after the person is revealed. 

If six is the number of secular or human perfection, then 
66 is a more emphatic expression of the same fact, and 666 
is the concentrated expression of it; 666 is therefore the 
trinity of human perfection; the perfection of imperfection; 
the culmination of human pride in independence of God and 
opposition to His Christ. 

The number, however, has to be computed (dio ( pseephizo), 
fo reckon, to calculate, not merely to count or enumerate). See 
Rev. xiii. 18. Therefore it is not to be known by gematria 
merely, though, as we have said, that will be one of the 
factors in the calculation, just as the letters in the word 
Jesus amount to 888. 


* See The Computation of 666, published by James Nisbet and Co. 
f Take ‘‘Venice.” This is the English spelling. But the French is 
Venise; the German is Venedig; while the Italian is Venezia. 


SIX HUNDRED AND SIXTY SIX. 283 


But 666 was the secre/ symbol of the ancient pagan mysteries 
connected with the worship of the Devil. It is to day the 
secret connecting link between those ancient mysteries and 
their modern revival in Spiritualism, Theosophy, etc. The 
efforts of the great enemy are now directed towards uniting 
all into one great whole. The newspapers, worldly and 
.religious, are full of schemes as to such a union. “Re- 
union" is in the air. The societies for the re-union of 
Christendom, and the Conferences for the re-union of the 
Churches, are alike parts of the same great movement, and 
are all making for and are signs of the coming Apostasy. 
During this age, * Separation" is God's word for His people, 
and is the mark of Christ; while “union” and “re-union ” is 
the mark of Antichrist. 

The number 6 was stamped on the old mysteries. 
The great secret symbol consisted of the three letters 
SSS, because the letter S in the Greek alphabet was the 
symbol of the figure 6 (see page 49) a=1, B=2, 
y= 3,8 = 4, «= 5, but when it came to 6, another letter was 
introduced! Not the next—the sixth letter (¢, ze/a)—but a 
different letter, a peculiar form of S, called “stigma” (s). 
Now the word orlyya (stigma), means a mark, but especially a 
mark made by a érand as burnt upon slaves, cattle, or soldiers, 
by their owners or masters ; or on devotees who thus branded 
themselves as belonging to their gods. It is from oro, 
to prick, or brand with a hot tron. Hence it came to be used 
of scars or wound-prinis, and it is thus used by Paul of his 
scars, which he regarded as the tokens of his sufferings, the 
marks which he bore on his body for the sake of his Lord 
and Master, and marking him as belonging to the one who 
had bought him (Gal. vi. 17). 

This letter is becoming familiar to us now; and it is not 
pleasant when we see many thus marked (ignorantly, no 
doubt) with the symbolical * S," “S,” especially when it is 
connected, not with “salvation,” but with judgment, and is 
associated with “blood and fire," which, in Joel ii. 30, 31, 
is given as one of the awful signs “before the great and 
terrible day of the Lord come." 

Apostasy is before us. The religion of Christ has, in the 
past, been opposed and corrufied, but when it once comes, as it 
has come in our day, to be durlesgued, there is nothing left but 


284 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


judgment. There is nothing more the enemy can do before 
he proceeds to build up the great apostasy on the ruins of 
true religion, and thus prepare the way for the coming of 
the Judge. 

It is remarkable that the Romans did not use all the letters 
of their alphabet, as did the Hebrews and Greeks. They 
used only szx letters,* D, C, L, X, V, and I. And it is still 
more remarkable, and perhaps significant, that the sum "S 
these amounts to 666 :— 


som ee 
saan 
D d 

= 


In each of the three pairs there is an addition of ome, for 
6=5+1. It is the grace of God superseded by the cor- 
ruption of man. 

It will be seen from this that the number 666 is very far- 
reaching, and is filled with a meaning deeper, perhaps, than 
anything we have yet discovered. One thing, however, is 
certain, and that is, that the triple 6 marks the culmination 
of man’s opposition to God in the person of the coming 
Antichrist. 

Further illustration of the significance of this number is 
seen in the fact that 


Tue Duration OF THE OLD Assyrian EMPIRE 
was 666 years before it was conquered by Babylon. 


JERUSALEM was Tronoen Down 


by the Roman Empire exactly 666 years from the battle of 
Actium, B.C. 31, to the Saracen conquest in A.D. 636. 


THERE ARE THREE MEN 
which stand out in Scripture as the avowed enemies of God 


* The M appears to have been merely two D's, (v). 
f See The Witness of the Stars, by the same author, pp. 177 to end. 


SIX HUNDRED AND SIXTY SIX. 285 


and of His people. Each is branded with this number szx 
that we may not miss their significance :— 
I. GoriarH, whose height was 6 cubits, and he had 6 
pieces of armour;* his spear's head weighed 600 
shekels of iron (1 Sam. xvii. 4-7). 


2. NESUCHADNEZZAR, whose *image" which he set up,f 
was 60 cubits high and 6 cubits broad (Dan. iii. 1), 
and which was worshipped when the music was 
heard from 6 specified instruments f, and 

3. ANTICHRIST, whose number is 666. 

In the first we have one six connected with the pride of 
fleshly might. 

In the second we have ‘wo sixes connected with the pride 
of absolute dominion. 

In the third we have hree sixes connected with the pride 
of Satanic guidance. 


Tur Tarents or Gorp 


brought to Solomon in a year were 666 (1 Kings x. 14). 
But this perfection of money-power was only *vanity and 
vexation of spirit " (Eccles. ii. 8, 11; compare 1 Tim. vi. 10). 
As to the triple number 666, we have already seen (page 
121) that while one figure (6) is significant, two figures (66) 
are still more so; and ZAree figures (666) seem to denote the 
concentration or essence of the particular number. 
We see further examples of this in 
Jesus, 888, the dominical number ; 
Sodom, 999, the number of judgment ; 
Damascus, 444, the world number ; 


* In Eph. vi. 14-18, the Christian’s armour has a seventh piece—‘‘ Prayer." 
See under ** Seven.” 

+ We must distinguish the **image" which he set up, from the ** man " of 
whom he afterwards dreamt. The proportions are not the same. The height 
of a man is to his breadth notas 10:1, Some have therefore thought that this 
**ómage" may have been an obelisk. But as the word for ‘‘image” denotes 
a form or likeness, it may have been like the form of a man standing on 
a pedestal of which the height was included. The pedestal being probably 
24 (6 x 4) cubits, and the image 36 (6 x 6). 

I The numerical value (by gematria) of the words in Dan. iii. I, which 
describe the setting up of this image is 4662. The very figures are significant, 
but still more so are the factors of this number. 4662 = 7 x 666, 


286 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


The beast, 666, the number of zzz ; 
« Verily, verily, I say unto you," 888; 
The Lord God made, 888; etc., etc. 

“The children of Adonikam" who returned from the 
Captivity (Ezra ii. 13) numbered 666.  Adonikam means 
the lord of the enemy. This is suggestive, even though it may 
be vague. 

The number 666 has another remarkable property. It is 
further marked as the concentration and essence of 6 by being 
the sum of all the numbers which make up the sguare of six / 
The square of six is 36 (6°, or 6 x 6), and the sum of the 
numbers 1 to 36 = 666, £e, 1--2--34-44- 540-6 4-748 
+9+ 104+ 11 + 12+134+ 14+ I5 H- 16+ 17+ 18 4 19 
+ 20 + 21 + 22 + 23 + 24+ 25 + 26 + 27 + 28 + 29 + 30 
+ 31 + 32 + 33 + 34 + 35 + 36 — 666. 

They may be arranged in the form of a square with six 
figures each way, so that the sum of each six figures in any 
direction shall be another significant /rzzz/y = 111, 


8 II 27 28 8 30 


19 14 p I5 23 24 
18 20 22 21 E I3 
25 29 Io 9 26 | 12 
36 5 33 4 2 31 


GEMATRIA. 


It is remarkable that the numerical value of the “Sone or 
Moszs" (Exod. xv. 1-18) is 41626, which is the product of 
the significant factors 13 x 42 X 70. 

On the other hand, if we compare “the Song of Moses 
and of the Lamb,” in Rev. xv. 1-5, the remarkable value is 
9261, which has the remarkable factors 3? x 7 


( 287 ) 


CONCLUSION. 


We have now come to the end of our survey of number 
as used by God in His works and in His Word, and we have 
seen that all is perfect. 

Our apprehension and interpretation of the phenomena 
may be marked with many imperfections, and we are con- 
scious that after all we have but touched the fringe of this 
great and important subject. 

One thing, however, is certain, and that is, that we have, 
in the Scripture of Truth, a revelation from God absolutely 
without error, and whatever difficulties we may encounter in 
seeking to understand it, they are all the outcome of our own 
infirmities. 

Of another thing we are also certain, that the Written 
Word cannot be separated from the Living Word, nor the 
spiritual meaning of the one understood without a living 
union with the other. 

It may be said of the Word of God, as it is written of the 
New Jerusalem (Rev. xxi. 23), 


“THE LAMB IS THE LIGHT THEREOF,” 


SE —À ————— — 


288 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE, 


ADDITIONAL MISCELLANEOUS 
ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Many illustrations have been added while this work has 
been passing through the press. 

A few others are now given, which have been found since 
the work has been printed. 


THREE. 


Three multitudes miraculously fed :—(1) 2 Kings iv. 42, 43; 
(2) Matt. xv. 34, 38; (3) Mark vi. 38, 44. 

Three times Abraham called the “Friend of God” :— 
(1) 2 Chron. xx. 7; (2) Isa. xli, 8; (3) Janmiesmimes 

Three times the word “ Christian " is found in the New Tes- 
tament:—(1) Acts xi. 26; (2) Acts xxv. 28; (3) 1 Pet. iv. 6. 


FOUR. 


Four times “Eve” mentioned in the Bible by name:— 
Gen. 11.20; iv. 1; 2 Cor. xt. 3; 1 EI 013. 


SIX. 


Szx times our Lord was asked for a sign :— 
1. The Pharisees, Matt. xii. 38; Mark viii. 11. 
. The Sadducees, Matt. xvi. 1. 
. The Disciples, Matt. xxiv. 3; Mark xiii. 4. 
. The people, Luke xi. 16. 
. The Jews, John ii. 18. 
. The people, John vi. 3o. 
Six persons bore testimony to the Saviour's innocency :— 
1. Pilate, Luke xxiii. 14, 
2. Heroda uke xxiii. r5, 
3. Judas, Matt. xxvii. 3. 
4. Pilate’s wife, Matt. xxvii. 19, 
5. The dying thief, Luke xxiii. 41. 
6. The centurion, Luke xxiii. 47. 


Atm BW N 


( 289 ) 


SEVEN. 


Seven miracles wrought by Christ on the Sabbath day :— 
I. The withered hand, Matt. xii. 9. 
2. The unclean spirit, Mark i. 21. 
3. Peter's wife's mother, Mark i. 29. 
4. The woman, Luke xiii. 11. 
5. The man with dropsy, Luke xiv. 2. 
6. The impotent man, John v. 8, 9. 
7. The man born blind, John ix. 14. 


“The last day” mentioned sezez times in John’s Gospel:— 
Jonn vi 30, 40, 44, 54; vil. 37; Xi. 24; xii. 48. 


NINE. 


Nine persons “ sZoned." 
I. The blasphemer, Lev. xxiv. 14. 
2. The Sabbath-breaker, Num. xv. 36. 
3. Achan, Josh. vii. 25. 
4. Abimelech, Judg. ix. 53. 
5. Adoram, 1 Kings xii. 18. 
6. Naboth, 1 Kings xxi. Io. 
7. Zechariah, 2 Chron. xxiv. 21. 
8. Stephen, Acts vii. 
9. Paul, Acts xiv. I9. 


Nine widows are specially mentioned :— 
I. Tamar, Gen. xxxviii. 19. 
2. Woman of Tekoah, 2 Sam. xiv. 5. 
3. Hiram's mother, 1 Kings vii. 14. 
4. Zeruah, 1 Kings xi. 26. 
s. Woman of Zarephath, 1 Kings xvii. 9. 
6. The poor widow, Mark xii. 42. 
7. Anna, Luke ii. 37. 
8. Widow of Nain, Luke vii. 12. 
9. The importunate widow, Luke xviii. 3. 


Nine persons afflicted with dlndness :— 
i. The men at Lot's door, Gen. xix. II. 
2. Isaac, Gen. xxvii. I. 
3. Jacob, Gen. xlviii. 10. 
4. Samson, Judg. xvi. 21. 
S 13566. U 


290 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE. 


m Eo T Sam, rv: 

6. The prophet Ahijah, 1 Kings xiv. 4. 
4. The Syrian army, 2 Kings vi. 18. 

8. King Zedekiah, 2 Kings xxv. 7. 

9. Elymas, Acts xiii. 1I. 


Vine were afflicted with leprosy:-— 
1. Moses, Exod. iv. 6. 
2. Miriam, Num. xii. 10. 
3. Naaman, 2 Kings v. I. 
4. Gehazi, 2 Kings v. 27. 
5-8. The four lepers at Samaria, 2 Kings vii. 3. 
g. Azariah, 2 Kings xv. 5. 


TEN. 


The observance of zen passovers are recorded :--- 
In Egypt, Exod. xii. 
In the wilderness, Num. ix. 5. 
Plains of Jericho, Josh. v. 10. 
Hezekiah's, 2 Chron. xxx. I. 
Josiah's, 2 Chron. xxxv. 1. 
Ezra's, Ezra vi. 19. 
7. When our Lord was twelve years of age, Luke ii. 41. 
8. John ii. 13. 
9. John vi. 4. 
10. Matt. xxvi. 2. 


Lani 


FAGA HOUR 


Ten deaths occasioned by women :— 

. Sisera, Jude iv. 21. 

. Abimelech, Judg. ix. §2, 53; 254m ann. 
« Sheba, 2 Sam. xx. 1, 21,22. 

. The harlot's child, 1 Kings iii. 19. 

. The prophets of the land, 1 Kings xviii. 4. 
. Naboth, 1 Kings xxi. 9, 10. 

The son boiled by his mother, 2 Kings vi. 29. 
Mine seed royal, 2? Kings xin 

Haman’s ten sons, Est. ix. 13, 14. 

. John the Baptist, Matt. xiv. 8. 


OQ ON Ot Bow Mx 


Lon] 


Ten instances in the Old Testament of younger sons being 
preferred before the elder:— Abel, Shem, Abraham, Isaac, 
Jacob, Judah, Joseph, Ephraim, Moses, David. 


( 291 ) 


ELEVEN. 
Eleven kings and rulers offended with God's servants for 

telling them the truth :— 

I. Pharaoh, Exod. x. 28. 

2. Balak, Num. xxiv. to. 
. Jeroboam, 1 Kings xiii. 4. 
. Ahab, 1 Kings xxii. 27. 
Naaman, 2 Kings v. 12. 
Asa, 2 Chron. xvi. 10. 
. Joash, 2 Chron. xxiv. 21. 
. Uzziah, 2 Chron. xxvi. 19. 
. Jehoiakim, Jer. xxvi. 21. 
» Zedekiah, Jer. xxxii. 3. 
. Herod, Matt. xiv. 3. 


Joseph was eleven years in Potiphar's house :— 
He was 30 years of age when he stood before 


- OQ CN Dne w 


Lal 


Pharaoh (Gen. xli. 46) - à 30 
He was 17 years old when sold (Gen. xxxvii. 
2,38) . ee ave Ty 
He was 2 yeats in prison (Ga. siii. D um 2 
u 
THIRTEEN. = 


Thirteen famines are recorded in the Scriptures :—(1) Gen. 
XO, (2) Gen. xxvi. 1; (3) Gen. xli. 54; (4) Ruth i. 1; 
(5) 2 Sam. xxi. 1; (6) 1 Kings xviii. 1; (7) 2 Kings iv. 38; 
(8) 2 Kings vii. 4; (9) 2 Kings xxv. 3; (10) Neh. v. 3; 
(Fi) jer. xiv. 1; (12) Luke xv. t4; (13) Acts xi. 28. 


FOURTEEN. 
Fourteen times in the Book of Proverbs the expression 
occurs “the fear of the Lord” :—Prov. i. 7, 29; ii. 5; viii. 13; 


ORR; KV. 26, 27 ; xv. 16, 33; xvi. 6; xix. 23; xxii. 4; 
xxiii. 17. 
SEVENTEEN. 
Seventeen Angelic appearances are recorded in the Gospels 

and Acts :— 

I-3. Three to Joseph, Matt. i. 20; ii. 13, 19. 

4. To the Lord in the wilderness, Matt. iv. 11. 

U2 


202 NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE, 


5. In Gethsemane, Luke xxii. 43. 

6. On the stone at the sepulchre, Matt, xxviii. 2. 
7. Within the sepulchre, Mark xvi. 5. 

8. To Zecharias, Luke i. II, 

9. To Mary, Luke i. 26. 

0, 1I. Two to the Shepherds, Luke ii. 9, 13. 
12. At the pool of Bethesda, John v. 4. 

13. To the disciples, Acts i. 11. 

14. To the disciples in prison, Acts v. 19. 

I5. To Cornelius, Acts x. 3. 

16. To Peter in prison, Acts xii. 7. 

17. To Paul, Acts xxvii. 23. 


TWENTY. 


Twenty dreams are recorded :— 

I. Abimelech, Gen. xx. 3. 

2, 3. Jacob, Gen. xxviii. 12; xxxi. 10. 

4. Laban, Gen. xxxi. 24. 

5, 6. Joseph, Gen. xxxvii. 5, 9. 

7, 8. The butler and the baker, Gen. xl. 5. 
9, IO. Pharaoh, Gen. xli. 1, 5. 

11. The man in Gideon's army, Judg. vii. 13. 
12.. Solomon, 1 Kings iii. 5. 

13, 14. Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. ii. 3; iv. 5. 
15. Daniel, Dan. vii. 1. 

16, 17, 18. Joseph, Matt. i. 20; ii. 13, 19. 
19. The wise men, Matt. ii. 13. 
20. Pilate's wife, Matt. xxvii. 19. 


TWENTY-ONE 
times in the Book of Kings it is said that Jeroboam the son 
of Nebat “made Israel to sin" :—1 Kings xiv. 16; xv. 26, 
30, 34; Xvi. 19, 26; xxi. 22; xxii. 52; 2 Kings iii. 3; x. 29, 
31; xiii. 2,6, 11; xiv. 24; xv. 9, 18, 24, 28; xvii. 21; xxiii. r5. 


— ——— 


[RISE X ES. 


( 295 ) A. 


MODEA OF SUBJECTS. 


*,* Add. signifies the Addenda, pp. 288-292. 


A 


Aaron and his sons, 199. 
Abel and Cain, 97. 
** Abomination of desolation," 231, 
282: 
Abraham, **the friend of God,” Add. 
his call, 21. 
change of name, 136. 
covenant, 113, 196. 
his descendants, 199, 212, 213. 
his ‘‘ generations,” 210. 
his sevenfold blessing, 169. 
the ten trials of his faith, 244. 
Abraham and Lot, 97. 
Absalom, 279. 
Achan, 279. 
Adonikam, the children of, 286. 
Adversaries, 224. 
Agnostic, 83. 
Amaziah, 161. 
Amen, 9I. 
Angelic appearances, Add. 
Angels, appearances of, in life of our 
Lord, 177. 
appearances of, in Gospels and 
Acts, Add. 
Anointing of twelve persons, 254. 
Anointing oil, the holy, 144. 
Antichrist, 244, 283. 
Apocalypse, 225, 234. 
occurrences of words in, 32. . 
Apostles, names of, 31. 
Arphaxad's line, 210. 
6¢ Ask of Me,” 117. 
Ass, the, 194, 195. 
Asshur, 221. 
Assyrian Empire, 284. 


Athaliah, 152. 
Atonement and the No. 13, 228-233. 
Augustine and the No. 153, 274. 


B 


Babylon, the names of those who re- 

turned from, 217. 
Badgers’ skins, 129, 143. 
Barabbas, 223. 
Bartimæus, 277. 
Bee, the, 10. 
Beelzebub, 153. 
** Bewitch,” 75. 
Bible, the books of, 25. 

the divisions of, 93, 94. 

Blindness, Add. 
Brazen serpent, the, 230. 
Bride, the, 6r. 
Burnt offering, the, 151. 
** Busy-body,” 77. 


C 


Cain and Abel, 97. 

Cain line of names, 207. 

Cain's descendants, 209. 

Chemical elements, the, 11. 

Cherubim, the, 124, 125. 

Chladni's figures, 17. 

Chovevei Zion (the Society), 82 x. 

** Christian,” occurrences of the word, 

Add. 

Christ’s adversaries, 223. 

genealogies, 131, 158—164. 


296 


Colour, 18, 

Completeness of apostasy, II5. 
judgment, 115. 
peoples, 115. 

Consecration, 145, 146. 

Corrupt, 71, 72, 73. 

Corruption of God's Word, 116, 117. 

Critic, 70. 

Curses, 246. 


D 


Daily bread, 75. 

Danicl and his companions, 219. 

David and the five stones, 138. 
the eighth son, 200. 

Day of Atonement, 171, 229, 231. 

Day of the Lord, the, 61. 

Deaths occasioned by women, Add. 

Design in the Word of God, 20. 

Deuteronomy, 137. 

Dreams, Add. 

Dukes of Edom, 212. 


E 


Ear, the, 18. 

Earthquakes, 152. 

Edom’s dukes, 212, 251. 

Egypt and the No. 5, 137 z. 

Eight, 196, 200. 

Eight and seven together, 196. 

Eight and thirteen together, 205. 

Eight the dominical number, 203, 
204. 

Elders, the twenty-four, 264. 

Eleven, 251, Add. 

Eli and his sons, 251. 

Elijah’s miracles, 202. 

Elisha's miracles, 202. 

Enemies of God and his people, 219. 

Esther, 221. 

Eve, her quotation of God's Word, 
116, 117. 

her name four times mentioned, 

Add. 

Exodus, III. 

Ezra's adversaries, 218. 


INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 


F 
Famines, the thirteen mentioned, 
Add. 
Fear of the Lord, the, Add. 
Fifteen, 257. 
Fifth Book, the, 137, 138. 
Fifty, 268. 
Fifty-one, 268. 
Fire from heaven, 245. 
First book of the Bible, the, 53. 
commandment, 54. 
fulfilment of prophecy, 63. 
ministerial words of Christ, 52. 
occurrences of words, 60, 61. 
question, 62. 
uttered words of Christ, 52. 
First-fruits, 180. 
Five, 135. 
Forty, 266. 
Forty days, 267. 
Forty-two, 268. 
Forty years, 267. 
Four, 123, Add. 
Four as composed of 3 + 1, 128-132. 
Four hundred, 280. 
Four hundred and thirty, 280. 
Four hundred and ninety, 280. 
Four in contrast with seven, 127. 
Four world-powers, the, 126. 
Fours of persons, r30-132. 
Fourteen, 256, Add. 
* Friend of God,” Abraham the, 
Add. . 
Ful&lment of prophecy, 63-70. 


G 


Gematria, 48, 133, 205-233, 268, 
275, 282. 

Genealogies of Jesus Christ, 131, 158- 
164. 

Generations of Genesis, the, 34-36, 


93. 
Genesis, the first book, 53. 
Gestation, 9. 
Gideon's qualifications for service, 175. 
Gog, 226. 
Gold, seven words for, 132. 
Goliath, 285. 


INDEX OF SUBFECTS. 


Great Pyramid, the, 150, 151. 
Great Synagogue, the, 272. 
Greek alphabet, the, 49. 
Gregory, 274. 


EI 


«t Hallelujah," 42, 60. 

Haman, 222. 

Haman’s sons, 222. 

Hapax legomena, 70. 

Heavens, number in the, 2. 

Hebrew alphabet, 48. 

Hebrews, the Epistle to the, 180. 
the authorship of, 26, 37. 

Hebron, 170. 

Hinnom, valley of, 227. 

“Holy,” 6r. 

Holy anointing oil, 144-146. 

Holy Spirit, Fruit of, 242 7. 
Gifts of, 242. 

Human adversaries, 221. 


I 


“I am," the phrase used by Christ, 
248. 

« I have sinned,” 246. 
Imperfection, 15. 
Incense, 146, 147. 
indian corn, 8 
Innocence of Jesus, Add. 
Interpretation of prophecy, 63-70. 
Isaac, 230. 
Isaac and Ishmael, of. 
Ishmael's descendants, 212. 
Israel's lovers, 165. 

separation, 113. 


J 


Jacob and Esau, 98. 

Jacob's family, 210. 

Jacob’s sons, 251; 253. 

Jehoiakim, 161, 251. 

Jehovah's demand to Pharaoh, 139, 
140. 

Jericho, 214. 


297 


Jeroboam II., 227. 
Jeroboam who ** made Israel to sin,” 
Add. 
Jerusalem, 271, 284. 
sieges of, 236-240. 
Jesse’s sons, 176. 
“ Jew,” 80, 81. 
Joash, 161, 227. 
Job’s sacrifice, 230. 
John’s Epistles, 225. 
John’s Gospel (miracles in), 176. 
Joktan’s descendants, 209. 


| Joseph’s communications with his 


brethren, 197. 
in Potiphar’s house, Add. 
Judas Iscariot, 224. 
Judges, 214. 
the seven weak things in, 174. 


K 


Kadesh-Barnea, 251. 
Kings of Israel, 215, 217. 
of Judah, 215, 216. 
Korah and his rebellion, 227, 230. 


L 


Lamech’s family, 207. 
** Last day," the, Add. 


, Law, the Christian not under, 88, 


241. 


| Leah’s sons, 210. 


Leaven, 109, 110, 234- 
Leprosy, Add. 


| Leviticus, III, 141. 


Lord's Prayer, 243. 
Lost Tribes, the, 79. 
Lot's descendants, 213. 


M 


Man, six words for, 154- 

« Man of God,” 174. 
Micah’s graven image, 279. 
* Michtam," 157. 

Midian's descendants, 213. 


298 


Miracles in John’s Gospel, 176. | 
wrought on Sabbath, Add. 
of Elijah and Elisha, 202. 
Miraculous feeding of people, Add. 
Mordecai, 222. 


N 


Names repeated, 248, 249. 
Nature, classification of, 7. 
Nazarene, 29. 
Nebuchadnezzar, 285. 
Nehemiah, 153. 
his adversaries, 218. 
New Jerusalem, 254. 
Nimrod, 221. 
Nine, 235, Add. 
Nineteen, 262. 
Noah, 243. 
Number in the Heavens, 2. 
Numbers, the book of, 126. 


Oak trees, 176. 
Occurrences of phrases: 
once, 86-88. 
Jive times, 149. 
seven times, 43, 188-190, 
Zen times, 249. 
Occurrences of words, 26-43, 70. 
once, 7o, 82-88. 
twice, 99, 103, 106. 
three times, 120. 
four times, 133, 134. 
five times, 148. 
six times, 157. 
seven times, 
191-193. 
nine times, 241, 242. 
ten times, 249. 
thirteen times, 234. 
One, 50. 
One hundred and fifty and three, 273. 


| 
| 
| 
- 
| 


26-44, 185-188, 


P 


Palestine, seven names for, 184. 
Palmoni, Preface, 20, 83. 
Parable of the Sower, 130. 


INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 


Parables of the Kingdom, 248. 
Passovers, the ten recorded, Add. 
Paul's adversaries, 225. 
Pendulograph, 17. 
Perfect, 74. 
Perfect numbers, 23, 107, 243, 253. 
Peter's Epistles (authorship), 41. 
Pharaoh and the Exodus, 21, 139, 
I40. 

Phrases. See Occurrences. 
Physiology, 9. 
Plagues, 244. 
Potter’s house, the, 103. 
Prayer, 147. 
Prayer, the Lord’s, 243. 
Prayers of Mark v., the three, 118. 
Prepositions of substitution, 144. 
Prime numbers, 258. 
Prophecy, interpretation of, 63-70. 
** Prophet,” 6r. 
Psalms, 94, 171. 

the second book of, 95. 

the fourth book of, 126. 

Seven, ascribed to David in New 

"Testament, 172. 

quotations from Ps. lxix., 173. 

Pyramid, the Great, 150, 152. 


Q 


Question, the first, 62. 


R 


Rachel’s sons, 211. 

Rameses, 22. 

Redemption money, 243. 

Repeated names, 248, 249. 
Resurrections (eight), 201. 

Reynold's curve of the elements, 13. 
Righteousness, 241. 

Roman numerals, the, 284. 

Roman occupation of Jerusalem, 284. 


S 


Sabbath-day, miracles wrought on, 
Add. 
Saints’ security, 248. 


INDEX OF SUBYECIS. 


Satan's names, 219. | 
Saul and his descendants, 214. 
Second day, 92. 
books, 94. 
epistles, 96. 
Psalms, 95. 
Serpent, six words for, 156. 
Seth line of names, 206. 
Seven, 23-47, 158, 167, Add. 
Seven ages of man, 9. 
Seven as made up of 4 + 3, 178. 
Seven parables of Matt. xiii, 109, 
128, 181. 
Seven words of Jesus, 181. 
Seventeen, 258, Add. 
Seventy, 270. 
Seventy nations, 270. 
Seventy souls of Gen. xlvi., 270, 271. 
Seventy weeks of Dan. ix., 6. 
Shem, Ham, and Japheth, 164, 207. 
Shepherd, 112. 
Shouting for joy, 245. 
Sign, six times the Lord is asked for a, 
Add. 
Six, 150, Add. 
Six and seven, 158, Add. 
Six hundred and sixty-six, 49 z., 282. 
Sixty-five, 269. 
Sodom, 236. 
Solfeggio, 16. 
Solomon, 227. 
Solomon's talents of gold, 285. 
Temple, 199, 239, 253. 
Songs of the Old Testament, 202. 
Sons of God, 164, 275. 
Sound and music, 15. 
Spies, the, 114. 
Spirit. See Holy Spirit. 
** Spirit of Christ,” the, 86. 
Stigma, 283, 
Stoning, Add. 
Synagogue, the Great, 272. 


T 


Tabernacle, the, 140-144, 199, 247, 
253: 

Talmud, the, 122, 149, 156, 160%., 
250. 

Temple, 114. 


299 


Ten, 243, Add. 

Ten Commandments, 177, 243. 

Ten Virgins, 246. 

Tenth generations, 247. 

Testimony, 104-106. 

**'The fear of the Lord,” Add. 

“ The last day,” Add. 

The Lord’s Prayer, 243. 

The lost tribes, 79. 

The potter’s house, 103. 

The Shepherd, 112. 

The Songs of the Old Test., 202. 

“ The Sons of God," 164, 275. 

The spies, 114. 

“t The spirit of Christ," 86. 

The ten words of Ps, cxix., 247. 

The third day, 111. 

The twelve tribes, 79, 211. 

The words of Jehovah, 169, 

The writers of the Bible, 26. 

Thirteen, 205-233, 256, Add. 

Thirty, 265. 

Thirty-one, 265. 

Thorn in the flesh, 76. 

Three, 107, Add. 

Three-fold combination of numbers, 
121. 

Three hundred and ninety, 279. 

Three measures of meal, 109. 

Tithes, 243. 

Transfiguration, the, 201. 

Treading down of Jerusalem, the, 
284. 

Triple numbers, £21, 285. 

Truth, one word for, 89. 

Twelve, 253. 

Twelve tribes, 79, 211. 

Twenty, 262, Add. 

Twenty-one, Add, 

‘Twenty-two, 262. 

Twenty-four, 264. 

Twenty-five, 265. 

Twenty-seven, 265. 

Twenty-eight, 265. 

Twenty-nine, 265. 

Two, 92. 

Two hundred, 279. 


U 


Uzziah, 227. 


Vegetable kingdom, 8. | 
** Verily," 30. | Y 


Years, different kinds « 
W 
Widows (the nine mentioned), Add. 
Woman of Samaria, 176. Z 
Words, „See Occurrences of. 
Words of Jehovah, 169. Zedekiah, 251. 
E Wordsworth, Bp., 274. Zodiac, the signs of, 3. 


( 301 ) 


INDEX OF TEXTS 


MORE OR LESS EXPLAINED AND ILLUSTRATED, 
OMITTING MERE REFERENCES, 


Ey, 1,2 


3,4 
I 12-17 


— xxxvi 40-43 ..- 


— xlvi. 


*,* n signifies Note, 


Page 
93, 168, 205 
ES 
116, 117 
ono Pe) 
116, 117 
62 
21207 

. 229 

. 208 

- 207 

. 208 

i ah 
125, 227 


Exod E -e 
—--8 .. 
— iii. 5 

— vi. 3 .. 
— — 6-8... 
— xii. 40 ... 
— xiii. 18 
= SUL cas 
— xxi. 23-25 
— xxiv. I... 
— xxxviii. 27 
Dev avi ... 


— xxiii. 26-28 
— xxv. 4, 8, 18-21 


— xxvi. 8... 


Num. iii. I2, 13, 40-51... 


E 23, 27 
— XL 5 .« 
— — 16 ... 
— xvi. 35, 49 
— xxi. 8, 9 
Judg. iv. 3 
— vi. ase 
— xiii. 25 
— xv. 20 

— xvi 5... 
— — jl ... 
— xvii 2... 
Ruth iv. II 
— — 18 ... 
1 Sam. vii. 2 
— xvi. 6... 
2 Sam. vii. 

I Kings vi. I 
— vil. 13-51 


see 


105, 


302 


I Kings viii. 
— ix. 1O ... 
— X. I4 .. 
— xi. 7 

— xiv. 20 
— xyi. 29 


— xi. 
— xviii 32 


D Chron 15 


2 Chron. vi. 
= AN, 00 fon 
— xi. 13-16 
—XV.9 .. 
— xxiii. 

— xxix. 3I 
Ezra ii. 

— iv. 7-9 
— X. 17-44 
Esther 

Ps. ii 

— viii. 6-8 
— xii. 6 ... 
— xl. 6 

— xliii. 

— lii. 

— lxix. 


— Ixxiv. ... aie 


— lxxv. .. 
— lxxxiii. 
— lxxxix. 19 
— xciv. 9... 
— civ. 35... 
— cviii. 
— cxix. 
Eccles. ii. 
[52251929 eee 
— ii 12 ... 
— v. I, 2... 
— vii. 7-16 
——8 

— — 14. 
— viii. 8-12 
— xi. 2 

— xiv. 29 
— xxvii. I 
— xl. 1, 9 
Eo diee els 
eH, db oss 
—]hü 


———À EU e m 


2 Kings i 11029521 


6-11 ... 


SINE... 


INDEX OF TEXTS. 


Page 


EIOS 
. 262 


Es 285 


. 228 
12.0202 
. 262 


268 


5 T52 


2 E 


. 200 


198 


. 262 


8o 
8o 
152 
145 


s En 
= 218 
. 218 
5 221 


165 


95 


. 169 
"HI2S 


95 


221 7. 
cc HR 


95 
I5 


12250 
. 105 


. 247 


18 
60 


95 


x: 285 


72 
61 


«os 198 


. 166 
. 220 


t 12229 
265, 269, 


279 
63 


65 


... 220 
* 159 


6r 


Page 

Ezek iv. 455 : 215 
— xxvi I 252 
m X 10) 5 252 
— xxxi. I : 252 
— Xxxvi. ... 193 
— xxxvii... 226 
— xxxix. ... 12220 
—sgL E 167, 198 
Dane lO. soc BBG) 
— iii, 1 285 z. 
— ix. 24 ... E 27 
— — 24-27 6 
— — 25-27 231 
— xi. nee 240 
Joel ii. 28, 29 : 3 . 166 
— 30, 31... 283 
Hab. ii. 4 9I 
Hag. i. 8... g 8 
— — Ii.. 240 
Zech. vi. 12 159 
— ix. 9 159 
— xiv. 9 ... 57 
Matt. i. Ae 40) 
222200 63 
— iii 13, 17 52 

— vi II... 75 
— xi 25, 26, gm - 58 
— Xii. 43-45 : 100 
— xiii. é 129 
E SE 22 99 
— xvi. 23 221 
— Xx. 30 ... . 277 
— xxii. 37 : 54 
= XXIV: I5 . . 231 
— xxvi. 48 : 224 
SSXXVIDSIO 208. . 223 
Mark v. 5 118 
28S A occ 277 
— xv. 6 ... 223 
bukei 6... 241 
wc chee 233 
= AG) onc 1-052 
— iii. 23 ... 159, 265 
— iv. 18-21 sse DEA! 
— viii. 33 99 
E059 Hy/ . 271 
— — 18 ... 221 
== 8b $33 cac . 99 
— — 24-26 G .. 100 
— xviii. 35 : o 277 n. 
e Bp AAL ow 220224 


INDEX OF TEXTS. 


Page 
Luke xxiii, 18  ... 566 .. 223 | Eph. iv. 20, 21 ... 38 x6 
John iii. 14 a BA 2982302 — vi. IT ... oe ens =2 00) 
— iv. ee TS s coc HAS || e———B X wae ; m: 
— viii. 44 ee o 05e 220 | — — 14-18 167, 285 
— xii. 4 ... zs wre e. 224 | — — 17 ... T. AC 
— — 48 ... ade Got sc we | PhiL ii hes 181, 232, 233 
— xii 26 «ee occ wo E E ea e ee Us . 233 
— — 31,335 bas ood 222322 —SHHnPWI2, I3. — ... E ++. 199 
“— xvii. 8, 14, 17 SE = 53 | 2 Phesshi. 3 ... "A s EP) 
— xviii. 40 LM Sod co CAL | acis obi. to» hea see 2735} 
ACISI I5: a sss one Pape |) fe Ibias fe ase ue 155008755 
— iv. 25-27 ax Bcc .. 224 | — vi. IO ... ses con 2. E) 
— vii. 4 ... san Eee ccn. EAR Pen Durs OTE Ge em a xu Uh 
-——6 .. As TT .. 280 | Heb. iii 11 me m 4295 
— xiii 20 ae 2o 225 7 | —iv. 12 ... ee o fen 98) 
— xxvi. 7 € $e. XN OS ESSISNIS IO. e E ess 
Rom. i. 32 -— Soc oe 241 | — — 26-28 Ie vee Hy gue) 
— ii. 25... 505 sce oe 241 | — xi. 25 ... Soc dio so GI) 
— v. 16, 18 dos e .. 241 | — xii. 18-24  ... ce A259 
— vi. 6-8 Soc ga .. 232 | James i 5-18 ... T <. 99 
— viii. 4 E one .. 241 | — iii. 17... xc eee s LOO) 
——9 ... scc see oos ICESESEOIS, I9 ... 3oc 38245 
——38,39  .. acc .. 248 | — iii. 20 ... A. “1c $5233 
—ix.4 ... sS cec .. 166 | —iv. 15 ... wee E oem We 
I Cor. i. 20 Ses t m 1 Jomi 16 s ue 116 
—ii2 .. ae och ... 232 | Jude ae sdc 158522082217 
— ix. 20, 21 m ato .. 89 | — 11 J sex 
— xiv. 19 e 306 S I ROA -.-. ae -. IIQ, 204 
— xv. 3 o oe T. .. 232 | —— 5,6 e. ot wo. 264. 
2 Gordin 17 "a wee M 71 | ——8,17 are 2. vee) ON 
—iv.2 ... Beir Be e 72 | —V.9 we ono "o6 i 26 
— v. 17-21 ze. 506 e. 232 | — ix. II ... e Sod se: 221 
—- xii. 7 .. ag e. como) || — xn I E 3120922525226 
Gal. iii. 17 me AS 5, 280 | —xv. 4 ... $e 30 2T 
— vi. I4 ... TE ae ese | — IN S se oon 3d 55 EXE 


LONDON: 
EYRE AND SPOTTISWOODE, 


Her Majesty's Primers, 
DOWNS PARK ROAD, HACKNEY, N.E. 


WORKS BY THE REV. E. W. BULLINGER, D.D. 


Indispensable to Ministers, Teachers, and Bible Students. 


THE CRITICAL LEXICON & CONCORDANCE 
to the ENGLISH & GREEK NEW TESTAMENT. 


Third and Cheaper Edition, large 8vo., 1034 pp., reduced from 30/- to 15/- 
LONGMANS & CO., 39, Paternoster Row. 


This work is specially designed for those who have little or no knowledge of 
Greek. It shows them at a glance the literal meaning of the Greek word by 
a mere reference to the English word which translates it. 


It is the result of nine years’ work. Professors, Divines, Ministers of various 
Denominations, competent Critics, Editors of Leading Papers, unite in hearty 
approval. 


** Admirable and elaborate."—Pnor. PLumprre, at Croydon Church Congress, 1877. 

“ Sound and accurate.” —British Quarterly Review. 

** A compilation which ought to find a place on the study-table of every English divine and 
biblical scholar." — Saturday Review. 

** A work of great industry and of great usefulness. We welcome a second edition."— Record. 

“We heartily commend this . . . as supplying a need greatly felt in the present day. . . . 
We wish this book much success."— The Christian, 

“It is, in fact, a book which no Bible student can afford to do without. . . . A simple 
glance through the work will convince anyone that it has very superior advantages over any 
other book of its kind now before the public."— The Christian Commonwealth. 

“The Christian Church owes much to the labours of such students of the Holy Scriptures as 
Dr. Bullinger, Cruden, and others."— The Overland Mad. 

‘* Supplies a want long felt by Bible students."—7 rim. Meth. World. 

** A very valuable work. We strongly recommend it."—Gos?e/ Magazine. 

** A triumph of painstaking labour."— The English Independent. 

** Both in design and execution the work is one calling for high praise."-- 7e Home News. 

“It seems to us to supply a manifest and important want. A really useful book."— 
Lhe Guardian. 

“Tt is a herculean labour—at once a noble monument of unwearied perseverance and of 
untiring industry.”— The Rock. 

“English readers of the New Testament . . . will do well to have it beside them,"— 
The Academy. 

“ Reflects the greatest credit on the energy and industry of its author." — The Spectator. 

** Supplies a real and widely-felt want. . . . The author deserves the gratitude of Biblical 
students." — Wesleyan Methodist Magazine. 

“ Tt will be very useful’ —THE Larg& Dr. TREGELLES. 

** Accurate and scholarlike."—THE Lare DEAN oF WELLS. 

** Greatly needed, and is indeed essential to the right understanding of the New Testa- 
ment.” —DR. ANGUS, 

** Eminently scholarly and exhaustive.” — DR. WESTCOTT. 

** A useful work."— THE DEAN or CANTERBURY. 

** Deserves every encouragement.” —PROF. STANLEY LEATHES. 

** Admirable and very valuable.” —THE LATE DR. ALLON. 

** Must prove very useful. . . . your reader's gratitude will be great.”—DR. MOULTON. 

*' Happily arranged and prepared with the utmost care. Explained . . . with brevity, but 
with much Christian discernment, depth, and freshness.”——Dr. SMEATON. 

** Very valuable and elaborate.” —DR. SCRIVENER. 


WORKS BY THE REV. E. W. BULLINGER, D.D. 


THE IMPORTANCE OF ACCURACY IN THE 
STUDY OF HOLY SCRIPTORE: 
Seventh Edition. 36 pp., demy 8vo., Coloured Wrapper. 
Reduced to Threepence (post free Fourpence). : 


Published by PARTRIDGE & CO., 9, Paternoster Row, E.C. 


The following Works can be obtained of the Author, Bromley, Kent ; or through 
the Trade of Messrs, EYRE & SPOTTISWOODE, Great New Street, E. C. 


TEN SERMONS ON THE SECOND ADVENT. 
Preached at Oxford.. 


Second Edition. Price Two Shillings and Sixpence. 


CONTENTS. 


I. THE IMPORTANCE OF PROPHETIC STUDY (2 Peter z. 19). 
II. THE INTERPRETATION OF PROPHECY (2 Peter i. 20, 21). s 
III. THE SECOND ADVENT PnE-MiLLENNIAL (Isa. xi. 9; Matt. xxiv, 37). 
IV. No MILLENNIUM WITHOUT CHRIST (Matt. xxiv. 29, 30). E 
V. Tue Cattinc AND Hope or “Tue CuuncH or Gop” (Eph. iii. 8, 9). 
VI. THE Cuurcn’s MOTIVE For SERVICE (1 John iti. 2, 3). n 
VII. Tug Seconp ApvENT IN RELATION TO "Tug Jew” (Rom. xz. 25-29). 
VIII. Tue SEcoNo ADVENT IN RELATION TO ‘THE GENTILE” (Daz. zi. 44, 45). 
IX. THE RESURRECTION OF *THg JUST AND OF THE UNJUST” (x Cor. xv. 22-24). 
X. THe JupGMent OF “THe Quick AND THE DEAD” (2 Cor. v. 10; Matt. xxv. 
31, 32; Kev. xx. 11-15). 
Appendix :—THE BEGINNING OF THE END. 


A KEY TO CLHESPSAIMS 


A new and unique work, in which each Psalm is displayed to the eye, by arrangements of the 
type, &c., so as to exhibit the perfection of its plan, the symmetry of its structure, and the 
point of its teaching. ‘The plan is exhibited on which the Psalm is actually constructed, showing 
that the words ‘‘ which the Holy Ghost teacheth” are not written with the imperfection which 
pertains to man's writings, but with an order, method, perfection and precision peculiar to them- 
selves, and not found in any mere human composition. The great central thought of each Psalm, 
and the object of its teaching, is thus discovered and clearly brought out. 

By the late Rev. THomas Boys, M.A. Edited by the Rev. Dr. BuLLINGER, with an 
INTRODUCTION showing how the same principle pervades the whole of the sacred writings; and 
an APPENDIX exhi iting 


Tue STRUCTURE OF THE Book oF PsALMS AS A WHOLE, 


giving the plan on which the one hundred and fifty Psalms are arranged (in their books, divisions 
and groups, &c.); thus not only showing the structure of the Psalms separately, but setting 
forth the mutual relation of each. 


Price Five Shillings, by post 43d. extra. 


THE SPIRITS INSPRISC ae 
An Exposition of 1 Pet. iii. 17—iv. 6, in the light of the Epistle as a whole. 
Third Edition, Revised. Price Sixpence, post free. 


THE NAME OF JEHOVAH IN THE BOGE 
OF ESTHER 


Its occurrences in Four Acrostics, with their Lessons, 
Fourth Edition, Price Twopence, post free. 


Published by Messrs. EYRE & SPOTTISWOODE, Great New Street, E.C. 


WORKS BY THE REV. E. W. BULLINGER, D.D. 


BOUR FROPHEDIC PERIODS. 
A Key to the **Things which must Shortly come to Pass.” 


““Man’s Day.” 1 Cor. iv. 2. “THe Dav OF THE Lorp.” Rev. i. 10. 
“Tue Day oF CHRIST.” PAZ. zi, 16. “Tuae Dav or Gop.” 2 Pet. zii. 12. 


Fifth Edition. Price One Penny. 


[ire MAN OT GOD”: 
A Bible Study. 
Price One Penny. Fourth Edition. 


SUINEINGS TO COME”: 


An Epitome of Prophetic Truth. 
Envelope size. Price One Penny. Sixth Edition, Revised. 


re KINGDOM? AND “THE CHURCH"; 
Or, The Seven Parables of Matthew xiii. 
Price One Penny. Third Edition, Revised. 


THE NEW CREATION AND THE OLD; 
Or, The Ways of God in Grace, illustrated by the Works of God in Creation. 
A Bible Study on Genesis i. in the light of 2 Cor. v. 17. 
Price One Penny. Third Edition. 


SUNDAY SCHOOL LESSONS. 
A Series for Five Years in Course of Publication. 


Yearly Volumes, complete, One Shilling. FIRST, SECOND, and THIRD 
Series now ready. 


are INSPIRATION AND AUTHORITY OF 
HOLY SCRIPTURE. 
Fourth Edition. Price One Penny. 


GODS URPOSE IN YSRAEL: 
Third Edition, Revised. Price One Penny. 


HYMNS ON THE WSECOND ADVENT. 


A Collection of 118 Hymns for use in Conferences, &c., on the Subject of the 
Pre-Millennial Advent of Christ. 


Price Sixpence, cloth, gilt lettered. Special terms for quantities. 


Published by Messrs, EYRE & SPOTTISWOODE, Great New Street, E.C, 


WORKS BY THE REV. E. W. BULLINGER, D.D. 


THE WITNESS OF THE STAR 


Showing how the Ancient Signs and Constellations were designed for ‘‘signs 
and seasons” to record and preserve the prophecy of Genesis lii. 15 for 2,500 
years before the Revelation from God was written in the Scriptures of Truth. . 

With 41 coloured plates and 5 engravings.  Handsomely bound, suitable 
for Presents. Price Seven and Sixpence. 


NUMBER IN SCRIPTURE: 
ITS SUPERNATURAL DESIGN AND SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE, 
Demy 8vo. Price Seven and Sixpence, 


THE STRUCTURE OF THE TWOUBPISTPEDS 
TO THE THESSALCONIASS, 


Arranged after the manner of the Key zo the Psalms, on two large sheets 
folded in envelope. Price Sixpence. 


CHRIST’S PROPHETIC TEACHING, 


IN RELATION TO THE DIVINE ORDER OF HIS WORDS 
AND WORKS. 


Demy 8vo., paper covers, 32 pages. Price Sixpence. Third Edition. 


Being an Address at the Mildmay Conference, 1893. 
Price One Penny. Third Edition. 


PAES Og 
A BIBLE-STUDY ON THE USAGE OF THE WORD. 
Price Fourpence. 


HYMNS FOR. BIBLBORBEBADINGS 
Thirty-five Hymns. 
Price One Penny. Special terms for quantities. 


FIFTY ORIGINAL HYMN-TUNES: 
Set to Appropriate Words. 
Second Edition. Price Two Shillings, post free. 


SIXTY-SIX OLD BRETON TUNES: 


Collected and transcribed from the lips of Breton peasants ; and harmonised 
in short score, for the use of the churches of the Breton Evangelical Mission. 
These Tunes have never before appeared in this form, and most of them are 
printed for the first time. Some of them are in the ancient Greek Modes, 
and all of them are peculiarly characteristic. 


Price Two Shillings, post free, 


Published by Messrs, EYRE & SPOTTISWOODE, Great New Street, E.C. 


