A.  D.  1773 — A.  D.  1890 


LAURENCE  iHUTTON 


AND 

WILLIAM  CAREY 


orft,  1890. 


This  is  one  of  an  edition  of  one  hundred  and 
eighty-five  copies  printed  from  type  for  the  Dunlap 
Society  in  the  month  of  December,  1890. 


OCCASIONAL  ADDRESSES 


PUBLICATIONS  OF  THE  DUNLAP  SOCIETY 


1886-1887. 

I.  THE  CONTRAST.     A  comedy  by  Royall  Tyler, 
with  an  introduction  by  Thomas  J.  McKee. 

II.  THE  FATHER,  OR  AMERICAN  SHANDYISM.     A 

comedy  by  William  Dunlap,  with  an  intro 
duction  by  Thomas  J.  McKee. 

III.  OPENING   ADDRESSES.     Edited   by  Laurence 

Mutton. 

1888. 

IV.  ANDRE.  A  tragedy  in  five  acts,  by  William  Dun- 

lap,  with  an  introduction  by  Brander    Mat 
thews. 
V.  THOMAS  ABTHORPE  COOPER.   A  memoir  of  his 

professional  life,  by  Joseph  Norton  Ireland. 
VI.  Biennial  reports  of  the  treasurer  and  secretary 
of  the  Dunlap  Society. 


i889. 

VII.  BRIEF  CHRONICLES,  by  William  Winter.  Part  I. 

VIII.  BRIEF  CHRONICLES,  by  William  Winter.  Part  II. 

IX.  CHARLOTTE  CUSHMAN.  A  lecture  by  Lawrence 

Barrett,  with  an  appendix  containing  a  letter 

from  Joseph  N.  Ireland. 


1890. 

X.  BRIEF  CHRONICLES,  by  William  Winter.    Part 

III. 

XI.  JOHN  GILBERT.   A  sketch  of  his  life,  together 
with  extracts  from  his  letters  and  souvenirs  of 
his  career,  by  William  Winter. 
XII.  OCCASIONAL  ADDRESSES.    Edited  by  Laurence 
Hutton  and  William  Carey. 


THE    OLD    ASTOR    PLACE    OPERA    HOUSE 
(DEMOLISHED     1 890). 


OCCASIONAL 
ADDRESSES 


EDITED  BY 

LAURENCE  HUTTON 

AND 

WILLIAM  CAREY 


NEW-YORK 

THE  DUNLAP  SOCIETY 

1890 


.0 


THE  present  volume  is  a  natural  sequel  to  the  collec 
tion  of  " Opening  Addresses"  published  by  The  Dunlap 
Society  in  1887.  It  is  of  necessity  incomplete,  the  editors, 
out  of  the  great  mass  of  material  at  their  command,  hav 
ing  given  preference  to  those  Prologues,  Epilogues,  and 
other  "Occasional  Addresses"  in  verse  with  which  the 
students  of  dramatic  literature  are  least  familiar.  Many 
of  the  selections  have  appeared  only  in  the  periodical 
press,  and  a  great  number  of  them  are  published  now  for 
the  first  time. 

The  arrangement  has  been  made  chronological  as  far 
as  is  possible  from  the  incomplete  records  that  exist ;  and, 
as  in  the  earlier  volume,  each  address  is  prefaced  by  the 
names  of  its  author  and  its  speaker,  together  with  the 
lime  and  the  place  of  its  delivery. 

The  frontispiece  is  a  reproduction,  which  is  here  pub 
lished  for  the  first  time,  of  a  drawing  made  by  Mr. 
Roger  Riordan  for  The  Century  Magazine.  It  shows 


M176424 


various  views  of  the  building  on  Astor  Place,  New  York 
City,  which  was  erected  by  subscription  in  184?  and 
called  the  '•'•Astor  Place  Opera  House"  Here  it  was 
that  Macready  appeared  in  1848,  and  the  street  in  front 
of  this  building,  at  the  close  of  his  performance,  was  the 
scene  of  the  Macready  Riot.  In  1853  the  building  passed 
into  the  possession  of  the  Mercantile  Library  Association. 
It  was  demolished  in  1890. 

The  editors  wish  to  acknowledge  their  obligations  to 
Mr.  William  Winter,  Mr.  George  Parsons  Lathrop,  Mr. 
Brander  Matthews,  Mr.  Henry  Edwards,  Mr.  L.  W. 
Kingman,  Mr.  Augustin  Daly,  Mr.  Thomas  Nelson 
Page,  Mr.  William  L.  Keese,  Mr.  William  J.  Henderson, 
Mr.  J.  M.  Thompson,  and  Mr.  George  H.  Jess  op,  for aid 
extended  in  the  preparation  of  this  volume. 

LA  URENCE  HUTTON. 

WILLIAM  CAREY. 
New -York,  December,  1890. 


€aWe  of 


PAGE 

1773.  JOHN  STREET  THEATER,  NEW-? 

J  YORK \MylesCooper. i 

1 778.   Bow  STREET  THEATER,  PORTS-  > 

MOUTH,  NEW  HAMPSHIRE  ,.,  J  J™**™  M-  s™al1-  •  •        4 
1797-  JOHN  STREET  THEATER,  NEW-  ) 

YORK \Mr.Milne 7 

1823.   THEATER,  BOSTON Charles  Sprague 9 

1823.  PARK  THEATER,  NEW- YORK Joseph  D.  Fay 17 

1824.  NEW     AMERICAN      THEATER, 

NEW  ORLEANS..  \ThomasWMs ,9 


:EATER,  ) 

1825.   NEW      AMERICAN      THEATER,  > 
NEW  ORLEANS $ 

Mrs.  Entwistle  .    24 

R,    HUNTSVILLE,  ALA-  > 


22 

1825.  CHATHAM  GARDEN    THEATER, 

NEW- YORK 

1826.  THEATER,    HUNTSVILLE,  ALA 

BAMA 

1820.   NEW    PARK    THEATER,    NEW-  > 

*        v  \ProsperM.Wetmore...       30 

i  ORK.  • • ) 

1829.  NEW    PARK    THEATER,    NEW-  > 

YORK f^-f*"*1 32 

1830.  NEW    PARK    THEATER,    NEW-  ) 

,T  f  Samuel  Woodworm.  ...       34 

YORK S 

1830.   NEW    PARK   THEATER,   NEW-  > 

YORK S  " 

18^1.   CHATHAM      THEATER,     NEW-  > 

>  Samuel  Wood  worth  ...       41 
YORK  S 


€aWe  of  Content^ 


PAGE 


1831.  PARK  THEATER,    NEW-  YORK  ----  Mr.  Bailey  ...........  44 

1832.  THEATER,  CINCINNATI  ..........  Caroline  Lee  Hentz.  ...  46 

1832.  PARK  THEATER,  NEW-  YORK  ____  Richard  Penn  Smith  ...  49 

1833.  PARK  THEATER,  NEW-  YORK  ----  George  P.  Morris  .....  51 

1833.    BOWERY      THEATER,       NEW-  > 

v  >  Samuel  Woodworth  ....  54 

i8-u.    HISTRIONIC      HALL,    ALBANY, 


NEW-YORK  ................      Ch°rl"  **»>*•»»•  •  •        57 

1814.  NEW  OR-  > 

LEANS  ....................     $  George  C.   Chase  ......       59 

1835.    PARK  THEATER,  NEW-  YORK  ----  George  P.  Morris  ......  61 

;.  THEATER,  ALBANY,  NEW-  ) 

YORK  ......................  I  Hugh  Moore  ..........  5 

1837.    NEW  THEATER,  ST.  Louis,  Mo.  .Edward  Johnson  ......  67 

1840.  AMPHITHEATER,  ALBANY,  NEW-  ) 

YORK  ....................  I  Alfred  B'  Street  ......  7I 

1851.  BURTON'S      THEATER,     NEW-  > 

YORK  ......................  \  Henry  Oake  Pardey  .  .  .       73 

1852.  GREEN      STREET      THEATER,) 

ALBANY  ....................  \  Julia  de  Marguerites.  .       76 

1855.   LAURA     KEENE'S     VARIETIES,  ) 

NEW-YORK  ................  \  " 

i8t;8.   ACADEMY   OF    Music,    PHILA-  > 


DELPH.A  ....................  ..........         79 

1863.   NEW    THEATER,     RICHMOND,) 

>  Henry    Timrod  .......       82 

V  A*  •  ......................   j 

1870.   FIFTH  AVENUE  THEATER,  NEW-  ) 

v  >  William    Winter  ......       87 

YORK.  ........  ••••••  .......  3* 


George    Vandenhoff. ...       91 


C.  C.  Van  Zanit 94 


1871.  WALLACK'S     THEATER, 

YORK 

FIFTH      AVENUE       THEATER, 


NEW-YORK. 


NIBLO'S  THEATER,  NEW- YORK. 
ACADEMY    OF     Music,    NEW- 
YORK 

1871.   OPERA    HOUSE,    PROVIDENCE, 


Cable  of  Content^ 


PAGE 

1873.   NEW  PARK  THEATER,  BROOK-  > 

>  William  Winter  .......       98 

1873.  FIFTH      AVENUE      THEATER,  > 

NEW  YORK  {  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  .     102 

1874.  BOOTH'S       THEATER,      NEW-  \ 

-y  ?  Richard  Henry  Stoddard    108 

1875.  FIFTH      AVENUE       THEATER,  ) 

NEW-YORK  ................  \John  s™gha™  ......     '  I2 

1877.   BALDWIN'S  OPERA  HOUSE,  SAN  > 

FRANCISCO,  CAL  ............  \  GeorZe  H'  Jessof  ......     "3 


1878.   GRAND    OPERA    HOUSE, 

Dan"1  °'CmnM  .....     "8 


HOUSE,    SAN  > 

FRANCISCO,  CAL $ 

1886.   DALY'S  THEATER,  NEW- YORK Augustin  Daly 121 

1886.  STAR  THEATER,  NEW-YORK George  Parsons  Lathrop.  124 

1887.  MANCHESTER,  MASS T.   W.  Ball  126 

1888.  DALY'S  THEATER,  NEW-YORK.  .  .Edgar  Fawcett 128 

1888.   MANCHESTER,  MASS T.   W.  Ball 132 

1888.  THE  PLAYERS,   NEW-YORK Thomas  W.  Parsons..  134 

1889.  DALY'S  THEATER,  NEW- YORK William    Winter 136 

1890.  LYCEUM  THEATER,  NEW  LON-  > 

DON,  CONN.  . ,  \  Geor& Pa™ns  Lathrop.  137 


Occasional 


AN   ADDRESS. 

Written  by  Reverend  Doctor  Myles  Cooper  for  a 
July  26,  benefit  for  the  New-York  Hospital.     Spoken  by 

!  *  7  •?  Mr.  Lewis  Hattam  at  the  John  Street  Theater, 

116'  New-York. 

WITH  melting  breast  the  wretch's  pangs  to  feel, 
His  cares  to  soften,  or  his  anguish  heal ; 
Woe  into  peace  by  pity  to  beguile, 
And  make  disease,  and  want,  and  sorrow  smile  ; 
Are  deeds  that  nobly  mark  the  generous  mind 
Which  swells  with  liberal  love  to  human  kind, 
And  triumphs  in  each  joy  to  others  known 
As  blissful  portions  added  to  his  own. 

Small  though  our  powers,  we  pant  with  honest  heart 
In  pity's  cause  to  bear  a  humble  part ; 
We  gladly  give  this  night  to  aid  a  plan 
Whose  object 's  charity  and  good  to  man. 

Patrons  of  charity  !     While  time  endures 
Be  every  bliss  of  conscious  virtue  yours  ! 
The  hoary  father,  snatch'd  from  want  and  pain, 
Oft  to  his  consort  and  his  youthful  train 


Shall  praise  the  hand  that  rais'd  his  drooping  head 
When  every  hope,  when  every  friend  had  fled, 
That  rais'd  him,  cold  and  naked,  from  the  ground, 
And  pour'd  the  healing  balsam  in  his  wound ; 
With  kindly  art  detain 'd  his  parting  breath, 
And  back  repelFd  the  threat'ning  dart  of  death. 
The  plaintive  widow,  shedding  tears  of  joy, 
As  fondly  watching  o'er  her  darling  boy, 
Her  anxious  eyes,  with  keen  discernment,  trace 
The  dawn  of  health  re'lumining  his  face, 
Shall  clasp  him  to  her  breast  with  raptures  new, 
And  pour  the  prayer  of  gratitude  for  you. 
In  you,  the  long-lost  characters  shall  blend, 
Of  guardian,  brother,  father,  husband,  friend  ! 
And  sure  if  bliss  in  mortal  breast  can  shine, 
That  purest  bliss,  humanity !  is  thine. 

Let  not  mistaken  avarice  deplore 
Each  mite  diminished  from  his  useless  store, — 
But  tell  the  wretch  —  that  liberal  acts  bestow 
Delights  which  hearts  like  his  can  never  know. 
Tell  —  for  you  feel  —  that  generous  love  receives 
A  double  portion  of  the  joy  it  gives, 
Beams  o'er  the  soul  a  radiance  pure  and  even, 
And  antedates  on  earth  the  bliss  of  Heaven. 

This  night,  to  youth,  our  moral  scene  displays 
How  false,  how  fatal,  are  the  wanton's  ways; 
Paints  her  alluring  looks,  fallacious  wiles, 
And  the  black  ruin  lurking  in  her  smiles ; — 
Bids  us  the  first  approach  of  vice  to  shun, — 
And  claims  a  tear  for  innocence  undone. 

While  scenes  like  this  employ  our  humble  stage, 
We  fondly  hope  your  favors  to  engage; 


No  ribald  page  shall  here  admittance  claim, 
Which  decency  or  virtue  brands  with  shame : 
No  artful  hint  that  wounds  the  virgin's  ear, 
No  thought  that  modesty  would  blush  to  hear. 
We  ask  no  patronage  —  disclaim  applause  — 
But  while  we  act  and  speak  in  virtue's  cause. 
This  is  our  aim  —  and  while  we  this  pursue, 
We  ne'er  can  fail  of  patronage  from  you. 


EPILOGUE  TO  CATO. 


Written   by   Jonathan    M.    Sewall,  for  the  Bow 
street  Theater,  Portsmouth,  N.  H. 


YOU  see  mankind  the  same  in  ev'ry  age; 
Heroic  fortitude,  tyrannic  rage, 
Boundless  ambition,  patriotic  truth, 
And  hoary  treason,  and  untainted  youth, 
Have  deeply  mark'd  all  periods,  and  all  climes; 
The  noblest  virtues,  and  the  blackest  crimes. 

Britannia's  daring  sins,  and  virtues  both, 
Perhaps  once  mark'd  the  Vandal  and  the  Goth. 
And  what  now  gleams  with  dawning  ray  at  home, 
Once  blaz'd  in  full-orb'd  majesty  at  Rome. 

Did  Caesar,  drunk  with  pow'r  and  madly  brave, 
Insatiate  burn,  his  country  to  enslave  ? 
Did  he  for  this,  lead  forth  a  servile  host, 
And  spill  the  choicest  blood  that  Rome  could  boast  ? 
Our  British  Caesar  too  has  done  the  same, 
And  damn'd  this  age  to  everlasting  fame. 
Columbia's  crimson'd  fields  still  smoke  with  gore  ! 
Her  bravest  heroes  cover  all  the  shore ! 
The  flow'r  of  Britain  too  in  martial  bloom, 
In  one  sad  year  sent  headlong  to  the  tomb ! 

Did  Rome's  brave  senate  nobly  strive  t'  oppose 
The  mighty  torrent  of  domestic  foes  ? 


And  boldly  arm  the  virtuous  few,  and  dare 
The  desp'rate  perils  of  unequal  war  ? 

Our  senate  too,  the  same  bold  deed  has  done, 
And  for  a  Cato,  arm'd  a  Washington ! 
A  chief  in  all  the  ways  of  battle  skilPd, 
Great  in  the  council,  glorious  in  the  field ! 
Thy  scourge,  O  Britain !  and  Columbia's  boast, 
The  dread,  and  admiration  of  each  host ! 
Whose  martial  arm,  and  steady  soul,  alone 
Have  made  thy  legions  quake,  thy  empire  groan, 
And  thy  proud  monarch  tremble  on  his  throne. 
What  now  thou  art,  oh  !  ever  may'st  thou  be, 
And  death  the  lot  of  any  chief  but  thee  ! 
We  've  had  one  Decius  too,  and  Howe  can  say 
Health,  pardon,  peace,  George  sends  America ! 
Yet  brings  destruction  for  the  olive- wreath, 
For  health  contagion,  and  for  pardon  death. 
In  brave  Fayette  young  Juba  lives  again, 
And  many  a  Marcus  bleeds  on  yonder  plain. 
Like  Pompey,  Warren  fell  in  martial  pride, 
And  great  Montgomery  like  Scipio  dy'd ! 
In  Green  the  hero,  patriot,  sage  we  see, 
And  Lucius,  Juba,  Cato,  shine  in  thee  ! 
When  Rome  received  her  last  decisive  blow, 
Hadst  thou,  immortal  Gates,  been  Caesar's  foe, 
All  perfect  discipline  had  check'd  his  sway, 
And  thy  superior  conduct  won  the  day. 
Freedom  had  triumph'd  on  Pharsalian  ground, 
Nor  Saratoga's  heights  been  more  renown'd ! 
Long  as  heroic  deeds  the  soul  enflame, 
Eternal  praise  bold  Stark  will  ever  claim, 
Who  led  thy  glorious  way,  and  gave  thee  half  thy  fame. 


See  persevering  A**  proudly  scale 
Canadia's  Alpine  hills,  a  second  Hannibal! 
In  Caesar's  days  had  such  a  daring  mind 
With  Washington's  serenity  been  join'd 
The  tyrant  then  had  bled,  great  Cato  liv'd, 
And  Rome  in  all  her  majesty  surviv'd. 
What  praise,  what  gratitude,  are  due  to  thee, 
Oh  brave,  experienc'd,  all-accomplish'd  Lee ! 
The  sword,  the  pen,  thou  dost  alternate  wield, 
Nor  Julius'  self  to  thee  would  blush  to  yield. 
And  while  Sempronius'  bellowings  stun  the  ear, 

I  see  the  traitor  C his  thunders  hear, 

"  But  all  was  false,  and  hollow,  tho'  his  tongue 

Dropt  manna,"  with  the  garb  of  reason  hung. 

Ere  long  the  wily  Syphax  may  advance, 

And  Afric  faith  be  verify'd  in  France, 

How  long,  deluded  by  that  faithless  pow'r, 

Will  ye  dream  on,  nor  seize  the  golden  hour  ? 

In  vain  do  ye  rely  on  foreign  aid, 

By  her  own  arm  and  heav'n's  Columbia  must  be  freed. 

Rise  then,  my  countrymen !  for  fight  prepare, 
Gird  on  your  swords,  and  fearless  rush  to  war ! 
For  your  griev'd  country  nobly  dare  to  die, 
And  empty  all  your  veins  for  Liberty. 
No  pent-up  Utica  contracts  your  pow'rs, 
But  the  whole  boundless  continent  is  yours ! 


AN   ADDRESS. 

June,  Written  by  Mr.   Milne.     Spoken  by  Mrs.  Lewis 

1797.  Hallam  at  the  John  Street  Theater,  New-  York. 

'T^HESE  flattering  plaudits  cannot  fail  to  raise 
JL    A  wish  to  merit  such  transcendent  praise ; 
It  can  but  be  a  wish,  for  ah  !  —  my  heart 
Knows  merit  could  not  claim  a  thousandth  part : 
But,  like  the  lavish  hand  of  Heaven,  you 
Give  largely,  e'en  though  nothing  should  be  due. 
O'ercome  with  joy,  my  anxious,  throbbing  heart, 
Disdaining  all  the  little  tricks  of  art, 
Conceals  those  feelings  in  a  grateful  breast 
Which  may  befe/t,  but  cannot  be  expressed. 
Time  has  now  swept  ten  rolling  years  away, 
Since  flattering  plaudits  graced  my  first  essay, 
Young,  giddy,  rash,  ambitious,  and  untaught, 
You  still  caress'd,  excusing  many  a  fault ; 
With  friendly  hand  safe  led  me  through  the  way 
Where  lurking  error  watches  to  betray  : 
And  shall  I  such  advantages  forego 
With  my  consent  ?    I  frankly  answer,  no  : 
I  may,  through  inadvertency,  have  stray'd, 
But  who  by  folly  never  was  betray'd  ? 
If  e'er  my  judgment  played  the  foolish  part, 
I  acted  not  in  concert  with  my  heart. 
4 


8  ©cca^ional 


I  boldly  can  defy  the  world  to  say 
From  my  first  entree  to  the  present  day, 
Whate'er  my  errors,  numerous  or  few, 
I  never  wanted  gratitude  to  you. 
On  your  indulgence  still  I  '11  rest  my  cause; 
Will  you  support  me  with  your  kind  applause  ? 
You  verify  the  truth  of  Pope's  fine  line  — 
"  To  err  is  human ;  to  forgive,  divine." 


AN   ADDRESS. 

Written  by  Mr.  Charles  Sprag^le,  and  read  by  Mr. 
1 82  $.  Henry  James  Finn  at  an  exhibition  of  a  Pageant 

in  Honor  of  Shakspeare  at  the  Boston  Theater. 

GOD  of  the  glorious  Lyre  ! 
Whose  notes  of  old  on  lofty  Pindus  rang, 
While  Jove's  exulting  choir 
Caught  the  glad  echoes  and  responsive  sang  — 
Come !  bless  the  service  and  the  shrine 
We  consecrate  to  thee  and  thine. 

Fierce  from  the  frozen  North, 
When  havoc  led  his  legions  forth, 
O'er  Learning's  sunny  groves  the  dark  destroyer  spread; 
In  dust  the  sacred  statue  slept, 
Fair  Science  round  her  altars  wept, 
And  Wisdom  cowled  his  head. 

At  length,  Olympian  Lord  of  morn, 
The  raven  veil  of  night  was  torn. 

When,  through  golden  clouds  descending, 
Thou  didst  hold  thy  radiant  flight 

O'er  nature's  lovely  pageant  bending, 
Till  Avon  rolled,  all  sparkling,  to  thy  sight ! 


There,  on  its  bank,  beneath  the  mulberry's  shade, 
Wrapp'd    in    young    dreams,    a    wild-eyed   minstrel 

strayed ; 

Lighting  there  and  lingering  long, 
Thou  didst  teach  the  bard  his  song ; 

Thy  fingers  strung  his  sleeping  shell, 
And  round  his  brows  a  garland  curled ; 

On  his  lips  thy  spirit  fell, 
And  bade  him  wake,  and  warm  the  world  ! 

Then  Shakspeare  rose ! 
Across  the  trembling  strings 
His  daring  hand  he  flings, 

And,  lo  !  a  new  creation  glows ! 
There,  clustering  round,  submissive  to  his  will, 
Fate's  vassal  train  his  high  commands  fulfil. 

Madness,  with  his  frightful  scream; 
Vengeance,  leaning  on  his  lance ; 
Avarice,  with  his  blade  and  beam  ; 
Hatred,  blasting  with  a  glance ; 
Remorse,  that  weeps;  and  Rage,  that  roars, 
And  Jealousy,  that  dotes,  but  dooms   and  murders 
yet  adores. 

Mirth,  his  face  with  sunbeams  lit, 
Waking  laughter's  merry  swell, 

Arm  in  arm  with  fresh-eyed  Wit, 
That  waves  his  tingling  lash,  while  Folly  shakes  his 
bell. 


Despair,  that  haunts  the  gurgling  stream, 
Kissed  by  the  virgin  moon's  cold  beam, 
Where  some  lost  maid  wild  chaplets  wreathes, 
And,  swan-like,  there  her  own  dirge  breathes, 

Then,  broken-hearted,  sinks  to  rest, 

Beneath  the  bubbling  waves,  that  shroud  her  maniac 
breast. 

Young  Love,  with  eye  of  tender  gloom, 

Now  drooping  o'er  the  hallowed  tomb, 

Where  his  plighted  victims  lie, 

Where  they  met,  but  met  to  die ; 

And  now,  when  crimson  buds  are  sleeping, 

Through  the  dewy  arbor  creeping, 
Where  beauty's  child,  the  frowning  world  forgot, 

To  youth's  devoted  tale  is  listening, 

Rapture  on  her  dark  lash  glistening, 
While  fairies  leave  their  cowslip  cells,  and  guard  the 
happy  spot. 

Thus  rise  the  phantom  throng, 

Obedient  to  their  Master's  song, 
And  lead  in  willing  chain  the  wondering  soul  along, 
For  other  worlds  war's  Great  One  sighed  in  vain  — 
O'er  other  worlds  see  Shakspeare  rove  and  reign ! 
The  rapt  magician  of  his  own  wild  lay, 
Earth  and  her  tribes  his  mystic  wand  obey, 
Old  ocean  trembles,  thunder  cracks  the  skies, 
Air  teems  with  shapes,  and  tell-tale  specters  rise ; 
Night's  paltering  hags  their  fearful  orgies  keep, 
And  faithless  guilt  unseals  the  lip  of  sleep : 


12 


Time  yields  his  trophies  up,  and  death  restores 

The  moldered  victims  of  his  voiceless  shores. 

The  fireside  legend,  and  the  faded  page, 

The  crime  that  cursed,  the  deed  that  blessed  an  age — 

All,  all,  come  forth  —  the  good  to  charm  and  cheer, 

To  scourge  bold  Vice,  and  start  the  generous  tear; 

With  pictured  Folly,  gazing  fools  to  shame, 

And  guide  young  Glory's  foot  along  the  path  of  fame. 

Lo  !  hand  in  hand, 

Hell's  juggling  sisters  stand, 
To  greet  their  victims  from  the  fight ; — 

Grouped  on  the  blasted  heath, 

They  tempt  him  to  the  work  of  death, 
Then  melt  in  air,  and  mock  his  wondering  sight. 

In  midnight's  hallowed  hour, 

He  seeks  the  fatal  tower, 
Where  the  lone  raven,  perched  on  high, 

Pours  to  the  sullen  gale 

Her  hoarse  prophetic  wail, 
And  croaks  the  dreadful  moment  nigh. 
See,  by  the  phantom  dagger  led, 
Pale,  guilty  thing, 

Slowly  he  steals  with  silent  tread, 
And  grasps  his  coward  steel  to  smite  his  sleeping  king. 

Hark !  't  is  the  signal  bell, 

Struck  by  that  bold  and  unsexed  one, 

Whose  milk  is  gall,  whose  heart  is  stone, 

His  ear  hath  caught  the  knell  — 
?T  is  done !  't  is  done ! 

Behold  him  from  the  chamber  rushing, 

Where  his  dead  monarch's  blood  is  gushing, 


13 


Look  where  he  trembling  stands, 
Sad  gazing  there ; 

Life's  smoking  crimson  on  his  hands, 
And  in  his  felon  heart  the  worm   of  wild  de 
spair. 

Mark  the  sceptered  traitor  slumbering ! 

There  flit  the  slaves  of  conscience  round, 
With  boding  tongue  foul  murders  numbering ; 

Sleep's  laden  portals  catch  the  sound ; 
In  his  dream  of  blood  for  mercy  quaking, 
At  his  own  dull  scream  behold  him  waking ! 
Soon  that  dream  to  fate  shall  turn, 
For  him  the  living  furies  burn ; 
For  him  the  vulture  sits  on  yonder  misty  peak, 
And  chides  the  lagging  night,  and  whets  her  hungry 

beak. 

Hark  !  the  trumpet's  warning  breath 
Echoes  round  the  vale  of  death. 
Unhorsed,  unhelmed,  disdaining  shield, 
The  panting  tyrant  scours  the  field ; 

Vengeance  !  he  meets  thy  dooming  blade ! 
The  scourge  of  earth,  the  scorn  of  Heaven, 
He  falls !  unwept  and  unforgiven, 

And  all  his  guilty  glories  fade. 
Like  a  crushed  reptile  in  the  dust  he  lies, 
And  Hate's  last  lightning  quivers  from  his  eyes ! 
Behold  yon  crownless  king  — 

Yon  white-locked,  weeping  sire  — 
Where  Heaven's  unpillar'd  chambers  ring, 

And  burst  their  streams  of  flood  and  fire  ! 


He  gave  them  all  —  the  daughters  of  his  love  — 
That  recreant  pair !  —  they  drive  him  forth  to  rove  ; 

In  such  a  night  of  woe, 
The  cubless  regent  of  the  wood 
Forgets  to  bathe  her  fangs  in  blood, 
And  caverns  with  her  foe; 
Yet  one  was  ever  kind  — 
Why  lingers  she  behind  ? 

O,  pity ! —  view  him  by  her  dead  form  kneeling, 
Even  in  wild  frenzy  holy  nature  feeling. 

His  aching  eyeballs  strain 
To  see  those  curtained  orbs  unfold, 

That  beauteous  bosom  heave  again ; 
But  all  is  dark  and  cold ; 
In  agony  the  father  shakes ; 
Grief's  choking  note 
Swells  in  his  throat, 

Each  withered  heartstring  tugs  and  breaks ! 
Round  her  pale  neck  his  dying  arms  he  wreathes, 
And  on  her  marble  lips  his  last,  his  death  kiss  breathes. 
Down!  trembling  wing — shall  insect  weakness  keep 
The  sun-defying  eagle's  sweep  ? 

A  mortal  strike  celestial  strings, 
And  feebly  echo  what  a  seraph  sings  ? 
Who  now  shall  grace  the  glowing  throne 
Where,  all  unrivaled,  all  alone, 
Bold  Shakspeare  sat,  and  looked  creation  through, 
The  minstrel  monarch  of  the  worlds  he  drew  ? 

That  throne  is  cold  —  that  lyre  in  death  unstrung, 
On  whose  proud  note  delighted  Wonder  hung. 


15 


Yet  Old  Oblivion,  as  in  wrath  he  sweeps, 

One  spot  shall  spare,  the   grave  where  Shakspeare 

sleeps. 

Rulers  and  ruled  in  common  gloom  may  lie, 
But  Nature's  laureate  bards  shall  never  die. 
Art's  chiseled  boast,  and  Glory's  trophied  shore 
Must  live  in  numbers,  or  can  live  no  more. 
While  sculptured  Jove  some  nameless  waste  may  claim, 
Still  rolls  the  Olympic  car  in  Pindar's  fame; 
Troy's  doubtful  walls  in  ashes  passed  away, 
Yet  frown  on  Greece  in  Homer's  deathless  lay; 
Rome,  slowly  sinking  in  her  crumbling  fanes, 
Stands  all  immortal  in  her  Maro's  strains  : 
So,  too,  yon  giant  empress  of  the  isles, 
On  whose  broad  sway  the  sun  forever  smiles, 
To  Time's  unsparing  rage  one  day  must  bend, 
And  all  her  triumphs  in  her  Shakspeare  end  ! 

O  thou  !  to  whose  creative  power 

We  dedicate  the  festal  hour, 

While  Grace  and  Goodness  round  the  altar  stand, 
Learning's  anointed  train,  and  Beauty's  rose-lipped 

band  — 

Realms  yet  unborn,  in  accents  now  unknown, 
Thy  song  shall  learn,  and  bless  it  for  their  own. 
Deep  in  the  West,  as  Independence  roves, 
His  banners  planting  round  the  land  he  loves, 
Where  nature  sleeps  in  Eden's  infant  grace, 
In  time's  full  hand  shall  spring  a  glorious  race  : 
Thy  name,  thy  verse,  thy  language  shall  they  bear, 
And  deck  for  thee  the  vaulted  temple  there. 

5 


1 6 


Our  Roman-hearted  father  broke 

Thy  parent  empire's  galling  yoke, 
But  thou,  harmonious  monarch  of  the  mind, 
Around  their  sons  a  gentler  chain  shall  bind : 
Still  o'er  our  land  shall  Albion's  scepter  wave, 
And  what  her  mighty  Lion  lost  her  mightier  Swan 
shall  save. 


17 


EPILOGUE   TO   THE   RENEGADE. 

Sept.  26,  Written,  by  Mr.  Joseph  D.  Fay.     Spoken  by  Miss 

182  3.  Johnson,  at  the  Park  Theater^  New-York. 

WEARY  of  plots  and  murders,  bloody  strife, 
Of  war's  hoarse  din,  and  all  the  martial  life, 
The  mimic  mask  laid  by,  I'm  called  to  say 
Something,  by  way  of  epilogue,  to  this  new  play. 
And  first,  ye  angel  fair,  whose  brilliant  eyes 
Can  knock  our  poet  down,  or  bid  him  rise; 
Fling  out  your  smiles,  his  sinking  hopes  elate, 
One  smile  from  you  may  stamp  his  future  fate. 
And  you,  immortals,  dwelling  far  above, 
Who  wield  the  thunder  like  immortal  Jove, 
Ring  the  long  peal,  in  this  our  poet's  cause, 
And  flash  good-natured  lightning  for  applause. 
And"  you,  oh  critics  !  whose  word,  like  doctor's  pill, 
Hath  power  to  damn  or  save  —  to  cure  or  kill; 
Lo !  our  poor  bard,  on  trembling  footsteps  borne, 
Lest  his  first  daring  feat  may  meet  your  scorn, 
Disordered,  waits,  with  bosom  sore  afraid, 
To  die  of  doctors,  or  live  by  doctors'  aid ; 
One  smile  from  you  were  worth  a  world  of  wealth  — 
May  I  report  him  to  the  Board  of  Health 
As  safe  and  sound  —  his  fears  gone  by  forever, 
And  no  more  symptoms  of  the  yellow  fever? 


1 8 


Oh  praise!  how  sweet  thy  sound  to  human  ear  — 
We  women  love  thee,  and  the  men  revere ! 
For  thee,  the  statesman  quits  his  tranquil  life  — 
For  thee,  the  hero  seeks  the  battle's  strife. 
Toiling  for  thee,  Columbus  left  his  home, 
Through  unknown  seas,  in  search  of  worlds  to  roam. 
Homer  and  Shakspeare  wrote  alone  for  thee. 
Oh !  shed  thy  bounties  on  our  bard,  and  me. 
When  first  the  eaglet,  at  his  sire's  behest, 
On  untried  pinions,  leaves  his  parent  nest, 
Fluttering,  he  flies ;  but  soon  the  bird  of  Jove, 
On  wings  of  thunder,  seeks  the  courts  above. 
Just  so  the  bard,  when  first  he  dares  to  fling 
His  untried  fingers  on  the  sacred  string; 
He  falters  —  stops  —  and  anxious  looks  around, 
To  see  if  others  like  the  virgin  sound. 
And  should  he  hear  the  enlivening  voice  of  praise, 
He  strikes  the  harp  to  more  majestic  lays. 
With  bolder  hand  he  sweeps  the  living  lyre, 
While  thronging  thousands  listen  and  admire. 


19 


AN  ADDRESS. 

jan     j  Written  by  Mr.  Thomas  Wells.     Spoken  by  Mr. 

James  H.  Cold-well,  at  the  opening  of  the  New 
I°24.  American  Theater,  New  Orleans. 

WHEN  first,  o'er  Learning,  Persecution  trod, 
And  fettered  Letters  felt  his  iron  rod, 
Long,  long  in  darkness  bound,  the  Muses  slept, 
Each  haunt  left  bardless,  and  each  harp  unswept; 
'Till,  bursting  through  the  gloom,  dramatic  fire 
Apollo  darted  o'er  each  slumbering  lyre; 
Through  clouds  of  dullness  shot  his  attic  light, 
And  chased  the  shades  of  superstitious  night ; 
Loud  paeans  then  broke  forth  from  every  tongue, — 
The  Temples  echoed,  and  the  Chorus  rung  — 
Warm  with  new  soul,  young  Music  smote  the  strings, 
To  Song  gave  life  —  to  Inspiration  wings  ! 
Genius,  by  Freedom  roused,  shook  off  his  yoke, 
And  from  his  deep,  oblivious  dream  awoke ! 
Awoke,  and  saw  the  Drama 's  towering  dome 
Swell  its  asylum  arch,  and  call  him  home; 
Allured  to  higher  worlds,  he  took  his  flight, 
And  rose  to  realms  of  empyrean  height, 
Explored  the  winding  paths  of  Fiction's  bowers, 
And  gathered  for  the  Stage  his  deathless  flowers. 
Her  ample  page  redeeming  Learning  spread, 
And  o'er  the  night  of  Mind  her  radiance  shed, 


20 


Taste  polished  life  —  the  arts  refined  the  age  — 
And  Virtue  triumphed  as  she  reared  the  Stage. 
Patrons  !  this  night  our  cause  to  you  we  trust, 
As  Guardians  of  the  Drama's  rights  —  be  just  ; 
Support  from  you  the  child  of  Thespis  draws, 
Warms  in  your  sun,  and  thrives  on  your  applause; 
At  your  tribunal  he  expecting  stands, 
And  craves  indulgent  judgment  at  your  hands  ; 
Your  willing  smiles  then  let  his  efforts  share, 
And,  to  your  shelter  take  the  buskin's  heir  ! 
O,  let  your  presence,  let  your  plaudits  cheer 
Our  Protean  toil,  and  give  us  welcome  here  ! 
And  yet,  no  purchased  favor  we  would  ask  ; 
Unbiased  and  unbought  fulfil  your  task. 
Before  your  critic-bench  we  humbly  bend, 
And  to  your  righteous  voice  ourselves  commend; 
No  servile  suppliants  to  your  court,  we  sue, 
But  praise  and  censure  claim  alike,  from  you  ; 
Assembled  here,  to  your  decree  submit, 
And  hail  in  you  the  arbiters  of  wit. 
And,  now,  in  scenic  beauty  drest,  thou  Dome  — 
The  shield  of  Morals,  and  of  Song  the  home  — 
The  nurse  of  Eloquence  —  the  school  of  Taste, 
Hence  be  thy  altars  by  the  Muses  graced. 
Within  thy  walls,  perhaps,  by  Genius  led 
Shall  future  Shakspeares  sing,  or  Garricks  tread  ; 
In  Roman  grace,  and  majesty  of  mien, 
Some  Kemble  reign,  the  monarch  of  the  scene  ; 
Her  fire  of  soul  some  Siddons  here  impart, 
Shoot  through  each  quivering  nerve,  and  storm  the 
heart  ; 


21 


On  rapid  wing  still  speeds  the  auspicious  time, 

When  bards  our  own  the  Olympic  mount  shall  climb ; 

When  round  their  consecrated  shrines  shall  throng 

Our  buskined  heroes,  and  our  sons  of  Song ; 

In  attic  pride  our  Drama  then  shall  rise, 

And  nobly  daring,  claim  the  Thespian  prize : 

To  classic  height  exalt  the  rising  age, 

And  give,  to  peerless,  lasting  fame,  the  Stage. 


22 


A  PRIZE   POEM. 

Jan.    8,  Spoken  by  Mr.  James  H.  Caldwell,  at  the  New 

182^.  American  Theater,  New  Orleans. 

CHILL  was  the  breeze,  nor  yet  the  herald  light 
Had  chased  the  lingering  shadows  of  the  night; 
O'er  still  expanse  of  lake,  and  marshy  bed, 
Gloomy  and  dense  the  mantling  vapors  spread: 
But  soon  the  battle-flash  that  darkness  broke, 
And  soon,  that  dread  repose,  the  peal  awoke 
Of  loud  artillery,  and  the  dire  alarms 
Of  mingling  conflict,  a'nd  the  clash  of  arms. 

Fate  gave  the  word !  and  now,  by  veterans  led, 
In  pride  of  chivalry,  to  conquest  bred, 
The  foe  advanced  —  entrenched,  the  champion  band 
Of  freemen  stood,  the  bulwark  of  the  land ; 
Fearless  their  stars  unfurled,  and,  as  the  rock, 
Storm-proof,  they  stood,  impervious  to  the  shock : 
Their  patriot  Chief —  with  patriot  ardor  fired  — 
Nerved  every  hand,  and  every  heart  inspired ; 
Himself,  in  peril's  trying  hour,  a  host : 
A  nation's  rescue,  and  a  nation's  boast. 


As  near  the  bastion'd  wall  the  invader  drew, 
A  storm  of  iron  hail  to  greet  him  flew ; 
On  Havoc's  wing  the  mission'd  vengeance  rode, 
And  whole  platoons  the  scythe  of  Ruin  mowed ; 
Through  paths  of  blood,  o'er  undistinguished  slain, 
Unyoked,  the  hungry  war-dogs  scoured  the  plain : 
Borne  on  the  blast,  the  scattering  besom  kept 
Its  course,  and  ranks  on  ranks  promiscuous  swept. 
The  trophied  Lion  fell  —  while  o'er  his  foes 
Unscathed,  in  arms  supreme,  the  towering  Eagle  rose. 

Sublime  in  majesty  —  matchless  in  might  — 
Columbia  stood,  unshaken  in  the  fight ; 
From  lips  of  adamant,  'midst  volumed  smoke 
And  cataracts  of  fire,  her  thunders  spoke 
In  triumph  to  the  skies ;  from  shore  to  shore 
Old  Mississippi  shook,  and  echoed  to  the  roar. 

High  on  his  sceptered  perch,  our  mountain  bird 
Amidst  the  din  the  shout  of  Victory  heard, 
Exulting  heard,  and  from  his  aery  came 
Through  clouds  of  rolling  dun,  and  sheets  of  flame; 
Renown's  immortal  meed  he  bore,  and  spread 
His  ample  pinions  o'er  the  conqueror's  head  — 
THE  HERO  OF  THE  WEST  —  to  him  assigned 
The  glorious  palm,  and  round  his  brows  the  guerdon 
twined. 


24 


A  RIFLEMAN'S  ADDRESS. 

July  23,  Written  by  "George"    Spoken  by  Mrs.  Entwistle, 

J32F  at  the  Chatham  Garden  Theater,  New-York. 

WHERE  sinks  the  sun  in  majesty  to  rest, 
Within  the  bosom  of  the  bonny  West ; 
Where  roves  the  hunter,  where  the  forest  blooms, 
And  where  the  rose  the  ambient  air  perfumes; 
Where  lakes  and  hills  diversify  the  earth, 
With  patriot  kinsmen  I  received  my  birth. 
In  sex  a  woman  —  yet  a  man  in  nerve  — 
In  wish  a  warrior,  this  proud  land  to  serve  ; 
My  greatest  boast  is  in  my  rifle's  aim, 
In  God,  my  honor,  and  my  country's  fame. 
For  her  I  deal  my  tomahawk's  dread  blow, 
To  send  destruction  on  her  ruthless  foe ; 
For  her  the  knife  and  polished  sword  I  draw, 
To  shield  her  rights  and  vindicate  her  law. 
The  ardent  flame  which  in  this  bosom  glows, 
In  former  days  with  Washington  arose  : 
Oh,  who  can  dwell  upon  that  hallowed  name, 
Inscribed  by  glory  on  the  roll  of  fame; 
Nor  feel  his  heart  with  adoration  beat 
For  him  who  braved  the  fiercest  battle's  heat  ? 


25 


'Mid  war,  and  danger,  and  the  worst  of  griefs, 
He  stood  the  bravest  and  the  best  of  chiefs. 
Then  strive  each  patriot  —  father,  brother,  son  — 
To  imitate  the  peerless  Washington. 
But  while  we  ponder  on  the  time  that  's  fled, 
"The  army's  idol,  and  "the  council's  head," 
Oh,  can  we  then,  my  countrymen,  forget 
The  brave,  the  honored,  noble  Lafayette  ? 
No,  by  the  stream  that  circles  in  your  veins, 
While  freedom's  spark  within  this  clime  remains, 
His  name  shall  vibrate  to  the  distant  poles, 
Long  as  a  billow  of  the  ocean  rolls. 
This  is  the  language  of  the  West  —  't  is  mine  — 
And  oh,  my  country,  it  was  ever  thine. 
If  War's  hoarse  throat  should  summon  us  again, 
To  drive  the  foeman  from  our  native  plain  ; 
Led  on  by  Jackson,  will  our  hardy  band, 
Like  heroes  struggle  for  their  native  land  ; 
And  while  his  presence  animates  the  field, 
The  eagle  to  the  kite  shall  never  yield. 
Enough  of  war  !  that  gentle,  blue-eyed  maid, 
Celestial  Peace  —  in  spotless  garb  arrayed  — 
Her  choicest  blessings  o'er  our  soil  she  flings, 
And  sheds  pure  crystal  from  her  downy  wings  : 
She  drives  her  chariot  over  hill  and  plain, 
With  Wealth  and  Commerce  in  her  happy  train; 
Brown  Agriculture  and  the  Arts  convene, 
To  pause  and  ponder  on  the  grateful  scene  ; 
While  Science  moves  with  stately  steps  along, 
With  blushing  Genius  and  the  Child  of  Song. 


26 


Oh  happy  country  !  on  this  hallowed  day, 
Ere  half  a  century  moved  its  course  away, 
Thy  sons  the  banner  of  our  land  unfurled, 
And  published  freedom  to  a  startled  world  ; 
The  crown,  the  scepter,  and  the  tyrant's  yoke, 
With  manly  strength  the  mighty  warriors  broke, 
And  taught  the  rulers  of  the  land  and  sea 
Columbia  would  —  Columbia  must  be  free  ! 


27 


AN  ADDRESS. 

July  24,  Spoken  by  Mr.  James  H.  Caldwell,  at  the  opening 

1 826  of  the  Theater,  Huntsville,  Alabama. 

IN  climes  of  the  East,  when  dark  Tyranny's  form 
Rode  in  triumph  aloft,  on  proud  Victory's  storm, 
The  genius  of  Freedom  in  agony  wept 
O'er  the  tomb  where  the  martyr  of  liberty  slept. 
Their  relics  in  silent  devotion  she  blest, 
Then  sought  an  asylum  in  climes  of  the  West; 
On  the  plains  of  Columbia  her  stripes  were  unfurl'd, 
And  here  she  spoke  thunders  to  tyranny's  world  ! 
The  conflict  o'er,  the  warring  discords  hush'd, 
The  tyrant  fall'n,  and  his  minions  crush'd, 
Oppression's  requiem  o'er  his  tomb  is  hung, 
And  Freedom's  triumph  in  hosannas  sung ! 
When  the  dread  trumpet  of  the  battle  closed, 
And  fair  Columbia  safe  in  peace  reposed ; 
The  gleam  of  science  in  effulgence  glowed 
On  the  wild  land  of  Liberty's  abode. 
'T  was  here  that  once  the  wandering  Indian  stray'd 
Or  slothful  slumbered  in  the  sylvan  shade ; 
Quaffed  the  clear  streamlet  as  it  pour'd  along, 
Or  sung  the  burden  of  his  heathen  song; 
His  home —  the  valley  —  or  the  mountain  cave, 
The  dreary  forest  —  or  the  restless  wave. 


28 


To  bask  unthoughtful  in  the  morning's  beam, 
Or  trace  the  windings  of  the  rolling  stream, 
Or  vie  in  swiftness  with  the  fleetest  hind, 
Was  the  rich  glory  of  the  savage  mind. 

But  see  how  changed  the  Alabama's  plain, 
And  how  transformed  are  all  its  roving  train  ; 
See  Learning  rising  from  the  sage's  dome, 
And  beams  in  brightness  o'er  the  heathen's  home; 
See  Mind  emerging  from  its  moral  night, 
And  claim  its  lineage  from  the  "  throne  of  light." 
And  here,  behold !  the  Drama's  temple  rise 
In  the  bright  beauty  of  its  varied  dyes ; 
May  circling  halos  round  its  summit  gleam, 
And  bursting  visions  round  its  altars  stream ; 
May  Fancy  here,  on  waving  pinions  fly, 
And  pour  her  light  from  every  star  on  high. 
Oh !  fostering  genius  of  the  rising  stage 
Display  the  treasures  of  thy  classic  page, 
And  here,  oh !  let  the  infant  drama  claim 
Thy  glow  celestial,  and  thy  radiant  flame ; 
Here  let  the  tragic  and  the  comic  muse, 
Mingle  their  crimson  and  their  airy  hues ; 
Disclose  their  horrors,  or  the  hero's  doom, 
And  weep  in  sorrow  o'er  the  bloody  tomb. 
Here  let  young  passion  at  thy  altar  stand ; 
But  own  the  presence  of  stern  reason's  hand; 
Improve  his  feelings,  purify  their  flow, 
Curb  his  loose  fires,  but  let  his  ardor  glow. 
And  here  let  knowledge,  dignified  and  chaste, 
And  truth  and  virtue,  elegance  and  taste, 


29 


Exclusive  wit,  amusive  and  refin'd, 
Unfold  their  splendor  to  the  youthful  mind. 
Let  mingling  beauties  round  this  circle  move, 
Like  a  bright  vision  in  the  dream  of  love, 
And  youth  and  wisdom,  innocence  and  age, 
Feast  on  the  pleasures  of  the  polished  stage. 


PROLOGUE  TO  METAMORA. 

Dec.  15,  Written  by  Mr.  Prosper  M.  Wetmore.     Spoken  by 

1829.  Mr.  Barrett,  New  Park  Theater,  New-York. 

NOT  from  the  records  of  Imperial  Rome, 
Or  classic  Greece — the  muses'  chosen  home — 
From  no  rich  legends  of  the  olden  day 
Our  bard  hath  drawn  the  story  of  his  play ; 
Led  by  the  guiding  hand  of  genius  on, 
He  here  hath  painted  Nature  on  her  throne ; 
His  eye  hath  pierced  the  forest's  shadowy  gloom, 
And  read  strange  lessons  from  a  nation's  tomb  : 
Brief  are  the  annals  of  that  blighted  race  — 
These  halls  usurp  a  monarch's  resting-place — 
Tradition's  mist-enshrouded  page  alone 
Tells  that  an  empire  was  —  we  know  't  is  gone ! 

From  foreign  climes  full  oft  the  muse  hath  brought 
Her  glorious  treasures  of  gigantic  thought; 
And  here,  beneath  the  witchery  of  her  power, 
The  eye  hath  poured  its  tributary  shower : 
When  modern  pens  have  sought  th'  historic  page, 
To  picture  forth  the  deeds  of  former  age  — 
O'er  soft  Virginia's  sorrows  ye  have  sighed, 
And  dropt  a  tear  when  spotless  beauty  died ; 
When  Brutus  "  cast  his  cloud  aside  " ;  to  stand 
The  guardian  of  the  tyrant-trampled  land — 


31 


When  patriot  Tell  his  clime  from  thraldom  freed, 
And  bade  th'  avenging  arrow  do  its  deed, 
Your  bosoms  answered  with  responsive  swell, 
For  freedom  triumphed  when  th'  oppressors  fell ! 

These  were  the  melodies  of  humbler  lyres, 
The  lights  of  Genius,  yet  without  his  fires ; 
But  when  the  master-spirit  struck  the  chords, 
And  inspiration  breathed  her  burning  words — 
When  passion's  self  stalked  living  o'er  the  stage, 
To  plead  with  love,  or  rouse  the  soul  to  rage  — 
When  Shakspeare  led  his  bright  creations  forth, 
And  conjured  up  the  mighty  dead  from  earth  — 
Breathless — entranced  —  ye  've  listened  to  the  line, 
And  felt  the  minstrel's  power,  all  but  divine ! 

While  thus  your  plaudits  cheer  the  stranger  lay, 
Shall  native  pens  in  vain  the  field  essay  ? 
To-night  we  test  the  strength  of  native  powers, 
Subject,  and  bard,  and  actor,  all  are  ours  — 
'T  is  yours  to  judge,  if  worthy  of  a  name, 
And  bid  them  live  within  the  halls  of  fame ! 


32  ©ccagional 


EPILOGUE  TO  METAMORA. 

Dec.  15,  Written  by  Mr.  James  Lawson.     Spoken  by  Mrs. 

1820  Hilson.,  New  Park  Theater,  New-  York. 

TJEFORE  this  bar  of  beauty,  taste,  and  wit, 
J3  This  host  of  critics,  too,  who  throng  the  pit, 
A  trembling  bard  has  been  this  night  arraigned  ; 
And  I  am  counsel  in  the  cause  retained. 
Here  come  I,  then,  to  plead  with  nature's  art, 
And  speak,  less  to  the  law,  than  to  the  heart. 

A  native  bard  —  a  native  actor  too, 
Have  drawn  a  native  picture  to  your  view ; 
In  fancy,  this  bade  Indian  wrongs  arise, 
While  that  embodied  all  before  your  eyes ; 
Inspired  by  genius,  and  by  judgment  led, 
Again  the  Wampanoag  fought  and  bled ; 
Rich  plants  are  both  of  our  own  fruitful  land, 
Your  smiles  the  sun  that  made  their  leaves  expand; 
Yet,  not  that  they  are  native  do  I  plead, 
'T  is  for  their  worth  alone  I  ask  your  meed. 
How  shall  I  ask  ye  ?     Singly  ?     Then  I  will  — 
But  should  I  fail  ?     Fail !     I  must  try  my  skill. 

Sir,  I  know  you  —  I  've  often  seen  your  face, 
And  always  seated  in  that  selfsame  place; 
Now,  in  my  ear  —  what  think  you  of  our  play  ? 
That  it  has  merit  truly,  he  did  say ; 


33 


And  that  the  hero,  prop'd  on  genius'  wing, 
The  Indian  forest  scoured,  like  Indian  king ! 

See  that  fair  maid,  the  tear  still  in  her  eye, 
And  hark!  hear  not  you  now  that  gentle  sigh  ? 
Ah  !  these  speak  more  than  language  could  relate, 
The  woe-fraught  heart  o'er  Nahmeokee's  fate  ; 
She  scans  us  not  by  rigid  rules  of  art, 
Her  test  is  feeling,  and  her  judge  the  heart. 

What  dost  thou  say,  thou  bushy-whiskered  beau  ? 
He  nods  approval — whiskers  are  the  go. 

Who  is  he  sits  the  fourth  bench  from  the  stage  ? 
There ;  in  the  pit !  —  why  he  looks  wond'rous  sage ! 
He  seems  displeased,  his  lip  denotes  a  sneer  — 
O !  he  's  a  critic  that  looks  so  severe ! 
Why,  in  his  face  I  see  the  attic  salt  — 
A  critic's  merit  is  to  find  a  fault. 
What  fault  find  you,  sir  ?  eh !  or  you,  sir  ?     None ! 
Then,  if  the  critic  's  mute,  my  cause  is  won. 
Yea,  by  that  burst  of  loud  heartfelt  applause, 
I  feel  that  I  have  gained  my  client's  cause. 
Thanks,  that  our  strong  demerits  you  forgive, 
And  bid  our  bard  and  Metamora  live. 


34 


EPILOGUE  TO  NARRAH  MATTAH. 

Jan.  ^15,  Written  by  Mr.  Samuel  Woodworth.  Delivered  by 

1830.  Mrs-  SharP  at  New  Park  Theater,  New-York. 

THE  curtain  's  down;  and,  while  they  're  all  behind 
Doffing  their  pilgrim  dresses,  I  've  a  mind 
At  the  gay  modern  world  to  have  one  peep, 
And  just  say,  "  How  d'  ye  do  ?  "  before  I  sleep. 
But  how  is  this  ?    Am  I  to  understand 
That  these  are  the  descendants  of  that  band 
Of  pious  plain-clad  pilgrims,  who  came  o'er 
To  seek  for  freedom  on  this  Western  shore  ? 
Why — where  's  the  plain  mob  cap  ?  the  russet  gown  ? 
The  puritanic  coat  ?  the  close-cropt  crown  ? 
Where  's  all  that  neat  simplicity  of  dress 
Which  marked  the  Puritans  ?     Egad !     I  guess 
I  wa'  n't  alone  —  more  of  them  must  have  wed 
With  native  chiefs,  and  mingled  white  and  red ; 
Else  why  this  taste  for  feathers,  beads,  and  shells, 
In  their  descendants  ?     Why  do  modern  belles 
Paint  their  sweet  faces,  and  from  either  ear 
Suspend  those  sparkling  trinkets  ?     And  then  here 
So  modestly  to  bury  half  their  charms 
In  those  huge  silken  bags  that  hide  their  arms  ? 


35 


0  there  's  red  blood  in  some  of  your  blue  veins, 
And  so  there  is  in  yours,  ye  dapper  swains, 

Or  what  's  the  meaning  of  those  dandy  chains 
Extending  from  your  bosoms  to  your  pockets  ? 

1  wonder  if  you  modern  beaux  wear  lockets  ! 
Nay,  hope  not  to  escape  me  —  you  will  fail, 

Those  treacherous  square-toes,  I  shall  know  your  trail 

I  see  you  there,  but  I  won't  tell  your  name, 

He  with  the  whiskers  —  yes  —  that  's  him  —  the  same 

A  mighty  chief  of  some  great  tribe,  no  doubt, 

You  need  not  tell  me  —  I  shall  make  it  out  : 

Yes,  yes  —  I  see  —  it  plainly  now  appears, 

Those  artificial  whiskers  hide  long  ears  ! 

But  he  with  that  blue  blanket  on  one  shoulder, 

And  feathered  lip,  must  be  a  chief  still  bolder; 

Perhaps  a  sachem,  sagamore,  or  scribe, 

0  I  perceive,  he  's  of  the  cockney  tribe, 

But  what  is  that  thing  ?  —  yonder  —  up  above? 
He  with  the  eye-glass  ?   There  !  he  's  dropt  his  glove  ; 
What  tribe  claims  him  —  or  it  —  that  taper  shape  ? 

1  Ve  strong  suspicions  it  must  be  the  ape  ! 
You  need  n't  smile,  here,  in  the  pit,  below, 

For  I  Ve  a  word  with  you  before  I  go. 
Yes,  do  smile  !     In  mercy  don't  look  grave, 
For  't  is  your  tribe  must  either  damn  or  save 
The  little  bantling  just  gone  off  the  stage. 
Forget  its  faults,  but  not  its  tender  age. 
What  if  it  be  a  little  rude  and  wild, 
Remember  that  a  parent  loves  his  child  ; 
And  I  '11  be  sworn  he  's  somewhere  here  to-night, 
With  feelings  none  can  know  but  they  who  write. 


36 


So  be  good-natured,  now,  ye  critic  tribe  ; 
Nay,  do  not  frown  —  can  I  not  name  some  bribe? 
Yes,  here  it  goes  —  don't  let  the  new  play  fall, 
And  Narrah  Mattah  vows  to  kiss  you  all. 

'T  is  safe  !  't  is  safe  !  your  generous  hands  decide  it  ; 
There,  take  a  kiss  among  you,  and  divide  it. 


37 


EPILOGUE  TO  ROKEBY. 

May,  Spoken  by  Barnes,  Placide,  and  Hilson.    Delivered 

1 830.  at  the  New  Park  Theater,  New-York. 

BARNES. —  O,  spare   your   hands  —  't  is  useless 
all  this  blarney; 

The  play  can't  live,  without  a  word  from  Barney ; 
'T  is  like  a  patient — quacks  to  death  may  steam  him, 
And  he  is  damned,  if  science  don't  redeem  him. 
Grappling  with  fate  't  is  I  alone  can  part  'em, 
Barney  will  save  the  piece,  secundem  artem. 

Go  on,  that 's  right,  your  smiles  are  what  I  'm  after, 
The  best  prescription  is  a  roar  of  laughter ; 
One  hearty  laugh,  no  matter  how  excited, 
May  save  a  life  when  every  hope  is  blighted. 

'T  is  true,  Placide  has  got  an  epilogue, 
But 't  ain't  the  thing — it  don't  "  go  the  whole  hog  "; 
So,  while  he  's  back  there,  spelling  out  each  line, 
I  '11  give  you  an  extrumpery  of  mine ; 
Original  throughout  —  no  one  has  read  it  — 
So,  if  you  have  a  tear,  "  prepare  to  shed  it  "  : 

A  certain  fair  one  —  once,  in  days  of  yore, 
Caught  a  bad  quinsey,  and  her  throat  was  sore ; 
She  could  not  speak,  nor  swallow,  chew,  nor  sup, 
She  scarcely  breathed  —  the  doctors  gave  her  up. 


Her  weeping  friends,  in  silence,  breathed  their  sighs, 
And  stood  prepared  to  close  her  fading  eyes  ! 
'T  was  at  this  awful  crisis,  'mid  the  gloom, 
Her  favorite  monkey  stole  into  the  room ; 
With  doctor's  formal  air  approached  the  bed, 
Seized  hold  her  wrist,  then  gravely  shook  his  head. 
The  droll  manoeuver  called  a  smile  from  death, 
And  one  convulsive  laugh  restored  her  breath, 
Broke  her  disorder,  let  the  fair  escape, 
Who  owed  her  cure  alone  to  Dr.  Ape  : 

D'  ye  take  ?  or  must  I  give  your  wits  a  jog  ? 
Stay  —  here  comes  Harry  with  his  epilogue. 

PLACIDE. — "  In  ancient  times,  when  plighted  vows 

were  broken  — " 
BARNES. —  You   're  too   late,   Hal,  the   epilogue    is 

spoken. 

PLACIDE. —  Spoken  !     By  whom  ? 
BARNES. —  By  me. 

PLACIDE. —  By  you  ? 

BARNES. —  'T  is  certain. 

PLACIDE. —  Why,  't  is  n't  a  minute  since  they  dropt 

the  curtain, 

And  my  address  a  good  half  hour  employs. 
BARNES. —  "  I  Ve  done  the  deed  —  didst  thou  not  hear 

a  noise  ?  " 

If  you  attempt,  you  '11  find  yourself  mistaken ; 
I  made  them  laugh  —  that  saved  the  author's  bacon. 
PLACIDE. —  And   who,  pray,  bade    you    show    your 

monkey  capers? 

The  sun  requires  no  aid  from  farthing  tapers  — 
I  saved  the  piece,  sir. 


Occasional 


39 


BARNES. —  You  ? 

PLACIDE. —  My  humble  talents 

Secured  the  thing's  success  and  turned  the  balance, 

Or,  as  Prince  Rupert  says  —  "  Alone  I  did  it !  " 

It  's  true,  I  pledge  my  honor ! 
HILSON. —  Heaven  forbid  it ! 

To  put  so  mean  a  trifle  "  up  the  spout  "  ! 
PLACIDE. —  Hilson,  be   quiet!     I   know   what    I    'm 

about. 
HILSON. —  That  tone,  my  boy,  smacks  sharply  of  the 

acid. 
BARNES. —  Placide,  by  name,  but  not  exactly  placid. 

You  're  somewhat  wroth. 
PLACIDE. —  I  am,  and  shall  be  wrother. 

I  '11  speak  my  speech  ! 
HILSON. —  Not  if  you  love  the  author. 

Since  I  have  saved  his  opera,  't  were  wrong 

To  jeopardize  it  with  a  speech  so  long. 
PLACIDE. —  You  saved  the  opera  ! 
BARNES. —  You  saved  it! 

BOTH. —  You ! 

HILSON. —  Yes,   I    myself   alone  —  you  know   it   's 
true; 

I  hit  it  on  the  head  — but  lest  it  fail, 

Here  's  a  short  epilogue  to  clench  the  nail ; 
"  When  erst  the  Muses  on  Parnassus'  top, 

In  mazy  dances  —  " 
BARNES. —  Prithee,  Tommy,  stop ; 

Throw  poetry  and  physic  to  the  dogs, 

Nor  bore  our  friends,  here,  with  dull  epilogues. 
HILSON. —  Agreed,  old  Barney !    and  to  end  disputes, 

The  readiest  way  to  harmonize  our  flutes, 


4o 


Is  to  admit  —  so  be  it  understood, 

To  please  our  friends  we  've  all  done  what  we  could. 

If  we  have  failed  — 
PLACIDE. —  Why  then  — 

BARNES. —  What  then,  Placide  ? 

PLACIDE. —  They  '11  take  "  a  good  intention  for  the 

deed." 

HILSON. —  I  '11  answer  for  't  —  I  know  these  generous 
folks, 

They  're  always  laughing  at  us,  or  our  jokes ; 

But  what  of  our  young  author  ?    Jests  nor  wit 

Won't  add  a  penny  to  his  benefit. 
PLACIDE. —  His  benefit  is  safe. 

BARNES. —  What  then  of  Rokeby  ? 

HILSON. —  Should  that  be  damn'd,  it  would  a  serious 
joke  be. 

But  see  !  there  's  mercy  in  each  judge's  eye  — 

The  bard  's  acquitted  !  —  Rokeby  shall  not  die ! 
PLACIDE. —  Egad,  their  plaudits  make  old  Drury  shake. 
HILSON. —  It 's  just  the  thing ! 
BARNES. —         I  say  —  "  there  's  no  mistake !  " 


41 


EPILOGUE  TO  OSWALI. 

June  6,  Written  by  Mr.  Samuel  Woodworth.     Spoken  by 

Mrs-  Hughes  at  the  Chatham  Theater,  New-  York. 


DON'T  be  alarm'd  because  you  saw  me  slain, 
And  now  behold  me  on  the  stage  again  ; 
For  you  must  know,  we  murder  here  "  in  jest"  ; 
But  had  it  been  in  earnest,  could  I  rest 
In  quiet,  think  ye,  even  in  the  grave, 
When  my  appearance  Oswali  might  save  ? 
You  know  how  cleverly  I  rush'd  between 
The  youth  and  fate  —  there,  in  my  dying  scene  ; 
And  if  I  fell  a  martyr  for  him  there, 
In  the  same  cause  I  've  yet  some  breath  to  spare. 

My  turban'd  Turkish  tyrant  lover  said, 
That  I,  among  the  dying  and  the  dead, 
When  Moslem  wrath  its  bolts  of  vengeance  hurl'd, 
"  Hung  like  an  angel  o'er  a  blazing  world" 
'T  was  most  gallantly  spoken  for  a  Turk, 
The  ruthless  author  of  that  bloody  work  ; 
What  then,  ye  free-born  Christians,  ought  to  be 
Your  exclamation  —  when  you  witness  me 
Rise  from  the  bier  to  intercede  for  one, 
Whom  you  are  prcud  to  call  "  Columbia's  son  "  ; 
For,  though  no  stoics,  you  will  not  disdain 
To  own  the  pleasure  you  've  derived  from  Payne. 


42 


'T  is  not  in  ghostly  costume  I  appear  — 
No  bullet  wound  —  no  crimson  stain  is  here,. 
I  'm  not  a  shade,  or  specter,  good  or  evil  — 
Nor  am  I  quite  an  angel,  or  a  devil; 
No  spirit  of  the  air  —  or  fire  —  or  flood  — 
But  true  substantial  female  flesh  and  blood; 
Disclaiming  powers  and  titles  superhuman, 
Though  a  true  patriot,  I  am  still  a  woman  ; 
As  such,  I  love  the  youth  who  freely  fights 
For  country  —  freedom  —  and  for  female  rights  ; 
As  such,  I  come  to  plead  our  poet's  cause, 
And  ask  a  verdict  in  your  kind  applause. 

Why  to  you  smile,  there  —  Mr.  Zoilus  —  say  — 
I  know  you  well  —  you  once  produced  a  play, 
And  said  we  actors  damn'd  it  !  —  let  that  pass  — 
Bards  must  be  civil  when  their  house  is  glass. 


,  Sir  Critic  —  who  one  night  —  don't  start  — 
Assum'd  the  buskin  —  and  —  forgot  your  part  ! 
You  '11  be  indulgent,  won't  you  ?  nay,  for  shame  ! 
Don't  look  so  frighten'd  —  I  '11  not  tell  your  name. 

Ay,  there  is  sunshine  in  this  sparkling  crescent  ; 
Those  smiling  faces  promise  something  pleasant. 
Were  Payne  but  here,  how  he  would  idolize 
This  starry  galaxy  of  laughing  eyes  ! 
Who  's  he  that  sits  behind  yon  lady  ?  —  Pshaw  ! 
That  mammoth  hat  !  —  what  do  you  wear  it  for  ? 
Why  not  confine  your  ringlets,  puffs  and  curls 
In  a  neat  turban,  like  our  Grecian  girls  ? 


43 


There  are  some  eyes  behind  that  monstrous  screen 
That  might  smile  kindly  —  could  they  but  be  seen. 
Egad!  —  I  Ve  caught  one!  —  thank  you  —  that's 

enough  — 
You  're  on  \hz  free-list,  sir,  and  we  expect  zpujf. 

To  you  who  choose  a  more  exalted  station, 
We  look  with  confidence  for  approbation  ; 
For  elevated  souls,  in  every  age, 
Have  been  the  friends  of  genius  and  the  stage  ; 
And  never  be  it  said,  that  our  own  Payne 
Pleaded  for  mercy  to  the  gods  in  vain. 


44 


EPILOGUE   TO    WALDEMAR. 

NOV.  I,  Written  by  Mr.  Bailey.     Spoken  by  Mrs.  Sharpe 

1831.  at  the  Park  Theater,  New-  York. 

IT  must  be  done.     The  man's  heart  will  be  broken 
Unless  some  sort  of  epilogue  be  spoken ; 
Besides,  the  house  expects  it —  always  —  don't  you  ? 
I  'm  sure  you  '11  let  me  try  one  for  him —  won't  you  ? 
Only  a  word  —  to  help  along  the  play  ? 
The  author  's  almost  scared  to  death,  they  say. 
To  leave  him  thus  would  be,  indeed,  a  sin  — 
Come,  "  down  in  front,"  "  hats  off,"  and  I  '11  begin. 

When  the  young  rose  first  opens  in  the  vale, 
Its  bud,  uncurling,  scarcely  scents  the  gale. 
Should  chilling  winds  and  angry  storms  arise, 
It  droops  its  leaves,  and  prematurely  dies. 
But,  let  the  sun  inspire  each  tender  charm, 
Cheer  it  with  smiles,  with  melting  kisses  warm, 
Grateful  it  blooms  —  preserved  from  early  death, 
And  thanks  the  heavens  with  its  ambrosial  breath. 
And  so,  the  author,  trembling,  first  appears, 
Nurses  one  hope  amid  a  thousand  fears; 
Starts  lest  he  mark  some  awful  symptom  lower, 
(A  sensitive  plant  —  your  literary  flower). 


45 


This  is  his  sky  —  and  mine  the  task  to  find  — 
Must  he  be  withered  with  the  wintry  wind  ? 
Will  he  meet  stormy  weather  here,  I  wonder  ? 
Did  n't  you  think  you  heard  a  clap  of  thunder  ? 

You  wicked  critics  —  ranged  around,  that  sit, 
With  your  stop-watches,  yonder,  in  the  pit; 
Whose  dreams  are  haunted,  for  your  faces  show  it, 
With  the  dim  ghosts  of  many  a  murdered  poet, 
Shall  I  our  author's  thronging  doubts  allay  ? 
May  I  inform  him  that  you  like  his  play  ? 
Will  ye  be  civil  ?     Will  ye  take  his  hand, 
And  cheer  his  way  o'er  fancy's  fairy-land  ? 
Will  you  hie  home,  and,  by  your  midnight  tapers, 
Do  "  the  genteel  thing  "  for  him  in  the  papers  ? 
Or  strive,  like  Shylock,  though  in  style  politer, 
To  "  cut  the  forfeit  "  from  a  bankrupt  writer  ? 

To  you  I  turn,  th'  Apollos  and  the  Graces, 
And  read  indulgence  in  your  smiling  faces. 
None  here  the  generous  tribute  will  refuse, 
Wooed  by  a  native  author's  early  muse. 
Anxious  he  waits,  as  one  who  from  a  steep 
Watches  his  vessel  launched  upon  the  deep. 
With  you  it  rests  th'  adventurous  bark  to  save  ; 
Let  not  his  hard-earned  treasures  feed  the  wave. 
O'er  the  blue  sea  a  summer's  calmness  throw,     \ 
Bid  prosperous  breezes  swell  the  sails  of  snow. 
Let  him  but  once  yonr  generous  favor  share, 
And  then,  ye  critics,  touch  him  if  ye  dare. 


*    — 


AN  ADDRESS. 

-,    .  Written  by  Mrs.  Caroline  Lee  Hentz.     Spoken  by 

J  ulv  4)  Mr^  james  H.  Caldwell  at  the  opening  of  the  New 

1832.  Theater  at  Cincinnati. 

WHAT  Grecian  dome  o'ertopp'd  its  gates  of  pride 
In  more  auspicious  hour  ?     The  eventide 
Of  freedom's  most  august  and  glorious  day 
Pours  on  these  classic  walls  its  hallowed  ray, 
And  the  rich  gale,  that  now  floats  wearied  by, 
Has  borne  a  nation's  gratitude  on  high. 
While  from  the  fountain  of  each  patriot  heart 
Gushes  of  high,  heroic  feeling  start, 
The  children  of  the  free,  we  gather  here, 
Anthems  of  glory  lingering  in  our  ear, 
To  dedicate  this  yet  unsullied  shrine, 
By  rites  the  bards  of  old  believed  divine. 
When  first  the  strain  that  still  from  clime  to  clime 
Rolls  its  deep  echoes  down  the  flood  of  time 
SwelFd  o'er  our  ancient  hills,  gray  rocks,  and  green 
wood  bowers 

Show'd  this  fair  city,  then,  its  stately  towers  ? 
No !    Nature  here  in  druid  grandeur  dwelt, 
Before  her  throne  the  forest  monarch  knelt, 


47 


Faith's  only  altar,  earth's  vine-shadowed  foam, 
And  God's  sole  temple  yon  unchiseled  dome. 
But  Freedom  traveling  in  its  strength  unfurl'd 
Erewhile  its  banner  o'er  this  western  world  — 
Religion,  science,  genius,  wealth,  and  taste, 
Followed  with  gliding  steps  the  path  she  trac'd, 
Scatter'd  the  stars  amid  the  forest  gloom, 
And  gave  to  man  the  wild's  uncultur'd  bloom. 
Here,  too,  the  Muses,  seraph  pilgrims,  came, 
Heralds  and  guardians  of  the  drama's  fame  — 
Whose  lyre,  from  land  to  land,  from  age  to  age, 
Has  wak'd  its  noblest  descant  for.  the  stage. 
Hail  to  this  shrine  !     Oh  !  never  may  the  flame 
Enkindled  here  be  dimmed  by  clouds  of  shame  — 
May  sorrow  gather  here,  a  thornless  flower, 
Whose  bloom  shall  sweeten  life's  autumnal  hour; 
Virtue,  oppressed  by  passion's  lawless  rage, 
Find  an  avenging  champion  in  the  stage, 
And  conscience,  writhing  in  conviction's  grasp, 
Pierc'd  by  remorse,  with  pangs,  convulsive  gasp. 
Patrons  of  genius  !  be  it  yours  to  guard 
This  virgin  temple,  spotless  and  unmarr'd, 
High  o'er  its  gates  inscribe  this  ban  to  sin, 
Let  not  pollution  dare  to  enter  in. 
Then  even  prayer  in  holy  brow  may  bend, 
And  bless  the  drama,  as  religion's  friend. 
May  native  genius,  sunning  in  the  ray 
Your  smiles  reflect,  exalt  its  boldest  lay, 
And  reaching  here  arjr.bition's  loftiest  goal, 
On  glory's  page  your  fathers'  deeds  enroll. 


The  bard,  in  vision,  sees  with  prophet  glance 
The  glimmering  shades  of  other  years  advance, 
Where  fair  Ohio's  waves  embalmed  in  song, 
A  second  Avon  flows  in  pride  along, 
And  every  regal  mountain  of  the  West 
Lifts,  with  Olympian  fame,  its  rainbow'd  crest. 
As  erst  the  pilgrim  to  the  hills  of  Rome, 
To  this  proud  dome  unnumber'd  votaries  come ; 
And  lingering  o'er  the  annals  of  this  day, 
Dear  to  our  country's  pride,  exulting  say : 
"  Ye  walls  —  corruption  never  has  profan'd, 
Long  may  ye  stand  unmoldering  as  unstain'd." 


49 


PROLOGUE  TO  ORALLOOSA. 

Dec.  7,  Written  by  Mr.  Richard  Penn  Smith.     Spoken  by 

1832.  Mr.  Duffy,  at  the  Park  Theater,  New-York. 

TO  wake  the  mold'ring  ashes  of  the  dead, 
And  o'er  forgotten  ages  light  to  shed, 
Until  the  picture  in  such  color  glows 
That  truth  approaches, —  time  his  power  foregoes  ; 
T'  anatomize  the  pulses  of  the  soul, 
From  gentlest  throb  to  throes  beyond  control ; 
The  varied  passion  from  their  germ  to  trace, 
Till  reason  totters  from  her  judgment  place; 
To  call  the  latent  seeds  of  virtue  forth, 
And  urge  the  mind  to  deeds  of  lasting  worth. 
For  this  the  Stage  in  ancient  days  arose; 
In  teaching  this  she  triumphed  o'er  her  foes, 
And  soon  became,  in  spite  of  bigot  rule, 
A  nation's  glory,  and  a  nation's  school. 
Too  long  we  've  been  accustomed  to  regard 
Alone  the  dogmas  of  some  foreign  bard. 
Too  long  imagined,  'neath  our  shifting  skies, 
"  That  fancy  sickens,  and  that  genius  dies." 
Dreaming,  when  Freedom  left  old  Europe's  shore, 
Spread  the  strong  wing  new  regions  to  explore, 
Her  altar  in  the  wilderness  to  raise 
Where  all  might  bend,  and  safely  chaunt  her  praise, 


50 


The  gifted  nine  refused  to  join  her  train, 

And  still  amidst  their  ruined  haunts  remain. 

Banish  the  thought ;  extend  the  fostering  hand, 

And  wild-eye'd  Genius  soars  at  your  command ; 

With  "  native  wood-notes  wild  "  our  hills  shall  swell, 

Till  all  confess  the  Muses  with  us  dwell. 

Our  bard,  to-night,  a  bold  adventurer  grown, 

A  flight  has  taken  to  the  torrid  zone  : 

Calls  from  the  grave  the  ruthless  Spaniard's  dust, 

To  meet  the  judgment  of  the  free  and  just, 

Shows,  in  the  progress  of  his  mournful  song, 

The  Indian's  vengeance,  and  the  Indian's  wrong; 

How  bigots,  with  the  cross  and  sword  in  hand, 

Unpeopled  and  laid  waste  the  peaceful  land,       *  , 

Then  scourged  the  conquered  with  an  iron  rod, 

And  stabb'd  for  gold  the  seeming  zeal  for  God ! 

Critics !  a  word  !  —  we  pray,  be  not  too  hard 

On  native  actor  or  on  native  bard, 

A  second  time  th'  offenders  stand  before  you, 

Therefore  for  mercy  humbly  we  implore  you, 

When  last  arraigned  the  cause  was  ably  tried, 

For  Gladiators  battled  on  their  side  : 

Took  you  by  storm  :  ere  you  knew  what  to  say 

The  valiant  rogues  had  fairly  won'  the  day. 

Should  Oralloosa  prove  a  victor  too, 

His  triumph  here  repays  for  lost  Peru. 


51 


AN  ADDRESS. 

February  Written  by  Mr.  George  P.  Morris.    Spoken  by  Mrs. 

Sharpe,  on  the  evening  of  the  festival  in  honor  of 
I°33-  Mr.  Dunlap,  at  the  Park  Theater,  New-York. 

WHAT  gay  assemblage  greets  my  wondering  sight? 
What  scene  of  splendor — conjured  here  to 
night  ? 

What  voices  murmur,  and  what  glances  gleam  ? 
Sure  't  is  some  flattering,  unsubstantial  dream. 
The  house  is  crowded  —  everybody  's  here 
For  beauty  famous,  or  to  science  dear; 
Doctors  and  lawyers,  judges,  belles  and  beaux, 
Poets  and  painters  —  and  heaven  only  knows 
Whom  else  beside  —  and,  see,  gay  ladies  sit, 
Lighting  with  smiles  that  fearful  place,  the  pit 
(A  fairy  change  —  ah,  pray  continue  it). 
Gray  heads  are  here  too,  listening  to  my  rhymes, 
Full  of  the  spirit  of  departed  times  ; 
Grave  men  and  studious,  strangers  to  my  sight, 
All  gather  round  me  on  this  brilliant  night. 
And  welcome  are  ye  all.     Not  now  ye  come 
To  speak  some  trembling  poet's  awful  doom ; 
With  frowning  eyes  a  "  want  of  mind  "  to  trace 
In  some  new  actor's  inexperienced  face 
Or  e'en  us  old  ones  (oh,  for  shame !)  to  rate 
"  With  study,  good  —  in  time  —  but  —  never  great " ; 


Not  like  yon  travel'd  native,  just  to  say 

"  Folks  in  this  country  cannot  act  a  play, 

They  can't,  'pon  honor!  "     How  the  creature  starts ! 

His  wit  and  whiskers  came  from  foreign  parts  ! 

Nay,  madam,  spare  your  blushes  —  you  I  mean  — 

There  —  close  beside  him  —  oh,  you  're  full  sixteen  — 

You  need  not  shake  your  flowing  locks  at  me  — 

The  man,  your  sweetheart — then  I  'm  dumb,  you  see; 

I  '11  let  him  off — you  '11  punish  him  in  time, 

Or  I  've  no  skill  in  prophecy  or  rhyme  ; 

Nor  like  that  knot  of  surly  critics  yonder, 

Who  wield  the  press,  that  modern  bolt  of  thunder, 

To  "  cut  us  up,"  when  from  this  house  they  lollop, 

With  no  more  mercy  than  fair  Mrs.  Trollope  / 

A  nobler  motive  fills  your  bosoms  now, 

To  wreath  the  laurel  round  the  silver'd  brow 

Of  one  who  merits  it  —  if  any  can, 

The  artist,  author,  and  the  honest  man. 

With  equal  charms  his  pen  and  pencil  drew 

Rich  scenes,  to  nature  and  to  virtue  true. 

Full  oft  upon  these  boards  hath  youth  appear'd, 

And  oft  your  smiles  his  faltering  footsteps  cheer'd; 

But  not  alone  on  budding  genius  smile, 

Leaving  the  ripen'd  sheaf  unown'd  the  while ; 

To  boyish  hope  not  every  bounty  give, 

And  only  youth  and  beauty  bid  to  live. 

Will  you  forget  the  services  long  past, 

Turn  the  old  war-horse  out  to  die  at  last  ? 

When,  his  proud  strength  and  noble  fleetness  o'er, 

His  faithful  bosom  dares  the  charge  no  more? 


©cca^ional  3l&tng$$e&  53 


Ah,  no  —  the  sun  that  loves  his  beams  to  shed 
Round  every  opening  flowret's  tender  head, 
With  smiles  as  kind  his  genial  radiance  throws 
To  cheer  the  sadness  of  the  fading  rose. 
Thus  he,  whose  merit  claims  this  dazzling  crowd, 
Points  to  the  past,  and  has  his  claims  allowed ; 
Looks  brightly  forth,  his  faithful  journey  done, 
And  rests  in  triumph  — like  the  setting  sun. 


54 


AN  ADDRESS. 


JT          ^  Written  by  Mr.  Samuel  Wood-worth  on  the  benefit  of 

Mr.  Thomas  A .  Cooper.    Spoken  by  Mr.  Thomas 
Hamblin,  at  the  Bowery  Theater,  New-York. 


"  nPHE  King  comes  here  to-night."    He  who  could 

.A.    wring 

Our  hearts  at  will  was  "  every  inch  a  king  "  ! 
For  when  in  life's  bright  noon  the  stage  he  trod 
In  majesty  and  grace,  a  demigod ; 
With  form,  and  mien,  and  attitude,  and  air, 
Which  modern  kings  might  envy  in  despair ; 
When  his  stern  brow  and  awe-inspiring  eye 
Bore  sign  of  an  imperial  majesty ; 
Then — in  the  zenith  of  his  glory  —  then 
He  moved,  a  model  for  the  first  of  men ! 
The  drama  was  his  empire ;  and  his  throne 
No  rival  dared  dispute  —  he  reigned  alone ! 
"  His  feet  bestrode  the  ocean  !  his  reared  arm 
Crested  the  world !  "     His  voice  possessed  a  charm 
To  love's,  to  friendship's,  and  to  classic  ears 
Like  the  sweet  music  of  the  tuneful  spheres : 
"  But  when  he  meant  to  quail  and  shake  the  world  " 
His  accents  were  "  like  rattling  thunders  "  hurled ! 
Or  plead,  "  like  angels,  trumpet-tongued,"  to  prove 
The  worth  of  freedom,  and  the  joys  of  love! 


55 


Whether  he  gave  ungentle  wives  rebuke 

As  simple  Leon  or  Aranza's  duke  ; 

Or  tamed  (as  wild  Petruchio]  the  shrew, 

Or  showed  a  fiend  in  the  unpitying  Jew; 

Displayed  the  wrecks  of  passion's  withering  storm, 

In  stern  Penruddoctts  or  the  Stranger's  form  ; 

Whether  he  bade  unnumbered  victims  bleed 

"  As  Macedonia's  madman  or  the  Swede" 

Moved  as  lago,  or  the  generous  Moor, 

Or  gallant  Rolla  'mid  the  battle's  roar 

Stemming  alone  the  tide  of  war  and  death  ; 

Hamlet  or  Damon,  Bertram  or  Macbeth  ; 

Gloster,  Young  Wilding,  Falstaff,  Charles  de  Moor, 

The  graceful  Doricourt,  the  gay  Belcour  ; 

Brutus  —  aye,  both  the  Brutuses  of  Rome  ; 

Mark  Antony,  lamenting  Ccesar's  doom, 

The  proud  Coriolanus,  or  the  sire 

Of  sweet  Virginia  ;  still  his  soul  of  fire 

With  grandeur  blazed,  to  ravish  or  appal  — 

He  "  was  the  noblest  Roman  of  them  all  "  ! 

Whether  he  wore  the  reckless  mien  of  Pierre, 

Or  the  time-scathed  decrepitude  of  Lear, 

"  Fourscore  and  upwards  "  —  he  might  justly  say  : 

'  Did  n't  I,  fellow  ?  I  have  seen  the  day 

When,  with  the  very  lightning  of  my  brow 

I  would  have  made  them  skip  —  I  am  old  now, 

And  these  same  crosses  spoil  me." 

Yes,  't  is  true, 

He  once  commanded  where  he  now  must  sue  ; 
For  he  's  old  now  —  and  those  unrivaled  powers 
For  you  exerted  in  his  happiest  hours, 
10 


56 


Like  flickering  lights  which  in  their  socket  burn, 
Are  fast  departing  —  never  to  return ! 

But  shall  he  now,  when  silvered  o'er  with  age, 

Who  never  made  his  exit  from  the  stage 

But  'mid  the  thunders  of  heart-felt  applause, 

Unhonored  pass,  when  he  at  last  withdraws  ? 

He  who  devoted  all  his  noonday  powers, 

To  strew  your  thorny  path  with  classic  flowers  — 

He,  whom  with  laurels  you  have  thickly  decked, 

Shall  he  at  last  be  chilled  with  cold  neglect  ? 

Perish  the  thought !  't  is  Cooper's  right  to  claim, 

Besides  the  glory  of  a  deathless  name, 

Of  your  regard  a  more  substantial  proof 

Than  the  loud  cheers  which  shake  this  vaulted  roof; 

Protection  for  his  offspring !  dearer  far 

To  his  fond  heart  than  earthly  glories  are ; 

And  you  concede  this  claim  —  or  else,  to-night, 

Here  were  not  seen  a  galaxy  so  bright 

Of  beauty,  taste,  and  fashion, — 't  is  a  blaze 

Which  so  reminds  him  of  his  better  days 

That  fond  regrets,  with  gratitude  sincere, 

Are  mingled  in  the  language  of  a  tear. 

And  as  the  worn  war-horse  at  trumpet  shrill 

Leaps  o'er  each  barrier  that  restrains  his  will, 

So  comes  our  monarch  of  a  former  age 

Again  to  claim  his  empire  o'er  the  stage, 

From  tyro  potentates  this  truth  to  wring : 

He  was  and  is  "  in  every  inch  a  king  " ; 

With  one  bright  flash  renew  th'  expiring  flame, 

And  gild  the  trophies  round  his  honored  name. 


57 


AN  ADDRESS. 

Written  by  Mr.  Charles  Woodhouse,  and  read  by 

Oct.  30,  Mr.  Arthur  C.  Southwick  on  the  occasion  of  the 

l8^4  opening  of  Histrionic  Hall,  No.  126  North  Pearl 

Street  (then  Orchard  Street) ,  Albany,  New-  York. 

'rT"s  IS  said  that  fashion  rules  this  world  of  ours ; 

JL     And  true  it  is  we  own  and  feel  her  powers, 
Her  sway  resistless  by  this  act  confess, 
In  presentation  of  this  night's  address. 
How  like  a  dream  this  scene  to-night  appears  ? 
And  is  it  true,  'midst  doubt,  and  hopes,  and  fears, 
A  new  and  better  house  we  now  behold  ? 
Upsprung,  as  by  enchantment,  while  our  old 
No  more  will  tell  the  drama's  grief  and  mirth, 
But  give  that  boon  to  this,  whose  recent  birth 
We  hail  this  night  with  pleasure  undefined, 
Flowing  from  every  joyful,  grateful  mind. 
In  ancient  Greece  the  drama  claims  her  birth : 
A  sacred  clime,  renowned  'bove  all  the  earth 
For  Science,  Art,  and  Eloquence,  which  tells 
To  present  time  its  spirit-moving  spells, 
Here  on  this  soil,  where  the  historic  pen 
Has  wrote  her  epitaph  of  noble  men. 

Where  deeds  of  time  are  writ  with  impress  deep 
On  tables,  their  eternal  fame  to  keep ; 
Here  sprung  the  drama  —  here  life's  mimic  scene 
First  taught  as  Truths  from  Fancy's  field  to  glean ; 


58 


While,  like  a,  glass,  reflecting  e'en  the  hearts 
Of  men,  the  Muses  played  their  magic  parts; 
Portrayed  the  passions  of  the  human  soul  ; 
Taught  us  the  good  to  cherish,  and  control 
The  bad;  placed  Virtue  in  her  own  bright  view, 
And  painted  Vice  in  every  hideous  hue  ! 
And  thus  the  stage,  if  kept  in  morals  pure 
(A  moving  world  in  moving  miniature  !) 
Still  holds  a  mirror  in  which  all  may  gaze, 
And  learn  a  lesson  to  direct  their  ways  ; 
And  while  we  see  fair  Virtue's  cause  defended, 
Find  the  amusing  with  the  useful  blended. 

In  this  a  helping  hand  we  lend;  and  here 
The  drama's  friends  this  humble  temple  rear. 
Here  shall  the  Truth  exhibit  all  her  charms, 
And  to  black  Falsehood  sound  her  dread  alarms. 
Here  shall  be  cherished  all  that  tends  to  raise 
The  mind  to  soar  aloft  on  Poesy's  lays  ; 
The  moralists  glean  ethics  for  the  young, 
Clothed  in  poetic  dress,  by  Fancy  sung; 
And  now,  spectators,  in  your  smile  so  bright 
We  cheerfully  begin  this  work  to-night; 
And  tho'  we  hold  in  the  dramatic  cause 
An  humble  station,  yet,  with  your  applause, 
We  may  our  feeble  aid  lend  with  success 
In  showing  Life  in  its  most  simple  dress  ; 
That  all  may  see  themselves  reflected  true 
To  the  image  Justice  gives  of  us  and  you  ; 
And  thus  transmit,  to  the  remotest  age, 
A  pure  and  useful  Histrionic  Stage  ! 


59 


AN  ADDRESS. 

Written  by  Mr.  George  C.  Chase,  for  the  benefit  of 
1834.  Mr.  Thomas  A.  Cooper,  at  New  Orleans.  Spoken 

by  Mr.  George  Barrett. 

AS  some  bold  mariner  by  storms  long  tossed, 
±\.  His  all,  save  hope,  in  trackless  ocean  lost, 
Steers  his  frail  bark  by  vivid  lightning's  glare, 
With  cheek  unblanched,  'midst  all  the  terrors  there  — 
Braving  the  billows  manfully,  descries 
The  wished-for  harbor  and  propitious  skies  — 
He  comes  to  greet  you,  not  the  least,  if  last, 
And  in  your  smiles  finds  balm  for  sufferings  past. 
Crowned  with  a  laurel  wreath,  by  friendship  wrought, 
By  you  bestowed  —  as  welcome  as  unbought, 
He  comes,  glad  in  the  memory  of  hours 
Passed  in  your  own  bright  land  of  sun  and  flowers. 

'T  was  his,  full  often  here  in  times  gone  by 
To  strike  the  chord  of  generous  sympathy ; 
'T  was  his  to  picture  forth  each  noble  part  — 
The  high,  proud  workings  of  the  human  heart, 
Ambition,  jealousy,  revenge,  pride,  hate, 
In  humble  cottage  or  in  princely  state. 
'T  was  his  with  words  of  fire  to  move  the  throng, 
And  rouse  resistance  to  the  tyrant's  wrong  — 


In  virtue's  cause  to  mail  his  manly  breast, 

And  stand  forth  friend  and  champion  of  the  oppressed ; 

Still  most  admired  in  honesty  arrayed, 

For  then  't  was  all  himself — 't  was  COOPER  played! 

To  draw  from  virtuous  eyes  a  priceless  tear 
For  dying  Brutus  or  forlorn  old  Lear — 
To  wake  the  terrors  of  Rome's  proudest  name, 
To  catch  a  gleam  from  noble  Cato's  flame  — 
To  rule  a  wife  —  to  tame  a  wayward  shrew  — 
The  melancholy  Dane  —  the  cruel  Jew  — 
Aspiring  Macbeth,  red  with  bloody  thought  — 
lago's  honeyed  words  with  mischief  fraught  — 
The  kingly  Damon,  on  the  scaffold  throne  — 
These,  in  his  day  of  power,  were  all  his  own. 
So  was  the  Roman  father  —  and  to  you 
To-night  he  gives  his  own  loved  daughter  too. 
Receive  her  kindly  from  the  old  man's  hand, 
And  cherish  into  life  this  blossom  of  our  land. 


61 


AN  ADDRESS. 


2,_  Written  by  Mr.  George  P.  Morris,  and  spoken  by 

Q  Mrs.  Hilson  at  a  benefit  given  to  Mr.  Placide  in 

1  °3  5  •  the  Park  Theater,  New-  York. 


THE  music  's  done.     Be  quiet,  Mr.  Durie, 
Your  bell  and  whistle  put  me  in  a  fury  ! 
Don't  ring  up  yet,  sir  —  I  Ve  a  word  to  say 
Before  the  curtain  rises  for  the  play ! 

Your  pardon,  gentlefolks,  nor  think  me  bold 
Because  I  thus  our  worthy  prompter  scold  \ 
'T  was  all  feigned  anger.     This  enlightened  age 
Requires  a  ruse  to  bring  one  on  the  stage. 

Well,  here  I  am,  quite  dazzled  with  the  sight 
Presented  on  this  brilliant  festal  night ! 
Where'er  I  turn  whole  rows  of  patrons  sit, 
The  house  is  full  —  box,  gallery,  and  pit ! 
Who  says  the  New- York  public  are  unkind  ? 
I  know  them  well,  and  plainly  speak  my  mind  — 
"  It  is  our  right,"  the  ancient  poet  sung  — 
He  knew  the  value  of  a  woman's  tongue! 
With  this  I  will  defend  ye  :  and  rehearse 
Five  glorious  acts  of  yours  —  in  modern  verse : 
Each  one  concluding  with  a  generous  deed 
For  Payne  and  Dunlap,  Cooper,  Knowles,  Placide ! 


62 


'T  was  nobly  done,  ye  patriots  and  scholars, 

Besides  —  they  netted  twenty  thousand  dollars! 

"  A  good,  round  sum,"  in  these  degenerate  times  — 

"  This  bank-note  world,"  so-called  in  Halleck's  rhymes; 

And  proof  conclusive,  you  will  frankly  own, 

In  liberal  action  New-  York  stands  alone. 

Upon  the  stage,  thirteen  brief  years  ago, 

Flush'd  with  the  hopes  that  ardent  bosoms  know, 

A  youth  appear'd  :  nor  friends,  nor  loud  acclaim 

Ushered  him  forth.     Unheralded  by  fame 

He  came  among  us,  with  a  taste  refined, 

A  vivid  fancy,  and  a  burning  mind  ; 

Nature  his  model,  counselor,  and  guide, 

The  goddess  found  him  ever  at  her  side. 

All  her  instructions  he  instinctive  caught, 

And  ne'er  o'erstepped  her  modesty  in  aught 

Until  the  wreath  for  which  he  strove  was  won, 

And  gay  Thalia  crowned  her  favorite  son  ! 

'T  was  then  the  public,  with  admiring  eyes, 
Saw  a  new  star  in  placid  beauty  rise 
And  take  its  place,  transcendent  and  alone, 
The  brightest  jewel  in  the  mimic  zone  ! 
Though  roams  he  oft  'mong  green,  poetic  bowers, 
The  actor's  path  is  seldom  strewn  with  flowers  ; 
His  is  a  silent,  secret,  patient  toil  — 
While  others  sleep  he  burns  the  midnight  oil, 
Pores  o'er  his  books  —  thence  inspiration  draws, 
And  wastes  his  life  to  merit  your  applause  ! 
Oh  ye,  who  come  the  laggard  hours  to  wile, 
And  with  the  laugh-provoking  muse  to  smile, 


Remember  this ;  the  mirth  that  cheers  you  so 

Shows  but  the  surface  —  not  the  depths  below ! 

Then  judge  not  lightly  of  the  actor's  art 

Who  smiles  to  please  you,  with  a  breaking  heart ! 

Neglect  him  not  in  his  hill-climbing  course, 

Nor  treat  him  with  less  kindness  than  your  horse ; 

Uphill  indulge  him  —  down  the  steep  descent 

Spare,  and  don't  urge  him  when  his  strength  is  spent ; 

Impel  him  briskly  o'er  the  level  earth, 

But  in  the  stable  don't  forget  his  worth ! 

So  with  the  actor  —  while  you  work  him  hard, 

Be  mindful  of  his  claims  to  your  regard. 

But  hold,  methinks  some  carping  cynic  here 
Will  greet  my  homely  image  with  a  sneer. 
Well — let  us  see  —  I  would  the  creature  view; 
Man,  with  umbrageous  whiskers,  is  it  you  ? 
Ah,  no,  I  was  mistaken  —  every  brow 
Beams  with  benevolence  and  kindness  now; 
Beauty  and  fashion  all  the  circles  grace  — 
And  scowling  envy  here  were  out  of  place ; 
On  every  side  the  wise  and  good  appear  — 
The  very  pillars  of  the  State  are  here ! 
There  sit  the  doctors  of  the  legal  clan, 
There,  all  the  city's  rulers,  to  a  man; 
Critics  and  editors  and  learned  M.  D.'s, 
Buzzing  and  busy,  like  a  hive  of  bees ; 
And  there,  as  if  to  keep  us  all  in  order, 
Our  worthy  friends,  the  Mayor  and  the  Recorder! 

Well,  peace  be  with  you.    Friends  of  native  worth, 
Yours  is  the  power  to  call  it  into  birth; 


ii 


64 


Yours  is  the  genial  influence  smiles  upon 
The  budding  flow'rets  opening  to  the  sun, 
They  all  around  us  court  your  fostering  hand  — 
Rear  them  with  care,  in  beauty  they  '11  expand  - 
With  grateful  odors  well  repay  your  toil, 
Equal  to  those  sprung  from  a  foreign  soil ; 
And  more  Placides  bask  in  your  sunshine  then, 
The  first  of  actors,  and  the  best  of  men. 


6s 


AN  ADDRESS. 

Dec  8  Writtenby  Mr.  Hugh  Moore.  Spoken  by  Mrs.  John 

o  '     '  Greene  at  Mr.    William  Duffy  s  Benefit  at  the 

I535-  Albany  Theater. 

T^RIENDS  of  the  drama,  friends  to  every  part 
r  Of  human  action  that  improves  the  heart  — 
Friends  to  the  free-born  sentiment  that  blends 
Alike  the  names  of  rich  and  poor  as  friends  — 
While  your  good  wishes  form  a  wreath  of  smiles, 
To  cheer  us  onward  in  our  path  of  toils, 
Free  be  the  offering  that  our  feelings  lend 
The  drama's  patron  and  the  actor's  friend. 

Friends  of  the  drama,  in  the  ancient  time, 

When  fancy's  flower  bedecked  the  wings  of  rhyme, 

When  Shakspeare  flourished,  and  when  genius  hurled 

The  shafts  that  pierced  the  follies  of  the  world — 

Then  woke  the  drama  from  its  night  of  gloom  — 

A  morning  sun  beamed  o'er  a  moldy  tomb. 

Oh,  may  the  beam  thus  snatched  from  early  night 

A  beacon  serve  from  superstition's  night ! 

From  thoughts  thus  sacred  to  the  "  march  of  mind  " 
We  homeward  turn,  and  leave  an  age  behind 
Where  erst  arose  the  humble  roof,  and  where 
The  words  of  genius  wasted  on  the  air, 


66 


Now  stands  the  temple  of  the  drama's  cause  — 
Where  tyrants  tremble,  and  where  bigots  pause; 
Here,  nursed  in  friendship,  Forrest  gained  a  name 
High  in  the  niche  of  histrionic  fame, 
And  all  that  cheered  him,  in  his  lone  career, 
'T  was  thine  to  give  —  his  nature  to  revere. 
Thus  by  thy  aim  —  and  long  may  Duffy  prove 
That  sterling  talent  merits  public  love. 

Friends  of  the  drama,  in  a  scene  like  this, 
Where  patrons  smile,  all  language  proves  amiss, 
Save  the  high  tones  that  gratitude  imparts  — 
The  words  of  friendship  gushing  from  our  hearts. 
To  female  beauty,  as  the  brightest  gem 
That  throws  its  light  o'er  woman's  diadem  — 
We  proffer  virtue  —  as  the  choicest  part 
Of  modern  drama  in  the  human  heart. 
We  proffer  friendship  as  a  kind  behest, 
To  warm  the  feelings  of  the  human  breast. 
We  proffer  love  —  nay,  ladies,  do  not  start, 
'T  is  but  the  offering  of  a  grateful  heart, 
Too  full  to  give  the  sentiment  its  due, 
When  all  its  magic  beams,  at  once,  from  you. 


67 


AN  ADDRESS. 

Tulv    3  Written  by  Mr.  Edward  Johnson.     Spoken  by  Mr. 

Q  J.  M.  Field,  at  the  opening  of  the  New    St. 

l837-  Louis  Theater. 

WHEN  Freedom's  flag  was  wide  o'er  Greece  un- 
furl'd, 

And  Delphi  was  the  center  of  the  world, 
The  Drama  first  uprear'd  the  rustic  stage, 
To  smooth  the  manners  and  instruct  the  age ; 
And  though  hoar  Time  has  sped  with  ceaseless  flight, 
And  crush'd  the  splendors  of  that  age  of  light  — 
Though  the  famed  monuments  of  that  bless'd  day 
Have  fallen  to  earth,  and  molder'd  in  decay  — 
Though,  vision-like,  two  thousand  years  have  roll'd, 
And  Greece  is  not  now  what  she  was  of  old  — 
The  Drama  still,  to  kindly  feeling  true, 
Loves  the  bright  land  where  first  her  childhood  grew, 
Points  to  her  Thespis,  who,  though  rude  in  art, 
Touch'd  the  warm  feelings  of  each  generous  heart; 
To  sEschylus,  who  madden'd  while  he  sung, 
And  o'er  the  lyre  a  hand  of  frenzy  flung; 
To  Sophocles,  who,  gorgeous  and  sublime, 
Lives  to  this  day,  and  only  dies  with  Time  • 
And  to  Euripides,  whose  plaintive  song 
Seizes  the  list'ner  as  it  floats  along  — 


68 


Leaves  with  the  bosom  liquid  notes  of  woe  — 

Steals  to  the  heart,  and  makes  the  tear  to  flow ! 

Where  the  rough  Alps,  with  summits  high  and  free, 

Look  o'er  the  plains  of  fallen  Italy  — 

The  drama  there  a  look  of  pity  throws, 

For  there,  in  days  of  yore,  her  anthems  rose ; 

For  then  were  heard  the  mirth  and  laughter  loud 

When  Plautus's  muse  address'd  the  Roman  crowd ; 

When  Terence,  too,  pour'd  forth  the  comic  song, 

The  cheers  were  high  —  the  laughter  loud  and  long. 

Again  she  casts  her  searching  eyes  around : 

"  Beware  ! "  't  is  whispered,  "  this  is  holy  ground  !  " 

Why  ?    'T  is  on  Briton's  Isle  our  footsteps  stand, 

Nay,  it  is  more  —  't  is  Shakspeare's  fatherland ! 

Here  did  that  master  all  our  feelings  scan  — 

Each  nook,  each  recess  in  the  heart  of  man ; 

Here  brilliant  Sheridan  fame's  laurel  won ; 

Here,  Johnson  put  his  "  learned  buskin  "  on. 

Flush'd  with  fond  joy,  she  turns  with  rapturous  glance 

To  vine-clad  hills  and  sun-bright  vales  of  France ; 

Points  to  the  theater  with  tragic  mien, 

And  marks  the  passions  of  the  stern  Racine. 

For  those  who  pity,  and  who  kindly  feel, 

She  asks  a  tear  —  to  shed  with  "great  Corneille  f  " 

Now,  swift  across  the  Atlantic  wave  she  flies  — 

Where,  reared  'mid  wilds,  her  beauteous  domes  arise ! 

Each  hill  and  dale  her  thrilling  voice  has  heard, 

And  Forests  echo  to  the  native  Bird; 

Throughout  our  land,  where'er  she  chance  to  roam, 

She  finds  a  resting-place  —  but  here  a  home  / 


69 


We  dedicate  to  thee,  oh  !  goddess  bless'd, 

This,  \hyjirst  temple  in  the  far,  far  West  ! 

Oh  !  fondly  cherish  this  fair  house  of  thine, 

And  shed  around  thy  influence  benign. 

Let  vivid  images  of  bygone  things 

Defile  before  our  eyes  like  "  Banqurfs  kings  "  ; 

Let  Lear  again  enact  his  frantic  part, 

And  sweet  Ophelia  steal  the  hearer's  heart: 

Let  the  kind  audience  feel  a  fond  regret, 

And  weep  with  Romeo  over  Juliet  ; 

Let  Spartacus,  again  from  bondage  freed, 

Not  like  a  slave,  but  like  a  Thracian  bleed  ; 

Picture  the  scene  where  chaste  Virginia  fell, 

And  point  to  "  freedom  in  the  shaft  of  Tell!  " 

And  may  the  sylph-like  nymphs  our  joys  enhance 

By  mystic  trippings  of  the  fairy  dance 

On  Ariel's  wing,  and  soft  as  brooklet's  flow, 

Their  footsteps  falling  like  the  flakes  of  snow  — 

Let  their  lithe  forms  in  mazy  circles  run, 

And  grace  receive  —  what  Taglioni  won  ! 

Let  these  fair  walls  with  echoes  soft  prolong 

The  dulcet  gushings  of  each  soul-born  song  — 

Sweet  as  the  euphony  of  heaven's  bright  spheres 

Strike  the  bland  warblings  on  the  list'ner's  ears. 

Now  to  our  audience  —  honor'd,  learn'd,  and  gay  — 

The  humble  speaker  hath  one  word  to  say  : 

If  e'er  loathed  vice  should  rear  her  hideous  face, 

Or  in  this  tragic  fane  find  dwelling-place  — 

If  e'er  this  house  with  scullion  jesting  rings, 

Or  desecrated  be  to  sinful  things, 


7° 


Let  the  bold  actor  his  presumption  rue  — 
Be  cursed  the  player  and  his  temple  too. 
But  if  the  muse,  enlighten'd,  never  strays 
Far  from  the  pleasant  path  of  virtue's  ways, 
Then  shall  fair  learning  sanctify  this  dome, 
And  joy  and  science  fix  their  lasting  home  — 
The  tragic  muse  shall  high  her  scepter  rear  — 
The  sternest  eye  shall  glitter  with  a  tear. 
Mild  Thalia,  too,  shall  all  our  griefs  beguile, 
And  from  the  lips  of  sorrow  steal  a  smile. 
The  rudest  hearts  shall  feel  the  genial  power, 
And  future  ages  bless  this  natal  hour ! 
Then  o'er  the  player  be  your  kindness  shed, 
Pour  out  a  golden  shower  upon  his  head ; 
And  may  this  house  be  ever  richly  bless'd, 
And  stars  arise  hereafter  in  the  West/ 


AN  ADDRESS. 

Dec     7  Written  by  Mr.  Alfred  B.  Street.    Spoken  by  Mr. 

'  Collenburne  at  the  opening  of  the  Dallius  Street 

l84°-  Amphitheater,  Albany. 

TO  lift  from  age  Time's  burden  for  a  while, 
And  light  the  brow  of  manhood  with  a  smile, 
Repress  the  tear  and  hush  the  sorrowing  sigh, 
And  bid  mirth  sparkle  in  the  youthful  eye ; 
With  Pleasure's  golden  pinions  plume  the  hours, 
And  muffle  their  quick  feet  with  thornless  flowers ; 
Display  the  wondrous  strength  and  grace  that  Heaven 
To  this  proud  fabric  of  the  soul  has  given  — 
The  sway  despotic,  human  reason  wields  — 
The  tame  submission  brutish  instinct  yields ; 
These  are  our  objects.    Is  a  guerdon  due  ? 
Kindness  and  favor  then  we  ask  of  you. 

Round  the  wide  arena  now  the  fiery  steed 

Loos'd  from  his  thraldom,  bounds  with  headlong  speed, 

Free  seems  he  as  the  tempest,  yet  a  rein 

Is  o'er  him,  stronger  than  the  weightiest  chain ; 

An  eye  and  voice  whose  slightest  glance  and  sound 

Plant  him  a  breathing  statue  on  the  ground, 

Eager  and  watchful ;  then  their  different  sway 

Shoots  him  again,  an  arrow  on  his  way. 

With  a  light  leap  as  upward  borne  on  wings, 

To  the  fleet  courser's  back  his  rider  springs ; 

12 


72 


Around  —  around  —  the  flying  Centaur  skims, 

And  to  the  sight  in  dizzy  circles  swims  ; 

Now  on  his  surging  pedestal  unchecked, 

Whirling  along,  the  rider  stands  erect  ; 

Pois'd  with  stretched  arms,  now  leans,  with  sudden 

bound, 

Now  to  the  eye  another  change  is  found  ; 
Then,  leaping  o'er  some  barrier  in  his  way, 
Regains  his  platform  like  a  bird  its  spray, 
While  the  gay  harlequin  in  motley  drest, 
Draws  the  loud  laugh,  with  gambol  quaint  and  jest. 

Fancy  flies  back  to  those  old  classic  days 

Which  witnessed  Greece  in  glory's  brightest  blaze  ; 

That  purple  clime,  once  Freedom's  proudest  dower, 

Cradle  of  Arts,  the  Muses'  greenest  bower, 

Again  the  amphitheater  displays 

Its  splendid  pomp  to  Athens'  crowded  gaze  ! 

Tier  upon  tier  of  animated  life 

To  view  the  struggling  race  —  the  wrestling  strife  — 

The  strong  athlete  grasps  sinewy  foe, 

Muscle  strains  muscle  —  blow  succeeds  blow  — 

The  foaming  courser  whirls  the  chariot  on, 

And  the  green  laurel  crowns  the  triumph  won. 

Thus  do  we  strive  your  cheering  smiles  to  gain 

With  anxious  efforts  —  shall  we  strive  in  vain  ? 

To  cast  bright  drops  in  life's  dark  chalice,  ours  ; 

To  deck  earth's  desert  with  a  few  sweet  flowers  ; 

Yours  be  the  meed  that  all  our  toil  repays 

Our  gladdening  laurel-wreath,  the  bounty  of  your  praise. 


73 


PROLOGUE  TO  NATURE'S  NOBLEMAN. 

October  n          Written  by  Mr.  Henry  Oake  Pardey.     Spoken  by 
'     ''  Mr.    William  E.  Burton,  at  Burton's   Theater, 

1 °5 1 '  Chambers  Street,  New-York. 

T\ESPONDING  critics  oft  of  late  presage 

\J  The  closing  of  the  histrionic  page. 

They  mourn  that  Shakspeare,  e'en,  has  lost  his  power; 

That  Sheridan  has  strutted  out  his  *  hour.' 

Does  not  great  Horace  Greeley  plainly  say, 

We  've  grown  too  wise  and  good  to  need  '  the  play '  ? 

That  mind  and  heart  disdain  the  drama's  rule, 

And  study  's  needless  in  the  scenic  school  ? 

Thespians  arouse !  and  tell  th'  erratic  sage, 

Firm  as  his  printing  press  we  '11  keep  the  stage. 

The  drama  languishes.     Let  us  detect  — 
Polonius  like  — '  the  cause  of  this  defect.' 
'T  is  certain  that  the  sprightliest  tongue  must  fail 
To  win  attention  to  an  '  oft  told  tale.' 
We  cannot  ever  with  «  crook'd  Richard  '.  fight, 
Or  weep  with  Desdemona,  every  night; 
And  even  cloying  is  the  luscious  sack, 
If  we  too  often  sip  with  '  burly  Jack ' ; 
Nor,  every  week,  will  people  take  the  trouble 
To  witness  Hecate's  cauldron  hiss  and  bubble  ] 


74 


Nor  can  we,  as  we  have  done,  hope  to  draw 
Still  on  <  The  Rivals,'  or  '  The  Heir  at  Law.' 
We  've  seen  sly  Jack  his  father's  anger  rouse ; 
We  Ve  heard  Lord  Dowlas  tutored  by  his  spouse. 
Old  English  comedy  should  now  give  way ; 
It  has,  like  Acres'  '  dammes,'  had  its  day. 
Hang  up  bag-wigs  —  our  study  now  should  be 
The  men  and  the  moustachios  that  we  see. 
Let  us  some  pictures  of  the  time  provide ; 
Let  the  pen,  practically,  be  applied ! 

Or,  shall  we  seek  our  stores  beyond  the  main, 
When  literary  freedom  we  may  gain  ? 
'  London  Assurance '  why  should  we  endure  ? — 
Our  own  assurance  should  be  'doubly  sure  ' ! 
The  doting  Baronet  or  flimsy  Peer 
Need  not,  exclusively,  be  mirrored  here. 
Why  should  the  theme  of  our  dramatic  sports 
Be  the  amours  of  kings,  th'  intrigues  of  courts  ? 
Can  we  an  interest  for  our  stage  command 
With  fancies  wove  by  transatlantic  hand? 
Thus  shadowing  forth '  the  forms  of  things  unknown  '- 
Painting  all  character,  except  our  own  ? 

Perhaps  some  of  my  auditors  will  cry, 
Such  reasoning  as  this  will  ill  apply, 
When  a  high-sounding  title  you  display 
In  this  your  so-called  genuine  native  play ! 
Suspend  your  censures  —  you  shall  be  assured 
We  '11  make  a  good  use  of  our  English  Lord. 
Who  knows  but  in  the  pressure  of  our  scene 
We  '11  make  him  bend  to  a  Columbian  queen  ? 


75 


Peer  as  he  is,  we  '11  try  and  make  the  man, 
By  far  the  better  half,  republican  ! 

Do  not  our  author's  anxious  toil  despise  : 
Judge  less  by  what  he  does  than  what  he  tries, 
Two  hours  your  patience  —  then  decide  his  right 
To  have  and  hold  his  title  of  to-night, 


76 


AN  ADDRESS. 

Dec.    2O  Spoken,  and  probably  "written,  by  Mme.  Julia  de 

1 8  C  2  Marguerittes  at  the  reopening  of  the  Green  Street 

Theater,  Albany. 

TV  1 ETHOUGHT  my  task  accomplished— but  I  find 

IVl  The  part  most  difficult  remains  behind. 

As  yet  unseen  have  I  my  work  performed — 

By  Science  guided, 'by  Ambition  warmed; 

But  now,  I  must  produce  myself,  poor  me, 

Who  hath  not  skill,  nor  science,  as  you  see. 

'T  was  easy  to  explore  the  realms  of  taste, 

Thence  to  evoke  the  temple  you  have  graced. 

The  Golden  Wand  its  magic  spell  hath  wrought, 

Behold !  in  these  bright  forms  survive  my  thought. 

And  now  I  come  to  consecrate  the  shrine  — 

To  you  I  give  it  —  't  is  no  longer  mine. 

I  would  but  welcome  those  benignant  powers 

That  blessed  the  drama  in  its  brighter  hours. 

Once  more  let  beauty  condescend  to  smile 

On  the  brief  pageant  and  the  gorgeous  wile; 

Once  more  let  gallantry  with  sense  unite, 

And  cheer  us  ever,  as  you  've  cheered  to-night ; 

And,  if  some  shadows  o'er  this  picture  fall, 

The  sunshine  of  your  smiles  will  brighten  all. 


77 


AN  ADDRESS. 

Dec.  27,  Read  by  Miss  Keene  at  the  opening  of  Laura  Keene's 

1855.  Varieties,  Neiv-York. 

ONCE  more  surrounded  by  my  early  friends, 
On  whom  each  hope  of  fair  success  depends  ; 
I  feel  impelled  —  though  some  may  deem  me  vain  — 
To  cry  with  joy,  "  Laura's  herself  again !  " 
Night  after  night,  while  toiling  in  the  cause 
For  others'  good,  your  generous  applause 
Made  study  pleasure,  labor,  something  dear, 
Cherished  ambition,  and  extinguished  fear. 
Now,  for  myself,  I  try  my  mimic  skill, 
Anxious  my  boxes  (play  and  cash)  to  fill. 
Will  you  assist  me  with  your  generous  aid? 
If  so,  a  grateful  debtor  twice  you've  made. 
What  shall  I  promise  ? — That  all  things  shall  be  done, 
Or  new  or  old  e'er  seen  beneath  the  sun. 
Make  up  a  pie-crust  batch,  profoundly  spoken, 
To  bear  the  proverb  out  —  both  made  but  to  be  broken. 
Declare  the  patent  cull'd  from  every  land 
Shall  at  your  nod  combined  before  you  stand. 
Oh,  no;  excuse  me;  spite  of  the  classic  rhymes, 
Which  form'd  addresses  in  dull,  good,  old  times, 
I'll  try  the  railroad  pace  of  this  our  age, 
And  hurry  up  by  steam  their  slow-coach  stage, 


7s 


Variety  is  life's  best  spice,  folks  say  — 

That  be  my  aim  —  my  motto,  "  Ever  gay." 

Not  here  shall  tragic  muse  with  tearful  eyes, 

And  heaving  breasts  replete  with  anguished  sighs, 

Gaze  on  her  dagger  and  her  fatal  cup 

As  if  about  on  poison  still  to  sup  — 

No  —  if  she  come,  unless  we  toil  in  vain, 

We  '11  fill  her  poison  cup  with  mirth's  champagne  ; 

With  muses'  spells  make  glad  each  list'ning  ear, 

And  dance  with  flying  feet  away  from  care  ; 

Do  all  we  can  to  drive  life's  gloom  away, 

And  end  with  joy  the  labors  of  the  day. 

Give  welcome  to  you  all.     Then  let  me  ask, 

Ladies,  your  smiles  to  cheer  our  willing  task  ; 

And  you  —  good  gracious  !  what  a  palpitation 

I  feel  before  you,  lords  of  the  creation  ! 

Excuse   me  —  was    ever   anything   much    more    un 

lucky  ?  — 

I  have  no  smelling  salt,  or  e'en  a  decent  bouquet, 
Therefore  take  pity  on  my  sad  complaint. 
You  see  - 

I  must  proceed  ;  with  feelings  truly  Keene 
I  ask  your  presence  at  our  festive  scene; 
An  anxious  suppliant  before  you  stands  — 
Shall  I  succeed  ?     That  splendid  show  of  hands 
Removes  all  doubt.  Armed  in  Hope's  fear-proof  mail 
I  feel,  indeed,  there  's  no  such  word  as  —  fail. 


79 


AN  ADDRESS. 

Written  by  Judge  Conrad,  and  read  by  Miss  Caro- 
1858.  line  Richings    at  the  opening  of  the  Philadel 

phia  Academy  of  Music. 

WHEN  Time  was  young,  and  Music's  spell  't  is 
said 

Moved  stones  and  trees,  and  ev'n  recalled  the  dead ; 
Then  (when  the  poet's  dreams  were  sooth),  the  lyre 
Once  bade  a  city's  prostrate  walls  aspire ; 
Quick  throbs  the  granite  rock  —  a  living  thing ; 
The  ruins  tremble  with  the  trembling  sting ; 
They  move,  responsive  to  the  lyre's  command ; 
They  form,  they  rise,  a  towery  wall  they  stand. 
Such  power  had  Music's  self!     But  lo !    A  thought  — 
Her  shadow — here  a  mightier  work  hath  wrought; 
Spells  of  the  past  here  bade  the  walls  arise, 
While  list'ning  Hope  lean'd  o'er  with  glad  surprise. 
Soon  towers  the  dome  —  the  temple  soon  expands, 
For  thousand  needs  quick  meet  a  thousand  hands ; 
The  purpose  planned,  't  is  jostled  by  the  deed, 
And  wonder  on  wonder  crowds  with  eager  speed ; 
'T  is  done,  and  nobly  done !     Exulting  art 
Smiles  o'er  the  pile,  so  perfect  in  each  part : 
Wide  and  harmonious,  as  bright  Music's  reign, 
Her  newest  triumph  lights  her  noblest  fane  : 
Long  may  it  stand ! — long  yield  the  tribute  due 
To  art,  to  joys  reproachless  —  and  to  you. 
13 


so  <©cca£ional 


Music,  whose  hymns  the  stars  of  morning  sung, 
Ere  the  sweet  spheres  by  Discord's  hands  were  wrung  ; 
Whose  rules  great  Kepler  in  the  planets  saw, 
And  knew  in  them  the  universal  law  — 
The  law  by  which  the  stars  their  orbits  sweep, 
And  quivering  worlds  their  course  in  concert  keep. 
Music,  whose  code  by  bright  ^Egea's  tide 
(So  Plato  tells)  overruled  all  codes  beside. 
For  Athens  trembled  o'er  the  Lydian  lute, 
And  Sparta  battled  to  the  soft-voiced  flute  ; 
Music  !  whose  boundless  wealth,  like  day,  can  give 
At  large,  unlessen'd  unto  all  who  live  ; 
Costless,  yet  priceless  ;  free  as  ocean's  wave, 
Alike  to  Fortune's  darling  and  her  slave  ; 
The  peasant's  joy,  it  thrilled  Arcadia's  sky; 
The  poet's  bliss,  it  lighted  Milton's  eye  ; 
The  courtier's  grace,  't  was  gallant  Raleigh's  pride  ; 
The  lover's  voice,  so  burning  Sappho  sighed  ; 
The  warrior's  summons  :  when  'mid  Alpine  snows 
Gaul's  quick  strength  faltered  and  her  hot  blood  froze  — 
When  squadrons  fainting,  paused,  or  stark  and  stiff, 
Toppled  to  gulfy  death  far  down  the  cliff; 
Sudden,  Napoleon  bids  the  war  charge  sound, 
And  wild  and  high,  the  glaciers  echo  round  — 
They  start,  they  burn  ;  their  nerves  are  fire  again  — 
They  win  the  height,  to  conquer  on  the  plain  ! 
Music  !  which  sins  not,  cannot  fail  nor  fade, 
Exalter,  friend,  consoler,  soother,  aid  ! 
Here,  in  her  temple,  we  her  altars  rear, 
And  service  meet,  hearts,  hopes  —  all  offer  here. 


81 


Nor  sole,  though  regnant,  here  our  sovereign  sway 
The  Drama,  too,  shall  know  its  better  day. 
Bright  in  the  splendor  of  immortal  youth, 
Rich  in  rare  wisdom,  poetry,  and  truth; 
What  though  her  mirror  darkling  mists  distain, 
Clear  but  the  surface,  it  will  shine  again  — 
Shine  with  the  wild  and  weird-like  glory  shed 
By  poet-seers,  the  myriad-minded  dead. 

In  such  a  home,  where  ardent  service  tends, 
Where  wealth  is  zealous,  and  where  worth  befriends, 
No  more  shall  scenes  unmeet  the  stage  profane, 
Nor  vice,  nor  folly,  steal  into  her  train. 
Afar  the  tastes,  which  with  her  genius  war, 
The  sullying  jest,  the  sordid  taint,  afar. 
The  drama  here  in  vestal  fame  shall  live, 
And  crave  no  triumph  virtue  cannot  give. 

As  when  the  morn  on  Memnon's  marble  shone, 
The  marble  warm'd,  breathed  music's  sweetest  tone, 
So  in  your  kindling  smiles  our  dawn  will  break, 
And  music  here  in  grateful  witchery  wake, 
The  buskin'd  muse  with  solemn  step  descend, 
And  their  sweet  spells  the  arts  and  graces  lend. 
We  of  our  temple  proud,  our  triumph  too  — 
Proud  of  our  cause  —  and  patrons,  proud  of  you, 
Will  call  up  worlds  of  faery  —  pure  and  bright 
With  genius,  wit,  worth,  melody,  delight  — 
While  white-rob'd  Virtue,  from  her  sacred  throne, 
Smiles  o'er  the  scene,  and  claims  it  as  her  own  1 


82 


A   PRIZE   POEM. 

Feb    Q  Written  by  Mr.  Henry   Timrod.    Spoken  by  Mr. 

" '  Walter  Keeble  at  the  Opening  of  the  New  Theater 

I°03.  at  Richmond,  Virginia. 

A  FAIRY  ring 
Drawn  in  the  crimson  of  a  battle-plain  — 
From  whose  weird  circle  every  loathsome  thing 
And  sight  and  sound  of  pain 
Are  banished,  while  about  it  in  the  air, 
And  from  the  ground,  and  from  the  low-hung  skies, 
Throng,  in  a  vision  fair 
As  ever  lit  a  prophet's  dying  eyes ; 
Gleams  of  that  unseen  world — 
That  lies  about  us,  rainbow-tinted  shapes 
With  starry  wings  unfurled, 
Poised  for  a  moment  on  such  airy  capes 
As  pierce  the  golden  foam 
Of  sunset's  silent  main  — 
Would  image  what  in  this  enchanted  dome 
Amid  the  night  of  war  and  death 
In  which  the  armed  city  draws  its  breath, 
We  have  built  up ! 
For  though  no  wizard  wand  or  magic  cup 


The  spell  hath  wrought, 

Within  this  charmed  fane  we  ope  the  gates 

Of  that  divinest  Fairy-land, 

Where  under  loftier  fates 

Than  rule  the  vulgar  earth  on  which  we  stand, 

Move  the  bright  creatures  of  the  realm  of  thought. 

Shut  for  one  happy  evening  from  the  flood 

That  roars  around  us,  here  you  may  behold — 

As  if  a  desert  way 

Could  blossom  and  unfold 

A  garden  fresh  as  May  — 

Substantialized  in  breathing  flesh  and  blood, 

Souls  that  upon  the  poet's  page 

Have  lived  from  age  to  age, 

And  yet  have  never  donned  this  mortal  clay. 

A  golden  strand 

Shall  sometimes  spread  before  you  like  the  isle 

Where  fair  Miranda's  smile 

Met  the  sweet  stranger  whom  the  father's  art 

Had  led  unto  her  heart, 

Which,  like  a  bud  that  waited  for  the  light, 

Burst  into  bloom  at  sight ! 

Love  shall  grow  softer  in  each  maiden's  eyes 

As  Juliet  leans  her  cheek  upon  her  hand 

And  prattles  to  the  night. 

Anon,  a  reverend  form, 

With  tattered  robe  and  forehead  bare, 

That  challenge  all  the  torments  of  the  air, 

Goes  by! 

And  the  pent  feelings  choke  in  one  long  sigh, 


While,  as  the  mimic  thunder  rolls,  you  hear 

The  noble  wreck  of  Lear 

Reproach  like  things  of  life  the  ancient  skies, 

And  commune  with  the  storm ! 

Lo !  next  a  dim  and  silent  chamber  where, 

Wrapt  in  glad  dreams,  in  which,  perchance,  the 

Moor 

Tells  his  strange  story  o'er, 
The  gentle  Desdemona  chastely  lies, 
Unconscious  of  the  loving  murderer  nigh. 
Then  through  a  hush  like  death 
Stalks  Denmark's  mailed  ghost ! 
And  Hamlet  enters  with  that  thoughtful  breath 
Which  is  the  trumpet  to  a  countless  host 
Of  reasons,  but  which  wakes  no  deed  from  sleep ; 
For  while  it  calls  to  strife, 
He  pauses  on  the  very  brink  of  fact 
To  toy  as  with  the  shadow  of  an  act, 
And  utter  those  wise  saws  that  cut  so  deep 
Into  the  core  of  life  ! 

Nor  shall  be  wanting  many  a  scene 
Where  forms  of  more  familiar  mien, 
Moving  through  lowlier  pathways,  shall  present 
The  world  of  every  day, 
Such  as  it  whirls  along  the  busy  quay, 
Or  sits  beneath  a  rustic  orchard  wall, 
Or  floats  about  a  fashion-freighted  hall, 
Or  toils  in  attics  dark  the  night  away. 
Love, — hate, — grief, — joy, — gain, —  glory, — shame 
shall  meet, 


As  in  the  round  wherein  our  lives  are  pent ; 

Chance  for  a  while  shall  seem  to  reign, 

While  Goodness  roves  like  Guilt  about  the  street, 

And  Guilt  looks  innocent. 

But  all  at  last  shall  vindicate  the  right, 

Crime  shall  be  meted  with  its  proper  pain 

Motes  shall  be  taken  from  the  doubter's  sight, 

And  Fortune's  general  justice  rendered  plain. 

Of  honest  laughter  there  shall  be  no  dearth; 

Wit  shall  shake  hands  with  humor  grave  and  sweet, 

Our  wisdom  shall  not  be  too  wise  for  mirth, 

Nor  kindred  follies  want  a  fool  to  greet. 

As  sometimes  from  the  meanest  spot  of  earth 

A  sudden  beauty  unexpected  starts, 

So  you  shall  find  some  germs  of  hidden  worth 

Within  the  vilest  hearts ; 

And  now  and  then,  when  in  those  moods  that  turn 

To  the  cold  Muse  that  whips  a  fault  with  sneers, 

You  shall,  perchance,  be  strangely  touched  to  learn 

You  've  struck  a  spring  of  tears  ! 

But  while  we  lead  you  thus  from  change  to  change 

Shall  we  not  find  within  our  ample  range 

Some  type  to  elevate  a  people's  heart  — 

Some  hero  who  shall  teach  a  hero's  part 

In  this  distracted  time  ? 

Rise  from  thy  sleep  of  ages,  noble  Tell ! 

And  with  the  Alpine  thunders  of  thy  voice 

As  if  across  the  billows  unenthralled 

Thy  Alps  unto  the  Alleghanies  called, 

Bid  Liberty  rejoice ! 

Proclaim  upon  this  transatlantic  strand 


86 


The  deeds,  which  more  than  their  own  awful  mien 

Make  every  crag  of  Switzerland  sublime ! 

And  say  to  those  whose  feeble  souls  would  lean 

Not  on  themselves,  but  on  some  outstretched  hand — 

That  once  a  single  mind  sufficed  to  quell 

The  malice  of  a  tyrant;  let  them  know 

That  each  may  crowd  in  every  well-aimed  blow, 

Not  the  poor  strength  alone  of  arm  and  brand, 

But  the  whole  spirit  of  a  mighty  land. 

Bid  Liberty  rejoice !     Aye,  though  its  day 

Be  far  or  near,  these  clouds  shall  yet  be  red 

With  the  large  promise  of  the  coming  ray. 

Meanwhile,  with  that  calm  courage  which  can  smile 

Amid  the  terrors  of  the  wildest  fray, 

Let  us  among  the  charms  of  Art  awhile 

Fleet  the  deep  gloom  away ; 

Nor  yet  forget  that  on  each  hand  and  head 

Rest  the  dear  rights  for  which  we  fight  and  pray. 


87 


EPILOGUE    TO  THE   GOOD-NATURED 

MAN. 

-»«•  Written  by  Mr.  William  Winter  for  Mr.  Augustin 

*      3i  Daly's  revival  of  the  piece,  at  the  Fifth  Avenue 

1870.  Theater,  New-York. 

SIR  WILLIAM  HONEYWOOD  : 

OLD  custom  bids  (we  '11  not  forego  it  quite) 
An  epilogue  —  before  we  say  good-night ; 
In  which  the  player,  anxious  o'er  his  task, 
Your  cheer  would  crave,  your  kindly  verdict  ask ; 
For  that  reward  he  's  not  ashamed  to  sue; 
What  true  good-nature  is  he  'd  learn  from  you. 
Speak  your  kind  hearts  with  hands  as  kind  —  because 
The  play  ends  well  that  ends  in  your  applause. 

LOFTY : 

For  kindly  conduct  there  's  a  simple  rule  — 
The  man  who  serves  another  is  a  fool. 
A  benefactor  be,  with  shrewd  pretense, 
And  help  yourself  to  all  —  except  expense. 
Intrude;  presume;  and  let  your  skill  be  shown 
In  minding  all  men's  business  but  your  own. 
Life  never  has  the  interest  that  appears 
When  one  has  set  his  neighbors  by  the  ears. 
That  true  good- nature  is,  beyond  a  doubt  — 
Unless  the  benefactor  gets  found  out. 


88  ©ccagional 


CROAKER : 

I  am  the  most  good-natured  man  on  earth ; 
But  true  good-nature  is  not  found  in  mirth  ; 
I  hate  a  rattle-brain.     Give  me  the  man 
Who  trouble  sees  before  his  neighbor  can  — 
And  gives  him  warning.     That  's  the  gracious  way  — 
And  just  as  good  in  life  as  in  a  play. 
Hang  grumbling  bores  !     But  sure  it  is  not  rash 
To  indicate  th'  inevitable  smash. 
All   's  well  to-night;    but,  three  months  hence,  you 
know  — 

Mrs.  CROAKER: 

Where  there  's  a  corn-field  always  there  's  a  crow ! 
Good  things  grow  better  by  a  natural  law, 
Though  forty  thousand  croaking  ravens  caw. 
Good-nature  makes  a  banquet  of  a  crust ; 
Aye  —  notwithstanding  man  must  turn  to  dust. 
A  cheerful  heart,  however  life  may  fare, 
Makes  gladness  gladder,  lightens  every  care. 
My  doctrine  's  simple,  but 't  is  very  human, 
And  means  contentment  both  for  man  and  woman. 

LEONTINE  : 

Love  needs  good-nature  most  —  and  all  the  more 
Because,  except  to  lovers,  't  is  a  bore. 
Parents  and  guardians,  take  a  hint  from  this  ! 
Don't  see  the  young  ones  when  they  want  to  kiss ; 
Don't  know  what  game  's  afoot !    You  're  just  as  wise 
As  though  you  always  used  your  ears  and  eyes. 


Let  things  drift  on,  the  way  they  used  to  do 
When  you  were  young  and  love  was  young  with  you. 
You  strolled,  by  starlight,  under  summer  trees, 
And  Cupid  used  to  purr  — 

CROAKER : 

And  used  to  sneeze. 

OLIVIA  : 
None  but  a  bear  love's  privilege  would  stint ! 

LEONTINE  : 
I  honor  wisdom  and  observe  your  hint. 

(Salutes  OLIVIA.) 

Mr.  HONEYWOOD  : 

My  views  't  were  vain  to  state,  because  the  play 
Has  shown  them  wrong  and  swept  them  quite  away. 
I  Ve  learned  that,  to  be  happy,  one  must  show 
The  rare  and  precious  talent  to  say  no. 
But  sure  a  man  with  such  a  prize  as  this 

(To  Miss  RICHLAND.) 
Good-natured  must  be  —  in  excess  of  bliss. 
How  to  be  genial  sure  he  need  not  ask, 
Since  to  be  otherwise  would  be  the  task. 
In  this  discussion,  then,  I  '11  take  no  part; 
Fate  saves  me  all  the  trouble  at  the  start. 

Miss  RICHLAND: 

A  kind  good-night !     But,  ere  we  part,  I  'd  say  — 
One  loving  thought  to  him  who  wrote  the  play  ! 


9o 


That  rare,  sweet  genius,  great  among  the  great, 

Who  humbly  wrought,  and  kept  no  pompous  state  ; 

The  good,  true  heart,  the  noble,  gentle  mind, 

That  blessed  his  age,  and  lives  to  bless  mankind. 

He  sowed  the  seeds  of  kindness  everywhere 

With  the  unconscious  bounty  of  the  air. 

In  him  love,  beauty,  mirth,  forbearance  blent, 

And  Heaven  disclosed  what  true  good-nature  meant. 


THE  POOR  PLAYER  AT  THE  GATE. 

Written  and  spoken  by  Mr.  George  Vandenhoff  for 
Jan.    19,  21,  the  Holland  Testimonial  at  Wallack's  Theater, 

1871.  the  Fifth  Avenue  Theater,  Niblo's  Theater,  and 

the  Academy  of  Music. 

WISELY  good  Uncle  Toby  said  : 
"  If  here  below  the  right  we  do, 
'T  will  ne'er  be  ask'd  of  us  above, 

What  coat  we  wore,  red,  black,  or  blue." 

At  Heaven's  high  chancery  gracious  deeds 

Shall  count  before  professions, 
And  humble  virtues,  clad  in  weeds, 

Shall  rank  o'er  rich  possessions. 

So  the  poor  player's  motley  garb, 

If  truth  and  worth  adorn  it, 
May  pass  unchallenged  through  the  gate, 

Though  churls  and  bigots  scorn  it. 

The  Lord  of  Love,  the  world's  great  Light, 

Made  Publicans  his  care, 
And  Pharisees  alone  demurred 

That  such  his  gifts  should  share. 


92 


But  still  he  held  his  gracious  way 
Soothing  the  humblest  mourner, 

Nor  ever  bade  one  sinner  seek 
For  comfort  "  round  the  corner." 

The  woman  that  in  sin  was  ta'en, 
Bowed  down  with  guilt  and  shame, 

Found  pity  in  that  breast  divine 
That  knew  no  taint  of  blame. 

The  Pharisees  all  gathered  round 
To  taunt,  revile,  and  stone  her, 

He  bade  her  "  go  and  sin  no  more  "  ; 
His  mercy  would  atone  her, 

He  raised  from  death  the  widow's  son, 
Nor  ask'd  his  trade,  profession  ; 

Enough  for  him  a  mother's  faith 
In  his  divine  compassion. 

He  healed  the  palsied,  halt,  and  blind, 

Nor  left  one  heart  forlorner  j 
He  never  bade  them  go  and  find 

A  doctor  —  "  round  the  corner." 

Some  modern  saints  too  dainty  are 

To  walk  in  paths  like  these  ; 
They  'd  lock  the  gates  of  heaven  on  woe, 

If  they  but  held  the  keys. 


93 


The  widow's  friend  asks  prayers  o'er  him 
From  whom  death's  hand  has  torn  her  ; 

The  saintly  man  refers  him  to 

"  The  small  church  round  the  corner." 

What  is  there  in  the  player's  art 
Should  close  the  fount  of  love  ? 

He  who  on  earth  plays  well  his  part 
May  hope  a  seat  above. 

The  lessons  he  has  wreathed  with  smiles, 
The  hearts  his  mirth  made  lighter 

Shall  plead  like  angels'  tongues  for  grace, 
And  make  his  record  brighter  ! 

And  though  not  nearest  to  the  Throne, 
Yet  sure  the  lowliest  born,  or 

The  actor  in  the  veriest  barn, 
May  find  in  heav'n  a  corner. 

All  honor  to  the  little  church, 

And  to  its  gracious  pastor, 
Who  in  his  heart  the  lessons  kept 

Taught  by  his  heav'nly  Master  ! 

And  when  this  fleeting  scene  is  past 
To  sinner,  saint,  and  scorner, 

Let  's  hope  we  All  may  find,  at  last, 
A  bright  home  round  the  corner  ! 


94 


OPENING  ADDRESS. 

-p.  Written  by   General  C.    C.    Van  Zandt,  for   the 

'  **  opening  of  the  Providence  Opera  House.     Spoken 

l87J-  by  Mr.  E.  L.  Tilton. 

BRIGHT,  fairy  Puck!  swifter  than  rifle-shot, 
Put  round  the  earth  thy  girdle,  spun  of  light, 
And  tie  it  in  a  jeweled  lovers'  knot ! 

There  by  the  footlights  —  on  the  stage  to-night 
'Tis  done  !  it  swings  as  musical  as  chimes 

Of"  sweet  bells,"  never  "jangling  out  of  tune," — 
A  star-beam  ladder !  how  the  fairy  climbs 

To  dress  his  elf-locks  in  the  mirror  moon ! 
Now,  Puck !  leap  down  ;  don't  bump  your  little  head 

On  the  proscenium ;  you  may  break  a  bone, 
Or  singe  your  silver  wings,  or  worse,  instead, 

B  flat  by  falling  in  the  big  trombone ; 
Here,  take  my  hand,  stretch  up  on  your  tip-toe, 

Stop  winking  at  the  girls  —  the  men  will  hiss  ! 
You've  lived  forever  !  now  I  want  to  know 

What  Roger  Williams  would  have  thought  of  this  ? 
Why,  when  he  landed  on  the  Seekonk  shore 

The  Indians  said  "  What  Cheer?"  and  it's  but  fair 
To  think  if  he  was  with  us  now  once  more, 

He'd  say  "  I'll  take  the  best  orchestra  chair/  " 
For,  after  his  long  life,  so  orthodox, 

His  very  bones  don't  fill  a  private  box. 


95 


Yet  I  believe  that  stalwart  Baptist  bore 

Wit,  brightening  wisdom,  'neath  his  thatch  of  gray, 
And  would  have  loved  the  stage,  and  cried  encore  ! 

Although  he  traveled  in  another  way, 
Never  by  stage  —  but  made  tracts  on.  the  shore. 

Come,  Puck!    trot  out  your  memories  from  their 

cloisters, 
These  opening  nights  are  death  to  rhymes  and  oysters. 

Throwing  up  his  dimpled  heels, 
Turning  somersaults  and  wheels, 
Every  feather  in  his  wings, 
Like  a  song-bird  trills  and  sings ; 
Dancing  eyes,  like  diamonds  bright, 
Tangled  curls  of  sunrise  light ; 
Teeth  as  white  as  snow-drops  are. 
Laugh  like  music  from  a  Star ; 
Cheeks  as  red  as  sunset  hue, 
Breath  like  violets  wet  with  dew,  — 
Little  Puck  paints  fair  and  fast 
Mystic  pictures  from  the  past. 

My  Lords  and  Ladies, —  for,  upon  my  word, 
Each  Yankee  is  a  lady  or  a  lord,  — 
The  night  was  dark,  a  gale  was  rising  fast, 
And  Newport's  spires  quivered  in  the  blast, 
When  in  a  little  building  by  the  shore, 
Half  deafened  by  the  equinoctial  roar, 
A  band  of  players  from  across  the  sea 
Acted  a  queer,  old-fashioned  comedy  — 
Giving  their  earnings  to  sweet  charity. 


96 


There  first  upon  our  fields  the  buskin  trod, 

Where  beaded  moccasins  had  pressed  the  sod. 

And  there,  a  century  since,  the  fair  Muse  bore 

Her  first  glad  offspring  on  New  England's  shore. 

Your  city  has  a  pleasant  pictured  page 

In  history  for  her  annals  of  the  stage, 

Radiant  with  stars.     How  brilliant  seems,  forsooth, 

The  kingly  splendor  of  the  elder  Booth, 

Whether  with  tragedy  he  rent  the  air, 

Or  with  a  tender  pathos,  rich  and  rare, 

Gave  a  new  music  to  the  Lord's  own  prayer  ! 

Old  men  are  living  now  who  loved  to  meet 

George  Frederick  Cooke  upon  the  busy  street, 

Heard  Hackett  roar  in  Falstaff,  or  perchance, 

Finn  flash  his  wit's  electric-pointed  lance  ; 

Saw  Charles  Kean's  Hamlet,  and  young  Forrest's  Lear 

And  mad  Joe  Cowell  play  his  pranks  so  queer; 

Heard  Conway's  voice,  who  sleeps  beneath  the  wave, 

Or  Hazard's  fire,  quenched  in  an  early  grave, 

Or  Charlotte  Cushman  seem  the  blood  to  freeze 

In  gaunt,  prophetic,  weird  Meg  Merrillies. 

Here  Taglioni  whirled  in  fire-fly  maze, 

Madame  Augusta  flashed  between  the  plays, 

Or  Fanny  Ellsler's  sweet  bewitching  glance 

Made  hearts  beat  cadence  to  her  airy  dance. 

And  later  still,  came  Howard,  Forbes,  and  Drew  ; 

The  Palmer's  grassy  mound  is  wet  with  dew; 

Old  Pardey's  nights  were  crowned  with  an  encore, 

And  Varrey  "  set  the  tables  on  a  roar." 

Grace  strode  the  stage  superbly,  rich  in  health, 

Now  he  lies  palsied  —  aid  him  from  your  wealth  ! 


97 


Three  times  the  Fire  Fiend  flung  his  blazing  torch 

Against  the  lintels  of  the  Thespian  porch  ; 

Three  times  the  Drama  sank  in  dark  eclipse, 

The  rosy  fruit  was  ashes  on  the  lips  ! 

A  truce  to  memories  !  we  have  come  to-night 

With  bursts  of  music  and  a  flood  of  light, 

To  dedicate  to  th'  Histrionic  Muse 

This  splendid  temple.     Not  alone  we  choose 

To  garland  her  white  limbs  and  crown  her  head 

With  flowers  plucked  from  the  past,  but  we  instead 

Would  nightly  on  this  mimic  stage  rehearse 

Great  thoughts  embalmed  in  purest  prose  and  verse, 

And  elevate  the  drama  from  a  trade 

To  what  it  was  when  Shakspeare  wrote  and  played  ; 

Call  a  glad  smile  to  lips  grown  white  with  care; 

Show  virtue  radiant  as  she  is  fair  ; 

Act  comedies,  culled  from  "  the  golden  age  "  ; 

Retouch  with  living  hues  each  master's  page; 

Call  Garrick's  spirit  from  across  the  sea, 

And  Siddons,  stately  Queen  of  Tragedy. 

Then  Science,  Art,  the  Drama,  linked,  will  stand 

The  Sister  Graces  of  this  Western  Land. 


A  PARLEY  BEFORE  THE  PLAY. 

Opening  address  written  by  Mr.   William   \Vinter. 
Sept.  9,  for  Mr.  A.  R.  Samuellss  New  Park   Theater, 

1873.  Brooklyn.    Mr.    Thomas  B.  Morris,  Manager. 

(Not  delivered.) 


T 


A 

HE  flowers  are  culled  to  deck  another  shrine. 


B 
Which  means  —  the  cards  are  cut  to  make  a  deal. 

A 
There  is  a  hint  of  slang  in  that  bad  line. 


But  slang  is  what  the  people  like  and  feel. 
No  talk  of  flowers  or  bowers  is  needed  here; 
No  costly  wine,  but  only  simple  beer. 


That 's  a  mistake.     The  time,  perhaps,  has  been 
When  Brooklyn  looked  on  drama  as  a  sin ; 
When,  rapt  in  decorous  sanctity,  this  town 
Gave  the  poor  Thespian  nothing  but  a  frown; 
But,  stronger  since  in  liberal  virtue  grown  ; 
She  knows  his  worth  and  makes  his  cause  her  own ; 


99 


And  where  your  simple  beer  might  once  have  hit 
The  taste  of  sinners,  parching  in  the  pit, 
You  '11  find  (or  falsely  all  experience  paints), 
A  different  drink  is  relished  by  the  saints. 


I  stand  rebuked.     But  what  I  meant  to  say 

Is  that  plain  words  are  best  about  the  play. 

The  flowers  of  fact  are  well  —  but  flowers  of  speech 

Are  things  beyond  the  common  public  reach. 

The  public  wants  to  know,  in  language  plain, 

In  what  way  Morris  means  to  entertain. 


He  means  —  if  so  much  truth  may  here  be  told  — 

Chiefly  to  entertain  the  public  gold. 

He  courts  "  returns  " ;  he  does  not  care  for  bays ; 

He  wants  "  the  solid  pudding,"  not  the  praise. 

Give  him  full  benches  and  full  coffers  too, 

And  all  is  done  that  he  desires  to  do. — 

I  hope  these  words  impress  the  common  ear 

As  wholly  practical,  precise,  and  clear. 


They  do.     But  much  I  grieve  your  sapient  mind 

Should  deem  no  worthier  enterprise  designed 

In  these  fair  walls,  by  taste  and  beauty  reared 

To  all  by  genius  given  and  time  endeared. 

Our  theater,  certain,  must  be  made  to  pay, 

And  with  that  view  he  '11  "  catch  the  nearest  way  " : 

But  —  reared  in  days  when  worth  and  wit  were  prized, 

And  courtly  manners  had  not  been  despised : 


100 


One  of  the  good  old  school  that  made  the  stage 

A  mirror  and  a  teacher  of  its  age  — 

Our  Morris,  yielding  every  point  he  can 

To  modern  whim,  will  keep  his  simple  plan  — 

And  be  both  manager  and  gentleman. 

A 

Your  thought  is  kind  and  your  reproof  is  fair ; 
But  what  I  meant,  in  taking  on  this  air 
Of  worldly  wisdom,  merely  was  to  pay 
Due  deference  to  the  doctrine  of  the  day. 
That  doctrine  is  (I  do  not  think  it  nice) 
"  Success  is  all !     Succeed,  at  any  price  !  " 
Not  ours  the  error,  and  not  ours  the  shame  ! 
For  public  wrong  the  public  is  to  blame. 


True !     And  within  these  walls  't  is  understood 
That  a  good  public  seeks  the  public  good. 

A 

Here  let  all  harmless  pleasure  be  combined 
With  noble  lessons  for  the  heart  and  mind. 


Here  let  no  vicious  revelry  pollute, 

By  making  youngsters  wish  to  "  follow  suit  "  ; 

No  vulgar  sin,  well  glossed  with  specious  guile, 

Be  made  angelic,  in  the  Gallic  style; 

No  coarse  parade  of  beauties  unrefined 

Mock  the  ideals  of  the  modest  mind, 


Nor  sap  the  spring  that  sanctifies  this  earth  — 
A  manly  reverence  for  woman's  worth ! 


But,  in  their  place  be  shapes  and  words  of  power ; 

Heroes  and  heroines  of  the  olden  time ; 
The  living  manners  of  the  passing  hour; 

The  frolic  Foote,  and  Shakspeare  the  sublime  ; 
The  Irish  wit,  that  sparkles  as  it  flies ;     ' 

The  mirth  of  France,  that  bubbles  through  the  foam  ; 
The  heartsome  English  thought,  that  never  dies; 

Beauty  of  Greece,  and  pageantry  of  Rome  : 
The  growth  of  culture  in  our  own  fair  land; 

The  darts  of  mind,  through  war  and  tumult  hurled ; 
And  —  sword  and  lily  in  her  conquering  hand  — 

Art  crowning  labor,  in  the  western  world ! 

B 

With  these  if  Morris  strive  to  entertain, 
His  worthy  work  should  not  be  done  in  vain. 
'T  is  yours  to  crown,  or  to  withhold  the  meed ; 
Doom  us  to  fail,  or  cheer  us  to  succeed. 
Accept  our  efforts,  therefore,  to  be  true 
To  our  beloved  art,  ourselves,  and  you ! 
Kindle  a  flame  from  this  suggestive  spark, 
And  make  a  bright  renown  for  Brooklyn's  Park. 


102 


AN  ADDRESS. 


Dec    3  Written  by  Dr.  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes.    Spoken  by 

Miss  Fanny  Morant  at  the  opening  of  Daly's  New- 
1873.  pijtfr  Avenue  Theater,  New-  York. 


HANG  out  our  banners  on  the  stately  tower  ! 
It  dawns  at  last  —  the  long-expected  hour! 
The  steep  is  climbed,  the  star-lit  summit  won, 
The  builder's  task,  the  artist's  labor  done; 
Before  the  finished  work  the  herald  stands, 
And  asks  the  verdict  of  your  lips  and  hands  ! 

Shall  rosy  daybreak  make  us  all  forget 

The  golden  sun  that  yester-evening  set  ? 

Fair  was  the  fabric  doomed  to  pass  away 

Ere  the  last  headaches,  born  of  New-  Year's  day. 

With  blasting  breath  the  fierce  destroyer  came 

And  wrapped  the  victim  in  his  robes  of  flame  ; 

The  pictured  sky  with  redder  morning  blushed, 

With  scorching  streams  the  naiad's  fountain  gushed, 

With  kindling  mountains  glowed  the  funeral  pyre, 

Forests  ablaze  and  rivers  all  on  fire,  — 

The  scenes  dissolved,  the  shriveling  curtain  fell,  — 

Art  spread  her  wings,  and  sighed  a  long  farewell  ! 

Mourn  o'er  the  player's  melancholy  plight  — 
Falstaffin  tears,  Othello  deadly  white  — 


103 


Poor  Romeo  reckoning  what  his  doublet  cost, 
And  Juliet  whimpering  for  her  dresses  lost  — 
Their  wardrobes  burned,  their  salaries  all  undrawn, 
Their  cues  cut  short,  their  occupation  gone  ! 
"  Lie  there  in  dust,"  the  red-winged  demon  cried, 
"  Wreck  of  the  lordly  city's  hope  and  pride  !  " 
Silent  they  stand,  and  stare  with  vacant  gaze, 
While  o'er  the  embers  leaps  the  fitful  blaze; 
When,  lo  !  a  hand  before  the  startled  train 
Writes  in  the  ashes  :  "  It  shall  rise  again, 
Rise  and  confront  its  elemental  foes  !  " 
The  word  was  spoken,  and  the  walls  arose, 
And  ere  the  seasons  round  their  brief  career 
The  new-born  temple  waits  the  unborn  year. 

Ours  was  the  toil  of  many  a  weary  day, 
Your  smiles,  your  plaudits  only  can  repay  ; 
We  are  the  monarchs  of  the  painted  scenes, 
You,  you  alone  the  real  kings  and  queens  ! 
Lords  of  the  little  kingdom  where  we  meet, 
We  lay  our  gilded  scepters  at  your  feet, 
Place  in  your  grasp  our  portal's  silvered  keys, 
With  one  brief  utterance  :  "  We  have  tried  to  please." 
Tell  us,  ye  sovereigns  of  the  new  domain, 
Are  you  content  —  or  have  we  toiled  in  vain  ? 

With  no  irreverent  glances  look  around 
The  realm  you  rule,  for  this  is  haunted  ground  ! 
Here  stalks  the  Sorcerer,  here  the  Fairy  trips, 
Here  limps  the  Witch  with  malice-working  lips, 


16 


The  Graces  here  their  snowy  arms  entwine, 
Here  dwell  the  fairest  sisters  of  the  Nine, — 
She  who,  with  jocund  voice  and  twinkling  eye, 
Laughs  at  the  brood  of  follies  as  they  fly ; 
She  of  the  dagger  and  the  deadly  bowl, 
Whose  charming  horrors  thrill  the  trembling  soul; 
She  who,  a  truant  from  celestial  spheres, 
In  mortal  semblance  now  and  then  appears, 
Stealing  the  fairest  earthly  shape  she  can  — 
Sontag  or  Nilsson,  Lind  or  Malibran ; 
With  these  the  spangled  houri  of  the  dance  — 
What  shaft  so  dangerous  as  her  melting  glance, 
As  poised  in  air  she  spurns  the  earth  below, 
And  points  aloft  her  heavenly-minded  toe  ! 

What  were  our  life,  with  all  its  rents  and  seams, 
Stripped  of  its  purple  robes,  our  waking  dreams  ? 
The  poet's  song,  the  bright  romancer's  page, 
The  tinseled  shows  that  cheat  us  on  the  stage 
Lead  all  our  fancies  captive  at  their  will ; 
Three  years  or  threescore,  we  are  children  still  — 
The  little  listener  on  his  father's  knee 
With  wandering  Sinbad  plows  the  stormy  sea, 
With  Gotham's  sages  hears  the  billows  roll, 
Illustrious  trio  of  the  venturous  bowl, 
Too  early  shipwrecked,  for  they  died  too  soon 
To  see  their  offspring  launch  the  great  balloon ; 
Tracks  the  dark  brigand  to  his  mountain  lair, 
Slays  the  grim  giant,  saves  the  lady  fair, 
Fights  all  his  country's  battles  o'er  again, 
From  Bunker's  blazing  height  to  Lundy's  Lane ; 


105 


Floats  with  the  mighty  captains  as  they  sailed 
Before  whose  flag  the  flaming  red  cross  paled, 
And  claims  the  oft-told  story  of  the  scars, 
Scarce  yet  grown  white,  that  saved  the  Stripes  and 
Stars ! 

Children  of  later  growth,  we  love  the  play, 
We  love  its  heroes,  be  they  grave  or  gay, 
From  squeaking,  peppery,  devil-defying  Punch 
To  roaring  Richard  with  his  camel-hunch ; 
Adore  its  heroines,  those  immortal  dames, 
Time  's  only  rivals,  whom  he  never  tames, 
Whose  youth,  unchanging,  lives  while  thrones  decay 
(Age  spares  the  Pyramids  —  and  Dejazet) ; 
The  saucy-aproned,  razor-tongued  soubrette, 
The  blonde-haired  beauty  with  the  eyes  of  jet, 
The  gorgeous  Beings,  whom  the  viewless  wires 
Lift  to  the  skies  in  strontian-crimson  fires, 
And  all  the  wealth  of  splendor  that  awaits 
The  throng  that  enters  those  Elysian  gates. 

See  where  the  hurrying  crowd  impatient  pours, 
With  noise  of  trampling  feet  and  flapping  doors, 
Streams  to  the  numbered  seat  each  pasteboard  fits, 
And  smooths  its  caudal  plumage  as  it  sits ; 
Waits  while  the  slow  musicians  saunter  in, 
Till  the  bald  leader  taps  his  violin, 
Till  the  old  overture  we  know  so  well, 
Zampa,  or  Magic  Flute,  or  William  Tell, 
Has  done  its  worst  —  then  hark !  the  tinkling  bell ; 
The  crash  is  o'er  —  the  crinkling  curtain  furled, 
And  lo  !  the  glories  of  that  brighter  world  ! 


(Concluded  by  Mr.  FRANK  HARDENBURG.) 

Behold  the  offspring  of  the  Thespian  cart, 
This  full-grown  temple  of  the  magic  art, 
Where  all  the  conjurers  of  illusion  meet, 
And  please  us  all  the  more,  the  more  they  cheat. 
These  are  the  wizards,  and  the  witches  too, 
Who  win  their  honest  bread  by  cheating  you 
With  cheeks  that  drown  in  artificial  tears 
And  lying  skull-caps  white  with  seventy  years, 
Sweet-tempered  matrons  changed  to  scolding  Kates, 
Maids  mild  as  moonbeams  crazed  with  murderous 

hates, 

Kind,  simple  souls  that  stab,  and  slash,  and  slay, 
And  stick  at  nothing,  if  it 's  in  the  play  ! 

Would  all  the  world  told  half  as  harmless  lies ! 
Would  all  its  real  fools  were  half  as  wise 
As  he  who  blinks  through  dull  Dundreary's  eyes ! 
Would  all  the  unhanged  bandits  of  the  age 
Were  like  the  peaceful  ruffians  of  the  stage ! 
Would  all  the  cankers  wasting  town  and  State, 
The  mob  of  rascals,  little  thieves  and  great, 
Dealers  in  watered  milk  and  watered  stocks, 
Who  lead  us  lambs  to  pasture  on  the  rocks  — 
Shepherds — Jack  Shepherds — of  their  city  flocks — 
The  rings  of  rogues  that  rob  the  luckless  town, 
Those  evil  angels  creeping  up  and  down 
The  Jacob's  ladder  of  the  treasury  stairs  — 
Not  stage,  but  real  Turpins  and  Macaires  — 
Could  doff,  like  us,  their  knavery  with  their  clothes, 
And  find  it  easy  as  forgetting  oaths ! 


107 


Welcome,  thrice  welcome,  to  our  virgin  dome, 
The  Muses'  shrine,  the  Drama's  new-found  home  ! 
Here  shall  the  Statesman  rest  his  weary  brain, 
The  worn-out  Artist  find  his  wits  again  ; 
Here  Trade  forget  his  ledger  and  his  cares, 
And  sweet  communion  mingle  Bulls  and  Bears  ; 
Here  shall  the  youthful  lover  nestling  near 
The  shrinking  maiden,  her  he  holds  most  dear, 
Gaze  on  the  mimic  moonlight  as  it  falls 
On  painted  groves,  on  sliding  canvas  walls, 
And  sigh,  "  My  angel  !     What  a  life  of  bliss 
We  two  could  live  in  such  a  world  as  this  !  " 
Here  shall  the  tumid  pedants  of  the  schools, 
The  gilded  boors,  the  labor-scorning  fools, 
The  grass-green  rustic  and  the  smoke-dried  cit 
Feel  each  in  turn  the  stinging  lash  of  wit, 
And  as  it  tingles  on  some  tender  part 
Each  finds  a  balsam  in  his  neighbor's  smart  — 
So  every  folly  prove  a  fresh  delight 
As  in  the  pictures  of  our  play  to-night. 

Farewell  !    The  players  wait  the  prompter's  call  ; 
Friends,  lovers,  listeners  !    Welcome,  one  and  all  ! 


SALVE,  REGINA! 

Written  by  Mr.  Richard  Henry  Stoddard.     Spoken 

NOV.    7,  by  Mr.  Charles  Roberts,  on  the  occasion  of  Miss 

j  g  fj  A  Charlotte  Cushman 's  Farewell,  at  Booth' s  Theater, 


New-York, 


T 


HE  race  of  greatness  never  dies ; 
Here,  there,  its  fiery  children  rise, 
Perform  their  splendid  parts, 
And  captive  take  our  hearts. 


Men,  women,  of  heroic  mold 
Have  overcome  us  from  of  old ; 

Crowns  waited  then,  as  now, 
For  every  royal  brow. 

The  victor  in  the  Olympian  games  — 
His  name  among  the  proudest  names 
Was  handed  deathless  down : 
To  him  the  olive  crown. 

And  they,  the  poets,  grave  and  sage, 
Stern  masters  of  the  tragic  stage, 
Who,  moved  by  art  austere 
To  pity,  love,  and  fear, — 


109 


To  these  was  given  the  laurel  crown, 
Whose  lightest  leaf  conferred  renown 
That,  through  the  ages  fled, 
Still  circles  each  gray  head. 

But  greener  laurels  cluster  now, 
World-gathered,  on  his  spacious  brow, 
In  his  supremest  place, 
Greatest  of  their  great  race,  — 

Shakspeare  !     Honor  to  him,  and  her 
Who  stands  his  grand  interpreter, 

Stepped  out  of  his  broad  page 

Upon  the  living  stage. 

The  unseen  hands  that  shape  our  fate 
Molded  her  strongly,  made  her  great, 

And  gave  her  for  her  dower 

Abundant  life  and  power. 

To  her  the  sister  Muses  came, 

Proffered  their  masks,  and  promised  fame  : 

She  chose  the  tragic  —  rose 

To  its  imperial  woes. 

What  queen  unqueened  is  here  ?   What  wife, 
Whose  long  bright  years  of  loving  life 
Are  suddenly  darkened  ?     Fate 
Has  crushed,  but  left  her  great. 


no 


Abandoned  for  a  younger  face, 

She  sees  another  fill  her  place, 

Be  more  than  she  has  been — 
Most  wretched  wife  and  queen ! 

O  royal  sufferer !  patient  heart ! 

Lay  down  thy  burdens  and  depart : 

"  Mine  eyes  grow  dim.     Farewell." 
They  ring  her  passing  bell. 

And  thine,  thy  knell  shall  soon  be  rung, 
Lady,  the  valor  of  whose  tongue, 
That  did  not  urge  in  vain, 
Stung  the  irresolute  Thane 

To  bloody  thoughts,  and  deeds  of  death  — 

The  evil  genius  of  Macbeth ; 

But  thy  strong  will  must  break, 
And  thy  poor  heart  must  ache. 

Sleeping,  she  sleeps  not;  night  betrays 
The  secret  that  consumes  her  days. 
Behold  her  where  she  stands, 
And  rubs  her  guilty  hands. 
• 

From  darkness,  by  the  midnight  fire, 
Withered  and  weird,  in  wild  attire, 
Starts  spectral  on  the  scene 
The  stern  old  gipsy  queen. 


in 


She  croons  his  simple  cradle  song, 
She  will  redress  his  ancient  wrong — 
The  rightful  heir  come  back 
With  Murder  on  his  track. 

Commanding,  crouching,  dangerous,  kind, 
Confusion  in  her  darkened  mind, 
The  pathos  of  her  years 
Compels  the  soul  to  tears. 

Bring  laurel !     Go,  ye  tragic  Three, 

And  strip  the  sacred  laurel  tree, 
And  at  her  feet  lay  down 
Here,  now,  a  triple  crown. 

Salve,  Regina!     Art  and  song, 
Dismissed  by  thee,  shall  miss  thee  long, 
And  keep  thy  memory  green  — 
Our  most  illustrious  Queen. 


112 


EPILOGUE  TO  OUR  BOYS. 

Written  by  Mr.  John  Brougham,  and  spoken  at  the 
Oct.  23,  end  of  the  first  production  in  New-York  of  Mr. 

1871;.  H.   J.  Byron's  "Our  Boys,"  at  Daly's  Fifth 

Avenue  Theater. 

MIDDLEWICK  (to  SIR  GEOFFREY  confidentially). 
Our  children,  sir,  are  ticklish  things  to  handle  ; 
They  can't  be  molded  as  you  would  a  candle. 
We  were  both  wrong ;  with  customers  like  these 
The  bullyragging  system  ain't  the  cheese. 
When  we  first  twigged  as  they  was  going  to  slope, 
We  should  have  tried  the  vally  of  soft  soap. 

SIR  GEOFFREY. 

Ah,  well !  the  past  is  gone  beyond  excuse ; 

This  lesson,  though  severe,  will  be  of  use. 

Privation  only  heightens  future  joys ; 

Let 's  hope  't  will  bring  success  to  both  "  Our  Boys !  " 


AN  ADDRESS. 

M  a  V  2  8  Written  by  Mr.  George  H.  Jessop,  for  the  Dedication 

of  Baldwin's  Opera  House,  San  Francisco,  Cali- 
I"77-  fornia.     Read  by  Mr.  Henry  Edwards. 

THALIA  wept  so  many  bitter  tears 
When  Shakspeare's  spirit  winged  to  other  spheres, 
And  "  Jonson's  learned  sock,'?  untimely  doffed, 
Was  banished  from  the  stage  it  trod  so  oft, 
That  Congreve's  sallies  could  not  quite  console, 
And  Wycherley  but  stained  the  Muse's  stole ; 
Vanbrugh's  broad  humor  had  too  coarse  a  touch, 
From  Farquhar's  jests  she  turned  to  hide  her  blush, 
And  e'en  when  Brinsley  Sheridan  essayed 
To  flash  his  sparkle  o'er  the  pensive  maid, 
She  only  turned  her  graceful  head  aside  — 
"  Alas  !  with  Shakspeare  comedy  has  died." 

Be  thankful,  ye  who  loved  the  comic  mask, 
That  Sheridan  relinquished  not  his  task; 
That,  when  an  unappreciative  town 
Turned  from  the  doors,  and  coughed  "  The  Rivals  " 

down, 

One  partial  failure  led  not  to  despair  — 
The  path  was  open  and  the  field  was  fair ; 
Another  comedy  the  wit  essayed, 
A  graceful  one  —  it  cheered  the  drooping  maid  — 


This  year  of  grace  't  is  just  one  hundred  years 
Since  "  School  for  Scandal "  dried  the  Muse's  tears 
And  fair  Thalia  saw,  with  smiling  eyes, 
Another  school  of  comedy  arise. 

Columbia's  tears,  a  hundred  years  ago, 
Kissed  dry  by  Washington,  had  ceased  to  flow ; 
The  weary  chances  of  a  fearful  war, 
Its  trials  and  its  triumphs  were  not  o'er, 
But  victory  was  hovering  o'er  the  land 
Drawn  down  resistless  by  a  master  hand; 
And  oceans,  rivers,  continents,  and  isles 
Brightened  with  joy,  and  rippled  into  smiles. 

Thalia  looked  across  the  western  sea 
And  saw  her  smiles  returned  with  sympathy  ; 
The  clash  of  weapons  faint  and  fainter  grew, 
The  scenes  of  tragedy  became  more  few. 
"  Come,"  said  the  Muse,  "  the  din  of  death  is  o'er, 
And  peace  is  settling  on  yon  western  shore  — 
Yon  shore,  the  first  to  greet  my  new-born  smiles 
While  frowns  still  lowered  on  these  gloomy  isles; 
There  shall  Thalia  with  her  drama  roam, 
There  shall  she  found  her  temple,  make  her  home." 
So  spoke  the  Muse,  and,  gently  wafted  o'er, 
Lighted,  all  radiant,  on  Columbia's  shore. 
Here  the  free  homage  that  our  country  pays 
To  wit  and  beauty,  wreathed  the  ready  bays, 
And  blent  their  emerald  with  her  locks  of  gold 
And  made  her  welcome  warm  and  manifold ; 
Till,  in  America,  a  world  surprised 
Beheld  the  Comic  Muse  acclimatized. 


Hers  was  no  passing  visit :  she  brought  o'er 
The  choicest  favorites  of  her  repertoire, 
She  brought  them  all — Noll  Goldsmith,  rare  old  Ben, 
And  her  last  choice  and  greatest,  Sheridan. 
The  lightest  spirits,  culled  from  every  age, 
Donned  the  bright  sock  and  gaily  trod  our  stage. 

Years  passed,  and  o'er  the  land  from  east  to  west 
The  Muse's  fame  is  everywhere  confessed; 
Temples  have  risen  hallowed  to  her  name, 
Worthy  high  priests  have  well  upheld  her  fame. 
What  fragrant  incense  burned  before  her  shrine 
When  Wallack's  genius  fed  the  flame  divine, 
What  pathos,  blending  with  his  quiet  wit  — 
A  mirthful  ripple  with  a  tear  in  it  — 
Made  Rip  Van  Winkle's  quaintnesses  enthrall, 
And  Jefferson  the  favorite  of  all. 
How  oft  have  Fox's  drolleries  appealed 
To  lips  but  late  from  Burton's  laughter  sealed, 
Nor  e'er  appealed  in  vain  •  and,  ah !  how  few 
Who  e'er  have  seen  him  can  forget  John  Drew! 
And  one  kind  face  and  sympathetic  tone 
Blend  with  the  brightest  memories  we  own, 
Collecting  all  the  wit  that  moves  the  spheres 
Unto  their  fabled  laughter  for  our  ears, 
L'Allegro's  self,  the  deadliest  foe  of  gloom, 
The  friend  of  all  the  world  beside  —  John  Brougham. 

Nor,  gentle  Muse,  doth  thine  own  charming  sex 
Disdain  to  grace  the  wit  that  it  respects, 
Since  Caroline  Chapman's  mingled  grace  and  power 
Made  thy  halls  bright  with  gladness  many  an  hour, 


116 


And  Sophy  Edwin,  mourned  and  loved  so  much, 
Whose  native  archness  could  amuse  and  touch 
Both  pleasantly  and  gently ;  nor  must  we 
Forget  our  favorite,  whom  we  still  may  see, 
And  will  see  often  ornament  this  stage, 
Whose  sprightly  humor  trips  ahead  of  age  — 
Oh,  Muse  !  't  is  sure  thou  art  not  far  removed 
From  real  goodness,  since  thou  art  beloved 
By  Mrs.  Judah  !     Blessed  be  the  art 
Whose  best  exponent  has  so  kind  a  heart; 
And  now,  to-night,  high  priestess  of  thy  fame, 
Louisa  Drew,  the  heiress  of  thy  name, 
How  many  a  golden  moment  in  its  flight 
She  grasped,  and,  in  thy  service,  turned  to  light! 
By  that  rare  alchemy  thou  'st  left  on  earth 
Whose  touch  transmutes  our  sadness  into  mirth. 

Worthy  such  temples  to  thy  mirthful  state, 
Worthy  such  priests  thy  shrines  to  consecrate, 
Worthy  thine  honors,  growing  year  by  year, 
Thalia,  Muse  of  Mirth,  be  present  here ! 
One  laurel  from  the  circlet  on  thy  brow 
Hang  in  this  home  we  offer  to  thee  now. 
Teach  us  to  speak,  since  liking  liking  moves, 
As  Shakspeare  would  be  spoke  by  one  he  loves ; 
Show  us  the  smile  thou  suffered'st  to  appear 
When  Sheridan  poured  courtship  in  thine  ear; 
Thy  glamour  spread  through  boxes  and  through  aisles, 
Till  pleasure  dimples  every  face  with  smiles, 
And  all  this  theater,  from  pit  to  dome, 
Charm  with  thy  presence,  for  it  is  thy  home  — 


117 


A  home  not  all  unworthy  of  thy  heart, 

The  brightest  jewel  of  the  builder's  art, 

The  fairest  shrine  thy  lovers  could  devise 

Wherein  to  offer  thee  thy  sacrifice. 

Deign  but  a  glance — are  not  the  colors  bright? 

Smile  but  upon  them  —  they  will  live  in  light ; 

A  home,  fair  Muse,  to  which  thou  well  may'st  bring 

Thy  drama's  heroes  and  thy  drama's  king. 

And  you,  kind  friends,  whose  welcome  presence 

shows 

Concurrence  in  the  efforts  we  propose, 
May  those  your  kindly  faces  often  grace, 
And  grace  with  joy,  the  rarely  vacant  place  ! 
Will  you  not  greet  Thalia  as  she  comes, 
And  give  a  thousand  ringing  "  Welcome  homes  !  " 
And  say  to  us,  when  tinkling  prompter's  bell 
Shows  what  we  've  done,  that  we  have  done  it  well. 
Here,  to  the  portals  of  the  Golden  Gate, 
Where  life  is  throbbing  strong  in  this  young  State  — 
The  youngest,  fairest  daughter  of  the  earth  — 
Youth's  best  prerogative  we  bring  you  —  mirth. 
Apollo's  bow  is  not  forever  bent, 
Joy's  Easter  day  must  alternate  with  Lent; 
Come,  smiling  faces  and  applauding  palms, 
Come,  wit  and  mirth,  the  sad  heart's  only  balms, 
Have  welcome  and  good  wishes  in  your  eyes, 
And  keep  them  there  to  see  the  curtain  rise, 
For,  Muse,  to-night  we  dedicate  to  thee 
This  as  thy  western  home  of  sterling  comedy ! 


AN  ADDRESS. 

Tulv  17  Written  and  read  by  Mr.  Daniel  O'Connell  at  a 

•^      '      ' '  farewell  benefit  given  to  Mr.  Henry  Edwards  at 

1878.  ffo  Grand  Opera  House,  San  Francisco. 

DEAR  friend,  kind  friend,  and  must  we  say  farewell, 
And  break  that  circle,  Harry,  which  so  long 
Has  held  us,  brother,  in  its  present  spell 
A  lovely,  faithful,  merry-hearted  throng  ? 

Death  claims  his  own.  We  mourn,  we  pray,  and  trust, 
And  softly  praise  the  dead,  but  yet  we  know 

When  nature  summons  us  again  to  dust, 

We  too,  along  the  drear,  dark  path  must  go. 

But  when  we  feel  that  though  the  sun-rays  fall 
Upon  us  living,  though  when  stars  are  bright 

We  gaze  above  and  say,  "  He  now  sees  all 
The  mellow  beauty  of  this  summer's  night." 

Still  he  is  absent,  and  his  cheery  voice 
Is  lost  to  us,  as  if  our  friend  were  dead, 

Though  we  may  grieve  and  we,  perchance  rejoice, 
And  he  rejoice  while  we  are  sad  instead. 


We  know  not,  for,  alas  !  between  us  lies 
A  barrier  our  thoughts  alone  may  span, 

What  matter  to  us  stars  or  glowing  skies, 
Since  we  have  lost,  of  men,  the  truest  man  ? 

The  circle  narrower  grows.     Ah,  what  is  wrong 
In  this  strange  world,  that  partings  are  so  rife  ? 

For  ere  are  hushed  the  echoes  of  the  song, 
There  comes  the  dirge,  and  bitterness  of  life. 

The  breeze  that  creeps  through  aisles  of  woodland 
shade, 

When  day  is  done,  bringing  delicious  balm, 
The  cooling  mist  that  freshens  all  the  glade, 

The  wave-borne  lights  that  gleam  when  seas  are  calm 

Are  grand,  rich  blessings  in  Creation's  plan, 
From  the  Beneficent  who  reigns  above. 

But  greater  is  the  love  of  man  for  man, 
The  love  exceeding  woman's  rarest  love. 

Such  is  our  love.     And  never  better  placed 
Was  man's  affection,  since  the  Persian  youth 

Beneath  the  tyrant's  footstool  strong  embraced, 
Glorying  in  death  for  friendship  and  for  truth. 

The  morning  sun  that  climbs  the  eastern  sky, 
And  fades  at  evening  in  the  crimson  west, 

Though  grand  at  noon  its  luster  to  the  eye, 
Its  last  light  is  the  fairest  and  the  best. 
18 


120 


And  thus  our  love,  in  its  meridian  heat, 
In  all  the  warmth  of  its  noontide  power, 

Has  never  seemed  so  dear,  so  sadly  sweet, 
As  in  the  twilight  of  this  parting  hour. 

And  now,  farewell.    Night  may  give  place  to  dawn, 
And  birds  sing  on,  and  Autumn  crown  the  land, 

But  what  care  we  when  you,  our  friend,  are  gone  ? 
And  but  the  last  grip  of  your  faithful  hand 

Left  as  a  memory  of  a  golden  scene, 
On  which  the  curtain  all  too  early  fell, 

The  sad  awakening  that  succeeds  the  dream 
Of  severed  ties;  farewell,  dear  friend,  farewell. 


121 


EPILOGUE  TO  NANCY  &  CO. 


May  2  Written  by  Mr.   Angus  tin  Daly.     Spoken  after 

"Nancy  &  Co."  at  the  close  of  the  season,  at 


1886. 


Daly's  Theater,  New -York. 


NANCY. 

A  SPEECH  ?     Alas  !     This  dignified  occasion 
Confuses  all  my  personal  equation ; 
You  quite  forget  we  now  should  utter  nicely 
Our  thanks  and  farewells  to  these  friends. 

GRIPPING. 

Precisely. 

A  wise  reminder,  and  most  aptly  made,  too. 
I  'd  gush  with  gratitude,  if  not  afraid  to. 
But  oratoric  shame  's  too  great  a  teaser. 

MRS.  DANGERY. 

You  might  as  well  be  silent,  Ebenezer ! 

The  fuss  and  bungling  you  have  always  shown,  sir, 

Suggest  that  you  let  bad  enough  alone,  sir ! 

CAPTAIN  VAN  RENSSELAER. 

Here  's  Keife  O'Keife ;  it  would  not  be  surprising 
If  he  were  graceful  at  extemporizing. 
Just  mention  with  what  sadness  we  are  smitten 
At  our  approaching  absence  in  Great  Britain. 


122 


DAISY. 


Say  no  unpatriotic  Anglomania 

Now  prompts  us  to  embark  on  the  Aurania. 

ORIANA. 

Say  London,  from  Belgravia  to  Old  Bailey, 
Can't  wean  us  from  New  York  and  Mr.  Daly. 


BETSY. 

Say  I  '11  be  true  !     Though  all  foine  Piccadilly 
Should  want  me  picture  as  the  New  York  Lily ! 

MRS.  DANGERY. 

Please  tell  them  my  regrets  are  far  from  cold  ones, 
For  new  friends  never  take  the  place  of  old  ones ! 

BRASHER. 

Tell  'em,  were  our  sojourn  of  long  duration, 
We  'd  turn  strikers  without  hesitation ! 

STOCKSLOW. 

Express,  I  beg,  my  little  deep  emotion 
To  cross  that  nauseating  little  ocean ! 

GRIPPING. 

Tell  them  my  loyalty  will  not  be  thinned,  sir, 
Though  asked  by  Mrs.  Guelph  to  dine  at  Windsor. 
No,  not  if  Oscar  Wilde,  with  joy  dismayed  there, 
Threw  me  a  sunflower  every  night  I  played  there ! 

O'KEIFE. 

Good  gracious !  you  perplex,  amaze  and  shake  me ! 
For  what  rare-gifted  spokesman  do  you  take  me  ? 


<©cca£ional  SBbbre&ste^  123 


I  'm  neither  poet,  orator  nor  preacher, 
I  'm  not  Bob  Ingersoll,  Mark  Twain  or  Beecher. 
But  if  you  'd  like  real  feeling  wed  with  fancy, 
I  '11  recommend  to  you  — 

BRASHER. 

Of  course,  my  Nancy ! 

Come,  Nancy,  now !    Tell  something  light  and  trippy, 
You  know  you  can.     Step  forward. 

NANCY. 

Spare  me,  Tippy ! 

My  heart 's  brimful.    Feel  how  it  beats.    Just  press  it, 
Tip,  the  good-by's  there  ! 

ALL. 
Why,  then  express  it ! 

NANCY. 

We  might  from  Greenland  stray  to  Mount  Hymettus, 

Yet  know  you  'd  never  slight  us,  or  forget  us ! 

But  if,  too  rashly  on  ourselves  relying, 

Fresh  fields  and  pastures  new  we  now  are  trying, 

If  soon  our  modest  banner  we  unfurl  in 

Fastidious  London  or  esthetic  Berlin  — 

'T  is  only  that  your  wealth  of  generous  praises 

For  foreign  conquest  our  ambition  raises. 

While  still  we  hope,  whatever  welcome  find  us, 

For  none  more  dear  than  those  we  leave  behind  us ! — 

And  now  —  not  good-by  —  au  revoir  is  better, 

You  '11  hear  from  us  each  week  or  so  by  letter ; 

And  if  we  're  found  exceptionally  able, 

No  doubt  you  '11  learn  it  all  per  ocean  cable. 


AN  ADDRESS. 


Mav  Written  by  Mr.  George  Parsons  Lathrop  for  the 

y  y    '  benefit  of  Mr.  Henry  Edwards,  at  the  Star  The- 

1         '  ater,  New-York.     Spoken  by  Miss  Maud  Banks. 

BETTER  than  regal  pomp  and  pride 
The  power  that  moves  to  tears  or  laughter ; 
The  art  whose  memories  sweet  abide 
And  make  life  rich  forever  after. 


Better  than  art,  the  soul  whose  plan 
Makes  brotherhood  the  foremost  factor : 

A  man  is  all  the  more  a  man 
Who  figures  as  a  sterling  actor. 

And  so  the  true  man  on  the  boards, 
Whate'er  he  feigns  of  smiles  or  sorrow, 

Lends  to  the  public  from  his  hoards 
More  sympathy  than  he  can  borrow. 

Such  is  the  friend  we  greet  to-night : 
Complete  in  skill  —  his  humor  blending 

With  honesty  time  wears  more  bright, 
And  geniality  unending. 


125 


There  have  been  Edwards  crowned  as  kings  ; 

And  Harrys,  too  ;  but  if  you  tarry, 
You  '11  see  this  man  whose  good  name  rings 

With  fame  of  Edwards  and  of  Harry. 

Why  should  I  lengthen  out  my  lay  ? 

I  see  you  're  bent  upon  a  moral. 
Agreed  !  But  all  I  have  to  say 

Is,  crown  him  with  your  fairest  laurel! 


AN  ADDRESS. 


Written  by  Mr.  T.   W.  Ball,  and  read  by  Mrs. 
Aug.    8,  Agnes  Booth  Schoeffel,  as  "Audrey,"  at  an  open 

1887.  air  performance  of"  As  You  Like  It,"  at  Man 

chester,  Mass. 


HERE,  by  the  margent  of  this  summer  sea, 
Befitting  place,  where  Shakspeare's  self  might 

be, 

With  the  green  sward  responsive  to  our  tread, 
This  "  brave,  o'erhanging  firmament "  o'erhead, 
Where  the  winds  whist  to  hear  our  sylvan  sport, 
Here,  where  King  Oberon  might  hold  his  court, 
I  give  you  welcome,  beauty,  youth,  and  age, 
To  this,  our  rustic  playhouse,  and  our  stage. 

In  the  great  master's  time,  who  made  our  stage 
"  Th'  applause,  delight,  the  wonder  of  his  age," 
The  playhouse  all  was  open  to  the  day ; 
We  only  follow,  where  he  led  the  way. 
And  so,  e'en  now,  with  us  shall  not  be  seen 
The  garish  lights,  the  tawdry,  painted  scene ; 
Lend  your  imagination  all  its  wings 
And  you  '11  forget  there  ever  were  such  things. 
Here  they  are  needless;  here,  where  nature  rare 
Provides  no  mimic  scene,  but  all  is  fair; 


127 


The  turf  our  stage,  the  trees  our  forestry, 
The  fleecy  clouds  our  glorious  canopy  ! 
To  read  the  master's  honeyed  page  aright 
Needs  no  deck'd  cloth,  no  meretricious  light; 
What  better  than  the  leafy  boughs,  earth's  sod, 
For  him  who  best  communed  with  nature's  God  ! 
The  toil-spent  actor,  when  his  work  is  done, 
Seeks  for  some  comfort  when  the  race  is  run  : 
Some  kind  assurance  that  his  latter  years 
Shall  not  be  bound  "  to  saucy  doubts  and  fears." 
He  's  been  a  prodigal  —  that  is  too  true, 
Yet  only  prodigal  to  pleasure  you  ; 
He  has  been  rich  in  giving  joys  to  all, 
Yet,  somehow,  wealth  came  never  at  his  call. 
Worn  out  with  service,  when  his  day  is  o'er, 
And  he  can  rove  the  drama's  fields  no  more, 
To  soothe  his  cares,  to  ease  his  bed  of  pain, 
Is  the  proud  privilege  his  brethren  claim; 
Thus,  their  life's  labors  done,  to  give  them  ease, 
We  ask  from  you,  for  whom  they  lived  to  please. 

For  my  dear  sisters,  and  my  brothers  all, 
Who  Ve  left  their  ease  in  answer  to  the  call 
Of  broad  humanity  —  your  hands  I  crave  — 
They  ministering  angels  are  who  save  ! 
Deal  kindly  with  our  faults;  we  are  but  human  — 
E'en  like  yourselves,  we  are  but  man  and  woman. 
Deep  in  your  "  heart  of  heart  "  let  us  be  sown  ; 
"  There  if  we  grow  the  harvest  is  your  own  !  " 


128 


EPILOGUE  TO  PYRAMUS  AND  THISBE. 

April  7  Written  by  Mr.   Edgar  Fawcett.      Spoken  after 

"Pyramus  and  Thisbe  "  at  the  close  of  the  season, 
l888'  at  Daly's  Theater,  New-York. 

THESEUS. 

THIS  looks  as  if  you  all  had  been  conspiring 
Against  my  late  commands  about  retiring. 
On  tough  tradition  what  bold  fool  would  break  spear 
By  thus  absurdly  amplifying  Shakspeare  ? 

HIPPOLITA. 

No  modern  scribes  can  in  their  wildest  flights  dream 
Of  giving  six  acts  to  Midsummer  Night's  Dream ! 

LYSANDER. 

Your  truth  such  verdict  it  were  rash  to  stake  on. 
What  of  some  new-found  version  by  Lord  Bacon  ? 

HERMIA. 

Bacon  ?     Oh,  no !     Our  play  has  gone  so  bonnily. 
Why  should  we  change  it  ? 

BOTTOM. 

Ask  Ignatius  Donnelly ! 

No  doubt  he  '11  give  some  cryptogramic  reason 
Why  our  sixth  act  is  not  an  act  of  treason. 


129 


QUINCE. 

Nay,  as  we  've  all  much  more  than  mere  suspicion, 
It  's  but  an  act  of —  grateful  recognition. 

FLUTE. 

You  make  us  ladies  our  quaint  robes  feel  shy  in ! 
They  're  not  the  proper  ones  to  say  good-by  in ! 

SNUG. 

What  of  us  men,  like  fancy-clad  carousers? 

No  swallow-tails,  white  ties,  or  evening  trousers  ? 

DEMETRIUS. 

Our  friends  at  this  will  surely  not  be  staggered; 
They  know  we  're  old  as  — "  She,"  by  Rider  Haggard, 
All  fresh  from  Athens,  twice  a  thousand  years  back, 
And  — 

HELENA. 

Jest  away !     It  helps  to  keep  the  tears  back ! 
These  garbs  we  wear,  though  Greek  enough  you  find 

them, 

Hide  Yankeeland  in  every  heart  behind  them! 
That  word  "  farewell,"  howe'er  our  speech  convey  it, 
Seems  more  American  the  more  we  say  it ! 
Each  year  more  bounteous  in  our  memory's  garden 
Grow  friendship's  fair  forget-me-nots!  — 

DEMETRIUS. 

Beg  pardon. 

Your  metaphor  's  a  picturesque  one,  surely ; 
But  don't  you  speak  it  somewhat  prematurely  ? 
I  hate  objections  by  the  ears  to  drag  on, 
But  — 


BOTTOM. 

Is  it  yet  quite  time  to  bring  the  "  tag  "  on  ? 
You  know  a  quorum  's  not  a  full  convention. 

HELENA. 

Forgive!— Forgive  my  dull  misapprehension 
That  I,  their  loyal  and  devout  well-wisher, 
Recalled  not  Mrs.  Gilbert,  Mr.  Fisher. 

HIPPOLITA. 
One  more ! 

THESEUS. 

Yes,  one  't  were  strange  of  us  to  slight  so ! 

DEMETRIUS. 

Bless  me  if  I  know  whom. 

HELENA. 

Our  Governor ! 

DEMETRIUS. 

Quite  so. 

BOTTOM. 

True !     He  whose  care  has  given  his  name  to 
The  Augustin  age  we  all  owe  thrift  and  fame  to ! 
Who  's  monthly,  weekly,  yes,  even  daily  near  us  — 

DEMETRIUS. 

Don't  pun  upon  his  name !     He  '11  overhear  us ! 

BOTTOM. 

Good  heavens !    Why  did  n't  some  of  you  prevent  it  ? 
Goose  that  I  was! 


DEMETRIUS. 

He  's  here  now  to  resent  it ! 

MRS.  GILBERT. 

You  see !   The  Governor  's  heard  your  conversation  ! 

MR.  FISHER. 

And  positively  boils  with  indignation  ! 

MRS.  GILBERT. 

Still,  don't  look  scared,  as  though  you  meant  dispersal, 
He  '11  save  all  scoldings  for  our  next  rehearsal. 

MR.  DALY. 

Bearded  like  Douglas  in  his  hall,  I  tender 

This  once  my  managerial  surrender ! 

My  talents,  though  you  praise  them  or  deplore  them 

Are  powers  behind  the  scenes,  but  not  before  them. 

Old  Nero  wished  the  entire  great  Roman  nation 

Had  but  one  head,  to  meet  decapitation ! 

We  wish  the  indulgent  throng  we  now  apply  to 

Had  but  one  hand  our  clasp  might  say  good-by  to ! 


132 


AN  ADDRESS. 


Written  by  Mr.    T.   W.  Ball,  and  read  by  Mrs. 
July  30,  Agnes  Booth  Schoeffel  at  an  open-air  performance 

1888.  of  "A  Midsummer  Night's  Dream"  at  Man 

chester,  Mass. 


WHAT,  Mrs.  Schoeffel!  "  cried  a  lovely  fair, 
The  freshening  sea  breeze  toying  with  her  hair : 
Health  on  her  cheek  and  beauty  in  her  eye, 
Her  form  all  grace  and  queen-like  majesty; 
"  What,  give  another  play  upon  the  green, 
And  in  the  cast  your  name  not  to  be  seen  ? 
Why,  't  is  outrageous !  "     "  Season  for  a  while 
Your  admiration,"  said  I,  with  a  smile, 
"  Though  true  it  is  no  player's  part  I  claim, 
Rest  you  assured  I  '11  get  there  just  the  same." 
And  so  I  come  before  you,  gentles  all, 
And  bid  you  welcome.     Surely  at  my  call 
You  '11  not  refuse  your  heartiest  applause 
To  those  who  labor  here  in  this  good  cause. 
You,  friends,  who  read  our  Shakspeare's  page  aright 
And  sit  in  judgment  on  us  here  to-night, 
Well  know  the  scene  of  our  midsummer  play 
Is  in  a  wood  near  Athens  made  to  lay; 
Old  Athens  then,  but  in  the  later  years 
The  "  Modern  Athens,"  peerless  among  peers, 


133 


Seeks  out  this  wood,  well  fitting,  as  I  ween, 

Again  to  reproduce  the  mimic  scene  ; 

And  you  '11  admit  —  I  see  it  in  each  face  — 

That  't  is  a  marvelous  convenient  place. 

What  is  our  object  ?     Still  as  in  the  past, 

To  help  the  needy  ;  round  pain's  bed  to  cast, 

With  tender  hopes  and  sympathetic  care, 

All  comforts  that  should  have  a  lodgment  there  ; 

Succor  the  widow  and  the  orphaned  child 

With  open  hands  and  ministrations  mild. 

And  on  life's  journey  to  the  world  above 

Twine  white-robed  charity  with  arms  of  love. 

For  this  to-night  your  presence  here  is  sought  ; 

We  barter  pleasure  for  the  aid  you  've  brought. 

Be  it  our  aim  to  fill  your  hearts  with  gladness, 

And  by  our  "  Dream  "  cause  no  midsummer  sadness. 

I,  prologue-like,  your  humble  patience  pray, 

Gently  to  hear,  kindly  to  judge,  our  play. 


AN  ADDRESS  AT  THE  PLAYERS'. 

Dec    "31  Written  by  Mr.   Thomas  \V.  Parsons.     Spoken  by 

Mr,  Lawrence  Barrett  at  the  Opening  of  The 
1555.  Players'  Club,  New-York. 

LET  us  crown  Edwin.     Though  he  wear 
The  crown  already  of  his  Art, 
Grateful  Manhattan's  mighty  mart 

May  well  a  civic  garland  spare 
For  one  who  hath  deserved  so  well 

Of  his  whole  country,  carrying  far 
And  wide  the  great  Enchanter's  spell 

Under  whose  thraldom  we  all  are. 
Yet  not  alone  his  laurel  twine 

With  civil  oak.     The  poet's  bays 
And  critic's  ivy  should  combine 

Besides,  to  speak  our  actor's  praise. 
For  he  hath  educated  men 

(Who  knew  none  other  lore  but  this), 
Making  past  history  live  again  — 

A  lofty  mark  which  many  miss ! 
Through  him  those  rough  lads  of  the  West 
That  never  slept  beneath  a  roof, 
Men  from  the  mountains,  tempest-proof, 

Gold-hunters,  rugged  and  untaught, 
Feel  Romeo's  passion  heave  their  breast, 

Or  Hamlet's  wisdom  swell  their  thought. 


135 


Even  the  great  Marlborough,  we  are  told, 

More  history  learned  from  Shakspeare's  page 
Than  Holinshed's ;  nor  seems  it  bold 

To  guess  that  many  a  sapient  sage, 
As  well  as  soldier,  may  have  known 

More  of  mankind  from  gifted  bards 
Than  chroniclers,  though  he  had  grown 

Gray  o'er  the  schoolroom's  history  cards. 

(To  the  PLAYERS.) 

Players !     I  ask  your  benison  for  this  wreath  : 
Oh,  read  the  name  that  here  is  writ  beneath 
Approvingly,  as  of  all  words  the  one 
Most  fit  to  glorify  the  sire  and  son! 
Perchance  the  coming  centuries  will  say, 
There  was  a  home  by  Massachusetts  Bay, 
Whence  children  came  to  keep  that  flame  alive 
Which  Edwin  kindled,  and  may  long  survive 
Till  each  America,  both  North  and  South, 
Shall  speak  him  honor  with  a  single  mouth, 
And  England's  language  from  the  Arctic  main 
To  San  Rosario's  watch-tower  hold  one  reign. 

(To  MR.  BOOTH.) 

Tragedian,  teacher,  take  the  crown 

Where  Love  her  myrtle  with  our  laurel  blends 
These  portals  open  to  large  troops  of  friends, 

But  I  behold,  to  cherish  thy  renown, 

A  line,  aye  stretching  as  in  Banquo's  glass, 
Of  thousands  following  after  these  do  pass. 


20 


136 


EPILOGUE  TO  THE  INCONSTANT. 


Tan     8  Written  by  Mr.  William  Winter  for  the  revival  of 

the  piece,  at  Daly's   Theater.     Spoken  by  Miss 
Ada  Rehan. 


NOTE. — Mirabels  closing  speech  is :  "  Fortune!  has  she  not  given 
me  mine  —  my  life,  my  estate,  my  all,  and,  what  is  more,  her  loyal 
self? ' '  And  as  a  reply  to  this  question  Oriana  speaks  these  lines. 


ORIANA  : 

NOT  yet !  For,  what  if  Oriana  choose 
The  crown  of  all  your  rapture  to  refuse  ? 
Through  many  a  maze  of  folly  yet  of  pain 
Her  faithful  heart  has  felt  your  gay  disdain. 
Shall  she  not  triumph  —  now  the  strife  is  o'er  — 
And  punish  him  who  vexed  her  so  before  ? 
No  !    take  her  hand.     Her  heart  has  long  been  yours. 
True  love  in  trouble  all  the  more  endures  ! 
She  '11  cling  the  closer  for  the  risk  she  braved 
And  cherish  all  the  more  the  life  she  saved. 
There  's  naught  a  loving  woman  will  not  do 
When  once  she  feels  her  lover's  heart  is  true. 


PROLOGUE  TO  THE  WIFE. 


Written  by  Mr.  George  Parsons  Lathrop.    Spoken  by 
>  Mrs.  Berlan  Gibbs,  at  the  opening  of  the  Lyceum 

0.  Theater,  New  London,  Connecticut. 


HERE  on  the  bank  side  of  the  Thames  we  meet, 
As  on  the  Bankside  Shakspeare  used  to  greet 
Old  London's  audience.     But  our  London  's  New, 
And  this  bright  theater  we  owe  to  you. 
Long  is  the  path  from  those  far  English  times 
When  the  great  drama  rang  its  morning-chimes  : 
Blackfrairs,  the  Globe,  the  Rose,  the  Swan,  the  Cur 

tain  — 

Long  since,  all  vanished.  Yet  who  doubts  't  is  certain 
That,  while  man  breathes,  new  theaters  will  rise, 
And  echo  with  new  words  'neath  New  World  skies  ? 

Good  friends,  who  come  to  us  from  work  or  home 
To  spend  with  us  an  evening,  as  we  roam,  — 
You  bring  us  life,  we  give  you  life  again  : 
Love,  laughter,  sorrow,  starry  pleasure,  pain  ; 
The  blended  hopes  and  motives  ;  all  the  gain 
Of  noble  conduct,  and  the  triumph  glorious 
Wherewith  true  hearts  may  crown  our  days  victorious. 
Your  eager  living  we  in  earnest  play, 
And  try  to  show  the  laws  your  lives  obey. 


138 


So,  when  we  leave  you,  may  our  mimic  scening 
Leave   with   you   some    fair    thought   of   life's    true 

meaning. 

Then  shall  we  be  content.     And  may  this  place 
Long  be  the  haunt  of  music,  mirth,  of  grace, 
And  worthy  actors'  art !     Thus,  when  each  year 
Rounds  out  its  term,  the  plays  enacted  here 
Shall  form  a  memory  as  of  seasons  mellow 
Still  closer  linking  fellow-man  to  fellow. 
And  when  life's  curtain  on  us  all  descends, 
As  we  have  met,  so  may  we  part  —  good  friends ! 


14  DAY  USE 

RETURN  TO  DESK  FROM  WHICH  BORROWED 

LOAN  DEPT. 

RENEWALS  ONLY— TEL.  NO.  642-3405 

This  book  is  due  on  the  last  date  stamped  below,  or 

on  the  date  to  which  renewed. 
Renewed  books  are  subject  to  immediate  recall. 


LD21A-60m-3,'70 
(X5382slO)476-A-32 


General  Library 

University  of  California 

Berkeley 


M1764S4 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 


918 
\\935 
DC 


