- - g^^=^. 


1  And  ho  called  his  ten  servants,  and  delivered  them  ten  pounds,  and  said  unto 
them,  Occupy  till  I  come.” — Luke  xix.  13. 


^fjnaSelpjna: 

CHARLES  CAMPBELL,  112  NORTH  NINTH  STREET. 
Xeto=¥ortt : 

J.  INGLIS  &  CO.,  26  COOPER  INSTITUTE. 

I860. 


-T^ 


archlve.org/delails/occupyllllicom 


nebOOryle 


“OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME. 

t 


LUKE  XIX.  11—13. 

“And  as  they  heard  these  things,  he  added  and  spake  a 
parable,  because  he  was  nigh  to  Jerusalem,  and  because 
they  thought  that  the  kingdom  of  God  should  imme¬ 
diately  appear. 

“He  said  therefore,  A  certain  nobleman  went  into  a  far 
country  to  receive  for  himself  a  kingdom,  and  to  return. 
u  And  he  called  his  ten  servants,  and  delivered  them  ten 

pounds,  and  said  unto  them,  Occupy  till  I  come.” 

■ 

Reader: — ■ 

The  words  before  your  eyes  form  an  introduction  to  the 
parable  which  is  commonly  called  the  “  Parable  of  the 
Pounds.”  They  contain  matter  which  deserves  the  prayer¬ 
ful  consideration  of  every  true  Christian  in  the  present 
day. 

There  are  some  parables  of  which  Matthew  Henry  says 
with  equal  quaintness  and  truth,  “  The  key  hangs  beside 
the  door.”  The  Holy  Ghost  himself  interprets  them. 
There  is  no  room  left  for  doubt  as  to  the  purpose  for  which 
they  were  spoken.  Of  such  parables  the  Parable  of  the 
Pounds  is  an  example. 

St.  Luke  tells  us  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  “ added 
and  spake  a  parable,  because  he  was  nigh  to  Jerusalem, 
and  because  they  thought  that  the  kingdom  of  God  should 
immediately  appear.” 

These  words  reveal  to  us  the  secret  thoughts  of  our 
Lord’s  disciples  at  this  period  of  His  ministry.  They  were 
drawing  nigh  to  Jerusalem.  They  gathered  from  many 
of  their  Master’s  sayings,  that  something  remarkable  was 
about  to  happen.  They  had  a  strong  impression  that  one 
great  end  of  His  coming  into  the  world  was  about  to  be 
accomplished.  So  far  they  were  quite  right.  As  to  tho 


4 


“OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.” 

precise  nature  of  the  event  about  to  happen  they  were 
quite  wrong. 

Reader,  there  are  three  subjects  opened  up  in  this  pass¬ 
age  of  Scripture,  which  appear  to  me  to  be  of  the  deepest 
importance.  Upon  each  of  these  I  wish  to  otfer  a  few 
thoughts  for  your  private  meditation.  I  purposely  abstain 
from  touching  any  part  of  the  parable  except  the  begin¬ 
ning.  I  want  to  direct  your  attention  to  the  three  follow¬ 
ing  points : — 

I.  I  will  speak  of  the  mistake  of  the  disciples,  referred 
to  in  the  verses  before  us. 

II.  I  will  speak  of  the  present  position  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ. 

III.  I  will  speak  of  the  present  duty  of  all  who  profess 
to  be  Jesus  Christ’s  disciples. 

May  God  bless  the  reading  of  this  tract  to  every  one 
into  whose  hands  it  may  fall !  May  every  reader  be  taught 
to  pray  that  the  Spirit  will  guide  him  into  all  truth ! 

I.  I  will  first  speak  of  the  mistake  into  which  the  dis- 
cijdes  had  fallen. 

What  was  this  mistake  ?  Let  us  try  to  understand  this 
point  clearly.  With  what  feelings  ought  Christians  in  the 
present  day  to  regard  this  mistake  ?  Let  us  try  to  under¬ 
stand  this  clearly  also. 

Our  Lord’s  disciples  seem  to  have  thought  that  the  Old 
Testament  promises  of  Messiah’s  visible  kingdom  and  glory 
were  about  to  be  immediately  fulfilled.  They  believed 
rightly  that  He  was  indeed  the  Messiah — the  Christ  of 
God.  But  they  blindly  supposed  that  He  was  going  at 
ouc-e  to  take  to  Himself  His  great  power,  and  reign  glo¬ 
riously  over  the  earth.  This  was  the  sum  and  substance 
of  their  error. 

They  appear  to  have  concluded  that  now  was  the  day 
and  now  the  hour  when  the  Redeemer  would  build  up 
Zion,  and  appear  in  His  glory,  (Psalm  cii.  16,) — when  He 
would  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod  of  His  mouth,  and 
with  the  breath  of  His  lips  slay  the  wicked, — when  He 
would  assemble  the  outcasts  of  Israel,  and  gather  the  dis¬ 
persed  of  Judah,  (Isaiah  xi.  4,  12,) — when  He  would  take 
the  heathen  for  His  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts 
of  the  earth  for  His  possession, — break  His  enemies  with 
a  rod  of  iron,  and  dash  them  in  pieces  like  a  potter’s 
vessel,  (Psalm  ii.  8,  9,) — when  He  would  reign  in  Mount 


5 


“  OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.” 

Zion,  and  in  Jerusalem,  and  before  His  ancients  glori¬ 
ously,  (Isaiah  xxiv.  23,) — when  the  kingdom  and  do¬ 
minion,  and  the  greatness  of  the  kingdom  under  the  whole 
heaven,  would  be  given  to  the  saints  of  the  Most  High. 
(Dan.  vii.  27.)  Such  appears  to  have  been  the  mistake 
into  which  our  Lord’s  disciples  had  fallen  at  the  time  when 
die  spoke  the  Parable  of  the  Pounds. 

It  was  a  great  mistake ,  unquestionably.  They  did  not 
jrealize  that,  before  all  these  prophecies  could  be  fulfilled, 
lit  behooved  Christ  to  suffer.  (Luke  xxiv.  46.)  Their  san¬ 
guine  expectations  overleaped  the  crucifixion  and  the  long 
parenthesis  of  time  to  follow,  and  bounded  onward  to  the 
i final  glory.  They  did  not  see  that  there  was  to  be  a  first 
advent  of  Messiah  “to  be  cut  off,”  before  the  second 
advent  of  Messiah  to  reign.  They  did  not  perceive  that 
the  sacrifices  and  ceremonies  of  the  law  of  Moses  were 
first  to  receive  their  fulfilment  in  a  better  sacrifice  and  a 
better  high-priest,  and  the  shedding  of  blood  more  pre¬ 
cious  than  that  of  bulls  and  goats.  They  did  riot  com¬ 
prehend  that  before  the  glory  Christ  must  be  crucified, 
and  an  elect  people  gathered  out  from  among  the  Gentiles 
by  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel.  All  these  were  dark 
things  to  them.  They  grasped  part  of  the  prophetical 
word,  but  not  all.  They  saw  that  Christ  was  to  have  a 
kingdom;  but  thoy  did  not  see  that  He  was  to  be  wounded 
and  bruised,  and  be  an  offering  for  sin.  They  understood 
the  end  of  the  second  Psalm,  and  the  whole  of  the  ninety- 
seventh  and  ninety-eighth,  but  not  the  beginning  of  the 
twenty-second.  They  understood  the  eleventh  chapter  of 
Isaiah,  but  not  the  fifty-third.  They  understood  the  dis¬ 
pensation  of  the  crown  and  the  glory,  but  not  the  dispensa¬ 
tion  of  the  cross  and  the  shame.  Such  was  their  mistake. 

It  was  a  mistake  which  you  will  find  partially  clinging 
to  the  disciples  even  after  the  crucifixion  You  see  it 
creeping  forth  in  the  first  days  of  the  Church  between  the 
resurrection  and  the  ascension.  They  said,  “  Lord,  wilt 
thou  at  this  time  restore  again  the  kingdom  to  Israel?”* 


*  Christ  did  never  absolutely  deny  his  having  such  a  visible  glorious 
kingdom  upon  earth,  as  that  which  his  disciples  looked  for;  only  he 
corrected  their  error  as  to  the  time  of  this  kingdom  appearing.  Christ 
did  not  say  to  them  that  there  never  should  be  any  such  restoration  of 
the  kingdom  to  Israel,  as  their  thoughts  were  running  upon ;  only  he 
telleth  them  the  times  and  seasons  were  not  for  them  to  know;  thereby 


6 


“  OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.” 

(Acts  i.  6.)  You  have  it  referred  to  by  St.  Paul,  “  Bo 
not  soon  shaken  in  mind,  or  be  troubled,  neither  by  spirit, 
nor  by  word,  nor  by  letter  as  from  us,  as  that  the  day  of 
Christ  is  at  hand.  Let  no  man  deceive  you  by  any  means  : 
for  that  day  shall  not  come,  except  there  he  a  falling  away 
first.”  (2  Thess.  ii.  2.)  In  both  these  instances  the  old 
Jewish  leaven  peeps  out.  In  both  you  see  the  same  ten¬ 
dency  to  misunderstand  God’s  purposes, — to’ overlook  the 
dispensation  of  the  crucifixion,  and  to  concentrate  all 
thought  on  the  dispensation  of  the  kingdom.  In  both  you 
see  the  same  disposition  to  neglect  the  duties  of  the  present 
order  of  things.  Those  duties  are  to  hear  the  cross  after 
Christ,  to  take  part  in  the  afflictions  of  the  Gospel,  to  work, 
to  witness,  to  preach,  and  to  help  to  gather  out  a  people  for 
the  Lord. 

It  was  a  mistake,  however,  which,  I  frankly  say,  I  think 
we  Gentile  believers  are  bound  to  regard  with  much  tender¬ 
ness  and  consideration.  It  will  not  do  to  run  down  our 
Jewish  brethren  as  “  carnal”  and  earthly-minded  in  their 
interpretation  of  prophecy,  as  if  we  Gentiles  had  never 
made  any  mistake  at  all.  I  think  we  have  made  great  mis¬ 
takes,  and  it  is  high  time  that  we  should  confess  it. 

I  believe  we  have  fallen  into  an  error  parallel  with  that 
of  our  Jewish  brethren, — an  error  less  fatal  in  its  conse¬ 
quences  than  theirs,  but  an  error  far  more  inexcusable, 
because  we  have  had  more  light.  If  the  Jew  thought  too 
exclusively  of  Christ  reigning,  has  not  the  Gentile  thought 
too  exclusively  of  Christ  suffering?  If  the  Jew  could  see 
nothing  in  Old  Testament  prophecy  but  Christ’s  exaltation 
and  final  power,  has  not  the  Gentile  often  seen  nothing  but 
Christ’s  humiliation  and  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel?  If 
the  Jew  dwelt  too  much  on  Christ’s  second  advent,  has  not 
the  Gentile  dwelt  too  exclusively  on  the  first?  If  the  Jew 
ignored  the  cross,  has  not  the  Gentile  ignored  the  crown  ? 
I  believe  there  can  be  but  one  answer  to  these  questions. 
I  believe  that  we  Gentiles  till  lately  have  been  verily  guilty 
concerning  a  large  portion  of  God’s  truth.  I  believe  that 
we  have  cherished  an  arbitrary,  reckless  habit  of  inter- 


acknowledging  that  such  a  kingdom  should  indeed  be,  as  they  did  from 
the  holy  prophets  expect.  Herein  was  their  error,— not  in  expecting  a 
glorious  appearance  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  but  in  that  they  made 
account  that  this  would  be  immediately.” — The  Mystery  of  Israel’s  Sal¬ 
vation :  by  Dr.  Increase  Mather.  1669,  p.  130. 


“OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.”  7 

preting  first  advent  texts  literally  and  second  advent  texts 
spiritually.  I  believe  we  have  not  rightly  understood  “all 
that  the  prophets  have  spoken”  about  the  second  personal 
advent  of  Christ  any  more  than  the  Jews  did  about  the 
first.  And  because  we  have  done  this,  I  say  that  we  should 
speak  of  such  mistakes  as  that  referred  to  in  our  text  with 
much  tenderness  and  compassion. 

Reader,  I  earnestly  invite  your  special  attention  to  the 
point  on  which  I  am  now  dwelling.  I  know  not  what  your 
opinions  may  be  about  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophetical 
parts  of  Scripture.  I  approach  the  subject  with  fear  and 
trembling,  lest  I  should  hurt  the  feelings  of  any  dear 
brother  in  the  Lord.  But  I  ask  you  in  all  affection  to  ex¬ 
amine  your  own  views  about  prophecy.  I  entreat  you  to 
consider  calmly  whether  your  opinions  about  Christ’s  second 
advent  and  kingdom  are  as  sound  and  Scriptural  as  those 
of  His  first  disciples.  I  entreat  you  to  take  heed,  lest 
insensibly  you  commit  as  great  errors  about  Christ’s  second 
coming  and  glory,  as  they  did  about  Christ’s  first  coming 
and  cross. 

I  beseech  you  not  to  dismiss  the  subject  which  I  now 
press  upon  your  attention,  as  a  matter  of  curious  specula¬ 
tion,  and  one  of  no  practical  importance.  Believe  me,  it 
affects  the  whole  question  between  yourself  and  the  uncon¬ 
verted  Jew.  I  warn  you,  that  unless  you  interpret  the 
prophetical  portion  of  the  Old  Testament  in  the  simple 
literal  meaning  of  its  words,  you  will  find  it  no  easy  matter 
to  carry  on  an  argument  with  an  unconverted  Jew. 

You  would  probably  tell  the  Jew  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth 
was  the  Messiah  promised  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures. 
To  those  Scriptures  you  would  refer  him  for  proof.  You 
would  show  him  Psalm  xxii.,  Isaiah  liii.,  Daniel  ix.  26, 
Micah  v.  2,  Zechariah  ix.  9,  and  xi.  13.  You  would  tell 
him  that  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth  those  Scriptures  were  lite¬ 
rally  fulfilled.  You  would  urge  upon  him  that  he  ought  to 
believe  these  Scriptures,  and  receive  Christ  as  the  Messiah. 
All  this  is  very  good.  So  far  you  would  do  well. 

But  suppose  the  Jew  asks  you  if  you  take  all  the  pro¬ 
phecies  of  the  Old  Testament  in  their  simple  literal  mean¬ 
ing.  Suppose  he  asks  you  if  you  believe  in  a  literal  per¬ 
sonal  advent  of  Messiah  to  reign  over  the  earth  in  glory, — 
a  literal  restoration  of  Judah  and  Israel  to  Palestine, — a 
literal  re-building  and  restoration  of  Zion  and  Jerusalem. 


8  “OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.” 

Suppose  the  unconverted  Jew  puts  these  questions  to  you: 
what  answer  are  you  prepared  to  make? 

Will  you  dare  to  tell  him  that  Old  Testament  prophecies 
of  this  kind  are  not  to  he  taken  in  their  plain  literal  sense? 
Will  you  dare  to  tell  him  that  the  words  Zion,  Jerusalem, 
Jacob,  Judah,  Ephraim,  Israel,  do  not  mean  what  they 
seem  to  mean,  but  mean  the  Church  of  Christ?  Will  you 
dare  to  tell  him  that  the  glorious  kingdom  and  future 
blessedness  of  Zion,  so  often  dwelt  upon  in  prophecy,  mean 
nothing  more  than  the  gradual  Christianizing  of  the  world 
by  missionaries  and  Gospel  preaching?  Will  you  dare  to 
tell  him  that  you  think  it  “  carnal”  to  take  such  Scrip¬ 
tures  literally, — “  carnal”  to  expect  a  literal  rebuilding  of 
Jerusalem, — “carnal”  to  expect  a  literal  coming  of  Mes¬ 
siah  to  reign, — “  carnal”  to  look  for  a  literal  gathering  and 
restoration  of  Israel  ?  Oh !  reader,  if  you  are  a  man  of 
this  mind,  take  care  what  you  are  doing.  I  say  again, 
take  care. 

Do  you  not  see  that  you  are  putting  a  weapon  in  the 
hand  of  the  unconverted  Jew,  which  he  will  probably  use 
with  irresistible  power?  Do  you  not  see  that  you  are 
cutting  the  ground  from  under  your  own  feet,  and  supply¬ 
ing  the  Jew  with  a  strong  argument  for  not  believing  your 
own  interpretation  of  Scripture?  Do  you  not  see  that  the 
Jew  will  reply,  that  it  is  “  carnal”  to  tell  him  that  Messiah 
has  come  literally  to  suffer,  if  you  tell  him  that  it  is 
“carnal”  to  expect  Messiah  to  come  literally  to  reign? 
Do  you  not  see  that  the  Jew  will  tell  you,  that  it  is  far 
more  “  carnal”  in  you  to  believe  that  Messiah  could  come 
into  the  world  as  a  despised,  crucified  man  of  sorrows,  than 
it  is  in  him  to  believe  that  He  will  come  into  the  world  as 
a  glorious  King?  Beyond  doubt  he  will  do  so,  and  you 
will  find  no  answer  to  give. 

Header,  I  commend  these  things  to  your  serious  attention. 
I  entreat  you  to  throw  aside  all  prejudice,  and  view  the 
subject  I  am  dwelling  upon  with  calm  and  dispassionate 
thought.  I  beseech  you  to  take  up  anew  the  prophetical 
Scriptures,  and  pray  that  you  may  not  err  in  interpreting 
their  meaning.  Bead  them  in  the  light  of  those  two  great 
pole-stars,  the  first  and  second  advents  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Bind  up  with  the  first  advent  the  rejection  of  the  Jews, 
the  calling  of  the  Gentiles,  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  as 
a  witness  to  the  world,  and  the  gathering  out  of  the 


“OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.”  9 

election  of  grace.  Bind  up  with  the  second  advent  the 
restoration  of  the  Jews,  the  pouring  out  of  judgments  on 
unbelieving  Christians,  the  conversion  of  the  world,  and 
the  establishment  of  Christ’s  kingdom  upon  earth.  Do 
this,  and  you  will  see  a  meaning  and  fulness  in  prophecy 
which  perhaps  you  never  yet  discovered. 

I  am  quite  aware  that  many  good  men  do  not  see  the 
prophetical  subject  as  I  do.  I  am  painfully  sensible  that 
I  seem  presumptuous  in  differing  from  them.  But  I  dare 
not  refuse  any  thing  which  appears  to  me  plainly  written 
in  Scripture.  I  consider  the  best  of  men  are  not  infallible. 
I  think  we  should  dread  Protestant  traditions  not  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  Bible,  as  much  as  the  traditions  of  the  Church 
of  Rome. 

I  believe  it  is  high  time  for  the  Church  of  Christ  to 
awake  out  of  its  sleep  about  Old  Testament  prophecy. 
From  the  time  of  the  old  Father,  Jerome,  down  to  the 
present  day,  men  have  gone  on  in  a  pernicious  habit  of 
“  spiritualizing ”  the  words  of  the  Prophets,  until  their  true 
meaning  has  been  well-nigh  buried.  It  is  high  time  to  lay 
aside  traditional  methods  of  interpretation,  and  to  give  up 
our  blind  obedience  to  the  opinions  of  such  writers  as 
Poole,  Henry,  Scott,  and  Clarke,  upon  unfulfilled  prophecy. 
It  is  high  time  to  fall  back  on  the  good  old  principle  that 
Scripture  generally  means  what  it  seems  to  mean,  and  to 
beware  of  that  semi-sceptical  argument,  “such  and  such 
an  interpretation  cannot  be  correct ,  because  it  seems  to  us 
1  carnal !’  ” 

It  is  high  time  for  Christians  to  interpret  unfulfilled 
prophecy  by  the  light  of  prophecies  already  fulfilled.  The 
curses  on  the  Jews  were  brought  to  pass  literally ; — so  also 
will  be  the  blessings.  The  scattering  was  literal ; — so  also 
will  be  the  gathering.  The  pulling  down  of  Zion  was 
literal ; — so  also  will  be  the  building  up.  The  rejection 
of  Israel  was  literal ; — so  also  will  be  the  restoration. 

It  is  high  time  to  interpret  the  events  that  shall  ac- 
oompany  Christ’s  second  advent  by  the  light  of  those 
accompanying  His  first  advent.  The  first  advent  was 
literal,  visible,  personal;  —  so  also  will  be  Ilis  second.  His 
first  advent  was  with  a  literal  body ; — so  also  will  be  His 
second.  At  His  first  advent  the  least  predictions  were 
fulfilled  to  the  very  letter; — so  also  will  they  be  at  His 


10 


“OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.” 

second.  The  shame  was  literal  and  visible; — so  also  will 
be  the  glory. 

It  is  high  time  to  cease  from  explaining  Old  Testament 
prophecies  in  a  ivay  not  warranted  by  the  New  Testament. 
What  right  have  we  to  say  that  Judah,  Zion,  Israel,  and 
Jerusalem,  ever  mean  any  thing  hut  literal  Judah,  literal 
Zion,  literal  Israel,  and  literal  Jerusalem?  What  precedent 
shall  we  find  in  the  New  Testament?  Hardly  any,  if 
indeed  any  at  all.  Well  says  an  admirable  writer  on  this 
subject: — “There  are  really  two  or  three  places  in  the 
whole  New  Testament — Gospels,  Epistles,  and  Revelation 
— where  such  names  are  used  decidedly  in  what  may  be 
called  a  spiritual  or  figurative  state.”  The  word  “Jeru¬ 
salem”  occurs  eighty  times,  and  all  of  them  unquestionably 
literal,  save  when  the  opposite  is  expressly  pointed  out  by 
the  epithets  “heavenly,”  or  “new,”  or  “holy.”  “Jew” 
occurs  an  hundred  times,  and  only  four  are  even  ambiguous, 
as  Romans  ii.  28.  “  Israel”  and  “  Israelite”  occur  forty  times, 
and  all  literal.  “Judah”  and  “Judea”  above  twenty  times, 
and  all  literal. — Bonar’s  Prophetical  Landmarks,  p.  300. 

It  is  no  answer  to  all  this  to  tell  us,  that  it  is  impossible 
to  carry  out  the  principle  of  a  literal  interpretation,  and 
that  Christ  was  not  a  literal  “door,”  nor  a  literal  “branch,” 
nor  the  bread  in  the  sacrament  His  literal  “body.”  I 
reply,  that  when  I  speak  of  literal  interpretation,  I  require 
no  man  to  deny  the  use  of  figurative  language.  I  fully 
admit  that  emblems,  figures,  and  symbols  are  used  in  fore¬ 
telling  Messiah’s  glory,  as  well  as  in  foretelling  Messiah’s 
sufferings.  I  do  not  believe  that  Jesus  was  a  literal  “root 
out  of  dry  ground,”  or  a  literal  “  lamb.”  (Isa.  liii.)  All 
I  maintain  is,  that  prophecies  about  Christ’s  coming  and 
kingdom ,  do  foretell  literal  facts  as  truly  as  the  prophecy 
about  Christ  being  numbered  with  the  transgressors.  All  I 
say  is,  that  prophecies  about  the  Jews  being  gathered,  will 
be  as  really  and  literally  made  good  as  those  about  the 
Jews  being  scattered. 

It  is  no  good  argument  to  tel!  us  that  the  principle  of 
literal  interpretation  deprives  the  church  of  the  use  and 
benefit  of  many  parts  of  the  Old  Testament.  I  deny  the 
justice  of  the  charge  altogether.  I  consider  that  all  things 
written  in  the  Prophets  concerning  the  salvation  of  indi¬ 
vidual  souls,  may  be  used  by  Gentiles  as  freely  as  by  Jews. 
The  hearts  of  Jews  and  Gentiles  are  naturally  just  the 


“OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.”  11 

same.  The  way  to  heaven  is  but  one.  Both  Jews  and 
Gentiles  need  justification,  regeneration,  sanctification. 
Whatever  is  written  concerning  such  subjects,  is  just  as 
much  the  property  of  the  Gentile  as  the  Jew.  Moreover, 
I  hold  Israel  to  be  a  people  specially  typical  of  the  whole 
body  of  believers  in  Christ.  (Hosea  xii.  10.)  I  consider 
that  believers  now,  may  take  the  comfort  of  every  promise 
of  pardon,  comfort,  and  grace  which  is  addressed  to  Israel. 
Such  words  I  regard  as  the  common  portion  of  all  believers. 
All  I  maintain  is,  that  whenever  God  says  He  shall  do  or 
give  certain  things  to  Israel  and  Jerusalem  in  this  world, 
we  ought  entirely  to  believe  that  to  literal  Israel  and 
Jerusalem  those  things  will  be  given  and  done. 

It  is  no  valid  argument,  to  say  that  many  who  think  as 
I  do  about  prophecy,  have  said  and  written  -very  foolish 
things,  and  have  often  contradicted  one  another.  All  this 
may  be  very  true,  and  yet  the  principles  for  which  we 
contend  may  be  scriptural,  sound,  and  correct.  The  infidel 
does  not  overturn  the  truth  of  Christianity,  when  he  points 
to  the  existence  of  Antinomians,  Jumpers,  and  Shakers. 
The  worldly  man  does  not  overturn  the  truth  of  real 
evangelical  religion,  when  he  sneers  at  the  differences  of 
Calvinists  and  Arminians.  Just  in  the  same  way  one 
writer  on  prophecy  may  interpret  Revelation  or  Daniel  in 
one  way,  and  another  in  another.*  One  man  may  take  on 
him  to  fix  dates,  and  prove  at  last  to  Jbe  quite  wrong. 
Another  may  apply  prophecies  to  living  individuals,  and 
prove  utterly  mistaken.  But  all  these  things  do  not  affect 
the  main  question.  They  do  not  in  the  least  prove  that 
the  advent  of  Christ  before  the  millennium,  is  not  a  Scrip¬ 
tural  truth,  and  that  the  principle  of  interpreting  Old 
Testament  prophecy  literally  is  not  a  sound  principle. 

Reader,  I  say  once  more,  we  ought  to  regard  the  mis¬ 
takes  of  our  Lord’s  disciples  with  great  tenderness  and 
consideration.  We  Christians  are  the  last  who  ought  to 
condemn  them  strongly.  Great  as  their  mistakes  were,  our 
own  have  been  almost  as  bad.  We  have  been  very  quick 
in  discovering  the  beam  in  our  Jewish  brother’s  eyes,  and 
have  forgotten  a  large  mote  in  our  own.  We  have  been 
long  putting  a  great  stumbling-block  in  his  way ,  by  our 
arbitrary  and  inconsistent  explanations  of  Old  Testament 
'prophecy. 

Reader,  let  us  do  our  part  to  remove  that  great  stum- 


12 


“OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.” 

bling-block.  If  we  would  help  to  remove  the  veil  which 
prevents  the  Jews  seeing  the  cross,  let  us  also  strip  off  the 
veil  from  our  own  eyes  and  look  steadily  and  unflinchingly 
at  the  second  advent  and  the  crown. 

II.  The  second  question  I  wish  to  consider  is  this,  what 
is  the  present  position  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ? 

The  parable  appears  to  me  to  answer  that  question 
distinctly  in  the  twelfth  verse: — “A  certain  nobleman  went 
into  a  far  country  to  receive  for  himself  a  kingdom,  and  to 
return.”  This  nobleman  represents  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  that  in  two  respects. 

Like  the  nobleman,  the  Lord  Jesus  is  gone  into  a  far 
country  to  receive  for  Himself  a  kingdom.  He  has  not 
received  it  yet  in  jiossession,  though  He  has  it  in  promise. 
He  has  a  spiritual  kingdom,  unquestionably.  He  is  king 
over  the  hearts  of  His  believing  people,  and  they  are  all 
His  faithful  subjects.  He  has  a  controlling  power  over 
the  world,  without  controversy.  He  is  King  of  kings  and 
Lord  of  lords.  “By  Him  all  things  consist,”  and  nothing 
can  happen  without  His  permission.  But  His  real,  literal, 
visible,  complete  kingdom  the  Lord  Jesus  has  not  yet 
received.  To  use  the  words  of  Ileb.  ii.  8,  “We  see  not 
yet  all  things  put  under  Him.”  To  use  the  words  of 
Psalm  cx.  1,  “He  sits  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Father  till 
His  enemies  are  made  His  footstool.” 

The  devil  is  the  prince  of  this  world  during  the  present 
dispensation.  (John  xiv.  30.)  The  vast  majority  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  earth  choose  the  things  that  please  the 
devil  far  more  than  the  things  that  please  God.  Little  as 
they  may  think  it,  they  are  doing  the  devil’s  will,  behaving 
as  the  devil’s  subjects,  and  serving  the  devil  far  more  than 
Christ.  This  is  the  actual  condition  of  Christendom  as  well 
as  heathen  countries.  After  1800  years  of  Bibles  and  Gospel 
preaching,  there  is  not  a  nation,  or  a  country,  or  a  parish, 
or  a  long-established  congregation,  where  the  devil  has  not 
more  subjects  than  Christ.  So  fearfully  true  is  it  that  the 
world  is  not  yet  the  kingdom  of  Christ. 

The  Lord  Jesus  during  the  present  dispensation  is  like 
David  between  the  time  of  his  anointing  and  Saul’s  dteath. 
He  has  the  promise  of  the  kingdom,  but  He  has  not  yet 
received  the  crown  and  throne.  (1  Samuel  xxii.  1,  2.) 

He  is  followed  by  a  few,  and  those  often  neither  great 
nor  wise,  but  they  are  a  faithful  people.  He  is  persecuted 


“OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.”  13 

by  His  enemies,  and  ofttimes  driven  into  the  wilderness, 
and  yet  His  party  is  never  quite  destroyed.  But  He  has 
none  of  the  visible  signs  of  the  kingdom  at  present,  no 
earthly  glory,  majesty,  greatness,  obedience.  The  vast 
majority  of  mankind  see  no  beauty  in  Him.  They  will  not 
have  this  man  to  reign  over  them.  His  people  are  not 
honoured  for  their  Master’s  sake.  They  Walk  the  earth 
like  princes  in  disguise.  His  kingdom  is  not  yet  come. 
His  will  is  not  yet  done  on  earth,  excepting  by  a  little  flock. 
It  is  not  the  day  of  u  His  power.”  The  Lord  Jesus  is 
biding  His  time. 

Reader,  I  entreat  you  to  grasp  firmly  this  truth,  for 
truth  I  believe  it  to  be.  Great  delusion  abounds  on  the 
subject  of  Christ’s  kingdom.  Take  heed  lest  any  man 
deceive  you  by  purely  traditional  teachings  about  pro¬ 
phetical  truth.  Hymns  are  composed  and  sung  which 
darken  God’s  counsel  on  this  subject  by  words  without 
knowledge.  Texts  are  wrested  from  their  true  meaning, 
and  accommodated  to  the  present  order  of  things ,  which 
are  not  justly  applicable  to  any  but  the  period  of  the 
second  advent.  Beware  of  the  mischievous  infection  of 
this  habit  of  text-wresting.  Beware  of  the  sapping  effect 
of  beautiful  poetry  in  which  unfulfilled  promises  of  glory 
are  twisted  and  adapted  to  the  present  dispensation.  Settle 
it  down  in  your  mind  that  Christ’s  kingdom  is  yet  to  come. 
His  arrows  are  not  yet  sharp  in  the  hearts  of  His  enemies. 
The  day  of  His  power  has  not  yet  begun.  He  is  gathering 
out  a  people  to  carry  the  cross  and  walk  in  His  steps.  But 
the  time  of  His  coronation  has  not  yet  arrived. 

But  just  as  the  Lord  Jesus,  like  the  nobleman,  “went 
to  receive  a  kingdom,”  so,  like  the  nobleman,  the  Lord  Jesus 
intends  one  day  “to  return.” 

The  words  of  the  Angels  (Acts  i.  11)  shall  have  a  com¬ 
plete  fulfilment,  “This  same  Jesus  which  was  taken  up 
from  you  into  heaven,  shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye 
have  seen  Him  go  into  heaven.”  As  His  going  away  was 
a  real  literal  going  away,  so  His  return  shall  be  areal  literal 
return.  As  He  came  personally  the  first  time  with  a  body, 
so  He  shall  come  personally  the  second  time  with  a  body. 
As  He  came  visibly  to  this  earth  and  visibly  went  away, 
so  when  He  comes  the  second  time  He  shall  visibly  return. 
And  then,  and  not  till  then,  the  complete  kingdom  of 


2 


14  “  OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.” 

Christ  shall  begin.  He  left  His  servants  as  “a  nobleman 
he  returns  to  His  servants  as  “a  king.” 

Then  He  intends  to  cast  out  that  old  usurper  the  devil, 
to  bind  him  for  a  thousand  years,  and  strip  Him  of  his 
power.  (Rev.  xx.  1 ;  Isaiah  xxvi.  21.) 

Then  He  intends  to  make  a  restitution  of  the  face  of 
creation.  (Acts  iii.  21.)  It  shall  be  the  world’s  jubilee 
day.  Our  earth  shall  at  last  bring  forth  her  increase. 
The  King  shall  at  length  have  His  own  again.  At  last  the 
ninety-seventh  Psalm  shall  be  fulfilled,  and  men  shall  say, 
“The  Lord  rcigneth:  let  the  earth  rejoice!” 

Then  He  intends  to  fulfil  the  prophecies  of  Enoch, 
John  the  Baptist,  and  St.  Paul;  “to  execute  judgment 
upon  all  the  ungodly”  inhabitants  of  Christendom — “  to 
burn  up  the  chaff  with  unquenchable  fire” — and  “  in  flam¬ 
ing  fire  to  take  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God 
and  obey  not  the  Gospel.”  (Jude  15;  Matt.  iii.  12;  2  Thess. 

i-  8-) 

Then  He  intends  to  raise  His  dead  saints  and  gather  His 
living  ones,  to  gather  together  the  scattered  tribes  of  Israel, 
and  to  set  up  an  empire  on  earth  in  which  every  knee 
shall  bow  to  Him,  and  every  tongue  confess  that  Christ  is 
Lord. 

When,  how,  where,  in  what  manner,  all  these  things 
shall  be,  we  cannot  say  particularly.  Enough  for  us  to 
know  that  they  shall  be.  The  Lord  Jesus  has  undertaken 
to  do  them,  and  they  shall  be  performed.  The  Lord  Jesus 
waits  for  the  time  appointed  by  the  Father,  and  then  they 
shall  all  come  to  pass.  As  surely  as  He  was  born  of  a 
pure  virgin,  and  lived  on  earth  thirty-three  years  as  a 
servant,  so  surely  He  shall  come  with  clouds  in  glory,  and 
reign  on  the  earth  as  a  king. 

Reader,  I  charge  you  to  establish  in  your  mind  among 
the  great  varieties  of  your  religion,  that  Christ  is  one  day 
to  have  a  complete  kingdom  in  this  world, — that  His  king¬ 
dom  is  not  yet  set  up, — but  that  it  will  be  set  up  in  the 
day  of  Ilis  return.  Know  clearly  whose  kingdom  it  is 
now :  not  Christ’s,  but  the  usurper  Satan’s.  Know  clearly 
whose  kingdom  it  is  to  do  one  day :  not  Satan  the  usurper’s, 
but  Jesus  Christ’s.  Know  clearly  when  the  kingdom  is  to 
change  hands,  and  the  usurper  to  be  cast  out :  when  the 
Lord  Jesus  returns  in  person,  and  not  before.  Know 
clearly  what  the  Lord  J  esus  is  doing  now :  He  is  sitting 


15 


“OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.” 

at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,— interceding  as  a  high- 
priest  in  the  holy  of  holies  for  His  people, — adding  to 
their  number  such  as  shall  be  saved  by  the  preaching  of 
the  Gospel, — and  waiting  till  the  appointed  “  day  of  Ills 
power,”  when  He  shall  come  forth  to  bless  His  people, 
and  sit  as  a  priest  upon  His  throne.  Know  these  things 
clearly,  and  you  will  do  well. 

Know  these  things  clearly,  and  then  you  will  not  cherish 
extravagant  expectations  from  any  church,  minister,  or  re¬ 
ligious  machinery  in  this  present  dispensation.  You  will 
not  marvel  to  see  ministers  and  missionaries  not  converting 
all  to  whom  they  preach.  You  will  not  wonder  to  find 
that  while  some  believe  the  Gospel,  many  believe  not. 
You  will  not  be  depressed  and  cast  down  when  you  see 
the  children  of  the  world  in  every  place  many,  and  the 
children  of  God  few.  You  will  remember  that  “the  days 
are  evil,”  and  that  the  time  of  general  conversion  is  not 
yet  arrived.  You  will  thank  God  that  any  are  converted 
at  all,  and  that  while  the  Gospel  is  hid  to  the  wise  and 
prudent,  it  is  yet  revealed  to  babes.  Alas  for  the  man 
who  expects  a  millennium  before  the  Lord  Jesus  returns! 
How  can  this  possibly  be,  if  the  world  in  the  day  of  His 
coming  is  to  be  found  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Noah  and 
Lot?  (Luke  xviii.  26-30.) 

Know  these  things  clearly,  and  then  you  will  not  he  con¬ 
founded  and  surprised  hy  the  continuance  of  immense  evils 
in  the  world.  Wars,  and  tumults,  and  oppression,  and  dis¬ 
honesty,  and  selfishness,  and  covetousness,  and  superstition, 
and  bad  government,  and  abounding  heresies,  will  not 
appear  to  you  unaccountable.  You  will  not  sink  down  into 
a  morbid,  misanthropic  condition  of  mind,  when  you  see 
laws,  and  reforms,  and  education,  not  making  mankind 
perfect.  You  will  not  relapse  into  a  state  of  apathy  and 
disgust  when  you  see  churches  full  of  imperfections,  and 
theologians  making  mistakes.  You  will  say  to  yourself, 
“  The  time  of  Christ’s  power  has  not  yet  arrived, — the 
devil  is  still  working  among  his  children,  and  sowing  dark¬ 
ness  and  division  broadcast  among  the  saints, — the  true 
King  is  yet  to  come.” 

Know  these  things  clearly,  and  then  you  will  see  why 
God  delays  the  final  glory ,  and  allows  things  to  go  on  as 
they  do  in  this  world.  It  is  not  that  He  is  not  able  to 
prevent  evil, — it  is  not  that  He  is  slack  in  the  fulfilling  of 


16 


“OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.” 

His  promises, — but  the  Lord  is  taking  out  for  Himself  a 
people  by  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel.  (Acts  xvi.  14  j  2 
Peter  iii.  9.)  He  is  long-suffering'  to  unconverted  Chris¬ 
tians.  The  Lord  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish, 
but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance.  Once  let  the 
number  of  the  elect  be  gathered  out  of  the  world,  once 
let  the  last  elect  sinner  be  brought  to  repentance,  and  then 
the  kingdom  of  Christ  shall  be  set  up,  and  the  throne  of 
grace  exchanged  for  the  throne  of  glory. 

Know  these  things  clearly,  and  then  you  will  work  dili¬ 
gently  to  do  good  to  souls.  The  time  is  short.  “  The  night 
is  far  spent.  The  day  is  at  hand.”  The  signs  of  the  times 
cedi  loudly  for  watchfulness,  and  speak  with  no  uncertain 
voice.  The  Turkish  empire  is  drying  up.  The  Jews  are 
cared  for  as  they  never  have  been  for  eighteen  hundred 
years.  The  Gospel  is  being  preached  as  a  witness  in 
almost  every  corner  of  the  world.  Surely  if  we  would 
pluck  a  few  more  brands  from  the  burning  before  it  is  too 
late,  we  must  work  hard  and  lose  no  time.  We  must 
preach, — we  must  warn, — we  must  exhort, — we  must  give 
money  to  religious  societies, — we  must  spend  and  be  spent 
far  more  than  we  have  ever  done  yet. 

Know  these  things  clearly,  and  then  you  will  be  often 
looking  for  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God.  You  will 
regard  the  second  advent  as  a  glorious  and  comfortable 
truth,  around  which  your  best  hopes  will  all  be  clustered. 
You  will  not  merely  think  of  Christ  crucified,  but  you  will 
think  also  of  Christ  coming  again.  You  will  long  for  the 
days  of  refreshing  and  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God. 
(Acts  iii.  19;  Horn.  viii.  19.)  You  will  find  peace  in  look¬ 
ing  back  to  the  cross,  and  you  will  find  joyful  hope  in  look¬ 
ing  forward  to  the  kingdom. 

Once  more,  I  repeat,  know  clearly  Christ’s  present  posi¬ 
tion.  He  is  like  one  who  is  “gone  into  a  far  country  to 
receive  a  kingdom,  and  then  to  return.” 

III.  The  third  and  last  question  I  wish  to  consider,  is 
this:  What  is  the  present  duty  of  all  Christ’ s  prof cssing 
disciples? 

When  I  speak  of  present  duty,  I  mean  of  course  their 
duty  between  the  period  of  Christ’s  first  and  second  advent. 
And  I  find  an  answer  in  the  words  of  the  nobleman,  in  the 
parable,  to  his  servants  :  “  He  delivered  them  ten  pounds, 
and  said  unto  them,  Occupy  till  I  come.” 


“OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.”  17 

Reader,  I  know  few  words  more  searching  and  impressive 
than  these  four,  “  Occupy  till  I  come.”  They  are  spoken 
to  all  who  profess  and  call  themselves  Christians.  They 
address  the  conscience  of  every  one  who  has  not  re¬ 
nounced  his  baptism,  and  formally  turned  his  back  on 
Christianity.  They  ought  to  stir  up  all  hearers  of  the 
Gospel  to  examine  themselves  whether  they  are  in  the 
faith,  and  to  prove  themselves.  Listen  to  me  for  a  few 
minutes,  while  I  try  to  impress  them  on  your  attention. 
For  your  sake,  remember,  these  words  were  Written :  “  Oc¬ 
cupy  till  I  come.” 

The  Lord  Jesus  bids  you  “occupy.”  By  that  He  means 
that  you  are  to  be  “  a  doer”  in  your  Christianity,  and  not 
merely  a  hearer  and  professor.  He  wants  His  servants 
not  only  to  receive  His  wages,  and  eat  His  bread,  and 
dwell  in  His  house,  and  belong  to  His  family, — but  also 
to  do  His  work.  You  are  to  “  let  your  light  so  shine 
before  men  that  they  may  see  your  good  works.”  (Matt.  v. 
16.)  HaVe  you  faith?  It  must  not  be  a  dead  faith:  it 
must  “work  by  love.”  (Gal.  v.  6.)  Are  you  elect?  You 
are  elect  unto  “  obedience.”  (1  Peter  i.  2.)  Are  you  re¬ 
deemed?  You  are  redeemed  that  you  may  be  “a  peculiar 
people,  zealous  of  good  works.”  (Titus  ii.  14.)  Do  you 
love  Christ?  Prove  the  reality  of  your  love  by  keeping 
Christ’s  commandments.  (John  xiv.  15.)  Oh!  reader,  do 
not  forget  this  charge  to  “  occupy.”  Beware  of  an  idle, 
talking,  gossiping,  sentimental,  do-nothing  religion.  Think 
not  because  your  doings  cannot  justify  you,  or  put  away 
one  single  sin,  that  therefore  it  matters  not  whether  you  do 
any  thing  at  all.  Away  with  such  a  delusion !  Cast  it 
behind  you  as  an  invention  of  the  devil.  Think  of  the 
house  built  upon  the  sand,  and  its  miserable  end.  (Matt 
vii.  24-27.)  As  ever  you  would  “make  your  calling  and 
election  sure,”  be  a  doing  Christian. 

But  the  Lord  Jesus  also  bids  you  “occipy  your  pound.” 
By  this  He  means  that  He  has  given  each  one  of  His 
people  some  opportunity  of  glorifying  Him.  He  would 
have  you  understand  that  every  one  has  got  his  own 
sphere, — the  poorest  as  well  as  the  richest; — that  every 
one  has  an  open  door  before  him,  and  may,  if  he  will, 
show  forth  his  Master’s  praise.  Your  bodily  health  and 
strength, — your  mental  gifts  and  capacities, — your  money 
and  your  earthly  possessions, — your  rank  and  position  in 

2* 


18 


“  OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.” 

life, — your  example  and  influence  with  others, — your  liberty 
to  lead  the  Bible  and  hear  the  Gospel, —  your  plentiful 
supply  of  means  of  grace, — all  these  are  your  “  pounds.” 
All  these  are  to  be  used  and  employed  with  a  continual 
reference  to  the  glory  of  Christ.  All  these  are  His  gifts. 
“  Of  Him  come  riches  and  honour.”  (1  Chron.  xxix.  12.) 
“  Ilis  is  the  silver,  and  his  is  the  gold.”  (Haggai  ii.  8.) 
“  His  is  your  body,  and  his  is  your  spirit.”  (1  Cor.  vi.  20.) 
He  appoints  your  habitation.  He  gives  you  life  and 
breath.  (Acts  xvii.  25,  20.)  You  are  not  your  own.  You 
are  bought  with  a  price.  (1  Cor.  vi.  20.)  Surely  it  is  no 
great  matter  if  He  bid  you  honour  Him  and  serve  Him  with 
all  that  you  have.  Breathes  there  a  man  or  woman  among 
the  readers  of  this  tract,  that  has  received  nothing  at  the 
Lord’s  hand?  Not  one,  I  am  sure.  Oh!  see  to  it,  that  you 
lay  out  your  Lord’s  money  well  and  honestly !  Take  heed 
that  you  do  not  bury  your  pound ! 

But  the  Lord  Jesus  bids  you  also  to  “ occupy  till  He 
comes.”  By  that  He  means  that  you  are  to  do  His  work 
on  earth,  like  one  w7ho  continually  looks  for  His  return. 
You  are  to  be  like  the  faithful  servant,  who  knows  not 
what  hour  his  master  may  come  home,  but  keeps  all  things 
in  readiness,  and  is  always  prepared.  You  are  to  be  like 
one  who  knows  that  Christ’s  coining  is  the  great  reckoning 
day,  and  to  be  ready  to  render  up  your  account  at  any 
moment.  You  are  not  to  suppose  that  you  have  any  free¬ 
hold  in  this  world,  nor  even  a  lease.  The  greatest  and  the 
richest  of  mankind  is  only  God’s  tenant-at-will.  You  are 
not  to  neglect  any  social  duty  or  relation  of  life,  because 
of  the  uncertainty  of  the  Lord’s  return.  You  are  to  fill 
the  station  to  which  God  has  called  you  in  a  godly  and 
Christian  way;  and  you  are  to  be  ready  to  go  from  the 
place  of  business  to  meet  Christ  in  the  air,  if  the  Lord 
shall  think  fit.  You  are  to  be  like  a  man  who  never  knows 
what  a  day  might  bring  forth,  and,  therefore,  to  put  off 
nothing  till  a  “  convenient  season.”  You  are  to  rise  and 
go  forth  in  the  morning,  ready,  if  need  be,  to  meet  Christ 
at  noon.  You  are  to  lie  down  in  bed  at  night,  ready,  if 
need  be,  to  be  awakened  by  the  midnight  cry,  u  Behold, 
the  Bridegroom  cometh.”  You  are  to  keep  your  spiritual 
accounts  in  a  state  of  constant  preparation,  like  one  who 
never  knows  how  soon  they  may  be  called  for.  You  are 
to  measure  all  your  ways  by  the  measure  of  Christ’s  ap- 


19 


“OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.” 

pearing,  and  to  do  nothing  in  which  you  would  not  like 
Jesus  to  find  you  engaged.  This  is  to  “occupy”  till  Jesus 
comes. 

Think,  reader,  how  condemning  are  these  words  to  thou¬ 
sands  of  professing  Christians !  What  an  utter  absence 
of  preparation  appears  in  their  daily  walk  and  conversa¬ 
tion  !  How  thoroughly  unfit  they  are  to  meet  Christ ! 
They  know  nothing  of  occupying  the  gifts  of  God  as  loans 
for  which  they  must  give  account.  They  show  not  the 
slightest  desire  to  glorify  Him  with  “body  and  spirit  which 
are  his.”  They  give  no  sign  of  readiness  for  the  second 
advent.  Well  says  old  Gurnall,  “It  may  be  written  on  the 
grave  of  every  unconverted  man,  Here  lies  one  who  never 
did  for  God  an  hour’s  work.”  Who  can  wonder  in  a  world 
like  this,  if  a  minister  often  cries  to  his  congregation,  “Ye 
must  be  born  again :”  “  Except  ye  be  converted,  and  become 
as  little  children,  ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.”  (John  iii.  7;  Matt,  xviii.  3.) 

Think,  again,  how  arousing  these  words  ought  to  be  to 
all  who  are  rich  in  this  world,  hut  do  not  know  how  to 
spend  their  money  rightly.  Alas !  there  are  many  who 
live  on  as  if  Christ  had  never  said  any  thing  about  the 
difficulty  of  rich  men  being  saved.  They  are  rich  towards 
their  own  pleasures,  or  their  own  tastes,  or  their  own  fami¬ 
lies,  hut  not  rich  towards  God  !  They  live  as  if  they 
would  not  have  to  give  an  account  of  their  use  of  money. 
They  live  as  if  there  was  no  reckoning-day  before  the  bar 
of  Christ.  They  live  as  if  Christ  had  never  said,  “  It  is 
more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive.”  (Acts  xx.  35.) 
“  Sell  that  ye  have,  and  give  alms.  Provide  yourselves 
bags  which  wax  not  old,  a  treasure  in  heaven  that  faileth 
not.”  (Luke  xii.  33.)  Oh!  if  this  tract  should  by  chance 
fall  into  the  hands  of  such  an  one,  I  do  beseech  you,  con¬ 
sider  your  ways  and  be  wise.  Cease  to  be  content  with 
giving  God’s  cause  a  few  shillings,  or  an  occasional  guinea. 
Give  far  more  liberally  than  you  have  done  yet.  Give 
hundreds  where  you  now  give  tens.  Give  thousands  where 
you  now  give  hundreds.  Then,  and  not  till  then,  I  shall 
believe  you  are  “  occupying”  as  one  who  looks  for  Christ’s 
return.  Alas  for  the  covetousness  and  narrow-mindedness 
of  the  Church  of  these  days !  May  the  Lord  open  the  eyes 
of  rich  Christians ! 

Think,  again,  how  instructive  are  these  words  to  all  who 


20  “OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.” 

are  troubled  by  doubts  about  mingling  with  the  world,  and 
taking  part  in  its  vain  amusements.  It  is  useless  to  tell 
us  that  races,  and  balls,  and  theatres,  and  operas,  and 
cards,  are  not  forbidden  by  name  in  Scripture.  The 
question  we  should  ask  ourselves  is  simply  this, — “Ami 
occupying,  as  one  who  looks  for  Christ’s  return,  when  I 
take  part  in  these  things?  Should  I  like  Jesus  to  return 
suddenly  and  find  me  on  the  race-course,  or  in  the  ball¬ 
room,  or  at  the  theatre,  or  at  the  card-table?  Should  I 
think  I  was  in  my  right  place,  and  where  my  Lord  would 
have  me  to  be?”  Oh,  dear  reader,  this  is  the  true  test 
by  which  to  try  all  our  daily  occupations  and  employ¬ 
ment  of  time.  That  thing  which  we  would  not  do  if  we 
thought  Jesus  was  coming  to-night,  that  thing  we 
ought  not  to  do  at  all.  That  place  to  which  we  would 
not  go  if  we  thought  Jesus  was  coming  this  day,  that 
place  we  ought  to  avoid.  That  company  in  which  we 
would  not  like  Jesus  to  find  us,  in  that  company  we  ought 
never  to  sit  down.  Oh !  that  men  would  live  as  in  the 
sight  of  Christ, — not  as  in  the  sight  of  man,  or  of  the 
church,  or  of  ministers, — but  as  in  the  sight  of  Christ ! 
This  would  be  “occupying  till  He  comes.” 

But  think  how  encouraging  are  these  words  to  all  who 
seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  love  the  Lord  Christ  in 
sincerity.  What,  though  the  children  of  the  world  regard 
them  as  “righteous  overmuch!”  What,  though  mistaken 
friends  and  relations  tell  them  they  pay  too  much  atten¬ 
tion  to  religion,  and  go  too  far!  Those  words,  “Occupy 
till  1  come,”  are  words  which  justify  their  conduct.  They 
may  well  reply  to  their  persecutors,  “I  am  doing  a  great 
work,  and  I  cannot  come  down ;  I  am  striving  to  live  so  as 
to  be  ready  when  the  Lord  comes;  ‘I  must  be  about  my 
Bather’s  business.’  ” 

Let  me  conclude  this  tract  by  a  few  words  of  general 
application. 

1.  First,  let  me  draw  from  the  whole  subject  a  word  of 
solemn  warning  fur  overy  one  into  whose  hands  this  tract 
may  fall.  That  warning  is,  that  there  is  a  great  change 
yet  to  come  on  this  world,  and  a  change  we  ought  to  keep 
constantly  before  our  mind’s  eye. 

That  change  is  a  change  of  Masters.  That  old  rebel, 
the  devil,  and  all  his  adherents,  shall  be  cast  down.  The 
Lord  Jesus,  and  all  llis  saints,  shall  be  exalted  and  raised 


21 


“OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.” 

to  honour.  “  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  become  the 
kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of  His  Christ.”  (Rev.  xi.  15.) 

That  change  is  a  change  of  manners.  Sin  shall  no 
longer  be  made  light  of  and  palliated.  Wickedness  shall 
no  longer  go  unpunished,  and  unreproved.  Holiness  shall 
become  the  general  character  of  the  inhabitants  of  the 
earth.  “The  new  heaven  and  new  earth”  shall  be  the 
dwelling  of  “righteousness.”  (2  Peter  iii.  13.) 

That  change  is  a  change  of  opinion.  There  shall  be  no 
more  Socinianism,  or  Deism,  or  Scepticism,  or  Infidelity. 
All  nations  shall  do  honour  to  the  crucified  Lamb  of  God. 
All  men  shall  know  Him,  from  the  least  to  the  greatest. 
“The  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  Him,  as  the 
waters  cover  the  sea.”  (Isa.  xi.  9.) 

I  say  nothing  as  to  the  time  when  these  things  shall 
take  place.  I  object  on  principle  to  all  dogmatism  about 
dates.  All  I  insist  upon  is  this, — that  there  is  a  great 
change  before  us  all, — a  change  for  the  earth,  a  change 
for  man,  and,  above  all,  a  change  for  the  saints. 

I  accept  the  prediction  that  “  there  is  a  great  improve¬ 
ment  and  development  of  human  nature  yet  to  take  place.” 
I  accept  it  with  all  my  heart.  But  how  and  when  shall  it 
be  brought  about?  Not  by  any  system  of  education.  Not 
by  any  legislation  of  politicians.  Not  by  any  thing  short 
of  the  appearing  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Then,  and 
then  only,  shall  there  be  universal  justice,  universal  know¬ 
ledge,  and  universal  peace. 

I  accept  the  common  phrase  of  many,  “  There  is  a  good 
time  coming.”  I  accept  it  with  all  my  heart.  I  do  verily 
believe  there  shall  one  day  be  no  more  poverty, — no  more 
oppression, — no  more  ignorance, — no  more  grinding  com¬ 
petition, — no  more  covetousness.  But  when  shall  that 
good  time  come?  Never!  never,  till  the  return  of  Jesus 
Christ  at  His  second  advent.  And  for  whom  shall  that  time 
be  good  ?  For  none  but  those  who  know  and  love  the  Lord. 

I  accept  the  common  phrase,  “  There  is  a  man  coming 
who  will  set  all  right  that  is  now  wrong.  We  wa  it  for  the 
coming  man.”  I  accept  it  with  all  my  heart.  I  do  look 
for  one  who  shall  unravel  the  tangled  skein  of  this  world’s 
affairs,  and  put  every  thing  in  its  right  place.  But  who 
is  the  great  physician  for  an  old,  diseased,  and  worn-out 
world?  It  is  the  man  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  yet  to  return. 

Oh!  reader,  let  us  realize  this  point.  There  is  before 


9 o 


“OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.” 

us  all  a  great  change.  Surely,  when  a  man  has  notice  to 
quit  his  present  dwelling-place,  he  ought  to  make  sure 
that  he  has  before  him  another  home. 

2.  Next,  let  me  draw  from  the  whole  subject  a  solemn 
question  for  all  into  whose  hands  this  tract  may  fall.  That 
question  is  simply  this,  Ake  you  heady  for  the  great 
change  ?  Are  you  ready  for  the  coming  and  kingdom 
of  Christ  ? 

Remember,  I  do  not  ask  what  you  think  about  con¬ 
troversial  points  in  the  subject  of  prophecy.  I  do  not  ask 
your  opinion  about  preterism  and  futurism.  I  do  not  ask 
whether  you  think  Revelation  fulfilled  or  unfulfilled, — or 
whether  you  consider  the  Man  of  Sin  to  be  an  individual, 
— or  whether  you  hold  prophetical  days  to  be  years. 
About  all  these  points  you  and  I  may  err,  and  yet  be 
saved.  The  one  point  to  which  I  want  to  fix  you  down  is 
this,  “Are  you  ready  for  the  kingdom  of  Christ?” 

It  is  useless  to  tell  me,  that,  in  asking  this,  I  put  before 
you  too  high  a  standard.  It  is  vain  to  tell  me  that  a  man 
may  be  a  very  good  man,  and  yet  not  be  ready  for  the 
kingdom  of  Christ.  I  deny  it  altogether.  I  say  that 
every  justified  and  converted  man  is  ready,  and  that  if  you 
are  not  ready,  you  are  not  a  justified  man.  I  say  that  the 
standard  I  put  before  you  is  nothing  more  than  the  New 
Testament  standard,  and  that  the  Apostles  would  have 
doubted  the  truth  of  your  religion,  if  you  were  not  looking 
and  longing  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  I  say  above  all 
that  the  grand  end  of  the  Gospel  is  to  prepare  men  to  meet 
God.  What  has  your  Christianity  done  for  you  if  it  has 
not  made  you  meet  for  the  kingdom  of  Christ?  Nothing ! 
nothing !  nothing  at  all !  Oh  !  that  you  may  think  on  this 
matter,  and  never  rest  till  you  are  ready  to  meet  Christ. 

3.  In  the  next  place,  let  me  offer  an  invitation  to  all 
readers  who  do  not  feel  ready  for  Christ’s  return.  That 
invitation  shall  be  short  and  simple.  I  beseech  you  to 
know  your  danger,  and  come  to  Christ  without  delay,  that 
you  may  be  pardoned,  justified,  and  made  ready  fof  things 
to  come.  I  entreat  you  this  day  to  “flee  from  the  wrath 
to  come,”  to  the  hope  set  before  you  in  the  Gospel.  I 
pray  you  in  Christ’s  stead,  to  lay  down  enmity  and  un¬ 
belief,  and  at  once  to  be  reconciled  to  God.  (2  Cor.  v.  20.) 

I  tremble  when  I  think  of  the  privileges  which  surround 
you  in  this  country,  and  of  the  peril  in  which  you  stand 


“OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.”  23 

BO  long  as  you  neglect  them.  I  tremble  when  I  think  of  the 
possibility  of  Christ  coming  again,  and  of  your  being  found 
unpardoned  and  unconverted  in  the  day  of  His  return. 
Better  a  thousand  times  will  he  his  lot  who  was  born  a 
heathen,  and  never  heard  the  Gospel,  than  the  lot  of  him 
who  has  been  a  member  of  a  Church,  but  not  a  living 
member  of  Christ.  Surely  the  time  past  may  suffice  you 
to  have  delayed  and  lingered  about  your  soul.  Awake 
this  day !  “  Awake,  thou  that  sleepest,  and  Christ  shall 

give  thee  light.”  (Eph.  v.  14.) 

Lay  aside  every  thing  that  stands  between  you  and 
Christ.  Cast  away  every  thing  that  draws  you  back  and 
prevents  you  feeling  ready  for  the  Lord’s  appearing.  Find 
out  the  besetting  sin  that  weighs  you  down,  and  tear  it 
from  your  heart,  however  dear  it  may  be.  Cry  mightily 
to  the  Lord  Jesus  to  reveal  Himself  to  your  soul.  Rest 
not  till  you  have  got  a  real,  firm,  and  reasonable  hope,  and 
know  that  your  feet  are  on  the  rock  of  ages.  Rest  not  till 
you  can  say,  “The  Lord  may  come;  the  earth  may  be 
shaken ;  the  foundations  of  the  round  world  may  be  over¬ 
turned;  but  thank  God  I  have  got  treasure  in  heaven,  and 
an  advocate  with  the  Father,  and  I  will  not  be  afraid.” 

Do  this,  and  you  shall  have  got  something  from  reading 
a  simple  tract. 

4.  Last  of  all,  let  me  draw  from  the  subject  an  exhort¬ 
ation  to  all  who  know  Christ  indeed,  and  love  His  appear¬ 
ing.  That  exhortation  is  simply  this,  that  you  will  strive 
more  and  more  to  be  a  “doing”  Christian.  (James  i.  22.) 
Labour  more  and  more  to  show  forth  the  praises  of  Him 
who  hath  called  you  out  of  darkness  into  marvellous  light. 
Improve  every  talent  which  the  Lord  Jesus  has  committed 
to  your  charge  to  the  setting  forth  of  His  glory.  Let  your 
walk  declare  plainly  that  you  seek  a  country.  Let  your 
conformity  to  the  mind  of  Christ  he  unquestionable  and 
unmistakable.  (Philipp,  ii.  5-8.)  Let  your  holiness  be 
a  clear  plain  fact,  which  even  the  worst  enemies  of  the 
Gospel  cannot  deny. 

Above  all,  if  you  are  a  student  of  prophecy,  I  entreat 
you  never  to  let  it  be  said  that  prophetical  study  prevents 
practical  diligence.  If  you  do  believe  that  the  day  is  really 
approaching,  then  labour  actively  to  provoke  others  unto 
love  and  good  works.  If  you  do  believe  that  the  night  is  far 
spent,  be  doubly  diligent  to  cast  off  the  works  of  darkness 


24 


“OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.” 

and  put  on  tlie  armour  of  light.  Never  was  there  a  greater 
mistake  than  to  fancy  the  doctrine  of  the  personal  return 
of  Christ  is  calculated  to  paralyze  Christian  diligence. 
Surely  there  can  be  no  greater  spur  to  the  servant’s  act¬ 
ivity  than  the  expectation  of  his  master’s  speedy  return. 

This  is  the  way  to  attain  a  healthy  state  of  soul.  There 
is  nothing  like  the  exercise  of  our  graces  for  promoting 
our  spiritual  vigour.  Alas  !  there  are  not  a  few  of  God’s 
saints  who  complain  that  they  want  spiritual  comfort  in 
their  religion,  while  the  fault  is  altogether  in  themselves. 
“  Occupy,”  “  occupy,”  I  would  say  to  such  persons.  Lay 
yourselves  out  more  heartily  for  the  glory  of  God,  and 
these  uncomfortable  feelings  will  soon  vanish  away. 

This  is  the  way  to  do  good  to  the  children  of  the  world. 
Nothing  under  God  has  such  an  effect  on  unconverted 
people  as  the  sight  of  a  real  thorough-going  live  Christian. 
There  are  thousands  who  will  not  come  to  hear  the  Gospel, 
and  do  not  know  the  meaning  of  justification  by  faith,  who 
yet  can  understand  an  uncompromising,  holy,  consistent 
walk  with  God.  “Occupy,”  “occupy,”  I  say  again,  if 
you  want  to  do  good. 

This  is  the  way  to  promote  meefness  for  the  inheritance 
of  the  saints  in  light.  There  will  be  no  idleness  in  the 
kingdom  of  Christ.  The  saints  and  angels  shall  there  wait 
on  their  Lord  with  unwearied  activity,  and  serve  Him 
day  and  night.  It  is  a  line  saying  of  Bernard,  that  Jacob 
in  his  vision  saw  some  angels  ascending,  and  some  de¬ 
scending,  but  none  standing  still.  “Occupy,”  “occupy,” 
1  say  again,  if  you  would  be  thoroughly  trained  for  your 
glorious  home. 

Oh  !  brethren  believers,  it  would  be  well  indeed  if  we 
did  but  see  clearly  how  much  it  is  for  our  interest  and 
happiness  to  occupy  every  farthing  of  our  Lord’s  money 
to  live  very  near  to  God. 

So  living  we  shall  find  great  joy  in  our  work — great 
comfort  in  our  trials — great  doors  of  usefulness  in  the  world 
— great  consolation  in  our  sicknesses — great  hope  in  our 
death — leave  great  evidences  behind  us  when  we  are  buried 
— have  great  confidence  in  the  day  of  Christ’s  return — and 
receive  a  great  crown  in  the  day  of  reward. 

I  remain,  your  affectionate  Friend, 

J.  C.  HYLE. 


