4- 


PBESENTED  TO  THE  LIBRARY 


OF 


PRINCETON  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 

BY 

Professor  flenry  von  Dyke,  D.D.,  Ixlx.D. 


BX  5131    .R94  1878 
Ryle,  J.  C.  1816-1900. 
Old  paths 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2015 


https://archive.org/details/oldpathsbeingplaOOryle 


OLD  PATHS. 


OLD  PATHS. 


BEING  PLAIN  STATEMENTS  ON 
SOME  OF  .THE  WEIGHTIER  MATTERS  OF  CHRISTIANITY, 

FROM  THE 

STANDPOINT  OF  AN  EVANGELICAL  CHURCHMAN. 


REV.   J.  C.  'RYLE,  M.A., 

HON.  CANON  OF  NORWICH  ; 
VICAR  OF  STRADBEOKE,  AND  RURAL  DEAN  OF  HOXNE,  SUFFOLK. 

Author  of  "Expository  Tlioughts  on  the  Gospels," 
"Knots  Untied,"  etc. 


"  If  the  tiumpet  give  an  uncertain  sound,  who  shall  prepare  himself  to  the 
battle?"—!  Cob.  xiv.  8. 

LONDON: 
WILLIAM    HUNT   AND  COMPANY, 

12,  PATERNOSTER  ROW. 

IPSWICH:    WILLIAM    HUNT,    TAVERN  STREET. 

1878. 


PKEFACE. 


The  volume  now  in  the  reader's  hands  consists  of  a  series 
of  papers,  systematically  arranged,  on  the  leading  truths 
of  Christianity  which  are  "  necessary  to  salvation." 

Few,  probably,  will  deny  that  there  are  some  things  in 
religion  about  which  we  may  think  other  people  hold  very 
erroneous  views,  and  are,  notwithstanding,  in  no  danger  of 
being  finally  lost.  About  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper, 
— about  the  Christian  ministry, — about  forms  of  prayer  and 
modes  of  worship, — about  the  union  of  Church  and  State, 
— about  all  these  things  it  is  commonly  admitted  that 
people  may  differ  widely,  and  yet  be  finally  saved.  No 
doubt  there  are  always  bigots  and  extreme  partisans,  who 
are  ready  to  excommunicate  every  one  who  cannot  pro- 
nounce their  Shibboleth  on  the  above-named  points.  But, 
speaking  generally,  to  shut  out  of  heaven  all  who  dis- 
agree with  us  about  these  things,  is  to  take  up  a  position 
which  most  thoughtful  Christians  condemn  as  unscriptural, 
narrow,  and  uncharitable. 


vi 


PREFACE. 


On  the  other  hand,  there  are  certain  great  truths  of 
which  some  knowledge,  by  common  consent,  appears 
essential  to  salvation.  Such  truths  are  the  immortality 
of  the  soul, — the  sinfulness  of  human  nature, — the  work 
of  Christ  for  us  as  our  Redeemer, — the  work  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  us, — forgiveness, — ^justification, —  conversion, — 
faith, — repentance, — the  marks  of  a  right  heart, — Christ's 
invitations, — Christ's  intercession, — and  the  like.  If  truths 
like  these  are  not  absolutely  necessary  to  salvation,  it  is 
difficult  to  understand  how  any  truths  whatever  can  be 
called  necessary.  If  people  may  be  saved  without  knowing 
anything  about  these  truths,  it  appears  to  me  that  we  may 
throw  away  our  Bibles  altogether,  and  proclaim  that  the 
Christian  religion  is  of  no  use.  From  such  a  miserable 
conclusion  I  hope  most  people  will  shrink  back  with  horror. 

To  open  out  and  explain  these  great  necessary  trutlis, — 
to  confirm  them  by  Scripture, — to  enforce  them  by  home 
appeals  to  the  conscience  of  all  who  read  this  volume, — 
this  is  the  simple  object  of  the  series  of  papers  which  is 
now  ottered  to  the  public* 


To  this  statement,  I  frankly  admit,  the  first  and  two  last  papers  in 
the  volume  form  an  exception.  Inspiration,  Election,  and  Perseverance 
are  undoubtedly  points  about  which  good  men  in  every  age  have  dis- 
agreed, and  will  disagree  perhaps  while  the  world  stands.  The  immense 
importance  of  inspiration  in  this  day,  and  the  extraordinary  neglect  into 
which  election  and  perseverance  have  fallen,  notwithstanding  the  Seven- 
teenth Article,  are  my  reasons  for  inserting  the  three  papers. 


PREFACE. 


VII 


The  name  Avliich  I  have  selected  will  prepare  the  reader 
to  expect  no  new  doctrines  in  this  volume.  It  is  simple^ 
unadulterated,  old-fashioned  Evangelical  theology.  It 
contains  nothing  but  the  "  Old  Paths "  in  which  the 
Apostolic  Christians,  the  Reformers,  the  best  English 
Churchmen  for  the  last  three  hundred  years,  and  the 
best  Evangelical  Christians  of  the  present  day,  have  per- 
sistently walked.  From  these  "  paths "  I  see  no  reason 
to  depart.  They  are  often  sneered  at  and  ridiculed,  as 
old-fashioned,  effete,  worn  out,  and  powerless  in  the  Nine- 
teenth Century.  Be  it  so.  "  None  of  these  things  move 
me."  I  have  yet  to  learn  that  there  is  any  system  of 
religious  teaching,  by  whatever  name  it  may  be  called. 
High,  or  Broad,  or  Romish,  or  Neologian,  which  produces 
one  quarter  of  the  effect  on  human  nature  that  is  produced 
by  the  old,  despised  system  of  doctrine  which  is  commonly 
called  Evangelical.  I  willingly  admit  the  zeal,  earnestness, 
and  devotedness  of  many  religious  teachers  wlio  are  not 
Evangelical.  But  I  hrmly  maintain  that  the  way  of  the 
school  to  which  I  belong  is  the  "more  excellent  way." 
The  longer  I  live  the  more  I  am  convinced  that  the 
world  needs  no  new  Gospel,  as  some  profess  to  think.  I 
am  thoroughly  persuaded  that  the  world  needs  nothing 
but  a  bold,  full,  unflinching  teaching  of  the  "  old  paths." 
The  heart  of  man  is  the  same  in  every  age.  The  spiritual 
medicine  which  it  requires  is  always  the  same.    The  same 


VIU 


PREFACE. 


Gospel  whicli  was  preached  by  Latimer,  and  Hooper,  and 
Bradford, —  by  Hall,  Davenant,  Usher,  Reynolds,  and 
Hopkins, — by  Manton,  Brooks,  Watson,  Charnock,  Owen, 
and'  Gurnall, — by  Romaine,  Venn,  Grimshaw,  Hervey, 
and  Cecil, — this  is  the  gospel  which  alone  will  do  real 
good  in  the  present  da}'.  The  leading  doctrines  of  that 
gospel  are  the  substance  of  the  papers  which  compose  this 
volume.  They  are  the  doctrines,  I  firmly  believe,  of  the 
Bible  and  the  Thirty-nine  Ai-ticles  of  the  Church  of 
England.  They  are  doctrines  which,  I  find,  wear  well, 
and  in  the  faith  of  them  I  hope  to  live  and  die. 

I  repeat  most  emphatically  that  I  am  not  ashamed  of 
what  are  commonly  called  "  Evangelical  principles." 
Fiercely  and  bitterly  as  those  principles  are  assailed  on 
all  sides, — loudly  and  scornfully  as  some  proclaim  that  they 
have  done  their  work  and  are  useless  in  this  day, — I  see  no 
evidence  whatever  that  they  are  defective  or  decayed,  and 
I  see  no  reason  for  giving  them  up.  No  doubt  other 
schools  of  thought  produce  great  outward  eflfects  on  man- 
kind, gather  large  congregations,  attain  great  popularity, 
and  by  means  of  music,  ornaments,  gestures,  postures,  and 
a  generally  histrionic  ceremonial,  make  a  great  show  of 
religion.  I  see  it  all,  and  I  am  not  surprised.  It  is  exactly 
what  a  study  of  human  nature  by  the  light  of  the  Bible 
would  lead  me  to  expect.  But  for  real  imoard  eflfects  on 
hearts,  and  outward  effects  on  lives,  I  see  no  teaching  so 


PREFACE. 


ix 


powerful  as  thorough,  genuine  Evangelical  teaching.  Just 
in  proportion  as  the  preachers  of  other  schools  borrow 
Evangelical  weapons  and  Evangelical  phraseology  I  see 
them  obtaining  influence.  No  doubt  the  good  that  is 
done  in  the  world  is  little,  and  evil  abounds.  But  I  am 
certain  that  the  teaching  which  does  most  good  is  that 
of  the  despised  Evangelical  school.  It  is  not  merely  true 
and  good  up  to  a  certain  point,  and  then  defective  and 
needing  additions,  as  some  tell  us ;  it  is  true  and  good  all 
round,  and  needs  no  addition  at  all.  If  those  who  hold 
Evangelical  views  were  only  more  faithful  to  their  own 
principles,  and  more  bold,  and  uncompromising,  and 
decided,  both  in  their  preaching  and  their  lives,  they 
would  soon  find,  whatever  infidels  and  Romanists  may 
please  to  say,  that  they  hold  the  only  lever  which  can 
shake  the  world. 

The  readers  of  the  many  tracts  which  God  has  allowed 
me  to  send  fortli  for  thirty  years,  must  not  expect  much 
that  they  have  not  seen  before,  in  "  Old  Paths."  Expe- 
rience has  taught  me,  at  last,  that  the  peculiar  tastes  of 
all  classes  of  society  must  be  consulted,  if  good  is  to  be 
done  by  the  press.  I  am  convinced  that  there  are  thousands 

of  people  in  England  who  are  willing  to  read  a  volume,  but 

f 

will  never  look  at  anything  in  the  form  of  a  tract.  It  is 
for  them  that  I  now  send  forth  "  Old  Paths." 

Those  who  read  through  this  book  continuously,  and 


PREFACE. 


without  a  pause,  will,  doubtless,  observe  a  certain  degree 
of  sameness  and  similarity  in  some  of  the  papers.  The 
same  thoughts  are  occasionally  repeated,  though  in  a 
diflferent  dress.  To  account  for  this,  I  will  ask  them  to 
remember  that  most  of  the  papers  were  originally  written 
separately,  and  at  long  intervals  of  time,  in  some 
cases  of  as  much  as  twenty  years.  On  calm  reflection, 
I  have  thought  it  better  to  republish  them,  pretty 
much  as  they  originally  appeared.  Few  readers  of  a 
religious  book  like  this  read  it  all  through  at  once ;  and 
the  great  majority,  I  suspect,  find  it  enough  to  read 
quietly  only  one  or  two  chapters  at  a  time. 

I  now  send  forth  the  volume  with  a  deep  sense  of  its 
many  defects ;  but  with  an  earnest  prayer  that  it  may  do 
some  good. 

J.  C.  RYLE. 

October,  1877.  Vicar  of  Stradbroke. 


CONTENTS. 

PREFACE 

V 

I. 

INSPIRATION 

1 

II. 

OUR  SOULS  . 

40 

III. 

FEW  SAVED 

64 

IV. 

OUR  HOPE  . 

93 

V. 

ALIVE  OR  DEAD  . 

.  121 

VI. 

OUR  SINS 

150 

VII. 

FORGIVENESS 

.  179 

VIII. 

JUSTIFICATION 

211 

IX. 

THE  CROSS  OF  CHRIST 

.  239 

X. 

THE  HOLY  GHOST 

263 

XI. 

HAVING  THE  SPIRIT 

.  291 

XII. 

CONVERSION  . 

322 

XIII. 

THE  HEART 

.  340 

XIV. 

Christ's  invitation 

358 

XV. 

FAITH  .... 

.  376 

XVI. 

repentance 

403 

xyii. 

Christ's  power  to  save 

.  436 

XVIII. 

election 

458 

XIX. 

perseverance 

.  476 

OLD  PATHS. 


1. 

INSPIRATION. 

"All  Scripture  is  g'ven  hy  inspiration  of  God." — 2  Tdi.  iii.  IG. 

How  was  the  Bible  written?  —  "Whence  is  it?  From 
heaven,  or  of  men  ? " — Had  the  writers  of  the  Bible  any 
special  or  peculiar  help  in  doing  their  work  ? — Is  there 
anything  in  the  Bible  which  makes  it  unlike  all  other 
books,  and  therefore  demands  our  respectful  attention  ? — 
These  are  questions  of  vast  importance.  They  are  ques- 
tions to  which  I  wish  to  offer  an  answer  in  this  paper.  To 
speak  plainly,  the  subject  I  propose  to  examine  is  that 
deep  one,  the  inspiration  of  Scripture.  I  believe  the  Bible 
to  have  been  written  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  I  want 
others  to  be  of  the  same  belief 

The  subject  is  ahunyf?  important.  I  place  it  purposely 
in  the  very  forefront  of  the  papers  which  compose  this 
volume.  I  ask  a  hearing  for  the  doctrines  which  I  am 
about  to  handle,  because  they  are  drawn  from  a  book 
which  is  the  "  Word  of  God."  Inspiration,  in  short,  is  the 
very  keel  and  foundation  of  Christianity.  If  Christians 
have  no  Divine  book  to  turn  to  as  the  warrant  of  their 
doctrine  and  practice,  they  have  no  solid  ground  for  present 
peace  or  hope,  and  no  right  to  claim  the  attention  of  man- 

B 


2 


OLD  PATHS. 


kind.  They  are  building  on  a  quicksand,  and  their  faith  is 
vain.  We  ought  to  be  able  to  say  boldly, "  We  are  what  we 
are,  and  we  do  what  we  do,  because  we  have  here  a  book 
whicb  we  believe  to  be  the  Word  of  God." 

The  subject  is  one  of  peculiar  importance  in  the 
present  day.  Infidelity  and  scepticism  abound  everywhere. 
In  one  form  or  another  they  are  to  be  found  in  every  rank 
and  class  of  society.  Thousands  of  Englishmen  are  not 
ashamed  to  say  that  they  regard  the  Bible  as  an  old 
obsolete  Jewish  book,  which  has  no  special  claim  on  our 
faith  and  obedience,  and  that  it  contains  many  inaccuracies 
«  and  defects.  Myriads  who  will  not  go  so  far  as  this  are 
wavering  and  shaken  in  their  belief,  and  show  plainly  by 
their  lives  that  they  are  not  quite  sure  the  Bible  is  true. 
In  a  day  like  this  the  true  Christian  should  be  able  to  set 
bis  foot  down  firmly,  and  to  render  a  reason  of  liis  con- 
fidence in  God's  Word.  He  should  be  able  by  sound 
arguments  to  meet  and  silence  the  gainsayer,  if  he  cannot 
convince  him.  He  should  be  able  to  show  good  cause  why 
he  thinks  the  Bible  is  "from  heaven,  and  not  of  men." 

The  subject  without  doubt  is  a  very  difficult  one.  It 
cannot  be  followed  up  without  entering  on  ground  which 
is  dark  and  mysterious  to  mortal  man.  It  involves  the 
discussion  of  things  which  are  miraculous,  and  supernatural, 
and  above  reason,  and  cannot  be  fully  explained.  But 
difficulties  must  not  turn  us  away  from  any  subject  in 
religion.  There  is  not  a  science  in  the  world  about  which 
questions  may  not  be  asked  which  no  one  can  answer.  It 
is  poor  ^ihilosophy  to  say  we  will  believe  nothing  unless 
we  can  understand  everything !  We  must  not  give  up  the 
subject  of  inspiration  in  despair  because  it  contains  things 
"hard  to  be  understood."  There  still  remains  a  vast 
amount  of  ground  which  is  plain  to  every  common  under- 
standing. I  invite  my  readers  to  occupy  this  ground  with 
me  to-day,  and  to  hear  what  I  have  got  to  say  on  the 
Divine  authority  of  God's  Word. 


INSPIRATION. 


3 


In  considering  the  subject  before  us,  there  are  two  things 
which  I  propose  to  do : — 

I.  In  the  first  place,  I  shall  try  to  show  the  general 
truth,  that  the  Bible  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God. 

II.  In  the  second  place,  I  shall  try  to  show  the  extent 
to  which  the  Bible  is  inspired. 

I  trust  that  all  who  read  this  paper  will  take  up  the 
subject  ill  a  serious  and  reverent  spirit.  This  question  of 
inspiration  is  no  light  one.  It  involves  tremendously 
grave  consequences.  If  the  Bible  is  not  the  Word  of  God 
and  inspired,  the  whole  of  Christendom  for  1800  years  has 
been  under  an  immense  delusion ; — half  the  human  race 
has  been  cheated  and  deceived,  and  churches  are  monu- 
ments of  folly. — If  the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God  and 
inspired,  all  who  refuse  to  believe  it  are  in  fearful  danger ; 
— they  are  living  on  the  brink  of  eternal  misery.  No 
man,  in  his  sober  senses,  can  fail  to  see  that  the  whole 
subject  demands  most  serious  attention. 

I.  In  the  first  place,  I  propose  to  show  the  general 
truth, — that  the  Bible  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God. 

In  saying  this,  I  mean  to  assert  that  the  Bible  is  utterly 
unlike  all  other  books  that  were  ever  written,  because  its 
writers  were  specially  inspired,  or  enabled  by  God,  for  the 
work  which  they  did.  I  say  that  the  Book  comes  to  us 
with  a  claim  which  no  other  book  possesses.  It  is  stamped 
with  Divine  authority.  In  this  respect  it  stands  entirely 
alone.  Sermons,  and  tracts,  and  theological  writings  of 
all  kinds,  may  be  sound  and  edifying,  but  they  are  only 
the  handiwork  of  uninspired  man.  The  Bible  alone  is  the 
Book  of  God. 

Now  I  shall  not  waste  time  in  proving  that  the  Scrip- 
tures are  genuine  and  authentic,  that  they  were  really 
written  by  the  very  men  who  profess  to  have  written  them, 
and  that  they  contain  the  very  things  which  they  wrote. 


4 


OLD  PATHS. 


I  shall  not  touch  what  are  commonly  called  external 
evidences.  I  shall  bring  forward  the  book  itself,  and  pu  t 
it  in  the  witness  box.  I  shall  try  to  show  that  nothing 
can  possibly  account  for  the  Bible  being  what  it  is,  and 
doing  what  it  has  done,  except  the  theory  that  it  is  the 
Word  of  God.  I  lay  it  down  broadly,  as  a  position  whicli 
cannot  be  turned,  that  the  Bible  itself,  fairly  examined,  is 
the  best  witness  of  its  own  inspiration.  I  shall  content 
myself  with  stating  some  plain  facts  about  the  Bible, 
which  can  neither  be  denied  nor  explained  away.  And 
the  ground  I  shall  take  up  is  this, — that  these  facts  ought 
to  satisfy  every  reasonable  inquirer  that  the  Bible  is  of 
God,  and  not  of  man.  They  are  simple  facts,  whicli 
require  no  knowledge  of  Hebrew,  or  Greek,  or  Latin,  in 
order  to  be  understood ;  yet  they  are  facts  which  prove  to 
my  own  mind  conclusively  that  the  Bible  is  superhuman, 
or  not  of  man. 

(a)  It  is  a  fact,  that  there  is  an  extraordinary  fulness 
and  richness  in  the  contents  of  the  Bible.  It  throw^s  more 
light  on  a  vast  number  of  most  important  subjects  than 
all  the  other  books  in  the  world  put  together.  It  boldly 
handles  matters  which  are  beyond  the  reach  of  man,  when 
left  to  himself  It  treats  of  things  which  are  mysterious 
and  invisible, — the  soul,  the  world  to  come,  and  eternity, — 
depths  which  man  has  no  line  to  fathom.  All  who  have 
tried  to  write  of  these  things,  without  Bible  light,  have 
done  little  but  show  their  own  ignorance.  They  grope 
like  the  blind  ;  they  speculate  ;  they  guess ;  they  generally 
make  the  darkness  more  visible,  and  land  us  in  a  region 
of  vincertainty  and  doubt.  How  dim  were  the  views  of 
Socrates,  Plato,  Cicero,  and  Seneca!  A  well-taught 
Sunday  scholar,  in  this  day,  knows  more  spiritual  truth 
than  all  these  sages  put  together. 

The  Bible  alone  gives  a  reasonable  account  of  the 
beginning  and  end  of  the  globe  on  which  we  live.  It 
starts  from  the  birthday  of  sun,  moon,  stars,  and  earth  in 


INSPIRATION. 


5 


their  present  order,  and  shows  us  creation  iti  its  cradle. 
It  foretells  the  dissolution  of  all  things,  when  the  earth 
and  all  its  works  shall  be  burned  up,  and  shows  us  creation 
in  its  grave.  It  tells  us  the  story  of  the  world's  youth  ; 
and  it  tells  us  the  story  of  its  old  age.  It  gives  us  a 
picture  of  its  first  days;  and  it  gives  us  a  picture  of  its 
last.  How  vast  and  important  is  this  knowledge !  Can 
this  be  the  handiwork  of  uninspired  man  ?  Let  us  try  to 
answer  that  question. 

The  Bible  alone  gives  a  true  and  faithful  account  of 
man.  It  does  not  flatter  him  as  novels  and  romances  do ; 
it  does  not  conceal  his  faults  and  exaggerate  his  goodness ; 
it  paints  him  just  as  he  is.  It  describes  him  as  a  fallen 
creature,  of  his  own  nature  inclined  to  evil, — a  creature 
needing  not  only  a  pardon,  bat  a  new  heart,  to  make  him 
fit  for  heaven.  It  shows  him  to  be  a  corrupt  being  under 
every  circumstance,  when  left  to  himself, — corrupt  after 
the  loss  of  paratlise, — corrupt  after  the  flood, — corrupt 
when  fenced  in  by  divine  laws  and  commandments, — 
corrupt  when  the  Son  of  God  came  down  and  visited  him 
in  the  flesh, — corrupt  in  the  fice  of  warnings,  promises, 
miracles,  judgments,  mercies.  In  one  word,  it  shows  man 
to  be  by  nature  always  a  sinner.  How  important  is  this 
knowledge  !  Can  this  be  the  work  of  uninspired  minds  ? 
Let  us  try  to  answer  that  question. 

The  Bible  alone  gives  us  true  views  of  God.  By  nature 
man  knows  nothing  clearly  or  fully  about  Him.  All  his 
conceptions  of  Him  are  low,  grovelling,  and  debased. 
What  could  be  more  degraded  than  the  gods  of  the 
Cauaanitcs  and  Egyptians, — of  Babylon,  of  Greece,  and  of 
Rome  ?  What  can  be  more  vile  than  the  gods  of  the 
Hindoos  and  other  heathen  in  our  own  time  ? — By  the 
Bible  we  know  that  God  hates  sin.  The  destruction  of 
the  old  world  by  the  flood ;  the  burning  of  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah ;  the  drowning  of  Pharoah  and  the  Egyptians 
in  the  Red  Sea ;  the  cutting  olf  the  nations  of  Canaan ; 


6 


OLD  PATHS. 


the  overthrow  of  Jerusalem  and  the  Temple;  the  scattering 
of  the  Jews ; — all  these  are  unmistakable  witnesses. — By 
the  Bible  we  know  that  God  loves  sinners.  His  sracious 
promise  in  tlie  day  of  Adam's  fall;  His  longsuffering  in 
the  time  of  Noah ;  His  deliverance  of  Israel  out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt ;  His  gift  of  the  law  at  Mount  Sinai ;  His 
bringing  the  tribes  into  the  promised  laud ;  His  forbearance 
in  the  days  of  the  Judges  and  Kings ;  His  repeated 
warnings  by  the  month  of  His  prophets ;  His  restoration 
of  Israel  after  the  Babylonian  captivity ;  His  sending  His 
Son  into  the  world,  in  due  time,  to  be  crucified ;  His 
commanding  the  Gospel  to  be  preached  to  the  Gentiles ; — 
all  these  are  speaking  facts. — By  the  Bible  we  learn  that 
God  knows  all  things.  We  see  Him  foretelling  things 
hundreds  and  thousands  of  years  before  they  take  place, 
and  as  He  foretells  so  it  comes  to  pass.  He  foretold  that 
the  family  of  Ham  should  be  a  servant  of  servants, — that 
Tyre  should  become  a  rock  for  drying  nets, — that  Nineveh 
should  become  a  desolation, — that  Babylon  should  be  made 
a  desert — that  Egypt  should  be  the  basest  of  kingdoms, — 
that  Edom  should  be  forsaken  and  uninhabited, — and  that 
the  Jews  should  not  be  reckoned  among  the  nations.  All 
these  things  were  utterly  unlikely  and  improbable.  Yet 
all  have  been  fulfilled.  Once  more  I  sa}-,  how  vast  and 
important  is  all  this  knowledge !  Can  this  Book  be  the 
work  of  uninspired  man  ?  Let  us  try  to  answer  that 
question. 

The  Bible  alone  teaches  us  that  God  has  made  a  full, 
perfect,  and  comiilcte  provision  for  the  salvation  of  fallen 
man.  It  tells  of  an  atonement  made  for  the  sin  of  the 
world,  by  the  sacrifice  and  death  of  God's  own  Son  upon 
the  cross.  It  tells  us  that  by  His  death  for  sinners,  as 
their  Substitute,  He  obtained  eternal  redemption  for  all 
that  believe  on  Him.  The  claims  of  God's  broken  law 
have  now  been  satisfied.  Christ  has  suffered  for  sin,  the 
just  for  the  unjust.    God  can  now  be  just,  and  yet  the 


INSPIRATION. 


7 


justifier  of  the  ungodly.  It  tells  us  that  there  is  now  a 
complete  remedy  for  the  guilt  of  sin, — even  the  precious 
blood  of  Christ;  and  peace,  and  rest  of  conscience  for  all 
who  believe  on  Christ.  "  Whosoever  believeth  on  Him 
.shall  not  perish,  but  have  eternal  life."  It  tells  us  that 
there  is  a  comjilete  remedy  for  the  power  of  sin, — even 
the  almighty  grace  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  It  shows  us 
the  Holy  Ghost  quickening  believers,  and  making  them 
new  creatures.  It  promises  a  new  heart  and  a  new  nature 
to  all  who  will  hear  Christ's  voice,  and  follow  Him.  Once 
more  I  say,  how  important  is  this  knowledge !  What 
should  we  know  of  all  this  comfortable  truth  without  the 
Bible  ?  Can  this  Book  be  the  composition  of  uninspired 
men  ?    Let  us  try  to  answer  that  question. 

The  Bible  alone  explains  the  state  of  things  that  ice  see 
in  the  tuorld  around  us.  There  are  many  things  on  earth 
which  a  natural  man  cannot  explain.  The  amazing 
inequality  of  conditions, — the  poverty  and  distress, — the 
oppression  and  persecution, — the  shakings  and  tumults, — 
the  failures  of  statesmen  and  legislators, — the  constant 
existence  of  uncured  evils  and  abuses, — all  these  things 
are  often  puzzling  to  him.  He  sees,  but  docs  not  under- 
stand. But  the  Bible  makes  it  all  clear.  The  Bible  can 
tell  him  that  the  whole  world  lieth  in  wickedness, — that 
the  prince  of  the  world,  the  devil,  is  everywhere, — and 
that  it  is  vain  to  look  for  perfection  in  the  present  order 
of  things.  The  Bible  will  tell  him  that  neither  laws  nor 
education  can  ever  change  men's  hearts, — and  that  just  as 
no  man  will  ever  make  a  machine  work  well,  unless  he 
allows  for  friction, — so  also  no  man  will  do  much  good  in 
the  world,  unless  he  always  remembers  that  human  nature 
is  fallen,  and  that  the  world  he  works  in  is  full  of  sin. 
The  Bible  will  tell  him  that  there  is  "a  good  time" 
certainly  coming, — and  coming  perhaps  sooner  than  people 
expect  it, — a  time  of  perfect  knowledge,  perfect  justice, 
perfect  happiness,  and  perfect  peace.    But  the  Bible  will 


8 


OLD  PATHS. 


tell  him  this  time  shall  not  he  brought  in  by  any  power 
but  that  of  Christ  coming  to  earth  again.  And  for  that 
second  coming  of  Christ,  the  Bible  will  tell  him  to  prepare. 
Once  more,  I  say,  how  important  is  all  this  knowledge ! 

All  these  are  things  which  men  covdd  find  nowhere 
except  in  the  Scriptures.  We  have  probably  not  the  least 
idea  how  little  we  should  know  about  these  thinsfs  if  we 
had  not  the  Bible.  We  hardly  know  the  value  of  the  air 
we  breathe,  and  the  sun  which  shines  on  us,  because  we 
have  never  known  what  it  is  to  be  without  them.  We  do 
not  value  the  truths  on  which  I  have  been  just  now 
dwelling,  because  we  do  not  realize  the  darkness  of  men 
to  whom  these  truths  have  not  been  revealed.  Surely  no 
tongue  can  fully  tell  the  value  of  the  treasures  this  one 
volume  contains.  Set  down  that  fact  in  your  mind,  and 
do  not  forget  it.  The  extraordinary  contents  of  the  Bible 
are  a  great  fact  which  can  only  be  explained  by  admitting 
its  inspiration.  Mark  well  what  I  say.  It  is  a  simple 
broad  fact,  that  in  the  matter  of  contents,  the  Bible  stands 
entirely  alone,  and  no  other  book  is  fit  to  be  named  in  the 
same  day  with  it.  He  that  dares  to  say  the  Bible  is  not 
inspired,  let  him  give  a  reasonable  account  of  this  fact,  if 
he  can. 

(b)  It  is  another  fact  that  there  is  an  extraordinary 
unity  and  harmony  in  the  contents  of  the  Bible,  which 
is  entirely  above  man.  We  all  know  how  difficult  it  is  to 
get  a  story  told  by  any  three  persons,  not  living  together, 
in  which  there  are  not  some  contradictions  and  discrepan- 
cies. If  the  story  is  a  long  one,  and  involves  a  large 
quantity  of  particulars,  unity  seems  almost  impossible 
among  the  common  run  of  men.  But  it  is  not  so  with 
the  Bible.  Here  is  a  long  book  written  by  not  less  than 
thirty  different  persons.  The  writers  were  men  of  every 
rank  and  class  in  society.  One  was  a  lawgiver.  One  was 
a  warlike  king.  One  was  a  peaceful  kmg.  One  was  a 
herdsman.    One  had  been  brought  up  as  a  publican, — 


INSPIRATION. 


9 


finother  as  a  physician, — another  as  a  learned  Pliarisce, — - 
two  as  fishermen, — several  as  priests.  They  lived  at 
different  intervals  over  a  space  of  1500  years;  and  tho 
greater  part  of  them  never  saw  each  other  face  to  face. 
And  yet  there  is  a  perfect  harmony  among  all  these 
writers  ?  They  all  write  as  if  they  were  under  one 
dictation.  The  style  and  hand-writing  may  vary,  but 
the  mind  that  runs  through  their  work  is  always  one  and 
the  same.  They  all  tell  the  same  story.  They  all  give 
one  account  of  man, — one  account  of  God, — one  account 
of  the  way  of  salvation, — one  account  of  the  human  heart. 
You  see  truth  unfokling  under  their  hands,  as  you  go 
through  the  volume  of  their  writings, — but  you  never 
detect  any  real  contradiction,  or  contrariety  of  view. 

Let  U8  set  down  this  fact  in  our  minds,  and  ponder  it 
well.  Tell  us  not  that  this  unity  might  be  the  result  of 
chance.  No  one  can  ever  believe  that  but  a  very 
credulous  person.  There  is  only  one  satisfactory  account 
to  be  given  of  the  fact  before  us. — The  Bible  is  not  of 
man,  but  of  God. 

(c)  It  is  another  fact  that  there  is  an  extraordinary 
rvisdom,  svMiinity  and  majesty  in  the  style  of  the  Bible, 
which  is  above  man.  Strange  and  unlikely  as  it  was, 
the  writers  of  Scripture  have  produced  a  book  which 
even  at  this  day  is  utterly  unrivalled.  With  all  our 
boasted  attainments  in  science  and  art  and  learning,  we 
can  produce  nothing  that  can  be  compared  with  the  Bible. 
Even  at  this  very  hour,  in  1877,  the  book  stands  entirely 
alone.  There  is  a  strain  and  a  style  and  a  tone  of  thought 
about  it,  which  separate  it  from  all  other  writings.  There 
are  no  weak  points,  and  motes,  and  flaws,  and  blemishes. 
There  is  no  mixture  of  infirmity  and  feebleness,  such  as 
you  will  find  in  the  works  of  even  the  best  Christians. 
"  Holy,  holy,  holy,"  seems  written  on  every  page.  To  talk 
of  comparing  the  Bible  with  other  "sacred  books"  so- 
called,  such  as  the  Koran,  the  Shasters,  or  the  book  of 


10 


OLD  PATHS. 


Mormon,  is  positively  absurd.  You  niioht  as  well  compare 
the  sun  with  a  rushlight, — or  Skiddaw  with  a  mole  hill, — 
or  St.  Paul's  with  an  Irish  hovel, — or  the  Portland  vase 
Avith  a  garden  pot, — or  the  Koh-i-noor  diamond  with  a 
bit  of  glass.  *  God  seems  to  have  allowed  the  existence 
of  these  pretended  revelations,  in  order  to  prove  the 
immeasurable  superiority  of  His  own  Word.  To  talk  of 
the  inspiration  of  the  Bible,  as  only  differing  in  degree 
from  that  of  such  writings  as  the  works  of  Homer,  Plato, 
Shakspeare,  Dante,  and  Milton,  is  simply  a  piece  of 
I  blasphemous  folly.  Every  honest  and  unprejudiced  reader 
/  must  see  that  there  is  a  gulf  between  the  Bible  and  any 
'  other  book,  which  no  man  can  fathom.  You  feel,  on 
turning  from  the  Scriptures  to  other  works,  that  you  have 
got  into  a  new  atmosphere.  You  feel  like  one  who  has 
exchancred  sold  for  base  metal,  and  heaven  for  earth. 
And  how  can  this  mighty  difference  be  accounted  for  ? 
The  men  who  wrote  the  Bible  had  no  special  advantages. 
They  lived  in  a  remote  corner  of  the  civilized  earth. 
They  had,  most  of  them,  little  leisure,  few  books,  and  no 
learning, — such  as  learning  is  reckoned  in  this  world. 
Yet  the  book  they  compose  is  cue  which  is  unrivalled  ! 
There  is  but  one  way  of  accounting  for  this  fact. — They 
wrote  under  the  direct  inspiration  of  God. 

(d)    It  is  another  fact  that  there  is  an  extraordinary 
accuracy  in  the  facts  and  statements  of  the  Bible,  which 

*Carlyle's  estimate  of  the  Koran  is  given,  in  "  Hero-worsliip, "  in 
the  following  words.  "It  is  a  wearisome,  confused  jumble,  crude, 
recondite,  abounding  in  endless  iterations,  long-windeduess,  entangle- 
ment, insupportable  stupidity.  In  short  nothing  but  a  sense  of  duty 
could  carry  any  European  through  the  Koran,  with  its  unreadable 
masses  of  lumber." 

John  Owen  says,  "  There  are  no  other  writings  in  the  world,  beside  the 
Bible,  that  ever  pretended  unto  a  divine  original,  but  they  are  not  only 
from  their  matter,  but  from  the  manner  of  their  writing,  and  the  plain 
footsteps  of  human  artifice  and  weakness  therein,  sufficient  for  their 
own  conviction,  and  do  openly  discover  their  own  vain  pretensions." 
{The  Reason  of  Faith.    AYorks,  vol  iv.,  p.  34r,  Johnston's  Edition.) 


INSPIRATION. 


11 


is  above  man.  Here  is  a  book  wliieli  has  been  finished 
and  before  the  world  for  nearly  1800  years.  These  1800 
years  have  been  the  busiest  and  most  changeful  period 
the  world  has  ever  seen.  During  this  period  the  greatest 
discoveries  have  been  made  in  science,  the  greatest 
alterations  in  the  ways  and  customs  of  society,  the  greatest 
improvements  in  the  habits  and -usages  of  life.  Hundreds 
of  things  might  be  named  which  satisfied  and  pleased  our 
lorefathers,  which  we  have  laid  aside  long  ago  as  obsolete, 
useless,  and  old-fashioned.  The  laws,  the  books,  the  houses, 
the  furniture,  the  clothes,  the  arms,  the  machinery,  the  car- 
riages of  each  succeeding  century,  have  been  a  continual 
improvement  on  those  of  the  century  that  went  before. 
There  is  hardly  a  thing  in  which  fiiults  and  weak  points 
have  not  been  discovered.  There  is  scarcely  an  institution 
which  has  not  gone  through  a  process  of  sifting,  purifying, 
refining,  simplifying,  reforming,  amending,  and  changing. 
But  all  this  time  men  have  never  discovered  a  weak  point 
or  a  defect  in  the  Bible.  Infidels  have  assailed  it  in  vain. 
There  it  stands, — perfect,  and  fresh,  and  complete,  as  it 
did  eighteen  centuries  ago.  The  march  of  intellect  never 
overtakes  it.  The  wisdom  of  wise  men  never  gets  beyond 
it.  The  science  of  philosophers  never  proves  it  wrong. 
The  discoveries  of  travellers  never  convict  it  of  mistakes. 
- — Are  the  distant  islands  of  the  Pacific  laid  open  ?  Nothing 
is  found  that  in  the  slightest  desjree  contradicts  the  Bible 
account  of  man's  heart. — Are  the  ruins  of  Nineveh  and 
Egypt  ransacked  and  explored  ?  Notliing  is  found  that 
overturns  one  jot  or  tittle  of  the  Bible's  historical  state- 
ments.— How  shall  we  account  for  this  fact  ?  Who  could 
have  thought  it  possible  that  so  large  a  book,  handling 
such  a  vast  variety  of  subjects,  should  at  the  end  of  1800 
years,  be  found  so  free  from  erroneous  statements  ?  There 
is  only  one  account  to  be  given  of  the  fact. — The  Bible 
was  written  hy  inspiration  of  God. 

(e)    It  is  another  fact  that  there  is  in  the  Bible  an 


12 


OLD  PATHS. 


extraorJinary  suitahleness  to  the  spiritual  wants  of  all 
'mankind.  It  exactly  meets  the  heart  of  man  in  every 
rank  or  class,  in  every  country  and  climate,  in  every  age 
and  period  of  life.  It  is  the  only  book  in  existence  which 
is  never  out  of  place  and  out  of  date.  Other  books  after 
a  time  become  obsolete  and  old-fashioned :  the  Bible 
never  does.  Other  books  suit  one  country  or  people,  and 
not  another :  the  Bible  suits  all.  It  is  the  book  of  the 
poor  and  unlearned  no  less  than  of  the  rich  and  the 
philosopher.  It  feeds  the  mind  of  the  labourer  in  his 
cottage,  and  it  satisfies  the  gigantic  intellects  of  Newton, 
Chalmers,  Brewster,  and  Farada}^  Lord  Macaulay,  and 
John  Bright,  and  the  writers  of  brilliant  articles  in  the 
Times,  are  all  under  obligations  to  the  same  volume.  It 
is  equally  valued  by  the  converted  New  Zealander  in  the 
southern  hemisphere,  and  the  Red  River  Indian  in  the  cold 
north  of  America,  and  the  Hindoo  under  the  tropical  sun. 

It  is  the  only  book,  moreover,  which  seems  always  fresh 
and  evergreen  and  new.  For  eighteen  centuries  it  has 
been  studied  and  jarayed  over  by  millions  of  private 
Christians,  and  expounded  and  explained  and  preached  to 
us  by  thousands  of  ministers.  Fathers,  and  Schoolmen, 
and  Reformers,  and  Puritans,  and  modern  divines,  have 
incessantly  dug  down  into  the  mine  of  Scripture,  and  yet 
have  never  exhausted  it.  It  is  a  well  never  dry,  and  a  field 
which  is  never  barren.  It  meets  the  hearts  and  minds 
and  consciences  of  Christians  in  the  nineteenth  century 
as  fully  as  it  did  those  of  Greeks  and  Romans  when  it 
was  first  completed.  It  suits  the  "  Dairyman's  daughter  "  as 
well  as  Persis,  or  Tryphena,  or  Tryphosa, — and  the  English 
Peer  as  well  as  the  converted  African  at  Sierra  Leone.  It 
is  still  the  first  book  which  fits  the  child's  mind  when  he 
begins  to  learn  religion,  and  the  last  to  which  the  old  man 
clings  as  he  leaves  the  world.*    In  short,  it  suits  all  ages, 


*  "I  have  alwaj's  been  strongly  in  favour  of  secular  education  in  the 
sense  of  education  without  theology.    But  I  must  confess  I  have  been 


INSPIRATION. 


13 


ranks,  climates,  minds,  conditions.  It  is  tlie  one  book 
which  suits  the  world. 

Now  how  shall  we  account  for  this  singular  fact  ?  What 
satisfactory  explanation  can  we  give  ?  There  is  only  one 
account  and  explanation. —  The  Bible  was  %vritten  hy 
Divine  inspiration.  It  is  the  book  of  the  world,  because 
He  inspired  it  who  formed  the  world, — who  made  all 
nations  of  one  blood, — and  knows  man's  common  nature. 
It  is  the  book  for  every  heart,  because  He  dictated  it  who 
alone  knows  all  hearts,  and  what  all  hearts  require.  It  is 
the  book  of  God. 

(/)  Last,  but  not  least,  it  is  a  great  fact  that  the  Bible 
hds  liad  a  most  cxtraordiuarij  ejfect  on  the  condition  oj 
those  nations  in  which  it  lias  been  known,  taught,  and  read. 

I  invite  any  honest-minded  reader  to  look  at  a  map  of 
the  worhl,  and  see  what  a  story  that  map  tells.  Which 
are  the  countries  on  the  face  of  the  globe  at  this  moment 
where  there  is  the  greatest  amount  of  idolatry,  or  cruelty, 
or  tyranny,  or  impurity,  or  misgovernmeut,  or  disregard  of 


no  less  seriously  perplexed  to  know  by  what  practical  measures  tlie 
religious  feeling,  which  is  the  essential  basis  of  conduct,  could  be  ke]it 
up  in  the  present  chaotic  state  of  opinion  on  these  matters  without  //i" 
use  of  the  Bible." 

"  Consider  the  great  historical  fact  that  for  three  centuries  tliis  Book 
has  been  woven  into  the  life  of  all  that  is  best  and  noblest  iii  Kngli.sh 
Listory  ; — that  it  has  become  the  national  epic  of  Britain,  iind  is  as 
familiar  to  noble  and  simple  from  John  o'  Groat's  Home  to  the  Land's 
End,  as  Dante  and  Tasso  once  were  to  the  Italians  ; — that  it  is  writteu 
in  the  best  and  purest  E  :glish,  and  abounds  in  exquisite  beauties  of 
mere  literary  form  ; — and  Hnally,  that  it  forbids  the  veriest  hind  who 
never  left  his  village  to  be  ignorant  of  other  countries  and  other  civiliza- 
tions, and  of  a  great  past,  stretching  back  to  tlie  furthest  limits  of  t!ie 
oldest  nations  in  the  world.  By  the  study  of  what  other  book  to  dd 
children  be  so  much  humaniEed  and  made  to  feel  that  each  figure  in  that 
vast  historical  procession  tills,  like  themselves,  but  a  mon  e  itary  space 
in  the  interval  between  two  eternities,  and  earns  the  blessings  or  the 
curses  of  all  time,  according  to  its  effort  to  do  good  and  hate  evil,  even 
as  they  also  are  earning  their  payment  fo;-  their  woik?" — Proftasor 
Hucky  on  School  Boards  [Huxleijs  Critiques  and  E^saijH,  p.  51.) 


14. 


OLD  PATHS. 


life  and  liberty  and  truth  ?  Precisely  those  countries 
where  the  Bible  is  not  known. — Which  are  the  Christian 
countries,  so-called,  where  the  greatest  quantity  of  ignor- 
ance, superstition,  and  corruption,  is  to  be  found  at  this 
very  moment?  The  countries  in  which  the  Bible  is  a 
forbidden  or  neglected  book, — such  countries  as  Spain  and 
the  South  American  States. — Which  are  the  countries 
where  liberty,  and  public  and  private  morality  have 
attained  the  highest  pitcli  ?  The  countries  where  the 
Bible  is  free  to  all,  like  England,  Scotland,  Germany,  and 
'  the  United  States.  Yes !  when  you  know  how  a  nation 
deals  with  the  Bible,  you  may  generally  know  what  a 
nation  is. 

But  this  is  not  all.  Let  us  look  nearer  home.  Which 
are  the  cities  on  earth  where  the  fewest  soldiers  and  police 
are  required  to  keep  order  ?  London,  Manchester,  Liver- 
pool, New  York,  Philadelphia, — cities  where  Bibles  abound. 
— Which  are  tlie  countries  in  Europe  where  there  are  the 
fewest  murders  and  illegitimate  births  ?  The  Protestant 
countries,  where  the  Bible  is  freely  read. — Which  are  the 
Churches  and  religious  bodies  on  earth  which  are  producing 
the  greatest  results  by  spreading  light  and  dispelling 
darkness  ?  Those  which  make  much  of  the  Bible,  and 
teach  and  preach  it  as  God's  Word.  The  Romanist,  the 
Neologian,  the  Socinian,  the  deist,  the  sceptic,  or  the  friends 
of  mere  secular  teaching,  have  never  yet  shown  us  one 
Sierra  Leone,  one  New  Zealand,  one  Tinnevell)'-,  as  the 
fruit  of  their  principles.  We  onl}'  can  do  that  who  honour 
the  Bible  and  reverence  it  as  as  God's  Word.  Let  this 
fact  also  be  remembered.  He  that  denies  the  Divine 
inspiration  of  the  Bible,  let  him  explain  this  fact  if  he  can.* 

*  "The  Bible  is  the  fountain  of  all  true  patriotism  and  loyalty  in 
States  ; — it  is  the  source  of  all  true  wisdom,  sound  policy,  and  equity  in 
Senates,  CouncU-chambers,  and  Courts  of  Justice  ; — it  is  the  spring  of 
all  tme  discipline  and  obedience,  and  of  all  valour  and  chivalry,  in 
armies  and  fleets,  in  the  battlefield  and  on  the  wide  sea  ; — it  is  the 


INSPIRATION. 


15 


I  place  these  six  facts  about  the  Bible  before  my 
readers,  and  I  ask  them  to  consider  them  well.  Take 
them  all  six  together,  treat  them  fairly,  and  look  at  them 
honestly.  Upon  any  other  principle  than  that  of  divine 
inspiration,  those  six  facts  appear  to  me  inexplicable  and. 
unaccountable.  Here  is  a  book  written  by  a  succession  of 
Jews,  in  a  little  corner  of  the  world,  which  positively 
stands  alone.  Not  only  were  its  writers  isolated  and  cut 
off  in  a  peculiar  manner  from  other  nations,  but  they 
belonged  to  a  people  who  have  never  produced  any  other 
book  of  note  except  the  Bible  !  There  is  not  the  slightest 
proof  that,  unassisted  and  left  to  themselves,  they  were 
capable  of  writing  anything  remarkable,  like  the  Greeks 
and  Romans.  Yet  these  men  have  given  the  world  a 
volume  which  for  depth,  unity,  sublimity,  accuracy, 
suitableness  to  the  wants  of  man,  and  power  of  influencing 
its  readers,  is  perfectly  unrivalled.  How  can  this  be 
explained  ?  How  can  it  be  accounted  for  ?  To  my  mind 
there  is  only  one  answei*.  The  writers  of  the  Bible  were 
divinely  helped  and  qualified  for  the  work  which  they 
did.  The  book  which  they  have  given  to  us  was  written 
by  inspiration  of  God* 

For  my  own  part,  I  believe  that  in  dealing  with  sceptics, 
and  unbelievers,  and  enemies  of  the  Bible,  Christians  are 
too  apt  to  stand  only  on  the  defensive.  They  are  too 
often  content  with  answering  this  or  that  little  objection. 


origin  of  all  probity  and  integrity  in  commerce  and  in  trade,  in  marts 
and  in  shops,  in  b.mks  and  exchanges,  in  the  public  resorts  of  men  and 
the  secret  silence  of  the  heart ; — it  is  the  pure,  unsullied  fountain  of  all 
love  and  peace,  happiness,  quietness  and  joy,  in  families  and  bouspholds. 
— Wherever  it  is  duly  obeyed  it  makes  the  desert  of  the  world  to 
rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose." —  Wordsworth  on  Intipiration,  p.  113. 

*  "The  little  ark  of  Jewish  literature  still  floats  above  the  surges  of 
time,  while  mere  fragments  of  the  wrecked  archives  of  the  huge  oriental 
empires,  as  well  as  of  the  lesser  kingdoms  that  surrounded  Juda'a,  arc 
now  and  then  cast  on  o\ir  distant  shores."— i?o<7e>-s  on  the  Svpcrhitman 
Origin  of  the.  Bible,  p.  311. 


16 


OLD  PATHS. 


or  discussing  this  or  that  little  difficulty,  which  is  picked 
out  of  Scripture  and  thrown  in  their  teeth.  I  believe  we 
ought  to  act  on  the  aggressive  far  more  than  we  do,  and 
to  press  home  on  the  adversaries  of  inspiration  the 
enormous  difficulties  of  their  own  position.  We  have  a 
right  to  ask  them  how  they  can  possibly  ex^^lain  the  origin 
and  nature  of  the  Bible,  if  they  will  not  allow  that  it  is  of 
Divine  authority  ?  We  have  a  right  to  say, — "  Here  is  a 
book  which  not  only  courts  inquiry  but  demands  investi- 
gation. We  challenge  you  to  tell  us  how  that  Book  was 
written." — How  can  they  account  for  this  Book  standing 
so  entirely  alone,  and  for  nothing  having  ever  been  written 
equal  to  it,  like  it,  near  it,  or  fit  to  be  compared  with  it 
for  a  minute  ?  I  defy  them  to  give  any  rational  reply  on 
their  own  principles.  On  our  principles  we  can.  To  tell 
us  that  man's  unassisted  mind  could  have  written  the 
Bible  is  simply  ridiculous.  It  is  worse  than  ridiculous: 
it  is  the  height  of  credulity.  In  short,  the  difficulties  of 
unbelief  are  far  greater  than  the  difficulties  of  faith.  No 
doubt  there  ai-e  things  "  hard  to  be  understood "  if  we 
accept  the  Scriptures  as  God's  Word.  But,  after  all,  they 
are  nothing  compared  to  the  hard  things  which  rise  up  in 
our  way,  and  demand  solution  if  we  once  deny  inspiration. 
There  is  no  alternative.  Men  must  either  believe  things 
which  are  grossly  improbable,  or  else  they  must  accept  the 
great  general  truth  that  tJie  Bible  is  tlie  inspired  Word 
of  God. 

II.  The  second  thing  which  I  pro])ose  to  consider  is 
the  extent  to  xvlucli  the  Bible  is  inspired.  Assuming,  as  a 
general  truth,  that  the  Bible  is  given  by  Divine  inspira- 
tion, I  wish  to  examine  how  far  and  to  what  degree  its 
writers  received  Divine  help.  In  short,  what  is  it  exactly 
that  we  mean  when  we  talk  of  the  Scriptures  as  "tlie 
Word  of  God  "  ? 

This  is,  no  doubt,  a  difficult  question,  and  one  about 


INSPIRATION. 


17 


wliich  the  best  Christians  are  not  entirely  of  one  mini). 
The  plain  truth  is  that  inspiration  is  a  miracle;  and,  like 
all  miracles,  there  is  much  about  it  which  we  cannot  fully 
understand. — We  must  not  confound  it  with  intellectual 
power,  such  as  great  poets  and  authors  possess.  To  talk 
of  Shakespeare  and"  Milton  and  Byron  being  inspired,  like 
Moses  and  St.  Paul,  is  to  my  mind  almost  profane. — Nur 
must  we  confound  it  with  the  gifts  and  graces  bestowed 
on  the  early  Christians  in  the  primitive  Church.  All  the 
Apostles  were  enabled  to  preach  and  woi'k  miracles,  but 
not  all  were  inspired  to  write. — We  must  rather  regard  it 
as  a  special  supernatural  gift,  bestowed  on  about  thirty 
people  out  of  mankind,  in  order  to  qualify  them  for  the 
special  business  of  writing  the  Scriptures;  and  we  must 
be  content  to  allow  that,  like  everything  miraculous,  we 
cannot  entirely  explain  it,  though  we  can  believe  it.  A 
miracle  would  not  be  a  miracle,  if  it  could  be  explained. 
That  miracles  are  possible,  I  do  not  stop  to  prove  here.  I 
never  trouble  myself  on  that  subject  until  those  who  deny 
miracles  have  fairly  grappled  with  the  great  fact  that 
Christ  rose  again  from  the  dead.  I  firmly  believe  that 
miracles  are  possible,  and  have  been  wrought ;  and  among 
great  miracles  I  place  the  fact  that  men  were  inspired  by 
God  to  write  the  Bible.  Inspiration,  therefore,  being  a 
miracle,  I  frankly  allow  that  there  are  difficulties  about  it 
which  at  present  I  cannot  fully  solve. 

The  exact  manner  in  which  the  minds  of  the  inspired 
writers  of  Scripture  worked  when  they  wrote,  I  do  not 
pretend  to  exjliin.  Very  likely  they  could  not  have  ex- 
plained it  themselves.  I  do  not  admit  for  a  moment 
that  they  were  mere  machines  holding  pens,  and,  like 
type-setters  in  a  printing-office,  did  not  understand  what 
they  were  doing.  I  abhor  the  "mechanical"  theory  of 
inspiration.  I  dislike  the  idea  that  men  like  Moses  an  I 
St.  Paul  were  no  better  than  organ  pipes,  employed  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  or  ignorant  secretaries  or  amanuenses  who 

c 


18 


OLD  PATHS. 


wrote  by  dictation  what  they  did  not  understand.  I 
admit  nothing  of  the  kind.  I  believe  that  in  some  mar- 
vellous manner  the  Holy  Ghost  made  use  ^of  the  reason, 
the  memory,  the  intellect,  the  style  of  thought,  and  the 
pecul'ar  mental  temperament  of  each  writer  of  the  Scrip- 
ture.s.  But  how  and  in  what  manner  this  was  done  I  can 
no  more  explain  than  I  can  the  union  of  two  natures,  God 
and  man,  in  the  person  of  our  blessed  hord  Jesus  Christ. 
I  only  know  that  there  is  both  a  Divine  and  a  human 
element  in  the  Bible,  and  that  while  the  men  who  wrote 
it  were  really  and  truly  men,  the  book  that  they  wrote 
and  handed  down  to  us  is  really  and  truly  the  Word  of 
God.  I  know  the  result,  but  I  do  not  understand  the 
process.  The  result  is,  that  the  Bible  is  the  written  Word 
of  God ;  but  I  can  no  more  explain  the  process  than  I  can 
explain  how  the  water  became  wine  at  Cana,  or  how  five 
loaves  fed  five  thousand  men,  or  how  a  word  raised  Lazarus 
from  the  dead.  I  do  not  pretend  to  explain  miracles, 
and  I  do  not  pretend  to  explain  fully  the  miraculous 
gift  of  inspiration.  The  position  I  take  up  is  that,  while 
the  Bible-Avriters  were  not  "  machines,"  as  some  sneeringly 
say,  they  only  wrote  what  God  taught  them  to  write. 
The  Holy  Ghost  put  into  their  minds  thoughts  and 
ideas,  and  then  guided  their  pens  in  writing  them.  When 
you  read  the  Bible  you  are  not  reading  the  unaided, 
self-taught  composition  of  erring  men  like  ourselves,  but 
thoughts  and  words  which  were  suggested  by  the  eternal 
God.  The  men  who  were  emjiloyed  to  indite  the  Scrip- 
ture spake  not  of  themselves.  They  "spake  as  they  were 
moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  (2  Peter  i.  21.)  He  that 
holds  a  Bible  in  his  hand  should  know  that  he  holds  "  not 
the  word  of  man  but  of  God."    (1  Thess.  ii.  13.) 

Concerning  the  precise  extent  to  which  the  Bible  is 
inspired,  I  freely  admit  that  Christians  differ  widely. 
Some  of  the  views  put  forth  on  the  subject  appear  to  me 
erroneous  in  the  extreme.    I  shall  not  shrink  from  giving 


INSPIRATION. 


19 


my  own  opinion  and  stating  my  reasons  for  maintaining 
it.  In  matters  like  those  I  dare  not  call  any  riian  master. 
Painful  as  it  is  to  disagree  with  able  and  gifted  men  on 
religious  questions,  I  dare  not  take  up  views  of  inspiration 
which  my  head  and  heart  tell  me  are  unsound,  however 
high  and  honoured  the  names  of  those  who  maintain  them. 
I  believe  in  my  conscience  that  low  and  defective  views  of 
the  subject  are  doing  immense  damage  to  the  cause  of 
Christ  in  the.se  last  days. 

Some  hold  that  some  of  the  books  of  Scripture  are  not 
in.spired  at  all,  and  have  no  more  authority  or  claim  to 
our  reverence  than  the  writings  of  any  ordinary  man. — 
Others  who  do  not  go  so  far  as  this,  and  allow  that  all  the 
books  in  the  Bible  are  inspired,  maintain  that  inspiration 
was  only  partial,  and  that  there  are  portions  in  almost 
every  book  which  are  uninspired. — Others  hold  that  in- 
spiration means  nothing  more  than  general  superintendence 
and  direction,  and  that,  while  the  Bible  writers  were 
miraculou.sly  preserved  from  making  mistakes  in  great 
things  and  matters  necessary  to  salvation,  in  thin<?s  in- 
different  they  were  left  to  their  own  unassisted  faculties, 
like  any  other  writers. — Some  hold  that  all  the  ideas  in 
the  Bible  were  given  by  inspiration,  but  not  the  words 
and  language  in  which  they  are  clothed, — though  how  to 
separate  ideas  from  words  it  is  rather  hard  to  understand  ! 
— Some,  finally,  allow  the  thorough  inspiration  of  all  the 
Bible,  and  yet  maintain  that  it  was  possible  for  the  writers 
to  make  occasional  mistakes  in  their  statements,  and  that 
such  mistakes  do  exist  at  this  day. 

From  all  these  views  I  totally  and  entirely  dissent. 
They  all  appear  to  me  more  or  less  defective,  below  the 
truth,  dangerous  in  their  tendency,  and  open  to  grave  and 
insuperable  objections.  The  view  which  I  maintain  is 
that  every  book,  and  chapter,  and  verse,  and  syllable  of  the 
Bible  was  originally  given  by  inspiration  of  God.  I  hold 
that  not  only  the  substance  of  the  Bible^  but  its  language, 


20 


OLD  PATHS. 


— not  only  the  ideas  of  the  Bible,  but  its  words, — not  only 
certain  parts  of  the  Bible,  but  every  chap.ter  of  the  book, 
— that  all  and  each  are  of  Divine  authority.  I  hold  that 
the  Scripture  not  only  contains  the  "Word  of  God,  but  is 
the  Word  of  God.  I  believe  the  naiTatives  and  statements 
of  Genesis,  and  the  catalogues  in  Chronicles,  were  just  as 
truly  written  by  inspiration  as  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 
I  believe  Ezra's  account  of  the  nine-and-twenty  knives, 
and  St.  Paul's  message  about  the  cloak  and  parchments, 
were  as  much  written  under  Divine  direction  as  the  20th 
of  Exodus,  the  17th  of  John,  or  the  8tli  of  Romans.  I 
do  not  say,  be  it  remembered,  that  all  these  parts  of  the 
Bible  are  of  equal  importance  to  our  souls.  Nothing  of 
the  kind  !  But  I  do  say  they  were  all  equally  given  by 
inspiration.* 

In  making  this  statement  T  ask  the  reader  not  to  mis- 
understand my  meaning.  I  do  not  forget  that  the  Old 
Testament  was  written  in  Hebrew  and  the  New  Testament 
in  Greek.  The  inspiration  of  every  word,  for  which  I 
contend,  is  the  inspiration  of  every  original  Hebrew  and 
Greek  word,  as  the  Bible  writers  first  wrote  it  down.  I 
stand  up  for  nothing  more  and  nothing  less  than  this.  I 
lay  no  claim  to  the  in.spiration  of  every  word  in  the  various 
versions  and  translations  of  God's  Word.  So  far  as  those 
translations  and  versions  are  faithfully  and  correctly  done, 
so  far  they  are  of  equal  authority  with  the  original  Hebrew 
and  Greek.  We  have  reason  to  thank  God  that  many  of 
the  translations  are,  in  the  main,  faithful  and  accurate. 
At  any  rate  our  own  English  Bible,  if  not  perfect,  is  so  far 
correct,  that  in  reading  it  we  have  a  right  to  believe  that 


*  "We  afiBrm  that  the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God,  and  that  it  is  not 
marred  with  human  infirmities.  AVe  do  not  imagine,  with  some,  that 
the  BilJe  is  like  a  threshing-floor,  on  which  wheat  and  chafF  lie  mingled 
together,  and  that  it  is  left  for  the  reader  to  winnow  and  sift  the  wheat 
from  the  chaff  by  tlie  fan  and  sieve  of  his  own  mind." — Wordsworth  on 
"Inspiration."    (P.  11.) 


INSPIRATION. 


21 


Ave  are  reading  iu  our  own  tongue  not  the  word  of  man. 
but  of  God. 

Now  the  view  for  which  I  contend, — that  every  word 
of  the  Bible  is  inspired, — is  not  accepted  by  many  good 
Cliristians,  and  is  bitterly  opposed  in  many  quarters.  I 
shall  therefore  mention  a  few  reasons  why  it  a^jpears  to 
me  the  only  safe  and  tenable  view  which  can  be  adopted, 
and  the  only  one  which  is  free  from  innumerable  objec- 
tions. If  I  err  in  maintaining  it  I  have  the  comfort,  At 
any  rate,  of  erring  in  good  company.  I  only  take  up  the 
same  ground  which  almost  all  the  Fathers  occupied ; 
which  Bishop  Jewell,  and  Hooker,  and  Owen,  took  up 
lonsi  asfo :  and  which  Chalmers,  Robert  Haldane,  Gaussen, 
Bishop  Wordsworth,  M'Caul,  Burgon,  and  Archdeacon  Lee 
of  the  Irish  Church,  have  ably  defended  in  modern  days. 
I  know,  however,  that  men's  minds  are  variously  constituted. 
Arguments  and  reasons  which  ajDpear  weighty  to  some  are 
of  no  weight  with  others.  I  shall  content  myself  with 
setting  down  in  order  the  reasons  which  satisfy  me. 

(a)  For  one  thing,  I  cannot  see  how  the  Bible  can  be 
a  "perfect  ride  of  faith  and  practice  if  it  is  not  fully 
inspired,  and  if  it  contains  any  flaws  and  imperfections. 
If  the  Bible  is  anything  at  all  it  is  the  statute-book  of 
God's  kingdom, — the  code  of  laws  and  regulations  by 
which  the  subjects  of  that  kingdom  are  to  live, — the 
register-deed  of  the  terms  on  which  they  have  peace  now 
and  shall  have  glory  hereafter.  Now,  why  are  we  to 
suppose  that  such  a  book  will  be  loosely  and  imperfectly 
drawn  up,  any  more  than  legal  deeds  are  drawn  up  on 
earth  ?  Every  lawyer  can  tell  us  that  in  legal  deeds  and 
statutes  every  word  is  of  importance,  and  that  property, 
life,  or  death  may  often  turn  on  a  single  word.  Think  of 
the  confusion  that  would  ensue  if  wills,  and  settlements, 
and  conveyances,  and  partnership-deeds,  and  leases,  and 
agreements,  and  acts  of  parliament  were  not  carefully 
drawn  up  and  carefully  interpreted,  and  every  word  allowed 


22 


OLD  PATHS. 


its  due  weight.  Where  "would  be  the  use  of  such  docu- 
ments  if  particular  words  weut  for  nothing,  and  every  one 
had  a  right  to  add,  or  take  away,  or  alter,  or  deny  the 
validity  of  words,  or  erase  words  at  his  own  discretion  ? 
At  this  rate  we  might  as  well  lay  aside  our  legal  documents 
altogether.  Surely  we  have  a  right  to  expect  that  in  the 
book  which  contains  our  title-deeds  for  eternity  every  word 
will  be  inspired,  and  nothing  imperfect  admitted.  If 
God's  statute-book  is  not  inspired,  and  every  word  is  not 
of  Divine  authority,  God's  subjects  are  left  in  a  pitiable 
state.    I  see  much  in  this. 

(b)  For  another  thing,  if  the  Bible  is  not  fully  inspired 
and  contains  imperfections,  I  cannot  understand  the 
language  which  is  frequently  used  about  it  in  its  own 
pages.  Such  expressions  as  "  The  oracles  of  God  ; " — "  He 
saith  ; " — "  God  saith  " — "  the  Holy  Ghost  spake  by  Esaias 
the  prophet;" — "the  Holy  Ghost  saith,  "To-day  if  ye  will 
hear  His  voice," — would  appear  to  me  inexplicable  and 
extravagant  if  applied  to  a  book  containing  occasional 
blemishes,  defects,  and  mistakes.  (Acts  vii.  38 ;  Rom.  iii. 
2;  Heb.  v.  12;  1  Peter  iv.  11;  Ephes.  iv.  8;  Heb.  i.  8; 
Acts  xxviii.  25;  Heb.  iii.  7;  x.  15;  Rom.  ix.  25.)  Once 
grant  that  every  word  of  Scripture  is  inspired,  and  I  see 
an  admirable  propriety  in  the  language.  I  cannot  under- 
stand "  the  Holy  Ghost,"  making  a  mistake,  or  an  "  oracle  " 
containing  anything  defective  !  If  any  man  replies  that 
the  Holy  Ghost  did  not  alivays  speak  by  Isaiah,  I  will  ask 
him  who  is  to  decide  when  He  did  and  when  He  did  not  ? 
I  see  much  in  this. 

(o)  For  another  thing,  the  theory  that  the  Bible  was 
not  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  appears  to  me  utterly  at 
variance  tvith  several  quotations  from  the  Old  Testament 
which  I  find  in  the  New.  I  allude  to  those  quotations  in 
which  the  whole  force  of  the  passage  turns  on  one  single 
word,  and  once  even  on  the  use  of  the  singular  instead  of 
the  plural  number.  Take,  for  instance,  such  quotations  as 


INSPIRATION. 


23 


"The  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord."  (Matt.  xxii.  44 — "I  said, 
Ye  are  gods."  (John  x.  34.) — ^"  To  Abraham  and  liis  seed 
were  the  promises  made.  He  saith  not,  And  to  seeds,  as 
of  many ;  but  of  one,  And  to  thy  seed,  which  is  Christ." 
(Gal.  iii.  16.) — ^"He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren, 
saying,  I  will  declare  Thy  name  unto  my  brethren."  (Heb. 
ii.  11,  12.) — In  every  one  these  cases  the  whole  point  of 
the  quotation  lies  in  a  single  word.*  But  if  this  is  so,  it 
is  hard  to  see  on  what  principle  we  can  deny  the  inspira- 
tion of  all  the  words  of  Scripture.  At  any  rate,  those  who 
deny  verbal  inspiration  will  find  it  difficult  to  show  us 
which  words  are  inspired  and  Avhich  are  not.  Who  is  to 
draw  the  line,  and  where  is  it  to  be  drawn  ?  I  see  much 
in  this. 

(cZ)  For  another  thing,  if  the  words  of  Scripture  are 
jiot  all  inspired,  the  value  of  the  Bible  as  a  weapon  in 
controversy  is  greatly  damaged,  if  not  entirely  taken 
away.  Who  does  not  know  that  in  arguing  with  Jews, 
Arians,  or  Socinians,  the  whole  point  of  the  texts  we  quote 
against  them  often  lies  in  a  single  word  ?  What  are  we 
to  reply  if  an  adversary  asserts  that  the  special  word  of 
some  text,  on  which  we  ground  an  argument,  is  a  mistake 
of  the  writer,  and  therefore  of  no  authority  ?  To  my  mind 
it  appears  that  the  objection  would  be  fatal.  It  is  useless 
to  quote  texts  if  we  once  admit  that  not  all  the  words  o" 
which  they  are  composed  were  given  by  inspiration. 
Unless  there  is  some  certain  standard  to  appeal  to  we  may 
as  well  hold  our  tongues.  Argument  is  labour  in  vain  if 
our  mouths  are  to  be  stopped  by  the  retort,  "  That  text  is 
not  inspired."    I  see  much  in  this. 

(e)  For  another  thing,  to  give  up  verbal  inspiration 
appears  to  me  to  destroy  the  usefidness  of  the  Bible  as  an 
instrument  of  public  preaching  and  instruction.  Where 


*  It  would  be  easy  to  multiply  texts  in  proof  of  tliis  point.  I  will  only 
name  the  following  :  Heb.  ii.  8  ;  iii.  7 — 19  ;  iv.  2 — 11 ;  xii.  27. 


24 


OLD  PATHS, 


is  the  use  of  choosiug  a  text  and  making  it  the  suhject  of 
a  pulpit  address,  if  we  do  not  beheve  that  every  word  of 
the  text  is  inspired  ?  Once  let  our  hearers  get  hold  of  the 
idea  that  the  writers  of  the  Bible  could  make  mistakes  in 
the  particular  words  they  used,  and  they  will  care  little  for 
any  reproofs,  or  exhortations,  or  remarks  which  are  based 
on  words. — "How  do  you  know,"  they  might  ask  us,  "that 
this  word,  about  which  you  made  such  ado  yesterday,  was 
piven  by  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  How  do  you  know  that  St. 
Paul,  or  St.  Peter,  or  St.  John  did  not  make  a  mistake, 
and  use  the  wrong  word  ?  That  they  could  make  mistakes 
about  w'ords  you  yourself  allow."- — I  know  not  what  others 
may  think.  For  myself,  I  could  give  no  answer.  I  see 
much  in  this. 

(/)  Last,  but  not  least,  the  denial  of  verbal  inspiration 
appears  to  me  to  de-'<troy  a  great  jiart  of  the  usef  ulness  of 
the  Bible  as  a  source  of  comfort  and  instruction  in  pri- 
vate reading.  "Where  is  the  true  Christian  student  of  the 
Bible  who  does  not  know  that  words,  particular  words, 
afford  a  large  portion  of  the  benefit  which  he  derives  from 
his  daily  reading  ?  How  much  the  value  of  many  a 
cherished  text  depends  on  some  single  phrase,  or  the 
number  of  a  substantive,  or  the  tense  of  a  verb  ?  Alas! 
there  would  be  an  end  of  all  this  if  we  once  concede  that' 
each  word  is  not  inspired  ;  and  that,  for  anything  we  know, 
some  much  loved  favourite  substantive,  or  verb,  or  pronoun, 
or  adverb,  or  adjective,  was  an  Apostle's  mistake,  and  the 
word  of  man,  not  of  God  !  What  others  might  think  I 
know  not.  For  myself,  I  should  be  tempted  to  lay  aside 
my  Bible  in  despair,  and  become  of  all  men  most  miserable. 
I  see  much  in  this. 

Now,  I  freely  grant  that  many  excellent  Chi'istians  think 
that  the  view  I  maintain  is  open  to  serious  objections. 
That  the  Bible,  generally  speaking,  is  given  by  inspiration, 
they  firmly  maintain.  But  they  shrink  from  maintaining 
that  insj)iration  extends  to  ever}'  word  of  Scripture.  I 


INSPIRATION. 


25 


am  sorry  to  differ  from  these  worthy  people.  But  I  cannot 
see  the  weight  and  force  of  their  objections.  Fairly  and 
[lonestly  examined,  they  fail  to  carry  conviction  to  my 
mind. 

(a)  Some  object  that  there  are  occasional  statements  in 
the  Bible  which  contmdicct  the  facts  of  history.  Are  these 
all  verbally  inspired  ? — My  answer  is  that  it  is  far  more 
easy  to  assert  this  than  to  prove  it.  There  is  nothing  of 
which  we  have  so  few  trustworthy  remains  as  very  ancient 
history,  and  if  ancient  uninspired  history  and  Bible  his- 
tory seem  to  disagree,  it  is  generally  safer  and  wiser  to 
believe  that  Bible  history  is  right  and  other  history  wrong. 
At  any  rate,  it  is  a  singular  fact  tuat  all  recent  researches 
in  Assyria,  Babylon,  Palestine,  and  Egypt,  show  an  extra- 
ordinary tendency  to  confirm  the  perfect  accuracy  of  the 
Word  of  God.  The  lamented  Mr.  Smith's  discoveries  at 
Babylon  are  a  remarkable  example  of  what  I  mean.  There 
are  buried  evidences  which  God  seems  to  keep  in  reserve 
for  these  last  days.  If  Bible  history  and  other  histories 
cannot  be  made  to  agree  at  present,  it  is  safest  to 
wait. 

(h)  Some  object  that  there  are  occasional  statements  in 
the  Bible  which  contradict  the  facts  of  natural  science. 
Are  these  all  inspired  ? — My  answer  is  again,  that  it  is  far 
more  easy  to  assert  this  than  to  prove  it.  The  Bible  was 
not  written  to  teach  a  system  of  geology,  botany,  or  as- 
tronomy, or  a  history  of  birds,  insects,  and  animals,  and  on 
matters  touching  these  subjects  it  wisely  uses  popular 
language,  such  as  common  people  can  understand.  No 
one  thinks  of  saying  that  the  Astronomer  Koyal  contradicts 
science  because  he  speaks  of  the  sun's  "  rising  and  setting." 
If  the  Bible  said  anywhere  that  the  earth  was  a  flat  sur- 
face,— or  that  it  was  a  fixed  globe  round  which  the  sun 
revolved, — or  that  it  never  existed  in  any  state  before 
Adam  and  Eve, — there  might  be  sometliing  in  the  ob- 
jection.    But  it  never  does  so.     It  speaks  of  scientific 


26 


OLD  PATHS. 


subjects  as  they  appear.  But  it  never  flatly  contradicts 
science* 

(c)  Some  object  that  there  are  occasional  statements  in 
the  Bible  which  are  monstrous,  absurd,  and  incredible. 
Are  they  really  obliged  to  believe  that  Eve  was  temjDted 
by  the  devil  in  the  form  of  a  serpent, — that  Noah  was 
saved  in  an  ark, — that  the  Israelites  crossed  the  Red  Sea 
between  two  walls  of  water, — that  Balaam's  ass  spoke, — 
and  that  Jonah  actually  went  into  the  whale's  belly  ?  Are 
all  these  statements  inspired  ? — My  answer  is  that  Christ's 
apostles  speak  of  these  things  as  historical  facts,  and  were 
more  likely  to  know  the  truth  about  them  than  we  are. 
After  all,  do  we  believe  in  miracles  or  not  ?  Do  we  be- 
lieve that  Christ  Himself  rose  from  the  dead  ?  Let  us 
stick  to  that  one  grand  miracle  first,  and  disprove  it  if  we 
can.  If  we  do  believe  it,  it  is  foolish  to  object  to  things 
because  they  are  miraculous. 

((?)  Some  object  that  there  are  things  mentioned  occa- 
sionally in  the  Bible  which  are  so  tr'ijiing  that  they  are 
unworthy  to  be  called  inspired.  They  point  to  St.  Paul's 
writing  about  his  cloak,  and  books,  and  parchments,  and  ask 
if  we  really  think  that  the  Apostle  wrote  about  such  little 
matters  by  inspiration  of  God  ? — I  answer  that  the  least 
things  affecting  any  of  God's  children  are  not  too  small  lor 
the  notice  of  Him  who  "  numbers  the  hairs  of  our  heads." 
There  are  excellent  and  edifying  lessons  to  be  learned 
from  the  cloak  and  the  parchments,  as  Robert  Haldane 
has  shown  most  convincingly,  in  his  work  on  the  Evidences 

*  "  The  language  of  Scripture  is  necessarilj' adapted  to  the  common 
state  of  man's  intellectual  development,  in  which  he  is  not  supposed  to 
1)6  possessed  of  science.  Hence  tlie  phrases  used  by  Scripture  are  pre- 
cisely those  which  science  soon  teaches  man  to  consider  inaccurate.  Yet 
they  are  not  on  that  account  the  less  fitted  for  their  purpose,  for  if  any 
terms  had  been  used  adajjted  to  a  more  advanced  state  of  knowledge, 
they  must  have  been  unintelligible  to  those  to  whom  the  Scripture  was 
first  addressed." — Whcwell's  PJdlosoji/iy  of  Inductive  Science.  Vol.  i., 
p.  686. 


INSPIRATION. 


27 


ui  Divine  Revelation.  After  all,  man  knows  very  little 
what  is  great  and  what  is  small  in  God's  sight.  The 
history  of  Nimrod  "the  mighty  hunter"  is  dispatched 
in  three  verses  of  Genesis,  and  the  history  of  a  Syrian 
dwelling  in  tents,  called  Abraham,  fills  up  no  less  than 
fourteen  chapters.  The  microscope  applied  to  the  book 
of  nature,  can  show  us  God's  hand  in  the  least  lichen  that 
grows  on  the  top  of  Scawfell  as  well  as  in  the  cedar  of 
Lebanon.  The  veriest  trifles,  as  they  seem  to  us  in  the 
Book  of  Scripture,  may  turn  out  to  be  most  striking  con- 
firmations of  its  truth.  Paley  has  shown  this  admirably 
in  his  "Horse  Paulinoe,"  and  Professor  Blunt  in  his 
"  Undesigned  Coincidences." 

(e)  Some  object  that  there  are  gi-ave  discrepancies  in 
some  of  the  Bible  histories,  especially  in  the  four  Gospels, 
which  cannot  he  made  to  harmonize  and  agree.  Are  the 
words,  they  ask,  all  inspired  in  these  cases  ?  Have  the 
writers  made  no  mistakes? — I  answer  that  the  number  of 
these  discrepancies  is  grossly  exaggerated,  and  that  in 
many  cases  they  are  only  apparent,  and  disappear  under 
the  touch  of  common  sense.  Even  in  the  hardest  of  them 
we  should  remember,  in  common  fairness,  that  circum- 
stances are  very  likely  kept  back  from  us  which  entirely 
reconcile  everything,  if  we  only  knew  them.  Very  often 
in  these  days  when  two  honest,  veracious  men  give  a 
separate  account  of  some  long  story,  their  accounts  do  not 
quite  tally,  because  one  dwells  on  one  part  and  the  other 
on  another.  All  well-informed  students  of  history  know 
that  the  precise  day  when  Charles  I.  erected  his  standard 
at  Nottingham,  in  the  Parliamentary  war,  has  not  been 
settled  to  this  hour. 

(J)  Some  object  that  Job's  friends,  in  their  long  speeches, 
soAd  many  xveak  and  foolish  things.  Were  all  their  words 
inspired  ? — An  objection  like  this  arises  from  an  illogical 
and  confused  idea  of  what  inspiration  means.  The  book 
of  Job  contains  an  historical  account  of  a  wonderful  pai't 


28 


OLD  PATHS. 


of  the  old  patriarch's  history,  and  a  report  both  of  his 
speeches  and  of  those  of  his  friends.  But  we  are  nowhere 
toUl  that  either  Job  or  Eliphaz  and  his  companions  spoke 
all  that  they  spoke  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  writer  of  the 
book  of  Job  was  thoroughly  inspired  to  record  all  they  said. 
But  whether  they  spoke  rightly  or  wrongly  is  to  be  decided 
bv  the  general  teaching  of  Scripture.  No  one  would  say 
that  St.  Peter  was  inspired  when  he  said,  "  I  know  not  the 
Man,"  in  the  High  Priest's  palace.  But  the  writer  of  the 
Gospel  was  inspired  when  he  wrote  it  down  for  our  learning. 
In  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  the  letter  of  Claudius  Lysias 
was  certainly  not  written  by  inspiration,  and  Gamaliel, 
and  the  town  clerk  of  Ephesus  and  TertuUus  were  not 
inspired  when  they  made  their  speeches.  But  it  is 
equally  certain  that  St.  Luke  was  inspired  to  write  them 
down  and  record  them  in  his  book, 

{(j)  Some  object  that  St.  Paul,  in  the  7th  chapter  of  the 
\st  epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  when  giving  certain  advice 
to  the  Corinthian  Church,  says  at  one  time,  "Not  I,  but 
the  Lord,"  and  at  another,  "  I,  not  the  Lord."  And  they 
ask,  Does  not  this  show  that  in  part  of  his  advice  he  was 
not  inspired  ?— I  answer.  Not  at  all.  A  careful  study  of  the 
chapter  will  show  that  when  the  Apostle  says  "Not  I,  but 
the  Lord,"  he  lays  down  some  principles  on  which  the 
Lord  had  spoken  already ;  and  when  he  says  "  I,  not  the 
Lord,"  he  gives  advice  on  some  point  about  which  there 
had  been  no  revelation  hitherto.  But  there  is  not  the 
slightest  proof  that  he  is  not  writing  all  the  way  through 
under  direct  inspiration  of  God. 

(h)  Some  object  that  there  are  many  various  readings 
of  the  words  of  Scripture,  and  that  we  cannot,  therefore, 
feel  sure  that  we  have  the  original  inspired  Word  of  God. 
I  answer  that  the  various  readings,  when  fairly  examined, 
will  prove  to  be  absurdly  exaggerated  in  number  and  im- 
portance. Dr.  Kennicott,  Bengel,  and  others  have  proved 
this  long  ago.    No  doubt  we  may  have  lost  a  few  of  the 


INSPIRATION. 


29 


original  -words.  We  have  no  right  to  expect  infallibility 
in  transcribers  and  copyists,  before  the  invention  of  print- 
ing. But  there  is  not  a  single  doctrine  in  Scripture  which 
■would  be  affected  or  altered  if  all  the  various  readings 
•were  allowed,  and  all  the  disputed  or  doubtful  words  were 
omitted.  Considering  how  many  hands  the  Bible  passeil 
through  before  printing  was  invented,  and  who  the  tran- 
scribers were,  it  is  marvellous  that  the  various  readings 
are  so  few  !  The  fact  that  about  the  immense  majority  of  all 
the  words  in  the  old  Hebrew  and  Greek  Scriptures  there  is 
no  doubt  at  all,  is  little  short  of  a  miracle,  and  demands  much 
thanksgiving  to  God.  One  thing  is  very  certain.  There 
is  no  ancient  book  which  has  been  handed  down  to  us  with 
so  good  a  text  and  so  few  various  readings  as  the  Bible. 

(i)  Finally,  some  object  that  occasional  parts  of  the 
Bible  are  taken  out,  copied,  and  extracted  from  the  writings 
of  uninspired  men,  such  as  historical  chronicles,  and  pedi- 
grees, and  lists  of  names.  Are  all  these  to  be  regarded 
as  inspired  ? — I  reply  that  there  seems  no  reason  wliy  the 
Holy  Ghost  should  not  direct  the  Bible  writers  to  use 
materials  made  ready  to  their  hands,  as  well  as  facts  which 
they  had  seen  themselves,  and  by  so  directing  them,  in- 
vested such  words  as  they  used  with  Divine  authority. 
When  St.  Paul  quoted  lines  from  heathen  poets  he  did  not 
mean  us  to  regard  them  as  inspired.  But  he  was  taught 
by  God  to  clothe  his  ideas  in  the  words  which  they  had 
used,  and  by  so  doing  he  very  likely  obtained  a  favourable 
reading  from  many.  And  when  we  read  such  quotations, 
or  read  lists  of  names  taken  from  Jewish  chronicles  and 
registers,  Ave  need  not  doubt  that  Bible  writers  were  taught 
to  use  such  materials  by  inspiration  of  God. 

I  leave  the  ol)jections  to  verbal  inspiration  at  this  point, 
and  will  detain  my  readers  no  longer  with  them.  I  will 
not  pretend  to  deny  that  the  subject  has  its  difficulties, 
which  will  probably  never  be  completely  solved.  I  can- 
not perhaps  clear  up  such  difficulties  as  the  mention  of 


80 


OLD  PATHS. 


"Jeremy  the  prophet"  in  Matthew  xxvii.,  or  reconcile  the 
third  and  sixth  hour  in  St.  John's  and  St.  Mark's  account 
of  the  crucifixion,  or  explain  Stephen's  account  of  Jacob's 
burial  in  the  seventh  chapter  of  Acts,  to  my  own  entire 
satisfaction.  But  I  have  no  doubt  these  dijficulties  can 
he  explained,  and  perhaps  will  be  some  day.  These  things 
do  not  move  me.  I  expect  difficulties  in  such  a  deep  and 
miraculous  matter  as  inspiration,  which  I  have  not  eyes  to 
see  through.  I  am  content  to  wait.  It  was  a  wise  sajdng 
of  Faraday,  that  "  there  are  many  questions  about  which 
it  is  the  highest  philosophy  to  keep  our  minds  in  a  state  of 
iudicious  suspense."  It  should  be  a  settled  rule  with  us 
never  to  give  up  a  great  principle,  when  we  have  got  hold 
of  it,  on  account  of  difficulties.  Time  often  makes  things 
clear  which  at  first  look  dark.  The  view  of  inspiration 
which  presents  to  my  own  mind  the  fewest  difficulties,  is 
that  in  which  all  the  words  of  Scripture,  as  well  as  the 
thoughts,  are  regarded  as  inspired.  Here  I  take  my 
stand. 

Remember  what  I  have  just  said.  Never  give  up  a 
great  principle  in  theology  on  account  of  difficulties.  Wait 
patiently,  and  the  difficulties  may  all  melt  away.  Let 
that  be  an  axiom  in  your  mind.  Suffer  me  to  mention  an 
illustration  of  what  I  mean.  Persons  who  are  conversant 
with  astronomy  know  that  before  the  discovery  of  the  planet 
Neptune  there  were  difficulties  which  greatly  troubled  the 
most  scientific  astronomers,  respecting  certain  aberrations 
of  the  planet  Uranus.  These  aberrations  puzzled  the 
minds  of  astronomers;  and  some  of  them  suggested  that 
they  might  possibly  prove  the  whole  Newtonian  system 
to  be  untrue.  But  just  at  that  time  a  well-known  Frenoh 
astronomer,  named  Leverrier,  read  before  the  Academy  of 
Science  at  Pai'is  a  paper,  in  which  he  laid  down  this  great 
axiom, — that  it  did  not  become  a  scientific  man  to  give  up 
a  principle  because  of  difficulties  which  apparently  could 
not  be  explained.    He  said  in  effect,  "  We  cannot  explain 


INSPIRATION. 


the  aberrations  of  Uranus  now ;  but  we  may  be  sure  that 
the  Newtonian  system  will  be  proved  to  be  riglit,  sooner  or 
later.  Something  may  be  discovered  one  day  which  will 
prove  that  these  aberrations  may  be  accounted  for,  and 
yet  the  Newtonian  system  remain  true  and  unshaken." 
A  few  years  after,  the  anxious  eyes  of  astronomers  dis- 
covered the  last  great  planet,  Neptune.  This  planet  was 
shown  to  be  the  true  cause  of  all  the  aberrations  of 
Uranus;  and  what  the  French  astronomer  had  laid  down 
as  a  princij)le  in  science  was  proved  to  be  wise  and  true. 
The  application  of  the  anecdote  is  obvious.  Let  us  beware 
of  giving  up  any  first  principle  in  theology.  Let  us  not 
give  up  the  great  principle  of  plenary  verbal  inspiration 
because  of  apparent  difficulties.  The  day  may  come  when 
they  will  all  be  solved.  In  the  meantime  we  may  rest 
assured  that  the  difficulties  which  beset  any  other  theory 
of  inspiration  are  tenfold  greater  than  any  which  beset 
our  own. 

Let  me  now  conclude  this  paper  with  a  few  words  of 
plain  application.  Let  us  lay  aside  all  deep  discussion  of 
hard  things  about  the  manner  of  inspiration.  Let  us  take 
it  for  granted  that,  in  some  way  or  other,  whether  we  can 
explain  it  or  not,  we  hold  the  Bible  to  be  the  Word  of 
God.  Let  us  start  from  this  point.  Let  my  readers  give 
me  a  hearing,  while  I  say  a  few  things  which  appear  to 
me  to  deserve  their  attention. 

1.  Is  the  Bible  the  Word  of  God  ?  Then  mind  that 
yon  do  not  neglect  it.  Read  it:  read  it!  Begin  to  read 
it  this  very  day.  What  greater  insult  to  God  can  a  man 
be  guilty  of  than  to  refuse  to  read  the  letter  God  sends 
him  from  heaven  ?  Oh,  be  sure,  if  you  will  not  read  your 
Bible,  you  are  in  fearful  danger  of  losing  your  soul ! 

You  are  in  danger,  because  God  will  reckon  ivith  you 
for  your  neglect  of  the  Bible  in  the  day  of  judgment. 
You  will  have  to  give  account  of  your  use  of  time,  strength, 
and  money;  and  you  will  also  have  to  give  account  of  your 


32 


OLD  PATHS. 


use  of  the  Word.  You  will  not  stand  at  that  bar  on  the 
same  level,  in  point  of  responsibility,  with  the  dweller  in 
central  Africa,  who  never  heard  of  the  Bible.  Oh,  no ! 
To  whom  much  is  given,  of  them  much  will  be  required. 
Of  all  men's  buried  talents,  none  will  weigh  them  down  so 
heavily  as  a  neglected  Bible.  As  you  deal  with  the  Bible, 
so  God  will  deal  with  your  soul.  Will  you  not  repent, 
and  turn  over  a  new  leaf  in  life,  and  read  your  Bible  ? 

You  are  in  danger,  because  tJiere  is  no  degree  of  error 
ill  religion  into  icJiich  you  may  not  fall.  You  are  at 
the  mercy  of  the  first  clever  Jesuit,  Iilormonite,  Socinian, 
Turk,  or  Jew,  who  may  happen  to  meet  you.  A  land  of 
unwalled  villages  is  not  more  defenceless  against  an  enemy 
than  a  man  who  neglects  his  Bible.  You  may  go  on 
tumbling  from  one  step  of  delusion  to  another,  till  at 
length  you  are  landed  in  the  pit  of  hell.  I  say  once  more. 
Will  you  not  repent  and  read  your  Bible  ? 

You  are  in  danger,  because  there  is  not  a  single 
reasonable  excuse  you  can  allege  for  neglecting  the  Bible. 
You  have  no  time  to  read  it  forsooth  !  But  you  can  make 
time  for  eating,  drinking,  sleeping,  getting  money  and 
spending  money,  and  perhaps. for  newspaper  reading  and 
smoking.  You  might  easily  make  time  to  read  the  Word. 
Alas,  it  is  not  want  of  time,  but  waste  of  time  that  ruins 
souls ! — You  find  it  too  troublesome  to  read,  forsooth ! 
You  had  better  say  at  once  it  is  too  much  trouble  to  go 
to  heaven,  and  you  are  content  to  go  to  heU.  Truly  these 
excuses  are  like  the  rubbish  round  the  walls  of  Jerusalem 
in  Neheraiah's  days.  They  would  all  soon  disappear  if, 
like  the  Jews,  you  had  "  a  mind  to  work."  I  say  for  the 
last  time,  Will  you  not  repent  and  read  your  Bible  ? 

Believe  me,  believe  me,  the  Bible  itself  is  the  best 
witness  of  its  own  inspiration.  The  men  who  quibble  and 
make  difficulties  about  inspiration  are  too  often  the  very 
men  who  never  read  the  Scriptures  at  all.  The  darkness 
and  hardness  and  obscurity  they  profess  to  complain  of  are 


INSPIRATION. 


S3 


far  more  often  in  their  own  hearts  than  in  the  book.  Oh, 
be  persuaded  !    Take  it  up  and  begin  to  read, 

2.  Is  the  Bible  the  Word  of  God  ?  Then  be  sure  you 
always  read  it  tvith  deep  reverence.  Say  to  your  soul, 
whenever  you  open  the  Bible,  "  0  my  soul,  thou  art  going 
to  read  a  message  from  God."  The  sentences  of  judges, 
and  the  speeches  of  kings,  are  received  with  awe  and 
respect.  How  much  more  reverence  is  due  to  the  words 
of  the  Judge  of  judges  and  King  of  kings  !  Avoid,  as 
j^ou  would  cursing  and  swearing,  that  irreverent  habit  of 
mind  into  which  some  modern  divines  Imve  unhappily 
fallen,  in  speaking  about  the  Bible.  They  handle  the 
contents  of  the  holy  book  as  carelessly  and  disrespectfully 
as  if  the  writers  were  such  men  as  themselves.  They 
make  one  think  of  a  child  composing  a  book  to  expose  the 
fancied  ignorance  of  his  own  father, — or  of  a  pardoned 
murderer  criticising  the  handwriting  and  style  of  his  own 
reprieve.  Enter  rather  into  the  spirit  of  Moses  on  Mount 
Horeb : — "  Put  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet ;  the  jilace 
whereon  thou  standest  is  holy  ground." 

3.  Is  the  Bible  the  Word  of  God  ?  Then  be  sure  you 
never  read  it  without  fervent  prayer  for  the  help  and 
teacldng  of  tlte  Holy  Spirit.  Here  is  the  rock  on  which 
many  make  shipwreck.  They  do  not  ask  for  wisdom  and 
instruction,  and  so  they  find  the  Bible  dark,  and  carry 
nothing  away  from  it.  You  should  pray  for  the  Spirit  to 
guide  you  into  all  truth.  You  should  beg  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  to  "  open  your  understanding,"  as  He  did  that  of  His 
disciples.  The  Lord  God,  by  whose  ins^oiration  the  book 
was  written,  keeps  the  keys  of  the  book,  and  alone  can 
enable  you  to  understand  it  profitably.  Nine  times  over 
in  one  Psalm  does  David  cry,  "  Teach  me."  Five  times 
over,  in  the  same  Psalm,  does  he  say,  "  Give  me  under- 
standing." Well  says  John  Owen,  Dean  of  Christ  Church, 
Oxford,  "  There  is  a  sacred  light  in  the  Word :  but  there 
is  a  covering  and  veil  on  the  eyes  of  men,  so  that  they 

D 


34 


OLD  PATHS. 


cannot  behold  it  aright.  Now,  the  removal  of  this  veil  13 
the  peculiar  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit."  Humble  prayei 
Avill  throw  more  light  on  your  Bible  than  Poole,  or  Henry, 
or  Scott,  or  Burkitt,  or  Bengel,  or  Alford,  or  Wordsworth, 
or  Barnes,  or  Ellicott,  or  Lightfoot,  or  any  commentary 
that  ever  was  written. 

The  Bible  is  a  large  book  or  a  small  one,  a  dark  or  a 
bright  one,  according  to  the  spirit  in  which  men  read  it. 
Intellect  alone  will  do  nothing  with  it.  Wranglers  and 
first-class  men  will  not  understand  it  unless  their  hearts 
are  right  as  well  as  their  heads.  The  highest  critical  and 
gframmatical  knowledge  will  find  it  a  sealed  book  without 
tlie  teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Its  contents  are  often  "  hid 
to  the  wise  and  prudent  and  revealed  to  babes."  Remember 
this,  and  say  always,  when  you  open  your  Bible,  "  O  God, 
for  Christ's  sake,  give  me  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit." 

4.  Finally,  is  the  Bible  the  Word  of  God  ?  Then  let 
us  all  resolve  from  this  day  forward  to  prize  the  Bible 
more.  Let  us  not  fear  being  idolaters  of  this  blessed  book. 
Men  may  easily  make  an  idol  of  the  Church,  of  ministers, 
of  sacraments,  or  of  intellect.  Men  cannot  make  an  idol 
of  the  Word.  Let  us  regard  all  who  would  damage  the 
authority  of  the  Bible,  or  impugn  its  credit,  as  spiritual 
robbers.  We  are  travelling  through  a  wilderness :  they 
rob  us  of  our  only  guide.  We  are  voyaging  over  a  stormy 
sea :  they  rob  us  of  our  only  compass.  We  are  toiling  over 
a  weary  road :  they  pluck  our  staff  out  of  our  hands. 
And  what  do  these  spiritual  robbers  give  us  in  place  of 
the  Bible  ?  What  do  they  offer  as  a  safer  guide  and  better 
provision  for  our  souls  ?  Nothing  !  absolutely  nothing  I 
Big  swelling  words  !  Empty  promises  of  new  light !  High 
sounding  jargon ;  but  nothing  substantial  and  real !  They 
would  fain  take  from  us  the  bread  of  life,  and  they  do  not 
give  us  in  its  place  so  much  as  a  stone.  Let  us  turn  a 
deaf  ear  to  them.  Let  us  firmly  grasp  and  j^rize  the 
Bible  more  and  more,  the  more  it  is  assaulted. 


INSPIRATION. 


35 


Let  us  liear  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter.  God 
has  given  us  the  Bible  to  be  a  light  to  guide  us  to 
everlasting  life.  Let  us  not  neglect  this  precious  gift. 
Let  us  read  it  diligently,  walk  in  its  light,  and  we  shall 
be  saved. 


The  following  quotations  about  inspiration,  froyn  the  ivories  of  fo7ir 
eminent  British  theologians,  Iventv,re  to  think  deserve  attentive 

perusal.  Tliey  ere  valuable  in  themselves  on  account  of  the 
arguments  which  they  contain.    They  also  sivp]ply  abundant 

proof  that  the  high  view  of  verbal  inspiration  which  I  advocate 
in  this  paper  is  no  modern  invention,  but  a,n  "  old  path,"  in 
which  many  of  God's  ablest  children  have  walhed,  and  found  it 
a  good  way. 

1.  Bisbop  Jewell,  author  of  the  "  Apology,"'  was  unquestionaljly  one 
of  the  most  learned  of  the  English  Reformers.  Let  us  hear  what  he 
says : — 

"St.  Paul,  speaking  of  the  Word  of  God,  saith,  'the  whole  Scripture 
is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  aud  is  profitable.'  Many  think  the 
Apostle's  spench  is  hardly  true  of  the  whole  Scripture,— that  all  and 
every  part  of  the  Scripture  is  profitable.  Much  is  spoken  of  genealogies 
and  pedigrees,  of  lepers,  of  sacrificing  goats  aud  oxen,  etc.  Tliese  seem 
to  have  little  profit  iu  them  :  to  be  idle  and  vain.  If  they  show  vain 
in  thine  eyes,  yet  hath  not  the  Lord  set  them  down  in  vain.  The  words 
of  the  Lord  are  pure  words,  as  the  silver  tried  in  a  furnace  of  earth 
refined  seven  times.  There  is  no  sentence,  no  clause,  no  word,  no 
syllable,  no  letter,  but  it  is  written  for  thy  instruction  :  there  is  not  one 
jot  but  it  is  sealed  and  signed  with  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Our 
imaginations  are  itUe,  our  thoughts  are  vain  :  there  is  no  idleness,  no 
vanity,  in  the  Word  of  God.  Those  oxen  and  goats  which  were  sacrificed 
teach  thee  to  kill  the  uncleanness  and  filthiness  of  thine  heart :  they 
teach  thee  that  thou  art  guilty  of  death,  when  thy  life  must  be  redeemed 
by  the  death  of  some  beast :  they  lead  thee  to  believe  the  forgiveness 
of  sins  by  a  more  perfect  sacrifice,  since  it  was  not  possible  that  the 
l)lood  of  bulls  or  of  goats  should  take  away  sins.  That  leprosy  teachetb 
thee  the  uncleanness  and  leprosy  of  thy  soul.  These  genealogies  and 
pedigrees  lead  us  to  the  birth  of  our  Saviour  Christ,  so  that  the  whole 
Word  of  God  is  pure  and  holy.  No  word,  no  letter,  no  syllable,  nor 
point  or  prick  thereof,  but  is  written  and  preserve'',  for  thy  sake." — 
Jewell  on  l/ie  Holy  Scriptures, 


86 


OLD  PATHS. 


2.  Richarrl  Hooker,  antlior  of  the  "  Ecclesiastical  Polity,"  is  justly 
respected  by  all  schools  of  thought  in  the  Church  of  Eiiglaud  as  "tiie 
judicious  Hooker."    Let  us  hear  what  he  says  : — 

"Touching  the  manner  how  men,  by  the  Spirit  ot  Prophecy  m  Holy 
Scripture,  have  spoken  and  written  of  things  to  come,  we  must  under- 
stand, that  as  the  knowledge  of  that  thej-  spake,  so  likewise  the  utterance 
of  that  they  knew,  came  not  by  those  usual  aud  ordinarj'  means  whereby 
we  are  brought  to  understand  the  mysteries  of  our  salvation,  and  are 
wont  to  instruct  others  in  the  same.  For  whatsoever  we  know,  we  have 
it  by  the  hands  aud  ministry  of  men,  who  led  us  along  like  children 
from  a  letter  to  a  syllable,  from  a  syllable  to  a  word,  from  a  word  to  a 
line,  from  a  line  to  a  sentence,  from  a  sentence  to  a  side,  anil  so  turn 
over.  But  God  Himself  was  their  instructor.  He  Himself  taught  them, 
partly  by  dreams  and  \nsions  in  the  night,  partly  by  revelations  in  the 
day,  taking  them  aside  from  amongst  their  brethren,  and  talking  witli 
them  as  a  man  would  talk  with  his  neighbours  in  the  way.  Thus  they 
became  accjuainted  even  with  the  secret  and  hidden  counsels  of  God  ; 
they  saw  things  which  themselves  were  not  able  to  utter,  thej'  beheld 
that  whereat  men  and  atigels  are  astonished,  they  understood  in  the 
beginning  what  should  come  to  pass  in  the  last  days.  God,  who 
ligliteued  thus  the  e^-es  of  their  understanding,  giving  them  knowledge 
by  unusual  and  extraordinary  means,  did  aho  mrraruhushj  Himsa/J 
frame  and  fashion  their  roords  and  iuritinij.%  insomuch  that  a  greater 
difference  there  seemeth  not  to  be  between  the  mauuer  of  their  know- 
ledge, than  there  is  between  the  manner  of  their  speech  and  ours.  '  We 
have  received,'  saith  the  Apostle,  'not  the  spirit  of  the  world,  but  the 
Spirit  which  is  of  God,  that  we  miglit  luiow  the  things  that  are  given 
to  us  of  God  :  which  things  also  we  speak,  not  in  words  which  man's 
wisdom  teacheth,  but  which  the  Hol3'-  Ghost  doth  teach.'  This  is  that 
which  the  Prophets  mean  by  those  books  written  full  within  and  with- 
out ;  which  books  were  so  often  delivered  them  to  eat,  not  because  God 
fed  them  with  ink  and  paper,  but  to  teach  us,  that  so  often  as  He 
employed  them  in  this  heavenly  work,  they  neither  spake  nor  \crote  any 
word  of  their  own,  but  uttered  syllable  by  syllable  as  the  Spirit  pid  it  in 
their  moutlis,  no  otherwise  than  the  harp  or  the  lute  doth  give  a  sound 
according  to  the  direction  of  his  hands  that  holdeth  it  and  striketh  it 
with  skill." — Hookers  Works.    Vol.  iii.,  pp.  537,  540. 

3.  John  Owen,  Dean  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford,  was  the  most  learned 
and  argumentative  of  the  Puritans.    Let  us  hear  what  he  says  : — 

"  Holy  men  of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
U'lien  the  word  was  thus  brought  to  them  it  was  not  left  to  their  own 
understandings,  wisdom,  minds,  memories,  to  order,  dispose,  and  give 
it  out ;  but  they  were  borne,  actuated,  carried  out  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
to  speak,  deliver,  and  write  all  that,  and  nothing  but  that, — to  very 
tittles, — that  was  so  brought  unto  them.     They  invented  not  words 


INSPIRATION. 


87 


tlicmsclves,  suited  to  the  things  they  liad  learned,  but  only  expressed 
the  word  that  they  received.  Though  their  mind  and  understanding 
■were  used  in  the  choice  of  words  (whence  arise  all  the  differences  in 
their  manner  of  expression),  yet  they  were  so  guided  that  their  words 
were  not  their  own,  but  immediately  supplied  unto  them.  Not  only 
the  doctrine  they  taught  was  the  word  of  truth, — trnth  itself, — but  the 
words  whereby  they  taught  it  were  words  of  truth  from  God  Himself. 
Thus,  allowing  the  contribution  of  proper  instruments  for  the  reception 
and  representation  of  words  which  answer  to  the  mind  and  tongue  of 
the  Prophets  in  the  coming  of  the  voice  of  God  to  them, — every  apex 
of  the  written  Word  is  equally  divine,  and  as  immediately  from  God  as 
the  voice  wherewith,  or  whereby.  He  spake  to  us  in  the  Prophets  ;  and 
is  therefore  accompanied  with  the  same  authority  in  itself  and  to  us." 
—Owen  on  the  Divim  Original  of  the  ScrijJture.    Vol.  xvi.,  p.  305. 

4.  Dr.  Chalmers  was  probably  the  most  intellectual  and  deep-thinkirg 
theologian  that  intellectual  Scotland  has  ever  produced.  Let  us  hear 
what  he  says  : — 

(a)  "The  subject-matter  of  the  Bible  had  to  pass  through  the  minds 
of  the  selected  Prophets  and  Apostles,  and  to  issue  thence  in  language 
ere  it  comes  forth  in  the  shape  of  Scripture  upon  the  world.  Now  it  is 
here  that  we  meet  the  advocates  of  a  jiartial  or  mitigated  inspiration, 
and  would  make  common  cause  against  one,  and  all  of  tliem.  There  is 
not  one  theory  short,  by  however  so  little,  of  a  thorough  and  perfect 
inspiration, — there  is  not  one  of  them  but  is  chargeable  with  the  con- 
sequence, that  the  subject-matter  of  revelation  suffers  and  is  deteriorated 
in  the  closing  footsteps  of  its  progress  ;  and  just  before  it  settles  into 
that  ultimate  position,  where  it  stands  forth  to  guide  and  illuminate  the 
world.  It  existed  purely  in  heaven.  It  descended  purely  from  heaven 
to  earth.  It  was  deposited  purely  by  the  great  Agent  of  revelation  in 
the  minds  of  the  Apostles.  But  then  we  are  told  that  when  but  a  little 
vi-ay  from  the  final  landing  place,  then,  instead  of  being  carried  forward 
purely  to  the  situation  where  alone  the  great  purpose  of  the  whole 
movement  was  to  be  fulfilled,  then  was  it  abandoned  to  itself,  and  then 
were  human  infirmities  permitted  to  mingle  with  it,  and  to  mar  its 
lustre.  Strange,  that  just  when  entering  on  the  functions  of  an  authori- 
tative guide  and  leader  to  mankind,  that  then,  and  not  till  then,  the 
soil  and  the  feebleness  of  humanity  should  be  suffered  to  gather  around 
it.  Strange,  that,  with  the  inspiration  of  thoughts,  it  should  maki 
pure  ingress  into  the  minds  of  the  Apostles ;  but  wanting  the  inspiration 
of  words  should  not  make  pure  egress  to  that  world  in  whose  behalf 
alone,  and  for  whose  admonition  alone,  this  great  movement  originated 
in  heaven,  and  terminated  in  earth.  Strange,  more  especially  strange, 
in  the  face  of  the  declaration  that  not  unto  themselves  but  unto  us  tljcy 
ministered  these  things, — strange,  nevertheless,  that  this  revelation 
should  come  in  purely  to  themselves,  but  to  i!s  should  come  forth 


38 


OLD  PATHS. 


impurely,  with  somewhat,  it  wotild  appear,  with  somewhat  the  taint 
.111(1  the  obscuration  of  human  frailty  attached  to  it. — It  matters  not  at 
what  point  in  the  progress  of  this  celestial  truth  to  our  world  the 
obscuration  has  been  cast  upon  it.  It  comes  to  us  a  dim  and  desecrated 
thuvg  at  last ;  and  man  instead  of  holding  converse  with  God's  unspotted 
testimony,  has  an  imperfect,  a  mutilated  Bible  put  into  his  hands." 

(b)  "Such  being  our  views,  it  is  the  unavoidable  consequence  of  them 
that  we  should  hold  the  Bible,  for  aU  the  purposes  of  a  revelation,  to  be 
perfect  in  its  language,  as  well  as  perfect  in  its  doctrine.  And  for  this 
conclusion  it  is  not  necessary  that  we  should  arbitrate  bet\\  een  the 
theories  of  superintendence  and  suggestion.  The  superintendence  that 
would  barelj'  intercept  the  progress  of  error,  we  altogether  discard, — 
conceiving,  that,  if  this  term  be  applicable  to  the  process  of  inspiration 
at  all,  it  must  be  that  efficient  superintendence  which  not  only  secures 
that,  negativel)-,  there  shall  be  nothing  wrong, — but  which  also  secures 
that,  affirmatively,  there  should  at  all  times  have  emanated  from  the 
sacred  penmen,  the  fittest  topics,  and  these  couched  in  the  fittest  and 
most  appropriate  exjtression.  Whether  this  has  been  effected  partly 
by  superintendence  and  partly  hy  suggestion,  or  wholly  by  suggestion, 
we  care  not.  We  have  uo  inclination  and  no  taste  for  these  distinctions. 
Our  cause  is  independent  of  them  ;  nor  can  we  fully  participate  in  the 
fears  of  those  alarmists  who  think  that  our  cause  is  materially  injured 
by  them.  The  important  question  with  us  is  not  the  process  of  the 
manufacture,  but  the  qualities  of  the  resulting  commoditj'.  The  former 
we  hold  not  to  be  a  relevant,  and  we  are  not  sure  that  it  is  a  legitimate 
inquiry.  It  is  on  the  latter  we  take  our  stand  ;  and  the  superabundant 
testimonies  of  Scripture  on  the  worth  and  the  perfection  and  the  absolute 
autlioritj'  of  the  Word — these  form  the  strong-holds  of  an  argument 
that  goes  to  establish  all  which  the  most  rigid  advocates  for  a  total  and 
infalUhle  inspiration  ought  to  desire.  Our  concern  is  with  the  work,  and 
not  with  the  workmanship  ;  nor  need  we  intrude  into  the  mj'steries  of 
the  hidden  oijeration,  if  only  assured  by  the  explicit  testimonies  of 
Scripture  that  the  product  of  that  ojjeration,  is,  both  in  substance  and 
expression,  a  perfect  directory  of  faith  and  practice.  AVe  believe  that, 
in  the  composition  of  that  record,  men  not  only  thought  as  they  were 
inspired,  but  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  our 
argument  for  the  absolute  perfection  of  Holy  Writ  is  invulnerably 
beyond  the  reach  even  of  those  who  have  attempted  to  trace  with 
geographical  precision  the  line  which  separates  the  miraculous  from  the 
natural ;  and  tell  us  when  it  was  that  Apostles  wrote  the  words  which 
the  Spirit  prompted  them,  and  when  it  was  that  they  ■wrote  the  words 
which  the  Spirit  permitted  them.  To  the  result,  in  our  humble  appre- 
hension, it  positively  matters  not.  Did  they  speak  the  words  that  the 
Spirit  prompted,- — these  words  were  therefore  the  best.  Did  thej'  speak 
tlie  words  which  the  Spirit  permitted, — it  was  because  these  words  were 
the  best.    The  optimism  of  the  Bible  is  alike  secured  in  both  these  ways; 


INSPIRATION. 


39 


nnd  the  sanction  of  the  Spirit  extended,  both  in  respect  of  sentiments 
nnd  of  sayings,  to  every  clause  of  it.  In  either  way,  they  effectively  are 
the  words  of  the  Spirit ;  and  God  through  the  Bible  is  not  presenting 
truths  through  the  medium  of  others'  language.  He  in  effect  has  made 
it  His  own  language  ;  and  God,  through  the  Bible,  is  speaking  to  us." 

(c)  "It  is  the  part  of  Christians  to  rise  like  a  wall  of  fire  around  the 
integrity  and  inspiration  of  Scripture  ;  and  to  hold  them  as  intact  and 
inviolable  as  if  a  rampart  were  thrown  around  them  whose  foundations 
are  on  earth  and  whose  battlements  are  in  heaven.  It  is  this  tampering 
with  limits  that  destroys  and  defaces  everything ;  and  therefore  it  is 
precisely  when  the  limit  is  broken  that  the  alarm  should  be  sounded. 
If  the  battle-cry  is  to  be  lifted  at  all,  it  should  be  lifted  at  the  outset  ; 
and  so  on  the  first  mingling,  by  however  so  slight  an  infusion,  of  things 
human  with  things  divine,  all  the  friends  of  the  Bible  should  join  heart 
and  hand  against  so  foul  and  fearful  a  desecration." — Chalmers'  Christian 
Evidences,  Vol.  ii.,  pp.  371,  372,  375,  376,  396. 


II. 


OUE  SOULS! 

^' For  ivliat  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole 
world,  and  lose  his  own  soul? — Makk  viii.  36. 

The  saying  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Clirist,  wliich  stands  at 
the  head  of  this  page,  ought  to  ring  in  our  ears  like  a 
trumpet-blast.  It  concerns  our  highest  and  best  interests. 
It  concerns  OUR  SOULS. 

What  a  solemn  question  these  words  of  Scripture 
contain !  What  a  mighty  sum  of  profit  and  loss  they 
propound  to  us  for  calculation  !  Where  is  the  accountant 
who  could  reckon  it  up  ?  Where  is  the  clever  arithmetician 
who  would  not  be  baffled  by  that  sum  ? — "  What  shall  it 
profit  a  man,  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose 
his  own  soul  ?  " 

I  wish  to  offer  a  few  plain  remarks,  to  enforce  and 
illustrate  tVie  question  which  the  Lord  Jesus  asks  in  the 
passage  before  its.  I  invite  the  serious  attention  of  all 
who  read  this  volume.  May  all  who  take  it  up  feel  more 
deeply  than  they  ever  yet  felt  the  value  of  an  immortal 
soul !  It  is  the  first  step  toward  heaven  to  find  out  the 
true  worth  of  our  souls. 

I.^   The  FIRST  remark  I  have  to  make  is  this.  Every 

ONE  OF  us  HAS  AN  UNDYING  SOUL. 


OUR  SOULS. 


41i 


I  am  not  ashamed  to  begin  my  paper  with  these  words. 
I  dare  say  that  they  sound  strange  and  foolish  to  some 
readers.  I  dare  say  that  some  will  exclaim,  "  Who 
knoweth  not  such  things  as  these  ?  Who  ever  thinks  of 
doubting  that  we  have  souls  ?  "  But  I  cannot  forget  that 
the  world  is  just  now  fixing  its  attention  on  material 
things  to  a  most  extravagant  extent.  We  live  in  an  age  of 
progress, — an  age  of  steam-engines  and  machinery,  of 
locomotion  and  invention.  We  live  in  an  age  when  the 
multitude  are  increasingly  absorbed  in  earthly  things, — 
in  railways,  and  docks,  and  mines,  and  commerce,  and 
trade,  and  banks,  and  shops,  and  cotton,  and  corn,  and 
iron,  and  gold.  We  live  in  an  age  when  there  is  a  false 
glare  on  the  things  of  time,  and  a  great  mist  over  the 
things  of  eternity.  In  an  age  like  this  it  is  the  bounden 
duty  of  the  ministers  of  Christ  to  fall  back  upon  first 
principles.  Necessity  is  laid  upon  us.  Woe  is  unto  us, 
if  we  do  not  press  home  on  men  our  Lord's  question 
about  the  soul !  Woe  is  unto  us,  if  we  do  not  cry  aloud, 
"  The  world  is  not  all.  The  life  that  we  now  live  in  the 
flesh  is  not  the  only  life.  There  is  a  life  to  come.  We 
have  souls." 

Let  us  stablish  it  in  our  minds  as  a  great  fact,  that  we 
all  carry  within  our  bosoms  something  that  will  never  die. 
This  body  of  ours,  which  takes  up  so  much  of  our  thoughts 
and  time,  to  warm  it,  dress  it,  feed  it,  and  make  it 
comfortable, — this  body  alone  is  not  all  the  man.  It  is 
but  the  lodging  of  a  noble  tenant,  and  that  tenant  is  the 
immortal  soul !  The  death  which  each  of  us  has  one  day 
to  die  does  not  make  an  end  of  the  man.  All  is  not  over 
when  the  last  breath  is  drawn,  and  the  doctor's  last  visit 
has  been  paid, — when  the  coffin  is  screwed  down,  and  the 
funeral  preparations  are  made, — when  "  ashes  to  ashes  and 
dust  to  dust"  has  been  pronounced  over  the  grave, — when 
our  place  in  the  world  is  filled  up,  and  the  gap  made  by 
our  absence  from  society  is  no  longer  noticed.    No:  all  is 


42 


OLD  PATHS. 


not  over  then !  The  spirit  of  man  still  lives  on.  Every- 
one has  within  him  an  undying  soul. 

I  do  not  stop  to  prove  this.  It  would  be  a  mere  waste 
of  time.  There  is  a  conscience  in  all  mankind  which  is 
worth  a  thousand  metaphysical  arguments.  There  is  a 
voice  within,  w^hich  speaks  out  loudly  at  times,  and  will 
be  heard, — a  voice  which  tells  us,  whether  we  like  it  or 
not,  that  we  have,  every  one  of  us,  an  undying  soul. 
What  though  we  cannot  see  our  souls  ?  Are  there  not 
millions  of  things  in  existence  which  we  cannot  see  with 
the  naked  eye  ?  "Who  that  has  looked  through  the 
telescope  or  microscope  can  doubt  that  this  is  the  case  ? — 
What  though  we  cannot  see  our  souls  ?  W^e  can/ee^  them. 
When  we  are  alone,  on  the  bed  of  sickness,  and  the  world 
is  shut  out,— when  we  watch  by  the  death-bed  of  a  friend, 
— when  we  see  those  whom  we  love  lowered  into  the  grave, 
— at  times  like  these,  who  does  not  know  the  feelings  which 
come  across  men's  minds  ?  Who  does  not  know  that  in 
houi'S  like  these  something  rises  in  the  heart,  telling  us 
that  there  is  a  life  to  come,  and  that  all,  from  the  highest 
to  the  lowest,  have  undying  souls  ? 

You  may  go  all  over  the  Avorld,  and  take  the  evidence 
of  every  age  and  time.  You  will  never  receive  but  one 
answer  on  this  subject.  You  Avill  find  some  nations  buried 
in  degrading  superstition,  and  mad  after  idols.  You  will 
find  others  sunk  in  the  darkest  ignorance,  and  utterly 
unacquainted  with  the  true  God.  But  you  will  not  find 
a  nation  or  people  amongst  whom  there  is  not  some 
consciousness  that  there  is  a  life  to  come.  The  deserted 
temples  of  Egypt,  Greece,  and  Rome,  the  Druidical  remains 
of  our  own  native  land,  the  splendid  pagodas  of  Hindostan, 
the  Fetish  worship  of  Africa,  the  funeral  ceremonies  of  the 
New  Zealand  chiefs,  the  conjurers'  tents  among  the  North 
American  tribes, — all,  all  speak  with  the  same  voice,  and 
tell  the  same  story.  Far  down  in  the  human  heart, 
b(!neath  the  rubbish  heaped  up  by  the  Fall,  there  is  an 


OUTv  SOULS. 


43 


inscn'iDtiou  which  nothing  can  efface,  telling  us  that  this 
world  is  not  all,  and  that  every  one  of  us  has  an  undying 
soul. 

I  do  not  stop  to  prove  that  men  have  souls,  hut  I  do 
ask  every  reader  of  this  paper  to  keep  it  ever  before  his 
mind.  Perhaps  your  lot  is  cast  in  the  midst  of  some  busy 
city.  You  see  around  you  an  endless  struggle  about 
temporal  things.  Hurry,  bustle,  and  business  hem  you  in 
on  every  side.  I  can  well  believe  you  are  sometimes 
tempted  to  think  that  this  world  is  everything,  and  the 
body  all  that  is  worth  caring  for.  But  resist  the  temptation, 
and  cast  it  behind  you.  Say  to  yourself  every  morning 
when  you  rise,  and  every  night  when  you  lie  down,  "  The 
fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away.  The  life  that  I  now 
live  is  not  all.  There  is  something  beside  business,  and 
money,  and  pleasure,  and  commerce,  and  trade.  There  is 
la  life  to  come.    We  have  all  immortal  souls." 

I  do  not  stop  to  prove  the  point,  but  I  do  ask  every 
reader  to  realize  the  dignity  and  responsibility  of  having 
a  soul.  Yes  :  realize  the  fact,  that  in  your  soul  you  have 
the  greatest  talent  which  God  has  committed  to  your 
charge.  Know  that  in  your  soul  you  have  a  pearl  above 
all  price,  compared  to  which  all  earthly  possessions  are 
trifles  light  as  air.  The  horse  that  wins  the  Derby  or  the 
St.  Leger,  attracts  the  attention  of  thousands :  painters 
paint  it,  and  engravers  engrave  it,  and  vast  sums  of  money 
turn  on  its  achievements.  Yet  the  weakest  infant  in  a 
working  man's  family,  is  far  more  important  in  God's  sight 
than  that  horse.  The  spirit  of  the  beast  goeth  downwards  ; 
but  that  infant  has  an  immortal  soul. — The  pictures  at  our 
great  exhibitions  are  visited  by  admiring  crowds :  people 
gaze  on  them  with  wonder,  and  talk  with  rapture  of  the 
"immortal  works"  of  Rubens,  Titian,  and  other  great 
masters.  But  there  is  no  immortality  about  these  things. 
The  earth,  and  all  its  works  shall  be  burned  up.  The  little 
babe  that  cries  in  a  garret  and  linows  nothing  of  fine  art. 


OLD  PATHS. 


shall  outlive  all  those  pictures,  for  it  has  a  soul  which  shall 
neverdie. — There  shall  be  a  time  when  the  Pyramids  and  the 
Parthenon  shall  alike  crumble  to  nothing, — when  Windsor 
Castle  and  Westminster  Abbey  shall  be  cast  down  and 
pass  away, — when  the  sun  shall  cease  to  shine,  and  the 
moon  no  more  give  her  light.  But  the  soul  of  the  humblest 
labourer  is  of  far  more  enduring  stuff.  It  shall  survive 
the  crash  of  an  expiring  universe,  and  live  on  to  all 
eternity.  Realize,  I  say  once  more,  the  responsibility  and 
dignity  of  having  a  never-dying  soul.  You  may  be  poor 
in  this  world ;  but  you  have  a  soul.  You  may  be  sickly 
and  weak  in  body;  but  you  have  a  soul.  You  may  not 
be  a  king,  or  a  queen,  or  a  duke,  or  an  earl ;  yet  you  have 
a  soul.  The  soul  is  the  part  of  us  which  God  chiefly 
regards.    The  soul  is  "  the  man." 

"The  guinea's  worth  is  in  the  gold, 
And  not  the  stamp  upon  it. " 

The  soul  which  is  in  man  is  the  most  important  thing 
about  him. 

I  do  not  stop  to  prove  that  men  have  souls,  but  I  do 
ask  all  men  to  live  as  if  they  believed  it.  Live  as  if  you 
really  believed  that  we  were  not  sent  into  the  world  merely 
to  spin  cotton,  and  grow  corn,  and  hoard  up  gold,  but  to 
"glorify  God  and  to  enjoy  Him  for  ever."  Read  your 
Bible,  and  become  acquainted  with  its  contents.  Seek 
the  Lord  in  prayer,  and  pour  out  your  heart  before  Him. 
Go  to  a  place  of  worship  regularly,  and  hear  the  Gospel 
preached.  Keep  the  Sabbath  holy,  and  give  God  His  day. 
And  if  any  ask  you  the  reason  why :  if  wife,  or  child,  or" 
companion  say,  "  What  are  you  about  ? " — answer  them 
boldly,  like  a  man,  and  say.  "  I  do  these  things  because  I 
have  a  soul," 

IL    The  SECOND  remark  I  have  to  make  is  this.  Any 

ONE  MAY  LOSE  HIS  OWN  SOUL. 


OUR  SOULS. 


45 


This  is  a  sorrowful  portion  of  my  subject.  But  it  is  ono 
which  I  dare  not,  cannot  pass  by.  I  have  no  sympathy 
with  those  who  prophesy  nothing  but  peace,  and  keep 
back  from  men  the  awful  fact,  that  they  may  lose  their 
souls.  I  am  one  of  those  old-fashioned  ministers  who 
believe  the  ivhole  Bible, — and  everything  that  it  contains. 
I  can  find  no  Scriptural  foundation  for  that  smooth-spoken 
theology,  which  jDleases  so  many  in  these  days,  and  ac- 
cording to  which  every  body  will  get  to  heaven  at  last.  I 
believe  that  there  is  a  real  devil.  I  believe  that  there  is 
a  real  hell.  I  believe  that  it  is  not  charity  to  keep  back 
from  men  that  they  may  be  lost.  Charity  !  shall  I  call  it  ? 
If  you  saw  a  brother  drinking  poison,  would  you  hold 
your  peace  ? — Charity  !  shall  I  call  it  ?  If  you  saw  a  blind 
man  tottering  towards  a  precipice,  Avould  you  not  cry  out 
"  Stop"  ?  Away  with  such  false  notions  of  charity  !  Let 
us  not  slander  that  blessed  grace,  by  using  its  name  in  a 
false  sense.  It  is  the  highest  charity  to  bring  the  whole 
truth  before  men.  It  is  real  charity  to  warn  them  plainly 
when  they  are  in  danger.  It  is  charity  to  impress  upon 
them,  that  they  may  lose  their  own  souls  for  ever  in  hell. 

Man  has  about  him  a  wonderful  power  for  evil.  Weak 
as  we  are  in  all  that  is  good,  we  have  a  mighty  power  to 
do  ourselves  harm.  You  cannot  save  that  soul  of  your's, 
my  brother :  remember  that !  You  cannot  make  your 
own  peace  with  God.  You  cannot  wipe  away  a  single  sin. 
You  cannot  blot  out  one  of  the  black  records  which  stand 
in  the  book  of  God  against  you.  You  cannot  change  your 
own  heart.  But  there  is  one  thing  you  can  do, — you  can 
lose  your  own  soul. 

But  this  is  not  all.  Not  only  can  we  all  lose  our  own 
souls,  but  we  are  all  in  imminent  peril  of  doing  it.  Born 
in  sin,  and  children  of  wrath,  we  have  no  natural  desire 
to  have  our  souls  saved.  Weak,  corrupt,  inclined  to  sin, 
we  "  call  good  evil,  and  evil  good."  Dark  and  blind,  and 
dead  in  trespasses,  we  have  no  eyes  to  see  the  pit  which 


'46 


OLD  PATHS. 


yawns  beneath  our  feet,  and  no  sense  of  our  guilt  and 
danger.  And  j'et  our  souls  are  all  this  time  in  awful 
l)eril !  If  any  one  were  to  sail  for  America  in  a  leaky  ship, 
witho'.it  compass,  without  water,  without  provisions,  who 
does  not  see  that  there  would  be  little  chance  of  his 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  safety  ?  If  you  were  to  place  the 
Koh-i-noor  diamond  in  the  hands  of  a  little  child,  and  bid 
him  carry  it  from  Tower  Hill  to  Bristol,  who  does  not 
perceive  the  doubtfulness  of  that  diamond  arriving  safely 
at  the  end  of  the  journey  ?  Yet  these  are  but  faint 
images  of  the  immense  peril  in  which  we  stand  by  nature 
of  losing  our  souls. 

But  some  one  may  ask.  How  can  a  man  lose  his  soul? 
There  are  many  answers  to  that  question.  Just  as  there 
are  many  diseases  which  assault  and  hurt  the  body,  so 
there  are  many  evils  which  assault  and  injure  the  soul. 
Yet  however  numerous  the  ways  in  which  a  man  may  lose 
his  own  soul,  they  may  be  classed  under  three  general 
heads.    Let  me  show  briefly  what  they  are. 

For  one  thing,  you  may  murder  your  soul  by  running 
into  open  sin,  and  serving  lusts  and  pleasures.  Adultery 
and  fornication,  drunkenness  and  revelling,  basphemy 
and  sabbath-breaking,  dishonesty  and  lying,  are  aU  so 
many  short-cuts  to  perdition.  "Let  no  man  deceive 
you  with  vain  words,  for  because  of  these  things  cometh 
the  wrath  of  God  upon  the  children  of  disobedience." 
(Ejjhes.  V.  6.) 

For  another  thing,  you  may  poison  your  own  soul  by 
taking  up  some  false  religion.  You  may  drug  it  with 
traditions  of  man's  invention,  and  a  round  of  ceremonies 
and  observances  which  never  came  down  from  heaven. 
You  may  lull  it  to  sleep  with  opiates  which  stupify  the 
conscience,  but  do  not  heal  the  heart.  Strychnine  and 
arsenic  will  do  their  work  quite  as  effectually  as  the  pistol 
or  sword,  though  with  less  noise.  Let  no  man  deceive 
you.  "Beware  of  false  prophets."  When  men  commit  their 


OUR  SOULS. 


47 


souls  to  blind  leaders,  both  must  fall  into  the  ditch.  A 
false  religion  is  quite  as  ruinous  as  no  religion  at  all. 

For  another  thing,  you  may  starve  your  soul  to  death 
by  trifling  and  indecision.  You  may  idle  through  life 
with  a  name  upon  the  baptismal  register,  but  not  inscribed 
in  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life, — with  a  form  of  godliness, 
but  without  the  power.  You  may  trifle  on  year  after 
year,  taking  no  interest  in  that  which  is  good,  content  to 
sneer  at  the  inconsistencies  of  professors,  and  flattering 
yoi;rself  because  you  are  no  bigot,  or  party  man,  or  pro- 
fessor, it  will  be  "all  right"  with  your  soul  at  last.  "Let 
no  man  deceive  you  with  vain  words."  Indecision  is  just 
as  ruinous  to,  the  soul  as  a  false  religion  or  no  religion  at 
all.  The  stream  of  life  can  never  stand  still.  Whether 
you  are  sleeping  or  waking,  you  are  floating  down  that 
stream.  You  are  coming  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  rapids. 
You  will  soon  pass  over  the  falls,  and,  if  you  die  without  a 
decided  faith,  be  cast  away  to  all  eternity. 

Such  then  are  the  three  chief  ways  in  which  you  can  lose 
your  soul.  Does  any  one  who  is  reading  this  paper  know 
which  of  these  ways  he  is  taking  ?  Search  and  look 
whether  I  have  touched  your  own  case.  Find  out  whether 
or  not  you  are  losing  your  soul. 

But  does  it  take  much  trouble  to  ruin  a  soul  ?  Oh,  no  ! 
It  is  a  down-hill  journey.  There  is  nothing  required  at 
your  hands.  There  is  no  need  of  exertion.  You  have 
only  to  sit  still,  and  do  as  others  do  in  the  circle  in  which 
God's  providence  has  placed  you, — to  swim  with  the  tide, 
to  float  down  the  stream,  to  go  with  the  crowd, — and  by 
and  by  the  time  of  mercy  will  be  past  for  evermore ! 
"  Wide  is  the  gate  that  leadeth  to  destruction." 

But  are  there  many,  you  will  ask,  who  are  losing  their 
souls  ?  Yes,  indeed  there  are  !  Look  not  at  the  inscrip- 
tions and  epitaphs  on  tombstones  if  you  would  find  tlie 
true  answer  to  that  question  !  As  Dr.  Watts  says,  they  are 
"Taught  to  flatter  and  to  lie." 


48 


OLD  PATHS. 


All  men  are  thought  respectable  and  "good  sort  of  people" 
as  soon  as  they  are  dead.  But  look  at  the  Word  of  God. 
and  mark  well  what  it  says.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
declares,  "  Strait  is  the  gate  and  narrow  is  the  way  which 
leadeth  unto  life,  and  few  there  be  that  find  it : — broad  is 
the  way  that  leadeth  to  destruction,  and  many  there  be 
that  go  in  thereat."    (Matt.  vii.  13,  14.) 

But  who  is  responsible  for  the  loss  of  our  souls  ?  No 
one  but  ourselves.  Our  blood  will  be  upon  our  own  heads. 
The  blame  will  lie  at  our  own  door.  We  shall  have 
nothing  to  plead  at  the  last  day,  when  we  stand  before 
the  great  white  throne  and  the  books  are  opened.  When 
the  King  comes  in  to  see  His  guests,  and  says,  "  Friend, 
how  earnest  thou  in,  not  having  a  wedding  garment  ?  "  we 
shall  be  speechless.  We  shall  have  no  excuse  to  plead 
for  the  loss  of  our  souls. 

But  where  does  the  soul  go  to  when  lost  ?  There  is  only 
one  solemn  answer  to  that  question.  There  is  but  one 
place  to  which  it  can  go,  and  that  is  hell.  There  is  no 
such  thing  as  annihilation.  The  lost  soul  goes  to  that 
place  where  the  worm  dies  not,  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched, 
— where  there  is  blackness  and  darkness,  Avretchedness 
and  despair  for  ever.  It  goes  to  hell, — the  onlj-  place  for 
which  it  is  meet, — since  it  is  not  meet  for  heaven.  "  The 
wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell,  with  all  the  nations  that 
forget  God."  "  The  end  of  those  things  is  death  !  "  (Rom. 
vi.  21.) 

Let  me  say  plainlj'^  that  we  ministers  are  full  of  fears  about 
many  who  profess  and  call  themselves  Christians.  We 
fear  lest  they  should  lose  at  last  their  precious  souls.  We 
fear  lest  that  arch-impostor,  Satan,  should  cheat  them  out 
of  salvation,  and  lead  them  captive  at  his  will.  We  fear 
lest  they  should  w-ake  up  in  eternity,  and  find  themselves 
lost  for  evermore  !  We  fear,  because  we  see  so  many  living 
in  sinful  habits,  so  many  resting  in  forms  and  ceremonies 
which  God  never  commanded,  so  many  trifling  with  all 


OUR  SOULS. 


49 


religion  whatsoever,  so  many,  in  short,  ruiuiug  their  own 
souls.    We  see  these  things,  and  are  afraid. 

It  is  just  because  I  feel  that  souls  are  in  danger  that  I 
write  this  paper,  and  invite  men  to  read  it.  If  I  thought 
there  was  no  such  place  as  hell  I  would  not  write  as  I  do. 
If  I  thought  that  as  a  matter  of  course  all  people  would 
go  to  heaven  at  last,  I  would  hold  my  peace  and  leave  them 
alone.  But  I  dare  not  do  so.  I  see  danger  ahead,  and  I 
would  fain  warn  every  man  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come. 
I  see  peril  of  shipwreck,  and  I  would  light  a  beacon  and 
entreat  every  man  to  seek  the  harbour  of  safety.  Do  not 
despise  my  warning.  Examine  your  own  heart :  find  out 
whether  you  are  in  a  way  to  be  lost  or  saved.  Search  and 
see  how  matters  stand  between  yourself  and  God :  do  not 
commit  the  enormous  folly  of  losing  your  own  soul.  We 
live  in  an  age  of  great  temptation.  The  devil  is  going 
about  and  is  very  busy.  The  night  is  far  spent.  The  time 
is  sliort.    Do  not  lose  your  own  soul. 

III.  The  THIRD  remark  which  I  desire  to  make  is  this. 
The  loss  of  any  man's  soul  is  the  heaviest  loss  which 
he  can  suffer. 

I  feel  unable  to  set  forth  this  point  as  I  ought.  No 
living  man  can  show  the  full  extent  of  the  loss  of  the 
soul.  No  one  can  paint  that  loss  in  its  true  colours.  No  : 
we  shall  never  understand  it  till  we  have  passed  through 
the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  and  wake  up  in  another 
world !  Never  till  then  shall  we  know  the  value  of  an 
immortal  soul. 

I  might  say  that  nothing  can  make  up  for  the  loss 
of  the  soul  in  the  life  which  now  is.  You  may  have 
all  the  riches  of  the  world, — all  the  gold  of  Au.stralia 
and  of  California,  all  the  honours  which  your  country  can 
bestow  upon  you.  You  may  be  the  owner  of  half  a  county. 
You  may  be  one  whom  kings  delight  to  honour,  and  nations 
gaze  upon  with  admiration.    But  all  this  time,  if  you  are 

E 


50 


OLD  PATHS. 


losing  your  soul,  you  are  a  poor  man  in  the  sight  of  God. 
Your  honours  are  but  for  a  few  years.  Your  riches  must 
be  left  at  last.  "Naked  came  we  into  the  world,  and 
naked  must  we  go  out."  No  light  heart,  no  cheerful 
conscience,  will  you  have  in  life,  unless  your  soul  is  saved. 
Of  all  your  money  or  broad  acres,  you  will  carry  nothing 
with  you  when  you  die.  A  few  feet  of  earth  will  suffice 
to  cover  that  body  of  yours  when  life  is  over.  And  then, 
if  your  soul  be  lost,  you  will  find  yourself  a  pauper  to  all 
eternity.  Verily  it  shall  profit  a  man  nothing  to  gain  the 
whole  world  if  he  lose  his  own  soul. 

I  might  say  that  when  the  soul  is  lost  it  is  a  loss  that 
cannot  be  retrieved.  Once  lost,  it  is  lost  for  evermore. 
The  loss  of  property  may  be  retrieved  in  this  world.  The 
loss  of  health  and  character  are  not  always  irreparable. 
But  no  man  who  has  once  drawn  his  last  breath  can  ever 
retrieve  his  lost  soul.  Scripture  reveals  to  us  no  purgatory 
beyond  the  grave.  Scripture  teaches  us  that,  once  lost, 
■we  are  lost  for  ever.  Verily  a  man  will  find  that  there  is 
-nothing  he  can  give  to  buy  back  and  redeem  his  soul. 

But  I  feel  deeply  that  arguments  like  these  fall  far 
below  the  level  of  the  subject.  The  time  is  not  yet  come 
when  we  shall  fully  realize  what  a  soul  is  worth.  We 
must  look  far  forward.  We  must  place  ourselves  in 
imagination  in  a  different  position  from  that  which  we  now 
occupy,  before  we  shall  form  a  right  estimate  of  the  thing 
i(ve  are  considering.  The  blind  man  cannot  understand 
beautiful  scenery.  The  deaf  man  cannot  appreciate  fine 
music.  The  living  man  cannot  fully  realize  the  amazing 
importance  of  a  world  to  come. 

Does  any  reader  of  this  paper  wish  to  have  some  faint 
idea  of  the  value  of  a  soul  ?  Then  go  and  measure  it 
by  the  opinions  of  dying  people.  The  solemnity  of  the 
.closing  scene  strips  off  the  tinsel  and  pretence  of  things, 
and  makes  men  see  them  as  they  really  are.  What  would 
men  do  then  for  their  souls  ?    I  have  seen  something  of 


OUR  SOULS. 


51 


this,  as  a  Christian  minister.  Seldom,  very  seldom,  have  I 
found  people  careless,  thoughtless,  and  indifferent  about 
the  world  to  come,  in  the  hour  of  death.  The  man  who 
can  tell  good  stories,  and  sing  good  songs  to  merry  com- 
panions, turns  very  grave  when  he  begins  to  feel  that  life 
is  leaving  his  body.  The  boasting  infidel  at  such  a  season 
has  often  cast  aside  his  infidelity.  Men  like  Paine  and 
Voltaire  have  often  shown  that  their  vaunted  philosophy 
breaks  down  Avhen  the  grave  is  in  sight.  Tell  me  not 
what  a  man  thinks  about  the  soul  when  he  is  in  the 
fulness  of  health ;  tell  me  rather  -vyhat  he  thinks  when  the 
world  is  sinking  beneath  him,  and  death,  judgment,  and 
eternity  loom  in  sight.  The  great  realities  of  our  being 
will  then  demand  attention,  and  must  be  considered. 
The  value  of  the  soul  in  the  light  of  time  is  one  thing, 
but  seen  in  the  light  of  eternity  it  is  quite  another. 
Never  does  living  man  know  the  value  of  the  soul  so 
well  as  when  he  is  dying,  and  can  keep  the  world  no 
longer. 

Does  any  one  wish  to  have  a  still  clearer  idea  of  the 
soul's  value  ?  Then  go  and  measure  it  by  the  opinions  of 
the  dead.  Eead  in  the  sixteenth  chapter  of  St.  Luke  the 
parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus.  When  the  rich 
man  awoke  in  hell  and  in  torments,  what  did  he  say  to 
Abraham  ?  "  Send  Lazarus  to  my  father's  house  : — For  I 
have  five  brethren, — that  he  may  testify  to  them, — lest 
they  also  come  to  this  place  of  torment."  That  rich  man 
probably  thought  little  or  nothing  of  the  souls  of  others 
while  he  lived  upon  the  earth.  Once  dead  and  in  the 
place  of  torment,  he  sees  things  in  their  true  colours. 
Then  he  thinks  of  his  brethren,  and  begins  to  care  for, 
their  salvation.  Then  he  cries,  "  Send  Lazarus  to  my 
father's  house.  I  have  five  brethren.  Let  him  testify  unto 
them."  If  that  wonderful  parable  did  nothing  else,  it 
would  teach  us  what  men  think  when  they  awake  in  the 
next  world.    It  lifts  a  corner  of  the  veil  which  hangs  over 


52 


OLD  PATHS. 


the  world  to  come,  aud  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  wliat  dead 
men  think  of  the  value  of  the  soul. 

Does  any  one  wish  to  have  the  clearest  idea  that  can  be 
given  of  the  soul's  value  ?  Then  go  and  measure  it  by 
the  price  which  was  paid  for  it  1800  years  ago.  ^^^lat  an 
enormous  and  countless  price  it  was  which  was  paid  !  No 
gold,  no  silver,  no  diamonds  were  found  sufficient  to 
provide  redemption  :  no  angel  in  heaven  was  able  to  bring 
a  ransom.  Nothing  but  the  blood  of  Christ, — nothing  but 
the  death  of  the  eternal  Son  of  God  upon  the  cross,  was 
found  sufficient  to  buy  for  the  soul  deliverance  from  hell. 
Go  to  Calvary  in  spirit,  and  consider  what  took  place 
there,  when  the  Lord  Jesus  died.  See  the  blessed  Saviour 
suffering  on  the  cross.  Mark  what  happens  there  when 
He  dies.  See  how  there  was  darkness  for  three  hours  over 
the  face  of  the  earth.  The  earth  quakes.  The  rocks  are 
rent.  The  graves  are  opened.  Listen  to  His  dying  words : 
"  My  God,  my  God,  why  bast  thou  forsaken  Me  ? "  Then 
see  in  all  that  man-ellous  transaction  something  which 
may  give  you  an  idea  of  the  value  of  the  soul.  In  that 
awful  scene  we  witness  payment  of  the  only  price  which 
was  found  sufficient  to  redeem  men's  souls. 

We  shall  all  understand  the  value  of  the  soul  one  day, 
if  we  do  not  understand  it  now.  God  grant  that  no  one 
who  reads  this  paper  may  understand  it  too  late. — A  lunatic 
asylum  is  a  pitiable  sight.  It  wrings  the  heart  to  see  in 
that  gloomy  building  some  man,  who  had  once  a  princely 
fortune,  but  has  squandered  it,  and  brought  himself  to 
hopeless  insanity  by  drunkenness. — A  shipwreck  is  a 
pitiable  sight.  It  makes  one  melancholy  to  see  some 
gallant  vessel,  which  once  "walked  the  water  like  a  thing 
of  life,"  stranded  on  a  rocky  shore,  with  a  drowned  crew 
and  a'  scattered  cargo  l}T^ng  round  her  on  the  beach.  But 
of  all  sights  that  can  affect  the  eye  and  grieve  the  heart, 
I  know  none  so  pitiable  as  the  sight  of  a  man  ruining  his 
own  soul.    No  wonder  that  Jesus  wept  when  He  drew 


OUR  SOULS. 


53 


nigh  unto  Jerusalem  for  the  last  time.  It  is  written,  that 
"  He  beheld  the  city  and  wept  over  it ! "  (Luke  xix.  41.) 
He  knew  the  value  of  souls,  if  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees 
did  not.  We  may  learn  from  those  tears  of  His, — if  from 
nothing  else, — the  value  of  man's  soul,  and  the  amount  of 
loss  which  he  will  sustain  if  that  soul  is  cast  away. 

I  charge  every  reader  of  this  paper,  while  it  is  called! 
to-day,  to  open  his  eyes  to  the  worth  of  his  soul.  Rise  to 
a  sense  of  the  awfulness  of  losing  a  soul.  Strive  to  know 
the  real  preciousness  of  that  mighty  treasure  committed  to 
your  charge.  The  value  of  all  things  will  change  greatly 
one  day.  The  hour  cometh  when  bank-notes  shall  be 
worth  no  more  than  waste  paper,  and  gold  and  diamonds 
shall  be  as  the  dust  of  the  streets, — when  the  palace  of 
the  peer  and  the  cottage  of  the  peasant  shall  both  alike 
fall  to  the  ground, — when  stocks  and  funds  shall  be  all 
unsaleable,  and  grace  and  faith  and  good  hope  be  no  longer 
underrated  and  despised.  In  that  hour  you  will  find  out, 
in  a  way  you  never  found  out  before,  the  value  of  the 
immortal  soul.  Soul-loss  will  then  be  seen  to  be  the 
greatest  of  losses,  and  soul-gain  the  greatest  of  gains. 
Seek  to  know  the  value  of  the  soul  now.  Do  not  be  like 
the  Egyptian  Queen,  who,  in  foolish  ostentation,  took  a 
pearl  of  great  value,  dissolved  it  in  acid,  and  then  drank 
it  off.  Do  not,  like  her,  cast  away  the  "pearl  of  great 
price,"  which  God  has  committed  to  your  charge.  Once 
lost,  no  loss  can  compare  with  the  loss  of  the  souL 

IV.  The  FOURTH  and  last  remark  I  have  to  make  is 
this.   Any  man's  soul  may  be  saved. 

I  bless  God  that  the  Gospel  of  Christ  enables  me  to 
proclaim  these  glad  tidings,  and  to  proclaim  them  freely 
and  unconditionally  to  every  one  who  reads  these  pages. 
I  bless  God,  that  after  all  the  solemn  things  I  have  been 
saying,  I  can  wind  up  with  a  message  of  peace.  I  could 
not  bear  the  awful  responsibility  of  telling  men  that  every 


54 


OLD  PATHS. 


one  has  a  soul, — that  any  one  may  lose  his  soul, — that  the 
loss  of  the  soul  is  a  loss  for  which  nothing  can  make  up, — 
if  I  could  not  also  proclaim  that  any  man's  soul  may  be 
saved. 

I  think  it  possible  that  this  proclamation  may  sound 
startling  to  some  readers  of  this  paper.  I  remember  the 
time  when  it  would  have  sounded  startling  to  me.  But  I 
am  persuaded  that  it  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the 
voice  of  the  everlasting  Gospel,  and  I  am  not  ashamed  to 
make  it  known  to  all  who  have  an  ear  to  hear.  I  say 
boldly,  that  there  is  salvation  in  the  Gosjiel  for  the  chief 
of  sinners.  I  say  confidently,  that  any  one  and  every  one 
may  have  his  soul  saved  ! 

I  know  that  we  are  all  sinners  by  nature, — fallen,  guilty, 
corrupt,  covered  with  sin.  I  know  that  the  God  with 
whom  we  have  to  do  is  a  most  holy  Being,  of  purer  eyes 
than  to  behold  iniquity,  and  One  who  cannot  look  upon 
that  which  is  evil.  I  know  also  that  the  world  in  which 
our  lot  is  cast,  is  a  hard  world  for  religion.  It  is  a  world 
full  of  cares  and  troubles,  of  unbelief  and  impurity,  of 
opposition  and  hatred  to  God.  It  is  a  world  in  which 
religion  is  like  an  exotic, — a  world  which  has  an  atmosphere 
that  makes  religion  wither  away.  But,  notwithstanding 
ail  this,  hard  as  this  world  is,  holy  as  God  is,  sinful  as  we 
are  by  nature, — I  say,  that  any  one  and  every  one  may  be 
saved.  Any  man  or  woman  may  be  saved  from  the  guilt, 
the  power,  the  consequences  of  sin,  and  be  found  at  length 
at  the  right  hand  of  God  in  everlasting  glory. 

I  fancy  I  hear  some  reader  exclaim,  "  How  can  these 
things  be  ? "  No  wonder  that  you  ask  that  question. 
This  is  the  great  knot  which  heathen  philosophers  could 
never  untie.  This  is  the  problem  which  all  the  sages  of 
Greece  and  of  Rome  could  not  solve.  This  is  the  question 
which  nothing  can  answer  but  the  Gospel  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  That  answer  of  the  Gospel  I  now  desire 
to  place  before  you. 


OUR  SOULS.  55 

I 

I  proclaim  then,  with  all  confidence,  that  any  one's  soul 
may  be  saved,  (1)  because  Christ  has  once  died.  Jesus 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  has  died  upon  the  cross  to  make 
atonement  for  men's  sins.  "  Christ  has  once  suffered  for 
sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to 
God."  (1  Pet.  iii.  18.)  Christ  has  borne  our  sins  in  His 
own  body  on  the  tree,  and  allowed  the  curse  we  all 
deserved  to  fall  on  His  head.  Christ  by  His  death  has 
made  satisfaction  to  the  holy  law  of  God  which  we  have 
broken.  That  death  was  no  common  death :  it  was  no 
mere  example  of  self-denial ;  it  was  no  mere  death  of 
a  martyr,  such  as  were  the  deaths  of  a  Ridley,  a 
Latimer,  or  a  Cranmer.  The  death  of  Christ  was  a 
sacrifice  and  propitiation  for  the  sin  of  the  whole  world. 
It  was  the  vicarious  death  of  an  Almighty  Substitute, 
Surety,  and  Representative  of  the  sons  of  men.  It 
paid  our  enormous  debt  to  God.  It  opened  up  the  way 
to  heaven  to  all  believers.  It  provided  a  fountain  for  all 
sin  and  uncleanness.  It  enabled  God  to  be  just,  and  yet 
to  be  the  justifier  of  the  ungodly.  It  purchased  recon- 
ciliation with  Him.  It  procured  perfect  peace  with 
God  for  all  who  come  to  Him  by  Jesus.  The  prison- 
doors  were  set  open  when  Jesus  died.  Liberty  was 
proclaimed  to  all  who  feel  the  bondage  of  sin,  and  desire 
to  be  free. 

For  whom,  do  you  suppose,  was  all  that  suffering  under- 
gone, which  Jesus  endured  at  Calvary  ?  Why  was  the 
holy  Son  of  God  dealt  with  as  a  malefactor,  reckoned  a 
transgressor,  and  condemned  to  so  cruel  a  death  ?  For 
whom  were  those  hands  and  feet  nailed  to  the  cross  ?  For 
whom  was  that  side  pierced  with  the  spear  ?  For  whom 
did  that  precious  blood  flow  so  freely  down  ?  Wherefore 
was  all  this  done  ?  It  was  done  for  you  !  It  was  done  for 
the  sinful, —  for  the  ungodly  !  It  was  done  freely,  volun- 
tarily,— not  by  compulsion, —  out  of  love  to  sinners,  and  to 
make  atonement  for  sin.    Surely,  then,  as  Christ  died  for 


56 


OLD  PATHS. 


the  ungodly,  I  have  a  right  to  proclaim  that  any  one  may 
be  saved. 

Furthermore,  I  proclaim  with  all  confidence,  that  any 
one  may  be  saved,  (2)  because  Christ  still  lives.  That 
same  Jesus  who  once  died  for  sinners,  still  lives  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  to  carry  on.  the  work  of  salvation  which 
He  came  down  from  heaven  to  perform.  He  lives  to 
receive  all  who  come  unto  God  by  Him,  and  to  give  them 
power  to  become  the  sons  of  God.  He  lives  to  hear  the 
confession  of  every  heavy-laden  conscience,  and  to  grant, 
as  an  almighty  High  Priest,  perfect  absolution.  He  Lives 
to  pour  down  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  on  all  who  believe  in 
Him,  and  to  enable  them  to  cry,  Abba,  Father !  He  lives 
to  be  the  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  the 
unwearied  Intercessor,  the  kind  Shepherd,  the  elder 
Brother,  the  prevailing  Advocate,  the  never-failing  Priest 
and  Friend  of  all  who  come  to  God  by  Him.  He  lives 
to  be  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption 
to  all  His  people, — to  keep  them  in  life,  to  support  them 
in  death,  and  to  bring  them  finally  to  eternal  glory. 

For  whom,  do  you  suppose,  is  Jesus  sitting  at  God's 
right  hand  ?  It  is  for  the  sons  of  men.  High  in  heaven, 
and  surrounded  by  unspeakable  glory.  He  still  cares  for 
that  mighty  work  which  He  undertook  when  He  w^as 
born  in  the  manger  of  Bethlehem.  He  is  not  one  whit 
altered.  He  is  always  in  one  mind.  He  is  the  same  that 
He  was  when  He  walked  the  shores  of  the  sea  of  Galilee 
He  is  the  same  that  He  was  when  He  pardoned  Saul  the 
Pharisee,  and  sent  him  forth  to  preach  the  faith  he  had 
once  destroyed.  He  is  the  same  that  He  was  when  He 
received  Mary  Magdalene, — called  Matthew  the  publican, 
—brought  Zacchteus  down  from  the  tree,  and  made  them 
examples  of  what  His  grace  could  do.  And  He  is  not 
changed.  He  is  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for 
ever.  Surely  I  have  a  right  to  say  that  any  one  maybe 
saved,  since  Jesus  lives. 


OUR  SOULS. 


57 


Once  more  I  proclaim,  with  all  confidence,  that  any  one 
may  be  saved,  (3)  because  the  promises  of  Christ's  gospel 
(ire  full,  free,  and  unconditional.  "Come  unto  Me," 
says  the  Saviour,  "  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden, 
and  I  will  give  you  rest."- — ■"  He  that  believeth  on  the 
Son  shall  not  perish,  but  have  eternal  life." — "  He  that 
believeth  on  Him  is  not  condemned." — "  Him  that  corneth 
unto  Me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out." — "  Every  one  which 
seeth  the  Son,  and  believeth  on  Him  may  have  everlasting 
life." — "  He  that  believeth  on  Me  hath  everlasting  life." 
■ — "  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  Me  and  drink." 
"  Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  of  the  water  of  life  freely." 
(Matt.  xi.  28;  John  iii.  15,  18;  vi.  37,  40,  47;  vii.  37; 
Rev.  xxii.  17.) 

For  whom,  do  you  suppose,  were  these  words  spoken  ? 
Were  they  meant  for  the  Jews  only  ?  No :  for  the 
Gentiles  also ! — Were  they  meant  for  people  in  old  times 
only  ?  No  :  for  people  in  every  age  ! — Were  they  meant 
for  Palestine  and  Syvia  only  ?  No :  for  the  whole  world, 
— for  every  name  and  nation  and  people  and  tongue  ! — 
Were  they  meant  for  the  rich  only  ?  No  :  for  the  poor  as 
well  as  for  the  rich  ! — Were  they  meant  for  the  very  moral 
and  correct  only  ?  No :  they  were  meant  for  all, — for  the 
chief  of  sinners, — for  the  vilest  of  offenders, — for  all  who 
will  receive  them !  Surely  when  I  call  to  mind  these 
promises,  I  have  a  right  to  say  that  any  one  and  every  one 
may  be  saved.  Any  one  who  reads  these  words,  and  is  not 
saved,  can  never  blame  the  Gospel.  If  you  are  lost,  it  is 
not  because  you  couhi  not  be  saved.  If  you  are  lost,  it  is 
not  because  there  was  no  pardon  for  sinners,  no  Mediator, 
no  High  Priest,  no  fountain  open  for  sin  and  for  unclean- 
ne&s,  no  open  door.  It  is  because  you  would  have  your 
own  way,  because  you  would  cleave  to  your  sins,  because 
you  would  not  come  to  Christ,  that  in  Christ  you  might 
have  life. 

I  make  no  secret  of  my  object  in  sending  foi-th  this 


58 


OLD  PATHS. 


volume.  My  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  for  you  is, 
that  your  soul  may  be  saved.  This  is  the  graud  object 
for  which  every  faithful  minister  is  ordained.  This  is  the 
end  for  which  we  preach,  and  speak,  and  write.  We  want 
souls  to  be  saved.  They  know  not  what  they  say,  who 
charge  us  with  worldly  motives,  and  tell  us  we  only  wish 
to  advance  our  order,  and  promote  priest-craft.  We  know 
nothing  of  such  feelings.  May  God  forgive  those  who  lay 
these  things  to  our  charge  !  We  labour  for  higher  objects. 
We  want  souls  to  be  saved !  We  love  the  Church  of 
England :  we  feel  deep  affection  for  her  Prayer-book,  her 
Articles,  her  Homilies,  her  Forms  for  the  Worship  of  God. 
But  one  thing  we  feel  even  more  deeply, — we  want  souls 
to  be  saved.  We  desire  to  pluck  some  brands  from  the 
burning.  We  desire  to  be  the  honoured  instruments  in  the 
liand  of  God  of  leading  some  souls  to  a  knowledge  of  Jesus 
.Christ  our  Lord. 

And  now  I  will  conclude  this  paper  by  three  words  of 
affectionate  application,  which  I  heartily  pray  God  to  bless 
to  the  spiritual  good  of  many  souls.  I  know  not  into 
whose  hands  these  pages  may  fall.  I  draw  my  bow  at  a 
venture.  I  can  only  pray  God  that  He  may  send  an  arrow 
home  to  some  consciences,  and  that  many  who  read  this 
volume  may  lay  it  down  smiting  upon  their  breasts  and 
saying,  "  ^Vhat  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ? " 

(1)  My  first  word  of  application  shall  be  a  word  of 
affectionate  luarning.  That  word  of  warning  is  short 
and  simple, — Do  not  neglect  your  own  soul. 

I  have  little  doubt  that  this  volume  will  fall  into  the 
hands  of  some  who  are  often  tried  with  anxiety  about  the 
thinsrs  of  this  life.  You  are  "careful  and  troubled  about 
many  things."  You  seem  to  live  in  a  constant  whirl  of 
business,  hurry,  and  trouble.  You  see  around  you  thou- 
sands who  care  for  nothing  but  what  they  shall  eat,  and 
what  they  shall  drink,  and  what  they  shall  put  on.  You 


OUR  SOULS. 


59 


are  often  sorely  tempted  to  think  it  is  no  use  to  try  to 
liave  any  religion.  I  say  to  you,  in  God's  name,  Resist 
the  temptation.  It  comes  from  the  devil.  I  say  to  you, 
Never  forget  the  one  thing  needful !  Never  forget  your 
immortal  soul ! 

You  may  tell  me,  perhaps,  that  the  times  are  hard. 
They  may  be  hard  ;  but  it  is  m}^  duty  to  remind  you  that 
time  is  short,  and  will  be  soon  changed  for  eternity.  You 
may  tell  me  that  you  must  live ;  but  it  is  my  duty  to 
remind  you  that  you  must  also  die,  and  be  ready  to  meet 
your  God.  What  should  we  think  of  a  man  who  in  time 
of  famine  fed  his  dose  and  starved  his  cliild  ?  Should  we 
not  say  that  he  was  a  heartless  and  unnatural  father? 
Well :  take  heed  that  you  do  not  do  something  like  this 
yourself  Do  not  forget  your  soul  in  your  anxiety  for 
your  body.  Do  not,  in  your  concern  about  the  life  that 
now  is,  forget  that  which  is  to  come.  Do  not  neglect 
your  soul ! 

Whatever  you  may  have  been  in  time  past,  I  beseech 
you  for  time  to  come  to  live  as  one  who  feels  that  he  has 
an  immortal  soul !  Lay  down  this  book  with  a  holy 
determination,  by  God's  help,  to  "  cease  to  do  evil,  and 
learn  to  do  well"  Do  not  be  ashamed,  from  this  time 
forward,  to  care  about  your  soul's  interests.  Do  not  be 
ashamed  to  read  your  Bible,  to  pray,  to  keep  the  Sabbath 
holy,  and  to  hear  the  Gospel  preached.  Of  sin  and  un- 
godliness you  may  well  be  ashamed.  You  never  need  be 
ashamed  of  caring  for  your  soul.  Let  others  laugh  if  they 
will :  they  will  not  laugh  at  you  one  day.  Take  it 
patiently.  Bear  it  quietly.  Tell  them  you  have  made  up 
your  mind,  and  do  not  mean  to  alter.  Tell  them  that  you 
have  learned  one  thing,  if  nothing  else,  and  that  is  that 
you  have  a  precious  soul.  And  tell  them  you  have 
resolved  that,  come  what  will,  you  will  no  longer  neglect 
,thut  soul. 

(2)  My  second  word  of  application  shall  be  an  offec-, 


60 


OLD  PATHS. 


tionate  invitation  to  all  who  desire  their  souls  to  bo 
saved.  I  invite  every  reader  of  this  paper  who  feels  the 
value  of  his  soul,  and  desires  salvation,  to  come  to  Christ 
without  delay,  and  be  saved.  I  invite  him  to  come  to 
Christ  by  faith,  and  commit  his  soul  to  Him,  that  he  may 
be  delivered  from  the  guilt,  the  power,  and  the  conse- 
quences of  sin. 

My  tongue  is  not  able  to  tell,  and  my  mind  is  too  weak 
to  explain,  the  whole  extent  of  God's  love  towards  sinners, 
and  of  Christ's  willingness  to  receive  and  save  souls.  You 
are  not  straitened  in  Christ,  but  in  yourself.  You  mistake 
greatly  if  you  doubt  Christ's  readiness  to  save.  I  know 
there  are  no  obstacles  between  that  soul  of  yours  and 
eternal  life,  except  your  own  will.  "  There  is  joj'  in  the 
presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  re- 
penteth."  (Luke  xv.  10.)  You  may  have  heard  something 
of  the  wonders  of  the  choruses  at  the  Crystal  Palace 
concerts.  But  what  is  all  that  burst  of  harmony  in  the 
'■  Hallelujah  Chorus,"  to  the  outburst  of  joy  which  is 
heard  in  heaven  when  a  soul  turns  from  darkness  to  light  ? 
What  is  it  all  but  a  mere  whisper,  compai-ed  to  the  "joy 
of  angels  "  over  one  sinner  taught  to  see  the  folly  of  sin, 
and  to  seek  Christ  ?  Oh,  come  and  add  to  that  joy 
without  delay ! 

If  you  love  life,  I  beseech  you  to  lay  hold  on  Christ  at 
once,  that  your  soul  may  be  saved.  Why  not  do  it  to- 
day ?  T\Tiy  not  this  day  join  yourself  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
in  an  everlasting  covenant  which  cannot  be  broken  ?  Why 
not  resolve,  before  to-morrow's  sun  dawns,  to  turn  from 
the  service  of  sin,  and  turn  to  Christ  ?  Why  not  go  to 
Christ  this  very  day,  and  cast  your  soul  on  Him,  with  all 
its  sins  and  all  its  unbelief,  with  all  its  doubts  and  all  its 
fears  ? — Are  you  poor  ?  Seek  treasure  in  heaven  and  be 
rich. — Are  you  old  ?  Hasten,  hasten  to  be  ready  for  your 
end,  and  prepare  to  meet  your  God. — Are  you  young  ? 
Begin  well,  and  seek  in  Christ  a  never-failing  friend,  who 


OUR  SOULS. 


Gl 


will  never  forsake  you. — Are  you  in  trouble,  careful  about 
this  life  ?  Seek  Him  who  alone  can  help  you  and  bear 
your  burdens :  seek  Him  who  will  never  disappoint  you. 
When  otliers  turn  their  backs  upon  you,  then  will  Jesus 
Christ  the  Lord  take  you  uj). — Are  you  a  sinner,  a  great 
sinner,  a  sinner  of  the  worst  description  ?  It  shall  all  be 
remembered  no  more  if  you  only  come  to  Christ:  His  blood 
shall  cleanse  all  sin  away.  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet, 
they  shall  be  made  white  as  snow. 

Go  then,  and  cry  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Think  of 
the  value  of  your  soul,  and  think  of  the  one  way  of 
salvation.  Call  on  the  Lord  in  earnest  prayer.  Do  as 
the  penitent  thief  did :  pour  out  your  heart  before  Him  : 
cry,  "  Lord  remember  me,  even  me."  Tell  him  yon  come 
to  Him,  because  you  have  heard  that  He  "receives  sinners," 
and  because  you  are  a  sinner  and  want  to  be  saved.  Tell 
Him  the  whole  story  of  your  past  life.  Tell  Him,  if  you 
will,  that  you  have  been  an  imbeliever,  a  profligate,  a 
Sabbath-breaker,  a  godless,  reckless,  ill-tempered  man. 
He  M'ill  not  despise  you.  He  will  not  cast  you  out.  He 
will  not  turn  His  back  upon  you.  He  never  breaks  the 
bruised  reed,  or  quenches  the  smoking  flax.  No  man  ever 
came  to  Him  and  was  cast  out.  Oli,  come  to  Christ,  and 
your  soul  shall  live  ! 

(3)  My  last  word  of  application  shall  be  an  affectionate 
exhortation  to  every  reader  of  this  paper  who  has  found 
out  the  value  of  his  soul,  and  believed  in  Jesus  Christ. 
That  exhortation  shall  be  short  and  simple.  I  beseech  you 
to  cleave  to  the  Lord  with  all  your  heart,  and  to  press 
towards  the  mark  for  the  prize  of  your  high  calling. 

I  can  well  conceive  that  you  find  your  way  very  narrow. 
There  are  few  with  you  and  many  against  you.  Your  lot 
in  life  may  seem  hard,  and  your  position  may  be  difficult. 
But  still  cleave  to  the  Lord,  and  He  will  never  forsake 
you.  Cleave  to  the  Lord  in  the  midst  of  persecution. 
Cleave  to  the  Lord,  though  men  laugh  at  you  and  mock 


62 


OLD  PATHS. 


you,  and  try  to  make  you  ashamed.  Cleave  to  the  Lord, 
though  the  cross  be  heavy  and  the  fight  be  hard.  He  was 
not  ashamed  of  you  upon  the  Cross  of  Calvary :  then  do 
not  be  ashamed  of  Him  upon  earth,  lest  He  should  be 
ashamed  of  you  before  His  Father  who  is  in  heaven. 
Cleave  to  the  Lord,  and  He  will  never  forsake  you.  In 
this  world  there  are  plenty  of  disappointments, — disappoint- 
ments in  properties,  and  families,  and  houses,  and  lands, 
and  situations.  But  no  man  ever  yet  was  disappointed  in 
Christ.  No  man  ever  failed  to  find  Christ  all  that  the 
Bible  says  He  is,  and  a  thousand  times  better  than  he 
had  been  told  before. 

Look  forward,  look  onward  and  forward  to  the  end  ! 
Your  best  things  are  yet  to  come.  Time  is  short.  The 
end  is  drawing  near.  The  latter  days  of  the  world  are 
upon  us.  Fight  the  good  fight.  Labour  on.  Work  on. 
Strive  on.  Pray  on.  Read  on.  Labour  hard  for  your  own 
soul's  prosperity.  Labour  hard  for  the  prosperity  of  the 
souls  of  others.  Strive  to  bring  a  few  more  with  you  to 
heaven,  and  by  all  means  to  save  some.  Do  something, 
by  God's  help,  to  make  heaven  more  full  and  hell  more 
empty.  Speak  to  that  young  man  by  your  side,  and  to 
that  old  person  who  lives  near  to  your  house.  Speak 
to  that  neighbour  who  never  goes  to  a  place  of  worship. 
Speak  to  that  relative  who  never  reads  the  Bible  in 
private,  and  makes  a  jest  of  serious  religion.  Entreat 
them  all  to  think  about  their  souls.  Beg  them  to  go  and 
hear  something  on  Sundays  which  will  be  for  their  good 
unto  everlasting  life.  Try  to  persuade  them  to  live,  not 
like  the  beasts  which  perish,  but  like  men  who  desire  to 
be  saved.  Great  is  your  reward  in  heaven,  if  you  try  to 
do  good  to  souls.  Great  is  the  reward  of  all  who  confess 
Christ  before  the  sons  of  men.  The  honours  of  this  world 
will  soon  be  at  an  end  for  ever.  The  rewards  which  our 
gracious  Queen  bestows  are  only  enjoyed  for  a  few  short 
years.    The  "Victoria  Cross"  will  not  be  long  worn  by 


OUR  SOULS. 


those  brave  soldiers  who  won  it  so  gallantly  and  deserve' 
it  so  richly.  The  place  that  knows  them  now  shall  soon 
know  them  no  more :  a  few  more  years  and  they  will  be 
gathered  to  their  fathers.  But  the  crown  which  Christ 
gives  never  fades.  Seek  that  crown,  my  believing  reader. 
Labour  for  that  crown.  It  will  make  amends  for  all  that 
you  have  to  pass  through  in  this  troublous  world.  The 
rewards  of  Christ's  soldiers  are  for  evermore.  Their  home 
is  eternal.    Their  glory  never  comes  to  an  end.  ♦ 


III. 


FEW  SAVED ! 

"A7-e  there  few  that  he  saved?  " — Luke  xiii.  23, 

I  TAKE  it  for  granted  tliat  every  reader  of  this  paper 
calls  himself  a  Christian.  You  would  not  like  to  be 
reckoned  a  deist,  or  an  infidel.  You  profess  to  believe 
the  Bible  to  be  true.  The  birth  of  Christ  the  Saviour, — 
the  death  of  Christ  the  Saviour, — the  salvation  provided 
by  Christ  the  Saviour, — all  these  are  facts  which  you  have 
probably  never  doubted.  But,  after  all,  will  Christianity 
like  this  profit  you  anything  at  last  ?  Will  it  do  your 
soul  any  good  when  you  die  ?  In  one  word, — Shall  you 
be  saved? 

It  may  be  you  are  now  young,  healthy  and  strong.  Per- 
haps you  never  had  a  day's  illness  in  your  life,  and  scarcely 
know  what  it  is  to  feel  weakness  and  pain.  You  scheme 
and  plan  for  future  years,  and  feel  as  if  death  was  far 
away,  and  out  of  sight.  Yet,  remember,  death  sometimes 
cuts  off  young  people  in  the  flower  of  their  days.  The 
strong  and  healthy  of  the  family  do  not  always  live  the 
longest.  Your  sun  may  go  down  before  your  life  has 
reached  its  mid-day.  Yet  a  little  while,  and  you  may 
be  lying  in  a  narrow,  silent  home,  and  the  daisies  may 
be  growing  over  your  grave.  And  then,  consider, — Shall 
you,  he  saved? 

It  may  be  you  are  rich  and  prosperous  in  this  world. 


FEW  SAVED. 


63' 


You  have  money,  and  all  that  money  can  command.  You 
have  "  honour,  love,  obedience,  troops  of  friends."  But, 
remember,  "riches  are  not  for  ever."  You  cannot  keep 
them  longer  than  a  few  years.  "  It  is  appointed  unto  men 
once  to  die,  and  after  this  the  judgment."  (Prov.  xxvii.  24; 
Heb.  ix.  27.)   And  then,  consider, — Shall  you  be  saved  ? 

It  may  be  you  are  poor  and  needy.  You  have  scarcely 
enough  to  provide  food  and  raiment  for  yourself  and 
family.  You  are  often  distressed  for  want  of  comforts,  which 
you  have  no  power  to  get.  Like  Lazarus,  you  seem  to  have 
"evil  things"  only,and  not  good.  But,  nevertheless,  you  take 
comfort  in  the  thought  that  there  will  be  an  end  of  all  this. 
There  is  a  world  to  come,  where  poverty  and  want  shall  be 
unknown.   Yet,  consider  a  moment, — Shall  you  be  saved  ? 

It  may  be  you  have  a  weak  and  sickly  body.  You 
hardly  know  what  it  is  to  be  free  from  pain.  You  have 
.so  long  parted  company  with  health,  that  you  have  almost 
forgotten  what  it  is  like.  You  have  often  said  in  the 
morning,  "  Would  God  it  were  evening," — and  in  the 
evening,  "  Would  God  it  were  morning."  There  are  days 
when  you  are  tempted  by  very  weariness  to  cry  out  with 
Jonah,  "  It  is  better  for  me  to  die  than  to  live."  (Jonah 
iv.  3.)  But,  remember,  death  is  not  all.  There  is  some- 
thing else  beyond  the  grave.  And  then,  consider, — Shall 
you  be  saved  ? 

If  it  was  an  easy  thing  to  be  saved,  I  would  not  write 
as  I  do  in  this  volume.    But  is  it  so  ?    Let  us  see. 

If  the  common  opinion  of  the  world  as  to  the  number 
of  the  saved  was  correct,  I  would  not  trouble  men  with 
searching  and  hard  questions.    But  is  it  so  ?    Let  us  see. 

If  God  had  never  spoken  plainly  in  the  Bible  about  the 
number  of  the  saved,  I  might  well  be  silent.  But  is  it 
so  ?    Let  us  see. 

If  experience  and  facts  left  it  doubtful  whether  many 
or  few  would  be  saved,  I  might  hold  my  peace.  But  is  it 
so  ?    Let  us  see. 

P 


66 


OLD  PATHS. 


There  are  four  points  -which  I  propose  to  examine  ia 
considering  the  subject  before  us. 

I.  Let  me  explain  what  it  is  to  be  saved. 

II.  Let  me  point  out  the  mistakes  which  are  common 
in  the  world  about  the  number  of  the  saved. 

III.  Let  me  show  what  the  Bible  says  about  the 
number  of  the  saved. 

TV.  Let  me  bring  forward  some  plain  facts  as  to  the 
number  of  the  saved. 

A  calm  examination  of  these  four  points,  in  a  day 
of  wide-spread  carelessness  about  vital  religion,  will  be 
found  of  vast  importance  to  our  souls. 

I.    First  of  all  let  me  explain  what  it  is  to  be  saved. 

This  is  a  matter  that  must  be  cleared  up.  Till  we 
know  this,  we  shall  make  no  progress.  By  being  "  saved  " 
I  may  mean  one  thing,  and  jon  may  mean  another.  Let 
me  show  you  what  the  Bible  says  it  is  to  be  "  saved," 
and  then  there  will  be  no  misunderstanding. 

To  be  saved,  is  not  merely  to  profess  and  call  ourselves 
Christians.  We  may  have  all  the  outward  parts  of 
Christianity,  and  yet  be  lost  after  aU.  We  may  be 
baptized  into  Christ's  Church, — go  to  Christ's  table, — 
have  Christian  knowledge, — be  reckoned  Christian  men 
and  women — and  yet  be  dead  souls  all  our  lives, — and  at 
last,  in  the  judgment  day,  be  found  on  Christ's  left  hand, 
among  the  goats.  No:  this  is  not  salvation!  Salvation 
is  something  far  higher  and  deeper  than  this.  Now  what 
is  it? 

(a)  To  be  saved,  is  to  be  delivered  in  this  present  life 
from  the  guilt  of  sin,  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  the 
Saviour.  It  is  to  be  pardoned,  justified,  and  freed  from 
every  charge  of  sin,  by  faith  in  Christ's  blood  and 
mediation.     Whosoever  with  his  heart  believes  on  the 


FEW  SAVED. 


67 


Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is  a  saved  soul.  He  shall  not  perish. 
He  shall  have  eternal  life.  This  is  the  first  part  of 
salvation,  and  the  root  of  all  the  rest.    But  this  is  not  all. 

(b)  To  be  saved,  is  to  be  delivered  in  this  present  life  from 
tlie  power  of  sin,  by  being  born  again,  and  sanctified  by 
Christ's  spirit.  It  is  to  be  freed  from  the  hateful  dominion 
of  sin,  the  world,  and  the  devil,  by  having  a  new  nature 
put  in  us  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Whosoever  is  thus  renewed 
in  the  spirit  of  his  mind,  and  converted,  is  a  saved  soul. 
He  shall  not  perish.  He  shall  enter  into  the  glorious 
kingdom  of  God.  This  is  the  second  part  of  salvation. 
But  this  is  not  all. 

(c)  To  be  saved,  is  to  be  delivered  in  the  day  of  judgment, 
from  all  the  awful  consequences  of  sin.  It  is  to  be 
declared  blameless,  spotless,  faultless,  and  complete  in 
Christ,  while  others  are  found  guilty,  and  condemned  for 
ever.  It  is  ta  hear  those  comfortable  words, — ".Come,  ye 
blessed  ! "  while  others  are  hearing  those  fearful  words, — 
"  Depart,  ye  cursed  ! "  (Matt.  xxv.  34, 41.)  It  is  to  be  owned 
and  confessed  by  Christ,  as  one  of  His  dear  children  and 
servants,  while  others  are  disowned  and  cast  off  for  ever.  Itis 
to  be  pronounced  free  from  the  portion  of  the  wicked, — the 
worm  that  never  dies, — the  fire  that  is  not  quenched, — 
'the  weeping,  wailing,  and  gnashing  of  teeth,  that  never 
ends.  It  is  to  receive  the  reward  prepared  for  the 
righteous,  in  the  day  of  Christ's  second  coming ; — the 
glorious  body, — the  kingdom  that  is  incorruptible, — the 
crown  that  fadeth  not  away, — and  the  joy  that  is  for 
evermore.  This  is  complete  salvation.  This  is  the 
"redemption"  for  which  true  Christians  are  bid  to  look  and 
long.  (Luke  xxi.  28.)  This  is  the  heritage  of  all  men  and 
women  who  believe  and  are  born  again.  By  faith  they 
are  saved  already.  In  the  eye  of  God  their  final  salvation  is 
an  absolutely  certain  thing.  Their  names  are  in  the  book  of 
life.  Their  mansions  in  heaven  are  even  now  prepared 
But  still  there  is  a  fulness  of  redemption  and  salvation 


G8 


OLD  PATHS. 


which  they  do  not  attain  to  while  they  are  in  the  body. 
They  are  saved  from  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin ; — but  not 
from  the  necessity  of  watching  and  praying  against  it. 
They  are  saved  from  the  fear  and  love  of  the  world ; — 
but  not  from  the  necessity  of  daily  fighting  with  it.  They 
are  saved  from  the  sei-vice  of  the  devil ; — but  they  are  not 
saved  from  being  vexed  by  his  temptations.  But  when 
Christ  comes  the  salvation  of  believers  shall  be  complete. 
They  possess  it  already  in  the  bud.  They  shall  see  it  then 
in  the  flower. 

Such  is  salvation.  It  is  to  be  saved  from  the  guilt, 
power,  and  consequences  of  sin.  It  is  to  believe  and  be 
sanctified  now,  and  to  be  delivered  from  the  wrath  of  God 
in  the  last  day.  He  that  has  the  first  part  in  the  life  that 
now  is,  shall  undoubtedly  have  the  second  part  in  the  life 
to  come.  ■  Both  parts  of  it  hang  together.  What  God  has 
joined  together,  let  no  man  dare  to  put  asunder.  Let 
none  dream  he  shall  ever  be  saved  at  last,  if  he  is  not 
born  again  first.  Let  none  doubt,  if  he  is  born  again  here, 
that  he  shall  assuredly  be  saved  hereafter. 

Let  it  never  be  forgotten  that  the  chief  object  of  a 
minister  of  the  Gospel  is  to  set  forward  the  salvation  of 
souls.  I  lay  it  down  as  a  certain  fact  that  he  is  no  true 
minister  who  does  not  feel  this.  Talk  not  of  a  man's 
orders  !  All  may  have  been  done  correctly,  and  according 
to  rule.  He  may  wear  a  black  coat,  and  be  called  a 
"  reverend  "  man.  But  if  the  saving  of  souls  is  not  the 
grand  interest — the  ruling  passion — the  absorbing  thought 
of  his  heart, — he  is  no  true  minister  of  the  Gospel :  he 
is  a  hireling,  and  not  a  shepherd.  Congregations  may 
have  called  him, — but  he  is  not  called  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
Bishops  may  have  ordained  him, — but  not  Christ. 

For  what  purpose  do  men  suppose  that  ministers  are 
sent  forth  ?  Is  it  merely  to  wear  a  surplice, — and  read 
the  services, — and  preach  a  certain  number  of  sermons  ? 
Is  it  merely  to  administer  the  sacraments,  and  officiate  at 


FEW  SAVED. 


69' 


weddings  and  funerals  ?  Is  it  merely  to  get  a  comfortable 
living,  and  be  in  a  respectable  profession  ?  No,  indeed  !i 
we  are  sent  forth  for  other  ends  than  these.  "We  are  sent 
to  turn  men  from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of 
Satan  unto  God.  We  are  sent  to  persuade  men  to  flee 
from  the  wrath  to  come.  We  are  sent  to  draw  men  from 
the  service  of  the  world  to  the  service  of  God, — to  awaken 
the  sleeping, — to  arouse  the  careless, — and  "  by  all  means 
to  save  some."    (1  Cor.  ix.  22.) 

Think  not  that  all  is  done  when  we  have  set  up  regular 
services,  and  persuaded  people  to  attend  them.  Think 
not  that  all  is  done,  when  full  congregations  are  gathered, 
and  the  Lord's  table  is  crowded,  and  the  parish  school  is 
filled.  We  want  to  see  manifest  work  of  the  Spirit  among 
people, — an  evident  sense  of  sin, — a  lively  faith  in  Christ, 
— a  decided  change  of  heart, — a  distinct  separation  from 
the  world, — a  holy  walk  with  God.  In  one  word,  we  want 
to  see  souls  saved ;  and  we  are  fools  and  impostors, — blind 
leaders  of  the  blind, — if  we  rest  satisfied  with  anything  less. 

After  all  the  grand  object  of  having  a  religion  is  to  he 
saved.  This  is  the  great  question  that  we  have  to  settle 
with  our  consciences.  The  matter  for  our  consideration 
is  not  whether  we  go  to  church  or  chapel, — whether  we 
go  through  certain  forms  and  ceremonies, — whethej-  we 
observe  certain  days,  and  perform  a  certain  number  of 
religious  duties.  The  matter  is  Avhether,  after  all,  we 
shall  be  "saved."  Without  this  all  our  religious  doings 
are  weariness  and  labour  in  vain. 

Never,  never  let  us  be  content  with  anything  short  of 
a  saving  religion.  Surely  to  be  satisfied  with  a  religion 
which  neither  gives  peace  in  life,  nor  hope  in  death,  nor 
glory  in  the  world  to  come,  is  childish  folly. 

II.  Let  me,  in  the  second  place,  25omi  out  the  mistakes 
which  are  common  in  the  world  about  the  number  of 
tJie  saved. 


70 


OLD  PATHS. 


I  need  not  go  far  for  evidence  on  this  subject.  I  will 
speak  of  things  which  every  man  may  see  with  his  own 
eyes,  and  hear  with  his  own  ears. 

I  will  try  to  show  that  there  is  a  wide-spread  delusion 
abroad  about  this  matter,  and  that  this  very  delusion  is 
one  of  the  greatest  dangers  to  which  our  souls  are 
exposed. 

(a)  What  then  do  men  generally  think  about  the 
spiritual  state  of  others  tvhile  they  are  alive?  What  do 
they  think  of  the  souls  of  their  relations,  and  friends, 
and  neighbours,  and  acquaintances  ?  Let  us  just  see 
how  that  question  can  be  answered. 

They  know  that  all  around  them  are  going  to  die,  and 
to  be  judged.  They  know  that  they  have  souls  to  be 
lost  or  saved.  And  what,  to  all  appearance,  do  they 
consider  their  end  is  likely  to  be  ? 

Do  they  think  those  around  -them  are  in  danger  of 
hell  ?  There  is  nothing  whatever  to  show  they  think  so. 
They  eat  and  drink  together ;  they  laugh,  and  talk,  and 
walk,  and  work  together.  They  seldom  or  never  speak 
to  one  another  of  God  and  eternity, — of  heaven  and  of 
hell.  I  ask  any  one,  who  knows  the  world,  as  in  the  sight 
of  God,  is  it  not  so  ? 

Will  they  allow  that  anybody  is  wicked  or  ungodly  ? 
Never,  hardly,  whatever  may  be  his  way  of  life.  He  may 
be  a  breaker  of  the  Sabbath ;  he  may  be  a  neglecter  of 
the  Bible ;  he  may  be  utterly  without  evidence  of  true 
religion.  No  matter !  His  friends  will  often  tell  you, 
that  he  may  not  make  so  much  profession  as  some,  but 
that  he  has  a  "  good  heart "  at  the  bottom,  and  is  not  a 
wicked  man.  I  ask  any  one,  who  knows  the  world,  as  in 
God's  sight,  is  it  not  so  ? 

And  what  does  all  this  prove  ?  It  proves  that  men 
flatter  themselves  there  is  no  great  difficulty  in  getting 
to  heaven.  It  proves  plainly  that  men  are  of  opinion 
that  most  persons  will  be  saved. 


FEW  SAVED. 


71 


(b)  But  what  do  men  generally  think  about  the 
spiritual  state  of  others  after  they  are  dead  ?  Let  us  just 
see  how  this  question  can  be  answered. 

Men  allow,  if  they  are  not  infidels,  that  all  who  die 
have  gone  to  a  place  of  happiness,  or  of  misery.  And  to 
which  of  these  two  places  do  they  seem  to  think  the 
gi'eater  part  of  persons  go,  when  they  leave  this  world  ? 

I  say,  without  fear  of  contradiction,  that  there  is  an 
unhappily  common  fashion  of  speaking  well  of  the  con- 
dition of  all  who  have  departed  this  life.  It  matters  little, 
apparently,  how  a  man  has  behaved  while  he  lived.  He 
may  have  given  no  signs  of  repentance,  or  faith  in  Christ ; 
he  may  have  been  ignorant  of  the  plan  of  salvation  set  forth 
in  the  Gospel ;  he  may  have  shown  no  evidence  whatever 
of  conversion  or  sanctification ;  he  may  have  lived  and  died 
like  a  creature  without  a  soul.  And  yet,  as  soon  as  this 
man  is  dead,  people  will  dare  to  say  that  he  is  "  probably 
happier  than  ever  he  was  in  his  life."  They  will  tell  you 
complacently,  they  "  hope  he  is  gone  to  a  better  world." 
They  will  shake  their  beads  gravely,  and  say  they  "  hope 
he  is  in  heaven."  They  will  follow  him  to  the  grave 
without  fear  and  trembling,  and  speak  of  his  death  after- 
wards as  "  a  blessed  change  for  him."  They  may  have 
disliked  him,  and  thought  him  a  bad  man  while  he  was 
alive;  but  the  moment  he  is  dead  they  turn  round  in 
their  opinions  and  say  they  trust  he  is  gone  to  heaven ! 
I  have  no  wish  to  hurt  any  one's  feelings.  I  only  ask 
any  one,  who  knows  the  world, — Is  it  not  true  ? 

And  what  does  it  all  prove  1  It  just  supplies  one  more 
awful  proof  that  men  are  determined  to  believe  it  is  an 
easy  business  to  get  to  heaven.  Men  will  have  it  that 
most  persons  are  saved. 

(c)  But  again,  what  do  men  generally  tliinl:  of  minis- 
ters who  preach  fully  the  doctrines  of  the  New  Testament  ? 
Let  us  see  how  this  question  can  be  answered. 

Send  a  clergyman  into  a  parish  who  shall  "declare  all  the 


72 


OLD  PATHS. 


counsel  of  God,"  and  "keep  back  nothing  that  is  profitable." 
Let  him  be  one  who  shall  clearly  proclaim  justification 
by  faith, — regeneration  by  the  Spirit, — and  holiness  of 
life.  Let  him  be  one  who  shall  draw  the  line  distinctly: 
between  the  converted  and  the  unconverted,  and  give  both' 
to  sinners  and  to  saints  their  portion.  Let  him  frequently 
produce  out  of  the  New  Testament  a  plain,  unanswer- 
able description  of  the  true  Christian's  character.  Let 
him  show  that  no  man  who  does  not  possess  that  character, 
can  have  any  reasonable  hope  of  being  saved.  Let  him' 
constantly  press  that  description  on  the  consciences  of 
his  hearers,  and  urge  upon  them  repeatedly  that  every 
soul  who  dies  without  that  character  will  be  lost.  Let 
him  do  this,  ably  and  affectionately,  and  after  all,  what 
will  the  result  be  ? 

The  result  will  be,  that  while  some  few  repent  and  are 
saved,  the  great  majority  of  his  hearers  will  not  receive 
and  believe  his  doctrine.  They  may  not  oppose  him 
publicly.  They  may  even  esteem  him,  and  respect  him  as 
an  earnest,  sincere,  kind-hearted  man,  who  means  well.  But 
they  will  go  no  further.  He  may  show  them  the  express 
words  of  Christ  and  His  Apostles ;  he  may  quote  text  upon 
text,  and  passage  upon  passage  :  it  will  be  to  no  purpose. 
The  great  majority  of  his  hearers  will  think  him  "  too 
strict,"  and  "  too  close,"  and  "  too  particular."  They  will 
say  among  themselves,  that  the  world  is  not  so  bad  as  the 
minister  seems  to  think, — and  that  people  cannot  be  so 
good  as  the  minister  wants  them  to  be, — and  that  after 
all,  they  hope  they  shall  be  all  right  at  the  last !  I  appeal 
to  any  minister  of  the  Gospel,  who  has  been  any  length 
of  time  in  the  ministry,  whether  I  am  not  stating  the 
truth.    Are  not  these  things  so  ? 

And  what  does  it  prove  ?  It  just  makes  one  more 
proof  that  men  generally  are  resolved  to  think  that 
salvation  is  not  a  very  hard  business,  and  that  after  all 
most  people  will  be  saved. 


FEW  SAVED. 


73 


Now  what  solid  reason  can  men  show  us  for  theso 
common  opinions  ?  Upon  what  Scripture  do  they  build 
this  notion,  that  salvation  is  an  easy  business,  and  that 
most  people  will  be  saved  ?  What  revelation  of  God  can 
they  show  us,  to  satisfy  us  that  these  opinions  are  sound 
and  true  ? 

They  have  none, — literally  none  at  all.  Tliey  have  not 
a  text  of  Scripture  which,  fairly  interpreted,  supports  their 
views.  They  have  not  a  reason  which  will  bear  ex- 
amination. They  speak  smooth  things  about  one  another's 
spiritual  state,  just  because  they  do  not  like  to  allow  there 
is  danger.  They  build  up  one  another  into  an  easy,  self- 
satisfied  state  of  soul,  in  order  to  soothe  their  consciences 
and  make  things  pleasant.  They  cry  "  Peace,  peace,"  over 
one  another's  graves,  because  they  want  it  to  be  so,  and 
would  fain  persuade  themselves  that  so  it  is.  Surely 
against  such  hollow,  foundationless  opinons  as  these,  a 
minister  of  the  Gospel  may  well  protest. 

The  plain  truth  is  that  the  world's  opinion  is  worth 
nothing  in  matters  of  religion.  About  the  price  of  an 
ox,  or  a  horse,  or  a  farm,  or  the  value  of  labour, — about 
wages  and  work, — about  money,  cotton,  coals,  iron  and  corn, 
— about  arts,  and  sciences,  and  manufactures, — about  rail- 
ways, and  commerce,  and  trade,  and  politics, — about  all 
such  things  the  men  of  the  world  may  give  a  correct 
opinion.  But  we  must  beware,  if  we  love  life,  of  being 
guided  by  man's  judgment  in  the  things  that  concern 
salvation.  "  The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of 
the  Spirit  of  God,  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him." 
(1  Cor.  ii.  14.) 

Let  us  remember,  above  all,  that  it  never  will  do  to 
think  as  others  do,  if  we  want  to  get  to  heaven.  No 
doubt  it  is  easy  work  to  "  go  with  the  crowd  "  in  religious 
matters.  It  will  save  us  much  trouble  to  swim  with  the 
stream  and  tide.  We  shall  be  spared  much  ridicule  :  we 
shall  be  freed  from  much  unpleasantness.    But  let  us  re- 


74 


OLD  PATHS. 


member,  once  for  all,  that  the  world's  mistakes  about 
salvation  are  many  and  dangerous.  Unless  we  are  on  our 
guard  against  them  we  shall  never  be  saved. 

III.  Let  me  show,  in  the  third  place,  what  the  Bible 
says  about  the  number  of  the  saved. 

There  is  only  one  standard  of  truth  and  error  to  which 
we  ought  to  appeal.  That  standard  is  the  Holy  Scripture. 
"Whatsoever  is  there  written  we  must  receive  and  believe : 
whatsoever  cannot  be  proved  by  Scripture  we  ought  to 
refuse. 

Can  any  reader  of  this  paper  subscribe  to  this  ?  If  he 
cannot,  there  is  little  chance  of  his  being  moved  by  any 
words  of  mine.  If  he  can,  let  him  give  me  his  attention 
for  a  few  moments,  and  I  will  tell  him  some  solemn 
things. 

Let  us  look,  then,  for  one  thing,  at  one  single  text  of 
Scripture,  and  examine  it  welL  We  shall  find  it  in 
Matthew  vii.  13,  14: — "Enter  ye  in  at  the  strait  gate: 
for  wide  is  the  gate,  and  broad  is  the  way  that  leadeth  to 
destruction,  and  many  there  be  which  go  in  thereat : 
because  strait  is  the  gate,  and  narrow  is  the  way  which 
leadeth  unto  life,  and  fevj  there  be  that  find  it."  Now 
these  are  the  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  They  are  the 
words  of  Him  who  was  very  God,  and  whose  words  shall 
never  pass  away.  They  are  the  words  of  Him  who  knew 
what  was  in  man, — who  knew  thin^js  to  come,  and  thincjs 
past, — who  knew  that  He  should  judge  all  men  at  the 
last  day.  And  what  do  those  words  mean  ?  Are  they 
words  which  no  man  can  understand  without  a  knowledge 
of  Hebrew  or  Greek  ?  No :  they  are  not !  Are  they  a  dark, 
unfulfilled  prophecy,  like  the  visions  in  Revelation,  or  the 
description  of  Ezekiel's  temj)le  ?  No :  they  are  not !  Are 
they  a  deep  mysterious  saying,  which  no  human  intellect 
can  fathom  ?  No :  they  are  not !  The  words  are  clear, 
plain,  and  unmistakable.  Ask  any  labouring  man  who  can 


FEW  SAVED. 


75 


read,  and  he  will  tell  you  so.  There  is  only  one  meaning, 
which  can  be  attached  to  them.  Their  meaning  is,  that 
many  people  will  be  lost,  and  few  will  be  found  saved. 

Let  us  look,  in  the  next  place,  at  the  whole  history  of! 
mankind  as  respects  religion,  as  we  have  it  given  in  the 
Bible.  Let  us  go  through  the  whole  four  thousand  years, 
over  which  the  history  of  the  Bible  reaches.  Let  us  find, 
if  we  can,  one  single  period  of  time  at  which  godly  people 
were  many,  and  ungodly  people  were  few. 

How  was  it  in  the  days  of  Noah  ?  The  earth  we  are 
told  expressly  was  "  filled  with  violence."  The  imagination 
of  man's  heart  was  only  "  evil  continually."  (Gen.  vi.  5, 12.) 
"  All  flesh  had  corrupted  his  way."  The  loss  of  paradise 
was  forgotten.  The  warnings  of  God,  by  Noah's  mouth, 
were  despised.  And  at  length,  when  the  flood  came  on 
the  world  and  drowned  every  living  thing,  there  were 
but  eight  people  who  had  faith  enough  to  flee  for  refuge 
to  the  ark  !  And  were  there  many  saved  in  those  days  ? 
Let  any  honest  reader  of  the  Bible  give  an  answer  to  that 
question.  There  can  be  no  doubt  what  the  answer  must 
be. 

How  was  it  in  the  days  of  Ahraliam,  and  Isaac,  and 
Lot  ?  It  is  evident  that  in  the  matter  of  religion  they  stood, 
very  much  alone.  The  family  from  which  they  were' 
taken  was  a  family  of  idolaters.  The  nations  among 
whom  they  lived  were  sunk  in  gross  darkness  and 
sin.  When  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  were  burned  there  were 
not  five  righteous  people  to  be  found  in  the  four  cities 
of  the  plain.  When  Abraham  and  Isaac  desired  to  find 
wives  for  their  sons,  there  was  not  a  woman  in  the  land 
where  they  sojourned  to  whom  they  could  wish  to  see  them 
married.  And  were  there  many  saved  in  those  days  ? 
Let  any  honest  reader  of  the  Bible  give  an  answer 
to  that  question.  There  can  be  no  doubt  what  the  answer 
must  be. 

How  was  it  with  Israel  in  the  days  of  the  Judges?  No 


76 


OLD  PATHS. 


one  can  read  the  book  of  Judges,  and  not  be  struck  with 
the  sad  examples  of  man's  corruption  which  it  affords. 
Time  after  time  we  are  told  of  the  people  forsaking  God, 
and  following  idols.  In  spite  of  the  plainest  warnings, 
they  joined  affinity  with  the  Canaanites,  and  learned  their 
works.  Time  after  time  we  read  of  their  being  oppressed 
by  foreign  kings,  because  of  their  sins,  and  then  miracu- 
lously delivered.  Time  after  time  we  read  of  the  deliver- 
ance being  forgotten,  and  of  the  people  returning  to  their 
former  sins,  like  the  sow  that  is  washed  to  her  wallowins 
in  the  mire.  And  were  there  many  saved  in  those  days  ? 
Let  any  honest  reader  of  the  Bible  give  an  answer  to  that 
question.  There  can  be  no  doubt  what  the  answer 
must  be. 

How  was  it  with  Israel  in  the  days  of  the  Kings  ? 
From  Saul,  the  first  king,  down  to  Zedekiah,  the  last  king, 
their  history  is  a  melancholy  account  of  backsliding,  and 
declension,  and  idolatry, — with  a  few  bright  exceptional 
periods.  Even  under  the  best  kings  there  seems  to  have 
been  a  vast  amount  of  unbelief  and  ungodliness,  which  only 
lay  hid  for  a  season,  and  burst  out  at  the  first  favourable 
opportunity.  Over  and  over  again  we  find  that  vinder  the 
most  zealous  kings  "  the  high  places  were  not  taken  away." 
Mark  how  even  David  speaks  of  the  state  of  things  around 
him:  "Help,  Lord,  for  the  godly  man  ceaseth  ;  for  the 
faithful  fail  from  among  the  children  of  men."  (Psalm  xii. 
1.)  Mark  how  Isaiah  describes  the  condition  of  Judah 
and  Jerusalem :  "  The  whole  head  is  sick,  and  the  whole 
heart  faint.  From  the  sole  of  the  foot,  even  unto  the 
crown  of  the  head,  there  is  no  soundness  in  it." — "Ex- 
cept the  Lord  of  Hosts  had  left  unto  us  a  very  small 
remnant,  we  should  have  been  as  Sodom,  and  should  have 
been  like  unto  Gomorrah."  (Isaiah  i.  5 — 9.)  Mark  how 
Jeremiah  describes  his  time  :  "  Run  ye  to  and  fro  through 
the  streets  of  Jerusalem,  and  see  now,  and  know,  and  seek 
in  the  broad  places  thereof,  if  ye  can  find  a  man,  if  there 


FEW  SAVED. 


77 


be  any  that  executeth  judgment,  that  seeketh  the  truth, 
and  I  will  pardon  it."  (Jar.  v.  1.)  Mark  how  Ezekiel 
speaks  of  the  men  of  his  times :  "  The  word  of  the  Lord 
came  unto  me,  saying.  Son  of  man,  the  house  of  Israel  is 
to  me  become  dross :  all  they  are  brass,  and  iron,  and  tin 
and  lead  in  the  midst  of  the  furnace :  they  arc  even  the 
dross  of  silver."  (Ezek.  xxii.  17, 18.)  Mark  what  he  says  in 
the  sixteenth  and  twenty-third  chapters  of  his  prophecy 
about  the  kingdoms  of  Judah  and  Israel.  And  were  there 
many  riaved  in  those  days  ?  Let  any  honest  reader  of  the 
Bible  give  an  answer  to  that  question.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  what  the  answer  must  be. 

How  was  it  with  the  Jews  xuhen  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
was  on  earth  ?  The  words  of  Saint  John  are  the  best  ac- 
count of  their  spiritual  state :  "  He  came  unto  His  own, 
and  His  own  received  Him  not."  (John  i.  11.)  He  lived 
as  no  one  bom  of  woman  had  ever  lived  before, — a  blame- 
less, harmless,  boly  life.  "  He  went  about  doing  good." 
(Acts  X.  38.)  He  preached  as  no  one  ever  preached  before. 
Even  the  officers  of  his  enemies  confessed,  "Never  man 
spake  like  this  man."  (John  vii.  46.)  He  did  miracles 
to  confirm  His  ministry,  which,  at  first  sight,  we  might 
have  fancied  would  have  convinced  the  most  -hardened. 
But,  notwithstanding  all  this,  the  vast  majority  of  the 
Jews  refused  to  believe  Him.  Follow  our  Lord  in  all 
His  travels  over  Palestine,  and  you  will  always  find  the 
same  story.  Follow  Him  into  the  city,  and  follow 
Him  into  the  wilderness ;  follow  Him  to  Capernaum  and 
Nazareth,  and  follow  Him  to  Jerusalem  ;  follow  Him 
among  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  and  follow  Him  among 
Sadducees  and  Herodians :  everywhere  you  will  arrive  at 
the  same  result.  They  were  amazed  ; — they  were  silenced  ; 
— they  were  astonished  ; — they  wondered  ; — but  very  few 
became  disciples !  The  immense  proportion  of  the  nation 
would  have  none  of  His  doctrine,  and  crowned  all  their 
wickedness  by  putting  Him  to  death.    And  were  there 


78 


OLD  PATHS. 


many  saved  in  tliose  days  ?  Let  any  honest  reader  of  the 
Bible  give  an  answer  to  that  question.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  what  the  answer  must  be. 

How  was  it  with  the  world  in  the  days  of  the  Apostles  ? 
If  ever  there  was  a  period  when  true  religion  flourished 
it  was  then.  Never  did  the  Holy  Ghost  call  into  the  fold 
of  Christ  so  many  souls  in  the  same  space  of  time.' 
Never  were  there  so  many  conversions  under  the  preaching 
of  the  Gospel  as  when  Paul  and  his  fellow-labourers  were 
the  preachers.  But  still,  it  is  plain  from  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles,  that  true  Christianity  was  "  everywhere  spoken 
against."  (Acts  xxviii.  22.)  It  is  evident  that  in  every  city, 
even  in  Jerusalem  itself,  true  Christians  were  a  small 
minority.  We  read  of  perils  of  all  kinds  which  the 
Apostles  had  to  go  through, — not  only  perils  from  without, 
but  perils  from  -ndthin, — not  only  perils  from  the  heathen, 
but  perils  from  false  brethren.  We  hardly  read  of  a 
single  city  visited  by  Paul  Avhere  he  was  not  in  danger 
from  open  violence  and  persecution.  We  see  plainly,  by 
some  of  his  epistles,  that  the  professing  Churches  were 
mixed  bodies,  in  which  there  were  many  rotten  members. 
We  find  him  telling  the  Philippians  a  painful  part  of  his 
experience, — "  Many  walk,  of  whom  I  tell  you,  even  weep- 
ing, that  they  are  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ; 
whose  end  is  destruction,  whose  god  is  their  belly,  and 
whose  glory  is  their  shame,  who  mind  earthly  things." 
(Philip,  iii.  18,  19.)  And  were  there  many  saved  in  those 
days  ?  Let  any  honest  reader  of  the  Bible  give  an  answer 
to  this  question.  There  can  be  no  doubt  what  that  answer 
must  be. 

I  ask  any  honest-minded  unprejudiced  reader  of  the 
volume  to  weigh  well  the  lessons  of  the  Bible  which  I 
have  just  brought  forward.  Surely  they  are  weighty  and 
solemn,  and  deserve  serious  attention. 

Let  no  one  think  to  evade  their  force  by  saying  that 
the  Bible  only  tells  the  story  of  the  Jews.    Think  not  to 


FEW  SAVED. 


79 


comfort  yourself  by  saying  that  "  perhaps  the  Jews  were 
more  wicked  than  other  nations,  and  many  people  were 
probably  saved  among  other  nations,  though  few  were 
saved  among  the  Jews."  You  forget  that  this  argnament 
tells  against  you.  You  forget  that  the  Jews  had  light 
and  privileges  which  the  Gentiles  had  not,  and  with  all 
their  sins  and  faults,  were  probably  the  holiest  and  most 
moral  nation  upon  earth.  As  to  the  moral  state  of  people 
among  the  Assjrrians,  and  Egyptians,  and  Greeks,  and 
Romans,  it  is  fearful  to  think  what  it  must  have  been. 
But  this  we  may  be  sure  of, — that  if  many  were  ungodly 
among  the  Jews,  the  number  was  far  greater  among  the 
Gentiles.  If  few  were  saved  in  the  green  tree,  alas,  how 
much  fewer  must  have  been  saved  in  the  dry ! 

The  sum  of  the  whole  matter  is  this:  the  Bible  and 
the  men  of  the  world  speak  very  differently  about  the 
number  of  the  saved.  According  to  the  Bible,  few  will 
be  saved :  according  to  the  men  of  the  world,  many. — 
According  to  the  men  of  the  world  few  are  going  to  hell : 
according  to  the  Bible  few  are  going  to  heaven. — Accord- 
ing to  the  men  of  the  world  salvation  is  an  easy  business  : 
according  to  the  Bible  the  way  is  narrow  and  the  gate  is 
strait. — According  to  the  men  of  the  world  few  will  be 
found  at  last  seeking  admission  into  heaven  when  too  late  : 
according  to  the  Bible  many  will  be  in  that  sad  condition, 
and  will  cry  in  vain,  "  Lord,  Lord,  open  to  us."  Yet  the 
Bible  was  never  wrong  yet.  The  most  unlikely  and 
improbable  prophecies  about  Tyre,  Egypt,  Babylon,  and 
Nineveh,  have  all  come  true  to  the  letter.  And  as  in 
other  matters,  so  it  will  be  about  the  number  of  the  saved. 
The  Bible  will  prove  quite  right  and  the  men  of  the  world 
quite  wrong. 

IV.  Let  me  show,  in  the  last  place,  some  plain  facts 
about  the  number  of  the  saved. 

I  ask  particular  attention  to  this  part  of  the  subject. 


80 


OLD  PATHS. 


I  know  well  that  people  flatter  themselves  that  the  world 
is  far  better  and  wiser  than  it  was  1800  j'ears  ago.  We 
have  churches,  and  schools,  and  books.  We  have  civili- 
zation, and  liberty,  and  good  laws.  We  have  a  far  higher 
standard  of  morality  in  society  than  that  which  once 
prevailed.  We  have  the  power  of  obtaining  comforts  and 
enjoyments  which  our  forefathers  knew  nothing  of  Steam, 
and  gas,  and  electricity,  and  chemistry,  have  effected 
Avonders  for  us.  All  this  is  perfectly  true.  I  see  it,  and 
I  am  thankful.  But  all  this  does  not  diminish  the  impor- 
tance of  the  question ; — Are  there  few  or  many  of  us 
likely  to  be  saved  ? 

I  am  thoroughly  satisfied  that  the  importance  of  this 
question  is  painfully  overlooked.  I  am  persuaded  that  the 
views  of  most  people  about  the  quantity  of  unbelief  and 
sin  in  the  world,  are  utterly  inadequate  and  incorrect. 
I  am  convinced  that  very  few  people,  whether  ministers  or 
private  Christians,  at  all  realize  how  few  there  are  in  a  way 
to  be  saved.  I  want  to  draw  attention  to  the  subject, 
and  I  will  therefore  bring  forward  a  few  plain  facts  about 
it. 

But  where  shall  I  go  for  these  facts  ?  I  might  easily 
turn  to  the  millions  of  heathen,  who  in  various  parts  of 
the  world  are  worshijiping  they  know  not  what.  But  I 
shall  not  do  so. — I  might  easily  turn  to  the  millions  of 
Mahometans  who  honour  the  Koran  more  than  the  Bible, 
and  the  false  prophet  of  Mecca  more  than  Christ.  But  I 
shall  not  do  so. — I  might  easily  turn  to  the  millions  of 
Roman  Catholics  who  are  making  the  Word  of  God  of 
none  effect  by  their  traditions.  But  I  shall  not  do  so. 
I  shall  look  nearer  home.  I  shall  draw  my  facts  from  the 
land  in  which  I  live,  and  then  ask  every  honest  reader 
whether  it  be  not  strictly  true  that  feiv  are  saved. 

I  invite  any  intelligent  reader  of  these  pages  to  imagine 
himself  in  any  parish  in  Protestant  England  or  Scotland 
at  this  day.     Choose  which  you  please,  a  town  parish, 


FEW  SAVED. 


81 


or  a  country  parish, — a  great  parish  or  a  small.  Let  us 
take  our  New  Testaments  in  our  hands.  Let  us  sift 
the  Christianity  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  parish,  family 
by  family,  and  man  by  man.  Let  us  put  on  one  side 
any  one  who  does  not  possess  the  New  Testament 
evidence  of  being  a  true  Christian.  Let  us  deal  honestly 
and  fairly  in  the  investigation,  and  not  allow  any  one 
to  be  a  true  Christian  who  does  not  come  up  to  the 
New  Testament  standard  of  faith  and  practice.  Let 
us  count  eveiy  man  a  saved  soul  in  whom  we  see  some- 
thing of  Christ, — some  evidence  of  true  repentance, — 
some  evidence  of  saving  faith  in  Jesus, — some  evidence 
of  real  evangelical  holiness.  Let  us  reject  every  man  in 
whom,  on  the  most  charitable  construction,  we  cannot 
see  these  evidences,  as  one  "  weighed  in  the  balances,  and 
found  wanting."  Let  us  apply  this  sifting  process  to  any 
parish  in  this  land,  and  see  what  the  result  would  be. 

(a)  Let  us  set  aside,  first  of  all,  those  persons  in  a  parish 
who  are  living  in  any  kind  of  ojpen  sin.  By  these  I 
mean  such  as  fornicators,  and  adulterers,  and  liars,  and 
thieves,  and  drunkards,  and  cheats,  and  revilers,  and 
extortioners.  About  these  I  think  there  can  be  no  difference 
of  opinion.  The  Bible  says  plainly,  that  "  they  which  do 
such  things,  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God."  (Gal. 
V.  21.)  Now  will  these  persons  be  saved  ?  The  answer  is 
clear  to  my  own  mind :  In  their  present  condition  they 
will  not. 

(6)  Let  us  set  aside,  in  the  next  place,  those  persons  who 
are  Sahbath-breakers.  I  mean  by  this  expression,  those  who 
seldom  or  never  go  to  a  place  of  worship,  though  they  have 
the  power, — those  who  do  not  give  the  Sabbath  to  God, 
bdt  to  themselves, — those  who  think  of  nothing  but  doing 
their  own  ways,  and  finding  their  own  pleasure  upon 
Sundays.  They  show  plainly  that  they  are  not  meet  for 
heaven  !  The  inhabitants  of  heaven  would  be  company 
they  could  not  like.    The  employments  of  heaven  would 

G 


82 


OLD  PATHS. 


be  a'  weariness  to  tliem,  and  not  a  joj'.  Now  will  these 
persons  be  saved  ?  The  answer  is  clear  to  my  mind :  In 
their  present  condition  they  will  not. 

(c)  Let  us  set  aside,  in  the  next  place,  all  tho.se  persons 
who  are  careless  and  thowjhtless  Christians.  I  mean  by 
this  expression,  those  who  attend  many  of  the  outward 
ordinances  of  religion,  but  .show  no  signs  of  taking  any  real 
interest  in  its  doctrines  and  substance.  They  care  little 
whether  the  minister  preaches  the  Gospel  or  not.  They  care 
little  whether  they  hear  a  good  sermon  or  not.  They  would 
care  little  if  all  the  Bibles  in  the  world  were  burned.  They 
would  care  little  if  an  Act  of  Parliament  were  passed  for- 
bidding any  one  to  pray.  In  short,  religion  is  not  the  "  one 
thing  needful"  with  them.  Their  treasure  is  on  earth. 
They  are  just  like  Gallio,  to  whom  it  mattered  little 
w^hether  people  were  Jews  or  Christians:  he  "cared  for 
none  of  these  things."  (Acts  xviii.  17.)  Now  will  these 
persons  be  saved  ?  The  answer  is  clear  to  my  own  mind  : 
In  their  present  condition  they  will  not. 

{d)  Let  us  set  aside,  in  the  next  place,  all  those  who  area 
formalists  and  self-righteous.  I  mean  by  this  expression, 
those  who  value  themselves  on  their  own  regularity  in  the 
use  of  the  forms  of  Christianity,  and  depend  either  directly 
or  indirectly  on  their  own  doings  for  their  acceptance  with 
God.  I  mean  all  who  rest  their  souls  on  any  work  but 
the  work  of  Christ,  or  any  righteousness  but  the  righteous- 
ness of  Christ.  Of  such  the  AjDOstle  Paul  has  expressly 
testified,  "  By  the  deeds  of  the  law  shaU  no  flesh  livdng  be 
justified." — "  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that 
is  laid,  which  is  Jesus  Christ."  (Rom.  iii.  20 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  11.) 
And  dare  we  say,  in  the  face  of  such  texts,  that  such  as 
these  will  be  saved  ?  The  answer  is  plain  to  my  own 
mind  :  In  their  present  condition  they  will  not. 

(e)  Let  us  set  aside,  in  the  next  place,  all  those  who  know 
the  Gospel  with  their  heads,  but  do  not  obey  it  with  their 
hearts.    These  are  those  unhappy  persons  who  have  e3'es 


FEW  SAVED. 


83 


to  see  the  way  of  life,  but  have  not  will  or  courage  to  walk 
in  it.  They  approve  sound  doctrine.  They  will  not  listen 
to  preaching  which  does  not  contain  it.  But  the  fear  of  man, 
or  the  cares  of  the  world,  or  the  love  of  money,  or  the 
dread  of  offending  relations,  perpetually  holds  them  back. 
They  will  not  come  out  boldly,  and  take  up  the  cross,  and 
confess  Christ  before  men.  Of  these  also  the  Bible  speaks 
expressly:  "Faith,  if  it  hath  not  works,  is  dead,  being  alone." 
— "  To  him  that  knoweth  to  do  good,  and  doeth  it  not,  to 
him  it  is  sin." — "  If  any  man  is  ashamed  of  Me  and  of 
my  words,  of  him  will  the  Son  of  man  be  ashamed  when 
He  shall  come  in  His  own  glory,  and  in  His  Father's,  and 
of  the  holy  angels."  (James  ii.  17;  iv.  17;  Luke  ix.  26.) 
Shall  we  say  that  such  as  these  will  be  saved  ?  The 
answer  is  clear  to  my  own  mind  :  In  their  present  condition 
they  will  not. 

(/)  Let  us  set  aside,  in  the  last  place,  all  those  who  are 
liypocvltical  'professors.  I  mean  by  that  expression,  all 
those  whose  religion  consists  in  talk  and  high  j^rofession, 
and  in  nothing  besides.  These  are  they  of  whom  the 
prophet  Ezekiel  speaks,  saying,  "  With  their  mouth  they 
show  much  love,  but  their  heart  goeth  after  their  covetous- 
ness." — "  They  profess  that  they  know  God,  but  in  works 
they  deny  Him." — They  "have  a  form  of  godliness,  but 
they  have  not  the  power"  of  it.  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  31 ;  Titus 
i.  16 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  5.)  They  are  saints  at  church,  and  saints 
to  talk  to  in  public.  But  they  are  not  saints  in  private,  and 
in  their  own  homes ;  and  worst  of  all,  they  are  not  saints  in 
heart.  There  can  be  no  dispute  about  such  persons.  Shall 
we  say  that  they  will  be  saved  ?  There  can  only  be  one 
answer:  In  their  present  condition  they  will  not. 

And  now,  after  setting  aside  these  classes  which  I  have 
described,  I  ask  any  sensible  thinking  reader  to  tell  me 
how  many  persons  in  any  parish  in  England  will  there  be 
left  behind  ?  How  many,  after  sifting  a  parish  thoroughly 
and  honestly, — how  many  men  and  women  will  remain 


84 


OLD  PATHS. 


who  are  in  a  way  to  be  saved  ?  How  many  true  penitents, 
— how  many  real  believers  in  Christ, — how  many  truly  holy 
people  will  there  be  found  ?  I  put  it  to  the  conscience  of 
every  reader  of  this  volume  to  give  an  honest  answer,  as 
in  the  sight  of  God.  I  ask  you  whether,  after  sifting  a 
parish  with  the  Bible  in  the  fashion  described,  you  can 
come  to  any  conclusion  but  this, — that  few  persons, — sadly 
few  persons,  are  in  a  way  to  be  saved  ? 

It  is  a  painful  conclusion  to  arrive  at,  but  I  know  not 
how  it  can  be  avoided.  It  is  a  fearful  and  tremendous 
thought,  that  there  should  be  so  many  churchmen  in 
England,  and  so  many  dissenters,  so  many  seat-holders,  and 
so  many  pew-renters,  so  many  hearers,  and  so  many  com- 
municants,— and  yet,  after  all,  so  few  in  a  way  to  be  saved  ! 
But  the  only  question  is.  Is  it  not  true  ? — It  is  vain  to  shut 
our  eyes  against  facts.  It  is  useless  to  pretend  not  to  see 
what  is  going  on  around  us.  The  statements  of  the  Bible 
and  the  facts  of  the  world  we  live  in  will  lead  us  to  the 
same  conclusion :  Many  are  being  lost,  and  few  being 
saved  ! 

(a)  I  know  well  that  many  do  not  believe  what  I  am 
saying,  because  they  thi  nk  there  is  an  immense  quantity  of 
death-bed  repentance.  They  flatter  themselves  that  mul- 
titudes who  do  not  live  religious  lives  will  yet  die  religious 
deaths.  They  take  comfort  in  the  thought  that  vast 
numbers  of  persons  turn  to  God  in  their  last  illness  and 
are  saved  at  the  eleventh  hour.  I  will  only  remind  such 
persons  that  all  the  experience  of  ministers  is  utterly 
against  the  theory.  People  generally  die  just  as  they  have 
lived.  True  repentance  is  never  too  late  : — but  repentance 
defen-ed  to  the  last  hours  of  life  is  seldom  true.  A  man's 
life  is  the  surest  evidence  of  his  spiritual  state,  and  if  lives 
are  to  be  witnesses,  then  few  are  likely  to  be  saved. 

(6)  I  know  well  that  many  do  not  believe  what  I  am 
saving,  because  they  fancy  it  contradicts  the  mercy  of  God. 
They  dwell  on  the  love  to  sinners  which  the  Gospel  reveals. 


FEW  SAVED. 


85 


They  point  to  the  offers  of  pardon  and  forgiveness  which 
abound  in  the  Bible.  They  ask  us  if  we  maintain,  in  the 
face  of  all  this,  that  only  few  people  will  be  saved.  I 
answer,  I  will  go  as  far  as  any  one  in  exalting  God's  mercy 
in  Christ,  but  I  cannot  shut  my  eyes  against  the  fact  that 
this  mercy  profits  no  man  so  long  as  it  is  wilfully  refused. 
I  see  nothing  wanting,  on  God's  part,  for  man's  salvation. 
I  see  room  in  heaven  for  the  chief  of  sinners.  I  see 
willingness  in  Christ  to  receive  the  most  ungodly.  I  see 
power  in  the  Holy  Ghost  to  renew  the  most  ungodly.  But 
I  see,  on  the  other  hand,  desperate  unbelief  in  man :  he 
will  not  believe  what  God  tells  him  in  the  Bible.  I  see 
desperate  pride  in  man:  he  will  not  bow  his  heart  to 
receive  the  Gospel  as  a  little  child.  I  see  desperate  sloth 
in  man:  he  will  not  take  the  trouble  to  arise  and  call 
upon  God.  I  see  desperate  worldliness  in  man  :  he  will 
not  loose  his  hold  on  the  poor  perishable  things  of  time, 
and  consider  eternity.  In  short,  I  see  the  words  of  our 
Lord  continually  verified :  "  Ye  will  not  come  unto  Me, 
that  ye  might  have  life"  (John  v.  40),  and  therefore  I  am 
driven  to  the  sorrowful  conclusion  that  few  are  likely  to 
be  saved. 

(c)  I  know  well  that  many  will  not  believe  what  I  am 
saying,  because  they  refuse  to  observe  the  evil  there  is  in 
the  xvorld.  They  live  in  the  midst  of  a  little  circle  of 
good  people :  they  know  little  of  anything  that  goes  on 
in  the  world  outside  that  circle.  They  tell  us  the  world 
is  a  world  which  is  rapidly  improving  and  going  on  to 
perfection.  They  count  up  on  their  fingers  the  number 
of  good  ministers  whom  they  have  heard  and  seen  in  the 
last  year.  They  call  our  attention  to  the  number  of 
religious  societies,  and  religious  meetings,  to  the  money 
which  is  subscribed,  to  the  Bibles  and  tracts  which  are 
being  constantly  distributed."  They  ask  us  if  we  really 
dare  to  say,  in  the  face  of  all  this,  that  few  are  in  the  way 
to  be  saved.    In  reply,  I  will  only  remind  these  amiable 


86 


OLD  PATHS. 


people,  that  there  are  other  people  in  the  world  besides 
their  own  little  circle,  and  other  men  and  women  besides 
the  chosen  few  whom  they  know  in  their  own  congregation. 
I  entreat  them  to  open  their  eyes,  and  see  things  as  they 
really  are.  I  assure  them  there  are  things  going  on  in 
this  country  of  ours  of  which  they  are  at  present  in  happy 
ignorance.  I  ask  them  to  sift  any  parish  or  congregation 
in  England,  with  the  Bible,  before  they  condemn  me 
hastily.  I  tell  them,  if  they  Avill  do  this  honestly,  they 
will  soon  find  that  I  am  not  far  Avrong,  when  I  say  that 
few  are  likely  to  be  saved. 

(d)  I  knowwell  that  many  will  not  believe  me,  because  theij 
think  such  a  doctrine  very  narroxo-minded  and  exclusive. 
I  utterly  deny  the  charge.  I  disclaim  any  sympathy  with 
those  Christians  who  condemn  everybody  outside  their 
own  communion,  and  appear  to  shut  the  door  of  heaven 
against  everybody  who  does  not  see  everything  with  their 
eyes.  Whether  Roman  Catholics,  or  Episcopalians,  or  Free 
Churchmen,  or  Baptists,  or  Plymouth  Brethren,  whosoever 
does  anything  of  this  kind,  I  reckon  him  an  exclusive 
man.  I  have  no  desire  to  shut  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
against  any  one.  All  I  say  is,  that  none  will  enter  that 
kingdom,  except  converted,  believing,  and  holy  souls ;  and 
all  I  take  on  myself  to  assert  is,  that  both  the  Bible  and 
facts  combine  to  prove  that  such  persons  are  few. 

(e)  I  know  well  that  many  will  not  believe  what  I  am 
saying,  because  they  think  it  a  gloomy,  uncharitable 
doctrine.  It  is  easy  to  make  vague,  general  assertions  of 
this  kind.  It  is  not  so  easy  to  show  that  any  doctrine 
deserves  to  be  called  "  gloomy  and  uncharitable  "  which  is 
scriptural  and  true.  There  is  a  spurious  charity,  I  am 
afraid,  which  dislikes  all  strong  statements  in  religion, — 
a  charity  which  would  have  no  one  interfered  with, — 
a  charity  which  would  have  'everyone  let  alone  in  his  sins, 
— a  charity  which,  without  evidence,  takes  for  granted 
that  everybody  is  in  a  way  to  be  saved, — a  charity  which 


FEW  SAVED. 


87 


never  doubts  that  all  people  are  going  to  heaven,  and  seems 
to  deny  the  existence  of  such  a  place  as  hell.  But  such 
charity  is  not  the  charity  of  the  New  Testament,  and  does 
not  deserve  the  name.  Give  me  the  charity  which  tries 
everything  by  the  test  of  the  Bible,  and  believes  nothing 
and  hopes  nothing  that  is  not  sanctioned  by  the  Word. 
Give  me  the  charity  which  St.  Paul  describes  to  tlie 
Corinthians  (1  Cor.  xiii.  1,  etc.) :  the  charity  which  is  not 
blind,  and  deaf,  and  stupid,  but  has  eyes  to  see  and  senses 
to  discern  between  him  that  feareth  God  and  him  that 
feareth  Him  not.  Such  charity  will  rejoice  in  nothing 
but  "  the  truth,"  and  will  confess  with  sorrow  that  I  tell 
nothing  but  the  truth  when  I  say  that  few  are  likely  to 
be  saved. 

(/)  I  know  well  that  many  will  not  believe  me,  because 
they  think  it  presumptitous  to  have  any  oinnion  at  all 
about  the  number  of  the  saved.  But  will  these  people 
dare  to  tell  us  that' the  Bible  has  not  spoken  plainly  as  to 
the  character  of  saved  souls  ?  And  will  they  dare  to  say 
that  there  is  any  standard  of  truth  except  the  Bible  ? 
Surely  there  can  be  no  presumption  in  asserting  that 
which  is  agreeable  to  the  Bible.  I  tell  them  plainly  that 
the  charge  of  presumption  does  not  lie  at  my  door.  I  say 
that  he  is  the  truly  presumptuous  man  who,  when  the 
Bible  has  said  a  thing  clearly  and  unmistakably,  refuses 
to  receive  it. 

(g)  I  know,  finally,  that  many  will  not  believe  me,  because 
they  think  my  statement  extravagant,  and  ummrrantable. 
They  regard  it  as  a  piece  of  fanaticism,  unworthy  of  the 
attention  of  a  rational  man.  They  look  on  ministers  who 
make  such  assertions,  as  weak  minded  per.sons,  and 
wanting  in  common  sense.  I  can  bear  such  imputations 
unmoved.  I  only  ask  those  who  make  them  to  show  me 
some  plain  proof  that  they  are  right  and  I  am  wrong.  Let 
them  show  me,  if  they  can,  that  anybody  is  likely  to  get 
to  heaven  whose  heart  is  not  renewed,  who  is  not  a 


88 


OLD  PATHS. 


believer  in  Jesus  Christ,  \vlio  is  not  a  spiritually-minded 
and  holy  man.  Let  them  show  me,  if  they  can,  that  people 
of  this  description  ai'e  many,  compared  with  those  who 
are  not.  Let  them,  in  one  word,  point  to  any  place  on 
EARTH  where  the  great  majority  of  the  people  are  not 
ungodly,  and  the  truly  godly  are  not  a  little  flock.  Let 
them  do  this,  and  I  will  grant  they  have  done  right  to 
disbelieve  what  I  have  said.  Till  they  do  this,  I  must 
maintain  the  sorrowful  conclusion,  that  few  persons  are 
likely  to  be  saved. 

And  now  it  only  remains  to  make  some  practical  appli- 
cation of  the  subject  of  this  paper.  I  have  set  forth  as 
plainly  as  I  can  the  character  of  saved  people. — I  have 
shown  the  painful  delusions  of  the  world  as  to  the  number 
of  the  saved. — I  have  brought  forward  the  evidence  of  the 
Bible  on  the  subject. — I  have  drawn  from  the  world 
around  us  plain  facts  in  confirmation  of  the  statements  I 
have  made. — May  the  Lord  grant  that  all  these  solemn 
truths  may  not  have  been  exhibited  in  vain  ! 

I  am  quite  aware  that  I  have  said  many  things  in  this 
paper  which  are  likely  to  give  offence.  I  know  it.  It 
must  be  so.  The  point  which  it  handles  is  far  too 
serious  and  heart-searching  to  be  otherwise  than  offen- 
sive to  some.  But  I  have  long  had  a  deep  conviction 
that  the  subject  has  been  painfully  neglected,  and  that 
few  things  are  so  little  realized  as  the  comparative 
numbers  of  the  lost  and  saved.  All  that  I  have  written, 
I  have  written  because  I  firmly  believe  it  to  be  God's  truth. 
All  that  I  have  said,  I  have  said,  not  as  an  enemj^  but 
as  a  lover  of  souls.  You  do  not  count  him  an  enemy  who 
gives  you  a  bitter  medicine  to  save  your  life.  You  do  not 
count  him  an  enemy  who  shakes  you  roughly  from  your 
sleep  when  your  house  is  on  fire.  Surely  you  will  not 
count  me  an  enemy  because  I  tell  you  strong  truths  for 
the  benefit  of  your  soul.    I  appeal,  as  a  friend,  to  every 


FEW  SAVED. 


89' 


man  or  woman  into  whose  hands  this  volume  has  come. 
Bear  with  me,  for  a  few  moments,  Avhile  I  say  a  few  last 
words  to  impress  the  whole  subject  on  your  conscience. 

(a)  Are  there  few  saved  ?  Then,  shall  you  be  one  of 
the  few?  Oh,  that  you  would  see  that  salvation  is  the 
one  thing  needful !  Health,  and  riches,  and  titles,  are 
not  needful  thiags.  A  man  may  gain  heaven  without 
them.  But  what  sliall  the  man  do  who  dies  not  saved  ! 
Oh,  that  you  would  see  that  you  must  have  salvation  now, 
in  this  present  life,  and  lay  hold  upon  it  for  your  own  soul ! 
Oh,  that  you  would  see  that  "saved"  or  "not  saved"  is 
the  grand  question  in  religion !  High  Church  or  Low 
Church,  Churchman  or  Dissenter,  all  these  are  trifling 
questions  in  comparison.  What  a  man  needs  in  order  to 
get  to  heaven  is  an  actual  personal  interest  in  Christ's 
salvation.  Surely,  if  you  are  not  saved,  it  will  be  better 
at  last  never  to  have  been  bom. 

(h)  Are  there  few  saved  ?  Then,  if  you  are  not  one 
of  the  few  already,  strive  to  he  one  ivithout  delay.  I 
know  not  who  and  what  you  are,  but  I  say  boldly,  Come 
to  Christ  and  you  shall  be  saved.  The  gate  that  leads  to 
life  may  be  strait,  but  it  was  wide  enough  to  admit 
Manasseh,  and  Saul  of  Tarsus,  and  why  not  you  ?  The 
way  that  leads  to  life  may  be  narrow,  but  it  is  marked  by 
the  footsteps  of  thousands  of  sinners  like  yourself.  All 
have  found  it  a  good  way.  All  have  persevered,  and  got 
safe  home  at  last.  Jesus  Christ  invites  you.  The  pro- 
mises of  the  Gospel  encourage  you.  Oh,  strive  to  enter 
in  without  delay  ! 

(c)  Are  there  few  saved  ?  Then,  if  you  are  doubtful 
vjhetJier  you  are  one  of  the  few,  make  sure  tvork  at  once, 
and  be  doubtful  no  more.  Leave  no  stone  unturned 
in  order  to  ascertain  your  own  spiritual  state.  Be  not 
content  with  vague  hopes  and  trusts.  Rest  not  on  warm 
feelings  and  temporary  desires  after  God.  Give  diligence 
to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure.     Oh,  give  me 


90 


OLD  PATHS. 


leave  to  say,  that  if  you  are  content  to  live  on  uncertain 
about  salvation,  you  live  the  maddest  life  in  the  world ! 
The  fires  of  hell  are  before  you,  and  you  are  uncertain 
whether  your  soul  is  insured.  This  world  below  must 
soon  be  left,  and  you  are  uncertain  whether  you  have  a 
mansion  prepared  to  receive  you  in  the  world  above. 
The  judgment  will  soon  be  set,  and  you  are  uncertain 
whether  you  have  an  Advocate  to  plead  your  cause.  Eter- 
nity will  soon  begin,  and  you  are  uncertain  whether  you 
are  prepared  to  meet  God.  Oh,  sit  down  this  day,  and 
study  the  subject  of  salvation  !  Give  God  no  rest  till 
uncertainty  has  disajjpeared,  and  you  have  got  hold  of  a 
reasonable  hope  that  you  are  saved. 

(d)  Are  there  few  that  be  saved  ?  Then,  if  you  are 
one,  he  tJianJcful.  Chosen  and  called  of  God,  while 
thousands  around  you  are  sunk  in  unbelief, — seeing 
the  kingdom  of  God,  while  multitudes  around  you  are 
utterly  blind, — delivered  from  this  present  evil  world, 
while  crowds  are  overcome  by  its  love  and  fear — taught 
to  know  sin,  and  God,  and  Christ,  while  numbers,  to  all 
appearance  as  good  as  you,  live  in  ignorance  and  darkness/ 
■ — Oh,  you  have  reason  every  day  to  bless  and  jiraise 
God !  "Whence  came  this  sense  of  sin,  which  you  now 
experience  ?  Whence  came  this  love  of  Christ, — this 
desire  after  holiness, — this  hungering  after  righteousness, 
— this  delight  in  the  Word  ?  Has  not  free  grace  done  it, 
while  many  a  companion  of  your  youth  still  knows  nothing 
about  it,  or  has  been  cut  off  in  his  sins  ?  You  ought 
indeed  to  bless  God  !  Surely  Whitefield  might  well  say, 
that  one  anthem  among  the  saints  in  heaven  will  be 
"  Why  me.  Lord  ?    Why  didst  Thou  choose  me  ? " 

(e)  Are  there  few  that  be  saved  ?  Then,  if  you 
are  one,  do  not  wonder  that  you  often  find  yourself 
standing  alone.  I  dare  believe  you  are  sometimes  almost 
brought  to  a  standstill,  by  the  corruption  and  wickedness 
that  you  see  in  the  world  around  you.    You  see  false 


FEW  SAVED. 


91 


doctrine  abounding.  You  see  unbelief  and  ungodliness  of 
every  description.  You  are  sometimes  tempted  to  say, 
"Can  I  really  be  in  the  right  in  my  religion?  Can  it 
really  be  that  all  these  people  are  in  the  wrong  ?  "  Be- 
ware of  giving  way  to  thoughts  like  these.  Remember, 
you  are  only  having  practical  proof  of  the  truth  of  your 
Master's  sayings.  Think  not  that  His  purposes  are  being 
defeated.  Think  not  that  His  work  is  not  going  forward 
in  the  world.  He  is  still  taking  out  a  people  to  His 
praise.  He  is  still  raising  up  witnesses  to  Himself,  here 
and  there,  all  over  the  world.  The  saved  will  yet  be  found 
to  be  a  "  multitude  that  no  man  can  number,"  when  all  are 
gathered  together  at  last.  (Rev.  vii.  9.)  The  earth  will 
yet  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord.  All  nations 
shall  serve  Him :  all  kings  shall  yet  delight  to  do  Him 
honour.  But  the  night  is  not  yet  spent.  The  day  of  tlie 
Lord's  power  is  yet  to  come.  In  the  mean  time  all  is  going 
on  as  He  foretold  1800  years  ago.  Many  are  being  lost 
and  few  saved. 

(/)  Are  there  few  saved  ?  Then,  if  you  are  one,  do 
not  he  afraid  of  halving  too  much  religion.  Settle  it 
down  in  your  mind  that  you  will  aim  at  the  highest  degree 
of  holiness,  and  spiritual-mindedness,  and  consecration  to 
God, — that  you  will  not  be  content  with  any  low  degree  of 
sanctification.  Resolve  that,  by  the  grace  of  God,  you  will 
make  Christianity  beautiful  in  the  eyes  of  the  world. 
Remember  that  the  children  of  the  world  have  but  few 
patterns  of  true  religion  before  them.  Endeavour,  as  itxv 
as  in  you  lies,  to  make  those  few  patterns  recommend  the 
service  of  your  Master.  Oh,  that  every  true  Christian 
would  recollect  that  he  is  set  as  a  lighthouse  in  the  midst 
of  a  dark  world,  and  would  labour  so  to  live  that  every 
part  of  him  may  reflect  light,  and  no  side  be  dim  ! 

(g)  Are  there  few  saved  ?  Then,  if  you  are  one, 
vse  every  opportunity  of  trying  to  do  good  to  souls. 
Settle  it  down  in  your  mind  that  the  vast  majority  of 


92 


OLD  PATHS. 


people  around  you  are  in  awful  danger  of  being  lost  for 
ever.  Work  every  engine  for  bringing  the  Gospel  to  bear 
upon  them.  Help  every  Christian  machinery  for  plucking 
brands  from  the  burning.  Give  liberally  to  every  Society 
which  has  for  its  object  to  spread  the  everlasting  Gospel. 
Throw  all  your  influence  heartily  and  unreservedly  into 
the  cause  of  doing  good  to  souls.  Live  like  one  who 
thoroughly  believes  that  time  is  short  and  eternity  near, — 
the  devil  strong  and  sin  abounding,— the  darkness  very 
great  and  the  light  very  small, — the  ungodly  very  many 
and  the  godly  very  few, — the  things  of  the  world  mere 
transitory  shadows,  and  heaven  and  hell  the  gTeat  sub- 
stantial realities.  Alas,  indeed,  for  the  lives  that  many 
believers  live !  How  cold  are  many,  and  how  frozen, — 
how  slow  to  do  decided  things  in  religion,  and  how  afraid 
of  going  too  far, — how  backward  to  attempt  anything  new, 
— how  ready  to  discourage  a  good  movement, — how  in- 
genious in  discovering  reasons  why  it  is  best  to  sit  still, — 
how  unwilling  ever  to  allow  that  "the  time"  for  active  exer- 
tion is  come, — how  wise  in  finding  fault, — how  shiftless  in 
devising  plans  to  meet  growing  evils  !  Truly  a  man  might 
sometimes  fancy,  Avhen  he  looks  at  the  ways  of  many  who 
are  counted  believers,  that  all  the  world  was  going  to 
heaven,  and  hell  was  nothing  but  a  lie. 

Let  us  all  beware  of  this  state  of  mind  !  Whether 
we  like  to  believe  it  or  not,  hell  is  filling  fast, — Christ  is 
daily  holding  out  His  hand  to  a  disobedient  people, — many 
many  are  in  the  way  to  destruction, — few,  few  are  in  the 
way  to  life.  Many,  many  are  likely  to  be  lost.  Few,  few 
are  likely  to  be  saved. 

Once  more  I  ask  every  reader,  as  I  asked  at  the 
beginning  of  this  paper, — Shall  you,  he  saved  ?  If  you  are 
not  saved  already,  my  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  is, 
that  you  may  seek  salvation  without  delay.  If  you  are 
saved,  my  desire  is  that  you  may  live  like  a  saved  soul, — 
and  like  one  who  knows  that  saved  souls  are  few. 


lY. 


OUK  HOPE! 

"  Good  ho2)e  through  grace." — 2  Thess.  ii.  16. 

"  I  HOPE,"  is  a  very  common  expression.  Everybody 
can  say,  "  I  hope."  About  no  subject  is  the  expression  used 
so  commonly  as  it  is  about  religion.  Nothing  is  more 
frequent  than  to  hear  men  turn  off  some  jiome-thrust  at 
conscience  by  this  convenient  form  of  words,  "I  hope." 
— "  I  hope  it  will  be  all  right  at  last." — "  I  hope  I  shall 
be  a  better  man  some  day.  " — "  I  hope  we  shall  all  get  to 
heaven." — But  why  do  they  hope  ?  On  what  is  their  hope 
built  ?  Too  often  they  cannot  tell  you  !  Too  often  it  is  a 
mere  excuse  for  avoiding  a  disagreeable  subject.  "'Hoping," 
they  live  on.  "  Hoping,"  they  grow  old.  "  Hoping,"  they 
die  at  last, — and  find  too  often  that  they  are  lost  for  ever 
in  hell. 

I  ask  the  serious  attention  of  all  who  read  this  paper. 
The  subject  is  one  of  the  deepest  importance :  "  We  are 
saved  by  hope."  (Rom.  viii.  24.)  Let  us,  then,  make  sure 
that  our  hope  is  sound. — Have  we  a  hope  that  our  sins  are 
pardoned,  our  hearts  renewed,  and  our  souls  at  peace 
with  God  ?  Then  let  us  see  to  it  that  our  hope  is  "good," 
and  "  lively,"  and  one  "  that  maketh  not  ashamed." 
(2  Thess.  ii.  16;  1  Pet.  i.  3;  Rom.  v.  5.)  Let  us  consider 
our  ways.  Let  us  not  shrink  from  honest,  searching  in- 
quiry iuto  the  condition  of  our  souls.    If  our  hope  is  good, 


!94 


OLD  PATHS. 


Examination  will  do  it  no  harm.  If  our  hope  is  bad,  it  is 
high  time  to  know  it,  and  to  seek  a  better. 

There  are  five  marks  of  a  really  "  good  hope."  I  desire 
to  place  them  before  my  readers  in  order.  Let  us  ask  our- 
selves what  we  know  of  them.  Let  us  prove  our  own 
state  by  them.  Happy  is  he  who  can  say  of  each  of  these 
marks, — "  I  know  it  by  experience.  This  is  my  hope 
about  my  soul." 

I.  In  the  first  place,  a  good  hope  is  a  hope  that  a  man 
can  explain.  What  saith  the  Scripture  ?  "  Be  ready 
always  to  give  an  answer  to  every  man  that  asketh  you  a 
reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you."    (1  Pet.  iii.  15.) 

If  our  hope  is  sound  we  must  be  able  to  give  some 
account  of  it.  We  must  be  able  to  show  why,  and  where- 
fore, and  on  what  grounds,  and  for  what  reason  we  expect 
to  go  to  heaven  when  we  die.    Now  can  we  do  this  ? 

Let  no  one  misunderstand  my  meaning.  I  do  not  say 
that  deep  learning  and  great  hioivledge  are  absolutely 
needful  to  salvation.  A  man  may  know  twenty  la.nguages, 
and  have  the  whole  body  of  divinity  at  his  fingers'  ends, 
and  yet  be  lost ;  a  man  may  be  unable  to  read,  and  have 
a  very  weak  understanding,  and  yet  be  saved.  But  I  do 
say  that  a  man  must  know  what  his  hope  is,  and  be  able 
to  tell  us  its  nature.  I  cannot  believe  that  a  man  has  got 
possession  of  a  thing  if  he  knows  nothing  about  it. 

Once  more,  let  no  one  misunderstand  my  meaning.  I 
do  not  say  that  a  power  of  talking  well  is  necessary  to 
salvation.  There  may  be  many  fine  words  on  a  man's 
lips,  and  not  a  whit  of  grace  in  his  heart ;  there  may  be 
few  and  stammering  words,  and  yet  deep  feeling  within, 
planted  there  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  There  are  some  who 
cannot  speak  many  words  for  Christ,  and  yet  would  die 
for  Him.  But  for  all  this,  I  do  say  that  the  man  who 
has  a  good  hope  ought  to  be  able  to  tell  us  why.  If  he 
can  tell  us  no  more  than  this,  that  "  he  feels  himself  a 


OUR  HOPE. 


95 


sinner,  and  has  no  hope  but  in  Christ,"  it  is  something. 
But  if  he  can  tell  us  nothing  at  all,  I  must  suspect  that 
he  has  got  no  real  hope. 

I  am  aware  that  the  opinion  just  expressed  displeases 
many.  Thousands  can  see  no  necessity  for  that  clear 
knowledge  which  I  believe  to  be  essential  to  a  saving 
hope.  So  long  as  a  man  goes  to  church  on  Sunday,  and 
has  his  children  baptized,  the}'  think  we  ought  to  be 
content.  "  Knowledge,"  they  tell  us,  "  may  be  very  well 
for  clergymen  and  professors  of  theology ;  but  it  is  too 
much  to  require  it  of  common  men." 

My  answer  to  all  such  people  is  short  and  simple.  Where 
in  the  whole  New  Testament  shall  we  find  that  men  were 
called  Christians,  unless  they  knew  something  of  Christi- 
anity ?  Will  any  one  try  to  persuade  me  that  a  Corinthian 
Christian,  or  a  Colossiau,  or  Thessalonian,  or  Philippian,  or 
Ephesian,  could  not  have  told  us  what  was  his  hope  about 
his  soul  ?  Let  those  believe  it  who  will :  I,  for  one,  can- 
not. I  believe  that  in  requiring  a  man  to  know  the  ground 
of  his  hope  I  am  only  setting  up  the  standard  of  the  New 
Testament.  Ignorance  may  suit  a  Roman  Catholic  well 
enough.  He  belongs  to  what  he  considers  to  be  the  true 
Church  •  He  does  as  his  priest  tells  him !  He  asks  no 
more  ! — But  ignorance  ought  never  to  be  the  characteristic 
of  a  Protestant  Christian.  He  ought  to  know  what  he 
believes,  and  if  he  does  not  know  he  is  in  a  bad  way. 

I  ask  every  reader  of  this  paper  to  search  his  heart, 
and  see  how  the  matter  stands  with  his  soul.  Can  you 
tell  us  nothing  more  than  this,  that  "you  hope  to  be 
saved  "  ?  Can  you  give  no  explanation  of  the  grounds  of 
your  confidence  ?  Can  you  show  us  nothing  more  satis- 
factory than  your  own  vague  expectation  ?  If  this  be  the 
case  you  are  in  imminent  peril  of  being  lost  for  ever. 
Like  Ignorance,  in  Pilgrim's  Progress,  you  may  get  to  your 
journey's  end,  and  be  ferried  by  Vainhope  over  the  river, 
without  much  trouble.    But,  like  Ignorance,  you  may  find 


96 


OLD  PATHS. 


to  your  sorrow  that  there  is  no  admission  for  you  into  the 
celestial  city.  None  enter  in  there  but  those  who  "  know 
what  as  well  as  whom  they  have  believed."  * 

I  lay  down  this  principle  as  a  starting  point,  and  I  ask 
my  readers  to  consider  it  well.  I  admit  most  fully  that 
there  are  different  desrrees  of  "race  amonjj  true  Christians. 
I  do  not  forget  that  there  are  many  in  the  family  of  God 
whose  faith  is  very  weak,  and  whose  hope  is  very  small. 
But  I  believe  confidently,  that  the  standard  of  require- 
ment I  have  set  up  is  not  a  whit  too  high.  I  believe 
that  the  man  who  has  a  "  good  hope "  will  always  be 
able  to  give  some  account  of  it. 

II.  In  the  second  place,  a  good  hope  is  a  hojie  that  is 
draioa  from  Scripture.    What  says  David?    "I  hope 


*  "Now,  while  I  was  gazing  upon  all  these  things,  I  turned  my  head 
to  look  back,  and  saw  Ignorance  coming  up  to  the  river  side  :  but  he  soon 
got  over,  and  that  without  half  the  difficulty  which  the  other  two  men 
met  with.  For  it  happened  that  there  was  then  in  that  place  one  Vain- 
hope,  a  ferry-man,  that  with  his  boat  helped  him  over  ;  so  he,  as  the 
other  I  saw,  did  ascend  the  hill  to  come  up  to  the  gate,  only  he  came 
alone  ;  neither  did  any  man  meet  him  with  the  least  encouragement. 
When  he  was  come  up  to  tlie  gate,  he  looked  up  to  the  writing  that  was 
above,  and  then  began  to  knock,  supposing  that  entrance  should  have 
been  quickly  administered  to  him.  But  he  was  asked  by  the  man  that 
looked  over  the  top  of  the  gate,  'Whence  come  you  ?  And  wliat  would 
you  have?'  He  answered,  'I  have  ate  and  drank  in  the  presence  of  the 
King,  and  He  has  taught  in  our  streets.'  Then  they  asked  liim  for  his 
certificate,  that  they  might  go  in  and  show  it  to  the  King.  So  he 
fumbled  in  his  bosom  for  one,  and  found  none.  Then  said  they,  '  Have 
you  none?'    But  the  man  answered  never  a  word. 

"So  they  told  the  King;  but  He  would  not  come  down  to  see  him, 
but  commanded  the  two  shining  ones  that  conducted  Christian  and 
Hopeful  to  the  City,  to  take  Ignorance  and  bind  him  hand  and  foot, 
and  have  him  away.  Then  they  took  him  up,  and  carried  him  through 
the  air  to  the  door  that  I  saw  in  the  side  of  the  hill,  and  put  him  in 
there.  Then  I  saw  that  there  was  a  way  to  hell,  even  from  the  gate  of 
heaven,  as  well  as  from  the  city  of  destruction." — Biiiiyan's  Pilgrim's 
Progress. 


OUll  HOPE. 


97 


ID  Thy  word." — "  Remember  the  word  unto  Thy  servant, 
upon  which  Thou  hast  caused  me  to  hope."  What  says 
St.  Paul  ?  "  Whatsoever  things  were  written  aforetime, 
were  wi-itten  for  our  learning,  that  we  through  patience 
and  comfort  of  the  Scriptures  might  have  hope."  (Psalm 
cxix.  81,  49.    Rom.  xv.  4.) 

If  our  hope  is  sound  we  ought  to  be  able  to  turn  to 
some  text,  or  fact,  or  doctrine  of  God'.s  Word,  as  the 
source  of  it.  Our  confidence  must  arise  from  something 
which  God  has  caused  to  be  written  in  the  Bible  for  our 
learning,  and  which  our  heart  has  received  and  believed. 

It  is  not  enough  to  have  good  feelings  about  the  state 
of  our  souls.  We  may  flatter  ourselves  that  all  is  right, 
and  that  we  are  going  to  heaven  when  we  die,  and  yet 
have  nothing  to  show  for  our  expectations  but  mere 
fancy  and  imagination.  "  The  heart  is  deceitful  above 
all  things."  — "  He  that  tru.steth  in  his  own  heart  is 
a  fool."  (Jcr.  xvii.  9.  Prov.  xxviii,  2b'.)— I  have  fre- 
quently heard  dying  people  say  that  "  they  felt  quite 
happy  and  ready  to  go."  I  have  heard  them  say  that 
"  they  felt  as  if  they  craved  nothing  in  this  world."  And 
all  this  time  I  have  remarked  that  they  were  profoundly 
ignorant  of  Scripture,  and  seemed  unable  to  lay  firm  hold 
on  a  single  truth  of  the  Gospel !  I  never  can  feel  comfort 
about  such  people.  I  am  persuaded  that  there  is  some- 
tliing  wrong  in  their  condition.  Good  feelings  without 
some  warrant  of  Scripture  do  not  make  up  a  good  hope. 

It  is  not  enough  to  have  the  good  opinion  of  others 
about  the  state  of  our  souls.  We  may  be  told  by  others 
on  our  death  beds,  to  "keep  up  our  spirits,"  and  "not  to 
be  afraid."  We  may  be  reminded  that  we  have  "  lived 
good  lives, — or  had  a  good  heart, — or  done  nobody  any 
harm, — or  not  been  so  bad  as  many ; "  and  all  this  time 
our  friends  may  not  bring  forward  a  word  of  Scripture, 
and  may  be  feeding  us  on  poison.  Such  friends  are 
miserable  comforters.    However  well  meaning,  they  are 

H 


98 


OLD  PATHS. 


(lownriglit  enemies  to  our  souls.  The  good  opinion  of 
others,  without  the  warrant  of  God's  Word,  will  never 
make  up  a  good  hope. 

If  a  man  would  know  the  soundness  of  his  own  hope, 
let  him  search  and  look  within  his  heart  for  some  text 
or  doctrine,  or  fact  out  of  God's  book.  Tliere  will  always 
be  some  one  or  more  on  which  your  soul  hangs,  if  you  are 
a  true  child  of  God.  The  dying  thief  in  London,  who 
was  visited  by  a  City  Missionary,  and  found  utterly 
ignorant  of  Christianity,  laid  hold  on  one  single  fact  in 
a  chapter  of  St.  Luke's  Gospel  which  was  read  to 
him,  and  found  comfort  in  it.  That  fact  was  the  story 
of  the  penitent  thief.  "  Sir,"  he  said,  when  visited  the 
second  time,  "are  there  any  more  thieves  in  that  book 
from  which  you  read  yesterday  ? " — The  dying  Hindoo 
who  was  found  by  a  missionary  on  a  roadside,  had  grasped 
one  single  text  in  the  First  Epistle  of  St.  John,  and  found 
in  it  peace.  That  text  was  the  precious  saying,  "  The 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin." 
(1  John  i.  7.) — This  is  the  experience  of  all  true  Christians. 
Unlearned,  humble,  poor,  as  many  of  them  are,  they  have 
got  hold  of  something  in  the  Bible,  and  this  causes  them 
to  hope.  The  hope  which  "maketh  not  ashamed"  is 
never  separate  from  God's  Word. 

Men  wonder  sometimes  that  ministers  press  them  so 
strongly  to  read  the  Bible.  They  marvel  that  we  say  so 
much  about  the  importance  of  preaching,  and  urge  them 
so  often  to  hear  sermons.  Let  them  cease  to  wonder,  and 
marvel  no  more.  Our  object  is  to  make  you  acquainted 
with  Goil's  Word.  We  want  you  to  have  a  good  hope, 
and  we  know  that  a  good  hope  must  be  drawn  from  the 
Scriptures.  Without  reading  or  hearing  you  must  live 
and  die  in  ignorance.  Hence  we  cry,  Search  the  Scrip- 
tures" "Hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live."  (John  v.  39. 
Isa.  Iv.  3.) 

.1  warn  every  one  to  beware  of  a  hope  not  drawn  from 


OUR  HOPE. 


99 


Scripture.  It  is  a  false  hope,  and  many  will  find  out  this 
to  their  cost.  That  glorious  and  perfect  book,  the  Bible, 
however  men  despise  it,  is  the  only  fountain  out  of  which 
man's  soul  can  derive  peace.  Many  sneer  at  the  old  book 
Avhile  living,  who  find  their  need  of  it  when  dying.  The 
Queen  in  her  palace  and  the  pauper  in  the  workhouse,  the 
philosopher  in  his  study  and  the  child  in  the  cottage, — 
each  and  all  must  be  content  to  seek  living  water  from  the 
Bible,  if  they  are  to  have  any  hope  at  all.  Honour  your 
Bible, — read  your  Bible, — stick  to  your  Bible.  There  is 
not  on  earth  a  scrap  of  solid  hope  for  the  other  side  of  the 
grave  which  is  not  drawn  out  of  the  Word.* 

III.  In  the  third  place,  a  good  hope  is  a  hope  that 
rests  entirely  on  Jesus  Christ.  What  says  St.  Paul  to 
Timothy  ?  He  says  that  Jesus  Christ  "  is  our  hope." 
What  says  he  to  the  Colossiaus  ?  He  speaks  of  "  Christ 
in  you  the  hope  of  glory."    (1  Tim.  i. ;  1  Coloss.  i.  27.) 

The  man  who  has  a  good  hope  founds  all  his  ex- 
pectations of  pardon  and  salvation  on  the  mediation  and 
redeeming  work  of  Jesus  the  Son  of  God.  He  knows  his 
own  sinfulness  ;  he  feels  that  he  is  guilty,  wicked,  and  lost 
by  nature :  but  he  sees  forgiveness  and  peace  with  God 
offered  freely  to  him  through  faith  in  Christ.  He  ac- 
cepts the  offer :  he  casts  himself  with  all  his  sins  on 
Jesus,  and  rests  on  Him.    Jesus  and  His  atonement  on 


*  "The  hope  of  eternal  life  is  a  hope  of  the  greatest  blessing  that  can 
be  conceived.  It  is  a  hope  bottomed  only  ou  the  pure  Word  of  God. 
When  you  examine  your  hearts  you  find  some  hope  of  being  saved,  and 
that  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  you  shall  stand  with  peace  and  confidence 
before  your  Judge.  Why  so?  Wlierefore  do  you  hope  for  this  ?  Is  it 
not  because  God  hath  said  it  ?  Is  it  not  because  the  God  that  cannot  lie 
hath  spoken  it  1  If  you  expect  to  be  saved  upon  any  other  ground  but 
because  God  hath  said  it,  ye  must  change  your  mind  ere  you  be  saved  ; 
for  ye  are  off  the  rock,  ye  are  off  the  sure  foundation  that  all  God's  Israel 
must  rest  upon." — Traill. 


100 


OLD  PATHS. 


the  cross, — Jesus  and  His  righteousness, — Jesus  and  His 
finished  work, — Jesus  and  His  all-prevailing  intercession, 
— Jesus,  and  Jesus  only,  is  the  foundation  of  the  con- 
fidence of  his  soul. 

Let  us  beware  of  supposing  that  any  hope  is  good  which 
is  not  founded  on  Christ.  All  other  hopes  are  built  on  sand. 
They  may  look  well  in  the  summer  time  of  health  and 
prosperity,  but  they  will  f;iil  in  the  day  of  sickness  and  the 
hour  of  death.  "  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than 
that  is  laid,  which  is  Jesus  Christ."    (1  Cor.  iii.  11.) 

Church -membership  is  no  foundation  of  hope.  We  may 
belong  to  the  best  of  Churches,  and  yet  never  belong  to 
Christ.  We  may  fill  our  pew  regularly  every  Sunday,  and 
hear  the  sermons  of  orthodox,  ordained  clergymen,  and  yet 
never  hear  the  voice  of  Jesus,  or  follow  Him.  If  we  have 
nothing  better  than  Church-membership  to  rest  upon  we 
are  in  a  poor  plight :  we  have  nothing  solid  beneath  our 
feet. 

Keception  of  the  sacraments  is  no  foundation  of  hope. 
We  may  be  washed  in  the  waters  of  baptism,  and  yet 
know  nothing  of  the  water  of  life.  We  may  go  to  the 
Lord's  table  every  Sunday  of  our  lives,  and  yet  never  eat 
Christ's  body  and  drink  Christ's  blood  by  faith.  Miserable 
indeed  is  our  condition  if  we  can  say  nothing  more  than 
this  !  We  possess  nothing  but  the  outside  of  Christianity  : 
we  are  leaning  on  a  reed. 

Christ  Himself  is  the  only  true  foundation  of  a  good 
hope.  He  is  the  rock, — His  work  is  perfect.  He  is  the 
stone, —  the  sure  stone, — the  tried  corner-stone.  He  is 
able  to  bear  all  the  weight  that  we  can  lay  upon  Him. 
He  only  that  buildeth  and  "  believeth  on  Him  shall  not  be 
confounded."  (Deut.  xxxii.  4  ;  Isa.  xxviii.  16  ;  1  Peter  ii.  6.) 

This  is  the  point  on  which  all  true  saints  of  God  in  every 
age  have  been  entirely  agreed.  Differing  on  other  matters, 
they  have  always  been  of  one  mind  upon  this.  Unable  to  see 
alike  about  Church -government,   and   discipline,  and 


OUR  HOPE. 


101 


liturgies,  they  have  ever  seen  alike  about  tlie  iouudation 
of  hope.  Not  one  of  them  has  ever  left  the  world  trusting 
in  his  own  righteousness.  Christ  has  been  all  their  con- 
fidence :  they  have  hoped  in  Him,  and  not  been  ashamed.* 
Would  any  one  like  to  know  what  kind  of  death-beds  a 
minister  of  the  Gospel  finds  comfort  in  attending  ?  Would 
you  know  what  closing  scenes  are  cheering  to  us,  and  leave 
favourable  impressions  on  our  minds  ?  We  like  to  see 
dying  people  maldng  much  of  Christ.  So  long  as  they 
can  only  talk  of  "  the  Almighty,"  and  "  Providence,"  and 
"  God,"  and  "  mercy,"  we  must  stand  in  doubt.  Dying  in 
this  state,  they  give  no  satisfactory  sign.  Give  us  the 
men  and  women  who  feel  their  sins  deeply,  and  cling  to 
Jesus, — who  think  much  of  His  dying  love, — who  like  to 
hear  of  His  atoning  blood, — who  return  again  and  again 
to  the  story  of  His  cross.  These  are  the  death-beds  which 
leave  good  evidence  behind  them.  For  my  part  I  had 
rather  hear  the  name  of  Jesus  come  heartily  from  a  dying 
relative's  lips,  than  see  him  die  without  a  word  about 
Christ,  and  then  be  told  by  an  angel  that  he  was  saved."  -f- 


*  "Consiler  how  it  is  with  the  most  holy  anil  eminent  saints  when 
dying.  Did  you  ever  see  or  hear  any  boasting  of  tlieir  own  works  and 
performances  ?  They  may,  and  do  own  to  the  praise  of  His  grace,  what 
they  have  been  made  to  be,  what  they  have  been  helped  to  do  or  sufifer 
for  Christ's  sake.  But  wlien  they  draw  near  to  the  awful  tribunal,  what 
else  is  in  their  eye  and  heart,  but  only  free  grace,  ransoming  blood,  and 
a  well-ordered  covenant  in  Christ  the  surety  ?  They  cannot  bear  to 
have  any  make  mention  to  them  of  their  holiness,  their  own  grace,  and 
attainments. 

"He  is  a  wise  and  happy  mau  that  can  anchor  his  soul  on  that  rock 
on  which  he  can  ride  out  the  storm  of  death.  Why  should  men  contend 
for  that  in  their  life  that  they  know  they  must  renounce  at  their  death  ? 
or  neglect  that  truth  now,  that  they  must  betake  themselves  unto  then? 
It  is  a  great  test  of  the  truth  of  the  doctrine  about  the  way  of  salvation 
when  it  is  generally  approved  by  sensible  dying  men." — Traill, 

+  The  dying  words  of  Mr.  Ash,  the  Puritan,  are  well-deserving  of 
notice.    He  said,  "When  I  consider  my  best  duties,  I  sink,  I  die,  I 


102 


OLD  PATHS. 


IV.  In  the  fourth  place,  a  good  hope  is  a  hope  that  is 
felt  inwardly  in  the  heart.  What  says  St.  Paul?  He 
fipeaks  of  "  hope  that  niaketh  not  ashamed,  because  the 
love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts."  He  speaks  of 
"  rejoicing  in  hope."    (Rom.  v.  5  ;  xii.  12.) 

The  man  who  has  a  good  hope  is  conscious  of  it.  He 
feels  within  him  something  that  another  man  does  not : 
he  is  conscious  of  possessing  a  well-grounded  expectation 
of  good  things  to  come.  This  consciousness  may  vary  ex- 
ceedingly in  different  persons.  In  one  it  may  be  strong 
and  well-defined  ;  in  another  it  may  be  feeble  and  indis- 
tinct.— It  may  vary  exceedingly  in  different  .stages  of  the 
same  person's  experience.  At  one  time  he  may  be  full 
of  "joy  and  peace  in  believing;"  at  another  he  may  be 
depressed  and  cast  down.  But  in  all  persons  who  have 
a  "good  hope,"  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  this  conscious- 
ness does  exist. 

I  am  aware  that  this  truth  is  one  which  has  been 
fearfully  abused  and  perverted.  It  has  been  brought  into 
great  disrepute  by  the  fanaticism,  enthusiasm,  and  ex- 
travagance of  some  professing  Christians.  Mere  animal 
excitement  has  been  mistaken  for  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  The  over-wrought  feelings  of  weak  and  nervous 
people  have  been  prematurely  and  rashly  supposed  to  be 
the  result  of  grace.    Men  and  women  have  been  hastily 


despair.  But  -wlieti  I  think  of  Cbrist,  I  have  enough.  He  is  all  and 
iu  all. ' 

The  words  of  Mr.  Cecil  shortly  before  his  death  are  very  remarkable. 
He  said,  "  I  know  myself  to  be  a  wretched,  worthless  sinner,  having 
nothing  in  myself  but  poverty  and  sin.  I  know  Jesus  Christ  to  be  a 
glorious  and  almighty  Saviour.  I  see  the  full  efficacy  of  His  atonement 
and  grace ;  and  I  cast  myself  entirely  on  Him,  and  wait  at  His  foot- 
stool." A  short  time  before  his  decease  he  requested  one  of  his  family 
to  write  down  for  him  the  following  sentence  in  a  book  :  "  'None  but 
Christ,  none  but  Christ,'  said  Lambert,  dying  at  a  stake:  the  same  in 
dying  circumstances,  with  his  whole  heart,  says  Eichard  Cecil " 


OUR  HOPE. 


103 


pronounced  "  converted,"  wlio  have  soon  gone  back  to  the 
world,  and  proved  utterly  "  unconverted  "  and  dead  in  sins. 
And  then  has  come  in  the  devil.  Contempt  has  been 
poured  on  religious  feelings  of  every  description  :  their 
very  existence  has  been  denied  and  scouted ;  and  the 
result  is  that  the  very  name  of  "  feelings  "  in  religion  is  in 
many  quarters  dreaded  and  disliked. 

But  the  abuse  and  perversion  of  a  truth  must  never  be 
allowed  to  rob  us  of  the  use  of  it.  When  all  has  been 
said  that  can  be  said  against  fanaticism  and  enthusiasni, 
it  is  still  undeniable  that  religious  feelings  are  plainly 
spoken  of  and  described  in  Sci"ipture.  The  Word  of  God 
tells  us  that  the  true  Christian  has  "peace,"  and  "rest," 
and  "joy,"  and  "confidence."  It  tells  us  of  some  who 
have  the  "  witness  of  the  Spirit," — of  some  who  "  fear  no 
evil,"- — of  some  who  enjoy  "  assiu-ance/' — of  some  who 
"  know  whom  they  have  believed," — of  some  who  "  are 
persuaded  that  they  shall  never  be  separated  from  the 
love  of  God  in  Christ."  These  are  the  feelings  for  wliich  I 
contend:  this  is  that  sober,  inward  experience  in  which  I 
see  nothing  extravagant,  enthusiastic,  or  fanatical.  Of 
such  feelings  I  say  boldly,  no  man  need  be  ashamed.  I 
go  further,  and  say  that  no  man  has  a  "good  hope"  who 
does  not  know  something,  however  faintly,  of  these  feelings 
in  his  own  heart.  I  go  further  still,  and  say  that  to  hold 
any  other  doctrine  is  to  cast  dishonour  on  the  whole  work 
of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Will  any  one  tell  us  that  God  ever  intended  a  true 
Christian  to  have  no  inward  consciousness  of  his  own 
Christianity  ?  Will  any  one  say  that  the  Bible  teaches 
that  people  can  pass  from  death  to  life,  be  pardoned, 
renewed,  and  sanctified,  and  yet  feel  nothing  of  this 
mighty  change  within  ?  Let  those  think  it  who  will : 
I  can  hold  no  such  doctrine.  I  would  as  soon  believe 
that  Lazarus  did  not  knoAV  that  he  was  raised  from 
the  grave,  or  Bartimeus  that  he  was  restored  to  sight, 


104 


OLD  PATHS. 


as  believe  that  a  man  cannot  feel  within  him  the  Spirit 
of  God. 

Can  a  weary  man  lie  clo^yn  in  bed  and  not  feel  rested  ? 
Can  the  parched  traveller  in  an  African  desert  drink  water 
and  not  feel  refreshed  ?  Can  the  starved  sailor,  in  Arctic 
regions,  draw  near  to  the  fire  and  not  feel  warmed  ?  Can 
the  half-naked,  hungry,  homeless  wanderer  in  our  streets 
be  clothed,  fed,  and  housed,  and  not  feel  comforted  ?  Can 
the  fainting  sick  man  receive  the  healing  cordial,  and 
not  feel  revived  ?  I  cannot  believe  it.  I  believe  that  in 
each  case  something  will  be  felt. — Just  so  I  cannot  believe 
that  a  man  can  be  a  true  Christian  if  he  does  not  feel 
someihing  within,  A  new  birth,  a  pai'don  of  sins,  a  con- 
science sprinkled  with  Christ's  blood,  an  indwelling  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  are  no  such  small  matters  as  men  seem  to 
sujipose.  He  that  knows  anything  of  them  will  feel  them  : 
there  will  be  a  real,  distinct  witness  in  his  inward  man. 

Let  us  beware  of  a  hope  that  is  not  felt,  and  a  Christi- 
anity that  is  destitute  of  any  inward  experience.  They 
are  idols  of  the  present  day,  and  idols  before  which 
thousands  are  bowing  down.  Thousands  are  trying  to 
persuade  themselves  that  people  may  be  born  again,  and 
liave  the  Spirit,  and  yet  not  be  sensible  of  it, — or  that 
people  may  be  members  of  Christ,  and  receive  benefit 
from  Him,  who  have  neither  faith  nor  love  towards  His 
name.  These  are  the  favourite  doctrines  of  modern  days! 
These  be  the  gods  which  have  taken  the  place  of  Diana 
and  Mercury, and  "the  image  which  fell  down  from  Jupiter!" 
These  be  the  last  new  deities  invented  by  poor,  weak, 
idolatrous  man !  From  all  such  idols  let  us  keep  ourselves 
with  jealous  care.  Golden  as  their  heads  may  be,  their 
feet  are  no  better  than  clay.  They  cannot  stand :  they 
must,  sooner  or  later,  break  down.  Miserable  indeed  are 
the  prospects  of  those  who  worship  them !  Their  hope  is 
not  the  hope  of  the  Bible :  it  is  the  hope  of  a  dead  corpse. 
Yrhere  Christ  and  the  Spirit  are  their  presence  will  be  felt ! 


OUR  HOPE. 


105 


Can  any  one  in  his  senses  suppose  that  the  apostle 
Paul  would  have  been  content  with  Christians  who  knew 
nothing  of  inward  feelings  ?  Can  we  ftxncy  that  mighty 
man  of  God  sanctioning  a  religion  which  a  person  might 
have,  and  yet  experience  nothing  within  ?  Can  we  picture 
to  ourselves  a  member  of  one  of  the  Churclies  he  founded, 
who  was  utterly  unacquainted  with  peace,  or  joy,  or 
confidence  towards  God,  and  was  yet  approved  by  the 
great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  as  a  true  believer  !  Away 
with  the  idea  !  It  will  not  bear  reflection  for  a  moment. 
The  testimony  of  Scripture  is  plain  and  explicit.  Talk  as 
men  will  about  enthusiasm  and  excitement,  there  are  such 
things  as  fedings  in  religion.  The  Christian  who  knows 
nothing  of  them  is  not  yet  converted,  and  has  everything 
to  learn.  The  cold  marble  of  a  Grecian  statue  may  well 
be  uninipassioned.  The  dried  mummy  from  Egypt  may 
well  look  stiff  and  still.  The  stuffed  beast  in  a  museum 
may  well  be  motionless  and  cold.  They  are  all  lifeless 
things.  But  where  there  is  life  there  will  always  be 
some  feeling.  The  "good  hope"  is  a  hope  that  can  bo 
lelt. 

V.  In  the  last  place,  a  good  hope  is  a  hope  that  is 
manifested  outwardly  in  the  life.  Once  more,  what 
saith  the  Scripture  ?  "  Every  one  that  hath  this  hope  in 
Him  pnrifieth  himself,  even  as  He  is  pure."    (1  John  iii.  3.) 

The  man  that  has  a  good  hope  will  show  it  in  all  his 
ways.  It  will  influence  his  life,  his  character,  and  his 
daily  conduct ;  it  will  make  him  strive  to  be  a  holy,  godly, 
conscientious,  spiritual  man.  He  will  feel  under  a  constant 
obligation  to  serve  and  please  Him  from  whom  his  hope 
comes.  He  will  say  to  himself,  "  What  shall  I  render  to 
the  Lord  for  all  His  benefits  to  me  ? "  He  will  feel,  "  I 
am  bought  with  a  price :  let  me  glorify  God  with  body  and 
spirit,  which  are  His." — "Let  me  show  forth  the  praises 
of  Him  who  hath  called  me  out  of  darkness  into  His 


106 


OLD  PATHS. 


marvellous  liglit."  Let  me  prove  that  I  am  Christ's  friend, 
"by  keeping  His  commandments."  (Psalm  cxvi.  12;  1  Cor 
vi.  20 ;  1  Peter  ii.  9  ;  John  xv.  14.) 

This  is  a  point  which  has  been  of  infinite  importance 
in  every  age  of  the  Church.  It  is  a  tmth  •which  is  always 
assailed  by  Satan,  and  needs  guarding  with  jealous  care. 
Let  us  grasp  it  firml}^,  and  make  it  a  settled  principle  in 
our  reliafion.  If  there  is  liarht  in  a  house  it  will  shine 
through  the  windows  :  if  there  is  any  real  hope  in  a  man's 
soul  it  will  be  seen  in  his  ways.  Show  me  your  hope  in 
your  life  and  daily  behaviour.  Where  is  it  ?  Wherein 
does  it  appear  ?  If  you  cannot  show  it,  you  may  be  sure 
it  is  nothing  better  than  a  delusion  and  a  snare. 

The  times  demand  a  very  distinct  testimony  from  all 
ministers  on  this  subject.  The  truth  on  this  point  requires 
very  plain  speaking.  Let  us  settle  it  in  our  minds  deeply, 
and  beware  of  letting;  it  go.  Let  no  man  deceive  us  with 
vain  words.  "  He  that  doeth  righteousness  is  righteous." 
"  He  that  Gaith  he  abideth  in  Him,  ought  himself  also  so 
to  walk,  even  as  He  walked."  (1  John  ii.  6  ;  iii.  7.)  The 
hope  that  does  not  make  a  man  honest,  honourable,  truth- 
ful, sober,  diligent,  unselfish,  loving,  meek,  kind,  and 
faithful  in  all  the  relations  of  life,  is  not  from  above.  It 
is  only  "the  talk  of  the  lips  which  tendeth  to  penury." 
"  He  that  boasteth  himself  of  a  false  gift,  is  like  clouds 
and  wind  without  rain."    (Prov.  xiv.  23 ;  xxv.  14.) 

(a)  There  are  some  in  the  present  day  who  flatter  them- 
selves they  have  a  good  hope  because  they  jjossess  religious 
I'novjledge.  They  are  acquainted  with  the  letter  of  their 
Bibles;  they  can  argue  and  dispute  about  points  of 
doctrine :  they  can  quote  texts  by  the  score,  in  defence 
of  their  own  theological  oi^inions.  They  are  perfect 
Benjamites  in  controversy : — they  can  "  sling  stones  at  an 
hair-breadth,  and  not  miss."  (Judges  xx.  16.)  And  yet 
they  have  no  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  no  charity,  no  meekness, 
no  gentleness,  no  humility,  nothing  of  the  mind  that  was 


OUE  HOPE. 


107 


in  Chricit.  And  Lave  these  people  a  hope  ?  Let  those 
believe  it  who  will,  I  dare  not  say  so.  I  hold  with  St. 
Paul,  "Though  a  man  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men 
and  angels,  and  have  not  charity,  he  is  become  as  sounding 
brass,  or  a  tinkling  cymbal.  And  though  a  man  has  the 
gift  of  prophecy,  and  understands  all  mysteries,  and  all 
knowledge,  and  has  not  charity,  he  is  nothing."  Yes : 
hope  without  charity  is  no  hope  at  all.  (1  Cor.  xiii.  1 — 3 ) 
(h)  There  are  some  again  who  presume  to  think  they  have 
a  good  hope  because  of  God's  everhn^ting  election.  They 
holdly  persuade  themselves  that  they  were  once  called  and 
chosen  of  God  to  salvation.  They  take  it  for  granted  that 
there  was  once  a  real  work  of  the  Spirit  on  their  hearts,  and 
that  all  therefore  must  be  well.  They  look  down  upon 
others,  who  are  afraid  of  profes,sing  as  much  as  they  do. 
They  seem  to  think,  "We  are  the  people  of  God,  we  are 
the  temple  of  the  Lord,  we  are  the  favoured  servants  of 
the  Most  High, — we  are  they  that  shall  reign  in  heaven, 
and  none  beside."  And  yet  these  very  peojDle  can  lie,  and 
cheat,  and  swindle,  and  be  dishonourable  !  Some  of  them 
can  even  get  drunk  in  private,  and  secretly  commit  sins 
of  which  it  is  a  shame  to  speak  !  And  have  they  a  good 
hope  1  God  forbid  that  I  should  say  so '  The  election 
which  is  not  "unto  san ctifi cation "  is  not  of  God,  but  of 
the  devil.  The  hope  that  does  not  make  a  man  holy  is  no 
hope  at  all. 

(c)  There  are  some  in  this  day  who  fancy  they  have  a  good 
hope  because  they  like  hcarivg  the  Gospel.  They  are  fond 
of  hearing  good  sermons.  They  will  go  miles  to  listen  to 
some  favourite  preacher,  and  will  even  weep  and  be  much 
affected  by  his  words.  To  see  them  in  church  one  would 
think,  "  Surely  these  are  the  disciples  of  Christ,  surely 
these  are  excellent  Christians!" — And  yet  these  very 
people  can  plunge  into  every  folly  and  gaiety  of  the  world. 
Night  after  night  they  can  go  with  their  whole  heart  to 
the  opera,  the  theatre,  or  the  ball.    They  are  to  be  seen 


108 


OLD  PATHS. 


on  the  race-course.  They  are  forward  ia  every  worldly 
revel.  Their  voice  on  Sunday  is  the  voice  of  Jacob,  but 
their  hands  on  week  days  are  the  hands  of  Esau. — And 
have  these  people  a  good  hope  ?  I  dare  not  say  so.  "  The 
friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God ; "  the  hope 
that  does  not  prevent  conformity  to  the  world,  is  no  hope 
at  all.  "  Whatsoever  is  born  of  God  overcometh  the 
world."    (James  iv.  4  ;  1  John  v.  4.) 

Let  us  beware  of  any  hope  that  does  not  exercise  a 
sanctifying  influence  over  our  hearts,  lives,  tastes,  conduct, 
and  conversation.  It  is  a  hope  that  never  came  down  from 
above.  It  is  mere  base  metal,  and  counterfeit  coin.  It 
lacks  the  mint-stamp  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  will  never 
pass  current  in  heaven.  The  man  that  has  a  real  hope,  no 
doubt,  may  be  overtaken  in  a  fault;  He  may  stumble 
occasionally  in  his  practice,  and  be  drawn  aside  from  the 
right  path  for  a  while.  But  the  man  that  can  allow  him- 
self in  any  wiJful  and  habitual  breach  of  GoJ's  law  is 
rotten  at  the  lieart.  He  may  talk  of  his  hope  as  much  as 
he  pleases,  but  he  has  none  in  reality.  His  religion  is  a 
joy  to  the  devil,  a  stumbling  block  to  the  world,  a  sorrow 
to  true  Christians,  and  an  offence  to  God.  Oh,  that  men 
would  consider  these  things !  Oh,  that  many  would  use 
some  such  prayer  as  this,  "From  antinomianism  and 
hypocrisy,  good  Lord,  deliver  me  !  " 

T  have  now  done  what  I  proposed  to  do.  I  have  shown  the 
five  leading  marks  of  a  sound  good  hope. — (1)  It  is  a  hope 
that  a  man  can  explain.  (2)  It  is  a  hope  that  is  drawn 
from  Scripture.  (3)  It  is  a  hope  that  is  founded  on  Christ. 
(4)  It  is  a  hope  that  is  felt  within  the  heart.  (5)  It  is  a 
hope  that  is  manifested  outwardly  in  the  life. — Such,  I 
firmly  believe  is  the  hope  of  all  true  Christians,  of  every 
name,  and  Church,  and  denomination,  and  people,  and 
tongue.  Such  is  the  hope  that  we  must  have,  if  we  mean 
to  go  to  heaven.     Such  is  the  hope  without  which,  I 


OUR  HOPE. 


109 


firmly  believe,  no  man  can  be  saved.  Sucb  is  "  the  good 
hope  through  grace." 

Suffer  me  now  to  apply  the  whole  subject  to  the 
conscience  of  every  reader  in  a  practical  way.  What  shall 
it  profit  us  to  know  trutlis  unless  we  use  them  ?  What 
shall  it  avail  us  to  see  the  real  nature  of  a  good  hope 
unless  the  matter  be  brought  home  to  our  own  souls? 
This  is  what  I  now  propose  to  do,  if  God  permit,  in  the 
remainder  of  this  paper.  May  the  spirit  of  God  apply  my 
words  to  the  heart  of  every  reader  of  these  pages  with 
mighty  power !  Man  may  speak,  and  preach,  and  write, 
but  God  alone  can  convert. 

(1)  My  first  word  of  application  shall  be  a  question.  I 
offer  it  to  all  who  read  this  paper,  and  I  entreat  each 
reader  to  give  it  an  answer.  That  question  is,  "  What  is 
your  own  hope  about  your  soul  ? " 

I  do  not  ask  this  out  of  idle  curiosity.  I  ask  it  as  an 
ambassador  for  Christ,  and  a  friend  to  your  best  interests, 
I  ask  it  in  order  to  stir  up  self-inquiry,  and  promote  your 
spiritual  welfare.  I  ask,  "  What  is  your  hope  about  your 
soul?" 

I  do  not  want  to  know  whether  you  go  to  church  or 
chapel :  there  will  be  no  account  of  these  differences  in 
heaven.  I  do  not  want  to  know  whether  you  approve  of 
the  Gospel,  and  think  it  very  right  and  proper  that  people 
should  have  their  religion,  and  say  their  prayers  ;  all  this 
is  beside  the  mark  :  it  is  not  the  point.  The  point  I 
want  you  to  look  at  is  this,  "  What  is  your  hope  about 
your  soul ? " 

It  matters  nothing  what  your  relations  think.  It  matters 
nothing  what  other  persons  in  the  parish  or  town  approve. 
The  account  of  God  will  not  be  taken  by  towns,or  byparishes, 
or  by  families :  each  must  stand  forth  separately  and 
answer  for  himself  "  Every  one  of  us  shall  give  account 
of  himself  to  God."    (Rom.  xiv.  12.)    And  what  is  the 


110 


OLD  PATHS. 


defence  you  mean  to  set  up  ?  What  is  to  be  your  plea  i 
"  What  is  your  hope  about  your  soul  ? " 

Time  is  short,  and  is  passing  quickly  away:  yet  a  few 
years,  and  we  shall  be  all  dead  and  gone.  The  trees  per- 
haps are  cut  down  out  of  which  our  coffins  will  be  made  : 
the  winding-sheets  perhaps  are  woven  which  will  surround 
our  bodies  ;  the  spades  perhaps  are  made  that  will  dig  our 
graves.  Eternity  draws  near.  There  ought  to  be  no 
trifling.    "  What,  what  is  your  hope  about  your  soul  ? " 

Another  world  will  soon  begin.  Trade,  politics,  money, 
lands,  cottages,  palaces,  eating,  drinking,  dressing,  reading, 
hunting,  shooting,  drawing,  working,  dancing,  feasting,  will 
soon  be  at  an  end  for  ever.  There  will  remain  nothing 
but  a  heaven  for  some,  and  a  hell  for  others.  "  What,  what 
is  your  hope  about  your  soul  ? " 

I  have  asked  my  question.  And  now  I  ask  every 
reader  as  in  the  sight  of  God,  What  is  your  reply  1 

Many  would  say,  I  believe,  if  they  spoke  the  truth,  "  I 
don't  know  anything  about  it.  I  suppose  I  am  not  what 
I  ought  to  be.  I  dare  say  I  ought  to  have  more  religion 
than  I  have.  I  trust  I  shall  have  more  some  day.  But  as 
to  any  hope  at  jDresent,  I  really  don't  know." 

I  can  quite  believe  that  this  is  the  state  of  many.  I 
have  seen  enough  of  the  spiritual  ignorance  of  men  to  fill 
me  with  deep  sorrow.  I  am  convinced  that  there  is  no 
error,  or  heresy,  or  "ism,"  which  is  ruining  so  many  souls 
as  the  heresy  of  ignorance.  I  am  convinced  that  there  are 
myriads  of  people  in  England  who  do  not  even  know  the 
A  B  C  of  Christianity,  and  are  nothing  better  than 
baptized  heathen.  I  have  heard  of  a  man,  in  his  last 
days,  whose  only  hope  was,  "  that  he  had  always  kept  his 
Church,  and  voted  for  the  Blues."  I  have  heard  of 
a  woman,  who  was  asked  on  her  death-bed  where  she  hoped 
to  go,  and  said,  "  She  hoped  she  should  go  with  the  crowd." 
I  have  little  doubt  that  there  are  thousands  of  people  in 
this  country  who  are  much  in  the  same  condition,  knowing 


OUR  HOPE. 


Ill 


nothln"'  whatever  about  their  state  before  God.  If  this  be 
the  condition  of  any  reader  of  this  paper,  I  can  only  say, 
May  God  convert  you  !  May  God  awaken  you  !  May  God 
open  your  eyes  before  it  is  too  late  !  * 

Look  at  that  man  who  goes  to  the  Bank  of  England  on 
a  dividend  day,  and  asks  to  be  paid  a  large  sum  of  money. 
Is  his  name  down  among  the  list  of  people  to  be  paid  ? 
No  ! — Has  he  any  title  or  right  to  claim  payment  ?  No  : 
he  has  none ! — He  only  knows  that  other  people  are  re- 
ceiving money,  and  that  he  would  like  to  receive  some  too. 
You  know  well  that  you  would  call  the  man  "  out  of  his 
mind  : "  you  would  say  he  was  nothing  better  than  a  mad- 
man. But  stop  !  Take  care  what  you  are  saying !  You 
are  the  real  madman,  if  you  mean  to  claim  heaven  at  last, 
when  you  have  no  title,  no  warrant,  no  ground  of  hope  to 
show.    Once  more,  I  say.  May  God  open  your  eyes ! 

But  many,  I  believe,  would  reply  to  my  question  that 
"  they  have  hope."  They  would  say,  "  I  am  not  as  bad  as 
some,  at  any  rate.  I  am  no  heathen.  I  am  no  infidel.  I 
have  some  hope  about  my  soul." 


*  "  When  we  deal  with,  the  carnal,  secure,  careless  sinners  (aucl  they 
are  a  vast  multitude),  and  ask  them  a  reason  of  that  hope  of  heaven  they 
pretend  to,  is  not  this  their  common  answer  :  "  I  live  inoffensively  ;  I  keep 
God's  law  as  well  as  I  can  ;  whenever  L  fail,  I  repent,  and  beg  God  s 
mercy  for  Christ's  sake  :  my  heart  is  sincere,  though  my  knowledge  and 
attainments  be  short  of  others."  If  we  go  on  further  to  inquire  what 
acquaintance  they  have  with  Jesus  Christ  ?  what  application  their 
souls  have  made  to  Him  ?  what  workings  of  faith  on  Him  ?  what  use 
they  have  made  of  His  righteousness  for  justification  and  of  His  Spirit 
for  sanctitication  ?  what  they  know  of  living  by  faith  on  Jesus  Christ  ? 
we  are  barbarians  to  them.  And  in  this  sad  state  thousands  in  England 
live,  and  die,  and  perish  eternally.  Yet  so  thick  is  the  darkness  of  the 
age,  that  many  of  them  live  here  and  go  hence  with  the  reputation  of 
good  Christians ;  and  some  of  them  may  have  tlieir  funeral  sermon  and 
praise  preached  by  an  ignorant  flattering  minister  ;  though  it  may  be  the 
poor  creatures  did  never,  in  the  whole  course  of  their  lives,  nor  at  their 
deaths,  emploj'  Jesus  Christ  so  much  for  any  entry  to  heaven,  purchased 
by  His  blood  and  accessible  by  faith  in  Him,  as  a  poor  Turk  doth  Ma- 
homet for  a  room  in  his  beastly  paradise  !  " — Tndll. 


112 


OLD  PATHS. 


If  this  be  your  case,  I  beseech  you  to  consider  caUxily  what 
your  hope  really  is.  I  entreat  yon  not  to  be  content  with 
saying,  like  a  parrot,  "  I  hope, — T  hope, — I  hope  ; "  but  to 
examine  seriously  into  the  nature  of  your  confidence,  and 
to  make  sure  that  it  is  well-founded. — Is  it  a  hope  you  can 
explain  ? — Is  it  scriptural  ? — Is  it  built  on  Christ  ? — Is  it 
felt  in  your  heart  ? — Is  it  sanctifying  to  your  life  ? — All  is 
not  gold  that  glitter^.  I  have  warned  you  already  that 
there  is  a  false  hope  as  well  as  a  true :  I  offer  the  warning 
again.  I  beseech  you  to  take  heed  that  you  be  not  de- 
ceived.   Beware  of  mistakes. 

There  are  ships  lying  quietly  in  Liverpool  and  London 
docks,  about  to  sail  for  every  part  of  the  globe.  They  all 
look  equally  trustworthy,  so  long  as  they  are  in  harbour ; 
they  have  all  equally  good  names,  and  are  equally  well- 
rigged  and  jjainted :  but  tliey  are  not  all  equally  well- 
found  and  equally  safe.  Once  let  them  put  to  sea,  and 
meet  with  rough  weather,  and  the  difference  between  the 
sound  and  unsound  ships  will  soon  appear — Many  a  ship 
which  looked  well  in  dock  has  proved  not  sea-worthy  when 
she  got  into  deep  Avater,  and  has  gone  down  at  last  with 
all  hands  on  board  !  Just  so  it  is  with  many  a  false  hope. 
It  has  failed  completely, when  most  wanted:  it  has  broken 
down  at  last,  and  ruined  its  possessor's  soul.  You  Avill 
soon  have  to  put  to  sea.    I  say  again,  beware  of  mistakes. 

I  leave  my  question  here.  I  earnestly  pray  that  God 
may  apply  it  to  the  hearts  of  all  who  read  this  paper.  1 
am  sure  it  is  much  needed.  I  believe  there  never  was  a 
time  when  there  was  so  much  counterfeit  religion  current, 
and  so  many  "  false  hopes  "  passing  off  for  true.  There 
never  was  a  time  when  tliere  was  so  much  high  profession, 
and  so  little  spiritual  practice,  so  much  loud  talk  about 
preachers,  and  parties,  and  Churches,  and  so  little  close 
walking  with  God,  and  real  work  of  the  Spirit.  There  is  no 
lack  of  blossoms  in  Christendom,  but  there  is  a  melancholy 
scarcity  of  ripe  fruit.  There  is  an  abundance  of  controversial 


OUE  HOPE. 


112 


theology,  but  a  dearth  of  practical  holiness.  There  are 
myriads  who  have  a  name  to  live,  but  lew  whose  hearts 
are  really  given  to  Jesus  Christ, — lew  whose  affections  aio 
really  set  on  things  above.  There  will  be  some  awful 
failures  yet  in  many  quarters :  there  will  be  still  more 
awful  disclosures  at  the  last  day.  There  are  many  hopes 
uow-a-days,  which  are  utterly  destitute  of  fodndation.  I 
say,  for  tbe  last  time,  Beware  of  mistakes, 

(2)  My  second  word  of  application  shall  be  a  requei^t. 
I  make  it  to  all  readers  of  this  paper  who  feel  they  have; 
no  hope  and  desire  to  have  it.  It  is  a  short  simple  re- 
qiiest.  I  entreat  them  to  seek  "  a  good  hojje  "  while  it  can 
be  found. 

A  good  hope  is  within  the  reach  of  any  man,  if  he  is 
only  willing  to  seek  it.  It  is  called  emi^hatically  in  Scrip- 
ture, a  "  good  hojDe  through  gTace."  It  is  freely  offered, 
even  as  it  was  freely  purchased :  it  may  be  freely  obtained, 
"  without  money  aud  without  price."  Our  past  lives  do 
not  make  it  impossible  to  obtain  it,  however  bad  they  may 
have  been ;  our  present  weaknesses  and  infirmities  do  not 
shut  us  out,  however  great  they  may  be.  The  same  grace 
which  provided  mankind  with  a  hope,  makes  a  free,  full, 
and  unlimited  invitation  : — "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  take 
the  water  of  life  freely;" — "Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given 
you ;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find."  (Rev.  xxii.  17 ;  Matt.  vii.  7.) 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  able  and  willing  to  give  "  a 
good  hope"  to  all  who  really  want  it.  He  is  sealed  and 
appointed  by  God  the  Father  to  give  the  bread  of  life  to 
all  that  hunger,  and  the  water  of  life  to  all  that  thirst.  "  It 
pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him  should  all  fulness  dwell." 
(Coloss.  i.  19.)  In  Him  there  is  pardon  and  peace  with 
God,  bought  by  the  precious  blood  which  He  shed  upon 
the  cross.  In  Him  there  is  joy  and  peace  for  any  be- 
liever, and  a  solid,  well-grounded  expectation  of  good 
things  to  come.  In  Him  there  is  rest  for  the  weary, 
refuge  for  the  fearful,  a  cleansing  fountain  for  the  unclean, 


114 


OLD  PATHS. 


medicine  for  the  sick,  healing  for  the  broken-hearted,  and 
hope  for  the  lost.  Whosoever  feels  labouring  and  heavy- 
laden  vs^ith  sin,  whosoever  feels  anxious  and  distressed 
about  his  soul,  whosoever  feels  afraid  of  death  and  unfit 
to  die, — whosoever  he  is,  let  1dm  go  to  Christ  and  trust 
in  Him.  This  is  the  thing  to  be  done:  this  is  the  way 
to  follow.  Whosoever  wants  "hope,"  let  him  go  to 
Christ. 

If  any  reader  of  this  paper  really  wants  to  enjoy  a  good 
liope,  let  him  seek  it  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  There 
is  every  encouragement  to  do  so.  The  Thessalonians  in 
old  time  were,  like  the  Ephesiaos,  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins,  having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the  world  ;  but 
when  St.  Paul  preached  Jesus  to  them,  they  arose  from 
their  miserable  state  and  became  new  men.  God  gave 
them  a  "good  hope  through  grace."  The  door  through 
which  Manasseh  and  Magdalene  entered,  is  still  open : 
the  fountain  in  which  Zacchasus  and  Matthew  were  washed, 
is  still  unsealed.  Seek  hope  from  Christ,  and  you  shall 
find  it. 

Seek  it  honestly,  andiuith  no  secret  reserve.  The  ruin 
of  many  is  that  they  are  not  fair  and  straightforward. 
They  say  that  they  "  try  as  much  as  they  can,"  and  that 
they  really  "  want  to  be  saved,"  and  that  they  really  "  look 
to  Christ;"  and  yet  in  the  chamber  of  their  own  heart 
there  lies  some  darling  sin,  to  which  they  privately  cling, 
and  are  resolved  not  to  give  it  up.  Tliey  are  like  Augustine, 
who  said,  "  Lord  convert  me  :  but  not  now."  Seek  honestly, 
if  you  wish  to  find  a  good  hope. 

Seek  it  in  humble  prayer.  Pour  out  your  heart  before 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  tell  Him  all  the  wants  of  your  soul. 
Do  as  you  would  have  done  had  you  lived  in  Galilee 
eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  and  had  a  leprosy :  go  direct 
to  Christ,  and  lay  before  Him  your  cares.  Tell  Him  that 
you  are  a  poor,  sinful  creature,  but  that  you  have  heard 
He  is  a  gracious  Saviour,  and  that  you  come  to  Him  for 


OUR  HOPE. 


115 


"hope"  for  your  soul.  Tell  Him  that  you  have  nothing  to 
say  for  yourself, — no  excuse  to  make,  nothing  of  your  own 
to  plead, — but  that  you  have  heard  that  He  ''receives 
sinuers,"  and  as  such  you  come  to  Him.    (Luke  xv.  2.) 

Seek  it  at  once  without  delay.  Halt  no  more  between 
two  opinions :  do  not  linger  another  day.  Cast  away  the 
remnants  of  pride  which  are  still  keeping  you  back :  draw 
nigh  to  Jesus  as  a  heavy-laden  sinner,  and  "  lay  hold  upon 
the  hope  set  before  you."  (Heb.  vi.  18.)  This  is  the  point 
to  which  all  must  come  at  last  if  they  mean  to  be  saved. 
Sooner  or  later  they  must  knock  at  the  door  of  grace  and 
ask  to  be  admitted.  Why  not  do  it  at  once  ? — Why  stand 
still  looking  at  the  bread  of  life  ?  Why  not  come  forward 
and  eat  it? — Why  remain  outside  the  city  of  refuge?  Why 
not  enter  in  and  be  safe  ? — Why  not  seek  hope  at  once, 
and  never  rest  till  you  find  it  ?  Never  did  soul  seek 
houestly  in  the  way  I  have  marked  out,  and  fail  to  find !  * 


*  The  words  of  Traill  on  tliis  point  of  coming  to  Christ  by  faith,  de- 
serve many  thoughts.  They  throw  light  on  a  subject  which  is  constantly 
misunderstood. — He  says,  "When  we  come  to  deal  with  a  poor,  awakened 
sinner,,  who  seeth  his  lost  estate,  and  that  he  is  condemned  by  the  law 
of  God,  we  find  the  same  principles  (jjride  and  ignorance)  working  in 
him.  We  see  him  sick  and  wounded  :  we  tell  him  wLere  his  help  lies, 
in  Jesus  Christ ;  and  what  his  proper  work  is,  to  apply  to  Him  by  faith. 
\Miat  is  his  answer :  'Alas,'  says  the  man,  'I  have  been,  and  I  am  so 
vile  a  sinner,  ray  heart  is  so  bad,  and  so  full  of  plagues  and  corruptions, 
that  1  cannot  think  of  believing  on  Christ.  But  if  I  had  but  repentance, 
and  some  holiness  in  heart  ajid  life,  and  such  and  such  gracious  qualifi- 
cations, I  would  then  believe."  This  his  answer  is  as  full  of  nonsense, 
ignorance  and  pride,  as  words  can  contain  or  express.  It  implies  :  (I) 
'  If  I  w  ere  pretty  well  recovered,  I  would  employ  the  Physician,  Christ ; 
(2)  There  is  some  hope  to  work  out  these  good  things  by  myself,  with- 
out Christ ;  (3)  When  I  come  to  Christ  with  a  price  in  my  hand  I  shall 
be  welcome ;  (4)  I  can  come  to  Christ  when  I  will. '  So  ignorant  are 
people  naturally  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ;  and  no  words,  or  warnings,  or 
plainest  instructions  can  beat  into  men's  heads  and  hearts  that  the  first 
coming  to  Christ  V)y  faith,  and  believing  on  Him,  is  not  a  believing  we 
shall  be  saved  by  Him,  but  a  believing  on  Him,  that  we  may  be  saved 
by  Him." — Traill's  Wur/cs. 


116 


OLD  PATHS. 


(3)  My  last  word  of  application  •  sliall  be  counsel.  I 
offer  it  to  all  who  have  really  obtained  "good  hope  through 
grace."  1  offer  it  to  all  who  are  really  leaning  on  Christ, 
walking  in  the  narrow  way,  and  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 
1  ask  them  to  accept  advice  from  one  who  hopes  that  he 
is  "their  brother  and  companion  in  the  kingdom  and 
patience  of  Jesus  Christ."  (Rev.  i.  9.)  I  believe  the 
advice  to  be  sound  and  good. 

(a)  If  you  have  a  good  hope  he  zealous  and  ivatclifid 
over  it.  Beware  that  Satan  does  not  steal  it  away  for  a 
season,  as  he  did  from  David  and  Peter.  Beware  that  you 
do  not  lose  sight  of  it  by  giving  way  to  inconsistencies, 
and  by  conformity  to  the  world.  Examine  it  often,  and 
make  sure  that  it  is  not  becoming  dim  :  keep  it  bright  by 
daily  carefulness  over  your  temper,  thoughts,  and  words; 
keep  it  healthy  by  hearty,  fervent,  and  continual  prayer. 
The  hope  of  the  Christian  is  a  very  delicate  plant.  It  is 
an  exotic  from  above :  it  is  not  a  plant  of  natural  growth. 
It  is  easily  chilled  and  nipped  by  the  cold  frosts  of  this 
world.  Unless  watered  and  tended  carefully,  it  will  soon 
dwindle  away  to  a  mere  nothing,  and  scarcely  be  felt  or 
seen.  None  find  out  this  so  painfully  as  dying  believers 
who  have  not  walked  very  closely  with  God.  They  find 
that  they  have  sown  thorns  in  their  dying  pillows,  and 
brought  clouds  between  themselves  and  the  sun. 

(6)  For  another  thing,  if  you  have  a  good  hope,  hecp  it 
ahcays  ready.  Have  it  at  your  right  hand,  prepared  for 
immediate  use  :  look  at  it  often,  and  take  care  that  it  is 
in  good  order.  Trials  often  break  in  upon  us  suddenly, 
like  an  armed  man.  Sicknesses  and  injuries  to  our 
mortal  frame  sometimes  lay  us  low  on  our  beds  Avithout 
any  warning.  Hapj^y  is  he  who  keeps  his  lamp  well 
trimmed,  and  lives  in  the  daily  sense  of  communion  with 
Christ ! 

Did  you  ever  see  a  fire-engine  in  some  old  country  house  ? 
Did  you  ever  remark  how  often  it  lies  for  months  in  a 


OUR  HOPE. 


117 


dark  slied,  untouched,  unexamined,  and  uncleancd  ?  The 
valves  are  out  of  order ;  the  leather  hose  is  full  of  holes ; 
the  pumi)s  are  rusty  and  stiff.  A  house  might  be  almost 
burnt  to  the  ground  before  it  could  lift  a  pailful  of  water.' 
In  its  present  state  it  is  a  well-nigh  useless  machine. 

Did  you  ever  see  a  ship  in  ordinary,  in  Portsmouth 
harbour  ?  The  hull  may  perhaps  be  good  and  sound ;  the 
keel  and  topsides,  and  timbers  and  beams,  and  decks  may 
be  all  that  you  could  desire.  But  she  is  not  rigged,  or 
stored,  or  armed,  or  fit  for  service.  It  would  take  weeks 
and  months  to  make  her  ready  for  sea.  In  her  present 
state  she  could  do  little  for  her  country's  defence. 

The  hope  of  many  a  believer  is  like  that  fire-engine, 
and  that  ship.  It  exists, — it  lives,— it  is  real, — it  is  true, 
it  is  sound, — it  is  good :  it  came  down  from  heaven  :  it 
was  implanted  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  But,  alas,  it  is  not 
ready  for  use  !  Its  possessor  will  find  that  out,  by  his  own 
want  of  joy  and  sensible  comfort,  when  he  comes  to  his 
death-bed.  Beware  that  your  hope  be  not  a  hope  of  this 
kind.  If  you  have  a  hope  keep  it  ready  for  use,  and 
within  reach  of  your  hand. 

(c)  For  another  thing,  if  you  have  a  good  hope,  seek 
and  pray  that  it  may  grow  more  and  more  strong  every 
year.  Do  not  be  content  with  a  "day  of  small  things;" 
covet  the  best  gifts :  desire  to  enjoy  full  assurance.  Strive 
to  attain  to  Paul's  standard,  and  to  be  able  to  say, "  I  know 
whom  I  have  believed," — "  I  am  persuaded  that  neither 
death  nor  life  shall  separate  me  from  the  love  of  God 
which  is  in  Jesus  Christ."    (2  Tim.  i,  12 ;  Rom.  viii.  38.) 

Believe  me,  this  part  of  my  counsel  is  one  that  deserves 
close  attention.  Believe  me,  the  things  before  us  all  will 
try  our  hope  of  what  sort  it  is.  Sickness  and  death  are 
solemn  things.  They  strip  off  all  the  tinsel  and  paint 
from  a  man's  religion  ;  they  discover  the  weak  places  in 
our  Christianity ;  they  strain  our  hopes  to  the  very  utter- 
most, and  often  make  us  well  nigh  despair.    Old  Christian, 


lis 


OLD  PATHS. 


in  Pilgrim's  Progress,  had  a  sore  trial  at  bis  latter  end  in 
crossing  the  cold  river  before  he  entered  the  celestial  city. 
Faithful  and  true  as  he  was,  he  still  cried  out,  "  All  thy 
billows  go  over  me,"  and  had  a  hard  struggle  to  keep  his 
footing.  May  we  all  lay  this  to  heart  ?  May  we  seek  to 
know  and  feel  that  we  are  one  with  Christ  and  Christ  in 
us !  He  that  has  hope  does  well ;  but  he  that  has  assur- 
ance does  better.  Blessed  indeed  are  they  who  "  abound 
in  hope  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  (Rom 
XV.  13.) 

(d)  Finally,  if  you  have  a  good  hope,  he  thankful, 
for  it,  and  give  God  daily  praise.  Who  has  made  you  to 
differ  ?  Why  have  you  been  taught  to  feel  your  sins,  and 
nothingness,  while  others  are  ignorant  and  self-righteous  ? 
Why  have  you  been  taught  to  look  to  Jesus,  Avhile  others 
are  lookins:  to  their  own  goodness,  or  restino-  on  some 
mere  form  of  religion  ?  Why  are  you  longing  and  striving 
to  be  holy,  Avhile  others  are  caring  for  nothing  but  this 
world  ?  Why  are  these  things  so  ?  There  is  but  one 
answer, — Grace,  grace,  free  grace,  has  done  it  all.  For  that 
grace  praise  God.    For  that  grace  be  thankful. 

Go  on,  then,  to  your  journey's  end,  "rejoicing  in  hope  of 
the  glory  of  God."  (Rom.  v.  2.)  Go  on,  rejoicing  in  the 
thought  that  though  you  are  a  poor  sinner  Jesus  is  a  most 
gracious  Saviour,  and  that  though  you  have  trials  here  for 
a  little  season,  heaven  shall  soon  make  amends  for  all. 

Go  on,  wearing  hope  as  a  helmet  in  all  the  battles  of 
life, — a  hope  of  pardon,  a  hope  of  perseverance,  a  hope  of 
acquittal  in  the  judgment  day,  a  hope  of  final  glory.  Put 
on  the  breast-plate  of  righteousness  :  take  the  shield  of 
faith  ;  have  your  loins  girt  about  with  truth  :  wield  valiantly 
the  sword  of  the  Spirit.  But  never  forget — as  ever  you 
would  be  a  happy  Christian — never  forget  to  put  on  the 
"  helmet  of  hope.  "    (1  Thess.  v.  8.) 

Go  on,  in  spite  of  an  ill-natured  world,  and  be  not 
moved  by  its  laughter  or  its  persecution,  its  slanders  or  its 


OUK  HOPE. 


119 


sneers.  Comfort  your  heart  witli  the  thought  that  the 
time  is  short,  the  good  things  yet  to  come,  the  night  far 
spent,  the  "  morning  "without  clouds"  at  hand;  (2  Sam. 
xxiii.  4.)  When  the  wicked  man  dies  his  expectation 
perishes ;  but  your  expectation  shall  not  deceive  you, — 
your  reward  is  sure. 

Go  on,  and  be  not  cast  down  because  you  are  troubled 
by  doubts  and  fears.  You  are  yet  in  the  body:  this  world 
is  not  your  rest.  The  devil  hates  you  because  you  have 
escaped  from  him,  and  he  will  do  all  he  can  to  rob  you  of 
peace.  The  very  fact  that  you  have  fears  is  an  evidence 
that  you  feel  you  have  something  to  lose.  The  true  Chris- 
tian may  ever  be  discerned  by  his  warfare  quite  as  much 
as  by  his  peace,  and  by  his  fears  quite  as  much  as  by  his 
hopes.  The  ships  at  anchor  at  Spithead  may  swing  to  and 
fro  with  the  tide,  and  pitch  heavily  in  a  south-eastern 
gale;  but  so  long  as  their  anchors  hold  the  ground  they 
ride  safely,  and  have  no  cause  to  fear.  The  hope  of  the 
true  Ciiristian  is  the  "anchor  of  his  soul,  sure  and  steadfast." 
(Heb.  vi.  19.)  His  heart  may  be  tossed  to  and  fro  some- 
times, but  he  is  safe  in  Christ.  The  waves  may  swell,  and 
lift  him  up  and  down,  but  he  will  not  be  wrecked. 

Go  on,  and  "  hope  to  the  end  for  the  grace  that  is  to  be 
brought  to  you  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  '  (1  Pet. 
i.  13.)  Yet  a  little  time,  and  faith  shall  be  changed  to  sight, 
and  hope  to  certainty :  you  shall  see  even  as  you  have  been 
seen,  and  know  even  as  you  have  been  known.  A  few  more 
tossings  to  and  fro  on  the  waves  of  this  troublesome  world, 
— a  few  more  battles  and  conflicts  with  our  spiritual  enemy, 
— a  few  more  years  of  tears  and  partings,  of  working  and 
suffering,  of  crosses  and  cares,  of  disappointments  and 
vexations, — and  then,  then  we  shall  be  at  home.  The 
harbour  lights  are  already  in  view :  the  haven  of  rest  is 
not  far  off.  There  we  shall  find  all  that  we  have  hoped 
for,  and  find  that  it  was  a  million  times  better  than  our 
hopes.    There  we  shall  find  all  the  saints, — and  no  sin,  no 


120 


OLD  PATHS. 


cares  of  this  world,  no  money,  no  f^i^kness,  no  death,  no 
devil.  There,  above  all,  we  shall  find  Jesus,  and  be  ever 
with  the  Lord  !  (1  Thess.  iv.  17.)  Let  us  hope  on.  It  is 
worth  while  to  carry  the  cross  and  follow  Christ.  Let  the 
world  laugh  and  mock,  if  it  will ;  it  is  worth  while  to  have 
"  a  good  hope  through  gi-ace,"  and  be  a  thorough  decided 
Christian.    I  say  again, — Let  us  hope  on. 


V. 


"ALIVE  OR  DEAD?" 

"  You  liatli  he  quiclcened  who  icere  dead." — EriiES.  ii.  1. 

The  question  which  forms  the  title  of  this  paper  deserves 
a  thousand  thoughts.  I  invite  every  reader  of  this  volume 
to  look  at  it  carefully,  and  pontler  it  well.  Search  your 
own  heart,  and  do  not  lay  down  this  book  without  solemn 
self-inquiry. — Are  you  among  the  living,  or  among  the 
dead  ? 

Listen  to  me  while  I  try  to  help  you  to  an  answer.  Give 
me  your  attention,  wliile  I  unfold  this  matter,  and  show 
you  what  God  has  said  about  it  in  the  Scriptures.  If  I 
say  hard  things,  it  is  not  because  I  do  not  love  you.  I 
write  as  I  do,  because  I  desire  your  salvation.  He  is  your 
best  friend  who  tells  you  the  most  truth. 

I.  First  then,  let  me  tell  you  %vliat  wa  all  are  hy 
nature. —  We  are  spiritually  DEAD  ! 

"  Dead  "  is  a  strong  word,  but  it  is  not  my  own  coining 
and  invention.  I  did  not  choose  it.  The  Holy  Ghost  taught 
St.  Paul  to  write  it  down  about  the  Ephesians :  "  You  hath 
he  quickened  who  were  dead."  (Ej)h.  ii.  1.)  The  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  made  use  of  it  in  the  parable  of  the  prodigal 
son :  "  This  my  son  was  dead  and  is  alive  again." 
(Luke  XV.  24,  32.)  You  will  read  it  also  in  the  first  Epistle 
to  Timothy:  "She  that  liveth  in  pleasure  is  cZeacZ  while 


122 


OLD  PATHS. 


she  liveth."  (1  Tim.  v.  6.)  Shall  a  mortal  man  be  wise 
above  that  which  is  written  ?  Must  I  not  take  heed  to 
speak  that  wliich  I  find  in  the  Bible,  and  neither  less  nor 
more  ? 

"  Dead "  is  an  awful  idea,  and  one  that  man  is  most 
unwilling  to  receive.  He  does  not  like  to  allow  the  whole 
extent  of  his  soul's  disease :  he  shuts  his  eyes  to  the  real 
amount  of  his  danger.  Many  an  one  will  allow  us  to  say. 
that  naturally  most  people  "are  not  quite  what  they  ought 
to  be  :  they  are  thoughtless, — they  are  unsteady, — they 
are  gay, — they  are  wild, — they  are  not  serious  enough." 
But  dead  ?  Oh,  no  !  We  must  not  mention  it.  It  is  going 
too  far  to  say  that.  The  idea  is  a  stone  of  stumbling,  and 
a  rock  of  offence."* 

But  what  we  like  in  religion  is  of  very  little  consequence. 
The  only  question  is,  What  is  Avritten  ?  What  saith  the 
Lord?  God's  thoughts  are  not  man's  thoughts,  and  God's 
words  are  not  man's  words.  God  says  of  every  living 
person  who  is  not  a  real,  thorough,  genuine,  decided  Chris- 
tian,— be  he  high  or  low,  rich  or  poor,  old  or  young, — He 
is  spiritually  dead. 

In  this,  as  in  every  thing  else,  God's  words  are  right. 
Nothing  could  be  said  more  correct,  nothing  more  ac- 
curate,  nothing  more  faithful,  nothing  more  true.  Stay  a 
little,  and  let  me  reason  this  out  with  you.  Come  and  see. 

What  should  you  have  said,  if  you  had  seen  Joseph 
weeping  over  his  father  Jacob  ? — "  He  fell  upon  his  face, 
and  wept  upon  him,  and  kissed  him."  (Gen.  1.  1.)  But 
there  was  no  reply  to  his  affection.  All  about  that  aged 
countenance  was  unmoved,  silent,  and  still.  Doubtless  you 
would  have  guessed  the  reason. — Jacob  was  dead. 


*  "This  is  the  reason  we  are  no  better,  because  our  disease  is  not 
perfectly  known  :  this  is  the  reason  we  are  no  better,  because  we  know 
not  how  bad  \vc  are."  —  Archbishop  Ushei'^s  Sermons,  preached  at 
Oxford,  1650. 


ALIVE  OR  DEAD. 


123 


What  would  you  have  said,  if  you  had  heard  the  Levito 
speaking  to  his  wife,  when  he  found  her  lying  before  the 
door  in  Gibeah  ?  "  Up,"  he  said,  "  and  let  us  be  going.  But 
none  answered."  (Judges  xix.  28.)  His  words  were  thrown 
away.  There  she  lay,  motionless,  stiff,  and  cold.  You 
know  the  cause. — She  was  dead. 

What  should  you  have  thought,  if  you  had  seen  the 
Amalekite  stripping  Saul  of  his  royal  ornaments  in  Mount 
Gilboa  ?  He  "  took  from  him  the  crown  that  was  upon  his 
head,  and  the  bracelet  that  was  on  his  arm."  (2  Sam.  i.  10.) 
There  was  no  resistance.  Not  a  muscle  moved  in  that 
proud  face  :  not  a  finger  was  raised  to  prevent  him.  And 
why  ? — Saul  was  dead. 

What  should  you  have  thought,  if  you  had  met  the 
widow's  son  in  the  gate  of  Nain,  lying  on  a  bier,  wrapped 
about  with  grave-clothes,  followed  by  his  weeping  mother, 
carried  slowly  towards  the  tomb  ?  (Luke  vii.  12.)  Doubt- 
less it  would  have  been  all  clear  to  you.  It  would  have 
needed  no  explanation. — The  young  man  was  dead. 

Now  I  say  this  is  just  the  condition  of  every  man  by 
nature  in  the  matter  of  his  soul.  I  say  this  is  just  the 
state  of  the  vast  majority  of  people  around  us  in  spiritual 
things.  God  calls  to  them  continually, — by  mercies,  by 
afflictions,  by  ministers,  by  His  word : — but  they  do  not 
hear  His  voice.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  mourns  over 
them,  pleads  with  them,  sends  them  gracious  invitations, 
knocks  at  the  door  of  their  hearts : — but  they  do  not 
regard  it.  The  crown  and  glory  of  their  being,  that 
precious  jewel,  their  immortnl  soul,  is  being  seized, 
plundered,  and  taken  away : — and  they  are  utterly  un- 
concerned. The  devil  is  carrying  them  away,  day  after 
day,  along  the  broad  road  that  leads  to  destruction  : — 
and  they  allow  him  to  make  them  his  captives  without  a 
struggle.  And  this  is  going  on  everywhere, — all  around 
U.S, — among  all  classes, — throughout  the  length  and  breadth 
of  the  laud.    You  know  it  in  your  own  conscience  while 


OLD  PATHS. 


3'ou  read  this  paper:  you  must  be  aware  of  it.  You 
cannot  deny  it.  And  what  then,  I  ask,  can  be  said  more 
perfectly  true  tlian  that  which  God  says : — we  are  all  by 
nature  spiritually  cZmcZ 

Yes !  when  a  man's  heart  is  cold  and  unconcerned  about 
leligion, — when  his  hands  are  never  employed  in  doing 
God's  work, — when  his  feet  are  not  familiar  with  God's 
ways, — when  his  tongue  is  seldom  or  never  used  in  prayer 
and  praise, — when  his  ears  are  deaf  to  the  voice  of  Christ 
in  the  Gospel, — when  his  eyes  are  blind  to  the  beauty  of 
tlie  kingdom  of  heaven, — when  his  mind  is  full  of  the 
world,  and  has  no  room  for  spiritual  things, — when  these 
marks  are  to  be  found  in  a  man,  the  word  of  the  Bible  is  the 
right  word  to  use  about  him, — and  that  word  is,  "Dead." 

We  may  not  like  this  perhaps.  We  may  shut  our  eyes 
both  to  facts  in  the  woi'ld,  and  texts  in  the  Word.  But 
God's  truth  must  be  spoken,  and  to  keep  it  back  does 
positive  harm.  Truth  must  be  spoken,  however  condemn- 
ing it  may  be.  So  long  as  a  man  does  not  serve  God  with 
body,  soul,  and  spirit,  he  is  not  really  alive.  So  long  as  he 
puts  the  first  things  last  and  the  last  first,  buries  his  talent 
like  an  unprofitable  servant,  and  brings  the  Lord  no 
revenue  of  honour,  so  long  in  God's  sight  he  is  dead.  He 
is  not  filling  the  place  in  creation  for  which  he  was  in- 
tended ;  he  is  not  using  his  powers  and  faculties  as  God 
meant  them  to  be  used.  The  poet's  words  are  strictly 
true, — 

"  He  only  lives  wlio  lives  to  God, 
And  all  are  dead  beside. " 

This  is  the  true  explanation  of  sin  not  felt, —  and 
sermons  not  believed, — and  good  advice  not  followed, — 
and  the  Gospel  not  embraced, — and  the  world  not  forsaken, 
— and  the  cross  not  taken  np, — and  self-will  not  mortified, 
— and  evil  habits  not  laid  aside, — and  the  Bible  seldom 
read, — and  the  knee  never  bent  in  prayer.  Why  is  all 
this  on  every  side.    The  answer  is  simple :  Men  are  dead. 


ALIVE  OR  DEAD. 


12n 


This  is  tlie  true  accoiiut  of  that  host  of  excuses,  which 
so  many  make  "  with  one  consent."  Some  have  no  learning, 
and  some  have  no  time.  Some  are  ojipressed  with  busi- 
ness, and  the  care  of  money,  and  some  with  poverty.  Some 
have  difficulties  in  their  own  families,  and  some  in  their 
own  health.  Some  have  peculiar  obstacles  in  their  calling, 
wliich  others,  we  are  told,  cannot  understand  ;  and  others 
have  peculiar  drawbacks  at  home,  and  they  wait  to  have 
them  removed.  But  God  has  a  shorter  word  in  the  Bible, 
which  describes  all  these  people  at  once.  He  says.  They 
are  dead.  If  spiritual  life  began  in  these  people's  hearts, 
their  excuses  would  soon  vanish  away. 

This  is  the  true  explanation  of  many  things  which 
"wring  a  faithful  minister's  heart.  Many  around  him  never 
attend  a  place  of  Avorship  at  all.  Many  attend  so  irregu- 
larly, that  it  is  clear  they  think  it  of  no  importance. 
Many  attend  once  on  a  Sunday  who  might  just  as  easily 
attend  twice.  Many  never  come  to  the  Lord's  table,- — and 
never  appear  at  a  week-day  means  of  grace  of  any  kind. 
And  why  is  all  this  ?  Often,  far  too  often,  there  can  be 
only  one  reply  about  these  people :  They  are  dead. 

See  now  how  all  professing  Christians  should  examine 
themselves  and  try  their  own  state.  It  is  not  in  church- 
yards alone  where  the  dead  are  to  be  found ;  there  are 
only  too  many  inside  our  churches,  and  close  to  our 
pulpits, — too  many  on  the  benches,  and  too  many  in  the 
pews.  The  land  is  like  the  valley  in  Ezekiel's  vision, — 
"  full  of  bones,  very  many,  and  very  dry."  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  2.) 
There  are  dead  souls  in  all  our  parishes,  and  dead  souls  in 
all  our  streets.  There  is  hardly  a  family  in  which  all  live 
to  God  ;  there  is  hardly  a  house  in  which  there  is  not 
some  one  dead.  Oh,  let  us  all  search  and  look  at  home ! 
Let  us  i)rove  our  own  selves.    Are  we  alive  or  dead  ? 

See,  too,  how  sad  is  the  condition  of  all  who  have  gone 
tlirough  no  spiritual  change,  whose  hearts  are  still  the 
same  as  in  the  day  they  were  born.    There  is  a  mountain 


126 


OLD  PATHS. 


of  division  between  them  and  heaven.  They  have  yet  to 
"pass  from  death  to  life."  (1  John  iii.  14.)  Oh,  that 
they  did  but  see  and  know  their  danger!  Alas,  it  is  one 
fearful  mark  of  spiritual  death,  that,  like  natural  death,  it 
is  not  felt !  We  lay  our  beloved  ones  tenderly  and  gently 
in  their  naiTow  beds,  but  they  feel  nothing  of  what  we 
do.  "  The  dead,"  says  the  wise  man,  "  know  not  anything." 
(Eccl.  ix.  5.)    And  this  is  just  the  case  with  dead  souls. 

See,  too,  what  reason  ministers  have  to  be  anxious  about 
their  coai];rerations.  We  feel  that  time  is  short,  and  life 
uncertain.  We  know  that  death  spiritual  is  the  high 
road  that  leads  to  death  eternal.  We  fear  lest  any  of  our 
hearers  should  die  in  their  sins,  unprepared,  unrenewed, 
impenitent,  unchanged.  Oh,  marvel  not  if  we  often  speak 
strongly  and  plead  with  you  warmly !  We  dare  not  give 
you  flattering  titles,  amuse  you  with  trifles,  say  smooth 
things,  and  cry  "Peace,  peace,"  when  life  and  death  are  at 
stake,  and  nothing  less.  The  plague  is  among  you.  We 
feel  that  we  stand  between  ±he  living  and  the  dead.  We 
must  and  will  "use  great  plainness  of  speech."  "  Ii  the 
trumpet  give  an  uncertain  sound,  who  shall  prepai'S  him- 
self for  the  battle  ?  "    (2  Cor.  iii.  12 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  8.) 

II.  Let  me  tell  you,  in  the  second  place,  what  every 
man  needs  ivho  would  be  saved. — He  must  be  quickened 
and  made  spiritually  alive. 

Life  is  the  mightiest  of  all  possessions.  From  death  to 
life  is  the  mightiest  of  all  changes.  And  no  change  short 
of  this  will  ever  avail  to  fit  man's  soul  for  heaven. 

Yes  !  it  is  not  a  little  mending  and  alteration, — a  little 
cleansing  and  purifying,— a  little  painting  and  patching, — 
a  little  whitewashing  and  varnishing, — a  little  turning  over 
a  new  leaf  and  putting  on  a  new  out-side  that  is  wanted. 
It  is  the  bringing  in  of  something  altogether  new, — the 
planting  within  us  of  a  new  nature,^ — a  new  being — a  new 
princijDle, — a  new  mind  :  this  alone,  and  nothing  less  than 


ALIVE  OR  DEAD. 


127 


this,  will  ever  meet  the  necessities  of  man's  soul.  "We 
need  not  merely  a  new  skin,  but  a  new  heart.* 

To  hew  a  block  of  marble  from  the  quarry,  and  carve  it 
into  a  noble  statue, — to  break  up  a  waste  wilderness,  and 
turn  it  into  a  garden  of  flowers,^ — to  melt  a  lump  of  iron- 
stone, and  forge  it  into  watch-springs, — all  these  are 
mighty  changes.  Yet  they  all  come  short  of  the  change 
which  every  child  of  Adam  requires,  for  they  are  merely 
the  same  thing  in  a  new  form,  and  the  same  substance  in 
a  new  shape.  But  man  requires  the  grafting  in  of  that 
which  he  had  not  before.  He  needs  a  change  as  great 
as  a  resurrection  from  the  dead :  he  must  become  a  new 
creatiire.  "  Old  things  must  pass  away,  and  all  things 
must  become  new."  He  must  be  "  born  again,  born  from 
above,  born  of  God."  The  natural  birth  is  not  a  whit  more 
necessary  to  the  life  of  the  body,  tlian  is  the  Sjiiritual 
birth  to  the  life  of  the  soul.    (2  Cor.  v.  17.    John  iii.  3.) 

I  know  well  this  is  a  hard  saying.  I  know  the 
children  of  this  world  dislike  to  hear  they  must  be  born 
again.  It  pricks  their  consciences :  it  makes  them  feel 
they  are  further  off  from  heaven  than  they  are  willing  to 
allow.  It  seems  like  a  narrow  door  which  they  have  not 
yet  stooped  to  enter,  and  they  would  fain  make  the  door 
wider,  or  clirnb  in  some  other  way.  But  I  dare  not  give 
place  by  subjection  in  this  matter.  I  will  not  foster  a 
delusion,  and  tell  people  they  only  need  repent  a  little, 
and  stir  up  a  gift  they  have  within  them,  in  order  to 
become  real  Christians.  I  dare  not  use  any  other  language 
than  that  of  the  Bible ;  and  I  say,  in  the  words  which  are 
written  for  our  learning,  "  We  all  need  to  be  born  again : 
,  we  are  all  naturally  dead,  and  must  be  made  alive." 

If  we  had  seen  Manasseh,  King  of  Judah,  at  one  time 

*  "  It  is  not  a  little  reforming  will  save  the  man,  no,  nor  all  the 
morality  in  the  world,  nor  all  the  common  graces  of  God's  Spirit,  nor 
the  outward  change  of  the  life  ;  they  will  not  do,  unless  we  are  quickened, 
and  have  a  new  life  wrought  in  us." — Uslbcris  Sermons. 


128 


OLD  TAXES. 


filliDg  Jerusalem  with  idols,  and  murdering  his  children 
in  honour  of  false  gods,  at  another  purifying  the  temple, 
putting  down  idolatry,  and  living  a  godly  life ; — if  we  had 
seen  ZacchtBiis  the  publican  of  Jericho,  at  one  time  cheating, 
plundering,  and  covetous,  at  another  following  Christ,  and 
giving  half  his  goods  to  the  poor; — if  we  had  seen  the 
servants  of  Nero's  household,  at  one  time  conforming  to 
their  master's  profligate  ways,  at  another  of  one  heart  and 
mind  with  the  Apostle  Paul, — if  we  had  seen  the  ancient 
father  Augustine,  at  one  time  living  in  fornication,  at 
another  walking  closely  with  God ; — if  we  had  seen  our 
own  Reformer  Latimer,  at  one  time  preaching  earnestly 
against  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  at  another  spending  and 
being  spent  even  to  death  in  Christ's  cause  ; — if  we  had  seen 
the  New  Zealanders,  or  Tinnevelly  Hindoos,  at  one  time 
blood-thirsty,  immoral,  or  sunk  in  abominable  supersti- 
tions, at  another  holy,  pure,  and  believing  Christians ; — if 
we  had  seen  these  wonderful  changes,  or  any  of  them,  I 
ask  any  sensible  Christian  what  we  should  have  said  ? 
Should  we  have  been  content  to  call  them  nothing  more 
than  amendments  and  alterations  ?  Should  we  have  been 
satisfied  with  saying  that  Augustine  had  "  reformed  his 
ways,"  and  that  Latimer  had  "  turned  over  a  new  leaf  "  ? 
Verily  if  we  said  no  more  than  this,  the  very  stones  would  cry 
out.  I  say  in  all  these  cases  there  was  nothing  less  than 
a  new  birth,  a  resurrection  of  human  nature,  a  quickening 
of  the  dead.  These  are  the  right  words  to  use.  All  other 
language  is  weak,  poor,  beggarl}^,  unscriptural,  and  short 
of  the  truth. 

Now  I  will  not  shrink  from  saying  plainly,  we  all  need 
the  same  kind  of  change,  if  we  are  to  be  saved.  The 
difference  between  us  and  any  of  those  I  have  just  named 
is  far  less  than  it  appears.  Take  off  the  outward  crust, 
and  you  will  find  the  same  nature  beneath,  in  us  and 
them, — an  evil  nature,  requiring  a  complete  change.  The 
face  of  the  earth  is  very  different  in  different  climates,  but 


ALIVE  OR  DEAD. 


129 


the  heart  of  the  earth,  I  believe,  is  everywhere  the  same. 
Go  where  you  wiW,  from  one  end  to  the  other,  you  vi^ould 
always  find  the  granite,  or  other  primitive  rocks,  beneath 
your  feet,  if  you  only  bored  down  deep  enough.  And  it 
is  just  the  same  with  men's  hearts.  Their  customs  and 
their  colours,  their  ways  and  their  laws,  may  all  be  utterly 
unlike;  but  the  inner  man  is  always  the  same. — Their 
liearts  are  all  alike  at  the  bottom, — all  stony,  all  hard,  all 
ungodly,  all  needing  to  be  thoroughly  renewed.  The 
Englishman  and  the  New  Zealander  stand  on  the  same 
level  in  this  matter.  Both  are  naturally  dead,  and  both 
need  to  be  made  alive.  Both  are  children  of  the  same 
father  Adam  who  fell  by  sin,  and  both  need  to  be  "  born 
again,"  and  made  children  of  God. 

Whatever  part  of  the  globe  we  live  in,  our  eyes  need 
to  be  opened  :  naturally  we  never  see  our  sinfulness,  guilt, 
and  danger.  Whatever  nation  we  belong  to  our  under- 
standings need  to  be  enlightened:*  naturally  we  know 
little  or  nothing  of  the  plan  of  salvation ; — like  the 
Babel-builders,  we  think  to  get  to  heaven  our  own  way. 
Wliatever  church  we  may  belong  to,  our  wills  need  to  be 
bent  m  the  right  direction : — naturally  we  should  never 
choose  the  things  which  are  for  our  peace;  we  should  never 
corae  to  Christ.  Whatever  be  our  rank  in  life,  our 
affections  need  to  be  turned  to  things  above : — naturally 
we  only  set  them  on  things  below,  earthly,  sensual,  short- 
lived, and  vain.  Pride  must  give  place  to  humility, — self- 
righteousness  to  self-abasement, — carelessness  to  serious- 
ness,— worldliness  to  holiness, — unbelief  to  faith.  Satan's 
dominion  must  be  put  down  within  us,  and  the  kingdom 


*  "Man's  understanding  is  so  darkened  that  he  can  see  nothing  of 
God  in  God,  nothing  of  holiness  in  holiness,  nothing  of  good  in  good, 
nothing  of  evil  in  evil,  nor  anything  of  sinfulness  in  sin.  Nay,  it  is  so 
darkened  that  he  fancies  himself  to  see  good  in  evil,  and  evil  in  good, 
happiness  in  sin,  and  misery  in  holiness." — Bishop  Beveridge,  on  the 
Articlat, 

K 


130 


OLD  PATHS. 


of  God  set  up.  Self  must  be  crucified,  and  Christ  must 
reign.  Till  these  things  come  to  pass,  we  are  dead  as 
stones.  When  these  things  begin  to  take  place,  and  not 
till  then,  we  are  alive. 

I  dare  say  this  sounds  like  foolishness  to  some.  Bat 
many  a  living  man  could  stand  up  this  day  and  testify 
that  it  is  true.  Many  an  one  could  tell  us  that  he  knows 
it  all  by  experience,  and  that  he  does  indeed  feel  himself 
a  new  man.  He  loves  the  things  that  once  he  hated,  and 
hates  the  things  that  once  he  loved.  He  lias  new  habits, 
new  companions,  new  ways,  new  tastes,  new  feelings,  new 
opinions,  new  sorrows,  new  joys,  new  anxieties,  new 
pleasures,  new  hopes,  and  new  fears.  *  In  short,  the  whole 
bias  and  current  of  his  being  is  changed.  Ask  his  nearest 
relations  and  friends,  and  they  would  bear  witness  to  it. 
Whether  they  liked  it  or  not,  they  would  be  obliged  to 
confess  he  was  no  lonnfer  the  same. 

o 

Many  an  one  could  tell  you  that  once  he  did  not  think 
himself  such  a  very  great  transgressor.  At  any  rate  he 
fancied  he  was  no  worse  than  others.  Now  he  would  say 
with  the  apostle  Paul,  he  feels  himself  the  "  chief  of 
sinners."  -f    (1  Tim.  i.  15.) 


*"  How  wonderfully  dotli  the  newborn  soul  differ  from  liis  former 
self.  He  livetli  a  new  life,  he  walketh  in  a  new  way,  he  steereth  his 
course  by  a  new  compass,  and  towards  a  new  coast.  His  principle  is 
new,  his  pattern  is  new,  his  practices  are  new,  his  projects  are  new,  all 
is  new.  He  ravels  out  all  he  had  wove  before,  and  employeth  himself 
wholly  about  another  work." — George  Swinnocke.  16G0. 

+  "T  cannot  pray,  but  I  sin :  I  cannot  hear  or  preach  a  sermon,  but 
I  sin  :  T  cannot  give  an  alms,  or  receive  the  sacrament,  but  I  sin  :  nay, 
I  cannot  so  much  as  confess  my  sins,  but  my  confessions  are  still 
aggravations  of  them.  My  repentance  needs  to  be  repented  of,  my  tears 
want  washing,  and  the  very  washing  of  my  tears  needs  still  to  be  washed 
over  again  with  the  blood  of  my  Eedeemer." — Bishop  Beveridge. 

"  Woe  is  me,  that  man  should  think  there  is  anything  in  me  !  He  is 
my  witness,  before  whom  I  am  as  crystal,  that  the  secret  house-devils, 
that  bear  me  too  often  company,  that  the  corruption  which  I  find 
within,  make  me  go  with  low  sails." — Batherford's  Letters.  1637. 


ALIVE  OR  DEAD. 


131 


Once  lie  did  not  consider  he  liad  a  bad  heart.  He  miefht 
have  his  faults,  and  be  led  away  by  bad  company  and 
temptations,  but  he  had  a  good  heart  at  the  bottom.  Now 
he  would  tell  you,  he  knows  no  heart  so  bad  as  his  own. 
He  finds  it  "deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately 
wicked."    (Jer.  xvii.  6.) 

Once  he  did  not  suppose  it  was  a  very  hard  matter  to 
get  to  heaven.  He  thought  he  had  only  to  repent,  and 
say  a  few  prayers,  and  do  what  he  could,  and  Christ  would 
make  up  what  was  wanting.  Now  he  believes  the  way 
is  narrow,  and  few  find  it.  He  is  convinced  he  could  never 
Ijave  made  his  own  peace  with  God.  He  is  persuaded 
that  nothing  but  the  blood  of  Christ  could  wash  away  his 
sins.  His  only  hope  is  to  be  "justified  by  faith  without 
the  deeds  of  the  law."    (Kom.  iii.  28.) 

Once  he  could  see  no  beauty  and  excellence  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  could  not  understand  some 
]uinisters  speaking  so  much  about  Him.  Now  he  would 
tell  you  He  is  the  j^earl  above  all  price,  the  chiefest  among 
ten  thousand, — his  Redeemer,  his  Advocate,  his  Priest, 
his  King,  his  Physician,  his  Shepherd,  his  Friend,  his 
All. 

Once  he  thought  lightly  about  sin.  He  could  not  see 
the  necessity  of  being  so  particular  about  it.  He  could 
not  think  a  man's  words,  and  thoughts,  and  actions, 
were  of  such  importance,  and  required  such  watchfulness. 
Now  he  would  tell  you,  sin  is  the  abominable  thing  which 
he  hates,  the  sorrow  and  burden  of  his  life.  He  longs  to 
be  more  holy.  He  can  enter  thoroughly  into  Whitefield's 
desire, — "  I  want  to  go  where  I  shall  neither  sin  myself,  nor 
see  others  sin  any  more." 

Once  he  found  no  pleasure  in  means  of  grace.  The 


"I  am  sick  of  all  I  do,  and  stand  astonished  that  the  Redeemer  still 
continues  to  make  use  of  and  bless  me.  Surely  I  am  more  foolish  than 
any  man:  no  one  receives  so  much  aud  does  so  little." — jyhitejield's 
Letters. 


132 


OLD  PATHS. 


Bible  was  neglected.  His  prayers,  if  he  had  any,  were  a' 
mere  form.  Sunday  was  a  tiresome  day.  Sermons  were  a 
weariness,  and  often  sent  him  to  sleep.  Now  all  is  altered. 
These  things  are  the  food,  the  comfort,  the  delight  of  his 
soul. 

Once  he  disliked  earnest-minded  Christians.  He  shunned 
them  as  melancholy,  low-spirited,  weak  people.  Now  they 
are  the  excellent  of  the  earth,  of  whom  he  cannot  see  too 
much.  He  is  never  so  happy  as  he  is  in  their  company. 
He  feels  if  all  men  and  women  were  saints,  it  would  be 
heaven  upon  earth. 

Once  he  cared  only  for  this  world,  its  pleasures,  its  busi- 
ness, its  occupations,  its  rewards.  Now  he  looks  upon  it 
as  an  empty,  unsatisfying  place, — an  inn, — a  lodging, — a 
training-school  for  the  life  to  come.  His  treasure  is  in 
heaven.    His  home  is  beyond  the  grave. 

I  ask  once  more,  what  is  all  this  but  new  life  ?  Such 
a  change  as  I  have  described  is  no  vision  and  fancy.  It  is 
a  real  actual  thing,  which  not  a  few  in  this  world  have 
known  or  felt.  It  is  not  a  picture  of  ray  own  imagining. 
It  is  a  true  thing  which  some  of  us  could  find  at  this 
moment  hard  by  our  own  doors.  But  wherever  such  a 
change  does  take  place,  there  you  see  the  thing  of  which  I 
am  now  speaking, — you  see  the  dead  made  alive,  a  new 
creature,  a  soul  born  again. 

I  would  to  God  that  changes  such  as  this  were  more 
common  !  I  would  to  God  there  were  not  such  multitudes, 
of  whom  we  must  say  even  weeping,  they  know  nothing 
about  the  matter  at  all.  But,  common  or  not,  one  thing 
I  say  plainly, — this  is  the  kind  of  change  we  all  need. 
I  do  not  hold  that  ail  must  have  exactly  the  same  experience. 
I  allow  most  fully  that  the  change  is  different,  in  degree, 
extent,  and  intensity,  in  different  persons.  Grace  may  be 
weak,  and  yet  true ; — life  may  be  feeble,  and  yet  real. 
But  I  do  confidently  affirm  we  must  all  go  through  some- 
thing of  this  kind,  if  ever  we  mean  to  be  saved.  Till 


ALIVE  OR  DEAD. 


133 


this  sort  of  change  has  taken  place,  there  is  no  life  in  us 
at  all.  We  may  be  living  Churchmen,  but  we  are  dead 
Christians.* 

Take  it  home,  every  man  or  woman  that  reads  this 
paper,  take  it  home  to  your  own  conscience,  and  look  at  it 
well  Some  time  or  other,  between  the  cradle  and  the 
grave,  all  who  would  be  saved  must  be  made  alive.  The 
words  which  good  old  Berridge  had  graven  on  his  tomb- 
stone are  faithful  and  true :  "  Reader !  art  thou  born 
aerain  ?    Remember !  no  salvation  without  a  new  birth." 

See  now  what  an  amazing  gulf  there  is  between  the 
Christian  in  name  and  form,  and  the  Christian  in  deed 
and  truth.  It  is  not  the  difference  of  one  being  a  little 
better,  and  the  other  a  little  worse  than  his  neighbour ; — 
it  is  the  difference  between  a  state  of  life  and  a  state  of 
death.  The  meanest  blade  of  grass  that  grows  upon  a 
Highland  mountain  is  a  more  noble  object  than  the  fairest 
wax  flower  that  was  ever  formed ;  for  it  has  that  which  no 
science  of  man  can  impart,  it  has  life.  The  most  splendid 
marble  statue  in  Greece  or  Italy  is  nothing  by  the  side  of 
the  poor  sickly  child  that  crawls  over  the  cottage  floor;  for 
with  all  its  beauty  it  is  dead.  And  the  weakest  member 
of  the  family  of  Christ  is  far  higher  and  more  precious  in 
God's  eyes  than  the  most  gifted  man  of  the  world.  The 
one  lives  unto  God,  and  shall  live  for  ever; — the  other, 
with  all  his  intellect,  is  still  dead  in  sins. 

Oh,  you  that  have  passed  from  death  to  life,  you  have 
reason  indeed  to  be  thankful !  Remember  what  you  once 
were  by  nature, — dead.     Think  what  you  are  now  by 


*  If  we  be  still  our  old  selves,  no  changelings  at  all,  the  same  man 
that  we  came  into  the  world,  without  defalcation  of  our  corruptions, 
without  addition  of  grace  and  sanctification,  surely  we  must  seek  us 
another  Father,  we  are  not  yet  the  sons  of  God." — Bishop  Hall.  1652. 

"Tf  thou  hast  anything  less  than  regeneration,  believe  me,  thou  canst 
jnever  see  heaven.  There  is  no  hope  of  heaven  till  then, — till  thou  art 
.born  again." — Archbinhop  Unkcr'ti  Sermons. 


134 


OLD  PATHS. 


grace, — alive.  Look  at  the  dry  bones  thrown  up  from  the 
graves.  Such  were  ye ;  and  who  has  made  you  to  differ  ? 
Go  and  fall  low  before  the  footstool  of  your  God.  Bless 
Him  for  His  grace,  His  free  distinguishing  grace.  Say  to 
Him  often,  "  Who  am  I,  Lord,  that  thou  hast  brought  me 
hitherto  ?  Why  me  ?  why  hast  thou  been  merciful  unto 
me  ?" 

IIL  Let  me  tell  you,  in  the  third  place,  in  ivhnt 
way  alone  this  quickening  can  be  brought  about, — by 
what  means  a  dead  soul  can  be  made  spritually 
alive. 

Surely,  if  I  did  not  tell  you  this,  it  would  be  cruelty  to 
write  what  I  have  written.  Surely,  it  would  be  leading 
you  into  a  dreary  wilderness,  and  then  leaving  you  Avithout 
bread  and  water. — It  would  be  like  marching  you  down 
to  the  Red  Sea,  and  then  bidding  you  walk  over. — It 
would  be  commanding  you  to  make  brick  like  Pharaoh, 
and  yet  refusing  to  provide  you  with  straw. — It  would  be 
like  tying  your  hands  and  feet,  and  then  desiring  you  to 
war  a  good  warfare,  and  "  so  run  as  to  obtain  the  prize." 
I  will  not  do  so.  I  will  not  leave  you,  till  I  have  pointed 
out  the  wicket-gate  towards  which  you  must  run.  By 
God's  help,  I  will  set  before  you  the  full  provision  there 
is  made  for  dead  souls.  Listen  to  me  a  little  longer,  and 
I  will  once  more  show  you  what  is  written  in  the 
Scripture  of  truth. 

One  thing  is  very  clear; — we  cannot  work  this  mighty 
change  ourselves.  It  is  not  in  us.  We  have  no  strength  or 
power  to  do  it.  We  may  change  our  sins,  but  we  cannot 
change  our  hearts.  We  may  take  up  a  new  way,  but  not  a 
new  nature.  We  may  make  considerable  reforms  and  altera- 
tions. We  may  lay  aside  many  outward  bad  habits,  and 
begin  to  do  many  outward  duties.  But  we  cannot  create 
a  new  principle  within  us.  We  cannot  bring  something 
out  of  nothing.    The  Ethiopian  cannot  change  his  skin, 


ALIVE  OR  DEAD. 


135 


nor  the  leopard  his  spots.  No  more  can  we  put  life  into 
our  own  souls.*    (Jerem.  xiii.  23.) 

Another  thing  is  equally  clear :  no  man  can  do  it  for  us. 
Ministers  may  preach  to  us,  and  pray  with  us, — receive  us 
at  the  font  in  baptism,  admit  us  at  the  Lord's  Table,  and 
give  us  the  bread  and  wine ; — but  they  cannot  bestow 
spiritual  life.  They  may  bring  in  regularity  in  the  j^ace 
of  disorder,  and  outward  decency  in  the  place  of  open  sin. 
Bat  they  cannot  go  below  the  surface.  They  cannot  reach 
our  hearts.  Paul  may  plant  and  AjJoUos  water,  but  God 
alone  can  give  the  increase.  .  (1  Cor.  iii.  6.) 

Who  then  can  make  a  dead  soul  alive  ?  No  one  can  do 
it  but  God.  He  only  who  breathed  into  Adam's  nostrils 
the  breath  of  life,  can  ever  make  a  dead  sinner  a  living 
Christian.  He  only  who  formed  the  world  oat  of  nothing 
in  the  day  of  creation,  can  make  man  a  new  creature.  He 
only  who  said,  "  Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light," 
can  cause  spiritual  light  to  shine  into  man's  heart.  He 
only  who  formed  man  out  of  the  dust  and  gave  life  to  his 
body  can  ever  give  life  to  his  soul.  His  is  the  special 
office  to  do  it  by  His  Sjiirit,  and  His  also  is  the  power. f 
(Gen.  i.  2,  3.) 

*  "There  is  not  one  good  duty  which  the  natural  man  can  do.  If  it 
should  be  said  to  him,  Think  but  one  good  thought,  and  for  it  thou  slialt 
go  to  heaven,  he  could  not  think  it.  TiU  God  raise  him  from  the  sink  of 
sin,  as  he  did  Lazarus  from  the  grave,  he  cannot  do  anything  that  is  well 
pleasing  to  God.  He  may  do  the  works  of  a  moral  man,  but  to  do  the 
works  of  a  man  quickened  and  enlightened,  it  is  beyond  his  power. " — 
Usher's  Sermons. 

"  Nature  can  no  more  cast  out  nature,  than  Satan  can  cast  out  Satan." 
— Thomas  Wattion.  1G53. 

"Nature  cannot  raise  itself  to  this,  any  more  than  a  man  can  give 
natural  being  to  himself." — Archbishop  LaUjhlon. 

t  "To  create  or  bring  something  out  of  nothing,  is  beyond  the  power 
of  the  strongest  creature.  It  is  above  the  strength  of  all  men  and  angels 
to  create  the  least  blade  of  grass  ;  God  challengeth  this  as  His  prerogative 
royal.  (Isaiah  xl.  2G.)  Augustine  said  truly,  To  convert  the  little  world 
man,  is  more  than  to  create  thcgreat  world." — George  Swinnocke.  IGGOi 


136 


OLD  PATHS. 


The  glorious  Gospel  contains  provision  for  our  spiritual, 
as  ■well  as  our  eternal  life.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  a  complete 
Saviour.  That  mighty  living  Head  has  no  dead  members. 
His  people  are  not  only  justified  and  pardoned,  but 
quickened  together  with  Him,  and  made  partakers  of  His 
resurrection.  To  Him  the  Spirit  joins  the  sinner,  and 
raises  him  by  that  union  from  death  to  life.  In  Him  the 
sinner  lives  after  he  has  believed.  The  spring  of  all  his 
vitality  is  the  union  between  Christ  and  his  soul,  which 
the  Spirit  begins  and  keeps  up.  Christ  is  the  appointed 
fountain  of  all  spiritual  life,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  the  ap- 
pointed agent  who  conveys  that  life  to  our  souls.* 

Come  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  if  you  would  have  life. 
He  will  not  cast  you  out.  He  has  gifts,  even  for  the 
rebellious.  The  moment  the  dead  man  touched  the  body 
of  Elisha,  he  revived  and  stood  upon  his  feet.  (2  Kings 
xiii.  21.) — The  moment  you  touch  the  Lord  Jesus  with 
the  hand  of  faith,  you  ai-e  alive  unto  God,  as  ■well  as 
forgiven  all  tresj)asses.    Come,  and  your  soul  shall  live. 

I  never  despair  of  any  one  becoming  a  decided  Christian, 
whatever  he  may  have  been  in  days  gone  by.  I  know 
how  ojreat  the  chaugje  is  from  death  to  life.  I  know  the 
mountains  of  division  that  seem  to  stand  between  some  of 
us  and  heaven.  I  know  the  hardness,  the  prejudices,  the 
desperate  sinfulness  of  the  natural  heart.  But  I  remember 
that  God  the  Father  made  this  beautiful  and  well-ordered 
world  out  of  nothing.  I  remember  the  voice  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  could  reach  Lazarus  when  four  davs  dead,  and 
recall  him  even  from  the  grave.  I  remember  the  amazing 
victories  the  Spirit  of  God  has  won  in  every  nation  under 
heaven.    I  remember  all  this,  and  feel  that  I  never  need 


*  "  Then  do  vre  begin  to  live,  when  we  begin  to  have  union  with 
Christ  the  Fountain  of  Life,  by  His  Spirit  communicated  to  us :  from 
this  time  we  are  to  reckon  our  life." — Flavtl. 

" Christ  is  an  universal  principle  of  all  life." — S'thhs.  1035. 


ALIVE  OR  DEAD. 


137 


despair.  Yes !  those  among  us  who  now  seem  most  utterly 
dead  in  sins,  may  yet  be  raised  to  a  new  being,  and  walk 
before  God  in  newness  of  life. 

Why  should  it  not  be  so  ?  The  Holy  Spirit  is  a  merciful 
and  loving  Spirit.  He  turns  away  from  no  man  because 
of  his  vileness.  He  passes  by  no  one  because  his  sins  are 
black  and  scarlet. 

There  was  nothing  in  the  Corinthians  that  He  should 
come  down  and  quicken  them.  Paul  reports  of  them  that 
they  were  "  fornicators,  idolaters,  adulterers,  effeminate, 
thieves, covetous, drunkards,revilers, extortioners."  "Such," 
he  says,  "  were  some  of  you."  Yet  even  them  the  Spirit 
made  alive.  "  Ye  are  washed,"  he  writes,  "  ye  are  sanctified, 
ye  are  justified,  in  the  name  of  the  Loi'd  Jesus,  and  by  the 
spirit  of  our  God."    (1  Cor.  vi.  9,  10,  11.) 

There  was  nothing  in  the  Colossians,  that  He  should 
visit  their  hearts.  Paul  tells  us  that  "  they  walked  in 
fornication,  uncleanness,  inordinate  affection,  evil  con- 
cupiscence, and  covetousness,  which  is  idolatry."  Yet 
them  also  the  Spirit  quickened.  He  made  them  "  put  off 
the  old  man  with  his  deeds,  and  put  on  the  new  man 
which  is  renewed  in  knowledsre  after  the  imajje  of  Him 
that  created  him."    (Coloss.  iii.  5 — 10.) 

There  was  nothing  in  Mary  Magdalene  that  the  Spirit 
should  make  her  soul  alive.  Once  she  had  been  "  possessed 
with  seven  devils."  There  was  once  a  time,  if  report  be 
true,  when  she  was  a  woman  proverbial  for  vileness  and 
iniquity.  Yet  even  her  the  Spirit  made  a  new  creature, 
separated  her  from  her  sins,  brought  her  to  Christ,  made 
her  "  last  at  the  cross,  and  first  at  the  tomb." 

Never,  never  will  the  Spirit  turn  away  from  a  soul 
because  of  its  corruption.  He  never  has  done  so; — He 
never  will.  It  is  His  glory  that  He  has  purified  the  minds 
of  the  most  impure,  and  made  them  temples  for  His  own 
abode.  He  may  yet  take  the  worst  of  us,  and  make  him 
a  vessel  of  grace. 


138 


OLD  PATHS. 


Why  indeed  should  it  not  be  so  ?  The  Spirit  is  an 
Almighty  Spirit.  He  can  change  the  stony  heart  into  a 
heart  of  flesh.  He  can  break  up  and  destroy  the  strongest 
bad  habits,  like  tow  in  the  fire.  He  can  make  the  most 
difficult  things  seem  easy,  and  the  mightiest  objections  melt 
away  like  snow  in  spring.  He  can  -cut  the  bars  of  brass, 
and  throw  the  gates  of  prejudice  wide  open.  He  can  fill 
up  every  valley,  and  make  every  rough  place  smooth.  He 
has  done  it  often,  and  He  can  do  it  again.* 

The  Spirit  can  take  a  Jew, — the  bitterest  enemy  of 
Christianity, — the  fiercest  persecutor  of  true  believers, — 
the  strongest  stickler  for  Pharisaical  notions, — the  most 
prejudiced  opposer  of  Gospel  doctrine, — and  turn  that  man 
into  an  earnest  preacher  of  the  very  faith  he  once  de- 
stroyed. He  has  done  it  already. — He  did  it  with  the 
Apostle  Paul. 

The  Spirit  can  take  a  Roman  Catholic  monk,  brought 
up  in  the  midst  of  Eomish  superstition, — trained  from  his 
".nfancy  to  believe  false  doctrine,  and  obey  the  Pope, — 
steeped  to  the  eyes  in  error, — and  make  that  man  the 
clearest  upholder  of  justification  by  faith  the  world  ever 
saw.  He  has  done  so  already. — He  did  it  with  Martin 
Luther. 

The  Spirit  can  take  an  English  tinker,  without  learning, 
patronage,  or  money, — a  man  at  one  time  notorious  for 
nothing  so  much  as  blasphemy  and  swearing, — and  make 
that  man  write  a  religious  book,  which  shall  stand  un- 
rivalled and  unequalled,  in  its  way,  by  any  book  since 
the  time  of  the  Apostles.  He  has  done  so  already. — He 
did  it  with  John  Bunyan,  the  author  of  "Pilgrim's 

rogre=s. 

The  Spirit  can  take  a  sailor  drenched  in  worldliness  and 
sin, — a  profligate  captain  of  a  slave  ship, — and  make  that 

•  "Sucli  is  the  power  of  the  Holj'  Ghost  to  regenerate  men,  and  as  it 
were  to  bring  them  forth  anew,  so  that  thej'  shall  be  nothing  like  the 
men  they  were  before." — Homily  for  Whit-Sunday. 


ALIVE  OR  DEAD. 


139 


man  a  most  successful  minister  of  the  Gospel, — a  writer  tf 
letters,  which  are  a  store-house  of  experimental  religion, — 
and  of  hymns  which  are  known  and  sung  wherever  English 
is  spoken.  He  has  done  it  already. — He  did  it  with  John 
Newton. 

All  this  the  Spirit  has  done,  and  much  more,  of  which 
I  cannot  speak  particularly.  And  the  arm  of  the  Spirit 
is  not  shortened.  His  power  is  not  decayed.  He  is  like 
the  Lord  Jesus, — "the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for 
ever."  (Heb.  xiii.  8.)  He  is  still  doing  wonder.s,  and  will 
do  to  the  very  end. 

Once  more  then,  I  say,  I  never  despair  of  any  man's 
soul  being  made  alive.  I  should  if  it  depended  on  man 
himself  Some  seem  so  hardened,  I  should  have  no  hope. 
I  should  despair  if  it  depended  on  the  work  of  mini.sters. 
Alas,  the  very  best  of  us  are  poor,  weak  creatures  !  But  I 
cannot  despair  when  I  remember  that  Gotl  the  Spirit  is 
the  agent  who  conveys  life  to  the  soul, — for  I  know  and 
am  persuaded  that  with  Him  nothing  is  impossible. 

I  should  not  be  surprised  to  hear,  even  in  this  life,  that 
the  hardest  man  in  the  list  of  my  acquaintances  has 
become  softened,  and  the  proudest  has  taken  his  jDlace  at 
the  feet  of  Jesus  as  a  weaned  child. 

I  shall  not  be  surprised  to  meet  many  on  the  right 
hand,  in  the  day  of  judgment,  whom  I  shall  leave,  when  I 
die,  travelling  in  the  broad  way.  I  shall  not  start,  and 
say, "  What !  you  here  ! "  I  shall  only  remind  them,  "  \Yas 
not  this  my  word,  when  I  was  yet  among  you, — Nothing 
is  impossible  with  Him  that  quickeneth  the  dead." 

Does  any  one  of  us  desire  to  help  the  Church  of  Christ  ? 
Then  let  him  pray  for  a  great  outpouring  of  the  Spirit. 
He  alone  can  give  edge  to  sermons,  and  point  to  advice, 
and  power  to  rebukes,  and  can  cast  down  the  high  walls  of 
sinful  hearts.  It  is  not  better  preaching,  and  finer  wri ting- 
that  is  wanted  in  this  day,  but  more  of  the  presence  of 
the  Holy  Ghost. 


140 


OLD  PATHS. 


Does  any  one  feel  the  slightest  drawing  towards  God, — 
the  smallest  concern  about  his  immortal  soul  ?  Then  Hee  to 
that  open  fountain  of  liviug  waters,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  you  shall  receive  the  Holy  Ghost.  (John  vii.  39.) 
Begin  at  once  to  pray  for  the  Holy  Spirit.  Think  not 
that  you  are  shut  up  and  cut  off  from  hope.  The  Holy 
Ghost  is  promised  to  "  them  that  ask  Him."  (Luke  xi.  13.) 
His  very  name  is  the  Spirit  of  promise  and  the  Spirit  of 
life.  Give  Him  no  rest  till  He  comes  down  and  makes 
you  a  new  heart.  Cry  mightily  unto  the  Lord, — say  unto 
Him,  "  Bless  me,  even  me  also, — quicken  me,  and  make 
me  alive." 

And  now  let  me  wind  up  all  I  have  said  with  a  few 
words  of  special  application.  I  have  shown  what  I  believe 
to  be  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  Let  me  try,  by  God's 
blessing,  to  bring  it  home  to  the  hearts  and  consciences  of 
all  into  whose  hands  this  volume  may  fall. 

1.  First,  let  me  put  this  question  to  every  soul  who 
reads  this  paper :  "  Are  you  dead,  or  are  you  alive  ?  " 

Suffer  me,  as  an  ambassador  for  Christ,  to  press  the 
inquiry  on  every  conscience.  There  are  only  two  ways  to 
walk  in,  the  narrow  and  the  broad ; — two  companies  in 
the  day  of  judgment,  those  on  the  right  hand,  and  those 
on  the  left; — two  classes  of  people  in  the  professing 
Church  of  Christ,  and  to  one  of  them  you  must  belong. 
Where  are  you  ?  What  are  you  ?  Are  you  among  the 
living,  or  among  the  dead  ? 

I  speak  to  you  yourself,  and  to  none  else, — not  to  your 
neighbour,  but  to  you, — not  to  Africans  or  New  Zealanders, 
but  to  you.  I  do  not  ask  whether  you  are  an  angel,  or 
whether  you  have  the  mind  of  David  or  Paul, — but  I  do 
ask  whether  you  have  a  well-founded  hope  that  you  are  a 
new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus, — I  do  ask  whether  you  have 
reason  to  believe  you  have  put  off  the  old  man  and  put  on 
the  new, — whether  you  are  conscious  of  ever  having  gone 


ALIVE  OR  DEAD. 


141 


through  a  real  spiritual  change  of  heart, — whether,  in  one 
word,  you  are  dead  or  alive.* 

(a)  Think  not  to  put  me  off  by  saying,  "  you  were 
admitted  into  the  Church  by  baptism,  you  received  grace 
and  the  Spirit  in  tliat  sacrament, — you  are  alive."  It 
shall  not  avail  you.  Paul  himself  says  of  the  baptized 
widow  who  lives  in  pleasure,  "  She  is  dead  while  she 
liveth."  (1  Tim.  v.  6.)  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself 
tells  the  chief  officer  of  the  Church  in  Sardis,  "  Thou  hast 
a  name  that  thou  livest,  and  art  dead."  (Rev.  iii.  1 )  The 
life  you  talk  of  is  nothing  if  it  cannot  be  seen.  Show  it 
to  me,  if  I  am  to  believe  its  existence.  Grace  is  light, 
and  light  will  always  be  discerned.  Grace  is  salt,  and  salt 
will  always  be  tasted.  An  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  which 
does  not  show  itself  by  outward  fruits,  and  a  grace  which 
men's  eyes  cannot  discover,  are  both  to  be  viewed  with 
the  utmost  suspicion.  Believe  me,  if  you  have  no  other 
proof  of  spiritual  life  but  your  baptism,  you  are  yet  a  dead 
soul. 

(h)  Think  not  to  tell  me  "It  is  a  question  that  cannot 
be  decided,  and  you  call  it  presumptuous  to  give  an  opinion 
in  such  a  matter."  This  is  a  vain  refuge,  and  a  false 
humility.  Spiritual  life  is  no  such  dim  and  doubtful  thing 
as  you  seem  to  fancy.  There  are  marks  and  evidences  by 
which  its  presence  may  be  di-scerned  by  those  who  know 


*  "  Al!  hangs  upon  this  hinge.  If  this  be  not  clone,  ye  are  undone— 
iindone  eternally.  All  your  profession,  civility,  privileges,  gifts,  duties, 
are  cyphers,  and  signify  nothing,  unless  regeneration  be  the  figure  put 
before  them." Swbinocke.  16C0. 

"  Believe  me,  whatsoever  thou  art,  thou  shalt  never  be  saved  for  being 
a  lord  or  a  knight,  a  gentleman  or  a  rich  man,  a  learned  man  or  a  well- 
spoken,  eloquent  man  ;  nor  yet  for  being  a  Calviuist,  or  a  Lutheran, 
an  Arminian,  an  Anabaptist,  a  Presbyterian,  an  Independent,  or  a 
Protestant,  formally  and  merely  as  such  ;  mucli  less  for  being  a  Papist, 
or  of  any  such  grossly  deluded  sect : — but  as  a  regenerate  Christian 
it  is  that  thou  must  be  saved, — or  thou  canst  have  no  hope." — Richard 
Baxter.  1C59. 


142 


OLD  PATHS. 


the  Bible.  "We  know,"  says  John,  "that  we  have  passed 
from  death  unto  life."  (1  John  iii.  14.)  The  exact  time 
and  season  of  that  passage  may  often  be  hidden  from  a 
man.  The  fact  and  reality  of  it  will  seldom  be  entirely 
an  uncertain  thing.  It  was  a  true  and  beautiful  saying  of 
a  Scotch  girl,  to  "Whitefield,  when  asked  if  her  heart  Avas 
changed  :  "  Something  was  changed,  she  knew, — it  might 
be  the  world,  it  might  be  her  own  heart, — but  there  was  a 
great  change  somewhere,  she  was  quite  sure,  for  every 
thing  seemed  different  to  what  it  once  did."  Oh,  cease 
to  evade  the  inquiry !  "  Anoint  your  eyes  with  eye-salve 
that  you  may  see."   (Rev.  iii.  18.)   Are  you  dead  or  alive  ? 

(c)  Think  not  to  reply,  "  You  do  not  know ; — you  allow 
it  is  a  matter  of  importance you  hope  to  know  some 
time  before  you  die ; — you  mean  to  give  your  mind  to  it 
when  3"ou  have  a  convenient  season ; — but  at  present  you 
do  not  know." 

You  do  not  know !  Yet  heaven  or  hell  is  \vrapf»ed  up 
in  this  question.  An  eternity  of  happiness  or  misery 
hinges  upon  your  answer.  You  do  not  leave  your  worldly 
affairs  so  imsettled.  You  do  not  manage  your  earthly 
business  so  loosely.  You  look  far  forward.  You  provide 
against  every  possible  contingency.  You  insure  life  and 
property.  Oh,  why  not  deal  in  the  same  way  with  youi 
immortal  soul  ? 

You  do  not  know !  Yet  all  around  you  is  uncertaint}'. 
You  are  a  poor  frail  worm, — your  body  fearfully  and 
wonderfully  made, — your  health  liable  to  be  put  out  of 
order  in  a  thousand  ways.  The  next  time  the  daisies 
bloom,  it  may  be  over  your  grave.  All  before  you  is  dark. 
You  know  not  what  a  day  might  bring  forth,  much  less  a 
yeai\  Oh  !  why  not  bring  your  soul's  business  to  a  point 
without  delay  ? 

Let  every  reader  of  this  paper  begin  the  great  business 
of  self-examination.  Rest  not  till  you  know  the  length 
and  breadth  of  your  own  state  in  God's  sight.  Back- 


ALIVE  OR  DEAD. 


143 


wardness  in  this  matter  is  an  evil  sign.  It  springs  from 
an  uneasy  conscience.  It  shows  that  a  man  thinks  ill  of 
his  own  case.  He  feels,  like  a  dishonest  tradesman,  that 
his  accounts  will  not  bear  inquiry.    He  dreads  the  light. 

In  spiritual  things,  as  in  everything  else,  it  is  the  highest 
wisdom  to  make  sure  work.  Take  nothing  for  granted. 
Do  not  measure  your  condition  by  that  of  others.  Bring 
everything  to  the  measure  of  God's  Word.  A  mistake 
about  your  sonl  is  a  mistake  for  eternity  "  Surely,"  says 
Leighton,  "  they  that  are  not  born  again,  shall  one  day 
wish  they  had  never  been  born." 

Sit  down  this  day  and  think.  Commune  with  your 
own  heart  and  be  still.  Go  to  your  own  room  and  con- 
sider. Enter  into  your  own  closet,  or  at  any  rate  contrive 
to  be  alone  with  God.  Look  the  question  fairly,  fully, 
honestly  in  the  face.  How  does  it  touch  you  ?  Are  you 
among  the  living  or  among  the  dead  ?  * 

2.  In  the  second  place,  let  me  speak  in  all  affection 
to  those  who  are  dead. 

What  shall  I  say  to  you  ?  What  can  I  say  ?  What 
words  of  mine  are  likely  to  have  anj^  effect  on  your  hearts  ? 

This  I  will  say, — I  mourn  over  your  souls.  I  do  most 
unfeignedly  mourn.  You  may  be  thoughtless  and  un- 
concerned. You  may  care  little  for  what  I  am  saying. 
You  may  scarcely  run  your  eye  over  this  paper,  and  after 
reading  it  you  may  despise  it  and  return  to  the  world ; 
but  you  cannot  prevent  my  feeling  for  you,  however  little 
you  may  feel  for  yourselves. 

Do  I  mourn  when  T  see  a  young  man  sapping  the 
foundation  of  his  bodily  health  by  indulging  his  lusts  and 
passions,  sowing  bitterness  for  himself  in  his  old  age  ? 
Much  more  then  will  I  mourn  over  your  souls. 

*  "If  your  state  be  good,  searching  into  it  will  give  you  the  comfort 
of  it.  If  your  state  be  bad,  searching  into  it  cannot  make  it  worse  ; 
nay,  it  is  the  only  way  to  make  it  better :  for  conversion  begins  with 
conviction." — Bishop  Hopkins.  IGSO. 


144 


OLD  PATHS. 


Do  I  mourn  when  I  see  men  squandering  away  their 
inheritance,  and  wasting  their  property  on  trifles  and 
follies  ?    Much  more  then  will  I  mourn  over  your  souls. 

Do  I  mourn  when  I  hear  of  one  drinking  slow  poisons, 
because  they  are  pleasant,  as  the  Chinese  take  opium, 
— putting  the  clock  of  his  life  on,  as  if  it  did  not  go  fast 
enough, — inch  by  inch  digging  his  own  grave  ?  Much 
more  then  will  I  mourn  over  your  souls. 

I  mourn  to  think  of  golden  opportunities  thrown  away, 
— of  Christ  rejected, — of  the  blood  of  atonement  trampled 
under  foot, — of  the  Sjiirit  resisted, — the  Bible  neglected, 
— heaven  despised,  and  the  world  put  in  the  place  of  God. 

I  mourn  to  think  of  the  present  happiness  you  are 
missing, — the  peace  and  consolation  you  are  thrusting 
from  3'ou, — the  misery  you  are  laying  up  in  store  for  your- 
selves,— and  the  bitter  waking  up  which  is  yet  to  come. 

Yes  !  I  must  mourn.  I  cannot  help  it.  Others  may 
think  it  enough  to  mourn  over  dead  bodies.  For  my  part, 
I  think  there  is  far  more  cause  to  mourn  over  dead  souls. 
The  children  of  this  world  find  fault  with  us  sometimes 
for  being  so  serious  and  grave.  Truly,  when  I  look  at  the 
world,  I  marvel  w^e  can  ever  smile  at  all. 

To  every  one  who  is  dead  in  sins  I  say  this  day,  Why  will 
you  die  ?  Are  the  wages  of  sin  so  sweet  and  good,  that 
vou  cannot  give  them  up  ?  Is  the  world  so  satisfying  that 
you  cannot  forsake  it  ?  Is  the  sen-ice  of  Satan  so 
pleasant  that  you  and  he  are  never  to  be  parted  ?  Is 
heaven  so  poor  a  thing  that  it  is  not  worth  seeking  ?  Is 
your  soul  of  so  little  consequence,  that  it  is  not  worth  a 
strusfofle  to  have  it  saved  ?  Oh,  turn !  turn  before  it  be 
too  late  !  God  is  not  willing  that  you  should  perish.  "As 
I  live,"  He  says,  "  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him 
that  dieth."  Jesus  loves  you,  and  grieves  to  see  your  folly. 
He  wept  over  wicked  Jerusalem,  saying,  "  I  would  have 
gathered  thee,  but  thou  wouldst  not  be  gathered."  Sui'ely 
if  lost,  your  blood  will  be  upon  your  own  heads.    "  Aw-ake, 


ALIVE  OR  DEAD. 


145 


ami  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give  you  liylit." 
(Ezek.  xviii.  32;  Matt,  xxiii.  37;  Eph.  v.  14.) 

Believe  me,  believe  me,  true  repentance  is  that  one  step 
that  no  man  ever  repented.  Thousands  have  said  at  their 
latter  end,  they  had  "  served  God  too  little : "  no  child  of 
Adam  ever  said,  as  he  left  this  world,  that  lie  had  cared 
for  his  soul  too  much.  The  way  of  life  is  a  narrow  path, 
but  the  footsteps  in  it  are  all  in  one  direction  :  not  one 
child  of  Adam  has  ever  come  back  and  said  it  was  a  de- 
lu.s)on.  Tlie  way  of  the  world  is  a  bi  oad  way,  but  millions 
on  millions  have  forsaken  it,  and  borne  their  testimony 
that  it  was  a  way  of  sorrow  and  disappointment. 

3.  Let  mc,  in  the  third  place,  speak  to  those  who  are 
living. 

Are  you  indeed  alive  unto  God  ?  Can  you  say  with 
truth,  "I  was  dead,  and  am  alive  again.  I  was  blind,  but 
now  I  see  "  ?  Then  suffer  the  word  of  exhortation,  and 
incline  your  hearts  unto  wisdom. 

Are  you  alive  ?  Then  see  that  you  'prove  it  hy  your 
actions.  Be  a  consistent  witness.  Let  your  words,  and 
works,  and  ways,  and  tempers  all  tell  the  same  story.  Let 
not  your  life  be  a  poor  torpid  life,  like  that  of  a  tortoise  or 
a  sloth ; — let  it  rather  be  an  energetic  stirring  life,  like 
that  of  a  deer  or  bird.  Let  your  graces  shine  forth  from  all 
the  windows  of  your  conversation,  that  those  who  live  near 
you  may  see  that  the  Spirit  is  abiding  in  your  hearts.  Let 
your  light  not  be  a  dim,  flickering,  uncertain  flame;  let  it 
burn  steadily,  like  the  eternal  fire  on  the  altar,  and  never 
become  low.  Let  the  savour  of  your  religion,  like  Mary's 
precious  ointment,  fill  all  the  houses  where  you  dwell  — 
Be  an  epistle  of  Christ  so  clearly  written,  penned  in  such 
large  bold  characters,  that  he  who  runs  may  read  it.  Let 
your  Christianity  be  so  unmistakeable,  your  eye  so  single, 
your  heart  so  whole,  your  walk  so  straightforward,  that 
all  who  see  you  may  have  no  doubt  whose  you  are,  and 
whom  you  serve.    If  we  are  quickened  by  the  Spirit,  no 

L 


146 


OLD  PATHS. 


one  oiiglit  to  be  able  to  doubt  it.  Our  conversation  sliould 
declare  plainly  that  we  "seek  a  country."  (Heb  xi  14.) 
It  ought  not  to  be  necessary  to  tell  people,  as  in  the  case 
of  a  badly  painted  picture,  "This  is  a  Christian."  We 
ought  not  to  be  so  sluggish  and  still,  that  men  shall  be 
obliged  to  come  close  and  look  hard^  and  say,  "  Is  he  dead 
or  alive  ?  " 

Are  you  alive  ?  Then  see  that  jon  prove  it  hy  your 
groiuth.  Let  the  great  change  within  become  every  year 
more  evident.  Let  your  light  be  an  increasing  light, — not 
like  Joshua's  sun  in  the  valley  of  Ajalon,  standing  still, — 
nor  like  Hezekiah's  sun,  going  back, — but  ever  shining 
more  and  more  to  the  very  end  of  your  days.  Let  the 
image  of  your  Lord,  wherein  you  are  renewed,  grow  clearer 
and  sharper  every  month.  Let  it  not  be  like  the  image 
and  superscription  on  a  coin,  more  indistinct  and  defaced  the 
longer  it  is  used.  Let  it  rather  become  more  plain  the  older 
it  is,  and  let  the  likeness  of  your  King  stand  out  more  fully 
and  sharply.  I  have  no  confidence  in  a  standing-still 
religion.  I  do  not  think  a  Christian  was  meant  to  be  like 
an  animal,  to  grow  to  a  certain  age,  and  then  stop  growing. 
I  believe  rather  he  was  meant  to  be  like  a  tree,  and  to  in- 
crease more  and  more  in  strength  and  vigour  all  his  days. 
Remember  the  words  of  the  Apostle  Peter:  "Add  to  your 
faith  virtue,  and  to  virtue  knowledrre,  and  to  knowledge 
temperance,  and  to  temperance  brotherly  kindness,  and 
to  brotherly  kindness  charity."  (2  Peter  i.  5,  6,  7.)  This 
is  the  way  to  be  a  useful  Christian.  Men  will  believe  yon 
are  in  earnest  when  they  see  constant  improvement,  and 
perhaps  be  drawn  to  go  with  you.* — This  is  one  way  to 
obtain  comfortable  assurance.  "  So  an  entrance  shall  be 
ministered  unto  you  abundantly."  (2  Peter  i.  11.)  Oh. 
as  ever  you  would  be  useful  and  happy  in  your  religion, 


*"Menwlio  are  prejudiced  observe  actions  a  i;reat  deal  more  than 
words. " — LcUjhton. 


ALIVE  OR  DEAD. 


147 


let  your  motto  be,  "  Forward,  forward  !  '  to  your  very  last 
day. 

I  entreat  all  believing  readers  to  remember  that  I  speak 
to  myself  as  well  as  to  them.  I  say  the  spiritual  life  there 
is  in  Christians  ought  to  be  more  evident.  Our  lamps 
want  trimmmg, — they  ought  not  to  burn  so  dim.  Our 
separation  from  the  world  should  be  more  distinct, — our 
walk  with  God  more  decided.  Too  many  of  us  are  like 
Lot, — lingerers;  or  like  Reuben,  Grad,  and  Manassel., 
— borderers;  or  like  the  Jews  in  Ezra's  time, — so  mixed  up 
with  strangers,  that  our  spiritual  pedigree  cannot  be  made 
out.  It  ought  not  so  to  be.  Let  us  be  up  and  doing.  If 
we  live  in  the  Spirit,  let  us  also  walk  in  the  Spirit.  If  we 
really  have  life,  let  us  make  it  known. 

The  state  of  the  world  demands  it.  The  latter  days 
have  fallen  upon  us.  The  kingdoms  of  the  earth  are 
shaking,  falling,  crashing,  and  crumbling  away.  (Isaiah 
xxiv.  1,  etc.)  The  glorious  kingdom  that  will  never  be 
removed  is  drawing  nigh.  The  King  Himself  is  close  at 
hand.  The  children  of  this  world  are  looking  round  to 
see  what  the  saints  are  doing.  God,  in  His  wonderful 
providences,  is  calling  to  us, — "  Who  is  on  my  side  ? 
Who  ? " — Surely  we  ought  to  be,  like  Abraham,  very 
ready  with  our  answer :  "  Here  am  I ! "    (Gen.  xxii.  1.) 

"Ah  ! "  you  may  say, — "  These  are  ancient  things :  these 
are  brave  words.  We  know  it  all.  But  we  are  weak,  we 
have  no  power  to  think  a  good  thought,  we  can  do  nothing, 
we  must  sit  still." — Hearken,  my  believing  reader.  What 
is  the  cause  of  your  weakness  ?  Is  it  not  because  the 
fountain  of  life  is  little  used  ?  Is  it  not  because  you  are 
resting  on  old  experiences,  and  not  daily  gathering  new 
manna, — daily  drawing  new  strength  from  Christ  ?  He 
has  left  you  the  promise  of  the  Comforter.  "  He  giveth 
more  grace," — grace  upon  grace  to  all  who  ask  it.- — He 
came  "  that  you  might  have  life,  and  have  it  more  abund- 
antly."— "Open  your  mouths  wide,"  He  says  this  day, 


148 


OLD  PATHS. 


"and  they  shall  be  filled."  (James  iv.  6;  John  s.  10 j 
Ps.  Ixxxi.  10.) 

I  say  to  all  believers  who  read  this  paper,  if  you  want 
your  spiritual  life  to  be  more  healthy  and  vigorous,  yoa 
must  just  come  more  boldly  to  the  throne  of  gi-ace.  You 
must  give  up  this  hanging-back  spirit, — this  hesitation 
about  taking  the  Lord  at  His  own  word.  Doubtless  you 
are  poor  sinners,  and  nothing  at  all.  The  Lord  knows  it, 
and  has  provided  a  store  of  strength  for  you.  But  you 
do  not  draw  upon  the  store  He  has  provided :  you  have 
not,  because  you  ask  not.  The  secret  of  your  weakness  is 
your  little  faith,  and  little  prayer.  The  fountain  is  un- 
sealed, but  you  only  sip  a  few  drops.  The  bread  of  life 
is  before  you,  yet  you  only  eat  a  few  crumbs.  The 
treasury  of  heaven  is  open,  but  you  only  take  a  few 
pence.  "0  ye  of  little  faith,  wherefore  do  ye  doubt?" 
(Matt.  xiv.  31.) 

Awake  to  know  your  privileges  ; — awake,  and  sleep  no 
longer.  Tell  me  not  of  spiritual  hunger,  and  thirst,  and 
poverty,  so  long  as  the  throne  of  grace  is  before  you.  Say 
rather,  that  you  are  proud,  and  will  not  come  to  it  as  poor 
sinners.  Say  rather,  you  are  slothful,  and  will  not  take 
pains  to  get  more. 

Cast  aside  the  grave-clothes  of  pride,  which  still  hang 
around  you.  Throw  off  that  Egyptian  garment  of  indolence, 
which  ought  not  to  have  been  brought  through  the  Red 
Sea.  Away  with  that  unbelief,  which  ties  and  paralyzes 
your  tongue.  You  are  not  straitened  in  God,  but  in 
yourselves.  "  Come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace,"  Avhere 
the  Father  is  ever  waiting  to  give,  and  Jesus  ever  sits 
by  Him  to  intercede.  (Heb.  iv.  16.)  Come  boldly,  for 
you  may,  all  sinful  as  you  are,  if  you  come  in  the  name 
of  the  Great  High  Priest.  Come  boldly,  and  ask  largely, 
and  you  shall  have  abundant  answers, — mercy  like  a  river, 
and  grace  and  strength  like  a  mighty  stream.  Come 
boldly,  and  you  shall  have  supplies  exceeding  all  you  can 


ALIVE  OR  DEAD. 


149 


ask  or  think.  "  Hitherto  you  have  asked  nothing.  Ask 
and  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full.".  (John  xvi.  21.) 

[f  we  really  are  alive  and  not  dead,  let  us  strive  so  to 
carry  ourselves  that  men  may  know  whose  we  are.  While 
we  live,  may  we  live  unto  the  Lord.  When  we  die,  may 
we  die  the  death  of  the  righteous.  And  when  the  Lord 
Jesus  comes,  may  we  be  found  ready,  and  "  not  be  ashamed 
before  Him  at  His  coming."    (1  John  ii.  28.) 

But,  after  all,  are  we  alive  or  dead  ?  That  is  the  great 
question. 


VI. 


OUR  SINS! 

"  Make  me  to  hiow  my  tmiigression  and  my  sin." — Job  xiii.  23. 
"  Our  sins  testify  against  us." — Isa.  lix.  12. 
"  Cleanse  me  from  my  sin." — Psalm  li.  2, 
The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sii..'^ 
— 1  John  i.  7. 

The  two  words  which  head  this  page  ought  to  stir  up 
within  us  gi-eat  searchings  of  heart.  Tliey  concern  every 
man  and  woman  born  into  the  world.  To  know  "our 
sins  "  is  the  first  letter  in  the  alphabet  of  saving  religion. 
To  understand  our  position  in  the  sight  of  God  is  one  step 
towards  heaven.  The  true  secret  of  peace  of  conscience  is 
to  feel  "  our  sins "  put  away.  If  we  love  life  we  ought 
never  to  rest  till  we  can  give  a  satisfactory  answer  to  the 
question— "WHERE  ARE  MY  SINS?" 

I  ask  my  readers  this  day  to  look  this  simple  question  in 
the  face.  A  time  draws  nigh  when  the  question  must 
be  answered.  The  hour  cometh  when  all  other  questions 
will  seem  like  a  drop  of  water  in  comparison  with  this. 
We  shall  not  say,  "Where  is  my  money?" — or,  "Where 
are  my  lands  ? " — or,  "  Where  is  my  property  ? "  Our 
only  thought  will  be,  "  My  sins  !  my  sins  ! — Where  are  mv 
sins  ? " 

I  am  going  to  offer  a  few  remarks  which  may  help  to 
throw  light  on  the  mighty  subject  which  is  before  our 


OUR  SINS. 


151 


eyes.  My  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  is  tLis, — that 
this  paper  may  be  useful  to  the  souls  of  all  who  read  this 
volume.  I  entreat  you  to  give  it  a  fair  reading.  Read 
it :  read  it !  Read  it  to  the  end  !  Who  can  tell  but  the 
Holy  Ghost  may  employ  this  paper  for  the  saving  of  your 
soul  ? 

I.    My  first  remark  is  this.    You  have  many  sins. 

I  say  this  boldly,  and  without  the  least  hesitation.  I 
know  not  who  you  are,  or  how  the  time  past  of  your  life 
has  been  spent.  But  I  know,  from  the  Word  of  God,  that 
every  son  and  daughter  of  Adam  is  a  great  sinner  in  the 
sight  of  God.  There  is  no  exception :  it  is  the  common 
disease  of  the  whole  family  of  mankind  in  every  quarter  of 
the  globe.  From  the  king  on  his  throne,  to  the  beggar  by 
the  roadside, — from  the  landlord  in  his  hall,  to  the  labourer 
in  his  cottage, — from  the  fine  lady  in  her  drawing-room, 
to  the  humblest  maid-servant  in  the  kitchen, — from  the 
clergyman  in  the  pulpit,  to  the  little  child  in  the  Sunday- 
school, — we  are  all  by  nature  guilty,  guilty,  guilty  in  the 
sight  of  God.  "  In  many  things  we  offend  all." — "  There 
is  none  righteous:  no,  not  one." — "All  have  sinned." — "  If 
we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the 
truth  is  not  in  us."  (James  iii.  2;  Rom.  iii.  10;  v.  12;  1 
John  i.  8.)  It  is  useless  to  deny  it.  We  have  all  sinned 
many  sins ! 

Does  any  one  doubt  the  truth  of  these  words  ?  Then 
go  and  examine  the  latu  of  God,  as  expounded  by  the  Son 
of  God  Himself.  Read  with  attention  the  fifth  chapter  of 
St.  Matthew's  Gospel.  See  how  the  commandments  of 
God  apply  to  our  words  as  well  as  to  our  actions,  and  to 
our  thoughts  and  motives,  as  well  as  to  our  words.  Know 
that  "  the  Lord  seeth  not  as  man  seeth :  man  looketh  at 
tlie  outward  appearance,  but  the  Lord  looketh  at  the 
heart."  In  His  sight  the  very  "thought  of  foolishness  is 
sin."    (1  Sam.  xvi.  7;  Prov.  xxiv.  9.) 


152 


OLD  PATHS, 


And  now  turn  to  the  liidtory  of  your  oiun  life,  and  try 
it  by  the  standard  of  this  holy  law.  Think  of  the  days  of 
your  childhood,  and  all  j-our  waywardness,  and  selfishness, 
and  evil  tempers,  and  perversity,  and  backwardness  to 
that  which  is  good. — Remember  the  days  of  yonr  youth, — 
your  self-will,  your  pride,  your  worldly  inclinations,  your 
impatience  of  control,  your  longing  after  forbidden  things. 
— Call  to  mind  your  conduct  since  you  came  to  man's 
estate,  and  the  many  departures  from  the  right  way,  of 
which  you  have  been  guilty  every  j  ear.- — Surely,  in  the 
face  of  your  life's  history,  you  will  not  stand  up  and  say, 
"  I  have  not  sinned  ! " 

And  then  turn  to  the  history  of  your  oivn  heart. 
Consider  how  many  evil  things  have  gone  through  it,  of 
which  the  world  knows  nothing  at  all. — Remember  the 
thousands  of  sinful  imaginations,  and  corrupt  ideas,  which 
your  heart  has  entertained,  even  while  your  outward  con- 
duct has  been  correct,  moral,  and  respectable. — Think  of 
the  vile  thoughts,  and  deceitful  intentions,  and  false 
motives,  and  malicious,  envious,  spiteful  feelings,  which 
have  walked  up  and  down  in  your  inward  man,  while  those 
nearest  to  you  never  dreamed  or  guessed  what  was  going 
on. —  Surely,  in  the  face  of  your  heart's  history,  you  will 
not  stand  up  and  say,  "  I  have  not  sinned  ! " 

Once  more  I  ask  every  reader  of  this  paper.  Do  you 
doubt  what  I  am  saying?  Do  you  doubt  wdiether  you 
have  sinned  many  sins? — Then  go  and  examine  the  twenty- 
fifth  chapter  of  St.  Matthew's  Gospel.  Read  the  concluding 
portion  of  that  chapter,  which  describes  the  proceedings  of 
the  judgment  day.  Note  carefully  the  grounds  on  which, 
the  wicked,  at  the  left  hand,  are  condemned  to  everlasting 
fire.  No  mention  is  made  of  great  open  acts  of  wickedness 
which  they  Ijave  committed.  They  are  not  charged  with 
having  murdered,  or  stolen,  or  borne  false  witness,  or 
committed  adultery.  They  are  condemned  for  sins  of 
oraission !    The  mere  fact  that  they  have  left  undone 


OUR  SINS. 


1.33 


things  which  they  ought  to  have  done,  is  sufficient  to  ruin 
their  souls  for  ever.  In  short,  a  man's  sins  of  omission 
alone  are  enough  to  sink  him  into  hell ! 

And  now  look  at  yourself  by  the  light  of  this  wonderful 
passage  of  Scripture.  Try  to  remember  the  countless 
things  you  have  left  undone,  which  you  might  have  done, 
and  have  left  unsaid,  that  you  might  have  said.  The  acts 
of  self-denying  kindness,  which  you  might  have  performed, 
but  have  neglected, — how  many  they  are  !  The  good  you 
might  have  done,  and  the  happiness  you  might  have 
caused,  at  very  little  trouble  to  yourself, — how  vast  is  the 
amount  of  it !  Surely,  in  the  face  of  our  Lord's  teaching 
about  sins  of  omission,  you  will  not  stand  up  and  say,  "  I 
have  not  sinned  !** 

Once  more  I  ask.  Do  you  doubt  the  truth  of  what  I  am 
saying  ?  I  think  it  quite  possible  that  you  do.  As  a 
minister  of  Christ  for  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century,  I 
know  somethin!^  of  man's  exceediu^j;  blindness  to  his  own 
natural  state.  Listen  to  me  once  more,  whilst  I  ply  your 
conscience  with  another  argument.  Oh,  that  God  may 
open  your  eyes,  and  show  you  what  you  are  ! 

Sit  down,  and  take  pen  and  paper,  and  count  up  the 
sins  that  you  have  probably  sinned  since  you  first  knew 
good  from  evil.  Sit  down,  I  say,  and  make  a  sum.  Grant 
for  a  moment  that  there  have  been  on  an  average,  fifteen 
hours  in  every  twenty-four  during  which  you  have  been 
awake,  and  an  active  and  accountable  being.  Grant  for 
a  moment  that  in  each  one  of  these  fifteen  hours  you 
have  sinned  only  two  sins.  Surely  you  will  not  say  that 
this  is  an  unfair  supposition.  Remember  we  may  sin 
against  God  in  thought,  word,  or  deed.  I  repeat,  it  cannot 
be  thought  an  extreme  thing  to  suppose  that  in  each 
waking  hour  of  your  life  you  have,  in  thought,  or  word,  or 
deed,  sinned  two  sins.  And  now  add  up  the  sins  of  your 
life,  and  see  to  what  sum  they  will  amount. 

At  the  rate  of  fifteen  waking  hours  in  a  day,  you  have 


154 


OLD  PATHS. 


sinned  every  day  thirty  sins  ! — At  the  rate  of  seven  days 
in  a  week,  you  have  sinned  two  hundred  and  ten  sins 
every  Aveek  ' — At  the  rate  of  four  weeks  in  every  month, 
you  have  sinned  eight  hundred  and  forty  sins  every  month  ! 
— At  the  rate  of  twelve  months  in  every  year,  you  have 
sinned  ten  thousand  and  eighty  sins  every  year ! — And,  in 
short,  not  to  go  further  with  the  calculation,  every  ten 
years  of  you  life  you  have  sinned,  at  the  lowest  computa- 
tion, more  than  ONE  HUNDRED  THOUSAND  SINS  ! 

I  invite  you  to  look  calmly  at  this  sum.  I  defy  you 
to  disj)rove  its  correctness.  I  ask  you,  on  the  contrary, 
whether  I  have  not  entirely  understated  your  case  ?  I 
appeal  to  j^ou,  as  an  honest  person,  whether  it  be  not  true, 
that  many  an  hour,  and  many  a  day  in  your  life,  you  have 
sinned  incessantly  ?  I  ask  you  confidently,  whether  the 
sum  would  not  be  far  more  correct  if  the  total  number  of 
your  sins  was  multiplied  ten-fold  ? — Oh,  cease  from  your 
self-righteousness  !  Lay  aside  this  proud  affectation  of 
"  not  being  so  very  bad,"  in  which  you  are  tiying  to  wrap 
yourself  up.  Be  bold  enough  to  confess  the  truth.  Listen 
not  to  that  old  liar,  the  devil.  Surely  in  the  face  of  that 
damning  sum  which  I  have  just  cast  up,  you  will  not  dare 
to  deny  that  "  you  have  many  sins." 

I  leave  this  part  of  my  subject  here,  and  pass  on.  I 
sadly  fear  that  many  a  reader  will  run  his  eye  over  what 
I  have  been  saying,  and  remain  unconvinced  and  unmoved. 
I  have  learned  by  mournful  experience  that  the  last  thing 
a  man  finds  out  and  understands,  is  his  own  state  in  the 
sight  of  God.  Well  saith  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  we  are  all 
by  nature  "blind,"  and  "deaf,"  and  "dumb,"  and  "asleep,"- 
and  "beside  ourselves,"  and  "dead!"  Nothing,  nothing 
will  ever  convince  man  of  sin  but  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Show  him  hell,  and  he  will  not  flee  from  it ;  show 
him  heaven,  and  he  will  not  seek  it ;  silence  him  with 
warnings,  and  yet  he  will  not  stir ;  prick  his  conscience, 
and  yet  he  will  remain  hard.    Power  from  on  high  must 


OUR  SINS. 


155 


come  down  and  do  the  work.  To  show  man  what  he 
really  is,  is  the  special  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God. 

He  that  has  any  feeling  of  his  own  sinfulness,  ought 
to  thank  God  for  it.  That  very  sense  of  weakness, 
wickedness,  and  corruption,  which  perhaps  makes  you 
imcomfortable,  is  in  reality  a  token  for  good,  and  a  cause 
for  praise.  The  first  step  towards  being  really  good,  is  to 
feel  had.  The  first  preparation  for  heaven,  ig  to  know  that 
we  deserve  nothing  but  liell.  Before  we  can  be  counted 
rio-hteous  we  must  know  ourselves  to  be  miserable  sinners. 
Before  we  can  have  inward  happiness  and  peace  with 
God,  we  must  learn  to  be  ashamed  and  confounded 
because  of  our  manifold  transgressions.  Before  we  can 
rejoice  in  a  well-grounded  hope,  we  raiist  be  taught  to 
say,  "Unclean:  unclean!  God,  be  merciful  to  me  a 
sinner ! " 

He  that  really  loves  his  own  soul  must  beware  of 
checking  and  stifling  this  inward  feeling  of  sinfulness.  I 
beseech  you,  by  the  mercies  of  God,  do  not  trample  on  it, 
do  not  crush  it,  do  not  take  it  by  the  throat  and  refuse  to 
give  it  your  attention.  Beware  of  taking  the  advice  of 
worldly  men  about  it.  Treat  it  not  as  a  case  of  low- 
spirits,  disordered  health,  or  anything  of  the  kind.  Be- 
ware of  listening  to  the  devil's  counsel  about  it.  Do  not 
try  to  drown  it  in  drink  and  revelling  ;  do  not  try  to  drive 
over  it  with  horses,  and  dogs,  and  carriages,  and  field- 
sports  ;  do  not  try  to  purge  it  away  by  a  course  of  card- 
parties,  and  balls,  and  concerts.  Oh,  if  you  love  your 
soul,  do  not,  do  not  treat  the  first  sense  of  sin  in  tliis 
miserable  foshion !  Do  not  commit  spiritual  suicide, — ■ 
do  not  murder  your  soul ! 

Go  rather  and  pray  God  to  show  you  what  this  feeling 
of  sin  means.  Ask  Him  to  send  the  Holy  Spirit  to  teacli 
you  what  you  are,  and  what  He  would  liave  you  to  do. 
Go  and  read  your  Bible,  and  see  whether  there  is  not  just 
cause  for  your  being  uncomfortable,  and  whether  this 


156 


OLD  PATHS. 


sense  of  being  " wicked  and  bad"  is  not  just  what  you 
bave  a  right  to  expect.  Who  can  tell  but  it  is  a  seed  from 
beaven,  which  is  one  day  to  bear  fruit  in  Paradise  in  your 
complete  salvation  ?  Who  can  tell  but  it  is  a  spark  from 
heaven,  which  God  means  to  blow  up  into  a  steady  and 
shining  fire  ?  Who  can  tell  but  it  is  a  little  stone  from 
above,  before  which  the  devil's  kingdom  in  your  heart  is  to 
go  down,  and  a  stone  which  shall  prove  the  first  foundation 
of  a  glorious  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ? — Happy  indeed 
is  that  man  or  woman  who  can  go  along  with  my  first 
remark,  and  say,  "  IT  IS  TRUE :  I  HAVE  MANY  SINS." 

II.  My  second  remark  is  this.  It  is  of  the  utmost 
importance  to  have  our  sins  tahen  off  us  and  put  aiuay. 

I  say  this  boldly  and  confidently.  I  am  aware  of  the 
multitude  of  things  which  are  thought  "important"  in  the 
world,  and  receive  the  fii'st  and  best  of  men's  attentions. 
But  I  know  well  what  I  am  saying.  I  am  bold  to  say  that 
my  Master's  business  deserves  to  be  placed  before  all  other 
business ;  and  I  learn  from  my  Master's  book  that  there 
is  nothing  of  such  importance  to  a  man  as  to  have  his  sins 
forgiven  and  cleansed  away. 

Let  us  remember  there  is  a  God  above  us.  We  see 
Him  not  in  the  city.  Hurry  and  bustle,  trade  and  com- 
merce, appear  to  swallow  up  men's  minds.  We  see  Him 
not  in  the  country.  Farming  and  labouring  go  on  in 
regular  course,  and  seed  time  and  harvest  never  fail.  But 
all  this  time  there  is  an  eternal  Eye  looking  down  from 
heaven  and  seeing  all  that  men  do :  an  eye  that  never 
slumbers,  and  never  sleeps.  Yes !  there  is  not  only  a 
Queen,  and  a  government,  and  a  landlord,  and  a  master, 
and  an  employer,  to  be  remembered.  There  is  One  higher, 
far  higher  than  all  these,  who  expects  His  dues  to  be  paid. 
That  One  is  the  most  high  God. 

This  God  is  a  God  of  infinite  holiness.  He  is  of 
"puter  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,  and  canst  not  look  on 


OUR  SINS. 


157 


iniquity."  (Habak.  i.  IS.)  He- sees  defects  and  infirmities 
where  we  see  none.  In  His  sight  the  very  "heavens  are 
not  clean."  (Job.  xv.  15.)  He  is  a  God  of  infinite  knoiuledge. 
He  knows  every  thought,  and  word,  and  action  of  every  one 
of  Adam's  children :  there  are  no  secrets  hid  from  Him.  All 
that  we  think,  and  say,  and  do,  is  noted  down  and  recorded 
in  the  book  of  His  remembrance. — He  is  a  God  of  infinite 
poiver.  He  made  all  things  at  the  beginning.  He  orders 
all  things  according  to  His  Avill.  He  casts  down  the  Kings 
of  this  world  in  a  moment.  None  can  stand  against  Him 
when  He  is  angry. — Above  all,  He  is  a  God  in  whose 
Imnds  are  our  lives  and  all  our  concerns.  He  first  gave  us 
being.  He  has  kept  us  alive  since  Ave  were  born.  He 
will  remove  us  when  He  sees  fit,  and  reckon  with  us  ac- 
cording to  our  ways.  Such  is  the  God  with  whom  we 
have  to  do. 

Let  us  think  of  these  things.  Surely,  as  Job  says,  "  when 
you  consider  you  will  be  afraid."  (Job  xxiii.  15.)  Surely 
you  will  see  it  is  of  the  utmost  imj^ortance  to  have  your 
sins  cleansed  away.  Surely  you  will  inquire,  "  How  do 
matters  stand  between  me  and  God?" 

Let  us  remember,  furthermore,  that  death  is  before  lis. 
We  cannot  live  always.  There  must  be  an  end,  one  day,  of 
all  our  scheming  and  planning,  and  buying  and  selling, 
and  working  and  toiling.  A  visitor  will  come  to  our  house 
who  will  take  no  denial.  The  king  of  terrors  will  demand- 
admission,  and  serve  us  with  notice  to  quit.  "Where  are 
the  rulers  and  kings  who  governed  millions  a  hundred 
years  ago  ?  Where  are  the  rich  men  who  made  fortunes 
and  founded  bouses  ?  Where  are  the  landlords  who  re- 
ceived rents  and  added  field  to  field  ?  Where  are  the 
labourers  who  ploughed  the  land  and  reaped  the  corn  ? 
Where  are  the  clergymen  who  read  services  and  preached 
sermons  ?  Where  are  the  children  who  played  in  the 
sunshine  as  if  they  would  never  be  old  ?  Where  are  the 
old  men  who  leaned  on  their  sticks  and  gossiped  about 


158 


OLD  PATHS. 


"the  days  when  they  were  young"?  There  is  but  one 
answer.  They  are  all  dead,  dead,  dead !  Strong,  and 
beautiful,  and  active  as  they  once  were,  they  are  all  dust 
and  ashes  now.  Mighty  and  important  as  they  all 
thought  their  business,  it  all  came  to  an  end.  And  we 
are  travelling  in  the  same  way  !  A  few  more  years  and  we 
also  shall  be  lying  in  our  graves ! 

Let  us  think  of  these  things.  Surely  when  you  con- 
sider your  latter  end  you  Avill  not  think  the  cleansing 
away  of  sin  a  light  matter.  Surely  you  will  see  something 
in  the  question,  "  Where  are  your  sins  ? "  Surely  you  will 
consider,  "  How  am  I  going  to  die  ? " 

Let  us  remember,  furthermore,  that  resurrection  and 
judgment  await  us.  All  is  not  over  when  the  last  breath 
is  drawn  and  our  bodies  become  a  lump  of  cold  clay.  No : 
all  is  not  over  !  The  realities  of  existence  then  begin.  The 
shadows  will  have  passed  away  for  ever.  The  trumpet 
shall  one  day  sound,  and  call  us  forth  from  our  narrow 
bed.  The  graves  shall  be  rent  asimder,  and  their  tenants 
shall  be  summoned  forth  to  meet  God.  The  ears  that  would 
not  obey  the  church-going  bpll  shall  be  obliged  to  obey 
another  summons  ;  the  proud  wills  that  would  not  submit 
to  listen  to  sermons  shall  be  compelled  to  listen  to  the 
judgment  of  God.  The  great  white  throne  shall  be  set :  the 
books  shall  be  opened.  Every  man,  woman,  and  child, 
•shall  be  arraigned  at  that  great  assize.  Every  one  shall 
be  judged  according  to  his  works.  The  sins  of  every  one 
shall  be  answered  for.  And  every  one  shall  receive  his 
eternal  portion  either  in  heaven  or  in  hell ! 

Let  us  think  of  these  things.  Surely  in  remembrance 
of  that  day  you  must  allow  that  the  subject  I  am  upon  de- 
serves attention.  Surely  you  must  confess  that  it  is  of 
the  utmost  importance  to  have  your  sins  cleansed  away. 
Surely  you  will  consider,  "  How  am  I  goiog  to  be  judged  ? " 

I  must  speak  out  what  is  upon  my  mind.  I  feel  great 
sorrow  and  trouble  of  heart  about  many  men  and  women 


OUR  SINS. 


159' 


in  the  world.  I  fear  for  many  who  hve  in  this  so-called 
Christian  land ;  I  fear  for  many  who  profess  and  call 
themselves  Christians ;  I  fear  for  many  who  go  to  church 
or  chapel  every  Sunday  and  have  a  decent  form  of  religion  ; 
I  fear  that  they  do  not  see  the  immense  importance  of 
having  their  sins  cleansed  away.  I  can  see  plainly  that 
there  are  many  other  things  which  they  think  far  more 
important.  Money,  and  land,  and  farms,  and  horses,  and 
carriages,  and  dogs,  and  meat,  and  drink,  and  clothes,  and 
houses,  and  marriages,  and  families,  and  business,  and 
pleasure, — these,  these  are  the  sort  of  things  which  many 
evidently  think  the  "first  things."  And  as  for  the  for- 
giveness and  cleansing  away  of  their  sins,  it  is  a  matter 
which  has  only  the  second  place  in  their  thoughts. 

See  the  man  of  business,  as  he  pores  over  his  ledger  and 
account  books,  and  runs  his  eye  over  the  columns  of  figures. 
See  the  man  of  pleasure,  as  he  tears  over  the  country  with 
his  horses  and  dogs,  or  rushes  after  excitement  at  the  races, 
the  theatre,  the  card  party,  or  the  ball.  See  the  poor 
thoughtless  labourer,  as  he  carries  off  his  hard-earned 
■wages  to  the  public  house,  and  wastes  them  in  ruining 
both  body  and  soul.  See  them  all,  how  thoroughly  they 
are  in  earnest !  See  them  all,  how  they  tlirow  their  hearts 
into  what  they  are  doing ! — And  then  mark  them  all  at 
church  next  Sunday :  listless,  careless,  yawning,  sleepy,  and 
indifferent,  as  if  there  were  no  God,  and  no  devil,  and  no 
Christ,  and  no  heaven,  and  no  hell !  Mark  how  evident 
it  is  that  they  have  left  their  hearts  outside  tlie  church  ! 
Mark  how  plain  it  is  tljat  they  have  no  real  interest  in 
religion  !  And  then  say  whether  it  be  not  true  that 
many  know  nothing  of  the  importance  of  having  their 
sins  cleansed  away.  0,  take  heed  lest  this  be  the  case 
with  you  ! 

Does  any  reader  of  these  pages  feel  anything  of  the 
importance  of  being  forgiven  ?  Then,  in  the  name  of  God, 
I  call  upon  you  to  encourage  that  feeling  more  and  more. 


160 


OLD  PATHS. 


This  is  the  point  to  which  we  desire  to  bring  all  people's 
souls.  We  want  you  to  understand  that  religion  does  not 
consist  in  professing  certain  opinions,  and  performing 
certain  outward  duties,  and  going  through  certain  out- 
ward forms.  It  consists  in  being  reconciled  to  God, 
and  enjoying  peace  with  Him.  It  consists  in  having  our 
sins  cleansed  away,  and  knowing  that  they  are  cleansed. 
It  consists  in  being  brought  back  into  friendship  with 
the  King  of  kings,  and  living  in  the  sunshine  of  that 
friendship. — Listen  not  to  those  who  would  fain  persuade 
you  that  if  you  only  "  go  to  church  "  regularly  you  will 
of  course  go  to  heaven.  Settle  it  rather  in  your  mind, 
that  true  saving  religion,  such  as  the  Bible  teaches,  is 
another  kind  of  thing  altogether.  The  very  foundation 
of  real  Christianity  is  to  know  that  you  have  many  sins, 
and  deserve  hell, — and  to  feel  the  importance  of  having 
these  sins  cleansed  away,  in  order  that  you  may  go  to 
heaven. 

Happy,  says  the  Avorld,  are  they  who  have  plenty  of 
property  and  fine  houses '  Happy  are  they  who  have 
carriages,  and  horses,  and  servants,  and  large  balances  at 
their  bankers,  and  great  troops  of  friends !  Haj^py  are 
they  who  are  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  and  fare 
sumptuously  every  day,  who  have  nothing  to  do  but  to 
spend  their  money  and  enjoy  themselves ! — Yet  what  is 
the  real  value  of  such  happiness  ?  It  gives  no  solid,  real 
satisfaction,  even  at  the  tiine  of  enjoyment.  It  endures 
but  for  a  few  years.  It  only  lasts  till  death  comes  in,  like 
the  hand  at  Belshazzar's  feast,  and  breaks  up  all.  And 
then,  in  too  many  cases,  this  so-called  happiness  is 
exchanged  for  ETERNAL  MISERY  IN  HELL. 

"  Blessed,"  says  the  Word  of  God,  "  are  those  whose 
iniquities  are  forgiven,  and  whose  sins  are  covered ! 
Blessed  is  the  man  unto  whom  the  Lord  imputeth  not 
iniquity  ! — Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  !    Blessed  are  they  that  mourn,  for 


OUR  SINS. 


161 


they  sliall  be  comforted!  Blessed  are  they  that  hunger 
and  thirst  after  righteousness,  for  they  shall  be  filled ! " 
(Psalm  xxxii.  1,  2 ;  Matt,  v.  2,  etc.) — Their  blessedness 
shall  never  come  to  an  end  :  their  happiness  is  no  summer- 
dried  fountain,  just  failing  when  need  is  the  sorest;  their 
friends  are  no  summer  swallows,  forsaking  them,  like 
Adouijah's  guests,  the  first  moment  that  the  trumpet 
sounds.  Their  sun  shall  never  go  down.  Their  joy  shall 
bud  in  time,  and  bloom  in  eternity.  Theirs,  in  a  word,  is 
true  happiness,  for  it  is  for  evermore. 

Do  you  believe  what  I  am  saying  ?  It  is  all  Scriptural 
and  true.  You  will  see  one  day  whose  words  sliall  stand, 
the  words  of  man  or  the  Word  of  God.  Be  wise  in  time. 
Settle  it  in  your  heart  this  very  hour,  that  the  most  im- 
portant thing  that  man  can  attend  to  is  the  cleansing  and 
forgiveness  of  his  sins. 

III.  My  third  remark  is  this.  We  cannot  cleanse 
away  our  own  sins. 

I  make  this  statement  boldly  and  confidently.  Startling 
as  it  sounds  to  the  natural  heart,  I  lay  it  down  as  a 
piece  of  undeniable  Scriptural  truth.  In  spite  of  all  the 
Pharisees,  and  Roman  Catholics,  and  Socinians,  and  Deists, 
and  idolaters  of  human  reason  and  human  power,  I  unhesi- 
tatingly repeat  my  assertion. — Man's  sins  are  many  and 
great.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  these  sins 
should  be  cleansed  away.  Man's  guilt  in  the  sight  of 
God,  is  enormous.  Man's  danger  of  hell,  after  he  dies,  is 
imminent  and  tremendous.  And  yet  man  cannot  cleanse 
away  his  own  sins !  It  is  written,  and  it  is  true,  "  By  the 
deeds  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  be  justified."  (Rom.  iii.  20.) 

(a)  It  will  not  cleanse  away  your  sins  to  he  sorry  for  them. 
You  may  mourn  over  your  past  wickedness,  and  humble 
yourself  in  sackcloth  and  ashes.  You  may  shed  floods  of 
tears,  and  acknowledge  your  own  guilt  and  danger.  Yoxt 
may  — you  must, — you  ought  to  do  this.   But  you  will  not 


162 


OLD  PATHS. 


by  so  doing  wipe  out  your  transgressions  from  the  book  of 
God.  SORROW  CANNOT  MAKE  ATONEMENT 
FOR  SIN. 

Tlie  convicted  criminal  in  a  court  of  justice  is  often 
sorry  for  his  offences.  He  sees  the  misery  and  ruin  they 
have  brought  upon  him.  He  mourns  over  his  folly  in  not 
listening  to  advice  and  in  giving  way  to  temj)tation.  But 
the  judge  does  not  let  him  off  because  he  is  sorry.  The 
deed  has  been  done ;  the  law  has  been  broken ;  the  penalty 
has  been  incurred.  The  punishment  must  be  inflicted, 
notwithstanding  the  criminal's  tears. — This  is  precisely 
your  position  in  the  sight  of  God.  Your  sorrow  is  right, 
and  good,  and  proper.  But  your  sorrow  has  no  power 
whatever  to  cleanse  away  j'our  sins.  It  needs  some- 
thing more  than  penitence  to  take  the  burden  off  your 
heart. 

(6)  It  will  not  cleanse  away  your  sins  to  mend  your  life} 
You  may  reform  your  conduct,  and  turn  over  a  new  leaf 
you  may  break  off  many  evil  habits,  and  take  up  many 
good  ones ;  you  may  become,  in  short,  an.  altered  man  in 
all  your  outward  behaviour.  You  may, — you  must, — you 
ought  to  do  so.  Without  such  chan<je  no  soul  ever  was 
saved.  But  you  will  not,  by  so  doing,  wipe  away  one 
particle  of  your  guilt  in  God's  siglit.  REFORLIATION 
MAKES  NO  ATONEMENT  FOR  SIN. 

The  bankrupt  tradesman,  who  owes  ten  thousand  pounds 
and  has  not  ten  shillings  to  pay,  may  resolve  to  become  a 
reformed  character.  After  wasting  his  w^hole  substance  in 
riotous  living,  he  may  become  steady,  temperate,  and 
respectable.  It  is  all  right  and  proper  that  he  should  be 
so :  but  this  will  not  satisfy  the  claims  of  those  to  whom 
he  owes  money.  Once  more  I  say,  this  is  precisely  your 
case  by  nature  in  the  sight  of  God.  You  owe  Him  ten 
thousand  talents,  and  have  "  nothing  to  pay."  To-day's 
amendments  are  all  very  well,  but  they  do  not  wipe  away 
yesterday's  debts.  —  It  requires  something  more  than 


OUR  SINS. 


163! 


amendment  and  reformation  to  give  you  a  light  heart  and 
to  set  your  conscience  free. 

(c)  It  will  not  cleanse  away  your  sins  to  become  diligent 
in  the  use  of  the  forms  and  ordinances  of  religion.  You 
may  alter  your  habits  about  Sunday,  and  attend  services 
from  morning  to  night ;  you  may  take  pains  to  hear 
preaching  on  week-days,  as  well  as  on  Sundays  ;  you  may 
receive  the  Lord's  Supper  on  every  possible  occasion,  and 
give  alms,  and  keep  fasts.  It  is  all  very  well  as  far  as  it 
goes.  It  is  a  right  and  proper  thing  to  attend  to  your 
religious  duties.  But  all  the  means  of  grace  in  the  world 
will  never  do  you  any  good  so  long  as  you  trust  in  them 
as  saviours.  They  will  not  bind  up  the  wounds  of  your, 
heart,  and  give  you  inward  peace.  FORMALITY  CAN- 
NOT MAKE  ATONEMENT  FOR  SIN. 

A  lantern  on  a  dark  night  is  a  very  useful  thing.  It 
can  help  the  traveller  to  find  his  way  home;  it  can  pre- 
serve him  from  losing  his  path,  and  keep  him  from  falling, 
into  danger.  But  the  lantern  itself  is  not  the  traveller's 
fireside.  The  man  who  is  content  to  sit  down  in  the  road 
by  the  side  of  his  lantern,  must  never  be  surprised  if  he 
dies  of  cold.  If  you  try  to  satisfy  your  conscience  with  a 
formal  attendance  on  means  of  grace,  you  are  no  wiser 
than  this  traveller.  It  needs  something  more  than  re- 
ligious formality  to  take  the  burden  from  your  conscience 
and  to  give  you  peace  with  God. 

(d)  It  will  not  cleanse  away  your  sins  to  looh  to  man  for 
help.  It  is  not  in  the  power  of  any  child  of  Adam  to  save 
another's  soul.  No  bishop,  no  priest,  no  ordained  man  of 
any  Church  or  denomination  has  power  to  forgive  sins : 
no  human  absolution,  however  solemnly  conferred,  can 
purge  that  conscience  which  is  not  purged  by  God.  It  is 
well  to  ask  the  counsel  of  the  ministers  of  the  Gospel 
when  the  conscience  is  perplexed.  It  is  their  office  to 
help  the  labouring  and  heavy-laden,  and  to  show  them 
the  way  of  peace.    But  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  any 


164 


OLD  PATHS. 


minister  to  deliver  any  man  from  his  guilt.  We  can  only 
show  the  path  that  must  be  followed :  we  can  only  point 
out  the  door  at  which  every  one  must  knock.  It  requires 
a  hand  far  stronger  than  that  of  man  to  take  the  chains 
off  conscience,  and  set  the  prisoner  free.  NO  CHILD 
OF  ADAM  CAN  TAKE  AWAY  HIS  BROTHER'S 
SINS. 

The  bankrupt  who  asks  a  bankrupt  to  set  him  up  in 
business  again  is  only  losing  time.  The  pauper  who  travels 
off  to  a  neighbour  pauper,  and  begs  him  to  help  him  out 
of  difficulties,  is  only  troubling  himself  in  vain.  The 
prisoner  does  not  beg  his  fellow-prisoner  to  set  him  free ; 
the  shipwrecked  sailor  does  not  call  on  his  shijDwrecked 
comrade  to  place  him  safe  ashore.  Help  in  all  these 
cases  must  come  from  some  other  quarter:  relief  in  all 
these  cases  must  be  sought  from  some  other  hand.  It  is 
just  the  same  in  the  matter  of  cleansing  away  your  sins. 
So  long  as  you  seek  it  from  man,  whether  man  ordained 
or  man  not  ordained,  you  seek  it  where  it  cannot  be  found. 
You  must  go  further :  you  must  look  higher.  You  must 
turn  elsewhere  for  comfort.  It  is  not  in  the  power  of 
any  man  on  earth  or  in  heaven  to  take  the  burden  of 
sin  from  off  another  man's  soul.  "None  can  by  any 
means  redeem  his  brother,  nor  give  to  God  a  ransom  for 
him."   (Psalm  xlix.  7.) 

Thousands  in  every  age  have  tried  to  cleanse  themselves 
from  their  sins  in  the  ways  I  have  now  described,  and 
have  tried  in  vain.  Thousands,  I  doubt  not,  are  trying  at 
this  very  moment,  and  find  themselves  "  nothing  bettered, 
but  rather  worse."  (Mark  v.  26.)  They  are  climbing  up  a 
steep  precipice  of  ice,  toiling  hard,  and  yet  slipping  back- 
wards as  fast  as  they  climb. — They  are  pouring  water  into  a 
cask  full  of  holes,  labouring  busily,  and  yet  no  nearer  the 
end  of  their  work  than  when  they  began. — They  are  rowing 
a  boat  against  a  rapid  stream,  plying  the  oar  diligently, 
and  yet  in  reality  losing  ground  every  minute. — They  are 


OUR  SINS. 


165' 


trying  to  build  up  a  wall  of  loose  sand,  wearing  themselves 
out  with  fatigue,  and  yet  seeing  their  work  roll  down  on 
them  as  fast  as  they  throw  it  up. — They  are  striving  to 
pump  dry  a  sinking  ship:  the  water  gains  on  them  andj 
they  will  soon  be  drowned. — Such  is  the  experience,  inl 
every  part  of  the  world,  of  all  who  think  to  cleanse  them- 
selves from  their  sins. 

I  warn  every  reader  of  this  paper  to  beware  of  quack 
medicines  in  religion.  Beware  of  supposing  that  penitence, 
and  reformation,  and  formality,  and  priest-craft,  can  ever 
give  you  peace  with  God.  They  cannot  do  it.  It  is  not; 
in  them.  The  man  who  says  they  can  must  be  ignorant' 
ot  two  things.  He  cannot  know  the  length  and  breadth 
of  human  sinfulness :  he  cannot  understand  the  height 
and  depth  of  the  holiness  of  God.  There  never  breathed 
the  man  or  woman  on  earth  who  tried  to  cleanse  himself 
from  bis  sins,  and  in  so  doing  obtained  relief. 

if  you  have  found  out  this  truth  by  experience,  be 
diligent  to  impart  it  to  others.  Show  them  as  plainly  as 
you  can  their  guilt  and  danger  by  nature.  Tell  them, 
with  uo  less  plainness,  the  immense  importance  of  having 
their  sins  forgiven  and  cleansed  away.  But  then  warn 
them  not  to  waste  time  in  seeking  to  be  cleansed  in 
unlawful  fashions.  Warn  them  against  the  specious  advice 
of  "  Mr.  Legality  "  and  his  companions,  so  vividly  described 
in  "  Pilgrim's  Progress."  Warn  them  against  false  remedies 
and  sham  medicines  for  the  soul.  Send  them  to  the  old 
Avicket-gate,  described  in  Scripture,  however  hard  and 
rough  the  way  may  seem.  Tell  them  it  is  "  the  old  path 
and  the  good  way,"  and  that,  whatever  men  may  say,  it  is 
the  only  way  to  obtain  cleansing  of  our  sins.   (Jer.  vi.  16.) 

IV,  The  fourth  remark  I  have  to  make  is  this.  The 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  can  cleanse  away  all  our  sins. 

I  enter  on  this  part  of  my  paper  with  a  thankful  heart. 
I  bless  God  that  after  setting  before  my  readers  the  deadly 


166 


OLD  PATHS. 


nature  of  their  spiritual  disease,  I  am  able  to  set  before' 
them  an  almighty  remedy.  But  I  feel  it  needful  to  dwell 
upon  this  remedy  for  a  few  minutes.  A  thing  of  such 
wondrous  efficacy  as  this  "blood"  ought  to  be  clear!}/ 
understood :  there  should  be  no  vagueness  or  mystery  in 
your  ideas  about  it.  When  you  hear  of  the  "  blood  of 
Christ"  you  ought  thoroughly  to  comprehend  what  the 
expression  means. 

The  blood  of  Christ  is  that  life-blood  which  the  Lord 
Jesus  shed  when  He  died  for  sinners  upon  the  cross.  It  is 
the  blood  which  flowed  so  freely  from  His  head  pierced 
with  thorns,  and  His  hands  and  feet  pierced  with  nails,  and 
His  side  pierced  with  a  spear,  in  the  day  when  He  was 
crucified  and  slain.  The  quantity  of  that  blood  may  very 
likely  have  been  small ;  the  appearance  of  that  blood  was 
doubtless  like  that  of  our  own :  but  never  since  the  day 
when  Adam  was  first  formed  out  of  the  dust  of  the 
ground,  has  any  blood  been  shed  of  such  deep  importance 
to  the  whole  family  of  mankind. 

It  was  blood  that  had  been  long  covenanted  and 
promised.  In  the  day  when  sin  came  into  the  world, 
God  mercifully  engaged  that  "the  Seed  of  the  woman 
should  bruise  the  serpent's  head."  (Gen.  iii.  15.)  One 
born  of  woman  should  appear  one  day,  and  deliver  the 
children  of  Adam  from  Satan's  power.  That  Seed  of  the 
woman  was  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  In  the  day  that  He 
suffered  on  the  cross,  He  triumphed  over  Satan  and  accom- 
plished redemption  for  mankind.  When  Jesus  shed  His 
life-blood  on  the  cross,  the  head  of  the  serpent  was  bruised, 
and  the  ancient  promise  was  fulfilled. 

It  was  blood  that  had  been  long  typified  and  po-efigured. 
Every  sacrifice  that  was  offered  up  by  patriarchs,  was  a 
testimony  of  their  faith  in  a  greater  sacrifice  yet  to  come. 
Every  shedding  of  the  blood  of  lambs  and  goats  under 
the  Mosaic  law  was  meant  to  foreshadow  the  dying  of  the 
true  Lamb  of  God  for  the  sin  of  the  world.    When  Christy 


OUR  SINS. 


167 


was  crucified,  these  sacrifices  and  types  received  their  full 
accomplishment.  The  true  sacrifice  for  sin  was  at  length 
offered  ;  the  real  atoning  blood  was  at  length  shed.  From 
that  day  the  offerings  of  the  Mosaic  law  were  no  longer 
needed.  Their  work  was  done.  Like  old  almanacs,  they 
might  be  laid  aside  for  ever. 

It  was  blood  which  w^as  of  infinite  merit  and  value  in 
the  sight  of  God.  It  was  not  the  blood  oi  one  who  was 
nothing  more  than  a  singularly  holy  man,  but  oi  one  who 
was  God's  own  "  Fellow,"  very  God  of  very  God.  (Zech.  xiii. 
7.)  It  was  not  the  blood  of  one  who  died  involuntarily,  as  a 
martyr  for  truth,  but  of  one  who  voluntarily  imdertook  to 
be  the  Substitute  and  Proxy  for  mankind,  to  bear  their  sins 
and  carry  their  iniquities.  It  made  atonement  for  man's 
transgressions ;  it  paid  man's  enormous  debt  to  God  ;  it 
provided  a  way  of  righteous  reconciliation  between  sinful 
man  and  his  holy  Maker ;  it  made  a  road  from  heaven  to 
earth,  by  which  God  could  come  down  to  man,  and  show^ 
mercy ;  it  made  a  road  from  earth  to  heaven,  by  which 
man  could  draw  near  to  God,  and  yet  not  feel  afraid. 
Without  it  there  could  have  been  no  remission  of  sin.l 
Through  it  God  can  be  "just  and  yet  the  justifier  "  ot  the 
ungodly.  From  it  a  fountain  has  been  formed,  wherem 
sinners  can  wash  and  be  clean  to  all  eternity.  (Rom.  iii.  26.) 

This  wondrous  blood  of  Christ,  applied  to  your  con- 
science, can  cleanse  you  from  all  sin.  It  matters  nothing 
"what  your  sins  may  have  been,  "Though  they  be  as 
scarlet  they  may  be  made  like  snow.  Though  they  be 
red  like  crimson  they  can  be  made  like  wool."  (Isaiah  i. 
18.)  From  sins  of  youth  and  sins  of  age, — from  sins  of 
ignorance  and  sins  of  knowledge, — from  sins  of  open 
profligacy  and  sins  of  secret  vice, — from  sins  against  law 
and  sins  against  Gospel, — from  sins  of  head,  and  heart, 
and  tongue,  and  thought,  and  imagination, — from  sins 
against  each  and  all  of  the  ten  commandments, — from  all 
these  the  blood  of  Christ  can  set  us  free.    To  this  end 


168 


OLD  PATHS. 


was  it  appointed ;  for  this  cause  was  it  shed ;  for  this 
purpose  it  is  still  a  fountain  open  to  all  mankind.  That 
thing  which  you  cannot  do  for  yourself  can  be  done  in  a 
moment  by  this  precious  fountain.  YOU  CAN  HAVE 
ALL  YOUR  SINS  CLEANSED  AWAY. 

In  this  blood  all  the  dead  saints  have  been  cleansed 
hitherto,  who  are  now  waiting  the  resurrection  of  the  just. 
From  Abel,  the  first  of  whom  we  read,  down  to  the  last 
who  has  fallen  asleep  to-day,  they  have  all  "  washed  their 
robes,  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb." 
(Rev.  vii.  14.)  Not  one  has  entered  into  rest  by  his  own 
works  and  deservings ;  not  one  has  make  himself  clean 
before  God  by  his  own  goodness  and  his  own  strength. 
They  have  all  "overcome  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb." 
(Rev.  xii.  11.)  And  their  testimony  in  Paradise  is  clear 
and  distinct :  "  Thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to 
God  by  Thy  blood,  out  of  every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and 
people,  and  nation."    (Rev.  v.  9.) 

By  this  blood  all  the  living  saints  of  God  have  peace 
and  hope  now.  By  it  they  have  boldness  to  enter  into 
the  holiest;  by  it  they  are  justified  and  made  nigh  to 
God ;  by  it  their  consciences  are  daily  purged  and  filled 
with  holy  confidence.  About  it  all  believers  are  agreed, 
however  much  they  may  differ  on  other  matters.  Episco- 
palians and  Presbyterians,  Baptists  and  Methodists, — all 
are  agreed  that  the  blood  of  Christ  is  that  only  thing  that 
can  cleanse  the  soul. — All  are  agreed  that  in  ourselves  we 
are  "wretched  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and 
naked."  (Rev.  iii.  17.)  But  all  are  agreed  that  in  the 
blood  of  Christ  the  chief  of  sinners  can  be  made  clean. 

Would  you  like  to  know  what  we  ministers  of  the  Gcspel 
are  ordained  to  do  ?  We  are  not  set  apart  for  no  other 
end  than  to  read  services,  and  administer  sacraments,  and 
marry  people,  and  bury  the  dead.  We  are  not  meant  to 
do  nothing  more  than  show  you  the  church,  or  ourselves, 
or  our  party.    We  are  set  for  the  work  of  showing  men 


OUR  SINS. 


169 


the  "blood  of  Christ;"  and  except  we  are  continually 
showing  it,  we  are  no  true  ministers  of  the  Gospel. 

Would  you  like  to  know  what  is  our  heart's  desire  and 
prayer  for  the  souls  to  whom  we  minister  ?  We  want  to 
brinjTf  them  to  the  "  blood  of  Christ."  We  are  not  content  to 
see  our  churches  filled,  and  our  ordinances  well  attended, 
our  congregations  numerous,  and  our  cause  outwardly 
flourishing'.  We  want  to  see  men  and  women  coming  to 
this  great  Fountain  for  sin  and  uncleanness,  and  washing 
their  souls  in  it  that  they  may  be  clean.  Here  only  is  rest 
for  the  conscience.  Here  only  is  peace  for  the  inward  man. 
Here  only  is  a  cure  for  spiritual  diseases.  Here  only  is  the 
secret  of  a  light  and  happy  heart.  No  doubt  we  have 
within  us  a  fountain  of  evil  and  corruption.  But,  blessed 
be  God,  there  is  another  Fountain  of  greater  power  still, — 
even  the  precious  blood  of  the  Lamb ;  and,  washing  daily 
in  that  other  Fountain,  we  are  clean  from  all  sin. 

V.  The  fifth,  and  last  remark  I  have  to  make,  is  this. 
Faith  is  absolutely  necessary,  and  the  only  thing 
necessary,  in  order  to  give  us  an  interest  in  the 
cleansing  blood  of  Christ. 

I  ask  the  special  attention  of  all  my  readers  to  this 
point.  A  mistake  here  is  often  ruinous  to  a  man's  soul. 
It  is  a  great  leak  at  the  bottom  of  your  Chri.stianity  if 
you  do  not  clearly  see  the  true  way  of  union  between 
Christ  and  the  soul. — That  way  is  faith. 

Church-membership  and  reception  of  the  sacraments 
are  no  proof  that  you  are  washed  in  Christ's  blood. 
Thousands  attend  a  Christian  place  of  worship,  and  re- 
ceive the  Lord's  Supper  from  the  hands  of  Christian 
ministers,  and  yet  show  plainly  that  th  y  are  not  cleansed 
from  their  sins.  Beware  of  despising  means  of  grace,  if 
you  have  any  desire  to  be  saved.  But  never,  never  forget 
that  Church-membership  is  not  faith. 

Faith  is  the  one  thing  needfjl  in  order  to  give  you  the 


170 


OLD  PATHS. 


benefit  of  Christ's  cleansing  blood.  He  is  called  a  "pro- 
pitiation througb  faith  in  His  blood." — "  He  that  believetli 
on  Him  hath  everlasting  life." — "  By  Him  all  that  believe 
are  justified  from  all  things." — "  Being  justified  by  faith 
we  have  peace  with  God,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
(Rom,  iii.  25 ;  John  iii.  36 ;  Acts  xiii.  39 ;  Rom.  v.  1.) — 
The  wisdom  of  the  whole  world  will  never  provide  a 
better  answer  to  an  anxious  inquirer  than  that  which  Paul 
gave  to  the  Philippian  jailor :  "Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  (Acts  xvi.  31.) — "Art 
thou  convinced  of  sin  ? "  says  the  Gospel.  "  Dost  thou 
really  see  that  thou  hast  many  sins,  and  art  deserving 
of  hell  ?  Dost  thou  renounce  all  hope  of  cleansing  thyseli 
from  thy  sins  by  thine  own  power  ?  Then  thou  art  just 
the  man  for  whom  the  Gospel  jirovides  comfort.  Behold 
the  atoning  blood  of  Christ  ]  Only  trust  in  it,  and  this 
day  thou  shalt  be  freely  pardoned.  Only  believe,  and  this 
very  moment  thy  sins  shall  be  cleansed  away." — It  is  only 
"  Believe  and  have."  It  is  only  "  Believe  and  be  clean." 
Let  those  who  will  call  such  doctrine  rant  and  enthusiasm. 
I  am  bold  to  call  it  by  another  name.  It  is  the  "  glorious 
Gospel "  of  the  grace  of  God. 

I  ask  you  not  to  misunderstand  my  meaning  in  thus 
speaking  of  faith.  I  do  not  tell  you  that  faith  is  the  only 
mark  of  the  man  whose  sins  are  cleansed  away.  I  do  not 
say  that  the  faith  which  gives  a  man  an  interest  in  Christ's 
atoning  blood,  is  ever  found  alone.  Saving  faith  is  no 
barren,  solitary  grace.  It  is  always  accompanied  by^ 
repentance  and  personal  holiness.— But  this  I  say  con- 
fidently,— that  in  the  matter  of  giving  the  soul  an  interest 
in  Christ,  faith  is  the  only  thing  required.  In  the  matter 
of  justification  "before  God,  faith,  I  repeat  emphatically, 
stands  entirely  alone.  Faith  is  the  hand  that  lays  hold  on 
Christ.  Faith  begins,  faith  carries  on,  faith  keeps  up  the 
claim  which  the  sinner  makes  on  the  Saviour.  By  faith 
we  are  justified.    By  faith  we  bathe  our  souls  in  the  great 


•OUE  SINS. 


171 


Fountain  for  sin.  By  faith  we  go  on  obtaining  fresh  sup- 
plies of  pardoning  mercy  all  through  our  journey.  By 
faith  we  live,  and  by  faith  we  stand. 

Nothing  ivhatever  beside  this  faith  is  required,  in  order 
to  your  complete  justification  and  cleansing  from  all  sin.i 
Let  this  sink  deeply  into  your  mind.  Where  is  the  man 
that  desires  to  enjoy  real  comfort  from  the  Gospel  ?  Seek, 
I  do  entreat  you,  to  have  clear  and  simple  views  of  the 
nature  of  saving  faith.  Beware  of  those  dark,  and  confused, 
and  muddy  notions  of  faith,  by  wliich  so  many  distress 
their  souls.  Dismiss  from  your  mind  the  idea  that  faith 
is  a  mere  act  of  the  intellect.  It  is  not  assent  to  doctrines 
or  articles ;  it  is  not  belief  of  "  Paley's  Evidences "  or 
"Pearson  on  the  Creed."  It  is  simply  the  grasp  of  a 
contrite  heart  on  the  outstretched  hand  of  an  Almighty 
Saviour, — the  repose  of  a  weary  head  on  the  bosom  of  an 
Almighty  Friend. — Cast  away  all  idea  of  work,  or  merit, 
or  doing,  or  performing,  or  paying,  or  giving,  or  buying,  or 
labouring,  in  the  act  of  believing  on  Christ.  Understand 
that  faith  is  not  giving,  but  taking, — not  paying,  but  re- 
ceiving,— not  buying,  but  being  enriched.  Faith  is  the  eye 
Avhich  looks  to  the  brazen  serpent,  and  looking  obtains  life 
and  health ;  it  is  the  mouth  which  drinks  down  the  reviving 
medicine,  and  drinkino^  receives  strensrth  and  vigour  for 
the  whole  body;  it  is  the  hand  of  the  drowning  man  which 
lays  hold  on  the  rope  thrown  to  him,  and  laying  hold 
enables  him  to  be  drawn  up  from  the  deep  water  safe  and 
sound.  This,  and  nothing  more  than  this,  is  the  true  idea 
of  saving  faith.  This,  and  this  only,  is  the  faith  that  is 
required  to  give  you  an  interest  in  the  blood  of  Christ. 
Believe  in  this  Avay,  and  your  sins  are  at  once  cleansed 
away ! 

Nothing  whatever  except  this  faith  will  ever  give  you 
an  interest  in  Christ's  atoning  blood.  You  may  go  daily 
to  Christ's  church  ;  you  may  often  use  Christ's  name  ;  you 
may  bow  the  head  at  the  name  of  Jesus ;  you  may  eat  of 


172 


OLD  PATHS. 


the  bread  and  wine  which  Christ  commanded  to  be  received. 
But  all  this  time,  without  faith,  you  have  neither  part  nor 
lot  in  Christ :  without  faith,  so  far  as  you  are  concerned, 
Christ's  blood  has  been  shed  in  vain. 

I  desire  to  enter  my  solemn  protest  against  the  modern 
notions  which  prevail  on  this  solemn  subject.  I  protest 
against  the  opinion  which  many  now  maintain,  that  any 
are  saved  by  Christ  excepting  those  who  believe.  There 
is  much  vague  talk  in  some  quarters  about  the  "Fatherhood 
of  God"  and  the  "love  of  God,"  as  if  we  who  are  called 
"  Evangelical "  denied  these  glorious  truths.  We  do  not 
deny  them  at  all :  we  hold  them  as  strongly  as  any.  We 
give  place  to  no  man  in  this  matter.  But  we  utterly  deny 
that  God  is  the  spiritual  Father  of  any  excepting  those  who 
are  His  cldldren  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  (Gal.  iii.  26.) 
We  utterly  deny  that  men  have  a  right  to  take  comfort  in 
God's  love,  except  they  believe  on  Him  through  whom 
that  love  has  been  manifested,  even  His  dear  Son.  The 
atoning  blood  of  the  Son  of  God  is  the  grand  exhibition  of 
God's  love  towards  sinners.  The  sinner  who  desires  to  be 
saved,  must  have  personal  dealings  with  Him  who  shed 
that  blood.  By  personal  faith  he  must  wash  in  it;  by 
personal  faith  he  must  drink  of  it ;  by  personal  faith  he 
must  put  in  his  own  claim  to  all  its  blessings.  Without 
this  faith  there  can  be  no  salvation. 

Would  you  know  one  main  object  which  we  ministers 
have  in  view  in  our  preaching  ?  We  jireach  that  you  may 
believe.  Faith  is  the  thing  that  we  desire  to  see  produced 
in  your  souls ;  faith  is  the  thing  that,  once  produced,  we^ 
desire  to  see  growing.  We  rejoice  to  see  you  coming 
regularly  to  hear  the  Gospel ;  we  rejoice  to  see  an  orderly, 
well-behaved  congregation  of  worshippers :  but  faith,  faith, 
faith, — is  the  grand  result  which  we  long  to  see  in  your 
souls.  Without  faith  we  cannot  feel  comfortable  about 
you ;  without  faith  you  are  in  imminent  danger  of  hell. 
^According  to  your  faith  will  be  the  strength  of  your 


OUR  SINS. 


173 


Christianity ;  according  to  the  degree  of  your  faith  Avill  be 
the  increase  of  your  peace  and  hope,  and  the  closeness  of 
your  walk  with  God.  You  will  not  wonder  that  there  is 
nothing  we  care  for  so  much  as  your  believing. 

I  hasten  to  bring  my  remarks  to  a  conclusion.  I  have 
tried  to  show  you  five  things,  and  have  endeavoured  to 
set  them  before  you  in  plain  language.  (1)  I  have  told 
you  that  you  have  many  sins.  (2)  I  have  told  you  that 
it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  have  these  sins  cleansed 
away.  (3)  I  have  told  you  that  you  cannot  cleanse  away 
your  own  sins.  (4)  I  have  told  you  that  the  blood  of 
Christ  cleanseth  from  all  sin.  (5)  I  have  told  you  that 
faith  only  is  needful,  but  absolutely  needful,  to  give  you 
any  interest  in  Christ's  blood.  I  have  told  you  what  I 
am  firmly  persuaded  is  God's  own  truth, — the  truth  on 
which  I  desire  myself  to  live  and  die.  I  pray  God  that 
the  Holy  Ghost  may  apply  this  truth  with  mighty  power 
to  many  souls. 

Let  me  wind  up  all  this  subject  by  three  words  of 
parting  application.  Our  years  are  passing  quickly  away. 
The  night  comcth,  when  no  man  can  work.  Yet  a  little 
time,  and  our  place  in  another  world  will  be  settled  to  all 
eternity.  A  few  more  years,  and  we  shall  be  either  in 
heaven  or  in  hell.  Surely  this  fact  alone  ought  to  set  us 
thinking. 

1.  My  first  word  of  application  shall  be  a  question.  I 
address  it  to  all  into  whose  hands  this  paper  may  fall, 
without  distinction  or  exception.  It  is  a  question  which 
concerns  deeply  every  man,  woman,  and  child  in  the  world, 
whatever  be  their  rank  or  station.  It  is  the  question 
which  rises  naturally  out  of  our  subject:  "  Where  are  your 
sins?" 

Remember,  I  do  not  ask  you  what  you  call  yourself  in 
religion.  I  do  not  ask  you  where  you  go, — or  whom  you 
hear, — or  to  what  party  you  belong, — or  what  are  your 


17i 


OLD  PATHS. 


peculiar  opinions  about  Church  or  Dissent.  I  leave  such' 
matters  alone.  I  am  weary  to  see  the  enormous  waste  of 
time  of  which  multitudes  are  yearly  guilty  in  respect  to 
these  matters.  I  am  for  the  realities  and  substance  of 
Christianity ;  I  want  to  fix  your  attention  on  the  things 
which  will  look  important  in  the  hour  ot  death  and  at  the 
last  day.  And  I  say  boldly,  that  one  of  the  first  questions 
which  demand  your  notice,  is  the  question,  "  Where  are 
your  sins?" 

I  am  not  asking  what  you  intend,  or  mean,  or  hope,  or 
resolve  to  aim  at,  at  some  future  time ;  I  leave  all  that  to 
children  and  fools.  To-morrow  is  the  devil's  day,  but 
to-day  is  God's.  And  here,  as  in  God's  sight,  this  very 
day,  while  you  are  reading  my  paper,  I  ask  you  to  find  an 
answer  to  my  question :  "  Where  are  your  sins  ? " 

I  ask  you  to  mark  what  I  am  going  to  say.  I  say  it 
calmly,  deliberately,  advisedly,  and  with  consideration.  I 
tell  you  that  at  this  moment  there  are  only  two  places  in 
which  your  sins  can  be,  and  I  defy  the  wisdom  ot  the 
world  to  find  out  a  third.  Either  your  sins  are  UPON 
YOURSELF,  unpardoned,  unforgiven,  uncleansed,  un- 
washed away, — sinking  you  daily  nearer  to  hell !  Or  else 
your  sins  are  UPON  CHRIST,  taken  away,  forgiven, 
pardoned,  blotted  out  and  cleansed  away  by  Christ's 
precious  blood !  I  am  utterly  unable  to  see  any  third 
place  in  which  a  man's  sins  can  possibly  be.  I  am  utterly 
unable  to  discover  any  third  alternative.  Forgiven  or 
imforgiven, — pardoned  or  not  pardoned, — cleansed  away 
or  not  cleansed, — this,  according  to  the  Bible,  is  the  exact 
position  of  every  one's  sins.  How  is  it  with  you  ?  "  Where 
are  your  sins  ? " 

I  beseech  you  to  lay  this  question  to  heart,  and  never  to 
rest  till  you  can  give  it  an  answer.  I  do  entreat  you  to 
examine  your  own  state — to  prove  your  own  spiritual  con- 
dition,— and  to  find  out  how  matters  stand  between  your- 
self and  God.    Let  the  time  past  sufiice  for  trifling  and 


OUR  SINS. 


175 


ii\clecision  about  your  soul.  Give  it  up, — give  it  up, — give 
it  up  for  ever.  Let  the  time  past  suffice  for  a  mere  formal, 
aimle.ss,  meaningless,  comfortless  religion.  Lay  it  aside, — 
lay  it  aside, — lay  it  aside  for  ever.  Be  real ;  be  thorough  ; 
be  in  earnest.  Deal  with  your  soul  as  a  reasonable  being ; 
deal  with  it  as  one  who  feels  that  eternal  interests  are  at 
stake;  deal  with  it  as  one  who  has  made  up  his  mind, 
and  is  determined  to  live  in  suspense  no  longer.  Oh, 
resolve  this  very  day  to  find  an  answer  to  my  question  : 
"  Where  are  your  sinsf"  Are  they  on  yourself?  or  are 
they  on  Christ 

2.  My  second  word  of  application  shall  be  an  invitat  ion. 
I  address  it  to  all  who  feel  unable  to  give  a  satisfactory 
answer  to  the  question  of  my  paper.  I  address  it  to  all 
who  feel  sinful,  and  lost,  and  condemned,  and  unfit  to  die. 
It  is  that  invitation  which  is  the  glory  of  the  Gospel.  I 
say  to  you,  "  Come  to  Christ,  and  he  cleansed  in  His 
Mood  without  delay." 

I  know  not  what  you  may  have  been  in  your  past  life  :  it 
matters  nothing.  You  may  have  broken  every  command- 
ment under  heaven ;  you  may  have  sinned  with  a  high 
hand  against  light  and  knowledge  ;  you  may  have  despised 
a  father's  warnings  and  a  mother's  tears ;  you  may  have 
run  greedily  into  every  excess  of  riot,  and  plunged  into 
every  kind  of  abominable  profligacy :  you  may  have  turned 
your  back  entirely  on  God,  His  day.  His  house.  His 
ministers.  His  word.  I  say  again  it  matters  nothing. — Do 
you  feel  your  sins  ?  Are  you  sick  of  them  ?  Are  you 
ashamed  of  them  ?  Are  you  weary  of  them  ?  Then  covie 
to  Christ  just  as  you  are,  and  Christ's  blood  shall  make 
you  clean. 

T  see  you  lingering,  and  doubting,  and  fancying  the 
news  too  good  to  be  true.  I  hear  the  devil  whispering  in 
your  ear,  "  You  are  too  bad ;  you  are  too  wicked  to  be 
saved."  I  charge  you,  in  God's  name,  not  to  give  way  to 
such  doubts.    I  remind  you  that  Satan  always  was  a  liar, 


176 


OLD  PATHS. 


One  time  he  told  you  it  was  "  too  soon  "  for  religion :  and 
now  he  tells  you  it  is  "  too  late."  I  tell  you  confidently, 
tliat  Jesus  Christ  is  "  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  who 
come  to  God  by  Him."  (Heb.  vii.  25.)  I  tell  you  con- 
fidently, that  He  has  received,  cleansed,  and  pardoned 
thousands  as  bad  as  you.  He  never  changes.  Only  come 
to  Him,  and  His  blood  shall  cleanse  you  from  all  sin. 

I  can  well  fancy  that  you  feel  at  a  loss,  and  know  not 
what  to  do.  I  can  well  believe  that  you  do  not  see  which 
way  to  turn,  or  what  step  to  take,  or  in  what  manner  to 
follow  out  my  counsel.  /  bid  you  go  and  say  so  to  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  !  I  bid  you  seek  some  quiet  solitary 
place,  and  pour  out  your  heart  before  Him.  Tell  Him 
that  you  are  a  poor  miserable  sinner.  Tell  Him  that  you 
know  not  how  to  pray,  or  what  to  say,  or  what  to  do.  But 
tell  Him  that  you  have  heard  something  about  His  blood 
cleansing  a  man  from  all  sin,  and  entreat  Him  to  think 
on  you,  and  cleanse  your  soul.  Oh,  take  this  advice, — and 
who  can  tell  but  you  may  say  one  day,  "The  blood  of 
Christ  does  indeed  cleanse  a  man  from  all  sin." 

For  the  last  time  I  offer  my  invitation.  I  stand  in  the 
life-boat  alongside  the  wreck  to  which  you  are  clinging, 
and  I  entreat  you  to  come  in.  The  day  is  far  spent ;  the 
night  is  coming  on ;  the  clouds  are  gathering ;  the  waves 
are  rising.  Yet  a  little  time  and  the  old  wreck  of  this 
worhi  will  go  to  pieces.  Come  into  the  life-boat ;  come  in 
and  be  safe.  Come  to  the  blood  of  Christ ;  wash,  and  be 
clean.  Come  with  all  your  sins  to  Christ,  and  cast  them 
on  Him.  He  will  bear  them  away ;  He  will  cleanse  them ; 
He  will  pardon  them.    Only  believe  and  be  saved. 

3.  My  last  word  shall  be  aii  exhortation.  I  address  it 
to  all  who  have  been  taught  by  the  Spirit  to  feel  their 
sins,  and  have  fled  to  the  hope  set  before  them  in  the 
Gospel.  I  address  it  to  all  who  have  discovered  the  grand 
truth  that  they  are  guilty  sinners,  and  have  washed  in  the 
blood  of  Christ  in  order  to  have  their  sins  cleansed  away. 


OUR  SINS. 


177' 


That  exhortation  shall  be  short  and  simple.  I  bid  them 
"  clinj?  to  Christ." 

Cling  to  Christ,  I  say :  and  never  forget  your  debt  to 
Him.  Sinners  you  were,  when  you  were  first  called 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  fled  to  Jesus.  Sinners  you  have 
been,  even  at  your  best,  from  the  day  of  your  conver- 
sion. Sinners  you  will  find  yourselves  to  your  dying  hour, 
having  nothing  to  boast  of  in  yourselves.  Then  cling  to 
Christ. 

Cling  to  Christ,  I  say :  and  make  use  of  His  atoning 
blood  every  day.  Go  to  Him  every  morning  as  your 
morning  sacrifice,  and  confess  your  need  of  His  salvation. 
Go  to  Him  every  night,  after  the  bustle  of  the  day,  and 
plead  for  fresh  absolution.  Wash  in  the  great  Fountain 
every  evening,  after  all  the  defilement  of  contact  with  the 
world.  "  He  that  is  washed,  needeth  not  save  to  wash  his 
feet."    But  his  feet  he  needs  to  wash.    (John  xiii.  10.) 

Cling  to  Christ,  I  say :  and  show  the  world  how  you  love 
Him.  Show  it  by  obedience  to  His  commandments. 
Show  it  by  conformity  to  His  image.  Show  it  by  following 
His  example.  Make  your  Master's  cause  lovely  and  beau- 
tiful before  men,  by  your  own  holiness  of  temper  and 
conversation.  Let  all  the  world  see  that  he  who  is  much 
forgiven  is  the  man  who  loves  much,  and  that  he  who 
loves  most  is  the  man  who  does  most  for  Christ.  (Luke 
vii.  47.) 

CUng  to  Christ,  I  say:  and  have  high  thoughts  of  the 
atonement  made  by  His  blood  upon  the  cross.  Think 
highly  of  His  incarnation  and  His  example, — tliink  highly 
of  His  miracles  and  His  words,— think  highly  of  His 
resurrection,  and  intercession,  and  coming  again.  But 
think  highest  of  all  of  Christ's  sacrifice,  and  the  propitiation 
made  by  His  death.  Contend  earnestly  for  the  old  faitli 
concerning  His  atonement.  See  in  the  old  doctrine  that 
He  died  as  a  Substitute  for  sinners,  the  only  solution  of  a 
thousand  passages  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  a  hundred 

N 


178 


OLD  PATHS. 


passages  in  the  New.  Never,  never  be  ashamed  to  let 
men  know  that  you  derive  all  your  comfort  from  the 
atoning  blood  of  Christ,  and  from  His  substitution  for  you 
on  the  cross. 

Cling  to  Christ,  I  say  lastly :  and  make  much  of  the  old 
foundation  truths  concerning  salvation  by  His  blood. 
These  are  the  old  friends  to  which  our  souls  will  turn  at 
last  in  the  hour  of  our  departure.  These  are  the  ancient 
doctrines  on  which  we  shall  lean  back  our  aching  heads, 
when  life  is  ebbing  away  and  death  is  in  sight.  We  shall 
not  ask  ourselves  then  whether  we  have  been  Episcopalians 
or  Presbyterians,  Churchmen  or  Dissenters.  We  shall 
not  find  comfort  then  in  new-faugled  notions  and  human 
inventions, — in  baptism  and  churchmembership, — in  sects 
and  parties, — in  ceremonies  and  forms.  Nothing  will  do 
us  good  then  but  the  blood  of  Christ.  Nothing  will 
support  us  then  but  the  witness  of  the  Spirit,  that  in  the 
blood  of  Jesus  we  have  washed,  and  by  that  blood  have 
been  made  clean. 

I  commend  these  things  to  the  serious  attention  of  all 
who  read  this  volume.  If  you  never  knew  these  things 
before,  may  you  soon  become  acquainted  with  them !  If 
you  have  known  them  in  time  past,  may  you  know  them 
better  for  time  to  come !  We  can  never  know  too  well 
the  right  answer  to  the  mighty  question, — "  Where  are, 
■your  sins?" 


vn. 


FORGIVENESS. 

"  Your  sins  are  foi-given  you." — 1  John  ii.  12. 

There  is  a  clause  near  the  end  of  the  Belief,  or  Apostle's 
Creed,  which,  I  fear,  is  often  repeated  without  thought  or 
consideration.  I  refer  to  the  clause  which  contains  these 
words,  "  I  believe  in  the  Forgiveness  of  sins."  Thousands, 
I  am  afraid,  never  reflect  what  those  words  mean.  I 
propose  to  examine  the  subject  of  them  in  the  following 
paper,  and  I  invite  the  attention  of  all  who  care  for  their 
souls,  and  Avant  to  be  saved.  Do  we  believe  in  the  "  Resur- 
rection of  our  bodies "  ?  Then  let  us  see  to  it  that  we 
know  something  by  experience  of  the  "  Forgiveness  of  our 
sins." 

I.  Let  me  slioxv,  first  of  all,  our  need  of  forgiveness. 
I  All  men  need  forgiveness,  because  all  men  are  sinners. 
He  that  does  not  know  this,  knows  nothing  in  religion. 
It  is  the  very  A  B  C  of  Christianity,  that  a  man  should 
know  his  right  place  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  understand 
his  deserts. 

We  are  all  great  sinners.  "  There  is  none  righteous,' 
no,  not  one." — "All  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the 
glory  of  God."  (Rom.  iii.  10,  23.)  Sinners  we  were  born,, 
and  sinners  we  have  been  all  our  lives.  We  take  to  sin 
naturally  from  the  very  first.  Nj  child  ever  needs  schooling. 


180 


OLD  PATHS. 


find  education  to  teaCh  it  to  do  wrong.  No  devil,  or  bad 
companion,  ever  leads  us  into  such  wickedness  as  our  own 
hearts.  And  "  the  wages  of  sin  is  death."  (Rom.  vi.  23.) 
We  must  either  be  forgiven,  or  lost  eternally. 

We  are  all  guilty  sinners  in  the  sight  of  God.  We 
have  broken  His  holy  law.  We  have  transgressed  His 
precepts.  We  have  not  done  His  will.  There  is  not  a 
commandment  in  all  the  ten  which  does  not  condemn  us. 
If  we  have  not  broken  it  in  deed  we  have  in  word ;  if  we 
have  not  broken  it  in  word,  we  have  in  thought  and 
imagination, — and  that  continually.  Tried  by  the  standard 
of  the  fifth  chapter  of  St.  Matthew,  there  is  not  one  of  us 
that  would  be  acquitted.  All  the  world  is  "  guilty  before 
God."  And  "  as  it  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die,  so 
after  this  conies  the  judgment "  We  must  either  be  for- 
given, or  perish  everlastingly.    (Rom.  iii.  19 ;  Heb.  ix.  27.) 

When  I  walk  through  the  crowded  streets  of  London,  I 
see  hundreds  and  thousands  of  whom  I  know  nothing 
beyond  their  outward  appearance.  I  see  some  bent  on 
pleasure,  and  some  on  business, — some  who  look  rich,  and 
some  who  look  poor, — some  rolling  in  their  carriages,  some 
hurrying  along  on  foot.  Each  has  his  own  object  in  view. 
Each  has  his  own  aims  and  ends,  all  alike  hidden  from- 
me.  But  one  thing  I  know  for  a  certainty,  as  I  look  upon 
them, — they  are  all  sinners.  There  is  not  a  soul  among 
them  all  but  "deserves  God's  wrath  and  condemnation." 
(See  9th  Article.)  There  breathes  not  the  man  or  woman 
in  that  crowd  but  must  die  forgiven,  or  else  rise  again  tc 
be  condemned  for  ever  at  the  last  day. 

When  I  look  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  Great 
Britain  I  must  make  the  same  report.  From  the  Land's 
End  to  the  North  Foreland, — from  the  Isle  of  Wight  to 
Caithness, — from  the  Queen  on  the  throne  to  the  pauper  in 
the  workhouse, — we  are  all  sinners.  We  Englishmen  have 
got  a  name  among  the  empires  of  the  earth.  We  send  our 
ships  into  every  sea,  and  our  merchandise  into  every  town 


FORGIVENESS. 


181 


in  the  world.  We  have  bridged  the  Atlantic  with  our 
steamers.  We  have  made  night  in  our  cities  like  day 
with  gas.  We  have  changed  England  into  one  great 
county  by  railways.  We  can  exchange  thought  between 
London  and  Edinburgh  in  a  few  seconds  by  the  electric 
telegraph.  But  with  all  our  arts  and  sciences, — with  all 
our  machinery  and  inventions, — with  all  our  armies  and 
navies, — with  all  our  lawyers  and  statesmen,  we  have  not 
altered  the  nature  of  our  people.  We  are  still  in  the  eye 
of  God  an  island  full  of  sinners. 

When  I  turn  to  the  map  of  the  world  I  must  say  the 
same  thing.  It  matters  not  what  quarter  I  examine :  I 
find  men's  hearts  are  everywhere  the  same,  and  everywhere 
wicked.  Sin  is  the  family  disease  of  all  the  children  of 
Adam.  Never  has  there  been  a  corner  of  the  earth 
discovered  where  sin  and  the  devil  do  not  reign.  Wide  as 
the  difference  is  between  the  nations  of  the  earth,  they 
have  always  been  found  to  have  one  great  mark  in  common. 
Europe  and  Asia,  Africa  and  America,  Iceland  and  India, 
Paris  and  Pekin, — all  alike  have  the  mark  of  sin.  The 
eye  of  the  Lord  looks  down  on  this  globe  of  ours,  as  it 
rolls  round  the  sun,  and  sees  it  covered  with  corruption 
and  wickedness.  What  He  sees  in  the  moon  and  stars, 
in  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  I  cannot  tell, — but  on  the  earth  I 
know  He  sees  sin.    (Psalm  xiv.  2,  3.) 

I  have  no  doubt  such  language  as  this  sounds  extrava- 
gant to  some.  You  think  I  am  going  much  too  far.  But 
mark  well  what  I  am  about  to  say  next,  and  then  consider 
whether  I  have  not  used  the  words  of  soberness  and  truth. 

What  then,  I  ask,  is  the  life  of  the  best  Christian 
amongst  us  all  ?  What  is  it  but  one  great  career  of  short- 
comings ?  What  is  it  but  a  daily  acting  out  the  words  of 
our  Prayer-book, — "  leaving  undone  things  we  ought  to 
do,  and  doing  things  that  we  ought  not  to  do  "  ?  Our 
faith,  how  feeble  !  Our  love,  how  cold  !  Our  works,  how 
few !    Our  zeal,  how  small !    Our  patience,  how  short- 


182 


OLD  PATHS. 


breathed !  Our  humility,  how  thread-bare !  Our  self- 
denial,  how  dwarfish  !  Our  knowledge,  how  dim  !  Our 
spirituality,  how  shallow  !  Our  prayers,  how  formal !  Our 
desires  for  more  grace,  how  faint !  Never  did  the  wisest 
of  men  speak  more  wisely  than  when  he  said,  "There  is 
not  a  just  man  upon  earth,  that  doeth  good,  and  sinneth 
not."  (Eccles.  vii.  20.)  "  In  many  things,"  says  the  apostle 
James,  "we  offend  all."  (James  iii.  2.)  And  what  is  the 
best  action  that  is  ever  done  by  the  very  best  of  Christians  ? 
What  is  it  after  all  but  an  imperfect  work,  when  tried  on 
its  own  merits  ?  It  is,  as  Luther  says,  no  better  than  "  a 
splendid  sin."  It  is  always  more  or  less  defective.  It  is 
either  wrong  in  its  motive  or  incomplete  in  its  performance, 
— not  done  from  perfect  principles,  or  not  executed  in  a 
perfect  way.  The  eyes  of  men  may  see  no  fault  in  it,  but 
weighed  in  the  balances  of  God  it  would  be  found  wanting, 
and  viewed  in  the  light  of  heaven  it  would  prove  full  of 
flaws.  It  is  like  the  drop  of  water  which  seems  clear  to  the 
naked  eye,  but,  placed  under  a  microscope,  is  discovered 
to  be  full  of  impurity.  David's  account  is  literally  true : 
"There  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no,  not  one."  (Psalm 
xiv.  3.) 

And  then  what  is  the  Lord  God,  whose  eyes  are  on  all 
our  ways,  and  before  whom  we  have  one  day  to  give 
account  ?  "  Holy,  holy,  holy,"  is  the  remarkable  expres- 
,sion  applied  to  Him  by  those  who  are  nearest  to  Him. 
(Isaiah  vi.  3 ;  Rev.  iv.  8.)  It  sounds  as  if  no  one  word 
could  express  the  intensity  of  His  holiness.  One  of  His 
prophets  sa3^s,  "  He  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil, 
and  cannot  look  on  iniquity."  (Habak.  i.  13.)  We  think 
the  angels  exalted  beings,  and  far  above  ourselves;  but 
we  are  told  in  Scripture,  "He  charged  His  angels  with 
folly."  (Job  iv.  18.)  We  admire  the  moon  and  stars  as 
glorious  and  splendid  bodies ;  but  we  read,  "  Behold  even 
to  the  moon,  and  it  shineth  not,  3'ea  the  stars  are  not  pure 
in  His  sight."    (Job  xxv.  5.)    We  talk  of  the  heavens  as 


FORGIVENESS. 


183 


the  noblest  aud  jDurest  part  of  creation  ;  but  even  of  them 
it  is  written,  "  The  heavens  are  not  clean  in  His  sight." 
(Job  XV.  15.)  What  then  is  any  one  of  us  but  a  miser- 
able sinner  in  the  sight  of  such  a  God  as  this  ? 

Surely  we  ought  all  to  cease  from  proud  thoughts  about; 
ourselves.  We  ought  to  lay  our  hands  upon  our  mouths, 
and  say  with  Abraham,  "  I  am  dust  and  ashes ; "  and  with 
Job,  "  I  am  vile ; "  and  with  Isaiah,  "  We  are  all  as  an 
unclean  thing;"  and  with  John,  "If  we  say  that  Ave  have 
no  sin  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us." 
(Gen.  xviii.  27;  Job  xl.  4;  Isaiah  Ixiv.  6;  1  John  i.  8.) 
Where  is  the  man  or  woman  in  the  whole  cataloorue  of  the 
Book  of  Life,  that  will  ever  be  able  to  say  more  than  this, 
— "  I  obtained  mercy  "  ?  What  is  the  glorious  company  ot 
the  apostles,  the  goodly  fellowship  of  the  prophets,  the 
noble  army  of  martyrs, — what  are  they  all  but  pardoned 
smners  ?  Surely  there  is  but  one  conclusion  to  be  arrived 
at : — We  are  all  great  sinners,  and  we  all  need  a  great 
forgiveness. 

See  now  what  just  cause  I  have  to  say  that  to  know  our 
need  of  forgiveness  is  the  first  thing  in  true  religion.  Sin 
is  a  burden,  and  must  be  taken  off.  Sin  is  a  defilement, 
and  must  be  cleansed  away.  Sin  is  a  mighty  debt,  and 
must  be  paid.  Sin  is  a  mountain  standing  between  us  and 
heaven,  and  must  be  removed.  Happy  is  that  mother's 
child  amongst  us  that  feels  all  this  !  The  first  step  towards 
heaven  is  to  see  clearly  that  we  deserve  hell.  There  ai-e 
but  two  alternatives  before  us, — we  must  either  be  forsfiven, 
or  be  miserable  for  ever. 

See  too  how  little  many  persons  know  of  the  main  design 
of  Christianity,  though  they  live  in  a  Christian  land.  They 
fancy  they  are  to  go  to  church  to  learn  their  duty,  and  hear 
morality  enforced,  and  for  no  other  purpose.  They  forget 
that  the  heathen  philosophers  could  have  told  them  as 
much  as  this.  They  forget  that  such  men  as  Plato  and 
Seneca  gave  instructions  which  ought  to  put  to  shame  the 


184 


OI,D  PATHS. 


Christian  liar,  the  Christian  drunkard,  and  the  Christian 
thief.  They  have  yet  to  learn  that  the  leading  mark  of 
Christianity  is  the  remedy  it  provides  for  sin.  This  is  the 
glory  and  excellence  of  the  Gospel.  It  meets  man  as  he 
really  is.  It  takes  him  as  it  finds  him.  It  goes  down  to 
the  level  to  which  sin  has  brought  him,  and  offers  to  raise 
him  up.  It  tells  him  of  a  remedy  equal  to  his  disease, — 
a  great  remedy  for  a  great  disease, — a  great  forgiveness  for 
gi'eat  sinners. 

I  ask  every  reader  to  consider  these  things  weU,  if  he 
never  considered  them  before.  It  is  no  light  matter 
whether  you  know  your  soul's  necessities  or  not :  it  is  a 
matter  of  life  and  death.  Try,  I  beseech  you,  to  become 
acquainted  with  your  own  heart.  Sit  down  and  think 
quietly  what  you  are  in  the  sight  of  God.  Bring  together 
the  thoughts,  and  words,  and  actions  of  any  day  in  your 
life,  and  measure  them  by  the  measure  of  God's  Word. 
Judge  yourself  honestly,  that  you  may  not  be  condemned 
at  the  last  day.  Oh,  that  you  might  find  out  what  you 
really  are  !  Oh,  that  you  might  learn  to  pray  Job's  prayer : 
"  Make  me  to  know  my  transgression  and  my  sin."  (Job 
xiii.  23.)  Oh,  that  you  might  see  this  great  truth, — that 
until  you  are  forgiven  your  Christianity  has  done  nothing 
for  you  at  all ! 

II.  Let  me  point  out,  in  the  second  place,  the  way  oj 
forgiveness. 

I  ask  particular  attention  to  this  point,  for  none  can  be 
more  important.  Granting  for  a  moment  that  you  want 
pardon  and  forgiveness,  what  ought  you  to  do  ?  Whither 
will  you  go  ?  Which  way  will  you  turn  ?  Every  thing 
hinges  on  the  answer  you  give  to  this  question. 

Will  you  turn  to  ministers  and  put  your  trust  in  them  ? 
They  cannot  give  you  pardon:  they  can  only  tell  you 
where  it  is  to  be  found.  They  cm  set  before  you  the 
bread  of  life ;  but  you  yourself  must  eat  it.    They  can 


FORGIVENESS. 


185 


show  you  the  path  of  peace ;  but  you  yourself  must  walk 
in  it.  The  Jewish  priest  had  no  power  to  cleanse  the 
leper,  but  only  to  declare  him  cleansed.  The  Christian 
minister  has  no  power  to  forgive  sins ; — he  can  only  declare 
and  pronounce  who  they  are  that  are  forgiven. 

Will  you  turn  to  sacraments  and  ordinances,  and  trust 
in  them  ?  They  cannot  supply  you  with  forgiveness,' 
however  diligently  you  may  use  them.  By  sacraments 
"faith  is  confirmed  and  grace  increased,"  in  all  who  rightly 
use  them.  (See  Article  27.)  But  they  cannot  justify  the 
sinner.  They  cannot  put  away  transgression.  You  may 
go  to  the  Lord's  table  every  Sunday  in  your  life :  but 
unless  you  look  far  beyond  the  sign  to  the  thing  signified,' 
you  will  after  all  die  in  your  sins.  You  may  attend  a  daily 
service  regularly,  but  if  you  think  to  establish  a  righteous- 
ness of  your  own  by  it,  in  the  slightest  degree,  you  are 
only  getting  further  away  from  God  every  day. 

Will  you  trust  in  your  own  %vorks  and  endeavours,  your 
virtues  and  your  good  deeds,  your  prayers  and  your  alms  ? 
They  will  never  buy  for  you  an  entrance  into  heaven. 
They  will  never  pay  your  debt  to  God.  They  are  all 
imperfect  in  themselves,  and  only  increase  your  guilt. 
There  is  no  merit  or  worthiness  in  them  at  the  very  best. 
The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  says  expressly,  "  When  you  have 
done  all  those  things  which  are  commanded  you,  say.  We 
are  unprofitable  servants."    (Luke  xvii.  10.) 

Will  you  trust  in  your  own  repentance  and  amend- 
ment ?  You  are  very  sorry  for  the  past.  You  hope  to  do 
better  for  time  to  come.  You  hope  God  will  be  merciful. 
Alas,  if  you  lean  on  this,  you  have  nothing  beneath  you 
but  a  broken  reed !  The  judge  does  not  pardon  the  thief 
because  he  is  sorry  for  what  he  did.  To-day's  sorrow  will 
not  wipe  oflf  the  score  of  yesterday's  sins.  It  is  not  an 
ocean  of  tears  that  would  ever  cleanse  an  uneasy  conscience 
and  give  it  peace. 

Where  then  must  a  man  go  for  pardon  ?   Where  is  for- 


186 


OLD  PATHS. 


giveness  to  be  found  ?  There  is  a  way  both  sure  and  plain, 
and  into  that  way  I  desire  to  guide  every  inquirer's  feet. 

That  way  is  simply  to  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as 
your  Saviour.  It  is  to  cast  your  soul,  with  all  its  sins, 
unreservedly  on  Christ, — to  cease  completely  from  any 
dependence  on  your  own  works  or  doings,  either  in  whole 
or  in  part, — and  to  rest  on  no  other  work  but  Christ's 
work,  no  other  righteousness  but  Christ's  righteousness, 
no  other  merit  but  Christ's  merit,  as  your  ground  of  hope. 
Take  this  course  and  you  are  a  pardoned  soul.  "  To 
Christ,"  says  Peter,  "give  all  the  prophets  witness,  that 
through  His  name  whosoever  believeth  in  Him  shall  receive 
remission  of  sins."  (Acts  x.  43.)  "  Through  this  Man," 
says  Paul  at  Antioch,  "  is  preached  unto  you  the  forgiveness 
of  sins,  and  by  Him  all  that  believe  are  justified  from  all 
things."  (Acts  xiii.  38.)  "  In  Him,"  writes  Paul  to  the 
Colossians,  "  we  have  redemption  through  His  blood,  even 
the  forgiveness  of  sins."    (Col.  i.  14.) 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  great  love  and  compassion,  has 
made  a  full  and  complete  satisfaction  for  sin,  by  sufifering 
death  in  our  place  upon  the  cross.  There  He  offered  Himself 
as  a  sacrifice  for  us,  and  allowed  the  wrath  of  God,  which 
we  deserved,  to  fall  on  His  own  head.  For  our  sins,  as  our 
Substitute,  He  gave  Himself,  suffered,  and  died, — the  just 
for  the  unjust,  the  innocent  for  the  guilty, — that  He  might 
deliver  us  from  the  curse  of  a  broken  law,  and  provide  a 
complete  pardon  for  all  who  are  willing  to  receive  it.  And 
by  so  doing,  as  Isaiah  says, — He  has  home  our  sins ;  as 
John  the  Baptist  says,- — He  has  taken  av:ay  sin ;  as  Paul 
says, — He  has  purged  our  sins,  and  put  auuy  sin ;  and  as 
Daniel  says, — He  has  made  an  end  of  sin,  and  finished 
trangi-ession.  (Isaiah  liii.  11;  John  i.  29;  Heb.  i.  3; 
Heb.  ix.  26;  Dan.  ix.  24) 

And  now  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  sealed  and  appointed 
by  God  the  Father  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give 
remission  of  sins  to  all  who  will  have  it.    The  keys  of 


FORGIVENESS.  187 

death  and  hell  are  put  in  His  hand.  The  government 
of  the  gate  of  heaven  is  laid  on  His  shoulder.  He  Himself 
is  the  door,  and  by  Him  all  that  enter  in  shall  be  saved. 
(Acts  v.  31 ;  Rev.  i.  18 ;  John  x.  9.) 

Christ,  in  one  word,  has  purchased  a  full  forgiveness,  if 
■\ve  are  only  willing  to  receive  it.  He  has  done  all,  paid 
all,  suflfered  all  that  was  needful  to  reconcile  us  to  God. 
He  has  provided  a  garment  of  righteousness  to  clothe  us. 
He  has  opened  a  fountain  of  living  waters  to  cleanse  us. 
He  has  removed  every  barrier  between  us  and  God  the 
Father,  taken  every  obstacle  out  of  the  way,  and  made  a 
road  by  which  the  vilest  may  return.  All  things  are  now 
ready,  and  the  sinner  has  only  to  believe  and  be  saved,  to 
eat  and  be  satisfied,  to  ask  and  receive,  to  wash  and  be 
clean. 

And  faith,  simple  faith,  is  the  only  thing  required,  in 
order  that  you  and  I  may  be  forgiven.  That  we  will  come 
by  faith  to  Jesus  as  sinners  with  our  sins, — trust  in  Him, — 
rest  on  Him, — lean  on  Him, — confide  in  Him, — commit  our 
souls  to  Him, — and  forsaking  all  other  hope,  cleave  only 
to  Him, — this  is  all  and  everything  that  God  asks  for.  Let 
a  man  only  do  this,  and  he  shall  be  saved.  His  iniquities 
shall  be  found  completely  pardoned,  and  his  transgressions 
entirely  taken  away.  Every  man  and  woman  that  so 
trusts  is  wholly  forgiven,  and  reckoned  perfectly  righteous. 
His  sins  are  clean  gone,  and  his  soul  is  justified  in  God's 
sight,  however  bad  and  guilty  he  may  have  been. 

Faith  is  the  only  thing  required,  oiot  knorvledge.  A 
man  may  be  a  poor  unlearned  sinner,  and  know  little  of 
books.  But  if  he  sees  enough  to  find  the  foot  of  the  cross, 
and  trust  in  Jesus  for  pardon,  I  will  engage,  from  the 
authority  of  the  Bible,  that  he  shall  not  miss  heaven.  To 
know  Christ  is  the  corner-stone  of  all  religious  knowledge. 

Faith,  1  say,  and  not  conversion.  A  man  may  have 
been  walking  in  the  broad  way  up  to  the  very  hour  he 
first  hears  the  Gospel.    But  if  in  that  hearing  he  is 


188 


OLD  PATHS. 


awakened  to  feel  his  danger,  and  wants  to  be  saved,  let 
bim  come  to  Christ  at  once,  and  wait  for  nothing.  That 
very  coming  is  the  beginning  of  conversion. 

Faith,  I  repeat,  and  not  holiness.  A  man  may  feel  all^ 
fall  of  sin,  and  unworthy  to  be  saved.  But  let  him  not 
tarry  outside  the  ark  till  he  is  better.  Let  him  come  to 
Christ  without  delay,  just  as  he  is.  Afterwards  he  shall 
be  holy. 

I  call  upon  every  reader  of  these  pages  to  let  nothing 
move  him  from  this  strong  ground, — that  faith  in  Christ 
is  the  only  thing  needed  for  our  justification.  Stand 
firm  here,  if  you  value  your  soul's  peace.  I  see  many 
walking  in  darkness  and  having  no  light,  from  confused 
notions  as  to  what  faith  is.  They  hear  that  saving  faith 
will  work  by  love  and  produce  holiness,  and  not  finding 
all  this  at  once  in  themselves,  they  think  they  have  no 
faith  at  all.  They  forget  that  these  things  are  the  fruits 
of  faith,  and  not  faith  itself,  and  that  to  doubt  whether  we 
have  faith,  because  we  do  not  see  them  at  once,  is  like 
doubting  whether  a  tree  is  alive,  because  it  does  not  bear 
fruit  the  very  day  we  plant  it  in  the  ground.  I  charge 
you  to  settle  it  firmly  in  your  mind,  that  in  the  matter  of 
your  forgiveness  and  justification  there  is  but  one  thing 
required,  and  that  is,  simple  faith  in  Christ. 

I  know  well  that  the  natural  heart  dislikes  this  doctrine. 
It  runs  counter  to  man's  notions  of  religion.  It  leaves 
him  no  room  to  boast.  Man's  idea  is  to  come  to  Christ 
with  a  price  in  his  hand, — his  regularity, — his  morality, — 
his  repentance, — his  goodness, — and  so,  as  it  were,  to  buy 
his  pardon  and  justification.  The  Spirit's  teaching  is 
quite  different :  it  is  first  of  all,  to  believe.  Whosoever 
believeth  slvall  not  perish.    (John  iii.  16.) 

Some  say  such  doctrine  cannot  be  right,  because  it 
makes  the  way  to  heaven  too  easy.  I  fear  that  many  such 
persons,  if  the  truth  were  spoken,  find  it  too  hard.  I  be- 
lieve in  reality  it  is  easier  to  give  a  fortune  in  building  a 


FORGIVENESS.  ISO} 

cathedral  like  York  Minster,  or  to  go  to  the  stake  and  be 
burned,  than  thoroughly  to  receive  "justification  by  faith 
without  the  deeds  of  the  law,"  and  to  enter  heaven  as  a 
sinner  saved  by  grace. 

Some  say  this  doctrine  is  foolishness  and  enthusiasm. 
I  answer.  This  is  just  what  was  said  of  it  1800  years  ago, 
and  it  is  a  vain  cavil  now,  as  it  was  then.  So  far  from  the 
charge  being  true,  a  thousand  facts  can  prove  this  doctrine 
jto  be  from  God.  No  doctrine  certainly  has  produced  such 
mighty  effects  in  the  world,  as  the  simple  proclamation  of 
free  forgiveness  through  faith  in  Christ. 

This  is  the  glorious  doctrine  which  was  the  strength  of 
the  Apostles  when  they  went  forth  to  the  Gentiles  to 
preach  a  new  religion.  They  began,  a  few  poor  fishermen, 
in  a  despised  corner  of  the  earth.  They  turned  the  world 
upside  down.  They  changed  the  face  of  the  Roman 
empire.  They  emptied  the  heathen  temples  of  their 
worshippers,  and  made  the  whole  system  of  idolatry 
crumble  away.  And  what  was  the  weapon  by  which  they 
did  it  all  ?  It  vf&s  f  ree  forgiveness  through  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ. 

Tliis  is  the  doctrine  which  brought  light  into  Europe 
300  years  ago,  at  the  time  of  the  blessed  Reformation,  and 
enabled  one  solitary  monk,  Martin  Luther,  to  shake  the 
whole  Church  of  Rome.  Through  his  preaching  and 
writing  the  scales  fell  from  men's  eyes,  and  the  chains  of 
their  souls  were  loosed.  And  what  was  the  lever  that 
gave  him  his  power  ?  It  was  free  forgiveness  through 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ. 

This  is  the  doctrine  which  revived  our  own  Church  in  the 
middle  of  last  ceutury,  when  Whitefield,  and  the  Wesleys, 
and  Berridge,  and  Venn  broke  up  the  wretched  "  sjiirit  of 
slumber"  which  had  come  over  the  land,  and  roused  men 
to  think.  They  began  a  mighty  work,  with  little  seeming 
likelihood  of  success.  They  began,  few  in  number,  with 
small  encouragement  from  the  rich_  and  great.    But  they 


190 


OLD  PATHS. 


prospered.  And  why? — Because  they  preached  free,  for- 
giveness through  faith  in  Christ. 

This  is  the  doctrine  which  is  the  true  stren2;th  of  anv 
Church  on  earth  at  this  day.  It  is  not  orders,  or  endow- 
ments, or  liturgies,  or  learning,  that  will  keep  a  Church 
alive.  Let  free  forgiveness  through  Christ  be  faithfully 
proclaimed  in  her  pulpits,  and  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not 
prevail  against  her.  Let  it  be  buried,  or  kept  back,  and 
her  candlestick  will  soon  be  taken  away.  When  the 
Saracens  invaded  the  lands  where  Jerome,  and  Athanasius, 
and  Cyprian,  and  Augustine  once  wrote  and  preached,  they 
found  bishops  and  liturgies,  I  make  no  question.  But  I 
fear  they  found  no  preaching  of  free  forgiveness  of  sins, 
and  so  they  swept  the  Churches  of  those  lands  clean  away. 
They  were  a  body  without  a  vital  principle,  and  therefore 
they  fell.  Let  us  never  forget  the  brightest  days  of  a 
Chui'ch  are  those  when  "Christ  crucified "  is  most  exalted. 
The  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth,  where  the  early  Chris- 
tians met  to  hear  of  the  love  of  Jesus,  were  more  full  of 
glory  and  beauty  in  God's  sight  than  ever  was  St.  Peter's 
at  Rome.  The  meanest  bam  at  this  day,  where  the  true 
way  of  pardon  is  offered  to  sinners,  is  a  far  more  honour- 
able place  than  the  Cathedral  of  Cologne  or  Milan.  A 
Church  is  only  useful  so  far  as  she  exalts  free  forgiveness 
through  Christ. 

This  is  the  doctrine  which,  of  all  others,  is  the  mightiest 
engine  for  pulling  down  the  kingdom  of  Satan.  The 
Greenlanders  were  unmoved  so  long  as  the  Moravians  told 
them  of  the  creation  and  the  fall  of  man ;  but  when  they 
heard  of  redeeming  love,  their  frozen  hearts  melted  like 
snow  in  spring.  Preach  salvation  by  the  sacraments, 
exalt  the  Church  above  Christ,  and  keep  back  the  doctrine 
of  the  Atonement,  and  the  devil  cares  little, — his  goods 
are  at  peace.  But  preach  a  full  Christ,  and  a  free  pardon 
by  faith  in  Him,  and  then  Satan  will  have  great  wrath, 
for  he  knows  he  has  but  a  short  time.    John  Berridge  said 


FORGIVENESS. 


191 


he  went  on  preaching  morality  and  nothing  else,  till  he 
found  there  was  not  a  moral  man  in  his  parish.  But  when 
he  changed  his  plan,  and  began  to  preach  the  love  of 
Christ  to  sinners,  and  a  free  salvation  by  faith,  then  there 
was  a  stirring  of  the  dry  bones,  and  a  mighty  turning 
to  God. 

This  is  the  only  doctrine  which  will  ever  bring  peace  to 
an  uneasy  conscience,  and  rest  to  a  troubled  soul.  A  man 
may  get  on  pretty  well  without  it  so  long  as  he  is  asleep^ 
about  his  spiritual  condition.  But  once  let  him  awake 
from  his  slumber,  and  nothing  will  ever  calm  him  but  the 
blood  of  Atonement,  and  the  peace  which  comes  by  faith 
in  Christ.  How  any  one  can  undertake  to  be  a  minister 
of  religion  without  a  firm  grasp  of  this  doctrine,  I  never 
can  understand.  For  myself,  I  can  only  say,  I  sliould 
think  my  office  a  most  painful  one  if  I  had  not  the 
message  of  free  forgiveness  to  convey.  It  would  be 
miserable  work  indeed  to  visit  the  sick  and  dying,  if 
I  could  not  say,  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God: — believe  on 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  The 
right  hand  of  a  Christian  minister  is  the  doctrine  of  free 
forgiveness  through  faith  in  Christ.  Give  us  this  doctrine,, 
and  we  have  power :  we  will  never  despair  of  doingi 
good  to  men's  souls.  Take  away  this  doctrine,  and  we 
are  weak  as  water.  We  may  read  the  prayers  and  go 
through  a  round  of  forms,  but  we  are  like  Samson  with 
his  hair  shorn :  our  strength  is  gone.  Souls  will  not  be 
benefited  by  us,  and  good  will  not  be  done. 

I  commend  the  things  I  have  been  saying  to  the  notice 
of  every  reader.  I  am  not  ashamed  of  free  pardon  through 
faith  in  Christ,  whatever  some  may  say  against  the  doc- 
trine. I  am  not  ashamed  of  it,  for  its  fruits  speak  for  them- 
selves. It  has  done  things  that  no  other  doctrine  can  do. 
It  has  effected  moral  changes  which  laws  and  punishments 
have  failed  to  work, — which  magistrates  and  policemen 
have  laboured  after  in  vain, — which  mechanics'  institutes 


192 


OLD  PATHS. 


and  secular  knowledge  have  proved  utterly  powerless  to' 
produce.  Just  as  the  fiercest  lunatics  in  Bethlehem 
hospital  became  suddenly  gentle  when  kindly  treated, 
even  so  the  worst  and  most  hardened  sinners  have  often 
become  as  little  children,  when  told  of  Jesus  loving  them 
and  willincc  to  foroive.  I  can  w^ell  understand  Paul  endins; 
his  Epistle  to  the  erring  Galatians  with  that  solemn  burst 
of  feeling,  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the 
cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (Gal.  vi.  14.)  The 
crown  has  indeed  fallen  from  a  Christian's  head  when  he 
leaves  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith. 

You  should  ask  yourself  whether  you  have  really 
received  the  truth  which  I  have  been  dwelling  on,  and 
know  it  by  experience.  Jesus,  and  faith  in  Him,  is  the 
only  w^ay  to  the  Father.  He  that  thinks  to  climb  into 
Paradise  by  some  other  road,  will  find  himself  fearfully 
mistaken.  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  for  an 
immortal  soul  than  that  of  which  I  have  been  feebly 
speaking.  He  that  ventures  himself  here  is  safe.  He 
that  is  off  this  rock  has  got  no  standingr  OTound  at  all. 

You  should  seriously  consider  what  kind  of  a  ministry 
you  are  in  the  habit  of  attending,  supposing  you  have  a 
choice.  You  have  reason  indeed  to  be  careful.  It  is  not 
all  the  same  where  you  go,  whatever  people  may  say. 
There  are  many  places  of  worship,  I  fear,  where  you  might 
look  long  for  Christ  crucified,  and  never  find  Him.  He  is 
buried  under  outward  ceremonies, — thrust  behind  the 
baptismal  font, — lost  sight  of  under  the  shadow  of  the 
Church.  "  They  have  taken  away  my  Lord,  and  I  know 
not  where  they  have  laid  Him."  (John  xx.  13.)  Take 
heed  where  you  settle  yourself  Try  all  by  this  single 
test,  "  Is  Jesus  and  free  forgiveness  proclaimed  here  ? " 
There  may  be  comfortable  j)ews, — there  may  be  good 
singing, — there  may  be  learned  sermons.  But  if  Christ's 
Gospel  is  not  the  sun  and  centre  of  the  whole  j^lace,  do 
not  pitch  your  tent  there.    Say  rather  with  Isaac,  "  Here. 


FORGIVENESS. 


193 


is  the  wood  and  the  fire,  but  where  is  the  Iamb  ? 
(Gen.  xxii.  7.)    Be  very  sure  this  is  not  the  place  for  your 
soul. 

III.  Let  me,  in  the  third  place,  encouraje  all  who 
wish  to  be  forgiven. 

I  dare  be  sure  this  paper  will  be  read  by  some  one  who 
feels  he  is  not  yet  a  forgiven  soul.  My  heart's  desire  and 
prayer  is  that  such  an  one  may  seek  his  pardon  at  once. 
And  I  would  fain  help  him  forward,  by  showing  him  the 
kind  of  forgiveness  offered  to  him,  and  the  glorious 
privileges  within  his  reach. 

Listen  to  me,  then,  while  I  try  to  exhibit  to  you  the 
treasures  of  Gospel  forgiveness.  I  cannot  describe  its 
fulness  as  I  ought.  Its  riches  are  indeed  unsearchable. 
(Eph.  iii.  8.)  But  if  you  will  turn  away  from  it,  you  shall 
not  be  able  to  say  in  the  day  of  judgment,  you  did  not 
at  all  know  what  it  was. 

Consider,  then,  for  one  thing,  that  the  forgiveness  set 
before  you  is  a.  great  and  broad  forgiveness.  Hear  what 
the  Prince  of  Peace  Himself  declares:  "All  sins  shall  be 
forgiven  unto  the  sons  of  men,  and  blasphemies,  wherc- 
j  withsoever  they  shall  blaspheme."  (Mark  iii.  28.)  "Though 
your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  become  white  as  snow 
though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool." 
(Isaiah  i.  18.)  Yes:  though  your  trespasses  be  more  in 
number  than  the  hairs  of  your  head,  the  stars  in  heaven, 
the  leaves  of  the  forest,  the  blades  of  grass,  the  grains  of 
sand  on  the  sea  sliore,  still  they  can  all  be  pardoned  !  As 
the  waters  of  Noah's  flood  covered  over  and  hid  the  tops 
of  the  highest  hills,  so  can  the  blood  of  Jesus  cover  over 
and  hide  your  mightiest  sins.  "  His  blood  cleanseth  from 
all  sin."  (1  John  i.  7.)  Though  to  you  they  seem  written 
with  the  point  of  a  diamond,  they  can  all  be  effaced 
from  the  book  of  God's  remembrance  by  that  precious 
blood.    Paul  names  a  long  list  of  abominations  which 

O 


194 


OLD  PATHS. 


the  Corinthians  had  committed,  and  then  says,  "  Such 
were  some  of  you :  but  ye  are  washed."    (I  Cor.  vi.  11.) 

Furthermore,  it  is  a  full  and  complete  forgiveness.  It 
is  not  like  David's  pardon  to  Absalom, — a  permission  to 
return  home,  but  not  a  full  restoration  to  favour.  (2  Sam. 
xiv.  24.)  It  is  not,  as  some  fancy,  a  mere  letting  ofiF,  and 
letting  alo.ne.  It  is  a  pardon  so  complete  that  he  who 
has  it  is  reckoned  as  righteous  as  if  he  had  never  sinned 
at  all !  His  iniquities  are  blotted  out.  They  are  removed 
from  him  as  far  as  the  east  from  the  west.  (Psalm  ciii.  12.) 
There  remains  no  condemnation  for  him.  The  Father  sees 
him  joined  to  Christ,  and  is  well  pleased.  The  Son  beholds 
him  clothe^  with  His  own  righteousness,  and  says,  "  Thou 
art  all  fair,  there  is  no  spot  in  thee."  (Cant.  iv.  7.)  Blessed 
be  God  that  it  is  so  !  I  verily  believe  if  the  best  of  us  all 
had  only  one  blot  left  for  himself  to  Avipe  out,  he  would 
miss  eternal  life.  If  the  holiest  child  of  Adam  were  in 
heaven  all  but  his  little  finger,  and  to  get  in  depended  on 
himself,  I  am  sure  he  would  never  enter  the  kingdom.  If 
Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job,  had  had  but  one  day's  sins  to  wash 
away,  they  would  never  have  been  saved.  Praised  be  God, 
that  in  the  matter  of  our  pardon  there  is  nothing  left  for 
man  to  do !  Jesus  does  all,  and  man  has  only  to  hold  out 
an  empty  hand  and  to  receive. 

Furthermore,  it  is  a  f  ree  and  uncmiditional  forgiveness. 
It  is  not  burdened  with  an  "  if,"  like  Solomon's  pardon  to 
Adonijah :  "  If  he  will  show  himself  a  worthy  man." 
(1  Kings  i.  52.)  Nor  yet  are  you  obliged  to  carry  a  price 
in  your  hand,  or  to  bring  a  character  v/ith  you  to  prove 
yourself  deserving  of  mercy.  Jesus  requires  but  one 
character,  and  that  is  that  you  should  feel  yourself  a  sinful, 
bad  man.  He  invites  you  to  "buy  wine  and  milk  without 
money  and  without  price,"  and  declares,  "  Whosoever  will, 
let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely."  (Isaiah  Iv.  1 ;  Rev. 
xxii.  17.)  Like  David  in  the  cave  of  Adullam,  He  receives 
every  one  that  feels  in  distress  and  a  debtor,  and  rejects 


FORGIVENESS. 


195 


none.  (1  Sara.  xxii.  2.)  Are  you  a  sinner  ?  Do  you 
want  a  Saviour  ?  Then  come  to  Jesus  just  as  you  are,  and 
your  soul  shall  live. 

Again,  it  is  an  offered  forgiveness.  I  have  read  of 
earthly  Kings  who  knew  not  how  to  show  mercy;  of 
Henry  the  Eighth  of  England  who  spared  neither  man 
nor  woman, — of  James  the  Fifth  of  Scotland,  who  would 
never  show  favour  to  a  Douglas.  The  King  of  kings  is 
not  like  them.  He  calls  on  men  to  come  to  Him,  and  be 
pardoned.  "  Unto  you,  0  men,  I  call,  and  my  voice  is  to 
the  sons  of  men."  (Prov.  viii.  4.)  "  Ho  !  every  one  that 
thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters."  (Isaiah  Iv.  1.)  "  If 
any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  Me  and  drink."  (John 
vii.  37.)  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are 
heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  (Matt.  xi.  28.)  It 
ought  to  be  a  great  comfort  to  you  and  me  to  hear  of  any 
pardon  at  all;  but  to  hear  Jesus  Himself  inviting  us,  to 
see  Jesus  Himself  holding  out  His  hand  to  us, — the 
Saviour  seeking  the  sinner  before  the  sinner  seeks  the 
Saviour, — this  is  encouragement,  this  is  strong  consolation 
indeed ! 

Again,  it  is  a  willing  forgiveness.  I  have  heard  of 
pardons  granted  in  reply  to  long  entreaty,  and  wrung  out 
by  much  importunity.  King  Edward  the  Third  of  England 
would  not  spare  the  citizens  of  Calais  till  they  came  to  him 
with  halters  round  their  necks,  and  his  own  Queen  inter- 
ceded for  them  on  her  knees.  But  Jesus  is  "good  and 
ready  to  forgive."  (Psalm  Ixxxvi.  5.)  He  "  delighteth  in 
mercy."  (Micah  vii.  18.)  Judgment  is  "  His  strange  work." 
He  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish.  (Isai.  xxviii.  21 , 
2  Pet.  iii.  9.)  He  would  fain  have  all  men  saved,  and  come 
to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  (1  Tim.  ii.  4.)  He  wept  over 
unbelieving  Jerusalem.  "  As  I  live,"  He  says,  "  I  have  no 
pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked.  Turn  ye,  turn  ye 
from  your  evil  ways ;  why  will  ye  die  ? "  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  11.) 
You  and  I  m&j  well  come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace. 


lf)6 


OLD  PATHS. 


He  who  sits  there  is  far  more  AvilliHg  and  ready  to  give' 
mercy  than  we  are  to  receive  it.    (Heb.  iv.  16.) 

Besides  this,  it  is  a  tried  forgiveness.  Thousands  and 
tens  of  thousands  have  sought  for  pardon  at  the  mercy- 
seat  of  Christ,  and  not  one  has  ever  returned  to  say  that 
he  sought  in  vain.  Sinners  of  every  name  and  nation, — 
sinners  of  every  sort  and  description, — have  knocked  at  the 
door  of  the  fold,  and  none  have  ever  been  refused  admis- 
sion. Zacchasus  the  extortioner,  Magdalen  the  harlot,  Saul 
the  persecutor,  Peter  the  denier  of  his  Lord,  the  Jews  who 
crucified  the  Prince  of  Life,  the  idolatrous  Athenians,  the 
adulterous  Corinthians,  the  ignorant  Africans,  the  blood- 
thirsty New  Zealanders, — all  have  ventured  their  souls  on 
Christ's  promises  of  pardon,  and  none  have  ever  found 
them  fail.  If  the  way  which  the  Gospel  sets  before  us  were 
a  new  and  untraveled  way,  we  might  well  feel  faint-hearted. 
But  it  is  not  so.  It  is  an  old  path.  It  is  a  path  worn  by 
the  feet  of  many  pilgrims,  and  a  path  in  which  the  foot- 
steps are  all  one  way.  The  treasury  of  Christ's  mercies 
has  never  been  found  empty.  The  well  of  living  waters 
has  never  proved  dry. 

Besides  this,  it  is  a  present  forgiveness.  All  that  believe 
in  Jesus  are  at  once  justified  from  all  things.  (Acts  xiii. 
39.)  The  very  day  the  younger  son  returned  to  his 
father's  house  he  was  clothed  with  the  best  robe,  had  the 
ring  put  on  his  hand,  and  the  shoes  on  his  feet.  (Luke  xv.) 
The  very  day  Zacchseus  received  Jesus  he  heard  those 
comfortable  words,  "This  day  is  salvation  come  to  this 
house."  (Luke  xix.  9.)  The  very  day  that  David  said, 
"  I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord,"  he  was  told  by  Nathan, 
"  The  Lord  also  hath  put  away  thy  sin*'  (2  Sam.  xii.  13.) 
The  very  day  you  first  flee  to  Christ,  your  sins  are  all 
removed.  Your  pardon  is  not  a  thing  far  away,  to  be 
obtained  only  after  many  years.  It  is  nigh  at  hand.  It 
is  close  to  you,  within  your  reach,  all  ready  to  be  bestowed. 
Believe,  and  that  very  moment  it  is  your  ov/n.    "  He  that 


FORGIVENESS. 


197 


belie veth  is  not  condemned."  (John  iii.  18.)  It  is  not 
said,  "  He  shall  not  be,"  or  "  will  not  be,"  but  "  is  not." 
From  the  time  of  his  believing,  condemnation  is  gone. 
"  He  that  believeth  hath  everlasting  life."  (John  iii.  36.) 
It  is  not  said,  "  He  shall  have,"  or  "  mil  have,"  it  is  "  hath." 
It  is  his  own  as  surely  as  if  he  was  in  heaven,  though  not 
so  evidently  so  to  his  own  eyes.  You  must  not  think 
forgiveness  will  be  nearer  to  a  believer  in  the  day  of 
judgment  than  it  was  in  the  hour  he  first  believed.  His 
complete  salvation  from  the  power  of  sin  is  every  year 
nearer  and  nearer  to  him ;  but  as  to  his  forgiveness  and 
justification,  and  deliverance  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  it  is  a 
finished  work  from  the  very  minute  he  first  commits 
himself  to  Christ. 

Last,  and  best  of  all,  it  is  an  everlasting  forgiveness. 
It  is  not  like  Shimei's  pardon, — a  pardon  that  may  some 
time  be  revoked  and  taken  away.  (1  Kings  ii.  9.)  Once 
justified,  you  are  justified  for  ever.  Once  written  down 
in  the  book  of  life,  your  name  shall  never  be  blotted  out. 
The  sins  of  God's  children  are  said  to  be  cast  into  the 
depths  of  the  sea, — to  be  sought  for  and  not  found, — to 
be  remembered  no  more, — to  be  cast  behind  God's  back. 
(Mic.  vii.  19 ;  Jer.  1.  20 ;  xxxi.  34 ;  Isa.  xxxviii.  17.) 
Some  people  fancy  they  may  be  justified  one  year  and 
condemned  another, — children  of  adoption  at  one  time, 
and  strangers  by  and  by, — heirs  of  the  kingdom  in  the 
beginning  of  their  days,  and  yet  servants  of  the  devil  in 
their  end.  I  cannot  find  this  in  the  Bible : — as  the  New 
Zealander  told  the  Romish  priest,  "  /  do  not  see  it  in  the 
Book."  It  seems  to  me  to  overturn  the  good  news  of  the 
Gospel  altogether,  and  to  tear  up  its  comforts  by  the 
roots.  I  believe  the  salvation  Jesus  offers  is  an  everlasting 
salvation,  and  a  pardon  once  sealed  with  His  blood  shall 
never  be  reversed. 

I  have  set  before  you  the  nature  of  the  forgiveness 
offered  to  you.    I  have  told  you  but  a  little  of  it,  for  my 


198 


OLD  PATHS. 


words  are  weaker  than  my  will.  The  half  of  it  remains 
untold.  The  greatness  of  it  is  far  more  than  any  report 
of  mine.  But  I  think  I  have  said  enough  to  show  you  it 
is  worth  the  seeking,  and  I  can  wish  you  nothing  better 
than  that  you  may  strive  to  make  it  your  own. 

Do  you  call  it  nothing  to  look  forward  to  death  without 
fear,  and  to  judgment  without  doubtings,  and  to  eternity 
without  a  sinking  heart  ?  Do  you  call  it  nothing  to  feel 
the  world  slipping  from  your  gi'asp,  and  to  see  the  grave' 
getting  ready  for  you,  and  the  valley  of  the  shadow  ofj 
death  opening  before  your  eyes,  and  yet  to  be  not  afraid  ?| 
Do  you  call  it  nothing  to  be  able  to  think  of  the  great 
day  of  account,  the  throne,  the  books,  the  Judge,  the 
assembled  worlds,  the  revealing  of  secrets,  the  final 
sentence,  and  yet  to  feel,  "  I  am  safe "  ?  This  is  the 
portion,  and  this  the  privilege  of  a  forgiven  soul. 

Such  an  one  is  on  a  rock.  When  the  rain  of  God's 
wrath  descends,  and  the  floods  come,  and  the  winds  blow, 
his  feet  shall  not  slide,  his  habitation  shall  be  sure. 

Such  an  one  is  in  an  ark.    When  the  last  fiery  delug 
is  sweeping  over  all  things  on  the  surface  ot  the  earth,  it 
shall  not  come  nigh  him.    He  shall  be  caught  up,  and 
borne  securely  above  it  all. 

Such  an  one  is  in  an  hiding  place.  When  God  arises 
to  judge  terribly  the  earth,  and  men  are  calling  to  rocks 
and  mountains  to  fall  upon  them  and  cover  them,  the 
Everlasting  Arms  shall  be  thrown  around  him,  and  the 
storm  shall  pass  over  his  head.  He  shall  "abide  under  the 
shadow  of  the  Almighty."   (Psalm  xci.  1.) 

Such  an  one  is  in  a  city  of  refuge.  The  accuser  of 
the  brethren  can  lay  no  charge  against  him.  The  law 
cannot  condemn  him.  There  is  a  wall  between  him  and 
the  avenger  of  blood.  The  enemies  of  his  soul  cannot 
hurt  him.    He  is  in  a  secure  sanctuary. 

Such  an  one  is  rich.  He  has  treasure  in  heaven  which 
cannot  be  affected  by  worldly  changes,  compared  to  which 


FORGIVENESS. 


199 


Peru  and  California  are  notliing  at  all.  He  need  not 
envy  the  richest  merchants  and  bankers.  He  has  a  por- 
tion that  will  endure  when  bank-notes  and  sovereigns 
are  worthless  things.  He  can  say,  like  the  Spanish 
ambassador,  when  shown  the  treasury  at  Venice,  "  My 
Master's  treasury  has  no  bottom."    He  has  Christ. 

Such  an  one  is  insured.  He  is  ready  for  anything 
that  may  happen.  Nothing  can  harm  him.  Banks  may 
break,  and  Governments  may  be  overturned.  Famine  and 
pestilence  may  rage  around  him.  Sickness  and  sorrow 
may  visit  liis  own  fireside.  But  still  he  is  ready  for  all, 
■ — ready  for  health,  ready  for  disease, — ready  for  tears, 
— ready  for  joy, — ready  for  poverty,  ready  for  plenty, — 
ready  for  life,  ready  for  death.  He  has  Christ.  He  is  a 
pardoned  soul.  "  Blessed  "  indeed  "  is  he  whose  transgres- 
sion is  forgiven,  and  whose  sin  is  covered."    (Ps.  xxxii.  1.)' 

How  will  any  one  escape  if  he  neglects  so  great  salvation  ? 
Why  should  you  not  lay  hold  on  it  at  once,  and  say. 
Pardon  me,  even  me  also,  O  my  Saviour !  What  would 
you  have,  if  the  way  I  have  set  before  you  does  not  satisfy 
you  ?  Come  while  the  door  is  open.  Ask,  and  you  shall 
receive. 

IV.  Let  me,  hi  the  last  place,  supply  the  readers  of 
this  paper  with  some  marks  of  having  found  forgiveness. 

I  dare  not  leave  out  this  point.  Too  many  persons 
presume  they  are  forgiven,  who  have  no  evidence  to  show. 
Not  a  few  cannot  think  it  possible  they  are  forgiven,  who 
are  plainly  in  the  way  to  heaven,  though  they  may  not  see 
it  themselves.  I  would  fain  raise  hope  in  some,  and  self- 
inquiry  in  others ;  and  to  do  this,  let  me  set  down  in 
order  the  leading  marks  of  a  forgiven  soul. 

(a)  Forgiven  souls  hate  sin.  They  can  enter  most  fully 
into  the  words  of  our  Communion  Service  :  "  The  remem- 
brance of  sin  is  grievous  unto  them,  and  the  burden  of  it 
is  intolerable."    It  is  the  sequent  which  bit  them  :  how 


200 


OLD  PATHS. 


should  they  not  shrink  from  it  with  horror?  It  is  the 
poison  which  brought  them  to  the  brink  of  eternal  death : 
how  should  they  not  loathe  it  with  a  godly  disgust?  It 
is  the  Egyptian  enemy  which  kept  them  in  hard  bondage : 
how  should  not  the  very  memory  of  it  be  bitter  to  their 
hearts  ?  It  is  the  disease  of  which  they  carry  the  marks 
and  scars  about  them,  and  from  which  they  have  scarcely 
recovered  :  well  may  they  dread  it,  flee  from  it,  and  long  to 
be  delivered  altogether  from  its  power  !  Remember  how 
the  woman  in  Simon's  house  wept  over  the  feet  of  Jesus. 
(Luke  vii.  38.)  Remember  how  the  Ephesians  publicly 
burned  their  wicked  books.  (Acts  xix.  19.)  Remember 
how  Paul  mourned  over  his  youthful  tran.«gressions :  "  I 
am  not  meet  to  be  called  an  Apostle,  because  I  persecuted 
the  Church  of  God."  (1  Cor.  xv.  9.)  If  you  and  sin  are 
friends,  you  and  God  are  not  yet  reconciled.  You  are  not 
meet  for  heaven  ;  for  one  main  part  of  heaven's  excellence 
is  the  absence  of  all  sin. 

(b)  Forgiven  souls  love  CJivist.  This  is  that  one  thing 
they  can  say,  if  they  dare  say  nothing  else, — they  do  love 
Christ.  His  person,  His  offices.  His  work,  His  name.  His 
cross,  His  blood.  His  words.  His  examj)le,  His  day,  His  or- 
dinances,— all,  all  are  precious  to  forgiven  souls.  The  minis- 
try which  exalts  Him  most,  is  that  which  they  enjoy  most. 
The  books  which  are  most  full  of  Him,  are  most  pleasant  to 
their  minds.  The  people  on  earth  they  feel  most  drawn 
to,  are  those  in  whom  they  see  something  of  Christ.  His 
name  is  as  ointment  poured  forth,  and  comes  with  a 
peculiar  sweetness  to  their  ears.  (Cant.  i.  3.)  They 
would  tell  you  they  cannot  help  feeling  as  they  do.  He 
is  their  Redeemer,  their  Shepherd,  their  Physician,  their 
King,  their  strong  Deliverer,  their  gracious  Guide,  their 
hope,  their  joy,  their  All.  Were  it  not  for  Him  they 
would  be  of  all  men  most  miserable.  They  would  as  soon 
consent  that  you  should  take  the  sun  out  of  the  sky,  as 
Christ  out  of  their  religion.    Those  people  who  talk  ot 


FORGIVENESS. 


201 


"the  Lord,"  and  "the  Ahnighty,'"  and  "the  Deity,"  and 
so  forth,  but  have  not  a  word  to  say  about  Christ,  are  in 
anything  but  a  right  state  of  mind.  What  saith  the 
Scripture?  "He  that  honoureth  not  the  Son,  honoureth 
not  the  Father  which  hath  sent  Him."  (John  v.  23.)  "  If 
any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be 
anathema."    (1  Cor.  xvi.  22.) 

(c)  Forgiven  souls  are  humble.  They  cannot  forget 
that  they  owe  all  they  have  and  hope  for  to  free  grace, 
and  this  keeps  them  lowly.  They  are  brands  plucked 
from  the  fire, — debtors  who  could  not  pay  for  themselves, 
— captives  who  must  have  remained  in  prison  for  ever,  but 
for  undeserved  mercy, — wandering  sheep  who  were  ready 
to  perish  when  the  Shepherd  found  them ;  and  what  right 
then  have  they  to  be  proud  ?  I  do  not  deny  that  there  are 
proud  saints.  But  this  I  do  say, — they  are  of  all  God's 
creatures  the  most  inconsistent,  and  of  all  God's  children 
the  most  likely  to  stumble  and  pierce  themselves  with 
many  sorrows.  Forgiveness  more  often  produces  the 
spirit  of  Jacob:  "I  am  not  worthy  of  the  least  of  all  the 
mercies,  and  all  the  truth  which  Thou  hast  showed  unto 
Thy  servant  "  (Gen.  xxxii.  10)  ;  and  of  Hezekiah : — "  I 
shall  go  softly  all  my  years  "  (Isaiah  xxxviii.  15) ;  and  of 
the  Apostle  Paul :  "  I  am  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints, 
— chief  of  sinners."  (Eph.  iii.  8;  1  Tim.  i.  15.)  When 
you  and  I  have  nothing  we  can  call  our  own  but  sin  and 
weakness,  there  is  surely  no  gai-ment  that  becomes  us  so 
well  as  humility. 

(d)  Forgiven  souls  are  holy.  Their  chief  desire  is  to 
please  Him  who  has  saved  them,  to  do  His  will,  to  glorify 
Him  in  body  and  in  Spirit,  which  are  His.  "  What  shall  I 
render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  His  benefits  ? "  (Ps.  cxvi.  12),  is 
a  leading  principle  in  a  pardoned  heart.  It  was  the  remem- 
brance of  Jesus  showing  mercy  that  made  Paul  in  labours  so 
abundant,  and  in  doing  good  so  unwearied.  It  was  a  sense 
of  pardon  that  made  Zaccheus  say,"  The  half  of  my  goods  I 


202 


OLD  PATHS. 


give  to  the  poor,  and  if  I  have  taken  anything  from  any 
man  by  false  accusation,  I  restore  him  four-fold."  (Luke 
xix.  8.)  If  any  one  points  out  to  me  believers  who  are 
in  a  carnal,  slothful  state  of  soul,  I  reply  in  the  words  of 
Peter,  "  They  have  forgotten  they  were  purged  from  their 
old  sins."  (2  Pet.  i.  9.)  But  if  you  show  me  a  man  de- 
liberately living  an  unholy  and  licentious  life,  and  yet 
boasting  that  his  sins  are  forgiven,  I  answer,  "  He  is  under 
a  ruinous  delusion,  and  is  not  forgiven  at  all."  I  would  not 
believe  he  is  forgiven  if  an  angel  from  heaven  affirmed  it^ 
and  I  charge  you  not  to  believe  it  too.  Pardon  of  sin  and 
love  of  sin  are  like  oil  and  water, — they  will  never  go 
together.  All  that  are  washed  in  the  blood  of  Christ  are 
also  sanctified  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ. 

(e)  Forgiven  souls  are  forgiving.  They  do  as  they  have 
been  done  by.  They  look  over  the  offences  of  their  brethren. 
They  endeavour  to  "  walk  in  love,  as  Christ  loved  them,  and 
gave  Himself  for  them."  (Eph.  v.  2.)  They  remember  how 
God  for  Christ's  sake  forgave  them,  and  endeavour  to  do 
the  same  towards  their  fellow-creatures.  Has  He  forgiven 
them  pounds,  and  shall  they  not  forgive  a  few  pence  ? 
Doubtless  in  this,  as  in  every  thing  else,  they  come  short ; — 
but  this  is  their  desire  and  their  aim.  A  spiteful 
quarrelsome  Christian  is  a  scandal  to  his  profession.  It  is 
very  hard  to  believe  that  such  an  one  has  ever  sat  at  the 
foot  of  the  cross,  and  has  ever  considered  how  he  is  praying 
against  himself  every  time  he  uses  the  Lord's  Prayer.  Is 
he  not  saying  as  it  were,  "Father,  do  not  forgive  me  my  tres- 
passes at  all  "  ?  But  it  is  still  harder  to  understand  what 
such  a  one  would  do  in  heaven,  if  he  got  there.  All  ideas  of 
heaven  in  which  forgiveness  has  not  a  place,  are  castles  in 
the  air  and  vain  fancies.  Forgiveness  is  the  way  by  which 
every  saved  soul  enters  heaven.  Forgiveness  is  the  only 
title  by  which  he  remains  in  heaven.  Forgiveness  is  the 
eternal  subject  of  song  with  all  the  redeemed  who  inhabit 
heaven.    Surelv  an  unforgiving  soul  in  heaven  would  fnJ 


FORGIVENESS. 


203 


his  heart  completely  out  of  tune.  Surely  we  know  nothing 
of  Christ's  love  to  us  but  the  name  of  it,  if  we  do  not 
love  our  brethren. 

I  lay  these  things  before  every  reader  of  this  paper.  I 
know  well  there  are  great  diversities  in  the  degree  of  men's 
attainments  in  grace,  and  that  saving  faith  in  Christ  is 
consistent  with  many  imperfections.  But  still  I  do  believe 
the  five  marks  I  have  just  been  naming  will  generally  be 
found  more  or  less  in  all  forgiven  souls. 

I  cannot  conceal  from  you,  these  marks  should  raise  in 
many  minds  great  searchings  of  heart.  I  must  be  plain. 
I  fear  there  are  thousands  of  persons  called  Christians, 
who  know  nothing  of  these  marks.  They  are  baptized. 
They  attend  the  services  of  their  Church.  They  would 
not  on  any  account  be  reckoned  infidels.  But  as  to  true 
repentance  and  saving  faith,  union  with  Christ  and 
sanctification  of  the  Spirit,  they  are  "  names  and  words " 
of  which  they  know  nothing  at  all. 

Now  if  this  paper  is  read  by  such  persons,  it  will 
probably  either  alarm  them,  or  make  them  very  angry. 
If  it  makes  them  angry  I  shall  be  sorry.  If  it  alarms  them 
I  shall  be  glad.  I  want  to  alarm  them.  I  want  to  awaken 
them  from  their  present  state.  I  want  them  to  take  in  the 
great  fact,  that  they  are  not  yet  forgiven,  that  they  have  not 
peace  with  God,  and  are  on  the  high  road  to  destruction. 

I  must  say  thi.s,  for  I  see  no  alternative.  It  seems 
neither  Christian  faithfulness,  nor  Christian  charity,  to 
keep  it  back.  I  see  certain  marks  of  pardoned  souls  laid 
down  in  Scripture.  I  see  an  utter  want  of  these  marks  in 
many  men  and  women  around  me.  How  then  can  I  avoid 
the  conclusion  that  they  are  not  yet  "  forgiven  "  ?  And  how 
shall  I  do  the  work  of  a  faithful  watchman  if  I  do  not 
write  it  down  plainly  in  so  many  words?  Where  is  thp 
use  of  crying  Peace !  Peace !  when  there  is  no  peace  ? 
Where  is  the  honesty  of  acting  the  part  of  a  lying  physician, 
and  telling  people  there  is  no  danger,  when  in  reality  they 


204 


OLD  PATHS. 


are  fast  drawing  near  to  eternal  death  ?  Surely  the  blood 
of  souls  would  be  required  at  my  hands  if  I  wrote  to  you 
anything  less  than  the  truth.  "  If  the  trumpet  give  an 
uncertain  sound,  who  shall  prepare  himself  to  the  battle?" 
(1  Cor.  xiv.  8.) 

Examine  yourself,  then,  before  this  subject  is  forgotten. 
Consider  of  what  sort  your  religion  is.  Try  it  by  the  five 
marks  I  have  just  set  before  you.  I  have  endeavoured  to 
make  them  as  broad  and  general  as  I  can,  for  fear  of 
causing  any  heart  to  be  sad  that  God  has  not  made  sad. 
If  you  know  anything  of  them,  though  it  be  but  a  little, 
I  am  thankful,  and  entreat  you  to  go  forward.  But  if  you 
know  nothing  of  them  in  your  own  experience,  let  me  say, 
in  all  affection,  I  stand  in  doubt  of  you.  I  tremble  for 
your  soul. 

1.  And  now,  before  I  conclude,  let  me  put  a  home 
question  to  every  one  who  reads  tliis  paper.  It  shall  be 
short  and  plain,  but  it  is  all  important:  "Are  you 
forgiven  ?  " 

I  have  told  you  all  I  can  about  forgiveness.  Your 
need  of  forgiveness, — the  way  of  forgiveness, — ^the  en- 
couragements to  seek  forgiveness, — the  marks  of  having 
found  it, — all  have  been  placed  before  you.  Bring  the 
whole  subject  to  bear  upon  your  own  heart,  and  ask  your- 
self, "Am  I  forgiven  ?  Either  I  am,  or  I  am  not.  Which 
of  the  two  is  it  ?  " 

You  believe  perhaps,  there  is  forgiveness  of  sins.  You 
believe  that  Christ  died  for  sinners,  and  that  He  offers 
a  pardon  to  the  most  ungodly.  But  are  you  forgiven 
yourself?  Have  you  yourself  laid  hold  on  Christ  by 
faith,  and  found  peace  through  His  blood  ?  "V\Tiat  profit 
is  there  to  you  in  forgiveness,  except  you  get  the  benefit 
of  it  ?  What  does  it  profit  the  shipwrecked  sailor  that 
the  life-boat  is  alongside,  if  he  sticks  by  the  wreck,  and 
does  not  jump  in  and  escape  ?  What  does  it  avail  the 
sick  man  that  the  doctor  offers  him  a  medicine,  if  he  only 


FORGIVENESS.  205 

looks  at  it,  and  does  not  swallow  it  down  ?  Except  you 
lay  hold  for  your  own  soul,  you  will  be  as  surely  lost  as  if 
there  was  no  forgiveness  at  all. 

If  ever  your  sins  are  to  be  forgiven,  it  must  be  now, — 
now  in  this  life,  if  ever  in  the  life  to  come, — now  in  this 
world,  if  they  are  to  be  found  blotted  out  when  Jesus 
comes  again  the  second  time.  There  must  be  actual  busi- 
ness between  you  and  Christ.  Your  sins  must  be  laid 
on  Him  by  faith :  His  righteousness  must  be  laid  on  you. 
His  blood  must  be  applied  to  your  conscience,  or  else  your 
sins  will  meet  you  in  the  day  of  judgment,  and  sink  you 
into  hell.  Oh,  how  can  you  trifle  when  such  things  are  at 
stake  ?  How  can  you  be  content  to  leave  it  uncertain 
whether  you  are  forgiven  ?  Surely  that  a  man  can  make 
his  will,  insure  his  life,  give  directions  about  his  funeral, 
and  yet  leave  his  soul's  affairs  in  uncertainty,  is  a  won- 
derful thing  indeed. 

2.  Let  me  next  give  a  solemn  warning  to  every  one 
who  reads  this  paper,  and  knows  in  his  conscience  he  is 
not  forgiven. 

Your  soul  is  in  awful  danger.  You  may  die  this  year. 
And  if  you  die  as  you  are,  you  are  lost  for  ever.  If  you 
die  without  pardon,  without  pardon  you  will  rise  again  at 
the  last  day.  There  is  a  sword  over  your  head  which  hangs 
by  a  single  hair.  There  is  but  a  step  between  you  and 
death.  Oh,  I  wonder  that  you  can  sleep  quietly  in  your 
bed! 

You  are  7iot  yet  forgiven.  Then  what  have  you  got  by 
your  religion  ?  You  go  to  church.  You  have  a  Bible,  you 
have  a  Prayer-book,  and  perhaps  a  Hymn-book.  You 
hear  sermons.  You  join  in  services.  It  may  be  you  go 
to  the  Lord's  table.  But  what  have  you  really  got  after 
all  ?  Any  hope  ?  Any  peace  ?  Any  joy  ?  Any  comfort  ? 
Nothing :  literally  nothing !  You  have  got  nothing  but 
mere  temporal  things,  if  you  are  not  a  pardoned  soul. 

You  are  7iot  yet  forgiven.    But  you  trust  God  will  be 


206 


OLD  PATHS. 


merciful.  Yet  why  should  He  be  merciful  if  you  will 
not  seek  Him  in  His  own  appointed  way  ?  Merciful  He 
doubtless  is,  wonderfully  merciful  to  all  who  come  to  Him 
in  the  name  of  Jesus.  But  if  you  choose  to  despise  His 
directions,  and  make  a  road  to  heaven  of  your  own,  you 
will  find  to  your  cost  there  is  no  mercy  for  you. 

You  are  not  yet  forgiven.  But  you  hope  you  will  be 
some  day.  I  cannot  away  with  that  expression.  It  is 
like  thrusting  off  the  hand  of  conscience,  and  seizing  it  by 
the  throat  to  stop  its  voice.  Why  are  you  more  likely  to 
seek  forgiveness  at  a  future  time  ?  Why  should  you  not 
seek  it  now  ?  Now  is  the  time  for  gathering  the  bread  of 
life.  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  fast  drawing  near,  and  then 
no  man  can  work.  (Exod.  xvi.  26.)  The  Seventh  trumpet 
will  soon  sound.  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  will  soon 
become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of  His  Christ. 
(Rev.  xi.  15.)  Woe  to  the  house  which  is  found  without 
the  scarlet  line,  and  without  the  mark  of  blood  upon  the 
door  !    (Josh,  ii  18  ;  Exod.  xii.  13.) 

Well,  yoii  may  not  feel  your  need  of  forgiveness  now. 
But  a  time  may  come  when  you  will  want  it.  The  Lord 
in  mercy  grant  that  it  may  not  then  be  too  late. 

3.  Let  me  next  give  an  earnest  invitation  to  all  who 
'read  this  paper  and  desire  forgiveness. 

I  know  not  who  you  are,  or  what  you  have  been  in  time 
past,  but  I  say  boldly.  Come  to  Christ  by  faith,  and  you 
shall  have  a  pardon.  High  or  low,  rich  or  poor,  young  men 
and  maidens,  old  men  and  children, — you  cannot  be  worse 
than  Manasseh  and  Paul  before  conversion, — than  David 
and  Peter  after  conversion :  come  all  of  you  to  Christ,  and 
you  shall  be  freely  forgiven. 

Think  not  for  a  moment  that  you  have  some  great  thing 
to  do  before  you  come  to  Christ.  Such  a  notion  is  of  the 
earth,  earthy ;  the  Gospel  bids  you  come  just  as  you  are. 
Man's  idea  is  to  make  his  peace  with  God  by  repentance 
and  then  come  to  Christ  at  last :  the  Gospel  way  is  to 


FORGIVENESS. 


207 


receive  peace  from  Christ  first  of  all,  and  begin  with  Him. 
Man's  idea  is  to  amend,  and  turn  over  a  new  leaf,  and  so 
work  his  way  up  to  reconciliation  and  friendship  with  God  : 
the  Gospel  way  is  first  to  be  friends  with  God  through 
Christ,  and  then  to  work.  Man's  idea  is  to  toil  up  the  hill, 
and  find  life  at  the  top :  the  Gospel  way  is  first  to  live  by 
faith  in  Christ,  and  then  to  do  His  will. 

And  judge  ye,  every  one,  judge  ye,  which  is  true 
Christianity  ?  Which  is  the  good  news  ?  Which  is  the 
glad  tidings  ?  First  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  and  then  peace, 
or  first  peace  and  then  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  ?  First 
sanctification  and  then  pardon,  or  first  pardon  and  then 
sanctification  ?  First  service  and  then  life,  or  first  life 
and  then  service  ?  Your  own  hearts  can  well  supply  the 
answer. 

Come  then,  willing  to  receive,  and  not  thinking  how 
much  you  can  bring.  Come,  willing  to  take  what  Christ 
offers,  and  not  fancying  you  can  give  anything  in  return. 
Come  with  your  sins,  and  no  other  qualification  but  a 
hearty  desire  for  pardon,  and,  as  sure  as  the  Bible  is  true, 
you  shall  be  saved. 

You  may  tell  me  you  are  not  worthy,  you  are  not  good 
enough,  you  are  not  elect.  I  answer,  You  are  a  sinner,  and 
yon  want  to  be  saved,  and  what  more  do  you  want  ?  You 
are  one  of  those  whom  Jesus  came  to  save.  Come  to  Him 
and  you  shall  have  life.  Take  with  you  words,  and  He 
will  hear  you  graciously.  Tell  Him  all  your  soul's  neces- 
sities, and  I  know  from  the  Bible  He  will  give  heed. 
Tell  Him  you  have  heard  He  receiveth  sinners,  and  that 
you  are  such.  Tell  Him  you  have  heard  He  has  the  keys 
of  life  in  his  hand,  and  entreat  Him  to  let  you  in.  Tell 
Him  you  come  in  dependence  on  His  own  promises,  and 
ask  Him  to  fulfil  His  word,  and  "do  as  He  has  said.", 
(2  Sam.  vii.  25.)  Do  this  in  simplicity  and  sincerity,  and, 
my  soul  for  your's,  you  shall  not  ask  in  vain.  Do  this 
and  you  shall  find  Him  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  your 


208 


OLD  PATHS. 


sins,  and  to  cleanse  you  from  all  unrighteousness.  (1  John 
i.  0.) 

4.  Last  of  all,  let  me  give  a  vjord  of  exhortation  to 
all  forgiven  souls. 

You  are  forgiven.  Then  know  the  full  extent  of  your 
privileges,  and  learn  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord.  You  and  I 
are  great  sinners,  but  then  we  have  a  great  Saviour.  You 
and  I  have  sinned  sins  that  are  past  man's  knowledge,  but 
then  we  have  "the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  knowledge," 
to  rest  upon.  (Ejah.  iii.  19.)  You  and  I  feel  our  hearts  to  be 
a  bubbling  fountain  of  evil,  but  then  we  have  another 
fountain  of  greater  power  in  Christ's  blood,  to  which  we 
may  daily  resort.  You  and  I  have  mighty  enemies  to 
contend  with,  but  then  the  "  Captain  of  our  salvation  "  is 
mightier  still,  and  is  ever  with  us.  Why  should  our 
hearts  be  troubled  ?  Why  should  we  be  disquieted  and 
cast  down  ?  O  men  and  women  of  little  faith  that  we 
are !    Wherefore  do  we  doubt  ? 

Let  us  strive  every  year  to  grow  in  grace,  and  in  the 
knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  sad  to  be  con- 
tent with  a  little  religion.  It  is  honourable  to  covet  the 
best  rifts.  We  ought  not  to  be  satisfied  with  the  same 
kind  of  hearing,  and  reading,  and  praying,  which  satisfied 
us  in  years  gone  by.  We  ought  to  labour  every  year  to 
throw  more  heart  and  reality  into  everything  we  do  in  our 
religion.  To  love  Christ  more  intensely, — to  abhor  evU 
more  thoroughly, — to  cleave  to  what  is  good  more  closely, 
— to  watch  even  our  least  ways  more  narrowly, — to  declare 
very  plainly  that  we  seek  a  country, — to  put  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  be  clothed  with  Him  in  every  place  and 
company, — to  see  more, — to  feel  more, — to  know  more, — 
to  do  more, — these  ought  to  be  our  aims  and  desires  every 
year  we  begin.  Truly  there  is  room  for  improvement  in 
us  all. 

Let  us  try  to  do  good  to  the  souls  of  others,  more  than 
we  have  done  hitherto.    Ala.s,  it  is  poor  work  indeed  to  be 


FORGIVENESS. 


209 


swallowed  up  in  our  own  spiritual  concerns,  and  taken  up 
with  our  own  spiritual  ailments,  and  never  to  think  of 
others  !  We  forget  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  religious 
selfishness.  Let  us  count  it  a  sorrowful  thing  to  go  to 
heaven  alone,  and  let  us  seek  to  draw  companions  with  us. 
We  ought  never  to  forget  that  every  man,  Avoman  and 
child  around  us,  will  soon  be  either  in  heaven  or  hell. 
Let  us  say  to  otliers,  as  Moses  did  to  Hobab,  "  Come  witii 
us,  and  we  will  do  thee  good."  (Num.  x.  29.)  Oh,  it  is 
indeed  a  true  saying,  "He  that  watereth  .shall  be  watered 
himself"  (Prov.  xi.  25.)  The  idle,  do-little,  selfish 
Christian  has  little  idea  what  he  is  missing. 

But  above  all,  let  us  learn  to  live  the  life  of  faith  in 
Jesus  more  than  we  have  hitherto.  Ever  to  be  found  by 
the  fountain  side, — ever  to  be  eating  Christ's  body  by  faith, 
and  drinking  Christ's  blood  by  faith, — ever  to  have  before 
our  minds  Christ's  dying  for  our  sins, — Christ's  rising 
again  for  our  justification, — Christ  interceding  for  us  at 
God's  right  hand, — Christ  soon  coming  again  to  gather  us 
to  Himself, — this  is  the  mark  which  we  should  have 
continually  before  our  eyes.  We  may  fall  short,  but  let 
us  aim  high.  Let  us  walk  in  the  full  light  of  the  Sun  of 
righteousness,  and  then  our  graces  will  grow.  Let  us  not 
be  like  trees  on  a  cold  north  wall,  weak,  half-starved,  and 
unfruitful.  Let  us  rather  strive  to  be  like  the  sun-flower, 
and  follow  the  great  Fountain  of  Light  wherever  He  goes, 
and  see  Him  with  open  face.  Oh,  for  an  eye  more  quick 
to  discern  His  dealings !  Oh,  for  an  ear  more  ready  to 
hear  His  voice ! 

Finally,  let  us  say  to  everything  in  the  world  that  inter- 
feres between  ourselves  and  Jesus  Christ,  "  Stand  aside ; " 
and  let  us  dread  aUoiving  ourselves  in  the  least  evil  habits, 
lest  insensibly  they  rise  up  like  a  mist  and  hide  Him  from 
our  eyes,  "  In  His  light  alone  shall  we  see  light "  and  feel 
warmth,  and  separate  from  Him  we  shall  find  the  world  a 
dark  and  cold  wilderness,    (Psalm  xxxvi.  9.)    We  should 

P 


210 


OLD  PATHS. 


call  to  mind  the  request  of  the  Athenian  philosopher,  when 
the  mightiest  Monarch  on  earth  asked  him  what  he  desired 
most.  "  I  have,"  said  he,  "  but  one  request  to  make  ;  and 
that  is  that  you  would  stand  from  between  me  and  the 
sun,"  Let  this  be  the  spirit  in  which  you  and  I  are  found 
continually.  Let  us  think  lightly  of  the  world's  gifts.  Let 
us  sit  calmly  under  its  cares.  Let  us  care  for  nothing  if 
we  may  only  ever  see  the  King's  face,  if  we  may  only 
ever  abide  in  Christ. 

If  our  sins  are  forgiven,  our  best  things  are  yet  to  come. 

Yet  a  little  time,  and  we  shall  "  see  face  to  face,  and 
know  as  we  have  been  known."  We  shall  "  see  the  King 
in  His  beauty,"  and  "go  out  no  more."  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12;: 
Isa.  xxxiii.  17;  Rev.  iii.  12.)  "Blessed  then  is  he  whose 
transgression  is  forgiven,  and  whose  sins  are  covered." 
(Psalm  xxxii.  1.) 


YIII. 


JUSTIFICATION! 

"Being  justified  hy  faith,  tve  haue  peace  ivith  God  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ." — Romans  v.  1. 

There  is  a  word  in  the  text  which  heads  this  page  which 
ought  to  be  very  precious  in  the  eyes  of  Englishmen. 
That  word  is  "peace." 

Even  in  "  merry  England  "  we  have  known  something 
of  the  horrors  of  war  in  the  last  thirty  years.  The 
Crimean  war,  the  Indian  mutiny,  the  Chinese,  Abyssinian, 
and  Ashantee  wars  have  left  deep  marks  on  the  history  of 
our  country. 

We  have  tasted  some  of  the  tremendous  evils  which 
war,  however  just  and  necessary,  brings  in  its  train. 
Battle  and  disease  have  done  their  deadly  work  among 
our  gallant  soldiers  and  sailors.  Gentle  and  simple  blood 
has  been  shed  like  water  in  far  distant  lands.  Many  of 
the  best  and  bravest  of  our  countrymen  are  lying  cold  in 
untimely  graves.  Hearts  in  England  have  been  broken 
by  sudden,  stunning,  crushing  bereavements.  Mourning 
has  been  put  on  in  many  a  palace,  and  many  a  cottage. 
The  light  of  hundreds  of  happy  firesides  has  been  quenched. 
The  mirth  of  thousands  of  homes  is  gone.  Alas,  we  have 
learned  b}'  bitter  experience  what  a  blessed  thing  is  peace ! 

I  desire,  however,  to  call  the  attention  of  all  who  read 
this  paper  to  the  best  of  all  peace, — even  peace  with  God. 


OLD  PATHS. 


I  would  fain  speak  to  you  of  a  peace  which  this  world  can 
neither  give  nor  take  away, — a  peace  which  depends  on  no' 
earthly  governments,  and  needs  no  carnal  weapons,  either 
to  win  it  or  preserve  it, — a  peace  which  is  freely  oflfered 
by  the  King  of  kings,  and  is  within  the  reach  of  all  who 
are  willing  to  receive  it. 

There  is  such  a  thing  as  "peace  with  God."  It  may  be 
felt  and  known.  My  heart's  desire  and  prayer  is  that  you 
maybe  able  to  say  with  the  Apostle  Paul,  "  Being  justified 
by  faith,  I  have  peace  with  God  tlirough  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."    (Rom.  v.  1.) 

There  are  four  things  which  I  propose  to  bring  before 
you,  in  order  to  throw  light  on  the  whole  subject. 

I.  Let  me  show  you  the  chief  privilege  of  a  true 
Christian : — "  he  has  peace  with  God." 

II.  Let  me  show  you  the  fountain  from  which  that 
privilege  flows : — "  he  is  justified." 

III.  Let  me  show  you  the  rock  from  which  that 
fountain  springs : — "  J esus  Christ." 

IV.  Let  me  show  you  the  hand  by  which  the  privilege 
is  made  our  own  : — "faith." 

Upon  each  of  these  four  points  I  have  something  to 
say.  May  the  Holy  Ghost  make  the  whole  subject  peace- 
givincr  to  some  souls  ! 

I.  First  of  all,  let  me  show  the  chief  privilege  of  a 
true  Christian : — he  has  peace  ivith  God. 

When  the  apostle  Paul  wrote  his  ejiistle  to  the  Romans, 
he  used  five  words  which  the  wisest  of  the  heathen  could 
never  have  used.  Socrates,  and  Plato,  and  Aristotle,  and 
Cicero,  and  Seneca  were  wise  men.  On  many  subjects 
they  saw  more  clearly  than  most  people  in  the  present 
day.    They  were  men  of  mighty  minds,  and  of  a  vast 


JUSTIFICATION. 


ranjfe  of  intellect.  But  not  one  of  them,  could  have  said' 
as  the  apostle  did,  "  I  have  peace  with  God."    (Rom  v.  1.) 

When  Paul  used  these  words,  he  spoke  not  for  himself 
only,  but  for  all  true  Christians.  Some  of  them  no  doubt 
have  a  greater  sense  of  this  privilege  than  others.  All  of 
them  find  an  evil  principle  within,  warring  against  their 
spiritual  welfare  day  by  day.  All  of  them  find  their^ 
adversary,  the  devil,  waging  an  endless  battle  with  their 
souls.  All  of  them  find  that  they  must  endure  the  enmity 
of  the  world.  But  all,  notwithstanding,  to  a  greater  or  less 
extent,  "  have  peace  with  God." 

This  peace  with  God  is  a  calm,  intelligent  sense  of 
friendship  with  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth.  He  that 
lias  it,  feels  as  if  there  was  no  barrier  and  separation 
between  himself  and  his  holy  Maker.  He  can  think  of 
himself  as  under  the  eye  of  an  all-seeing  Being,  and  yet 
not  feel  afraid.  He  can  believe  that  this  all-seeing  Being 
beholds  him,  and  yet  is  not  displeased. 

Such  a  man  can  see  death  waiting  for  him,  and  yet  not 
be  greatly  moved.  He  can  go  down  into  the  cold  river, — 
close  his  eyes  on  all  he  has  on  earth, — launch  forth  into  a 
world  unknown,  and  take  up  his  abode  in  the  silent  grave, — 
and  yet  feel  peace. 

Such  a  man  can  look  forward  to  the  resurrection  and 
the  judgment,  and  yet  not  be  greatly  moved.  He  can  see 
with  his  mind's  eye  the  great  white  throne, — the  assembled 
world, — the  open  books,: — the  listening  angels, — the  Judge 
Himself, — and  yet  feel  peace. 

Such  a  man  can  think  of  eternity,  and  yet  not  be  greatly 
moved.  He  can  imagine  a  never-ending  existence  in  the 
presence  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb, — an  everlasting 
Sunday, — a  perpetual  communion, — and  yet  feel  peace. 

I  know  of  no  happiness  compared  to  that  which  this 
peace  affords.  A  calm  sea  after  a  storm, — a  blue  sky  after 
a  black  thunder  cloud, — health  after  sickness, — light  after 
darkness, — rest  after  toil, — ail,  all  are  beautiful  and  pleasant 


214 


OLD  PATHS. 


things.  But  none,  none  of  them  all  can  give  more  than  a 
feeble  idea  of  the  comfort  which  those  enjoy  who  have 
been  brought  into  the  state  of  peace  with  God.  It  is  "a 
peace  which  passeth  all  understanding."    (Phil.  iv.  7.) 

It  is  the  want  of  this  very  peace  which  makes  many  in^ 
the  world  unhappy.  Thousands  have  everything  that  is 
thought  able  to  give  pleasure,  and  yet  are  never  satisfied. 
Their  hearts  are  always  aching.  There  is  a  constant  sense 
of  emptiness  within.  And  what  is  the  secret  of  all  this  ? 
They  have  no  peace  with  God. 

It  is  the  desire  of  this  very  peace  which  makes  many  a 
heathen  do  much  in  his  idolatrous  religion.  Hundreds  of 
them  have  been  seen  to  mortify  their  bodies,  and  vex  their 
own  flesh  in  the  service  of  some  wretched  image  which 
their  own  hands  had  made.  And  why  ?  Because  they 
hungered  after  peace  with  God, 

It  is  the  possession  of  this  very  peace  on  which  the  value 
of  a  man's  religion  depends.  Without  it  there  may  be 
everything  to  please  the  eye,  and  gratify  the  ear, — forms, 
ceremonies,  services,  and  sacraments, — and  yet  no  good 
done  to  the  soul.  The  grand  question  that  should  try  all 
is  the  state  of  a  man's  conscience.  Is  it  peace  ?  Has  he 
peace  ivith  God  ? 

This  is  the  very  peace  about  which  I  address  every 
reader  of  these  pages  this  day.  Have  you  got  it  ?  Do. 
you  feel  it  ?    Is  it  your  owa.  ? 

If  you  have  it,  you  are  truly  rich.  You  have  that  which 
will  endure  for  ever.  You  have  treasure  which  j^ou  will 
not  lose  when  you  die  and  leave  the  world.  You  will  carry 
it  with  you  beyond  the  grave.  You  will  have  it  and  enjoy 
it  to  all  eternity.  Silver  and  gold  you  may  have  none. 
The  praise  of  man  you  may  never  enjoy.  But  you  have 
that  which  is  far  better  than  either,  if  you  have  the  peace 
of  God. 

If  you  have  it  not,  you  are  truly  poor.  You  have' 
nothing  which  will  last, — nothing  which  will  Avear,- 


JUSTIFICATION. 


215 


nothing  which  you  can  carry  with  you  when  your  turn 
comes  to  die.  Naked  you  came  into  this  world,  and  naked 
in  every  sense  you  will  go  forth.  Your  body  may  be 
carried  to  the  grave  with  pomp  and  ceremony.  A  solemn 
service  may  be  read  over  your  coffin.  A  marble  monu- 
ment may  be  put  up  in  your  honour.  But  after  all  it  will  be 
but  a  pauper's  funeral,  if  you  die  witliout  PEACE  WITH 
GOD. 

II.  Let  me  show  you,  in  the  next  place,  the  fountain 
from  which  true  peace  is  drawn.  That  fountain  is 
justification. 

The  peace  of  the  true  Christian  is  not  a  vague,  dreamy 
feeling,  without  reason  and  without  foundation.  He  can 
show  cause  for  it.  He  builds  upon  solid  ground.  He  has 
peace  with  God,  because  he  is  justified. 

Without  justification  it  is  impossible  to  have  real  peace. 
Conscience  forbids  it.  Sin  is  a  mountain  between  a  man 
and  God,  and  must  be  taken  away.  The  sense  of  guilt 
lies  heavy  on  the  heart,  and  must  be  removed.  Unpardoned 
sin  will  murder  peace.  The  true  Christian  knows  all  this 
well.  His  peace  arises  from  a  consciousness  of  his  sins 
being  forgiven,  and  his  guilt  being  put  away.  His  house 
is  not  built  on  sandy  ground.  His  well  is  not  a  broken 
cistern,  which  can  hold  no  water.  He  has  peace  with  God, 
because  he  is  justified. 

He  is  justified,  and  his  sins  are  forgiven.  However 
many,  and  however  great,  they  are  cleansed  away,  pardoned, 
and  wiped  out.  They  are  blotted  out  of  the  book  of 
God's  remembrance.  They  are  sunk  into  the  depths  of 
the  sea.  They  are  cast  behind  God's  back.  They  are 
searched  for  and  not  found.  They  are  remembered  no 
more.  Though  they  may  have  been  like  scarlet,  they 
are  become  white  as  snow ;  though  they  may  have  been 
red  like  crimson,  they  are  as  wool.    And  so  he  has  peace. 

He  is  justified  and  counted  righteous  in  God's  sight. 


216 


OLD  PATHS. 


The  Father  sees  no  spot  in  him,  and  reckons  him  innocent. 
He  is  clothed  in  a  robe  of  perfect  righteousness,  and  may- 
sit  down  by  the  side  of  angels  without  feeling  ashamed. 
The  holy  law  of  God,  which  touches  the  thoughts  and 
intents  of  men's  hearts,  cannot  condemn  him.  The  devil, 
"the  accuser  of  the  brethren,"  can  lay  nothing  to  his 
charge,  to  prevent  his  full  acquittal.  And  so  he  has 
peace. 

Is  he  not  naturally  a  poor,  weak,  erring,  defective 
sinner  ^  He  is.  None  knows  that  better  than  he  does 
himself.  But  notwithstanding  this,  he  is  reckoned  com- 
plete, periect,  and  faultless  before  God,  for  he  is  justified. 

Is  he  not  naturally  a  debtor'}  He  is.  None  feels 
that  more  deeply  than  he  does  himself  He  owes  ten 
thousand  talents,  and  has  nothing  of  his  own  to  pay.  But 
his  debts  are  all  paid,  settled,  and  crossed  out  for  ever,  lor 
he  »3  justified. 

Is  he  not  naturally  liable  to  the  curse  of  a  broJcen  latu  ? 
He  is.  None  would  confess  that  more  readily  than  he 
would  himself.  But  the  demands  of  the  law  have  been 
fully  satisfied, — the  claims  ot  justice  have  been  met  to  the 
last  tittle,  and  he  is  justified. 

Does  he  not  naturally  deserve  punishmeiit  ?  He  does. 
None  would  acknowledge  that  more  tully  than  he  would 
himself  But  the  punishment  has  been  borne.  The 
wrath  of  God  against  sin  has  been  made  manifest.  Yet 
he  has  escaped,  and  is  justified. 

Does  any  one  who  is  reading  this  paper  know  anything  of 
all  this  ?  Are  you  justified  ?  Do  you  feel  as  if  you  were 
pardoned,  forgiven,  and  accepted  before  God  ?  Can  you 
draw  near  to  Him  vfith  boldness,  and  say,  "  Thou  art  my 
Father  and  my  Friend,  and  I  am  Thy  reconciled  child"  ? 
Oh,  believe  me,  you  will  never  taste  true  peace  until  you 
are  justified ! 

Where  are  your  sins?  Are  they  removed  and  taken 
away  from  off  your  soul  ?    Have  they  been  reckoned  for, 


JUSTIFICATION. 


217 


and  accounted  for,  in  God's  presence  ?  Oh,  be  very  sure 
these  questions  are  of  the  most  solemn  importance !  A 
peace  of  conscience  not  built  on  justification,  is  a  perilous 
dream.    From  such  a  peace  the  Lord  deliver  you  ! 

Go  with  me  in  imagination  to  some  of  our  great  London 
hospitals.  Stand  with  me  there  by  the  bedside  of  some 
poor  creature  m  the  last  stage  of  an  incurable  disease. 
He  lies  quiet  perhaps,  and  makes  no  struggle.  He  does 
not  complain  of  pain  perhaps,  and  does  not  appear  to  feel 
it.  He  sleeps,  and  is  still.  His  eyes  are  closed.  His 
head  reclines  on  his  pillow.  He  smiles  faintly,  and  mutters 
something.  He  is  dreaming  of  home,  and  his  mother,  and 
his  youth.  His  thoughts  are  far  away. — But  is  this  health  ? 
Oh,  no :  no !  It  is  only  the  effect  of  opiates.  Nothing 
can  be  done  for  him.  He  is  dying  daily.  The  only  object 
is  to  lessen  his  pain.  His  quiet  is  an  unnatural  quiet. 
His  sleep  is  an  unhealthy  sleep.  You  see  in  that  man's 
case  a  vivid  likeness  of  peace  luithout  justijicatioii.  It  is 
a  hollow,  deceptive,  unhealthy  thing.    Its  end  is  death. 

Go  with  me  in  imagination  to  some  lunatic  asylum. 
Let  us  visit  some  case  of  incurable  delusion.  We  shall 
probably  find  some  one  who  fancies  that  he  is  rich  and 
noble,  or  a  king.  See  how  he  will  take  the  straw  from  off 
the  ground,  twist  it  round  his  head,  and  call  it  a  crown. 
Mark  how  he  will  pick  up  stones  and  gravel,  and  call  them 
diamonds  and  pearls.  Hear  how  he  will  laugh,  and  sing, 
and  appear  to  be  happy  in  his  delusions. — But  is  this 
happiness  ?  Oh,  no !  We  know  it  is  only  the  result  of 
ignorant  insanity.  You  see  in  that  man's  case  another 
likeness  oi  peace  hitilt  on  fancy,  and  not  on  justification. 
It  is  a  senseless,  baseless  thing.  It  has  neither  root  nor 
life. 

Settle  it  in  your  mind  that  there  can  be  no  peace  with 
God,  unless  we  feel  that  we  are  justified.  We  must  knoio 
tvhat  is  become  of  our  sins.  We  must  have  a  reasonable 
hope  that  they  are  forgiven,  and  put  away.    We  must 


218 


OLD  PATHS. 


have  the  witness  of  our  conscience  that  we  are  reckoned 
iiot  guilty  before  God.  Without  this  it  is  vain  to  talk  of 
peace.  We  have  nothing  but  the  shadow  and  imitation 
of  it.  "  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked." 
(Isa.  ivii.  21.) 

Did  you  ever  hear  the  sound  of  the  trumpets  which  are 
blown  before  the  judges,  as  they  come  into  a  city  to  open 
the  Assizes  ?  Did  you  ever  reflect  how  different  are  the 
teelings  which  these  trumpets  awaken  in  the  minds  of 
different  men  ?  The  innocent  man,  who  has  no  cause  to 
be  tried,  hears  them  unmoved.  They  proclaim  no  terrors 
to  him.  He  listens  and  looks  on  quietly,  and  is  not  afraid. 
But  often  there  is  some  poor  ^^Tetch,  waiting  his  trial  in  a 
Silent  cell,  to  whom  those  trumpets  are  a  knell  of  despair. 
They  warn  him  that  the  day  of  trial  is  at  hand.  Yet  a  little 
timfc  and  he  will  stand  at  the  bar  of  justice,  and  hear 
witness  aftej  witness  telling  the  story  of  his  misdeeds. 
Yet  a  little  time,  and  all  will  be  over, — the  trial,  the 
verdict,  and  the  sentence, — and  there  will  remain  nothing 
tor  him  but  punishment  and  disgTace.  No  wonder  the 
prisoner's  heart  beatb,  when  he  hears  that  trumpet's  sound ! 

There  is  a  day  fast  coming  when  all  w^ho  are  not  justified 
shall  despair  in  like  manner.  The  voice  of  the  archangel 
and  the  trump  of  God  shall  scatter  to  the  winds  the  false 
peace  which  now  buoys  up  many  a  soul.  The  day  of 
judgment  shall  convince  thousands  of  self-willed  people 
too  late,  that  it  needs  something  more  than  a  few  beautiful 
ideas  about  "  God's  love  and  mercy,"  to  reconcile  a  man  to 
his  Maker,  and  to  deliver  his  guilty  soul  from  heU.  No 
hope  shall  stand  in  that  awful  day  but  the  hope  of  the 
justified  man.  No  peace  shall  prove  solid,  substantial, 
and  unbroken,  but  the  peace  which  is  built  on  justification. 

Is  this  peace  your  own  ?  Rest  not,  I'est  not,  if  you  love 
life,  till  you  know  and  feel  that  you  are  a  justified  man. 
Tliink  not  that  this  is  a  mere  matter  of  names  and  words. 
Flatter  not  yourself  with  the  idea  that  justification  is  an 


JUSTIFICATION. 


•219 


"  abstruse  and  difficult  subject,"  and  that  you  may  get  to 
heaven  well  enough  without  knowing  anything  about  it. 
Make  up  your  mind  to  the  great  truth  that  there  can  be 
no  heaven  without  peace  with  God,  and  no  peace  with  God 
without  justification.  And  then  give  your  soul  no  rest  till 
you  are  a  JUSTIFIED  MAN. 

III.  Let  me  show  you,  in  the  third  place,  the  rock  from 
wliich  justification  and  peace  Avith  God  flow.  That  vocii 
is  Christ. 

The  true  Christian  is  not  justified  because  ot  any 
goodness  of  his  own.  His  peace  is  not  to  be  traced  up  to 
any  work  that  he  has  done.  It  is  not  purchased  by  his 
prayers  and  regularity,  his  repentance  and  his  amendment, 
his  morality  and  his  charity.  All  these  are  utterly  unable 
to  justify  him.  In  themselves  they  are  defective  in  many 
things  and  need  a  large  forgiveness.  And  as  to  justifying 
him,  such  a  thing  is  not  to  be  named.  Tried  by  the  per- 
fect standard  of  God's  law  the  best  of  Christians  is  nothing 
better  than  a  justified  sinner,  a  pardoned  criminal.  As  to 
merit,  worthiness,  desert,  or  claim  upon  God's  mercy,  he 
has  none.  Peace  built  on  any  such  foundations  as  these  is 
utterly  worthless.  The  man  who  rests  upon  them  is 
miserably  deceived. 

Never  were  truer  words  words  put  on  paper  than  those 
which  Richard  Hooker  jienned  on  this  subject  280  years 
ago.  Let  those  who  would  like  to  know  what  English 
clergymen  thought  in  olden  times,  mark  well  what  he 
says. — "  If  God  would  make  us  an  offer  thus  large,  Search 
all  the  generation  of  men  since  the  fall  of  your  father 
Adam,  and  find  one  man,  that  hath  done  any  one  action, 
which  hath  past  from  him  pure,  without  any  stain  or 
blemish  at  all; — and  for  that  one  man's  one  only  action, 
neither  man  nor  angel  shall  find  the  torments  Avhich  are 
prepared  for  both : — do  you  think  this  ransom,  to  deliver 
,man  and  angels,  would  be  found  among  the  sons  of  men? 


220 


OLD  PATHS. 


The  best  things  we  do  have  somewliat  in  them  to  be 
pardoned.  How  then  can  we  do  anything  meritorious  and 
worthy  to  be  rewarded  ?  " — To  these  words  I  desire  entirely 
to  subscribe.  I  believe  that  no  man  can  be  justified  by  his 
works  before  God  in  the  slightest  possible  degree.  Before 
man  he  may  be  justified :  his  works  may  evidence  the 
reality  of  his  Christianity.  Before  God  he  cannot  be 
justified  by  anything  that  he  can  do :  he  will  be  always 
defective,  always  imperfect,  always  short-coming,  always  far 
below  the  mark,  so  long  as  he  lives.  It  is  not  by  works  of 
his  own  that  any  one  ever  has  peace  and  is  a  justified  man. 

But  how  then  is  a  true  Christian  justified  ?  What  is  the 
secret  of  that  peace  and  sense  of  pardon  which  he  enjoys  ? 
How  can  we  understand  a  Holy  God  dealing  with  a  sinful 
man  as  with  one  innocent,  and  reckonin"^  him  riofhteous 
notwithstanding  his  many  sins  ? 

The  answer  to  all  these  questions  is  short  and  simple. 
The  true  Christian  is  counted  righteous  for  the  sake  of  Jesus 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  He  is  justified  because  of  the 
death  and  atonement  of  Christ.  He  has  peace  because 
"  Christ  died  for  his  sins  according  to  the  Scriptures."  This 
is  the  key  that  unlocks  the  mighty  mystery.  Here  the 
great  problem  is  solved,  how  God  can  be  just  and  yet  justify 
the  ungodly.  The  life  and  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus  exjilain 
all.    "He  is  our  peace."    (1  Cor.  xv.  3;  Ephes.  ii.  14.) 

Christ  has  stood  in  the  place  of  the  true  Christian.  He 
has  become  his  Surety  and  his  Substitute.  He  undertook 
to  bear  all  that  was  to  be  borne,  and  to  do  all  that  was  to 
be  done,  and  what  He  undertook  He  performed.  Hence 
the  true  Christian  is  a  justified  man.   (Isai.  liii.  6.) 

Christ  has  suffered  for  sins,  the  "just  for  the  unjust." 
He  bas  endured  our  punishment  in  His  own  body  on  the 
cross.  He  has  allowed  the  wrath  of  God,,  which  we  deserved, 
to  fall  on  His  own  bead.  Hence  the  true  Christian  is  a 
justified  man.    (1  Pet.  iii.  18.) 

Christ  has  i^aid  the  debt  the  Christian  owed,  by  His  own 


JUSTIFICATION. 


221 


blood.  He  has  reckoned  for  it,  and  discliarged  it  to  the 
uttermost  farthing  by  His  own  death.  God  is  a  just  God, 
and  will  not  require  his  debts  to  be  paid  twice  over. 
Hence  the  true  Christian  is  a  justified  man.  (Acts  xx.  28  ; 
1  Pet  i.  18,  19.) 

Christ  has  obeyed  the  lavj  of  God  perfectly.  The  devil, 
the  Prince  of  this  World,  could  find  no  fault  in  Him.  By  so 
lulfiUing  it  He  brought  in  an  everlasting  righteousness,  in 
which  all  His  people  are  clothed  in  the  sight  of  God.  Hence 
the  true  Christian  is  a  justified  man.  (Dan  ix.  2i;  Rom  x.  4.) 

Christ,  in  one  word,  has  lived  for  the  true  Christian. 
Christ  has  died  for  him.  Christ  has  gone  to  the  grave  for 
him.  Christ  has  risen  again  for  him.  Christ  has  ascended 
up  on  high  for  him,  and  gone  into  heaven  to  intercede  for 
his  soul.  Christ  has  done  all,  paid  all,  suifered  all  that 
was  needful  for  his  redemption.  Hence  arises  the  true 
Christian's  justification, — hence  his  peace.  In  himself 
there  is  nothing,  but  in  Christ  he  has  all  things  that  his 
soul  can  require.    (Coloss.  ii.  3;  iii.  11 ) 

Who  can  tell  the  blessedness  of  the  exchange  that  takes 
place  between  the  true  Christian  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ !  Christ's  righteousness  is  placed  upon  him,  and 
his  sins  are  placed  upon  Christ.  Christ  has  been  reckoned 
a  sinner  for  his  sake,  and  now  he  is  reckoned  innocent  for 
Christ's  sake.  Christ  has  been  condemned  for  his  sake, 
though  there  was  no  fault  in  Him, — and  now  he  is  acquitted 
for  Christ's  sake,  though  he  is  covered  with  sins,  faults, 
and  short-comings.  Here  is  wisdom  indeed !  God  can 
now  be  just  and  yet  pardon  the  ungodly.  Man  can  feel 
that  he  is  a  sinner,  and  yet  have  a  good  hope  of  heaven 
and  feel  peace  within.  Who  among  men  could  have 
imagined  such  a  thing?  Who  ought  not  to  admire  it 
when  he  hears  it  ?    (2  Cor  v.  21.) 

We  read  in  British  history  of  a  Lord  Nithsdale  who  was 
sentenced  to  death  for  a  great  political  crime.  He  was 
closely  confined  in  prison  after  his  trial.    The  day  of  his 


222 


OLD  PATHS. 


execution  was  fixed.  There  seemed  no  chance  of  escape. 
A.nd  yet  before  the  sentence  was  carried  into  effect,  he 
contrived  to  escape  through  the  skill  and  affection  of  his 
wife.  She  visited  him  in  prison,  and  exchanged  clothes 
with  him.  Dressed  in  his  wife's  clothes  he  walked  out  of 
prison  and  escaped,  and  neither  guards  nor  keeijers  detected 
him,  while  his  wife  remained  behind  in  his  place.  In  short, 
she  risked  her  own  life  to  save  the  life  of  her  husband. 
Who  would  not  admire  the  skill  and  the  love  of  such  a 
wife  as  this  ? 

But  we  read  in  Gospel  history  of  a  display  of  love, 
compared  to  which  the  love  of  Lady  Nithsdale  is  nothing. 
We  read  of  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  coming  down  to  a  world 
of  sinners,  who  neither  cared  for  Him  before  He  came, 
nor  honoured  Him  when  He  appeared.  We  read  of  Him 
going  down  to  the  prison-house,  and  submitting  to  be 
bound,  that  we  the  poor  prisoners  might  be  able  to  go 
free.  We  read  of  Him  becoming  obedient  to  death, — 
and  that  the  death  of  the  cross, — that  we  the  unworthy 
children  of  Adam  might  have  a  door  opened  to  life  ever- 
lasting. We  read  of  Him  being  content  to  bear  our 
sins  and  carry  our  trangressions,  that  we  might  wear  His 
righteousness,  and  walk  in  the  light  and  liberty  of  the 
Sons  of  God.    (Phil.  ii.  8.) 

This  may  well  be  called  a  "love  that  passeth  knowledge!" 
In  no  way  could  free  grace  ever  have  shone  so  brightly 
as  in  the  way  oi  justification  by  Christ.    (Ephes.  iii.  19.) 

This  is  the  old  ivay  by  which  alone  the  children  of 
Adam,  who  have  been  justified  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world,  have  found  their  peace.  From  Abel  downwards,  no 
man  or  woman  has  ever  had  one  drop  of  mercy  excepting 
through  Christ.  To  Him  every  altar  that  was  raised 
before  the  time  of  Moses  was  intended  to  point.  To  Him 
every  sacrifice  and  ordinance  of  the  Jewish  law  was  meant 
to  direct  the  children  of  Israel.  Of  Him  all  the  prophets 
testified.    In  a  word,  if  you  lose  sight  of  justification  by 


JUSTIFICATION. 


223 


Christ,  a  large  part  of  the  Old  Testament  Scripture  ■will 
become  an  unmeaning  tangled  maze. 

This,  above  all,  is  the  Avay  of  justification  which  exactly 
meets  the  wants  and  vequirements  of  human  nature. 
There  is  a  conscience  left  in  man,  although  he  is  a  fallen 
beinar.  There  is  a  dim  sense  of  his  own  need,  which  in 
his  better  moments  will  make  itself  heard,  and  which 
nothing  but  Christ  can  satisfy.  So  long  as  his  conscience 
is  not  hungry,  any  religious  toy  will  satisfy  a  man's  soul 
and  keep  him  quiet.  But  once  let  his  conscience  become 
hungry,  and  nothing  will  quiet  him  but  real  spiritual  food, 
and  no  food  but  Christ. 

There  is  something  within  a  man  when  his  conscience 
is  really  awake,  which  whispers,  "  There  must  be  a  price 
paid  for  my  soul,  or  no  peace."  At  once  the  Gospel 
meets  him  with  Christ.  Christ  has  already  paid  a  ransom 
for  his  redemption.  Christ  has  given  Himself  for  him. 
Christ  has  redeemed  him  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being 
made  a  curse  for  him.    (Gal.  ii.  20;  iii.  13.) 

There  is  something  within  a  man,  when  his  conscience  is 
really  awake,  which  whispers,"  /  must  have  some  right- 
eousness or  title  to  heaven,  or  no  'peace."  At  once  the 
Gospel  meets  him  with  Christ.  He  has  brought  in  an 
everlastings  rijrhteousness.  He  is  the  end  of  the  law  for 
righteousness.  His  name  is  called  the  Lord  our  righteous- 
ness. God  has  made  Him  to  be  sin  for  us  who  knew  no 
sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in 
Him.    (2  Cor.  v.  21 ;  Rom.  x.  4 ;  Jer.  xxiii.  6.) 

There  is  something  within  a  man,  when  his  conscience  is 
really  awake,  which  whispers,  "  There  must  he  punishment 
and  suffering  because  of  my  sins,  or  no  peace."  At  once 
the  Gospel  meets  him  with  Christ.  Christ  hath  suffered 
for  sin,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  to  bring  him  to  God.  He 
bore  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree.  By  His 
stripes  we  are  healed.    (1  Peter  ii.  24  ;  iii.  18.) 

There  is  something  within  a  man,  when  his  conscience 


224 


OLD  PATHS. 


is  really  awake,  which  whispers,  "  I  must  have  a  'priest 
for  my  soul,  or  no  peace!'  At  once  the  Gospel  meets  him 
with  Christ.  Christ  is  sealed  and  appointed  by  God  the 
Father  to  be  the  Mediator  between  Himself  and  man.  He 
is  the  ordained  Advocate  for  sinners.  He  is  the  accredited 
Counsellor  and  Physician  of  sick  souls.  He  is  the  great 
High  Priest,  the  Almighty  Absolver,  the  Gracious  Confessor 
of  heavy-laden  sinners.    (1  Tim.  ii.  5  ;  Heb.  viii.  1.) 

I  know  there  are  thousands  of  professing  Christians 
who  see  no  peculiar  beaut}-  in  this  doctrine  of  justification 
by  Christ.  Their  hearts  are  buried  in  the  things  of  the 
world.  Their  consciences  are  palsied,  benumbed,  and 
speechless.  But  whenever  a  man's  conscience  begins 
really  to  feel  and  speak,  he  will  see  something  in  Christ's 
atonement  and  priestly  office  which  he  never  saw  before. 
Light  does  not  suit  the  eye  nor  music  the  ear,  more  per- 
fectly than  Christ  suits  the  real  wants  of  a  sinful  soul. 
Hundreds  can  testify  that  the  experience  of  a  converted 
heathen  in  the  island  of  Raiatea  in  the  South  Pacific 
Ocean  has  been  exactly  their  own.  "  I  saw,"  he  said,  "  an 
immense  mountain,  with  precipitous  sides,  up  which  I 
endeavoured  to  climb,  but  when  I  had  attained  a  con- 
siderable height,  I  lost  my  hold  and  fell  to  the  bottom. 
Exhausted  with  perplexity  and  fatigue,  I  went  to  a  dis- 
tance and  sat  down  to  weep,  and  while  weeping,  I  saw  a 
drop  of  blood  fall  upon  that  mountain,  and  in  a  moment 
it  was  dissolved."  He  was  asked  to  explain  what  all  this 
meant.  "That  mountain,"  he  said,  "was  my  sins,  and 
that  drop  which  fell  upon  it,  was  one  drop  of  the  precious 
blood  of  Jesus,  by  which  the  mountain  of  my  guilt  was 
melted  away."    {William's  South  Sea  2Iissions.] 

This  is  the  one  true  way  of  peace, — justification  by 
Christ.  Beware  lest  any  turn  you  out  of  this  way  and 
lead  you  into  any  of  the  false  doctrines  of  the  Church  of 
Rome.  Alas,  it  is  wonderful  to  see  how  that  unhappy 
Church  has  built  a  house  of  error  hard  by  the  house  of 


I 


JUSTIFICATION. 


22o 


trutli !  Hold  fast  the  truth  of  God  about  justification, 
and  be  not  deceived.  Listen  not  to  any  thing  you  may 
liear  about  other  mediators  and  helpers  to  peace.  Re- 
member there  is  no  mediator  but  one, — Jesus  Christ;  no 
purgatory  for  sinners  but  one, — the  blood  of  Christ ;  no 
sacrifice  for  sin  but  one, — the  sacrifice  once  made  on  the 
cross;  no  ivorks  that  can  merit  anything — but  the  work 
of  Christ;  no  priest  that  can  truly  absolve — -but  Christ. 
Stand  fast  here,  and  be  on  your  guard.  Give  not  the 
glory  due  to  Christ  to  auotlier. 

What  do  you  know  of  Christ  ?  I  doubt  not  you 
have  heard  of  Him  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  and 
repeated  His  name  in  the  Belief  You  are  acquainted 
perhaps  with  the  story  of  His  life  and  death.  But  what 
experimental  knowledge  have  you  of  Him  ?  Wiiat  prac- 
tical use  do  you  make  of  Him  ?  What  dealings  and 
transactions  have  there  been  between  your  soul  and  Him  ? 

Oh,  believe  me,  there  is  no  peace  tvith  God  excepting 
through  Christ !  Peace  is  His  peculiar  gift.  Peace  is 
that  legacy  which  He  alone  had  power  to  leave  behind 
Him  when  He  left  the  Avorld.  All  other  peace  beside 
this  is  a  mockery  and  a  delusion.  When  hunger  can  be 
relieved  without  food,  and  thirst  quenched  without  drink, 
and  weariness  removed  without  rest,  then,  and  not  till 
then,  will  men  find  jieace  without  Christ. 

Now,  is  this  peace  your  own  ?  Bought  by  Christ  with 
His  own  blood,  offered  by  Christ  freely  to  all  who  are 
willing  to  receive  it, — is  this  peace  your  own  ?  Oh,  rest 
not :  rest  not  till  you  can  give  a  satisfactory  answer  to  my 
question,— HAVE  YOU  PEACE? 

IV.  Let  me  show  you,  in  the  last  place,  the  hand  hg 
which  the  privilege  of  peace  is  received. 

I  ask  the  special  attention  of  all  who  read  these  pages 
to  this  part  of  our  subject.  There  is  scarcely  any  point  in 
Christianity  so  important  as  the  means  by  which  Christ, 

Q 


226 


OLD  PATHS. 


justification,  and  peace,  become  tbe  property  of  a  man's 
soul.  Many,  I  fear,  would  go  with  me  so  far  as  I  have 
gone  in  this  paper,  but  would  part  company  here.  Let  us 
endeavour  to  lay  hold  firmly  on  the  truth. 

The  means  by  which  a  man  obtains  an  interest  in 
Christ  and  all  His  benefits  is  simple  faith.  There  is  but 
one  thing  needful  in  order  to  be  justified  by  His  blood, 
and  have  peace  with  God.  That  one  thing  is  to  believe 
on  Him.  This  is  the  peculiar  mark  of  a  true  Christian. 
He  believes  on  the  Lord  Jesus  for  his  salvation.  "  Believe 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved." 
"  Whosoever  believeth  in  Him  shall  not  perish,  but  have 
eternal  life."    (Acts  xvi.  31  ;  John  iii.  16.) 

Without  this  faith  it  is  impossible  to  he  saved.  A  man 
may  be  moral,  amiable,  good-natured,  and  respectable. 
But  if  he  does  not  believe  on  Christ,  he  has  no  pardon,  no 
justification,  no  title  to  heaven.  "  He  that  believeth  not 
is  condemned  already."  "  He  that  believeth  not  the  Son 
shall  not  see  life :  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him." 
"He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  (John  iii.  18, 
36;  Mark  xvi.  16) 

Beside  this  faith  iiotldng  whatever  is  needed  for  a 
man's  justification.  Beyond  doubt,  repentance,  holiness, 
love,  humility,  prayerfulness,  will  always  be  seen  in  the 
justified  man.  But  they  do  not  in  the  smallest  degree 
justify  him  in  the  sight  of  God.  Nothing  joins  a  man  to 
Christ, — nothing  justifies,  but  simple  faith.  "  To  him  that 
worketh  not,  but  believeth  on  Him  that  justifieth  the 
ungodly,  his  faith  is  counted  for  righteousness."  "We 
conclude  that  a  man  is  justified  by  faith  without  the  deeds 
of  the  law."    (Horn.  iv.  5  ;  iii.  28.) 

Having  this  faith,  a  man  is  at  nnce  completely  justified. 
His  sins  are  at  once  removed.  His  iniquities  are  at  once 
put  away.  The  very  hour  that  he  believes  he  is  reckoned 
by  God  entirely  pardoned,  forgiven,  and  a  righteous  man. 
His  justification  is  not  a  future  privilege,  to  be  obtained 


I 


JUSTIFICATION. 


227 


after  a  long  time  and  great  pains.  It  is  an  immediate 
present  possession.  Jesus  says,  "  He  that  believeth  on  Me 
hath  everlasting  life."  Paul  says,  "By  Him  all  that 
believe  are  justified  from  all  things."  (John  vi.  47 ; 
Acts  xiii.  39.) 

I  need  hardly  say  that  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to 
have  clear  views  about  the  nature  of  true  saving  faith.  It 
is  constantly  spoken  of  as  the  distinguishing  characteristic 
of  New  Testament  Christians.  They  are  called  "  believers." 
In  the  single  Gospel  of  John,  "believing"  is  mentioned 
eighty  or  ninety  times.  There  is  hardly  any  subject  about 
which  so  many  mistakes  are  made.  There  is  none  about 
which  mistakes  are  so  injurious  to  the  soul.  The  darkness 
of  many  a  sincere  inquirer  may  be  traced  up  to  confused 
views  about  faith.  Let  us  try  to  get  a  distinct  idea  of 
its  real  nature. 

True  saving  faith  is  not  the  possession  of  everybody. 
The  opinion  that  all  who  are  called  Christians 
matter  of  course,  believers,  is  a  most  mischievous  delusion. 
A  man  may  be  baptized,  like  Simon  Magus,  and  yet  have 
"  no  part  or  lot "  in  Christ.  The  visible  Church  contains 
imbelievers  as  well  as  believers.  "All  men  have  not 
faith."    (2  Thess.  iii.  2.) 

True  saving  faith  is  not  a  mere  matter  of  feeling.  A 
man  may  have  many  good  feelings  and  desires  in  his  mind 
towards  Christ,  and  yet  they  may  all  prove  as  temporary 
and  short-lived  as  the  morning  cloud  and  the  early  dew. 
Many  are  like  the  stony-ground  hearers,  and  "receive  the 
word  with  joy."  Many  will  say  under  momentary  excite- 
ment, "I  will  follow  Thee  whithersoever  Thou  goest," 
and  yet  return  to  the  world.    (Matt.  viii.  19  ;  xiii.  20.) 

True  saving  faith  is  not  a  bare  assent  of  the  intellect 
to  the  fact  that  Christ  died  for  sinners.  This  is  not  a  jot 
better  than  the  faith  of  devils.  They  know  who  Jesus  is. 
"  They  believe,"  and  they  do  more,  "they  tremble."  (James 
ii.  19.) 


228 


OLD  PATHS. 


True  saving  faith  is  a7i  act  of  the  ivhole  inner  man. 
It  is  an  act  of  the  head,  heart,  and  will,  all  united  and 
combined.  It  is  an  act  of  the  soul,  in  which, — seeing  his 
own  guilt,  danger,  and  hopelessness, — and  seeing  at  the 
same  time  Christ  ofifering  to  save  him, — a  man  ventures 
on  Christ, — flees  to  Christ, — receives  Christ  as  his  only 
hope, — and  becomes  a  willing  dependant  on  Him  for 
salvation.  It  is  an  act  which  becomes  at  once  the  parent 
of  a  habit.  He  that  has  it  may  not  always  be  equally 
sensible  of  his  own  faith ;  but  in  the  main  he  lives  by 
faith,  and  walks  by  faith. 

True  faith  has  nothing  ivhatever  of  merit  about  it,  and 
in  the  highest  sense  cannot  be  called  "  a  work."  It  is  but 
laying  hold  of  a  Saviour's  hand,  leaning  on  a  husband's 
arm,  and  receiving  a  physician's  medicine.  It  brings  with 
it  nothing  to  Christ  but  a  sinful  man's  soul.  It  gives 
nothing,  contributes  nothing,  pays  nothing,  performs 
nothing.  It  only  receives,  takes,  accepts,  grasps,  and 
embraces  the  glorious  gift  of  justification  which  Christ 
bestows,  and  by  renewed  daily  acts  enjoys  that  gift. 

Of  all  Christian  graces,  faith  is  the  most  important.  Of 
all,  it  is  the  simplest  in  reality.  Of  all,  it  is  the  most 
difficult  to  make  men  understand  in  practice.  The  mistakes 
into  which  men  fall  about  it  are  endless.  Some  who  have 
no  faith  never  doubt  for  a  moment  that  they  are  believers. 
Others,  who  have  real  faith,  can  never  be  persuaded  that 
they  are  believers  at  all.  But  nearly  every  mistake  about 
faith  may  be  traced  up  to  the  old  root  of  natural  pride. 
Men  will  persist  in  sticking  to  the  idea  that  they  are  to 
pay  something  of  their  own  in  order  to  be  saved.  As  to  a 
faith  which  consists  in  receiving  only,  and  paying  nothing 
at  all,  it  seems  as  if  they  could  not  understand  it. 

Saving  faith  is  the  hand  of  the  soul.  The  sinner  is 
like  a  drowning  man  at  the  point  of  sinking.  He  sees 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  holding  out  help  to  him.  He  grasps 
it  and  is  saved.    This  is  faith.    (Heb.  vi.  18.) 


JUSTIFICATION. 


229' 


Saving  faith  is  the  eye  of  the  soul.  The  sinner  is  like 
the  Israelite  bitten  by  the  fiery  serpent  in  the  wilderness, 
and  at  the  point  of  death.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
offered  to  him  as  the  brazen  serpent,  set  up  for  his  cure. 
He  looks  and  is  healed.    This  is  faith.    (John  iii.  14,  15.) 

Saving  faith  is  the  wMuth  of  the  souL  The  sinner  is 
starving  for  want  of  food,  and  sick  of  a  sore  disease.  The 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  set  before  him  as  the  bread  of  life, 
and  the  universal  medicine.  He  receives  it,  and  is  made 
well  and  strong.    This  is  faith.    (John  vi.  35.) 

Saving  faith  is  the  foot  of  the  soul.  The  sinner  is 
pursued  by  a  deadly  enemy,  and  is  in  fear  of  being  over- 
taken. The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  put  before  him  as  a 
strong  tower,  a  hiding  place,  and  a  refuge.  He  runs  into 
it  and  is  safe.    This  is  faith.    (Prov.  xviii.  10.) 

If  you  love  life  cling  with  a  fast  hold  to  the  doctrine  of 
justification  by  faith.  If  you  love  inward  peace,  let  your 
views  of  faith  be  very  simple.  Honour  every  part  of  the 
Christian  religion.  Contend  to  the  death  for  the  necessity 
of  holiness.  Use  diligently  and  reverently  every  appointed 
means  of  grace :  but  do  not  give  to  these  things  the  office 
of  justifying  your  soul  in  the  sUghtest  degree.  If  you 
would  have  peace,  and  keep  peace,  remember  that  faith 
alone  justifies,  and  that  not  as  a  meritorious  work,  but  as 
the  act  that  joins  the  soul  to  Christ.  Believe  me,  the 
crown  and  glory  of  the  Gospel  is  justification  by  faith 
without  the  deeds  of  the  law. 

No  doctrine  can  be  imagined  so  beautifully  simple  as 
justification  by  faith.  It  is  not  a  dark  mysterious  truth, 
intelligible  to  none  but  the  great,  the  rich,  and  the  learned. 
It  places  eternal  life  within  the  reach  of  the  most 
unlearned,  and  the  poorest  in  the  land.  It  must  be  of  God.' 

No  doctrine  can  be  imagined  so  glorifying  to  God.  It 
honours  all  His  attributes,  His  justice,  mercy,  and  holiness. 
It  gives  the  whole  credit  of  the. sinners  salvation  to  the 
Saviour  He  has  appointed.    It  honours  the  Son,  and  so 


230 


OLD  PATHS. 


honours  tbe  Father  that  sent  Him.  (John  v.  23.)  It  gives 
man  no  partnership  in  his  redemption,  but  makes  salvation 
to  be  wholly  of  the  Lord.    It  must  be  of  God. 

No  -doctrine  can  be  imagined  so  calculated  to  put  man 
in  his  right  place.  It  shows  him  his  own  sinfulness,  and 
weakness,  and  inability  to  save  his  soul  by  his  own  works. 
It  leaves  him  without  excuse  if  he  is  not  saved  at  last. 
It  offers  to  him  peace  and  pardon  "  without  money  and 
ffithout  price."    It  must  be  of  God.    (Isa.  Iv.  1.) 

No  doctrine  can  be  imagined  so  comforting  to  a  broken- 
heaiied -and  penitent  sinner.  It  brings  to  such  an  one 
glad  tidings.  It  shows  him  that  there  is  hope  even  for 
him.  It  tells  him,  though  he  is  a  great  sinner,  there  is 
ready  for  him  a  great  Saviour;  and  though  he  cannot 
justify  himself,  God  can  and  will  justif)'  him  for  the  sake 
of  Christ.    It  must  be  of  God. 

No  doctrine  can  be  imagined  so  satisfying  to  a  true 
Christian.  It  suppHes  him  with  a  solid  ground  of  comfort, 
— the  finished  work  of  Christ.  If  anything  was  left  for 
the  Christian  to  do,  where  would  his  comfort  be  ?  He 
would  never  know  that  he  had  done  enough,  and  was 
really  safe.  But  the  doctrine  that  Christ  undertakes  all, 
and  that  we  have  only  to  believe  and  receive  peace,  meets 
every  fear.    It  must  be  of  God. 

No  doctrine  can  be  imagined  so  sanctifying.  It  draws 
men  by  the  strongest  of  all  cords,  tlie  cord  of  love.  It 
makes  them  feel  they  are  debtors,  and  in  gratitude  bound 
to  love  much,  when  much  has  been  forgiven.  Preaching 
up  works  never  produces  such  fruit  as  preaching  them  down. 
Exalting  man's  goodness  and  merits  never  makes  men  so 
holy  as  exalting  Christ.  The  fiercest  lunatics  at  Paris 
became  gentle,  mild,  and  obedient,  when  Abbe  Pinel  gave 
them  liberty  and  hope.  The  free  grace  of  Christ  will 
produce  far  greater  effects  on  men's  lives  than  the  sternest 
commands  of  law.    Surely  the  doctrine  must  be  of  God. 

No  doctrine  can  be  imagined  so  strengthening  to  the 


JUSTIFICATION. 


231 


hands  of  a  minister.  It  enables  him  to  come  to  the  vilest 
of  men,  and  say,  "  There  is  a  door  of  hope  even  for  you." 
It  enables  him  to  feel,  "  "While  life  lasts  there  are  no 
incurable  cases  among  the  souls  under  my  charge."  Mauy 
a  minister  by  the  use  of  this  doctrine  can  say  of  souls,  "  I 
found  them  in  the  state  of  nature.  I  beheld  them  pass 
into  the  state  of  grace.  I  watched  them  moving  into  the 
state  of  glory."    Truly  this  doctrine  must  be  of  God. 

No  doctrine  can  be  imagined  that  wears  so  well.  It 
suits  men  when  they  first  begin,  like  the  Philip2)ian  jailer, 
crying,  "What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved?"- — It  suits  them 
when  they  fight  in  the  forefront  of  the  battle.  Like  the 
apostle  Paul,  they  say,  "  The  life  that  I  live,  I  live  by  the 
faith  of  the  Son  of  God."  (Gal.  ii.  20.) — It  suits  them 
when  they  die,  as  it  did  Stephen  when  he  cried,  "  Lord 
J esus,  receive  my  spirit."  (Acts  vii.  59.) — Yes  :  many  an 
one  has  opposed  the  doctrine  fiercely  while  he  lived,  and 
yet  on  his  death -bed  has  gladly  embraced  justification  by 
faith,  and  departed  saying  that  "he  trusted  in  nioth'mg 
hut  Christ."    It  must  be  of  God. 

Have  you  this  faith  ?  Do  you  know  any  thing  of  simple 
child-like  confidence  in  Jesus  ?  Do  you  know  what  it  is  to 
rest  your  soul's  hopes  wholly  on  Christ  ?  Oh,  remember 
that  where  there  is  no  faith,  there  is  no  interest  in 
Christ; — where  there  is  no  interest  in  Christ,  there  is  no 
justification ; — where  there  is  no  justification,  there  can  be 
no  peace  with  God ; — where  there  is  no  peace  with  God, 
there  is  no  heaven !  And  what  then  ?  There  remains 
nothing  but  helL 

And  now,  let  me  commend  the  solemn  matters  we  have 
been  considering  to  the  serious  and  prayerful  attention  of 
all  who  read  this  paper.  I  invite  you  to  begin  by 
meditating  calmly  on  peace  with  God, — on  justification, — 
on  Christ, — on  faith.  These  are  not  mere  speculative 
i&ubjects,  fit  for  none  but  retired  students.    They  lie  at  the, 


'232 


OLD  PATHS. 


very  roots  of  Christianity.  They  are  bound  up  with  life 
eternal.  Bear  with  me  for  a  few  moments,  while  I  add  a 
few  words  in  order  to  bring  tbem  home  more  closely  to  your 
heart  and  conscience. 

1.  Let  me,  then,  for  one  thing,  request  every  reader  of 
this  paper  to  put  a  plain  question  to  himself 

Have  you  peace  with  God  ?  You  have  heard  of  it. 
You  have  read  of  it.  You  know  there  is  such  a  thing. 
You  know  where  it  is  to  be  found.  But  do  you  possess  it 
yourself?  Is  it  yet  your  own?  Oh,  deal  honestly  with 
yourself,  and  do  not  evade  my  question  !  Have  you  peace 
with  God  ? 

I  do  not  ask  whether  you  think  it  an  excellent  thing, 
and  hope  to  procure  it  at  some  future  time  before  you  die. 
I  want  to  know  about  your  state  now.  To-day,  while  it  is 
called  to-day,  I  ask  you  to  deal  honestly  with  my  question. 
Have  you  peace  with  God  ? 

Do  not,  I  beseech  you,  allow  any  public  events  to  make 
you  put  off  the  consideration  of  your  own  spiritual  welfare. 
The  wars  and  contentions  of  nations  will  never  cease. 
The  strife  of  political  parties  will  never  end.  But  after 
all,  a  hundred  years  hence  these  very  things  will  seem  of 
little  importance  to  you.  The  question  I  am  asking  will 
seem  a  thousand  times  more  important.  You  may  possibly 
be  saying  then,  too  late,  "  Oh,  tliat  I  had  thought  more 
about  peace  with  God ! " 

May  the  question  ring  in  your  ears,  and  never  leave  you 
till  you  can  give  it  a  satisfactory  answer !  May  the  Spirit 
of  God  so  apply  it  to  your  heart  that  you  may  be  able  to 
say  boldly,  before  you  die,  "  Being  justified  by  faith,  I  have 
peace  with  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord ! " 

2.  In  the  next  place,  let  me  offer  a  solemn  warning 
to  every  reader  of  this  paper  who  knows  that  he  has  not 
peace  with  God. 

You  have  not  peace !  Consider  for  a  moment  how 
fearfully  great  is  your  danger  !    You  and  God  are  not 


JUSTIFICATION. 


233 


friends.  The  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  you.  God  is 
angry  with  you  every  day.  Your  ways,  your  words,  your 
thoughts,  your  actions,  are  a  continual  offence  to  Him. 
They  are  all  unpardoned  and  unforgiven.  They  cover 
you  from  head  to  foot.  They  provoke  Him  every  day 
to  cut  you  off.  The  sword  that  the  reveller  of  old  saw 
hanging  over  his  head  by  a  single  hair,  is  but  a  faint 
emblem  of  the  danger  of  your  soul.  There  is  but  a 
step  between  you  and  hell. 

You  have  not  peace !  Consider  for  a  moment  how 
fearfully  great  is  your  folly !  There  sits  at  the  right 
hand  of  God  a  mighty  Saviour  able  and  willing  to  give 
you  peace,  and  you  do  not  seek  Him.  For  ten,  twenty, 
thirty,  and  perhaps  forty  years  He  has  called  to  you,  and 
you  have  refused  His  counsel.  He  has  cried,  "  Come  to 
Me,"  and  you  have  practically  replied,  "  I  will  not."  He 
has  said,  "  My  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness,"  and  you 
have  constantly  said,  "I  like  my  own  sinful  ways  far 
better." 

And  after  all,  for  what  have  you  refused  Christ  ?  For 
worldly  riches,  which  cannot  heal  a  broken  heart, — for 
worldly  business,  which  you  must  one  day  leave, — for 
worldly  pleasures,  which  do  not  really  satisfy :  for  these 
things,  and  such  as  these,  you  have  refused  Christ !  Is 
this  wisdom  !  is  this  fairness,  is  this  kindness  to  your  soul  ? 

I  do  beseech  you  to  consider  your  ways.  I  mourn  over 
your  present  condition  with  especial  sorrow.  I  grieve  to 
think  how  many  are  within  a  hair's  breadth  of  some  crush- 
ing affliction,  and  yet  utterly  unprepared  to  meet  it.  Fain 
would  I  draw  near  to  every  one,  and  cry  in  his  ear,  "  Seek 
Christ !  Seek  Christ,  that  you  may  have  peace  within  and 
a  present  help  in  trouble."  Fain  would  I  persuade  every 
anxious  parent  and  wife  and  child  to  become  acquainted 
with  Him,  who  is  a  brother  born  for  adversity,  and  the 
Prince  of  peace, — a  friend  that  never  fails  nor  forsakes, 
and  a  husband  that  never  dies. 


234 


OLD  PATHS. 


3.  Let  me,  in  the  next  place,  offer  an  affectionate 
entreaty  to  all  who  Avant  peace  and  know  not  where  to 
find  it. 

You  want  peace !  Then  seek  it  without  delay  from 
Him  who  alone  is  able  to  give  it, — Christ  Jesus  the  Lord. 
Go  to  Him  in  humble  prayer,  and  ask  Him  to  fulfil  His 
own  promises  and  look  graciously  on  your  soul.  Tell  Him 
you  have  read  His  compassionate  invitation  to  the  "labour- 
ing and  heavy-laden."  Tell  Him  that  this  is  the  plight  of 
your  soul,  and  implore  Him  to  give  you  rest.  Do  this, 
and  do  it  without  delay. 

Seek  Christ  Himself,  and  do  not  stop  short  of  j^ersonal 
dealings  luith  Him.  Rest  not  in  regular  attendance  on 
Christ's  ordinances.  Be  not  content  Avith  becoming  a 
communicant,  and  receiving  the  Lord's  supper.  Think 
not  to  find  solid  peace  in  this  way.  You  must  see  the 
King's  face,  and  be  touched  by  the  golden  sceptre.  You 
must  speak  to  the  Physician,  and  open  your  whole  case 
to  Him.  You  must  be  closeted  with  the  Advocate,  and 
keep  nothing  back  from  Him.  Oh,  remember  this  !  Many 
are  shipwrecked  just  outside  the  harbour.  They  stop 
short  in  means  and  ordinances,  and  never  go  completely 
to  Christ.  "  Whosoever  drinks  of  this  water  shall  thirst 
again."  (John  iv.  13.)  Christ  Himself  can  alone  satisfy 
the  soul. 

Seek  Christ,  and  wait  for  nothing.  Wait  not  till  you 
feel  you  have  repented  enough.  Wait  not  till  your 
knowledge  is  increased.  Wail  not  till  you  have  been 
sufficiently  humbled  because  of  your  sins.  Wait  not  till 
you  have  no  ravelled  tangle  of  doubts  and  darkness  and 
unbelief  all  over  your  heart.  Seek  Christ  just  as  you  are. 
You  will  never  be  better  by  keeping  away  from  Him. 
From  the  bottom  of  my  heart  I  subscribe  to  old  Traill's 
opinion,  "  It  is  impossible  that  people  should  believe  in 
Christ  too  soon.  "  Alas,  it  is  not  humility,  but  pride  and 
ignorance  that  make  so  many  anxious  souls  hang  back 


JUSTIFICATION. 


235 


from  closing  with  Jesus.  They  forget  that  the  more  sick 
a  man  is,  the  more  need  he  has  of  the  physician.  Tlie 
more  bad  a  man  feels  his  heart,  the  more  readily  and 
speedily  ought  he  to  flee  to  Christ. 

Seek  Christ,  and  do  not  fancy  you  must  sit  still.  Let 
not  Satan  tempt  you  to  suppose  that  you  must  wait  in  a 
state  of  passive  inaction,  and  not  strive  to  lay  hold 
upon  Jesus.  How  you  can  lay  hold  upon  Him  I  do 
not  pretend  to  explain.  But  I  am  certain  that  it 
is  better  to  struggle  towards  Christ  and  strive  to  lay 
hold,  than  to  sit  still  with  our  arms  folded  in  sin  and 
unbelief.  Better  perish  striving  to  lay  hold  on  Jesus, 
than  perish  in  indolence  and  sin.  Well  says  old  Traill,  of 
those  who  tell  us  they  are  anxious  but  cannot  believe  in 
Christ :  "  This  pretence  is  as  inexcusable  as  if  a  man 
wearied  with  a  journey,  and  not  able  to  go  one  step 
further,  should  argue,  '  /  am  so  tired  that  I  am  not  able 
to  lie  down'  when  indeed  he  can  neither  stand  nor  go." 

4.  Let  me,  in  the  next  place,  offer  some  encouragement 
to  those  who  have  good  reason  to  hope  they  have  peace 
with  God,  but  are  troubled  by  doubts  and  fears. 

You  have  doubts  and  fears  !  But  what  do  you  expect  ? 
What  would  you  have  ?  Your  soul  is  married  to  a  body 
full  of  weakness,  passions,  and  infirmities.  You  live  in  a 
world  that  lies  in  wickedness,  a  world  in  which  the  great 
majority  do  not  love  Christ.  You  are  constantly  liable  to 
the  temptations  of  the  devil.  That  busy  enemy,  if  he 
cannot  shut  you  out  of  heaven,  will  try  hard  to  make 
your  journey  uncomfortable.  Surely  all  these  things  ought 
to  be  considered. 

I  say  to  every  believer,  that  so  far  from  being  surprised 
that  you  have  doubts  and  fears,  I  should  suspect  the  reality 
of  your  peace  if  you  had  none.  I  think  little  of  that  grace, 
which  is  accompanied  by  no  inward  conflict.  There  is 
seldom  life  in  the  heart  when  all  is  still,  quiet,  and  in  one 
way  of  thinking.    Believe  me,  a  true  Christian  may  be 


236 


OLD  PATHS. 


known  by  his  warfare  as  well  as  by  his  peace.  These' 
very  doubts  and  fears  which  now  distress  you  are  tokens 
of  good.  They  satisfy  me  that  you  have  really  got 
something  which  you  are  afraid  to  lose. 

Beware  that  you  do  not  help  Satan  by  becoming  an 
unjust  accuser  of  yourself,  and  an  unbeliever  in  the  reality 
of  God's  work  of  grace.  I  advise  you  to  pray  for  more 
knowledge  of  your  own  heart,  of  the  fulness  of  Jesus,  and 
of  the  devices  of  the  devil.  Let  doubts  and  fears  drive  you 
to  the  throne  of  grace,  stir  you  up  to  more  prayer,  send 
you  more  frequently  to  Christ.  But  do  not  let  doubts  and 
fears  rob  you  of  your  peace.  Believe  me,  you  must  be 
content  to  go  to  heaven  as  a  sinner  saved  by  grace.  And 
you  must  not  be  surprised  to  find  daily  proof  that  you 
really  are  a  sinner  so  long  as  you  live. 

5.  Let  me,  in  the  last  place,  offer  some  counsel  to  all 
who  have  peace  with  God,  and  desire  to  keep  up  a  lively 
sense  of  it. 

It  must  never  be  forgotten  that  a  believer's  sense  of  his 
own  justification  and  acceptance  with  God  admits  of  many 
degrees  and  variations.  At  one  time  it  may  be  bright  and 
clear ;  at  another  dull  and  dim.  At  one  time  it  may  be 
high  and  full,  like  the  flood  tide ;  at  another  low,  like  the 
ebb.  Our  justification  is  a  fixed,  changeless,  immovable 
thing.  But  our  sense  of  justification  is  liable  to  many 
changes. 

What  then  are  the  best  means  of  preserving  in  a 
believer's  heart  that  lively  sense  of  justification  which  is 
so  precious  to  the  soul  that  knows  it  ?  I  offer  a  few  hints 
to  believers.  I  lay  no  claim  to  infallibility  in  setting 
down  these  hints,  for  I  am  only  a  man.  But  such  as  they 
are  I  offer  them. 

(a)  To  keep  up  a  lively  sense  of  peace,  there  must  be 
constant  looking  to  Jesus.  As  the  pilot  keeps  his  eye 
on  the  mark  by  which  he  steers,  so  must  we  keep  our  eye 
on  Christ. 


JUSTIFICATION. 


2S7 


(6)  There  must  be  coustant  communion  with  Jesus. 
We  must  use  Him  daily  as  our  soul's  Physician,  and  High 
Priest.  There  must  be  daily  conference,  daily  confession, 
and  daily  absolution. 

(c)  There  must  be  constant  toatchfulness  against  the 
enemies  of  your  soul.  He  that  would  have  peace  must  be 
always  prepared  for  war. 

{d)  There  must  be  constant /oZ^omw^f  after  holiness  in 
every  relation  of  life, — in  our  tempers,  in  our  tongues, 
abroad  and  at  home.  A  small  speck  on  the  lens  of  a 
telescope  is  enough  to  prevent  our  seeing  distant  objects 
clearly,  A  little  dust  will  soon  make  a  watch  go  incorrectly. 

(e)  There  must  be  a  constant  labouring  after  humility. 
Pride  goes  before  a  fall.  Self-contidence  is  often  the 
mother  of  sloth,  of  hurried  Bible-reading,  and  sleepy 
prayers.  Peter  first  said  he  would  never  forsake  his  Lord, 
though  all  others  did ; — then  he  slept  when  he  should  have 
prayed  ;— then  he  denied  Him  three  times,  and  only  found 
wisdom  after  bitter  weeping. 

(/)  There  must  be  constant  boldness  in  confessing  our 
Lord  before  men.  Them  that  honour  Christ,  Christ  will 
honour  with  much  of  His  company.  When  the  disciples 
forsook  our  Lord  they  were  wretched  and  miserable. 
When  they  confessed  Him  before  the  council,  they  were 
hlled  with  joy  and  the  Holy  Ghost. 

(<j)  There  must  be  constant  diligence  about  means  of 
grace.  Here  are  the  ways  in  which  Jesus  loves  to  walk. 
No  disciple  must  e.xpect  to  see  much  of  his  Master,  who 
does  not  delight  in  public  worship,  Bible-reading,  and 
private  prayer. 

(Ji)  Lastly,  there  must  be  con^iixni  jealousy  over  our  own 
souls,  and  frequent  self-examiaatiou.  We  must  be  careful 
to  distinguish  between  justification  and  sanctification.  We 
must  beware  that  we  do  not  make  a  Christ  of  holiness. 

I  lay  these  hints  before  all  believing  readers.  I  might 
easily  add  to  them.    But  I  am  sure  they  are  among  the 


238 


OLD  PATHS. 


first  things  to  be  attended  to  by  true  Christian  believers, 
if  they  wish  to  keep  up  a  lively  sense  of  their  own 
justification  and  acceptance  with  God. 

I  conclude  all  by  expressing  my  heart's  desire  and 
prayer  that  all  who  read  these  pages  may  know  what  it  is 
to  have  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understanding 
in  their  souls. 

If  you  never  had  "  peace  "  yet,  may  it  be  recorded  in  the 
book  of  God  that  this  year  you  sought  peace  in  Christ  and 
lound  it ! 

If  you  have  tasted  "  peace  "  already,  may  your  sense  of 
peace  mightily  increase ! 


The  following  passage  from  a  direction  for  the  Visitation  of  the 
Sick,  composed  by  Anselm,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  about 
the  year  1093,  will  probably  be  interesting  to  many  readers. 

"  Dost  thou  believe  that  thou  canst  not  be  saved  but  by  the  death  of 
Christ '!  The  sick  man  answereth,  Yes.  Then  let  it  be  said  unto  him, 
(jio  to  then,  and  whilst  thy  soul  abideth  in  thee,  put  aU  thy  confidence 
m  this  death  alone.  Place  thy  trust  in  no  other  thing.  Commit  thyself 
wholly  to  this  death.  Cover  thyself  wholly  with  this  alone.  Cast 
thyselt  wholly  on  this  death.  Wrap  thyself  wholly  in  this  death.  And 
it  God  would  judge  thee,  say,  '  Lord,  I  place  the  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  between  me  and  Thy  judgment ;  and  otherwise  I  will  not  contend 
with  Thee. '  And  if  He  shall  say  unto  thee  that  thou  art  a  sinner,  say, 
'1  place  the  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  between  me  and  my  sins.' 
If  He  shall  say  unto  thee  that  thou  hast  deserved  damnation,  say,  '  Lord, 
i  put  the  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  between  Thee  and  all  my  sins  ; 
and  1  offer  His  merits  for  my  own,  which  1  should  have,  and  have  not.' 
If  He  say  that  He  is  angry  with  thee,  say,  '  Lord,  I  place  the  death  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  between  me  and  Thy  anger.'  " — Quoted  by  Owen 
in  his  Treatise  on  J«s<j/!ca<io«.— Johnstone's  Edition  of  Owens 
Works.    Vol.  V.,  p.  17. 


IX. 


THE  CROSS  OF  CHRIST. 

"  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ." — Gal.  vi.  14. 

What  do  we  tbink  and  feel  about  the  cross  of  Christ  ? 
We  live  in  a  Cliristian  land.  We  probably  attend  the 
worship  of  a  Christian  cburch.  We  have,  most  of  us,  been 
baptized  in  the  name  of  Clirist.  We  profess  and  call 
ourselves  Christians.  All  this  is  well :  it  is  more  than  can 
be  said  of  millions  in  the  world.  But  tuhat  do  we  think 
and  feel  about  the  cross  of  Christ  ? 

I  want  to  examine  what  one  of  the  greatest  Christians 
that  ever  lived  thought  of  the  cross  of  Christ.  He  has 
written  down  his  opinion:  he  has  given  his  judgment  in 
words  that  cannot  be  mistaken.  The  man  I  mean  is  the 
Apostle  Paul.  The  place  where  you  will  find  his  opinion, 
is  in  the  letter  which  the  Holy  Ghost  insj^ired  him  to 
Avrito  to  the  Galatians.  The  words  in  which  his  judgment 
is  set  down,  ai-e  these, — "  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory, 
save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

Now  what  did  Paul  mean  by  saying  this  ?  He  meant 
to  declare  strongly,  that  he  trusted  in  nothing  but  "  Jesus 
Christ  crucified  "  for  the  pardon  of  his  sins  and  the  salvation 
of  his  soul.  Let  others,  if  they  would,  look  elsewhere  for 
salvation ;  let  others,  if  they  were  so  disposed,  trust  in 


240 


OLD  PATHS. 


other  things  for  pardon  and  peace :  for  his  part  the  apostle 
was  determined  to  rest  on  nothing,  lean  on  nothins:,  build 
his  hope  on  nothing,  place  confidence  in  nothing,  glory  in 
nothing,  except  "  the  cross  of  Jesus  Christ." 

I  -wish  to  say  something  about  "the  cross"  to  the  readers 
of  this  volume.  Believe  me,  the  subject  is  one  of  the 
deepest  importance.  This  is  no  mere  question  of  contro- 
versy. It  is  not  one  of  those  points  on  which  men  may 
agree  to  differ,  and  feel  that  differences  will  not  shut  them 
out  of  heaven.  A  man  must  be  right  on  this  subject,  or 
he  is  lost  for  ever.  Heaven  or  hell,  happiness  or  misery, 
life  or  death,  blessing  or  cursing  in  the  last  day, — all  hinges 
on  the  answer  to  this  question:  "  What  do  You  think  about 
the  cross  of  Christ  ?  " 

I.  Let  me  show  you,  first  of  all,  what  the  Apostle  Paul 
did  not  glory  in. 

There  are  many  things  that  Paul  might  have  gloried 
in,  if  he  had  thought  as  some  do  in  this  day.  If  ever 
there  was  one  on  earth  who  had  something  to  boast  of  in 
himself,  that  man  was  the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles. 
Now  if  he  did  not  dare  to  glorj^,  who  shall  1 

He  never  gloried  in  his  national  'privileges.  He  was 
a  Jew  by  birth,  and,  as  he  tells  us  himself, — "An  Hebrew 
of  the  Hebrews."  (Phil.  iii.  5.)  He  might  have  said,  like 
many  of  his  brethren,  "  I  have  Abraham  for  my  forefather. 
I  am  not  a  dark  unenlightened  heathen  ;  I  am  one  of  the 
favoured  people  of  God :  I  have  been  admitted  into  cove- 
nant with  God  by  circumcision.  I  am  a  far  better  man 
than  the  ignorant  Gentiles."  But  he  never  said  so.  He 
never  gloried  in  anything  of  this  kind.  Never,  for  one 
moment ! 

He  never  gloried  in  his  own  works.  None  ever  worked 
so  hard  for  God  as  he  did.  He  was  "  more  abundant  in 
labours  "  than  any  of  the  apostles.  (2  Cor.  xi.  2.3.)  No 
man  ever  preached  so  much,  travelled  so  much,  and  endured 


THE  CROSS  OF  CHRIST. 


241 


SO  many  hardships  for  Christ's  cause.  None  was  ever  made 
the  means  of  converting  so  many  souls,  did  so  much  good 
to  the  world,  and  made  himself  so  useful  to  mankind.  No 
Father  of  the  early  Church,  no  Reformer,  no  Puritan,  no 
Missionary,  no  minister,  no  layman, — no  one  man  could 
ever  be  named,  who  did  so  many  good  works  as  the  Apostle 
Paul.  But  did  he  ever  glory  in  them,  as  if  they  were  in 
the  least  meritorious,  and  could  save  his  soul  ?  Never ! 
Never  for  one  moment ! 

He  never  gloried  in  his  Jcnoivledge.  He  was  a  man  of 
great  gifts  naturally,  and,  after  he  was  converted,  the  Holy 
Spirit  gave  him  greater  gifts  still.  He  was  a  mighty 
preacher,  and  a  mighty  speaker,  and  a  mighty  writer.  He 
was  as  great  with  his  pen  as  he  was  with  his  tongue.  He 
could  reason  equally  well  with  Jews  and  Gentiles.  He 
could  argue  with  infidels  at  Corinth,  or  Pharisees  at 
Jerusalem,  or  self-righteous  people  in  Galatia.  He  knew 
many  deep  things.  He  had  been  in  the  third  heaven,  and 
"heard  unspeakable  words."  (2  Cor.  xii.  4.)  He  had 
received  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  and  could  foretell  things 
yet  to  come.  But  did  he  ever  glory  in  his  knowledge,  as 
if  it  could  justify  him  before  God  ?  Never:  never!  Never 
for  one  moment ! 

He  never  gloried  in  his  graces.  If  ever  there  was  one 
who  abounded  in  graces,  that  man  was  Paul.  He  was  full 
of  love.  How  tenderly  and  affectionately  he  used  to 
write  !  He  could  feel  for  souls  like  a  mother  or  a  nurse 
feeling  for  her  child. — He  was  a  bold  man.  He  cared  not 
whom  he  opposed  when  truth  was  at  stake.  He  cared  not 
what  risks  he  ran  when  souls  were  to  be  won. — He  was  a 
self-denying  man, — in  hunger  and  thirst  often,  in  cold 
and  nakedness,  in  watchings  and  fastings. — He  was  a 
humble  man.  He  thought  himself  less  than  the  least  of 
all  saints,  and  the  chief  of  sinners. — He  was  a  prayerful 
man.  See  how  it  comes  out  at  the  beginninir  of  all  his 
Epistles. — He  was  a  thankful  man.    His  thanksgivings 

R 


OLD  PATHS. 


and  bis  prayers  walked  side  by  side.  But  be  never  gloried 
in  all  this, — never  valued  himself  on  it, — never  rested  his 
soul's  hopes  on  it.    Oh,  no  :  never  for  a  moment ! 

He  never  gloried  in  his  Churclimansliip.  If  ever  there 
was  a  good  Churchman,  that  man  was  Paul.  He  was 
himself  a  chosen  apostle.  He  was  a  founder  of  churches, 
and  an  ordainer  of  ministers :  Timothy  and  Titus,  and 
"many  elders,  received  their  first  commission  from  his 
bands.  He  was  the  beginner  of  services  and  sacraments 
in  many  a  dark  place.  Manj'  an  one  did  he  baptize; 
many  an  one  did  be  receive  to  the  Lord's  Table ;  many  a 
meeting  for  prayer,  and  praise,  and  preaching,  did  be 
begin  and  carry  on.  He  was  the  setter  up  of  discipline 
in  many  a  young  Church.  Whatever  ordinances,  and  rules, 
and  ceremonies  were  observed  in  man)^  Churches,  were  first 
recommended  by  him.  But  did  he  ever  glory  in  his  office 
and  Church  standing  ?  Does  he  ever  speak  as  if  his 
Churchmanship  would  save  him,  justif}"  him,  put  away  his 
sins,  and  make  him  acceptable  before  God  ?  Oh,  no ! 
Never :  never  !    Never  for  a  moment ! 

Now  if  the  apostle  Paul  never  gloried  in  any  of  these 
things,  who  in  all  the  world,  from  one  end  to  the  other, — 
who  has  any  right  to  glory  in  them  in  our  day  ?  If  Paul 
said, "  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory  in  anything  whatever 
except  the  cross,"  who  shall  dare  to  say,  "  I  have  something 
to  glory  of :  I  am  a  better  man  than  Paul "  ? 

Who  is  there  among  the  readers  of  this  paper  that  trusts 
in  any  goodness  of  his  own  ?  Who  is  there  that  is  resting 
on  his  own  amendments, — his  own  morality, — his  own 
churchmanship, — his  own  works  and  performances  of  any 
kind  whatever  ?  Who  is  there  that  is  leaning  the  weight 
of  his  soul  on  anything  whatever  of  bis  own,  in  the 
smallest  possible  degree  ?  Leam,  I  say,  that  you  are  very 
unlike  the  apostle  Paul.  Learn  that  your  religion  is  not 
apodolical  religion. 

Who  is  there  among  the  readers  of  this  paper  that  trusts 


THE  CKOSS  OF  CHRIST. 


243 


in  his  religious  profession  for  salvation  ?  Who  is  there  that 
is  valuing  himself  on  his  baptism,  or  his  attendance  at  the 
Lord's  table, — his  church-going  on  Sundays,  or  his  daily 
services  during  the  week, — and  saying  to  himself,  "  What 
lack  I  yet  ? "  Learn,  I  say,  this  day,  that  you  are  very 
unlike  Paul.  Your  Christianity  is  not  the  Christianity  of 
the  New  Testament.  Paul  would  not  glory  in  anything 
but  "  the  cross."    Neither  ought  you. 

Oh,  let  us  beware  of  self-righteousness !  Open  sin  kills 
its  thousands  of  soiils.  Self-righteousness  kills  its  tens  of 
thousands.  Go  and  study  humility  with  the  great  apostle 
of  the  Gentiles.  Go  and  sit  with  Paul  at  the  foot  of  the 
cross.  Give  up  your  secret  pride.  Cast  away  your  vain 
ideas  of  your  own  goodness.  Be  thankful  if  you  have 
grace,  but  never  glory  in  it  for  a  moment.  Work  for  God 
and  Christ,  with  heart  and  soul  and  mind  and  strength, 
but  never  dream  for  a  second  of  placing  confidence  in 
any  Avork  of  your  own. 

Think,  you  who  take  comfort  in  some  fancied  ideas  of 
your  own  goodness, — think,  you  who  wrap  up  yourselves 
in  the  notion,  "  all  must  be  right,  if  I  keep  to  my  Church," 
— think  for  a  moment  what  a  sandy  foundation  you  are 
building  upon !  Think  how  miserably  defective  your 
hopes  and  pleas  will  look  in  the  hour  of  death,  and  in  the 
day  of  judgment !  Whatever  men  may  say  of  their  own 
goodness  while  they  are  strong  and  healthy,  they  will  find 
but  little  to  say  of  it  when  they  are  sick  and  dying. 
Whatever  merit  they  may  see  in  their  own  works  here  in 
this  world,  tliey  will  discover  none  in  them  when  they  stand 
before  the  bar  of  Christ.  The  light  of  that  great  day  of 
assize  will  make  a  wonderful  difference  in  the  appearance 
of  all  their  doings.  It  will  strip  off  the  tinsel,  shrivel  up 
the  complexion,  expose  the  rottenness  of  many  a  deed  that 
is  now  called  good.  Their  wheat  will  prove  nothing  but 
chaff:  their  gold  will  be  found  nothing  but  dross.  Millions 
of  so-called  Christian  actions  will  turn  out  to  have  been 


OLD  PATHS. 


utterly  defective  and  graceless.  They  passed  current,  and 
were  valued  among  men :  they  will  prove  light  and  worth- 
less in  the  balance  of  God.  They  will  be  found  to  have  been 
like  the  whitened  sepulchres  of  old, — fair  and  beautiful 
without,  but  full  of  corruption  within.  Alas,  for  the  man 
who  can  look  forward  to  the  day  of  judgment,  and  lean 
his  soul  in  the  smallest  degree  on  anything  of  his  own 
now !  * 

Once  more  I  say,  let  us  beware  of  self-righteousness  in 
every  possible  shape  and  form.  Some  people  get  as  much 
harm  from  their  fancied  virtues  as  others  do  from  their 
sins.  Rest  not,  re.?t  not  till  your  heart  beats  in  tune  with 
St.  Paul's.  Rest  not  till  you  can  say  with  him,  "  GOD 
FORBID  THAT  I  SHOULD  GLORY  IN  ANYTHING 
BUT  THE  CROSS." 

II.  Let  me  explain,  in  the  second  place,  ^uJiat  we  are 
to  understand  by  the  cross  of  Christ. 

The  cross  is  an  expression  that  is  used  in  more  than 
one  meaning  in  the  Bible.  What  did  St.  Paul  mean 
when  Ii%  said,  "I  glory  in  the  cross  of  Christ,"  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Galatians  ?  This  is  the  jjoint  I  now  wish 
to  examine  closely  and  make  clear. 

The  cross  sometimes  means  that  wooden  cross,  on  which 


*  "Howsoever  men  when  they  sit  at  ease,  do  vainly  tickle  tbeir  own 
hearts  with  the  wanton  conceit  of  I  know  not  what  proportionable  cor- 
respondence between  their  merits  and  their  rewards,  which  in  the  trance 
of  their  high  speculations,  they  dream  that  God  hath  measured  and  laid 
up  as  it  were  in  bundles  for  them; — we  see  notwithstanding  by  daily 
experience  in  a  number  even  of  them,  that  when  the  hour  of  death  ap- 
pi'oacheth,  when  they  secretly  hear  themselves  summoned  to  appear  and 
stand  at  the  bar  of  that  Judge,  whose  brightness  causeth  the  eyes  of 
angels  themselves  to  dazzle,  all  those  idle  imaginations  do  then  begin  to 
hide  their  faces.  To  name  merits  then  is  to  lay  their  souls  upon  the  rack. 
The  memory  of  their  own  deeds  is  loathsome  unto  them.  They  forsake 
all  things  wherein  they  have  put  any  trust  and  confidence.  No  staff  to 
lean  upon,  no  rest,  no  ease,  no  comfort  then,  but  only  in  Christ  Jesus."— 
Rkhard  Hooker.  1585. 


THE  CROSS  OF  CHRIST. 


215 


tlic  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  nailed  and  put  to  death  on 
Calvary.  This  is  what  St.  Paul  had  in  his  mind's  eye, 
when  he  told  the  Philippians  that  Christ  "became  obedient, 
unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross."  (Phil.  ii.  8.) 
Tliis  is  not  the  cross  in  which  St.  Paul  gloried.  He  would 
have  shrunk  with  horror  from  the  idea  of  glorying  in  a 
mere  piece  of  wood.  I  have  no  doubt  he  would  have 
denounced  the  Roman  Catholic  adoration  of  the  crucifix, 
as  profane,  blasj^hemous,  and  idolatrous. 

The  cross  sometimes  means  the  afflictions  and  trials 
which  believers  in  Christ  have  to  go  through,  if  they 
follow  Christ  faithfully,  for  their  religion's  sake.  This  is 
the  sense  in  which  our  Lord  uses  tlie  word  when  He  says, 
"  He  that  taketh  not  his  cross  and  foUoweth  after  Me, 
cannot  be  my  disciple."  (Matt.  x.  38.)  This  also  is  not 
the  sense  in  which  Paul  uses  the  word  when  he  writes  to 
the  Galatians.  He  knew  that  cross  well :  he  carried  it 
patiently.    But  he  is  not  speaking  of  it  here. 

But  the  cross  also  means,  in  some  places,  the  doctrine 
that  Christ  died  for  sinners  upon  the  cross, — the  atone- 
ment that  He  made  for  sinners,  by  His  suffering  f  4-  them 
on  the  cross, — the  complete  and  perfect  sacrifice  for  sin 
which  He  offered  up,  when  He  gave  His  own  body  to  be 
crucified.  In  short,  this  one  word,  "the  cross,"  stands  for 
Christ  crucified,  the  only  Saviour.  This  is  the  meaning 
in  which  Paul  nses  the  expression,  when  he  tells  the 
Corinthians,  "  the  preaching  of  the  cross  is  to  them  that 
perish  foolishness."  (1  Cor.  i.  18,)  This  is  the  meaning 
in  which  he  wrote  to  the  Galatians,  "  God  forbid  that  I 
should  glory,  save  in  the  cross."  He  simply  meant,  "  I 
glory  in  nothing  but  Christ  crucified,  as  the  salvation 
of  my  soul "  * 


*  "By  the  cross  of  Christ  the  Apostle  undcrstandoth  the  all-sufficient, 
expiatory,  and  satisfactory  sacrifice  of  Christ  upon  the  cross,  with  the 
■whole  work  of  our  redemption  ;  in  the  saving  knowledge  of  whereof  he 
professeth  he  will  glory  and  bursts." — Cudworlh  on  Galatiaiis.  I(il3., 


'246 


OLD  PATHS. 


Jesus  Christ  crucified  was  the  joy  and  delight,  the 
comfort  and  the  peace,  the  hope  and  the  confidence,  the 
foundation  and  the  resting-place,  the  ark  and  the  refuge, 
the  food  and  the  medicine  of  Paul's  soul.  He  did  not 
think  of  what  he  had  done  himself,  and  suffered  himself. 
He  did  not  meditate  on  his  own  goodness,  and  his  own 
righteousness.  He  loved  to  think  of  what  Christ  had  done, 
and  Christ  had  suffered, — of  the  death  of  Christ,  the 
righteousness  of  Christ,  the  atonement  of  Christ,  the  blood 
of  Christ,  the  finished  work  of  Christ.  In  this  he  did  glory. 
This  was  the  sun  of  his  soul. 

This  is  the  subject  he  loved  to  preach  about.  He  was 
a  man  who  went  to  and  fro  on  the  earth,  proclaiming  to 
sinners  that  the  Sou  of  God  had  shed  His  own  heart's 
blood  to  save  their  souls.  He  walked  up  and  down  the 
world  telling  people  that  Jesus  Christ  had  loved  them, 
and  died  for  their  sins  upon  the  cross.  Mark  how  he  says 
to  the  Corinthians,  "  I  delivered  unto  you  first  of  all  that 
which  I  also  received,  how  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins." 
(I  Cor.  XV.  3.)  "I  determined  not  to  know  anything 
among  you  save  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified."  (1  Cor, 
ii.  2.)  He,  a  blaspheming,  persecuting  Pharisee,  had  been 
washed  in  Christ's  blood.  He  could  not  hold  his  peace 
about  it.  He  was  never  weary  of  telling  the  story  of 
the  cross. 

This  is  the  subject  he  loved  to  dwell  upon  when  he 
lOTote  to  believers.  It  is  wonderful  to  observe  how  full 
his  epistles  generally  are  of  the  sufferings  and  death  of 


"Touching  these  words,  I  do  not  find  that  any,  expositor,  either 
ancient  or  modern,  Popish,  or  Protestant,  writing  on  this  place,  doth 
expound  the  cross  here  mentioned  of  the  sign  of  the  cross,  but  of  the 
profession  of  faith  in  Him  that  was  hanged  on  the  cross." — Mayer'' s 
Commentary.  1G31. 

"This  is  rather  to  be  understood  of  the  cross  which  Christ  suffered 
for  us,  than  of  that  we  suffer  for  Him." — Leiyh's  Annotations.  1650. 


THE  CROSS  OF  CHRIST. 


2471 


Clirist, — how  they  run  over  with  "  thoughts  that  breathe 
and  words  that  burn,"  about  Christ's  dying  love  and  power. 
His  heart  seems  full  of  the  subject.  He  enlarges  on  it 
constantly:  he  returns  to  it  continually.  It  is  the  golden 
thread  that  runs  through  all  his  doctrinal  teaching  and 
2:)ractical  exhortations.  He  seems  to  think  that  the  most 
advanced  Christian  can  never  hear  too  much  about  the 
cross.* 

This  is  what  he  lived  upon  all  his  life,  from  the  time  of 
his  conversion.  He  tells  the  Galatians,  "  The  life  that  I 
now  live  in  the  flesh  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God, 
who  loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me."  (Galat.  ii.  20.) 
What  made  him  so  strono;  to  labour  ?  What  made  him  so 
willing  to  work  ?  What  made  him  so  unwearied  in  en- 
deavouring to  save  some  ?  What  made  him  so  persevering 
and  patient  ?  I  will  tell  you  the  secret  of  it  all.  He  was 
always  feeding  by  faith  on  Christ's  body  and  Christ's 
blood.  Jesus  crucified  was  the  meat  and  drink  of  his 
soul. 

And  we  may  rest  assured  that  Paul  was  right.  Depend 
upon  it,  the  cross  of  Christ, — the  death  of  Christ  on  the 
cross  to  make  atonement  for  sinners, — is  the  centre  truth 
in  the  whole  Bible.  This  is  the  truth  we  begin  with 
when  we  q-^qw  Genesis.  The  seed  of  the  woman  bruising 
the  serpent's  head  is  nothing  else  but  a  prophecy  of  Christ 
crucified. — This  is  the  truth  that  shines  out,  though  veiled, 
all  through  the  law  of  Moses,  and  the  history  of  the  Jews. 
The  daily  sacrifice,  the  passover  lamb,  the  continual 
shedding  of  blood  in  the  tabernacle  and  temple, — all  these 
were  emblems  of  Christ  crucified. — This  is  the  truth  that 


*  "Cliri.st  crucified  in  the  sum  of  the  Gospel,  and  contains  all  the 
riches  of  it.  Paul  was  so  much  taken  with  Christ,  that  nothing  sweeter 
than  Jesus  could  drop  from  his  pen  and  lips.  It  is  observed  that  he 
hath  the  word  "Jesus  "  five  hundred  times  ia  his  Epistles." — Charnock. 
,1084. 


248 


OLD  PATHS. 


we  see  honoured  in  the  vision  of  heaven  before  we  close 
the  book  of  Revelation.  "  In  the  midst  of  the  throne  and 
of  the  four  beasts/'  we  are  told,  "and  in  the  midst  of  the 
elders,  stood  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain."  (Rev.  v.  6.) 
Even  in  the  midst  of  heavenly  glory  we  get  a  view  of 
Christ  crucified.  Take  away  the  cross  of  Christ,  and  the 
Bible  is  a  dark  book.  It  is  like  the  Egyptian  hieroglyphics 
without  the  key  that  interprets  their  meaning, — curious 
and  wonderful,  but  of  no  real  use. 

Let  every  reader  of  this  paper  mark  what  I  say.  You 
may  know  a  good  deal  about  the  Bible.  You  may  know 
the  outlines  of  the  histories  it  contains,  and  the  dates  of 
the  events  described,  just  as  a  man  knows  the  history  of 
England.  You  may  know  the  names  of  the  men  and 
women  mentioned  in  it,  just  as  a  man  knows  CjEsar, 
Alexander  the  Great,  or  Napoleon.  You  may  know  the 
several  precepts  of  the  Bible,  and  admire  them,  just  as  a 
man  admires  Plato,  Aristotle,  or  Seneca.  But  if  you  have 
not  yet  found  out  that  Christ  crucified  is  the  foundation 
of  the  whole  volume,  you  have  read  j'our  Bible  hitherto 
to  very  little  profit.  Your  religion  is  a  heaven  without  a 
sun,  an  arch  without  a  key-stone,  a  compass  without  a 
needle,  a  clock  without  spring  or  weights,  a  lamp  without 
oil.  It  will  not  comfort  you.  It  will  not  deliver  your 
soul  from  hell. 

Mark  what  I  say  again.  You  may  know  a  good  deal 
about  Christ,  by  a  kind  of  head  knowledge.  You  may 
know  who  He  was,  and  where  He  was  born,  and  what 
He  did.  You  may  know  His  miracles.  His  sayings.  His 
prophecies,  and  His  ordinances.  You  may  know  how  He 
lived,  and  how  He  suffered,  and  how  He  died.  But  unless 
you  know  the  power  of  Christ's  cross  by  experience, — 
unless  you  know  and  feel  within  that  the  blood  shed  on 
that  cross  has  washed  away  your  own  particular  sins, — 
unless  you  are  willing  to  confess  that  your  salvation 
depends  entirely  on  the  work  that  Christ  did  upon  the 


THE  CROSS  OF  CHRIST. 


249 


cross, — unless  this  be  the  case,  Christ  will  profit  yoa 
nothinsf.  The  mere  knowinof  Christ's  name  will  never 
save  you.  You  must  know  His  cross,  and  His  blood,  or 
else  you  will  die  in  your  sins.* 

As  long  as  you  live,  beivare  of  a  religion  in  which' 
there  is  not  much  of  the  cross.  You  live  in  times  when 
the  warning  is  sadly  needful.  Beware,  I  say  again,  of  a 
religion  without  the  cross. 

There  are  hundreds  of  places  of  worship,  in  this  day,' 
in  which  there  is  everything  almost  except  the  cross. 
There  is  carved  oak,  and  sculptured  stone ;  there  is  stained 
glass,  and  brilliant  painting;  there  are  solemn  services, 
and  a  constant  round  of  ordinances ;  but  the  real  cross  of 
Christ  is  not  there.  Jesus  crucified  is  not  proclaimed  in 
the  pulpit.  The  Lamb  of  God  is  not  lifted  up,  and 
salvation  by  faith  in  Him  is  not  freely  proclaimed.  And 
hence  all  is  wrong.  Beware  of  such  places  of  worship. 
They  are  not  apostolical.  They  would  not  have  satisfied 
St.  Paul.f 

There  are  thousands  of  religious  books  published  in  our 
times,  in  which  there  is  everything  except  the  cross. 
They  are  full  of  directions  about  sacraments,  and  praises 
of  the  Church.  They  abound  in  exhortations  about  holy 
living,  and  rules  for  the  attainment  of  perfection.  They 
have  plenty  of  fonts  and  crosses,  both  inside  and  outside. 
But  the  real  cross  of  Christ  is  left  out.  Tlie  Saviour,  and 
His  work  of  atonement  and  complete  salvation,  are  either 


*  "  If  our  faith  stop  in  Christ's  life,  and  do  not  fasten  upon  His  blood, 
it  will  not  be  justifying  faith.  His  miracles,  which  prepared  the 
world  for  His  doctrines ;  Ills  holiness,  which  fitted  Himself  for  His 
sufferings,  had  been  insufficient  for  us  without  the  addition  of  the  cross. 
— Charnock.  1G84. 

t  "Paul  determined  to  know  nothing  else  but  Jesus  Christ  and  Him 
crucified.  But  many  manage  the  ministry  as  if  tliey  had  taken  up  a 
contrary  determination,— even  to  know  anything  save  Jesus  Christ  and 
Him  crucified. "—  Traill.  1690. 


250 


OLD  PATHS. 


not  mentioned,  or  mentioned  in  an  unscriptural  way.  And 
Lcnce  they  are  worse  than  useless.  Beware  of  such  books. 
They  are  not  apostolical.  They  would  never  have  satisfied 
St.  Paul. 

St.  Paul  gloried  in  nothing  but  the  cross.  Strive  to  be 
like  him.  Set  Jesus  crucified  fully  before  the  eyes  of  your 
soul.  Listen  not  to  any  teaching  which  would  interpose 
anything  between  you  and  Him.  Do  not  fall  into  the  old 
Galatian  error :  think  not  that  any  one  in  this  day  is  a 
better  guide  than  the  apostles.  Do  not  be  ashamed  of  the 
"  old  paths,"  in  which  men  walked  who  were  inspired  by 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Let  not  the  vague  talk  of  modern 
teachers,  who  speak  great  swelling  words  about  "  catho- 
licity," and  "the  church,"  disturb  your  peace,  and  make 
you  loose  your  hands  from  the  cross.  Churches,  ministers, 
and  sacraments,  are  all  useful  in  their  way,  but  they  are  not 
Christ  crucified.  Do  not  give  Christ's  honour  to  another. 
"  He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord."  (1  Cor.  i.  1.) 

III.  Let  me  show,  lastly,  tvJiy  all  Christians  ought  to 
glory  in  the  crof.s  of  Christ. 

I  feel  that  I  must  say  something  on  this  point,  because 
of  the  ignorance  that  prevails  about  it.  I  suspect  that 
many  see  no  peculiar  glory  and  beauty  in  the  subject  of 
Christ's  cross.  On  the  contraiy,  they  think  it  painful, 
humbling,  and  degrading.  They  do  not  see  much  profit 
in  the  story  of  His  death  and  sufferings.  They  rather 
turn  from  it  as  an  unpleasant  thing. 

Now  I  believe  that  such  persons  are  quite  wrong.  I 
cannot  hold  with  them.  I  believe  it  is  an  excellent  thing 
for  us  all  to  be  continually  dwelling  on  the  cross  of  Christ. 
It  is  a  good  thing  to  be  often  reminded  how  Jesus  was 
betrayed  into  the  hands  of  wicked  men, — how  they  con- 
denmed  Him  with  most  unjust  judgment, — how  they  spit 
on  Him,  scourged  Him,  beat  Him,  and  crowned  Him  with 
thorijs, — how  they  led  Him  forth  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughtei', 


THE  CEOSS  OF  CHRIST. 


251 


without  His  murmuring  or  resisting, — liow  they  drove  tlie 
nails  through  His  hands  and  feet,  and  set  Him  up  on 
Calvary  between  two  thieves, — how  they  pierced  His  side 
with  a  spear,  mocked  Him  in  His  sufferings,  and  let  Him 
hang  there  naked  and  bleeding  till  Ho  died.  Of  all  these 
things,  I  say,  it  is  good  to  be  reminded.  It  is  not  for 
nothing  that  the  crucifixion  is  described  four  times  over  in 
the  New  Testament.  There  are  very  few  things  that  all 
four  writers  of  tl>e  Gospel  describe.  Generally  speaking,  if 
Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke  tell  a  thing  in  our  Lord's  his- 
tory, John  does  not  tell  it.  But  there  is  one  thing  that 
all  the  four  give  us  most  fully,  and  that  one  thing  is  the 
story  of  the  cross.  This  is  a  telling  fact,  and  not  to  be 
overlooked. 

People  seem  to  me  to  forget  that  all  Christ's  sufferings 
on  the  cross  were  fore-ordained.  They  did  not  come 
on  Him  by  chance  or  accident :  they  were  all  planned, 
counselled,  and  determined  from  all  eternity.  The  cross 
was  foreseen  in  all  the  provisions  of  the  everlasting 
Trinity  for  the  salvation  of  sinners.  In  the  purposes  of 
God  the  cross  was  set  up  from  everlasting.  Not  one  throb 
of  pain  did  Jesus  feel,  not  one  precious  droji  of  blood  did 
Jesus  shed,  which  had  not  been  appointed  long  ago.  Infinite 
wisdom  planned  that  redemption  should  be  by  the  cross. 
Infinite  wisdom  brought  Jesus  to  the  cross  in  due  time. 
He  was  crucified  "by  the  determinate  counsel  and  fore- 
knowledge of  God."    (Acts  ii.  23.) 

People  seem  to  me  to  forget  that  all  Christ's  sufferings 
on  the  cross  were  necessary  for  man's  salvation.  He 
had  to  bear  our  sins,  if  ever  they  were  to  be  borne  at  all. 
With  His  stripes  alone  could  we  be  healed.  This  was  the 
one  payment  of  our  debt  that  God  would  accept :  this  was 
the  great  sacrifice  on  which  our  eternal  life  depended. 
If  Christ  had  not  gone  to  the  cross  and  suffered  in  our 
stead,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  there  would  not  have  been 
a  spark  of  hope  for  us.    There  would  have  been  a  mighty 


252 


OLD  PATHS. 


gulf  between  ourselves  and  God,  wliicli  no  man  ever  could 
have  passed.  * 

People  seem  to  me  to  forget  that  all  Christ's  sufferings 
were  endured  voluntarily,  and  of  His  own  free  will.  He 
was  under  no  compulsion.  Of  His  own  choice  He  laid 
down  His  life :  of  His  own  choice  He  went  to  the  cross  in 
order  to  finish  the  work  He  came  to  do.  He  might  easily 
have  summoned  legions  of  angels  with  a  word,  and  scattered 
Pilate  and  Herod,  and  all  their  armies,  like  chaff  before 
the  wind.  But  He  was  a  willing  sufferer.  His  heart  was 
set  on  the  salvation  of  sinners.  He  was  resolved  to  open 
"  a  fountain  for  all  sin  and  uncleanness,"  by  shedding  His 
own  blood.    (Zech.  xiii.  1.), 

When  I  think  of  all  this,  I  see  nothing  painful  or 
disagreeable  in  the  subject  of  Christ's  cross.  On  the 
contrary,  I  see  in  it  wisdom  and  power,  peace  and  hope, 
ioy  and  gladness,  comfort  and  consolation.  The  more  I 
keep  the  cross  in  my  mind's  eye,  the  more  fulness  I  seem 
to  discern  in  it.  The  longer  I  dwell  on  the  cross  in  my 
thoughts,  the  more  I  am  satisfied  that  there  is  more  to  be 
learned  at  the  foot  of  the  cross  than  anywhere  else  in  the 
world. 

(a)  Would  I  know  the  length  and  breadth  of  God  the 
Father's  love  towards  a  sinful  world  ?  Where  shall  I  see 
it  most  displayed  ?  Shall  I  look  at  His  glorious  sun, 
shining  down  daily  on  the  unthankful  and  evil  ?'  Shall  I 
look  at  seed-time  and  harvest,  returning  in  regular  yearly 
succession  ?  Oh,  no  !  I  can  find  a  stronger  proof  of  love 
than  anything  of  this  sort.    I  look  at  the  cross  of  Christ. 


*  "In  Christ's  humiliation  stands  our  exaltation;  in  His  weakness 
stands  our  strength  ;  in  His  ignominy  our  glory  ;  in  His  death  our  life." 
—Cudworth.  1613. 

"The  eye  of  faith  regards  Christ  sitting  on  the  summit  of  the  cross 
as  in  a  triumphal  chariot ;  the  devil  bound  to  the  lowest  part  of  the 
same  cross,  and  trodden  under  the  feet  of  Christ. " — Blaliop  Davenant  on 
Colossians.  1627. 


THE  CROSS  OF  CHRIST. 


253 


I  see  in  it  not  the  cause  of  the  Father's  love,  but  the 
effect.  There  I  see  that  God  so  loved  this  wicked  world, 
that  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son, — gave  Him  to  suffer 
and  die, — that  "  whosoever  believeth  in  Him  should  not 
perish,  but  have  eternal  life."  (John  iii.  16.)  I  know  that 
the  Father  loves  us,  because  He  did  not  withhold  from  us 
His  Son,  His  only  Son.  I  might  sometimes  fancy  that  God 
the  Father  is  too  high  and  holy  to  care  for  such  miserable, 
corrupt  creatures  as  we  are !  But  I  cannot,  must  not,  dare 
not  think  it,  when  I  look  at  the  cross  of  Christ.* 

(6)  Would  I  know  how  exceedingly  sinful  and  abomi- 
nable sin  is  in  the  sight  of  God  ?  Where  shall  I  see  that 
most  fully  brought  out  ?  Shall  I  turn  to  the  history  of  the 
flood,  and  read  how  sin  drowned  the  world  ?  Shall  I  go 
to  the  shore  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  mark  what  sin  brouq-ht 
on  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  ?  Shall  I  turn  to  the  wandering 
Jews,  and  observe  how  sin  has  scattered  them  over  the 
face  of  the  earth  ?  No :  I  can  find  a  clearer  proof  still ! 
I  look  at  the  cross  of  Christ.  There  I  see  that  sin  is  so 
black  and  damnable,  that  nothing  but  the  blood  of  God's 
own  Son  can  wash  it  away.  There  I  see  that  sin  has  so 
separated  me  from  my  holy  Maker,  that  all  the  angels  in 
heaven  could  never  have  made  peace  between  us.  Nothing 
could  reconcile  us,  short  of  the  death  of  Christ.  If  I 
listened  to  the  wretched  talk  of  proud  men,  I  might 
sometimes  fancy  sin  was  not  so  very  sinful !  But  I  cannot 
think  little  of  sin,  when  I  look  at  the  cross  of  Christ.-f- 
I  

*  "The  world  we  live  in  had  fallen  upon  our  heads,  had  it  not  been 
upheld  by  the  pillar  of  the  cross  ;  had  not  '-hrist  stepped  in  and  promised 
a  satisfaction  for  the  sin  of  man.  By  this  all  things  consist :  not  a 
blessing  we  enjoy  but  may  put  us  in  mind  of  it ;  they  were  all  forfeited 
by  sin,  but  merited  by  His  blood.  If  we  study  it  well  we  shall  be 
sensible  how  God  hated  sin  and  loved  a  world." — Charnock. 

t  "  If  God  hateth  sin  so  much  that  He  would  allow  neither  man  nor 
angel  for  the  redemption  thereof,  but  only  the  death  of  His  only  and 
well-beloved  Son,  who  will  not  stand  in  fear  thereof?" — Church  of 
England  Iloiiiihj  for  Good  Friday.  15G0. 


.254 


OLD  PATHS. 


(c)  Would  I  know  the  fulness  and  completeness  of  the 
salvation  God  has  provided  for  sinners  ?  Where  shall  I 
see  it  most  distinctly  ?  Shall  I  go  to  the  general  declara- 
tions in  the  Bible  about  God's  mercy  ?  Shall  I  rest  in 
the  general  truth  that  God  is  a  "  God  of  love  "  ?  Oh,  no  ! 
I  will  look  at  the  cross  of  Christ.  T  find  no  evidence  like 
that.  I  find  no  balm  for  a  sore  conscience  and  a  troubled 
heart,  like  the  sight  of  Jesus  dying  for  me  ou  the  accursed 
tree.  There  I  see  that  a  full  payment  has  been  made  for 
all  ray  enormous  debts.  The  curse  of  that  law  which  I 
have  broken  has  come  down  on  One  who  there  suffered  in 
my  stead.  The  demands  of  that  law  are  all  satisfied. 
Payment  has  been  made  for  me,  even  to  the  uttermost 
farthing.  It  will  not  be  required  twice  over.  Ah,  I  might 
sometimes  imagine  I  was  too  bad  to  be  forgiven  !  My  own 
heart  sometimes  whispers  that  I  am  too  Avicked  to  be  saved. 
But  I  know  in  my  better  moments  this  is  all  my  foolish 
unbeHef  I  read  an  answer  to  my  doubts  in  the  blood  shed 
on  Calvary.  I  feel  sure  that  there  is  a  way  to  heaven  for 
the  very  vilest  of  men,  when  I  look  at  the  cross. 

(fZ)  Would  I  find  strong  reasons  for  being  a  holy  man?^ 
Whither  shall  I  turn  for  them  ?  Shall  I  listen  to  the  ten 
commandments  merely  ?  Shall  I  study  the  examples  given 
me  in  the  Bible  of  what  grace  can  do  ?  Shall  I  meditate 
on  the  rewards  of  heaven,  and  the  punishments  of  hell  ? 
Is  there  no  stronger  motive  still  ?  Yes :  I  will  look  at  the 
cross  of  Christ !  There  I  see  the  love  of  Christ  constraining 
me  to  "  live  not  unto  myself,  but  unto  Him."  There  I  see 
that  I  am  not  my  own  now :  I  am  "  bought  with  a  price." 
(2  Cor.  v.  15 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  20.)  I  am  bound  by  the  most 
solenm  obligations  to  glorify  Jesus  with  body  and  spirit, 
which  are  His.  There  I  see  that  Jesus  gave  Himself  for| 
me,  not  only  to  redeem  me  from  all  iniquity,  but  also  to 
purify  me,  and  to  make  me  one  of  a  "peculiar  people, 
zealous  of  good  works."  (Titus  ii.  14.)  He  bore  my  sins 
in  His  own  body  on  the  tree,  "  that  I  being  dead  unto  sin 


THE  CROSS  OF  CHRIST, 


255 


sliould  live  unto  righteousness."  (1  Pet.  ii.  2-i.)  There  isi 
nothing  so  sanctifying  as  a  clear  view  of  the  cross  of' 
Christ !  It  crucifies  the  world  unto  us,  and  us  unto  the 
world.  How  can  we  love  sin,  when  we  remember  that 
because  of  our  sins  Jesus  died  ?  Surely  none  ought  to 
be  so  holy  as  the  disciples  of  a  crucified  Lord. 

(e)  Would  I  Icarnhow  to  he  contented  and  cheerful  under 
all  the  cares  and  anxieties  of  life  ?  What  school  shall  I 
go  to  ?  How  shall  I  attain  this  state  of  mind  most  easily  ? 
Shall  I  look  at  the  sovereignty  of  God,  the  wisdom  of  God, 
the  providence  of  God,  the  love  of  God  ?  It  is  well  to  do 
so.  But  I  have  a  better  argument  still.  I  will  look  at 
the  cross  of  Christ.  I  feel  that  "  He  who  spared  not  His 
only-begotteu  Son,  but  delivered  Him  up  to  die  for  me, 
will  surely  with  Him  give  me  all  things"  that  I  really 
need.  (Rom.  viii.  32.)  He  that  endured  such  agony, 
sufferings,  and  pain  for  my  soul,  will  surely  not  withhold 
from  me  anything  that  is  really  good.  He  that  has  done 
the  greater  things  for  me,  will  doubtless  do  the  lesser  things 
also.  He  that  gave  His  own  blood  to  procure  me  a  home  in 
heaven,  will  unquestionably  supply  me  with  all  that  is  really 
profitable  for  me  by  the  way.  There  is  no  school  for  learning 
contentment  that  can  be  compared  with  the  foot  of  the  cross  ! 

(/)  Would  I  gather  arguments  for  hoping  that  I  shall 
never  he  cast  away  ?  Where  shall  I  go  to  find  them  ? 
Shall  I  look  at  my  own  graces  and  gifts  ?  Shall  I  take 
comfort  in  my  own  faitli,  and  love,  and  penitence,  and  zeal, 
and  prayer  ?  Shall  I  turn  to  my  own  heart,  and  say,  "  this 
same  heart  will  never  be  false  and  cold  "  ?  Oh,  no !  God 
forbid !  I  will  look  at  the  cross  of  Christ.  This  is  my 
grand  argument.  This  is  my  main  stay.  I  cannot  think 
that  He  who  went  through  such  sufferings  to  redeem  my 
soul,  will  let  that  soul  perish  after  all,  when  it  has  once 
cast  itself  on  Him.  Oh,  no !  what  Jesus  paid  for,  Jesus 
will  surely  keep.  He  paid  dearly  for  it.  He  will  not  let 
it  easily  be  lost.    He  called  me  to  Himself  when  I  was  a 


256 


OLD  PATHS. 


dark  sinner:  He  will  never  forsake  me  after  I  have 
believed.  AVhen  Satan  tempts  us  to  doubt  whether 
Christ's  people  will  be  kept  from  falling,  we  should  tell 
Satan  to  look  at  the  cross.* 

And  now,  will  you  marvel  that  I  said  all  Christians  ought 
to  glory  in  the  cross  ?  Will  you  not  rather  wonder  that 
any  can  hear  of  the  cross  and  remain  unmoved  ?  I  declare 
I  know  no  greater  proof  of  man's  depravity,  than  the  fact 
that  thousands  of  so-called  Christians  see  nothing  in  the 
cross.  Well  may  our  hearts  be  called  stony, — well  may  the 
eyes  of  our  mind  be  called  blind,— well  may  our  whole 
nature  be  called  diseased, — well  may  we  all  be  called  dead, 
when  the  cross  of  Christ  is  heard  of  and  yet  neglected. 
Surely  we  may  take  up  the  words  of  the  prophet,  and  sa}^ 
"  Hear,  0  heavens,  and  be  astonished  0  earth ;  a  wonderful 
and  a  horrible  thing  is  done," — Christ  was  crucified  for 
sinners,  and  yet  many  Christians  live  as  if  He  was  never 
crucified  at  all ! 

(a)  The  cross  is  tlie  grand  peculiarity  of  the  Christian 
religion.  Other  religions  have  laws  and  moral  precepts, 
forms  and  ceremonies,  rewards  and  punishments.  But 
other  religions  cannot  tell  us  of  a  dying  Saviour.  They 
cannot  show  us  the  cross.  This  is  the  crown  and  gloiy  of 
the  Gospel.  This  is  that  special  comfort  which  belongs  to 
it  alone.  Miserable  indeed  is  that  religious  teaching 
Avhich  calls  itself  Christian,  and  yet  contains  nothing  of 
the  cross.  A  man  who  teaches  in  this  way,  might  as  well 
profess  to  explain  the  solar  system,  and  yet  tell  his  hearers 
nothin"'  about  the  sun. 

o 

(6)  The  cross  is  the  strength  of  a  minister.  I  for  one 
1  _  

*  "The  believ^er  is  so  freed  from  eternal  wrath,  that  if  Satan  and 
'conscience  say,  'Thou  art  a  sinner,  and  under  the  curse  of  the  law,'  he 
can  say.  It  is  true,  I  am  a  sinner  ;  but  I  was  hanged  on  a  tree  and  died, 
and  was  made  a  curse  in  my  Head  and  Lawgiver  Christ,  and  His  pay- 
ment and  suffering  is  my  payment  and  swSmvig."— Rutherford's  ChrUt 
Dying.  1647. 


THE  CROSS  OF  CHRIST. 


257 


would  not  be  without  it  for  all  the  world.  I  should  feel  like 
a  soldier  without  arms, — like  an  artist  without  his  pencil, — 
like  a  pilot  without  his  compass, — like  a  labourer  without 
his  tools.  Let  others,  if  they  will,  preach  the  law  and 
morality ;  let  others  hold  forth  the  terrors  of  hell,  and  the 
joys  of  heaven  ;  let  others  drench  their  congregations  with 
teachings  about  the  sacraments  and  the  church ;  give  me 
the  cross  of  Christ !  This  is  the  only  lever  which  has 
ever  turned  the  world  ujiside  down  hitherto,  and  made 
men  forsake  their  sins.  And  if  this  will  not,  nothing  will. 
A  man  may  begin  preaching  with  a  perfect  knowledge  of 
Latin,  Greek,  and  Hebrew ;  but  he  will  do  little  or  no 
good  among  his  hearers  unless  he  knows  something  of  the 
cross.  Never  was.  there  a  minister  who  did  much  for  the 
conversion  of  souls  who  did  not  dwell  much  on  Christ 
crucified.  Luther,  Rutherford,  Whitefield,  M'Cheyne,  were 
all  most  eminently  preachers  of  the  cross.  This  is  the 
preaching  that  the  Holy  Ghost  delights  to  bless.  He 
loves  to  honour  those  who  honour  the  cross. 

(c)  The  cross  is  the  secret  of  all  missionary  success. 
Nothing  but  this  has  ever  moved  the  hearts  of  the  heathen. 
Just  according  as  this  has  been  lifted  up  missions  have 
prospered.  This  is  the  weapon  which  has  won  victories 
over  hearts  of  every  kind,  in  every  quarter  of  the  globe. 
Greenlanders,  Africans,  South-Sea  Islanders,  Hindoos, 
Chinese,  all  have  alike  felt  its  power.  Just  as  that  huge 
iron  tube  which  crosses  the  Menai  Straits,  is  more  affected 
and  bent  by  half-an-hour's  sunshine  than  by  all  the  dead 
weight  that  can  be  jilaced  in  it,  so  in  like  manner  the 
hearts  of  savages  have  melted  before  the  cross,  when  every 
other  argument  seemed  to  move  them  no  more  than  stones. 
"  Brethren,"  said  a  North-American  Indian  after  his  con- 
version, "  I  have  been  a  heathen.  I  know  how  heathens 
think.  Once  a  preacher  came  and  began  to  explain  to  us 
that  there  was  a  God ;  but  we  told  him  to  return  to  the 
place  from  whence  he  came.    Another  preacher  came  and 

S 


258 


OLD  PATHS. 


told  US  not  to  lie,  nor  steal,  nor  drink ;  but  we  did  not 
heed  him.  At  last  another  came  into  my  hut  one  day 
and  said,  '  I  am  come  to  you  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of 
heaven  and  earth,  He  sends  to  let  you  know  that  He 
will  make  you  happy,  and  deliver  you  from  misery.  For 
this  end  He  became  a  man,  gave  His  life  a  ransom,  and 
shed  His  blood  for  sinners.'  I  could  not  forget  his  Avords. 
I  told  them  to  the  other  Indians,  and  an  awakening  began 
among  us.  I  say,  therefore,  preach  the  sufferings  and  death 
of  Christ,  our  Saviour,  if  you  wish  your  words  to  gain 
entrance  among  the  heathen."  Never  indeed  did  the  devil 
triumph  so  thoroughly,  as  when  he  persuaded  the  Jesuit 
missionaries  in  China  to  keep  back  the  story  of  the  cross  ! 

(d)  The  cross  is  ^/ie  foundation  of  a CJmrch's 'prosperity. 
No  Church  will  ever  be  honoured  in  which  Christ 
crucified  is  not  continually  lifted  up:  nothing  whatever 
can  make  up  for  the  want  of  the  cross.  Without  it 
all  things  may  be  done  decently  and  in  order ;  without 
it  there  may  be  splendid  ceremonies,  beautiful  music, 
gorgeous  churches,  learned  ministers,  crowded  communion 
tables,  huge  collections  for  the  poor.  But  without  the 
cross  no  good  will  be  done ;  dark  hearts  will  not  be  en- 
lightened, proud  hearts  will  not  be  humbled,  mourning 
hearts  will  not  be  comforted,  faintitag  hearts  will  not  be 
cheered.  Sermons  about  the  Catholic  Church  and  an 
apostolic  ministry, — sermons  about  baptism  and  the  Lord's 
supper, — sermons  about  unity  and  schism, — sermons  about 
fasts  and  communion, — sermons  about  fathers  and  saints, 
— such  sermons  will  never  make  up  for  the  absence  of 
sermons  about  the  cross  of  Christ.  They  may  amuse  some  : 
they  will  feed  none.  A  gorgeous  banqueting  room,  and 
splendid  gold  plate  on  the  table,  will  never  make  up  to  a 
hungry  man  for  the  want  of  food.  Christ  crucified  is  God's 
ordinance  for  doing  good  to  men.  Whenever  a  Church 
keeps  back  Christ  crucified,  or  puts  anything  whatever  in 
that  foremost  place  which  Christ  crucified  should  always 


THE  CROSS  OF  CHRIST. 


259 


have,  from  that  moment  a  Church  ceases  to  be  useful. 
Without  Christ  crucified  in  her  pulpits,  a  church  is  little 
better  than  a  cumberer  of  the  ground,  a  dead  carcase,  a 
well  without  water,  a  barren  fig  tree,  a  sleeping  watchman, 
a  silent  trumpet,  a  dumb  witness,  an  ambassador  without 
terms  of  peace,  a  messenger  without  tidings,  a  lighthouse 
without  fire,  a  stumbling-block  to  weak  believers,  a  comfort 
to  infidels,  a  hot-bed  for  formalism,  a  joy  to  the  devil,  and 
an  offence  to  God. 

(e)  The  cross  is  the  grand  centre  of  union  among  true 
Christians.  Our  outward  differences  are  many,  without 
doubt.  One  man  is  an  Episcopalian,  another  is  a  Presby- 
terian,— one  is  an  Independent,  another  a  Baptist, — one  is 
a  Calvinist,  another  an  Arminian, — one  is  a  Lutheran, 
another  a  Plymouth  Brother, — one  is  a  friend  to  Establish- 
ments, another  a  friend  to  the  voluntary  system, — one  is 
a  friend  to  liturgies,  another  a  friend  to  extempore  prayer. 
But,  after  all,  what  shall  we  hear  about  most  of  these 
differences,  in  heaven  ?  Nothing,  most  probably :  nothing 
at  all.  Does  a  man  really  and  sincerely  glory  in  the 
cross  of  Christ  I  That  is  the  grand  question.  If  he  does, 
he  is  my  brother :  we  are  travelling  on  the  same  road ;  we 
are  journeying  towards  a  home  where  Christ  is  all,  and 
everything  outward  in  religion  will  be  forgotten.  But  if 
he  does  not  glory  in  the  cross  of  Christ,  I  cannot  feel 
comfort  about  him.  Union  on  outward  points  only  is 
union  only  for  a  time :  union  about  the  cross  is  union  for 
eternity.  Error  on  outward  points  is  only  a  skin-deep 
disease :  error  about  the  cross  is  disease  at  the  heart. 
Union  about  outward  points  is  a  mere  man-made  union : 
union  about  the  cross  of  Christ  can  only  be  produced  by 
the  Holy  Ghost. 

I  know  not  what  you  think  of  all  this.  I  feel  as  if  I 
had  said  nothing  compared  to  what  might  be  said.  I  feel 
as  if  the  half  of  what  I  desire  to  tell  you  about  the  cross 
were  left  untold.    But  I  do  hope  that  I  have  given  you 


260 


OLD  PATHS. 


something  to  think  about.  I  do  trust  that  I  have  shown 
you  that  I  have  reason  for  the  question  with  which  I 
began  this  paper :  "  What  do  you  think  and  feel  about  the 
cross  of  Christ  ? "  Listen  to  me  now  for  a  few  moments, 
while  I  say  something  to  apply  the  whole  subject  to  your 
conscience. 

(a)  Are  you  living  in  any  kind  of  sin?  Are  you 
following  the  course  of  this  world,  and  neglecting  your  soul? 
Hear,  I  beseech  you,  what  I  sa}^  to  you  this  day:  "Behold 
the  Cross  of  Christ."  See  there  how  Jesus  loved  you! 
See  there  what  Jesus  suffered  to  prepare  for  you  a  way  of 
salvation.  Yes :  careless  men  and  women,  for  you  that 
blood  was  shed !  For  you  those  hands  and  feet  were 
pierced  with  nails  !  For  you  that  body  hung  in  agony  on 
the  cross !  You  are  those  whom  Jesus  loved,  and  for 
whom  He  died !  Surely  that  love  ought  to  melt  you. 
Surely  the  thought  of  the  cross  should  draw  you  to  repent- 
ance. Oh,  that  it  might  be  so  this  very  day !  Oh,  that 
you  would  come  at  once  to  that  Saviour  who  died  for  you, 
and  is  willing  to  save !  Come,  and  cry  to  Him  with  the 
prayer  of  faith,  and  I  know  that  He  will  listen.  Come, 
and  lay  hold  wpon  the  cross,  and  I  know  that  He  will  not 
cast  you  out.  Come,  and  believe  on  Him  who  died  on 
the  cross,  and  this  very  day  you  shall  have  eternal  life. 
How  will  you  ever  escape  if  you  neglect  so  great  salva- 
tion ?  None  surely  will  be  so  deep  in  hell  as  those  who 
despise  the  cross ! 

(b)  Are  you  inquiring  the  imy  toiuarcl  heaven  ?  Are 
you  seeking  salvation,  but  doubtful  whether  you  can  find 
it  ?  Are  you  desiring  to  have  an  interest  in  Christ,  but 
doubting  whether  Christ  will  receive  you  ?  To  you  also 
I  say  this  day,  "Behold  the  cross  of  Christ."  Here  is 
encouragement  if  you  really  want  it.  Draw  near  to  the 
Lord  Jesus  with  boldness,  for  nothing  need  keep  you 
back.  His  arms  are  jpen  to  receive  you  :  His  heart  is  full 
of  love  towards  you.    He  has  made  a  way  by  which  you 


THE  CROSS  OF  CHRIST. 


may  approach  Him  with  confidence.  Think  of  the  cross. 
Draw  near,  and  fear  not. 

(c)  Are  you  an  unlearned  man  ?  Are  you  desirous  to 
get  to  heaven,  and  perplexed  and  brought  to  a  stand-still 
by  difficulties  in  the  Bible  which  you  cannot  explain  ?  To 
you  also  I  say  this  day,  "  Behold  the  cross  of  Christ." 
Read  there  the  Father's  love  and  the  Son's  compassion. 
Surely  they  are  written  in  great  plain  letters,  which  none 
can  well  mistake.  What  though  you  are  now  perplexed 
by  the  doctrine  of  election  ?  What  though  at  present 
you  cannot  reconcile  your  own  utter  corruption  and  your 
own  responsibility  ?  Look,  I  say,  at  the  cross.  Does  not 
that  cross  tell  you  that  Jesus  is  a  mighty,  loving,  ready 
Saviour  ?  Docs  it  not  make  one  thing  plain,  and  that  is 
that  it  is  all  your  own  fault  if  you  are  not  saved  ?  Ob, 
get  hold  of  that  truth,  and  hold  it  fast ! 

(d)  Are  you  a  distressed  believer?  Is  your  heart 
pressed  down  with  sickness,  tried  with  disappointments, 
overburdened  with  cares  ?  To  you  also  I  say  this  day, 
"Behold  the  cross  of  Christ."  Think  whose  hand  it  is 
that  chastens  you  ;  think  whose  hand  is  measuring  to  you 
the  cup  of  bitterness  which  you  are  now  drinking.  It  is 
the  hand  of  Him  that  was  crucified.  It  is  the  same  hand 
which  in  love  to  your  soul  was  nailed  to  the  accursed  tree. 
Surely  that  thought  should  comfort  and  hearten  you. 
Surely  you  should  say  to  yourself,  "A  crucified  Saviour 
v?ill  never  lay  upon  me  anything  that  is  not  for  my  good. 
There  is  a  needs  be.    It  must  be  well." 

(e)  Are  you  a  believer  that  longs  to  be  more  holy? 
Are  you  one  that  finds  his  heart  too  ready  to  love  earthly 
things  ?  To  you  also  I  say,  "  Behold  the  cross  of  Christ." 
Look  at  the  cross,  think  of  the  cross,  meditate  on  the  cross, 
and  then  go  and  set  your  affections  on  the  world  if  you 
can.  I  believe  that  holiness  is  nowhere  learned  so  well  as 
on  Calvary.  I  believe  you  cannot  look  much  at  the  cross 
without  feeling  your  will  sanctified,  and  your  tastes  made 


2G2 


OLD  PATHS. 


more  spiritual.  As  the  sun  gazed  upon  makes  everything 
else  look  dark  and  dim,  so  does  the  cross  darken  the  false 
splendour  of  this  world.  As  honey  tasted  makes  all  other 
things  seem  to  have  no  taste  at  all,  so  does  the  cross  seen 
by  faith  take  all  the  sweetness  out  of  the  pleasures  of  the 
world.  Keep  on  every  day  steadily  looking  at  the  cross 
of  Christ,  and  you  will  soon  say  of  the  world,  as  the  poet 
does, — 

Its  pkeasures  now  no  longer  please, 

No  more  content  afford  ; 
Far  from  my  heart  be  joys  like  these, 

Now  I  have  seen  the  Lord. 

As  by  the  light  of  opening  day 

The  stare  are  all  concealed, 
So  earthly  pleasures  fade  away  ' 

When  Jesus  is  revealed. 

(/)  Are  you  a  dying  believer  ?  Have  you  gone  to  that 
bed  from  which  something  within  tells  you  you  will  never 
come  down  alive  ?  Ai'e  you  drawing  near  to  that  solemn 
hour,  Avhen  soul  and  body  must  part  for  a  season,  and  you 
must  launch  into  a  world  unknown  ?  Oh,  look  steadily  at 
the  cross  of  Christ  by  faith,  and  you  shall  be  kept  in 
peace !  Fix  the  eyes  of  your  mind  firmly,  not  on  a 
man-made  crucifix,  but  on  Jesus  crucified,  and  He  shall 
deliver  you  from  all  your  fears.  Though  you  walk  through 
dark  places,  He  will  be  with  you.  He  will  never  leave 
you, — never  forsake  you.  Sit  under  the  shadow  oi  the 
cross  to  the  very  last,  and  its  fruit  shall  be  sweet  to 
your  taste.  "  Ah,"  said  a  dying  missionary,  "  there  is  but 
one  thing  needful  on  a  death-bed,  and  that  is  to  feel  one's 
arms  around  the  cross  ! " 

I  lay  these  thoughts  before  your  mind.  What  you 
think  now  about  the  cross  of  Christ,  I  cannot  tell.  But  1 
can  wish  you  nothing  better  than  this, — that  you  may  be 
able  to  say  with  the  Apostle  Paul,  before  you  die  or  meet 
the  Lord,  "God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the 
cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 


X. 


THE  HOLY  GHOST. 

"Tf  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His." — 
Rom.  viii.  9. 

The  subject  of  this  paper  is  one  of  the  deepest  importance 
to  our  souls.  That  subject  is  the  work  of  God  the  Holy 
Ghost.  The  solemn  words  of  the  text  which  heads  this  page 
demand  the  attention  of  all  who  believe  the  Scriptures  to 
be  the  living  voice  of  God.  "  If  any  man  have  not  the 
Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  NONE  OF  HIS." 

It  is  probable  that  most  of  those  into  whose  hands  this 
paper  will  fall,  have  been  baptized  ?  And  in  what  name 
were  you  baptized  ?  It  was  "  In  the  name  of  the  Father, 
and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 

It  is  probable  that  many  readers  of  this  paper  are 
married  people.  And  in  what  name  were  you  pronounced 
man  and  wife  together  ?  Again,  it  was  "  Ii  the  name  of 
the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 

It  is  not  unlikely  that  many  readers  of  this  paper  are 
members  of  the  Church  of  England.  And  in  what  do  you 
declare  your  belief  every  Sunday,  when  you  repeat  the 
Creed  ?  You  say  that  you  "  Believe  in  God  the  Father, 
and  in  God  the  Son,  and  in  God  the  Holy  Ghost." 

It  is  likely  that  many  readers  of  this  paper  will  be 


264 


OLD  PATHS. 


buried  one  da}-  vrith.  the  burial  service  of  tbe  Clinrch  of 
England.  And  what  will  be  the  last  words  pronounced 
over  your  coffin,  before  the  mourners  go  home,  and  the 
grave  closes  over  your  head?  They  will  be,  "The  grace 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  love  of  God,  and  the 
fellowship  of  the  Holy  Ghost  be  with  you  all."  (2  Cor. 
xiii.  14.) 

Now  I  ask  every  reader  oi  this  paper  a  plain  question  :' 
Do  you  know  what  you  mean  by  these  words,  so  often 
repeated, — the  Holy  Ghost  ? — What  place  has  God  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  your  religion  ?— What  do  you  know  of  His 
office,  His  work,  His  indwelling.  His  fellowship,  and  His 
power  ? — This  is  the  subject  to  which  I  ask  your  attention 
this  day.  I  want  you  to  consider  seriously  what  you  know 
about  the  work  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost. 

I  believe  that  the  times  in  which  we  live  demand 
frequent  and  distinct  testimonies  upon  this  great  subject. 
I  believe  that  few  truths  of  the  Christian  relijrion  are  so 

O 

often  obscured  and  spoiled  by  false  doctrine  as  the  truth 
about  the  Holy  Ghost.  I  believe  that  there  is  no  subject 
wbich  an  ignorant  world  is  so  ready  to  revile  as  "  cant, 
fanaticism,  and  enthusiasm,"  as  the  subject  of  the  work  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  My  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God 
is,  that  about  this  subject  I  may  write  nothing  but  the 
"truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,"  and  that  I  may  write  that  truth 
in  love. 

For  convenience  sake  I  shall  divide  my  subject  into  lour 
heads.    I  shall  examine  in  order : — 

I.  Firstly, — the  importance  attached  to  the  work  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  Scripture. 

II.  Secondly, — the  necesnity  of  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  man's  salvation. 

III.  Thirdly, — the  manner  in  which  the  Holy  Ghost 
works  in  man's  heart. 


THE  HOLY  GHOST. 


2G.5 


IV.  Lastly, — the  metrics  and  evidences  by  which  the 
presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  a  man's  heart  may  be 
known. 

I.  The  first  point  I  propose  to  consider  is  the  import- 
ance attached  to  the  ivork  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  Scripture. 

I  find  it  hard  to  know  where  to  begin  and  where  to 
leave  off,  in  liandling  this  branch  of  my  subject.  It  would 
be  easy  to  fill  up  all  this  paper  by  quoting  texts  about 
it.  So  often  is  the  Holy  Ghost  mentioned  in  the  New 
Testament,  that  my  difficulty  is  not  so  much  the  discovery 
of  evidence  as  the  selection.  Eighteen  times  in  the 
eighth  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  St,  Paul 
speaks  of  God  the  Spirit.  In  fact  the  place  which  the 
Holy  Ghost  holds  in  the  minds  of  most  professing 
Christians  bears  no  proportion  to  the  place  which  He 
holds  in  the  Word.* 

I  shall  not  spend  much  time  in  pi'oving  the  divinity  and 
personality  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  They  are  points  which  arc 
written  in  Scripture  as  with  a  sun-beam.  I  am  utterly  at 
a  loss  to  understand  how  any  honest-minded  reader  of  the 
Bible  can  fail  to  see  them.  Above  all,  I  am  unable  to 
comprehend  how  any  unprejudiced  reader  of  the  Bible  can 
regard  the  Spirit  as  nothing  more  than  "  an  influence  or 
principle."  We  find  it  written  in  the  New  Testament, 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  was  "  seen  descending  in  a  bodily 


*  "There  is  a  general  omission  in  the  saints  of  God,  in  their  not 
giving  the  Holy  Ghost  that  glory  that  is  clue  to  His  person,  and  for  His 
great  work  of  salvation  in  us  ;  insomuch  that  we  have  in  onr  hearts 
almost  lost  this  Third  Person.  We  give  daily  in  our  thoughts, 
prayers,  affections  and  speeches,  an  honour  to  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
But  who  directs  the  aims  of  his  praise  {more  than  in  that  general  way 
of  doxology  we  use  to  close  our  prayers  with)  unto  God  the  Holy  Ghost  ? 
He  is  a  Person  in  tlie  Godhead,  ec^ual  with  the  Father  and  the  Son.  The 
work  He  doth  for  us,  in  its  kind,  is  as  great  as  those  of  the  Father  or 
the  Son.  Therefore,  by  the  equity  of  all  law,  a  proportionable  honour  is 
due  to  Him."— y/iowas  Goodwin  on  the  Work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  1704. 


266 


OLD  PATHS. 


shape."  (Luke  iii.  22.)  He  commanded  disciples  to  do 
acts,  and  lifted  them  through  the  air  by  His  own  power. 
(Acts  viii.  29 — 39.)  He  sent  forth  the  first  preachers  to 
the  Gentiles.  (Acts  xiii.  2.)  He  spake  to  the  Churches. 
(Rev.  ii.  7.)  He  maketh  intercession.  (Rom.  viii.  26.) 
He  searcheth  all  things,  teacheth  all  things,  and  guideth 
into  all  truth.  (1  Cor.  ii.  10;  John  xiv.  26 ;  xvi.  IS.)  He 
is  another  Comforter  distinct  from  Christ.  (John  xiv.  16.) 
He  has  personal  affections  ascribed  to  Him.  (Isaiah  Ixiii. 
:10 ;  Ephes.  iv.  30  ;  Rom.  xv.  30.)  He  has  a  mind,  will, 
and  power  of  His  own.  (Rom.  viii.  27;  1  Cor.  xii.  11; 
Rom.  XV.  13.)  He  has  baptism  administered  in  His 
name  together  with  the  Father  and  the  Son.  (Matt, 
xxviii.  19.)  And  whosoever  shall  blaspheme  Him  hath 
never  forgiveness,  and  is  in  danger  of  eternal  damnation. 
(Mark  iii.  29.) 

I  make  no  comment  on  these  passages.  They  speak  for 
themselves.  I  only  use  the  words  of  Ambrose  Serle  in 
saying,  that  "  Two  and  two  making  four,  does  not  appear 
more  clear  and  conclusive  than  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  a 
living  divine  Agent,  working  with  consciousness,  will,  and 
power.  If  people  will  not  be  persuaded  by  these  testi- 
monies, neither  would  they  be  persuaded  though  one  rose 
from  the  dead."  * 

I  repeat  that  I  will  not  spend  time  in  dwelling  on  proofs 
of  the  Holy  Spirit's  divinity  and  personality.  I  will  rather 
confine  all  I  have  to  say  on  this  branch  of  my  subject  to 
two  general  remarks. 

For  one  thing,  I  ask  my  readers  to  remark  carefully  that 
in  every  step  of  the  grand  tvork  of  man's  reder^iption  the 
Bible  assigns  a  prominent  place  to  God  the  Holy  Ghost. 

What  do  you  think  of  the  incarnation  of  Christ  ?  You 
know  we  cannot  over-rate  its  importance.  Well !  it  is 
written  that  when  our  Lord  was  conceived  of  the  Virgin 


*  Serle's  Horce  Solitaria'. 


THE  HOLT  GHOST, 


267 


Mary,  "  the  Holy  Ghost  came  upon  her,  and  the  power  of 
the  Highest  overshadowed  her."    (Luke  i.  35.) 

What  do  you  think  of  the  earthly  ministry  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  ?  You  know  that  none  ever  did  what  He 
did,  lived  as  He  lived,  and  spake  as  He  spake.  Well !  it 
is  written  that  the  Spirit  "  descended  from  heaven  like  a 
dove  and  abode  upon  Him," — that  "  God  anointed  Him 
with  the  Holy  Ghost," — that  "  the  Father  gave  not  the 
Spirit  by  measure  unto  Hinci,"  and  that  He  was  "  full  of 
the  Holy  Ghost."  (John  i.  32 ;  Acts  x.  38  ;  John  iii.  34 ; 
Luke  iv.  1.) 

What  do  you  think  of  the  vicarious  sacrifice  of  Christ 
on  the  cross  ?  Its  value  is  simply  unspeakable.  No 
wonder  St.  Paul  says,  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  gloryj 
save  in  the  cross."  (Gal.  vi.  14.)  Well !  it  is  written, 
"  Through  the  eternal  Spirit  He  offered  Himself  without 
spot  to  God."    (Heb.  ix.  14.) 

What  do  you  think  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ  ?  It 
was  the  seal  and  topstone  of  all  His  work.  He  was 
"raised  again  for  our  justification."  (Rom.  iv.  25.)  Well! 
it  is  written  that  "  He  was  put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  but 
quickened  by  the  Spirit."    (1  Pet.  iii.  18.) 

What  do  you  think  of  the  departure  of  Christ  from  this 
world,  when  He  ascended  up  into  heaven  ?  It  was  a 
tremendous  trial  to  His  disciples.  They  were  left  like  a 
little  orphan  family,  in  the  midst  of  cruel  enemies.  Well  ! 
ivhat  was  the  grand  promise  wherewith  our  Saviour  cheered 
them  the  night  before  He  died  ?  "I  will  pray  the  Father 
and  He  shall  give  you  another  Comforter,  even  the  Spirit 
of  truth."    (John  xiv.  16,  17.) 

What  do  you  think  of  the  mission  of  the  apostles  to 
preach  the  Gospel  ?  We  Gentiles  owe  to  it  all  our  religious 
light  and  knowledge.  Well !  they  were  obliged  to  tarry 
at  Jerusalem  and  "  wait  for  the  promise  of  the  Father." 
They  were  unfit  to  go  forth  till  they  were  "filled  Avith  the 
Holy  Ghost,"  upon  the  day  of  Pentecost.   (Acts  i.  4 ;  ii.  4.) 


268 


OLD  PATHS. 


What  do  yon  think  of  the  Scripture,  which  is  written 
for  our  learning  ?  You  know  that  our  earth  without  a 
sun  would  be  but  a  faint  emblem  of  a  world  without  a 
Bible.  Well !  we  are  informed  that  in  writing  that  Scrip- 
ture, "  Holy  rnen  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy 
Ghost."  (2  Pet.  i.  21.)  "The  things  which  we  speak," 
says  St.  Paul,  wc  speak  in  the  words  which  the  Holy 
Ghost  teacheth."    (1  Cor.  ii.  13.) 

What  do  you  think  of  the  whole  dispensation  under 
which  we  Christians  live  ?  You  know  its  privileges  as  far 
exceed  those  of  the  Jews  as  twilight  is  exceeded  by  noon- 
day. Well  we  are  especially  told  that  it  is  the  "  ministra- 
tion of  the  Spirit."    (2  Cor.  iii.  8.)* 

I  place  these  texts  before  my  readers  as  matter  for 
private  meditation.  I  pass  on  to  the  other  general  remark 
I  promised  to  make. 

I  ask  you  then  to  remark  carefully,  that  whatever 
individual  Christians  have,  are,  and  enjoy,  in  co7itra- 
distinction  to  the  worldly  and  unconverted,  they  owe  to 
the  agency  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  By  Him  they  are 
first  called,  quickened,  and  made  alive.  Of  Him  they  are 
born  again,  and  made  new  creatures.  By  Him  they  are 
convinced  of  sin,  guided  into  all  truth  and  led  to  Christ. 
By  Him  they  are  sealed  unto  the  day  of  redemption.  He 
dwells  in  them  as  His  living  temples.  He  witnesses  with 
their  spirits, — gives  them  the  spirit  of  adoption,  makes 
them  to  cry  Abba  Father,  and  makes  intercession  for 


*  I  would  not  for  a  moment  have  any  one  suppose  that  I  think  Old 
Testament  believers  had  not  the  Holy  Ghost.  On  the  contrary  I  hold 
that  there  has  never  been  a  whit  of  spiritual  life  among  men,  excepting 
from  the  Holy  Ghost, — and  that  the  Holy  Ghost  made  Abel  and  Noali 
what  they  were  no  less  really  than  He  made  St.  Paul.  All  I  mean  to 
assert  is,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  so  much  more  fully  revealed  and  largely 
poured  out  under  the  New  Testament  than  under  the  Old,  that  the 
New  Testament  dispensation  is  emphatically  and  peculiarly  called  the 
"ministration  of  the  Spirit.''  The  difference  between  the  two  dispensa- 
tions is  only  one  of  degree. 


THE  HOLY  GHOST. 


2GD 


them.  By  Him  they  are  sanctified.  By  Him  the  love 
of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  their  hearts.  Through  His  power 
they  abound  in  hope,  Through  Him  they  wait  for  the 
hope  of  righteousness  by  faith.  Through  Him  they 
mortify  the  deeds  of  their  bodies.  After  Him  they  walk. 
In  Him  they  live.  In  a  word,  all  that  believers  have 
from  grace  to  glory, — all  that  they  are  from  the  first 
moment  they  believe  to  the  day  they  depart  to  be  with 
Christ, — all,  all,  all  may  be  traced  to  the  work  of  God  the 
Holy  Ghost.  (John  vi.  63 ;  iii.  8 ;  xvi.  9,  10  ;  Eph.  iv.  30  ; 
1  Cor.  vi.  19  ;  Rom.  viii.  15,  16,  26 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  13  ; 
Rom.  V.  5 ;  xv.  13 ;  Gal.  v.  5,  2.5  ;  Rom.  viii.  1,  13.) 

I  may  not  tarry  longer  on  this  branch  of  my  subject.  I 
trust  I  have  said  enough  to  prove  that  I  did  not  use  word.s 
without  meaning,  when  I  spoke  of  the  importance  attached 
in  ScriiDture  to  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 

Before  I  pass  on  let  me  entreat  all  who  read  this  paper 
to  make  sure  that  they  hold  sound  doctrine  concerniug 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  *  Give  Him  the  honour  due 
unto  His  name.  Give  Him  in  your  religion  the  place  and 
the  dignity  which  Scripture  assigns  to  Him.  Settle  it  in 
your  minds  that  the  work  of  all  three  Persons  in  the 
blessed  Trinity,  is  absolutely  and  equally  needful  to  the 
salvation  of  every  saved  soul.  The  election  of  God  the 
Father,  and  the  atoning  blood  of  God  the  Son,  are  the 
foundation  stones  of  our  faith.  But  from  them  must 
never  be  separated  the  applicatory  work  of  God  the  Holy 
Ghost.  The  Father  chooses.  The  Son  mediates,  absolves, 
justifies,  and  intercedes.  The  Holy  Ghost  applies  the 
whole  work  to  man's  soul.  Always  together  in  Scripture, 
never  separated  in  Scripture,  let  the  offices  of  the  three 


*  "To  give  the  Holy  Spirit  divine  worship,  if  he  be  not  God,  is 
idolatry  ;  and  to  withhold  it,  if  He  is  God,  is  a  heinous  sin.  To  be  well 
informed  on  this  point,  is  of  the  last  importance." — Ilurrion  on  the  Hultj 
Spirit.  1731. 


270 


OLD  PATHS. 


Persons  in  the  Trinity  never  be  wrenched  asunder  and 
disjoined  in  your  Christianity.  What  God  hath  so  beauti- 
fully joined  together  let  no  man  dare  to  put  asunder. 

Accept  a  brotherly  caution  against  all  kinds  of  Christian 
teaching,  falsely  so  called,  which,  either  directly  or  indirectly* 
dishonour  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Beware  of  tfu 
error,  on  one  side,  which  practically  substitutes  church- 
membership  and  participation  of  the  sacraments  for  the 
Spirit.  Let  no  man  make  you  believe  that  to  be  baptized 
and  go  to  the  Lord's  Table,  is  any  sure  proof  that  you 
have  the  Spirit  ot  Christ. — Beware  of  the  error,  on  the 
other  side,  which  proudly  substitutes  the  inward  light,  so 
called,  and  the  scraps  of  conscience  which  remain  in 
every  man  after  the  fall,  for  the  saving  grace  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  *  Let  no  man  make  you  believe  that  as  a  matter 
of  course,  since  Christ  died,  all  men  and  women  have 
within  them  the  Spirit  of  Christ. — I  touch  on  these  points 
gently.  I  should  be  sorry  to  write  one  needless  word  of 
controversy.  But  I  do  say  to  every  one  who  prizes  real 
Christianity  in  these  days,  "Be  very  jealous  about  the  real 
work  and  office  of  the  third  Person  of  the  Trinity."  Try 
the  spirits  whether  they  be  of  God.    Prove  diligently  the 


*  "It  is  not  the  natural  liglit  of  conscience,  nor  that  improved  by  the 
Word,  which  converts  any  man  to  God,  although  this  is  the  best  spring 
of  most  men's  practical  part  of  religion.  But  it  is  faith,  bringing  in  a 
new  light  into  conscience,  and  so  conscience  lighting  its  taper  at  that 
sun  which  humbleth  for  sin  in  another  manner,  and  drives  men  to 
Christ,  sanctifieth,  changeth,  and  writes  the  law  in  the  heart.  And  this 
you  will  find  to  be  the  state  of  difference  between  Augustine,  and  the 
Pelagians,  and  semi-Pelagians,  which  the  whole  stream  and  current  of 
his  writings  against  them  hold  forth.  They  would  have  had  the  light  of 
natural  conscience,  and  the  seeds  of  natural  virtues  in  men  (as  in 
philosophers),  being  improved  and  manured  by  the  revelation  of  the 
Word,  to  be  that  grace  which  the  Scripture  speaks  of.  He  proclaims  all 
their  virtues,  and  their  use  of  natural  light  to  be  sins,  because  deficient 
of  holiness,  and  requires  for  us  not  only  the  revelation  of  the  objects  of 
faith,  which  else  natural  light  could  not  find  out,  but  a  new  light  to  see 
them  withal." — Thomas  Goodwin  on  the  Woi'k  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  1704. 


THE  HOLT  GHOST. 


271 


many  divers  and  strange  doctrines  which  now  infect  the 
Church.  And  let  the  subject  brought  before  you  this  day 
be  one  of  your  princii^al  tests.  Try  every  new  doctrine 
of  these  latter  times  by  two  simple  questions.  Ask  first, 
"  Where  is  the  Lamb  ? "  And  ask  secondly,  "  Where  is 
the  Holy  Ghost  ? " 

II.  The  second  point  I  propose  to  consider,  is  the 
necessity  of  the  ivork  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  man's  salvation. 

I  invite  special  attention  to  this  part  of  the  subject. 
Let  it  be  a  settled  thing  in  our  minds  that  the  matter  we 
are  considering  in  this  paper  is  no  mere  speculative 
question  in  religion,  about  which  it  signifies  little  what  we 
believe.  On  the  contrary,  it  lies  at  the  very  foundation 
of  all  saving  Christianity.  Wrong  about  the  Holy  Ghost 
and  His  offices,  we  are  wrong  to  all  eternity. 

The  necessity  of  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  arises  from 
the  total  corruption  of  human  nature.  We  are  all  by 
nature  "  dead  in  sins."  (Eph.  ii.  1.)  However  shrewd,  and 
clever,  and  wise  in  the  things  of  this  world,  we  are  all  dead 
towards  God.  The  eyes  of  our  understanding  are  blinded. 
We  see  nothing  aright.  Our  wills,  affections,  and  inclinations 
are  alienated  from  Him  who  made  us.  "  The  carnal  mind 
is  enmity  against  God."  (Rom.  viii.  7.)  We  have  naturally 
neither  faith,  nor  fear,  nor  love,  nor  holiness.  In  short, 
left  to  ourselves,  we  should  never  be  saved. 

Without  the  Holy  Ghost  no  man  ever  turns  to  God, 
repents,  believes,  and  obeys. — Intellectual  training  and 
secular  education  alone  make  no  true  Cliristians.  Acquaint- 
ance with  fine  arts  and  science  leads  no  one  to  heaven. 
Pictures  and  statues  never  brought  one  soul  to  God.  The 
"  tender  strokes  of  art "  never  prepared  any  man  or  woman 
for  the  judgment  day.*    They  bind  up  no  broken  heart; 


*  "  To  wake  the  soul  by  tender  strokes  of  .art,"— was  the  motto  which 
in  large  letters  caught  the  eye  on  entering  the  Manchester  Exhibition  of 
f"ine  Arts,  at  the  extreme  end  of  the  building. 


272 


OLD  PATHS. 


they  heal  no  wounded  conscience.  The  Greeks  had  their 
Zeuxis  and  Parrhasius,  their  Phidias  and  Praxiteles, 
masters  as  great  in  their  day  as  any  in  modern  times;  yet 
the  Greeks  knew  nothing  of  the  way  of  jieace  with  God. 
They  were  sunk  in  gross  idolatry,  and  bowed  down  to  the 
works  of  their  own  hands. — The  most  zealous  efforts  of 
ministers  alone  cannot  make  men  Christians.  The  ablest 
scriptural  reasoning  has  no  effect  on  the  mind ;  the  most 
fervent  pulpit  eloquence  will  not  move  the  heart;  the 
naked  truth  alone  will  not  lead  the  will.  We  who  are 
ministers  know  this  well  by  painful  experience.  We  can 
show  men  the  fountain  of  living  Avaters,  but  we  cannot 
make  them  drink.  We  see  many  a  one  sitting  under  our 
pulpits  year  after  year,  and  hearing  hundreds  of  sermons, 
full  of  Gospel  truth,  without  the  slightest  result.  WS 
mark  him  year  after  year,  imaffected  and  unmoved  by  every 
Scriptural  argument, — cold  as  the  stones  on  which  he  treads 
as  he  enters  our  church, — unmoved  as  the  marble  statue 
which  adorns  the  tomb  against  the  wall, — dead  as  the  old 
dry  oak  of  which  his  pew  is  made, — feelingless  as  the 
painted  glass  in  the  windows,  through  which  the  sun  shines 
on  his  head.  We  look  at  him  with  wonder  and  sorrow, 
and  remember  Xavier's  words  as  he  looked  at  China :  "  Oh, 
rock,  rock  !  when  wilt  thou  open  ? "  And  we  learn  by  such 
cases  as  these,  that  nothing  will  make  a  Christian  but  the 
introduction  into  the  heart  of  a  new  nature,  a  new  prin- 
ciple, and  a  Divine  seed  from  above. 

What  is  it  then  that  man  needs  ?— We  need  to  be  "  born 
again : "  and  this  new  birth  we  must  receive  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  The  Spirit  of  life  must  quicken  us.  The  Spirit 
must  renew  us.  The  Spirit  must  take  away  from  us  the 
heart  of  stone.  The  Spirit  must  put  in  us  the  heart  of 
flesh.  A  new  act  of  creation  must  take  place.  A  new 
beinsr  must  be  called  into  existence.  Without  all  this  we 
cannot  be  saved.  Here  lies  the  main  part  of  our  need  of 
the  H0I3'  Ghost.   "  Except  a  man  be  born  again  he  cannot 


THE  HOLY  GHOST. 


273 


see  il\e  kingdom  of  God."  (Jolin  iii.  3.)  No  salvation 
without  a  new  birth  !  * 

Let  us  dismiss  from  our  minds  for  ever  the  common 
idea  that  natural  theology,  moral  suasion,  logical  arguments, 
or  even  an  exhibition  of  Gospel  truth,  are  sufficient  of 
themselves  to  turn  a  sinner  from  his  sins,  if  once  brought 
to  bear  upon  him.  It  is  a  strong  delusion.  Tliey  will 
not  do  so.  The  heart  of  man  is  far  harder  than  we  fancy  : 
the  old  Adam  is  much  more  strong  than  we  suppose.  The 
ships  which  run  aground  at  half-ebb,  will  never  stir  till 
the  tide  flows :  the  heart  of  man  will  never  look  to  Christ, 
repent,  and  believe,  till  the  Holy  Ghost  comes  down  upon 
it.  Till  that  takes  place,  our  inner  nature  is  like  the 
earth  before  the  present  order  of  creation  began, — "  without 
form  and  void,  and  darkness  covering  the  face  of  the  deep." 
(Gen.  i.  2.)  The  same  power  which  said  at  the  beginning, 
"  Let  there  be  light :  and  there  was  light,"  must  work  a 
creating  work  in  us,  or  we  shall  never  rise  to  newness  of 
life. 

But  I  have  something  more  to  say  yet  on  this  branch  of 
my  subject.  The  necessity  of  the  work  of  the  Spirit  to 
man's  salvation  is  a  wide  field,  and  I  have  yet  another  re- 
mark to  make  upon  it. 

I  say  then,  that  without  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  no 
man  could  ever  he  fit  to  divell  xuith  God  in  another 
world.  A  fitness  of  some  kind  we  must  have.  The  mere 
pardon  of  our  sins  would  be  a  worthless  gift,  unless  accom- 


*  "This  is  tliat  which  gives  unto  the  ministry  of  the  Gospel  both  its 
glory  and  its  elficacy.  Talvc  away  tlie  Spirit  from  the  Gospel,  and  you 
render  it  a  dead  letter,  and  leave  the  New  Testament  of  no  more  use 
unto  Christians  than  the  Old  Testament  is  unto  the  Jews." — Owen  on 
the  Ilohj  Sjiirit. 

"  In  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  resteth  all  ability  to  know  God  and 
to  please  Him.  It  is  He  that  piirifieth  the  mind  by  His  secret  working. 
He  enlighteneth  the  mind  to  conceive  worthy  thoughts  of  Almighty^ 
God." — Ilom'dy  for  Ro'jatlon  Week. 

T  , 


274 


OLD  PATHS. 


panied  by  the  gift  of  a  uew  nature,  a  nature  in  harmony 
and  in  tune  with  that  of  God  Himself.  We  need  a  meet- 
ness  for  heaven,  as  well  as  a  title  for  heaven,  and  this 
meetness  we  must  receive  from  the  Holy  Gliost.  We  must 
be  made  "  partakers  of  the  divine  nature,"  by  the  indwelling 
ot  the  Holy  Ghost.  (2  Pet.  i.  4.)  The  Spirit  must  sanctify 
our  carnal  natures,  and  make  them  love  spiritual  things. 
The  Spirit  must  wean  our  affections  from  things  below, 
and  teach  us  to  set  them  on  things  above.  The  Spirit  must 
bend  our  stubborn  wills,  and  teach  them  to  be  submissive 
to  the  will  of  God.  The  Spirit  must  write  again  the  law 
of  God  on  our  inward  man,  and  put  His  fear  within  us. 
The  Spirit  must  transform  us  by  the  daily  renewing  of 
our  minds,  and  implant  in  us  the  image  of  Him  whose 
servants  we  profess  to  be.  Here  lies  the  other  great  part 
of  our  need  of  the  Holy  Ghost's  work.  We  need  sanctification 
no  less  than  justification.  "  Without  holiness  no  man  shall 
see  the  Lord."    (Heb.  xii.  14.) 

Once  more  1  beseech  my  readers  to  dismiss  from  their 
minds  the  common  idea,  that  men  and  women  need  nothing 
but  pardon  and  absolution,  in  order  to  be  prepared  to  meet 
God.  It  is  a  stton"  delusion,  and  one  against  which  T 
desire  with  all  my  heart  to  place  you  on  your  guard.  It  is 
not  enough,  as  many  a  poor  ignorant  Christian  supposes 
on  his  death-  bed,  if  God  "  pardons  our  sins  and  takes 
us  to  rest."  1  say  again  most  emphatically,  it  is  not 
enough.  The  love  of  sin  must  be  taken  from  us,  as 
well  as  the  guilt  of  sin  removed ;  the  desire  of  pleasing 
God  must  be  implanted  in  us,  as  well  as  the  fear  of 
God's  judgment  taken  away ;  a  love  to  holiness  must 
be  engrafted,  as  well  as  a  dread  of  punishment  removed. 
Heaven  itself  would  be  no  heaven  to  us  if  we  entered 
it  without  a  new  heart.  An  eternal  Sabbath  and  the 
society  of  saints  and  angels  could  give  us  no  happiness 
in  heaven,  unless  the  love  of  Sabbaths  and  of  holy  com- 
pany had  been  first  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  upon  earth. 


THE  HOLY  GHOST. 


275 


Whether  men  will  hear  or  forbear,  the  man  wlio  enters 
heaven  must  have  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit,  as  well 
as  the  siirinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  To  use  the 
words  of  Owen,  "When  God  designed  the  g.-eat  and 
glorious  work  of  recovering  fallen  man  and  saving  sinners. 
He  appointed  in  His  infinite  wisdom  two  great  means. 
The  one  was  the  giving  of  His  Son  for  them ;  and  the 
other  was  the  giving  of  his  Spirit  unto  them.  And  hereby 
was  way  made  for  the  manifestation  of  the  glory  of  the 
whole  blessed  Trinity."  * 

I  trust  I  have  said  enough  to  show  the  absolute 
necessity  of  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  the  salvation 
of  man's  soul.  Man's  utter  inability  to  turn  to  God  without 
the  Spirit, — man's  utter  uumeetness  for  the  joys  of  heaven, 
without  the  Spirit, — are  two  great  foundation  stones  in 
revealed  religion,  which  ought  to  be  always  deeply  rooted 
in  a  Christian's  mind.  Rightly  understood,  they  will  lead 
to  one  conclusion, — "Without  the  Spirit,  no  salvation  !" 

Would  you  like  to  know  the  reason  why  we  who  preach 
the  Gospel,  preach  so  often  about  conversion?  We  do 
it  because  of  the  necessities  of  men's  souls.  We  do  it 
because  we  see  plainly  from  the  Word  of  God  that  nothing- 
short  of  a  thorough  change  of  heart  will  ever  meet  the 
exigencies  of  your  case.  Your  case  is  naturally  desperate. 
Your  danger  is  great.  You  need  not  only  the  atonement 
of  Jesus  Christ,  but  the  quickening,  sanctifying  work  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  to  make  you  a  true  Christian,  and  deliver 
you  from  hell.  Fain  would  I  lead  to  heaven  all  who  read 
this  volume  !  My  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  is 
that  you  may  be  saved.     But  I  know  that  none  enter 


*  "God  the  Father  had  but  two  grand  gifts  to  bestow;  and  when 
once  they  were  given,  He  had  left  then  nothing  that  was  great  (eoni- 
paratively)  to  give,  for  they  contained  all  good  in  tliem.  These  two 
gifts  were  His  Son,  who  was  His  promise  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  the 
Spirit,  the  promise  of  the  New." — Thomas  Goodwin  on  the  Work  of  the 
Holy  Olwst.  1704. 


276 


OLD  PATHS. 


lieaven  without  a  heart  to  enjoy  heaven,  and  this  heart 
we  must  receive  from  God's  Spirit. 

Shall  I  tell  you  plainly  the  reason  why  some  receive 
these  truths  so  coldly,  and  are  so  little  affected  by  them  ? 
You  hear  us  listless  and  unconcerned.  You  think  us 
extreme  and  extravagant  in  our  statements.  And  why 
is  this?  It  is  just  because  you  do  not  see  or  know  the 
disease  of  your  own  soul.  You  are  not  aware  ot  your 
own  sinfulness  and  weakness.  Low  and  inadequate  views 
of  your  spiritual  disease,  are  sure  to  be  accompanied  by 
low  and  inadequate  views  of  the  remedy  provided  in  the 
Gospel.  What  shall  I  say  to  you  ?  I  can  only  say,  "  The 
Lord  awaken  you  !  The  Lord  have  mercy  on  your  soul ! " 
The  day  may  come  when  the  scales  will  fall  from  youi 
eyes,  when  old  things  will  pass  away,  and  all  things 
become  new.  And  in  that  day  I  foretell  and  forewarn 
you  confidently  that  the  first  truth  you  will  grasp,  next 
to  the  work  of  Christ,  Avill  be  the  absolute  necessity  of 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

III.  The  third  thing  I  propose  to  consider,  is  the 
manner  in  which  the  Holy  Ghost  ivories  on  the  hearts  of 
those  ivho  are  saved. 

I  approach  this  branch  of  my  subject  with  much 
difiidence.  I  am  very  sensible  that  it  is  surrounded 
with  difficulties,  and  involves  many  of  the  deepest  things 
of  God.  But  it  is  folly  for  mortal  man  to  turn  away  from 
any  truth  in  Christianity,  merely  because  of  difficulties. 
Better  a  thousand  times  receive  with  meekness  what  we 
cannot  fully  explain,  and  believe  that  what  we  know  not 
now,  we  shall  know  hereafter.  "Enough  for  us,"  says  an 
old  divine,  "  if  we  sit  in  God's  court,  without  pretending  to 
be  of  God's  counsel." 

In  speaking  of  the  manner  of  the  Holy  Ghost's  work- 
ing, I  shall  simply  state  certain  great  leading  facts.  They 
are  facts  attested  alike  by  Scripture  and  experience.  They 


THE  HOLT  GHOST. 


277 


are  facts  patent  to  the  eyes  of  every  candid  and  well- 
instructed  observer.  They  are  facts  which  I  believe  it  is 
impossible  to  gainsay. 

(a)  I  say  then  that  the  Holy  Ghost  works  on  the  heart  of 
a  man  in  a  mysterious  manner.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
Himself  tell  us  that  in  well-known  words ; — "  The  wind 
bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  thou  hearest  the  sound  thereof, 
but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh  and  whither  it  goeth  ; 
so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit."  (John  iii.  S.) 
We  cannot  explain  how  and  in  what  way  the  Almighty 
Spirit  comes  into  man,  and  operates  upon  him ;  but 
neither  also  can  we  explain  a  thousand  things  which  are 
continually  taking  place  in  the  natural  world.  We  cannot 
explain  how  our  wills  work  daily  on  our  members,  and 
make  them  walk,  or  move,  or  rest,  at  our  discretion;  yet 
no  one  ever  thinks  of  disjDuting  the  fact.  So  ought  it 
to  be  with  the  work  of  the  Spirit.  We  ought  to  believe 
the  fact,  though  we  cannot  explain  the  manner. 

(6)  I  say  furthei'more,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  works  on  the 
heart  of  a  man  in  a  sovereign  manner.  He  comes  to  one 
and  does  not  come  to  another.  He  often  converts  one  in 
a  family,  while  others  are  left  alone.  There  were  two 
thieves  crucified  with  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  on  Calvary. 
They  saw  the  same  Saviour  dying,  and  heard  the  same 
words  come  from  His  lips.  Yet  only  one  repented  and 
went  to  Paradise,  while  the  other  died  in  his  sins. — There 
were  many  Pharisees  besides  Saul,  who  had  a  hand  in 
Stephen's  murder;  but  Saul  alone  became  an  apostle. — 
There  were  many  slave  captains  in  John  Newton's  time  ; 
yet  none  but  he  became  a  preacher  of  the  Gospel. — We 
cannot  account  for  this.  But  neither  can  we  account  tor 
China  being  a  heathen  country,  and  England  a  Christian 
land :  we  only  know  that  so  it  is. 

(c)  I  say  furthermore,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  always  works 
on  the  heart  of  a  man  in  such  a  manner  as  to  he  felt.  I 
do  not  for  a  moment  say  that  the  feelings  which  He  pro- 


278 


OLD  PATHS. 


duces  are  always  understood  by  the  person  in  whom  they 
are  produced.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  often  a  cause  of 
anxiety,  and  conflict,  and  inward  strife.  All  I  maintain  is 
that  we  have  no  warrant  of  Scripture  for  supjjosing  that 
there  is  an  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  which  is  not  felt  at 
all.  Where  He  is  there  will  always  be  corresponding 
feelings. 

(d)  I  say  furthermore,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  always  works 
on  the  heart  of  a  man  in  such  a  manner  as  to  be  seen  in 
ihe  man's  life.  I  do  not  say  that  as  soon  as  He  comes 
into  a  man,  that  man  becomes  immediately  an  established 
Christian,  a  Christian  in  whose  life  and  ways  nothing  but 
spirituality  can  be  observed.  But  this  I  say, — that  the 
Almighty  Spirit  is  never  present  in  a  person's  soul  without 
producing  some  perceptible  results  in  that  person's  conduct. 
He  never  sleeps :  He  is  never  idle.  We  have  no  warrant 
of  Scripture  for  talking  of  "  dormant  grace."  "  Whosoever 
is  born  of  God  doth  not  commit  sin  ;  for  his  seed  remaineth 
in  him."  (1  John  iii.  9.)  Where  the  Holy  Ghost  is,  there 
will  be  something  seen. 

(e)  I  say  furthermore,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  always  works 
on  the  heart  of  a  man  in  an  irresistible  manner.  I  do 
not  deny  for  a  moment  that  there  are  sometimes  spiritual 
strivings  and  workings  of  conscience  in  the  minds  of  uncon- 
verted  men,  which  finally  come  to  nothing.  But  I  say 
confidently,  that  when  the  Spirit  really  begins  a  work  of 
conversion,  He  always  carries  that  work  to  perfection.  He 
effects  miraculous  changes.  He  turns  the  character  upside 
down.  He  causes  old  things  to  pass  away,  and  all  things 
to  become  new.  In  a  word,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  Almighty. 
With  Him  nothing  is  impo.'^sible. 

(/)  I  say,  finally,  under  this  head,  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
generally  works  on  the  heart  of  man  through  the  use  of 
means.  The  Word  of  God,  preached  or  read,  is  generally 
employed  by  Him  as  an  instrument  in  the  conversion 
of  a  soul.    He  applies  that  Word  to  the  conscience :  He 


THE  HOLY  GHOST. 


279 


brings  that  Word  home  to  the  mind.  This  is  His 
general  course  of  procedure.  There  are  instances,  un- 
doubtedly, in  which  people  are  converted  "  without  tlie 
Word."  (1  Pet.  iii.  1.)  But,  as  a  general  rule,  God's 
truth  is  the  sword  of  the  Spirit.  By  it  He  teaches,  and 
teaches  nothing  else  but  that  which  is  written  in  the 
Word. 

I  commend  these  six  points  to  the  attention  of  all  my 
readers.  A  right  understanding  of  them  supplies  the  best 
antidote  to  the  many  false  and  specious  doctrines  by  whicb 
Satan  labours  to  darken  the  blessed  work  of  the  Spirit. 

(a)  Is  there  a  haughty,  highminded  person  reading  this 
paper,  who  in  his  pride  of  intellect  rejects  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  because  of  its  mysteriousness  and  sovereignty  ? 
I  tell  you  boldly  that  you  must  take  up  other  ground  than 
this  before  you  dispute  and  deny  our  doctrine.  Look  to  the 
heaven  above  you,  and  the  earth  beneath  you,  and  deny, 
if  you  can,  that  there  are  mysteries  there. — Look  to  the 
map  of  the  world  you  live  in,  and  the  marvellous  difference 
between  the  privileges  of  one  nation  and  another,  and  deny 
if  you  can,  that  there  is  sovereignty  there. — Go  and  learn 
to  be  consistent.  Submit  that  proud  mind  of  yours  to  jjlain 
undeniable  facts.  Be  clothed  with  the  humility  that  becomes 
poor  mortal  man.  Cast  off  that  affectation  of  reasoning, 
under  which  you  now  try  to  smother  your  conscience^ 
Dare  to  confess  that  the  Avork  of  the  Spirit  may  be 
mysterious  and  sovereign,  and  yet  for  all  that  is  true. 

Qj)  Is  there  a  Romanist,  or  semi-Romanist  reading  this 
paper,  who  tries  to  persuade  himself  that  all  bairtized 
people,  and  members  of  the  Church,  as  a  matter  of  course, 
have  the  Spirit  ?  I  tell  you  plainly  that  you  are  deceiving 
yourself,  if  you  dream  that  the  Spirit  is  in  a  man,  when 
His  presence  cannot  be  seen.  Go  and  learn  this  day  that 
the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  to  be  tested,  not  by  the, 
name  in  the  register,  or  the  place  in  the  family  pew,  butj 
by  the  visible  fruits  in  a  man's  life. 


280 


OLD  PATHS. 


(c)  Is  there  a  worldly  man  reading  this  paper,  who  regards 
all  claims  to  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  as  so  much  en- 
thusiasm and  fanaticism  ?  I  warn  you  also  to  take  heed 
what  you  are  about.  No  doubt  there  is  plenty  of  hypocrisy 
and  false  profession  in  the  Churches ;  no  doubt  there  are 
thousands  whose  religious  feelings  are  mere  delusion.  But 
bad  money  is  no  proof  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  good 
coin  :  1he  abuse  of  a  thing  does  not  destroy  the  use  of  it. 
The  Bible  tells  us  plainly  that  there  are  certain  hopes,  and 
joys,  and  sorrows,  and  inward  feelings,  inseparable  from  the 
•work  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Go  and  learn  this  day  that 
you  have  not  received  the  Spirit,  if  His  presence  within 
you  has  not  been  felt. 

(d)  Is  there  an  excuse-making  indolent  person  reading 
this  paper,  who  comforts  himself  with  the  thought  that 
decided  Christianity  is  an  impossible  thing,  and  that  in  a 
world  like  this  he  cannot  serve  Christ  ?  Your  excuses 
will  not  avail  you.  The  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  offered 
to  you  without  money  and  without  price.  Go  and  learn 
this  day  that  there  is  strength  to  be  had  for  the  asking. 
Through  the  Spirit,  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  offers  to  give 
to  you,  all  difficulties  may  be  overcome. 

Is  there  a  fanatic  reading  this  paper,  who  fancies  that  it 
matters  nothing  whether  a  man  stays  at  home  or  goes  to 
church,  and  that  if  a  man  is  to  be  saved,  he  will  be  saved 
in  spite  of  himself?  I  tell  you  also  this  day,  that  you 
have  much  to  learn.  Go  and  learn  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
ordinarily  works  through  the  use  of  means  of  grace,  and 
that  it  is  by  "  hearing  "  that  faith  generally  comes  into  the 
soul."    (Rom.  X.  17.) 

I  leave  this  branch  of  my  subject  here,  and  pass  on.  I 
leave  it  with  a  sorrowful  conviction  that  nothin"-  in  reliOTon 
so  shows  the  blindness  of  natural  man  as  his  inability  to 
receive  the  teaching  of  Scripture  on  the  manner  of  the 
Holy  Ghost's  operations.  To  quote  the  saying  of  our 
Divine  Master, — "  The  world  cannot  receive  Him."  (John 


THE  HOLY  GHOST. 


281 


xlv.  17.)  To  use  the  words  of  Ambrose  Serle :  "  This 
operation  of  the  Spirit  hath  been,  and  ever  will  be,  an 
incomprehensible  business  to  those  who  have  not  known 
it  in  themselves.  Like  Nicodemus,  and  other  masters  in 
Israel,  they  will  reason  and  re-reason,  till  they  puzzle  and 
perplex  themselves,  by  darkening  counsel  without  know- 
ledge ;  and  when  they  cannot  make  out  the  matter,  will 
give  the  strongest  proof  of  all  that  they  know  nothing  of 
it,  by  fretting  and  raving,  and  calling  hard  names,  and 
saying,  in  short,  that  there  is  no  such  thing." 

IV.  I  propose,  in  the  last  place,  to  consider  tlie  marJcs 
and  evidences  hy  tvhich  the  'presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
a  mans  heart  may  he  knoivn. 

Last  as  this  point  comes  in  order,  it  is  anything  but 
last  in  importance.  In  fact,  it  is  that  view  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  which  demands  the  closest  attention  of  every  pro- 
fessing Christian.  We  have  seen  something  of  the  place 
assigned  to  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  Bible.  We  have  seea 
something  of  the  absolute  necessity  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
a  man's  salvation.  We  have  seen  something  of  the  manner 
of  the  Holy  Ghost's  oj^erations.  And  now  comes  the, 
mighty  question,  which  ought  to  interest  every  reader 
"  How  are  we  to  know  whether  we  are  partakers  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  ?  By  what  marks  may  we  find  out  whether 
we  have  the  Spirit  of  Christ  ?" 

I  will  begin  by  taking  it  for  gi'anted  that  tlie  question 
I  have  just  asked  may  be  answered.  Where  is  the  use  of 
our  Bibles,  if  we  cannot  find  out  whether  we  are  in  the 
way  to  heaven  ?  Let  it  be  a  settled  principle  in  our 
Christianity,  that  a  man  may  know  whether  or  not  he  has 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Let  us  dismiss  from  our  minds  once  and 
for  ever  the  many  unscriptural  evidences  of  the  Spirit's 
presence  with  which  thousands  content  themselves.  Re- 
ception of  the  sacraments  and  membership  of  the  visible 
Church  are  no  proofs  whatever  that  we  "  have  the  Spirit 


282 


OLD  PATHS. 


of  Christ."  Ill  short,  I  call  it  a  short  cut  to  the  grossest 
antinomiamsm  to  talk  of  a  man  having  the  Holy  Ghost  so 
long  as  he  serves  sin  and  the  world. 

The  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  a  man's  heart  can 
only  be  known  by  the  fruits  and  effects  He  produces.] 
Mysterious  and  invisible  to  mortal  eye  as  His  operations 
are,  they  always  lead  to  certain  visible  and  tangible  results. 
Just  as  you  know  the  compass-needle  to  be  magnetized 
by  its  turning  to  the  north, — just  as  you  know  there  is 
life  in  a  tree  by  its  sap,  buds,  leaves  and  fruits, — ^just  as 
you  know  thei-e  is  a  steersman  on  board  a  ship  by  its 
keeping  a  steady  rogiilar  course, — ^just  so  you  may  know 
the  Spirit  to  be  in  a  man's  heart  by  the  influence  He 
exercises  over  his  thoughts,  affections,  opinions,  habits, 
and  life.  I  lay  this  down  broadly  and  unhesitatingly.  I 
find  no  safe  ground  to  occupy  excepting  this.  I  see  no 
safeguard  against  the  wildest  enthusiasm,  excepting  in 
this  j)osition.  And  I  see  it  clearly  marked  out  in  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ's  words:  "Every  tree  is  known  by  his  own 
fruit."    (Luke  vi.  44.) 

But  what  are  the  specific  fruits  by  which  the  presence 
of  the  Sj^irit  in  the  heart  may  be  known  ?  I  find  no 
difficulty  in  answering  that  question.  The  Holy  Ghost 
always  works  after  a  certain  definite  pattern.  Just  as  the 
bee  always  forms  the  cells  of  its  comb  in  one  regular 
hexagonal  shape,  so  does  the  Spirit  of  God  work  on  the 
heart  of  man  with  one  uniform  result.  His  work  is^ 
the  work  of  a  master.  The  world  may  see  no  beautyj 
in  it :  it  is  foolishness  to  the  natural  man.  But  "  he  that 
is  spiritual  discerneth  all  things."  (1  Cor.  ii.  15.)  A  well- 
instructed  Christian  knows  well  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  of 
God.  Let  me  briefly  set  them  before  you  in  order.  They 
are  all  clear  and  unmistakable,  "  plain  to  him  that  under- 
standeth,  and  right  to  them  that  find  knowledge."  (Prov. 
viii.  9.) 

(1)  Where  the  Holy  Ghost  is,  there  will  always  be  deep 


THE  HOLY  GHOST. 


283 


conviction  of  sin,  and  true  repentance  for  it.  It  is  His 
special  office  to  convince  of  sin.  (J ohn  xvi.  8.)  He  shows 
the  exceedini?  holiness  of  God.  He  teaches  the  exceedinn^ 
corruption  and  infirmity  of  our  nature.  He  strips  us  of 
our  blind  self-righteousness.  He  opens  our  eyes  to  our 
awful  guilt,  folly  and  danger.  He  fills  the  heart  with 
sorrow,  contrition,  and  abhorrence  for  sin,  as  the  abomin- 
able thing  which  God  hateth.  He  that  knows  nothing  o^ 
all  this,  and  saunters  carelessly  through  life,  thoughtless 
about  sin,  and  indifferent  and  unconcerned  about  his  soul, 
is  a  dead  man  before  God.  He  has  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ. 

(2)  Where  the  Holy  Ghost  is,  there  will  always  be  lively 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  only  Saviour.  It  is  His 
special  office  to  testify  of  Christ,  to  take  of  the  things  of 
Christ  and  .show  them  to  man.  (John  xvi.  1.5.)  He  leads  the 
soul  which  feels  its  sin,  to  Jesus  and  the  atonement  made 
by  His  blood.  He  shows  the  soul  that  Christ  has  suffered 
for  sin,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God.  He 
points  out  to  the  sin-sick  soul  that  we  have  only  to  receive 
Christ,  believe  in  Christ,  commit  ourselves  to  Christ,  and 
pardon,  peace,  and  life  eternal,  are  at  once  our  own.  He 
makes  us  see  a  beautiful  fitness  in  Christ's  finished  work 
of  redemption  to  meet  our  spiritual  necessities.  He  makes 
us  willing  to  disclaim  all  merit  of  our  own  and  to  venture 
all  on  Jesus,  looking  to  nothinj^,  restincj  on  nothing,  ti'ust- 
ing  in  nothing  but  Christ, — Christ, — Christ, — "  delivered 
for  our  offences,  and  raised  again  for  our  justification." 
(Kom.  iv.  25.)  He  that  knows  nothing  of  all  this,  and 
builds  on  any  other  foundation,  is  dead  before  God.  He 
has  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ. 

(3)  Where  the  Holy  Ghost  is,  there  vnll  alwaj's  be 
holiness  of  life  and  conversation.  He  is  the  Spirit  of 
holiness.  (Rom.  i.  4.)  He  is  the  sanctifying  Spirit.  He 
takes  away  the  hard,  carnal,  worldly  heart  of  man,  and 
puts  in  its  i^lace  a  tender,  C(mscientious,  spiritual  heart, 
deli^htiiij;  in  the  law  of  God.    He  makes  a  man  turn  his 


281 


OLD  PATHS. 


face  towards  God,  and  desire  above  all  things  to  please 
Him,  and  turn  his  back  on  the  fashion  of  this  woidd,  and 
no  longer  make  that  fashion  his  god.  He  sows  in  a  man's 
heart  the  blessed  seeds  of  "love,  joy,  meekness,  long- 
suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  temperance,"  and 
causes  these  seeds  to  spring  up  and  bear  pleasant  fruit. 
(Gal.  V.  22.)  He  that  lacketh  these  things,  and  knows 
nothing  of  daily  practical  godliness,  is  dead  before  God. 
He  has  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ. 

(4)  Where  the  Holy  Ghost  is,  there  will  always  be  the 
Tidbit  of  earnest  private  prayer.  He  is  the  Spirit  of  grace 
and  supplication,  (Zech.  xii.  10.)  He  works  in  the  heart 
as  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry  Abba,  Father. 
He  makes  a  man  feel  that  he  must  cry  to  God,  and  speak 
to  God, — feebly,  falteringly,  weakly,  it  may  be, — but  cry 
he  must  about  his  soul.  He  makes  it  as  natural  to  a  man 
to  pray  as  it  is  to  an  infant  to  breathe ;  with  this  one 
difference, — that  the  infant  breathes  without  an  effort, 
and  the  new-born  soul  prays  with  much  conflict  and  strife. 
He  that  knows  nothing  of  real,  living,  fervent,  private 
prayer,  and  is  content  with  some  old  form,  or  with  no 
prayer  at  all,  is  dead  before  God.  He  has  not  the  Spirit 
of  Christ. 

(.5)  Finally,  where  the  Holy  Ghost  is,  there  will  always 
be  love  and  reverence  f(w  God's  Word.  He  makes  the 
new-born  soul  desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word,  just  as 
the  infant  desires  its  natural  food.  He  makes  it  "  delight 
in  the  law  of  the  Lord."  (1  Pet.  ii.  2  ;  Psa.  i.  2.)  He 
shows  man  a  fulness,  and  depth,  and  wisdom,  and  sufficiency: 
in  the  Holy  Scripture,  which  is  utterly  hid  from  a  natural 
man's  eyes.  He  draws  him  to  the  Word  with  an  irresistible 
force,  as  the  light  and  lantern,  and  manna,  and  sword, 
which  are  essential  to  a  safe  journey  through  this  world. 
If  the  man  cannot  read  He  makes  him  love  to  hear :  if  he 
cannot  hear  He  makes  him  love  to  meditate.  But  to  the 
Word  the  Spirit  always  leads  him.    He  that  sees  no, 


THE  HOLY  GHOST. 


2S5 


special  beauty  in  God's  Bible,  and  takes  no  i^leasure  in 
reading,  hearing,  and  understanding  it,  is  dead  before  God. 
He  has  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ. 

I  place  these  five  grand  marks  of  the  Spirit's  presence 
before  my  readers,  and  confidently  claim  attention  to  them. 
I  believe  they  will  bear  insjiectiou.  I  am  not  afraid  of 
their  being  searched,  criticized,  and  cross-examined- 
Repentance  toward  God, — faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ, — ^holiness  of  heart  and  life, — habits  of  real  private 
prayer, — love  and  reverence  toward  God's  Word, — these 
are  the  real  proofs  of  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
in  a  man's  soul.  Where  He  is,  these  marks  will  be  seen. 
Where  He  is  not,  these  marks  will  be  lacking. 

I  grant  freely  that  the  leadings  of  the  Spirit,  in  some 
minute  details,  are  not  always  uniform.  The  paths  over 
which  He  conducts  souls,  are  not  always  precisely  one  and 
the  same.  The  experience  that  true  Christians  pass  through 
in  their  beginnings  is  often  somewhat  various.  This  only 
I  maintain, — that  the  main  road  into  which  the  Spirit 
leads  people,  and  the  final  results  which  He  at  length 
produces,  are  always  alike.  In  all  true  Christians,  the 
five  great  marks  I  have  already  mentioned  will  always 
be  found. 

I  grant  freely  that  the  degree  and  depth  of  the  work 
of  the  Spirit  in  the  heart  may  vary  exceedingly.  There  is 
weak  fiiith  and  strong  faith, — weak  love  and  strong  love, — 
a  bright  hope  and  a  dim  hope, — a  feeble  obedience  to 
Christ's  will,  and  a  close  following  of  the  Lord.  This  only 
I  maintain, — that  the  ma^>^  outlines  of  religious  character 
in  all  who  have  the  Spirit,  perfectly  correspond.  Life  is 
life,  whether  strong  or  feeble.  The  infant  in  arms,  though 
weak  and  dependent,  is  as  real  and  true  a  representative 
of  the  great  family  of  Adam  as  the  strongest  man  alive. 

Wherever  you  see  these  five  great  marks,  you  see  a 
true  Christian.  Let  that  never  be  forgotten.  I  leave  it 
to  others  to  excommunicate  and  unchurch  all  who  do  not 


OLD  PATHS. 


belong  to  their  own  pale,  and  do  not  worship  after  their 
bwn  particular  fashion.  I  have  no  sympathy  with  such 
narrowmindedness.  Show  me  a  man  who  repents,  and 
believes  in  Christ  crucified, — who  lives  a  holy  life,  and 
delights  in  his  Bible  and  prayer, — and  I  desire  to  regard 
him  as  a  brother.  I  see  in  him  a  member  of  the  Holy 
Catholic  Church,  out  of  which  there  is  no  salvation.  I 
behold  in  him  an  heir  of  that  crown  of  glory  which  is 
incorruptible  and  fadeth  not  away.  If  he  has  the  Holy 
Ghost,  he  has  Christ.  If  he  has  Christ,  he  has  God.  If 
he  has  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God  the  Spirit, 
all  things  are  his.  Who  am  I  that  I  should  turn  my  back 
on  him,  because  we  cannot  see  all  things  eye  to  eye  ? 

Wherever  these  five  great  marks  of  the  Spirit  are 
wanting,  we  have  just  cause  to  be  afraid  about  a  man's 
soul.  Visible  Churches  may  endorse  him,  sacraments  may 
be  administered  to  him,  forms  of  prayer  may  be  read  over 
him,  ministers  may  charitably  speak  of  him  as  "  a  brother," 
— but  all  this  does  not  alter  the  real  state  of  things.  The 
man  is  in  the  broad  way  that  leadetb  to  destruction.  With- 
out the  Spirit  he  is  without  Christ.  Without  Christ  he  is 
^without  God.  Without  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and 
God  the  Spirit,  he  is  in  imminent  danger.  The  Lord  have 
mercy  upon  his  soul ! 

,  I  hasten  on  now  towards  a  conclusion.  I  desire  to  wind 
up  all  I  have  been  saying  by  a  few  words  of  direct  personal 
application.  ^ 

(1)  In  the  first  place,  let  me  ash  a  question  of  all  who 
read  this  paper.  It  is  a  short  and  simple  one,  and  grows 
naturally  out  of  the  subject.  "Have  you,  or  have  you  not, 
the  Spirit  of  Christ  ? " 

I  am  not  afraid  to  ask  this  question.  I  will  not  be 
stopped  by  the  commonplace  remark  that  it  is  absurd, 
enthusiastic,  unreasonable  to  ask  such  questions  in  the 
present  day.    I  take  my  stand  on  a  plain  declaration  or 


THE  HOLY  GHOST. 


287 


Scripture.  I  find  an  inspired  Apostle  saying,  "If  any 
man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ  he  is  none  of  His."  I 
want  to  know  what  can  be  more  reasonable  than  to  press 
on  your  conscience  the  inquiry,  "  Have  you  the  Spirit  of 
Christ  ? " 

I  will  not  be  stopped  by  the  foolish  observation,  that  no 
man  can  tell  in  this  world  whether  or  not  he  has  the 
Spirit..  No  man  can  tell !  Then  what  was  the  Bible  given 
to  us  for  ?  Where  is  the  use  of  the  Scriptures  if  we  cannot 
discover  whether  we  are  going  to  heaven  or  hell  ?  The 
thing  I  ask  can  be  known.  The  evidences  of  the  Spirit's 
presence  in  the  soul  are  simple,  plain,  and  intelligible. 
No  honest  inquirer  needs  miss  the  way  in  this  matter. 
You  may  find  out  whether  you  have  the  Holy  Ghost. 

I  entreat  you  not  to  evade  the  question  I  have  now 
asked.  I  beseech  you  to  allow  it  to  work  inwardly  in  your 
heart.  I  charge  you,  as  ever  you  would  be  saved,  to  give 
it  an  honest  answer.  Baptism,  Church-membership,  re- 
spectability, morality,  outward  correctncs?,  are  all  excellent 
things.  But  do  not  be  content  with  them.  Go  deeper  r 
look  farther.  "  Have  you  received  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  Have 
you  the  Spirit  of  Christ  ? "  * 

(2)  Let  me,  in  the  next  place,  offer  a  solemn  tvarninr/ 
to  all  who  feel  in  their  own  consciences  that  they  have  not 
the  Spirit  of  Christ.  That  warning  is  short  and  simple. 
If  you  have  not  the  Spirit,  you  arc  not  yet  Christ's  people : 
you  are  "  none  of  Hi.s." 

Think  for  a  moment  how  much  is  involved  in  those  few 
words,  "none  of  His."  You  are  not  washed  in  Christ's 
blood  !  You  are  not  clothed  in  His  righteousness !  You 
are  not  justified!    You  are  not  interceded  for!  Your 


*  "  It  is  a  good  sign  of  grace  when  a  man  is  willing  to  search  and 
examine  himself,  whether  he  be  gracious  or  not.  There  is  a  certain 
instinct  in  a  child  of  God,  whereby  he  naturally  desires  to  have  the  titfe 
of  liis  legitimation  tried  ;  whereas  a  hypocrite  dreads  nothing  more  thau 
to  have  his  rottenness  searched  into." — Bishop  Hoplcim. 


288 


OLD  PATHS. 


sins  are  yet  upon  you  !  The  devil  claluis  you  for  his  own  ! 
The  pit  opens  her  mouth  for  you !  Tlie  torments  of  hell 
wait  for  you ! 

I  have  no  desire  to  create  needless  fear.  I  only  want 
sensible  people  to  look  calmly  at  things  as  they  are.  I 
only  want  one  plain  text  of  Scripture  to  be  duly  weighed. 
It  is  A%Titten,  "  If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ, 
he  is  none  of  His."  And  I  say  in  the  sight  of  such  a  text, 
if  you  die  without  the  Spirit,  you  had  better  never  have 
been  bom. 

(3)  Let  me,  in  the  next  place,  give  an  earnest  invita- 
tion to  all  who  feel  that  they  have  not  the  Spirit.  That 
invitation  is  short  and  simple.  Go  and  cry  to  God  this 
day  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  pray  for 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  be  poured  down  on  your  soul. 

There  is  every  possible  encouragement  to  do  this. 
There  is  warrant  of  Scripture  for  doing  it.  "  Turn  you 
at  my  reproof, — I  will  pour  out  my  Spirit  upon  you.  I 
will  make  known  my  words  unto  you." — "If  ye,  being 
evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  to  your  children,  how 
much  more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  them  that  ask  Him."  (Prov.  i.  23 ;  Luke  xi.  13.) 
There  is  warrant  in  the  experience  of  thousands  for  doing 
it.  Thousands  will  rise  at  the  last  day,  and  testify  that 
when  they  prayed  they  were  heard,  and  when  they  sought 
grace,  they  found  it. — Above  all,  there  is  warrant  in  the 
person  and  character  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  waits 
to  be  gracious.  He  invites  sinners  to  come  to  Him.  He 
rejects  none  that  come.  He  gives  "power  to  all  who 
receive  Him  by  faith  and  come  to  Him,  to  become  the 
sons  of  God."    (John  i.  12.) 

Go  then  to  Jesus,  as  a  needy,  wanting,  humble,  contrite 
sinner,  and  you  shall  not  go  in  vain.  Cry  to  Him  mightily 
about  your  soul,  and  you  shall  not  cry  to  no  purpose. 
Confess  to  Him  your  need,  and  guilt,  and  fear,  and  danger, 
and  He  will  not  despise  you.    Ask,  and  you  shall  receive. 


THE  HOLY  GHOST. 


289 


Seek,  and  you  shall  find.  Knock,  and  it  shall  be  openetl 
to  you.  I  testify  to  the  chief  of  sinners  this  day,  that  there 
is  enough  in  Christ,  and  to  spare,  for  your  soul.  Come, 
come :  come,  this  very  day.    Come  to  Christ ! 

(4)  Let  me,  in  the  last  place,  give  a  parting  ivord  of 
exliortation  to  all  readers  of  this  paper  who  have  received 
the  Spirit  of  Christ, — to  the  penitent,  the  believing,  the 
holy,  the  praying,  the  lovers  of  the  Word  of  God.  That 
exhortation  shall  consist  of  three  simple  things. 

(a)  For  one  thing,  be  thankful  for  the  S^Dirit.  Who 
has  made  you  to  differ  ?  Whence  came  all  these  feelings 
in  your  heart,  which  thousands  around  you  know  not,  and 
you  yourself  knew  not  at  one  time  ?  To  what  do  you  owe 
that  sense  of  sin,  and  that  drawing  towards  Christ,  and 
that  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness,  and  that  taste 
for  the  Bible  and  prayer,  which,  with  all  your  doubts  and 
infirmities,  you  find  within  your  soul  ? 

Did  these  things  come  of  nature  ?  Oh,  no ! — Did  you 
learn  these  things  in  the  schools  of  this  world  ?  Oh,  no : 
no ! — They  are  all  of  grace.  Grace  sowed  them,  grace 
watered  them,  grace  began  them,  grace  has  kept  them  up. 
Learn  to  be  more  thankful.  Praise  God  moi-e  every  day 
you  live :  praise  Him  more  in  private,  praise  Him  more 
in  public,  praise  Him  in  your  own  family,  praise  Him 
above  all  in  your  own  heart.  This  is  the  way  to  be  in 
tune  for  heaven.  The  anthem  there  will  be,  "  What  hath 
God  wrought  ?  " 

(6)  For  another  thing,  he  filled  with  the  Spirit.  Seek 
to  be  more  and  more  under  His  blessed  influence.  Strive 
to  have  every  thought,  and  word,  and  action,  and  habit, 
brought  under  obedience  to  the  leadings  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Grieve  Him  not  by  inconsistencies  and  conformity  to  the 
world.  Quench  Him  not  by  trifling  with  little  infirmities 
and  small  besetting  sins.  Seek  rather  to  have  Him  ruling 
and  reigning  more  completely  over  you  every  week  that 
you  live.    Pray  that  you  may  yearly  grov;  in  grace,  and  in 

U 


290 


OLD  PATHS. 


the  knowledge  of  Christ.  This  is  the  Avay  to  do  good  to' 
the  world.  An  eminent  Christian  is  a  North  Foreland 
Light-house,  seen  far  and  wide  by  others,  and  doing  good 
to  myriads,  whom  he  never  knows. — This  is  the  way  to 
enjoy  much  inward  comfort  in  this  world,  to  have  bright 
assurance  in  death,  to  leave  broad  evidences  behind  us, 
and  at  last  to  receive  a  great  crown. 

(c)  Finally,  pray  daily  for  a  great  outpouring  of  the 
Spirit  on  the  Church  and  on  the  world.  This  is  the  grand 
want  of  the  day :  it  is  the  thing  that  we  need  far  more 
than  money,  machinery,  and  men.  The  "  company  of 
preachers "  in  Christendom  is  far  greater  than  it  was  in 
the  days  of  St.  Paul ;  but  the  actual  spiritual  work  done 
in  the  earth,  in  proportion  to  the  means  used,  is  un- 
doubtedly far  less.  We  want  more  of  the  presence  of  the 
Holy  Ghost, — more  in  the  pulpit,  and  more  in  the 
congregation, — more  in  the  pastoral  visit,  and  more  in  the 
school.  Where  He  is,  there  will  be  life,  health,  growth, 
and  fruitfulness.  Where  He  is  not,  all  will  be  dead,  tame, 
formal,  sleepy,  and  cold.  Then  let  every  one  who  desires 
to  see  an  increase  of  pure  and  undefiled  religion,  pray  daily 
for  more  of  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  every  branch 
of  the  visible  Church  of  Christ. 


XI. 


HAVING  THE  SPIRIT. 

.  "Having  not  the  Spirit."  —  Jude  19. 

I  TAKE  it  for  granted  that  every  reader  of  this  paper 
believes  in  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  number  of  people  in 
this  country  who  are  iniidels,  deists,  or  Socioians,  and 
openly  deny  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  is  hajjpily  not 
very  great.  Most  persons  have  been  baptized  in  the  name 
ot  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  ot  the  Holy  Ghost. 
There  are  lew  Churchmen,  at  any  rate,  who  have  not  often 
heard  tlie  well-known  words  of  our  old  Catechism,  "  I  be- 
lieve in  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  sanctifieth  me  and  aU 
the  elect  people  of  God." 

But,  notwithstanding  all  this,  it  would  be  well  for  many 
if  they  Avould  consider  what  they  know  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
beyond  His  name.  What  experimental  acquaintance  have 
you  with  the  Spirit's  work  ?  What  has  He  done  for  you  ?, 
What  benefit  have  you  received  from  Him  ?  You  can 
say  of  God  the  Father,  "  He  made  me  and  all  the  world  ; " 
you  can  say  of  God  the  Son,  "He  died  for  me  and  all  man- 
kind :"  but  can  you  say  anything  about  the  Holy  Ghost? 
Can  you  say,  with  any  degree  of  confidence,  "  He  dwells  in 
me,  and  sanctifies  me"?  In  one  word.  Have  you  the 
Spirit?  The  text  which  heads  this  paper  will  tell  you 
that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  "not  having  the  Spirit." 
This  is  the  point  which  I  press  upon  your  attention. 


292 


OLD  PATHS. 


I  believe  the  point  to  be  one  of  vital  importance  at' 
all  seasons.  I  hold  it  to  be  one  of  special  importance  in 
the  present  day.  I  consider  that  clear  vie'n-s  about  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  are  among  the  best  preser\^atives 
against  the  many  false  doctrines  which  abound  in  our 
times.  Sufler  me  then,  to  lay  belare  you  a  lew  things, 
■which  by  God's  blessing,  may  throw  light  on  the  subject 
of  having  the  Spirit. 

I.  Let  me  explain  the  immense  importance  of 
"  Having  the  Spirit" 

II.  Let  me  point  out  the  great  general  principle  by 
u-hich  alone  the  question  can  he  tried, — "  Have  you  the 
Spirit?" 

III.  Let  me  describe  the  particular  effects  tvhich  the 
Spirit  always  produces  on  the  souls  in  which  He  dwells. 

I.  Let  me,  in  the  first  place,  explain  the  immense 
impoHance  of  having  the  Spirit. 

It  is  absolutely  necessary  to  make  this  point  clear. 
Unless  you  see  this  I  shall  appear  like  one  beating  the  air 
all  through  this  paper.  Once  let  your  mind  lay  hold  on 
this,  and  half  the  work  I  want  to  do  is  alreadv  done  tor 
your  soal. 

I  can  easily  fancy  some  reader  saying,  "  I  do  not  see  the 
use  of  this  question !  Supposing  I  have  not  the  Spirit, 
where  is  the  mighty  harm  ?  I  try  to  do  my  duty  in  this 
world  :  I  attend  my  church  regularly  :  I  receive  the 
Sacrament  occasionally:  I  believe  I  am  as  good  a 
Christian  as  my  neighbours.  I  say  my  prayers:  I  trust 
God  will  pardon  my  sins  for  Christ's  sake.  I  do  not  see 
why  I  should  not  reach  heaven  at  last,  without  troubling 
myself  with  hard  questions  about  the  Spirit." 

If  these  are  your  thoughts,  I  entreat  you  to  give  me 
your  attention  for  a  few  minutes,  while  I  try  to  supply  you 


HAVING  THE  SPIRIT. 


293 


with  reasons  for  thinking  differently.  Believe  me,  nothing 
less  than  your  soul's  salvation  depends  on  "  Having  the 
Spirit."  Life  or  death,  heaven  or  hell,  eternal  happiness 
or  eternal  misery,  are  bound  up  with  the  subject  of  this 
13aper. 

(«)  Remember,  for  one  thing,  if  you  have  not  the  Spirit, 
you,  have  no  part  in  Christ,  and  no  title  to  heaven. 

The  words  of  St.  Paul  are  express  and  unmistakable : 
"  If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of 
His."  (Rom.  viii.  9.)  The  words  of  St.  John  are  no  less 
clear :  "  Hereby  we  know  that  He  abideth  in  us  by  the 
Spirit  which  He  hath  given  us."  (1  John  iii.  2-1!.)  The 
indwelling  of  God  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  common  mark  of 
all  true  believers  in  Christ.  It  is  the  Shepherd's  mark  on  the 
flock  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  distinguishing  them  from  the  rest 
of  the  world.  It  is  the  goldsmith's  stamp  on  the  genuine 
sons  of  God,  which  separates  them  from  the  dross  and 
mass  of  false  professors.  It  is  the  King's  own  seal  on 
those  who  are  His  peculiar  people,  proving  them  to  be 
His  own  property.  It  is  "  the  earnest"  which  the  Redeemer 
gives  to  His  believing  disciples  while  they  are  in  the  body, 
as  a  pledge  of  the  full  and  complete  "  redemption  "  yet  to 
come  in  the  resurrection  morning.  (Ephes.  i.  14.)  This 
is  the  case  of  all  believers.    They  all  have  the  Spirit. 

Let  it  be  distinctly  understood  that  he  who  has  not  the 
Spirit  has  not  Christ.  He  who  has  not  Christ  has  no 
pardon  of  his  sins, — no  peace  with  God, — no  title  to  heaven, 
— no  well-grounded  hope  of  being  saved.  His  religion  is 
like  the  house  built  on  the  sand.  It  may  look  well  in  fine 
weather.  It  may  satisfy  him  in  the  time  of  health  and 
prosperity.  But  when  the  flood  rises,  and  the  wind  blows, 
— when  sickness  and  trouble  come  up  against  him,  it  will' 
fall  and  bury  him  under  its  ruins.  He  lives  without  a 
good  hope,  and  without  a  good  hope  he  dies.  He  will  rise 
again  only  to  be  miserable.  He  will  stand  in  the  judgment 
only  to  be  condemned ;  he  will  see  saints  and  angels 


294 


OLD  PATHS. 


looking  on,  and  remember  he  might  have  been  among 
them,  but  too  late ;  he  will  see  lost  myriads  around  him, 
and  find  they  cannot  comfort  him,  but  too  late.  This  Avill 
be  the  end  of  the  man  who  thinks  to  reach  heaven  without 
the  Spirit. 

Settle  these  things  down  in  5'our  memory,  and  let  them 
never  be  forgotten.  Are  they  not  worth  remembering? 
No  Holy  Spirit  in  you, — no  part  in  Christ !  No  part  in 
Christ, — no  forgiveness  of  sins  !  No  forgiveness  of  sins, — 
no  peace  with  God !  No  peace  with  God, — no  title  to 
heaven !  No  title  to  heaven, — no  admission  into  heaven  ! 
No  admission  into  heaven, — and  what  then  ?  Aye :  what 
then  ?  You  may  well  ask.  Whither  will  you  flee  ?  Which 
way  Avill  you  turn  ?  To  Avhat  refuge  will  you  run  ?  There 
is  none  at  all.  There  remains  nothing  but  hell.  Not 
admitted  into  heaven,  you  must  sink  at  last  into  hell. 

I  ask  eveiy  reader  of  this  paper  to  mark  well  what  I 
say.  Perhaps  it  startles  you :  but  may  it  not  be  good  for 
you  to  be  startled  ?  Have  I  told  jou  anything  more  than 
simple  scriptural  truth  ?  Where  is  the  defective  link  in 
the  chain  of  reasoning  you  have  heard  ?  Where  is  the 
flaw  in  the  argument  ?  I  believe  in  my  conscience  there 
is  none.  From  not  having  the  Spirit  to  being  in  hell, 
there  is  but  a  long  flight  of  downward  steps.  Living 
without  the  Spirit,  you  are  already  on  the  top;  dying 
without  the  Spirit,  you  will  find  your  way  to  the  bottom. 

(b)  Eemember,  for  another  thing,  if  you  have  not  the 
Spirit  you  have  no  holiness  of  heart,  and  no  meetness 
for  heaven. 

Heaven  is  the  place  to  which  all  people  hope  to  go  after 
death.  It  would  be  well  for  many  if  they  considered 
calmly  what  kind  of  dwelling-place  heaven  is.  It  is  the 
habitation  of  the  King  of  kings,  who  is  "  of  purer  eyes  than 
to  behold  iniquity,"  and  it  must  needs  be  a  holy  place.  It 
is  a  place  into  which  Scripture  tells  us  there  shall  enter  in 
nothing  "  that  defileth,  neither  whatsoever  worketh  abomi- 


HAVING  THE  SPIRIT. 


295: 


nation."  (Rev.  xxi.  27.)  It  is  a  place  where  there  shall 
be  nothing  wicked,  sinful,  or  sensual, — nothing  worldly, 
foolish,  frivolous,  or  profane.  There,  let  the  covetous  man 
remember,  shall  be  no  more  money ;  there,  let  the  pleasure- 
seeker  remember,  shall  be  no  more  races,  theatres,  novel 
reading,  or  balls ;  there,  let  the  drunkard  and  the  gambler 
remember,  shall  be  no  more  strong  drink,  no  more  dice,  no 
more  betting,  no  more  cards.  The  everlasting  presence  of 
God,  saints,  and  angels, — the  perpetual  doing  of  God's 
will, — the  complete  absence  of  everything  which  God  does 
not  approve, — these  are  the  chief  things  which  shall  make 
up  heaven.    It  shall  be  an  eternal  Sabbath  day. 

For  this  heaven  we  are  all  by  nature  utterly  unfit.  We 
have  no  capacity  for  enjoying  its  happiness ;  we  have  no, 
taste  for  its  blessings;  we  have  no  eye  to  see  its  beauty; 
we  have  no  heart  to  feel  its  comforts.  Instead  of  freedom, 
we  should  find  it  bondage ;  instead  of  glorious  liberty,  we 
should  find  it  constant  constraint;  instead  of  a  splendid 
palace,  we  should  find  it  a  gloomy  prison.  A  fish  on  dry 
land,  a  sheep  in  the  water,  an  eagle  in  a  cage,  a  painted 
savage  in  a  royal  drawing  room,  would  all  feel  more  at 
ease  and  in  their  place  than  a  natural  man  in  heaven. 
"  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  (Heb. 
xii.  14.) 

For  this  heaven  it  is  the  special  office  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  prepare  men's  souls.  He  alone  can  change  the 
earthly  heart,  and  purify  the  worldly  affections  of  Adam's 
children.  He  alone  can  can  bring  their  minds  into 
harmony  with  God,  and  tune  them  for  the  eternal  com- 
pany of  saints,  and  angels,  and  Christ.  He  alone  can 
make  them  love  what  God  loves,  and  hate  what  God  hates, 
and  delight  in  God's  presence.  He  alone  can  set  the 
limbs  of  human  nature,  which  were  broken  and'  dislocated 
by  Adam's  fall,  and  bring  about  a  real  unity  between 
man's  will  and  God's.  And  this  He  does  for  every  one 
that  is  saved.    It  is  written  of  believers  that  they  are 


296 


OLD  PATHS. 


"saved  according  to  God's  mercy,"  but  it  is  "by  tbe 
washing  of  regeneration,  and  renewing  of  the  Holy 
Ghost."  They  are  chosen  unto  salvation,  but  it  is 
"  through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit/'  as  well  as  "  belief, 
of  the  truth."    (Titus  iii.  5  ;  2  Thess.  ii.  13.) 

Let  this  also  be  written  down  on  the  tablet  of  your 
memory.  No  entrance  into  heaven  without  the  Spirit 
first  entering  your  heart  upon  earth  !  No  admission  intoi 
glory  in  the  next  life  without  previous  sanctification  in 
this  life !  No  Holy  Spirit  in  you  in  this  world, — then  no 
heaven  in  the  world  to  come !  You  would  not  be  fit  for 
it ;  you  would  not  be  ready  for  it ;  you  would  not  like  it ; 
you  would  not  enjoy  it.  There  is  much  use  made  in  the 
present  day  of  the  word  "  holy."  Our  ears  are  wearied  with 
"  holy  church,"  and  "  holy  baptism,"  and  "  holy  days,"  and 
"  holy  water,"  and  "  holy  services,"  and  "  holy  priests." 
But  one  thing  is  a  thousand  times  more  important :  and 
that  is,  to  be  made  a  really  holy  man  by  the  Spirit.  We 
must  be  made  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature,  while  we 
are  alive.  We  must  "  sow  to  the  Spirit,"  if  we  would  ever 
reap  life  everlasting.    (2  Peter  i.  4 ;  Gal.  vi.  8.) 

(c)  Remember,  for  another  thing,  if  you  have  not  the 
Spirit,  you  have  no  right  to  he  considered  a  true  Christian, 
and  no  ivill  or  power  to  become  one. 

It  x'equires  little  to  make  a  Christian  according  to  the 
standard  of  the  world.  Only  let  a  man  be  baptized  and 
attend  some  place  of  worship,  and  the  requirements  of  the 
world  are  satisfied.  The  man's  belief  may  not  be  so 
intelligent  as  that  of  a  Turk :  he  may  be  profoundly 
ignorant  of  the  Bible.  The  man's  practice  may  be  no 
better  than  that  of  a  heathen  :  many  a  respectable  Hindoo 
might  put  him  to  shame. — But  what  of  that  ?  He  is  an 
Englishman  !  He  has  been  baptized  !  He  goes  to  church 
or  chapel,  and  behaves  decently  when  there  !  What  more 
would  you  have  ?  If  you  do  not  call  him  a  Christian  you 
are  thought  very  uncharitable  ! 


HAVING  THE  SPIRIT. 


297 


But  it  takes  a  great  deal  more  than  this  to  make  a  man 
a  real  Christian  according  to  the  standard  of  the  Bible.' 
It  requires  the  co-operation  of  all  the  Three  Persons  of 
the  Blessed  Trinity.  The  election  of  God  the  Father, — 
tlie  blood  and  intercession  of  God  the  Son, — the  sanctifica- 
tion  of  God  the  Spirit, — must  all  meet  together  on  the 
soul  that  is  to  be  saved.  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost 
must  unite  to  work  the  work  of  making  any  child  of  Adam 
a  true  Christian. 

This  is  a  deep  subject,  and  one  that  must  be  bandied 
with  reverence.  But  where  the  Bible  speaks  with  decision, 
there  we  may  also  speak  with  decision  ;  and  the  words  of 
the  Bible  have  no  meaning  if  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
be  not  just  as  n<iedful  in  order  to  make  a  man  a  true 
Christian,  as  the  work  of  tlio  Father  or  the  work  of  the 
Son.  "  No  man,"  we  are  told,  "  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the 
Lord,  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  (1  Cor.  xii.  3.)  True 
Christians,  we  are  taught  in  Scripture,  are  "born  of  the 
Spirit."  They  live  in  the  Spirit;  they  are  led  by  the 
Spirit ;  by  the  Spirit  they  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body  ; 
by  one  Spirit  they  have  access  through  Jesus  unto  the 
Father.  Their  graces  are  all  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit ;  they 
are  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  they  are  a  habitation 
of  God  through  the  Spu-it ;  they  walk  after  the  Spirit; 
they  are  strengthened  by  the  Spirit.  Through  the  Spirit 
they  wait  for  the  hope  of  righteousness  by  faith.  (John 
iii.  6;  Gal.  v.  2.5;  Rom.  viii.  13,  14;  Eph.  ii.  18;  Gal.  v. 
22  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  19  ;  Eph.  ii.  22  ;  Rom.  viii.  4 ;  Eph.  iii.  16  ; 
Gal.  V.  5.)  These  are  plain  Scriptural  expressions.  Who 
will  dare  to  gainsay  them  ? 

The  truth  is  that  the  deep  corruption  of  human  nature 
would  make  salvation  impossible  if  it  were  not  for  the 
work  of  the  Spirit.  Without  Him  the  Father's  love  and 
the  Son's  redemption  are  set  before  us  in  vain.  The 
Spirit  must  reveal  them,  the  Spirit  must  apply  them,  or 
else  we  are  lost' souls. 


298 


OLD  PATHS. 


Nothing  less  than  the  power  of  Him  who  moved  on  the 
face  of  the  waters  in  the  day  of  creation  can  ever  raise  us 
from  our  low  estate.  He  Avho  said,  "  Let  there  be  light, 
and  there  was  light,"  must  speak  the  word  before  any  one 
of  us  will  ever  rise  to  newness  of  life.  He  who  came 
down  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  must  come  down  on  our 
poor  dead  souls,  before  they  will  ever  see  the  kingdom  of 
God.  Mercies  and  afflictions  may  move  the  surface  of  our 
hearts,  but  they  alone  will  never  reach  the  inner  man. 
Sacraments,  and  services,  and  sermons  may  produce  out- 
ward formality,  and  clothe  us  with  a  skin  of  religion,  but 
there  will  be  no  life.  Ministers  may  make  communicants, 
and  fill  churches  with  regular  worsliippers :  the  almighty 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  alone  can  make  true  Christians, 
and  fill  heaven  with  orlorified  saints. 

Let  this  also  be  written  in  your  memory,  and  never 
forgotten.  No  Holy  Spirit, — no  true  Christianity  !  You 
must  have  the  Spirit  in  you,  as  well  as  Christ  for  you,  if 
you  are  ever  to  be  saved.  God  must  be  your  loving  Father, 
Jesus  must  be  your  knovm  Redeemer,  the  Holy  Ghost 
must  be  your  felt  Sanctifier,  or  else  it  will  be  better  for 
you  never  to  have  been  born. 

I  press  the  subject  on  the  serious  consideration  of  all 
who  read  these  pages.  I  trust  I  have  said  enough  to 
show  you  that  it  is  of  vital  importance  to  your  soul  to 
"have  the  Spirit."  It  is  no  abstruse  and  mysterious 
point  of  divinity;  it  is  no  nice  question  of  which  the 
solution  matters  little  one  way  or  another.  It  is  a  subject 
in  which  is  bound  up  the  everlasting  peace  of  your  soul. 

You  may  not  like  the  tidings.  You  may  call  it  enthu- 
siasm, or  fanaticism,  or  extravagance.  I  take  my  stand  on 
the  plain  teaching  of  the  Bible.  I  say  that  God  must 
dwell  in  your  heart  by  the  Spirit  on  earth,  or  you  will 
never  dwell  with  God  in  heaven. 

"  Ah,"  you  may  say,  "  I  do  not  know  much  about  it.  I 
trust  Christ  will  be  merciful.    I  hope  I  shall  go  to  heaven 


HAVING  THE  SPIRIT, 


299: 


'after  all."  I  answer,  No  man  ever  yet  tasted  of  Christ's 
mercy  who  did  not  also  receive  of  His  Spirit. — No  man 
was  ever  justified  who  was  not  also  sanctified. — No  man 
ever  went  to  heaven  who  was  not  led  there  by  the 
Spirit. 

II.  Let  me,  in  the  second  place,  point  out  the  great 
general  rule  and  'principle  by  tvhich  the  question  may  b& 
decided,  tvhether  ive  have  the  Spirit. 

I  can  quite  understand  that  the  idea  of  knowing  whethen 
we  "have  the  Spirit "  is  disagreeable  to  many  minds.  I  am 
not  ignorant  of  the  objections  which  Satan  at  once  stirs 
lip  in  the  natural  heart.  "  It  is  impossible  to  know  it," 
says  one  person :  "  it  is  a  deep  thing,  and  beyond  our* 
reach." — "It  is  too  mysterious  a  thing  to  inquire  into," 
says  another :  "we  must  be  content  to  leave  the  subject  in 
uncertainty." — "  It  is  wrong  to  pretend  to  know  anything 
about  it,"  says  a  third :  "  we  were  never  meant  to  look 
into  such  questions.  It  is  only  fit  for  enthusiasts  and 
fanatics  to  talk  of  having  the  Spirit." — I  hear  such 
objections  without  being  moved  by  them.  I  say  that  it 
can  be  known  whether  a  man  has  the  Spirit.  It  can  bo 
known, — it  ma.y  be  known, — it  ought  to  be  known.  It 
needs  no  vision  from  heaven,  no  revelation  from  an  angel 
to  discern  it ;  it  needs  nothing  but  calm  inquiry  by  the 
light  of  God's  Word.    Let  us  enter  upon  that  inquiry. 

All  men  have  not  the  Holy  Spirit.  I  regard  the 
doctrine  of  an  inward  spiritual  light  enjoyed  by  all  man- 
kind as  an  unscriptural  delusion.  I  believe  the  modern 
notion  of  universal  inspiration  to  be  a  baseless  dream. 
Without  controversy,  God  has  not  left  Himself  without  a 
witness  in  the  heart  of  fallen  man.  He  has  left  in  every 
mind  sufficient  knowledge  of  right  and  wrong  to  make  all 
men  responsible  and  accountable.  He  has  given  to  every 
child  of  Adam  a  conscience :  but  He  has  not  given  to 
every  child  of  Adam  the  Holy  Ghost.    A  man  may  have 


300 


OLD  PATHS. 


good  wishes  like  Balaam,  do  many  things  like  Herod,  be 
almost  persuaded  like  Agrippa,  and  tremble  like  Felix, 
and  yet  be  as  uttei-ly  destitute  of  the  grace  of  the  Spirit 
as  these  men  were.  St.  Paul  tells  us  that  before  con- 
version men  may  "know  God"  in  a  certain  sense,  and 
have  "  thoughts  accusing  or  excusing  one  another."  But 
he  also  tells  us  that  before  conversion  men  are  "  without 
God"  and  "without  Christ,"  have  "no  hope,"  and  are 
"darkness"  itself.  (Rom.  i.  21 ;  ii.  15  ;  Eph.  ii.  12 ;  v.  8.) 
The  Lord  Jesus  Himself  says  of  the  Spirit,  "  The  world 
seeth  Him  not,  neither  knoweth  Him :  but  ye  know  Him, 
for  He  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in  you."  (John 
xiv.  17.) 

All  members  oj  Churches  and  baptized  persons  have 
not  the  Spirit.  I  see  no  ground  in  Scripture  for  saying 
that  every  man  who  receives  baptism  receives  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  that  we  ought  to  regard  him  as  born  of  the 
Spirit.  I  dare  not  tell  baptized  people  that  they  all  have 
the  Spirit,  and  that  they  only  need  "  stir  up  the  gift  of 
God "  within  them  in  order  to  be  saved.  I  see,  on  the 
contrary,  that  Jude  speaks  of  members  of  the  visible 
Church  in  his  day  as  "not  having  the  Spirit."  Some  of 
them  probably  had  been  baptized  by  the  hands  of  apostles, 
and  admitted  into  full  communion  with  the  professing 
Church.  No  matter !  they  "had  not  the  Spirit."  (Jude  19.) 

It  is  vain  to  attempt  to  evade  the  power  of  this  single 
expression.  It  teaches  plainly  that  "  having  the  Spirit " 
is  not  the  lot  of  every  man,  and  not  the  portion  of  every 
member  of  the  visible  Church  of  Christ.  It  shows  the 
necessity  of  finding  out  some  general  rule  and  principle 
by  which  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  in  a  man  may  be 
ascertained.  He  does  not  dwell  in  every  one.  Baptism 
and  churchmanship  are  no  proofs  of  His  presence.  How, 
then,  shall  I  know  whether  a  man  has  the  Spirit  ? 

The  presence  of  the  Spirit  in  a  man's  soul  can  only  be 
known  by  the  effects  which  He  produces.    The  f  ruits  He 


HAVING  THE  SPIRIT. 


SOI 


causes  to  be  brought  forth  in  a  man's  heart  and  liie,  are 
the  only  evidence  which  can  be  depended  on.  A  man's 
faith,  a  man's  opinions,  and  a  man's  practice,  are  the 
witnesses  we  must  examine,  if  we  would  find  out  whether 
a  man  has  the  Spirit.  This  is  the  rule  of  the  Lord  Jesus  : 
"  Every  tree  is  known  by  his  own  fruit."    (Luke  vi.  44.) 

The  effects  which  the  Holy  Spirit  produces  may  always 
be  seen.  The  man  of  the  world  may  not  understand 
them  :  they  may  in  many  cases  be  feeble  and  indistinct ; 
but  where  the  Spirit  is.  He  will  not  be  hid.  He  is  not 
idle  when  He  enters  the  heart :  He  does  not  lie  still ; 
He  does  not  sleep:  He  will  make  His  presence  known. 
He  will  shine  out  little  by  little  through  the  windows  of  a 
man's  daily  habits  and  conversation,  and  manifest  to  the 
world  that  He  is  in  him.  A  dormant,  torpid,  silent  in- 
dwelling of  the  Spirit  is  a  notion  that  pleases  the  minds 
of  many.  It  is  a  notion  for  which  I  see  no  authority  in 
the  Word  of  God.  I  hold  entirely  with  the  Homily  for 
Whit-Sunday:  "As  the  tree  is  known  by  his  frviit,  so  is 
also  the  Holy  Ghost." 

In  whomsoever  I  see  the  effects  and  fruits  of  the  Spirit, 
|in  that  man  I  see  one  who  has  the  Spirit.  I  believe  it  to 
be  not  only  charitable  to  think  so,  but  presumption  to 
doubt  it.  I  do  not  expect  to  behold  the  Holy  Ghost  with 
my  bodily  eyes,  or  to  touch  Him  with  my  hands.  But  I 
need  no  angel  to  come  down  to  show  me  where  He  dwells  ; 
I  need  no  vision  from  heaven  to  tell  me  where  I  may  find 
Him.  Only  show  me  a  man  in  whom  the  fruits  of  the 
Spirit  are  to  be  seen,  and  I  see  one  who  "  has  the  Spirit." 
I  will  not  doubt  the  inward  presence  of  the  almighty 
cause,  when  I  see  the  outward  fact  of  an  evident  effect. 

Can  I  see  the  wind  on  a  stormy  day  ?  I  cannot :  but  I 
can  see  the  effects  of  its  force  and  power.  When  I  see  the 
clouds  driven  before  it,  and  the  trees  bending  under  it, — 
when  I  hear  it  whistling  through  doors  and  windows,  or 
howling  round  the  chimney  tops,  I  do  not  for  a  moment 


'302^ 


OLD  PATHS. 


doubt  its  existence.  I  say,  "  There  is  a  wind."  Just  so 
it  is  with  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  in  the  soul. 

Can  I  see  the  deiu  of  heaven  as  it  falls  on  a  summer 
iBvening  ?  I  cannot.  It  comes  down  softly  and  gently, 
noiseless  and  imperceptible.  But  when  I  go  forth  in  the 
morning  after  a  cloudless  night,  and  see  every  leaf  spark- 
ling with  moisture,  and  feel  every  blade  of  grass  damp  and 
wet,  I  say  at  once,  "  There  has  been  a  dew."  Just  so  it  is 
with  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  in  the  soul. 

Can  I  see  the  hand  of  the  soiver  when  I  walk  through 
the  corn  fields  in  the  month  of  July?  I  cannot.  I  see 
nothing  but  millions  of  ears  rich  with  grain,  and  bending 
to  the  ground  with  ripeness :  but  do  I  Suppose  that  harvest 
came  by  chance,  and  grew  of  itseK  ?  I  suppose  nothing  of 
the  kind.  I  know  when  I  see  those  corn  fields  that  the 
plough  and  the  harrow  were  at  work  one  day,  and  that 
a  hand  has  been  there  which  sowed  the  seed.  Just  so  it 
is  with  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  the  soul. 

Can  I  see  the  magnetic  fluid  in  the  compass-needle  1 
I  cannot.  It  acts  in  a  hidden  mysterious  way  :  but  when  I 
see  that  little  piece  of  iron  always  turning  to  the  north,  I 
know  at  once  that  it  is  under  the  secret  influence  of 
magnetic  power.  Just  so  it  is  with  the  work  of  the  Spirit 
in  the  soul. 

Can  I  see  the  mainspring  of  my  tuatch  when  I  look 
upon  its  face  ?  I  cannot.  But  when  I  see  the  fingers 
going  round  and  telling  the  hours  and  minutes  of  the  day 
in  regular  succession,  I  do  not  donbt  the  mainspring's  ex- 
istence.   Just  so  it  is  with  the  work  of  the  Spirit. 

Can  I  see  the  steersman  of  the  homeward-bound  ship, 
when  she  first  comes  in  sight,  and  her  sails  whiten  on  the 
horizon  ?  I  cannot.  But  when  I  stand  on  the  pier-head 
and  see  that  ship  working  her  course  over  the  sea  towards 
the  harbour's  mouth,klike  a  thing  of  life,  I  know  well  there 
is  one  at  the  helm  who  guides  her  movements.  Just  so  it 
is  with  the  work  of  the  Spirit. 


HAVIXG  THE  SPIRIT. 


303 


I  cliarge  all  my  readers  to  remember  tliis.  Establish  it 
as  a  settled  principle  in  your  mind,  that  if  the  Holy  Ghost 
really  is  in  a  man,  it  will  be  seen  in  the  effects  He  pro- 
duces on  his  heart  and  life. 

Beware  of  supposing  that  a  man  may  have  the  Spirit 
when  there  is  no  outward  evidence  of  His  presence  in  the 
soul.  It  is  a  dangerous  and  unscriptural  delusion  to  think 
so.  We  must  never  lose  sight  of  the  broad  principles  laid 
down  for  us  in  Scripture  :  "  If  we  say  that  we  have  fellow- 
ship with  Him,  and  walk  in  darkness,  we  lie,  and  do  not 
the  truth." — "  In  this  the  children  of  God  are  manifest  and 
the  children  of  the  devil :  whosoever  doeth  not  righteous- 
ness is  not  of  God."    (1  John  i.  6  ;  iii.  10.) 

You  have  heard,  I  doubt  not,  of  a  wretched  class  of 
Christians  called  Antiuomians.  They  are  persons  who 
boast  of  having  an  interest  in  Christ,  and  say  they  are 
pardoned  and  forgiven,  while  at  the  same  time  they  live 
in  wilful  sin  and  open  breach  of  God's  commandments. 
You  have  been  told,  I  dare  say,  that  such  people  are 
miserably  deceived.  They  are  going  down  to  hell  with  a 
lie  in  their  right  hand.  The  true  believer  in  Christ  is 
"  dead  to  sin."  Every  man  that  has  real  hope  in  Christ 
"  purifieth  himself  even  as  He  is  pure."    (1  John  iii.  3.) 

But  I  will  tell  you  of  a  delusion  quite  as  dangerous  as 
that  of  the  Antinomians,  and  flir  more  specious.  That 
delusion  is, — to  flatter  yourself  you  have  the  Spirit 
dwelling  in  your  heart,  while  there  are  no  fruits  of  the 
Spirit  to  be  seen  in  your  life.  I  firmly  believe  that  this 
delusion  is  ruining  thousands,  as  surely  as  Antinomianism. 
It  is  just  as  perilous  to  dishonour  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  it  is 
to  dishonour  Christ.  It  is  just  as  offensive  to  God  to 
pretend  to  an  interest  in  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  as  it  is 
to  pretend  to  an  interest  in  the  work  of  Christ. 

Once  for  all,  I  charge  my  readers  to  remember  that 
the  effects  which  the  Spirit  produces  are  the  only  trust- 
worthy evidences  of  His  presence.    To  talk  of  the  Holy 


304 


OLD  PATHS. 


Ghost  dwelling  in  you  and  yet  being  unseen  in  your  life, 
is  wild  work  indeed.  It  confounds  the  first  principles  of 
the  Gospel :  it  confounds  light  and  darkness, — nature  and 
grace, — conversion  and  unconversiou, — faith  and  unbelief, 
■ — the  children  of  God  and  the  children  of  the  devil. 

There  is  only  one  safe  position  in  this  matter.  There 
is  only  one  safe  answer  to  the  question,  "  How  shall  we 
decide  who  have  the  Spirit  ?  "  We  must  take  our  stand 
on  the  old  principle  laid  down  b}'  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ : 
"By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them."  (Matt.  vii.  20.) 
Where  the  Spirit  is  there  will  be  fruit :  he  who  has  no 
fruit  of  the  Spirit  has  not  the  Spirit.  A  work  of  the 
Spirit  unfelt,  unseen,  inoperative,  is  a  positive  delusion. 
Where  the  Spu-it  really  is  He  will  be  felt,  seen,  and 
known. 

III.  Let  me,  in  the  last  place,  describe  the  farticvlar 
effects  vjhich  the  S2nrit  irroduces  on  the  souls  in  which 
He  divells. 

I  regard  this  part  of  the  subject  as  the  most  important 
of  all.  Hitherto  I  have  spoken  generally  of  the  great 
leading  principles  which  must  guide  us  in  inquiring  about 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  I  must  now  come  closer, 
and  speak  of  the  special  marks  by  which  the  presence  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  any  individual  heart  may  be  discerned. 
Happily,  with  the  Bible  for  our  light,  these  marks  are  not 
hard  to  find  out. 

Some  things  I  wish  to  premise  before  entering  fully  into 
the  subject.    It  is  needful  in  order  to  clear  the  way. 

(a)  I  grant  freely  that  there  are  some  deep  raysterics 
about  the  work  of  the  Spirit.  I  cannot  explain  the  manner 
of  His  comins:  into  the  heart.  "  The  wind  bloweth  where 
it  listeth,  and  thou  hearest  the  sound  thereof,  but  canst  not 
tell  whence  it  cometh  and  whither  it  goeth :  so  is  every 
one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit."  (John  iii.  8.)  I  cannot 
explain  why  He  comes  into  one  heart  and  not  into  another. 


HAVING  THE  SPIKIT. 


805 


—  why  He  condescends  to  dwell  in  tlais  man  and  not  in 
that.  I  only  know  that  so  it  is.  He  acts  as  a  sovereign. 
To  use  the  words  of  the  Church  Catechism,  He  sanctifioth 
"  the  elect  people  of  God."  But  I  remember  also  that  T 
cannot  explain  why  I  was  born  in  Christian  England,  and 
not  in  heathen  Africa.  I  am  satisfied  t'^  believe  that  all 
God's  work  is  well  done.  It  is  enough  for  me  to  be  in  the 
Kind's  court,  without  being  of  the  King's  counsel. 

(b)  I  grant  freely  that  there  are  gjxat  diversities  in  the 
operations  by  which  the  Spirit  carries  on  His  work  in 
men's  souls. — There  are  differences  in  the  ages  at  which 
He  begins  to  enter  the  heart.  With  some  He  begins 
young,  as  with  John  the  Baptist  and  Timothy :  with  some 
he  begins  old,  as  with  Manasseh  and  Zacchasus. — There  are 
differences  in  the  feelings  which  He  first  stirs  up  in  the 
heart.  He  leads  some  by  strong  terror  and  alarm,  like  the 
jailer  at  Philipj^i.  He  leads  some  by  gently  opening  their 
hearts  to  receive  the  truth,  as  Lydia,  the  purple-seller. — 
There  are  differences  in  ihe  time  occuined  in  effecting  this 
complete  change  of  character.  With  some  the  change  is 
immediate  and  sudden,  as  it  was  with  Saul  when  he 
journeyed  to  Damascus:  with  others  it  is  gradual  and 
slow,  as  it  was  with  Nicodemus  the  Pharisee. — There  are 
differences  in  the  instruments  lie  uses  in  first  awakening 
the  soul  from  its  natural  death.  With  some  He  uses  a 
sermon,  with  others  the  Bible,  with  others  a  tract,  with 
others  a  friend's  advice,  with  others  a  sickness  or  affliction, 
with  others  no  one  particular  thing  that  can  be  distinctly 
traced.  All  this  is  most  important  to  understand.  To 
require  all  persons  to  be  squared  down  to  one  kind  of 
experience  is  a  most  grievous  mistake. 

(c)  I  grant  freely  that  the  hcginnings  of  the  Spirit's 
vjork  are  often  small  and  imj)erceptihle.  The  seed  from 
which  the  spiritual  character  is  formed  is  often  very  minute 
at  first.  The  fountain-head  of  the  spiritual  life,  like  that 
of  many  a  mighty  river,  is  frequently  at  its  outset  a  little 

X 


306 


OLD  PATHS. 


trickling  stream.  The  beginnings  therefore  of  the  Spirit's 
work  in  a  soul  are  generally  overlooked  by  the  world, — 
very  frequently  not  duly  valued  and  encouraged  by  other 
Christians, — and  almost  without  exception  thoroughly  mis- 
imderstood  by  the  soul  itself  which  is  the  subject  of  them. 
Let  that  never  he  forgotten.  The  man  in  whom  the  Spirit 
begins  to  work  is  never  hardly  iiware,  till  long  afterwards, 
that  his  state  of  mind  about  the  time  of  his  conversion 
arose  from  the  entrance  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

But  still,  after  all  these  concessions  and  allowances, 
there  are  certain  great  leading  effects  which  the  Spirit 
produces  on  the  soul  in  which  He  dwells,  which  are 
always  one  and  the  same.  Those  who  have  the  Spirit 
may  be  led  at  first  by  different  paths,  but  they  are  always 
brought,  sooner  or  later,  into  one  and  the  same  narrow 
vjay.  Their  leading  opinions  in  religion  are  the  same ; 
their  leading  desires  are  the  same ;  their  general  walk  is 
the  same.  They  may  differ  from  one  another  widely  in 
their  natural  character,  but  their  spiritual  character,  in 
its  main  features,  is  always  one.  The  Holy  Ghost  al- 
ways produces  one  general  kind  of  effects.  Shades  and 
varieties  there  are  no  doubt  in  the  experience  of  those  on 
whose  hearts  He  works,  but  the  general  outline  of  their 
faith  and  life  is  always  the  same. 

What  then  are  these  general  effects  which  the  Spirit 
always  produces  on  those  who  really  have  Him  ?  What 
are  the  marks  of  His  presence  in  the  soul  ?  This  is  the 
question  which  now  remains  to  be  considered.  Let  us  try 
to  set  down  these  marks  in  order. 

1.  All  who  have  the  Spirit  are  quickened  by  Him,and 
made  spiritually  alive.  He  is  called  in  Scripture,  "  The 
Spirit  of  life."  (Rom.  viii.  3.)  "  It  is  the  Spirit,"  says 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  "that  quickeneth."  (John  vi.  63.) 
We  are  all  by  nature  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  We 
have  neither  feeling  nor  interest  about  religion ;  we  have 
neither  faith,  nor  hope,  nor  fear,  nor  love :  our  hearts  are 


HAVING  THE  SPIRIT. 


S07 


iu  a  state  of  torpor ;  they  are  compared  in  Scripture  to  a 
stone.  We  may  be  alive  about  money,  learning,  politics, 
or  pleasure,  but  we  are  dead  towards  God. — All  this  is 
changed  when  the  Spirit  comes  into  the  heart.  He  raises 
us  from  this  state  of  death,  and  makes  us  new  creatures. 
He  awakens  the  conscience,  and  inclines  the  will  towards 
God.  He  causes  old  things  to  pass  away,  and  all  things  to 
become  new.  He  gives  us  a  new  heart;  He  makes  us  put 
off  the  old  man,  and  put  on  the  new.  He  blows  the 
trumpet  in  the  ear  of  our  slumbering  faculties,  and  sends 
us  forth  to  walk  the  world  as  if  we  were  new  beings. 
How  unlike  was  Lazarus  shut  up  in  the  silent  tomb,  to 
Lazarus  coming  forth  at  our  Lord's  command !  How 
unlike  was  Jairus'  daughter  lying  cold  on  her  bed  amidst 
weeping  friends,  to  Jairus'  daughter  rising  and  speaking  to 
her  mother  as  she  was  wont  to  do !  Just  as  unlike  is  the 
man  in  whom  the  Spirit  dwells  to  what  he  was  before  the 
Spirit  came  into  him. 

I  appeal  to  every  thinking  reader.  Can  he  whose  heart 
is  manifestly  full  of  everything  but  God, — hard,  cold,  and 
insensible, — can  he  be  said  to  "  have  the  Spirit  "  ?  Judge 
for  yourself. 

2.  All  who  have  the  Spirit  are  taugltt  by  Him.  He  is 
called  in  Scripture,  "  The  Spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation." 
(Ejjh.  i.  17.)  It  was  the  promise  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  "He 
shall  teach  you  all  things ; "  "  He  shall  guide  you  into  all 
truth."  (John  xiv.  26;  xvi.  13.)  We  are  all  by  nature 
ignorant  of  spiritual  truth.  "  The  natural  man  receiveth 
not  the  things  of  tlie  Spirit  of  God :  they  are  foolishness ' 
to  him."  (1  Cor.  ii.  14.)  Our  eyes  are  blinded.  We 
neither  know  God,  nor  Christ,  nor  ourselves,  nor  the  world, 
nor  sin,  nor  heaven,  nor  hell,  as  we  ought.  We  see  every- 
thing under  false  colours. — The  Spirit  alters  entirely  this 
state  of  things.  He  opens  the  eyes  of  our  understandings  ; 
He  illumines  us ;  He  calls  us  out  of  darkness  into  mar- 
vellous light ;  He  takes  away  the  veil ;  He  shines  into  our 


308 


OLD  PATHS. 


Iiearts,  and  makes  us  see  things  as  they  really  are.  No 
wonder  that  all  true  Christians  are  so  remarkably  agreed 
upon  the  essentials  of  true  religion  ?  The  reason  is  that 
they  have  all  learned  in  one  school, — the  school  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  No  wonder  that  true  Christians  can  under- 
stand each  other  at  once,  and  find  common  ground  of 
communion  !  They  have  been  taught  the  same  language 
by  One  whose  lessons  are  never  forgotten. 

I  appeal  again  to  every  thinking  rea'ler.  Can  he  who 
is  ignorant  of  the  leading  doctrines  of  the  Gospel,  and 
blind  to  his  own  state, — can  he  be  said  to  "  have  the 
Spirit  "  ?    J udge  for  yourself. 

3.  All  who  have  the  Spirit  are  led  hy  Him  to  the 
Scriptures.  This  is  the  instrument  by  which  He  specially 
works  on  the  soul.  The  Word  is  called  "the  sword  of 
the  Spirit."  Those  who  are  born  again  are  said  to  be 
"  born  by  the  Word."  (Eph.  vi.  17 ;  1  Peter  i.  23.)  All 
Scripture  was  written  under  His  inspiration:  He  never 
teaches  anything  which  is  not  therein  written.  He  causes 
the  man  in  whom  He  dwells  to  "  delisfht  in  the  law  of  the 
Lord."  (Psalm  i.  2.)  Just  as  the  infant  desires  the  milk 
Avhich  nature  has  provided  for  it,  and  refuses  all  other 
food,  so  does  the  soul  which  has  the  Sj^irit  desire  the  sincere 
milk  of  the  Word.  Just  as  the  Israelites  fed  on  the 
manna  in  the  wilderness,  so  are  the  children  of  God  taught 
by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  feed  on  the  contents  of  the  Bible. 

I  appeal  again  to  every  thinking  reader.  Can  he  who 
never  reads  the  Bible,  or  only  reads  it  formally, — can  he 
be  said  to  "  have  the  Spirit "  ?    Judge  for  yourself 

4.  All  who  have  the  Spirit  are  convinced  by  Him  of 
8171.  This  is  an  especial  office  which  the  Lord  Jesns 
promised  He  should  fulfil.  "  When  He  is  come,  He  shall 
reprove  the  world  of  sin."  (John  xvi.  8.)  He  alone  can 
open  a  man's  eyes  to  the  real  extent  of  His  guilt  and 
corruption  before  God.  He  always  does  this  when  He  comes 
into  the  soul.    He  puts  us  in  our  right  place ;  He  shows 


HAVING  THE  SPIRIT. 


S09 


US  the  vilencss  of  our  own  hearts,  and  makes  us  cry  with  the 
publican,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  He  pulls  , 
down  those  proud,  self-righteous,  self-justifying  notions 
Avith  which  we  are  all  born,  and  makes  us  feel  as  we  ought 
to  feel, — "  I  am  a  bad  man,  and  I  deserve  to  be  in  hell." 
Ministers  may  alarm  us  for  a  little  season ;  sickness  may 
break  the  ice  on  our  hearts ;  but  the  ice  will  soon  freeze 
again  if  it  is  not  thawed  by  the  breath  of  the  Spirit, 
and  convictions  not  wrought  by  Him  will  pass  away  like 
the  morning  dew. 

I  appeal  again  to  every  thinking  reader.  Can  the  man. 
who  never  feels  the  burden  of  his  sins,  and  knows  not 
what  it  is  to  be  humbled  by  the  thought  of  them, — can  he 
"  have  the  Spirit "  ?    Judge  for  yourself. 

5.  All  who  have  the  Spirit  are  led  by  Him  to  Christ 
for  salvation.  It  is  one  special  part  of  His  office  to 
"  testify  of  Christ,"  to  "  take  of  the  things  of  Christ,  and 
to  show  them  to  us."  (John  xv.  26;  xvi.  15.)  By  nature 
we  all  think  to  work  our  own  way  to  heaven :  we  fancy  in  our 
blindness  that  we  can  make  our  peace  with  God.  From 
this  miserable  blindness  the  Spirit  delivers  us.  He  shows 
us  that  in  ourselves  we  are  lost  and  hopeless,  and  that 
Christ  is  the  only  door  by  which  we  can  enter  heaven  and 
be  saved.  He  teaches  'us  that  nothing  but  the  blood  of 
Jesus  can  atone  for  sin,  and  that  through  His  mediation 
alone  God  can  be  just  and  the  justificr  of  the  ungodly. 
He  reveals  to  us  the  exqixisite  fitness  and  suitableness  to  our 
souls  of  Christ's  salvation.  He  unfolds  to  us  the  beauty  of 
the  glorious  doctrine  of  justification  by  simple  faith.  He 
sheds  abroad  in  our  hearts  that  mighty  love  of  God  which 
is  in  Christ  Jesus.  Just  as  the  dove  flies  to  the  well- 
known  cleft  of  the  rock,  so  does  the  soul  of  him  who  has 
the  Spirit  flee  to  Christ  and  rest  on  Him.   (Rom.  v.  5.) 

I  appeal  again  to  every  thinking  reader.  Can  he  who 
knows  nothing  of  faith  in  Christ,  be  said  to  "  have  the 
Spirit "  ?    Judge  for  yourself. 


OLD  PATHS. 


6.  All  who  have  the  Spirit  are  hy  Him  made  holy. 
He  is  "  the  Spirit  of  holiness."  (Rom.  i.  4.)  When  He 
dwells  in  men,  He  makes  them  follow  after  "  love,  joy, 
peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness,  meekness,  faith,  patience, 
temperance."  He  makes  it  natural  to  them,  through  their 
new  "Divine  nature,"  to  count  all  God's  precepts  concerning 
all  things  to  be  right,  and  to  "  hate  every  false  way." 
(2  Pet  i.  4;  Ps.  cxix.  128.)  Sin  is  no  more  pleasant  to 
them :  it  is  their  sorrow  when  tempted  by  it ;  it  is  their 
shame  when  they  are  overtaken  by  it.  Their  desire  is  to 
be  free  from  it  altogether.  Their  happiest  times  are  when 
they  are  enabled  to  walk  most  closely  with  God :  their 
saddest  times  are  when  they  are  furthest  oft  ft-om  Him. 

I  appeal  again  to  every  thinking  reader.  Can  those 
who  do  not  even  pretend  to  live  strictly  according  to  God's 
will,  be  said  to  "  have  the  Spirit "  ?    Judge  for  yourself. 

7.  All  those  who  have  the  Spirit  are  spiritually 
minded.  To  use  the  words  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  "  They 
that  are  after  the  Spirit,  mind  the  things  of  the  Spirit." 
(Rom.  viii.  5.)  The  general  tone,  tenor,  and  bias  of  their 
minds  is  in  favour  of  spiritual  things.  They  do  not  serve 
God  by  fits  and  starts,  but  habitually.  They  may  be  drawn 
aside  by  strong  temptations ;  but  the  general  tendency  of 
their  lives,  ways,  tastes,  thoughts  and  habits,  is  spiritual. 
You  see  it  in  the  way  they  spend  their  leisure  time,  the 
company  they  love  to  keep,  and  their  conduct  in  their  own 
homes.  And  all  is  the  result  of  the  spiritual  nature 
implanted  in  them  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Just  as  the  cater- 
pillar when  it  becomes  a  butterfly  can  no  longer  be  content 
to  crawl  on  earth,  but  will  fly  upwards  and  use  its  Avings, 
so  will  the  affections  of  the  man  who  has  the  Spirit  be 
ever  reaching  upwards  toward  God. 

I  appeal  again  to  every  thinking  reader.  Can  those 
whose  minds  are  wholly  intent  on  the  things  of  this  world 
be  said  to  "  have  the  Spirit "  ?    Judge  for  yourself. 

8.  All  that  have  the  Spirit  leel  a  conflict  within  them. 


HAVING  THE  SPIRIT. 


behrccn  the  old  nature  and  the  neiu.  The  words  of  St. 
Paul  are  true,  more  or  less,  of  all  the  children  of  God  : 
"  The  flesh  lusteth  against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against 
the  flesh,  so  that  ye  cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  would." 
(Gal.  V.  17.)  They  feel  a  holy  principle  within  their 
breasts,  which  makes  them  delight  in  the  law  of  God :  but 
they  feel  another  principle  within,  striving  hard  for  the 
mastery,  and  struggling  to  drag  them  downwards  and 
backwards.  Some  feel  this  conflict  more  than  others :  but 
all  who  have  the  Spirit  are  acquainted  with  it ;  and  it  is 
a  token  for  good.  It  is  a  proof  that  the  strong  man  armed 
no  longer  reigns  within,  as  he  once  did,  with  undisj^uted 
sway.  The  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  may  be  known  by 
inward  warfare  as  well  as  by  inward  peace.  He  that  has 
been  taught  to  rest  and  hope  in  Christ,  will  always  be  one 
who  fights  and  wars  with  sin. 

I  appeal  again  to  every  thinking  reader.  Can  he  who 
knows  nothing  of  inward  conflict,  and  is  a  servant  to  sin, 
the  world,  and  his  own  self-will,  can  he  be  said  to  "  have 
the  Spirit "  ?    Judge  for  yourself. 

9.  All  who  have  the  Spirit  love  others  tvho  have  the 
Spirit.  It  is  written  of  them  by  St.  John,  "  We  know 
that  we  have  passed  from  death  to  life,  because  we  love 
tlie  brethren."  (1  John  iii.  14)  The  more  they  see  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  any  one,  the  more  dear  he  is  to  them. 
They  regard  him  as  a  member  of  the  same  family,  a  child 
of  the  same  Father,  a  subject  of  the  same  King,  and  a 
fellow-traveller  with  themselves  in  a  foreign  country  to- 
wards the  same  father-land.  It  is  the  glory  of  tiie  Spirit 
to  bring  back  something  of  that  brotherly  love  which  sin 
has  so  miserably  chased  out  of  the  world.  He  makes 
men  love  one  another  for  reasons  which  to  the  natural 
man  are  foolishness, — for  the  sake  of  a  common  Saviour, 
a  common  faith,  a  common  service  on  earth,  and  the  hope 
of  a  common  home.  He  raises  up  friendships  independent 
of  blood,  marriage,  interest,  business,  or  any  worldly 


312 


OLD  PATHS. 


motive.  He  unites  mea  by  making  them  feel  they  are 
united  to  one  great  centre,  Jesus  Christ. 
.  I  appeal  again  to  every  thinking  reader.  Can  he  who 
finds  no  pleasure  in  the  company  of  siiiritually-minded 
persons,  or  even  sneers  at  them  as  saints, — can  he  be 
said  to  "  have  the  Spirit "  ?    J udge  for  yourself 

10.  Finally,  all  who  have  the  Spirit  are  taught  by  Him 
to  pray.  He  is  called  in  Scripture,  "  The  Spirit  of  grace 
and  supplication."  (Zech.  xii.  10.)  The  elect  of  God 
are  said  to  "  cry  to  Him  night  and  day."  (Luke  xviii.  7.) 
They  cannot  help  it :  their  prayers  may  be  poor,  and 
weak,  and  wandering, — but  pray  they  must ;  something 
within  them  tells  them  they  must  speak  with  God  and  lay 
their  wants  before  Him.  Just  as  the  infant  Avill  cry  when 
it  feels  pain  or  hunger,  because  it  is  its  nature,  so  will  the 
new  nature  implanted  by  the  Holy  Ghost  oblige  a  man  to 
pray.  He  has  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  and  he  must  cry, 
"  Abba,  Father."    (Gal.  iv.  6.) 

Once  more  I  appeal  to  every  thinking  reader.  Can 
the  man  who  never  prays  at  all,  or  is  content  with  saying 
a  few  formal  heartless  words,  can  he  be  said  to  "  have  the 
Spirit "  ?    For  the  last  time  I  say,  Judge  for  yourself 

Such  are  the  marks  and  signs  by  which  I  believe  the 
presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  a  man  may  be  discerned. 
I  have  set  them  down  fairly  as  they  appear  to  me  to  be 
laid  before  us  in  the  Scriptures.  I  have  endeavoured  to 
exaggerate  nothing,  and  to  keep  back  nothing.  I  believe 
there  are  no  true  Christians  in  whom  these  marks  may 
not  be  found.  Some  of  them,  no  doubt,  stand  out  more 
prominently  in  some,  and  others  in  others.  My  own 
experience  is  distinct  and  decided, — that  I  never  saw  a 
truly  godly  person,  even  of  the  poorest  and  humblest 
classes,  in  whom,  on  close  observation,  these  marks  might 
not  be  discovered. 

I  believe  that  marks  such  as  these  are  the  only  safe  . 


HAVING  THE  SPIRIT. 


313 


evidence  that  we  are  travelling  in  the  way  that  leads  to 
everlasting  life.  I  charge  every  one  who  desires  to  make 
his  calling  and  election  sure,  to  see  that  these  marks  are 
his  own.  There  are  high-flying  professors  of  religion,  I 
know,  who  despise  the  mention  of  "  marks,"  and  call  them 
"leral."  I  care  nothinfr  for  their  being  called  legal,  so 
long  as  I  am  satisfied  they  are  scriptural.  And,  with  the 
Bible  before  me,  I  give  my  opinion  confidently,  that  he 
who  is  without  these  marks  is  without  the  Spirit  of  God. 

Show  me  a  man  who  has  these  marks  about  him,  and  I 
acknowledge  him  as  a  child  of  God.  He  may  be  poor 
and  lowly  in  this  world  ;  he  may  be  vile  in  his  own  eyes, 
and  often  doubt  of  his  own  salvation.  But  he  has  that 
within  him  which  only  comes  from  above,  and  Avill  never 
be  destroyed, — even  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  God 
is  his,  Christ  is  his.  His  name  is  already  written  in  the 
book  of  life,  and  before  long  heaven  will  be  his  own. 

Show  me  a  man  in  whom  these  marks  are  not  to  be 
found,  and  I  dare  not  acknowledge  him  to  be  a  true 
Christian.  I  dare  not  as  an  honest  man  ;  I  dare  not  as  a 
lover  of  his  soul;  I  dare  not  as  a  reader  of  the  Bible. 
He  may  make  a  great  religious  profession ;  ho  may  be 
learned,  high  in  the  world,  and  moral  in  his  life.  It  is  all 
nothing  if  he  has  not  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  is  without 
God,  without  Christ,  without  solid  hope,  and,  unless  he 
changes,  will  at  length  be  without  heaven. 

And  now  let  me  finish  this  paper  by  a  few  practical 
remarks  which  arise  naturally  out  of  the  matter  which  it 
contains. 

(a)  Would  you  know,  first  of  all,  ivhat  is  your  oivn 
immediate  duty  f    Listen,  and  I  will  tell  you. 

You  ought  to  examine  yourself  calmly  about  the  sub- 
ject which  I  have  been  tiying  to  set  before  you.  You 
ought  to  ask  yourself  seriously  how  the  doctrine  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  affects  your  soul.    Look  away,  I  beseech  you, 


OLD  PATHS. 


for  a  few  minutes,  to  higher  things  than  the  things  of 
earth,  and  more  important  things  than  the  things  of  time. 
Bear  with  me,  while  I  ask  you  a  plain  question.  I  ask  it 
solemnly  and  affectionately,  as  one  who  desires  your  salva- 
tion,— Have  you  the  Spirit  ? 

Remember,  I  do  not  ask  whether  you  think  all  I  have 
been  saying  is  true,  and  right,  and  good.  I  ask  whether 
3'ou  yourself,  who  are  reading  these  lines,  have  within  you 
the  Holy  Spirit  ? 

Remember,  I  do  not  ask  whether  j'ou  believe  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  given  to  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  that  all 
who  belong  to  the  Church  are  within  reach  of  His  opera- 
tions. I  ask  whether  you  yourself  have  the  Spirit  in  your 
own  heart  ? 

Remember,  I  do  not  ask  whether  you  sometimes  feel 
strivings  of  conscience,  and  good  desires  flitting  about 
within  you.  I  ask  whether  you  have  really  experienced 
the  quickening  and  reviving  work  of  the  Spirit  upon  your 
heart  ? 

Remember,  I  do  not  ask  you  to  tell  me  the  day  or 
month  when  the  Spirit  began  His  work  in  you.  It  is  enough 
for  me  if  fruit  trees  bear  fruit,  without  inquiring  the 
precise  time  when  they  were  planted.  But  I  do  ask.  Are 
}■  ou  bringing  forth  any  fruits  of  the  Spirit  ? 

Remember,  I  do  not  ask  whether  you  are  a  perfect 
person,  and  never  feel  anj'thing  evil  within.  But  I  do 
ask,  gravely  and  seriously,  whether  you  have  about  youi 
heart  and  life  the  marks  of  the  Spirit  ? 

I  hope  you  will  not  tell  me  you  do  not  know  what  the 
marks  of  the  Spirit  are.  I  have  described  them  plainly. 
I  now  repeat  them  briefly,  and  press  them  on  your  attention. 
1.  The  Spirit  quickens  men's  hearts.  2.  The  Spirit  teaches 
men's  minds.  3.  The  Spirit  leads  to  the  Word.  4.  The 
Spirit  convinces  of  sin.  5.  The  Spirit  draws  to  Christ.  6. 
The  Spirit  sanctifies.  7.  The  Spirit  makes  men  spiritually- 
,minded.    8.  The  Spirit  produces  inward  conflict.    9.  The 


HAVING  THE  SPIRIT. 


315 


Spirit  makes  men  love  the  brethren.  10.  The  Spirit 
teaches  to  pray.  These  are  the  great  marks  of  the  Holy 
Ghost's  presence.  Put  the  question  to  your  conscience 
like  a  man, — Has  the  Spirit  done  anything  of  this  kind 
for  your  soul  ? 

I  charge  you  not  to  let  many  days  pass  away  without 
trying  to  answer  my  question.  I  summon  you,  as  a  faith- 
ful watchman  knocking  at  the  door  of  your  heart,  to 
bring  the  matter  to  an  issue.  We  live  in  an  old,  worn- 
out,  sin-laden  world.  Who  can  tell  what  "a  day  may 
bring  forth  ? "  Who  shall  live  to  see  another  year  ?  Have 
you  the  Spirit  ?    (Prov.  xxvii.  1.) 

(6)  Would  you  know,  in  the  next  place,  what  is  the  grand 
defect  of  the  Christianity  of  our  times  Listen  to  me, 
and  I  will  tell  you. 

The  grand  defect  I  speak  of  is  simply  this, — that  the 
Christianity  of  many  people  is  not  real  Christianity  at  all. 
I  know  that  such  an  opinion  sounds  hard  and  shockingly 
uncharitable.  I  cannot  help  that :  I  am  satisfied  that  it 
is  sadly  true.  I  only  want  people's  Christianity  to  be  that 
of  the  Bible ;  but  I  doubt  exceedingly,  in  many  cases, 
whether  it  is  so. 

There  are  multitudes  of  English  people,  I  believe,  who 
go  to  church  or  chapel  every  Sunday  merely  as  a  form. 
Their  fathers  or  mothers  went,  and  so  they  go ;  it  is  the 
fashion  of  the  country  to  go,  and  so  they  go;  it  is  the 
custom  to  attend  a  religious  service  and  hear  a  sermon, 
and  so  they  go.  But  as  to  real,  vital,  saving  religion,  they 
neither  know  nor  care  anything  about  it.  They  can  give 
no  account  of  the  distinctive  doctrines  of  the  Gospel.  Jus- 
tification, and  regeneration,  and  sanctification,  are  "  words 
and  names  "  which  they  cannot  explain.  They  may  have  a 
sort  of  vague  idea  that  they  ought  to  go  to  the  Lord's 
Table,  and  may  be  able  to  say  a  few  vague  words  about 
Christ,  but  they  have  no  intelligent  notion  of  the  way 
of  salvation.    As  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  they  can  scarcely 


316 


OLD  PATHS. 


say  more  about  Him  than  that  they  have  heard  His 
name,  and  repeated  it  in  the  Belief. 

Now,  if  any  reader  of  this  paper  is  conscious  that  his 
religion  is  such  as  I  have  described,  I  will  only  warn  him 
affectionately  to  remember  that  such  religion  is  utterly 
useless.  It  will  neither  save,  comfort,  satisfy,  nor  sanctify 
his  soul.  And  the  plain  advice  I  give  him  is  to  change  it 
for  something  better  without  delay.  Remember  my  words. 
It  will  not  do  at  the  last. 

(c)  Would  you  know,  in  the  next  place,  one  truth  in 
the  Gospel  about  which  we  need  to  be  specially  jealous  in 
this  day.    Listen,  and  I  will  tell  you. 

The  truth  which  I  have  in  view  is  the  truth  about  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  All  truth  no  doubt  is  constantly 
assailed  by  Satan.  I  liave  no  desire  for  a  moment  to 
exaggerate  the  office  of  the  Spirit,  and  to  exalt  Him  above 
the  Sun  and  Centre  of  the  Gospel, — Jesus  Christ.  But  I 
do  believe  that,  next  to  the  priestly  office  of  Christ,  no 
truth  in  the  present  day  is  so  frequently  lost  sight  of,  and  so 
cunningly  assailed,  as  tlie  work  of  the  Spirit.  Some  injure 
it  by  ignorant  neglect :  their  talk  is  all  about  Christ. 
They  can  tell  you  something  about  "  the  Saviour ; "  but  if 
you  ask  them  about  that  inward  work  of  the  Spirit  which 
all  who  really  know  the  Saviour  experience,  they  have 
not  a  word  to  say. — Some  injure  the  work  of  the  Spirit  by 
taking  it  all  for  granted.  Membership  of  the  Church, 
participation  of  the  Sacraments,  become  their  substitutes 
for  conversion  and  spiritual  regeneration. — Some  injure 
the  work  of  the  Spirit  by  confounding  it  with  the  action 
of  natural  conscience.  According  to  this  low  view,  none 
but  the  most  hardened  and  degraded  of  mankind  are 
destitute  of  the  Holy  Gliost. — Against  all  such  departures 
from  the  truth  let  us  watch  and  be  on  our  guard.  Let  us 
beware  of  leaving  the  proportion  of  Gospel  statements. 
Let  one  of  our  chief  watchwords  in  the  present  day  be, — 
No  salvation  without  the  inward  work  of  the  Spirit !  No 


HAVING  THE  SPIRIT, 


317 


inward  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  unless  it  can  be  seen,  felt, 
and  known !  No  saving  work  of  tlie  Spirit  which  does 
not  show  itself  in  repentance  towards  God,  and  living  faith 
towards  Jesus  Christ ! 

(d)  Would  you  know,  in  the  next  place,  the  reason  ivliy 
we,  tfho  are  ministers  of  the  Gospel,  never  despair  of  any 
one  ivho  hears  us  so  long  as  he  lives  ?  Listen,  and  I  will 
tell  you. 

We  never  despair,  because  we  believe  the  power  of  the 
Floly  Ghost.  We  might  well  despair  when  we  look  at  our 
own  performances :  we  are  often  sick  of  ourselves.  We 
might  well  despair  when  Ave  look  at  some  who  belong  to 
our  congregations :  they  seem  as  hard  and  insensible  as 
the  nfether  mill-stone.  But  we  remember  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  what  He  has  done ;  we  remember  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  consider  that  He  has  not  changed.  He  can  come 
down  like  fire  and  melt  the  hardest  hearts ;  He  can  convert 
the  worst  man  or  woman  among  our  hearers,  and  mould 
their  whole  character  into  a  new  shape.  And  so  we  preach 
on.  We  hope,  because  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Oh,  that  our 
hearers  would  understand  that  the  progress  of  true  religion 
depends  "  not  on  might  or  on  power,"  but  on  the  Lord's 
Sjiirit !  Oh,  that  many  of  them  would  learn  to  lean  less 
on  ministers,  and  to  pray  more  for  the  Holy  Spirit !  Oh, 
that  all  would  learn  to  expect  less  from  schools,  and  tracts, 
and  ecclesiastical  machinery,  and,  while  using  all  means 
diligently,  would  seek  more  earnestly  for  the  outpouring 
of  the  Spirit.   (Zech.  iv.  6.) 

(e)  Would  you  know,  in  the  next  place,  what  you  ought 
to  do,  if  your  conscience  tells  you  you  have  not  the 
Spirit  ?    Listen,  and  I  wdll  tell  you. 

If  you  have  not  the  Spirit,  you  ought  to  go  at  once  to 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  prayer,  and  beseech  Him  to  have 
mercy  on  you,  and  send  you  the  Spirit.  I  have  not  the 
slightest  sympathy  with  those  who  tell  men  to  pray  for 
the  Holy  S2)irit  in  the  first  place,  in  order  that  they  may 


818 


OLD  PATHS. 


go  to  Christ  in  the  second  place.  I  see  no  warrant  of 
Scriptiire  for  saying  so.  I  only  see  that  if  men  feel  they 
are  needy,  perishing  sinners,  they  ought  to  apply  first  and 
foremost,  straight  and  direct,  to  Jesus  Christ.  I  see  that 
He  Himself  says,  "  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto 
Me  and  drink."  (John  vii.  37.)  I  know  that  it  is 
written,  "  He  hath  received  gifts  for  men,  even  for  the 
rebellious,  that  the  Lord  God  mig^ht  dwell  amono[  them." 
(Psal.  Ixviii.  18.)  I  know  it  is  His  special  office  to 
baptize  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  that  "  in  Him  all 
fulness  dwells."  I  dare  not  pretend  to  be  more  syste- 
matic than  the  Bible.  I  believe  that  Christ  is  the 
meeting  place  between  God  and  the  soul,  and  my  first 
advice  to  any  one  who  wants  the  Spirit  must  always  be, 
"  Go  to  Jesus,  and  tell  your  v:ard  to  Him."    (Col.  i.  19.) 

Furthermore  I  would  say,  if  jo\i  have  not  the  Spirit, 
you  must  be  diligent  in  attending  those  means  of  grace 
through  which  the  Spirit  works.  You  must  regularly 
hear  that  Word,  which  is  His  sword;  you  must  habitually 
attend  those  assemblies  where  His  presence  is  promised  ; 
you  must,  in  short,  be  found  in  the  way  of  the  S^nrit,  if 
j^ou  want  the  Spirit  to  do  you  good.  Blind  Bartimeus 
would  never  have  received  sight  had  he  sat  lazily  at  home, 
and  not  come  forth  to  sit  by  the  wayside.  Zacchaeus  might 
never  have  seen  Jesus  and  become  a  son  of  Abraham,  if 
he  had  not  run  before  and  climbed  up  into  the  sycamore 
tree.  The  Spirit  is  a  loving  and  good  Spirit.  But  he 
tvho  despises  means  of  grace  resists  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Remember  these  two  things.  I  firmly  believe  that  no 
man  ever  acted  honestly  and  perseveriugly  on  these  two 
pieces  of  advice  who  did  not,  sooner  or  later,  have  the 
Spirit. 

(/)  Would  you  know,  in  the  next  -place,  ivhat  you  ought 
to  do,  if  you  stand  in  doubt  about  your  oxen  state,  and 
cannot  tell  whether  you  have  the  Spirit?  Listen,  and  I 
will  tell  you. 


HAVING  THE  SPIRIT. 


319 


If  you  stand  in  doubt  whether  you  have  the  Spirit,  you 
ought  to  examine  calmly  whether  your  doubts  are  well- 
founded.  There  are  many  true  believers,  I  fear,  who  are 
destitute  of  any  firm  assurance  as  to  their  own  state : 
doubting  is  their  life.  I  ask  such  persons  to  take  their 
Bibles  down,  and  consider  quietly  the  grounds  of  their 
anxiety.  I  ask  them  to  consider  whence  came  their  sense 
of  sin,  however  feeble, — their  love  to  Christ,  however 
faint, — their  desire  after  holiness,  however  weak, — their 
pleasure  in  the  company  of  God's  people, — their  inclma- 
tion  to  prayer  and  the  Word  ?  Whence  came  these  things, 
I  say?  Did  they  come  from  your  own  heart?  Surely 
not !  Nature  bears  no  such  fruit. — Did  they  come  from 
the  devil  ?  Surely  not !  Satan  does  not  war  against 
Satan.  Whence  then,  I  repeat,  did  these  things  come  ? 
I  warn  you  to  beware  lest  you  grieve  the  Holy  Ghost  by 
doubting  the  truth  of  His  operations.  I  tell  you  it  is  high 
time  for  you  to  reflect  whether  you  have  not  been  ex- 
pecting an  inward  perfection  which  you  had  no  right  to 
expect,  and  at  the  same  time  thanklessly  undervaluing  a 
real  work  which  the  Holy  Ghost  has  actually  wrought  in 
your  souls. 

A  great  statesman  once  said  that  if  a  foreigner  visited 
England,  for  the  first  time,  with  his  eyes  bandaged  and  his 
ears  open, — hearing  everything,  but  seeing  nothing, — he 
might  well  suppose  that  England  was  on  the  road  to  ruin ; 
so  many  are  the  murmurings  of  the  English  people.  And 
yet  if  that  same  foreigner  came  to  Engl-and  with  his  ears 
stopped  and  his  eyes  open, — seeing  everything  and  hear- 
ing nothing, — he  would  probably  suppose  that  England 
was  the  most  wealthy  and  flourishing  country  in  the 
world,  so  many  are  the  signs  of  prosperity  that  he 
would  see. 

I  am  often  disposed  to  apply  this  remark  to  the 
case  of  doubting  Christians.  If  I  believed  all  they  say 
of  themselves  I  should  certainly  think  they  were  in  a 


S20 


OLD  PATHS. 


bad  state.  But  -wbeu  I  see  them  living  as  they  do, — 
liungering  and  thirsting  after  righteousness,  poor  in  spirit, 
desiring  holiness,  loving  the  name  of  Christ,  keeping  up 
habits  of  Bible  reading  and  prayer, — when  I  see  these 
things  I  cease  to  be  afraid.  I  trust  my  eyes  more  than 
my  ears.  I  see  manifest  marks  of  the  Spirit's  presence, 
and  I  only  grieve  tliat  they  should  refuse  to  see  them 
themselves.  I  see  the  devil  robbing  them  of  their  peace, 
by  instilling  these  doubts  into  their  minds,  and  I  mourn 
that  they  should  injure  themselves  by  believing  him. 
Some  professors,  without  controversy,  may  well  doubt 
whether  they  "  have  the  Spirit,"  for  they  have  no  signs  of 
grace  about  them.  But  many  nurse  up  a  habit  of  doubt 
hi  their  minds  for  which  they  have  no  cause,  and  of  which 
they  ought  to  be  ashamed. 

{g)  Would  you  know,  last  of  all,  ivliat  you  ought  to  do 
'if  yon.  really  have  the  Spirit.  Listen  to  me,  and  I  will 
tell  you. 

If  you  have  the  Si:>irit,  seek  to  be  "  filled  with  the 
Spirit."  (Ephes.  v.  18.)  Drink  deep  of  the  living  waters. 
Do  not  be  content  Avith  a  little  religion.  Pray  that  the 
Spirit  may  fill  every  corner  and  chamber  of  your  heart, 
aud  that  not  an  inch  of  room  may  be  left  in  it  for  the 
world  and  the  devil. 

If  you  have  the  Spirit,  "grieve  not  the  SjDirit."  (Ephes. 
iv.  30.)  It  is  easy  for  believers  to  weaken  their  sense  of 
His  presence,  and  deprive  themselves  of  Ilis  comfort. 
Little  sins  not  mortified,  little  bad  habits  of  temper  or  of 
tongue  not  corrected,  little  compliances  with  the  world, — 
are  all  likely  to  otfend  the  Holy  Ghost.  Oh,  that  believers 
would  remember  this !  There  is  far  more  of  "  heaven  on 
earth  "  to  be  enjoyed  than  many  of  them  attain  to :  and 
why  do  they  not  attain  to  it  ?  They  do  not  watch  suffi- 
ciently over  their  daily  ways, — and  so  the  Spirit's  work  is 
damjDed  and  hindered.  The  Spirit  must  be  a  thoroughly 
sanctifying  Sj^irit  if  He  is  to  be  a  comforter  to  your  soul. 


HAVING  THE  SPIRIT. 


321' 


If  you  have  the  Spirit,  labour  to  bring  forth  all  "  the 
fruits  of  the  Spirit."  (Gal.  v.  22.)  Read  over  the  list 
which  the  Apostle  has  drawn  out,  and  see  that  no  one  of 
these  fruits  is  neglected.  Oh,  that  believers  would  seek 
for  n  ore  "love,"  and  more  "joy!"  Then  would  they  do 
more  good  to  all  men ;  then  would  they  feel  happier  them  - 
selves ;  then  would  they  make  religion  more  beautiful  in 
the  eyes  of  the  world  ! 

I  commend  the  things  that  I  have  -WTitten  to  the  serious 
attention  of  every  reader  of  these  pages.  Let  them  not 
have  been  written  in  vain.  Join  with  me  in  praying  that 
the  Spirit  may  be  poured  out  from  on  high  with  more 
abundant  influence  than  He  has  ever  been  yet.  Pray  that 
He  may  be  poured  out  on  all  believers,  at  home  and  abroad, 
that  they  may  be  more  united  and  more  holy.  Pray  that 
He  may  be  poured  out  on  Jews,  Mahometans,  and  Heathen, 
that  many  of  tliem  may  be  converted. 

Pray  that  He  may  be  poured  out  on  Roman  Catholics, 
and  especially  in  Italy  and  Ireland.  Pray  that  He  may 
be  poured  out  on  your  own  country,  and  that  it  may  be 
spared  the  judgments  it  deserves.  Pray  that  He  may  be 
poured  out  on  all  faithful  ministers  and  missionaries,  and 
that  their  numbers  may  be  increased  an  hundredfold. 

Pray,  above  all,  that  He  may  be  poured  out,  in  abundant 
power,  on  your  own  soul,  that  if  you  know  not  the  truth, 
you  may  be  taught  to  know  it, — and  that  if  you  know  it, 
you  may  know  it  better. 


T 


XII. 


CONVERSION. 

"Repent  ye  therefore,  and  he  converted." — Acts  iii.  19. 

The  subject  "vvliich  forms  the  title  of  this  paper  is  one' 
which  touches  all  mankind.  It  ought  to  come  home  to  all 
ranks  and  classes,  high  or  low,  rich  or  poor,  old  or  young, 
gentle  or  simple.  Any  one  may  get  to  heaven  without 
money,  rank,  or  learning.  No  one,  however  wise,  wealthy, 
noble,  or  beautiful,  will  ever  get  to  heaven  without  CON- 
VERSION. 

There  are  six  points  of  view  in  which  I  wish  to  con- 
sider the  subject  of  this  pajier.  I  will  try  to  show  that 
Conversion  is — 

I.  A  Scriptural  thing, 

II.  A  real  thing, 

III.  A  necessary  thing, 

IV.  A  possible  thing, 
V.  A  happy  thing, 

VI.    A  thing  that  may  he  seen. 

I.  Let  me  show,  in  the  first  place,  that  conversion  is  a 
.Scriptural  thing. 

I  mean  by  this,  that  conversion  is  a  thing  plainly 


CONVERSION. 


mentioned  in  the  Bible.  This  is  the  first  point  we  have 
to  ascertain  about  anything  in  religion.  It  matters  nothing 
who  says  a  thing,  and  declares  it  to  be  religious  truth ;  it 
matters  nothing  whether  we  like  or  dislike  a  doctrine.  Is 
it  in  the  Bible  ?  That  is  the  only  question.  If  it  is,  we 
have  no  right  to  refuse  it.  If  we  reject  a  Bible  truth 
because  we  do  not  like  it,  we  do  so  at  the  peril  of  our 
souls,  and  might  as  well  become  infidels  at  once.  This  is  a 
principle  which  ought  never  to  be  forgotten. 

Let  us  turn  to  the  Bible.  Hear  what  David  says :  "  The 
law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  converting  the  soul." — "  Sinners 
shall  be  converted  unto  Thee."  (Psalm  xix.  7;  li.  13.) 
Hear  what  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  says :  "  Except  ye  be 
converted,  and  become  as  little  children,  ye  shall  not  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  (Matt,  xviii.  3.)  Hear 
what  St.  Peter  says :  "  Repent  ye,  and  be  converted,  that 
your  sins  may  be  blotted  out."  (Acts  iii.  19.)  Hear  what 
St.  James  says :  "  He  which  converteth  the  sinner  from 
the  error  of  his  way  shall  save  a  soul  from  death,  and  shall 
hide  a  multitude  of  sins."    (James  v.  20.) 

I  could  easily  add  to  this  Scriptural  evidence.  I  could 
quote  many  passages  in  which  the  idea  of  conversion  is 
contained,  though  the  word  itself  is  not  used.  To  be 
renewed, — to  be  transformed, — to  be  created  anew, — to  be 
raised  from  the  dead, — to  be  illuminated, — to  pass  from 
death  to  life, — to  be  born  again, — to  put  off  the  old  man 
and  put  on  the  new  man, — all  these  are  Scriptural  ex- 
pressions, which  mean  the  same  thing  as  conversion.  They 
are  all  the  same  thing,  seen  from  a  different  point  of  view. 
But  enough  is  as  good  as  a  feast,  in  these  matters.  There 
can  be  no  doubt  of  the  truth  of  my  first  position, — that 
conversion  is  a  Scriptural  thing.  It  is  not  a  mere  device 
of  man's  invention  :  it  is  in  the  Bible. 

You  may  tell  me,  perhaps,  that  you  do  not  care  for 
"texts."  You  may  say  that  you  are  not  accustomed  to 
make  single  texts  decide  questions  in  your  religion.  If 


82i 


OLD  PATHS. 


this  is  your  case,  I  am  sorry  for  you.  Our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  and  His  apostles  used  to  quote  single  texts  fre- 
quently, and  to  make  everything  in  their  arguments  hinge 
upon  them.  One  plain  text  with  them  was  sufficient  to 
settle  a  point.  Is  it  not  a  serious  matter,  that  while  the 
Lord  Jesus  and  His  apostles  made  such  use  of  single  texts, 
you  do  not  care  for  them  ? 

I  entreat  every  reader  of  these  pages  to  beware  of 
ignorant  prejudices  on  religious  subjects.  I  have  known 
people  to  find  fault  with  doctrines  and  opinions  as  enthu- 
siastic, fanatical,  and  absurd,  in  perfect  ignorance  that  they 
were  finding  fault  with  Scripture  itself !  They  have  given 
sad  proof  that  they  spoke  of  things  which  they  did  not 
understand,  and  that  they  knew  nothing,  comparativel}-, 
of  the  contents  of  the  Bible.  It  is  recorded  that,  in 
Somersetshire,  one  hundred  years  ago,  a  great  preacher 
Avas  summoned  before  the  magistrates  for  swearing  in  the 
pulpit.  He  had  used  in  his  sermon  the  well-known  text, 
"  He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned  "  (Mark  xvi.  16) ; 
and  the  constable  who  laid  the  information  was  so  ignorant 
that  he  did  not  know  the  preacher  was  quoting  God's 
Word  I — I  myself  remember  a  lady  of  rank  being  very 
indignant,  because  a  speaker  at  a  Missionary  meeting 
described  the  heathen  as  "  having  no  hope."  And  yet  the 
speaker  had  only  used  the  ver}^  exjiression  used  by  St. 
Paul,  in  describing  the  state  of  the  Ephesians  before  the 
Gospel  came  to  them  '  (Ephes.  ii.  12.)  Beware  of  making 
a  like  mistake.  Take  care  that  you  do  not  expose  your 
own  ignorance  by  talking  against  conversion.  Search 
the  Scriptures.  CONVERSION  IS  A  SCRIPTURAL 
.THING. 

II.  Let  me  show,  in  the  second  place,  that  conversion 
'is  a  real  tldng. 

I  feel  it  very  needful  to  say  something  about  this  point. 
j\\'e  live  in  an  age  of  shams,  cheats,  deceptions,  and 


CONVERSION. 


325 


impositions.  It  is  an  age  of  white-wash,  varnish,  lacquer, 
and  veneer.  It  is  an  age  of  plaster,  compo,  plating,  gilding, 
and  electrotyping.  It  is  an  age  of  adulterated  food,  paste 
diamonds,  false  weights  and  measures,  unsound  timber, 
and  shoddy  clothing.  It  is  an  age  of  wind-bags,  and' 
whitened  sepulchres,  and  cymbals  in  religion.  I  can 
hardly  wonder  that  many  regard  all  Christian  professors 
as  suspicious  characters,  if  not  hypocrites,  and  deny  the 
reality  of  any  such  thing  as  conversion. 

Still,  notwithstanding  all  that  such  people  may  say,  I 
assert  confidently,  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  conversion. 
There  are  to  be  seen  among  men,  every  here  and  there, 
unmistakable  cases  of  a  complete  turning  round  of  heart, 
character,  tastes,  and  life, — cases  which  deserve  no  other 
name  than  that  of  conversion.  I  say  that  when  a  man 
turns  right  round  from  sin  to  God, — from  worldliness  to 
holiness, — from  self-righteousness  to  self-distrust, — from 
carelessness  about  religion  to  deep  repentance, — from 
unbelief  to  .faith, — from  indifference  to  Christ  to  strong 
love  to  Christ, — from  neglect  of  prayer,  the  Bible,  and  the 
Sabbath,  to  a  diligent  use  of  all  means  of  grace, — I  say 
boldly,  that  such  a  man  is  a  converted  man.  When  a 
man's  heart  is  turned  upside  down  in  the  way  I  have 
described,  so  that  he  loves  what  he  once  hated,  and  hates 
what  he  once  loved,  I  say  boldly,  that  it  is  a  case  of 
conversion.  To  deny  it,  is  mere  obstinacy  and  afifectation. 
Such  a  change  can  be  described  in  no  other  way.  By  far 
the  most  suitable  name  that  can  be  given  to  it  is  the 
Scriptural  name, — conversion. 

Of  such  changes  the  Bible  gives  many  unmistakable 
patterns.  Let  any  one  read  attentively  the  histories  ofi 
Manasseh  king  of  Judah,  of  Matthew  the  apostle,  of  the 
woman  of  Samaria,  of  Zacchasus  the  publican,  of  Marji 
Magdalene,  of  Saul  of  Tarsus,  of  the  Philippian  jailer,  of 
Lydia  the  purple  seller,  of  the  Jews  to  whom  Peter 
preached  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  of  the  Corinthians  to 


S26 


OLD  PATHS. 


■v\  hom  St.  Paul  preached.  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  1 — 19.  Matt, 
ix.  9.  John  iv.  1 — 29.  Luke  xix.  1 — 10;  viii.  2.  Acts 
ix.  1— 22;xvi.  14—34;  ii  37—41.  1  Cor.  vi.  9—11.) 
In  every  one  of  these  cases  there  was  a  mighty  change. 
What  can  that  change  be  called  but  conversion  ? 

Of  such  changes  the  history  of  the  Church  in  every  age 
can  supply  many  ■well-known  examples.  Let  any  one 
study  the  life  of  Augustine,  of  Martin  Luther,  of  Hugh 
Latimer,  of  John  Bunyan,  of  Colonel  Gardiner,  of  John 
Kewton,  of  Thomas  Scott.  In  every  one  of  these  lives 
he  will  find  a  description  of  a  mighty  turning  of  heart, 
opinion,  and  conduct,  towards  God.  What  can  that  turning 
be  called  better  than  conversion  ? 

Of  such  changes  every  man's  own  neighbourhood  and 
circle  of  acquaintances  will  furnish  many  specimens.  Let 
any  honest-minded  person  of  observation  look  around 
him,  and  consider  what  I  assert.  Let  him  deny,  if  he 
can,  that  he  can  put  his  finger  on  men  and  women  of  his 
own  age  and  standing,  who  are  now  utterly  unlike  what 
they  once  were  in  the  matter  of  religion.  About  their 
own  souls,  and  the  importance  of  being  saved, — about 
sin,  and  God,  and  Christ,  and  repentance,  and  faith,  and 
holiness, — about  Bible-reading,  and  prapng,  and  Sabbath- 
keeping — about  all  these  things  they  are  completely 
changed.  I  challenge  any  sensible  man  to  deny  that  he 
knows  such  persons.  They  are  to  be  met  with  here  and 
there  in  every  part  of  the  kingdom.  Once  more  I  ask, 
what  can  such  changes  be  called  but  conversions? 

I  feel  almost  ashamed  to  dwell  so  long  on  this  point. 
It  seems  like  spending  time  in  proving  that  two  and  two 
make  four,  or  that  the  sun  rises  in  the  east.  But,  alas, 
there  are  too  many  people  who  will  allow  nothing,  and  will 
dispute  €ver3'thing,  in  religion  !  They  know  that  they  are 
not  yet  converted  themselves,  and  they  therefore  try  hard 
to  make  out  that  nobody  was  ever  converted  at  all !  I  trust 
I  have  given  a  sufficient  answer  to  all  such  persons.  T 


CONVERSION. 


327 


liave  shown  you  that  CONVERSION  IS  A  REAL  TRUE 
THING. 

III.  Let  me  show,  in  the  third  place,  that  conversion 
is  a  necessary  thing. 

This  is  a  point  of  great  importance.  Some  worthy 
people  are  ready  enough  to  admit  that  conversion  is  a 
Scriptural  truth  and  a  reality,  but  not  a  thing  which  needs 
to  be  pressed  on  most  English  people.  The  heathen,  they 
grant,  need  conversion.  Even  the  thieves,  and  fallen 
characters,  and  inmates  of  jails,  they  allow,  may  require 
conversion.  But  to  talk  of  conversion  being  necessary  for 
Church-going  people,  is  to  talk  of  things  which  they  can- 
not see  at  all.  "  Such  people  may,  in  some  cases,  need  a 
little  stirring  up  and  amendment.  They  may  not  be  quite 
as  good  as  they  ought  to  be  .■  it  would  be  better  if  they 
attended  more  to  religion ;  but  you  have  no  right  to  say 
they  need  conversion  !  It  is  uncharitable,  harsh,  narrow- 
minded,  bitter,  wrong,  to  tell  them  they  require  conversion!" 

This  sadly  common  notion  is  a  complete  delusion.  It 
is  a  pure  invention  of  man's,  without  a  scrap  of  foundation 
in  God's  Word.  The  Bible  teaches  expressly  that  the 
change  of  heart,  called  conversion,  is  a  thing  absolutely 
needed  by  every  one.  It  is  needed  because  of  the  total 
corruption  of  human  nature.  It  is  needed  because  of  the 
condition  of  every  man's  natural  heart.  All  people  born 
into  the  world,  of  every  rank  and  nation,  must  have  their 
hearts  changed  between  the  cradle  and  the  grave,  before 
they  can  go  to  heaven.  All,  all  men,  without  exception, 
must  be  converted. 

Without  conversion  of  heart  we  cannot  serve  God  on 
earth.  We  have  naturally  neither  faith,  nor  fear,  nor  love, 
toward  God  and  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  We  have  no 
delight  in  His  Word.  We  take  no  pleasure  in  prayer  or 
communion  with  Him.  We  have  no  enjoyment  in  His 
ordinances.  His  house.  His  people,  or  His  day.    We  may 


328 


OLD  PATHS, 


liave  a  form  of  Christianity,  and  keep  up  a  round  of 
ceremonies  and  religious  performances.  But  without 
conversion  we  have  no  more  heart  in  our  religion  than 
a  brick  or  a  stone.  Can  a  dead  corpse  serve  God  ?  We 
know  it  cannot.  Well,  without  conversion  we  are  dead 
toward  God. 

Look  round  the  congregation  with  which  you  worship 
every  Sunday.  Mark  how  little  interest  the  great  majority 
of  them  take  in  what  is  going  on.  Observe  how  listless, 
and  apathetic,  and  indifferent,  they  evidently  are  about 
the  whole  affair.  It  is  clear  their  hearts  are  not  there ! 
They  are  thinking  of  something  else,  and  not  of  religion. 
They  are  thinking  of  business,  or  money,  or  pleasure,  or 
worldly  plans,  or  bonnets,  or  gowns,  or  new  dresses,  or 
amusements.  Their  bodies  are  there,  but  not  their  hearts. 
— And  what  is  the  reason  ?  What  is  it  they  all  need  ? 
They  need  conversion.  Without  it  they  only  come  to 
church  for  fashion  and  form's  sake,  and  go  away  from 
church  to  serve  the  world  or  their  sins. 

But  this  is  not  all.  Without  conversion  of  heart  ive 
could  not  enjoy  heaven,  if  we  got  there.  Heaven  is  a 
place  where  holiness  reigns  supreme,  and  sin  and  the  world 
have  no  place  at  all.  The  company  will  all  be  holy ;  the 
employments  will  all  be  holy ;  it  will  be  an  eternal 
Sabbath-day.  Surely  if  we  go  to  heaven,  we  must  have 
a  heart  in  tune  and  able  to  enjoy  it,  or  else  we  shall  not 
be  happy.  We  must  have  a  nature  in  harmony  with  the 
element  we  live  in,  and  the  place  where  we  dwell.  Can  a 
fish  be  happy  out  of  water  ?  We  know  it  cannot.  Well, 
without  conversion  of  heart  we  could  not  be  happy  m 
heaven. 

Look  round  the  neighbourhood  in  which  you  live,  and 
the  persons  with  whom  you  are  acquainted.  Think  what 
many  of  them  would  do  if  they  were  cut  off  for  ever  from 
money,  and  business,  and  newspapers,  and  cards,  and  balls, 
and  races,  and  hunting,  and  shooting,  and  worldly  amuse- 


CONVERSION-. 


329 


ments !  Would  they  like  it  ? — Think  what  they  would 
feel  if  they  were  shut  up  for  ever  with  Jesus  Christ,  and 
saints,  and  angels  !  Would  they  be  happy  ? — Would  the 
eternal  company  of  Moses,  and  David,  and  St.  Paul,  be 
pleasant  to  those  who  never  take  the  trouble  to  read  what 
those  holy  men  wrote  ?  Would  heaven's  everlasting  praise 
suit  the  taste  of  those  who  can  hardly  spare  a  few  minutes 
in  a  week  for  private  religion,  even  for  prayer  ?  There  is 
but  one  answer  to  be  given  to  all  these  questions.  We 
must  be  converted  before  we  Can  enjoy  heaven.  Heaven 
would  be  no  heaven  to  any  child  of  Adam  without 
conversion. 

Let  no  man  deceive  us.  There  are  two  things  which 
are  of  absolute  necessity  to  the  salvation  of  every  man  and 
woman  on  earth.  One  of  them  is  the  mediatorial  work  of 
Christ  for  us, — His  atonement,satisfaction,and  intercession. 
The  other  is  the  converting  work  of  the  Spirit  in  us, — His 
guiding,  renewing,  and  sanctifying  grace. — We  must  have 
both  a  title  and  a  heart  for  heaven.  Sacraments  are  only 
generally  necessary  to  salvation :  a  man  may  be  saved 
without  them,  like  the  penitent  thief  An  interest  in 
Christ  and  conversion  are  absolutely  necessary  :  without 
them  no  one  can  possibly  be  saved. — All,  all  alike,  high  or 
low,  rich  or  poor,  old  or  young,  gentle  or  simple,  churchmen 
or  dissenters,  bajitized  or  unbajitized,  all  must  be  converted 
or  perish.  There  is  no  salvation  without  conversion.  IT 
IS  A  NECESSARY  THING. 

IV.  Let  me  now  show,  in  the  fourth  place,  that  con- 
version is  a  possible  tiling. 

1  think  I  know  the  feelings  which  come  across  many 
people's  minds,  when  they  read  the  things  which  I  am  writ- 
ing in  this  paper.  They  take  refuge  in  the  idea  that  such 
a  change  as  conversion  is  quite  impossible,  except  for  a 
favoured  few.  "  It  is  all  very  well,"  they  argue,  "  for  parsons 
^to  talk  of  conversion ;  but  the  thing  cannot  be  done ;  we 


330 


OLD  PATHS. 


Lave  work  to  mind,  families  to  provide  for,  business  to 
attend  to.  It  is  no  use  expecting  miracles  now.  We 
cannot  be  converted."  Such  thoughts  are  very  common. 
Tiie  devil  loves  to  put  them  before  us,  and  our  own  lazy 
hearts  are  only  too  ready  to  receive  them :  but  they  will 
not  stand  examination.  I  am  not  afraid  to  lay  it  down  that 
conversion  is  a  possible  thing.  If  it  were  not  so  I  would 
not  say  another  word. 

In  saying  this,  however,  I  should  be  sorry  to  be  mistaken. 
I  do  not  for  a  moment  mean  that  any  one  can  convert 
himself,  change  his  own  heart,  take  away  his  own  corrupt 
nature,  put  in  himself  a  new  spirit.  I  mean  nothing  of 
the  kind.  I  should  as  soon  expect  the  dry  bones  in 
Ezekiel's  vision  to  give  themselves  life.  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  3.) 
I  only  mean  that  there  is  nothing  in  Scripture,  nothing  in 
God,  nothing  in  man's  condition,  which  warrants  any  one 
in  saying,  "  I  can  never  be  converted.''  There  lives  not 
the  man  or  woman  on  earth  of  whom  it  could  be  said, 
"  their  conversion  is  an  imjiossibility." — Any  one,  however 
sinful  and  hardened,  any  one  may  be  converted. 

Why  do  I  speak  so  confidently  ?  How  is  it  that  I  can 
look  round  the  world,  and  see  the  desperate  wickedness 
that  is  in  it,  and  yet  despair  of  no  living  man's  soul  ? 
How  is  it  that  I  can  say  to  any  one,  however  hard,  fallen, 
and  bad,  "  Your  case  is  not  hopeless :  you,  even  you,  may 
be  converted  ? " — I  can  do  it  because  of  the  things 
contained  in  Christ's  Gospel.  It  is  the  glory  of  that 
Gospel  that  under  it  nothing  is  impossible. 

Conversion  is  a  possible  thing,  because  of  the  almighty 
'power  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  In  Him  is  life.  In 
His  hand  are  the  keys  of  death  and  hell.  He  has  all 
power  in  heaven  and  earth.  He  quickeneth  whom  He 
Avill.  (John  i.  4 ;  Rev.  i.  18 ;  Matt,  xxviii.  18 ;  John 
v.  21.)  It  is  as  easy  to  Him  to  create  new  hearts  out  of 
nothing,  as  it  was  to  create  the  world  out  of  nothing.  It 
is  as  easy  to  Him  to  breathe  spiritual  life  into  a  stony. 


CONVERSION. 


331 


•lead  heart,  as  it  was  to  breathe  natural  life  into  tlie  clay 
of  which  Adam  was  formed,  and  make  him  a  living  man. 
There  was  nothing  He  could  not  do  on  earth.  Wind,  sea, 
disease,  death,  the  devil, — all  were  obedient  to  His  word. 
There  is  nothing  that  He  cannot  do  in  heaven  at  God's 
right  hand.  His  hand  is  as  strong  as  ever :  His  love  is  as 
great  as  ever.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  lives,  and  therefore 
conversion  is  not  impossible. 

But  beside  this,  conversion  is  a  possible  thing,  because 
of  the  almighty  poiuer  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  Christ 
sends  into  the  hearts  of  all  whom  He  undertakes  to  save. 
The  same  divine  Spirit  who  co-operated  with  the  Father 
and  Son  in  the  work  of  creation,  co-operates  specially  in 
the  work  of  conversion.  It  is  He  who  conveys  life  from 
Christ,  the  great  Fountain  of  Life,  into  the  hearts  of 
sinners.  He  who  moved  on  the  face  of  the  waters 
before  those  wonderful  words  were  spoken,  "  Let  there 
be  light,"  is  He  who  moves  over  sinners'  souls,  and  takes 
their  natural  darkness  away.  Great  indeed  is  the  invisible 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost !  He  can  soften  that  which 
is  hard.  He  can  bend  that  which  is  stiff  and  stubborn. 
He  can  give  eyes  to  the  spiritually  blind,  ears  to  the 
spiritually  deaf,  tongues  to  the  spiritually  dumb,  feet  to 
the  spiritually  lame,  warmth  to  the  spiritually  cold, 
knowledge  to  the  spiritually  ignorant,  and  life  to  the 
spiritually  dead.  "  None  teacheth  like  Him  ! "  (Job  xxxvi. 
22.)  He  has  taught  thousands  of  ignorant  sinners,  and 
never  failed  to  make  them  "  wise  unto  salvation."  The 
Holy  Ghost  lives,  and  therefore  conversion  is  never 
impossible. 

What  can  you  say  to  these  things  ?  Away  with  the  idea 
for  ever  that  conversion  is  not  possible.  Cast  it  behind 
you :  it  is  a  temptation  of  the  devil.  Look  not  at  yourself, 
and  your  own  weak  heart ; — for  then  you  may  well  despair. 
Look  upward  at  Christ,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  learn  that 
with  them  nothing  is  impossible.    Yes!  the  age  of  siDiritual 


332 


OLD  PATHS. 


niiracies  is  not  yet  past !  Dead  souls  in  oiir  congregations 
can  yet  be  raised;  blind  eyes  can  yet  be  made  to  see;  dumb 
prayerless  tongues  can  yet  be  taught  to  pra}'.  No  one 
ought  ever  to  despair.  When  Christ  has  left  heaven,  and 
laid  dowL  His  ofl&ce  as  the  Saviour  of  sinners, — when  the 
Holy  Ghost  has  ceased  to  dwell  in  hearts,  and  is  no  longer 
God. — then,  and  not  till  then,  men  and  women  may  say, 
"  Wfc  cannot  be  converted."  Till  then,  I  say  boldly, 
conversion  is  a  possible  thing.  If  men  are  not  converted, 
it  is  because  they  will  not  come  to  Christ  for  life."  (John 
V.  40.)    CONVERSION  IS  POSSIBLE. 

V.  Let  me  show,  in  the  fifth  place,  that  conversion  is 
a  hap^y  thing. 

I  shall  have  written  in  vain  if  I  leave  this  point 
untouched.  There  are  thousands,  I  firmly  believe,  who 
are  ready  to  admit  the  truth  of  all  I  have  said  hitherto. 
Scriptural,  real,  necessary,  jDossible, — all  this  they  willingly 
allow  conversion  to  be.  "  Of  course,"  they  say,  "  we  know 
it  is  all  true.  People  ought  to  be  converted."  But  will 
it  increase  a  man's  happiness  to  be  converted  ?  Will 
it  add  to  a  man's  joys,  and  lessen  his  sorrows,  to  be 
converted  ?  Here  alas,  is  a  point  at  which  many  stick 
fast.  They  have  a  secret,  lurking  fear,  that  if  they  are 
converted  they  must  become  melancholy,  miserable,  and 
low-spinted.  Conversion  and  a  sour  face, — conversion 
and  a  gloomy  brow, — conversion  and  an  ill-natured 
readiness  to  snub  young  people,  and  put  down  all  mirth, 
— conversion  and  a  sorrowful  countenance, — conversion  and 
sighing  and  groaning, — all  these  are  things  w^hich  they 
seem  to  think  must  go  together !  No  wonder  that  such 
people  shrink  from  the  idea  of  conversion  ! 

The  notion  I  have  just  described  is  very  common  and 
very  mischievous.  I  desire  to  protest  against  it  with  all 
my  heart,  and  soul,  and  mind,  and  strength.  I  assei  t 
without  hesitation,   that  the  conversion  described  in 


CONVERSION. 


333 


Scripture  is  a  happy  thing  and  not  a  miserable  one,  and 
that  if  converted  persons  are  not  happy,  the  fault  must  be 
in  themselves.  The  happiness  of  a  true  Christian,  no 
doubt,  is  not  quite  of  the  same  sort  as  that  of  a  worldly 
man.  It  is  a  calm,  solid,  deep  flowing,  substantial  joy. 
It  is  not  made  up  of  excitement,  levity,  and  boisterous 
spasmodic  mirth.  It  is  the  sober,  quiet  joy  of  one  who 
does  not  forget  deatb,  judgment,  eternity,  and- a  world  to 
come,  even  in  his  chief  mirth.  But  in  the  main  I  am 
confident  the  converted  man  is  the  happiest  man. 

What  says  the  Scripture  ?  How  does  it  describe  the 
feelings  and  experience  of  persons  who  have  been  con- 
verted ?  Does  it  give  any  countenance  to  the  idea  that 
conversion  is  a  sorrowful  and  melancholy  thing  ?  Let  us 
hear  what  Levi  felt,  when  he  had  left  the  receipt  of  custom 
to  follow  Christ.  We  read  that  "  he  made  a  great  feast 
in  his  own  house,"  as  if  it  was  an  occasion  of  gladness. 
(Luke  v.  29.)  Let  us  hear  what  Zacchajus  the  publican 
felt,  when  Jesus  offered  to  come  to  his  house.  We  read 
that  "he  received  Him  joyfully"  (Luke  xix.  6.)  Let  us 
hear  what  the  Samaritans  felt,  when  they  were  converted 
through  Philip's  preaching.  We  read  that  "there  was 
great  joy  in  that  city."  (Acts  viii.  8.)  Let  us  hear  what 
the  Ethiopian  eunuch  felt  in  the  day  of  his  conversion. 
We  read  that  "he  went  on  his  way  rejoicing."  (Acts  viii. 
39.)  Let  us  hear  what  the  Philippian  jailer  felt  in  the 
hour  of  his  conversion.  We  read  that  "  he  rejoiced,  be- 
lieving in  God  with  all  his  house."  (Acts  xvi.  34.)  In  fact 
the  testimony  of  Scripture  on  this  subject  is  always  one 
and  the  same.  Conversion  is  always  described  as  the  cause 
of  joy  and  not  of  sorrow,  of  happiness  and  not  of  misery. 

The  plain  truth,  is  that  people  speak  ill  of  conversion 
because  they  know  nothing  really  about  it.  They  run 
down  converted  men  and  women  as  unhappy,  because  they 
judge  them  by  their  outward  appearance  of  calmness, 
gravity,  and  quietness,  and  know  nothing  of  their  inward 


334. 


OLD  PATHS. 


peace.  Tliey  forget  that  it  is  not  those  who  boast  most' 
of  their  own  performances  who  do  most,  and  it  is  not  those 
who  talk  most  of  their  happiness  who  are  in  reality  the 
happiest  people. 

A  converted  man  is  happy,  because  he  has  peace  with 
God.  His  sins  are  forgiven ;  his  conscience  is  free  from 
the  sense  of  guilt:  he  can  look  forward  to  death,  judg- 
ment, and  eternity,  and  not  feel  afraid.  What  an  immense 
blessing  to  feel  forgiven  and  free  ! — He  is  happy  because 
he  finds  order  in  his  heart.  His  passions  are  controlled,  his 
affections  are  rightly  directed.  Everything  in  his  inner 
man,  however  weak  and  feeble,  is  in  its  right  place,  and  not 
in  confusion.  What  an  immense  blessing  order  is  ! — He 
is  happy,  because  he  feels  independent  of  circumstances. 
Come  what  will,  he  is  provided  for :  sickness,  and  losses, 
and  death,  can  never  touch  his  treasure  in  heaven,  or  rob 
him  of  Christ.  What  a  blessing  to  feel  independent ! — 
He  is  happy,  because  he  feels  ready.  Whatever  haf)pens 
he  is  somewhat  prepared :  the  great  business  is  settled ; 
the  great  concern  of  life  is  arranged.  What  a  blessing  to 
feel  ready  ! — These  are  indeed  true  springs  of  happiness. 
They  are  springs  which  are  utterly  shut  up  and  sealed  to 
an  unconverted  man. — Without  forgiveness  of  sins,  without 
hope  for  the  world  to  come,  dependent  on  this  world  for 
comfort,  unprepared  to  meet  God,  he  cannot  be  really 
happy.    Conversion  is  an  essential  part  of  true  happiness. 

Settle  it  in  your  mind  to-day  that  the  friend  who 
labours  for  your  conversion  to  God  is  the  best  friend  that 
you  have.  He  is  a  friend  not  merely  for  the  life  to  come, 
but  for  the  life  that  now  is.  He  is  a  friend  to  your  present 
comfort  as  well  as  to  your  future  deliverance  from  hell.  He 
is  a  friend  for  time  as  well  as  for  eternity.  CONVERSION 
IS  A  HAPPY  THING. 

VI.  Let  me  now  show  you,  in  the  last  place,  that  con- 
version is  a  tiling  that  may  he  seen. 


CONVERSION. 


335 


This  is  a  part  of  my  subject  which  ought  never  to  be 
overlooked.  Well  would  it  be  for  the  Church  and  the 
world,  if  in  every  age  it  had  received  more  attention. 
Thousands  have  turned  away  in  disgust  from  religion, 
because  of  the  wickedness  of  many  who  profess  it.  Hun- 
dreds have  caused  the  very  name  of  conversion  to  stink, 
by  the  lives  they  have  lived  after  declaring  themselves 
converted.  They  have  fancied  that  a  few  spasmodic 
sensations  and  convictions  were  the  true  grace  of  God. 
They  have  imagined  themselves  converted,  because  their 
animal  feelings  were  excited.  They  have  called  themselves 
"  converts "  without  the  slightest  right  or  title  to  that 
honoured  name.  All  this  has  done  immense  harm,  and  it 
is  doing  peculiar  harm  in  the  present  day.  The  times 
demand  a  very  clear  assertion  of  the  great  principle,  that 
true  conversion  is  a  thing  that  can  always  be  seen. 

I  admit  fully  that  the  manner  of  the  Spirit's  working 
is  invisible.  It  is  like  the  wind.  It  is  like  the  attractive 
power  of  the  magnet.  It  is  like  the  influence  of  the 
moon  upon  the  tides.  There  is  something  about  it  far 
beyond  the  reach  of  man's  eyes  or  understanding. — But 
while  I  admit  this  decidedly,  I  maintain  no  less  de- 
cidedly that  the  effects  of  the  Spirit's  work  in  conversion 
will  always  be  seen.  Those  effects  may  be  weak  and 
feeble  at  first :  to  the  natural  man  they  may  hardly  be 
visible,  and  not  understood.  But  effects  there  always 
will  be:  some  fruit  will  always  be  seen  where  there  is 
true  conversion.  Where  no  effect  can  be  seen,  there 
you  may  be  sure  there  is  no  grace.  Where  no  visible 
fruit  can  be  found,  there  you  may  be  sure  is  no  conversion. 

Does  any  one  ask  me  what  we  may  e.xpect  to  see  in  a 
true  conversion  ?  I  reply.  There  will  always  be  something 
seen  in  a  converted  man's  character,  and  feelings,  and 
conduct,  and  opinions,  and  daily  life.  You  will  not  see 
in  him  perfection ;  but  you  will  see  in  him  something 
peculiar,  distinct,  and  different  from  other  people.  You 


336 


OLD  PATHS. 


will  see  liim  hating  sin,  loving  Christ,  following  after 
holiness,  taking  pleasure  in  his  Bible,  persevering  in 
prayer.  You  ■vvill  see  him  penitent,  humble,  believing, 
temperate,  charitable,  truthful,  good-tempered,  patient, 
upright,  honourable,  kind.  These,  at  any  rate,  will  be  his 
aims  :  these  are  the  things  which  he  will  follow  after, 
however  short  he  may  come  of  perfection.  In  some  con- 
verted persons  you  will  see  these  things  more  distinctly, 
in  others  less.  This  only  I  say,  wherever  there  is  con- 
version, something  of  this  kind  will  be  seen. 

I  care  nothing  for  a  conversion  which  has  neither  marks 
nor  evidences  to  show.  I  shall  always  say,  "  Give  me 
some  marks  if  I  am  to  think  you  are  converted.  Show 
me  thy  conversion  without  any  marks,  if  thou  canst !  I 
do  not  believe  in  it.  It  is  worth  nothing  at  all." — You 
may  call  such  doctrine  legal  if  you  please.  It  is  far  better 
to  be  called  legal  than  to  he  an  Antinomian.  Never,  never, 
will  I  allow  that  the  blessed  Spirit  can  be  in  a  man's 
heart,  when  no  fruit  of  the  Spirit  can  be  seen  in  his  life. 
A  conversion  which  allows  a  man  to  live  in  sin,  to  lie,  and 
drink,  and  swear,  is  not  the  conversion  of  the  Bible.  It 
is  a  counterfeit  conversion,  which  can  only  please  the  devil, 
and  will  lead  the  man  who  is  satisfied  with  it,  not  to 
heaven,  but  to  hell. 

Let  this  last  point  sink  down  into  your  heart  and  nevei 
be  forgotten.  Conversion  is  not  only  a  Scriptural  thing, 
a  real  thing,  a  necessary  thing,  a  possible  thing,  and  a 
happy  thing :  there  remains  one  more  grand  characteristic 
about  it —it  is  A  THING  THAT  WILL  ALWAYS  BE 
SEEN. 

And  now  let  me  wind  up  this  paper  by  a  few  plain 
appeals  to  the  consciences  of  all  who  read  it.  I  have 
tried  to  the  best  of  my  power  to  unfold  and  explain  the 
nature  of  conversion.  I  have  endeavoured  to  set  it  forth 
in  every  point  of  view.    Nothing  remains  but  to  try  to 


CONVERSION. 


337 


bring  it  home  to  the  heart  of  every  one  into  whose  hands 
this  book  may  fall. 

(1)  First  of  all,  I  urge  every  reader  of  this  paper  to 
find  out  whether  he  is  converted.  I  am  not  asking  about 
other  people.  The  heathen  no  doubt  need  conversion. 
The  unhappy  inmates  of  jails  and  reformatories  need 
conversion.  There  may  be  people  living  near  your  own 
house  who  are  open  sinners  and  unbelievers,  and  need 
conversion.  But  all  this  is  beside  the  question.  I  ask. 
Are  you  converted  yourself? 

Are  you  converted  ?  It  is  no  reply  to  tell  me  that 
many  people  are  hypocrites  and  false  professors.  It  is  no 
argument  to  say  that  there  are  many  sham  revivals,  and 
mock  conversions.  All  this  may  be  very  true :  but  the' 
abuse  of  a  thing  does  not  destroy  the  use  of  it.  The 
circulation  of  bad  money  is  no  reason  why  there  shoul(f 
not  be  good  coin.  Whatever  others  may  be.  Are  you 
converted  yourself? 

Are  you  converted  ?  It  is  no  answer  to  tell  me  that' 
you  go  to  church  or  chapel,  and  have  been  baptized  and 
admitted  to  the  Table  of  the  Lord.  All  this  proves  little : 
I  could  say  as  much  for  Judas  Iscariot,  Demas,  Simon 
Magus,  Ananias,  and  Sapphira.  The  question  is  still  not 
answered.  Is  your  heart  changed  ?  Are  you  really  con- 
verted to  God  ? 

(2)  In  the  next  place,  I  urge  every  reader  of  this  book 
who  is  not  converted,  never  to  rest  till  he  is.  Make  haste : 
awake  to  know  your  danger.  Escape  for  your  life:  flee  from 
the  wrath  to  come.  Time  is  short :  eternity  is  near.  Life 
is  uncertain :  judgment  is  sure.  Arise  and  call  upon  God. 
The  throne  of  grace  is  yet  standing:  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  is  yet  waiting  to  be  gracious.  The  promises  of  the 
Gospel  are  wide,  broad,  full,  and  free :  lay  hold  upon  them 
this  day.  Repent,  and  believe  the  Gospel :  repent,  and  be 
converted.  Rest  not,  rest  not,  rest  not,  till  you  know  and 
feel  that  you  are  a  converted  man. 

z 


338 


OLD  PATHS. 


(3)  In  the  last  place,  I  offer  a  icord  of  exltortation  to 
every  reader  "who  has  reason  to  think  that  he  has  gone 
through  that  blessed  change  of  which  I  have  been  speak- 
ing in  this  paper.  You  can  remember  the  time  when  you 
were  not  what  you  are  now.  You  can  remember  a  time  in 
3-our  life  when  old  things  passed  away,  and  all  things 
became  new.  To  you  also  I  have  something  to  say.  Suffer 
the  word  of  friendly  counsel,  and  lay  it  to  heart. 

(a)  Do  you  think  that  you  are  converted  ?  Then  give  all 
diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  conversion  sure.  Leave 
nothing  uncertain  that  concerns  your  immortal  soul.  Labour 
to  have  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  with  your  spirit,  that  you 
are  a  child  of  God.  Assurance  is  to  be  had  in  this  world, 
and  assurance  is  worth  the  seeking.  It  is  good  to  have 
hope  :  it  is  far  better  to  feel  sure. 

(6)  Do  you  tliink  that  you  are  converted  ?  Then  do  not 
expect  impossibilities  in  this  world.  Do  not  suppose  the 
day  will  ever  come  when  you  will  find  no  weak  point  in 
your  heart,  no  wanderings  in  private  prayer,  no  distraction 
in  Bible-reading,  no  cold  desires  in  the  public  worship  of 
God,  no  flesh  to  mortify,  no  devil  to  tempt,  no  worldly 
snares  to  make  j'ou  fall.  Expect  nothing  of  the  kmd. 
Conversion  is  not  perfection  !  Conversion  is  not  heaven  ! 
The  old  man  within  you  is  yet  alive ;  the  world  around 
you  is  yet  full  of  danger;  the  devil  is  not  dead.  Remember 
at  your  best,  that  a  converted  sinner  is  still  a  poor  weak 
sinner,  needing  Christ  every  day.  Remember  this,  and 
you  Avill  not  be  disappointed. 

(c)  Do  you  think  that  you  are  converted  ?  Then  labour 
and  desire  to  grow  in  grace  every  year  that  you  live.  Look 
not  to  the  things  behind ;  be  not  content  with  old 
experience,  old  grace,  old  attainments  in  religion.  Desire 
the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word,  that  you  may  grow  thereby. 
(1  Pet.  ii.  2.)  Entreat  the  Lord  to  carry  on  the  work  of 
conversion  more  and  more  in  your  soul,  and  to  deepen 
sjiiritual  impressions  within  you.    Read  your  Bible  more 


CONVERSION. 


339 


carefully  every  year:  watch  over  your  prayers  more  jealously 
every  year.  Beware  of  becoming  sleepy  and  lazy  in  your 
religion.  There  is  a  vtist  difference  between  the  lowest 
and  the  highest  forms  in  the  school  of  Christ.  Strive  to 
get  on  in  knowledge,  faith,  hope,  charity,  and  patience. 
Let  your  yearly  motto  be,  "  Onward,  Forward,  Upward  !  " 
to  the  last  hour  of  your  life. 

(d)  Do  you  think  you  are  converted  ?  Tlien  show  the 
value  you  place  on  conversion  by  your  diligence  in  trying 
to  do  good  to  others. — Do  you  really  believe  it  is  an  awful 
thing  to  be  an  unconverted  man  ?  Do  you  really  think 
that  conversion  is  an  unspeakable  blessing  ?  Then  prove 
it,  pi'ove  it,  prove  it,  by  constant  zealous  efforts  to  promote 
the  conversion  of  others.  Look  round  the  neiglibourhood 
in  which  you  live  :  have  compassion  on  the  multitudes  who 
are  yet  unconverted.  Be  not  content  with  getting  them 
to  come  to  your  church  or  chapel ;  aim  at  nothing  less 
than  their  entire  conversion  to  God.  Speak  to  them,  read 
to  them,  pray  for  them,  stir  up  others  to  help  tliera.  But 
never,  never,  if  you  are  a  converted  man,  never  be  content 
to  go  to  heaven  alone  1 


XIII. 


THE  HEAET. 

"Give  Me  thine  heart." — Prov.  xxiii.  26. 
"  Tlcy  heart  is  not  right  in  tlie  sight  of  God." — Acts  viii.  21. 

The  heart  is  the  main  thino^  in  religion.  I  make  no 
excuse  for  asking  the  special  attention  of  my  readers, 
while  I  try  to  say  a  few  things  about  the  heart. 

The  head  is  not  the  principal  thing.  You  may  know 
the  whole  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  and  consent  that  it  is 
good.  You  may  be  clear,  correct,  and  sound  in  your 
religious  opinions.  But  all  this  time  you  may  be  walking 
in  tlie  broad  way  which  leadeth  to  destruction.  It  is 
your  heart  which  is  the  main  point.  "  Is  thy  heart  right 
in  the  sight  of  God  ? " 

Your  outward  life  may  be  moral,  decent,  respectable, 
in  the  eyes  of  men.  Your  minister,  and  friends,  and 
neighbours,  may  see  nothing  very  wrong  in  your  general 
conduct.  But  all  this  time  you  may  be  hanging  on  the 
brink  of  everlasting  ruin.  It  is  your  heart  which  is  the 
main  thing.    Is  that  heart  right  in  the  sight  of  God  ? 

Wishes  and  desires  are  not  enough  to  make  a  Christian. 
You  may  have  many  good  feelings  about  your  soul.  You 
may,  like  Balaam,  long  to  "  die  the  death  of  the  righteous." 
(Num.  xxiii.  10.)  You  may  sometimes  tremble  at  the 
thought  of  judgment  to  come,  or  be  melted  to  tears  by 
the  tidings  of  Christ's  love.    But  all  this  time  you  may 


THE  HEART. 


311 


be  slowly  drifting  downward  into  hell.  It  is  your  heart 
which  is  the  main  thing.  Is  that  heart  right  in  the  sight 
of  God  ? 

There  are  three  things  which  I  propose  to  do  in  order 
to  impress  the  subject  of  this  paper  upon  your  mind. 

I.  First,  I  will  show  you  the  immense  importance  of 
the  heart  in  religion. 

II.  Secondly,  I  will  show  you  the  heart  that  is  ivrong 
in  the  sight  of  God. 

III.  Lastly,  I  will  show  you  the  heart  that  is  right. 

May  God  bless  the  whole  subject  to  the  soul  of  every 
one  into  whose  hands  this  book  may  fall !  May  the  Holy 
Ghost,  without  whom  all  preacbiug  and  writing  can  do 
nothing,  apply  this  paper  to  man}'  consciences,  and  make 
it  an  aiTow  to  pierce  many  hearts ! 

I.  In  the  first  place,  I  will  show  the  immense  import- 
ance of  the  heart  in  religion. 

How  shall  I  prove  this  point  ?  From  whence  shall  I 
fetch  my  arguments  ? — I  must  turn  to  the  Word  of  God. 
In  questions  of  this  kind  it  matters  nothing  what  the 
Avorld  thinks  right  or  wrong.  There  is  only  one  sure  test 
of  truth.  What  saith  the  Scripture  ?  What  is  written  in 
the  Bible  ?  What  is  the  mind  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ? — It  we 
cannot  submit  our  judgments  to  this  infalhble  umpire,  it  is 
useless  to  pretend  that  we  have  any  religion  at  all. 

For  one  thing,  the  Bible  teaches  that  the  heart  is  that 
part  of  us  on  which  the  state  of  our  soul  depends.  "  Out 
of  it  are  the  issues  of  life."  (Prov.  iv.  23.)  The  reason, 
|the  understanding,  the  conscience,  the  affections,  are  all 
second  in  importance  to  the  heart.  The  heart  is  the  man. 
It  is  the  seat  of  all  spiritual  life,  and  health,  and  strength, 
and  growth.    It  is  the  hinge  and  turning-point  in  the 


342 


OLD  PATHS. 


condition  of  man's  soul.  If  the  heart  is  alive  to  God  and 
quickened  by  the  Spirit,  the  man  is  a  living  Christian. 
If  the  heart  is  dead  and  has  not  the  Sj^irit,  the  man  is 
dead  before  God.  The  heart  is  the  man !  Tell  me  not 
merely  what  a  man  says  and  professes,  and  where  a  man 
goes  on  Sunda}',  and  what  money  he  puts  in  the  collecting- 
plate.  Tell  me  rather  what  his  heart  is,  and  I  will  tell 
you  what  he  is.  "  As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is 
he."    (Prov.  xxiii.  7.) 

For  another  thing,  the  Bible  teaches  that  the  heart  is 
that  part  of  us  at  which  God  especially  looks.  "  Man 
looketh  at  the  outward  appearance,  but  the  Lord  looketh 
on  the  heart."  (1  Sam.  xvi.  7.)  "Every  way  of  man  is 
right  in  his  own  eyes :  but  the  Lord  pondereth  the  heart." 
(Proverbs  xxi.  2.)  Man  is  naturally  content  with  the 
outward  part  of  religion,  with  outward  morality,  outward 
correctness,  outward  regular  attendance  on  means  of  grace. 
But  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  look  much  further.  He  regards 
our  motives.  He  "  weigheth  the  spirits."  (Prov.  xvi.  2.) 
He  says  Himself,  "  1  the  Lord  search  the  heart,  I  try  the 
reins."    (Jer.  xvii.  10.) 

For  another  thing,  the  Bible  teaches  that  the  heart  is 
the  first  and  foremost  thing  which  God  asks  man  to  give 
him.  "  My  son,"  He  says,  "  give  Me  thine  heart."  (Prov. 
xxiii.  26.)  We  may  give  God  a  bowed  head  and  a  serious 
face,  our  bodily  presence  in  His  house,  and  a  loud  amen. 
But  until  we  give  God  our  hearts,  we  give  Him  nothing  of 
any  value. — The  sacrifices  of  the  Jews  in  Isaiah's  time  were 
many  and  costly.  They  drew  nigh  to  God  with  their  mouth, 
and  honoured  Him  with  their  lips.  But  they  were  all 
wholly  useless,  because  the  heart  of  the  worshippers  was 
far  from  God.  (Matt.  xv.  8.)  The  zeal  of  Jehu  against 
idolatry  was  very  great,  and  his  services  in  pulling  down 
idols  brought  him  many  temporal  rewards.  But  there 
was  one  great  blot  on  his  character  which  spoiled  all.  He 
did  not  walk  in  the  law  of  God  "with  all  his  heart."  (2 


THE  HEART. 


343 


Kings  X.  31.)  The  heart  is  what  the  husband  desires  to 
have  in  his  wife,  the  parent  in  his  child,  and  the  master 
in  his  servant.  And  the  heart  is  what  God  desires  to  have 
in  professing  Christians. 

Wliat  is  the  heart  in  man's  body  ?  It  is  the  principal 
and  most  important  organ  in  the  whole  frame.  A  man 
may  live  many  years  in  spite  of  fevers,  wounds,  and  loss 
of  limbs.  But  a  man  cannot  live  if  you  injure  his  heart. 
Just  so  it  is  with  the  heart  in  religion.  It  is  the  fountain 
of  life  to  the  soul. 

What  is  the  root  to  the  tree  ?  It  is  the  source  of  all 
life,  and  growth,  and  fruitfulness.  You  may  cut  off  the 
branches,  and  wound  the  trunk,  and  the  tree  may  yet 
survive.  But  if  you  hurt  the  root  the  tree  will  die.  Just 
so  it  is  with  the  heart  in  religion.  It  is  the  root  of  life  to 
the  soul. 

What  is  the  mainspring  to  the  watch?  It  is  the  cause 
of  all  its  movements,  and  the  secret  of  all  its  usefulness. 
The  case  may  be  costly  and  beautiful.  The  face  and 
figures  may  be  skilfully  made.  But  if  there  is  anything 
wrong  with  the  mainspring  the  works  will  not  go.  Just 
so  it  is  with  the  heart  in  religion.  It  is  the  mainspring  of 
life  to  the  soul. 

What  is  the  fire  to  the  steam  engine?  It  is  the  cause 
of  all  its  motion  and  power.  The  machinery  may  be 
properly  made.  Every  screw,  and  valve,  and  joint,  and| 
crank,  and  rod  may  be  in  its  right  place.  But  if  the 
furnace  is  cold  and  the  water  is  not  turned  into  steam, 
the  engine  will  do  nothing.  Just  so  is  it  with  the  heart  in 
religion.  Unless  the  heart  is  lighted  with  fire  from  on 
high,  the  soul  will  not  move. 

Would  you  know  the  reason  why  such  multitudes  around 
you  take  no  interest  in  religion  ?  They  have  no  real 
concern  about  God,  or  Christ,  or  the  Bible,  or  heaven,  or 
hell,  or  judgment,  or  eternity.  They  care  for  nothing  but 
what  they  shall  eat,  or  v/hat  they  shall  drink,  or  what  they 


OLD  PATHS. 


shall  put  on,  or  what  money  they  can  get,  or  what 
]ileasure  they  can  have.  It  is  their  heart  which  is  in 
fault !  They  have  not  the  least  appetite  for  the  things  of 
God.  They  are  destitute  of  any  taste  or  inclination  for 
spiritual  things.  They  need  a  new  mainspring.  They 
"want  a  new  heart.  "  Wherefore  is  there  a  price  in  the 
hand  of  a  fool  to  get  wisdom,  seeing  he  hath  no  heart 
unto  it."    (Prov.  xvii.  16.) 

Would  you  know  the  reason  wh}^  so  many  hear  the 
Gospel  year  after  year,  and  yet  remain  unmoved  by  it  ? 
Their  minds  seem  like  Bunyan's  "  slough  of  despond." 
Cartloads  of  good  instruction  are  poured  into  them  without 
j^roducing  any  good  effect.  Their  reason  is  convinced. 
Their  head  assents  to  the  truth.  Their  conscience  is 
sometimes  pricked.  Their  feelings  are  sometimes  roused. 
Why  then  do  they  stick  fast  ?  Why  do  they  tarry  ?  It  is 
their  hearts  ivhich  are  in  fault !  Some  secret  idol  chains 
them  down  to  the  earth,  and  keeps  them  tied  hand  and 
foot,  so  that  they  cannot  move.  They  want  a  new  heart. 
Their  picture  is  drawn  faithfully  byEzekiel:  "They  sit 
before  thee  as  my  people,  and  they  hear  thy  words,  but 
they  will  not  do  them :  for  with  their  mouth  they  show 
much  love,  but  their  heart  goeth  after  their  covetousness." 
(Ezek.  xxxiii.  31.) 

Would  you  know  the  reason  why  thousands  of  so-called 
Christians  will  be  lost  at  last,  and  perish  miserably  in  hell  ? 
They  will  not  be  able  to  say  that  God  did  not  offer  salva- 
tion to  them.  They  will  not  be  able  to  plead  that  Christ 
did  not  send  them  invitations.  Oh  no !  They  will  be 
obliged  to  confess  that  "all  things  were  ready"  for  them, 
except  their  own  hearts.  Their  own  hearts  will  prove  to 
have  been  the  cause  of  their  ruin  !  The  life-boat  was 
alongside  the  wreck,  but  they  would  not  enter  it.  Christ 
"would"  have  gathered  them,  but  they  "would  not"  be 
gathered.  (Matt,  xxiii.  37.)  Christ  would  have  saved  them,, 
but  they  would  not  be  saved.   "  They  loved  darkness  more 


THE  HEART. 


345 


than  light."  Their  hearts  were  in  fault.  "  They  would  not 
come  to  Christ,  that  they  might  have  life."  (John  iii.  19 ; 
V.  -40.) 

I  leave  this  branch  of  my  subject.  I  trust  I  have  said 
enough  to  show  you  the  immense  importance  of  the  heart 
in  religion.  Surely  I  have  good  reason  for  pressing  the 
subject  of  this  paper  on  your  notice. — Is  thy  heart  right  ? 
Is  it  right  in  the  sight  of  God  ? 

II.  I  will  now  show  you,  in  the  second  place,  the  heart 
that  is  wrong  in  the  sight  of  God.  There  are  only  two 
sorts  of  hearts,  a  rio-ht  one  and  a  wronij  one.  What  is  a 
wrong  heart  like  ? 

The  wrong  heart  is  the  natural  heart  with  which  we  are 
all  born.  There  are  no  hearts  which  are  right  by  nature. 
There  are  no  such  things  as  naturally  "good  hearts," 
whatever  some  ignorant  people  may  please  to  say  about 
"  having  a  good  heart  at  the  bottom."  Ever  since  Adam 
and  Eve  fell,  and  sin  etitered  into  the  world,  men  and 
■women  are  born  with  an  inclination  to  evil.  Every  natural 
heart  is  wrong.  If  your  heart  has  never  been  changed  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  since  you  were  born,  know  this  day,  that 
your  heart  is  wrong. 

What  does  the  Scripture  say  about  the  natural  heart  ? 
It  says  many  things  which  are  deeply  solemn,  and  painfully 
true.  It  saj's  that  "  the  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things, 
and  desperately  wicked."  (Jer.  xvii.  9.)  It  says  that 
"every  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  the  heart  is  only 
evil  continually."  (Gen.  vi.  5.)  It  says  that "  the  heart  of 
the  sons  of  irien  is  full  of  evil."  (Eccles.  ix.  3.)  It  says 
that  "  From  within,  out  of  the  heart  of  man,"  as  out  of  a 
fountain,  "proceed  evil  thoughts,  adulteries,  fornications, 
murders,  thefts,  covetousness,  wickedness,  deceit,  lascivi- 
ousness,  an  evil  eye,  blasphemy,  pride,  foolishness.  All 
these  evil  things  come  from  within."  (Mark  vii.  21.) 
Truly  this  is  a  humbling  picture !  The  seeds  of  these  things 


346 


OLD  PATHS. 


are  in  the  heart  of  every  one  born  into  the  world.  Surely 
I  may  well  tell  5"ou  that  the  natural  heart  is  wrong. 

But  is  there  no  one  common  mark  of  the  wrong  heart, 
which  is  to  be  seen  in  all  whom  God  has  not  changed  ? 
Yes !  there  is ;  and  to  that  common  mark  of  the  wrong 
heart  I  now  request  your  attention.  There  is  a  most 
striking  and  instructive  figure  of  speech,  which  the  Holy 
Ghost  has  thought  fit  to  use,  in  describing  the  natural 
heart.  He  calls  it  a  "  stonj^  heart."  (Ezek.  xi.  19.)  I 
know  no  emblem  in  the  Bible  so  full  of  instruction,  and  so 
apt  and  fitting  as  this  one.  A  truer  word  was  never  written 
than  that  which  calls  the  natural  heart  a  heart  of  stone. 
Mark  well  what  I  am  going  to  say;  and  may  the  Lord 
give  you  understanding ! 

(a)  A  stone  is  hard.  All  people  know  that.  It  is  un- 
yielding, unbending,  unimpressible.  It  may  be  broken,  but 
it  will  never  bend.  The  proverb  is  world-wide,  "  as  hard  as 
a  stone."  Look  at  the  granite  rocks  which  line  the  coast 
of  Coi-mvall.  For  four  thousand'  years  the  waves  of  the 
Atlantic  Ocean  have  dashed  against  them  in  vain.  There 
they  stand  in  their  old  hardness,  unbroken  and  unmoved. 
It  is  just  the  same  with  the  natural  heart.  Afflictions, 
mercies,  losses,  crosses,  sermons,  counsels,  books,  tracts, 
speaking,  writing, — all,  all  are  unable  to  soften  it.  Until 
tlie  day  that  God  comes  down  to  change  it,  it  remains 
unmoved.  Well  may  the  natural  heait  be  called  a  heart 
of  stone ! 

(b)  A  stone  is  cold.  There  is  a  chilly,  icy  feeling  about  it, 
which  you  know  the  moment  you  touch  it.  It  is  utterly 
unlike  the  feeling  of  flesh,  or  wood,  or  even  earth.  The 
proverb  is  in  every  one's  mouth,  "  As  cold  as  a  stone."  The 
old  marble  statues  in  many  a  cathredral  church  have  heard 
the  substance  of  thousands  of  sermons.  Yet  they  never 
show  any  feeling.  Not  a  muscle  of  their  marble  faces  ever 
shrinks  or  moves.  It  is  just  the  same  with  the  natural 
heart.    It  is  utterly  destitute  of  spiritual  feeling.    It  cares 


THE  HEAET. 


347 


less  for  the  story  of  Christ's  death  on  the  cross,  than  it  docs 
for  the  last  new  novel,  or  the  last  debate  in  Parliament,  or 
the  account  of  a  railway  accident,  or  a  shipwreck,  or  an 
execution.  Until  God  sends  fire  from  heaven  to  warm  it, 
the  natural  heart  of  man  has  no  feeling  about  religion. 
Well  may  it  be  called  a  heart  of  stone  ! 

(c)  A  stone  is  barren.  You  will  reap  no  harvest  off  rocks 
of  any  description.  You  will  never  fill  your  barns  withi 
corn  from  the  top  of  Snowdon  or  Ben  Nevis.  You  will 
never  reap  wheat  on  granite  or  slate, — on  lime-stone  or 
trap-stone, — on  oolite  or  sandstone, — on  flint  or  on  clialk. 
You  may  get  good  crops  on  Norfolk  sands,  or  Cambridge- 
shire fens,  or  Suftblk  clay,  by  patience,  labour,  money,  and 
good  farming.  But  you  will  never  get  a  crop  worth  a 
farthing  off  a  stone.  It  is  just  the  same  with  the  natural 
heart.  It  is  utterly  barren  of  penitence,  or  faith,  or  love, 
or  fear,  or  holiness,  or  humility.  Until  God  breaks  it  up, 
and  puts  a  new  principle  in  it,  it  bears  no  fruit  to  God's 
praise.  Well  may  the  natural  heart  be  called  a  heart  of 
stone ! 

(cZ)  A  stone  is  dead.  It  neither  sees,  nor  hears,  nor  moves, 
nor  grows.  Show  it  the  glories  of  heaven,  and  it  would 
not  be  pleased.  Tell  it  of  the  fires  of  hell,  and  it  would 
not  be  alarmed.  Bid  it  flee  from  a  roaring  lion,  or  an 
earthquake,  and  it  would  not  stir.  The  Bass  Rock  and 
Mount  Blanc  are  just  what  they  were  4000  years  ago. 
They  have  seen  kingdoms  rise  and  fall,  and  they  remain 
utterly  unchanged.  They  are  neitlier  higher,  nor  broader, 
nor  larger  than  they  were  when  Noah  left  the  ark.  It  is 
iust  the  same  with  the  natural  heart.  It  has  not  a  spark 
of  spiritual  life  about  it.  Until  God  plants  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  it,  it  is  dead  and  motionless  about  real  religion. 
Well  may  the  natural  heart  be  called  a  heart  of  stone ! 

The  wrong  heart  is  now  set  before  you.  Look  at  it. 
Think  about  it.  Examine  yourself  by  the  light  of  the 
picture  I  have  drawn.    Perhaps  your  iieart  has  never  yet 


348 


OLD  PATHS. 


been  changed.  Perhaps  your  heart  is  still  just  as  it  was 
when  you  were  born.  If  so,  remember  this  day  what  I 
tell  you.  YOUR  HEART  IS  WRONG  IN  THE  SIGHT 
OF  GOD. 

Would  you  know  the  reason  why  it  is  so  difficult  to  do 
good  in  the  world  ?  Would  you  know  why  so  few  believe 
the  Gospel,  and  live  like  true  Christians  ?  The  reason  is, 
the  hardness  of  man's  natural  heart.  He  neither  sees  nor 
knows  what  is  for  his  good.  The  wonder,  to  my  mind,  is 
not  so  much  that  few  are  converted,  as  the  miraculous  fact 
that  any  are  converted  at  all.  I  am  not  greatly  surprised 
when  I  see  or  hear  of  unbelief.  I  remember  the  natural 
heart  is  wrong. 

Would  you  know  the  reason  why  the  state  of  men  is  so 
desperately  helpless,  if  they  die  in  their  sins  ?  Would 
you  know  why  ministers  feel  so  fearful  about  every  one 
who  is  cut  off  unprepared  to  meet  God  ?  The  reason  is, 
the  hardness  of  man's  natural  heart.  What  would  a  man 
do  in  heaven,  if  he  got  there,  with  his  heart  unchanged  ? 
By  which  of  the  saints  would  he  sit  down  ?  What  pleasure 
could  he  take  in  God's  presence  and  company !  Oh  no .' 
it  is  vain  to  conceal  it.  There  can  be  no  real  hope  about 
a  man's  condition,  if  he  dies  with  his  heart  wrong. 

I  leave  this  point  here.  Once  more  I  press  the  whole 
subject  of  my  paper  upon  your  conscience.  Surely  you 
must  allow  it  is  a  very  serious  one. — Is  thy  heart  right  ? 
Is  it  right  in  the  sight  of  God  ? 

III.  I  will  now  show  you,  in  the  last  place,  the  right 
Jieart.  It  is  a  heart  of  which  the  Bible  contains  many 
pictures.  I  am  going  to  try  to  place  some  of  those  pictures 
before  you.  On  a  question  like  this,  I  want  you  to  observe 
what  God  says,  rather  than  what  is  said  by  man.  Come, 
uow,  and  see  the  marks  and  signs  of  a  right  heart. 

(a)  The  right  heart  is  a  "  neiv  heaii."  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  26.) 
It  is  not  the  heart  with  which  a  man  is  born,  but  another 


THE  HEART. 


heart  put  in  liim  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  a  heart  which 
lias  new  tastes,  new  joys,  new  sorrows,  new  desires,  new 
hopes,  new  fears,  new  likes,  new  dislikes.  It  has  new 
views  about  the  soul,  and  sin,  and  God,  and  Christ,  and 
salvation,  and  the  Bible,  and  prayer,  and  Sunday,  and 
heaven,  and  hell,  and  the  world,  and  holiness.  It  is  like 
a  farm  with  a  new  and  oood  tenant.  "  Old  thinsfs  are 
passed  away.  Behold  all  things  are  become  new."  (2  Cor. 
v.  17.) 

(b)  The  right  heart  is  a  "  broken  and  contrite  heart." 
(Psalm,  li.  17.)  It  is  broken  off  from  pride,  self-conceit, 
and  self-righteousness.  Its  former  high  thoughts  of  self 
are  cracked,  shattered,  and  shivered  to  atoms.  It  thinks 
itself  guilty,  unworthy,  and  coiTupt.  Its  former  stubborn- 
ness, heaviness,  and  insensibility  have  thawed,  disappeared, 
and  passed  away.  It  no  longer  thinks  lightly  of  offending 
God.  It  is  tender,  sensitive,  and  jealously  fearful  of 
running  into  sin.  (2  Kings  xxii.  19.)  It  is  humble,  lowly, 
and  self-abased,  and  sees  in  itself  no  good  thing. 

(c)  A  right  heart  is  a  heart  which  believes  on  Christ 
alone  for  salvation,  and  in  which  Christ  dwells  by  faith. 
(Rom.  X.  10;  Eph.  iii.  17.)  It  rests  all  its  hopes  of 
pardon  and  eternal  life  on  Christ's  atonement,  Christ's 
mediation,  and  Christ's  intercession.  It  is  sprinkled  in 
Christ's  blood  from  an  evil  conscience.  (Heb.  x.  22.)  It 
turns  to  Christ  as  the  compass-needle  turns  to  the  north. 
It  looks  to  Christ  for  daily  peace,  mercy,  and  grace,  as 
the  sun-flower  looks  to  the  sun.  It  feeds  on  Christ  for 
its  daily  sustenance,  as  Israel  fed  on  the  manna  in  the 
wilderness.  It  sees  in  Christ  a  special  fitness  to  supply  all 
its  wants  and  requirements.  It  leans  on  Han,  hangs  on 
Him,  builds  on  Him,  cleaves  to  Him,  as  its  physician, 
guardian,  husband,  and  friend. 

{d)  A  right  heart  is  a  purified  heart.  (Acts  xv.  9  ;  Matt, 
v.  8.)  It  loves  holiness,  and  hates  sin.  It  strives  daily  to 
cleanse  itself  from  all  filthiness  of  flesh  and  spirit.  (2  Cor. 


350 


OLD  PATHS. 


vii.  1.)  It  abhors  that  which  is  evil,  and  cleaves  to  that 
which  is  good.  It  delights  in  the  law  of  God,  and  has  that 
law  engraven  on  it,  that  it  may  not  forget  it.  (Psalm 
cxix.  11.)  It  longs  to  keep  the  law  more  perfectly,  and 
takes  pleasure  in  those  who  love  the  law^.  It  loves  God 
and  man.  Its  affections  are  set  on  things  above.  It 
never  feels  so  light  and  happy  as  when  it  is  most  holy; 
and  it  looks  forward  to  heaven  with  joy,  as  the  place 
where  perfect  holiness  will  at  length  be  attained. 

(e)  A  right  heart  is  a  praying  heaH.  It  has  within  it 
"  the  Spirit  of  adoption  whereby  we  cry,  Abba  Father." 
(Rom.  viii.  15.)  Its  daily  feeling  is,  "  Thy  face.  Lord,  will 
I  seek."  (Psalm  xxvii.  8.)  It  is  drawn  by  an  habitual 
inclination  to  speak  to  God  about  spiritual  things, — 
weakly,  feebly,  and  imperfectly  perhaps,  but  speak  it 
must.  It  finds  it  necessary  to  pour  out  itself  before  God, 
as  before  a  friend,  and  to  spread  before  Him  all  its  wants 
and  desires.  It  tells  Him  all  its  secrets.  It  keeps  back 
nothing  from  Him.  You  might  as  well  try  to  persuade  a 
man  to  live  without  breathing,  as  to  persuade  the  possessor 
of  a  right  heart  to  live  without  praying. 

(/)  A  right  heart  is  a  heart  that  feels  within  a  conflict. 
(Gal.  V.  17.)  It  finds  within  itself  tw^o  opposing  jDrinciples 
contending  one  with  another  for  the  mastery, — the  flesh 
lusting  against  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh. 
It  knows  by  experience  what  St.  Paul  means  when  he 
says,  "I  see  a  law^  in  my  members  warring  against  the  law 
of  my  mind."  (Rom.  vii.  23.)  The  wrong  heart  knows 
nothing  of  this  strife.  The  strong  man  armed  keeps  the 
wrong  heart  as  his  palace,  and  his  goods  are  at  peace. 
(Luke  xi.  21.)  But  when  the  rightful  King  takes  pos- 
session of  the  heart,  a  .struggle  begins  which  never  ends 
till  death.  The  right  heart  may  be  known  by  its  warfare, 
quite  as  much  as  by  its  peace. 

(g)  Last,  but  not  least,  the  right  heart  is  honest,  and 
single,  and  true.  (Luke  viii.  15;  1  Chron.  xii.  S3 ;  Heb.x.  22.) 


THE  HEART. 


351 


There  is  nothing  about  it  of  falsehood,  hypocrisy,  or  part- 
acting.  It  is  not  double  or  divided.  It  really  is  what  it 
professes  to  be,  feels  what  it  professes  to  feel,  and  believes 
what  it  professes  to  believe.  Its  faith  may  be  feeble.  Its 
obedience  may  be  very  im2Derfect.  But  one  thing  will 
always  distinguish  the  right  heart.  Its  religion  will  be 
real,  genuine,  thorough,  and  sincere. 

A  heart  such  as  that  which  I  have  now  described,  has 
always  been  the  possession  of  all  true  Christians  of  every 
name,  and  nation,  and  people  and  tongue.  They  have 
differed  from  one  another  on  many  subjects,  but  they  have 
all  been  of  a  "  right  lieart."  They  have  some  of  them  fallen, 
for  a  season,  like  David  and  Peter,  but  their  hearts  have 
never  entirely  departed  from  the  Lord.  They  have  often 
proved  themselves  to  be  men  and  women  laden  with  in- 
firmities, but  their  hearts  have  been  right  in  the  sight  of 
God.  They  have  understood  one  another  on  earth.  They 
have  found  that  their  experience  was  everywhere  one  and 
the  same.  They  will  understand  each  other  even  better 
in  the  world  to  come.  All  that  have  had  "  right  hearts  " 
upon  earth,  will  find  that  they  have  one  heart  when  they 
enter  heaven. 

(1)  I  wish  now  in  conclusion  to  offer  to  every  reader 
of  this  paper,  a  question  to  promote  self  inquiry.  I  ask 
you  plainly  this  day,  "  What  is  your  heart  ?  Is  your  heart 
ricrht  or  wronoj  ? " 

I  know  not  who  you  are  into  whose  hands  this  paper 
have  fallen.  But  I  do  know  that  self-examination  cannot 
do  you  any  harm.  If  your  heart  is  right,  it  will  be  a 
comfort  to  know  it.  "  If  our  heart  condemn  us  not,  then 
have  we  confidence  towards  God."  (1  John  iii.  21.)  But 
if  your  heart  is  wrong,  it  is  high  time  to  find  it  out,  and 
seek  a  change.  The  time  is  short.  The  night  cometh 
when  no  man  can  work.  Say  to  yourself  this  very  day, 
"  Is  my  heart  riglit  or  wrong  ? " 


652 


OLD  PATHS. 


Think  not  to  say  within  yourself. — "  There  is  no  need 
for  such  questions  as  these.  There  is  no  need  to  make 
such  ado  about  the  heart.  I  go  to  church  or  chapel 
regularly.  I  live  a  respectable  life.  I  hope  I  shall  prove 
right  at  last." — Beware  of  such  thoughts,  I  beseech  you  ; 
— beware  of  them  if  you  would  ever  be  saved.  You  may 
go  to  the  best  church  on  earth,  and  hear  the  best  of 
preachers.  You  may  be  the  best  of  churchmen,  or  the 
soundest  member  of  a  chapel.  But  all  this  time,  if  your 
heart  is  not  right  in  the  sight  of  God,  you  are  on  the  high 
road  to  destruction.  Settle  down  to  quiet  consideration 
of  the  question  before  you.  Look  it  manfully  in  the  face, 
and  do  not  turn  aside.    Is  your  heart  right  or  wrong  ? 

Think  not  to  say  within  yourself,  "No  one  can  know 
what  his  heart  is.  We  must  hope  the  best.  No  one  can 
find  out  with  any  certainty  the  state  of  his  own  soul." 
Beware,  I  say  again ; — ^beware  of  sixch  thoughts.  The  thing 
can  be  known,  The  thing  can  be  found  out.  Deal 
honestly  and  fairly  with  yourself.  Set  up  an  assize  on 
the  state  of  your  inward  man.  Summon  a  jury.  Let  the 
Bible  preside  as  judge.  Bring  up  the  witnesses.  Inquire 
what  your  tastes  are, — where  your  affections  are  placed, 
— where  your  treasure  is, — what  you  hate  most, — what 
you  love  most, — what  pleases  you  most, — what  grieves  you 
most.  Inquire  into  all  those  points  impartially,  and  mark 
what  the  answers  are.  "  Where  your  treasure  is  there  will 
your  heart  be  also."  (Matt.  vi.  21.)  A  tree  may  always 
be  known  by  its  fruit,  and  a  true  Christian  may  always 
be  discovered  by  his  habits,  tastes,  and  affections.  Yes ! 
you  may  soon  find  out  what  your  heart  is,  if  you  are 
honest,  sincere,  and  impartial.    Is  it  right  or  wrong  ? 

Think  not  to  say  within  yourself,  "  I  quite  approve  of 
all  you  say,  and  hope  to  examine  the  state  of  my  heart 
some  day.  But  I  have  no  time  just  at  present.  I  cannot 
find  leisure.  I  wait  for  a  convenient  season."  Oh,  beware 
of  such  thoughts ; — again  I  say  beware  !    Life  is  uncertain, 


THE  HEART. 


S53 


and  yet  you  talk  of  "  a  convenient  season."  (Acts  xxiv.  25.) 
Eternity  is  close  at  hand,  and  yet  you  talk  of  putting  off 
preparation  to  meet  God.  Alas,  that  habit  of  putting 
off  is  the  everlasting  ruin  of  millions  of  souls !  Wretched 
man  that  you  are !  who  shall  deliver  you  from  this  devil 
of  putting  off  ?  Awake  to  a  sense  of  duty.  Throw  off 
the  chains  that  pride,  and  laziness,  and  love  of  the  world 
are  weaving  round  you.  Arise  and  stand  upon  your  feet, 
and  look  steadily  at  the  question  before  you.  Churchman 
or  dissenter,  I  ask  jon  this  day, — Is  your  heart  right  or 
wrong  ? 

(2)  I  wish,  in  the  next  place,  to  offer  a  solemn  tvarning 
to  all  who  know  their  hearts  are  ^Yl■ong,  but  have  no 
desire  to  change.  I  do  it  with  every  feeling  of  kindness 
and  affection.  I  have  no  wish  to  excite  needless  fears. 
But  I  know  not  how  to  exaggerate  the  danger  of  your 
condition.  I  warn  you  that  if  your  heart  is  wrong  in  the 
sight  of  God  you  are  hanging  over  the  brink  of  hell. 
There  is  but  a  step  between  you  and  everlasting  death. 

Can  you  really  suppose  that  any  man  or  woman  will 
ever  enter  heaven  without  a  right  heart  ?  Do  you  Hatter 
yourself  that  any  unconverted  person  will  ever  be  saved  ? 
Away  with  such  a  miserable  delusion !  Cast  it  from 
you  at  once  and  for  ever.  What  saith  the  Scripture  ? 
"  Except  a  man  be  born  again  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom 
of  God." — "  Except  ye  be  converted  and  become  as  little 
children,  ye  shall  in  no  wise  see  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 
— "  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  (John 
iii.  8 ;  Matt,  xviii.  3 ;  Heb.  xii.  14.)  It  is  not  enough  to 
have  our  sins  pardoned,  as  many  seem  to  suppose.  There 
is  another  thing  wanted  as  well  as  a  pardon,  and  that 
thing  is  a  new  heart.  We  must  have  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  renew  us,  as  well  as  Christ's  blood  to  wash  us.  Both 
renewing  and  washing  are  needful  before  any  one  can  be 
saved. 

Can  you  suppose  for  a  moment,  that  you  vrould  be 


354 


OLD  PATHS. 


happy  in  heaven,  if  you  entered  heaven  without  a  right 
heart  ?  Away  with  the  miserable  delusion  !  Cast  it  from 
you  at  once  and  for  ever !  You  must  have  a  "  meetness 
for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints/'  before  you  can  enjoy  it. 
(Coloss.  i.  12.)  Your  tastes  must  be  tuned  and  brought  into 
harmony  with  those  of  saints  and  angels,  before  you  can 
delight  in  their  company.  A  sheep  is  not  hapjDy  when  it 
is  thrown  into  the  water.  A  fish  is  not  happy  when  it  is 
cast  on  dr}'  land.  And  men  and  women  would  not  be  happy 
in  heaven  if  they  entered  heaven  -without  right  hearts. 

My  warning  is  before  you.  Harden  not  your  heart 
against  it.  Believe  it.  Act  upon  it.  Turn  it  to  account. 
Awake  and  arise  to  newness  of  life  without  delay.  One 
thing  is  very  certain.  Whether  you  hear  the  warning  or 
not,  God  will  not  go  back  from  what  He  has  said.  "  If  we 
believe  not,  He  abideth  faithful :  He  cannot  deny  Himself." 
(2  Tim.  ii.  13.) 

(3)  I  wish,  thirdly,  to  offer  counsel  to  all  who  know  their 
hearts  are  wronsr,  but  desire  to  have  them  made  rio-ht. 
That  counsel  is  short  and  simple.  I  advise  you  to  apply 
at  once  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  ask  for  the  gift  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Entreat  Him,  as  a  lost  and  ruined  sinner, 
to  receive  you,  and  supply  the  wants  of  your  soul.  I  know 
Avell  that  you  cannot  make  your  own  heart  right.  But  I 
know  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  can.  And  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  I  entreat  you  to  ajjply  without  delay. 

If  any  reader  of  this  paper  really  wants  a  right  heart, 
I  thank  God  that  I  can  give  him  good  encouragement.  I 
thank  God  that  I  can  lift  up  Christ  before  you,  and  say 
boldly,  Look  at  Christ, — Seek  Christ, — Go  to  Christ.  For 
what  did  that  blessed  Lord  Jesus  come  into  the  world  ? 
For  Mdiat  did  He  give  His  precious  body  to  be  crucified  ? 
For  what  did  He  die  and  rise  again  ?  For  what  did  He 
ascend  up  into  heaven,  and  sit  down  at  the  right  hand  of 
God  ?  For  what  did  Christ  do  all  this,  but  to  provide 
complete  salvation  for  poor  sinners  like  you  and  me, — 


THE  HEART. 


355 


salvation  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  and  salvation  from  the 
power  of  sin,  for  all  who  believe  ?  Oh,  yes !  Christ  is  no 
half  Saviour.  He  has  "received  gifts  for  men,  even  for 
the  rebellious."  (Psalm  Ixviii.  18.)  He  waits  to  pour  out 
the  Spirit  on  all  who  will  come  to  Him.  Mercy  and 
grace, — pardon  and  a  new  heart, — all  this  Jesus  is  ready 
to  apply  to  you  by  His  Spirit,  if  you  will  only  come  to 
Him.    Then  come :  come  without  delay  to  Christ. 

What  is  there  that  Christ  cannot  do  ?  He  can  create. 
By  Him  were  all  things  made  at  the  beginning.  He 
called  the  whole  world  into  being  by  His  command. — He 
can  quicken.  Ho  raised  the  dead  when  He  was  on  earth, 
and  gave  back  life  by  a  word. — He  can  change.  He  has 
turned  sickness  into  health,  and  weakness  into  strength, — 
famine  into  plenty,  storm  into  calm,  and  sorrow  into  joy. 
— He  has  wrought  thousands  of  miracles  on  hearts  already. 
He  turned  Peter  the  unlearned  fisherman  into  Peter  the 
Apostle, — Matthew  the  covetous  publican  into  Matthew 
the  Gospel  writer, — Saul  the  self-righteous  Pharisee  into 
Paul  the  Evangelist  of  the  world.  What  Christ  has  done 
once  Christ  can  do  again.  Christ  and  the  Holy  Ghost  are 
always  the  same.  There  is  nothing  in  your  heart  that  the 
Lord  Jesus  cannot  make  right.    Only  come  to  Christ. 

If  you  had  lived  in  Palestine,  in  the  days  when  Jesus 
was  upon  earth,  you  would  have  sought  Christ's  help  if 
you  had  been  sick.  If  you  had  been  crushed  down  by 
heart-disease  in  some  back  lane  of  Capernaum,  or  in  some 
cottage  by  the  blue  waters  of  the  sea  of  Galilee,  you 
would  surely  have  gone  to  Jesus  for  a  cure.  You  would 
have  sat  by  the  way-side  day  after  day,  waiting  for  His 
appearing.  You  would  have  sought  Him,  if  He  did  not 
happen  to  come  near  your  dwelling,  and  never  rested  till 
you  found  Him.  Oh,  why  not  do  the  same  this  very  day 
for  the  sickness  of  your  soul  ?  Why  not  apply  at  once  to 
the  Great  Physician  in  heaven,  and  ask  Him  to  "  take 
away  the  stony  heart  and  give  you  a  heart  of  flesh ''  ? 


356 


OLD  PATHS. 


(Ezek.  xi.  19.)  Once  more  I  invite  you.  If  you  want  a 
"right  heart,"  do  not  waste  time  in  tr}'ing  to  make  it 
right  by  your  own  strength.  It  is  far  beyond  your  power 
to  do  it.  Come  to  the  great  Physician  of  souls.  Come  at 
once  to  Jesus  Christ. 

(4)  I  wish,  lastly,  to  offer  an  cxhoiiation  to  all  whose 
hearts  have  been  made  right  in  the  sight  of  God.  I  offer 
it  as  a  word  in  season  to  aU  true  Christians.  Hear  me,  I 
say  to  every  believing  brother  or  sister.  I  speak  especially 
to  you. 

Is  your  heart  right  ?  Then  be  thankful.  Praise  the 
Lord  for  His  distingniishing  mercy,  in  "  calling  you  out  of 
darkness  into  His  marvellous  light."  (1  Pet.  ii.  9.)  Think 
what  you  were  by  nature.  Think  what  has  been  done  for 
you  by  free  undeserved  grace.  Your  heart  may  not  be  all 
that  it  ought  to  be,  nor  yet  all  that  you  hope  it  will  be. 
But  at  any  rate  your  heart  is  not  the  old  hard  heart  with 
which  you  were  bom.  Surely  the  man  whose  heart  is 
changed  ought  to  be  full  of  praise. 

Is  your  heart  right  ?  Then  be  humble  and  watchful. 
You  are  not  yet  in  heaven,  but  in  the  world.  You  are  in 
the  body.  The  devil  is  near  you,  and  never  sleeps.  Ob, 
keep  your  heart  with  all  diligence  !  Watch  and  pray  lest 
you  fall  into  temptation.  Ask  Christ  Himself  to  keep 
your  heart  for  you.  Ask  Him  to  dwell  in  it,  and  reign  in 
it,  and  garrison  it,  and  to  put  down  every  enemy  under 
His  feet.  Give  the  keys  of  the  citadel  into  the  King's 
own  hands,  and  leave  them  there.  It  is  a  weighty  saying 
of  Solomon :  "  He  that  trusteth  in  his  own  heart  is  a 
fool."    (Prov.  xxviii.  26.) 

Is  your  heart  right  ?  Then  be  hopeful  about  the  hearts 
of  other  people.  Who  has  made  you  to  differ  ?  Why  should 
not  any  one  in  the  world  be  changed,  when  such  an  one 
as  you  has  been  made  a  new  creature  ?  Work  on.  Pray 
on.  Speak  on.  Write  on.  Labour  to  do  all  the  good  you 
can  to  souls.    Never  despair  of  any  one  being  saved  so 


THE  HEART. 


357 


long  as  he  is  alive.  Surely  the  man  who  has  been  changed 
by  grace  ought  to  feel  that  there  are  no  desperate  cases. 
There  are  no  hearts  which  it  is  impossible  for  Christ  to 
cure. 

Is  your  heart  right  ?  Then  do  not  expect  too  much  froix 
it.  Do  not  be  surprised  to  find  it  weak  and  Avaywarcl, 
faint  and  unstable,  often  ready  to  doubt  and  fear.  Your 
redemption  is  not  complete  until  your  Lord  and  Saviour 
comes  again.  Your  full  salvation  remains  yet  to  be 
revealed.  (Luke  xxi.  28 ;  1  Pet.  i.  5.)  You  cannot  have 
two  heavens, — a  heaven  here  and  a  heaven  hereafter. 
Changed,  renewed,  converted,  sanctified,  as  your  heart  is, 
you  must  never  forget  that  it  is  a  man's  heart  after  all, 
and  the  heart  of  a  man  living  in  the  midst  of  a  wicked 
world. 

Finally,  let  me  entreat  all  right-hearted  readers  to  look 
onward  and  forward  to  the  day  of  Christ's  second  coming. 
A  time  draws  near  when  Satan  shall  be  bound,  and  Christ's 
saints  shall  be  changed, — when  sin  shall  no  more  vex  us, 
and  the  sight  of  sinnex'S  shall  no  more  sadden  our  minds, — 
when  believers  shall  at  length  attend  on  God  without 
distraction,  and  love  Him  with  a  perfect  heart.  For  that 
day  let  us  wait,  and  watch,  and  pray.  It  cannot  be  very 
far  off.  The  night  is  far  spent.  The  day  is  at  hand. 
Surely  if  our  hearts  are  right,  we  ought  often  to  cry, 
"  Come  quickly :  come  Lord  J esus ! " 


XIY. 


CHEIST'S  INVITATION. 

"  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I 
will  give  you  rest." — Matthew  xi.  28. 

The  text  which  heads  this  paper  is  one  whicli  deserves  to 
be  written  in  letters  of  gold.  Few  verses  of  Scripture  have 
done  more  good  to  the  souls  of  men  than  this  old  familiar 
invitation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Let  us  examine  it 
carefully,  and  see  what  it  contains. 

There  are  four  points  in  the  text  before  us,  to  which  I 
am  going  to  ask  attention.  On  each  of  these  I  have 
somewhat  to  say. 

I.  First.    Who  is  the  Speaker  of  this  invitation  ? 

II.  Secondly.    To  whom  is  this  invitation  addressed  ? 

III.  Thirdly.    What  does  the  Speaker  ask  us  to  do  ? 

IV.  Lastly.    What  does  the  Speaker  offer  to  give  ? 

I.  In  the  first  place,  ^Y^w  is  the  Speaker  of  the  inv'da-, 
tiomvhich  heads  this  paper  ?  Who  is  it  that  invites  so 
freely,  and  offers  so  largely  ?  Who  is  it  that  says  to  your 
conscience  this  day,  "  Come  :  come  unto  Me  "  ? 

We  have  a  right  to  ask  these  questions.  We  live  in  a 
lying  world.   The  earth  is  full  of  cheats,  shams,  deceptions. 


CHRIST'S  INVITATION. 


359 


impositions  and  falsehoods.  The  value  of  a  promissory 
note  depends  entirely  on  the  name  which  is  signed  at  the 
bottom.  When  we  hear  of  a  mighty  Promiser,  we  have  a 
right  to  say,  Who  is  this  ?  and  what  is  His  name  ? 

The  Speaker  of  the  invitation  before  you  is  the  greatest 
and  best  friend  that  man  has  ever  had.  It  is  tho  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  eternal  Son  of  God. 

He  is  One  who  is  almighty.  He  is  God  the  Father's 
fellow  and  equal.  He  is  very  God  of  very  God.  by  Him 
were  all  things  made. — In  His  hand  are  all  the  treasures 
of  wisdom  and  knowledge. — He  has  all  power  in  heaven 
and  earth. — In  Him  all  fulness  dwells. — He  has  the  keys  of 
death  and  hell. — He  is  now  the  appointed  Mediator 
between  God  and  man:  He  will  one  day  be  the  Judge 
and  King  of  all  the  earth.  When  such  an  One  as  this 
speaks,  you  may  safely  trust  Him.  What  He  promises 
He  is  able  to  perform.  (Zech.  xiii.  7;  John  i.  3;  Col.  ii.  S; 
Matt,  xxviii.  18;  Col.  i.  19;  Rev.  i.  18.) 

He  is  One  who  is  most  loving.  He  loved  us  so  that 
He  left  heaven  for  our  sakes,  and  laid  aside  for  a  season 
the  glory  that  He  had  with  the  Father.  He  loved  iis  so 
that  He  was  born  of  a  woman  for  our  sakes,  and  lived 
thirty-three  years  in  this  sinful  world.  He  loved  us  so 
that  He  undertook  to  pay  our  mighty  debt  to  God,  and 
died  upon  the  cross  to  make  atonement  for  our  sins. 
When  such  an  One  as  this  speaks.  He  deserves  a  hearing. 
When  He  promises  a  thing,  you  need  not  be  afraid  to 
trust  Him. 

He  is  One  who  knoivs  the  heart  of  man  most  thoroughly. 
He  took  on  Him  a  body  like  our  own,  and  was  made  like 
man  in  all  things,  sin  only  excepted.  He  knows  by 
experience  what  man  has  to  go  through.  He  has  tasted 
poverty,  and  weariness,  and  hunger,  and  thirst,  and  pain, 
and  temptation.  He  is  acquainted  with  all  our  condition 
upon  earth.  He  has  "  suffered  Himself  being  tempted." 
When  such  an  One  as  this  makes  an  offer,  He  makes  it 


360 


OLD  PATHS. 


with  perfect  wisdom.  He  knows  exactly  what  you  and  I 
need.    (Heb.  ii.  18.) 

He  is  One  who  never  breaks  His  luord.  He  always 
fulfils  His  promises :  He  never  fails  to  do  what  He  under- 
itakes.  He  never  disappoints  the  soul  that  trusts  Him. 
Mighty  as  He  is,  there  is  one  thing  which  He  cannot  do : 
it  is  impossible  for  Him  to  lie.  (Heb.  vi.  18.)  When  such 
an  One  as  this  makes  a  promise,  you  need  not  doubt  that 
He  will  stand  to  it.  You  may  depend  with  confidence  on 
His  word. 

You  have  now  heard  who  sends  the  invitation  which  is 
before  you  to-day.  It  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Give 
Him  the  credit  due  to  His  name.  Grant  Him  a  full  and 
impartial  hearing.  Believe  that  a  promise  from  His  mouth 
deserves  your  best  attention.  See  that  you  refuse  not  Him 
that  speaketh.  It  is  written,  "  If  they  escaped  not  who 
refused  him  that  spake  on  earth,  much  more  shall  not  we 
escape  if  we  refuse  Him  that  speaketh  from  heaven." 
(Heb.  xii.  25.) 

II.  I  will  now  show  you,  in  the  second  place,  to  ivhom 
the  invitation  before  you  is  addressed. 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  addresses  "  all  that  labour  and 
are  heavy-laden."  The  expression  is  deeply  comforting  and 
instructive.  It  is  wide,  sweeping,  and  comprehensive.  It 
describes  the  case  of  millions  in  every  part  of  the  world. 

Where  are  the  labouring  and  heavy-laden  ?  They  are 
everywhere.  They  are  a  multitude  that  man  can  scarcely 
number;  they  are  to  be  found  in  every  climate,  and  in 
every  country  under  the  sun.  They  live  in  Europe,  in 
Asia,  in  Africa,  and  in  America  They  dwell  by  the  banks 
of  the  Seine,  as  well  as  the  banks  of  the  Thames, — by 
the  banks  of  the  Mississippi  as  well  as  the  banks  of  the 
Niger.  They  abound  under  republics  as  well  as  under 
monarchies, — under  liberal  governments  as  well  as  under 
despotism.   Everywhere  you  will  find  trouble,  care,  sorrow. 


Christ's  invitation. 


361 


anxiety,  murmuring,  discontent,  and  unrest.  What  does 
it  mean  ?  What  does  it  all  come  to  ?  Men  are  "  labouring 
and  heavy-laden." 

To  what  class  do  the  labouring  and  heavy  laden  belong  ? 
They  belong  to  every  class  :  there  is  no  exception.  They 
are  to  be  found  among  masters  as  well  as  among  servants, 
— among  rich  as  well  as  among  poor, — among  kings  as 
well  as  among  subjects, — among  learned  as  well  as  among 
ignorant  people.  In  every  class  you  will  find  trouble,  care, 
sorrow,  anxiety,  murmuring,  discontent,  and  unrest.  What 
does  it  mean  ?  What  does  it  all  come  to  ?  Men  are 
"  labouring  and  heavy-laden." 

How  shall  we  explain  this  ?  What  is  the  cause  of  the 
state  of  things  which  I  have  just  tried  to  describe  ? — Did 
God  create  man  at  the  beginning  to  bo  unhappy  ?  Most 
certainly  not — Are  human  governments  to  blame  because 
men  are  not  happy  ?  At  most  to  a  very  slight  extent. 
The  fault  lies  far  too  deep  to  be  reached  by  human  laws. 
— There  is  another  cause,  a  cause  which  many  unhappily 
refuse  to  see.  THAT  CAUSE  IS  SIN. 

Sin  and  departure  from  God,  are  the  true  reasons  why 
men  are  everywhere  labouring  and  heavy-laden.  Sin  is 
the  universal  disease  which  infects  the  whole  earth.  Sin 
brought  in  thorns  and  thistles  at  the  beginning,  and 
obliged  man  to  earn  his  bread  by  the  sweat  of  his  brow. 
Sin  is  the  reason  why  the  "whole  creation  groaneth  and 
travaileth  in  pain,"  and  the  "  foundations  of  the  earth  are 
out  of  course."  (Rom.  viii.  22 ;  Psalm  Ixxxii.  5.)  Sin  is 
the  cause  of  all  the  burdens  which  now  press  down  man- 
kind. Most  men  know  it  not,  and  weary  themselves  in 
vain  to  explain  the  state  of  things  around  them.  But  sin 
is  the  great  root  and  foundation  of  all  sorrow,  whatever 
proud  man  may  think.  How  much  men  ought  to  hate 
sin  ! 

Are  you  one  of  those  who  are  labouring  and  heavy- 
laden  ?    I  think  it  very  likely  that  you  are.    I  am  firmly 


3G2 


OLD  PATHS. 


persuaded  that  there  are  thousands  of  men  and  women  in 
the  world  who  are  inwardly  uncomfortable,  and  yet  will 
not  confess  it.  They  feel  a  burden  on  their  hearts,  which 
they  would  gladly  get  rid  of ;  and  yet  they  do  not  know 
the  way.  They  have  a  conviction  that  all  is  not  right  in 
their  inward  man,  which  they  never  tell  to  any  one. 
Husbands  do  not  tell  it  to  their  wives,  and  wives  do  not 
tell  it  to  their  husbands;  children  do  not  tell  it  to  their 
parents,  and  friends  do  not  tell  it  to  their  friends.  But  the 
inward  burden  lies  heavily  on  many  hearts !  There  is  far 
more  unhappiness  than  the  world  sees.  Disguise  it  as 
some  will,  there  are  multitudes  uncomfortable  because 
they  know  they  are  not  prepared  to  meet  God.  And  you, 
who  are  reading  this  volume,  perhaps  are  one. 

If  any  reader  of  this  paper  is  "labouring  and  heavy- 
laden,"  you  are  the  very  person  to  whom  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  sends  an  invitation  this  day.  If  you  have  an 
aching  heart,  and  a  sore  conscience, — if  you  want  rest  for 
a  weary  soul,  and  know  not  where  to  find  it, — if  you  want 
peace  for  a  guilty  heart,  and  are  at  a  loss  which  way  to 
turn, — you  are  the  man,  you  are  the  woman,  to  whom 
Jesus  speaks  to-day.  There  is  hope  for  you.  I  bring  you 
good  tidings.  "  Come  unto  Me,"  says  the  Lord  Jesus,  "  and 
I  will  give  you  rest." 

You  may  tell  me  this  invitation  cannot  be  meant  for 
you,  because  you  are  not  good  enough  to  be  invited  by 
Christ.  I  answer,  that  Jesus  does  not  speak  to  the  good, 
but  to  the  "  labouring  and  heavy-laden."  Do  you  know 
anything  of  this  feeling  ?  Then  you  are  one  to  whom  He 
speaks. 

You  may  tell  me  that  the  invitation  cannot  be  meant 
for  you,  because  you  are  a  sinner,  and  know  nothing  about 
religion.  I  answer,  that  it  matters  nothing  what  you  are, 
or  what  you  have  been.  Do  you  at  this  moment  feel 
"  labouring  and  heavy  laden  "  ?  Then  you  are  one  to  whom 
Jesus  speaks. 


CHRIST'S  INVITATION. 


363 


You  may  tell  me  that  you  cannot  tliink  the  invitation 
is  meant  for  you,  because  you  are  not  yet  converted,  and 
have  not  got  a  new  heart,  I  answer,  that  Christ's  invita- 
tion is  not  addressed  to  the  converted,  but  to  the  "labouring 
and  heavy-laden."  Is  this  what  you  feel  ?  Is  there  any 
burden  on  your  heart  ?  Then  you  are  one  of  those  to 
whom  Christ  speaks. 

You  may  tell  me  that  you  have  no  right  to  accept  this 
invitation,  because  you  do  not  know  that  you  are  one  of 
God's  elect.  I  answer,  that  you  have  no  right  to  put 
words  in  Christ's  mouth,  which  He  has  not  used.  He 
does  not  say,  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  are  elect."  He 
addresses  all  the  "  labouring  and  heavy-laden  ones,"  with- 
out any  exception.  Are  you  one  of  them  ?  Is  there  weight 
within  on  your  soul  ?  This  is  the  only  question  you  have 
to  decide.  If  you  are,  you  are  one  of  those  to  whom 
Christ  speaks. 

If  you  are  one  of  the  "labouring  and  heavy-laden"  ones, 
once  more  I  entreat  you  not  to  refuse  the  invitation  which 
I  bring  you  to-day.  Do  not  forsake  your  own  mercies. 
The  harbo>ir  of  refuge  is  freely  before  you :  do  not  turn 
away  from  it.  The  best  of  friends  holds  out  His  hand  to 
you :  let  not  pride,  or  self-righteousness,  or  fear  of  man's 
ridicule,  make  you  reject  His  proffered  love.  Take  Hirri 
at  His  word.  Say  to  Him,  "  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  I  am  one 
of  those  whom  Thine  invitation  suits:  I  am  labouring 
and  heavy-laden.    Lord,  Avhat  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ? " 

III.  I  will  now  show  you,  in  the  third  place,  ivJmt  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  asks  you  to  do.  Three  words  make  up 
the  sum  and  substance  of  the  invitation  which  He  sends 
you  to-day.  If  you  are  "labouring  and  heavy-laden,"  Jesus 
says,  "Come  unto  Me." 

There  is  a  grand  simplicity  about  the  three  words  now 
before  you.  Short  and  plain  as  the  sentence  seems,  it 
contains  a  mine  of  deep  truth  and  solid  comfort.  Weigh 


364 


OLD  PATHS. 


it:  look  at  it:  consider  it:  ponder  it  well.  I  believe  tliat 
it  is  one  half  of  saving  Christianity  to  understand  what 
Jesus  means,  when  He  says,  "Come  unto  Me." 

Mark  well,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  does  not  bid  the 
labouring  and  heavy-laden  "  go  and  work."  Those  words 
would  carry  no  comfort  to  heavy  consciences  :  it  Avould  be 
like  requiring  labour  from  an  exhausted  man.  No :  He 
bids  them  "  Come  ! " — He  does  not  say,  "  Pay  Me  what 
thou  owest."  That  demand  would  drive  a  broken  heart 
into  despair:  it  would  be  like  claiming  a  debt  from  a 
ruined  bankrupt.  No :  He  says,  "  Come  ! " — He  does  not 
say,  "  Stand  still  and  wait."  That  command  would  only 
be  a  mockery :  it  would  be  like  promising  to  give  medicine 
at  the  end  of  a  week  to  one  at  the  point  of  death."  No: 
He  says,  "Come!"  To-day, — at  once, — without  any 
delay,  "  Come  unto  Me." 

But,  after  all,  what  is  meant  by  coming  to  Christ  ?  It 
is  an  expression  often  used,  but  often  misunderstood. 
Beware  that  you  make  no  mistake  at  this  point.  Here, 
unhappily,  thousands  turn  aside  out  of  the  right  course, 
and  miss  the  truth.  Beware  that  you  do  not  make  shipwreck 
at  the  very  mouth  of  the  harbour. 

(o)  Take  notice,  that  coming  to  Christ  means  something 
more  than  coming  to  church  and  chapel.  You  may  fill 
your  place  regularly  at  a  place  of  worship,  and  attend  all 
outward  means  of  grace,  and  yet  not  be  saved.  All  this 
is  not  coming  to  Christ. 

(b)  Take  notice,  that  coming  to  Christ  is  something  more 
than  coming  to  the  Lord's  table.  You  may  be  a  regular 
member  and  communicant ;  you  may  never  be  missing  in 
the  lists  of  those  who  eat  that  bread  and  drink  that  wine, 
which  the  Lord  commanded  to  be  received,  and  yet,  you 
may  never  be  saved.    All  this  is  not  coming  to  Christ. 

(c)  Take  notice,  that  coming  to  Christ  is  something  more 
than  coming  to  ministers.  You  may  be  a  constant  hearer 
of  some  popular  preacher,  and  a  zealous  partizan  of  all  his 


Christ's  invitation. 


365 


opinions,  and  yet  never  be  saved.  All  this  is  not  coming 
to  Christ. 

(d)  Take  notice,  once  more,  that  coming  to  Christ  is 
something  more  than  coming  to  the  possession  of  head- 
knowledge  about  Him.  You  may  know  the  whole  system 
of  evangelical  doctrine,  and  be  able  to  talk,  argue,  and 
dispute  on  every  jot  of  it,  and  yet  never  be  saved.  All 
this  is  not  coming  to  Christ. 

Coming  to  Christ  is  coming  to  Him  with  the  heart  by 
simple  faith.  Believing  on  Christ  is  coming  to  Him,  and 
comincj  to  Christ  is  believing  on  Him.  It  is  that  act  of 
the  soul  which  takes  place  when  a  man,  feeling  his  own 
sins,  and  despairing  of  all  other  hope,  commits  himself  to 
Christ  for  salvation,  ventures  on  Him,  trusts  Him,  and  casts 
himself  wholly  on  Him.  When  a  man  turns  to  Christ 
empty  that  he  may  be  filled,  sick  that  he  may  be  healed, 
hungry  that  he  may  be  satisfied,  thirsty  that  he  may  be 
refreshed,  needy  that  he  may  be  enriched,  dying  that  he 
may  have  life,  lost  that  he  may  be  saved,  guilty  that  he 
may  be  pardoned,  sin-defiled  that  he  may  be  cleansed, 
confessing  that  Christ  alone  can  supply  his  need, — then 
he  comes  to  Christ.  When  he  uses  Christ  as  the  Jews 
used  the  city  of  refuge,  as  the  starving  Egyptians  used 
Joseph,  as  the  dying  Israelites  used  the  brazen  serpent, — 
then  he  comes  to  Christ.  It  is  the  empty  soul's  venture 
on  a  full  Saviour.  It  is  the  drowning  man's  grasp  on  the 
hand  held  out  to  help  him.  It  is  the  sick  man's  reception 
of  a  healing  medicine.  This,  and  nothing  more  than  this, 
is  coming  to  Christ. 

Let  every  reader  of  this  paper  accept  at  this  point  a  word 
of  caution.  Beware  of  mistakes  as  to  this  matter  of 
coming  to  Christ.  Do  not  stop  short  in  any  half-way 
house.  Do  not  allow  the  devil  and  the  world  to  cheat  you 
out  of  eternal  life.  Do  not  suppose  that  you  will  ever  get 
any  good  from  Christ,  unless  you  go  straight,  direct, 
thoroughly,  and  entirely  to  Christ  Himself.    Trust  not  in 


366 


OLD  PATHS. 


a  little  outward  formality:  content  not  yourself  with  a 
regular  use  of  outward  means.  A  lantern  is  an  excellent 
help  in  a  dark  night,  but  it  is  not  home.  Means  of  grace 
are  useful  aids,  but  they  are  not  Christ.  Oh,  no !  Press 
onward,  forward,  upward,  till  you  have  had  personal,  busi- 
ness-like dealings  with  Christ  Himself. 

Beware  of  mistakes  as  to  the  manner  of  coming  to 
Christ.  Dismiss  from  your  mind  for  ever  all  idea  of 
worthiness,  merit,  and  fitness  in  yourself  Throw  a«'ay 
all  notions  of  goodness,  righteousness,  and  deserts.  Think 
not  that  you  can  bring  anything  to  recommend  you, 
or  to  make  you  deserving  of  Christ's  notice.  You  must 
come  to  Him  as  a  poor,  guilty,  undeserving  sinner,  or 
you  might  just  as  well  not  come  at  all.  "  To  him  that 
ivorheih  not  but  believeth  on  Him  that  justifieth  the 
ungodly,  his  faith  is  counted  for  righteousness."  (Rom. 
iv.  5.)  It  is  the  peculiar  mark  of  the  faith  that  justifies 
and  saves,  that  it  brings  to  Christ  nothing  but  an  empty 
hand. 

Last,  but  not  least,  let  there  be  no  mistake  in  your  mind 
as  to  the  special  character  of  the  man  who  has  come  to 
Christ,  and  is  a  true  Christian.  He  is  not  an  angel ;  he 
is  not  a  half-angelic  being,  in  whom  is  no  weakness,  or 
blemish,  or  infirmity :  he  is  nothing  of  the  kind.  He  is 
nothing  more  than  a  sinner  who  has  found  out  his  sinful- 
ness, and  has  learned  the  blessed  secret  of  living  by  faith 
in  Christ.  What  was  the  glorious  company  of  the  apostles 
and  prophets  ?  What  was  the  noble  army  of  martyrs  ? 
What  were  Isaiah,  Daniel,  Peter,  James,  John,  Paul,  Poly- 
carp,  Chrysostom,  Augustine,  Luther,  Ridley,  Latimer, 
Bunyan,  Baxter,  Whitefield,  Venn,  Chalmers,  Bickersteth, 
M'Cheyne  ?  What  were  they  all,  but  sinners  who  knew 
and  felt  their  sins,  and  trusted  only  in  Christ?  What 
were  they,  but  men  who  accepted  the  invitation  I  bring 
you  this  day,  and  came  to  Christ  by  faith  1  By  this  faith 
they  lived :  in  this  faith  they  died.    In  themselves  and 


CHRIST'S  INVITATION. 


367 


their  doings  they  saw  nothing  worth  mentioning;  but  in 
Christ  they  saw  all  that  their  souls  required. 

The  invitation  of  Christ  is  now  before  you.  If  you 
never  listened  to  it  before,  listen  to  it  to-day.  Broad,  full, 
free,  wide,  simple,  tender,  kind, — that  invitation  will  leave 
you  without  excuse  if  you  refuse  to  accept  it.  There  arc* 
some  invitations,  perhaps,  which  it  is  wiser  and  better  to 
decline.  There  is  one  which  ought  always  to  be  accepted  : 
that  one  is  before  you  to-day.  Jesus  Christ  is  saying, 
"Come:  come  unto  Me." 

IV.  I  will  now  show  you,  in  the  last  place,  xoltat  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  promises  to  give.  He  does  not  ask  the 
"  labouring  and  heavy-laden  "  to  come  to  Him  for  nothing. 
He  holds  out  gracious  inducements :  He  allures  them  by 
sweet  offers.  "  Come  unto  Me/'  He  says,  "  and  I  will  give 
you  rest." 

Rest  is  a  pleasant  thing.  Few  are  the  men  and  women 
in  this  weary  world  who  do  not  know  the  sweetness  of  it. 
The  man  who  has  been  labouring  hard  with  his  hands  all 
the  week,  working  in  iron,  or  brass,  or  stone,  or  wood,  or 
clay, — digging,  lifting,  hammei'ing,  cutting, — he  knows  the 
comfort  of  going  home  on  Saturday  night,  and  having  one 
day  of  rest.  The  man  who  has  been  toiling  hard  with  his 
head  all  day, — writing,  copying,  calculating,  composing, 
scheming,  planning, — he  knows  the  comfort  of  laying  aside 
his  papers,  and  having  a  little  rest.  Yes !  rest  is  a 
pleasant  thing. 

And  rest  is  one  of  the  principal  offers  which  the  Gospel 
makes  to  man.  "  Come  to  me,  says  the  world, "  and  I  will 
give  you  riches  and  pleasure." — "  Come  with  me,"  says  the 
devil,  "  and  I  will  give  you  greatness,  power,  and  wisdom." 
— "  Come  unto  Me,"  says  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  "  and  I 
will  give  you  rest." 

But  what  is  the  nature  of  that  rest  which  the  Lord 
Jesus  promises  to  give  ?    It  is  no  nrere  repose  of  body.  A 


368 


OLD  PATHS. 


man  may  have  that  aud  yet  be  miserable.  Yoa  may  place 
him  in  a  palace,  and  surround  him  with  every  possible 
comfort.  You  may  give  him  money  in  abundance,  and 
every  thing  that  money  can  buy.  You  may  free  him  from 
all  care  about  to-morrow's  bodily  wants,  and  take  away  the 
need  of  labouring  for  a  single  hour.  All  this  you  may  do 
to  a  man,  and  yet  not  give  him  true  rest.  Thousands 
know  this  only  too  well  by  bitter  experience.  Their  hearts 
are  starving  in  the  midst  of  worldly  plenty.  Their  inward 
man  is  sick  and  wearj-,  while  their  outward  man  is  clothed 
in  purple  and  fine  linen,  and  fares  sumptuously  every  day ! 
Yes :  a  man  may  have  houses,  and  lands^  and  money,  and 
horses,  and  carriages,  and  soft  beds,  and  good  fare,  and 
attentive  servants,  and  yet  not  have  true  rest. 

The  rest  that  Christ  gives  is  an  inward  and  spiritual 
thing.  It  is  rest  of  heart,  rest  of  conscience,  rest  of  mind, 
rest  of  affectiou,  rest  of  will.  It  is  rest,  from  a  comfortable 
sense  of  sins  being  all  forgiven  and  guilt  all  put  away.  It 
is  rest,  from  a  solid  hope  of  good  things  to  come,  laid  up 
beyond  the  reach  of  disease,  and  death,  and  the  grave.  It 
is  rest,  from  the  well-grounded  feeling,  that  the  great  busi- 
ness of  life  is  settled,  its  great  end  provided  for,  that  in  time 
all  is  well  done,  and  in  eternity  heaven  will  be  our  home. 

(o)  Rest  such  as  this  the  Lord  Jesus  gives  to  those  who 
come  to  Him,  by  showing  them  His  own  finished  work  on 
the  cross,  by  clothing  them  in  His  own  perfect  righteous- 
ness, and  washing  them  in  His  own  precious  blood.  When 
a  man  begins  to  see  that  the  Son  of  God  actually  died  for 
his  sins,  his  soul  begins  to  taste  something  of  inward  quiet 
and  peace. 

(b)  Rest  such  as  this  the  Lord  Jesus  gives  to  those  who 
come  to  Him,  by  revealing  Himself  as  their  overliving 
High  Priest  in  heaven,  and  God  reconciled  to  them 
through  Him.  ^Tien  a  man  begins  to  see  that  the  Son 
of  God  actually  lives  to  intercede  for  him,  he  will  begin  to 
feel  something  of  inward  quiet  and  peace. 


Christ's  invitation. 


369 


(c)  Rest  such  as  this  the  Lord  Jesus  gives  to  those  who 
come  to  Him,  by  implanting  His  Spirit  in  their  hearts, 
witnessing  with  their  spirits  that  they  are  God's  children, 
and  that  old  things  are  passed  away,  and  all  tilings  are 
become  new.  When  a  man  begins  to  feel  an  inward 
drawing  towards  God  as  a  Father,  and  a  sense  of  being  an 
adopted  and  forgiven  child,  his  soul  begins  to  feel  some- 
thing of  quiet  and  peace. 

{d)  Rest  such  as  this  the  Lord  Jesus  gives  to  those  who 
come  to  Him,  by  dwelling  in  their  hearts  as  King,  by  put- 
ting all  things  within  in  order,  and  giving  to  each  faculty 
its  place  and  work.  When  a  man  begins  to  find  order  in 
his  heart  in  place  of  rebellion  and  confusion,  his  soul  begins 
to  understand  something  of  quiet  and  peace.  There  is  no 
true  inward  happiness  until  the  true  King  is  on  the  throne. 

(e)  Rest  such  as  this  is  the  privilege  of  all  believers  in 
Christ.  Some  know  more  of  it  and  some  less ;  some  feel 
it  only  at  distant  intervals,  and  some  feel  it  almost  alwa3-s. 
Few  enjoy  the  sense  of  it  without  manj^  a  battle  with 
unbelief,  and  many  a  conflict  with  fear.  But  all  who  truly 
come  to  Christ,  know  something  of  this  rest.  Ask  them, 
with  all  their  complaints  and  doubts,  whether  they  would 
give  up  Christ  and  go  back  to  the  world.  You  will  get 
only  one  answer.  Weak  as  their  sense  of  rest  may  be,  they 
have  got  hold  of  something  which  does  them  good,  and  that 
something  they  cannot  let  go. 

(/)  Rest  such  as  this  is  within  reach  of  all  who  are  willing 
to  seek  it  and  receive  it.  The  poor  man  is  not  so  poor  but 
he  may  have  it ;  the  ignorant  man  is  not  so  ignorant  but  he 
may  know  it ;  the  sick  man  is  not  so  weak  and  helpless  but 
he  may  get  hold  of  it.  Faith,  simple  faith,  is  the  one  thing 
needful  in  order  to  possess  Christ's  rest.  Faith  in  Christ 
is  the  grand  secret  of  happiness.  Neither  poverty,  nor 
ignorance,  nor  tribulation,  nor  distress  can  prevent  men 
and  women  feeling  rest  of  soul,  if  they  will  only  come  to 
Christ  and  believe. 

B  2 


•370 


OLD  PATHS. 


(g)  Rest  such  as  this  is  the  possession  which  makes  men 
independent.  Banks  may  break,  and  money  make  itself 
wings  and  flee  away.  War,  pestilence,  and  famine  may 
'break  in  on  a  land,  and  the  foundations  of  the  earth  be  out 
'of  course.  Health  and  vigour  may  depart,  and  the  body  be 
crushed  down  by  loathsome  disease.  Death  may  cut  down 
wife,  and  children,  and  friends,  until  he  who  once  enjoyed 
them  stands  entirely  alone.  But  the  man  who  has  come  to 
Christ  by  ftiith,  will  still  possess  something  which  can  never 
be  taken  from  him.  Like  Paul  and  Silas,  he  will  sing  in 
'prison.  Like  Job,  bereaved  of  children  and  property,  he 
will  bless  the  name  of  the  Lord.  (Acts  xvi.  2.5  ;  Job  i.  21.) 
He  is  the  truly  independent  man  who  possesses  that  which 
nothing  can  take  away. 

(/i)  Rest  such  as  this  is  the  possession  which  makes  men 
truly  rich.  It  lasts ;  it  wears  ;  it  endures.  It  lightens  the 
solitary  home.  It  smooths  down  the  dying  pillow.  It  goes 
with  men  when  they  are  placed  in  their  coffins.  It  abides 
with  them  when  they  are  laid  in  their  graves.  When 
friends  can  no  longer  help  us,  and  money  is  no  longer  of 
use, — when  doctors  can  no  longer  relieve  our  pain,  and 
nurses  can  no  longer  minister  to  our  wants, — when  sense 
begins  to  fail,  and  eye  and  ear  can  no  longer  do  their  duty, 
— then,  even  then,  the  "  rest "  which  Christ  gives  will  be 
shed  abroad  in  the  heart  of  the  believer.  The  words  "rich" 
and  "  poor "  will  change  their  meaning  entirely  one  day. 
He  is  the  only  rich  man  who  has  come  to  Christ  by  faith, 
and  from  Chi'ist  has  received  rest. 

This  is  the  rest  which  Christ  offers  to  give  to  all  who  are 
"  labouring  and  heavy-laden."  This  is  the  rest  for  which  He 
invites  them  to  come  to  Him.  This  is  the  rest  which  I  want 
you  to  enjoy,  and  to  which  I  bring  you  an  invitation  this 
day.  May  God  grant  that  the  invitation  may  not  be  brought 
to  you  in  vain  ! 

(1)  Does  any  reader  of  this  paper  feel  ignorant  of  the 
"rest"  of  whichT  have  been  speaking?    If  so,  what  have 


CHRIST'S  INVITATION. 


371 


you  got  from  your  religion  ?  You  live  in  a  Christian 
land  ;  you  profess  and  call  yourself  a  Christian.  You  have 
probably  attended  a  Christian  place  of  worship  many  years. 
You  would  not  like  to  be  called  an  infidel  or  a  heathen. 
Yet  all  this  time  what  benefit  have  you  received  from  your 
Christianity.?  What  solid  advantage  have  you  obtained 
from  it  ?  For  anything  one  can  see,  you  might  just  as  well 
have  been  a  Turk  or  a  Jew. 

Take  advice  this  day,  and  resolve  to  possess  the  realities 
of  Christianity  as  well  as  the  name,  and  the  substance  as 
well  as  the  form.  Do  not  be  content  until  you  know 
something  of  the  peace,  and  hope,  and  joy,  and  consolation 
which  Cliristians  enjoyed  in  former  times.  Ask  yourself 
what  is  the  reason  that  you  are  a  stranger  to  the  feelings 
which  men  and  women  experienced  in  the  days  of  the 
Apostles.  Ask  yourself  why  you  do  not  "joy  in  the  Lord," 
and  feel  "peace  with  God,"  like  the  Romans  and  Philippians, 
to  whom  St.  Paul  wrote.  Religious  feelings,  no  doubt,  are 
often  deceptive;  but  surely  the  religion  which  produces  no 
feelings  at  all  is  not  the  religion  of  the  New  Testament. 
The  religion  which  gives  a  man  no  inward  comfort,  can 
never  be  a  religion  from  God.  Take  heed  to  yourself. 
Never  be  satisfied  until  you  know  something  of  the  "rest 
that  is  in  Christ." 

(2)  Does  any  reader  of  this  paper  desire  rest  of  soul, 
and  yet  knows  not  where  to  turn  for  it  ?  Remember  this 
day,  that  there  is  only  one  place  where  it  can  be  found. 
Governments  cannot  give  it ;  education  will  not  impart  it ; 
worldly  amusements  cannot  supply  it;  money  will  not 
purchase  it.  It  can  only  be  found  in  tlie  hand  of  Jesus 
Christ :  and  to  His  hand  you  must  turn,  if  you  would  find 
peace  within. 

There  is  no  royal  road  to  rest  of  soul.  Let  that  never 
be  forgotten.  There  is  only  one  way  to  the  Father, — 
Jesus  Christ;  one  door  into  heaven, — Jesus  Christ;  and 
one  path  to  heart-peace, — Jesus  Christ.    By  that  way 


372 


OLD  PATHS. 


all  "  labouring  and  heavy-laden  "  ones  must  go,  whatever 
1)8  their  rank  or  condition.  Kings  in  their  palaces  and 
paupers  in  the  workhouse,  are  all  on  a  level  in  this  matter. 
All  alike  must  come  to  Christ,  if  they  feel  soul-weary  and 
athirst.  All  must  drink  of  the  same  fountain,  if  they 
would  have  their  thirst  relieved. 

You  may  not  believe  what  I  am  now  writing.  Time 
will  show  who  is  right  and  who  is  wrong.  Go  on,  if  you 
will,  imagining  that  true  happiness  is  to  be  found  in  the 
good  things  of  this  world.  Seek  it,  if  you  will,  in  revelling 
and  banqueting,  in  dancing  and  merry-making,  in  races  and 
theatres,  in  field-sports  and  cards.  Seek  it  if  you  will,  in 
reading  and  scientific  jjiirsuits,  in  music  and  painting,  in 
politics  and  business.  Seek  it:  but  you  will  never  overtake 
it,  unless  you  change  your  plan.  Real  heart-rest  is  never 
to  be  found  except  in  heart-union  with  Jesus  Christ. 

The  Princess  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Charles  I,  lies 
buried  in  Newport  church,  in  the  Isle  of  Wight.  A  marble 
monument,  erected  by  our  gracious  Queen  Victoria,  records 
in  a  touching  way  the  manner  of  her  death.  She  languished 
in  Carisbrook  Castle  during  the  unhappy  Commonwealth 
wars,  a  prisoner,  alone,  and  separate  from  all  the  com- 
panions of  her  youth,  until  death  set  her  free.  She  was 
found  dead  one  day  with  her  head  leaning  on  her  Bible, 
and  the  Bible  open  at  the  words,  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye 
that  labour  and  are  heavy-laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest." 
The  monument  in  Newport  church  records  this  fact.  It 
consists  of  a  female  figure  reclining  her  head  on  a  marble 
book,  with  the  text  already  quoted  engraven  on  the  book. 
Think  what  a  sermon  in  stone  that  monument  preaches. 
Think,  what  a  standing  memorial  it  affoi'ds  of  the  utter 
inability  of  rank  and  high  birth  to  confer  certain  happi- 
ness !  Think  what  a  testimony  it  bears  to  the  lesson 
before  you  this  day, — the  mighty  lesson  that  there  is  no 
true  rest  for  any  one  excepting  in  Christ !  Happy  will  it 
be  for  your  soul  if  that  lesson  is  never  forgotten ! 


CHRIST'S  INVITATION, 


(3)  Does  any  reader  of  this  paper  desire  to  possess  the 
rest  that  Christ  alone  can  give,  and  yet  feel  af  raid  to  seek 
it  ?  I  beseech  you,  as  a  friend  to  your  soul,  to  cast  this 
needless  fear  away.  For  what  did  Christ  die  on  the  cross, 
if  not  to  save  sinners  ?  For  what  does  He  sit  at  the  right 
hand  of  God,  if  not  to  receive  and  intercede  for  sinners  ? 
When  Christ  invites  you  so  plainly,  and  promises  so  freely, 
why  should  you  rob  your  own  soul,  and  refuse  to  come 
to  Him  ? 

Who,  among  all  the  readers  of  this  paper,  desires  to  be 
saved  by  Christ,  and  yet  is  not  saved  at  present  ?  Come, 
I  beseech  you :  come  to  Christ  without  delay.  Though 
you  have  been  a  great  sinner,  COME. — Though  you  have 
long  resisted  warnings,  counsels,  sermons,  COME. — Though 
you  have  sinned  against  light  and  knowledge,  against  a 
father's  advice  and  a  mother's  tears,  COME. — Though  you 
have  plunged  into  every  excess  of  wickedness,  and  lived 
without  a  Sabbath  and  without  prayer,  yet  COME. — 
The  door  is  not  shut,  the  fountain  is  not  yet  closed.  Jesus 
Christ  invites  you.  It  is  enough  that  you  feel  labouring 
and  heavy-laden,  and  desire  to  be  saved.  COME :  COME 
TO  CHRIST  WITHOUT  DELAY! 

Come  to  Him  by  faith,  and  pour  out  your  heart  before 
Him  in  prayer.  Tell  Him  the  whole  story  of  your  life, 
and  ask  Him  to  receive  you.  Cry  to  Him  as  the  penitent 
thief  did,  when  he  He  saw  Him  on  the  cross.  Say  to 
Him,  "  Lord,  save  me  also  !  Lord,  remember  me  !  " 
COME:  COME  TO  CHRIST! 

If  you  have  never  come  to  this  point  yet,  you  must 
come  to  it  at  last,  if  yon  mean  to  be  saved.  You  must 
apply  to  Christ  as  a  sinner;  you  must  have  personal 
dealings  with  the  great  Physician,  and  apply  to  Him  for  a 
cure.  Why  not  do  it  at  once  ?  Why  not  this  very  day 
accept  the  great  invitation  ?  Once  more,  I  repeat  my 
exhortation.  COME :  COME  TO  CHRIST  WITHOUT 
DELAY ! 


374 


OLD  PATHS. 


(4)  Has  any  reader  of  this  paper  found  the  rest  which 
Christ  gives  ?  Have  you  tasted  true  peace  by  coming  to 
Him  and  casting  your  soul  on  Him  ?  Then  go  on  to  the 
end  of  your  days  as  you  have  begun,  looking  to  Jesus  and 
living  on  Him.  Go  on  drawing  daily  full  supplies  of  rest, 
peace,  mercy,  and  grace  from  the  great  fountain  of  rest 
and  peace.  Remember  that,  if  you  live  to  the  age  of 
Methuselah,  you  will  never  be  anything  but  a  poor  empty 
sinner,  owing  all  you  have  and  hope  for  to  Christ  alone. 

Never  be  ashamed  of  living  the  life  of  faith  in  Christ. 
Men  may  ridicule  and  mock  you,  and  even  silence  you  in 
argument ;  but  they  can  never  take  from  you  the  feelings 
which  faith  in  Christ  gives.  They  can  never  prevent  you 
feeling,  "I  was  weary  till  I  found  Christ,  but  now  I  have 
rest  of  conscience.  I  was  blind,  but  now  I  see.  I  was 
dead,  but  I  am  alive  again.    I  was  lost,  but  I  am  found." 

Invite  all  around  you  to  come  to  Christ.  Use  every 
lawful  effort  to  bring  father,  mother,  husband,  wife, 
children,  brothers,  sisters,  friends,  relatives,  companions, 
fellow-workmen,  servants, — to  bring  all  and  every  one  to 
the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Spare  no  pains.  Speak 
to  them  about  Christ :  speak  to  Christ  about  them.  Be 
instant  in  season,  out  of  season.  Say  to  them,  as  Moses 
did  to  Hobab,  "  Come  thou  with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee 
good."  (Num.  X.  29.)  The  more  you  work  for  the  souls 
of  others,  the  more  blessing  will  you  get  for  your  own  soul. 

Last,  but  not  least,  look  forward  with  confidence  to  a 
better  rest  in  a  woi'ld  to  come.  Yet  a  little  time,  and  He 
that  shall  come,  will  come,  and  will  not  tarry.  He  will 
gather  together  all  who  have  believed  in  Him,  and  take 
His  people  to  a  home  where  the  wicked  shall  cease  from 
troubling,  and  the  weary  shall  be  at  perfect  rest.  He  shall 
give  them  a  glorious  body,  in  which  they  shall  serve  Him 
without  distraction,  and  praise  Him  without  weariness. 
He  shall  wipe  away  tears  from  all  faces,  and  make  all 
things  new.    (Isa.  xxv.  8.) 


CHRIST'S  INVITATION. 


375' 


There  is  a  good  time  coming  for  all  who  have  come  to 
Christ  and  committed  their  souls  into  His  keeping.  They 
Ghall  "remember  all  the  way  by  which  they  have  been  led," 
and  see  the  wisdom  of  every  step  in  the  way.  They  shall' 
wonder  that  they  ever  doubted  the  kindness  and  love  of 
their  Shepherd.  Above  all,  they  shall  wonder  that  they 
could  live  so  long  without  Him,  and  that  when  they  heard 
of  Him  they  could  hesitate  about  coming  to  Him. 

There  is  a  jjass  in  Scotland  called  Glencoe,  which 
supplies  a  beautiful  illustration  of  wliat  heaven  will  be  to 
the  man  who  comes  to  Christ.  The  road  through  Glencoe 
carries  the  traveller  up  a  long  and  steep  ascent,  with  many 
a  little  winding  and  many  a  little  turn  in  its  course.  But 
when  the  top  of  the  pass  is  reached,  a  stone  is  seen  by  the 
wayside,  with  these  simple  words  engraven  on  it,  "  Rest, 
and  be  thankful."  Those  words  describe  the  feeliners 
with  which  every  one  who  comes  to  Christ  will  at  length 
enter  heaven.  The  summit  of  the  narrow  way  will  be 
won.  We  shall  cease  from  our  weary  journeying,  and  sit 
down  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  We  shall  look  back  over 
all  the  way  of  life  with  thankfulness,  and  see  the  perfect 
wisdom  of  every  little  winding  and  turn  in  the  steep  ascent 
by  which  we  were  led.  We  shall  forget  the  toils  of  the 
upward  journey  in  the  glorious  rest.  Here  in  this  world 
our  sense  of  rest  in  Christ  at  best  is  feeble  and  partial : 
but,  "  when  that  which  is  perfect  is  come,  then  that  which 
is  in  part  shall  be  done  away."  (1  Cor.  xiii.  10.)  Thanks 
be  unto  God,  a  day  is  coming  when  believers  shall  rest 
^perfectly,  and  be  thankful. 


XV, 


FAITH! 

"  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  He  gave  His  only  herjotten  Son,  that 
ivhosoever  helievetk  in  Him,  should  not  perish,  but  have  ever- 
lasting life." — John  iii.  16. 

There  are  few  texts  better  known  than  that  which  heads 
this  page.  Its  words  are  probably  familiar  to  our  ears. 
We  have  very  likely  heard  them,  or  read  them,  or  quoted 
them,  a  hundred  times.  But  have  we  ever  considered 
what  a  vast  amount  of  divinity  this  text  contains?  No 
wonder  that  Luther  called  it  "the  Bible  in  miniature  !" — 
And  have' we  ever  considered  the  word  which  forms  the 
turning-point  of  the  text,  and  the  immensely  solemn 
question  which  arises  out  of  it  ?  The  word  I  refer  to  is 
"  believeth."  The  Lord  Jesus  says,  "  Whosoever  believeth 
shall  not  perish."    Now,  DO  WE  BELIEVE  ? 

Questions  about  religion  are  seldom  popular.  They 
frighten  people.  They  oblige  them  to  look  within,  and  to 
think.  The  insolvent  tradesman  does  not  like  his  books 
to  be  searched.  The  faithless  steward  does  not  like  his 
accounts  to  be  examined.  And  the  unconverted  Christian 
does  not  like  to  be  asked  home-questions  about  his  souL 

Bat  questions  about  religion  are  very  useful.  The  Lord 
Jesus. Christ  asked  many  questions  during  His  ministry  on 
earth.  The  servant  of  Christ  ought  not  to  be  ashamed  to 
do  likewise.    Questions  about  things  necessary  to  salva- 


FAITH. 


377^ 


tion, —  questions  wLich  probe  the  conscience,  and  bring 
men  face  to  face  with  God, — such  questions  often  bring 
life  and  health  to  souls.  I  know  few  questions  more 
important  than  the  one  which  arises  out  of  this  text : — 


The  question  before  us  is  no  easy  one  to  answer.  It 
will  not  do  to  thrust  it  aside  by  the  off-hand  answer,  "  Of 
course  I  believe."  True  belief  is  no  such  "  matter  of 
course"  as  many  suppose.  Myriads  of  Protestants  and 
Roman  Catholics  are  constantly  saying  on  Sunda3's,  "  I 
believe,"  who  know  nothing  whatever  of  believing.  They 
cannot  explain  what  they  mean.  They  neither  know 
what,  nor  in  whom,  they  believe.  They  can  give  no 
account  of  their  faith.  A  belief  of  this  kind  is  utterly 
useless.    It  can  neither  satisfy,  nor  sanctify,  nor  save. 


In  order  to  see  clearly  the^^mportance  of  "believing," 
we  should  ponder  well  the  words  of  Christ  which  head 
this  paper.  It  is  by  the  unfolding  of  these  words,  that  I 
shall  hope  to  show  the  weight  of  the  question,  "Do  you 
believe  ? " 

There  are  four  things  which  I  wish  to  consider,  and  to 
impress  upon  the  minds  of  all  who  read  this  volume. 
These  four  things  are  as  follows : — 

1.    God's  mind  towards  the  world  : — He  "  loved  "  it. 

II.  God's  gift  to  the  world: — "He  gave  His  onlj 
hegotten  Son." 

III.  The  only  way  to  obtain  the  benefit  of  God's  gift : 

— "  Whosoever  helieveth  on  Him  shall  not  iwrish." 

IV.  The  marks  by  which  true  belief  may  be  known. 

I.  Let  us  consider,  in  the  first  place,  Gods  mind  to- 
tvards  the  ivorld  : — He  "  loved  "  it. 

The  extent  of  the  Father's  love  towards  the  world,  is  a 
subject  on  which  there  is  some  difference  of  opinion.  It 


DO  WE  BELIEVE? 


'378  OLD  PATHS. 

L  .  . 

is  a  subject  on  wliicli  I  have  long  taken  my  side,  and  will 
never  hesitate  to  speak  my  mind.  I  believe  that  the  Bible 
teaches  us  that  God's  love  extends  to  all  mankind.  "  His 
tender  mercies  are  over  all  His  works."  (Psalm  cxlv.  9.) 
He  did  not  love  the  Jews  only,  but  the  Gentiles  also.  He 
does  not  love  His  own  elect  only.    He  loves  all  the  world. 

But  what  kind  of  love  is  this  with  which  the  Father 
regards  all  mankind  ?  It  cannot  be  a  love  of  complacency, 
or  else  He  would  cease  to  be  a  perfect  God.  He  is  one 
who  "cannot  look  upon  that  which  is  iniquity."  (Hab. 
i.  13.)  Oh,  no !  The  world-wide  love  of  which  Jesus 
speaks,  is  a  love  of  kindness,  pity,^nd  compassion.  Fallen 
as  man  is,  and  provoking  as  man's  ways  are,  the  heart  of 
God  is  full  of  kindness  towards  him.  While  as  a  ris^hteous 
Judge  He  hates  sin,  He  is  yet  able  in  a  certain  sense  to 
love  sinners  !  The  length  and  breadth  of  His  compassion 
are  not  to  be  measured  by  our  feeble  measures.  We 
are  not  to  suppose  that  He  is  such  an  one  as  ourselves. 
Righteous,  and  holy,  and  pure  as  God  is,  it  is  yet  possible 
for  God  to  love  all  mankind.  "  His  compassions  fail  not." 
(Lam.  iii.  22.) 

Let  us  think,  for  a  moment,  how  wonderful  is  this  extent 
of  God's  love.  Look  at  the  state  of  mankind  in  every  part 
of  the  earth,  and  mark  the  amazing  quantity  of  wickedness 
and  ungodliness  by  which  earth  is  defiled. — Look  at  the 
millions  of  heathen  worshipping  stocks  and  stones,  and 
living  in  a  spiritual  darkness  "  that  may  be  felt." — Look  at 
the  millions  of  Roman  Catholics,  burying  the  truth  under 
man-made  traditions,  and  giving  the  honour  due  to  Christ 
to  the  church,  the  saints,  and  the  priest. — Look  at  the 
millions  of  Protestants  who  are  content  with  a  mere  formal 
Christianity,  and  know  nothing  of  Cliristian  believing  or 
Christian  living,  except  the  name. — Look  at  the  land  in 
which  we  live  at  this  very  day,  and  mark  the  sins  which 
abound  even  in  a  privileged  nation  like  our  own.  Think 
how  drunkenness,  and  Sabbath-breaking,  and  uncleanness, 


FAITH. 


379 


and  lying,  and  swearing,  and  pride,  and  covetousness,  and 
infidelity,  are  crying  aloud  to  God  from  one  end  of  Great 
Britain  to  the  other.  And  then  remember  that  God  loves 
this  world !  No  wonder  that  we  find  it  written  that  He 
is  "  merciful  and  gracious,  long-suffering,  and  abundant  in 
goodness  and  truth."  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6.)  He  is  "  not  willing' 
that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to 
repentance."^ — He  "  would  have  all  men  to  be  saved,  and 
to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth." — He  "  has  no 
pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth." — (2  Peter  iii.  9; 
1  Tim.  ii.  4;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  11.)  There  lives  not  the  man 
or  woman  on  earth  whom  God  regards  with  absolute 
hatred  or  complete  indifference.  His  mercy  is  like  all  His- 
other  attributes.  It  passes  knowledge.  God  loves  the 
world. 

There  are  divers  and  strange  doctrines  abroad  in  the 
present  day  about  the  love  of  God.  It  is  a  precious  truth 
which  Satan  labours  hard  to  obscure  by  misrepresentation 
and  perversion.  Let  us  grasp  it  firmly,  and  stand  on  our 
guard. 

Beware  of  the  common  idea  that  God  the  Father  is  an 
angry  Being,  whom  sinful  man  can  only  regard  with  fear, 
and  from  whom  he  must  flee  to  Christ  for  safety.  Cast  it 
aside  as  a  baseless  and  unscriptural  notion.  Contend 
earnestly  for  all  the  attributes  of  God, — for  His  holiness 
and  His  justice,  as  well  as  for  His  love.  But  never  allow 
for  one  moment  that  there  is  any  want  of  love  towards 
sinners  in  any  Person  in  the  Blessed  Trinity.  Oh,  no ! 
Such  as  the  Father  is,  such  is  the  Son,  and  such  is  the 
Holy  Ghost.  The  Father  loves,  and  the  Son  loves,  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  loves.  When  Christ  came  on  earth,  the 
kindness  and  love  of  God  toward  man  appeared.  (Titus 
iii.  4.)  The  cross  is  the  effect  of  the  Father's  love,  and  not 
the  cause.  Redemption  is  the  result  of  the  compassion  of 
all  three  Persons  in  the  Trinity.  To  place  the  Father  and 
the  Son  in  opposition  one  to  another,  is  weak  and  crude 


380 


OLD  PATHS. 


theology.  Christ  died,  not  because  God  the  Father  hated, 
but  because  He  loved  the  world. 

Beware,  again,  of  the  common  doctrine  that  God's  love 
is  limited  and  confined  to  His  own  elect,  and  that  all  the 
rest  of  mankind  are  passed  by,  neglected,  aud  let  alone. 
This  also  is  a  notion  that  will  not  bear  examination  by  the 
light  of  Scripture.  The  father  of  a  prodigal  son  can  surely 
love  and  pity  him,  even  when  he  is  walking  after  his  own 
lusts,  and  refusing  to  return  home.  The  Maker  of  all  things 
may  surely  love  the  work  of  His  own  hands  with  a  love  of 
compassion,  even  when  rebellious  against  Him. — Let  us 
resist  to  the  death  the  uri scriptural  doctrine  of  universal 
salvation.  It  is  not  true  that  all  mankintl  will  be  finally 
saved.  But  let  us  not  fly  into  the  extreme  of  denying 
God's  universal  compassion.  It  is  true  that  God  "  loves  the 
world." — Let  us  maintain  jealously  the  privileges  of  God's 
elect.  It  is  true  that  they  are  lov(?d  with  a  special  love, 
and  will  be  loved  to  all  eternity.  But  let  us  not  exclude 
any  man  or  woman  from  the  pale  of  God's  kindness  and 
compassion.  We  have  no  right  to  pare  down  the  meaning 
of  words  when  Jesus  says,  "  God  loved  the  world."  The 
heart  of  God  is  far  wider  than  that  of  man.  There  is  a 
sense  in  which  the  Father  loves  all  mankind.* 

If  any  reader  of  these  pages  never  yet  took  up  the  service 
of  Christ  in  real  earnest,  and  has  the  least  desire  to  begin 
now,  take  comfort  in  the  truth  before  you.    Take  comfort 


*  If  any  reader  is  stumliled  by  the  statements  I  liave  made  about 
God's  love,  I  venture  to  request  his  attention  to  the  notes  on  John  i.  29, 
and  John  iii.  16,  in  my  "Expository  Thoughts  on  St.  John's  Gospel." 
I  hold  firmly  the  doctrine  of  election,  as  set  forth  in  the  Seventeenth 
Article  of  the  Church  of  England.  I  glory  in  that  Article,  as  one 
of  the  sheet  anchors  of  my  Church.  I  delight  in  the  blessed  truth 
that  God  has  loved  His  own  elect  with  an  everlasting  love,  before 
the  foundation  of  the  world.  But  all  this  is  beside  the  question 
before  us.  That  question  is,  "  How  does  God  regard  all  mankind  ?  "  I 
reply  unhesitatingly,  that  God  luves  them.  God  loves  all  the  world  with 
a  love  of  compassion. 


FAITH. 


SSI 


iu  the  thought  that  God  the  Father  is  a  God  of  infinite 
love  and  compassion.  Do  not  liang  back  and  hesitate, 
under  the  idea  that  God  is  an  angry  Being,  who  is  unwilling 
to  receive  sinners,  and  slow  to  joardon.  Remember  this 
day  that  love  is  the  Father's  darling  attribute.  In  Him 
there  is  perfect  justice,  perfect  purity,  perfect  wisdom, 
l^erfect  knowledge,  infinite  power.  But,  above  all,  never 
forget  there  is  in  the  Father  a  perfect  love  and  compassion. 
Draw  near  to  Him  with  boldness,  because  Jesus  has  made 
a  way  for  you.  But  draw  nigh  to  Him  also  with  boldness, 
because  it  is  written  that  "  He  loved  the  world." 

If  you  have  taken  up  the  service  of  God  already,  never 
be  ashamed  of  imitating  Him  whom  you  serve.  Be  full 
of  love  and  kindness  to  all  men,  and  full  of  special  love  to 
them  that  believe.  Let  there  be  nothinc^  narrow,  limited, 
contracted,  stingy,  or  sectarian  . in  your  love.  Do  not  only 
love  your  family  and  your  friends  ; — love  all  mankind. 
Love  your  neighbours  and  your  fellow-countrymen.  Love 
strangers  and  foreigners.  Love  heathen  and  Mahometans. 
Love  the  worst  of  men  with  a  love  of  pity.  Love  all  the 
world.  Lay  aside  all  envy  and  malice, — all  selfishness  and 
unkindness.  To  keep  up  such  a  spirit  is  to  be  no  better 
than  an  infidel.  "  Let  all  your  things  be  done  with 
charity." — "  Love  your  enemies,  bless  them  that  curse  you. 
do  good  to  them  that  hate  you,"  and  be  not  weary  of 
doing  them  good  to  your  life's  end.  (1  Cor.  xvi.  14 ; 
Matt.  v.  44.)  The  world  may  sneer  at  such  conduct,  and 
call  it  mean  and  low-spirited.  But  this  is  the  mind  of 
Christ.  This  is  the  way  to  be  like  God.  GOD  LOVED 
THE  WORLD. 

II.  The  next  thing  I  want  to  consider  is  God's  gift  to 
the  %vorld.    "He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son." 

The* manner  in  which  the  truth  before  us  is  stated  by 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  demands  special  attention.  It 
would  be  v.'cll  for  many  who  talk  big  swelling  words  about 


382 


OLD  PATHS. 


"  the  love  of  God  "  in  the  present  day,  if  they  would  mark 
the  way  in  which  the  Lord  Jesus  sets  it  before  us. 

The  love  of  God  towards  the  world  is  not  a  vague, 
abstract  idea  of  mercy,  which  we  are  obliged  to  take  on 
trust,  without  any  proof  that  it  is  true.  It  is  a  love  which 
has  been  manifested  by  a  mighty  gift.  It  is  a  love  which 
bas  been  put  before  us  in  a  plain,  unmistakable,  tangible 
form.  God  the  Father  was  not  content  to  sit  in  heaven, 
idly  pitying  and  loving  His  fallen  creatures  on  earth.  He 
has  given  the  mightiest  evidence  of  His  love  towards  us 
by  a  gift  of  unspeakable  value.  He  has  "  not  spared  His 
own  Son,  but  delivered  Him  up  for  us  all."  (Rom.  viii. 
32.)  He  has  so  loved  us  that  He  has  given  us  His  only 
begotten  Son,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ !  A  higher  proof  oi 
the  Father's  love  could  not  have  been  given. 

Again,  it  is  not  written  that  God  so  loved  the  world 
that  He  resolved  to  save  it,  but  that  He  so  loved  it  that 
He  gave  Christ.  His  love  is  not  displaj^ed  at  the  expense 
of  His  holiness  and  justice.  It  flows  down  from  heaven 
to  earth  through  one  particular  channel.  It  is  set  before 
men  in  one  special  way.  It  is  only  through  Christ,  by 
Christ,  on  account  of  Christ,  and  in  inseparable  connection 
with  the  work  of  Christ.  Let  us  glory  in  God's  love  by 
all  means.  Let  us  proclaim  to  all  the  world  that  God  is 
love.  But  let  us  carefully  remember  that  we  know  little 
or  nothing  of  God's-  love  which  can  give  us  comfort, 
excepting  in  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  not  written  that  God  so 
loved  the  world  that  He  will  take  all  the  world  to  heaven, 
but  that  He  so  loved  it,  that  He  has  given  His  only 
begotten  Son.  He  that  ventures  on  God's  love  without 
reference  to  Christ,  is  building  on  a  foundation  of  sand. 

Who  can  estimate  the  value  of  God's  gift,  when  He 
gave  to  the  world  His  only  begotten  Son  ?  It  is  some- 
thing unspeakable  and  incomprehensible.  It  passes  man's 
understandinof.  Two  things  there  are  which  man  has  no 
arithmetic  to  reckon,  and  no  line  to  measure.    One  of 


FAITH. 


383 


these  things  is  the  extent  of  that  man's  loss  who  loses  his 
own  soul.  The  other  is  the  extent  of  God's  gift  when  He 
srave  Christ  to  sinners.  He  f^ave  no  created  thincf  for  oui 
redemption,  though  all  the  treasures  of  earth,  and  all  the 
stars  of  heaven,  were  at  His  disposal.  He  gave  no  created 
being  to  be  our  Redeemer,  though  angels,  principalities 
and  powers  in  heavenly  places,  were  ready  to  do  His  will. 
Oh,  no  !  He  gave  us  One  who  was  nothing  less  than  His 
own  fellow,  very  God  of  very  God,  His  only  begotten  Son. 
He  that  thinks  lightly  of  man's  need  and  man's  sin,  would 
do  well  to  consider  man's  Saviour.  Sin  must  indeed  be 
exceedincif  sinful,  when  the  Father  must  needs  give  His 
only  Son  to  be  the  sinner  s  Friend ! 

Have  we  ever  considered  to  ivliat  the  Father  gave  His 
only  begotten  Son  ?  Was  it  to  be  received  with  gratitude 
and  thankfulness  by  a  lost  and  bankrupt  world  ?  Was  it 
to  reign  in  ro^'al  majesty  on  a  restored  earth,  and  put 
down  every  enemy  under  His  feet?  Was  it  to  enter  the 
world  as  a  kin^^,  and  to  give  laws  to  a  willing  and  obedient 
people  ?  No  !  The  Father  gave  His  Son  to  be  "  despised 
and  rejected  of  men,"  to  be  born  of  a  poor  woman,  and  live 
a  life  of  poverty, — to  be  hated,  persecuted,  slandered,  and 
blasphemed, — to  be  counted  a  malefactor,  condemned  as  a 
transgressor,  and  die  the  death  of  a  felon.  Never  was 
there  such  love  as  this !  Never  such  condescension !  The 
man  among  ourselves  who  cannot  stoop  much  and  suffer 
much  in  order  to  do  good,  knows  nothing  of  the  mind  of 
Christ. 

For  what  end  and  purpose  did  the  Father  give  His 
only  begotten  Son  ?  Was  it  only  to  supply  an  example  of 
self-denial  and  self-sacrifice  ?  No  !  It  was  for  a  far  higher 
end  and  purpose  than  this.  He  gave  Him  to  be  a 
sacrifice  for  man's  sin,  and  an  atonement  for  man's  trans- 
gression. He  gave  Him  to  be  delivered  for  our  offences, 
and  to  die  for  the  ungodly.  He  gave  Him  to  bear  our 
iniquities,  and  to  suffer  for  our  sins,  the  just  for  the 


SS4 


OLD  PATHS. 


unjust.  He  gave  Him  to  be  made  a  curse  for  us,  that  we 
might  be  redeemed  from  the  curse  of  the  law.  He  gave 
Him  to  be  sin  for  us  who  knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be 
made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him.  He  gave  Him 
to  be  a  propitiation  for  our  sins,  and  not  for  ours  only,  but 
for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  He  gave  Him  to  be  a 
ransom  for  all,  and  to  make  satisfaction  for  our  heavy  debt 
to  God  by  His  own  precious  blood.  (1  Pet.  iii.  18 ;  Gal. 
iii.  13 ;  2  Cor.  v.  21 ;  1  John  ii.  2 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  6 ;  1  Pet. 
i.  18,  19.)  He  gave  Him  to  be  the  Almighty  Friend  of 
all  sinners  of  mankind, — to  be  their  Surety  and  Substitute, 
— to  do  for  them  what  they  never  could  have  done  for 
themselves, — suffer  what  they  could  never  have  suffered, — 
and  pay  what  they  could  never  have  paid.  All  that 
Jesus  did  and  suffered  on  earth  was  according  to  the 
determinate  counsel  and  fore-knowledge  of  God.  The 
chief  end  for  which  He  lived  and  died  was  to  provide 
eternal  redemption  for  mankind. 

Beware  of  ever  losing  sight  of  the  great  purpose  for 
which  Christ  was  given  by  God  the  Father.  Let  not  the 
false  teaching  of  modern  divinity,  however  plausible  it 
may  sound,  tempt  you  to  forsake  the  old  paths.  Hold 
fast  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints, — that  the  special 
object  for  which  Christ  was  given  was  to  die  for  sinners, 
and  to  make  atonement  for  them  by  His  sacrifice  on  the 
cross.  Once  give  up  this  great  doctrine,  and  there  is  little 
worth  contending  for  in  Christianity.  If  Christ  did  not 
really  "bear  our  sins  on  the  tree"  as  our  Substitute,  there 
is  an  end  of  all  solid  peace.    (1  Pet.  ii.  24.) 

Beware,  again,  of  holding  narrow  and  confined  views  of 
the  extent  of  Christ's  redemption.  Regard  Him  as  given 
by  God  the  Father  to  be  the  common  Saviour  for  all  the 
world.  See  in  Him  the  fountain  for  all  sin  and  unclean- 
ness,  to  which  every  sinner  may  come  boldly,  drink  and 
live.  See  in  Him  the  brazen  serpent  set  up  in  the  midst 
of  the  camp,  to  Avhich  every  sin-bitten  soul  ma}'-  look  and 


FAITH. 


385 


be  healed.  See  in  Him  a  medicine  of  matchless  value, 
sufficient  for  the  wants  of  all  the  world,  and  ofifered  freely 
to  all  mankind.  The  way  to  heaven  is  narrow  enough 
already,  by  reason  of  man's  pride,  hardness,  sloth,  listless- 
ness,  and  unbelief.  But  take  heed  that  you  do  not  make 
that  way  more  narrow  than  it  really  is. 

I  confess,  boldly,  that  I  hold  the  doctrine  of  particular 
redemption,  in  a  certain  sense,  as  strongly  as  any  one.  I 
believe  that  none  are  effectually  redeemed  but  God's  elect. 
They,  and  they  only,  are  set  free  from  the  guilt,  and  power, 
and  consequences  of  sin.  But  I  hold  no  less  strongly,  that 
Christ's  work  of  atonement  is  suffcient  for  all  mankind. 
There  is  a  sense  in  which  Ho  has  tasted  death  for  every 
man,  and  has  taken  upon  Him  the  sin  of  the  world. 
(Heb.  ii.  9 ;  John  i.  29.)  I  dare  not  pare  down,  and  fine 
away,  what  appear  to  me  the  plain  statements  of  Scripture. 
I  dare  not  shut  a  door  which  God  seems,  to  my  eyes,  to 
have  left  open.  I  dare  not  tell  any  man  on  earth  that 
Christ  has  done  nothing  for  him,  and  that  he  has  no 
warrant  to  apply  boldly  to  Christ  for  salvation.  I  must 
abide  by  the  statements  of  the  Bible.  Christ  is  God's  gilt 
to  the  whole  world. 

Let  us  observe  what  a  giving  religion  true  Christianity 
is.  Gift,  love,  and  free  grace  are  the  grand  characteristics 
of  the  pure  gospel.  The  Father  loves  the  world  and  gives 
His  only  begotten  Son.  The  Son  loves  us  and  gives 
Himself  for  us.  .The  Father  and  the  Son  together  give 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  all  that  ask.  All  Three  Persons  in  the 
Blessed  Trinity  give  "  grace  upon  grace "  to  them  that 
believe.  Never  let  us  be  ashamed  of  being  giving 
Christians  if  we  profess  to  have  any  hope  in  Christ.  Let 
us  give  freely,  liberally,  and  self-denyingly,  according  as 
we  have  power  and  opportunity.  Let  not  our  love  consist 
in  nothing  more  than  vague  expressions  of  kindness  and 
compassion.  Let  us  make  proof  of  it  by  actions.  Let  us 
help  forward  the  cause  of  Christ  on  earth,  by  money, 


386 


OLD  PATHS. 


influence,  pains,  and  prayer.  If  God  so  loved  us  as  to 
give  His  Son  for  our  souls,  Ave  should  count  it  a  privilege 
and  not  a  burden,  to  give  what  we  can  to  do  good  to  men. 

If  God  has  given  us  His  only  begotten  Son,  let  us 
beware  of  doubting  His  kindness  and  love  in  any  painful 
providence  of  our  daily  life.  Let  us  never  allow  ourselves 
to  think  hard  thoughts  of  God.  Let  us  never  suppose 
that  He  can  give  us  anything  that  is  not  really  for  our 
good.  Let  us  remember  the  words  of  St.  Paul :  "  He  that 
spared  not  His  own  Son,  but  delivered  Him  up  for  us  all, 
how  shall  He  not  with  Him  also  freely  give  us  all  things." 
(Rom.  viii.  32.)  Let  us  see  in  every  sorrow  and  trouble  of 
our  earthly  pilgrimage,  the  hand  of  Him  who  gave  Christ 
ito  die  for  our  sins.  That  hand  can  never  smite  us  except 
in  love.  He  who  gave  us  His  only  begotten  Son,  will 
never  withhold  anything  from  us  that  is  really  for  our  good. 
Let  us  lean  back  on  this  thought  and  be  content.  Let 
fus  say  to  ourselves  in  the  darkest  hour  of  trial,  "  This  also 
is  ordered  by  Him  who  gave  Christ  to  die  for  my  sins. 
It  cannot  be  wrong.    It  is  done  in  love.    It  must  be  well." 

III.  The  third  thing  I  propose  to  consider,  is  the  tcay 
in  tuhich  man  obtains  the  benefit  of  God's  love  and 
Christ's  salvation.  It  is  written  that  "  whosoever  be- 
lieveth  shall  not  perish." 

The  point  before  us  is  of  the  deepest  importance.  To 
bring  it  out  clearly  before  your  eyes  is  one  great  object  of 
the  paper  you  are  now  reading.  God  has  loved  the  world. 
God  has  given  His  Son  "  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world." 
(1  John  iv.  14.)  And  yet  we  learn  from  Scripture  that 
many  persons  in  the  world  never  reach  heaven  ?  Here  at 
any  rate  is  limitation.  Here  the  gate  is  strait  and  the, 
way  narrow.  Some  and  some  only  out  of  mankind  obtain 
eternal  benefit  from  Christ.  Who  then,  and  what  are 
they? 

Christ  and  His  benefits  are  only  available  to  those  who 


FAITH. 


387 


believe.  To  believe,  in  the  language  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, is  simply  to  trust.  Trusting  and  believing  are  the 
same  thing.  This  is  a  doctrine  repeatedly  laid  down  in 
Scripture,  in  plain  and  unmistakable  language.  Those 
who  will  not  trust  or  believe  in  Him  have  no  part  in  Him. 
Without  believing  there  is  no  salvation.  It  is  vain  to 
suppose  that  any  will  be  saved,  merely  because  Christ  was 
incarnate, — or  because  Christ  is  in  heaven, — or  because 
they  belong  to  Christ's  Church, — or  because  they  are 
baptized, — or  because  they  have  received  the  Lord's  supper. 
All  this  is  entirely  useless  to  any  man  except  he  believes. 
Without  faith,  or  trust,  on  his  part,  all  these  things  together 
will  not  save  his  soul.  We  must  have  personal  faith  in 
Christ,  personal  dealings  with  Christ,  personal  transactions 
with  Christ,  or  we  are  lost  for  evermore.  It  is  utterly  false 
and  unscriptural  to  say  that  Christ  is  in  every  man.  Christ 
no  doubt  is  for  every  one,  but  Christ  is  not  in  every  one. 
He  dwells  only  in  those  hearts  which  have  faith  ;  and  all, 
unhappily,  have  not  faith.  He  that  believeth  not  in  the 
Son  of  God  is  yet  in  his  sins,  "  the  wrath  of  God  abideth 
on  him."  "  He  that  believeth  not,"  says  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  in  words  of  fearful  distinctness, — "  he  that  believeth 
not  shall  be  damned."*    (Mark  xvi.  16;  John  iii.  36.) 

But  Christ  and  all  His  benefits  are  the  property  of  any 
one  of  mankind  that  believes.  Every  one  that  believes 
on  the  Son  of  God,  and  trusts  his  soul  to  Him,  is  at  once 
pardoned,  forgiven,  justified,  counted  righteous,  reckoned 
innocent,  and  freed  from  all  liability  to  condemnation.  His 
sins,  however  many,  are  at  once  cleansed  away  by  Christ's 
precious  blood.  His  soul,  however  guilty,  is  at  once  clothedj 
with  Christ's  perfect  righteousness.  It  matters  not  what 
he  may  have  been  in  time  past.  His  sins  may  have  been 
of  the  worst  kind.    His  former  character  may  be  of  the 


*  It  is  perhaps  almost  needless  to  say,  that  I  am  not  speaking  of  idiots, 
or  those  who  die  ia  infancy,  in  this  paragraph. 


SS8 


OLD  PATHS. 


blackest  description.  But  does  He  believe  on  tlie  Son  oi 
God  ?  This  is  the  one  question.  If  he  does  believe,  he  is 
justified  from  all  things  in  the  sight  of  God. — It  matters 
not  that  he  can  bring  to  Christ  nothing  to  recommend 
him,  no  good  works,  no  long-proved  amendments,  no 
unmistakable  repentance  and  change  of  life.  But  does 
he  this  day  believe  in  Jesus  Christ?  This  is  the  grand 
question.  If  he  does  he  is  at  once  accepted.  He  is 
accounted  righteous  for  Christ's  sake. 

But  what  is  this  believing,  which  is  of  such  matchless 
importance.  What  is  the  nature  of  this  faith  which  gives 
n  man  such  amazing  privileges  ?  This  is  an  important 
question.  1  ask  attention  to  the  answer.  Here  is  a 
rock  on  which  many  make  shipwreck.  There  is  nothing 
really  mysterious  and  hard  to  understand  about  saving- 
belief.  But  the  whole  difficulty  arises  from  man's  pride 
and  self-righteousness.  It  is  the  very  simplicity  of  justi- 
fying faith  at  which  thousands  stumble.  They  cannot 
imderstand  it  because  they  will  not  stoop. 

Believing  on  Christ  is  no  mere  intellectual  assent,  or 
belief  of  the  head.  This  is  no  more  than  the  faith  of 
devils.  We  may  believe  that  there  was  a  divine  Person 
called  Jesus  Christ,  who  lived  and  died  and  rose  again, 
eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  and  yet  never  believe  so  as, 
to  be  saved.  Doubtless  there  must  be  some  knowledge 
before  we  can  believe.  There  is  no  true  religion  in 
ignorance.    But  knowledge  alone  is  not  saving  faith. 

Believing  on  Christ,  again,  is  not  mere  feeling  some- 
thing about  Christ.  This  is  often  no  more  than  temporary 
excitement,  which,  like  the  early  dew,  soon  passes  away. 
We  may  be  pricked  in  conscience,  and  feel  drawings  toward 
the  Gospel,  like  Herod  and  Felix.  We  may  even  tremble 
and  weep,  and  show  much  affection  for  the  truth  and 
those  that  profess  it.  And  yet  all  this  time  our  heai'ts 
and  wills  may  remain  utterly  unchanged,  and  secretly 
chained  down  to  the  world.    Doubtless  there  is  no  saving 


FAITH, 


389 


faith  where  there  is  no  feeling.  But  feeling  alone  is  not 
faith. 

True  belief  in  Christ  is  the  unreserved  trust  of  a  heart 
convinced  of  sin,  in  Christ,  as  an  all-sufficient  Saviour.  It 
is  the  combined  act  of  the  whole  man's  head,  conscience, 
lieart,  and  will  It  is  often  so  weak  and  feeble  at  first, 
that  he  who  has  it  cannot  be  persuaded  that  he  has  it. 
And  yet,  like  life  in  the  new-born  infant,  his  belief  may 
be  real,  genuine,  saving,  and  true.  The  moment  that  the 
conscience  is  convinced  of  sin,  and  the  head  sees  Christ  to 
be  the  only  One  who  can  save,  and  the  heart  and  will  lay 
hold  on  the  hand  that  Christ  holds  out,  that  moment 
there  is  saving  faith.    In  that  moment  a  man  believes. 

True  belief  in  Christ  is  so  immensely  important  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  has  graciously  used  many  figures  in  the  Bible  in 
describing  it.  The  Lord  God  knows  the  slowness  of  man 
to  comprehend  spiritual  things.  He  has  therefore  multi- 
plied forms  of  expression,  in  order  to  set  faith  fully  before 
us.  The  man  wlio  cannot  understand  "  believing  "  in  one 
form  of  words,  will  perhaps  understand  it  in  another. 

(1)  Believing  is  the  soul's  coining  to  Christ.  The 
Lord  Jesus  says,  "  He  that  cometh  to  Me  shall  never 
hunger."  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are 
heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  (John  vi.  35 ; 
Matt.  xi.  28.)  Christ  is  that  Almighty  Friend,  Advocate^ 
and  Physician,  to  whom  all  sinners,  needing  help,  are 
commanded  to  apply.  The  believer  comes  to  Him  by 
faith,  and  is  relieved. 

(2)  Believing  is  the  soul's  receiving  Christ.  St.  Paul 
says,  "Ye  have  received  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord."  (Col.  ii.  6.) 
Christ  offers  to  come  into  man's  heart  with  pardon, 
mercy,  and  grace,  and  to  dwell  there  as  its  Peace-maker 
and  King.  He  says,  "I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock." 
(Rev.  iii.  20.)  The  believer  hears  His  voice,  opens  the 
duor,  and  admits  Christ,  as  his  Master,  Priest,  and  King. 

(3)  Believing  is  the  soul's  building  on  Christ.  St. 


390 


OLD  PATHS. 


Paul  says,  ye  are  "  built  up  in  Him." — "  Ye  are  built  upon 
the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets."  (Eph.  ii.  20 ; 
Col.  ii.  7.)  Christ  is  that  sure  corner-stone,  that  strong 
foundation,  which  alone  can  bear  the  weight  of  a  sinful 
soul.  The  believer  places  his  hopes  for  eternity  on  Him, 
and  is  safe.  The  earth  may  be  shaken  and  dissolved ;  but 
he  is  built  upon  a  rock,  and  will  never  be  confounded. 

(4)  Believing  is  the  soul's  imtting  on  Christ.  St. 
Paul  says,  "  As  many  of  you  as  have  been  baptized  into 
Christ,  have  put  on  Christ."  (Galat.  iii.  27.)  Christ  is 
that  pure  Avhite  robe  which  God  has  provided  for  all 
sinners  who  would  enter  heaven.  The  believer  puts  on 
this  robe  by  faith,  and  is  at  once  perfect  and  free  from 
any  spot  in  God's  sight. 

(5)  Believing  is  the  soul's  laying  hold  on  Christ. 
St.  Paul  says,  "  We  have  fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  on  the 
hope  set  before  us."  (Heb.  vi.  18.)  Christ  is  that  true 
city  of  refuge,  to  which  the  man  fleeing  from  the  avenger 
of  blood  runs,  and  in  which  he  is  safe.  Christ  is  that 
altar  which  provided  a  sanctuary  to  him  who  laid  hold  on 
its  horns.  Christ  is  that  almighty  'hand  of  mercy,  which 
God  holds  out  from  heaven  to  lost  and  drowning  sinners. 
The  believer  lays  hold  on  this  hand  by  faith,  and  is 
delivered  from  the  pit  of  hell. 

(6)  Believing  is  the  soul's  eating  Christ.  The  Lord 
Jesus  says,  "  My  flesh  is  meat  indeed.  He  that  eateth  ol 
this  bread  shall  live  for  ever."  (John  vi.  55,  58.)  Christ 
is  that  divine  food  which  God  has  provided  for  starving 
sinners.  He  is  that  divine  bread  which  is  at  the  same 
time  life,  nourishment,  and  medicine.  The  believer  feeds 
ion  this  bread  of  life  by  faith.  His  hunger  is  relieved. 
His  soul  is  delivered  from  death. 

(7)  Believing  is  the  soul's  drinJdng  Christ.  The  Lord 
Jesus  says,  "  My  blood  is  drink  indeed."  (John  vi.  55.) 
Christ  is  that  fountain  of  livinsj  water  which  God  has 
'opened  for  the  use  of  all  thirsty  and  sin-defiled  sinners, 


FAITH. 


391 


proclaiming,  "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of 
life  freely."  (Rev.  xxii.  17.)  The  believer  drinks  of  this 
living  water,  and  his  thirst  is  quenched. 

(8)  Believing  is  the  soul's  committal  of  itself  to  Christ. 
St.  Paul  says,  "  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have 
committed  to  Him  against  that  day."  (2  Tim.  i.  12.) 
Christ  is  the  apjiointed  keeper  and  guardian  of  souls.  It 
is  His  office  to  preserve  from  sin,  death,  hell,  and  the 
devil,  anything  committed  to  his  charge.  The  believer 
places  his  soul  in  the  hands  of  the  Almighty  treasure- 
keeper,  and  is  insured  against  loss  to  all  eternity.  He 
trusts  himself  to  Him  and  is  safe. 

(9)  Last,  but  not  least,  believing  is  the  soul's  look  to 
Christ.  St.  Paul  describes  the  saints  as  "looking  to  Jesus." 
(Heb.  xii.  2.)  The  invitation  of  the  Gospel  is,  "  Look  unto 
Me,  and  be  ye  saved."  (Isai.  xlv.  22.)  Christ  is  that 
brazen  serpent  which  God  has  set  up  in  the  world,  for 
the  healing  of  all  sin-bitten  souls  who  desire  to  be  cured. 
The  believer  looks  to  Him  by  faith,  and  has  life,  health, 
and  spiritual  strength. 

One  common  remark  applies  to  all  the  nine  expressions 
which  I  have  just  gone  through.  They  all  give  us  the 
simplest  idea  of  faith,  or  believing  and  trusting,  that  man 
can  desire.  Not  one  of  them  implies  the  notion  of  any- 
thing mysterious,  great,  or  meritorious  in  the  act  of  belief 
All  represent  it  as  something  within  reach  of  the  weakest 
and  feeblest  sinner,  and  within  the  comprehension  of  the 
most  ignorant  and  unlearned.  Grant  for  a  moment  that  a 
man  says  he  cannot  understand  what  faith  in  Christ  is. 
Let  him  look  at  the  nine  expressions  under  which  faith  is 
described  in  Scripture,  and  tell  me,  if  he  can,  that  he 
cannot  understand  them.  Surely  he  must  allow  that 
coming  to  Christ,  looking  to  Christ,  committing  our  souls 
to  Christ,  laying  hold  on  Christ,  are  simple  ideas.  Then 
let  him  remember  that  coming,  looking,  and  committing 
,our  souls  to  Christ,  are,  in  other  words,  believing. 


392 


OLD  PATHS, 


And  now,  if  any  reader  of  these  pages  desires  to  have 
peace  of  conscience  in  his  religion,  I  entreat  him  to  grasp 
firmly  the  great  doctrine  which  I  have  tried  to  set  before 
him,  and  never  let  it  go.  Hold  fast  the  grand  truth  that 
saving  faith  is  nothing  but  simple  trust  in  Christ,  that 
faith  alone  justifies,  and  that  the  one  thing  needful  in 
order  to  obtain  an  interest  in  Christ  is  to  believe. — No  doubt 
repentance,  holiness,  and  charity  are  excellent  things. 
They  will  always  accompany  true  faith.  But  in  the  matter 
of  justification,  they  have  nothing  to  do.  In  that  matter, 
the  one  thing  needful  is  to  believe. — No  doubt  belief  is 
not  the  only  grace  to  be  found  in  the  heart  of  a  true 
Christian.  But  only  belief  gives  him  an  interest  in 
Christ.  Prize  that  doctrine  as  the  peculiar  treasure  of 
Christianity.  Once  let  it  go,  or  add  anything  to  it,  and 
there  is  an  end  of  inward  peace.* 

Prize  the  doctrine  for  its  suitableness  to  the  wants  of 
fallen  man.  It  places  salvation  within  reach  of  the  lowest 
and  vilest  sinner,  if  he  has  but  heart  and  will  to  receive 
it.  It  asks  him  not  for  works,  righteousness,  merit,  good- 
ness, worthiness.  It  requires  nothing  of  him.  It  strips 
him  of  all  excuses.  It  deprives  him  of  all  pretext  for 
despair.  His  sins  may  have  been  as  scarlet.  But  will  he 
believe  ?    Then  there  is  hope. 

Prize  the  doctrine  for  its  glorious  simplicity.  It  brings 
eternal  life  near  to  the  poor,  and  ignorant,  and  unlearned. 
It  does  not  ask  a  man  for  a  long  confession  of  doctrinal 
orthodoxy.  It  does  not  require  a  store  of  head-knowledge, 
and  an  acquaintance  with  articles  and  creeds.  Does  the 
man,  with  all  his  ignorance,  come  to  Christ  as  a  sinner, 
and  commit  himself  entirely  to  Him  for  salvation  ?  Will 
he  believe  ?    If  he  will,  there  is  hope. 

*  If  any  reader  is  startled  and  stumbled  by  what  I  here  say  about 
'aitli,  I  recommend  liim  to  read  attentively  the  Church  of  England 
Homily  aboat  Salvation.  My  doctrine  at  any  rate  is  that  of  the  Church 
of  England. 


FAITH. 


393 


Above  all,  prize  the  doctrine  for  the  glorious  breadth 
and  fulness  of  its  terms.  It  does  not  say  "  the  elect "  who 
believe,  or  "  the  rich  "  who  believe,  or  "  the  moral "  people 
who  believe,  or  "  the  Churchman  "  who  believes,  or  "  the 
Dissenter  "  who  believes, — these,  and  these  only  shall  be 
saved.  Oh,  no  !  it  uses  a  word  of  far  wider  signification : — • 
It  says,  "  Whosoever  believeth,  shall  not  perish."  Who- 
soever,— whatever  his  past  life,  conduct,  or  character, — 
whatever  his  name,  rank,  people,  or  country, — whatever 
his  denomination,  and  whatever  place  of  worship  he  may 
have  attended, — "  ivhosoever  believeth  in  Christ  shall  not 
perish." 

This  is  the  Gospel.  I  marvel  not  that  St.  Paul  wrote 
those  words,  "  If  we  or  an  angel  from  heaven  preach  any 
other  Gospel  unto  you  than  that  which  we  have  preached, 
let  him  be  accursed."    (Gal.  i.  8.) 

IV.  The  fourth  and  last  thing  which  I  propose  to 
consider  is  a  point  of  great  practical  importance.  I  wish 
to  show  you  the  marks  by  tvhich  true  belief  in  Christ  may 
be  discerned  and  hnoxon. 

The  faith  or  believing  of  which  I  have  spoken,  is  a 
grace  of  such  importance,  that  we  may  naturally  expect  to 
hear  of  many  counterfeits  of  it.  There  is  a  dead  faith  as 
well  as  a  living  one, —  a  faith  of  devils  as  well  as  a  faith  of 
God's  elect, — a  faith  which  is  vain  and  useless,  as  well  as  a 
faith  that  justifies  and  saves.  How  shall  a  man  know 
whether  he  has  true  faith  ?  How  shall  he  find  out 
whether  he  "believes  to  the  saving  of  his  soul"?  The 
thing  may  be  found  out.  The  Ethiopian  may  be  known 
by  his  skin,  and  the  leopard  by  his  spots.  True  faith  may 
always  be  known  by  certain  marks.  These  marks  are  laid 
down  unmistakably  in  Scripture.  Let  me  endeavour  to 
set  down  these  marks  in  order. 

(1)  He  that  believeth  in  Christ  has  inward  peace  and 
hope.    It  is  written,  "Being  justified  by  faith,  we  have, 


394 


OLD  PATHS. 


peace  with  God,  tlirough  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  "  We 
which  have  believed  do  enter  into  rest."  (Rom.  v.  1 ; 
Heb.  iv.  3.)  The  believer's  sins  are  pardoned,  and  his 
iniquities  taken  away.  His  conscience  is  no  longer  bur- 
dened with  the  load  of  unpardoned  transgressions.  He  is 
reconciled  to  God,  and  is  one  of  His  friends.  He  can  look 
forward  to  death,  judgment,  and  eternity  without  fear. 
The  sting  of  death  is  taken  away.  When  the  great  assize 
of  the  last  day  is  held,  and  the  books  are  opened,  there 
will  be  nothing  laid  to  his  charge.  When  eternity  begins, 
he  is  provided  for.  He  has  a  hope  laid  up  in  heaven,  and 
a  city  which  cannot  be  moved.  He  may  not  be  fully 
sensible  of  all  these  privileges.  His  sense  and  view  of 
them  may  vary  greatly  at  ditferent  times,  and  be  often 
obscured  by  doubts  and  fears.  Like  a  child  who  is  yet 
under  age,  though  heir  to  a  great  fortune,  he  may  not  be 
fully  aware  of  the  value  of  his  possessions.  But  with  all 
his  doubts  and  fears,  he  has  a  real,  solid,  true  hoj^e,  which 
will  bear  examination,  and  at  his  best  moments  he  will  be 
able  to  say,  "  I  feel  a  hoj)e  which  makes  me  not  ashamed." 
(Rom.  V.  5.) 

(2)  He  that  believes  in  Christ  Tias  a  new  lieart.  It  is 
written,  "  If  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creature : 
old  things  are  passed  away :  behold  all  things  are  become 
new." — "  To  as  many  as  received  Christ,  He  gave  power  to 
become  sons  of  God,  which  were  born  not  of  blood,  nor  of 
the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God." — 
'■  Whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  born  of 
God."  (2  Cor.  V.  17;  John  i.  12,  13;  1  John  v.  1.)  A 
believer  has  no  longer  the  same  nature  with  which  he  was 
born.  He  is  changed,  renewed,  and  transformed  after  the 
image  of  his  Lord  and  Saviour.  He  that  minds  first  the 
things  of  the  flesh,  has  no  saving  faith.  True  faith  and 
spiritual  regeneration  are  inseiDarable  comjDanions.  An 
unconverted  person  is  not  a  believer ! 

(3)  He  that  believes  in  Christ  is  a  lioly  loerson  in  heart 


FAITH. 


395 


and  life.  It  is  written  that  God  "  purifies  the  heart  by 
faith and,  "Whoso  hath  this  hope  in  him,  purifieth  him- 
self." (Acts.  XV.  9  ;  1  John  iii.  3.)  A  believer  loves  Avhat 
God  loves,  and  hates  what  God  hates.  His  heart's  desire 
is  to  walk  in  the  way  of  God's  commandments,  and  to 
abstain  from  all  manner  of  evil.  His  wish  is  to  follow 
after  the  things  which  are  just,  and  pure,  and  honest,  and 
lovely,  and  of  good  report,  and  to  cleanse  himself  from  all 
filthiness  of  flesh  and  sjoirit.  He  falls  far  short  of  his  aim 
in  many  things.  He  finds  his  daily  life  a  constant  fight 
with  indwelling  corruption.  But  he  fights  on,  and  reso- 
lutely refuses  to  serve  sin.  Where  there  is  no  holiness,  we 
may  be  sure  there  is  no  saving  faith.  An  unholy  man  is 
not  a  believer ! 

(4)  He  that  believes  on  Christ  tuorks  godly  works.  It 
is  written,  that  "  faith  worketh  by  love."  (Gal.  v.  6.)  True 
belief  will  never  make  a  man  idle,  or  allow  him  to  sit  still, 
contented  with  his  own  religion.  It  will  stir  him  to  do 
acts  of  love,  kindness,  and  charity,  according  as  he  sees 
opportunity.  It  will  constrain  him  to  walk  in  the  steps  of 
his  Master,  who  "  went  about  doing  good."  (Acts  x.  38.) 
In  one  Avay  or  another,  it  will  make  him  work.  The  works 
that  he  does  may  attract  no  notice  from  the  world.  They 
may  seem  trifling  and  insignificant  to  many  persons.  But 
they  are  not  forgotten  by  Him  who  notices  a  cup  of  cold 
water  given  for  His  sake.  Where  there  is  no  working 
love,  there  is  no  faith.  A  lazy,  selfish  Christian,  has  no 
right  to  regard  himself  as  a  believer  ! 

(.5)  He  that  believes  on  Christ  overcomes  the  tuorld.  It 
is  written,  that  "  whatsoever  is  born  of  God  overcometh 
the  world,  and  this  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the 
world,  even  our  faith."  (1  John  v.  4.)  A  true  believer  is 
not  ruled  by  the  world's  standard  of  right  or  wrong,  of 
truth  or  error.  He  is  independent  of  the  world's  opinion. 
He  cares  little  for  the  world's  praise.  He  is  not  moved 
by  the  world's  blame.    He  does  not  seek  for  the  world's 


396 


OLD  PATHS. 


pleasures.  He  is  not  ambitions  of  the  world's  rewards. 
He  looks  at  things  unseen.  He  sees  an  invisible  Saviour, 
a  coming  judgment,  a  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away. 
The  sight  of  these  objects  makes  him  think  comparatively 
little  of  this  world.  Where  the  world  reigns  in  the  heart, 
there  is  no  faith.  A  man  that  is  habitually  conformed  to 
the  world,  has  no  title  to  the  name  of  a  believer ! 

(6)  He  that  believes  on  Christ,  has  an  inward  testi- 
mony of  his  belief.  It  is  written,  that  "  he  that 
believeth  on  the  Son  of  God,  hath  the  witness  in 
himself."  (1  John  v.  10.)  The  mark  before  us  requires 
very  delicate  handling.  The  witness  of  the  Spirit  is 
unquestionably  a  very  difficult  subject.  But  I  cannot 
shrink  from  declaring  my  own  firm  persuasion  that  a 
true  believer  always  has  inward  feelings  peculiar  to 
himself, — feelings  wliich  are  inseparably  connected  with 
his  faith,  and  flow  from  it, — feelings  of  which  unbelievers 
know  nothing  at  all.  He  "  has  the  Spirit  of  adoption,"  by 
which  he  regards  God  as  a  reconciled  Father,  and  looks 
up  to  Him  without  fear.  (Rom.  viii.  15.)  He  has  the 
testimony  of  his  conscience,  sprinkled  with  Clirist's  blood, 
that  weak  as  he  is,  he  rests  on  Christ.  He  has  hopes,  joys, 
fears,  sorrows,  consolations,  expectations,  of  which  he  knew 
nothing  before  he  believed.  He  has  pocket  evidences 
which  the  world  cannot  understand,  but  which  are  better 
to  him  than  all  the  books  of  evidence  in  existence.  Feel- 
ings are,  no  doubt,  very  deceitful.  But  where  there  are 
no  inward  religious  feelings  there  is  no  faith.  A  man 
who  knows  nothing  of  an  inward,  spiritual,  experimental 
religion,  is  not  yet  a  believer  ! 

(7)  Last,  but  not  least,  he  that  believes  on  Christ,  has  a 
special  regard  in  all  his  religion  to  the  person  of  Christ 
Himself.  It  is  written,  "  Unto  you  that  believe  Christ  is 
precious."  (1  Pet.  ii.  7.)  That  text  deserves  especial 
notice.  It  does  not  say  "  Christianity  "  is  precious,  or  the 
"  Gospel "  is  precious,  or  "  salvation  "  is  precious,  but 


FAITH. 


S97 


Christ  Himself.  A  believer's  religion  does  not  consist  in 
mere  intellectual  assent  to  a  certain  set  of  propositions  and 
doctrines.  It  is  not  a  mere  cold  belief  of  a  certain  set  of 
truths  and  facts  concerning  Christ.  It  consists  in  union, 
communion,  and  fellowship  with  an  actual  living  Person, 
even  J esus  the  Son  of  God.  It  is  a  life  of  faith  in  Jesu.s, 
confidence  in  Jesus,  leaning  on  Jesus,  drawing  out  of  the 
fulness  of  Jesus,  speaking  to  Jesus,  working  for  Jesus, 
loving  Jesus,  and  looking  for  Jesus  to  come  again.  St. 
Paul  said,  "  The  life  that  I  live  in  the  flesh  I  live  by  the 
faith  of  the  Son  of  God."—"  To  me  to  live  is  Christ." 
(Galat.  ii.  20 ;  Phil.  i.  21.)  Such  life  may  sound  like 
enthusiasm  to  many.  But  where  there  is  true  faith,  Christ 
will  always  be  known  and  realized,  as  an  actual  living 
personal  Friend.  He  that  knows  nothing  of  Christ  as  his 
own  Priest,  Physician,  and  Redeemer,  knows  nothing  yet 
of  believing ! 

I  place  these  seven  marks  of  believing  before  every  one 
who  reads  this  paper,  and  I  ask  him  to  consider  them  well. 
I  do  not  say,  that  all  believers  have  them  equally.  I  do 
not  say,  that  no  one  will  be  saved  who  cannot  discover  all 
these  marks  in  himself  I  concede,  freely,  that  many  be- 
lievers are  so  weak  in  faith,  that  they  go  doubting  all  their 
days,  and  make  others  doubt  about  them  too.  I  simply 
say  that  these  are  the  marks  to  which  a  man  should  first 
direct  his  attention,  if  he  would  know  whether  he  believes. 

Where  the  seven  marks,  of  which  I  have  just  been 
speaking,  are  utterly  wanting,  I  dare  not  tell  a  man  that 
he  is  a  true  believer.  He  may  be  called  a  Christian,  and 
attend  on  Christian  ordinances.  He  may  have  been 
baptized  with  Christian  bai^tism,  and  be  a  member  of  a 
Christian  church.  But  if  he  knows  nothing  of  peace  with 
God,  conversion  of  heart,  newness  of  life,  and  victory  over 
the  world,  I  dare  not  pronounce  him  a  believer.  He  is  yet 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  Except  he  awakes  to  newness 
of  life,  he  will  jDerish  everlastingly. 


S98 


OLD  PATHS. 


Show  me  a  man  who  has  about  him  the  seven  marks 
which  I  have  described,  and  I  feel  a  strong  confidence  about 
the  state  of  his  soul.  He  may  be  poor  and  needy  in  this 
world,  but  he  is  rich  in  the  sight  of  God.  He  may  be 
despised  and  sneered  at  by  man,  but  he  is  honourable  in 
the  sight  of  the  King  of  kings.  He  is  travelling  towards 
heaven.  He  has  a  mansion  ready  for  him  in  the  Father's 
house.  He  is  cared  for  by  Christ,  while  on  earth.  He  will 
be  owned  by  Christ  before  assembled  worlds,  in  the  life 
which  is  to  come. 

(1)  And  now,  in  drawing  this  paper  to  a  conclusion,  I 
return  to  the  question  with  which  I  began.  I  press  that 
question  on  the  conscience  of  every  one  whose  eyes  are  on 
this  page.  I  ask  you,  in  my  Master's  name,  whether  you 
yet  know  anything  of  the  subject  of  it  ?  I  ask  you  to  look 
my  inquiry  in  the  face.    I  ask  you,  Do  you  believe  ? 

DO  YOU  BELIEVE  ?  I  think  it  impossible  to  over- 
rate the  immense  importance  of  the  question  before  you. 
Life  or  death,  heaven  or  hell,  blessing  or  cursing,  aU  hinge 
and  turn  upon  it.  He  that  believeth  on  Christ  is  not 
condemned.  He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned.  If 
you  believe  3'ou  are  pardoned,  justified,  accepted  in  God's 
sight,  and  have  a  title  to  everlasting  life.  If  you  do  not 
believe,  you  are  perishing  daily.  Your  sins  are  all  upon 
your  head,  sinking  you  down  to  perdition.  Every  hour 
you  are  so  much  nearer  to  hell. 

DO  YOU  BELIEVE  ?  It  matters  nothing  what  others 
are  doing.  The  question  concerns  yourself.  The  folly  of 
other  men  is  no  excuse  for  yours.  The  loss  of  heaven  will 
not  be  less  bitter,  because  you  lose  it  in  company.  Look 
at  home.    Think  of  your  own  soul. 

DO  YOU  BELIEVE?  It  is  no  answer  to  say,  that 
"  you  sometimes  hope  Christ  died  for  you."  The  Scrip- 
tures never  tell  us  to  spend  our  time  in  doubts  and 
hesitation  on  that  point.    We  never  read  of  a  single  case 


FAITH. 


399' 


of  one  who  stood  still  on  that  ground.  Salvation  is  never 
made  to  turn  on  the  question,  whether  Christ  died  for  a 
man  or  not.  The  turning-point  which  is  always  set  before 
us  is  believing. 

DO  YOU  BELIEVE  ?  This  is  the  point  to  which  all 
must  come  at  last,  if  they  would  be  saved.  It  will  signify 
little,  when  we  hang  on  the  brink  of  the  grave,  what  we 
have  professed,  and  to  what  denomination  we  have  be- 
longed. All  this  will  sink  into  nothing,  in  comparison 
with  the  question  of  this  paper.  All  will  be  useless,  if  we 
have  not  believed. 

DO  YOU  BELIEVE?  This  is  the  common  mark  of 
all  saved  souls.  Episcopalians  or  Presbyterians,  Baptists 
or  Independents,  Methodists  or  Plymouth  Brethren, 
Churchmen  or  Dissenters,  all  meet  on  this  common 
ground,  if  they  are  true  men.  On  other  matters,  they 
are  often  hopelessly  disagreed.  But  in  living  by  faith  on 
Jesus  Christ,  they  are  all  one. 

DO  YOU  BELIEVE  ?  What  reason  can  you  give  for 
unbelief,  that  will  bear  examination  ?  Life  is  short  and 
ixncertain.  Death  is  sure.  Judgment  is  inevitable.  Sin 
is  exceeding  sinful.  Hell  is  an  awful  reality.  Christ 
alone  can  save  you.  There  is  no  other  name  given  under 
heaven,  whereby  you  can  be  saved.  If  not  saved,  the 
blame  will  be  on  your  own  head.  You  will  not  believe ! 
You  will  not  come  to  Christ,  that  He  may  give  you  life ! 

Take  warning  this  day.  You  must  either  believe  on 
Christ,  or  perish  everlastingly.  Rest  not  till  you  can  give 
a  satisfactory  answer  to  the  question  before  you.  Never 
be  satisfied,  till  you  can  say.  By  the  grace  of  God  I  do 
believe. 

(2)  I  pass  on  from  questions  to  counsel.  I  offer  it  to 
all  who  are  convinced  of  sin,  and  dissatisfied  with  their 
own  spiritual  condition,  I  entreat  you  to  come  to  Clirist 
by  faith  without  delay.  I  invite  you  this  day  to  believe 
on  Clirist  to  the  saving  of  your  soul. 


400 


OLD  PATHS. 


I  will  not  let  you  put  me  ofif  by  the  common  objection, 
"We  cannot  believe, — we  must  wait  till  God  gives  us 
faitli."  I  grant  most  fully  that  saving  faith,  like  true 
repentance,  is  the  gift  of  God.  I  grant  that  we  have  no 
natural  power  of  our  own  to  believe  on  Christ,  receive 
Christ,  come  to  Christ,  lay  hold  on  Christ,  and  commit 
cur  souls  to  Christ.  But  I  see  faith  and  repentance  laid 
down  clearly  in  Scripture  as  duties  which  God  requires 
at  any  man's  hands.  He  "  commandeth  all  men  to  repent." 
"  This  is  His  commandment,  that  we  should  believe." 
'Acts  xvii.  30 ;  1  John  iii.  2.3.)  And  I  see  it  laid  down 
with  no  less  clearness,  that  unbelief  and  impenitence  are 
sins  for  which  man  will  be  held  accountable,  and  that  he 
who  does  not  repent  and  believe  destroys  his  own  soul. 
(Mark  xvi.  16  ;  Luke  xiii.  3.) 

AVill  any  one  tell  me  that  it  is  right  for  a  man  to  sit 
still  in  sin  ?  Will  any  one  say  that  a  sinner  on  the  road 
to  hell  ought  to  wait  idly  for  some  power  to  take  him  up 
and  put  him  in  the  Avay  to  heaven  ?  Will  any  one  say 
that  it  is  right  for  a  man  to  continue  quietly  serving  the 
devil,  in  open  rebellion  against  God,  and  that  he  is  to 
make  no  effort,  no  struggle,  no  attempt  to  turn  towards 
Christ  ? 

Let  others  say  these  things,  if  they  will.  I  cannot  say 
them.  I  can  find  no  warrant  for  them  in  Scripture.  I 
will  not  waste  time  in  trying  to  explain  what  cannot  be 
oxplained,  and  unravel  what  cannot  be  unravelled.  I  will 
not  attempt  to  show  metaphysically  in  what  way  an  un- 
converted man  can  look  to  Christ,  or  repent,  or  believe. 
But  this  I  know,  that  it  is  my  plain  duty  to  bid  every 
unbeliever  to  repent  and  believe.  And  this  I  know,  that 
the  man  who  will  not  accept  the  invitation,  will  find  at  last 
that  he  has  ruined  his  own  soul ! 

Trust  Christ,  look  to  Christ,  cry  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  if  you  never  yet  believed,  about  your  soul.  If 
you  have  not  the  right  feelings  yet,  ask  Him  to  give  you 


FAITH. 


401 


right  feelings.  If  you  dare  not  think  that  you  have  trxie 
faith  yet,  ask  Him  to  give  you  faith.  But  in  any  case  do 
not  sit  still.  Do  not  idle  away  your  soul  into  hell  in 
ignorant  unscriptural  sloth.  Do  not  live  on  in  senseless 
inactivity, — waiting  for  you  know  not  what, — expecting 
what  you  cannot  explain, — increasing  your  guilt  every 
day, — offending  God  by  continuing  in  lazy  unbelief, — and 
hourly  digging  a  grave  for  your  own  soul.  Arise  and  call 
upon  Christ !  Awake  and  cry  to  Jesus  about  your  soul ! 
Whatever  difficulties  there  may  be  about  believing,  one 
thing  at  least  is  abundantly  clear, — no  man  ever  perished 
and  went  to  hell  from  the  foot  of  the  cross.  If  you  can 
do  nothing  else,  lie  down  at  the  foot  of  the  cross. 

(3)  I  finish  all  by  a  word  of  exhortation  to  all  believers 
into  whose  hands  this  paper  may  fall.  I  address  them  as 
fellow-pilgrims  and  companions  in  tribulation.  I  exhort 
them,  if  they  love  life,  and  have  found  any  peace  in  be- 
lieving, to  pray  daily  for  an  increase  of  faith.  Let  your 
prayer  be  continually,  "  Lord,  increase  my  faith." 

True  faith  admits  of  many  degi'ees.  The  weakest  faith 
is  enough  to  join  the  soul  to  Christ,  and  to  secure  salvation. 
A  trembling  hand  may  receive  a  healing  medicine.  The 
feeblest  infant  may  be  heir  to  the  richest  possessions. 
The  least  faith  gives  a  sinner  a  title  to  heaven  as  surely 
as  the  strongest.  But  little  faith  can  never  give  so  much 
sensible  comfort  as  strong  faith.  According  to  the  degree 
of  our  faith  will  be  the  degree  of  our  peace,  our  hope,  our 
strength  for  duty,  and  our  patience  in  trial.  Surely  we 
should  pray  continually,  "  Increase  our  faith." 

Would  you  have  more  faith  ?  Do  you  find  believing  so 
pleasant  that  you  would  like  to  believe  more  ?  Then  take 
heed  that  you  are  diligent  in  the  use  of  every  means  of 
grace, — diligent  in  your  private  communion  with  God, — 
diligent  in  your  daily  watchfulness  over  time,  temper,  and 
tongue, — diligent  in  your  private  Bible-reading, — diligent 
in  your  own  private  prayers.    It  is  vain  to  expect  spiritual 

D  2 


402 


OLD  PATHS. 


prosperity,  when  we  are  careless  about  these  things.  Let 
those  who  will,  call  it  over-precise  and  legal  to  be  par- 
ticular about  them.  I  only  reply,  that  there  never  was  an 
eminent  saint  who  neglected  them. 

Would  you  have  more  faith  ?  Then  seek  to  become  more 
acquainted  with  Jesus  Christ.  Study  your  blessed  Saviour 
more  and  more,  and  strive  to  know  more  of  the  length  and 
breadth  and  height  of  His  love.  Study  Him  in  all  His 
offices,  as  the  Priest,  the  Physician,  the  Redeemer,  the 
Advocate,  the  Friend,  the  Teacher,  the  Shepherd  of  His 
believing  people.  Study  Him  as  one  who  not  only  died 
for  you,  but  is  also  living  for  you  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
— as  one  who  not  only  shed  His  blood  for  you,  but  daily 
intercedes  for  you  at  the  right  hand  of  God, — as  one  who 
is  soon  coming  again  for  you,  and  will  stand  once  more  on 
this  earth.  The  miner  who  is  fully  persuaded  that  the 
rope  which  draws  him  up  from  the  pit  will  not  break,  is 
drawn  up  without  anxiety  and  alarm.  The  believer  who 
is  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  fulness  of  Jesus  Christ, 
is  the  believer  who  travels  from  grace  to  glory  with  the 
greatest  comfort  and  peace.  Then  let  your  daily  prayers 
always  contain  these  words,  "  Lord,  increase  my  faith." 


XVI. 


EEPENTANCE. 

"Except  ye  repeyit,  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish." — Luke  xiii.  3. 

The  text  which  heads  this  page,  at  first  sight,  looks  stern 
and  severe :  "  Except  ye  rej^ent,  ye  shall  all  perish." — I 
can  fancy  some  one  saying,  "  Is  this  the  Gospel  ? "  "  Are 
these  the  glad  tidings  ?  Are  these  the  good  news  of  which 
ministers  speak  ?  " — "  This  is  a  hard  saying,  who  can  hear 
it  ? "    (John  vi.  60.) 

But  from  whose  lips  did  these  words  come  ?  They  camej 
from  the  lips  of  One  who  loves  us  with  a  love  that  passeth 
knowledge,  even  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  They 
were  spoken  by  One  who  so  loved  us  that  He  left  heaven 
for  our  sakes, — came  down  to  earth  for  our  sake.s, — lived 
a  poor,  humble  life,  for  three  and  thirty  years  on  earth  for 
our  sakes, — went  to  the  cross  for  us,  went  to  the  grave  for 
us,  and  died  for  our  sins.  The  words  that  come  from  lips 
like  these,  must  surely  be  words  of  love. 

And,  after  all,  what  greater  proof  of  love  can  be  given 
than  to  warn  a  friend  of  coming  danger  ?  The  father 
who  sees  his  son  tottering  toward  the  brink  of  a  precipice, 
and  as  he  sees  him  cries  out  sharply,  "  Stop,  stop ! " — does 
not  that  father  love  his  son? — The  tender  mother  who 
sees  her  infant  on  the  point  of  eating  some  poisonous 
berry,  and  cries  out  sharply,  "  Stop,  stop !  put  it  down  ! " — 
does  not  that  mother  love  that  child  ? — It  is  indifference 


404. 


OLD  PATHS. 


which  lets  people  alone,  and  allows  them  to  go  on  every  one 
in  his  own  way.  It  is  love,  tender  love,  which  warns,  and 
raises  the  cry  of  alarm.  The  cry  of  "Fire:  fire!"  at 
midnight,  may  sometimes  startle  a  man  out  of  his  sleep, 
rudely,  harshly,  unpleasantly.  But  who  would  complain, 
if  that  cry  was  the  means  of  saving  his  life  ?  The  words^ 
"  Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  perish,"  may  seem  at  first 
sight  stern  and  severe.  But  they  are  words  of  love,  and 
may  be  the  means  of  delivering  precious  souls  from  hell. 

There  are  three  things  to  which  I  ask  attention  in 
considering  this  text  of  Scripture. 

I.  First  of  aU,  I  will  speak  of  the  nature  of  re'pentance : 
— WJiat  is  it? 

II.  Secondly,  I  will  speak  of  the  necessity  of  repent- 
ance : — Why  is  repentance  needful  ? 

III.  Thirdly,  I  will  speak  of  the  encouragements  to 
repentance : — Wltat  is  there  to  lead  men  to  repent  I 

I.    First  of  all,  ^chat  is  repentance  ? 

Let  us  see  that  we  set  down  our  feet  firmly  on  this 
point.  The  importance  of  the  inquiry  cannot  be  overrated. 
Kepentance  is  one  of  the  foundation-stones  of  Christianity. 
Sixty  times,  at  least,  we  find  repentance  spoken  of  in  the 
New  Testament.  What  was  the  first  doctrine  our  Lord 
■Jesus  Christ  preached?  We  are  told,  that  He  said, 
"  Repent  ye,  and  believe  the  Gospel."  (Mark  i.  15.) — What 
did  the  Apostles  proclaim  when  the  Lord  sent  them  forth 
the  first  time  ?  They  "  preached  that  men  should  repent.'' 
(IMark  vi.  12.) — What  was  the  charge  which  Jesus  gave 
His  disciples  when  He  left  the  world  ?  That  "  repentance 
and  remission  of  sins  should  be  preached  in  His  name 
among  all  nations."  (Luke  xxiv.  47.) — What  was  the  con- 
cluding appeal  of  the  first  sermons  which  Peter  preached  ? 
"  Repent,  and  be  baptized."  "Repent  ye,  and  be  converted." 


EEPENTANCE. 


405 


(Acts  ii.  38 ;  iii.  19.) — What  was  the  summary  of  doctrme 
which  Paul  gave  to  the  Ephesian  elders,  when  he  parted 
from  them  ?  He  told  them  that  he  had  taught  them 
publicly,  and  from  house  to  house,  "  testifying  both  to  the 
Jews,  and  also  to  the  Greeks,  repentance  toward  God,  and 
faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (Acts  xx.  21.) — What 
was  the  description  which  Paul  gave  of  his  own  ministry, 
when  he  made  his  defence  before  Festus  and  Agrippa  I 
He  told  them  that  he  had  showed  all  men  that  the}'  should 
"  repent,  and  do  works  meet  for  repentance."  (Acts  xxvi. 
20.) — What  was  the  account  given  by  the  believers  at 
Jerusalem  of  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles  ?  When  they 
heard  of  it  they  said,  "  Then  hath  God  also  to  the  Gentiles 
granted  repentance  unto  life."  (Acts  xi.  18.) — What  is 
one  of  the  first  qualifications  which  the  Church  of  Euglaud 
requires  of  all  persons  that  would  come  to  the  Lord's 
table  ?  They  are  to  "  examine  themselves  whether  they 
repent  them  truly  of  their  former  sins."  No  impenitent 
person,  according  to  the  Church  of  England,  ought  ever 
to  come  to  the  Lord's  table. — Surely  we  must  all  agree 
that  these  are  serious  considerations.  They  ought  to  show 
the  importance  of  the  inquiry  I  am  now  making.  A 
mistake  about  repentance  is  a  most  dangerous  mistake. 
An  error  about  repentance  is  an  error  that  lies  at  the  very 
roots  of  our  religion.  What,  then,  is  repentance  ?  When 
can  it  be  said  of  any  man,  that  he  repents  ? 

Repentance  is  a  thorough  change  of  man's  natural  heart 
upon  the  subject  of  sin.  We  are  all  born  in  sin.  We 
naturally  love  sin.  We  take  to  sin,  as  soon  as  we  can  act 
and  think,  as  the  bird  takes  to  flying,  and  the  fish  takes 
to  swimming.  There  never  was  a  child  that  required 
schooling  or  education  in  order  to  learn  deceitfulnes.s, 
sensuality,  passion,  self-will,  gluttony,  pride,  and  foolish- 
ness. These  things  are  not  picked  up  from  bad  companions, 
or  gradually  learned  by  a  long  course  of  tedious  instruction. 
They  spring  up  of  themselves,  even  Avhen  boys  and  girls 


406 


OLD  PATHS. 


are  brought  up  alone.  The  seeds  of  them  are  evidently 
the  natural  product  of  the  heart.  The  aptitude  of  all 
children  to  these  things  is  an  unanswerable  proof  of  the 
corruption  and  fall  of  man.  Now  when  this  heart  of  ours 
is  changed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  when  this  natural  love  of 
sin  is  cast  out,  then  takes  place  that  change  which  the 
Word  of  God  calls  "  repentance."  The  man  in  whom  the 
change  is  wrought  is  said  to  "  repent."  He  may  be  called, 
in  one  word,  a  "penitent"  man. 

But  I  dare  not  leave  the  subject  here.  It  deserves  a 
closer  and  more  searching  investigation.  It  is  not  safe  to 
deal  in  general  statements,  when  doctrines  of  this  kind 
are  handled.  I  will  try  to  take  repentance  to  pieces,  and 
dissect  and  analyze  it  before  your  eyes.  I  will  show  you 
the  parts  and  portions  of  which  repentance  is  made  up. 
I  will  endeavour  to  set  before  you  something  of  the 
experience  of  every  truly  penitent  man. 

(a)  True  repentance  begins  with  knowledge  of  sin. 
The  eyes  of  the  penitent  man  are  opened.  He  sees  with 
dismay  and  confusion  the  length  and  breadth  of  God's  holy 
law,  and  the  extent,  the  enormous  extent,  of  his  own 
transgressions.  He  discovers,  to  his  surprise,  that  in 
thinking  himself  a  "good  sort  of  man,"  and  a  man 
with  a  "good  heart,"  he  has  been  under  a  huge  delusion. 
He  finds  out  that,  in  reality,  he  is  wicked,  and  guilty,  and 
corrupt,  and  bad  in  God's  sight.  His  pride  breaks  down. 
His  high  thoughts  melt  away.  He  sees  that  he  is  neither 
more  nor  less  than  a  great  sinner.  This  is  the  first  step  in 
true  repentance. 

(6)  True  repentance  goes  on  to  work  sorrow  for  sin. 
The  heart  of  a  penitent  man  is  touched  with  deep  remorse 
because  of  his  past  transgressions.  He  is  cut  to  the  heart 
to  think  that  he  should  have  lived  so  madly  and  so 
wickedly.  He  mourns  over  time  wasted,  over  talents  mis- 
spent, over  God  dishonoured,  over  his  own  soul  injured. 
The  remembrance  of  these  things  is  grievous  to  him.  The 


REPENTANCE. 


407 


burden  of  these  things  is  sometimes  almost  intolerable. 
When  a  man  so  sorrows,  you  have  the  second  step  in  true 
repentance. 

(c)  True  repentance  proceeds,  further,  to  produce  in  a 
man  confession  of  sin.  The  tongue  of  a  penitent  man  is 
loosed.  He  feels  he  must  s-peak  to  that  God  against 
whom  he  has  sinned.  Somethmg  within  him  tells  him  he 
must  cry  to  God,  and  pray  to  God,  and  talk  with  God, 
about  the  state  of  his  own  soul.  He  must  pour  out  his 
heart,  and  acknowledge  his  iniquities,  at  the  throne  of 
grace.  They  are  a  heavy  burden  within  him,  and  he  can 
no  longer  keep  silence.  He  can  keep  nothing  back.  He 
will  not  hide  anything.  He  goes  before  God,  pleading 
nothing  for  himself,  and  willing  to  say,  "  I  have  sinned 
against  heaven  and  before  Thee:  my  iniquity  is  great. 
God  be  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner  ! "  When  a  man  goes 
thus  to  God  in  confession,  you  have  the  third  stejJ  in  true 
repentance. 

(d)  True  repentance,  furthermore,  shows  itself  before  the 
world  in  a  thorough  breaJcing,  off  from  sin.  The  life  of 
a  penitent  man  is  altered.  The  course  of  his  daily  con- 
duct is  entirely  changed.  A  new  King  reigns  within  his 
heart.  He  puts  off  the  old  man.  What  God  commands 
he  now  desires  to  practise ;  and  what  God  forbids  he  now 
desires  to  avoid.  He  strives  in  all  ways  to  keep  clear  of 
sin,  to  fight  with  sin,  to  war  with  sin,  to  get  the  victory 
over  sin.  He  ceases  to  do  evil.  He  learns  to  do  well. 
He  breaks  off  sharply  from  bad  ways  and  bad  companions. 
He  labours,  however  feebly,  to  live  a  new  life.  When  a 
man  does  this,  you  have  the  fourth  step  in  true  repentance. 

(e)  True  repentance,  in  the  last  place,  shows  itself  by 
producing  in  the  heart  a  settled  habit  of  deep  hatred  of  all 
sin.  The  mind  of  a  penitent  man  becomes  a  mind  habit- 
ually holy.  He  abhors  that  which  is  evil,  and  cleaves  to 
that  which  is  good.  He  delights  in  the  law  of  God.  He 
comes  short  of  his  own  desires  not  unfrequently.  He^ 


'408 


OLD  PATHS. 


finds  in  himself  an  evil  principle  warring  against  the 
spirit  of  God.  He  finds  himself  cold  when  he  would  be 
hot,  backward  when  he  would  be  forward,  heavy  when  he 
would  be  lively  in  God's  service.  He  is  deeply  conscious 
of  his  own  infirmities.  He  groans  under  a  sense  of  in- 
dwelling corruption.  But  still,  for  all  that,  the  general 
bias  of  his  heart  is  towards  God,  and  away  from  evil.  He 
can  say  with  David,  "  I  count  all  Thy  precepts  concerning 
all  things  to  be  right,  and  I  hate  every  false  way." 
(Psa.  cxix.  128.)  When  a  man  can  say  this,  you  have  the 
fifth,  or  crowning  step,  of  true  repentance. 

But  now,  is  the  picture  of  repentance  complete  ?  Can 
I  leave  the  subject  here,  and  go  on  ?  I  cannot  do  it. 
There  remains  yet  one  thing  behind  which  ought  never  to 
be  fortrotten.  Were  I  not  to  mention  this  one  thinar,  I 
might  make  hearts  sad  that  God  would  not  have  made 
sad,  and  raise  seeming  barriers  between  men's  souls  and 
heaven. 

True  repentance,  such  as  I  have  just  described,  is  never 
alone  in  the  heart  of  -any  man.  It  always  has  a  com- 
panion— a  blessed  companion.  It  is  always  accompanied 
by  lively  faith  in  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 
Wherever  faith  is,  there  is  repentance ;  wherever  re- 
pentance is,  there  is  always  faith.  I  do  not  decide  which 
comes  first, — whether  repentance  comes  before  faith,  or 
faith  before  repentance.  But  I  am  bold  to  say  that 
the  two  graces  are  never  found  separate,  one  from  the 
other.  J ust  as  you  cannot  have  the  sun  without  light,  or 
ice  without  cold,  or  fire  without  heat,  or  water  without 
moisture, — so  long  you  will  never  find  true  faith  Avithout 
true  repentance,  and  you  will  never  find  true  repentance 
without  lively  faith.  The  two  things  will  always  go  side 
by  side. 

And  now,  before  I  go  any  further,  let  us  search  and  try 
our  own  hearts,  and  see  what  we  know  about  true  re- 
pentance.    I  do  not  affirm  that  the  experience  of  all 


REPENTANCE. 


4U9 


penitent  people  tallies  exactly,  precisely,  and  minutely.  1 
do  not  say  that  any  man  ever  knows  sin,  or  mourns  for 
sin,  or  confesses  sin,  or  forsakes  sin,  or  hates  sin,  perfectly, 
thoroughly,  completely,  and  as  he  ought.  But  this  I  do 
say,  that  all  true  Christians  will  recognise  something 
which  they  know  and  have  felt,  in  the  things  which  I 
have  just  been  saying.  Repentance,  such  as  I  have  de- 
scribed, will  be,  in  the  main,  the  experience  of  every  true 
believer.  Search,  then,  and  see  what  you  know  of  it  in 
your  own  soul. 

Beware  that  you  make  no  mistake  about  the  nature  of 
true  repentance.  The  devil  knows  too  well  the  value  of 
that  precious  grace  not  to  dress  up  spurious  imitations  of 
it.  Wherever  there  is  good  coin  there  will  always  be  bad 
money.  Wherever  there  is  a  valuable  grace,  the  devil  will 
put  in  circulation  jounterfeits  and  shams  of  that  grace, 
and  try  to  palm  them  off  on  men's  souls.  Make  sure  that 
you  are  not  deceived. 

(a)  Take  heed  that  your  repentance  be  a  business  of  your 
heart.  It  is  not  a  grave  face,  or  a  sanctimonious  countenance, 
or  around  of  self-imposed  austerities, — it  is  not  this  alone 
which  makes  up  true  repentance  towards  God.  The  real 
grace  is  something  far  deeper  than  a  mere  affair  of  face, 
and  clothes,  and  days,  and  forms.  Ahab  could  put  on  sack- 
cloth when  it  served  his  turn.    But  Ahab  never  repented. 

(b)  Take  heed  that  your  repentance  be  a  repentance 
wherein  you  turn  to  God.  Roman  Catholics  can  run  to 
priests  and  confessionals,  when  they  are  frightened.  Felix 
could  tremble,  when  he  heard  the  Apostle  Paul  preach. 
But  all  this  is  not  true  repentance.  See  that  your  repent- 
ance lead  you  unto  God,  and  make  you  flee  to  Him  as 
your  best  Friend. 

(c)  Take  heed  that  your  repentance  be  a  repentance 
attended  by  a  thorough  forsaJcing  of  sin.  Sentimental 
people  can  cry  when  they  hear  moving  sermons  on 
Sundays,  and  yet  return  to  the  ball,  the  theatre,  and  the, 


410 


OLD  PATHS. 


Opera  in  the  week  after,  Herod  liked  to  hear  John  the 
Baptist  preach,  and  heard  him  gladly,  "  and  did  roany 
things."  But  feelings  in  religion  are  worse  than  worthless, 
unless  they  are  accompanied  by  practice.  Mere  senti- 
mental excitement,  without  thorough  breaking  off  from  sin, 
is  not  the  repentance  which  God  approves.   (Mark  vi.  20.) 

(d)  Take  heed,  above  all  things,  that  your  repentance 
be  closely  bound  up  with  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
See  that  your  convictions  be  convictions  which  never  rest 
except  at  the  foot  of  the  cross  whereon  Jesus  Christ  died. 
Judas  Iscariot  could  say, "  I  have  smned,"  but  Judas  never 
turned  to  Jesus.  Judas  never  looked  by  faith  to  Jesus, 
and  therefore  Judas  died  in  his  sins.  Give  me  that 
conviction  of  sin  which  makes  a  man  flee  to  Christ,  and 
mourn,  because  by  his  sins  he  has  j^ierced  the  Lord  who 
bought  him.  Give  me  that  contrition  of  soul  under  which 
a  man  feels  much  about  Christ,  and  grieves  to  think  of 
the  despite  he  has  done  to  so  gracious  a  Saviour.  Going 
to  Sinai,  hearing  about  the  ten  commandments,  looking 
at  hell,  thinking  about  the  terrors  of  damnation — all  this 
may  make  peojile  afraid,  and  has  its  use.  But  no  repen- 
tance ever  lasts  in  which  a  man  does  not  look  at  Calvary 
more  .than  at  Sinai,  and  see  in  a  bleeding  Jesus  the 
strongest  motive  for  contrition.  Such  repentance  comes 
down  from  heaven.  Such  repentance  is  planted  in  man's 
heart  by  God  the  Holy  Ghost. 

II.  I  pass  on  now  to  the  second  point  which  I  proposed 
to  handle.  I  will  consider  the  necessity  of  repentance. 
Why  is  repentance  needful  ? 

The  text  which  stands  at  the  head  of  this  paper  shows 
clearly  the  necessity  of  repentance. — The  words  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  are  distinct,  express,  and  emphatic : 
"Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish."  All, 
all,  without  exception,  need  reiDentance  toward  God.  It 
is  not  only  necessary  for  thieves,  murderers,  drunkards, 


KEPENTAXCE. 


411 


adulterers,  fornicators,  and  the  inmates  of  prisons  and  of 
jails.  No:  all  born  of  the  seed  of  Adam, — all,  without 
exception,  need  repentance  toward  God.  The  queen  upon 
her  throne  and  the  pauper  in  the  workhouse,  the  rich 
man  in  his  drawing  room,  the  servant  maid  in  the  kitchen, 
the  professor  of  sciences  at  the  University,  the  poor 
ignorant  boy  who  follows  the  plough, — all  by  nature  need 
repentance.  All  are  born  in  sin,  and  all  must  repent  and 
be  converted,  if  they  would  be  saved.  All  must  have 
their  hearts  changed  about  sin.  All  must  repent,  as  well 
as  believe  the  Gospel.  "Except  ye  be  converted,  and 
become  as  little  children,  ye  shall  in  no  wise  enter  the 
kingdom  of  heaven."  "  Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all 
likewise  perish."    (Matt,  xviii.  3  ;  Luke  xiii.  3.) 

But  whence  comes  the  necessity  of  repentance  ?  "Why 
is  such  tremendously  strong  language  used  about  this 
necessity  ?  What  are  the  reasons,  what  the  causes,  why 
repentance  is  so  needful  ? 

(a)  For  one  thing,  without  repentance  there  is  no  forgive- 
ness  of  sins.  In  saying  this,  I  must  guard  myself  against 
misconstruction.  I  ask  you  emphatically  not  to  misunder- 
stand me.  The  tears  of  repentance  wash  away  no  sins.  It 
is  bad  divinity  to  say  that  they  do.  That  is  the  office,  that 
the  work  of  the  blood  of  Christ  alone. — Contrition  makes 
no  atonement  for  transgression.  It  is  wretched  theology 
to  say  that  it  does.  It  can  do  nothing  of  the  kind.  Our 
best  repentance  is  a  poor,  imperfect  thing,  and  needs 
repenting  over -again.  Our  best  contrition  has  defects 
enough  about  it  to  sink  us  into  hell. — "We  are  counted 
righteous  before  God  only  for  the  sake  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  by  faith,  and  not  for  our  own  works  or  deservings : " 
not  for  our  repentance,  holiness,  almsgiving,  sacrament- 
receiving,  or  anything  of  the  kind. — All  this  is  perfectly 
true.  But  still  it  is  no  less  true  that  justified  people  are 
always  penitent  people,  and  that  a  forgiven  sinner  will 
always  be  a  man  who  mourns  over,  and  loathes  his  sins. 


412 


OLD  PATHS. 


God  in  Christ  is  willing  to  receive  rebellious  man,  and 
grant  him  peace,  if  he  only  come  to  Him  in  Christ's  name, 
however  wicked  he  may  have  been.  But  God  requires,  and 
requires  justly,  that  the  rebel  shall  throw  down  his  arms. 
The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  ready  to  pity,  pardon,  relieve, 
cleanse,  Avash,  sanctify,  and  fit  for  heaven.  But  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  desires  to  see  a  man  hate  the  sins  that  he 
wishes  to  be  forgiven.  Let  some  men  call  this  "  legality  " 
if  they  will.  Let  some  call  it  "  bondage  "  if  they  please. 
I  take  my  stand  on  Scripture.  The  testimony  of  God's 
Word  is  plain  and  unmistakable.  Justified  people  are 
always  penitent  people.  Without  repentance  there  is  no 
forgiveness  of  sins. 

(b)  For  another  thing,  without  repentance  there  is  no 
liap'piness  in  the  life  that  now  is.  There  may  be  high 
spirits,  excitement,  laughter  and  merriment,  so  long  as 
health  is  good,  and  money  is  in  the  pocket.  But  these 
things  are  not  solid  happiness.  There  is  a  conscience  in 
all  men,  and  that  conscience  must  be  satisfied.  So  long 
as  conscience  feels  that  sin  has  not  been  repented  of  and 
forsaken,  so  long  it  will  not  be  quiet,  and  will  not  let  a 
man  feel  comfortable  within.  We  all  of  us  have  an 
inner  man,  imknown  to  the  world, — an  inner  man,  with 
which  our  companions  and  friends  have  often  no  ac- 
quaintance. That  inner  man  has  a  burden  upon  it,  so 
long  as  sin  is  not  repented  of ;  and  until  that  burden  is 
taken  off,  that  inner  man  has  no  real  comfort.  Can  you 
and  I  be  comfortable,  when  we  are  not  in  a,  right  position  ? 
It  is  impossible.  And  what  is  a  man's  true  position  ?  He 
is  never  in  his  right  position  till  he  has  turned  his  back 
upon  sin,  and  turned  his  face  towards  God. — A  man's 
house  is  never  comfortable  till  all  things  are  in  order. 
And  when  is  the  house  of  the  inward  man  in  order? 
Never,  till  God  is  king,  and  the  world  put  down  in  the 
second  place ;  never,  till  God  is  upon  the  throne,  and 
sin  cast  down  and  put  out  of  doors.    You  might  as  well 


EEPENTAKCE. 


413 


expect  the  solar  system  to  go  on  well  without  the  sun,  as 
expect  that  heart  of  yours  to  be  comfortable  when  God  is 
not  in  His  place.  The  great  account  with  God  must  be 
settled.  The  King  must  be  upon  His  throne.  Then, 
and  not  till  then,  there  will  be  peace  within.  Without 
repentance  there  can  be  no  true  happiness.  We  must 
repent  if  we  want  to  be  happy. 

For  another  thing,  without  repentance  there  can  be  oio 
me.etness  for  heaven  in  the  ivorld  that  is  yet  to  come. 
Heaven  is  a  prepared  place,  and  they  who  go  to  heaven 
must  be  a  prepared  people.  Our  hearts  must  be  in  tune 
for  the  employments  of  heaven,  or  else  heaven  itself 
would  be  a  miserable  abode.  Our  minds  must  be  in 
harmony  with  those  of  the  inhabitants  of  heaven,  or  else 
the  society  of  heaven  would  soon  be  intolerable  to  us. 
Gladly  would  I  help  every  one  to  heaven  into  whose  hands 
this  paper  may  fall.  But  I  never  would  have  you  ignorant 
that  if  you  went  there  with  an  impenitent  heart,  heaven 
would  be  no  heaven  to  your  soul.  What  could  you 
possibly  do  in  heaven,  if  you  got  there  with  a  heart 
loving  sin  ?  To  which  of  all  the  saints  would  you  speak  ? 
By  whose  side  would  you  sit  down  ?  Surely  the  angels 
of  God  would  make  no  sweet  music  to  the  heart  of  him 
who  cannot  bear  saints  upon  earth,  and  never  praised 
the  Lamb  for  redeeming  love !  Surely  the  company  of 
patriarchs,  and  apostles,  and  prophets,  would  be  no  joy  to 
that  man  who  will  not  read  his  Bible  now,  and  does  not 
care  to  know  what  apostles  and  prophets  wrote.  Oh,  no  ! 
no !  there  can  be  no  happiness  in  heaven,  if  we  get  there 
Avith  an  impenitent  heart.  The  fish  is  not  happy  when 
it  is  out  of  water.  The  bird  is  not  happy  when  it  is 
confined  in  a  cage.  And  why  ?  They  are  all  out  of  their 
proper  element  and  natural  position.  And  man,  uncon- 
verted man,  impenitent  man,  would  not  be  happy  if  he 
got  to  heaven  without  a  heart  changed  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
He  would  be  a  creature  out  of  his  proper  element.  He 


414 


OLD  PATHS. 


would  have  no  faculties  to  enable  him  to  enjoy  his  holy 
abode.  AVithout  a  penitent  heart  there  is  no  "meetness 
for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  licrlit."  We  must 
repent,  if  we  want  to  go  to  heaven.    (Coloss.  i.  12.) 

I  beseech  you  by  the  mercies  of  God,  to  lay  to  heart 
the  things  which  I  have  just  been  saying,  and  to  ponder 
them  well.  You  live  in  a  world  of  cheating,  imposition, 
and  deception.  Let  no  man  deceive  you  about  the  necessity 
of  repentance.  Oh,  that  professing  Christians  Avould  see, 
and  know,  and  feel,  more  than  they  do,  the  necessity, 
the  absolute  necessity,  of  true  repentance  towards  God  ! 
There  are  many  things  which  are  not  needful.  Riches  are 
not  needful.  Health  is  not  needful.  Fine  clothes  are  not 
needful.  Noble  friends  are  not  needful.  The  favour  of 
the  world  is  not  needful.  Gifts  and  learning  are  not 
needful.  Millions  have  reached  heaven  without  these 
things.  Thousands  are  reaching  heaven  every  year  with- 
out them.  But  no  one  ever  reached  heaven  without 
"  reiDentance  toward  God,  and  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ." 

Let  no  man  ever  persuade  you  that  any  i-eligion  deserves 
to  be  called  the  Gospel,  in  Avhich  repentance  toward  God 
has  not  a  most  prominent  place.  A  Gospel,  indeed ! 
That  is  no  Gospel  in  which  rej^entance  is  not  a  principal 
thing. — A  Gospel !  It  is  the  Gospel  of  man,  but  not  of 
God. — A  Gospel!  It  comes  from  earth,  but  not  from 
heaven.  — A  Gospel !  It  is  not  the  Gospel  at  all ;  it  is 
rank  antinomianism,  and  nothing  else.  So  long  as  you 
hug  your  sins,  and  cleave  to  your  sins,  and  will  have  your 
sins,  so  long  you  may  talk  as  you  please  about  the  Gospel, 
but  your  sins  are  not  forgiven.  You  may  call  that  legal, 
if  you  like.  You  may  say,  if  you  please,  you  "  hope  it 
will  be  all  right  at  the  last ; — God  is  merciful ; — God  is 
love  ; — Christ  has  died ; — I  hope  I  shall  go  to  heaven  after 
all."  No !  I  tell  you,  it  is  not  all  right.  It  will  never  be 
all  right,  at  that  rate.    You  are  trampling  under  foot  the 


REPENTAXCE. 


415; 


blood  of  atonement.  You  have  as  yet  no  part  or  lot  iii 
Christ.  So  long  as  you  do  not  rejDent  of  sin,  the  Gospel  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  no  Gospel  to  your  soul.  Christ 
is  a  Saviour  from  sin,  not  a  Saviour  for  man  in  sin.  If 
a  man  will  have  his  sins,  the  day  will  come  when  that 
merciful  Saviour  will  say  to  him,  "  Depart  from  Me,  thou 
worker  of  iniquity '  depart  into  everlasting  fire,  jirepared 
for  the  devil  and  his  angels."    (Matt.  xxv.  41.) 

Let  no  man  ever  delude  you  into  supj)osing  that  you 
can  be  happy  in  this  world  without  repentance.  Oh,  no ! 
You  may  laugh  and  dance,  and  go  upon  Sundays  in  ex- 
cursion-trains, and  crack  good  jokes,  and  sing  good  songs, 
and  say,  "  Cheer,  boys,  cheer  ! "  and  "  There's  a  good  time 
coming ; " — but  all  this  is  no  proof  that  you  are  happy. 
So  long  as  you  do  not  quarrel  with  sin,  you  will  never  be 
a  truly  happy  man.  Thousands  go  on  for  a  time  in  this 
way,  and  seem  merry  before  the  eyes  of  men,  and  yet  in 
their  hearts  carry  about  a  lurking  sorrow.  When  they 
are  alone  they  arc  wretched.  When  they  are  not  in  jovial 
company  they  are  low.  Conscience  makes  cowards  of 
them.  They  do  not  like  being  by  themselves.  They  hate 
quiet  thinking.  They  must  constantly  have  some  new 
excitement.  Every  year  they  must  have  more.  Just  as 
an  opium-eater  needs  a  larger  dose  every  year  he  goes  on 
eating  opium,  so  does  the  man  who  seeks  happiness  in 
anything  except  in  God  need  greater  excitement  every 
year  that  he  lives,  and  after  all  is  never  hajipy. 

Yes !  and  worse  than  all,  the  longer  you  go  on  without 
repentance,  the  more  unhappy  will  that  heart  of  your's  be. 
When  old  age  creeps  over  you,  and  grey  hairs  appear  upon 
your  head, — when  you  are  unable  to  go  where  you  once 
went,  and  take  pleasure  where  you  once  took  pleasure, — 
your  wretchedness  and  misery  will  break  in  upon  you  like 
an  armed  man.  The  more  impenitent  a  man  is,  the  more 
miserable  he  becomes.  Have  you  ever  heard  of  the  great 
clock  of  St.  Paul's  cathedral,  in  London  ?  At  midday,  in  the 


416 


OLD  PATHS. 


roar  of  business,  when  carriages,  and  carts,  and  waggons, 
and  omnibuses,  go  rolling  through  the  streets,  how  many 
never  hear  that  gi-eat  clock  strike,  unless  they  live  very  near 
it.  But  when  the  work  of  the  day  is  over,  and  the  roar  of 
business  has  passed  away, — when  men  are  gone  to  sleep, 
and  silence  reigns  in  London, — then  at  twelve,  at  one,  at 
two,  at  three,  at  four,  the  sound  of  that  clock  may  be 
heard  for  miles  round.  Twelve  ! — One  ! — Two  ! — Three ! 
— Four ! — How  that  clock  is  heard  by  many  a  sleepless 
man !  That  clock  is  just  like  the  conscience  of  the 
impenitent  man.  While  he  has  health  and  strength,  and 
soes  on  in  the  whirl  of  business,  he  will  not  hear  con- 
science.  He  drowns  and  silences  its  voice  by  plunging  into 
the  world.  He  will  not  allow  the  inner  man  to  speak  to 
him.  But  the  day  will  come  when  conscience  wiU  be 
heard,  whether  he  likes  it  or  not.  The  day  will  come 
when  its  voice  will  sound  in  his  ears,  and  pierce  him  like 
a  sword.  The  time  will  come  when  he  must  retire  from 
the  world,  and  lie  down  on  the  sick  bed,  and  look  death 
in  the  face.  And  then  the  clock  of  conscience,  that 
solemn  clock,  will  sound  in  his  heart,  and  if  he  has  not 
repented,  will  bring  wretchedness  and  misery  to  his  soul. 
Oh,  no !  write  it  down  in  the  tablets  of  your  heart, — 
without  repentance  no  peace  ! 

Above  all,  let  no  man  make  you  dream  that  there  is  a 
possibility  of  reaching  heaven  without  repentance  toward 
God.  We  all  want  to  go  to  heaven.  A  man  would  be 
justly  set  down  as  a  madman,  if  he  said  that  he  wanted 
to  go  to  hell.  But  never  let  it  be  forgotten,  that  none  go 
to  heaven  except  those  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  has  pre- 
pared for  it.  I  make  my  solemn  protest  against  those 
modem  delusions,  "  that  all  men  shall  go  to  heaven  at  last, 
— that  it  matters  not  how  you  live, — that  whether  you 
are  holy  or  unholy  it  does  not  signify, — that  whether  you 
are  godless  or  God-fearing,  it  is  aU  the  same  thing, — that 
all  at  length  will  get  to  heaven."    I  cannot  find  such 


REPENTANCE. 


417 


teaching  in  the  Bible.  I  find  the  Bible  contradicting  it 
flatly.  However  speciously  this  new  idea  may  be  pro- 
pounded, and  however  plausibly  it  may  be  defended,  it 
cannot  stand  the  test  of  the  Word  of  God.  No  !  let  God 
be  true,  and  every  man  a  liar.  Heaven  is  no  such  place 
as  some  seem  to  fancy.  The  inhabitants  of  heaven  are  no 
such  mixed  multitude  as  many  try  to  believe.  They  are 
all  of  one  heart,  and  one  mind.  Heaven  is  the  place  to 
which  God's  people  shall  go.  But  for  those  who  are 
impenitent  and  unbelieving,  and  will  not  come  to  Christ, 
for  such  the  Bible  says,  plainly  and  unmistakably,  there 
remains  nothing  but  hell. 

It  is  a  solemn  thought  that  an  impenitent  man  is  unfit 
for  heaven.  He  could  not  be  happy  in  heaven,  if  he  got 
there.  I  remember  hearing  of  a  clergyman  who  many 
years  ago  was  travelling  by  coach.  He  sat  by  the  coach- 
man's side  upon  the  box.  The  coachman  was  one  of  those 
unhapi^y  men  who  fancy  nothing  is  to  be  done  without 
swearing.  He  was  cursing,  sweaiing,  blaspheming,  taking 
God's  name  in  vain,  for  many  a  long  mile  together.  Ou 
he  drove,  now  flying  into  a  passion,  now  beating  his  horses, 
now  cursing  and  swearing  again.  Such  were  the  coach- 
man's ways.  At  last  the  clergyman  said  to  him  quietly, 
"Coachman,  I  am  exceedingly  afraid  about  you." — "Sir," 
said  the  coachman,  " what  should  you  be  afraid  of?  All 
is  going  on  right,  we  are  not  likely  to  be  upset." — "  Coach- 
man," said  the  clergyman  again,  "  I  am  exceedingly  afraid 
about  you;  because  I  cannot  think  what  you  would  do  in 
heaven,  if  you  got  there.  There  will  be  no  cursing  in 
lieaven ;  there  will  be  no  swearing  in  heaven ;  there  will 
be  no  passion  in  heaven ;  there  will  be  no  horses  to  beat  in 
lieaven."  "Coachman,"  said  the  minister  once  more,  "I  can- 
not think  what  you  would  do  in  heaven." — "  Oh,"  said  the 
coachman,"  that  is  your  opinion :"  and  no  more  was  said. — 
Years  passed  away.  A  day  came  when  a  person  told  this  same 
clergyman  that  a  sick  man  desired  to  see  him.    He  was  a 

e2 


418 


OLD  PATHS. 


stranger.  He  had  come  into  the  parish,  he  said,  because  he 
wanted  to  die  there.  The  clergj'man  went  to  see  him.  He 
entered  a  room  and  found  a  dying  man,  w^hose  face  he  did  not 
know.  "  Sir,"  said  the  dying  man,  "  you  do  not  remember 
me  ? "  "  No,"  said  the  clergyman, "  I  do  not."  "  Sir,"  said  the 
man,  "  I  remember  you.  I  am  that  coachman  to  whom, 
many  years  ago,  you  said,  '  Coachman,  I  am  afraid  about 
you,  because  I  do  not  know  what  you  would  do  if  you 
got  to  heaven.'  Sir,  those  words  laid  hold  upon  me.  I 
saw  I  -was  not  fit  to  die.  Those  words  worked,  and  worked, 
and  worked  in  my  heart,  and  I  never  rested  till  I  had 
repented  of  sin,  and  fled  to  Christ,  and  found  peace  in 
Him,  and  became  a  new  man.  And  now,"  said  he,  "  by 
the  grace  of  God  I  trust  I  am  prepared  to  meet  my  Maker, 
and  am  meet  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light." 

Once  more  I  charge  you  to  remember, — without  re- 
pentance toward  God,  there  can  be  no  meetness  for  heaven. 
It  would  give  pain  to  an  impenitent  man  to  place  him 
there.  It  would  be  no  mercy  to  him. — He  would  not  be 
happy.  He  could  not  be  ha^jpy.  There  could  be  no 
enjo}Tnent  in  heaven  to  a  man  who  got  there  without  a 
heart  hating  sin,  and  a  heart  loving  God.  I  expect  to  see 
many  wonders  at  the  last  day.  I  expect  to  see  some  at 
the  right  hand  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whom  I  once 
feared  I  should  see  upon  the  left.  I  expect  to  see  some 
at  the  left  hand  whom  I  supposed  to  be  good  Christians, 
and  expected  to  see  at  the  right.  But  there  is  one  thing 
I  am  sure  I  shall  not  see. — I  shall  not  see  at  the  right 
hand  of  Jesus  Chi'ist  one  single  impenitent  man.  I  shall 
see  Abraham  there,  who  said,  "I  am  dust  and  ashes." — I 
shall  see  Jacob  there,  who  said,  "  I  am  not  worthy  of  the 
least  of  all  Tliy  mercies." — I  shall  see  Job  there,  who  said, 
"  I  am  vile." — I  shall  see  David  there,  who  said,  "  I  was 
.shapen  in  iniquity :  in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me." — 
I  shall  see  Isaiah  there,  who  said,  "  I  am  a  man  of  unclean 
llil^s." — I  shall  see  Paul  there,  who  said,  "  I  am  the  chiet 


EEPENTANCE. 


419 


of  sinners."  (Gen.  xviii.  27 ;  xxxii.  10 ;  Job.  xl.  4 ;  Psalm 
li.  5  ;  Isa.  vi.  5 ;  1  Tim.  i.  15.)  I  shall  see  the  martyr  John 
Bradford  there,  who  often  signed  himself  at  the  end  of  his 
letters,  "  That  wretched  sinner,  that  miserable  sinner,  John 
Bradford:"  that  same  John  Bradford  who  said,  whenever  he 
saw  a  man  going  to  be  hanged, "  There  goes  John  Bradford, 
but  for  the  grace  of  God." — I  shall  see  Archbishop  Usher 
there,  whose  last  words  were,  "  Pardon  my  many  sins, 
especially  my  sins  of  omission." — I  shall  see  Grimshaw 
there,  whose  last  words  were,  "Here  goes  an  unprofitable 
servant." — But  they  will  all  be  of  one  heart,  one  mind,  one 
experience.  They  will  all  have  hated  sin.  They  will  all 
have  mourned  for  sin.  They  will  all  have  confessed  sin. 
They  will  all  have  forsaken  sin.  They  will  all  have 
repented  as  well  as  believed. — repented  toward  God  as 
well  as  believed  in  Jesus  Christ.  They  will  all  say  with 
one  voice,  "  What  hath  God  wrought ! "  The}^  will  all  say, 
"  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  where  I  am,"  as  well  as 
"  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am." 

IIL  I  come  now  to  the  third  and  last  thing  of  which 
I  promised  to  speak.  I  will  consider  encouragement 
there  is  to  repentance.  What  is  there  to  lead  a  man  to 
repent  ? 

I  feel  it  very  important  to  say  something  on  this  point. 
I  know  that  many  difficulties  arise  in  the  way  when  the 
subject  of  repentance  is  brought  before  us.  I  know  how 
slow  man  is  to  give  up  sin.  You  might  as  well  tell  him 
to  cut  off  a  right  hand,  or  pluck  out  a  right  eye,  or  cut  off 
a  right  foot^  as-  tell  him  to  part  with  his  darling  sins. — 
I  know  the  strength  of  old  habits  and  early  ways  of  think- 
ing about  religion.  At  first  they  are  all  like  cobwebs.  At 
last  they  are  iron  chains. — I  know  the  power  of  pride,  and 
that  "  fear  of  man  that  bringeth  a  snare." — I  know  the 
dislike  there  is  in  people  to  being  thought  a  saint,  and 
supposed  to  care  about  religion. — I  know  that  hundreds 


420 


OLD  PATHS. 


and  thousands  would  never  shrink  from  storming  a  Eedan, 
a  Malakhoff,  and  yet  cannot  bear  to  be  laughed  at  and 
thought  ridiculous  because  they  care  for  their  souls. — And 
I  know,  too,  the  malice  of  our  great  enemy,  the  devil. 
Will  he  part  with  his  "  lawful  captives  "  without  a 
conflict  ?  Never.  Will  he  give  up  his  prey  without  a 
fight  ?  Never.  I  once  saw  a  lion,  at  the  Zoological 
Gardens,  being  fed.  I  saw  his  meal  cast  down  before  him. 
I  saw  the  keeper  try  to  take  that  meal  away. — I  remember 
the  lion's  roar,  his  spring,  his  struggle  to  retain  his  food. 
And  I  remember  the  "roaring  lion  that  walketh  about, 
seeking  whom  he  may  devour."  (1  Pet.  v.  8.)  Will  he  give 
up  a  man,  and  let  him  repent,  without  a  struggle  ?  Never, 
never,  never !  Man  wants  many  encouragements  to  make 
him  repent. 

But  there  are  encouragements,  great,  broad,  wide,  full  and 
free.  There  are  things  in  the  Word  of  God  which  ouscht 
to  nerve  every  heart,  and  arouse  every  one  to  repent 
without  delay.  I  desire  to  bring  these  things  before  the 
readers  of  this  volume.  I  would  not  have  one  soul  lay 
down  this  paper  and  say,"  The  thing  cannot  be  done:  it  is 
impossible."  I  should  like  all  to  say,  "  There  is  hope :  there 
is  hope  !  There  is  an  open  door  !  It  is  possible  :  the  thing 
can  be  done  !    By  the  grace  of  God  a  man  may  repent ! " 

(a)  Hear,  for  one  thiug,  what  a  gracious  Saviour  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is.  I  place  Him  first  and  foremost,  as 
the  great  argument  to  encourage  a  man  to  repentance.  I 
say  to  every  doubting  soul,  Look  at  Christ,  think  of 
Christ.  He  is  one  "  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  that 
come  unto  God  by  Him."  He  is  one  anointed  "  a  Prince 
and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  as  well  as  remission  of 
sins."  He  is  one  who  "  came  to  seek  and  to  save  that 
which  was  lost."  He  is  one  who  said,  "  I  came  not  to  call 
the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance."  He  is  one  who 
cries,  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy 
laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."    He  is  one  who  has 


KEPENTANCE. 


421 


pledged  His  royal  word :  "  Him  that  cometh  unto  Me,  I 
will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  And  He  it  is  of  whom'  it  is 
written,  "As  many  as  received  Him,  to  them  gave  He 
power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to-  them-  that 
believe  on  His  name."  I  answer  all  doubts,  and  questions, 
and  difficulties,  and  objections,  and  fears  with  this  simple 
argument.  I  say-  to  every  one  who  wants  encouragement. 
Look  at  Christ,  think  of  Christ.  Consider  Jesus  Christ 
the  Lord ;  and  then  doubt  about  repentance  no  more. 
(Heb.  vii.  25;  Acts  v.  31;  Luke  xix.  10;  Mark  ii.  17  j 
Matt.  xi.  28 ;  John  vi.  37 ;  John  i.  12.) 

(b)  Hear,  for  another  thing,  luhat  glorious  promises  the 
Word  of  God  contains.  It  is  written :  "  Whosoever  con- 
fesseth  and  forsaketh  his  sins  shall  find  mercy."  It  is 
written  again :  "  If  we  confess  our  sins.  He  is  faithful  and' 
just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all 
unrighteousness."  It  is  written  again :  "  Blessed  are  the 
poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  God.  Blessed 
are  they  that  mourn,  for  they  shall  be  comforted.  Blessed 
are  they  that  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness,  for 
they  shall  be  filled."  Surely  these  promises  are  encourage- 
ments. Again  I  say,  doubt  about  repentance  no  more. 
(Prov.  xxviii.  13 ;  1  John  i.  9 ;  Matt.  v.  3,  4,  6.) 

(c)  Hear,  for  another  thing,  xvliat  gracious  declarations 
the  Word  of  God  contains :  "  When  the  wicked  man 
turneth  away  from  his  wickedness  that  he  hath  committed, 
and  doeth  that  which  is  lawful  and  right,  he  shall  save 
his  soul  alive." — "  The  sacrifices  of  God  are  a  broken 
spirit :  a  broken  and  a  contrite  heart,  0  God,  Thou  wilt 
not  despise." — "God  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish, 
but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance." — "As  I  live, 
saith  the  Lord,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the 
wicked  :  turn  ye,  turn  ye,  why  will  ye  die  ? " — "  There  is 
joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner 
that  repenteth." — (Ezek.  xviii.  27;  Psalm  H.  17;  2  Pet. 
iii.  9;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  11;  Luke  xv.  10.)    Surely  these  words 


422 


OLD  PATHS. 


are  encouraging,  if  any  words  can  be !  Again  I  say,  doubt 
about  oxpentance  no  more. 

(d)  Hear,  for  another  thing,  tvhat  marvellous  parables 
our  Lord  Jesus  spoke  upon  this  subject.  "  Two  men 
went  up  into  the  temple  to  pray ;  the  one  a  Pharisee,  and 
the  other  a  publican.  The  Pharisee  stood  and  prayed 
thus  with  himself:  God,  I  thank  Thee  that  I  am  not  as 
other  men  are,  extortioners,  unjust,  adulterers,  or  even  as 
this  publican.  I  fast  twice  in  the  week,  I  give  tithes  of 
all  that  I  possess.  And  the  publican,  standing  afar  off, 
would  not  lift  up  so  much  as  his  eyes  unto  heaven,  but 
smote  upon  his  breast," — as  if  his  heart  was  so  full  of 
sorrow  that  he  could  not  show  it  sufficiently, — "  he  smote 
upon  his  breast,  saying,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner. 
I  tell  you,  this  man  went  down  to  bis  house  justified  rather 
than  the  other."  (Luke  xviii.  10 — 14.)  Hear,  again,  that 
other  marvellous  parable,- — the  parable  of  the  prodigal  son. 
"A  certain  man  had  two  sons:  and  the  younger  of  them 
said  to  his  father.  Father,  give  me  the  portion  of  goods  that 
falleth  to  me.  And  he  divided  unto  them  his  living.  And 
not  many  days  after,  the  younger  son  gathered  all  together, 
and  took  his  journey  into  a  far  country,  and  there  wasted 
his  substance  with  riotous  living.  And  vv^hen  he  had  spent 
all,  there  arose  a  mighty  famine  in  that  land ;  and  he 
began  to  be  in  want.  And  he  went  and  joined  himself  to 
a  citizen  of  that  country  ;  and  he  sent  him  into  his  fields 
to  feed  swine."  And  there,  feeding  swine,  in  his  lowly 
case  "  he  cavie  to  himself,"  and  said,  "  How  many  hired 
servants  of  my  father's  have  bread  enough,  and  to  spare, 
and  I  perish  with  hunger!  I  will  arise,  and  go  to  my 
father,  and  will  say  unto  him.  Father,  I  have  sinned  against 
heaven,  and  before  thee,  and  am  no  more  worthy  to  be 
called  thy  son :  make  me  as  one  of  thy  hired  servants. 
And  he  arose,  and  came  to  his  father.  But  when  he  was 
yet  a  great  way  off," — mark  that, — "a  great  way  off, — his 
father  saw  him,  and  had  compassion,  and  ran,  and  fell  on 


REPENTANCE. 


423 


his  neck,  and  kissed  liim.  And  tlie  son  said  unto  him, 
Father,  I  have  sinned  against  heaven,  and  in  thy  sight, 
and  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son.  But  the 
father  said  to  his  servants,  Bring  forth  the  best  robe, 
and  put  it  on  him ;  and  put  a  ring  on  his  hand,  and  shoes 
on  his  feet:  and  bring  hither  the  fatted  calf,  and  kill  it; 
and  let  us  eat  and  be  merry :  for  this  my  son  was  dead, 
and  is  alive  again ;  he  was  lost,  and  is  found.  And  they 
began  to  be  merry."  (Luke  xv.  11 — 24.)  Surely  these 
are  mighty  encouragements  to  re^Dentance.  Again  I  say, 
doubt  about  repentance  no  more. 

(e)  Hear,  lastly,  ivhat  wonderful  examples  there  are 
in  the  Word  of  God,  of  God's  mercy  and  kindness  to 
penitent  men.  Read  the  story  of  David.  What  sin  can 
be  greater  than  David's  sin  ?  But  when  David  turned  to 
the  Lord,  and  said,  "  I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord,"  the 
answer  came,  "  The  Lord  hath  put  away  thy  sin." — Read 
the  story  of  Manasseh.  What  wickedness  could  have  been 
greater  than  his  ?  He  killed  his  own  children.  He  turned 
his  back  upon  his  father's  God.  He  placed  idols  in  the 
temple.  And  yet,  when  Manasseh  was  in  prison  and 
humbled  himself,  and  prayed  to  the  Lord,  the  Lord  heard 
his  prayer,  and  brought  him  out  of  captivity. — Read  the 
history  of  Peter.  What  apostacy  could  be  greater  than 
his  ?  He  denied  his  Master  three  times  over  with  an 
oath  !  And  yet,  when  Peter  wept,  and  mourned  for  his 
sin,  there  was  mercy  even  for  Peter,  and  penitent  Peter 
was  restored  to  his  Master's  favour. — Read  the  story  of  the 
penitent  thief.  What  case  could  be  more  desperate  than 
his  ?  He  was  a  dying  man  on  the  brink  of  hell.  Yet 
when  he  said  to  Jesus,  "  Lord,  remember  me  when  Thou 
comest  into  Thy  kingdom,"  at  once  the  marvellous  answer 
came,  "  Verily  I  say  unto  thee.  To-day  shalt  thou  "  (even 
thou)  "be  with  Me  in  paradise."  (2  Sam.  xii.  13;  2  Chron. 
xxxiii.  1 — 19;  Mark  xvi.  7;  Luke  xxiii.  39 — 43.) 

What  greater  encouragement  to  repentance  can  be 


424 


OLD  PATHS. 


imagined  or  conceived  ?  Why  are  all  these  cases  recorded 
for  our  learning  ?  They  are  intended  to  lead  men  to 
repentance.  They  are  all  patterns  of  God's  long-suffering 
■ — patterns  of  God's  mercy — patterns  of  God's  willingness 
to  receive  penitent  sinners.  They  are  proofs  of  what  God's 
grace  can  do.  They  are  a  cloud  of  witnesses,  proving  that 
it  is  worth  while  for  man  to  repent — that  there  is  en- 
couragement for  man  to  turn  to  God,  and  that  such  an 
one  as  goeth  on  still  in  his  sins  is  utterly  without  excuse. 
"  The  goodness  of  God  leadeth  him  to  repentance." 
(Rom.  ii.  4.) 

I  remember  hearing  of  a  mother  whose  daughter  ran 
away  from  her,  and  lived  a  life  of  sin.  For  a  long  time 
no  one  could  tell  where  she  was. — Yet  that  daughter  came 
Lack  and  was  reclaimed.  She  became  a  true  penitent. 
She  was  taught  to  mourn  for  sin.  She  turned  to  Christ 
and  believed  in  Him.  Old  tilings  passed  away,  and  all 
things  became  new.  Her  mother  was  asked  one  day  to 
tell  what  she  had  done  to  bring  her  daughter  back. — What 
means  had  she  used  ? — What  steps  had  she  taken  ?  Her 
rejjly  was  a  very  striking  one.  She  said,  "  I  prayed  for 
her  night  and  day."  But  that  was  not  all.  She  went  on 
to  say,  ■''  I  never  went  to  bed  at  night  without  leaving  my 
front  door  unlocked,  and  the  door  on  the  latch.  I  thought 
if  my  daughter  came  back  some  night  when  I  was  in  bed, 
she  should  never  be  able  to  say  that  she  found  the  door 
shut.  She  should  never  be  able  to  say  that  she  came  to 
her  mother's  home,  but  could  not  get  in."  And  so  it 
turned  out.  Her  daughter  came  back  one  night,  and  tried 
the  door,  and  found  the  door  open,  and  at  once  came  in, 
to  go  out  and  sin  no  more.  That  open  door  was  the  saving 
of  her  soul. — That  open  door  is  a  beautiful  illustration  of  the 
heart  of  God  towards  sinners !  "  The  door  of  mercy  is  set 
wide  open.  The  door  is  not  yet  locked.  The  door  is  always 
upon  the  latch.  God's  heart  is  full  of  love.  God's  heart 
is  full  of  compassion.    Whosoever  a  man  may  have  been, 


REPENTANCE. 


425 


and  whatsoever  a  man  may  have  been,  at  midnight,  at 
any  time,  whenever  he  returns  to  God,  he  will  find  God 
willing  to  receive  him,  ready  to  pardon  him,  and  glad  to 
have  him  at  home.  All  things  are  ready.  Whosoever 
will  may  come  in. 

And,  out  of  all  the  millions  who  have  turned  to  God 
and  repented,  who  ever  repented  of  repentance  ?  I  answei 
boldly.  Not  one.  Thousands  every  year  repent  of  foUj 
and  unbelief  Thousands  mourn  over  time  misspent. 
Thousands  regret  their  drunkenness,  and  gambling,  and 
fornication,  and  oaths,  and  idleness ;  and  neglected  oppor- 
tunities. But  no  one  has  ever  risen  up  and  declared  to 
the  world  that  he  repents  of  repenting  and  turning  toward 
God.  The  steps  in  the  narrow  way  of  life  are  all  in  one 
direction.  You  will  never  see  in  the  narrow  way  the  step 
of  one  who  turned  back  because  the  narrow  way  was  not 
good. 

I  remember  reading  of  a  remarkable  event  that  occurred 
in  a  place  of  worship  where  a  Puritan  minister,  Mr. 
Doolittle,  was  preaching,  two  hundred  years  ago.  Just  as 
lie  was  about  to  begin  his  sermon,  he  saw  a  young  man, 
a  stranger,  coming  into  his  church.  He  guessed  by  the 
young  man's  manner  that  he  was  anxious  about  his  soul, 
and  yet  undecided  about  religion.  He  took  a  remarkable 
course  with  him.  He  tried  a  curious  experiment,  but 
God  blessed  it  to  the  young  man's  soul.  Before  Mr. 
Doolittle  gave  out  his  text,  he  turned  to  an  old  Christian 
whom  he  saw  on  one  side  of  his  church.  He  addressed 
him  by  name,  and  said  to  liim,  "Brother,  do  you  repent 
of  having  served  God  ? "  The  old  Christian  stood  up 
manfully  before  the  congregation,  and  said,  "  Sir,  I  have 
served  the  Lord  from  my  youth,  and  He  has  never  done 
me  anything  but  good." — He  turned  to  the  left  hand, 
where  he  saw  another  Christian,  and  addressed  him  in 
the  same  way.  "Brother,"  said  he,  calling  him  by  his 
name,  "Do  you  repent  of  having  served  Christ?"  That 


426 


OLD  PATHS. 


mau  also  stood  up  manfully  before  the  congregation,  and 
said,  "Sir,  I  never  was  truly  happy  till  I  took  up  the 
cross,  and  served  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Then  Mr. 
Doolittle  turned  to  the  young  man,  and  said,  "  Young 
man,  will  you  repent  ?  Young  man,  will  you  take  up  the 
cross  ?  Young  man,  will  you  this  day  begin  to  serve 
Christ?"  Ood  sent  power  with  these  words.  The  young 
man  stood  up  before  the  congregation,  and  said  in  a 
humble  tone,  "  Yes  sir,  I  will."  That  very  day  was 
the  beginning  of  eternal  life  in  the  young  man's  soul. 
We  may  depend  upon  it,  the  two  answers  which  Mr. 
Doolittle  got  that  day  are  the  experience  of  all  true 
Christians.  We  may  be  quite  sure  that  no  man  ever 
repents  of  repentance.  No  man  was  ever  sorry  that  he 
served  the  Lord.  No  man  ever  said  at  the  end  of  his  days, 
"I  have  read  my  Bible  too  much,  I  have  thought  of  God  too 
much,  I  have  prayed  too  much,  I  have  been  too  careful  about 
my  soul."  Oh,  no !  The  people  of  God  would  always 
say,  "  Had  I  my  life  over  again,  I  would  walk  far  more 
closely  with  God  than  ever  I  have  done.  I  am  sorry  that 
I  have  not  served  God  better,  but  I  am  not  sorry  that  I 
have  served  Him.  The  way  of  Christ  may  have  its  cross. 
But  it  is  a  Avay  of  pleasantness,  and  a  path  of  peace." 
Surely  that  fact  alone  speaks  volumes.  It  is  a  fact  that 
clinches  every  argument  which  I  have  already  advanced. 
Surely  it  is  worth  while  for  a  man  to  repent.  There  are 
encouragements.    The  impenitent  man  is  without  excuse. 

And  now,  I  have  brought  before  my  readers  the  three 
points  which  I  proposed  at  the  outset  of  this  paper  to  con- 
sider. I  have  shown  you  the  nature  of  repentance  toward 
God — the  necessity  of  repentance — and  the  encourage- 
ments to  repentance.  It  only  remains  to  conclude  this 
paper  by  a  few  words  of  practical  affectionate  application 
to  the  souls  of  all  who  read  it. 

(1)  My  first  word  shall  be  a  tuord  of  warning.    I  o&er 


EEPENTANCE.  427/ 

an  affectionate  wai'ning  to  every  impenitent  soul  into 
whose  hands  this  volume  may  fall.  I  cannot  for  a 
moment  suppose  that  all  who  read  its  pages  are  truly 
repentant  toward  God,  and  lively  believers  in  Jesus  Christ. 
I  dare  not  think  it. — I  cannot  think  it.  And  my  first 
word  shall  be  a  word  of  warning, — tender,  affectionatei 
warning, — to  all  impenitent  and  unconverted  people  who 
may  happen  to  read  this  paper. 

What  stronger  warning  can  I  give  you  than  that  which 
my  text  contains  ?  What  words  can  I  use  more  solemn 
and  more  heart-searching  than  the  words  of  my  Lord  and 
Master :  "  Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish  "  ? 
Yes !  you  who  are  reading,  and,  as  you  read,  know  you  are 
not  yet  at  peace  with  God, — you  who  are  halting,  lingering, 
undecided,  in  religion, — you  ai^e  the  man  to  whom  the 
words  of  the  text  should  come  with  power :  "  Except  thou 
repentest,  thou,"  even  thou,  "shalt  perish." 

Oh,  think  what  awful  words  are  these !  Who  can 
measure  out  the  full  amount  of  what  they  contain?  "Shall 
perish  ' "  Perish  in  body, — perish  in  soul, — perish  misera- 
bly at  last  in  hell!  I  dare  not  attempt  to  paint  the 
horrors  of  that  thought.  The  worm  that  never  dies,  the 
fire  that  is  not  quenclied,  the  blackness  of  darkness  for 
ever,  the  hopeless  prison,  the  bottomless  pit,  the  lake  that 
burns  with  fire  and  brimstone, — all,  all  are  but  feeble 
emblems  of  the  reality  of  hell.  And  to  tbis  hell  all  im- 
penitent people  are  daily  travelling!  Yes:  from  churches 
and  chapels, — from  rich  men's  drawing  rooms  and  poor 
men's  cottages, — from  the  midst  of  knowledge,  wealth, 
and  respectability,  all  who  will  not  repent  are  certainly 
travelling  towards  hell.  "  Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all 
perish." 

Think  how  great  is  your  danger!  Where  are  your 
sins,  your  many  sins  ?  You  know  you  are  a  sinner.  You 
must  be  aware  of  it.  It  is  vain  to  pretend  you  have 
committed  no  sins.    And  where  are  your  sins,  if  you  have 


428 


OLD  PATHS. 


never  yet  repented,  never  mourned  for  sin,  never  confessed 
sin,  never  fled  to  Christ,  and  never  found  pardon  through 
Christ's  blood  ?  Oh,  take  heed  to  yourself — The  pit  opens 
her  mouth  for  you.  The  devil  is  saying  of  you,  "  He  will 
be  mine."  Take  heed  to  yourself  Remember  the  words 
of  the  text :  "  Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise 
perish."  They  are  not  my  words,  but  Christ's  words.  It 
is  not  my  saying,  but  Christ's  saying.  Christ  says  it — 
Christ,  the  merciful :  Christ,  the  gracious, — "  Except  thou 
repentest,  thou  wilt  certainly  perish." 

Think  again  of  your  guilt. — Yes,  I  say,  deliberately, 
think  of  your  guilt.  It  is  guilt  when  a  man  does  not 
repent.  We  are  responsible  and  accountable  to  God  for 
repentance.  It  is  vain  to  say  we  axe  not.  What  does  St. 
Paul  say  to  the  Athenians :  "  God  commandeth  all  men 
everywhere  to  repent."  (Acts  xvii.  30.)  What  does  our 
Lord  say  of  Chorazin  and  Bethsaida  ?  Why  were  they  so 
guilty  ?  Why  was  their  position  in  hell  to  be  so  intolerable  ? 
Because  they  would  not  repent  and  believe. — It  is  the 
express  testimony  of  the  Son  of  God  that  the  impenitent 
man  who  has  been  called  to  repentance,  and  refused  to 
obey  the  call,  is  more  guilty  than  the  man.  who-  has  never 
been  urged  to  repent. 

Think  again  of  the  folly  of  remaining  an  impenitent 
man !  Yes,  I  say  the  folly.  The  world  yoa  deave  to  is 
melting  beneath  your  feet  already.  What  will  bank-notes 
do  for  you  in  the  life  to  come  ?  What  will  your  gold  be 
worth  to  you  a  hundred  years  hence  ?'  When  your  last 
hour  comes,  what  can  all  the  gold  in  the  globe  do  for  you, 
if  you  die  an  impenitent  man  ?  You  live  for  the  world, 
perhaps,  now.  You  strive  hard  and  furiously  to  be  suc- 
cessful in  business.  You  compass  sea  and  land  to  add  acre 
to  acre,  or  accumulate  stock  in  the  funds.  You  do  all  you 
can  to  get  money,  to  amass  riches,  to  make  yourself  com- 
foi-table,  to  have  pleasure,  to  leave  something  for  wife  and 
children  when  you  die.    But,  oh,  remember !  Remember, 


REPENTAXCE. 


429 


if  you  have  not  got  the  grace  of  God  and  true  repentance, 
you  are  a  poor  man,  a  pauper  in  the  sight  of  God. 

I  shall  never  forget  the  effect  produced  upon  my  own 
mind  when  I  read  some  years  ago  of  that  fearful  shipwreck, 
the  loss  of  the  Central  America,  a  great  steamer  which 
was  lost  on  the  voyage  from  Havannah  to  New  York, 
That  steamer  was  bringing  home  from  California  three  or 
four  hvmdred  gold-diggers.  They  had  all  got  their  gold, 
and  were  coming  home,  proposing  to  spend  their  latter 
days  in  ease  in  their  own  country.  But  man  proposes  and 
God  disposes. 

About  four-and-twenty  hours  after  the  Central  America 
left  Havannah,  a  mighty  storm  arose.  Three  or  four  heavy 
seas  in  succession  struck  the  ship,  and  seriously  damaged 
her.  The  engines  became  disabled  and  useless,  and  she 
fell  off  into  the  trough  of  the  sea.  She  sprung  a  leak,  and 
in  spite  of  every  effort  the  ship  began  to  fdl.  And  after  a 
while,  when  all  on  board  had  pumped  and  baled,  and  baled 
and  pumped,  until  they  were  exhausted,  it  became  plain 
that  the  Central  America,  with  her  three  or  four  hundred 
passengers  and  all  her  crew,  was  likely  to  go  down  into 
the  deep,  deep  sea,  and  carry  nearly  all  on  board  with  her. 
The  crew  launched  the  only  boats  they  had.  They  placed 
the  women  passengers  in  these  boats,  with  just  a  sufficient 
complement  of  sailors  to  manage  them.  All  honour  be  to 
them  for  their  kind  feeling  to  the  weak  and  defenceless  at 
a  time  like  that !  The  boats  put  off  from  the  vessel ;  but 
there  were  left  behind  two  or  three  hundred  people,  many 
of  them  gold-diggers,  when  the  Central  America  went 
down.  One  who  left  the  ship  in  one  of  the  last  boats  which 
took  the  women,  described  what  he  saw  in  the  cabin  of 
the  steamer  when  all  hope  was  gone,  and  the  great  ship 
was  about  to  go  down.  Men  took  out  their  gold.  One 
said,  holding  his  leather  bag,  containing  his  long-toiled-for 
accumulations,  "  Here :  take  it  who  will !  Take  it  who 
will.    It  is  no  more  use  to  me :  the  ship  is  going  down. 


430 


OLD  PATHS. 


Take  it  who  will."  Others  took  out  their  gold-dust,  and 
scattered  it  broadcast  over  the  cabin.  "  There,"  they  said, 
"  take  it :  take  it  who  will  !  We  are  all  going  down. 
There  is  no  more  chance  for  us.  The  gold  will  do  us  no 
good."  Oh,  what  a  comment  that  is  on  the  truly  valueless 
nature  of  riches  when  a  man  draws  near  to  God  !  "  Riches 
profit  not  in  the  day  of  wrath,  but  righteousness  delivereth 
from  death."  (Prov.  xi.  4.)  Think  of  your  folly, — your 
folly  as  well  as  your  danger,  your  folly  as  well  as  your 
guilt,  if  you  will  cleave  to  your  sins.  Think  of  your  folly, 
if  you  will  not  hear  the  warning  which  I  give  you  this  day. 
In  my  Master's  name,  I  say  to  you  once  more,  "  Except 
thou  repentest,"  thou,  even  thou  who  art  reading  this 
paper,  "  thou  shalt  likewise  perish." 

(2)  My  second  word  of  application  shall  be  an  invita- 
tion to  all  who  feel  their  sins  and  desire  to  repent,  and 
yet  know  not  what  to  do.  I  give  it  broadly  and  fully  to 
all  who  ask  me,  "  What  shall  I  do,  this  very  day,  if  I  am 
to  take  your  advice  ? "  I  answer  that  question  without 
any  hesitation.  I  say  to  you,  in  my  Master's  name. 
Repent,  Repent,  Repent  this  very  day.  Repent  without 
delay. 

I  feel  no  difficulty  in  saying  this.  I  cannot  agree  with 
those  who  say  that  unconverted  people  should  not  be  told 
to  repent  or  pray.  I  find  the  Apostle  Peter  saying  to 
Simon  Magus,  "  Repent  of  this  thy  wickedness."  I  find 
him  saying, "  Pray  God,  if  perhaps  the  thought  of  thy  heart 
may  be  forgiven."  (Acts  viii.  22.)  I  am  content  to  follow 
in  the  Apostle's  wake.  I  say  the  same  to  every  one  who 
is  anxious  about  his  soul.  I  say  Repent,  Repent,  Repent 
without  delay.  The  time  will  soon  come  when  you  must 
be  decided,  if  you  ever  mean  to  be.  Why  not  this  very 
day  ?  Why  not  to-night  ?  Sermon-hearing  cannot  go  on 
for  ever.  Going  to  churches  and  chapels  must  have  an  end. 
Liking  this  minister  and  liking  that  minister,  belonging  to 
this  church  and  belonging  to  that  chapel,  holding  these 


REPENTANCE. 


431 


views  and  holding  those  views,  thinking  this  preacher 
sound  and  that  preacher  unsound,  is  not  enough  to  save  a 
soul.  A  man  must  act  at  last,  as  well  as  think,  if  he  means 
to  go  to  heaven.  A  man  must  break  off  from  his  sins,  and 
flee  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  if  he  does  not  intend  to  be  damned. 
A  man  must  come  out  from  the  Avorld,  and  take  up  the 
cross.  A  man  must  be  decided,  and  repent,  and  believe. 
A  man  must  show  his  colours,  and  be  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ's  side,  if  he  means  to  be  saved.  And  why  not 
begin  all  this  to-day  ?  Oh,  Repent,  Repent,  Repent  with- 
out delay ! 

Do  you  ask  me  again  what  you  ought  to  do  ?  Go,  I 
tell  you,  and  cry  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  this  very  day. 
Go  and  pour  out  your  heart  before  Him.  Go  and  tell 
Him  what  you  are,  and  tell  Him  what  you  desire.  Tell 
Him  you  are  a  sinner :  He  will  not  be  ashamed  of  you. 
Tell  Him  you  want  to  be  saved :  He  will  hear  you.  Tell 
Him  you  are  a  poor  weak  creature  :  He  will  listen  to  you. 
Tell  Him  you  do  not  know  what  to  do  or  how  to  repent : 
He  will  give  you  His  grace.  He  will  pour  out  His  Spirit 
upon  you.  He  will  hear  you.  He  will  grant  your  prayer. 
He  will  save  your  soul.  There  is  enough  in  Clirist,  and 
to  spare,  for  all  the  wants  of  all  the  world, — for  all  the 
wants  of  every  heart  that  is  unconverted,  imsanctified, 
unbelieving,  impenitent,  and  unrenewed.  "  What  is  your 
hope  ? "  said  a  man  to  a  poor  Welsh  boy,  who  could  not 
speak  much  English,  and  was  found  dying  in  an  inn  one 
day. — "  What  is  your  hope  about  your  soul  ?  "  What  was 
his  reply  ?  He  turned  to  the  questioner,  and  said  to  him, 
in  broken  English,  "  Jesus  Christ  is  plenty  for  everybody  ! 
Jesus  Christ  is  plenty  for  everybody  !  "  There  was  a  mine 
of  truth  in  those  words.  And  well  said  another, — a 
navigator  who  died  in  the  Lord  at  Beckenham :  "  Tell 
them  all, — tell  every  man  you  meet, — Christ  is  for  every 
man !  Jesus  Christ  is  for  every  man  ! "  Go  to  that 
Saviour  this  day,  and  tell  Him  the  wants  of  your  soul. 


432 


OLD  PATHS. 


Go  to  Him,  in  the  words  of  that  beautiful  hymn  which 

"Just  as  I  am  :  -without  one  plea, 
But  that  Tliy  blood  was  shed  for  me, 
And  that  Thov.  bidst  me  come  to  Thee, — 
O  Lamb  of  God,  I  come  ! 

"  Just  as  I  am  :  and  waiting  not 
To  rid  my  soul  of  one  dark  blot. 
To  Thee,  whose  blood  can  cleanse  each  spot, — 
0  Lamb  of  God,  I  come  !  " 

Go  to  the  Lord  Jesus  in  that  spirit,  and  He  will 
receive  you.  He  Avill  not  refuse  you.  He  will  not  despi.se 
you.  He  will  grant  you  pardon,  peace,  everlasting  life, 
and  give  you  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Do  you  ask  me  whether  there  is  anything  else  you 
ought  to  do  ?  Yes  !  I  reply.  Go  and  resolve  to  break  ofi 
from  every  known  sin.  Let  those  who  will  call  such 
advice  legal :  I  trust  I  may  never  shrink  from  giving  it.  It 
never  can  be  right  to  sit  still  in  wickedness.  It  never  can 
be  wrong  to  say  with  Isaiah,  "  Cease  to  do  evil."  (Isa.  i.  16.) 
Whatever  be  your  sin,  resolve,  by  God's  help,  that  to-morrow 
morning  you  will  rise  an  altered  man,  and  break  off  from 
that  sin. — Whether  it  be  drinking  or  swearing,  or  Sabbath- 
breaking,  or  passion,  or  lying,  or  cheating,  or  covetousness, — 
whatever  your  sin  and  fault, — determine,  by  God's  grace, 
that  you  will  break  off  sharp  from  it.  Give  it  up  without 
delay,  and  turn  from  it,  by  God's  lielp,  for  the  rest  of  your 
days.  Cast  it  from  you  :  it  is  a  serpent  that  will  bite  you 
to  death.  Throw  it  from  you :  it  is  useless  lumber ;  it 
will  sink  the  ship  down  to  perdition.  Cast  away  your 
besetting  sin — give  it  up — turn  from  it — break  it  off  By 
God's  help  resolve  that  in  that  respect  you  will  sin  no 
more. 

But  I  think  it  just  possible  that  some  reader  of  this 
volume  may  be  ashamed  of  repentance.  I  do  beseech  you 
to  cast  away  such  shame  for  ever.    Never  be  ashamed  of, 


REPENTANCE. 


repentance  toward  God.  Of  sin  you  might  be  ashamed.) 
Of  lying,  swearing,  drunkenness,  gambling,  Sabbath- 
breaking, — of  these  a  man  ought  to  be  ashamed.  But  of 
repentance,  of  prayer,  of  faith  in  Christ,  of  seeking  God, 
of  caring  for  the  soul, — never,  never,  so  long  as  you  live, 
never  be  ashamed  of  such  things  as  these.  I  remember, 
long  ago,  a  thing  that  came  under  my  own  knowledge,, 
which  gave  me  some  idea  what  the  fear  of  man  can  do.i 
I  was  attending  a  dying  man,  who  had  been  a  sergeant  iui 
the  7th  Dragoon  Guards.  He  had  ruined  his  health  by 
drinking  spirits.  He  had  been  a  careless,  thoughtless  man 
about  his  soul.  He  told  me  iipon  his  death-bed,  that 
when  he  first  began  to  pray  he  was  so  ashamed  of  his 
wife  knowing  it,  that  when  he  went  upstairs  to  pray  he] 
would  take  his  shoes  off  and  creep  up  in  his  stockings,: 
that  his  wife  might  not  be  aware  how  he  was  spending] 
his  time.  "Verily,  I  am  afraid  there  are  many  like  him  !i 
Do  not  you  be  one  of  them.  Whatever  you  are  ashamed^ 
of,  never  be  ashamed  of  seeking  God. 

But,  I  think  it  just  possible  that  some  reader  of  this 
volume  is  afraid  to  repent.  You  think  you  are  so  bad' 
and  unworthy  that  Christ  will  not  have  you.  I  do  beseech 
you  once  more,  to  cast  away  such  fear  for  ever.  Never, 
never  be  afraid  to  repent.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  very, 
gracious.  He  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed,  nor  quench 
the  smoking  flax.  Fear  not  to  draw  near  to  Him. — There 
is  a  confessional  ready  for  you.  You  need  none  made  by 
man.  The  throne  of  grace  is  the  true  confessional. — There 
is  a  Confessor  ready  for  you.  You  need  no  ordained  man, 
no  priest,  no  bishop,  no  minister,  to  stand  between  you 
and  God.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  the  true  High  Priest.  The 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  real  Confessor.  None  is  so  wise, 
and  none  so  loving  as  He.  None  but  He  can  give  you 
absolution,  and  send  you  away  with  a  light  heart  and  in 
perfect  peace. — Oh,  take  the  invitation  I  bring  you.  Fear 
nothing.    Christ  is  not  an  "  austere  man."    He  "  despiseth 

F  2 


'434. 


OLD  PATHS. 


not  any."  (Job  xxxvi.  5.)  Arise  this  day,  and  flee  to 
Him.    Go  to  Christ  and  repent  this  night  without  delay. 

(3)  My  last  word  of  application  shall  be  an  exhortation 
to  all  xvlw  have  known  luhat  rei^cntance  is  by  experience. 
I  address  it  to  all  who  have,  by  God's  grace,  felt  their  sins, 
sorrowed  for  their  sins,  confessed  their  sins,  given  up  their 
sins,  and  found  peace  in  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  What 
shall  I  say  to  you  but  this :  Keep  up  your  repentance, — 
Keep  up  yov.r  repentance.  Let  it  be  a  habit  of  mind  you 
watch  over  to  the  last  day  of  your  life.  Let  it  be  a  fire 
you  never  allow  to  burn  low  or  to  become  dull.  Keep  up 
your  repentance,  if  you  love  life. 

I  do  not  want  you  to  make  a  Christ  of  repentance,  or  to 
turn  it  into  a  bondage  for  your  soul.  I  do  not  bid  you  to 
measure  the  degree  of  your  justification  by  your  repent- 
ance, or  to  suppose  that  your  sins  are  not  forgiven  because 
your  repentance  is  imperfect.  Justification  is  one  thing, 
and  repentance  is  another.  You  must  not  confuse  things 
that  differ.  It  is  only  faith  that  justifies.  It  is  only 
faith  that  lays  hold  of  Christ.  But  for  all  that,  keep  a 
jealous  watch  over  your  repentance.  Keep  it  up — keep 
it  up,  and  let  not  the  fire  burn  low.  Whenever  you  find  a 
slackness  coming  over  your  soul, — whenever  you  feel  slow, 
and  dull,  and  heavy,  and  cold,  and  careless  about  little 
sins,  look  to  your  own  heart  then,  and  take  heed  lest  you 
fall.  Say  to  your  soul, "  Oh,  my  soul,  what  art  thou  doing  ? 
Hast  thou  forgotten  David's  fall  ?  Hast  thou  forgotten 
Peter's  backsliding  ?  Hast  thou  forgotten  David's  sub- 
sequent misery  ?  Hast  thou  forgotten  Peter's  after  tears  ? 
Awake,  0  my  soul,  awake  once  more.  Heap  on  fuel,  make 
the  fire  burn  bright.  Return  again  to  thy  God,  let  thy 
repentance  once  more  be  lively. — Let  thy  repentance  be 
repented  over  again." — Alas,  how  few  are  the  hours  in  a 
Christian's  best  days  when  he  does  not  "  make  work  for 
repentance ! " 

Keep  up  your  repentance  till  the  last  day  of  your  life. 


EEPENTANCE. 


435 


There  -will  always  be  sins  to  deplore,  and  infirmities  to 
confess.  Take  them  daily  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
obtain  from  Him  daily  supplies  of  mercy  and  grace.  Make 
confession  daily  to  the  great  High  Priest,  and  receive  from 
Him  daily  absolution.  Feed  daily  on  the  passover  Lamb. 
But  never  forget  that  it  was  to  be  eaten  with  bitter  herbs. 
"  Sir,"  said  a  young  man  to  Philip  Henry,  "  how  long 
should  a  man  go  on  repenting  ?  How  long,  Mr.  Henry,  do 
you  mean  to  go  on  repenting  yourself?"  What  did  old 
Philip  Henry  reply  ?  "  Sir,  I  hope  to  carry  my  repentance 
to  the  very  gates  of  heaven.  Every  day  I  find  I  am  a 
sinner,  and  every  day  I  need  to  repent.  I  mean  to  carry 
my  repentance,  by  God's  help,  up  to  the  very  gates  of 
heaven." 

May  this  be  our  divinity,  your  divinity,  my  divinity; 
your  theology,  my  theology  !  May  repentance  toward  God 
and  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  Jachin  and 
Boaz, — the  two  great  pillars  before  the  temple  of  our 
religion,  the  corner-stones  in  our  system  of  Christianity  ! 
(2  Chron.  iii.  17.)  May  the  two  never  be  di-sjoined  !  May 
we,  while  we  repent,  believe ;  and  while  we  believe, 
repent !  And  may  rej^entance  and  faith,  faith  and  repent- 
ance, be  ever  uppermost,  foremost,  the  chief  and  principal 
articles,  in  the  creed  of  our  souls  1 


XVII. 


CHRIST'S  POWER  TO  SAVE. 

"  lie  is  ahle  also  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God 
hy  Him,  seeing  He  ever  Uveth  to  make  intercession  for  them." 
—Hebrews  vii.  25. 

There  is  one  subject  in  religion  about  which  we  can  never 
know  too  much.  That  subject  is  Jesus  Clirist  the  Lord.' 
This  is  the  mighty  subject  which  the  text  that  heads  this 
page  unfolds, — Jesus  Christ,  and  Jesus  Christ's  intercession. 

I  have  heard  of  a  book  entitled  "  The  Story  without  an 
End."  I  know  no  story  deserving  that  title  so  well  as  the 
everlasting  Gospel :  this  is  indeed  and  in  truth  the  story 
without  an  end.  There  is  an  infinite  "  fulness  "  in  Christ ; 
there  are  in  Him  "unsearchable  riches;"  there  is  in  Him 
a  "  love  which  passeth  knowledge He  is  an  "  unspeakable 
gift."  (Col.i.  19;Eph.iii.  8;iii.  19;2Cor.ix.  1.5.)  There 
is  no  end  to  all  the  riches  which  are  treasured  up  in  Him, — 
in  His  person,  in  His  work,  in  His  offices,  in  His  words,  in 
His  deeds,  in  His  life,  in  His  death,  in  His  resurrection. 
I  take  up  only  one  branch  of  the  great  subject  this  day. 
I  am  going  to  consider  the  intercession  and  priestly  office 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

There  are  three  points  which  I  purpose  to  examine  in 
opening  the  text  which  heads  this  paper. 

I.  You  have  here  a  description  of  all  true  Christians: 
they  are  a  people  who  "  come  to  God  by  Christ " 


CHRIST'S  POWER  TO  SAVE. 


437 


II.  You  have  the  luorJc  that  J esus  Christ  is  ever  carry- 
ing on  on  behalf  of  true  Christians :  He  "  ever  lives  to 
make  intercession  for  them." 

III.  You  have  the  comfortable  conclusion  built  by  St. 
Paul  upon  Christ's  work  of  intercession.  He  says :  "  He 
is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  them  that  come  unto  God 
by  Him,  because  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for 
them." 

I.  You  have,  first,  a  description  of  all  true  Christians. 
It  is  most  simple,  most  beautiful,  and  most  true.  Great 
is  the  contrast  between  the  description  given  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  of  a  Christian,  and  the  description  which  is  given 
by  man !  With  man  it  is  often  enough  to  say  that  such  a 
one  "  is  a  Churchman,"  or  that  such  a  one  "  belongs  to 
this  body  of  Christians,  or  to  that."  It  is  not  so  when  the 
Holy  Ghost  draws  the  picture.  The  Holy  Ghost  describes 
a  Christian  as  a  man  "  who  comes  unto  God  by  Christ." 

True  Christians  come  unto  God.  They  are  not  as  many 
who  turn  their  backs  upon  Him : — who  "  go  into  a  far 
country,"  like  the  prodigal  son  : — "  who  go  out,"  like  Cain, 
"  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  : " — who  are  "  alienated, 
strangers,  and  enemies  in  their  mind  by  wicked  works." 
(Coloss.  i.  21.)  They  are  reconciled  to  God  and  friends  of 
God.  They  are  not  as  many,  who  dislike  everything  that 
belongs  to  God, — His  word.  His  day.  His  ordinances.  His 
people,  His  house.  They  love  all  that  belongs  to  their 
Master.  The  very  footprints  of  His  steps  are  dear  unto 
them.  "His  name  is  as  ointment  poured  forth."  (Cant, 
i.  3.) — They  are  not  as  many,  who  are  content  with  coming 
to  church,  or  with  coming  to  chapel,  or  with  coming  to  the 
Lord's  table.  They  go  further  than  that.  They  "  come 
unto  God,"  and  in  communion  with  God  they  live. 

But,  more  than  this,  true  Christians  come  unto  God  in 
a  certain  peculiar  way.    They  come  unto  God  by  Christ, — 


438  ^ 


OLD  PATHS. 


pleading  no  other  plea,  mentioniug  no  other  name,  trusting 
in  no  other  righteousness,  resting  on  no  other  foundation 
than  this, — that  Jesus  hath  lived,  Jesus  hath  died,  Jesus 
hath  risen  again  for  their  souls. 

"I  the  chief  of  sinners  am. 
But  Jesus  died  for  me." 

iTliis  is  the  way  by  which  the  true  Christian  draws  near 
to  God. 

The  way  of  which  I  liave  been  speaking  is  an  old  way. 
It  is  well  nigh  6,000  years  old.  All  who  have  ever  been 
saved  have  drawn  near  to  God  by  this  way.  From  Abel, 
the  first  saint  that  entered  Paradise,  down  to  the  last 
infant  that  died  this  morning,  they  have  all  come  to  God 
only  by  Jesus  Christ.  "  No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father 
but  by  Christ."    (John  xiv.  6.) 

It  is  a  good  way.  It  is  easy  for  the  worldly-wise  to  sneer 
at  and  ridicule  it.  But  all  the  wit  and  wisdom  of  man  has 
never  devised  a  way  more  perfect,more  suitable  to  our  wants, 
and  that  will  bear  more  thoroughly  all  fair  and  reasonable 
investigation.  It  has  been  to  the  Jew  a  stumbling-block  ; 
it  has  been  to  the  Greek  foolishness.  But  all  who  have 
known  their  hearts,  and  understood  what  God  demands, 
have  found  the  way  made  by  Jesus  Christ  a  good  way,  and 
a  way  which  stands  the  fullest  examination  that  can  be 
made  as  to  its  wisdom.  Therein  they  find  justice  and 
mercy  met  together,  righteousness  and  peace  kissing  one 
another, — God  a  holy  God,  yet  loving,  kind,  and  merciful, 
— man  knowing  himself  a  poor,  weak  sinner,  yet  drawing 
near  to  God  with  boldness,  having  access  with  confidence, 
looking  up  into  His  face  without  fear,  and  seeing  Him  in 
Christ  his  Father  and  his  Friend. 

Not  least  it  is  a  tried  way.  Thousands  and  tens  of 
thousands  have  walked  in  it,  and  not  one  of  all  that 
number  has  ever  missed  heaven.  Apostles,  prophets, 
patriarchs,  martyrs,  early  fathers,  reformers,  puritans,  men 


CHRIST'S  POWER  TO  SAVE. 


439 


of  God  in  every  age,  and  of  every  people  and  tongue, — 
holy  men  of  our  own  day,  men  like  Simeon,  Bickersteth, 
Havelock, — have  all  walked  in  this  way.  They  have  had 
their  battles  to  fight  and  their  enemies  to  contend  with. 
They  have  had  to  carry  the  cross,  and  have  found  lions  in 
their  path.  They  have  had  to  walk  through  the  valley  of 
the  shadow  of  death,  and  to  contend  with  Apollyon.  They 
have  had  to  cross  at  last  the  cold  dark  river;  but  they 
have  walked  safely  through  to  the  other  side,  and  entered 
with  joy  into  the  celestial  city.  And  now  they  are  all 
waiting  for  us  to  walk  in  their  steps,  to  follow  them,  and 
to  share  in  their  glory. 

This  is  the  way  I  want  every  reader  of  this  paper  to 
walk  in.  I  want  you  to  "  come  unto  God  by  Jesus  Christ." 
Let  there  be  no  mistake  as  to  the  object  which  true 
ministers  of  the  Gospel  have  in  view.  We  are  not  set 
apart  merely  to  perform  a  certain  round  of  ordinances, 
— to  read  prayers,  to  baptize  those  that  are  baptized, 
to  bury  those  that  are  buried,  to  marry  those  that  are 
married.  We  are  set  apart  for  the  grand  purpose  of 
proclaiming  the  one  true  living  way,  and  inviting  you  to 
walk  in  it.  ,  We  want  to  j^ersuade  you,  by  God's  blessing, 
to  walk  in  that  way, — the  tried  way,  the  good  way,  the 
old  way, — and  to  know  the  "  peace  which  passeth  all  under- 
standing," which  in  that  way  alone  is  to  be  found. 

II.  I  pass  on  now  to  the  second  point  which  I  purpose 
to  consider.  The  text  which  heads  this  paper  speaks  of 
the  work  ivJdch  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  ever  doing  on 
behalf  of  true  Christians.  I  ask  special  attention  to 
this  pgint.  It  is  one  of  deep  importance  to  our  peace, 
and  to  the  establishment  of  our  souls  in  the  Christian 
faith. 

There  is  one  great  work  which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
has  done  and  finished  completely.  That  Avork  is  the  work 
of  atonement,  sacrifice,  and  substitution.    It  is  the  work 


4-10 


OLD  PATHS. 


which  He  did  when  He  "  suffered  for  sin,  the  just  for  the  un- 
just, that  He  might  bring  us  unto  God."  (1  Pet.  iii.  18.)  He 
saw  us  ruined  by  the  fall,  a  world  of  poor,  lost,  shipwrecked 
sinners.  He  saw  and  He  pitied  us;  and,  in  compliance  with 
the  everlasting  counsels  of  the  Eternal  Trinity,  He  came 
down  to  the  world,  to  suffer  in  our  stead,  and  to  save  us. 
He  did  not  sit  in  heaven  pitying  us  from  a  distance.  He 
did  not  stand  upon  the  shore  and  see  the  wreck,  and 
behold  poor  drowning  sinners  struggling  in  vain  to  get 
to  shore.  He  plunged  into  the  waters  Himself  He  came 
off  to  the  wreck,  and  took  part  with  us  in  our  Avcakness 
and  infirmity,  becoming  a  man  to  save  our  souls.  As 
man,  He  bore  our  sins  and  carried  our  transgressions.  As 
man,  He  endured  all  that  man  can  endure,  and  went 
through  everything  in  man's  experience,  sin  only  excepted. 
As  man  He  lived  ;  as  man  He  went  to  the  cross ;  as  man 
He  died.  As  man  He  shed  His  blood,  in  order  that  He 
might  save  us,  poor  shipwrecked  sinners,  and  establish  a 
communication  between  earth  and  heaven  !  As  man  He 
became  a  curse  for  us,  in  order  that  He  might  bridge  the 
gulf,  and  make  a  way  by  which  you  and  I  might  draw 
near  to  God  with  boldness,  and  have  access  to  God  without 
fear.  In  all  this  work  of  Christ,  remember,  there  was 
infinite  merit,  because  He  Avho  did  it  was  not  only  man 
but  God.  Let  that  never  be  forgotten  !  He  who  wrought 
out  our  redemption  was  perfect  man ;  but  He  never 
ceased  for  a  moment  to  be  perfect  God. 

But  there  is  another  great  work  which  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  is  yet  doing.  That  work  is  the  work  of  intercession. 
— The  first  work  of  atonement  He  did  once  for  all :  nothing 
can  be  added  to  it ;  nothing  can  be  taken  away  from  it.  It 
was  a  finished,  perfect  work,  when  Christ  offered  up  the 
sacrifice  upon  the  cross.  No  other  sacrifice  need  be 
offered,  beside  the  sacrifice  once  made  by  the  Lamb  of 
God,  when  He  shed  His  own  blood  at  Calvary.  But  the 
second  work  He  is  ever  carrying  on  at  the  right  hand  of 


Christ's  power  to  save. 


441 


God,  where  He  makes  intercession  for  His  people. — The 
first  work  He  did  on  earth  when  He  died  upon  the  cross : 
the  second  work  He  carries  on  in  heaven,  at  the  right 
hand  of  God  the  Father. — The  first  work  He  did  for  all' 
mankind,  and  offers  the  benefit  of  it  to  all  the  world :  the 
second  Avork  He  carries  on  and  accomplishes  solely  and, 
entirely  on  behalf  of  His  own  elect,  His  people,  His 
believing  servants,  and  His  children. 

How  does  our  Lord  Jesus  Clirist  carry  on  this  work  ? 
How  shall  we  comprehend  and  gi-asp  what  is  the  meaning 
of  Christ's  intercession  ?  We  must  not  pry  rashly  into 
thinfjs  unseen.  We  must  not  "rush  in  where  anoels  fear 
to  tread."  Yet  some  faint  idea  we  can  obtain  of  the  nature 
of  that  continual  intercession  Avhich  Christ  ever  lives  to 
make  on  behalf  of  His  believing  people. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  doing  for  His  people  the 
work  which  the  Jewish  high-priest  of  old  did  on  behalf 
of  the  Israelites.  He  is  acting  as  the  manager,  the 
representative,  the  mediator  in  all  things  between  His 
people  and  God. — He  is  ever  presenting  on  their  behalf 
His  own  perfect  sacrifice,  and  His  all-suflficient  merit, 
l)efore  God  the  Father,  —  He  is  ever  obtaining  daily 
supplies  of  fresh  mercy  and  of  fresh  grace  fur  His  poor, 
weak  servants,  who  need  daily  mercy  for  daily  sins,  and 
daily  grace  for  daily  necessities. — He  ever  jirays  for  them. 
As  He  prayed  for  Simon  Peter  upon  earth,  so,  in  a  certain 
mysterious  sense,  I  believe  He  prays  for  His  people  iiow. — 
He  presents  their  names  before  God  the  Father.  He 
carries  their  names  upon  His  heart,  the  place  of  love,  and 
upon  His  shoulder,  the  place  of  power, — as  the  high-priest 
carried  the  names  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  from  the  least 
to  the  greatest,  when  he  wore  his  robes  of  office.  lie 
presents  their  prayers  before  God.  They  go  up  before  God 
the  Father  mingled  with  Christ's  all-prevailing  intercession, 
and  so  are  acceptable  in  God's  sight.  He  lives,  in  one  word, 
to  be  the  friend,  the  advocate,  the  priest,  the  all-prevailing 


442 


OLD  PATHS. 


agent,  of  all  who  are  His  members  here  upon  earth.  As 
their  elder  brother  He  acts  for  them ;  and  all  that  their 
souls  require,  He,  in  tlie  court  of  heaven,  is  ever  carrying  on. 

Does  any  reader  of  this  paper  need  a  friend  ?  In  such 
a  world  as  this,  how  many  hearts  there  are  which  ought 
to  respond  to  that  appeal !  How  many  there  are  who 
feel,  "  I  stand  alone."  How  many  have  found  one  idol 
broken  after  another,  one  staff  failing  after  another,  one 
fountain  dried  after  another,  as  they  have  travelled 
through  the  wilderness  of  this  world.  If  there  is  one  who 
wants  a  friend,  let  that  one  behold  at  the  right  hand  of 
Go'd  an  unfailino:  friend,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Let  that 
one  repose  his  aching  head  and  weary  heart  upon  the 
bosom  of  that  unfailing  friend,  Jesus  Christ  the  Lord. 
There  is  one  living  at  God's  right  hand  of  matchless 
tenderness.  There  is  one  who  never  dies.  There  is 
one  who  never  fails,  never  disappoints,  never  forsakes, 
never  changes  His  mind,  never  breaks  off  friendship. 
That  One,  the  Lord  Jesus,  I  commend  to  all  who  need 
a  friend.  No  one  in  a  world  like  this,  a  fallen  world, 
a  world  which  we  find  more  and  more  barren,  it  may  be, 
every  year  we  live, — no  one  ever  need  be  friendless  while 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  lives  to  intercede  at  the  right  hand 
of  God. 

Does  any  reader  of  this  paper  need  a  priest.  There 
can  be  no  true  religion  without  a  priest,  and  no  saving 
Christianity  without  a  confessional.  But  who  is  the  true 
priest  ?  Where  is  the  true  confessional  ?  There  is  only 
one  true  priest, — and  that  is  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  There 
is  only  one  real  confessional, — and  that  is  the  throne  of 
srace  where  the  Lord  Jesus  waits  to  receive  those  who 
come  to  Him  to  unburden  their  hearts  in  His  presence. 
We  can  find  no  better  priest  than  Christ.  We  need  no 
other  Priest.  Why  need  we  turn  to  any  priest  upon  earth, 
while  Jesus  is  sealed,  anointed,  appointed,  ordained,  and 
commissioned  by  God  the  Father,  and  has  an  ear  ever 


CHRIST'S  POWER  TO  SAVE. 


443 


ready  to  hear,  and  a  heart  ever  ready  to  feel  for  tlie  poor 
sinful  sons  of  men  ?  The  priesthood  is  His  lawful  prero- 
gative. He  has  deputed  that  office  to  none.  Woe  be  to 
any  one  upon  earth  who  dares  to  rob  Christ  of  His  prero- 
gative !  Woe  be  to  the  man  who  takes  upon  himself  the 
office  which  Christ  holds  in  His  own  hands,  and  has  never 
transferred  to  any  one  born  of  Adam,  upon  the  face  of 
the  globe  I 

Let  us  never  lose  sight  of  this  mighty  truth  of  the 
Gospel, — the  intercession  and  priestly  office  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  I  believe  that  a  firm  grasp  of 
this  truth  is  one  great  safefjuard  asjainst  the  errors  of  the 
Church  of  Rome.  I  believe  that  losing  sight  of  this  great 
truth  is  one  principal  reason  why  so  many  have  fallen 
away  from  the  faith  in  some  quarters,  have  forsaken  the 
creed  of  their  Protestant  forefathers,  and  have  gone  back 
to  the  darkness  of  Rome.  Once  firmly  established  upon 
this  mighty  truth, — that  we  have  a  Priest,  an  altar,  and  a 
Confessor, — that  we  have  an  unfailing,  never-dying,  ever- 
living  Intercessor,  who  has  deputed  His  office  to  none, — 
and  we  shall  see  that  we  need  turn  aside  nowhere  else. 
We  need  not  hew  for  ourselves  broken  cisterns  that  can 
hold  no  water,  when  we  have  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  a 
fountain  of  living  waters,  ever  flowing  and  free  to  all.  We 
need  not  seek  any  human  priest  upon  earth,  when  we 
liave  a  divine  Priest  living  for  us  in  heaven. 

Let  us  beware  of  regarding  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  only  as 
one  that  is  dead.  Here,  I  believe,  many  greatly  err.  They 
think  much  of  His  atoning  death,  and  it  is  right  that  they 
shoidd  do  so.  But  we  ought  not  to  stop  short  there.  We 
ought  to  remember  that  He  not  only  died  and  went  to  the 
grave,  but  that  He  rose  again,  and  ascended  up  on  high, 
leading  captivity  captive.  We  ought  to  remember  that 
He  is  now  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  to  do  a  work 
as  real,  as  true,  as  important  to  our  souls,  as  the  work  which 
He  did  when  He  shed  His  blood.    Christ  lives,  and  is  not 


OLD  PATHS. 


dead.  He  lives  as  truly  as  any  one  of  ourselves.  Christ 
sees  us,  hears  us,  knows  us,  and  is  acting  as  a  Priest  in 
heaven  on  behalf  of  His  believing  people.  The  thought 
of  His  life  ought  to  have  as  great  and  important  a  place 
in  our  souls,  as  the  thought  of  His  death  upon  the  cross. 

III.  I  will  now  consider,  in  the  third  place,  the 
comfortable  conclusions  that  the  Apostle  builds  upon  the 
everlasting  intercession  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We 
need  much  comfort  and  consolation  in  a  world  like  this. 
It  is  no  easy  matter  for  a  man  to  carry  the  cross  and 
reach  heaven.  There  are  many  enemies  to  be  encountered 
and  overcome.  We  have  often  to  stand  alone.  AVe  have 
at  the  best  times  few  with  us  and  many  against  us.  We^ 
need  cordials  and  "  strong  consolation  "  to  sustain  and  cheer 
us,  and'  to  preserve  us  from  fainting  on  the  way  as  we 
travel  from  Egypt  into  Canaan.  The  Ajiostle  appears 
deeply  consciuus  of  all  this  in  the  words  he  uses.  He 
says,  "  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost," — to  save 
perfectly,  to  save  completely,  to  save  eternally, — "  all  that 
come  unto  God  by  Him,  because  He  ever  liveth  to  make 
intercession  for  them." 

I  might  say  much  on  the  glorious  expression  which  is 
before  us.  But  I  forbear.  I  will  only  point  out  a  few  of 
the  thoughts  which  ought  to  arise  in  our  minds  when  we 
hear  of  Christ's  ability  to  "  save  to  the  uttermost."  I  have 
not  space  to  dwell  on  them  at  length.  I  rather  throw 
them  out  as  suggestions  to  supply  matter  for  the  jDrivate 
meditation  of  every  one  who  reads  this  paper. 

(1)  Let  us  think,  for  one  thing,  that  Christ  is  able  to  save, 
to  the  uttermost,  nottuithstanding  the  old  sins  of  any  be- 
liever. Those  old  sins  shall  never  rise  again,  nor  stand 
up  to  condemn  the  child  of  God.  For  what  says  the 
Scripture :  "  Christ  hath  not  entered  into  the  holy  place 
made  with  hands,  but  into  heaven  itself,  now  to  ai^pear  in 
the  i^resence  of  God  for  us."  (Heb.  ix.  24.)  Christ,  to  use  a 


Christ's  power  to  save. 


445 


legal  phrase,  is  ever  "  putting  in  an  appearance"  in  the  court 
of  heaven  on  behalf  of  them  that  believe  in  Him.  There 
is  not  a  year,  nor  a  month,  nor  a  day,  nor  an  hour,  nor  a 
minute,  but  there  is  One  living  in  the  presence  of  God, 
to  "  make  an  appearance  "  there  on  behalf  of  all  the  saints. 
Christ  is  ever  appearing  before  God  the  Father  on  behalf 
of  the  men  and  women  that  believe  in  Him.  His  blood 
and  His  sacrifice  are  ever  in  God's  sight.  His  work,  His 
death.  His  intercession,  are  always  sounding  in  God  the 
Father's  ears. 

I  remember  reading  a  story  in  ancient  history  which 
may  help  to  illustrate  the  truth  on  which  I  am  now 
dwelling.  It  is  the  story  of  one  who  was  put  upon  trial 
for  a  capital  charge,  at  Athens,  shortly  after  the  great 
battle  of  Marathon.  In  that  famous  battle  the  Athenians 
had  preserved,  by  their  valour,  liberty  for  their  little 
State,  against  the  mighty  hosts  of  the  Persians.  Among 
those  who  had  distinguished  themselves  greatly,  thei 
brother  of  the  prisoner  was  one,  and  had  been  sorely 
wounded  in  the  fight.  The  man  was  put  upon  his  trial. 
The  evidence  against  him  was  strong  and  unanswerable : 
there  seemed  no  chance  of  the  prisoner  escaping  con- 
demnation. Suddenly  there  came  forward  one  who  asked 
to  be  heard  on  his  behalf.  And  who  was  this  ?  It  was 
his  own  brother.  When  he  was  asked  what  evidence  he 
had  to  give,  or  what  reason  he  had  to  show  why  the 
prisoner  at  the  bar  ought  not  to  be  found  gnilty,  he 
simply  lifted  up  his  mutilated  arms — nothing  but  stumps 
— the  hands  completely  cut  off,  the  wounded  stumps  alone 
remaining.  He  was  recognized  as  a  man  who,  at  the 
battle  of  Marathon,  had  done  prodigies  of  valour,  and  in 
the  service  of  the  State  had  lost  his  hands.  By  those 
wounds  he  had  helped  to  win  the  victory  which  was  still 
ringing  in  Athenian  ears.  Those  wounds  were  the  only 
evidence  he  brought  forward.  Those  wounds  were  the 
only  plea  he  advanced  why  his  brother  ought  to  be  let  go 


446 


OLD  PATHS. 


free,  and  sentence  ouglit  not  to  be  jjassed  upon  him.  And 
the  storj'^  states  that  for  the  sake  of  those  wounds — for  the 
sake  of  all  his  brother  had  suffered, — the  prisoner  was 
acquitted.  The  case  was  dismissed  at  once,  and  the 
prisoner  obtained  his  liberty.  In  like  manner  the  wounds 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  are  ever  before  God  the  Father. 
The  nail-prints  in  His  hands  and  feet — the  marks  of  the 
spear  in  His  side — the  thorn  marks  upon  His  forehead 
— the  marks  of  all  that  He  suffered  as  a  Lamb  slain,  are, 
in  a  certain  sense,  ever  before  God  the  Father  in  heaven. 
While  Christ  is  in  heaven  the  believer's  old  sins  will 
never  rise  in  judgment  against  him.  Christ  lives,  and  those 
old  sins  will  not  condemn  him.  We  have  an  ever-livinsc, 
ever-interceding  Priest.    Christ  is  not  dead  but  alive. 

(2)  Let  us  think  again,  that  Christ  is  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost,  notivitlistanding  all  the  present  vjeaJcness  of 
His  believing  people.  How  great  that  weakness  is,  time 
would  fail  me  to  show.  There  are  many  of  God's  children 
who  know  their  hearts'  bitterness,  who  bewail  with  strong 
3rying  and  tears  their  short-comings,  their  unprofitableness, 
and  the  scanty  fi'uit  they  bring  forth.  But  let  us  take 
comfort  in  the  words  of  St.  John:  "If  any  man  sin,  we 
have  an  advocate  with  the  Father" — ever  present  with 
the  Father — "Jesus  Christ  the  righteous:  and  He  is  the 
propitiation  for  our  sins."  (1  John  ii.  1.)  Those  weak- 
nesses may  well  humble  us.  Those  infirmities  may  well 
make  us  walk  softly  before  our  God.  But  while  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  lives  those  infirmities  need  not  make  us 
entirely  despair.  We  have  an  ever-living,  ever-interceding 
Priest.    Christ  is  not  dead  but  alive. 

(3)  Let  us  think  again,  that  Jesus  Christ  is  able  to  save  to 
the  uttermost,  notwithstanding  all  the  trials  that  believers 
have  to  go  through.  Hear  what  the  Apostle  Paul  says  to 
Timothy :  "  I  suffer :  nevertheless  I  am  not  ashamed,  foi 
I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am  persuaded  that  He 
is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  unto  Him 


CHRIST'S  POWER  TO  SAVE. 


447 


against  that  day."  (2  Tim.  i.  12.)  So  long  as  Jesus  Christ 
lives,  the  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  be  assured 
that  no  affliction  shall  be  allowed  to  break  off  the  union 
between  him  and  his  risen  Head.  He  may  sufifer  greatly 
and  be  sorely  tried.  But  while  Christ  lives  he  shall  never 
be  forsaken.  Neither  poverty,  nor  sickness,  nor  bereave- 
ments, nor  separations,  shall  ever  separate  Jesus  and  His 
believing  people.  We  have  an  ever-living,  ever-interceding 
Priest.    Christ  is  not  dead  but  alive. 

(4)  Let  us  think  again,  that  Christ  is  able  to  save  to 
the  uttermost,  notivithstancling  all  the  persecutions  that 
believers  have  to  go  through.  See  what  is  said  of  St. 
Paul,  when  he  met  with  much  opposition  at  Corinth.  We 
are  told  that  the  Lord  stood  by  him  in  the  night,  and  said, 
"  Be  not  afraid,  but  speak  and  hold  not  thy  peace ;  for  I 
am  with  thee,  and  no  man  shall  set  on  thee  to  hurt  thee, 
for  I  have  much  people  in  this  city."  (Acts  xviii.  10.) 
Remember  what  He  said  to  St.  Paul  at  a  former  time, 
before  his  conversion,  when  He  met  him  on  the  way  to 
Damascus  :  "  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  Me  ?  " 
(Acts  ix.  4.)  Every  injury  done  to  the  believer,  is  an 
injury  done  to  the  living  Head  in  heaven.  Every  per- 
secution showered  down  upon  the  head  of  the  poor 
child  of  God  here,  is  known,  felt,  and,  I  may  add  with  all 
reverence,  resented,  by  our  Great  Elder  Brother,  who  is 
ever  living  to  make  intercession  for  us.  Christ  lives,  and 
therefore  believers,  though  persecuted,  shall  not  be  de- 
stroyed. "  In  all  these  things  we  are  more  than  conquerors 
through  Him  that  loved  us."  (Rom.  viii.  37.)  We  have 
an  ever-living,  ever-interceding  Priest.  Christ  is  not  dead 
but  alive. 

(5)  Let  us  think  again,  that  Christ  is  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost,  notivWistanding  all  the  temptations  of  the 
devil.  Remember  that  famous  passage  in  the  Gospel  of 
St.  Luke,  where  our  Lord,  speaking  to  St.  Peter,  says. 
"  Simon,  Simon,  behold  Satan  hath  desired  to  have  you, 


448 


OLD  PATHS. 


that  he  may  sift  you  as  wheat :  but  I  have  prayed  for 
thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not."  (Luke  xxii.  32.)  We  may 
surely  believe  that  intercession  like  that  is  still  carried  on. 
Those  words  were  spoken  as  an  emblem  of  what  the  Lord 
is  ever  doing  on  behalf  of  His  believing  people.  Satan, 
the  prince  of  this  world,  is  ever  "  walking  about  as  a  roar- 
ing lion  seeking  whom  he  may  devour."  (1  Pet.  v.  8.) 
But  Christ  lives ;  and,  blessed  be  God,  while  Christ  lives 
Satan  shall  not  be  able  to  overcome  the  soul  that  believes 
on  Him.  We  have  an  ever-living,  ever-interceding  Priest.' 
Christ  is  not  dead  but  alive. 

(6)  Let  us  think  again,  that  Christ  is  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost,  notwithstanding  the  sting  of  death,  and  all 
that  death  brings  with  it.  Even  David  could  say,  "  Though 
I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  I  will 
fear  no  evil :  for  Thou  art  with  me ;  Thy  rod  and  Thy 
staff  they  comfort  me."  (Ps.  xxiii.  4.)  Yet  David  saw 
through  a  glass  darkly,  compared  to  a  believing  Christian. 
The  hour  may  come  when  friends  can  do  us  no  more  good, 
when  faithful  servants  can  no  longer  minister  to  our  want?, 
when  all  that  love,  and  kindness,  and  affection  can  do  to 
alleviate  pain,  and  make  the  last  journey  as  easy  as  pos- 
sible, can  no  longer  render  any  service  to  us.  But  then 
the  thought  that  Christ  lives — Christ  interceding,  Christ 
carina;  for  us,  Christ  at  the  ri^ht  hand  of  God  for  us — 
ought  to  cheer  us.  The  sting  of  death  will  be  taken  away 
from  the  man  who  leans  iipon  a  dying  and  also  a  living 
Saviour.  Christ  never  dies.  Through  faith  in  that  living 
Saviour  we  shall  have  a  complete  victory.  We  have  an 
ever-living,  ever-interceding  Priest.  Christ  is  not  dead 
but  alive. 

(7)  Let  us  think,  again,  that  Christ  is  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost,  notwithstanding  the  terrors  of  the  judgment 
day.  Mark  how  St.  Paul  rests  upon  this  in  the  eighth 
chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans, — in  that  wonderful 
conclusion  to  that  wonderful  chapter, — a  chapter  unrivalled 


CHRIST'S  POWER  TO  SAVE. 


in  the  Word  of  God  for  privilege,  beginning  with  "  no  con- 
demnation," and  concluding  with  "no  separation!"  Observe 
how  he  dwells  upon  Christ's  intercession  in  connection 
with  the  judgment  of  the  last  day.  After  saying,  "Who 
shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  It  is 
God  that  justifieth,"  he  goes  on:  "Who  is  he  that  con- 
demneth  ?  It  is  Christ  that  died,  yea  rather,  that  is  risen 
again,  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also 
maketh  intercession  for  us."  (Rom.  viii.  33,  34.)  The 
thought  of  Christ's  intercession,  no  less  than  His  dying 
and  rising  again,  was  one  ground  of  the  Apostle  Paul's 
confidence  in  looking  forward  to  the  great  day.  His  strong- 
consolation  was  the  recollection  of  a  living  Christ.  That 
consolation  is  for  us  as  well  as  for  St.  Paul.  We  have  an 
ever-living,  ever-interceding  Priest.  Christ  is  not  dead 
but  alive. 

(8)  Let  us  think,  lastly,  and  above  all,  that  Christ  is  able 
save  to  the  uttermost  throughout  all  eternity.  "  I  am 
He,"  He  says,  "  that  liveth,  and  was  dead ;  and,  behold, 
I  am  alive  for  evermore."  (Rev.  i.  18.)  The  root  of  the 
believer  never  dies,  and  the  branches,  therefore,  shall  never 
die.  Christ  being  "  raised  from  the  dead,  dieth  no  more ; 
death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  Him."  (Rom.  vi.  9.) 
He  lives,  that  all  who  trust  in  Him  may  receive  honour  and 
glory  to  all  eternity ;  and  because  He  lives.  His  believing 
people  shall  never  die.  "  Because  I  live,"  to  use  His  own 
words,  "ye  shall  live  also."  (John  xiv.  19.)  We  have  an 
ever-living,  ever-interceding  Priest.  Christ  is  not  dead 
but  alive. 

Would  you  know  the  secret  of  the  security  for  the  perse- 
verance of  God's  own  people  ?  Would  you  know  why  it  is 
that  Christ's  sheep  shall  never  perish,  and  none  shall  ever 
pluck  them  out  of  His  hand  ?  It  is  a  miraculous  thing. 
When  you  look  at  the  believer's  heart,  listen  to  the 
believer's  prayers,  mark  the  believer's  confessions, — when 
^ou  see  how  a  just  man  may  fall,  sometimes  seven  times, — 

G  2 


450 


OLD  PATHS. 


wlien  you  see,  with  all  this,  the  believer's  perseverance,  it 
is  a  marvel  indeed.  To  carry  a  candle  upon  a  stormy 
night,  when  winds  and  gusty  blasts  are  blowing  from 
every  quarter, — to  carry  it  still  burning,  steadily  burning, 
along  the  street, — this  is  a  wonderful  achievement.  To 
go  over  a  stormy  sea  in  a  little  boat, — to  mount  billow 
after  billow,  and  not  see  the  waves  breaking  over  the  boat, 
and  ovcrturnincT  it, — this  is  well-nioh  a  miracle.  To  see  a 
little  child  tottering  along  the  crowded  street,  a  child  some 
three  or  four  years  old — to  see  it  tottering  on  and  making 
its  way  in  safety,  from  one  end  of  a  long  street  to  the  other, 
— this  is  a  mighty  marvel.  But  after  all,  what  is  this  but 
the  life,  and  history,  and  experience  of  every  true  Christian? 
Though  he  falls,  he  rises  again ;  though  he  is  cast  down, 
he  is  not  destroj'ed.  He  goes  on  from  one  position  to 
another,  like  the  moon  upon  a  stormy  night,  plunging  from 
one  cloud  into  another,  yet  by-and-by  shining  out  again 
and  walkings  in  briohtness.  What  is  the  secret  of  it  all  ? 
It  is  the  continual  intercession  of  a  mighty  Friend  at  the 
right  hand  of  God, — a  Friend  who  never  slumbers  and 
never  sleeps, — a  Friend  who  cares  for  the  believer,  morning, 
noon,  and  night.  The  intercession  of  Christ  is  the  secret 
of  the  pei'severance  of  the  Christian. 

We  shall  do  well  to  study  the  words  of  the  Apostle  in 
the  5th  chapter  of  Romans :  "  Much  more  then,"  he  says, 
■'being  now  justified  by  His  blood,  we  shall  be  saved  from 
wrath  through  Him.  For  if,  when  we  were  enemies,  we 
were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  His  Son,  much 
more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  His  life." 
Mark  the  connection:  "Being  already  justified  by  His 
death,  wc  shall  be  saved," — and  saved  by  what?  "By 
His  life,"  by  His  ever  living  to  make  intercession  for  us. 
(Rom.  V.  10.)  Wise  and  beautiful  is  the  comparison  made 
by  that  master  of  allegory,  John  Bunyan,  in  the  "  Pilgrim's 
Progress."  He  tells  us  how  Christian  was  taken  into  the 
Interpreter's  house,  and  how  the  Interpreter  showed  him 


CHRIST'S  POWER  TO  SAVE. 


451 


many  things  wonderful  and  instructive.  In  one  place  Le 
took  him  into  a  room  where  there  was  a  fire  burning,  and 
shwved  him  one  ever  pouring  Avater  upon  that  fire, 
and  yet  the  water  did  not  quench  the  fire.  However 
much  water  he  poured  on,  still  the  fire  went  on  burning 
steadily !  Then  said  the  Interpreter, "  Knowest  thou  what 
this  means  ? "  When  Christian  did  not  know,  he  took 
him  behind  the  fire,  and  showed  him  one  pouring  on  oil 
out  of  a  vessel.  This  oil  fed  the  fire,  and  made  it  burn 
more  fiercely,  notwithstanding  all  the  water  that  was 
poured  upon  it.  Then  the  Interpreter  told  him  that  this 
was  a  picture  of  Jesus  Christ's  intercession.  That  fire  was 
the  fire  of  grace  in  the  believer's  heart.  He  that  poured 
on  the  water  was  the  enemy  of  souls,  the  devil.  But  He 
that  poured  on  the  oil,  standing  behind  the  fire,  was  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  by  continual  intercession  and  the 
supply  of  His  Spirit,  secretly  and  unseen  by  man,  kept 
alive  His  own  work  in  the  believer's  heart,  and  did  not 
allow  Satan  and  all  his  agents  to  get  a  victory  over  Him. 

Would  you  know  the  secret  of  the  believer's  boldness 
in  frayer  ?  It  is  a  marvel  how  a  man  that  feels  his  sin  so 
deeply  as  the  believer  does,  can  speak  with  the  confidence 
the  believer  frequently  does.  How  one  that  acknowledges 
he  is  "  wretched,  miserable,  poor,  blind,  naked,"  ruined,  un- 
done,— who  often  does  what  he  ought  not  to  do,  and  leaves 
undone  what  he  ought  to  do,  and  finds  no  health  in  him, — ■ 
how  such  a  one  as  this  can  go  before  God  with  confidence, 
pour  out  his  heart  before  Him  freely,  ask  from  Him  what 
he  requires  day  after  day  and  not  feel  afraid, — this  is 
wonderful  indeed.  What  is  the  secret  of  it  ?  It  is  the 
intercession  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  whereby 
the  true  Christian  knows  his  prayers  are  made  acceptable, 
and  received  in  the  court  of  heaven.  What  is  the  be- 
liever's prayer  in  itself  ?  A  poor,  weak  thing,  unfit  to  rise 
above  the  ground.  I  know  nothing  it  is  more  like  than 
a  bank-note  without  the  signature  in  the  cornei'.  What 


452 


OLD  PATHS. 


is  the  value  of  that  bank-note  without  the  signature  ? 
Nothing  at  all.  Once  get  a  few  words,  a  very  few  letters, 
traced  in  ink  upon  the  corner  of  that  bank-note,  and  that 
which  was  a  piece  of  waste  paper  a  few  moments  before, 
becomes  worth,  it  may  be,  many  hundred  pounds,  through 
the  signature  being  attached  to  it.  So  it  is  with  the 
intercession  of  Christ.  He  signs,  endorses,  and  presents 
the  believer's  petitions;  and  through  His  all-prevailing 
intercession  they  are  heard  on  high,  and  bring  down 
blessings  upon  the  Christian's  soul. 

Would  you  know  the  secret  of  daily  comfoH  in  all  the 
toil,  and  business,  and  distractions  we  have  to  go  through  ? 
We  all  know  that  they  who  have  to  do  work  in  any 
secular  calling,  find  the  work  oftentimes  a  sore  burden  to 
their  souls.  Oftentimes  in  the  morning  they  feel,  "  Hovr 
can  I  get  through  this  day  without  a  defiled  conscience,. 
Avithout  being  sorely  troubled  and  tempted  to  forget  my 
God  ?  "  How  shall  a  man  get  through  the  day  with  com- 
fort, fill  his  office  in  the  world,  do  his  duty  in  the  position 
to  which  God  has  called  him  ?  Let  him  lay  hold  upon 
the  intercession  of  Jesus  Christ.  Let  him  grasp  the  great 
thought,  that  Christ  not  merely  died  for  him,  but  rosa 
again,  and  still  lives  for  him. 

It  is  recorded  of  a  Christian  soldier,  who  fell  in  the 
unhappy  Commonwealth  wars,  that  a  common  prayer  of 
his  before  leaving  his  tent  was  something  of  this  kind, — 
"Lord,  I  am  going  this  day  to  do  the  duty  whereunto  I 
am  called.  I  may  sometimes  forget  Thee.  I  cannot  have 
my  thoughts  at  all  times  as  fully  fixed  upon  Thee  as  I 
wish.  But,  Lord,  if  I  this  day  forget  Thee,  do  not  Thou 
forget  me."  This  is  the  kind  of  thought  which  every  believer 
should  lay  hold  upon  who  has  much  to  do  in  tlie  business  of 
this  world.  E-ising  from  his  bed  in  the  morning,  going  from 
his  room  every  morning,  leaving  his  house  every  morning, 
let  him  bear  in  mind,  "  There  is  One  living  in  heaven  who 
intercedes  for  me,  Avhile  I  am  following  my  lawful  calling. 


Christ's  power  to  save. 


453 


Although  I  may  be  absorbed  in  business,  and  obliged  to 
give  up  all  the  powers  of  my  poor  weak  mind  to  it,  still 
there  lives  One  who  never  forgets  me."  He  may  say,  as 
the  old  soldier  did,  "  Lord, — if  I  this  day  forget  Thee,  do 
not  Thou  forget  me." 

Last  of  all,  would  you  know  the  secret  of  comfort  in 
looking  fortuard  to  that  heaven  whereunto  every  believer 
desires  to  go  ?  I  believe  there  are  few  children  of  God 
who  do  not  sometimes  feel  anxious,  troubled,  and  casti 
dowH;  when  they  think  quietly  about  the  eternal  habitation 
towards  which  they  are  travelling.  The  nature  of  it,  the 
manner  of  it,  the  employments  of  it,  their  own  apparent 
unfitness  and  unmeetness  for  it,  will  sometimes  perplex 
their  minds.  These  thoughts  will  sometimes  come  across 
the  believer's  mind,  especially  in  times  of  sickness,  filling 
him  with  heaviness,  and  making  his  heart  sink.  Now  I 
know  no  remedy  against  these  thoughts  to  be  compared 
to  the  recollection  of  the  continual  intercession  of  tho 
Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Christ  is  gone  into  heaven 
to  be  the  "  forerunner  "  of  a  people  who  are  to  follow  after 
Him.  He  is  gone  "  to  prepare  a  place  for  them  ; " — and  the 
place  whereto  He  goes  is  the  place  whereto  His  people  are^ 
to  go  by-and-by.  When  they  go  there  they  will  find  all, 
things  made  ready,  a  place  for  every  one,  and  a  fitting 
and  proper  place,  too,  through  the  intercession  of  theiii 
Lord  and  Saviour.  There  never  will  be  a  time  when  their 
company  will  not  be  liked  in  heaven.  There  never  will  be 
a  time  when  their  old  sins, — the  sins  of  their  youth  and 
their  backslidings,  their  wickedness  before  conversion, 
their  profligacy,  it  may  be,  before  the  grace  of  God  came 
into  their  hearts, — there  never  will  be  a  day  when  all 
these  sins  shall  come  up  against  them,  and  make  them 
feel  abashed  and  ashamed  in  heaven.  Christ  will  be  in 
the  midst.  Christ  will  ever  intercede  for  them.  Where 
Christ  is,  there  His  people  will  be.  Where  He  lives, 
His  perfect  merit,  His  spotless  righteousness.  His  in- 


45-1. 


OLD  PATHS. 


tercession,  will  make  them  perfect  in  the  sight  of  God 
<he  Father.  They  will  stand  in  heaven,  seen  in  Christ, 
clothed  in  Christ,  members  of  Christ,  part  of  Christ,  and 
so  will  possess  a  firm  and  solid  and  eternal  title  to  the 
eternal  joys  which  shall  be  hereafter. 

I  will  now  conclude  this  paper  by  a  few  words  of 
application  to  all  into  whose  hands  it  may  fall.  My  heart's 
desire  and  prayer  to  God  is  that  the  words  I  have  been 
writing  may  yet  bear  fruit  in  some  souls.  In  order  that 
they  may  do  so,  I  offer  a  few  words  of  faithful  and 
affectionate  exhortation. 

(1)  I  would  ofer  counsel,  first,  to  all  who  are  anxious 
and  troubled  respecting  their  soul's  salvation,  and  yet 
know  not  what  to  do.  If  you  ai'e  such  a  person,  I  charge 
3  0U  and  intreat  you,  I  beseech  you  and  invite  you,  to  come 
into  the  way  of  which  I  have  been  speaking  in  this  paper. 
I  beseech  you  to  come  to  God  by  the  old  and  tried  way, — 
the  way  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  Draw  near  to  God, 
pleading  the  name  of  Jesus.  Begin  this  very  day  to  cry 
mightily  unto  God,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  on  behalf  of 
3'our  soul.  Say  not  you  have  anything  to  plead  for  your- 
self You  have  nothing  to  plead.  Your  life,  your  thoughts, 
your  ways,  all  alike  condemn  you.  Say  nothing  about 
yourself  but  this, — that  you  are  a  sinner,  a  great  sinner,  a 
guilty  sinner,  a  condemned  sinner ;  but  because  you  are  a 
sinner,  you  turn  to  God.  Come  to  Him  in  the  name  of 
Jesus,  saying,  you  have  heard  that  through  Jesus  a  sinner 
may  come  near  Him.  Tell  Him  that  you  are  a  sinner,  a 
great  sinner,  and  an  unworthy  one.  But  teU  Him  that 
you  come  in  the  faith  of  His  promises,  in  the  confidence 
of  His  own  Bible  invitation ;  and  in  the  name  of  Jesus, 
and  for  the  sake  of  Jesus,  and  on  account  of  Jesus,  you 
ask  to  be  received,  heard,  pardoned,  forgiven,  and  accepted. 
Tell  Him  that  you  wish  to  have  your  name, — even  that 
name  of  your's  connected  hitherto  with  worldliness,  thought- 


CHRIST'S  POWER  TO  SAVE. 


455 


Icssness,  carelessness,  and  sin, — added  to  the  list  of  God's 
dear  children. 

Will  you  say  that  you  are  afraid  to  come  to  God  ? 
Your  fear  is  needless.  You  shall  not  be  cast  out,  if  yon 
will  but  come  in  the  way  of  faith  in  Christ.  Our  God  is 
not  "  an  austere  man."  Our  Father  in  heaven  is  full  of 
mercy,  love,  and  grace.  I  yield  to  none  in  desire  to  exalt 
the  love,  mercy,  and  tenderness  of  God  the  Father.  I 
will  never  concede,  for  one  moment,  that  what  is  called  an 
evangelical  ministry,  will  not  magnify  the  mercy,  love,  and 
compassion  of  God  the  Father  as  much  as  any  ministry 
on  earth.  "VVe  know  that  God  is  holy.  We  know  He  is 
just.  We  believe  that  He  can  be  angry  with  them  that 
go  on  still  in  sin.  But  we  also  believe  that  to  those  who 
draw  near  to  Him  in  Christ  Jesus,  He  is  most  merciful, 
most  loving,  most  tender,  and  most  compassionate.  We 
tell  you  that  the  cross  of  Jesus  Clirist  was  the  result  and 
consequence  of  that  love.  The  cross  was  not  the  cause 
and  reason  of  God's  mercy,  but  the  result  and  consequence 
of  the  everlasting  love  of  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son, 
and  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  towards  a  poor,  lost,  and 
bankrupt  \yorld.  Draw  near  in  faith,  by  that  living  way, 
Christ  Jesus,  to  the  Father.  Think  not  for  a  moment 
— the  unworthy  thought  shall  never  prove  true — that  so 
drawing  near  to  God  the  Father  by  Christ,  God  the  Father, 
will  not  receive  you.  He  will  receive  you  gladly.  As  the 
father  did  to  the  prodigal  son  when  he  ran  to  meet  him, — 
fell  on  his  neck  and  kissed  him, — so  will  God  the  Father 
do  to  that  soul  that  draws  near  to  Him  in  the  name  of 
Christ. 

(2)  In  the  next  place,  I  ivoidd  cheer  those  readers  who 
have  walked  in  the  way  of  God,  and  yet  are  afraid  of 
falling.  Why  should  you  be  afraid  ?  What  should  make 
you  fear  ?  What  should  make  you  suppose  that  you  shall 
ever  be  allowed  to  fall  away,  while  Jesus  Christ  lives  at 
the  right  hand  of  God  to  make  intercession  for  you  ?  All 


456 


OLD  PATHS. 


the  power  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  pledged  upon  your 
behalf.  He  has  undertaken  to  care  for  all  the  flock  that 
God  the  Father  has  committed  into  His  hand.  He  will 
care  for  it.  He  has  cared  for  it.  He  went  to  the  cross 
for  it.  He  died  for  it.  He  is  ever  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  and  has  not  ceased  to  care  for  it.  Every  member  of 
that  flock — the  weakest,  the  feeblest  sheep  or  lamb, — 
is  equally  dear  to  the  Lord  and  Saviour,  and  none  shall 
pluck  the  least  of  Christ's  sheep  out  of  God's  hand.  Can 
you  stop  the  tides  of  the  sea,  and  make  them  not  rise  at 
your  command  ?  Can  you  make  the  waters  stay  when  the' 
tide  begins  to  fall  ?  Can  you  prevent  the  sun  in  heaven 
going  down  in  the  west,  or  prevent  the  same  sun  from 
rising  to-morrow  morning  in  the  east  ?  You  cannot  do 
it:  these  things  are  impossible.  And  all  the  power  of 
devils,. all  the  power  of  the  world,  and  all  the  enemies  of 
the  Christian,  shall  not  be  able  to  pluck  out  of  the  hand 
of  Jesus  Christ  one  single  soid  who  has  been  brought  by 
the  Spirit's  teaching  to  true  union  with  Christ,  and  for 
whom  Jesus  Christ  intercedes.  The  days  of  Christ's 
weakness  have  passed  away.  He  was  "  crucified  through 
weakness,"  and  was  weak  on  our  account  when  He  went 
to  the  cross.  (2  Cor.  xiii.  4.)  The  days  of  His  weakness 
are  over:  the  days  of  His  power  have  begun.  Pilate 
shall  no  more  condemn  Him :  He  shall  come  to  condemn 
Pilate.  All  power  is  His  in  heaven  and  earth,  and  all  that 
power  is  engaged  on  behalf  of  His  believing  people. 

(3)  Finally,  let  me  gladden  all  believers  who  read  this 
paper,  by  reminding  them  that  Christ  is  yet  to  come  again. 
The  Great  High  Priest  is  yet  to  come  forth  from  the  Holy 
of  Holies,  to  bless  all  the  people  who  have  believed  on 
Him.  One  part  of  His  work  He  did  when  He  died  upon 
the  cross;  another  part  of  His  work  He  is  still  doing, — 
interceding  for  us  at  God's  right  hand.  But  the  third 
part  of  the  High  Priest's  office  remains  yet  to  be  done. 
He  has  yet  to  come  forth  from  the  Holy  of  Holies,  as  the 


CHRIST'S  POWER  TO  SAVE. 


457 


liigli-priest  did  upon  the  day  of  atonement, — to  come  forth 
from  within  the  vail  to  bless  the  people.  That  part  of 
Christ's  work  is  yet  to  come.  He  is  now  gone  into  heaven 
itself, — He  is  within  the  Holy  of  Holies :  He  is  gone 
behind  the  vail.  But  our  Great  High  Priest — a  gTeater 
one  than  Aaron — shall  yet  come  forth  one  day.  He  shall 
come  in  power  and  great  glory.  He  shall  come  as  He  left 
the  world,  when  He  went  up  in  the  clouds  of  heaven.  He 
shall  come  to  gather  from  the  north  and  from  the  south,' 
from  the  east  and  from  the  west,  all  who  have  loved  His 
name  and  confessed  Him  before  men, — all  who  have  heardj 
His  voice  and  followed  Him.  He  shall  gather  them 
together  into  one  happy  company.  There  shall  be  no 
more  weakness,  and  no  more  sorrow, — no  more  parting, 
and  no  more  separation, — no  more  sickness,  and  no  more 
death, — no  more  disputing,  and  no  more  controversy, — no 
more  fighting  with  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  devil, — and,' 
best  of  all,  no  more  sin.  That  day  shall  be  a  happy  day 
indeed,  when  the  High  Priest  comes  forth  to  do  the  third, 
last,  and  completing  part  of  His  work, —  to  bless  His 
believing  people. 

"  He  that  testifieth  these  things  saith.  Surely  I  come 
quickly.  Amen.  Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus."  (Rev.  xxii.  20.) 


XVIII. 


ELECTION. 

"  Knovjing,  hrethren  heloved,  your  election  of  God." — 

1  Thess.  i.  4. 

"  Give  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure." — 

2  Peter  i.  10. 

The  texts  wliicli  head  this  page  contain  a  word  of  peculiai 
interest.  It  is  a  word  which  is  often  in  men's  minds,  and 
on  men's  tongues,  from  one  end  of  Great  Britain  to  the 
other.    That  word  is  "  Election." 

There  are  few  Englishmen  who  do  not  know  something 
of  a  general  election  to  Parliament.  Many  are  the  evils 
'which  come  to  the  surface  at  such  a  time.  Bad  passions 
are  called  out.  Old  quarrels  are  dug  up,  and  new  ones 
are  planted.  Promises  are  made,  like  pie-crust,  only  to  be 
broken.  False  profession,  lying,  drunkenness,  intimidation, 
oppression,  flattery,  abound  on  every  side.  At  no  time 
pei'haps  does  human  nature  make  such  a  poor  exhibition 
of  itself  as  at  a  general  election! 

Yet  it  is  only  fair  to  look  at  all  sides  of  an  election  to 
Parliament.  There  is  nothing  new,  or  peculiarly  English, 
about  its  evils.  In  every  age,  and  in  every  part  of  the 
world,  the  heart  of  man  is  pretty  much  the  same.  There 
have  never  been  wanting  men  ready  to  persuade  others 
that  they  are  not  so  well  governed  as  they  ought  to  be, 
and  that  they  themselves  are  the  fittest  rulers  that  can  be 


ELECTION. 


459: 


Vound.*  A  thousand  years  before  Christ  was  born  the' 
following  picture  was  drawn  by  the  unerring  hand  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  :— 

"  Absalom  rose  up  early,  and  stood  beside  the  way  of  the 
'gate :  and  it  was  so,  that  when  any  man  that  had  a 
controversy  came  to  the  king  for  judgment,  then  Absalom 
called  unto  him,  and  said.  Of  what  city  art  thou  ?  And 
ihe  said,  Thy  servant  is  of  one  of  the  tribes  of  Israel. 

"  And  Absalom  said  unto  him,  See,  thy  matters  are  good 
and  right ;  but  there  is  no  man  deputed  of  the  king  to 
hear  thee. 

"  Absalom  said  moreover.  Oh  that  I  were  made  judge 
in  the  land,  that  every  man  which  hath  any  suit  or  cause 
might  come  unto  me,  and  T  would  do  him  justice  ! 

"  And  it  was  so,  that  when  any  man  came  nigh  to  him 
to  do  him  obeisance,  he  put  forth  his  hand,  and  took  him, 
and  kissed  him."    (2  Sam.  xv.  2 — 5.) 


*  The  following  weighty  passage,  from  the  pen  of  the  judicious  Hooker, 
is  commended  to  the  attention  of  all  in  the  present  day.  It  is  the 
opening  passage  of  the  first  book  of  his  "Ecclesiastical  Polity." 

•'  He  that  goetli  about  to  persuade  a  multitude  that  they  are  not  so 
well  governed  as  they  ought  to  bo,  shall  never  want  attentive  and 
favourable  hearers,  because  they  know  the  manifold  defects  whereanto 
every  kind  of  regiment  or  government  is  subject ;  but  the  secret  lets  and 
difficulties,  which  in  public  proceedings  are  innumerable  and  inevitaV)le, 
they  have  not  ordinarily  the  judgment  to  consider.  And  because  such 
as  openly  reprove  disorders  of  States  are  taken  for  principal  friends  to 
the  common  benefit  of  all,  and  for  men  that  carry  singular  freedom  of 
mind,  under  this  fair  and  plausilde  colour  whatsoever  they  utter  passeth 
for  good  and  current.  That  which  is  wanting  in  the  weight  of  their 
speech  is  supplied  by  the  aptness  of  men's  minds  to  accept  and  believe 
it.  Whereas,  on  the  other  side,  if  we  maintain  things  that  are  estab- 
lished, we  have  not  only  to  strive  with  a  number  of  heavy  prejudices, 
deeply  rooted  in  the  breasts  of  men,  who  think  that  herein  we  serve  the 
times,  and  speak  in  favour  of  the  present  state,  because  we  either  hold 
or  seek  preferment ;  but  also  to  bear  such  reception  as  minds  so  averted 
beforehand  usually  take  against  that  which  they  are  loth  should  be 
poured  into  them." 


460 


OLD  PATHS. 


"Wlien  we  read  tliis  passage  we  must  learn  not  to  ju Jge 
cur  own  times  too  harshly.  The  eriis  that  we  see  are 
neither  peculiar  nor  new. 

After  all,  we  must  never  forget  that  popular  election, 
with  all  its  evils,  is  far  better  than  an  absolute  form  of 
jzovernment.  To  live  under  the  dominion  of  an  absolute 
t}Tant,  who  allows  no  one  to  think,  speak,  or  act  for  him- 
self, is  miserable  slavery.  For  the  sake  of  liberty  we 
must  put  up  with  all  the  evils  which  accompany  the 
return  of  members  to  Parliament.  We  must  each  do  our 
duty  conscientiously,  and  learn  to  expect  little  from  any 
party.  If  those  we  support  succeed,  we  must  not  think 
that  all  they  do  will  be  right.  If  those  we  oppose 
succeed,  we  must  not  think  that  all  they  do  will  be  wrong. 
To  expect  little  from  any  earthly  ruler  is  one  great  secret 
of  contentmeut.  To  pray  for  all  who  are  in  authority, 
and  to  judge  all  their  actions  charitably,  is  one  of  the 
principal  duties  of  a  Christian. 

But  there  is  another  Election,  which  is  of  far  higher 
importance  than  any  election  to  Parliament, — an  Election 
whose  consequences  v,-ill  abide,  when  Queen,  Lords,  and 
Commons  have  passed  away, — an  Election  which  concerns 
all  classes,  the  lowest  as  well  as  the  highest,  the  women  as 
well  as  the  men.  It  is  the  Election  which  the  Scriptures 
call  "  the  Election  of  God." 

I  ask  the  readers  of  this  paper  to  give  me  their 
attention  for  a  few  minutes,  while  I  try  to  set  before 
them  the  subject  of  this  Election.  Believe  me,  it  affects 
your  eternal  happiness  most  deeply.  Whether  you  are 
in  Parliament  or  not,  whether  you  vote  or  not,  whether 
you  are  on  the  winning  side  or  not,  all  this  will  matter 
very  Kttle  a  hundred  years  hence.  But  it  will  matter 
greatly  whether  you  are  in  the  number  of  "  God's 
Elect." 

In  handling  the  subject  of  Election,  there  are  only  two 
things  which  I  propose  to  do. 


ELECTION. 


461 


I.  Firstly,  I  will  state  the  doctrine  of  Election,  and 
^how  what  it  is. 

II.  Secondly,  I  will  fence  the  subject  with  cautions, 
ind  guard  it  against  abuse. 

If  I  can  make  these  two  points  clear  and  plain  to  the 
aiind  of  all  who  read  these  pages,  I  think  I  shall  have 
done  their  souls  a  great  and  essential  service. 

I.  I  have  firstly  to  state  the  doctrine  of  Election.  What 
is  it?  What  does  it  mean?  Accurate  statements  on  this 
point  are  of  great  importance.  No  doctrine  of  Scrii^ture 
perhaps  has  suffered  so  much  damage  from  the  erroneous 
conceptions  of  foes,  and  the  incorrect  descriptions  of 
friends,  as  that  which  is  now  before  us. 

The  true  doctrine  of  Election  I  believe  to  be  as  follows. 
God  has  been  pleased  from  all  eternity  to  choose  certain 
men  and  women  out  of  mankind,  whom  by  His  counsel 
secret  to  us.  He  has  decreed  to  save  by  Jesus  Christ. 
None  are  finally  saved  except  those  who  are  thus  chosen. 
Hence  the  Scripture  gives  to  God's  people  in  several  places 
the  names  of  "  God's  Elect,"  and  the  choice  or  appoint- 
ment of  them  to  eternal  life  is  called  "  God's  election." 

Those  men  and  women  whom  God  has  been  pleased  to 
choose  from  all  eternity.  He  calls  in  time,  by  His  Spirit 
working  in  due  season.  He  convinces  them  of  sin.  He 
leads  them  to  Christ.  He  works  in  them  repentance  and 
faith.  He  converts,  renews,  and  sanctifies  them.  He 
keeps  them  by  His  grace  from  falling  away  entirely,  and 
finally  brings  them  safe  to  glory.  In  short  God's  eternal 
Election  is  the  first  link  in  that  chain  of  a  sinner's  salva- 
tion of  which  heavenly  glory  is  the  end.  None  ever  repent, 
believe,  and  are  born  again,  except  the  Elect.  The  primary 
and  original  cause  of  a  saint's  being  what  he  is,  is  eternal 
God's  election. 

The  doctrine  here  stated,  no  doubt,  is  peculiarly  deep. 


462 


OLD  PATHS, 


mysterious,  and  hard  to  understand.  We  have  no  eyes  to 
see  it  fully.  We  have  no  line  to  fathom  it  thoroughly. 
Xo  part  of  the  Christian  religion  has  Leen  so  much 
disputed,  rejected,  and  reviled  as  this.  None  has  called 
forth  so  much  of  that  enmity  against  God  which  is  the 
grand  mark  of  the  carnal  mind.  Thousands  of  so-called 
Christians  profess  to  believe  the  Atonement,  salvation  by 
grace,  and  justification  by  faith,  and  yet  refuse  to  look  at 
the  doctrine  of  Election.  The  very  mention  of  the  word 
to  some  persons  is  enough  to  call  forth  expressions  of 
anger,  ill-temper,  and  passion. 

But,  after  all,  is  the  doctrine  of  Election  plainly  stated 
in  Scripture  ?  This  is  the  whole  question  which  an  honest 
Christian  has  to  do  with.  If  it  is  not  in  the  Book  of  God, 
let  it  be  for  ever  discarded,  refused,  and  rejected  by  man, 
no  matter  who  propounds  it.  If  it  is  there,  let  us  receive 
it  with  reverence,  as  a  part  of  Divine  revelation,  and 
humbly  believe,  even  where  we  are  not  able  to  understand 
completely  or  explain  fully.  What  then  is  written  in  the 
Scriptures  ?  "  To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony :  if  they 
speak  not  according  to  this  word,  it  is  because  there  is  no 
light  in  them."  (Isaiah,  viii.  20.)  Is  Election  in  the  Bible, 
or  is  it  not  ?  Does  the  Bible  speak  of  certain  persons 
as  God's  Elect,  or  not  ? 

Hear  what  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  says  : — "  For  the  Elect's 
sake  the  days  shall  be  shortened."    (Matt.  xxiv.  22.) 

"  If  it  were  possible  they  should  deceive  even  the 
Elect."    (Mark  xiii.  22.) 

"  He  shall  send  His  angels,  and  thev"  shall  gather  together 
His  Elect."    (Matt.  xxiv.  31.) 

"  Shall  not  God  avenge  His  own  Elect  ?  "   (Luke  xviiL  7.) 

Hear  what  St.  Paul  says : — "  Whom  He  did  foreknow, 
He  also  did  predestinate  to  be  confonned  to  the  image  of 
His  Son,  that  He  might  be  the  firstborn  among  many 
brethren.  Moreover  whom  He  did  j^reJcstinate,  them  He 
also  called :  and  whom  He  called,  them  He  also  justified : 


ELECTION. 


4G3' 


snd  -wliom  He  justified,  tliem  He  also  glorifietl."  (Rom. 
viii.  29,  30.) 

"  Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  Elect  ? " 
(Rom.  viii.  33.) 

"  God  hath  chosen  us  in  Him  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world."    (Ephes.  i.  4.) 

"  Who  hath  saved  us,  and  called  us  with  an  holy  calling, 
not  according  to  our  works,  but  according  to  His  own 
purpose  and  grace,  which  was  given  us  in  Christ  Jesus 
before  the  world  began."    (2  Tim.  i.  9.) 

"  God  hath  from  the  beginning  chosen  you  to  salvation 
through  sanctification  of  the  Sjiirit  and  belief  of  the 
truth."    (2  Thess.  ii.  13.) 

Hear  what  St.  Peter  says : — "  Elect  according  to  the 
foreknowledge  of  God  the  Father,  through  sanctification 
of  the  Spirit,  unto  obedience  and  sprinkling  of  the  blood 
of  Jesus  Christ."    (I  Peter  i.  2.) 

"  Give  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  Election  sure." 
(2  Peter  i.  10.) 

I  place  these  eleven  texts  before  my  readers,  and  I  ask 
them  to  consider  them  well.  If  words  have  any  meaning 
at  all,  they  appear  to  me  to  teach  most  plainly  the 
doctrine  of  personal  Election.  In  the  face  of  such  texts  I 
dare  not  refuse  to  believe  that  it  is  a  Scriptural  doctrine.  I 
dare  not,  as  an  honest  man,  shut  my  eyes  against  the  plain, 
obvious  sense  of  Bible  language.  If  I  once  began  to  do 
so,  I  should  have  no  ground  to  stand  on  in  pressing  the 
Gospel  on  an  unconverted  man.  I  could  not  expect  him' 
to  believe  one  set  of  texts  to  be  true,  if  I  did  not  believe 
another  set.  The  eleven  texts  above  quoted  seem  to  my 
mind  to  prove  conclusively  that  personal  Election  is  a 
doctrine  of  Scripture.  As  such  I  must  receive  it,  and  I 
must  believe  it,  however  difficult  it  may  be.  As  such  I 
ask  my  readers  this  day  to  look  at  it  calmly,  weigh  it 
seriously,  and  receive  it  as  God's  truth. 

After  all,  whatever  men  may  please  to  say,  there  is  no 


OLD  PATHS. 


denying  that  the  Election  of  some  men  and  women  to 
salvation  is  a  simple  matter  of  fact.  That  all  professing 
Christians  are  not  finally  saved,  but  only  some, — that 
those  who  are  saved  owe  their  salvation  entirely  to  the 
free  grace  of  God  and  the  calling  of  His  Spirit, — that  no 
man  can  at  all  explain  why  some  are  called  unto  salvation 
and  others  are  not  called, — all  these  are  things  which  no 
Christian  who  looks  around  him  can  pretend  for  a  moment 
to  deny.  Yet  what  does  all  this  come  to  but  the  doctrine 
of  Election  ? 

Risfht  views  of  human  nature  are  certain  to  lead  us  to 
the  same  conclusion.  Once  admit  that  we  are  all  naturally 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  and  have  no  power  to  turn  to 
God, — once  admit  that  all  spiritual  life  in  the  heart  of 
man  must  begin  with  God, — once  admit  that  He  who 
created  the  world  by  saying,  "  Let  there  be  light,"  must 
shine  into  man's  heart,  and  create  light  Avithin  him, — once 
admit  that  God  does  not  enlighten  all  professing  Christians 
in  this  manner,  but  only  some,  and  that  He  acts  in  this 
matter  entirely  as  a  Sovereign,  giving  no  account  of  His 
matters, — once  admit  all  this,  and  then  see  where  you  are. 
Whether  you  know  it  or  not,  you  admit  the  whole  doctrine 
of  Election  ! 

Ria^ht  views  of  God's  nature  and  character,  as  revealed 
in  the  Bible,  appear  to  me  to  bring  us  to  the  same  position. 
Do  we  believe  that  God  knows  all  things  from  all  eternity, 
— that  He  governs  all  things  by  His  providence,  and  that 
not  even  a  sparrow  falleth  to  the  ground  without  Him  ? 
Do  we  believe  that  He  works  all  His  works  by  a  plan, 
like  an  architect  of  perfect  knowledge,  and  that  nothing 
concerning  His  saints,  as  His  choicest  and  most  excellent 
work,  is  left  to  chance,  accident,  and  luck  ? — Well,  if  we 
believe  all  this,  we  believe  the  whole  doctrine  which  this 
paper  is  meant  to  support.  This  is  the  doctrine  of 
Election. 

Now  what  can  be  said  in  reply  to  these  things  ?  What 


ELECTION. 


465 


are  the  principal  weapons  of  argument  with  which  Election 
is  assailed  ?    Let  us  see. 

Some  tell  us  that  there  is  no  such  thing  in  Scripture  as 
an  Election  of  persons  and  individuals.  Such  an  Election, 
they  say,  would  be  arbitrary,  unjust,  unfair,  partial,  and 
unkind.  The  only  Election  they  admit  is  one  of  nations, 
churches,  communities, — such  as  Israel  in  ancient  times, 
and  Christian  nations,  as  compared  to  heathen  nations, 
in  our  own  day.  Now  is  there  anything  in  this  objection 
that  will  stand  ?  I  believe  there  is  nothing  at  all. — For 
one  thing,  the  Election  spoken  of  in  Scripture  is  an  Election 
attended  by  the  sanctifying  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
This  certainly  is  not  the  Election  of  nations.  For  another 
thing  St.  Paul  himself  draws  a  clear  and  sharply-cut 
distinction  between  Israel  itself  and  the  Election.  "  Israel 
hath  not  obtained  that  which  he  seeketh  for;  but  the 
Election  hath  obtained  it."  (Rom.  xi.  7.) — Last,  but  not 
least,  the  advocates  of  the  theory  of  national  Election  gain 
nothing  whatever  by  it.  How  can  they  account  for  God 
withholding  the  knowledge  of  Christianity  from  35(J 
millions  of  Chinese  for  1800  years,  and  yet  spreading  it 
over  the  continent  of  Europe  ?  They  cannot,  except  on 
the  ground  of  God's  sovereign  will  and  His  free  Election  ! 
So  that,  in  fact,  they  are  driven  to  take  up  the  very 
same  position  which  they  blame  us  for  defending,  and 
denounce  as  arbitrary  and  uncharitable. 

Some  tell  us  that  at  any  rate  Election  is  not  the  doctrine 
of  the  Church  of  England.  It  may  do  very  well  for 
dissenters  and  presbyterians,  but  not  for  churchmen.  "  It 
is  a  mere  piece  of  Calvinism,"  they  say, — "  an  extravagant 
notion  which  came  from  Geneva,  and  deserves  no  credit 
among  those  who  love  the  Prayer-book."  Such  people 
would  do  well  to  look  at  the  end  of  their  Prayer-books, 
and  to  read  the  Thirty-nine  Articles.  Let  them  turn  to  the 
17th  Article,  and  mark  the  following  words :  "  Predesti- 
nation to  Life  is  the  everlasting  jJurjDose  of  God,  whereby 

H  2 


466  OLD  PATHS. 

(before  tlie  foundations  of  the  world  were  laid)  He  hath 
constant!}'  decreed  by  His  counsel  secret  to  us,  to  deliver 
from  curse  and  damnation  those  whom  He  hath  chosen 
in  Christ  out  of  mankind,  and  to  bring  them  by  Christ  to 
everlasting  salvation,  as  vessels  made  to  honour.  Where- 
fore, they  which  be  endued  with  so  excellent  a  benefit  of 
God  be  called  according  to  God's  purpose  by  His  Spirit 
working  in  due  season :  they  through  grace  obey  the 
calling :  they  be  justified  freely :  they  be  made  sons  of 
God  by  adoption :  they  be  made  like  the  image  of  His 
only-begotten  Son  Jesus  Christ :  they  walk  religiously  in 
good  works,  and  at  length,  by  God's  mercy,  they  attain 
to  everlasting  felicity." 

I  commend  that  Article  to  the  special  attention  of  all 
English  Churchmen.  It  is  one  of  the  sheet-anchors  of 
sound  doctrine  in  the  present  day.  It  never  can  be 
reconciled  with  baptismal  regeneration  !  A  wiser  state- 
ment of  the  true  doctrine  of  personal  Election  was  never 
penned  by  the  hand  of  uninspired  man.  It  is  thoroughly 
well-balanced  and  judiciously  proportioned.  In  the  face 
of  such  an  Article  it  is  simply  ridiculous  to  say  that  the 
Church  of  England  does  not  hold  the  doctrine  of  this 
paper. 

In  controverted  matters  I  desire  to  speak  courteously 
and  cautiously.  I  wish  to  make  allowance  for  the  many 
varieties  of  men's  temperaments,  which  insensibly  affect 
our  religious  opinions,  and  for  the  lasting  effect  of  early 
prejudices.  I  freely  concede  that  "Wesley,  Fletcher,  and  a 
whole  host  of  excellent  Methodists  and  Arminians,  have 
always  denied  Election,  and  that  many  deny  it  to  this  day. 
I  do  not  say  that  to  hold  Election  is  absolutely  necessary 
to  salvation,  though  to  be  one  of  God's  Elect  undoubtedly 
is  necessary.  But  I  cannot  call  any  man  my  master  in 
theological  matters.  My  own  eyes  see  the  doctrine  of 
personal  Election  most  clearly  stated  both  in  Scripture 
and  the  17th  Article  of  the  Church  of  England.    I  cannot 


ELECTION. 


467 


give  it  up.  I  believe  firmly  that  it  is  an  important  part 
of  God's  truth,  and  one  which  to  godly  persons  is  "  full  of 
sweet,  pleasant,  and  unspeakable  comfort." 

II.  The  next  thing  that  I  wish  to  do  is  to  fence  the 
doctrine  of  Election  luith  cautions,  and  to  guard  it 
against  abuse. 

This  is  a  branch  of  the  subject  which  I  hold  to  be  of 
vast  importance.  All  revealed  truth  is  liable  to  be  wrested 
and  perverted.  It  is  one  of  Satan's  chief  devices  to  make 
the  Gospel  odious  by  tempting  men  to  distort  it.  Perhaps 
no  part  of  Christian  theology  has  suffered  so  much  damage 
in  this  way  as  the  doctrine  of  personal  Election.  Let  me 
proceed  to  explain  Avhat  I  mean. 

"  I  am  not  one  of  God's  Elect,"  says  one  man.  "  It  is 
no  use  for  me  to  do  anything  at  all  in  religion.  It  is  waste 
of  time  for  me  to  keep  the  Sabbath,  attend  the  public 
worship  of  God,  read  my  Bible,  say  my  prayers.  If  I  am 
to  be  saved,  I  shall  be  saved.  If  I  am  to  be  lost,  I  shall 
be  lost.  In  the  mean  time  I  sit  still  and  wait."  This  is 
a  sore  disease  of  soul.  But  I  fear  it  is  a  very  common 
one ! 

"  I  am  one  of  God's  Elect,"  says  another  man.  "  I  am 
sure  to  be  saved  and  go  to  heaven  at  last,  no  matter  how 
I  may  live  and  go  on.  Exhortations  to  holiness  are  legal. 
Recommendations  to  watch,  and  crucify  self,  are  bondage. 
Though  I  fall,  God  sees  no  sin  in  me  and  loves  me  all  the 
same.  Though  I  often  give  way  to  temptation,  God  will 
not  let  me  be  altogether  lost.  Where  is  the  use  of  doubts 
and  fears  and  anxieties  ?  I  am  confident  I  am  one  of 
the  Elect,  and  as  such  I  shall  be  found  in  glory."  This 
again,  is  a  sore  disease.  But  I  fear  it  is  not  altogether 
uncommon. 

Now  what  shall  be  said  to  men  who  talk  in  this  way  ? 
They  need  to  be  told  very  plainly  that  they  are  wresting 
a  truth  of  the  Bible  to  their  own  destruction,  and  turning 


468 


OLD  PATHS. 


meat  into  poison.  They  need  to  be  reminded  that  their 
notion  of  Election  is  a  miserably  unscriptural  one.  Election 
according  to  the  Bible  is  a  very  different  thing  from  what 
they  suppose  it  to  be.  It  is  most  intimately  connected 
with  other  truths  of  equal  importance  -with  itself,  and 
from  these  truths  it  ought  never  to  be  separated.  Truths 
Avhich  God  has  joined  together  no  man  should  ever  dare 
to  put  asunder. 

(a)  For  one  thing,  the  doctrine  of  Election  was  never 
meant  to  destroy  man's  responsihility  for  the  state  of  his 
own  soul.  The  Bible  everywhere  addresses  men  as  free- 
agents,  as  beings  accountable  to  God,  and  not  as  mere  logs, 
and  bricks,  and  stones.  It  is  false  to  say  that  it  is  useless 
to  tell  men  to  cease  to  do  evil,  to  learn  to  do  well,  to 
repent,  to  believe,  to  turn  to  God,  to  pray.  Everywhere  in 
Scripture  it  is  a  leading  princij)le  that  man  can  lose  his 
own  soul,  that  if  he  is  lost  at  last  it  will  be  his  own  fault, 
and  his  blood  will  be  on  his  own  head.  The  same  inspu-ed 
Bible  wliich  reveals  this  doctrine  of  Election  is  the  Bible 
which  contains  the  words,  "  Why  will  ye  die,  0  house  of 
Israel  ?'' — "Ye  will  not  come  unto  Me  that  ye  might  have 
life." — "  This  is  the  condemnation,  that  light  is  come  into 
the  world,  and  men  loved  darkness  rather  than  light,  be- 
cause their  deeds  were  evil."  (Ezek.  x%-iii.  31;  John  v. 
40;  iii.  19.)  The  Bible  never  says  that  sinners  miss 
heaven  because  they  are  not  Elect,  but  because  they 
"  nesflect  the  sreat  salvation,"  and  because  thev  will  not 
repent  and  believe.  The  last  judgment  will  abundantly 
prove  that  it  is  not  the  want  of  God's  Election,  so  much 
as  laziness,  the  love  of  sin,  unbelief,  and  unwillingness  to 
come  to  Christ,  which  ruins  the  souls  that  are  lost. 

(h)  For  another  thing,  the  doctrine  of  Election  was 
never  meant  to  prevent  the  fullest,  freest  offer  of  salvation 
to  every  sinner.  In  preaching  and  trying  to  do  good  we 
are  warranted  and  commanded  to  set  an  open  door  before 
every  man,  woman,  and  child,  and  to  invite  every  one  to 


ELECTION, 


469' 


come  in.  We  know  not  who  are  God's  Elect,  and  whom 
He  means  to  call  and  convert.  Our  duty  is  to  invite  all. 
To  every  unconverted  soul  without  exception  we  ought  to 
say,  "  God  loves  you,  and  Christ  has  died  for  you."  To 
everyone  we  ought  to  say,  "  Awake, — repent, — believe, — 
come  to  Christ, — be  converted, — turn, — call  upon  God, — 
strive  to  enter  in, — come,  for  all  things  are  ready."  To 
tell  us  that  none  will  hear  and  be  saved  except  God's 
Elect,  is  quite  needless.  We  know  it  very  well.  But  to 
tell  us  that  on  that  account  it  is  useless  to  offer  salvation 
to  any  at  all,  is  simply  absurd.  Who  are  we  that  we 
should  pretend  to  know  who  will  be  found  God's  Elect  at 
last  ?  No  !  indeed.  Tliose  who  now  seem  first  may  prove 
last,  and  those  who  seem  last  may  prove  first  in  the 
judgment  day.  We  will  invite  all,  in  the  firm  belief  that 
the  invitation  will  do  good  tu  some.  We  will  prophesy  to 
the  dry  bones,  if  God  commands  us.  We  will  offer  life  to 
all,  though  many  reject  the  offer.  In  so  doing  we  believe 
that  we  walk  in  the  steps  of  our  Master  and  His  Apostles. 

(c)  For  another  thing,  Election  can  only  be  hnoivn  by 
ifs  fruits.  The  Elect  of  God  can  only  be  discerned  from 
those  who  are  not  Elect  by  their  faith  and  life.  We  can- 
not climb  up  into  the  secret  of  God's  eternal  counsels. 
We  cannot  read  the  book  of  life.  The  fruits  of  the  Spirit, 
seen  and  manifested  in  a  man's  conversation,  are  the  only 
grounds  on  which  we  can  ascertain  that  he  is  one  of  God's 
Elect.  Where  the  marks  of  God's  Elect  can  be  seen, 
there,  and  there  only,  have  we  any  warrant  for  saying  "  this 
is  one  of  the  Elect." — How  do  T  know  that  yon  distant 
ship  on  the  horizon  of  the  sea  has  any  pilot  or  steersman 
on  boai-d  ?  I  cannot  with  the  best  telescope  discern  any- 
thing but  her  masts  and  sails.  Yet  I  see  her  steadily 
moving  in  one  direction.  That  is  enough  for  me.  I  know 
by  tliis  that  there  is  a  guiding  hand  on  board,  though  I 
cannot  see  it.  Just  so  it  is  with  God's  Election.  The 
eternal  decree  we  cannot  possibly  see.    But  the  result  of 


470 


OLD  PATHS. 


that  decree  cannot  be  hid.  It  was  when  St.  Paul  remem- 
bered the  faith  and  hope  and  love  of  the  ThessaloniaiT;, 
that  he  cried,  I  "  know  your  Election  of  God."  (1  Thess. 
i.  4.)  For  over  let  us  hold  fast  this  principle  in  considering 
the  subject  before  us.  To  talk  of  any  one  being  Elect 
when  he  is  living  in  sin,  is  nothing  better  than  blasphemous 
folly.  The  Bible  knows  of  no  Election  except  througli 
"  sanctification," — no  eternal  choosing  except  that  we  should 
be  "holy," — no  predestination  except  to  be  "conformed  to 
the  image  of  God's  Son."  When  these  things  are  lacking, 
it  is  mere  waste  of  time  to  talk  of  Election.  (1  Pet.  i.  2 ; 
Ephes.  i.  4 ;  Kom.  viii.  29.) 

(d)  Last,  but  not  least.  Election  was  never  intended  to 
prevent  men  making  a  diligent  use  of  all  means  of  grace. 
On  the  contrary,  the  neglect  of  means  is  a  most  suspicious 
symptom,  and  should  make  us  very  doubtful  about  the 
state  of  a  man's  soul.  Those  whom  the  Holy  Ghost 
draws  He  always  draws  to  the  written  Word  of  God  and 
to  prayer.  When  there  is  the  real  grace  of  God  in  a 
heart,  there  will  always  be  love  to  the  means  of  grace. 
What  saith  the  Scripture  ?  The  very  Christians  at  Rome 
to  whom  St.  Paul  wrote  about  foreknowledge  and  predes- 
tination, are  the  same  to  whom  he  says,  "  Continue 
instant  in  prayer."  (Rom.  xiL  12.)  The  very  Ephesians 
who  were  "chosen  before  the  foundation  of  the  Avorld," 
are  the  same  to  whom  it  is  said,  "  Put  on  the  whole 
armour  of  God — take  the  sword  of  the  Sjoirit — pray 
always  with  all  prayer."  (Ephes.  vi.  18.)  The  very 
Thessalonians  whose  Election  Paul  said  be  "knew,"  are 
the  Christians  to  whom  he  cries  in  the  same  Epistle, 
"  Pray  without  ceasing."  (1  Thess.  v.  17.)  The  very 
Christians  whom  Peter  calls  "  Elect  according  to  the  fore- 
knowledge of  God  the  Father,"  are  the  same  to  whom  he 
says,  "  Desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word — watch  unto 
prayer."  (1  Pet.  ii.  2 ;  iv.  7.)  The  evidence  of  texts  like 
these  is  simply  unanswerable  and  overwhelming.    I  shall 


ELECTION. 


471 


not  waste  time  by  making  any  comment  on  them.  An 
Election  to  salvation  which  teaches  men  to  dispense  with 
the  use  of  all  means  of  grace,  may  please  ignorant  people, 
fanatics,  and  Antinomians.  But  I  take  leave  to  say  that 
it  is  an  Election  of  which  I  can  find  no  mention  in  God's 
Word. 

I  know  not  that  I  can  wind  up  this  part  of  my  subject 
better  than  by  quoting  the  latter  part  of  the  Seventeenth 
Article  of  the  Church  of  England.  I  commend  it  to  the 
special  attention  of  all  my  readers^  and  particularly  the 
last  paragraph. — "  As  the  godly  consideration  of  Predesti- 
nation, and  our  Election  in  Christ,  is  full  of  sweet,  pleasant, 
and  unspeakable  comfort  to  godly  persons,  and  such  as 
feel  in  themselves  the  working  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ, 
mortifying  the  works  of  the  flesh,  and  their  earthly 
members,  and  drawing  up  their  mind  to  high  and  heavenly 
things,  as  well  because  it  doth  greatly  establish  and  confirm 
their  faith  of  eternal  Salvation  to  be  enjoyed  through 
Christ,  as  because  it  doth  fervently  kindle  their  love 
towards  God :  so,  for  curious  and  carnal  persons,  lacking 
the  Spirit  of  Christ,  to  have  continually  before  their  eyes 
the  sentence  of  God's  Predestination,  is  a  most  dangerous 
downfall,  whereby  the  Devil  doth  thrust  them  either  into 
desperation,  or  into  wretchedness  of  most  unclean  living, 
no  less  perilous  than  desperation. 

"  Furthermore,  we  m.ust  receive  God's  promises  in  such 
wise,  as  they  be  generally  set  forth  to  us  in  holy  Scripture  : 
and,  in  our  doings,  that  will  of  God  is  to  be  followed 
which  we  have  expressly  declared  unto  us  in  the  Word 
of  God." 

These  are  wise  words.  This  is  sound  speech  that  can- 
not be  condemned.  For  ever  let  us  cling  to  the  principle 
contained  in  this  statement.  Well  would  it  have  been  for 
the  Church  of  Christ,  if  the  doctrine  of  Election  had 
always  been  handled  in  this  fashion.  Well  would  it  be 
for  all  Christians  who  feel  puzzled  by  the  heights  and 


472 


OLD  PATHS. 


depths  of  this  mighty  doctrine,  if  they  would  remember 
the  words  of  Scripture, — "  The  secret  things  belong  unto 
the  Lord  our  God  :  but  those  which  are  revealed  belong 
unto  us  and  to  our  children  for  ever,  that  we  may  do  all 
the  words  of  this  law."    (Deut.  xxix.  29.) 

I  will  now  conclude  the  whole  subject  with  a  few  plain 
words  of  personal  application. 

(1)  First  of  all  let  me  entreat  every  reader  of  this 
paper  not  to  refuse  this  doctrine  of  Election,  merely 
because  it  is  high,  mysterious,  and  hard  to  be  understood. 
Is  it  reverent  to  do  so  ?  Is  it  treating  God's  Word  with 
the  respect  due  to  revelation  ?  Is  it  right  to  reject  any- 
thing written  for  our  learning,  and  to  give  it  hard  names, 
merely  because  some  misguided  men  have  misused  it,  and 
turned  it  to  a  bad  purpose?  These  are  serious  questions. 
They  deserve  serious  consideration.  If  men  begin  reject- 
ing a  truth  of  Scripture  merely  because  they  do  not  like 
1  it,  they  are  on  slippery  ground.  There  is  no  saying  how 
far  they  may  fall. 

What  after  all  do  men  gain  by  refusing  the  doctrine  of 
Election  ?  Does  the  system  of  those  Avho  deny  Election 
save  one  soul  more  than  that  of  those  who  liold  it  ?, 
Certainly  not.- — Do  those  who  hold  Election  narrow  the 
way  to  heaven,  and  make  salvation  more  difficult  than 
those  who  deny  it  ?  Certainly  not. — The  opponents  of 
Election  maintain  that  none  will  be  saved  except  those 
who  repent  and  believe.  Well :  the  advocates  of  Election 
say  just  the  same  ! — The  opponents  of  Election  proclaim 
loudly  that  none  but  holy  people  go  to  heaven.  Well: 
the  advocates  of  Election  proclaim  the  same  doctrine  just 
as  loudl}' ! — What  then,  I  ask  once  more,  is  gained  by 
den3^ing  the  truth  of  Election  ?  I  answer.  Nothing  what- 
ever. And  yet,  Avliile  nothing  is  gained,  a  great  deal  of 
comfoi't  seems  to  be  lost.  It  is  cold  comfort  to  be  told 
that  God  never  thought  on  me  before  I  repented  and 


ELECTION. 


473 


believed.  But  to  know  and  feel  that  God  had  purposes  of 
mercy  toward  me  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  and 
that  all  the  work  of  grace  in  my  heart  is  the  result  of  an 
everlasting  covenant  and  an  eternal  Election,  is  a  thought 
full  of  sweet  and  unspeakable  consolation.  A  work  that 
was  planned  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  by  an 
Architect  of  almighty  power  and  perfect  wisdom,  is  a  work 
which  will  never  be  allowed  to  fail  and  be  overthrown. 

(2)  In  the  next  place,  let  me  entreat  every  reader  of 
this  paper  to  approach  iltis  doctrine  of  Election  from  the 
right  end,  and  not  to  confuse  his  mind  by  inverting  the 
order  of  truth.  Let  him  begin  with  the  first  elements  of 
Christianity, — with  simple  repentance  toward  God,  and 
faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  so  work  his  way 
toward  Election.  Let  him  not  waste  his  time  by  be- 
ginning with  inquiries  about  his  own  Election.  Let  him 
rather  attend  first  to  the  plain  marks  of  an  Elect  man, 
and  never  rest  till  these  marks  are  his  own.  Let  him' 
break  off  from  all  known  sin,  and  flee  to  Christ  for  pardon,' 
peace,  mercy,  and  grace.  Let  him  cry  mightily  to  God  in 
prayer,  and  give  the  Lord  no  rest  till  he  feels  within  him 
tlie  real  witness  of  the  Spirit.  He  that  begins  in  this 
fashion  will  thank  God  one  day  for  His  electing  grace,  in 
eternity  if  not  in  time.  It  is  an  old  and  quaint  saying, 
but  a  very  true  one : "  A  man  must  first  go  to  the  little 
Grammar-school  of  Repentance  and  Faith,  before  he  enters 
the  great  University  of  Election  and  Predestination." 

The  plain  truth  is,  that  God's  scheme  of  salvation  is 
like  a  ladder  let  down  from  heaven  to  earth,  to  bring 
together  the  holy  God,  and  the  sinful  creature,  man.  God 
is  at  the  top  of  the  ladder  and  man  is  at  the  bottom. — The 
top  of  the  ladder  is  far  above,  out  of  our  sight,  and  we 
have  no  eyes  to  see  it.  There,  at  the  top  of  that  ladder, 
are  God's  eternal  purposes, — His  everlasting  covenant.  His 
Election,  His  predestination  of  a  people  to  be  saved  by 
Christ.    From  the  top  of  that  ladder  comes  down  that  full 


47i 


OLD  PATHS. 


and  rich  provision  of  mercy  for  sinners  which  is  revealed 
to  us  in  the  Gospel. — The  bottom  of  that  ladder  is  close 
to  sinful  man  on  earth,  and  consists  of  the  simple  steps  of 
repentance  and  faith.  By  them  he  must  begin  to  climb 
upwards.  In  the  humble  use  of  them  he  shall  mount 
higher  and  higher  every  year,  and  get  clearer  glimpses  of 
good  things  yet  to  come. — What  can  be  more  plain  than 
the  duty  of  using  the  steps  which  are  close  to  our  hands  ? 
What  can  be  more  foolish  than  to  say,  I  will  not  put  my 
foot  on  the  steps  at  the  bottom,  until  I  clearly  under-stand 
the  steps  at  the  top  ?  Away  with  such  perverse  and 
childish  reasoninsrs  I  Common  sense  alone  might  tell  us 
the  path  of  duty,  if  we  would  only  make  use  of  it.  That 
duty  is  to  use  simple  truths  honestly,  and  then  to  believe 
that  higher  truths  will  one  day  be  made  plain  to  our  eyes. 
How,  and  in  what  manner  the  love  of  the  eternal  God 
comes  down  to  us,  may  have  much  about  it  which  is  hard 
for  poor  woiTus  like  us  to  understand.  But  how  we  poor 
sinners  are  to  draw  near  to  God  is  clear  and  plain  as  the 
sun  at  noon-day.  Jesus  Christ  stands  before  us,  saying. 
"  Come  unto  Me  ! "  Let  us  not  waste  time  in  doubting, 
quibbling,  and  disputing.  Let  us  come  to  Christ  at  once, 
just  as  we  are.    Let  us  lay  hold  and  believe  ! 

(3)  In  the  last  place,  let  me  entreat  every  true  Christian 
who  reads  this  paper  to  reviemher  the  exhoiiation  of  St 
Peter, — "  Give  diligence,  to  make  your  calling  and  Election 
sure."    (2  Pet.  i.  10.) 

Surer  in  the  sight  of  God  than  your  Election  has  been 
from  all  eternity,  you  cannot  make  it  With  Him  "there 
is  no  uncertainty.  Nothing  that  God  does  for  His  people 
is  left  to  chance,  or  liable  to  change.  But  surer  and  more 
evident  to  yourself  and  to  the  Church,  your  Election  can 
be  made ;  and  this  is  the  point  that  I  wish  to  press  on 
your  attention.  Strive  to  obtain  such  well-grounded 
assurance  of  hope  that,  as  St.  John  says,  you  may  "  know 
that  you  know  Christ."    (1  John  ii.  3.)    Strive  so  to  live 


ELECTION. 


475 


and  walk  in  tins  world  that  all  may  take  knowledge  of 
j'ou  as  one  of  God's  children,  and  feel  no  doubt  that  you 
are  <;oin<j  to  heaven. 

Listen  not  for  a  moment  to  those  who  tell  you  that  in 
this  life  we  can  never  be  sure  of  our  own  spiritual  state, 
and  must  alwa3'S  be  in  doubt.  The  Roman  Catholics  say 
so.  The  ignorant  world  says  so.  The  devil  says  so.  But 
the  Bible  says  nothing  of  the  kind.  There  is  such  a  thing 
as  strong  assurance  of  our  acceptance  in  Christ,  and  a 
Christian  should  never  rest  till  he  has  obtained  it.  That 
a  man  may  be  saved  without  this  strong  assurance  I  do 
not  deny.  But  that  without  it  he  misses  a  great  privilege, 
and  much  comfort,  I  am  quite  sure. 

Strive,  then,  with  all  diligence,  "  to  make  your  calling 
and  Election  sure." — "  Lay  aside  every  weight  and  the 
sins  that  most  easily  beset  you."  (Heb.  xii.  2.)  Be  ready 
to  cut  off  the  right  hand  and  pluck  out  the  right  eye, 
if  need  be.  Settle  it  firmly  in  your  mind,  that  it  is  the 
highest  privilege  on  this  side  the  grave  to  know  that 
you  are  one  of  the  children  of  God. 

They  that  contend  for  place  and  office  in  this  world  arc 
sure  to  be  disappointed.  When  they  have  done  all  and 
succeeded  to  the  uttermost,  their  honours  are  thoroughly 
unsatisfying,  and  their  rewards  are  short-lived.  Seats  in 
Parliament  and  places  in  Cabinets  must  all  be  vacated  one 
day.  At  best  they  can  only  be  held  for  a  few  years.  But 
he  that  is  one  of  God's  Elect  has  a  treasure  which  can 
never  be  taken  from  him,  and  a  place  from  which  he  can 
never  be  removed.  Blessed  is  that  man  who  sets  his 
heart  on  this  Election.  There  is  no  election  like  the 
Election  of  God ! 


XIX. 


PEKSEVERANCE. 

"  They  shall  never  •perish^'' — John  s.  23. 

There  are  two  points  in  religion  on  wliich  the  teaching 
of  the  Bible  is  very  {Dlain  and  distinct.  One  of  these 
points  is  the  fearful  danger  of  the  ungodly;  the  other  is 
the  perfect  safety  of  the  righteous.  One  is  the  happiness 
of  those  who  are  converted ;  the  other  is  the  misery  of 
those  who  are  unconverted.  One  is  the  blessedness  of 
being  in  the  way  to  heaven ;  the  other  is  the  wTetchedness 
of  being  in  the  way  to  hell. 

I  hold  it  to  be  of  the  utmost  importance  that  these 
two  points  should  be  constantly  impressed  on  the  minds 
of  professing  Christians.  I  believe  that  the  exceeding 
privileges  of  the  children  of  God,  and  the  deadly  peril  of 
the  children  of  tlie  world,  should  be  continually  set  forth 
in  the  clearest  colours  before  the  Church  of  Christ.  I 
believe  that  the  difference  between  the  man  in  Christ,  and 
the  man  not  in  Christ,  can  never  be  stated  too  strongly 
and  too  fully.  Reserve  on  this  subject  is  a  jDositive 
injury  to  the  souls  of  men.  Wherever  such  reserve  is 
j)ractised,  the  careless  will  not  be  aroused,  believers  will 
not  be  established,  and  the  cause  of  God  will  receive 
much  damage. 

Many  people,  I  fear,  are  not  aware  what  a  vast  store  of 


PERSEVERANCE. 


477 


comfortable  trutlis  the  Bible  contains  for  the  peculiar 
benefit  of  real  Christians.  There  is  a  spiritual  treasure- 
house  in  the  Word  which  many  never  enter,  and  some 
eyes  have  not  so  much  as  seen.  There  you  will  find 
many  a  golden  verity  besides  the  old  first  principles  of 
repentance,  faith,  and  conversion.  There  you  will  see  in 
glorious  array  the  everlasting  election  of  the  saints  in 
Christ, — the  special  love  wherewith  God  loved  them  before 
the  foundation  of  the  world, — their  mystical  union  with' 
their  risen  Head  in  heaven,  and  His  consequent  sympathy 
with  them, — their  interest  in  the  perpetual  intercession  of 
Jesus,  their  High  Priest, — their  liberty  of  daily  communion 
with  the  Father  and  the  Son, — their  full  assurance  of 
hope, — their  perseverance  to  the  end.  These  are  some  of 
the  precious  things  laid  up  in  Scripture  for  those  who  love 
God.  These  are  truths  which  some  neglect  from  ignorance. 
Like  the  Spaniards  in  the  days  when  they  possessed 
California,  they  know  not  the  rich  mines  beneath  their 
feet,  the  mines  from  which  the  Americans  have  extracted 
such  untold  wealth.    These  are  truths  which  some  neglect 

O 

from  false  humility.  They  look  at  them  afor  off  with  fear 
and  trembling,  but  dare  not  touch  them.  But  these  are 
truths  which  God  has  given  for  our  learning,  and  which 
we  are  bound  to  study.  It  is  impossible  to  neglect  them 
without  inflicting  injury  upon  ourselves. 

It  is  to  one  special  truth  in  the  list  of  a  believer's 
privileges  that  I  now  desire  to  direct  attention.  That 
truth  is  the  doctrine  of  "perseverance, — the  doctrine  that 
true  Christians  shall  never  perish  or  be  cast  away.  It 
is  a  truth  which  the  natural  heart  has  bitterly  opposed 
in  every  age.  It  is  a  truth  which  for  many  reasons 
deserves  particular  attention  at  the  present  time.  Above 
all,  it  is  a  truth  with  which  the  happiness  of  all  God's 
children  is  most  closely  connected. 

There  are  four  things  wdiich  I  propose  to  do  in  con- 
sidering the  subject  of  perseverance. 


478 


OLD  PATHS. 


I.  I  will  explain  ivJiat  the  doctrine  of  'perseverance 
means. 

II.  I  will  show  the  Scriptural  foundations  on  rvhich 
the  doctrine  is  built. 

III.  I  will  point  out  some  reasons  why  many  reject 
the  doctrine. 

IV.  I  will  mention  some  reasons  why  the  doctrine  is 
of  great  practical  importance. 

1  approach  the  subject  with  diffidence,  because  I  know 
it  is  one  on  which  holy  men  do  not  see  alike.  But  God  is 
my  witness,  that  in  writing  this  paper,  I  have  no  desire  to 
promote  any  cause  but  that  of  Scriptural  truth.  In  pleading 
for  perseverance,  I  can  say  with  a  good  conscience,  that 
I  firmly  believe  I  am  pleading  for  an  important  part  of 
the  Gospel  of  Christ.  May  God  the  Spirit  guide  both 
writer  and  reader  into  all  truth !  May  that  blessed  day 
soon  come  when  all  shall  know  the  Lord  perfectly,  and 
differences  and  divisions  pass  away  for  ever! 

I.  I  will  first  explain  what  I  mean  by  the  doctrine  of 
perseverance. 

It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  make  this  point 
clear.  It  is  the  very  foundation  of  the  subject.  It  lies 
at  the  threshold  of  the  whole  argument.  In  all  discus- 
sions of  disputed  points  in  theology,  it  is  impossible  to 
be  too  accurate  in  defining  terms.  Half  the  abuse  which 
has  unhappily  been  poured  on  perseverance,  has  arisen 
from  a  thorough  misunderstanding  of  the  doctrine  in 
question.  Its  adversaries  have  fought  with  phantoms  of 
their  own  creation,  and  spent  their  strength  in  beating 
the  air. 

When  I  speak  of  the  doctrine  of  perseverance,  I  mean 
this.  I  say  that  the  Bible  teaches  that  true  believers,  real 
genuine  Christians,  shall  persevere  in  their  religion  to  the 


PERSEVERANCE. 


471) 


end  of  tlieir  lives.  They  shall  never  perish.  They  shall 
never  be  lost.  They  shall  never  be  cast  away.  Once  in 
Christ,  they  shall  always  be  in  Christ.  Once  made  children 
of  God  by  adoption  and  grace,  they  shall  never  cease  to  be 
His  children  and  become  cliildren  of  the  devil.  Once 
endued  with  the  grace  of  the  Spirit,  that  grace  shall  never  be 
taken  from  them.  Once  pardoned  and  forgiven,  they  shall 
never  be  deprived  of  their  pardon.  Once  joined  to  Christ; 
by  living  faith,  their  union  shall  never  be  broken  oft. 
Once  called  by  God  into  the  narrow  way  that  leads  to  life, 
they  shall  never  be  allowed  to  fall  into  hell.  In  a  word, 
every  man,  woman,  and  child  on  earth  that  receives  saving 
grace,  shall  sooner  or  later  receive  eternal  glory.  Every 
soul  that  is  once  justified  and  washed  in  Christ's  blood, 
shall  at  length  be  found  safe  at  Christ's  rirfit  hand  in  the 
day  of  judgment. 

Such  statements  as  this  sound  tremendously  strong.  I 
know  that  well.  But  I  am  not  going  to  leave  the  subject 
here :  I  must  dwell  upon  it  a  little  longer.  I  desire  to 
clear  the  doctrine  I  am  defending  from  the  cloud  of 
misrepresentation  by  which  many  darken  it.  I  want  men 
to  see  it  in  its  own  proper  dress, — not  as  it  is  pourtrayed 
by  the  hand  of  ignorance  and  prejudice,  but  as  it  is  set 
forth  in  the  Scriptui-e  of  truth. 

(a)  Perseverance  is  a  doctrine  ivith  ivhich  the  ungodly 
and  worldly  have  nothing  to  do.  It  does  not  belong  to 
that  vast  multitude  who  have  neither  knowledge,  nor 
thought,  nor  faith,  nor  fear,  nor  anything  else  of  Christianity 
except  the  name.  It  is  not  true  of  them,  that  they  will 
"  never  perish."  On  the  contrary,  except  they  repent,  they 
will  come  to  a  miserable  end. 

(6)  Perseverance  is  a  doctrine  with  which  hypocrites 
and  false  professors  have  nothing  to  do.  It  does  not 
belong  to  those  unhappy  people  whose  religion  consists  in 
talk,  and  words,  and  a  form  of  godliness,  while  their  hearts 
are  destitute  of  the  grace  of  the  Spirit.    It  is  not  true  of 


480 


OLD  PATHS. 


them,  tliat  they  will  "never  perish."  On  the  contrary, 
except  they  repent,  they  Avill  be  lost  for  ever.* 

(c)  Perseverance  is  the  peculiar  privUcrje  of  real,  true 
spiritual  Christians.  It  belongs  to  the  sheep  of  Christ 
who  hear  His  voice  and  follow  Him.  It  belongs  to  those 
who  are  "  washed,  and  justified,  and  sanctified  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  God."  (1  Cor.  vi.  11.) 
It  belongs  to  those  who  repent,  and  believe  in  Christ,  and 
live  holy  lives.  It  belongs  to  those  who  have  been  born 
again,  and  converted,  and  made  new  creatures  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  It  belongs  to  those  who  are  of  a  broken  and 
contrite  heart,  and  mind  the  things  of  the  Spirit,  and  bring 
forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  It  belongs  to  "the  elect  of 
God,  who  cry  to  Him  night  and  day."  (Luke  xviii.  7.) 
It  belongs  to  those  who  know  the  Lord  Jesus  by. experi- 
ence, and  have  faith,  and  hope,  and  charity.  It  belongs 
to  those  who  are  the  fruit-bearing  branches  of  the  vine, — 
the  wise  virgins, — the  light  of  the  world, — the  salt  of  the 
earth, — the  heirs  of  the  kingdom, — the  followers  of  the 
Lamb.  These  are  they  whom  the  Bible  calls  "  the  saints." 
And  it  is  the  saints  and  the  saints  alone  of  whom  it  is 
written,  that  they  shall  "  never  perish."  -f- 

Does  any  one  suppose  that  what  I  am  saying  applies  to 
none  but  eminent  saints  ?  Does  any  one  think  that  jjeople 
like  the  apostles,  and  prophets,  and  martjTS,  may  perhaps 
persevere  to  the  end,  but  that  it  cannot  be  said  of  the 
common  sort  of  believers  ?    Let  him  know  that  he  is 


*  "We  do  not  hold  that  all  whom  the  most  discerning  minister  or 
Christian  cousiders  true  Christians,  will  be  'kept  bj-  the  power  of  God 
through  faith  unto  salvation.'  God  alone  can  search  the  heart,  and  He 
may  see  that  to  be  a  dead  and  temporarj-  faith,  -which  we  in  the  judg- 
ment of  charity  think  living  and  permanent." — Scott's  rei'ihj  to  Tomline, 
p.  675. 

+  "It  is  grossly  contrary  to  the  truth  of  the  Scriptures  to  imagine 
that  they  who  are  thus  renewed,  can  be  unborn  again." — Archll<hop 
Lei'jhton.  IGSO. 


PERSEVERANCE. 


481' 


entirely  mistaken.  Let  him  know  that  this  privilege  of 
perseverance  belongs  to  the  whole  family  of  God, — to  the 
youngest  as  well  as  the  oldest, — to  the  weakest  as  Avell  as 
the  strongest, — to  the  babes  in  grace  as  well  as  to  the 
oldest  pillars  of  the  Church.  The  least  faith  shall  as 
certainly  continue  indestructible  as  the  greatest.  The 
least  spark  of  grace  shall  prove  as  unquenchable  as  the 
most  burning  and  shining  light.  Your  faith  may  be  very 
feeble,  your  grace  may  be  very  weak,  your  strength  may  be 
very  small,  you  may  feel  that  in  spiritual  things  you  are 
but  a  child.  You  may  doubt  the  reality  of  your  own  con- 
version. Yet  fear  not,  neither  be  afraid.  It  is  not  on  the 
quantity  of  a  man's  grace,  but  on  the  truth  and  genuine- 
ness of  it  that  the  promise  turns.  A  bronze  farthing  is 
as  truly  a  current  coin  of  the  realm  as  a  golden  sovereign, 
though  it  is  not  so  valuable.  Wherever  sin  is  trulv 
repented  of,  and  Christ  is  truly  trusted,  and  holiness  is 
truly  followed,  there  is  a  work  which  shall  never  be  over- 
thrown. It  shall  stand  when  the  earth  and  ail  the  works 
thereof  shall  be  burned  up. 

There  are  yet  some  things  to  be  said  about  perseverance, 
to  which  I  must  request  special  attention.  Witliout  them 
the  account  of  the  doctrine  would  be  imperfect  and 
incomplete.  The  mention  of  them  may  clear  up  some  of 
the  difficulties  which  surround  the  subject,  and  throw  light 
on  some  points  of  Christian  experience,  which  God's 
children  find  hard  to  understand. 

(a)  Remember,  then,  that  when  I  say  believers  shall  per- 
severe to  the  end,  I  do  not  for  a  moment  say  that  then 
shall  never  fall  into  sin.  They  may  fall  sadly,  foully, 
and  shamefully,  to  the  scandal  of  true  religion,  to  the 
injury  of  their  families,  to  their  own  deep  and  bitter 
sorrow.  Noah  once  fell  into  drunkenness.  Abraham 
twice  said  falsely  that  Sarah  was  only  his  sister.  Lot 
took  up  his  abode  in  Sodom.  Jacob  deceived  his  father 
Isaac.    Moses  spoke  unadvisedly  with  his  lips.  David 

i2 


482 


OLD  PATHS. 


committed  horrible  adultery.  Solomon  lost  his  first  love, 
and  was  led  away  by  his  many  wives.  Jehoshaphat  made 
affinity  with  Aliab.  Hezekiah  forgot  God,  and  boasted  oi 
his  riches.  Peter  denied  his  Lord  three  times  with  an 
oath.  The  apostles  all  forsook  Christ  in  the  garden.  Paul 
and  Barnabas  had  such  a  "  sharp  contention  "  that  they 
were  obliged  to  part  company.  All  these  are  cases  in 
point.  They  are  all  melancholy  proofs  that  Christians 
may  fall.  But  believers  shall  never  fall  totally,  finally, 
and  completely.  They  shall  always  rise  again  from  their 
falls  by  repentance,  and  renew  their  walk  with  God. 
Though  sorely  humbled  and  cast  down,  they  never 
entirely  lose  their  grace.  The  comfort  of  it  they  may 
lose,  but  not  the  being.  Like  the  moon  under  an  eclipse, 
their  light  is  for  a  season  turned  into  darkness  ;  but  they 
are  not  rejected  and  cast  away.  Like  the  trees  in  winter, 
they  may  show  neither  leaves  nor  fruit  for  a  time ;  but 
the  life  is  still  in  their  roots.  They  may  be  overtaken  by 
a  fault,  and  carried  away  by  temptation.  But  they  never 
perish. 

{h)  E.emember,for  another  thing, that  when  I  say  believers 
shall  persevere  to  the  end,  /  do  not  mean  that  they  shall 
have  no  doubts  and,  fears  about  their  oivn  safety.  So 
far  from  this  being  the  case,  the  holiest  men  of  God  are 
sometimes  sorely  troubled  by  anxieties  about  their  own 
spiritual  condition.  They  see  so  much  weakness  in  their 
own  hearts,  and  find  their  practice  come  so  short  of  their 
desires,  that  they  are  strongly  tempted  to  doubt  the  truth 
of  their  own  grace,  and  to  fancy  they  are  but  hypocrites, 
and  shall  never  reach  heaven  at  all.  To  be  safe  is  one 
thing:  to  feel  sure  that  we  are  safe  is  quite  another. 
There  are  many  true  believers  who  never  enjoy  the  full 
assurance  of  hope  all  their  days.  Their  faith  is  so  weak, 
and  their  sense  of  sin  so  strong,  that  they  never  feel 
confident  of  their  own  interest  in  Christ.  Many  a  time 
they  could  say  with  David,  "  I  shall  one  day  perish "  (1 


PEKSEVERANCE. 


483 


Sam.  xxvii.  1);  and  with  Job,  "Where  is  my  hope?" 
(Job  xvii.  15.)  The  "joy  and  peace  in  believing,"  which 
some  feel,  and  the  "  witness  of  the  Spirit,"  which  some 
experience,  are  things  which  some  believers,  whose  faith 
it  is  impossible  to  deny,  never  appear  to  attain.  Called 
as  they  evidently  are  by  the  grace  of  God,  they  never 
seem  to  taste  the  full  comfort  of  tlieir  calling.  But  still 
they  are  perfectly  safe,  though  they  themselves  refuse  to 
know  it. 

"  More  happy,  but  not  more  secure. 
The  glorified  spirits  in  heaven." 

The  full  assui-ance  of  hope  is  not  necessary  to  salvation. 
The  absence  of  it  is  no  argument  against  a  man's  per- 
severance to  the  end.  That  mighty  master  of  theology, 
John  Bunyan,  knew  well  what  he  wrote,  when  he  told  us 
that  Despondency  and  Much-afraid  got  safe  to  the  celestial 
city  at  last,  as  well  as  Christiana  and  Valiant-for-the-truth 
It  is  as  true  of  the  most  doubting  child  of  God,  as  it  is 
of  the  strongest,  that  he  shall  "  never  perish."  He  may 
never  feel  it.    But  it  is  true.  * 

(c)  Remember,  in  the  last  place,  that  the  certain  perse- 
verance of  believers  does  not  free  them  from  the  necessity 
of  watching,  'praying,  and  using  means,  or  make  it 
needless  to  ply  them  with  practical  exhortat  ions.  So  far 
from  this  being  the  case,  it  is  just  by  the  use  of  means 
that  God  enables  them  to  continue  in  the  faith.  He  draws 
them  with  the  "  cords  of  a  man."  He  uses  warnings  and 
conditional  promises  as  part  of  the  machinery  by  which 
He  insures  their  final  safety.  The  very  fact  that  they 
despised  the  helps  and  ordinances  which  God  has  ap- 
pointed, would  be  a  plain  proof  that  they  had  no  grace 
at  all  and  were  on  the  road  to  destruction.  St.  Paul 
had  a  special  revelation  from  God  before  his  shipwreck,' 


'  "Every  believer  doth  not  know  that  he  is  a  believer,  and  therefore, 
he  cannot  know  all  the  privileges  that  belong  to  believers." — Traill,  1G9U. 


48:!. 


OLD  PATHS. 


that  be  and  all  the  ship's  company  should  get  safe  to  land. 
But  it  is  a  striking  fact  that  he  said  to  the  soldiers, 
"  Except  the  shipmen  abide  in  the  ship  ye  cannot  be  saved." 
(Acts  xxviL  31.)  He  knew  that  the  end  was  insured,  but 
be  believed  also  that  it  was  an  end  to  be  reached  by  the 
use  of  certain  means.  The  cautions,  and  conditional 
promises,  and  admonitions  to  believers,  with  which  Scrip- 
ture abounds,  are  all  a  part  of  the  Divine  agency  by  which 
their  perseverance  is  effected.  An  old  writer  says,  "  they 
do  not  imply  that  the  saints  can  fall  away :  but  they  are 
preservatives  to  keep  them  from  falling  away."  The  man 
that  thinks  he  can  do  without  such  cautions,  and  despises 
them  as  legal,  may  well  be  suspected  as  an  impostor,  whose 
heart  has  never  yet  been  renewed.  The  man  who  has 
been  really  taught  by  the  Spirit  will  generally  have  a 
humble  sense  of  his  own  weakness,  and  be  thankful  for 
anything  which  can  quicken  his  conscience,  and  keep  him 
on  his  guard.  They  that  persevere  to  the  end  are  not 
dependent  on  any  means,  but  still  they  are  not  inde- 
pendent of  them.  Their  final  salvation  does  not  hang  on 
their  obedience  to  practical  exhortations,  but  it  is  just 
in  taking  heed  to  such  exhortations  that  they  will  always 
continue  to  the  end.  It  is  the  diligent,  the  watchful, 
the  prayerful,  and  the  humble,  to  whom  belongs  the 
l^romise, — "  They  shall  never  perish." 

I  have  now  given  an  account  of  what  I  mean  when  I 
speak  of  the  doctrine  of  perseverance.  This,  and  this 
only,  is  the  doctrine  that  I  am  prepared  to  defend  in  this 
paper.  I  ask  men  to  weigh  well  what  I  have  said,  and  to 
examine  the  statement  I  have  made  on  every  side.  I  be- 
lieve it  will  stand  inspection. 

(a)  It  will  not  do  to  tell  us  that  this  doctrine  of  perseve- 
rance has  any  tendency  to  encourage  careless  and  ungodly 
living.  Such  a  charge  is  utterly  destitute  of  truth.  It 
cannot  justly  be  brought  forward.    I  have  not  a  word  to 


PERSEVERANCE. 


485 


say  in  behalf  of  any  one  who  lives  in  wilful  sin,  however 
high  his  profession  may  be.  He  is  deceiving  himself  He 
has  a  lie  in  his  hand.  He  has  none  of  the  marks  of  God's 
elect.  The  perseverance  I  jilead  for  is  not  that  of  sinners, 
but  of  saints.  It  is  not  a  perseverance  in  carnal  and  un- 
godly ways,  but  a  perseverance  in  the  way  of  faith  and 
grace.  Show  me  a  man  who  deliberately  lives  an  unholy 
life,  and  yet  boasts  that  he  is  converted  and  shall  never 
perish,  and  I  say  plainly  that  I  see  nothing  hopeful  about 
him.  He  may  know  all  mysteries,  and  speak  with  the 
tongue  of  angels,  but,  so  long  as  his  life  is  unaltered,  he 
appears  to  me  in  the  higli  road  to  hell.* 

(b)  It  Avill  not  do  to  tell  us  that  this  doctrine  of  perseve- 
rance, is  merely  a  piece  of  Calvinism.  Nothing  is  easier 
than  to  get  up  a  prejudice  against  a  truth,  by  giving  it  a 
bad  name.  Men  deal  with  doctrines  they  do  not  like, 
much  as  Nero  did  when  he  persecuted  the  early  Chris- 
tians. They  dress  them  up  in  a  hideous  garment,  and 
then  hold  them  up  to  scorn  and  run  them  down.  The 
perseverance  of  the  saints  is  often  treated  in  this  manner. 
People  stave  it  off  by  some  sneering  remark  about  Calvin- 
ism, or  by  some  apocryphal  old  wives'  fable  about  Oliver 
Cromwell's  death-bed,  and  then  think  they  have  settled  the 
question."!-    Surely  it  would  be  more  becoming  to  inquire 


*  "Let  none  encourage  themselves  to  a  freedom  in  sin,  and  presume 
upon  God's  preservation  of  them  without  the  use  of  means.  No  !  The 
electing  counsel  upon  which  this  victory  is  founded,  chose  us  to  the 
means  as  well  as  to  the  end.  He  that  makes  such  a  consequence,  I  doubt 
whether  he  ever  was  a  Christian.  I  may  safely  say  that  any  person  that 
liath  settled,  resolved,  and  wilful  remissness,  never  yet  was  in  the  cove- 
nant of  Grace." — Charnock  on  Weak  Grace.  1684. 

+  "I  allude  to  the  common  story  that  Cromwell  on  his  death-bed 
asked  Dr.  Thomas  Goodwin  whether  a  believer  could  fall  from  grace. 
Goodwin  replied  that  he  could  not.  Cromwell  is  reported  to  have  said, 
that  "  if  so  he  was  safe,  for  he  was  sure  that  he  had  once  been  in  a  state 
of  grace." 

The  truth  of  this  story  is  exceedingly  (luestionable.  It  is  a  remarkable 


486 


OLD  PATHS, 


whether  perseverance  was  not  taught  in  the  Bible  from 
the  beginning,  and  long  before  Calvin  was  born.  The 
question  to  be  decided  is  not  whether  the  doctrine  is 
Calvinistic,  but  whether  it  is  scriptural.  The  words  of 
the  famous  Bishop  Horsley  deserve  to  be  widely  known. 
"Take  especial  care/'  he  says,  "before  yoii»  aim  your 
shafts  at  Calvinism,  that  you  know  what  is  Calvinism 
and  what  is  not ; — that  in  the  mass  of  doctrine  which 
it  is  of  late  become  the  fashion  to  abuse  under  the 
name  of  Calvinism,  you  can  distinguish  with  certainty 
between  that  part  of  it  which  is  nothing  better  than  Cal- 
vinism, and  that  which  belongs  to  our  common  Christianity 
and  the  general  faith  of  the  reformed  Churches, — lest,  when 
you  mean  only  to  fall  foul  of  Calvinism  you  should  un- 
warily attack  something  more  sacred  and  of  a  higher 
orio-in." 

(c)  Last,but  not  least,  it  will  not  do  to  tell  us  that  'perseve- 
rance is  not  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England. 
Whatever  men  may  please  to  say  against  it,  this  is  an 
assertion,  at  any  rate,  which  they  will  find  it  hard  to  prove. 
Perseverance  is  taught  in  the  seventeenth  Article  of  the 
Church  of  England,  clearly,  plainly,  unmistakably.  It  was 
the  doctrine  of  the  first  five  Archbishops  of  Canterbury, 
Parker,  Grindal,  Whitgift,  Bancroft,  and  Abbott.  It  was 
the  doctrine  preached  by  the  judicious  Hooker,  as  any  one 
may  see  by  reading  his  sermons.*    It  was  the  doctrine 


fact  that  Cromwell's  faithful  servant,  who  published  a  collection  of  all 
the  remarkable  sayings  and  doings  of  his  master  in  his  last  sickness, 
does  not  mention  this  conversation.  It  is  more  than  probable  that  it  is 
one  of  those  false  and  malicious  inventions  vi'ith  which  the  great  Pro- 
tector's enemies  laboured  so  hard  to  blacken  his  memory  after  his  death. 

"As  Christ  being  raised  from  the  dead,  dieth  no  more,  death  hath 
no  more  power  over  Him  ;  so  the  justified  man  being  allied  to  God  in 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  doth  as  necessarily  from  that  time  forward  always 
live,  as  Christ  by  whom  He  hath  life  liveth  always."  (Rom.  vi.  10; 
John  xiv.  19.) 


PERSEVERANCE. 


487 


wliich  all  the  leading  diviues  of  the  Church  of  England 
maintained  till  the  reign  of  Charles  the  First.  The  denial 
of  the  doctrine  up  to  this  time  was  hardly  tolerated.  More 
than  one  minister  who  called  it  in  question  was  compelled 
to  read  a  public  recantation  before  the  University  of 
Cambridge.  In  short,  till  the  time  when  Archbishop 
Laud  came  into  power,  perseverance  was  regarded  in 
the  Church  of  Enoland  as  an  acknowled<jed  truth  of  the 
Gospel.  Together  vvith  the  Popish  leaven  which  Laud 
brought  with  him,  there  came  the  unhappy  doctrine  that 
true  believers  may  fall  away  and  perish.  This  is  simjile 
matter  of  history.  The  perseverance  of  the  saints  is  the 
old  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England.  The  denial  of  it 
is  the  new.* 

It  is  time  to  leave  this  branch  of  the  subject  and  pass 
on.  I  want  no  clearer  and  more  distinct  statement  of  jier- 
severance  than  that  contained  in  the  Seventeenth  Article 
of  my  own  Church,  to  which  I  have  already  referred. 
The  Article  says  of  God's  elect:  "They  which  be  endued 
with  so  excellent  a  benefit  of  God,  be  called  according  to 
God's  purpose  by  His  Spirit  working  in  due  season  :  they 
through  grace  obey  His  calling:  they  be  justified  freely: 
they  be  made  sons  of  God  by  adoption:  they  be  made 
like  the  image  of  His  only  begotten  Son  Jesus  Christ: 
they  walk  religiously  in  good  works,  and  at  length,  by 


"As  long  as  that  abideth  in  us  whicli  animateth,  quickencth,  ami 
preth  life,  so  long  we  live  ;  and  we  know  that  the  cause  of  our  faitli 
abideth  in  us  for  ever.  If  Christ  the  fountain  of  life  may  flit,  and  leave 
the  habitation  where  once  He  dwclloth,  what  shall  become  of  His  promise, 
'I  am  with  you  to  the  world's"  end'?  If  the  seed  of  God  which  con- 
taineth  Christ  may  be  first  conceived  and  then  cast  out,  how  doth 
St.  Peter  term  it  immortal?  (1  Pet.  i.  23.)  How  doth  St.  .John  affirm 
that  it  abideth  ?  (1  John  iii.  9.)" — Hooker's  Discourse  of  Juslijication. 
1.390. 

*  Those  readers  who  wish  to  know  more  on  this  subject,  arc  referred 
to  a  note  which  they  will  find  at  the  end  of  this  paper. 


OLD  PATHS. 


God's  mercy,  tliey  attain  to  everlasting  felicity!'  These 
are  precisely  the  views  which  I  maintain.  This  is  the 
doctrine  which  I  long  ajro  subscribed.  This  is  the  truth 
which  I  believe  it  is  my  duty,  as  a  clergyman,  to  defend. 
This  is  the  truth  which  I  now  want  my  readers  to  receive 
and  believe.* 

II.  I  now  proceed  to  sJioiv  the  Scriptural  foundations 
on  tvhich  the  doctrine  of  perseverance  is  built. 

I  need  hardly  say  that  the  Bible  is  the  only  test  by 
which  the  truth  of  every  religious  doctrine  can  be  tried. 
,The  words  of  the  Sixth  Article  of  the  Church  of  England 
'deserve  to  be  written  in  letters  of  gold :  "  Whatsoever  is 
not  read  in  the  Holy  Scripture,  nor  may  be  proved 
thereby,  is  not  to  be  required  of  any  man  that  it  should 
;be  believed  as  an  article  of  the  faith."  By  that  rule  I 
am  content  to  abide.  I  ask  no  one  to  believe  the  final 
perseverance  of  the  saints,  unless  the  doctrine  can  be. 
proved  to  be  that  of  the  Word  of  God.  One  plain  verse 
of  Scripture,  to  my  mind,  outweighs  the  most  logical  con- 
clusions to  which  human  reason  can  attain. 

In  bringing  forward  those  texts  of  Scripture  on  which 
this  paper  is  founded,  I  purposely  abstain  from  quoting 
from  the  Old  Testament.  I  do  so,  lest  any  should  say 
that  the  Old  Testament  promises  belong  exclusively  to 
the  Jewish  people  as  a  nation,  and  are  not  available  in  a 
disputed  question  affecting  individual  believers.  I  do 
not  admit  the  soundness  of  this  argument,  but  I  will 
not  give  any  one  the  chance  of  using  it.  I  find  proofs 
in  abundance  in  the  New  Testament,  and  to  them  I  shall 
confine  myself. 


*  "  I  would  entreat  any  man  that  hath  his  eyes  set  right  in  his  head, 
to  read  and  consider  the  words  of  the  Seventeenth  Article,  the  order  and 
soundness  of  them  ;  and  then  let  him  judge  whether  perseverance  unto 
the  end  be  not  soundly  and  roundlj'  set  down  and  averred  ia  this  Article." 
—George  Carldoii,  Bishop  of  Chichester,  1620.    An  Examination,  p.  63. 


PERSEVERANCE. 


4S9 


I  shall  write  down  the  texts  which  appear  to  me  to 
prove  final  perseverance,  without  note  or  comment.  I 
will  only  ask  my  readers  to  observe  how  deep  and  broad 
is  the  foundation  on  which  the  doctrine  rests.  Observe 
that  it  is  not  for  any  strength  or  goodness  of  their 
own  that  the  saints  shall  continue  to  the  end,  and  never 
fall  away.  They  are  in  themselves  weak,  and  frail,  and 
liable  to  fall  like  others.  Their  safety  is  based  on  the 
jDromise  of  God,  which  W'as  never  yet  broken, — on  the 
election  of  God,  which  cannot  be  in  vain, — on  the  jDOwer 
of  the  great  Mediator  Christ  Jesus,  which  is  Almighty, — 
on  the  inward  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  cannot  be 
overthrown.  I  ask  you  to  read  the  following  texts  care- 
fully, and  see  whether  it  is  not  so. 

"  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life ;  and  they  shall  never 
^perish,  neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand. 

"  My  Father  which  gave  them  Me,  is  greater  than  all ; 
and  no  man  is  able  to  pluck  them  out  of  my  Father's 
hand."    (John  x.  28,  29.) 

"  Who  shall  separate  its  from  the  love  of  Christ  ?  Shall 
tribulation,  or  distress,  or  persecution,  or  famine,  or  naked- 
ness, or  peril,  or  sword  ? 

"As  it  is  written.  For  thy  sake  we  are  killed  all  the  day 
long;  we  are  accounted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter. 

"  Nay  in  all  these  things  we  are  more  than  conquerors 
through  Him  that  loved  us. 

"  For  I  am  persuaded,  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor 
angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things  present, 
nor  things  to  come, 

"  Nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other  creature,  shall  be' 
ahle  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in 
Clirist  Jesus  our  Lord."    (Rom.  viii.  33 — 39.) 

"  They  went  out  from  us,  but  they  were  not  of  us ;  for  if 
they  had  been  of  us,  they  would  no  doubt  have  continued 
with  us:  but  they  went  out  that  they  might  be  made 
manifest  that  they  were  not  all  of  us."    (1  John  ii.  19.) 


490 


OLD  PATHS, 


"  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  He  that  heareth  my 
word,  and  believeth  on  Him  that  sent  Me,  hath  everlasting 
life,  and  shall  not  come  into  condemnation ;  but  is  passed 
from  death  unto  life."    (John  v.  24.) 

"  I  am  the  livins:  bread  which  came  down  from  heaven : 
if  any  man  eat  of  this  bread,  he  shall  live  for  ever." 
(John  vi.  51.) 

"Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."    (John  siv.  19.) 

"Whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  in  Me,  shall  never 
die."    (John  xi.  26.) 

"By  one  offering  He  hath  jyerfeded  for  ever  them  that 
are  sanctified."    (Heb.  x.  14.) 

"He  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  ahideth  for  ever."  (1 
John  ii.  17.) 

"  Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you."  (Rom.  vi.  14.) 

"  Who  shall  also  confirm  you  to  the  end,  that  ye  may 
be  blameless  in  the  day  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (1 
Cor.  i.  8.) 

"Kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto  sal- 
vation, ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time."  (1  Peter  i.  5.) 

"  Preserved  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  called."    (Jude  1.) 

"  The  Lord  shall  deliver  me  from  every  evil  work,  and 
will  preserve  me  unto  His  heavenly  kingdom."  (2  Tim. 
iv.  18.) 

"  I  pray  God  your  whole  spii'it,  and  soul,  and  hoAy  be 
preserved  blameless  unto  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ. 

"  Faithful  is  He  that  calleth  you,  who  also  will  do  it." 
(1  Thess.  V.  23,  24.) 

"The  Lord  is  faithful,  who  shcdl  stablish  you,  and  keep 
you  from  evil."    (2  Thess.  iii.  3.) 

"  God  is  faithful,  who  will  not  suffer  you  to  be  tempted 
above  that  ye  are  able ;  but  will  with  the  temptation  also 
make  a  way  to  escape,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  bear  it." 
(1  Cor.  X.  13.) 

"  God,  willing  more  abundantly  to  show  unto  the  heirs 


PERSEVERANCE. 


491 


of  promise  the  immutability  of  His  counsel,  confirmed  it 
by  an  oath  ; 

"  That  by  two  immutable  things,  in  which  it  was  iin- 
possible  for  God  to  lie,  we  might  have  a  strong  consolation, 
who  have  fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  upon  the  hope  set 
before  us."    (Heb.  vi.  17,  18.) 

"  This  is  the  Father's  will  which  hath  sent  Me,  that  of 
all  which  He  hath  given  Me  I  should  lose  nothing,  but 
should  raise  it  up  again  at  the  last  day."    (John  vi.  39.) 

"  The  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure,  having  this  seal, 
the  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His."    (2  Tim.  ii.  19.) 

"  Whom  He  did  predestinate,  them  He  also  called ;  and 
whom  He  called,  them  He  also  justified ;  and  whom  He 
justified,  them  He  also  glorified."    (Rom.  viii.  30.) 

"  God  hath  not  appointed  us  unto  WTath,  but  to  obtain 
salvation  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."    (1  Thess.  v.  9.) 

"God  hath  from  the  beginning  chosen  you  to  salvation 
through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit,  and  belief  of  the 
truth."    (2  Thess.  ii.  13.) 

"The  vessels  of  mercy,  which  He  had  afore  prepared 
unto  glory."    (Rom.  ix.  23.) 

"  The  gifts  and  calling  ot  God  are  without  repentance." 
(Rom.  xi.  29.) 

"  If  it  were  possible,  they  shall  deceive  the  very  elect." 
(Matt.  xxiv.  24.) 

"  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  them  that  come 
unto  God  by  Him,  seeing  He  ever  liveth  to  make  interces- 
sion for  them."    (Heb.  vii.  25.) 

"  Able  to  keep  you  from  falling,  and  to  present  you 
faultless  before  the  presence  of  His  glory  with  exceeding 
joy."    (Jude  24.) 

"I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am  persuaded  that 
Ele  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  unto  Him 
igainst  that  day."    (2  Tim.  i.  12.) 

"I  have  prayed  for  thee,  that  tliy  faith  fail  not.'' 
'.Luke  xxii.  32.) 


492 


OLD  PATHS. 


"Holy  Father,  keep  through  Thine  own  name  those 
whom  Thou  hast  given  Me."    (John  xvii.  11.) 

"  I  pray  not  that  Thou  shouldest  take  them  out  of  the 
world,  but  that  Thou  shouldest  keep  them  from  the  evil." 
(John  xvii.  1.5.) 

"  I  will  that  they  also  whom  Thou  hast  given  Me,  be 
with  Me  where  I  am."    (John  xvii.  24.) 

"  If,  when  we  were  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God 
by  the  death  of  His  Son ;  much  more,  being  reconciled, 
we  shall  be  saved  by  His  life."    (Rom.  v.  10.) 

"  The  Spirit  of  truth ;  whom  the  world  cannot  receive, 
because  it  seeth  Him  not,  neither  knoweth  Him  ;  but  ye 
know  Him,  for  He  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in 
you  "    (John  xiv.  17.) 

"  Being  confident  of  this  very  thing,  that  He  which  hath 
begun  a  good  work  in  jou,  will  2)erform  it  until  the  day 
of  Jesus  Christ."    (Phil.  i.  6.) 

"  The  anointing  which  ye  have  received  of  Him  abideth 
in  you ;  and  ye  need  not  that  any  man  teach  you :  but  as 
the  same  anointing  teacheth  you  of  all  things,  and  is  truth, 
and  no  lie,  and  even  as  it  hath  taught  you,  ye  shall  abide 
in  Him."    (1  John  ii.  27.) 

"Born  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incor- 
ruptible"   (1  Peter  i.  23.) 

"He  hath  said,  I  will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee." 
(Heb.  xiii.  5.) 

I  lay  these  thirty-nine  texts  of  Scripture  before  my 
readers,  and  ask  serious  attention  to  them.  I  repeat  that 
I  will  make  no  comment  on  them.  I  had  rather  leave 
them  to  the  honest  common  sense  of  all  who  read  the 
Bible.  Some  of  these  texts,  no  doubt,  bring  out  the 
doctrine  of  final  perseverance  more  clearly  than  others. 
About  the  inteq^retation  of  some  of  them,  men's  judgments 
may  differ  widely.  But  there  are  not  a  few  of  the  thirty- 
nine  which  appear  to  my  mind  so  plain,  that  were  I  to 
invent  words  to  confirm  my  views,  I  should  despair  of, 


PEKSEVERANCE. 


493' 


inventing  any  that  would  convey  my  meaning  so  nmi-iis- 
takably. 

I  am  far  from  saying  that  these  texts  are  all  the 
Scriptural  evidence  that  might  be  brought  forward.  I 
am  satisfied  that  the  doctrine  maintained  in  this  paper 
might  be  confirmed  by  other  arguments  of  great  weight 
and  power. 

(a)  I  might  point  to  the  attributes  of  God's  character 
revealed  in  the  Bible,  and  show  how  His  wisdom,  un- 
changeableness,  and  power,  and  love,  and  glory  are  all 
involved  in  the  perseverance  of  the  saints.  If  the  elect 
may  finally  perish,  what  becomes  of  God's  counsel  about 
them  in  eternity,  and  His  doings  for  them  in  time  ?* 

Qj)  I  might  point  to  all  the  offices  zuhich  the  Lord  Jesus 
fills,  and  show  what  discredit  is  thrown  on  His  discharge 
of  them,  if  any  of  His  believing  people  can  finally  be  lost. 
What  kind  of  Head  would  He  be,  if  any  of  the  members 
of  His  mystical  body  could  be  torn  from  Him  ?  What 
kind  of  Shepherd  would  He  be,  if  a  single  sheep  of  His 
flock  was  left  behind  in  the  wilderness  ?  What  kind  of 
Physician  would  He  be,  if  any  patient  under  His  hand 
were  at  length  found  incurable  ?  What  kind  of  Hinli 
Priest  would  He  be,  if  any  name  once  written  on  His 
heart  were  found  wanting  when  He  makes  up  His  jewels  ? 
What  kind  of  Husband  would  He  be,  if  He  and  any  soul 
once  united  to  Him  by  faith  were  ever  put  asunder  ?•}- 


*  "  Now  if  Thou  slialt  kill  all  this  people  as  one  man,  then  the  nations, 
which  have  heard  the  fame  of  Thee,  will  speak,  saying, 

"Because  the  Lord  was  not  able  to  bring  this  people  into  the  land 
which  He  sware  unto  them,  therefore  He  hath  slain  them  in  the  wilder- 
ness."— Numbers  xiv.  15,  10. 

"  What  wilt  Thou  do  to  Thy  great  name?" — Joshua  vii.  9. 

"  If  any  of  the  elect  perish,  God  is  overcome  by  man's  perverseness  : 
but  none  of  them  perish,  because  God,  who  is  omnipotent,  can  by  no 
means  be  overcome." — Au'jusline.    De  Corruptione  et  Gratia,  cap.  VII. 

t  "How  well  do  they  consult  for  Christ's  honour  that  say  His  sheep, 
may  die  in  a  ditch  of  final  apostacy  ! 


OLD  PATHS, 


(c)  Finally,  I  might  point  to  the  great  fact  that  there  is 
not  a  single  example  in  all  Scripture  of  any  one  of  God's 
elect  ever  finally  maJcing  shipwreck  and  going  to  hell.  "We 
read  of  false  prophets  and  hypocrites.  We  read  of  fruit- 
less branches,  stony-ground  and  thorny-ground  hearers, 
virgins  witliout  oil  in  their  vessels,  servants  who  bury  their 
talents.  We  read  of  Balaam,  and  Lot's  wife,  and  Saul, 
and  Judas  Iscariot,  and  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  and  Demas. 
We  see  their  hollow  characters.  We  are  told  of  their  end. 
They  had  no  root.  They  were  rotten  at  the  heart.  They 
endured  for  awhile.  They  went  at  last  to  their  own  place. 
But  there  is  not  a  single  instance  in  the  wliole  Bible  of 
any  one  falling  away  who  ever  showed  unquestionable 
evidences  of  grace.  Men  like  Abraham,  and  Moses,  and 
David,  and  Peter,  and  Paul  always  hold  on  their  way. 
They  may  slip.  They  may  fall  for  a  season.  But  they 
never  entirely  depai-t  from  God.  They  never  perish. 
Surely  if  the  saints  of  God  can  be  cast  away,  it  is  a  curious 
and  striking  fact  that  the  Bible  should  not  have  given  us 
one  single  plain  example  of  it. 

But  time  and  space  would  fail  me  if  I  were  to  enter  into 
the  field  which  I  have  just  pointed  out.  I  think  it  better 
to  rest  my  case  on  the  texts  which  I  have  already  given. 
The  mind  to  which  these  texts  carry  no  conviction,  is  not 
likely  to  be  influenced  by  other  arguments.  To  myself 
they  appear,  when  taken  altogether,  to  contain  such  an 
immense  mass  of  evidence,  that  I  dare  not,  as  a  Christian 
man,  deny  perseverance  to  be  true.  I  dare  not,  because 
I  feel  at  this  rate  I  might  dispute  the  truth  of  any  doctrine 
in  the  Gospel.    I  feel  that  if  I  could  explain  away  such 


"Christ  and  His  members  mate  one  Christ.  Now  is  it  possible  a 
piece  of  Christ  can  be  found  at  last  burning  in  hell  ?  Can  Christ  be  a 
crippled  Christ  ?  Can  tliis  member  drop  off  and  that  ?  How  can  Christ 
part  with  His  mystical  members  and  not  with  His  glory?" — GurnalL 
1Gj5. 


PERSEVERANCE. 


495 


plain  texts  as  some  of  those  I  have  quoted,  I  could  explain 
away  almost  all  the  leading  truths  of  Christianity. 

I  am  quite  aware  that  there  are  some  texts  and  passages 
of  Scripture  which  appear  at  first  sight  to  teach  a  contrary 
doctrine  to  that  which  I  maintain  in  this  paper.  I  know 
that  many  attach  great  weight  to  these  texts,  and  consider 
them  to  prove  that  the  saints  of  God  may  perish  and  fall 
away.  I  can  only  say  that  I  have  examined  these  texts 
with  attention,  but  have  found  in  them  no  reason,  to  alter 
my  opinion  on  the  subject  of  perseverance.*   Their  number 


*  The  following  texts,  on  which  the  opponents  of  perseverance  princi- 
pally rely,  appear  to  call  for  a  brief  notice. 

E;ek.  iii.  20  and  Ezek  xviii.  24.  I  can  see  no  proof  in  either  of  these 
cases  that  "the  righteous"  here  spoken  of,  is  anything  more  than  one, 
whose  outward  conduct  is  righteous.  There  is  nothing  to  show  that  he 
is  one  justified  by  faith  and  accounted  righteous  before  God. 

1  Cor.  ix.  27.  t  see  nothing  in  this  but  the  godly  fear  of  falling  into 
sin,  which  is  one  of  the  marks  of  a  believer,  and  distinguishes  him  from 
the  unconverted,  and  a  simple  declaration  of  the  means  which  Paul  used 
to  preserve  himself  from  being  a  cast-away.  It  is  like  1  John  v.  18  : 
"He  that  is  begotten  of  God  keepeth  himself." 

John  XV.  2.  This  does  not  prove  that  true  believers  shall  be  taken 
away  from  Christ.  A  branch  that  does  not  hear  fruit "  is  not  a  believer. 
"A  lively  faith,"  says  the  12th  Article,  "may  be  as  evidently  known 
by  good  works,  as  a  tree  is  known  by  the  fruit." 

1  Thess.  V.  19.  If  "the  Spirit"  here  means  the  Spirit  in  ourselves,  it 
means  no  more  than  "grieving  the  Spirit,"  in  Ep.  iv.  30.  But  most 
good  commentators  think  it  is  the  Spirit's  gifts  in  others,  and  ought  to 
be  taken  in  connection  with  verse  20. 

Gal.  V.  4.  The  tenor  of  the  whole  Epistle  seems  to  show  that  this 
"falling"  is  not  from  the  inward  grace  of  the  Spirit,  but  from  the  doctrine 
of  grace.    The  same  remarks  applies  to  2  Cor.  vi.  1. 

Heb.  vi.  4 — G.  The  person  here  described  as  "falling  away  "  has  no 
characteristics  which  may  not  be  discovered  in  unconverted  men,  while 
it  is  not  said  that  he  possesses  saving  faith,  and  charity,  and  is  elect. 

John  viii.  31  ;  Col.  i.  23.  The  conditional  "if"  in  both  these  verses, 
and  several  others  like  them  that  might  be  quoted,  does  not  imply  an 
uncertainty  as  to  the  salvation  of  those  described.  It  simply  means 
that  the  evidence  of  real  grace  is  "continuance."  False  grace  perishes. 
True  grace  lasts.  "It  is  frequent  in  Scripture,"  says  Charnock,  "to 
put  into  promises  these  conditions  which  in  other  places  are  promised  to 
^be  wrought  in  us. " — Charnoch  on  Real  Grace,  1G84, 


496 


OLD  TATIIS. 


is  small.  Their  meaning  is  unquestionably  more  open  to 
dispute  than  that  of  many  of  the  thirty-nine  I  have 
quoted.  All  of  them  admit  of  being  interpreted  so  as  not 
to  contradict  the  doctrine  of  perseverance.  I  hold  it  to  be 
an  infallible  rule  in  the  exposition  of  Scripture,  that  when 
two  texts  seem  to  contradict  one  another,  the  less  plain 
must  give  way  to  the  more  plain,  and  the  weak  must  give 
v.-ay  to  the  strong.  That  doctrine  which  reconciles  most 
texts  of  Scripture  is  most  likely  to  be  right.  That  doctrine 
which  makes  most  texts  quarrel  with  one  another  is  most 
likely  to  be  wrong. 

I  ask  my  readers,  if  not  convinced  by  all  I  have  said 
hitherto,  to  put  down  the  texts  I  have  quoted  on  behalf  of 
perseverance,  and  the  texts  commonly  quoted  against  it, 
in  two  separate  lists.  Weigh  them  one  against  another. 
Judge  them  with  fair  and  honest  judgment.  Which  list 
contains  the  greatest  number  of  positive,  unmistakable 
assertions  ?  Which  list  contains  the  greatest  number  of 
sentences  which  cannot  be  explained  away  ?  Which  list  is 
the  strongest  ?  Which  list  is  the  weakest  ?  Which  list  is 
the  most  flexible  ?  Which  list  is  the  most  unbending  ? 
If  it  were  possible  in  a  world  like  this  to  have  this 
question  fairly  tried  by  an  unprejudiced,  intelligent  jury,  I 
have  not  the  least  doubt  which  way  the  verdict  would  go.' 
It  is  my  own  firm  belief  and  conviction  that  the  final 
perseverance  of  the  saints  is  so  deeply  founded  on  Scrip- 


I  readily  grant  that  these  ai'e  not  all  the  texts  that  the  adversaries  of 
final  perseverance  generally  briug  forward  ;  but  I  believe  they  are  the 
principal  ones.  The  weak  point  in  their  case  is  this  :  they  have  no  text 
to  prove  that  saints  may  fall  away,  which  will  at  all  compare  with  such 
an  expression  as,  "-il/y  sheep  shall  never  perish;"  and  they  have  no 
account  to  give  of  such  a  mighty  saying  as  this  promise  of  our  Lord, 
which  is  at  all  satisfactory  or  even  rational.  John  Goodwin,  the  fa- 
mous Armiuian,  offers  the  following  explanation  of  this  text:  "The 
promise  of  eternal  safety  made  by  Christ  to  His  sheep,  dnth  not  relate 
to  their  estate  in  the  present  world,  but  to  that  of  the  world  to  come  I  " 
.A  man  must  be  sorely  put  to  straits  when  he  can  argue  in  such  a  way. 


PERSEVERANCE. 


497 


tural  foundations,  that  so  long  as  the  Bible  is  the  judge,  it 
cannot  be  overthrown. 

III.  The  third  thing  I  propose  to  do,  is  to  point  out 
the  reasons  ivUy  many  reject  the  doctrine  of  perseverance. 

It  is  impossible  to  deny  that  multitudes  of  professing 
Christians  entirely  disagree  with  the  views  expressed  in 
this  paper.  I  am  quite  aware  that  many  regard  them 
with  abhorrence,  as  daugerous,  enthusiastic,  and  fanatical, 
and  lose  no  opportunity  of  warning  people  against  them. 
I  am  also  aware  that  among  those  who  hold  that  the 
saints  of  God  may  fall  away  and  perish,  are  to  be  found 
many  holy,  self-denying,  spiritually-minded  persons, — 
persons  at  whose  feet  I  would  gladly  sit  in  heaven,  though 
I  cannot  approve  of  all  their  teaching  upon  earth. 

This  being  the  case,  it  becomes  a  matter  of  deep  interest 
to  find  out,  if  we  can,  the  reasons  why  the  doctrine  of 
perseverance  is  so  often  refused.  How  is  it  that  a 
doctrine  for  which  so  much  Scripture  can  be  alleged, 
should  be  stoutly  opposed  ?  How  is  it  that  a  doctrine 
which  for  the  first  hundred  years  of  the  Reformed  Clinrch 
of  England  it  was  hardly  allowable  to  call  in  question, 
should  now  be  so  frequently  rejected  ?  What  new  views 
can  have  risen  up  in  the  last  two  centuries  which  make 
it  necessary  to  discharge  this  good  old  servant  of  Christ  ? 
I  am  confident  that  such  inquiries  are  of  deep  imjDortance 
in  the  present  day.  There  is  far  more  in  this  question 
than  appears  at  first  sight.  I  am  satisfied  that  I  am  not 
wastincr  time  in  endeavouring  to  throw  a  little  light  on 

o  o  o 

the  whole  subject. 

I  desire  to  clear  the  Avay  by  conceding  that  many  good 
persons  refuse  the  doctrine  of  perseverance  for  no  reason 
whatever  excepting  that  it  is  too  strong  for  them.  There 
are  vast  numbers  of  true-hearted  Christians  just  now  who 
never  seem  able  to  bear  anything  strong.  Their  religious 
constitution  appears  so  feeble,  and  their  spiritual  digestion 

k2 


498 


OLD  PATHS. 


SO  weak,  that  they  must  aln^ays  be  "fed  with  milk  and  not 
with  meat."  Talk  to  them  strongly  about  grace,  and  they 
put  you  down  as  an  Antinomian ! — Talk  strongly  about 
holiness,  and  you  are  thought  legal .' — Speak  strongly  of 
election,  and  you  are  considered  a  narrow-minded  Calvinist ! 
— Speak  strongly  about  responsibility  and  free  agency,  and 
you  are  regarded  as  a  low  Arminian  ! — In  short,  they  can 
hear  notJiing  strong  of  any  kind  or  in  any  direction ! 
Of  course  they  cannot  receive  the  doctrine  of  perseverance. 

I  leave  these  people  alone.  I  am  sorry  for  them.  There 
are  sadly  too  many  of  them  in  the  Churches  of  Christ 
jnst  now.  I  can  only  wish  them  better  spiritual  health, 
and  less  narrowness  of  views,  and  a  quicker  growth  in 
spiritual  knowledge.  The  persons  I  have  in  my  mind's 
eye  in  this  part  of  my  paper  are  of  a  different  class,  and 
to  them  I  now  address  myself 

(1)  I  believe  one  reason  why  many  do  not  hold  per- 
severance is  their  general  ignorance  of  the  xvhole  system 
of  Christianity.  They  have  no  clear  idea  of  the  nature, 
place,  and  proiDortion  of  the  various  doctrines  which  com- 
pose the  Gospel.  Its  several  truths  have  no  definite 
position  in  their  minds.  Its  general  outline  is  not  mapped 
out  in  their  understandings.  They  liave  a  vague  notion 
that  it  is  a  right  thing  to  belong  to  the  Church  of  Christ, 
and  to  believe  all  the  articles  of  the  Christian  faith. 
They  have  a  floating  misty  idea  that  Christ  has  done 
certain  things  for  them,  and  that  they  ought  to  do  certain 
things  for  Him,  and  that  if  they  do  them  it  will  be  all 
right  at  last.  But  beyond  this  they  really  know  nothing ! 
Of  the  great  systematic  statements  in  the  Epistles  to  the 
Eomans,  Galatians,  and  Hebrews,  they  are  profoundly 
ignorant.  As  to  a  clear  account  of  J ustification,  you  might 
as  well  ask  them  to  square  the  circle,  or  to  write  a  letter  in 
Sanscrit.  It  is  a  subject  they  have  not  even  touched  with 
the  tips  of  their  fingers.  This  is  a  sore  disease,  and  onl}' 
too  common  in  England.    Unhappily  it  is  the  disease  of 


PERSEVERANCE. 


499 


thousands  who  pass  muster  as  excellent  Churchmen.  It  is 
absurd  to  expect  such  people  to  hold  perseverance.  When 
a  man  does  not  know  what  it  is  to  be  justified,  he  cannot 
of  course  understand  what  it  is  to  persevere  to  the  end. 

(2)  I  believe  another  reason  why  many  do  not  hold 
perseverance,  is  their  dislike  to  any  system  of  religion 
which  draivs  distinctions  betiveen  man  and  man.  There 
are  not  a  few  who  entirely  disapprove  of  any  Christian 
teaching  which  divides  congregations  into  different  classes, 
and  speaks  of  one  class  of  people  as  being  in  a  better 
and  more  favourable  state  before  God  than  another. 
Such  people  cry  out,  that  "all  teaching  of  this  kind  is 
uncharitable ; "  that "  we  ought  to  hope  well  of  everybody, 
and  suppose  everybody  will  go  to  heaven." — They  think 
it  downright  wrong  to  say  that  one  man  has  faith  and 
another  has  not,  one  is  converted  and  another  not,  one  a 
child  of  God  and  another  a  child  of  the  world,  one  a  saint 
and  another  a  sinner.  "  What  right  have  we  to  think 
anything  about  it  ? "  they  say.  "  We  cannot  possibly  know. 
Those  whom  we  call  good,  are  very  likely  no  better  than 
others, — hypocrites,  impostors  and  tlie  like. — Those  of 
whom  we  think  badly  are  very  probably  quite  as  much  in 
the  way  to  heaven  as  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  have  got 
good  hearts  at  the  bottom." — As  to  any  one  feeling  sure 
of  heaven,  or  confident  of  liis  own  salvation,  they  consider 
it  quite  abominable.  "  No  man  can  be  sure.  We  ought 
to  hope  well  of  all." — There  are  only  too  many  people  of 
this  sort  in  the  present  day.  Of  course  the  doctrine  of 
perseverance  is  perfectly  intolerable  to  them.  When  a 
man  refuses  to  allow  that  any  one  is  elect,  or  has  grace,  or 
enjoys  any  special  mark  of  God's  favour  more  than  his 
neighbours,  it  stands  to  reason  that  he  will  deny  that  any 
one  can  have  the  grace  of  perseverance. 

(3)  I  believe  another  common  reason  why  many  do  not 
bold  perseverance,  is  an  incorrect  view  of  the  nature  oj 
saving  faith.    They  regard  faith  as  nothing  better  than 


500 


OLD  PATHS. 


a  feeling  or  impression.  As  soon  as  they  see  a  man  some- 
Avhat  impressed  with  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  and 
manifesting  some  pleasure  in  hearing  about  Christ,  they 
set  him  down  at  once  as  a  believer.  By  and  by  the  man's 
impressions  wear  away,  and  his  interest  about  Christ  and 
salvation  ceases  altogether.  Where  is  the  faith  he  seemed 
to  have  ?  It  is  gone.  How  can  his  friends,  who  had 
pronounced  him  a  believer,  account  for  it  ?  They  can  only 
account  for  it  by  saying,  that  "a  man  may  fall  away  from 
faith,"  and  that  "  there  is  no  such  thing  as  perseverance." 
And,  in  short,  this  becomes  an  established  principle  in 
their  religion.  Now  this  is  a  mischievous  error,  and  I  am 
afraid  it  is  sadly  common  in  many  quarters.  It  may  be 
traced  to  ignorance  of  the  true  nature  of  religious  affections. 
People  forget  that  there  may  be  many  religious  emotions 
in  the  human  mind  with  which  grace  has  nothing  to  do. 
The  "  stony-ground  "  hearers  received  the  word  with  joy, 
but  it  had  no  root  in  them.  (Matt.  xiii.  20.)  The  history  of 
all  revivals  proves  that  there  may  often  be  a  great  quantity  of 
seemingly  religious  impression  without  any  true  work  of  the 
Spirit.  Saving  faith  is  something  far  deeper  and  mightier 
than  a  little  sudden  feeling.  It  is  not  an  act  of  the  feelinsrs 
only,  but  of  the  whole  conscience,  will,  understanding,  and 
inward  man.  It  is  the  result  of  clear  knowledge.  It  springs 
from  a  conscience  not  grazed  merely,  but  thoroughly 
stirred.  It  shows  itself  in  a  deliberate,  willing,  humble 
dependence  on  Christ.  Such  faith  is  the  gift  of  God,  and 
is  never  overthrown.  Make  faith  a  mere  matter  of  feelinof, 
and  it  is  of  course  impossible  to  maintain  perseverance. 

(4)  I  believe  another  reason  why  many  do  not  hold 
perseverance,  is  near  akin  to  the  one  last  mentioned.  It 
is  an  incorrect  view  of  the  nature  of  conversion.  Not  a 
few  are  ready  to  pronounce  any  change  for  the  better  in 
a  man's  character,  a  conversion.  They  forget  that  there 
may  be  many  blossoms  on  a  tree  in  spring,  and  yet  no 
fruit  in  autumn,  and  that  a  new  coat  of  paint  does  not 


PERSEVERANCE. 


501 


make  an  old  door  new.  Some,  if  they  see  any  one  wee}3- 
ing  under  the  influence  of  a  sermon,  will  set  it  down  at 
ouce  as  a  case  of  conversion !  Others,  if  a  neighbour 
suddenly  gives  up  drinking,  or  swearing,  or  card-playing, 
and  becomes  a  communicant  and  a  great  professor,  at  once 
rush  to  the  conclusion  that  he  is  converted  !  The  natural 
consequence  in  numerous  instances  is  disappointment. 
Their  supposed  case  of  conversion  often  turns  out  nothing 
more  than  a  case  of  outward  reform,  in  which  the  heart 
was  never  changed.  Their  converted  neighbour  sometimes 
returns  to  his  old  bad  habits,  as  the  sow  that  was  washed  to 
her  wallowing  in  the  mire.  But  then,  unhappily,  the  pride 
of  the  natural  heart,  which  never  likes  to  allow  itself  mis- 
taken, induces  people  to  form  a  wrong  conclusion  about 
the  case.  Instead  of  telling  us  that  the  man  never  was 
converted  at  all,  they  say  that  "  he  was  converted,  but 
afterwards  lost  his  grace  and  fell  away."  The  true  remedy 
for  this  is  a  right  understanding  of  conversion.  It  is  no 
such  cheap,  and  easy,  and  common  thing  as  many  seem  to 
fancy.  It  is  a  mighty  work  on  the  heart,  which  none  but 
He  who  made  the  world  can  eflfect,  and  a  work  which  will 
always  abide  and  stand  the  fire.  But  once  take  a  low  and 
superficial  view  of  conversion,  and  you  will  find  it  im- 
possible to  maintain  final  perseverance. 

(5)  I  believe  another  most  common  reason  why  many 
do  not  hold  perseverance,  is  an  incorrect  vieiv  of  the  effect 
of  baptism.  They  lay  it  down,  as  a  cardinal  point  in 
their  theology,  that  all  who  are  baptized  are  born  again  in 
baptism,  and  all  receive  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Without  a  single  plain  text  in  the  Bible  to  support  their 
opinions,  and  in  the  face  of  the  17th  Article,  which  many 
of  them  as  Churchmen  have  subscribed,  they  still  tell  ug 
that  all  baptized  persons  are  necessarily  "  regenerate."  Of 
course  such  a  view  of  baptism  is  utterly  destructive  of 
the  doctrine  that  true  grace  can  never  be  overthrown.  It 
is  plain  as  daylight,  that  multitudes  of  baptized  persons 


502 


OLD  PATHS. 


never  show  a  sjiark  of  grace  all  their  lives,  and  never  give 
the  slightest  evidence  of  having  been  born  of  God.  They 
live  careless  and  worldly,  and  careless  and  worldly  they 
die,  and  to  all  appearance  miserably  perish.  According 
to  the  view  to  which  I  am  now  referring,  "  they  have  all 
fallen  away  from  grace  !  They  all  had  it !  They  were  all 
made  God's  children  !  But  they  all  lost  their  grace  !  They 
have  all  become  children  of  the  devil  !"  I  will  not  trust 
myself  to  make  a  single  remark  on  such  doctrine.  I  leave 
those  who  can  to  reconcile  it  with  the  Bible.  All  I  say  is, 
that  "if  baptismal  regeneration"  be  true,  there  is  an  end  of 
final  perseverance.* 

(6)  I  believe  another  reason  why  many  do  not  hold 
perseverance,  is  an  incorrect  vietv  of  the  nature  of  the 
Church.  They  make  no  distinction  between  the  visible 
Church  Avhich  contains  "evil  as  well  as  good,"  and  the 
invisible  Church  which  is  composed  of  none  but  God's  elect 
and  true  believers.  Tliey  apply  to  the  one  the  privileges, 
and  blessings,  and  promises  which  belong  to  the  other. 
They  call  the  visible  Church,  with  its  crowds  of  ungodly 
members,  and  baptized  infidels,  "the  mystical  body  of 
Christ,  the  Bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  the  Holy  Catholic 
Church,"  and  the  like  !  They  will  not  see  what  Hooker 
long  ago  pointed  out,  and  his  admirers  would  do  well  to 
remember, — that  all  these  glorious  titles  do- not  properly 
belong  to  any  visible  Church,  but  to  the  mj^stical  company 
of  God's  elect.  The  consequence  of  all  this  confusion  is 
certain  and  plain.  Upon  this  man-made  system  they  are 
obliged  to  allow  that  thousands  of  members  of  Christ's 
body  have  no  life,  no  grace,  and  no  sympathy  with  their 
Head,  and  end  at  last  by  being  ruined  for  ever,  and  becom- 


*  To  those  who  wish  to  see  a  full  discussion  of  this  subject,  I  venture 
to  recommend  a  paper  of  mine  called  "  A  Guide  to  Churchmen  about 
Baptism  and  Regeneration."  The  same  paper  will  be  found  in  my 
volume,  "  Knots  Untied." 


PERSEVERANCE. 


503 


ing  lost  members  of  Christ  in  hell !  Of  course  at  tin's 
rate  they  cannot  maintain  the  doctrine  of  perseverance. 
Once  embrace  the  unscriptural  notion  that  all  members  ol 
the  visible  Church  are,  by  virtue  of  their  churchman  ship, 
members  of  Christ,  and  the  doctrine  of  this  paper  must 
be  thrown  aside.  Oh,  what  a  wise  remark  it  is  oi 
Hooker's,  "  For  want  of  diligently  observing  the  difference 
between  the  Church  of  God  mystical  and  visible,  the 
oversights  are  neither  few  nor  light  that  have  been  com- 
mitted." 

I  commend  the  things  I  have  just  been  saying  to  the 
sincere  and  prayerful  attention  ot  every  reader  of  these 
pages.  I  have  gone  through  them  at  the  risk  of  seeming 
wearisome,  from  a  deep  conviction  of  their  great  import- 
ance. I  am  sure  if  any  part  of  this  paper  deserves  con- 
sideration, it  is  this. 

I  entreat  you  to  observe  how  important  it  is  for  Christians 
to  be  sotmd  in  the  faith,  and  to  be  armed  with  clear 
Scriptural  knowledge  of  the  whole  system  of  the  Gospel.' 
I  fear  the  increasing  tendency  to  regard  all  doctrinal 
questions  as  matters  of  opinion,  and  to  look  on  all "  earnest- 
minded  "  men  as  right,  whatever  doctrines  they  maintain. 
I  warn  you  that  the  sure  result  of  giving  way  to  this 
tendency  will  be  a  vague,  low,  misty  theology, — a  theology 
containing  no  positive  hope,  no  positive  motive,  and  no 
positive  consolation, — a  theology  which  will  fail  most,  just 
when  it  is  most  wanted,  in  the  day  of  affliction,  the  hour 
of  sickness,  and  on  the  bed  of  death. 

I  know  well  that  it  is  a  thankless  office  to  offer  such 
warnings  as  these.  1  know  well  that  those  who  give  them 
must  expect  to  be  called  bigoted,  narrow-minded,  and 
exclusive.  But  I  cannot  review  the  many  errors  which 
prevail  on  the  subject  of  perseverance,  without  seeing 
more  than  ever  the  immense  need  there  is  for  urging:  on 
all  to  be  careful  about  doctrine.  Oh,  learn  to  know  what 
you  mean  when  you  talk  of  believing  the  doctrines  of 


504 


OLD  PATHS. 


Christianity!  Be  able  to  give  a  reason  of  your  hope. 
Be  able  to  say  what  you  think  true,  and  what  you  think 
false  in  religion.  And  never,  never  forget  that  the  only 
foundation  of  soundness  in  the  faith,  is  a  thorough  textual 
knowledge  of  the  Bible. 

I  entreat  you,  in  the  last  place,  to  observe  how  one 
error  in  religion  leads  on  to  another.  There  is  a  close 
connection  between  false  doctrines.  It  is  almost  impossible 
to  take  up  one  alone.  Once  let  a  man  get  wrong  about 
the  Church  and  the  sacraments,  and  there  is  no  saying 
how  far  he  may  go,  and  where  he  may  land  at  last.  It  is 
a  mistake  at  the  fountain-head,  and  it  influences  the  whole 
course  of  his  religion.  The  mistake  about  baptism  is  a 
striking  illustration  of  what  I  mean.  It  throws  a  colour 
over  the  whole  of  a  man's  divinity.  It  insensibly  affects 
his  views  of  justification,  sanctification,  election,  and 
perseverance.  It  fills  his  mind  with  a  tangled  maze  of 
confusion  as  to  all  the  leading  articles  of  the  faith.  He 
starts  with  a  theory  for  which  no  single  plain  text  of 
Scripture  can  be  alleged,  and  before  this  theory  he  tramples 
down  plain  passages  of  the  Bible  by  the  score !  They 
interfere  forsooth,  with  his  favourite  theory,  and  therefore 
cannot  mean  what  common  sense  tells  us  they  do  !  We 
ought  to  be  as  jealous  about  a  little  false  doctrine,  as  we 
would  be  about  a  little  sin  !  Remember  the  words  of  St. 
Paul  about  false  doctrine, — "  a  little  heaven  leaveneth  the 
whole  lump."    (Gal.  v.  9.) 

IV.  I  now  proceed,  in  the  last  place,  to  mention  some 
reasons  %vhy  tJie  doctrine  of  final  perseverance  is  of  great 
importance. 

When  I  speak  of  the  importance  of  perseverance,  I  do 
not  for  a  moment  mean  that  it  is  necessary  to  salvation  to 
receive  it.  I  freely  grant  that  thousands  and  tens  of 
thousands  have  gone  to  heaven,  who  believed  all  their 
lives  that  saints  might  fall  away.    But  all  this  does  not 


PERSEVERANCE. 


50o 


prove  the  doctrine  maintained  in  this  paper  to  be  a 
matter  of  indifference.  He  that  does  not  believe  it,  and 
yet  is  saved,  no  doubt  does  well ;  but  I  am  persuaded 
that  lie  that  believes  it  and  is  saved,  does  far  better, 
I  hold  it  to  be  one  of  the  chief  privileges  of  the  chil- 
dren of  God,  and  I  consider  that  no  pi'ivilege  contained 
in  the  Gospel  can  be  lost  sight  of  without  injury  to  the 
soul. 

(1)  Perseverance  is  a  doctrine  of  great  importance  because 
of  the  strong  colour  luhich  it  throws  on  the  luholc  state- 
ment of  the  Gospel. 

The  grand  characteristic  of  the  Gospel  is,  tliat  it  is 
glad  tidings.  It  is  a  message  of  peace  to  a  rebellious 
world.  It  is  good  news  from  a  far  country,  alike  unex- 
pected and  undeserved.  It  is  the  glad  tidings  that  there 
is  a  hope  for  us,  lost,  ruined,  and  bankrupt  as  we  are  by 
nature, — a  hope  of  pardon,  a  hope  of  reconciliation  with 
God,  a  hope  of  glory.  It  is  the  glad  tidings  that  the 
foundation  of  this  hope  is  mighty,  deep,  and  broad, — 
that  it  is  built  on  the  atoning  death  and  gracious  media- 
tion of  a  Saviour.  It  is  the  glad  tidings  that  this  Saviour 
is  an  actual  living  person,  Jesus  the  Son  of  God ;  able  to 
save  to  the  uttermost  all  who  come  to  God  by  Him,  and 
no  less  merciful,  compassionate,  and  ready  to  save  than 
able.  It  is  the  glad  tidings  that  the  way  to  pardon  and 
peace  by  this  Saviour  is  the  simplest  possible.  It  is  not  a 
thing  high  in  heaven,  that  we  cannot  reach,  or  deep  in  the 
depths,  that  we  cannot  fathom.  It  is  simply  to  believe, 
to  trust,  and  to  cast  ourselves  wholly  on  Jesus  for  salva- 
tion ;  and  then  salvation  is  all  our  own.  It  is  the  glad 
lidings  that  all  who  believe  are  at  once  justified  and 
forgiven  all  things ;  their  sins,  however  many,  are  washed 
away ;  their  souls,  however  unworthy,  are  counted  right- 
eous before  God.  They  believe  on  Jesus,  and  therefore 
they  are  saved.  This  is  the  good  news.  This  is  the 
glad  tidings.     This  is  the  truth  which  is  the  grand 


506 


OLD  PATHS. 


peculiarity  of  tlie  GosjDcl.  Happy  indeed  is  be  that  knows 
and  believes  it ! 

But  think,  for  a  moment,  what  a  mighty  difference  it 
would  make  in  the  sound  of  the  Gospel,  if  I  went  on  to 
say,  that  after  receiving  all  these  mercies  you  might  by- 
and-by  lose  them  entirely.  What  would  your  feelings  be  if 
I  told  you  that  you  were  in  daily  peril  of  forfeiting  all  these 
privileges,  and  of  having  jour  pardon  sealed  in  Christ's 
blood  taken  back  again  ?  What  would  you  think  if  I  told 
you  that  3^our  safety  was  yet  an  uncertain  thing,  and  that 
you  might  yet  perish,  and  never  reach  heaven  at  all  ?  Oh, 
"what  a  falling  off"  this  would  seem  !  Oh,  how  much  of 
the  grace  and  beauty  of  the  glorious  Gospel  would  disap- 
pear and  fade  away !  Yet  this  is  literally  and  exactly  the 
conclusion  to  which  a  denial  of  perseverance  must  bring  us. 

Once  admit  that  the  saints  of  God  may  perish,  and  you 
seem  to  me  to  tear  from  the  Gospel  crown  it  brightest 
jewel.  We  are  hanging  on  the  edge  of  a  precipice.  We 
are  kept  in  awful  susjDense  until  we  are  dead.  To  tell  us 
that  there  are  plenty  of  gracious  promises  to  encourage 
us,  if  we  will  only  persevere,  is  but  mockery.  It  is  like 
telling  the  sick  man  that  if  he  will  only  get  well  he  will 
be  strong.  The  poor  patient  feels  no  confidence  that  he 
will  get  well,  and  the  poor  weak  believer  feels  nothing  in 
him  like  power  to  persevere.  To-day  he  may  be  in 
Canaan,  and  to-morrow  he  may  be  in  Eg}"pt  again,  and  in 
bondage.  This  week  he  may  be  in  the  narrow  way ;  but, 
for  anything  he  knows,  next  week  he  may  be  back  in  the 
broad  road.  This  month  he  may  be  a  justified,  pardoned, 
and  forgiven  man ;  but  next  month  his  pardon  may  be  all 
revoked,  and  he  himself  in  a  state  of  condemnation.  This 
year  he  may  have  faith,  and  be  a  child  of  God ;  next  year 
he  may  be  a  child  of  the  devil,  and  have  no  part  or  lot  in 
Christ.  Where  is  the  good  news  in  all  this  ?  What 
becomes  of  the  glad  tidings  ?  Verily  such  doctrine  seems 
to  me  to  cut  up  the  joy  of  the  Gospel  by  the  roots.  Yet 


PERSEVERANCE. 


507' 


tins  is  the  doctrine  we  must  hold,  if  we  reject  the  final 
perseverance  of  the  saints.* 

I  bless  God  that  I  am  able  to  see  another  kind  of 
Gospel  than  this  in  the  Word  of  God.  To  my  eyes  the 
Bible  seems  to  teach  that  he  who  once  begins  the  life 
of  faith  in  Christ,  shall  without  doubt  be  preserved  from 
apostasy,  and  come  to  a  glorious  end.  Once  made  alive 
by  the  grace  of  God,  he  shall  live  for  ever.  Once  raised 
from  the  grave  of  sin  and  made  a  new  man,  he  shall  never 
go  back  to  the  grave,  and  become  once  more  the  old  man 
"  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  He  shall  be  kept  by  the 
power  of  God.  He  shall  be  more  than  conqueror  through 
Him  that  loved  him.  The  eternal  God  is  his  refuge: 
underneath  him  are  the  Everlasting  Arms.  The  love  in 
which  he  is  interested  is  eternal.  Tlie  righteousness  in 
which  he  is  clothed  is  eternal.  The  redemption  which  he 
enjoys  is  eternal.  The  sense  and  comfort  of  it  he  may 
lose  by  his  own.  carelessness.  But  tJie  thing  itself,  after 
once  believing,  is  his  for  evermore. 

Let  any  thinking  man  look  at  the  two  ways  in  which 
the  weary  and  heavy-laden  sinner  may  be  addressed,  and 
judge  for  himself  which  is  most  like  the  Gospel  of  the 
grace  of  God.  On  the  one  side  stands  the  doctrine,  which 
says,  "Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  thou  shalt  be 
saved.  Once  believing  thou  shalt  never  perish.  Thy 
faith  shall  never  be  allowed  entirely  to  fail.  Thou  shalt 
be  sealed  by  the  Holy  Spirit  unto  the  day  of  redemption." — 
On  the  other  side  stands  the  doctrine,  which  says,  "  Believe 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved.  But 
after  thou  hast  believed  take  care.  Thy  faith  may  fail. 
Thou  mayest  fall  away.  Thou  mayest  drive  the  Sjiirit 
from  thee.  Thou  mayest  at  length  perish  everlastingly." — 


*  "Tliey  weaken  Christians'  comfort  that  make  believers  walk  with 
Christ,  like  dancers  upon  a  rope,  every  moment  in  fear  of  breaking  tlieir 
necks." — Manlon  on  Jiide.  1G58. 


508 


OLD  PATHS. 


Which  doctrine  of  these  two  contains  most  good  news  ? 
"Which  is  most  like  glad  tidings  ?  Is  it  all  the  same  which 
way  the  sinner  is  addressed  ?  Is  it  a  matter  of  indiflference 
Avhether  we  tell  him  that  believing  he  is  saved,  unless  he 
falls  OAvay,  or  wliether  we  tell  him  that  believing  he  is 
saved /oj' ever?  I  cannot  think  it.  I  regard  the  difference 
between  the  two  doctrines  as  very  great  indeed.  It  is  the 
difference  between  January  and  June.  It  is  the  difference 
between  twilight  and  noonday. 

I  speak  for  m3-self.  I  cannot  answer  for  the  experience 
of  others.  To  give  me  solid  peace,  I  must  know  something 
about  my  future  prospects  as  well  as  about  my  present 
'position.  It  is  pleasant  to  .see  my  pardon  to-day :  but  I 
cannot  help  thinking  of  to-morrow.  Tell  me  that  He  who 
leads  me  to  Christ,  and  gives  me  repentance  and  faith  in 
Him,  will  never  leave  me  nor  forsake  me,  and  I  feel  solid 
comfort.  My  feet  are  on  a  rock.  My  soul  is  in  safe  hands. 
I  shall  get  safe  home.  TeU  me,  on  the  other  hand,  that 
after  being  led  to  Christ  I  am  left  to  my  own  vigilance, 
and  that  it  depends  on  my  watching,  and  praying,  and 
care,  whether  the  Spirit  leaves  me  or  no,  and  my  heart 
melts  within  me.  I  stand  on  a  quicksand.  I  lean  on  a 
broken  reed.  I  shall  never  (jet  to  heaven.  It  is  vain  to 
tell  me  of  the  promises ;  they  are  only  mine  if  I  walk 
worthy  of  them.  It  is  vain  to  talk  to  me  of  Christ's  mercy  ; 
I  may  lose  all  my  interest  in  it  by  indolence  and  self-will. 
The  absence  of  the  doctrine  of  perseverance  appears  to  me 
to  give  a  different  colour  to  the  whole  Gospel  of  Christ. 
You  cannot  wonder  if  I  regard  it  as  of  great  importance. 

(2)  But  the  doctrine  of  perseverance  is  also  of  importance, 
because  of  the  special  infiuence  it  is  calculated  to  have  on 
all  who  halt  bettveen  txvo  oj)inions  in  religion. 

There  are  many  persons  of  this  description  in  the 
Church  of  Christ.  There  are  hundreds  to  be  found  in  every 
congregation  to  which  the  Gospel  of  Christ  is  preached, 
who  know  well  what  is  right,  and  yet  have  not  courage  to 


PERSEVERANCE. 


509 


act  up  to  their  knowledge.  Tlieir  consciences  are  awakened. 
Tlieir  minds  are  comparatively  enlightened.  Their  feelings 
are  partially  aroused  to  a  sense  of  the  value  of  their  souls. 
They  see  the  path  they  ought  to  take.  Tliey  hope  one 
day  to  be  able  to  take  it.  But  at  present  they  sit  still  and 
ivait.    They  will  not  take  up  the  cross  and  confess  Christ. 

And  what  is  it  that  keeps  them  back  ?  In  a  vast 
proportion  of  cases  they  are  afraid  to  begin,  lest  they 
should  by-and-by  fail  and  fall  away.  They  see  innumer- 
able difficulties  before  them  if  they  serve  Christ.  They 
are  quite  right.  It  is  vain  to  deny  that  there  are  diffi- 
culties, both  many  and  great.  They  stand  shivering  on 
the  brink  of  the  vast  sea  on  which  we  would  have  them 
embai'k,  and  as  they  mark  the  rolling,  tumbling  waves, 
their  hearts  faint.  They  mark  many  a  little  boat  on  the 
waters  of  that  sea,  tossed  to  and  fro,  and  struggling  hard 
to  make  its  way  across,  and  looking  as  if  it  would  be 
engulfed  in  the  angry  billows,  and  never  get  safe  to 
harbour.  "  It  is  of  no  use,"  they  feel :  "  it  is  of  no  use. 
We  shall  certainly  fall  away.  We  cannot  serve  Christ 
yet.    The  thing  cannot  be  done." 

Now,  what  is  most  likely  to  give  courage  to  these 
lialting  souls  ?  What  is  most  likely  to  hearten  them  for 
the  voyage  ?  What  is  most  likely  to  cheer  their  spirits, 
nerve  their  minds,  and  bring  them  to  the  point  of  boldly 
launching  away? — I  answer,  without  hesitation.  The 
doctrine  of  final  perseverance. 

I  would  fain  tell  them  that  however  great  the  diffi- 
culties of  Christ's  service,  there  is  errace  and  stren^rth  in 
store  to  carry  them  triumphantly  through  all.  I  would  tell 
them  that  these  poor,  praying,  brokcn-sijirited  voyagers 
whom  they  watch,  and  expect  to  see  cast  away,  are  all  as 
safe  as  if  they  were  already  in  harbour.  They  have  each 
a  pilot  on  board,  who  will  carry  them  safe  through  every 
storm.  They  are  each  joined  to  the  everlasting  God  by  a 
tie  that  can  never  be  broken,  and  shall  all  appear  at 


510 


OLD  PATHS. 


length  safe  at  the  right  hand  of  their  Lord.  Yes:  and  I 
would  fain  tell  them  that  they  too  shall  all  make  a  glorious 
end  if  they  will  only  begin.  I  would  liave  them  know 
that,  if  they  will  only  commit  themselves  to  Christ,  they 
.shall  never  be  cast  away.  They  shall  not  be  plucked  away 
by  Satan.  They  shall  never  be  left  to  sink  and  come  to 
shame.  Trials  they  may  have,  but  none  that  the  Spirit 
will  not  give  them  power  to  endure.  Temptations  they 
may  have,  but  none  that  the  Spirit  shall  not  enable  them 
to  resist.  Only  let  them  begin,  and  they  shall  be  con- 
querors.   But  the  great  matter  is  to  begin. 

I  believe  iirml}'  that  one  reason  why  so  many  wavering 
Christians  hang  back  from  making  a  decided  profession,  is 
the  want  of  encouragement  which  the  doctrine  of  perse- 
verance is  intended  to  afford. 

(3)  The  doctrine  of  perseverance  is  of  importance 
because  of  the  special  influence  it  is  calculated  to  have  on 
the  minds  of  true  believers. 

The  number  of  true  believers  is  at  all  times  very  small. 
They  are  a  little  flock.  But  even  out  of  that  flock  there 
are  few  who  can  be  called  strong  in  faith,  few  who  know 
much  of  uninterrupted  joy  and  peace  in  believing,  few  who 
are  not  often  cast  down  by  doubts,  anxieties,  and  fears. 

It  is  useless  to  deny  that  the  way  to  heaven  is  narrow. 
There  are  many  things  to  try  the  faith  of  believers. 
They  have  trials  the  world  cannot  understand.  They 
have  vjithin  a  heart  weak,  deceitful,  and  not  to  be  trusted, 
— cold  when  they  would  fain  be  warm, — backward  when 
they  would  fain  be  forward, — more  ready  to  sleep  than 
to  watch.  They  have  without  a  world  that  does  not  love 
Christ's  truth  and  Christ's  people, — a  world  full  of  slander, 
ridicule,  and  persecution, — a  world  with  which  their  own 
dearest  relations  often  join.  They  have  ever  near  them  a 
busy  devil,  an  enemy  who  has  been  reading  men's  hearts 
for  6,000  years,  and  knows  exactly  how  to  suit  and  time 
his  temptations, — an  enemy  who  never  ceases  to  lay  snares 


PERSEVERANCE. 


511 


in  their  way, — who  never  slumbers  and  never  sleeps. 
They  have  the  cares  of  life  to  attend  to,  like  other  people, 
— the  cares  of  children, — the  cares  of  business, — the  cares 
of  servants, — the  cares  of  money, — the  cares  of  earthly 
plans  and  arrangements, — the  cares  of  a  poor  weak  body, 
each  daily  thrusting  itself  upon  their  souls.  Who  can 
wonder  that  believers  are  sometimes  cast  down  ?  Who 
ought  not  rather  to  marvel  that  any  believers  are  saved  ? 
Truly  I  often  think  that  the  salvation  of  each  saved 
person  is  a  greater  miracle  than  the  passage  of  Israel 
through  the  Red  Sea.* 

But  what  is  the  best  antidote  against  the  believer's  fears 
and  anxieties  ?  What  is  most  likely  to  cheer  him  as  he 
looks  forward  to  the  untried  future  and  remembers  the 
weary  past  ?  I  answer  without  hesitation,  the  doctrine 
of  the  final  'perseverance  of  God's  elect.  Let  him  know 
that  God  having  begun  a  good  work  in  him  will  never 
allow  it  to  be  overthrown.  Let  him  know  that  the  foot- 
steps of  Christ's  little  flock  are  all  in  one  direction.  They 
have  erred.  They  have  been  vexed.  They  have  been 
tempted.  But  not  one  of  them  has  been  lost.  Let  him 
know  that  those  whom  Jesus  loves,  He  loves  unto  the  end. 
Let  him  know  that  He  will  not  suffer  the  weakest  lamb 
in  His  flock  to  perish  in  the  wilderness,  or  the  tenderest 
flower  in  His  garden  to  wither  and  die.  Let  him  know 
that  Daniel  in  the  den  of  lions,  the  three  children  in  the 
fiery  furnace,  Paul  in  the  shipwreck,  Noah  in  the  Ark, 
were  none  of  them  more  cared  for  and  more  secure  than 
each  believer  in  Christ  is  at  the  present  day.  Let  him 
know  that  he  is  fenced,  walled  in,  protected,  guarded  by 
the  Almighty  power  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  and 
cannot  perish.  Let  him  know  that  it  is  not  in  the  power 
of  things  present  or  things  to  come, — of  men  or  of  devils. 


•  "There  are  as  many  miracles  wrought  as  a  saiiit  is  preserved 
minutes." — Janhjn  on  Jude.  1080. 


512 


'OLD  PATHS. 


— of  cares  within  or  troubles  without,  to  separate  one 
single  child  of  God  from  the  love  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus. 

This  is  strong  consolation  !  These  are  the  things  which 
God  has  laid  up  in  the  Gospel,  for  the  establishment  and 
confirmation  of  His  people.  Well  would  it  be  for  His 
people  if  these  things  were  more  brought  forward  than 
they  are  in  the  Church  of  Christ.  Verily  I  believe  that 
one  reason  of  the  saints'  weakness  is  their  ignorance  of  the 
truths  whicli  God  has  revealed  in  order  to  make  them  strong. 

I  leave  the  subject  of  the  importance  of  perseverance 
here.  I  trust  I  have  said  enough  to  show  my  readers  that 
I  have  not  called  their  attention  to  it  in  this  paper  without 
good  cause.  I  feel  strongly  tliat  the  hardness  of  man's 
heart  is  such  that  nothing  should  be  omitted  in  religious 
teaching  which  is  likely  to  do  it  good.  I  dare  not  omit  a 
single  grain  of  truth,  however  strong,  and  liable  to  abuse,  it 
may  seem  to  be.  Nothing  appears  to  me  of  small  import- 
ance which  adds  to  the  beauty  of  the  Gospel,  or  gives 
encouragement  to  the  halting,  or  confirms  and  builds  up 
■God's  people.  I  desire  to  teach  that  the  Gospel  not  only 
offers  present  pardon  and  peace,  but  eternal  safety  and 
certain  continuance  to  the  end.  This  I  believe  to  be  the 
mind  of  the  Spirit.  And  what  the  Spirit  reveals  I  desire 
to  proclaim. 

And  now  I  have  brought  before  my  readers,  to  the 
best  of  my  ability,  the  whole  subject  of  perseverance. 
If  I  have  failed  to  convince  you,  I  am  sorry,  but  I  am 
satisfied  the  defect  is  not  in  the  doctrine  I  defend,  but  in 
my  manner  of  stating  it.  It  only  remains  to  conclude  this 
paper  by  a  few  words  of  practical  application. 

(1)  For  one  thing,  let  me  entreat  you  to  consider  well, 
ivhether  you  have  any  'part  at  all  in  the  salvation  of 
Christ  Jesus. 

It  matters  nothing  what  you  believe  about  perseverance, 
if  after  all  you  have  no  faith  in  Christ.    It  matters  little 


PERSEVEBANCE. 


513 


whether  you  hold  the  doctrine  or  not,  so  long  as  you  have 
no  saving  faith,  and  your  sins  are  not  forgiven,  and  your 
heart  not  renewed  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  clearest 
head-knowledge  will  save  no  man.  The  most  correct  and 
orthodox  views  will  not  prevent  a  man  perishing  by  the 
side  of  the  most  imorant  heathen,  if  he  is  not  born  again. 
Oh,  search  and  see  what  is  the  state  of  your  own  soul ! 

You  cannot  live  for  ever.  You  must  one  day  die.  You 
cannot  avoid  the  judgment  after  death.  You  must  stand 
before  the  bar  of  Christ.  The  summons  of  the  Archangel 
cannot  be  disobeyed.  The  last  great  assembly  must  be 
attended.  The  state  of  your  own  soul  must  one  day 
undergo  a  thorough  investigation.  It  will  be  found  out 
one  day  what  you  are  in  God's  sight.  Your  spiritual  con- 
dition will  at  length  be  brought  to  light  before  the  whole 
world.  Oh,  find  out  what  it  is  now !  While  you  have 
time,  while  you  have  health,  find  out  the  state  of  your  soul. 

Your  danger,  if  you  are  not  converted,  is  far  greater 
than  I  can  describe.  Just  in  proportion  to  the  thorough 
safety  of  the  believer  is  the  deadly  peril  of  the  unbeliever. 
There  is  but  a  step  between  the  unbeliever  and  the  worm 
that  never  dies,  and  the  fire  that  is  not  quenched.  He  is 
literally  hanging  over  the  brink  of  the  bottomless  pit. 
Sudden  death  to  the  saint  is  sudden  glory ;  but  sudden 
death  to  the  unconverted  sinner,  is  sudden  hell.  Oh, 
search  and  see  what  is  the  state  of  your  soul ! 

Remember  that  you  may  find  out  whether  you  have 
an  interest  in  the  invitations  of  the  Gospel.  It  is  a  thing 
which  may  be  known.  It  is  nonsense  to  pretend  that  no 
man  can  tell.  I  never  will  believe  that  an  honest  man, 
with  a  Bible  in  his  hand,  will  fail  to  discover  his  own 
spiritual  condition  by  diligent  self-examination.  Oh,  be 
an  honest  man  !  Search  the  Scriptures.  Look  within. 
Rest  not  till  you  find  out  the  state  of  your  soul.  To  live 
on  and  leave  the  soul's  state  uncertain,  is  not  to  play  the 
part  of  a  wise  man  but  of  a  fool. 

l2 


OLD  PATHS. 


(2)  In  the  next  place,  if  you  know  nothing  of  the 
'privileges  of  the  Gospel,  I  entreat  you  this  day  to  repent 
and  be  converted,  to  hear  Christ's  voice,  and  follow  Him. 

I  know  no  reason,  human  or  divine,  why  you  should  not 
accept  this  invitation  to-day  and  be  saved,  if  you  are  really 
willing.  It  is  not  the  quantity  of  your  sins  that  need 
prevent  you.  All  manner  of  sin  may  be  forgiven.  The 
blood  of  Jesus  cleanseth  away  all  sin.^ — It  is  not  the  hard- 
ness of  your  heart  that  need  prevent  you.  A  new  heart 
God  will  give  you,  and  a  new  spirit  will  He  put  in  you. — 
It  is  not  the  decrees  of  God  that  need  prevent  you.  He 
willeth  not  the  death  of  sinners.  He  is  not  willing  that 
any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance. 
— It  is  not  any  want  of  willingness  in  Christ:— He  has 
long  cried  to  the  sons  of  men,  "  Whosoever  will,  let  him 
take  the  water  of  life  freely."  "  Him  that  cometh  unto 
Me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  Oh,  why  should  not  you 
be  saved  ?    (Rev.  xxii.  17  ;  John  vi.  37.) 

A  day  must  come,  if  you  are  ever  to  be  God's  child,  when 
you  will  cease  to  trifle  with  your  soul's  interests.  An  hour 
must  come  when  at  last  you  will  bend  your  knee  in  real 
earnestness,  and  pour  out  your  heart  before  God  in  real 
prayer.  A  time  must  come  when  the  burden  of  your  sins 
will  at  last  feel  intolerable,  and  when  you  will  feel  you 
must  have  rest  in  Christ  or  perish.  All  this  must  come 
to  pass,  if  you  are  ever  to  become  a  child  of  God  and  be 
saved.  And  why  not  to-day  ?  Why  not  this  very  night  ? 
Why  not  without  delay  seek  Christ  and  live  ?  Answer  me, 
if  you  can ! 

(3)  In  the  next  place,  let  me  entreat  every  reader  who 
holds  final  perseverance,  so  to  use  this  precious  doctrine 
as  not  to  abuse  it. 

There  is  an  awful  readiness  in  all  men  to  abuse  God's 
mercies.  Even  the  children  of  God  are  not  free  from  the 
sad  infection.  There  is  a  busy  devil  near  the  best  of 
saints,  who  would  fain  persuade  them  to  make  their 


PERSEVERANCE. 


515 


privileges  a  plea  for  careless  living,  and  to  turn  their  soul's 
meat  into  poison.  I  cannot  look  round  the  Church  of 
Christ,  and  see  the  end  to  which  many  high  professors 
come,  without  feeling  that  there  is  need  for  a  caution. 
"Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he 
fall."    (1  Cor.  X.  12.) 

Would  we  know  what  it  is  to  abuse  the  doctrine  of 
perseverance  ?  It  is  abused  when  believers  make  their 
safety  an  excuse  for  inconsistencies  in  practice.  It  is 
abused  when  they  make  their  security  from  final  ruin  an 
apology  for  a  low  standard  of  sanctification,  and  a  distant 
walk  with  God.  Against  both  these  abuses  I  entreat 
believers  to  be  on  their  guard. 

Would  we  know  what  it  is  to  use  the  doctrine  of  per- 
severance aright  ?  Let  us  watch  jealously  over  the  daily 
workings  of  our  own  hearts.  Let  us  mortify  and  nip  in  the 
bud  the  least  inclination  to  spiritual  indolence.  Let  us 
settle  it  down  in  our  minds,  as  a  ruling  principle  of  our 
lives,  that  the  mercies  of  God  are  only  turned  to  a  good 
account  when  they  have  a  sanctifying  effect  on  our 
hearts.  Let  us  root  it  firmly  in  our  inward  man,  that  the 
love  of  Christ  is  never  so  really  valued  as  when  it  con- 
strains us  to  increased  spiritual-mindedness.  Let  us  set 
before  our  minds,  that  the  more  safe  we  feel  the  more 
holy  we  ought  to  be.  The  more  we  realize  that  God  has 
done  much  for  us,  the  more  we  ought  to  do  for  God.  The 
greater  our  debt,  the  greater  should  be  our  gratitude. 
The  more  we  see  the  riches  of  grace,  the  more  rich  should 
we  be  in  good  works. 

Oh,  for  a  heart  like  that  of  the  Apostle  Paul !  To 
realize  as  he  did,  our  perfect  safety  in  Christ, — to  labour 
as  he  did  for  God's  glory,  as  if  we  could  never  do  too 
much, — this  is  the  mark, — this  is  the  standard  at  which 
we  ought  to  aim. 

Let  us  so  use  the  doctrine  of  perseverance  that  our  good 
may  never  be  evil  spoken  of.    Let  us  so  adorn  the  doctrine 


516 


OLD  PATHS. 


by  our  lives  that  we  may  make  it  beautiful  to  others,  and 
constrain  men  to  say,  "  It  is  a  good  and  holy  thing  to  be 
persuaded  that  saints  shall  never  perish." 

(4)  In  the  last  place,  /  entreat  all  believers  who  have 
hitherto  been  afraid  of  falling  away,  to  lay  firm  hold  on 
the  doctrine  of  perseverance,  and  to  realize  their  own 
safety  in  Christ. 

I  want  you  to  know  the  length  and  breadth  of  your 
portion  in  Christ.  I  want  you  to  understand  the  full 
amoimt  of  the  treasure  to  which  faith  in  Jesus  entitles 
you.  You  have  found  out  that  you  are  a  great  sinner. 
Thank  God  for  that. — You  have  fled  to  Christ  for  pardon 
and  peace  with  God.  Thank  God  for  that. — You  have 
committed  yourself  to  Jesus  for  time  and  eternity:  you 
have  no  hope  but  in  Christ's  blood,  Christ's  righteousness 
Christ's  mediation,  Christ's  daily  all-persevering  interces- 
sion. Thank  God  for  that. — Your  heart's  desire  and 
prayer  is  to  be  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation.  Thank 
God  for  that. — ^But  oh,  lay  hold  upon  the  glorious  truth, — 
that  believing  on  Jesus  you  shall  never  perish,  you  shall 
never  be  cast  away,  you  shall  never  fall  away !  It  is 
written  for  you  as  well  as  for  the  apostles,  "  My  sheep 
shall  never  perish." 

Yes !  Jesus  has  spoken  it,  and  Jesus  meant  it  to  be 
believed.  Jesus  has  spoken  it,  who  never  broke  His 
promises.  Jesus  has  spoken  it,  who  cannot  lie.  Jesus 
has  spoken  it,  who  has  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth  to 
keep  His  word.  Jesus  has  spoken  it  for  the  least  and 
lowest  believers, — "  My  sheep  shall  never  perish." 

Wouldest  thou  have  perfect  'peace  in  life  ?-  Then  lay 
hold  on  this  doctrine  of  perseverance.  Thy  trials  may  be 
many  and  great.  Thy  cross  may  be  very  heavy.  But 
the  business  of  thy  soul  is  all  conducted  according  to  an 
"  everlasting  covenant,  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure." 
(2  Sam.  xxiii.  5.)  All  things  are  working  together  for  thy 
good.    Thy  sorrows  are  only  purifying  thy  soul  for  glory. 


PEESEVERANCE. 


517 


Thy  bereavements  are  only  fashioning  thee  as  a  polished 
stone  for  the  temple  above,  made  without  hands.  From 
whatever  quarter  the  storms  blow,  they  only  drive  thee 
nearer  to  heaven.  Whatever  weather  thou  mayest  go 
through  it  is  only  ripening  thee  for  the  gai-ner  of  God. 
Thy  best  things  are  quite  safe.  Come  what  will,  thou 
shalt  "  never  perish." 

Wouldest  thou  have  strong  consolation  in  sickness  t 
Then  lay  hold  on  this  doctrine  of  perseverance.  Think, 
as  thou  feelest  the  pins  of  this  earthly  tabernacle  loosen- 
ing one  by  one,  "  nothing  can  break  my  union  with  Christ." 
Thy  body  may  become  useless  ;  thy  members  may  refuse 
to  perform  their  office ;  thou  mayest  feel  like  an  old 
useless  log, — a  weariness  to  others,  and  a  burden  to 
thyself  But  thy  soul  is  safe.  Jesus  is  never  tired  of 
caring  for  thy  soul.    Thou  shalt  "  never  perish." 

Wouldest  thou  have  full  assurance  of  hope  in  death  ? 
Then  lay  hold  on  this  doctrine  of  perseverance.  Doctors 
may  have  given  over  their  labours ;  friends  may  be  unable 
to  minister  to  thy  wants  ;  sight  may  depart ;  hearing  may 
depart ;  memory  may  be  almost  gone :  but  the  loving- 
kindness  of  God  shall  not  depart.  Once  in  Christ  thou 
shalt  never  be  forsaken.  Jesus  shall  stand  by  thee.  Satan 
shall  not  harm  thee.  Death  shall  not  separate  thee  from 
the  everlasting  love  of  God  in  Christ.  Thou  shalt  "  never 
perish."  * 


*  The  death-bed  of  Bruce,  the  famous  Scotch  divine,  is  a  striking 
illustration  of  this  jjart  of  my  subject.  Old  Fleming  describes  it  in  the 
following  words.  "His  sight  failed  him,  whereupon  he  called  for  his 
Bible  ;  but  finding  his  sight  gone  he  said,  '  Cast  up  to  me  the  eighth 
chapter  of  Romans  and  set  my  finger  on  these  words, — I  am  persuaded 
that  neither  death,  nor  life,  etc.,  shall  be  able  to  separate  me  from  the 
love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  Now,'  said  he,  'is  my 
finger  upon  them  ?  '  when  they  told  him  it  was,  he  said,  '  Now  God  be 
with  you,  my  children  :  I  have  breakfasted  with  you,  and  shall  sup  with 
my  Lord  Jesus  Christ  this  night,'  and  so  gave  up  the  Ghost." — Fkmhuj's 
Fulfilment  of  Prophecy,  1G80. 


518 


OLD  PATHS. 


NOTE  REFERRED  TO  AT  PAGE  487. 

There  are  few  subjects  about  which  English  people  are  so  ignorant  as 
they  are  about  the  real  doctrines  of  the  Church  of  England.  Many 
persons  know  nothing  of  the  theological  opinions  of  the  English  Re- 
formers, and  of  all  the  leading  English  Divines  for  nearly  a  century  after 
the  Protestant  Reformation.  They  call  opinions  old  which  in  reality 
are  new,  and  they  call  opinions  new  which  in  reality  are  old. 

It  would  be  waste  of  time  to  inquire  into  the  causes  of  this  ignorance. 
Certain  it  is  that  it  exists.  Few  people  seem  to  be  aware  that  those 
doctrines  which  now  are  commonly  called  evangelical,  were  the  uni- 
versally received  divinity  of  English  Churchmen  throughout  the  reigns 
of  Queen  Elizabeth  and  James  I.  They  are  not,  as  many  ignorantly 
suppose,  new-fangled  views  of  modern  invention.  They  are  simply  the 
old  paths  in  which  the  Reformers  and  their  immediate  successors  walked. 
Tractarianism,  High  Churchism,  and  Broad  Churcliism  are  new  systems. 
Evangelical  teaching  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  old  school. 

The  proof  of  this  assertion  is  to  be  found  in  the  Church  history  of  the 
reigns  of  Elizabeth  and  James  I.,  and  in  the  writings  of  the  divines  of 
that  period.  Far  be  it  from  me  to  defend  all  the  sayings  and  doings  of 
theologians  of  that  date.  The  student  will  find  in  their  writings  abun- 
dant traces  of  intolerance,  illiberality,  and  bigotry,  which  I  would  be 
the  last  to  defend.  But  that  the  vast  majority  of  all  Churchmen  in  that 
day  held  the  doctrines  which  are  now  called  Calvinistic  and  Evangelical, 
is  to  my  mind  as  clear  as  noon-day  :  and  upon  no  point  does  the  evi- 
dence appear  to  me  so  clear  as  upon  the  doctrine  of  perseverance. 

(1)  Is  it  not  a  historical  fact,  that  in  Queen  Elizabeth's  reign,  in  the 
year  1.595,  the  University  of  Cambridge  compelled  Mr.  Barret,  of  Caius 
College,  to  read  a  public  recantation  and  apology  in  St.  Mary's  Church, 
for  having  denied  the  doctrines  of  final  perseverance  and  election  ? — The 
Church  of  England's  old  Antithesis  to  new  Arminianism,  by  William 
Prynnc,  page  56. 

(2)  Is  it  not  a  historical  fact,  that  the  Articles  drawn  up  by  the  Vice- 
Chancellor  and  heads  of  the  University  of  Cambridge,  against  the  above- 
mentioned  Barret,  conclude  with  the  following  words  ?  "This  doctrine, 
being  not  about  inferior  points  of  matters  indifferent,  but  of  the  sub- 
stantial ground,  and  chief  comfort  and  anchor  ground  of  our  salvation, 
hath  been  to  our  knowledge  continually  and  generally  received,  taught, 
and  defended  in  this  University,  in  lectures,  disputations,  and  sermons, 
and  in  other  places  in  sermons,  since  the  beginning  of  her  Majesty's 
reign,  and  is  so  still  holden  ;  and  we  take  it  agreeable  to  the  doctrine  of 
the  Church  of  England." — Edwards'  Veritas  Redux,  Jjagi  534. 

(3)  Is  it  not  a  historical  fact,  that  in  the  same  Queen  Elizabeth's 
reign,  in  the  same  year,  1595,  the  Lambeth  Articles  were  drawn  up  and 
approved  by  Archbishop  Whitgift  and  Bishop  Bancroft  (afterwards 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury)  ;  and  that  they  contain  the  following  pro- 


PERSEVERANCE. 


519 


position  :  "  A  true  living  and  justifying  faith,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  who 
justifies,  is  not  extinguished,  falleth  not  away,  vanisheth  not  in  the 
elect,  either  linally  or  totally."  These  articles  were  not  added  to  our 
confession  of  faith  ;  but  Fuller's  words  nevertheless  are  perfectly  true  : 
"The  testimony  of  these  learned  divines  is  an  infallible  evidence  what 
were  the  general  and  received  doctrines  of  England  in  that  age." — 
Fulltr's  Church  Hlstorij.    Terjg^s  edition.    Third  volume,  page  150. 

(4)  Is  it  not  a  historical  fact,  that  in  the  year  1604,  in  James  the  First's 
reign,  this  doctrine  of  perseverance  was  considered  at  the  Hampton  Court 
Conference.  The  Puritan  party  wished  the  Lambeth  Articles  to  be  added 
to  the  Thirty-nine  Articles.  Their  request  was  not  granted  :  but  on  what 
grounds  ?  2iol  became  the  doctrine  of  perseverance  loas  objected  to,  but 
because  King  James  thought  it  better  "not  to  stuff  the  book  of  Articles  with 
all  conclusions  theological."  While  even  Overall,  Dean  of  St.  Paul's, 
whose  soundness  on  this  point  was  most  suspected,  used  these  remark- 
able words  :  "Those  who  are  justified  according  to  the  purpose  of  God's 
election,  though  they  might  fall  into  grievous  sin,  and  thereby  into  the 
present  estate  of  damnation,  yet  never  totally  nor  finally  from  justifica- 
tion, but  are  in  time  renewed  by  God's  Spirit  unto  lively  faith  and 
repentance." — Fuller's  Church  History,  third  volumi',  page  181. 

(5)  Is  it  not  a  historical  fact,  that  the  first  exposition  of  the  Tliirty- 
nine  Articles,  published  after  the  Reformation,  contains  a  fuU  and 
distinct  assertion  of  the  doctrine  of  perseverance,  in  the  part  which 
treats  of  the  Seventeenth  Article  ?  I  allude  to  the  work  of  Thomas 
Rogers,  Chaplain  to  Archbishop  Bancroft,  to  whom  the  book  was 
dedicated,  1607. — Rogers  on  the  Thirttj-nine  Articles.  Parker  Society 
Edition. 

(6)  Is  it  not  a  historical  fact,  that  in  the  year  1612,  King  James  the 
First  published  a  declaration  written  by  himself,  against  one  Vorstius, 
an  Arminian  divine,  in  which  he  calls  the  doctrine  that  the  saints  may 
fall  away,  "A  wicked  doctrine,  a  blasphemous  heresy,  directly  contrary 
to  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England. " — Prynne.  Church  of  England 
Antithesis,  etc.,  page  206. 

(7)  Is  it  not  a  historical  fact,  that  the  same  King  James  the  First, 
in  the  same  year  1612,  wrote  a  letter  to  the  States  of  Holland,  in  conse- 
quence of  a  Dutch  divine,  named  Bertius,  having  written  a  book  on  the 
Apostacy  of  the  Saints,  and  sent  it  to  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury. 
In  this  letter,  the  King  speaks  of  Bertius  as  "a  pestilent  heretic,"  and 
calls  his  doctrine  "an  abominable  heresy, "  and  in  one  place  says,  "he 
is  not  ashamed  to  lie  so  grossly  as  to  avow  that  the  heresies  contained 
in  the  said  book  are  agreeable  with  the  religion  and  profession  of 
the  Church  of  England." — Prynne.  Church  of  England's  Antithesis  to 
Arminianism,  page  200. 

(8)  Is  it  not  a  historical  fact,  that  the  same  King  James  the  First,  in 
the  year  1616,  visited  with  severe  displeasure  a  clergyman  named 
Sympson,  a  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  for  preaching  Ijefore 


620 


OLD  PATHS. 


him  at  Royston,  that  true  believers  may  totally  fall  away  ? — FuUer\i 
History  of  Cambridge,  page  160. 

(9)  Is  it  not  a  historical  fact,  that  in  the  Synod  of  Dort,  in  the  year 
1619,  the  doctrine  of  final  perseverance  was  strongly  asserted?  Now 
several  English  Divines  were  formally  deputed  to  attend  this  Synod  and 
take  part  in  its  proceedings,  and  amongst  others.  Bishop  Davenant,  and 
Bishop  Carleton.  And  is  it  not  notorious  that  however  much  they 
diflfered  from  the  conclusions  of  the  Synod  in  matters  of  discipline,  they 
"approved  all  the  points  of  doctrine?" — Fuller's  Church  History,  vol.  3, 
2^age  279. 

(10)  Last,  but  not  least,  is  it  not  a  historical  fact,  that  all  the  leading 
Archbishops  and  Bishops  in  the  reigns  of  Elizabeth  and  James  the 
First,  were  thorough  Calvinists  in  matters  of  doctrine  ?  And  is  it  not  a 
notorious  fact  that  the  final  perseverance  of  the  saints  is  one  of  the 
leading  principles  of  the  system  that  is  called  Calviuistic  ?  Heylin 
himself  is  obliged  to  confess  this.  He  says,  "  It  was  safer  for  any  man 
in  those  times  to  have  been  looked  upon  as  a  heathen  or  publican  than 
an  anti-Calvinist. " — Heylin's  Life  of  Laud,  page  52. 

I  lay  these  ten  facts  before  my  readers  and  ask  their  serious  attention 
to  them.  I  am  unable  to  understand  how  any  one  can  avoid  the 
conclusion  which  may  be  drawn  from  them.  To  me  it  appears  an 
established  point  in  history,  that  the  doctrine  of  the  final  perseverance 
of  the  saints  is  the  old  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  the 
denial  of  this  doctrine  is  new. 

I  could  easilj'  add  long  quotations  to  strengthen  the  evidence  which  I 
have  brought  forward.  I  could  turn  to  marginal  notes  of  the  ' '  Bishop's 
Bible,"  published  under  the  special  suj)erintendence  and  approval  of 
Archbishop  Parker.  I  could  quote  passage  upon  passage  from  the 
writings  of  Archbishops  Cranmer,  Grindal,  Sandys,  Whitgift,  Abbot, 
Usher,  and  Leighton, — of  Bishops  Uidley,  L.atimer,  Jewell,  Pilkington, 
Babington,  Hall,  Davenant,  Carleton,  Prideaux,  and  Reynolds.  In 
short,  the  difiiculty  is  to  find  theological  writers  in  the  reigns  of 
Elizabeth  and  James  the  First  who  ever  thought  of  disputing  final 
perseverance.  William  Prynne  gives  the  names  of  no  less  than  130 
writers  who  held  that  the  saints  could  never  perish,  and  gives  the 
reference  to  their  works.  But  at  the  time  he  wrote  (1629)  he  could 
only  find  four  writers  who  had  denied  the  perseverance  of  the  saints, 
and  taught  the  possibility  of  their  apostacy.  I  could  supply  many 
quotations  from  the  writers  he  names.  But  I  spare  the  reader.  He 
has  probably  heard  enough. 

I  have  made  this  note  longer  than  I  intended,  but  the  importance  of 
the  facts  which  it  contains  must  be  my  ajjology.  The  whole  subject 
in  the  present  day  is  one  of  the  deepest  moment. 

The  evangelical  members  of  the  Church  of  England  are  constantly 
taunted  by  their  adversaries  with  holding  new  views.  They  are  told 
that  their  opinions  are  not  "Church  opinions,"  and  that  they  ought  to 


PERSEVERANCE. 


521 


leave  the  Churcli  of  England  and  become  dissenters  without  delay.  I 
entreat  all  readers  of  these  pages  never  to  be  moved  by  such  taunts  and 
insinuations.  I  tell  them  that  those  who  make  them  are  only  exposing 
their  own  thorough  ignorance  of  the  first  principles  of  their  own  com- 
munion. I  tell  them  not  to  be  ashamed  of  their  own  views,  for  they 
have  no  cause.  I  tell  them  that  the  evangelical  members  of  the  Church 
of  England  are  the  true  representatives  of  the  views  of  the  Reformers 
and  their  immediate  successors,  and  that  those  who  oppose  them  know 
not  what  they  are  saying. 

Last,  but  not  least,  I  would  counsel  all  clergymen  who  are  persecuted 
for  holding  evangelical  opinions,  to  arm  themselves  with  a  thorough 
knowledge  of  old  Church  of  England  divinity,  and  to  take  comfort  in 
the  thought  that  they  have  truth  on  their  side.  They,  at  all  events, 
are  explaining  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  according  to  the  intention  of 
those  who  composed  them.  Their  opponents  are  either  neglecting  the 
Articles,  or  attaching  to  them  a  new  meaning. 

How  far  it  is  reasonable  and  fair  to  persecute  godly  men  for  preferring 
the  views  of  the  Reformers  to  those  of  Laud,  I  leave  it  to  others  to  decide. 
But  those  who  are  persecuted  may  take  comfort  in  the  reflection  that 
if  they  err,  they  err  in  good  company.  And  if  they  ever  suffer 
loss  of  character  and  position  for  holding  final  jjerseverance  and  denying 
the  inseparable  connection  of  baptism  and  regeneration,  they  may  boldly 
tell  the  world  that  they  suffer  because  they  agree  with  Latimer,  and 
Hooper,  and  Jewell,  and  Whitgift,  and  Carleton,  and  Davenant,  and 
Usher,  and  Leighton,  and  Hooker,  and  Hall.  He  that  suffers  in  com- 
pany wdth  these  good  men  has  no  cause  to  be  ashamed  ! 

If  I  were  in  a  position  to  offer  counsel  to  my  evangelical  brethren  at 
this  crisis,  I  would  earnestly  advise  them  to  hold  fast  ike  doctrine  of  final 
perseverance,  and  never  let  it  go.  There  is  no  doctrine  which  so  entirely 
overturns  the  modern  view  of  baptismal  regeneration.  There  is  no 
doctrine  in  consequence  which  many  dislike  so  much,  and  labour  so 
hard  to  overthrow.  It  is  a  barrier  in  their  path.  It  is  a  thom  in 
their  side.  It  is  an  argument  which  they  cannot  answer.  The  Seven- 
teenth Article  of  the  Church  of  England  is  one  of  the  keys  of  our 
position.  He  that  gives  up  the  doctrine  of  perseverance  may  rest 
assured  that  he  has  sold  the  pass  to  his  enemy.  Once  allow  that  saving 
grace  may  be  totally  lost,  and  in  the  day  of  controversy  you  will  never 
hold  your  ground. 


LONBON  : 
WILLIAM  HUNT  AND  COMPANY. 
PATERNOSTER  ROW. 


1   1012  01207  9549 


DATE  DUE 

WW  4 

1  I  "',4'  ,„1-J 

t 

i 

1 
1 

i 

G  A  Y  L  O  R  D 

PRINTED  IN  U  S  A. 

