ne 


LL ALLE LL RARE ec a 
a 


= ONE WAY. ¢ 


\ bey 
\" cape 


A TRACT FOR THE NIMES. = 
BEING THOUGHTS ON ACTS iv. 12. ee 


te 


BY THE % iS 
& jg tin 2 


REV."J. CP RYLE, BA oT RO 


af 
RECTOR OF HELMINGHAM, cu Fone 


a 


+) 


* 


Author of ‘“ Lavina: on Dean, ? ” 
a Asecelnos ke 


SOSH SSESSCEHSSEOHS 


D2 08 


he aoe 
| a 
le! 


Te substance of the following pages were originally preached 
asa Lecture, at St. Clement’s Church, Ipswich, on the Even- 
ing of January Ist, 1850. 


The desire expressed by some who were present on that oc- 


casion, united with my own deep conviction of the great im- 
portance of the subject in the present day, has induced me to 


send forth the Lecture in its present shape. 


I can truly say, in the words of that admirable divine, Robert 
Traill, “ The edification of any believer, and the correction 
of any unbeliever, will over-pay the labour of this service. This 
is all I design and desire. I have neither sought patrons nor 
vouchers, beside the Spirit of God speaking in the Scripture of 
truth. At this bar all men and all doctrines must stand and 
be judged.” 

J. ©. RYLE. 


Helmingham Rectory, 
February, 1850. 


“ Ne 


TuHEs: 
are n 
whom 


Th 
tian, . 
It wa 

The 
This 
and 
denied 
He st 
tells 
that 
the he 
any o 
given 

No 
princi 
of the 

The 
be had 
shall b 
he be 
aid th 
out. u 


men 


ONLY ONE WAY. 


“‘ Neither is there salvation in any other : for there is 
none other name under heaven, given among men, 
whereby we must be saved.”’—Acts iv. 12. 


THESE words are striking in themselves. But they 
are much more striking, if you consider when and by 
whom they were spoken. 


They were spoken by a poor and friendless Chris- 
tian, in the midst of a persecuting Jewish Council. 
It was a grand confession of Christ. 


They were spoken by the lips of the Apostle Peter. 
This is the man who a few weeks before forsook Jesus 
and fled. This is the very man who three times over 
denied his Lord. There is another spirit in him now.. 
He stands up boldly before Priests and Sadduces, and 
tells them the truth to their face: “ This is the stone 
that was set at nought of you builders, which is become 
the head of the corner. Neither is there salvation in 
any other: for there is none other name under heaven, 
given among men, whereby we must be saved.”’ 


Now, I need hardly tell you, this text is one of the 
principal foundations on which the Highteenth Article 
of the Church of England is built. 


That Article runs as follows: “ They also are to 
be had accursed that presume to say that every man 
shall be saved by the law or sect he professeth, so that 
he be diligent to frame his life according to that law 
anid the light of nature. For holy Scripture doth set 
out: unto us only the name of Jesus Christ, whereby 
men must be saved.” 


4 


There are few stronger assertions than this, 
throughout the whole thirty-nine Articles. It is the 
only anathema pronounced by our Church from one 
end of her confession of faith to the other. The 
Council of Trent in her decrees anathematizes con- 
tinually. The Church of England does it once, and 
once only. And that she does it on good grounds, I 
sialic to show you by an examination of the Apostle 

eter’s words. 


In considering this solemn subject, there are three 
things which I wish to do. 


J. First, to show you the doctrine here laid down 
by the Apostle. 


II. Secondly, to show you some reasons why this 
doctrine must be true. 


III. Thirdly, to show you some consequences which 
naturally flow from the doctrine. 


I. First let me show you the doctrine of the text. 


Let us make sure that we rightly understand what 
the Apostle Peter means. He says of Christ, ‘ Nei- 
ther is there salvation in any other: for there is 
none other name under heaven, given among men, 
whereby we must be saved.” Now what is this ? 
On our clearly seeing this, very much depends. 


He means that no one can be saved from sin,— 
its guilt, power, and consequences, — excepting by 
Jesus Christ. 

He means that no one can have peace with God 


the Father,—obtain pardon in this world,—and escape | 


wrath to come in the next,—excepting through the 
atonement and mediation of Jesus Christ. 


In Christ alone God’s rich provision of salvation 
for sinners is treasured =p. By Christ alone God’s 
abundant mercies come down from heaven to earth. 
Christ’s blood alone can cleanse us. Christ’s righteous- 
ness alone can clothe us. Christ’s merit alone can 
give us a title to heaven. Jews and Gentiles, learned 
and unlearned, kings and poor men—all alike must 
either be saved by Jesus, or lost for ever. 


5 


And the Apostle adds emphatically, “there is none 
other name under heaven, given among men, whereby 
we must be saved.’”’ There is no other person com. 
misioned, sealed, and appointed by God the Father, to 
be the Saviour of sinners, excepting Christ. The 
keys of life and death are committed to His hand, and 
all who would be saved must go to Him. ! 

There was but one place of safety in the day when 
the flood came upon the earth, and that was Noah’s 
ark. All other places and devices,—mountains, towers, 
trees, rafts, boats,—all were alike useless. So also 
there is but one hiding-place for the sinner who would 
escape the storm of God’s anger,—he must venture 
his soul on Christ. 

There was but one man to whom the Egyptians. 
could go in the time of famine, when they wanted food. 
They must go to Joseph. It was a waste of time to go 
to any one else. So also there is but one to whom 
hungering souls must go, if they would not perish for 
ever,—they must go to Christ. 

There was but one word that could save the lives 
of the Ephraimites in the day when the Gileadites con- 
tended with them, and took the fords of Jordan. 
(Judges xi.) They must say ‘ Shibboleth” or die. 
Just so there is but one name that will avail us when 
we stand at the gate of heaven. We must name the 
name of Jesus as our only hope, or be cast away ever. 


-lastingly. 


Such is the doctrine of the text, “Ne #alvation but 
by Jesus Christ ;—in Him plenty of salva.ion,—salva- 
tion to the uttermost,—salvation for the very chief of 
sinners ;—out of Him no salvation at all.” It isin 
perfect harmony with our Lord’s own word in. St. 


John: “I am the way, the truth, and the life; no man 


cometh unto the Father but by me.” (John xiv. 6.) 
It is the same thing that Paul tells the Corinthians: 
‘Other foundation can no man lay, than thet is laid, 
which is Jesus Christ.” (1 Cor. iii. 11.) And the 
same that John tells us in his first epistle: “ God hath 
given to us eternal life, and this life is in His Son. 
He that hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the 


6 


Son of God hath not life.”? (1 John v. 12.) all these 
texts come to one and the same point,—no salvation but 
by Jesus Christ. 
Reader, make sure that you understand this before 
ou passon. Perhaps you think this: is all old news. 
Perhaps you feel ‘these are ancient things: who 
knoweth not such truths as these? Of course we 
believe there is no salvation but by Christ.” But mark 
well what I say; make sure that you understand this 
doctrine, or else by and by you will stumble and be 
offended at what I have yet to say. 


Remember that you are to venture the whole salva- 
tion of your soul on Christ, and on Christ only. You 
are to cast loose completely and entirely from all other 
hopes and trusts. You are not to rest partly on Christ, 
—partly on doing all you can,—partly on keeping 
your Church,—partly on receiving the sacrament. In 
the matter of your justification Christ is to be all. 
This is the doctrine of the text. 


Remember that heaven is before you, and Christ the 
only door into it ;—hell beneath you, and Christ alone 
able to deliver you from it ;—the devil behind you, 
and Christ the only refuge from his wrath and accusa- 
tions ;—the law against you, and Christ alone able to 
redeem you ;—sin weighing you down, and Christ alone 
able to put it away. This is the doctrine of the text. 

Now do you see it? I hope youdo. But I fear 
many think so, who may find before laying down this 
paper they do not. 


Il. Let me show you, in the second place, some rea- 
sons why the doctrine of the text must be true. 


I might cut short this part of the subject by one 
simple argument, “ God says so.”” ‘One plain text,” 
said an old divine, “is as good as a thousand rea. 
sons.’ 


But I will not do this. I wish to meet the objections 
that are ready to rise in many hearts against this doc- 
aia by pointing out the strong foundations on which it 
stands. 


these 
n but 


efore 
ews. 
who 
> we 
mark 
d this 
id be 


alva- 
You 
other 
shrist, 
oping 
In 

e all. 


ist the 
alone 
you, 
cusa- 
ble to 
alone 
Ext. 
I fear 
n this 


7 


1. Let me then say, for one thing, the doctrine 
of the text must be true, because man is what man is. 

Now, what is man? There is one broad sweeping 
answer, which takes in the whole human race,—man 
is a sinful being. All children of Adam born into the 
world, whatever be their name or nation, are corrupt, 
wicked, and defiled, in the sight of God. Their 
thoughts, words, ways, and actions, are all more or less 
defective and imperfect. 

Is there no country on the face of the globe, where 


“ssin does not reign? Is there no happy valley, no se- 


cluded island, where innocence is to be found? Is 
there no tribe on earth, where, far away from civiliza- 
tion and commerce, and money, and gunpowder, and 
luxury, and books, morality and purity flourish ?—No ! 
reader, there isnone. Look over all the voyages and 
travels you can.lay your hand on, from Columbus 
down to Cook, and you will see the truth of what I am 
asserting. The most solitary islands of the Pacific 
Ocean ; islands cut off from all the rest ofthe world ; 
islands where people were alike ignorant of Rome and 
Paris, London and Jerusalem : these islands have been 
found full of impurity, cruelty, and idolatry. The 
footprints of the devil have been traced on every shore. 
The veracity of the third of Genesis has everywhere 
been established. Whatever else savages have been 
pn ee ignorant of, they have never been found ignorant 
of sin. 

But are there no men and women inthe world who 
are free from this corruption of nature? Have there 
not been high and exalted souls, who have every now 
and then lived faultless lives? Have there not been 
some, if it be only a few, who have done all that God 
required, and thus proved that sinless perfection is a 
possibility ?—-No, reader, there have been none. Look 
over all the biographies and lives of the holiest Chris- 
tians. Mark how the brightest and best of Christ's 
people have always had the deepest sense of their own 
defectiveness and corruption. They groan, they mourn, 
they sigh, they weep over their own short-comings. 
Ités one of the common grounds on which they meet. 


8 


Patriarchs and Apostles, Fathers and Reformers, Epis. 
copalians and Presbyterians, Luther and Calvin, Knox 
and Bradford, Rutherford and Bishop Hall, Wesley and 
Whitefield, Martyn and M’Cheyne,—all are alike agreed 
in feeling their own sinfulness. The more light they 
have, the more humble and self-abased they seem to be. 
The more holy they are, the more they seem to feel 
their own unworthiness, and to glory, not in themselves, 
but in Christ. 

Now, what does all this tend to prove? To my eyes 
it seems to prove, that human nature is so tainted and 
corrupt that, left to himself, no man could be saved. 
Man’s case appears to me a hopeless one without a 
Saviour,—and that a mighty Saviour too. ‘There must 
be a Mediator, an atonement, an Advocate, to make 
such poor sinful beings acceptable with God :—and I 
find this nowhere excepting in Jesus Christ. Heaven 
for man without a mighty Redeemer,—peace with God 
for man without a mighty Intercessor,—eternal life for 
man without an eternal Saviour,—in one word, salvation 
without Christ,—all alike appear to me utter impossi- 
bilities. 

I lay these things before you, and ask you to consider 
them. I know it is one of the hardest things in the 
world to realize the sinfulness of sin. To say we are 
all sinners is one thing ; to have an idea what sin must 
be in the sight of God is quite another. Sin is too 
much part of ourselves to allow us to see it as it is. 
We do not feel our own moral deformity. We are like 
those animals in creation which are vile and loathsome 
to our senses, but are not so to themselves, nor yet to 
one another. Their loathsomeness is their nature, and 
they do not perceive it. Our corruption is part and 
parcel of ourselves, and at our best we have buta 
feeble comprehension of its intensity. 

But this you may be sure of, if you could see your 
own lives with the eyes of the angels who never fell, 
you would never doubt this point fora moment. De- 
pend on it, no one can really know what man is, and 
not see that the doctrine of our text must be true. 
. There can be no salvation except by Christ. 


left 
cifu 
His 
invis 
Eee 
no\ 
wisd 
B 
high 
wha 
expr 
fathc 


, Epis- 

Knox 
ey and 
agreed 
ht they 
1 to be. 
to feel 
selves, 


ly eyes 
ted and 
saved. 
ithout a 
re must 
> make 
—and I 
Heaven 
ith God 
life for 
alvation 
impossi- 


onsider 
s in the 
we are 
in must 

is too 
as it is. 
are like 
Athsome 
r yet to 
ure, and 
art and 

but a 


pe your 
er fell, 
t. De- 
is, and 
be true. 


9 


2. Let me say another thing. The doctrine of our 
text must be true, because God is what God is, 


Now, what is God ? That is a deep question indeed. 
We know something of [lis attributes. He has not 
left Himself without witness in creation. He has mer- 
cifully revealed to us many things about Himself in 
His word. We know that God is a Spirit,—eternal,— 
invisible,-—almighty,—the maker of all things,—the 
pete? of all things,—holy, just, all-seeing,—all- 

nowieg, all-remembering,—infinite in mercy, in 
wisdom, in purity. 


But alas! after all, how léw and grovelling are our 
highest ideas, when we come to put down on paper 
what we believe God to be! How many words and 
expressions we use whose full meaning we cannot 
fathom! How many things our tongues say of Him, 
which our minds are utterly unable to conceive ! 


How small a part of Him dowe see! How little 
of Him can we possibly know !_ How mean and paltry 
are any words of ours to convey any idea of Him who 
made this mighty world out of nothing, and with whom 
one day is as a thousand years, anda thousand years 
as one day !_ How weak and inadequate are our poor 
feeble intellects to conceive of Him who is perfect: in 
all His works,—perfect in the greatest as well as per- 
fect in the smallest,—pérfect in appointing the days 
and hours in which Jupiter, with all his satellites, shall 
travel round the sun,—perfect in forming the smallest 
insect that creeps over a few feet of our little globe ! 
How little can our busy helplessness comprehend a 
Being who is ever ordering all things in heaven and 
earth by universal Providence,—ordering the rise and 
fall of nations and dynasties, like Nineveh and Car- 
thage ;—ordering the exact length to which men like 
Alexander, and Tamerlane, and Napoleon shall extend 
their conquests,—ordering the least step in the life of 
the humblest believer among His people, all at the 
same time, all unceassingly,—all perfectly,—all for His 
own glory ! : 


10 


The blind man is no judge ofthe paintings of Rubens 
or Titian. The deaf man is insensible to the beauty 
of Handel’s music. The Greenlander can have buta 
faint notion of the climate of the tropics. The Austra- 
lian savage can form but a remote conception of a loco- 
motive engine, however well you describe it. There 
is no place in their minds to take in these things. They 
have no set of thoughts which can comprehend them. 
They have no mental fingers to grasp them. And 
just in the same way, the best and brightest ideas 
that men can form of God, compared to the reality 
which we shall see one day, are weak and faint 
indeed. 


But, reader, one thing, I think, is very clear, and 
that is this. The more any man considers calmly what 
God really is, the more he must feel the immeasurable 
distanee between God and himself. - The more he 
meditates, the more he must see that there is a great 

ulf between him and God. His conscience, I think, 


will teli him, if he will let it speak, that God is perfect, 
and he imperfect ;—that God is very high, and he very 
low ;—that God is glorious majesty, and he a poor 
worm ;—and that if ever he is to stand before Him in 
judgment with comfort, he must have some mighty 
helper, or he will not be saved. 


And what is all this but the very doctrine of our 
text? What is all this but eoming round to the con- 
clusion I am urging upon you? With such an one as 
God to give account to, we must have a mighty 
Saviour. To give us peace with such a glorious Being 
as God, we must have an almighty Friend and Advocate 
on our side,—an Advocate who can answer every charge 
that can be laid against us, and plead our cause with 
God on equal terms. We want this, and nothing less 
than this: vague notions of mercy will never give true 
peace. And such a Saviour, such a Friend, such an 
Advocate is nowhere to be found, excepting in the per. 
son of Jesus Christ, 


I lay this reason also before you. I know well that 
people may have false notions of God, as well as every. 


Rubens 
beauty 
e buta 
\ ustra- 
a loco- 
There 
They 

1 them. 
And 

st ideas 
reality 
d faint 


ar, and 
ly what 
surable 
iore he 
a great 
I think, 
perfect, 
e very 
a poor 
Him in 
mighty 


> of our 
he con- 

one as 
mighty 
s Being 
dvocate 
charge 
se with 
ing less 
ve true 
such an 
he per- 


ell that 
8 every 


11 


thing else, and shut their eyes against truth. But I 
say boldly and confidéhtly, no man can have really 
high and honourable views of what God is, and escape 
the conclusion that the doctrine of our text-must be 


true. There can be no possible salvation, but by Jesus 
Christ. 


3. Let me say, in the third place, this doctrine must 
be true, because the Bible is what the Bible is. 


All through the Bible, from Genesis down to Revela- 
tion, there is only one simple account of the way in 
which men must be saved. It is always the same,— 
only for the sake of our Lord Jesus Christ,—through 
faith,—not for our own works and deservings. 

You see it dimly revealed at first. It looms through 
the mist of a few promises, but there it is. 

You have it more plainly afterwards. It is taught 
by the pictures and emblems of the law of Moses, the 
schoolmaster dispensation. 

You have it still more clearly by and by. The Pro- 
phets saw in vision many particulars about the Redeem- 
er yet to come. 

You have it fully at last, in the sunshine of New 
Testament history,—Christ incarnate,—Christ cruci- 
fied,—Christ rising again,—Christ preached to the 
world. 

But one golden chain runs through the whole volume, 


- —no salvation excepting by Jesus Christ. The bruis- 


ing of the serpent’s head, foretold in the day of the fall, 
—the clothing of our first parents with skins,—the 
sacrifices of Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,—the 
passover, and all the particulars of the Jewish law,— 
the high priest,—the altar,—the daily offering of the 
lamb,—the holy of holies, entered only by blood,—the 
scape goat,—the cities of refuge,—all are so many wit- 
nesses to the truth set forth in the text,—all preach with 
one voice, salvation only by Jesus Christ. 

In fact this truth appears to me the grand subject of 
the Bible, and all the different parts and portions of the 
Book are meant to throw light upon it. I can gather 
from it no ideas of pardon and peace with God, except- 


12 


ing in connexion with this truth. If I could read of one 
soul in it, who was saved without faith in a Saviour, I ‘ 
might perhaps not speak so confidently. But when I to 
see that faith in Christ,—whether a coming Christ, ora po 
crucified Christ,—was the prominent feature in the re- | 
ligion of all who went to heaven ;—when I see Abel 
owning Christ in his better sacrifice, at one end of the 
Bible, and the saints in glory in John’s vision, rejoicing 
in Christ at the other end of the Bible;—when I see a 
man like Cornelius, who was devout and feared God, 
and gave alms, and prayed, not told that he had done 
all, and would of course be saved, but ordered to send 
for Peter, and hear of Christ ;—when I see all these 
things, I say, I feel bound to believe that the doctrine 
of the text is the doctrine of the whole Bible,—no sal- 
vation, no way to heaven excepting by Jesus Christ. 
Reader, I do not know what use you make of your | 
Bible,—whether you read it, or whether you do not,— ) 
whether you read it all, or whether you only read such 


parts as you like. But this I tell you plainly, if you ts 
read and believe the whole Bible, you will find it hard é 
to escape the doctrine of the eighteenth Article of the col 
Church of England, already quoted. I do not see how nes 
you can consistently reject what I have been endeav- ua 
ouring to prove. Christ is the way, and the only way, = 
—Christ the truth, and the only truth,—Christ the lite, be! 
and the only life. = hi 


Such are the reasons which seem to me to confirm 
the truth laid down in our text. What man is,—what 
God is,—what the Bible is ;—all appear to me to lead us d 
on to the same great conclusion,—no possible salva- i! 


tion without Christ. I leave them with you, and pass es 
on. 
he 
IlJ. And now, in the third and last place, let me | ito 
show you some consequences which flow naturally out of gr 
our text. inf 
There are few parts of this subject which seem tome da 
more important than this. The truth I have been trying Hi 
to set before you, bears so strongly on the condition of a of 


great proportion of mankind, that I consider it would be 


ead of one 
Saviour, I 
t when [I 
yhrist, or a 
in the re- 
see Abel 
end of the 
, rejoicing 
en I see a 
ared God, 
had done 
2d to send 
all these 
> doctrine 
,—no sal- 
Christ. 
e of your 
do not,— 
read such 
ly, if you 
id it hard 
cle of the 
pt see how 
endeav- 
only way, 
st the life, 


Db confirm 
is,—what 
to lead us 
ble salva- 
and pass 


e, let me 
lly out of 


eem tome 
een trying 
dition of a 
would be 


13 


mere aifectation on my part, not to say something about 
it. If Christisthe only way of salvation, what are we 
to feel about many people in the world? This is the 
point I am now going to take up. 


I believe that many persons would go with me so far 
as I have gone, and would go no further. They will 
allow my premises. ‘They will have nothing to say to 
my conclusions. They think it uncharitable to say 
anything which appears to condemn others. For my 
part I cannot understand such charity. It seems to me 
the kind of charity which would see a neighbour drink- 
ing slow poison, but never interfere to stop him ;— 
which would allow emigrants to embark in a leaky, 
ill-found vessel, and not interfere to prevent them ;— 
which would see a blind man walking near a precipice, 
and think it wrong to cry out and tell him there was 
danger. 


I believe the greatest charity is to tell the greatest 
quantity of truth. I believe it is no charity to hide the 
legitimate consequences of such a text as we are now 
considering, or to shut our eyes against them. And I 
solemnly call on every one who really believes there is 
no salvation in any but Christ,—and none other name 
given under heaven whereby we must be saved,—I 
solemnly call on that person to listen to me, while I set 
before him some of the tremendous consequences which 


the text involves. 


I am not going to speak of the heathen, who have 
never heard the Gospel. Their final state is a great 
depth, which the mightiest minds have been unable to 
fathom. Iam not ashamed of leaving it alone. One 
thing only I will say,—if any of the heathen, who die 
heathen, are saved, I believe they will owe their salva- 
tion, however little they may know it on this side of the 
grave, to the work and atonement of Christ. Just as 
infants and idiots among ourselves will find in the last 
day they owed all to Christ, though they never knew 
Him, so I believe it will be with the heathen, if ariy 
of them are saved, whether many or few. For this I. 
‘am sure of, there is no such thing as creaturé merit. 


14 


My own private opinion is, that the highest arch-angel, 
soup of course in a very different way and degree 
rom us,) will be found im some way to own his standing 
to Christ, and that things in heaven, as well as things on 
earth, will ultimately be found all indebted to the name 
of Jesus. But I leave the case of the heathen to others, 
and will speak of matters nearer home. 


One mighty consequence then which seems to be 
learned from this text, is the ulter uselessness of any re- 
ligion without Christ. 


There are many to be found in Christendom at this 
day, who have a religion of this kind. ‘They would not 
like to be called Deists, but Deists they are. That there 
is a God,—that there is what they are pleased to call 
Providence,—that God is merciful,—that there will be 
a state after death,—this is about the sum and substance 
of their creed. And as to the distinguishing tenets of 
Christianity, they do not seem to recognize them at all. 
Now I denounce such a system as a baseless fabric,— 
its seeming foundation, man’s fancy,—its hopes, an 
utter delusion. The god of such people is an idol of 
their own invention, and not the glorious God of the 
Scriptures,—a miserably imperfect being, even on their 
own showing,—without holiness, without justice, without 
any attribute but that of vague indiscriminate mercy. 
Such a religion may possibly do as a toy to live with ;— 
it is far too unreal to die with. It utterly fails to meet 
the wants of man’s conscience. It offers no remedy. 
It affords no rest for the soles of our feet. It cannot 
comfort, for it cannot save. Reader, beware of it, if 
you love life. Beware of a religion without Christ. 


Another consequence to be learned from the text is, 
the folly of any religion in which Christ has not the first 
place. 

I need not remind you how many hold a system of 
this kind. The Socinian tells us that Christ was a mere 
man ; that His blood had no more efficacy than that of 
another ; that His death on the cross was nota real 
atonement and propitiation for man’s sins ; and that after 
all, doing is the way to heaven, and not believing. I 


rch-angel, 
nd degree 
is standing 
; things on 
» the name 
1 to others, 


»ms to be 
of any re- 


m at this 
‘would not 
That there 
ed to call 
are will be 
| substance 
xy tenets of 
hem at all. 
3 fabric,— 
hopes, an 
an idol of 
rod of the 
en on their 
ce, without 
te mercy. 
e with ;— 
s to meet 
D remedy. 
It cannot 
e of it, if 
rhrist. 

e text is, 
pt the first 


system of 
was amere 
an that of 
5 not a real 
d that after 
lieving. I 


4 add to the safety there is in Christ Jesus. 
= this she sins against our text with a high hand. Let us 


15 


solemnly declare that I believe such a system is ruinous 
to men’s souls. It seems to me to strike at the root of 
the whole plan of salvation which God has revealed in 
the Bible, and practically to nullify the greater part of 
the Scriptures. It overthrows the priesthood of the 
Lord Jesus, and strips Him of His office. It converts 
the whole system of the law of Moses, touching sacri- 
ficee and ordinances, intoa meaningless form. It seems 
to say that the sacrifice of Cain was just as good as the 
sacrifice of Abel. It turns man adrift on a sea of un- 
certainty, by plucking from under him the finished work 
of a divine Mediator. Beware of it, Reader, no less 
than of Deism, if you love life. Beware of the least 
attempt to depreciate and undervalue Christ’s person, 
offices, or work. The name whereby alone you and | 
can be saved, is a name above every name, and the 
slightest contempt poured upon it is an insult to the 
King of Kings. The salvation of your soul has been 
laid by God the Father on Christ, and no other ; and if 
He were not very God of very God, He never could 
accomplish it,—there could be no salvation at all. 


Another consequence to be learned from our text is, 
the great error committed by those who add anything to 
Christ as necessary to salvation. 


It is an easy thing to profess belief in the Trinity, 
and reaerence for our Lord Jesus Christ, and yet to 
make some addition to Christ, as the ground ot hope, and 
so to overthrow the doctrine of the text as really and 
completely as by denying it altogether. 


The Church of Rome does this systematically. She 
adds things over and above the requirements of the 
Gospel, of her own invention. She speaks as if Christ’s 
finished work was not a sufficient foundation for a sin. 


4) ner’s soul ; and asif it were not enough to say, “ Bélieve 
} onthe Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved.” 


She sends men to penances and absolution, to masses 
and extreme unction, to fasting and bodily mortification, 
to the virgin and the saints,—as if these things could 
And in doing 


16 


beware of any Romish hankering after additions to the 
simple way of the Gospel, from whatever quarter it may 
come. 


But I fear the Church of Rome does not stand alone 
in this matter. I fear there are thousands of professing 
Protestants, who are often erring in the same direction, 
although of course ina very different degree. They 
get into a way of adding, perhaps insensibly, other 
names to the name of Christ, or attaching an importance 
to them which-they never ought to receive. ‘The ultra 
Churchman in England, who thinks God’s covenanted 
mercies are tied to episcopacy,—the ultra Presbyterian 
in Scotland, who cannot reconcile prelacy with an intel- 
ligent knowledge of the Gospel,—the ultra Free-kirk- 
man by his side, who seems to think lay patronage and 
vital Christianity almost incompatible,—the ultra Dis- 
senter, who traces every evil in the Church to its con- 
nection with the state, and can talk of nothing but the 
voluntary system,—the ultra Baptist, who shuts out 
from the Lord’s table every one who has not received 
his views of adult baptism,—the ultra Plymouth Broth- 
er, who believes all knowledge to reside with his own 
body, and condemns every one outside as a poor weak 
babe ;—all these, I say, however unwittingly, appear to 
me to have a most uncomfortable tendency to add to the 
doctrine of our text. All seem to me to be practically 
declaring that salvation is not to be found simply and 
solely in Christ. All seem to me to be practically add- 
ing another name to the name of Jesus whereby men 
must be saved, even the name of their own party and 
sect. All seem to me to be practically replying to the 
question, ‘“‘ What shall Ido to be saved ?”’ not merely, 
‘“ Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ,’? but also, ‘Come 
and join us.” 


Now I call upon every true Christian to beware of 
such ultraism, in whatsoever form he may be inclined 
to it. In saying this, I would not be misunderstood. I 
like every one to be decided in his views of ecclesiasti- 


cal matters, and to be fully persuaded of their correct- . @ 
ness. All I ask is, that you will not put these things in: 3 


Beil ke trie ge Ree ea ae TIT a | 


itions to the 
uarter it may 


stand alone 
of professing 
me direction, 
gree. They 
nsibly, other 
in. importance 
The ultra 
s covenanted 
Presbyterian 
vith an intel- 
a Free-kirk.- 
atronage and 
he ultra Dis- 
h to its con- 
hing but the 
ho shuts out 
not received 
mouth Broth- 
with his own 
a poor weak 
sly, appear to 
to add to the 
e practically 
d simply and 
ictically add- 
‘hereby men 
wn party and 
plying to the 
not merely, 
also, ‘‘ Come 


to beware of 
y be inclined 
nderstood. I 
f ecclesiasti- 


their correct- . | 


| 
| 
: 
| 


} sinner and the Saviour. 


17 


the place of Christ, or place them anywhere near Him, 
or speak of them as if you thought them needful to sal. 
vation. However dear to us our own peculiar views 
may be, let us beware of thrusting them in between the 
Let us beware, in short, of 
adding to the doctrine of the text. In the things of 
God’s word, be it remembered, addition, as well as sub. 
traction, is a great sin. 


The last consequence which seems to me to be learned 
from our text is, the utter absurdity of supposing that we 
ought tc be satisfied with a man’s state of soul if he is 
only sincere. 


This is a very common heresy indeed, and one against 
which we all need to. be on our guard. There are 


| thousands who say, in the present day, “ We have noth. 


on himself great guilt by so doing ? 


ing to do with the opinions of others. They may per- 
haps be mistaken, though it is possible they are right 
and we wrong ;—but if they are sincere, we hope they 
will be saved, even as we.’”’ And all this sounds liberal 
and charitable, and people like to fancy their own views 
are so. 


Now, I believe such notions are entirely contradictory 
to the Bible, whatever else they may be. I cannot find 
in Scripture that any one ever got to heaven merely by 
sincerity, or was accepted with God if he was only 
earnest in maintaining his own views. The priests of 
Baal were sincere when they cut themselves with knives 
and lancets, till the blood gushed out ; but still that did 
not prevent Elijah from commanding them to be treated 
as wicked idolators. Manasseh, king of Judah, was 
doubtless sincere when he burned his children in the 
fire to Moloch ; but who does not know that he brought 
The Apostle Paul, 
when a Pharisee, was sincere while he made havoc of 
the Church ; but when his eyes were opened he mourn- 
ed over this as a special wickedness. Let us beware 
of allowing for a moment, that sincerity is everything, 
and that we have no right to think ill of a man’s spirit- 


; ual state, because of the opinions he holds, if he is only 


ese things in: § 


-earnest in holding them. 


On such principles, the 


18 


Druidical sacrifices, the car of Juggernaut, the Indian 
Suttees, the systematic murders of the Thugs, the fires 
of Smithfield, might each and all be defended. It will i 
not stand. It will not bear the test of Scripture. Once | 
allow such notions to be true, and you may as well 
throw your Bible aside altogether. Sincerity is not 
‘Christ, and therefore sincerity cannot put away sin. 


I dare be sure these consequences sound very un- 
leasant to the minds of some who may read them. 
ut | tell you of them advisedly and deliberately. I 
say calmly that a religion without Christ,—a religion § 
that takes away from Christ,—a religion that adds any- | 
thing to Christ,—a religion that puts sincerity in the 
place of Christ,—all are dangerous,—all are to be 
avoided, and all are alike contrary to the doctrine of 
our text. 


You may not like this. Iam sorry forit. You think j 
me uncharitable,—illiberal,—narrow-minded,—-bigotted, 
and so forth. Be it so. But you will not tell me m 
doctrine is not that of the word of God, and of the 
Church of England, whose minister am. That doc- | 
trine is salvation in Christ to the very uttermost,—but 
out of Christ nosalvation at all. 


I feel it a duty to bear my solemn testimony against 
the spirit of the day you live in; to warn you against 
its infection. It is not Atheism I fear so much in the 
present times as Pantheism. It is not the system which 
says nothing is true, so much as the system which says 
everything is true. It is not the system which says 
there is no Saviour, so much as the system which says 
there are many Saviours, and many ways to peace. It 
is the system which is so liberal, that it dares not say 
anything is false. It is the system which is so charita- | 
ble, that it will allow everything to be true. It is the | 
system which seems ready to honour others as well as 
our Lord Jesus Christ, class them altogether, and hope | 
well of all. Confucius and Zoroaster,—Socrates and 
Mahomet,—the Indian Brahmins and the African devil- 
worshippers,—Arius and Pelagius,—Ignatius Loyola | 
and Socinus, and are all to be treated respectfully, none 


t, the Indian 
ugs, the fires 
nded. It will 
pture. Once 
may as well 
cerity is not 
away sin. 
und very un- 


y read them. 
liberately. I 


st, —a religion § 


hat adds any- | 
cerity in the 
ll are to be 
e doctrine of 


t. Youthink j 
ed,—-bigotted, 
ot tell me my 
d, and of the 
That doc. | 
termost,—but 


nony against 
| you against 
much in the 
system which 
1 which says 
which says 
1 which says 
to peace. It 
res not say 
is so charita- 
2. It is the 
‘Ss as well as 
er, and hope | 
Socrates and 
frican devil- 
tius Loyola 
ctfully, none 


= deliver you! 


19 


are to be condemned. It is the system which bids us 
sinitz complacently on all creeds and systems of relig- 


jion,—the Bible and the Koran,—the Hindoo Vedas and 
ithe Persian Zendavesta,—the old wives fables of Rab- 


binical writers and the rubbish of Patristic traditions,— 
the Racovian catechism and the thirty-nine Articles,— 
the Revelations of Emanuel Swedenborg and the Book 
of Mormon of Joseph Smith ;—all are to be listened to, 
none are to be denounced as lies. It is the system 
which is so scrupulous about the feelings of others, 
that we are never to say they are wrong. It is the 
system which is so liberal, that it calls a man a bigot, if 
he dares to say ‘“‘I know my views are right.” This 
is the system, this is the tone of feeling which I fear in 
this day. This is the system which I desire emphati- 
cally to testify against and denounce. 


What is it but a bowing down before a great idol, 
speciously called liberality? What is it all but a 
sacrificing of truth upon the altar of a caricature of 
charity ? Beware of it, reader,—beware that the 
rushing stream of public opinion does not carry you 
away. Beware of it, if you believe the Bible. Be- 
ware of it, if you are a consistent member of the 
Church of England. Has the Lord God spoken to us 
in the Bible, or has He not? 
way of salvation plainly in that Bible, or has He not ? 
Has He declared to us the dangerous state of all out 
of that way, or has He not? Gird up the loins of your 
mind, and look these questions fairly in the face, and 
give them an honest answer. Tell us there is some 
other inspired book beside the Bible, and then we shall 
know what you mean. ‘Tell us that the whole Bible is 
not inspired, and then we shall know where to meet 


# you. But grant for a moment that the Bible, the whole 
j Bible, and nothing but the Bible is God’s truth, and 


then I know not in what way you can escape the doc. 
trine of the text. From the liberality which says 
everybody is right,—from the charity which forbids you 


@to say anybody.is wrong,—from the peace which is 


bought at the expense of truth, may the good Lord 


Has He shown us the ” 


20 


I speak for myself. I find no resting-place betweeg Seq 
downright evangelical Christianity, and downriglpy to 
infidelity, whatever others may find. I see no half-wam 
house between them, but houses that are roofless, an 
cannot shelter my weary soul. I can see consistenc 
in an infidel, however much I may pity him. Ica 
see consistency in the full maintenance of evangelic: 
truth. But as to a middle course between the two, 
cannot see it, and I say so plainly. Let it be calle 
illiberal and uncharitable ; I can hear God’s voi 
nowhere except in the Bible, and I can see no salvatio 
for sinners in the Bible excepting through Jesus Christ 
In Him I see abundance. Out of Him J see none 
And as for those who hold religions in which Christ igP@9 
not all, whoever they may be, I have a most uncomfor# the 
able feeling about their safety. I do not for a momenget W 
say that none of them are saved, but I say that thos 
who are saved are saved by their disagreement wit 
their own principles, and in spite of their own systemg?! 
The man who wrote the famous line,. 


“© He can’t be wrong whose life is in the right,” 


was a'great poet undoubtedly, but he was a wretchec “ 
divine. 

Let me conclude with a few words by way o 
application. 


First of all, if there is no salvation excepting i 
Christ, make sure that you have an interest in that sal 
vation yourself. Do not be content with hearing an¢ 
approving, and assenting to the truth, and going no 
further. Seek to have a personal interest in this sal 
vation. Lay hold by faith for your own soul. Rest 
not till you know and feel that you have got actual 
possession of that peace with God, which Jesus offers 
and that Christ is your’s and you are Christ’s. [ff ve, 
there were two, or three, or more ways of getting toll, , 
heaven, there would be no necessity for pressing thist rm 
matter upon you. But if there is only one way, youl py; 
will hardly wonder that I say “ make sure that youlesj, 
are in it.’’ » it 


21 


r-place betwee 
and downrigl 
see no half-wa 
re roofless, an 
see consistenc 
ity him. Ica 
e of evangelics 
een the two, 
et it be calle 
ar God’s voi 
see no salvatio 
th Jesus Christ 
im J see none 
which Christ i 
most uncomfor 
bt for a momen 
say that thos 
agreement witl 
ir own system 


Secondly, If there is no salvation excepting in Christ, 
y to do good to the souls of all who do not know Him 
s a Saviour. There are millions in this miserable 
ndition,—millions in foreign lands,—millions in your 
n country,—wmillions who are not trusting in Christ. 
ou ought to feel for them, if you are a true Christian ; 
you ought to pray for them ;—you ought to work for 
em, while there is yet time. Do you really believe 
at Christ is the only way to heaven ?—then live as if 
ou believed it. 


Look round the circle of your own relations and 
iends. Count them up one by one, and think how 
any of them are not yet in Christ. Try to do good 
>) them in some way or other. Act as a man should 
t who believes his friends to be in danger. Do not 
e content with their being kind and amiable, gentle 
nd good-tempered, moral and courteous,—be miser- 
ble about them till they come to Christ, and trust in 
im,—for miserable you ought to be. Let nobody 
lone who is out of Christ, if only you have opportuni- 
es of reaching him. I know all this may sound like 
nthusiasm and fanaticism. I wish there was more of 
in the world. Anything, I am sure, is better than a 
uiet indifference about the souls of others, as if every- 
ody were inthe way to heaven. Nothing, to my mind, 
0 proves our little faith, as our little feeling about the 
1 excepting inpiritual condition of those around us. 

rest in that sal 
ith hearing and 
, and going no 
est in this sal 
m soul. Rest 
ave got actual 
h Jesus offers/a, 
e Christ’s. Tf 


1e right,” 


was a wretche: 


‘ds by way o 


Thirdly, if there is no salvation excepting in Christ, 
et us love all who love the Lord Jesus in sincerity and 
exalt Him as their Saviour, whoever they may be. 
et us not draw back and look shy on others, because 
hey do not see eye to eye with ourselves in everything. 
hether a man be a Free-kirk-man or an Indepen- 
nt, a Wesleyan or a Baptist, let us love him if he 
patti oves Christ, and gives Christ His rightful place. We 
5 ol getting tore all fast travelling towards a place where names'and 

pressing this#irms and Church-government will be nothing, and 
one way, YOUMhrist will be all. Let us get ready for that place 
sure that you etimes, by loving all who are in the way that leads 


22 


This is the true charity, to believe all things, and 
hope all things, so long as we see Bible doctrines main- 
tained, and Christ exalted. Christ must be the single 
standard by which all opinions must be measured. 
Let us honour all who honour Him. But let us never 
forget that the same Apostle Paul who wrote about 
charity, says also, “If any man love not the Lord 
Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema.” If our charity 
and liberality are wider than that of the Bible, they are 
worth nothing at all. Indiscriminate love is no love at 
all; and indiscriminate approbation of all religious 
opinions, is only a new name for infidelity. Let us 
hold out the right hand to all who love the Lord Jesus, 
but let us beware how we go beyond this. 


Lastly, if there is no salvation excepting by Christ, 
you must not be surprised if ministers of the Gospel 
preach much about Him. We cannot tell you too 
much about the name which is above every name. 
You cannot hear of Him too often. You may hear | 
too much about controversy in our sermons,—you may 
hear too much of men and books, of works and duties, 
of forms and ceremonies, of sacraments and ordinances. 
But there is one subject which you never hear too much 
of,—you can never hear too much of Christ. 


When we are wearied of preaching Him, we are | 
false ministers. When you are wearied of hearing of 
Him, your souls are in an unhealthy state. When we 
have preached Him all our lives, the half of His excel- 
lence will remain untold. When you see Flim face to | 
face in the day of His appearing, you will find there § 
was more in Him than your heart ever conceived. 


Let me leave you with the words of an old writer, 
to which I desire humbly to subscribe :—‘“ I know no 
true religion but Christianity ; no true Christianity but 
the doctrine of Christ,—the doctrine of His divine per- 
son, of His divine office, of His divine righteousness, 
and of His divine Spirit, which all that are His receive. 
I know no true ministers of Christ, but such as make it 
- their business, in their calling, to commend Jesus Christ, 
in His saving fulness of grace and glory, to the faith 


23 


l things, and 
octrines main. 


nd love of men ;—no true Christian but one united to 


ifyi f the 
: faith and love, unto the glorifying of 
infos: Sar of Toon Christ, in the beauty of Gospel ha ag 
tg OARS etae’ end Chileans of this spirit have Pea Be 
let us never any years my brethren and companions, yt ait 
a he gi hali ever be, whithersoever the hand of ) 
tas charity ead me.” 
Bible, they are 
P is no love at 


every name. 
yu may hear | 
8,—you may 
| and duties, 
1 ordinances, 
ear too much 


lim, we are | 
f hearing of 
When we 
f His excel. 
lim face to | 
ll find there § 
seived. 
old writer, 
‘I know no 
stianity but 
divine per. 
hteousness, 
lis receive, 
as make it 
esus Christ, 
© the faith 


