The Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 


WEST FOOTHILL AT COLLEGE AVENUE 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 


ONLY A PRAYER-MEETING!’ 


“ONLY A PRAYER-MEBTING! 


POR TY ADDRESSES 


AT 


METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE 
AND 


OTHER PRAYER-MEETINGS. 


BY 


Gane SPURGEON; 


LONDON: 
PASSMORE AND ALABASTER, 
PATERNOSTER BuiLpines, E.C. 


1gOl. 


(All rights reserved.) 


vi Prefatory Note. 


minister lately said that he was never more surprised in his 
life than when he dropped into the Tabernacle, and found 
the ground-floor and part of the gallery filled at a Prayer- 
meeting. He believed that such a thing was almost without 
a parallel in London, and that it accounted for the success 
of the ministry. We concur in his impartial judgment. 
Will not all the churches try the power of prayer?” 

The second chapter in this book is the only one that was 
not delivered as an Address; but it so well sets forth MR. 
SPURGEON’S opinions of what Prayer-meetings should be, 
that it is included in order to make the volume as complete 
as possible. 

Others of Mr. SPURGEON’S Prayer-meeting Addresses 
have been published in his volumes entitled The Bible and 
the Newspaper, “Be of Good Cheer,” “Till He Come,” and 
The Soul-Winner. 


, CONTENTS. 


i 
PAGE 
I.—ADDRESSES ON PRAYER AND PRAYER-MEETINGS :— 

“Only a Prayer-meeting! Bor “ Il 

Prayer-meetings ;—as they were, oa as er should be 23 

Business Prayers ace ee ep 

God’s Willingness to Bless Saints ad Senerss Po 60) 

Confession of Sin... =e acs SS 

“T Pray you to Fasten your Grips” BY nee ee OS 

IJ.—ExposiTIONS OF SCRIPTURE :— 

Genesis iv. 26 ... ae te a ase Nes aan, 9) 
¥ XVsPa yes ae as sie es vate See ieee) 
= XIIT. 22)en eas a Sac cee ah as) Ah 

Exodus xvii. 8, 9 sr 50 fd as see roe NELOO, 
WeeXXXill- 14) Be te as Roe LOE 

Leviticus xxvi. 15—18 ; 23-25; pees nad ox er (1 38) 

Iesalnyl xis 2'ee o. he soe ee “to edb an h39 
Ai) MbS.o.4 RS Coy. rae LBD ae bie: nips Salo 
ree CXIX 1205.5 sot i ae 50 Abe PAS eh ity 

Isaiah vi. 1—8 ... at A ath =. soe elOS 

John xv. 2 de fee aire oh was or eee TA 

‘je kndbdnd ew enect fe wis a cm ae Ve lOS 

Acts ii. I—6; 33—41 ... ie a aor aoe pelos 

2Corinthiansi.11r... ane a iss wee wea 2OL 

James iv. 2 “i Ane cide ane See “se soe 2 

III],—INcIDENTS AND ILLUSTRATIONS :— 

An Interruption Improved ... aes abs vc Roe. PH) 

Fishing ... ae cae Hor mae Ro eRe 

“ Trespassers, Beware ! Pee aioe 560 ase ee mzas 

The Silent Steam-roller ore Bae ae wee 249 

The Steam-roller and the Stone- roller io age on W255 

Two Common Dangers 6c sic con | hehe} 

A Little Sermon from the Paruers s ere ova ro eye 

A Life-belt for Daily Use... 6} aa apy Pay AS 

The Eye, an Emblem of Faith 5 355 iis cae eh} 

“Nothing toSay” ... 6c ane 20 ae .. ©6289 


Fasting and Backsliding ... ae we by we 205 


A Full Christ for Empty Sinners and Saints we 
“Steal Away to Jesus” Seah | betwee 
An Address to Sunday-school Teachers 
a Fellowship with God’s Greatness 
_ Timely Cautions... Sant etane 


ms » “Tempted of the Devil”... ~ 2. os 
wee = u pave shall Get Home; we shall Get Home” ... 
a 
ee 


C. H. Spurgeon’s Hymn for an Early ee | Prayer- 
meeting go, yao 


aoe = eee ae 


Tee a cortege ag 


= i a ee 
rs ; 
as 


I. 


ADDRESSES ON 


_ PRAYER AND PRAYER-MEETINGS. 


oss: 


“ONLY A PRAYER-MEETING!” 


W HAT a company we have here to-night! It 

fills my heart with gladness, and my eyes 
with tears of joy, to see so many hundreds of persons 
gathered together at what is sometimes wickedly 
described as “only a prayer-meeting.” It is good 
for us to draw nigh unto God in prayer, and specially 
good to make up a great congregation for such a 
purpose. We have attended little prayer-meetings 
of four or five, and we have been glad to be there, 
for we had the promise of our Lord’s presence; but 
our minds are grieved to see so little attention given 
to united prayer by many of our churches. We have 
longed to see great numbers of God’s people coming 
up to pray, and we now enjoy this sight. Let us 
praise God that it is so. How could we expect a 
blessing if we were too idle to ask for it? How could 
we look for a Pentecost if we never met with one 
accord, in one place, to wait upon the Lord? 
Brethren, we shall never see much change for the 
better in our churches in general till the prayer- 
meeting occupies a higher place in the esteem of 
Christians. To mix it up with the week-night lecture, 
and really make an end of it, is a sad sign of declen- 
sion. I worider some two or three earnest souls in 
such churches do not band themselves together to 
restore the meeting for prayer, and bind themselves 


~ 


12 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


with a pledge to keep it up whether the minister will 
come to it or not. 

But now that we have come together, how shall we 
pray? Let us not degenerate into formality, or we 
‘shall be dead while we think we live. Let us not 
waver through unbelief, or we shall pray in vain. 
The Lord saith to His Church, “Open thy mouth, 
wide, and I will fill it.” Oh, for great faith with which 
to offer great prayers! We have been mingling 
praise and prayer together as a delicious compound 
of spices, fit to be presented upon the altar of incense 
through Christ our Lord; may we not, at this time, 
offer some special far-reaching petition? It is sug- 
gested to me that we pray for a true and genuine 
revival of religion throughout the world. 

I am glad of any signs of life, even if they should 
be feverish and transient, and I am slow to judge any 
well-intended movement; but yet I am very fearful 
that many so-called “ revivals” have, in the long run, 
wrought more harm than good. Places which have 
had the most of religious excitement are frequently 
the most difficult to move. Men’s minds have been 
baked hard in the oven of fanaticism. A species of 
religious gambling has fascinated many men, and 
given them a distaste for the sober business of true 
godliness. But if I would nail down counterfeits 
upon the counter, I do not therefore undervalue true 
gold. Far from it. It is to be desired, beyond measure, 
that the Lord would send a real and lasting revival 
of spiritual life. We need a work of the Holy Ghost 
of a supernatural kind, putting power into the preach- 
ing of the Word, inspiring all believers with heavenly 


eel 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” * 13 


energy, and solemnly affecting the hearts of the 
careless, so that they may turn to God, and live. We 
would not be drunk with the wine of carnal excite- 
ment, but we would be filled with the Spirit; we 
would not leap upon the altar, and shout and cry, 
“O Baal, hear us!” but we would behold the fire 
descending from Heaven in answer to the effectual 
fervent prayers of righteous men. Can we not entreat 
the Lord our God to make bare His holy arm in the 
eyes of all the people in this day of declension and 
vanity? 

We want a revival of old-fashioned doctrine. 
Our fear is that, if “modern thought” proceeds much 
further, the fashion of our religion will be as much 
Mohammedan as Christian; in fact, it will be more 
like infidelity than either. A converted Jew, staying 
in London, went into a dissenting chapel which I 
could mention; and when he returned to the friend 
with whom he was staying, he enquired what the re- 
ligion of the place could be, for he had heard nothing 
of what he had received as the Christian faith. The 
doctrines which are distinctive of the New Testament 
may not be actually denied in set terms, but they are 
spirited away; familiar phrases are used, but a new 
sense is attached to them. 

Certain modern preachers talk much of Christ, and 
yet reject Christianity. Under cover of ex- 
tolling the Teacher, they reject His teaching for 
theories more in accord with the spirit of the age. 
At first, Calvinism was too harsh, then Evangelical 
doctrines became too antiquated, and now the Scrip- 
tures themselves must bow to man’s alteration and 


14 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


improvement. There is plenty of preaching, in the 
present day, in which no mention is made of the 
depravity of human nature, the work of the Holy 
Ghost, the blood of atonement, or the punishment of 
sin. The Deity of Christ is not so often assailed, 
but the Gospel which He gave us, through His own 
teaching and that of the apostles, is questioned, criti- 
cized, and set aside. One of the great Missionary 
Societies actually informs us, by one of its writers, 
that it does not send out missionaries to save the 
heathen from the wrath to come, but to prepare them 
“for the higher realm which awaits them beyond the 
river of death.” I confess that I have better hopes 
for the future of the heathen than for the state of 
those who thus write concerning them. The heathen 
will derive but small advantage from the Gospel 
which such triflers with the Scriptures are likely to 
carry them. 

I know not a single doctrine which is not at this 
hour studiously undermined by those who ought to 
be its defenders; there is not a truth that is precious 
to the soul which is not now denied by those whose 
profession it is to proclaim it. The times are out of 
joint, and many are hoping to make them more and 
more so. To me, it is clear that we need a revival 
of old-fashioned Gospel preaching like that of White- 
field and Wesley; to me, preferably that of White- 
field. We need to believe: the Scriptures must be 
made the infallible foundation of all teaching; the 
ruin, redemption, and regeneration of man- 
kind must be set forth in unmistakable terms, 
and that right speedily, or faith will be more rare 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” » 15 


than gold of Ophir. We must demand from our 
teachers that they give us a “ Thus saith the Lord;” 
for, at this time, they give us their own imaginations. 
To-day, the Word of the Lord in the Book of Jere- 
miah is true: “Hearken not unto the words of the 
prophets that prophesy unto you: they make you 
vain: they speak a vision of their own heart, and not 
out of the mouth of the Lord. They say still unto 
them that despise Me, The Lord hath said, Ye shall 
have peace; and they say unto every one that 
walketh after the imagination of his own heart, No 
evil shall come upon you.” (Jer. xxi. 16, 17.) 
Beware of those who say that there is no hell, and 
who declare new ways to Heaven. May the Lord 
have mercy upon them! 

Urgently do we need a revival of personal godli- 
ness. This is, indeed, the’ secret of church 
prosperity. When individuals fall from their stead- 
fastness, the church is tossed to and fro; when 
personal faith is steadfast, the church abides true to 
her Lord. We have in and around our own de- 
nomination many true-hearted servants of Christ, 
who are hardly put to it to know what to do. Their 
loyalty to their Lord and to His truth is greater than 
their love to sect or party, and they know not whether 
to abide in their present position, and fight out the 
great question, or to lift the old banner, and quit 
their apostatizing associates. Do whichever they 
may, it is upon the truly godly and spiritual that the 
future of religion depends in the hand of God. Oh, 
for more truly holy men, quickened and filled with 
the Holy Spirit, consecrated to the Lord, and sancti- 


16 . “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


OPPO 4 ote fen ee cttnte aay oe a 


fied by His truth! What can be accomplished by 


worldly professors, theatre-going church-members, 
semi-infidel teachers, and philosophical preachers? 


Nothing but ruin can follow from a preponderance 


of these. Their presence is grievous to God, and 
disastrous to His people. Brethren, we must each 


one live if the church is to be alive; we must live 


unto God if we expect to see the pleasure of the Lord 
prospering in our hands. Sanctified men are the 
necessity of every age, for they are the salt of society, 
and the saviours of the race. The Lord has made a 
man more precious than a wedge of gold,—I mean, a 
decided, instructed, bold, unswerving man of God. 
We deeply want a revival of domestic religion. 
We have been saddened at the terrible accounts of 
the impurity of this city; but, doubtless, one cause 
of this state of things is the neglect of household 
religion among Christians, and the entire absence of 
common decency in many of the lodgings of the 
poor. The Christian family was the bulwark of god- 
liness in the days of the Puritans; but, in these evil 


times, hundreds of families of so-called Christians. 


have no family worship, no restraint upon growing 
sons, and no wholesome instruction or discipline. 
See how the families of many professors are as dressy, 
as gay, as godless as the children of the non-religious! 
How can we hope to see the Kingdom of our Lord ad- 
vance when His own disciples do not teach His Gospel 
to their own sons and daughters? Have we not need 
to repeat the lament of Jeremiah? “Even the sea 
monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their 
young ones: the daughter of my people is become 


at a 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” . : cz 


cruel, like the ostriches in the wilderness.” How 
different this from the father of the faithful, of whom 
the Lord said, “I know Abraham, that he will com- 
mand his children and his household after him, and 
they shall keep the way of the Lord”! 

The surest way to promote godliness abroad is to 
labour for it at home. The shortest method for the 
overthrow of priestcraft is for every man to be the 
priest in his own house, and to warn his sons against 
deceitful men. May our dear children be so well 
taught from infancy that they may not only escape 
the common vices of the age, but grow up to become 
patterns of holiness! This is a great difficulty to our 
poorer friends in this loathsome city, which is be- 
coming as polluted as heathendom. A good sister, 
who lives close to this house of prayer, came up from 
a country town with her little boy, and she was horri- 
fied before long to hear him use profane language, 
being evidently unaware of its meaning. He had 
picked it up in the street close to his mother’s door. 
Where are the children of working-folks to run if 
they are not able to walk the streets? All around 
us, vice has become so daring that a blind man may 


-almost be envied; but even he has ears, and will, 


therefore, be vexed with the filthy conversation of the 
wicked. Good people say to me, “ What are we to 
do?” I wish those who live in the breezy country 
village would stop there, and not come into our close 
streets, and lanes, and courts, which reek with blas- 
phemy and dirty talk. Why do working-men so 
often think it necessary, in their ordinary conversa- 
tion, to use such abominable expressions, which have 


2 


18 3 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


no useful meaning, and are simply disgusting? If 
ever Christian people should be pure, and should 
watch over their children with a holy jealousy, now is” 
the time, and this is a worthy subject for daily prayer. 
I would sooner have the doctrines of grace revived, 

individual piety deepened, and family religion in- 

creased, than I would watch a frantic crowd parading 
the street with noisy music, and harsh clamour. I see 

‘no special virtue in drums and tambourines. Make 

what noise you will to attract the careless if you 

afterwards give them sound instruction in the truth, 

and make them to know the meaning of the Word of 

the Lord; but if it be mere stir, and song, and 

swagger, what is the good of it? If Gospel truth is 

not taught, your work will be a building of wood, hay, 

‘and stubble, soon to be consumed. Quick building 

is seldom permanent. Gold, silver, and precious 

stones are scarce material, not easily found; but then 

they endure the fire. What is the use of religion 

which comes up in a night, and perishes as soon? 

Ah, me! what empty bragging we have heard! The 

thing was done, but then it was never worth doing ; 

soon things were as if it never had been done; and, 

moreover, this sham way of doing it made it all the 

harder toil for the real worker. 

O Christian men and women, be thorough in what 
you do, and know, and teach! Hold truth as with an 
iron grip; let your families be trained in the fear of 
God, and be yourselves “ holiness unto the Lord ;” so 
shall you stand like rocks amid the surging waves of 
error and ungodliness which rage around you. 

We want, also, more and more, a revival of ULZOroUs © 


MOS ta! ae ee ls ol Oe Veter Se “PAN A ele em eA GY Voie 
. Sy Wc a 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 19 


consecrated strength. \ have pleaded for true piety ; 


I now beg for one of the highest results of it. We 


need saints. It may be that all cannot attain unto — 


“the first three”; but we cannot do without cham- 


pions. We need gracious minds trained to a high © 


form of spiritual life by much converse with God in 
solitude. These are the standard-bearers of the 
army: each one isa king’s son. There is an air about 
them, humble as they are, as of men who breathe a 
purer atmosphere. Such was Abraham, who, by his 


communion with God, acquired a more than royal | 


bearing. The king of Sodom shrinks into insignifi- 
cance in the presence of the high-minded sheik who 
will not take of his lawful spoils from a thread to a 
shoe-latchet, lest the heathen king should say, “I 


have made Abraham rich.” Saints acquire nobility — 


from their constant resort to the place where the 
Lord meets with them. There, also, they acquire 
that power in prayer which we so greatly need. Oh, 
that we had more men like John Knox, whose prayers 
were more terrible to Queen Mary than ten thousand 
men! Oh, that we had more Eliahs, by whose faith 
the windows of Heaven should be shut or opened! 
This power comes not by a sudden effort; it is the 
outcome of a life devoted to the God of Israel. If our 
life is all in public, it will be a frothy, vapoury, in- 
effectual existence; but if we hold high converse 
with God in secret, we shall be mighty for good. The 
Puritans were abundant in meditation and prayer ; 
and there were giants on the earth in those days. 
He that is a prince with God will take high rank with 
men, after the true measure of nobility. 


20 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


May the Lord send us many self-contained 
Christians, whose godliness leans on God for itself, 
and is not a second-hand affair! We see too many 
Christian people depending upon one another, like 
houses “run up” by “ jerry-builders””, which are so 
slenderly built that, if you were to pull down the last 
one in the row, they would all follow. Beware of 
being a lean-to ; endeavour to rest on your own walls 
of real faith in the Lord Jesus. I tremble for a 
church whose continuance depends upon the talent 
and cleverness of one man. If he is removed, the 
whole thing will collapse: this is a wretched business. 
May none of us fall into a mean, poverty-stricken 
dependence on man! We want among us believers 
like those solid, substantial family mansions which 
stand from generation to generation as landmarks of 
the country ; no lath-and-plaster fabrics, but edifices 
solidly constructed to bear all weathers, and defy time 
itself. Given a host of men who are steadfast, im- 
movable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, 
and then the glory of God’s grace will be clearly 
manifested, not only in them, but in those round 
about them. The Lord send us a revival of conse- 
crated strength, and heavenly energy! May the 
weakest among us be as David, and David as the 
angel of the Lord! 

As for you who are not converted to God, many of 
you will be caught in the great wave of blessing, if 
God shall cause it to break over us. When saints 
live unto God, sinners are converted to God. “I was 
converted,” said one, “not by hearing a sermon, but 
by seeing one.” “How was that?” he was asked. 


j f- eee ee * 
' - 


Ay 
4 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” ~— 25 


“My next-door neighbour was the only man in the 
street who went to a place of worship; and, as I saw 
him go out as regularly as clockwork, I said to myself, 
“That man regards the Sabbath, and the God of the 
Sabbath, and I do not.’ By-and-by, I went into his 
house, and I saw that comfort and order reigned in 
it, while my room was wretched. I saw how his wife 
and children dwelt in love, and I said to myself, ‘ This 
home is happy because the father fears God. I saw 
my neighbour calm in trouble, and patient under 
persecution. I knew him to be upright, true, and 
kind, and I said to myself, ‘I will find out this man’s 
secret, and thus I was converted.” Preach by your 
hands if you cannot preach by your tongues. When 
our church-members show the fruits of true godliness, 
we shall soon have enquiries for the tree which bears 
such a crop. 

Dear friends, at our prayer-meetings of late, our 
Lord has very graciously spoken to one and another 
of the unconverted among us. What a mercy that 
they were so far interested as to come! We have 
not said very much to them, but we have been pray- 
ing for them; and we have talked of the joys of our 
holy faith, and_one after another they have quietly 
given their hearts to God while in the prayer-meeting. 
I feel very glad about it; it was all that we needed 
to make these meetings the gate of Heaven. Such 
conversions are specially beautiful, they are so alto- 
gether of the Lord, and are so much the result of His 
working by the whole church, that I am doubly 
delighted with them. Oh, that every gathering of 
faithful men might be a lure to attract others to Jesus! 


eo “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


bie May many souls fly to Him because they see others 
speeding in that direction! Why not? The coming 
it together of the saints is the first part of Pentecost, 
' and the ingathering of sinners is the second. It 
began with “only a prayer-meeting,”’ but it ended 
- with a grand baptism of thousands of converts. Oh, 
that the prayers of believers may act as loadstones 
to sinners! 
There are a few among us who are not saved, and 
but afew. I do not believe they will long escape 
the saving influence which floods these assemblies. 
We have made a holy ring around certain of them; 
and they must soon yield to our importunity, for we 
are pleading with God as well as with them. Their 
wives are praying for them, their brothers and sisters 
are praying for them, and others are in the devout 
confederacy; therefore they must be brought in. 
Oh, that they would come at once! Why this re- 
luctance to be blessed? Why this hesitation to be 
| saved? Lord, we turn from these poor foolish pro- 
_'_scrastinators to Thyself, and we plead for them with 
Thine all-wise and gracious Spirit! Lord, turn 
a them, and they shall be turned! By their conver- 
sion, prove that a true revival has commenced to- 
night! Let it spread through all our households, 
’ and then run from church to church till the whole of 
’ Christendom shall be ablaze with the Heaven- 
descended fire! Let us pray. 


PRAYER-MEETINGS;—AS THEY WERE, 
AND AS THEY SHOULD BE. 


MONG the faults, which have largely dis- 
appeared from prayer-meetings as they used 
to be conducted in my early days, these were the 
principal ones. First, the excessive length of the 
prayers. A brother would fix himself against the 
table-pew, and pray for twenty minutes or half-an- 
hour, and then conclude by asking forgiveness for his 
shortcomings,—a petition which was hardly sanc- 
tioned by those who had undergone the penance of 
endeavouring to join in his long-winded discourse. 
A good cure for this evil is for the minister judiciously 
to admonish the brother to study brevity; and if this 
avail not, to jog his elbow when the people are getting 
weary. This fault, which is the ruin of all fervency, 
ought to be extirpated by all means, even at the 
expense of the personal feelings of the offender. 

Cant phrases were another evil. “We would not 
rush into Thy presence as the unthinking (!) horse 
into the battle.’ Asif horses ever did think, and as 
if it were not better to exhibit the spirit and energy 
of the horse rather than the sluggishness and stupidity 
of the ass. As the verse from which we imagine this 
fine sentence to be derived has more to do with 
sinning than with praying, we are glad that the 
phrase is on its last legs. “Go from heart to heart 


24 “Only a Prayer-meeting ! se 


as oil from vessel to vessel.” This is probably a 
quotation from the nursery romance of “Ah Baba 
and the Forty Thieves,” but as destitute of sense, 
Scripture, and poetry as ever sentence could be con- 
ceived to be. We are not aware that oil runs from 
one vessel to another in any very mysterious or 
wonderful manner; it is true it is rather slow in 
coming out, and is therefore an apt symbol of some 
people’s earnestness ; but surely it would be better to 
have the grace direct from Heaven than to have it 
out of another vessel,—a Popish idea which the meta- 
phor seems to insinuate, if indeed it has any meaning 
at all. 

A very favourite description of the suppliant was, 
“Thy poor unworthy dust,’—an epithet generally 
applied to themselves by the proudest men in the 
congregation, and not seldom by the most monied 
and grovelling, in which case the last two words are 
not so very inappropriate. We have heard of a good 
man who, in pleading for his children and grandchil- 
dren, was so completely beclouded in the blinding 
influence of this expression, that he exclaimed, “ O 
Lord, save Thy dust, and Thy dust’s dust, and Thy 
dust’s dust’s dust!” When Abraham said, “I have 
taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but 
dust and ashes,” the utterance was forcible and deeply 
expressive; but in its misquoted, perverted, and 
abused form, the sooner it is consigned to its own 
element, the better. Very many other perversions 
of ‘Scripture, uncouth similes, and ridiculous meta- 
phors, will recall themselves to the reader; we have 
neither time nor patience to recapitulate them; they 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” * 25 


are a sort of spiritual slang, the offspring of unholy 
ignorance, unmanly imitation, or graceless hypocrisy ; 
they are at once a dishonour to those who constantly 
repeat them, and an intolerable nuisance to» those 
whose ears are jaded with them. They have had the 
most baneful effects upon our prayer-meetings, and 
we rejoice to assist in bringing them to their deserved 
and ignoble end. 

Another evil was, mistaking preaching for prayer. 
The friends who were reputed to be “ gifted” in- 
dulged themselves in public prayer with a review of 
their own experience, a recapitulation of their creed, 
an occasional running commentary upon a chapter or 
Psalm, or even a criticism upon the Pastor and his 
sermons. It was too often quite forgotten that the 
brother was addressing the Divine Majesty, before 
whose wisdom a display of our knowledge 1s imper- 
. tinence, and before whose glory an attempt at swelling 
words and pompous periods is little short of pro- 
fanity; the harangue was evidently intended for 
man rather than God, and on some occasions did not 
contain a single petition from beginning to end. We 
hope that good men are leaving this unhallowed prac- 
tice, and are beginning to see that sermons and 
doctrinal disquisitions are miserable substitutes for 
earnest wrestling prayers, when our place is before 
the mercy-seat, and our engagement is intercession 
with the Most High. 

Monotonous repetition frequently occurred, and is 
not yet extinct. Christian men, who object to forms 
of prayer, will nevertheless use the same words, the 
same sentences, the identical address at the com- 


Sty OK oh 


° 20 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


mencement, and the exact ascriptions at the conclu- 
sion. We have known some brethren’s prayers by 
heart, so that we could calculate within a few seconds 
when they would conclude. Now this cometh of evil. 
All that can be said against the prayers of the Church 
of England, which were many of them composed by 
eminent Christians, and are, some of them, as beautiful 
as they are Scriptural, must apply with tenfold force 


to those dreary compositions which have little virtue 


left, since their extempore character is clearly dis- 
proved. Oh, for warm hearts, burning with red-hot 
desires which make a channel from the lip in glowing 
words; then, indeed, this complaint would never be 


-made,—“ What is the use of my going to the prayer- 


meeting, when I know all that will be said if So-and-so 
is called on?” This is not an uncommon excuse for 
staying away; and, really, while flesh is weak, it is 
not so very unreasonable a plea; we have heard far 
worse apologies for Bea offences. If our (so- 
called) “praying men” drive the people away by 
their constant repetitions, one-half at least of the 
fault lies at their door. 


Most of these diseases, we trust, are finding their 
cure; but the man would be hardy, not to say fool- 
hardy, who should affirm that there is now no room 
for further improvement. “ Advance” must still be 
our motto, and in the matter of the prayer-meeting 
it will be found most suitable. 

Our brethren will excuse our offering them advice, 
and must take it only for what it is worth; but having 
to superintend a large church, and to conduct a 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” Ger ene 


prayer-meeting which scarcely ever numbers less than 
from a thousand to twelve hundred attendants, we 
will simply give our own notions as to the most 
eficient method of promoting and sustaining these 
holy gatherings. 

1. Let the minister himself set a very high value 
upon this means of grace. Let him frequently speak 
of it as being dear to his own heart; and let him 
prove his words by throwing all his vigour into it, 
being absent as seldom as possible, and doing all in 
his power to give an interest to the meeting. If our 
pastors set the ill example of coming in late, of 
frequently staying away, or conducting the engage- 
ments in a drowsy, formal way, we shall soon see our 
people despising the exercise, and forsaking the 
assembling of themselves together. A warm-hearted 
address of ten minutes, with a few lively words inter- 
posed between the prayers, will do much, with God’s 
blessing, to foster a love for the prayer-meeting. 

2. Let the brethren labour after brevity.. If each 
person will offer the petition most laid upon his heart 
by the Holy Spirit, and then make room for another, 
the evening will be far more profitable, and the 
prayers incomparably more fervent than if each 
brother ran round the whole circle of petition without 
dwelling upon any one point. Compare the subjects 
of prayer to so many nails; it will be better for a 
petitioner to drive one nail home with repeated blows, 
than to deal one ineffectual tap to them one after 
another. Let as many as possible take part in the 
utterance of the church’s desires ; the change of voice 
will prevent weariness, and the variety of subjects 


Re Se ee 


28 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


will excite attention. Better to have six pleading 
earnestly, than two drowsily ; far better for the whole 
meeting that the many wants should be represented 
experimentally by many intercessors, than formally 
by two orthree. Asa general rule, meetings in which 
no prayer exceeds ten minutes, and the most are under 
five, will exhibit the most fervour and life; in fact, 
length is a deathblow to earnestness, and brevity is 
an assistant to zeal. When we have had ten prayers 
in the hour, varied with the singing of single verses, 
we have far oftener been in the Spirit, than when 
only four persons have engaged in supplication. 
This is an observation confirmed by the opinion of 
our fellow-worshippers ; it might not hold good in all 
cases, but it is so with us, and therefore we thus 
witness. 

3. Persuade all the brethren to pray aloud. If the 
younger and less-instructed members shrink from the 
privilege, tell them they are not to speak to man, but 
to God. Assure them that it does us all good to 
hear their groans and ineffectual attempts at utter- 
ance. For our own part, a few breakdowns generally 
come very sweetly home; and, awakening our sym- 
pathies, constrain us to aid the brother by our more 
earnest wrestlings. It gives a reality and life to the 
whole matter, to hear those trembling lips utter thanks 
for new life just received, and to hear that choking 
voice confessing the sin from which it has just 
escaped. The cries of the lambs must mingle with 
the bleating of the sheep, or the flock will lack much 
of its natural music. As Mr. Beecher well says, 
“Humble prayers, timid prayers, half-naudible 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” f 29 


prayers, the utterances of uncultured lips, may cut a 
poor figure as lecture-room literature; but are they 
to be scornfully disdained? If a child may not talk 
at all till it can speak fluent English, will it ever learn 
to speak well? There should be a process of educa- 
tion going on continually, by which all the members 
of the church shall be able to contribute of their 
experiences and gifts; and in such a course of de- 
velopment, the first hesitating, stumbling, ungram- 
matical prayer of a confused Christian may be worth 
more to the church than the best prayer of the most 
eloquent pastor.” 

Every man, feeling that 4e is to take part in the 
meeting at some time or other, will become at once 
interested, and from interest may advance to love. 
Some of those who have now the best gifts of utter- 
ance, had few enough when they began. 

4. Encourage the attendants to send in special 
requests for prayer as often as they feel constrained 
to do so. These little scraps of paper, in themselves 
most truly prayers, may be used as kindling to the 
fire in the whole assembly. 

5. Suffer neither hymn, nor chapter, nor address, 
to supplant prayer. We remember hearing seven 
verses of a hymn, ending with “He hates to put 
away,” until we lost all relish for the service, and have 
hardly been reconciled to the hymn ever since. Re- 
member that we meet for prayer, and let it be prayer ; 
and, oh, that it may be that genuine, familiar converse 
with God which shall drive out the formality and 
pomposity which so much mar our public suppli- 
cations! 


3° | “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


6. It is not at all amiss to let two or even three 


competent brethren succeed each other without a 
pause, but this must be done judiciously; and if one 
of the three should become prolix, let the pause come 
in as soon as he has finished. Sing only one verse, 
or at the most two, between the prayers, and let those 
be such as shall. not distract the mind from the sub- 
ject by being alien from the spirit of the meeting. 
Why need to sing about the temptations of Satan 
just after an earnest prayer for the conversion of 
sinners; and when a brother has just had joyous 
fellowship with Christ in intercession, why drag him 
down by singing, “’Tis a point I long to know”? 

Of course, we ought to have said all manner of 
good things about the necessity of the Holy Spirit ; 
but upon that matter we are all agreed, knowing right 
well that all must be in vain without His presence. 
Our object has rather been to gather out the stones 
from the way than to speak of that Divine life which 
alone can enable us to run therein. 


BUSINESS\ PRAYERS. 


EAR FRIENDS,—I think that many of these 
Monday evening meetings for prayer will 

never be forgotten by us who have been privileged 
_ to be present at them. Perhaps, even throughout 


eternity, we shall gratefully recall the hallowed hours 


that we have spent here around the throne of grace. 
I know that, very often, as 1 have gone home, I have 
felt that the spirit of prayer has been so manifestly 
poured out in our midst that we have been carried 
right up to the gates of Heaven on the wings of be- 
lieving supplication, and the sacred anointing which 
we have received from the Holy Spirit’s gracious 
influences has left a blessed perfume and holy savour 
upon us long after we have left the assembly. 

If we are to receive such a blessing to-night, and 
whenever we meet together in the Name of Jesus, 
for prayer and praise, we must sincerely desire it, 
confidently expect it, and go straight to God and 
ask for it. There is no need for us to go beating 
about the bush, and not telling the Lord distinctly 
_ what it is that we crave at His hands. Nor will it be 
seemly for us to make any attempts to use fine 
language; but let us ask God, in the simplest and 
most direct manner, for just the things that we want 
for ourselves, or for others, or for His cause and 
Kingdom. Then let us remember our Lord’s words, 


32 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


“ What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe 
that ye receive them, and ye shall have them;” and, 
at the close of the meeting, let us go on our way 
rejoicing, and thankful for what we have received. 

I believe in business prayers,—I mean, prayers in 
which you take to God one of the many precious 
promises which He has given us in His Word, and 
expect it to be fulfilled as certainly as we look for the 
money to be given to us when we go to the bank to 
cash a cheque or a note. We should not think of 
going there, lolling over the counter, chatting with the 
clerks upon every conceivable subject except the one 
thing for which we had gone to the bank, and then 
coming away without the coin we needed; but we 
should lay before the clerk the promise to pay the 
bearer a certain sum, tell him in what form we wished 
to take the amount, count the cash after him, and 
then go our way to attend to other business. That 
is just an illustration of the method in which we 
should draw supplies from the Bank of Heaven. We 
should seek out the promise which applies to that 
particular case, plead it before the Lord in faith, 
expect to have the blessing to which it relates; and 
then, having received it, let us proceed to the next 
duty devolving upon us. 

There are many requests, which have been sent to 
us for presentation this evening. Among them is one 
from a venerable clergyman, who has often entreated 
us to remember him in prayer, and who still suffers 
from such deep depression of spirit that he is-unable 
satisfactorily to discharge the duties of his sacred 
office. Then there are letters from friends who are in\ 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” *~ 33 


various stages of spiritual sickness, and who desire 
us to bring their cases before the Lord in believing: 
and sympathetic supplication. 

We will pray that the mental affliction of this- dear 
servant of Christ may be removed in God’s own time, 
and that the soul maladies of these other tried ones 
may also be cured by the great Physician. Verily, 
there is a God that heareth prayer. Do any of you 
doubt it? If so, you will not receive answers to your 
petitions, “for he that cometh to God must believe 
that He is, and that He is a rewarder of them that. 
diligently seek Him.” 

I must, however, by way of warning, just mention. 
that I have known some persons who, with altogether 
wrong motives, have tried to use for very improper 
purposes the fact that God hears prayer. They have 
set their hearts on something which they fancy that 
they want; and although they cannot reasonably 
expect that God will do what they ask, because there 
is no real need that it should be done, they keep on 
praying, and are sorely disappointed because they are 
not heard. If you were to say to your child, “I will 
give you anything you like to ask for,” you certainly 
would not be so unkind as to let him have a dose of 
prussic acid for breakfast, or a razor to cut his throat. 
with, however earnestly he might plead for such 
things. In your promise, there is always implied the- 
natural reservation that, if your boy asks foolishly, , 
you will refuse to give him what he asks. 

If God had ever given to me absolute power in: 
prayer, He would practically have put the reins of the: 
universe into my hands; andI should very soon want: 


> 
J 


r 7) ‘ _ ‘t 7T) * “W's 
ys thee 7 ee 
S 


wees “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


to kneel down, and cry, “O Lord, wilt Thou not take 
away from me such a dangerous weapon? If it is 
left in my hands, I fear that I shall be very likely to 
use it for that which is directly opposed to my own 
best interests and to Thy glory.” Weare not to take 
the place of God, or to make a god of ourselves. God 
will attend to the cry of His children, but He will be 
their Father, and will only comply with their petitions 
if He sees that they are right and proper. 

When you tell your child that you will give him 
anything he asks for, it is clearly understood that his 
requests must be reasonable if they are to be granted. 
You do not mean that your boy is to be master of 
the family, and that his will is to rule the whole 
household ; but you mean that you will give him any- 
thing that a loving and obedient child ought to ask 
for, and that his prayer must be rational, and ithe 
right kind of petition to come from the mouth of 
your son. 

God has never given an absolutely unconditional 
promise to~hear every prayer that may be presented 
to Him; but, side by side with the promise, He has 
put other things which qualify and explain it. For 
instance, in one of our Lord’s last addresses to His 
disciples, He said, “If ye abide in Me, and My words 
abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be 
done unto you.” The apostle Paul wrote to the 
Romans, “Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our in- 
firmities: for we know not what we should pray for 
as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession 
for us with groanings which cannot be uttered ;” and 
He teaches us how to pray, and what to pray for. 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” ~ 35 


David knew enough of the will of God to be able to 
say, “ Trust in the Lord, and do good; so shalt thou 
dwell in the land, and verily thou shalt be fed. De- 
light thyself also in the Lord; and He shall give 
thee the desires of thine heart.” Do not imagine that 
the Lord will give you the desires of your heart unless 
first you delight in Him. If a man really, in his 
inmost soul, does delight in the Lord, his mind and 
God’s mind will be in harmony, and he will ask in 
prayer what God will be able and willing to grant. — 
If his delight is in God Himself, and not merely in 
God’s gifts, he will say, “ Bless His dear Name, let 
Him do what He will with me, I will still be satisfied, 
and will praise Him both for what He bestows and 
what He withholds.” 

If you delight more in God’s gifts than in God 
Himself, you are practically setting up another god 
above Him, and this you must never do. Even when 
a man truly loves the Lord Jesus Christ, there may 
be within Him something which is very like idolatry. 
_ There is even a danger of loving some things which 
are associated with Christ as much as we love Christ 
Himself ; and we must be on the watch against such 
a feeling asthat. Love Him, dear friends, even when 
you do not realize His presence ; love Him even when 
you do not feel His love; if you cannot walk in the 
light of His countenance, hide beneath the shadow 
of His wings; and, under all circumstances, let it be 
your joy still to say, “ He is worthy to be praised, He 
is ever to be blessed, whatever He does with me.” 
_Ask your Lord so to teach you by His gracious Spirit 
that no prayer shall come from your lips, and that no 


36 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


desire shall be formed in your heart, except that 
which is in accordance with His holy will. 

It would be wise for you to pray in this fashion, 
“Lord, do not take the least notice of any petition of 
mine if I ask for anything that is not for Thy glory 
and for my own and others’ good!” The very best 
of us are often only like sick people, and you know 
how they get strange notions into their heads, and 
talk all manner of nonsense, and have a lot of curious 
and foolish whims and fancies. I would like to say 
to you now that, if I have you for my nurse in any 
illness that may come upon me, and I then make 
strange and unreasonable requests, “ Be so good as to 
thwart me when I want that which would do me 
harm. Be so kind as to be cruel to me sometimes. 
Understand that this proviso of mine shall override all 
the petitions that I may put up when I am suffering 
from fever. Do not mind what I say then; do not 
give heed to me when I talk nonsense; but let me 
have only what I ask for when I am in my right 
senses, when I am my inmost, truest, healthiest self. 
Ask my physician what you should do, and believe 
that my wish is for you to do with me and for me 
exactly as he directs.” 

It seems to me that such prayers as these which we 
are asked to present to-night may be offered. I 
cannot say as much as that for all the requests that I 
receive, for some of them are foolish, if not worse 
than that. When a person, who is in want of money, 
prays to God that I may give him a hundred pounds, © 
I can assure him that I shall not do anything of the 
kind. If God tells me to give him a hundred pounds, 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” ; Ws 


that will be another matter. I should long ago have 
been in the bankruptcy court if I had granted half the 
demands of that sort which have been made upon me ; 
and some other requests which I have received have 
not been much more reasonable. A young man 
comes to me, and wants to preach in the Tabernacle, 
because he says that the Lord has told him that he 
is to take my place one Lord’s-day morning. My 
reply is, “ Yes, of course I will let you preach when 
the Lord tells me to do so; but it is a lop-sided 
revelation as it now stands, for the Lord has not re- 
vealed to me my share in the transaction ;” and the 
young man goes his way disappointed because his 
prayer is not answered! Do not any of you pray that 
which is manifestly nonsense; pray for something 
reasonable and sensible, and then you may have your 
prayers answered if they are according to the will of 
God. 

I feel all the more free to speak thus to you, dear 
friends, because you are about as sensible a lot of 
people as I can ever hope to find; yet, every now 
and then, some poor crooked, cranky soul gets in 
amongst us, who sadly misreads or misapplies God’s 
Word, and then begins to doubt God’s faithfulness in 
fulfilling His promise. He makes the Lord seem to 
say what He never said, and never meant to say. 
Let no one act so foolishly, but let us exercise 
common sense concerning our prayers, and in all 
things submit our will to the wise will of our Heavenly 


Father. 


GOD’S WILLINGNESS TO BLESS SAINTS 
AND SINNERS. 


E have been pleading with God. Prayer after 
prayer has knocked at Heaven’s gate, en- 

treating for the conversion of souls, and the upbuild- 
ing of the church. I have no doubt that our prayer 
has been, in itself, acceptable with God, through Jesus 
Christ. It is in itself a form of worship to which our 
gracious God hath much respect. The golden vials 
of the elders before the throne are said to be full of 
odours, which are the prayers of saints. Prayer is 
typified by sweet incense, because God delights in it. 
He loves to see our desires for the accomplishment 
of His purposes. It is very pleasing to a father, as 
you who are parents can testify, to see his child in 
full sympathy with him, and anxious to help him in 
his work. Though he can do but little, and that little 
feebly and faultily, yet his eagerness to work with 
his father, and for his father, gives his father joy. 
Even thus does our Heavenly Father take pleasure 
in us, and in our desires for His glory. “Thou didst 
well in that it was in thine heart,” said the Lord to 
David, even when He did not accept what David 
proposed to do; and I believe there may be glory 
brought to God, not only by those prayers which are 
manifestly answered, but by those which for wise 
reasons the good Lord is pleased to lay on one side. 
We are nothing better than children even in prayer, 


40 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


and therefore it is not every request that is wise; 
but yet we are children, and therefore the cries which 
come from our hearts touch the heart of our great 
Father in Heaven. Our desires that souls may be 
saved, and that the church may prosper, are so much 
in accordance with the mind of God that they must 
be a sweet savour unto Him. Therefore, brethren, 
let us pray on as long as breath remains. If prayer 
pleaseth God, it should always please us. 

There are two things, however, which sometimes 
puzzle us. One is, fo see a child of God anxious to 
bring others to Christ, and perseveringly using the 
ordained means, and yet success is not given him, 
and men are not brought to Jesus; at least, they are 
not brought in such numbers as the eager worker 
desired and expected. Strange sight! Are we really 
more anxious to save souls than God Himself is? 
It would be a marvellous spectacle if it were actually 
the case! It certainly looks so. This is the appear- 
ance upon the surface. Our earnest spirits long for 
the salvation of men. If we could save them, we 
would save them at once. If it were possible for us, 
when we speak, to convince and convert every sinner 
within hearing, it should be done. It looks, for the 
moment, as though we were more merciful than the 
All-merciful, more compassionate than He is of whom 
it is written, “ God is love.” 3 

Ah, my brethren, it only seems to be so: we 
humbly ask pardon for yielding to the illusion even 
for an instant! It is our ignorance of our own hearts 
which makes us think ourselves so supremely kind 
and loving. Somewhat of pride mingles with this 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” — AI 


fond conceit of our own goodness. I fear that, if we 
were weighed in the scales of the sanctuary, it would 
be found that we do not possess all that agonizing 
pity which we suppose ourselves to possess. Too 
often our compassion shows itself in spasms, and is 
not a matter of fixed principle. Our zeal comes and 
goes ; but if we felt it as intensely as we think we do, 
or as intensely always as we do sometimes, then we 
might have more reason for our complaining and 
wondering. For the present, we may rather blush 
for ourselves than complain of our God. We have 
not yet done all that lies in our power, and therefore 
we have no ground upon which to complain of our 
God. 

If we are disappointed about our success in Christ’s 
work, what shall we say? Shall we not first look for 
the cause within ourselves? From observation and 
experience, I have learned to look very hopefully 
upon dissatisfaction and anguish when they are seen 
in Christian workers. It gives me no sorrow to see 
my brethren unhappy and miserable because others 
are not saved. It would be a far sadder thing to see 
them useless and yet contented. If ever I have been 
satisfied with what I have done for the Lord, I have 
invariably found my service to prove barren. Pangs 
go with birth, and anguish precedes success. So far 
as I am able to judge, it does not seem that the Lord 
can wisely bless people who are satisfied with them- 
selves, and with their own efforts. It would not be 
safe to trust the conceited with any large measure of 
success: they might be injured for life by such 
honour. Certainly God Himself would have small 


42. “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


honour, for the individual would steal every bit of it, 
and wear it himself. When you get to feel, “I am 
not satisfied, for God is not blessing me as I long to 
be blessed, and therefore I fear something must be 
hindering the blessing;” then you are advancing 
towards a right condition—a condition favourable 
to success. 

The Lord is always willing to bless us up to the 
measure of our fitness to be blessed ; and sometimes 
it is absolutely necessary that we should be dis- . 
tressed, broken-hearted, and brought to an agony of 
prayer, before we can hold the choice gift of the God 
of grace. I am sure it is so. We are straitened in 
ourselves. Our own unfitness turns aside the Divine 
benediction. The Lord will have us know the value of 
the blessing before He gives it to us; and He will 
also have us know our own inability, apart from His 
Holy Spirit, to perform any good work, or bring forth 
any holy fruit. Our God takes care always to have 
security that, if He works a great work by us, we shall 
not appropriate the glory of it to ourselves. He 
brings us down lower and lower in our own esteem, 
until we feel that we are nothing at all, and then He 
condescends to use us. Some trumpets are so stuffed 
with self that God cannot blow through them. Some 
pitchers are too full of their own muddy water for God 
to pour the water of life into them. However much 
we may wish for a blessing, God will not set the seal 
of His blessing to work which is begun and carried 
on in the power of self. 

Besides this, the Lord wants us to be more 
thoroughly in sympathy with Himself. He has two 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” ~ 43 


designs in making use of us in His service, not only to — 
save souls, but also to bless us as the instruments of 
such salvation. There are always two edges to God’s 
sword; so that, while He kills sin in the hearer, He 
strikes a blow at sin in the preacher also. God has a 
way of killing two birds with one stone; or, if I may 
use such an expression, of making two birds alive 
with one quickening word. He has a way of blessing 
the very channel through which the blessing comes, 
as well as the people who receive the blessing. It 
was grace to the Gentiles to be preached to; but 
Paul called it “ grace” to be permitted to preach the 
unsearchable riches of Christ. The Lord intends to 
educate us by non-success as well as by success, and 
therefore He causes us to sigh and cry until His 
Spirit puts forth His power. 

It is a natural law in the spiritual world that joy is 
not born without sorrow. We must travail in birth 
before Christ will be formed in men’s hearts. There 
is no reaping in joy without a previous sowing in 
tears. As Christ Himself suffered to make us blest, 
so, in Our measure, must we endure pain of heart in 
order to give men peace of mind. We must die that 
others may live. We must agonize that the tempted 
may rest. We must mourn that mourners may re- 
joice. It is a noble thing for a Christian man to act 
as a priest before the Lord, and, in a certain manner, 
to take upon himself the sins of the people, confessing 
them as though they were his own, and mourning 
over men’s hardness of heart as though it were his 
own hardness of heart. We do well to take the 
sinner’s place in prayer even as our Lord took that 


ae none Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


place in sacrifice. It is ours to lay ourselves before 
God, and cry out of the depths of our souls, as Moses 
did, “If Thou wilt forgive their sin ; and if not, 
blot me, I pray Thee, out of Thy book which Thou 
hast written.” Moses was now in a prepared state 
to see the nation saved. Some try to make out that 
Moses did not mean what he said; but he did mean 
it, and the Lord did ‘not rebuke him for excess of zeal 
or unguardedness of speech. Remember that, for 
speaking unadvisedly with his lips on another occa- 
sion, Moses was shut out of the land of promise, yet 
for this language he received no check whatever, 
but prevailed with the Lord to turn away His anger 
from Israel. He felt, in the compassion of His soul, 
much more than could be justified by reasoning in 
cool blood, even as Paul did when he wrote, “ For I 
could wish that myself were accursed from Christ for 
my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh.” 
If you ever reach such a stage of compassion, you 
will feel ready, if it were possible, as it were, to put 
your own soul in pawn for the souls of others; and 
you will express yourself in words which others may 
call fanatical. When it comes to that pass with you, 
the Lord will hear you. If you cannot live without 
a blessing, you shall not live without it. He who 
weeps for souls shall before long weep for joy. 
When we live, men will live; when we are quickened 
to fulness of life, the living waters shall flow: out of 
us. Perhaps we have to reach a higher point of 
grace and love before we shall receive the fulness 
of the blessing. At any rate, I put the case very 
strongly, on purpose that you may see the wrongful- 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” » 45 


\ 


ness of the supposition that the fault of our non- 
success lies with the Lord. It cannot be that God is 
less willing for men to be saved than we are; it 
cannot be that we have outrun love itself on its own 
ground. We cry, “Arm of the Lord, awake!” and 
He replies, “ Awake, awake, O Zion!” The slumber 
is with us, and not with Him. We must not think 
that the Lord has set a barrier in the way of our 
efforts, but we must be encouraged to feel that, if we 
love the souls of men, the Lord must love them more ; 
and that, if we would do anything and everything in 
our power to secure their salvation, we may depend 
upon it that the Lord is not slack in grace. 

A second matter equally causes a difficulty in 
people’s minds, and that is, fo see sinners more 
willing to be saved than God is to save them. Ihave 
often seen this to be the case apparently. Ap- 
parently, I say, for it could never be really so. 
According to the statement of the anxious, it is the 
case; but their statements are born of confusion, 
and not of the truth. It cannot be that a sinner 
should be eager for reconciliation, and the Lord be 
hard to bring to terms. Did you ever hear of a flock 
of sheep in the Highlands travelling all over the hills, 
and roaming down the glens, trying to find their 
shepherd? Have you seen reports in the newspapers 
of the efforts made by the lost sheep to discover their 
shepherd, when he has been buried in the snow, and 
needed to be dug out? You smile, but the parable is 
to the point. I have observed several singular facts 
in natural history, but I have never heard of anything 
so remarkable as sheep seeking out their shepherd, 


46 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


and tracking his wandering footsteps in the cloudy 
and dark day. Yet this is what we might expect if 
it be true that sinners seek after the Lord Jesus, and 
cannot find Him. They say, “I have sought the 
Lord, and He has not been found of me; I have cried 
to Him in prayer, and He has not regarded me. Alas, 
I have hungered and thirsted for Christ, but He is 
not willing that I should enjoy Him!” What 
singular spectacles! A sheep seeking its straying 
shepherd! <A piece of money searching for its mis- 
tress! A prodigal son rejoicing over his lost father! 
The supposition is altogether too absurd. Is it not? 
Can it be that, in this race of love, you, a poor, dead 
sinner, have outstripped the living Saviour? We 
sometimes sing,— 


“No sinner can be beforehand with Thee, 
Thy grace is most sovereign, most rich, and most 
free ;"— 


and I believe it. If I were to see a needle running 
across a table all by itself, I should know that under 
the table a magnet was at work out of sight. When 
I see a sinner running after Christ, I feel certain that 
Divine love is drawing him: the cords may be in- 
visible, but we are quite sure that they are there. If 
you are seeking Christ, it is because He is seeking 
you. The desire for grace is caused by the very 
grace which we desire. You must not dare to charge 
the Lord Jesus with unwillingness to save, seeing He 
has laid down His life to prove His eagerness to 
redeem. No, it is not possible that there can be any 
backwardness with the Saviour; the backwardness 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” ~ - 47 


lies with you. Get rid of the unbelieving and dis- 
honouring notion that Jesus is unwilling to forgive, 
and at once throw yourself into His arms. He thirsts _ 
to bless men; it is His meat and His drink in this 
respect to do the will of Him that sent Him. You 
are being drawn by His loving hands; those warm — 
desires for salvation are created in you by His Holy 
Spirit: believe this, and thus recognize the bond 
which unites you to the Lord; by faith, that bond 
will become consciously stronger from day to day. 
Trust wholly in Jesus, and the work is done. Trust 
Him simply; trust Him solely; trust Him without 
hesitation, and you are saved. 

It is remarkable that, very often, the most common- 
place things that we say in our preaching strike atten- 
tion and convey blessing. An evangelist, some time 
ago, while he was explaining faith, took up a book, 
and handed it to a friend. “ Now,” said he to his 
friend, “ suppose this to be salvation ; I freely present 
itvtoyou,, )tiave, you got ite)“ Yes, I phave ais 
“ How did you get it? Did you buy it? Did you work 
for it? Did you make it?” “No, you gave it to 
me, and [| took it.” “JI gave it to you, and you took 
it;” and that is how we receive salvation from the 
Lord. He gives it to us freely, and we take it by 
faith; that is all. Did the friend wash his hands, or 
put on kid gloves, before he took the book? No. 
If he had done so, he would not more surely have 
received the book; his hand did very well just as it 
was. It is just so with the gift of God. 

If a very poor man asks you to help him, and you 
offer him a shilling, he does not say, “ Please, sir, [ 


48 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


cannot accept your money, for I am not dressed in 
good enough clothes.” He is not so foolish; he asks 
no questions, but gladly takes what is freely given. 
Even so, let us accept Christ as the gift of God. The 
worse we are, the more we need Jesus; and the more 
‘unprepared for Christ we seem, the more prepared 
we are for Him, in the unquestionable sense that 
need is the best preparation for receiving charity. 
When the housewife looks out the linen for the 
laundry, she does not say, “ This garment is too dirty 
to be washed.” No, no. As she looks over the 
household linen, there may be a piece or two so little 
soiled that she questions whether she shall send them 
to be washed; but if one piece is worse than the 
rest, she is quite sure that it is fit to go, and she puts 
it without a question into the bag. 

O my sinful friend, your sinfulness is the reason 
why you should go to Christ for cleansing! Did 
you ever know a man stop away from dinner because 
he was hungry? Did you ever say, “I must not 
drink because I am thirsty”? Do men say, “When 
I am not quite so thirsty, then I will drink; when I 
am not quite so faint, then I will eat”? Does any 
sick man say, “I am so ill that I shall not send for 
a doctor till I am better”? We do not talk in this 
fashion about other matters; then why do we talk 
so about our souls? Jesus Christ asks nothing of us 
except that we will receive Him; and He presents 
Himself to us freely. We say, “There is nothing 
freer than a gift,” so there is nothing freer than the 
grace of God. “This is the record, that God hath 
given to us eternal life, and this life is in His Son.” 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!”. 40 


“God so loved the world, that He gave His only 
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him 
should not perish, but have everlasting life.” 

Jesus and His salvation are matters of pure gift; 
then why will you not have them? Do you say, 
“Oh, that we might receive them”? Do you still 
say that you are more willing to receive than God is 
to give, when God has already given, and you have 
not received? You know the message of the king 
who had invited many guests to his son’s wedding- 
feast, “ Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my oxen 
and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready: 
come unto the marriage.” It was pitiful that every- 
thing should be prepared, and yet the guests should 
not come. My good sister, how would you feel if 
you had invited your friends to see you, and then, 
when everything was ready, you found that nobody 
came to partake of your feast? Would you not cry, 
“What am I to do? Here is everything ready, but 
no one to eat it!” One thing, however, would be 
clear, nobody could say that you were unwilling that 
they should come. All things are ready, and every- 
thing will be spoiled if there are no guests: the 
hostess longs to see every seat at the table filled. 

Jesus Himself, that great provision of God, will be 
of no use if sinners do not come to Him to be saved: 
the substitutionary sacrifice will be an eternal waste 
if men are not redeemed thereby: the provisions of 
atoning love will be a superfluity if the guilty do not 
come and partake of them. “ My oxen and my fat- 
lings are killed. Then, if nobody comes to the 
wedding, all my preparations will be in vain.” The 


4 
ae 


50 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


king must have guests for his feast, and therefore he 


_ said to his servant, “Go out quickly into the streets 


and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor, 
and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind.” When 
this was done, and there was still room, he said to his 
servant, “ Go out into the highways and hedges, and 
compel them to come in, that my house may be 
filled.” A mingled company sat down to the feast. 


You fancy that they appeared very odd and out of 


place. Poor people, picked from the streets, how 
would they appear at a royal table feasting upon 
dainties ? 

Ah, you make a great mistake if you imagine that 
they looked to be a motley crew! The spectacle was 
magnificent; they were all dressed as ladies and 
gentlemen, for they had put on wedding-garments 


_ furnished by the giver of the banquet. As they sat 


at table, they looked like courtiers, for they were all 
dressed in robes worthy of the great occasion. They 
hardly knew themselves, or one another. One of 
them would look across the table to a man who used 
to be his companion in poverty, and he would say, 
“Is that you?” And the other would reply, “It is, 
and it is not. I have undergone a great change. I 
have put off my rags, and I am covered with beauty.” 
If you come to Christ, the poorest of you shall be made 
to sit among princes. You, who are covered with 
leprosy and pollution, may come just as you are, 
and the Lord will welcome you, will heal you, and 
bid you be at home at His table, where fat things full 
of marrow prove the splendour of His love. Come to 
Jesus, and see if it be not so. 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” ~ 51 


Some of you seem to me like the poor dogs that go 
about muzzled ; if there is a bone, they cannot get at 
it. It seems as if the devil had muzzled some of you, 
so that you dare not take the good things of the 
Gospel to yourselves. O Lord, be pleased to take 
the muzzles off these poor dogs! Oh, that they 
could but get a taste of what the Lord has prepared 
for them that love Him! You may have any and 
every Gospel blessing if you dare to take it. Make 
a dash for it. Believe that Jesus Christ is able to 
save you. Trust Him, and He has saved you. 

Do you say that you will not now believe, but will 
wait till your own heart is better, and you feel more 
inward encouragement? How foolish! You will 
wait in vain. Did you ever hear of the deaf man who 
waited to hear the ticking of a sun-dial? He was as 
wise a man as you are. Cease to look within, and 
begin to look up. Jesus saves all those who trust 
Him to save them. End all questions and delays, 
and de saved at once. 


CONFESSION OF SIN.* 


EAR FRIENDS,—According to the printed 
programme, the subject for this morning is 
humiliation on account of national, social, and personal 
sins. The very fact that there is such a thing as sin, 
should humble us in the very dust. Sins against God 
our Creator! How can creatures dare to rebel 
against the Almighty Lord who made them? Sins 
against so gooda God! Why, and wherefore do they 
exist? Sins so wilful, so wanton, so injurious to our- 
selves! What madness! If there could be conceived 
to be the slightest speck of good resulting from sin, 
it might be urged in its favour; but it is evil, only 
evil, and that continually. It dishonours God, and it 
also destroys ourselves. What do we want with sin? 
There is variety enough in that which is permitted 
us; abundant exercise that would yield us pleasure 
and joy, and would allow full and healthy play to our 
whole being; yet we must needs break down all 
restraint, and go after sin. We have left the clear, 
cool, flowing streams from Lebanon to go and drink 
of the polluted pools of Sodom. We have turned 
away from that which was sweet, and safe, and satis- 
factory; and we have gone to that which is bitter 
upon the palate even now, and will be far more bitter 
in the bowels in the world to come. At the remem- 


* An address delivered at Mentone, during the week of universal 
prayer, in connection with the Evangelical Alliance, in January, 1886. 


. 54 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


brance of the very fact of sin, we should lie in the 
dust before God. 

Is there one of us who knows thoroughly what the 
evil of sin is? I do not think there is. If any one 
of us were to see the depravity of his own heart, he 
would lose his reason. Concealed within sin there 
lurks a measureless world of mischief; who can know 
it? Were it not that the infinite satisfaction resulting 
from the atoning sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ 
is ever present before the eye of the great God, He 
would at once ease Him of His adversaries, and sweep 
both sin and sinners out of the world. 

Iam asked to speak concerning zatzonal sins; but 
this is a work too delicate for me, and I fear it would 
do but little good even if executed to perfection. 
We are of many nationalities, and each man is jealous 
for his country. Let each nationality confess its own 
sin by one of its own representatives; and perhaps 
this were better done apart: who cares to expose in 
public the faults of his own family? Moreover, 
general descriptions of a people must necessarily be 
in a great measure incorrect. Little is done for the 
benefit of anybody by “ American Notes,” which hold 
a nation up to ridicule; or by descriptions of English 
manners, which are only regarded as true where 
caricature is accepted as portrait! Patriotism repents 
for its beloved land in secret; but it is wounded by 
unqualified and sweeping censures. The fact is, that 
all nations are of one blood, and display the same 
faults; but there is a considerable variety as to the 
proportion in which the evil ingredients are mixed. 
Sin is neither an English, nor a French, nor a German 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” _ 55 


weed ; it grows wherever there is an inch of human 
soil. If I spoke of drunkenness as an English sin, 
I should be quite correct; for it is so to a terrible 
extent. May God help every friend of Britain to 
protest against the intemperance of his country! 
But since I have been in this town, I am less able to 
speak of the superior sobriety of France; and it is to 
be feared that the serpent, which lurks in the cup of 
red wine, biteth like an adder in all lands. Let this 
evil be confessed by all who lament it, and let it be 
fought against with every lawful weapon within reach. 
To confess it, and then to countenance it, will be to 
make our day of humiliation a day of hypocrisy. 

This much I must say of national sins, that, 
wherever great powers have interfered with smaller 
and inoffensive nationalities, for the sake of increasing 
their territory, or their influence, they are verily 
guilty; and wherein nations have shown a feverish 
irritability, or a readiness for war, they are also to be 
censured. Is not war always a conglomerate of 
crimes? Wherein our civilized races have oppressed 
and degraded aboriginal tribes, the sin cries out be- 
fore high Heaven. I blush to own the part of my 
own country in the enormous infamy of the opium 
traffic. May God forgive this great wickedness, and 
deliver us from it! But enough of this, lest I should 
awaken difference of opinion where I would excite a 
common repentance. Let each nationality humble 
itself apart, and cry, in the language of Daniel: “O 
Lord, to us belongeth confusion of face, to our kings, 
to our princes, and to our fathers, because we have 
sinned against Thee.” 


56 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


Neither will I dwell at any length upon soczal sans. 
Ah, me! How have both our ears been made to 
tingle during the past year! I could wish that I had 
never heard nor read of those things which are done 
of the infamous in secret. Henceforth, for tales of 
horror men will turn, not to the writer of fiction, but 
to the discoverer of fact. Ah, God! What a world 
we live in! Our ‘fine boulevards, our pleasant streets, 
our noble mansions,—these make a goodly show. 
These people, dressed in their Sunday garments, are 
pleasant to look upon. Alas, this is but a film! Our 
cities reek with the crimes of Sodom. It is of no use 
for us to mince matters, or delude ourselves as to the 
sad facts of the case. We have festering within the 
body politic the foul diseases of the vilest ages. We 
talk of Christian lands; as yet the earth has not seen 
such prodigies. Countries are labelled “ Christian ” 
to the dishonour of the sacred Name of our Divine 
Lord. Social iniquity, like a troubled sea, which 
cannot rest, is constantly casting up mire and dirt; 
and I fear there is not a family which has not found 
this black sea encroaching upon it. In very deed, 
the world still lieth in the bosom of the wicked one. 
Do not let Christian people imagine that, in order to 
reach the heathen, they must travel thousands of 
miles; the heathen are all around us, perishing in 
their sins. The sooner we recognize that we are to 
be lights in the midst of darkness, and salt. in the 
midst of putrefaction, the better for the accomplish- 
ment of our life-work. If we believe that the world 
has become cleansed and sanctified into a church, we 
shall live in a fool’s paradise, we shall help to sustain 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” (Ve 


a huge hypocrisy, and we shall miss the purpose for 
which a church is continued in the midst of the world. 

Amongst social sins, I feel inclined to lay most 
stress upon the widespread social atheism of the 
present time. It is not that many are avowed infi- 
dels, but that so many are so, and have not the 
honesty to avow it. Men forget God; He is not in 
all their thoughts, or ways, or estimates. Attempts 
are made to remove the idea of God from science, 
from trade, from politics, and from education. There 
is not so much even of external religion as there used 
to be; many are casting off outward respect for it. 
And can we wonder? Certain of our theologians 
have questioned the inspiration of the Scriptures, 
and cast doubt upon even the historical facts therein 
narrated. The teachings of our Lord and of His 
apostles have been assailed by their pretended de- 
fenders, and the doctrines of our holy faith have, one 
by one, been betrayed into the hands of enemies. 
Of course, the people deny when their ministers 
doubt. Unbelief is in the air; scepticism has become 
the fashion of the period. All this must be preparing 
calamity for a coming day. People do not deny the 
Lord who made them without heaping up wrath 
against the day of wrath. 

I prefer, however, dear friends, to spend the few 
minutes remaining to me in recalling to our minds 
our own personal sins. These are the sins for which 
our penitence is most required, and for which it is 
most effectual. We cannot vanquish widespread social 
sins, but by God’s grace we can overcome our own. 
It may be idle for an obscure individual to lift the 


58 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


lash against a nation, but the least of us may scourge 
his own homeborn sin, and hope for a good result 
from the chastisement. 

Let us personally prostrate ourselves at the feet of 
our Lord Jesus. Let us recollect that many of us 
may be much more guilty than may appear from our 
outward lives. Our secret sins, our heart sins, our 
sins of omission, must be taken into account. It may 
have been impossible for some of us to have sinned 
as others have done; let us not take credit to our- 
selves on that account. The dog is not to be praised 
for not straying if it has been chained up. If we have 
done evil as we could, we need not glory that we 
have not done that which was impossible to us. Sins 
of thought, of desire, and of word, are also to be put 
down in our statement, together with all our ingrati- 
tude to God, and want of love to our neighbour, and 
our pride, and self-seeking, and discontent. 

Let no one of us ever think of compounding for 
sins which he has committed by the reflection that he 
has not fallen so grievously as others. We may be very 
respectable people, and yet we may, in some respects, 
exceed in sin those who appear to be greater sinners. 
What if I am not unchaste, yet Pharisaic pride may 
make me quite as obnoxious to Almighty God. 
What if Iam not a gambler, yet a malicious mind will 
as surely shut me out of Heaven. What if I am not 
a blasphemer, yet the carnal mind is enmity against 
God; and if my nature is not changed, I am not 
reconciled to God. Therefore it becomes each one 
to look narrowly within, by hearty self-examination ; 
and, after doing so, it will be the wisdom of each one 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” — heSg 


to cry, with penitent David, “Have mercy upon me, 
O God, according to Thy lovingkindness: according 
unto the multitude of Thy tender mercies blot out my | 
transgressions.” 

Since I am a believer in the Lord Jesus Christ, I 
know assuredly, at this moment, that all my sins are 
forgiven me. As to the pardon of every true be- 
liever, there can be no doubt, if we believe the testi- 
mony of Holy Scripture. But yet we never dare to 
quit the place of the publican, who cried, “God be 
merciful to mea sinner!” We acknowledge that we 
need continually to receive that pardon which we 
already enjoy. To congratulate ourselves upon a 
fancied perfection, is a folly in which we ought never 
to indulge. Though we know we are forgiven, our 
grief for our transgressions is mcreased. Sin be- 
comes in our esteem more exceeding sinful, because 
of the love which pardons it. It laid on Thee, O 
Lord, so heavy a burden that, when we think of all 
Thine exceeding sorrows, we are ashamed and con- 
founded, and feel that we never can open our mouths 
again with so much as the semblance of self-congratu- 
lation! “To us belongeth shame and confusion of 
face,” and it is the only heritage that we have earned 
by our own merits. 

Our sins, dear friends, ought to be viewed very 
much in relation to our privileges. The sin of those 
who know more than others is marked with a special 
emphasis. Those who sin against a tender and en- 
lightened conscience, and against holy examples and 
influences, sin with a tenfold guilt. Some men have 
to do violence to their better selves in order to do 


60 _ “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


wrong; many amiable women have to harden them- 
selves ere they can unite in the follies of others. 
Ever remember that light increases our guilt if we 
sin against it. 

Forget not, also, that even in making confession of 
sin we may sin. A confession of sin which comes not 
from the heart, and does not affect the after life, is 
in itself a sin. Confession, in which there is no faith 
in Jesus, is an additional transgression, in so far as 
it is the language of unbelief. I am not sure that 
it is not a sin for a child of God to confess sin which 
has been forgiven, as if it were not forgiven. Though 
we are all to confess our sins, no “ General Confes- 
sion” can suit all men alike. Be it ever remembered 
that there isa wide difference between men and men; 
some are unforgiven, and others have been washed 
from their iniquities through the blood of Jesus. 
For the unforgiven to confess their sin as unforgiven, 
is truthful and right; but for a child of God, who is 
forgiven, to speak of his sin as though it had never 
been put away, is to dishonour that glorious sacrifice 
by which the Lord Jesus has finished transgression, 
and made an end of sin. Shall we make the won- 
drous death on Calvary to be of none effect? Never 
let us so transgress. Do not, therefore, you who are 
trusting in Christ, come with your confession in the 
spirit of bondage, much less of despair. Own your 
sins with your heads in your Father’s bosom, weeping 
because of the great love which has forgiven you. 

With all this upon our minds, let us return to the 
sorrowful remembrance of our shortcomings as mem- 
bers of the Church of Christ. How far have we been 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 61 


partakers in the widespread worldliness of professing 
Christians? It is a sad thing that the Church and 
the world are so much alike in these days. A clear 
division should be manifest between the two. The 
world was once destroyed by a flood, and what was 
the cause of it? It was because “the sons of God 
saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and 
they took them wives of all which they chose.” When 
thus the Church and the world were confused, de- 
struction was at hand. It is neither for the good of 
the world nor for the good of the Church that the 
lines of demarcation should grow dim. There is 
an eternal difference between him that feareth God 
and him that feareth Him not; and when professing 
Christians cannot be distinguished from worldly men, 
it 1s because the salt has lost its savour. 

Another greatly prevailing sin is the sad indifference 
concerning the souls of our fellow-men. Certain doc- 
trines have been introduced which tend to make 
men feel easy as to the future of the impenitent; a 
condition which naturally leads to indifference as to 
whether they are led to faith in Jesus, or are allowed 
to remain in their sins. We are all sufficiently callous 
without these modern soporifics. I dread any form 
of teaching which would diminish my horror of a 
man’s dying without God and without hope. It is no 
work of ours to buoy up men with a hope for which 
there is no Scriptural warrant. We would fain deliver 
souls from going down into the pit; we leave others 
to speculate upon their coming out if once they fall 
into it. In any case, may we never grow unmindful 
of the souls of our fellow-men; but, wherever we are 


62. “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


found, may we watch for opportunities of warning 
men of the wrath to come, and wooing them to the 
Saviour’s love! 

Brethren in Christ, may we not have sinned in 
looking too exclusively to our own work, and forget- 
ting the labours of our brethren in other parts of the 
field? How few of us can rejoice when the Lord 
blesses others more than He does ourselves! 

Is there not sin, also, in the disunion which exists 
among professing Christians? Shall we never come 
together? Could we not all revise our opinions by 
the Word of God? This Holy Book is acknowledged 

by us all to be our guide; should we not be agreed 

with one another if we were all agreed with the 
Bible? It seems to me an axiom that persons who 
are agreed with the same rule must be agreed with 
one another. If this suffices not, will we not labour 
to be one with each other by being one with Christ ? 
If we are all united to HIM, must we not be united 
to one another? 

My dear brethren, I dare not omit mention of 
that sin of sins, our wretched unbelief. Do we be- 
lieve anything as we ought to believe it? Have wea 
firm grip of eternal certainties? Do we not act to- 
wards God as if He were a shadow, instead of resting 
upon Him as the Rock of ages? We do not half 
believe the Divine promises, nor rely upon the 
immutable goodness and faithfulness of our Heavenly 
Father. Weare alive unto God; but, alas! that life 
beats feebly within our bosom. Where is our confi- 
dence in the Gospel? Where is our glory in the 
cross? We are trembling followers of a Master who 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 63 


deserves the unwavering faith of every one who has 
the honour to be His disciple. 7 

Only a minute remains in which to acknowledge 
our shortcomings as to private prayer. Where are 
the men mighty in supplication? Do not our closets 
cry out against us? Where are our united pleadings 
with the Lord? Do not many forget meetings for 
prayer? Are not many altogether unaware of what 
they are like? 

Have we not been lacking in meditation, in com- 
munion, in walking with God? Where are the saints 
now? We have a superabundance of professors, but 
where are the truly eminent Christians? I believe 
that the strength of the Church lies in that inner 
circle of champions which is composed of the 
thoroughly consecrated, the men who are favoured 
of the Lord. Holy Bernard was the light of his age, 
and passing on from age to age we see men who 
blazed with the light of God; but we ought each one 
of us to seek to be saints in the highest sense of the 
word. We must aim at being the holiest of men and 
women. Let it be ours to be like the mountain-tops 
that catch first the beams of the rising sun, and reflect 
the light upon the lowlands. If we are not such, we 
ought to be ; and wherein we are not all that we ought 
to be, we sin. 

Let us now lay bare our hearts before God, and 
ask Him to search us that so our guilt may be per- 
fectly removed, and we may be clean in His sight, and 
so enter with joyous hearts into the New Year. May 
the Holy Spirit pour upon us the spirit of grace and 
of supplications! Amen. 


; FOPRAY~YOU: TO’ FASTEN*YOUR GRIPS” 


HIS sentence I met with in one of those, 
marvellous letters which Samuel Rutherford 
left as a priceless legacy to the Church of God in all 
ages. Truly, he hath dust of gold. I thought it 
would make a capital text for a prayer-meeting ad- 
dress, so I jotted it down. It gripped me, and so I 
gripped it, in the hope that it might grip you, and 
lead you “ to fasten your grips.” 

But do not imagine that I have taken a text from 
Rutherford because I could not find one in the Bible, 
for there are many passages of Scripture which teach 
the same lesson. As for instance, that exhortation, 
“Lay hold on eternal life,” or that other, “ Hold fast 
that thou hast,” or that other, “ Hold fast the form of 
sound words.” The things of God are not to be 
trifled with, “lest at any time we should let them 
slip.” They are to be grasped, as Jacob seized the 
angel, crying, “I will not let thee go.” Faith is first 
the eye of the soul, wherewith it sees the invisible 
things of God; and then it becomes the hand of the 
soul, with which it gets a grip of the substance of 
“the things not seen as yet.” A man has two hands, 
and I would urge you to take a double hold upon 
those things which Satan will try to steal from you. 
Take hold of them as the limpet takes hold upon the 


~ 
iS 


\ 


66 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


rock, or as the magnet takes hold of steel Give a’ 
- life grip—a death grip: “I pray you to fasten your 
grips.” 

And, first, do this with regard to the Lord Jesus 
Christ. Cling to His cross as the sole hope of your 
soul. You, who already hold Him by faith, I would 
stir up to hold fast the beginning of your confidence 
even to the end. Hold to Him more intelligently 
and more decidedly than ever. Let everything else 
go, but keep your hand upon Him as Joab held to 
the horns of the altar. Should Jesus ask you, “ Will 
ye also go away?” answer at once, “ Lord, to whom 
should we go? Thou hast the words of eternal life.” 
As He holds you by His grace, so hold Him by the 
grace which He has wrought in you. You must not 
ever have to think, as that Swedish sailor did, of 
whom Mr. Faithfull told us that he said, “ he once had 
Christ, and had lost Him.” “I pray you to fasten your 
erips” so firmly that no such awful thought shall 
ever darken your minds. “I held Him,” said the 
spouse in the Canticles, “and would not let Him go, 
until I had brought Him into my mother’s house, and 
into the chamber of her that conceived me.” You 
cannot bring Jesus to others if you do not hold Him 
fast yourselves. Never dream of letting Him go who. 
is your hope, your joy, your all. He is yours to have 
and to hold when death shall part you from all beside. 

If any of you have never taken hold upon Christ 
Jesus, “I pray you to fasten your grips” on Him to- 
night. Oh, that the Holy Spirit may teach you, lead 
you, and enable you to do soat this moment! Christ 
is no shadow ; you can lay hold of Him, there is some- 


BPO Siewratg 
vies on 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” ey 67 


thing to lay hold upon. Grasp Him now as a drown- 
ing man would seize a life-buoy, as a man dying of 
hunger would clutch at a bit of bread. Jesus will not 
try to get away from you. He did not withdraw His 
garment from the woman who touched it for healing ; — 
He never denied Himself to a seeking soul. Hold 
Him, then, with a daring grasp. Make bold with our 
good Lord, for He loves a daring faith. Hath He not 
said, “ Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast 
out”? Grasp Him, for He puts Himself in your way 
at this good hour. Men are eager enough to snatch 
at the shadows of this poor fleeting world; why are 
you so slow to “fasten your grips” upon Him who is 
grace and truth? What life, what salvation, what 
everlasting joy shall come streaming out of Him into 
you, if you are now moved to lay hold on Him, and 
take Him as your own! Think it no robbery. He is 
God’s unspeakable gift, freely bestowed on needy 
sinners. 

In the next place, “I pray you to fasten your 
grips” on the doctrines of the Gospel. You do believe 
them, dear friends, or you would not rally around the 
preacher. If there are any of you who do not believe 
them, and yet are members of this church, you can 
scarcely remain so with a clear conscience, for our 
Confession of Faith is most explicit on those points. 
When any cease to hold the grand doctrines of a free- 
grace Gospel, they generally clear out within a very 
short time, for they are weary of the constant preach- 
ing of them. My ministry is a flail which parts the’ 
chaff from the wheat, and a fan which drives the chaff 
away ; and I desire it to be so. I aim at separating the 


68 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


chaff from the wheat. If I hear that somebody has 
been offended because of the truth which I have 
preached, I remember that many were offended at 
that infinitely greater Preacher who, on one occasion, 
found that many went back, and walked no more 
with Him, for He had uttered a hard saying,—“ who 
could hear it?” Doth this offend you? You will 
be more offended yet, as we further and further dive 
into the truth of sovereign, distinguishing grace. 

But you, dear friends, have taken hold of the 
doctrines of grace, and “I pray you to fasten your 
grips.” These are times when everything will be 
snatched away from you unless you hold it fast. 
‘Some years ago, I was highly flattered by a neigh- 
‘bour of rather advanced views, who said that the 
region of South London was difficult to work in, 
because the people were infected with a kind of 
teaching which it was impossible to destroy; for 
when people once got hold of it, they obstinately 
refused to let it go. I am rejoiced that this is the 
case. The doctrines of a gracious Gospel are so 
Scriptural, so comforting, so self-evidencing, so satis- 
fying, that men will not readily quit them when once 
they know their virtue. “Free grace and dying 
love” are such old wine that no man desireth new. 
Gospel truths saturate a. believer right through, and 
remain in the grain of the cloth like the old red of 
soldiers’ coats. The Gospel is like some perfumes, 
which never leave the boxes in which they have once 
lain. The love of free grace dwells in the core of 
our heart. It has not only reached our bone, but it 
has impregnated the marrow; you cannot get it out 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 69 


of us, even if you kill us. I judge how it is with you 
by what I know of myself; I could be ground into 
atoms so small that you could not see them without 
a powerful microscope, but every atom would sparkle 
with belief in the atoning sacrifice, and the eternal 
love which gave it. 

“I pray you to fasten your grips” upon the re- 
vealed truths of God’s Word, so that you shall never 
flinch from avowing and defending them, whatever 
ridicule your adherence to them may cost you. I 
told an American friend, yesterday, that I could claim 
no credit for preaching a free-grace Gospel, because 
I did not know any other, and would not know any 
other if I could. “I determined not to know any- 
thing among you save Jesus Christ, and Him cruci- 
fied.” I will be an agnostic to all but my Lord and 
His infallible Word. Once, when I had been preach- 
ing in Wales, an old lady told me that she had been 
very pleased with what I had said, but I was inferior 
to Christmas Evans, because he had only one eye, 
while I had two. I hope I have only one eye, however, 
in the higher sense. When a man gets a single eye for 
God’s glory, and preaches nothing else but the doc- 
trine of the Word, he will take good aim, and hit a 
glorious mark. I pray that I may myself “fasten 
my grips” more and more upon the one and only 
Gospel, and that all of you may do the same, without 
a single exception. We will not let go a particle of 
that perfect system of revealed truth of which Christ 
is the centre, and grace is the circumference. 

Thirdly, dear friends, for your own comfort, “I 
pray you to fasten your grips” on the promises of 


70 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


God. In days to come, the younger ones amongst 
us may see the wisdom of this advice. I will tell 
you what will help you to fasten your grips,—a 
sharp touch of rheumatism, if grace goes with it. 
I do not want you to have the rheumatism, or 
any other trial; but if you do, I trust you will have 
grace given to lay hold upon precious promises suit- 
able to your condition. Sanctified afflictions will 
help you to fasten your grips. If you have a very 
dear one long lying ill, or if your property is melting 
away, or if your jubilant spirits are sinking in de- 
pression, you will want the promises, and you will 
feel the necessity of fastening your grips. A grip of 
a promise of God is better than a grasp of a bag of 
gold. A grip of such a_ promise as _ this, “I 
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee,” will 
enable you to understand the exhortation which 
Paul saddles upon it, “Let your conversation 
be without covetousness, and be content with 
such things as ye have: for He hath said, I will 
never leave-thee, nor forsake thee.” If you are afraid 
of trouble, if you are doubting and fearing, “I pray 
you to fasten your grips ” on the everlasting covenant. 
You have an anchor, within the veil, which will never 
give way; but mind that your cable is firmly held on 
board your vessel, for it is to this end of it that your 
care must be given; and, therefore, “I pray you to 
fasten your grips.” . 

“T pray you to fasten your grips,” also, on the service 
which God has given you to do. You who conduct 
Bible-classes and missions, you who teach in the 
Sunday-school, you who visit the kitchens of the 


yah 
“Only a Prayer-meeting!” — 71 


lodging-houses, you who go round with those brown- 
covered sermons, and leave them from door to door, 
you who labour for your gracious Lord in any way,— 
did you say that you thought of giving up your work? 
What are you at? “I pray you to fasten your grips.” 
I heard, the other day, of a place of worship from. 
which the congregation has gradually migrated, till 
very, very few remain. On looking over it, I said to 
one of the deacons, “ This place might do for me 
when I give up the Tabernacle, because of my 
general weakness and failure of health.” He gave 
me no verbal answer, but he laughed, as if he could 
not contain himself, and that was all he said. I did 
not ask him to explain what he meant by laughing 
at my remarks. The laughter said more than words. 
I see you are laughing, too. Well, you are going to. 
give up your class, are you? Shall I laugh? I would 
if it would be interpreted by you as I interpreted my 
deacon’s laugh. 

It does seem ridiculous for anyone who has a work 
to do for Christ to talk of giving it up, unless there 
is a sheer inability to go on. I could rather weep 
than laugh, for it is even more sad than absurd. 
Here you are highly honoured by having the oppor- 
tunity of doing good, and winning souls, and you talk 
of giving up? “I pray you to fasten your grips.” 
Of course, when you cannot do the work because of 
age and infirmity, it will be your wisdom to stand out 
of the way, and let somebody else do it better; but as 
long as you can do it, “I pray you to fasten your 
grips.” Some old men of my acquaintance carried 
on Sunday-school work till they died, and some aged 


72 | “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


ministers have been useful to the very last. One 
good point in the chapter from the Acts, which we 
read yesterday morning, was the fine fidelity of the 
Roman soldiers. The Sadducees and the high priest 
—little can be said in their praise; but the soldiers 
stood at the door of the prison in the morning, 
though an angel had set the apostles free. They 
stood as sentries where they were bidden to stand ; 
and you, who are good soldiers of Jesus Christ, must 
stand where your Lord and Master has placed youp— 
sentries fixed like statues till recalled. 

I have heard that, on one occasion, Sir Henry 
Havelock was going over London Bridge with his 
son, and that he said, “ Stop here, Harry, until I come 
back.” He forgot all. about his boy, finished his 
business in the city, and went home. His wife said 
to him, “ Where is Harry?” “Bless me,” he replied, 
“he is on London Bridge; I told him to stop there 
until I returned, and I am sure he will do so.” He 
hastened to the spot, and there was young Harry. 
“What, Harry, are you still here?” “Yes, father; 
you told me to stop here until you came back, and I 
have done so.” A soldier's son could do no other- 
wise ; and you are sons of the great Captain of our 
salvation, even the Lord of hosts. Keep your places, 
whatever happens; and work on, whatever occurs. 
Having done all, still stand; and you have not done 
all yet. Blessed shall that servant be whom his Lord 
at His coming shall find watching and working. To 
desert your posts will be too shameful. Are you 
weary? Rest in your Lord. Are you discouraged? 
Let patience have her perfect work. No, no, my 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” _ 73 


beloved, we will not one of us think of retiring. “I 
pray you to fasten your grips.” 

Now here is a harder bit. “I pray you to fasten 
your grips” won the cross. 1 mean, the cross which 
you are to bear after Jesus. You see, you are bound 
to carry it, for all believers in the Crucified must be 
cross-bearers. The cross of Christ has saved you, 
and now there is a cross of your own which the Lord 
has prepared for your shoulders, which you are to 
carry because you are saved. On affliction, loss, re- 
proach for Christ’s sake, “I pray you to fasten your 
grips.” This cross you must take up. You are not to 
wait to have it forced upon unwilling shoulders. Your 
Lord’s command is, “Take up thy cross, and follow 
Me.” Stoop down to it, grasp it, and bear it. Let your 
hand embrace it for Christ’s sake. Do not shun that 
which is the badge of true saints, and at once their 
burden and their blessing. Is it reproach? Count 
it greater riches than all the treasures of Egypt. Is 
it loss for the sake of holiness? Espouse it, as your 
joyful bride. Is it any form of persecution? Rejoice 
and be exceeding glad that you are counted worthy 
to suffer for your Lord’s sake. Is it any other form 
of sorrow which attaches to the life of the godly? 
Do not rebel against it, but “take it up,” and bear 
cheerfully the sacred load. Sanctified afflictions are 
spiritual promotions. 

Even if your cross grows heavier as you carry it, 
welcome it, and follow on in the footsteps of the 
Well-beloved, as one of an elect train, chosen in the 
furnace of affliction. Some day, you will come to see 
the excellent uses of your crosses, and then you will 


tes Pee ee Se ee 
74 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


praise God for them. By faith and patience you may 
even fall in love with the cross, till you would not 
even wish to part with it. Submission is the near 
road to comfort, and cheerful acquiescence finds the 
‘cross on the back to be like wings to the shoulders. 
“We glory in tribulations also.” “I pray you to 
fasten your grips” upon your cross, and hold it fast 
as a treasure rather than an infliction. What I say 
unto you, I say also to myself. I owe more than I 
can ever tell you to pain, and weakness, and other 
forms of my Lord’s dear cross. It is not an iron 
cross, as I once thought it, it is only a wooden one; 
and He Himself always bears the heavier end. I 
could almost sing, “sweet affliction”; surely its bit- 
terness 1s soon over. 

“I pray you to fasten your grips” in a practical 
manner wzfon one another. Brethren, let us love one 
another, for love is of God. We are heartily joined 
together in one spirit: let us remain so. Let our 
love increase exceedingly, as we are pressed together 
by surrounding opposition. Let all those who are 
one in the common faith get together, and cheer each . 
other. I will not venture upon shaking hands at this 
moment with Mr. Faithfull, the brother who labours 
in Marseilles, because example is very contagious, 
and he has told us that the sailors give him awful 
grips when they shake hands. A very little while 
ago, I could not even hold a pen, and I dare not run 
the risk of a sailor's grip with this most excellent 
friend; but spiritually, if not corporeally, let us all 
give each other one of those sailor grips with our 
hearts, if not with our hands. Brethren, you are very, 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 75 


very dear to me, and you return that love. Be of 
like mind among yourselves. Are you out at elbows 
with one another? Are there even two women who 
cannot agree? Remember how our apostle said, “I 
beseech Euodias, and I beseech Syntyche, that they 
be of the same mind in the Lord.” They were only 
two private members, but Paul could not let them 
fall out. Put an end to discord at once. “I pray 
you to fasten your grips.” Be not cold and distant 
towards your fellow-members, but let love reign 
supreme everywhere. 


“Tis a shameful sight, 
When children of one family 
Fall out, and chide, and fight.” 


Get to know each other better. “Bear ye one 
another’s burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ.” 
Bear and forbear, feeling that you are not yourselves 
perfect. Let us live in hearty love, first to our 
adorable Lord, and then with all our fellow-servants, 
and so we shall become strong in the Lord, and the 
Lord will command His blessing to fall like the dew 
of Hermon where He sees brotherly love abounding. 
I speak not thus because you fail in this respect, but I 
speak the more freely because I trust you excel in it. 
Oh, that all churches were abodes of love! What do 
we see in many places? No contending earnestly for 
the faith, but much contending as to who shall be the 
greatest. I heard, the other day, of a church which 
has come to nothing, and one told me that the reason 
was that “everybody wanted to be boss.” You 
know what the word means; I think it is of American 


76 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


origin, and includes a good deal. Diotrephes is a 
dreadful mischief-maker. Let us not imitate him, 
but let us be ready to wash the saints’ feet. 

“T pray you to fasten your grips” on all God’s 
chosen in every place; on all God’s Church through- 
out the whole world; let us pray for all the Lord’s 
people. Let us grip our brethren in America, who 
have sent so many gracious representatives among 
us. Let us do the same with the churches on the 
Continent, for whom our brother Faithfull has spoken. 
God bless France, and save her! Our evangelist, 
Mr. Harmer, has just touched the coast of Africa, 
and his presence makes us think of the Congo and 
the Cape. With both hands, and with all our hearts, 
we salute all the people of God throughout the world, 
rejoicing that we are one body in Christ Jesus. In 
this holy love, “I pray you to fasten your grips.” 
Amen. 


IT. 


EXPOSITIONS OF SCRIPTURE. 


THE FIRST PUBLIC WORSHIP IN THE 
WORLD. 


“ Then began men to cali upon the Name of the LorD.”»— 
Genesis iv. 26. 

EFORE we join in prayer again,—and I Awe 

we shall spend the greater part of our time to- 

night in that most delightful and most profitable 

exercise,—I should like to make just a few remarks 

upon the last verse of the fourth chapter of the Book 

of Genesis. To Adam and Eve there was born a 

son instead of Abel, namely, Seth; and to Seth him- 

self there was also born a son, whom he named Enos. 
After the record of his birth, we are told,— 


“ THEN BEGAN MEN TO CALL UPON THE NAME 
OF THE LORD.” 


I suppose that, by this expression, it is meant that 
they began to have set assemblies for the worship of 
Jehovah, and that they came together for what we 
generally speak of now as public worship; for men 
had, doubtless, called upon the Name of the Lord, 
each one by himself, from the very first. We cannot 
doubt that our father Adam and our mother Eve 
were, by Divine grace, led to repent of their great 
sin, and to cry for mercy and pardon; and if they 
did so, we are quite sure that they never neglected to 
pray both separately and together. There was Abel, 


hae 1 ‘e Ut et oe 


80 “Only a Prayer-meeting ! > 


too; he “brought of the firstlings of his flock” in 
sacrifice to God, “and the Lord had respect unto 
Abel and to his offering.” His was the offering of 
a believer, and therefore his sacrifice was accepted. 
I suppose that, often, as a solitary man, he would go 
forth privately to worship God on his own account. 

But, after Abel’s death, and the birth of Seth and 
Enos, there were two families in which the fear of 
the Lord was manifested, the family of Adam and 
the family of his son Seth. When Enos was born, 
as the first of a long succession of descendants that 
has continued to this day, men began to meet to- 
gether in assemblies for the worship of Jehovah ; 
they were very, very few: but yet, from that time, 
they “began to call upon the Name of the Lord.” 
So, if there should be two of your families who find 
yourselves in some back settlement of Canada, if there 
should be only your two families in the whole region, 
mind that you get together on the Sabbath-day, and 
worship the Lord as best you can. Let this be your 
example; there were at the first only two families 
that feared Jehovah, yet “ Ten began men to call 
upon the Name of the Lord.” 

It is not essential to the constitution of a congrega- 
tion, nor is it essential to the formation of a Christian 
church, that there should be large numbers; it is 
neither necessary to the devotion nor to the accept- 
ance of it with God that there should be a crowd of 
people; for, when there were but twos and threes, 
only two families, or perhaps three, upon the face of 
the whole earth, “ Then began men to call upon the 
Name of the Lord.” Some of you may not always 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 81 


have the privilege of living where so many of us 
meet together to worship God. It is a very joyous 
thing to gather with the multitude to keep holy-day ; 
—the more the merrier, in our Lord’s service, I am 
sure; but if you should find yourselves in some re- 
mote part of your own country, or far away from the 
assemblies of God’s people in other lands, do not let 
that hinder you from meeting together as a Christian 
church, and observing the ordinances of the Christian 
religion. Remember that our Lord Jesus said, 
“Where two or three are gathered together in My 
Name, there am I in the midst of them;” and you 
may be sure that, if He is in the assembly, however 
few may be present, they make up a valid, lawful 
congregation, and a real church in the New Testa- 
ment meaning of that term. Whether the company 
is large or small, Charles Wesley’s hymn is always in 
season,— 


“ Meet and right it is to sing, 

In every time and place, 
Glory to our Heavenly King, 

The God of truth and grace. 
Join we then with sweet accord, 
All in one thanksgiving join ! 
Holy, Holy, Holy Lord, 

Eternal praise be Thine. 


“ Father, God, Thy love we praise, 

Which gave Thy Son to die ; 

Jesus, full of truth and grace, 
Alike we glorify: 

Spirit, Comforter Divine, 

Praise by all to Thee be given, 

Till we in full chorus join, 
And earth is turn’d to Heaven.” 


earn fo 


82 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


There was also, at the time mentioned in this 
_ passage, a special reason why the godly ones should | 
call upon the Name of the Lord, for there was an 
opposition element in the world. Cain, as well as 
Seth, was the founder of a family. There were, 

henceforth, two lines of generation in the world, the 
~ line of grace that seemed to keep largely to the family 
of Seth, and the line of sin, the line of rebellion, 
and the line of darkness and death, which kept 
mainly to the family of Cain. Cain’s descendants 
multiplied ; I do not know what religion they had, or 
professed to have; but whatever they had, it was not 
the religion of gracé, and they went continually 
further and further away from the light, always with 
their backs to the sun. Consequently, the people 
of God, pained and grieved to find that there was 
another family in the world, the seed of the serpent 
multiplying among them, thought it their duty, as well 
as their privilege, to set up a standard, and make it 
known to all that they were believers, that they feared 
Jehovah, the one living and true God. “Then began 
men to call upon the Name of the Lord.” 

And, brethren, if anything should make us come 
out boldly in our worship of God, it is the publicity 
of the sin of the ungodly; if anything should make 
us band together, it is the presence of sin in so many 
of our fellow-creatures ; if anything should make us 
pray, it is the prevalence of iniquity all around us; if 
anything should make us feel that we who love the 
Lord must unite to serve Him, and throw our whole 
heart and soul into united prayer to the Most High, 
and united adoration of God over all, blessed for 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 83 


evermore, it is when we hear the blasphemies of men, 
and see their rebellion against the Lord. “Then 
began men to call upon the Name of the Lord” when 
others turned aside from His ways; and thus, dear 
friends, should it be with you who are His loyal sub- 
jects. The more you are surrounded by enemies of 
the truth, the more you see of the prevalence of sin 
in the world, the more necessity is there for frequent 
attendance at public worship, the Scriptural observ- 
ance of all the ordinances of the Lord’s house, and 
the more earnest and resolute contention for the faith 
once for all delivered to the saints. We live in such 
times as these, and therefore we need to hear and to 
heed the stirring summons,— 


“Stand up! Stand up for Jesus! 

The trumpet-call obey; 

Forth to the mighty conflict, 
In this His glorious day ; 

Ye that are men, now serve Him, 
Against unnumbered foes ; 

Your courage rise with danger, 
And strength to strength oppose.” 


Another thought strikes me. Thzs public worship 
was a very small affair at the beginning, yet it has 
lasted to this day; and if ever the Church of God in 
any place grows exceedingly small and feeble, let us 
not despair of it, but remember what it was at its 
commencement. It was a tiny mill when first the 
stream of public worship leaped into life; it was a 
small assembly, that first Church of God, that first 
separated congregation that met together to declare 
that Jehovah was their Lord; yet the little one has 


84 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


become many a thousand, and the small one a strong 
nation. It has often declined, but it has as frequently 
revived ; it has been sometimes hidden, but by-and-by 
it has been again revealed; it has been almost 
crushed out in some countries, but, in due time, 
through the power of God’s mighty grace, it has been 
made to flourish again. Well did Wesley sing of 
his Saviour,— 


“When He first the work begun, 
Small and feeble was His day: 
Now the Word doth swiftly run, 
Now it wins its widening way: 
More and more it spreads and grows, 
Ever mighty to prevail ; 
Sin’s strongholds it now o’erthrows, 
Shakes the trembling gates of hell. 


“ Saw ye not the cloud arise, 
Little as a human hand ? 
Now it spreads along the skies 
Hangs o’er all the thirsty land: 
Lo, the promise of a shower, 
Drops already from above; 

_ But the Lord will shortly pour 
All the Spirit of His love.” 


Men still continue “to call upon the Name of the 
Lord,” or, as the marginal reading puts it, “to call 
themselves by the Name of the Lord.” May the 
Lord multiply these assemblies, and grant grace to 
many more of our fellow-creatures to meet together 
with us in the Name of the Lord, and to call them- 
selves by His sacred Name! Thus shall be fulfilled 
that gracious promise of the Lord to His ancient 
people, “I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” — 85 


and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour My 
Spirit upon thy seed, and My blessing upon thine off- 
spring: and they shall spring up as among the grass, 
as willows by the water courses. One shall say, I 
am the Lord’s; and another shall call himself by the 
name of Jacob; and another shall subscribe with his 
hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the 
name of Israel.” 

As of old, men met to call upon the Name of the 
Lord, so still do we gather together to call upon His 
Name in prayer, in praise, and in the preaching of His 
Word, and especially to call upon His Name in the 
New Testament sense of repentance towards God 
and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. In this sense, 
“whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord 
shall be saved.” Thus early, and thus late, have men 
- called upon the Name of the Lord; and if the days 
should grow darker even than they are at present, 
and the number of the faithful should get fewer and 
yet fewer still, there will always be some left to call 
upon His Name, until “ He shall come to be glorified 
in His saints, and to be admired in all them that be- 
events cual Wherefore also we pray always for you, 
that our God would count you worthy of this calling, 
and fulfil all the good pleasure of His goodness, and 
the work of faith with power: that the Name of our 
Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in 
Him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord 
Jesus Christ.” Amen. 


CONCERNING THE DROPPING OF 
HONEYCOMBS. 


“ Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield, and thy exceeding 
great reward.” —Genesis xv. I. 


URN to the nineteenth Psalm, and the tenth 
verse, and there read, in our version, “ sweeter 
also than honey and the honeycomb.” This is 
applied to “the judgments of the Lord,” which are 
“true and righteous altogether.” The expression sets 
forth David’s esteem of the law of God, and we may 
fitly apply it to Holy Scripture. The Hebrew hath 
it, “sweeter than the dropping of honeycombs.” 
Whereupon good Mr. Brooks observes, “ It is sweeter 
than that which drops immediately and naturally 
without any force or art, which is counted the purest 
and the sweetest honey.” 

There are texts of Scripture which are exceedingly 
sweet, and marvellously free in the giving forth of 
their sweetness, needing little study or meditation. 
Children have their drops, and their little candies, 
which melt away in their mouths; and, even so, cer- 
tain Scriptures are prepared for the Lord’s little 
children; they have only to receive them by the 
mouth of faith, and their enjoyment is great. Some 
words of the Lord are as nuts that need cracking, or 
grapes that need treading in the winepress, for their 
meaning lieth not upon the surface; but those to 


88 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


which I refer are ready for use: they are simple 
sweetnesses, prepared pleasures ; in fact, drops of de- 
light. To enjoy these, one does not need to be a 
theologian or a grammarian, much less a philosopher 
or a mystic. The honey of the meaning flows out of 
the comb of the words as fluid consolation, liquid love, 
pure joy, and perfect truth. The student does not 
need to pore over his book, or the preacher to consult 
his library, or the hearer to collect his knowledge ; 
the dainty comfort offers itself to the palate, and 
goeth down sweetly, spreading its savour over the 
whole inner man without effort. 

I should like, as the Holy Spirit opens up the Word 
to me, to give my friends, every now and then, a drop 
of honey out of the rock, by dwelling upon certain 
easy texts as they yield themselves to my heart. I 
would not so much think as enjoy, and then give to 
you that which has been precious to my own heart. 
There are some preachers, whose main business seems 
to be to lead people among the thorns, where they 
are torn with perplexities; it is mine, on this occa- 
sion, to run by way of the plain, along the level road 
of evident teaching. On the Sabbath, it is well to 
rest the mind as well as the body. We do not so 
much want deep problems to make our heads ache as 
holy consolations to quiet our hearts. Those who use 
such long words that they cannot be understood 
without a dictionary go very near to breaking the 
Sabbath themselves, and compelling their hearers to 
do the same. At any rate, on these occasions, I shall 
neither perplex my readers, nor cause them any 
mental labour. Honey-drops are for pleasure, not for 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 89 


labour; and they are for children rather than for 
students. Many a sweet truth in God’s Word is so 
very simple that it does not need excogitating so 
much as enjoying. When you get a honey-drop, you 
just put it in your mouth, and let it lie there, or turn 
it round with your tongue till it dissolves. Let us 
do this, as occasion offers, with several simple pas- 
sages ; and just now with these words from the Book 
of Genesis, fifteenth chapter, and first verse. Bees, 
and their hives and combs, are very plentiful in Pales- 
tine, and here we have good store of sweetness. The 
one sentence which I have pitched upon is full, and 
rich, and simple, and we will try to enjoy it. It is 
God’s word to His servant Abraham :— 


“FEAR NOT, ABRAM: I AM THY SHIELD, AND THY 
EXCEEDING GREAT REWARD.” 


“Fear not, Abram.” Alas! fear is an ague which 
haunts these marsh-lands. When shall we get to 
higher ground, and dwell above? Fear is a com- 
plaint common among the Lord’s people; we might 
be sure that it was so when we learned that Abram 
suffered from it, for he was the most vigorous of 
believers. Does Abram need a “fear not”? Then 
we may be pretty sure that we require it, too. I am 
afraid that, wherever there is faith, there will also be 
a measure of fear; though the less of it there is, the 
better will it be. How tenderly the Lord quiets the 
fears of His children! “Fear not, Abram.” As much 
as if He had said, “ You are all alone; but fear not, for 
I am with you. You are in much labour ; but fear not, 
I will help you. You have no portion in this strange 


. 


7 are te 
go “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


land; but fear not, for I am your God. Do not fear 
in the present ; do not fear in the future. Fear neither 
the failure of friends nor the fury of foes. Be brave, 
calm, hopeful, trustful, joyful. ‘Fear not, Abram.’ 
You have just been fighting the kings; you felt your- 
self to be a man of peace, and not accustomed to the 
deadly strife; but I have given the plunderers, hke 
driven stubble, to your bow, and you have brought 
back Lot and all his train of servants that were taken 
prisoners. You need not even fear for your relatives ; 
I will bless them for your sake. Beside that, you 
have not touched a thread or a shoe-latchet of the 
King of. Sodom’s goods, but you have borne yourself 
in a right royal manner; therefore, fear not to enjoy 
your success, you shall be safe from all attacks, and 
you shall live in the respect of the great ones around 
you.” This blessed “Fear not” was a quietus to 
every form of alarm which might come near the man 
of God. 

But the Lord seemed to think that, after his conflict 
and his victory, Abram might begin to sink. It is 
often so with bold men; it was so even with Elias, 
the prophet of fire. Men are not afraid when the 
battle rages, their spirit is equal to the danger and the 
struggle; but when all is over, then a reaction comes, 
and they greatly need the Lord’s “ Fear not.” Have 
you never felt yourself strangely supported under the 
direst afflictions, so that they seemed not to be 
afflictions at all? And yet, when pressure has 
been removed, you have been ready to faint, like 
Samson after he had slain the Philistines. Fear is 
apt to be greatest when the reason for it is smallest. 


i ae ) 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” ot 


We are often quiet in a storm, and distracted in a 
calm. We are singular beings, mysteries to our- 
selves, and riddles to our neighbours. Our constitu- 
tion and disposition are made up of odds and ends, 
and gatherings from all manner of beasts, and birds, 
and fishes, and no one can understand us except the 
Lord; but, blessed be His Name, He knows us 
altogether, and therefore He brings forth the nght 
consolation at the right moment, saying, “ Fear not,” 
in the instant wherein we are most likely to fear. 

“Fear not, Abram.” Were there not two things 
about which the patriarch might have feared? First, 
about his own safety. This was met by the assur- 
ance, “ Fear not, Abram, I am thy shield.” When he 
had no other guard, Abraham was shielded by his 
God. He was like a sheep in the midst of wolves, a 
lone stranger surrounded by hostile nations; but a 
spell was upon the Canaanites, for the Lord had said, 
“Touch not Mine anointed, and do My prophets no 
harm.” The protected of the Lord needed not to 
wear armour, nor bear a sword, for Jehovah had said, 
“T am thy shield.” Abraham possessed no fortress, 
he commanded no army; he did not even dwell in 
a house, and yet he was safe enough. His tents were 
no defence, and yet no one ever broke into them, 
or dared to threaten those who dwelt within: no 
assassin waylaid him, no marauder attacked him; 
he dwelt at ease behind the broad shield of the 
Almighty. He was as safe asif he had been enclosed 
within walls that reached to Heaven. The armour 
of God covered him from head to foot. 

So, dear friends, when we seem to have nothing 


92 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


visible to protect us, what a blessing it is to know 
that we are guarded by the invisible and omnipotent 
God! The visible must always of necessity be finite, 
but the invisible God is infinite, there is no searching 
of His understanding. You are infinitely safe if you 
are a believer in the living God,—your beginnings 
and your endings, your wakings and your sleepings, 
your journeyings and your restings, your sufferings 
and your doings, your slander or your honour, your 
poverty or your wealth, your all for ever and ever 
is most secure when the Lord is your Keeper, and 
your shield upon your right hand. Be it ours to leave 
our cares, and give our hearts up to the repose of 
faith. Come, sing with me that verse of the beloved 
Toplady,— 


“Tnspirer and Hearer of prayer, 
Thou Shepherd and Guardian of Thine, 
My all to Thy covenant care 
I sleeping and waking resign. 
If Thou art my shield and my sun, 
The night is no darkness to me; 
And fast as my moments roll on, 
They bring me but nearer to Thee.” 


We are safe if God be with us. We may be in the 
midst of cruel adversaries, but no weapon that is 
formed against us can prosper if God be our shield. 
Please to notice that the Lord does not say, “I will 
shield you;” but, “I, the Almighty, am your shield; 
it is not alone My power, My wisdom, My love, which 
will protect you, but I Myself will be your shield.” 
Then Abram may have thought, “I shall be pro- 
tected; but, after all, shall I not spend my life in 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 93 


vain?” He might have feared for his success. He 
had led the life of a gipsy, roaming through a land 
in which he owned no foot of ground; therefore the 
Lord added, “TI am thy reward.” He does not say, 
“T will reward you ;” but He says, “ I am thy reward.” 
Dear brother-ministers, if souls are saved, they are a 
form of reward to you; but, nevertheless, rejoice not 
in them, but rather rejoice that your names are written 
in Heaven. I have quoted an old text, first spoken 
to chosen men who had healed the sick and cast out 
devils in Christ’s Name. Yes, dear brethren, if many 
receive our word, it is our joy that they have received 
it; but, still, we may be disappointed in our estimate 
of conversions; and, at the best, our success will not 
equal our desires. 

The only reward that a Christian can fully rejoice 
in, without any reservation, is this assurance of the 
Lord, “I am thy reward.” Did not the father, in the 
parable, say to the elder son, when he grumbled and 
growled at the reception given to his brother, “ Son, 
thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine ”? 
That was reward enough, was it not? It is wealth 
enough to a believer to possess his God, honour 
enough to please his God, happiness enough to enjoy 
his God. My heart’s best treasure lies here: “ This 
God is our God for ever and ever; He will be our 
Guide even unto death.” 

“Oh, but people have been so ungrateful to me!” 
True, but your God does not forget your work of 
faith and labour of love. “Ah, sir, I am dreadfully 
poor!” Yet you have God All-sufficient; and all 
things are yours. “Alas! Jam so ill.” But Jehovah 


7 
a 


Ve LOR ft Sr earn 
tue 


94 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


Rophi is the Lord that healeth thee. “Alas! I have 
no friends left to me.” Yet the best of friends 
changes not, and dies not. Is He not better to you 
than a host of other friends? How great is your 
God? He filleth all things. Then, what more can 
-you seek? Would you have two persons occupying 
the same place? If God fills all, where is there room 
for another? Is not God’s grace sufficient for you? 
Do you bemoan a cup of water which has been spilled 
at your feet? <A well is near. Did I hear you cry, 
“T have not a drop in my bucket”? A river flows 
hard by,—the river of God, which is full of water. O 
mournful soul, why art thou disquieted? What aileth 
thee, that thou shouldst fret thy life into rags? 

Very fitly does the Lord say to Abram, “I am thy 
excecding great reward.” He is infinitely more as a 
reward than we could ever have deserved, desired, or 
expected. There is no measuring such a reward as 
God Himself. If we were to pine away in poverty, 
it would be joy enough to know that God gives Him- . 
self over to us to be our portion. The tried people of 
God will tell you that, in their sharpest sorrows, their 
joys have reached flood-tide when they have 
known and felt that the Lord is their Covenant God, 
their Father, their all. Our cup runs over when 
faith receives Jehovah Himself as the crown of the 
race, the wages of the service. What more can even 
God bestow than Himself ? 

Now you see what I meant at the beginning, by 
honey-drops. I have not strained after novel 
thoughts or choice words; but have persuaded you 
to taste the natural sweetness of the Scripture. Re- 


erty 5 ey Cees Pa 
eM Aye ale 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” - 95 


ceive it as God gives it; and go your way, and let the 
flavour of it fill your mouths all through the week. 
Fear not, Mary; fear not, William; fear not, Sarah; 
fear not, John. The Lord saith to thee, even as to 
Abraham, “1 am thy shield, and thy exceeding great 
reward.” No Scripture is of private interpretation ; you 
may take out the name of Abram, and put your own 
name into the promise if you are of Abraham’s spiritual — 
seed, and do not stagger at the promise through un- 
belief. “If children, then heirs,” applies to all the 
spiritual family. The ground whereon thou liest, the 
Lord thy God has given thee; if thou canst rest on 
this Word, it is thine to rest upon. The Lord is thy 
Defender and Rewarder, and by the double title he 
shuts out all fear, making thy rest to be doubly sure. 
Wherefore, cease thou from all anxiety. Rest in the 
Lord, and wait patiently for Him. This day He bids 
thee dwell at ease, and delight thyself in HIM. 


| DOT NOT, SIN) AGAINST THE/CHILD” 


(AN ADDRESS AT A PRAYER-MEETING FOR SABBATH 
SCHOOLS.) 


“And Reuben answered them, saying, Spake I not unto 
you, saying, Do not sin against the child; and ye would 
not hear? therefore, behold, also his blood is required.” — 


Genesis xlii. 22. 


OU know how Joseph’s brethren, through envy, 
sold him into Egypt; and how, ultimately, 

they were themselves compelled to go down into 
Egypt to buy corn. When they were treated roughly 
by the governor of that country, whom they did not 
know to be their brother, their consciences smote 
them, and they said one to another, “ We are verily 
guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the 
anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we 
would not hear; therefore is this distress come upon 
us.” While their consciences were thus accusing 
them, the voice of their elder brother chimed in, 
saying, “Spake I not unto you, saying, Do not sin 
against the child?” From which I gather that, if 
we commit sin after being warned, the voice of con- 
science will be all the more condemning, for it will be 
supported by the memory of disregarded admonitions, 
which will revive again, and with solemn voices say 
to us, “Said we not unto you, Do not sin against the 


7 


08 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


child?” We who know what is due to children will 
be far more guilty than others if we sin against their 
souls. Wiser views as to the needs and hopes of the 
little ones are now abroad in the world than those 
which ruled the public mind fifty years ago, and we 
shall be doubly criminal if now we bring evil upon 
the little ones. 
The advice of Reuben may well be given to all 
grown-up persons: “Do not sin against the child.” 
Thus would I speak to every parent, to every elder 
brother or sister, to every schoolmaster, to every em- 
ployer, to every man and woman, whether they have 
families or not, “Do not sin against the child:” 
neither against your own child, nor against anybody’s 
child, nor against the poor waif of the street whom 
they call “nobody’s child.” If you sin against adults, 
“do not sin against the child.” If a man must be 
profane, let him have too much reverence for a child 
to pollute its little ear with blasphemy. If a man 
must drink, let him have too much respect for child- 
hood to entice his boy to sip at the intoxicating cup. 
If there be aught of lewdness or coarseness on foot, 
screen the young child from the sight and hearing of 
it. O ye parents, do not follow trades which will 
ruin your children, do not select houses where they 
will be cast into evil society, do not bring depraved 
persons within your doors to defile them! For aman 
to lead others like himself into temptation, is bad 
enough; but to sow the vile seed of vice in hearts 
that are as yet untainted by any gross, actual sin, is 
a hideous piece of wickedness. Do not commit 
spiritual infanticide. For God’s sake, in the name of 


A ig ON wy De 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 99 


common humanity, I pray you, if you have any sort of 
feeling left, do not play the Herod by morally murder- 
ing the innocents. I have heard that when, in the 
cruel sack of a city, a soldier was about to kill a child, 
his hand was stayed by the little one’s crying out, “O 
sir, please don’t kill me; Iam so little!” The feeble- 
ness and littleness of childhood should appeal to the 
worst of men, and restrain them from sinning against 
the child. 

According to the story of Joseph, there are three 
ways of sinning against the child. The first was 
contained in the proposition of the envious brothers, 
“ Let us slay him, and we shall see what will become 
of his dreams.” “Shed no blood,” said Reuben, who 
had reasons of his own for wishing to save Joseph’s 
life. There is such a thing as morally and spiritually 
slaying boys and girls, and here even the Reubens 
unite with us; even those, who are not so good as 
they should be, will join in the earnest protest, “ Do 
not sin against the child,’—do not train him in dis- 
honesty, lying, drunkenness, and vice. No one 
among us would wish to do so, yet it is continually 
being done by evil example. Many sons are ruined 
by their fathers. Those who gave them birth give 
them their death. They brought them into the world 
of sin, and they seem intent to bring them into the 
world of punishment, and will succeed in the fearful 
attempt unless the grace of God shall interfere. 
Many are doing all they can, by their own conduct at 
home and abroad, to educate their offspring into pests 
of society and plagues to their country. 

When I see the number of juvenile criminals, I 


100 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


cannot help asking, “ Who slew all these?” and it is 
sad to have for an answer, “ These are mostly the 
victims of their parents’ sin.” The fiercest beasts of 
prey will not destroy their own young; but sin makes 
men unnatural, so that they destroy their offspring’s 
souls without thought. To teach a child a lascivious 
song, is unutterably wicked ; to introduce him to the 
wine cup, is evil. To take children to places of 
amusement where everything is polluting,—where the 
quick-witted boy soon spies out vice, and learns to 
be precocious in it; where the girl, while sitting to 
see the play, has kindled within her passions which 
need no fuel,—to do this, is to act the tempter’s part. 
Would you poison young hearts, and do them lifelong 
mischief? I wish that the guardians of public morals 
would put down all open impurity ; but if that cannot 
be, at least let the young be shielded. He who in- 
structs a youth in the vices of the world is a despicable 
wretch, a panderer to the devil, for whom contempt 
is a feeling too lenient. No, even though thou be 
of all men most hardened, there can be no need to 
worry the lambs, and offer the babes before the shrine 
of Moloch. 

The same evil may be committed by indoctrinating 
children with evil teachings. They learn so soon, 
that it is a sad thing to teach them error. It is a 
dreadful thing when the infidel father sneers at the 
cross of Christ in the presence of his boy; when he 
utters horrible things against our blessed Lord in the 
hearing of tender youth. It is sad, to the last degree, 
that those who have been singing holy hymns in the 
Sabbath-school should go home to hear God blas- 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” ~ 101 


phemed, and to see holy things spit upon and de- 
spised. To the very worst unbeliever, we might well 
say, “Do not thus ruin your child’s immortal soul ; 
if you are resolved to perish yourself, do not drag your 
child downward, too.” 

But there is a second way of sinning against the 
child, of which Reuben’s own proposition may serve 
as an illustration. Though not with a bad motive, 
Reuben said, “Cast him into this pit that is in the 
wilderness, and lay no hand upon him.” The idea of 
many is to leave the child as a child, and then look 
him up in after days, and seek to deliver him from 
destruction. Do not kill him, but leave him alone 
till riper years. Do not kill him, that would be 
wicked murder; but leave him in the wilderness till 
a more convenient season, when, like Reuben, you 
hope to come to his rescue. Upon this point, I shall 
touch many more than upon the first. Many pro- 
fessing Christians ignore the multitudes of children 
around them, and act as if there were no such living 
beings. They may go to Sunday-school or not; they 
do not know, and do not care. At any rate, these 
good people cannot trouble themselves with teaching 
children. I would earnestly say, “ Do not sin against 
the child by such neglect.” “No,” says Reuben, “we 
will look after him when he isa man. He is in the 
pit now, but we are in hopes of getting him out 
afterwards.” 

That is the common notion,—that the children are 
to grow up unconverted, and that they are to be 
saved in after life. They are to be left in the pit now, 
and to be drawn out by-and-by. This pernicious 


102. “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


notion is sinning against the child. No word of 

Holy Scripture gives countenance to such a policy of 
delay and neglect. Neither nature nor grace pleads 
for it.. It was the complaint of Jeremiah, “Even the 
sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to 
their young ones: the daughter of my people is 
become cruel, like the ostriches in the wilderness.” 
Let not such a charge lie against any one of us. Our 
design and object should be that our children, while 
they are yet children, should be brought to Christ ; 
and I ask those dear brothers and sisters here present 
who love the Lord not to doubt about the conversion 
of their little ones, but to seek it at once with all 
their hearts. Why should our Josephs remain in the 
pit of nature’s corruption? Let us pray the Lord at 
once to take them up out of the horrible pit, and save 
them with a great salvation. 

There is yet a third way of sinning against the 
child, which plan was actually tried upon Joseph; 
they sola him,—sold him to the Ishmaelites. The 
merchantmen. came by, and they offered so many 
pieces of silver for him, and his brothers readily 
handed him over for a reward. I am afraid that some 
are half inclined to do the same now. It is imagined 
that, now we have School-boards, we shall not want 
Sabbath-schools so much, but may give over the young 
to the Secularists. Because the children are to be 
taught the multiplication table, they will not need to 
be taught the fear of the Lord! Strange reasoning 
this! Can geography teach them the way to 
Heaven, or arithmetic remove their countless sins? 
The more of secular knowledge our juveniles acquire, 


hat ad ee ee Oe : i 4 Pe ie 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” — 103 

the more will they need to be taught in the fear of the 
Lord. To leave our youthful population in the hands 
of secular teachers, will be to sell them to the Ish- 
maelites. Nor is it less perilous to leave them to the 
seductive arts of Ritualists and Papists. We who 
love the Gospel must not let the children slip through 
our hands into the power of those who would enslave 
their minds by superstitious dogmas. We sin against 
the child if we hand it over to teachers of error. 

The same selling of the young Josephs can be 
effected by looking only to their worldly interests, 
and forgetting their souls. A great many parents sell 
their children by putting them out as apprentices to 
men of no character, or by placing them in situations 
where ungodliness is the paramount influence. Fre- 
quently, the father does not ask where the boy can 
go on the Sabbath-day, and the mother does not 
enquire whether her girl can hear the Gospel when 
she gets out; but good wages are looked after, and 
not much else. They count themselves very staunch 
if they draw a line at Roman Catholics, but world- 
liness and even profligacy are not reckoned as barriers 
in many cases. How many there are of those who 
call themselves Christians who sell their daughters in 
marriage to rich men! The men have no religion 
whatever, but “it is a splendid match,” because they 
move in high society. Young men and women are 
put into the matrimonial market, and disposed of to 
the highest bidder: God is not thought of in the 
matter. Thus the rich depart from the Lord, and 
curse their children quite as much as the poor. I am 
sure you would not literally sell your offspring for 


104 = Only a Prayer-meeting! is 


slaves, and yet to sell their souls is by no means less 
abominable. “Do not sin against the child.” Do not 
sell him to the Ishmaelites. “Ah!” say you, “the 
money is always handy.” Will you take the price of 
blood? Shall the blood of your children’s souls be 
on your skirts? I pray you, pause a while ere you 
commit this great crime. 

Sometimes, a child may be sinned against because 
he is disliked. The excuse for undue harshness and 
severity is, “ He is such a strange child!” You have 
heard of the cygnet that was hatched in a duck’s nest. 
Neither duck, nor drake, nor ducklings could make 
anything out of the ugly bird; and yet, in truth, it 
was superior to all the rest. Joseph was the swan in 
Jacob’s nest, and his brothers and even his father did 
not understand him. His father rebuked him, and 
said, “ Shall I and thy mother and thy brethren indeed 
come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?” 
He was not understood by his own kin. I should fancy 
he was a most uncomfortable boy to live with; for 
when his elder brothers transgressed, he felt bound 
to bring to his father the report of their evil deeds. 
I doubt not that they called him “a little sneak,” 
though, indeed, he was a gracious child. His dreams 
also were very odd, and considerably provoking, for 
he was always the hero of them. His brothers called 
him “this dreamer,” and evidently thought him to be 
a mere fool. He was his father’s pet boy, and this 
made him even more obnoxious to the other sons. 
Yet that very child, who was so despised by his 
brothers, was the Joseph among them. History re- 
peats itself; and the difference in your child, which 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” — 108 


now causes him to be pecked at, may perhaps arise 
from a superiority which as yet has not found its 
sphere; at any rate, “do not sin against the child” 
because he is singular, for he may rise to special dis- 
tinction. Do not, of course, show him partiality, and 
make him a coat of many colours; because, if you 
do, his brothers will have some excuse for their envy ; 
but, on the other hand, do not suffer him to be 
snubbed, and do not allow his spirit to be crushed. 

I have known some who, when they have met with 
a little Joseph, have sinned against him by foolish 
flattery. The boy has said something rather good, 
and then they have set him upon the table so that 
everybody might see him, and admire what he had to 
say, while he was coaxed into repeating his sage 
observations. Thus the child was made _ self- 
conceited, forward, and pert. Children who are much 
exhibited are usually spoiled in the operation. I think 
I hear the proud parent say, “Now do see,—do see 
what a wonderful boy my Harryis!” Yes, I do see; 
I do see what a wonderful stupid his mother is. I do 
see how unwise his father is to expose his boy to such 
perl. Do not sin against the child by fostering his 
pride, which, as it is an ill weed, will grow apace of 
itself. 

In many cases, the sin is of quite the opposite 
character. Contemptuous sneers have chilled many a 
good desire, and ridicule has nipped in the bud many 
a sincere purpose. Beware of checking youthful en- 
thusiasm for good things. God forbid that you or I 
should quench one tiny spark of grace in a lad’s heart, 
or destroy a single bud of promise! We believe in 


106 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


the piety of children; let us never speak, or act, or 
look, as if we despised it. 

“Do not sin against the child,” whoever you may 
be. Whether you are teacher or parent, take care 
that, if there is any trace of the little Joseph in your 
child, even though it be but in his dreams, you do not 
sin against him by attempting to repress the noble 
flame which God may be kindling in his soul. I 
cannot just now mention the many, many ways in 
which we may be offending against one of the Lord’s 
little ones; but I would have you recollect that, if 
the Lord’s love should light upon your boy, and he 
should grow up to be a distinguished servant of the 
Lord, your conscience will prick you, and a voice will 
say in your soul, “ Said I not unto you, Do not sin 
against the child?” And if, on the other hand, your 
child should not become a Joseph, but an Absalom, 
it will be a horrible thing to be compelled to mingle 
with your lamentations the overwhelming conscious- 
ness that you led your child into the sin by which he 
became the dishonour of your family. If I see my 
child perish, and know that he becomes a reprobate 
through my ill teaching and example, I shall have to 
wring my hands with dread remorse, and cry, “I slew 
my child! I slew my child! and when I did it, I 
knew better; but I disregarded the voice which said 
to me, “Do not sin against the child.’ ” 

Now, dear Sunday-school teachers, I will mention 
one or two matters which concern you. “Do not sin 
against the child” by coming to your class with a chilly 
heart. Why should you make your children cold 
towards Divine things? Do not sin against them by 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” ~ 107 


coming too late, for that will make them think that 
punctuality is not a virtue, and that the Sunday-school 
is of no very great importance. “Do not sin against 
the child” by coming irregularly, and absenting your- 
self on the smallest pretence, for that is distinctly 
saying to the child, “ You can neglect to serve God 
when you please, for you see I do.” “Do not sin 
against the child” by merely going through class 
routine, without really teaching and _ instructing. 
That is the shadow of Sunday-school teaching, and 
not the substance, and it is in some respects worse 
than nothing. “Do not sin against the child” by 
merely telling him a number of stories without setting 
forth the Saviour ; for that will be giving him a stone 
instead of bread. “ Do not sin against the child” by 
aiming at anything short of his conversion to God 
through Jesus Christ the Saviour. 

And then, you parents, “do not sin against the 
child” by being so very soon angry. I have fre- 
quently heard grown-up people repeat that verse, 
“Children, obey your parents in all things.” It is a 
very proper text,—a very proper text, and boys and 
girls should carefully attend to it. I like to hear 
fathers and mothers preach from it; but there zs that 
other one, you know, which is quite as fully inspired, 
“Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, 
lest they be discouraged.” Do not pick up every 
little thing against a good child, and throw it in his 
or her teeth, and say, “ Ah, if you were a Christian 
child, you would not do this, and you would not do 
that!” I am not so sure. You who are heads of 
families do a great many wrong things yourselves, 


108 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


and yet I hope you are Christians,; and if your Father 
in Heaven were sometimes to be as severe with you 
as you are with the sincere little ones when you are 
out of temper, I am afraid it would go very hard with 
you. Be gentle, and kind, and tender, and loving. 

At the same time, do not sin against any child by 
over-indulgence. Spoiled children are like spoiled 
fruit; the less we see of them, the better. In some 
families, the master of the house is the youngest boy, 
though he is not yet big enough to wear knicker- 
bockers. He manages his mother, and his mother, of 
course, manages his father, and so, in that way, he 
rules the whole house. This is unwise, unnatural, 
and highly perilous to the pampered child. Keep 
boys and girls in proper subjection, for they cannot 
be happy themselves, nor can you be so, unless they 
are in their places. Do not water your young plants 
either with vinegar or with syrup. Neither use too 
much nor too little of rebuke. Seek wisdom of the 
Lord, and keep the middle of the way. 

In a word, “do not sin against the child,” but train 
it in the way it should go, and bring it to Jesus that 
He may bless it. Cease not to pray for the child till 
his young heart is given to the Lord. May the Holy 
Spirit make you wise to deal with these young 
immortals! Like plastic clay, they are on the wheel. 
Oh, that He would teach us to mould and fashion 
their characters! Above all, may He put His own 
hand to the work, and then it will be done indeed. 


FIGHTING AND PRAYING. 


“* Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel in Rephidim. 
And Moses said unto Joshua, Choose us out men, and go 
out, fight with Amalek.: to morrow I will stand on the top 
of the hill with the rod of God in mine hand.”—Exodus 
xvii..8, 9. 

BS HEN came Amalek ;” that is, after the manna 

had fallen, after the rock had been smitten. 
First food, then conflict. God spared His people all 
battles in their early days. For a while, their adver- 
saries were as still as a stone. But when everything 
was arranged, and the commissariat of the camp was 
provided for, “then came Amalek.” Brethren, in our 
march to Heaven, it may happen that one part of the 
way is free from conflict; but let no man wonder if 
things change. One of these days, we shall read this 
despatch from the seat of war, “ Then came Amalek, 
and fought with Israel.” Do not court attack, nor 
even desire it. When you hear the older folk talk 
about their inward conflicts, do not lament if your 
chronicle of wars is a short one. There is a time when 
kings go forth to battle, and that time will come to 
you soon enough. It has often been the Lord’s way 
to give His people space for refreshment before trying 
them. 

The same truth holds good as to service for the 
Lord. In the case before us, warfare was service. 
Some new-born converts rush to the service of God 
before their knowledge or their strength has fitted 


110 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


them for it. I want to speak very guardedly, for I 
have great sympathy with their zeal; but I wish to 
show unto them a more excellent way. Few begin 
work for God too soon. Ah, me! Some professors 
have not begun yet, after years of profession. What 
shall we do with old sluggards, who have been 
lying in bed for thirty years? Are they worth the 
trouble of waking? I fear not. May the Lord be 
gracious to them, and save them! We cannot work 
for God too soon; yet it is possible to go to work 
before you have sharpened your tools. There is a 
time for every purpose; and each thing is good in its 
season. Learn, and then teach. I would have you 
serve the Lord successfully: wherefore, as God gave 
to Israel manna and water before He sent them to 
fight with Amalek, so should every believer first feed 
on the truth himself, and then go forth to teach others 
also. Feed, that you may work, and work because 
you have been fed. 

After the manna and after the smitten rock, came 
the fight: “Then came Amalek.” He was a de- 
scendant of Esau, full of his father’s hate. This tribe 
fell upon Israel without proclamation of war, in a 
cowardly manner, and slew the hindmost of them, 
when they were not expecting an attack. They were 
the first of the nations that dared enter the lists 
against Jehovah. The others had been cowed by the 
wonders of the Red Sea; but Amalek was daring and 
presumptuous. According to the Hebrew, Amalek 
laid his hand upon the throne of God, and dared to 
molest His people. 


Note well that, in this battle of the Lord, there were 


. 2 2 


won? 2 Prayer-meeting ! % III 


“ 


two kinds of fighting. The first was the /Joshua- 
Service ; and that was done in the plain by the fighting 
men. The second was the Moses-service; and this 
was done upon the side of the hill, by the men of God, 
who communed with Heaven. We need both modes 
of warfare. . 

I. To begin with, we want much of THE JOSHUA- 
SERVICE. 

This is the service of many. Moses said to Joshua, 
“ Choose us out men, and go out, fight with Amalek.” 
We have a battle against sin, error, pride, self, and 
everything that is contrary to God and to His Christ ; 
and in the Joshua-service many can be employed. 
As the Holy Spirit has given diversities of gifts, so 
are there varieties of agencies for battling for the 
truth. Every believer should bea soldier in Christ’s 
own army of salvation. We must not join a church 
with the main design of our own edification: our chief 
point in life is far higher than the most spiritual form 
of self-interest. We must live to battle for Christ 
Jesus our Lord in all manner of ways. To feed on the 
manna of Heaven, and then to wrestle with the evils 
of earth, is a healthy combination. We need, all of us, 
to stand up for Jesus in these evil days: the enemies 
are many and powerful, and no man, redeemed by 
Christ, must keep back from the conflict. Friend, 
what part will you take? 

In this  Joshua-service, al/ the combatants were 
under due command. “ Joshua did as Moses had said 
to him,” and the people did as Joshua commanded 
them. In all holy service, willingness to be led is a 
great point. Certain workers may be very good per- 


II2 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


sonally ; but they will never combine with others to 
make a conquering band. They work very well 
alone, or as fore-horses in the team; but they cannot 
trot in double harness. We most of all need men 
and women who can keep rank, who can do their 
work quietly and perseveringly, and are ready to 
follow the direction of those whom God may call to be 
leaders. A general can do nothing without such 
soldiers ; and they feel that they can do little without 
him. Soldiers without discipline become a mob, and 
not an army. May the Lord send us troops of disci- 
plined warriors prepared to chase the Amalekites! 
All at it, and always at it, and all for the love of Jesus : 
this makes a fine motto. Friend, will you be one of 
the steady workers? 

In Joshua-work, courage was required. “Go out, 
fight with Amalek.” The Amalekites were fierce, 
cruel, strong. They are said to have been the chief 
among the nations; by which I understand first 
among the plunderers of the desert. The soldiers 
under Joshua had courage, and faced their wolfish 
foes. Saints need courage for Jesus in these days. 
May God, in His mercy, make His people bold against 
scepticism, superstition, and open wickedness! In 
these days, boldness is a jewel, for men are not sure 
about anything, or they speak as if they were not; 
and when men are not sure themselves, they can never 
convince others. A modern-thought gentleman said 
in a paper, the other day, “ We are not all so cocksure 
as Mr. Spurgeon.” No; and the more’s the pity. If 
ministers are not absolutely certain of what they 
preach, they are not likely to convince others. If 


vy oo ae ~e 
a , 
z 


© Only a Prayer-meeting!” 113 


you doubt a thing, let it alone till your doubt is solved 
one way or the other. He that doubts creates 
doubters. Only he that believes will make believers. 
In this age of unbelief, if you are to win victories, you 
must have convictions, and you must have the courage 
of those convictions, and refuse to bow down before 
the infidelity of the age. We are called, not to flirt 
with error, but to fight with it; therefore, let us be 
brave, and push on the conflict. } 

Those fighting under Joshua did not grow weary. 
Moses had the more spiritual work, and his hands 
grew heavy: we sooner tire in private devotion than 
in public service. Joshua and his men were not 
weary : never let us be weary in well doing. Do you 
ever grow weary in one peculiar way of serving God? 
It may be useful to try something else. “ You mean, 
drop what Iam doing?” No; I do not. I mean, 
do something extra. It often happens that a man 
cannot do one thing, but he can do two things. Do 
you think the observation strange? It is true. 
Variety of labour serves for recreation. In the ser- 
vice of God, it is a relief to turn from one consecrated 
effort to another; and so rest one set of faculties by 
exercising others. Throw your whole soul into the 
heavenly crusade, and weary not through your fight 
with Amalek from dawn to set of sun. Friend, will 
you be unwearied in the heavenly war? 

In the Joshua-service, they were successful, for 
“they discomfited Amalek and his people with the 
edge of the sword.” Beloved workers for the Lord, 
may He grant you like success against evil! The 
devil goes to be beaten, and he shall be beaten. If 

8 


114 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


we have but courage and faith in God, and can use 
the edge of the sword, we shall yet defeat the powers 
of darkness. Many evils are deeply entrenched in 


modern society: the drunkenness, the scepticism, the. 


superstition, and the vice around us are a tremendous 
force; but the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ is 
equal to the emergency. [If all professedly Christian 
men were actuated by the spirit of the Gospel, many 
evils would be greatly diminished. If we also be- 
lieved in the power of the Gospel, so as to tell it out 
to our fellows with joyful confidence, in the power of 
the Spirit of God, we should soon see the wickedness 
and worldliness of the age put to the rout. Alas, 
brethren! the fault of many workers is that they do 
not use the edge of the sword. One does not like to 
think of the edge of a sword; but nothing else will 
serve in battle. One gentleman has preached a mag- 
nificent sermon, everybody admired it. Yes, that was 
the richly-adorned hilt of the sword; but nobody was 
wounded. Another man, in rough tones, boldly 
stated a naked truth, and pressed it home on the 
conscience, and that truth has pricked his hearer in 
the heart. 


The edge of the sword means business, and people 


know it. They are not amused; but are made to 


mourn and repent. What cares the evil heart of man 
for the scabbard of our sword? It needs the edge, 
and must have it. In talking to people, are we not 
often afraid of using the edge of the sword? “ Well,” 
says one, “I try to bring in the Gospel gradually.” 
Quite right ; but the best way to bring in the edge of 
the sword gradually is to cut with it at once. We are 


7% 


facts 


! 


_ “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 115 


such a long while parading and parleying, that we do 
not come to the point, and tell men that they are lost 
in sin, and must immediately fly to Christ for refuge, 
or they will perish. We must bring forth the truth 
clearly and boldly, if any good is to be done. 
“Joshua discomfited Amalek with the edge of the 
sword.” We must use the Word of God, which is the 
sword of the Spirit, and force it home upon the atten- 
tion and the conscience of all we can reach. Give 
the people plenty of instruction as to the central 
truth of salvation through the blood of Jesus. We 
may do as we like about flags and drums,—I mean, 
preaching about this or that minor point,—but we 
must come to the edge of the sword,—the wrath to 
come for the ungodly, and salvation in Christ for 
believers. Give men plenty of that sacred command, 
“ Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be 
saved.” Strike home in the Name of the Lord, and 
command all men everywhere to repent. Quote 
Scripture ; quote it continually. Bring out the doc- 
trines of grace, which are the burden of the inspired 
Book. It is the Word of God that saves souls, not 
our comment upon it. Smite them with the edge of 
the sword. 

Thus I have spoken about the Joshua-work, wish- 
ing with my whole soul that every member of the 
visible church would enter the ranks, and use the 
sword with his whole heart. Oh, that those who are 
marching to the promised rest may serve the Lord 
valiantly while they are on the road thither! If you 
are saved yourselves, may the Lord employ you in 
His army, and glorify Himself in you! 


116 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


II. The second part of the subject is full of 
interest. It is THE MOSES-SERVICE,—the service of 
Moses and his comrades. These did not go down to 
the battle-field themselves, but they climbed the 
mountain-side, where they could see the warriors in 
the conflict; and there Moses lifted up the rod of 
God. 

Note, that the Moses-service was essential to the 
battle; for when Moses held up his hand, Israel pre- 
vailed; and when he let down his hand, Amalek 
prevailed. The scales of the conflict were in the hand 
of Moses, and they turned as his prayer and testimony 
failed or continued. It was quite as necessary that 
Moses should be on the hill as that Joshua should 
be in the plain. This part of church-work is often 
overlooked ; but it is quite as necessary as the activity 
of the many. We need the secret prevalence of 
chosen servants of the Lord, whose business is not so 
much with men for God as with God for men. 

This holy work was of a very special character. 
Only three were able to enter into it. I believe that, 
in every church, the deeply-spiritual, who prevalently 
commune with God, and bring down the blessing 
upon the work of the rest, are comparatively few; 
I might almost say, are absolutely few. God lays 
His own hand upon one here, and another there, and 
causes them to approach unto Him. “ Would God 
that all the Lord’s servants were prophets!” But it 
is not so. The Lord uses many in His working- 
service, who, nevertheless, are not among His inti- 
mates. They do not hold high rank among the inter- 
cessors who have power with God. This service is 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 117 


peculiar; but the more widely it is exercised, the 
better for the cause of God. We want many who can 
draw down power from God, as well as many who can 
use that power against the enemy. 

This Moses-service lay in very close communion 
with God. Moses, and Aaron, and Hur were called 
to rise above the people, and to get alone, apart from 
the company. They climbed the hill as a symbol, 
and in retirement they silently communed with God. 
That rod of God in Moses’ hand meant this,—God is 
here with these pleading ones on the mount; and by 


- His powerful presence He is smiting the enemy. How 


blessed it is for a people to be led by those whom the 
Lord has honoured in former times, and with whom 
He still holds fellowship! 

In this sacred engagement, ¢here was a terrible 
strain upon the one man who led the others im it. In 
the process of bringing down the Divine power upon 
the people, the vehicle of communication was sorely 
tried. “ Moses’ hands were heavy.” Beloved, if God 
gives you spiritual power to lead in Christian work, 
you will soon find out that the condition of such 
leadership is a costly one. Your case requires a 
deeper humility, a steadier watchfulness, a higher 
consecration, and a closer communion with God than 
that of others; and these things will try you, and, in 
many ways, put a heavy strain upon you. You will 
be like Elias, who, at one time, could run like a giant, 
and at another could faint and fly. The burden of 
the Lord is no feather-weight. 

In this hallowed service, 4elp is very precious. 
When Moses’ hands began to drop down, and he him- 


118 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


self was faint, Aaron and Hur gave him substantial 
aid. They fetched a stone, and put it under him, and 
‘they made him sit thereon, with his hands still lifted 
high, and his eyes towards Heaven. When he was all 
in a sweat, because of his anxious prayer, and the 
muscles of his arms grew weary, his brethren stood by 
him, each one holding up an arm lest the rod should 
drop; for if it did, the cause of Israel dropped also. 
Are you a worker? Have you a leader fit to lead you? 
Bring a stone, and put it under him: cheer his heart 
with some gracious promise from the Lord’s Word, 
or with some happy sign from the work itself. Cheer 
the good man as much as possible. Do not throw a 
- stone at him, as I have known some workers do; but 
put a stone under him, that he may sit down, and not 
be overcome. Copy Aaron and Hur, by staying up 
his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on 
the other side, so that his hands may be steady until 
the going down of the sun. Happy men, thus to 
sustain their leader! The sacred power with God, 
which brings down victory for others, is given to some, 
and they use it; but flesh is weak, and they faint. 
Let others of like grace gather to their help, and hold 
up their hands, one in one way, and one in another 
way, as Aaron and Hur held up the hands of Moses. 
Let spiritual men earnestly help those whom God 
calls into spiritual communion with Himself, that so 
the Name of the Lord may be glorified, and victory 
may follow the banners of His people. 


This is the pith of my address. The prayer- 
meeting is, after all, that spiritual power on the 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 119 


mountain-side which makes the workers strong. Do 
not let the praying work flag; and even if it seems to 
do so, let Aaron and Hur come to the rescue. Come, 
and help, with all your might, to keep the rod of the 
Lord still steady, that the battle of the Lord may be 
fought out victoriously. Go on, Joshua, and use the 
edge of the sword: the Amalekites need it. But take 
heed, you who are on the mountain-side, that your 
service does not cease. Humble men and women, 
unknown to fame, you may be called by God, like 
Moses, to hold up His rod, and bring down the 
blessing. If any of you grow faint, I pray that others 
may come forward, and keep the rod of God in its 
place. 

The prayer-meeting must be maintained at all cost. | 
The communion of the church with God must never 
be broken. If you visit a factory, you may see thou- 
sands of wheels revolving, and a host of hands 
employed. It is a wonderful sight. Where is the 
power that keeps all this running? Look at that 
slated shed! Come into this grimy place, smelling of 
oil. What is it? It is the engine-house. You do 
not think much of it, but that is the centre of power. 
If you stop that engine, every wheel will stand still. 
Some good people say, “I am not going out to-night. 
It is only a prayer-meeting.” Just so. It is only the 
engine, but that is everything. Go on board a great 
ocean steamer, bound for New York. You say, “I 
have been in the saloon. I have seen the wonderful 
luxuries provided for the passengers. It is a marvel- 
lous vessel.” Did you look at her engines? “ What! 
go down that ladder? I saw some black fellows 


120 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


below, stoking great fires; but I did not care for that.” 
Talk not so. If it were not for those sooty stokers, 
the grand saloon and the fine decks would be of no 
use. Prayer is the engine of the Church; it supplies 
the force. I like to see the engines going,—praying, 
praying, praying, praying! Then the hidden screw, 
down under water, drives the huge ship, and causes 
it to speed towards the appointed haven. Keep the 
Moses part of the work going; and let not the 
Joshua-work be slack. 

Beloved in the Lord, let us hearten one another in 
our warfare. Let us each stand in his office, and do 
the part to which the Lord has called us. Let us take 
courage. We are sure of victory. In the margin of 
our Bibles we read, “ Because Amalek had laid his 
hand upon the throne of Jehovah, the Lord will have 
war with Amalek from generation to generation.” 
Sin lays its traitorous hand upon the very throne of 
God. Will He allow it? The unbelief of the age 
has laid its hand upon the holy sacrifice of Christ. 
Will the Lord be quiet concerning this? Scepticism 
has dared to assail the inspired Word. Will the Lord 
endure it? Is not the time of His coming hastening 
on when men grow bolder in sin? May we not, from 
the very infamy of the age, gather that it is coming to 
its climax? The iniquity of the Amalekites is filling 
up. The Lord will surely smite the evil of the age 
with the edge of the sword. Let us not be afraid. 

My firm conviction is, that the Gospel is as powerful 
as ever. If we could but get it out of the sheath of 
so-called culture, and education, and progress, and 
questioning, and could use the bare, two-edged sword 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!”- I2I 


of the old-fashioned Gospel upon the hearts of men, 
we should again hear shouts of victory. We have 
heard with our ears, O God, and our fathers have told 
us, what work Thou didst in their days, and in the old 
time before them ; and if we can get back the courage 
of the old times, and the Gospel of the old times, and 
the spirit of the old times, we shall see a renewal of 
those wondrous deeds. We must exert ourselves; 
for Joshua did so. We must lean upon the strength 
of God; for Moses did so. The two together—active 
warfare and prayerful dependence—will bring the 
blessing. We are more than ever forced into this 
fight to-day. Thirty years ago, things were very 
different from what they are now. It was easy to 
gather a congregation then, compared with what it is 
now; the spirit of hearing is departing from our 
cities. Cavillers and questioners are to-day far more 
numerous than they were thirty years ago. One 
finds among Christian professors shoals of infidels. 
Ministers are, in large numbers, sowers of doubt. 
One who is reputed to preach evangelically told his 
young men, the other day, that a page of Huxley was 
worth all that Moses had written in Genesis. Many 
ministers are more at home in undermining the 
Gospel, than in the conversion of souls. Let us, 
therefore, look well to our weapons, and be in earnest 
to defend the truth of God. I charge you, each one, 
to do his part, and play the man in this evil day. 
Though myself only fit to be numbered with the 
least of my Master’s servants, yet I am called to lead 
a great work, and therefore | beg my comrades to 
help me. My brethren, hold up my hands! Send up 


‘ + 


122 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


your continual prayer on my behalf. If the standard- 
bearer falls, what will the weaklings do? I am 
feeble in body, and sorely pressed with anxious care ; 

spare me what care you can by your brotherly aid, 
and specially by your loving words of comfort, and 
your pleadings in prayer. To the best of my ability, 
I have held the fort, and kept the faith. Though, as 
yet, my protest seems unavailing, and Amalek prevails 
by reason of scientific unbelief, yet the Lord on high 
is greater than the noise of many waters. Truth 
must yet prevail, and error must be routed. In the 
Name of the Lord, let us set up our banners once 
again. Renewing the pledges of our brotherly coven- 
ant, let nothing but death divide us. Let us be one 
in this great conflict for the Lord and for His’ throne. 
Amen. 


ANOTHER SPIRITUAL HONEY-DROP. 


“And He said, My presence shall go with thee, and £ 
will give thee rest.” —Exodus xXxxiil. 14. 


HIS is another of our choicest honey-drops,” 

about which I will speak without premedita- 

tion, simply allowing the sweetness to flow forth of 
itself. It is God’s word to His servant Moses. 

It was not a pleasure-trip that Moses was taking ; 
it was a journey through the wilderness, on most 
important business, with a great pressure on his own 
heart. He took his case before his God, and he said 
unto Jehovah, “See, Thou sayest unto me, Bring up 
this people: and Thou hast not let me know whom 
Thou wilt send with me. Yet Thou hast said, I know 
thee by name, and thou hast also found grace in My 
sight? Now therefore, I pray thee, if I have 
found grace in Thy sight, shew me now Thy 
way, that I may know Thee, that I may find 
grace in Thy sight: and consider that this 
nation is Thy people.” It is very beautiful to 
notice the argument that Moses uses. He says, 
“Lord, Thou hast set me to take care of this people. 
How can I do it? But they are Thy people.” 
Therefore he gives an eye to Jehovah Himself for 
assistance. “ Thou hast not let me know whom Thou 
wilt send with me,” is his complaint ; but he seems to 


* See page 87, ‘‘ Coacerning the Dropping of Honeycombs.,”’ 


124 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


have an eye to the fact that HE, whose people they 
were, who had put him into commission to guide them, 
and to bear all their provocations, must intend to give 
him some very superior help. The answer to that is, 
“ My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee 
rest.” 

What more could Moses want than that, and what 
more can we want? We are so foolish that we look 
about for strength away from God, but there is none 
except in Him. Dear Brother Varley, you are going 
to preach the Gospel in the lands beyond the sea; 
this is the assurance that you want in going forth; 
“My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee 
rest.” You will want much help in journeying from 
place to place; and that help lies in the constant 
fellowship of your heart with the Lord, the continual 
presence of God consciously enjoyed. You have a 
great burden of souls lying upon you, dear friend; 
your strength to bear that burden lies in the realiza- 
tion of God’s presence with yourself. It may not 
appear to some that the quarter of an hour in the 
morning spent in looking’ into the face of God, with 
ecstatic joy, can fill us with strength; but we know, 
from blessed experience, that there is no strength like 
_ it. We are only strong as we are overshadowed by 
the Eternal. Then Omnipotence comes streaming 
‘nto us; Jehovah, in infinite, condescending aise! 
gives forth His might to us. 

Now, notice, that Moses was not informed that God 
would send Hobab, his father-in-law, to go with him; 
he was not told that Joshua, his successor, choad 
accompany him; nothing was said to him about the 


“Only a Prayer-mecting!” _ 125 


seventy elders who were to share the burden of re- 
sponsibility with him. Moses was to have their 
presence and help, but his true power was to lie in 
this, “ My presence shall go with thee.” He is about 
to start on a journey of great importance, a journey 
of great trial, a journey of great provocation, a 
journey that is to last for forty years; but this is all 
the provender that he needs, and God Himself could 
not give him more. 

And then the Lord adds, “and I will give thee 
rest.” The most important thing to a Christian 
worker, as it was to Moses, is to have rest. “Ido not 
expect any rest,” says one, “while I am here.’ Do 
you not? Then you will not do much work for the 
Lord. They who work most must rest most; and if 
they work with their mind, they cannot do it well, 
indeed they cannot do it at all, unless they have plenty 
of rest. You will notice how people that get greatly 
excited often talk nonsense, and people who are very 
fretful and fearful do not speak or act as they should. 
The man who is to move others must have both his 
own feet fixed firmly ; there is nothing like having a 
good grip of the ground, then you can fling the fellow 
with whom you are wrestling, but he cannot fling you. 

“Do you think Moses had this rest?” someone 
asks. I am sure he had, because of the meekness of 
his spirit. You remember how the Lord Jesus said, 
“Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I. 
am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest 
unto your souls.” It is true that meekness of heart 
produces rest; but still, at the bottom, rest of heart 
produces meekness. You can very well afford to be 


126. i Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


quiet with your fellow-men when you yourself are 
perfectly restful in the living God. I remember a man 
being run over in the street one day. Somebody 
rushed off, post haste, for the nearest doctor ; and 
when the medical man heard of the accident, he went 
quietly into his surgery, turned over his case of instru- 
_ ments, selected those that he thought he might want, 
and then leisurely walked to the spot where the poor 
man lay. The messenger tried to hurry him, but it 
was no use. “ Be quick, doctor,” he cried, “the man’s 
leg is broken, every moment is precious.” Now, the 
surgeon knew that he was doing the very best thing 
that he could do, and he was far wiser than he would 
have been if he had rushed off in wild haste, perhaps 
forgetting the very instrument he most needed, and 
arriving out of breath, and quite unfit for the delicate 
duty required of him. The doctor's composure was 
not the result of coldness of heart, but the result of 
the resolution to do the best possible thing in the best 
possible way. If you are conscious of the Lord’s 
presence, you will do the best thing possible by being 
very calm, deliberate, and quiet in His service. “He 
that believeth,” in that sense, “ shall not make haste ;” 
but he shall go about his Lord’s business in a restful 
spirit. 

Mark the kind of rest that is here mentioned. “I 
will give thee rest.” All the rest that God gives us, 
we may safely take. No man ever rested too long 
upon the bosom of Jesus. I believe that many 
Christian workers would be better if they enjoyed 
more rest. I was speaking to the ministers at the 
Conference upon this matter, my subject being the 


» ’ J y isd 
Vai} . 4 : S 


on Only a Prayer-meeting!” ~ 127 


Saviour asleep during the storm on the Sea of Galilee. 
He knew there was a storm coming on, but He felt 
so happy and restful in His Father’s love and care that 
He went into the hinder part of the ship, the best 
place for sleeping, deliberately took a pillow, lay 
down, and went to sleep. It was the very best thing 
He could do. He had been busy all day, teaching 
and feeding the multitudes, and He felt that it was His 
duty to go to sleep that He might be ready for the 
next day’s toil. When you get very weary, and per- 
haps worried as well, the best thing you can do is to 
go to sleep. Go to bed, brother; and go to sleep. 
It is astonishing what a difference a night’s rest makes 
with our troubles. I would say this literally to 
fidgety, worrying people, like myself, “Go to bed, 
brother, go to bed.” But I would also say it 
spiritually to all sorts of people ; when you are feeling 
weak, and disturbed, and you do not know what to do 
for the best, “ Go into the presence of God, and there 
get rest.” “My presence shall go with thee, and I 
will give thee rest.” 

I will give you a little bit of worldly wisdom; it 
is this,—whenever you do not know what to do, do not 
do it. But some people, when they do not know 
what to.do, go and do it directly, and get themselves 
into all sorts of trouble. Many of us, like Moses, 


‘need rest. Moses has to bear two millions of people 


on his heart; he needs rest. He has to put 
up with them for forty years; he needs rest. 


‘Never had another man such a family as_ that, 


never was another man so likely to be fluttered and 
worried ; and he was a meek-spirited man, too, who 


128 “Only a Prayer-mecting!” 


could not make a dash, as others might have done. 
This is his strength, that he dwells in the Divine 
presence, and therefore is restful, calm, and strong. 
It is only now and then that he lets the human meek- 
ness be for a moment clouded. Thus he was enabled 
to march along, like a king in Jeshurun, as he was; 
and his soul dwelt in the eternity of God, singing ever 
amidst ten thousand graves, for he had forty of his 
people dying every day, “Lord, Thou hast been our 
dwelling-place in all generations.” 


ipens 
THREE “THENS” OF LEVITICUS XXVI. 


N the twenty-sixth chapter of the Book of Leviticus, 

there are three “THENS”, which will afford us 

instruction if the Spirit of God will shine upon them. 
Turn to the passage, and read for yourselves. 

We have first the THEN of promise and threatening 
repeated several times. The children of Israel were 
not to make any graven images, nor to set up any 
images made by others, nor to bow to those already 
set up, but to keep clear of idolatry in every shape, 
and worship only their great invisible God, Jehovah, 
whose Sabbaths they were to keep, and whose pre- 
cepts they were to obey; and ¢hen the Lord says, 
“Then I will give you rain in due season, and the 
land shall yield her increase, and the trees of the field 
shall yield their fruit. And I will give peace in the 
land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make you 
afraid: and I will rid evil beasts out of the land, 
neither shall the sword go through your land. And 
I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye 
shall be My people.” Very rich are the blessings 
which the Lord lavishes upon an obedient people ; 
peace and plenty, conquest and communion, are the 
portion of believers whose hearts are chaste towards 
the Lord. 

But should Israel refuse to hearken to the Lord, the 


9 


- 


130 = Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


chastening would be terrible indeed. Listen to these 
verses from the fifteenth to the eighteenth: “And 
if ye shall despise My statutes, or if your soul abhor 
My judgments, so that ye will not do all My com- 
mandments, but that ye break My covenant: I also 
will do this unto you; I will even appoint over you 
terror, consumption, and the burning ague, that shall 
consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart: and ye 
shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat 
it. And I will set My face against you, and ye shall 
be slain before your enemies : they that hate you shall 
reign over you; and ye shall flee when none pursueth 
you. And if ye will not yet for all this hearken unto 
me, ¢hen I will punish you seven times more for your 
sins.” 

Is not this first “¢hex” a very terrible one? But 
this is not all; more sorrows are added if their sins 
be multiplied. Read verses 23 and 24: “And if ye 
will not be reformed by Me by these things, but will 
walk contrary unto Me, then will I also walk 
contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven 
times for your sins.” Here we have stroke upon 
stroke to break a hard heart. Nor even there does 
the judgment rest. Hear again the Word of the 
Lord: “And if ye will not for all this hearken unto 
Me, but walk contrary unto Me; then I will walk 
contrary unto you also in fury; and J, even I, will 
chastise you seven times for your sins.” 

Brethren, read these words with holy trembling : 
they are written not for strangers, but for the seed of 
Israel, and for us also who are grafted in unto the 
true olive. Those who are written in the eternal 


fsa 


“Only a Prayer-meeting i 131 


covenant will find it a hard thing to sin against the 
Lord their God. The utterly ungodly often go un- 
punished in this life, for their punishment is reserved 
for the world to come, where the due reward of their 
deeds shall be meted out to them for ever and ever ; 
but the Lord dealeth far otherwise with His own, 
whose transgressions He hath blotted out. These are 
absolved in their relation to Him as a Judge, but as 
children they come under His fatherly discipline, and 
out of love to them He causes them in this life to 
smart for their sins if they break the law of His house. 
As our covenant God, the Lord is jealous. He is no 
Eli who ruins his sons by indulgence, but He 
scourgeth every son whom He receiveth. 

Very heavily has the Lord chastised some of His 
children. I ask you not to judge of one case by 
another, nor suppose that all the family must needs > 
be scourged in the same measure. The Lord speaks 
of the Church as having compassion, and making a 
difference, and He in mercy makes differences in dis- 
cipline, because real differences of character exist. 
Certain of the Lord’s beloved ones were happily led 
to Christ in their early days, and therefore know 
nothing of those sins which are the torment of others ; 
when these are kept by Divine grace from all in- 
consistency, the rod is little needed, and few clouds 
darken their path; but there are others, of rougher 
mould and sadder experience, who smarted much at 
their first conversion, and having wandered again, are 
brought back with heavy chastisements, and waters 
of a full cup are wrung out to them. The Lord may 
be dealing in discipline with some among you; and if 


132 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


so, you will smart indeed, for our Heavenly Father 
never plays with the rod, but uses it in real earnest. 
It may be that sorrow of heart consumes your eyes, 
and your strength is spent in vain: a blight from the 
Lord seems to have fallen upon you both in temporal 
and in spiritual things; you sow, but you do not 
reap; you labour, and obtain not. A faintness is in 
your head, so that the sound of a shaken leaf doth 
chase you, and you have no power to stand before 
your enemies. Sin and Satan, doubt and desolation, 
triumph over you, and you flee when no man pur- 
sueth. To you it has happened according to the 
threatening in the nineteenth verse, “1 will break the 
pride of your power,” for now you find no spiritual 
power within you, even power in prayer is gone, and 
all around you is barren; God hath made your heaven 
as iron, and your earth as brass. Ah, me! you are in 
a woful plight, for your strength is spent in vain, and 
your plagues are multiplied according to your sins. 

It comes to this, my dear brother, that you are to 
be driven from your sins. God is “avenging the 
quarrel of His covenant,” as He solemnly says in verse 
twenty-five. Read that word, and mark it. It is an 
awful thing to have God walking contrary to 
you; and yet He told you that He would do 
so if you walked contrary to Him. What 
else could you expect? If you are His dear child, 
He will be much grieved if He sees you act like 
a traitor; if you have leaned upon His bosom as a 
favoured friend, He has a greater interest in you than 
in others ; and He cannot therefore endure to see you 
polluted. The dearer you are to. God, the more angry 


——— 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” . 1 


will He be with you when you sin. The more He 
loves you, the more determined will He be to drive 
out the evil, and rid you of the abominable thing 
which His soul hateth. ; 

A judge, when he is sitting upon the bench, may 
feel a great indignation against a robber, or a mur- 
derer ; yet he does not show it, but calmly condemns 
him to suffer the penalty of the law. See that judge 
without his robes, acting as a father at home: his. 
child has transgressed, and now he is really angry, 
and shows far more sharpness towards his child than 
towards the offender. He who spoke in cold measured 
tones to the gross criminal now speaks severely, and 
with heat of spirit to his own offending boy. You all 
understand why he feels and acts thus; his wrath is 
of that kind which grows out of the truest love, a dove 
which cannot suffer evil in its darling object. The 
child does not think his father loves him much when 
he makes him tingle and smart beneath his strokes, 
but we who are wiser understand that “ herein is love.” 

When God chastens you, my brother, yield at once, 
and yield completely. If you do not, you may take 
warning from this chapter, for the Lord puts His 
threatening before you three times over: “ And if ye 
will not be reformed by Me by these things, but will 
walk contrary unto Me; then will I also walk con- 
trary unto you, and will punish you yet seven times for 
your sins.” The old Roman judges, when they 
passed along the streets, were attended by lictors; 
and those lictors carried an axe bound up ina bundle 
of rods, to signify this, that offenders should first be 
beaten with rods, but if these rods were of no use, 


Tay « Only a Prayer-mecting! vi 


they should be slain with the axe. I beseech every 
soul that is under the striving influences of the Spirit, 
or suffering from the trials of Providence, to hear at 
once the warning voice of the rod; for those who will 
not hear the rod must feel the axe. 

The Lord useth great discretion and deliberation, 
for He doth not afflict willingly: when little will 
suffice, He will smite but little. If men humble them- 
selves under His mighty hand, He will exalt them in 
due time; but, if they refuse and rebel, He will smite 
them more and more, till He has chastened them 
seven times for their sins. “Tex I will walk con- 
trary unto you also in fury; and I, even J, will chastise 
you seven times for your sins.” We have known some 
men lose all their goods before they have turned to 
theif God. Diseases, accidents, sicknesses have fol- 
lowed each other in quick succession, and hardly 
would they repent when they were all wounds, and 
bruises, and putrefying sores. Death has rent away 
their darlings ; lovely children have been followed to 
the grave by their yet more precious mother; and 
hardly then has the proud spirit broken down. It 
has seemed as if Pharaoh was alive again, and the 
plagues were being repeated. Alas! in some cases, 
there has even been a hardening as the result of 
affliction ; the man has accused God of harshness, and 
has refused to turn to the chastening hand. Ah, me! 
what sorrows such are preparing for themselves! 
Those whom the Lord means to bless He will go on 
smiting till they bow before Him, and make a full 
surrender. THEN, when they continue to rebel; then, 
when they still harden their neck; ¢hen, when they 


a 
ee 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” nitas 


will not hear the rod; then, when they cleave to their 


idols, and depart from the Most High; ¢hen, He will 
make them to pine away in their iniquity, and will set 
His face against them. 


We are glad to come to the second THEN of wise 
and penitent action. In the fortieth verse of this 
chapter we read, “If they shall confess their 
iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers, with 
their trespass which they trespassed against Me, 
and that also they have walked contrary unto Me; 
and that I also have walked contrary unto them, and 
have brought them into the land of their enemies; 
if ¢hen their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and 
they then accept of the punishment of their iniquity : 
then will I remember My covenant with Jacob, and 
also My covenant with Isaac, and also My covenant 
with Abraham will I remember ; and I will remember 
the land.” They were brought very low: they were 
even driven out of their land to perish among the 
heathen ; and God seemed utterly to have cast them 
off, but He declares that even ¢hez He would re- 
member His covenant, and restore them, if they would 
turn from their iniquities,—their turning from iniquity 
would be the turning-point of their affairs ; the end of 
woe, and the dawn of hope. 

I beg you to listen to this call of mercy, and to note 
when judgment would stay its hand. ‘They were first 
to “confess their iniquity,” and then would come the 
mercy, but not till then. O you chastened ones, are 
you prepared to acknowledge your transgressions, and 
your doings which are not good? They were to con- 


kee tat ae: | Oe yl eee ae a ee er 
: , ~4™ ‘ me: a 


136 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


fess their trespass, their own peculiar trespass, what-— 
ever that might be; their hearts were to search out 
sin, confess it, and mourn over it; z#ex would forgive- 
ness come,—there can be no pardon till this is done. 
We must take sin to ourselves before God can put it 
away from us. 

Next, their heart was to be humbled; see the 
forty-first verse: “If their uncircumcised hearts be 
humbled.” | Proud sinners cannot be pardoned 
sinners. If we are not submissive, there are more 
plagues in store for us. They were to be lowly, and 
then they would be cleansed from sin. Humility 
dates the hour of comfort. Observe, also, the peculiar 
point, that they were to accept the punishment of 
their iniquity, by which, I suppose, is meant that they 
must see their sorrow to be the result of their sin, 
and must own that it was a just infliction, a natural 
fruit of their own conduct. We are to have no quarrel 
with God, but to own that we deserve all that He has 
put upon us; and confess that, if He should cast us 
into hell itself, He would be just: #en, may we look 
for grace. If a child should say, “Father, you do 
well to punish me, for I deserve it,” the father would 
put up the rod, for it would have wrought its end; 
and when a soul has been sore broken, till it sobs out 
in its agony, “I deserve Thy rod; I deserve Thine 
eternal wrath, O God,” then, then, then it is that the 
Lord accepts the repentance, and looks with an eye 
of mercy upon the contrite one. 


The third THEN will be observed in the forty- 
second verse: “ Then will I remember My covenant 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” _ 137 ‘ 


with Jacob, and also My covenant with Isaac, and also 
My covenant with Abraham will I remember; and I 
will remember the land. The land also shall be left 
of them, and shall enjoy her sabbaths, while she 
lieth desolate without them: and they shall accept of 
the punishment of their iniquity: because, even be- 
cause they despised My judgments, and because their 
soul abhorred My statutes.” “Yet for all that,” He 
mentions all their sins, and He says in the forty- 
fourth verse, “ Yet for all that, when they be in the 
land of their enemies, I will not cast them away, 
neither will I abhor them, to destroy them utterly, 
and to break My covenant with them: for I am the 
Lord their God. But I will for their sakes remember 
the covenant of their ancestors, whom I brought forth 
out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the heathen, 
that I might be their God: I am the Lord.” 

Now, fellow-sinner, when the Lord has brought 
you down to accept the punishment which He has 
laid upon you, then will He remember His covenant, 
that old and glorious covenant of grace which was 
made with faithful Abraham, which, better still, is 
made with every believer in the person of the Lord 
Jesus. Abraham was the father of the faithful, and 
the covenant is made with all the faithful, with all the 
trusters, and God will remember it towards them. 
What is the tenor of it? “I will be merciful to their 
unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities 
will I remember no more.” “A new heart also will I 
give you, and a new spirit will I put within you.” 
This is the covenant of grace ; and, oh! it is a blessed 
thing when God remembers it on our behalf, for then 


Ar PE he) 
Pe ha AN ye Oe 
Nd i pes a 
t rat 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


4 


He remembers no more the iniquities of His people. 
Poor sinner, though He has hunted you down, and 
pursued you in His fierce anger; though conviction 
has broken you as a lion tears its prey; though you 
fear that the Lord has cast you away from all hope 
of grace, and outlawed you from all hope; yet, if you 
accept your punishment, then you, even you, shall sing 
of pardon bought with blood. 

“ Then,’ when you are proud, He will smite you; 
“then,” when He has smitten you, you are to accept 
your punishment; “ ¢exz,” when you have accepted 
your punishment, and confessed your sin, the Lord 
will remember His covenant, and forgive all your 
iniquity. Observe well the three steps: chastisement 
when you are wrapped up in your iniquities; genuine 
submission when you feel the chastisement; and 
full covenant blessing when your submission is fully 
made. If any of us are now smarting, may we hasten 
there and ¢hen to full confession, and may we chen 
receive restoration and comfort! God is very 
punctual; may He never find us procrastinating! 

God grant that we may be kept from sin, or if we 
fall into it, may He deliver us from its power; and if 
one of these ¢kexs happens to us, may the others 
follow in merciful succession! Amen. 


AN ADDRESS FOR SAD TIMES. 


“When my heart is overwhelmed : lead me to the rock 
that ts higher than I.”—Psalm 1xi. 2. 


AVID’S prayer is a very wise and appropriate 

one. He is in great sorrow, and asks that he 

may be enabled to rise above it; he has great faith, 

and therefore is sure that there is a safe refuge for 

him; and he is conscious of great weakness, for he 

does not speak of climbing the rock of safety by him- 

self, but implores Divine leading that he may come to 

it. His prayer will well befit the lips of men like 

ourselves who dwell where troubles rage and toss 
their waves on high. 

By many forces the heart may be overwhelmed. A 
sense of guilt may do it. Carelessness and in- 
difference are swept away when the Holy Ghost works 
conviction of sin upon the conscience, reveals the 
justice of God, and leads a man to see that he is in 
danger of the wrath to come: then heart and flesh 
fail, courage and hope depart, and the man is over- 
whelmed. Such a season is the fittest time for crying, 
“Lead me to the rock that is higher than I.” If you 
can but find shelter in the rifts of the Rock of ages, 
what security will be yours! The rock of atoning 
sacrifice rises higher than your sin, and upon it the 


140 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” a 


most guilty may stand far above the surging billows 
of vengeance. Led by the Divine hand to cling to 
the great Redeemer and Substitute, the utterly ship- 
wrecked soul is safely landed, and may sing because 
of his escape. 

Sometimes, however, believers in Jesus, though 
quite secure from Divine wrath, are, nevertheless, 
overwhelmed with trouble. They should not be so; 
for, if their faith acted as it ought, no fear would 
fasten upon them; but through the infirmity of the 
flesh, and, partly, also through inbred sin, unbelief 
comes in like a flood, and drenches and deluges the 
anxious heart. At times also, the trials of life roll 
onward like enormous Atlantic billows, and toss our 
poor bark till we reel to and fro, and stagger like a 
drunken man. The ship becomes waterlogged, and 
does not answer to the helm of reason; she drifts 
with the adverse current whithersoever it pleases to 
hurry her, and eternal shipwreck seems near at hand. 
It is good for a Christian then to cry, “Lead me to 
the rock that is higher than I;” for, though a rock 
is to be avoided in a natural storm, yet in our spiritual 
tempests there is a high rock which is to be sought 
unto as our shelter and haven. Truly, that rock is 
higher than we are, and its very height is our comfort. 
God, the infinitely high and glorious, is not troubled nor 
dismayed. His purposes are far above and out of our 
sight, and they are also far beyond the operation of 
evil; hence, by confidence in God, we leave the storm 
beneath us, and smile at the hurly-burly down below. 

To me, my brethren, the most overwhelming 
thoughts do not come to my heart from my own 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” _ I4I 


personal sin, for I know it is forgiven, nor from worldly 
trouble, for I am persuaded that all things work for 
my good; but I am deeply distressed by the present 
condition of the Church of God. Men, who are called 
of God to care for His flock, are grievously bowed 
down when the signs of the times are dark and 
lowering. Moses carried the whole people of Israel in 
his bosom in the wilderness, and they were sometimes 
a heavy load to him; and thus each true minister 
bears the Church upon his heart, and is often sorely 
burdened. At this moment, I can sorrowfully cry, 
with Jeremiah, “My bowels, my bowels! I am 
pained at my very heart. I cannot hold my peace.” 

It is overwhelming to my spirit to see the growing 
worldliness of the visible church. Many professed 
Christians—the Lord alone knows whether they are 
true believers or no,—give us grave cause for appre- 
hension. We see them tolerating practices which 
would not have been endured by their fathers; my 
blood chills when I think of how far some fashionable 
professors go astray. There are families in connec- 
tion with our churches in which there is no house- 
hold prayer ; but much luxurious eating, and drinking, 
and extravagance. I have my suspicions that there 
are, among professors, a considerable number who 
attend the theatre, spend their evenings in card- 
playing, read the most frivolous and foolish of books, 
and yet come to the Lord’s table. If they differ from 
the world, it is hard to see how or where. Neither in 
their dress, nor in their speech, nor in their mode of 
trading, nor in their habits at home, are they at all 
superior to the unconverted. 


ae OO ba mee 8 fe oe ots 
¢ nee i hey oY we 
a | 


142 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


Is not this an evil ace the sun? When the 


Church descends to the world’s level, her power is 


gone. Yet we cannot root up these suspected tares ; 
we are even forbidden to do so, lest we root up the 
wheat with them. If false professors were more open 
in their conduct, we should know them; but their evil 
is secret, and therefore we are obliged to let them 
grow’ together with the wheat; yet, sometimes, the 
sorrowful husbandman goes to the great Owner of 
the farm, and cries, “ Didst Thou not sow good seed 
in Thy ground? From whence, then, hath it tares?” 
The answer is that “an enemy hath done this,” and 
we are overwhelmed in spirit because we fear that 
our sleeping gave the enemy the opportunity. 

I look again, and see zumbers of professors apos- 
tatizing altogether. In this great London, many 
persons, who were members of churches in the 
country, fall into the habits of their neighbours, and 
absent themselves altogether from the means of 
grace ; or treat the worship of God on the Lord’s-day 
as if it were optional; and when they attend to it, 
they go tripping from one place of worship to another, 
and forget the duties of Christian fellowship. Many 
others are content to hear noted preachers; not be- 
cause they preach the Gospel, but because they are 
reputed to be “clever men.” Once, ministers were 
esteemed for soundness, unction, and experience ; but, 
now, men crave after popularity and cleverness. 

Some, who call themselves Christians, make fine 
music their grand requisite. If they need that gratifi- 
cation, why do they not content themselves with a 
week-day concert in the proper place for such dis- 


ef Only a Prayer-meeting!” - 143 


plays? God’s house was never meant to be made into 
a hall where tweedle-dee and tweedle-dum may vie 
with each other in pleasing man’s ears.. Not a few 
choose their Sunday resort because the “ church” is 
an imposing structure, and the congregation is com- 
posed of “very respectable people.” If they seek 
society, let them go where the éite may fitly gather, 
and keep themselves select; but, in the worship of 
God, “the rich and poor meet together, and the Lord 
is the Maker of them all.” It isan ill sign when God’s 
poor saints are despised ; but so it is in this day. If 
tradesmen save a little money, they grow too great 
for the assembly in which they were once at home, 
and must needs make part of a more fashionable 
congregation. These things also cause my spirit to 
be overwhelmed ; not because, in one single instance, 
it has happened to members of my own church; but 
because the fact is open to the view of all, and is the 
subject of general remark. 

Equally grievous to the heart is it to see the spread 
of superstition. You can hardly go down a street 
but you will pass some Popish joss-house, called an 
Episcopal church, where self-styled “priests” entice 
silly women to the confessional, and amuse them with 
masses and processions. Vile impostors! Clergy of 
an avowedly Protestant church, and supported by 
this nation, they are yet ravenous to eat out the very 
vitals of Protestantism. Fools enough are found to 
believe in these priests, and bow before their cruci- 
fixes, and their stations of the cross, and the like 
rubbish, and the abomination evidently spreads like 
the leaven among the meal as described by our blessed 


ea oR i ah Sle andl SO il a in eee Las PINE A OR 


144 “Only a Prayer-mecting!” 


Lord. Heaven alone knows where this England of 
ours is going, and he who loves his country feels his 
spirit overwhelmed within him. 

Nor do I think this to be the worst sign of the times. 
All around us there is growing up in tangled masses 
the ill weed of “modern thought,’ which is nothing 
better than an infidelity too cowardly to wear its 
proper name. There are preachers, in Christian 
pulpits, who deny the authenticity of various Books of 
the Bible, and reject plenary inspiration altogether. 
There is not a doctrine of the Gospel which is not 
denied by some “thinker” or other, and even the 
existence of a personal God is by the more advanced 
regarded as a moot point; yet the churches bear with 
them, and allow them to pollute the pulpits once 
occupied by godly preachers of Christ. After having 
denied the faith, and plunged their daggers into the 
heart of vital doctrines as best they can, they still 
claim to be ministers of the Gospel, and ask to be 
received into union on the ground of some peculiar 
inward virtue which exists in them apart from all 
doctrinal belief. Men, who might justly be prose- 
cuted for obtaining property under false pretences 
by violating the trust-deeds of our churches, may well 
wish to abolish creeds and articles of faith, because 
these are perpetual witnesses against their knavery. 
I would not care what became of the pelf if the 
churches were saved from error. I see this leaven 
of unbelief working in all directions, and many are 
tainted with it, in one point or another; it eateth 


like a cancer into the very soul of the churches. 
God deliver us from it! 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” _ 145 


It is hard to know what to do, for no one wishes 
to suspect his fellow, and yet a pest seems to be in 
the very air, so that it penetrates into the best 
guarded chambers. We hear of this man and then 
of another broaching strange notions, and those who 
were thought to be pillars suddenly become rolling | 
stones. Who will go next? And what will happen 
next? In the midst of this confusion, our heart is 
apt to be overwhelmed within us. Is there not a 
cause? It is not our household, it is not our estate, 
it is not our bodily health which is in danger, or we 
would bow in silence, and bear it; but it is the 
household of God, it is the estate and Kingdom of 
Christ, it is the Church of God on earth, which is thus 
suffering ; and well may those, who love the Lord, 
and His Christ, and His truth, tremble for the ark, 
and feel a holy jealousy burning within them. At 
such a time, the prayer of David 1s priceless, “ Lead 
me to the rock that is higher than I.” Let us see how 
this petition meets the case. 

First, let us remember that God dives. Glorious 
thought! “The Lord sitteth upon the flood; yea, 
wie Lord» sitteth King. <for ever...“ ‘The Lord 
reigneth; let the earth rejoice.” Still He effects 
His purposes and accomplishes His will. It would 
be very childish if we were afraid for the moon be- 
cause dogs bay her when she walks in her splendour, 
it would be very absurd to fear for the eternal 
mountains because the winds blow upon their granite 
peaks, and it would be equally idle to tremble for 
the truth of God. The stable things will stand, and 
those which cannot stand are better gone. God 


ie) 


140 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


liveth, and everything that is of God liveth in His 
life. On this rock let us rest. ' 


“ Error must die, and they who love her most, 
And suck the poison from her venomed lips, 
Will find her vaunted strength an empty boast, 

_ And share the horrors of her last eclipse. 


“ But truth is strong, and worthy of our trust, 
And truth shall stand when time no more shall be, 
And man is levelled to his native dust, 
For God is truth to all eternity.” 


Next, let us remember that God’s truth is stzll the 
same. It does not matter whether fifty thousand 
espouse its cause, or only five, or only one. Truth 
does not reign by the ballot box, or by the counting 
of heads: it abideth for ever. All the tongues of 
men and angels cannot make truth more true; and 
all the howlings of devils and doubters cannot trans- 
form it into a lie. Glory be to God for this! Jesus 
Christ is the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever. 
The eternal verity holds its deniers in derision, for 
they are as the chaff which the wind driveth away. 
“Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is 
the disputer of this world? hath not God made foolish 
the wisdom of this world?” 

Another rock may also afford us shelter, namely, 
the high doctrine that the Lord will save His own. 
The much-despised truth of election stands us in 
good stead in troublous times. We sigh, and cry, 
because so many worship the deity of the hour; but 
the Lord answereth, “ Yet have I reserved unto Myself 
seven thousand men who have not bowed the knee to 
Baal. Even so then at this. present time also there 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” Seen 147 


is a remnant according to the election of grace.” 
The words of the apostle are true at this moment, 
“The election hath obtained it, and the rest were 
blinded, according as it is written, God hath. given 
them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not 
see, and ears that they should not hear, unto this day.” 
I bow before the awful sovereignty of God, and the 
clamour of the people comes not into mine ears. 
Jehovah’s purpose shall stand, and He will do all His 
pleasure. No drop of the redeeming blood shall. be 
spent in vain, no line of the everlasting covenant shall 
be erased, no decree of the Eternal shall be dis- 
annulled. This angers the adversary, but in its 
Divine truth we find our consolation while the heathen 
rage, and the people imagine a vain thing. 

A rock that is higher than I may be useful, not only 
for shelter, but for elevation. If you stand upon high 
ground, though you may be a dwarf, you can see 
farther than the tallest man who remains below; and 
now, standing upon the high rock of God’s Word, 
what do we see? Look! Clear your eyes of doubt 
and mist, and look! Forget the present for a while, 
and gaze through the telescope of faith. What do we 
see? Systems of error broken in pieces, superstitions 
given to the moles and to the bats, the clouds vanish- 
ing, the darkness of night disappearing, and the beasts 
going back to their dens, for the Sun of righteousness 
arises with healing beneath His wings. The day of 
the triumph of the truth must dawn. 

If it shall not come before the advent of our Lord, 
it shall come ¢hen, to the confusion of His adversaries, 
and to the delight of His saints, and there shall be 


148 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


“new heavens and a new earth wherein dwelleth 
righteousness.” If this old earth will still reject the 
truth, and the old heavens still look down on a reign 
of error, they shall be utterly consumed with fire ; 
and on this very earth, on which we stand, renewed 
and purified, there shall be placed a throne as glorious 
and terrible as the cross of Christ was ignominious 
and shameful. The blood of Jesus has fallen on this 
world, and guaranteed its redemption from the curse ; 
and, one day, when He has delivered the subject 
creation, our Lord will dwell here, and reign amongst 
His ancients gloriously. 

We can afford to wait, for eternity is on our side. 
We can afford to see the ranks of the Lord’s army 
pushed back for a while; we can afford to see the 
standard fluttered by the rough winds; we can afford 
to hear the “ Aha! Aha!” of the Philistines ; for when 
the Prince cometh, they shall know His Name, and 
the power of His might. If they will not yield to 
Him now, and kiss His sceptre silvered with love, they 
shall bow. before Him when they see the naked iron 
of His rod breaking them in pieces like potters’ 
vessels. Oh, to be on God’s side! The whole root 
of the matter lies there. If a man knows that his 
heart and soul are given to the cause of God and 
truth, he is entrenched within an impregnable fortress, 
and he shall find in the eternal verities munitions of 
stupendous rock. He shall be steadfast “ though the 
earth be removed, and though the mountains be 
carried into the midst of the sea; though the waters 
thereof roar and be troubled, though the mountains 
shake with the swelling thereof.” 


ete 6 ee 


ai Only a Prayer-meeting!” 2 149 


What, then, are we to do? We are to give all 
diligence to make our calling and election sure. See 
to that, for, though some denounce such holy care as 
selfishness, our Lord and Master knows best, and He 
charged His servants not so much to rejoice in their 
power over devils as in the fact that their names were 
written in Heaven. Watch over your own spirit, and 
cast not away your confidence. 

Then, zealously, in dependence upon God, do the 
little you can do; do it well, and keep on doing it- 
You and [are not called upon to regulate the world, 
nor to stay the raging sea of human sin. Let us not: 
attempt to wield the Divine sceptre; it befits us not. 
Naturally, you would like to set all people right, and 
make all preachers orthodox. But, my brother, the 
task is beyond you. Be careful to be right yourself 
in your own life, and be resolute to bear your com- 
plete, honest, obedient testimony to all the truth you 
know; and there leave the business, for you are not 
responsible beyond your possibilities. 

No one of us is much more than an emmet on its: 
little hill. Now, if yon tiny ant were to indulge im 
serious reflections upon the state of London, and 
forget to assist in the labours of the insect common- 
wealth, it would be a foolish creature ; butaf it will let 
those great matters alone, and go on doing its ant- 
work, as an ant, it will fillits little sphere, and answer 
the purpose of its Maker. A mother teaching her 
little ones, and doing all she can to bring them up im 
the fear of God; a humble village pastor with his 
score or two of people around him; a teacher with her 

‘dozen children; a quiet Christian woman in her 


= a} ee 48 ite 
150 , “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


domestic circle bearing her godly testimony ; a young 
man speaking for Jesus to other young men ;—there 
is nothing very ambitious about the sphere of any one 
of these, but they are wise in the sight of the Lord. 
Leave the reins. of the universe in the hand of the 
Maker of the universe, and then do what He has 
given you to do, in His fear, and by His Spirit, and 
more will come of it than you dare to hope. 

We are like coral insects building each one his 
minute portion of a structure far down in the deeps 
of obscurity. We cannot as yet war with those 
- vaunted ironclads which sweep the ocean, and hurl 
_ destruction upon cities; and yet—who knows ?—we 
may build and build until we pile up a reef upon which 
the proudest navies may be wrecked. By the steady, 
simple, honest, Christian upbuilding of holiness and 
truth,—defying no one, attacking no one,-—we may 
nevertheless create a situation which will be eminently 
perilous to the boastful craft of falsehood and 
scepticism. A holy, earnest, Gospel church is a grand 
wrecker of-superstition and of infidelity. The life of 
God in man, patience in suffering, perseverance in 
well-doing, faithfulness to truth, prayer in the Holy 
Ghost, supreme zeal for the Divine glory, and un- 
staggering faith in the unseen God,—these are our 
battleaxe and weapons of war; and, by the aid of the 
Holy Ghost, we shall win the battle ere the day comes 
to its close. Till then, O Lord, when our heart is 
overwhelmed, lead us to the rock which is higher 
than we are! 


* yay ae * SS eas Bd ae a ae t ‘J 5 ae 
jas eee 4 . yer & : - Tat 
tor 4 a! ; 
ol gk 1 y , 


“HONEY OUT OF THE ROCK” 


“ He should have fed them also with the finest of the 
wheat: and with honey out of the rock should I have 
satisfied thee.”—Psalm }xxxi. 16. 


F you have not read what Thomas Wilcocks wrote, 
on A Choice Drop of Honey from the Rock 
Christ, | recommend you to get it, and read it prayer- 
fully, and it will do you good. Let me give you a 
taste, to set you longing for more. Our old author 
well says :—“ A Christian never lacks comfort but by 
. breaking the order and method of the Gospel, looking 
on his own attainments, and looking off Christ’s per- 
fect righteousness, which is, to choose rather to live 
by candle-light than’ by the light of the sun. The 
honey that you suck from your own righteousness 
will turn into perfect gall; and the light that you take 
from that to walk in, will turn into black night upon 
the soul. Satan is tempting thee to plod about thy 
own grace, to get comfort from that ; then the Father 
comes, and points thee to Christ’s grace, as rich, 
glorious, infinitely pleasing to Him, and biddeth thee 
study Christ’s righteousness; and His biddings are 
enablings; that is a blessed motion, a sweet whisper- 
ing, checking thy unbelief. Follow the least hint 
closely with much prayer; prize it as an invaluable 
jewel, it is an earnest of more to come.” 
So, dear friend, keep thine eye steadily fixed upon 


152 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be “fed with 
the finest of the wheat.” As thou lookest unto Jesus 
only, thou shalt be “ satisfied with honey out of the 
_ rock.” The sweetness of true religion is found in the 
Rock Christ Jesus; not in thy mere performance 
of certain duties, or in thine own poor promises of 
amendment. The sweetness is in the Rock, the Rock 
of ages cleft for thee. 

Some of the “honey out of the Rock” is a sweet 
sense of our security in Christ. The believer can con- 
fidently exclaim, “ Let what will happen to me, I know 
that Iam secure in Jesus. He is my Rock. Let me 
bury my only friend, let me see the last stick of my 
earthly possessions burned, yet I have a living, loving 

Saviour; I have an inheritance in reversion, a crown 
laid up in Heaven, a kingdom entailed, which cannot 
be taken away from me.” 


“JT have a heritage of joy 
That yet I must not see: 
The hand that bled to make it mine, 
Is keeping it for me. 


“ And a ‘new song’ is in my mouth, 
To long-loved music set ; 
‘Glory.to Thee for all the grace 
I have not tasted yet.’” 


“IT know whom I have believed, and am persuaded 
that He is able to keep that which I have committed 
unto Him against that day.” “I know that my Re- 
deemer liveth, and that He shall stand at the latter 
day upon the earth: and though after my skin worms 
destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God: 
whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” | 153 


behold, and not another; though my reins be con- 
sumed within me.” I shall one day be like Jesus, 
for I shall see Him as He is; and even now I know 
that Iam asonof God. It isa sweet drop of “ honey 
out of the Rock” to have a personal sense of our own 
individual security in Christ Jesus the Lord. 

Another drop of “honey out of the Rock” is fo 
know my perfection in Christ. The child of God, 
though vile and black in himself, can look to Jesus, 
and see himself arrayed in the spotless robe of his 
Saviour’s righteousness, and then he can exclaim, “In 
His righteousness I am perfect, I am complete in 
Him.” Truly does Kent sing,— 


“Tn thy Surety thou art free, 
His dear hands were pierced for thee; 
With His spotless vesture on, 
Holy as the Holy One. 


“Saints dejected, cease to mourn, 
Faith shall soon to vision turn; 
Ye the Kingdom shall obtain 
And with Christ exalted reign.” 


Ah, beloved, we only need to get the taste of unbelief 
out of our mouths, to enable us to enjoy the sweetness 
of these precious truths! 

Once again, the saint’s acceptance in Jesus is a sweet 
drop of “honey out of the Rock.” To know myself 
“accepted in the Beloved,” is one of the choicest 
things that I can learn this side of Heaven. Yet 
another drop of “honey out of the Rock” is, che 
fulness which the believer has from Jesus: “ And of 
His fulness have all we received, and grace for grace.” 
You cannot know the luscious sweetness of this drop 


Rb aS SEL ek i 
; " : eect i - vat 
154 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” = 


of “honey out of the Rock” until you have learned 
that, in yourself, you are a poor sinner and nothing at 
¥,. all, and have taken Jesus Christ as your All-in-all. 
“Oh!” says one, “I do not have much honey out 
_ of the Rock; I wish I could taste of this sweetness.” 
You may do so, you shall do so, if you will only live 
near the Rock Christ Jesus. We must not expect 
the honey to come leaping out of the Rock ever so far, 
ua because we are living at a distance from the Rock. 
If you want “honey out of the Rock,” you must live 
close to the Rock. If you are satisfied with the mere 
outside of religion, you must be content without much 
honey. The sweetness of religion is in the marrow ; 
and you cannot get at that if you dwell on the outside. 
If you do not get “ honey out of the Rock,” it may be 
because you do not live high enough. You must have 
higher and more exalted thoughts concerning Jesus. 
Low thoughts of Christ Jesus yield us no honey; but 
high thoughts of Jesus bring the honey down to us. 
Love Jesus, admire Jesus, extol Jesus, and you will 
find Him to be a precious Saviour. 

Child of God, if you want “ honey out of the Rock,” 
view Jesus in the garden, sweating “as it were great 
drops of blood falling down to the ground” (Luke 
xxil. 44). He is sweating drops of honey for you. 
View His thorn-crowned head, and you will see every 
thorn sparkling and opening a fissure to let out the 
honey for you. Think much of Jesus, live close to 

_ Him; then will you get “honey out of the Rock.” 
Do not have the devil's christ; he is a dwarf. THE 
CHRISTIAN’S CHRIST plants His foot where man lives, 
but His head is in the land where angels dwell. The 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” _— Iss 


_ devil would make you imagine that Christ is a weak, 


powerless being; do not believe any of his hes. 
Think highly of Christ, think lofty thoughts of Jesus. 
I defy you to think too much of Him. You may soar 
upward with an eagle’s wing, but you will not reach - 
those locks that are “bushy and black as a raven” 
(Solomon’s Song v. 11). You may expand your faith 
as far as you please, but you shall never know the 
full extent of His grace. With the spouse you may 
say, “My Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest 
among ten thousand . . . . His mouth is most sweet ; 
yea, He is altogether lovely.” 

How did the honey get out of the Rock? The 
Rock of ages was cleft for me. Ah, beloved, neither 
you nor I would ever have had “honey out of the 
Rock” if Jesus had not died! The Rock of ages 
was riven for sinners! It was when Christ’s side was 
pierced that the honey flowed from His heart. The 
wounds of Jesus stream forth with precious sweets 
for His beloved ones. Again I say, live near to Jesus, 
and with “honey out of the Rock” He will satisfy 
you. 


“Thou shalt taste the stream that flows 
From thine eternal Rock.” 


“eos 
ake” Sg 


* 


THE PREVALENCE OF EVIL AN: ARGU- 


MENT IN PRAYER. 


“Tt ws time for Thee, LoRD, to work: for they have 
made void Thy law.’—Psalm cxix. 126. 


HERE are many ways of pleading for the same 
thing when we draw near to God in prayer. In 

one condition of heart, one form of argument will rise 
to the lip; while, at another season, our circumstances 
may suggest quite a different way of pleading with 
God. I was noticing, while reading in the one- 
hundred and nineteenth Psalm, the plea which the 
psalmist urges with the Most High while entreating 
Him graciously to work among men. He says, “IT 
IS TIME FOR THEE, LORD, TO WORK: FOR THEY 
HAVE MADE VOID THY LAW.” We might urge, as 
reasons for the Lord’s working, the sorrows of man- 
kind, the terrors of the world to come, the glory of 
God, and the merits of the Saviour. We might plead 
the promises, the covenant, the prophecies, and the 
long weary time of waiting before they are fulfilled ; 
but it is a bright use of a gloomy fact when we can 
turn even the infidelity, the superstition, and the 
rebellion of man into an argument for the Lord's 
interference: “It is time for Thee, Lord, to work: for 


RENT Sat aC er 
' & “ ba “s y Cis & , r + - 
4 of 4 ‘AS } , i in ~, rf F . *; 
/ : ¢ cA 


Com 
= 


~ B58 ie EG aes Prayer-meeting ! bi sa, 


they have made void Thy law.” Thus we set our 
sail so as to use an adverse wind. We extract a 
reason for grace out of the reeking of iniquity. 

We observe that many men now deny the inspira- 
tion of the Scriptures, and that is making void the 
law of the Lord. Of what use is the Bible to us if 
it be not infallibly inspired of the Holy Spirit? An 
erring guide is as bad as none at all when a step may 
lead to ruin. If we have not the very mind of God 
in these pages, their essence, their authority, their 
life, and their power are gone. Yet certain ministers, 


ay, ministers of Nonconformist churches, speak of the . 


Bible as though it were in considerable portions of 
it blurred with mistakes, and by no means to be relied 
upon. They talk of “essential parts of the Old Testa- 
ment,” as if other parts might be laid aside; and 
some of them set up the Gospels above the Epistles, 
as if the one Spirit had not dictated all the Word. It 
is grievous to hear divines’ undermining the founda- 
tions of the faith which they are supposed to preach. 
“OQ Lord, we turn from these Thine unfaithful 
servants to Thyself, and cry, ‘Do Thou prove the 
_ truth of the Scriptures, fulfil the promises, and put 
power into the teaching of the cross, so that men may 
be compelled to own that Thy law is not void, but 
that the Scripture cannot be broken.’ ” 

Thirty years ago or more, John Angell James said, 
“Infidelity was never more subtle, more hurtful, more 
plausible, perhaps more successful, than in the day in 
which we live. It has left the low grounds of vul- 
garity, and coarseness, and ribaldry, and entrenched 
itself upon the lofty heights of criticism, philology, and 


_ 


Fi 


De a a EE LRTI ee ohm ae mite SMCS aia Dn hol ia? 

Pe a ee tS 

Le aie : ote at ‘ 
“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 159 


even science itself. It pervades to a fearful extent 
our popular literature ; it has invested itself with the 
charms of poetry, to throw its spell over the public | 
mind; it has endeavoured to enweaye itself with 
science; and he must be little acquainted with the 
state of opinion in this land, who does not know that 
it is espoused by a large portion of the cultivated mind 
of this generation. ‘It is time for Thee, Lord, to 
work.’” The statement is even more true at this 
hour, for still “not many wise men after the flesh, 
not many mighty, not many noble, are called.” Let 
our prayers increase in fervour as we implore that 
“philosophy, falsely so-called,” may not be allowed 
to poison the springs of Gospel teaching. 

Certain bold spirits make void the law of God, in a 
very dreadful way, by teaching a code of morals and 
a system of ethics contrary to the Word of God. 
Laws as to property are freely assailed, as if the Lord 
had never said, “ Thou shalt not covet.” Killing is 
thought to be no murder if it is performed upon an 
enormous scale. The sacred chastities which give 
stability to family institutions are abused, and an 
attempt is made to exalt lust into the place which is 
due only to conjugal affection; indeed, there are 
filthy pens which dare to write of the marriage bond as 
if it were a chain and a curse. Lewd tongues attack 
all laws by which the social fabric is held together ; 
the Sabbath is ridiculed, and the honouring of parents 
is considered out of date. Images are set up in places 
of worship, and material objects are publicly adored, 
as if this had not been most positively forbidden by 
the Lord of all. If it were not that the Lord of hosts 


@* — a ——— 


100 oe Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


has left unto us a small remnant, we should long ere 
this have been as Sodom, and been made like unto 
Gomorrah. Politically, we should before now have 
shot over our national Niagara into anarchy and 
abomination; and we should have seen in London 
all the horrors of the French Revolution if it had not 
been for the godly who leaven the mass. 

How dreadful it must have been to have lived in 
Paris when all the foundations of society were loosed ; 
when religion was debased into the worship of the 
goddess of reason ; when virtue was regarded as vice, 
and vice as virtue! Ere it comes to that dreadful 
pass, be it ours to cry out unto the Lord, “It is 
time for Thee to work.” Surely it is now needful 
for the Lord to vindicate His holy law when loud- 
mouthed blasphemers criticize the Saviour, censure 
their God, and propose to overturn from its base the 
pillar of society. They not only make their own lives 
void of morality, but they labour to make void the 
law itself, that no one may regard it. As Caryl says, 
they act “as if they would not only sin against the 
law, but sin away the law; not only withdraw them- 
selves from the obedience of it, but drive it out of the 
world ; they would make void and repeal the holy acts 
of God, that their own wicked acts might not be 
questioned ; and lest the law should have a power to 
punish them, they will deny it a power to rule them.” 

Men of another order are active and earnest in 
attacking the law of God, from another side, dy 
multiplying rites, and exalting ceremonies into a 
place which they should never usurp. Of these, I 
may say for the most part, “Father, forgive them, for 


Roe oe ee ay ee Oe 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” _. 161 


they know not what they do.” “They have a zeal 
of God, but not according to knowledge.” They. 
make void the law of God through their traditions. 
Being in all things too superstitious, they destroy the 
worship of God by their will-worship. To support 
their own invented rites and ceremonies, they give us 
interpretations which becloud the Gospel, and afford 
cover for priestcraft, monkery, Mariolatry, and image- 
worship. Sometimes, these persons are called Papists, 
at other times, Ritualists; and, in many cases, it is 
extremely difficult to see the slightest distinction 
between them; they are two apples from the same 
tree: 

Remember that, to worship God otherwise than He 
has ordained, is a sin which makes void His law. We 
are not really serving God at all if we presume to do 
it in our way rather than in His way. To present to 
God “the unbloody sacrifice of the mass,” is to dis- 
honour the one sacrifice of our Lord Jesus. To 
worship Mary, is to offend Jehovah. To bow before 
a crucifix, is to commit idolatry under pretence of 
reverence. Superstition is as real an adversary to the 
truth as scepticism itself, and it ultimately leads to 
irreligion. Idolatry conducts men to atheism, and 
superstition lands them in infidelity. Now that we 
see Anglican Popery covering our land with its altars, 
we may well cry, “ It is time for Thee, Lord, to work : 
for they have made void Thy law.” Plead with God, 
whenever you meet with either Rationalism or 
Ritualism, that He would graciously stretch out His 
hand, and get to His pure Word the victory. 

I find that, upon the passage before us, I have 


II 


ie ak, 1 eee Oo mee eee 
3 2 1. “A4e rc <P ae eS. 5 oot) 
, Oe pee nae i far CMT Maa tet 4 
t > as a built 8 a , aes BX. te ak ne 
Them 


162 | “Only a Prayer-meeting! 


written in my “ Treasury of David” as follows :—“ ‘It 
is time for Thee, Lord, to work: for they have made 
void Thy law.’. David was a servant, and therefore 
it was always zs time to work; but being oppressed 
by a sight of man’s ungodly behaviour, he feels that 
his Master’s hand is wanted, and therefore he appeals 
to Him to work against the working of evil. Men 
make void the law of God by denying it to be His 
law, by promulgating commands and doctrines in 
opposition to it, by setting up tradition in its place, or 
by utterly disregarding and scorning the authority 
of the Lawgiver. When sin becomes fashionable, 
a holy walk is regarded as a contemptible Puritanism ; 
vice is styled pleasure, and vanity bears the bell. 
Then the saints sigh for the presence and power of 
their God. Oh, for an hour of the King upon His 
throne, wielding the rod of iron! Oh, for another 
Pentecost, with all its wonders, to reveal the energy of 
God to gainsayers, and make them see that there is 
a God in Israel! Man’s extremity, whether of need 
or of sin, is God’s opportunity. When the earth was 
without form and void, the Spirit came, and moved 
upon the face of the waters: should He not come 
when society is returning to a like chaos? When 
Israel in Egypt was reduced to the lowest point, and 
it seemed that the covenant would be void, then 
Moses appeared, and wrought mighty miracles; so, 
too, when the Church of God is trampled down, and 
her message is derided, we may expect to see the 
hand of the Lord stretched out for the revival of 
religion, the defence of the truth, and the glorifying 
of the Divine Name. The Lord can work either by 


| “Only a Prayer-meeting ! aimee 103. 


judgments, which hurl down the ramparts of the foe, 
or by revivals, which build up the walls of His own 
Jerusalem. How heartily may we pray the Lord to 
raise up new evangelists, to quicken those we already 
ehave, to set His whole Church on fire, and to bring the 
world to His feet.” 

Thus, dear friends, you see how the prominence 
of evil can be made to quicken us in supplication. 
Every sin may be used as a plea in prayer. If we 
were in a right state of mind, every time we heard a 
man swear in the street we should at once pray, “It is 
time for Thee, Lord, to work: for they have made ~ 
void Thy law.” Every time we took up a newspaper, 
and our eye glanced upon a police case, we should pray 
in like manner. Every time we saw sin in our neigh- 
bours, or in our families, or felt its working in our- 
selves, we should cry out to God, “Lord, sin is at 
work, be Thou also at work! Sin is hardening, sin 
is defiling ; come, Lord, and work with all the soften- 
ing and quickening processes of Thy blessed Spirit, 
with all the purifying power of the water and of the 
blood, and so undo the evil working of the world, the 
flesh, and the devil! O Lord, meet energy with 
energy, meet fire with fire; and let Thy Son, the seed 
of the woman, meet the seed of the serpent, and 
destroy all the works of the devil!” 

Thus, you see that good arguments for prayer may 
be raked up among the stubble of sin. As the Green- 
landers find their wood washed up by the sea, so let 
us find fuel for the fire of our earnestness borne to 
us by the troubled sea of human wickedness. 
Brethren, let us wrestle in prayer, using this plea. 


, 
ut 


eae 7% He Wes i 
re we do s0, let us distil 


“Lord, when iniquities abound, 

And blasphemy grows bold, 

When faith is hardly to be found, 
And love is waxing cold,— 


“Ts not Thy chariot hastening on ? 
Hast Thou not given this sign ? 
May we not trust and live upon 
A promise so divine ? 


“« Yes,’ saith the Lord, ‘now will I rise, SSN 
And make oppressors flee ; 

I shall appear to their surprise. a 
And set My servants free.’” axe 


vr 


ee 
re 


a 
eet gy 


2 


a Ni a i A 


a, 
nl 
Pe as 


< pone eee) 


» THE THREE “THENS” OF ISAIAH’S 
TEMPLE VISION. 


“In the year that king Uzziah died I saw also the Lord 
sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and His train 
filled the temple. Above it stood the seraphims: each one 
had six wings; with twain he covered his face, and with 
twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly. And 
one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the 
Lorv of hosts: the whole earth ts full of His glory. And 
the posts of the door moved at the voice of him that cried, 
and the house was filled with smoke. THEN said I, Woe ts 
me! for Lam undone ; because lam a man of unclean lips, 
and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for 
mine eyes have seen the King, the Lorp of hosts. THEN 
flew one of the seraphims unto me, having a live coal in his 
hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar: 
and he laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath 
touched thy lips ; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy 
sin purged. Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, 
Whom shall I send, and who will go for Us? THEN said 
LI, Here amT,; send me.”—Isaiah vi. 1—8. 


N this passage, we have the record of a vision 
granted to the favoured prophet Isaiah,—a 
vision of so grand a character, and exercising so great 
an influence over its beholder, that he records the 
exact date of it,—“ In the year that king Uzziah died.” 
Such transcendently glorious manifestations come 


166 é Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


not every day, and therefore it is well to note their 
occurrence with a red letter. Perhaps the date was 
better fixed on his memory by a thought of contrast : 
Judah’s king was dead, and then the prophet saw the 
living King sitting upon His throne. That dead king 
had intruded into the temple; but the eternal King 


reigns there, and fills the holy place with His train. 


Our one point just now is to mark ‘fhe three 
“ THENS.” The prophet commences his narrative by 
a note of time, and he makes his time-bell ring again, 
and again, and again,—striking then, #Zex, THEN. 

The first “THEN” occurs thus:—the prophet was 
led to feel his own uncleanness, and the uncleanness 
of those among whom he dwelt. When was that? 
For it is important for us to feel the same conviction, 
and we may do so by the same means. Was it when 
he had been looking into his own heart, and seeing its 
dire deceitfulness, and the black streams of actual 
transgression which welled up from that inward 
fountain of depravity? He might certainly have said, 
“Woe is me!” if he had been looking there; but he 
was not doing so on this occasion. 

Had he been considering the law of God, had he 
observed how exceeding broad it is, how it touches 
the thoughts and intents of the heart, and condemns 
us because we do not meet its demands of perfect 
obedience? Assuredly, if he had been looking into 
that pure and holy law, he might well have bewailed 
his guilt, for by the law is the knowledge of sin. 

Or had he been turning over the pages of memory, 
and noting his own shortcomings, and the sins 
of his fellows? Had he noted his own failures 


MERU EE ein ee owls 8 
<n ‘, 4 s , U ins 

| ATES A Vey , ray 
wey, i jens 4 

a 

¥ 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 167 


in prayer, Or in service, or in patience? ‘Had 
he watched himself in private and in public, 
and did the record of the past bring a con- 
sciousness ‘of sin upon him? If so, he might well 
enough have lamented before the Lord, and cried, 
“Woe is me! for I am undone.” I might even say, 
had he been carrying out self-examination for a single 
day of his life, and had that day been the Sabbath, 
and had he been acting as the preacher, or had he 
been sitting under the most stirring ministry, and had 
he been at the holy feasts of the Lord, he might have 
found reason for confession. I will not judge all of 
my brethren, but I will make this confession for 
myself, that if I examine the best day I have ever 
spent, and the holiest hour I have ever lived, I can see, 
even with my poor, weak eyes, enough of sin in my 
holiest things to make me cry, “ Woe is me! for I am 
undone.” The best sermon I have ever preached is a 
sure proof to me that my lips are unclean; for, when | 
come to examine it with care, I discover in it a thou- 
sand defects. 

But none of these things are mentioned here as the 
occasion for Isaiah’s humbling cry. When was it, 
then, that he had such an overpowering sense of his 
own unworthiness, and of the sinfulness of the people 
among whom he dwelt? It was “ THEN,’—when he 
had seen the Lord. He had been permitted, in vision, 
to gaze upon the great King upon His throne ; he had 
seen Him in His infinite sovereignty; he had beheld 
His glory filling the temple, till the house was filled 
with smoke to veil the matchless splendour; he had — 
heard, in vision, those sinless beings, the seraphim, 


2 i se ee 
Vea oe yee 
rh ot 1k oly se 4 


168 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


using their lips to cry in ecstasy, “Holy, holy, holy, 
is the Lord of hosts;” and he had carefully observed 
that, when they drew near to the awful majesty, each 
one of them used his wings as a fourfold veil with 
which to hide himself: “with twain he covered his 
face, and with twain he covered his feet.” Even they 
did not dare to look upon God’s glory, or to stand 
before Him without a covering. What with their cry 
of “ Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts: the whole 
earth is full of His glory,” and their lowly posture 
while adoring, the prophet was humbled by their 
reverence, and wondered how or in what language he 
should ever speak with God. John, in his Gospel, 
tells us that Isaiah saw the glory of God in the person 
of the Lord Jesus. The posts of the door moved and 
trembled at the presence of the Lord of the whole 
earth, under the stress of those adoring cries which 
rose from an innumerable company of angels, of 
whom the seraphim may be regarded as representa- 
tives. It was the sight of the thrice-holy God which 
made the prophet say, “ Woe is me! for Iam undone ; 
because I am a man of unclean lips.” 

O my dear brethren and sisters, if you have never 
seen God, if you have never had a faith’s view of Him, 
you have not really seen yourselves! You will never 
know how black you are till you have seen how bright 
He is; and inasmuch as you will never know all His 
brightness, so you will never know all your own black- 
ness. Learn, however, this lesson, that for you to 
turn your face away from God in order to repent of 
sin, is a great mistake; it is a sight of God in Christ 
Jesus which will breed humiliation and lowly con- « 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 169 


fession of sin. Dream not that you are to stay away 
from Christ till you sufficiently lament your sin; it is 
a grave error and a grievous folly, for nothing makes 
sin to appear so exceeding sinful as a view of the 
glory of God in Christ Jesus. No, your face must be 
towards your Father's house, and you must hopefully 
resolve to arise and go to your Father, or you will 
never cry, “ Father, I have sinned against Heaven, 
and in Thy sight.” Yes, and I will venture to say 
that, the nearer the prodigal came to his father, the 
more he repented ; and when his face was hidden in his 
father’s bosom, and kiss after kiss saluted him, then his 
repentance was deepest of all. O poor hearts, if you 
cannot come to Christ wzth repentance, come to Him 
for repentance! If you want to feel, “ Woe is me! ” 
come and see the glory of Jesus, and the holiness of 
the great God; and then will your knee bow, and 
your heart tremble. There is no road to repentance 
so short and sure as to remember your God, and 
enter spiritually into His presence. “I saw the Lord 
sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up . . . . THEN 
said I, Woe is me! ” 

Now, is there any man here who says, “I have had 
intimate communion with God”? Brother, we will 
listen to your speech, and judge of your pretensions. 
Did I hear you say, “I am a man who lives very near 
to God. I walk in the light as God is in the light, 
and enjoy a higher life than other Christians”? 
Brother, your speech is as sounding brass and as a 
tinkling cymbal, for no man, who has come fresh from 
God, ever speaks in tones of  self-congratulation. 
What said Job? “Behold I am vile; what shall I 


ira” Stole Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


answer Thee? I have heard of Thee by the hearing 
of the ear: but now mine eye seeth Thee. Where- 
fore I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes” 
(Job xlii. 5, 6). This was the experience of a perfect 
and an upright man, one that feared God, and 
eschewed evil; and if you have really entered into 
communion with the Lord, the same humble emotions 
will fill your breast. No man has seen the Lord, 
high and lifted up, if he exalts himself. When we are 
favoured to know the Lord, we are humbled ¢khen, 
and not till then. 


You see the prophet trembling: in himself unclean, 
and conscious of it, and surrounded by a people as 
unclean as himself, and it is while he stands in that 


condition that we meet with our second “THEN.” 


“ Then flew one of the seraphims unto me, having a 
live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the 
tongs from off the altar: and he laid it upon my 
mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched thy lips; and 
thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin is purged.” 
“Then,” that is, not when this man was full of joy 
and rejoicing, but when he said, “ Woe is me! ”—not 
when he was living in the sublimities of boastful self- 
consciousness, but when he was crying, “I am un- 
done ;” “ ¢hen flew one of the seraphims.” When he 
was consciously unfit, the Lord commissioned him; 
when he felt his uncleanness, when he owned the ruin 
of his nature, and the sad estate of his people, then 
it was that the seraphic messenger touched him with 
the living altar coal. 


Brethren, do you so much feel your sinfulness that 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!”  . WAS: 


you are afraid that the Lord will never use you in the 
conversion of sinners? I am glad of it. Are you 
conscious that your lips are not worthy to speak for 
the holy God? Then I know you feel that, if ever 
God should save a soul by you, He must have all the 
glory of it. You feel that it is a wonder of grace that 
you are saved yourself, and if ever others are saved 
through your means, you confess that it will be a 
miracle of Divine power. In all this I rejoice, for 
your hour of acceptable service has begun. I have 
noted, in my own experience, that whenever I have 
been most blessed in the winning of souls, it has 
generally been just after I have endured a thorough 
stripping in my own heart, or when by soul trouble | 
have been brayed as in a mortar among wheat with a 
pestle till I seemed ground into dust. Trial has pre- 
ceded triumph. A wider field has been opened to 
me by the breaking down of my hedges. I have 
shrunk into self-oblivion, and then the Lord has 
moved me to speak in a burning manner to His glory. — 

I remember a foolish person coming to me once 
after I had been preaching, and he said to me, “ You 
said you were a sinner when you were preaching.” 1 
replied, “Yes, I did, and I meant it.” His answer 
was, “ What right had you to preach if you are a 
sinner?” “Well,” I replied, “ my right to preach lies 
in the Lord’s command, ‘Let him that heareth say, 
Come,’ but I think little of right, for I preach because 
I cannot help it, and I preach to sinners because I am 
a sinner myself, and feel a sympathy with them. If 
any man needs to be daily saved by Christ, I am that 
man, and therefore I delight to describe the salvation 


172 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


which is so dear to me. Sometimes, when I have 
been myself in bondage, I have preached in chains to 
men in chains, but made music with my fetters, by 
commending Christ when I could not have said a 
good word for myself.” Why, methinks that a man, 
who has taken medicine, and has recovered, is the 
very man to extol it to others; yea, and if he still 
feels that, in some measure, the disease is upon him 
though its deadly power is taken away, and if he feels 
that every day he must drink the healing draught, and 
wash in the healing bath, he is the very man con- 
tinually to tell of the abiding power of that ever- 
precious heal-all which meets his case. Even when 
we walk in the light with God, still the precious blood 
of Jesus cleanses us from all sin, and still we declare 
from our own experience its gracious power. 

My dear brethren and sisters, I want this to en- 
courage you, if you feel unhappy in your work for the 
Lord. If you feel very much cast down, and are 
crying, “ Woe is me!” do not, therefore, cease from 
your service. If you did not get on last Sunday, 
when you tried to preach; if you blunder every day 
with those unclean lips of yours; if you have been 
unsuccessful in working among the people with whom 
you dwell, or if you have not succeeded with the 
children in your class, or with your own children at 
home, now is the time to seek the blessing, now is the 
time to pray for it in hope. “Then flew one of the 
seraphims unto me, having a live coal in his hand, 
which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar.” 
The seraph does not come with live coals from off the 
altar to men of pure lips who never were undone, for 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 173 


such are exceedingly satisfied without altar coals; 
but when the chosen servant of the Lord is deeply 
conscious of his unworthiness, then shall the Lord 
inspire him from above. It is His delight to fill empty 
vessels, and to put His treasure into caskets which 
contain nothing of their own. 


Very briefly, let us now speak of the third “ THEN.” 
“Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom 
shall I send, and who will go for Us? Then said I, 
Here am I; send me.” Hear ye not, to-night, the 
voice which never ceases to cry in the Church, “ Whom 
shall I send, and who will go for Us?” Oh, that we 
may be ready to respond to it! Alas! We feel re- 
luctant to answer, “Send me,” because we feel that 
we are undone, and our lips are unclean ; but, beloved, 
if while we are sitting here, the angel shall bring the 
live coal from off the altar,—one of those coals where- 
with our great Sacrifice was consumed,—and touch 
each lip with it, and say, “ Lo, this hath touched thy 
lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin 
purged,” then we shall leap to our feet, and cry, 
“Here am I; send me.” Knowing that we are now 
clean in the sight of God, through that altar which 
sanctifies all that it touches, we shall have all our 
fears removed, and then will grateful love burst out 
into the cry of full surrender and complete consecra- 
tion, “ Here am I; send me.” Here is a man full of 
leprosy, and there is a healing bath. Jehovah Rophi 
cries, “ Who will go and publish the news of healing, 
sure and effectual?” He makes no answer because 
he is himself still full of disease; but the moment he 


74 : “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


S0 


has stepped in, and perceives that he is cleansed, he 
shouts, “ Eureka, I have found it,” and begins at once 
to publish the joyful tidings. He longs for opportuni- 
ties to tell his story. He rests not day nor night, but 
incessantly publishes the glad tidings of salvation. 


“Then I will teach the world Thy ways; 
Sinners shall learn Thy sovereign grace; 
I'll lead them to my Saviour’s blood, 
And they shall praise a pardoning God.” 


“Here am 1; send me.” Who among you will say 
this in reference to missions abroad, or holy works at 
home? I expect to hear it come from those who love 
much because they have had much forgiven. The 
coal which purges will also fire your lip, and burn 
the bonds which restrain your tongue. “ The love of 
Christ constraineth us.” How can we be silent? 
The beam out of the roof and the timber from the 
wall would cry out against us if we did not witness for 
our Lord. Others may be able to be silent; as for 
us, we must cry out, “ Here am I; send me.” I could 
most heartily wish that more of you deeply felt your 
unworthiness till it filled you with anguish, and that 
you felt anew. the altar’s purifying flame, for then 
would you be fired with fervour and enthusiasm, and 
a great work would be done for my Lord. Fresh 
from a sense of sin, you would pity careless sinners ; 
newly blessed with a sense of sacrificial cleansing, 
you would earnestly point men to the Saviour, and the 
fire which kindled your life would communicate itself 
to many other hearts. 

These are the three “thens”: “ then,” when I had 


me.” ae this a a comnts in season to nua! ae = 
_will they be blessed, then will we Be togeth 


: and then will God be glorified. . ; 


PRUNING THE VINES. 


“* Every branch that beareth fruit He purgeth (or, pruneth) 
it, that tt may bring forth more fruit.”—John xv. 2. 


HE prayer of one of our brethren, just now, 
made me think of something upon which I will 
say a few words to you. I have recently watched, 
more carefully than ever I did before, the treatment 
of vines; and I have observed how true are the 
Saviour’s words: “Every branch that beareth fruit, 
He purgeth (or, pruneth) it, that it may bring forth 
more fruit.” All fruit-bearing trees, or all that I am 
acquainted with, more or less néed the knife to cut 
away the superfluous shoots from the wood; but the 
vine is probably selected by the Saviour, among other 
reasons, for this fact, that it has to endure the pruning- 
knife more than any other tree. When I saw the 
vines, the gardeners had cut them back dreadfully ; 
there seemed to be nothing left but old, dried stems, 
with a few knuckles, as it were, sticking up here and 
there, like swans’ necks; but to all appearance hard, 
and withered, and dead. 
As I looked at them, I thought they were just like 
myself, I have been cut back terribly.* I hoped to 
have had many branches, from which there might 


* This address was delivered at the Tabernacle, after the Pastor’s 
recovery from one of the many illnesses from which he suffered. 


12 


Fai be 2 


178 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


have come large clusters of luscious fruit for my 

blessed Master; but, instead of that, the knife has 

been used upon me, and there has been the cutting- 
away of a shoot here, and a branch there, until I 
Bo wondered what would be left when the Vine-dresser 
had finished His pruning. 

While a vine is being pruned, or after the pruning 
‘process is over, there is a wonderful change in its 
appearance. You would hardly know it to be the 
3 same as when it was covered with leaves, and laden 
with fruit. On our journeys to Mentone, we pass 
3 through some of the principal vine-growing districts 
of France, and the view of the vines that we get in 
the winter is by no means charming. As we look at 
them, we understand why the Saviour was likened to 
“a root out of a dry ground,” of whom many say, “ He 
hath no form nor comeliness; ... no beauty that 
we should desire Him.” Iwas told, when at Mentone, 
that the best vines were cut back the most. The 
vine-dressers pruned them until I thought they might 
as well root them up out of the ground, they seemed 
quite destroyed. But the men told me that they 
would not yield one-half such sweet and choice grapes 
if they were not thus cut. They said that there are 
coarser vines, which can grow upon trellis-work, and 
climb over arches; but that the grapes they produce 
are very poor, compared with those that are brought 
forth upon the other vines. The scenery gains in 
beauty; but the fruit loses in sweetness and flavour. 
The best vines must be cut back most. I am sure this 
is a rule which applies both in nature and in grace. 
I do not say that it is a proof that we are the best 


Pe iV am ; = 
ted ee ¢ * ' a ’ 
tie 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” + 179 


Christians because we suffer most; but I do say that 
we ought to try to be the best branches of the true 
and living Vine if we have been the most cut back. 

Notice the exact words of our Lord: “Every 
branch that beareth fruit, He purgeth it, that it may 
bring forth more fruit.” This pruning must be per- 
sonal: “ Every branch that beareth fruit, He purgeth 
at.” ‘The pruning of any other branch will not avail ; 
the knife must be used upon this particular 
branch. This pruning process must be applied 
to you, my brother, and you, my sister, who 
are in Christ, and who are bringing forth 
fruit because of your union to Him. It is not 
sufficient to be a member of a fruitful church, or class, 
or family; each one must be fruitful if we are to 
accomplish the end for which we were elected by our 
Lord. He said, “I have chosen you, and ordained 
you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that 
your fruit should remain.” 

And note, that it is the fruzt-bearing branch that 
is to be pruned. Fruitless branches are cut off; but 
those that bear any fruit are cut, that they may bring 
forth “more fruit” (verse 2), and “much fruit” 
(verses 5 and 8). The heavenly Husbandman takes 
away the fruitless branches, and He takes away from 
the fruit-bearing branches everything that would 
hinder them from being full of fruit. The clinging 
tendrils of self-conceit, the too-luxuriant foliage of 
outward profession, or anything that would prevent 
the fullest possible production of fruit, must be 
pruned with unsparing hand., 

“HE purgeth it.” However sharp the knife may 


oS 
3. Pek ee a’, 
i 4 se a 4 


180 ae Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


be, it is held in the hand of unerring wisdom and in- 
finite love. “Shall not the Judge of all the earth do 
right?” Ay, that He will, even though the pruning 
makes the branch to bleed, as if its very life were 
being taken away. HE will not prune either too much 
or too little. Be thankful if the Vine-dresser thinks 
you worth pruning, and does not cast you away with 
the fruitless branches that are thrown aside for 
burning. 

“He purgeth it.” The Revised Version has it, 
“He cleanseth it.” In speaking to His disciples, our 
Lord explained how the purging or cleansing is 
effected. “Now ye are clean through the Word 
which I have spoken unto you.” Many godly people 
speak of affliction as the Lord’s pruning-knife; and, 
doubtless, the Vine-dresser often uses it for that 
purpose; and if He wills it to be so, it is a most © 
efficient instrument for effecting His Divine purposes. 
I bear my willing testimony to the blessing that 
affliction and trial have been to me. I owe more to 
the fire and the file than I can ever describe. Still, 
the teaching of this passage is, that it is the Word of 
the Lord which is to purge and cleanse believers. 
Affliction may be the handle of the pruning-knife, or 
the ladder by which the gracious Gardener reaches 
every branch of the vine; but it is the Word itself 
which is used to Betarapieh the needed purging or 
cleansing. 

The great end that the Vine-dresser has in view, 
in pruning the fruit-bearing branch, is “hat it may 
bring forth more fruit.” Other trees may be useful 
for various purposes ; but the vine exists that it may. 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” . 181 


bear “fruit.” Before we were converted, we brought 
forth evil fruit; but now, by the grace of God, we 
bear “fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting 
life.” Writing to the Galatians, the apostle Paul 
makes a catalogue of the fruit of the Spirit: “love, 
joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, 
meekness, temperance.” Men are not to be judged 
by their profession, or by their appearance; the 
Lord’s test is, “ The tree is known by his fruit.” If 
we are bearing fruit, it is an evidence that we are 
abiding in the true Vine. Our Lord Jesus said to His 
disciples, “ As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, 
except it abide in the vine, no more can ye, except 
ye abide in Me.” The purging, pruning, cleansing, 
is only to make us abide still more closely in the Vine, 
that all the vital sap flowing into us may be used in 
the formation of fruit. “ He that abideth in Me, and 
I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for 
without Me (margin, severed from Me,) ye can do 
nothing.” The more fruit we bear, the more will God 
be glorified, and the more shall we prove that we 
are Christ’s followers, to whom He can say, “I am the 
Vine, ye are the branches.” 

This is just what has happened to the vines that I 
have watched. If I had not seen it so often, I could 
not have believed that such a change could have been 
wrought. The vines, that were cut back so terribly 
before my illness, are now adorned with lovely leaves, 
and, better still, there are flowers from which the 
clusters will come, and the branches have grown 
marvellously during the time that I have been laid 
aside. It looked like a miracle to see the poor dried 


a aS 5 oe ols sues ¥? ih 9 Rie |, AD ENORE oe tae oe a 
“Ay ete . ‘ Lay Oe EE 
182 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


vine again springing up, and throwing out hopes of 
abundant fruitage by-and-by. This ought to en- 
courage all of us who are being pruned. If we have 
been cut back by the Lord, it is only that we may 
gather strength that shall not be spent to waste in 
producing wood and leaf, but that shall be used in 
bringing forth fruit for our dear Lord and Master. 


. _ That ought to be the case, and will be the case, with. 


each branch of the living Vine. 

Our friend prayed that, now that I am better, I 
may have strength never dreamed of. I hope every 
one of you will have strength you never dreamed of. 
It would be a blessed thing if every branch in the 
true Vine should bear clusters as large as that which 
came from Eshcol. Oh, to bear for King Jesus such 
fruit, to abide in Him so closely, and to glorify Him 
so completely, that no more could have been done by 
us! I fear we do not, any of us, reach that standard ; 
but let us all seek to get as near to it as we pos- 
sibly can. 

You must-have noticed, in reading the lives of men 
who have been very fruitful unto God and His 
Church, how much they have been cut back. You 
remember how it was with Martin Luther. At the 
very time that he seemed to be most wanted in the 
world, when he was returning from the Diet of 
Worms, and hoping soon to be again preaching in his 
beloved Wittenberg, he was surrounded by a band of 
soldiers, and carried off to the castle of the Wartburg, 
and there he was shut up fora while, and unable to 
mix with men, as he longed to do. He was not 
confined as a prisoner, for he went out hunting and 


aceite a ara! he | 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” _ 183 


riding ; but he was always attended by guards; and 
the rest of his time he spent in reading and studying. 
He wanted to be preaching and thundering away 
against the evils of the Papacy; and he said that he 
believed it was the devil who had come and shut him 
up just when he wanted to be in the thick of the fight 
It was, however, the act, not of Satan, but of his 
faithful friend the Elector Frederic, who knew that, 
at that time, his life would be in great danger if he 
were out abroad; so he kept him out of the way of 
harm, and in that castle of the Wartburg he was able 
to do more for the cause of God and truth than if he 
had been at liberty. It was there that he threw the 
inkstand at the devil’s head, and it was there that he 
began to throw the inkstand at the devil’s head in 
another sense by his translation of the Bible, and by 
his other writings. It was a good time for Luther, 
and it was a good time for the whole world. He was 
able to take active exercise, and also carefully and 
prayerfully to study the Scriptures, thus preparing 
himself for future service. 

Luther was also cut back in another fashion. That 
faithful servant of God—the bravest of the brave, I 
think I might call him; one who seemed dauntless as 
a lion before the Lord’s enemies,—was throughout 
his whole life tormented by such doubt, unbelief, and 
horrible attacks of Satan, that I suppose there has 
scarcely existed a man who has gone through a more 
trying experience. No barque that ever rode the 
waters endured fiercer tempests than Martin Luther 
when he was driven before the blast of Satanic 
assaults. He would get down his violin, and play, in 


184 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


the hope of driving away the foul fiend; he would 
talk with Catherine von Bora, his wife,—his queen, 
his empress, as he called her ; and she would reason 
with him, and sometimes scold him. But it was no 
use: poor Martin went down, down, down, till he 
cursed the day of his birth, and wished himself in 
his grave. Imagine, if you can, what he would have 
been without all these trials. With such a spirit as 
he had, he would have been like a wild boar, rooting 
up everything that was growing in his pathway; and 
he would have acted towards a great many people in 
a way that would not have been for their comfort, or 
his own good name. So he was cut back, and was 
not allowed to grow according to the vigour of the 
sap that was in him, and thus he was enabled to 
render such noble service to the great Protestant 
Reformation, with which his name will be eternally 
associated. 

I have spoken thus in the hope of cheering any of 
you who are being tried, you that have been doubting, 
you that have been troubled in your minds. Cry to 
God that this pruning process may make you fruitful 
in every good work, and cheerfully submissive to the 
will of the Lord. Do not so much ask for deliverance 
from trouble as for the sanctified use of it; and may 
the Lord bless you all, and save any unsaved ones 
who may be present! Amen. 


“WRITE THE NAME OF JESUS ON ALL 
YOUR CROSSES.” 


“And Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the cross. And 
the writing was, JESUS OF NAZARETH THE 
KING OF THE /JEWS.’—Jobn xix. 19. 


WEET is this hour of prayer, all the sweeter 
because outside in the world we meet with so 
much of trouble and disquietude. We have each a 
cross to carry, a burden which we may not and cannot 
refuse. What shall we do with our crosses? For 
once, we will go down to the Philistines, and learn 
from them. 

I know of nothing in which I could hold up Pilate 
as an example to you, save in this one thing; he 
placed the Name of Jesus on the cross. Writing 
these words with his own hand, he refused to alter 
them: “Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews” 
must stand over the cross, whether the high priests 
rage or submit. The vacillating governor for once 
stuck to the truth, and would not be driven from it. 

Now, whenever you have a cross, write the Name 
of Jesus, the King, above it, and stand to what you 
have written. 

Let us consider Pilate’s inscription word by word. 
Over your cross take care that you set the Name 
of JESUS. Bear your cross for Jesus, with Jesus, 
and after Jesus: this is a grand recipe for making it 


186 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


as light as it can be. Remember it is only a wooden 
cross that we have to carry, though our fears often 
- paint it with iron colours. Neither do we bear upon 
our shoulder a cross which will destroy us,,but one 
upon which we shall triumph, after the manner of our 
Lord. We have not to bear it first in the procession 
-of sorrow which is wending its way through this 
ribald world; but “to bear it after Jesus,” along a 
pathway which He has beaten for us. He has Him- 
self carried a cross far heavier than ours, and His 
hearty sympathy is with us. He is so united to us 
that all our crosses are His own. Bear your cross 
for the sake of Jesus. What could you not suffer for 
Him? Bear it with Jesus. What can you not bear 
in His company? In this way you may joyfully carry 
your appointed load; the strengthening touch of 
Jesus will make the yoke easy and the burden light. 
Oh, that Name of Jesus! I could talk till mid- 
night of its depth and meaning, its sweetness, its 
power ; and when the twelfth hour struck, you would 
say to one another, “Why, it is midnight, and the 
Pastor is only as yet upon the threshold of his 
theme!” There is so much to be said about the 
Name of Jesus that all the tongues of men and of 
angels would fail to tell the half thereof. It is the 
joy of Heaven above ; and, meanwhile, it is the solace 
of sorrow below. Not only is it the most majestic 
Name, the most instructive Name, the most truthful 
Name, the most powerful Name, the most sanctifying 
Name, but it is also the most comfortable Name that 
was ever sounded in this valley of weeping. If you 
will keep your mouth flavoured and your heart per- 


HS ES SON Pek} cM yy ret bt ita RS ar ee ie A LA 
Peay i ns ram bs 4s if 5 2S St ar " ; 
a “I. of ate ne Y ? 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” ~ 187 


fumed with the dear Name of Jesus, you will find that 
every bitter thing becomes sweet, and the most un- 
pleasant becomes fragrant. Jesus, Emmanuel, God- 
with-us,—why, this is as the opened windows of 
Heaven, and as the inner melodies of the King’s 
chamber! Our Saviour is the great Cross-bearer, 
Jesus is the Crucified ; and, therefore, we gladly take 
up our cross, and follow Him; finding, to our astonish- 
ment, that our cross has grown light in the presence 
of His cross. 

The Roman governor did not fail to write, “ Jesus 
of Nazareth.” Those last words meant scorn of the 
bitterest kind, as if he had said, “ The wise man of 
Gotham,” or Tom of Bedlam. To him, it meant that 
an ignorant country fellow had set up to be a king. 
Marvel not if, upon your crosses, there should fall a 
bitter rain of contempt. Accept shame and ridicule 

aS a part of your life’s burden. Be thou also called 
“a Nazarene”; be not ashamed to own that “thou 
also wast with Jesus of Nazareth.” Who are we, that 
we should receive praise where Jesus received spittle? 
Let us settle it in our hearts that, if there be an 
epithet of derision, it may as well honour us as 
anyone else. The world will not know us any more 
than it knew Jesus. If they have called the Master of 
the house Beelzebub, the servants must not expect 
fair titles. Write Jesus of Nazareth on your crosses, 
and henceforth contumely and sarcasm will lose their 
edge. 

Very significantly for us, the Name of Jesus, in 
Pilate’s superscription, is followed by the words the 
King, Jesus, the King. These also are highly con- 


po aS Si OES 
188 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


solatory words, because our hearts prompt us to say, 
“Did the King bear a cross infinitely heavier than 
mine? Then I, a servant, may well take up my load, 
which is comparatively so light. Jesus, the King, 
does He condescend to this shame? Then, to follow 
Him, is the utmost height of honour. Jesus, the 
King, does He ordain a cross for me? Then, why 
should I question His love, or doubt His wisdom? If 
He bids me take the cross, what remains to a loyal 
subject but to obey? If He be my King, I should be 
a rebel if I kicked against the burden which He lays 
upon me. 

Jesus, the King; is it not sweet to think that, even 
on the cross, Jesus is the King? When He dies, for 
the first time in His mortal career His sovereignty is 
acknowledged by official authority among His coun- 
trymen, and the representative of Czsar sits down in 
Jerusalem, and writes, “ This is Jesus, the King of the 
Jews.” Hebrew and Greek and Roman had it, under 
Pilate’s hand and seal, that the Crucified One was 
indeed a King. Then, my soul, if Jesus triumphed 
on the cross, canst thou not triumph under the cross if 
His grace be in thee? Art thou not still a priest and 
king unto the living God, despite thy griefs, and re- 
proaches, and crosses? He that hath made us kings 
and priests unto God has not given us an empty title, 
neither does the fact of our cross-bearing in the 
slightest degree cast a doubt upon our royal dignity. 
We wear our coronets by patent of the King of kings, 
and our royalty none may question. Even when the 
cross weighs heaviest upon us, let us still rejoice that 
we are honoured to suffer with Christ, and are thus 


“— F* 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” » 189 


crowned as well as crossed. See the royal Name 
set on our cross, and it will become at once lovely in 
our sight. 

But Pilate wrote, “ This is Jesus, the King of the 
Jews. “Well,” says one, “what has that to do with 
us?” I answer, write this also on that great cross 
which the whole Church has to carry after Christ. He 
is a. King whom His subjects refuse. The heaviest 
cross the Church has to bear is that the world will not 
bow to Christ. Perhaps, in our younger days, we said, 
“We have only to tell men the Gospel, and they will 
obey it;” but we soon found out our mistake. We 
thought that there was very little for us to do except 
to push the world before us, and to drag the Church 
behind us; but, to-day, we have a different opinion. 
We see the legions of darkness still in their entrench- 
ments, and though we have won many a victory, yet 
how small our success compared with what still 
remains to be done! Africa, China, India, why, these 
are all parts of the great cross for the Church to carry. 
Jesus is King of all these countries, for He is “ Head 
over all things ;” but as yet we see not all things put 
under Him, and this is our cross. 

Write on the burden of your service these words, 
“Jesus, the King of the Jews;” and be encouraged. 
Jesus possesses a throne which rules over Israel, even 
though Israel be not gathered. “Oh!” says some- 
body, “the Jews are the last people that will be con- 
verted.” Perhaps so, for judicial blindness has fallen 
upon them ; but, still, Jesus is their King, and He will 
yet bring them to bow at His feet. He despairs not 
of them, He doubts not that Israel shall yet adore 


LER ricky Ae en Oe SPR ne 


190 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


Him; wherefore, be ye also of good courage. Do 
you wish it had been written, “ Jesus, the King of the 
Gentiles”? Ah! but this is better still; for when the 
Jews bow the knee to Jesus, then the fulness of the 
Gentiles shall be gathered in. Their conversion will 
be the capture of the innermost citadel of unbelief. 
I remember how Luther used to talk of the Jews in 
his wild, cruel way; he did not believe in their sal- 
vation at all; but we have made a great advance 
upon so unchristian a feeling. We hail with acclama- 
tion the title, “ King of the Jews.” 

My point, however, here is this. The Jews rejected 
Jesus, and yet He reigned over them upon the tree ; 
and we, too, shall triumph in that very point in which 
we are most tried, and perhaps most overcome. Trib- 
ulations crush us, but we “ glory in tribulations also.” 
The cross was Christ’s throne over Israel, and our 
affliction is our conquest over sin through the work of 
the Holy Spirit, sanctifying it to our purification. 
Let us not hesitate, therefore, to bear the cross which 
bore our Lord, and to write over our cross the same 
claim of kingship which was written over Him. 

Very plainly let us label our crosses with the regal 
title in full. Hebrew, and Greek, and Latin were the 
three common languages of Jerusalem; all men in the 
Passover crowd would know one or other of these 
tongues, hence the superscription was repeated in 
three varying characters. Let it be plain to ourselves, 
and then to all others, that we have fellowship with 
Christ in His sufferings, and that our griefs are akin 
to His, and shared by Him. Then our sorrows will 
build us pulpits from which ‘to preach Jesus; or, at 


e least, hey will be pillars! upon Cee we can uplift 
_ the adorable Name of our Lord. Our afflictions will 


teach us many languages, we shall speak to the many 


sons and daughters of woe, and each one shall hear, in 
his own tongue wherein he was born, a brother voice 
proclaiming comfort to the mourners in Zion. It is 
well to carve the Name of the Well-beloved every- 


where; but the cross is a peculiarly suitable pillar 


for uplifting the dear memorial. This title will be 


read by many if we affix it to the cross. Some will 


scoff, but others will turn aside to indulge in thought 


awakened by our thoughtfulness, and to assuage their — Mie 


sorrows by learning how to make them golden links” 


with the Man of sorrows. Sure I am that you will 
find it wisdom to— | 


WRITE THE NAME OF JESUS ON ALL YOUR 
CROSSES. 


eter ees 
ude, wiry Prar.ee 


PENTECOST AND WHITSUNTIDE. 


“And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they 
were all with one accord in one place. And suddenly 
there came a sound from Heaven as of a rushing mighty 
wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting. 
And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of 
fire. and it sat upon each of them. And they were all 
filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other 
tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance. And there were 
dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every nation 
under Fleaven. Now when this was noised abroad, the 
multitude came together, and were confounded, because that 
every man heard them speak in his own language.” —Acts 
il, 1—6. 

“ Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and 
having received of the Father the promise of the Holy 
Ghost, He hath shed forth this, which ye now see and hear. 
For David is not ascended into the Heavens: but he saith 
himself, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on My 
right hand, until I make Thy foes Thy footstool. Therefore 
let all the house of [srael know assuredly, that God hath made 
that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and 
Christ. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in 
their heart, and said unto Peter and to the rest of the 
apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Then 
Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of 
you in the Name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, 
and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the 
promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are 
afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. 
And with many other words did he testify and exhort, 


13 


Be eA ey 52) A009 cae ie gee diane PS rs 


194 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


saying, Save yourselves from this untoward generation. 
Then they that gladly received his word were baptized : and 
the same day there were added unto them about three 
thousand souls.” —Acts ii. 33—41. 


HESE two passages remind us of the great 
events which make the day of Pentecost still re- 

main to us a standing encouragement and inspiration. 
It comes down to us, to-day, almost as a tradition, and 
the tradition has wrought such sad changes that the 
very glory of that memorable time is to a large extent 
hidden. People now talk of “ Whit-Sunday, Whit- 
Monday, Whitsuntide,’—these names are given to 
this period because of a custom that was prevalent in 
the early Church. Now, I do not pay any attention 
to what the early Church did, any more than to what 
the late Church has done, unless there is reason to 
believe that it was the will of the Lord that they 
should act as they did. In many matters, that were 
not subjects of Divine Revelation, they were no more 
right than we are; in some things, far less’ so. 
“Well,” they said, “this is the day of Pentecost, and 
we must have a special observance of the day.” I do 
not know that they were right in what they did, nor 
can I see what particular use there was in their 
action; for, after the ceremonial law was abrogated, 
all its festivals were also abolished, and it would have 
been far better not to keep such days in any unusual 
manner, but to sanctify all days alike as holy unto the 
-Lord. I always consider that the religious observ- 
ance of “ Christmas-day ” and “ Good Friday ” is only 
a piece of modern Judaism, which tends to support the 
pretensions of the Church of Rome. Still, rightly or 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” nate 195 


wrongly, these early Christians said to one another, 
as the anniversary came round again, “ This is the 
day of Pentecost; three thousand believers were bap- 
tized on that day, and we should like to commemorate 
that great event by baptizing our candidates every 
year on that day.” So it came to pass that, year by 
year, there were crowds of persons, believers in the 
Lord Jesus Christ, who had waited till the day of 
Pentecost that they might be baptized. 

“ But,” asks someone, “why is it called Whitsun- 
tide?” That is easily explained; for it was the 
custom to dress the candidates,—the word “ candi- 
dates” conveys the idea of persons robed in white,— 
it was the practice to dress them in white, and so the 
day was called W4zte-Sunday. We have a similar 
custom now, when our sisters come to be baptized 
here,—not because we have any superstitious belief 
concerning their being dressed in white, but because 
it appears to be appropriate to the service, and is the 
best and easiest to be washed; blue or green would 
do just as well, though it might not look so comely. 
To the Christians of the first century, it seemed suit- 
able that the men and women who came to confess 
their faith in Christ should be clad in white,—that 
being in accordance with the taste of Orientals,—so 
everyone who was accepted for baptism wore a new 
white garment. The great numbers who had waited 
until the Pentecostal day probably made it impossible 
for all to be baptized on the White-Sunday, so I dare- 
say they continued the services on the next day, and 
therefore called it White-Monday, and possibly the 
day after as well, White-Tuesday. I only wish that 


yor MS) 


190 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


we might have such a White-Sunday, and White- 
Monday, and White-Tuesday, that the Lord would 
give us such a multitude of converts that we should 
be obliged to have baptisms day after day because 
there were so many to be baptized. 

To the praise of God’s grace, I must here say that 
this is very much what we have had these many 
years; long church-meetings, church-meeting after 
church-meeting, held almost exclusively for the recep- 
tion of candidates for baptism and fellowship, all being 
the result of one long-continued Pentecost which God 
has most graciously given us. I sometimes make our 
friends from the country open their eyes when I tell 
them that we have as many as half-a-dozen church- 
meetings in a single month. They ask me, in the 
greatest astonishment, “ What can your members find 
to do so often?” Well, we do not find any quarrel- 
ling to do, and we do not call a meeting to decide 
whether they shall use mottled soap or yellow for 
cleaning the Tabernacle. That is the sort of subject 
that they~have for discussion in some churches, or 
little insignificant matters of detail of no more im- 
portance than that; some of their church-meetings 
are concerning nothing at all, and that is a grand 
subject to fight about. That is not our ideal of a 
church-meeting ; we meet very often for no other 
purpose than to take in the candidates, who wish to 
come forward, and in the waters of baptism confess 
their faith in Christ ; and they keep on coming in great 
numbers, thanks be ae God! Wecantruly say, “The 
Lord hath done great things for us,” and He continues 
to do great things for us, blessed be His holy Name! 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” ~ 197 


But, my dear brethren and sisters, notwithstand- 
ing this glorious fact, does not your heart often grow 
heavy as you remember that, in this city of London, 
there are vast masses of people who never go to hear 
the Word of God at all? In some parts of the 
metropolis, you might go through street after street, 
and scarcely find a Christian family, or you might find 
large families without a single member attending the 
means of grace. The irreligion and indifference of 
the people are perfectly appalling; the few who 
are godly are like speckled birds in the midst of multi- 
tudes who are altogether careless. I have lived in 
country villages where I do not believe there was any 
habitual breaking of the Sabbath-day; if you spent 
the Lord’s-day there, you would see the whole popula- 
tion going either to the Baptist Chapel or the Parish 
Church, or the Wesleyan or Primitive Methodist 
Mission-room. Everybody went somewhere or other 
to the house of God; a man who never entered a 
place of worship would have been looked upon 
as an utter heathen; but here, in. London, we 
have multitudes sunk in this kind of heathenism ; 
and do what we may, we do not seem to have 
any power to influence these masses of irreligious 
people. 

Then there is a growing infidelity; not an infi- 
delity that talks much, it is a great deal too respectable 
for that, but an infidelity that refuses to think about 
the things of God. What is to be done? What is to 
be done? There are a great many places of worship 
that are not half full, and a great many more with a 
little handful sprinkled about; the difficulty is to get 


Core Rie “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


the people in, to get the kind of man that the people 
care to hear, and to give them the kind of word that 
will attract and retain them. 

Is not the case difficult? Is not the case hopeless? 
It is neither hopeless nor difficult, because it is both 
hopeless and difficult. If we had to do the work by 
ourselves, it would be both hopeless and impossible ; 
but since the Lord alone kills and makes alive, since 
He wounds and He heals, since salvation is of the 
Lord alone from first to last, we have passed out of 
the sphere of difficulty, and consequently out of the 
region of hopelessness and impossibility. He can send 
us men from quarters where we never expected them ; 
the boldest advocates of error may become the ablest 
defenders of the faith. This has happened before, 
and the Lord can make it occur again andagain. He 
can take the most wicked and most blasphemous of 
men, and cleanse them, and make them chosen vessels 
to bear His Name and His Gospel to the people. He 
can employ you, dear friends, in your homes, or in 
your workshops; He can make any one of you, nay, 
He can make all of you to be the dispensers of life 
and grace amidst the masses of the people, as it was 
when the newly-slaughtered Christ, by His almighty 
Spirit, inspired those who were but a handful, and 
a very feeble folk, and made them do exploits which, 
without the Holy Ghost, they would never have 
dared to attempt. Let the Lord but make bare His 
holy arm in our midst, let Him but fill each of you, 
and me, and every one of His servants, with His Holy 
Spirit, and who knoweth what may come of it? He 
has ways and means of working where we have none. 


Tia’ oe 
Nia | 


it @ wy * 
} : = 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” ~~ 199 


He is the mighty God, our strong Rock, and our ever- 
present Helper. 

I am sometimes greatly strengthened in my faith 
by the awful wickedness of men. 1 had to-day a 
letter—I often receive letters containing abuse and 
blasphemy, and become so used to seeing them 
that I take no notice of them,—I had to-day 
a ‘letter, in which a man has ‘written! )-all 
the passages in the Old Testament in which | 
God commanded the Israelites to slay their 
enemies. After citing these texts, the writer says to 
me, “ And this is your God, is it? I do not wonder 
that He wants a bloody sacrifice to appease His anger 
if these are His orders to His ancient people.” Yes, 
sir,—if you are here,—I say without hesitation that 
Jehovah zs my God, and that I am not ashamed of 
anything that He ever said or did. 

Why, friends! when we think of the judgments of 
God upon the wicked, in days gone by, we need never 
feel the slightest shudder at what some call God’s 
cruelty. When I think of the abominable sinfulness 
of men, I wonder that the Lord, in punishing them, 
was not a thousand times more severe than He was; 
and when I have heard the way in which some men 
speak of Him now, I ask myself, “ How is it possible 
for Him to continue to bear with them as He does?” 
After He has formed them, and fed them, they neglect 
Him, and despise Him, and fight against Him, and 
some of them even deny His very existence; why 
does He not destroy them? It is because He is God, 
and not man, that they are not all consumed ; and if, 
sometimes, He does lay bare His mighty arm, and 


200 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


teach them terrible lessons with the edge of His sharp 
sword, still I adore and bless the angry God. Let 
Him be what He may, He is to me altogether perfect ; 
and though he slay me, yet will I trust in Him. 
Jehovah, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of 
Jacob, the God of the whole earth shall He be 
called, that self-same God is my God, and He will 
win the day despite all His adversaries. 

But perhaps you ask me, “ How can you draw any 
comfort out of the blasphemy of men?” Why, in 
this way! It will stir up the Lord to jealousy, it will 
move Him to say, “ Now will I do a great work in the 
midst of these rebellious and sinful people.” I used to 
wonder what John Bunyan meant when he said that 
he had great hope of the world because he saw so 
many young men who were terribly wicked. He felt 
that, if the Lord should save such big sinners as those, 
they would be great saints indeed. This is a prayer 
that the Lord will hear from His people: “It is time 
for Thee, Lord, to work: for men have made void 
Thy law.” There is a good deal in that argument ; 
we do have confidence in God, brethren, even amidst 
the prevailing wickedness of men. Oh, what a mercy 
it is to have such a God to whom we can go in prayer! 
Let us turn again to the mercy-seat, and plead for the 
masses of men who are still far from God by wicked 
works. It was while the apostles were all with one 
accord in one place, continuing in prayer and supplica- 
tion, that the Holy Ghost came upon them, and they 
were endued with the power from on high which their 
Lord had promised> So may it be with us, for His 
dear Name’s sake! Amen. 


THEF- PASTOR'S NEED: OF “THE PEOPLE'S 
PRAYERS. 


“Ve also helping together by prayer for us.” —2 Cor. i. 11. 


HERE is a short sentence, written by the apostle 
Paul, which I very earnestly commend to your 
serious attention, though I shall only speak upon it 
briefly. In the second Epistle to the Corinthians, 
the first chapter, and the eleventh verse, you will find 
these words,— 
“YE ALSO HELPING TOGETHER BY PRAYER FOR US.” 
Dear friends, we are most of us members of one 
church, we are enlisted under one banner, and we are 
sworn to be faithful to one great purpose, namely, to 
live for Jesus, and to seek to glorify God. Now, we 
cannot all of us do the same thing for our Lord; we 
have each one some office, differing from all the rest 
_ of our brethren and sisters in Christ. Here let me 
pause, and say that everyone who has a work to do 
for Christ needs the prayers of his fellow-Christians, 
therefore I urge you all to ask for them. You may be the 
teacher of the infant class in the Sunday-school, or you 
may be only able to talk with one or two individuals 
now and then about your Saviour ; but, whatever your 
service is, do not neglect to entreat the prayers of 
your brethren for a blessing upon your work; how- 
ever limited may be your sphere, you will not get on 


202 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


without the supplications of others. “Ye also help- 


ing together by prayer for us,” may be the utterance 


of the weakest and feeblest brother; and he may, 
because of his weakness and feebleness, all the more 
powerfully appeal to his Christian brethren and sisters 
to help together by prayer for him. 

But the most conspicuous person in the church is 
the one who has, from week to week, to preach the 
Gospel to the great assembly; and he may,: there- 
fore, as the apostle does in this case, plead for himself, 
and say to the saints, “ Ye also helping together by 
prayer for zs.” Oh, dear friends, do pray for all who 
preach the Gospel, whether to many or to few! They 
all need your sympathy and help; but I make a 
specially earnest, personal appeal for my own self. 
I crave, beyond all things, your constant prayers; for 
I think a burden is laid upon me more than is borne 


_by any other man, because of the vastness of this con- 
gregation, and because of the multitude of agencies 


connected with this great church. Many of the works 
are carried on by others, and I' can take small per- 
sonal part in them; and yet, somehow, I have to take 
the most difficult part, that of helping in every time 
of need, mending up any weak places when they are 
discovered, and keeping all things in good order.. A 
great care comes upon me, and not for this church 
only, but for many other churches, in various parts of 
the country, which have been formed by the brethren 
who have gone out from the College; and I have to 
deal with all sorts of difficult cases all over England, 
and I might almost say all over the world,—things that 
try the mind, and exercise the judgment, and some- 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” » 203 


times fret the heart; and therefore I must have your 
prayers. 

Now, there are some of you who cannot do any- 
thing in the way of preaching; I do not want that 
you should try, and there are other agencies to which 
you could not put your hand; to you especially I may 
say, “ Ye also helping together by your prayers for 
us.” Here is a way in which you can really help, 
substantially help, wonderfully help; and this you 
can do even if you should become bed-ridden, you 
could even then he still, and invoke a blessing from 
God upon our ministry. You can do this also if you are 
dumb so far as public speaking is concerned; you 
can, in the silence of your spirit, lay hold upon the 
Angel of the covenant, and wrestle and _ prevail. 
Amazing possibilities le within the reach of the be- 
leving man. “All things are possible to him that 
believeth.” 

I have always, with my whole heart, and without 
any sort of untruthfulness, ascribed all the success I 
ever had to the prayers of God’s people, and I un- 
feignedly do the same now. God the Holy Spirit 
has ever given the blessing in answer to your suppli- 
cations. You have asked in faith for a blessing, and 
it has come, and it will come as long as such prayers 
are continued. If I should be called to lie down in 
the grave, if I should retire from the Lord’s service 
through utter inability, it would be infinitely to be 
preferred to the sad end of the man who falls because 
those who used to hold him up are gone. It is hard 
to fight like Joshua, when there is no Moses on the 
hill-top, nor any Aaron and Hur to hold up his hands 


BOA un “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


in prayer. I appeal to those of you who have been 
with me from the beginning, that you will never cease 
crying to God at the throne of grace. Never neglect 
that holy privilege and sacred duty, I implore you. 
I appeal to those who have been converted here,— 
and they are not a few,—that they will not forget to 
ask for a blessing upon others: “Ye also helping 
together by prayer for us, that for the gift bestowed 
upon us by the means of many persons thanks may be 
given by many on our behalf.” 

You want to praise God, you say. I was glad our 
brother, who prayed just now, began by praising the 
Lord for His goodness. Many pray for their minister, 
and they are the people who also praise God for their 
minister; how many there are who have praised God 
for us, we could not possibly tell. I have a family of 
spiritual children in Heaven, and no small one; they 
will go on praising and magnifying the Name of the 
Lord to all eternity; and among believing men and 
women on earth,—I speak not egotistically, but only 
utter the plain and simple truth,—I think no one has 
more friends who are constantly praising God for the 
ministry in this house of prayer, and for the blessing 
they have received through reading the printed ser- 
mons. Therefore, while you are on your knees on 
earth, your prayers and praises are in harmony with 
the melody of the harps of Heaven, and by your 
supplications you are calling down blessings which 
will make music for God in thousands of hearts of 
persons whom you never will know till you meet 
them in glory. 


I wonder whether it strikes anybody that it is a 


»% 


ee ee 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” © 205 


very difficult task to keep on preaching when almost 
every word you say gets printed; I do not know 
whether anyone ever thinks of the sore travail of this 
brain in trying to find fresh subjects, and fresh matter 
upon those subjects. If I begin to repeat myself in 
the pulpit, we shall have a great sleeping society here 
instead of a living church, or the members will go 
their way to some other place. And what if the 
subject and material upon it are given, yet how is 
one always to keep up a lively spirit without the con- 
tinual supplication of believers? Do you not feel, 
sometimes, my brother, or my sister, that you are very 
stupid when you are studying your subject? I know 
that I do; and then I say to myself, “ This will not 
do, sir, this will not do; you cannot go to the pulpit 
in this way, you must wake yourself up, you must get 
to your knees, you must draw nigh to God somehow, 
it will not do to go into the pulpit like a dead man, 
to talk of a dead gospel to dead hearers.” Mr. 
William Olney seems to be always alive, and active, 
and earnest; but I have no doubt that he would ask 
your prayers that he may be kept so. At any 
rate, I do, with my whole soul, ask you to carry out 
these words on my behalf, “ Ye also helping together 
by prayer for us.” 

It is not selfish to ask the prayers of so many for 
one man, since the reason is that, afterwards, the 
blessing may go out to the many through the preach- 
ing of the Gospel. If we are filled, it is that we may 
be emptied ; if we receive, it is that we may give; for 
the apostle says what I, in my humble measure, can 
also say, “ Whether we be afflicted, it is for your con- 


200 i Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


7 


3 


a Th ae ea at 
‘ a aban ss 

+ Mike $Me us byl 

: gt ae 


solation and salvation; ... or whether we be com- 
forted, it is for your consolation and salvation.” Ido 
verily believe that, many a time, we have been 
chastened that we might be made a blessing to 
others; and we have had to carry the yoke of Christ 
more than we might have had to bear it on our own 
account, that so we might be better enabled to sym- 
pathize with the Lord’s tried and afflicted people. 
“Whether we be afflicted, or whether we be com- 
forted,” it is for the same reason, “for your consola- 
tion and salvation.” And here, too, can I add with 
the apostle, “ We were pressed out of measure, above 
strength, insomuch that we despaired even of life: 
but we had the sentence of death in ourselves, that 
we should not trust in ourselves, but in God who 
raiseth the dead: who delivered us from so great a 
death, and doth deliver: in whom we trust that He 
will yet deliver us; ye also helping together by prayer 
for us.” Paul implicitly trusts in his God, yet he asks 
the people’s prayers as much as if he rested entirely in 
them, and so must we do. Oh, give us continually 
more and more of your supplications! 

I should like to ask a special favour of all who are 
present to-night that, some time this week, each be- 
liever here would not only pray for a blessing upon 
the work of God in this place, but that each one 
would pray with some other one, better still, with 
some other two, or three, or four, or five, or six, but at 
least with some other one, and ask for a blessing on 
this church. Could you not each one make a point of 
saying, “I know whom I will get to jon me”? You 
will do it, my sisters, I have no doubt; I am rather 


ee Pr Myst 2 


‘ 


abe Only a Stace la say Pa 207 


afraid of the brethren, yet I think all will join in this 

good work. Many of you will get together, I feel 
sure ; and I cannot imagine a greater service that you 
can do to me, and to the church, than for two sisters, 
or two brethren, or more where it is possible, to meet 
together thus. Would you not also come together 
just a little before the Thursday-night service, say, 
at six o'clock, in the lecture-hall? I will be there at 
six o'clock, to have a little prayer with you, so as to 
sharpen my sword before I come into the pulpit. 
And then one other thing I should like. Will every- 
body here try and bring some other person on 
Thursday night to hear the Gospel preached in this 
place, and I will ask the Lord to give me a soul- 


_ winning sermon, and I shall be very glad if you will 


all try to bring some fresh hearer to listen to it? 
Well, now, that is a little task for some of you; it 
may take some thought, and time, and effort, for you 
to accomplish it; but I really think it might be done. 
Let us see if every one of us can bring an uncon- 
verted person, I would aim at that; let each one say, 
“T will try what I can do, I think I know somebody 
I can get.” Let us do so, then, and also pray much 
about it, and then we will watch and see whether 
it be not a good thing. I hope many will, somehow 
or other, find the necessary time for it; try for once, 
and see what you can do. It appears to me to be a 
good suggestion : what do you think of it, Mr. Wilham 
Olney? 

Mr. WILLIAM OLNEY: “It is a very excellent 
thing indeed, sir. I promise, by God’s help, to bring 
my one, and more if I can. I will try to bring some 


‘ 


208 “Only a Prayer-meeting ae 


of the men who work for me, and I will give them an 
hour less work on Thursday so that they may come.” 

Others of you have workmen in your employ, some 
of you have servant girls, or else there is somebody 
in the house whom you could bring if you made an 
effort. Why might we not thus really bring some to 
the Saviour who, to all outward appearance, are at 
present beyond our reach? I shall be grateful to 
God and I shall also be thankful to you if it is so. 
What is more, God will bless this effort; I] am sure 
He will, and you may live to thank God for what 
I have proposed to you this evening; and if not, 
many of those whom you bring will eternally have 
cause to bless the Lord for your loving service and 
your believing prayers.* 

If I could not preach, I do think that one of the 
things I would do would be to bring others to hear 
the preachers of the Word. I should lke to have a 
large number of friends like my brother Hobson, who 
used to sit up there in the gallery. Many persons 
joined the church through that dear old man, who is 
now in Heaven,—men who might not have come in 
here at all, but he used to be on the look-out for them, 
in Hyde Park and other places, and he would tell 
them that they must come and hear Mr. Spurgeon ; 
he would offer them a seat in his pew, and, through 
coming, God met with them, and blessed and saved 


* It is worthy of note that the Pastor’s Thursday evening prayer- 
meeting, in the Tabernacle lecture-hall, thus commenced, has been con- 
tinued until the present time, although over twenty years have elapsed 
since this address was delivered. The suggestion made by the beloved 


Pastor was evidently one of those happy inspirations with which the 
Lord often favoured him. 


we” Meee DS 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” »* 209 


them. Well, then, there is a task for you; but set 
about it with prayer. I come back to that point; my 
aim is to hit this nail on the head, and drive it home, 
and clinch it: “Ye also helping together by prayer 
for us.” Oh, may God send this rich abounding spirit 
of prayer upon us all at this very hour, and to Him 
shall be the praise! 

I think I am right in begging this favour, for I 
remember that our dear brother George Miiller, who 
is, as you know, a man mighty in prayer, yet found 
it needful, after he was seventy years of age, to make 
an appeal like this to the people, “I beseech you, 
deny me not your prayers,” and he stated that he 
rested, under God, in the prayers. of the saints. Now, 
he is a man who can have anything he likes in answer 
to prayer; yet he entreats the petitions of others. 
We are none of us worthy to be placed beside him; 
but, if he needs prayer,—and he does,—how much 
more do we, who are weaker, need it ; therefore, deny 
us not your supplications, I earnestly beg you. 

Now let us come back to prayer again, and ask the 
Lord’s blessing upon this new work that we are 
hoping to do for Him. 


' 


a> 


WHY OWE) HAVE: NOT. 


“* Ve have not, because ve ask not.”—James iv. 2. 


HE Holy Ghost, by the mouth of His servant 
James, has said, “Ve have not, because ye ask 
not.” J would not willingly be censorious, but crying 
evils demand open rebuke. Do you not think that 
this text applies to the case of many of our churches? 
They have no prosperity, their numbers do not in- 
crease, and the congregations are small; and, as the 
main cause of it all, they have scarcely a prayer-meet- 
ing. I hear perpetually of prayer-meetings abandoned, 
or, what is much the same thing, blended with the 
weekly lecture. From various sources I gather that, 
in many instances, the meeting for prayer is so small 
that it is difficult to spin out the hour; and as the 
same few persons come from time to time, variety is 
out of the question; indeed, in some places, the 
prayer-meeting only exists to reveal the nakedness of 
the land. Now, if there be no conversions, and no 
additions to such churches, what is the reason? Is it 
not found here, “ Ye have not, because ye ask not”? 
A lack of interest exists in many places, so that the 
assembly for prayer is despised, and put down asa 
second-rate affair: “‘only a prayer-meeting.” Is this 
a right view of the throne of grace? Will this bring 
blessing? In certain churches, there is no union, and 
consequently no agreement in prayer: “their heart is 
divided; now shall they be found wanting;” and 
wanting they are in their assemblies for prayer. In 


212 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


such a case, a feeble prayer-meeting is an effect as 
- well as a cause of disunion; and till this is altered, we 
may expect to see more and more of “the divisions 
of Reuben.” Prayer is a grand cement; and lack of 
prayer is like withdrawing the force of gravitation 
from a mass of matter, and scattering it into so many 
separate atoms. Some churches are feeble all round ; 
the members are a race of invalids, a body of infirm 
pensioners who can hardly hobble about in the ways 
of godliness. They have no life, no energy, or enter- 
prise for Christ ; and do you wonder at it when their 
meetings for prayer are so scantily attended? 

In some places where there are good, praying 
people, the prayer-meetings are badly attended, be- 
cause certain long-winded brethren spoil them. I 
know a church which is endowed with an excellent 
deacon, a real godly man, but he will pray without 
ceasing at every meeting, and I fear he will pray the 
prayer-meeting down to nothing unless he is soon 
taken home. The other night, when he had 
talked for full twenty minutes, he intimated, both to 
Heaven and earth, that all he had said was merely a 
preface, a drawing near as he called it, and that he 
was then going to begin. None of his friends were 
pleased to receive that information, for they had 
begun to cherish the hope that he would soon have 
done. They were all too sadly aware that now he 
would pray for “our own beloved country,” “from 
the Queen upon the throne to the peasant in the 
cottage,” then for Australia and all the Colonies, and 
then for China and India, starting off afresh with 
kindly expressions for the young and for the old, for 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” »— 213 


the sick, for sailors, and for the Jews. As a rule, 
nothing was really asked for by this most estimable 
brother, but he uttered several pious remarks on all 
these subjects, and many more. 

It is a great pity when highly-esteemed brethren fall 
into the notion that they must deliver themselves of 
long harangues; the better the men, the worse the 
evil, for then we are forced to tolerate them. I am 
sorry when a good man gets the idea that praying 
means telling out his experience, or giving his theo- 
logical opinions. I am told that our Salvation Army 
friends strike up a tune whenever a friend becomes 
long and prosy, and I have great sympathy with the 
practice. It removes the responsibility of stopping 
the man from the minister to the people, and by 
dividing the action among many it operates like a 
round robin for the screening of any one. When 
prayer is an earnest asking, it may occasionally be 
lengthened to advantage; but the less of mere holy 
gossip, the better. If prayer-meetings degenerate into 
gospel gossip, we cannot wonder if no blessing comes. 
In such cases, the word is true, “ Ye have not, because 
ye ask not.” 

If any believer should chance to live where the 
prayer-meeting is neglected, let him now resolve to 
revive it. Let us make a solemn league and covenant 
that the churches shall pray, or that it shall not be our 
fault if they do not. To strengthen a prayer-meet- 
ing, is as good a work as to preach a sermon. I 
would have you vow that the prayer-meeting shall 
never be given up while you live. Be like the good 
woman who, when it was decided to close the prayer- 


) 


4 


214 “Only a Prayer-meeting! és 


meeting in a certain village, declared that it should 
not be, for she would be there if no one else was. 
She was true to her word; and when, the next 
morning, someone said to her rather jestingly, “ Did 
you have a prayer-meeting last night?” “Ah, that 
we did!” she replied. “How many were present?” 
“Four,” she said. “ Why,” said he, “I heard that you 
were there all alone.” “No,” she said, “I was the 
only one visible, but the Father was there, and the 

Son was there, and the Holy Spirit was there, and we 
were agreed in prayer.” Before long, others took 
shame to themselves at the earnest perseverance of a 
poor old woman, and soon there was a revived prayer- 
meeting and a prospering church. I have heard of 
a negro, who was found sitting out the time of service 
all alone when his coloured brethren had grown cold 
and prayerless ; in his case also, the rest were shamed 
into fresh energy. I beg you, then, to maintain this 
holy ordinance even if the attendance should have 
dwindled down to two or three. Surely a church, if 
it be a Church of Christ at all, must feel the rebuke 
which would be given by your perseverance. Oh, 
never let us leave off praying unitedly for a blessing! 
Solemnly settle it in your hearts that the fire upon the 
altar shall never go out. As for me and my church, 
we will serve the Lord by maintaining this sacred 
exercise in full vigour; and I beseech all other be- 
lievers to come to the same resolve; or, if not, there 
will be dreary days for the Church of Christ. 

But now let us apply this passage to  our- 
selves as individuals: “Ye have not, because 
ye ask not.” I wonder whether there is a 


pe 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” . "26 


brother here, who has been tugging and toiling, 
and struggling for years after a certain thing 
which seems farther off than ever; and does 
the reason of his failure lie in the fact that he has 
never prayed about it? Do you wonder, dear 
brother, that you have not when you do not ask? 
With one hundredth part of your present trouble, you 
may obtain the desired boon if you seek it at the 
Lord’s hands. I mean, even as to temporal things, 
it is our duty to work for our daily bread, and to 
earn what is necessary for this life; but do recollect 
that everything about a Christian should be a matter 
of prayer, because everything about a child that ought 
to be the child’s business is his Father’s business. 
If a child should have a perfect father, that father 
would be interested to hear about the child’s play as 
well as about the child’s suffering. He would take 
an interest in his boy’s lesson-books at school, and 
cheer him in reference to the little trials of his play- 
hours, for that which may be very little to a stranger, 
may be great to a father who measures things by his 
love to his child. Though a matter might be little 
to the father, considering him as a man alone, yet 
since it is great to the child, and the father puts 
himself into the child’s place, his sympathy makes 
insignificance important. I have heard of a great 
king who was one day waited upon by an ambassador, 
who found him upon all-fours upon the floor, making 
himself into a horse for his little son. He said to the 
ambassador, “Sir, are you a father?” “Yes, your 
majesty, I am.” “Then,” said he, “I will finish my 
game with my boy, for you will understand me.” So 


>» ae eS 


216 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


he went on round and round the room till the little 
one had enjoyed his full share of romp, and then his 
majesty turned to the ambassador, and said, “ Now 
I am ready to attend to the affairs of state.” I 
honour the king for thus showing that he was a man 
who had a father’s heart. So our Heavenly Father 
takes an interest in the trifles which concern His 
children, if they are such as ought to concern them ; 
sand therefore you need never fear to tell everything 
tto your God. Little things are often more trouble- 
«some than great things. If a tiny splinter of wood 
»gets into your finger, it may be more serious than a 
heavy blow, and even so a minor sorrow may work us 
sigrievous ill. 
Take your daily troubles, wants, longings, aspira- 
tions, and endeavours to the Lord; for if they are 
- such as are right and true, they should be laid at His 
feet. “In everything by prayer and supplication 
ewith thanksgiving let your requests be made known 
unto God.” Do you not think that many desires of 
your heart and many domestic troubles may continue 
-—the desires to be unfulfilled, and the troubles to be 
»unremoved,—because they have not been made the 
ssubject of prayer? “Ye have not, because ye ask 
not.” May not that be the case with many a 
merchant, student, mother, or worker? Success in 
life, comfort, employment, health, friends may, in some 
cases, be found by asking, and missed by neglect of 
prayer. 
Certainly, with regard to spiritual things, this must 
often be so. A brother has heard of the high joys 
of God’s saints, and of the lofty places to which they 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” _. ohive 


have attained, so that they pass through life as if 
their feet trod lightly on the mountain-tops. He 
sighs, “I wish I had their faith.” How many times 
has that brother said the same! Let me speak to 
him. Have you ever sought this faith of the Lord? 
If you had once prayed for it, it might have been 
better than wishing for it a thousand times; perad- 
venture, strength of faith and elasticity of step have 
been denied you because you have not yet asked for 
them. May there not be a hundred other boons, 
which you have missed because you have never asked 
for them? You have envied others who had them, 
you have picked holes in their characters in conse- 
quence, and you have complained of the Lord for 
withholding them; yet, all the while, the secret of 
your spiritual poverty has been this fact, “Ye have 
not, because ye ask not.” 

Sometimes you will not ask because the thing is too 
little, sometimes because it is too great, and oftener © 
still because it does not occur to you to ask for it. 
Is there anything about which a Christian ought not 
to pray? Then be sure of this, it is a matter with 
which he should have nothing to do. Mr. Rowland 
Hill, in his Village Dialogues, proposes the compo- 
sition of a form of prayer to be offered by a young 
lady before going to the theatre, and another to be 
said when she returns from a dance. “ There,” cries 
one, “I call that mere hypocrisy. Who ever heard of 
praying in connection with such matters? It is pre- 
posterous.” Just so, and thus it is clear that these 
things are not for Christians, for they must do nothing 
which they cannot pray about, and it was to exhibit 


ne aN SiS LINED as iy ee gel a 


; 218 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


the incongruity of such actions that Mr. Hill wrote — 
as he did. A beloved brother said, the other night, 
and I heartily agree with him, that we ought not to 
pray anything that we could not suppose our Lord 
Jesus Christ praying. He allows us to ask in His 
Name, and thus to use His authority in prayer. Now, 
what right has anybody to use my name in favour 
of that which he knows I should not approve of? 
_ This may test your prayers. If there is anything that 
Jesus would not pray for, do not dream of praying for 
it; but humble yourself for being guilty of a desire 
which would be contrary to His pure and holy mind. 

This rule will be an excellent guide to you, for 
as you may only ask for that which Jesus would en- 
dorse, so you may only seek in your daily life that 
which Jesus would support you in seeking. Pray 
over everything; and that which you dare not pray 
over, do not touch. You-are proposing a new course 
in business; well, go and pray over it. Are you 
going to issue bills announcing “an alarming sacri- 
fice” of your goods? Can you pray over them? 
You say that you will sell off “ under cost price.” © Is 
it true that you hope to get a profit on all that you 
sell? Then how can you ask the God of truth to 
prosper your sales? This simple rule, if fully fol- 
lowed, would work a revolution in trade; and, truly, 
it should be followed by all who call themselves 
Christians. Even in commerce, men have not, be- 
cause they ask not ; they think cheating to be a surer 
way of profit than praying. Hence evil practices 
arise, and at length become so usual that they lose 
their efficacy, and everybody allows discount for them. 


ome eer oe le AY oe I ak le 2 1t4, ep rad. + 


es — 
t 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!”. 219. 


Should not godly men, in every case, set their faces 
against dishonest customs? “Yes,” says one, “but 
they would be great losers.” That might be, and yet 
the Lord is able to make it up to them in a thousand 
ways if they tried the power of prayer. In questions 
of business complication, where there is a will to do 
right, there is sure to be a way; and if you have not 
found out such a way, I must again quote the text, 
“Ye have not, because ye ask not.” 

It may be that many a spiritual thing, for which you 
may pray without doubt, has never become yours 
simply because you have never asked for it. Is not 
that a pity? What! Nothing to pay; the priceless 
treasure a free grant, and yet I have it not because I 
do not ask for it! This is such a folly as we do not 
see in common life. Few people miss an alms for 
want of asking. Our poor neighbours are generally 
fast enough in begging. Poor frozen-out gardeners 
are out in the streets pouring out their complaint long 
before the ponds will bear a mouse. Few need to be 
encouraged to apply for charity; and yet, while 
spiritual gifts are to be had for the asking, many have 
not, because they ask not. Open your mouth wide, 
brother, and ask for a great deal. Begin asking in 
real earnest, and never let it be said that your spiritual 
poverty is your own fault. 

If it is ever true of us, “ ye have not, because ye ask 
not,” what does it mean? It means that there are 
needful spiritual blessings which you do not desire 
with all your heart. In what a wrong condition your 
heart must be! When a person has no appetite. for 
wholesome food, it is a sign of disease; and if you 


220 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


have no appetite for Divine grace, you must be sick 
in soul. Healthy children have large appetites; and 
God’s children, when they are healthy, hunger and 
thirst after righteousness. Why is it we do not de- 
sire these precious things? Very often, it is because 
we do not feel our need of them; and what a proud 
ignorance that is which does not know its need! If 
you were to look at yourself, brother, though you 
think yourself rich, and increased with goods, and 
needing nothing, you would see that you are naked, 
and poor, and miserable. What a sad thing it is that 
you should miss priceless blessings because you fondly 
fancy that you already possess them! 

Or, possibly, you know your need, and are anxious 
to be supplied, and yet you do not ask because you 
have no faith in God upon the matter. How long 
have you known the Lord? Have you known Him a 
year? Is not this long enough to have gained con- 
fidence in Him? There are many persons whom you 
would rely upon at once, and hundreds whom you 
could trust with untold gold after having known them 
for a few hours. Cannot you thus trust God? How 
is it that you dare to doubt Him? What a sin it must 
be to distrust One so faithful and true! 

Or else it may be that you do not doubt either 
God’s ability or willingness to help you, but you have 
grown rusty in the knee; I mean, out of order as to 
prayer. It is a very great evil when this is the case. 
When I have pains in my wrist, or in my foot, I have 
some hope of speedy recovery, but I am always 
despondent when the weakness is in the knee; then 
it is a very serious business. O brethren, well doth 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” ~~ — 221 


the Scripture say, “Confirm the feeble knees.” If 
we are not at home in prayer, everything is out of 
order. He who goes often to a room knows how to 
gain admittance, but a stranger loses himself in the 
passages. Familiarity with the mercy-seat is a great 
point in the education of a child of God; be sure that 
you gain it. 

There are two or three matters for which I desire to 
ask your earnest prayers just now. Do pray for a 
very large blessing on the congregation here. In the 
early summer weeks, I thought that this house was not 
so full as usual, and I was greatly troubled about it; 
but the fact was, that the major part of our friends 
had taken their holidays early. Of late, the crowds 
have exceeded those of past years, and we are all 
amazed at the attendance at the prayer-meeting and 
the lecture. The sickness of the minister, no doubt, 
tended to make the public fearful of not hearing him, 
and his continued health reassured them, so that now 
our great building will not hold all who come. We 
have the people, to our heart’s content; do you 
wonder that I tremble lest the opportunity should be 
lost in any measure? Do pray that I may preach 
with power. Plead with the Holy Ghost to convert 
these eager thousands. Persons of all nations, ranks, 
ages, and religions come hither. I beseech you, 
agonize in prayer that they may be saved. Let it 
not be true, in their case, that we have not, because 
we ask not. 

Greatly do I need your prayer for the work and 
ministry of this huge church. What a load rests upon 
me! Here are about 5,500 of you; and with all the 


Yee ee he Py dat hen a a ee eS 
APN AUP at vcr : GAY, ae Pet tay pre 


222 “Only a Prayer-meeting! % 


sii 


Ae 


help I have, I find I have enough upon me to crush 
me unless Heaven sustains me. My brother and the 
elders do for me what the elders in the wilderness 
church did for Moses, else should I utterly faint; but 
the more difficult cases, and the general leadership, 
make up a burden which none can carry unless the 
Lord gives strength. I loathe to speak thus about 
myself ; and yet I must, for there is need. Beside all 
this, there cometh upon me the care of many another 
church, and of all sorts of works for our Lord. There, 
you do not know all, but you may guess; if you love 
me, if you love my Master, I implore you, pray for me. 
A good old man prayed, before I came to London, 
that I might always be delivered from the bleating of 
the sheep. I did not understand what he meant ; 
but I know now, when hour by hour all sorts of 
petitions, complaints, bemoanings, and hard questions 
come to me. The bleating of the sheep is not the 
most helpful sound in the world, especially when I 
am trying to get the food ready for the thousands 
here, there, and everywhere, who look for it to come 
to them regularly, week by week. | 

Sometimes, I become so perplexed that I sink in 
heart, and dream that it were better for me never to 
have been born than to have been called to bear all 
this multitude upon my heart. Especially do I feel 
this when I cannot help the people who come to me, 
and yet they expect that I should do impossibilities. 
Moreover, it is not easy to give wise advice in such 
complicated affairs as those which come before me, 
and I hope I shall never be content without using 
my best judgment at all times. Frequently, I can do 


ee aT ates ost SP ee Sal sie a 4 ) (aS 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” — 223 


nothing but bring the cases before God in prayer, and - 
bear them as a burden on my heart. These burdens 
are apt to press very heavily on a sympathizing heart, 
and cause a wear and tear which tell upon a man. [ 
only say this because I want more and more the 
sympathy of God’s people, and perhaps I may not 
have even this if I ask not for it. 

If you put me in so difficult a position, you must ~ 
uphold me by your prayers. If I have been useful to 
you in any measure, pray for me; it is the greatest 
kindness you can do me. If the word as spoken by 
these lips has been a means of grace to your children, 
plead for me that others of the young may be brought 
to Jesus by my teaching. If you would find my 
ministry more profitable to your souls, pray for me 
still more ; and let it not be said of your minister that 
‘ you do not profit by his preaching, and that you have 
not, because you ask not. Beloved, let us wrestle in 
prayer; for untold blessings are to be had for the 
asking. As a church, we have been specially 
favoured ; but we have not exhausted the possibilities 
of prosperity, or the resources of heavenly power. 
There is a future for us, if we pray. Greater things 
than these lie behind that curtain; no hand can un- 
veil them but the hand of prayer. The singular 
blessings which have rested upon us in the past call 
upon us to pray; the marked prosperity and unity of 
the present invite us to pray; and the hopes of the 
future encourage us to pray. Behold, the Lord says 
to you, “ Ask, and ye shall receive.” Brothers, sisters, 
slack not your asking; but, for the love of souls, 
multiply your petitions, and increase your importunity. 


AN INTERRUPTION IMPROVED.* 


OSSESS your souls in quietness, beloved friends. 
When we are engaged in prayer, or in any 
other form of worship, interruptions may occur, 
especially in large assemblies. We cannot expect all. 
nature to be hushed because we are bowing the knee. 
Permit not your minds to be easily distracted, or you 
will often have your devotion destroyed. Rather let 
us learn a lesson from a painful incident. I seemed 
to hear a voice in that sorrowful cry of our friend,” 
and it bade me have pity upon the many whose life is 
one long agony. Let that doleful moan awaken 
sympathy for thousands in the hospital, and out of it, 
who are grievously tormented. We are in good 
health, and are sitting in the midst of a happy com- 
pany of our fellow-Christians; let us be grateful that 
we have not been struck down, to be carried out amid 
the distress of anxious friends. Sympathy and grati-— 
tude are two choice emotions; and if both of these 
are aroused by this interruption, we shall have gained 
more by it than we can possibly have lost. 

Sympathy, or fellow-feeling, may well be excited 
by the sight or hearing of pain in our fellow-creatures. 
We may indulge it freely, for it is not only due'to the 
sufferer, but exceedingly beneficial to the humane 


res 


* A few words spoken by Mr. Spurgeon, at a Tabernacle prayer- 
meeting, when a friend had been carried out in a fit. 


228 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


heart which feels it. Those who are never out of 
health themselves, and keep aloof from the poor and 
the sick, are apt to undergo a hardening process of 
the most injurious kind. It is a sad thing for the 
blind man, who has to read the raised type, when the 
tips of his fingers harden, for then he cannot read the 
thoughts of men which stand out upon the page ; but 
it is far worse to lose sensibility of soul, for then you 
cannot peruse the book of human nature, but must 
remain untaught in the sacred literature of the heart. 
You have heard of “the iron Duke,” but an iron 
Christian would be a very terrible person. A heart 
of flesh is the gift of Divine grace, and one of its sure 
results is the power to be very pitiful, tender, and full 
of compassion. 

You would feel all the greater sympathy with some 
afflicted ones if you knew how good they are, and 
how patient they are under their sufferings. I am 
delighted with the diligent way in which some of our 
tried sisters come out to religious services. When 
many in good health stay away from the meetings 
upon the most frivolous excuses, there are certain dear 
sick ones who are never absent. There is one among 
us who has many fits in a week, but how she loves to 
be here! I beg her to sit near the door, for her fits 
may come upon her at any moment, but she is an 
example to us all in the constancy of her attendance. 
Have sympathy with all the sick, but especially with 
those who-might be spoken of in the words applied to 
Lazarus, “.Lord, he whom Thou lovest is sick.” 

I mentioned gratitude also, and I hope it will not 
be forgotten. Let the cry of pain remind us that we 


ww te 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 229 | 


owe our Lord a song of thanksgiving for screening 
us from the greater ills of life.—consumption sapping 
the constitution, asthma making it misery to breathe, 
epilepsy tearing us to pieces, or palsy causing every 
limb to lose its power. Blessed be God for our limbs 
and senses, and for health which sweetens all. We 
shall never become too grateful; let us abound in 
thanksgiving. 

This interruption speaks to us with a still deeper 
and more solemn tone. Our friend is not dead, but 
might readily enough have been so. That cry says. 
to me, “ Prepare to meet thy God.” We are liable to. 
death at any moment, and ought always to be ready 
for it; I mean, not only ready because we are washed 
in the blood of the Lamb, but because we have set 
our house in order, and are prepared to depart. [ 
feel it right, when I lay my head upon my pillow, to 
ask myself, “If I never wake on earth, is it well with 
my soul?” and then to reply,— 


“ Sprinkled afresh with pardoning blood, 
I lay me down to rest, 
As in the embraces of my God, 
Or on my Saviour’s breast.” 


Could we now, dear friends, at this moment, resign 
our breath, and without further preparation enter 
upon the eternal world? Breathing out the prayer, 
“ Father, into Thy hands I commend my spirit,” could 
we now ascend from earth, made meet for the in- 
heritance above? It should be so. Everything 
about us should be in such order that, if our Lord 
should come while we are in the field, we should not 


230 ORLY 2 Prayer-meeting!” 


wish to go into the house, but could depart at once. 
I agree with the great scholar Bengel that death 
should not become a spiritual parade, but should be 
regarded as the natural close of our ordinary life; the 
final note of the psalm of which each day has been a 
stanza. We ought so to live that to die would be no 
more remarkable than for a man in the middle of 
business to hear a knock at the street door, and 
quietly to step away from his engagements. There 
should be no hurrying for a clergyman to administer 
“sacraments” as some call them, or for a lawyer to 
write a hasty will, or for an estranged relative to make 
peace; but all should be arranged and ordered as if 
we kept our accounts closely balanced, expecting an 
immediate audit. This would make noble living, and 
do more for God’s glory than the most triumphant 
death-scene. 

A friend remarked to George Whitefield that, 
should he survive him, he would wish to witness the 
preacher's death, and hear his noble testimony for 
Christ. The good man replied, “I do not think it 
at all likely that I shall bear any remarkable witness 
in death, for I have borne so many testimonies to my 
Lord and Master during my life.” This is far better 
than looking forward to the chill evening or actual 
sunset of life as the time of bearing witness. Let us 
set about that holy work immediately, lest swift death 
arrest us on the spot, and seal our lips in silence. Be 
faithful every day that you may be faithful to the end. 
Let not your life be like a tangled mass of yarn, but 
Keep it ever in due order on the distaff, so that, when- 
ever the fatal knife shall cut the thread, it may end 


‘to go to. Aiea id leave even a ae & ioe out 
. place. He felt that his Master might come at an 
moment, and he wished to be ready even to. the 
munutest, details. tan 
_ Now that disturbing incident is over, we shall settle 
down again, all the more ready to unite in prayer } and d 


FISHING. 


FEAR I have gathered but few illustrations 

during my holiday in the North, though I am 
almost always upon the look-out for them. I have 
spent nearly all my time on board a friend’s yacht, 
cruising by day in sunny seas, and usually anchoring 
at night in lonely bays, far off from the busy haunts of 
men, where you hear neither rumble of traffic nor 
hum of city life, but are startled by the scream of 
sea-birds, the cry of the seal, and the splash of leaping 
fish. The profound quiet of those solitary regions is 
a bath of rest for a wearied brain: lone mountain, and 
sparkling wave, and circling gull, and flitting sea- 
swallow, all seem to call the mind away from care and 
toilto rest and play. Iam grateful, to the last degree, 
for the brief furlough which is permitted me, and for 
the intense enjoyment and repose which I find in the 
works of God. No exhibitions, or picture galleries, or 
artificial recreations, or medical preparations can 
afford a tithe of the restoring influence which pure 
nature exercises. 

I have been resting, but not idling; relieving the 
mind, but not smothering it. Very frequently, I have 
seen others fishing; and as I have looked on with 
interest and excitement, I have been sorry to have 
been able to take so small a share in it. Perhaps, 


rie 234 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


however, I have gained as much from lines and nets 
as those who personally used them; they took the 


fish, but I preserved the silver truths which the 


creatures brought in their mouths. These pieces of 
money I have taken, like Peter, not for myself only, 
but “ for me and thee,” and so let us share them. We 
have a good company of spiritual fishermen in our 
midst to-night, for here are the young members of 


“the College of Fishermen,” who are making and 


mending their nets; here, too, are eager members of 


a church in which, when the minister says, “I go 


a-fishing,” all the members say, “We will go with 
thee.” Here are the fishers of the Sabbath-schools 
and of the Bible-classes, fishers of the Tract Society 
and of the Evangelists’ Associations; all these have 
heard our Lord say, “ Follow Me, and I will make you 
fishers of men.” Not for the hurting of our fellows, 
but for their good, we seek to “take up all of them 
with the angle, to catch them in our net, and gather 
them in our drag;” and therefore we are willing to 
learn from others who are fishers, too. 

Fishermen speak of what they call gathering bait, 
and they say, such a fish is “a gathering bait,” and 
another is “a killing bait.” We need ‘both. The 
gathering bait brings the fishes together, and thus 
becomes very useful. You cannot catch the fish if 
they are not there, and it is therefore wise to throw in 
your ground-bait pretty freely to attract the finny 
multitude. I wish some of my fellow-fishermen were 
a little more liberal with gathering bait, for one would 
like to see the creeks and bays of their pews and 
galleries swarming with life. Some of them appear 


a ONO EL Ayla NM Gu ey Deh ak ALTE 
i: wy ; in ; ' Fak WULP ERDAS i 


‘ Only a Prayer-meeting! a! Zac 


rather to frighten the fish away than to attract them — | 


around their hooks, they are so dull, so monotonous, 
so long, and so sour. All spiritual fishermen should 
learn the art of attraction; Jesus drew men to Him- 
self, and we must draw menin like manner. Not only 
in the pulpit, but in the Sunday-school class, you need 
gathering bait, to draw the little ones together, and 
maintain and increase their numbers. In every other 
sphere of Christian service, the same is true. If faith 
cometh by hearing, we should first endeavour to gain 
interested listeners, for how shall they believe if they 
will not hear? Common sense teaches us that the 
people must be drawn together first, and must be 
induced to attend to what we have to put before 
them; and, therefore, we must lay ourselves out to 
this end, because it is essential to our highest aim. A 
pleasant manner, an interesting style, and even a 
touch of wit, may be useful. I have sometimes been 
blamed for making use of pleasantries, but I have 
done so partly because I could not help it, and chiefly 
because I have perceived that the interest is sustained 
and the attention excited by a dash of the familiar 
and the striking. A sufficient quantity of that which 
will draw men to listen to our message we not only 
may use but szust use, unless we mean to be content 
with empty nets and useless hooks. 

A good temper isa fine gathering bait in a Sabbath- 
school. There are some of our brethren and sisters 
whose very faces are enough to gather the children 
round them. If I were a little girl, I could not help 
being drawn to some of the sisters who teach in our 
schools; and if I were a boy, the kindly manners of 


236 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


many of our brethren would bind me to them at once. 
Kindly teachers need not bribe children with gifts, 
their looks and words are irresistible bonds. * Cheer- 
fulness and good humour should be conspicuous in all 
our attempts to catch men for Jesus; we cannot drive 
them to the Saviour, but they may be drawn. There 
is a way of offering a tract in the street which will 
ensure its acceptance, and another way which will 
prejudice the receiver against it: you can shove it 
into a person’s hand so roughly that it is almost an 
insult, or you can hold it out so deftly that the 
passer-by accepts it with pleasure. Do not thrust it 
upon him as if it were a writ, but invite him to accept 
it as if it were a ten-pound note. Our fish need deli- 
cate handling. A certain painter, when asked how he 
mixed his colours, replied, “ With brains, sir,’ and we 
must fish for the souls of men in liketashion. If you 
are to win souls, you must not be fools. Men will no 
more succeed in the Lord’s business than they will 
in their own unless they have their wits about them. 
If Christ’s work be done in a slovenly or churlish 
manner, it will answer no man’s purpose, but prove 
labour in vain. We cannot make the fish bite, but 
we can do our best to draw them near the killing bait 
of the Word of God; and when once they are there, 
we will watch and pray till they are fairly taken. 
The fisherman, however, thinks far less of his 
gathering bait than he does of his catching bait, in 
which he hides his hook. Very numerous are his in- 
ventions for winning his prey, and it is by practice 
that he learns how to adapt his bait to his fish. 
Scores of things serve as bait; and when he is not 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” | 237 


actually at work, the wise fisherman takes care to 
seize anything which comes in his way which may be 
useful when the time comes to cast his lines. We 
usually carried mussels, whelks, and some of the 
coarser sorts of fish, which could be used when they 
were wanted. When the anchor was down, the hooks 
were baited, and let down for the benefit of the in- 
habitants of the deep; and great would have been 
the disappointment if they had merely swarmed 
around the delicious morsel, but had refused to par- 
take thereof. 

A good fisherman actually catches fish. He is not 
always alike successful; but, as a rule, he has some- 
thing to show for histrouble. I do not call that man 
a fisherman whose basket seldom holds a fish; he is 
sure to tell you of the many bites he had, and of that 
very big fish which he almost captured; but that is 
neither here nor there. There are some, whose know- 
ledge of terms and phrases, and whose extensive 
preparations lead you to fear that they will extermin- 
ate the fishy race; but as their basket returns empty, 
they can hardly be so proficient as they seem. The 
parable hardly needs expounding: great talkers and 
theorizers are common enough, and there are not a 
few whose cultured boastfulness is only exceeded by 
their lifelong failure. We cannot take these for our 
example, nor fall at their feet with reverence for their 
pretensions. We must have sinners saved. Nothing 
else will content us: the fisherman must take fish, or 
lose his toil; and we must bring souls to Jesus, or we 
shall break our hearts with disappointment. 

Walking to the head of the boat, one evening, I 


fist Raat els , SY LAE ee Tap hele eee ey eee ae 
a (ESS OT ce 


238 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” d 


saw a line over the side, and must needs hold it. You 
can generally feel, with your finger, whether you have 
a bite or no; but I was in considerable doubt whether 
anything was at the other end or not. I thought they 
were biting, but I was not certain, so I pulled up the 
long line, and found that the baits were all gone; 
the fish had sucked them all off, and that was what 
they were doing when I was in doubt. If you have 
nothing but a sort of gathering bait, and the fish 
merely come and suck, but do not take the hook, you 
will catch no fish; you need killing bait. This often 
happens in the Sunday-school: a pleasing speaker 
tells a story, and the children are all listening, he has 
gathered them; now comes the spiritual lesson, but 
hardly any of them take notice of it, they have sucked 
the bait from the hook, and are up and away. A 
minister, in preaching, delivers a telling illustration, 
all the ears in the place are open; but when ‘he 
comes to the application of it, the people have become 
listless; they like the bait very well, but not the 
hook; they hke the adornment of the tale, but not 
the point of the moral. This is poor work. The plan 
is, if you possibly can manage it, so to get the bait on 
the hook that they cannot suck it off, but must take 
the hook and all. Do take care, dear friends, when 
you teach children or grown-up people, that you do 
not arrange the anecdotes in such a way that they can 
sort them out, as boys pick the plums from their 
cakes, or else you will amuse, but not benefit. 

When your tackle is in good trim, it is very pleasant 
to feel the fish biting, but it is quite the reverse to 
watch by the hour, and to have no sign. Then 


“Onl y a Prayer-meeting!” 230 


patience has her perfect work. It is very encourag- 
ing to feel that a large creature of some sort is tugging © 
away at the other end of your line. Up with him at 
once! It is better still to have two hooks, and to 
pull up two fish at a time, as one of our friends did. 
To do this twice every minute, or as fast as ever you 
can throw the line, is best of all. What an excite- 
ment! Nobody grows tired, and the day is hardly 
long enough. Up with them! In with the lines! 
What, another bite? Quick! quick! We seem to 
be all among a shoal. The basket is soon filled. 
This is good fishing. Our great Lord sometimes 
guides His ministers to the right kind of bait, and to 
the right spot for the fish, and they take so many 
that they have hardly time to attend to each case, but 
in joyful haste receive the converts by the score, and 
fill the boat. It is grand fishing when the fish flock 
around you, but it does not happen all the day long, 
nor yet all the days of the week, nor yet all the weeks 
of the year, else would there be a great rush for the 
fishers’ trade. 

When amateurs are at sea, and the fish do not 
bite, they have nothing to do but to give over, and 
amuse themselves in some other way; but it must 
not be so with us, to whom fishing for souls is a life- 
work and a vocation; we must persevere, whether we 
have present success or not. At times, we have to 
spend many a weary hour with our line, and never feel 
a bite; but we must not, therefore, go to sleep, for it 
would be a pity for the angler to lose a fish by 
negligence. Draw the line in every now and then, 
look to the hooks, try a new bait, or go to the other 


240 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


side of the vessel, and cast your tackle into another 
place. Do not be disappointed because you do not 
always fish as you did once; have patience, and your 
hour will come. 

Our captain, one evening, when we were in a very 
lovely bay, came up to me, and said, “ Look at this ; 
I only just threw the line over the side, and this fine 
cod has taken the bait in a minute.” A cod is noted 
for the thorough manner in which it swallows the 
bait. Being of a hungry nature, it is not in a picking 
humour, but feeds heartily. I remarked, at the time, 
that the cod was like earnest hearers who are hunger- 
ing for Divine grace, and so greedily snatch at 
the Sacred Word. Hungering and thirsting, their 
souls faint within them; and when the promise of 
the Gospel is placed before them, they seize it 
directly. Tell them of Jesus, and full deliverance 
through His precious blood, they do not make two 
bites of the gracious message,—they dash at it, and 
they are not content till they have it, and it holds 
them fast. Oh, for more of such hearers! 

All fish are not of this kind, for some of them are 
cautious to the last degree. The author of “ The Sea 
Fisherman ” introduces us to an old salt, who says of 
the Conger eel, “ He don’t bite home, sir,’—that is to 
say, he does not take the hook if he can help it. In 
the instance referred to, it had stolen the bait six 
times, and yet was not captured. Alas! we have an 
abundance of hearers of this kind, who are interested 
but not impressed, or impressed but not converted ; 


“they don’t bite home,” and we fear they 
never will. 


eae wi NGA wiki 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” . 241 


This fishing with a line is a suggestive subject, but 
I must leave it to say a word about fishing with the 
net, a mode of fishing to which our Saviour makes 
more numerous allusions than to angling with a 
hook. 

When we came home, on the Monday, after visiting 
Rothesay, we cast anchor in the Holy Loch. My 
friend said to me, “Look at the fish. Just look at 
them out there, they are leaping up on all sides; and 
there are the men, let us go and see what they are 
getting.” We were soon in a boat pulling towards 
them, while all around us were the fish leaping in the 
air and splashing back into the water. We reached 
the fishers, who were just getting out the net. I sup- 
pose you all know how this is done. A certain 
number of men remained near the shore with one end 
of the net, while others in a boat encompassed a great 
circle of water, letting out the net as they went along. 
Thus they enclosed a large space, and the salmon 
within that area were fairly imprisoned. When all 
was ready, the fishers began to pull at both ends, so 
as to make the circle smaller and smaller. We fol- 
lowed the decreasing ring, and kept just outside the 
edge of the net. The fish, which had still been leap- 
ing all around us, now began to do so in great earnest, 
for those within the range of the net seemed to know 
that they were in an undesirable position, and strove 
to leap out of it. Some escaped, but many more 
failed in the attempt. The men kept pulling in, and 
then it became very exciting, for it was evident that 
the net was full of life. 

Here is a very good picture of what we should do 

16 


242 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


PES seh beet U he Me Ol eis, ay OLAS oe Sa!) ee he ee fu 
M an , e PS : Bey ; 
yea ; 5 Gere 4 . 


asa church. I am to go out on the Sabbath with the 
net, the grand old Gospel net, and it is my business to 
let it out, and encompass the thousands who fill the 
Tabernacle; then, on Monday night, at the prayer- 
meeting, we must all join in pulling in the big net, and 
looking after the fish. So we bring to land all that 
have been caught. Many, who were surrounded by 
the net during the sermon, will jump out before we 
secure them; but, still, it is a comfort that it is not 
every fish that knows how to get out of the Gospel 
net. Some of them will be ina rage, and bite at the 
nets; but they will only be the more surely held 
prisoners. To me, it was a very pleasant sight to see 
within the net a mass of living, twisting, and strug- 
gling salmon-trout, most of them fine fish. There 
were thirty-seven large fish taken at one haul. Oh, 
that we may often succeed in taking men in 
larger numbers still! Let us drag in the net 
to-night. Let us pray the Lord to bless the 
services of last Lord’s-day, and recompense the 
fisher’s toil. 

We must never be satisfied till we lift sinners out 
of their native element. That destroys fish, but it 
saves souls. We long to be the means of lifting sin- 
ners out of the water of sin to lay them in the boat 
at the feet of Jesus. To this end, we must enclose 
them as in a net; we must shut them up under the 
law, and surround them with the Gospel, so that there 
is no getting out, but they must be captives unto 
Christ. We must net them with entreaties, encircle 


them with invitations, and entangle them with prayers. 


We cannot let them go away to perish in their sin, we 


cast une Bee ae he sock s bbe ae our in 
a _ that we 1 may know ow to doit. May the Lord 
eras tO: profit, and may we return from our - 
bringing ox our fish with us! Amen. 


MES ie 


oe RE SPASSERS, BEWARE!” 


N proclaiming the Gospel, we endeavour to set 
forth both its fulness and its freeness. We put 
up no hedge, fence, or barrier; we raise no question, 
and utter no prohibition ; for the invitation runs thus, 
“ Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.” 
We sometimes meet with the opposite of this in the 
world without, and the contrast serves to enhance our 
idea of Divine liberality. This afternoon, I saw a 
large board, conspicuously lettered and elaborately 
printed, which bore the following inscription, 
“"TRESPASSERS WILL BE PROSECUTED. No DOGS 
ALLOWED IN THESE WATERS.” 

The “waters” were a little miserable stagnant 
pond, green with duckweed, and the estate into which 
no trespassers were allowed to enter was about half 
an acre, of what would have been a meadow if 
the grass had not been too much trodden down. I 
was cheered by the reflection that the dogs of the 
neighbourhood must have been highly intelligent, 
and that there was no need for the School Board in 
that region ; for, of course, it would have been no use 
to put up the notice, “No dogs allowed in these 
waters,” unless the dogs could read. I have before 
heard of learned pigs, but reading dogs are even more 
an evidence of the culture of the district. The exclu- 


ny 
“A 
\ 


tie, LE hen ee PACKS 7 Oe SL eae ae Pe en ee 
yk Ghee 1h boty aoe Re ils erage Wai hor A 

4 - EB Mit dA! itn kt eee Th ‘he ay 
+ . : a ’ De, 


246 “Only a Prayer-meeting ! . 


siveness of the notice is not altogether new ; but 
being placed so prominently, it struck my attention. 

Frequently, we are warned that “trespassers will 
be prosecuted ;” but there is no sentence of the 
Gospel which breathes such a spirit. You cannot 
trespass there, for the rule is, “ Whosoever will, let 

him come.” You may come to the richest banquets 
of the Gospel; you may walk up and down through 
all the length and breadth of the land of promise, but 
you shall never be questioned as to your right to be 
_ there, for the Lord says, “ Him that cometh to Me I 
will in no wise cast out.” An open door is set before 
us which no man can shut, and we may enter freely. 
I know an hotel, in a Continental town, in front of 
which there is a fine garden, and at the gate you may 
read this notice, “ Strangers not residing at this hotel 
are invited to enter and enjoy the garden at all 
A) times.” Now that is generous, and deserves all 
praise ; it is indeed after the manner of the Gospel,— 
yt enter and enjoy yourselves. “ Hearken diligently 
fee unto Me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your 
soul delight itself in fatness.” “Come in, thou 
blessed of the Lord, wherefore standest thou 
without? ” 

The Lord draws men to Him with the cords of a 
man, and with the bands of love; but He never did 
drive a soul from Him yet, and He never will. So 
long as this dispensation of grace shall last, no tres- 
passers can ever be found on the domain of grace, 
for all who come are invited guests. The Queen per- 
mits certain favoured persons to drive through her 
private park, but the Lord sets the gate of mercy 


Ray 
tps. 


or TO eis De aati at 
“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 247 


open to all comers, and gives all believers a golden _ 
key which will admit them at all hours to His own 
palace. Who then will refuse to come? 

The board also said, “No dogs allowed in these 
waters.” But no such intimation is given concerning 
the living waters of Divine grace, for the poorest dog — 


-of a sinner that ever lived may come to drink, and 


swim, and wash here. No doubt it is advisable to 
keep dogs out of little shallow pools, for the water 
would soon become defiled, and the cattle would 
refuse it; but we do not need to preserve a great 
river, and no one cares to put up a notice informing 
the dogs that they may not wash in the sea, because 
there is no fear whatever that, however many dogs 
may come, they will ever pollute old Father Thames 
or defile the boundless sea. Where there is infinite 
abundance, there may well be unlimited freeness. The © 
vilest dog of a sinner, that ever ate the crumbs which 
fell from the Master’s table, is invited to plunge into 
the river of the water of life, which is clear as crystal 
still, though thousands of uncircumcised and defiled 
lips have drunk of it, and myriads of foul souls have 
been washed whiter than snow in its streams. 

“Come and welcome, come and welcome,” is the 
note which sounds from Calvary, from the wounds of 
the expiring Saviour, yea, it sweetly comes upon 
mine ear from the lips of the glorified Christ, who sits 
at the right hand of the Father. “Let him that is 
athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the 
water of life freely.” No one can be an intruder 
when the call is so unconditional; and whoever tries 
to keep any sinner back, is doing the devil’s work. 


248 “Only a Prayer-meeting! fe 


They are trespassers who keep away from Jesus, and 
not those who come to Him. Some are afraid that 
they would be presumptuous should they believe on 
the Lord Jesus, but presumption lies in the opposite 
direction: it is the worst of presumption to dare to 
question the love of God, the efficacy of the blood of 
atonement, and the saving power of the Redeemer. 
Cease from such proud questionings, and trust in 
Jesus. 


“Come, hither bring thy boding fears, 
Thy aching heart, thy bursting tears; 
*Tis mercy’s voice salutes thine ears,— 

O trembling sinner, come!” 


THE SILENT STEAM-ROLLER. 


ID you observe, last Sunday, a notice at the 

bottom of a street, at the back of this Taber- 

nacle, warning us in large letters against a terrible 
monster? Thus ran the oracle,— 


BEWARE OF THE STEAM-ROLLER. 


I always feel inclined to turn down a side street when 
I see the red flag and that admonitory sentence; for 
useful as the steam-roller certainly is, I cannot per- 
suade horses to believe that it is their true friend. 
On this particular occasion, there was no cause to 
fear the steam-breathing, coal-consuming leviathan, 
for its fire was out, its steam was a thing of yesterday, 
and the creature rested in perfect quiet, under cover 
of a tarpaulin. It is quite right that even engines 
should have their Sabbath. 

I thought, as I passed it,—a steam-roller at work is 
the pattern of what a church ought to be; but this 
particular steam-roller is a type of what many churches 
are. A church should be “terrible as an army with 
banners ;” but, oftentimes, it is not. “ BEWARE OF 
THE STEAM-ROLLER!” seemed rather a humorous 
notice, under the circumstances. Why, a kitten need 
not be afraid of the huge machine, or its big wheels, 
when the fire is out. Satan, who is said to tremble 
at the sight of a single praying man, might laugh in 
the presence of some of our churches, for there is no 


Te OD aL Dawa ee ia sss. 
: i teins A's 
SALE aad, + 


Roos ig Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


“fear of their doing any harm to his kingdom. We 


must have the steam up if we are to crush the granite, 
and prepare a highway for our God. The weight 
of our numbers, and the excellence of our machinery, 
will go for nothing unless the inward fires are glowing, 
turning lukewarmness into heat, and impelling every 


wheel to strong, all-subduing motion. 


The steam-roller could do nothing without the 
stoker, and his coals and fire; and a church can do 
nothing if love, and fervour, and enthusiasm are not 
produced in it. It is my longing desire that we may 
ever be filled with the Divine energy. I see in our 
congregations, and in our societies, the altar and the 
wood; but what sacrifice can we offer to the Lord if 
we lack fire? One of the great uses of a prayer- 
meeting is to keep the fires burning. By earnest 
pleadings, we heap on the fuel; and the Holy Spirit 
comes to us as a heavenly wind, and makes the fire 
burn vehemently. There may be wild-fire about, and, 
if so, I deplore it; but as far as my observation and 
experience have gone, I am more afraid of the want 
of fire than of the excess of it. The majority of our 
brethren are in no danger of becoming fanatical ; 
the danger lies in the opposite direction: they are 
more likely to have their boilers cold, and their wheels 
rusted, than to burst with excess of force, or fly to 
pieces with perilous velocity. At any rate, let us 
cry for the fire to-night. 

At the same time, we must not be satisfied with 
heat; for a steam-roller needs weight, or it will ac- 
complish no useful end. As a church, we need sound 
doctrine ; or else our ministries will be mere sound, 


be ee teed TONGS oat ed ee oe ee 3 Wier 


se Only a Prayer-meeting!” i Se 


and nothing more. We need to be taught by God 
ourselves, that we may be able to teach others. Go 
ahead, my young and fervent brethren; but, as you 
run, mind that you have a message to carry, or to 
what end will you run? You must have something 
to tell the people, and real instruction to impart to 
them, or your zeal will be “ much ado about nothing.” 
If you gather the people together, or call at their 
houses, or talk to them individually, you must have 
precious truth to impart. Clouds are well enough; 
but clouds without rain are disappointing. 

Any mother will tell you that it is a very bad thing 
for a baby to suck an empty bottle; if it gets no food 
from the bottle, it sucks down a deal of wind, and 
does itself hurt. Beware of giving an empty bottle 
to those whom you desire to benefit. I am afraid 
that, in many exciting meetings, there 1s more clatter 
of plates, and rattling of knives and forks, than any- 
thing else. Men may bawl and stamp, but if they 
do not teach the Gospel, they are doing no more good 
than acrobats in a circus. The babes of Christ need 
the unadulterated milk of the Word, that they may 
grow thereby; and if they do not get it, they will 
starve, even though you try to amuse them with 
rattles and corals. I will accord you great liberty as 
to how you shall say it, but there must be something 
in what you say. Why, in certain Evangelical meet- 
ings, if you listen to one address, you have heard all 
that you are likely to hear if you wait for half a 
century. Under a prosy minister, a little boy once 
turned to his father, and said, “ Father, what are we 
all sitting here for?” And a similar question might 


a’ athe : ng eet ek diol 


252 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


be asked when earnest ignorance repeats its common- 
places till they are as well known as the street cry of 
“ scissors to grind.” 

We must have something to communicate, or we 
shall be like a gun which has plenty of powder in it, 
but no shot; we shall make a great noise, but pro- 
duce no result. Better to teach the simplest truth 


with great quietness than to make a great fuss and 


teach nothing. The steam-roller needs the fire; but 
if it were itself light as a feather, however fast it 
moved, it would never crush down the stones, and 
prepare the highway. Be solid as well as earnest, 
instructive as well as impassioned. 

I am thankful to say that among us, as a church, 
this state of things is largely realized; our most 
zealous brethren are the most attached to the old, old 
Gospel; they are as enthusiastic as the Salvation 
Army, and as true to the old faith as the staunchest 
of Calvinists. 

Often, when I get letters concerning our 
evangelists, Fullerton and Smith, I meet with the 
remark, “Your brethren preach the truth as fully as 
if they were pastors, and yet they exhort the people 
with all the freeness of evangelists.” This is what I 
desire: I would see the doctrine of the Calvinist 
associated with the fire of the Methodist, and the 
holiness of the Puritan. I thank God that you, my 
brethren, know the difference between thunder and 
lightning, between beating a drum and breaking a 
heart. Make all the stir you please, but do not forget 
that clap-trap has nothing in it, and that shouting is 
not grace. The Gospel truth which is communicated 


eee “Only a Prayer-meeting!” _ 299 


is the true means of blessing, and not the excitement 
which may go with it. Dust will rise as an express 
train rushes along the metals, but the dust is not what 
the traveller admires, or the engineer depends upon. 
By all means give us truth red-hot, but mind that it 
2s truth, or you cannot expect the Lord to bless it. 
Let us all be anxious to know more and more of 
Christ personally, and to be filled more and more with 
the Divine Spirit, without whose aid all our teaching 
will be in vain. Unless we are made partakers of the 
fiery energy of the Holy Ghost, the best instruction 
we can give will be cold, and lifeless, and powerless to 
affect the hearts of men. 

As for me, I beg a special interest in your prayers 
that I may be sustained in the tremendous work to 
which I am called. A minister must be upheld by 
his people’s prayers, or what can he do? When a 
diver is on the sea-bottom, he depends upon the 
pumps above, which send him down the air. Pump 
away, brethren, while I am seeking for my Lord’s 
lost money among the timbers of this old wreck. I 
feel the fresh air coming in at every stroke of your 
prayer-pump; but if you stop your supplications, I 
shall perish. When a fireman climbs upon the roof 
with the hose, he can do nothing if the water is not 
driven up into it. Here I stand, pointing my hose 
at the burning mass. Send up the water, brethren! 
Send up a continual supply! What will be the use 
of my standing here with an empty hose? Every 
man to the pump! Let each one do better still, let 
him turn on the main. The reservoir is in Heaven; 
every saint is a turncock; use your keys, and give 


m 


> a plentiful Sop Wise ask for myself, 
for every true minister of Christ. Let not on 

o himself. We all cry with one voice, “ BRET 
RAY FOR US.” ea. 
Thus, with a church seals its steam up, sowers with 
eir baskets filled with precious seed, and officers ° 
the Lord’s army supported by a valiant soldiery, all 
things | will be ordered as they should be, and we — 
- shall see greater things than these. Only let our 


aaa be wholly fixed upon the Lord our Agee 


THE STEAM-ROLLER AND THE STONE- 
ROLLER. 


~, EAR FRIENDS,—Each saved one must try to 
serve his God according to his calling, position, © 
and ability. Our powers vary greatly, and our modes 
of action must vary also; but each one ought to do his 
very best, and he should try to raise that best to 
something better. The largest capacities are none 
too large for our holy service. If we could each gain 
ten talents, our Lord would deserve ten times as 
many. The Lord Jesus is such a good Master, that 
He deserves to have good servants, and to receive 
perfect service. Oh, that I could honour Him with 
a thousand voices, and continue to extol Him through 
a thousand lives! It may be that some of us will 
never be able to gain any remarkable degree of mind 
or influence; well, then, we must use what capacity 
we have. Whatever our work may be, we must 
throw our whole energy into it, and let it stand as a 
pattern of how work can be thoroughly done; and 
then, whether large or small, it will be acceptable. It 
is astonishing how much zeal and perseverance can 
accomplish with very little ability; and even if there 
be not much in quantity, the little may be so fine in 
quality as to be very precious. He who carves ivory 
does not expect to fill so large a space as if his tools 
were used upon wood. 


aS aS 


a eee 


Pape ae $e 3. 4 Say an ae ea as 


2 BOeris “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


As I came to this service, I met an old acquaintance, : 


for whom I have a respect almost amounting to 
dread; for my horse is too much impressed by him; 
I mean the steam-roller. He is the friend of all who 
travel upon wheels, and deserves first place among 
public benefactors. Rough roads, which make your 
ride like a voyage upon a stormy sea, are transformed 
into smoothness by this giant’s power. When a long 
stretch of road has been broken up with picks, it is 
then covered with bits of granite which are all sharp 
edge and pointed corner, and every step becomes 
painful both to horse and rider. With the help of the 
water-cart, our weighty friend comes in, and makes 
the rough places smooth. It is wonderful how every 
unruly stone subsides into order as soon as the roller 
appears. It does its work grandly; with a steady, 
immovable determination which mortal men might 
envy. 

If ever I were, or could be, a steam-roller upon the 
road to Heaven, crushing down those stones, which 
now hinder travellers, I am afraid I might become 
proud of my own prowess, and therefore I will not 
covet so hazardous an office ; but yet I would earnestly 
desire and eagerly seek after all the force and ability 
that may be within my reach, that I may employ them 
for my Lord and His people. We may all ask that 
the power of Christ may rest upon us, that out of 
weakness we may be made strong,—strong in the 
Lord, and in the power of His might. Of such power, 
the steam-roller may be a type; for all the impedi- 
ments which lie in its way are most effectually over- 
come, and used to make its road better. The very 


fe Only a Prayer-meeting!” « 257 


things which look like difficulties are treated as 
instruments for the accomplishment of its design: 
granite stones are the material which the steam-roller 
subdues to its purpose. If a man receives great grace 
from on high, and the Lord endues him with much of 
His Holy Spirit, what work he can do for Christ! 

But there may be much mental and moral force, 
and it may remain unused. If God has made you 
capable of being a steam-roller, I hope you will set the 
fire alight, and keep the steam up, and be ready for 
constant work. But it is not so in every case; those 
who could do much, and should even do most, often 
do the least. Many men have ability, but there is no 
“go” inthem ; there is plenty of roller, but no steam ; 
plenty of weight, but no driving power. Many a 
preacher is heavy; oh, that we could put force into 
him, and set him to work! What is learning if a man 
will not teach? What is the profoundest knowledge 
of theology if there be no love to souls? What is 
the use of that young man’s Biblical information if he 
merely reads and studies for himself? Grace to make 
us zealous in the Lord’s cause must abound in us, or 
else our weight will create responsibility for ourselves, 
but it will have no salutary influence upon other 
minds and hearts. It is a small matter for a pitcher 
to be full, if nothing can be poured from it to slake 
the thirst of the fainting. It is well to have the 
talents, but it is better to trade with them for the 
Master. 

_ To my big brothers, comparable to the steam-roller, 
I offer earnest entreaties that they will consecrate 
every ounce of their power, and use it diligently. Oh 


17 


— 


OES 


LF 


= 


So EF A EE REN ed ES 


2 58 “Onl 'y a Prayer-meeting!” 


how much we need the help of all men of light and 
leading! Forcible characters are not so plentiful 
among us that we can afford to let one of them waste 
his energies. Indeed, my brothers, we are surrounded 
by so many feeble folk who need assistance, but can 
render little efficient aid in return, that our work is 
rendered hard from the want of capable and sagacious 
workers. May God send us a legion of strong men ; 


‘but may He fill them to the full with His grace! My 


district would be all the better for a few more steam- 
rollers: I find plenty of stones in my road, and I have 
need of all the force I can enlist in preparing a 
highway for our God. 

We cannot expect all of you to be steam-rollers ; 
perhaps it is not needful that you should be. [If all 
ships were ironclads, or huge frigates, how would 
shallow rivers be navigated? If all were learned and 
cultured, simple folk might never hear a plain sermon. 

At Menttone, I have seen another kind of roller 
used on the road. The remembrance of it amuses me 
much. Often as I have seen it, it has never failed to 
make me smile. In the mending of roads in the 
South of France, things are done in a special manner ; 
it wears the appearance of an endeavour to employ 
the largest number of men, and to give each one 
as little fatigue as possible. It is a fine country 
for going about work in a deliberate fashion. 
There is a bit of road to be mended, and it is 
done in detail, patch by patch; those who under- 
take too much at once may fail in their endeavours. 
A man picks the road over just a little, but he does 
not wear himself out with rash haste; he thinks 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” * 250 


between each stroke, and thus he performs his im- 
portant office with wisdom and judgment. Having 
disturbed that little bit of road, of about the size of a 
door-mat, or possibly of a small Turkey carpet, another 
man comes along with a little water-cart, which he 
draws himself by the help of a hard-working comrade 
who pushes behind. Inasmuch as it would be a pity 
for one man to do the work that might be done by 
two, or which might do itself, the water is not allowed 
to flow out from the cart, through an arrangement of 
a pipe with holes in it; but a tap is turned, and a 
watering-pot is filled, and a rose is put upon it, and 
the section of road is thus moistened with tender 
discretion, as if it were a bed of tulips. Another 
hard-working person now appears on the scene with 
a barrow-load of stones, a discreet load, such as may 
be pushed along without breaking one’s back. You 
imagine that these stones will be shot down; but you 
are in too much of a hurry; they do things so much 
better in France. A small basket is provided, and a 
large shovel; the stones are shovelled into the basket, 
and then carefully deposited upon the prepared 
ground. A barrow of earth is also fetched; measured 
into the basket, and daintily used to mix with and 
cover the stones, even as a cook puts a crust over 
her gooseberries, and makes a pie. 

It is quite beautiful to observe these children of 
toil when occupied with their sore travail; they may 
well be a terror to British workmen, and make them 
dread competition with them! We should all mend 
our ways; but should we not do it with care, and 
thought, and deliberation? So our French brethren 


260 “Only a Prayer-meetin gl” 


rightly judge. Now comes in our roller, after a little 
discreet touching-up of the stones and earth with a 
rake. 

The beauty of the whole concern to me lies in this 
stone-roller. It is a roller similar to that which any 
one gardener would cheerfully drag over our gravel 
paths; but this roller has a horse to move it to and 
fro. I confess it is a very old horse, and that you 
may tell all his bones; but still it is a horse, and a big 
horse for so little a roller. An excellent man led the 
horse with care over the difficulties of the selected 
portion of road. He fastened the traces to the roller, 
and gently led the horse to the end of the little bit of 
road; then he took off the ropes, and hooked them 
on to the other side of the roller, and walked the 
steed back again, and so on, with persevering con- 
tinuance. It is a beautiful instance of how the thing 
should be done in order to utilize a large quantity of 
unexhausting labour for which the payers of taxes 
may give a bountiful reward. 

Here, -however, is the point of the whole affair; 
when I rode over roads which had been dealt with in 
this fashion, I invariably found that they were 
effectually mended. The old-fashioned method pro- 
duced first-rate results. It took a good while to do; 
but when the work was done, it was well done; and 
complaint turned into good-humoured criticism. 

It struck me that I knew certain friends who do 
their work for God very calmly and deliberately, and 
with as little of push as the old man and the old 
horse and the stone-roller at Mentone get through 
their labours, and yet what they perform will bear 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 201 


inspection, is of a lasting character, and wears well. 
It is therefore no business of mine to find fault; but, 
on the contrary, to commend; and if I smile, it shall 
be in all good fellowship. So far from disturbing our 
quiet, steady workers, I wish we had thousands more 
of them. Brother, let not the rush and worry of this 
boastful age disturb you. Move more quickly, if you 
can; but if not, be not distressed by the criticisms of 
the flippant. If you cannot be a steam-roller, and 
should happen to be more like a common stone-roller, 
keep on steadily at your work, and roll well the little 
bit of road that you travel. 

It may be, you could do nothing if you quitted 
your own ways and methods; don’t quit them, but 
stick to ways by which you have done good work. 
Don’t try to wear Saul’s armour, nor even Solomon’s 
robes. Only do your work conscientiously, prayer- 
fully, and with faith in God, and somebody will yet 
say, “ Well, it was a slow business; but it was a sure 
one.” Have we not often seen workers do a great 
deal which has all ended in nothing? What a noise 
and fuss they have made! The papers have been 
ablaze with their mighty deeds; and yet we have 
passed that way, and the spreading bay-tree has 
vanished, not a leaf has remained. The bulk of us 
may never be more than humble plodders ; but let it 
be our resolve that we will do good sound work by 
the help of God’s Holy Spirit. Better that one soul 
should be savingly converted, than that hundreds 
should crowd the enquiry-rooms, and turn out to be 
only excitable persons, temporarily wrought upon, but 
not brought to Jesus in spirit and in truth. Better 


stones, than a mile of wood, hay, and Sunble is 
_ While speaking to those who are saved, I remmem- 
ber sadly that some of my hearers cannot do any-— 
_ thing for the Saviour. Who are they? Those who 
Es are bedridden? Ah! they can speak of Christ upon — 
their beds. Those that have but one talent? They 
Y can use that one talent for the Lord. A little candle 
may give great light. But who are the useless ones? 
They are such as are not yet alive from the dead, 
those who have not yet come to Jesus. How can 
they do anything for Jesus, or even attempt it? Your 
first business, my friend, is to find the Lord yourself, 
and yield yourself to Him, that He may give you a 
new heart and a right spirit. Then may you go 
forth, and serve Him. In one of the letters brought 
_ to me this evening, asking for our prayers, the writer 
says, “If God will but hear me, I will tell everybody 
of His goodness.” Is not that the resolve of each 
one who has tasted that the Lord is gracious? Do 
not all believers cry, “ Taste and see that the Lord is 
good”? 


TWO COMMON DANGERS: 


WO great dangers are common in the streets of 
the City of Vanity in which we are called upon 
to sojourn for a season. If we were to shut our- 
selves up within doors, and never go abroad, we might 
possibly avoid one of these dangers; but we should 
certainly fall into the other. The two perils are those 
of getting harm from others, and doing mischief to 
others; the latter we can fall into by doing nothing 
at all; possibly, we may, in this way, occasion more 
mischief than by mistaken activity. These dangers 
are equally great, and equally imminent, unless we 
are strictly upon our guard. Happy is that man who 
shall reach Heaven unharmed and harmless, having 
neither gotten nor given a wound. 

Illustrations sometimes come in our way, and 
demand a hearing. I have lately been instructed by 
two parables, which have met me on the road, and 
compelled me to learn from them whether I would or 
not. I cannot refrain from telling them to you. 

As I rode home, the other evening, I had like to 
have fallen a victim to the Drink Traffic in a very 
literal sense. A loaded dray came thundering along 
the road with its freight of barrels. It was hard to 
tell which side of the way it would take, and certainly 
there was nothing to be done but to yield it the 
road without dispute. As it was very much upon the 


~ 


ae ne 


ca Se 


ee ae Ds oe | 


ee ee Pee ee ee a 
, ro. 


POA “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


wrong side, there was nothing better for my driver to 
do than to get on the path, and shout, in the hope of | 
arousing the attention of the Jehu in command. No 
such person was visible; there was no Jehu to say, 
“ Gee-woah!” Nevertheless, the sensible horses 
steered more nearly to the centre of the road; and 
as they went by at a great rate, we saw that they 


were their own masters. We escaped that peril, and 


were thankful. Their driver was refreshing himself 
at the next public-house ; and his poor steeds, having 
waited patiently till they felt the cold might air, were 
making the best of their way home, to the serious 
peril of her Majesty’s subjects. 

There are a great many runaway teams upon the 
road of life in these evil days; indeed, it was always 
so in the best of times. If we would not be run down 
by transgressors of one sort or another, we shall have 
need to be always on the watch. One cannot go into 
the street, the shop, or the workroom, without being 
exposed to more or less of risk. Immense damage 
may befall us through the evil deeds or wicked words 
of unregenerate men and women. Satan assails us 
through our fellows. He has his apostles, evangelists, 
and ministers everywhere; nor is he without his 
house-to-house visitors and tract distributors. With 
great noise or with none, the drays and chariots of 
the evil one rush along the road, and will soon run us 
down unless we get out of their way. This is so 
difficult a task, that when we have prayed, “ Lead us 
not into temptation,” we are bidden to add, “but 
deliver us from evil;” for the most careful avoidance 
of evil will not suffice to. prevent our being in peril. 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 205 
The devil does not keep to his own side of the road, 
but drives in where we least expect him. When the 
sons of God came together, did not Satan come also 
among them? Yes, he is not omnipresent: that 
none can be but the Lord Himself; but it is very 
hard to tell where he is not. “ Watch and pray, that 
ye enter not into temptation.” We are careful not to 
go into harm’s way. In places where sin is open and 
rife, we are never found; but we must watch even 
in the safest places lest, in an hour when we are not 
aware, we should be battered and bruised by some 
mighty evil. 

The second peril is that of doing harm to others. 
This would be sadness indeed. If we are run into by 
others, we must bear the damage, and in due time 
we shall get over it; but if we were to cause grievous 
harm to another, how could we bear the painful 
reflection? A sensitive mind would be driven into 
the depths of misery by considering the injury which 
it had unwittingly inflicted. Now it happened to me 
that almost my next journey to London was on the 
Bank Holiday; and, alas! there were on that day 
sadly abundant signs of the dominion of John Barley- 
corn in the open streets. An intoxicated man fell 
from the pavement full upon his back. It was an ugly 
fall for the back of his head; but, by the good provi- 
dence of God, a worse evil was averted. We were 
passing at that instant; and, as I looked out of the 
carriage window, I saw that a few inches further would 
have laid that drunken cranium, or the neck of the 
beery one, right under our wheel. Had we passed 
over his prostrate body, we could not have helped it, 


SPV b 5 Onc FOUL ced Sea aa ee 
ey . 7 : Wiey fag OO a 
pesurun aint cts yt 


Pity saat m — 1 rey ee 


266 “Only a Prayer-meeting!~ : 


for his fall was altogether unexpected; but what a 


horrible event for us as well as for the poor tippler! 


I would very much have preferred an accident to 
myself. 

It is not easy to avoid injuring others, and you may 
do it when you are where you have a right to be, and 


when you would gladly empty your purse to avoid it. 


I rejoiced exceedingly to have escaped this second 


peril. I think I was more glad on this occasion than on 


the former one. To injure another is worse by far than 
being injured ourselves. It is always painful for me 
to cause the least pain to those around me, or indeed 
to anyone. 

On the highway of life, such minor accidents as 
treading upon people’s corns are very common to me; 
I have been doing it rathér much of late, without the 
slightest intention of so doing. I shall have to buy a 
pair of list slippers, and muffle my oratorical feet in 


them; for I fear my boots must have rather heavy 


soles, since people complain of their weight even 
when I think I am tripping very lightly. I hope the 
crushed corns will soon forgive me. 

It is worse when there is somewhat in our example 
which becomes an unavoidable but real injury to 
others. Though we may not be aware of it at the 
time, we make a sad discovery when we find out, in 
after days, that what we did without a thought was 
turned to sad account by some young observer, and 
made the occasion of evil. We did not, at the time, 
look around for all the consequences of our act, 
neither did we foresee what would be sure to be made 
of it; and so the deed was done, and a wound in- 


be i, min’ Tul re eS ark ees ee SRER 8 ees 
dae) { “ ket | 
a; *~ , : ‘ 


“Only a Prayer-meeting ! Se | 207 


flicted which we would give our eyes to cure, but 
cannot. We may yet have to make very humiliating 
discoveries of the evils wrought inadvertently by us. 
Who among us can hope to be quite clear? A look 
of vexation, or a word coldly spoken, or a little help 
_ thoughtlessly withheld, may produce long issues of 
regret. This should warn us to walk circumspectly 
both in the present and in the future, and go carefully _ 
in and out among men. He who has to deal with 
young lambs, or little children, has great need to guard 
his movements. 

I see that great objection has been taken to my 
warning you not to be partakers of other men’s sins 
by setting an example in the matter of drink, which 
it would be unsafe for others to follow. I 
thought that I put the case very temperately. I 
neither said nor implied that it was sinful to drink 
wine ; nay, I said that, in and by itself, this might be 
done without blame. But I remarked that, if 1 knew 
that another would be led to take it by my example, 
and this would lead him on to further drinking, and 
even to intoxication, then I would not touch it. I did 
not urge abstinence as a duty to one’s self, as I might 
have done; but I gently placed it on the footing of 
concern for the welfare of others. I thought every 
Christian man would agree to this. I did not make it 
a matter of law, but of love. I set forth no doctrine 
of salvation by meats and drinks, and I laid no ban 
upon the exercise of your liberty. I did, however, 
entreat you not to endanger others by an inexpedient 
use of things lawful. It was saying no more than 
Paul meant when he said, “If meat make my brother 


‘ j : ' - 4 _ al BEN « oe 
208 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


to offend, I will eat no meat while the world standeth.” — 
This has made some brethren very angry; but, in 
truth, I see no cause. May I not express my opinion ? 
Are they so insecure in their own position that they 
are afraid to have it challenged, even in the gentlest 
manner? I sincerely hope that this is the case. 

One friend asks, “ Are we to give up shaving be- 
cause people may cut their throats with razors?” To 
which I answer that, if I had an insane friend in my 
house, who was likely to commit suicide, I would far 
rather leave my beard alone than put a razor in his 
way. If I knew of even one poor friend who had 
cut his throat with my razor, I should hate the sight 
of it, and I would make sure that no second person 
should be tempted to destruction by any razor of mine. 
It would be an awful memory to have carelessly con- 
tributed to a suicide, and it would be still worse to 
have aided in ruining a soul by strong drink. 

The same friend enquires, “If I am a skater myself, 
must I keep off the ice because my skating would 
induce another to come upon the ice, who might fall 
down?” This also is not a difficult question. If 
my skating caused no further mischief than a tumble 
or two to those inexpert in the exercise, I should not 
feel called upon to abstain ; for the only result would 
be an increase of merriment, with a possible bruise or 
two which would soon be gone. But if I saw legs 
broken, spines injured, and lives lost, I should never 
forgive myself if I enticed a single person into such 
peril. But the subject under consideration is no 
child’s play. The falls in this case are not such as 
boys may get upon a slide. Oh, that they were such 


‘ss Bester to ten to eternal well-being, and a 
not for Christians to speak lightly of it. When Tae a 
think of the poverty, misery, and crime which are 
caused by drunkenness, I can see no parallel between 
these things and healthy sport upon the ice. It may — 

‘a seem trivial to some; but to those who come in daily 


contact with the oat it is a solemn business. 
_ Brethren, let us have all our eyes open, that in the 
highway of life we neither suffer injury from others — 


. nor inflict injury upon them unawares. 


A LITTLE SERMON FROM THE 
PAINTER’S BRAZIER. 


SAW a painter doing up the posts of a gate which 


led into a gentleman’s grounds. The paint was . 


very foul, so the workman had a brazier, filled with 
glowing coals, which he held close to the paint, to 
burn it off. His aim was to paint the posts, and he 
began his work by scorching them with hot coals. 
He was no simpleton, but knew his business well; and 
he knew that, before he could put on fresh paint, he 
must first burn off the old paint, or else the work 
would be badly done. 

Seeing that painter at work, I said to myself, “ That 
man is doing what the Lord has often done to me;” 
and it is what He may be doing to some of you who 
are now suffering greatly in the process. You have 
been seeking the Lord, and you had hoped that you 
would be converted, and enter into peace at once; 
instead of which, the sermons you have heard have 
made you feel worse and worse. You are more 
troubled now than when you began in earnest to seek 
salvation. It is all right; the old paint is being burned 
off. Your self-righteousness and self-sufficiency are 
being destroyed, and you are keenly feeling the 
fire of the Lord’s wrath against sin burning into 
your very soul. 


272 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


If the old self had been left, the colour of grace 
could never have soaked into your mind: the old 
stuff would have kept it out; you would have taken 
a mere film of grace, and soon the old rubbish of 
nature would have appeared through the new colour 
of grace. The more completely the old paint is 


burned off, the better will the new work stand; and | 


it is for this reason that the Holy Spirit is to you a 
Spirit of judgment, and a Spirit of burning, before 
He works for your renewal. See this, and understand 
the wisdom and lovingkindness of the Lord. 

A similar process goes on with godly people, as well 
as with the unconverted. Your spiritual beauty gets 
old with the wear and tear of life; you lose your 
freshness, you get into a mouldy and defiled condi- 
tion; for this is a damp and smoky atmosphere in 
which you stand, even the best of you. Then the Lord 
comes to you, to restore your soul, and give you the 
renewing of the Holy Ghost. In order to do this, 
He removes the old comeliness, and turns your beauty 
into corruption. There is nothing like the burning 
process for really, effectually preparing the way fora 
fair and abiding renewal. 

No mill has yet been invented for grinding old 
people young again ; but if ever it should be invented, 
the old man will have to be crushed very small, and 
broken into the finest powder. I am afraid that 
most of us would steal away rather than endure the 
grinding. But yet the crushing is the only sure way 
to the restoring ; we must die daily that we may fully 
enter into life. By the gate of death, multitudes of 
saints find their way into Heaven; and by a deeper 


“Only a Prayer-meeting! ie 273 


death to sin and self, we rise more fully into an ex- 
perimental enjoyment of newness of life. 

Some of us owe a great deal to the brazier of glow- 
ing coals, for this is a chief instrument in the process 
by which we renew our freshness. Our youth is re- 
newed like the eagle’s, and the eagle renews its youth 
by moulting ; it loses its glorious feathers, and seems 
worn and haggard, and then newer, fresher, and 
brighter plumage covers it. The ways of the Lord 
are only strange to inexperience ; faith sees how per- 
fectly natural they are. 

Learn, also, another lesson from the brazier. I said 
to a friend, as we looked at the painter burning off 
the old paint, “ That is what the devil tries to do with 
me; he endeavours to burn the doctrines of grace and 
the old Evangelic faith out of me.” Ah, friends! the 
hot brazier of ridicule and unkindness has been laid 
very close to my soul! But the attempt is not suc- 
cessful; for those truths, in my case, are not paint, 
and so they cannot be burnt off. The Gospel is in 
the very grain of my soul. Even the devil himself 
cannot burn off that which is part and parcel of my- 
self, my life, my all. When the doctrines of the 
Word are taught us by God the Holy Ghost, and 
made to tincture and season our inmost life-blood, no 
burning process can take them from us, or cause us 
to give them up. That which is in the grain of the 
wood becomes more apparent the more deeply the 
plane cuts its way. My belief in the Gospel of the 
grace of God, and especially in the doctrine of our 
Lord’s substitution, is no veneer; but is in me and of 
me. I live upon this truth, and by God’s help I could 

18 


en. 1 away font it. All the power of ee or - wate ; 
ne or eternity, life or death, can never separate oie 


le has engraved upon our hearts. This, Sie is 3 
PA our little sermon from the painter’s brazier. 3 


wie 


i 


RP gt ee ft te 


A “LIFE-BELT : FOR: DAILY “USE. 


S OMEBODY wrote in the newspaper, immediately 
~/7 after one of our great passenger steamers had 
gene down, that it was a very advisable thing that 
everybody who went on board a ship should wear a 
life-belt. He suggested that we should have the 
apparatus affixed to us, so that, just as we felt the 
ship sinking, all we should have to do would be to float 
away from the vessel until we were picked up. It did 
seem to me to be about the last thing that mortal 
man would ever attempt to do; but the proposal was 
a very natural one, and in a spiritual sense, and for 
the highest purposes, it may suggest an equipment 
which would be exceedingly wise. 

If we always went about with life-belts around us, 
we should look very awkward, and they would be 
often in our way in following the ordinary business of 
life if we walked or rode on dry land prepared for 
swimming or floating; but suppose there could be a 
life-belt invented, which would make our ordinary 
garments more comfortable, which would be of use to 
us while on the land as well as in the water, which 
would give ease to us while we were sitting in the 
pew, and which would positively put strength into us 
while walking, as well as help us to float instead of 
sinking, which would be useful to the housewife in the 
kitchen, to the merchant at his desk, to the ploughman 
in the field, and to: the workman in the shop,—sup- 


,  =— = 


276) 7 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


pose there were such a life-belt as that, everyone of us 
would want to have it on, and would never want to 
put it off. 

Now it so happens that, if we would be prepared 
to die, that preparation will not in the least degree 
interfere with the duties of this life; but our best 
preparation for the life that now is will be that which 
prepares us for the life that is to come. If we were 
to be immortal on earth, and never see death, the 
very best thing that we could do in order to live a 
happy, useful, successful life would be, first of all, to 
be reconciled to God, and to receive from Him a new 
heart, and a right spirit, by which we should be 
enabled to live in a way which would be acceptable 
with Him. Now, dear friends, you know how need- 
ful it is to be prepared to die; but ought it not to 
commend that solemn consideration to your soul that 
the very thing which fits us to die is that without 
which we are not fit to live? 

“ Are you prepared to die?” is thought to be a very 
solemn enquiry, and so it is; but, “Are you pre- 
pared to live?” is quite as solemn a question, if a man 
would weigh it by the light of eternity. If my be- 
lieving in Jesus unto eternal salvation would make me 
miserable in this life, it would be worth while be- 
lieving and being miserable through this little mortal 
span in order to inherit eternal life, would it not? 
When we once pass into the eternal state; how the 
ages of time will dwindle into nothing! But, beloved, 
believing in Jesus will not make you miserable, it is 
the path of happiness and bliss. To believe in Christ 
is to be unloaded of a terrible burden, and to have 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 277 ¢ 


your heart filled with a sweet serenity. So there is 
a double advantage in believing; the result would be 
worth the having if it brought us a lifetime of misery ; 
but it will not have that effect, for it will bring us | 
present as well as perpetual joy. As we often sing,— 


“Tis religion that can give 
Sweetest pleasures while we live; 
Tis religion must supply 
Solid comfort when we die. 


“ After death its joys will be 
Lasting as eternity: 
Be the living God my Friend, 
Then my bliss shall never end.” 


Suppose that, from this time forth, if you became 
a Christian, you had to be always poor, always sick, 
always baffled, always afflicted, it would be worth 
all that, it would be worth while suffering anything 
of which a human being is capable, to be eternally 
saved, and to have the joy of dwelling at the nght 
hand of God for ever; but if you believe in Jesus 
Christ, it will not necessarily deprive you of anything 
that is really worth having; indeed, there are many 
who have proved that, although the great gain of 
godliness is in the world to come, yet even here it has 
brought them untold blessedness. I remember the 
story of an old man and his wife, who were once 
called upon for a subscription to the Bible Society, or | 
some other good work. The old lady said they had 
lost so much by their religion that they had no money 
to spare. The old gentleman said, “Yes, we have 
lost a.great deal. I used to have a suit of clothes all 
ragged and greasy and filthy, and I never could get 


Lh ee 


27D oe One Only ‘a Prayer-meeting!” 


another suit because I was a drunkard; and you 
know, Mary, that by my religion I lost my old ragged 


clothes. I used to be out till late at night, and then 


came home drunk, and very often through fighting 
I brought with mea pair of black eyes; I lost all that 
by my religion. I also had a nose that began to show 
the effect of drinking; and I lost that fine rosy tint, 
you know, Mary. That is only a small part of what 
we have lost by religion; and I think we can well 


afford to give a good subscription.” 


Lost by religion! Why, where would some of you 
have been but for the grace of God? Where does a 
course of drunkenness and vice lead men? Where 
does even morality lead many? They have the 
chilly moonlight of self-satisfaction; but, in the hour 
of trouble, they have not the warm sunshine of the 
Lord’s love and grace to cheer them. Yes, although 
our brightest joys are yet to be revealed, God has 
been pleased to attach many temporal blessings to 
the yielding up of ourselves by faith in His dear Son. 
Who, then, would not be a Christian ? 

“There are drawbacks,” says one. “If we are 
Christians, we shall get ridiculed and laughed at.” I 
think I have had a tolerable share of that sort of 
thing ; but it has not hurt me, I have not had a bone 
in my body broken through it, and I have not been 
robbed of an hour’s sleep by it. Dr. Watts said,— 


“Let dogs delight to bark and bite,”— 


and I think we have come to that pass, and can say 
the same with regard to ridicule for Christ’s sake; 
that is a very small matter. - 


C8 paw | a) Sa) 


yi ob Me oes NG cak ee Se lee at 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” _ 276 


“Oh! but it is at home that we are so cruelly per- 
secuted,” says somebody. Yes, I know that is a very 
severe trial, and yet it produces most blessed results. 
If your persecution were to cease, it might be the 
worst thing that could happen to you. I knew right 
well a young man, in a good station in life, a believer, 
apparently a very earnest believer, and the most in- 
defatigable worker I ever met. He was constantly 
opposed at home on account of his religion, yet he 
never yielded an inch, but kept on earnestly working 
for Christ. The opposition is all gone, and he hasa > 
house of his own; but I do not see any earnestness in 
him now, it disappeared as soon as the persecution 
ceased, 

Some of us are very much like those gas bags that 
we have when we are exhibiting dissolving views ; 
we put heavy weights on them to press out the gas 
so that we may have a more brilliant light. I do 
believe that most of our troubles at home and abroad 
are just like the weights on the oxygen bags. I am 
not disposed to wish that every young Christian 
should have a smooth path, for I notice that the 
bravest believers are often those who have had the 
severest struggles to maintain their integrity. “It is 
good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth.” 
If you have too much fine weather, you will be like 
some gardeners’ plants that grow too fast; they 
never get much heart, they had too much sun at the 
first, they would have been all the better for a little 
early nipping. You know that celery is not really 
good till it has had a sharp frost on it, and there are 
some Christians who seem all the better for a little 


280 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


persecution or trial; it seems to pinch them back; 
and, at the same time, it sends a sweetness into the 
very heart of their religion. If you ask me, “ Do you 
like to hear of our being opposed?” I answer, “ No, 
I do not; but I would not take this burden off you 
if I could, for it is best that you should have at least a 
little of it to bear.” 

To be truly saved, to be a Christian, to be on 
Christ’s side, to know that you have an everlasting 
Saviour, is worth a great many fools’ laughs, is it not? 
You can bear to let all the asses bray at once, and 
yet not be troubled, if you know that you have Christ, 
and eternal life in Him. My dear young friends, I 
do pray that you may be led to weigh and estimate 
these things, and that you may be drawn by the 
Divine Spirit to say, “ Jesus shall be mine, I will trust 
myself to Him whatever the consequences may be.” 
You will never come to Christ unless you feel your 
need of Him, unless you are convinced that you are 
really sinners, and confess it in penitence before God ; 
but if the Lord has made you realize your true con- 
dition, come and welcome to the Saviour who died 
for the guilty ; stand not back through shame or fear, 
the great gates of Divine mercy are set wide open that 
all sinners who believe in Jesus may come through 
them, and enter the Kingdom of Heaven, “for God 
so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten 
Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life.” 

Then, dear friends, having trusted Christ for your- 
selves, remember that all whom you meet with need 
to hear about the Saviour who has delivered you. I 


ee A eR +i ot ie =i. oF = — 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” - 281 


have known some good earnest Christian people who 
have hardly known when to stop talking about 
religion, and some of them have at times spoken very 
indiscreetly. Well, well, I had rather hear of a hun- 
dred such indiscretions than that you should be in- 
different to the welfare of the souls around you. 
Never you mind about being called “imprudent ” now 
and then; there is nobody worth a button with the 
shank off who has not been imprudent sometimes, 
there is no one who has ever done anything for Christ 
who has not been lacking in discretion in the judg- 
ments of other people. Zey have been so prudent 
that they never spoke to anybody about Christ, they 
have been so prudent that they never lived as Christ- 
ians should live ; they have been so prudent with their 
saving faith that they have saved all their money, 
and not given any to the cause of Christ; they have 
been so prudent that, when they came to die, they 
had seriously to raise the question whether they were 
Christians at all; and they have been so prudent that, 
when they were dead, their friends did not know what 
to say of them, but they hoped that the Lord would 
see some sign of grace in them, although nobody had 
ever seen it while they were alive. 

For my own part, I do not wish to be the chip in 
the porridge ; and I hope you will be something that 
has a flavour in it, and show it by speaking to others 
of what you yourselves have experienced. There are 
some things that have flavour in them, but it is never 
known until they are boiled or bruised; and there 
are some Christians whose excellence is not revealed 
till they are persecuted. Therefore, do not shrink 


_ “Tf on my face for Thy dear Name, 
_ Shame and reproaches be, 
_ All hail reproach, and welcome shame, 
If Thou remember me.” — 


THE EYE, AN EMBLEM OF FAITH. 


i 
et 


EAR friends, before we return to the holy exer- ‘ ae 


cise of prayer, in which we will spend most of aa 


our time this evening, I want to say just a few words 
to you so as to put the Gospel before you all once 
more, very simply and plainly. My subject will be,— 


THE EYE, AN EMBLEM OF FAITH ;— 


and, singularly enough, I have an illustration of my 
theme, and a very painful one, too, in my own eye. 


I mean that expression quite literally ; I do not know 
_ what it is, but a little something or other has found a 
lodging in my eye, and it causes me much pain. I 
shall not mind the suffering if some of you learn the 
lesson that it has already taught to me. 

I was thinking that the eye is the type and symbol 
and emblem of faith. Nobody in his right senses 
wishes to have anything in his eye; he wants his eye 
to be, just as an eye should be, without anything at 
allin it, but bright, and strong, and clear; and that is 
precisely what we want our faith to be,—bright, and 
strong, and clear,—with nothing in it, so that we may 
just simply look away to Christ, and be saved. 

My eye does not see itself; I cannot see my own 
eye unless I stand before a looking-glass. There are 
some people who are always wanting to see their own 


_ faith, but that is not the right thing to look at or to » 


- 


284 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


look for; you might as well desire to take out your 
eyes to examine their structure and uses. No, no, 
the object on which your faith rests and relies, that 
upon which your salvation depends, is not your faith, 
but what your faith sees. Do not try to see your own 
eye; look through your eye, as the window of your 
body, and gaze at the object you desire to see; and 
just in that fashion use your faith in a spiritual sense. 
Jesus Christ is the sinner’s Saviour, and faith is simply 
the eye that looks to Him. Oh, that you would, dear 
hearer, look unto Him now at this moment, for,— 


“ There is life for a look at the Crucified One; 
There is life at this moment for thee; 
Then look, sinner,—look unto Him, and be saved,— 
Unto Him who was nail’d to the tree.” 


Do not think so much about your faith as about the 
Christ at whom you are by faith looking. Do not 
wish to have anything in your eye; if you do get any- 
thing in, it will have to come out, for it cannot help 
you to see, and will probably cause you much pain 
and suffering. “Oh!” says one, “I wish I had a tear 
in my eye; I do want to feel repentance.” Yes, my 
dear friend, but tears do not help a person to see; on 
the contrary, they hinder a clear sight of the object 
before him. Your business is not to look at your 
own repentance, but at Christ. Looking at Christ 
alone, you will repent aright; but looking at your 
repentance, you will not. 

I recollect a striking expression in that precious 
book by Thomas Wilcocks which 1 have often men- 
tioned to you.—A Choice Drop of Honey from the 


Pe ae ee ae PON be yee 


x 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” % 285 


Rock Christ Jesus. There is some such expression 
as this in it:—“ When thou art seeking Christ, if 
thou dost look to thy repentance, away with thy 
repentance ; for if thy repentance come into the place 
of Christ, it is a repentance that will need to be 
repented of.” So I say to you, dear friends, do not 
even wish to have a tear in your eye as a part of the 
means by which you hope to be able to see Jesus as 
your Saviour. Remember what we so often sing,— 


“ Could my tears for ever flow, 
All for sin could not atone: 
Thou must save, and Thou alone.” 


“Oh, but!” says another, “I wish I had more 
feelings.” It isa curious thing that, very often, those 
persons who feel the most are the very ones who 
think that they do not feel at all) One says, “I am 
in an agony because I cannot feel.” Surely, that 
“agony” is a plain proof of very acute feeling. 
Another says, “I am quite broken-hearted because I 
have got a heart of stone.” No heart of stone ever 
feels itself to be broken; yet it is true that they who 
feel most, feel that they do not feel at all; their 


cry 1s,— 


“Tf aught is felt, ’tis only pain 
To find I cannot feel.” 


Yet that is feeling, and no mistake. You need not 
wish to have feelings, dear friends ; they are like this 
bit of dust, or whatever it is that I have in my eye,— 
far better out than in. 

You have nothing to do with anything else but 


NPT ae eee NN Cl ole eel Pe ae St ae eee ee er Ane 
tl ohh OLR ioe SA eee pest Tea & 
; ¥ i x Tq v ye hs ¥ . iF 


Ye Teor a" 
aioe, Fee j K 


286 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


Christ as the ground and object of your faith. Re- 


- member the epitome of the Gospel which Paul wrote 


to the Corinthians: “I delivered unto you first of all 
that which I also received, how that Christ died for 
our sins according to the Scriptures.” The apostle 
Peter put it with equal clearness: “ Who His own self 
bare our sins in His own body on the tree.” If you 
mix up anything of your own,—your feelings, or your 
tears,—with Christ, you do dishonour to Him. Will 
you stitch your filthy rags on to the glistening robe 
of His stainless righteousness? Far be it from any 
one of us to attempt such a thing. Go and yoke a 
gnat with one of the cherubim, and see how they will 
work together; but never seek to join Christ and 
yourself in trying to do the work that He has com- 
pletely and for ever finished. Why, it would be an 
impertinence akin to profanity! Shake thyself clear 
of everything like trust in what thou art or canst be. 
You may have seen a balloon ready to ascend into 
cloudland; and, perhaps, as you gazed upon it, you 
have asked yourself, “ Why does it not go up? The 
supply of gas is furnished, the voyagers are in the 
car, everything appears ready; why does it not go 
up?” The attendants have cut most of the ropes; 
but there the balloon hangs because there is one rope 
that still holds it to the earth, and it is not until they 
cut the last one that away it bounds off towards 
Heaven. That is what you need to do. Perhaps you 
have a little goodness of your own, a little something 
to which you think you can trust. Well, if so, you 
must cut that rope, and all others; for you must get 
rid of anything and everything upon which you can 


“Only a Prayer-meeting! "Bir 287 ! 


rely for salvation except Jesus Christ, the only 
Saviour. “He hath made Him to be sin for us, who 
knew no sin; that we might be made the righteous- 
ness of God in Him.” “Christ is all.” “Ye are 
complete in Him.” “ Perfect in Christ Jesus.” “Who 
of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, 
and sanctification, and redemption.” This is the 
teaching of the Scriptures. You cannot have Christ, 
and mix Him up with something else ; you must have 
“ JESUS only.” 

I wonder whether this little thing in my eye will be 
remembered by some of you, whether you will say, “I 
must have my eye single, and clear; I must look 
right out of it to Christ.” You know, if a person is 
in good health, he does not think about his eyes. 
You may ride a thousand miles in a train; and as 
long as your eye is all right, you do not think any- 
thing about it; and the less you think about your 
faith, the better; and the more you think about 
Christ, the better; for, after all, what is your faith 
by itself? Apart from Christ, there would be nothing’ 
to believe in, and therefore there would be no faith; 
and really to believe in Christ Jesus, to trust in Him, if 
we ever weigh it in comparison with Christ Himself, 
what is it? Then, away, away, away from all thou 
hast, and all thou art, and look alone to Jesus Christ, 
thy Lord and Saviour, for again I remind you that— 


“Tt is not thy tears of repentance or prayers, 
But the blood that atones for the soul: 
On Him, then, who shed it, believing at once 
Thy weight of iniquities roll.” 


eNOVHING TOW SAY? 


EAR FRIENDS,—When I stood up, a few 
minutes ago, and tried to think what I should 
say to you, I discovered that I had— 


NOTHING TO SAY. 


I have often found the theme for a brief address 
while meeting with you here on these happy Monday 
evenings, and my experience to-night has suggested 
a subject on which I think we may profitably meditate 
for a few moments, and then return to the holy exer- 
cise of prayer, in which we always like to spend most 
of the time. Perhaps some of you are wondering © 
whether I ever before felt that I had “nothing to 
say.” 

Yes, more than once in my life has this been true ; 
and, first, it was very specially the case with me 
when I was under conviction of sin. Through the 
Lord’s restraining grace, and the holy influence of my 
early home-life, both at my father’s and my grand- 
father’s, I was kept from certain outward forms of sin 
in which others indulged; and, sometimes, when I 
began to take stock of myself, I really thought I was 
quite a respectable lad, and might have been half in- 
clined to boast that I was not like other boys,—un- 
truthful, dishonest, disobedient, swearing, Sabbath- 
breaking, and so on. But, all of a sudden, I met 

ue) 


290 “Only a Prayer-meeting! Mf 


Moses, carrying in his hand the law of God; and as 
he looked at me, he seemed to search me through and 
through with his eyes of fire. He bade me read 
“ God’s Ten Words,’—the ten commandments ;—and 
as I read them, and remembered what I had been 
taught about their spiritual meaning as interpreted by 
the Lord Jesus Christ, they all seemed to join in 
accusing and condemning me in the sight of the 
thrice-holy Jehovah. Then, like Daniel, “my come- 
liness was turned in me into corruption, and I retained 
no strength;” and I understood what Paul meant 


when he wrote, “Now we know that what things 


soever the law saith, it saith to them who are under 


‘the law: that every mouth may be stopped, and all 


the world may become guilty before God.” 

When I saw myself as guilty before God, I could 
say nothing in self-defence, or by way of excuse or 
extenuation. I confessed my transgression in solemn 
silence unto the Lord; but I could speak no word of 
self-justification, or apology, for I felt that I was verily 
guilty of grievous sins against the Holy One of Israel. 
1 remember that it was a dreadful silence that reigned 
within my spirit at that time; even if I had tried to 
say a word in my own favour, I should have been self- 
condemned as a har. I felt that Job’s words might 
be applied to me, “If I wash myself in snow water, 
and make my hands never so clean; yet shalt Thou 
plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall 
abhor me. For He is not a man, as I am, that I 
should answer Him.” So I said nothing, when I was 
under conviction of sin, because I had “nothing to 


” 


say. 


eal ato a (pte i ail le Seale esa aa 


be OnLy a NP ie senting ihe 291 


I will tell you another time when I had “nothing 
to say,” and that was, when I first saw the Lord Jesus 
Christ as my Saviour, and realized the meaning of 
John Newton’s hymn,— 


“T saw One hanging on a tree, 
In agonies and blood, 
Who fix’d His languid eyes on me, 
As near His cross I stood. 


“Sure never till my latest breath 
Can I forget that look; 
It seem’d to charge me with His death, 
Though not a word He spoke. 


“My conscience felt and owned the guilt, 
And plunged me in despair ; 
I saw my sins His blood had spilt, 
And help’d to nail him there. 


* * % * can 


“ A second look He gave, which said, 
‘J freely all forgive; 
This blood is for thy ransom paid, 
I die that thou mayest live.’” . 


I remember well how He told me that He had loved 
me with an everlasting love, and that He had given 
Himself up to die for me. I can never forget His 
wondrous words, nor the effect they produced upon 
me; I wanted to shout, “ Hallelujah!” I wanted to - 
borrow all the angels’ harps, and to set all Heaven 
ringing with my Saviour’s praise; I wanted all the 
stars to speak in His honour, and every voice in 
Heaven and earth to. be jubilant with thanksgiving 
unto Him who had done such great things for me; 
and failing all that, I could only sit down, and weep to 
the praise of the mercy I had found. 


292 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


It was not long, however, before I began to tell 
others of my Lord’s great love to me; and now I can 
truly say to Him,— 


“ Wer since by faith I saw the stream 
Thy flowing wounds supply, 
Redeeming love has been my theme, 
And shall be till I die.” 


Ay, that it shall as long as I have a tongue to speak ; 
but tell it all out, I never shall; and, sometimes, under 
a sense of His great goodness to me, I can sing, with 
good John Berridge,— 


“Then my tongue would fain express 
All His love and loveliness; 
But I lisp, and falter forth 
Broken words, not half His worth. 
“Vex'd, I try and try again, 
Still my efforts all are vain: 
Living tongues are dumb at best, 
We must die to speak of Christ. 


It must-be so, my brethren; to speak of Christ as 
He deserves, is quite impossible while we are in this 
imperfect state. 

I hope that none of you will ever be in the con- 
dition of having “nothing to say” 2 the presence of 
God the Judge of all. Recollect the man who came 
in to the marriage of the King’s Son without putting 
on a wedding garment; and when the King came in 
to see the guests, He said to him, “ Friend, how 
camest thou in hither not having a wedding garment? 
And he was speechless.” © you who hear the Gospel, 
but do not receive it; you who join us in the outward 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” _ , 203 


act of devotion, yet do not yield yourselves to the 
Lord Jesus Christ; especially you who prefer the 
rags of your own righteousness to the perfect robe of 
the righteousness of Christ, you will not be able to 
say a word in self-defence! Shame will tie your 
tongues, conscience will prevent your utterance of a 
single syllable; and the King will say unto His ser- 
vants, “ Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, 
and cast him into outer darkness; there shall be 
weeping and gnashing of teeth;” and you will be 
driven from His presence for ever. O my hearers, do 
not let it be so with any of you! May the Holy 
Spirit work in you, even now, repentance towards 
God and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ! God grant 
it, for Christ’s sake! Amen. 


FASTING AND BACKSLIDING. 


D EAR FRIENDS, I asked you specially to pray, 

just now, for those who are backsliding, for — 
those who are declining by little and little from the 
ways of God, that eternal mercy may stop them, and 
bring them to a better and happier condition. 

You have noticed in the papers, lately, an account 
of a fasting man; and I am afraid there are some 
people who are doing spiritually what that foolish 
fellow is trying to do physically; he is seeking to 
find out how long he can fast; I think he is going to 
see whether he can live for forty days without eating. 
I do not recommend any of you to follow his 
example ; and it strikes me that, if I did, you would 
not be likely to try it; there are not sufficient fools in 
the world to make such an experiment as_ that 
_ practicable on a very large scale. God has made it a 
law of our being that we should eat in order to live; 
but this stupid man means to ascertain how long he 
can violate that law, and still live. 

I have known some professing Christians who 
seemed to be trying to see how long they could live 
without eating spiritually. Prayer is neglected, the 
reading of the Scriptures is forgotten, attendance 
upon the means of grace is very much slackened ; and 
as for coming out to a week-night service, that is 
given upaltogether. If they are not quite going with- 


2090 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


out all spiritual food, yet they are trying to find out 
on how little they can exist. If they try the experi- 
ment long enough, they will be like a valuable horse 
that a Frenchman had, which managed to live on 
next to nothing. He had at last brought the poor 
creature’s allowance down to one straw a day, and 
then the experiment failed, for the animal died. Some 
professors have got down to one service on the Sun- 
day as their spiritual food for the whole week, and 
we have not been greatly surprised when their poor 
form of religion has died altogether. They tried how 
little their souls could live upon, and there is an awful 
risk in such an experiment as that. 

Now, first of all, the man who tries to live without 
food denies himself a natural pleasure. Whatever 
may be said about eating for the nourishment of the 
body, this is certainly true concerning spiritual food ; 
for, to feed upon the Word is a great delight to the 
heart, to feed upon Christ is a heavenly banquet. 
You felt it to be so once, did you not? Then, you 
must be out of health if you do not enjoy your 
spiritual food now. If you cannot eat, you take it as 
a sure token that there is something wrong with you. 
The psalmist speaks of “fools” whose “soul abhorreth 
all manner of meat ;” and he significantly adds, “and 
they draw near unto the gates of death.” God grant 
that we may not be such fools in a spiritual sense! 

We are not surprised to learn that the fasting man 
is gradually losing weight. That might not be so 
great a calamity to anyone who is overburdened with 
flesh as I am, but it is a serious thing for most people 
to be losing weight ; and if you do not have spiritual 


_ “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 207 


food, you will certainly lose weight in many ways. 
You will lose weight of moral character ; you will lose 
weight of influence; you will lose the weight of 
solidity and restfulness of mind; you will lose power 
in prayer ; you will lose force in every direction; and, 
if you do not actually die, you will get to be a living 
skeleton. 

I know some professors who, if they are Christians 
at all, are nothing but skeletons; they are bony kind 
of people, very bad to run against, for they bore holes 
in you. The moment you come into contact with 
them, they begin to bore you about modes of worship, 
or about the Second Advent, or about high Calvinism, 
or about low Arminianism, or anything else which is 
their special craze. They have lost weight, they have 
lost enjoyment, they have lost all pleasure in religion, 
and they become uncomfortable people to associate 
with, for they are very apt to make others as miser- 
able as they are themselves. 

That fasting man is a/so losing strength. "We has 
no vigour, he could not run up a hill, he can do very 
little now; and, soon, he will not be able to do any- 
thing at all if his foolish experiment be continued. 
As for the man who does not feed spiritually, what 
can he do? What can be done by those professors 
who do not take spiritual food? Go and get a num- 
ber of consumptives from Brompton Hospital, and 
say to them, “Come along, you poor weak-kneed 
creatures, we are going to make a railway cutting. 
Here are the planks, and the picks, and the shovels ; 
so set to work, and get the cutting made as fast as 
you can.” They stand still, or lie about on the 


do Eiacly to lift it; he auld never use such a ‘al aa 
that. Another takes hold of his spade, and puts his — 
foot on it, but there is no force in him; so we say — 
to the whole lot of them, “ You had better go back to 
_ the hospital.” Now bring us a dozen stalwart navvies, — 
tell them what you want done, give them the picks, — 
and the shovels, and the planks; see there, they seem _ 
to walk through the hill, they have tunnelled it as if — 
_ they had simply threaded a needle! So, letamanhave © 
p) Spiitual force through feeding on the wondrous _ 
bread that Jesus Christ gives to our souls, and all 

_ things are possible to him; but let him go without his_ 
spiritual meat, and then what is there that he can 
accomplish ? 


ae ee 


IV. 


MISCELLANEOUS! ADDRESSES. 


PREACHING TO SINNERS. 


E shall always, I trust, as a church, cultivate an 
anxious desire for the conversion of all who 
come within our gates; yea, and of all who dwell 
around us. Never, I hope, will you wish the Pastor 
to preach so that you shall be fed, careless as to 
whether sinners are saved or not; nor will you make 
yourselves into a snug corporation for purposes of 
profit and mutual admiration. We long to see the 
wedding furnished with guests, and our Redeemer 
seeing of the travail of His soul. The public ministry 
must not be confined to a part of the truth, for it 
should reflect the whole counsel of God as far as 
mortal mind can do so. It is my delight to preach 
the doctrine of election, and all the other grand 
teachings which declare Jehovah’s special love to His 
chosen ; but, at the same time, I have felt it to be my 
duty to preach the Gospel to every creature. We 
know no other limit to our invitation than this, 
“Whosoever will, let him take the water of life 
freely.” “Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters, and he that hath no money; come ye, 
buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price.” 
I have been amused, lately, with a story told me 
by a dear fellow-labourer in the Gospel. One of his 
church-members came to him, and said that she was 


s 


Res Vee An Ln maka 


302 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


going to unite herself with another church, a church 
higher in doctrine, and less given to evangelistic 
efforts. She said, “When you preach the doctrines 
of grace, I am very happy; but when I hear you 
inviting sinners to Christ, my heart goes down into 
my shoes.” “That is a very sad thing,” said the 
minister, “but I cannot alter my preaching on that 
account, for I think you are wrong.” When our 
brother met his people at the prayer-meeting in the 
evening, he told them what had occurred, and said, 
“I cannot help preaching to sinners as I do; and 
even if more of you go, it will be the same. I shall 
preach to sinners as long as there are any sinners 
__ left.” Our friend then went on to say that the mode 
Tae of preaching among certain friends reminded him of 
ari his school-boy days. A boy had a nice, rosy- 
; cheeked apple, which he tossed up in the air before 
be: our friend’s eyes, and then he shouted to him, “ Do 
you see this apple?” “Yes.” “Well, now, take a 
good look at it,” replied the boy, “for that is your 
share of it;” and he put it back into his pocket. 
Another playmate pretended to be more generous, and 
said, “ Oh, give the poor fellow a smell!” Even his 
liberality went no further. Have you never heard 
preaching of that sort? “Here is a precious salva- 
tion! I hope you sinners see how precious it is, for 
that is your share of it.” The minister puts the 
heavenly fruit back again into his pocket, and the 
sermon is over; and this is called free-grace! The 
most liberal of those who dare not invite the sinner, 
try to give him a smell of the Gospel by telling ti of 
the peace and joy which it brings. 


ae 
aia dz: 
q 
i} F504 
if 


box 


nn i i a re OS EE oo 
Se 2 tas 


, ny 


“Only a Prayer-meeting ! Pon 303 - 


Now, when I am preaching to sinners, I feel inclined 
always to beg every one of them to put the golden 
apple in his pocket, for this choice fruit of the tree of 
life may belong to millions, and yet the whole of it 
will remain for millions more. There is not a sinner 
in the world who is to be told that he may not come 
to Jesus, and receive the whole of the blessings of the 
Gospel. What a blessing to have a free salvation to 
preach as well as a full salvation! At least, I feel it to 
be so. Everyone must speak according to his light ;_ 
but while I see clearly the doctrines of distinguishing 
grace, I see also the universality of the Gospel 
command. 

Many years ago, I had a good old friend, who, like 
myself, had a very sweet tooth for Calvinistic doc- 
trine; and I cannot do with any other doctrine any 
more than he could. He said to me, one day, “I love 
to hear you preach the doctrines of grace, but I feel 
very uncomfortable when you are giving free invita- 
tions to sinners; I feel as if I could not sit in the 
place.” I said to him, “ Well, shall I give up inviting 
sinners in order to please you?” “No,” he replied, 
“by no manner of means ; for, a month or two ago, my 
son-in-law, about whom I was very anxious, went to 
hear your sermon, and you were very persuasive with 
sinners, and set Christ before them most freely. I 
did not enjoy it at all; but when I got home, I found 
my son-in-law in tears, and that sermon, by the bless- 
ing of the eternal Spirit, brought him to the Saviour. 
Therefore, I think you had better go on in your own 
style, and not alter your preaching to please a poor 
old man like me.” 


a a) ee Pa Sle Psy one ees fa 
a ae ae ah eae 


~ y  4¢ 


> ' : ; 


3048 oe. “Only a Prayer-meeting! ss 


I answered, “That is just how I feel; I would 
gladly agree with you in everything, but I dare not 
try to appear consistent by leaving out one side of the 
truth.” He said to me afterwards, “If I do not quite 
agree with your invitations to sinners, it is clear that 
God blesses them ; and therefore I must look into the 
matter, and see whether I am right or not. You have 
declared the doctrines of grace, yet you have freely 
given the invitations of the Gospel; and I hope, my 
dear sir, you will long continue to preach what you 
feel you have learned in your own soul.” I have 
followed his advice, and I hope to do the same as 
long as the Lord spares me. We shall proclaim the 
doctrine of God’s sovereignty without toning it down, 
and electing love without any stuttering over it; but 
we shall proclaim the other truth also. 

Those who differ from us, in one direction, ought 
also to remember that there are others who differ 
from us on the other side. A sister has written to 
me saying that, even if I do believe in election, she 
would not have me preach it, but keep it in my own 
mind, and get comfort from it for myself. I do not 
know who the friend is, for she forgot to put her name 
to her letter; but I would like her to know that I 
cannot accept her idea for a moment. I feel sure 
she does not expect me to do as she says; for, if I 
did, I should act like a Jesuit ; I should say one thing 
and believe another, and that be far from me! I 
hope that no earthly power could bring me to do 
that; no, not even an anonymous letter from a good 
lady! 

Everything that I believe to be in God’s Word, I 


a Only a Prayer-meeting!” ° 305 


shall preach, whether my hearers accept it or not. 
It is to me a great comfort that such numbers do 
receive my teaching ; and I never feel surprised when 
I meet with those who do not. I do not expect 
everybody to eat everything that I put on the table. 
I may flavour a dish with too much salt or too much 
pepper at times, but your own prayerful judgments 
will guide your tastes. We must preach all the truth ; 
and this one thing is certain, we shall never give up 
loving the souls of men, or cease from trying to bring 
in the lost from the highways and hedges. We shall, 
throughout life, echo that blessed call of our Lord 
Jesus, “Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are 
heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” Labourers 
and burden-bearers shall hear continually that gracious 
Word ; and if they do not come to Jesus, their blood 
shall be upon their own heads, for the invitation is as 
free as the blessing is full) The Gospel trumpet 
rings out clearly over hill and dale. “ The Spirit and 
the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say, 
Come. And let him that is athirst come. And who- 
soever will, let him take the water of life freely.” We 
cannot make men come; that is the work of the Holy 
Spirit; but we can persuade them, by the love of 
Jesus, and by the terrors of the Lord. We can preach 
Christ to sinners if we cannot preach sinners to 
Christ ; and we know that the Lord’s Word shall not 
return unto Him void. 


20 


Rave 


= 
’ 


PePUutLe CHRIST FOR, EMPTY SINNERS 
AND SAINTS. 


HAT was a very neat way of putting the matter 
when someone spoke of “a rich Christ for poor 
sinners and saints.” I think I might put another ex- 
pression side by side with it, which would be equally 
good as descriptive of our experience of Christ’s 
preciousness. It is this,— 


A FULL CHRIST FOR EMPTY SINNERS AND SAINTS. 


There is emptiness in the sinner’s heart, apart from 
the guilt which makes his heart worse than empty ; 
and the believer, day by day, as much depends upon 
the continued grace of God as at the first, when, full 
of guilt, and covered with shame, he came to Christ 
for pardon. 

So, first, let me speak a word or two about a full 
Christ for empty sinners. Are you empty, brothers, 
to-night? Then Christ’s fulness is precisely what 
you want, and your emptiness is precisely what Christ 
is looking for; and when the two meet, then, as our 
brother just now said in his prayer, the nght things 
are in the right place. Where could your emptiness 
be in a more suitable place than where Christ fills it? 
Where could Christ’s fulness be more useful than in 
filling up the emptiness of a poor guilty sinner? 

“ Alas!” says one; “I do not feel my emptiness.” 


a are 


~ 7 ~ ~ ad 4002 


208 230 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” ae 


Then, my friend, you are one of the very empty ones, 
because you have not even a sense of emptiness to fill 
you. I generally find that those who think they do 
not feel their sinfulness are those who feel it most; 
and if anybody were to say, “I do sufficiently feel 
the burden of sin,” I think I should tell him that he 
did not know anything at all about it. Fully to feel 
the burden of sin, is utterly overwhelming; and no 
man ever thinks he repents enough, or, if he does so 
think, it is evidence that he has not really repented 
at all of his sins. 


“Could my zeal no respite know, 
Could my tears for ever flow,”— 


none of these would be as fitting or as full an ex- 
pression as we need to denote all the repentance that 
we ought to feel because of sin. 

“T am afraid,” says one, “I have no good thing in 
me at all.” Then, my brother, you are another of 
the empty ones. “ But, oh, I am afraid to hope that 
I am such an one!” Then you seem to be even 
empty of hope and of courage. Well, well, you are 
empty indeed. “I have sometimes thought that, if I 
could feel despair, then, strange to say, I could have 
some hope; but I have not even that feeling.” Well, 
friend, I see that you ave empty. If I search you 
through and through, even with a candle, there is 
not a good thing, nor a rag of a good thing, to be 
found in you. 

But what then? This only proves what an empty 
sinner you are ; and there is a full Christ for all empty 
sinners. Only let them be but empty, and the Master 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” * 309 


is ready enough to fill them. Confess your emptiness, 
acknowledge that in you dwelleth no good thing; 
and ask Him, according to the infinitude of His mercy, 
the multitude of His tender mercies, to fill you, even 
you. I am sure that, the moment when we are 
accepted in Christ is the moment when we realize our 
need of Christ, and yield up our emptiness to be filled 
from His fulness. We generally get Christ, I think, 
when we acknowledge ourselves to be the very lowest 
and most unworthy of men. He that is bankrupt and 
beggared of all consciousness of creature merit, and 
of all human hope, is the man to whom the riches of 
the covenant of grace most surely belong. 


“*Tis perfect poverty alone, 
That sets the soul at large; 
While we can call one mite our own, 
We have no full discharge.” 


The Lord bring us down to realize what we are in 
His sight, to be in our apprehension what we are in 
fact, “less than nothing, and vanity”! 

But, dear hearers, whilst I have spoken these few 
words about your emptiness, I beg you to think much 
of the fulness of Christ. You are full of sin; well, 
but He is full of mercy. You are full of guilt; He is 
full of atoning merit. You are full of hardness of 
heart; He is full of longsuffering and tenderness 
towards you. You are full of mistakes; He is full of 
wisdom. You are empty of all power; He is full of 
might. Though you have nothing, He has every- 
thing. The mercy is that, just in those very points 
where you fail, Christ excels; and His merits just fit 


Now, if you want Christ because you are empty, ; 


a and Christ wants you because He is full, who forbids — 
the banns when it is proposed that you two should - 
be united? There is a tree laden with beautiful” 


fruit ; it is late in the autumn, and the apples are all 
of ared and yellow colour. -They are all ready to be 
gathered; what, then, is wanted? Why, they want- 
baskets. And what kind of baskets? “See,” says. 
one, “there is a basketful here.” That is no use at 
all. Another says, “Here is another full basket.” 
But that is of no use. What that tree wants, with its 
mellow fruit, is that somebody should bring empty 
baskets. Now there is Jesus Christ, the Tree of life, 
laden with the ripe fruits of His abundant grace. 
What does He want? Why, not you who are already 
full; no, but you who are like empty baskets, you: 
who have need of Christ’s glorious fruit of life. He: 
wants you, and you want Him. Now, who is here, I 
say again, to forbid the banns, when Christ loves : 
sinners, and sinners want Him? ) 

But where is the ring? How shall we effect the: 
marriage? The ring is faith. If thou wilt simply - 
trust Christ Jesus, thou art saved. Persons some-. 
times say, “ What! am I to believe such-and-such a; 
thing in order to be saved?” No, that is not the» 


point; you are not saved by believing in things; it.’ 


is your demerits as the e fits the wards of ‘ite jens G2 
_ Christ was prepared on purpose for such an one.as 
- youare! His character and His work precisely meet ‘ 

4 the needs of your sad and fallen condition. ef 


is not believing even doctrine that saves you; it is: 


trusting a Person, relying upon Christ Jesus; and if, 


i 


= 


_ 


Pere ae ee Foire te ee 
et ae weer , 
: 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” _ 311 


you trust in Him, your faith is the wedding-ring’ which: 
espouses you unto the Lord Jesus for ever. ‘The’ 
matriage may be now performed in this very place; 
by the power of the Holy Ghost. 

Now, secondly, I want to say a word or two about’ 
a full Christ for empty saints. I do not think we 
know much about Christ yet ; at any rate, we who are 
but beginners in the things of God. Some of our 
elder brethren may know more; but I think I know 
enough to say that, probably, he knows mest of 
Christ who has discovered most of his own empti- 
ness; that, in proportion as we go down, Christ goes 
up; and as we see more and more of the deep 
depravity of our own hearts, we shall see more and 
more of the amazing excellence of the person and 
work of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Now, how is a Christian made to feel himself an 
empty saint? Well, there are many ways. Some of’ 
us, at certain times, have been made to be empty of 
our own wills. Now, you who have had an invalid 
child, or a sick husband, or an ailing wife, or beloved 
sister, you have prayed and wrestled with strong: 
crying and tears to God; and night and day you 
have carried your burden, and of course it has been 
very heavy. At last, you have been brought to’this 
point : “ Lord, I see there is self here; I have wanted 
to have my own way;” and the Holy Ghost has: 
brought you to say, “Not my will, but Thine be: 
done.” It has taken a long time, perhaps, to bring: 
you to that point; but, at last, you have laid self=will ; 
right down at the Lord’s feet, and you would have 
nothing more to do with it. You have said, “Nay, 


312 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


Lord, I will not complain; I will scarcely express a 
desire; there is the whole case, do as Thou wilt. I 
have told Thee what nature suggests, and Thou hast 
helped me now to play the man of grace rather than 
of nature. The decision rests with Thee; do as 
‘Thou wilt.” 

Well, now, it is at such a time, when you are 
emptied of your own will, that you begin to see the 
fulness of Christ; for I am persuaded that our self- 
will is the cataract on the eye, which prevents the soul 
from having a clear view of Jesus; but if self-will is 
brought into subjection to Christ, and if it can be 
kept under His dominion, what a sweet and comfort- 
ing sense of the love of Jesus we may always enjoy! 
We should have a fulness of joy in the will of God, 
if we were emptied of our own will. It would be 
‘sweet to us to be in pain, and we should rejoice even 
to be in sorrow, if our will were quite subdued to the 
will of God; and we could even kiss the rod with 
which He corrects us. 

Another. kind of emptiness is emptiness of all 
power. We, who are constantly engaged in the 
Lord’s work, have to feel that emptiness pretty often. 
You feel as if you were quite unequal to that next 
sermon, or to meet that class, or to talk with those who 
are in affliction. You often feel, like Jonah, as if you 
would like to take ship, and be off to Tarshish. The 
work is sweet; but you do not seem to feel any 
capacity for the task. You go to it, and are very 
graciously helped; but you go home complaining, 
“Who hath believed our report?” and are as dis- 
heartened as ever. Some of those whom you thought 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” - 313 


were converted have gone back; others, whom you 
fancied able to meet sorrow with unshaken faith, have 
not been able to stand firm in the time of trial; and 
you go home greatly discouraged and bowed down. 
Oh, it is then that Christ rises! There is nothing 
that forms such a suitable frame to set the picture of 
Christ in as a thoroughly broken-down spirit. Then 
we come to Him, and feel that He is the great 
Allin-all, and we are poor nothings; then we run 
to Him, and ask Him to make our work acceptable 
through His own merits, to plead before His Father 
for us that our infirmities may be removed, or else 
that even these may make room for the greater 
display of the grace of God, and that we may bring 
even more glory to God because through such weak 
instruments He can do such great exploits. You 
never see the fulness of Jesus Christ as the omnipo- 
tent Saviour so well as when you are emptied of all 
power. 

And let me also tell you that there are times, with 
believers, when they seem to be emptied even of all 
spiritual life. Of course, they never are so emptied, 
because, while Christ lives, they must live also; yet 
it appears to them sometimes as if they had quite 
lost their religion, and there was not a spark of vital 
godliness left in them. You may rake and stir the - 
embers, and go down on your knees and blow; but 
you cannot find even a spark. You ought to be 
grateful to God for all His goodness; but you feel 
as if a great stone had been rolled over the door of 
your heart, and that it had been turned into a 
sepulchre. You have no light. You want to pray, 


? 


Pe Te I 


PIE oR, yes ORS oe 


LP <n 


= a. oP 


he ee 


E | } “ 
a | 


ie | A 


314. -—s “Only a Prayer-meeting! _ cae : AT 


_ you feel that you must pray; you cannot do without 


prayer; yet your prayers are “ groanings which cannot | 
be uttered.” You feel as if they would burst the 
bonds of your soul; and yet you feel as if you did not 
feel at all. You say with Cowper,— 


' 


“Tf aught is felt, tis only pain 
To find I cannot feel.” 


There are promises, but you cannot grip them; there 
are threatenings, but you do not feel their power. 


At such times, it is a blessed thing to remember that_ 


Christ “is able also to save them to the uttermost 
that come unto God by Him, seeing He ever liveth to 
make intercession for them.” Empty saints rejoice 
that Christ is the sinner’s Saviour still. Often and 
often are we driven to Christ alone, as at the first. 
We are obliged to look up, for we feel that if we 
could not look up, it would be death to look within, 


for within there can be nought to comfort. It is in 


looking up to Jesus, looking away from self, and look- 
ing into the wounds of Christ, and reading His heart’s 
love, that we get comfort. To believe that I am saved 
when the graces of the Holy Spirit abound in my 
soul, is no faith; that is only sight. But to believe in 
Christ when you cannot see any evidence, when sin 
abounds, and doubts and fears roll over you, to come 


even in the dark, and in your consciousness of natural» 


depravity to say, “ Lord Jesus, I believe; over all this 
mountain of sin, from the dark pit of this iniquity, 
right here out of the depth of my soul’s abasement, I 
cling to Thy cross. Though I feel myself to be by 
nature as a very devil, only fit to be an outcast from 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” ~ 315: 


Thy mercy, and to be driven into the lowest hell, yet 
I do believe Thou canst save me, and I cast myself on 
Thee, and Thee alone.” Then it is that the empty 
saint, like the empty sinner, finds a full Christ exactly 
suited to him. 

As I was singing those verses, just now, my mind 
seemed to picture our Lord Jesus Christ, and I stood 
before Him in meditation, and did sing, I hope, from 
my heart,— 


“Tf ever I loved Thee, my Jesus, ’tis now.” 


There I see Him stand, clothed with a linen garment 
down to His feet, and girt about the paps with a 
golden girdle; and as I look at Him, how He remains 
ever the same, and yet how He changes! One 
moment, there is a mitre on His head, and He is my 
Priest ; and I see that breastplate hung with golden 
chains, and set with precious stones, and I rejoice that 
He is my blessed priestly Intercessor! 

And then I look again, and behold there is a crown 
instead of a mitre. He is a King, and how truly royal 
does He appear, King over Heaven, and earth, and 
hell, King of my soul, my bosom’s Lord! Look at 
the silver sceptre, how He wields it! If He should 
smite with it, He could break the nations as the 
potter’s vessel is broken with a rod of iron; but He- 
stretches it out, and bids me touch it; “ Thou,” saith 
He to each believer, “ Thou hast obtained favour of 
the Lord.” ; 

Now I look again, and the crown is gone for a 
moment; and I see Him with the Prophet’s mantle 
about Him. How wise He is! What wisdom drops 
from those blessed lips! How I wish to sit down at 


316 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


His feet, and to be taught of Him! He is the in- 
fallible and the good Teacher, who teaches the heart, 
while others teach but the head or the hand. 

Now look at Him, and, as you gaze, one moment 
you catch a glimpse of the nail-prints, and you worship 
Him as the Lamb that was slain. And the next 
moment the nail-prints are gone, and you see Him as 
Solomon saw Him, “ His hands are as gold rings set 
with the beryl: His belly is as bright ivory overlaid 
with sapphires.” His glory shines forth now re- 
splendent with heavenly brightness. 


“No more the bloody spear, 
The cross and nails no more, 
For hell itself shakes at His Name, 
And all the Heavens adore.” 


See Him again, and for the moment, as you gaze 
upon Him, your eyes are dazzled, the Godhead is so 
grand and so glorious; but you turn again, and the 
manhood is so soft, so sweet! If that Deity were 
alone, you might flee from it; but when you see it 
shining through the transparent glass of Christ’s man- 
hood, you are comforted, and you say, in the language 
of the Song of Solomon, “ Let Him kiss me with the 
kisses of His mouth: for Thy love is better than 
wine.” 

Can you not see Him now? Do you not behold 
Him? The angels bow before Him around the glassy 
sea; and the elders, with their vials full of odours, 
and their harps of gold, cast their crowns before the 
throne. Can ye not see Him, as, at the right hand of 
the Father, “ God blessed for ever,” Jesus, the Son of 
the Virgin, sits supreme, Son of God, and Son of man? 


tre ial Mia wen 72 = 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 317 


Our hearts exclaim, “ Blessed be Thy Name for ever ; 
be Thou exalted in the highest Heavens; worthy art 
Thou, O dying Lamb; worthy, O risen Lord! Let 
all the angels of God worship Thee, Thou Well- 
beloved, the Only-begotten of the Father! ” 

And what shall we say next to Him? Just this, 


; “Lord, reveal Thyself to us. Come, now, and if our 


hearts be shut up, put in Thine hand by the hole of 
the door, and our bowels shall be moved towards 
Thee. If thou standest at the door, and knockest, 
Lord, by the sweet influence of Thy grace, let the door 
be opened, and come in, and sup with us, and we with 
Thee. We will find the empty house in our poor 
hearts, and Thou shalt find the feast, and we will sup 
with Thee, and Thou shalt sup with us.” 

Do you not long for His presence, my fellow- 
believer? I know you do,if you are empty; for there 
is no such fulness or such satisfaction in all Heaven 
beside as can be found in Him, under whose shadow 
we sit with great delight when He brings us into His 
banqueting-house, and His banner over us is love. 

Two things I want you to recollect, and I have 
done. One is, believer, that you are altogether 
Christ’s; body, soul, and spirit. Do not pilfer any- 
thing that belongs to your Lord; do not be a traitor 
to Him, and do not dispute your Master’s right to all 
that He has so dearly bought. 

The next truth is, that Christ is all yours, every part 
of Him, His Godhead, and His manhood; Huis time- 
life, and His eternal existence; all His promises, all 
His offices, all His graces; all He bought on Calvary ; 
all He scattered among His followers when He 


« . Sy 
= 
a3) 


( ea in hic S5a¢ be His Father, an all ite holy 
angels with Him. Till He comes, glory in the truth — 
1at He is wholly yours, and you are wholly His; ¥ 
d live “to the praise of the glory of His grace, — 
_ wherein He hath made us accepted in the Beloved 
re God bless you all! Amen. 


eo 


’ 
‘ 


Pre hor) 


/ 
wy 


. “en Pie Yard ¢ 


4 


ey 
d 
? : 
“ 


* * ee 
- 


“p ; 


olin AWAY TOsteoUS” 


“Return! O wanderer, to thy home, 
Thy Father calls for thee; 
No longer now an exile roam, 
In guilt and misery. 
“Steal away, steal away, steal away to Jesus, 
Steal away, steal away home; for Jesus waits to save you. 


“Return! O wanderer, to thy home, 
Tis Jesus calls for thee; 
The Spirit and the Bride say, Come; 
Oh, now for refuge flee! 


“ Return! O wanderer, to thy home, 
’Tis madness to delay ; 
There are no pardons in the tomb, 
And brief is mercy’s day.” 


AY those sweet words of invitation be very 
graciously blessed! I was smiling, while you 

were singing that refrain, “Steal away to Jesus,” at 
the recollection of something that happened a long 
time since. A brother minister was, years ago, almost 
as eccentric as I am said to be, though the peculiarity 
after all is not in us, but in other people who are not 
so concentric as we are. After an evangelistic 
service, we were holding a prayer-meeting, or a meet- 
ing for enquirers. Among the rest of the anxious 
ones, there was a young man in whom we were both 
interested. I was kneeling on one side of him, and 
my friend knelt down on the other side of him, and 
prayed a prayer which made me laugh,—I could not 


TR OE SE eee 
. = * ons of anit is 


s ae j Se 6 
B20 7 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


help it. He said, “ Lord, here is a poor sinner, who 
has been a servant of the devil, and he has run away 
from his master, and never given him any notice.” 

I was amused by the expression at the time; but 
there is a great truth in it, and I want, just for a few 
moments, to call your attention to that truth, for it may 
be of lasting service to any of you who long to escape 


from the slavery of sin and Satan. First, let me re- 


mark that, zf you give the devil notice, you will never 
get away from him. If that prodigal son had gone 
to the citizen in the far country, and said to him, “I 
am engaged to you for another week to feed the 
swine, but I give you notice that, at the end of the 
week, I shall quit your service,” he would never have 
gone back to his father. The only way of escape for 
him was to steal away home; so he not only said, “I 
will arise and go to my father,” but at once “ he arose, 
and came to his father.” Imitate his example. Do 
not give the devil any notice. This is the very 
meaning of the refrain, with which we have been 
familiar ever since we first heard it so pathetically 
sung by the Jubilee Singers,— 


“Steal away to Jesus.” 


That simple sentence may be a very delightful 
voice to someone here who has been living a life of 
sin. Do not go back into the midst of your old com- 
panions; but steal away to Jesus; steal away home. 
Perhaps your life has been a very evil one, altogether 
contrary to the law of God; yet here you are to-night, 
in the house of prayer, and among a company of 
praying people. Now, I beseech you, do not say what 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” ~ 321 


you will do to-morrow, or in a month’s time, or when 
you have set some matters right; but steal away to 
Jesus at once, just as the poor slave in the Southern 
States did when he found a chance of gaining his 
freedom. I warrant you that he did not go to his 
master, and say, “I’s goin’ to run away from you to- 
morrow, massa.” Oh, dear, no! But on some moon- 
shiny night, when his master least expected it, Sambo 
was away in the woods, and was being guided by the 
blessed pole-star to the land of liberty. I say to you 
again, imitate his example, steal away, steal away to 
Jesus, if you are held in bondage by sin and Satan; I 
cannot give you any better advice than that. Procras- 
tination is not only the thief of time, but the murderer 
of many souls. Remember those verses we sometimes 
sing,— 
“ To-day, a pardoning God 
Will hear the suppliant pray ; 


To-day, a Saviour’s cleansing blood 
Will wash thy guilt away. 


“ But grace, so dearly bought 
If yet thou wilt despise, 
Thy fearful doom with vengeance fraught 
Will fill thee with surprise.” 


Then again, as to the idea of giving the devil notice, 
you cannot give it. Some try to give this notice by 
attempting to escape from the power of some one sin, 
when all the while they are in captivity to other sins 
as securely as ever. There is many a man who has 
meant to break off wrong-doing by degrees, and to 
loose himself from his fetters one by one; but he has 


not been able to do it; it can only be done all at 
21 


322 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


once, straight away, there and then. Sin is like 
Joseph’s mistress; you must not parley with it, you 
must leave your garment, and run away; your only 
safety is in immediate flight. We say to you, as 
Mentor did to Télémaque, “Fly, Télémaque, fly ! 
Your only hope of conquering is by flight.” Oh! get 
away at once, poor sinner. Steal away, steal away to 
Jesus. Let us sing that second verse-and the chorus 
again very softly,— 
“Return! O wanderer to thy home, 
Tis Jesus calls for thee; 


The Spirit and the Bride say, Come; 
Oh, now for refuge flee! 


“Steal away, steal away, steal away to Jesus, 
Steal away, steal away home; for Jesus waits to save you.” 


Just this word in closing. You know that, in the 
old slave days, when one negro wanted to run 
away from his master, there was often someone who 
told him the way. There were some good people who 
worked what they called “The Underground Rail- 
way”, by which they passed the slaves on from one 
place to another till they reached the land of liberty ; 
so, to-might, there are many friends all about this 
Tabernacle who would be only too glad to speak to 
any of you who want to steal away to Jesus; and 
especially if you will come to the platform when the 
meeting is over, you will find some of my brethren 
who will be delighted to tell you how to get out of the 
great dismal swamp of sin. They know the road; 
some of them have hardly brushed the mud off their 
own garments yet, and they will be most pleased of 
all if they can guide you into freedom. The all- 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” : 323 


important thing is to get to Jesus. He is the great 
Liberator, and “if the Son shall make you free, ye 
shall be free indeed.” 

If any of you have found your way to Jesus, let me 
say to you that it is all very well to steal away from 
the old master, but do not steal up to the new one. 
Come right up to Him, and say, “ Thine I am, Lord 
Jesus, and I am not ashamed to own Thee as my 
Lord and Master.” Come out boldly on the Lord’s 
side, be baptized according to His command, and His | 
example, too, and unite with His people in fellowship 
and holy service. If you are truly the Lord’s, you 
will never want to steal away from Him, and He will 
never give you up to your old master again, for so 


hath He declared,— 


“The soul that on Jesus hath lean’d for repose, 
T will not, I will not desert to his foes ; 
That soul, though all hell should endeavour to shake, 
Tll never, no never, no never forsake.” 


AN ADDRESS TO SUNDAY-SCHOOE 
TEACTIERS. 


EAR FRIENDS, the Sunday-school teachers, I 
hardly think that I need to tell you to-night 
how greatly we value your work, and how thankful 
we are to God for your holy zeal and Christian love. 
There are some of you who are our most continual 
helpers in the work of the Lord; the very sight.of 
your faces always gives me pleasure, because I re- 
member how many of the dear children and young 
people you have brought to the Saviour’s feet. Go 
on, brothers and sisters, with your sacred service, and 
the Lord be with you! 

I should like you to think, however, not only of the 
benefit that you bestow on others by this holy work, 
but also of the great good you yourselves receive by 
teaching. Will you try, just for a moment, in order 
that you may be humbled by gratitude, to think how 
much you have gained by teaching others? Speaking 
for myself, I can testify that I owe very much to the 
Sunday-school. I never was in a Sunday-school as a 
child; but that was because my mother thought she 
could be a better teacher than anybody else, and so 
she taught me at home, and I think she did nght. 
But after I knew the Lord, I soon became a great 
debtor to the Sunday-school, because it gave me an 
immediate and important field of labour, and it also 


326 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


helped very materially to prepare me for future 
service. 
. I could not do much for my Lord at first; but I 
thought that I could go and teach a class in the 
_ Sunday-school, and I did so. Then, through teaching 
a class, I was asked to give addresses to the scholars. 
I do not think I had any idea that I could speak in 
public until I began to address the children; but God 
Ree gave them such attention that I was asked to speak 
to them every Sunday. Some of the teachers, some 
of the young men, thought it was a pity that any one 
of their number should always be the speaker, and 
i therefore it was agreed that they should take the 
fe address alternately with me. Then the superin- 
tendent divided the girls from the boys, and I had to 
speak to the girls once a fortnight, and to the boys on 
the intervening Sabbath, and thus I was kept at the 
happy employment every Lord’s-day. To my sur- 
prise, before long I found the end of the schoolroom 
filled with grown-up people; and soon I had more to 
hear me in the afternoon than my pastor had to preach 
to on a Sunday morning. I could not make it out; 
but I did know that the opportunity of speaking was 
blessed. 

One of my friends was telling me, the other day, 
that he recollected an address of mine to the boys in 
the schoolroom at Cambridge. He said that I told 
them a story about a fly on the window. I told them 
that I was standing in a farmhouse, and there saw a 
fly on the window, and I tried to catch him; but as 
soon as I put out my finger, he went a little lower 
down the pane; and as I moved, he moved. I soon 


="s! ,' % - hd J ,, 
Ps Oo cok dae 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” — 327 


saw that the fly was on the other side of the glass, so 
that I was not likely to catch him; and my friend 
reminded me that I said to the boys, “ Now, there are 
many people who are trying to be happy, and they are 
aiming at happiness in this way and that way, and 
they think they will get it here or get it there; but all 
their efforts are in vain, for it is on the other side of 
the glass. It is only when they have been renewed in 
the spirit of their minds that they will catch that fly, 
and secure that happiness which they so much desire.” 
It was a striking simile for boys, and I was glad my 
friend had not forgotten it. I recollect a boy who was 
struck with that simile; he was the worst lad in the 
school until the day when God blessed that message 
to him. 

Now, I feel so glad that I had an opportunity of 
opening my mouth for God in a Sunday-school, be- 
cause it helped me to begin preaching; and I have 
no doubt that many of our pulpits have been filled by 
those whose first training in speaking for Christ was 
received in a Sunday-school, where they were asked 
to address the children. I do not say this that all of 
you may become preachers; you are not all wanted 
in that particular service; our good sisters, for in- 
stance, are not required as preachers. Yet, what a 
blessing it is for you to have an opportunity of doing 
good to others, and, at the same time, of getting good 
yourself! . 

Nothing, I think, tends to keep piety so much alive 
as trying to bring others to Christ. If aman does not 
feel his own weakness, and his entire dependence 
upon the Holy Spirit as he once did, when he begins 


SE nd 


ea Pha oe 


2 pa OF 
. 2 re 


328 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


to teach others, he soon finds that old Adam, even in 
young children, is far too strong for him. Thus, 
trying to teach others, teaches us humility. It also 
teaches us earnestness, for children, as a rule, will not 
listen to us if we are not in solemn earnest. I re- 
member seeing the boys spinning round over a form, 
and twisting over and under the seats in a school while 
the teacher was addressing them, and I really wished 
I could do the same, for there was nothing to interest 
anyone in what he was saying. [If all our people could 
amuse themselves in that fashion whenever we 
preached dull sermons, it would tend to wake us up. 
They have done away with the good old custom of 
clapping or hissing the preacher, because, while the 
people applauded the minister, all was right, but when 
they hissed him, it was another matter; so they said 
that it was improper to have any manifestation of 
approval or disapproval, and they put it down. I am 
inclined to think that something or other of the kind 
would be good for some of us when we are dull, just to 
let us know that it will not do to waste our people’s 
time, and our own, too, in that fashion. It is only 
natural that, when you are talking as if your hearts 
were miles away, that your hearers’ hearts go gadding 
away, too. If you are not yourself interested in your 
theme, you cannot expect them to be much concerned 
about it. But when you do labour for your Lord with 
real earnestness, and especially when you do bring 
souls to Christ, what a blessing it is to yourself as well 
as to them! “It is more blessed to give than to 
receive.” To be feasting in the house of God, is 
good; but oh, to go out and speak for Jesus, and to 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” — 320 


bring others to Him, is one of the highest felicities on 
earth! Go on, brothers and sisters, work away for 
your Lord, and God send you abundant success! 

I do not think it is necessary to say to you, but I 
will say it in case it should be necessary, that the 
same Gospel that saves grown-up people saves chil- 
dren. You must not give to the children a different 
gospel from that which we have to preach to their 
parents. Do not give your scholars a diluted gospel, 
the Gospel and water. I have noticed that children 
are often told, “You must love Jesus, and then you 
will be saved.” Yes, but that is not the Bible plan of 
salvation ; it is, “ Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and thou shalt be saved ;” and though, undoubtedly, 
where love exists in the heart, it is an abundant proof 
of the exercise of faith, yet you were never sent into 
the world to tell people, either old or young, that they 
would be saved by loving Christ; you have altered 
your Master’s commission, which you have no right 
to do. Those children need to know what they have 
to believe in order that they may be saved; and you 
must tell them that it is in Christ and Him crucified 
that they have to trust, and that it is by faith that 
even little children are brought to Jesus, and saved. 

I know you, my dear brethren and sisters, will do 
that, I have no fear that you will do otherwise; but I 
do know some Sunday-schools where it is not so, and 
where the childcen are taught anything but the truth 
as itis in Jesus. There are other schools where there 
is nothing for the scholars but the reading and ex- 
plaining of those regular orderly lessons that are 
issued by the Sunday-school Union. I suppose they 


330 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


are very capital things for those who can use them; 
but I know that my experience was that they were 
of no use to me. They were so often about David 
and Goliath, or about Ezra and Sanballat, or about 
Daniel and Nebuchadnezzar; but I wanted to get 
away to Jesus Christ at once. Now, whether you usé 
the regular lessons or not, do seek to bring your 
scholars to Christ, and do the best you can to win 
every one of them for the Saviour, and remember that 
persuasion is a mighty force with the children. 

All of you teachers, I am sure, will get a blessing if 
you pray for your children one by one, and speak with 
them one by one. Much more is usually done by a 
special, particular, personal word than by a general 


message delivered to.a large number. If you were all © 


bottles, and I wanted to fill you, I should not try to 
do it by squirting over you all at once; but I should 
come to you one by one, and pour the liquor into you 
one by one, slowly and gently. [think that, in your 
Sunday-school teaching, you can try to do too much, 
and accomplish nothing. You cannot get a quartern 
loaf into a child all at once; but it goes to be dene 
by breaking it up, and putting some nice warm milk 
with it. So, when you have a great mass of truth, and 
you say to yourself, “ How am I to get this loaf into 
that child’s mind and heart?” break it up small, and 
give it to them with some nice warm milk of affection ; 
and thus, by God’s grace, you will get it into the 
children, and they will be built up thereby. That is 
the way, I have no doubt, you are doing it. Go on 
doing it in that way; and may God bless you, dear 
friends, more and more! Amen. 


he 


FELLOWSHIP WITH GOD’S GREATNESS. 


’ 


W HEN I think of the great work of foreign 
missions, and of all that may result, with the 
Lord’s blessing, from our obedience to His command, 
“Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to 
every creature,” the chief emotion that thrills my heart 
is that of gratitude to God for enabling me to have 
some sort of— 
FELLOWSHIP WITH HIs INFINITY,— 


with His greatness. It was enough for me, at the 
beginning of my Christian life, to have fellowship 
with God's mercy, to rejoice in His compassion as a 
pardoning God, “merciful and gracious, long-suffer- 


“ing, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping 


mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and trans- 
gression and sin.” I rejoiced to know, not only that 
God is merciful and gracious ; but that His mercy and 
His grace had been displayed in pardoning my sins 
and iniquities. I praised the Lord because I could 
say with David, “ Great is Thy mercy toward me: and 
Thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest hell.” 
Ever since that glad hour when I first saw Jesus as 
my Saviour, I have delighted to sing to Him, whose 
mercy endureth for ever. I have no sympathy with those 
who would set down as a vain repetition that oft-re- 
peated refrain recorded in the hundred and thirty-sixth 
Psalm, “ For His mercy endureth for ever.” Long as 
we live, and till we die, this should be the grateful song 
of all who have tasted that the Lord is gracious,— 


“ For His mercies shall endure, 
Ever faithful, ever sure.” 


" . et ee ps stead fae Pe aes 
=— F . ir 


B30 “Only a Prayer-mecting!” 


This, then, was my first Christian experience ; a sense 
of overflowing gratitude for the Lord’s forgiving 
mercy. 

When I had advanced a little further along the 
heavenward way, I came to have sympathy with God’s 
justice. I began to see something of the horrible 
character of sin, both in myself and in other people ; 
and, sometimes, I felt a burning passion of righteous 
indignation within my heart as I heard, or read, of 
vice and crime in some of their grosser forms, or as 
I became acquainted with sinful men’s intense hatred 
of Christ, the altogether lovely One. Our modern 
doubters talk with contempt of “the cursing Psalms” 
of David; but we have often needed just such 
language as he used; not for the purpose of vin- 
dictively calling for judgments upon our fellow- 
creatures, but as a prophecy of the doom that certainly 
awaits evil-doers. 

Even under the milder radiance of the Gospel, we 
have the awful apostolic anathema, “If any man love 
not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema 
Maran-atha ” (let him be accursed, the Lord cometh). 
Preachers of “ another gospel, which is not another ” 
(Gospel), ought to take warning from Paul’s solemn 
imprecation, “If any man preach any other gospel 
unto you than that ye have received, let him be 
accursed.” God’s danger-signals have flamed forth 
from the time of our first parents’ entrance into the 
Garden of Eden, and the red lamp of His inflexible 
justice is still undimmed. By its crimson light we can 


_ Clearly read that “the soul that sinneth, it shall die.” 


The righteous God “will by no means clear the 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” - 333 


guilty.” “God is angry with the wicked every day.” 
“The Lord is a God of judgment.” As I thought of 
God’s justice, and then saw how He had vindicated 
it by the great sacrifice on Calvary’s cross, “ that He 
might be just, and the Justifier of him which believeth 
in Jesus,” I think I rejoiced as much in His justice as 
I had formerly done in His mercy. 

Since then, on many occasions, I have seemed to 
have fellowship with God’s power. During the, 
terrific thunderstorms that we have had lately, I have 
thought of Job’s words, “The pillars of Heaven 
tremble and are astonished at His reproof. He 
divideth the sea with His power, and by His under- 
standing He smiteth through the proud. By His 
Spirit He hath garnished the Heavens; His hand 
hath formed the crooked serpent. Lo, these are parts 
of His ways: but how little a portion is heard of Him? 
but the thunder of His power who can understand? ” 
I have had to get Dr. Watts to help me to understand 
“the thunder of His power,” and I have joined him 
in singing,— 

“ The God that rules on high, 
And thunders when He please, 


That rides upon the stormy sky, 
And manages the seas: 


“ This awful God is ours, 
Our Father and our love; 
He shall send down His heavenly powers 

To carry us above.” 
It is not easy for poor creatures, such as we are, to 
have sympathy with God’s great power as manifested 
in the thunderstorm; some of us can scarcely do more 
than lie down, cowed by its majestic grandeur. What 


334 “Only a Prayer-meeting! x 


would become of us if the Lord were to let loose all ; 


His wonderful power? Our comfort is that all the 
might of omnipotence is pledged to defend us who 
belong to Christ; and that greater is He that is for 
us than all that can be against us. 

Thus, you see, I have had fellowship with God’s 
mercy, God’s justice, and God’s power; but when I 
come to the mission-field, and begin to think of the 
work of foreign missions, I get more communion with 
God’s infinity there than I do in almost anything else. 
You look at the mass of mankind, and talk of the 
population of the globe as being nearly fifteen 
hundred millions! What do we know about fifteen 
hundred millions? We cannot comprehend what one 
million means; indeed, we do not know much about 
fifteen hundred: what can we know about fifteen 
hundred millions? When we get into these long 
figures, we may as well talk about a million millions at 
once, or any larger number that you please, for we are 
quite out of our depth even with the smaller numbers. 
It is like a man who cannot swim, and who is cast 
overboardwhere the sea is five thousand fathoms deep ; 
he would have been drowned if it had been only five 
fathoms deep; and he would not have been any more 
drowned if it had been five million fathoms deep. 
The term “millions” is one, after all, of which we 
have a very faint idea; and how can we think of the 
multitudes of men and women and children who 
swarm upon this globe, and not be overwhelmed with 
the magnitude of their numbers? Are these millions 
to be converted to God? That is our great aim and 
object, to seek to bring back this world to its rightful 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” — 335 
Lord and Master; that, filled with redeemed souls, it 
may shine among its sister stars with a fair, clear light 
to the praise and glory of God’s grace. 

We look back upon the ages past, and we mourn 
that so few have been brought to the Saviour. The 
years keep rolling on, and but slender progress is 
made, after all ; and centuries, in which we hoped that 
so much would have been accomplished, pass away 
with comparatively little done for Christ and His 
cause and Kingdom. It is an awful struggle, this 
fight with sin; the cross against the tenfold midnight 
of human depravity ; “the foolishness of preaching ” 
against the wisdom of this world; nothing against 
everything, so far as appearances go! Yet God, who 
is All-in-all, is able to effect His eternal purposes con- 
cerning the salvation of men by the feeble means that 
I have ventured to describe as “ nothing.” 

When you come to the missionary meeting, you 
have gone beyond those trifling troubles with which 
some are so grievously perplexed. They are wasting 
their time in a fruitless discussion about the shape 
of a communion cup, or the colour of a vestment, or 
the position of a “celebrant” at what he calls “an 
altar.” You have left the puddles of the street, and 
are soaring upwards toward your God; you have for- 
saken the little molehills where the worldlings burrow, 
and you are high up among the Alps when you get to 
the work of foreign missions. Here is a field wherein 
the tallest of us may stretch his legs, and not be afraid 
of intruding into the domain of his fellow-labourer. 
There are some men, and some women, too, who 
would be all the better if they would stretch their 


336 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


minds, and not always confine their thoughts to one 
narrow circle. 

Look at our small country villages; how rife they 
are with slander and scandal! Very often, it is 
because the people have nothing better to think 
about. I believe that the daily newspaper, with all its 
faults, has rendered some service to the cottagers of 
our hamlets, for it has enlarged their ideas, and shown 
them that there are other people in the world beside 
those who live at Little Pedlington or Slocum-in-the- 
Marsh. You hear them talk about the President of 
the French Republic, or the President of the United 
States, or the Emperor of Germany, or the Czar of 
Russia; and even if they talk nonsense, it is better 
than slandering their neighbours. 

When you transfer this idea to a higher sphere, 
when you begin to read God’s Word, when the Lord 
has brought you into fellowship with Himself through 
the death of His dear Son, when He has made you 
a new creature in Christ Jesus, and put His Holy Spirit 
within you, and given you something of His own com- 
passion for souls; then all things else shrink into 
nothingness compared with the great redemptive work 
of Christ, and your obligation to make that work 
known among the millions of men upon the earth. 
Compared with the tremendous conflict between God 
incarnate and the evil that still remains in the hearts 
and lives of millions of our fellow-creatures, all the 
battles that ever were fought on the earth seem only 
to be like the fights of ants in their nests. There is 
no chivalry like that which is possible to a good 
soldier of Jesus Christ. 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 33% 


I seem to live in poetry when I get to the work 
of foreign missions. Some of our young brethren in 
the College, when they begin to make poetry (which 
is sometimes very poor-try, and at other times very 
cracked pottery), really imagine that one day they 
will become Miltons. Ah! well, there will be plenty 
of prose, and perhaps prosiness, too, in their ministry 
before it is finished ; let us not take their poetry from 
them ; but, brethren, if you want to be poets, think of 
missions to the heathen; there is a theme worthy of 
your muse. One feels as if his wings were beginning 
to grow as he contemplates the triumphs of the cross 
in foreign lands as well as in our own dear country. 
Are there not nations that are to be born to God, and 
are there not whole lands that are to be sown with the 
seeds of light for the reaping by-and-by? 

Foreign missions supply a theme for the prophet as 
well as the poet. I hke, asa rule, to prophesy after 
the event, or else when I am perfectly sure it is going 
to happen; and even then, I hold my tongue longer 
than most people would. But when a man begins to 
be a foreign missionary, he really does seem to grow 
into a prophet; there is something in his occupation 
congenial to the prophetic spirit, and he is linked on 
to the glorious company that in all ages has prophe- 
sied in the Name of the Lord. He has higher objects 
and aims than he used to have, and nobler ambitions 
than many of his fellows have; his object, and aim, 
and ambition are to carry out God’s purposes of 
mercy toward the sinful sons of men. 

So, if nothing came of our mission-work except the 
education of the workers, the lifting up of men until 

22 


~# ; we >) > a ow > sod. aoe 
ot ‘ s ’ zs 


338 Ba Only a Prayer-meeting ! s 


they are able to have some sort of sympathy with God, 
it were worth while to have our foreign missions; but, 
thank God, there is much more than that as the result 
of our efforts! Let India, China, Japan, Africa, and 
_ the islands of the sea testify what triumphs have been 
won for King Jesus by the heralds who have gone 
forth in His Name to all quarters of the earth. There 
remaineth yet very much land to be possessed, both at_ 
home and abroad. 

Enlarge your sympathies, dear friends, increase your 
contributions ; give yourselves to this glorious work, 
if you can ; and if that is absolutely impossible, help to 
support those who are both able and willing to go. 
Do not imagine that the decrees of God can be shut 
up in a small box, and put away in a cupboard in one 
of your rooms. They are too great to be confined to 
any box, or any cupboard, or any room, or any house, 

or any-street, or any town, or any country; nay, they 
are not confined to the world in which we live; for 
all worlds are comprehended within the influence of 
the everlasting purposes of God. His decrees con- 
cern the smallest grain of dust that can only be dis- 
covered-by the aid of the microscope; but they 
equally have to do with the orbs of Heaven, those 
starry hosts that He calleth by their names, and 
numbereth, as the Eastern shepherd does with his 
sheep. In this foreign mission work, I seem to get 
into the sweep of the spheres of God’s eternal. pur- 
poses; and there I hear again that note that first 
brought peace and pardon to my burdened heart, 
“Look unto Me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the 
earth: for 1am God, and there is none else.” 


My 
Fs 
, 

A, 


eens eee a ae een ee ee NS eS 
2 lh Pas ae er a ; : ; 


TIMELY CAUTIONS. 


: V E have great reason to bless God for the rich - 

mercies we have enjoyed as a church and 
people for many years, in the unity of the 
brotherhood, the zeal of the workers, the 
number of conversions, the success of all our 
enterprises, and the growth of the whole body. 
It is on my heart to say a word upon another 
subject,—a subject which presses heavily upon my 
heart. I beseech you, by the mercies of God, and by 
the love of Christ Jesus, your Lord, that, as members 
of this church, you do nothing which would grieve the 
Spirit of God, and cause Him to depart from among 
us. Remember how Israel suffered defeat because of 
Achan. One man only, and one family only, had 
broken the Divine rule, but that sufficed to trouble 
the whole camp. Achan had taken of the accursed 
thing, and hid it in his tent, and all Israel had to suffer 
defeat because thereof ; how much more may a people 
suffer if sin become general among them, and is 
allowed to walk abroad unrebuked! At this time, 
I am greatly mistaken if the Church of God is not 
suffering grievously from the sin of its own members, 
sin in 1ts own midst. 

As I look abroad, I am grieved and have great 
heaviness of spirit at what I see among professing 
Christians, not here and there, but almost everywhere. 
Many Christians, nowadays, do not order their families 


340 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


with godly discipline as becometh saints. I am 
thunderstruck to hear of Christian men who allow 
their sons to drink, to keep late hours, and even to 
swear, while their daughters are dressed as gaudily as 
the gayest of the gay. It grieves me that some pro- 
fessors have no family prayer, and have no command 
over their children whatever, but seem as if they 
thought that the duty of a father was to let his 
children have their own way in all things, and make 
him their slave. We have too many of the race of 
Eli, who perhaps say, “ Do not so,” but exercise no 
authority, and put no real check upon the sins of 
their sons. This is a great source of evil. 

The Lord said, “I know Abraham that he will 
command his children and his household after him ;” 
and where households are not ordered aright, we can- 
not expect that the Lord will show special favour to 
the parents. A husband is the king of his house- 
hold; and if he allows everything to be in a state of 
anarchy, he must blame himself in some measure. A 
husband cannot always govern his wife, for here and 
there a Jezebel is to be met with; but there are certain 
things which he should never permit in her if he be a 
Christian man ; and if he fails in his duty of prevent- 
ing and forbidding sin, God will certainly visit him 
for it. In ourselves, and in our partners, children, or 
servants, evils are not be winked at, but put down 
with a strong hand. May God grant us wisdom and 
strength of mind to discharge our duty at home! 
To show piety at home, is to show real piety. Time 
was when there was not a professing family without 
family prayer, but now there are scores in which it is 


“Only a Prayer-meeting! ie 341 


never offered. You can some of you remember that, 
if your father was absent on business, your mother 
carried on the daily sacrifice; and when mother was 
sick, there was found a boy or girl who would read 
the Scriptures and pray, so that the holy fire was not 
allowed to go out. If there be no gathering together 
for prayer in the morning, how can we expect to be 
prospered in the duties of the day? If there be no 
meeting for prayer at night, how can we expect the 
Lord to guard the tents of Jacob through the night 
watches? If prayer be neglected in our families, how 
can we hope to see its spirit pervading our churches? 
Another very serious matter. concerns the amuse- 
ments of professing Christians. I see it publicly — 
stated, by men who call themselves Christians, that it 
would be advisable for Christians to frequent the 
theatre, that the character of the drama might be 
raised. The suggestion is about as sensible as if we 
were bidden to pour a bottle of lavender water into 
the great sewer to improve its aroma. If the Church 
is to imitate the world, in order to raise its tone, things 
have strangely altered since the day when our Lord 
said, “ Come ye out from among them, and touch not 
the unclean thing.” Is Heaven to descend to the 
infernal lake to raise its tone? Such has been the 
moral condition of the theatre, for many a year, that 
it has become too bad for mending; and even if it 
were mended, it would corrupt again. Pass by it with 


— ayerted gaze, the house of the strange woman is there. 


It has not been my lot ever to enter a theatre 
during the performance of a play; but I have seen 
enough, when I have come home from distant journeys 


342 “Only.a Prayer-meeting! 


at night, while riding past the play-houses, to make 
me pray that our sons and daughters may never go 
within the doors. It must be a strange school for 
virtue which attracts the harlot and the debauchee. 
It is no place for a Christian, for it is best appreciated 
by the irreligious and worldly. If our church-mem- 
bers fall into the habit of frequenting the theatre, we 
shall soon have them going much further in the 
direction of vice, and they will lose all relish for the 
ways of God. Theatre-going, if it becomes general 
among professing Christians, will soon prove the 
death of piety. One finds the taste for such things 
increasing on all hands, insomuch that we cannot enter 
places of entertainment once dedicated to science and 
art without finding ourselves before long in the 
presence of something like a theatrical performance. 

I do not doubt that these things, which may be in 
themselves harmless enough, have tended to create 
and foster the taste which leads ultimately to the 
theatre and its surroundings. Who can suppose 
amusements surrounded with the seductions of vice to 
be fit recreation for a pure mind? Who could draw 
near to God after sitting to admire the performances 
of a.wanton woman, and I am told that some who 
have dazzled London society are such. When man- 
ners are growing every day more lax and licentious, 
shall the Nonconformists of England cease from their 
godly protests, and lower the standard of their lives? 
If they do so, their spiritual power is departed, and 
their reason for existence is gone. 

If there ever could be a time when Christians might 
relax their rigidity, it surely is not now when the very 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!”~ 343 


air is tainted with pollution, and our streets ring with 
the newsboys’ cries vending filthy papers and abomin- 
able prints. It is sad to hear how people talk about 
acts of sin nowadays; how young men and women, 
without blushing, talk of deeds which deprave and 
destroy, as though they were trifles, or themes for 
jests. It is a thousand pities that the ends of justice 
should require the publishing of unsavoury details. 
I suppose there are grave objections to certain cases 
being heard more privately; otherwise, it would 
assuredly be better for public morals. As for those 
who not only commit lewdness, but take pleasure in 
those who do it, “Oh, my soul, come not thou into 
their secret.” My heart often cries, “Oh, that I had 
the wings of a dove, that I might fly away and be at 
rest.” It will, indeed, be ill for the Church of God 
if her members should become impure. In these days, 
we must be doubly strict, lest any looseness of con- 
duct should come in among us. Actual sin must be 
repressed with a strong hand, but even the appear- 
ance of evil must be avoided. 

My dear brethren and sisters, be ye pure; what- 
ever you are not, be pure in heart, and lip, and hfe. 
Never indulge an evil imagination, much less speak 
that which is unclean; let it not once be named 
among you, as becometh saints. A lascivious glance, 
a doubtful word, a questionable act must be earnestly 
avoided; anything and everything that verges upon 
the unchaste must be eschewed. Only the pure in 
heart shall see God. We are all subject to human 
passions, and this wretched flesh of ours 1s all: too 
easily fascinated by those who would minister to its 


344 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


indulgences ; and before we know where we are, the 

soul is led into captivity. Watch unto prayer; watch 
especially in these evil days. Cry, “ Lead us not into 
temptation ;” and if the prayer be sincere, you will 
keep far from doubtful haunts. Make a covenant 
with your eyes that you will not look upon that which 
pollutes, and stop your ears from hearing of licentious- 
ness. Pray God to keep your heart pure and holy. 
Watch your lips lest they spread corruption when 
speaking of sin. I do not fear so much your going 
into gross open sin as your doing that which will 
take you a little way upon the road to it. 

I think it is Augustine who tells a story of a young 
friend of his, who had the greatest horror of every- 
thing connected with the Roman amphitheatre. A 
heathen friend tried to persuade him to enter the 
Colosseum ; and as he was very hard pressed, and was 
under some obligation to that friend, he determined to 
go just once, but to keep his eyes and ears closed all 
the time. It would seem to be a very small risk to sit 
there as one who was blind and deaf; but, in the 
middle of the sports, the people so loudly applauded 
a certain gladiator, who had pleased them, that the 
young man opened his eyes to discover what it was 
about. From that moment, he was spellbound; he 
looked on, and enjoyed the sight ; and though, before, 
he could not bear the very mention of it, he came at 
last to be a regular frequenter of the cruel sports, and 
a defender of them, and after a short time he aban- 
doned his profession of Christianity. Beware of the 
leaven of worldly pleasure, for its working is silent 
but sure, and a little of it will leaven the whole lump. 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!”” 345 


Keep up the distinction between a Christian and an 
unbeliever, and make it clearer every day. Have you 
never heard of the minister who complained of the 
devil for running off with one of his church-members? 
The fiend replied, “I found him on my premises, and 
therefore I claimed him.” I, also, may say,.“ Stop! ” 
to the arch-deceiver, but it will be of no use if he finds 
you in his domains. Every fowler claims the bird 
which he finds in his own net. This is the argument, 
“TI caught him in my net, and therefore he is mine.” 
We shall in vain try to dispute this right of property 
with the arch-enemy, for possession is nine points of 
the law. 

Avoid the appearance of evil. “But we must not 
be too rigid,” says one. There is no fear of that in 
these days. You will never go too far in holiness, nor 
become too like your Lord Jesus. If anybody accuses 
you of being too strict and precise, do not grieve; but 
try to deserve the charge. I cannot suppose that, at 
the last great day, our Lord Jesus Christ will say to 
anyone, “ You were not worldly enough. You were 
too jealous over your conduct, and did not sufficiently 
conform to the world.” No, my brethren, sucha thing 
is impossible. He who said, “ Be ye perfect, even as 
your Father which is in Heaven is perfect,” has set 
before you a standard beyond which you can never go. 

“Well, but,” says one, “are we to have no enjoy- 
ments?” My dear friend, the enjoyments which are 
prepared for Christians are many and great, but they 
are not such as savour of sin and folly. Do you 
call vice and folly, amusements? Then I do not 
grudge you your mirth. When I go down into the 


Aig), a 


oS 


a: if 


7 


t? 


ED OR ST ee ee PPE SS BRET eae Late a CERT KOS ee ARENDS 


SF a ee ee eee 


346 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


country, I see the farmer’s men carrying out great 
pails of hog’s-wash for the swine, and I never grudge 
them their dainty meal. I never protest against their 
having a full trough twice over. But do 1 partake 
with them? Not I. NotI! I have no taste that 
way. Do I therefore deny myself? Certainly not! 
It never struck me that there was anything desirable 
in their rich mixture. I have no doubt that it has a 
fine flavour to the creatures for whom it is prepared ; 
at least, it is very strong, and seems to be highly 


appreciated. So, when persons can enjoy the 


pleasures of the world and sin, let them have them: 
poor souls, they have nothing else to enjoy, they have 
no Paradise for their hereafter, they have no Jesu’s 
bosom to lean their heads upon for the present, let 
them have that which makes them happy while they 
can be so. But when I am talking to the children of 
God, I adopt another tone, since for you these things 
have no charms if you have, indeed, tasted the high 
delights of fellowship with God. 

“ But,” say you, “I should greatly enjoy a little of 
the pleasures of sin.” Judge yourselves, then, to be 
falsely called children of God. “He that is born of 
God doth not commit sin;” by which is not meant 
that he does not fall into sins of infirmity, but that it 
is not his delight to commit sin, it is not the way of 
him; he is a new creature, and he finds his joy and 
pleasure in living as near to God as possible. 

“ How far may we go in conformity to the world? ” 
is a question that is frequently asked in some men’s 
hearts, if not in so many words. Have you never 


heard the story of the lady who wanted a coachman?, 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” ~ BAC 


Two or three called to see her about the situation, 
and, in answer to her enquiries, the first applicant said, 
“Yes, madam, you could not have a better coachman 
than myself.” She replied, “ How near do you think, 
you could drive to danger without an accident?” 
“Madam, I could go within a yard of it, and yet 
you would be perfectly safe.” “ Very well,” she said, 
“you will not suit me.” The second one had heard 
the question upon which the other had been rejected, 
and therefore he was ready with his answer, “ Danger! 
madam, why I could drive within a hair’s breadth, and 
yet be perfectly safe.” “Then you will not suit me 
at all.” When number three came in, he was asked, 
“ Are you a good driver?” “ Well,” he replied, “I am 
careful, and have never met with an accident.” “ But 
how near do you think you could drive to danger? ” 
“Madam,” he said, “that is a thing I never tried, I 
always drive as far away from danger as ever I can.” 
The lady at once replied, “ You are the kind of coach- 
man I want, and I will engage you at once.” 

Get such a coachman as that yourself, to guide your 
own heart, and lead your own character. Do not see 
how near you can go to sin, but see how far you can 
keep away from it. If you do not take that advice, 
and if the Spirit of God does not work in you purity of 
life, by-and-by the church will have to hold up its 
hands, and say, “ Who would have thought it? These 
were the nice young people of whom so much was 
expected; these were the good people who used to 
say, ‘You must not be too strict, and where are they 
now?” To avoid the worst, keep clear of the bad. 

As for your Lord’s work, be bound to the altar of 


losers Saby giving up ae aelenes: The ee 
ways are ways of pleasantness, and all His paths are ox 


"peace. There is a safe and sweet pleasantness in holy 4 


On 


living, and the pleasantness lies very much in the 
fact that an abounding peace springs from it. God 
grant us grace to keep in these peaceful paths, even © 
— though others should call us Puritans, and ridicule our 
_ holy fear of sin! Amen. ~ | TH 


» 


a) 


* "4 
b i 7 


d 
% 


i Lib od cas shoal GS Gar Bh aha Rie 


SC LEMPTED OF THE DEVIL.” 


HE letter, which I am about to read, comes from 
a certain county in Scotland. Each line begins 
in the original with a capital letter, so that it wears the 
appearance of poetry. I believe the idea is current 
m remote country places that this is the correct way 
of writing, and the writer is too earnest to do anything 
carelessly or contrary torule. Here is the letter : — 
“To the Very Rev. C. H. Spurgeon,—Believing 
that you are one of the faithful servants of God, and 
also that you have a large congregation, and that 
there is many a true believer among them; therefore 
I proposed to write to you in the hope that you and 
your congregation will remember me in your daily 
prayers, and also that it will be made public that I am 
requesting the prayers of the Lord’s people for my 
soul and everlasting salvation, knowing that the 
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth 
much. Dear sir, I may tell you that I am suffering 
much from the adversary. It is true that I cannot 
compare myself to that holy man, John Bunyan; but 
in the book that he wrote under this title, ‘ Grace 
Abounding, he tells us how he was tempted; and I 
feel that the old serpent, which is the devil, and Satan, 
who deceived Eve in the Garden, and who was tempt- 
ing that saint, John Bunyan, with many of the same 
temptations, tempteth me on this day; and if you 
would know all that I am suffering from his fiery darts, 


350 “Only a Prayer-meeting!”™ 


you would have commiseration with me. I believe 
it will be twenty-five years now, if not more, since | 
began to pray to God, and yet my temptations are 
terrible. Yet I cannot say that I am in despair, for I 
know that my Redeemer liveth, and I will see Him. 
My trials from the adversary are awful. It may be 
when I am on my knees praying to God that he will 
come to me as sudden as a gunshot, and I believe 
doing all he can to steal my heart and affections away 
from God and Heaven, and trying to make me say 
some wrong word; and many a time he will make 
my heart and flesh tremble while [ am at my meat or 
talking, or in the house of worship, or travelling. In 
whatever condition I am, I feel that he is 
doing all he can to ruin my poor soul; there- 
fore, | request the earnest prayer of all Christians 
for my poor soul, and I know for one, and for 
the first one, that you will not refuse this supplication 
to me. I believe that we never saw one another in 
the flesh, and God only knows if we will see each 
other on the face of the earth; but I hope we will see 
one another in Heaven where the adversaries can 
never come near us. I hope this will be told before 


your congregation on Sabbath first—I am, dear sir, 
your obedient servant, who resides in the county of: 


‘The Lord knoweth all them that are His.’ 
“P.S—I will be happy to see your kind advice 
either in a tract or in a newspaper. I am a reader of 
the Herald.” 
I very much demur to the commencement, “ To the 
Very Reverend C. H. Spurgeon,” for no revererice is 
due to me. Romaine used to say that it was very 


. Pee 
Sy Pes 
3 


“Only-a Prayer-meeting!” _ 351 


astonishing to observe how many reverend, right: 


reverend, and very reverend sinners there were upon 
the face of the earth. Assuredly, reverend and sinner 
‘make a curious combination ; and as I know that I am 
the second, I repudiate the first. To me, it is sur- 
prising that such a flattering title should have been 
invented, and more amazing still that good men should 
be found who are angry if this title be not duly given 
to them. However, the superscription is a small 
matter. I would make a few remarks upon the letter 
itself, in order that we may the more intelligently and 
fervently present our supplications on the writer’s 
behalf. 

And, first, we notice with pleasure that ¢he writer 
7s not altogether in despair, for he expressly says, “I 
know that my Redeemer’ liveth.” If he would dwell 
more on his living Redeemer, and look less at the 
changeful current of his own thoughts, the snare 
would be broken, and he would escape. It is very 
charming to see how poor souls, when tossed to and 
fro by the devil, will yet hold on to their hope; half 
afraid to think that Jesus is theirs, they nevertheless 
feel that they could not give up what little hope they 
have. By a blessed inconsistency, they doubt and yet 
cling, dread and yet trust, condemn themselves and 
yet hope. Such souls are a riddle, puzzling their 
friends, and most of all confusing themselves. Could 
we but persuade them to give their thoughts to that 
blessed “I know,” they would soon chase away the 
enemy, for Satan abhors a believing “I know.” He is 
more content with “I hope,” and best pleased with 
“Tam afraid”; but “I know” stings him dreadfully ; 


b 
- 


ro A. ee Gee ta 
3 bs ay’ 


352° “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


and if he, who can truly say it, will arm himself with 
that mind, he will ere long overcome the enemy. 
Satan dreads the Redeemer’s Name, and he falls like 
lightning from Heaven before those who know how to 
plead it with confidence. 

Having noticed the pleasing point in the letter, we 
are now forced to remark that z¢ zs a very dreadful 
thing to be tempted twenty-five years in this way, and 
yet this is not the only case we have heard of, in 
which temptation has been both long and strong. I 
have, in my library, a book by Timothy Rogers upon 
“Trouble of Mind,” in which he tells us of Mr. 
Rosewell and Mr. Porter, both ministers, the latter of 
whom was six years oppressed by Satan, and yet 
afterwards rejoiced in the light of God’s countenance. 
Mr. Robert Bruce, many years ago minister in Edin- 
burgh, was twenty years under terrors of conscience, 
and yet found deliverance. Rogers says:—“ You 
have, in ‘the Book of Martyrs,’ written by Mr. Fox, 
an instance of Mr. Glover, who was so worn and 
consumed with inward trouble for the space of five 
years, that he neither had any comfort in his meat 
nor any quietness of sleep, nor any pleasure of life ; 
he was as perplexed as if he had been in the deepest 
pit of hell, yet at last this good servant of God, after 
such sharp temptations, and strong buffetings of 
Satan, was freed from all his trouble, and was thereby 
led to great mortification, and was like one already 
placed in Heaven, leading a life altogether celestial, 
abhorring in his mind all profane things.” 

None of these cases extend to quite the length of 
time mentioned in the letter ; but I remember to have 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 353 


heard of one who lay in the prison-house some twenty- 
seven years, and yet came forth to perfect liberty: 
but even this is less remarkable than the case 
mentioned by Turner in his “Remarkable Provi- 
dences,” of Mr. Charles Langford, the author of a 
book called “ God’s Wonderful Mercy in the Mount 
of Woful Extremity.” He therein says that, for nearly 
forty years, he had been severely buffeted by Satan, 
who left no stone unturned to do him all the mischief 
he could. For forty years was he led through the un- 
comfortable wilderness of temptation ; and his clearest 
day, all that time, was but dark; Satan filling his soul 
with cursed injections, blasphemous thoughts, and 
dreadful temptations. The Lord was pleased to make 
use of his godly wife for his deliverance. He over- 
heard her pleading at the throne of grace, as was her 
wont, after this fashion, “My Father! My Father! 
What wilt Thou do with my husband? He hath 
been speaking and acting still in Thy cause. Oh, 
destroy him not, for Thine own glory! What dis- 
honour will come to Thy great Name if Thou do it! 
Oh, rather do with me as Thou wilt; but spare my 
husband,” &c. “God, who delights to advance His 
own power by using small and unlikely means, came,” 
said he, “and owned His own ordinance, and crowned 
the cries, and faith, and patience of a poor woman with 
such success that my praise shall be continually of 
Him. Mine adversary, the devil, was sent to his own 
place by my dear Lord Christ, who brake the door of 
brass, and rescued me from his fury.” So, you see, 
that long temptation by Satan is not so rare a trial as 
some would suppose. 


a3 


<P 


Pe ag ee 


Ae te Ae 
- WoL n* ‘ih 


7 
ne 


. rey 


tC ea pe ot TA 


TIN La ee ee by ee an ae 


354 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


But these temptations of the devil, do they come 
to really gracious men? Certainly. The instances 
I have given prove it; and, besides, our reason would 


lead us to expect it. If a foot-pad were on the road, 
and knew something about the travellers, he would 


not stop beggars, for he would know that they have 
nothing to lose. Would he try to rob the rich or the 
poor? Those that have money, of course, would be 
his game; and, just so, Satan assaults those who 
have grace, and leaves those-who have none. 

When a sportsman is engaged in duck-shooting, 
he does not hurry himself to pick up the dead ducks 
that fall around him; he pays all his attention to those 
which are full of life, and are only wounded, and may 
perhaps get away. He can pick up the dead ones at 
any time. Even so, when Satan sees that a man’s 
soul is wounded, and yet that it has a measure. of 
spiritual life, he bends his strength in that direction, 
in the hope of securing that poor bleeding spirit. It 
is grace that attracts his malicious eye and his 
diabolical arrows. He would not sift if there were 
no wheat, nor break into the house if there were no 
treasure within. It is no ill proof, therefore, when you 
find yourself tempted of Satan; his assaults are no 


sign of a want of grace, but rather a token of the 


presence of it. 

But can a good man be tempted to use bad 
language? Ah, that he can! The purest mind is 
sometimes most of all assaulted by insinuations of the 
filthiest thoughts and most horrible words. I was 
brought up, as a child, with such care that I knew but 
very little of foul or profane language, having scarcely 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!’” 355 


ever heard a man swear. Yet do I remember times, in 
my earliest Christian days, when there came into my 
mind thoughts so evil that I clapped my hand to my 
mouth for fear I should be led to give utterance to 
them. This is one way in which Satan tortures those 
whom God has delivered out of his hand. Many of 
the choicest saints have been thus molested. Be- 
loved, think it not strange concerning this fiery trial 
when it comes upon you, for no new thing is happen- 
ing unto you but such as is common to godly men. 

What ts to be done, then, in the case of one who is 
beaten down and harassed by fierce temptation? If 
I were the writer of this letter, I suppose I should do 
as he does; but if I acted rightly, 1 would go and tell 
the Lord Jesus Christ all about the devil’s sugges- 
tions, and beg Him to interfere, and restrain the evil 
one. It is His office to bruise the serpent’s head, and 
He can and will doit. We need not fear that our poor 
cries and tears will be in vain. Jesus is very faithful, 
and will come to our rescue. “ That great Shepherd 
of the sheep” will not allow the wolf to worry His 
lambs to death. 

In addition to spreading his case before the Lord, it 
may be helpful to the tempted one to write down his 
trouble. Very much of perturbation of mind arises 
out of absolute confusion of thought, and a written 
statement may help to clear away the cobwebs. 
Luther threw an inkstand at the devil’s head at the 
Wartburg, arid the example may be wisely followed ; 
for, often, when you see your misty thought con- 
densed in black and white before your own eyes, 
it will not exercise over you one half the power which 


4 


356 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 
it possessed before, and often there will be an end of 
it altogether. I have told you, before, of the poor 
woman who complained to her minister that she did 
not love the Saviour. So the pastor went to the 
window, and with his pencil wrote on a piece of paper, 
“T do not love the Lord Jesus Christ.” Taking it to 
the good woman, he said, “ Now, Sarah, will you put 
your name to the bottom of that?” Her horror was 
most manifest, and she cried, “ Oh, no, sir! I could not 
do it; I would die first.” “But you said so.” “ Yes, 
I did, but I will not write it. I love the Lord Jesus 
too much to sign any such a document.” Is there not 
wisdom in my advice to write down your temptation? 
Still, the main remedy is ¢o keep on going to the 
Saviour as each new blasphemy is injected, and as 
each fresh sin is suggested, for He will send the Holy 
Spirit, the Comforter, to deliver you. If Satan sees 
a soul constantly driven to Christ by his temptations, 
he is too crafty to continue them. He will say to 
himself, “ These attacks of mine accomplish nothing ; 
for, every time that I tempt him, he runs to his 
Saviour, and so becomes stronger and holier. I will 
let him alone, and perhaps he will then go to sleep, 
and so I shall do him greater mischief by my quiet- 
ness than by roaring at him.” The devil is a 
cowardly spirit, and fears to meet the courageous in 
heart. Stretch out your hand, and lay hold upon the © 
sword of the Spirit, and give him a believing thrust, 
and he will spread his dragon wings in dastard flight. 
A man had better go a hundred miles roundabout, 
over hedge and ditch, rather than meet the arch- 
enemy; yet, if any of you must meet him, be not 


bs 
wi 
- 


RS | Os Seat 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 357 


dismayed, but face it out with him. Resist the devil, 
and he will flee from you. May we, in all our con- 
flicts with him, fight the good fight so bravely that, 
when a memorial is set up to record the conflict, it 
may bear those lines of honest John Bunyan,— 


“ The man so bravely played the man 
He made the fiend to fly; 
Whereof a monument I stand, 
The same to testify.” 


May the brother, whose letter I have read, find the 
Lord to be his strong helper, and speedily come forth 
out of darkness into marvellous light! 


“WE SHALL GET HOME; WE SHALL GET 
HOME.” 


ONVERSING, just now, with an elder of the 
church, I remarked that he must be somewhere 
about seventy-five, and he replied, “ I am eighty-two.” 
“That,” I replied, “is a good old age.” “Yes,” said 
he, “it is;” and then he cheerfully nodded his head, 
and added, “We shall get home; WE SHALL GET 
HOME.” And so we shall, brothers; so we shall, 
sisters. In chorus we will take up our brother’s word, 
and say, “We shall get home; WE SHALL GET 
HOME.” 

“We shall get home.” There is music in that simple 
sentence; a soft melody, as of the evening bell. 
Early in life, its sound may be more stirring and 
trumpet-like, nerving our youth to energy, and making 
us cry, “ Excelsior”; but, as our years increase, and 
the sun descends, its note is sweet and soothing, and 
we love to listen to it in our quiet moods, for each 
word has a silvery tone, “We shall get home, WE 
SHALL GET HOME.” This is our great comfort: how- 
ever long the way, we shall get home. We may live 
to be eighty-two, or even ninety-nine; but we shall 
get home in due time. We may not doubt that 
blessed truth, for the Lord has taught us to sing in 
the song of Moses, His servant, “Thou shalt bring 
them in, and plant them in the mountain of Thine 


300 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


inheritance.” The way may be rough, but it is the 
King’s highway, and no brigands can drag us off from 
it; we shall by this road get home to the Father’s 
own house above. Some of us are not nearing three- 
score years as yet, and perhaps we have many long 
leagues to traverse, but we shall get home,—glory be 
to God! 
“ His love has fixed the happy day 

When the last tears will wet our eyes, 

And God shall wipe those dews away, 

And fill us with Divine surprise, 

To be at home, and see His face, 

And feel His infinite embrace.” 


One reason why I feel sure that we shall get home 
is this, that we are found in the road which leads 
‘there. This is a great wonder; in fact, a greater 
wonder than our getting home will be. When we 
were far astray, with our backs to the Father’s house, 
fond of riotous living, the Lord in His infinite mercy 
visited us, made us long to return to Him, and set our 
feet upon the way of life. This is a miracle of grace, 
and I am never tired of thinking of it; and because 
of all that it includes, I feel quite at ease about getting 
home. “For if, when we were enemies, we were 
reconciled to God by the death of His Son, much 
more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by His life.” 
The love which plucked us out of the fire will 
assuredly keep us from falling back into it. God does 
not begin a work without intending to finish it. 

Besides, my brethren, we have already come far on 
the road, and therefore we shall get home. Consider- 
ing our many temptations and trials, and the evil of 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!”* 361 


our nature, we are bound to praise the Lord with our 
whole hearts because we have been preserved unto 
this day. Our life in the future can hardly be more 
full of miracle than the past has been; why should we 
suppose that the Lord will stay His hand? Nothing 
but omnipotent grace could have brought us thus far, 
and that grace is quite sufficient to preserve us 
through all the rest of the way. We shall get home; 
for “the Lord hath been mindful of us: He will 
bless us.” Even in the hour of death, fear shall not 
overshadow us. You know how quaintly John Mason 
puts it,— 
“T have a God that changeth not: 
Why should I be perplext ? 


My God, that owns me in this world, 
Will own me in the next. 


“ Go fearless then, my soul, with God 
Into another room: 
Thou who has walkéd with Him here, 
Go, see thy God at home.” 


I am persuaded we shall get home because, often- 
times, we receive messages from the Father Himself, 
and these love-words assure us that He remembers 
us; and if He remembers us, He will not let us perish. 
Moreover, we receive substantial help from Him, and 
comforts by the way both by day and by night. If 
He meant to cast us off at last, He would not so often 
have cheered our spirits by His gracious visits and 
love-tokens on the road. As the land-birds, which 
light upon the rigging of his vessel, assure the voyager 
that he is nearing the shore, which as yet he sees not, 
so heavenly blessings without number flying to our 


NT wee eee 1. ee ee 
et Cis iT: 


te eae 


a r" > 


eee “Only a Prayer-meeting! 3 


succour tell us that the glory-land is nigh. We shall 
soon cast anchor in the Fair Havens. ~ 

We shall get home, for others have done so who were 
once at our side travelling the same path. We asked 
them, as they departed from us, how they hoped to 
reach their journey’s end, and they told us that all 
their hope rested upon sovereign grace: what less or 
what more do we rest in? That grace, which has 
secured to them a safe journey, will secure the like to 
us; why should it not? It is true that we do not 
deserve it, nor did they; it was to them a matter of 
grace, as it certainly will be to us. But that grace is 
true and constant. All who sail with Jesus shall be 
saved from the yawning deep. Yes, even though it 
should be on boards and broken pieces of the ship, 
we shall get safe to land! 

We shall get home; for, oh! 2f we do not, what a 
lament there will be in Heaven! Think of that. If 
the children do not come home, what mourning for the 
lost ones will be heard in the mansions above! 
Neither God nor good men could see the Divine 
family broken, and yet be happy. Every angel in 
Heaven would feel a disappointment if one child of 
God was absent at the reading of the muster-roll. 
Did they not once rejoice over each one of us as a 
sinner repenting? Their sympathetic mirth was 
premature in our cases if we perish by the way. But 
angels are not doomed to find their hopes frustrated, 
neither will the great Father find that He Himself 
was glad too soon. Heaven would be a desolate place 
if at its banquets some David’s seat was empty! We 
cannot endure to imagine some member of the sacred 


Peete er ee ee Ne eS Or ee Ste ~ 
Pinte wes eo ¥ “y ? 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” — 303 


family missing, lost for ever, cast into hell! It must not 
be, for in that land of absolute perfectness there is— 


“No missing heir, no harp that lies unstrung, 
No vacant place those hallowed halls among.” 


We shall get home, for the great Father Himself will 
_ hever rest until we do; and He that bought us with 
His precious blood will never be satisfied till all His 
redeemed shall stand around Him girt in their snow- 
white robes. If we had been on pilgrimage with our 
families, and we had reached home ourselves, and 
then missed a dear child, what a stir there would be! 
I appeal to every father’s heart; would you sleep 
with a child lost? Would you not tramp back every 
step of the road to seek your dear stray lamb? You 
would cry everywhere, “Saw ye him whom my soul 


loveth?” Well can I imagine our good Shepherd ~ 


using the same words concerning any one of us if we 
did not get home, and asking everywhere, “Saw ye 
him whom My soul loveth?” He would not rest until 
He had found His chosen, His heart’s delight. Did 
He rest, the first time, till He brought us home on His 
shoulders rejoicing? Would He rest, a second time, 
till He had folded us in glory? No, He can never 
have full joy in His heart until all His ransomed are 
in the place where the many mansions be. 

Brothers, we shall get home, I am sure we shall; 
and what a joy it will be! Think of the bliss of 
seeing our Father, our home, our Saviour, and all 
those who are dear to us for Jesus’ sake. A venerable 
sister, who saw me very busy, the other day, remarked 
that we shall have plenty of time to talk to each other 


es 


304 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” 


in eternity. I do not quite see how there can be time 
when time shall be no more; but no doubt there will 
be space and opportunity for the fullest communion 
with each other, and for much fellowship of united 
delight in the adorable person of our blessed Lord. 
I anticipate much felicity from fellowship with perfect 
saints above, since I have had so much pleasure in the 
society of imperfect saints below. Many have gone 
home from us of late, and we are getting older; but 
let us not regret the fact; since the home above is 
being filled, and a perfect society is being formed 
which will last for ever. 

I remember a remark of my dear friend, John 
Edwards, before he left us for the Fatherland above. 
I said to him, one day, “Our brother So-and-so is 
gone home,” and he replied, “Where else should he 
go?” Just so. When evening draws nigh, home is 
the fit place for each one of us, and we instinctively 
turn to it. We think badly of people who do not 
care to go home when their work is done. Some 
workmen- make long hours, and stay late at work; 
but nobody envies them on that account: most 
persons think the sooner they are home the better. 
Do not youthink so? Do you not long for the home- 
going? It is best to have no impatience about it, but 
to fill up the whole day with holy service, and then 
consider going home as the crown of it all. Even 
this poor world can be made very home-like if we have 
the true childlike spirit. “Where is your home?” 
said one to a little girl. The reply was, “My home 
is where mother is.” Even so, our home is where 
Jesus is; and if He wills for us to tarry out of Heaven 


eee er Pye ee Me OM oo a. | are 
A ee pat he o~ ~ s i 


~ 


“Only a Prayer-meeting!” 305 


for a while, we will feel at home in the desert in His 
sweet company. 

Here, however, comes in a word of caution ; it will 
be wise to ask ourselves, “Where is our home?” 
Somebody said, “It is well to go home zf we have a 
good home to go to.” That point is worthy of deep 
thought. Every creature goes to its own place; the 
fox to its hole, the bird to its nest, the lion to its den, 
and man to hishome. The righteous will rise to the 
light that is sown for them; but as for the ungodly, 
where will they go? Where must they go? You 
may judge of their place 4y their pleasures. What 
are their pleasures? Vanity, sin, self. There are 
none of these things in Heaven; and, therefore, those 
who love them cannot enter there. If they have 
found their pleasure in the ways of Satan, there shall 
they find their endless portion. 

We may judge men by their company. Like will to 
like. What sort of company do you prefer? The 
man who sings the drunkard’s song, the man who 
pours forth loose talk, is he your companion and 
friend? Then you shall be gathered to him, and to 
such as he, in the assembly of the dead. I remember 
a good woman saying to me, on her dying bed, “I am 
sure the Lord will not cause me to dwell for ever with 
the ungodly and the profane, for I have never loved 
such society. I think He will let me go to my own 
company.” Yes, that He will. Those who are your 
companions here will be your companions hereafter. 

You may also foretell your future abode from your 
present character, for your eternal destiny will be the 
ripe fruit of your character in time. If you are numbered 


Lief 
~ 


fet 


- 


ii% Wa 
en eae 


le 


net sa at EN lore aaa a Me a Ua ht 


SF SU ee ele Ree pod 
ee i 


& 
7 


ci 
OF ee eG 
- mA 


Sea a tg aa BS eee oe ears Pare 
cet se Fe att Soe a ms AS See noone 
360 “Only a Prayer-meeting!” Bree 


amongst the ungodly when the Lord comes to judg- 
ment, you must have your portion far off from God. 
The false, the foul, the prayerless, cannot find a home 
among the true, the pure, the holy. Oh, you who are 
unrenewed, I pray you think over those words of the 
psalmist, “Jf I make my bed in hell.” What a bed! 
But as you make it, you will have to lie upon it. If 
you find rest.in sin, you will make your bed in hell. 
O my beloved, do not one of you run the risk of sucha 


‘doom! We have loved each other here; Jet us not 


be divided. Let us go together along the way of 
holiness. Together let us follow Jesus, and then we 
shall all get home to the same Father’s house. My 
joy, my crown, my second Heaven shall be to meet 
you all there in that sweet, sweet home, where danger 
shall be ended, where sorrow shall be banished, and 
sin excluded. Our Father will receive us, our elder 
Brother will joy in us, and the Spirit of God will be 
glad over us. The dear ones, whom we wept as lost, — 
will meet us; and all the rest of the company re- 
deemed by blood will welcome us. Do not our souls 
joyfully anticipate that grandest of all family gather- 
ings? Is it not a jubilee to our hearts to think of the 
general assembly and Church of the firstborn, whose- 
names are written in Heaven? : 


WE SHALL GET HOME; 
WE SHALL GET HOME. 


MORNING PRAYER-MEETING., 


(No. 974 in “Our Own Hymn Book.”) 
Gweery the holy hymn 


Before the world with smoke is dim 
We meet to offer prayer. 


While flowers are wet with dews, 
Dew of our souls descend; 

Ere yet the sun the day renews; 
O Lord, Thy Spirit send! 


bs Upon the battle field 
aes Before the fight begins, 


To guard us from our sins! 


Ere yet our vessel sails 

Upon the stream of day, 

We plead, O Lord, for heatenly gales 
To speed us on our way! 


On the lone mountain side, 
Before the morning’s light, 

per: The Man of sorrows wept and cried, 
eis And rose refresh’d with might. 


4a Oh, hear us then, for we 

sil ; Are very weak and frail ! 

pes We make the Saviour’s Name our plea, 
And surely must prevail. 


C. H. SPURGEON’S HYMN FOR AN EARLY |. 


Breaks on the morning air; } 


We seek, O Lord, Thy sheltering shield, Sy a 


THEOLOGY LIBRARY | 


CLAREMONT, CALIF. 


¥ d 
Se OST aS 
pee. Se 


% 


“ 


By 0. H. Srurezon. Orown 8vo, Oloth, 3s. 6d, 
oD A OE Et oat ha Oth rich Antes 


CGHorks ty C. H. Spurgeon 


AND OTHER AUTHORS, 


Published by PASSMORE & ALABASTER, 
PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, E.C. 


C. H. SPURGEON’S AUTOBLOGRAPHY, 
Compiled by His Wife and Private Secretary. 
Handsomely bound and profusely illustrated, complete in four 

volumes, 10s: 6d. each. \ 
** Every page sparkles with good things. The record is worthy of the 
man.—The Methodist Times. 


“The Autobiography is full of characteristic touches. Almost every” 


page contains some instance of Spurgeon’s ready humour and his faculty 
for apt illustration.—The Review of Reviews. ’ 


Expository. 

The Gospel of the Kingdom: a Popular Exposition of the 
Gospel according to Matthew. By ©. H. Spurezon. Preface by Mrs. 
SpurGzHon. Price 6s. ; half calf, 10s,; calf, 15s, 

“Tt has all Mr. Spurgeon’s characteristics, his simple unquestioning faith, 
his command of nervous telling Anglo-Saxon, his ready wit and forcible appli- 
cation of religious doctrine to daily life and conduct.”—The Christian World. 

‘This is not only an exposition and a commentary—it is an education in 
the true method of Bible readings, which is Bible feeding...... These comments, 
therefore, are even more experimental than expository, for experience is the 
best expositor......I¢ contains numerous terse sentences which will be useful 
for quotation when they have been read, marked, learned, and inwardly 
digested.” —The Christian. 

- *The work has all the charm of Mr. Spurgeon’s simple but forcible style; 

and while it is a treasury from which a// may draw, the profoundly suggestive 

character of many of its notes makes it a valuable assistant for any minister of 
the Gospel.”—The Quiver. vt ie pay 

Treasury of David: Containing an Original Exposition of the 
Book of Psalms; a collection of illustrative Extracts from the whole range 
of Literature; a series of Homiletical Hints upon almost every verse; and 
list of Writers upon each Psalm, Oomplete in 7 vols., Oloth, 88. each. 
May also behad in half-calf and calf bindings. Of these volumes 
148 thousand haye been sold. 

Treasury of David: New Issue, in Monthly Parts, 1s. each. 
Mr. SruRGEON’s magnum opus, ‘‘The Treasury of David,’’ which occupied 
over twenty years of the author’s busy life, is too well-known to need any 
lengthy description. 148,000 volumes have been sold, and it is still 
in constant demand. The cost of a complete set (seven volumes, pub- 
lished at eight shillings each), though comparatively little for such an 
immense mass of valuable theological literature, has placed the work 
beyond the reach of many Christian workers who desire to possess it, 
Messrs. Passmore and Alabaster haye therefore re-issued the whole 
work in 42 monthly parts, at one shilling each. Parts 1 to 42 now ready. 

The Interpreter ; or, Scripture for Family Worship: being 
selected passages of the Word of God for every morning and evening 
throughout the year, accompanied by a running comment and suitable 
Hymns. By 0. H. SruRGEon. Cloth 25s., Persian Morocco 32s. Turkey 
Morocco 428. Oheap edition, Cloth, 12s. 6d. Imitation Morocco, gilt 


edges, 21s, i , 
The ‘Golden Alphabet of the Praises of Holy Scriptures 
setting forth the Believer’s Delight in the Word of the Lord: being a 
Devotional Commentary upon the One Hundred and Nineteenth Psalm, 


5/3/01— 10,000. 2494% 


The Metropolitan Tabernacle Pulpit, Containing the Ser- | 
mons of 0. H. Spurexon, published during the past forty-six years, 

_ Vols, I. to XLVI.,7s.each. Whole calf, 17s. 64., and half-calf, 12s. per vol. 
The Sermons are published every Thursday at 1d.; and will be sent weekly 
by the Publishers, post free, to any address in the United Kingdom :— 
Three months, 1s. 8d.; Six months, 3s. 3d. ; Twelve months, 6s, 6d. 

A full Textual Index of 2,700 Sermons, post free, on application. - 

**Twelve Sermons” Series. Cloth, 1s. each. Post free Is. 2d. 
Christmas Sermons. Revival Sermons. , 


New Year’s Sermons. . Sermons for the Troubled and 
Popular Sermons, | Tried. 
Sermons on the Passion and | Sermons to Seekers. 
_ » Death of Christ. © | Soul-winning Sermons. 
Sermons on the Resurrection, | Striking Sermons. “ 
Sermons on the Holy Spirit. Missionary Sermons. 
Sermons on the Second Coming Sermons on the Prodigal Son, &c. 

of Christ, Sermons on the Word of God. __ 
Sermons on Prayer. Sermons on Faith. 
Sermons on the Plan of Salvation. | Sermons on Unbelief. 
Sermons on Various Subjects. Sermons on Conversion. 
Sermons on Vital Questions. | Sermons on Praise. ; 
Sermons on Hope, | Sermons for Christian Workers, 
Sermons on Holiness, Memorable Sermons preached on 
Sermons on Joy. | Remarkable Occasions, 
Sermons on Peace. | Gospel Sermons for Sinners. 
Sermons with Strange Titles. Sermons on Thanksgiving. 
Sermons on the Love of Christ. | Sermons on Ritualism. 


Sermons on Our Lord’s Cries from the Oross, 


Jusi Published— Sermons on}Temptation. 
Sermons on Death. Sermons on Forgiveness. 
Sermons on Heaven. Sermons on Repentance. 
Sermons on Backsliding. Sermons on the Christian Warfare. 


Types and Emblems: A Collection of Sermons preached on 
Sunday and Thursday Evenings at the Metropolitan Tabernacle, 
By C. H. Spurexon. 3s. : 

Trumpet Calls to Christian Energy: A Second Series of 
Sunday and Thursday Evening Sermons. 8s. 6d, 

The Present Truth: A Third Series of Sunday and Thursday 
Evening Sermons. 3s. 6d. 

Storm Signals: A Fourth Series of Sunday -and Thursday 
Evening Sermons at the Metropolitan Tabernacle. 3s, 6d. 

Farm Sermons. By ©. H. Srurgzon, Illustrated Volume, 
Crown 8vo. 828 PP. 3s, 6d, cloth gilt, 

The Royal Wedding. The Banquet and the Guests, By 
0. H. SpuReEON. Paper covers, 6d. Cloth, Is. 

The Most Holy Place. Sermons on the Song of Solomon, By") Sa 
C. H, Spurcxon. Containing 52 Sermons delivered in the New Park | 
Street Chapel andthe Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newin gton. Oloth gilt, 7s. 

Our Lord’s Parables. By C. H. Spuraxon. Containing 65 
Sermons delivered in the New Park Street Chapel and the Metropolitan z 
Tabernacle, Newington. Oloth gilt, price 7s. P 3 

Our Lord’s Miracles. By ©. H. Spurgzon, Containing 107 SS, 
Sermons delivered in the New Park Street Chapel and the Metropolitan = 
Tabernacle, Newington. 2 vols., cloth gilt, 7s. each. 

The Gospel for the People. Sixty Short Sermons, with a 


Sketch of Mr. Spurgeon’s Life, and Fourteen Portraits and Engravings. 
With preface by Pastor Tuomas Spurcxon, Cloth gilt, 5s. S 

These Short Sermons have been selected from the Series witha view . 
to their being used in Mission Halls, and other similar places, They |) ~ 
are about half the length of the ordinary Sermons, 


aan eee 


al 


nd Attributes. | 


_. Cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. 
The Everlasting Gospel of the Old and New Testaments. 


Cloth, 8s, 6d, 
Ellustratibe, 


Fac-simile Pulpit Notes, with the sermons preached from them. 
Cloth extra, 2s.6d, This volume contains twelve fac-simile reproductions 
of Mr, Eparpeon's written notes used by him when preaching, With 
two portraits, and view of interior of Tabernacle with congregation. . 

| lustrationgs and Meditations ; or, Flowers from a Puritan’s 

: Garden. Distilled and Dispensed by C.H. Sruroron. Priceda.éd. 

Barbed Arrows, from the Quiver of C. H. Spurazon. A Col- | 

lection of Anecdotes, Illustrations and Similes, with Preface by Pastor : 

C. Spurezon. A companion volume to ‘‘ Feathers for Arrows.” Oloth, | 


= 2s. 6d, 

| Feathers for Arrows; or, Illustrations for Preachers and 
| Teachers, from my Note Book. By 0. H. Spurcgon. Price 2s, 6d 
: 33rd Thousand. - : 
Teachings of Nature in the Kingdom of Grace, Uniform 
el with ‘‘Till He Come,” Cloth gilt, price 3s, 6d. , 
| “Till He Come”: Communion Meditations and Addresses, By 
er. : p. = Spurcxon, Cloth gilt, price 3s. 6d.: Morocco, red and gilt edges, | 
a s. 6d. | 
aS The Soul-Winner; Or, How to Lead Sinners to the Saviour. | 2 
By 0. H. Srurczon. Cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. | = aaa 
- The Salt-Cellars; Being a Collection of Proverbs and Quaint | 
Sayings, with Homely Notes thereon. By C. H, Spuraxon. Vol. I.— 

Ato. Twelfth thousand. Vol II.—M to Z. Tenth Thousand, Cloth 
ee gilt, 38, 6d, each; French morocco, 7s. 6d. each, oa 
| Sermons in Candles; Being Two Lectures upon the Ilus- 
Sal) trations which may be found in Common Candles. Stiff Covers, 1s.;_ 
f or handsomely bound in Cloth, gilt edges, 2s, 5 
We Endeavour.’’ Uniform with ‘Words of Wisdom for Daily 


Life.”? Oloth gift, 2s. 
“Come, ye Children.” Uniform with ‘‘ Words of Wisdom for | 
= Daily Life.” Cloth gilt, 2s, | 
| Words of Counsel for Christian Workers. Words of 
oe Advice for Seekers. Uniform with ‘Words of Wisdom for Daily 

Life,.”” Cloth gilt, 2s, each. 1 4 
Words of Wisdom for Daily Life. ByjC. H, Spurazon, 

Crown 8v0, 160 pp. Oloth gilt, 2s. 

Words of Cheer for Daily Life. By ©. H. Spurenon. 
Cloth gilt, 2s. | : : F 

Words of Warning for Daily Life. By 0. H. Spurazon. 
Oloth gilt, 2s. be 

Everybody's Book: C. H. Spurgeon’s Pilgrim’s Guide. 

= A word for all times and for all seasons. Price 1s., paper. covers; 
2s, handsomely bound in cloth, 

A Good Start: A Book for Young Men and Women, By 
0. H. Spurexon. Cloth gilt, price 38.6d. With Introductory Note 
by Simm Gzorce WILLIAMS. | ’ 

Glorious Themes for Saints and Sinners. By O, H. 
Srureczon, Orown Syo. Oloth gilt 8s. 6d. 


ae ge a, a ee oe 
= LEDS eee ee 
Extracts. 


Gospel Extracts from C. H. Spurgeon. Price is. 


Flashes of Thought; Being One Thousand Choice Extracts 


from the Works of C. H. Spunexon. Alphabetically arranged, and with 
a copious Index. Price 5s. pie 

Spurgeon’s Gems; Being Brilliant Passages Selected from 
the Discourses of C. H. Spurexon. Large Type, 3s. 6d. 

Gleanings among the Sheaves. By 0. H.Spurezon. Cloth, 
price 1s. : 

Spurgeon’s Birthday Book. Cloth, 2s. 6d,; Persian, 3s. 
Calf or Morocco, 5s.; Russia, with Photograph, 10s, 6d. 


Bebotional, 

Morning and Evening Daily Readings: New Edition on 
India paper, in one volume. Royal 32mo. 736 pp. Cloth, gilt edges, 
8s. 6d. Leather, 5s. Oalf or Morocco, 7s. 6d. : : 

Morning by Morning; or, Daily Readings for the Family 

or the Closet. By C. H. Spurgxon. 3s. 6d. Morocco, 7s. 6d. 134th thousand. 

Evening by Evening; or, Readings at Eventide for the Family 
or the Closet. By 0. H.Spureron. 8s.6d. Morocco, 7s. 6d. 98th thousand. 

The Cheque Book of the Bank of Faith; Being Precious 
Promises arranged for Daily Use; with Brief Experimental Comments. 
Cloth, 8s.6d. Persian Morocco, red and gilt edges, 7s. 6d. 29th thousand. 

Our Own Hymn Book. Compiled by 0. H. Spurazon. Prices 
from 1s. to 10s, 6d. School Edition, 6d. : 

Supplement to Our Own Hymn Book. Price 6d., 1s. and 2s, 


For Students. 


Lectures to a Students; A Selection from Addresses 
delivered to the Students of the Pastors’ College, Metropolitan Tabernacle. 
By ©. H. Spunexon, President. First Series, Forty-first thousand, 
and Second Series, Twenty-fourth thousand. Price 2s. 6d. each. 

Commenting and Commentaries: Two Lectures addressed 
to the Students of the Pastors’ College, together with a Oatalogue of 
Bible Commentaries and Expositions, Fourteenth thousand. Price 2s. 6d. 

The Art of Illustration. A Course of Lectures delivered to 

the Students of the Pastors’ College. By 0. H. Spurcron. Price 2s. 6d. 

My Sermon-Notes. A Selection from Outlines of Discourses 
delivered at the Metropolitan Tabernacle. Part I. Genesis to Proverbs 
—I. to LXIV. Part Il, Ecclesiastes to Malachi—LXV. to OXXIX. 
2s, 6d. each. Parts I, and IT. bound together in one Volume, Cloth, 5s, 
Part III. Matthew to Acts—OXXX. to OXCOV. Part IV. Romans 
to Revelation. OXOVI. to OCLXIV. 28. 6d.each. Parts III. and Iv. 
bound together in one volume, price 5s. 

Speeches by C. H. Spurgeon at Home and Abroad. 
In paper covers, 1s. QOloth gilt, 2s. 6d. 

The Greatest Fight in the World. Conference Address 
by 0. H. Spunckron., New Edition. Oloth gilt, 1s, 


Pertodtcal, 


The Sword and the Trowel: A Monthly Magazine, Price 
8d. Yearly vols., 5s, Cases for binding, 1s. 4d. 

It commands a large circulation among almost all classes of Christians, and 
as a religious periodical, it now occupies a position second to none. It records 
the works of faith and labours of love which are the honour of the various 
sections of the Church, and it contends most unsparingly against the errors of 
the times. It is an accurate record of the religious movements which emanate 
from the Metropolitan Tabernacle, but its advocacy is far from being confined 
within that area, No pains will be spared to render the Magazine growingly 


worthy of the widest circulation. 


Wistorical. 


The Metropolitan Tabernacle: its History and Work, 
With 32 Illustrations, By 0. H. 8rurczon. Price, in paper covers, 
1s, Bound in cloth, 2s, 


Memorial Volume, Oontaining Sermons and Addresses 


delivered on the completion of the Twenty-fifth year of the Pastorate 
of 0. H, Spuraxon. Price 1s., cloth. 


Memories of Stambourne: With Personal Remarks, Recollec- 


tions and Reflections. By C. H. Spurazon and Bznsamin Beppow, 
Stiff covers, 1s. Cloth, gilt edges, 2s. 


Southwark. A Lecture by C. H. Spurczon, delivered in the 


Metropolitan Tabernacle Leoture Hall, on December 26th, 1860. Stiff 


Covers, 6d. 
The Two Wesileys. A Lecture delivered in the Metropolitan 
Tabernacle Lecture Hall, on December 6th, 1861, by 0. H. SpurGEON. 


Price 9d. 
6 Popular. 


John Ploughman’s Talk; or, Plain Advice for Plain People. 
Illustrated. By C. H. Spurcxon, Cloth, 1s, Cloth, gilt edges, 2s, 
415th Thousand, 

John Ploughman’s Pictures; or, More of his Plain Talk for 
Plain People. Cloth, 1s.; cloth, gilt edges, 2s. 155th Thousand. 

C. H. Spurgeen Anecdoies: containing 100 authentic 

Anecdotes. Cloth gilt, 1s, 
Spurgeon’s Shilling Series. Bound in Cloth. 
No.1.—Christ’sGloriousAchievements. ' No. 5.—The Bible and the Newspaper. 


yy 2.-——Seven Wonders of Grace, s, §.—Eccentric Preachers. 
9) 3.—The Spare Half-Hour, +) 7.—Good Cheer. 
5) 4.—The Mourner’s Comforter. », 8.—Gleanings among the Sheaves 


he Clue of the Maze: A Voice Lifted up on Behalf of Honest 
Faith. ByO.H. Spurcron. Price 1s, 


New Enlarged Edition, uniform with ‘‘ Around the Wicket Gate.” Cloth 


ilt, 1s. 
. It is the author’s desire that it may strengthen the faith of many, and 
recover others out of the snare of the enemy, 

All of Grace. An Earnest Word with those who are seeking 
Salvation by the Lord Jesus Christ. By ©. H, Spuraron. Price 1s. 
Persian Morocco, gilt edged, 28. Sixtieth thousand. 

According to Promise; or, The Method of the Lord’s 
Dealing with His Chosen People. A Companion Volume to ‘All of 
Grace.” Oloth, 1s. Morocco, gilt edges, 2s. Thirty-fifth thousand. 

Around the Wicket Gate; or, A Friendly Talk with Seekers 
concerning Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. By O, H. Spurenon. 
Cloth gilt, illustrated, 1s.; French Morocco, 2s, Fiftieth thousand. 


BOOKLETS, 

Breaking the Long Silence. Mr. Spurgeon’s Last Address at 
Mentone, New Year’s Day, 1892. Price 6d. 

Peace! Perfect Peace! An Address suitable for the New Year 
on the Bishop of Exeter’s Hymn. By 0. H. Spureron. Price 6d. 

May |? By C. H.Spurcron. Price. 6d. 

Sweet Experiences in 1842 and -I892. By C. H, Spurezon, 
Price 6d. 

Supposing Him to be the Gardener. By C, H. Spuraxon, 
Price 6d. 

There go the Ships. By C. H. Spurcnon. Price 6d, 

The Name of Jesus. A choice Booklet. By C. H. Spurgzon. 
Price 6d. 


The Sermon of the Seasons. By C. H. Spuranon. Price 6d, 


= 


: oa. oe : 
_ The Search after Happiness. By ©. H. Srurcron 
Christ is All. By 0. H. Spurezon. Price 6d. — was , 
The Talking Book. By OC. H. Spurezon. Price 6d. P53 
Looking unto Jesus. By C, H. Spurazon. Price 6d. 2m ges 
The Great Shield of Faith. By 0. H. Spurgron. Price 6d. 
Pictures of Life and Birthday Reflections. By ©. H. 
Srurcron. Price 6d. 


Published in Pretty Booklets, with Gold Cord, at 6d. each, or in Tluminated 
; Envelope, 2s. 6d. for siz. 


Works by MRS. SPURGEON. ae 

The Standard Life of C. H. Spurgeon, by his Wife and his | 
Private Secretary. Complete in 4 Demy 4to Volumes, 10s. 6d.each; or | 
about 32 One Shilling Monthly Parts. Vols. 7.,1I., //7.1V.now ready. 

A Carillon of Bells to Ring Ont the Old Truths of ‘‘ Free 
Grace and Dying Love.” Cloth gilt, is. 6d. 

A Cluster of Camphire; or, Words of Cheer and Comfort 
for Sick and Sorrowful Souls; uniform with ‘‘ A Carillon of Bells.” 
Cloth Gilt, 1s. 6d. = 

Ten Years After! A Sequel to “‘Ten Years of my Life in | 
the Service of the Book Fund.’ Cloth gilt, 8s.6d. Special Edition, 

i with new Photograph and written Autograph, 5s. 

Ten Years of My Life in the Service of the Book Fund; 
Being a Grateful Record of my Experience of the Lord’s Ways, and 
Work, and Wages. By Mrs.C.H.Srureron, Third Edition, handsomely 
bound, 3s. 6d. Bevelled boards, gilt edges, Portrait and Autograph, 5s. 
Sixth Thousand, 

Westwood Leaflets. By Mrs.0. H. Spurezon. Price 3d. per 
set, In packets of 50, 6d. 


1, Imprisoned Music (Prose). — 7. Plenty of Shadows. 
2. Imprisoned Music (Poetry). 8. Songs in the Night. 
ee 8. The Empty Fountain. 9. The Lark’s Nest. S 
aN 4, The Dripping Roses. 10, The Syringa. 
= 5. The Place where the King’s Prisoners 11, Cutting down the Trees. 
wee 6. Pains and Pearls. {were Bound. | 12. The Gobelins Tapestries, 
rey Westwood Leaflets. Devotional Series. Price 3d. per set. In 


packets of 50, 6d. 


A Protest Against Bazaars (New and Enlarged Edition), By 
Mrs. C0. H. Spureron. Price ld. lp 


Works by THOMAS SPURGEON. 

“Down to the Sea.” A Collection of Sermons Chast, 
with Portrait. Oloth gilt, 3s. 6d.; bevelled boards, gilt edges, 5s. 
Scarlet Threads. and Bits of Blue. A Selection of Short 

Poems. Paper covers, ls.; cloth, is. 6d. ; 

The Gospel of the Grace of God. Sermons delivered at 

the Metropolitan Tabernacle in 1884. Bound in cloth, Is. 6d. 
_In Perils in the Sea. A Poem. Paper Covers, 1d, 

En Voyage ; or, Hindrances and Helps in Church Work 
and Life. Inaugural Address at the Eighth Annual Conference of the 
Pastors’ College Evangelical Association, by the President. Price 1d. 

Lost and Found: The Lost Sheep. The Lost Coin. The Lost 


Son. Addresses on Lukexy. Price 2d. 


Works by Rev. ARTHUR T. PIERSON, D.D. 
The Hopes of the Gospel. Uniform with “The Heart of the 
Gospel.” Cloth gilt, 2s. 6d, 
The Coming of the Lord. As. the Doctrinal and Practical 
Centre’of the Bible. Illustrated with Diagrams. Price ls. 


a a a a a 


7 


The Heart of the Gospel. Sermons delivered at the Metro- 
politan Tabernacle. Oloth gilt, 2s.6d. Second Edition. 

The Heights of the Gospel. A companion volume to ‘The 

' Heart of the Gospel.” Cloth gilt, 2s. 6d. 

“Life-Power”; or, Character, Culture and Conduct, Uniform 
with “The Heart of the Gospel,” ‘The Heights of the Gospel,’ and 
‘‘Evangelistic Work.” Oontents:—“The Elements and Secreta of 
Power.” ‘‘The Power of a Presiding Purpose.” ‘*The Use and Abuse 
of Books.”’ “The Genius of Industry.” ‘‘ The Ethics of Amusement,’ 
“The Inspiration of Ideals.’ Cloth gilt, 2s. 6d. 

Evangelistic Work in Principle and Practice. New and 
revised edition. Cloth gilt, 2s. 6d. 

The Divine Art of Preaching. Lectures on Preaching,&¢,Cloth,2s. 

Papers for Thinking People. I. “The Fool’s Creed.” 
II. ‘‘The Ethics of the Dance.” III. ‘The Word of God Tried and 
Proved.” IV. ‘‘Two Great Laws of the Sermon.” Y. “Why and How 
shallI give?” Stiff covers, 1s.; cloth, 1s, 6d. 

Love in Wrath, Or the Perfection of God’s Judgments. An 
Address delivered before the Mildmay Conference. Price 4d. 


DR. PIERSON’S SIXPENNY BOOKLETS. 

Stumbling Stones Removed from the Word of God. 
Paper, 6d.; cloth, ls. 

The Dove in the Heart. Price 6d. 

The = laa on the Plough; or, some Secrets of Service. 
Price 6d. 

In Full Armour ; or, The Disciple Equipped for Conflict with 
the Devil. Price 6d. 

The Reading of the Word of God in Public, and Hints on 


Bible Readings. Price 6d. 
UNIFORM WITH ‘* THE Dovz IN THE HEART.’’ 


Hope: the Last Thing in the World. Price 6d. 

The Greatest Work in the World. 64 pages, Attractive 
Cover. Price 6d. Gilt edges, 1s. 

The Pillar of Fire. A Word of Witness from Personal Experience, 
Price 6d. 

Answered Prayer. A Book of Remembrance written before 

; God, New Edition, revised and improved, Oloth, 6d,; leather, 1s, 


LECTURES AND SERMONS. 


The Pastor’s True Monument and Memorial, and The 
Pastor’s Last Testimony and Testament. Being Two Sermons 
delivered at the Metropolitan Tabernacle, on Sunday Morning and 
Evening, June 19th, 1892, on the 58th Anniversary of the Birth of 0. H. 
Spurgeon, With PortraitofthePreacher. Price3d. 

Immortality and Resurrection, and a Voice from the 
Dead. Two Sermons delivered on Sunday, January 29th, 1893, the first 
Anniversary of the death of the Pastor. Price 3d. 

The Bible: God’s Rock of Ages. A Lecture by the Rey, 
Dr. A. T. Prurson, delivered in the Metropolitan Tabernacle, on 
Thursday Evening, Noy. 24th, 1892. Price 2d. 

The Crowning Beatitude. Price 2d. 

God’s Judgments and their Lessons. A Sermon on the 
Influenza Scourge. Price 1d. $ 

The Loyal Minister of Christ. Price 1d. 

The Three Determining Wills. Price 1d. 

Sin’s Dominion Destroyed. Price 1d. 


— SS - 


= 
er, foc. Bae 
i x ee A 


| The Security of the Saint. Price 1d. 
| The Criteria ef a True Church. Price 1d. a 
| The Sailor: God’s Scholar ; and the Sea : God’s School. 1d. 
The Witness of God’s Word against Wine. Price 1d, 


Works by Other Authors. 


| Sin and the Unfolding of Salvation. Being the Three Years’ 
Course of Theological Lectures delivered by the late Professor Dayip 
Gracry (Principal of the Pastors’ Gollege, London). With an Introduction 
by Pastor THomas Srurcon, and a Preface by Professor A. M‘Care, 
B.A,, LL.B, (Pastors’ College.) Large 8yo, Cloth gilt, 7s. 6d. 


| From the Usher’s Desk to the Tabernacle Pulpit, 


Pastor C. H. SPURGEON, Prince of Preachers. By Rey. RoBErt 
Suinpiez, Author of ‘‘ Northeram Hall,” &c., &c., &. With numerous 
Portraits and Illustrations. Oloth gilt, 2s.6d. ; bevelled boards, gilt edges, 
8s. 6d. ; Morocco, red and gilt edges, 7s.6d. Twenty-eighth thousand. 

From the Pulpit to the Palm-Branch. A Memorial of 
C. H. SPURGEON. Sequel to the Sketch of his Life, entitled, ‘From 
the Usher’s Desk to the Tabernacle Pulpit.” Including the Official Report 
of the Services in connection with his Funeral. Bound in cloth, 2s. 6d. ; 
bevelled boards, silvered edges, 3s. 6d. ; Morocco, red & gilt edges, 7s. 6d. 

The Essex Lad who became England’s Greatest 
Preacher. O. H. Spurgeon’s Life for Young People. Suitable for Prizes 
and Birthday Presents. With 35 Illustrations and Engravings. B 
J, Manton SmirH. With introduction by Rey. Joun Spurexon, 0, #. 
Spurgeon’s father. Cloth, gilt edges, 2s. ; cloth, ls. 6d.; paper covers, Is, 

The Lay Preacher’s Guide. Bright Words for Soul-Winners, 
Containing chapters by OC. H. Spurcron, G. E. Morean, W. Y. Funier- 
TON, Mark Guy Pxarsx, O. RusskLt Hurpirex, Jos1an Nix, W. Harpy 
Harwoon, Henry THORNE, FRANK Cockrem, F, B. Meyer, &c., &€. 
Preface by Sir Grorez WiLtiams, Cloth gilt, price 3s. 6d. net. 

The Greatest Problem, Miracle, Work,Wonder inthe World. 

a By Rey. T. GrexNwoop. Price ls. 

Are You a Christian? The Confession of Evelyn Thornton. 
Price, 6d.; post free, 7d. 

A Soldier's Conflict (a true Story). By one of the 57th 
Regiment (Old “Die-Hards”), In cloth, 1s. nett; paper covers, 6d. 
nett. 

Living Lighthouses. The Story of Two Brothers: William 
Henry Angas, first Missionary of the British and Fereign Sailors’ 
Society, and George Fife Angas, Founder and Father of South 
Australia. By G. HotpEn Pixs. With an Introduction by E. W. 
Marruews, Secretary British and Foreign Sailors’ Society Price 1s, 

Henry’s Outlines of Church History. By Joszra Frrnanpez, 
LL.D. Oloth gilt, 2s.6d. New Edition. 

Waymarks for Wanderers. By W. Y. Futtertron. Oloth 
gilt, 1s. 6d. New Edition, 4 : 
Striking Stories from Real Life. By the late Rey. J 

Manton SmitTH. Oloth gilt, 2s. 6d. 
Treasure Trove. Extracts in Prose and Verse. Compiled by 
. B. Cory. Price 6d, , 

A Clergyman’s Baptism, Confession and Testimony. 

By Arcursatp E. Grover, M.A. Oloth gilt, 1s. 6d, 


Lonpon : PASSMORE & ALABASTER, Paternoster Buildings, E.C. 


The Secret of Overcoming Satan. Priceld. As | 


Spurgeon, Charles Haddon, 1834-1892. 

"Only a prayer-meeting" : forty addresses a 
Metropolitan Tabernacle and other prayer-meet 
/ by C.. Spurgeon. -- London : Passmore and 
Alabaster, 1901. 

Wiii, 2oop. .; 20cm. 


lj. Baptists--Sermons. 2. Evangelistic ser 


SES “beige bce 


@ ccsc /mmb
