. piesdenllbonit be 


| Ought ile to be i Wearing? | 


, 


A REPLY TO Mr. L LAING’S TRACT ON THE 
een? COMING OF THE LORD.” 


« 


. TORONTO: - 


Brut, Hawes & Sty Printers, 13, Adelaide Strest East 


¢ 


M87 vas 


be iw 3 


econ ern A SSRIS =o SSS SATO cs 


OUG! 


Mr. Laing’ 


IN a day 
be) the cry 
groom come 
are in a pre: 
position of 
oppose him 
men that a 
equally unt 
taken. It 
such as he | 
coniing of t 
chosen delil 
He has und 
in earnest | 
not the ho 
comfort to 
buke to th 
dream of ; | 
cannot com 
whom his I 
apply to yo 

For, Is 
of details o 
in their ple 
tency of an 
or any oth 


OUGHT WE TO BE WATCHING? . 


A REPLY TO 


Mr. Laing’s Tract on the “ Second Coming of the Lord.” 


In a day like the present, when (true or false, as it may 
be) the cry is being so widely issued, “ Behold, the Bride- 
groom cometh,” and wheu almost all sections of Christendom , 
are in a greater or less degree responding to it, he assumes a 
position of no ordinary responsibility who comes forward to 
oppose himself to this growing expectancy, and to assure 

' men that alarm on the one hand and hope on the other are Mt 
equally unfounded. ‘This is the position Mr. Laing hag mip 
taken. It is not, merely details of prophetic interpretation, - _ 
such as he has chosen to link with this announcement of the 
coniing of the Lord, that he sets himself to oppose. He has | 
chosen deliberately to say, “ My Lord delayeth His coming,” 
He has undertaken to assure men there is no need ‘for taking ae 
in earnest the exhortation to ‘ watch,” because they know me 
not the hour the Lord doth come (Matth, xxiv. 42). His Re 
comfort to the careless is, “There is no danger.” His re- ra 
buke to the watchers is, “There is no such hope as ye it 
dream of ; if we know not the hour, we know at least Christ i 
cannot come in our time. The ‘blessed is that servant, ig 
whom his Lord when He cometh shall find watching,’ cannot i 
apply to you.” : os 

For, I say again, this is no mere question of the accuracy 
of details of prophetic interpretation, important as these are 
in their place. We have not first to determine the consis- 
tency of any views held by so-called ‘‘ Plymouth Brethren,” 

- or any others. The primary question is not so intricate as 


’ 


a 


x 
Pac 


ee, 


i ~~ é 
Miidagcat toe Foe 
Sab ene? <a 


Sis 


4 


e 
’ 


he would represent; and his making the two things one, is, 
I fear me (whether he intend it so or not) to daunt men by 
the apparent intricacy, if not indeed also to bring the fvll 
weight of ecclesiastical prejudice against “ Plymouthism ” to 
bear against the nearness of what the apostle styles “ that 
blessed hope.” 

I do not want to avoid the issue which he raises. I hope 
to meet it fully presently. But I do want it to be under- 
steod, that the question first of all is, ‘Is there for us any 
sense or meaning in the Lord’s words, Watch, for ye know 
not wuat hour your Lord doth come?” It is vain to say 
that the prophecy of these chapters (Matth. xxiv., xxv.) 
speaks, as Mr. Laing seems to assume (p. 58) of the destruc- 
tion of Jerusalens long ago. His own words (p. 53, 54) are 
in opposition to this, which indeed hears its own folly upon 
its face. Did the Lord then come with the clouds of heaven 
and all the holy angels with Him, and was there then any 
going forth of virgins to meet Him, or any separation of 
sheep from the goats? Evidently this is future, and as evi- 
dently it is not death, but a real personal coming of the Lord 
from heaven. It. is ‘thus as, to this coming that the Lord 
says ‘ Watch,” Ought we to be watching then? 1 cannot 
watch, for what I Anow cannot come for a thousand years yet. 
Watt, I .can,and must, of course. .Watc.., L.cannot.,, Watch- 
ing is’ bascd on the uncertainty of when He may come. Ac- 
cording, to Mr. Laing, it is certain He cannot come in, our 
time. ‘As to that then we may go to sleep, as we list; watch- 
ing isin vain. | 

Thus. does Mr. Lxing at the outset contradict God’s testi- 
mony. Buti I desire to follow him now, though. briefly, 
through the varions points to which he objects, seeking to 
show the Scripture doctrine, as the Lord may enable. It 
should matter little -to any child of God, whether man has 
baptized jit  Plymouthism ” or aught else. 

“The fallacious definitions on which the theory. rests 
refer,” says Mr. Laing, ‘ (1) to the Church ; (2) to the King- 
dom of God ; (3) to the personal coming of our Lord ; (4) to the 
Judgment ; (5) to the Resurrection ; (6) to the Milleniuin,” 


- 


- to be Christ 


A quota 
objects to: 
“Tt was 
that the Ch 
before all w 
Church was 
day of Pent 
believers, di: 
Spirit incor, 
since, and is 
tence on ear 
of the Lord 
Let us loc 
then it will 
L.’s objectio: 


of the meani 


be-better eve 
stituted for 
sembly ” all 
applied to th 
and to the J 
The use of 
question, as 
ment as to t 
to that Chu 
Church ” (M: 
“the house 
when was th 
all other bod 

Now the I 
my Church,’ 
of which He 
or was, build 


truth is this 
separate thin 


8 One, is, 
-men by 
the fr'll 
hism ” to 
es ‘ that 


3. I hope 
be under- 
or us any 
ye know 
in to say 
iv., XXvV.) 
e destruc- 
3, 54%) are 4 
folly upon 
of heaven 
then any 
aration of 
id as evi- 
the Lord 
the Lord 
I cannot 
years yet. 
,, Watch- 
ome, Ac- 
ein, our 
Bt; watch- 


od’s testi- 
h_ briefly, 
keeking to 
iable. It 
* man has 


enry rests 
the King- 
4 (4) to the 
illeniuin,” 


- of the meaning of the word translated “Church.” 


. to be Christ’s or God’s house. 


; 
1. Toe Cuuron. 


A quotation of Mr. Laing’s own will shew the view he Ht 
objects to: in 


‘Tt was not tiil after the death and resurrection of Jesus \ 
that the Church began. In the purpose of God, it existed Ms | 
before all worlds. But as to its actual existence on earth the ii 
Church was formed by the descent of the Holy Ghost on the 
day of Pentecost. Those who till then had been individual 
believers, disciples of Christ, were by the descent of the Holy 
Spirit incorporated into one body, which: has existed ever 
since, and is the Church of God. It has its exis- 
tence on earth between the day of Pentecost and the descent 
of the Lord Jesus into the air.” 


Let us look first at the proof of this from Scripture, and 
then it will not be hard to apprehend the character of Mr. : 
L.’s objections to it. He should know that it is no question i! 
It would . i 
be-better every way if the true word “assembly” were sub- 
stituted for this in every place in the New Testament. “ As- 
sembly ” all admit to be the meaning, the same word as that 
applied to the riotous heathen mob at Ephesus (Acts xix. 41) 
and to the Jewish “church in the wilderness ” (Acts vii. 38). | f 
The use of the mere word argues nothing, and is ‘not-the f 
question, as Mr. L. should have known ; and his whole argu- 
ment as to this (p. 29) is pointless. The real question is as Bh 
to that Church (or asserably), which is called Christ's “My Wa 
Church” (Matth. xvi. 8) ; “ His body” (Eph. i. 22, 23) ; and a 
“the house of God” (1 Tim. iii. 15). The real question is, Au 
when was that body formed and how, and is it distinct from Aid 
all other bodies of saved people, whether Jewish or millennial. bid 

Now the Lord’s own words, “ Upon this rock I will build Ht 
my Church,” should assure us that this was a future building tn 
of which He spoke. He was going to build it, not had been, Wa 
or was, building it. . Nor is the Jewish church ever claimed feb mr) | 

Notoriously, so far from the Hie: 
truth is this, that His house was (while Judaism lasted) a 
separate thing from the people, viz., the tabernacle or the 


Never was it once said to them, as now to Chris- 
tians, “‘ Ye are the temple of God.” Nor as much as once 
are they called (as we) even “living stones,” out of which a 
temple might be built. The assembly which is the “ house 
of God” is the Christian assembly alcne, 

As to the ‘ Body of Christ” the same thing is, if possible, 
plainer. Where, I would ask Mr. Laing, does he find that 
those who constituted the Jewish assembly were members of 
the body of Christ? It is very plain that the Jewish body 
was not even an assembly of believers, or of the trie children 
of God even at all. It was a nation, one of the ‘ families of 


temple. 


the earth ” (Amos iii. 2), among whom true child: * God 
were scattered. Only as the fruit of Christ’s wo | after 
it (Jno. xi. 52) were these scattered children of Gou to be 


gathered together in one. And the body of Christ, it is evi- 
dent, was only’ formed by that baptism with the Holy Ghost 
which John the Baptist predicted in his day as the then 
future work of Christ, and which was accomplished at Pente- 
cost for the first time. ‘‘ Ye shall be baptized with the Holy 
Ghost,” says the risen Lord to His disciples, “ not many days 
hence” (Acts i. 5), ‘ By one Spirit” says the apostle to the 
Corinthians, “are we all baptised into one-body” (1 Cor. 
xii. 13). If then by the baptism of the Spirit the body is 
‘formed, it. was not formed till Pentecost, there being no such 
baptiam before, if we are to take Scripture as the guide at 
least. Nor could there have been a body on earth until there 
was a head in beaven, and that was not till Christ as man sat 
down there, as it is written :. He raised Him from the dead, 
and set. Him at His own right, hand in the heavenly places, 

. + and put all things under His feet, and gave Him to 
be the head over all things to the Church which is His body, 
the fulness of Him that filleth all in all” (Eph, i. 20-23), 

That this church, His body, is also the Eve, the bride of 
the last Adam, is plain’ from the fifth chapter of the same 
epistle, 1t is so plain indeed, I need add no words of nine ; 
and the union between Christ and the church is said to be a 
great mystery, as I agree with Mr. Laing in believing to be 
the interpretation of the last verse but one. 


- 
~ 
—_ 


Mr. L 
the apostl 
him, “ wh 
in God, " 
Spirit. 1 
and states 
and a join 
English)— 
the gospel 

Mr. L, 
in of the C 
“ Christ ca 
make both 
body, or g 
_ tance; but 

' coming ad 
bestowing - 
Jewish inh 


How fe 
measure un 
do certain] 
rather, tha 
baptism of 
the myster 
be jointly, 
same body, 
one word a 
portant for 
have come 
time ; so t 

- according t 
without sub 
one word o 
itself to hir 

-principalitie 


* 6sA co- 


to Chris- 
h as once 
f which a 
ie * house 


f possible, 
find. that 
embers of 
wish body 
e children 
families of 

* God 

| after 
Gou to be 
t, it is evi- 
loly Ghost 
3 the then 
1 at Pente- 
h the Holy 
many days 
pstle. to the 


as man sat 
mn the dead, 


| 20-28). 
he bride of 


7 


Mr. L. must needs also agree, (because in so many words 
the apostle says so) that there was a mystery made known to 
him, “ which from the beginning of the world had been hid 
in God,” until revealed in New ‘Testament times by the 
Spirit. This he calls (Eph. iii. 4) “the mystery of Christ,” 
and states it to be “that the Gentiles should be joint heirs, 
and a joint body *”—(I give it literally, however harshly in 
English)—“ and joint-partakers of His promise in Christ by 
the gospel” (ver. 6). } 

Mr. L. maintains that this merely refers to the bringing 
in of the Gentiles into the Jewish blessing ! His words are : 
“‘ Christ came to take away the middle wall of partition, to 
make both Jew and Gentile one, not by setting up'a new 
body, or giving a new promise, or obtaining a new inheri- 
tance; but by putting the believing Gentile, without his be- 


‘coming a Jew, into the body of God’s people or church, and 


bestowing on him an interest in the Jewish promise and 
Jewish inheritance” (p. 32). 


How far this is from the fact we can already in some 
measure understand. For the Scriptures we have considered 
do certainly prove that Christ has formed a “new” body ; or 
rather, that the body of Christ began at Pentecost with the 
baptism of the Holy Ghost, and never existed before. Thus 
the mystery of Christ in this respect was that Gentiles should 
be jointly, or together, a body—His body. It is not “ the 
same body,” still less “of the Jewish body ;” nor is there 
one word about this “without his becoming a Jew ”.so im- 
portant for Mr. L.’s purpose. For of course a Gentile might 
have come into the Jewish body by circumcision at any 
time; so that the only point here, the thing unrevealed, 


-according to Mr. L., was that a Gentile might now come in 


without submitting to Jewish ordinances! That there is not 
one word of this in the text does not seem even to suggest 
itself to him! and this is what he thinks brings out to the 


-principalities and powers in heavenly places (ver. 8-10) the 


* A co-body;” i.e, jointly a body. 


. § 


manifold ‘wisdom of God—that Gentiles should come into 
the Jewish body without submitting to Jewish ordinances ! 

But is then the joint heirship a partaking with Jews in 
the Jewish inheritance? I ask Mr. Laing to produce, if he 
can, the Old Testament text which promises the Jew “an 
inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not 
away, reserved in heaven” (1 Pet. i. 4), or “spiritual bless- 
ings in heavenly places in Christ Jesus” (Eph. i. 3). I ask 
any reader of this to produce one if he can. No doubt Abra- 
ham looked forward, und others also, to “a better couxtry, 
that is, an heavenly,” and will obtain it. But only in the 
New Testament do we find this as to them. It was no 
Jewish promise or Jewish hope. ‘The Jewish hope was of 
blessing on the earth, the very blessing which we call millen- 
nial, and which Christians, to their manifold los’, have ap- 
propriated tv. themselves. 
Gentiles ever joint-heirs. Let those who think otherwise, com- 
pare “the promises” which do belong to Israel still, as the 
Apostle witnesses* (Rom. ix. 3). 

Thus it is no participation of Gentiles in the Jew’s in- 
heritance that is the “ mystery,” and the Apostle himself tells 
us that it is the “promise in Christ by the Gospel,” not 
Israel's promise by the Jaw, that he is speaking of. The 
conclusion is,directly the contrary therefore of Mr. Laing’s, 
that there is the formation of ‘a new body,” the “ giving 
& new promise,” and (so far as the written testimony is con- 
cerned) ‘‘ the obtaining of a new inheritance.” 

Moreover, if during the millennial age, thie Jews as Jews 
appear upon the scene and receive their own peculiar pro- 
mises, this plainly gives us the limit upon the other side, of 
the existence of the Church, Christ’s body, upon earth. And 
this leads us to what, in order to understand prophecy, it is 
absolutely necessary to remember, that there are thus two 
spheres, and for eternity, in which the redeemed among men 


-_ 


* Especially, Isa, Ix. 9-12 ; Ixi,. 4-9; Mic: iv. 1-8; Zech, viii: 
-28, etc. 


Not in the Jewish inheritance are 


those belongi 


are to have 
for Heaven, 
is ours also 
“the Heavy 
country,” fo 
and where | 
nothing to 
but they wi 
dren of God 
of heaven ai 
the gatherir 
Gentiles wi 
prophecy, 
(what many 
wherein dwe 
Before Ww 
and note ho. 
there from ‘ 
are two bod 
Testament ti 
departed‘ 
Heb, xi. 39,4 
such, sleep, 
Mr. Lai 
review. Hig 
prophets to 
objection. J 
the people (s¢ 
4). This wil 
in the millen 
one may co 
speaks, The 
(Eph. v.) or 3 
of Scripture 
Mr. Lain 
examined. H 
importance t¢ 


come into 
linances ! 
th Jews in 
duce, if he 
» Jew “an 
fadeth not 
itual bless- 
3). I ask 
loubt Abra- 
er country, 
only in the 
It was no 
hope was of 
call millen- 
88, have ap- 


1eritance are § 


erwise, com- 
still, as the 
he Jew’s in- 
himself tells 

ogpel,” not 
ng of. The 
Mr. Laing’s, 
the “ giving 
nony 18 con- 


ews as Jews 
peculiar pro- 
ther side, of 
earth, And 
‘ophecy, it 16 


are thus two § 


1 among men 


3; Zech, viii 


aro to have part—heaven and earth. 
for Heaven, 
is ours also (Jno xiv. 1-3), We are “ heavenly” as is Christ 
“the Heavenly” (1 Cor. xv. 48): looking for that “ heavenly 
country,” for which Abraham and the saints of old also looked, 
and where they with us also will have their place. This has 
nothing to do with belonging to the Church, Christ’s body ; 
but they will be saved, and in heaven, as much as we; chil- 
dren of God also, kings and priests to God. When the heirs 
of heaven are gathered up at the Lord’s coming, then will be 
the gathering time far heirs of earth, where Israel and the 
Gentiles will have their place according to Old Testament 
prophecy. Moreover, after the millennium there will still be 
(what many forget,-while some forget all else,) a “ new earth, 
wherein dwelleth righteousness” (2 Pet. iii. 13 ; Rev xxi. 1.) 

Before we leave this, let my reader compare Heb. xii. 23, 
and note how ‘the church of the first-born ” is distinguished 
there from “ the spirits of just men made perfect.” These 
are two bodies evidently, and while the saints of the Old 
Testament times alone could be characterized as “ spirits "= 
departed-—“ made perfect” by resurrection of the body (comp. 
Heb. xi. 39,40), the church of the first-born ones does not, as 
such, sleep, but waits for her Lord. 

Mr. Laing’s objections will ne need only a very brief 
review. His first puint, (p. 10) that ‘srael is said also in the 
prophets to be “ married” to Jehovah, is true, but not an 
objection. It is not the saints who were thus married, but 
the people (see e. g. Jer. xxxi. 31, 32) and the land (Isa. 1xii. 
4). This will be true again for Israel, now divorced (Hos. ii. 2) 
in the millennium, and in that earthly sphere of which any 
one may convince himself that the Old: Testament ever 
speaks, The New Testament bride is a spiritual people 
(Eph. v.) or a heavenly city (Rev. xxi). <A very little study 
ot Scripture will prevent one confounding these. 

Mr. Laing’s second objection (p. 31) we have sufficiently 
examined. His third, as to 1 Cor, x. 32 (p. 33), is of so little 
importance that I may leave it with the remark, that while 
those belonging to the “Church of God” might, of course, 


God is now gathering 
The Father’s house, Christ’s own eternal abede, 


10. 

be addressed individually, (and often are) as Jews or Gen- 
tiles, the Apostle’s words clearly show that he is looking be- 
yond the Church ; and clearly those beyond were Jews or Gen- 
tiles. I cannotevenunderstand Mr. Laing’s object in disputing 
that there were (and are) three divisions under which all men 
ranked. Nay, more, (I appeal to Scripture for the proof,) 
while an address to Jewish or Gentile believers as such 
might have its special force and take its shape from what 
they had been, I maintain that they are never spoken of as 
having Jewish or Gentile duties or privilezes any more, 
when once they had come into the “Church of God. ” 
Judaism and Gentilism had alike then passed away for these, 
and cannot be put upon the same footing, with gplationsyspe 
(such as marriage) which God still sanctioned. 

Mr. Laing’s one positive proof text that “the Church un- 
der both dispensations is one and the same glorious body 
united by the Holy Spirit and faith to Jehovah-Jesus as its 
head” (p. 35) is found in Rom. xi. It is a signal proof how 
little he can find in the Word of God what he desires to have 
it_say. For clearly there is in that chapter not one word 
about “church,” or “ body,” or “ union by the Holy Spirit,” 
(union by faith is not in Scripture at all), or Jesus being 
“‘head :” for a very simple reason, that a “tree” has no 
“head,” and is not a “ body,” nor even a figure of it, itis a 
thought essentially and perfectly distinct, nay, opposed. The 
tree is a figure‘of a people responsible to bring forth fruit, 
where fruitless branches are removed, and others may be 
grafted in, In a body, still more ihe body of Christ, this is 
not possible. -The body would be maimed if it lost. one 
member. Nor could fruitless (i, ¢ lifeless) members be 
found. Does Mr, Laing seriously believe that the Jewish 
branches, broken off for their rejection of Christ, were ever 
members of the body of Christ? Yet, if the olive tree and 
the body are the same thing, this must be true. If he says, 
they were professing people of God, it is quite true ; and as 
that the apostle takes them up, but not even as seed of Abra- 
ham, much less the body of Christ. Clearly the Jews had 
been the professing people of God. Some, not all, had been 


* 


broken off 
enjoying tl 
sibilities, 
how the pe 
those who 
this therefc 
What f 
this fundax 
enough (an 
Gospel* wa 
was glad: | 
are blessed - 
Jesus says t 
.these also h 
bélieve the 
: Shepherd, tl 
herd gave hi 
dant witnes: 
faith ; to ou 
and Gentile: 
tract out of 
being exclus 
® must mal 
But the 
as, with the 
posing, one 
sentation. 
that the Hol 
Pentecost, ar 
the church i 
to the analog 
Oppose confo 
Spirit and th 


* The go 
be blessed’ (¢ (a 
was about Cana 
ent times from 


or Gen- 
cing be- 
; or Gen- 
isputing 
1 all men 
2 proof,) 
as such 
ym what 
en of as 
ny more, 
of God.” 
for these, 
tionships 


hurch unr- 
ous body 
asus as its 
proof how 
es to have 


it, it is a 
osed. The 
hr fruit, 
s may be 
ist, this is 
lost one 


11 


broken off for unbelief, and Gentiles grafted in in their place, 
enjoying the privileges of the place, and assuming its respon- 
sibilities. This had nothing to do with the question as to 
how the people of God differed in the one dispensation from 
those who had been people of God-in a former one; and of 
this therefore he says nothing whatever. 

What further Mr. L. adduces as “abundant witness to 
this fundamental unity of the Church in all ages” is brief 
enough (and strange enough) to be quoted in full. “The 
Gospel* was preached to Abraham ; he saw Christ’s day and 
was glad: he.was justified by faith: they that are of faith 
are blessed with him, are his seed, and heirs of the promise. 
Jesus says that he has other sheep not of the Jewish fold ; 
.these also he must bring ; they shall hear his voice, that is, 
bélieve the Gospel call, and make one flock as there is one 
shepherd, that is, ore church for which the one good shep- 
herd gave his life” (pp. 37, 38). Thisis Mr. Laing’s “ abun- 
dant witness.” To what? To Abraham’s being justified by 
faith ; to our being his seed, and blessed with him ; to Jews 
and Gentiles forming’ now “ one flock.” If Mr. L. can ex- 
tract out of this a denial of the present Christian church 
being exclusively the body of Christ, the Eve of the last Adam, 
he must make this plainer than he has at present. 

But the last point under this head is the gravest for him, 
as, with the knowledge that he claims of the views he is op- 
posing, one can hardly acquit him of intentional misrepre- 
sentation. ‘Once more,” he says, “ the Plymouth: assertion, 
that the Holy Ghost' was not given unto men till the day of 
Pentecost, and will be withdrawn again from the earth when 
the church is taken up, alike does violence to Scripture and 
to the analogy of the faith. The theory which we 
oppose confounds these two things,”—a dispensation of the 
Spirit and the work of the Spirit,—“ and asserts that because 


& 


* The gospel preached to Abraham was, ‘‘In thee shall all nations 
be blessed’’ (Gal. iii. 8), as that to Israel in the wilderness (Heb. iv, 2) 
was about Canaan. God's gospel (or;good news) was different at differ- 
ent times from what we now above all call the ‘‘ gospel.” 


12 


at Pentecost the spiritual dispensation began, therefore the 
work of the Holy Ghost, as the Spirit of grace, was unknown 
before that time” (p. 38). 

This is absolute (and, I trust, may not be wilful,) mis- 
representation. He should know well that the so-called 
‘¢ Plymouth view ” is that the “ conversion and sanctification 
of individual believers,” which he specifies as what he 
means by the work of the Spirit, were always necessary to 
salvation, always by the operation in grace of the Spirit of 
God, and always being accomplished from Abel or from 
Adam even until now, and always will be to the end of the 
world. But that Scripture makes a difference between the 
work of the Spirit, which was from the beginning, and the 
coming of the Spirit at Pentecost, and His indwelling in be- 
lievers ever since. Let my reader note but a few Scriptures 
as to this, and he will see that in the Word of God. what 
took place at Pentecost was not merely the bestowal of soine 
miraculous gifts, but the “coming” of another Comforter 
who should “ abide for ever” with the disciples, in the place 
of Him who had left them for the Father's house (John xiv., 
16).. A coming of such inestimable value to His saints, 
that it was ‘‘ expedient for them that He should go away ” 
from them, that that Comforter might come (Jobn xvi. 7). 
' Being come, He was not only to “dwell with” them, (as 
Christ had dwelt), but to be “in” them, as He had not been 
(John xiv., 17). “At that day they should know that He was 
in the Father, and they in Him, and He in them” (ver. 20): 
knowledge never: possessed, never hinted at in Scripture 
before. 

Thus in the epistles we'find (as never in Judaism) that 
the very bodies of believers (1 Cor. vi. 19) are the temples of 
the Holy Ghost, wherein He dwells. And, as the result, “the 
Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the 
children of God ;” and by the “Spirit of adoption we cry, 
Abba, Father”, (Rom. viii. 15, 16). Search the Old Testa- 
ment through, you wili never find a believer, as that, uttering 
that cry. God was saying then, ‘I am a Father to Israel,” 
not to saints as such; and believers, although children of 


! above all p 


God, as tl 
from serve 
law as sch 
of the Fat! 
Father, ‘ 
sent forth 
to redeem | 
Ceive the a 
hath sent f 
ing Abba, 
Tt is th 
which beli 
version anc 


- con bats. 


one Spirit: 
(1 Cor. vi. 
forms the’t 
place in hes 

I pass o 


And he 
Scripture v 
It is certai 
in Jerusaler 
lennial days 
as claiming 
Israel, if 


“the ark ¢ 
passes over 
sion. So i 
purposes on 
the nations 
Adam, He 
number of 

We kno 


refore the 
; unknown 


Iful,) mis- 
e so-called 
nctification 
‘what he 
ecessary to 
» Spirit of 
el or from 
and of -the 
etween the 
g, and the 
lling in be- 
y Scriptures 
God. what 
val of soime 
+ Comforter 
in the place 
» (John xiv., 
His saints, 


that He was 
” (ver. 20): 


udaism) that 
1e temples of 
e result, “the 


dit uttering 
by to Israel,” 
children of 


- conbats. 


| above all people” (Ex. xix. 5). 


13 


God, as the apostle tells us (Gal. iv., 1-6), diifered nothing 
from servants, being under tutors and governors (under the 
law as schoolmaster, chap. iii., 24) until the time appointed 
of the Father. Thus under the law the children never cried, 
Father. ‘ But when the fulness of the time was come, God 
sent forth His Son, made of a woman, male under the law, 
to redeem them that were under the law, that we might re- 
ceive the adoption of sons. And because ye are sons, God 
hath sent forth the Spirit of His Son into your hearts, cry- 
ing Abba, Father.” 

It is this inestimable privilege of the in-dwelling Spirit 
which believers obtained therefore at Pentecost ; not “ con- 
version and sanctification,” as Mr. L. representsthe view he 
And union with the Lord is (not by faith but) by 
one Spirit: “he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit” 
(1 Cor. vi. 17). Hence the baptism of the Holy Ghost 
forms the body, the church, after the Head has taken His 
place in heaven. 

I pass on now briefly to consider 


2. Tue Kinepom or Gop. 


And here again the simplest way is to present first the 
Scripture view, and then to look at Mr. Laing’s objections. 
It is certain from Scripture that the throne of the Lord was 
in Jerusalem in time past, and that it shall be again in mil- 
lennial days (Jer. iii. 17). ~ He dwelt in glory among them ; 

as claiming “all the earth” at Sinai, He «promises that 
Israel, if obedient, shall be to Him “a peculiar treasure 
As supporting this claim 
“the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth” 
passes over Jordan (Josh. iii. 11) to give "srael their posses. 
sion. So identitied were they indeed with His plans and 
purposes on earth, that ‘‘when the Most High divided to 
the nations their inheritance, when He separated the sons of 
Adam, He set the bounds of the people according to the 
number of the children of Israel” (Deut. xxxii. 8). 

We know ell the history of this chosen people till Lo- 


14 . 


ammi (not my people) was sation upon them. Ezekiel sees 
‘the glory remove from the temple, and the King of Babylon 
carries them away captive. At this point an instructive term 
is used: it is no longer the “ God of all the earth” of whom 
we hear, but the God of heaven.”* It is as if God in a cer- 
tain sense had abandoned the earth, and the Gentile power 
(in Nebuchadnezzar) receives from Him the throne of a wni- 
versal kingdom. Here the times of the Gentiles manifestly 
begin, and last according to Daniel’s vision, until the coming 
of the Son of man in the clouds of Heaven (Dan. vii. 13). 
To a remnant returned from Babylon the Lord Jesus pre- 
sented Himself, announced beforehand by the Bantist, as King 
of God’s kingdom: the kingdom of God was at hand. 
Christ was rejected by his own, and the title He claimed was 
put up in derision over His cross: ‘‘ This ‘is the King of the 
Jews.” ‘The prophecies are not silert as to what that title 
implies (Isa. ix. 6, 7; xi.) But His rejection by Israel was 
the occasion of the display of Divine counsels hitherto hid- 
den. The cross laid the foundation of blessing both for Is- 
rael eventually and for the Church of God (Jno. xi. 51, 52). 
The suspension of the fulfilment of Israel’s promises, and of 
the earthly blessings, gives room for the gathering of a 
-heavenly people, who are to-share in the rule of the Son of 
man, over the earth in a day fast hastening. Until the broken 
thread of the Old Testament prophecy is resumed, the “ mys- 
teries of God” (Cor. iv. 1.) have their place, and among 
these the ‘ mysteries of the kingdom also” (Matth. xiii. 11). 
These ‘ mysteries’ are not things in their nature mysterious, 
but, according to the acknowledged meaning of the word, 
secrets not revealed before, and now made known to the in- 
itiated only, The kingdom in its present form was thus 
(Matth. xiii. 35) among the “things kept secret from the 
foundation of the world.” This should assure us that the 


~* Tt is found 2 Chr. xxxvi, 23; Ez.i: 2; v. 11, 12; vi. 9,10; vii. 
12, 21, 23; Neh. i. 4; 53 ii. 4, 20; Dan. ii. 18, 19, 37, ‘44, | And 
only +wice I think beside iu the Old Testament, Jon-i. 9 ; Ps, exxxvi. 
26. 


John therefo 


Old Testan 
kingdom in 
tament prop 
reader caref| 
There 4 
reigns, wher 
. His Father's 
as Son of 
His people : 
with Me on 
down with ] 
13). His tt 
and not His 
He is now r 
express pron 
reign with E 
connection w 
the blessing « 
Mr. Lain, 
kingdom to 
not tell us e 
power of au 
able, and tha 
It is quite tr 
it is plainly 
salem, whic 
But this beg 
fetched ” i) 
Gentiles,” 
alone is tek 
The next 
the Baptist a; 
day of the I 
Elias which 
will receive it 
xi. 14)—a m 
on to show, 


zekiel sees 
f Babylon 
ictive term 
” of whom 
1 in a cer- 
itile power 
e of 3 uni- 
manifestly 
the coming 
vii. 13). 

| Jesus pre- 
ist, as King 
s at hand. 
slaimed was 
King of the 
at that title 
y Israel ‘was 
itherto hid- 
noth for Is- 
xi. 51, 52). 
1ises, and of 
hering of a 
F the Son of 
1 the broken 
I, the “ mys- 
and among 
th. xiii. 11). 
mysterious, 
if the word, 
n to the in- 
mn was thus 
bt from the 
us that the 


vi. 9, 10; vii. 
87, 44. And 
; Ps, exxxvi. 


15 


Old Testament knows nothing of it, and that to take the 
rei anti i" cl Dien fa, Ae being the fulfilment of Old Tes- 
pheey must needs } istal 
wie akg sae Ai e an entire mistake, Let the 

There is a kingdom now. Christ does reign; but He 
reigns, where none can reign with Him, Son of God upon 
. His Father’s throne ; and not till He takes His own throne 
as Son of man, will He have a throne He can share with 
His people: “To him that overcometh will I give to sit 
with Me on My throne, even as I also overcome and am set, 
down with My Father on His throne” (Rev. iii, 21 ; Col. i. 
13). His throne as Son of man‘is the Old ‘Testament throne 
and not His present one, as we have seen. King as He is, 
He is now rejected, and His people too are suffering; but the 
express promise is that if we suffer with Him we shall also 
reign with Him. This coming kingdom és “in ‘inseparable 
connection with Israel’s restoration and supremac, and with 
the pressing of all nations : in a word, with-the millennium.” 
% fe Laing objects to “the idea of God transferring His 
kingdom to Nebuchad* ~zar, rightly enough, but he’ does 
not tell us exactly whose it is; that God committed the 
power of a universal kingdom to Gentile ‘hands is indisput- 
able, and that this began the times of the Gentiles equally 80. 
It is quite true that the phrase only occurs, Lu. xxi. 24, but 
it is plainly there the time of Gentile domination over Jeru- 
salem, Which will last till she rises again from ‘the dust. 
But this began with Nebuchadnezzar, so that it is not so “ far- 
fetched ,, to begin them there. As to the “fulness of the 
Gentiles,” which Mr. L. arbitrarily connects with these, he 
an ty esate for that idea. 

_ The next objection is singularly feeble. He refers to John 
ie Baptist as fulfilling Malachi’s prophecy of Elias before the 

ay of the Lord. He quotes the Lord saying, “This was 
Elias which was for to come,” incoyrectly, fur He says, “Lf ye 
will receive it, this is Elias, which was for to come” (Mattb. 
xi. 14)—a most important condition, for, as the Lord goes 
os to show, they were rejecting John and his Lord together. 
ohn therefore, who came as Elias, could not actually be Elias 


16 


to them ; he did not “ turn the hearts of the children to the 
fathers, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just,” and 


instead of saving the land from curse, their rejection o®\ 


Christ brought it down. Can Mr. L. contend that John 
saved the land from a curse? 

Again, the time was fulfilled, and the kingdom wag at 
hand, but I have shown tliat the kingdom of God had to 
come (because of their unbelief) in a way not contemplated 
in the Old Testament. The mysteries of the kingdom, were 
opened instead. But the apostle Peter’s own account should 
have made Mr. Laing aware how “some ” of those whe stood 
there saw “the kingdom of God come with power” (Mark 
ix. 1). Peter refers to the transfiguration scene which fol- 
lowed as that in which they were eye-witnesses of Christ's 
glory—“ the puwer and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ ”— 
“in the holy mount” (2 Pet. i. 16-18). It was the (still) 
future coming they saw, as it were, in sample. 

Moreover the kingdom of God is never in nature earthly, 


as Mr. L.. puts it, it is the kingdom of heaven; nor is it ever ~ 
a kingdom of this world to be established by . arfare, as the ; 


Lord truly assures us. He doves not say, it was to be “ es- 
tablished by witnessing for the tiuih,” but that He was fain 
to. be such a witnsss. 

Again, when tue apostle says, “ Flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the kingdom of heaven,” that was true for the people 
he was addressing, and he goes on to shew we are to be raised 
or changed therefore to enter into it, This proves surely that 
there is a future kingdom which remains to-be entered so. 
How does it consist on the other hand with Mr. L.'s idea 
that we have the kingdom now, in the way he puts it? 

The next passage, ‘The kingdom. of God shall be taken 
from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits 
thereof,” dues not show that they already had the kingdom 
except in promise, nor that’ it has been taken from. Israel 
without possibility” of restoration. “With such prophecies as 
Micah iii. 9—i~, 7 before one’s eyes, he is bold enough at 
least, who will deny such restoration. Clearly the Gentiles 
ha not God's kingdom, I agree with Mr. L. © 


Then | 
of Gentile 
nothing m 
such a sup 


We co: 


It is re 
80 much as 
directly the 
truth or fal 
tity of the 
presently, b 
these’ omitt 
AB one « 
a siege of J 
cessful, the 
stand on the 
Speak of a 
Hig presence 
land is bless 
Over all ‘the 
Then tak 
shall have p 
put on imma 
that is writt 
Xv. 54). W, 
you will find 
punishes the 
1—3), and ¢ 
199] ), and 
the pit, and s 
after many d 
the great wh 


as 


*T leave th 
affect the point, 


en to the Then as to Matth. viii. 11, 12, it shows the bringing in 


ust,” and of Gentiles into the place of cast out Jews, and it shows 
ection OM) nothing more, except the poverty of the cause which needs 
nat John \@ such a support. 

' ‘We come now to 
m was at : 
yd had to 3. Tue Comina or THE Lorp. 
templated 
dom, were It is remarkable as to this, that Mr. L, does not- examine 
int should so much as one of the passages which are believed to teach 
whe stood directly the pre-millennial coming! He prefers to base the 


1” (Mark 
which fol- 
of Christ's 
Christ "— 
the (still) 


truth or falsity of it on the further question as to the iden- 
tity of the coming and day of the Lord. This I shall look at 
presently, but in the meanwhile must produce one or two of 
these’ omitted Scriptures. 

As one of these we may take Zech. xiv. In the midst of 
a siege of Jerusalem, which has been already partially suc- 
cessful, the Lord comes with all His holy ones ;* His feet 
stand on the Mount of Olives (no words could more plainly 
speak of a personal coming); the mount cleaves asunder at _ 
His presence ; He delivers Israel, destroys their enemies, the 


land is, bless d and safely re-inhabited, and the Lord is king 
over all the earth. 


re earthly, , 
r is it ever ~ 
fare, as the » 
to be ‘* es- 

Ye was born | 


Vf. 


ood cannot Then take the apostle’s words: “So when this corruptible 

the people shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have 

o be raised put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass tk.. saying 

surely that that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory” (1 Cor. 

entered 80. xv. 54). Where is this written? Turn to Isa. xxv. 8, and, 

r, L,’s idea you will find that this takes place at the time that the Lord 

3 itd pense the host of the high ones on high, (cump. Rev. xx. 
il be taken 1—3), and the kings of the “earth upon the earth (Rev. xix, \ 

the fruits 


19—21), and when. they have been gathered as, prisoners. in | 
the pit, and shut up in the prison (Rev. xx. 3), to be. visited 
after many days (after the millennium, at the judgment of 
the great white throne, see Rev. xx, 10—12). It is then, 


e kingdom 
from. Israel 
ophecies as 
enough at 
he Gentiles 


*T leave the question open, whothek saints or angels ; it does not 
affect the point. 


when the Lord of Hosts reigns in Zion and before his ancients 
gloriously (chap. xxiv. 21—23); when he has brought. down 
the noise of strangers, and abased the branch of the terrible 
ones; whon He destroys the veil spread over all nations, and 
wipes away the tears from off all faces, and takes away the 
rebuke of His people from off all the earth. Then it is that , 
the resurrection of the saints shall bring to pass the saying, 
Death is.ewallowed up in victory.’ 

Mr. Laing insists that we are not to watch for the Lord, 
because Peter and Paul knew they were to die first. But wo 
have no evidence that they knew it any length of time before 
their death. When Paul first speaks of it, the time of his 
departure was already “at hand” (2 Tim. i. 6), And when 
Peter speaks of his, he was “shortly” to put off his taber- 
nacle (2 Peter, i. 14). John’s gospel was written after Peter's 
death, and therefore he could interpret the Lord’s sayiag as 
signifying “by what death he should glorify God,” without 
its being so clear that he knew at the time what was meant, 
for the Lord does not say distinctly he should die (John xxi. 
18, 19); mor was Peter ‘then young (“when thou wast 
young,”) so that if he did know, it would put. off the Lord’s 
coming of necessity but a little way ; and n6 one else would 
know that he must die, Nor does John say of himself (as 
Mr. L. seems to intimate) that Christ would no¢ come before 
he died, but that the Lord had not said he would (verse 23). 

For the rest, all the New Testument is full of the immin- 
ency of His coming. The same virgins who go out at first 
to.meet Him scem in the parable (Matt. xxv.) to, welcome 
Him back. The same with the servants in the parable of 
the talents. Watchfulness as to it is continually enjoined, 
“lest, coming suddenly, He tind you sleeping” (Mark xiii. 
36). ‘ We which aro alive and remain to the coming of the 
Lord,” says the apostle (1 Thes, iv). ‘“ Behold I come 
quickly ” (Rev. iii. 11). “He that testifieth, these things 
-gaith, Surely I come qnickly” (xxii. 20). And if that evil 
servant shall say in his heart, My Lorp pmeLayetH His 
comInG, and shall begin to smite his fellow-servants, and to 

eat and drink with the drupken, the Lord of that servant 
. 


! 


shall con 
hour tha: 
appoint I 
Weeping 
solemn, i: 
reviewing 
But I 

the Lord. 
longs to it 
apt to beli 
term, and 
e coming 
every eye : 
course His 
The “ ¢ 
only once ¢ 
and found 
Man’s day 
just as the 
own, Th 
the earth 
coming, but 
e is come 
explains th 
plexed abo 
Lord comes 
heavens pas 
this tinal a 
founding th 
all to a poi 
merely puts 
day of the 
men on the 
reach its 1j 
ition, “gee 
As to the 
for-and His 
enquiry to s¢ 


yncients 


shall come in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an 


ht, down hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder and 
terrible appoint him his portion with the hypocrites: there shall be 
ons, and weeping and gnashing of teeth” (Matt. xxiv. 48—51). How 
way the solemn, in the face of such words, such arguments as we are 
it is that , reviewing ! 
) saying, But I turn to the question as to the coming and day of 
the Lord. Scripture, with that precise accuracy which be- 
he Lord, longs to it, distinguishes much more minutely than we are 
But we apt to believe. The “coming” of the Lord is the general 
me before term, and does not define whether for or with His saints ; the 
ne of his ‘coming of the Son of Man” is always His appearing, when 
nd when every eye shall see Him. The’ revelation of the Lord is of 
his _taber- course His appearing also. ; 
ter Peter's The “ day of the-Lord” is in contrast with a thought 
saylag, a8 only once. expressed in so many words in the New Testament, 
,” without and found in the margin of 1 Cor. iv. 3, ‘‘ man’s day.” 
vas meant, Man’s day is the time in which he has the world to himself, 
(John xxl. just as the ‘day of the Lord” is when He takes it into His 


thou wast 


(verse 93). 


the immin- 


ly enjoined, 
(Mark xill. 
ming of the 


own. Thus the day of the Lord begins with judgment for 
the earth necessarily, and is in near connection with His 
coming, but it is not the same thing; nor does it end when 
He is come, but goes on right through the millennium. This 
explains the passage in 2 Peter iii, which many are per- 
plexed about ; for it is hence easily seen how “ the day of the 
Lord comes as a thief in the night,” and how init “the 
heavens pass away,” etc., without it being necessary that 
this final act take place as soon as the day comes. Con- 


founding the coming of the Lord with this of course narrows 
all to a point of time, but it is a mere mistake. The apostle 


merely puts before us the suddenness of the coming of the 


day of the Lord, in connection with its final issue, to assure 
men on the one hand how speedily His long-suffering would 
reach its limit, and on the other, to give effect to his admo- 
nition, “seeing then that all these things are to be dissolved.” - 
As to the difference again between the coming of the Lord 
for-and His appearing with the saints, it will not take long 
enquiry to settle it. The appearing is that which the Old 


old I come 


ants, and to 
that servant 


} 


20 


Testament is full of necessarily, because then it is that He 
takes up the earth to bless it. But the New Testament, 
which adds the heavenly side of all, is precise, that ‘* when 

Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall we also appear 
with Him in glory” (Col. iii. 4). This is what is seen in the 
vision of Rev. xix., the armies in heaven following the Lord 
to earth, clothed in the “fine linen” which is the ‘ righteous- 
ness of the suints” (comp. verses 14 and 8). 

But, to appear with Him when He appears, we must have 
been with Him before, and the passage in 1 Thess. iv. teaches 
us how: we are caught up, the dead in Christ and the living, 
raised or changed, to meet Him “in the air,” before He 
comes to earth at all. How soon before is not indeed stated 
there, but we have elsewhere what assures us that there is 
indeed a considerable interval. In the Book of Revelation, 
which is God’s unfolding of the future as He declares, the 
directly prophetic portion, in which we find the threads of 
Daniel’s and other Old Testament prophecies resumed,” is 
prefaced by a vision of saints in heaven. I do not insist 
upon the truth, which is plain to many, that the epistles to 
the seven churches have a prophetic bearing, and give us the 

- history of the general church as God’s light-bearer upon earth, 
until Christ removes His saints to heaven. In this way, 
however, we shall better understand the constant testimony 
to His coming (ch. ii. 25, iii, 3—11) and the solemn spuing 
out of Laodicea at the close. From that time the Spirit’s 
warning voice to the churches is heard no more, and the 
fourth and fifth chapters show us the apostle caught up to 
heaven. The point of view is altered; and he now sees 
around the throne of God four and twenty thrones,t occupied 
by those who, in chap. v., sing the song of praise for redemp- 
tion, and anticipate their reign over the earth (v. 10). These, 
then, are saints throned and glorified ; and now mark a sign 
of change: the Lamb slain is presented as ‘ Lion of the tribe 


, 
* All acknowledge this, as to Rev. xiii. and xvii. for instance. 
+ So really the word translated ‘‘ seats,” chap. iv. 4, 


of Judah’ 
round ab 
creation, 
Israel’s ca 
and so it 
lowing vi 
and Jerus 
Gentiles t 
the reader 
distinct fr 
all come o1 
lation, the 
not the chi 
Israel, out 
us that the 
cannot pur 
honest, ear 
there that ] 


appearing o 
the reward 


s that He 
‘estament, 
at “* when 
Iso appear 
een in the 
x the Lord 
 righteous- 


must have 
‘iv. teaches 
the living, 
before He 
deed stated 
vat there is 
Revelation, 
jeclares, the 
» threads of 
esumed,* is 
o not insist 
e epistles to 
1 give us the 
upon earth, 
n this way, 
nt testimony 
plemn spuing 
» the Spirit's 
ore, and the 
caught up to 


for instance. 


he now sees 
hes,t occupied 
.e for redemp- 
. 10). These, 
Wy mark @ sign 
bn of the tribe 


of Judah”—king of the Jews, that is—even as the “rainbow” 
round about the throne reminds us of His covenant with 
creation, The world is to be judged, but the earth blessed ; 
Israel’s cause is come up in remembrance before the Lord ; 
and so it is that while the church does nota ppear in the fol- 
lowing visions till the marriage of the Lamb, ch. xix., Israel 
and Jerusalem are there all through, and along with them 
Gentiles too, subjects of blessing but always distinct. Let 
the reader compare the sealing of the tribes of Israel (ch. vii.) 
distinct from the company of Gentiles further on, who have 
all come out of “the” great tribulation (literally, the tribu- 
lation, the great one}. So the woman of the 12th chapter is 
not the church, for how is Christ born of the church? but 
Israel, out of whom He plainly came. Chap. xi. 8 shows 
us that the scene of the witnesses’ death is in Jerusalem. I 
cannot pursue this further, but I am persuaded that any 
honest, earnest student of the Word will find sufficient proof 
there that Rev. vii—xix. give us indeed the interval between 
the Lord’s coming for and His appearing with His saints. 
This interval is the time of ingathering for earthly blessing— 
earth’s harvest—(xiv. 15); and thus is explained how, when 
the Lord comes on with his saints to earth, He finds the 
earth not empty of saints, but a people in Israel expecting 
Him, and Gentile “sheep” among the nations also, to be 
put upon His right hand, and to inherit the kingdom. The 
difference also between the Church’s hope of the ‘‘ morning 
star (Rev. xxii. 16, ii. 28), and Israel’s and the earth’s hope 
of the “sun of righteousness” (Mal. iv.) finds here its full 
significance. 

In this statement Mr. Laing’s objections have been met 
already, save one, and that needs no lengthy answer. The 
appearing of Christ 7s always that which is connected with 
the reward of a saint’s own work, asthe coming for the 
saints is that which introduces them into the result of 
Christ’s work. Crowns and rewards have to do with the 
kingdom and appearing; while the Father's house is the 
place for children, which He, not we, prepares for his own. 


. 


22 

This is a truth of great beauty and value for the soul, and no Ned Mf ill 
ground of valid objection at all. N C 

ext, 
m is a judgm 

4. Tus Jupemenr. nolae ng 
The Lord’s own words are (as is well known to readers of millenniun 
the Greek text)* that “he that believeth on Him that sent tion, throu 
Him shallnot come unto judgment,” not merely ‘ condemna- “ nations,” 
* tion.” The difference is plain, for the current belief of would haye 
of Christendom is that they shail come unto judgment, but, Giseriminat 
' they hope, not to be condemned. ‘The Lord’s words assure tion by jud 
us that as to the saint of God, no question will ever be raised who are sey 
as to him personally. He will give account of himself to 9 Caught up t 
God ; he will appear before the judgment-seat of Christ, and the judyme 
receive reward according to what is manifested there ; but he apportionms 
will not be “judged according to his works,” as they will ff ‘ation of ty 


the “ breth; 
sally as a te: 
shows conch 


who stand at last before the great white throne (Rev. xx. 12). 
Who could escupe, if judged according to his works? “ Enter 
not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord; for in thy 


sight shall no man living be justified ” (Ps. cxliii. 2). en suppos 

And it is plain there can be no question as to the accep- interval bet 
tance of those who go up, raised or changed, in His own like- coming wit 
ness to meet the Lord in the air and be ever with Him. It | Preached to 


have thus re 
saints, 

T am so 
ent or 
or its impo} 
than -he best. 
—the Son o 
adds, “as Ki 
should know 
4 difference b 
AHis Father's 
Upon His oy 
*pposing ow 
though ot 

* Alford and the Bible Union both give ‘‘judgment ” in John v. fii, 12 ). 
24, 29, instead of ‘* condemnation ” en] * damnation.”’ 


is plain they are not-left in a common crowd with sinners, to 
be picked out when the Lord has come. On the contrary, 
when He comes to execute judgment they come with Him. 
Does Mr. L. think to set aside these plain and positive state- 
ments of Scripture by the quotation of such a verse as 
1 Cor. v. 10%? Does he not see that it is.a simple statement 
of ‘a general truth which takes in all mankind? All shall 
stand before the judgment seat of Christ. True: but at 
different times and under different circumstances. ‘The two 
classes will be as in John v. 29—- those that have done 
good” and “those that have done evil,” and ‘ we all” shall 
receive Rodoningty - Does Mr. Laing really believe that a 


oo ee ee 


ul, and no 


» readers of 
1 that sent 
 condemna- 
t belief of 
gment, but, 
yords assure 
er be raised 
> himself to 
Christ, and 
ere ; but he 
as they will 
Rev. xx. 12). 
rks? “ Enter 
; for in thy 


es. 


pelieve that 


ont” in John 


9? 


th sinners, to 
the contrary, 
ne with Him. 
positive state- 


‘at have done 
we all” shall 


saint will be punished for his sins, after Christ’s dying for 
them? Or what else does he mean ? 

Next, as to the judgment of the nations in Matt. xxv., it 
is a judgment of the living nations at the coming of Christ, 
not of the dead before the yreat white throne at the end of the 
millennium. There is no word of “the dead,” or of résurrec- 
tion, throughout; nor are the dead spoken of any more as 
“nations.” Thatit is not a judgment of Christians, as Mr. L. 
would have it, should be clear from the very tact of its being 
discriminative, a separating of good from bad : such a separa- 
tion by judgment, we have seen already, is not for Christians, 
who are separated, befie judgment, from all others by being 
caught up to meet the Lord in the air. Again, it is not, as 
the judyment at the great white throne will be, an exact 
apportionment according to men’s works, but a simple sepa- 
ration of two classes according’ as they had honored or not 
the “ brethren ” of the King. How’could this apply univer- 
sally as a test, where the heathen were in question? All this 
shows conclusively it is not the general judgment which has 
been supposed. It is the judgment of those who in. the 
interval between the Lord’s taking up of His saints, and His 
coming with them, have had the gospel of the kingdom 
preached to them (by Jewish “ brethren,” I doubt not), and 
have thus received or rejected Christ in the person of His 
saints. 

I am sorry that I cannot credit Mr. Laing ‘with either 
candour or courtesy in his treatment of this subject, which, | 
for its importance, should have had more serious attention i 
than he bestows upon it. When he quotes, ‘‘ then shall He” 

iH 


—the Son of Man-—“ sit upon the throne of His glory,” and 
adds, ‘‘as King—meaning He was not King before this,” he 
should know well that, as I have before said, Scripture makes 
4 difference between His kingdom now as Son of God upon 
His Father’s throne, and His kingdom as here, Son of Man 
upon His own (Rev. iii. 21); and that those whom he is 
opposing own His “kingdom and patience” to be now, 
though not His “kingdom and glory” (Rey. i. 9; I Thes, 
i. 12). : 


- 


Vv. 


24 


Again he says (p. 58): “‘ Observe, then, that the parallel 
passages in Luke and Mark put it beyond doubt that the 
destruction of Jerusalem, spoken of by Matthew, was that 

which tvok place under Titus, before the generation who saw 

Jesus had passed away ; not the assault of Autichrist, which, 

it is said, shall take place between the comings.” 

It is dangerous to assume passages to be parallel withou 
ascertaining first how far they are so. That Matth. xxiv., xx P. 
and Luke xxi. are in general the same prophecy is plain, of 
course; but that there are great differences also is evident 
upon any carerul examination. Luke does speak of the de- 
struction of Jerusalem under Titus, and note, that the sign is 
there, “‘ when ye shall see Jerusalem encompassed with armies, 
then know that the desolation thereof is nigh. Then let 
those which are in Judea flee to the mountains, and let them 
which are in the midst of it depart out,” etc. Now, suppose 
we add some words from Matthew : ‘ Let him which is on 
the housetop not come down to take anything out of his 
house ’—that is, flee away immediately. How could a 
dweller in Jerusalem do that, when Jerusalem was encom- 
passed with armies? He could not; nor had he need. For 
when Cestius Gallus withdrew his army panic-stricken from 
Jerusalem, plenty of opportunity was afforded for leisurely 
escape. The words of Matthew are thus not found in Luke, 
nor would they be suitable, for the two passages are not 
parallel. Matthew mentions no‘destruction of Jerusalem, but 
the abomination of desolation standing in the holy place. 
Nor does he speak of an “ assault.” on it even, Antichrist’s or 
any other. Mr, Laing is every way outside of the truth in 
this. 

Luke therefore gives an interval between the destruction 
a of the city and the coming of the Lord:—* Jerusalem shall be 
1” trodden down of the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles 
be fulfilled.” Matthew connects the tribulation at Jerusalem 
closely. with the Lord’s coming : for we have first, the abomi- 
nation in the holy place ; ¢hen great tribulation such as never 
before or since, but shore, or no flesh would be saved ; and 
then “immediately after the tribulation” the signs of the 


- 


Mr, Laing, 


coming 
Luke di 
The 
set right 
a time si 
racteristj 
terous Q 
translate, 
from this 
Israel her 
for Chris: 
gathered 
Over, as if 
gToom mu 
goats take 
As to. 
difficulty, 
gether, for 
lieving. 
same time 
The la 
than for ¢ 
Opposes mz 
them the ¢ 
destroyed 
They belie 
ment” bei] 
nations upd 
hope, and ¢ 
As to “ 


passages tog 
tells us, Ps 
Christ ; 

and ‘ that d 
fire,’ etc, 
Rom. xiv. 


e parallel 
that the 

was that 
1 who saw 
ist, which, 


41 withou 
‘Xiv., XX VP. 
is plain, of 
is evident 
of the de- 
: the sign is 
vith armies, 
Then let 
nd let them 
Ow, suppose 
which is on 
4 out of his 


was encom- 
»need, For 
ricken from 
for leisurely 


» holy place. 
ntichrist’s or 
the truth in 


e destruction 
salem shall be 
the Gentiles 
at Jerusalem 
st, the abom!- 
such as never 
e saved ; and 
signs of the 


coming Lord. Thus Matthew does not speak of ‘Litus, while 
Luke does, and they are not, so far, parallel. 

The old' mistake as to ‘“‘ this generation ” has often been 
set right. In many languages the word is often used not in 
a time sense, but for a race or set of people with certain cha- 
racteristics. ‘ O generation of vipers ;” ‘a wicked and adul- 
terous generation.” In Philippians ii, 15, it is the word 
translated ‘‘nation.” In Ps. xii. 7, “Thou shalt preserve them 
from this generation for ever.” I do not doubt it refers to 
Israel here. Else see the enormous and inexplicable difficulty ; 
for Christ must have come in the clouds with His angels, and 
gathered His elect before thirty or forty years passed. More- 
over, as it is clearly the same coming all through, the Bride 
groom must have come and the judgment of the sheep and 
goats taken place! Does Mr. Laing believe this? 

As to the judgment of the ‘‘ wicked servant,” there is no 
difficulty. It is a parable, not a history, and groups to- 


_ gether, for the sake of the principle, the believing and unbe- 


lieving. This does not show that the award will be at the 
same time to each. 

The last objection is again more serious for Mr. Laing 
than for any other. He should know well that those he 
opposes maintain the very opposite of his assertion, that with 
them the doom of everlasting fire means, that they “ shall be 
destroyed by desolating judgments from the face of the earth.” 
They believe, fully as much_as he, in “ everlasting punish- 
ment” being really that. On the other hand, does wr. L. 
really believe that applying the blessing there awarded to 
nations upon earth “ robs” the Christian of his own beavenly 
hope, and of everlasting life ? 

As to “ sessional judgment” I must be more brief. But 
Mr. Laing, I must say, perverts Scripture. He puts these 
passages together as if one: “ ‘ Wz,’” Christians, the Apostle - 
tells us, as well as sinners, shall stand before the throne of 
Christ ; in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men ; 


and ‘that day is, when the Lord shall be revealed in flaming 


fire,’ *etc., (p. 61). Would it be believed that his first text, 
Rom. xiv. 10, says nothing about the day at all; that the 


- 


< 


26 


second text (Rom. ii. 16) says nothing about Christians at Word wil 

all; and that his third quotation, “that day 7s, when ”’—does and to dis 

not exist in Scripture; and that the passage in 2 Thes. i., 

which he quotes from, says nothing about our standing before 

the judgment seat then, but of vest recompensed to Christians 

in the day of the judgment of others ! , I must ag. 
No one supposes that ‘the saints shall judge the world ” difforshoe 4 

in the “ same sense” as when God judges the secrets of the Testament 

heart, so far as I know. But they shall “ judge,” for Scrip- The pro 

ture says so, and to this Rev. xx. 4 refers. As tothe rest, 9 only to be 

what Mr. L. says is only his own confounding things that Jf To quote ag 


. differ. Tyre and Sidon will not he judged at the time of 
which Jude, quoting Enoch, speaks ; nor does he mean to say 
that the very individuals existing in his day would be judged 
then either. ‘ These,” spoken of by Jude, alas, still exist, 
and will be judged then surely. 

As to the judgment of the great white throne, the passage 
itself limits it to the ‘‘dead” and not the living; and, there 
having been a resurrection of the saints a thousand years be- 
fore, it manifestly does not include these. Thus there is no 
restricting or adding to God’s word, but subjection to it, in so 
teaching. Moreover, the judgment of the “ world ” is not the 
judgment of Christians who are ‘‘nor of the world.” In 
Matt. x. 33 nothing is said about the time when; while 
Mark viii. 38 speaks only of those of whom he will be 
ashamed. ‘They also who pierced Him ” are the people who 
did so (Israel, who had the chief guilt of it), and not the 
individuals, as a glance at Zechariah (xii. 12) will show ; for 
they will mourn their sin and find cleansing from it, which 
Qaiaphas will not (ch. xiii. 1). Did Mr. L. ever read this 
prophecy of Zechariah seriously ? 

Again Rev. xi. 15 is the anticipation of what is coming, 
nothing more. If it be, where is even Mr. L.’s millennium? 
Nor is, the order one of time plainly. The “time” for all 
these things is the day of the Lord, and they will all take 
-place on that day, but there is no further synchronisyp. tom the nati 

I might apply Mr. L.’s own language (p. 22) with greatiihe earth, 
truth to this collection of texts on his part. I leave it, how-ff 


that “there 
Just and un 
29 is more r; 
and the “hg 
lapse of time 
pressions as 
guages in a y 
which is that 
out particula 
supply us wii 
pressions, in 
the definite, 
Scripture 
“Christ the 
His coming ( 
asserts is taug 
Mor himself, t 
Would be no 
thapter, reade 
nly of sain 
faised in inco 
lent that this 
lave already 
mat this take 


ever, in the assurance that the least intelligent student of the 
Word will not be at a loss to know what is truth amid it all, 
and to discern the spirit which is at work init. As to 


wristians at 
.en ”—does 
2 Thes. i., 
ding before 


- §, Tue ResurRecrion. 
» Christians 


I must agree with Mr. L. that “there is not a hint of any 
difference in time between the resurrection of Old and New 
Testament saints,” nor did I ever hear that any thought so. 
The progfs of the First Resurrection of the saints are not 
only to be found in Rev. xx., 4-6 as he seems to suppose. 
To quote agaiust it that Paul believed (what we all believe) 
that “there shall be a resurrection of the-dead, both of the 
just and unjust,” is childish. The quotation of Jno v. 28, 
29 is more rational ; but there also it is the general statement, 
and the “‘ hour” may, as we see from verse 25, embrace a long 
lapse of time. Nothiag can be really argued from such ex- 
pressions as “day” or “hour,” as they are used in all lan- 
guages in a very wide sense. ‘The last day” is an instance, 
which is that which succeeds the present, or man’s day, with- 
out particularizing exactly when. Scripture does not fail to 
supply us with the means of interpreting aright all such ex- 
pressions, in doing which we must explain the indefinite by 
the definite, and not reverse the rule as Mr. Laing does. © 
Scripture is precise, that the “order” of resurrection is 
“Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at 
His coming (1 Cor. xv. 23) ; not the Church only, as Mr. L. 
aseerts is taught, I know not by whom ; and not, as he asserts 
sfor himself, the wicked dead as well. If this were so, there 
Would be no meaning in the apostie’s words. Look at the 
thapter, reader, and see how plain itis that it is a resurrection 
nly of saints he has in mind. For when he says, “it is 
faised in incorruption,” “it is raised in glory,” &c., it is evi- 
lent that this could not apply to the wicked at all; and we 
lave already seen by comparing verse 54 with Isa. xxv. 8, 
hat this takes place at the time when the veil is removed | 
hronisyp. tom the nations and thé offence of God’s people taken from 
92) with greatiiie earth, 
I leave it, how-§ 


the world ” 
rets of the 
,” for Scrip- 
3 torthe rest, 
‘things that 

the time of 
, mean to say 
ild be judged 
g, still exist, 


e, the passage 
a and, there 
sand years be- 
us there is no 
ion to it, in 80 
1d” is not the 
b world.” In 
when; while 
he will be 
the people who 
), and not the 
ill show ; for 
rom it, which 
ever read this 


hat is coming, 
’. millennium 1 
3 time” for all 
y will all take 


28 


Again from Rom. viii. 19-23, we learn that the “whole partakers , 
creation” groans, waiting with ourselves for the “ manifesta- comes the 
tion of the sons of God” at the “redemption of the body,” This is, th 
expecting then to be “delivered from the bondage of corrup- vision of Te 
tion into the liberty of the glory (so the Greek) of the chil- ut necesga 
dren of God.” antic pla: 

Again, take the Loid’s answer to the’ Sadducees (Lu. xx. Thus M 


35, 36): “they which are accounted worthy to obtain that 
world and the resurrection from the dead”—how could one 
speak of being accounted worthy to obtain a general resurrec. 
tion, which nobody could lose /—“ neither marry nor are giv- 
en in marriage, neither can they die any more, for they are 
equal unto the angels ; and are the children of God, Bain the 
children of the resurrection.” This is either Universalism or 
Premillennialism. or if people are children of God as being 
children of a general resurrection, the wicked too being chil- 
dren of the resurrection must be also children of God. The 
first. part—“ they which are accounted worthy”—shews it is 
not this ; therefore.the other must be the truth: it must be 
a.‘ first resurrection” of saints alone. 

Now, compare with this the passage in Revelation (xx. 4- 


theory com, 
Go require, 
literal, not | 
Visions previ 
Up to ridicul 
wt. That th 
order in wh 
Laing to pro 
Interpretation 
they clash w; 
Lamb surely 
doubtful, wh 
Is ‘* the righté 
the rider on t¢ 


6) upon which Mr. Laing spends all 3.'s strength: how like flinen. 7775 , 
is this ‘‘they are the children of God” etc., to that “ Blessed [The binding , 
5 


‘and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection ;” and 
‘“‘neither can they die any more” to “on such the second 
death hath no power.” ind observe, these words in the 
Apocalypse are not part of the vision, but the interpretation* 
of the vision. First, there are seen thrones, and people sit- 
ting on them, to whom judgment is committed, then another 
company of martyrs under the beast, slain after the saints of 
the past and present had been caught up to meet the Lord. 
These might have been supposed to have thus been too late 
for a place with the rest of the heavenly saints, they are fi 
therefore here distinctly joined to the other throned saints, as 


with the over 
The first resur 
se6n, In perfec 
allel to Dan. x 
Prophecies) is 
Foeny aA 
When it is sai 
ousand year; 
Me «nother ¢ 
bold enough 
at with enti: 
Pint of (tod, 


_ * ‘These eee eae occur all through the book : take for in- 
stance, xix. 8, ‘‘the fine linen is the righteousness of the saints ;”’ xx. 
2 ‘‘that old serpent, which is the devil and Satan,’’ etc. 


Pd che Script 


, “whole 
nanifesta- 
1e body,” 
of corrup- 
the chil- 


g (Lu. Xx. 
btain that 
could one 
al resurrec- 
sor are giV- 
x they are 
], BEING the 
rersalism or 
‘od as being 
being chil- 
God. The 
_shews it is 
it must be 


ation (xx. 4- 
,: how like 
at “* Blessed 
action ;” and 

the second 
vords in the 
terpretation™ 
d people sit- 


then another 


the saints 0 


pet the Lord. 
been too ate } 
ints, they are § 
oned saints, 48 


a mall 


Ce 


hk: take for in- 
he saints; %* 


' 


partakers also, though distinct in time with these. Then 
comes the explanation: “This is thé first resurrection.” 
This is, therefore, no part of the figure, it is the reality. The 
vision of resurrection is the vision of a fact (for a vision is 
ut necessarily syinbolic), and we get into a region of indis- 
Fitable plain sneaking, and not symbol at all. 
Thus Mr. .’s shafts fall powerless. It is not because a 
theory compels us,, but because reverence for the Word of 
God requires it, that we believe the first resurrection to be 
literal, not spiritual. -Nor does this oblige us to take the 
visions previous to iv with the gross literalness which he holds 
up to ridicule, while he knows perfectly well that no one holds 
it. That the visions of chaps, xix, xx, do not follow in the 
order in which confessedly they are given, lies with Mr. 
Laing to prove: the “ assumption” is plainly his. As to the 
interpretation of them, there is little difficulty, save only that 
they clash with his on theories. First, the marriage of the 
Lamb surely should be clear, and who the Bride is not 
doubtful, when we see her clothed with the fine linen, which 
is ‘the righteousness of saints.” The armies which follow 
the rider on the white horse are clothed with that same. fine 
linen. His name is given us plainly—‘ the Word of God.” 
The binding of the great’ Adversary naturally connects itself 
with the overthrow of the kings of the earth, as in Isa. xxiv. 
The first resurrection and :ule of the saints is only, as we have 
seen, in perfect harmony with other scriptures, but 78 not par- 
allel to Dan. xii, 2, 3, which (like Ezek. xxxvii, and other 
prophecies) is the political resurrection of the Jewish people. 


when it is said “the rest of the dead lived not again till the 
thousand years were finished, and when at the close of that 
ine «nother confessedly literal resurrection dves take place, 
bold enough at any rate, even for Mr. Laing. I leave all 
at with entire confidence to the judgment of the simplest 
Bint of rod. Mr. Laing says little as to 


6. Tur-MILLENNIuM, 


md tne Scriptures examined have already furnished us with 


ena hanecongsie giorno ene 


30 


sufficient light as to it for our present purpose. Mr. L. has 
plainly not perceived that its being literally a thousand years 
resultsfrom this period being found in the explanation of the 
vision, and not merely in the vision itself. It is to be no- 
ticed how little is said even in Revelation as to the earthly 
blessing. This is left to the Old Testament prophets, and ise 
thoir common theme. ~The New Testament adds the reign of 
the saints and the vision of the heavenly, as Ezekiel of the 
earthly, city. 

Here then I close. It is not my intention to follow Mr. 
Laing through his further arguments as to the tendencies of 
the doctrines in question. Nor, if he has allowed himself to 
indulge in eharges of which he himself must know the false- 
hood, shall I do aught but refer it, as I safely may, “to Him 
who judgeth righteously.” I must ask, however, those who 
would do common justice to the holders of the views in ques- 
tion, to take these from ‘their own books, and not from Mr. 
_Laing’s statements. For instance, that they “claim for them- 
ate | selves the éxclusive name of ‘the Brethren,’ the Church, the 
7. alone Bride of the Lamb” (p. 23) is simply a false assertion. 
And there are many other statements in his book as unreli- 
able as this one. 

But I have done. Reader, eternity 's before us, and fast 
hastening on is the time when (too late alas, for many) the 
full truth will be known. Meanwhile the words of the Liv- 
ing Truth Himself are, ‘ Behold, I come quickly.” Can you 
respond, “‘ Even so, come, Lord Jesus?” 


F, W. GRAN T., 


Toronto, April, 1877, 


‘ 


{r. L. has 
sand years 
tion of the 
to be no- 
ne earthly 
ets, and is@ 
he reign of 
ciel of the 


follow Mr. 
ndencies of 
himself to 
w the false- 
y; “to Him 
“those who 
ews in ques- 
xt from Mr. 
im for them- 
Church, the 
Ise assertion. 
yk as unreli- 


, us, and fast 
yr many) the 
is of the Liv- 
y.” Can you 


. GRANT, 


