1C4 


•4121 


if  fl 


OUR  LORD'S  PASSION  AND  DEATH. 


Our  Lord'5 
Passion  ^  ^ 
and  Death. 


SERMONS   BY 

C.  H.  5PUKQEON. 


c^ 


LONDON: 

PASSMORE    &  ALABASTER,   4,  Paternoster  Buildings,  E.G. 
1904 


/^UU      RIQHTS      RF.  SERVED, 

CAVEN  UlRAtl 

KNOX  COLLEGE 


A-C»"~I"T6I  ^ 


ALAIJASTER,   PASSMOKE  &   SONS,   PRINTEKS, 

WHITKCBOSS  STIIBKT, 

LONDON,    E.C. 


INDEX 


Sermon 
No. 

2,338 

2,377 

2,522 

1,971 

1,442 

2,271 

2,331 

693 
2,767 
2,769 

493 
1,199 

2,376 

2,715 
2,616 
2,368 

722 

494 
1,955 
2,820 

2,822 
2,825 
1,643 

1,364 


Our   Lord's    Passion    and    Death. 


Title. 

The  Crisis  of  this  World  ... 

Love  Stronger  than  Death  ... 

"After  Two  Days  is  Tlie  Passover," 

The  Blood  Shed  for  Many 

Sorrow  at  the  Cross  Turned  into  Joy 

Alone,  yet  Not  Alone 

Christ's  Pastoral    Prayer     fur  His 
People 

Tlie  Garden  of  the  Soul     ... 

Jesus  in  Gethsemane 

The  Weakened  Christ  Strengthened 

Gethsemane 

The  Agony  in  Gethsemane 

"  I  Will,"  yet '^  Not  as  I  Will."   ...  j 

Christian  Resignation 

Christ's  Care  of  His  Disciples   ... 

The    Living    Care    of   the   Dying 

Christ        

The   Captive  Saviour  Freeing  His 

People 

The  Betrayal  

Jesus  Declining  the  Legions 
Christ  before  Annas 

Christ  in  Bonds 

Majesty  in  Misery  ... 

Our     Lord's      Trial      before     the 

Sanhedrim 
Nevertheless.     Hereafter. 


Text. 

Page. 

John.  xii.  31 — 33. 

1 

,,       xiii.  1. 

13 

Matt.  xxvi.  2. 

25 

„     28. 

37 

John  xvi.  20—22. 

49 

V       „     31,32. 

61 

„     xvii.  9,  10. 

73 

Matt.  xxvi.  36. 

85 

John  xviii.  1,2. 

97 

Luke  xxii.  43. 

109 

„        „     44. 

121 

n            n          »j 

133 

John  xvii.  24.    ) 
Matt.  xxvi.  39.  J 

145 

) J        )>      )) 

157 

John  xviii.  8. 

169 

„       8,  9. 


181 


>J         )> 

»j 

193 

Luke  xxii. 

47, 

48. 

205 

Matt,  xxvi 

.53, 

54. 

217 

John  xviii. 

12, 

LS 

19- 

-23. 

229 

M            n 

24 

241 

Luke  xxii. 

63- 

-65. 

253 

Mark  xiv. 

64. 

265 

Matt,  xxvi 

64, 

277 

INDKX. 


Sermon 
No. 

Title. 

Text. 

Page. 

2,473 

An  Awful  Contrast 

(  Matt. 
(Eev. 

xxvi.  67.    I 
XX.    )1.        j 

289 

2,624 

Secondhand 

John 

xviii.  34. 

801 

2,826 

The  King  in  Pilate's  Hall- 

)» 

„      37. 

313 

1,086 

Jesus,  the  King  of  Truth  ... 

n 

»>       )> 

325 

1,644 

Our      Lord's      First     Appearance 

before  Pilate        

>• 

„      38. 

337 

505 

Barabbas  Preferred  to  Jesus 

)? 

„      40. 

349 

1,645 

Our  Lord  before  Herod     

Luke 

xxiii.  8,9. 

361 

2,05  iV  Setting  Jesus  at  Nought 

»> 

„       H. 

373 

1,353 

Ecce  Eex     ... 

John 

xix.  11. 

385 

1,647 

The  Dream  of  Pilate's  Wife 

Malt. 

xxvii.  19. 

397 

1,648 

Pilate  and  Ourselves  Guilty  of  the 

Saviour' s  Death  ... 

>» 

„     24,25. 

409 

2,338 

The  Whole  Band  against  Christ  ... 

)) 

„      27. 

421 

1,168 

The  Crown  of  Thorns          

•> 

„      29. 

433 

2,824 

Mocked  of  the  Soldiers 

>> 

M            M 

445 

497 

The  Procession  of  Sorrow... 

John 

xix.  16. 

457 

1,683 

\  The  Great  Cross-bearer  and  His 
1      Followers 

Mark 
John 
Mark 

XV.  20.    ) 
xix.  17. 
XV.  21. 

469 

2,263 
897 
2,562 
1,767 
2,029 
1,896 
2,133 
2,803 
1,409 
2,844 

421 

1,881 
2,078 


Up  fjom  the  Country,  and  Pressed 

into  the  Service  ... 
The   Determination    of    Christ    to 

Suffer  for  his  People     ... 
Christ's  Plea  for  Ignorant  Sinners 
The  First  Cry  from  the  Cross 
Cries  from  the  Cross 
Faith  among  Mockers 
"  Let  Him  Deliver  Him  Now."    ... 
The  Three  Hours'  Darkness 
' '  Lama  Sabachthani  ?  "  . . . 
The  Saddest  Cry  from  the  Cross  ... 
The  Shortest  of  the  Seven  Cries  ... 
Christ's    Dying     Word     for     His 

Church 

"It  is  Finished." 

The  Dying  Thief  in  a  New  Light 
The  Believing  Thief  


I)         n         }' 
n        11       23. 

Luke  xxiii.  34. 

>>      jj        •» 
Psalm  xxii.  1. 

11         11      8. 
Matt,  xxvii.  43. 
»         „      45. 
,,      46. 

John  xix.  28. 

„      „     30. 

>«       >>       >» 
Luke  xxiii.  40 — 42. 


„  42,43, 


481 

493 
505 
517 
529 
535 
547 
559 
571 
683 
595 

607 
619 
627 
639 


Sermon  ™.^, 

No.  ^^^^^-  'J'ext.  Page. 

2,311     Our   Lord's    Last    Cry    from   the 

Cross        Luke  xxiii.  46.  651 

^  f...    The      Last    Words    of    Christ   on  ( -^^ ''         "    .  ''       ) 

^'^^^        the  Cross  Psalm  xxxi.  5.  668 

[  Acts  vii.  59.         j 

2,016     The  Bent  Veil       {  ^et^lt  20°' ''^  }  «^'^ 

2,059     The  Miracles  of  our  Lord's  Death     Matt,  xxvii.  50 — 53.    687 
860     Mourning    at    the    Sight   of    the 

Crucified Luke  xxiii.  48.  695 

1,956     On  the  Cross  after  Death John  xix.  31— 37.        707 

1,789  "  Joseph  of  Arimathica       Mark  xv.  43— 46.         719 

2,390     A  Eoyal  Funeral John  xix.  38 — 42.       731 


Uniform     with    the     preserit     Volun-i< 


SERMONS    ON 

OUR     LOHD'S     PARABLES. 

BY    C.    H.    SPURQEON. 

Cloth    Qilt,    78. 

Containing    Sixty-flve    Sermons  delivered   in   the   New   Park   Street   Chapel, 
Soathwark,  andPthe  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  Newlngton. 

SERMONS    ON 

OUR     LORD'S     MIRACLES. 

BY    C.    H.    5PURGE0N. 

Two  Vols.,  Oloth  Gilt,  78.  each. 

Containing  One  Hundred  and  Seven  Sermons  delivered  In  the  New  Park  Street 
Chape],  Southwark,  and  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  Newlngton. 

•♦THE     MOST     HOLY     PLACE/' 

SERMONS    ON    THB    SONO    OF    SOLOMON 

BY    C.    H.    SPURQEON. 

Cloth  Gilt,  78. 

Containing   Fifty-two   Sermons   delivered   in   the   New   Park   Street  Chapel, 
Southwark,  and  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  Newlngton. 


CHRIST  IN  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

BY    C.    H.    5PURQE0N. 

Cloth  Gilt,  78. 

Sixty  Sermons  on  the  Foreshadowlngs  of  our  Lord  in  Old  Testament  History, 
Ceremony,  and  Prophecy. 

THE     MESSIAH. 

SERMONS     ON     OUR     LORD'S     NAMES.     TITLES,     AND 
ATTRIBUTES. 

BY    C.    H.    SPURQEON. 

Cloth    Gilt,    7s. 

Containing  Sixty  Sermons  delivered  in  the  New  Park  Street  Chapel,  Southwark, 
and  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  Newlngton. 

CHRIST'S  RELATION  TO  HIS  PEOPLE, 

As  their  Life,  their  Keeper,  their  Lover,  King,  and  Priest,  and  their  Strength 

and  Joy. 
SIXTY    SERMONS 

BY     C.     H.     SPURQEON. 

With     Preface     by    ANDREW     MURRAY. 
Cloth    Gilt,    78. 

London:  PASSMORE  &  ALABASTER,  Paternoster  Buildings,  E.G. 


THE  CEISIS  OF  THIS  WOELD. 


Intended  for  Eeading  on  Lord's-day,  December  10th,   1893, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

A.T   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lord's-day  Evening,  October  6th,  1889. 


A  ''^ow  is  the  judgment  of  this  world  :  now  shall  the  prince  of  this  world  be  cast  out 
And  1,  If  I  be  htted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me.  This  he  said,  sieuifv- 
ing  what  death  he  should  die."— John  xii.  31—33.  ^     "^ 

Our  Lord  passed  through  his  passion  in  a  kind  of  rehearsal  before  it 
came.  He  saw  those  Grreeks,  who  came  to  Philip,  and  whom  Andrew 
and  Philip  brought  to  him,  and  his  heart  was  flushed  with  joy.  This 
was  to  be  the  result  of  his  death,  that  the  Gentiles  would  be  gathered 
to  him.  That  thought  reminded  him  of  his  approaching  decease.  It 
was  very  near ;  only  a  few  days  would  elapse,  and  then  he  would  die 
upon  the  cross.  In  anticipation  of  Calvary,  his  soul  was  full  of 
trouble ;  not  that  he  feared  death,  but  his  death  was  to  be  a  very 
peculiar  one.  He  was  to  die  the  Just  for  the  unjust ;  he  was  to  bear 
our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree ;  and  his  pure  and  holy  soul 
shrank  from  contact  with  sin.  To  stand  in  the  sinner's  place,  to  bear 
his  Father's  wrath,  this  bewildered  him.  He  was  very  faint  of  heart 
and  he  cried,  ''  What  shall  I  say  ?  Father,  save  me  from  this  hour  .• 
but  for  this  cause  came  I  unto  this  hour.  Father,  glorify  thy  name." 
Without  any  wicked  weakness,  he  proved  how  truly  human  he  was ; 
without  any  sinful  repining  at  his  Father's  will,  he  saw  how  terrible 
that  will  was,  and  he  shuddered  at  what  it  included.  This  was  a  kind 
of  rehearsal  for  Gethsemane  ;  it  was  a  sipping  of  that  cup  whereof  he 
was  to  drink  until  his  sweat  was,  as  it  were,  great  drops  of  blood  fall- 
ing down  to  the  ground,  while  his  whole  soul  poured  out  the  agonized 
petition,  *'  0  my  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me : 
nevertheless  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt." 

When  our  Lord  Jesus  was  in  this  great  distress  of  mind,  in  antici 
pation  of  the  terrible  sufferings  he  was  about  to  endure,  his  Fathei 
Kpoke  to  him  ;  and  when  you  are  in  your  direst  distress,  God  will 
speak  to  you.  If  you  are  his  child,  when  the  weakness  of  your  flesh 
seems  ready  to  prevail  over  your  spirit,  you,  too,  shaU  have  a  reassuring- 
voice  out  of  the  excellent  glory  even  as  your  Master  had.  He  seemed 
No.  2,338.  . 


-6  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

to  recover  himself  at  once,  and  bracing  himself  up,  he  indulged  his 
heart  again  with  a  vision  of  the  glorious  result  of  his  death.  Then 
he  uttered  the  happy  words  on  which  we  are  to  meditate  to-night,  in 
which  he  summed  up  the  consequences  of  his  death  in  these  three 
points  :  "  Now  is  the  judgment  of  this  world :  now  shall  the  prince  of 
this  world  be  cast  out.  And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will 
draw  all  men  unto  me." 

Let  us,  first,  to-night,  consider  the  threefold  result  of  Christ's  death ; 
and  when  we  have  done  that,  let  us  think  about  Chrisfs  death  as  it  is 
described  in  our  text. 

I.     First,   let  us  consider    the   threefold   result   of    Christ's 

DEATH. 

There  is,  first,  the  judgment  of  the  world:  ''  Now  is  the  judgment  of 
this  world."  If  you  like,  you  may  read  it  '<  crisis  ",  for  that  is  the 
Greek  word  used  here:  ''Now  is  the  crisis  of  this  world."  The 
world  is  sick,  it  grows  worse ;  and  the  physician  says  that  its  malady 
has  come  to  a  climax,  it  is  a  case  of  kill  or  cure.  There  was  a  crisis 
in  the  world's  disease,  and  that  crisis  was  when  Christ  died ;  his  death 
was  the  turning-point,  the  hinge  of  the  world's  history.  There  have 
been  many  hinges  in  history ;  every  nation  has  a  hinge  in  its  history  : 
the  cross  of  Christ  was  the  hinge  of  the  world's  history,  it  had  reached 
the  turning-point.  ^  I  thank  God  that  the  death  of  Christ  was  the 
future  death  of  sin.  When  he  died,  the  arch-enemy  received  his 
death-stroke.  That  death  was  the  bruising  of  Christ's  heel ;  but  in 
that  death  he  bruised  the  old  serpent's  head.  Now  there  is  hope  for 
the  world  ;  its  crisis  is  passed.  Now  will  the  gods  of  the  heathen  fall ; 
now  will  the  dark  ignorance  of  men  yield  to  the  Light  of  the  world. 
After  this  crisis,  there  shall  come  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth 
wherein  dwelleth  righteousness ;  for  Christ's  first  coming  is  a  pledge 
of  his  second  coming,  wherein  he  will  exterminate  sin,  and  make  the 
wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  to  blossom  as  the  rose.  Thus  we 
may  render  our  Saviour's  words,  "  Now  is  the  crisis  of  this  world,"  the 
turning-point,  the  hinge  on  which  all  its  history  hangs.  Still,  I  greatly 
prefer  to  keep  to  our  old  version,  which  is  a  translation,  whereas  mine 
is  only  a  borrowing  of  the  original  word  "  crisis." 

"  Now  is  the  judgment  of  this  world."  This  means  that,  when  Christ 
died,  the  world  that  lieth  in  the  wicked  one,  the  ungodly  world,  was 
judged  in  this  sense  ;  first,  it  was  convicted  of  ^being  guiltiest  of  the 
guilty.  I  daresay  you  have  heard  people  use  pretty  phrases  about 
the  dignity  of  human  nature,  and  so  on.  They  are  lying  phrases ;  for 
human  nature  is  as  bad  as  it  can  be.  If  you  want  the  proof  of  that 
assertion,  behold  how  God  himself  came  here  among  men,  incarnate 
virtue  robed  in  love  !  Did  men  love  him '?  Did  they  fall  down  before 
him,  and  do  him  homage  ?  The  homage  of  the  world  was,  "  Crucify 
him  !  Crucify  him  !  "  The  world  hates  virtue  ;  it  cannot  bear  per- 
fection ;  it  might  endure  benevolence,  but  absolute  purity  and 
righteousness  it  canaot,  away  with.  Its  native  instincts  are  wrong  ;  it 
is  not  towards  the  light  that  men  are  going,  their  backs  are  to  the 
sun,  they  are  journeying  into  the  thick  darkness. 

And,  next,  the  world  was  convicted  of  the  stupendous  crime  of 
murdering  the  Son  of  God.     I  will  not  call  it  regicide,  but  deicide ; 


iHE    CRISIS    OF    THIS    WORLD.  3 

and  tliis  is  the  crime  of  crimes.  Truly  was  the  world  guilty  of  all  that 
proj)hets  ever  charged  it  with,  and  much  more.  When  wicked  men  slew 
the  Prince  of  life,  the  Holy  One  and  the  Just,  then  was  it  proven  that 
the  world  is  at  heart  atheistic,  that  it  hates  God,  and  would  put  God 
himself  to  death  if  he  were  within  its  grasp.  Thus  did  men  put  the 
Incarnate  God  to  death  when  he  submitted  himself  to  their  power. 
You  need  not  talk  about  the  virtues  of  the  world ;  it  slew  the  Christ, 
and  that  is  enough  to  condemn  it.  We  want  no  other  proof  of  its 
guilt ;  you  cannot  bring  evidence  more  complete  and  overwhelming 
than  this,  they  slew  the  Lord  of  life  and  glory,  they  said,  "  This  is 
the  heir  ;  come,  let  us  kill  him,  and  the  inheritance  shall  be  ours." 

Christ's  death  was  the  judgment  of  this  world,  next,  by  sentencing 
the  world ;  for  if  Christ,  who  was  perfectly  innocent,  must  die  when 
he  stood  in  the  sinner's  place,  what  think  you,  0  guilty  men,  will  not 
you  also  die  ?  If  the  Well-beloved  of  heaven,  bearing  nothing  but 
imputed  guilt,  sins  not  his  own,  must  nevertheless  be  smitten  of  God 
and  afflicted,  and  a  voice  must  be  heard,  "  Awake,  0  sword,  against 
my  shepherd,  and  against  the  man  that  is  my  fellow,  saith  the  Lord  of 
hosts;"  if  he  must  die  on  yonder  cruel  tree,  if  he  must  cry,  ''My 
God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  then,  be  sure  of  this, 
there  is  wrath  treasured  up  against  the  day  of  wrath,  and  no  soul  of 
man  that  doeth  evil  shall  go  unpunished.  Is  there  not  a  God  who  is 
the  Judge  of  all  the  earth,  and  who  must  do  right  ?  If  it  be  right  to 
smite  the  Innocent,  who  assumed  the  place  of  the  guilty,  it  must 
surely  be  right  that  the  truly  guilty  should  die  the  death.  "  The  soul 
that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."  So  there  was  not  only  the  conviction,  but 
also  the  sentence  of  the  world,  when  Jesus  died. 

And  more  than  that,  there  is  the  final  ending  of  the  trial  when  the 
world  rejects  Christ.  As  long  as  you  are  here,  my  hearers,  and  Christ 
is  preached  to  you,  there  is  hope  for  you  ;  but  in  that  day  when  you 
reject  Christ  finally,  and  will  have  none  of  him,  when  you  cry,  "Away 
with  him,  away  with  him  !  We  wiU  not  be  washed  in  his  blood,  we 
will  not  be  clothed  in  his  righteousness  ;  "  in  that  day  you  seal  your 
doom,  and  there  remains  no  hope  for  you.  There  is  one  window  in 
heaven,  and  through  it  streams  the  light  of  life  ;  but  if  that  be  closed, 
no  other  wiU  ever  be  opened.  "There  is  none  other  name  under 
heaven  given  among  men,  whereby  we  must  be  saved."  If  you  have 
for  the  last  time  put  Christ  away,  if  you  have  altogether  done  with 
him,  you  have  ended  your  probation,  you  have  finished  your  trial,  you 
have  put  out  your  last  candle,  you  are  for  ever  doomed.  When 
Christ  is  so  rejected  as  actually  to  be  made  away  with  as  he  was 
upon  the  cross,  then  is  the  judgment  of  this  world. 

I  wish  tJiat  I  had  time  to  pause  here  to  press  these  points  upon  you 
who  belong  to  the  world.  There  are  but  two  parties,  the  world  and 
the  Church  of  God.  If  you  are  not  of  the  Church  of  God,  you  belong 
to  the  world  ;  and  the  world  is  judged  by  the  death  of  Christ.  If  you 
are  not  a  Christian,  you  are  a  member  of  that  great  corporation  called 
the  world.  Men  sometimes  speak  of  a  Christian  world  and  an  un- 
christian world,  a  religious  world  and  an  irreligious  world,  a  sporting 
world,  a  laughing  world,  a  thieving  world,  a  trading  world ;  but  all 
that  is  really  of  the  world  is  outside  the  hounds  of  the  Church  of  God. 


4  METilOPOLITAN  TABEKNACLE   PULPIT. 

He  that  believeth  in  Christ  has  escaped  from  the  world.  "  They  are 
not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world,"  said  Christ"  con- 
cerning his  disciples;  but  to  the  unbelieving  Jews  he  said,  '*  Ye  are 
from  beneath ;  I  am  from  above  :  ye  are  of  this  world  ;  I  am  not  of 
this  world." 

Thus,  you  see  that,  as  the  first  result  of  the  death  of  Christ,  the 
world  is  judged,  the  world  is  convicted,  the  world  is  sentenced  for  it» 
rejection  of  Christ.  A  Christ-rejecting  world  is  a  doomed  world  ;  may 
none  of  you  belong  to  that  world  ! 

The  second  result  of  Christ's  death  is  the  casting  out  of  Satan :  *'Now 
shall  the  prince  of  this  world  be  cast  out."  He  who  holds  sway  over 
it  shall  now  lose  his  throne.  The  prince  of  this  world  is  Satan,  the 
arch-enemy  of  God  and  of  man  ;  but  he  is  not  always  to  reign  as  the 
prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,  the  chief  of  the  rulers  of  the  darkness 
of  this  world.     He  is  to  be  cast  out  of  his  present  dominions. 

By  the  death  of  Christ,  Satan's  accusations  again&t  believers  are 
answered.  One  of  the  practices  in  which  he  most  delights  is  that 
of  accusing  the  people  of  God  ;  and,  alas  I  he  has  plenty  of  cause  for 
his  charges;  but  whenever  he  accuses  us,  our  one  answer  is,  "Jesus 
died."  He  says,  *'  These  people  have  sinned ;  "  and  we  reply,  "  True  ; 
but  Jesus  died  for  them ;  "  and  the  cross  of  Christ  stops  the  mouth  of 
the  accuser.  Even  a  feeble  saint,  looking  up  to  his  crucified  and  risen 
Saviour,  can  boldly  sing, — 

"  I  may  my  fierce  accuser  face, 
And  tell  him  thou  hast  died." 

Next,  Christ's  cross  spoils  Satan  of  his  universal  monarchy.  He 
could  once  lord  it  over  the  whole  world,  and  he  does  very  much  of 
that  even  now  ;  but  there  is  a  people  over  whom  he  cannot  sway  his  evil 
sceptre,  there  is  a  race  which  has  broken  loose  from  him.  They  are 
free,  and  they  defy  him  to  enslave  them  again.  They  care  not  for  his 
threats,  they  are  not  to  be  won  by  his  blandishments  ;  and  though  he 
worries  and  tempts  them,  yet  he  cannot  destroy  them.  He  can  boast 
no  longer  of  universal  dominion.  There  is  a  seed  of  the  woman  that 
has  revolted  from  him,  for  Jesus,  by  his  death,  hath  redeemed  them 
out  of  the  hand  of  the  enemy,  and  they  are  free.  I  heard  a  story  of 
an  old  black  woman,  who  was  waiting  upon  a  lady  visiting  friends 
in  the  South,  some  time  after  the  last  great  war  in  America.  The 
lady  said  to  the  black  servant,  ''You  may  very  well  wait  upon  a 
Northerner  with  great  attention,  for  it  is  through  us  that  you  are 
free."  "Free,  missy,  free?"  exclaimed  the  negress ;  "I's  a  slave. 
I  was  born  a  slave."  "  Oh,  but  you  are  free !  Do  you  not  know  that 
there  has  been  an  Act  passed  by  which  you  are  all  free?"  "Yes,  I 
did  hear  somet'ing  about  dat ;  and  I  said  to  old  massa, '  I  hear  dat  we 
is  all  free.'  He  says,  *  Stuff  and  nonsense,'  so  I's  bin  stoppin'  here 
workin'  for  him.  Is  it  true,  missy,  that  we  is  all  free  ?  "  "  Oh,  yes !  " 
she  answered,  "you  are  all  free,  every  slave  is  free  now."  "Then,"' 
said  the  woman,  "I  don't  bin  serve  old  massa  any  longer;  I  bid  him 
*  Good-bye.'  "  And  so  it  is  when  Christ  sets  us  free ;  we  do  not  serve 
the  old  massa  Satan  any  longer,  we  bid  him  "  Good-bye." 

"When  we  are  set  free  from  the  dominion  of  the  devil,  by  the  emanci- 
pating redemption  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,    Satan's 


THE    CRISIS    OF   THIS   WOKLU.  0 

tyrannical  power  is  crippled.  He  still  lias  great  influence,  and  lie  does 
his  worst  to  injure  tlie  kingdom  of  Christ  by  persecution,  by  false 
doctrine,  and  by  a  thousand  other  methods ;  but  Christ  has  broken 
his  right  arm,  he  cannot  work  as  once  he  did  ;  and  more  and  more,  as 
the  fruit  of  the  Eedeemer's  passion,  will  Satan's  power  be  curtailed 
until,  at  last,  he  shall  be  utterly  cast  out,  and  the  triumphant  shout 
shall  be  heard,  "  Hallelujah,  for  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth! 
Let  us  never  imagine  that  the  devil  is  going  to  conquer  m  the  great 
battle  between  right  and  wrong.  God's  Word  tells  us  plainly  enough 
what  his  end  is  to  be  :  "And  the  devil  that  deceived  them  was  cast 
into  the  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone,  where  the  beast  and  the  false 
prophet  are,  and  shall  be  tormented  day  and  night  for  ever  and  ever. 

Now,  if  any  of  you  sufEer  through  Satan  tempting  you  to  despair, 
if  he  comes  to  some  of  you,  and  entices  you  to  commit  a  sm  which 
you  hate,  and  against  which  you  strive  with  all  the  might  God  gives 
you,  if,  by  a  mysterious  force  that  you  cannot  comprehend,  he  seems 
to  make  you  do  otherwise  than  you  would,  take  courage,  and  stand 
up  agaiiist  him,  for  when  Jesus  died,  he  said  that,  by  his  death,  the 
prince  of  darkness  was  cast  out,  and  so  he  is.  Sin  shall  not^  have 
dominion  over  you,  nor  shall  Satan  either.  Only  be  you  bold  m  re- 
sisting him,  claim  your  liberty  as  a  child  of  God,  and  fight  under  the 
command  of  Christ,  for  the  cross  is  the  conquering  banner  for  all  who 
would  overthrow  the  power  of  Satan. 

•'  By  all  hell's  host  withstood  ; 
We  all  hell's  host  o'erthrow  ; 
And  conquering  them,  through  Jesu's  blood 
We  still  to  conquer  go." 
The  third  result  of  Christ's  death  is  the  central  attraction  of  Ms  cross. 
*'  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me." 
Christ  on  the  cross  lias  become  the  great  magnet  attracting  men  to 
himself.     What  did  he  mean  by  this  saying  ?     Did  he  not  mean  that 
his  sphere  of  influence  would  be  widened  ?     **  While  I  am  here,"  said 
he,  "I  draw  a  few  men  to  me  ;  these  fishermen  have  become  my  dis- 
ciples, these  Greeks  have  come  to  see  me ;  but  when  I  am  lifted  up 
upon  the  cross,  I  shall  draw  all  men  unto  me,  men  of  all  sorts,  men 
out  of  all  nations,  multitudes  of  men,  not  only  of  this  one  age,  but  of 
all  ages,  tiU  the  world  shall  end.     I  shall  become  the  centre  of  a  wider 
circle,  a  circle  wide  as  the  world.     I  shall  draw  all  men  unto  me. ' 

But  why  is  it  that  Christ  does  draw  men  to  himself  ?  I  answer  that 
it  is  because,  by  dying  on  the  cross,  he  gave  a  new  and  brighter  dis- 
play, of  his  love.  Men  came  to  Christ  because  of  his  love  while  he 
walked  the  earth  alive  ;  little  children  especially  did  so  ;  but  after  he 
had  died  that  shameful  death,  how  could  they  help  coming  to  him  i 
"  Scarcely  for  a  righteous  man  wiU  one  die  :  yet  peradventure  for  a 
good  man  some  would  even  dare  to  die.  But  God  commendeth  his 
love  toward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for 
us."  "  Herein  is  love."  And  to  aU  the  ages  the  masterpiece  of  love 
is  the  dying  Christ  praying  for  his  enemies,  "  Father,  forgive  them  ; 
for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  Christ  on  the  cross  draws  sinners 
to  himself,  Christ  crucified  attracts  through  the  infinite  love  to  men 
♦vhich  is  displayed  in  that  death. 


6  METRO  POLITAN   TABERNA.OLE   PULPIT. 

A  part  of  the  attraction  lies  in  the  wonderful  blessings  which  come  to 
us  through  Christ's  death.  We  were  drawn  to  him  because  we  received 
pardon  through  his  wounds,  we  came  to  him  because  we  found  eternal 
life  through  his  death  upon  the  tree.  Jesus  bore  the  sin  of  his  people, 
he  died  in  our  stead  ;  and  by  so  doing  he  put  away  all  our  iniquities, 
blotted  them  out,  cast  them  into  the  depths  of  the  sea.  Only  as  he 
was  lifted  up  upon  the  cross  could  that  be  said  to  be  the  case ;  but 
when  he  was  crucified,  he  finished  trangression,  made  an  end  of  sin, 
and  brought  in  everlasting  righteousness.  Beloved,  this  is  a  great 
attraction  to  perishing  sinners ;  it  is  a  drawing  of  love  to  which  they 
must  yield.  When  Jesus  thus  attracts  us,  we  run  to  him,  because 
pardon  and  eternal  life  are  to  be  found  through  his  uplifting  on  the 
cross.  I  would  that  some  here  might  be  drawn  to  Christ  at  this 
moment  by  the  mighty  magnet  of  his  death.  Remember  how  the 
poet  sings  of  the  attraction  of  the  cross, — 

"  So  great,  so  vast  a  sacrifice 
May  well  my  hope  revive  : 
If  God's  own  Son  thus  bleeds  and  dif'v 
The  sinner  sure  may  live. 

•  Oh,  that  these  cords  of  love  divine* 
Might  draw  me,  Lord,  to  thee  ! 
Thou  hast  my  heart,  it  shall  be  thine, 
Thine  it  shall  ever  be  !  " 

The  death  of  Christ  attracted  to  him  multitudes  of  the  sons  of 
men  because  it  expanded  the  hearts  of  his  people.  While  he  was 
alive  and  with  them,  they  never  burned  with  such  enthusiasm  as  after 
he  had  died.  One  of  the  first  effects  of  his  death  was  the  outpouring 
of  the  Spirit  of  God  upon  them,  infusing  them  with  new  life,  a  holy 
fervour,  and  a  sacred  enthusiasm,  which  made  them  go  unto  the 
utmost  ends  of  the  earth,  publishing  among  the  Gentiles  full  redemption 
through  his  precious  blood.  Christ,  when  he  was  lifted  up,  made  his 
followers  disseminate  themselves  throughout  all  populations  of  the 
globe  till  their  line  went  forth  to  the  ends  of  the  earth ;  and,  like  the 
sun  o'er  every  clime,  so  did  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  enlighten  every 
nation  under  heaven.  *'  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw 
all  men  unto  me."  Christ  is  the  centre  of  mankind.  He  is  the  Shiloh, 
and  unto  him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be.  They  shall  come 
away  from  the  abominations  of  Rome ;  they  shall  come  away  from 
the  crescent  of  the  false  prophet ;  they  shall  come  away  from  the  idols 
of  the  dark  places  of  the  earth  ;  they  shall  come  away  from  infidelity 
and  philosophy ;  and  shall  come  crowding  to  his  dear  feet  as  they  feel 
the  marvellous  magnetism  of  his  atoning  death. 

These  three  things,  then,  resulted  from  the  death  of  Christ,  the 
wicked  world  was  judged,  the  power  of  Satan  was  broken,  and  Christ 
was  made  the  central  attraction  of  sinners  to  himself ;  and  that  attract- 
ing power  is  working  now.  Oh,  that  these  three  wonders  might  be 
wrought  in  our  midst  to-night,  according  to  our  measure ! 

II.  Now,  in  the  second  place,  I  want  you,  for  a  few  minutes, 
quietly  to  think  about  the  death  of  our   Lord  Jesus  Christ  as 

DESCRIBED    IN    OUR    TEXT. 


THE    CRISIS   OF   THIS   "WOKLD.  7 

How  much  the  Holy  Spirit  desires  that  we  should  read  the  Scrip- 
tures intelligently !  He  had  recorded  these  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
"  I,  ii  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me."  If 
that  had  been  all,  we  might  have  asked, — Does  that  lifting  up  from 
the  earth  mean  Christ's  death  ?  Does  it  mean  his  ascension,  his  going 
up  from  the  earth  till  the  cloud  received  him  ?  Or  does  it  mean  our 
preaching  of  Christ,  when  we  lift  him  up  before  men,  as  Moses  lifted 
up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness?  So,  to  avoid  all  question,  the 
Holy  Spirit  added  the  thirty-third  verse,  "  This  he  said,  signifying 
uohat  death  he  should  dieP  If  there  is  anything  that  the  Spirit  wishes 
us  to  be  specially  clear  about,  it  is  all  expressions  that  have  to  do  with 
our  Lord's  death.  Let  us  thank  him  for  that  comment  inserted  here, 
lest  we  should  make  any  mistake  upon  so  vital  a  subject. 

Now  looking  at  the  words,  I  want  you  to  notice  that  Christ  went  to  hu 
death  with  a  clear-view  of  what  it  loas  to  he.  There  is  many  a  man  who  has 
rushed  into  the  battle,  and  died  without  any  idea  of  what  a  gunshot 
wound  would  be,  or  what  the  piercing  of  a  lance  would  be ;  but  our 
Lord,  as  it  were,  took  stock  of  his  death,  and  looked  it  calmly  in  the 
face.  He  does  not  speak  of  it  as  barely  death,  but  he  describes  the 
manner  of  it:  "I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth."  In  his  own 
mind,  he  had  gone  through  the  nailing  to  the  wood,  and  he  had  come 
to  the  uplifting  of  that  wood  into  the  air,  and  the  fixing  of  its  socket 
in  the  ground,  and  in  spirit  he  felt  himself  already  hanging  there, 
lifted  up  from  the  earth.  Just  think  of  this  wondrous  fact,  as  Dr. 
Watts  puts  it, — 

"  This  was  compassion  like  a  God, 
That  when 'the  Saviour  knew 
The  price  of  pardon  was  his  blood. 
His  pity  ne'er  withdrew." 

Knowing  that  his  death  was  to  be  by  crucifixion,  he  did  not  turn  from 
it ;  he  set  his  face  like  a  flint  to  endure  all  that  "  the  cross  "  meant. 
He  fully  knew  what  it  meant ;  but  you  and  I  do  not.  There  are 
depths  in  his  sufferings  that  must  be  unknown  to  us,  but  he  knew 
them  aU ;  yet,  with  love  that  was  strong  as  death,  he  went  through  it 
all  for  your  redemption,  0  believer !  Then,  love  him  in  return,  with  a 
resolute,  determined  consecration  of  thy  whole  being,  yield  thyself 
up  to  him,  not  spasmodically,  but  of  love  aforethought,  to  be  wholly 
his.  Somebody  said  to  me,  the  other  day,  that  aU  religion  nowadays 
either  sufEered  from  paralysis  or  convulsions.  I  do  not  want  you  to 
have  either  of  those  complaints,  though  I  like  the  convulsions  better 
than  the  paralysis.  Let  us  not  have  convulsed  religion,  but  let  us 
have  strongly  fixed  principles,  knowing  what  we  have  to  do,  and  why 
we  do  it,  and  then,  like  the  Saviour,  let  us  go  forward,  expecting  diffi- 
culty, expecting  loss,  expecting  ridicule,  but  willingly  and  wilfully 
facing  it  all  for  his  dear  sake,  as  he,  on  his  part,  endured  even  the 
cross  for  our  sake. 

Notice,  next,  that  though  our  Saviour  knew  the  bitterness  of  his 
death,  he  read  its  issues  in  another  light.  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up," — do  you 
catch  the  thought  ?  He  does  not  merely  mean  lifted  up  on  the  cross, 
he  means  another  kind  of  uplifting,  he  means  being  exalted.     When 


^  AfETROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

he  was  lifted  up  upon  the  cross,  men  thought  it  degradation ;  but  he 
looked  into  his  death  as  one  looks  into  an  opal,  till  he  sees  wondrous 
rainbows  and  flames  of  fire  in  the  precious  stone.  So  Jesus  looked 
into  his  passion  till  he  saw  his  glory.  Down  in  the  ruddy  depths  of 
that  blood -cup,  he  saw  that  he  was  really  being  lifted  up  when  men 
thought  that  he  was  being  cast  down.  That  crown  of  thorns  was  a  more 
wondrous  diadem  than  monarch  ever  wore.  His  cross  was  his  throne. 
With  his  outspread  hands,  he  ruled  the  nations ;  and  with  his  feet 
fixed  there,  he  trampled  on  the  enemies  of  men.  0  glorious  Christ, 
when  I  have  had  a  vision  of  thy  cross,  I  have  seen  it  at  first  like  a 
common  gibbet,  and  thou  wast  hanging  on  it  like  a  felon ;  but,  as  I 
have  looked,  I  have  seen  it  begin  to  rise,  and  tower  aloft  till  it  has 
reached  the  highest  heaven,  and  by  its  mighty  power  lifted  up  mjTiads 
to  the  throne  of  God.  I  have  seen  its  arms  extend  and  expand  until 
they  have  embraced  all  the  earth.  I  have  seen  the  foot  of  it  go  down 
deep  as  our  helpless  miseries  are ;  and  what  a  vision  I  have  had  of 
thy  magnificence,  0  thou  crucified  One  !  As  Jesus  looked  forward  to 
his  death,  he  saw  more  than  we  can  even  now  see  in  it,  and  he 
perceived  that  it  was  his  glory  to  be  lifted  up  on  the  cross  of  Calvary. 

Further,  he  beheld  in  it  the  supply  of  our  great  need.  "I,  if  I  be  lifted 
up  from  the  earth,  will  draw."  He  saw  that  we  were  far  away,  and 
could  not  of  ourselves  come  nigh;  so  he  said,  "If  I  am  lifted  up, 
I  will  draw  them."  He  saw  that  we  would  not  wish  to  come,  that  we 
should  be  so  hard-hearted  and  stifP-necked  that  we  would  not  come  if 
we  were  called.  "But,"  said  ho,  "I  from  the  cross  will  draw  them. 
As  a  magnet  draws  the  steel,  I  will  attract  them."  Oh,  think  of  the 
cross  of  Christ  in  that  light !  Some  have  thought  that,  if  we  preach 
the  gospel,  we  shall  always  have  a  congregation.  I  am  not  sure  of 
that ;  but  if  the  gospel  does  not  attract  a  congregation,  I  do  not  know 
what  will.  But  Christ  does  not  say,  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw 
all  men  to  little  Bethel,  or  to  Salem."  He  says,  *'  I  will  draw  all  men 
unto  me,"  that  is,  to  himself;  and  we  only  come  to  Christ  because 
Christ  comes  to  us.  No  man  ever  comes  to  Christ  unless  Christ  draws 
him,  and  the  only  magnet  that  Christ  ever  uses  is  himself.  I  do 
believe  that  we  slander  Christ  when  we  think  that  we  are  to  draw 
the  people  by  something  else  but  the  preaching  of  Christ  crucified. 
We  know  that  the  greatest  crowd  in  London  has  been  held  together 
these  thirty  years  by  nothing  but  the  preaching  of  Christ  crucified. 
Where  is  our  music  ?  Where  is  our  oratory  ?  Where  is  anything  of 
attractive  architecture,  or  beauty  of  ritual  ?  "A  bare  service,"  they 
call  it.  Yes,  but  Christ  makes  up  for  all  deficiencies.  Preach  Christ, 
and  men  will  be  drawn  to  him,  for  so  the  text  says,  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up 
from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me."  They  are  held  back  by 
Satan ;  but  the  cross  will  draw  them.  They  are  held  back  by  despair ; 
but  the  cross  will  attract  them.  They  are  held  back  by  want  of 
desire ;  but  the  cross  wiE  breed  desire.  They  are  held  back  by  love 
of  sin  ;  but  the  cross  will  make  them  hate  the  sin  that  crucified  the 
Saviour.  "I  will  draw  them.  All  sorts  of  men  I  will  draw  unto 
myself,"  says  the  crucified  Christ.     Thus  he  supplies  our  great  need. 

Observe,  too,  that  Jesus  knew  that  he  would  live  to  exercise  that 
attraction.     He  says,  "I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth," — what 


THE   CRISIS   OF   THIS   WORLD.  V 

then  ?  ''  Shall  I  be  dead  ?  No  ;  I  will  draw  all  men  unto  me."  He 
lives.  Going  to  death,  he  expects  to  live,  he  glories  in  his  life,  he  tells 
of  what  he  means  to  do  after  he  is  risen  from  the  dead.  0  glorious 
Christ,  to  look  beyond  thy  death,  and  find  comfort  in  thy  risen  life  ! 
Cannot  you,  my  brothers,  my  sisters,  sometimes  look  beyond  the  grave, 
and  find  comfort  in  what  you  will  do  in  heaven  ?  Oh,  will  we  not  in 
heaven  glorify  our  Lord  ?  In  the  anticipation  of  what  we  will  then  do 
in  honour  of  our  precious  Saviour,  let  us  now  take  up  arms  against 
our  present  trouble,  borrowing  our  weapons  from  the  armoury  of  the 
future  after  our  earthlj^  life  is  over. 

Jesus  saw,  too  (and  here  I  must  finish),  that  the  day  would  come  when 
he  would  he  -surrounded  hj  a  mighty  company.  Can  you  not  see  him? 
He  is  lifted  up  upon  the  cross,  and  he  begins  to  draw  ;  and  men  come 
to  him,  a  few  at  Jerusalem — nay,  did  I  say  "  a  few  "  ?  Three  thousand 
in  one  day !  The  Crucified  has  pierced  their  hearts,  the  Crucified  has 
begotten  faith  in  them,  the  Crucified  has  drawn  thousands  to  himself. 
He  is  preached  in  Damascus,  he  is  preached  at  Antioch,  he  is  preached 
at  Corinth,  he  is  preached  at  Eome,  and  everywhere  he  draws  sinners 
to  himself,  and  great  companies  come  to  him.  By-and-by,  he  is 
preached  in  far-off  Britain  ;  some  pioneer  evangelist  finds  a  place  in 
these  islands  where  he  can  preach  to  the  uncivilized  the  gospel  of 
Christ,  and  Jesus  draws  them  to  himself.  He  draws  men  till,  all 
over  Eome's  vast  empire,  Christ  crucified  is  drawing  them,  from 
Csesar's  palace  and  from  Caesar's  prison  ;  from  the  slave  at  the  mill 
to  the  senator  who  rules  the  city,  Christ  is  drawing  them.  The  kings 
who  wear  their  crowns  by  permission  of  the  Eoman  jDOwer,  some  of 
them  bow  before  King  Jesus,  he  is  drawing  them.  The  people  on 
the  isles  of  the  sea,  and  on  every  coast,  he  is  drawing  them.  And 
to-day  he  is  still  drawing  them.  From  the  sunny  islands  of  the 
southern  sea,  from  the  far  north  of  Greenland,  from  Africa,  from 
China,  from  everywhere,  he  draws  them  more  and  more  ;  and  here, 
in  this  our  favoured  island,  he  has  drawn  myriads  to  himself ;  but 
the  day  shall  come  when  that  drawing  power  will  begin  to  operate 
yet  more  freely.  They  shall  run  to  him ;  they  shall  fly  to  him  with 
swift  wings,  as  doves  fly  to  their  cots  ;  they  shall  come  to  him  as  on 
a  sudden,  till  the  Church  shall  cry  in  astonishment,  "Who  hath 
begotten  me  these  ?  These,  where  had  they  been?"  As  the  drops 
of  the  morning  dew  are  seen,  glittering  like  diamonds  on  every  hedge, 
and  on  every  blade  of  grass,  when  once  the  sun  is  up,  so  shall  Christ's 
converts  be,  like  Abraham's  promised  seed,  "  so  many  as  the  stars  of 
the  sky  in  multitude,  and  as  the  sand  which  is  by  the  sea  shore  in- 
numerable." Christ's  people  shall  be  willing  in  the  day  of  his  power ; 
and  the  great  attraction  by  which  they  will  be  drawn  to  him  will  be 
his  death  on  the  cross.  Oh,  that  he  would  draw  many  to  himself  to- 
night !     Let  this  be  our  prayer  to  him, — 

**  Dear  Saviour,  draw  reluctant  hearts, 
To  thee  let  sinners  fly, 
And  take  the  bliss  thy  love  imparts, 
And  drink,  and  never  die." 
Amen. 


10  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

^Exposition  b?  C*  ^.  Spurgeon. 

JOHN  XII.  19—43. 

Our  Lord  raised  Lazarus  from  the  dead  ;  and  this  miracle  made  a 
great  sensation  among  the  people.  They  came  to  meet  Jesus,  waving  palm 
branches  before  him,  and  all  Jerusalem  was  on  a  stir. 

Verses  19—22.  The  Pharisees  therefore  said  among  themselves,  Perceive  ye 
how  ye  prevail  nothing  ?  behold,  the  world  is  gone  after  him.  And  there  were 
certain  Greeks  among  them  that  came  up  to  worship  at  the  feast  :  the  same  came 
therefore  to  Philip,  which  was  of  Bethsaida  of  Galilee,  and  desired  him,  saying. 
Sir,  we  would  see  Jesus.  Philip  cmneth  and  telleth  Andrew :  and  again  Andreiv 
and  Philip  tell  Jesus. 

These  were  probably  Gentiles,  who  were  staying  at  Jerusalem  ;  perhaps, 
proselytes  who  had  come  up  to  the  feast.  They  were  touched  by  the  common 
feeling ;  they  desired  to  see  this  wonderful  Man  who  had  raised  to  life  one 
who  had  been  dead  four  days.  They  proceeded  courteously ;  they  went  to 
one  of  Christ's  disciples  who,  coming  from  Galilee  of  the  Gentiles,  would  be 
likely  to  sympathize  with  them,  and  they  sought  an  introduction  to  Jesus. 
This  Philip  obtained  for  them  with  the  help  of  Andrew. 

23.  And  Jesus  answered  them,  saying.  The  hour  is  come,  that  the  Son  of 
man  should  be  glorified. 

He  knew  that  the  hour  was  come  when  he  must  die.  Looking  through 
the  dark  glass  of  death,  he  saw  what  its  result  would  be,  and  he  called  it 
glory.  These  few  Greeks  were  the  advance  guard  of  the  great  Gentile  army 
of  the  Lord  ;   he  regarded  their  coming  in  that  sense. 

24.  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  Except  a  corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground 
and  die,  it  abideth  alone  :  but  if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth  much  fruit, 

TelUng  them  that  the  source  of  his  glory  would  be  his  death.  The  reason 
why  the  people  would  hear  of  him,  and  come  to  him,  was  that  he  would  be 
hanged  on  the  cross.  The  grain  of  wheat,  when  put  into  the  groiind,  if  it 
remains  as  it  is,  will  never  increase  ;  it  must  die  if  it  is  to  brmg  forth  fruit. 
What  is  death  ?  The  end  of  existence  ?  None  but  thoughtless  persons 
imaffme  that.  Death  is  the  resolution  of  any  living  substance  into  its 
primary  elements.  It  is  the  division  of  the  soul  from  the  body ;  originally, 
it  was  the  division  of  the  soul  from  God.  In  a  grain  of  wheat,  death  is  the 
separation  of  the  particles  of  which  it  is  composed,  that  the  We-germ  may 
feed  upon  that  which  was  provided  for  it.  -  If  it  die,'  m  the  true  sense 
of  the  word,  in  being  separated  into  its  constituent  elements,  then  it 
bringeth  forth  much  fruit."  Christ's  way  to  glory  was  through  the  grave  ; 
he  must  go  down  that  he  might  mount  to  the  throne. 

25.  He  that  l&veth  his  life  shall  lose  it ;  and  he  that  hateth  his  life  in  this 
world  shall  keep  it  unto  life  eternal. 

Live  for  this  world,  and  you  shall  lose  this  world  and  the  next  too  ;  live 
for  the  world  to  come,  and  you  shall  in  the  highest  sense  gam  both  worlds. 

26.  If  any  man  serve  me,  let  him  follow  me ; 

That  is  the  best  kind  of  service  ;  to  do  what  Christ  did,  and  to  do  what 
Christ  bids  you  do  :  "  If  any  man  serve  me,  let  him  follow  me. 

26.  And  where  lam,  there  shall  also  my  servant  be :  if  any  man  serve  me, 
him  will  my  Father  honour. 

Follow  Christ,  then,  to  the  cross ;  follow  him  to  the  grave  ;  follow  him 
in  his  humiliation;  and  then  the  Father  wiU  honour  you  even  as  he 
honoured  his  Son. 


EXPOSITION.  II 

27.     Now  is  my  soul  troubled  ; 

Or,  puzzled.     This  hour  of  his  glory  was  the  hour  of  his  passion,  too. 

27.     A7id  what  shall  I  say  f 

Such  sorrow  was  in  his  heart  that  he  asked,  "  What  shall  I  say  ?  *'  Great 
trouble  brings  astonishment,  amazement,  bewilderment  with  it ;  and  the 
human  soul  of  Christ  felt  as  ours  feels  when  in  great  agony. 

27.  Father,  save  me  from  this  hour  :  but  for  this  cause  came  I  unto  this  hour. 
Nature  suggests  the  cry,  "  Father,  save  me  from  this  hour."  Grace  comes 

behind  the  flesh,  being  a  little  slower  to  speak  ;  but  it  corrects  the  errors 
of  the  flesh,  and  says,  ''  For  this  cause  came  I  unto  this  hour." 

28.  Father,  glorify  thy  ninne. 

What  a  prayer  !  Jesus  swallows  up  his  temptation  to  escape  the  cup  by 
this  all-absorbing  petition,  "  Father,  glorify  thy  name." 

28.  29.  Then  came  there  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying,  I  have  both  glorified 
it,  and  will  glorify  it  again.  The  people  therefore,  that  stood  by,  and  heard  it, 
said  that  it  thundered  : 

They  only  heard  the  sound,  and  it  was  like  thunder  in  their  ears. 

29.  Others  said,  An  angel  spake  to  him. 

Thpy  distinguished  the  sound  of  some  one  speaking;  but  they  did  not 
recognize  the  voice  of  God. 

30.  Jesus  answered  and  said,  This  voice  came  not  because  of  me,  but  for  your 
sakes. 

"  To  make  you  believe  that  God  is  with  me,  and  that  I  am  his  Son," 

31 — 34.  Noiu  is  the  judgment  of  this  world:  now  shall  the  prince  of  this 
world  be  cast  out.  And  I,  if  I  be  If  ted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men 
unto  me.  This  he  said,  signifying  luhat  death  he  should  die.  The  people 
ansivered  him,  We  have  heard  out  of  the  laiu  that  Christ  abideth  for  ever  :  and 
how  sayest  thou.  The  So7i  of  man  must  be  lifted  up  f  who  is  this  Son  of  man  f 

As  if  it  could  not  be  true  that  Christ,  in  his  divine  nature,  abides  for 
ever,  and  yet,  as  Man,  could  be  lifted  up  to  die.  It  was  a  sneering  question, 
**  Who  is  this  Son  of  man  ?  "  Our  Lord  did  not  answer  it,  thus  teaching  us 
that  some  people  are  not  worth  answering.  Instead  of  replying  to  their 
question,  Jesus  gave  them  a  practical  admonition. 

35,  36.  Then  Jesus  said  unto  them,  Yet  a  little  tuhile  is  the  light  with  you. 
Walk  u'hile  ye  have  the  light,  lest  darkness  come  upon  you  :  for  he  that  loalketh 
in  darkness  knoweth  not  whither  he  goeth.  While  ye  have  light,  believe  in  the 
light,  that  ye  may  be  the  children  of  light.  These  things  spake  Jesus,  and  de- 
parted, and  did  hide  himself  from  them. 

When  people  determine  to  reject  Christ,  he  leaves  them  ;  why  should  he 
tarry  where  he  is  rejected  ?     He  "  departed,  and  did  hide  himself." 

37 — 41.  But  though  he  had  done  so  many  miracles  before  them,  yet  they 
believed  not  on  him  ;  that  the  saying  of  Esaias  the  prophet  might  be  fulfilled, 
which  he  spake.  Lord,  who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  and  to  whom  hath  the  arm 
of  the  Lord  been  revealed  ?  Therefore  they  could  not  believe,  because  that  Esaias 
said  again,  He  hath  blinded  their  eyes,  and  hardened  their  heart  j  that  they 
should  not  see  with  their  eyes,  nor  understand  with  their  heart,  and  be  converted, 
and  I  should  heal  them.  These  things  said  Esaias,  when  he  saw  his  glory,  and 
spake  of  him. 

Christ  is  in  the  Old  .Testament  in  many  places  where,  as  yet,  even  we 
have  never  seen  him.  I  doubt  not  that  he  lies  hidden  away  in  many  a 
Psalm,  and  many  a  prophetic  utterance  that  has  not  yet  been  fully  ex- 
pounded, or  even  comprehended  by  our  finite  minds.  Oh-  for  eyes  to  see 
him  where  he  sits  in  his  ancient  state ! 


12  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

What  a  solemn  fact  this  is,  though,  that  God  does  allow  men  to  be  given 
over  to  blindness  of  eyes,  and  hardness  of  heart !  I  sometimes  fear  that  it 
is  so  with  this  age.  Men  will  not  see  ;  they  will  not  believe ;  they  are  des- 
perately set  on  scepticism,  it  has  become  a  fashion  with  them.  Like  a 
torrent,  it  sweeps  through  the  very  churches  that  bear  the  name  of  Christ  ; 
my  fear  is  God  in  his  wrath  may  give  up  our  land  to  this  curse,  and  then 
where  will  our  hope  be  ? 

42,  43.  Nevertheless  among  the  chief  rulers  also  many  believed  on  him;  hui 
because  of  the  Pharisees  they  did  not  confess  him,  lest  they  should  be  put  out  of 
the  synagogue :  for  they  loved  the  praise  of  men  more  than  the  praise  of  God. 

I  wonder  whether  in  this  throng  there  are  any  of  this  kind,  who  do 
believe  in  Christ,  and  yet  never  come  out  and  confess  him  because  they  love 
the  praise  of  men  more  than  the  praise  of  God.  If  so,  I  venture  to  say  that 
they  are  found  among  what  are  called  the  more  respectable  people,  the  men 
of  light  and  leading,  the  chief  rulers.  Among  the  common  people  there  is 
very  little  of  this  evil.  They  will  generally  confess  what  they  believe,  and 
bravely  come  forward  to  declare  that  they  belong  to  Christ.  It  is  the 
chief  rulers,  the  gentlemen  of  the  Sanhedrim,  who,  if  they  believe  in  Christ 
in  their  hearts,  do  not  confess  him,  lest  they  should  be  put  out  of  society, 
ior  they  love  the  praise  of  men  more  than  the  praise  of  God. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 302,  313. 


LOVE    SXEONGEE    THAN    DEATH. 


%  ^mm 


Intended  for  Beading  on  Lord's-day,  September  Qth,  1894, 
deliyered  by 

G.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Thursday  Evening^  July  5th,  1888. 


*'  When  Jesus  knew  that  his  hour  was  come  that  he  should  depart  out  of  this  world' 
anto  the  Father,  having  loved  his  own  which  were  in  the  world,  he  loved  them  unto  the 
end." — John  xiii.  1. 

This  is  a  kind  of  preface  to  the  story  of  the  foot-washing,  and  a  very 
wonderful  preface  it  is,  when  coupled  with  the  third  and  fourth  verses, 
upon  which  I  commented,  "Jesus  knowing  that  the  Father  had 
given  all  things  into  his  hands,  and  that  he  was  come  from  Grod,  and 
went  to  God ;  he  riseth  from  supper,  and  laid  aside  his  garments  ;  and 
took  a  towel,  and  girded  himself."  This  is  the  frame  of  the  picture 
that  is  here  presented  to  us.  To  what  shall  I  compare  it  ?  It  is  like 
unto  a  gate  of  the  golden  city ;  each  gate  is  one  several  pearl,  and 
surely  this  verse  is  a  jewel  of  inestimable  price.  The  foot-washing 
picture  is  set  within  this  precious  frame. 

This  memorable  and  symbolical  act  took  place  at  the  end  of  our 
Lord's  sojourn  here  below.  The  Passion  was  the  end  of  his  life,  and 
we  may  consider  that  the  Passion  was  about  to  begin.  That  same 
night  he  would  go  to  Gethsemane,  and  in  less  than  four-and-twenty 
hours,  the  dear  hands  that  washed  the  disciples'  feet  would  be  nailed 
to  the  accursed  wood,  and  he  who  spoke  so  tenderly  to  his  little  band 
of  followers  would  be  in  his  death  agonies. 

It  is  an  important  thing  to  know  how  a  man  feels  when  he  comes 
to  the  real  crisis  of  his  life.  He  has  cultivated  a  great  variety  of 
feelings  during  his  career ;  but  what  has  been  his  ruling  passion  ? 
You  will  see  it  now.  It  has  passed  into  a  proverb  that,  "  The  ruling 
passion  is  strong  in  death ;  "  and  there  is  great  truth  in  the  saying. 
In  the  light  of  the  man's  departure,  we  shall  see  what  power  really 
ruled  him.  It  was  precisely  so  with  our  Divine  Master.  He  had 
almost  reached  the  end  of  his  earthly  life ;  he  had  come  to  a  season  of 
awful  agony  ;  he  was  about  to  endure  the  great  and  terrible  death  of 
the  cross,  by  which  he  was  to  purchase  eternal  redemption  for  all  hi? 
No.  2,377, 


14  METKOPOLITAN  TABEBNACLE   PtTLPIT. 

people.  What  will  be  uppermost  in  his  mind  now  ?  What  will  he 
think  of  his  disciples  now  that  he  has  so  many  other  things  to  think  of, 
now  that  the  thought  of  his  approaching  death  comes  over  him,  now 
that  the  agony  and  bloody  sweat  of  Gethsemane  are  so  near  ?  What 
will  Jesus  think  of  his  disciples  at  such  a  time  as  this,  and  under  such 
circumstances  as  these  ?  Our  text  is  the  answer  to  that  question : 
"  When  Jesus  knew  that  his  hour  was  come  that  he  should  depart  out 
of  this  world  uuto  the  Father,  having  loved  his  own  which  were  in  the 
world,  he  loved  them  unto  the  end."  His  love  was  burning  as  brightly 
at  tne  Paschal  supper  as  ever  it  burned  before.  Ay,  and  it  seemed  as 
if,  in  that  wondrous  prayer  that  is  recorded  in  the  seventeenth  chapter 
of  John,  and  in  the  wonderful  discourse  which  accompanied  it,  the 
love  of  Jesus  had  never  Hamed  out  so  clearly  before !  Then  were 
the  great  beacon  fires  lit,  and  the  fierce  winds  that  blew  around  the 
Saviour  fanned  them  to  their  full  force  of  flame.  Now  can  you  say 
of  Jesus,  "Behold  how  he  loved  his  disciples!  "  for  even  at  the  end 
of  his  life  he  still  loved  those  whom  he  had  loved  aforetime. 

With  that  thought  in  your  minds,  will  you  follow  me  while  I  take 
the  text  to  pieces,  and  dwell  upon  almost  every  word  of  it  ? 

I.  First,  then,  concerning  our  blessed  Master,  let  us  consider  with 
WHOM  HE  ASSOCIATED,  and  of  whom  this  verse  now  speaks.  They  are 
called,  "  his  own."  It  is  a  brief  description,  but  it  is  wonderfully 
full :  "  Having  loved  his  own  which  were  in  the  world,  he  loved  them 
unto  the  end." 

"  His  own."  There  was  a  circle — sometimes  a  wide  circle — round 
the  Saviour,  made  up  of  publicaus  and  sinners,  and  he  had  a  measure 
of  love  to  all  of  them,  a  benevolent  desire  to  bless  them ;  but 
there  was  an  inner  circle,  containing  the  twelve  apostles  aud  some 
godly  women,  who  had  joined  themselves  unto  him.  These  were 
"his  own."  To  them  he  often  expounded  the  hidden  meaning  of  a 
parable  which  he  left  unexplained  to  the  crowd.  To  them  he  often 
brought  many  a  dainty  dish  which  was  specially  reserved  for  their 
table,  and  not  intended  for  the  multitude.  Bread  and  fish  would  do 
for  the  crowd ;  but  Jesus  had  choicer  fare  for  ''  his  own."  They  were 
a  special  people  ;  many  knew  them,  many  despised  theji,  but  Jesus 
loved  them,  and  this  was  the  main  thing  which  made  them  "  his  own." 

You  know  how  they  came  to  be  "his  own."  Ife  chose  them 
or  ever  the  earth  was.  A  man  may  surely  choose  his  own  wife, 
and  Christ  chose  his  own  spouse,  he  chose  his  own  Church;  aud 
while  the  Scripture  stands,  that  doctrine  can  never  be  eradicated 
from  it.  Before  the  day-star  knew  its  place,  or  planets  ran  their 
rounds,  Christ  had  made  his  choice ;  and,  having  made  it,  he  stood 
to  it.     He  chose  them  for  his  love  ;   and  he  loved  them  for  his  choice. 

Having  loved  them,  and  chosen  them,  he  espoused  them  unto  himself, 
"  They  shall  be  mine,"  said  he ;  "I  will  be  married  to  them,  I  will  bo 
bone  of  their  bone,  and  flesh  of  their  flesh."  Consequently,  in  the 
fulness  of  time,  he  came  here,  made  one  with  our  humanity,  that  he 
might  be  seen  to  be  a  true  Husband  to  "his  own" — "his  own"  by 
choice,  "  his  own  "  by  espousal. 

They  were  "his  own"  also,  for  his  Father  gave  them  to  him.  The 
Father  committed   them  into  his  hands.     "  Thine  they  were,"  said 


LOVE    STRONGER   THAN   DEATH.  15 

Jesus,  "and  thou  gavest  them  me."  The  Father  loved  the  Son, 
and  committed  all  things  into  his  hand;  but  he  made  a  special 
committal  of  his  own  chosen  people.  He  gave  them  to  him,  and 
entered  with  him  into  surety  engagements  on  their  behalf,  that  as 
they  were  his  sheep,  committed  to  his  charge,  he  would  deliver  them 
up,  and  not  one  of  them  should  be  torn  by  the  wolf,  or  die  of  the 
frost  or  the  heat,  but  that  all  should  pass  again  under  the  rod  of  him 
that  telleth  them.  That  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep  will  take  care 
of  the  whole  flock  that  was  entrusted  to  his  care ;  he  will  not  lose  one 
of  his  sheep  or  lambs.  At  the  last,  Jesus  will  say,  "  Here  am  I, 
Father,  and  the  children  that  thou  hast  given  me ;  of  all  that  thou 
gavest  me  I  have  lost  none."  Thus,  they  are  "  his  own  "  by  his  own 
choice,  "his  own"  by  espousal,  and  '<  his  own"  by  his  Father's 
gift. 

But  these  whom-  he  called  "  his  own  "  were  soon  to  be  his  hy  a 
wondrom  purchase.  He  looked  upon  their  redemption  as  being  already 
accomplished,  for  in  his  prayer  he  said  to  his  Father,  "  I  have  finished 
the  work  which  thou  gavest  me  to  do."  Beloved  friends,  have  you 
ever  thought  how  dearly  we  are  Christ's  by  his  redemption  of  us  ? 
"  Ye  are  not  your  own  ;  ye  are  bought  with  a  price."  Have  you  ever 
realized  the  price  that  was  paid  for  you  ?  I  sometimes  think  that,  if 
I  could  have  been  there,  I  would  have  said,  "  0  thou  great  and  glorious 
Lord,  I  beseech  thee  not  to  pay  such  a  price  for  me  ;  it  is  too  great  a 
sacrifice  that  thou  shouldst  be  made  sin  for  me,  that  I  might  be  made 
the  righteousness  of  God  in  thee  !  "  But  he  would  do  it.  He  loved 
us  better  than  he  loved  himself.  He  would  do  it ;  and  he  has  paid 
the  purchase  price  for  us,  and  we  are  his ;  and  we  will  not  run  back 
from  the  glad  confession.  Well  may  he  call  us  "his  own  "  when  it 
cost  him  so  much  to  redeem  us. 

But  we  have  become  ' '  his  own  "  hy  his  conquest  of  us.  He  had  called 
his  disciples  by  his  grace ;  he  had  drawn  each  one  of  them  by  cords  of 
love,  and  they  had  run  after  him :  and  it  is  just  so  with  you  and  me. 
You  remember  when  he  drew  you  ;  do  you  not  ?  Can  you  ever  forget 
when,  at  last,  you  yielded  to  the  power  of  those  bands  of  love,  those 
cords  of  a  man  ?     Often  since  then  have  you  sung, — 

"  Oh,  happy  day,  that  fix'd  my  choice 
On  thee,  my  Saviour,  and  my  God ; 
Well  may  this  glowing  heart  rejoice. 
And  tell  its  raptures  all  abroad  ! 

"  'Tis  done !  the  great  transaction's  done  ; 
I  am  my  Lord's,  and  he  is  mine  : 
He  drew  me,  and  I  followed  on, 
Charm'd  to  confess  the  voice  divine." 

Beloved,  you  are  "  his  own  "  now  because  you  have  yielded  yourselves 
to  him.  You  delight  to  think  that  you  are  his.  There  is  no  greater 
joy  to  you  than  to  feel  that  you  belong  to  Christ.  The  fact  that  you 
are  truly  Christ's  is  the  fountain  of  innumerable  pleasures  and  blessings 
to  your  heart.  Jesus  calls  us  "his  own" — his  own  sheep,  his  own 
disciples,  his  own  friends,  his  own  brethren,  the  members  of  his  body. 
What  a  title  for  us  to  wear,  "  His  own  "  !     I  have  heard  of  some  who 


16  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

have  felt  it  an  honour  to  be  called,  "  The  Devil's  Own.  '  I  trust  that 
you  have  escaped  from  such  a  title  as  that ;  and  now  you  are  Christ's 
own.  How  many  regiments  have  felt  pleasure  in  being  called  the 
King's  Own,  the  Queen's  Own,  the  Prince's  Own!  Oh,  but  we  are 
His  own  !  He  owns  us  ;  he  calls  us  *'  his  own."  Thus  he  distinguishes 
us  from  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  sets  us  apart  unto  himself.  "  My 
name  shall  be  named  on  them,"  says  he.  They  are  ''his  own." 
Surely,  this  is  the  highest  honour  that  can  be  put  upon  us  even  in  the 
last  great  day.  *'  They  shall  be  mine,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  in 
that  day  when  I  make  up  my  jewels." 

Now  I  trust  we  can  say  that  we  desire  to  serve  Christ  in  our 
Yocation.  I  feel  happy  to  be  amongst  the  favoured  few  whose  vocation 
it  is  to  serve  Christ,  those  who  are  permitted  to  spend  aU  their  time, 
and  all  their  strength,  in  that  dear  service.  We  are  *'  his  own  "  ;  but 
80  are  you  "  his  own  "  if  you  believe  in  him,  you  also  are  Christ's  own, 
up  in  a  garret ;  Christ's  own,  at  the  washtub ;  Christ's  own,  in  the 
fields  at  the  plough ;  Christ's  own,  making  the  hay.  I  am  not  wander- 
ing from  my  subject  when  I  say  this,  for  Christ  has  *'his  own" 
among  all  these  classes.  "  His  own  "  were  fishermen,  "  his  own  "  cast 
the  net  into  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  "his  own"  drew  it  to  shore,  "his 
own"  were  the  poor  of  this  world.  His  own,  his  very  own,  his 
choicest  and  his  best  friends  and  followers,  were  just  such.  They 
were  unlearned  and  ignorant  men,  yet  they  were  '*  his  own."  So 
the  apostle  saith,  "  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the  world 
to  confound  the  wise ;  and  God  hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the 
world  to  confound  the  things  which  are  mighty ;  and  base  things  of 
the  world,  and  things  which  are  despised,  hath  God  chosen,  yea,  and 
things  which  are  not,  to  bring  to  nought  things  that  are :  that  no 
flesh  should  glory  in  his  presence."  Oh,  the  wondrous  sovereignty 
of  divine  love !  I  trust  that  there  are  some  here  to-night  whom 
Christ  calls  "  his  own  "  although  they  do  not  yet  know  that  it  is  so. 
Bought  with  his  blood,  and  they  are  not  aware  of  it  ?  Chosen  before 
the  foundation  of  the  world,  and  yet  they  have  not  discovered  it? 
May  the  Lord  reveal  to  you  his  everlasting  love,  and  help  you  to 
make  your  calling  and  election  sure  from  this  time  forth ! 

I  have  said  as  much  as  time  will  permit  me  to  say  about  our  Lord's 
dear  associates,  the  disciples,  whom  he  calls  "  his  own." 

II.  Now,  in  the  second  place,  you  have  a  full  description  of  how 
Jesus  had  felt  towards  them  up  to  that  moment:  **  Having  loved 
his  own." 

How  much  can  be  done  with  one  stroke  of  a  pen !  I  have  some- 
times marvelled  to  see  how  much  a  great  artist  can  do  by  a  singlt^ 
touch ;  his  work  has  seemed  unfinished,  but  he  has  come  with  a  brush, 
and  just  thrown  in  a  few  strokes,  and  the  canvas  that  was  dead  ha& 
seemed  to  live  before  you.  Now,  John  is  a  great  master  of  the  art  of 
word-painting,  and  he  gives  you  the  whole  history  of  Christ's  dealings 
with  his  disciples  in  these  few  words,  "  Having  loved  his  own." 

For,  remember,  that  is  how  he  began  with  them.  They  were  poor  and 
inconsiderable ;  but  he  loved  them,  and  he  showed  his  love  to  them 
by  calling  them  to  be  his  disciples.  That  love  wrought  upon  their 
hearts,  and  made  them  obedient  to  his  call.     He  began  by  lovinp: 


LOVE    STRO^^GER   T^AN   DEATH.  17 

them.  David  says,  "  Thou  hast  loved  my  soul  out  of  the  pit.'*  I  do 
not  know  a  more  beautiful  description  of  conversion  and  salvation. 
The  love  of  God  loves  us  up  out  of  the  pit,  and  loves  us  to  Christ. 
Thus  Christ  loved  his  people  from  the  beginning,  and  proved  his  love 
by  drawing  them  to  himself,  and  the  cords  he  used  to  draw  them  were 
the  bands  of  his  love. 

Having  begun  by  loving  them,  he  went  on  teaching  them  ;  but  all  his 
teaching  was  love,  for  they  were  such  dull  scholars,  quick  to  forget, 
yet  slow  to  remember,  that  he  had  to  keep  on  loving  them,  or  he 
would  have  been  tired  of  trying  to  train  them.  "  Have  I  been  so  long 
time  with  you,  and  yet  hast  thou  not  known  me,  Philip  ?  "  There  is 
a  mass  of  love  in  that  question.  So  was  it  when  he  was  dealing  with 
Thomas ;  in  his  tenderness  he  submitted  without  question  to  the 
doubting  disciple's  test.  He  said  to  him,  "  Eeach  hither  thy  finger, 
and  behold  my  hands  ;  and  reach  hither  thy  hand,  and  thrust  it  into 
my  side  :  and  be  not  faithless,  but  believing."  All  his  teaching  was 
uttered  with  lips  of  love,  and  all  his  instruction  consisted  of  lessons  of 
love. 

The  Lord  kept  on  loving  his  disciples,  although  their  statures  were 
wonderfully  imperfect,  all  of  them.  There  was  not  one  among  them 
who  had  what  one  would  call  an  all-round  nature,  unless  it  was  John, 
and  even  he  was  hasty  in  temper,  and  would  have  called  down  fire 
from  heaven  upon  certain  Samaritans.  Yet  the  Master  kept  on  loving 
them.  He  had  made  up  his  mind  to  love  them,  and  he  never  ceased 
to  love  them  as  long  as  he  was  with  them,  and  he  has  gone  on  loving 
them  ever  since.  At  the  time  when  ho  was  about  to  depart  out  of  the 
world  unto  the  Father,  they  still  needed  to  have  their  feet  washed, 
and  he  loved  them  enough  to  render  even  that  lowly  service  for  them. 
All  the  infirmities,  the  imperfections,  the  carnality,  the  dulness,  and 
the  slowness  of  their  nature,  which  he  saw  much  more  clearly  than 
they  saw  it,  did  not  make  him  cease  to  love  them  :  "  Having  loved 
his  own  which  were  in  the  world,  he  loved  them  unto  the  end." 

Strangest  of  all,  when  he  opened  his  eyes,  and  looked  into  the 
future  and  saw  that  they  tvould  soon  he  cowardly  and  faithless^  he  loved 
them  all  the  same.  He  said,  "  All  ye  shall  be  offended  because  of  me 
this  night,"  and  so  it  came  to  pass,  for  "they  all  forsook  him,  and 
fled."  He  told  Peter  that  he  would  deny  him  thrice  ;  and  so  it  was, 
yet  it  was  true  all  the  while,  ''  Having  loved  his  own  which  were  in 
the  world,  he  loved  them  unto  the  end."  That  sums  it  all  up.  There 
was  never  a  touch  of  hate,  there  was  never  any  anger,  there  was  never 
any  weariness,  there  was  never  any  lukewarmness  in  Jesus  towards 
his  disciples;  but  it  was  always  just  this,  "Having  loved  his  own 
which  were  in  the  world,  he  loved  them  unto  the  end.''  That  is  the 
love  of  Christ  to  his  chosen,  and  that  is  the  love  of  Christ  to  nie.  I 
do  not  think  that  those  gentlemen  who  have  written  a  "Life  of 
Christ  "  could  write  this  part  of  it.  This  is  a  portion  of  the  life  of 
Christ  that  wants  not  so  much  to  be  written  as  to  be  known  in  the 
heart,  and  in  the  soul. 

How  have  you  found  Christ,  my  brother  ?  If  you  have  known  him, 
what  has  been  his  conduct  towards  you?  You  answer,  "  Love."  As 
tor  me,  I  never  knew,  I  never  heard  of  such  a  lover  as  he  is ;  I  never 


18  METROPOLITAN -TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

dreamed  that  he  could  be  such  as  he  has  been  to  me.  Oh,  how  I 
must  have  vexed  and  grieved  his  gracious  heart,  and  caused  hina 
pain ;  but  never,  never,  never  once  have  I  had  anything  from  him 
but  love!  "  Having  loved  his  own."  That  expression  sums  up  the 
whole  of  Christ's  conduct  towards  his  chosen  people.  It  is  like  a 
miniature  painting ;  it  has  every  feature  of  his  character.  There  it 
is,  all  of  it.  You  may  apply  a  microscope,  and  look  as  long  as  you 
like,  but  you  will  find  that  it  is  all  there.     *'  Having  loved  his  own." 

So  then,  you  have  seen  your  Lord  associated  with  his  disciples  up 
to  this  point,  and  you  have  learned  that  he  has  manifested  nothing 
else  towards  them  but  love. 

III.  But  now,  thirdly,  what  a  change  was  coming  over  him  ! 
"  Jesus  knew  that  his  hour  was  come  that  he  should  depart  out  of 
this  world  unto  the  Father." 

Dear  friends,  it  was  a  wonderful  change  that  was  coming  over  him, 
for,  in  the  first  place,  though  it  is  so  tenderly  described  here,  yet  he 
knew  that  he  had  to  die.  You  do  not  wish  me,  I  am  sure,  to  tell  you  of 
all  the  surroundings  of  the  cross,  of  all  the  bitterness  and  woe  that 
culminated  in  that  cup  of  mingled  wormwood  and  gall.  Your  heart 
can  never  fail  to  remember  the  wounds  he  endured  when  suffering  for 
you.  Well,  now,  if  you  and  I  had  to  bear  all  that  Christ  had  to 
suffer,  it  would  engross  our  thoughts,  we  should  not  be  able  to  think 
of  anything  else  but  that ;  but  it  did  not  engross  our  Lord's  thoughts. 
He  still  thought  of  "  his  own."  He  loved  ''  his  own  "  unto  the  end. 
He  went  on  with  that  same  calm,  solid,  resolute  love  which  he  had 
shown  towards  them  aforetime.  He  set  his  face  like  a  flint  to  go  up 
to  Jerusalem ;  but  there  was  no  flint  in  his  heart,  it  had  all  gone  into 
his  face.  He  had  undertaken  the  work  of  his  people's  redemption, 
and  he  must  go  through  with  it.  Death  itself  could  not  change  his 
love.  You  know  the  love  of  which  Solomon  sings  at  the  end  of  the 
Canticles  :  "  Many  waters  cannot  quench  love,  neither  can  the  floods 
drown  it;"  and  he  says,  ''Love  is  strong  as  death."  Truly,  in  our 
Lord's  case,  love  was  stronger  than  that  death  of  deaths  which  he 
deigned  to  die  that  he  might  make  us  live.  Now  is  his  great  "  hour  " 
of  trial ;  but  he  is  true  to  ''  his  own  "  even  in  this  dread  hour.  He 
is  about  to  die  ;  but  he  still  loves  "  his  own." 

Dear  brethren,  that  is  not  all.  Jesus  was  about  to  depart  out  of 
this  world,  to  go  away  from  his  disciples.  After  a  while,  he  would  see 
them  no  more  with  his  bodily  eyes ;  neither  would  they  hear  his 
voice  leading  them  and  teaching  them.  It  may  be  true  that ' '  Absence 
makes  the  heart  grow  fonder,"  but,  alas,  we  have  met  with  many 
instances  in  which  mortal  men  have  quite  forgotten  those  whom  they 
professed  to  love  when  once  the  sea  has  rolled  between  them.  Many 
hearts  are  dependent  upon  eyesight.  It  is  a  pity  that  it  should  be 
so ;  but  it  was  not  so  with  Christ.  All  the  distance  between  earth 
and  heaven  was  soon  to  intervene  between  our  Lord  and  his  disciples  ; 
but  vet  he  loved  them,  and  he  loves  them  still.  No  distance  uiakes 
any  "difference  between  Jesus  and  "his  own":  "  Having  loved  his 
own  which  were  in  the  world,  he  loted  them  unto  the  end." 

Yet,  remember,  that  the  Saviour  was  about  to  unde.;i0  a  very 
wonderful  change  in  another  respect,  he  was  going  unto  the  Father. 


LOVE    STRONGEB   THAN   DEATH.  19 

Have  any  of  us  the  slightest  idea  of  what  he  is  now  with  the  Father  ? 
I  will  not  attempt  to  describe  the  supernal  splendours  of  his  throne, 
the  glories  which  his  redeemed  delight  to  lay  at  his  feet,  the  songs 
which  angels  and  cherubim  and  seraphim  continually  present  before 
him ;  but  this  verse  we  love,  and  we  can  truly  sing, — 

''  Now  though  he  reigns  exalted  high, 
His  love  is  still  as  great ; 
Well  he  remembers  Calvary, 
Nor  lets  his  saints  forget." 

I  cannot  describe  these  wonderful  changes  of  our  Lord,  from  life  to 
death,  from  death  to  resurrection,  from  resurrection  to  ascension,  from 
ascension  to  the  glories  of  his  Father's  throne.  Would  all  these 
changes  make  any  alteration  in  him  ?  No,  none  of  them.  "  Having 
loved  his  own  which  were  in  the  world,  he  loved  them  unto  the  end." 

I  shall  try  to  speak  of  that  presently,  that  will  be  my  last  point ; 
but  before  we  come  to  that  theme,  we  must  see  what  would  be  the 
condition  of  "  his  own."  I  have  shown  you  what  would  be  Christ's 
condition,  and  the  change  that  would  take  place  in  him. 

IV.     Now,  fourthly,  what  would  be  their  coxdition  ? 

Why,  they  would  remain  where  tliey  were  :  ' '  His  own  which  were 
in  the  world."  To  me,  there  seems  to  be  a  great  abyss  of  meaning 
in  that  expression,  "  in  the  world."  Some  of  you  know  more  about 
what  this  means  than  others  of  us  do.  The  Church  of  God  in  Loudon 
is  nothing  but  a  camp  in  the  midst  of  heathendom.  The  sooner  we 
believe  that  terrible  truth  the  better,  because  it  is  really  so ;  and  the 
Church  of  God  in  the  world  is  nothing  but  a  travelling  tent  in  the 
midst  of  a  world  that  lieth  in  the  wicked  one.  We  are  "in  the  world," 
Now,  some  of  you  know  what  it  is  to  be  "  in  the  world.''  When  you 
get  home  to-night,  there  will  be  little  but  oaths  and  cursing.  Some 
of  God's  dear  people,  whom  he  loves  with  all  his  heart,  are  still  in  the 
world,  seeing  that  which  vexes  them  as  much  as  Lot  was  vexed  by  the 
filthy  conversation  of  the  men  of  Sodom.  "In  the  world!"  Now, 
those  whom  Christ  was  about  to  leave  in  the  world  would  be  left  in 
the  midst  of  all  the  abounding  wickedness,  and  idolatry,  and 
blasphemy,  in  about  as  ungodly  an  age  as  men  could  live  in ;  yet  he 
left  them  "  in  the  world." 

Being  in  the  world,  you  see,  they  began  to  be  persecuted.  They 
were  stoned ;  they  were  shut  up  in  prison ;  they  were  dragged  into 
the  amphitheatre  to  be  torn  of  lions ;  but "  he  loved  them  unto  the  end." 
You  know  how  that  blessed  eighth  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Eomans 
concludes.  "  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ?  shall  tribu- 
lation, or  distress,  or  persecution,  or  famine,  or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or 
sword?  As  it  is  written.  For  thy  sake  we  are  killed  aU  the  day  long ; 
we  are  accounted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter.  Nay,  in  all  these  things 
we  are  more  than  conquerors  through  him  that  loved  us.  For  I  am 
persuaded,  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities, 
nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor 
depth,  nor  any  other  creature,  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the 
love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 

In  addition  to  being  persecuted,  they  were  liable   to  be  severely 


20  METROPOLITAN    TABEBNACLE    PULPIT. 

tempted.  All  kinds  of  bribes  were  put  in  their  way,  and  all  sorts  of 
pleasures  and  lusts  were  presented  to  tbem ;  they  were  men  of  like 
passions  with  ourselves,  so  these  temptations  were  very  real  to  them. 
They  were  "  in  the  world,"  and  Jesus  was  gone  to  heaven.  They  were 
"in  the  world"  also  in  affliction.  All,  dear  friends,  we  find  that  we, 
too  are  in  this  sense,  "  in  the  world."  However  closely  we  live  to 
God,  we  have  pains  of  body,  and  we  have  to  grieve  as  we  see  our 
dear  relatives  suffering  We  have  losses  and  crosses  because  we  are 
''in  the  world."  God's  curse  still  rests  upon  the  earth:  "Thorns 
also  and  thistles  shall  it  bring  forth  to  thee."  You  may  do  what  you 
like  with  it,  but  you  cannot  make  it  stop  bringing  forth  thorns  and 
thistles.  They  will  continue  to  spring  up  as  surely  as  the  dust  wiU 
return  to  the  dust  from  whence  it  was  taken. 

In  the  world,  of  course,  they  were  in  great  labour,  for  they  were  leit 
in  the  world  to  seek  to  convert  it,  or,  at  least,  to  caU  out  the  redeemed 
of  Christ  from  among  men  by  preaching  the  gospel  to  every  creature. 
And,  being  "  in  the  world,"  they  were  surrounded  hymuch  weakness, 
weakness  of  body  and  weakness  of  mind,  always  needing  to  call  to 
their  Lord  for  help.  He  was  up  there  upon  the  throne,  and  they 
were  down  in  the  dungeon.  He  was  up  there,  clothed  with  all  power, 
and  they  were  down  here  in  all  weakness. 

V.  Now,  HOW  WILL  Jesus  behave  towards  them  ?  That  is  our 
last  'question.  We  began  with  it,  and  we  will  finish  with  it.  Well, 
here  is  the  answer.  "  Having  loved  his  own  which  were  in  the 
world,  he  loved  them  unto  the  end;"  and  we  may  rest  sure  that  he 
always  will  love  them,  and  that  he  will  never  change  from  the  tender- 
nessof  his  heart  towards  them.  "He  loved  them  unto  the  end. ' 
What  does  that  sentence  mean  ?  mi      -n-  v 

I  think  it  means,  first,  that  he  loved  them  right  on.  The  Hebrew, 
"His  mercy  endureth  for  ever,"  might  be  rendered,  *' His  mercy 
endureth  to  the  end."  That  is,  to  the  end  which  has  no  end,  for  there 
never  will  be  an  end  to  his  mercy ;  and  his  love  is  continual,  ever- 
lasting love,  it  will  never  come  to  an  end.  Christ  himself,  m  his 
Passion,  may  be  said  to  have  come  to  an  end,  and  he  loved  his 
disciples  until  his  death;  but  it  means  that  he  loves  them  without 
any  end,  for  ever  and  ever.  Having  loved  them  while  he  was  in 
the  wona  with  tiiem,  he  loves  them  right  straight  on,  and  always  wiU 
love  them  when  time  shall  be  no  more.  o  tx  a 

I  am  sure,  dear  friends,  you  believe  in  the  everlasting  love  o±  God 
towards  his  people.  If  any  of  you  do  not,  you  are  robbing  yourselves 
of  one  of  the  greatest  comforts  that  are  to  be  found  m  the  Scriptures. 
If  the  Lord  can  change,  where  are  we?  Everything  has  gone  when 
his  everlasting  love  is  gone.  I  delight  to  believe  that  the  mountains 
^hall  depart,  and  the  hiUs  be  removed ;  but  his  kindness  shall  not 
depart  from  us,  neither  shall  the  covenant  of  his  peace  be  removed  ;  it 
-standeth  fast  for  ever  and  ever.  /..•«»' 

But  the  sentence  may  be  rendered,  '' m  loved  them  to  perfection. 
"  Having  loved  his  own  which  were  in  the  world,  he  loved  them  to 
perfection."     He  could  not  love  them  any  better ;  that  was  impossible. 
He  could  not  love  them  more  wisely ;  that  would  be  out  of  the  question. 
He  could  not  love  them   more   intensely;    that  is   not  supposable. 


LOVE    STRONGER    THAN    DEATH.  21 

Wiiateyer  the  perfection  of  love  may  be,  that  Jesus  Christ  bestows 
upon  his  people.  There  is  no  such  love  in  all  the  world  as  the  love  of 
Christ  to  his  people ;  and  if  you  were  to  gather  up  all  the  loves  that 
ever  were,  of  men  and  women,  of  mothers  and  children,  of  friends  and 
friends,  and  heap  up  all  these  loves,  the  love  of  Jesus  is  of  superior 
quality  to  them  all,  for  none  of  those  loves  are  absolutely  perfect,  but 
Jesus  Christ  loves  to  perfection. 

Those  of  you  who  have  the  Kevised  Version  will  find  in  the  margin 
the  following  words,  "  ^o  the  uttermost^  ''Having  loved  his  own 
which  were  in  the  world,  he  loved  them  to  the  uttermost,"  to  that 
which  is  uttermost,  farthest,  and  most  distant ;  or,  if  I  turn  the  word 
in  another  way,  "  He  loved  them  utterly,"  unutterably,  in  such  a  way 
that  you  cannot  tell,  or  conceive,  or  describe,  or  imagine,  how  much 
he  loved  his  people.  He  loved  his  people  to  the  utmost  stretch  of 
love.  So  is  it,  there  is  no  love  like  his,  and,  as  I  said  just  now,  all 
the  loves  in  the  world,  compressed  into  one,  would  not  equal  it. 
*'  Having  loved  his  own  which  were  in  the  world,  he  loved  them  to 
the  uttermost." 

Now,  it  does  seem  to  me  that  this  truth  ought  to  tempt  some 
poor  soul  to  wish  to  enjoy  Christ's  love.  "Oh!"  says  one,  "if  I 
did  but  get  that  love,  I  should  never  lose  it.  He  would  love  me  to 
the  uttermost.  Oh,  if  I  could  but  creep  in  among  his  people !  "  The 
way  to  discover  Christ's  love  to  thee  is  that  thou  shouldst  begin  by 
trusting  him  ;  and  surely  he  will  help  thee  to  do  this.  He  is  so  true, 
80  good,  so  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost,  that  if  thou  wilt  come  and 
trust  him,  trust  him  wholly,  trust  him  now,  trust  him  just  as  thou  art, 
then  he  will  save  thee  to  the  uttermost,  and  show  his  love  to  thee  to 
the  uttermost.  I  have  been  preaching  what  I  trust  will  comfort  God's 
people  ;  but  I  wish  that  some  poor  soul  would  come  to  Christ  through 
it.  I  believe  that  is  the  right  way  to  preach  the  gospel.  Have  you 
not  noticed,  in  the  story  of  the  Prodigal  Son,  that  the  father  said, 
*'  Bring  forth  the  best  robe,  and  put  it  on  him ;  and  put  a  ring  on  his 
hand,  and  shoes  on  his  feet,"  and  so  on,  but  he  did  not  go  on  to  say, 
"Feed  him,"  do  you  notice  what  he  said?  It  was,  "Let  us  eat, 
and  be  merry."  "  Well,  but  I  thought  he  was  thinking  about  his 
son."  Yes,  and  he  says,  "  Let  us  eat."  So,  dear  brothers  and  sisters 
in  Christ,  let  us  eat,  and  then  sinners  will  begin  to  feel  their 
mouths  watering,  and  they  also  will  want  to  eat,  and  to  have  a  share 
of  the  feast.  This  is  the  only  way  to  make  them  eat ;  you  can  bring 
a  horse  to  the  water,  but  you  cannot  make  him  drink ;  but  you  are 
very  likely  to  do  so  if  you  set  another  horse  a-drinking.  So,  if  you 
and  I  enjoy  the  sweetness  of  the  love  of  Christ,  there  may  be  some  in 
the  gallery,  and  some  downstairs  who  will  say,  "We  wish  that  we 
knew  it,  too,"  and  they  will  be  wanting  it ;  that  is  the  way  to  make 
them  eat.  I  pray  the  Lord,  by  his  Spirit,  to  lead  them  to  put  their 
trust  in  this  loving  Saviour,  and  each  one  to  say, — 

"  Jesu,  lover  of  my  soul, 
Let  me  to  thy  bosom  fly." 

He  will  let  you  fly  to  his  bosom ;  therefore, — 

'*  Come,  and  welcome ;  sinner,  come/* 


22  METBOPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

Exposition  Ijg  ((T.  ^.  ^purgron. 

JOHN  XIII.    1—19. 

Verse  1.  Now  be/ore  the  feast  of  the  paasover,  tuhen  Jeaus  knew  that  hit 
hour  ivas  come  that  he  should  depart  out  of  this  world  unto  the  Father,  having 
loved  his  own  which  luere  in  the  world,  he  loved  them  unto  the  end. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  a  clear  foresight  of  all  he  had  to  endure. 
Future  things  are  happily  hiddon  from  our  eyes.  We  do  not  even  know  the 
moment  when  we  shall  <fie,  nor  how  it  will  be.  It  is  well  that  it  is  so  ;  but 
our  Lord  was  able  to  anticipate  his  sufferings,  by  knowing  all  about  them  : 
"  Jesus  knew  that  his  hour  was  come."  It  was  all  appointed  ;  and  nothing 
happens  to  any  of  us  by  accident,  chance  is  banished  from  the  believer's 
creed.  There  is  an  appointed  "hour  "  for  each  one  of  us,  and  it  will  come 
in  due  season. 

"  Jesus  knew  that  his  hour  was  come,  that  he  should  depart  out  of  the 
world  unto  the  Father."  What  a  beautiful  way  of  describing  death  ! 
Christ's  death  was  certainly  a  more  trying  one  than  ours  will  be,  so  that 
this  description  may  apply  to  ours  as  well  as  to  his. 

2.     And  supper  being  ended, 

I  suppose  that  was  the  Paschal  supper. 

2.  The  devil  having  now  put  into  the  heart  of  Judas  Iscariot,  Simmies  son,  to 
betray  him; 

What  a  horrible  purpose  for  Satan  to  put  into  the  heart  of  Judas  even  in 
the  presence  of  Jesus  !  I  hope  that  the  devil  will  not  put  any  such  purpose 
into  your  hearts  or  into  mine  while  we  are  in  this  house  of  prayer  ;  but  no 
place  is  sacred  from  his  intrusion,  he  will  come  in  anywhere.  Evea  where 
Christ  himself  is  at  the  head  of  the  table,  Judas  may  be  sitting  at  that 
same  table,  and  Satan  may  then  and  there  put  into  his  heart  the  horrible 
purpose  of  betraying  his  Master. 

3,  4.  Jeaus  knowing  that  the  Father  had  given  all  things  into  his  hands,  and 
that  he  was  come  from  God,  and  went  to  Qod ;  he  ri-seth  from  supper,  and  laid 
aside  his  garments y  and  took  a  towel,,  and  girded  himself. 

Notice  those  words,  "Jesus  knowing,  ...  he  took  a  towel,  and 
girded  himself."  If  he  had  not  known  how  great  he  was,  there 'would  not 
have  been  such  condescension  in  his  action  ;  but  he  knew  who  he  was,  and 
what  the  Father  had  entrusted  to  him  :  "  The  Father  had  given  all  things 
into  his  hands."  You  might  suppose  that  he  would  rise  up,  in  a  very 
dignified  manner,  and  put  on  a  purple  robe  and  a  golden  girdle;  but, 
instead  of  that,  he  rose  from  the  supper  table,  laid  aside  his  garments,  and 
took  a  towel,  and  girded  himself.  He  knew  that  he  had  come  forth  from 
Qod,  and  that  he  was  going  back  to  God,  and  he  performed  this  action  on 
the  way  home  to  his  Father.  O  dear  brothers  and  sisters,  if  Christ  thus 
stooped,  how  humble  ought  we  to  be !  No  office  should  be  counted  too 
lowly,  no  work  for  his  servants  should  seem  to  be  too  humiliating,  since 
Jesus  "  took  a  towel,  and  girded  himself." 

o.  After  that  he  poureth  water  into  a  bason,  and  began  to  wash  the  disciple^ 
feet,  and  to  wipe  them  with  the  towel  wherewith  he  was  girded. 

You  see  that  Jesus  does  his  work  well.  He  omits  none  of  the  details  of 
it.  He  puts  himself  in  the  place  of  a  slave,  and  he  performs  a  slave's  duty 
very  thoroughly.  I  am  afraid  that,  sometimes,  we  do  our  work  for  him  in 
a  slovenly  way;  but  Jesus  was  not  satiified  with  simply  washing  his 
disciples'  feet,  he  must  do  the  wiping,  too.  I  do  bless  him  that  he  did  so, 
for  this  is  a  picture  of  what  he  has  done  for  us.  He  has  washed  our  feet ; 
and  he  often  repeats  the  gracious  act.  The  feet  that  Jesus  washes  he  will 
wipe  ;  he  has  not  begun  his  task  without  intendins:  to  finish  it.     I  know 


EXPOSITION.  23 

that  he  will  complete  in  my  soul  the  work  which  he  has  undertaken,  for  he 
fulfilled  on  the  feet  of  his  disciples  the  office  he  had  undertaken :  "  He 
began  to  wash  the  disciples'  feet,  and  to  wipe  them  with  the  towel  where- 
with he  was  girded." 

6.  Then  cometh  he  to  Simon  Peter  :  and  Peter  saith  unto  him,  Lord,  dost 
thou  wash  my  feet  ? 

I  do  not  wonder  that  he  said  that ;  would  not  you  have  been  equally 
astonished  had  you  been  there  ?  Peter  had  some  faint  idea  who  Christ 
was ;  he  had  confessed  him  in  such  a  way  that  Jesus  had  said  to  him, 
'■  Blessed  art  thou,  Simon  Bar-jona  :  for  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed 
it  unto  thee,  but  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  Knowing  so  much  about 
Christ,  Peter  did  marvel  at  his  action  ;  he  felt  so  astonished  that  he  asked 
''  Dost  thou  wash  my  feet  ?  " 

7.  Jesus  ansivered  and  said  unto  him,  What  T  do  thou  hnowest  not  now  ; 
but  thou  shult  know  hereafter. 

I  have  heard  this  saying  of  our  Lord  applied  to  affliction ;  and  it  is  very 
true  that  what  Jesus  does  we  do  not  at  present  understand,  but  we  shall 
know  by-and-by.  I  do  not  think,  however,  that  this  sentence  is  very 
applicable  that  way,  for  there  was  no  affliction  in  having  the  feet  washed. 
The  fact  is,  brethren,  though  it  is  a  very  humbling  thing  to  say,  we  do  not 
understand  that  which  Jesus  does,  even  his  simplest  actions  are  a  mystery 
to  us,  we  have  never  gone  into  the  very  depths  of  them  so  as  to  comprehend 
them.  "  What  I  do, — even  though  I  only  wash  thy  feet,  plain  and  simple 
operation  as  that  is, — thou  knowest  not  now  ;  but  thou  shalt  know  here- 
after." Our  knowing  times,  dear  friends,  are  to  come.  We  need  not  be  so 
very  anxious  to  know  at  present ;  this  is  the  time  of  love,  I  would  forego 
the  filling  of  my  head  for  a  while  if  I  could  have  my  heart  full ;  but,  alas, 
we  are  generally  so  busy  trying  to  attain  merely  head  knowledge !  My 
most  intense  longing  is  for  a  growing  heart,  a  heart  that  truly  loves  the 
Saviour.  That  is  the  way  for  the  head  to  learu,  for  knowledge  that  comes 
by  the  way  of  the  heart,  and  so  enters  the  head,  is  the  best  of  knowledge. 
Jesus  said  to  Peter,  "  What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now;  but  thou  shalt 
know  hereafter." 

8.  Peter  saith  unto  him,  Thou  shalt  never  wash  my  feet. 

That  is  j  list  like  Peter  ;  if  John  had  not  told  us  who  it  was  that  said  this, 
we  should  have  known  that  it  was  Peter.  He  was  always  in  such  a  hurry, 
and  he  spoke  so  quickly,  that  he  made  many  mistakes ;  yet  he  was  always 
so  honest  and  so  true  that  his  Master  forgave  his  faults,  and  helped  him  to 
correct  them. 

8.  Jesus  answered  him.  If  I  wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part  luith  me. 

If  Christ  does  not  cleanse  us,  we  do  not  belong  to  him.  If  he  does  not, 
day  by  day,  exercise  a  purifying  influence  over  us,  we  are  not  his. 

9.  Simon  Peter  saith  unto  him,  Lord,  not  my  feet  only,  hut  also  my  hands 
and  my  head. 

How  that  pendulum  swings  to  and  fro !  It  went  this  way  just  now : 
"  Thou  shalt  never  wash  my  feet."  Now  it  goes  right  away  to  the  other 
extreme :  "  Lord,  not  my  feet  only,  but  also  my  hands  and  my  head."  Go 
more  gently,  Peter,  be  more  quiet.  Why  do  you  go  so  far  in  one  direction, 
and  then  rush  off  so  far  in  another  way?  Thy  Master  knows  better 
than  thou  knowest  what  is  right  for  thee. 

10.  Jesus  saith  to  him,  He  that  is  washed  needeth  not  save  to  wash  his  feet, 
but  is  clean  every  whit :  and  ye  are  clean,  but  not  all. 

Dear  friends,  when  we  believe  in  Christ,  we  are  washed  in  the  fountain 
filled  with  blood,  and  we  are  clean  ;  but  this  world  is  such  a  sinful  place 
that  WG  cannot  walk  through  it  for  even  a  day  without  some  of  its  mire  an4 


24  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

dust  clinging  to  us.  Besides,  God's  lilies  are  so  pure  that  they  are  hardly 
fit  to  bloom  in  such  a  defiling  atmosphere.  Oh,  how  we  need  that  the  dew 
should  wash  the  lily  when  the  night  comes  on  !  How  greatly  we  need  to 
have  the  foot- washing  administered  to  us  every  day  !  We  need  not  repeat 
the  first  great  washing,  the  bath  by  which  our  sins  were  cleansed  ;  when 
that  was  done,  it  was  done  once  for  all.  Our  sin  was  pardoned  as  before  a 
Judge  ;  but  we  want  it  to  be  taken  away  as  before  our  Father,  for  we  are 
Qow  under  his  loving  discipline. 

Christ  further  said  to  his  disciples,  **  Ye  are  clean,  but  not  all."  Does  he 
say  that  to  us  at  this  time  ?  ''  Ye  are  clean,  but  not  all."  Where  sits  the 
man,  in  this  house  of  prayer,  who  is  not  clean,  the  sinner  who  has  not  yet 
been  washed  by  Jesus  Christ  ?  Where  sits  the  woman  who  is  not  clean  ? 
The  Lord  have  mercy  upon  you,  dear  friends !  You  know  that,  in  the 
olden  days,  they  put  a  red  cross  on  the  door  of  the  house  where  the  plague 
was.  We  cannot  put  a  cross  upon  you;  but  I  pray  you  to  consider 
yourselves  as  marked  men  and  marked  women  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  I 
pray  the  Lord  to  take  that  mark  away  by  causing  you  to  be  washed,  that 
you  may  be  clean  every  whit.  How  quickly  he  can  wash  the  foulest 
sinners  !  He  that  believeth  in  Jesus  is  washed  in  the  precious  blood,  and 
he  is  clean.     God  cleanse  us  all  for  his  great  name's  sake  1 

11—15.  For  he  knew  who  should  betray  him;  therefore  said  he.  Ye  are  not 
all  clean.  So  after  he  had  ivashed  their  feet,  and  had  taken  his  fjarments,  and 
was  set  down  again,  he  said  unto  them,  Know  ye  what  I  have  done  to  you  ?  Ye 
call  me  Master  and  Lord :  and  ye  say  welly  for  so  I  am.  If  I  then,  your  Lord 
and  Master,  have  washed  your  feet ;  ye  also  ought  to  wash  one  another's  feet. 
For  I  have  given  you  an  example,  that  ye  should  do  as  I  have  done  to  you. 

Christ's  actions  are  the  pattern  for  us  to  imitate  !  Oh,  that  we  followed 
them  more  closely  ! 

16.  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  The  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  lord ; 
neither  he  that  is  sent  greater  than  he  that  sent  him. 

Sometimes,  we  think  that  we  are  a  deal  too  great  to  wash  anybody's  feet ; 
we  should  like  to  see  a  person  propose  it  to  us,  such  big  people  as  we  are  I 
If  we  talk  like  that,  there  is  great  need  that  we  should  be  taken  down. 
That  would  be  the  true  way  to  rise  in  the  likeness  of  Jesus.  Oh,  that  we 
were  lowlier  in  humility  !     We  should  be  higher  in  grace  if  we  were. 

17.  If  ye  know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them. 
Peter  wanted  to  know  them ;  Jesus  would  have  us  do  them. 

18.  I  speak  not  of  you  all :  I  know  whom  I  have  chosen  ; 

Christ  has  a  chosen  people,  though  some  will  not  believe  it.  Yet  it  is 
so,  for  he  says,  "I  know  whom  I  have  chosen." 

18,  19.  But  that  the  scripture  may  he  fulfilled,  He  that  eateth  bread  with 
me  hath  lifted  up  his  heel  against  me.  Now  I  tell  you  before  it  come,  that,  when 
it  is  come  to  pass,  ye  may  believe  that  I  am  he. 

*♦  That  I  am."  So,  you  see,  even  the  great  trouble  of  the  early  Church, 
the  betrayal  by  Judas,  was  used  by  Christ  for  the  strengthening  of  his 
disciples'  faith.  He  foretold  that  it  would  be  as  it  came  to  pass.  So,  dear 
friends,  in  these  latter  days,  many  forsake  the  gospel,  but  Jesus  told  us 
that  it  would  be  so.  He  taught  his  servants  to  write  that  there  would  bo 
a  falling  away,  and  that  in  these  last  days  there  would  be  scoffers  ;  and  as 
we  read  the  prophecies,  and  compare  them  with  the  fulfilment,  even  the 
doleful  fact  itself  confirms  our  faith  in  our  Lord. 

God  bless  to  us  this  brief  reading  of  his  own  Word !     Amen. 


Hymns  from  *'0ur  Own  Hymn  Book" — 731,  815,  377. 


"AFTER  TWO   DAYS  IS  THE  PASSOVEE." 


%   $mut\ 


Intended  for  Reading  on  Lord's-day,  June  20th,   1897, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lord^s-day  Evening^  November  \st,  18S5. 


**  Ye  know  that  after  two  days  is  .  .  .  the  passover,  and  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to 
be  crucified." — Matthew  xxvi.  2. 

One  likes  to  know  how  a  great  commander  feels  before  a  battle.  What 
is  his  state  of  mind,  and  how  does  he  look  forward  to  to-morrow's 
struggle?  While  yet  the  balances  are  trembling,  how  does  he  act? 
How  does  he  bear  himself  ?  One  likes  to  know  the  condition  of  heart 
of  one's  fellow  in  the  prospect  of  a  great  trial.  There  is  a  serious 
operation  to  be  performed ;  how  is  the  sufferer  sujtported  in  the 
prospect  of  the  surgeon's  knife  and  of  the  danger  that  will  attend  it  ? 
Or,  perhaps,  death  itself  is  rapidly  approaching ;  in  what  condition  of 
heart  is  our  departing  friend  ?  How  does  he  anticipate  the  great 
change  ?  I  take  it  that  it  is  sometimes  much  harder  to  look  upon  a 
battle  than  to  fight  one, — more  difficult  to  foresee  an  ill  than  it  is  to 
bear  it ;  and,  peradvenlure,  the  foresight  eveu  of  death  is  much  more 
trying  than  death  itself  ever  proves  to  be  to  a  Christian  man.  Can  we 
he  confident  before  the  battle  begins  ?  Can  we  be  calm  before  the 
clouds  burst  in  the  time  of  storm  ?  Can  we  rest  in  God  before  the 
iron  gate  is  opened,  and  we  pass  through  it  into  the  unknown 
world?     These  are  questions  well  worth  asking. 

I  thought  that  it  would  be  very  profitable  to  us  if  we  tried  to  look 
at  our  Master  in  this  condition, — the  great  Captain  of  our  salvation 
before  the  battle, — the  great  Sacrifice  led  to  the  altar  where  his  blood 
is  about  to  be  shed.  How  does  he  behave  himself  ?  May  there  not 
be  something  specially  instructive  in  this  last  word  of  his,  when  he 
seems,  as  it  were,  to  take  off  the  robes  of  the  teacher  and  prophet,  and 
to  put  on  his  priestly  garments  ?  May  there  not  be  something  for  us 
to  learn  from  the  state  of  his  mind  and  spirit,  and  from  his  language, 
just  before  his  Passion  ?  It  is  a  small  window,  but  a  great  deal  of 
No.  2,522. 


% 
26  METROPOLITAN  TABEKNACLE  PULPIT. 

light  may  come  through  it.  The  Master  said  to  his  disciples,  "  Ye 
know  that  after  two  days  is  the  passover,  and  the  Son  of  man  is 
betrayed  to  be  crucified." 

I.  The  first  thing  I  would  say  upon  these  words  to  you,  beloved 
in  Christ  Jesus,  is,  admire  your  ISaviour.  Hear  him  speak,  and 
regard  him  in  holy  contemplation,  on  purpose  that  admiration  of  him 
may  be  greatly  excited. 

Admire  his  calmness.  There  is  no  token  of  any  disturbance  of 
mind,  there  are  no  evidences  of  dismay,  there  is  not  even  a  quiver  of 
fear,  nor  the  least  degree  of  anxiety  about  him.  He  speaks  not 
boastfully  ;  else  we  should  suspect  that  he  was  not  brave.  He  speaks 
very  solemnly,  for  it  was  a  terrible  ordeal  that  lay  before  him,  look  at 
it  as  he  might ;  but  still,  with  what  true  peace  of  mind,  in  what  tones 
of  quiet  serenity,  does  he  say  to  his  little  band  of  followers,  "  Ye  know 
that  after  two  days  is  the  passover,  and  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to 
be  crucified." 

This  calmness  is  very  wonderful,  because  there  was  so  much  that 
was  bitter  and  cruel  about  his  approaching  death :  *'  The  Son  of  niau 
is  betrayed. "  The  Saviour  felt  that  betrayal  most  keenly ;  it  was  a 
very  bitter  part  of  the  deadly  potion  which  he  had  to  drink.  "He 
that  eateth  bread  with  me  hath  lifted  up  his  heel  against  me,"  was  a 
venomous  drop  that  went  right  into  his  soul.  David,  in  his  great 
sorrow,  had  to  say,  "  For  it  was  not  an  enemy  that  reproached  me ; 
then  I  could  have  borne  it:  neither  was  it  he  that  hated  me  that  did 
magnify  himself  against  me  ;  then  I  would  have  hid  myself  from  him  ; 
but  it  was  thou,  a  man  mine  equal,  my  guide,  and  mine  acquaintance. 
We  took  sweet  counsel  together,  and  walked  into  the  house  of  God  in 
company."  And  it  was  a  very,  very,  very  bitter  thing  to  Christ  to  be 
betrayed  by  Judas  ;  yet  he  talks  of  it  calmly,  and  speaks  of  it  when  it 
was  not  absolutely  necessary,  one  would  think,  to  mention  that  inci- 
dental circumstance.  He  might  have  eaid,  "  In  two  days  I  shall  be 
crucified  ;  "  but  he  did  say,  "  In  two  days  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed 
to  be  crucified." 

Do  not  forget,  also,  the  extraordinary  bitterness  that  is  concentrated 
in  that  word  "  crucified."  Somehow,  we  have  got  to  be  used  to  the 
cross,  and  the  glory  which  surrounds  our  Lord  has  taken  away  from 
our  minds  mucli  of  the  shame  which  is  and  should  ever  be  associated 
with  the  gibbet.  The  cross  was  the  hangman's  gibbet  of  those  days, 
it  implied  all  the  shame  that  the  gallows  could  imply  with  us  to-day, 
and  more,  for  a  freeman  may  be  hanged,  but  crucifixion  was  a  death 
reserved  for  slaves.  Nor  was  it  merely  the  shame  of  crucifixion,  but 
it  was  the  great  pain  of  it.  It  was  an  exquisitely  cruel  death,  in 
which  the  body  was  tormented  for  a  considerable  length  of  time  to 
the  very  highest  degree,  and  the  nails  passing  through  the  flesh  just 
where  the  nerves  are  most  plentiful,  and  tearing  and  rending  through 
those  parts  of  the  body  by  the  weight  which  had  to  be  sustained  on 
hands  and  feet,  caused  torture  of  a  kind  which  I  will  not  attempt  to 
describe.  Beside  that,  remember,  veiled  beneath  the  words  "  to  be 
crucified"  lay  our  Saviour's  inward  and  spiritual  crucifixion,  for  his 
Father's  forsaking  of  him  was  the  essence,  the  extreme  gall,  of  the 
bitterness  that  he  endured.     He  meant  that  he  had  to  die  upon  the 


"AFTER    TWO    DAYS    IS    THE    PASSOVEB."  27 

accursed  tree,  deserted  even  by  his  Father ;  yet  he  talked  of  it,  truly 
with  all  solemnity,  but  yet  without  the  slightest  trace  of  trembling. 
"  Ye  know,"  said  he  to  his  disciples,  "  that  in  two  days  is  the  pass- 
over,  and  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be  crucified." 

Admire,  then,  the  calm,  brave  heart  of  your  Divine  Lord,  conscious 
— far  more  conscious  than  you  and  I  can  be, — of  what  was  meant  by 
being  betrayed  and  being  crucified,  cognisant  of  every  pang  that 
should  ever  come  upon  him, — the  bloody  sweat,  the  scourge,  the 
thorn-crown,  the  fevered  thirst,  the  tongue  cleaving  to  the  roof  of  his 
mouth,  and  all  the  dust  of  death  that  would  surround  and  choke 
him ;  yet  he  speaks  of  it  as  though  it  were  no  more  an  unusual  event 
than  the  passover  itself:  "  Ye  know  that  after  two  days  is  the  pass- 
over,  and  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be  crucified." 

I  want  you  to  admire,  next,  your  Saviour's  strong  resolve,  his  resolute 
purpose  to  go  through  all  this  suffering  that  he  might  effect  our 
redemption.  If  he  had  willed  it,  he  might  have  paused,  he  might 
have  gone  back,  he  might  have  given  up  the  enterprise.  You  know 
how  the  flesh,  in  sight  of  all  that  pain  and  grief,  cried,  "  If  it  be 
possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me ;  "  but  here  we  see,  before  the 
Passion  came,  that  strong  and  firm  and  brave  resolve  which,  when  the 
Passion  did  come,  would  not,  could  not,  and  did  not  flinch  or  hesitate, 
much  less  turn  back.  He  could  sweat  great  drops  of  blood,  but  lie 
could  not  give  up  the  work  he  came  to  do.  He  could  bow  his  head  to 
death,  but  he  could  not,  and  would  not,  cease  to  love  his  people  whom 
he  loved  so  much  as  to  end  his  life  for  their  sakes  upon  the  accursed 
tree.  Here  are  no  regrets,  and  no  faltering.  Our  Lord  speaks  as 
you  and  I  would  speak  of  something  about  which  our  mind  is  quite 
made  up,  concerning  which  there  is  no  room  for  argument  or  debate  : 
"  Ye  know  that  after  two  days  is  the  passover,  and  the  Son  of  man  is 
betrayed  to  be  crucified."  If  he  had  said,  "  After  two  years,"  I  could 
imderstand  something  of  his  purpose  concerning  an  event  that  was  so 
distant;  but  within  two  days  to  be  betrayed,  within  forty-eight  hours 
to  be  betrayed  for  crucifixion,  and  yet  to  talk  of  it  so,  0  my  Lord, 
truly  thy  love  for  us  is  strong  as  death,  thy  jealousy  o'ercomes  even 
the  grave  itself ! 

Admire  him,  then,  dear  friends  ;  let  your  inmost  heart  adore  and 
love  him.  But  I  want  you  to  notice  also  how  absorbed  he  teas  in  his 
approaching  betrayal' and  death;  that  truth  comes  out  in  the  words  of 
our  text :  "  Ye  know  that  after  two  days  is  the  passover,  and  the  Son 
of  man  is  betrayed  to  be  crucified."  Ah,  dear  Lord,  thou  didst  speak 
the  truth !  They  did  know  it,  and  yet  thou  didst  speak  to  them  with 
loving  partiality,  for  they  did  not  really  know  it.  They  did  not  as  yet 
understand  that  their  Master  must  die,  and  that  he  would  rise  again 
from  the  dead.  He  had  often  repeated  to  them  the  assurance  that  it 
would  be  so ;  but,  somehow,  they  had  not  truly  believed  it,  realized  it, 
grasped  it.  Ah,  but  he  had  !  He  had  ;  and,  you  know,  it  is  the  way 
of  men  who  have  realized  a  great  truth  to  talk  to  others  as  if  it  was 
as  real  to  them  as  to  themselves.  You  remember  how  the  spouse  asks 
the  watchmen  of  the  city,  "  Saw  ye  him  whom  my  soul  loveth  ?  "  She 
does  not  tell  them  any  name,  but  she  talks  of  her  Beloved  as  if  there 
were  no  other  "him"  in  all  the  world;  and  the  Lord  here  so  well 


28  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

knew,  and  was  so  wholly  absorbed  in  the  great  work  before  him,  that 
he  said  to  these  forgetful,  these  ignorant  disciples,  **  Ye  know  that 
after  two  days  is  the  passover,  and  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be 
crucified."  Why,  they  had  only  a  little  while  before  walked  with  him 
through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem !  The  people  had  strewn  the  road 
with  their  garments  and  with  branches  of  palm  trees ;  scarcely  had 
the  sound  of  their  hosannas  died  away  out  of  the  disciples'  ears,  yet 
Jesus  says  to  them,  "  Ye  know  that  after  two  days  is  the  passover,  and 
the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be  crucified ;  you  have  not  forgotten 
that,  have  you  ?  "  Ah,  but  they  had  !  They  were  still  dreaming  of  an 
earthly  sovereignty,  and  he  was  dreaming  of  nothing,  but  sternly, 
solemnly  setting  his  face  like  a  flint  to  go  to  prison  and  to  death  for 
'their  redemption,  and  for  yours,  and  for  mine,  sacredly  resolved  to  go 
through  with  it,  and  even  "  straitened  "  till  his  baptism  of  blood  should 
be  accomplished,  and  he  should  be  immersed  in  unknown  deeps  of  grief 
and  suffering.  Having  all  his  thought  taken  up  with  that  subject,  our 
Lord  therefore  talked  to  his  disciples  as  if  they  were  taken  up  with  it, 
too.  This  is  the  language  of  One  who  is  altogether  absorbed  with  tliis 
gigantic  enterprise  which  he  has  made  to  be  the  very  summit  of  his 
ambition,  though  he  knows  that  it  will  involve  him  in  shame  and 
death.  Admire  him,  brothers  and  sisters,  that  he  should  be  so  taken 
up  with  the  passion  of  winning  souls  as  to  forget  everything  else, 
and  have  this  only  upon  his  mind,  and  upon  his  lips :  "  After  two 
days  is  the  passover,  and  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be  crucified." 

I  cannot  help  adding  one  other  thing  in  which  I  admire  the  Saviour ; 
and  that  is,  how  wise  he  was  to  tell  his  disciples  this  !  You  see,  all  he 
cared  for  was  their  good.  He  was  not  mentioning  his  suffering  that 
he  might  ask  for  their  sympathy.  There  is  no  trace  of  his  crying,  like 
Job,  "  Have  pity  upon  me,  have  pity  upon  me,  0  ye  my  friends;  for 
the  hand  of  God  hath  touched  me."  No,  our  Lord  told  his  disciples 
this  for  their  sakes ;  first,  that  they  might  not  be  surprised  when  it 
came  to  pass,  as  though  some  strange  thing  had  happened  unto 
them, — that,  when  he  was  betrayed  and  crucified,  it  might  not  be 
quite  so  dire  a  blighting  of  all  their  hopes  since  he  had  prepared  them 
for  it  beforehand.  And,  moreover,  it  was  intended  to  strengthen  them 
when  they  should  come  into  the  trial,  so  that  they  should  say,  "  It  is 
all  just  as  he  told  us  it  would  be ;  how  true  he  is  I  He  told  us  about 
this  sorrow  beforehand  ;  and,  therefore,  if  he  spake  the  truth  then,  we 
will  believe  that  all  the  rest  that  he  said  is  also  true.  And  did  he  not 
say  that  he  would  rise  again  from  the  dead  ?  Then,  depend  upon  it, 
he  will  do  so.  He  died  when  he  said  he  would  die,  and  he  will  rise 
again  when  he  said  he  would  rise  again."  This  saying  of  our  Lord 
was  well  and  wisely  uttered,  that  the  crucifixion  should  not  come  upon 
them  as  a  thing  unknown  to  him ;  but  that,  when  they  were  in  the 
midst  of  the  trial,  they  should  remember  that  he  told  them  all  about 
it,  and  so  they  would  be  comforted. 

I  ask  you,  then,  dear  friends,  to  think  with  reverent  affection  of  this 
calm  speech  of  your  Divine  Master,  this  resolved  and  determined 
utterance,  this  all-absorbing  thought  of  his  concerning  the  purchase  of 
his  people  by  his  blood,  and  this  generous  wisdom  of  his  in  making 
it  all  known  beforehand  to  those  who  were  round  about  him,  and  who 


"  AFTER   TWO   DAYS   IS   THE   PASSOYER."  29 

truly  loved  him.     I  do  not  like  to  turn  from  that  thought  until  you 
have  in  your  own  heart  felt  this  intense  admiration  of  your  Lord. 

II.  But,  secondly,  I  want  to  take  your  thoughts  a  little  way— not 
from  the  text, — but  from  that  particular  line  of  meditation,  and  now 
to  ask  you  to  consider  your  Sacrifice. 

The  Master  says,  "  Ye  know  that  after  two  days  is  the  passover, 
and  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be  crucified."  I  cannot  help 
reading  it  like  this, — "  Ye  know  that  after  two  days  is  the  Passover. 
All  the  other  passovers  have  been  passovers  only  in  name,  passovers 
m  type,  passovers  in  emblem,  passovers  foreshadowing  the  Passover ; 
but  after  two  days  is  the  real  Passover,  and  the  Son  of  man  is 
betrayed  to  be  crucified."  At  any  rate,  I  want  you  to  notice  how 
true  it  is  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  our  Passover :  "  Christ  our 
Passover  is  sacrificed  for  us."  What  the  paschal  lamb  was  to  Israel 
in  Egypt,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  to  us.  Let  us  think  of  that 
for  a  few  minutes.  Put  the  passover  and  the  cross  together,  for 
indeed  tbey  are  one. 

And,  first,  here  is  a  laml.  Was  there  another  man  who  ever  lived 
who  was  so  worthy  to  be  called  a  lamb,  as  was  Jesus  Christ  ?  I  have 
never  heard  or  read  of  any  character  that  so  fully  realizes  what  must 
be  meant  by  "the  Lamb  of  God."  Other  men  have  been  like  lambs, 
but  there  is  a  touch  of  the  tiger  about  us  all  at  times.  There  was 
none  about  him  ;  he  was  the  Lamb  of  all  lambs, — the  Lamb  of  God, — 
the  most  lamb-like  of  all  men  who  ever  lived  or  died,  for  there  was 
no  trace  of  anything  about  him  that  was  contrary  to  tenderness,  and 
love,  and  gentleness.  There  were  other  qualities,  of  course,  but 
none  that  were  contrary  to  these ;  there  were  some  that  were  as 
necessary  to  a  complete  character  as  even  gentleness  was,  and  he  failed 
in  nothing  ;  but,  still,  if  you  only  view  him  from  that  one  side  of  his 
gentleness,  there  was  none  so  worthy  to  be  called  a  Lamb  as  he. 

The  lamb  of  the  passover,  however,  had  to  he  perfect;  it  must  be 
without  spot  or  blemish.  And  where  can  you  find  the  like  of  Jesus 
for  spotlessness  and  perfection  in  every  respect?  There  is  nothing 
in  him  redundant,  there  is  nothing  in  him  deficient ;  the  character  of 
the  Christ  is  absolutely  perfect,  insomuch  that  his  very  enemies, 
who  have  denied  his  Deity,  have  been  charmed  with  his  humanity ; 
and  those  who  have  even  tried  to  undermine  his  teaching,  have, 
nevertheless,  reverently  bowed  before  his  example.  He  is  the  Lamb 
of  God  **  without  blemish  and  without  spot." 

The  paschal  lamb  also  had  to  he  slain.  You  know  how  Christ  was 
slain  ;  there  is  no  need  to  dwell  upon  the  sufferings  and  death  of  our 
Well-beloved.  The  lamb  had  to  he  roast  with  Jire.  That  was  the 
method  by  which  it  was  prepared ;  and,  truly,  Christ  our  Passover 
was  roast  with  fire.  Through  what  fiery  sufferings,  through  what 
consuming  griefs,  did  he  pass !  There  was  nought  about  him  that 
was  sodden  at  all  with  water ;  but  every  bit  of  him  was  roast  with 
the  fire  of  human  hatred,  and  also  with  the  divine  and  righteous  ire 
of  the  thrice-holy  God. 

You  remember,  too,  that  in  the  paschal  lamb  not  a  hone  was  to  he 
hrohen.  Our  Lord  stood  in  imminent  jeopardy  of  having  his  bones 
broken,  for  with  iron  bars  the  Eoman  soldiers  went  to  break  the  legs 


80  METKOPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

of  the  three  crucified  persons,  that  they  might  die  the  more  quickly ; 
but  John  tells  us,  "  When  they  came  to  Jesus,  and  saw  that  he  was 
dead  already,  they  brake  not  his  legs  :  but  one  of  the  soldiers  with  a 
apear  pierced  his  side,  and  forthwith  came  there  out  blood  and  water. 
And  he  that  saw  it  bare  record,  and  his  record  is  true  :  and  he 
knoweth  that  he  saith  true,  that  ye  might  believe.  For  these  things 
were  done,  that  the  scripture  should  be  fulfilled,  a  bone  of  him  shall 
not  be  broken.  And  again  another  scripture  saith,  they  shall  look  on 
him  whom  they  pierced."     In  all  this  is  Christ  our  true  Paschal  Lamb. 

But  you  know,  dear  friends,  that  the  chief  point  about  the  paschal 
lamb  lay  in  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood.  The  blood  of  the  lamb  was 
caught  in  a  basin  ;  and  then,  the  father  of  the  family  took  a  bunch  of 
hyssop,  dipped  it  in  the  blood,  and  struck  the  lintel  and  the  two  side 
posts  of  the  house,  outside  the  door ;  then,  when  the  destroying  angel 
flew  through  the  land  of  Egypt  to  smite  the  firstborn  of  men  and  of 
cattle,  from  the  firstborn  of  Pharaoh  that  was  on  the  throne  to  the 
firstborn  of  one  that  was  in  the  dungeon,  he  passed  by  every  house 
that  was  sprinkled  with  the  blood ;  and  these  are  the  Lord's  memor- 
able words  concerning  that  ordinance,  "  When  I  see  the  blood,  I  will 
pass  over  you."  God's  sight  of  the  blood  was  the  reason  for  his 
passing  over  his  people,  and  not  smiting  them.  And  you  know, 
beloved,  that  the  reason  why  God  does  not  smite  you  on  account  of 
sin  is  that  he  sees  the  sprinkled  blood  of  Jesus  under  which  you  are 
sheltering.  That  blood  is  sprinkled  upon  you  ;  and  as  God  sees  it,  he 
knows  that  expiation  has  been  made,  the  substitutionary  sacrifice  has 
been  slain,  and  he  passes  you  by.  Thus  is  Christ,  the  true  Passover, 
accepted  in  your  stead,  and  you  are  saved  through  him. 

Eemember,  too,  that  the  paschal  lomh  furnished  food  for  a  swpptr.  It 
was  both  a  security  and  a  least  for  the  people.  The  whole  family 
stood  round  the  table  that  night,  and  ate  of  the  roasted  lamb.  With 
bitter  herbs  did  they  eat  it,  as  if  to  remind  them  of  the  bitterness  of 
their  bondage  in  Egypt ;  with  their  loins  girt,  and  with  their  walking 
staves  in  their  hands,  as  men  who  were  about  to  quit  their  homes,  and 
go  on  along  journey  never  to  return, — thus  they  stood  and  ate  the 
paschal  lamb.  They  all  ate  it,  and  they  ate  it  all ;  for  not  a  relic  of 
it  must  be  left  until  the  morning.  If  there  was  too  much  for  one 
family,  then  others  must  come  in  to  share  it ;  and  if  any  was  left,  it 
must  be  destroyed  by  fire.  Is  not  this,  dear  friends,  just  what  Christ 
is  to  us, — our  spiritual  meat,  the  food  of  our  souls  ?  We  receive 
a  whole  Christ,  and  feed  upon  a  whole  Christ, — often  with  bitter  herbs 
of  repentance  and  humiliation ;  t)Ut  still  we  feed  on  him,  and  we  all 
eat  of  the  same  spiritual  meat,  even  as  we  are  all  sprinkled  with 
the  one  precious  blood,  if  indeed  we  be  the  true  Israel  of  God. 

0  beloved,  let  us  bless  our  Lord  for  the  true  Passover  !  It  was  a 
night  to  be  remembered  when  Israel  came  out  of  Egypt ;  but  it  is  a 
night  to  be  remembered  even  more  when  you  and  I,  by  the  sprinkling  of 
the  blood  of  Jesus,  are  once  for  all  passed  over  by  the  angel  of  aveng- 
ing justice,  and  we  live  when  others  die; — a  night  to  be  remembered 
when  our  eager  lips  begin  to  feed  on  him  whose  flesh  is  meat  indeed, 
and  we  eat  and  live  for  ever.  Is  not  that  the  teaching  of  this  text  ? 
Did  not  the  Saviour  mean  this  when  he  said,    *' Ye   know  that  after 


"  AFTER    TWO    DAYS    IS    THE    PASSOVEE."  31 

two  days  is  the  passover,  and  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be  cruci- 
fied "  ?  These  two  things  are  bracketed  together  ;  as  in  mathematics, 
there  is  a  sort  of  mark  of  "  equals  "  put  between  them  to  signify  that 
the  one  is  equal  to  the  other,— the  feast  of  the  Passover,  and  the  fact 
that  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be  crucified. 

III.  Now  I  turn  to  a  third  point,  and  I  think  I  shall  have  your 
earnest  attention  upon  that,  because  there  is  something  in  it  which 
very  deeply  interests  all  of  us  who  belong  to  Christ.  I  have  already 
asked  you  to  admire  your  Saviour,  and  to  consider  your  sacrifice  ;  now, 
dear  friends,  adore  your  Lord. 

I  ask  you  to  adore  your  Lord,  first,  for  his  foresight.  *'  After  two 
days  .  .",  .  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be  crucified."  We  cannot 
prophesy  concerning  the  future.  The  man  who  can  tell  me  what  will 
happen  in  two  days  must  be  something  more  than  man.  As  to 
many  events,  it  is  as  difiicult  to  foresee  two  minutes  as  to  foresee  two 
centuries,  unless  there  be  some  causes  operating  which  must  produce 
certain  effects.  In  our  Lord's  case,  the  influences  seemed  all  to  point 
away  from  betrayal  and  crucifixion.  He  was  extremely  popular  ;  to 
all  appearance  he  was  beloved  by  the  mass  of  the  people ;  and  even 
the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  who  sought  his  death,  were  thoroughly 
afraid  of  him  ;  yet,  with  that  clear  foresight  of  the  eye  which  shines 
in  no  head  but  that  which  is  Divine,  Jesus  says,  "  After  two  days  the 
Son  of  man  is  betrayed.'*  He  sees  it  all  as  if  it  had  already  happened ; 
he  does  not  say,  "  shall  he,''  but  he  so  fully  sees  it,  he  is  such  a  true 
Seer,  that  he  says,  "  The  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be  crucified." 

Now,  beloved,  if  he  thus  foresaw  his  own  betrayal  and  death,  let  us 
adore  him,  for  he  can  foresee  our  trials  and  death.  He  knows  all  that 
is  going  to  happen  to  us;  he  knows  what  will  happen  to  me  within 
two  days.  I  bless  him  that  I  do  not ;  I  would  far  rather  that  the 
eyes  which  see  into  the  future  should  be  in  his  head  than  in  mine,  they 
are  safer  there.  But,  brother,  if  within  two  days,  or  two  months,^  or 
two  years,  you  are  to  pass  through  some  bitter  agony,  some  scourging 
and  buffeting,  which  looks  very  improbable  now,  you  may  not  see 
that  it  may  be  so,  but  there  is  One  who  sees  it.  The  sheep's  best  eyes 
are  in  the  shepherd's  head,  the  sheep  will  do  well  enough  if  he  can  see 
what  is  just  before  him,  especially  if  he  can  see  his  shepherd  ;  ^  that 
is  all  he  w^ants  to  see.  But  the  shepherd  can  see  into  the  cold  winter, 
the  shepherd  can  see  into  the  wild  wood  where  lurks  the  w^olf,  the 
shepherd  can  see  everything.  And  I  want  you,  dear  friends,  to  adore 
your  Lord  because,  if  in  his  humiliation  he  foresaw  his  betrayal  and 
death,  from  the  vantage  ground  of  his  glory  he  can  now  see  your 
griefs  and  your  woes  that  are  yet  in  reserve ;  and  it  ought  to  be 
enough  for  you  that  he  knows  all  about  you.  He  knows  what  your 
difficulty  will  be,  and  he  will  pray  for  you  that  your  faith  fail  not. 
Adore  your  Lord,  then,  for  his  foresight. 

I  want  you  next  to  adore  him  for  his  wonderful  providence.  There 
was  a  providence  which  surrounded  the  Christ  of  God  at  that  time ; 
it  was  according  to  the  divine  purpose  and  will  that  he  should  die 
at  the  passover,  and  at  that  particular  passover,  and  that  he  should 
die  by  being  betrayed,  and  by  being  crucified..  Without  entering 
into  the  question  of  the  responsibility  and  free  will  of  men,  I  am  sure 


.32  i£ETB,0¥OIJTAH  TABEILNAOLE   PULFIT. 

•that  the  providence  of  their  Lord  and  Master  wrought  this  all  out. 
I  wonder  that  they  did  not  take  up  stones  to  stone  him ;  but  they 
could  not,  for  he  must  be  crucified.  I  wonder  that  they  did  not  hire 
an  assassin,  for  there  were  plenty  in  those  days  who  would  have 
stabbed  him  for  a  shilling.  But  no  ;  he  must  be  crucified.  I  marvel 
that  they  had  not  slain  him  long  ago,  for  they  did  take  up  stones 
again  and  again  to  stone  him ;  but  his  hour  was  not  then  come. 
There  was  a  providence  working  all  the  while,  and  shaping  his  end  as 
it  shapes  ours.  He  was  immortal  till  his  work  was  done.  But  when 
the  two  days  of  which  he  spake  should  be  over,  he  must  die.  With 
cruel  and  wicked  hands,  and  of  their  own  voluntary  and  evil  will, 
they  crucified  and  slew  the  Christ;  yet  it  was  all  according  to  **the 
determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God."  I  never  j^et  pretended 
to  explain  how  free  agency  and  absolute  predestination  can  both  be 
true  ;  but  I  am  sure  that  they  are  both  true,  both  written  in  Scripture, 
and  both  facts.  To  reconcile  them,  is  no  business  of  mine  or  yours  ; 
but  to  admire  how  they  are  reconciled  in  fact,  is  a  business  of  yours 
.and  mine,  and  therefore  let  us  do  so  now. 

I  want  you,  next,  to  admire  your  Lord  by  recognizing  his  exfra- 
ordinary  correctnesa  as  a  Prophet.  Let  me  read  on  beyond  our  text : 
*'  Ye  know  that  after  two  days  is  the  feast  of  the  passover,  and  the 
Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be  crucified.  Then  assembled  together  the 
chief  priests,  and  the  scribes,  and  the  elders  of  the  people,  into  the 
palace  of  the  high  priest,  who  was  called  Caiaphas,  and  consulted 
that  they  might  take  Jesus  by  subtilty,  and  kill  him.  But  they  said, 
Not  on  the  feast  day,"— mark  that, — ''  Not  on  the  feast  day,  lest  there 
be  an  uproar  among  the  people."  Now,  note  this.  It  must  be  on  the 
feast  day,  and  it  shall  be  on  the  feast  day  ;  yet  they  said,  "  Not  on 
the  feast  day."  But  what  does  it  matter  what  they  say  ?  Do  you 
not  observe  how  they  were  checkmated  all  round,  how  their  purpose 
was  like  the  whistling  wind,  and  the  eternal  purpose  stood  firm  in 
every  particular?  They  said,  "We  will  take  him  by  subtilty,  and 
kill  him ;  "  but  they  did  not,  they  took  him  by  force.  They  said, 
<*  We  will  kill  him  ;  "  but  they  did  not,  for  he  died  by  the  hands  of 
the  Romans.  They  meant  to  slay  him  privately,  but  they  could  not, 
for  he  must  be  hung  up  before  high  noon  in  the  midst  of  the  people. 
And,  above  all,  they  said,  "  Not  on  the  feast  day.  Not  on  the  feast 
day."  I  think  I  hear  old  Caiaphas  there,  with  all  his  wisdom  and  all 
his  cunning,  saying,  "Not  on  the  feast  day,"  and  Annas  and  all  the 
priests  join  in  the  chorus,  *'  Not  on  the  feast  day.  Postpone  it  a  little 
till  the  million  have  departed,  the  vulgar  throng  who,  perhaps,  would 
make  a  riot  in  his  favour."  There  they  stood  with  their  broad- 
bordered  garments  and  their  phylacteries,  and  they  were  of  opinion 
that  what  Caiaphas  had  proposed,  and  Annas  had  seconded,  should  be 
carried  unanimously  :  "  Not  on  the  feast  day."  But  Christ  had  said, 
"  After  two  days  is  the  feast  day,  and  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to 
be  crucified."  We  do  not  know  how  it  all  came  to  be  hurried  on 
against  their  deliberate  will ;  but  Judas  ran  to  them  in  hot  haste,  and 
said,  "What  will  ye  give  me?  "  and  they  were  so  eager  for  Christ's 
death  that  they  overleaped  themselves.  "We  will  give  you  thirty 
pieces  of  silver,"  safd  they ;  and  they  weighed  them  out  to  him,  little 


"after  two  days  is  the  passovbr."  33 

thinking  how  quick  he  would  be  about  his  accursed  business.  Soon 
he  comes  back,  and  says,  "  He  is  in  the  garden ;  you  can  easily 
take  him  there  while  he  is  in  prayer  with  a  few  of  his  disciples ;  I 
will  conduct  you  thither ;  "  and  ere  long  the  deed  of  darkness  is  done. 
These  crafty,  cruel  men  had  said,  /'Not  on  the  feast  day;  "  but  it  was 
on  the  feast  day,  as  Jesus  had  foretold  that  it  would  be. 

Now,  beloved,  when  our  Lord  tells  us  anything,  let  us  always 
believe  it.  Whatever  may  appear  to  be  against  his  statements,  let  us 
make  nothing  of  it  all.  A  man  in  Jerusalem  at  that  time  might  have 
said,  ''The  Christ  cannot  be  put  to  death  unless  these  scribes  and 
elders  of  the  people  agree  to  it ;  and  you  can  see  that  they  have 
resolved  not  to  have  it  on  the  feast  day.  He  will  not  be  crucified  on 
the  passover,  the  whole  type  will  break  down,  and  it  will  be  shown 
that  he  is  not  what  he  professed  to  be."  Ah,  but  they  may  say,  "  Not 
on  the  feast  day,"  till  they  are  hoarse;  but  he  has  said,  "  After  two 
days  is  the  feast  day,  and  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be  crucified ;  " 
and  so  it  came  to  pass. 

Our  Lord  has  said  that  he  will  come  again  ;  yet  men  ask,  "  Where 
is  the  promise  of  his  coming  ?  "  Brothers,  be  you  sure  that  he  will 
come.  He  has  always  kept  his  word,  and  he  will  come,  as  he  said. 
Ah,  but  they  say  that  he  will  not  come  to  punish  the  ungodly  who 
have  defied  him ;  but  he  will !  The  Son  of  man  shall  sit  upon  the 
throne  of  his  glory,  and  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations ;  he  shall 
separate  them  the  one  from  the  other  as  a  shepherd  divideth  the 
sheep  from  the  goats,  and  he  will  say  to  those  on  his  left  hand,  "  Depart, 
ye  cursed,''  as  surely  as  he  will  say  to  those  on  his  right  hand,  "  Come, 
ye  blessed."  Every  jot  and  tittle  that  has  ever  fallen  from  the  lips  of 
Christ  is  sure  to  come  to  pass,  for  you  know  that  he  said,  "  Heaven 
and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  my  words  shall  not  pass  away."  Eest 
you  upon  the  eternal  purpose  of  Q-od,  and  the  faithful  promise  of 
Christ,  which  shall  never  fail ;  for  not  one  of  Christ's  words  shall  fall 
to  the  ground  unfulfilled.  Let  us  adore  him,  then,  as  our  true 
Prophet.  "  Yery  God  of  very  God,"  "  the  faithful  and  true  Witness," 
"  the  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth,"  we  do  adore  thee  this  very  hour  ! 

lY.  Now,  fourthly,  and  lastly,  dear  friends,  I  want  you  to  imitate 
Youu  Ex-;m:plar. 

I  will  not  detain  you  more  than  a  minute  or  two  upon  this  point ; 
but  I  want  you,  as  far  as  your  Lord  is  imitable,  to  imitate  him  in  the 
spirit  of  this  verse.  I  have  told  you  that  there  was  no  boasting  in 
him,  but  that  there  was  a  deep  calm  and  a  firm  resolve  even  in  the  imme- 
diate prospect  of  a  cruel  and  shameful  death  ;  and  I  think  that  you 
should  imitate  your  Lord  in  this  respect.  Suppose  that,  in  two  days, 
there  shall  come  a  "  post "  from  the  New  Jerusalem  to  tell  you  that  the 
silver  cord  is  about  to  be  loosed,  and  the  golden  bowl  to  be  broken, 
and  that  your  spirit  must  return  to  God  who  gave  it.  In  such  a  case, 
it  behoves  you,  dear  follower  of  Christ,  to  receive  that  message  with 
as  much  calmness  as  Christ  delivered  his  own  death-warrant,  though 
it  had  to  be  spoken  in  such  language  as  this  ;  "  Ye  know  that  after 
two  days  is  the  feast  of  the  passover,  and  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed 
to  be  crucified."  It  will  not  run  like  that  with  you ;  but  it  may  be 
that  in  two  days  consumption  will  end  in  hemorrhage,  or  that  old  age 

8 


Si  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

will  bring  down  the  frail  tent  of  your  mortality,  or  that  the  disease  which 
is  now  upon  you  will  drag  you  to  the  grave.  Well,  if  it  be  so  in  twa 
days, — ah,  if  it  were  so  in  two  hours,  or  two  minutes  ! — it  is  for  the 
child  of  God  to  say,  "  Thy  will  be  done,"  just  as  the  Master  did. 
Happy  was  that  woman  who  said,  "Every  morning,  before  I  come  down- 
stairs, I  dip  my  foot  in  the  river  of  death,  and  I  shall  not  be  afraid  to 
plunge  into  it  for  the  last  time."  They  who  die  daily,  as  we  all  should, 
are  always  ready  to  die.  I  like  Bengel's  notion  concerning  death. 
He  says,  **  I  do  not  think  that  a  Christian  should  make  any  fuss  about 
dying.  When  I  am  in  company,  and  somebody  comes  to  the  door, 
and  says,  'Mr.  Bengel  is  wanted,'  I  let  the  company  go  on  with 
their  talk,  and  I  just  slip  out,  and  I  am  gone.  Perhaps,  after  a  little 
while,  they  say,  *  Mr.  Bengel  is  gone.'  Yes,  that  is  all ;  and  that  i» 
how  I  would  like  to  die,  for  God  to  knock  at  my  door,  and  for  me  to 
be  gone,  without  making  any  ado  about  it." 

*'  Strangers  into  life  we  come, 
And  dying  is  but  going  home." 

I  do  not  think  that  there  ought  to  be  any  jerk  on  the  metals  when 
we  arrive  at  the  heavenly  terminus  ;  we  just  run  straight  on  into  th& 
shed  where  the  engine  stops, — nay,  into  the  glory,  where  we  shall 
rest  for  ever  and  ever.  I  think  I  have  heard  of  a  captain,  who  was 
so  skilled  that,  when  he  had  arranged  all  the  steering  gear,  he  had 
not  to  alter  a  point  for  thousands  of  miles ;  and  when  he  came  to  the 
harbour,  he  had  so  guided  the  vessel  that  he  sailed  straight  in.  If 
you  get  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  on  board  the  vessel  of  your  life,  you 
will  find  that  he  is  such  a  skilful  Steersman  that  you  will  never  have 
to  alter  your  course.  He  will  so  set  your  ship's  head  that,  between 
here  and  heaven,  there  will  be  nothing  to  do  but  to  go  right  on  ;  and 
then,  on  a  sudden,  you  will  hear  a  voice  saying,  *'  Furl  sail !  Let  go 
the  anchor ! "  You  will  hear  a  little  rattle  of  the  chain,  and  the 
vessel  will  be  still  for  ever  in  that  port  which  is  truly  called,  the  Fair 
Havens. 

That  is  how  it  should  be,  and  I  am  going  to  finish  by  saying  that 
I  believe  that  is  how  it  will  be.  If  I  say  to  you  that  it  ought  to  bo 
so,  you  will  perhaps  say  to  me,  "Ah,  sir,  but  I  am  often  subject  to 
bondage  through  fear  of  death !  "  Yes,  but  you  will  not  be  when  you 
come  to  die.  0  poor  Little-faith,  you  want  to  have  strength  now  to 
die  with !  But  God  knows  that  you  are  not  going  to  die  for  some  timo 
yet ;  so  what  would  you  do  with  dying  grace  if  he  were  to  give  it  to 
you  now  ?  Where  would  you  pack  it  up,  and  lay  it  by  ?  It  will  be 
quite  time  to  get  dying  grace  when  you  come  to  ^e.  Have  I  not  seen 
some  fidgety  old  folk  who  have  been  really  a  trouble  to  other  people 
through  their  getting  so  worried  and  anxious  ?  But  all  of  a  sudden 
there  has  come  upon  them  such  a  beautiful  quiet.  It  has  been  said, 
"  Oh,  grandma  is  so  different!  Something  is  going  to  happen,  we  feel 
sure."  One  day,  she  had  not  anything  to  trouble  her.  Everybody 
could  see  that  she  was  seriously  unwell ;  but  the  dear  old  eyes  sparkled 
with  unusual  brightness,  and  there  was  an  almost  unearthly  smUe  upon 
her  face,  and  she  said  at  night,  "  I  don't  feel  quite  as  well  as  usual  ;  I 
think,  to-morrow  morning,  I  shall  lie  a  little  later."     And  she  did  j 


EXPOSITIONS.  35 

SO  they  went  up  to  her.  She  said  that  she  had  had  a  blessed  night  ; 
she  did  not  know  whether  she  had  slept,  but  she  had  seen  in 
the  night  such  a  wondrous  sight,  though  she  could  not  describe 
what^  it  was  like.  They  all  gathered  round  the  bed,  for  they 
perceived  that  something  very  mysterious  had  happened  to  her; 
and  she  blessed  them  all,  and  said,  "Good-bye;  meet  me  in 
heaven ; "  and  she  was  gone.  And  they  have  said  to  me  after- 
wards, "  Our  dear  old  grandma  used  always  to  be  afraid  of  dying  ; 
but  it  did  not  come  to  much  when  she  really  came  to  die,  did  it  ?  "  I 
have  often  seen  it  so ;  it  is  no  strange  story  that  I  am  telling  you  now. 
A  Christian  man  has  been  so  unwise  as  to  be  always  fearing  that  he 
would  play  the  fool  when  he  came  to  die ;  and  yet,  when  it  has  come 
to  the  time  of  night,  the  dear  child  of  God,  who  had  long  been  in  the 
dark,  has  received  his  candle  ;  his  Lord  has  given  him  his  bed-room 
candle,  and  he  has  gone  upstairs,  and  by  its  light  he  has  passed  away 
into  the  land  where  they  need  no  candle,  neither  light  of  the  sun,  but 
the  Lord  God  giveth  them  light.  I  believe  that  many  of  us  will  die 
just  like  that ;  I  believe  that  you  will,  my  dear  sister.  I  believe  that 
you  will,  my  dear  brother.  As  your  days,  your  strength  shall  be  ;  and 
as  your  last  day  is,  so  shall  your  strength  be.  And  I  should  not 
wonder  if,  one  of  these  days,  you  or  I  will  be  heard  saying,  '<  Now, 
dear  friends,  the  doctor  has  told  me  that  I  cannot  live  long.  I  asked 
him  how  long,  and  he  said,  '  Perhaps,  a  week,'  and  I  was  a  little 
disappointed  that  I  had  to  wait  so  long."  I  should  not  wonder  if  those 
around  us  should  hear  us  say,  "  Well,  it  is  only  two  days  according  to 
their  reckoning,  and  perhaps  it  will  not  be  two  days.  I  think  that  I 
shall  go  next  Sunday  morning,  just  when  the  bells  are  ringing  the 
people  into  the  house  of  prayer  on  earth.  Just  then,  I  shall  hear 
heaven's  bells  ringing,  and  I  shall  say,  'Good-bye,'  and  be  where  I 
have  often  longed  to  be,  where  my  treasure  is,  where  my  Best-beloved 
is."     So  may  it  be  with  you  all,  for  Christ's  sake  !     Amen. 


IBxpositions  tig  €.  3g.  Spurgeon. 

LUKE    IV.    16—30;   akd  JOHN  VIII.    37—59.   (R.V.) 

We  will  read,  from  the  Revised  Version,  two  passages  which  record 
attempts  made  to  kill  our  Lord  before  his  time  had  come.  You  will  see,, 
from  the  sermon,  why  we  read  them. 

Luke  iv.  Verses  16— 2  L  And  he  came  to  Nazareth,  where  he  had  been 
brought  up :  and  he  entered,  as  his  custom  was,  'into  the  syn/igogue  on  the 
sabbath  day,  and  stood  up  to  read.  And  there  was  delivered  unto  him  the  book 
of  the  prophet  Isaiah.  And  he  opened  the  book,  and  found  the  place  where  it 
was  written,  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me,  because  he  anointed  me  to 
preach  good  tidings  to  the  poor  :  he  hath  sent  me  to  proclaim  release  to  the 
captives,  and  recovering  of  sight  to  the  blind,  to  set  at  liberty  them  that  are 
bruised,  to  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord.  And  he  closed  the  book, 
and  gave  it  bach  to  the  attendant,  and  sat  down :  and  the  eyes  of  all  in  the 
synagogue  were  fastened  on  him.  And  he  began  to  say  unto  them,  To-day  hath 
this  scripture  been  fulfilled  in  your  ears. 

Alas,  not  in  their  hearts  I  They  had  heard  Christ  read  the  prophecy  that 
related  to  himself,  but  they  had  not  accepted  its  message. 


JJb  METRO POLITAK  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

22 — 27.  And  all  bare  himwitnesa,  and  wondered  at  the  words  of  grace  which 
proceeded  out  of  his  mouth :  and  they  said,  Is  not  this  Joseph* s  son  f  And  he 
said  unto  them,  Doubtless  ye  will  say  unto  me  this  parable,  Physician,  heal 
thyself:  whatsoever  toe  have  heard  done  at  Capernaum,  do  also  here  in  thine  own 
country.  And  he  said.  Verily  I  say  unto  you.  No  prophet  is  acceptable  in  his 
own  country.  But  of  a  truth  I  say  unto  you.  There  were  many  widows  in  Israel 
in  the  days  of  Elijah,  when  the  heaven  was  shut  up  three  years  and  six  months, 
when  there  came  a  great  famine  over  all  the  land ;  and  unto  none  of  them  was 
Elijah  sent,  bat  only  to  Zarephath,  in  the  land  of  Sidon^  unto  a  woman  that  was 
a  widow.  And  there  were  many  lepers  in  Israel  in  the  time  of  Elisha  the 
prophet y  and  none  of  them  was  cleansed,  but  only  Naaman  the  Syrian, 

Thus  the  Saviour  taught  God's  absolute  right  to  deal  out  his  mercies  as 
he  pleases.  To  that  great  doctrine  of  divine  sovereignty,  Christ's  hearers 
would  not  submit,  even  as  meiny  in  the  present  day  will  not  yield. 

28.     And  they  were  all  filed  with  wrath  in  the  synagogue, — 

They  admired  Christ's  style  of  speech,  but  when  he  came  to  that  man- 
humbling  and  God- glorifying  doctrine,  they  were  filled  with  wrath, — 

28 — 30.  As  they  heard  these  things y  and  they  rose  up,  and  cast  him  forth 
otit  of  the  city,  and  led  him  unto  the  brow  of  the  hill  whereon  their  city  was 
built,  that  they  might  throw  him  down  headlong.  But  he  passing  through  the 
midst  of  them  went  his  way. 

John  viii.  37—59.  I  know  that  ye  are  Abraham's  seed;  yet  ye  seek  to  kill 
me,  because  my  word  hath  not  free  course  in  you.  I  speak  the  things  which  1 
have  seen  with  my  Father :  and  ye  also  do  the  things  which  ye  heard  from 
your  father.  They  answered  and  said  unto  him.  Our  father  is  Abraham. 
Jesus  saith  unto  them.  If  ye  were  Abraham's  children,  ye  would  do  the  works 
of  Abraham.  Bat  now  ye  seek  to  kill  me,  a  man  that  hath  told  you  the  truth, 
which  I  heard  from  Ood :  this  did  not  Abraham.  Ye  do  the  works  of  your 
father.  They  said  unto  him.  We  were  not  born  of  fornication ;  we  have  one 
Father,  even  Ood.  Jesus  said  unto  them.  If  Ood  were  your  Father,  ye  would 
love  me  :  for  I  came  forth  and  am  come  from  Ood  ;  for  neither  have  1  come  oj 
myself,  but  he  sent  me.  Why  do  ye  not  understand  my  speech  f  Even  because 
ye  cannot  hear  my  word.  Ye  are  of  your  father  the  devil,  and  the  lusts  oJ 
your  father  it  is  your  will  to  do.  He  was  a  murderer  from  the  beginning,  and 
stood  not  in  the  truth,  because  there  is  no  truth  in  him.  When  he  speaketh  a 
lie,  he  speaketh  of  his  own  :  for  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  thereof  But 
because  I  say  the  truth,  ye  believe  me  not.  Which  of  you  convicteth  me  of  sin  ? 
If  1  say  truth,  why  do  ye  not  believe  me  ?  He  that  is  of  Ood  heareth  the  words 
of  Ood  :  for  this  cau^e  ye  hear  them  not,  because  ye  are  not  of  Ood.  The  Jews 
answered  and  said  unto  him,  Say  we  not  well  that  thou  art  a  Samaritan,  and 
hast  a  devil  ?  Jesus  answered,  I  have  not  a  devil ;  but  I  honour  my  Father,  and 
ye  dishonour  me.  But  I  seek  not  mine  own  glory  :  there  is  one  that  seeketh  and 
judgeth.  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  If  a  man  keep  my  word,  he  shall 
never  see  death.  The  Jews  said  unto  him.  Now  we  know  that  thou  hast  a  devil. 
Abraham  is  dead,  and  the  prophets  ;  and  thou  sayest.  If  a  man  keep  my  word, 
he  shall  never  taste  of  death.  Art  thou  greater  than  our  father  Abraham, 
which  is  dead  f  and  the  prophets  are  dead  :  whom  makest  thou  thyself?  Jesus 
answered.  If  I  glorify  myself,  my  glory  is  nothing :  it  is  my   Father  that 


Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  my  day  ;  and  he  saw  it,  and  was  glad.  The  Jews 
therefore  said  unto  him.  Thou  art  not  yet  fifty  years  old,  and  hast  thou  seen 
Abraham  f  Jesus  said  unto  them.  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you.  Before 
Abraham  was,  I  am.  They  took  up  stones  therefore  to  cast  at  him ;  but  Jesus 
hid  himself,  and  went  out  of  the  temple. 


THE   BLOOD   SHED   FOR  MANY. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  July  3rd,  1887,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"  For  this  is  my  blood  of  the  new  testament,  which  is  shed  for  many  for  the  remission- 
of  sins."— Matthew  xxvi.  28. 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  then  alive,  sitting  at  the  table,  and  yet, 
pointing  to  the  cup  filled  with  red  wine,  he  said,  "This  is  my  blood, 
which  is  shed  for  many."  This  proves  that  he  could  not  have  mtended 
that  the  wine  was  literally  his  blood.  Surely  it  is  no  longer  necessary 
to  refute  the  gross  and  carnal  dogma  of  transubstantiation,  which  is 
obviously  absurd.  There  sat  the  living  Lord  at  the  supper,  with  his 
blood  in  his  veins,  and  therefore  the  wine  could  not  literally  be  his 
blood.  Value  the  symbol,  but  to  confound  it  with  the  thing  symbolized 
would  draw  into  the  idolatrous  worship  of  a  piece  of  bread. 

Our  Lord  spoke  of  his  blood  as  shed  when  as  yet  the  nails  had  not 
pierced  his  hands  and  feet,  and  the  spear  had  not  broached  his  side.  Is 
not  this  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  our  Lord  was  so  taken  up 
with  the  thought  of  our  redemption  by  his  death  that  he  speaks  of  that 
as  done  which  he  was  so  resolved  to  do  ?  Enjoying  loving  intercourse 
with  his  chosen  disciples,  he  spake  freely;  his  heart  did  not  study 
accuracy  so  much  as  feeling;  and  so,  in  speech  as  in  feeling,  he  ante- 
dated his  great  work  of  atonement,  and  spoke  of  it  as  done.  To  sec 
forth  the  future  intent  of  the  blessed  ordinance  of  the  Lord's  Supper 
he  must  of  necessity  treat  his  death  as  an  accomplished  fact ;  and  his 
complete  absorption  in  his  work  made  it  easy  and  natural  for  him  to  do 
BO.     He  ignores  moods  and  tenses ;"  his  work  is  before  him. 

By  the  use  of  such  language,  our  Lord  also  shows  us  the  abiding 
presence  of  the  great  sacrifice  as  a  power  and  an  influence.  He  is 
the  "  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,"  and  theretore 
he  speaks  of  his  blood  as  shed.  In  a  few  hours  it  would  be  literally 
poured  forth  ;  but  long  ages  before,  the  Lord  God  had  regarded  it  as  done. 
In  full  confidence  in  the  great  Sm-ety  that  he  would  never  draw  back 
from  the  perfect  fulfilment  of  his  engagements,  the  Father  saved  multi- 
tudes in  virtue  of  the  future  sin-offering.  He  communed  with  myriads 
of  saints  on  the  strength  of  the  purification  which  would  m  the  ^jlness 
of  time  be  presented  by  the  great  High  Priest  Could  not  the  Father 
No     1,971 


38  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

trnst  his  Son  ?  He  did  so,  and  by  this  act  set  ns  a  great  example 
of  faith.  God  himself  is  in  very  deed  the  Father  of  the  faithful,  seeing 
that  he  himself  reposed  the  utmost  confidence  in  Jesus,  and  because 
of  what  he  would  yet  do  in  the  pouring  out  of  his  soul  unto  death,  he 
''opened  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers."  What,  ray  soul! 
canst  thou  not  trust  the  sacrifice  now  that  it  has  been  presented  ?  If 
the  foresight  of  it  was  enough  for  God,  is  not  the  consummation  of  it 
enough  for  thee  ?  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,"  who  even  before  he  died 
was  described  as  taking  away  the  sin  of  the  world.  If  this  was  so  before 
he  went  to  Calvary,  how  surely  is  it  so  now  that  he  has  said  in  verity 
and  truth,  **  It  is  finished  "  ! 

Dear  friends,  I  am  going  to  preach  to  you  again  upon  the  comer-stone 
of  the  gospel.  How  many  times  will  this  make,  I  wonder  ?  The  doc- 
trine of  Christ  crucified  is  always  with  me.  As  the  Roman  sentinel  in 
Pompeii  stood  to  his  post  even  when  the  city  was  destroyed,  so  do  I 
stand  to  the  truth  of  the  atonement  though  the  church  is  being  buried 
beneath  the  boiling  mud-showers  of  modern  heresy.  Everything  else 
can  wait,  but  this  one  truth  must  be  proclaimed  with  a  voice  of  thunder. 
Others  may  preach  as  they  will,  but  as  for  this  pulpit,  it  shall  always 
resound  with  the  substitution  of  Christ.  "  God  forbid  that  I  should 
glory  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Some  may  con- 
tinually preach  Christ  as  an  example,  and  others  may  perpetually 
discourse  upon  his  coming  to  glory :  we  also  preach  both  of  these,  but 
mainly  we  preach  Christ  crucified,  to  the  Jews  a  stumbling-block,  and  to 
the  Q  reeks  foolishness ;  but  to  them  that  are  saved  Christ  the  power  of 
God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God. 

You  have  before  you  a  cup,  filled  with  wine,  which  Jesns  has  just 
blessed,  and  presented  to  his  disciples.  As  you  look  into  its  rosy 
depths,  hear  him  speak  of  the  cup  as  his  blood ;  for  thus  he  would  teach 
as  a  solemn  lesson. 

I.  Note,  first,  the  importance  of  the  precious  blood  of  Christ. 
The  vital  importance  of  the  great  truth  of  the  death  of  Christ  as  a 
vicarious  sacrifice,  is  set  before  us  in  this  cup,  which  is  the  memorial 
of  his  blood  shed  for  many. 

Blood  represents  suffering ;  but  it  goes  further,  and  suggests  suffer- 
ing unto  death.  "  The  blood  is  the  life  thereof,"  and  when  blood  is 
too  copiously  shed  death  is  suggested.  Remember  ttiat  in  the  sacred 
supper  you  have  the  bread  as  a  separate  emblem  of  the  body,  and  ctien 
the  wine  as  a  separate  symbol  of  tne  blood  :  thus  you  have  a  clear 
picture  of  death,  since  the  blood  is  separated  from  the  flesh.  **  As 
often  as  ye  eat  this  bread,  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  show  the  Lord's 
death."     Both  acts  are  essential. 

Upon  the  death  of  Christ  you  are  invited  to  fix  your  attention,  and 
upon  that  only.  In  the  suffering  of  our  Lord  unto  death  we  see  the 
boundless  stretch  of  his  love.  "  Greater  love  liath  no  man  than  this, 
that  he  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends."  Jesus  could  not  be  more 
loving  to  us  than  to  yield  himself  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the 
cross.  0  my  Lord,  in  thy  bloody  sweat,  and  in  the  piercing  of  thy 
hands,  and  feet,  and  side,  I  see  the  highest  proof  of  thy  love  !  Here 
£  see  that  Jesus  "loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me."  Beloved,  I  beg 
jou  to  consider  often  and  lovinijly  the  sufferings  of  your  Redeemer,  unto 


THE   BLOOD    SHED   FOR   MANY.  39 

the  pouring  out  of  his  heart's  blood.  Go  with  him  to  Gethsemane,  and 
thence  to  the  house  of  Caiaphas  and  Annas,  and  then  to  Pilate's  hall, 
and  Herod's  place  of  mockery  !  Behold  your  Lord  beneath  the  cruel 
€courges,  and  in  the  hands  of  the  executioners  upon  the  hill  of  shame. 
Forget  not  one  of  the  sorrows  which  were  mingled  in  the  bitter  cup  of 
his  crucifixion — its  pain,  its  mockery,  its  shame.  It  was  a  death  reserved 
for  slaves  and  felons.  To  make  its  deep  abysses  absolutely  bottomless, 
he  was  forsaken  even  of  his  God.  Let  the  darkness  of  "  Eloi,  Eloi, 
lama  sabachthani,"  bear  down  upon  your  spirit  till,  as  you  sink  in  awe, 
you  also  rise  in  love.  He  loved  you  better  than  he  loved  himself  !  The 
cup  means  love,  even  to  the  shedding  of  his  blood  for  you. 

It  means  something  more.  We  have  called  our  Lord,  in  our  hymn, 
"  Giver  of  life  for  life,"  and  that  is  what  this  cup  means.  He  gave  up 
his  life  that  we  might  live.  He  stood  in  our  place  and  stead  in  the  day 
of  Jehovah's  wrath,  receiving  into  his  bosom  the  fiery  sword  which  was 
unsheathed  for  our  destruction.  The  pouring  out  of  his  blood  has  made 
our  peace  with  God.  Jehovah  made  the  soul  of  his  only-begotten  an 
offering  for  sin,  that  the  guilty  might  be  cleared.  "He  hath  made 
him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin  ;  that  we  might  be  made  the 
righteousness  of  God  in  him."  That  is  what  the  wine  in  the  cup  means  : 
it  means  the  death  of  Jesus  in  our  stead.  It  means  the  blood  poured 
out  from  the  heart  of  the  incarnate  God,  that  we  might  have  fellowship 
with  God,  the  sin  which  divided  us  being  expiated  by  his  death. 

Our  blessed  Saviour  would  have  us  hold  his  death  in  great  reverence : 
it  is  to  be  our  chief  memory.  Both  the  emblems  of  the  Lord's  Supper 
«et  forth  the  Saviour's  death.  This  peculiarly  Christian  ordinance 
(teaches  nothing  if  it  does  not  teach  this.  Christ's  death  for  men  is  the 
great  doctrine  of  the  church.  We  profess  ourselves  partakers  of  the 
merit  of  his  death  when  we  come  to  this  table  ;  our  Lord's  death  is  then 
remembered,  shown,  declared,  testified,  and  trusted  in.  Evidently  the 
Lord  Jesus  means  us  to  treat  the  fact  of  his  death  as  a  truth  to  be 
made  pre-eminently  prominent:  he  would  not  have  instituted  an 
rdinance  specially  to  remind  us  of  the  shedding  of  his  bloud,  if  he  had 
•not  regarded  it  as  the  forefront  of  his  whole  earthly  career. 

The  other  ordinance  of  our  holy  faith  also  sets  forth  our  Lord's  death. 
Are  we  not  ♦* Buried  with  him  by  baptism  into  death  ?  "  Is  not  baptism 
an  emblem  of  his  being  immersed  beneath  the  waves  of  sorrow  and 
-death  ?  Baptism  shows  us  that  participation  in  Christ's  suffering  by 
which  we  begin  to  live  ;  the  Lord's  Supper  shows  us  that  participation 
in  Christ's  suffering  by  which  that  life  is  sustained.  Both  institutions 
jpoint  to  his  death. 

Besides,  beloved,  we  know  from  Holy  Scripture  that  this  doctrine  of 
-the  death  of  Christ  is  the  very  core  of  Christianity.  Leave  out  the 
cross,  and  you  have  killed  the  religion  of  Jesus.  Atonement  by  the 
blood  of  Jesus  is  not  an  arm  of  Christian  truth  ;  it  is  the  heart  of 
it.  Even  as  the  Lord  said  of  the  animal, "  The  blood  is  the  life  thereof," 
«o  is  it  true  of  the  gospel,  the  sacrificial  death  of  Jesus  is  the  vital 
point  of  our  profession.  I  know  nothing  of  Christianity  without  the 
blood  of  Christ.  No  teaching  is  healthy  which  throws  the  cross  into 
the  background.  The  other  day,  when  I  was  enquiring  about  the  welfare 
■  of  a  certain  congregation,  my  informant  told  me  that  there  had  been 


40  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

few  additions  to  the  church,  although  the  minister  was  a  man  of  ability 
and  industry.  Furthermore,  he  let  me  see  the  reason  for  failure,  for  he 
added,  "  I  have  attended  there  for  several  years,  and  during  all  that 
time  I  do  not  remember  hearing  a  sermon  upon  the  sacrifice  of  Christ* 
The  atonement  is  not  denied,  but  it  is  left  out."  If  this  be  so,  what  is 
to  become  of  our  churches  ?  If  the  light  of  the  atonement  is  put  under 
a  bushel,  the  darkness  will  be  dense.  In  omitting  the  cross  you  have 
cut  the  tendon  Achilles  of  the  church:  it  cannot  move,  nor  even  standi 
when  this  is  gone.  Holy  work  falls  to  the  ground:  it  faints  and  dies 
when  the  blood  of  Jesus  is  taken  away.  The  cross  must  be  put  in  the 
front  more  than  ever  by  the  faithful,  because  so  many  are  unfaithfal. 
Let  us  endeavour  to  make  amends  for  the  dishonour  done  to  our  divine 
Master  by  those  who  deny  or  dishonour  his  vicarious  sacrifice :  let  us 
abide  steadfast  in  this  faith  while  others  waver,  and  preach  Christ 
crucified  if  all  else  forbear.  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace  be  to  all  who  exalt 
Christ  crucified ! 

This  remembrance  of  the  death  of  Christ  must  be  a  constant  remem- 
hrance.  The  Lord's  Supper  was  meant  to  be  a  frequent  feast  of  fellow- 
ship. It  is  a  grievous  mistake  of  the  church  when  the  communion  i» 
held  but  once  in  the  year,  or  once  in  a  quarter  of  a  year ;  and  I  cannot 
remember  any  Scripture  which  justifies  once  in  the  month.  I  should 
not  feel  satisfied  without  breaking  bread  on  every  Lord's-day.  It  has 
come  to  me  even  oftener  than  once  a  week ;  for  it  has  been  ray  delight 
to  break  bread  with  many  a  little  company  of  Christian  friends.  When- 
ever this  Supper  is  celebrated,  we  declare  that  "Christ  died  for  our  sins 
according  to  the  Scriptures."  We  cannot  think  of  that  death  too  often. 
Never  was  man  blamed  in  heaven  for  preaching  Christ  too  much  ;  nay^ 
not  even  on  earth  to  the  sons  of  God  was  the  cross  ever  too  much  spoken 
of.  Outsiders  may  say,  "  This  man  harps  only  upon  one  string."  Do 
you  wonder  ?  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God,  and  it  specially 
shows  its  hatred  by  railing  at  the  cross.  Saintly  ones  find  here,  in  the- 
perpetual  monotony  of  the  cross,  a  greater  variety  than  in  all  other 
doctirines  put  together.  Preach  you  Christ,  and  Curist,  and  Christ,  and 
Christ,  and  nothing  else  but  Christ,  and  opened  ears  shall  find  in  your 
ministry  a  wondrous  harmony  of  linked  sweetnesses,  a  charming  perfect- 
ness  of  all  manner  of  delicious  voices.  All  good  things  lie  within  the- 
compass  of  the  cross ;  its  outstretched  arms  overshadow  the  whole  world 
of  thought;  from  the  east  even  unto  the  west  it  sheds  a  hallowed) 
influence  ;  meanwhile,  its  foot  is  planted  deep  in  the  eternal  mysteries, 
and  its  top  pierces  all  earth-born  clouds,  and  rises  to  the  throne  of  the 
Most  High.  Christ  is  lifted  up  upon  the  cross,  that  he  may  draw  all 
men  unto  him ;  and  if  we  desire  to  draw  them,  this  must  be  our  magnet. 

Beloved,  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  should  be  had  by  us  in  vivid 
remembrance.  There  is  something  to  me  most  homely  about  that  cup 
filled  with  the  fruit  of  the  vine.  The  bread  of  the  Supper  is  the  bread 
of  our  common  meal,  and  the  wine  is  the  usual  attendant  of  feasts. 
That  same  pure  blood  of  the  grape  which  is  set  on  our  sacramental 
table  I  drink  with  my  friend.  Look  at  those  ruby,  ruddy  drops, 
suggesting  your  Lord's  own  blood.  I  had  not  dared  to  invent  the 
symbol,  nor  might  any  man  of  mortal  mould  have  ventured  on  such  a 
thing,  lest  he  should  seem  to  bring  that  august  death  down  to  our  lowly 


THE   BLOOD   SHED    FOR  MANY.  41 

level;  but  in  infinite  condescension  Jesus  himself  chooses  the  symbol, 
and  while  by  its  materialism  he  sets  forth  the  reality  of  the  sacrifice, 
by  its  commonness  he  shows  how  freely  we  may  partake  thereof.  He 
would  not  have  us  know  him  after  the  flesh,  and  forget  the  spiritual 
nature  of  his  griefs ;  but  yet  he  would  have  us  know  that  he  was  in  a 
real  body  when  he  bled,  and  that  he  died  a  real  death,  and  became  most 
truly  fit  for  burial ;  and  therefore  he  symbolizes  his  blood,  not  by  some 
airy  fancy,  or  mystic  sign,  but  by  common  wine  in  the  cup.  Thus 
would  he  reach  us  by  our  eye  and  by  our  taste,  using  two  gates  of 
our  nature  which  lead  up  to  the  castle  of  the  heart,  but  are  not  often 
the  King's  roadway  thereto.  0  blessed  Master,  dost  thou  arrange  to 
teach  us  so  forcibly  ?  Then  let  us  be  impressed  with  the  reality  of  the 
lesson,  and  never  treat  thy  passion  as  a  thing  of  sentiment,  nor  make 
it  a  myth,  nor  view  it  as  a  dream  of  poesy.  Thou  shalt  be  in  death 
most  real  to  us,  even  as  is  that  cup  whereof  we  drink. 

The  dear  memorials  of  our  Lord's  blood-shedding  are  intended  for  a 
p&rsonal  remembrance.  There  is  no  Lord's  Supper  except  as  the  wine 
touches  the  lip,  and  is  received  into  the  communicant's  own  self.  All 
must  partake.  He  says,  "  Drink  ye  all  of  it."  You  cannot  take  the 
Lord's  Supper  by  deputy  or  representative ;  you  must  each  of  you  ap- 
proach the  table,  and  personally  eat  and  drink.  Beloved,  we  must 
come  into  personal  contact  with  the  death  of  Christ.  This  is  essential. 
We  must  each  one  say,  "  He  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me."  In 
his  blood  you  must  be  personally  washed ;  by  his  blood  you  must  be 
personally  reconciled  to  God ;  through  his  blood  you  must  personally 
have  access  to  God ;  and  by  his  blood  you  must  personally  overcome  the 
enemy  of  your  souls.  As  the  Israelite's  own  door  must  be  smeared  with 
the  blood  of  the  Paschal  lamb,  so  must  you  individually  partake  of  the 
true  Sacrifice,  and  know  each  one  for  himself  the  power  of  his 
redemption. 

As  it  is  personal,  it  is  a  charming  fact  that  it  is  a  happy  remembrance, 
Onr  remembrance  of  Christ  is  chastened  with  repentance,  but  it  is  also 
perfumed  with  faith.  The  Lord's  Supper  is  no  funeral  meal,  but  a 
festival;  most  fitly  do  we  begin  it  with  the  giving  of  thanks,  and  close 
it  with  a  hymn.  It  is  by  many  called  the  "  Eucharist,"  or  the  giving 
of  thanks:  it  is  not  a  fast,  but  a  feast.  My  happiest  moments  are  scent 
with  the  King  at  his  table,  when  his  oanner  over  me  is  love.  The 
death  of  Christ  is  a  well-spring  of  solemn  joy.  Before  our  great  Sacrifice 
died,  the  best  token  of  his  death  was  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats. 
See  how  the  victims  writhe  in  death !  The  sacrificial  knife  does  terrible 
work  at  the  foot  of  the  altar ;  it  is  hard  to  stand  by,  and  see  the  creatures 
bleed.  After  our  Lord's  death  was  over,  the  blood  of  animals  was  not 
the  type,  but  the  blood  of  the  grape.  That  which  was  terrible  m  prospect 
is  joyous  in  remembrance.  That  which  was  blood  in  the  shedding  is 
wine  in  the  receiving.  It  came  from  him  with  a  wound,  but  it  comes 
to  us  with  a  blessing.  His  blood  is  our  song  in  the  house  of  our 
pilgrimage,  and  it  shall  add  the  best  music  to  our  heavenly  harmonies 
as  we  sing  before  the  throne :  "  Unto  him  that  hath  loved  us,  and 
washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood;  to  him  be  glory  for  ever 
and  ever."  If  our  Lord  Jesus  has  made  the  memory  of  his  love  to  be 
more  sweet  than  wine,  let  us  never  turn  from  it  as  though  it  had 


42  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

f)ecome  a  distasteful  theme.     Let  us  find  our  choicest  pleasures  at  the 
•cross. 

Once  more,  our  Saviour  meant  us  to  maintain  the  doctrine  of  his 
death,  and  the  shedding  of  his  blood  for  the  remission  of  sins,  even  to 
the  end  of  time,  for  he  made  it  to  be  of  perpetual  remembrance.  We 
drink  this  cup  **  until  he  comq."  If  the  Lord  Jesus  had  foreseen  with 
approbation  the  changes  in  religious  thought  which  would  be  brought 
About  by  growing  "culture,"  he  would  surely  have  arranged  a  change 
of  symbols  to  suit  the  change  of  doctrines.  Would  he  not  have  warned 
us  that,  towards  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century,  men  would  become 
so  "  enlightened "  that  the  faith  of  Christendom  must  of  necessity 
take  a  new  departure,  and  therefore  he  had  appointed  a  change  of 
sacramental  memorials?  But  he  has  not  warned  us  of  the  coming  of 
those  eminently  great  and  wise  men  who  have  changed  all  things,  and 
abolished  the  old-fashioned  truths  for  which  martyrs  died.  Brethren, 
I  do  not  believe  in  the  wisdom  of  these  men,  and  their  changes  I  abhor ; 
but  had  there  been  any  ground  for  such  changes,  the  Lord's  Supper  would 
not  have  been  made  of  perpetual  obligation.  The  perpetuity  of  ordi- 
nances indicates  a  perpetuity  of  doctrine.  But  hear  the  moderns  talk 
— "  The  Apostles,  the  Fathers,  the  Puritans,  they  were  excellent  men,  no 
doubt,  but  then,  you  see,  they  lived  before  the  uprise  of  those  wonderful 
scientific  men  who  have  enlightened  us  so  much."  Let  me  repeat  what 
I  have  said.  If  we  had  come  to  a  new  point  as  to  believing,  should  we 
not  have  come  to  a  new  point  as  to  the  ordinances  in  which  those  beliefs 
are  embodied?  I  think  so.  The  evident  intent  of  Christ  in  giving  us 
settled  ordinances,  and  especially  in  settling  this  one  which  so  clearly 
"Commemorates  his  bloodshedding,  was  that  we  might  know  that  the 
truth  of  his  sacrifice  is  for  ever  fixed  land  settled,  and  must  unchangeably 
remain  the  essence  of  his  gospel.  Neither  nineteen  centuries,  nor  nineteen 
thousand  centuries,  can  make  the  slightest  difference  in  this  truth,  nor 
in  the  relative  proportion  of  this  truth  to  other  truths,  so  long  as  this 
dispensation  lasts.  Until  he  comes  a  second  time  without  a  sin-off  ring 
unto  salvation,  the  grand  work  of  his  first  coming  must  be  kept  first 
and  foremost  in  all  our  teaching,  trusting,  and  testifying.  As  in  the 
southern  hemisphere  the  cross  is  the  mariner's  guide,  so,  under  all 
skies,  is  the  death  of  our  Redeemer  the  polestar  of  our  hope  upon  the 
sea  of  life.  In  life  and  in  death  we  will  glory  in  the  cross  of  Christ, 
and  never  be  ashamed  of  it,  be  we  where  we  may. 

II.  Secondly,  note  well  the  connection  op  the  blood  op  Christ 
WITH  the  covenant.  Read  the  text  again  :  **  This  is  my  blood  of  the 
new  testament.''  The  translation  would  be  better,  '*  This  is  my  blood 
of  the  covenant." 

What  is  this  covenant  ?  The  covenant  is  that  which  I  read  to  you 
just  now  in  Jeremiah  xxxi.  33  :  **This  shall  be  the  covenant  that  I  will 
make  with  the  house  of  Israel ;  After  those  days,  saith  the  Lord,  1  will 
put  ray  law  in  their  inward  parts,  and  write  it  in  their  hearts;  and 
will  be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  my  people."  See  also  Jeremiah 
xxxii.  40  :  "  And  I  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  them,  that 
I  will  not  turn  away  from  them,  to  do  them  good  ;  but  I  will  put  my 
fear  in  their  hearts,  that  they  shall  not  depart  from  me."  Turn  also  to 
Ezekiel  xi.  19  :  "I  will  put  a  new  spirit  within  you;  and  I  will  take 


'     THE  BLOOD   SHED  FOR  MANY.  43 

'the  stony  heart  out  of  their  flesh,  and  will  give  them  an  heart  of  flesh.'* 
Look  in  the  same  prophecy  at  xxxvi.  26 :  "A  new  heart  also  will  I  give 
you,  and  a  new  spirit  will  I  put  within  you  :  and  I  will  take  away  the 
stony  heart  out  of  your  flesh,  and  I  will  give  you  an  heart  of  flesh." 
What  a  Magna  Oharta  is  this !  The  old  covenant  saith,  "  Keep  the  law 
and  live."  The  new  covenant  is,  "  Thou  shalt  live,  and  I  will  lead  thee 
to  keep  my  law,  for  I  will  write  it  on  thine  heart."  Happy  men  who 
know  their  standing  under  this  covenant ! 

What  has  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  to  do  with  this  covenant  ?  It 
has  everything  to  do  with  it,  for  the  covenant  could  never  have  been  made 
apart  from  the  blood  of  Jesus.  Atonement  was  taken  for  granted  in 
the  establishment  of  the  covenant.  No  one  else  could  have  stood  as  our 
representative,  to  fulfil  our  side  of  the  covenant,  except  the  Lord  Jesus 
Ohrist  ;  and  even  he  could  only  have  performed  that  covenant  by 
fihedding  his  blood.  In  that  cup  you  see  the  emblem  of  the  blood  which 
made  the  covenant  possible. 

Moreover,  the  blood  of  Jesus  makes  the  covenant  sure.  His  death 
has  fulfilled  man's  side  of  the  covenant,  and  God's  part  standeth  sure. 
The  stipulation  of  the  covenant  is  fulfilled  in  Christ,  and  now  the  tenor 
of  it  is  pure  promise.  Note  how  the  "  shalls  "  and  "wills"  follow  each 
other  in  quick  succession.  An  arrangement  of  absolute  grace  on  God's 
part  towards  the  undeserving  sons  of  men  is  now  in  full  action  through 
the  sacrifice  of  Christ. 

This  covenant  of  grace,  when  rightly  understood,  exerts  a  blessed 
influence  over  the  minds  of  men  conscious  of  sin.  The  chaplain  of  a 
jail,  a  dear  iriend  of  mine,  once  told  me  of  a  surprising  case  of  con- 
version in  which  a  knowledge  of  the  covenant  of  grace  was  the  chief 
instrument  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  My  friend  had  under  his  charge  a  man 
most  cunning  and  brutal.  He  was  singularly  repulsive,  even  in  com- 
parison with  other  convicts.  He  had  been  renowned  for  his  daring,  and 
for  the  utter  absence  of  all  feeling  when  committing  acts  of  violence. 
I  think  he  had  been  called  *' the  king  of  the  garotters."  The 
chaplain  had  spoken  to  him  several  times,  but  had  not  succeeded 
even  in  getting  an  answer.  The  man  was  sullenly  set  against  all 
instruction.  At  last  he  expressed  a  desire  for  a  certain  book,  but  as 
it  was  not  in  the  library  the  chaplain  pointed  to  the  Bible,  which 
was  placed  in  his  cell,  and  said,  "  Did  you  ever  read  that  Book  ?  "  He 
gave  no  answer,  but  looked  at  the  good  man  as  if  he  would  kill  him. 
The  question  .was  kindly  repeated,  with  the  assurance  that  he  would 
find  it  well  worth  reading.  *'  Sir,"  said  the  convict,  "  you  would 
not  ask  me  such  a  question  if  you  knew  who  I  was.  What  have 
I  to  do  with  a  Book  of  that  sort  ?  "  He  was  told  that  his  character 
was  well  known  to  the  chaplain,  and  that  for  this  very  reason  he 
recommended  the  Bible  as  a  Book  which  would  suit  his  case,  "It 
would  do  me  no  good,"  he  cried,  "  I  am  past  all  feeling."  Doubling  up 
his  fist  he  struck  the  iron  door  of  the  cell,  and  said,  "  My  heart  is  as 
hard  as  that  iron;  there  is  nothing  in  any  book  that  will  ever  touch 
me."  "  Well,"  said  the  chaplain,  "  You  want  a  new  heart.  Did  you 
■ever  read  the  covenant  of  grace?"  To  which  the  man  answered 
auUenly  by  enquiring  what  he  meant  by  such  talk.  His  friend  replied, 
*^  Listen  to  these  words — *  A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  you,  and  a 


44  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

new  spirit  will  I  put  within  you.'  "  The  words  struck  the  man  with 
amazement,  as  well  they  might;  he  asked  to  hare  the  passage  found 
for  him  in  the  Bible.  He  read  the  words  again  and  as:ain;  and  when 
the  chaplain  came  back  to  him  next  day,  the  wild  beast  was  tamed. 
"Oh,  sir,"  he  said,  "I  never  dreamed  of  such  a  promise  I  I  never 
believed  it  possible  that  God  would  speak  in  such  a  way  as  that  to  men. 
If  he  gives  me  a  new  heart  it  will  be  a  miracle  ot  mercy ;  and  yet  I 
think,"  he  said,  '*  he  is  going  to  work  that  miracle  upon  me,  for  the 
very  hope  of  a  new  nature  is  beginning  to  touch  me  as  I  never  was 
touched  before."  That  man  became  gentle  in  manner,  obedient  to 
authority,  and  childlike  in  spirit.  Though  my  friend  has  nothing  left 
of  the  sanguine  hopes  he  once  entertained  of  converted  criminals,  he  yet 
believes  that  in  this  case  no  observer  could  have  questioned  the  thorough 
nature  of  the  work,  and  ^  et  the  only  means  was  the  doctrine  of  the 
covenant.  My  rebellious  heart  is  not  affected  by  the  fact  that  God 
commands  me  to  do  this  or  that ;  but  when  he  declares  free  and  full  for- 
giveness, and  goes  on  to  promise  love  and  favour,  and  renewal  of  nature, 
I  feel  broken  down.  How  can  I  rebel  against  one  who  does  such 
wonders  in  me,  and  designs  such  great  things  for  me  ? 

"  Dissolved  by  his  goodness,  I  fall  to  the  ground. 
And  weep  to  the  praise  of  the  mercy  I've  found." 

How  dear  and  precious  this  makes  the  blood  of  Christ,  since  it  is  the 
blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant  I  Coming  under  this  blessed  covenant, 
we  henceforth  adore  the  fulness  of  that  grace  which,  at  the  cost  of  the 
most  preciuus  of  alMives,  has  made  this  arrangement  for  unworthy 
men. 

Yoii  will  perhaps  say  to  me,  "  Why  did  our  translators  use  the  word 
*  testament '  in  our  Authorized  Version  ?  "  They  were  hardly  so  wise 
as  usual  in  this  instance,  for  "covenant"  is  the  better  word  of  the 
two  Lo  set  forth  the  original;  but  yet  the  idea  of  a  testament  is  there 
also.  The  original  may  signify  either  or  both.  The  word  "  settlement," 
which  has  dropped  out  of  use  nowadays,  was  often  employed  by  our 
Calvinistic  forefathers  when  they  spoke  of  the  everlasting  arrangement 
of  grace.  The  word  settlement  might  take  in  both  covenant  and 
testament — there  is  a  covenant  of  grace,  but  the  covenant  stipulation 
being  fulfilled  by  our  Lord  Jesus,  the  arrangement  becomes  virtually 
a  testament,  through  which,  by  the  will  of  God,  countless  blessings 
are  secured  to  the  heirs  of  salvation.  The  blood  of  Jesus  is  the  seal 
of  the  covenant,  and  transforms  its  blessings  into  bequests  of  love, 
entailed  upon  believers.  The  settlement  or  arrangement,  by  which  God 
can  be  just  and  yet  the  Justifier  of  the  ungodly,  and  can  deal  with 
believers,  not  on  terms  of  law,  but  on  terms  of  pure  grace,  is  established 
by  the  sacrifice  of  our  Lord.  0  my  brethren,  as  God's  covenanted  ones, 
drink  ye  of  the  cup  with  joy,  and  renew  your  pledge  with  the  Lord 
your  God  I 

II L     A  third  point  comes  up  in  the   text  very  manifestly :    the 

BLOOD    HAS    AN    INTIMATE    CONNKCTION     WITH     REMISSION.      The    text 

says,  **  This  is  my  blood  of  the  new  covenant,  which  is  shed  for  many  for 
the  remission  of  sins."  Jesus  suffering,  bleeding,  dying,  has  procured 
for  sinners  the  forgiveness  of  their  sins. 


THE  BLOOD   SHED   FOR  MANY.  45 

Of  what  sins  ?  Of  all  sins  of  every  sort  and  kind,  however  heinous, 
aggravated,  and  multiplied.  The  blood  of  the  covenant  takes  every  sin 
Away,  be  it  what  it  may  ;  there  was  never  a  sin  believingly  confessed 
and  taken  to  Christ  that  ever  bafQed  his  power  to  cleanse  it.  This 
fountain  has  never  been  tried  in  vain.  Murderers,  thieves,  liars, 
adulterers,  and  what  not,  have  come  to  Jesus  by  penitence  and  faith, 
and  through  the  merit  of  his  sacrifice  their  sins  have  been  put  away._ 

Of  what  nature  is  the  remission  ?  It  is  pardon,  freely  given,  acting 
immediately,  and  abiding  for  ever,  so  that  there  is  no  fear  of  the  guilt 
ever  being  again  laid  to  the  charge  of  the  forgiven  one.  Through  the 
precious  blood  our  sins  are  blotted  out,  cast  into  the  depths  of  the  sea, 
and  removed  as  far  fro  n  us  as  the  east  is  from  the  west.  Our  sins 
cease  to  be  ;  they  are  made  an  end  of;  they  cannot  be  found  against  us 
any  more  for  ever.  Yes,  hear  it,  hear  it,  0  wide  earth  !  Let  the  glad 
news  startle  thy  darkest  dens  of  infamy,  there  is  absolute  remission  of 
sins  !  The  precious  blood  of  Christ  cleanseth  from  all  sin :  yes,  turns 
the  scarlet  into  a  whiteness  which  exceeds  thut  of  the  newly-fallen  snow 
— a  whiteness  which  never  can  be  tarnished.  Washed  by  Jesus,  the 
blackest  of  sinners  shall  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  the  all- 
seeing  Judge  without  spot. 

How  is  it  that  the  blood  of  Jesus  effects  this  ?  The  secret  lies  in  the 
vicarious  or  substitutionary  character  of  our  Lord's  suffering  and  death. 
Because  he  stood  in  our  place  the  justice  of  God  is  vindicated,  and  the 
threatening  of  the  law  is  falfilled.  It  is  now  just  for  God  to  pardon 
sin.  Christ's  bearing  the  penalty  of  human  sin  instead  of  men  has 
made  the  moral  government  of  God  perfect  in  justice,  has  laid  a  basis 
for  peace  of  conscience,  and  has  rendered  sin  immeasurably  hateful, 
though  its  punishment  does  not  fall  upon  the  believer.  This  is  the 
great  secret,  this  is  the  heavenly  news,  the  gospel  of  salvation,  that 
through  the  blood  of  Jesus  sin  is  justly  put  away.  Oh,  how  my 
yery  soul  loves  this  truth !  Therefore  do  I  speak  it  in  unmistakable 
terms. 

And  for  what  end  is  this  remission  of  si7is  secured  ?  My  brethren,  if 
there  were  no  other  end  for  the  remission  of  sins  but  its  own  self,  it 
would  be  a  noble  purpose,  and  it  would  be  worth  preaching  every  day 
of  our  lives ;  but  it  does  not  end  here.  We  mistake  if  we  think  that 
the  pardon  of  sins  is  God's  ultimatum.  No,  no ;  it  is  but  a  beginning, 
a  means  to  a  further  purpose.  He  forgives  our  sins  with  the  design  of 
curing  our  sinfulness.  We  are  pardoned  that  we  may  become  holy. 
God  forgives  the  sin  that  he  may  purify  the  sinner.  If  he  had  not 
aimed  at  thy  holiness,  there  had  not  been  so  imperative  a  necessity  for 
an  atonement ;  but  to  impress  thee  with  the  guilt  of  sin,  to  make  thee 
feel  the  evil  which  sin  hath  wrought,  to  l»t  thee  know  thine  obligation 
to  divine  love,  the  Lord  has  not  forgiven  thee  without  a  sacrifice.  Ah, 
what  a  sacrifice !  He  aims  at  the  death  of  thy  sinfulness,  that  thou 
mayest  henceforth  love  him,  and  seiTC  him,  and  crucify  the  lusts 
.which  crucified  thy  Lord.  The  Lord  aims  at  working  in  thee  the 
likeness  of  his  dear  Son.  Jesus  hath  saved  thee  by  his  self-sacrificing 
obedience  to  justice,  that  thou  mayest  yield  thy  whole  soul  to  God,  and 
be  willing  to  die  for  the  upholding  of  the  kingdom  of  loye  and  truth. 
The  death  of  Christ  for  thee  pledges  thee  to  be  dead  to  sin,  that  by  his 


46.  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

resurrection  from  the  dead  thou  mayest  rise  into  newness  of  life,  and  so 
become  like  thy  Lord.  Pardon  by  blood  aims  at  this.  Djst  thou  tatcb 
the  thought  ?  If  thou  believest  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  God's  intent 
is  to  make  thee  like  the  Firstborn  among  many  brethren,  and  to  work 
in  thee  everything  that  is  comely  and  of  good  report.  Even  this  is  not 
all  :  he  hath  a  further  design  to  bring  thee  into  everlasting  fellow8hij> 
with  himself.  He  is  sanctifying  thee,  that  thou  mayest  behold  his  face, 
and  that  thou  mayest  be  fit  to  be  a  comrade  of  his  only-begotten 
Son  throughout  eternity.  Thou  art  to  be  the  choice  and  dear  companion 
of  the  Lord  of  love.  He  has  a  throne  for  thee,  a  mansion  and  a  crown 
for  thee,  and  an  immortality  of  such  inconceivable  g'ory  and  blessednesa- 
that,  if  thou  didst  but  form  even  a  distant  conception  of  it,  no  golden, 
apple  of  earth  would  turn  thee  aside  Irom  pursuing  the  prize  of  thy 
high  calling.  Oh,  to  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord !  For  ever  to  behold, 
his  face  !  I  fail  to  reach  the  height  of  this  great  argument  I  See,  my 
brethren,  to  what  the  blood  of  your  Lord  destines  you.  0  my  souV 
bless  God  for  that  one  cup,  which  reminds  thee  of  the  great  sacrifice,. 
and  prophesies  to  thee  thy  glory  at  the  right  hand  of  God  for  ever  ! 

IV.  I  cannot  forget  to  notice,  in  closing,  the  connection  of  the 
BLOOD  WITH  MEN.  We  are  told  in  the  text  that  this  blood  is  bhed 
"/or  many  for  the  remission  of  sins.'*  In  that  large  word  "  many  **' 
let  us  exceedingly  rejoice.  Christ's  blood  was  not  shed  for  the  handful 
of  apostles  alone.  There  were  but  eleven  of  them  who  really  partook  of 
the  blood  symbolized  by  the  cup.  The  Saviour  does  not  say,  "  This  is 
my  blood  which  is  shed  for  you,  the  favoured  eleven  ; "  but  *'  shed  for 
many."  Jesus  did  not  die  for  the  clergy  alone.  I  recollect  in  Martin 
Luther's  life  that  he  saw,  in  one  of  the  Romish  churches,  a  picture  of 
the  Pope,  and  the  C'lrdinals,  and  bishops,  and  priests,  and  monks,  and 
friar.s,  all  on  board  a  ship.  They  were  all  safe,  every  one  of  them.  As 
for  the  laity,  poor  wretches,  they  were  struggling  in  the  sea,  and  many 
of  them  drowning.  Only  those  wore  saved  to  whom  the  good  men  in 
the  ship  were  so  kind  as  to  hand  out  a  rope  or  a  plank.  That  is  not 
our  Lord's  teaching :  his  blood  is  shed  "  for  many,"  and  not  for  the  few. 
He  is  not  the  Christ  of  a  caste,  or  a  class,  but  the  Christ  of  all  con- 
ditions of  men.  His  blood  is  shed  for  many  sinners,  that  their  sins  may 
be  remitted. 

Those  in  the  upper  room  were  all  Jews,  but  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
said  to  them,  **  This  blood  is  shed  for  many,''  to  let  them  see  that  he  did 
not  die  alone  for  the  seed  of  Abraham,  but  for  all  races  of  men  that 
dwell  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  "  Shed  for  many."  His  eye,  I  doubt 
not,  glanced  at  these  far-off  islands,  and  at  the  vast  lands  beyond  the 
western  sea.  He  thought  of  Africa,  and  India,  and  the  land  of  Sinim. 
A  multitude  that  no  man  can  number  gladdened  the  far-seeing  and  fore- 
seeing eye  of  the  Redeemer.  He  spoke  with  joyful  emphasis  when  he 
said,  "shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins."  Believe  in  the 
immeasurable  results  of  redemption.  Whenever  we  are  making 
arrangements  for  the  preaching  of  this  precious  blood,  let  us  make  them^ 
on  a  large  scale.  The  mansion  of  love  should  be  built  for  a  large  family/ 
Let  us  not  sing — 

"  We  are  a  garden  walled  around, 
Pray  "keep  the  walls  most  tight  and  sound." 


THE  BLOOD   SHED   FOR  MANY.  47 

Let  ns  expect  to  see  large  numbers  brought  within  the  sacred  enclosure* 
We  must  jet  break  forth  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left.  Th& 
masses  must  be  compelled  to  come  in.  This  blood  is  shed  for  many. 
A  group  of  half-a-dozen  converts  makes  us  very  glad,  and  so  it 
should;  but  oh,  to  have  half-a-dozen  thousand  at  once!  Why  not? 
This  blood  is  shed  "  for  many."  Let  us  cast  the  great  net  into 
the  sea.  You  young  men,  preach  the  gospel  in  the  streets  of  this 
crowded  city,  for  it  is  meant  for  many !  You  who  go  from  door  to 
door,  do  not  think  you  can  be  too  hopeful,  since  your  Saviour's  blood  is 
shed  for  many,  and  Christ's  "many"  is  a  very  great  many.  It  is 
shed  for  all  who  ever  shall  believe  in  him — shed  for  thee,  sinner^ 
if  thou  wilt  now  trust  him.  Only  confess  thy  sin,  aud  trust  Christ, 
and  be  assured  that  Jesus  died  in  thy  place  and  stead.  It  is  shed 
for  many,  so  that  no  man  or  woman  born  shall  ever  trust  Christ  in  vain, 
or  find  the  atonement  insufficient  for  him.  Oh,  for  a  large-hearted 
faith,  so  that  by  holy  effort  we  may  lengthen  our  cords,  and  strengthen 
our  stakes,  expecting  to  see  the  hoasehold  of  our  Lord  become  exceed- 
ing numerous !  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  shall  be 
satisfied ;  by  his  righteousness  shall  he  justify  many,  for  he  shall  bear 
their  iniquities.  Dwell  on  that  word  '*  many,"  and  let  it  nerve  you  for 
far-reaching  labours. 

Y.  Now  note  the  connection  of  the  blood  with  ourselves. 
Bear  hearer,  are  you  among  the  many  ?  Why  are  you  not  ?  May  his 
grace  bring  you  to  trust  in  him,  and  you  may  not  doubt  that  you  are 
among  the  many.  '*  Ah,"  say  you,  "  that  is  what  I  am  listening  for ! 
How  can  I  partake  in  the  effect  of  this  sacrifice  ?  "  Seest  thou  that 
wine-cup  which  I  set  before  th^e  just  now  ?  How  art  thou  to  enjoy  that 
wine  which  fills  the  cup  ?  Its  ruddy  drops,  how  are  they  to  be  thine? 
The  matter  is  very  simple.  I  think  I  see  thee  take  the  chalice  in  thine 
hand,  and  raise  it  to  thy  mouth.  Thou  drinkest,  and  the  deed  is  done. 
This  is  no  mystery.  Bread  and  wine  are  ours  by  eating  and  drinking ; 
Christ  is  ours  by  our  receiving  him.  The  merit  of  his  precious  blood 
becomes  ours  by  that  simple  child-like  faith  which  accepts  Jesus  to  be 
our  all.  We  say,  "  Here  it  is  ;  I  believe  in  it  ;  I  take  it  ,•  I  accept  it 
as  my  own."  It  is  yours.  No  man  can  take  from  you  that  which  yen 
have  eaten  and  drunk.  Christ  is  yours  for  ever  if  you  receive  him  inta 
your  heart. 

If  you  have  any  question  as  to  whether  you  have  drunk,  I  will  tell 
you  how  to  solve  it — drink  again!  If  you  have  been  eating,  and  you  hava 
really  forgotten  whether  you  ha;ve  eaten  or  not— such  things  do  occur  to 
busy  men,  who  eat  but  little ;  if,  I  say,  you  would  be  sure  that  you  have 
eaten,  eat  again  I  If  thou  wilt  be  assured  that  thou  hast  believed  in 
Jesus,  lelieve  again  I  Whenever  thou  hast  any  doubt  about  whether 
Christ  is  thine,  take  him  over  again.  I  like  to  begin  again.  Often  I 
find  the  best  way  of  going  forward  is  to  go  back  to  my  first  faith  in 
Jesus  and  as  a  sinner  renew  my  confidence  in  my  Saviour.  "  Oh,"  saya 
the  devil,  "  thou  art  a  preacher  of  the  gospel,  but  thou  dost  not  know 
it  thyself."  Atone  time  I  used  to  argue  with  the  accuser;  but  he  is  not 
worth  it,  and  it  is  by  no  means  profitable  to  one's  own  heart.  We 
cannot  convert  or  convince  the  devil  ;  it  is  better  to  refer  him  to  our 
Lord.    When  he  tells  me  I  am  not  a  saint,  I  answer,  "Well,  what  am  I,. 


48  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

then?"  '*  A  sinner,"  says  he.  "  Well,  80  are  you  !  "  "  Ah ! '*  saith  he, 
**  you  will  be  lost."  *'  No,"  say  I,  "  that  is  why  I  shall  not  be  lost, 
since  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  and  I  therefore 
trust  in  him  to  save  me."  This  is  what  Martin  Luther  calls  cutting 
the  devil's  head  off  with  his  own  sword,  and  it  is  the  best  coarse  you 
can  follow. 

You  say,  "  If  I  take  Christ  to  myself  as  a  man  takes  a  cup  and 
drinks  the  contents,  am  I  saved?"  Yes,  thou  art.  "  How  am  I  to 
know  it  ?  "  Know  it  because  God  says  so.  **  He  that  belie veth  in  him 
hath  everlasting  life."  If  I  did  not  feel  a  pulse  of  that  life  (as  I  did 
not  at  first),  I  nevertheless  would  believe  that  I  had  it,  simply  on  the 
strength  of  the  divine  assurance.  Since  my  conversion,  I  have  felt  the 
pulsings  of  a  life  more  strong  and  forcible  than  the  life  of  the  most 
vigorous  youth  that  ever  ran  without  wearmess ;  but  there  are  times 
when  it  is  not  so.  Just  now  I  feel  the  heavenly  life  joyously  leaping 
within  me;  but  when  I  do  not  feel  it,  I  fall  back  on  this:  God  has  said 
**  He  that  believeth  in  him  hath  everlasting  life."  God's  words  against 
all  my  feelings !  I  may  get  into  a  fainting  fit,  and  my  circumstances  may 
operate  upon  my  heart,  as  this  hot  weather  operates  upon  my  body,  and 
make  me  feel  dull  and  sleepy ;  but  this  cannot  make  the  Word  of  God  of 
none  effect.  I  go  back  to  the  Book,  and  believe  tbe  bare  Word  of  the 
Lord,  "  He  that  believeth  in  him  hath  everlasting  life."  That  is  enough 
for  me.  I  believe,  and  therefore  I  live.  Oar  inward  experience  is  fine 
corroborative  evidence,  but  God's  testimony  is  the  best  foundation  our 
confidence  can  have. 

I  recollect  a  story  told  of  William  Dawson,  whom  our  Wesleyan 
friends  used  to  call  Billy  Dawson,  one  of  the  best  preachers  that  ever 
entered  a  pulpit.  He  once  gave  out  as  his  text,  "  Through  this  man  is 
preached  unto  you  the  forgiveness  of  sins."  When  he  had  given  out 
his  text  he  dropped  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  pulpit,  so  that  nothing 
could  be  seen  of  him,  only  there  was  a  voice  heard  saying,  *•  Not  the 
man  in  the  pulpit,  he  is  out  of  sight,  but  the  Man  in  the  Book.  The 
Man  described  in  the  Book  is  the  Man  through  whom  is  preached  unto 
you  the  forgiveness  of  sins."  I  put  myself  aad  you,  and  everybody 
else  out  of  sight,  and  I  preach  to  you  the  remission  of  sins  through 
Jesus  only.  I  would  sing  with  the  children,  **  Nothing  but  the  blood 
of  Jesus."  Shut  your  eyes  to  all  things  but  the  cross.  Jesus  died, 
and  rose  again,  and  went  to  heaven,  and  all  your  hope  must  go  with 
him !  Come,  my  hearer,  take  Jesus  by  a  distinct  act  of  faith  this 
morning !  May  God  the  Holy  Ghost  constrain  thee  to  do  so,  and  then 
thou  mayest  go  on  thy  way  rejoicing  !    So  be  it  in  the  name  of  Jesus. 


Portions   of    Scripture    read    before    Sermon— 
Matthew  xxvi.  14—30;  Jeremiah  xxxi.  31—37. 


Hymns  FiiOM  ♦♦Ouii  Own  Hymn  Book"— 429,  296. 


SOEROW  AT  THE  CROSS  TURNED  INTO  JOY. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  November  3rd,  1878,  by 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    metropolitan    TABERNACIiB,    NEWINGTON. 


"  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  That  ye  shall  weep  and  lament,  but  the  world? 
shall  rejoice  :  and  ye  shall  be  sorrowful,  but  your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy. 
A  woman  when  she  is  in  travail  hath  sorrow,  because  her  hour  is  come  :  but  as  soon 
as  she  is  delivered  of  the  child,  she  remembereth  no  more  the  anguish,  for  joy  that 
a  man  is  born  into  the  world.  And  ye  now  therefore  have  sorrow  ;  but  I  will  see 
you  again,  and  your  heart  shall  rejoice,  and  your  joy  no  man  taketh  from  you." — 
John  xvi.  20—22. 

We  were  singing  just  now  a  hymn  in  which  the  first  verse  started  a 
difficult  question — 

"  '  It  is  finish'd  ;'  shall  we  raise 

Songs  of  sorrow,  or  of  praise  ? 

Mourn  to  see  the  Saviour  die. 

Or  proclaim  his  victory  ?" 

The  case  is  very  well  argued  in  the  second  and  third  verses — 

"  If  of  Calvary  we  tell,  , 

How  can  songs  of  triumph  swell  ? 
If  of  man  redeem'd  from  woe, 
How  shall  notes  of  mourning  flow  ? 

**  Ours  the  guilt  which  pierced  his  side, 
Ours  the  sin  for  which  he  died  ; 
But  the  blood  which  flow'd  that  day 
Wash'd  our  sin  and  gviilt  away." 

The  conclusion  at  which  we  arrived  in  the  concluding  verse  seems  to  me 
to  be  the  right  one — 

»  '*  Lamb  of  God !  Thy  death  hath  given 

Pardon,  peace,  and  hope  of  heaven  : 
'  It  is  finish'd  ;'  let  us  raise 
Songs  of  thankfulness  and  praise  !" 

The  chief  thought  connected  with  the  Eedeemer's  death  should  be  that 

of  grateful  praise.     That  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  died  upon  the  cross  is  a 

very  natural  cause  for  sorrow,  and  well  may  they  who  pierced  him,  and 

No.  1,442.  4 


^Q  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

we  are  all  among  the  number,  look  unto  him  and  mourn  for  their  sin, 
and  be  in  bitterness  for  him  as  one  that  is  in  bitterness  for  his  firstborn. 
Before  we  know  that  we  are  pardoned  our  grief  may  well  be  exceeding 
heavy,  for  till  sin  is  put  away  we  stand  guilty  of  the  Saviour's  blood. 
While  our  souls  are  only  conscious  of  our  guilty  share  in  the  Redeemer's 
blood,  we  may  well  stand  aghast  at  the  sight  of  the  accursed  tree,  but  the 
case  is  altered  when  by  faith  we  discern  the  glorious  fruit  of  our  Lord's 
sufferings,  and  know  that  on  the  cross  he  saved  us  and  triumphed  in  the 
deed.    The  feeling  of  sorrow  at  the  sight  of  the  crucified  Saviour  is  one 
to  be  cultivated  up  to  a  certain  point,  especially  if  we  take  care  to  avoid 
mere  sentiment  and  turn  our  grief  into  repentance :  then  it  is  "  godly 
sorrow,"  which  worketh  after  a  godly  sort,  and  it  is  likely  to  create  in 
us  an  intense  horror  of  sin,  and  a  strong  determination  to  purge  our- 
selves from   all  fellowship  with  the  works  of  darkness.      We  do  not 
therefore  condemn  those  who  frequently  preach  upon  the  sufferings  of 
our  Lord,  with  the  view  of  exciting  emotions  of  grief  in  the  hearts  of 
their  hearers,  for  such  emotions  have  a  softening  and  sanctifying  in- 
fluence if  attended  by  faith,  and  directed  by  sound  wisdom.     There  is, 
however,  a  middle  path  in  everything,  and  this  needs  to  be  followed,  for 
we  believe  that  such  preaching  may  be  carried  too  far.     It  is  most  re- 
markable and  instructive  that  the  apostles  do  not  appear  in  their  sermons 
or  epistles  to  have  -spoken  of  the  death  of  our  Lord  with  any  kind  of 
regret.     The  gospels  mention  their  distress  during  the  actual  occurrence 
of  the  crucifixion,  but  after  the  resurrection,  and  especially  after  Pente- 
cost, we  hear  of  no  such  grief     I   can  scarcely  find  a  passage  from 
which   I   could  preach  a    sermon  upon   sorrow   on    account  of   the 
death  of  Jesus,  if  I   confine  myself  to  the  sayings  and  writings  of 
the  apostles ;  on  the  contrary,  there  are  many  expressions  which  treat  of 
the  crucifixion  in  the  spirit  of  exulting  joy.     Remember  the  well-known 
exclamation  of  Paul—"  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory  save  m  the  cross 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."     He  had,  no  doubt,  as  vivid  an  idea  of  the 
agonies  of  our  Lord  as  any  of  us  have  ever  attained,  and  yet,  instead  of 
saying,  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  cease  to  weep  at  the  sight  of  my 
crucified  Master,"  he  declares  that  he  glories  in  his  cross.     The  death 
of  Jesus  was  to  him  a  thing  to  rejoice  in,  and  even  to  glory  in ;  he  kept 
no  black  fasts  to  commemorate  the  world's  redemption.     Note  well  the 
exalted  key  in  which  he  speaks  of  our  Lord's  death  in  the  epistle  to  the 
Colossians:   "Blotting  out  the  handwriting  of  ordinances  that  was 
against  us,  which  was  contrary  to  us,  and  took  it  out  of  the  way,  nailing 
it  to  his  cross ;  and  having  spoiled  principalities  and  powers,  he  made  a 
show  of  them  openly,  triumphing  over  them  in  it."     When  you  turn  to 
John's  ep^tles,  where  most  of  all  pathos  and  tenderness  would  naturaUy 
abound,  Toil  hear  no  weeping  and  wailing,  but  he  speaks  of  the  cleansing 
blood,  whivjh  is  the  very  centre  of  the  great  sacrifice,  in  a  calm,  quiet, 
happy  manner,  which  is  far  removed  from  bursting  grief  and  flowing 
tears.     He  say  .  "  If  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  he  is  in  the  light,  we  have 
fellowship  one  with  another,  and   the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son 
cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."     This  allusion  to  the  blood  of  atonement 
rather  suggests  joy  and  peace  than  woe  and  agony.     "  This  is  he,    saith 
John,  "  that  came  by  water  and  blood,  even  Jesus  Christ ;  not  by  water 
only,  but  by  water  and  blood;"  and  it  is  evidently  to  him  a  theme  of 


SORROW   AT   THE   CROSS   TURNED   INTO  JOY.  ,-61 

congi*atulation  and  delight  rather  than  a  cause  for  sorrow  that  Jesus  did 
come  by  blood  as  well  as  by  water.     So  Peter,  also,  when  he  mentions 
the  death  of  his  Lord  ^nd  Master,  speaks  of  "the  precious  blood  of 
Ohrist,"  but  not  in  words  of  sadness,  and  he  describes  our  Lord's  bearing 
our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,  but  not  in  the  language  of  lament. 
He  says  of  those  w^ho  suffered  for  the  gospel,  "  Rejoice,  inasmuch  as  ye 
■are  partakers  in  Christ's  sufferings."     Now,  if  he  finds  joy  in  those 
sufferings  of  ours  which  are  in  fellowship  with  the  sufferings  of  Christ, 
much  more  I  gather  did  he  find  ground  for  rejoicing  in  the  sufferings 
of  Christ  himself.     I  do  not  believe  that  the  "three  hours'  agony,"  the 
darkened  church,  the  altar  in  mourning,  the  toUing  of  a  bell,  and  all 
;the  other  mock  funereal  rites  of  superstition  derive  even  the  least  en- 
couragement from  the  spirit  and  language  of  the  apostles.     Those  prac- 
tical charades  in  which  the  crucifixion  is  mimicked  in  many  churches  on 
Good  Friday  are  more  worthy  of  the  heathen  women  weeping  for  Tham- 
muz,-or  of  Baal's  priests  crying  and  cutting  themselves  with  knives,  than  of 
a  Christian  assembly  who  know  that  the  Lord  is  not  here,  for  he  is  risen. 
Let  us  mourn  by  all  means,  for  Jesus  died ;  but  by  no  means  let  us 
make  mourning  the  prominent  thought  in  connection  with  his  death,  if 
we  have  obtained  thereby  the  pardon  of  our  sins.     The  language  of  our 
;text  allowed  and  yet  forbade  sorrow ;  it  gave  permission  to  weep,  but 
:only  for  a  little  while,  and  then  it  forbade  all  further  weeping  by  the  pro- 
mise to  turn  the  sorrow  into  joy.     "Ye  shall  weep  and  lament,"  that  is, 
his  disciples,  while  he  was  dying,  and  dead  and  buried,  would  be  sorely 
'distressed.     "And  ye  shall  be  sorrowful,  but  your  sorrow  shall  be  turned 
into  joy;"  their  grief  would  end  when  they  saw  him  risen  from  the  dead; 
and  so  it  did,  for  we  read, "  Then  were  the  disciples  glad  when  they  saw  the 
Lord."     The  sight  of  the  cross  to  their  unbelief  was  sadness,  and  sadness 
only,  but  now  to  the  eye  of  faith  it  is  the  gladdest  sight  that  ever  the 
liuman  eye  can  rest  upon  :  the  cross  is  as  the  light  of  the  morning, 
w^hich  ends  the  long  and  dreary  darkness  which  covered  the  nations.    Oh, 
wounds  of  Jesus,  ye  are  as  stars,  breaking  the  night  of  man's  despair. 
'Oh,  spear,  thou  hast  opened  the  fountain  of  healing  for  mortal  woe.     Oh, 
•crown  of  thorns,  thou  art  a  constellation  of  promises.     Eyes  that  were  red 
with  weeping  sparkle  with  hope  at  the  sight  of  thee,  0  bleeding  Lord. 
As  for  thy  tortured  body,  0  Emmanuel,  the  blood  which  dropped  therefrom 
cried  fi'om  the  ground,  and  proclaimed  peace,  pardon,  Paradise  to  all 
believers.     Though  laid  in  the  grave  by  thy  weeping  friends,  thy  body, 
O  divine  Saviour,  is  no  longer  in  Joseph's  tomb,  for  thou  art  risen  from  the 
•dead,  and  we  find  in  the  songs  of  resurrection  and  ascension  an  abundant 
solace  for  the  griefs  of  thy  death.     Like  a  woman  to  whom  a  son  is  born, 
we  forget  the  travail  for  the  joy  of  the  glorious  birth  which  the  church 
-and  the  world  may  now  gaze  upon  with  the  utmost  delight  as  they  behold 
in  Jesus  "  the  firstborn  from  the  dead." 

The  subject  for  this  morning,  then,  you  will  readily  guess  is,  how  far 
we  should  sorrow  for  the  death  of  Jesus,  and  how  much  further  we  are 
permitted  to  rejoice  therein.  The  first  point  will  be,  the  death  of  our  Lord 
was  and  still  is  a  theme  for  sorroiv ;  but  secondly,  that  sorroiv  is  trans- 
muted into  joy.  When  we  have  meditated  upon  these  two  points  we  shall 
for  a  little  space  notice  a  general  princi'ple  which  underlies  all  holy  sorrow 
as  well  as  this  particular  form  of  it. 


52  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

I.  First,  then,  the  death  of  our  Lord  was  and  is  a  themb 
FOR  sorrow.  I  make  a  point  of  saying  it  tvas  so,  because  during  the 
three  days  of  the  Saviour's  burial  there  was  more  cause  for  distress 
than  there  can  be  now  that  he  is  risen.  To  the  disciples  first  ot  aU 
the  death  of  Jesus  was  the  loss  of  his  personal  p-esence.  It  was  a  great 
dehghtto  that  little  family  to  have  the  Lord  always  among  them  as  their 
father  and  their  teacher,  and  it  was  a  great  grief  to  think  that  they 
should  no  more  hear  his  loving  voice,  or  catch  the  smile  of  his  benig- 
nant countenance.  It  brought  untold  comforts  to  them  to  be  able  k)  |o 
to  him  with  all  their  questions,  to  fly  to  him  in  every  moment  of  difti- 
culty,  to  resort  to  him  in  every  hour  of  sorrow.  Happy,  happy  disciples, 
to  have  such  a  Master  always  in  their  midst,  communing  with  them 
in  love,  guiding  them  by  his  perfect  example,  animating  them  by  his 
glorious  presence,  relieving  all  their  wants  and  guarding  them  from  all 
ills  Do  you  wonder  that  their  hearts  were  heavy  at  the  prospect  of  hi& 
ffoincr  away  from  them?  They  felt  that  they  would  be  sheep  without  a 
shepherd :  orphan  children  bereft  of  their  best  friend  and  helper.  Do 
you  wonder,  I  say,  that  they  wept  and  lamented  when  the  Rock  of  their 
confidence,  the  dehght  of  their  eyes,  the  hope  of  their  souls,  was  taken 
from  them?  What  would  you  think  if  your  best  earthly  friend  was 
hurried  away  from  you  by  a  shameful  death?  They  sorrowed  not  only 
because  of  their  owti  personal  loss  by  his  removal,  but  because  he  him- 
self was  very  dear  to  them.  They  could  not  bear  that  he  should  be  gone 
in  whom  their  hearts  centred  all  their  affection.  Their  sorrow  showed 
that  their  hearts  were  loyal  to  their  Beloved,  and  would  never  receive 
another  occupant  to  sit  upon  the  throne  of  their  affections.  They 
wept  and  they  lamented  because  their  bosom's  Lord  was  gone  and 
his  seat  was  empty.  They  could  not  endure  the  absence  of  their  best 
Beloved.  As  pines  the  dove  for  its  mate,  so  mourned  they  for  bim 
whom  their  soul  loved.  Whom  had  they  in  heaven  if  Jesus  were  gone? 
Certainly  there  was  none  upon  earth  that  they  could  desire  beside 
him.  They  were  widowed,  and  they  wept  and  refused  to  be  comforted. 
Nothing  could  compensate  them  for  Jesus'  absence,  for  he  was  their 
all  in  all.  For  his  sake  they  had  left  aU  and  followed  him,  and  now 
they  cannot  bear  that  they  should  lose  him,  and  so  lose  more  than  alL 
You  who  have  been  bereaved  of  those  whom  you-  have  dearly  loved, 
and  deeply  revered,  will  be  able  to  guess  what  kind  of  sorrow  filled  the 
hearts  of  the  disciples  when  their  Beloved  said  that  he  was  about  to  go 
from  them,  and  that  they  would  not  see  him  for  awhile.  This  mourning 
was  natural;  and  it  is  natural  that  we  also  should  feel  some  regret  that 
our  Lord  is  away  from  us  now,  as  to  his  bodily  presence,  though  I  trust 
we  have  by  this  time  learned  to  see  the  expediency  of  his  absence,  and 
are  so  satisfied  with  it  that  we  patiently  wait,  and  quietly  hope  until  his 
next  appearing.  ,        ,^  „         , ,  , 

It  added  greatly  to  the  disciples'  sorrow  that  the  world  would  be 
rejoicmq  because  their  Lord  was  gone.  "  The  world  shall  rejoice."  His 
eager  enemies  would  hasten  him  off  to  Pilate's  judgment-seat,  and 
triumph  when  they  forced  an  unwilling  sentence  from  that  time-serymg 
ruler  They  would  rejoice  when  they  saw  him  bearing  his  cross  along 
the  way  of  dolours.  They  would  stand  around  the  cross  and  mock  hiin 
with  their  cruel  gazes  and  with  their  ribald  speeches,  and  when  he  was 


I 


SORROW  AT  THE  CROSS  TURNED   INTO  JOY.  53 

dead  they  would  say,  "  This  deceiver  can  speak  no  more  ;  we  have 
ti'inmphed  over  him  who  set  our  pretensions  at  nought,  and  exposed  us 
before  the  people."  They  thought  that  they  had  quenched  the  light 
which  had  proved  painful  to  their  darkened  eyes,  and  therefore  they 
were  glad,  and  by  their  gladness  swelled  the  torrent  of  the  disciples* 
sorrow.  Brethren,  you  know  when  you  are  in  pain  or  in  sorrow  your- 
selves, how  very  bitter  is  the  coarse  laugh  of  an  adversary  who  exults 
over  your  misery  and  extracts  mirth  from  your  tears.  This  made  the 
disciples  smart  at  their  Lord's  death.  Why  should  the  wicked  rejoice 
over  him  ?  Why  should  the  scornful  Pharisee  and  priest  insult  over  his 
dead  body  ?  This  rubbed  salt  into  the  wounds  of  the  downcast  disciples, 
and  infused  a  double  gall  and  wormwood  into  the  cup  which  was  bitter 
enough  already.  You  do  not  wonder,  therefore,  that  they  wept  and 
lamented  when  their  Lord  was  put  to  death  by  wicked  hands.  Magdalene 
weeping  at  the  sepulchre  acted  as  her  gracious  nature  prompted  her, 
and  she  was  a  fair  sample  of  all  the  rest. 

They  had  this  also  to  make  them  sorrowful,  that  his  death  ivas  for  a 
time  the  disappointment  of  all  their  hopes.  They  at  first  had  fondly 
looked  for  a  kingdom — a  temporal  kingdom,  such  as  their  brother  Jews 
expected.  Even  when  our  Lord  had  moderated  their  expectations  and 
enlightened  their  views,  so  that  they  did  not  quite  so  much  look  for  an 
actual  temporal  sovereignty,  yet  still  that  thought  that  "  this  was  he  that 
would  have  restored  the  kingdom  to  Israel "  lingered  with  them.  If  any 
of  them  were  so  enlightened  as  to  believe  in  a  spiritual  kingdom,  as  per- 
haps some  of  them  were  in  a  measure,  yet  by  Jesus'  death  it  must  have 
seemed  that  all  their  hopes  were  shattered.  Without  a  leader,  how 
€ould  they  succeed  ?  How  could  a  kingdom  be  set  up  when  the  King 
himself  was  slain  ?  He  who  has  been  by  coward  hands  betrayed,  ho^ 
oan  he  reign  ?  He  that  was  to  be  the  King  has  been  spat  upon  an<? 
mocked,  and  nailed  up  hke  a  felon  to  the  gibbet  of  wood— where  is  his 
dominion  ?  He  is  cut  off  out  of  the  land  of  the  Hving,  who  will  now 
serve  him  ?  Clay  cold  his  body  Kes  in  Joseph's  tomb,  and  a  seal  is  set 
upon  the  stone  which  shuts  up  the  sepulchre ;  is  there  not  an  end  of 
holy  hopes,  a  final  close  to  all  holy  ambitions  ?  How  can  they  be  happy 
who  have  seen  an  end  of  their  fairest  hfe-dream  ?  Poor  followers  of  the 
dead  monarch,  how  can  they  have  hope  for  his  cause  and  crown? 
Doubtless  in  their  unbelief  they  sorrowed  deeply  because  their  hope 
seemed  blasted  and  their  faith  o'erturned.  They  knew  so  httle  of  the 
meaning  of  the  present,  and  guessed  so  little  of  what  the  future  would 
be,  that  sorrow  filled  their  hearts,  and  they  were  ready  to  perish. 

You  must  remember  that  added  to  this  was  the  sight  which  many  of 
them  had  of  their  beloved  Master  in  his  agonies.  Who  would  not  grieve 
to  see  him  hurried  away  at  dead  of  night  from  holy  retirement  to  be 
falsely  accused  ?  Might  not  angels  wish  to  weep  in  sympathy  with  him  ? 
Who  can  forbear  to  sorrow  when  Jesus  stands  insulted  by  menials,  reviled 
by  abjects,  forsaken  by  his  friends,  blasphemed  by  his  foes.  It  was  enough 
to  make  a  man's  heart  break  to  see  the  Lamb  of  God  so  roughly  handled. 
Who  can  endure  to  see  the  innocent  Sayiour  nailed  up  there  in  the  midst 
of  a  scornful  crew  ?  Who  could  endure  to  see  his  pangs  as  they  were  mirrored 
in  his  countenance,  or  to  hear  his  sorrows  as  they  expressed  themselves 
in  his  painful  cries  of  "  ^  thirst,"  and  in  the  still  sharper  agonising 


64  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

exclamation,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  It  is  little-, 
marvel  that  it  was  said  of  the  Virgin  that  the  sword  pierced  through 
her  heart,  for  surely  there  was  never  sorrow  hke  unto  Jesus'  sorrow,  nor 
grief  which  could  be  likened  unto  his  grief.  His  heavy  woes  must  have 
pierced  through  the  heart  of  all  right-minded  men  who  beheld  his  unex- 
ampled  miseries;  and  especially  must  all  personal  lovers  of  Christ  have 
felt  ready  to  die  themselves  when  they  saw  him  thus  put  to  death.  Oh- 
deeps  of  sorrow  which  my  Lord  has  suffered,  shall  there  be  no  deeps  to 
answer  to  you  ?  When  all  God's  waves  and  billows  go  over  thee,  0  Jesus, 
shall  not  we  be  plunged  into  sorrow  also  ?  Yes,  verily,  we  will  drink  of 
thy  cup  and  be  baptized  with  thy  baptism.  We  will  now  sit  down  before 
thy  cross  and  watch  with  thee  one  hour,  while  love  and  grief  conjointly 
occupy  our  souls. 

Now,  even  at  the  recollection  of  what  our  Lord  endured,  every 
Christian  feels  sympathy  with  him.  You  cannot  read  the  four  stories> 
of  the  evangelists,  and  weave  them  into  one  by  imagination  and  affec- 
tion, without  feehng  that  the  minor  key  befits  your  voice  at  such  a  time^ 
if  you  at  all  attempt  to  sing.  There  must  be,  it  is  natural  that  there 
should  be,  sorrow  because  Christ  has  died. 

One  of  the  sharpest  points  about  our  sorrow  at  Jesus'  death  is  this — 
that  ive  were  the  cause  of  it.    We  virtually  crucified  the  Lord,  seeing  it, 
was  because  we  were  sinners  that  he  must  needs  be  made  a  sacrifice... 
Had  none  of  us  gone  astray  like  lost  sheep,  then  our  wanderings  would 
not  have  been  gathered  up  and  laid  upon  the  shepherd's  head.     The 
sword  which  pierced  his  heart  through  and  through  was  forged  by  our 
offences:  the  vengeance  was  due  for  sins  which  tve  had  committed,  and; 
justice  exacted  its  rights  at  his  hands.     What  lo\ing  disciple  will  refuse* 
to  sorrow  when  he  sees  that  he  himself  has  put  his  Lord  to  death  ? 

Now,  putting  all  these  things  together,  I  think  I  see  abundant  reason 
why  the  disciples  should  be  sorrowful,  and  why  they  should  even  express- 
their  sorrow  by  weeping  and  lamenting.  They  sorrowed  as  those  ^o- 
who  attend  a  funeral :  for  weeping  and  lamenting  abound  at  eastern* 
funerals.  Orientals  are  much  more  demonstrative  than  we  are,  and 
therefore  at  the  deaths  of  relatives  they  make  a  far  greater  show  of 
grief  by  loud  cries  and  flowing  tears.  The  disciples  are  represented  aa 
using  the  same  forcible  expressions  to  set  forth  their  woe — "  Ye  shall 
weep  and  lament," — a  woe  worthy  of  the  buried  One  whom  they 
mourned.  "  Ye  shall  weep  and  lament " :  there  was  a  double  vent  for  a: 
double  sorrow,  eyes  wept  and  voices  lamented.  Christ's  death  was  a 
true  funeral  to  his  followers,  and  caused  a  crushing  sorrow  as  much  as- , 
if  they  had  each  one  been  bereft  of  all  his  house.  Who  marvels  that  it, 
W2S  so  ? 

"  Sorrow  hath  filled  your  hearts,"  says  Christ :  they  had  no  room  to. 
think  of  anything  else  but  his  death.  Their  heart  was  fall  to  bursting 
with  grief  because  he  was  taken  from  them,  and  that  grief  was  so  sharp 
as  to  be  likened  to  one  of  the  keenest  pangs  which  nature  is  capable  of 
bearing,  the  pangs  of  a  travailing  woman,  pangs  vvhich  seem  as  if  they 
must  bring  death  with  them,  and  compared  with  which  death  itself 
might  be  a  relief.  The  sharpness  of  their  anguish  in  the  hour  of  their 
trial  was  all  that  they  could  bear,  more  would  have  destroyed  them. 
All  this  they  felt,  and  it  is  no  wonder  if  we  feel  in  sGii;e  de;rr«K'  as  they 


SORROW  AT  THE  CROSS  TURNED   INTO  JOY.  5S 

did   when  we  take  a  retrospect  of  what  the  Saviour  endured  on  our 
behalf.    So  far  we  are  bound  to  concede  that  the  death  of  our  Lord  , 
worketh  sorrow :  but  there  is  a  moderation  even  in  the  most  justifiable 
mourning,  and  we  are  not  to  indulge  excessive  grief  even  at  the  foot  of 
the  cross,  lest  it  degenerate  into  folly. 

II.  Now,  secondly,  the  truth  taught  expressly  in  the  text  is  that  this 
SORROW  IS  CHANGED  INTO  JOY.  "Your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into 
joy."  Not  exchanged  for  joy,  but  actually  transmuted,  so  that  the  grief 
becomes  joy,  the  cause  of  sorrow  becomes  the  source  of  rejoicing. 

Begin  with  what  I  said  was  a  very  sharp  point  of  this  sorrow,  and  you 
will  see  at  once  how  it  is  turned  into  joy.  That  Jesus  Christ  died  for 
our  sins  is  a  sharp  sorrow :  we  lament  that  our  crimes  became  the  nails 
and  our  unbelief  the  spear :  and  yet,  my  brethren,  this  is  the  greatest  joy 
of  all.  If  each  one  of  us  can  say,  "He  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for 
me,"  we  are  truly  happy.  If  you  know  by  personal  faith  that  Jesus 
took  your  sin  and  suffered  for  it  on  the  tree,  so  that  now  your  debt  is 
paid  and  your  transgression  is  blotted  out  for  ever  by  his  precious  blood, 
you  do  not  want  half-a-dozen  words  from  me  to  indicate  that  this,  which 
was  the  centre  of  your  grief,  is  also  the  essence  of  your  joy.  What  were 
it  to  us  if  he  had  saved  all  the  rest  of  mankind  if  he  had  not  redeemed 
us  unto  God  by  his  blood  ?  We  might  have  been  glad  from  sheer  humanity 
that  others  should  be  benefited,  but  what  would  have  been  our  deep  regret 
to  be  ourselves  excluded  from  the  grace.  Blessed  be  the  Saviour's  name, 
we  are  not  excepted :  in  proportion  as  we  repentantly  upbraid  ourselves 
for  Jesus'  death  in  that  same  measure  may  we  believingly  exult  in  the 
fact  that  his  sacrifice  has  for  ever  put  away  our  sins,  and  therefore  being 
justified  by  faith  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesua 
Christ.  Because  God  hath  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh  of  Jesus  Christ, 
therefore  he  will  no  more  condemn  us ;  but  we  are  henceforth  free,  that 
the  righteousness  of  the  law  may  be  fulfilled  in  us  who  walk  not  after  the 
flesh  but  after  the  Spirit.  Heartily  do  we  lament  our  sin,  but  we  do  not 
lament  that  Christ  has  put  it  away  nor  lament  the  death  by  which  he 
put  it  away ;  rather  do  our  hearts  rejoice  in  all  his  atoning  agonies,  and 
glory  at  every  mention  of  that  death  by  which  he  has  reconciled  us  unto 
God.  'Tis  a  sad  thought  that  we  committed  the  sin  which  burdened  our 
Lord,  but  it  is  a  joy  to  think  that  he  has  taken  on  himself  our  personal 
sin  and  carried  it  right  away. 

The  next  point  of  joy  is  that  Jesus  Christ  has  now  suffered  all  that 
was  required  of  him.  That  he  should  suffer  was  cause  for  grief,  but  that 
he  has  now  suffered  all  is  equal  cause  for  joy.  When  a  champion  returns 
from  the  wars  bearing  the  scars  of  conflict  by  which  he  gained  his 
honours,  does  anyone  lament  over  his  campaigns  ?  When  he  left  the 
castle  his  wife  hung  about  his  neck  and  mourned  that  her  lord  must  go 
to  the  wars,  to  bleed  and  perhaps  to  die ;  but  when  he  returns  with 
sounding  trumpet  and  banner  held  aloft,  bringing  his  trophies  with  him, 
honoured  and  exalted  by  reason  of  his  victories  in  many  lands,  do  his 
dearest  friends  regret  his  toils  and  sufferings  ?  Do  they  keep  fasts  corres- 
pondent to  the  days  in  which  he  was  covered  with  the  sweat  and  dust  of 
battle!.  Do  they  toll  a  bell  on  the  anniversary  of  his  conflict?  Do 
they  weep  over  the  scars  which  are  stiU  upon  him  ?  Do  they  not 
glory  in  them  as  honourable  memorials  of  his  valour  ?    They  reckon 


§6'  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

that  the  marks  the  hero  bears  in  his  flesh  are  the  noblest  insignia  of  his 
glory,  and  the  best  tokens  of  his  prowess.  So  let  us  not  grieve  to-day 
that  Jesus'  hands  were  pierced ;  behold  they  are  now  "  as  gold  rings 
set  with  the  beryl."  Let  us  not  lament  that  his  feet  were  nailed  to  the 
tree,  for  his  legs  are  now  as  "  pillars  of  marble  set  upon  sockets  of  fine 
gold."  The  face  more  marred  than  that  of  any  man  is  now  the  more 
lovely  for  its  marring,  and  he  himself,  despite  his  agonies,  is  now  endowed 
with  a  beauty,  which  even  the  ravished  spouse  in  the  song  could  only 
describe  as  "  altogether  lovely."  The  mighty  love  which  enabled  him  to 
endure  his  mighty  passion  has  impressed  upon  him  charms  altogether 
inconceivable  in  their  sweetness.  Let  us  not  mourn,  then,  for  the  agony 
is  all  over  now,  and  he  is  none  the  worse  for  having  endured  it.  There 
is  no  cross  for  him  now,  except  in  the  sense  that  the  cross  honours 
and  glorifies  him ;  there  remains  for  him  no  cruel  spear  nor  crown  of 
thorns  now,  except  that  from  these  he  derives  a  revenue  of  honour  and 
titles  ever  new,  which  exalt  him  higher  and  yet  higher  in  the  love  of  his 
saints.  Glory  be  unto  God,  Christ  has  not  left  a  pang  unsuflPered  of  all 
his  substitutionary  sorrows ;  of  our  dread  ransom  price  he  has  paid  the 
utmost  farthing.  The  atoning  griefs  have  all  been  endured,  the  cup  of 
wrath  is  drunk  quite  dry,  and  because  of  this  we,  with  all  the  hosts 
above,  will  rejoice  for  ever  and  ever. 

We  are  glad,  not  only  that  the  hour  of  travail  is  over,  but  that  our 
Lord  has  survived  his  pains.  He  died  a  real  death,  but  now  he  lives  a 
real  life.  He  did  lie  in  the  tomb,  and  it  was  no  fiction  that  the  breath 
had  departed  from  him:  it  is  equally  no  fiction  that  our  Redeemer  liveth. 
The  Lord  is  risen  indeed.  He  hath  survived  the  death  struggle  and  the 
agony,  and  he  lives  unhurt :  he  has  come  out  of  the  furnace  without  so 
much  as  the  smell  of  fire  upon  him.  He  is  not  injured  in  any  faculty, 
whether  human  or  divine.  He  is  not  robbed  of  any  glory,  but  his  name 
is  now  surrounded  with  brighter  lustre  than  ever.  He  has  lost  no 
dominion,  he  claims  superior  rights  and  rules  over  a  new  empire.  He  is 
a  gainer  by  his  losses,  he  has  risen  by  his  descent.  All  along  the  Hne 
he  is  victorious  at  every  point.  Never  yet  was  there  a  victory  won  but 
what  it  was  in  some  respects  a  loss  as  well  as  a  gain,  but  our  Lord's 
triump»h  is  unmingled  glory — to  himself  a  gain  as  well  as  to  us  who 
share  in  it.  Shall  we  not  then  rejoice  ?  What,  would  ye  sit  and  weep 
by  a  mother  as  she  exultingly  shows  her  new-born  child  ?  Would  you 
call  together  a  company  of  mourners  to  lament  and  to  bewail  when  the 
heir  is  born  into  the  household?  This  were  to  mock  the  mother's 
gladness.  And  so  to-day  shall  we  use  dreary  music  and  sing  dolorous 
hymns  when  the  Lord  is  risen,  and  is  not  only  unhurt,  unharmed,  and 
unconquered,  but  is  far  more  glorified  and  exalted  than  before  his 
death  ?  He  hath  gone  into  the  glory  because  all  his  work  is  done,  shall 
not  your  sorrow  be  turned  into  joy  in  the  most  emphatic  sense  ? 

And  there  is  this  to  add  to  it,  that  the  grand  end  which  his  death  was 
meant  to  accomplish  is  all  attained.  What  was  that  end  ?  1  may 
divide  it  into  three  parts. 

It  was  the  putting  away  of  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself,  and  that  is 
complete.  He  hath  finished  transgression,  he  hath  made  an  end  of  sin  ; 
he  hath  taken  the  whole  load  of  the  sin  of  his  elect  and  hurled  it  into 
the  bottomless  abyss  ;  if  it  be  searched  for  it  shall  not  be  found,  yea,  it 


J 


SORROW   AT  THE  CROSS  TURNED  INTO  JOY.  67 

shall  not  be,  saith  the  Lord.  He  hath  put  away  our  sin  as  far  from  ua 
as  the  east  is  from  the  west,  and  he  has  risen  agam  to  prove  that  all  tor 
whom  he  died  are  justified  in  him.  ^  ..    r     i     ^• 

A  second  purpose  was  the  salvation  of  his  chosen,  and  that  salvation 
is  secured.  AVhen  he  died  and  rose  again  the  salvation  of  all  that  were 
in  him  was  placed  beyond  all  hazard.  He  hath  redeemed  us  unto  bod 
by  his  blood  by  an  effectual  redemption.  None  shall  be  enslaved  who 
were  by  him  redeemed  ;  none  shall  be  left  in  sin  or  cast  into  hell  whose 
names  are  graven  on  the  palms  of  his  hands.  He  has  gone  into  glory, 
carrying  their  names  upon  his  heart,  and  he  stands  pleading  there  tor 
them,  and  therefore  he  is  able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost.  '  1  wiU, 
saith  he,  "  that  they  whom  thou  hast  given  me  be  with  me  where  i  am, 
that  they  may  behold  my  glory,"  and  that  effectual  plea  secures  their 
being  with  him  and  like  him  when  the  end  shall  be.  .  n  ;x        a 

The  grand  object,  however,  of  his  death  was  the  glory  of  (xod,  and 
truly  God  is  glorified  in  the  death  of  his  Son,  beyond  anything  that  was 
known  before  or  since ;  for  here  the  very  heart  of  God  is  laid  open  to 
the  inspection  of  aU  believing  eyes— his  justice  and  his  love,  his  stem 
severity  which  will  not  pass  by  sin  without  atonement,  and  his  boundless 
love  that  gives  his  best  self,  his  darhng  from  his  bosom,  that  he  may 
bleed  and  die  in  our  stead : — 

"  Here  depths  of  wisdom  shine. 

Which  angels  cannot  trace  ; 
The  highest  rank  of  cherubim 

Still  lost  in  wonder  gaze." 

Yes,  0  Christ  of  God,  "  it  is  finished."  Thou  hast  done  all  thou  didst 
intend  to  do,  the  whole  of  thy  design  is  achieved,  not  one  purpose  hath 
failed,  nor  even  one  part  of  it  fallen  through,  and  therefore  shall  we  not 
rejoice?  The  child  is  born;  shall  we  not  be  glad?  The  travail  would 
have  been  a  subject  for  great  grief  had  the  mother  died,  or  had  the  child 
perished  in  the  birth  :  but  now  that  all  is  over,  and  all  is  well,  why  should 
we  remember  any  more  the  anguish  ?  Jesus  lives,  and  his  great  salva- 
tion makes  glad  the  sons  of  men.  Wherefore  should  we  tune  the  mourn- 
fal  string  and  mourn  sore  Uke  doves?  No !  Ring  out  the  clarion,  for 
the  battle  is  fought  and  the  victory  is  won  for  ever.  Vwtory,  victory, 
victory!  His  own  right  hand  and  his  holy  arm  hath  gotten  him  the 
victory !  Though  the  champion  died  in  the  conflict,  yet  m  his  death  he 
slew  death  and  destroyed  him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the 
devil.  Our  glorious  Champion  has  risen  from  his  fall,  for  he  could  not 
be  holden  by  the  bands  of  death.  He  hath  smitten  his  enemies,  but, 
as  for  himself,  he  hath  come  up  from  the  grave,  he  hath  risen  as  from 
the  heart  of  the  sea.  Let  us  exult  like  Israel  at  the  Red  Sea  when 
Pharaoh  was  overthrown  !  With  timbrel  and  dance  let  the  daughters  of 
Israel  go  forth  to  sing  unto  the  Lord,  for  he  hath  triumphed  gloriously, 
and  utterly  destroyed  all  our  adversaries.  ,        .      , -n 

We  have  not  yet  completed  this  work  of  changing  sorrow  into  ]oy  till 
we  notice  that  now  the  gi-eatest  possible  blessings  accrue  to  us,  because 
he  was  made  a  curse  for  us.  Through  his  death  come  pardon,  recon- 
ciliation, access,  acceptance :  his  blood  "  speaketh  better  things  than  that 
of  Abel,"  and  invokes  all  heaven's  blessings  upon  our  heads. 


58  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

But  Jesus  is  not  dead.  He  is  risen,  and  that  resurrection  brin^  jus- 
tification, and  the  safeguard  of  his  perpetual  plea  in  heaven.  It  brings 
us  his  representative  presence  in  glory,  and  the  making  all  things  ready 
fol*  us  in  the  many  mansions :  it  brings  us  a  share  in  that  "  all  power 
which  is  given  unto  him  in  heaven  and  in  earth,"  in  the  strength  of 
which  he  bids  us  go  and  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them  into  his  sacred 
name.  Beloved,  Pentecost  comes  to  us  because  Jesus  went  away  from 
uiB ;  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit — illuminating,  comforting,  quickening — 
the  power  to  proclaim  the  word,  and  the  might  which  attends  that  word, 
all  have  come  to  us  because  he  is  no  longer  with  us,  but  through  the^ 
regions  of  the  dead  has  passed  to  reach  his  crown. 
•  And  now  to-day  we  have  this  great  joy  again  that  because  he  died 
there  is  a  kingdom  set  up  in  the  world,  a  kingdom  which  never  can  be 
moved,  a  kingdom  whose  power  lies  in  weakness,  and  yet  it  is  irresistible: 
a  kingdom  whose  glory  lies  in  suffering,  and  yet  it  cannot  be  crushed :  a 
kingdom  of  love,  a  kingdom  of  unselfishness,  a  kingdom  of  kindness, 
truth,  purity,  hohness,  and  happiness.  Jesus  wears  the  imperial  purple 
of  a  kingdom  in  which  God  loves  men  and  men  love  God :  having  proved 
himself  the  prince  of  self-sacrificing  love  he  is  justly  exalted  to  the 
throne  amid  the  acclamations  of  all  his  saints.  His  kingdom,  shape- 
less as  it  looks  to  carnal  eyes,  like  a  stone  cut  out  of  a  mountain 
without  hands,  will,  nevertheless,  break  all  the  kingdoms  of  this  world 
to  shivers  in  due  time,  and  fill  the  whole  earth.  His  kingdom  will 
grow  and  extend  till  from  a  handful  of  corn  upon  the  top  of  the 
mountains  its  fruit  shall  so  increase  that  it  shall  shake  like  Lebanon ;  a 
kingdom  which  shall  comprehend  all  ranks  and  conditions  of  men,  men 
of  all  colours,  of  all  lands  and  nations,  encircling  all  even  as  the  ocean 
surrounds  many  lands.  The  unsuffering  kingdom  of  the  suffering  shep- 
herd, inaugurated  by  his  death,  established  by  his  resun-ection,  extended 
by  the  Pentecostal  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  secured  by  the  eternal 
covenant,  is  hastening  on.  Every  winged  hour  brings  it  nearer  to  it^ 
perfect  manifestation.  Yes,  the  kingdom  comes :  the  kingdom  whose 
foundation  was  laid  in  the  blood  of  its  King  at  Calvary.  Happy  are  they 
who  are  helping  it  on,  for  when  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed  they  also  shall 
be  manifested  with  him.  The  Chief  among  ten  thousand  and  the  ten 
thousand  who  were  with  him  shall  stand  side  by  side  in  the  day  of 
victory,  even  as  they  stood  side  by  side  in  the  hour  of  strife.  Then^ 
indeed,  our  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy. 

There  we  must  leave  the  subject,  only  noticing  this  one  fact,  that  that 
joy  is  right  hearty  joy.  "Your  hearts  shall  rejoice,"  said  the  Saviour  : 
ours  is  no  superficial  mirth,  but  heart-deep  bliss.  That  joy  is  also 
abiding  joy.  "Your  joy  no  man  taketh  from  you."  No,  nor  devil 
either.  Nor  time  nor  eternity  can  rob  us  of  it.  At  the  foot  of  the  cross- 
there  wells  up  a  flashing,  sparkling  fountain  of  joy,  which  never  can  be 
dried  up,  but  must  flow  on  for  ever  ;  in  summer  and  in  winter  sliall  it 
be,  and  none  shall  be  able  to  keep  us  back  from  the  living  flood,  but  we- 
shall  drink  to  the  full  for  ever  and  ever. 

111.    And,  now,  my  last  point  is  to  be  the  general  principle. 

INVOLVED   IN  THIS  ONE   PARTICULAR  INSTANCE. 

The  general  principle  is  this,  that  in  connection  with  Christ  you  must, 
expect  to  have  sorrow.     "  You  shall  weep  and  lament,  but  the  world 


1 


SORROW  AT  THE   CROSS  TURNED  INTO  JOT.  5^ 

shall  rejoice."  But  whatever  sorrow  you  feel  in  connection  with  Jesus 
there  is  this  consolation — the  pangs  are  all  birth-pangs,  they  are  all  the 
necessary  preliminaries  of  an  ever-increasing,  abounding  joy.  Brethren,,, 
since  you  have  come  to  know  Christ  you  have  felt  a  smarter  grief  on 
account  of  sin.  Let  it  continue  with  you,  for  it  is  working  holiness 
in  you,  and  holiness  is  happiness.  You  have  felt  of  late  a  keener 
sensibility  on  account  of  the  sins  of  those  around  you,  do  not  wish  to  be 
deprived  of  it,  it  will  be  the  means  of  your  loving  them  more,  praying- 
more  for  them,  and  seeking  more  their  good,  and  you  will  be  the  better 
qualified  to  do  them  real  service  and  to  lead  them  to  your  Lord.  Per- 
haps you  have  had  to  bear  a  little  persecution,  hard  words,  and  the  cold 
shoulder.  ^  Do  not  fret,  for  all  this  is  needful  to  make  you  have  fellowship^ 
with  Christ's  sufferings  that  you  may  know  more  of  him  and  may 
become  more  hke  him.  You  sometimes  see  the  cause  of  Christ  as  it, 
were  dead,  and  you  are  grieved  about  it,  as  well  you  may  be.  The  enemy 
triumphs,  false  doctrine  is  advanced,  Jesus  seems  to  be  crucified  afresh, 
or  hidden  away  in  the  grave,  forgotten,  as  a  dead  man  out  of  mind. 
It  is  well  that  you  should  feel  this,  but  in  that  very  feeling  there- 
should  be  the  full  persuasion  that  the  truth  of  Christ  cannot  long  be 
buried,  but  waits  to  rise  again  with  power.  Never  did  the  gospel  lie  in 
the  grave  more  than  its  three  days.  Never  did  a  lion  roar  upon  it  but 
what  it  turned  and  rent  the  enemy,  and  found  honey  in  its  carcase  in 
after  days.  Whenever  truth  seems  to  be  repulsed,  she  does  but  draw 
back  to  take  a  more  wondrous  leap  forward.  As  when  the  tide  ebbs  out. 
very  far,  we  expect  it  again  to  return  in  the  fulness  of  its  strength,  so  is 
it  with  the  church.  If  we  see  a  small  fall  in  the  tide  we  know  that  it 
will  not  rise  very  far,  but  when  we  see  the  stream  sinking  right  away,  and 
leaving  the  river-bed  almost  dry,  we  expect  to  see  it  roll  in  at  flood  tide 
till  the  banks  overflow.  Always  look  for  the  triumph  of  Christianity 
when  others  tell  you  it  is  defeated  ;  expect  to  find  in  the  very  quarter 
where  it  is  covered  with  most  obloquy  and  shame,  that  there  it  will  win 
its  most  glorious  laurels.  The  truth's  superlative  victories  follow  upon 
its  worst  defeats.  Have  faith  in  God.  You  tell  me  you  have  that; 
then,  saith  your  Master,  "  Ye  beheve  in  God,  believe  also  in  me."  BeHeve 
in  Christ,  trust  in  him,  rest  in  him,  fight  for  him,  labour  for  him,  suffer 
for  hiifi,  for  he  must  conquer.  Even  now  doth  he  sit  as  King  upon  the 
hill  of  Zion,  and  soon  the  heathen  shall  become  his  inheritance,  and  the 
uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  shall  be  his  possession.  Your  sorrow  shall 
be  turned  into  joy  in  all  tnese  cases. 

Whenever  your  sorrow  is  the  result  of  your  belonging  to  Christ  always- 
congratulate  yourself  upon  it,  since  as  the  spring  begetteth  the  summer 
so  doth  sorrow  in  connection  with  Christ  bring  forth  to  us  joy  in  the 
Lord.  By-and-by  will  come  your  last  sorrow :  unless  the  Lord  should 
suddenly  appear  you  will  die.  But  be  content  to  die.  Look  forward 
to  it  without  the  slightest  alarm.  Death  is  the  gate  of  endless  joy,  and 
shall  we  dread  to  enter  there  ?  No,  Jesus  being  with  you,  meet  death 
joyfully,  for  to  die  is  to  burst  the  bonds  of  this  death  which  everywhere 
surrounds  us,  and  to  enter  into  the  true  life  of  liberty  and  bliss.  Even 
to  the  end  sorrow  shall  be  to  you  the  birth-pang  of  your  joy.  Carry 
that  thought  with  you  and  be  always  glad. 

With  one  remark  I  finish.    I  will  not  dwell  upon  it,  but  leave  it  to 


CO  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

abide  in  the  memories  of  those  whom  it  concerns.     I  present  it  to  the 
mmds  of  all  those  who  are  not  believers  in  Christ.    Did  you  notice  that 
the  Lord  said,  '*  Ye  shall  weep  and  lament,  but  the  world  shall  rejoice  • 
ye  shall  be  sorrowful,  but  your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy."    Now 
what  IS  implied  there  to  complete  the  sentence  ?    Why,  that  the  world's 
joy  shall  be  turned  into  sorrow.     Even  so  shaU  it  be.    There  is  not  a 
pleasure  which  the  ungodly  man  enjoys  when  he  is  indulging  in  sin  but 
what  will  curdle  into  grief  and  be  his  sorrow  for  ever.     Depend  upon  it 
that  the  wine  of  transgression  will  sour  into  the  griping  vinegar  of  re- 
morse, which  shall  dissolve  the  rebel's  soul.     The  sparks  which  now 
delight  you  shall  kindle  the  flames  of  your  eternal  misery.    Every  sin 
though  sweet  when  it  is  like  a  green  fig,  is  bitterness  itself  when  it 
Cometh  to  its  ripeness.     Woe  unto  you  that  laugh  now,  for  you  shaU 
mourn  and  weep.     Woe  unto  you  that  now  rejoice  in  sin,  for  ye  shall 
gnash  your  teeth,  and  weep  and  wail  because  of  that  very  Christ  whom 
now  you  reject.    All  things  will  soon  be  turned  upside  down.     Blessed 
are  ye  that  mourn  now,  for  ye  shaU  be  comforted,  but  woe  unto  you  that 
are  full  this  day,  for  ye  shall  hunger.    The  sun  will  soon  be  set  for  you 
that  rejoice  m  sin.     Sadness  like  a  thick  cloud  is  now  descending  to 
surround  you  eternally  in  its  horrid  gloom.     Out  of  that  cloud  shall 
leap  the  flashes  of  eternal  justice,  and  forth  from  it  shall  peal  the 
thunder-claps  of  righteous  condemnation.     "  Upon  the  wicked  he  shall 
rain  snares,  fire  and  brimstone,  and  an  horrible  tempest :  this  shall  be 
the  portion  of  their  cup."     The  Lord  deliver  you  from  such  a  doom  by 
leading  you  now  to  yield  to  Jesus,  and  to  beheve  in  his  name.    May  he 
grant  this  prayer  for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 

Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon— John  xvi. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 917,  301,  287, 


? 


ALONE,   YET  NOT  ALONE. 


Intended  for  Reading  on  Lord's-day,  August  28th,  1892, 

DELIVERED   BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lord' 8-day  Evening,  March  2nd,  1890. 


«  TP911S  answered  them.  Do  ye  now  believe  ?  Behold,  the  hour  cometh,  yea,  is  now 
come,  that  ye  shall  be  scattereS,  every  man  to  his  own  and  shall  leave  me  alone  :  and 
yet  I  am  not  alone,  because  the  Father  is  with  me.»-John  xvi.  ol,  o2. 

Our  Lord  looks  for  faith  as  the  result  of  his  teaching  ;  and  I  think 
that  I  hear  him  say,  at  the  end  of  every  service,  ''  Do  ye  now  believe  ? 
You  have  listened  ;  you  have  made  remarks  upon  the  speaker  ;  do  ye 
now  believe?  You  have  been  made  to  feel,  you  have  brushed  the 
tear  away  ;  but  do  ye  now  believe  ?  Eor  anything  short  of  behevmg 
leaves  you  short  of  salvation."  I  would  like  to  put  the  question  of  my 
text  to  every  hearer  in  this  great  house  to-night.  You  have  hstened 
now  to  years  of  sermons ;  "  Do  ye  now  believe  ?  "  You  are  getting 
ffrey  now,  the  gospel  is  very  familiar  to  your  ear  ;  you  have  heard  it 
preached  for  many,  many  years ;  but  "  do  ye  now  beheve  ?  This 
is  the  crucial  point.  According  to  your  answer,  truthfully  given 
to  this  question,  you  may  decide  as  to  your  condition  beiore  Uod, 
'<  Do  ye  now  believe  ? "  •        .i,  • 

Christ  loves  faith  wherever  he  sees  it ;  it  is  to  him  a  precious  thing. 
To  you  that  beheve,  he  is  precious,  he  is  an  honour ;  and  upon  him 
you  who  believe  confer  aU  the  honour  it  is  possible  for  you  to  confer. 
Your  trust  adorns  him  with  jewels,  your  confidence  in  him  puts  tne 
crown  on  his  head.  But  our  Lord  is  very  discriminating ;  he  dis- 
tinguishes  between  faith  and  presumption,  and  between  faith  and  our 
idea  of  faith.  These  disciples  said  now  that  they  were  sure  :  "  Now 
are  we  sure  that  thou  knowest  aU  things,  and  needest  not  that  any 
man  should  ask  thee."  ''Yes!  Yes!"  the  Saviour  seemed  to  say, 
"That  is  your  measure  of  your  own  faith ;  but  I  do  not  measure  it  m 
the  same  way  that  you  do."  If  there  be  any  here  who  say,  "  As  to 
the  matter  of  faith,  I  need  no  caution,  I  scarcely  need  admonition, 
I  believe,  oh !  you  cannot  teU  how  firmly."  No,  my  dear  friend,  and 
perhaps  you  cannot  tell  how  weakly  you  believe.  At  any  rate,  do  not 
No.  2,271, 


<g2  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

mistake  your  belief  in  your  own  faith  for  faith  in  Christ ;  for  belief 
in  your  own  faith  may  be  only  self-conceit ;  but  faith  in  Christ  gives 
^lory  to  God,  and  brings  salvation  to  the  believer. 

To  take  the  disciples  down  a  notch,  the  Saviour  reminds  them  that, 
whatever  faith  they  had,  they  were  a  long  while  coming  to  it.^  *'  Do 
je  now  believe  ?  Three  years  have  I  been  teaching  you ;  three  years 
have  I  wrought  miracles  in  your  midst ;  three  years  have  you  seen 
me,  and  you  might  in  me  have  seen  the  Father,  but  after  all  this 
time  have  you  at  last  come  to  a  little  faith?  "  Oh !  friends,  we  have 
iTiever  any  reason  to  boast  of  our  faith  ;  for  we  have  been  very  long 
^coming  to  it.  We  do  trust  Christ  now ;  I  hope  that  many  of  us  can 
43incerely  say  that  we  lean  all  our  weight  on  him.  We  believe  in  God, 
we  believe  also  in  his  Son,  Jesus  Christ ;  but  it  took  months  to  drive 
us  out  of  our  self-confidence  ;  it  took  years  to  lift  us  out  of  despair ; 
it  has  taken  all  this  time  for  the  Lord,  in  the  power  of  his  own  Spirit, 
to  work  out  what  little  faith  we  have. 

Then  our  Lord  reminded  them  of  another  thing  more  humbling 
«till,  that  as  their  faith  was  long  in  coming,  it  might  be  very  quick  in 
.going.  "  Do  ye  now  believe  ?  "  saith  he,  **  Behold,  the  hour  cometh, 
yea,  is  now  come,  that  ye  shall  be  scattered,  every  man  to  his  own, 
and  shall  leave  me  alone."  0  beloved,  a  little  trouble  arises,  an 
unforeseen  difficulty  occurs,  and  where  is  your  faith?  A  little 
persecution,  the  idle  banter  of  an  unbeliever,  the  sarcasm  of  an 
agnostic,  and  where  is  your  faith  ?  Is  it  not  so  with  many,  that  while 
in  good  company,  they  can  almost  brag  of  tlieir  faith;  but  if  the 
oompany  is  changed,  they  certainly  have  no  faith  to  brag  of?  The 
men  who  were  so  glib  of  tongue  are  quiet  now ;  and  though,  before, 
they  wore  their  helmets  bedight  with  plumes,  they  would  hide  them 
away,  and  hide  their  heads,  too,  if  they  could.  They  are  ashamed  of 
iim,  now,  in  whom,  once,  they  gloried.  0  friends,  let  him  that 
.glorieth,  glory  only  in  the  Lord.  Let  the  believer  never  vaunt  his 
believing,  lest  he  be  reminded  how  long  he  was  in  coming  to  it,  and 
how  soon  he  may  be  parted  from  it. 

Our  Lord's  disciples  did  not  very  readily  take  this  caution.  I  do 
not  suppose  any  of  them  took  it ;  certainly  Peter  did  not,  and  the  rest 
of  them  were  very  much  like  him.  When  Peter  said  to  Jesus, 
*'  Though  all  men  shall  be  offended  because  of  thee,  yet  will  I  never 
be  offended;"  and  ''Though  I  should  die  with  thee,  yet  will  I  not 
-deny  thee ; "  we  read,'  *'  Likewise  also  said  all  the  disciples."  We  may 
say  to-night,  '*  There  is  no  man  among  us  who  will  ever  be  a  traitor 
to  Christ ;  there  is  no  wotnan  here  who  will  ever  grow  cold  of  heart." 
That  is  our  self -flattery.  What  others  have  done,  however  base  and 
mean,  we  too  are  capable  of  doing.  If  we  think  we  are  not,  it  is  our 
pride,  and  our  pride  alone,  that  makes  us  think  so.  Our  Saviour, 
therefore,  to  caU  the  particular  attention  of  his  disciples  to  their 
danger,  said,  not  merely  "  the  hour  cometh,"  but,  "  Behold,  the  hour 
<5ometh."  He  puts  in  a  ''  Behold !  "  an  ''  JScce  /  "  As  the  old  writers 
used  to  put  a  hand  in  the  margin,  or  an  N.B.,  nota  bene,  to  caii 
attention  to  something  special,  so  the  Saviour  puts  here  a  "  Behold  . 
*'  Look  here  !  "  *'  See  this."  You  who  have  just  put  on  your  armour 
.think  that  you  have  won  the  victory.     '*  Behold,  the  hour  cometh, 


ALONE,    YET   NOT  ALONE. 


63 


jea,  is  now  come,  that  ye  shall  be  scattered,  every  man  to  his  own, 
and  shall  leave  me  alone." 

I  pray  you,  therefore,  brethren,  and  I  speak  to  myself  as  well  as  to 
you,  let  us  learn  the  lesson  of  our  frailty;  and  though  we  are 
honestly  trusting  in  Christ  to-night,  let  each  one  cry,  "  Hold  thou  me 
up,  and  I  shall  be  safe."  Let  the  prayer  go  up  from  all  of  you  who 
are  in  these  galleries,  and  from  all  who  are  sitting  downstairs  in  those 
pews,  from  the  most  experienced  and  best  established  of  you,  as  well 
as  from  those  who  have  but  recently  been  brought  to  know  the  Lord, 
and  let  each  one  cry,  ''Lord,  keep  me,  for  I  cannot  keep  myself!" 
Alas  !  alas !  we  have  seen  even  the  standard-bearers  fall ;  and  when 
that  is  the  case,  how  sadly  do  the  common  soldiers  mourn !  They  who 
«tood  like  rocks  have  been  made  to  totter.  God  keep  us  !  Christ  of 
•God,  keep  us  by  thy  eternal  Spirit !     Amen. 

Now  I  am  going  to  take  you  away  from  that  prefatory  considera- 
tion, keeping  still,  however,  much  in  the  same  vein.  Let  us  learn 
io-night  from  our  Lord,  first,  his  trial:  "Ye  shall  be  scattered  every 
man  to  his  own,  and  shall  leave  me  alone ; "  secondly,  his  confidence : 
"  And  yet  I  am  not  alone,  because  the  Father  is  with  me ;  "  and  then, 
thirdly,  his  example :  for  in  all  this,  we  are  to  follow  his  steps.  May 
we,  if  we  have  our  Lord's  trial,  also  have  his  confidence  because  we 
imitate  his  example ! 

I,  First,  then,  notice  our  Lord's  trial,  for  the  like  of  it  may 
happen  to  you. 

He  ivas  left  alone.  Why,  these  eleven  apostles  that  are  round  him, 
and  to  whom  he  is  talking,  surely  they  will  not  leave  their  Lord! 
They  are  so  sure  that  they  will  stand  any  fire  that  may  be  directed 
against  them ;  and  yet  not  one  of  them  will  stand  firm.  They  will  all 
forsake  him  and  flee.  In  the  garden,  the  three  who  are  his  body- 
guard will  fall  asleep,  and  the  rest  of  the  disciples  will  do  the  same ; 
and  when  he  stands  before  Pilate  and  Herod,  none  of  them  will  be 
there  to  defend  him  ;  not  a  solitary  voice  will  be  lifted  up  for  him. 

The  sure  ones  left  him  whom  they  so  certainly  believed;  and 
they  were  honest  men,  too,  when  they  spoke  so  confidently.  There 
was  no  hypocrisy  about  what  they  said,  they  meant  it  all ;  they  did 
•each  one  verily  believe  that  he  could  go  to  prison  and  to  death,  and 
that  he  would  do  so  rather  than  deny  his  Lord.  In  their  own  esteem, 
they  were  not  boasting;  they  were  only  saying  what  they  really 
intended  to  do.  Here  is  the  bitterness  of  your  trial,  when,  in  your 
hour  of  need,  your  good,  honest  friends  are  gone,  your  real  friends 
fainting  and  weary.  They  cannot  go  your  pace  ;  they  cannot  confront 
the  storm  that  you  are  called  upon  to  face,  and  they  are  gone.  Alas, 
for  our  dear  Lord,  what  grief  it  was  to  him!  They  who  were  so 
confident,  and  they  who  were  really  true,  yet,  nevertheless,  were 
scattered,  and  he  was  left  alone. 

They  also  really  loved  Christ.  I  am  sure  that  Peter's  was  not  a 
new  love  when  he  said,  "  Thou  knowest  all  things ;  thou  knowest 
that  I  love  thee."  He  did  love  his  Master.  Even  when  he  denied 
his  Lord,  there  was  love  in  his  heart  towards  him.  So  was  it  with 
the  other  disciples,  they  all  loved  their  Lord,  yet  all  of  them  left  him, 
and  poor  weak  things  that  they  were,  they  turned  their  backs  in  the  day 


64  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PITLPIT. 

of  battle.  It  is  a  grief  to  our  hearts  to  be  forsaken  of  good  friends  and 
loving  friends.  I  do  not  know ;  but  if  you  were  sure  that  they  had 
been  hypocrites,  you  might  almost  be  glad  that  they  were  gone ;  but 
your  very  knowledge  that  they  were  true  at  heart,  as  true  as  such 
poor  things  could  be,  increases  the  bitterness  that  they  should  leave 
you.  You  need  not  think,  when  this  occurs  in  your  experience,  that 
any  strange  thing  has  happened  to  you,  for  Christ  was  thus  left  alone. 

Notice,  that  he  was  left  by  every  maji.  "  Ye  shall  be  scattered,  every 
man  to  his  own,"  '*  every  man."  When  the  trial  comes,  does  not  John 
remain  ?  Does  not  he  remember  that  dear  breast  on  which  he  leaned 
his  head?  Is  John  gone?  Yes,  "  every  man."  Christ  looked,  and 
there  was  none  to  stand  by  him.  He  must  confront  his  accusers 
without  a  single  witness  in  his  favour ;  every  man  was  gone.  Ah, 
this  was  a  trial,  indeed !  But  one  true  friend,  a  Damon  or  a  Pythias, 
to  be  faithful  to  one  another  even  unto  death,  and  the  trial  is  not  so 
overwhelming.  But,  no  ;  every  man  is  gone  to  his  own,  and  Christ  is 
left  alone ;  of  the  people  there  is  none  with  him,  not  even  one  of  those 
who  had  been  his  most  intimate  friends. 

What  were  they  all  at  ?  Well,  every  man  was  looking  to  his  own  safety : 
**  Ye  shall  be  scattered,  every  man  to  his  own."  Is  not  that  the  very 
essence  of  selfishness  and  of  meanness,  "  Every  man  to  his  own "  ? 
This  is  all  that  Christ  received  from  the  best  of  his  followers ;  they 
left  him,  and  went  every  man  to  his  own,  to  his  own  house,  to  see  to 
his  own  security,  to  screen  his  own  character,  to  preserve  his  own  life. 
**  Every  man  to  his  own."  Are  these  thy  friends,  0  Jesu  ?  Lover  of 
men,  are  these  thy  lovers  ?  Do  you  wonder  if,  sometimes,  you  find 
that  your  friends  would  take  care  of  you  only  that  they  must  take  care 
of  themselves  ?  They  would  keep  you,  but  then  you  cost  too  much ; 
you  are  too  ''  dear  "  a  friend !  The  expense  of  your  friendship  has  to 
be  looked  at,  and  their  income  will  not  bear  it.  "  Every  man  to 
his  own."     This  also  the  Saviour  had  to  feel. 

And,  remember,  this  happened  when  Chrisfs  special  liour  was  come. 
"  The  hour  cometh,"  Christ's  hour,  the  hour  of  the  power  of  darkness. 
It  was  then  that  they  left  him.  When  he  did  not  need  their  friendship, 
they  were  his  very  good  friends.  When  they  could  do  nothing  for 
him  if  they  tried,  they  were  his  faithful  followers.  But  the  pinch 
has  come ;  now  might  they  watch  with  him  one  hour,  now  might  they 
go  with  him  amid  the  rabble  throng,  and  interpose  at  least  the  vote  of 
the  minority  against  the  masses ;  but  they  are  gone.  Like  your 
swallows,  they  have  disappeared  or  e'er  the  first  frost  has  covered 
the  brook.  Like  the  green  leaves  of  summer,  where  are  they  now  in 
this  wintry  time  ?  Alas,  alas,  for  friendship,  when  it  fails  when  most 
it  is  needed  !     And  it  did  fail  the  Saviour  then. 

He  was  left,  also,  in  violation  of  every  bond.  These  men  who  left  him 
were  pledged  to  stand  by  him.  They  had  given  him  a  promise  to  die 
with  him.  These  were  his  choice  companions ;  he  had  called  them 
from  the  fishing-smacks  of  Galilee,  and  made  them  his  disciples.  These 
were  his  apostles,  the  chief  men  in  his  new  kingdom.  They  were  to 
sit  upon  thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  These,  he  had 
redeemed  unto  himself ;  these  were  to  be  partakers  of  his  glory  in  the 
day  of  his  appearing.     Never  were  men  bound  to  man  as  they  were 


{ 


ALONE,  YET  NOT   ALONE.  65 

bound  to  Christ ;  and  yet  they  left  him  alone.  Dear  friend,  do  not 
expect  gratitude  from  your  fellow-creatures ;  it  is  a  very  scarce  thing* 
in  this  world.  The  more  you  do  for  men,  the  less  will  be  their 
return.  I  speak  not  now  like  one  who  thinks  ill  of  my  fellows ;  but 
I  know  that  it  is  so,  alas !  in  many  instances ;  and  if  it  be  not  your 
lot,  you  may  thank  God  that  it  is  not,  and  wonder  why  you  are  an 
exception  to  the  rule.  If,  by-and-by,  you  shall  come  down  in  the 
world,  and  need  the  help  of  those  you  helped  in  days  gone  by,  they 
will,  as  a  rule,  be  the  last  to  help  you,  and  the  first  to  tread  you 
down.  Certainly,  with  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  those  who  were  nearest 
and  who  owed  him  most  fled  from  him,  and  he  derived  from  them  no 
succour.  It  was  "  every  man  to  his  own  "  ;  and  they  left  him  alone, 
to  be  bound  and  beaten  by  his  unfeeling  adversaries,  and  to  be  taken 
away  to  prison  and  to  death. 

There  is  the  first  division  of  our  subject,  our  Lord's  trial.  I  say 
again,  that  a  like  trial  may  happen  to  some  here.  It  has  happened 
often  to  bold  defenders  of  the  faith,  to  find  themselves  left  to  hold 
the  bridge  alone ;  but  it  is  a  sharp,  stern  trial  to  the  man  who  is 
called  to  endure  it. 

II.  More  cheery  talk  shall  we  have  on  our  second  head,  which  is 
ouB  Lord's  confidence.  He  says,  "  Ye  shall  leave  me  alone :  and 
yet  I  am  not  alone,  because  the  Father  is  with  me." 

Observe,  then,  that  Christ's  confidence  was  confidence  that  the  Father 
was  with  him,  and  this  confidence  kept  Mm  to  his  purpose.  See,  the  disciples 
flee  ;  they  are  all  scattered,  every  man  to  his  own.  Has  Christ  gone  ? 
Not  he.  John,  Peter,  James,  Thomas,  and  all  the  rest,  are  gone; 
has  Christ  gone  ?  Not  he.  There  he  stands.  They  have  left  him 
alone  ;  but  there  he  is,  still  standing  to  his  purpose.  He  has  come  to 
save,  and  he  will  save.  He  has  come  to  redeem,  and  he  will  redeem. 
He  has  come  to  overcome  the  world,  and  he  will  overcome  it.  They 
have  left  him  alone  ;  they  have  not  taken  him  away  with  them.  He 
is  no  coward.  From  his  purpose  he  doth  never  fly,  blessed  be  his 
name  !  He  stood  fast  in  that  dread  hour  when  all  forsook  him  and 
fled.     This  was  because  his  confidence  was  in  God. 

Next,  observe,  that  this  confidence  in  God  not  only  kept  him  to  his 
purpose,  but  it  sustained  him  in  the  prospect  of  the  trial.  Notice  how  it 
runs  :  "Ye  shall  leave  me  alone  :  and  yet  I  am  not  alone."  Christ 
does  not  say,  "  I  shall  not  be  alone."  That  was  true  ;  but  he  said, 
'^I  am  not  alone."'  I  love  to  read  the  experience  of  the  child  of  God 
in  the  present  tense,  the  gifts,  and  graces,  and  promises  of  God  in  the 
present  tense  :  "  I  am  not  alone."  "  The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd,"  as 
w^ell  as  ^^1  shall  not  want."  "He  maJceth  me  to  lie  down  in  green 
pastures  ;  he  leadeth  me  beside  the  still  waters."  He  is  doing  every- 
thing for  me  now.  The  blessed  Christ  says  that  the  prospect  of 
God's  being  with  him  all  through  the  trouble,  and  the  presence  of 
God  with  him  now,  is  his  comfort  in  the  prospect  of  it.  You  who  were 
here  this  morning  know  what  a  sad  discourse  we  had  from  the  text, 
"  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "*  I  took  this  text 
for  my  evening  discourse  because  it  is  the  counterpart  of  the  one  we 

*  See  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit,  No.  2,133.     "Lama  Sabachthani't"' 

5 


66  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

considered  this  morning ;  for  our  Lord  could  truly  say  to  Lis  disciples, 
"  And  yet  I  am  not  alone,  because  the  Father  is  with  me." 

Our  Lord's  declaration  was  contradicted  hy  appearances.  Did  he  not 
have  to  say  to  God:  "Why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  How,  then, 
could  he  say,  "The  Father  is  with  me"?  It  was  true;  and  in  a 
part  of  my  morning  sermon  I  tried  to  show  that,  while  Q-od  forsook 
him  in  his  official  capacity  as  the  Lawgiver  and  the  Executive  of  the 
law,  yet  in  his  personal  relation  to  him  he  did  not  and  could  not 
forsake  him.  The  Father  was  with  him.  Oh,  is  it  not  blessed  on  the 
part  of  Christ  to  stand  to  this  ?  He  knows  that  his  Father  is  with 
him,  even  when  he  feels  in  another  sense  that  the  Father  has  forsaken 
him.  Beloved,  if  everybody  leaves  you,  and  God  seems  to  leave  you, 
still  hold  to  your  confidence  in  God.  Do  not  believe  that  God  can 
forsake  his  own  ;  do  not  even  dream  it ;  it  cannot  be.  He  never  did 
forsake  his  own ;  he  never  can ;  and  he  never  will.  The  Father  is  with 
Jesus  Christ,  even  when  he  knows  that  he  will  have  to  say,  "Why 
hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  " 

Yet,  it  was  assuredly  true  that  the  Father  was  with  Christ  when  he  was 
left  alone.  How  was  the  Father  with  him,  then  ?  Beloved,  even  when  the 
Father  did  not  look  on  Christ,  or  give  him  one  smile,  or  one  word  of 
comfort,  he  was  still  with  him.  How  so  ?  Well,  he  was  with  him  as 
to  his  eternal  purposes  and  covenant.  They  had  entered  into  covenant 
together  for  the  redemption  of  men,  for  the  salvation  of  the  elect,  and 
they  had  crossed  hands,  and  pledged  each  other  to  carry  out  the 
divine  purpose  and  the  everlasting  covenant.  I  remember  that  passage 
about  Abraham  going  with  Isaac  to  moimt  Moriah,  where  Isaac  was 
to  be  offered  up.  It  is  written,  "  So  they  went  both  of  them  together." 
So  did  the  Eternal  Father  and  his  Well-beloved  Son  when  God  was 
about  to  give  up  his  own  Son  to  death.  There  was  no  divided  pur- 
pose ;  they  went  both  of  them  together.  All  the  work  of  Christ  was 
the  work  of  the  Father,  and  the  Father  supported  him  in  it  to  the 
very  full. 

In  the  design  and  method  of  the  atonement,  the  Father  and  the 
Son  were  together.  "  God  so  loved  the  world  that  he  gave  his  Only- 
begotten  Son ;  "  but  Jesus  so  loved  the  world  that  he  gave  himself. 
The  atonement  was  the  gift  of  the  Father ;  but  it  was  the  work  of  the 
Son.  In  all  that  he  suffered  he  could  say,  "  The  Father  is  with  me 
in  it.  I  am  doing  that  which  will  glorify  him,  and  content  him."  He 
went  not  alone  to  prison  and  to  death.  In  all  things  he  did  that 
which  pleased  the  Father,  and  the  Father  was  with  him  in  it  all. 

All  the  decrees  of  God  were  at  the  back  of  Christ.  It  is  written  in 
the  sealed  book,  but  who  shall  read  it  except  the  Christ  ?  Whatever 
is  written  there  is  written  in  support  of  Christ.  There  is  not  a 
decree  in  the  book  of  destiny  but  works  out  for  Christ's  glory,, and 
according  to  Christ's  mind.  It  is  not  merely  twelve  legions  of  angels 
that  are  behind  the  cross,  but  the  God  of  the  angels  is  there,  too.  It 
is  not  merely  the  forces  of  Providence  that  shall  work  together  to 
achieve  the  purpose  of  the  Creator,  but  the  God  of  Providence,  the 
infinite  Jehovah,  is  in  league  with  Jesus ;  and  he  can  say  it,  as  he 
goes  out  to  die,  "I  am  not  alone:  because  the  Father  is  with  me." 
Is  not  this  a  glorious  truth,  that  our  Lord  Christ  was  not  alone  ? 


ALONE,  YET  NOT   ALONE.  67 

So  far  as  earthly  companions  were  concerned,  tlie  words  written  by 
Isaiah  could  be  literally  uttered  by  Christ,  "  I  have  trodden  the  wine- 
press alone."     Every  man  was  gone,  but  God  was  always  with  him. 

Since  then,  it  has  beeti  made  manifest  that  God  was  with  Christ.  He 
proved  it  by  raising  him  from  the  dead.  Did  not  the  Father  also 
prove  that  he  was  with  the  Son  by  sending  the  Holy  Ghost  at 
Pentecost  with  divers  signs  and  wonders  ?  Jesus  is  not  alone.  All 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  since,  in  convincing  men  of  sin,  and 
leading  them  to  Jesus,  is  a  proof  that  he  is  not  alone.  Beloved,  all 
the  history  of  Providence,  since  the  day  when  Christ  was  taken  up 
into  heaven,  proves  that  he  is  not  alone.  Alone?  The  Christ 
alone  ?  Why,  the  beasts  of  the  field  are  in  league  with  him  ;  the  stars 
in  their  courses  fight  for  him.  Every  event  of  history,  give  it  but 
time  and  space,  will  make  his  kingdom  come.  Every  turn  of  yonder 
enormous  wheels  of  Providence  shall  make  his  chariot  of  triumph 
come  nearer  and  nearer  over  the  necks  of  his  foes.  Even  now,  by 
faith,  "we  see  Jesus,  who  was  made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels 
for  the  suffering  of  death,  crowned  with  glory  and  honour." 

**  Look,  ye  saints,  the  sight  is  glorious, 
See  the  "  Man  of  Sorrows  "  now  ; 
From  the  tight  return'd  victorious, 
Every  knee  to  him  shall  bow : 

Crown  him,  crown  him  ; 
Crowns  become  the  Victor's  brow.** 

Jesus  is  the  focus  of  all  power  and  wisdom.  God  is  with  him ;  and 
the  day  comes  when  he  shall  appear  in  his  glory.  In  his  millennial 
reign  among  the  sons  of  God  it  shall  be  seen  that  he  is  not  alone  ;  and 
when  he  shall  come  in  the  glory  of  the  Father,  and  all  his  holy  angels 
with  him,  then  shall  he  be  able  to  say  with  even  greater  emphasis, 
"I  am  not  alone:  because  the  Father  is  with  me."  And  when  he 
sits  upon  the  great  white  throne,  and  divides  mankind,  his  friends 
to  the  right,  his  foes  to  the  left,  and  pronounces  eternal  wrath  upon 
rebels,  and  opens  heaven  to  believers,  then  shall  all  worlds  know 
that  the  Man  of  Nazareth  is  not  alone.  Alone  ":*  I  seem  as  if  I  must 
laugh  at  the  very  thought.  AU  heaven  and  earth,  things  present  and 
things  to  come,  time  and  eternity,  life  and  death,  are  all  with  him. 
Men  may  forsake  him,  but  he  is  not  alone. 

III.  Now,  I  want,  in  the  third  place,  to  teach  the  lessons  of  our 
Lord's  example.  As  my  time  has  nearly  gone,  I  must  very  briefly 
speak  of  these  lessons. 

First,  learn  fidelity  when  others  fail.  Are  you  a  Christian  ?  Do  you 
trust  Christ?  Do  you  love  him?  Then,  never  desert  him.  "Oh! 
but,"  says  one,  "the  current  runs  the  other  way  now."  Brother,  let  it 
run ;  it  will  leave  oS  when  it  has  run  away.  I  believe  in  him  who 
rose  again  from  the  dead,  whose  righteousness  doth  justify  me,  whose 
blood  doth  wash  me  whiter  than  snow.  "  But  the  philosophers  tell 
us  that  this  is  not  scientific."  I  am  unscientific,  then,  and  I  delight  to 
be  unscientific.  "  Oh,  but  the  deep  thinkers  say  this  is  inconsistent 
with  progress!"  WeU,  let  it  be  inconsistent  with  progress.  "Ob, 
but  aU  the  world  denies  it !  "     So  much  the  worse  for  the  world.     Let 


68  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

it  deny  the  truth  if  it  will.  That  was  a  grand  spirit  of  Athanasius 
when  he  said,  ^^  Athanasius  contra  mundum^^ ;  that  is,  ''Athanasius 
against  the  whole  world."  And  every  Christian  may  be  of  this  spirit,, 
and  ought  to  be  of  this  spirit.  Is  this  Book  true  ?  What  matters  it 
though  every  Tom  Fool  says  that  it  is  a  lie  !  Let  Tom  Fools  say  that 
if  they  will ;  but  it  is  true,  and  hold  you  to  it.  If  God  the  Holy 
G-host  has  taught  you  to  trust  in  Christ,  trust  you  in  Christ,  whatever 
other  people  do.  What  ?  Do  you  live  on  the  breath  of  other  men's 
nostrils  ?  Do  you  count  heads,  and  then  jump  with  the  larger 
number?  Is  that  your  way?  Why,  surely  such  a  man  as  that  m 
hardly  worth  saving.  Is  he  a  man,  or  is  he  not  a  cat  that  must  look 
before  he  jumps?  Nay,  if  thou  art  a  man,  and  thou  believest  in 
Christ,  stand  up  for  Christ. 

"  Stand  up !   Stand  up  for  Jesus  I 

Ye  soldiers  of  the  cross  ! 
Lift  high  his  royal  banner  ; 

It  must  not  suffer  loss : 
From  victory  unto  victory 

His  army  shall  he  lead, 
Till  every  foe  is  vanquish'd. 

And  Christ  is  Lord  indeed. 

**  Stand  up  !     Stand  up  for  Jesus  I 

The  trumijet-call  obey ; 
Forth  to  the  mighty  conflict, 

In  this  his  glorious  day ; 
Ye  that  are  men,  now  serve  him, 

Against  unnumber'd  foes ; 
Your  courage  rise  with  danger. 

And  strength  to  strength  oppose." 

And  when  the  many  turn  aside,  stand  you  the  more  boldly  and  the 
more  confidently,  for  your  confidence  and  boldness  are  all  the  more 
needed  at  such  a  time.  Your  Lord  did^not  forsake  his  grand  errand 
when  all  men  forsook  him.  Do  not  renounce  your  lifework  and  your 
faith,  even  though,  all  others  should  renounce  theirs. 

Next,  with  your  Master,  believe  that  God  is  all-sufficient.  Head  this  : 
"Ye  shall  be  scattered,  every  man  to  his  own,  and  shall  leave  me 
alone:  and  j^et  I  am  not  alone,  because " — what?  "Because  there 
will  be  half-a-dozen  of  you  faithful "  ?  No.  "  Because  three  of  you 
will  cling  to  me"?  No.  "Because  the  Father  is  with  me."  Oh, 
we  do  not  count  as  we  should.  There  is  a  million  against  you.  Is 
God  for  you?  Well,  then,  you  are  in  the  majority.  What  is  a 
million,  after  aU,  but  one  and  so  many  ciphers  ?  Trust  thou  in  God, 
and  let  the  millions  go  their  way.  God  is  enough.  When  he  that 
spoke  in  the  academy  found  everybody  leaving  him  in  his  speaking 
except  Plato,  he  still  kept  on;  and  one  said,  "  Speaker,  thou  hast  no 
audience  but  Plato."  "No  audience  but  Plato?"  says  he;  "Plato 
is  enough  for  fifty  orators."  So,  truly,  if  thou  hast  no  other  helper 
but  God,  stand  thou  where  thou  art ;  for  God  is  not  only  enough  for 
thee,  but  for  all  the  faithful,  weak  as  they  may  be. 

Next,  learn  another  lesson.  Rest  in  God,  despite  appearances.  Art 
thoii  very  poor  ?     Art  thou  weak  ?     Art  thou  slandered  ?     Art  thou 


\  ALONE,  YET  NOT   ALONE.  69 

scourged  with  God's  heaviest  rod?  Yet  kick  not  thou  at  him,  any 
more  than  thy  Lord  did.  He  said,  "The  Father  is  with  me,"  even 
though  he  had  to  cry,  "  Why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  Believe  him 
when  thou  canst  not  see  him;  believe  him  when  he  smiles  not; 
believe  him  when  he  frowns ;  believe  him  when  he  smites ;  believe 
him  when  he  slays,  for  that  is  the  climax  of  it  all,  to  say  like  Job, 
<'  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  him."  It  is  his  to  do  what 
he  likes ;  it  is  mine  to  trust  him,  let  him  do  as  he  will.  I  throw  my 
arms  about  my  God,  and  say,  "My  God,  my  God,'^  even  when  no 
sensible  joys  are  felt,  and  I  am  obliged  to  walk  by  faith. 

Lastly,  struggling  child  of  God,  standing  firm  for  the  truth  and  the 
right,  expect  that  thy  trouble  ivill  not  last  long.  Did  you  notice  how 
Christ  puts  it,  "  Behold,  the  hour  cometh  "  ?  Only  an  hour.  "  Behold, 
the  hour  cometh."  It  is  not  a  year,  brother,  it  is  not  a  year ;  it  is  not 
a  month;  it  is  not  a  day;  it  is  but  an  hour.  "The  hour  cometh." 
To  Christ  it  was  a  long  hour  certainly,  when  he  hung  upon  the  cross ; 
but  he  calls  the  whole  period  from  the  bloody  sweat  to  the  death  of 
the  cross,  "  the  hour."  It  is  the  part  of  faith  to  shorten  days  to  hours. 
It  is  your  part,  to-night,  to  recollect  that,  if  you  have  to  suffer,  and 
to  stand  alone  for  Christ,  it  is  but  for  an  hour.  How  willingly  have 
we  waited  when  it  has  been  but  for  an  hour  !  How  cheerfully  have 
we  gone  on  in  the  dark  when  we  have  known  that  it  was  only  for  an 
hour  !  Our  trial  is  but  for  an  hour.  Literally,  before  another  hour 
strikes,  some  of  us  may  be  with  God ;  but  whether  it  is  so  with  us,  or 
not,  we  may  still  sing, — 

**Let  doubt,  then,  and  danger  my  progress  oppose, 
They  only  make  heaven  more  sweet  at  the  close : 
Come  joy  or  come  sorrow,  whate'er  may  befall. 
An  hour  with  my  God  will  make  up  for  them  all." 

But  if  not  literally  only  an  hour,  yet  certainly  the  longest  reign  of 
persecution  is  but  short.  It  is  soon  over  when  we  once  get  home.  I 
think  that  it  will  help  to  make  a  merry  holiday  in  the  land  that  flows 
with  milk  and  honey,  to  sit  one  of  these  days  by  one  of  those  rippling 
streams,  and  say,  "I  remember  when  So-and-so  forsook  me,  and  I 
stood  fast  by  the  truth  as  I  knew  it  and  believed  it.  They  all 
forsook  me,  and  it  did  seem  hard  to  bear  at  the  time;  but  my 
loneliness  did  not  last  long,  it  was  soon  over ;  and  when  the  Lord 
said,  '  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant,'  it  did  not  se®m  then  that 
it  had  been  an  hour,  but  only  the  winking  of  an  eye,  or  as  when,  in 
^A\Q  night,  the  candle  is  blown  out,  and  lighted  again  by  its  own 
smoke,  so  short  was  the  time  of  darkness."  So  it  shall  seem  in 
heaven  as  if  we  never  had  suffered  anything  for  Christ.  The  martyr 
shall  go  in  the  red-hot  chariot  from  the  stake ;  and  when  he  gets  to 
heaven,  he  shall  have  forgotten  that  he  burned  to  death,  in  the  ex- 
ceeding joy  of  beholding  his  Master.  It  is  but  an  hour,  and  we  shall 
meet  before  the  golden  throne,  and  stand  upon  the  sea  of  glass,  and 
sing  for  ever,  "  Unto  him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins 
in  his  own  blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God 
and  his  Father ;  to  him  be  glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen.'* 


70  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PUXPIT. 

^Exposition  ijg  €.  3^.  Spurgeon. 

JOHN  XVI.  16-33. 

Verse  16.  A  little  while,  and  ye  shall  not  see  me :  and  again,  a  little  while, 
and  ye  shall  see  me,  because  I  go  to  the  Father. 

Eemember  that  the  disciples  were  on  the  verge  of  great  trouble.  Their 
Leader  and  Friend  was  about  to  be  taken  away  from  them  by  a  cruel  death. 
They  were  to  be  tried  as  they  had  never  been  tried  before.  The  Saviour 
therefore  prepared  their  minds  for  the  trial.  I  have  often  noticed  that, 
before  a  great  trouble  comes,  the  Spirit  of  God  secretly  comforts  in  a  very 
remarkable  manner  those  who  are  to  be  tried.  Perhaps,  to-night,  without 
knowing  it,  we  ijaay  be  near  some  great  affliction  or  sorrow.  If  so,  may 
the  Lord  store  us  with  comfort  and  strength  for  the  coming  hour  of  need  ! 

17,  18.  Then  said  some  of  his  disciples  among  themselves,  WJiat  is  this  that 
he  saith  unto  us,  A  little  ivhile,  and  ye  shall  not  see  me:  and  again,  a  little 
while,  and  ye  shall  see  me :  and,  Because  1  go  to  the  Father  ?  They  said  there- 
fore. What  is  this  that  he  saith,  A  little  ivhile  ?  we  cannot  tell  ivhat  he  saith. 

It  was  only  too  plain.  We  often  do  not  understand  our  Master  because 
we  imagine  that  there  is  some  deep  significance  in  his  words  when  their 
meaning  lies  upon  the  very  surface.  If  you  would  understand  the  gospel 
as  you  understand  the  common  talk  of  life,  it  would  be  wise.  If  we  could 
but  bring  men  to  believe  God  as  a  child  believes  its  mother,  practically  and 
really,  then  their  salvation  would  be  a  very  simple  and  speedy  matter. 

19.  20.  Now  Jesus  knew  that  they  were  desirous  to  ask  him,  and  said  unto 
them.  Do  ye  enquire  among  yourselves  of  that  I  said,  A  little  while,  and  ye  shall 
not  see  me  :  and  again,  a  little  while,  and  ye  shall  see  me  ?  Verily,  verily,  I  say 
unto  you.  That  ye  shall  weep  and  lament,  hut  the  world  shall  rejoice  : 

Sometimes  the  world  appears  to  have  the  best  of  it.  Its  mouth  is  full  of 
laughter  while  the  child  of  God  cannot  speak  for  sorrow.  Ah  !  well,  there 
is  time  enough  for  a  change.  We  may  very  well  let  those  laugh  to-day  who 
will  have  to  gnash  their  teeth  for  ever.  Judge  not  God  by  your  present 
circumstances.  Take  the  rough  with  the  smooth.  Be  willing  to  go  to 
heaven  up  the  bleak  side  of  the  hill. 

20.  And  ye  shall  he  sorrowful,  hut  your  sorrow  shall  he  turned  into  joy. 
So,  the  more  of  it  the  better.     If  your  sorrow  is  to  be  turned  into  joy, 

then  the  more  sorrow,  the  more  joy.    Happy  is  he  who  endureth  trial,  since 
his  trial  is  to  be  turned  into  happiness. 

21.  22.  A  ivoman  when  she  is  in  travail  hath  sorrow,  because  her  hour  is 
come  :  hut  as  soon  as  she  is  delivered  of  the  child,  she  remembereth  no  more  the 
anguish,  for  joy  that  a  man  is  horn  into  the  world.  And  ye  now  therefore  have 
Borrow : 

But  your  sorrow  is  the  pang  of  life. 

22.  But  I  will  see  you  again,  and  your  heart  shall  rejoice,  and  your  joy  no 
man  taketh  from  you. 

The  joy  that  comes  by  sorrow  in  connection  with  Christ  is  the  joy  of 
which  we  shall  never  be  bereaved.  Let  us  thank  God  that  there  is  a  joy 
which  no  man  can  take  away.     Happy  are  they  who  have  it. 

23.  And  in  that  day  ye  shall  ask  me  nothing.  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
you,  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in  my  name,  he  will  give  it  you. 

This  is  a  grand  promise.  If  we  dare  ask  in  the  name  of  Christ,  and  it  is 
not  everything  that  we  could  ask  for  in  his  name — if  our  petition  is  such 
that  we  honestly  judge  that  we  may  put  Christ's  name  to  it,  if  it  is  a  thing 
that  Christ  would  have  asked,  if  it  is  a  thing  that  Christ  could  have  asked, 
let  us  ask  in  Christ's  name,  and  the  Father  will  ffive  it. 


EXPOSITION.  71 

24.     Hitherto  have  ye  ashed  nothing  in  my  name : 

You  have  not  been  bold  enough.  You  have  asked  a  few  petty  things, 
but  you  have  never  fully  made  use  of  Christ's  name.  How  many  Christians 
have  never  learned  to  pray  in  the  name  of  Christ !  They  say  at  the  end  of 
their  petition,  "  For  Christ's  sake."  That  is  good  as  far  as  it  goes.  I  may 
ask  a  man  to  give  me  such  and  such  a  thing  for  the  sake  of  another ;  that 
is  good  pleading  so  far  as  it  goes.  But  if  I  dare  to  use  the  authority  that 
my  friend  gives  me  to  put  his  name  at  the  bottom  of  my  request,  that  is 
another  and  a  higher  thing.  To  ask  in  the  name  of  Christ,  to  plead  under 
his  authority,  this  is  to  pray  indeed. 

24.  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may  he  fall. 

•'  That  your  joy  may  be  full,"  a  ripe  joy,  a  joy  that  fills  your  being,  that 
sparkles  in  your  eye,  dances  in  your  feet,  leaps  in  your  heart,  an  unutter- 
able, inexpressible  joy  :  "  That  your  joy  may  be  full." 

25,  26.  These  things  have  I s^johen  unto  you  inproverhs :  hut  the  time  cometh, 
xvhen  I  shall  no  more  speak  unto  you  in  proverhs,  hut  1  shall  shew  you  plainly 
of  the  Father.  At  that  day  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name:  and  I  say  not  unto  you, 
that  I  ivill  pray  the  Father  for  you : 

Though  that  be  true, 

27.     For  the  Father  himself  loveth  you. 

What  a  delightful  little  sentence  !     "  The  Father  himself  loveth  you." 

27.     Because  ye  have  loved  me,  and  have  helieved  that  I  came  out  from  God. 

God's  first  love  to  us  is  from  himself  alone.  Then  there  is  another  love 
that  grows  in  his  heart  because  of  our  love  to  his  Son.  You  love  your 
child.  The  reason  lies  in  your  own  heart.  After  a  while,  that  dear,  loving, 
affectionate  child  has  won  a  farther  place  in  your  affection,  and  you  love 
him  because  of  his  choice  and  special  love  to  you.  Remember  that  Psalm, 
' '  Because  he  hath  set  his  love  upon  me,  therefore  will  I  deliver  him  :  I  will 
set  him  on  high,  because  he  hath  known  my  name."  Our  love  of  God 
wins  from  him  another  love,  of  a  different  sort,  although  it  comes  from  the 
same  fountain  as  the  first :  "  For  the  Father  himself  loveth  you.  because 
ye  have  loved  me,  and  have  believed  that  I  came  out  from  God." 

28—30.  I  came  forth  from  the  Father,  and  am  come  into  the  world:  again, 
I  leave  the  world,  and  go  to  the  Father.  His  disciples  said  unto  him,  Lo,  now 
speakest  thou  plainly,  and  speakest  no  proverb.  Now  are  we  sure  that  thou 
knoivest  all  things,  and  needest  not  that  any  man  should  ask  thee :  by  this  we 
believe  that  thou  camest  forth  from  God. 

One  does  not  see  any  reason  why  they  should  have  been  made  so  strong 
m  faith  just  then.  But  we  were  not  there  to  hear  Christ's  words.  There  is 
many  a  message  which  depends  upon  the  tone  and  manner  of  the  speaker  for 
its  influence  over  the  people  who  hear  it.  When  you  read  the  story  after- 
wards, without  the  earnest  manner  and  the  living  tone  of  the  speaker,  you 
do  not  see  why  it  had  such  a  strange  effect  upon  his  hearers.  So  we  do  not 
quite  see  here,  by  the  calm  reading  of  this  narrative,  why  the  disciples 
leaped  all  of  a  sudden  into  such  confidence. 

31.  Jesus  answered  them.  Do  ye  now  believe  f 

He  did  not  feel  so  sure  of  their  faith  as  they  did.  We  often  think  we  have 
great  heaps  of  the  gold  of  faith ;  and  it  glitters  very  brightly,  but  it  is  not 
the  precious  metal  after  all.     So  Jesus  said,  "  Do  ye  now  believe  ?  " 

32.  Behold,  the  hour  cometh,  yea,  is  now  come,  that  ye  shall  he  scattered, 
ivery  man  to  his  own,  and  shall  leave  me  alone :  and  yet  I  am  not  alone,  because 
ihe  Father  is  luith  me. 

These  poor  creatures,  who  were  so  bold  and  so  oversure,  would  all  be 
muaways.     If  persecution  were  to  arise  in  our  day,  I  wonder  how  many  of 


72  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

US  would  be  found  true  men.  Ah  !  you  think  you  are  true  blue  ;  but  yon 
would  run  at  the  first  touch  of  water,  not  to  mention  fire.  Are  there  not 
many  of  us  who  are  but  poor  believers  ?  If  our  faith  were  sharply  tried, 
would  it  stand  the  test  ? 

33..  These  things  I  have  spoken  unto  you,  that  in  me  ye  might  have  peace. 
In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation :  but  be  of  good  cheer  ;  I  have  overcome  the 
world. 

Christ  wants  his  disciples  to  have  peace.  Are  you  fretting  to-night  ?  Are 
you  afraid  of  Monday  ?  Are  you  fearful  about  the  trials  of  the  week  ? 
Christ  wants  you  to  be  at  peace.  Be  quiet.  Be  quiet.  Let  all  lie  still 
within  your  heart,  and  wait  your  Father's  will.  *'  In  the  world  ye  shall 
have  tribulation :  "  on  God's  threshing-floor  the  flail  will  be  kept  going.  If 
you  are  a  child  of  God,  you  will  have  to  suffer.  The  Captain  of  our  salva- 
tion was  made  perfect  through  sufferings  ;  and  good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ 
must  expect  to  pass  through  the  same  experience.  As  long  as  you  are  here, 
you  will  be  tried :  "In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation :  but  be  of  good 
cheer;  I  have  overcome  the  world."  Think  of  that;  the  Christ  who  is 
about  to  sweat  great  drops  of  blood,  and  to  die  on  the  cross  of  Calvary, 
says,  ''  I  have  overcome."  It  is  not  Julius  Caesar's  **  Veni,  vidi,  vici  ;  "  but  it 
is  Christ's  "  Venif  vidi,  vici;  " — "I  came,  I  saw,  I  conquered  :  "  **  I  have  over- 
come."  And  as  he  has  overcome,  so  shall  you,  if  you  be  his  true  follower. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 685,  739. 


J 


CIHEIST'S   PASTOEAL   PEAYEE  FOE  HIS   PEOPLE. 


Intended  for  Eeading  on  Lord's-day,  October  22nd,  1893, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Zord^s-daj/  Evening,  September  1st,  1889. 


"  I  pray  for  them  :  I  pray  not  for  the  world,  but  for  them  which  thou  hast  given 
me ;  tor  they  are  thine.  And  all  mine  are  thiue,  and  thine  are  mine  •  and  T  am 
glorifiedin  them."— John  xvii.  9,  10.  ,  <*  u.  j.  am 

To  begin  with,  I  remark  that  our  Lord  Jesus  pleads  for  his  own 
people.  When  he  puts  on  his  priestly  breastplate,  it  is  for  the  tribes 
whose  names  are  there.  When  he  presents  the  atoning  sacrifice,  it  is 
for  Israel  whom  God  hath  chosen;  and  he  utters  this  great  truth 
which  some  regard  as  narrow,  but  which  we  adore,  "  I  pray  for  them  • 
I  pray  not  for  the  world."  The  point  to  which  I  want  to  call  attention 
18  this,  the  reason  why  Christ  prays  not  for  the  world,  but  for  his 
people.  He  puts  it,  ''For  they  are  thine,"  as  if  they  were  all  the 
dearer  to  him  because  they  were  the  Father's:  "I  pray  for  them  :  I 
pray  not  for  the  world,  but  for  them  which  thou  hast  given  me  for 
they  are  thine."  We  might  have  half  thought  that  Jesus  would  have 
«aid,  "  They  are  mine,  and  therefore  I  pray  for  them."  It  would  have 
been  true  ;  but  there  would  not  have  been  the  beauty  of  truth  about  it 
which  we  have  here.  He  loves  us  all  the  better,  and  he  prays  for  us 
all  the  more  fervently,  because  we  are  the  Father's.  Such  is  his  love 
to  his  Father,  that  our  being  the  Father's  sheds  upon  us  an  extra  halo 
of  beauty.  Because  we  belong  to  the  Father,  therefore  does  the 
Saviour  plead  for  us  with  all  the  greater  earnestness  at  the  throne  of 
the  heavenly  grace. 

But  this  leads  us  on  to  remember  that  our  Lord  had  undertaken 
suretyship  engagements  on  account  of  his  people ;  he  undertook  to 
preserve  the  Father's  gift:  "Those  that  thou  gavest  me  I  have  kept, 
and  none  of  them  is  lost."  He  looked  upon  the  sheep  of  his  pasture 
as  belonging  to  his  Father,  and  the  Father  had  put  them  into  his 
charge,  saying  to  him,  "  Of  thine  hand  will  I  require  them."  As 
Jacob  kept  his  uncle's  flocks,  by  day  the  heat  devoured  him,  and  at 
No.  2,331. 


74  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE    rtTLPIT. 

night  the  frost;  but  he  was  more  careful  over  them  because  they 
were  Laban's  than  if  they  had  been  his  own  ;  he  was  to  give  in  an 
account  of  all  the  sheep  committed  to  him,  and  he  did  so,  and  he  lost 
none  of  Laban's  sheep ;  but  his  care  over  them  was  partly  accounted 
for  by  the  fact  that  they  did  not  belong  to  himself,  but  belonged  to 
his  uncle  Laban. 

Understand  this  twofold  reason,  then,  for  Christ's  pastoral  prayer 
for  his  people.  He  first  prays  for  them  because  they  belong  to  the 
Father,  and  therefore  have  a  peculiar  value  in  his  eye ;  and  next, 
because  they  belong  to  the  Father,  he  is  under  suretyship  engage- 
ments to  deliver  them  all  to  the  Father  in  that  last  great  day  when  the 
sheep  shall  pass  under  the  rod  of  him  that  telleth  them.  Now  you 
see  where  I  am  bringing  you  to-night.  I  am  not  going  to  preach  at 
this  time  to  the  world  any  more  than  Christ  upon  this  occasion  prayed 
for  the  world  ;  but  I  am  going  to  preach  to  his  own  people  as  he  in 
this  intercessory  prayer  pleaded  for  them.  I  trust  that  they  will  all 
follow  me,  step  by  step,  through  this  great  theme ;  and  I  pray  the 
Lord  that,  in  these  deep  central  tmths  of  the  gospel  we  may  find  real 
refreshment  for  our  souls  to-night. 

I.     In  calling  your  attention  to  my  text,  I  want  you  to  notice,  first, 

THE  INTENSITY  OF  THE  SENSE  OF  PROPERTY  WHICH  ChRIST  HAS  IN  HIS 
PEOPLE. 

Here  are  six  words  setting  forth  Chrises  property  in  those  who  a/re  saved  : 
''Them  which  thou  hast  given  ma" — (that  is  one);  **for  they  are 
thine.  And  all  mine  are  thine ,  and  thine  are  mine ;  and  I  am  glorified 
in  them."  There  are  certain  persons  so  precious  to  Christ  that  they 
are  marked  all  over  with  special  tokens  that  they  belong  to  him  ;  as  I 
have  known  a  man  write  his  name  in  a  book  which  he  has  greatly 
valued,  and  then  he  has  turned  over  some  pages,  and  he  has  written 
his  name  again ;  and  as  we  have  sometimes  known  persons,  when  they 
have  highly  valued  a  thing,  to  put  their  mark,  their  seal,  their  stamp, 
here,  there,  and  almost  everywhere  upon  it.  So,  notice  in  my  text 
how  the  Lord  seems  to  have  the  seal  in  his  hand,  and  he  stamps  it  all 
over  his  peculiar  possession  :  "  They  are  thine.  And  all  mine  are 
thine,  and  thine  are  mine."  It  is  all  possessive  pronouns,  to  show  that 
Grod  looks  upon  his  people  as  his  portion,  his  possession,  his  property. 
"  They  shall  be  mine,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  in  that  day  when  I 
make  up  my  3  ewels."  Every  man  has  something  or  other  which  he  values 
above  the  rest  of  his  estate ;  and  here  the  Lord,  by  so  often  reiterating 
the  words  which  signify  possession,  proves  that  he  values  his  people 
above  ever>i;hing.  Let  us  show  that  we  appreciate  this  privilege  of 
being  set  apart  unto  G-od ;  and  let  us  each  one  say  to  him — 

**  Take  my  poor  heart,  and  let  it  be 
For  ever  closed  to  all  but  thee  ! 
Seal  thou  my  breast,  and  let  me  wear 
That  pledge  of  love  for  ever  there." 

I  call  your  attention,  next,  to  the  fact  that,  while  there  are  these  six 
expressions  here,  they  are  all  applied  to  the  Lord^s  own  people.  "  Mine  " 
(that  is,  the  saints)  **  are  thine  "  (that  is,  the  saints) ;  "  and  thine  " 
(that  is,  the  saints)  "are  mine"  (that  is,  the  saints).     These  broad 


I 


I 


CHRIST'S    PASTORAL    PRAYER    FOR    HIS    PEOPLE.  75 

Hi-rows  of  the  King  of  kings  are  all  stamped  upon  his  people.  While 
the  marks  of  possession  are  numerous,  they  are  all  set  upon  one  object. 
What,  doth  not  God  care  for  anything  else  ?  I  answer,  No  ;  as  com- 
pared with  his  own  people,  he  cares  for  nothing  else.  **  The  Lord's 
portion  is  his  people :  Jacob  is  the  lot  of  his  inheritance."  Has  not 
God  other  things  ?  Ah,  what  is  there  that  he  has  not  ?  The  silver 
and  the  gold  are  his,  and  the  cattle  on  a  thousand  hills.  All  things 
are  of  God ;  of  him,  and  by  him,  and  through  him,  and  to  him  are  all 
things  ;  yet  he  reckons  them  not  in  comparison  with  his  people.  You 
know  how  you,  dearly  beloved,  value  your  children  much  more  llian 
you  do  anything  else.  If  there  were  a  fire  in  your  house  to-night,  and 
you  could  only  carry  one  thing  out  of  it,  mother,  would  you  hesitate 
a  moment  as  to  what  that  one  thing  should  be  ?  You  would  carry 
your  babe,  and  let  everything  else  be  consumed  in  the  flames ;  and 
it  is  so  with  God.  He  cares  for  his  people  beyond  everything  else. 
He  is  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  and  in  Israel  he  hath  set  his  name,  and 
there  he  takes  his  delight.  There  doth  he  rest  in  his  love,  and  over 
her  doth  he  rejoice  with  singing. 

I  want  you  to  notice  these  different  points,  not  because  I  can  fully 
explain  them  all  to  you  ;  but  if  I  can  only  give  you  some  of  these  great 
truths  to  think  about,  and  to  help  you  to  communion  with  Christ  to- 
night, I  shall  have  done  well.  I  want  you  to  remark  yet  further,  con- 
cerning these  notes  of  possession,  that  they  occur  in  the  private  inter- 
couri^e  between  the  Father  and  the  Son.  It  is  in  our  Lord's  prayer,  when 
he  is  in  the  inner  sanctuaiy  speaking  with  the  Father,  that  we  have 
these  words,  "All  mine  are  thine,  and  thine  are  mine."  It  is  not  to 
you  and  to  me  that  he  is  talking  now ;  the  Son  of  God  is  speaking 
with  the  Father  when  they  are  in  very  near  communion  one  with  the 
other.  Now,  what  does  this  say  to  me  but  that  the  Father  and  the 
Son  greatly  value  believers  ?  What  people  talk  about  when  they  are 
alone,  not  what  they  say  in  the  market,  not  what  they  talk  of  in  the 
midst  of  the  confused  mob,  but  what  they  say  when  they  are  in  private^ 
that  lays  bare  their  heart.  Here  is  the  Son  speaking  to  the  Father, 
not  about  thrones  and  royalties,  nor  cherubim  and  seraphim,  but  about 
poor  men  and  women,  in  those  days  mostly  fishermen  and  peasant 
folk,  who  believed  on  him.  They  are  talking  about  these  people,  and 
the  Son  is  taking  his  own  solace  with  the  Father  in  their  secret  privacy 
by  talking  about  these  precious  jewels,  these  dear  ones  that  are  their 
peculiar  treasure.  You  have  not  any  notion  how  much  God  loves  you. 
Dear  brother,  dear  sister,  you  have  never  yet  had  half  an  idea,  or  the 
tithe  of  an  idea,  of  how  precious  you  are  to  Christ.  You  think,  be- 
cause you  are  so  imperfect,  and  you  fall  so  much  below  your  own  ideal, 
that,  therefore,  he  does  not  love  you  much  ;  you  think  that  he  cannot 
do  so.  Have  you  ever  measured  the  depth  of  Christ's  agony  in  Geth- 
semane,  and  of  his  death  on  Calvary  ?  If  you  have  tried  to  do  so,  you 
will  be  quite  sure  that,  apart  from  anything  in  you  or  about  you,  he 
loves  you  with  a  love  that  passeth  l^nowledge.  Believe  it.  "  But  I 
do  not  love  him  as  I  should,"  I  thi  ^  ;  I  hear  you  say.  No,  and  you 
never  will  unless  you  first  know  hi»  love  to  you.  Believe  it ;  believe 
it  to  the  highest  degree,  that  he  so  loves  you  that,  when  there  is  no  one 
who  can  commune  with  him  but  the  Father,  even  then  their  converse 


76  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PXTLPIT. 

is  about  their  mutual  estimate  of  you,  how  much  they  love  you  :  "  All 
mine  are  thine,  and  thine  are  mine." 

Only  one  other  thought  under  this  head,  and  I  do  but  put  it  before 
you,  and  leave  it  with  you,  for  I  cannot  expound  it  to-night.  All  that 
Jesus  says  is  about  all  his  people,  for  he  says,  "All  mine  are  thine,  and 
thine  are  mine."  These  high,  secret  talks  are  not  about  some  few 
saints  who  have  reached  a  "higher  life",  but  about  all  of  us  who 
belong  to  him.  Jesus  bears  all  of  us  on  his  heart,  and  he  speaks  of 
us  all  to  the  Father :  "  All  mine  are  thine."  "  That  poor  woman  who 
could  never  serve  her  Lord  except  by  patient  endurance,  she  is  mine," 
«ays  Jesus.  "  She  is  thine,  great  Father."  "  That  poor  girl,  newly- 
oonverted,  whose  only  spiritual  life  was  spent  upon  a  sick-bed,  and 
then  she  exhaled  to  heaven,  like  a  dewdrop  of  the  morning,  she  is 
mine,  and  she  is  thine.  That  poor  child  of  mine,  who  often  stumbles, 
who  never  brought  much  credit  to  the  sacred  name,  he  is  mine,  and  he 
is  thine.  All  mine  are  thine."  I  seem  as  if  I  heard  a  silver  bell 
ringing  out ;  the  very  tones  of  the  words  are  like  the  music  from  the 
harps  of  angels:  "  Mine,— thine ;  thine,— mine."  May  such  sweet 
risings  and  fallings  of  heavenly  melodies  charm  all  our  ears  ! 

I  think  that  I  have  said  enough  to  show  you  the  intensity  of  the 
sense  of  property  which  Christ  has  in  his  people:  "All  mine  are 
thine,  and  thine  are  mine." 

II.     The  next  head  of  my  discourse  is,  the  intensity  of  united 

INTEREST  BETWEEN  THE  FaTUER  AND  THE  SON  CONCERNING  BELIEVERS. 

First,  let  me  say  that  Jesm  loves  us  because  we  belong  to  the  Father. 
Turn  that  truth  over.  "  My  Father  has  chosen  them,  my  Father  loves 
them  ;  therefore,"  says  Jesus,  "  I  love  them,  and  I  lay  down  my  life 
for  them,  and  I  will  take  my  life  again  for  them,  and  live  throughout 
eternity  for  them.  They  are  dear  to  me  because  they  are  dear  to  my 
Father."  Have  you  not  often  loved  another  person  for  the  sake  of  a 
third  one  upon  whom  all  your  heart  was  set?  There  is  an  old 
proverb,  and  I  cannot  help  quoting  it  just  now ;  it  is,  "  Love  me, 
love  my  dog."  It  is  as  if  the  Lord  Jesus  so  loved  the  Father  that 
even  such  poor  dogs  as  we  are  get  loved  by  him  for  his  Father's 
sake.  To  the  eyes  of  Jesus  we  are  radiant  with  beauty  because  God 
hath  loved  us. 

Now  turn  that  thought  round  the  other  way,  the  Father  loves  us  he- 
cause  we  belong  to  Christ.  At  first,  the  Father's  love  in  election  was 
sovereign  and  self-contained ;  but  now,  to-day,  since  he  has  given  us 
over  to  Christ,  he  takes  a  still  greater  delight  in  us.  "  They  are  my 
Son's  sheep,"  says  he ;  "  he  bought  them  with  his  blood."  Better 
still,  "  That  is  my  Son's  spouse,"  says  he,  "that  is  my  Son's  bride. 
I  love  her  for  his  sake."  There  was  that  first  love  which  came  fresh 
from  the  Father's  heart,  but  now,  through  this  one  channel  of  love  to 
Jesus,  the  Father  pours  a  double  flood  of  love  on  us  for  his  dear  Son's 
sake.  He  sees  the  blood  of  Jesus  sprinkled  on  us ;  he  remembers 
the  token,  and  for  the  sake  of  his  beloved  Son  he  prizes  us  beyond 
all  price.  Jesus  loves  us  because  we  belong  to  the  Father,  and  the 
Father  loves  us  because  we  belong  to  Jesus. 

Now  come  closer  still  to  the  central  thought  of  the  text,  "  AU  mine 
are  thine."     All  who  are  the  Son^s  are  the  Father^s.     Do  we  belong  to 


chkist's  pastoral  prayer  for  his  people.  it 

Jesus  ?  Then  we  belong  to  the  Father.  Have  I  been  washed  in  the 
precious  blood  ?     Can  I  sing  to-night — 

"  The  dying  thief  rejoiced  to  see 
That  fountain  in  his  day  ; 
And  there  have  I,  though  vile  as  he, 
Washed  all  my  sins  away  "  ? 

Then,  by  redemption  I  belong  to  Christ ;  but  at  the  same  time  I  may 
be  sure  that  I  belong  to  the  Father  :  "  All  mine  are  thine."  Are  you 
trusting  in  Christ  ?  Then  you  are  one  of  God's  elect.  That  high  and 
deep  mystery  of  predestination  need  trouble  no  man's  heart  if  he  be 
a  believer  in  Christ.  If  thou  believest  in  Christ,  Christ  hath  redeemed 
thee,  and  the  Father  chose  thee  from  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world.  Eest  thou  happy  in  that  firm  belief,  **  All  mine  are  thine." 
How  often  have  I  met  with  people  puzzling  themselves  about  election ! 
They  want  to  know  if  they  are  elect.  No  man  can  come  to  the  Father 
but  by  Christ ;  no  man  can  come  to  election  except  through  redemp- 
tion. If  you  have  come  to  Christ,  and  are  his  redeemed,  it  is  certain 
beyond  aU  doubt  that  you  were  chosen  of  God,  and  are  the  Father's 
elect.     "  All  mine  are  thine." 

So,  if  I  am  bought  by  Christ's  precious  blood,  I  am  not  to  sit  down, 
and  say  how  grateful  I  am  to  Christ  as  though  he  were  apart  from 
the  Father,  and  more  loving  and  more  tender  than  the  Father.  No, 
no ;  I  belong  to  the  Father  if  I  belong  to  Christ ;  and  I  have  for 
the  Father  the  same  gratitude,  the  same  love,  and  I  would  render  the 
same  service  as  to  Jesus  ;  for  Jesus  puts  it,  "All  mine  are  thine." 

If,  to-night,  also,  I  am  a  servant  of  Christ,  if,  because  he  bought 
me,  I  try  to  serve  him,  then  I  am  a  servant  of  the  Father  if  I  am  a 
servant  of  the  Son.  "  AU  mine,  whatever  position  they  occupy,  belong 
to  thee,  great  Father,"  and  they  have  all  the  privileges  which  come 
to  those  who  belong  to  the  Father.  I  hope  that  I  do  not  weary  you ; 
I  cannot  make  these  things  entertaining  to  the  careless,  I  do  not  try 
to  do  so  ;  but  you  who  love  my  Lord,  and  his  truth,  ought  to  rejoice 
to-night  to  think  that,  in  being  the  property  of  Christ,  you  are  assured 
that  you  are  the  property  of  the  Father.     "  All  mine  are  thine." 

*'  With  Christ  our  Lord  we  share  our  part 
In  the  affections  of  his  heart ; 
Nor  shall  our  souls  be  thence  removed 
Till  he  forgets  his  first-beloved." 

But  now  you  have  to  look  at  the  other  part  of  it :  **  and  thine  are 
mine."  All  who  are  the  Father^ s  a/re  the  Sonh.  If  you  belong  to  the 
Father,  you  belong  to  the  Son.  If  you  are  elect,  and  so  the  Father's, 
you  are  redeemed,  and  so  the  Son's.  If  you  are  adopted,  and  so  the 
Father's,  you  are  justified  in  Christ,  and  so  you  are  the  Son's.  If  you 
are  regenerated,  and  so  are  begotten  of  the  Father,  yet  stiU  your  life 
is  dependent  upon  the  Son.  Eemember  that,  while  one  Biblical  figure 
sets  us  forth  as  children  who  have  each  one  a  life  within  himself, 
another  equally  valid  figure  represents  us  as  branches  of  tke  Vine, 
which  die  unless  they  continue  united  to  the  stem.  *'  All  thine  are 
mine."  If  you  are  the  Father's,  you  must  be  Christ's.  If  your  life 
is  given  you  of  the  Father,  it  still  depends  entirely  upon  the  Son. 


78  METROPOLITAN^'    TABERXACLE    PTJLPIT. 

What  a  wonderful  mixture  all  this  is  !  The  Father  and  the  Son  are 
one,  and  we  are  one  with  the  Father  and  with  the  Son.  A  mystic 
union  is  established  between  us  and  the  Father,  by  reason  of  our 
union  with  the  Son,  and  the  Son's  union  with  the  Father.  See  to 
what  a  glorious  height  our  humanity  has  risen  through  Christ.  By 
the  grace  of  God,  ye  who  were  like  stones  in  the  brook  are  made  sons 
of  Grod.  Lifted  out  of  your  dead  materialism,  you  are  elevated  into  a 
spiritual  life,  and  you  are  united  unto  God.  You  have  not  any  idea 
to-night  of  what  God  has  already  done  for  you,  and  truly  it  doth  not 
yet  appear  what  you  shall  be.  A  Christian  man  is  the  noblest  work  of 
God.  God  has  here  reached  the  fulness  of  his  power  and  his  grace, 
in  making  us  to  be  one  with  his  own  dear  Son,  and  so  bringing  us  into 
union  and  communion  with  himself.  Oh,  if  the  words  that  I  speak 
could  convey  to  you  the  fulness  of  their  own  meaning,  you  might 
spring  to  your  feet,  electrified  with  holy  joy  to  think  of  this,  that  we 
should  be  Christ's,  and  the  Father's,  and  that  we  should  be  thought 
worthy  to  be  the  object  of  intricate  transactions  and  inter-communions 
of  the  dearest  kind  between  the  Father  and  the  Son !  We,  even  we, 
who  are  but  dust  and  ashes  at  our  very  best,  are  favoured  as  angels 
never  were  ;  therefore  let  all  praise  be  ascribed  to  sovereign  grace  ! 

III.  And  now  I  shall  only  detain  you  a  few  minutes  longer  while 
I  speak  upon  the  third  part  of  our  subject,  that  is,  the  glory  of 
Christ  :  "  And  I  am  glorified  in  them."  I  must  confess  that,  while 
the  former  part  of  my  subject  was  very  deep,  this  third  part  seems  to 
me  to  be  deeper  still,  " I  am  glorified  in  them." 

If  Christ  had  said,  *'  I  will  glorify  them,"  I  could  have  understood 
it.  If  he  had  said,  "  I  am  pleased  with  them,"  I  might  have  set  it 
down  to  his  great  kindness  to  them;  but  when  he  says,  "I  am  glori- 
fied in  them,"  it  is  very  wonderful.  The  sun  can  be  reflected,  but  you 
need  proper  objects  to  act  as  reflectors ;  and  the  brighter  they  are,  the 
better  will  they  reflect.  You  and  I  do  not  seem  to  have  the  power  of 
reflecting  Christ's  glory ;  we  break  up  the  glorious  rays  that  shine 
upon  us;  we  spoil,  we  ruin  so  much  of  the  good  that  falls  upon  us. 
Yet  Christ  bajb  that  he  is  glorified  in  us.  Take  these  words  home, 
dear  friend,  to  yourself,  and  think  that  the  Lord  Jesus  met  you 
to-night,  and  as  jou  went  out  of  the  Tabernacle,  said  to  you,  ''  Thou 
art  mine,  thou  art  my  Father's  ;  and  I  am  glorified  in  thee  "  I  dare 
not  say  that  it  would  be  a  proud  moment  for  j^ou ;  but  I  dare  to  say 
that  there  would  be  more  in  it  to  make  you  feel  exalted  for  him  to  say, 
"  I  am  glorified  in  you,"  than  if  you  could  have  all  the  honours  that 
all  the  kings  can  put  upon  all  men  in  the  world.  I  think  that  I  could 
say,  "  Lord,  now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  according  to 
thy  word,"  if  he  would  but  say  to  me,  "  I  am  glorified  in  thy  minis- 
try." I  hope  that  he  is ;  I  believe  that  he  is  ;  but,  oh,  for  an  assuring 
word,  if  not  spoken  to  us  personally,  yet  spoken  to  his  Father  about 
us.  as  in  our  text,  "  I  am  glorified  in  them  "  ! 

How  can  this  be  ?  Well,  it  is  a  very  wide  subject.  Christ  is  glorified 
in  his  people  in  many  ways.  JTe  is  glorified  hy  saving  such  sinners^  taking 
these  people,  so  sinful,  so  lost,  so  unworthy.  When  the  Lord  lays 
hold  upon  a  drunkard,  a  thief,  an  adulterer,  when  he  arrests  one  who 
has  been  guilty  of  blasphemy,  whose  very  heart  is  reeking  with  evil 


oheist's  pastoral  prayer  for  his  people.  79 

thoughts,  when  he  picks  up  the  far-off  one,  the  abandoned,  the  disso- 
lute, the  fallen,  as  he  often  does,  and  when  he  says,  "  These  shall  be 
mine ;  I  will  wash  these  in  my  blood ;  I  will  use  these  to  speak  my 
word,"  oh,  then,  he  is  glorified  in  them  !  Eead  the  lives  of  many  great 
sinners  who  have  afterwards  become  great  saints,  and  you  will  see  how 
they  have  tried  to  glorify  him,  not  only  she  who  washed  his  feet  with 
her  tears,  but  many  another  like  her.  Oh,  how  they  have  loved  to  praise 
him  !  Eyes  have  wept  tears,  lips  have  spoken  words,  but  hearts  have 
felt  what  neither  eyes  nor  lips  could  speak,  of  adoring  gratitude  to 
him.  "  I  am  glorified  in  them."  Great  sinners,  Christ  is  glorified  in 
you.  Some  of  you  Pharisees,  if  you  were  to  be  converted,  would  not 
bring  Christ  such  glory  as  he  gets  through  saving  publicans  and  har- 
lots. Even  if  you  struggled  into  heaven,  it  would  be  with  very  little 
music  for  him  on  the  road,  certainly  no  tears  and  no  ointment  for  his 
feet,  and  no  wiping  them  with  the  hairs  of  your  head.  You  are  too 
respectable  ever  to  do  that ;  but  when  he  saves  great  sinners,  he  can 
truly  say,  "  I  am  glorified  in  them,"  and  each  of  them  can  sing, — 

"  It  passeth  praises,  that  dear  love  of  thine, 
My  Jesus,  Saviour  :  yet  this  heart  of  mine 
"Would  sing  that  love,  so  full,  so  rich,  so  free, 
"Which  brings  a  rebel  sinner,  such  as  me. 

Nigh  unto  God." 

And  Christ  is  glorified  hy  the  perseverance  which  he  shows  in  the  matter 
of  their  salvation.  See  how  he  begins  to  save,  and  the  man  resists. 
He  follows  up  his  kind  endeavour,  and  the  man  rebels.  He  hunts 
him,  pursues  him,  dogs  his  footsteps.  He  will  have  the  man,  and  the 
man  will  not  have  him.  But  the  Lord,  without  violating  the  free  wiU 
of  man,  which  he  never  does,  yet  at  length  brings  the  one  who 
was  most  unwilling  to  lie  at  his  feet,  and  he  that  hated  most  begins 
to  love,  and  he  that  was  most  stout-hearted  bows  the  knee  in  lowliest 
humility.  It  is  wonderful  how  persevering  the  Lord  is  in  the  salva- 
tion of  a  sinner ;  ay,  and  in  the  salvation  of  his  own,  for  you  would 
have  broken  loose  long  ago  if  your  great  Shepherd  had  not  penned 
you  up  within  the  fold.  Many  of  you  would  have  started  aside,  and 
have  lost  yourselves,  if  it  had  not  been  for  constraints  of  sovereign 
grace  which  have  kept  you  to  this  day,  and  will  not  let  you  go. 
Christ  is  glorified  in  you.  Oh,  when  you  once  get  to  heaven,  when 
the  angels  know  all  that  you  were,  and  all  that  you  tried  to  be,  when 
the  whole  story  of  almighty,  infinite  grace  is  told,  as  it  will  be  told, 
then  will  Christ  be  glorified  in  you ! 

Beloved,  we  actively  glorify  Christ  when  we  display  Christian  graces. 
You  who  are  loving,  forgiving,  tender-hearted,  gentle,  meek,  self- 
sacrificing,  you  glorify  him ;  he  is  glorified  in  you.  You  who  are 
upright,  and  who  will  not  be  moved  from  your  integrity,  you  who 
can  despise  the  sinner's  gold,  and  will  not  sell  your  conscience  for  it, 
you  who  are  bold  and  brave  for  Christ,  you  who  can  bear  and  suffer  for 
his  name's  sake,  all  your  graces  come  from  him.  As  all  the  flowers 
are  bred  and  begotten  of  the  sun,  so  all  that  is  in  you  that  is  good 
comes  from  Christ,  the  Sun  of  righteousness;  and  therefore  he  is 
glorified  in  you. 


80  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

But,  beloved,  God's  people  have  glorified  Christ  in  many  other  wayek 
When  they  mahe  him  the  object  of  all  their  trust,  they  glorify  him,  when 
they  say,  **  Though  I  am  the  chief  of  sinners,  yet  I  trust  him  ;  though 
my  mind  is  dark,  and  though  my  temptations  aboimd,  I  believe  that 
he  can  save  to  the  uttermost,  I  do  trust  him."  Christ  is  more  glorified 
by  a  sinner's  humble  faith  than  by  a  seraph's  loudest  song.  If  thou 
believest,  thou  dost  glorify  him.  Child  of  God,  are  you  to-night  very 
dark,  and  dull,  and  heavy  ?  Do  you  feel  haK  dead,  spiritually  ?  Come 
to  your  Lord's  feet,  and  kiss  them,  and  believe  that  he  can  save,  nay, 
that  he  has  saved  you,  even  you ;  and  thus  you  will  glorify  his  holy 
name.  "  Oh !  "  said  a  believer,  the  other  day,  "  I  know  whom  I  have 
believed ;  Christ  is  mine."  "  Ah ! "  said  another,  "  that  is  presumption." 
Beloved,  it  is  nothing  of  the  kind ;  it  is  not  presumption  for  a  child 
to  own  his  own  father ;  it  might  be  pride  for  him  to  be  ashamed  of  his 
father ;  it  is  certainly  great  alienation  from  his  father  if  he  is  ashamed 
to  own  him.  "I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  Happy  state  of  heart, 
to  be  absolutely  sure  that  you  are  resting  upon  Christ,  that  he  is  your 
Saviour,  that  you  believe  in  him,  for  Jesus  said,  "  He  that  believeth 
on  me  hath  everlasting  life."  I  believe  on  him,  and  I  have  everlast- 
ing life.  "  He  that  believeth  on  him  is  not  condemned."  ^  I  believe 
on^him,  and  I  am  not  condemned.  Make  sure  work  of  this,  not  only 
by  signs  and  evidences,  but  do  even  better ;  make  the  one  sign  and 
the  one  evidence  to  be  this,  "  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save 
sinners ;  I,  a  sinner,  accept  his  great  sacrifice,  and  I  am  saved." 

Especially,  I  think  that  God's  people  glorify  Christ  hy  a  cheerful 
conversation.  If  you  go  about  moaning  and  mourning,  pining  and 
complaining,  you  bring  no  honour  to  his  name;  but  if,  when  thou 
fastest,  thou  appear  not  unto  men  to  fast,  if  thou  canst  wear  a  cheer- 
ful countenance,  even  when  thy  heart  is  heavy,  and  if,  above  all,  thou 
canst  rally  thy  spirit  out  of  its  depths,  and  begin  to  bless  God  when 
the  cupboard  is  empty,  and  friends  are  few,  then  thou  wilt  indeed 
glorify  Christ. 

Many  are  the  ways  in  which  this  good  work  may  be  done  ;  let  us 
try  to  do  it.  **  I  am  glorified  in  them,"  says  Christ ;  that  is,  ly  their 
hold  confession  of  Christ.  Do  I  address  myself  to  any  here  who  love 
Christ,  but  who  have  never  owned  it  ?  Do  come  out,  and  come  out 
very  soon.  He  deserves  to  have  all  the  glory  that  you  can  give  him. 
If  he  has  healed  you,  be  not  like  the  nine  who  forgot  that  Christ  had 
healed  their  leprosy.  Come  and  praise  the  name  of  the  great  Healer, 
and  let  others  know  what  Christ  can  do.  I  am  afraid  that  there  are 
a  great  many  here  to-night  who  hope  that  they  are  Christians,  but 
they  have  never  said  so.  What  are  you  ashamed  of  ?  Ashamed  of 
your  Lord  ?  I  am  afraid  that  you  do  not,  after  all,  love  him.  Now, 
at  this  time,  at  this  particular  crisis  of  the  history  of  the  Church  and 
the  world,  if  we  do  not  publicly  take  sides  with  Christ,  we  shaU  really 
;be  against  him.  The  time  is  come  now  when  we  cannot  afford  to  have 
go-betweens.  You  must  be  for  him  or  for  his  enemies ;  and  to-night 
he  asks  you  if  you  are  really  his,  to  say  it.  Come  forward,  unite 
yourself  with  his  people,  and  let  it  be  seen  by  your  life  and  conversation 
that  you  do  belong  to  Christ.  If  not,  how  can  it  be  true,  **  I  am 
glorified  in  them  "  ?     Is  Christ  glorified  in  a  non-confessing  people,  a 


I 


Christ's  pastoral  prayer  iOR  his  people.  81 

people  that  hope  to  go  slinking  into  heaven  by  the  by-roads  or  across 
the  fields,  but  dare  not  come  into  the  King's  highway,  and  travel  with 
•the  King's  subjects,  and  own  that  they  belong  to  him  ? 

Lastly,  I  think  that  Christ  is  glorified  in  his  people  hj  their  efforts  to 
extend  his  hingdom.  What  efiEorts  are  you  making  ?  There  is  a  great 
deal  of  force  in  a  church  like  this;  but  I  am  afraid  that  there^  is  a 
great  deal  of  waste  steam,  waste  power  here.  The  tendency  is,  so 
often,  to  leave  everything  to  be  done  by  the  minister,  or  else  by  one 
or  two  leading  people  ;  but  I  do  pray  you,  beloved,  if  you  be  Christ's, 
and  if  you  belong  to  the  Father,  if,  unworthy  though  you  be,  you  are 
claimed  with  a  double  ownership  by  the  Father  and  the  Son,  do  try  to 
be  of  use  to  them.  Let  it  be  seen  by  your  winning  others  to  Christ 
that  he  is  glorified  in  you.  I  believe  that,  by  diligent  attendance  to 
even  the  smallest  Sabbath-school  class,  Christ  is  glorified  in  you.  By 
that  private  conversation  in  your  own  room,  by  that  letter  which  you 
dropped  into  the  post  with  many  a  prayer,  by  anything  that  you  have 
done  with  a  pure  motive,  trusting  in  Grod  in  order  to  glorify  Christ,  he 
is  glorified  in  you.  Do  not  mistake  my  meaning  with  regard  to 
serving  the  Lord.  I  think  it  exceedingly  wrong  when  I  hear  ex- 
hortations made  to  young  people,  "  Quit  your  service  as  domestics, 
and  come  out  into  spiritual  work.  Business  men,  leave  your  shops. 
Workmen,  give  up  your  trades.  You  cannot  serve  Christ  in  that 
calling,  come  away  from  it  altogether."  I  beg  to  say  that  nothing 
will  be  more  pestilent  than  such  advice  as  that.  There  are  men 
called  by  the  grace  of  God  to  separate  themselves  from  every  earthly 
occupation,  and  they  have  special  gifts  for  the  work  of  the 
ministry  ;  but  ever  to  imagine  that  the  bulk  of  Christian  people 
cannot  servo  God  in  their  daily  calling,  is  to  think  altogether  con- 
trary to  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  If  you  are  a  servant, 
remain  a  servant.  If  you  are  a  waiter,  go  on  with  your  waiting. 
If  you  are  a  tradesman,  go  on  with  your  trade.  Let  every  ma» 
abide  in  the  calling  wherein  he  is  called,  unless  there  be  to  him 
some  special  call  from  God  to  devote  himself  to  the  ministry.  Go  on 
with  your  employment,  dear  Christian  people,  and  do  not  imagine 
that  you  are  to  turn  hermits,  or  monks,  or  nuns.  You  would  not 
glorify  God  if  you  did  so  act.  Soldiers  of  Christ  are  to  fight  the 
battle  out  where  they  are.  To  quit  the  field,  and  shut  yourselves  up 
alone,  would  be  to  render  it  impossible  that  you  should  get  the  victory. 
The  work  of  God  is  as  holy  and  acceptable  in  domestic  service,  or  in 
trade,  as  any  service  that  can  be  rendered  in  the  pulpit,  or  even  by 
the  foreign  missionary.  We  thank  God  for  i^e  men  specially  called 
and  set  apart  for  his  own  work ;  but  we  know  that  they  would  do 
nothing  unless  the  salt  of  our  holy  faith  should  permeate  the  daily  life  of 
other  Christians.  You  godly  mothers,  you  are  the  glory  of  the  Church 
of  Christ.  You  hard-working  men  and  women,  who  endure  patiently 
"  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible,"  are  the  crown  and  glory  of  the 
Church  of  God.  You  who  do  not  shirk  your  daily  labour,  but  stand 
manfully  to  it,  obeying  Christ  in  it,  are  proving  what  the  Christian 
religion  was  meant  to  do.  We  can,  if  we  are  truly  priests  unto  God, 
make  our  pveryday  garments  into  vestments,  our  meals  into  sacra- 
ments, and  our  houses  into  temples  for  God's  worship.    Our  very 

6 


g2  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

beds  will  be  within  the  veil,  and  our  inmost  thoughts  will  be  as  a 
sweet  incense  perpetuaUy  smoking  up  to  the  Most  High.  Dream  not 
that  there  is  anything  about  any  honest  calling  that  degrades  a  man, 
or  hinders  him  in  glorifying  God ;  but  sanctify  it  all,  till  the  beUs 
upon  the  horses  shall  ring  out,  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord,"  and  the  pots 
in  your  houses  shall  be  as  holy  as  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary. 

Now,  I  want  that  we  should  so  come  to  the  communion-table  to- 
night, that  even  here  Christ  may  be  glorified  in  us.     Ah,  you  may  sit 
at  the  Lord's  tahle  wearing  a  fine  dress  or  a  diamond  ring,  and  you 
may  think  that  you  are  somebody  of  importance,  but  you  are  not ! 
Ah,  you  may  come  to  the  Lord's  table,  and  say,  "Here  is  an  expe- 
rienced Christian  man  who  knows  a  thing  or  two."     You  are  not 
glorifying  Christ   that   way;  you   are    only   a  nobody.     But  if  you 
come  to-night  saying,  "  Lord,   I  am  hungry,  thou  canst  feed  me ; 
that  is  glorifying  him.     If  you  come  saying,  "  Lord,  I  have  no  merit, 
and  no  worthiness,  I  come  because  thou  hast  died  for  me,  and  I  trust 
thee  "  you  are  glorifying  him.     He  glorifies  Christ  most  who  takes 
most  from  him,  and  who  then  gives  most  back  to  him.     Come,  empty 
pitcher,  come  and  be  fiUed ;  and,  when  thou  ai-t  fiUed,  pour  all  out 
at  the  dear  feet  of  him  who  fiUed  thee.     Come,  trembler,  come  and  let 
him  touch  thee  with  his  strengthening  hand,  and  then  go  out  and 
work,  and  use  the  strength  which  he  has  given  thee.     I  fear  that  1 
have  not  led  you  where  I  wanted  to  bring  you,  close  to  my  Lord  and  |l 

to  the  Father,  yet  I  have  done  my  best.     May  the  Lord  forgive  my  | 

feebleness  and  wandering,  and  yet  bless  you  for  his  dear  names         | 
sake !     Amen. 

Exposition  Ijg  €.  %  Spurgeom 

JOHN  XVII. 

Terses  1,  2.  These  words  spake  Jesus,  and  lifted  tip  his  eyes  to  heaven,  and 
.aid,  Fathlr,  the  hour  is  come;  glorify  thy  ^on  that  thy  l<^^  f'^^^fZtal 
thee:  as  thou  hast  given  him  power  over  all  flesh,  that  he  should  give  eternal 
life  to  as  many  as  thou  hast  given  him.  ^  .^    v.^     a 

Here  the  doctrines  of  a  general  and  a  particular  redemption  sweetly  blend  * 
"  As  thou  hast  given  him  power  over  all  flesh,^  they  are  all  ^^der^  CWs 
m^iatorial  govfmment  by  virtue  of  his  matchless  sacrifice ;  but  the  object 
Sview  is  specially  the  gift  of  everlasting  life  to  the  chosen  people  .  that 
he  should  give  eternal  life  to  as  many  as  thou  hast  given  him. 

3.  And  this  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and 
Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou  hast  sent.  ,  ^    ,        j    r  v    a 

No  man  has  life  eternal,  then,  who  is  in  ignorance  ^.^."'^K^'^^^'f^^^ 
Jesus  Christ ;  but  once  to  know  God,  and  to  know  Chnst,  is  sure  evidence 
that  we  possess  a  life  that  can  never  die :  "  This  is  life  eternal. 

4-6  I  have  glorified  thee  on  the  earth  :  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thou 
gavest  meto  do.  And  now,  0  Father,  glorify  thou  me  -V*\;^trW^LlK 
the  glory  which  I  had  with  thee  lefore  the  world  was.  I  have  ^^^f^j^f  ^^ 
name  ulto  the  mm  which  thou  gavest  me  out  of  the  loorU :  thine  they  were,  and 
thou  gavest  them  me;  and  they  have  kept  thy  word.  ^      ,  ^     ^^         , 

Is  not  that  sweetly  put  on  the  part  of  our  divine  Lord  ?  Jh^^f  «^^^!^ 
men  had  been  poor  creatures  at  the  very  best ;  very  forgetful  and  very 


EXPOSITION.  gg 

erring  ;  yet  their  Lord  brings  no  charges  againsf  fhem.  but  he  savs  to  hii 
Father,  *-They  have  kept  thy  word." 

7.  Now  they  have  Jcnovm  that  all  things  whatsoever  thou  hast  given  me  ar^ 
of  thee. 

"They  have  leamt  to  link  the  Father  and  the  Son;  they  know  that 
though  I  am  the  channel  of  all  blessing,  yet  thou,  O  my  Father,  art  the 
fountain  from  which  it  flows." 

**  Jesus,  we  bless  thy  Father's  name  ! 
Thy  God  and  ours  are  both  the  same  ; 
What  heavenly  blessings  from  his  throne 
Flow  down  to  sinners  through  his  Son  !  '* 

8,  For  I  have  givm  unto  them  the  toords  zvh'ch  thou  gavest  mej  and  they 
have  received  them,  and  have  hnotun  surely  that  I  came  out  from  thee,  and  they 
have  believed  that  thou  didst  send  me. 

He  is  looking  at  them  in  contrast  with  the  world  which  utterly  rejected 
him ;  m  contrast  with  that  world,  the  disciples  had  received  and  known 
Ohrist.  Oh,  what  a  blessed  distinction  does  the  grace  of  God  make  between 
men  !  We  were  all  blmd  by  nature ;  and  now  that  we  see,  it  is  because  the 
sacredhnger  of  Christ  hath  touched  our  eyes,  and  opened  them.  Let  him  have 
all  tne  glory  of  it ;  yet  let  us  note  how  well  he  speaks  of  his  people  :  "For 
1  have  given  unto  them  the  words  which  thou  gavest  me  ;  and  they  have 
received  them,  and  have  known  surely  that  I  came  out  from  thee,  and  thev 
have  believed  that  thou  didst  send  me." 


9,  10.  I  pray  for  them  :  I  pray  not  for  the  world,  hut  for  them  which  thou 
hast  given  me  ;  for  they  are  thine.  And  all  mine  are  thine,  and  thine  are  mine  • 
and  1  am  glorified  in  them.  ' 

Oh,  the  blessed  union  of  interests  between  Christ  and  the  Father  '  How 
surely  do  we  belong  to  the  Father  if  we  in  very  deed  belong  to  Christ  and 
what  a  holy  unity  is  thus  established  ! 

11.  Ajid  now  lam  no  more  in  the  world,  hut  these  are  in  the  world,  and  I 
come  to  thee  Holy  Father,  keep  through  thine  own  name  those  whom  thou  hast 
given  me,  that  they  may  be  one,  as  we  are. 

Here  is  a  prayer,  then,  for  the  preservation  and  the  unity  of  the  people  of 
God ;  two  very  necessary  petitions.  Would  God  that  they  might  be  ful- 
tilled  m  us,  that  we  might  be  kept,  and  kept  even  to  the  end,  and  then  kept 
m  hvmg  union  with  all  the  people  of  God,  and  with  the  Father  and  with 
the  Son  ! 

the 

^themsT'^^  ^  ^'^^"^'  ^"^  ^^^  ^^^"^^  ^^"'^  ^^^^  '^^'^^^  ^^""^  "^y  yo2/ /J^//e/'^w 

In  this  wondrous  prayer,  note  the  special  design  of  the  words  of  Christ  • 
not  only  that  we  might  have  joy,  but  that  we  might  have  Christ's  joy,  and 
not  merely  have  a  little  of  it,  but  might  have  it  fulfilled  in  ourselves. 

14—16.  /  have  given  them  thy  word  ;  and  the  world  hath  hated  them,  because 
they  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world.  I  pray  not  that  thou 
shouldest  take  them  out  of  the  world,  but  that  thou  shouldest  keep  them  from  the 
evil.     They  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world. 

Jesus  puts  twice  over  this  most  special  and  important  fact,  which  we 
must  never  forget :  "  They  are  not  of  the  world."  Let  us  never  live  as  if 
we  were  of  the  world ;  but  where  such  a  vivid  distinction  has  been  made,  God 
grant  that  there  may  be  an  equal  distinction  in  our  lives  I. 

Now  comes  the  prayer  for  sanctification. 


64  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

17,  18.  Sanctify  them  through  thy  truth  :  thy  word  ia  truth.  As  thou  had 
Bent  me  into  the  world,  even  so  have  I  also  sent  them  into  the  world. 

Christ  was  the  great  Missionary,  the  Messiah,  the  Sent  One  ;  we  are  the 
minor  missionaries,  sent  out  into  the  world  to  accomplish  the  Father's  will 
and  purpose. 

19,  20.  And  for  their  sakes  I  sanctify  myself,  that  they  also  might  be  sancti- 
fied through  the  truth.  Neither  pray  I  for  these  alone,  but  for  them  also  which 
shall  believe  on  me  through  their  word ; 

That  shows  that  Christ's  prayer  embraces  us  also  who  have  been  brought 
to  believe  on  him  through  the  word  which  the  apostles  declared.  Christ, 
with  prescient  eye,  looked  on  every  one  of  us  who  believe  on  him,  and 
prayed  for  each  one  of  us  as  much  as  he  did  for  John,  and  Peter,  and  James. 

21,  22.  That  they  all  may  be  one  ;  as  thou,  Father,  art  in  me,  and  I  in  thee, 
that  they  also  may  be  one  in  us :  that  the  world  may  believe  that  thou  hast 
sent  me.  And  the  glory  which  thou  gavest  me  I  have  given  them  ;  that  tJiey 
may  be  one,  even  as  we  are  one  : 

Unity  is  the  glory  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  It  shall  be  the  very  crown 
of  the  Church  of  the  kving  God ;  and  when  she  puts  it  on,  then  will  the 
wondering  world  acknowledge  and  accept  her  Lord. 

23.  I  in  them,  and  thou  in  me,  that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one;  and 
that  the  world  may  know  that  thou  hast  sent  me,  and  hast  loved  them  as  thou 
hast  loved  me. 

Wonderful  words  !  How  shall  we  dive  into  their  depths  ?  To  think  that 
the  Father  should  have  loved  us  even  as  he  loved  his  only-begotten  Son ; 
oh,  the  heights  and  depths  of  this  wondrous  love  ! 

24,  25.  Father,  I  will  that  they  also,  whom  thou  hast  given  me,  be  with  me 
where  I  am ;  that  they  may  behold  my  glory,  which  thou  hast  given  me :  for 
thou  lovedst  me  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.  0  righteous  Father,  the 
world  hath  not  known  thee  :  but  I  have  known  thee,  and  these  have  known  that 
thou  hast  sent  me. 

You  notice  the  division  that  there  is  here.  There  are  two  parties  ;  there 
is  the  world,  and  there  is  the  Church ;  what  is  it  that  divides  them  ?  Bead 
these  two  clauses:  "The  world  hath  not  known  thee:"  "These  have 
known  that  thou  hast  sent  me."  What  stands  between?  "But  I  have 
known  thee."  It  is  Christ  himself,  coming  in  between  the  two  parties,  like 
the  cloudy-fiery  pillar,  black  with  darkness  to  the  Egyptians,  but  bright 
with  light  to  the  Israelites.  Oh,  to  have  Christ  between  you  and  the 
world  !  It  is  the  best  form  of  separation :  "  I  have  known  thee,  and  these 
have  known  that  thou  hast  sent  me." 

26.     And  I  have  declared  unto  them  thy  name,  and  will  declare  it :. 

I  read  it  to  you  as  it  stands.  Our  good  translators  were  always  afraid  of 
using  a  word  too  often,  for  fear  of  falling  into  tautology  ;  so  for  what  they 
considered  the  beauty  of  the  language  they  used  the  word  **  declared " 
instead  of  "  made  known  " ;  but  why  should  they  have  done  so  ?  Who  were 
they  that  they  should  have  wanted  to  improve  on  Christ's  words  ?  It 
should  be  the  same  word  right  on  :  "  The  world  hath  not  known  thee :  but 
I  have  known  thee,  and  these  have  known  that  thou  hast  sent  me.  And  I 
have  made  known  tmto  them  thy  name,  and  will  make  it  known :  ^' 

26.  That  the  love  wherewith  thou  hast  loved  me  may  be  in  them,  and  1 
in  them,. 

Oh,  that  this  love  may  be  in  us,  for  Christ's  sake  !     Amen. 


Hymns  from  "Oxm  Own  Hymn  Book"— 728,  760. 


THE   GARDEX   OF   THE    SOUL. 


%  pennon 


DELIVERED  BY 

C.    H.    SPUR6E0N, 

AT  THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEVVINGTOK. 


"  A  place  called.  Gethsemaue.'' — Matthew  xxvi.  36. 

Though  I  have  taken  only  these  few  words  for  my  text,  I  shall 
endeavour  to  bring  the  whole  narrative  before  your  mind's  eye.  It  is  a 
part  of  the  teaching  of  Holy  Writ  that  man  is  a  composite  being;  his 
nature  being  divisible  into  three  parts — "  spirit,"  "  soul,"  and  "  body." 
I  am  not  going  to  draw  any  nice  distinctions  to-night  between  the 
spirit  and  the  soul,  or  to  analyse  the  connecting  link  between  our  im- 
material life  and  consciousness  and  the  physical  condition  of  our  nature 
and  the  materialism  of  the  world  around  us.  Suffice  it  to  say,  that 
whenever  our  vital  organization  is  mentioned,  this  triple  constiGution  is 
pretty  sure  to  be  referred  to.  If  you  notice  it  carefully,  you  will  see  in 
our  Saviour's  sufferings  on  our  behalf  that  the  passion  extended  to  his 
spirit,  soul,  and  body;  for  although  at  the  last  extremity  upon  the  cross 
it  were  hard  to  tell  in  which  respect  he  suffered  most,  all  three  being 
strained  to  the  utmost,  yet  it  is  certain  there  were  three  distinct  conflicts 
in  accordance  with  this  threefold  endowment  of  humanity. 

The  first  part  of  our  Lord's  dolorous  pain  fell  upon  his  spirit.  This 
took  place  at  the  table,  in  that  upper  chamber  where  he  ate  the 
Passover  with  his  disciples.  Those  of  you  who  have  read  the  narrative 
attentively,  will  have  noticed  these  remarkable  words  in  the  thirteenth 
chapter  of  John  and  the  twenty-first  verse:  "  When  Jesus  had  thus  said, 
he  was  troubled  in  spirit,  and  testified,  and  said.  Verily,  verily,  I  say 
unto  you,  that  one  of  you  shall  betray  me."  Of  that  silent  conflict  in 
the  Saviour's  heart  whilst  he  was  sitting  at  table  no  one  was  a  spectator. 
Into  any  man's  spiritual  apprehensions  it  were  beyond  the  power  of  any 
other  creature  to  penetrate;  how  much  less  into  the  spiritual  conflicts 
of  the  man  Christ  Jesus!  No  one  could  by  any  possibility  have  gazed 
upon  these  veiled  mysteries  He  seems  to  have  sat  there  for  a  time 
like  one  in  the  deepest  abstraction.  He  fought  a  mighty  battle  within 
himself.  When  Judas  rose  and  went  out  it  may  have  been  a  relief. 
The  Saviour  gave  out  a  hymn  as  if  to  celebrate  his  conflict;  then,  rising 
up,  he  went  forth  to  the  Mount  of  Olives.  His  discourse  with  his 
disciples  there  is  'recorded  in  that  wonderful  chapter,  the  fifteenth  of 
John,  so  full  of  holy  triumph,  beginning  thus,  "  I  am  the  true  vine.'* 

No.  693. 


86  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Ilu  went  to  the  ao:ony  in  the  same  joyous  spirit  like  a  conqueror,  and 
oh!  how  he  prayed!  That  famous  prayer,  what  a  profound  study  it  is 
for  us!  It  ought,  properly,  to  be  called  "The  Lord's  Prayer."  The 
manner  and  the  matter  are  alike  impressive.  "  These  words  spake 
Jesus,  and  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  heaven  and  said.  Father,  the  hour  is 
come;  glorify  thy  Son,  that  thy  Son  also  may  glorify  thee."  He 
seems  to  have  been  chanting  a  melodious  paean  just  then  at  the  thought 
that  his  first  battle  had  been  fought,  that  his  spirit,  which  had  been 
troubled,  had  risen  superior  to  the  conflict,  and  that  he  was  already 
victorious  in  the  first  of  the  three  terrible  struggles.  As  soon  as  this 
had  occurred  there  came  another  hour,  and  with  it  the  power  of  darkness, 
in  which  not  so  much  the  spirit  as  the  soul  of  our  blessed  Lord  was  to 
sustain  the  shock  of  the  encounter.  This  took  place  in  the  garden: 
You  know  that  after  he  had  come  forth  triumphant  in  this  death-struggle 
he  went  to  the  conflict  more  expressly  in  his  body,  undergoing  in  his 
physical  nature  the  scourging,  and  the  spitting,  and  the  crijcifixion; 
although  in  that  third  case  there  was  a  grief  of  spirit  and  an  anguish 
of  soul  likewise,  which  mingled  their  tributary  streams.  Wc  would 
counsel  you  to  meditate  upon  each  separately,  according  to  the  time 
and  the  circumstance  in  which  the  pre-eminence  of  any  one  of  these 
is  distinctly  adverted  to. 

This  second  conflict  which  we  have  now  before  us  well  deserves  our 
raest  reverent  attention.  I  think  it  has  been  much  misunderstood. 
Possibly  a  few  thoughts  may  be  given  us  to-night  which  shall  clear 
away  the  mist  from  our  understanding,  and  opeii  some  of  the  mystery 
to  our  hearts.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  agony  in  the  garden  was 
a  repetition  of  the  temptation  in  the  wilderness.  These  two  contests 
with  the  prince  of  darkness  have  many  points  of  exact  correspondence. 
If  carefully  pondered,  you  may  disoover  that  there  is  a  singular  and 
striking  connection  between  the  triple  temptation  and  the  triple  prayer. 
Having  fought  Satan  at  the  first  in  the  wilderness,  on  the  threshold  of 
his  public  ministry,  our  Lord  now  finds  him  at  the  last  in  the  garden 
as  he  nears  the  termination  of  his  mediatorial  work  on  the  earth. 
Keep  in  mind  that  it  is  the  soul  of  Jesus  of  which  we  now  have  to 
speak,  while  I  take  up  the  several  points  consecutively,  offering  a  few 
brief  words  on  each. 

The  place  of  conflict  has  furnished  the  theme  of  so  many 
discourses  that  you  can  hardly  expect  anything  new  to  be  said  upon  it. 
Let  us,  however,  stir  up  your  minds  by  way  of  remembrance.  Jesus 
went  to  the  garden,  there  to  endure  the  conflict,  because  it  was  the 
place  of  meditation.  It  seemed  fit  that  his  mental  conflict  should  be 
carried  on  in  the  place  where  man  is  most  at  home  in  the  pensive 
musings  of  his  mind — 

"  The  garden  contemplation  suits." 
As  Jesus  had  been  accustomed  to  indulge  himself  with  midnight  reve- 
ries in  the  midst  of  those  olive  groves,  he  fitly  chooses  a  place  sacred  to 
the  studies  of  the  mind  to  be  the  place  memorable  for  the  struggles   of 
his  soul— 

"  In  a  garden  man  became 
Heir  of  endless  death  and  pain.** 


THE   GARDEN   OF  THE   SOITL.  87 

It  was  there  the  first  Adam  fell,  and  it  was  meet  that  there 

"  The  second  Adam  should  restore 
The  ruins  of  the  first." 

He  went  to  that  particular  garden,  it  strikes  me,  because  it  was  witliin 
the  boundaries  of  Jerusalem.  He  might  have  gone  to  Bethany  tha,t 
night  as  he  had  on  former  nights,  but  why  did  he  not?  Do  you  not 
know  that  it  was  according  to  the  Levitical  law  that  the  Israelites 
should  sleep  within  the  boundaries  of  Jerusalem,  on  the  Paschal  night? 
When  they  cam-e  up  to  the  temple  to  keep  the  Passover  they  must  not 
go  away  till  that  Paschal  night  was  over.  So  our  Lord  selected  a 
rendezvous  within  the  liberties  of  the  ciry,  that  he  might  not  transgress 
even  the  slightest  jot  or  tittle  of  the  law.  And  again,  he  chose  that 
garden,  amongst  others  contiguous  to  Jerusalem,  because  Judas  knew 
the  place.  He  wanted  retirement,  but  he  did  not  want  a  place  where  he 
could  skulk  and  hide  himself.  It  was  not  for  Christ  to  give  himself 
up — that  were  like  suicide;  but  it  was  not  for  him  to  withdraw  and 
secrete  himself — that  were  like  cowardice.  So  he  goes  to  a  place  which 
he  is  quite  sure  that  Judas,  who  was  aware  of  his  habitudes,  knows  he 
is  accustomed  to  visit;  and  there,  like  one  who,  so  far  from  being  afraid 
to  meet  his  death,  pants  for  the  baptism  with  which  he  is  to  be  baptized, 
he  awaits  the  crisis  that  he  had  so  distinctly  anticipated.  "  If  they 
seek  me,"  he  seemed  to  say,  "  I  will  be  where  they  can  readily  find  me,  and 
lead  me  away."  Every  time  we  walk  in  a  garden  I  think  we  ought  to 
recollect  the  garden  where  the  Saviour  walked,  and  the  sorrows  that  befel 
him  there.  Did  he  select  a  garden,  I  wonder,  because  we  are  all  so  fond 
of  such  places,  thus  linking  our  seasons  of  recreation  with  the  most 
solemn  mementoes  of  himself?  Did  he  recollect  what  forgetful  creatures 
we  are,  and  did  he  therefore  let  his  blood  fall  upon  the  soil  of  a  garden, 
that  so  often  as  we  dig  and  delve  therein  we  might  lift  up  our  thoughts 
to  him  who  fertilised  earth's  soil,  and  delivered  it  from  the  curse  by 
yirtue  of  his  own  agony  and  griefs? 

Our  next  thought  shall  be  about  the  witnesses. 

Christ's  spiritual  suffering  was  altogether  within  the  veil.  As  I 
have  said,  no  one  could  descry  or  describe  it.  But  his  soul-sufferings 
had  some  witnesses.  Not  the  rabble,  not  the  multitude;  when  they  saw 
his  bodily  suffering,  that  was  all  they  could  understand,  therefore  it  was 
all  they  were  permitted  to  see.  Just  so,  Jesus  had  often  shown  them 
the  flesh  as  it  were,  or  the  carnal  things  of  his  teaching,  when  he  gave 
them  a  parable;  but  he  had  never  shown  them  the  soul,  the  hidden  life  of 
his  teaching,  this  he  reserved  for  his  disciples.  And  thus  it  was  in  his 
passion;  he  let  the  Greek  and  the  Roman  gather  around  in  mockery, 
and  see  his  flesh  torn,  and  rent,  and  bleeding,  but  he  did  not  let  them 
g(i  into  the  garden  with  him  to  witness  his  anguish  or  his  prayer. 
Within  that  enclosure  none  came  but  the  disciples.  And  mark,  my 
brethren,  not  all  the  disciples  were  there.  There  were  a  hundred  and 
twenty  of  his  disciples,  at  least,  if  not  more,  but  only  eleven  bore  him 
company  then.  Those  eleven  must  cross  that  gloomy  brook  of  Kedron 
with  him,  and  eight  of  them  are  set  to  keep  the  door,  their  faces 
towards  the  world,  there  to  sit  and  watch ;  only  three  go  into  the  garden, 
and  those  three  see  something  of  his  sufferings;  they  behold  him  wheu. 


88  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

the  agony  begins,  but  still  at  a  distance.  He  withdraws  from  them  a 
stone's  cast,  for  he  must  tread  the  wine-press  alone,  and  it  is  not  possi- 
ble that  the  priestly  sufferer  should  have  a  single  compeer  in  the  offering 
which  he  is  to  present  to  his  God.  At  last  it  came  to  this,  that  there 
was  only  one  observer.  The  chosen  three  had  fallen  asleep,  God's  un- 
sleeping eye  alone  looked  down  upon  him.  The  Father's  ear  alone  was 
attent  to  the  piteous  cries  of  the  Redeemer. 

"  He  knelt,  the  Saviour  knelt  and  pray'd, 

When  but  his  Father's  eye 
Look'd  through  the  lonely  gardens  shade 

On  that  dread  agony : 
The  Lord  of  all  above,  beneath, 

Was  bow'd  with  sorrow  unto  death !  " 

Then  there  came  an  unexpected  visitor.  Amazement  wrapped  the 
sky,  as  Christ  was  seen  of  angels  to  be  sweating  blood  for  us.  "  Give 
strength  to  Christ,"  the  Father  said  as  he  addressed  some  strong- winged 
spirit. 

"  The  astonish'd  seraph  bow'd  his  head, 
And  flew  from  worlds  on  high." 

He  stood  to  strengthen,  not  to  fight,  for  Christ  must  fight  alone;  but 
applying  some  holy  cordial,  some  sacred  anointing  to  the  oppressed 
Champion  who  was  ready  to  faint,  he,  our  great  Deliverer,  received 
strength  from  on  high,  and  rose  up  to  the  last  of  his  fights.  Oh.  my 
dear  friends,  does  not  all  this  teach  us  that  the  outside  world  knows 
nothing  about  Christ's  soul-sufferings?  They  draw  a  picture  of  him; 
they  carve  a  piece  of  wood  or  ivory,  but  they  do  not  know  his  soul- 
sufferings ;  they  cannot  enter  into  them.  Nay,  the  mass  of  his  own 
people  even  do  not  know  them,  for  they  are  not  made  conformable  to 
those  sufferings  by  a  spiritual  fellowship.  We  have  not  that  keen  sense 
of  mental  things  to  sympathize  with  such  grievings  as  he  had,  and  eyen 
the  favoured  ones,  the  three,  the  elect  out  of  the  elect,  who  have  the 
most  of  spiritual  graces  and  who  have  therefore  the  most  of  suffering  to 
endure,  and  the  most  of  depression  of  spirits,  even  they  cannot  pry^into 
the  fulness  of  the  mystery.  God  only  knows  the  soul-anguish  of  the 
Saviour  when  he  sweat  great  drops  of  blood;  angels  saw  it,  but  yet  they 
understood  it  not.  They  must  have  wondered  more  when  they  saw 
the  Lord  of  life  and  glory  sorrowful  with  exceeding  sorrowfulness,  even 
unto  death,  than  when  tliey  saw  this  round  world  spring  into  beautiful 
existence  from  nothingness,  or  when  they  saw  Jehovah  garnish  the 
heavens  with  his  Spirit,  and  with  his  hand  form  the  crooked  serpent. 
Brethren,  we  cannot  expect  to  know  the  length  and  breadth  and  height 
of  these  things,  but  as  our  own  experience  deepens  and  darkens  we 
shall  know  more  and  more  of  what  Christ  suffered  in  the  garden. 

Having  thus  spoken  about  the  place  and  the  witnesses,  let  us  say  a 
little  concerning  the  cup  itself. 

What  was  this  "  cup "  about  which  our  Saviour  prayed—"  If  it  be 
possible  let  this  cup  pass  from  me  "?  Some  of  us  may  have  entertamed 
the  notion  that  Christ  desired,  if  possible,  to  escape  fi'om  the  pangs  of 
death.  You  may  conjecture  that,  although  he  had  undertaken  to  redeem 
bis  people,  vet  his  human  nature  flinched  and  started  back  at  the  perilous 


THE  GARDEN  OF  THE  SOUL.  89 


hour  /  have  thought  so  myself  in  times  past,  but  on  more  mature 
consideration,  1  am  fully  persuaded  that  such  a  supposition  would  reflect 
upon  the  Saviour  a  dishonour.  I  do  not  consider  that  the  expression 
*'this  cup"  refers  to  death  at  all.  Nor  do  I  imagine  that  the  dear 
Saviour  meant  for  a  single  moment  to  express  even  a  particle  of  desire 
to  escape  from  the  pangs  whic\  were  necessary  for  our  redemption. 
This  "  cup  "  it  appears  to  me,  reK  ^es  to  something  altogether  ditterent — 
not  to  the  last  conflict,  but  to  the  conflict  in  which  he  was  then  engaged. 
If  vou  study  the  words— and  especially  the  Greek  words— which  are  used 
by 'the  various  evangelists,  I  think  you  will  find  that  they  all  tend  to 
suffcrest  and  confirm  this  view  of  the  subject.  The  Saviour's  spirit 
hav?ng  been  vexed  and  having  triumphed,  there  was  next  an  attack 
made  by  the  Evil  Spirit  upon  his  mental  nature,  and  this  mental  nature 
became  in  consequence  thereof  most  horribly  despondent  and  cast  down. 
As  when  on  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple  the  Saviour  felt  the  fear  of  fallmg, 
so  when  in  the  garden  he  felt  a  sinking  of  soul,  an  awful  despondency, 
and  he  began  to  be  verv  heavy.  The  cup,  then,  which  he  desired  to 
pass  from  him  was,  I  believe,  that  cup  of  despondency,  and  nothing 
more.  I  am  the  more  disposed  so  to  interpret  it,  because  not  a  single 
word*  recorded  by  anv  of  the  four  evangelists  seems  to  exhibit  the 
slio-htest  wavering  on  the  part  of  our  Saviour  as  to  offering  himself  up 
as  "an  atoning  sacrifice.  Their  testimony  is  frequent  and  conclusive  : 
"He  set  his  face  to  go  towards  Jerusalem;"  "I  have  a  baptism  to  be 
baptized  with,  and  h^ow  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  accomplished;"  "The 
Son  of  Man  goeth,  as  it  is  written  of  him."  You  never  hear  a  sentence 
of  reluctance  or  hesitancy.  It  does  not  seem  to  be  consistent  with  the 
character  of  our  blessed  Lord,  even  as  man,  to  suppose  that  he  desired 
that  final  cup  of  his  sufferings  to  pass  away  from  him  at  all. 

Moreover,  there  is  this,  which  I  take  to  be  a  strong  argument. 
The  apostle  tells  us  that  he  was  "  heard  in  that  he  feared."  Now,  if  he 
feared  to  die,  he  was  not  heard,  for  he  did  die.  If  he  feare<l  to  bear 
the  wrath  of  God,  or  the  weight  of  human  sin,  and  really  desired  to 
escape  therefrom,  then  he  was  not  heard,  for  he  did  feel  the  weight  of 
sin  and  he  did  suffer  the  weight  of  his  Father's  vindictive  wrath. 
Thus  it  appears  to  me  that  what  he  feared  was  that  dreadful  depression 
of  mind  which  had  suddenly  come  upon  him,  so  that  his  soul  wa«  very 
heavy.  He  prayed  his  Father  that  that  cup  might  pass  away;  and  so 
it  did,  for  I  do  not  see  in  all  the  Saviour's  griefs  afterwards  that  singular 
overwhelming  depression  he  endured  when  in  the  garden.  He  suffered 
much  in  Pilate's  hall,  he  suffered  much  upon  the  tree;  but  there  was,  I 
was  almost  about  to  say,  a  bold  cheerfulness  about  him  even  to  the  last, 
when  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him  he  endured  the  cross;  yea, 
when  he  cried,  "I  thirst,"  and,  "My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou 
forsaken  me  ?"  I  think  I  notice  a  holy  force  and  vigour  about  the 
words  and  thoughts  of  tbc  sufferer  which  not  the  weak  and  trembling 
state  of  his  body,  could  extinguish.  The  language  of  that  twenty-second 
Psalm,  which  seems  to  have  struck  the  key-note,  if  I  may  so  speak,  of 
his  devotion  on  the  cross,  is  full  of  faith  and  confidence.  If  the  first 
verse  contains  the  bitterest  of  woe,  the  twenty-first  Terse  changes  the 
plaintive  strain.  "  Thou  hast  heard  (or  answered)  me"  marks  a  tran- 
sition from  suffering  to  satisfaction  which  it  is  delightful  to  dwell  upon; 


90  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Now,  perhaps  some  of  you  may  think,  that  if  this  cup  only  meant 
depression  of  the  spirits  and  dismay  of  the  soul  it  was  nothing  of 
much  moment  or  significance,  or  at  least  ic  weakens  the  spell  of  those 
unwonted  words  and  deeds  which  twine  around  Gethsemane.  Permit 
me  to  beg  your  pardon.  Personally  I  know  that  there  is  nothing  on 
earth  that  the  human  frame  can  suffer  to  be  compared  with  despond- 
ency and  prostration  of  mind.  Such  is  the  dolefulness  and  gloom  of  a 
heavy  soul,  yea,  a  soul  exceeding  heavy  even  unto  death,  that  I  could 
imagine  the  pangs  of  dissolution  to  be  lighter.  In  our  latest  hour  joy 
may  light  up  the  heart,  and  the  sunshine  of  heaven  within  may  bear  up 
the  soul  when  all  without  is  dark.  But  when  the  iron  entereth  into  a 
man's  soul,  he  is  unmanned  indeed.  In  the  cheerlessness  of  such  ex- 
hausted spirits  the  mind  is  confounded;  well  can  I  understand  the 
saying  that  is  written,  "  I  am  a  worm  and  no  man,"  of  one  that  is  a 
prey  to  such  melancholy.  Oh  that  cup!  When  there  is  not  a  promise 
that  can  give  you  comfort,  when  everything  in  the  world  looks  dark, 
when  your  very  mercies  affright  you,  and  rise  like  hideous  spectres  and 
portents  of  evil  before  your  view,  when  you  are  like  the  brethren  of 
Benjamin  as  they  opened  the  sacks  and  found  the  money,  but  instead  of 
being  comforted  thereby  said,  "  What  is  this  that  God  hath  done  unto 
us?  *'  when  everything  looks  black,  and  you  seem,  through  some  morbid 
sensitiveness  into  which  you  have  fallen,  to  distort  every  object  and 
every  circumstance  into  a  dismal  caricature,  let  me  say  to  you,  that 
for  us  poor  sinful  men  this  is  a  cup  more  horrible  than  any  which  in- 
quisitors could  mix.  I  can  imagine  Anne  Askew  on  the  rack,  braving 
it  out,  like  the  bold  woman  she  was,  facing  all  her  accusers,  and  saying — 

"  I  am  not  she  that  lyst 
My  anchor  to  let  fall ; 
For  euery  dryzzling  myst 
My  ship's  substantial!," 

but  I  cannot  think  of  a  man  in  the  soul-sickness  of  such  depression  of 
spirits  as  I  am  referring  to,  finding  in  thought  or  song  a  palliative 
for  his  woe.  When  God  touches  the  very  secret  of  a  man's  soul,  and  his 
spirit  gives  way,  he  cannot  bear  up  very  long;  and  this  seems  to  me  to 
have  been  the  cup  which  the  Saviour  had  to  drink  just  then,  from  which 
he  prayed  to  be  delivered,  and  concerning  which  he  was  heard. 

Consider  for  a  moment  what  he  had  to  depress  his  soul.  Everythinjr, 
my  brethren,  everything  was  draped  in  gloom,  and  overcast  with  dark- 
ness that  might  be  felt.  There  was  the  past.  Putting  it  as  I  think  he 
would  look  at  it,  his  life  had  been  unsuccessful.  He  could  say  with 
Isaiah,  "  Who  hath  believed  our  report,  and  to  whom  is  the  arm  of  the 
Lord  revealed?  "  "  He  came  unto  his  own,  and  his  own  received  him 
not."  And  how  poor  was  that  little  success  he  did  have!  There  were 
his  twelve  disciples;  one  of  them  he  knew  to  be  on  the  way  to  betray 
him;  eight  of  them  were  asleep  at  the  entrance  to  the  garden,  and  three 
asleep  within  the  garden!  He  knew  that  they  would  all  forsake  him, 
and  one  of  them  would  deny  him  with  oaths  and  curses!  What  was  there 
to  comfort  him?  When  a  man's  spirit  sinks  he  wants  a  cheerful  com- 
panion; he  wants  somebody  to  talk  to  him.  Was  not  this  felt  by  the 
Saviour?  Did  not  he  go  three  times  to  his  disciples?  He  knew  they 
were  but  men;  but  then  a  man  can  comfort  a  man  in  such  a  time  as 


THE  GAEDEN  OF  THE  SOUL.  91 

that.  The  sight  of  a  friendly  face  may  cheer  one's  own  countenance, 
and  enliven  one's  heart.  But  "he  had  to  shake  them  from  their  slumbers, 
and  then  thev  stared  at  him  with  unmeaning  gaze.  Did  he  not  return 
back  again  to  prayer  because  there  was  no  eye  to  pity,  and  none  that 
could  help?  He  found  no  relief.  Half  a  word  sometimes,  or  even  a 
smile,  even  though  it  be  only  from  a  child,  will  help  you  when  you  are 
sad  and  prostrate.  But  Christ  could  not  get  even  that.  He  had  to 
rebuke  them  almost  bitterly.  Is  not  there  a  tone  of  irony  about  his 
remonstrance?  "  Sleep  on  now  and  take  your  rest."  He  was  not 
angry,  but  he  did  feel  it.  When  a  man  is  low-spirited  he  feels  more 
keen'lv  and  acutely  than  at  other  times;  and  although  the  splendid 
charity  of  our  Loixi  made  that  excuse—"  The  spirit  is  willing  bat  the 
flesk  is  weak,"  vet  it  did  cut  him  to  the  heart,  and  he  had  an  anguish  of 
soul  like  that  which  Joseph  felt  when  he  was  sold  into  Egypt  by  liis 
hretb.ren.  You  will  see,  then,  that  both  the  past  and  the  present  were 
sufficient  to  depr(^ss  him  to  the  greatest  degree.  But  there  was  the 
future;  and  as  he  looked  forward  to  that,  devoted  as  his  heartwas,  and 
unfaltering  as  was  the  courage  of  his  soul  (for  it  were  sacrilege  and 
slander  methinks  to  impute  even  a  thought  of  flinching  to  him),  yet  his 
human  heart  quailed;  he  seemed  to  think—'"  Oh!  how  shall  I  bear  it?" 
The  mind  started  back  from  the  shame,  and  the  body  started  back  from 
the  pain,  and  the  soul  and  body  both  started  back  from  the  thought  of 
death,  and  of  death  in  such  an  ignominious  way: — 

"  He  proved  them  all — the  doubt,  the  strife, 
♦  The  faint,  perplexing  dread  ; 

The  mists  that  hang  o'er  parting  life 

All  gathered  round  his  head  : 
That  he  who  gave  man's  breath  might  know 
The  very  depths  of  human  woe." 
Brethren,  none  of  us  have  such  cause  for  depression  as  the  Saviour  had. 
V\^e  have  not  his  load  to  carry;  and  we  have  a  helper  to  help  us  whom 
he  had  not,  for  God  who  forsook  him  will  never  forsake  us.  Our  soul 
may  be  cast  down  within  us,  but  we  can  never  have  such  great  reason 
for  it,  nor  can  we  ever  know  it  to  so  great  an  extent  as  our  dear 
Redeemer  did.  I  wish  I  could  picture  to  you  that  lovely  man,  friendless 
like  a  stag  at  bay,  with  the  dogs  compassing  him  round  about,  and  the 
assembly  of  the  wicked  enclosing  him;  foreseeing  every  incident  of  his 
passion,  even  to  the  piercing  of  his  hands  and  his  feet,  the  parting  of 
his  garments,  and  the  lots  cast  upon  his  vesture,  and  anticipating  that 
last  death-sweat  without  a  drop  of  water  to  cool  his  lips!  I  can  but 
conceive  that  his  soul  must  have  felt  within  itself  a  solemn  trembling, 
such  as  might  well  make  him  say,  "  I  am  exceeding  sorrowful  even 
unto  deaih." 

This,  then,  seems  to  me  to  be  the  cup  which  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
desired  to  have  passed  from  him,  and  which  did  pass  from  him  in  due 
time. 

Advancing  a  little  further,  I  want  you  to  think  of  the  agony. 
We  have  been  accustomed  so  to  call  this  scene  in  the  garden.     You 
all  know  that  it  is  a  word  which  signifies  "  wrestling."  _  Now,  there  is 
no  wrestling  where  there  is  only  one  individual.     To  this  agony,  there- 
fore,  there  must  have  been  two  parties.     Were  there  not,  however. 


^-  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

mystically  speaking,  two  parties  iu  Christ?    Wiiat  do  I  see  in  this  King 
ot  bharon  but,  as  it  were,  two  armies?     There  was  the  stern  resolve 
to  do  all,  and  to  accomplish  the  work  which  he  had  undertaken;  and 
there  was  the  mental  weakness  and  depression  which  seemed  to  say  to 
him  "You  cannot:  you  will  never  accomplish  it."  "  Our  fathers  trusted 
m  thee,  and  thou  didst  deliver  them.    They  cried  unto  thee  and  were 
delivered;  tliey  trusted  in  thee  and  were  not  confounded-"    "but  I 
am   a  worm   and    no   man,    a    reproach   of  men,   and    despised    of 
the   people;"   so    that    the    two    thoughts    come    into   conflict— the 
Bhrmking  of  the  soul,  and  yet  the  determination  of  his  invincible  will 
to  go  on  with  it,  and  to  work  it  out.     He  was  in  an  agony  in  that 
struggle  between  the  overwhelming  fear  of  his  mind  and  the  noble 
eagerness  of  his  spirit.    I  think,  too,  that  Satan  afflicted  him;  that 
the  powers  of  darkness  were  permitted  to  use  their  utmost  craft  in  order 
to  drive  the  Saviour  to  absolute  despair.     One  expression  used  to  depict 
It  1  will  handle  very  delicately;  a  word  that,  in  its  rougher  sense, 
means,  and  has  been  applied  to,  persons  out  of  their  mind  and  bereft 
for  awhile   of  reason.     The    term  used    concerning  the  Saviour   in 
(xethsemane  can   only  be  interpreted  by   a  word   equivalent  to   our 
"distracted."    He  was  like  one  bewildered  with  an  overwhelmino-  weight 
of  anxiety  and  terror.     But  his  divine  nature  awakened  up  his  spiritual 
faculties  and  his  mental  energy  to  display  their  full  power.     His  faith 
resisted  the. temptation  to  unbelief.     The  heavenly  goodness-  that  was 
within  him  so  mightily  contended  with  the  Satanic  suggestions  and  in- 
sinuations  which  were  thrown  in  his  way  that  it  came  to  a  Tfrestling. 
I  should  like  you  to  catch  the  idea  of  wrestling,  -as  though  you  saw  twa 
men  trying  to  throw  one  another,  struggling  together  till  the  muscles 
stand  out  and  the  veins  start  like  whip-cord  on  their  brows.     That  were 
a  fearful  spectacle  when  two  men  in  desperate  wrath  thus  close  in  with 
each  other.     But  the  Saviour  was  thus  wrestling  with  the  powers  of 
^arkness,  and  he  grappled  with  such  terrible  earnestnes&  in  the  fray  that 
he  sweat,  as  it  were,  great  drops  of  blood  :— 

"  The  powers  of  hell  united  prest, 
And  squeezed  his  heart,  and  bruised  hl»  breast. 
What  dreadful  conflicts  raged  within, 
When  sweat  and  blood  forced  through  his  skm !" 

Observe  the  way  in  which  Christ  conducted  the  agony.  It  was  by 
prayer.  He  turned  to  his  Father  three  times  with  the  self-same  words. 
It  is  an  index  of  distraction  when  you  repeat  yourself.  Three  times  with 
the  self-same  words  he  approached  his  God—"  My  Father,  let  this  cup 
pass  from  me."  Prayer  is  the  great  cure-all  for  depression  of  spirit. 
"  When  my  spirit  is  overwhelmed  within  me,  I  will  look  to  the  rock 
that  IS  higher  than  I."  There  will  be  a  breaking  up  altogether,  and  a 
bursting  of  spirit,  unless  you  pull  up  the  sluices  of  supplication,  and 
let  the  soul  flow  out  in  secret  communion  with  God.  If  we  would  state 
our  griefs  to  God  they  would  not  fret  and  fume  within,  and  wear  out 
our  patience  as  they  are  sometimes  wont  to  do.  In  connection  with  the 
agony  and  the  prayer  there  seems  to  have  been  a  bloody  sweat.  It  has 
been  thought  by  some  that  the  passage  onlv  means  that  the  sweat  was 
like  drops  of  blood;  but  then  the  word  "  like,"  is  used  in  Scripture  ta 


THE  GARDEN  OF  THE  SOUL.  93 

signify  not  merely  resemblance  but  the  identical  thing  itself.  We 
believe  that  the  Saviour  did  sweat  from  his  entire  person,  great  drops  of 
blood  falling  down  to  the  ground.  Such  an  occurrence  is  very  rare  indeed 
among  men.  It  has  happened  some  few  times.  Books  of  surgery  record 
a  few  instances,  but  I  believe  that  the  persons  who  under  some  horrify 
ing  grief  experience  such  a  sudor  never  recover;  they  have  always  died. 
Our  Saviour's  anguish  had  this  peculiarity  about  it,  that  though  he 
sweat  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood  falling  to  the  ground,  so  copiously 
as  if  in  a  crimson  shower,  yet  he  survived.  His  blood  must  needs  be 
shed  by  the  hands  of  others,  and  his  soul  poured  out  unto  death  in 
another  form.  Eemembering  the  doom  of  sinful  man — that  he  should 
eat  his  bread  in  the  sweat  of  his  face,  we  see  the  penalty  of  sin  exacted 
in  awful  measure  of  him  who  stood  surety  for  sinners.  As  we  eat  bread 
this  day  at  the  table  of  the  Lord  we  commemorate  the  drops  of  blood  that 
he  sweat.  With  the  perspirings  on  his  face,  and  huge  drops  on  his 
brow  man  toils  for  the  bread  that  perishes;  but  bread  is  only  the  staff 
of  life:  when  Christ  toiled  for  life  itself  to  give  it  to  men  he  sweat,  noc 
the  common  perspiration  of  the  outward  form,  but  the  blood  which  flows 
from  the  very  heart  itself. 

Would  that  I  had  words  to  bring  all  this  before  you.  I  want  to  make 
you  see  it;  I  want  to  make  you  feel  it.  The  heavenly  Lover  who  had 
nought  to  gain  except  to  redeem  our  souls  from  sin  and  Satan,  and  to 
win  our  hearts  for  himself,  leaves  the  shining  courts  of  his  eternal 
glory  and  comes  down  as  a  man,  poor,  feeble,  and  despised.  He  is  so 
depressed  at  the  thought  of  what  is  yet  to  be  done  and  suffered,  and 
under  such  pressure  of  Satanic  influence,  that  he  sweat  drops  of  blood, 
falling  upon  the  cold  frosty  soil  in  that  moon-lit  garden.  Oh  the  love 
of  JesusI  Oh  the  weight  of  sin!  Oh  the  debt  of  gratitude  which 
you  and  I  owe  to  him  I 

"Were  the  whole  realm  of  nature  mine, 

That  were  a  present  far  too  small : 

Love  so  amazing,  so  divine, 

Demands  my  soul,  my  life,  my  all," 

We  must  proceed  with  the  rich  narrative  to  meditate  upon  our 
Saviour  conquering. 

Our  imagination  is  slow  to  fix  upon  this  precious  feature  of  the 
dolorous  history.  Though  he  had  said,  "  If  it  be  possible  let  this  cup 
pass  from  me;"  yet  presently  we  observe  how  tranquil  and  calm  he  is 
when  he  rises  up  from  that  scene  of  prostrate  devotion!  He  remarks,  as 
though  it  were  in  an  ordinary  tone  of  voice  he  announced  some  expected 
circumstance, — "He  is  at  hand  that  shall  betray  me;  rise,  let  us  be 
going."  There  is  no  distraction  now,  no  hurry,  no  turmoil,  no  exceed- 
ing sorrow  even  unto  death.  Judas  comes,  and  Jesus  says,  "  Friend, 
wherefore  art  thou  come?"  You  would  hardly  know  him  to  be  the 
same  man  that  was  so  sorrowful  just  now.  One  word  with  an  emanation 
of  his  Deity  suffices  to  make  all  the  soldiery  fall  backwards.  Anon  he 
turns  round  and  touches  the  ear  of  the  high  priest's  servant,  and  heals 
it  as  in  happier  days  he  was  wont  to  heal  the  diseases  and  the  wounds 
of  the  people  that  flocked  round  him  in  his  journeys.  Away  he  goes,  so 
calm  and  collected  that  unjust  accusations  cannot  extort  a  reply  from 
him;  and  though  beset  on  every  hand  yet  is  he  led  as  a  lamb  to  the 


9^  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

slaughter,  and  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  is  dumb,  so  he  opens  not 
his  month.  That  was  a  magnificent  calmness  of  mind  that  sealed  his 
lips,  and  kept  him  passive  before  his  foes.  You  and  I  could  not  havre 
done  It.  _  It  must  have  been  a  deep  profound  peace  within  which 
enabled  him  to  be  thus  mute  and  still  amidst  the  hoarse  murmur  of  the 
council  and  the  boisterous  tumult  of  the  multitude.  I  believe  that 
havmg  fought  the  enemy  within,  he  had  achieved  a  splendid  victory; 
he  was  heard  in  that  he  feared,  and  was  now  able  in  the  fulness  of  his 
strength  to  go  out  to  the  last  tremendous  conflict  in  which  he  met  the 
embattled  hosts  of  earth  and  hell ;  and  vet  unabashed  after  he  had 
encountered  them  all,  to  wave  the  banner  of  triumph,  and  to  say  *'  It 
is  finished."  . 

What,  then,  let  us  ask  in  drawing  to  a  conclusion,  is  the  lesson  from 

ALL   THIS? 

I  think  I  could  draw  out  twenty  lessons,  but  if  I  did  they  would  not 
be  so  good  and  profitable  as  the  one  lesson  which   the  Saviour  draws 
himself.     What  was  the  lesson  which   he   particularly  taught  to  his 
disciples?    Now,  Peter,  and  James,  and  John,  open  vour  ears;  and  thou, 
Magdalene,  and  thou,  Mary,  and  thou,  the  wife  of  Herod's  steward,  and 
other  gracious  women,  listen  for  the  inference  which  I  am  going  to 
draw.     It   is  not  mine;  it  is  that  of  our  Lord  and   Master  hiinself. 
With  how  much  heed  should  we  treasure  it  upl     "  What  I  say  unto  yoa 
I  say  unto  all,  Watch."     "Watch;"  and  yet  again,   "Watch  and  pray 
lest  ye  enter  into  temptation."     I  have  been  turning  this  over  in  my 
mind  to  make  out  the  connection.     Why  on  this   particular  occasion 
should  he  exhort  them  to  watch?     It  strikes  me  that  there  were  two 
sorts  of  watching.     Did  you  notice  that  there  were  eight  disciples  at 
the  garden  gate?     They  were  watching,  or  ought  to  have  been;  and 
three  were  inside  the  garden;  they  were  watching,  or  ought  to  have 
been.     But  they   watched   differently.      Which  way  were   the   eight 
looking?     It  strikes  me  that  they  were  set  there  to  look  outwards,  to 
watch  lest  Christ  should  be  surprised  by  those  who  would  attack  him. 
That  was  the  object  of  their  being  put  there?     The  other  three  were  set 
to  watch  his  actions  and  his  words;  to  look  at  the  Saviour  and  see  if 
they  could  help,  or  cheer,  or  encourage  him.    Now,  you  and  I  have 
reason  to  look  both  ways,  and  the  Saviour  seems^to  say  as  we  look  upon 
the   agony— "You  will  have  to   feel   something   like   this,    therefore 
watch;"  watch  outwards;  be  always  on  your  watch-tower,  lest  sin  sur- 
prise you.     It  is  through  trespasses  that  you  will  be  brought  into  this 
agony;  it  is  by  giving  Satan  an  advantage  over  you  that  the  sorrows  of 
your  soul  will  be  multiplied.      If  your  foot  slip  your  heart  will  become 
the  prey  of  gloom.     If  you  neglect  communion  with  Jesus,  if  you  grow 
cold  or  lukewarm  in  your  affections,  if  you  do  not  live  up  to  your 
privileges,  you  will  become  the  prey  of  darkness,  dejection,  discourage- 
ment, and  despair;  therefore,  watch,  lest  ye  enter  upon  this  great  and 
terrible  temptation.     Satan  cannot  bring  strong  faith,  when  it  is  in 
healthy  exercise,  into  such  a  state  of  desolation.     It  is  when  your  faith 
declines  and  your  love  grows  negligent,  and  your  hope  is  inanimate,  that 
he  can  bring  you  into  such  disconsolate  heaviness  that  you  see  not  your 
signs,  nor  know  whether  you  are  a  believer  or  not.     You  will  not  be 
able  to  say,  "  My  Father,"  for  your  lOttl  will  doubt  whether  you  are  a 


THE  GARDEN  OF  THE  SOUL. 


95 


child  of  God  at  all.  When  the  ways  of  Zion  mourn,  the  harps  of  the 
sons  and  daughters  of  Zion  are  unstrung.  Therefore,  keep  good  watch, 
ye  who  like  the  eight  disciples  are  charged  as  sentinels  at  the  threshold 

of  the  o^arden.  •-,,.,    i. 

But  ye  three,  watch  inward.  Look  at  Christ.  "  Consider  him  that 
endured  such  contradiction  of  sinners  against  himself."  Watch  the 
Saviour,  and  watch  with  the  Saviour.  Brethren  and  sisters,  I  should 
like  to  speak  this  to  you  so  emphatically  that  you  would  never  forget  it. 
Be  familiar  with  the  passion  of  your  Lord.  Get  right  up  to  the  cross. 
Do  not  be  satisfied  with  that,  but  get  the  cross  on  your  shoulders;  get 
yourself  bound  to  the  cross  in  the  spirit  of  the  apostle  when  he  said, 
"  I  am  crucified  with  Christ,  nevertheless  I  live."  I  do  not  know  that 
I  have  had  sweeter  work  to  do  for  a  long  time  than  when  a  few  weeks 
ago  I  was  looking  over  all  the  hymn- writers  and  all  the  poets  I  knew  of 
for  hvmns  upon  the  passion  of  the  Lord.  I  tried  to  enjoy  them  as  I 
selected  them,  and  to  get  into  the  vein  in  which  the  poets  were  when 
they  sung  them.  Believe  me,  there  is  no  fount  that  yields  such  sweet 
water  as  the  fount  that  springs  from  Calvary  just  at  the  foot  of  the  cross. 
Here  it  is  that  there  is  a  sight  to  be  seen  more  astounding  and  more 
ravishing  than  even  from  the  top  of  Pisgah.  Get  into  the  side  of  Christ; 
if  is  a  cleft  of  the  rock  in  which  you  may  hide  until  the  tempest  is  over- 
passed. Live  in  Christ;  live  near  to  Christ;  and  then,  let  the  conflict 
come,  and  you  will  overcome  even  as  he  overcame,  and  rising  up  from 
your  sweat  and  from  your  agony  you  will  go  forth  to  meet  even  death 
itself  with  a  calm  expression  on  your  brow,  saying,  "  My  Father,  not  as 
I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt." 

"My  God,  I  love  thee;  not  because 

I  hope  for  heaven  thereby, 
Nor  because  they  who  love  thee  not 

Must  burn  eternally. 
Thou,  O  my  Jesus,  thou  didst  me 

Upon  the  cross  embrace  ; 
For  me  didst  bear  the  nails  and  spear, 

And  manifold  disgrace ; 
And  griefs  and  torments  numberless, 

And  sweat  of  agony ; 
Yea,  death  itself— and  all  for  me 

Who  was  thine  enemy. 
Then  why,  O  blessed  Jesu  Christ, 

Should  I  not  love  thee  well  ? 
Not  for  the  hope  of  winning  heaven, 

Nor  of  escaping  hell ; 
Not  with  the  hope  of  gaining  aught, 

Nor  seeking  a  reward  • 
But  as  thyself  hast  loved  me, 

O  ever-loving  Lord. 
E'en  so  I  love  thee,  and  will  love, 

And  in  thy  praise  will  sing ; 
Because  thou  art  my  loving  God, 
And  my  Eternal  King." 

I  hope  that  this  meditation  may  be  profitable  to  some  tried  Christians, 


96 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


and  even  to  impenitent  sinners  likewise.  Oh  that  the  pictures  1  har€ 
been  trying  to  draw  might  be  seen  by  some  who  will  come  and  trust  in 
this  wondrous  man,  this  wondrous  God,  who  saves  all  who  trust  in  him. 
Oh,  rest  on  him!  "  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as 
white  as  snow;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool." 
Do  but  trust  him,  and  you  are  saved.  I  do  not  say  you  shall  be  saved 
another  day,  but  you  are  saved  to-night.  The  sin  which  was  on  your 
shoulder  heavy  as  a  burden  when  you  came  into  this  house  shall  all  be  gone. 
Look  now  to  him  in  the  garden,  on  the  cross,  and  on  the  throne.  Trust 
him;  trust  him;  trust  him  now;  trust  him  only;  trust  him  wholly; 

"  Let  no  other  trust  intrude  ; 

None  but  Jesus 
Can  do  helpless  sinners  good." 

May  the  Lord  bless  you,  every  one  in  this  assembly,  end  at  the  table 
may  you  have  his  presence.     Amen. 


$*ORTioN  OF  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Matthew  xxvi.  36—56. 


JESUS    IN    GETHSEMANE. 


Intended  for  Reading  on  Lord's-day,  February  23rd,   1902, 
delivered  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINQTON, 
On  Lord's-day  Evening,  March  6ih,  1S81. 


"  When  Jesus  had  spoken  these  words,  he  went  forth  with  his  disciples  over  the 
brook  Cedron,  where  was  a  garden,  into  the  which  he  entered,  and  his  disciples.  And 
Judas  also,  which  betrayed  him,  knew  the  place;  for  Jesu8  ofttimes  resorted  thither 
with  his  disciples." — John  xviii.  1,  2, 

I  REMEMBER  to  have  read  somewhere,  though  I  cannot  just  now  recall 
the  authority,  that  Bethany — to  which  j^lace  one  would  have 
thought  the  Saviour  would  have  gone  to  spend  the  night,  at  the 
house  of  Mary  and  her  sister  Martha, — was  over  the  brow  of  the 
Mount  of  Olives,  and  was  out  of  the  bounds  of  the  city  of  Jerusalem. 
Now,  at  the  passover,  it  was  incumbent  that  all  who  kept  the  feast 
should  spend  the  whole  night  within  the  bounds  of  the  city ;  and 
our  Divine  Lord  and  Master,  scrupulous  to  observe  every  point  of 
the  old  law,  did  not  go  over  the  hill,  but  stayed  within  the 
area  which  was  technically  considered  to  be  part  and  parcel  of 
Jerusalem ;  so  that  his  going  to  Gethsemane  was,  in  part,  a  fulfil- 
ment of  the  ceremonial  law;  and,  for  that  reason,  he  went  no 
further,  and  sought  no  other  shelter. 

Our  Lord  also  knew  that,  on  that  particular  night,  he  would  be 
betrayed  into  the  hands  of  his  enemies;  and,  therefore,  he  would 
need  to  be  prepared,  by  a  special  season  of  devotion,  for  the  terrible 
ordeal  he  was  about  to  endure.  That  passover  night  was  a  night  to 
be  remembered  on  this  account,  and  he  would,  therefore,  keep  it 
peculiarly  sacred ;  but  it  was  to  be  made  still  more  memorable  a" 
the  time  of  the  commencement  of  his  passion  sufferings,  so  he 
determined  to  spend  the  whole  night  in  prayer  to  his  Father.  In 
this  act,  he  reminds  us  of  Jacob  by  the  brook  Jabbok ;  when  he  had 
to  face  trouble  on  the  morrow,  he  spent  the  night  in  wrestling 
prayer ;  and  this  greater  Jacob  spent  his  night,  not  by  Jabbok,  but 
by  the  black,  foul  brook  of  Kedron,  and  there  wrestled  with  mightier 
power  even  than  the  patriarch  put  forth  in  his  notable  night 
struggle  with  the  Angel  of  the  covenant.  I  want  you  to  try,  in 
thought,  to  go  as  far  as  Gethsemane,  and  I  think  you  ought  to  be 
No.  2,767.  ^ 


98 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


encouraged  to  go  there  because  our  text  says,  "  Jesus  ofttlmea 
resorted  thither  with  his  disciples." 

I.     And,  first,  so  far  as  we  can  in  thought,  let  us  view  the  place. 

I  have  never  seen  the  garden  of  Gethsemane;  many  travellers 
tell  us  that  they  have  done  so,  and  they  have  described  what  they 
saw  there.  My  impression  is,  that  not  one  of  them  ever  saw  the 
real  spot,  and  that  not  a  trace  of  it  remains.  There  are  certain  old 
olive  trees,  within  an  enclosure,  which  are  commonly  thought  to 
have  been  growing  at  the  time  of  the  Saviour;  but  that  seems 
scarcely  possible,  for  Josephus  tells  us  that  the  whole  of  the  trees 
round  about  Jerusalem  were  cut  down,  many  of  them  to  be  made 
into  crosses  for  the  crucifixion  of  the  Jews,  others  of  them  to  assist 
in  building  the  bulwarks  with  which  the  Roman  emperor  sur- 
rounded the  doomed  city.  There  does  not  seem  to  have  been 
scarcely  anything  left  that  would  be  a  true  relic  of  the  old  city, 
and  I  cannot  imagine  that  the  olive  trees  would  be  spared.  From 
what  I  have  heard  from  brethren  who  have  gone  to  the  reputed 
garden  of  Gethsemane,  I  conclude  that  it  is  not  very  helpful  to 
one's  devotions  to  go  there  at  all.  One,  who  thought  to  spend  a 
part  of  his  Sabbath  there,  and  who  hoped  to  enjoy  much  fellow- 
ship with  Christ  in  the  place,  said  that  he  was  made  very  bitterly 
to  learn  the  meaning  of  our  Saviour's  words  to  the  woman  at  the  well 
of  Sychar,  "  The  hour  cometh,  when  ye  shall  neither  in  this  moun- 
tain, nor  yet  at  Jerusalem,  worship  the  Father.  .  .  .  The  hour 
cometh,  and  now  is,  when  the  time  worshippers  shall  worship  the 
Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth :  for  the  Father  seeketh  such  to 
worship  him." 

I  do  not  want  to  find  out  exactly  where  Gethsemane  was;  it  is 
enough  for  me  to  know  that  it  was  at  the  side  of  Mount  Olivet, 
and  that  it  was  a  very  retired  spot.  My  conception  of  it  is  the 
result  of  having,  for  many  winters,  resided  in  a  little  town  in  the 
South  of  France  where  olive  trees  grow  to  perfection ;  and  where, 
on  the  side  of  the  hills^  I  have  often  sat  me  down  in  olive  groves, 
and  I  have  said  to  myself,  "  Gethsemane  was  a  plaee  just  like  this." 
I  am  sure  it  was  so,  because  one  olive  garden,  on  the  side  of  a  hill, 
must  necessarily  be  very  like  another.  The  hills  are  lined  out  in 
terrace  above  terrace,  each  one  seldom  above  eight,  ten,  or  twelve 
feet  wide;  then  you  rise,  say,  five,  six,'  seven,  or  eight  feet,  and 
there  is  another  terrace,  and  so  on  right  up  the  hill ;  and  on  these 
terraces  the  olive  trees  grow. 

One  of  the  charms  of  an  olive  garden  of  that  kind  is  that,  as 
soon  as  you  get  into  it,  you  may  sit  down  under  the  lee  of  the 
bank  at  the  back  of  the  terrace, — perhaps  in  an  angle  where  you 
are  sheltered  from  the  wind, — and  you  will  be  completely  hidden 
from  all  observers.  I  have  had  persons  sitting  within  a  few  yards 
of  me,  of  whose  presence  I  had  no  idea.  One  Sabbath  day,  when 
we  had  been  spending  a  little  time  in  prayer  together,  I  saw  what 
appeared  to  be  an  Englishman's  tall  hat  moving  away,  at  a  little 
distance,  just  above  one  of  the  terraces.  By-and-by,  I  recognized 
the  head  that  was  under  the  hat  as  that  of  a  Christian  brother 
whom  I  knew,  and  I  found  th?.t  he  had  been  walking  up  and  down 


JESUS  in'  gethsemane.  99 

there,  studying  his  sermon  for  the  afternoon.  He  had  not  noticed 
us,  except  that  he  had  heard  some  sounds  that  seemed  to  him  like 
prayer  and  praise.  Many  of  you  might  be  in  an  olive  garden; 
but,  unless  you  made  some  sign  of  recognition  to  your  friends, 
they  would  scarcely  know  that  anybody  else  was  there;  and  under 
the  thick  yet  light  foliage,  with  the  glints  of  sunlight  shining 
through,  or  at  night,  under  the  kind  of  ashy,  grey  colour,  with  the 
moonlight  glimmering  through  with  its  silvery  beams,  I  cannot 
imagine  a  more  delightful  place  of  retreat, — a  place  where  one 
would  feel  surer  of  being  quite  alone,  even  though  somebody  might 
be  near  you, — a  place  where  you  might  feel  free  to  express  your 
thoughts  and  your  prayers ;  because,  at  any  rate,  to  your  own  con- 
sciousness, you  would  seem  to  be  entirely  alone. 

I  cannot  help  thinking  that  our  Saviour  also  loved  to  get  among 
the  olive  trees,  because  of  the  very  congenial  form  of  the  olive.  It 
twists  and  winds  and  turns  about  as  though  it  were  in  an  agony. 
It  has  to  draw  up  oil  out  of  the  flinty  rock,  and  it  seems  to  do  so 
with  gi-eat  labour  and  travail ;  the  very  shape  of  many  olive  trees 
seems  to  suggest  that  thought.  So,  an  olive  garden  is  a  place  of 
painful  pleasure  and  of  fruitful  toil,  where  the  oil  is  rich  and  fat, 
but  where  much  effort  has  to  be  expended  in  the  extraction  of  it 
out  of  the  hard  soil  on  which  the  olive  stands.  I  believe  that 
others  have  felt  about  this  matter  as  I  have  felt,  namely,  that 
there  is  no  tree  which  seems  more  suggestive  of  a  fellow-feeling 
with  the  sufferer  than  an  olive, — no  shade  that  is  more  sweetly 
pensive,  more  suitable  to  the  season  of  sorrow,  and  the  hour  of 
devout  meditation.  I  marvel  not,  therefore,  that  Jesus  sought  the 
garden  of  Gethsemane  that  he  might  be  quite  alone, — that  ha 
might  poux  out  his  soul  before  God,  and  yet  might  have  some  com- 
panions within  call  without  being  disturbed  by  their  immediate 
presence. 

One  reason  for  his  going  to  that  particular  garden  was,  because 
he  had  gone  there  so  often  that  he  loved  to  he  in  the  old  familiar 
place.  Do  you  not  feel  something  of  that  in  your  own  special  place 
of  prayer?  I  do  not  like  reading  out  of  other  people's  Bibles  so  well 
as  out  of  my  own.  I  do  not  know  how  it  is,  but  I  like  my  own 
study  Bible  best  of  all;  and  if  I  must  have  a  smaller  one,  I  prefer 
one  that  has  the  words  on  the  same  page  as  in  my  Bible,  so  that 
I  may  easily  find  them ;  and  I  do  not  know  whether  you  feel  the 
same,  but  I  can  usually  pray  best  in  one  place.  There  are  certain 
spots  where  I  delight  to  be  when  I  draw  near  to  God;  there  is 
some  association,  connected  with  them,  of  former  interviews  with 
my  Heavenly  Father,  that  makes  the  old  arm-chair  to  be  the 
very  best  plaoe  at  which  one  can  kneel.  So,  methinks,  the  Saviour 
loved  Gethsemane,  because  he  had  oftentimes  resorted  thither 
with  his  disciples;  and,  therefore,  he  makes  that  the  sacred  spot 
where  his  last  agony  of  prayer  shall  be  poured  out  before  his  Father. 

II.  That,  however,  is  only  the  introduction  to  the  main  matter 
•of  our  meditations;  so,  now,  let  us  view  the  Saviour  in  Geth- 
semane, THAT  WE  MAY  IMITATE  HIM. 

And,  first,  our  blessed  Lord  is  to  be  imitated  by  us  in  that  he 


100  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

frequently  sought  and  enjoyed  retirement.  His  was  a  very  bus^ 
life ;  he  had  much  more  to  do  than  you  and  I  have ;  yet  he  found 
abundant  time  for  private  prayer.  He  was  much  holier  than  any 
of  us  are ;  yet  he  realized  his  need  of  private  prayer  and  meditation. 
He  was  much  wiser  than  we  shall  ever  be ;  yet  he  felt  the  necessity 
for  retiring  into  solitude  for  communion  with  his  Father.  He  had 
much  power  over  himself,  he  could  control  and  compose  himself  far 
more  readily  than  we  can ;  yet,  amid  the  distractions  of  the  world, 
he  felt  that  he  must  frequently  get  away  alone.  It  would  be  well 
for  us  if  we  were  more  often  alone ;  we  are  so  busy — so  taken  up 
with  this  or  that  committee-meeting,  working-class,  Sunday-school, 
preaching,  talking,  visiting,  gossiping, — all  sorts  of  things,  good, 
bad,  or  indifferent, — that  we  have  no  leisure  for  the  due  cultiva- 
tion of  our  spiritual  life.  We  rush  from  pillar  to  post,  without 
proper  time  for  rest;  but,  brothers  and  sisters,  if  we  want  to  be 
strong,  if  we  mean  to  be  like  Jesus  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  we  must 
have  our  Gethsemane,  our  place  for  secret  retirement,  where  we 
can  get  alone  with  our  God.  I  think  it  was  Luther  who  said,  "  I 
have  a  hard  day's  work  before  me  to-day;  it  will  take  me  many 
hours,  and  there  will  be  a  stem  struggle,  so  I  must  have  at  least 
three  hours'  prayer,  that  I  may  gain  the  necessary  strength  for  my 
task."  Ah!  we  do  not  act  in  that  wise  fashion  nowadays;  we 
feel  as  if  we  cannot  spare  the  time  for  private  prayer ;  but,  had  we 
more  communion  with  God,  we  should  have  more  influence  with 
men. 

But  our  blessed  Master  is  especially  to  be  imitated  in  that  he 
fought  retirement  when  he  was  about  to  enter  upon  the  great  struggle 
of  his  life.  Just  then,  when  Judas  was  about  to  give  the  traitor's 
kiss, — when  scribes  and  Pharisees  were  about  to  hound  him  to  the 
cross, — it  was  then  that  he  felt  that  he  must  get  away  to  Geth- 
semane, and  be  alone  in  prayer  with  his  Father.  What  did  you  do, 
my  dear  brother,  when  you  apprehended  trial?  Why,  you  sought 
out  a  sympathizing  friend.  I  shall  not  blame  you  for  desiring  the 
consolations  of  true  friendship,  but  I  shall  not  commend  you  if  you 
put  them  into  the  place  of  communion  with  God.  Are  you,  even 
now,  dreading  some  approaching  calamity?  What  are  you  doing 
to  meet  it?  I  will  not  suggest  that  you  should  neglect  certain  pre- 
cautions, but  I  would  admonish  you  that  the  first  and  best  pre- 
caution is  to  get  away  to  your  God  in  prayer.  As  the  feeble  conies 
find  their  shelter  in  the  solid  rock,  and  as  the  doves  fly  away  to 
their  home  in  the  dovecot,  so  should  Christians,  when  they  expect 
trouble,  fly  straight  away  to  their  God  upon  the  wings  of  fear  and 
faith.  Your  great  strength  does  not  lie  in  your  hair,  else  might 
you  feel  as  proud  as  Samson  was  in  the  days  of  his  victories ;  your 
great  strength  lies  in  your  God.  Wherefore,  hie  away  to  him  with 
all  speed,  and  ask  from  him  help  in  this  your  hour  of  need. 

Some  of  you  pray  when  you  are,  as  it  were,  at  Calvary,  but  not  at 
Gethsemane.  I  mean,  you  pray  when  the  .trouble  comes  upon  you, 
but  not  when  it  is  on  the  road ;  yet  your  Master  here  teaches  you 
that  to  conquer  at  your  Calvary,  you  must  commence  by  wrestling 
at  your  Gethsemane.     When  as  yet  it  is  but  the  shadow  of  your 


JESUS    IN    GETHSEMANE.  101 

coming  trial  that  spreads  its  black  wings  over  you,  cry  unto  God 
for  help.  Wlien  you  are  not  emptying  the  bitter  cup, — when  you 
are  only  sipping  the  first  drops  of  the  wormwood  and  the  gall,  begin 
even  then  to  pray,  "  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt,  O  my  Father !  " 
You  will  thu^  be  the  better  able  to  drink  of  the  cup  to  itB  very 
dregs  when  God  shall  place  it  in  your  hand. 

We  may  also  imitate  our  Lord — as  far  as  it  would  be  in  our 
line,  in  his  talcing  his  disciples  with  him.  At  any  rate,  if  we  do  not 
imitate  him  in  this  respect,  we  may  certainly  admire  him ;  for 
he  took  the  disciples  with  him,  I  think,  for  two  purposes.  First, 
for  their  good.  Remember,  brethren  and  sisters,  that  the  morrow 
was  to  be  a  day  of  trial  for  them  as  well  as  for  himself.  He  was  to 
be  taken  to  trial  and  condemnation ;  but  they  were  to  be  severely 
tried,  in  their  fidelity  to  him,  by  seeing  their  Lord  and  Master  put  to 
a  shameful  death.  So  he  took  them  with  him  that  they  also  might 
pray, — that  they  might  learn  how  to  pray  by  hearing  his  wondrous 
prayers, — that  they  might  watch  and  pray,  lest  they  should  enter 
into  temptation.  Now,  sometimes,  in  your  special  hour  of  trouble, 
I  believe  that  it  will  be  for  the  good  of  others  for  you  to  communi- 
cate to  them  the  story  of  your  distress,  and  ask  them^  to  join  you  in 
prayer  concerning  it.  I  have  often  done  this,  so  I  can  urge  you 
to  do  the  same.  I  found  it  a  great  blessing,  on  one  dark  day  of  my 
life,  to  ask  my  sons,  though  they  were  but  lads,  to  come  into  my 
room,  and  pray  with  their  father  in  his  time  of  trouble.  I  know 
that  it  was  good  for  them,  and  their  prayers  were  helpful  to  me ; 
but  I  acted  as  I  did  in  part  that  they  might  realize  their  share  in 
domestic  responsibilities,  that  they  might  come  to  know  their 
father's  God,  and  might  learn  to  trust  him  in  their  time  of  trouble. 

But  our  Saviour  also  took  his  disciples  with  him  to  Gethsemano 
that  they  might  assist  to  comfort  him ;  and,  in  this  respect,  he  is 
to  be  imitated  by  us  because  of  his  wonderful  humility.  If  those 
disciples  had  all  done  their  best,  what  would  it  have  been  worth? 
But  what  they  really  did  was  most  discouraging  to  Christ,  instead 
of  being  at  all  helpful  to  him.  They  went  to  sleep  when  they 
should  have  watched  with  their  Lord,  and  they  did  not  assist  him 
with  their  prayers  as  they  might  have  done.  It  is  noteworthy 
that  he  did  not  ask  them  to  pray  with  him ;  he  bade  them  watch 
and  pray,  lest  they  should  enter  into  temptation,  but  he  said  to 
them,  "What,  could  ye  not  watch  with  me  one  hour?"  He  did 
not  say,  "  What,  could  ye  not  pray  with  me  one  hour  ?  "  He  knew 
that  they  could  not  do  that.  What  mortal  man  could  pray  at 
such  a  time  as  that,  when  great  drops  of  bloody  sweat  punctuated 
every  paragraph  of  his  petition?  No;  they  could  not  pray  with 
him,  but  they  might  have  watched  with  him;  yet  that  they  did 
not  do.  Sometimes,  dear  friends,  when  a  very  great  trial  comes 
upon  you,  it  will  be  well  for  you  to  ask  some  brothers  and  sisters, 
who  cannot  do  much,  but  who  can  do  something,  to  come  and 
watch  with  you,  and  pray  with  you.  If  it  does  not  do  any  good  to 
you,  it  will  be  good  for  them;  but  it  will  do  good  to  you  also,  I 
feel  sure.  Often — I  have  to  confess  it, — I  have  got  two  brethren 
to  kneel  with  me  in  prayer,  when  I  have  been  depressed  through 


102  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

thia  late  illness  of  mine,  and  their  honest,  earnest,  hearty  prayer;^ 
in  my  study  have  often  lifted  me  right  up  into  joy  and  peace.  I 
believe  it  has  done  them  good  also ;  I  know  it  has  done  me  good, 
and  I  feel  sure  that  you  might  often  be  a  blessing  to  others  if  you 
did  not  mind  confessing  to  them  when  you  are  depressed  and  sad 
at  heart.  Say,  "  Come  into  my  room,  and  watch  with  me  one 
hour ; "  and  you  may  add  to  that  request  this  other  one,  "  Come 
and  pray  with  me,"  for  some  of  them  can  pray  as  well  as  you  can, 
and  even  better.  So  imitate  the  Saviour  in  endeavouring  not  only 
to  pray  yourself,  but  to  call  to  your  assistance  the  praying  legion  of 
God's  elect  ones  when  a  great  trial  is  impending. 

Still,  our  Lord's  example  may  mainly  be  followed  in  another 
direction,  namely,  when  we  do  pray  in  the  presence  of  a  great 
trouble,  it  is  well  to  pray  with  much  importunity.  Our  Saviour 
prayed  in  Gethsemane  three  times,  using  the  same  words.  He 
prayed  with  such  intensity  of  desire  that  his  heart  seemed  to  bum 
with  anguish.  The  canals  overflowed  their  banks,  and  the  red 
streams  came  bursting  down  in  bloody  drops  that  fell  upon  the 
earth  in  that  rightly-named  "  olive-press."  Ah !  that  is  the  way  to 
pray, — if  not  actually  unto  a  bloody  sweat,  as  we  may  not  have  to 
do,  or  be  able  to  do,  yet  with  such  intensity  of  hearty  earnestness 
as  we  can,  and  as  we  ought,  when  God  the  Holy  Spirit  is  working 
mightily  in  us.  We  cannot  expect  to  be  helped  in  our  time  of 
trouble  unless  it  is  intense  prayer  that  we  send  up  to  heaven. 

But  imitate  Christ  also  in  the  matter  of  your  jjrayer.  I  feel  sure 
that  he  only  softly  whispered  the  request,  "  O  my  Father,  if  it  be 
possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me."  You  also  may  present  that 
petition,  but  mind  that  you  say  it  very  softly.  Yet  I  feel  certain 
that  it  was  with  all  his  might  that  our  Saviour  said,  "  Nevertheless 
not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt."  In  the  presence  or  in  the  prospect 
of  a  great  trouble,  make  this  your  prayer  to  God,  "  Thy  will  be 
done."  Brace  up  your  soul  to  this  point; — having  asked  the  Lord 
to  screen  you,  if  it  should  seem  good  in  his  sight,  resign  yourself 
absolutely  into  his  hands,  and  say,  "  Nevertheless,  O  my  Father,  not 
as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt !  " 

It  is  prevailing  prayer  when  one  gets  as  far  as  that;  a  man  is 
prepared  to  die  when  he  knows  how  to  present  that  petition.  That 
is  the  best  preparation  for  any  cross  that  may  come  upon  your 
shoulders.  You  can  die  a  martyr's  death,  and  clap  your  hands  even 
in  the  midst  of  the  fire,  if  you  can,  with  all  your  soul,  really  pray 
as  Jesus  prayed,  "  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt."  This  is  the 
object  which  I  set  before  you,  my  brothers  and  sisters  in  Christ, — 
that,  if  you  are  expecting  sickness, — if  you  are  fearing  loss, — if  you 
are  anticipating  bereavement, — if  you  are  dreading  death, — let  this 
be  your  great  ultimatum,  go  to  God  now,  in  the  time  of  your 
distress,  and,  by  mighty  prevailing  prayer,  with  such  prayerful 
sympathy  as  others  can  give  you,  breathe  out  this  one  petition, 
"  Thy  will  be  done,  O  my  Father!  Thy  will  be  done;  help  me  to 
do  it ;  help  me  to  bear  it ;  help  me  to  go  through  with  it  all,  to 
thy  honour  and  glory.  Let  me  be  baptized  with  thy  baptism, 
and  drink  of  thy  cup,  oven  to  the  dregs." 


JESUS    IN    GETHSEMANE.  10^ 

Sometimes,  dear  friends,  you  may  wish,  in  your  hearts,  that  the 
Lord  would  make  great  us©  of  you,  and  yet  perhaps  he  may  not  do 
so.  Well,  a  man  who  holds  his  tongue,  when  Christ  tells  him  to  do 
so,  is  glorifying  Christ  more  than  if  he  opened  his  mouth,  and  broke 
the  Master's  commandment.  There  are  some  of  the  Lord's  people 
who,  by  a  quiet,  holy,  consistent  manifestation  of  what  the  Lord 
has  done  for  them,  glorify  him  more  than  they  would  do  if  they 
went  from  place  to  place  telling  out  his  gospel  in  a  way  which  would 
make  the  gospel  itself  disgusting  to  those  who  heard  it.  That  is 
quite  possible,  for  some  people  do  it.  If  my  Lord  puts  me  m  the 
front  rank,  blessed  be  his  name  for  it,  and  I  must  fight  for  him  there 
as  best  I  can.  But  if  he  says  to  me,  ''  Lie  in  bed !  Be  bed-ridden 
for  seven  years,  and  never  get  up  !  " — I  have  nothing  to  do  but  to 
glorify  him  in  that  way.  He  is  the  best  soldier  who  does  exactly 
what  his  captain  bids  him. 

III.     Now,  in  the  third  place,  and  only  briefly,  let  us  view  the 

DISCIPLES  IN   GeTHSEMANE,   BY   WAY   OF  INSTRUCTION  TO  OURSELVES. 

Probably,  the  disciples  had  often  been  ivith  their  Master  to  Geth- 
semane; — I  suppose,  sometimes  by  day,  and  oftentimes  by  night, 
in  secret  conclave  they  had  been  instructed  in  the  olive  garden. 
It  had  been  their  Academy ;  there  they  had  been  with  the  Master 
in  prayer;  no  doubt,  each  one  praying,  and  learning  how  to  pray 
better  from'  his  divine  example.  Dear  brothers  and  sisters,  I 
recommend  you  oftentimes  to  get  to  the  place  where  you  can  best 
commune  with  your  God. 

But,  now,  the  disciples  came  to  Gethsemane  because  a  great 
trouble  was  impending.  They  were  brought  there  that  they  might 
watch  and  pray.  So,  get  you  to  the  place  of  prayer,  at  this  time 
of  trouble,  and  at  all  other  times  of  trial  that  shall  come  upon  you 
throughout  your  whole  life.  Whenever  you  hear  the  knell  ringing 
out  all  earthly  joy,  let  it  ring  you  into  the  garden  of  prayer. 
Whenever  there  is  the  shadow  of  a  coming  trouble  looming  before 
you,  let  there  also  be  the  substance  of  more  intense  communion  witt- 
God.  These  disciples  were,  however,  at  this  time,  called  to  enter 
into  fellowship  with  their  Master  in  the  thicker,  deeper  darkness 
that  was  coming  over  him, — far  denser  than  any  that  was  coming 
over  them.  And  you  are  called,  dear  brothers  and  sisters,  each  in 
your  measure,  to  be  baptized  unto  Jesus  in  the  cloud  and  in  the 
aea,  that  you  may  have  fellowship  with  him  in  his  sufferings.  Be 
not  ashamed  to  go  even  to  Gethsemane  with  Christ,  entering  into 
a  knowledge  of  what  he  suffered  by  being  made,  according  to  your 
capacity,  to  suffer  in  the  selfsame  manner.  All  his  true  followers 
have  to  go  there ;  some  have  only  to  stand  at  the  outside  gate,  and 
keep  watch ;  but  his  highly-favoured  ones  have  to  go  into  the 
denser  gloom,  and  to  be  nearer  to  their  Lord  in  his  greatest  agonies ; 
but,  if  We  are  his  true  disciples,,  we  must  have  fellowship  with  him 
in  his  sufferings. 

Our  difficulty  is,  that  the  flesh  shrinks  from  this  trial,  and  that, 
like  the  disciples,  we  sleep  when  we  ought  to  watch.  When  the  time 
of  trial  comes,  if  we  get  depressed  in  spirit  about  it,  we  are  apt  not 
to  pray  with  that  fervour   and  vigour  which  greater  hopefulness 


104  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

would  have  begotten ;  and  when  we  come  to  feel  something  of  what 
the  Saviour  endured,  we  are  too  apt  to  be  overwhelmed  by  it  rather 
than  stimulated  by  it;  and  so,  when  he  comes  to  us,  he  finds  us, 
like  the  disciples,  "  sleeping  for  sorrow,"  The  Master  gently  said, 
"  The  spirit  indeed  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak ; "  but  I  do  not 
suppose  that  one  of  the  disciples  made  any  excuse  for  himself.  I 
feel,  if  I  may  judge  them  from  myself,  that  I  should  always  have 
said,  "  I  never  can  forgive  myself  for  going  to  sleep  that  night ; 
how  could  I  fall  asleep  when  he  said,  *  Watch  with  me '  ?  And 
when  he  came  again,  with  his  fa^e  red  with  bloody  sweat,  and  with 
that  disappointed  look  upon  his  countenance,  said,  '  What,  could  ye 
not  watch  with  me  one  hour?'  how  could  I  go  to  sleep  a  second 
time?  and,  then,  how  could  I  go  to  sleep  a  third  time?"  Oh, 
methinks  that  Simon  Peter  must  ever  have  remembered  that  his 
Saviour  said  to  him,  "  Simon,  couldst  not  thou  watch  with  me  one 
hour?"  That  question  must  have  stuck  by  him  all  his  life ;  and  James 
and  John  must  have  felt  the  same.  Brethren  and  sisters,  are  any 
of  you  sleeping  under  similar  circumstances, — while  Christ's  Church 
is  suffering, — while  Christ's  cause  is  suffering, — while  Christ's  people 
are  suffering, — while  a  trial  is  coming  upon  you  to  help  you  into 
fellowship  with  him?  Are  you,  instead  of  being  aroused  to  a 
higher  and  intenser  devotion,  sinking  into  deeper  sleep?  If  so, 
Christ  may  in  his  great  love  excuse  you,  but  I  beg  you  not  to  begin 
making  excuses  for  yourself.  Nay,  rouse  ye,  brethren,  and  "  watch 
and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into  temptation." 

That  slumber  of  theirs  must  have  been  greatly  rebuked  hy  their 
Saviour's  kindness  to  them.  As  I  understand  the  narrative,  our 
Lord  came  to  his  disciples  three  times,  and  on  the  third  occajsion 
he  found  them  still  heavy  with  sleep,  so  he  sat  down  beside  them, 
and  said  to  them,  "  Sleep  on  now,  and  take  your  rest."  There  he 
sat,  patiently  waiting  for  the  traitor's  arrival; — not  expecting  any 
help  or  sympathy  from  his  disciples,  but  just  watching  over  them 
as  they  would  not  watch  with  him,  praying  for  them  as  they  would 
not  pray  for  themselves,  and  letting  them  take  another  nap  while 
he  inade  himself  ready  to  meet  Judas  and  the  rabble  throng  that 
would  ao  soon  surround  him.  Our  Master,  in  his  great  tenderness, 
sometimes  indulges  us  with  such  sleeps  as  these;  yet  we  may  have 
to  regret  them,  and  to  wish  that  we  had  had  sufficient  strength  of 
mind  and  earnestness  of  heart  to  keep  awake,  and  watch  with  him 
in  his  season  of  sorrow.  It  appears  to  me  that,  of  all  the  eleven 
good  disciples,  there  was  not  one  who  kept  awake.  There  was  one 
vile  traitor,  and  he  was  wide  awake.  He  never  went  to  sleep, — he 
was  awake  enough  to  sell  his  Master,  and  to  act  as  guide  to  tkose 
who  came  to  capture  him. 

I  think  also  that,  at  least  partly  in  consequence  of  that  slumber 
of  the  disciples,  within  a  short  time,  "  they  all  forsook  him,  and  fled." 
They  seem,  for  the  time,  to  have  slept  away  their  attachment  to 
their  Lord,  and  waking,  as  from  a  disturbed  dream,  they  scarcely 
knew  what  they  did,  and  helter-skelter  away  they  fled.  The  sheep 
were  all  scattered,  and  the  Shepherd  was  left  alone,  thus  fulfilling 
the  ancient  prophecy,  "  Smite  the  Shepherd,  and  the  sheep  shall  be 


JESUS    IN    GETHSEMANE.  105 

scattered ; "  and  that  other  word,  "  I  have  trodden  the  winepress 
alone;  and  of  the  people  there  was  none  with  me."  Wake  up, 
brothers  and  sisters,  else  you  too  may  forsake  your  Master ;  and  in 
the  hour  when  you  ought  most  to  prove  your  fidelity,  it  may  be  that 
your  slumbering  state  of  heart  will  lead  on  to  backsliding,  and  to 
forsaking  of  your  Lord.     God  grant  that  it  may  not ! 

IV.  Now  I  close  with  a  word  of  warning  which  I  have  almost 
anticipated.  Let  us,  in  thought,  go  to  Gethsemane  to  take  warn- 
ing FROM  Judas.  Let  me  read  to  you  the  latter  part  of  the  text : 
"  Judas  also,  which  betrayed  him,  knew  the  place :  for  Jesus  of tr 
times  resorted  thither  with  his  disciples." 

"  Judas  also,  which  betrayed  him,  knew  the  place."  Yes,  he 
had  probably,  many  times,  been  there  all  night  with  Christ.  He  had 
sat  with  the  other  disciples  in  a  circle  round  their  Lord  on  one  of 
those  olive-clad  terraces,  and  he  had  listened  to  his  wondrous  words 
in  the  soft  moonlight.  He  had  often  heard  his  Master  pray  there; 
"  Judas  also,  which  betrayed  him,"  had  heard  him  pray  in  Geth- 
semane. He  knew  the  tones  of  his  voice,  the  pathos  of  his  pleading, 
the  intense  agony  of  that  great  heart  of  love  when  it  was  poured 
out  in  prayer.  He  had,  no  doubt,  joined  with  the  other  disciples 
when  they  said,  "  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 

"  Judas  also,  which  betrayed  him,  knew  the  place,"  He  could 
have  pointed  out  to  us  the  very  spot  where  the  Saviour  most  loved 
to  be, — that  angle  in  the  terrace,  that  little  corner  out  of  the  way, 
where  the  Master  was  wont  to  find  a  seat  when  he  sat  down,  and 
taught  the  chosen  band  around  him.  Yes,  Judas  knew  the  place ; 
and  it  was  because  he  knew  the  place  that  he  was  able  to  betray 
Christ ;  for,  if  he  had  not  known  where  Jesus  was,  he  could  not  have 
taken  the  guard  there. 

It  does  seem,  to  me,  very  dreadful  that  familiarity  with  Christ 
should  have  qualified  this  man  to  become  a  traitor ;  and  it  is  still 
true  that,  sometimes,  familiarity  with  religion  may  qualify  men  to 
become  apostates.  Oh,  if  there  be  a  Judas  here,  I  would  speak 
very  solemnly  to  you!  You  know  the  place;  you  know  all  about 
church  government  and  church  order,  and  you  can  go  and  tell 
pretty  tales  about  the  mistakes  made  by  some  of  God's  servants, 
who  would  not  err  if  they  could  help  it.  Yes;  you  know  the 
church  members;  you  know  where  there  are  any  flaws  of  character 
and  infirmity  of  spirit;  you  know  how  to  go  and  spread  the  story 
of  them  among  worldlings,  and  you  can  make  such  mischief  as 
you  could  not  make  if  you  had  not  known  the  place.  Yes ;  and 
you  know  the  doctrines  of  grace,  at  least  with  a  measure  of  head- 
knowledge,  and  you  know  how  to  twist  them,  so  as  to  make  them 
seem  ridiculous,  even  those  eternal  verities,  which  ravish  the  hearts 
of  angels  and  of  the  redeemed  from  among  men.  Because  you  know 
them  so  well,  you  know  how  to  parody  them,  and  to  caricature 
them,  and  to  make  the  grace  of  God  itself  seem  to  be  a  farce.  Yes, 
you  know  the  place ;  you  have  been  to  the  Lord's  table,  and  you 
have  heard  the  saints  speak  of  their  raptures  and  their  ecstasies; 
and  you  pretended  that  you  were  sharing  them.  So  you  know  how 
to  go  back  to  the  world,  and  to  represent  true  godliness  as  being  all 


10ft  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

cant  and  hypocrisy;  and  you  make  rare  fun  out  of  those  most 
solemn  secrets  of  which  a  man  would  scarcely  speak  to  his  fellow 
because  they  are  the  private  transactions  between  his  soul  and  his 
God. 

I  can  hardly  realize  how  terrible  will  be  the  doom  of  those  who, 
after  making  a  profession  of  religion,  have  prostituted  their  know- 
ledge of  the  inner  working  of  the  Church  of  God,  and  made  it  the 
material  for  novels  in  which  Christ's  gospel  is  held  up  to  scorn. 
Yet  there  have  been  such  men,  who  have  not  been  content  to  be  like 
birds  that  have  fouled  their  own  nests,  for  they  have  also  gone 
forth,  and  tried  also  to  foul  the  nest  of  every  believing  heart  that 
they  could  reach.  What  a  dreadful  thing  it  will  be  if  any  one  of 
us,  here,  should  know  the  place,  and  therefore  should  betray  the 
Saviour!  Do  you  know  the  place  of  private  prayer,  or  do  you 
think  you  do?  Do  you  know  the  place  where  men  go  when  the 
shadow  of  a  coming  trial  is  looming  before  them?  Do  you  think 
you  know  something  about  fellowship  with  Christ  in  his  sufferings? 
But,  what  if  the  greed  of  gold  should  overmaster  in  you,  as  it  did 
in  Judas,  such  natural  attachment  as  you  feel  towards  Christ  and 
better  things?  And  what  if  even  Gethsemane  shoidd,  like  a  pit, 
open  wide  its  mouth  to  swallow  you  up  ?  It  is  terrible  to  contem- 
plate, yet  it  may  be  true,  for  "  Judas  also,  which  betrayed  him, 
knew  the  place."  I  cannot  bear  to  think  that  any  one  of  you 
should  be  familiar  with  the  ins  and  outs  of  this  Tabernacle,  and  yet 
should  betray  Christ; — that  you  should  be  one  of  those  who  gather 
around  this  communion  table,  that  you  should  be  familiar  with  all 
the  loving  and  tender  expressions  which  we  are  wont  to  use  here, 
and  yet,  after  all,  should  forsake  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ. 
Pass  the  disciples'  question  round,  and  each  one  ask  it,  "  Lord,  is 
it  I?     Is  it  I?" 

**  When  any  turn  from  Zion's  way, 
(Alas,  what  numbers  do  !; 
Methinks  I  hear  my  Saviour  eay, 
'  Wilt  thou  forsake  me  too  ?  ' 

"  Ah,  Lord  I  with  such  a  heart  as  mine. 
Unless  thou  hold  me  fast, 
I  feel  I  must,  I  shall  decline. 
And  prove  like  them  at  last." 

Therefore,  hold  thou  me  up,  O  Lord,  and  I  shall  be  safe;  keep  me 
even  to  the  end,  for  thy  dear  Son's  sake !     Amen. 


lExposition  bo  C*  3^.  Spurgron. 

JOHN  XV.  1—8. 

On  the  way  from  the  supper  table  to  the  garden  of  Gethsemane,  or 
while  still  lingering  in  the  upper  room,  our  Lord  spoke  this  wondrous 
parable. 

Verse  1.     1  am  the  true  vine, — 

All  other  vines  are  but  shadows  of  Christ.  They  represent  Christ,  but 
he  is  himself  the  substance,  the  essence,  the  one  great  reality.     He  is  the 


EXPOSITION.  107 

tmfh  of  all  fhino-s  ttnt  exist:  "I  am  the  true  Vine."  Does  anybody  ask 
which  is  the  true  Church  ?  All  who  are  vitally  joined  to  Christ  are  in  the 
true  Church,  fur  he  says,  "I  am  the  true  Vine," — 

1.  And  my  Father  is  the  husbandman. 

He  cares  for  the  Church  with  infinite  wisdom  and  love.  No  one  else  can 
care  for  that  true  Vine  as  the  Father — the  Husbandman — does. 

2.  Every  branch  in  me  that  beareth  not  fruit  he  taketh  aivay  : 

If  there  be  any,  who  are  only  nominally  in  Christ,  and  who  therefore 
bear  no  fruit,  their  doom  is  to  be  taken  away  ;  for,  in  order  to  final 
perseverance  and  eternal  safety,  there  must  be  fruit-bearing. 

2,  And  every  branch  that  beareth  fruit,  he  purgeth  it,  that  it  may  bring 
forth  more  fruit. 

Pruning,  then,  is  for  fruit-bearers.  If  the  branch  were  dead,  what 
would  be  the  good  of  pruning  it  ?  Say  not,  dear  friend,  that  your 
afflictions  must  be  caused  by  your  sins ;  nay,  rather  they  may  come  in 
consequence  of  your  virtues.  Because  you  do  bear  fruit,  it  is  worth  while 
for  the  Husbandman  to  use  his  knife  upon  you,  that  you  may  bring  forth 
more  fruit. 

3,  4.  Noiv  ye  are  clean  through  the  word  which  I  have  spoken  unto  you. 
Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you. 

Give  good  heed  to  that  sweet  word,  beloved  brethren,  "  Abide  in  me  '•' 
Do  not  seem  to  get  into  Christ,  and  then  depart  from  him.  Add  constancy 
to  all  your  other  graces. 

4,  5.  As  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself,  except  it  abide  in  the  vine  ; 
no  more  can  ye,  except  ye  abide  in  me.  I  am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  branches  : 
He  that  abideth  in  me,  and  I  in  him,  the  same  bringtth  forth  much  fruit  :  for 
without  me  ye  can  do  nothing. 

You  know  how  the  branch  is  in  the  vine,  it  is  a  component  part  of  the 
vine  ;  but  do  not  forget  that  the  vine  is  also  in  the  branch, — that  the  sap, 
which  is  the  very  life  of  the  vine,  flows  into  every  living  branch.  So  we 
are  in  Christ,  and  Christ  is  in  us,  and  he  says  to  us,  as  the  marginal 
reading  has  it,  "  Severed  from  me,  ye  can  do  nothing."  What !  not  even  a 
little,  Lord  ?  Can  we  not  do  something  good,  something  acceptable  apart 
from  thee  ?    No  ;  "Without  me,  ye  can  do  nothing." 

6.  If  a  man  abide  not  in  me,  he  is  cast  forth  as  a  branch,  and  is  withered  ; 
and  men  gather  them,  and  cast  thtm  into  the  fire,  and  they  are  burned. 

That  is  all  that  can  be  done  with  fruitless  vine-branches.  You  cannot 
make  anything  of  them.  Other  trees  yield  timber,  and  are  useful  for 
various  purposes ;  but,  with  the  vine,  it  is  as  the  prophet  Ezekiel  says, 
"  Son  of  man.  What  is  the  vine  tree  more  than  any  tree,  or  than  a  branch 
which  is  among  the  trees  of  the  forest.?  Shall  wood  be  taken  thereof  to 
do  any  work  ?  or  will  men  take  a  pin  of  it  to  hang  any  vessel  thereon  ? 
Behold,  it  is  cast  into  the  fire  for  fuel ;  the  fire  devoureth  both  the  ends  of 
it,  and  the  midst  of  it  is  burned.  Is  it  meet  for  any  work  ?"  It  is  useless 
if  it  is  fruitless  ;  and  so  is  it  with  us,  if  we  do  not  bear  fruit  unto  God,  we 
are  of  no  service  to  him  whatsoever. 

7.  If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will, 
and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you. 

Here  is  the  secret  of  prevailing  prayer.  It  is  not  every  man,  who 
chooses  to  pray,  who  shall  have  whatever  he  asks  of  God  ;  but  the 
successful  pleader  is  the  man  who  abides  in  Christ,  and  in  whom  Christ's 
words  abide.  God  will  not  hear  our  words  if  we  disregard  his  words. 
We  cannot  expect  our  prayers  to  be  prevalent  if  we  are  severed  from 
our  Lord. 


108 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


8.  Herein  is  my  Father  glorified^  that  ye  hear  much  fruit;  so  ahaCl  ye  he 
my  disciples. 

"  Much  fruit "  should  be  produced  by  the  disciples  of  the  much-doing 
Christ.  The  true  Vine  was  full  of  fruit,  and  it  scarcely  can  be  believed 
that  we  are  branches  of  that  Vine  if  we  exhibit  only  a  little  fruit.  It  is 
**  much  fruit "  that  proves  our  union  to  this  Vine. 


Hymns  from  '*  Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 319,  271,  278. 


THE  WEAKENED   CHRIST  STRENGTHENED. 


%  ^ttm\\ 


Intended  for  Reading  on  Lord's-day,  March  9th,   1902, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lord's-day  Evening,  June  5th,  1881. 


"  And   there  appeared   an   angel   unto   him  from  heaven,    strengthening   him."-- 
Luke  xxii.  43. 

I  SUPPOSE  that  this  incident  happened  immediately  after  our  Lord's 
first  prayer  in  th©  garden  of  Gethsemane.  His  pleading  became  so 
fervent,  so  intense,  that  it  forced  from  him  a  bloody  sweat.  He 
was,  evidently,  in  a  great  agony  of  fear  as  he  prayed  and  wrestled 
even  unto  blood.  We  are  told,  by  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews,  that  he  ''  was  heard  in  that  he  feared."  It  is  probable 
that  this  angel  came  in  answer  to  that  prayer.  This  was  the 
Father's  reply  to  the  cry  of  his  fainting  Son,  who  was  enduring  an 
infinity  of  sorrow  because  of  his  people's  sin ;  and  who  must,  there- 
fore, be  divinely  upheld  as  to  his  manhood,  lest  he  should  be  utterly 
crushed  beneath  the  terrible  weight  that  was  pressing  upon  his 
holy  soul. 

Scarcely  had  our  Saviour  prayed  before  the  answer  to  his  petition 
came.  It  reminds  us  of  Daniel's  supplication,  and  of  the  angelic 
messenger  who  was  caused  tO'  fly  so  swiftly  that,  as  soon  as  the 
prayer  had  left  the  prophet's  lips,  Gabriel  stood  there  with  the 
reply  to  it.  So,  brethren  and  sisters,  whenever  your  times  of  trial 
come,  always  betake  yourselves  to  your  knees.  Whatever  shape 
your  trouble  may  take, — if,  to  you,  it  should  even  seem  to  be  a 
faint  representation  of  your  Lord's  agony  in  Gethsemane,  put  your- 
selves into  the  same  posture  as  that  in  which  he  sustained  the  great 
shock  that  came  upon  him.  Kneel  down,  and  cry  to  your  Father 
who  is  in  heaven,  who  is  able  tO'  save  you  from  death,  who  will 
prevent  the  trial  from  utterly  destroying  you,  will  give  you  strength 
that  you  may  be  able  to  endure  it,  and  will  bring  you  through  it  to 
the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his  grace. 

That    is    the    first    lesson    for    us    to    learn    from    cur    Lord's 

experience    in    Gethsemane, — the    blessing    of    prayer.       He    has 

bidden    us    pray,    but    he    haa     done    more    than    that,    for    he 

has    set    us    the    ectample   of    prayer;     and    if    example   be,    as 

No.  2,769. 


110 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


we  are  sure  it  is,  far  more  powerful  than  precept,  let  us  not  fail 
to  imitate  our  Saviour  in  the  exercise  of  potent,  prevalent,  re- 
peated supplication,  whenever  our  spirits  are  cast  down,  and  we  are 
in  sore  distress  of  soul.  Possibly,  you  have  sometimes  said,  "  I  feel 
so  sorrowful  that  I  cannot  pray."  Nay,  brother,  that  is  the  very 
time  when  you  must  pray.  As  the  spices,  when  bruised,  give  forth 
all  the  more  fragrance  because  of  the  bruising,  so  let  the  sorrow  of 
your  spirit  cause  it  to  send  forth  the  more  fervent  prayer  to  the 
God  who  is  both  able  and  willing  to  deliver  you.  You  must  express 
your  sorrow  in  one  way  or  another ;  so  let  it  not  be  expressed  in 
murmuring,  but  in  supplication.  It  is  a  vile  temptation,  on  the 
part  of  Satan,  to  keep  you  away  from  the  mercy-seat  when  you 
have  most  need  to  go  there;  but  do  not  yield  to  that  temptation. 
Pray  till  you  can  pray ;  and  if  you  find  that  you  are  not  filled  with 
the  Spirit  of  supplication,  use  whatever  measure  of  the  sacred 
bedewing  you  have;  and  so,  by-and-by,  you  shall  have  the  baptism 
of  the  Spirit,  and  prayer  shall  become  to  you  a  happier  and  more 
joyful  exercise  than  it  is  at  present.  Our  Saviour  said  to  his 
disciples,  "  My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto  death ; "  yet 
then,  above  all  times,  he  was  in  an  agony  of  prayer;  and,  in 
proportion  to  the  intensity  of  his  sorrow  was  the  intensity  of  his 
supplication. 

In  our  text,  there  are  two  things  to  note.  First,  our  Lord's 
weakness  ;  and,  secondly,  our  Lord's  strengthening . 

I.     First,  then,  let  us  meditate  for  a  little  while  upon  our  Lord's 

WEAKNESS. 

That  he  was  exceedingly  weak,  is  clear  from  the  fact  that  an 
angel  came  from  heaven  to  strengthen  him,  for  the  holy  angels  never 
do  anything  that  is  supei*fluous.  They  are  the  servants  of  an 
eminently  practical  God,  who  never  does  that  which  it  is  unneces- 
sary for  him  to  do.  If  Jesus  had  not  needed  strengthening,  an 
angel  would  not  have  come  from  heaven  to  strengthen  him.  But 
how  strange  it  sounds,  to  our  ears,  that  the  Lord  of  life  aiid  glory 
should  be  so  weak  that  he  should  need  to  be  strengthened  by  one  of 
his  own  creatures!  How  extraordinary  it  seems  that  he,  who  is 
"very  God  of  very  God,"  should,  nevertheless,  when  he  appeared  on 
earth  as  Immanuel,  God  with  us,  so  completely  take  upon  himself 
our  nature  that  he  should  become  so  weak  as  to  need  to  be  sustained 
by  angelic  agency !  This  struck  some  of  the  older  saints  as  being 
derogatory  to  his  divine  dignity;  so  some  manuscripts  of  the  New 
Testament  omit  this  passage;  it  is  supposed  that  the  verse  was 
struck  out  by  some  who  claimed  to  be  orthodox,  lest,  perhaps,  the 
Arians  should  lay  hold  upon  it,  and  us©  it  to  bolster  up  their 
heresies.  I  cannot  be  sure  who  did  strike  it  out,  and  I  am  not 
altogether  surprised  that  they  should  have  done  so.  They  had  no 
right  to  do  anything  of  the  kind,  for  whatever  is  revealed  in  the 
Scriptures  must  be  true.  But  they  seemed  to  shudder  at  the 
thought  that  the  Son  of  God  should  ever  have  been  so  weakened  as 
to  need  the  support  of  an  angelic  messenger  to  strengthen  him. 

Yet,  brethren  and  sisters,  this  incident  proves  the  reality  of  our 
Saviour's  manhood.     Here  you  can  perceive  how  fullv  he  shares  th© 


THE    WEAKENED    CHRIST    STRENGTHENED.  Ill 

weakness  of  our  humanity; — ^not  in  spiritual  weakness,  so  as  to 
become  guilty  of  any  sin; — but  in  mental  weakness,  so  as  to  be 
capable  of  great  depression  of  spirit;  and  in  physical  weakness,  so 
as  to  be  exhausted  to  the  last  degree  by  his  terrible  bloody  sweat. 
What  is  extreme  weakness?  It  is  something  different  from  pain, 
for  sharp  pain  evidences  at  least  some  measure  of  strength;  but 
perhaps  some  of  you  know  what  it  is  tO'  feel  as  if  you  were  scarcely 
alive ;  you  were  so  weak  that  you  could  hardly  realize  that  you  were 
actually  living.  The  blood  flowed,  if  it  flowed  at  all,  but  very 
slowly  in  the  canals  of  your  veins;  everything  seemed  stagnant 
within  you.  You  were  very  faint,  you  almost  wished  that  you 
could  become  unconscious,  for  the  consciousness  you  had  was  ex- 
tremely painful ;  you  were  so  weak  and  sick  that  you  seemed  almost 
ready  to  die.  Our  Master's  words,  "  My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful, 
even  unto  death,"  prove  that  the  shadow  of  impending  dissolution 
hung  darkly  over  his  spirit,  soul,  and  body,  so  that  he  could  truly 
quote  the  22nd  Psalm,  and  say,  "  Thou  hast  brought  me  into  the 
dust  of  death."  I  think,  beloved,  that  you  ought  to  be  glad  it  was 
so  with  your  Lord,  for  now  you  can  see  how  completely  he  is  made 
like  unto  his  brethren,  in  their  mental  depression  and  physical 
weakness,  as  well  as  in  other  respects. 

It  will  help  you  to  get  an  idea  of  the  true  manhood  of  Christ  if 
you  remember  that  this  was  not  the  only  time  when  he  was  weak. 
He,  the  Son  of  man,  was  once  a  babe ;  and,  therefore,  all  the  tender 
ministries  that  have  to  be  exercised  because  of  the  helplessness 
of  infancy  were  necessary  also  in  his  case.  Wrapped  in 
swaddling  bands,  and  lying  in  a  manger,  that  little  child  was, 
all  the  while,  the  mighty  God,  though  he  condescended  to  keep  his 
omnipotence  in  abeyance  in  order  that  he  might  redeem  his  people 
from  their  sins.  Doubt  not  his  true  humanity,  and  learn  from  it 
how  tenderly  he  is  able  to  sympathize  with  all  the  ills  of  childhood, 
and  all  the  griefs  of  boyhood,  which  are  not  so  few  or  so  small  as 
3ome  people  imagine. 

Besides  being  thus  an  infant,  and  gradually  growing  in  stature 
just  as  other  children  do,  our  Lord  Jesus  was  often  very  weary. 
How  the  angels  must  have  wondered  as  they  saw  him,  who  sways 
the  sceptre  of  universal  sovereignty,  and  marshals  all  the  starry 
hosts  according  to  his  will,  as  he,  "  being  wearied  with  his  journey, 
sat  thus  on  the  well  "  at  Sychar,  waiting  for  the  woman  whose  soul 
he  had  gone  to  win,  and  wiping  the  sweat  from  his  brow,  and 
resting  himself  after  having  travelled  over  the  burning  acres  of  th© 
land.  The  prophet  Isaiah  truly  said  that  "  the  everlasting  God,  the 
Lord,  the  Creator  of  tlie  ends  of  the  earth,  fainteth  not,  neither  is 
weai-y."  That  is  the  divine  side  of  his  glorious  nature.  "  Jesus, 
therefore,  being  wearied  with  his  journey,  sat  thus  on  the  well." 
That  was  the  human  side  of  his  nature.  We  read  that  "  he  did  eat 
nothing  "  during  the  forty  days'  temptation  in  the  wilderness,  and 
"  he  afterwards  hungered."  Have  any  of  you  ever  known  what  it 
has  been  to  suffer  the  bitterness  of  hunger?  Then,  remember  that 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  also  endured  that  pang.  He,  whom  we 
rightly  worship  and  adore  aa  "  God  blessed  for  ever,"  as  the  Son  of 


112 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


man,  the  Mediator  between  God  and  men,  hungered ;  and  he  also 
thirsted,  for  he  said  to  the  woman  at  the  well,  "  Give  me  to  drink." 

In  addition  to  this,  our  Saviour  was  often  so  weary  that  he  slept, 
which  is  another  proof  of  his  true  humanity.  He  was  so  tired, 
once,  that  he  slept  even  when  the  ship  was  tossing  to  and  fro  in  a 
storm,  and  was  ready  to  sink.  On  one  occasion,  we  read  that  the 
disciples  "  took  him  even  as  he  was  in  the  ship,"  which  seems  to  me 
to  imply  even  more  than  it  says,  namely,  that  he  was  so  worn  out 
that  he  was  scarcely  able  to  get  into  the  ship ;  but  "  they  took  him 
even  as  he  was,"  and  there  he  fell  asleep.  We  know,  moreover, 
that  "  Jesus  wept," — not  merely  once,  or  twice,  but  many  times ; 
and  we  also  know  what  completes  the  proof  of  his  humanity, — that 
he  died.  It  was  a  strange  phenomenon  that  he,  to  whom  the  Father 
has  given  "  to  have  life  in  himself,"  should  have  been  called  to  pass 
through  the  gloomy  shades  of  death,  that  he  might  in  all  points  be 
made  like  unto  his  brethren,  and  so  be  able  to  fully  sympathize 
with  us.  O  ye  weak  ones,  see  how  weak  your  Lord  became  that  he 
might  make  you  strong!  We  might  read  that  familiar  passage, 
"  though  he  was  rich,  yet  for  your  sakes  he  became  poor,  that  ye 
through  his  poverty  might  be  rich;"  in  a  slightly  different  way, 
"  though  he  was  strong,  yet  for  your  sakes  he  became  w^eak,  that  ye 
through  his  weakness  might  be  strong."  Therefore,  beloved,  "  be 
strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  might." 

What  was  the  reason  for  the  special  weakness  of  our  Saviour  when 
in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane?  I  cannot  now  go  fully  into  that 
matter,  but  I  want  you  to  notice  what  it  was  that  tried  him  so 
severely  there.  I  suppose,  first,  it  was  contact  with  sin.  Our 
Saviour  had  always  seen  the  effects  of  sin  upon  others,  but  it  had 
never  come  home  to  him  so  closely  as  it  did  when  he  entered  that 
garden ;  for  there,  more  than  ever  before,  the  iniquity  of  his  people 
was  made  to  meet  upon  him,  and  that  contact  aroused  in  him  a 
holy  horror.  You  and  I  are  not  perfectly  pure,  so  we  are  not  as 
horrified  at  sin  as  we  ought  to  be ;  yet,  sometimes,  we  can  say,  with 
the  psalmist,  "  Horror  hath  taken  hold  upon  me  because  of  the 
wicked  that  forsake  thy  law ; "  but  for  our  gracious  Saviour — hearken 
to  the  inspired  words,  they  are  none  of  mine, — to  be  "  numbered 
with  the  transgressors,"  must  have  been  an  awful  thing  to  his  pure 
and  holy  soul.  He  seemed  to  shrink  back  from  such  a  position, 
and  it  needed  that  he  should  be  strengthened  in  order  that  he 
might  be  able  to  endure  the  contact  with  that  terrible  mass  of 
iniquity. 

But  he  had,  in  addition,  to  bear  the  burden  of  that  sin.  It  was 
not  sufficient  for  him  to  come  into  contact  with  it;  but  it  is 
written,  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all ; "  and 
as  he  began  fully  to  realize  all  that  was  involved  in  his  position  as 
the  great  Sin-bearer,  his  spirit  seemed  to  droop,  and  he  became 
exceedingly  weak.  Ah,  sir!  if  you  have  to  bear  the  burden  of  your 
own  sin  when  you  appear  before  the  judgment  seat  of  God,  it  will 
sink  you  to  the  lowest  hell ;  but  what  must  Christ's  agony  have  been 
when  he  was  bearing  the  s'n  of  all  his  people?  As  the  mighty 
mass  of  their  guilt  came  rolling  upon  him,  his  Father  saw  that  the 


THE    WEAKENED    CHRIST    STRENGTHENED.  113 

human  soul  and  the  human  body  both  needed  to  be  upheld,  else 
they  would  have  been  utterly  crushed  before  the  atoning  work  had 
been  accomplished. 

Contact  with  sin,  and  the  bearing  of  sin's  penalty,  were  reason 
enough  to  produce  the  Saviour's  excessive  weakness  in  G-ethsemane ; 
but,  in  addition,  he  was  conscious  of  the  approach  of  death.  I  have 
heard  some  people  say  that  we  ought  not  to  shrink  from  death ; 
but  I  aver  that,  in  proportion  as  a  man  is  a  good  man,  death  will 
be  distasteful  to  him.  You  and  I  have  become,  to  a  large  extent, 
familiarized  with  the  thought  of  death.  We  know  that  we  must 
die, — unless  the  Lord  should  come  soon, — for  all  who  have  gone 
before  us  have  done  so,  and  the  seeds  of  death  are  sown  in  us,  and, 
like  some  fell  diseasei,  they  are  beginning  to  work  within  our 
nature.  It  is  natural  that  we  should  expect  to  die,  for  we  know 
that  we  are  mortal.  If  anybody  were  to  tell  us  that  we  should  be 
annihilated,  any  reasonable  and  sensible  man  would  be  horrified  at 
the  idea,  for  that  is  not  natural  to  the  soul  of  man.  Well,  now, 
death  was  as  unnatural  to  Christ  as  annihilation  would  be  to  us. 
It  had  never  come  to  be  a  part  of  his  nature,  his  holy  soul  had 
none  of  the  seeds  of  death  in  it;  and  his  untainted  body, — which 
had  never  known  any  kind  of  disease  or  corruption,  but  was  as 
pure  as  when,  first  of  all,  "  that  holy  thing  "  was  created  by  the 
Spirit  of  God, — that  also  shrank  back  from  death.  There  were  not 
in  it  any  of  the  things  which  make  death  natural ;  and,  therefore, 
because  of  the  very  purity  of  his  nature,  he  recoiled  at  the  approach 
of  death,  and  needed  to  be  'specially  strengthened  in  order  to  meet 
"  the  last  enemy." 

Probably,  however,  it  was  the  sense  of  utter  desertion  that  was 
preying  upon  his  mind,  and  so  produced  that  extremity  of  weak- 
ness. All  his  disciples  had  failed  him,  and  presently  would  forsake 
him.  Judas  had  lifted  up  his  heel  against  him,  and  there  was  not 
one  of  all  his  professed  followers  who  would  faithfully  cleave  to 
him.  Kings,  princes,  scribes,  and  rulers  were  all  united  against 
him,  and  of  the  people,  there  were  none  with  him.  Worst  of  all, 
by  the  necessity  of  his  expiatory  sacrifice,  and  his  substitution  for 
his  people,  his  Father  himself  withdrew  from  him  the  light  of  his 
countenance;  and,  even  in  the  garden,  he  was  beginning  to  feel 
that  agony  of  soul  which,  on  the  cross,  wrung  from  him  that  doleful 
cry,  "My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  And  that 
sense  of  utter  loneliness  and  desertion,  added  to  all  that  he  had 
endured,  made  him  so  exceedingly  weak  that  it  was  necessary  that 
he  should  be  specially  strengthened  for  the  ordeal  through  which  he 
had  still  to  pass. 

II.  Now,  in  the  second  place,  let  us  meditate  for  a  little  while 
upon  OUR  Lord's  strengthening  :  "  There  appeared  an  angel  unto 
him  from  heaven,  strengthening  him." 

It  is  night,  and  there  he  kneels,  under  the  olives,  offering  up,  as 
Paul  says,  "  prayers  and  supplications  with  strong  crying  and  tears 
unto  him  that  was  able  to  save  him  from  death."  While  wrestling 
there,  he  is  brought  into  such  a  state  of  agony  that  he  sweats  great 
drops  of  blood ;    and,   suddenly,    there  flasJiee  before  him,   like   a 

8 


11^  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

meteor  from  the  midnight  sky,  a  bright  spirit  that  had  come 
straight  from  the  throne  of  God  to  minisrt>er  to  him  in  his  hour 
of  need. 

Think  of  the  condescension  on  Christ's  part  to  allow  an  angel  to 
come  and  strengthen  him.  He  is  the  Lord  of  angels  as  well  as  of 
men.  At  his  bidding,  they  fly  more  swiftly  than  the  lightning 
flash  to  do  his  will.  Yet,  in  his  extremity  of  weakness,  he  was 
succoured  by  one  of  them.  It  was  a  wondrous  stoop  for  the 
infinitely-great  and  ever-blessed  Chiist  of  God  to  consent  that  a 
spirit  of  his  own  creation  should  appear  unto  him,  and  strengthen, 
him. 

But  while  I  admire  the  condescension  which  permitted  one  angel 
to  come,  I  equally  admire  the  self-restraint  which  allowed  only  one 
to  come  ;  for,  if  he  had  so  pleased,  he  might  have  appealed  to  his 
Father,  and  he  would  at  once  have  sent  to  him  "  more  than  twelve 
legions  of  angels."  No,  he  did  not  make  such  a  request;  he  rejoiced 
to  have  one  to  strengthen  him,  but  he  would  not  have  any  more. 
Oh,  what  matchless  beauties  are  combined  in  our  blessed  Saviour !' 
Ypu  may  look  on  this  side  of  the  shield,  and  you  will  perceive  that 
it  is  of  pure  gold.  Then  you  may  look  on  the  other  side  of  it,  but 
you  will  not  discover  that  it  is  brass,  as  in  the  fable,  for  it  is  gold 
all  through.  Our  Lord  Jesus  is  "  altogether  lovely."  What  he 
does,  or  what  he  refrains  from  doing,  equally  deserves  the  praises- 
of  his  people. 

How  could  the  angel  strengthen  Christ?  That  is  a  very  natural 
enquiry ;  but  it  is  quite  possible  that,  when  we  have  answered  that 
question  as  well  as  we  can,  we  shall  not  have  given  a  full  and 
satisfactory  reply  to  it.  Yet  I  can  conceive  that,  in  some  mysterious, 
manner,  an  angel  from  heaven  may  have  actually  infused  fresh 
vigour  into  the  physical  constitution  of  Christ.  I  cannot  positively 
affirm  that  it  was  so,  but  it  seems  to  me  a  very  likely  thing.  We 
do  know  that  God  can  suddenly  communicate  new  strength  to 
fainting  spirits;  and,  certainly,  if  he  willed  it,  he  could  thus  lift  up 
the  drooping  head  of  his  Son,  and  make  him  feel  strong  and. 
resolute  again. 

Perhaps  it  was  so ;  but,  in  any  case,  it  must  have  strengthened 
the  Saviour  to  feel  that  he  was  in  pure  company.  It  is  a  great  joy- 
to  a  man,  who  is  battling  for  the  right  against  a  crowd  who  love 
the  wrong,  to  find  a  comrade  by  his  side  who  loves  the  truth  as- 
he  loves  it  himself.  To  a  pure  mind,  obliged  to  listen  to  the  ribald 
jests  of  the  licentious,  I  know  of  nothing  that  is  more  strengthening 
than  to  get  a  whisper  in  the  ear  from  one  who  says,  "  I,  too,  love  that 
which  is  chaste  and  pure,  and  hate  the  filthy  conversation  of  the 
wicked."  So,  peradventure,  the  mere  fact  of  that  shining  angel 
standing  by  the  Saviour's  side,  or  reverently  bowing  before  him, 
may  in  itself  have  strengthened  him. 

Next  to  that,  was  the  tender  sympathy  which  this  angelic  ministra- 
tion proved.  I  can  imagine  that  all  the  holy  angels  leant  over  the 
battlements  of  heaven  to  watch  the  Saviour's  wondrous  life;  and 
now  that  they  see  him  in  the  garden,  and  perceive,  by  his  whole 
appearance,  and  his  desperato  agony,  that  death  is  drawing  near 


THE    WEAKENED    CHRIST    STRENGTHENED.  115 

to  him,  tliey  are  so  astonished  that  they  crave  permission  that  at 
least  one  of  their  number  shall  go  down  to  see  if  he  cannot  carry 
succour  to  him  from  his  Father's  house  above.  I  can  imagine  the 
angels  saying,  "  Did  we  not  sing  of  him  at  Bethlehem  when  he  was 
born?  Did  not  some  of  us  minister  to  him  when  he  was  in  the 
desert,  and  amongst  wild  beasts,  hungry  after  his  long  fast  and 
terrible  temptation?  Has  he  not  been  seen  of  angels  all  the  while 
he  has  been  on  earth?  Oh,  let  some  one  of  us  go  to  his  relief!  " 
And  I  can  readily  suppose  that  God  said  to  Gabriel,  "  Thy  name 
means,  '  The  strength  of  God,'  go  and  strengthen  your  Lord  in 
Gethsemane,"  "  and  there  appeared  an  angel  unto  him  from  heaven 
strengthening  him;"  and  I  think  that  he  was  strengthened,  at  least 
in  part,  by  observing  the  sympathy  of  all  the  heavenly  host  with  him 
in  his  season  of  secret  sorrow.  He  might  seem  to  be  alone  as  man; 
but,  as  Lord  and  King,  he  had  on  his  side  an  innumerable  company 
of  angels  who  waited  to  do  his  will;  and  here  was  one  of  them 
come  to  assure  him  that  he  was  not  alone,  after  all. 

Next,  no  doubt,  our  Saviour  was  comforted  by  the  aiigeVs  willing 
service.  You  know,  dear  brothers  and  sisters,  how  a  little  act  of 
kindness  will  cheer  us  when  we  are  very  low  in  spirit.  If  we  are 
despised  and  rejected  of  men,  if  we  are  deserted  and  defamed  by 
those  who  ought  to  have  dealt  differently  with  us,  even  a  tender 
look  from  a  child  will  help  to  remove  our  depression.  In  times  of 
loneliness,  it  is  something  even  to  have  a  dog  with  you,  to  lick  your 
hand,  and  show  you  such  kindness  as  is  possible  from  him.  And 
our  blessed  Master,  who  always  appreciated,  and  still  appreciates, 
the  least  service  rendered  to  him, — for  not  a  cup  of  cold  water, 
given  to  a  disciple,  in  Christ's  name,  shall  lose  its  reward, — was 
cheered  by  the  devotion  and  homage  of  the  ministering  spirit  that 
came  from  heaven  to  strengthen  him.  I  wonder  if  the  angel 
worshipped  him, — I  think  that  he  could  do  no  less ;  and  it  must 
have  been  something  to  worship  the  blood-red  Son  of  God.  Oh,  that 
any  one  of  us  could  have  paid  him  such  homage  as  that !  The  time 
for  such  special  ministry  as  that  is  over  now ;  yet  my  faith  seems  to 
bring  him  back  here,  at  this  moment,  just  as  if  we  were  in 
Gethsemane.  I  adore  thee,  thou  blessed  eternal  God, — never  more 
God-like  than  when  thou  didst  prove  thy  perfect  manhood  by 
sweating  great  drops  of  blood  in  the  awful  weakness  of  thy  depression 
in  the  garden  of  sorrow ! 

Peradventure,  too,  the  angel's  presence  comforted  and  strength- 
ened the  Saviour  as  being  a  sort  of  foretaste  of  his  final  victory. 
What  was  this  angel  but  the  pioneer  of  all  the  heavenly  host  that 
would  come  to  meet  him  when  the  fight  was  over?  He  was  one 
who,  in  full  confidence  of  his  Lord's  victory,  had  flown  before  the 
rest,  to  pay  homage  to  the  conquering  Son  of  God,  who  would  tread 
the  old  dragon  beneath  hia  feet.  You  remember  how,  when  Jesus 
was  bom,  first  there  came  one  angel  who  began  to  speak  of  him  to 
the  shepherds,  "  and  suddenly  there  was  with  the  angel  a  multitude 
of  the  heavenly  host  praising  God,  and  saying.  Glory  to  God  in  the 
highest,  and  on  earth  peace,  good  will  toward  men."  The  first 
angel  had,  as  it  were,  stolen  a  march  upon  his  brethren,  and  got 


lib  Al^TKui'OL.lTAN    TABERNACLE    PL'LPIT. 

before  them  ;  but,  no  sooner  was  the  wondrous  nefws  bruited  through 
heaven's  streets,  than  every  angel  resolved  to  overtake  him  ere  his 
message  was  completed.  So,  here  again  is  one  that  had  come  as  an 
outrider,  to  remind  his  Lord  of  his  ultimate  victory,  and  there 
were  many  more  afterwards  to  come  with  the  same  glad  tidings; 
but,  to  the  Saviour's  heart,  that  angel's  coming  was  a  token  that 
he  would  lead  captivity  captive;  and  that  myriads  of  other  bright 
spirits  would  crowd  around  him,  and  cry,  "  Lift  up  your  heads,  O 
ye  gates ;  and  be  ye  lifted  up,  ye  everlasting  doors ;  that  the  King 
of  glory,  fresh  from  his  blood-red  shame,  may  enter  into  his 
heavenly  and  eternal  inheritance !  " 

Yet  once  more,  is  it  not  very  likely  that  this  angel  brought  the 
Saviour  a  message  from  heaven?  The  angels  are  generally  God's 
messengers,  so  they  have  something  to  communicate  from  him ;  and, 
perhaps,  this  angel,  bending  over  the  Saviour's  prostrate  form, 
whispered  in  his  ear,  "  Be  of  good  cheer ;  thou  must  pass  through 
all  this  agony,  but  thou  wilt  thereby  save  an  innumerable  multitude 
of  the  sons  and  daughters  of  men,  who  will  love  and  worship  thee 
and  thy  Father  for  ever  and  for  ever.  He  is  with  thee  even  at  this 
moment.  Though  he  must  hide  his  faoe  from  thee,  because  of  the 
requirements  of  justice  that  the  atonement  may  be  complete,  his 
heart  is  with  thee,  and  he  loves  thee  ever."  Oh,  how  our  Lord 
Jesus  must  have  been  cheered  if  some  such  words  as  these  were 
whispered  into  his  ears! 

Now,  in  closing,  let  us  try  to  learn  the  lessons  of  this  incident. 
Beloved  brothers  and  sisters,  you  and  I  may  have  to  pass  through 
great  griefs, — certainly,  ours  will  never  be  so  great  as  those  of  our 
Divine  Master; — but  we  may  have  to  follow  through  the  same 
waters.  Well,  at  such  times,  as  I  have  already  said,  let  us  resort  to 
prayer,  and  let  us  he  content  to  receive  comfort  from  the  humblest 
instrumentality.  "  That  is  too  simple  an  observation,"  say  you. 
It  is  a  very  simple  one,  but  it  is  one  that  some  people  have  need  to 
remember.  You  remember  how  Naaman  the  Syrian  was  healed 
through  the  remark  of  a  little  captive  girl;  and,  sometimes,  great 
saints  have  been  cheered  by  the  words  of  very  little  people.  You 
recollect  how  Dr.  Guthrie,  when  he  was  dying,  wanted  "  a  bairn's 
hymn."  It  was  just  like  him,  great,  glorious,  simple-minded  child- 
man  that  he  was.  He  said  what  you  and  I  must  sometimes  have 
felt  that  we  wanted, — a  bairn's  hymn, — a  child's  joyful  song  to  cheer 
us  up  in  our  hour  of  depression  and  sorrow. 

There  are  some  people,  who  seem  as  if  they  would  not  be  converted 
unless  they  can  see  some  eminent  minister.  Even  that  will  not  suit 
some  of  them;  they  want  a  special  revelation  from  heaven.  They 
will  not  take  a  text  from  the  Bible, — though  I  cannot  conceive  of 
anything  better  than  that; — but  they  think  that,  if  they  could 
dream  something,  or  if  they  could  hear  words  spoken,  in  the  cool  of 
the  evening,  by  some  strange  voice  in  the  sky,  then  they  might  be 
converted.  Well,  brothers  and  sisters,  if  you  will  not  eat  the 
apples  that  grow  on  trees,  you  must  not  expect  angels  to  come  and 
bring  them  to  you.  We  have  a  more  sure  word  of  testimony  in  the 
Bible  than  we  can  have  anywhere  else.    If  you  will  not  be  converted 


THE    WEAKENED    CHRIST    STRENGTHENED. 


il 


by  that  Word,  it  is  a  great  pity ;  and  it  is  much  more  than  a  pity, 
it  is  a  great  sin.  If  your  Lord  and  Master  condescended  to  receive 
consolation  from  an  angel  whom  he  had  himself  created,  you  ought 
to  be  willing  to  gather  comfort  from  the  feeblest  speech  of  the 
poorest  person,— from  the  least  of  the  people  of  G-od  when  they  try 

to  cheer  you.  *  •    •  u  t4.   • 

I  have  known  an  old  professor  say  of  a  young  minister,  it  is 
no  use  for  me  to  hear  him,  for  he  has  not  had  the  experience  that 
1  have  had,  so  how  can  he  instruct  or  help  me?"  O  sirs,  I  have 
known  many  old  saints  get  more  comfort  out  of  godly  boys  than 
they  did  from  those  of  their  own  age !  God  knows  how,  out  of  the 
mouths  of  babes  and  sucklings,  to  perfect  praise ;  and  I  have  never 
heard  that  he  has  done  that  out  of  the  mouths  of  old  men.  Why  is 
that?  Because  they  know  too  much ;  but  the  children  do  not  know 
anything ;  and,  therefore,  out  of  their  mouths  the  praise  of  God  is 
perfect.  So  let  us  never  despise  God's  messengers,  however  humble 
they  may  be. 

The  next  lesson  is,  while  you  should  be  thankful  for  the  least 
comforter;  yet,  in  your  times  of  deepest  need,  you  may  expect  the 
greatest  comforters  to  come  to  you.  Let  me  remind  you  that  an 
angel  appeared  to  Joseph  when  Herod  was  seeking  Christ's  life. 
Then,  later,  angels  appeared  to  Christ  when  the  devil  had  been 
tempting  him.  And  now,  at  Gethsemane,  when  there  was  a 
peculiar  manifestation  of  diabolical  malice,  for  it  was  the  hour  of 
the  powers  of  darkness ;  then,  when  the  devil  was  loose,  and  doing 
his  utmost  against  Christ,  an  angel  came  from  heaven  to  strengthen 
him.  So,  when  you  are  in  your  heaviest  trials,  you  shall  have  your 
greatest  strength.  Perhaps  you  will  have  little  to  do  with  angels 
till  you  get  into  deep  trouble,  and  then  shall  the  promise  be 
fulfilled,  "  He  shall  give  his  angels  charge  over  thee,  to  keep  thee  in 
all  thy  ways.  They  shall  bear  thee  up  in  their  hands,  lest  thou  dash 
thy  foot  against  a  stone."  They  are  always  ready  to  be  your 
keepers;  but,  in  the  matter  of  spiritual  strengthening,  these  holy- 
spirits  may  have  little  to  do  with  some  of  you  until  you  stand  foot 
to  foot  with  Apollyon,  and  have  to  fight  stem  battles  with  the  evil 
bne  himself.  It  is  worth  while  to  go  through  rough  places  to  have 
angels  to  bear  you  up.  It  is  worth  while  to  go  to  Gethsemane,  if 
there  we  may  have  angels  from  heaven  to  strengthen  us.  So,  be  of 
good  comfort,  brethren,  whatever  lies  before  you.  The  darker  your 
experience  is,  the  brighter  will  be  that  which  comes  out  of  it.  The 
disciples  feared  as  they  entered  the  cloud  on  the  Mount  of  Trans- 
figuration ;  but  when  they  had  passed  right  into  it,  they  saw  Jesus, 
Moses,  and  Elias  in  glory.  O  ye  who  are  the  true  followers  of 
Christ,  fear  not  the  clouds  that  lower  darkly  over  you,  for  you  shall 
see  the  brightness  behind  them,  and  the  Christ  in  them ;  and  blessed 
shall  your  spirits  be. 

But  if  you  are  not  believing  in  Christ,  I  am  indeed  grieved  for 
you,  for  you  shall  have  the  sorrow  without  the  solace, — the  cup  of 
bitterness  without  the  angel, — the  agony,  and  that  for  ever,  without 
the  messenger  from  heaven  to  console  you.  Oh,  that  ye  would  all 
believe  in  Jesus !     God  help  you  so  to  do,  for  Christ's  sake !     Amen. 


118  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

IBxpositiou  by  €♦  1&.  Spuvgcom 

LUKE  XXII.  H— 46. 

Versps  14—16.  And  when  the  hour  was  come,  he  sat  doivtiy  and  the  twelve 
apostles  with  him.  And  he  said  unto  them,  With  desire  I  have  desired  to  eat 
this  pasaover  with  you  before  I  suffer:  for  I  say  nnto  you,  I  will  not  any  more 
eat  thereof,  until  it  he  fulfilled  in  the  kingdom  of  Qod. 

And  it  is  fulfilled,  for  Christ  himself  is  the  Lamb  of  our  passover.  His 
blood  has  been  shed  and  sprinkled  ;  his  people  have  been  brought  up  out 
of  their  Egyptian  bondage  ;  and,  by  faith,  they  feed  upon  him,  and  are 
glad.  How  sweetly  the  passover  melted  away  into  the  Lord's  supper, 
and  how  graciously  did  our  Saviour  thus  teach  us  that,  as  a  rule,  he  does 
not  make  violent  changes  in  the  development  of  his  people's  spiritual  life, 
but  he  leads  them  on  gradually  from  one  stage  to  another!  There  may 
be,  sometimes,  very  sudden  elevations ;  but,  as  a  general  rule,  we  go  from 
strength  to  strength,  a  step  at  a  time ;  and  the  truth  is  revealed  to  us  little 
by  little. 

17,  18.  And  he  took  the  cup,  and  gave  thanhs,  and  said,  Take  this,  and 
divide  it  among  yourselves  :  for  I  say  unto  you,  I  will  not  drink  of  the  fruit 
of  the  vine,  until  the  kingdom  of  God  shall  come. 

This  was  the  passover  cup, — the  cup  with  which  they  concluded  the 
paschal  supper.  At  such  times,  they  also  usually  began  to  chant  a  Psalm 
in  happy  unison.  Just  at  that  point,  Chri«t  interjected  the  first  part  of 
the  celebration  of  the  new  ordinance, — the  Lord's  supper,  into  which  the 
paschal  supper  was  to  melt. 

19.  And  he  took  bread,  and  gave  thanks,  and  brake  it,  and  gave  unto  them, 
saying.  This  is  my  body  which  is  given  for  you:  this  do  in  remembrance  of  me. 

It  was  clearly  impossible  that  he  could  have  meant  that  bread  to  be 
literally  his  body,  because  his  body  was  there  at  the  table.  Therefore,  the 
misunderstanding,  or  misrepresentation,  of  the  Church  of  Rome  is  altogether 
without  excuse.  Our  Saviour  plainly  intended  to  say,  "  This  bread  represents 
my  body;  it  is  an  emblem,  a  symbol,  of  my  body."  If  this  had  been 
spoken  concerning  the  bread  after  Christ  had  been  dead  and  gone,  and  not 
before,  there  might  have  been  some  warrant  for  the  teaching  of  the 
Papists  ;  but  there  cannot  be  any  such  warrant,  as  he  used  the  words 
while  he  was  sitting  there  with  his  apostles.  Let  us  be  careful  not  to  lose 
the  true  meaning  of  Christ's  words,  while  we  combat  the  false  interpreta- 
tion that  has  been  given  to  them. 

20.  Likewise  also  the  cup  after  supper,  saying.  This  cup  is  the  new  testament' 
in  my  blood,  which  is  shed  for  you. 

He  could  not  have  meant  that,  literally,  that  cup  was  the  new  covenant; 
I  never  heard  of  anybody  who  thought  ne  did.  Why,  then,  take  one  part 
of  the  ordinance  literally,  if  not  the  other  ?  But  our  Lord  did  mean  that 
the  contents  of  that  cup  represented  the  blood  which  seals  and  ratifies  the 
eternal  covenant  on  which  our  hopes  are  built. 

21.  But,  behold,  the  hand  of  him  that  hetrayeth  me  is  with  me  on  the  table. 
Lamentable  circuTustance, — sad  index  of  what  often  still  occurs  !     The 

worst  traitors  to  Christ  are  not  outside,  but  inside  the  visible  church  ;  there 
they  have  the  best  opportunity  for  doing  mischief;  there  they  can  give 
the  unkindest  cut  of  all.  God  grant  that  none  of  us  may  be  among  that 
miserable  number ! 

22.  And  truly  the  Son  of  man  goeth,  as  it  was  determined :  but  wot  unto 
that  man  by  whom  he  is  betrayed  ! 

The  fact  that  it  was  determined,  in  the  eternal  decrees  of  God,  that 
Christ  should  die,  did  not  at  all  diminish  the  responsibility  of  all  those  who 


EXPOSITION. 


119 


tad  a  share  in  bringing  about  that  death.  Learn,  beloved,  to  believe 
iirmly  in  Divine  predestination  without  doubting  human  responsibility. 
Even  though  you  may  not  be  able  to  show  how  these  two  things  agree, 
do  not  be  anxious  about  that  matter;  be  satisfied  to  believe  what  you 
<5annot  understand.  Both  these  things  are  true,  and  they  are  both  of 
them  in  this  verse. 

23,  24.  And  they  began  to  enqtiire  among  themselves,  which  of  them  it  was 
ihat  'should  do  this  thing.  And  there  tuas  also  a  strife  among  them,  which  of 
■them  should  he  accounted  the  greatest. 

What  a  strange  thing  that  it  should  have  been  so  !  Is  there  any  such 
strife  among  us  here?  If  so,  how  utterly  unworthy  are  we  to  be  the 
disciples  of  such  a  Master  as  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ! 

25,  26.  And  he  said  unto  them,  The  Icings  of  the  Oentiles  exercise  lordship 
over  them;  and  they  that  exercise  authority  upon  them  are  called  benefactors. 
But  ye  shall  not  be  so  :  but  he  that  is  greatest  among  you,  let  him  be  as  the 
younger;  and  he  that  is  chief,  as  he  that  doth  serve. 

You  know,  brethren,  that  it  always  will  be  so.  If  a  man  tries  to  be 
great  in  the  church,  somehow  or  other  his  brethren  generally  think  very 
little  of  him  ;  but  he  who  is  willing  to  serve,— whose  one  ambition  it  is 
to  lay  himself  out  for  the  glory  of  his  Master,  and  for  the  general  good,— 
that  man  usually  has  a  great  deal  more  honour  than  he  would  have 
expected  to  receive.  The  way  to  be  great  in  the  church  is  to  be  serviceable 
to  all  around  us,  to  be  meek  and  lowly,  to  be  williog  to  wait  upon  others. 
We  have  good  reason  for  being  the  servants  of  our  brethren  when  we 
remember  the  humble  position  that  our  Lord  himself  assumed. 

27.  For  whether  is  greater,  he  that  sitteth  at  meat,  or  he  that  serveth  ?  is 
not  he  that  sitteth  at  meat  ?  but  I  am  among  you  as  he  that  serueth. 

He  served  in  the  very  humblest  capacity,  for  did  he  not  even  wash  the 
disciples'  feet  ?  And  if  he,  who  was  the  greatest  of  all,  thus  condescended 
to  perform  the  lowliest  service,  who  among  us  shall  be  so  lifted  up  as  to 
suppose  that  no  common  work  is  good  enough  for  him  ?  Brethren,  we 
must  be  humble,  or  else  we  shall  be  humbled.  And  let  me  remark  that 
the  latter  experience  is  by  no  means  a  pleasant  one,  while  the  former 
experience  is  most  sweet  and  gracious.  God  give  us  the  grace  to  be 
humble ! 

28—30.  Ye  are  they  which  have  continued  with  me  in  my  temptations. 
And  1  appoint  unto  you  a  kingdom,  as  my  Father  hath  appointed  unto  me ; 
that  ye  may  eat  and  drink  at  my  table  in  my  kingdom,  and  sit  on  thrones 
judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel. 

Yes,  there  are  thrones  and  a  kingdom  for  those  who  are  faithful  to  the 
King  of  kings  ;  but  there  is  something  else  to  think  of  beside  that  kind  of 
glory,  for  notice  our  Saviour's  next  words : — 

31.  And  the  Lord  said,  Simon,  Simon,  behold,  Satan  hath  desired  to  have 
you,  that  he  may  sift  you  as  wheat  : 

And  between  us  and  the  kingdom  there  will  be  struggles  and  dangers; 
and  watchfulness  and  wrestling  prayer  will  be  required  of  us.  And  hero 
is  our  only  hope  of  escape  from  the  perils  of  the  way,  as  it  was  with  poor 
Peter  :— 

32—34.  But  I  have  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not:  and  ivhen 
thou  art  converted,  strengthen  thy  brethren.  And  he  said  unto  hint.  Lord,  I  am 
read II  to  go  ivith  thee,  both  into  prison,  and  to  death.  And  he  said,  I  tell  thee, 
Peter,  the  cock  shall  not  crow  this  day,  before  that  thou  shalt  thrice  deny  that 
thou  knoivest  me. 

Though  Peter  did  not  really  know  himself,  Christ  knew  him.  That  is 
one  of  our  comforts, — that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  foresees  all  future  ill, 


120  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

and"  80  proTides  against  it ;  he  looks  down  into  our  nature,  and  aeais  with 
us  as  we  need  to  be  dealt  with.     It  is  well  for  us  that  we  ar«  in  his  hands. 

35 — 40.  And  he  mid  unto  them,  When  I  sent  you  without  purse,  and  scripj 
and  shoes,  lacked  ye  any  thing  f  And  they  said.  Nothing.  Then  said  he  unto 
them,  But  now,  he  that  hath  a  purse,  let  him  take  it,  and  likewise  his  scrip  : 
and  he  that  hath  no  sword,  let  him  sell  his  garment,  and  buy  one.  For  I  say 
unto  you,  that  this  that  is  written  must  yet  be  accomplished  in  me.  And  he  was 
reckoned  among  the  transgressors :  for  the  things  concerning  me  have  an  end. 
And  they  said,  Lord,  behold,  here  are  two  swords.  And  he  said  unto  them.  It 
is  enough.  And  he  came  out,  and  went,  as  he  was  wont,  to  the  mount  of 
Olives;  and  his  disciples  also  followed  him.  And  when  he  was  at  the  placet 
he  said  unto  them,  Pray  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation. 

Or,  "  into  trial."  We  do  not  often  enough  present  that  petition,  "  Lead 
us  not  into  temptation."  We  are  not  able  to  bear  temptation  if  it  goes 
beyond  a  certain  point ;  and  it  is  a  greater  mercy  to  escape  temptation 
than  it  is  to  pass  through  it,  and  to  overcome  it.  I  mean,  of  course,  only 
in  some  respects.  We  may  ask  to  be  delivered  from  the  evil  one,  if  we 
must  be  tempted  by  him ;  but  our  first  prayer  should  be  that  we  may  not 
snter  into  temptation. 

41,  42.  And  he  was  withdrawn  from  them  about  a  stoneU  cast,  and  kneeled 
down,  and  prayed,  saying,  Father,  if  thou  be  willing^  remove  this  cup  from 
me  :  nevertheless  not  my  will,  but  thine,  be  done. 

We  can  read  these  words  in  a  calm,  quiet  tone  ;  but  they  were  uttered 
by  our  Lord  with  an  intensity  of  agony  which  we  can  scarcely  call  up 
before  our  mind's  eye.  So  terrible  was  that  agony,  that  our  Saviour 
became  utterly  weak  and  faint  through  the  intensity  of  his  pleading. 

43.  44.  And  there  appeared  an  angel  unto  him  from  heaven^  strengthening 
him.     And  being  in  an  agony  he  prayed  more  earnestly  : 

More  and  more  intense  was  that  brief  prayer  as  his  supplication  waf 
continued. 

44.  And  his  sweat  was  cu  it  were  great  drops  of  blood  falling  down  to  the 
ground. 

Luke  was  a  physician,  you  know,  so  he  was  the  most  likely  one  to  record 
this  phenomenon.  It  has  happened — so  we  have  been  told, — to  some  other 
persons  in  intense  fright  or  agony,  that  their  sweat  has  been  tinged  with 
blood;  but  we  never  remember  reading  or  hearing  of  anyone  but  our 
Lord  of  whom  it  could  be  said,  **  His  sweat  was  as  it  were  great  drops  of 
blood  falling  down  to  the  ground." 

45.  And  when  he  rose  up  from  prayer,  and  was  come  to  his  disciples,  he 
found  them  sleeping  for  sorrow, 

Great  sorrow  may  have  quite  opposite  effects  upon  different  men.  You 
have,  perhaps,  sometimes  noticed  that  intoxication  produces  upon  some 
men  exactly  the  opposite  effect  to  that  which  it  produces  upon  others ; 
some  become  irritable  and  noisy,  while  others  become  taciturn  and  quiet. 
It  is  also  quite  a  matter  of  fact  that  great  sorrow  has  various  effects  upon 
different  minds.  In  the  Saviour's  case,  it  aroused  him  to  an  awful  agony 
of  earnestness  in  prayer.     In  the  disciples'  case,  it  sent  them  to  sleep. 

46.  And  said  unto  them.  Why  sleep  ye  f  rise  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into 
temptation. 

The  great  trial  for  them,  as  well  as  for  their  Lord,  was  close  at  hand 
then.  It  was  late  at  night,  and  they  were  drowsy  and  sleepy ;  yet  no 
time  is  amiss  for  supplication.  Prayer  is  never  out  of  season,  and  never 
unnecessary.  We  never  know  when  temptation  is  near,  so  let  us  pray 
without  ceasing  to  him  who  is  able  to  preserve  us  from  temptation,  or  to 
delivtr  us  out  of  it. 


GETHSBMANE. 


Dblivbbbd  on  Sunday  Mobnino,  Febeuabt  8th,  1868,  bt  thi 

REV.  C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,   NBWINGTON. 


"And  being  in  an  agony  he  prayed  more  earnestly:  and  his  sweat  was  as  it  wert 
great  drops  of  blood  falling  down  to  the  ground." — Luke  xxii.  44. 

Few  had  fellowship  with  the  sorrows  of  Gethsemane.     The  majority 
of  the  disciples  were  not  there.    They  were  not  sufficiently  advanced  in 
grace  to  be  admitted  to  behold  the  mysteries  of  "  the  agony."   Occupied 
with  the  passover  feast  at  their  own  houses,  they  represent  the  many 
who  live  upon  the  letter,  but  are  mere  babes  and  sucklings  as  to  the 
spirit  of  the  gospel.    The  walls  of  Gethsemane  fitly  typify  that  weak- 
ness in  grace  which  effectually  shuts  in  the  deeper  marvels  of  communion 
from  the  gaze  of  ordinary  believers.    To  twelve,  nay,  to  eleven  only  was 
the  privilege  given  to  enter  Gethsemane  and  see  this  great  sight.     Out 
of  the  eleven,  eight  were  left  at  some  distance ;  they  had  fellowship,  but 
not  of  that  intimate  sort  to  which  the  men  greatly  beloved  are  admitted. 
Only  three  highly  favoured  ones,  who  had  been  with  him  on  the  mount 
of  transfiguration,  and  had  witnessed  the  life-giving  miracle  in  the  house 
of  Jairus— only  these  three  could  approach  the  veil  of  his  mysterious 
sorrow:  within  that  veil  even  these  must  not  intrude;  a  stone's-cast  dis- 
tance must  be  left  between.    He  must  tread  the  wine-press  alone,  and  of 
the  people  there  must  be  none  with  him.     Peter  and  the  two  sons  of 
Zebedee,  represent  the  few  eminent,  experienced,  grace-taught  saints, 
who  may  be  written  down  as  "  Fathers ;"  these  having  done  business  on 
great  waters,  can  in  some  degree,  measure  the  huge  Atlantic  waves  of  their 
Redeemer's  passion ;  having  been  much  alone  with  him,  they  can  read 
his  heart  far  better  than  those  who  merely  see  him  amid  the  crowd. 
To  some  selected  spirits  it  is  given,  for  the  good  of  others,  and  to 
strengthen  them  for  some  future,  special,  and  tremendous  conflict,  to 
enter' the  inner  circle  and  hear  the  pleadings  of  the  suffering  High 
Priest;  they  have  fellowship  with  him  in  his  sufferings,  and  are  made 
conformable  unto  his  death.     Yet  I  say,  even  these,  the  elect  out 
of  the  elect,  these  choice  and  peculiar  favourites  among  the  king's 
courtiers,  even  these  cannot  penetrate  the  secret  places  of  the  Saviour's 
woe,  so  as  to  comprehend  all  his  agonies.    "  Thine  unknown  sufferings" 

"No.  493. 


122  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

is  the  remarkable  expression  of  the  Greek  liturgy;  for  there  is  an  inner 
chamber  in  his  grief,  shut  out  from  human  knowledge  and  fellowship, 
Was  it  not  here  that  Christ  was  more  than  ever  an  "  tjnspeakable  gift  * 
to  us  ?     Is  not  Watts  right  when  he  sings — 

"  And  all  the  unknown  joys  he  gives, 
Were  bought  with  agonies  unknown," 

Since  it  would  not  be  possible  for  any  believer,  however  experienced,  to 
know  for  himself  all  that  our  Lord  endured  in  the  place  of  the  olive- 
press,  when  he  was  crushed  beneath  the  upper  and  the  nether  mill-stone 
of  mental  suffering  and  hellish  malice,  it  is  clearly  far  beyond  the 
preacher's  capacity  to  set  it  forth  to  you.  Jesus  himself  must  give  ycu 
access  to  the  wonders  of  Gethsemane :  as  for  me,  I  can  but  invite  you 
to  enter  the  garden,  bidding  you  put  your  shoes  from  off  your  feet, 
for  the  place  whereon  we  stand  is  holy  ground.  I  am  neither  Peter, 
nor  James,  nor  John,  but  one  who  would  fain  like  them  drink  of 
the  Master's  cup,  and  be  baptized  with  his  baptism.  I  have  hitherto  ad- 
vanced only  so  far  as  yonder  band  of  eight,  but  there  I  have  listened  to 
the  deep  groanings  of  the  man  of  sorrows.  Some  of  you,  my  venerable 
friends,  may  have  learned  far  more  than  I;  but  you  will  not  refuse  to 
hear  again  the  roarings  of  the  many  waters  which  strove  to  quench  the 
love  of  the  Great  Husband  of  our  souls. 

Several  matters  will  require  our  brief  consideration.      Come  Holy 
Spirit,  breathe  light  into  our  thoughts,  life  into  our  words. 

I.    Come  hither  and  behold  the  Saviour's  unutterable  woe. 

The  emotions  of  that  dolorous  night  are  expressed  by  several  words 
in  Scripture.  John  describes  him  as  saying  four  days  before  his  passion, 
■*Now  is  my  soul  troubled,"  as  he  marked  the  gathering  clouds  he 
hardly  knew  where  to  turn  himself,  and  cried  out  "  What  shall  I  say  ?'» 
Matthew  writes  of  him,  "  he  began  to  be  sorrowful  and  very  heavy."  Upon 
the  word  a^rjfxoyeiy  translated  "  very  heavy,"  Goodwin  remarks  that  there 
was  a  distraction  in  the  Saviour's  agony  since  the  root  of  the  word 
signifies  "  separated  from  the  people— men  in  distraction,  being  sepa- 
rated from  mankind."  What  a  thought,  my  brethren,  that  our  blessed 
Lord  should  be  driven  to  the  very  verge  of  distraction  by  the  intensity 
of  his  anguish.  Matthew  represents  the  Saviour  himself  as  saying  "  My 
soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto  death."  Here  the  word  UepiXvTroQ 
means  encompassed,  encircled,  overwhelmed  with  grief.  "He  was 
plunged  head  and  ears  in  soitow  and  had  no  breathing-hole,"  is  the 
strong  expression  of  Goodwin.  Sin  leaves  no  cranny  for  comfort  to 
enter,  and  therefore  the  sin-bearer  must  be  entirely  immersed  in  woe. 
Mark  records  that  he  began  to  be  sore  amazed,  and  to  be  very  heavy. 
In  this  case  ea/i^tio-flai,  with  the  prefix  ek,  shews  extremity  of 
amazement  like  that  of  Moses  when  he  did  exceedingly  fear  and  quake. 
0  blessed  Saviour,  how  can  we  bear  to  think  of  thee  as  a  man 
astonished  and  alarmed !  Yet  was  it  even  so  when  the  terrors  of 
God  set  themselves  in  array  against  thee.  Luke  uses  the  strong  lan- 
guage of  my  text — "  being  in  an  agony."  These  expressions,  each  of 
them  worthy  to  be  the  theme  of  a  discourse,  are  quite  sufficient  to  show 
that  the  grief  of  the  Saviour  was  of  the  most  extraordinary  character  ,• 


GBTHSEMABE. 


well  iustifving  the  prophetic  exclamation  "Behold  and  see  if  there  be 
Tny  sCoi  like  unto 'my  sorrow  which  was  done  unto  me.'  He 
rtauds  before  us  peerless  in  misery.  None  are  molested  by  the  powers 
of  evil  as  he  was  ;  as  if  the  powers  of  hell  had  given  commandment  to 
theti  legions,  "Fight  neither  with  small  nor  great,  save  only  with  the 

*"  ShouM  we  profess  to  understand  all  the  sources  of  our  Lord's  agony, 
.istm  would%uke  us  with  the  question  "  Hast  thou  entered  mto  he 
sra-in<'s  of  the  sea  ?  or  hast  thou  walked  in  search  of  the  depths  .  we 
cannot  do  more  than  look  at  the  revealed  causes  of  grief.  It  partly  arose 
from  he  Crorof  his  soul  when  fully  comprelwnding  llw  rn^nmg  oj 
T  Brethren,  when  you  were  first  convinced  of  s  n  and  saw  it  as  a  thmg 
:i";ed1ng  sinful,  though  your  perception  of  its  ^'■^/"Ijje^.^^^^^"^  '^^ 
comoared  with  its  real  heinousness,  yet  horror  took  hold  upon  you. 
1)0  Pfemember  those  sleepless  nights  ?  Like  the  Psalmist  you  s^d 
"Mv  bones  waxed  old  through  my  roarmg  all  the  day  ong  fo  day 
and'night  thv  hand  was  heavy  upon  me  ;  my  moisture  is  turned  wo  the 
drou-ht  of  summer."  Some  of  us  can  remember  when  our  sou  s  chose 
stran^linn-  rather  than  life  ;  when  if  the  shadows  of  death  could  have 
'ove red  us  from  the  wrath  of  God  we  would  have  been  too  glad  to 
^^uin  le  grave  that  we  might  not  make  our  bed  in  hel .  Oar  blessed 
ord  aw  sin'in  its  natural  blackness.  He  had  a  most  distinct  percep- 
tionof  its  treasonable  assault  upon  his  God,  its  '»?>^derous  hatied  to 
himself,  and  its  destructive  influence  upon  mankmd.  Well  might 
hon?,i  take  hold  upon  him,  for  a  sight  of  sin  must  be  far  more  hideous 
than  a  sight  of  hell,  which  is  but  its  offspring. 

Another  deep  fountain  of  grief  was  found  m  the  fact  that  Chust  now 
assumed  more  fully  his  official  position  with  regard  to  sm.  He  was  now 
made  sin.  Hear  the  word  !  he,  who  knew  no  sin,  w'as  made  ««&'". 
that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him.  In  that  night 
the  words  of  Isaiah  were  fulfilled-"  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  h.m  tl  e 
mquity  of  us  all."  Now  he  stood  as  the  sm-bearer,  the  subs  tute 
accepted  by  Divine  justice  to  bear  that  we  might  never  bear  the  «hole 
^  wrath  divine.  At  that  hour  heaven  looked  on  him  as  standing  in  the 
sinner's  stead,  and  treated  as  sinful  man  had  richly  deserved  o  b, 
treated.  Oh  !  dear  friends,  when  the  immaculate  Lamb  of  God  toan^ 
himself  in  the  place  of  the  guilty,  when  he  could  not  «P"dif  ^  'hat  place 
because  he  had  voluntarily  accepted  it  in  order  to  save  his  chosen  vvliat 
must  his  soul  have  felt,  how  must  his  perfect  nature  have  been  shocked 
at  such  close  association  with  iniquity  .' 

We  believe  that  at  this  time,  our  Lord  had  a  very  clear  view  of 
M  th,  sharm  and  suffering  of  hts  crucifixion.  The  agony  was  but  on^^^ 
of  the  first  drops  of  the  tremendous  shower  which  dischaiged  itselt 
upon  his  head.  He  foresaw  the  speedy  coming  of  the  Wor-discipH 
the  seizure  by  the  officers,  the  mock-trials  before  the  Sanhedrim,  and 
■  Pilate,  and  Herod,  the  scourging  and  buffeting,  the  crown  of  thorns  the 
shame  the  spitting.  All  these  rose  up  before  his  mind,  and,  as  it  is  a 
general  law  of  our^nature  that  the  foresight  of  tnal  is  more  grievous 
than  trial  itself,  we  can  conceive  how  i^-  was  that  he  who  answeied  not 
9  word  when  in  the  midst  of  the  conflict,  could  not  restrain  himself 


124 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


from  strong  crying  and  tears  in  the  prospect  of  it.  Beloved  friends,  if 
you  can  revive  before  your  mind's  eye  the  terrible  incidents  of  his  death, 
the  hounding  through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem,  the  nailing  to  the  cross, 
the  fever,  the  thirst,  and,  above  all,  the  forsaking  of  his  God,  you  cannot 
marvel  that  he  began  to  be  very  heavy,  and  was  sore  amazed. 

But  possibly  a  yet  more  fruitful  tree  of  bitterness  was  this — that  now 
his  Father  began  to  withdraw  his  presence  from  him.  The  shadow  of 
that  great  eclipse  began  to  fall  upon  his  spirit  when  he  knelt  in  that  cold 
midnight  amidst  the  olives  of  Gethsemane.  The  sensible  comforts  which 
had  cheered  his  spirit  were  taken  away;  that  blessed  application  of 
promises  which  Christ  Jesus  needed  as  a  man,  was  removed ;  all  that  we 
understand  by  the  term  *'  consolations  of  God"  were  hidden  from  his 
eyes.  He  was  left  single-handed  in  his  weakness  to  contend  for  the 
deliverance  of  man.  The  Lord  stood  by  as  if  he  were  an  indifferent 
spectator,  or  rather,  as  if  he  were  an  adversary,  he  wounded  him  "  with 
the  wound  of  an  enemy,  with  the  chastisement  of  a  cruel  one." 

But  in  our  judgment  the  fiercest  heat  of  the  Saviour's  suffering  in  the 
garden  lay  in  the  temptations  of  Satan.  That  hour  above  any  time  in 
his  life,  even  beyond  the  forty  days'  conflict  in  the  wilderness,  was  the 
time  of  his  temptation.  "  This  is  your  hour  and  the  power  of  darkness." 
Now  could  he  emphatically  say,  "  The  prince  of  this  world  cometh." 
This  was  his  last  hand-to-hand  fight  with  all  the  hosts  of  hell,  and 
here  must  he  sweat  great  drops  of  blood  before  the  victory  can  be 
achieved. 

We  have  glanced  at  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  which  were  broken 
up  when  the  floods  of  grief  deluged  the  Redeemer's  soul.  Brethren, 
this  one  lesson  ere  we  pass  from  the  contemplation.  "  We  have  not  an 
high  priest  which  cannot  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities; 
but  was  in  all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin.  Let  us 
therefore  come  boldly  unto  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  obtain 
mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need."  Let  us  reflect  that  no 
suffering  can  be  unknown  to  him.  We  do  but  run  with  footmen — he 
had  to  contend  with  horsemen ;  we  do  but  wade  up  to  our  ankles  in 
shallow  streams  of  sorrow — ^he  had  to  buffet  with  the  swellings  of 
Jordan.  He  will  never  fail  to  succour  his  people  when  tempted ;  even 
as  it  was  said  of  old,  "  In  all  their  affliction  he  was  afflicted,  and  the 
angel  of  his  presence  saved  them." 

II.    Turn  we  next  to  contemplate  the  temptation  op  oue  Lord. 

At  the  outset  of  his  career,  the  serpent  began  to  nibble  at  the  heel 
of  the  promised  deliverer;  and  now  as  the  time  approached  when  the 
seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head,  that  old  dragon 
made  a  desperate  attempt  upon  his  great  destroyer.  It  is  not  possible 
for  us  to  lift  the  veil  where  revelation  has  permitted  it  to  fall,  but  we 
can  form  some  faint  idea  of  the  suggestions  with  which  Satan  tempted 
our  Lord.  Let  us,  however,  remark  by  way  of  caution,  before  we  attempt 
to  paint  this  picture,  that  whatever  Satan  may  have  suggested  to  our 
Lord,  his  perfect  nature  did  not  in  any  degree  whatever  submit  to  it  so  as 
to  sin.  The  temptations  were,  doubtless,  of  the  very  foulest  character,  but 
they  left  no  speck  or  flaw  upon  him,  who  remained  still  the  fairest  among 
ten  thousand.    The  prince  of  this  world  came,  but  he  had  nothing  in 


GETHSBMANE. 


125 


Christ.  He  struck  the  sparks,  but  they  did  not  fall,  as  in  our  case,  upon 
dry  tinder  ;  they  fell  as  into  the  sea,  and  were  quenched  at  once.  He 
hurled  the  fiery  arrows,  but  they  could  not  even  scar  the  flesh  of 
Christ;  they  smote  upon  the  buckler  of  his  perfectly  righteous  nature, 
and  they  fell  off  with  their  points  broken,  to  the  discomfiture  of  the 

adversary. 

But  what,  think  you,  were  these  temptations  ?  It  strikes  me,  from 
some  hints  given,  that  they  were  somewhat  as  follows— there  was,  first, 
a  temptation  to  leave  the  work  unfinished;  we  may  gather  this  from  the 
prayer—"  If  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me."  "  Son  ot  b-od, 
the  tempter  said,  "is  it  so?  Art  thou  really  called  to  bear  the  sm  of 
man  ?  Hath  God  said,  '  I  have  laid  help  upon  one  that  is  mighty,'  and 
art  thou  he,  the  chosen  of  God,  to  bear  all  this  load?  Look  at  thy 
weakness  !  Thou  sweatest,  even  now,  great  drops  of  blood ;  surely  thou 
art  not  he  whom  the  Father  hath  ordained  to  be  mighty  to  save ;  or  if 
thou  be,  what  wilt  thou  win  by  it?  AVhat  will  it  avail  thee?  Thou  hast 
glory  enough  already.  See  what  miscreants  they  are  for  whom  thou  art 
to  offer  up  thyself  a  sacrifice.  Thy  best  friends  are  asleep  about  thee 
when  most  thou  needest  their  comfort;  thy  treasurer,  Judas,  is  hastening 
to  betray  thee  for  the  price  of  a  common  slave.  The  world  for  whicli 
thou  sacrificest  thyself  will  cast  out  thy  name  as  evil,  and  thy  Church, 
for  which  thou  dost  pay  the  ransom-price,  what  is  it  worth?  A  company 
of  mortals!  Thy  divinity  could  create  the  like  any  moment  it  pleaseth 
thee ;  why  needest  thou,  then,  pour  out  thy  soul  unto  death  ?"  Such 
arguments  would  Satan  use ;  the  hellish  craft  of  one  who  had  tlien  been 
thousands  of  years  tempting  men,  would  know  how  to  invent  all  manner 
of  mischief.  He  would  pour  the  hottest  coals  of  hell  upon  the  Saviour. 
It  was  in  struggling  with  this  temptation,  among  others,  that,  being 
in  an  agony,  our  Saviour  prayed  more  earnestly.  -,    ,   .  • 

Scripture  implies  that  our  Lord  was  assailed  by  the  fear  that  his 
strength  ivould  not  le  sufficient.  He  was  heard  in  that  he  feared. 
How,  then,  was  he  heard?  An  angel  was  sent  unto  him  strengthening 
him.  His  fear,  then,  was  probably  produced  by  a  sense  of  weakness. 
I  imagine  that  the  foul  fiend  would  whisper  in  his  ear— "  Thou !  thou 
endure  to  be  smitten  of  God  and  abhorred  of  men !  Reproach  hath 
broken  thy  heart  already ;  how  wilt  thou  bear  to  be  publicly  put  to 
shame  and  driven  without  the  citv  as  an  unclean  thing  ?  How  wilt 
thou  bear  to  see  thy  weeping  kinsfolk  and  thy  broken-hearted  mother 
standino-  at  the  foot  of  thy  cross  ?  Thy  tender  and  sensitive  spirit  will 
quail  under  it.  As  for  thy  body,  it  is  already  emaciated;  thy  long 
fastings  have  brought  thee  very  low  ;  thou  wilt  become  a  prey  to  death 
lono-  ere  thy  work  is  done.  Thou  ^vilt  surely  fail.  God  hath  forsaken 
thee.  Now  will  they  persecute  ana  take  thee ;  they  will  give  up  thy 
soul  to  the  lion,  and  thy  darling  to  the  power  of  the  dog."  Then  would 
he  picture  all  the  sufferings  of  crucifixion,  and  say,  "Can  thine  heart 
endure,  or  can  thine"  hands  be  strong  in  the  day  when  the  Lord  shall 
deal  with  thee  ?"  The  telnptation  of  Satan  was  not  directed  against  the 
Godhead,  but  the  manhood  of  Christ,  and  therefore  the  fiend  would  pro- 
bably dwell  upon  the  feebleness  of  man.  "  Didst  thou  not  say  thyself, 
'  I  am  a  worm  and  no  man,  the  reproach  of  men  and  the  despised  of  the 


126  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

people  ? '  How  wilt  thou  bear  it  when  the  wrath-clouds  of  God 
gather  about  thee  ?  The  tempest  will  surely  shipwreck  all  thy  hopes. 
It  cannot  be ;  thou  canst  not  drink  of  this  cup,  nor  be  baptized  with 
this  baptism."  In  this  manner,  we  think,  was  our  Master  tried.  But  see 
he  yields  not  to  it.  Being  in  an  agony,  which  word  means  in  a  wrest^ 
ling,  he  struggles  with  the  tempter  like  Jacob  with  the  angel.  "  Nay," 
saith  he,  "  I  will  not  be  subdued  by  taunts  of  my  weakness;  I  am  strong 
in  the  strength  of  my  Godhead,  I  will  overcome  thee  yet."  Yet  was 
the  temptation  so  awful,  that,  in  order  to  master  it,  his  mental  depres- 
sion caused  him  to  "sweat  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood  falling  down 
to  the  ground." 

Possibly,  also,  the  temptation  may  have  arisen  from  a  suggestion  thai 
he  was  utterhj  forsaken.  I  do  not  know — there  may  be  sterner  trials 
than  this,  but  surely  this  is  one  of  the  worst,  to  be  utterly  forsaken. 
"  See,"  said  Satan,  as  he  hissed  it  out  between  his  teeth — "  see,  thou 
hast  a  friend  nowhere  !  Look  up  to  heaven,  thy  Father  hath  shut  up 
the  bowels  of  his  compassion  against  thee.  Not  an  angel  in  thy  Father's 
courts  will  stretch  out  his  hand  to  help  thee.  Look  thou  yonder,  not 
one  of  those  spirits  who  honoured  thy  birth  will  interfere  to  protect  thy 
life.  All  heaven  is  false  to  thee ;  thou  art  left  alone.  And  as  for  earth, 
do  not  all  men  thirst  for  thy  blood  ?  Will  not  the  Jew  be  gratified  to 
see  thy  flesh  torn  with  nails,  and  will  not  the  Roman  gloat  himself  when 
thou,  the  King  of  the  Jews,  art  fastened  to  the  cross  ?  Thou  hast  no 
friend  among  the  nations;  the  high  and  mighty  scoff  at  thee,  and  the 
poor  thrust  out  their  tongues  in  derision.  Thou  hadst  not  where  to  lay 
thy  head  when  thou  wast  in  thy  best  estate;  thou  hast  no  place  now 
where  shelter  will  be  given  thee.  See  the  companions  with  whom  thou 
hast  taken  sweet  counsel,  what  are  they  worth?  Son  of  Mary,  see  there 
thy  brother  James,  see  there  thy  loved  disciple  John,  and  thy  bold 
Apostle  Peter — they  sleep,  the^  sleep;  and  yonder  eight,  how  the  cowards 
sleep  when  thou  art  in  thy  sufferings  !  And  where  are  the  four  hundred 
others?  They  have  forgotten  thee;  they  will  be  at  their  farms  and  their 
merchandize  by  morning.  Lo !  thou  hast  no  friend  left  in  heaven  or  earth. 
All  hell  is  against  thee.  I  have  stirred  up  mine  infernal  den.  I  have  sent 
my  missives  throughout  all  regions  summoning  every  prince  of  darkness 
Co  set  upon  thee  this  night,  and  we  will  spare  no  arrows,  we  will  use  all 
our  infernal  might  to  overwhelm  thee;  and  what  wilt  thou  do,  thou 
solitary  one?"  It  may  be,  this  was  the  temptation;  I  think  it 
was,  because  the  appearance  of  an  angel  unto  him  strengthening  him 
removed  that  fear.  He  was  heard  in  that  he  feared;  he  was  no 
more  alone,  but  heaven  was  with  him.  It  may  be  that  this  is  the 
reason  of  his  coming  three  times  to  his  disciples — as  Hart  puts  it — 

"  Backwards  and  forwards  thrice  he  ran, 
As  if  he  sought  some  help  from  man." 

He  would  see  for  himself  whether  it  was  really  true  that  all  men  had 
forsaken  him ;  he  found  them  all  asleep ;  bul  perhaps  he  gained  some 
faint  comfort  from  the  thought  that  they  were  sleeping,  not  from 
treachery,  but  from  sorrow,  the  spirit  indeed  was  willing,  but  the  flesh 
was  weak. 


GETHSEMANE.  127 

We  think  Satan  also  assaulted  our  Lord  with  a  bitter  taunt  indeed. 
You  know  in  what  guise  the  tempter  can  dress  it,  and  how  bitterly 
sarcastic  he  can  make  the  insinuation — ''Ah!  thou  wilt  not  he  able 
to  achieve  the  redemption  of  thy  people.  Thy  grand  benevolence  will 
prove  a  mockery,  and  thy  beloved  ones  will  perish.  Thou  shalt  not 
prevail  to  save  them  from  my  grasp.  Thy  scattered  sheep  shall  surely 
be  my  prey.  Son  of  David,  I  am  a  match  for  thee ;  thou  canst  not 
deliver  out  of  my  hand.  Many  of  thy  chosen  have  entered  heaven  on 
the  strength  of  thine  atonement,  but  I  will  drag  them  thence,  and 
quench  the  stars  of  glory ;  I  will  thin  the  courts  of  heaven  of  the  cho- 
risters of  God,  for  thou  wilt  not  fulfil  thy  suretyship ;  thou  canst  not 
do  it.  Thou  art  not  able  to  bring  up  all  this  great  people ;  they  will 
perish  yet.  See,  are  not  the  sheep  scattered  now  that  the  Shepherd 
is  smitten  ?  They  will  all  forget  thee.  Thou  wilt  never  see  of  the 
travail  of  thy  soul.  Thy  desired  end  will  never  be  reached.  Thou 
wilt  be  for  ever  the  man  that  began  to  build  but  was  not  able 
to  finish."  Perhaps  this  is  more  truly  the  reason  why  Christ  went 
three  times  to  look  at  his  disciples.  You  have  seen  a  mother  ; 
she  is  very  faint,  weary  with  a  heavy  sickness,  but  she  labours  under 
a  sore  dread  that  her  child  will  die.  She  has  started  from  her  couch,, 
upon  which  disease  had  thrown  her,  to  snatch  a  moment's  rest. 
She  gazes  anxiously  upon  her  child.  She  marks  the  faintest  sign  of 
recovery.  But  she  is  sore  sick  herself,  and  cannot  remain  more  than  an 
instant  from  her  own  bed.  She  cannot  sleep,  she  tosses  painfully,  for 
her  thoughts  wander;  she  rises  to  gaze  again — "How  art  thou,  my 
child,  how  art  thou  ?  Are  those  palpitations  of  thy  heart  less  violent  "^ 
Is  thy  pulse  more  gentle  ?"  But,  alas  !  she  is  faint,  and  she  must  go  to 
her  bed  again,  yet  she  can  get  no  rest.  She  will  return  again  and 
again  to  watch  the  loved  one.  So,  methinks,  Christ  looked  upon  Peter 
and  James,  and  John,  as  much  as  to  say,  "  No,  they  are  not  all  lost  yet; 
there  are  three  left  "  and,  looking  upon  them  as  the  type  of  all  the 
Church,  he  seemed  to  say — "  No,  no  ;  I  will  overcome ;  I  will  get  the 
mastery ;  I  will  struggle  even  unto  blood ;  I  will  pay  the  ransom-price, 
and  deliver  my  darlings  from  their  foe." 

Now  these,  methinks,  were  his  temptations.  If  you  can  form  a  fuller 
idea  of  what  they  were  than  this,  then  right  happy  shall  I  be.  With 
this  one  lesson  I  leave  the  point — "  Pray  that  ye  enter  not  into  tempta- 
tion" This  is  Christ's  own  expression;  his  own  deduction  from  hi& 
trial.  You  have  all  read,  dear  friends,  John  Bunyan's  picture  of  Chris 
tian  fighting  with  ApoUyon.  That  master-painter  has  sketched  it  to  the 
very  life.  He  says,  though  "  this  sore  combat  lasted  for  above  half  a 
day,  even  till  Christian  was  almost  quite  spent,  I  never  saw  him  all  the 
while  give  so  much  as  one  pleasant  look,  till  he  perceived  he  had 
wounded  Apollyon  with  his  two-edged  sword;  then,  indeed,  he  did 
smile  and  look  upward !  But  it  was  the  dreadfullest  sight  I  ever  saw.'^ 
That  is  the  meaning  of  that  prayer,  "  Lead  us  not  into  temptation."  Oh 
you  that  go  recklessly  where  you  are  tempted,  you  that  pray  for  afflic- 
tions— and  I  have  known  some  silly  enough  to  do  that — ^you  that  put 
yourselves  where  you  tempt  the  devil  to  tempt  you,  take  heed  from  the 
Master's  own  example.     He  sweats  great  drops  of  blood  when  he  is 


128  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

tempted.  Oh !  pray  God  to  spare  you  such  a  trial.  Pray  this  morning 
and  every  day,  "  Lead  me  not  into  temptation." 

III.    Behold,  dear  brethren,  the  bloody  sweat. 

We  read,  that  "  he  sweat  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood."  Hence 
a  few  writers  have  supposed  that  the  sweat  was  not  actually  blood, 
but  had  the  appearance  of  it.  That  interpretation,  however,  has  been 
rejected  by  most  commentators,  from  Augustine  downward,  and  it  is 
generally  held  that  the  words  "as  it  were"  do  not  only  set  forth  likeness 
to  blood,  but  signify  that  it  was  actually  and  literally  blood.  We  find 
the  same  idiom  used  in  the  text — "  We  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as 
of  the  only-begotten  of  the  Father."  Now,  clearly,  this  does  not  mean 
that  Christ  was  like  the  only-begotten  of  the  Father,  since  he  is  really  so. 
So  that  generally  this  expression  of  Holy  Scripture  sets  forth,  not  a  mere 
likeness  to  a  thing,  but  the  very  thing  itself.  We  believe,  then,  that 
Christ  did  really  sweat  blood.  This  phenomenon,  though  somewhat 
unusual,  has  been  witnessed  in  other  persons.  There  are  several  cases  on 
record,  some  in  the  old  medicine  books  of  Galen,  and  others  of  more 
recent  date,  of  persons  who  after  long  weakness,  under  fear  of  death 
have  sweat  blood.  But  this  case  is  altogether  one  by  itself  for  several 
reasons.  If  you  will  notice,  he  not  only  sweat  blood,  but  it  was  in 
gi-eat  drops ;  the  blood  coagulated,  and  formed  large  masses.  I 
cannot  better  express  what  is  meant  than  by  the  word  "gouts" — big, 
heavy  drops.  This  has  not  been  seen  in  any  case.  Some  slight 
effusions  of  blood  have  been  known  in  cases  of  persons  who  wore 
previously  enfeebled,  but  great  drops  never.  When  it  is  said  "  falling 
to  the  ground" — it  shows  their  copiousness,  so  that  they  not  only 
stood  upon  the  surface  and  were  sucked  up  by  his  garments  till 
he  became  like  the  red  heifer  which  was  slaughtered  on  that 
very  spot,  but  the  drops  fell  to  the  ground.  Here  he  stands  un- 
rivalled. He  was  a  man  in  good  health,  only  about  thirty  years  of 
age,  and  was  labouring  under  no  fear  of  death ;  but  the  mental  pressure 
arising  from  his  struggle  with  temptation,  and  the  straining  of  all  his 
strength,  in  order  to  baffle  the  temptation  of  Satan,  so  forced  his  fi*ame 
to  an  unnatural  excitement,  that  his  pores  sent  forth  great  drops  of  blood 
which  fell  down  to  the  ground.  This  proves  how  tremendous  must  have 
been  the  weight  of  sin. when  it  was  able  so  to  crush  the  Saviour  that  he 
distilled  drops^  of  blood !  Tliis  proves  too,  my  brethren,  the  mighty 
power  of  his  love.  It  is  a  very  pretty  observation  of  old  Isaac  Ambrose 
that  the  gum  which  exudes  from  the  tree  without  cutting  is  always  the 
best.  This  precious  camphire-tree  yielded  most  sweet  spices  when  it 
was  wounded  under  the  knotty  whips,  and  when  it  was  pierced  by  the 
nails  on  the  cross;  but  see,  it  giveth  forth  its  best  spice  when  there  is 
no  whip,  no  nail,  no  wound.  This  sets  forth  the  voluntariness  of  Christ's 
sufferings,  since  without  a  lance  the  blood  flowed  freely.  No  need  to 
put  on  the  leech,  or  apply  the  knife;  it  flows  spontaneously.  No  need 
for  the  rulers  to  cry  "  Spring  up,  0  well;"  of  itself  it  flows  in  crimson 
torrents.  Dearly  beloved  friends,  if  men  suffer  some  frightful  pain  of 
mind — I  am  not  acquainted  with  the  medical  matter — apparently  the 
blood  rushes  to  the  heart.  The  cheeks  are  pale;  a  fainting  fit  comes  on; 
the  blood  has  gone  inward,  as  if  to  nourish  the  inner  man  while  passing 


GBTHSEMANE.  129 

through  its  trial.  But  see  our  Saviour  in  his  agony ;  he  is  so  utterly 
oblivious  of  self,  that  instead  of  his  agony  driving  his  blood  to  the 
heart  to  nourish  himself,  it  drives  it  outward  to  bedew  the  earth.  The 
agony  of  Christ,  inasmuch  as  it  pours  him  out  upon  the  ground,  pictures 
the  fulness  of  the  offering  which  he  made  for  men. 

Do  you  not  perceive,  my  brethren,  how  intense  must  have  been  the 
wrestling  through  which  he  passed,  and  will  you  not  hear  its  voice  to 
you  7 — "  Ye  have  not  yet  resisted  unto  blood,  striving  against  sin."  It 
has  been  the  lot  of  some  of  us  to  have  sore  temptations — else  we  did 
not  know  how  to  teach  others — so  sore  that  in  wrestling  against  them 
the  cold,  clammy  sweat  has  stood  upon  our  brow.  The  place  will 
never  be  forgotten  by  me — a  lonely  spot ;  where,  musing  upon  my  Grod, 
an  awful  rush  of  blasphemy  went  over  ray  soul,  till  I  would  have 
preferred  death  to  the  trial ;  and  I  fell  on  my  knees  there  and  then,  for 
the  agony  was  awful,  while  my,  hand  was  at  my  mouth  to  keep  the 
blasphemies  from  being  spoken.  Once  let  Satan  be  permitted  really  to 
try  you  with  a  temptation  to  blasphemy,  and  you  will  never  forget  it, 
though  you  live  till  your  hairs  are  blanched ;  or  let  him  attack  you  with 
some  lust,  and  though  you  hate  and  loathe  the  very  thought  of  it,  and 
would  lose  your  right  arm  sooner  than  indulge  in  it,  yet  it  will  come, 
and  hunt,  and  persecute,  and  torment  you.  Wrestle  against  it  even 
unto  sweat,  my  brethren,  yea,  even  unto  blood.  None  of  you  should  say, 
"  I  could  not  help  it ;  I  was  tempted."  Resist  till  you  sweat  blood 
rather  than  sin.  Do  not  say,  "  I  was  so  pressed  with  it ;  and  it  so 
suited  my  natural  temperament,  that  I  could  not  help  falling  into  it." 
Look  at  the  great  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  your  profession,  and  sweat 
even  to  blood  rather  than  yield  to  the  great  tempter  of  your  souls. 
Pray  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation,  so  that  when  ye  enter  into 
it  ye  may  with  confidence  say,  "  Lord,  I  did  not  seek  this,  therefore  help 
me  through  with  it,  for  thy  name's  sake." 

IV.     I  want  you,  in  the  fourth  place,  to  notice   the   Saviour's 

PRAYER. 

Dear  friends,  when  we  are  tempted  and  desire  to  overcome,  the 
best  weapon  is  prayer.  When  you  cannot  use  the  sword  and  the  shield, 
take  to  yourself  the  famous  weapon  of  All-prayer.  So  your  Saviour 
did.  Let  us  notice  his  prayer.  It  was  lonely  prayer.  He  withdrew 
even  from  his  three  best  friends  about  a  stone's  cast.  Believer,  espe- 
cially in  temptation,  be  much  in  solitary  prayer.  As  private  prayer  is 
the  key  to  open  heaven,  so  is  it  the  key  to  shut  the  gates  of  hell.  As 
it  is  a  shield  to  prevent,  so  is  it  the  sword  with  which  to  fight  against 
temptation.  Family-prayer,  social  prayer,  prayer  in  the  Church,  will 
not  suffice,  these  are  very  precious,  but  the  best  beaten  spice  will  smoke 
in  your  censer  in  your  private  devotions,  where  no  ear  hears  but  God. 
Betake  yourselves  to  solitude  if  you  would  overcome. 

Mark,  too,  it  was  humile  prayer.  Luke  says  h<L,  knelt,  but  another 
evangelist  says  he  fell  on  his  face.  What!  does  the  King  fall  on  his 
face?  Where,  then,  must  be  thy  place,  thou  humble  servant  of  the 
great  Master?  Doth  the  Prince  fall  flat  to  the  ground?  Where,  then, 
wilt  thou  lie?  What  dust  and  ashes  shall  cover  thy  head?  What 
sackcloth  shall  gird  thy  loins?     Humility  gives  us  good  foot-hold  in 


180  METROPOLITAN   TABERXAOLE   PULPIT. 

grayer.    There  is  no  hope  of  any  real  prevalence  with  God,  who  casteth 
own  the  proud,  unless  we  abase  ourselves  that  he  may  exalt  us  in  due 
time. 

Further,  it  ^2i^  filial  prayer.  Matthew  describes  him  as  saying  "  0  my 
Father,"  and  Mark  puts  it,  "Abba,  Father."  You  will  find  this  always  a 
stronghold  in  the  day  of  trial  to  plead  your  adoption.  Hence  that 
prayer,  in  which  it  is  written,  "Lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but 
deliver  us  from  evil,"  begins  with  "  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven." 
Plead  as  a  child.  You  have  no  rights  as  a  subject ;  you  have 
forfeited  them  by  your  treason,  but  nothing  can  forfeit  a  child's  right 
to  a  father's  protection.  Be  not  then  ashamed  to  say,  "My  Father, 
hear  my  cry." 

Again,  observe  that  it  was  persevering  prayer.  He  prayed  three  times, 
using  the  same  words.  Be  not  content  until  you  prevail.  Be  as  the 
importunate  widow,  whose  continual  coming  earned  what  her  first  sup- 
plication could  not  win.  Continue  in  prayer,  and  watch  in  the  same 
with  thanksgiving. 

Further,  see  how  it  glowed  to  a  red-hot  heat — it  was  earnest  prayer. 
"He  prayed  more  earnestly."  "What  groans  were  those  which  were 
uttered  by  Christ!  What  tears,  which  welled  up  from  the  deep  fountains 
of  his  nature !  Make  earnest  supplication  if  you  would  prevail  against 
the  adversary. 

And  last,  it  was  the  prayer  of  resignation.  "  Nevertheless,  not  as  I 
will,  but  as  thou  wilt."  Yield,  and  God  yields.  Let  it  be  as  God  wills, 
and  God  will  will  it  that  it  shall  be  for  the  best.  Be  thou  perfectly 
content  to  leave  the  result  of  thy  prayer  in  his  hands,  who  knows  when 
to  give,  and  how  to  give,  and  what  to  give,  and  what  to  withhold.  So 
pleading,  earnestly,  importunately,  yet  mingling  with  it  humility  and 
resignation,  thou  shalt  yet  prevail. 

Dear  friends,  we  must  conclude,  turn  to  the  last  point  with  this  as  a 
practical  lesson — ''Eise  and  pray."  When  the  disciples  were  lying 
down  they  slept ;  sitting  was  the  posture  that  was  congenial  to  sleep. 
Rise;  shake  yourselves;  stand  up  in  the  name  of  God;  rise  and  pray. 
And  if  you  are  in  temptation,  be  you  more  than  ever  you  were  in  your 
life  before,  instant,  passionate,  importunate  with  God  that  he  would 
deliver  you  in  the  day  of  your  conflict. 

V.  As  time  has  failed  us  we  close  with  the  last  point,  which  is,  the 
Saviour's  prevalence. 

The  cloud  has  passed  away.  Christ  has  knelt,  and  the  prayer  is  over. 
"But,"  says  one,  "did  Christ  prevail  in  prayer?"  Beloved,  could  we 
have  any  hope  that  he  would  prevail  in  heaven  if  he  had  not  prevailed 
on  earth?  Should  we  not  have  had  a  suspicion  that  if  his  strong  crying 
and  tears  had  not  been  heard  then,  he  would  fail  now?  His  prayers 
did  speed,  and  therefore  he  is  a  good  intercessor  for  us.  "  How  was 
he  heard?"  The  answer  shall  be  given  very  briefly  indeed.  He  was 
heard,  I  think,  in  three  respects.  The  first  gracious  answer  that  was 
given  him  was,  that  his  mind  was  suddenly  rendered  calm.  What  a 
difference  there  is  between  "My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful," — his 
hurrying  too  and  fro,  his  repetition  of  the  prayer  three  times,  the  sin- 
galar  agitation  that  was  upon  him — what  a  contrast  between  all  these 


GETflSEMANB.  131 

and  his  going  forth  to  ment  the  traitor  with  "  Betrayest  thou  the  Son 
of  Man  with  a  kiss?"  Like  a  troubled  sea  before,  and  now  as  calm  as 
when  he  himself  said,  "  Peace  be  still,"  and  the  waves  were  quiet.  You 
cannot  know  a  profounder  peace  than  that  which  reigned  in  the  Saviour 
when  before  Pilate  he  ansAvered  him  not  a  word.  He  is  calm  to 
the  last,  as  calm  as  though  it  were  his  day  of  triumph  rather  than  his 
day  of  trouble.  Now  I  think  this  was  vouchsafed  to  him  in  answer  to 
.lis  prayer.  He  had  sufferings  perhaps  more  intense,  but  his  mind  was 
now  quieted  so  as  to  meet  them  with  greater  deliberation.  Like  some 
men,  who  when  they  first  hear  the  firing  of  the  shots  in  a  battle  are  all 
trepidation,  but  as  the  fight  grows  hotter  and  they  are  in  greater  danger, 
they  are  cool  and  collected  ;  they  are  wounded,  they  are  bleeding,  thej 
are  dying;  yet  are  they  quiet  as  a  summer's  eve;  the  first  young  flush 
of  trouble  is  gone,  and  they  can  meet  the  foe  with  peace — so  the  Father 
heard  the  Saviour's  cry,  and  breathed  such  a  profound  peace  into  his 
soul,  that  it  was  like  a  river,  and  his  righteousness  like  the  waves  of 
the  sea. 

Next,  v,'e  believe  that  he  was  answered  by  God  strengthening  him 
through  an  angel.  How  that  was  done  we  do  not  know.  Probably  it 
was  by  what  the  angel  said,  and  equally  likely  is  it  that  it  was  by  what 
he  did.  The  angel  may  have  whispered  the  promises ;  pictured  before 
his  mind's  eye  the  glory  of  his  success;  sketched  his  resurrection;  pour- 
trayed  the  scene  when  his  angels  would  bring  his  chariots  ft'om  on  high 
to  bear  him  to  his  throne ;  revived  before  him  the  recollection  of  the 
time  of  his  advent,  the  prospect  when  he  should  reign  from  sea  to  sea, 
and  from  the  river  even  to  the  ends  of  the  earth;  and  so  have  made  him 
strong.  Or,  perhaps,  by  some  unknown  method  God  sent  such  power 
to  our  Christ,  who  had  been  like  Samson  with  his  locks  shorn,  that  ht 
suddenly  received  all  the  might  and  majestic  energy  that  were  needed  for 
the  terrific  struggle.  Then  he  walked  out  of  the  gai'den  no  more  a  worm 
and  no  man,  but  made  strong  with  an  invisible  might  that  made  him  a 
match  for  all  the  armies  that  were  round  about  him.  A  troop  had  over- 
come him,  like  Gad  of  old,  but  he  overcame  at  last.  Now  he  can  dash 
through  a  troop ;  now  he  can  leap  over  a  wall.  God  has  sent  by  his 
angel  force  from  on  high,  and  made  the  man  Christ  strong  for  battle  and 
for  victory. 

And  I  think  we  may  conclude  with  saying,  that  God  heard  him  in 
granting  him  now,  not  simply  strength,  lut  a  real  victory  over  Satan. 
I  do  not  know  whether  what  Adam  Clarke  supposes  is  correct,  that 
in  the  garden  Christ  did  pay  more  of  the  price  than  he  did  even  on 
the  cross  ;  but  I  am  quite  convinced  that  they  are  very  foolish  who 
get  to  such  refinement  that  they  think  the  atonement  was  made  on 
the  cross,  and  nowhere  else  at  all.  We  believe  that  it  was  made 
in  the  garden  as  well  as  on  the  cross ;  and  it  strikes  me  that  in  the 
garden  one  part  of  Christ's  work  was  finished,  wholly  finished,  and 
that  was  his  conflict  with  Satan.  I  conceive  that  Christ  had  now  rather 
to  bear  the  absence  of  his  Father's  presence  and  the  revilings  of  the 
people  and  the  sons  of  men,  than  the  temptations  of  the  devil.  I  do 
think  that  these  were  over  when  he  rose  from  his  knees  in  prayer,  when 
he  lifted  himself  from  the  ground  where  he  marked  his  visage  in  the 
clay  in  drops  of  blood.    The  temptation  of  Satan  was  then  over,  and 


132  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

he  might  have  said  concerning  that  part  of  the  work — "  It  is  finished ; 
broken  is  the  dragon's  head;  I  have  overcome  him."  Perhaps  in 
those  few  hours  that  Christ  spent  in  the  garden  the  whole  energy  of 
the  agents  of  iniquity  was  concentrated  and  dissipated.  Perhaps  in  that 
one  conflict  all  that  craft  could  invent,  all  that  malice  could  devise,  all 
that  infernal  practice  could  suggest,  was  tried  on  Christ,  the  devil  having 
his  chain  loosened  for  that  purpose,  having  Christ  given  up  to  him,  as 
Job  was,  that  he  might  touch  him  in  his  bones  and  in  his  flesh,  yea, 
touch  him  in  his  heart  and  his  soul,  and  vex  him  in  his  spirit.  It  may 
be  that  every  devil  in  hell  and  every  fiend  of  the  pit  was  summoned, 
each  to  vent  his  own  spite  and  to  pour  their  united  energy  and  malice 
upon  the  head  of  Christ.  And  there  he  stood,  and  he  could  have  said 
as  he  stood  up  to  meet  the  next  adversary — a  devil  in  the  form  of  man — 
Judas — "  I  come  this  day  from  Bozrah,  with  garments  dyed  red  from 
Edom ;  I  have  trampled  on  my  enemies,  and  overcome  them  once  for  all; 
now  go  I  to  bear  man's  sin  and  my  Father's  wrath,  and  to  finish  the 
work  which  he  has  given  me  to  do."  If  this  be  so,  Christ  was  then 
heard  in  that  he  feared ;  he  feared  the  temptation  of  Satan,  and  he 
was  delivered  from  it ;  he  feared  his  own  weakness,  and  he  was 
strengthened ;  he  feared  his  own  trepidation  of  mind,  and  he  was 
made  calm. 

What  shall  we  say,  then,  in  conclusion,  but  this  lesson.  Does  it  not 
say  *'  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer,  believing,  ye  shall  have."  Then 
if  your  temptations  reach  the  most  tremendous  height  and  force,  still 
lay  hold  of  God  in  prayer  and  you  shall  prevail.  Con;  inced  sinner! 
that  is  a  comfort  for  you.  Troubled  saint !  that  is  a  joy  for  you.  To 
one  and  all  of  us  is  this  lesson  of  this  morning — "  Pray  ths^t  ye  enter  not 
into  temptation."  If  in  temptation  let  us  ask  that  Christ  may  pray  for 
us  that  our  faith  fail  not,  and  when  we  have  passed  through  the  trouble 
let  us  try  to  strengthen  our  brethren,  even  as  Christ  has  strengthened  us 
this  day," 


THE   AGONY   IN    GETHSEMANE. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  October  18th,  1874,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTOM. 


''  And  being  in  an  agony  he  prayed  more  earnestly :  and  his  sweat  was  as  it  were 
great  drops  of  blood  falling  down  to  the  ground." — Luke  xxii.  44. 

Our  Lord,  after  having  eaten  the  passover  and  celebrated  the  supper 
with  his  disciples,  went  with  them  to  the  Mount  of  Olives,  and  entered 
the  garden  of  Gethsemane.  What  induced  him  to  select  that  place  to 
be  the  scene  of  his  terrible  agony  ?  Why  there  in  preference  to  any- 
where else  would  he  be  arrested  by  his  enemies  ?  May  we  not  conceive 
that  as  in  a  garden  Adam's  self-indulgence  ruined  us,  so  in  another 
garden  the  agonies  of  the  second  Adam  should  restore  us.  Gethsemane 
supplies  the  medicine  for  the  ills  which  followed  upon  the  forbidden 
fruit  of  Eden.  No  flowers  which  bloomed  upon  the  banks  of  the 
four-fold  river  were  ever  so  precious  to  our  race  as  the  bitter  herbs 
which  grew  hard  by  the  black  and  sullen  stream  of  Kedron. 

May  not  our  Lord  also  have  thought  of  David,  when  on  that 
memorable  occasion  he  fled  out  of  the  city  from  his  rebellious  son,  and 
it  is  written,  **  The  king  also  himself  passed  over  the  brook  Kedron," 
and  he  and  his  people  went  up  bare-footed  and  bare-headed,  weeping 
as  they  went  ?  Behold,  the  greater  David  leaves  the  temple  to  become 
desolate,  and  forsakes  the  city  which  had  rejected  his  admonitions,  and 
with  a  sorrowful  heart  crosses  the  foul  brook,  to  find  in  solitude  a 
solace  for  his  woes.  Our  Lord  Jesus,  moreover,  meant  us  to  see  that 
our  sin  changed  everything  about  him  into  sorrow,  it  turned  his  riches 
into  poverty,  his  peace  into  travail,  his  glory  into  shame,  and  so  the  place 
of  his  peaceful  retirement,  where  in  hallowed  devotion  he  had  been 
nearest  heaven  in  communion  with  God,  our  sin  transformed  into  the 
focus  of  his  sorrow,  the  centre  of  his  woe.  Where  he  had  enjoyed 
most,  there  he  must  be  called  to  suffer  most.  Our  Lord  may  also  have 
chosen  the  garden,  because  needing  every  remembrance  that  could 
sustain  him  in  the  conflict,  he  felt  refreshed  by  the  memory  of  former 
hours  which  there  had  passed  away  so  quietly.  He  had  there  prayed. 
No.  1,199. 


134  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  gained  strength  and  comfort.  Those  gnarled  and  twisted  olivet 
knew  him  well ;  there  was  scarce  a  blade  of  grass  in  the  garden  which 
he  had  not  knelt  upon  ;  he  had  consecrated  the  spot  to  fellowship  with 
God.  What  wonder  then  that  he  preferred  this  favoured  soil  ?  Just 
as  a  man  would  choose  in  sickness  to  lie  in  his  own  bed,  so  Jesus  chost* 
to  endure  his  agony  in  his  own  oratory,  where  the  recollections  of 
former  communings  with  his  Father  would  come  vividly  before  him. 

But,  probably,  the  chief  reason  for  his  resort  to  Gethsemane  was, 
that  it  was  his  well-known  haunt,  and  John  tells  us,  "  Judas  also  knew 
the  place."  Our  Lord  did  not  wish  to  conceal  himself,  he  did  not  need 
to  be  hunted  down  like  a  thief,  or  searched  out  by  spies.  He  went 
boldly  to  the  place  where  his  enemies  knew  that  he  was  accustomed  to 

gray,  for  he  was  willing  to  be  taken  to  suffering  and  to  death.  They 
id  not  drag  him  off  to  Pilate's  hall  against  his  will,  but  he  went  with 
them  voluntarily.  When  the  hour  was  come  for  him  to  be  betrayed 
there  was  he  in  a  place  where  the  traitor  could  readily  find  him,  and 
when  Judas  would  betray  him  with  a  kiss  his  cheek  was  ready  to 
receive  the  traitorous  salutation.  The  blessed  Saviour  delighted  to  do 
the  will  of  the  Lord,  though  it  involved  obedience  unto  death. 

We  have  thus  come  to  the  gate  of  the  garden  of  Gethsemane,  let  us 
now  enter  ;  but  first  let  us  put  off  our  shoe  from  our  foot,  as  Moses 
did,  when  he  also  saw  the  bush  which  burned  with  fire,  and  was 
not  consumed.  Surely  we  may  say  with  Jacob,  "  How  dreadful  is  this 
place  I  "  I  tremble  at  the  task  which  lies  before  me,  for  how  shall  my 
feeble  speech  describe  thoso  agonies,  for  which  strong  crying  and  tears 
were  scarcely  an  adequate  expression  ?  I  desire  with  you  to  survey 
the  sufferings  of  our  Redeemer,  but  oh,  may  the  Spirit  of  God  prevent 
our  mind  from  thinking  aught  amiss,  or  our  tongue  from  speaking 
even  one  word  which  would  be  derogatory  to  him  either  in  his  immaculate 
manhood  or  his  glorious  Godhead.  It  is  not  easy  when  you  are  speak 
ing  of  one  who  is  both  God  and  man  to  observe  the  exact  line  of  correct 
speech ;  it  is  so  easy  to  describe  the  divine  side  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  trench  upon  the  human,  or  to  depict  the  human  at  the  cost  of  the 
divine.  Make  me  not  an  offender  for  a  word  if  I  should  err.  A  man 
had  need  himself  to  be  in^ired,  or  to  confine  himself  to  the  very 
words  of  inspiration,  fitly  to  speak  at  all  times  upon  the  great  "  mystery 
of  godliness,"  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  and  especially  when  he  has  to 
dwell  most  upon  God  so  manifest  in  suffering  flesh  that  the 
weakest  traits  in  manhood  become  the  most  conspicuous.  0  Lord, 
open  thou  my  lips  that  my  tongue  may  utter  right  words. 

Meditating  upon  the  agonizing  scene  in  Gethsemane  we  are  compelled 
to  observe  that  our  Savionr  there  endured  a  grief  unknown  to  any 
previous  period  of  his  life,  and  therefore  we  will  commence  our  dis- 
course by  raising  the  question,  what  was  the  cause  of  the  pecu- 
liar GRIEF  OF  gethsemane  ?  Our  Lord  was  the  "  man  of  sorrows 
and  acquainted  with  grief"  throughout  his  whole  life,  and  yet,  though 
it  may  sound  paradoxical,  I  scarcely  think  there  existed  on  the  face  of 
the  earth  a  happier  man  than  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  for  the  griefs  which 
he  endured  were  counterbalanced  by  the  peace  of  purity,  the  calm  of 
fellowship  with  God,  and  the  joy  of  benevolence.  This  last  every  good 
man  knows  to  be  very  sweet,  and  all  the  sweeter  in  proportion  to  the  pain 


THE   AGONY   IN   GETHSEMANE.  135- 

which  is  voluntarily  endured  for  the  carrying  out  of  its  kind  designs. 
It  is  always  joy  to  do  good,  cost  what  it  may.  Moreover  Jesus  dwelt  at 
perfect  peace  with  God  at  all  times ;  we  know  that  he  did  so,  for  he 
regarded  that  peace  as  a  choice  legacy  which  he  could  bequeath  to  his 
disciples,  and  ere  he  died  he  said  to  them,  "Peace  I  leave  with  you, 
my  peace  I  give  unto  you."  He  was  meek  and  lowly  of  heart,  and 
therefore  his  soul  had  rest ;  he  was  one  of  the  meek  who  inherit  the 
earth  ;  one  of  the  peacemakers  who  are  and  must  be  blessed.  I  think 
I  mistake  not  when  I  say  that  our  Lord  was  far  from  being  an  unhappy 
man.  But  in  Gethsemane  all  seems  changed,  his  peace  is  gone,  his 
calm  is  turned  to  tempest.  After  supper  our  Lord  had  sung  a  hymn, 
but  there  was  no  singing  in  Gethsemane.  Adown  the  steep  bank  which 
led  from  Jerusalem  to  the  Kedron  he  talked  very  cheerfully,  saying, 
"  I  am  the  vine  and  ye  are  the  branches,"  and  that  wondrous  prayer 
which  he  prayed  with  his  disciples  after  that  discourse,  is  very  full  of 
majesty  :  "  Father,  I  will  that  they  also  whom  thou  has  given  me 
be  with  me  where  I  am,"  is  a  very  different  prayer  from  that  inside 
Gethsemane's  walls,  where  he  cries,  "  If  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass 
from  me."  Notice  that  all  his  life  long  you  scarcely  find  him  uttering 
an  expression  of  grief,  and  yet  here  he  says,  not  only  by  his  sighs  and  by 
his  bloody  sweat,  but  in  so  many  words,  "  My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful 
even  unto  death."  In  the  garden  the  sufferer  could  not  conceal  his 
grief,  and  does  not  appear  to  have  wished  to  do  so.  Backward  and 
forward  thrice  he  ran  to  his  disciples,  he  let  them  see  his  sorrow  and 
appealed  to  them  for  sympathy;  his  exclamations  were  very  piteous, 
and  his  sighs  and  groans  were,  I  doubt  not,  very  terrible  to  hear. 
Chiefly  did  that  sorrow  reveal  itself  in  bloody  sweat,  which  is  a  very 
unusual  phenomenon,  although  I  suppose  we  must  believe  those  writers 
who  record  instances  somewhat  similar.  The  old  physician  Galen 
gives  an  instance  in  which,  through  extremity  of  horror,  an  individual 
poured  forth  a  discoloured  sweat,  so  nearly  crimson  as  at  any  rate  to 
appear  to  have  been  blood.  Other  cases  are  given  by  medical  authorities. 
We  do  not,  however,  on  any  previous  occasion  observe  anything  like 
this  in  our  Lord's  life;  it  was  only  in  the  last  grim  struggle  among 
the  olive  trees  that  our  champion  resisted  unto  blood,  agonizing 
against  sin.  What  ailed  Thee,  0  Lord,  that  thou  shouldst  be  so  sorely 
troubled  just  then  ? 

We  are  clear  that  his  deep  sorrow  and  distress  were  not  occasioned 
by  any  bodily  pain.  Our  Saviour  had  doubtless  been  familiar  with  weak- 
ness and  pain,  for  he  took  our  sicknesses,  but  he  never  in  any  previous 
instance  complained  of  physical  suffering.  Neither  at  the  time  when  he 
entered  Gethsemane  had  he  been  grieved  by  any  bereavement.  We  know 
why  it  is  written  "  Jesus  wept,"  it  was  because  his  friend  Lazarus  wag 
dead;  but  here  there  was  no  funeral,  nor  sick  bed,  nor  particular  cause 
of  grief  in  that  direction.  Nor  was  it  the  revived  remembrance  of 
any  past  reproaches  which  had  lain  dormant  in  his  mind.  Long 
beibre  this  "  reproach  had  broken  his  heart,"  and  he  had  known  to  the 
full  the  vexations  of  contumely  and  scorn.  They  had  called  him  a 
"  drunken  man  and  a  wine  bibber,"  they  had  charged  him  with  casting 
out  devils  by  the  prince  of  the  devils;  they  could  not  say  more  and  yet 
he  had  bravely  faced  it  all.  it  could  not  be  possible  that  he  was  now 


•136  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

sorrowful  unto  death  for  such  a  cause.  There  must  have  been  a  some- 
thing sharper  than  pain,  more  cutting  than  reproach,  more  terrible 
than  bereavement,  which  now  at  this  time  grappled  with  the  Saviour 
and  made  him  "exceeding  sorrowful,  and  very  heavy."  ' 

Do  you  suppose  it  was  the  fear  of  coming  scorn,  or  the  dread  of  cruci- 
fixion?   Was  it  terror  at  the  thought  of  death?    Is  not  such  a  sup- 
position impossible  ?   Every  man  dreads  death,  and  as  man  Jesus  could 
not  but  shrink  from    it.    When  we  were  originally  made  we  were 
created  for  immortality,  and  therefore  to  die  is  strange  and  uncongenial 
work  to  us,  and  the  instincts  of  self-preservation  cause  us  to  start  back 
from  it ;  but  surely  in  our  Lord's  case  that  natural  cause  could  not  have 
produced  such  specially  painful  results.     It  does  not  make  even  such  poor 
cowards  as  we  are  sweat  great  drops  of  blood,  why  then  should  it  work 
such  terror  in  him  ?    It  is  dishonouring  to  our  Lord  to  imagine  him 
less  brave  than  his  own  disciples,  yet  we  have  seen  some  of  the  very 
feeblest  of  his  saints  triumphant  in  the  prospect  oi  departing.     Kead 
the  stories  of  the  martyrs,  and  you  will  frequently  llnd  them  exultant 
in  the  near  approach  of  the  most  cruel  sufferings.     The  joy  of  the  Lord 
has  given  such  strength  to  them,  that  no  coward  thought  has  alarmed 
them  for  a  single  moment,  but  they  have  gone  to  the  stake,  or  to 
the  block,  with  psalms  of  victory  upon  their  lips.     Our  Master  must 
not  be  thought  of  as  inferior  to  his  boldest  servants,  it  cannot  be  that 
he  should  tremble  where  they  were  brave.     Oh,  no ;  the  noblest  spirit 
among  yon  martyr-band  is  the  Leader  himself,  who  in  suffering  and 
heroism  surpassed  them  all ;  none  could  so  defy  the  pangs  of  death  as 
the  Lord  Jesus,  who,  for  the  joy  which  was  set  before  him,  endured  the 
cross,  despising  the  shame. 

1  cannot  conceive  that  the  pangs  of  Gethsemane  were  occasioned  by 
any  extraordinary  attack  from  Satan.  It  is  possible  that  Satan  was 
there,  and  that  his  presence  may  have  darkened  the  shade,  but  he  was 
not  the  most  prominent  cause  of  that  hour  of  darkness.  Thus  much  is 
^uite  clear,  that  our  Lord  at  the  commencement  of  his  ministry  engaged 
in  a  very  severe  duel  with  the  prince  of  darkness,  and  yet  we  do  not 
read  concerning  that  temptation  in  the  wilderness  a  single  syllable  ap 
to  his  soul's  being  exceeding  sorrowful,  neither  do  we  find  that  he 
"was  sore  amazed  and  was  very  heavy,"  nor  is  there  a  solitary  hint 
at  anything  approaching  to  bloody  sweat.  When  the  Lord  of  angels 
condescended  to  stand  foot  to  foot  with  the  prince  of  the  power  of 
the  air,  he  had  no  such  dread  of  him  as  to  utter  strong  cries  and  tears 
and  fall  prostrate  on  the  ground  with  threefold,  appeals  to  the  Great 
Father.  Comparatively  speaking,  to  put  his  foot  on  the  old  serpent 
was  an  easy  task  for  Christ,  and  did  but  cost  him  a  bruised  heel, 
but  this  Gethsemane  agony  wounded  his  very  soul  even  unto  death. 

What  is  it  then,  think  you,  that  so  peculiarly  marks  off  Gethsemane 
and  the  griefs  thereof  ?  We  believe  that  now  the  Father  put  him  to 
grief  for  us.  It  was  now  that  our  Lord  had  to  take  a  certain  cup/rowi 
the  Father's  hand.  Not  from  the  Jews,  not  from  the  traitor  Judas,  not 
from  the  sleeping  disciples,  not  from  the  devil  came  the  trial  now,  but 
it  was  a  cup  filled  by  one  whom  he  knew  to  be  his  Father,  but  who 
nevertheless  he  understood  to  have  appointed  him  a  very  bitter  potion, 
«i  cup  not  to  be  drunk  by  his  body  and  to  spend  its  gall  upon  his  flesh. 


THE   AGONY   IN   GETHSEMANE.  137 

but  a  cup  which  specially  amazed  his  soul  and  troubled  his  inmost 
heart.  He  shrunk  from  it,  and  therefore  be  ye  sure  that  it  was  a 
draught  more  dreadful  than  physical  pain,  since  from  that  he  did  not 
ghrink ;  it  was  a  potion  more  dreadful  than  reproach,  from  that  he  had 
not  turned  aside;  more  dreadful  than  Satanic  temptation, — that  he 
had  overcome :  it  was  a  something  inconceivably  terrible,  amazingly 
full  of  dread,  which  came  from  the  Father's  hand.  This  removes  all 
doubt  as  to  what  it  was,  for  we  read  "  It  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise 
him,  he  hath  put  him  to  grief:  when  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an  offer- 
ing for  sin."  "  The  Lord  hath  made  to  meet  on  him  the  iniquity  of 
us  ail."  He  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us  though  he  knew  no  sin. 
This,  then,  is  that  which  caused  the  Saviour  such  extraordinary  depres- 
sion. He  was  now  about  to  "taste  death  for  every  man,"  to  bear 
the  curse  which  was  due  to  sinners,  because  he  stood  in  the  sinner's 
place  and  must  suffer  in  the  sinner's  stead.  Here  is  the  secret  of  those 
agonies  which  it  is  not  possible  for  me  to  set  forth  in  order  before  you, 
so  true  is  it  that — 

"'Tis  to  God,  and  God  alone, 
That  his  griefs  are  fully  known." 

Yet  would  I  exhort  you  to  consider  these  griefs  awhile,  that  you  may 
love  the  sufferer.  He  now  realized,  perhaps  for  the  first  time,  what  it 
was  to  be  a  sin  bearer.  As  God  he  was  perfectly  holy  and  incapable 
of  sin,  and  as  man  he  was  without  original  taint  and  spotlessly  pure  ; 
yet  he  had  to  bear  sin,  to  be  led  forth  as  the  scape  goat  bearing  the 
iniquity  of  Israel  upon  his  head,  to  be  taken  and  made  a  sin  offering, 
and  as  a  loathsome  thing  (for  nothing  was  more  loathsome  than  the 
sin  offering)  to  be  taken  without  the  camp  and  utterly  consumed  with 
the  fire  of  divine  wrath.  Do  you  wonder  that  his  infinite  purity  started 
back  from  that  ?  Would  he  have  been  what  he  was  if  it  had  not  been  a 
very  solemn  thing  for  him  to  stand  before  God  in  the  position  of  a 
sinner  ?  yea,  and  as  Luther  would  have  said  it,  to  be  looked  upon  by 
God  as  if  he  were  all  the  sinners  in  the  world,  and  as  if  he  had  com- 
mitted all  the  sin  that  ever  had  been  committed  by  his  people,  for  it 
was  all  laid  on  him,  and  on  him  must  the  vengeance  due  for  it  all  be 
poured  ;  he  must  be  the  centre  of  all  the  vengeance  and  bear  away  upon 
himself  what  ought  to  have  fallen  upon  the  guilty  sons  of  men.  To 
stand  in  such  a  position  when  once  it  was  realised  must  have  been  very 
terrible  to  the  Redeemer's  holy  soul.  Now  also  the  Saviour's  mind 
was  intently  fixed  upon  the  dreadful  nature  of  sin.  Sin  had  always 
been  abhorrent  to  him,  but  now  his  thoughts  were  engrossed  with  it, 
he  saw  its  worse  than  deadly  nature,  its  heinous  character,  and  horrible 
aim.  Probably  at  this  time  beyond  any  former  period  he  had,  as  man, 
a  view  of  the  wide  range  and  all-pervading  evil  of  sin,  and  a  sense  of 
the  blackness  of  its  darkness,  and  the  desperateness  of  its  guilt  as  being 
a  direct  attack  upon  the  throne,  yea,  and  upon  the  very  being  of  God. 
He  saw  in  his  own  person  to  what  lengths  sinners  would  go,  how  they 
would  sell  their  Lord  like  Judas,  and  seek  to  destroy  him  as  did 
the  Jews.  The  cruel  and  ungenerous  treatment  he  had  himself 
received  displayed  man's  hate  of  God,  and,  as  he  saw  it,  horror  took 
hold  upon  him,  and  his  soul  was  heavy  to  think  that  he  must  bear 
such  an  evil  and  be  numbered  with  such  transgressors,  to  be  wounded 


138  METROPOlilTAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

for  their  transgressions,  and  bruised  for  their  iniquities.  Not  th« 
wounding  nor  the  bruising  distressed  him  so  much  as  the  sin  itself, 
and  that  utterly  overwhelmed  his  soul. 

Then,  too,  no  doubt  the  penalty  of  sin  began  to  be  realised  by  him 
in  the  Garden — first  the  sin  which  had  put  him  in  the  position  of  a 
suffering  substitute,  and  then  the  penalty  which  must  be  borne,  because 
he  was  in  that  position.  I  dread  to  the  last  degree  that  kind  of 
theology  which  is  so  common  now-a-days,  which  seeks  to  depreciate  and 
diminish  our  estimate  of  the  sufferings  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Brethren,  that  was  no  trifling  suffering  which  made  recompense  to  the 
justice  of  God  for  the  sins  of  men.  I  am  never  afraid  of  exaggeration, 
when  I  speak  of  what  my  Lord  endured.  All  hell  was  distilled  into  that 
cup,  of  which  our  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  was  made  to  drink.  It 
was  not  eternal  suffering,  but  since  he  was  divine  he  could  in  a  short  time 
offer  unto  God  a  vindication  of  his  justice  which  sinners  in  hell  could 
not  have  offered  had  they  been  left  to  suffer  in  their  own  persons  for 
ever.  The  woe  that  broke  over  the  Saviour's  spirit,  the  great  and 
fathomless  ocean  of  inexpressible  anguish  which  dashed  over  the 
Saviour's  soul  when  he  died,  is  so  inconceivable,  that  I  must  not 
venture  far,  lest  I  be  accused  of  a  vain  attempt  to  express  the  unutter- 
able ;  but  this  I  will  say,  the  very  spray  from  that  great  tempestuous 
deep,  as  it  fell  on  Christ,  baptised  him  in  a  bloody  sweat.  He  had 
not  yet  come  to  the  raging  billows  of  the  penalty  itself,  but  even 
standing  on  the  shore,  as  he  heard  the  awful  surf  breaking  at  his  feet, 
his  soul  was  sore  amazed  and  very  heavy.  It  was  the  shadow  of  the 
coming  tempest,  it  was  the  prelude  of  the  dread  desertion  which  he 
had  to  endure,  when  he  stood  where  we  ought  to  have  stood,  and  paid  to 
his  Father's  justice  the  debt  which  was  due  from  us  ;  it  was  this  which 
laid  him  low.  To  be  treated  as  a  sinner,  to  be  smitten  as  a  sinner, 
though  in  him  was  no  sin, — this  it  was  which  caused  him  the  agony  of 
which  our  text  speaks. 

Having  thus  si3oken  of  the  cause  of  his  peculiar  grief,  I  think  we 
shall  be  able  to  support  our  view  of  the  matter,  while  we  lead  you  to 
consider,  what  was  the  character  of  the  grief  itself  ?  I  shall 
trouble  you,  as  little  as  possible,  with  the  Greek  words  used  by  the 
evangelists ;  I  have  studied  each  one  of  them,  to  try  and  find  out  the 
shades  of  their  meaning,  but  it  will  suffice  if  I  give  you  the  results  of 
my  careful  investigation.  What  was  the  grief  itself?  How  was  it 
described  ?  This  great  sorrow  assailed  our  Lord  some  four  days  before 
he  suffered.  If  you  turn  to  John  xii.  27,  you  find  that  remarkable 
utterance,  "  Now  is  my  soul  troubled."  We  never  knew  him  say  that 
before.  This  was  a  foretaste  of  the  great  depression  of  spirit  which  was 
BO  soon  to  lay  him  prostrate  in  Gethsemane.  ^*  Now  is  my  soul  troubled  ; 
and  what  shall  I  say  ?  Father,  save  me  from  this  hour ;  but  for  this 
cause  came  I  unto  this  hour."  After  that  we  read  of  him  in  Matthew 
xxvi.  37,  that  "he  began  to  be  sorrowful  and  very  heavy."  The 
depression  had  come  over  him  again.  It  was  not  pain,  it  was  not  a 
palpitation  of  the  heart,  or  an  aching  of  the  brow,  it  was  worse  than 
these.  Trouble  of  spirit  is  worse  than  pain  of  body ;  pain  may  bring 
trouble  and  be  the  incidental  cause  of  sorrow,  but  if  the  aand  is 
perfectly  untroubled,  how  well  a  man  can  bear  pain,  and  when  the 


THE   AGONY   IN  GBTHSEMANE.  139 

soul  is  exhilarated  and  lifted  up  with  inward  joy  pain  of  body  is 
almost  forgotten,  the  soul  conquering  the  body.  On  the  other  hand 
the  soul's  sorrow  will  create  bodily  pain,  the  lower  nature  sympathizing 
with  the  higher.  Our  Lord's  main  suffering  lay  in  his  soul — his  soul- 
sufferings  were  the  soul  of  his  sufferings.  "  A  wounded  spirit  who 
can  bear  ?  "  Pain  of  spirit  is  the  worst  of  pain,  sorrow  of  heart  is  the 
plimax  of  griefs.  Let  those  who  have  ever  known  sinking  spirits, 
despondency,  and  mental  gloom,  attest  the  truth  of  what  I  say  ! 

This  sorrow  of  heart  appears  to  have  led  to  a  very  deep  depression 
of  our  Lord's  spirit.  In  the  26th  of  Matthew,  37th  verse,  you  find  it 
recorded  that  he  was  ''very  heavy  J'  and  that  expression  is  full  of 
meaning, — of  more  meaning,  indeed,  than  it  would  be  easy  to  explain. 
The  word  in  the  original  is  a  very  difficult  one  to  translate.  It  may 
signify  the  abstraction  of  the  mind,  and  its  complete  occupation  by 
sorrow,  to  the  exclusion  of  every  thought  which  might  have  alleviated 
the  distress.  One  burning  thought  consumed  his  whole  soul,  and 
burned  up  all  that  might  have  yielded  comfort.  For  awhile  his  mind 
refused  to  dwell  upon  the  result  of  his  death,  the  consequent  joy  which 
was  set  before  him.  His  position  as  a  sinbearer,  and  the  desertion  by 
his  Father  which  was  necessitated  thereby,  engrossed  his  contempla- 
tions and  hurried  his  soul  away  from  all  else.  Some  have  seen  in  the 
word  a  measure  of  distraction,  and  though  I  will  not  go  far  in  that 
direction,  yet  it  does  seem  as  if  our  Saviour's  mind  underwent  pertur- 
bations and  convulsions  widely  different  from  his  usual  calm,  collected 
spirit.  He  was  tossed  to  and  fro  as  upon  a  mighty  sea  of  trouble, 
which  was  wrought  to  tempest,  and  carried  him  away  in  its  fury. 
"We  did  esteem  him  stricken,  smitten  of  God  and  afflicted."  As  the 
psalmist  said,  innumerable  evils  compassed  him  about  so  that  his  heart 
failed  him.  His  heart  was  melted  like  wax  in  the  midst  of  his  bowels 
with  sheer  dismay.  He  was  "  very  heavy."  Some  consider  the  word 
to  signify  at  its  root,  "  separated  from  the  people,"  as  if  he  had  become 
unlike  other  men,  even  as  one  whose  mind  is  staggered  by  a  sudden 
blow,  or  pressed  with  some  astounding  calamity,  is  no  more  as  ordinary 
men  are.  Mere  onlookers  would  have  thought  our  Lord  to  be  a 
man  distraught,  burdened  beyond  the  wont  of  men,  and  borne  down 
by  a  sorrow  unparalleled  among  men.  The  learned  Thomas  Goodwin 
says,  "  The  word  denotes  a  failing,  deficiency,  and  sinking  of  spirit,  such 
as  happens  to  men  in  sickness  and  swounding."  Epaphroditus'  sick- 
ness, whereby  he  was  brought  near  to  death,  is  called  by  the  same 
word  ;  so  that,  we  see,  that  Christ's  soul  was  sick  and  fainted.  Was 
not  his  sweat  produced  by  exhaustion  ?  The  cold,  clammy  sweat  of 
dying  men  comes  through  faintness  of  body,  but  the  bloody  sweat  of 
Jesus  came  from  an  utter  faintness  and  prostration  of  soul.  He  was 
in  an  awful  soul-swoon,  and  suffered  an  inward  death,  whose  accompa- 
niment was  not  watery  tears  from  the  eyes,  but  a  weeping  of  blood 
from  the  entire  man.  Many  of  you,  however,  know  in  your  measure 
what  it  is  to  be  very  heavy  without  my  multiplying  words  in  expla- 
nation, and  if  you  do  not  know  by  personal  experience  all  explanations 
must  be  vain.  When  deep  despondency  comes  on,  when  you  forget 
erery thing  that  would  sustain  you,  and  your  spirit  sinks  down,  down, 
down,  then  can  you  sympathise  with  your  T^ord.     Others  think  yon 


140  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

foolish,  call  you  nervous,  and  bid  you  rally  yourself,  but  they  know  not 
jour  case.  Did  they  understand  it  they  would  not  mock  you  with  such 
admonitions,  impossible  to  those  who  are  sinking  beneath  inward  woe. 
Our  Lord  was  "very  heavy,"  very  sinking,  very  despondent,  over- 
whelmed with  grief. 

Mark  tells  us  next,  in  his  fourteenth  chapter  and  thirty-third  verse, 
that  our  Lord  was  "  sore  amazed."  The  Greek  word  does  not  merely 
import  that  he  was  astonished  and  surprised,  but  that  his  amazement 
went  to  an  extremity  of  horror,  such  as  men  fall  into  when  their  hair 
■tands  on  end  and  their  flesh  trembles.  As  the  delivery  of  the  law 
made  Moses  exceedingly  fear  and  quake,  and  as  David  said,  "  My  flesh 
trembleth  because  of  thy  judgments,"  so  our  Lord  was  stricken  with 
horror  at  the  sight  of  the  sin  which  was  laid  upon  him  and  the  ven- 
geance which  was  due  on  account  of  it.  The  Saviour  was  first  *'  sor- 
rowful," then  depressed,  and  "  heavy,"  and  lastly,  sore  amazed  and 
filled  with  amazement ;  for  even  he  as  a  man  could  scarce  have  known 
what  it  was  that  he  had  undertaken  to  bear.  He  had  looked  at  it 
calmly  and  quietly,  and  felt  that  whatever  it  was  he  would  bear  it  for 
our  sake ;  but  when  it  actually  came  to  the  bearing  of  sin  he  was  utterly 
astonished  and  taken  aback  at  the  dreadful  position  of  standing  in  the 
sinner's  place  before  God,  of  having  his  holy  Father  look  upon  him  as 
the  sinner's  representative,  and  of  being  forsaken  by  that  Father  with 
whom  he  had  lived  on  terms  of  amity  and  delight  from  old  eternity. 
It  staggered  his  holy,  tender,  loving  nature,  and  he  was  "  sore  amazed  " 
and  was  "  very  heavy." 

We  are  further  taught  that  there  surrounded,  encompassed,  and 
overwhelmed  him  an  ocean  of  sorrow,  for  the  thirty-eighth  verse  of  the 
twenty-sixth  of  Matthew  contains  the  word  ^m/wjoos,  which  signifies  an 
encompassing  around  with  sorrows.  In  all  ordinary  miseries  there  is 
generally  some  loophole  of  escape,  some  breathing  place  for  hope.  We 
can  generally  remind  our  friends  in  trouble  that  their  case  might  be 
worse,  but  in  our  Lord's  griefs  worse  could  not  be  imagined ;  for  he 
could  say  with  David,  "The  pains  of  hell  gat  hold  upon  me."  All 
God's  waves  and  billows  went  over  him.  Above  him,  beneath  him, 
around  him,  without  him,  and  within,  all,  all  was  anguish,  neither  was 
there  one  alleviation  or  source  of  consolation.  His  disciples  could  not 
help  him, — they  were  all  but  one  sleeping,  and  he  who  was  awake  was 
on  the  road  to  betray  him.  His  spirit  cried  out  in  the  presence  of  the 
Almighty  God  beneath  the  crushing  burden  and  unbearable  load  of 
his  miseries.  No  griefs  could  have  gone  further  than  Christ's,  and  he 
himself  said,  "My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,"  or  surrounded  with 
sorrow  "  even  unto  death."  He  did  not  die  in  the  garden,  but  he  suf- 
fered as  much  as  if  he  had  died.  He  endured  death  intensively,  though 
not  extensively.  It  did  not  extend  to  the  making  his  body  a  corpse, 
but  it  went  as  far  in  pain  as  if  it  had  been  so.  His  pangs  and  anguish 
went  up  to  the  mortal  agony,  and  only  paused  on  the  verge  of  death. 

Luke,  to  crown  all,  tells  us  in  our  text,  that  our  liord  was  in  an 
agony.  The  expression  "  agony "  signifies  a  conflict,  a  contest,  a 
wrestling.  With  whom  was  the  agony  ?  With  whom  did  he  wrestle? 
1  believe  it  was  with  himself ;  the  contest  here  intended  was  not  with 
his  God ;  no,  "  not  as  I  will  but  as  thou  wilt "  does  not  look  like 


THE   AGONY   IN   GETHSBMANE. 


141 


irrestling  with  God ;  it  was  not  a  contest  with  Satan,  for,  as  we 
Aave  ah'eady  seen,  he  would  not  have  been  so  sore  amazed  had  that 
been  the  conflict,  but  it  was  a  terrible  combat  within  himself,  an  agony 
within  his  own  soul.  Remember  that  he  could  have  escaped  from  all 
this  grief  with  one  resolve  of  his  will,  and  naturally  the  manhood  in 
him  said,  "  Do  not  bear  it  !  "  and  the  purity  of  his  heart  said,  "  Oh 
do  not  bear  it,  do  not  stand  in  the  place  of  the  sinner ;"  and  the  deli- 
cate sensitiveness  of  his  mysterious  nature  shrank  altogether  from  any 
form  of  connection  with  sin ;  yet  infinite  lovf  said,  "  Bear  it,  stoop 
beneath  the  load";  and  so  there  was  agony  between  the  attributes  of 
his  nature,  a  battle  on  an  awful  scale  in  the  arena  of  his  soul.  The  purity 
which  cannot  bear  to  come  into  contact  with  sin  must  have  been  very 
mighty  in  Christ,  while  the  love  which  would  not  let  his  people  perish 
was  very  mighty  too.  It  was  a  struggle  on  a  Titanic  scale,  as  if  a 
Hercules  had  met  another  Hercules  ;  two  tremendous  forces  strove  and 
fought  and  agonised  within  the  bleeding  heart  of  Jesus.  Nothing 
causes  a  man  more  torture  than  to  be  dragged  hither  and  thither  with 
contending  emotions ;  as  civil  war  is  the  worst  and  most  cruel  kind  of 
war,  so  a  war  within  a  man's  soul  when  two  great  passions  in  him 
struggle  for  the  mastery,  and  both  noble  passions  too,  causes  a  trouble 
and  distress  which  none  but  he  that  feels  it  can  understand.  I  marvel 
not  that  our  Lord's  sweat  was  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood,  when 
such  an  inward  pressure  made  him  like  a  cluster  trodden  in  the  wine- 
press. I  hope  I  have  not  presumptuously  looked  into  the  ark,  or  gazed 
within  the  veiled  holy  of  holies ;  God  forbid  that  curiosity  or  pride 
should  urge  me  to  intrude  where  the  Lord  has  set  a  barrier.  I  have 
brought  you  as  far  as  I  can,  and  must  again  drop  the  curtain  with  the 
words  I  used  just  now, 

**  'Tis  to  God,  and  God  alone, 
That  his  griefs  are  fully  known." 

Our  third  question  shall  be,  What  was  our  Lord's  solace  in  all 
THIS  ?  He  sought  help  in  human  companionship,  and  very  natural  it 
was  that  he  should  do  so.  God  has  created  in  our  human  nature  a 
craving  for  sympathy.  We  do  not  amiss  when  we  expect  our  brethren 
to  watch  with  us  in  our  hour  of  trial ;  but  our  Lord  did  not  find  that 
men  were  able  to  assist  him ;  however  willing  their  spirit  might  be, 
their  flesh  was  weak.  What,  then,  did  he  do  ?  He  resorted  to  prayer, 
and  especially  to  prayer  to  God  under  the  character  of  Father.  I  have 
learned  by  experience  that  we  never  know  the  sweetness  of  the  Father- 
hood of  God  so  much  as  when  we  are  in  very  bitter  anguish ;  I  can 
understand  why  the  Saviour  said  "  Abba,  Father,"  it  was  anguish  that 
brought  him  down  as  a  chastened  child  to  appeal  plaintively  to  a  Father's 
love.  In  the  bitterness  of  my  soul  I  have  cried,  "  If,  indeed,  thou  be 
my  Father,  by  the  bowels  of  thy  fatherhood  have  pity  on  thy  child  ; " 
and  here  Jesus  pleads  with  his  Father  as  we  have  done,  and  finds  com- 
fort in  that  pleading.  Prayer  was  the  channel  of  the  Redeemer's  comfort, 
earnest,  intense,  reverent,  repeated  prayer,  and  after  each  time  of 
prayer  he  seems  to  have  grown  quiet,  and  to  have  gone  to  his  disciples 
with  a  measure  of  restored  peace  of  mind.  The  sight  of  their  sleep- 
ing helped  to  bring  back  his  griefs,  and  therefore  he  returned  to  pray 


142  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT 

again,  and  each  time  he  was  comforted,  so  that  when  he  had  prayed  for 
the  third  time  he  was  prepared  to  meet  Judas  and  the  soldiers  and  to 
go  with  silent  patience  to  judgment  and  to  death.  His  great  comfort 
was  prayer  and  submission  to  the  divine  will,  for  when  he  had  laid 
his  own  will  down  at  his  Father's  feet  the  feebleness  of  his  flesh  spoke 
no  more  complainingly,  but  in  sweet  silence,  like  a  sheep  dumb  before 
her  shearers,  he  contained  his  soul  in  patience  and  rest.  Dear  brothers 
and  sisters,  if  any  of  you  shall  have  your  Gethsemane  and  your  heavj 
griefs,  imitate  your  Master  by  resorting  to  prayer,  by  crying  to  your 
Father,  and  by  learning  submission  to  his  will. 

I  shall  conclude  by  drawing  two  or  three  inferences  from  the  whole 
•ubject.    May  the  Holy  Spirit  instruct  us. 

The  first  is  this — Learn,  dear  brethren,  the  real  humanity  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  Do  not  think  of  him  as  God  merely,  though  he  is 
assuredly  divine,  but  feel  him  to  be  near  of  kin  to  you,  bone  of  your 
bone,  flesh  of  your  flesh.  How  thoroughly  can  he  sympathize  with 
you  !  He  has  been  burdened  with  all  your  burdens  and  grieved  with 
all  your  griefs.  Are  the  waters  very  deep  through  which  you  are 
passing?  Yet  they  are  not  deep  compared  with  the  torrents  with 
which  he  was  buffeted.  Never  a  pang  penetrates  your  spirit  to  which 
your  covenant  Head  was  a  stranger.  Jesus  can  sympathize  with  you 
in  all  your  sorrows,  for  he  has  suffered  far  more  than  you  have  ever 
suffered,  and  is  able  therefore  to  succour  you  in  your  temptations.  Lay 
hold  on  Jesus  as  your  familiar  friend,  your  brother  born  for  adversity, 
and  you  will  have  obtained  a  consolation  which  will  bear  you  through 
the  uttermost  deeps. 

Next  see  here  the  intolerable  evil  of  sin.  You  are  a  sinner,  which 
Jesus  never  was,  yet  even  to  stand  in  the  sinner's  place  was  so  dreadful 
to  him  that  he  was  sorrowful  even  unto  death.  What  will  sin  one  day 
be  to  you  if  you  should  be  found  guilty  at  the  last !  Oh,  could  we  tell 
the  horror  of  sin  there  is  not  one  among  us  that  would  be  satisfied  to 
remain  in  sin  for  a  single  moment ;  I  believe  there  would  go  up  from 
this  house  of  prayer  this  morning  a  weeping  and  a  wailing  such  as 
might  be  heard  in  the  very  streets,  if  men  and  women  here  who  are 
living  in  sin  could  really  know  what  sin  is,  and  what  the  wrath  of  God 
is  that  rests  upon  them,  and  what  the  judgments  of  God  will  be  that 
will  shortly  surround  them  and  destroy  them.  Oh  soul,  sin  must  be 
an  awful  thing  if  it  so  crushed  our  Lord.  If  the  very  imputation  of  it 
fetched  bloody  sweat  from  the  piire  and  holy  Saviour,  what  must  sin 
itself  be  ?  Avoid  it,  pass  not  by  it,  turn  away  from  the  very  appear- 
ance of  it,  walk  humbly  and  carefully  with  your  God  that  sin  may  not 
harm  you,  for  it  is  an  exceeding  plague,  an  infinite  pest. 

Learn  next,  but  oh  how  few  minutes  have  I  in  which  to  speak  of 
4uch  a  lesson,  the  matchless  love  of  Jesus,  that  for  your  sakes  and  mine 
he  would  not  merely  suffer  in  body,  but  consented  even  to  bear  the 
horror  of  being  accounted  a  sinner,  and  coming  under  the  wrath  of 
God  because  of  our  sins  .  though  it  cost  him  suffering  unto  death  and 
sore  amazement,  yet  sooner  than  that  we  shall  perish,  the  Lord  smarted 
as  our  surety.  Can  we  not  cheerfully  endure  persecution  for  his  sake  ? 
Can  we  not  labour  earnestly  for  him  ?  Are  we  so  ungenerous  that 
his  cause  shall  know  a  lack  while  we  have  the  means  of  helping  it  ? 


THE   jtGONY   IN  GBTHSBMANE.  143 

Are  we  so  base  that  his  work  shall  flag  while  we  have  strength  to  carry 
it  on  ?  I  charge  you  by  Gethsemane,  my  brethren,  if  you  have  a  part 
and  lot  in  the  passion  of  your  Saviour,  love  him  much  who  loved  you 
io  immeasurably,  and  spend  and  be  spent  for  him. 

Again  looking  at  Jesus  in  the  garden,  we  learn  the  excellence  and 
completeness  of  the  atonement.  How  black  I  am,  how  filthy,  how  loath- 
some in  the  sight  of  God, — I  feel  myself  only  fit  to  be  cast  into  the 
lowest  hell,  and  I  wonder  that  God  has  not  long  ago  cast  me  there  ;  but 
1  go  into  Gethsemane,  and  I  peer  under  those  gnarled  olive  trees,  and  I 
see  my  Saviour.  Yes,  I  see  him  wallowing  on  the  ground  in  anguish,  and 
hear  such  groans  come  from  him  as  never  came  from  human  breast  before. 
I  look  upon  the  earth  and  see  it  red  with  his  blood,  while  his  face  is 
smeared  with  gory  sweat,  and  I  say  to  myself,  "  My  God,  my  Saviour, 
what  aileth  thee?"  I  hear  him  reply,  "I  am  suffering  for  thy  sin," 
and  then  I  take  comfort,  for  while  I  fain  would  have  spared  my  Lord 
such  an  anguish,  now  that  the  anguish  is  over  I  can  understand  how 
Jehovah  can  spare  me,  because  he  smote  his  Son  in  my  stead.  Now  I 
have  hope  of  justification,  for  I  bring  before  the  justice  of  God  and 
my  own  conscience  the  remembrance  of  my  bleeding  Saviour,  and  I 
say.  Canst  thou  twice  demand  payment,  first  at  the  hand  of  thy  agonis- 
ing Son  and  then  again  at  mine  ?  Sinner  as  I  am,  I  stand  before  the 
burning  throne  of  the  severity  of  God,  and  am  not  afi'aid  of  it. 
Canst  thou  scorch  me,  0  consuming  fire,  when  thou  hast  not  only 
scorched  but  utterly  consumed  my  substitute?  Nay,  by  faith,  my  soul 
sees  justice  satisfied,  the  law  honoured,  the  moral  government  of  God 
established,  and  yet  ray  once  guilty  soul  absolved  and  set  free.  The 
fire  of  avenging  justice  has  spent  itself,  and  the  law  has  exhausted  its 
most  rigorous  demands  upon  the  person  of  him  who  was  made  a  curse 
for  us,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him.  Oh 
the  sweetness  of  the  comfort  which  flows  from  the  atoning  blood !  Ob- 
tain that  comfort,  my  brethren,  and  never  leave  it.  Cling  to  your 
Lord's  bleeding  heart,  and  drink  in  abundant  consolation. 

Last  of  all,  what  must  he  the  terror  of  the  punishment  which  will  fall 
upon  those  men  who  reject  the  atoning  Mood,  and  who  will  have  to  stand 
before  God  in  their  own  proper  persons  to  suffer  for  their  sins.  I  will  tell 
you,  sirs,  with  pain  in  my  heart  as  I  tell  you  it,  what  will  happen  to  those 
of  you  who  reject  my  Lord.  Jesus  Christ  my  Lord  andMaster  is  a  sign 
and  prophecy  to  you  of  what  will  happen  to  you.  Not  in  a  garden,  but 
on  that  bed  of  yours  where  you  have  so  often  been  refreshed,  you  will 
be  surprised  and  overtaken,  and  the  pains  of  death  will  get  hold  upon 
you.  With  an  exceeding  sorrow  and  remorse  for  your  misspent  life  and 
for  a  rejected  Saviour  you  will  be  made  very  heavy.  Then  will  your 
darling  sin,  your  favourite  lust,  like  another  Judas,  betray  you  with  a 
kiss.  While  yet  your  soul  lingers  on  your  lip  you  will  be  seized  and 
taken  off  by  a  body  of  evil  ones,  and  carried  away  to  the  bar  of  God, 
just  as  Jesus  was  taken  to  the  judgment  seat  of  Caiaphas.  There  shalJ 
be  a  speedy,  personal,  and  somewhat  private  judgment,  by  which  you 
•hall  be  committed  to  prison  where,  in  darkness  and  weeping,  and  wail- 
ing, you  shall  spend  the  night  before  the  great  assize  of  the  judgment 
morning.  Then  shall  the  day  break  and  the  resurrection  morning 
come,  and  as  our  Lord  then  appeared  before  Pilate,  so  will  you  appear 


144  METROPOLITAN   TABERITAOLB   PULPIT. 

before  the  highest  tribunal,  not  that  of  Pilate,  but  the  dread  judgment 
Beat  of  the  Son  of  ^od,  whom  you  hare  despised  and  rejected.  Then 
will  witnesses  come  against  you,  not  false  witnesses,  but  true,  and 
fou  will  stand  speechless,  even  as  Jesus  said  not  a  word  before  his 
accusers.  Then  will  conscience  and  despair  buffet  you,  until  you  will 
become  such  a  monument  of  misery,  such  a  spectacle  of  contempt,  as  to 
be  fitly  noted  by  another  Ecce  .Homo,  and  men  shall  look  at  you  and 
say,  *'  Behold  the  man  and  the  suffering  which  has  come  upon  him, 
because  he  despised  his  God  and  found  pleasure  in  sin."  Then  shall 
you  be  condemned.  **  Depart,  ye  cursed,"  shall  be  your  sentence,  even 
as  "  Let  him  be  crucified  "  was  the  doom  of  Jesus.  You  shall  be  taken 
away  by  the  officers  of  justice  to  your  doom.  Then  like  the  sinner's 
substitute  you  will  cry,  "  I  thirst,"  but  not  a  drop  of  water  shall  be 
given  you  ;  you  shall  taste  nothing  but  the  gall  of  bitterness.  You 
shall  be  executed  publicly  with  your  crimes  written  over  your  head 
chat  all  may  read  and  understand  that  you  are  justly  condemned; 
and  then  will  you  be  mocked  as  Jesus  was,  especially  if  you  have 
been  a  professor  of  religion  and  a  false  one ;  all  that  pass  by  will 
s»y,  "  He  saved  others,  he  preached  to  others,  but  himself  he  can- 
not save."  God  himself  will  mock  you.  Nay,  think  not  I  dream,  has 
he  not  said  it :  "I  also  will  laugh  at  your  calamity,  I  will  mock  when 
your  fear  cometh  "  ?  Cry  unto  your  gods,  that  you  once  trusted  in ! 
Get  comfort  out  of  the  lusts  ye  once  delighted  in,  0  ye  that  are  cast 
away  for  ever !  To  your  shame,  and  to  the  confusion  of  your  naked- 
ness, shall  you  that  have  despised  the  Saviour  be  made  a  spectacle  of 
the  justice  of  God  for  ever.  It  is  right  it  should  be  so,  justice 
rightly  demands  it.  Sin  made  the  Saviour  suffer  an  agony,  shall 
it  not  make  you  suffer?  Moreover,  in  addition  to  your  sin,  you 
have  rejected  the  Saviour ;  you  have  said,  "  He  shall  not  be  my  trust 
and  confidence."  Voluntarily,  presumptuously,  and  against  your  own 
conscience  you  have  refused  eternal  life ;  and  if  you  die  rejecting  mercy 
what  can  come  of  it  but  that  first  your  sin,  and  secondly  your  un- 
belief, shall  condemn  you  to  misery  without  limit  or  end.  Let 
Gethsemane  warn  you,  let  its  groans,  and  tears,  and  bloody  sweat 
Admonish  you.  Repent  of  sin,  and  believe  in  Jesus.  May  his  Spirit 
♦nable  you,  for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


«I  WILL;"    YET,    "NOT  AS   I   WILL." 


Intended  for  Reading  on  Lord's-day,  September  2nd,  1894, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lord^s-day  Evening,  July  \st,  1888. 


"Father,  I  will."— John  xvii.  24. 
"  Not  as  I  will."— Matthew  xxvi.  39. 

We  have  here  two  prayers  uttered  hj  the  same  Person  ;  yet  there  is 
the  greatest  possible  contrast  between  them.  How  di:fferent  men  are 
at  different  times !  Yet  Jesus  was  always  essentially  the  same  :  "  the 
same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever."  Still,  his  mood  and  state 
of  mind  varied  from  time  to  time.  He  seemed  calmly  happy  when  he 
prayed  with  his  disciples,  and  said,  "Father,  I  will  that  they  also, 
whom  thou  hast  given  me,  be  with  me  where  I  am ;  that  they  may 
behold  my  glory,  which  thou  hast  given  me ;  "  but  he  was  in  an 
agony  when,  in  Gethsemane,  having  withdrawn  from  his  disciples,  and 
fallen  on  his  face,  he  prayed,  saying,  "  0  my  Father,  if  it  be 
possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me  :  nevertheless  not  as  I  will,  but  as 
thou  wilt."  It  is  the  same  Man,  and  an  unchangeable  Man,  too,  as 
to  his  essence,  who  uttered  both  prayers ;  yet  see  how  different  were 
his  frames  of  mind,  and  how  different  the  prayers  he  offered.  Brother, 
you  may  be  the  same  man,  and  quite  as  good  a  man,  when  you  are 
groaning  before  God  as  when  you  are  singing  before  him.  There 
may  be  more  grace  even  in  the  submissive  ' '  Not  as  I  wiU  "  than  in 
the  triumphant  "  Father,  I  will."  Do  not  judge  yourselves  to  have 
changed  in  your  standing  before  God  because  you  have  undergone  an 
alteration  as  to  your  feelings.  If  your  Master  prayed  so  differently 
at  different  times,  you,  who  have  not  the  fulness  of  grace  that  he  had, 
must  not  wonder  if  you  have  a  great  variety  of  inward  experiences. 

Notice,  also,  that  it  was  not  only  the  same  Person,  but  that  he  used 
these  two  expressions  almost  at  the  same  time.  I  do  not  know  how 
many  minutes — I  had  better  say  minutes  rather  than  hours — inter- 
vened between  the  last  supper,  and  the  wonderful  high-priestly  prayer, 
and  the  agonizing  cries  of  Gethsemane.  I  suppose  that  it  was  only  a 
No.  2,376.  10 


146  METBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

short  walk  from  Jerusalem  to  the  olive  garden,  and  that  it  would  not 
occupy  long  to  traverse  the  distance.  At  one  end  of  the  walk,  Jesus 
prays,  "  Father,  I  will ;  "  and  at  the  other  end  of  it,  he  says,  "  Not  as 
I  will."  In  like  manner,  we  may  undergo  great  changes,  and  have  to 
alter  the  tone  of  our  prayers,  in  a  few  minutes.  You  prayed  just  now 
with  holy  confidence ;  you  took  firm  hold  of  the  covenant  angel,  and 
with  wrestling  Jacob  you  said,  "  I  will  not  let  thee  go,  except  thou 
bless  me  ;  "  and  yet  it  may  be  equally  becoming  on  your  part,  within 
an  hour,  to  lie  in  the  very  dust,  and  in  an  agony  to  cry  unto  the  Lord, 
**  Pardon  my  prayers,  forgive  me  that  I  was  too  bold,  and  hear  me 
now  as  I  cry  to  thee,  and  say,  *  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt.'  " 

'*  If  but  my  fainting  heart  be  blest 
With  thy  sweet  Spirit  for  its  guest. 
My  God,  to  thee  I  leave  the  rest ; 
' Thy  will  be  done  ! '" 

Never  be  ashamed  because  you  have  to  mend  your  prayers;  be  careful 
not  to  make  a  mistake  if  you  can  help  it ;  but,  if  you  make  one,  do 
not  be  ashamed  to  confess  it,  and  to  correct  it  as  far  as  you  can. 
One  of  our  frequent  mistakes  is  that  we  wonder  that  we  make  mistakes. 
Whenever  a  man  says,  "  I  should  never  have  thought  that  I  could 
have  done  such  a  foolish  thing  as  that,"  it  shows  that  he  did  not  reaUy 
know  himself,  for  had  he  known  himself,  he  would  rather  have 
wondered  that  he  did  not  do  worse,  and  he  would  have  marvelled  that 
he  acted  as  wisely  as  he  did.  Only  the  grace  of  God  can  teach  us  how 
to  run  our  prayers  down  the  scale  from  the  high  note  of  '*  Father, 
hear  me,  for  thou  hast  said,  'Ask  what  thou  wilt,'  "  right  down  to  the 
deep,  deep  bass  of  "Father,  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt." 

I  must  further  remark  that  these  two  prayers  were  equally 
characteristic  of  Christ.  I  think  that  I  should  know  my  Lord  by  his 
voice  in  either  of  them.  Who  but  the  eternal  Son  of  God  may  dare  to 
say,  "Father,  I  will "  ?  There  speaks  Incarnate  Deity;  that  is  the 
sublime  utterance  of  the  well-beloved  Son.  And  yet  who  could  say  as 
he  said  it,  *'  If  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me  :  nevertheless 
not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt "  ?  Perhaps  you  have  uttered  those 
words,  dear  friend ;  but  in  your  case  they  were  not  concerning  such 
a  cup  of  woe  as  Christ  emptied.  There  were  but  a  few  drops  of  gall 
in  your  cup.  His  was  all  bitterness,  from  the  froth  to  the  dregs ;  all 
bitterness,  and  such  bitterness  as,  thank  God,  you  and  I  can  never 
taste !  That  cup  he  has  drained  to  the  dregs,  and  we  shall  not  have 
to  drink  one  drop  from  it ;  but  it  was  of  that  cup  that  he  said, — and 
I  detect  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  the  Son  of  man,  in  that  brief 
utterance, — "  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt." 

My  two  texts  make  up  a  strange  piece  of  music.  Blessed  are  the 
lips  that  know  how  to  express  the  confidence  that  rises  to  the  height 
as  far  as  we  can  go  with  Christ,  and  descends  even  to  the  deeps  as  far 
as  we  can  go  with  him  in  full  submission  to  the  will  of  God.  Does 
anybody  say  that  he  cannot  understand  the  contrast  between  these  two 
prayers?  Dear  friend,  it  is  to  be  explained  thus.  There  was  a 
difference  of  position  in  the  Suppliant  on  these  two  occasions.  The 
first  prayer,  "  Father,  I  will,"  is  the  prayer  of  our  great  High  Priust, 


"I    will;"    yet,    "not   as    I    WILL."  147 

with  all  his  heavenly  garments  on,  the  blue,  and  purple,  and  fine 
twined  linen,  and  the  pomegranates,  and  the  golden  bells,  and  the 
breastplate,  with  the  twelve  precious  stones  bearing  the  names  of  his 
chosen  people.  It  is  our  great  High  Priest,  in  the  glory  of  his 
mi^jestic  office  and  power,  who  says  to  God,  "Father,  I  will."  The 
second  Suppliant  is  not  so  much  the  Priest  as  the  Victim.  Our  Lord 
is  there  seen  bound  to  the  altar,  about  to  feel  the  sacrificial  knife, 
about  to  be  consumed  with  the  sacrificial  fire ;  and  you  hear  him  as 
though  it  were  a  lamb  bleating,  and  the  utterance  is,  "  Not  as  I  will, 
but  as  thou  wilt."  The  first  petition  is  the  language  of  Christ  in 
power  pleading  for  us  ;  the  second  is  the  utterance  of  Christ  made  sin 
for  us,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him.  That 
is  the  difference  of  position  that  explains  the  contrast  in  the  prayers. 

Let  me  tell  you  also  that  there  is  a  difference  in  the  subject  of  his 
supplication,  which  is  full  of  instruction.  In  the  first  prayer,  where 
our  Lord  says  so  majestically,  '*  Father,  I  will,"  he  is  pleading  for  his 
people,  he  is  praying  for  what  he  knows  to  be  the  Father's  will,  he  is 
officiating  there  before  God  as  the  very  mouthpiece  of  God,  and  speak- 
ing of  something  about  which  he  is  perfectly  clear  and  certain.  When 
you  are  praying  for  God's  people,  you  may  pray  very  boldly.  When 
you  are  pleading  for  God's  cause,  you  may  speak  very  positively. 
When  you  know  you  are  asking  what  is  definitely  promised  in  the 
Scriptures  as  part  of  the  covenant  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure,  you 
may  ask  without  hesitation,  as  our  Lord  did.  But,  in  the  second  case, 
Jesus  was  praying  for  himself  :  "  If  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass 
from  me."  He  was  praying  about  a  matter,  concerning  which  he  did 
not,  as  man,  know  the  Father's  will,  for  he  says,  "If  it  be  possible." 
There  is  an  "  if  "  in  it :  "  If  it  be  possible,  let  this  cuf)  pass  from  me." 
Whenever  you  go  upstairs  in  an  agony  of  distress,  and  begin  to  pray 
about  yourself,  and  about  a  possible  escape  from  suffering,  always  say, 
under  such  circumstances,  "  Nevertheless  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou 
wilt."  It  may  be  given  you  sometimes  to  pray  very  boldly  even  in 
such  a  case  as  that ;  but,  if  it  is  not  given  you,  take  care  that  you 
do  not  presume.  I  may  pray  for  healing  for  my  body,  but  not  with 
such  confidence  as  I  pray  for  the  prosperity  of  Zion  and  the  glory  of 
God.  That  which  has  to  do  with  myself- 1  may  ask  as  a  child  of 
God  asks  of  his  Father ;  but  I  must  ask  submissively,  leaving  the 
decision  wholly  in  his  hands,  feeling  that,  because  it  is  for  myself 
rather  than  for  him,  I  must  say,  "Nevertheless  not  as  I  will,  but  as 
thou  wilt."  I  think  that  there  is  a  plain  lesson  here  for  Christians  to 
take  heed  that,  while  they  are  very  confident  on  one  subject  for 
which  they  pray,  they  are  equally  submissive  on  another,  for  there  is 
a  heavenly  blending  in  the  Christian  character,  as  there  was  in 
Christ's  character,  a  firm  confidence  and  yet  an  absolute  yielding  to 
the  will  of  God,  let  that  will  be  what  it  may. 

**  Lord,  my  times  are  in  thy  hand ; 
All  my  sanguine  hopes  have  plann'd 
To  thy  wisdom  I  resign, 
And  would  make  thy  purpose  mine." 

Now  all  this  while  you  may  say  that  I  have  only  been  going  round 


148  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  text.  Very  well ;  but,  sometimeB,  there  is  a  good  deal  of  instruc- 
tion to  be  picked  up  round  a  text.  The  manna  fell  round  about  the 
camp  of  Israel ;  peradventure  there  is  some  manna  round  about  this 
text.     May  the  Lord  help  every  one  of  us  to  gather  his  portion  ! 

I  want  you  now,  for  a  few  minutes,  to  view  this  great  Suppliant  in 
the  two  moods  in  which  he  prayed,  **  Father,  I  will ;  "and,  "Not  as  I 
will,'*  and  then  to  combine  the  two.  We  will,  first,  view  Jesus  in  the 
power  of  his  intercession  ;  next,  we  will  talk  of  Jesus  in  the  power  of  his 
submission;  and  in  the  third  place,  we  will  try  to  combine  the  two 
prayers,  *'  I  will ;  "  yet,  "•  Not  as  I  will." 

I.  First,  let  us  view  Jesus  in  the  power  of  his  intercession, 
saying,  **  Father,  I  will." 

Whence  did  he  derive  that  power  ?  Who  enabled  him  thus  to  speak 
with  God,  and  say,  *  *  Father,  I  will "  ?  First,  Jesus  prayed  in  the  power  oj 
his  Sonship.  Sons  may  say  to  a  father  what  strangers  may  not  dare  to 
say ;  and  such  a  Son  as  Jesus  was,— so  near  to  his  Father's  heart,  one 
who  could  say,  *'  The  Father  hath  not  left  me  alone ;  for  I  do  always 
those  things  that  please  him ; "  one  of  whom  the  Father  had  said, 
*•  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased," — well  might 
he  have  power  with  God  so  as  to  be  able  to  say,  "  Father,  I  will." 

Next,  he  derived  this  power  from  the  Father*s  eternal  love  to  him. 
Did  you  notice  how,  in  the  very  verse  from  which  our  text  is  taken, 
Jesus  says  to  his  Father,  *'  Thou  lovedst  me  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world  "  ?  We  cannot  conceive  what  the  love  of  the  Father  is  to 
Christ  Jesus  his  Son.  Eemember,  they  are  one  in  essence.  God  is 
one,— Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit ;  and,  as  the  Incarnate  God,  Christ 
is  unspeakably  dear  to  the  Father's  heart.  There  is  nothing  about 
him  of  which  the  Father  disapproves ;  there  is  nothing  lacking  in 
him,  which  the  Father  would  desire  to  see  there.  He  is  God's  ideal  of 
himself:  "  In  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily." 
Well  may  one  who  is  the  subject  of  his  Father's  eternal  love  be  able 
to  say,  "  Father,  I  will." 

But  our  Lord  Jesus  also  based  this  prayer  upon  his  finished  work.  I 
grant  you  that  he  had  not  yet  actually  died,  but  in  the  certain  prospect 
of  his  doing  so,  he  had  said  to  his  Father,  "  I  have  glorified  thee  on 
the  earth :  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thou  gavest  me  to  do." 
Now,  he  has  actually  finished  it ;  he  has  been  able  in  the  fullest  sense 
to  say,  "  It  is  finished,"  and  he  has  gone  up  to  take  his  place  in  glory 
at  his  Father's  side.  You  remember  the  argument  with  which  Paul 
begins  his  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  :  "  God,  who  at  sundry  times  and 
in  divers  manners  spake  in  time  past  unto  the  fathers  by  the  prophets, 
hath  in  these  last  days  spoken  unto  us  by  his  Son,  whom  he  hath 
appointed  heir  of  all  things,  by  whom  also  he  made  the  worlds ;  who 
being  the  brightness  of  his  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  his 
person,  and  upholding  all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power,  when  he 
had  by  himself  purged  our  sins,  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the 
Majesty  on  high;  being  made  so  much  better  than  the  angels,  as  he 
hath  by  inheritance  obtained  a  more  excellent  name  than  they.  For 
unto  which  of  the  angels  said  he  at  any  time.  Thou  art  my  Son,  this 
day  have  I  begotten  thee  ?  And  again,  I  will  be  to  him  a  Father,  and 
he  shall  be  to  me  a  Son  ?  "     When  the  Father  looks  at  Christ,  be  sees 


"I   will;"    yet,    "not   as   I   WILL."  149 

in  him  atonement  accomplished,  satisfaction  presented,  sin  annihilated, 
the  elect  redeemed,  the  covenant  ratified,  the  everlasting  purpose 
settled  on  eternal  foundations.  0  beloved,  since  Christ  has  magnified 
God's  law,  and  made  it  honourable,  and  since  he  has  poured  out  his 
soul  unto  death,  he  may  well  possess  the  power  to  say,  **  Father, 
I  will." 

Eemember,  too,  that  Jems  still  possesses  this  power,  and  possesses  it 
for  you  and  for  me.  0  my  dear  hearers,  you  may  well  go  to  Christ,  and 
accept  him  as  your  Mediator  and  Intercessor,  since  all  this  power  to 
say,  "  Father,  I  will,"  is  laid  up  in  him  on  purpose  for  poor  believing 
sinners,  who  come  and  take  him  to  be  their  Saviour!  You  say  that 
you  cannot  pray.  Well,  he  can ;  ask  him  to  plead  for  you ;  and  I 
thank  Grod  that,  sometimes,  when  we  do  not  ask  him  to  plead  for  us, 
he  does  it  all  the  same,  as  he  did  for  Peter,  when  Satan  had  desired  to 
have  him,  but  Christ  had  prayed  for  him.  Peter  did  not  know  his 
danger,  but  the  Saviour  did,  and  he  pleaded  for  him  at  once.  What 
a  blessing  it  is  to  think  of  Christ,  clothed  with  divine  authority  and 
power,  using  it  all  for  us!     Well  does  Toplady  sin^ — 

*'  With  cries  and  tears  he  offer'd  up 
His  humble  suit  below  ; 
Eat  with  authority  he  asks, 
Enthroned  in  glory  now. 

"  For  all  that  come  to  God  by  him. 
Salvation  he  demands ; 
Points  to  their  names  upon  his  breast, 
And  spreads  his  wounded  hands. 

**  His  covenant  and  sacrifice 
Give  sanction  to  his  claim  ; 
'  Father,  I  will  that  all  my  saints 
Be  with  me  where  I  am.'  " 

Further,  that  power  of  Christ  will  land  every  believer  in  heaven.  Notice 
how  Christ  turns  all  his  pleading  with  God  that  way ;  he  says,  *' Father, 
I  will,  that  they  also,  whom  thou  hast  given  me,  be  with  me  where  I 
am ;  that  they  may  behold  my  glory."  The  devil  says  that  we  shall 
never  get  to  heaven;  but  we  remember  that  declaration  of  Moses, 
^*  thine  enemies  shall  be  found  liars  unto  thee,"  and  the  arch-enemy  will 
be  found  to  be  the  arch-liar,  for  the  Lord's  Prayer  will  be  heard,  and  as 
he  pleads  that  those' whom  the  Father  gave  him  should  be  brought  up 
to  be  with  him  where  he  is,  you  may  depend  upon  it  that  they  will  aU 
arrive  safely  in  heaven ;  and  you,  if  you  are  among  those  who  are 
given  to  Christ, — and  you  may  know  that  by  your  faith  in  him, — 
shall  be  among  that  blessed  company. 

I  shall  have  finished  with  this  first  point  when  I  have  said  this, 
that  power  which  Christ  had  may^  in  a  measure,  he  gained  hy  all  his  people. 
I  dare  not  say,  and  I  would  not  say,  that  any  one  of  us  will  ever  be 
able  to  utter  our  Saviour's  words,  **  Father,  I  will; "  but  I  do  say  this, 
if  you  abide  in  Christ,  and  his  words  abide  in  you,  you  may 
attain  to  such  power  in  prayer,  that  you  shall  ask  what  you  will,  and 
it  shall  be  done  unto  you.     This  is  not  a  promise  to  all  of  you ;  no, 


150  METEOPOLITlir  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

not  even  to  all  of  you  who  are  God's  people ;  but  only  to  those  of  you 
who  live  wholly  unto  God,  and  serve  him  with  all  your  heart.  You 
can,  by  habitual  intercourse  with  God,  attain  to  such  power  with  the 
Most  High  that  men  shall  say  of  you  what  they  used  to  say  of  Luther, 
"  There  goes  a  man  who  can  ask  what  he  likes  of  God,  and  have  it." 
You  may  attain  to  that  glorious  altitude.  Oh,  I  would  that  every  one 
of  us  would  seek  to  reach  this  height  of  power  and  blessing !  It  is 
not  the  feeble  Christian,  it  is  not  the  worldly  Christian,  who  has  just 
enough  grace  to  make  him  miserable,  the  man  who  has  only  about 
enough  grace  to  keep  him  from  being  absolutely  immoral ;  that  is  not 
the  man  who  will  prevail  with  God.  You  paddlers  in  Christianity, 
who  scarcely  wet  your  toes  ;  you  who  never  go  in  beyond  your  ankles, 
or  your  knees ;  God  will  never  give  you  this  privilege  unless  you  go 
in  for  it.  Get  where  the  waters  are  deep  enough  to  swim  in,  and 
plunge  in.  Be  perfectly  consecrated  to  God ;  yield  your  whole  lives  to 
his  glory  without  reserve ;  then  may  you  obtain  something  of  your 
Master's  power  in  prayer  when  he  said,  "  Father,  I  will." 

n.  Now  I  ask  you  kindly  to  accompany  me,  in  the  second  place, 
to  notice  Jesus  in  the  power  of  his  submission.  Our  second  text  is 
all  submission  :  **  Not  as  I  will." 

This  utterance,  **  Not  as  I  will,"  proved  that  the  shrinking s  of  Christ's 
nature  from  that  dreadful  cup  were  all  overcome.  I  do  not  believe  that 
Christ  was  afraid  to  die ;  do  you  believe  that  ?  Oh,  no ;  many  of  his 
servants  have  laughed  at  death  ;  I  am  sure  that  he  was  not  afraid  to 
die ;  what  was  it,  then,  that  made  that  cup  so  awfully  terrible  ?  Jesus 
was  to  be  made  sin  for  us,  he  was  to  come  under  the  curse  for  us,  he 
was  to  feel  the  Father's  wrath  on  account  of  human  guilt ;  and  his 
whole  nature,  not  alone  his  flesh,  but  his  whole  being,  shrank  from 
that  fearful  ordeal.  It  was  not  actual  defilement  that  was  to  come 
upon  him ;  but  it  looked  like  it ;  and,  as  man,  he  could  not  tell  what 
that  cup  of  wrath  must  contain. 

"  Immanuel,  sunk  with  dreadful  woe, 
Unfelt,  unknown  to  all  below — 

Except  the  Son  of  God- 
In  agonizing  pangs  of  soul, 
Drinks  deep  of  wormwood's  bitterest  bowl, 

And  sweats  great  drops  of  blood." 

After  dwelling  in  the  love  of  God  from  all  eternity,  he  was  in  a 
few  hours  to  bear  the  punishment  of  man's  sin;  yet  he  must  bear 
it,  and  therefore  he  said,  *'Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt."  Do 
you  wonder  that  he  prayed,  "If  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass 
from  me  "  ?^  Is  Christ  to  be  blamed  for  these  shrinkings  of  nature  ? 
My  dear  friends,  if  it  had  been  a  pleasure  to  him,  and  he  had  had 
no  shrinkings,  where  would  have  been  his  holy  courage  ?  If  it  had 
not  been  a  horrible  and  dreadful  thing  to  him,  where  would  have  been 
his  submission,  where  would  have  been  the  virtue  that  made  atone- 
ment of  it  ?  If  it  had  been  a  thing  that  he  could  not,  or  must  not, 
shrink  from,  where  would  have  been  the  pain,  the  wormwood,  and  the 
gall  of  it?  The  cup  must  be,  in  the  nature  of  things,  something  from 
which  he  that  beareth  it  must  shrink,  or  else  it  could  not  have  been 


YET,    "NOT    AS    I   WILL."  151 

sufficient  for  tlie  redemption  of  his  people,  and  the  vindication  of  the 
broken  law  of  God.  It  was  necessary,  then,  that  Christ  should,  by 
such  a  prayer  as  this,  prove  that  he  had  overcome  all  the  shrinkings 
of  his  nature. 

"  Not  as  I  will,"  is  also  an  evidence  of  Chrisfs  complete  submission  to 
the  will  of  his  Father.  "  He  is  brought  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,  and 
as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  is  dumb,  so  he  openeth  not  his  mouth." 
There  is  no  resistance,  no  struggling,  he  gives  himself  up  completely. 
"  There,"  he  seems  to  say  to  the  Lord,  "  do  what  thou  wilt  with  me ; 
I  yield  myself  absolutely  to  thy  will."  There  was  on  Christ's  part  no 
reserve,  no  wish  even  to  make  any  reserve  ;  I  go  further,  and  say  that 
Jesus  willed  as  God  willed,  and  even  prayed  that  the  will  of  God,  from 
which  his  human  nature  at  first  shrank,  might  be  fulfilled.  "  Never- 
theless not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt." 

0  brothers  and  sisters, — for  you  both  need  this  grace, — pray  God  to 
help  you  to  learn  how  to  copj/  your  Lord  in  thin  submission  !  Have  you 
submitted  to  the  Lord's  will  ?  Are  you  submitting  now  ?  Are  not 
some  of  you  like  bullocks  unaccustomed  to  the  yoke  ?  There  is  a  text, 
you  know,  in  the  one  hundred  and  thirty-first  Psalm,  '*  My  soul  is  even 
as  a  weaned  child."  I  have  sometimes  thought  that,  for  some  of  the 
Lord's  children,  the  passage  would  have  to  be  read,  "  My  soul  is  even 
as  a  weaning  child,"  and  there  are  many  of  God's  people  who  are  very 
long  in  the  weaning.  You  cannot  get  satisfaction,  and  quiet,  and 
content,  can  you  ?  Can  you  give  yourself  up  entirely  to  God,  that  he 
may  do  whatever  he  likes  with  you  ?  Have  you  some  fear  of  "a  tumour, 
or  a  cancer?  Is  there  before  you  the  prospect  of  a  painful  and 
dangerous  operation  ?  Is  business  going  badly  with  you,  so  that  you 
will  probably  lose  everything  ?  Is  a  dear  child  sickening  ?  Is  the 
mother  likely  to  be  taken  away  ?  Will  you  have  to  lose  your  position 
and  reputation  if  you  are  faithful  to  the  Lord  ?  Will  you  be  exposed 
to  cruel  slanders  ?  Will  you  probably  be  cast  out  of  your  situation  if 
you  do  what  is  right  ?  Come  now,  whatever  you  dread  or  expect,  can 
you  give  yourself  up  wholly  to  God,  and  say,  "  It  is  the  Lord,  let  him 
do  what  seemeth  him  good  "  ?  Your  Lord  and  Master  did  so  ;  he  said, 
*'Not  as  I  will."  Oh,  that  he  might  teach  you  this  divine  art  of 
absolute  resignation  to  the  purpose  and  ordinance  of  God,  till  you  also 
should  be  able  to  say,  "  Not  as  I  wiU  "  !     Thus  you  will  sing, — 

**  I  bow  me  to  thy  will,  O  God, 
And  all  thy  ways  adore ; 
And  every  day  I  live  I'U  seek 
To  please  thee  more  and  more." 

m.  I  have  finished  my  discourse  when  I  have  just  twisted  these 
two  sayings  together  a  little ;  so,  thirdly,  let  us  combine  the  two 
PRAYERS  :   "  I  will ;  "  yet,  ''  Not  as  I  will." 

First,  let  me  say.  Number  One  will  help  you  very  much  to  Number  Two. 
If  you  learn  to  pray  with  Christ,  with  the  holy  boldness  that  almost 
says,  *'  Father,  I  will,"  you  are  the  man  who  will  know  how  to  say, 
"  Not  as  I  will."  Is  it  not  strange  that  it  should  be  so  ?  It  looks  like 
a  contradiction ;  but  I  am  sure  that  it  is  not  so.  The  man  who  can 
have  his  will  with  God  is  the  very  man  who  does  not  want  his  own  way 


152 


METROPOLITAI^   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


Tfith  God.  He  who  may  have  what  he  likes,  is  the  man  who  wishes 
to  have  what  God  likes.  You  remember  the  good  old  woman,  who  lay 
near  to  death,  and  one  said  to  her,  "  Do  you  not  expect  soon  to  die  ?  '* 
She  answered,  **I  do  not  know  whether  I  shall  live  or  die;  and  what 
is  more,  I  have  no  concern  which  way  it  is."  Then  the  friend  asked, 
**  But  if  you  had  your  choice  whether  you  should  live  or  die,  which 
would  you  choose  ?  "  She  replied,  *'I  would  rather  that  the  Lord's 
will  should  be  done."  ''  But  suppose  the  Lord's  will  were  to  leave  it 
entirely  to  you  to  choose  whichever  you  liked  ?"  "  Then,"  she  said, 
"I  would  kneel  down,  and  pray  the  Lord  to  choose  for  me."  And  I  do 
think  that  is  the  best  way  to  live ;  not  to  have  any  choice  at  all,  but  to 
ask  the  Lord  to  choose  for  you.  You  can  always  have  your  way, 
you  know,  when  your  way  is  God's  way.  The  sure  way  to  carry  out 
self-will  is  when  self-will  is  nothing  else  but  God's  will.  Oh,  that  the 
Lord  would  teach  us  this  mighty  power  with  him  in  prayer  !  It  will  not 
be  given  without  much  close  fellowship  with  him.  Then,  when  we 
know  that  we  can  have  what  we  will  of  him,  we  shall  be  in  the  right 
state  to  say,  **  Not  as  I  will." 

The  next  remark  that  I  would  make  is,  that  Number  Two  is  needful 
for  Number  One;  that  is  to  say,  until  you  can  say,  *'  Not  as  I  will," 
you  never  will  be  able  to  say,  *<  Father,  I  will."  I  believe  that  one 
reason  why  people  cannot  prevail  in  prayer,  is  because  they  will  not 
yield  to  God ;  and  they  cannot  expect  Gtod  to  yield  to  them.  God 
does  this  and  that  with  you,  and  you  quarrel  with  him  ;  and  then  you 
go  upstairs,  and  begin  to  pray.  Go  down  on  your  knees,  ajid  make 
your  peace  with  him  first ;  for  if  you  must  not  come  to  the  altar  till 
you  have  become  reconciled  unto  your  brother,  how  can  you  come  to 
the  throne  of  grace  till  you  have  given  up  your  quarrel  with  God  ? 
But  some  people  are  never  at  peace  with  God.  I  have  heard  of  a 
good  friend  who  lost  a  child,  and  he  was  wearing  mourning  several 
years  afterwards,  and  he  was  always  fretting  about  the  dear  child,  till 
a  Quakeress  said  to  him,  "  What !  hast  thou  not  forgiven  God  yet  ?  " 
and  there  are  some  people  who  have  not  yet  forgiven  God  for  taking 
their  loved  ones.  They  ought  always  to  have  blessed  him,  for  he 
never  takes  away  any  but  those  whom  he  lent  to  us,  and  we  should 
bless  his  name  as  much  for  taking  them  again  as  for  lending  them  to 
us.  Dear  friends,  you  must  submit  to  the  will  of  God,  or  else  you 
cannot  have  power  with  him  in  prayer.  "  Well,"  say  you,  "  you  will 
not  let  me  have  my  own  way  at  all."  Certainly,  I  will  not  let  you 
have  your  own  way  ;  but  when  you  just  say,  "  There,  Lord,  I  have  no 
quarrel  with  thee  now;  do  what  thou  wilt  with  me,"  then  he  will  say, 
"  Eise,  my  child,  ask  what  thou  wilt,  and  I  will  give  it  thee ;  open  thy 
mouth  wide,  and  I  wiU  fill  it." 

Notice,  also,  dear  friends,  that  Jesus  will  help  us  to  have  Number  One 
and  Number  Two.  He  gives  himself  over  to  us  to  teach  us  the  power 
of  prevailing  prayer ;  but  he  also  gives  himself  over  to  teach  us  the 
art  of  blessed  submission  in  prayer ;  and  it  is  his  will  that  these 
two  should  not  be  separated.  *'  Father,  I  will,"  is  Christ's  word  on 
our  behalf;  and  "Not  as  I  will,"  is  equally  Christ's  word  on  our 
behalf.  When  you  cannot  pray  either  of  these  prayers  as  you  would. 
faU  back  upon  Christ's  prayer,  and  claim  it  as  your  own. 


"I  will;"  "yet,   "not  as  i  will."  153 

Lastly,  I  think  that  true  sonship  will  emhody  both  Number  One  and 
Number  Two.  It  is  the  true  child  of  God,  who  knows  that  he  is  his 
Father's  child,  who  says,  "  Father,  I  will."  He  is  often  very  bold 
where  another  would  be  presumptuous.  Oh,  I  have  heard  full  often 
of  somebody's  prayers, — I  will  not  say  who  the  somebody  is, — he 
seemed  so  familiar  with  God  in  his  prayer.  Oh,  yes ;  I  know !  You 
love  those  very  stately  prayers,  in  which  the  bounds  are  set  about  the 
mount,  and  no  man  may  dare  to  come  near.  You  make  the  throne  of 
grace  to  be  like  Sinai  was  of  old,  of  which  the  Lord  said,  "  Whosoever 
toucheth  the  mount  shall  be  surely  put  to  death  :  there  shall  not  an 
hand  touch  it,  but  he  shall  surely  be  stoned,  or  shot  through ;  whether 
it  be  beast  or  man,  it  shall  not  live."  "  Oh,  but,"  you  say,  "  so-and-so 
is  so  familiar  at  the  mercy-seat!"  Yes,  I  know ;  and  you  think  that  is 
a  pity,  do  you  not?  Perhaps  you  are  acquainted  with  a  judge  ;  look 
at  him  on  the  bench  wearing  his  wig  and  robe  of  office  ;  but  you  will 
not  dare  to  speak  to  him  there  unless  you  address  him  as  "  My  lord," 
and  behave  very  respectfully  to  him.  By-aud-by  he  goes  home,  and 
he  has  a  little  boy  there.  Master  Johnny.  Why,  the  child  has  seized 
hold  of  his  father's  whiskers,  there  he  is  up  on  his  father's  back ! 
"  Why,  Johnny,  you  are  disrespectful !  "  "  Oh,  but  he  is  my  father !  " 
says  the  boy;  and  his  father  says,  "Yes,  Johnny,  that  I  am;  and  I 
do  not  want  you  to  say,  '  My  lord,'  and  talk  to  me  as  they  do  in  the 
court."  So,  there  are  certain  liberties  which  God's  children  may  take 
with  him,  which  he  counts  no  liberties  at  all ;  but  he  loves  so  to  be 
treated  by  them.  He  will  let  each  one  of  them  say,  "  Father,  I  wiU," 
because  they  are  his  children. 

Then,  mark  you,  you  are  not  God's  child  unless  you  can  also  say, 
**  Father,  not  as  I  will."  The  true  child  bends  before  his  father's  wiU. 
"Yes,"  says  he,  "I  would  like  so-and-so."  His  father  forbids  it. 
"  Then  I  do  not  want  it,  and  I  wiU  not  touch  it ;  "  or  he  says,  "  I  do 
not  like  to  take  that  medicine,  but  my  father  says  I  am  to  take  it,"  and 
he  takes  the  cup,  and  he  drinks  the  whole  of  its  contents.  The  true 
child  says,  "Not  as  I  will,"  although,  after  his  measure,  he  also  says, 
"Father,  I  will." 

I  have  only  been  talking  to  you  who  are  the  Lord's  people. 
I  hope  you  have  learned  something  from  this  subject;  I  know 
you  have  if  the  Lord  has  taught  you  to  pray  after  the  fashion  of  these 
two  prayers,  as  you  humbly  yet  believingly  may,  copying  your  Lord. 

But  oh,  what  shall  I  say  to  those  of  you  who  are  not  the  Lord's 
people  ?  If  you  do  not  know  how  to  pray  at  all,  may  the  Lord  teach 
you  !  If  you  do  not  yet  know  your  needs,  may  the  Lord  instruct  you ! 
But  let  me  tell  you  that,  if  ever  there  shall  come  a  time  when  you  feel 
your  need  of  a  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  will  be  willing  to  receive  you. 
If  ever  you  should  yearn  after  him,  be  you  sure  that  he  is  also  yearning 
after  you.     Even  now, — 

•*  Kindled  his  relentings  are," 

and  if  you  will  but  breathe  the  penitent's  prayer,  "  God  be  merciful 
^K  to  me,  a  sinner,"  and  turn  your  eye  Christ- ward,  and  cross- ward,  there 
^B  is  salvation  for  you  even  now.  God  grant  that  you  may  have  it,  for 
^K  Jesu's  sake !    .Ajnen. 

I 


154  JIETBOPOLITAN   TABBENAOLE   PULPIT. 

lExpositions  tig  (I*  ©♦  Spurgeon. 

JOHN  XVn.    16—26 ;  and  MATTHEW  XXVI.  36-46. 

We  will  read  this  evening  a  portion  of  two  prayers  offered  by  our  Divine 
Lord  and  Master  on  that  night  in  which  he  was  betrayed.  The  first  is  that 
memorable  intercessory  prayer  of  his  recorded  in  the  seventeenth  chapter 
of  the  Gospel  according  to  John. 

John  xvii.  Verse  15.  /  pray  not  that  thou  shouldest  take  them  out  of  the 
world,  but  that  thou  ahouldeat  keep  them  from  the  evil. 

Christ  did  not  pray  that  his  disciples  should  be  taken  out  of  the  world. 
It  is  very  seldom  that  we  ought  to  present  such  a  petition.  If  that  had  been 
a  proper  prayer  for  us  to  offer,  it  would  have  been  authorized  by  the  Master. 
There  are  times  when,  in  great  pain  of  body,  or  in  deep  depression  of  spirit, 
the  believer,  like  Elijah  under  the  juniper  tree,  requests  for  himself  that  he 
may  die.  If  you  ever  do  pray  such  a  prayer,  utter  it  very  softly,  for  the 
Master  does  not  authorize  it,  and  that  is  a  matter  that  must  be  left  to  the 
Lord  of  life  and  death.  Jesus  says  here,  *'  I  pray  not  that  thou  shouldest 
take  them  out  of  the  world,  but  that  thou  shouldest  keep  them  from  the 
evil."  Sin  is  the  real  evil  of  the  world  ;  the  danger  of  our  being  entangled 
in  worldly  customs,  or  dropping  into  the  evil  ways  of  an  ungodly  generation. 
Christ  does  pray  that  we  may  he  kept  from  the  evil  that  is  in  the  world ; 
and  we  also  may  and  must  pray  that  the  Lord  will  keep  us  from  the  evil  by 
which  we  are  surrounded,  and  especially  from  the  evil  one  who  seeks  our 
destruction. 

16.  2' hey  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world. 

••  They  are  of  another  race :  they  are  swayed  by  other  motives  ;  they  have 
another  life  ;  they  have  another  destiny ;  *  They  are  not  of  the  world.'  "  Is 
that  true  of  you,  dear  hearer  ?  We  are  reading  out  of  God's  Book,  remem- 
ber. This  is  the  description  of  Christ's  people  ;  does  it  describe  you  P 
**  They  are  not  of  the  world  :  "  they  are  not  worldly,  they  are  other-world'y  : 
their  thoughts  and  hearts  are  set  upon  the  world  to  come. 

17.  Sanctify  them  through  thy  truth  :  thy  word  is  truth. 

What !  Do  they  need  to  be  sanctified  ?  They  are  not  of  the  world,  and 
are  kept  from  the  evil  in  the  world  ;  do  they  need  to  be  sanctified  ?  Yes, 
we  shall  always  need  sanctifying  until  we  reach  our  heavenly  home,  where 
flin  cannot  enter.  Every  day  we  need  the  sanctifying  influence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  lead  us  unto  holiness. 

*'  Sanctify  them  through  thy  truth  :  thy  word  is  truth."  It  is  only  the 
truth  of  God  that  can  beget  holiness  ;  false  doctrine  is  never  the  medium  of 
sanotification.  You  can  tell  which  are  f  .  Ise  doctrines,  and  which  are  the 
true,  by  our  Lord's  own  test :  *'  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them."  The 
same  men  who  reject  the  old-fashioned  doctrines  also  rebel  against  the  old- 
fashioned  style  of  living  ;  loose  living  generally  goes  with  loose  doctrine. 
There  never  was  an  age  in  which  the  doctrines  of  grace  were  despised  but, 
sooner  or  later,  licentiousness  prevailed.  On  the  other  hand,  when  we  had 
Paritan  teaching,  we  had  also  pure  and  holy  living.  This  prayer  is  still 
needed  for  all  Christ's  disciples,  **  Sanctify  them  through  thy  truth :  thy 
word  is  truth." 

18.  As  thou  hast  sent  me  into  the  worlds  even  so  have  I  also  sent  them  into  the 
world. 

This  is  the  original  Missionary  Society,  and  the  model  for  all  others ; 
CUvist  sent,  missioned,  of  the  Father,  and  every  saint  missioned  of  Christ. 
Are  you  carrying  out  your  mission,  O  ye  people  of  God  P  How  dare  you 
call  yourselves  by  that  name  if  you  have  no  mission  to  anybody  P  If  you 
are  living  here  for  yourself  alone,  how  can  you  belong  to  Christ,  who  never 
lived  a  moment  for  himself,  but  always  lived  wholly  for  others  P 


EXPOSITIONS.  155 

19.     And  for  their  sokes  I  sanctify  myself ^ 

"I  set  myself  apart,  as  one  who  is  consecrated  dedicated,  devoted  to 
a  grand  design." 

19.  That  they  also  might  he  sanctified  through  the  truth. 

This  is  our  Lord's  prayer  for  his  disciples.  In  the  ninth  verse  we  read, 
"  I  pray  for  them  :  I  pray  not  for  the  world,  but  for  them  which  thou  hast 
given  me;  for  they  are  thine." 

Now  our  Lord  Jesus  prays  for  those  who  are  to  be  his  people.  I  wonder 
whether  there  are  any  of  them  here  to-night. 

20.  Neither  'pray  I  for  these  alone,  hut  for  them  also  which  shall  believe  on 
me  through  their  word  ; 

There  is  a  great  company  of  people  who  are  not  at  present  believers,  but 
who  shall  yet  believe  on  Christ  through  the  testimony  of  those  who  are 
already  believers  on  him.     O  God,  call  out  many  such  through  our  word  ! 

21.  That  they  all  may  he  one; 

This  is  Christ's  prayer  for  all  those  who  shall  believe  on  him  ;  that  they 
may  be  converted,  and  brought  into  the  one  Church  together  with  those 
who  are  already  there  :  "  that  they  all  may  be  one." 

21.  As  thou.  Father  J  art  in  me,  and  I  in  thee,  that  they  also  may  he  one  in 
us  :  that  the  world  may  heh'eve  that  thou  hast  sent  me. 

Christ  would  have  all  his  people  joined  in  communion  with  himself,  and 
with  his  Father  ;  and  when  that  is  the  case,  then  will  men  know  that 
Christ  came  into  the  world  for  a  definite  purpose  :  **  that  the  world  may 
believe  that  thou  hast  sent  me." 

22,  23.  And  the  glory  ivhich  thou  gave  st  me  I  have  given  them;  that  they 
may  he  one,  even  as  we  are  one :  I  in  them,  and  thou  in  me,  that  they  may 
he  made  perfect  in  one  ; 

Christ  is  the  incarnation  of  God,  and  the  Church  should  be  the  incarnation 
of  Christ.     Oh,  when  shall  this  great  prayer  be  answered  ? 

23 — 26.  And  that  the  world  may  know  that  thou  hast  sent  me,  and  hast  loved 
them,  as  thou  hast  loved  me.  Father,  I  will  that  they  also,  lohom  thou  hast  given 
me,  he  with  me  where  I  am ;  that  they  may  hehold  my  glory,  which  thou  hast 
given  me  :  for  thou  lovedst  me  hefore  the  foundation  of  the  world.  0  righteous 
Father,  the  world  hath  not  known  thee :  hut  I  have  known  thee,  and  these  have 
hnovm  that  thou  hast  sent  me.  And  I  have  declared  unto  them  thy  name,  and 
wi  I  declare  it :  that  the  love  wherewith  thou  hast  loved  me  may  he  in  them,  and 
I  -in  them. 

A  very  short  time  after  our  Divine  Lord  offered  this  intercessory  supplica- 
tion, he  prayed  a  very  ditferent  prayer,  in  a  strangely-altered  style.  You 
will  find  it  in  the  Gospel  according  to  Matthew,  chapter  twenty-six. 

Remember  that  there  was  a  very  short  interval  between  the  utterance  of 
the  majestic  prayer  I  have  been  reading,  and  the  presentation  of  the  cries 
and  tears  of  which  we  are  now  to  read. 

Matthew  xxvi.  Verses  36 — 40.  Then  cometh  Jesus  with  them  unto  a  place 
called  Oethsemane,  and  saith  unto  the  disciples,  Sit  ye  here,  while  I  go  and  pray 
yonder.  And  he  took  with  him  Peter  and  the  two  sons  of  Zehedee,  and  hegan  to 
he  sorrowful  and  very  heavy.  Then  saith  he  unto  them,  My  soul  is  exceeding 
sorrovjful,  even  unto  death  :  tarry  ye  here,  and  watch  with  me.  And  he  went  a 
little  farther,  and  fell  on  his  face,  and  prayed,  saying,  0  my  Father,  if  it  he 
possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me :  nevertheless  not  as  I  will,  hut  as  thou  wilt. 
And  he  cometh  unto  the  disciples,  and  findeth  them  asleep,  and  saith  unto  Peter, 
What,  could  ye  not  watch  with  me  one  hour  f 

He  felt  the  need  of  human  sympathy  in  that  awful  hour  ;  yet  he  trod 
the  winepress  alone. 


156 


METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 


41.  Watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation :  the  spirit  indeed  w 
willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak. 

Admire  the  tenderness  of  Jesus  in  making  this  apology  for  his  disciples: 
What  he  said  about  them  was  true  :  but  it  is  not  everybody  who  would  have 
uttered  that  gentle  truth  at  such  a  trying  time.  Dear  friends,  make  ex- 
cuses for  one  another  whenever  you  can  ;  never  make  them  for  yourselves, 
but  often  make  them  for  others ;  and  especially,  when  some  treat  you  as 
you  think  very  untenderly,  be  the  more  tender  towards  them. 

42—44  He  went  away  again  the  second  time,  and  prayed,  saying,  0  my 
Father,  if  this  cup  may  not  pass  away  from  me,  except  I  drink  it,  thy  will  be 
done.  And  he  came  and  found  them  asleep  again  :  for  their  eyes  loere  heavy. 
And  he  left  them,  and  went  away  again,  and  prayed  the  third  time,  saying  the 
same  words. 

You  cannot  use  much  variety  of  language  when  your  heart  is  very  heavy ; 
vou  will  usually  dwell  upon  just  a  few  words  at  such  a  time.  Do  not  blame 
yourself  for  doing  so  ;  it  is  natural,  and  it  is  right.  Even  your  Lord,  the 
Master  of  language,  **  prayed  the  third  time,  saying  the  same  words. 

45  46  Then  cameth  he  to  his  disciples,  and  saith  unto  them.  Sleep  on  now, 
and  take  your  rest:  behold,  the  hour  is  at  hand,  and  the  Son  of  man  ^j  betrayed 
into  the  hands  of  sinners.  Rise,  let  us  be  going  :  behold,  he  is  at  hand  that  dotn 
betray  me.  t      v.- 

May  the  Master  never  have  to  say  this  concerning  any  one  of  us  for  run 
dear  name's  sake  !     Amen. 


CHRISTIAN    RESIGNATION. 


%   ^ttm^ 


Intended  for  Reading  on  Lord's-day,  February  24th,   1901^ 
dklivbred  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AX    NEW     PARK     STREET     CHAPEL,     80UTHWARK, 
On  a  Thursday  Evening,  early  in  the  year  1859. 


"Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt."— Matthew  xxvi.  39. 
The  apostle  Paul,  writing  concerning  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  ssays, 
"  Though  he  were  a  Son,  yet  learned  he  obedience  by  the  things 
which  he  suffered."  He  who,  as  God,  knew  all  things,  had  to  learn 
obedience  in  the  time  of  his  humiliation.  He,  who  is  in  himself 
Wisdom  Incarnate,  did  himself  condescend  to  enter  the  school  of 
suffering,  there  to  learn  that  important  lesson  of  the  Christian  life, 
obedience  to  the  will  of  God;  and  here,  in  Gethsemane's  garden, 
you'  can  see  the  Divine  Scholar  going  forth  to  practise  his  lesson. 
He  had  been  all  his  lifetime  learning  it,  and  now  he  has  to  learn  it 
for  the  last  time  in  his  agony  and  bloody  sweat,  and  in  his  terrible 
death  upon  the  cross.  Now  is  he  to  discover  the  utmost  depths  of 
suffering,  and  to  attain  to  the  height  of  the  knowledge  of  obedience. 
See  how  well  he  has  learned  his  lesson ;  note  how  complete  and  ripe 
a  scholar  he  is.  He  has  attained  to  the  very  highest  class  in  that 
school;  and,  in  the  immediate  prospect  of  death,  can  say  to  his 
Father,  "  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt." 

The  object  of  this  discourse  is  to  commend  to  you  the  blessed 
example  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and,  as  God  the  Holy  Spirit  shall 
help  me,  to  urge  you  to  be  made  like  unto  your  glorious  Head,  and 
yourselves  to  learn,  by  all  the  daily  providences  with  which  God  is 
pleased  to  surround  you,  this  lesson  of  resignation  to  the  will  of 
God,  and  of  making  an  entire  surrender  to  him. 

I  have  been  struck,  lately,  in  reading  works  by  some  writers  who 
belong  to  the  Romish  Church,  with  the  marvellous  love  which  they 
have  towards  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I  did  think,  at  one  time,  that 
it  could  not  be  possible  for  any  to  be  saved  in  that  church ;  but, 
often,  after  I  have  risen  from  reading  the  books  of  those  holy  men, 
and  have  felt  myself  to  be  quite  a  dwarf  by  their  side,  I  have  said, 
"  Yes,  despite  their  errors,  these  men  must  have  been  taught  of  the- 
Holy  Spirit.  Notwithstanding  all  the  evils  of  which  they  have 
drunk  so  deeply,  I  am  quite  certain  that  they  must  have  had  fellow- 
ship with  Jesus,  or  else  they  could  not  have  written  as  they  d* ' 
No.  2,715. 


158  METKOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Such  writers  are  few  and  far  between ;  but,  still,  there  is  a  remnant 
according  to  the  election  of  grace  even  in  the  midst  of  that  apostate 
church.  Looking  at  a  book  by  one  of  them,  the  other  day,  I  met 
with  this  remarkable  expression,  "  Shall  that  body,  whick  has  a 
thorn-crowned  Head,  have  delicate,  pain-fearing  members?  God 
forbid !  "  That  remark  went  straight  to  my  heart  at  once.  I 
thought  how  often  the  children  of  God  shun  pain,  reproach,  and 
rebuke,  and  think  it  to  be  a  strange  thing  when  some  fiery  trial 
happens  to  them  If  they  would  but  recollect  that  their  Head  had 
to  sweat  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood  falling  down  to  the  ground, 
and  that  their  Head  was  crowned  with  thorns,  it  would  not  seem 
strange  to  them  that  the  members  of  his  mystical  body  also  have  to 
suffer.  If  Christ  had  been  some  delicate  person,  if  our  glorious 
Head  had  been  reposing  upon  the  soft  pillow  of  ease,  then  might 
we,  who  are  the  members  of  his  Church,  have  expected  to  go 
through  this  world  with  joy  and  comfort ;  but  if  he  must  be  bathed 
in  his  own  blood,  if  the  thorns  must  pierce  his  temples,  if  his  lips 
must  be  parched,  and  if  his  mouth  must  be  dried  up  like  a  furnace, 
shall  we  escape  suffering  and  agony?  Is  Christ  to  have  a  head  of 
brass  and  hands  of  gold?  Is  his  head  to  be  as  if  it  glowed  in  the 
furnace,  and  are  not  we  to  glow  in  the  furnace,  too?  Must  he  pass 
through  seas  of  suffering,  and  shall  we — 

'*  Be  carried  to  the  skies, 
On  flowery  beds  of  ease  "  P 

Ah,  no!  we  must  be  conformed  unto  our  Lord  in  his  humiliation  if 
we  would  be  made  like  him  also  in  his  glory. 

So,  brethren  and  sisters,  I  have  to  discourse  to  you  upon  this 
lesson,  which  some  of  us  have  begun  to  learn,  but  of  which  as  yet 
we  know  so  little, — this  lesson  of  saying,  "  Not  as  I  will,  but  as 
thou  wilt."  First,  let  me  explain  the  meaning  of  this  prayer  ;  then, 
urge  you,  hy  certain  reasons^  to  make  this  your  constant  cry  ;  next, 
show  what  will  he  the  happy  effect  of  its  being  the  paramount  desire 
of  your  spirits  ;  and  we  will  conclude  with  a  practical  enquiry, — 
what  can  bring  us  to  this  blessed  condition? 

I.  First,  then,  what  is  the  meaning  of  this  prayer?  "  Not  as  I 
will,  but  as  thou  wilt." 

I  shall  not  address  myself  to  those  Christians  who  are  but  as 
dwarfs,  who  know  little  about  the  things  of  the  kingdom.  I  will 
speak  rather  to  those  who  do  business  in  the  deep  waters  of  com- 
munion, who  know  what  it  is  to  pillow  their  heads  upon  the  bosom 
of  Jesus,  to  walk  with  God  as  Enoch  did,  and  to  talk  with  him  as 
Abraham  did.  My  dear  brethren,  only  such  as  you  can  understand 
this  prayer  in  all  its  length  and  breadth.  Your  brother,  who  as 
yet  scarcely  knows  the  meaning  of  the  word  communion,  may  pray 
thus  in  some  feeble  measure ;  yet  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  he 
should  discern  all  the  spiritual  teaching  that  there  is  in  these  words 
of  our  Lord ;  but  to  you  who  are  Christ-taught,  you  who  have 
become  ripe  scholars  in  the  school  of  Christ,  to  you  I  may  speaJs  as 
unto  wise  men, — judge  ye  what  I  say. 

If  you  and  I  mean  this  prayer,  and  do  not  use  it  as  a  mere  form 
of  words,  but  mean  it  in  all  its  fulness,  we  must  be  prepared  for 


CHKISTIAN    RESIGNATION.  159 

this  kind  of  experience.  Sometimes,  when  we  are  in  the  midst  of 
the  most  active  service,  when  we  are  diligently  serving  God  both 
with  our  hands  and  our  heart,  and  when  success  is  crowning  all  our 
labours,  the  Lord  will  lay  us  aside,  take  us  right  away  from  the 
vineyard,  and  thrust  us  into  the  furnace.  Just  at  the  very  time 
when  the  church  seems  to  need  us  most,  and  when  the  world's 
necessities  are  most  of  all  appealing  to  us,  and  when  our  hearts  are 
full  of  love  towards  Christ  and  towards  our  fellow- creatures,  it  will 
often  happen  that,  just  then,  God  will  strike  us  down  with  sickness, 
or  remove  us  from  our  sphere  of  activity.  But  if  we  really  mean 
this  prayer,  we  must  be  prepared  to  say,  "  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou 
wilt."  This  is  not  easy,  for  does  not  the  Holy  Spirit  himself  teach 
us  to  long  after  active  service  for  our  Saviour  ?  Does  he  not,  when 
he  gives  us  love  towards  our  fellow-men,  constrain  us,  as  it  were,  to 
make  their  salvation  our  meat  and  our  drink?  When  he  is  actively 
at  work  within  our  hearts,  do  we  not  feel  as  if  we  could  not 
live  without  serving  God  ?  Do  we  not  then  feel  that,  to  labour  for 
the  Lord  is  our  highest  rest,  and  that  toil  for  Jesus  is  our  sweetest 
pleasure?  Does  it  not  then  seem  most  trying  to  our  ardent  spirit 
to  be  compelled  to  drink  the  cup  of  sickness,  and  to  be  incapable 
of  doing -anything  actively  for  God?  The  preacher  is  seeing  men 
converted  and  his  ministry  successful ;  but,  on  a  sudden,  he  is  com- 
pelled to  cease  from  preaching;  or  the  Sunday-school  teacher  has, 
by  the  grace  of  God,  been  the  means  of  bringing  his  class  into  an 
interesting  and  hopeful  condition;  yet,  just  when  the  class  needs 
his  presence  most,  he  is  smitten  down,  so  that  he  cannot  go  on  with 
his  work.  Ah  I  then  it  is  that  the  spirit  finds  it  hard  to  say,  "  Not 
as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt."  But  if  we  adopt  this  prayer,  this  is 
what  it  means ;  that  we  should  be  prepared  to  suffer  instead  of  to 
serve,  and  should  be  as  willing  to  lie  in  the  trenches  as  to  scale 
the  walls,  and  as  willing  to  be  laid  aside  in  the  King's  hospital  as 
to  be  fighting  in  the  midst  of  the  rank  and  file  of  the  King's  army. 
This  is  hard  to  flesh  and  blood,  but  we  must  do  it  if  we  present  this 
petition. 

If  we  really  mean  this  prayer,  there  will  be  a  second  trial  for  us. 
Sometimes,  God  will  demand  of  us  that  we  labour  in  unpropitious 
fields  ;  he  will  set  his  children  to  plough  the  rock,  and  to  cast  their 
bread  upon  the  waters.  He  will  send  his  Ezekiel  to  prophesy  in  a 
valley  full  of  dry  bones,  and  his  Jonah  to  carry  his  message  to 
Nineveh.  He  will  give  his  servants  strange  work  to  do, — work  which 
seems  as  if  it  never  could  be  successful,  or  bring  honour  either  to 
God  or  to  themselves.  I  doubt  not  that  there  are  some  ministers, 
who  toil  and  labour  with  all  their  might,  yet  who  see  but  little 
fruit.  Far  away  in  the  dark  places  of  heathendom,  there  are  men 
who  have  been  toiling  for  years  with  scarcely  a  convert  to  cheer 
them ;  and  here,  too,  in  England,  there  are  men  who  are  preaching, 
in  all  sincerity  and  faithfulness,  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  yet  they  do 
not  see  souls  converted.  They  know  that  they  are  unto  God  a 
sweet  savour  of  Christ,  both  in  them  that  perish,  and  in  them  that 
are  saved.  Our  hearts  are,  I  trust,  so  full  of  the  Spirit  prompting 
us  to  cry,  like  Rachel,  "  Give  me  children,  or  I  die  ; "  that  we  cannot 


160  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

rest  content  without  seeing  the  success  of  our  labours.  Yet  the 
Master,  in  effect,  says  to  us,  "  No,  I  tell  you  to  continue  to  toil  for 
me,  though  I  give  you  no  fruit  for  your  labour ;  you  are  to  keep  on 
ploughing  this  rock,  simply  because  I  tell  you  to  do  it."  Ah  !  then, 
brethren,  it  is  hard  to  say,  "  Not  my  will,  but  thine  be  done."  But 
we  must  say  it ;  we  must  feel  that  we  are  ready  to  forego  even  the 
joy  of  harvest,  and  the  glory  of  success,  if  God  wills  it. 

At  other  times,  God  will  remove  his  people^  from  positions  of 
honourable  service,  to  other  offices  that  are  far  inferior  in  the  minds 
of  men.  I  think  that  I  should  feel  it  hard  if  I  had  to  be  banished 
from  my  large  congregation,  and  from  my  thousands  of  hearers,  to 
a  small  village  where  I  could  only  preach  the  gospel  to  a  little  com- 
pany of  people ;  yet  I  am  sure  that,  if  I  entered  fully  into  the  spirit 
of  our  Lord's  words, — "  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt," — I  should 
be  quite  as  ready  to  be  there  as  to  be  here.  I  have  heard  that, 
among  the  Jesuits,  such  is  the  extraordinary  obedience  which  they 
are  compelled  to  pay  to  their  superiors,  that,  on  one  occasion,  there 
was  a  president  of  one  of  their  colleges,  who  had  written  some  of 
the  most  learned  books  in  any  language,  a  man  of  the  highest 
talents,  and  the  superior  of  the  order  took  a  freak  into  his  head, 
for  some  reason,  to  send  him  straight  away  from  the  country  where 
he  was  to  Bath,  to  stand  there  in  the  street  for  a  year,  and  sweep 
the  crossing ;  and  the  man  did  it.  He  was  compelled  to  do  it ;  his 
vow  obliged  him  to  do  anything  that  he  was  told  to  do.  Now,  in 
a  spiritual  sense,  this  is  hard  to  perform ;  but,  nevertheless,  it  is  a 
Christian's  duty.  We  remember  the  saying  of  a  good  man  that  the 
angels  in  heaven  are  so  completely  given  up  to  obedience  to  God 
that,  if  there  should  be  two  works  to  do,  ruling  an  empire  and 
sweeping  a  crossing,  neither  of  the  two  angels,  who  might  be  selected 
to  go  on  these  two  errands,  would  have  any  choice  in  the  matter, 
but  would  just  leave  it  with  their  Lord  to  decide  which  part  they 
were  to  fulfil.  You  may,  perhaps,  be  called  from  the  charge  of  the 
services  in  a  place  of  worship,  to  become  one  of  the  humblest  mem- 
bers in  another  church ;  you  may  be  taken  from  a  place  of  much 
honour,  and  put  in  the  very  lowest  ranks  of  the  army ;  are  you 
willing  to  submit  to  that  kind  of  treatment?  Your  flesh  and  blood 
say,  "  Lord,  if  I  may  still  serve  in  thine  army,  let  me  be  a  captain ; 
or,  at  least,  let  me  be  a  sergeant,  or  a  corporal.  If  I  may  help  to  draw 
thy  chariot,  let  me  be  the  leading  horse,  let  me  run  first  in  the 
team,  let  me  wear  the  gay  ribbons."  But  God  may  say  to  you,  "  I 
have  put  thee  there  in  the  thick  of  the  battle,  now  I  will  place  thee 
behind ;  I  have  given  thee  vigour  smd  strength  to  fight  with  great 
success,  now  I  will  make  thee  tarry  by  the  stuff ;  I  have  done  with 
thee  in  the  prominent  position,  now  I  will  use  thee  somewhere  else." 
But  if  we  can  only  pray  this  prayer,  "  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou 
wilt,"  we  shall  be  ready  to  serve  God  anywhere  and  everywhere,  so 
long  as  we  know  that  we  are  doing  his  will. 

But  there  is  another  trial  which  we  shall  all  have  to  endure  in 
our  measure,  which  will  prove  whether  we  understand  by  this 
prayer  what  Christ  meant  by  it.  Sometimes,  in  the  service  of 
Christ,  we  must  he  prepared  to  endure  the  loss  of  reputation,   of 


CHRISTIAN   RESIGNATION.  161 

honour,  and  even  of  character  itself.  I  remember,  when  I  first 
came  to  London  to  preach  the  Word,  I  thought  that  I  could  bear 
anything  for  Christ;  but  I  found  myself  shamefully  slandered,  all 
manner  of  falsehoods  were  uttered  concerning  me,  and  in  agony  I 
fell  on  my  face  before  God,  and  cried  unto  him.  I  felt  as  though 
that  was  a  thing  I  could  not  bear ;  my  character  was  very  dear  to 
me,  and  I  could  not  endure  to  have  such  false  things  said  about  me. 
Then  this  thought  came  to  me,  "  You  must  give  up  all  to  Christ, 
you  must  surrender  everything  for  him,  character,  reputation,  and 
all  that  you  have ;  and  if  it  is  the  Lord's  will,  you  shall  be  reckoned 
the  vilest  of  the  vile,  so  long  as  you  can  still  continue  to  serve  him, 
and  your  character  is  really  pure,  you  need  not  fear.  If  it  is  your 
Master's  will  that  you  shall  be  trampled  and  spit  upon  by  all  the 
wicked  men  in  the  world,  you  must  simply  bear  it,  and  say,  '  Not 
as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt.'  "  And  I  remember  then  how  I  rose 
from  my  knees,  and  sang  to  myself  that  verse, — 

"  If  on  my  face,  for  thy  dear  name, 
Shame  and  reproaches  be, 
All  hail  reproach,  and  welcome  shame, 
If  thou  remember  me." 

"  But  how  hard  it  was,"  you  say,  "  for  you  to  suffer  the  loss  of 
character,  and  to  have  evil  things  spoken  against  you  falsely  for 
Christ's  name's  sake !  "  And  what  was  the  reason  why  it  was  so 
hard?  Why,  it  was  just  because  I  had  not  fully  learnt  how  to  pray 
this  prayer  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, — and  I  am  afraid  that  I  have 
not  completely  learnt  it  yet.  It  is  a  very  delightful  thing  to  have 
even  our  enemies  speaking  well  of  us,  to  go  through  this  world  with 
such  holiness  of  character  that  men  who  pour  scorn  upon  all  religion 
cannot  find  fault  with  us ;  but  it  is  an  equally  glorious  thing  for  us 
to  be  set  in  the  pillory  of  shame,  to  be  pelted  by  every  passer-by, 
to  be  the  song  of  the  drunkard,  to  be  the  by-word  of  the  swearer, 
when  we  do  not  deserve  it,  and  to  endure  all  this  for  Christ's  sake. 
This  is  true  heroism ;  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  prayer  of  our  text. 

Again,  some  of  you  have  at  times  thought,  "  Oh,  if  the  Master 
will  only  be  pleased  to  open  a  door  for  me  where  I  may  be  the 
means  of  doing  good !  Eow  glad  I  should  he  if  I  could  have  either 
more  wealth,  or  more  influence,  or  more  knowledge,  or  more  talents, 
with  which  I  might  serve  him  better!  "  You  have  prayed  about  the 
matter,  and  thought  about  it,  and  you  have  said,  "  If  I  could  only 
get  into  such-and-such  a  position,  how  excellently  should  I  be  able 
to  serve  God !  "  You  have  seen  your  Master  give  to  some  of  his 
servants  ten  talents,  but  he  has  given  you  only  one;  you  have 
gone  on  your  knees,  and  asked  him  to  be  good  enough  to  trust  you 
with  two,  and  he  has  refused  it.  Or  you  have  had  two.  and  you 
have  asked  him  to  let  you  have  ten ;  and  he  has  said,  "  No,  I  will 
give  you  two  talents,  and  no  more."  But  you  say,  "Is  it  not  a 
laudable  desire  that  I  should  seek  to  do  more  good?"  Certainly; 
trade  with  your  talents,  multiply  them  if  you  can.  But  suppose 
you  have  no  power  of  utterance,  suppose  you  have  no  opportunities 
of  serving  God,  or  even  suppose  the  sphere  of  your  influence  is 
limited,  what  then?     Why,  you  are  to  say,  "Lord,  I  hoped  it  was 

11 


162  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

thy  will  that  I  might  have  a  wider  sphere ;  but  if  it  is  not,  although 
I  long  to  serve  thee  on  a  larger  scale,  I  will  be  quite  content  to 
glorify  the^  in  my  present  narrower  sphere,  for  I  feel  that  here  is 
an  opportunity  for  the  trial  of  my  faith  and  resignation,  and  again 
I  say,  *  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt.'  " 

Christian  men,  are  you  prepared  heartily  to  pray  this  prayer?  I 
fear  there  is  not  a  single  individual  amongst  us  who  could  pray  it 
in  all  its  fulness  of  meaning.  Perhaps  you  may  go  as  far  as  I  have 
already  gone;  but  if  God  should  take  you  at  your  word,  and  say, 
"  My  will  is  that  your  wife  should  be  smitten  with  a  fatal  illness, 
and,  like  a  fading  lily,  droop  and  die  before  your  eyes;  that  your 
children  should  be  caught  up  to  my  loving  bosom  in  heaven ;  that 
your  house  should  be  burned  with  fire;  that  you  should *be  left 
penniless,  a  pauper  dependent  on  the  charity  of  others;  it  is  my 
will  that  you  should  cross  the  sea;  that  you  should  go  to  distant 
lands,  and  endure  unheard-of  hardships;  it  is  my  will  that,  at  last, 
your  bones  should  lie  bleaching  on  the  desert  sand  in  some  foreign 
clime."  Are  you  willing  to  endure  all  this  for  Christ?  Remember 
that  you  have  not  attained  unto  the  full  meaning  of  this  prayer 
until  you  have  said  "  Yes  "  to  all  that  it  means ;  and,  until  you  can 
go  to  the  uttermost  lengths  to  which  God's  providence  may  go,  you 
have  not  gone  to  the  full  extent  of  the  resignation  in  this  cry  of 
our  Lord.  Many  of  the  early  Christians,  I  think,  did  know  this 
prayer  by  heart ;  it  is  wonderful  how  willing  they  were  to  do  any- 
thing and  be  anything  for  Christ.  They  had  got  this  idea  into 
their  heads,  that  they  were  not  to  live  to  themselves;  and  they 
had  it  also  in  their  hearts ;  and  they  believed  that,  to  be  martyred, 
was  the  highest  honour  they  could  possibly  wish  for.  Consequently, 
if  they  were  brought  to  the  tribunals  of  the  judges,  they  never  ran 
away  from  their  persecutors;  they  almost  courted  death,  for  they 
thought  it  was  the  highest  privilege  that  they  could  possibly  have 
if  they  might  be  torn  in  pieces  by  the  lions  in  the  arena,  or  be 
decapitated  with  the  sword.  Now,  if  we  also  could  but  get  that 
idea  into  our  hearts,  with  what  courage  would  it  gird  us,  how  fully 
might  we  then  serve  God,  and  how  patiently  might  we  endure 
persecution  if  we  had  but  learnt  the  meaning  of  this  prayer,  "  Not 
as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt." 

II.     In  the  second  place,  I  am  to  try  and  give  you  some  reasons 

WHY  IT  WILL  BE  BEST  FOR  US  ALL  TO  SEEK  TO  HAVE  THE  HoLY  SPIRIT 
WITHIN  US,  80  THAT  WE  MAY  BE  BROUGHT  INTO  THIS  FRAME  OF  MIND 
AND   HEART. 

And  the  first  reason  is,  because  it  is  simply  a  matter  of  right. 
God  ought  to  have  his  way  at  all  times,  and  I  ought  not  to  have 
mine  whenever  it  is  contrary  to  his.  If  ever  my  will  is  at  cross 
purposes  to  the  will  of  the  Supreme,  it  is  but  right  that  mine 
should  yield  to  his.  If  I  could  have  my  own  way, — if  such  a  poor, 
feeble  creature  as  I  am  could  thwart  the  Omnipotent  Creator,  it 
would  be  wrong  for  me  to  do  it.  What!  hath  he  made  me,  and 
shall  he  not  do  as  he  wills  with  me?  Is  he  like  the  potter,  and  am 
I  but  as  the  clay,  and  shall  the  thing  formed  say  to  him  that  formed 
it,  "  Why  hast  thou  made  me  thus?  "     No,  my  Lord,  it  is  but  right 


CHRISTIAN   EBSIONATION.  ]  63 

that  tliou  shouldest  do  what  thou  pleasest  with  me,  for  I  am  thine ; 
— thine,  for  thou  hast  made  me ;  — thine,  for  thou  hast  bought  me 
with  thy  blood.  If  I  am  a  jewel  purchased  with  the  precious  blood 
of  Jesus,  then  he  may  cut  me  into  what  shape  he  pleases,  he  may 
polish  me  as  he  chooses,  he  may  let  me  lie  in  the  darkness  of  the 
casket,  or  let  me  glitter  in  his  hand  or  in  his  diadem ;  in  fact,  he 
may  do  with  me  just  as  he  wills,  for  I  am  his ;  and  so  long  as  I  know 
that  he  does  it,  I  must  say,  "Whatever  he  does  is  right;  my  will 
shall  not  be  in  opposition  to  his  will." 

But,  again,  this  is  not  only  a  matter  of  right,  it  is  a  matter  of 
wisdom  with  us.  Depend  upon  it,  dear  brethren,  if  we  could  have 
our  own  will,  it  would  often  be  the  worst  thing  in  the  world  for  us ; 
but  to  let  God  have  his  way  with  us,  even  if  it  were  in  our  power 
to  thwart  him,  would  be  an  act  of  wisdom  on  our  part.  What  do  I 
desire  when  I  wish  to  have  my  own  will?  I  desire  my  own  happi- 
ness ;  well,  but  I  shall  get  it  far  more  easily  if  I  let  God  have  his 
will,  for  the  will  of  God  is  both  for  his  own  glory  and  my  happiness ; 
so,  however  much  I  may  think  that  my  own  will  would  tend  to  my 
comfort  and  happiness,  I  may  rest  assured  that  God's  will  would 
be  infinitely  more  profitable  to  me  than  my  own ;  and  that,  although 
God's  will  may  seem  to  make  it  dark  and  dreary  for  me  at  the  time, 
yet  from  seeming  evil  he  will  bring  forth  good,  such  as  never  could 
have  been  produced  from  that  supposed  good  after  which  my  weak 
and  feeble  judgment  is  so  apt  to  run. 

But,  again,  suppose  it  were  possible  for  us  to  have  our  own  will, 
would  it  not  he  an  infringement  of  that  loving  reliance  which  Christ 
may  well  ask  at  our  hands,  that  we  should  trust  him?  Are  we  not 
saved  by  trusting  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  Has  not  faith  in  Christ 
been  the  means  of  saving  me  from  sin  and  hell?  Then,  surely  I 
must  not  run  away  from  this  rule  when  I  come  into  positions  of 
trial  and  difficulty.  If  faith  has  been  superior  to  sin,  through  the 
blood  of  Christ,  it  will  certainly  be  superior  to  trial,  through  the 
almighty  arm  of  Christ.  Did  I  not  tell  him,  when  I  first  came  to 
him,  that  I  would  trust  no  one  but  him  ?  Did  I  not  declare  that  all 
my  other  confidences  were  burst  and  broken,  and  scattered  to  the 
winds ;  and  did  I  not  ask  that  he  would  permit  me  to  put  my  trust 
in  him  alone;  and  shall  I,  after  that,  play  the  traitor?  Shall  I  now 
set  up  some  other  object  in  which  to  place  my  trust?  Oh,  no!  my 
love  to  Jesus,  my  gratitude  to  him  for  his  condescension  in  accept- 
ing my  faith,  binds  me  henceforth  to  trust  to  him,  and  to  him  alone. 

We  often  lose  the  force  of  a  truth  by  not  making  it  palpable  to 
our  own  mind ;  let  us  try  to  make  this  one  so.  Imagine  the  Lord 
Jesus  to  be  visibly  present  in  this  pulpit;  suppose  that  he  looks 
down  upon  one  of  you,  and  says,  "  My  child,  thy  will  and  mine  do 
not,  just  now,  agree ;  thou  desirest  such-and-such  a  thing,  but  I  say, 
'  Nay,  thou  must  not  have  it ; '  now,  my  child,  which  will  is  to  pre- 
vail, mine  or  thine?"  Suppose  you  were  to  reply,  "Lord,  I  must 
have  my  will,"  do  you  not  think  he  would  look  at  you  with  eyes  of 
infinite  sadness  and  pity,  and  say  to  you,  "  What !  did  I  give  up  my 
will  for  thee,  and  wilt  thou  not  give  up  thy  will  for  me?  Did  I 
surrender  all  I  had,  even  my  life,  for  thy  sake,  and  dost  thou  say, 


164  MKTROPOLTTAlf  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

thou  self-willed  child,  '  I  must  have  these  things  according  to  my 
will,  and  contrary  to  thy  wish  and  purpose,  O  my  Saviour  '  ?  "  Surely. 
you  could  not  talk  like  that;  rather,  I  think  I  see  you  instantly 
falling  on  your  knees,  and  saying,  "  Lord  Jesus,  forgive  me  foi*  ever 
harbouring  such  evil  thoughts;  no,  my  Lord,  even  if  thy  will  be 
hard,  I  will  think  it  pleasant ;  if  it  be  bitter,  I  will  believe  that 
the  bitterest  draught  is  sweet.  Let  me  but  see  thee  dying  on  the 
cross  for  me,  let  me  only  know  that  thou  lovest  me,  and  wherever 
thou  shalt  put  me,  I  will  be  in  heaven  aa  long  as  I  can  feel  that  it 
is  thy  will  that  is  being  done  with  me.  I  will  be  perfectly  content 
to  be  just  wherever  thou  choosest  me  to  be,  and  to  suffer  whatever 
thou  choosest  for  me  to  endure."  Yes,  dear  friends,  it  would  show 
a  sad  want  of  that  love  which  we  owe  to  Christ,  and  of  that  grati- 
tude which  he  deserves,  if  we  were  once  to  set  our  wills  up  in  oppo- 
sition to  his.  Therefore,  again,  beloved,  for  love's  sake,  for  wisdom's 
sake,  for  right's  sake,  I  beseech  you  ask  the  Holy  Spirit  to  teach 
you  this  prayer  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  impart  to  you  its 
blessed  meaning. 

III.     I  notice,  in  the  next  place,  the  effect  of  truly  saying 

AND  FEELING,  "  NoT  AS  I  WILL,  BUT  AS  THOU  WILT." 

The  first  effect  is,  constant  happiness.  If  you  would  find  out  the 
cause  of  most  of  your  sorrows,  dig  at  the  root  of  your  self-will; 
for  that  is  where  it  lies.  When  your  heart  is  wholly  sanctified  unto 
God,  and  your  will  is  entirely  subdued  to  him,  the  bitter  becomes 
sweet,  pain  is  changed  to  pleasure,  and  suffering  is  turned  into  joy. 
It  is  not  possible  for  that  man's  mind  to  be  disturbed  whose  will  is 
wholly  resigned  to  the  will  of  God.  "  Well,"  says  one,  "  that  is  a 
very  startling  statement ; "  and  another  says,  "  I  have  really  sought 
to  have  my  will  resigned  to  God's  will,  yet  I  am  disturbed."  Yes, 
and  that  is  simply  because,  though  you  have  sought,  like  all  the  rest 
of  us,  you  have  not  yet  attained  to  full  resignation  to  the  will  of 
the  Lord,  But  when  once  you  have  attained  to  it, — I  fear  you 
never  will  in  this  life, — then  shall  you  be  free  from  everything  that 
shall  cause  you  sorrow  or  discomposure  of  mind. 

Another  blessed  effect  of  this  prayer,  if  it  is  truly  presented,  is,  that 
it  will  give  a  man  holy  courage  and  bravery.  If  my  mind  is  wholly 
resigned  to  God's  will,  what  have  I  to  fear  in  all  the  world  ?  It  is 
with  me  then  as  it  was  with  Polycarp  ;  when  the  Eoman  emperor 
threatened  that  he  would  banish  him,  he  said,  "  Thou  canst  not,  for 
the  whole  world  is  my  Father's  house,  and  thou  canst  not  banish 
me  from  it."  "  But  I  will  slay  thee,"  said  the  emperor.  "  Nay, 
thou  canst  not,  for  my  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  "  I  will 
take  away  all  thy  treasures."  "  Nay,  thou  canst  not ;  for  I  have 
nothing  that  thou  knowest  of ;  my  treasure  is  in  heaven,  and  my 
heart  is  there  also."  "  But  I  will  drive  thee  away  from  men,  and 
thou  shalt  have  no  friend  left."  "  Nay,  that  thou  canst  not  do,  for 
I  have  a  Friend  in  heaven  from  whom  thou  canst  not  separate  me ; 
I  defy  thee,  for  there  is  nothing  that  thou  canst  do  unto  me."  And 
so  can  the  Christian  always  say,  if  once  his  will  agrees  with  God's 
will ;  he  may  defy  all  men,  and  defy  hell  itself,  for  he  will  be  able 
to  say,  "  Nothing  can  happen  to  me  that  is  contrary  to  the  will  of 


CHRISTIAN    RESIGNATION.  165 

God ;  and  if  it  be  his  will,  it  is  my  will,  too ;  if  it  pleases  God,  it 
pleases  me.  God  has  been  pleased  to  give  me  part  of  his  will,  so 
I  am  satisfied  with  whatever  he  sends." 

Man  is,  after  all,  only  the  second  cause  of  our  sorows.  A  per- 
secutor says,  perhaps,  to  a  child  of  God,  "  I  can  afflict  thee."  "  Nay, 
thou  canst  not,  for  thou  art  dependent  on  the  first  Great  Cause, 
and  he  and  I  are  agreed."  Ah !  dear  friends,  there  is  nothing  that 
makes  men  such  cowards  as  having  wills  contrary  to  the  will  of 
God;  but  when  we  resign  ourselves  wholly  into  the  hands  of 
God/ what  have  we  to  fear?  The  thing  that  made  Jacob  a  coward 
was,  that  he  was  not  resigned  to  God's  will  when  Esau  came  to  meet 
him.  God  had  foretold  that  the  elder  of  the  two  sons  of  Isaac 
should  serve  the  younger ;  Jacob's  business  was  to  believe  that,  and 
to  go  boldly  forward  with  his  wives  and  children,  and  not  to  bow 
down  before  Esau,  but  to  say,  "  The  promise  is,  the  elder  shall  serve 
the  younger ;  I  am  not  going  to  bow  down  to  you ;  it  is  your  place 
to  fall  prostrate  before  me."  But  poor  Jacob  said,  "  Perhaps  it  is 
God's  will  that  Esau  should  conquer  me,  and  smite  the  mothers  and 
their  children ;  but  my  will  is  that  it  shall  not  be  so."  The  contest 
is  well  pictured  at  the  ford  Jabbok;  but  if  Jacob  had  not  dis- 
believed God's  promise,  he  would  never  have  bowed  himself  to  the 
earth  seven  times  before  his  brother  Esau.  In  the  holy  majesty  of 
his  faith,  he  would  have  said,  "  Esau,  my  brother,  thou  canst  do  me 
no  hurt;  for  thou  canst  do  nothing  contrary  to  the  will  of  God. 
Thou  canst  do  nothing  contrary  to  his  decree,  and  I  will  be  pleased 
with  whatsoever  it  is." 

So,  this  resignation  to  God's  will  gives,  first,  joy  in  the  heart,  and 
then  it  givss  fearless  courage ;  and  yet  another  thing  follows  from 
it.  As  soon  as  anyone  truly  says,  "  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt," 
this  resolve  tends  to  make  every  duty  light,  every  trial  easy,  every 
tribulation  sweet.  We  should  never  feel  it  to  be  a  hard  thing  to 
serve  God ;  yet  there  are  many  people,  who,  if  they  do  a  little  thing 
for  the  Lord,  think  so  much  of  it ;  and  if  there  is  ever  a  great  thing 
to  be  done,  you  have,  first,  to  plead  very  hard  to  get  them  to  do  it ; 
and  when  they  do  it,  very  often  it  is  done  so  badly  that  you  are  half 
sorry  you  ever  asked  them  to  do  it.  A  great  many  people  make 
very  much  out  of  what  is  really  very  little.  They  take  one  good 
action  which  thej  have  performed,  and  they  hammer  it  out  till 
it  becomes  as  thin  as  gold  leaf,  and  then  they  think  they  may  cover 
a  whole  week  with  that  one  good  deed.  The  seven  days  shall  all  be 
glorified  by  an  action  which  only  takes  five  minutes  to  perform ;  it 
shall  be  quite  enough,  they  even  think,  for  all  time  to  come.  But 
the  Christian,  whose  will  is  conformed  to  God's  will,  says,  "  My 
Lord,  is  there  anything  else  for  me  to  do  ?  Then,  I  will  gladly  do  it. 
I)oes  it  involve  want  of  rest  ?  I  will  do  it.  Does  it  involve  loss  of 
time  in  my  business?  Does  it  involve  me,  sometimes,  in  toil  and 
fatigue  ?  Lord,  it  shall  be  done,  if  it  is  thy  will ;  for  thy  will  and 
mine  are  in  complete  agreement.  If  it  is  possible,  I  will  do  it ;  and 
I  will  count  all  things  but  loss  that  I  may  win  Christ,  and  be  found 
in  him,  rejoicing  in  his  righteousnesrs,  and  not  in  mine  own." 

rV.     There  are  many  other  sweet  and  blessed  effects  which  this 


166  METKOFOLITAlf  TABERNAOLE  PULPIT. 

resignation  would  produce ;  but  I  must  close  by  observing  that  the 

ONLY   WAY  IN   WHICH    THIS    SPIRIT  CAN    BE    ATTAINED    IS    BY   THE  UNCTION 

OF  THE  Holy  One,  the  outpouring  and  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  our  hearts. 

You  may  try  to  subdue  your  own  self,  but  you  will  never  do  it 
alone.  You  may  labour,  by  self-denial,  to  keep  down  your  ambi- 
tion ;  but  you  will  find  that  it  takes  another  shape,  and  grows  by 
that  wherewith  you  thought  to  poison  it.  You  may  seek  to  concen- 
trate all  the  love  of  your  soul  on  Christ,  and  in  the  very  act  you 
will  find  self  creeping  in.  I  am  sometimes  astonished, — and  yet  not 
astonished  when  I  know  the  evil  of  my  own  heart, — when  I  look 
within  myself,  and  find  how  impure  my  motive  is  at  the  very 
moment  when  I  thought  it  was  most  pure ;  and  I  expect  it  is  the 
same  with  you,  dear  friends.  You  perform  a  good  action, — some 
almsgiving  to  the  poor,  perhaps.  You  say,  "  I  will  do  it  very 
quietly."  Someone  speaks  of  it,  and  you  say  at  once,  "  I  wish  you 
had  not  spoken  of  that;  I  do  not  like  to  hear  anyone  talk  of  what 
I  have  done;  it  hurts  me."  Perhaps  it  is  only  your  pride  that 
makes  you  say  that  it  hurts  you ;  for  some  folk  make  their  modesty 
to  be  their  pride;  it  is,  in  fact,  their  secret  pride  that  they  are 
doing  good,  and  that  people  do  not  know  it.  They  glory  in  that 
supposed  secrecy;  and  by  its  coming  out  they  feel  that  their 
modesty  is  spoilt,  and  they  are  afraid  that  people  will  say,  '*  Ah, 
you  see  that  it  is  known  what  they  do ;  they  do  not  really  do  their 
good  deeds  in  secret."  So  that  even  our  modesty  may  be  our  pride ; 
and  what  some  people  think  their  pride  may  happen  to  be  the  will 
of  God,  and  may  be  real  modesty.  It  is  very  hard  work  to  give  up 
our  own  will ;  but  it  is  possible,  and  that  is  one  of  the  lessons  we 
should  learn  from  this  text,  "  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt." 

Again,  if  there  is  anybody  of  whom  you  are  a  little  envious, — 
perhaps  a  minister  who  takes  a  little  of  the  gloss  off  you  by  preach- 
ing better  than  you  do,  or  a  Sunday-school  teacher  who  is  more 
successful  in  his  work, — mate  that  particular  person  the  object  of 
your  most  constant  prayer,  and  endeavour  as  much  as  lies  in  you  to 
increase  that  person's  popularity  and  success.  Someone  asks,  "  But 
you  cannot  bring  human  nature  up  to  that  point,  can  you, — to  try 
and  exalt  one's  own  rival  ?  "  My  dear  friends,  you  will  never  know 
the  full  meaning  of  this  prayer  till  you  have  tried  to  do  this,  and 
actually  sought  to  honour  your  rival  more  than  yourself;  that  is 
the  true  spirit  of  the  gospel,  "  in  honour  preferring  one  another. " 
I  have  sometimes  found  it  hard  work,  I  must  confess ;  but  I  have 
schooled  myself  down  to  it.  Can  this  be  done?  Yes,  John  the 
Baptist  did  it ;  he  said  of  Jesus,  "  He  must  increase,  but  I  must 
decrease."  If  you  had  asked  John  whether  he  wished  to  increase, 
he  would  have  said,  "  Well,  I  should  like  to  have  more  disciples ; 
still,  if  it  is  the  Lord's  will,  I  am  quite  content  to  go  down,  and 
that  Christ  should  go  up." 

How  important,  therefore,  it  is  for  us  to  learn  how  we  may 
attain  to  this  state  of  acquiescence  with  our  heavenly  Father's  will ! 
I  have  given  you  the  reasons  for  it,  but  how  can  it  be  done?  Only 
by  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God.     As  for  flesh  and  blood,  they 


EXPOSITION.  167 

will  not  help  you  in  the  least,  they  will  go  just  the  other  way ;  and 
when  you  think  that,  surely,  you  have  got  flesh  and  blood  under 
control,  you  will  find  that  they  have  got  the  upper  hand  of  you 
just  when  you  thought  you  were  conquering  them.  Pray  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  abide  with  you,  to  dwell  in  you,  to  baptize  you,  to  immerse 
you  in  his  sacred  influence,  to  cover  you,  to  bury  you  in  his  sublime 
power;  and  so,  and  only  so,  when  you  are  completely  immersed  in 
the  Spirit,  and  steeped,  as  it  were,  in  the  crimson  sea  of  the 
Saviour's  blood,  shall  you  be  made  fully  to  realize  the  meaning  of 
this  great  prayer,  "  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt."  "  Lord,  not 
self,  but  Christ ;  not  my  own  glory,  but  thy  glory ;  not  my  aggrand- 
isement, but  thine ;  nay,  not  even  my  success,  but  thy  success ;  not 
the  prosperity  of  my  own  church,  or  my  own  self,  but  the  prosperity 
of  thy  church,  the  increase  of  thy  glory; — let  all  that  be  done  as 
thou  wilt,  not  as  I  will." 

How  different  this  is  from  everything  connected  with  the  world ! 
I  have  tried  to  take  you  up  to  a  very  high  elevation;  and  if  you 
have  been  able  to  get  up  there,  or  even  to  pant  to  get  up  there, 
how  striking  has  the  contrast  been  between  this  spirit  and  the  spirit 
of  the  worldling !  I  shall  not  say  anything  to  those  of  you  who  are 
unconverted,  except  this.  Learn  how  contrary  you  are  to  what  God 
would  have  you  be,  and  what  you  must  be,  ere  you  can  enter  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  You  know  that  you  could  not  say,  "  Let  God 
have  his  will,"  and  you  know  also  that  you  could  not  humble  your- 
self to  become  as  a  little  child.  This  shows  your  deep  depravity ; 
so,  may  the  Holy  Spirit  rerew  you,  for  you  have  need  of  renewing, 
that  you  may  be  made  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus !  May  he 
sanctify  you  wholly,  spirit,  soul,  and  body,  and  at  last  present  you 
faultless,  before  the  throne  of  God,  for  his  dear  name's  sake !    Amen, 


lExpogittott  t!s  €.  IS.  Spurseom 

JOHN  XV.  1—11. 

Verse  1 .     I  am  the  trvs  vine,  and  my  Father  ia  the  husbandman. 

If  you  want  to  know  where  the  true  Church  is,  Christ  here  tells  you :  **  I 
am  the  true  vine."  All  who  are  in  Christ  are  in  the  true  Church.  If  you 
want  to  know  who  is  the  Father  of  the  Church,  its  Keeper  and  Guardian, 
Christ  here  tells  you:  "My  Father  is  the  husbandman."  Hence,  I  feel 
persuaded  that  the  true  vine,  the  Church,  will  never  die,  for  it  is  Christ ; 
and  I  am  also  persuaded  that  it  will  never  be  uprooted,  for  Jesus  says,  "  My 
Father  is  the  husbandman;"  and  that  fact  is  a  guarantee  that  he  will 
take  care  of  it. 

2.     Every  branch  in  me  that  beareth  not  fruit  he  taketh  away : 
In  some  sense,    men  and  women  may  be  in  Christ  by  a  mere  outward 
profession  ;  but  if  they  have  no  evidence  of  a  real  union  to  Christ,  if  they 
produce  no  fruit,  they  will  be  taken  away,  some  by  death,  and  others  by 
apostacy  ;  but  they  will  be  taken  away. 

2.     And  every  branch  that  beareth  fruit,  he  purgeth  it,  that  it  may  bring 
forth  more  fruit. 
From  these  words,  it  is  clear  that  many  of  the  afflictions  which  we  have 


l^gg  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

to  endure  are  not  brought  upon  us  because  we  are  unfruitful,  but,  because 
we  are  bearing  fruit. 

3  4.  Now  ye  are  clean  through  the  word  which  I  have  spoken  unto  you, 
AuZin  me,  and  I  in  you.  As  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself  except  it 
abide  in  the  vine;  no  more  can  ye,  except  ye  aUde  xnme,  ,  ,     .       ^ 

Dear  friends,  beware  of  a  Christless  Christianity.  Beware  of  trying  to 
be  Christians  without  living  daUy  upon  Christ.  The  l)ranch  may  just  as 
well  try  to  bear  fruit  apart  from  the  vine  as  for  you  to  hope  to  mamtain 
the  reSity  of  Christian  life  without  continual  feUowship  with  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ. 

5  6      lam  the  vine,  ye  are  the  branches:   he  that  abideth  in  me,  and  I  in 
'   him,  ihe  sam^  bringeth  forth  much  fruit:    for  without  "^  y^'^^-tt^    and 
If  a  man  aUde  not  in  me,  he  is  cast  forth  as  a  branch,  and  is  withered,    a7id 
men  gather  them,  and  cast  them  into  the  fire,  and  they  are  burned. 

The  vine  must  either  bear  fruit  or  be  good  for  nothing ;  and  you,  behever, 
must  be  vitally  united  to  Christ,  and  bear  fruit  in  consequence  of  that  union, 
or  else  you  mU  be  like  those  fruitless  vine-branches,  of  which  our  Lord 
■aid  that  "men  gather  them,  and  cast  them  into  the  fire,  and  they  are 
burned." 

7.  If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will, 
and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you. 

Do  not  take  that  verse  as  a  promise  <>*  unlimited  answers  to  P^^yf  i/^^ 
it  is  nothmg  of  the  kind.  Remember  the  "if"  that  quahfies  it.  //ye 
abide  in  me.  and  my  words  abide  in  you."  for  a  man  who  is  truly  m  Christ, 
as  the  Wch  is  in  the  vine,  and  who  i.  feeding  upon  Clf"t  s  wo  ^^^  ^^^^^ 
80  influenced  by  the  Holy  Spirit  that  he  will  not  ask  a^yJJ^^g.^^^^^^'^ 
con^ra^to  the  mind  of  God.  Consequently,  his  prayers  though  in  one 
sense  iSrestrictod.  are  really  restricted  by  the  tenderness  of  ^cons^^^^^^^^ 
aid  the  sensitiveness  of  his  spirit  to  the  influence  of  the  mmd  of  God. 
^erewe  some  Christians  who  do  not  get  their  prayers  answered  and  who 
iev^r  will  as  long  as  they  do  not  comply  with  this  ^f^^^'^'^'^ZlJchM^^ 
^  me.  and  my  words  abide  in  you."  If  you  do  not  take  notice  of  Christ  s 
wo^ds  he  will  not  take  notice  of  your  words.  He  is  ^^t  gomg  to^op^^^l,^^ 
door  to  every  stranger  who  chooses  to  give  a  runaway  knock  at  it,  but  he 
will  pay  attention  to  his  own  children  who  pay  attention  to  him. 

8.  Herein  is  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit ;  so  shall  ye  be  my 

"^^ «  Ye'shall  be  known  to  be  my  disciples."     Everybody  ijdll  perceive  that 
youlUt bebrSSTof  that  fiuitful'^vine,  Christ  Jesus,  if  ye  bear  much 

fruit. 

9.  As  the  Father  hath  Imed  me,  so  have  I  loved  you:    continue  ye  m  my 

^' How  wondrously  Jesus  loves  those  who  are  truly  his  !  As  tiie  Father 
Wli^^so  does  he  love  u. ;  that  is,  without  beginning,  without  measure, 

^^^l^t'^tX^^''^^^^  i->  1^-  ^  i*«  -3oy  it.  drink  it  in.  be 
influenced  by  it. 

10      If  ve  keep  my  commandmenU,  ye  shall  abide  in  my  love; 

-  You  shall  Uve  in  tiie  realization  of  my  love  if  you  Uve  m  obedience  to 

""^I'o  11  Even  as  I  have  kept  my  Father's  commandments,  and  abide  in  his 
love  These  mn^  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that  my  joy  might  remam  m  you, 
and  that  your  Joy  might  be  full. 

For.  when  Christ  is  not  pleased  with  us  we  are  not  likely  to  have  joy  m 
selves.     Oh,  that  we  may  so  live  as  to  please  Christ  1 


CHEIST'S  CAEE  OF  HIS  DISCIPLES. 


%    l^tniffil 


Intended  for  Ebading  on  Lord's-day,  April  2nd,   1899, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT    NEW    PARK    STREET    CHAPEL,    SOUTHWARK, 
On  a  Lord'S'day  Evening,  early  in  the  ytar  1857. 


"If  therefore  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way." — John  xviii.  8. 

We  need  but  hint  at  the  circumstances  under  which  these  words  were 
uttered.  Our  Saviour  was  in  the  Garden  of  Gethsemane  with  his 
disciples  ;  a  multitude  came  with  the  officers  commissioned  by  the  high 
priest  to  seize  him ;  he  went  boldly  towards  them,  and  asked,  "  Whom 
seek  ye?  "  Ttiey  answered,  "Jesus  of  Nazareth."  At  his  words,  "I 
am  he,"  *' they  went  backward  and  fell  to  the  ground,"  and  then 
Jesus  said  to  them,  "  I  have  told  you  that  I  am  he  :  if  therefore  ye 
seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way." 

Now,  in  a  very  simple  manner,  I  shall  try,  first  of  all,  to  draw  a  few 
lessons  from  this  occurrence  ;  and  then,  secondly,  to  bring  out  a  great 
truth  which  I  think  is  foreshadowed  in  this  utterance  of  our  Redeemer. 

I.  First,  let  us  consider  the  lessons  of  the  occurrence  itself. 
Our  Saviour  said  to  these  people,  "  If  therefore  ye  seek  me,  let  these 
go  their  way." 

In  this  incident,  our  Master  proved  his  own  willingness  to  die.  This 
word  of  his  was  a  mandate  so  powerful  that  none  of  the  disciples  were 
seized,  much  less  put  to  death.  There  was  Peter,  who  had  drawn  his 
sword,  and  cut  off  the  ear  of  the  high  priest's  servant.  We  should 
naturally  have  expected  that  he  would  have  been  arrested,  oi 
smitten  to  the  earth  ;  but  so  powerful  was  the  command  of  Christ 
that  not  a  finger  was  laid  upon  his  hasty-tempered  disciple.  Peter 
and  John  went  afterwards  into  the  judgment-hall, — as  it  were,  into 
the  very  teeth  of  our  Lord's  enemies ; — but,  with  the  exception  of  a 
few  jeers,  they  were  suffered  to  go  their  way.  John  did  even  more 
than  that,  for  he  went  within  the  range  of  the  spears  of  the  Eoman 
soldiers,  and  stood  at  the  foot  of  Christ's  cross,  and  wept ;  yet  not  a 
finger  was  laid  on  him,  nor  on  any  one  of  Christ's  disciples, — not  for 
want  of  will,  for,  you  remember,  they  seized  a  young  man  who  left 
his  garment  in  their  hands,  and  fled  naked, — evidently  supposing  him 
to  have  been  a  disciple  of  Christ.  This  shows,  then,  the  power  of 
Christ's  mandate  that,  in  that  hour  of  darkness,  not  so  much  as  one 
No.  2,616. 


170  METBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

of  his  disciples  was  maltreated,  but  all  were  suffered  to  go  their  way. 
If  Christ,  then,  by  his  simple  word,  delivered  his  disciples,  how  much 
more  could  he  have  delivered  himself  ?  And  in  his  not  doing  so,  you 
cannot  fail  to  see  how  willing  he  was  to  die.  One  word  threw  them 
to  the  ground ;  another  word  would  have  hurled  them  into  the  arms 
of  death;  but  our  Saviour  would  not  speak  the  word  which  might 
have  saved  himself,  for  he  came  to  save  others,  not  himself. 

There  is  something  very  courageous  in  the  Saviour's  saying,  **  If  ye 
seek  me.**  You  know  that,  when  Adam  sinned,  God  had  to  seek  the 
culprit ;  but,  in  this  case,  when  Christ  stood  as  the  Surety  for  his 
people,  instead  of  being  Bought,  he  seemed  to  seek  his  executioners. 
"  If  ye  seek  me,"  said  he;  and  he  put  in  an  "  if  " — as  though  it  were 
not  80  much  their  seeking  him  as  his  seeking  them ; — for  he  had  come 
into  their  very  midst  to  die.  Our  blessed  Lord  was  well  acquainted 
with  the  circumstances  of  his  own  death.  He  sat  at  the  table,  at  the 
institution  of  the  Lord's  supper,  on  that  memorable  evening ;  why 
could  he  not  wait  and  be  seized  there  ?  But  no ;  dauntless,  "  the 
Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah"  steps  out.  and  boldly  faces  his  enemy. 
He  does  not  wait  to  be  attacked ;  but  goes  forth  to  meet  death,  to 
give  himself  up  for  us.  Scarcely  any  martyr  has  done  such  a  deed  as 
this.  God  has  helped  them  to  die,  when  they  have  been  delivered 
into  the  hands  of  their  enemies ;  but  our  Saviour  goes  to  his  enemies, 
and  says,  '*  Here  I  am  :  if  ye  seek  me,  I  have  come  to  give  myself  up ; 
I  will  put  you  to  no  trouble  in  iearching  for  me ;  there  is  no  necessity 
to  hunt  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  Jerusalem  to  find  me  out, 
here  I  am ;  if  ye  seek  me,  I  am  ready  to  die ;  take  me,  I  have  no 
opposition  to  make.  *  If  ye  seek  me,'  all  I  have  to  say  is,  *  Let  these 
go  their  way  ; '  as  for  myself,  I  am  willing  enough  to  die  !  " 

Learn,  then,  Christian,  the  readiness  of  thy  Master  to  suffer  foi 
thee.  He  was  no  unwilling  Saviour.  Thou  hast  sometimes  borrowed 
money  of  a  friend ;  and  when  thou  hast  taken  it  of  him,  it  was  a  grief 
to  thee  to  accept  it,  for  he  looked  upon  thee  as  a  beggar,  or  even  as  a 
robber  who  had  demanded  spoil  of  him.  But  when  thou  takest 
Christ's  favours,  there  is  this  sweet  consideration  with  them,  that  they 
are  all  given  willingly.  The  blood  that  thou  drink  est,  and  the  flesh 
that  thou  eatest,  spiritually,  is  no  dole  of  a  strained  benevolence,  but 
the  voluntary,  munificent  gift  from  the  heart  of  Jesus  to  thee  and  to 
thy  brethren.  Eejoice,  then,  in  the  willingness  of  Christ  to  sufEer  for 
thee. 

In  the  second  place,  upon  the  very  face  of  our  text,  we  read  the  ca/re 
of  Christ  towards  hts  people.  "  If  therefore  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go 
their  way.'*  Oh  !  the  agony  of  the  Saviour's  heart  at  that  moment. 
A  friend  in  trouble  is  frequently  forgetful ;  expect  not  a  man  in  great 
grief  to  remember  you  ;  the  heart  is  then  so  full  of  its  own  bitterness, 
it  hath  no  time  to  think  of  others.  I  would  pardon  any  man  for  not 
noticing  me  in  the  street,  if  he  were  ill ;  I  would  easily  forgive  any- 
one for  forgetting  anything  when  loaded  with  pain  and  sorrow  ;  and 
surely,  beloved,  we  might  have  thought  it  not  hard  of  Jesus  if  he  had 
forgotten  his  disciples  in  his  hour  of  grief.  But  mark  how  kind  his 
heart  is :  " '  If  ye  seek  me,' — I  say  nothing  about  how  ye  should  treat 
me,— hut  'let  these ' "—these  disciples  were  the  only  ones  he  cared 


Christ's  care  of  his  disciples. 


171 


about;  lie  cared  not  for  himself  ;—'*  let  tJief^e  go  their  way."  Like 
the  mother  in  the  snowstorm,  who  takes  off  her  own  clothes  to  wrap 
around  Ler  cold  shivering  babe;  what  cares  she  though  the  blast 
should  find  out  her  inmost  soul,  and  though  her  body  be  frozen  like 
ice,  if  her  babe  but  lives  ?  Eer  first  thought,  after  she  is  restored  to 
consciousness,  when  she  Las  been  well-nigh  benumbed  to  death,  but 
chafed  to  life  by  kindness,  is  concerning  that  babe.  It  was  even  so 
with  Jesus  :   "  Let  these  go  their  way." 

"  When  justice,  by  our  sins  provoked, 
Drew  forth  its  dreadful  sword, 
He  gave  his  soul  up  to  the  stroke 
Without  a  murmuring  word. 

**  This  was  compassion  like  a  God, 
That  when  the  Saviour  knew 
The  price  of  pardon  was  his  blood, 
His  pity  ne'er  withdrew. 

"Now  though  he  reigns  exalted  high. 
His  love  is  still  as  great ; 
WhII  he  remembers  Calvary, 
Nor  lets  his  saints  forget." 

They  are  all  recollected,  all  borne  upon  his  heart,  and  still  cared  for. 
Tiierefore  thou  art  cared  for,  thou  lamb  of  the  fiock ;  thou  art  cared 
for,  poor  Eeady-to-halt ;  thou  art  remembered.  Miss  Despondency ; 
thou  art  regarded  with  the  eyes  of  love,  timid  Mr.  Fearing ;  though 
thou  stumblest  at  every  stone,  yet  thy  Saviour's  love  faileth  not ;  he 
remembereth  thee,  for  he  cared  for  his  disciples  in  his  hour  of  greatest 
sorrow. 

In  the  next  place,  learn  from  this  incident  our  Saviours  wisdom. 
When  he  said,  "Let  these  go  their  way,"  there  was  wisdom  in  it. 
How  ?  Because  they  were  not  prepared  to  suffer,  and  it  would  have 
been  unwise  to  have  allowed  them  to  suffer  then,  if  they  had  been 
prepared  ;  for  if  they  had  suffered  then,  it  would  have  been  thought 
that  at  least  they  shared  the  honour  of  our  redemption ;  therefore 
Christ  would  have  none  but  thieves  upon  the  mount  of  doom,  lest  any 
should  suppose  that  he  had  a  helper.  He  did  tread  the  winepress 
alone,  and  of  the  people  there  were  none  with  him.  Besides,  these 
disciples  were  but  infants  in  grace  ;  they  had  not  received  the  pleni- 
tude of  the  Spirit ;  they  were  not  fit  to  suffer.  Therefore  Christ  said, 
"If  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way."  These  raw  recruits  must 
not  yet  bear  the  brunt  of  the  battle ;  let  them  tarry  until,  by  a 
longer  experience,  and  by  greater  grace,  they  shall  be  made  brave  to 
die,  and  shall  each  of  them  in  his  turn  wear  the  crown  of  martyrdom ; 
but  not  now.  Christ  spared  his  people  at  that  moment,  since  it  would 
have  been  unwise  to  have  suffered  them  to  die  then. 

Learn  also.  Christians,  from  your  Master's  example,  the  duty  of 
putting  yourselves  in  the  way  of  sufferifig  when  you  can  save  your  brethren. 
Oh!  there  is  something  glorious  in  the  spirit  Christ  manifested  in 
j.lacing  himself  first.  *'  If  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way."  That  is 
the  spirit  all  Christians  ought  to  catch, — the  spirit  of  heroic  self-sacrifice 
for  the  disciples'  sake.     The  mere  professor  says,   **  Let   me   go  my 


^'^  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

way  seek  another  to  be  put  to  death;"  but  if  we  were  what  we 
should  b^  we  should  each  one  say,  "  If  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their 
way.  How  many  of  us  would  be  ready  to  escape  martyrdom,  and 
allow  our  brethren  to  be  burned !  But  that  would  not  be  the  spirit  of 
our  Master.  How  frequently  you  are  ready  to  allow  opprobrium  and 
shame  to  fall  upon  the  church  if  you  can  but  be  yourself  screened ! 
How  very  frequently  you  will  allow  a  brother  to  perform  a  duty   at 

ny  trouble  to  yoiir- 
would  say,  "■  'Let 

. .  ^,     --  .  •-  -  o or  it,  let  me  suffer  ; 

It  there  be  a  pamful  duty,  let  me  do  it ;  let  others  escape,  let  them  go 
free;  lo,  I  will  give  myself  a  willing  substitute  for  them  in  this 
matter."  Oh  !  we  want  everywhere  more  of  this  spirit,  to  be  able  to 
say  to  the  poor  saint,  ''  Poverty  is  seeking  thee,  I  will  in  some  degree 
bear  the  inconvenience  that  thou  mayest  be  screened.  Thou  art  sick, 
I  will  watch  thee;  thou  art  naked,  I  will  clothe  thee;  thou  art 
hungry,  I  will  feed  thee ;  I  will  stand  in  thy  stead  as  far  as  I  am 
ablp,  that  thou  mayest  go  thy  way." 

These  seem  to  me  to  be  the  lessons  to  be  learned  from  our  Saviour's 
words,  "If  therefore  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way." 

II.     Now  I  come  to  notice,  secondly,   the  great  doctrine  which 

THIS   INCIDENT   SEEMS   TO   FORESHADOW. 

Will  you  please  to  observe  the  next  verse  to  the  text  ?  *'  That  the 
saying  might  be  fulfilled,  which  he  spake,  Of  them  which  thou  gavest 
me  have  I  lost  none."  If  I  had  quoted  this  passage  in  such  a  con- 
nection, you  would  have  told  me  it  was  a  misquotation ;  you  would 
have  said,  "  Why,  my  dear  sir,  that  has  nothing  to  do  with  the 
disciples  going  their  way  or  not !  "  Ah  !  but  you  would  be  quite  in 
error  if  you  talked  like  that ;  God's  Spirit  knows  how  to  quote,  if  we 
do  not.  Very  often,  we  refer  our  hearers  to  a  text  which  we  think  is 
exactly  adapted  and  pertinent  to  the  point  before  us,  when  it  has 
really  nothing  to  do  with  the  matter;  and,  often,  the  Holy  Spirit 
quotes  a  text  which  we  think  unsuitable ;  but,  on  closer  examination, 
we  find  that  the  very  gist  of  it  bears  directly  upon  the  subject.  This 
was  the  beginning  of  Christ's  deliverances,  which  he  would  through 
eternity  vouchsafe  to  all  his  children.  Inasmuch  as  he  then  said, 
"Let  these  go  their  way,"  it  was  the  foreshadowing,  the  picturing,  of  the 
great  deed  of  substitution  whereby  Christ  would  be  able  to  say,  "  If 
therefore  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way."  This  point  will  appear 
clearly  if  we  look  at  how.Christ  treats  his  people  in  Providence  and 
at  the  bar  of  Justice. 

It  has  always  seemed  to  me  as  if  Christ  had  home  the  hrunt  of  Provi- 
dence for  his  people,  so  that  now  all  things  work  together  for  their  good. 
When  Christ  came  into  the  world,  he  did,  in  spirit,  say  something 
like  this,  "Ye  wild  beasts  of  the  field,  ye  are  against  my  people; 
come,  now,  be  against  me ;  and,  then,  let  these  go  their  way."  This 
was  according  to  the  ancient  prophecy  :  "  I  will  make  a  covenant  for 
i-hem  with  the  beasts  of  the  field,  and  with  the  fowls  of  heaven,  and  with 
the  creeping  things  of  the  ground."  Christ  seemed  to  say,  "  Stones,  ye 
are  enemies  to  my  flock ;  now  take  me  for  their  Substitute,  and  be  at 
€nuiity  against  me;  and  then  it  shall  be  written,  *  The  stones  of  the 


J 


CHRIST  S    CARE    OF    HIS    DISCIPLES.  173 

field  shall  be  in  league  with  them.'  "  Christ,  as  it  were,  said  to 
Providence,  *'  Thy  black  and  bitter  face  shall  look  on  me ;  thy  quiver, 
full  of  fiery  darts,  shall  be  emptied,  and  they  shall  all  find  their  tai  get 
here  in  my  bosom  ;  thy  dread  aspect  shall  be  seen  by  me  ;  "  but,  "  Let 
these  go  their  way." 

Providence  has  inflicted  its  evils  on  Christ,  and  has  now  only  good 
for  God's  people.  "What!  sir,  only  good?"  you  say,  ''  why,  I  am 
poor,  I  am  sick  !  "  Yes.  but  it  is  only  good  ;  for  that  is  good  which 
worketh  good.  "  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love 
God."  Christ  saith  even  to  kings,  "  Touch  not  mine  anointed,  and  do 
my  prophets  no  harm."  "  Let  these  go  their  way."  The  kings  of  the 
earth  have  been  seeking  Christ's  (Church,  to  destroy  and  to  devour  it ; 
so  Christ  lets  them  find  him,  and  put  him  to  death ;  and  before  lie 
dies,  he  turns  round  to  the  kings,  and  says,  "  Touch  not  mine 
anointed,  and  do  my  prophets  no  harm."  He  speaks  to  trouble,  to 
trial,  to  grief,  to  accident,  and  to  peril,  and  he  says  :  "  Ye  have  sought 
me ;  now  let  my  people  go  their  way."  We  should  never  have  known 
the  sweetness  of  the  psalm, — 

"  He  that  hath  made  his  refuge  God, 
Shall  find  a  most  secure  abode," — 

if  Christ  had  not  died.  The  only  way  that  you  and  I  can  have  a 
refuge  is  by  Christ  bearing  the  brunt  of  our  trouble.  How  does  a 
shield  save  me?  It  saves  me  by  bearing  the  blows  itself.  The 
shield  doth,  as  it  were,  say  to  the  swords  of  the  enemy,  "  If  ye  seek 
me,  let  this  warrior  go  his  way."  So  Christ,  our  Shield  and  God's 
Anointed,  beareth  the  brunt  of  Providence,  the  evil  and  the  woe 
thereof ;  and  he  saith  now  to  the  mysterious  dispensations  of  God, 
concerning  all  the  children  of  the  Lord,  "  '  Let  these  go  their  way.' 
Never,  never  work  ill  to  them,  but  let  them  have  only  good." 

The  other  thought  is,  Christ  hath  said  this  of  "his  people  even  to 
Justice.  Before  the  throne  of  God,  fiery  Justice  once  drew  his  sword, 
and  went  out  after  sinners,  to  find  full  many,  and  to  cast  them  into 
the  pit.  His  sword  thirsted  for  the  blood  of  all  that  had  sinned ;  but 
there  stood  a  chosen  multitude,  reserved  by  love  and  chosen  by  grace; 
and  Justice  said,  "  They  are  sinners  ;  I  will  have  them,  I  will  sheathe 
this  sword  in  their  hearts,  for  they  are  sinners,  and  they  must  perish." 
Then  Christ  came  forward,  and  asked  him,  "Whom  seekest  thou?" 
"Sinners,"  answered  Justice.  Then  said  Jesus,  "They  are  not  sin- 
ners ;  they  were  sinners  once,  but  they  are  righteous  now,  clothed  in 
my  righteousness ;  if  thou  seekest  the  sinner,  here  am  I."  "What !  " 
said  Justice,  "  art  thou  the  sinner  ?  "  "  Nay,  not  the  sinner,  but  I  am 
the  sinner's  Substitute ;  all  the  sinner's  guilt  was  imputed  to  me ;  all 
his  unrighteousness  is  mine,  and  all  my  righteousness  is  his ;  I,  the 
Saviour,  am  the  sinner's  Substitute  ;  take  me."  And  Justice  accepted 
the  substitution ;  took  the  Saviour,  crucified  him,  nailed  him  to  that 
cross  whoee  agonies  we  commemorate  at  the  communion  table.  In 
that  hour  Jesus  cried,  "  If  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way."  Who 
are  they  that  are  to  go  their  way  ?  Why,  the  very  men  whose  former 
way  was  one  of  iniquity,  and  whose  end  would  have  been  destruction, 
if  the  curse  had  not  been  made  to  fall  upon  the  head  of  Jesus ! 


174  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

**Let  these  go  their  way."  Oh,  that  wonderful  sentence!  I  nevei 
knew  its  sweetness  till  I  found  the  Lord  ;  but  I  did  know  something 
of  its  power.  Do  you  ask,  "  How  was  that  ?  "  Why,  long  before  you 
know  the  Lord,  you  have  some  of  the  power  of  the  blood  of  Christ 
resting  upon  you.  ''How  so?"  do  you  enquire.  "Why,  do  you  not 
know  it  to  be  a  fact  that,  — 

"  Determined  to  save,  he  watched  o'er  our  path, 
"When,  Satan's  blind  slaves,  we  sported  with  death"? 

And  80,  some  of  the  benefits  of  Christ's  death  were  ours  before  we 
knew  him,  and  before  we  loved  him.  The  reason  why  I  was  not 
damned  before  I  knew  the  Saviour  was  that  he  had  said,  '*  Let  him 
go  his  way;  I  have  died  for  him."  You  would  have  been  in  hell 
these  twenty  years,  saint,  for  you  were  then  unregenerate  ;  but  Christ 
said,  "  Let  him  go  his  way ;  if  ye  seek  me,  he  shall  go  his  way, 
sinner  though  he  be ;  "  and  now,  when  gloomy  fears  arise,  and  dark 
thoughts  roll  over  our  mind,  let  this  be  our  comfort.  Sinners  we  are 
still,  guilty  and  vile;  but  the  same  voice  says,  "Let  these  go  tlieir 
way."  It  is  the  "let  "  of  command;  and  who  can  hinder  when  God 
letteth  in  this  sense  ?  '*  Let  these  go  their  way."  You  are  going  up 
Bunyan's  Hill  Difficulty,  and  there  are  lions  at  the  top.  Christians, 
remember  this  message,  "Let  these  go  their  way."  You  will, 
perhaps,  get  into  Giant  Despair's  dungeon  ;  here  is  a  key  that  will  fit 
the  lock  :  "  Let  these  go  their  way."  You  will  be  tumbling  about  in 
the  Slough  of  Despond ;  here  is  a  stone  to  put  your  foot  on  to  help 
you  to  get  out :  "Let  these  go  their  way."  What  for  ?  Because  they 
pray  ?  No.  Because  they  serve  God  ?  No ;  the  mandate  was  given 
before  they  did  either  the  one  or  the  other.  "Let  these  go  their 
way,"  because  Christ  died  in  their  stead. 

The  day  is  coming,  and  shall  soon  be  here,  when  you  and  I  shall 
stretch  our  wings,  and  fly  away  to  the  land  that  is  very  far  off.  I 
think  I  might  picture  in  my  imagination  the  soul  when  it  has  left  the 
body.  The  believer  speeds  his  way  up  to  his  native  city,  Jerusalem, 
"  the  mother  of  us  all."  But  at  the  gate  one  standeth  ;  and  he  saith, 
"Hast  thou  a  right  to  admission  here?  It  is  written,  'He  that 
w^alketh  righteously,  and  speaketh  uprightly;  he  that  despiseth  the 
gain  of  oppressions,  that  shaketh  his  bauds  from  holding  of  bribes, 
that  stoppeth  his  ears  from  hearing  of  blood,  and  shutteth  his  eyes 
from  seeing  evil;  he  shall  dwell  on  high."  Art  thou  such  an  one  ?  " 
**  Ah  !  "  saith  the  soul,  "I  hope  by  grace  I  have  been  made  so ;  but  I 
cannot  claim  to  have  always  been  so,  for  *  I  the  chief  of  sinners  am.'  " 
"  Then  how  camest  thou  hero  ?  This  gate  gives  no  admission  to  those 
who  are  sinners."  While  the  angel  is  thus  parleying,  I  hear  a  voice 
trying,  "  Let  these  go  their  way  ;  "  and,  forthwith,  the  gates  of  heaven 
are  opened,  and  every  soul  for  whom  Christ  died  doth  enter  into 
Paradise. 

Come,  saint,  close  up  this  simple  meditation  by  looking  yonder. 
See  Christ,  with  justice,  vengeance,  wrath,  all  seeking  him.  Lo,  they 
have  found  him ;  they  have  slain  him  ;  he  is  buried ;  he  hath  risen 
again.  Oh  !  see  them  seeking  him  ;  and  as  you  sit  down  at  his  table, 
think,  "  When  they  sought  him,  they  let  me  go  my  way."     And  what 


^■1 


EXPOSITION.  1 75 

a  sweet  way  it  is  !  I  am  allowed  to  come  to  his  table  of  communion. 
Why  ?  Because  they  sought  him.  I  am  invited  to  hold  fellowship 
with  Jesus.  Why?  Because  they  sought  him.  I  am  permitted  to 
have  a  good  hope  through  grace  ;  and,  more  than  that,  "I  know  that 
when  this  earthly  house  of  my  taberuacle  is  dissolved,  I  have  a  build- 
ing of  God,  a  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens." 
AVhy  am  I  to  go  that  way  ?  Why  ?  Because  they  sought  him,  and 
found  him.  Else,  where  had  I  been  now  ?  My  place  might  have  been 
on  the  alehouse  bench,  or,  perhaps,  in  the  seat  of  the  scorner;  and 
what  would  have  been  my  prospect?  Why,  that,  at  the  last,  I 
should  be  in  hell  amongst  the  fiends  and  the  lost  spirits  of  the 
pit ;  but  now  I  tread  the  paths  of  righteousness  and  the  ways  of 
grace.  Oh,  let  me  remember  why  I  do  so ;  it  is  because  they  sought 
thee,  0  thou  precious  Lord  of  mine!  They  sought  thee,  my  dear 
Eedeemer  and  my  God ;  they  sought  thy  heart,  and  broke  it ;  they 
sought  thy  head,  and  crowned  it  with  thorns  ;  they  sought  thy  hands, 
and  nailed  them  to  the  tree ;  they  sought  thy  feet,  and  pierced  them ; 
they  sought  thy  body,  they  slew  and  buried  it.  And  now,  though  the 
roaring  lion  may  seek  me  never  so  much,  he  cannot  devour  me  ;  never 
can  I  be  rent  in  pieces,  never  can  I  be  destroyed,  for  I  carry  with  me 
this  sweet  passport  of  the  King  of  heaven,  "  Let  these  go  their  way." 
0  child  of  God,  take  this  with  thee  for  thy  safe  conduct  everywhere  ! 
When  men  travel  abroad,  they  carry  with  them  a  permit  to  go  to  this 
town  and  the  other.  Take  this  little  sentence,  brother  or  sister  in 
Jesus,  and  when  unbelief  stops  thee,  draw  it  out,  and  say,  "  He  hath 
said,  '  Let  these  go  their  way.'  "  And  when  Satan  stops  thee,  hold 
out  to  him  this  divine  mandate,  "  Let  these  go  their  way."  And 
when  death  shall  stop  thee,  take  out  this  sweet  permit  from  thy 
Master,  ''  Let  these  go  their  way."  And  when  the  throne  of  judg- 
ment shall  be  set,  and  thou  standest  before  it,  plead  this  sentence, 
plead  it  even  before  thy  Maker,  *'  My  Master  said, '  Let  these  go  their 
way.'  "  Oh,  cheering  words  !  I  could  weep  them  all  out ;  but  I  will 
say  no  more.  I  hope  many  of  you  will  enjoy  the  sweetness  of  them 
while  we  gather  around  the  Lords  table,  in  obedience  to  his  gracious 
command,  "  This  do  in  remembrance  of  me." 


lExposition  \s^  €.  1g.  Spurtjeon^ 

JOHN  XVII. ;  AND  XVIII.  1—9. 
Chapter  xvii.     Verse  1.     These  words  spake  Jesus,  and  lifted  up  his  eyes  to 
heaven,  and  said.  Father^  the  hour  is  come;  glorify  thy  Son,  that  thy  Son  also 
may  glorify  thee  : 

^^  Jesus  is  going  forth  to  die,  and  he  knows  it ;  yet  he  prays  to  his  Father, 
"  Glorify  thy  Son."  There  was  no  way  of  his  coming  to  that  glory  except 
by  passing  through  tears,  and  blood,  and  agony,  and  death.  He  only  asks 
that  he  may  be  glorified  in  what.he  is  about  to  do,  and  to  suffer,  and  he  is 
ready  for  it  all :  "  Father,  the  hour  is  come ;  glorify  thy  Son,  that  thy  Son 
also  may  glorify  thee." 

2.  Aa  thou  hast  given  him  power  over  all  flesh,  that  he  ihould  give  eternal 
life  to  as  many  as  thou  hast  given  him. 

In  that  saying  of  our  Lord  we  have  an  explanation  of  what  he  did  by 
ni8  redemption.    There  was  a  universal  aspect  of  it :   "  Thou  hast  given 


176  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

him  power  over  all  flesh."  There  was  a  special  design  in  it :  "  That  he 
should  give  eternal  life  to  as  many  as  thou  hast  given  him."  Sometimes, 
two  views  of  the  same  thing  may  appear  to  contradict  each  other ;  but 
when  we  are  taught  of  God,  we  soon  discover  that  they  do  not  really  do 
so,  and  that  a  grand  truth  may  be  contained  in  the  two  descriptions  of  it. 
Christ  had,  by  virtue  of  his  death,  power  over  all  flesh  ;  but  it  was  for  a 
distinct  purpose  :  "  that  he  should  give  eternal  life  to  as  many  as  thou  hast 
given  him." 

3.  And  this  is  life  eternal^  that  they  might  know  thee,  the  only  true  Oody  and 
Jesus  Christ,  whom  thoa  hast  sent. 

By  this,  then,  dear  friends,  we  can  know  whether  we  have  eternal  life  or 
not.  Do  we  know  the  Father  ?  Do  we  know  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Messiah — 
the  Sent  One  ?  Are  we  resting  in  that  blessed  knowledge  Y  If  so,  he  has 
given  to  us  eternal  life. 

4,  5.  /  have  glorified  thee  on  the  earth  :  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thou 
gavest  me  to  do.  And  now,  0  Father,  glorify  thou  me  with  thine  own  self  with 
the  glory  which  I  had  with  thee  before  the  world  was. 

In  deep  humility,  Jesus  had  laid  that  glory  aside  for  a  while.  He  had 
tabernacled  in  human  flesh  ;  and  when  he  spoke  these  words,  the  time  was 
approaching  when, — 

"  All  his  work  and  warfare  done," — 

he  should  go  back  to  his  pristine  glory  with  something  more  added  to  it. 

6.  /  have  manifested  thy  name  unto  the  men  which  thou  gavest  me  out  of  the 
world : 

They  had  not  all  of  them  clearly  seen  that  manifestation.  Jesus  had  to 
ask  the  question,  "  Have  I  been  so  long  time  with  you,  and  yet  hast  thou 
not  known  me,  Philip  ?  "  Still,  that  was  not  the  fault  of  the  manifestation  ; 
Christ  had  manifested  the  name — that  is,  the  character—of  God  unto  those 
who  had  been  given  to  him  out  of  the  world. 

6.  Thine  they  were,  and  thou  gavest  them  me  ;  and  they  have  kept  thy  word. 
We  might  have  expected  that  the  verse  would  end,  *•  and  I  have  kept 

them."  But  their  keeping  God's  Word  is  the  evidence  "that  Christ  has 
kept  them.  Whenever  a  soul  loves  the  Word  of  God,  delights  in  the  teach- 
ing of  Christ,  glories  in  those  things  which  the  world  calls  dogmas,— as  if 
they  were  so  much  dog's  meat, — when  you  and  I  can  feed  upon  these 
things, — when  every  utterance  of  Christ  is  dear  and  precious  to  us, — that  is 
good  evidence  of  our  being  called  out  of  the  world,  and  separated  unto 
Christ ;  it  is  one  of  the  marks  of  divine  grace  which  Jesus  works  in  those 
whom  the  Father  has  given  him  :  "  Thine  they  were,  and  thou  gavest  them 
me  ;  and  they  have  kept  thy  Word." 

7.  Now  they  have  known  that  all  things  whatsoever  thou  hast  given  me  are 
of  thee. 

The  Father  gives  Christ  the  truth  which  Christ  gives  to  us.  The  Father 
gives  Christ  the  souls  which  Jesus  keeps  until  the  day  of  his  power.  There 
is  mutual  communion  between  God  the  Father  and  his  blessed  Son  ;  let  us 
never  say  a  word  that  might  look  as  if  we  did  not  understand  the  oneness— 
the  everlasting  and  infinite  oneness— which  there  is  between  the  sacred 
persons  of  the  Divine  Unity. 

8.  For  I  have  given  unto  them  the  words  which  thou  gavest  me; 

You  know  how  men  talk  against  "  verbal  inspiration."  Yet  Christ  says, 
"  I  have  given  unto  them  the  vjords  which  thou  gavest  me."  Many  are 
trifling  with  the  teaching  of  God's  Word,  as  if  it  were  of  no  importance  at 
all.  Not  so  did  Christ ;  "  I  have  given  unto  them  the  words  which  thou 
gavest  me." 


EXPOSITION.  177 

8.  And  they  have  received  them,  and  have  known  surely  that  I  came  out 
from  thee^  and  they  have  believed  that  thou  didst  send  me. 

Firmly  do  we  believe  this,  and  in  our  heart  of  hearts  we  do  accept  every 
part  of  the  teaching  of  Christ,  no  matter  what  it  is.  I  hear  people  say 
sometimes,  "  Oh,  but  that  is  not  essential ! »  There  is  a  great  deal  of 
mischief  hatched  out  of  that  egg.  O  friends,  it  is  essential  that  Christ's 
disciples  should  treasure  whatever  he  has  said  1  Never  trifle  with  that  part 
of  the  Word  of  God  which  seems  to  be  less  essential  to  salvation  than 
another  portion  ;  for  if  it  is  not  essential  to  salvation,  it  may  be  essential  to 
your  comfort,  or  your  holiness,  or  your  strength,  or  your  usefulness ;  and 
if  it  be  essential  to  God's  glory,  let  us  never  trample  it  in  the  mire,  or  in 
any  way  dishonour  it.  Who  am  I  that  I  should  say,  "  This  which  God  has 
spoken  is  important,  but  that  other  is  not"?  It  does  not  do  for  us  to 
presume  to  judge  the  Word  of  God  ;  we  should  rather  let  the  Word  of  God 
judge  us. 

9.  /  pray  for  them  : — 

Blessed  word  !     Christ  prays  for  his  own  people  :  "  I  pray  for  them :  " 

9.     I  pray  not  for  the  world,  hut  for  them  which  thou  hast  given  me;— 
In  that  last  hour,  just  before  his  Passion,  his  thoughts  were  separating 
the  precious  from  the  vile ;  and  his  prayer  ascended  for  his  own  people : 
'  I  pray  for  them  :  I  pray  not  for  the  world,  but  for  them  which  thou  hast 
given  me  ; " — 

9, 10.  For  they  are  thine.  And  all  mine  are  thine,  and  thine  are  mine;  and 
I  am  glorified  in  them. 

It  is  a  wonderful  thing  that  Christ  should  be  glorified  in  his  people.  Can 
it  be  that  he  shall  be  glorified  in  me  ?  Dear  child  of  God,  you  sometimes 
eit  in  the  comer,  and  think  to  yourself,  "  How  insignificant  I  am  !  The 
church  on  earth  would  not  miss  me  if  I  were  taken  away  ;  and  the  choirs 
of  heaven  cannot  need  me."  Oh,  but  your  Lord  is  glorified  in  you  !  If  you 
are  one  of  his  chosen  and  redeemed  people,  in  your  very  weakness  and 
need  he  finds  opportunity  to  glorify  his  strength  and  his  fulness.  He 
knows  the  truth  about  this  matter,  and  he  says,  "  I  am  glorified  in  them." 

11.     And  now  I  am  no  more  in  the  world, — 

He  was  going  away  ;  he  has  gone  now. 

11.     But  these  are  in  the  world, — 

We  know  we  are  ;  do  we  not,  brethren  ?  We  have  a  thousand  things- 
some  of  them  very  painful  and  humiliating  to  us,— to  remind  us  that  we 
are  still  in  the  world. 

11.  And  I  come  to  thee.  Holy  Father,  keep  through  thine  own  name  those 
whom  thou  hast  given  me,  that  they  may  he  one,  as  we  are. 

Oh,  what  blessed  keeping  is  that,— to  be  kept  in  spiritual  oneness !  I  do 
not  expect  to  see  the  people  of  God  in  visible  oneness ;  but  as  there  was  a 
secret,  invisible  union,  most  real  and  most  true,  between  the  Father  and 
the  Son,  so  there  is,  at  this  time,  a  secret  union  in  the  hearts  of  all 
believers,  most  deep,  most  real,  most  true.  I  may  never  have  seen  that 
good  friend  before^  but  as  soon  as  ever  we  begin  to  talk  of  Jesus  and  his 
love,  if  we  are  the  living  children  of  the  living  God,  the  bond  of  unity  is 
felt  at  once  by  both  of  us.  «  One  is  your  Master,  even  Christ:  and  all  ve 
are  brethren."  ' 

12.  While  I  was  with  them  in  the  world,  I  kept  them  in  thy  name:  those 
that  thou  gavest  me  I  have  kept,  and  none  of  them  is  lost,  hut  the  son  of 
perdition;  that  the  scripture  might  he  fulfilled. 

What  a  blessed  Shepherd  is  this  who  never  lost  a  sheep  !  Judas  crept  in 
among  the  flock,  but  he  never  was  truly  one  of  the  flock.     He  was  never 

1^ 


178  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

a  son  of  God,  he  was  "the  son  of  perdition  "  all  along.  Christ  has  kept  all 
his  sheep,  and  all  his  lambs  ;  and  he  will  do  the  same,  dear  friends,  even  to 
the  end. 

13.  And  now  come  I  to  thee;  and  these  things  I  speak  in  the  world,  that 
they  might  have  my  joy  fulfilled  in  themselves^ 

What  an  unselfish  Saviour !  His  heart  is  ready  to  break  with  his  im- 
pending sufferings,  and  yet  he  prays  for  us,  that  we  may  be  filled  with  his 
joy.  I  suppose  that  it  is  true  that  the  Man  of  sorrows  was  the  happiest 
man  who  ever  lived.  "  For  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him,  he  endured  the 
cross,  despising  the  shame ; "  and,  notwithstanding  his  boundless  and 
bottomless  grief,  yet  there  was  within  him  such  communion  with  God,  and 
love  to  men,  and  the  certainty  of  his  ultimate  triumph,  that  kept  him  still 
joyous  above  the  seas  of  tribulation.  He  prays  that  that  same  joy  may  be 
fulfilled  in  us ;  may  God  graciously  grant  it  to  all  of  us  who  believe  in 
Jesus ! 

14,  15.  /  have  given  them  thy  word;  and  the  v)orld  hath  hated  them,  because 
they  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world.  I  yray  not  that  thou 
shoiddnt  take  them  out  of  the  world,  hut  that  thou  shouldest  keep  them  from 
the  evil. 

There  is  a  reason  for  God's  elect  being  allowed  to  remain  in  the  world. 
They  are  never  left,  like  wheat  in  the  field,  to  peiish  through  the  damp  and 
cold,  or  to  be  devoured  by  the  birds  of  the  air.  Oh,  no !  We  are  left  for 
God's  glory,  that  men  may  see  what  the  grace  of  God  can  do  in  poor  frail 
bodies  ;  for  the  service  of  Christ's  Church,  that  we  may  be  here  for  a  while 
to  carry  on  the  cause  of  God,  to  be  the  means  of  comforting  the  little  ones, 
and  to  seek  the  conversion  of  sinners.  We  are  to  be  like  salt  to  prevent 
putrefaction.  We  are  God's  preventive  men,  to  prevent  as  much  of  the  evil 
as  we  can  ;  and  we  are  to  fight  with  the  evil  that  cannot  be  prevented,  and 
to  seek  to  overthrow  it  in  Christ's  name. 

16.  They  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world. 

Many,  nowadays,  say  that  we  ought  to  blend  the  church  with  the  congre- 
gation, and  that  it  is  a  great  pity  to  have  any  division  between  them.  A 
great  many  good  people  are  outside  the  church  ;  therefore  try  to  make  the 
church  as  much  like  the  world  as  ever  you  can  !  That  is  a  silly  trick  of  the 
devil  which  the  wise  servants  of  God  will  answer  by  saying,  "To  whom  we 
give  place  for  subjection,  no,  not  for  an  hour."  There  must  ever  be  a 
broad  line  of  demarcation  between  the  Church  of  Christ  and  the  world,  and 
it  will  be  an  evil  day  when  that  line  is  abolished.  The  sons  of  God  took 
to  themselves  wives  of  the  daughters  of  men,  but  that  kind  of  union  brought 
mischief  with  it,  and  it  will  ever  do  so. 

17.  Sanctify  them  through  thy  truth :  thy  word  is  truth. 

We  cannot  afford  to  give  up  God's  inspired  Word,  because  it  is  a  means 
of  our  sanctification ;  and  if  this  be  taken  away,  it  is  not  such-and-such  a  ^ 
dogma,  as  they  call  it,  put  into  the  background,  but  it  is  truth  that  would  j 
sanctify  us  which  is  discarded,  it  is  God's  own  Word  that  is  flung  to  the 
dogs ;  and  that  must  never  be. 

18  19.  As  thou  hast  sent  me  into  the  world,  even  so  have  I  also  sent  them 
into  the  world.  And  for  their  sakes  I  sanctify  myself,  that  they  also  might  he 
sanctified  through  the  truth. 

"  I  set  myself  apart  unto  holiness,  that  they  also  might  be  set  apart  unto 
holy  uses  through  the  truth." 

20?  Neither  pray  I  for  these  alone,  but  for  them  also  which  shall  believe  on 
me  through  their  wordj 

Our  Lord  knew  that  the  little  circle  around  him  would  grow  into  a 


EXPOSITION.  179 

multitude  that  no  man  can  number,  out  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds, 
and  people,  and  tongues;  so  he  prayed  for  all  whom  his  Father  had 
given  him, — 

21,  22.  That  they  all  may  he  (me;  as  thou.  Father,  art  in  me,  and  I  in  thee, 
that  they  also  may  he  one  in  us  :  that  the  world  may  believe  that  thou  hast  sent 
me.  And  the  glory  which  thou  gavest  me  I  have  given  them;  that  they  may  he 
one,  even  as  we  are  one  : 

The  Church  will  never  know  her  true  glory  till  she  knows  her  perfect 
oneness  ;  the  One  Church  will  be  the  glorious  Church. 

23.  /  in  them,  and  thou  in  me,  that  they  may  he  made  perfect  in  one  ;  and 
that  the  world  may  know  that  thou  hast  sent  me,  and  hast  loved  them,  as  thou 
hast  loved  me. 

That  is  a  grand  expression :  "  Thou  hast  loved  them,  as  thou  hast  loved 
me."  What !  with  the  same  love  ?  It  is  even  so  ;— a  love  without  bogin- 
nirig,  a  love  without  change,  a  love  without  bounds,  a  love  without  end : 
"  Thou  hast  loved  them  as  thou  hast  loved  me." 

24 — 26.  Father,  I  will  that  they  also,  whom  thou  hast  given  me,  he  with  me 
where  I  amy  that  they  may  hehold  my  glory,  which  thou  hast  given  me:  for 
thou  lovedst  me  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.  0  righteous  Father,^ the 
world  hath  not  known  thee  :  hut  I  have  known  thee,  and  these  have  known  thai 
thou  hast  sent  me.  And  I  have  declared  unto  them  thy  name,  and  will  declare 
it ;  that  the  love  wherewith  thou  hast  loved  me  may  he  in  them,  and  I  in  them. 

This  blessed  prayer  was  heard  by  the  Father  ;  all  of  it  must  be  fulfilled, 
and  untold  blessings  do  and  shall  come  to  us  through  this  intercession  of 
our  Lord,  blessed  be  his  holy  name  ! 

Chapter  xviii.  Verse  1.  When  Jesus  had  spoken  these  words,  he  went  forth 
with  his  disciples  over  the  brook  Cedron,  where  was  a  garden,  into  the  which  he 
entered,  and  his  disciples. 

Our  Lord  could  not  cross  that  "  brook  Cedron"  without  being  reminded 
of  the  time  when  David  went  that  way  in  the  hour  of  his  sorrow,  though 
he  knew  that  he  had  to  face  a  far  greater  trial  than  that  of  David.  The 
very  brook  would  remind  him  of  his  approaching  sacrifice,  for  through  it 
flowed  the  blood  and  refuse  from  the  temple. 

2.  And  Judas  also,  which  betrayed  him,  knew  the  place :  for  Jesus  ofttimes 
resorted  thither  with  his  disciples. 

The  place  of  our  Lord's  frequent  retirement  for  private  prayer  was  well 
known  to  Judas,  who  had  often  gone  there  with  his  Lord  and  his  fellow- 
disciples. 

3.  Judas  then,  having  received  a  hand  of  men  and  officers  from  the  chief 
priests  and  Pharisees,  cometh  thither  with  lanterns  and  torches  and  weapons. 

How  completely  the  traitor  must  have  been  in  the  power  of  Satan,  and 
now  hardened  and  callous  he  must  have  grown,  that  he  could  lead  "  thither  " 
the  men  who  were  going  to  arrest  the  Saviour !  Truly  it  was  by  wicked 
hands  that  Christ  was  taken,  and  crucified,  and  slain  ;  yet,  unconsciously  these 
rT^i?^^^®^^  carrying  out  "the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of 
uS^'ivi  strangely  were  they  equipped  for  their  deed  of   darkness  ^ 

With  lanterns  and  torches  and  weapons."  They  were  coming  to  the  Light 
of  the  world  bearing  "lanterns  and  torches  "  ;  and  armed  with  "weapons  " 
that  they  might  use  against  "the  Lamb  of  God"  !  If  he  had  wished  to 
deliver  himself,  all  their  «*  weapons  »  would  have  been  in  vain,   and  their 

Janterns  and  torches  "  would  not  have  revealed  him,  even  with  the  help 
Of  the  full  moon,  which  was  probably  shining  at  the  time. 


180 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


4  6  Je9UB  therefore,  knowing  all  things  that  should  come  wpm  him,  went 
forth: and  said  uito  them.  Whom  seek  ye?  They  answered  him  Jesm  of 
Namreth     Jesv^  saUh  unto  them,  lam  he.    And  Judas  also,  which  betrayed 

him,  stood  with  them.  .  . 

Notice,  dear  friends,  that  the  word  "he"  is  m  italics,  ^l^owmg  that  it  is 
not  in  the  original.  Our  Lord  here  twice  used  the  name  of  Jehovah,- 
I  AM-as  he^did  on  certain  other  memorable  o^jasions  It  was  most 
fittine  that  ^  he  was  going  out  to  die,  he  should  declare  that  it  was  no 
me^e  m^  wh^  was  aboSt  to  suffer  on  the  cross,  but  that,  while  he  was  truly 
man,  he  was  also  "  very  God  of  very  God. 

6.     As  soon  then  as  he  had  said  unto  them,  I  am  he,  they  went  backward,  and 

fell  to  the  ground.  4.„  +i,«„ 

The  simple  utterance  of  his  name  drove  them  from  him   ^^^^^^^J^^^ 

to  the  earth  ;  what  would  have  happened  if  he  had  put  forth  his  almighty 

power  ?  .J    T  / 

7-9.     Then  asked  he  them  again.  Whom  seek  ye  ?    And  they  said,  Jesus  of 

Nazareth.     Jesus  answered,  I  have  told  you  that  Iamjie:if  therefore  ye  seek 

me,let  these  go  their  way  :  that  the  saying  might  be  fulfilled,  which  he  spake, 

Of  them,  which  thou  gavest  me  have  I  lost  none. 


I 

J 


THE   LIVING   CAEE   OF   THE   DYING   CHRIST. 


Intended  for  Eeadinq  on  Lord's-day,  July  8th,   1894, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lord's-day  Evening,  April  15th,  1888. 


"Jesus  answered,  I  have  told  you  that  I  am  he :  if  therefore  ye  seek  me,  let  these 
go  their  way :  that  the  saymg  might  be  fulfilled,  which  he  spake,  Of  them  which  thou 
gavest  me  have  I  lost  none."— John  xviii.  8,  9. 

The  two  remarkable  miracles  which  our  Lord  wrought  in  the  Garden 
of  Gethsemane  ought  not  to  be  lightly  passed  over.  The  first  was 
the  falling  to  the  ground  of  the  soldiers  and  the  servants  of  the 
priests.  Jesus  did  but  speak  to  them,  and  there  was  such  power  and 
majesty  about  his  presence  and  his  voice  that  ''they  went  back- 
ward, and  feU  to  the  ground."  They  were  quite  unable  to  seize  him. 
Here  was  a  display  in  some  measure  of  Christ's  divine  power.  These 
men  would  have  fallen  into  the  grave,  and  into  hell  itself,  if  Jesus  had 
put  forth  the  full  force  of  his  strength.  He  only  spake  a  word,  and 
down  they  fell ;  they  had  no  power  whatever  against  him.  Beloved, 
take  comfort  from  this  miracle.  When  the  enemies  and  foes  of  Christ 
come  against  him,  he  can  easily  overthrow  them.  Many  times  have 
there  been  crises  in  the  Church's  history  when  it  seemed  as  if  the  truth 
would  be  destroyed.  Then  has  come  the  opportunity  for  divine  in- 
terposition. A  word  from  Christ  has  vanquished  his  enemies.  They 
that  were  waiting,  like  lions  ready  to  leap  upon  their  prey,  have  been 
disappointed.  Jesus  has  but  spoken,  and  they  have  fallen  backward 
to  the  ground.  Wherefore,  take  heart,  and  be  not  dismayed  even  in 
the  darkest  hour.  Let  Christ  only  utter  a  word,  and  the  victory  is 
certain  to  be  with  him. 

The  other  miracle  was  this,  that  seeing  the  company  that  came 
together  to  take  him,  he  should  be  able  at  pleasure  to  screen  his 
disciples  so  that  no  one  of  them  was  injured.  The  ear  of  the  high 
priest's  servant  was  cut  ofE ;  it  was  the  opposite  party  that  received  the 
wound,  but  no  ear  of  Peter  or  finger  of  John  was  smitten.  The  apostles 
escaped  altogether  unharmed ;  they  were  not  able  to  protect  them- 
selves, being  a  very  slender  number  as  compared  with  the  posse  that 
No.  2,368.  *^ 


182  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

had  come  forth  from  the  high  priest,  yet  their  Master  preserved  them; 
from  which  learn  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  able  to  take  care  of  hivS 
own.  When  they  seem  to  be  like  so  many  lambs  in  the  midst  of 
wolves,  he  can  keep  them  so  that  no  wolf  can  devour  them.  He  has 
done  it,  and  he  will  continue  to  do  it.  "  Fear  not,  little  flock  :  for  it 
is  your  Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  you  the  kingdom."  He  will 
preserve  you  by  his  own  miraculous  power,  and  you  need  not  be 
dismayed  at  any  force  that  is  arrayed  against  you  Think,  then,  of 
those  two  miracles.  You  may  need  to  remember  them  ;  there  may 
come  a  time  when  it  shall  be  a  great  joy  to  you  to  think  of  Christ,  all 
ruddy  from  the  bloody  sweat,  yet  driving  back  his  adversaries  with 
a  word,  and  rescuing  the  little  handful  of  his  disciples  from  anything 
like  harm. 

But  in  my  text  I  notice  something  which  seems  to  me  very  re- 
markable. **  If  therefore,"  said  Jesus,  *'  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their 
way :  that  the  saying  might  be  fulfilled."  After  such  an  expression 
you  naturally  expect  some  Old  Testament  text,  something  said  by 
David  in  the  Psalms,  or  by  one  of  the  prophets,  Isaiah,  or  Ezekiel, 
but  it  is  not  so  ;  it  is,  "  that  the  saying  might  be  fulfilled,  which  he 
spake,  Of  them  which  thou  gavest  me  have  I  lost  none."  It  is  but 
an  hour  or  two  since  Jesus  uttered  this  sentence,  but  it  is  already 
among  the  inspired  Scriptures,  and  it  begins  to  take  effect  and  to  be 
fulfilled  at  once.  It  is  not  the  age  of  God's  word,  but  the  verity  of  it, 
that  constitutes  its  power.  What  Christ  had  said  that  very  night  in 
prayer  was  as  true  and  as  much  the  word  of  a  King  as  that  which  God 
had  spoken  by  his  Spirit  through  holy  men  ages  before. 

Beloved,  learn  this  lesson.  The  word  of  Christ  is  to  be  depended 
upon  ;  you  may  hang  your  whole  destiny  upon  it.  What  Christ  has 
said  is  full  of  truth.  He  is  Yea  and  Amen,  and  so  are  all  his  words  ; 
they  stand  fast  for  ever  and  ever,  like  his  own  eternal  Godhead. 
Wherefore,  since  this  word  of  Christ,  which  had  only  just  been  spoken, 
must  be  fulfilled,  believe  that  every  word  of  his  will  be  carried  out  to 
the  utmost.  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away ;  but  not  one  word 
which  was  spoken  by  our  Saviour  shall  ever  fail,  it  shall  not  fail  even 
the  least  of  you  in  your  worst  hour  of  peril.  I  read  this  truth  in  the 
text  with  very  great  delight.  We  might  have  expected  to  find  an  Old 
Testament  Scripture  quoted  here ;  but  the  New  Testament  Scripture 
is  put  upon  the  same  level  as  the  Old,  and  coming  from  the  lips  of 
Christ  we  are  pleased  to  see  it  so  soon  fulfilled. 

The  soldiers  and  ofiicers  from  the  chief  priests  had  come  forth  that 
night  especially  to  arrest  Christ.  Peter,  James,  John,  Bartholomew, 
Thomas,  and  the  rest  of  the  apostles,  are  all  there;  but  Judas  has 
come  to  betray,  not  the  servants,  but  their  Master ;  and  they  who  are 
with  the  traitor  have  come  to  take,  not  the  disciples,  but  their  Lord. 
To  me,  there  is  something  encouraging  about  this  fact,  although  it  is 
a  dismal  one.  The  fight  of  the  great  adversary  is  not  so  much  against 
us  as  against  our  Master.  Satan's  emissaries  are  very  furious  some- 
timeo  with  the  faithful  defenders  of  the  truth,  but  their  fury  is  not  so 
much  against  them  as  against  the  truth  and  against  the  Christ  who 
is  the  centre  of  that  truth.  In  olden  times,  they  hated  Luther,  and 
Calvin,   and  Zwingle,  and  the  rest  of  the  Eeformers,   but  the  main 


I 


i 


THE   LIVING    CABE    OF   THE    DYING    CHRIST.  183 

point  of  attack  was  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ ;  and  at  this  day  the  great  fight  is  around  the  Cross.  Did 
Jesus  die  as  his  people's  Substitute  ?  That  is  the  question  ;  and  there 
are  some,  I  grieve  to  say  it.  to  whom  that  text  is  applicable,  "  He 
that  despised  Moses'  law  died  without  mercy,  under  two  or  three 
witnesses :  of  how  much  sorer  punishment,  suppose  ye,  shall  he  be 
thought  worthy,  who  hath  trodden  under  foot  the  Son  of  God,  and 
hath  counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  wherewith  he  was  sanctified, 
an  unholy  thing,  and  hath  done  despite  unto  the  Spirit  of  grace  ?  " 
This  is  the  chief  aim  of  the  enemy's  assaults  ;  to  get  rid  of  Christ,  to 
get  rid  of  the  atonement,  to  get  rid  of  his  suffering  in  the  room  and 
place  and  stead  of  men.  They  say  they  can  embrace  the  rest  of  the 
gospel ;  but  what  ''  rest "  is  there  ?  What  is  there  left  ?  A  bloodless, 
Christless  gospel  is  fit  neither  for  the  land  nor  for  the  dunghill ;  it 
neither  honours  God  nor  converts  the  sons  of  men. 

This  is  our  consolation,  that  the  attack  is,  after  all,  against  the 
Master  himself.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  still  the  great  butt  for  the 
archer's  arrows.  Though  his  enemies  do  not  always  let  his  disciples 
go  their  way,  yet  they  do  seek  him  ;  it  is  against  him  that  they  rave 
most  of  all.  As  it  is  the  quarrel  of  God's  covenant,  he  will  fight  it  out 
to  the  end ;  and  so  far  as  your  part  in  the  battle  is  concerned,  as  it  is 
for  his  truth,  and  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead,  and  his  great  sacri- 
fice, you  may  safely  go  through  with  it,  for  he  who  fights  for  this 
cause  shall  surely  have  God  with  him. 

Now  let  us  come  to  our  text,  and  try  to  learn  some  lessons  from  it. 
I  notice  here,  first,  Chrisfs  dying  care  for  Ms  disciples.  Then,  next,  I 
see  that  his  care  extends  to  their  bodies  ;  and,  thirdly,  I  observe  that  his 
care  offers  himself  instead  of  them.  He  thrusts  himself  upon  the  edge 
of  the  adversaries'  sword,  and  says,  "  If  therefore  yo  seek  me,  let  these 
go  their  way." 

I.  First,  then,  I  call  upon  you  to  notice  in  our  text  Christ's 
DYING  CARE  FOR  HIS  DISCIPLES.    Let  me  corrcct  what  I  have  said,  and 

put    it,     THE   LIVING    CARE    OF   THE   DYING    ChRIST  ;     for    yOU    806    he    is 

occupied  first  of  all  with  his  disciples'  safety.  The  soldiers  have  come 
to  seize  him,  but  he  does  not  seek  to  escape.  They  bind  him,  but  he 
does  not  burst  his  bonds.  They  will  take  him  to  prison,  and  to  death ; 
but  he  has  not  a  word  to  say  in  his  own  defence,  he  utters  no  curse 
against  his  persecutors.  His  one  thought  is  for  his  disciples,  his 
ruling  passion  is  strong  in  death,  his  love  still  masters  him. 

This  was  the  more  wonderful  because  he  was  in  the  first  brunt  of 
the  danger.  He  had  been  betrayed  by  Judas,  and  the  high  priest's 
servants  were  gathering  about  him  4o  capture  him  ;  yet  he  was  calm 
and  quiet,  and  his  one  thought  was  concerning  the  eleven  who  were 
with  him.  Usually,  we  become  quieter  when  we  get  used  to  a  trouble  ; 
it  is  in  the  first  fluster  of  it  that  we  are  disconcerted,  and  thrown  o£B 
our  balance.  I  suppose  it  is  so  with  yoU ;  I  know  it  is  so  with  me. 
We  learn,  after  a  little  while,  to  look  calmly  around  us  ;  we  gird  up 
the  loins  of  our  mind,  and  we  begin  to  think  as  we  should  think ;  but 
at  first  we  are  like  birds  driven  out  to  sea  by  a  rough  wind,  that  have 
not  learnt  yet  to  manage  their  wings  in  the  gale.  It  was  not  so  with 
our  Saviour.     In  that  first  moment  of  attack  he  still  thought  of  his 


184  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PTJLPrT. 

disciples.  Oh,  the  splendour  of  that  love  which  could  not  be  disturbed  f 
Many  waters  could  not  quench  it  even  at  their  first  breaking  out ;  nor 
could  the  floods  drown  it  when  they  were  swollen  to  their  height ! 
Beloved,  Jesus  never  forgets  you  who  are  his  own.  Never  does  any- 
thing happen  in  this  world  or  in  heaven  that  leads  him  to  forget  you. 
He  has  graven  your  names  upon  the  palms  of  his  hands,  they  are 
written  upon  his  heart ;  so  be  it  the  first  brunt  of  your  battle  or  of  his 
own,  he  still  thinks  of  you,  and  cares  for  you. 

But  it  is  more  remarkable  still  that  Jesus  thought  of  his  disciples 
in  the  faintness  of  his  agony.  All  crimson  from  the  bloody  sweat,  he 
rose  from  under  the  olive  trees,  and  came  forward,  and  stood  there 
in  the  torchlight  before  his  persecutors ;  but  the  light  that  fell 
upon  his  brow  revealed  no  care  for  anything  but  the  safety  of  his 
followers.  His  whole  soul  had  gone  out  to  them.  That  crimson  sweat 
meant  a  heart  flowing  out  at  every  pore  with  love  for  those  whom  his 
Father  had  given  him,  and  whom  he  had  so  long  preserved.  I  doubt 
not  that  he  was  faint  with  the  dreadful  agony.  He  must  have  been 
brought  to  the  very  lowest  point  of  endurance  by  it,  yet  he  still  thought 
of  his  disciples.  Beloved,  when  you  and  I  are  sick  and  faint,  other 
people  do  not  expect  us  to  think  of  them.  We  grow  a  little  selfish 
when  we  are  weak  and  ill ;  we  want  water  to  moisten  our  lips,  we 
expect  our  friends  to  watch  over  us,  and  wipe  the  sweat  from  our 
brow.  It  was  not  so  with  our  Master ;  he  came,  not  to  be  ministered 
unto,  but  to  minister ;  and  he  does  so  by  saying  to  the  rabble  throng, 
"  If  therefore  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way." 

And  mark,  dear  friends,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  was  not  only  in  the 
brunt  of  danger,  and  in  the  faintness  of  his  agony,  but  he  was  in  full 
prospect  of  a  cruel  death.  He  knew  all  that  was  to  be  done  to  him. 
When  you  and  I  have  to  suffer,  we  do  not  know  what  is  before  us  ;  it 
is  a  happy  circumstance  that  we  do  not.  But  Jesus  knew  that  they 
would  buffet  him,  that  they  would  blindfold  him,  that  they  would  spit 
in  his  face,  that  they  would  scourge  him,  he  knew  that  the  crown  of 
thorns  would  tear  his  temples,  he  knew  that  he  would  be  led  forth  like 
a  malefactor,  bearing  the  gibbet  on  his  shoulder.  He  knew  that  they 
would  nail  his  feet  and  hands  to  the  cruel  cross,  he  knew  that  he 
would  cry,  "I  thirst,"  he  knew  that  his  Father  must  forsake  him  on 
account  of  the  sin  of  man  that  would  be  laid  upon  him.  He  knew  all 
that ;  these  huge  Atlantic  biUows  of  grief  cast  their  spray  in  his  face 
already,  his  lips  were  salt  with  the  brine  of  his  coming  grief ;  but  he 
did  not  think  of  that,  his  one  thought  was  for  his  beloved,  those  whom 
his  Father  had  given  him.  Till  he  dies,  he  will  keep  his  eye  on  his 
sheep,  and  he  will  grasp  his  Shepherd's  crook  with  which  to  drive  the 
foe  from  them.  Oh,  the  all-absorbing,  self -consuming  love  of  Christ ! 
Verily,  it  was  like  coals  of  juniper,  which  have  a  most  vehement  flame. 
Do  you  know  that  love,  beloved  ?  If  so,  let  your  hearts  reciprocate 
it,  loving  him  in  return  with  all  the  strength  of  your  life,  and  all  the 
wealth  of  your  being.  Even  then  you  can  never  love  him  as  he  has 
loved  you. 

I  must  add  that  it  was  all  the  more  remarkable  that  Jesus  should 
continue  to  think  of  his  disciples  at  such  a  time  when  he  knew  what 
were.     They  had  been  asleep,  even  while  he  was  in  the  bloody 


THE   LIVING   CARE    OF   THE   DYING   CHRIST.  185 

sweat.  Even  the  three  whom  he  had  chosen  as  his  body-guard,  and 
stationed  within  a  stone's  cast  of  his  terrible  agony,  had  slept.  Jesus 
knew  also  that  the  eleven  would  all  forsake  him  and  flee,  and  that  one 
of  them  would  even  deny  him ;  yet  he  thought  of  them.  0  Lord, 
how  canst  thou  think  of  such  sinful  creatures  as  we  are  ?  I  feel  glad 
that  these  apostles  were  not  perfect.  We  must  not  rejoice  in  anything 
that  is  evil ;  but  still  it  is  some  comfort  to  me  that  though  they  were 
such  poor  creatures  as  they  were,  Jesus  cared  for  them,  for  now  I  can 
believe  that  he  loves  me.  Though  I  sleep  when  I  ought  to  wake  and 
watch  with  him,  yet  he  loves  me.  Although,  under  the  brunt  of  a 
strong  temptation,  I  may  flee,  still  he  loves  me;  ay,  and  even  if  I 
should  deny  him,  yet  I  can  understand  that,  as  he  loved  Peter,  he 
may  still  love  me.  0  faulty  saints,  you  who  do  love  him,  and  yet 
often  fail  him,  you  who  do  trust  him,  and  yet  are  oftentimes  dismayed, 
gather  strength,  I  pray  you,  from  this  wonderful  love  of  Jesus !  Is 
not  the  love  of  Christ  a  mass  of  miracles,  all  wonders  packed  together  ? 
It  is  not  a  subject  for  surprise  that  he  should  love,  but  that  he  should 
love  such  worms  as  we  are,  that  he  should  love  us  when  we  were  dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins,  that  he  should  love  us  into  life,  should  love  us 
despite  our  faults,  should  love  us  to  perfection,  and  should  love  us  till 
he  briugs  us  to  share  his  glory.  Eejoice,  then,  in  this  wondrous  care 
of  Christ, — the  dying  Christ  with  a  living  care  for  his  disciples. 

II.     But  now,  secondly,  His  care  extends  to  their  bodies. 

I  wiU  not  be  long  upon  this  point,  but  I  want  you  to  note  some  of 
the  sweetness  there  is  in  it.  When  I  was  reading  to  you  just  now, 
you  must  have  noticed  that  our  Lord  said,  "  Those  that  thou  gavest 
me  I  have  kept,  and  none  of  them  is  lost."  Surely  he  meant  that  he 
kept  them  from  wandering  into  sin,  did  he  not  ?  Did  he  not  mean 
that  he  kept  them  unto  eternal  salvation  ?  Undoubtedly  he  did  ;  but 
the  greater  includes  the  less.  He  who  keeps  a  man,  keeps  the  whole 
man,  spirit,  soul,  and  body.  So  our  Lord  Jesus  here  interprets  his 
own  prayer,  which  dealt  with  the  souls  of  his  people.  He  mainly 
interprets  it  as  to  their  bodies,  for  he  bade  those  who  came  to  seize 
him  to  let  his  disciples  go,  saying,  '<  If  therefore  ye  seek  me,  let  these 
go  their  way." 

You  say  to  me,  '*  That  is  a  small  interpretation  of  a  great  utterance." 
I  know  it  is,  and  that  is  the  comfort  of  it,  that,  if  there  be  small 
meanings  to  the  promises,  you  may  quote  them,  and  pray  for  them, 
as  well  as  believe  in  and  pray  for  the  greater  and  immeasurable  mean- 
ing of  the  promises.  I  like  tp  believe  that  he  who  loves  me  as  an 
immortal  spirit,  loves  me  as  a  mortal  man.  He  who  loves  me  as  I 
shall  be  before  his  throne  in  glory,  loved  me  as  I  was  when  I  hung 
upon  my  mother's  breast,  and  loves  me  as  I  now  am,  with  many  a 
weakness  and  infirmity  clinging  to  me.  He  who  takes  care  of  the  soul, 
takes  care  of  the  body,  too. 

Notice  that  this  care  of  our  Lord  was  effectual.  Is  it  not  singular  that 
none  of  those  soldiers  and  servants  of  the  high  priest  touched  one  of 
the  eleven  ?  Is  it  not  remarkable  that  Malchus,  having  lost  his  right 
ear,  did  not  feel  it  his  duty  to  thrust  at  Peter  ?  But  the  Saviour 
interposes,  and  just  touches  the  wounded  ear,  and  it  is  healed,  and 
Peter  is  sufEered  to  go.     That  act  of  Peter  was  enough  to  bring  on  a 


186 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PTJLPIT. 


battle  royal  all  round,  and  we  know  that  the  whole  eleven  had  only 
two  swords  between  them.  They  could  have  made  only  a  very  feeble 
stand  against  a  band  of  armed  men;  yet  not  one  of  them  was  injured. 
How  well  does  Jesus  protect  his  own  ! 

What  is  more  remarkable,  the  apostles  were  not  harmed  at  the  time 
of  Christ's  death.  It  would  not  at  all  have  surprised  me  if  the  mob 
that  cried,  *'  Crucify  him,  crucify  him,"  had  also  said,  "  Here  are  some 
of  his  disciples,  let  us  put  them  also  to  death ;  let  us  increase  the 
agonies  of  the  dying  Nazarene  by  the  slaughter  of  his  disciples  before 
his  eyes."  Yet  not  a  dog  moved  his  tongue  against  them.  And  when 
it  was  reported  that  Christ  had  risen  from  the  dead,  why  did  not  his 
enemies  pounce  upon  Mary  Magdalene,  and  the  rest  of  the  women  ? 
Forty  days  was  Jesus  on  the  earth,  and  I  do  not  find  that  in  all  that 
time  there  was  any  hindrance  to  the  coming  or  going  anywhere  of 
any  one  of  his  disciples.  After  the  Holy  Ghost  had  been  poured  out, 
there  came  a  time  of  persecution ;  but  until  then  it  was  not  in  the 
Saviour's  mind  that  the  Jews  should  touch  one  of  his  disciples,  and 
they  could  not  do  it.  The  devil  cannot  go  any  farther  than  his  chain 
permits,  and  the  worst  enemies  of  Christ  can  do  no  more  than  Christ 
allows.  What  an  effectual  care  was  this  of  the  Master,  which  held 
the  broad  shield  of  his  divine  protection  not  only  over  the  eleven,  but 
also  over  all  the  rest  of  the  faithful !  He  was  at  his  lowest  when  they 
took  him,  and  bound  him,  and  led  him  away,  but  even  then,  with  his 
sovereign  word,  he  protected  his  people  from  all  harm,  as  to  their 
bodies  as  well  as  their  souls. 

Notice  also  that  it  was  needful  that  they  should  have  special  protection. 
Jesus  meant  them  all  to  remain  alive  to  see  him  after  his  death,  that 
they  might  be  witnesses  of  his  resurrection.  They  were  a  little 
handful  of  seed-corn,  and  he  would  not  have  one  grain  wasted,  because 
it  was  by  that  precious  wheat  that  his  Church  was  to  be  fed,  and  the 
world  was  to  be  sown  with  spiritual  life. 

Besides,  they  were  not  ready  yet  to  bear  persecution.  Afterwards 
they  bore  it  manfully,  joyfully ;  but  just  now  they  were  poor  feeble 
children,  until  the  Spirit  of  God  was  poured  out.  Brethren,  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  can  shelter  us  from  sickness,  and  from  every  kind  of 
bodily  affliction,  until  we  are  fit  to  bear  it ;  and  he  can  also  preserve 
us  from  death  till  our  work  is  done.  It  is  a  good  saying,  though  it  is 
not  a  Scriptural  one,  "  We  are  immortal  till  our  work  is  done."  If 
God  has  given  thee  aught  to  do,  get  thee  to  the  doing  of  it ;  the  time 
is  short,  but  dream  not  that  thou  shalt  be  cut  off  too  soon.  Thou  hast 
a  work  for  thy  time,  and  thou  shalt  have  time  for  thy  w^.k.  Believe 
it,  and  thou  may  est  go  between  the  jaws  of  behemoth  without  a  fear, 
while  God  has  work  for  thee  to  accomplish  for  him  ;  wherefore,  be  not 
afraid,  for  Jesus  says,  "  Let  these  go  their  way." 

Once  more,  the  care  which  the  Lord  took  of  his  people  was  much  better  than 
their  own  care.  See,  Peter  is  going  to  take  care  of  his  Master,  and  he 
makes  a  poor  mess  of  it ;  but  when  his  Master  took  care  of  him,  that 
was  a  very  different  affair.  Peter  is  going  to  fight  for  his  brethren  ; 
out  comes  the  sword,  off  goes  the  ear  of  Malchus,  and  Peter  probably 
regretted  that  he  had  not  cut  off  his  head.  But  what  good  did  Petei 
do  ?     He  only  increased  the  danger  they  were  in,  and  made  the  men 


THE   LIVIXG   CARE    OF   THE   DYING   CHRIST.  187 

feel  the  more  furious  against  them.  But  Christ's  word  was  ample ; 
here  was  sufficient  defence  for  all  the  apostles,  "Let  these  go 
their  way,"  and  go  their  way  they  did.  Brothers  and  sisters,  we 
should  do  a  deal  better  in  many  things  if  we  did  not  do  anything  at 
all.  There  is  many  a  man  who  is  drowning,  and  makes  his  drowning 
sure  by  his  struggling.  I  am  told  that,  if  he  could  but  lie  still  on  his 
back,  he  would  float ;  and  I  believe  that,  in  many  a  trouble,  we  make 
the  trouble  ten  times  worse  by  our  kicking  and  plunging.  "  0  rest  m 
the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  him."  Especially  do  so  if  it  is  a 
matter  of  scandal.  If  anybody  speaks  evil  of  you,  do  not  answer  hmi. 
I  have  had  a  great  deal  of  experience  of  this  kind,— perhaps  as  much 
as  anybody,— and  I  have  always  found  that,  if  I  got  a  spot  of  mud 
anywhere  on  my  coat,  and  I  proceeded  to  brush  it  off,  it  was  much 
worse  than  before.  Let  it  alone  till  it  is  dry ;  then  it  wiU  come  off 
easily.  Perhaps  even  then  you  had  better  leave  somebody  else  to  do 
your  clothes-brushing  and  your  boot-cleaning;  you  cannot  do  it 
nearly  so  well  yourself  as  somebody  else  can  do  it  for  you.  I  say 
again,  we  should  do  better  often  if  we  did  nothing.  These  eleven 
apostles  did  best  when  Peter  had  put  up  that  ugly  old  sword  of  his, 
and  left  off  fighting,  and  at  his  Master's  word  went  away  safe  and 
sound  from  the  armed  men  who  had  arrested  his  Lord. 

Beloved,  you  are  all  right  if  you  are  in  Jesus  Christ's  hands; 
right  for  your  body,  right  for  your  estate,  right  for  your  character, 
right  for  little  things  as  well  as  for  great,  if  you  just  leave  all  in  those 
dear  hands  that  never  fail,  because  they  act  for  the  dear  heart  that 
never  ceases  to  beat  with  infinite  affection  towards  all  those  whom  the 
Father  has  given  to  him. 

III.  I  have  continued  longer  than  I  intended,  so  I  am  coming  now 
to  the  third  and  last  point,  which  is  this,  Christ's  care  led  him  to 

OFFER  HIMSELF  INSTEAD  OF  HIS  PEOPLE. 

Jesus  said,  '•  If  therefore  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way."  This 
was  as  much  as  to  say,  '  •  You  cannot  hurt  both  myself  and  my  people.  ' 
This  is  a  great  truth,  though  I  put  it  very  simply  to  you.  When  the 
judgments  of  God  are  abroad,  it  is  not  possible  that  they  should 
fall  on  both  Christ  and  his  people.  Was  Jesus  Christ  the  Substitute 
for  his  people  ?  Grant  that ;  then,  if  the  punishment  of  sin  fell  on 
Christ,  it  cannot  fall  on  those  for  whom  Christ  died.  It  is  not 
according  to  natural  justice,  much  less  divine  justice,  first  that  the 
Substitute  should  suffer,  and  then  the  person  for  whom  he  stood  as 
Substitute  should  also  suffer.  That  cannot  be.  Why  have  a  Sub- 
stitute at  all,  unless  that  Substitute  by  his  suffering  clears  those  for 
whom  he  was  substituted  ?  I  will  give  you  a  very  simple  illustration ; 
you  will  find  it  in  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy.  There  is  the  old  divine 
ordinance  that,  when  a  man  found  a  bird's  nest,  and  there  were  young 
birds  in  the  nest,  if  he  took  the  young,  he  must  let  the  mother-bird 
go  free,  he  must  not  take  both ;  that  was  contrary  to  the  divine  law. 
So,  Christ  may  die,  or  his  people  may  die ;  but  not  both  of  them. 
Justice  will  not  have  it  that  they  shall  both  suffer,  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  gives  a  tongue  to  that  great  law  when  he  says,  "  If  ye  seek  me, 
here  I  am,  but  let  these  go  their  way ;  for  you  cannot  take  us  both." 
That  were  contrary  to  the  sacred  law,  and  to  the  divine  equity  which 


188 


METBOPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


Hes  at  the  bottom  of  everything  that  is  true.    Did  Christ,  my  Ransom, 
die  for  me  ?     Then  I  shaU  not  die.     Did  he  pay  my  debt  ?     Then  i 
IS  paid,  and  I  shall  not  be  called  upon  to  pay  it. 

"  If  thou  hast  my  discharge  procured, 
And  freely  in  my  room  endured 

The  whole  of  wrath  divine  ; 
Payment  God  cannot  twice  demand, 
First  at  my  bleeding  Surety's  hand, 
And  then  again  at  mine." 

Did  Jesus  suffer  in  my  stead  without  the  city-gate?  Then  turn 
thou  my  sou,  unto  thy  rest,  since  he  died  for  thee.  Justice  could 
not  claim  both  the  Surety  and  those  for  whom  he  stood  as  Substitute- 
but,  beloved,  tt  was  the  Master  who  died.  They  did  seek  him  they 
did  take  him,  they  did  crucify  him  ;  he  did  bear  it  aU  as  his  people^s 
Substitute.  *'  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all  " 
Do  not  be  deceived  about  this  matter,  but  grip  it  as  a  fact  most  sure 
that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  did  bear  his  people's  sins  in  his  own  body 
on  the  tree.  "The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him-  and 
with  his  stripes  we  are  healed."  Men  and  brethren,  I  am  not  making 
this  up,  and  teUing  you  words  of  my  own.  These  are  the  precious 
truths  of  Holy  Wnt,  divinely  inspired.  Oh,  that  aU  would  believe 
them  I 

Christ  has  suffered  in  the  stead  of  his  people.     What  then?     As  I 
have  said  to  you  before,  both  cannot  suffer ;  therefore,  as  Jesus  suf- 
fered, t/ou  who  are  his  people  are  clear.     Perhaps  you  will  go  down  to 
the  grave  ;  unless  the  Lord  should  speedily  come,  we  shall  die  ;  but 
since  Jesus  died,  death  cannot  hold  us.     The  resurrection  trumpet 
will  ring  out  its  sHver  note,  and  this  will  be  the  message  to  the  dull 
cold  ear  of  death,  "  Since  I  died,  let  these  go  their  way,"  and  every 
sepulchre  shaU  open  wide,  the  caverns  of  death  shall  no  longer  enclose 
the  bodies  of  the  saints,  but  from  beds  of  dust  and  silent  clay,  the 
whole  of  Christ's  redeemed  shaU  rise.     Because  he  Hves,  they  shall 
live  also.     Death  sought  him,  and  therefore  death  must  let  these  who 
belong  to  him  go  their  way;  and  as  for  justice,  there  comes  the  dread 
tremendous  day,  the  day  for  which  all  other  days  were  made,  the  day 
of  judgment,  and  of  condemnation  of  ungodly  men.     Shall  I  stand 
shivering  before  that  eternal  judgment-seat  ?     Nay,  not  so.     Shall  I 
feel  the  earth  quake  beneath  me,  and  see  heaven  splitting  above  me, 
and  the  stars  falling  like  withered  leaves  in  autumn  ?    Doubtless  it 
will  be  so.     Will  the  avenging  angel  come,  with  his  dread  sword  of 
fire,  and  sweep  us  poor  sinful  ones  away  ?     He  will,  unless  we  are  in 
Christ ;  but  if  we  are  among  the  blood-redeemed  ones,  he  must  stay 
his  fiery  vengeance,  for  there  shall  come  a  voice  from  the  risen  and 
reigning  Saviour,  *'  Thou  hast  smitten  me,  therefore  let  these  go  their 
way,"  and  because  he  died  for  us,  we  shall  go  our  way.    Which  way  ? 
Up  yonder  shining  staircase,  made  of  light ;  up  where  the  angels 
come  and  go,  we  shall  make  our  way,  like  children  who  run  upstairs 
at  home,  up  into  the  world  of  Hght,  and  to  the  home  of  glory,  where 
our  Saviour's  face  is  the  sun,  and  his  presence  makes  heaven.     Yes, 
and  this  shall  be  our  permit  for  ascending  there,  Jesus  hath  loved  us  ■ 
and  hath  died  to  redeem  us  from  our  sins. 


THE   LIVING   CARE   OF   THE   DYING   CHRIST.  189 

With  this  I  close,  dear  hearers.  When  I  come  into  this  pulpit,  and 
especially  during  the  last  two  or  three  Sunday  nights,  when  I  have 
felt  mv  head  swim  at  the  sight  of  you,  I  seem  like  one  standing  on  a 
high  cliff,  half  afraid  to  remain  there,  and  I  think  to  myself,  *'  Shall 
I  long  preach  to  these  people  ?  "  Well,  well,  whether  I  do  or  do  not, 
I  would  press  home  this  question  upon  your  consciences,  as  I  shall 
meet  you  in  that  great  day,  have  you  a  share  in  Jesus  Christ's  love  and 
care  ?  Did  he  bear  your  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree  ?  Do  you 
believe  in  him  ?  That  is,  do  you  trust  him  ?  Have  you  put  your 
soul  into  his  hands,  that  he  may  save  it  ?  If  so,  you  are  justified  by 
him,  you  are  saved  in  him. 

Say,  dear  friend,  next ;  do  you  obey  him  ?     Is  he  your  Master  and 
Lord  ?     Is  his  will  the  supreme  law  of  your  life  ?     Or  do  you  wish  it 
to  be  so,  and  pray  to  make  it  so  ?    Then  again  you  may  go  your  way, 
for  Christ  has  stood  in  your  stead.     Do  you  suffer  with  him  ?     Are 
you  willing  to  suffer  for  him  ?     There  are  some  who  will  go  with 
Christ  if  he  will  put  on  his  silver  slippers,  and  his  purple  mantle,  and 
his  jewelled  crown.    How  good  they  are  1    How  bravely  will  they  say, 
"  1  am  a  Christian,"  when  everybody  will  throw  primroses  on  then- 
path  !     Ay,  but  when  people  sneer,  and  call  you  an  old  Puritan,  a 
Methodist,  a  Presbyterian,  or  some  other  pretty  name,  and  when  those 
who  preach  to  you  are  much  abused,  and  ill  things  are  said  of  theni, 
can  you  take  the  side  of  a  despised  Christ  ?     Can  you  stand  at  his 
cross?     Can  you  own   him  when   the   blood   is   dripping   from   his 
wounds,  when  everybody  thrusts  out  his  tongue  at  him,  and  has  ill 
words  for  the  Crucified  One  ?     Can  you  say,  "  I  love  him  still "  ?    Ee- 
member  the  good  Scotch  woman,  when  Claverhouse  had  murdered 
her  godly  husband.     "Ah!"    he  said,   ''What  think  you  of  your 
bonny  husband  now  ?  "  and  she  answered,  "  I  always  thought  my  man 
was  very  beautiful ;  but  I  never  saw  him  look  as  he  does  now  that  he 
has  died  for  his  Master."     Can  you  say  the  same  of  Christ  ?     He  was 
ever  precious  to  me  ;  I  love  him  in  every  shape  and  form,  but  when  I 
see  him  put  on  his  crimson  robe,  and  bleed  at  every  pore  for  me,  when 
the  rubies  are  in  his  hands,   and  on  his  feet,  and  I  see  him  still 
despised  and  rejected  of  men,  I  love  him  more  than  ever;  and  I  love 
his  cross,  and  take  it  up ;  I  love  his  shame,  and  his  reproach,  and 
count  it  "  greater  riches  than  the  treasures  in  Egypt."     If  it  be  so 
with  you,  if  you  are  with  hipa  in  his  shame,  I  will  warrant  that  you 
shall  be  with  him  in  his  glory.    I  count  it  to  be  a  mean  position  to  be 
only  with  a  reigning  Christ  on  earth,  and  to  go  with  him  only  in  fair 
weather.     Oh,  but  this  is  the  pledge  and  proof  of  love,  if  you  are 
with  him  when  the  snow-flakes  blow  into  your  face,  and  the  storm 
comes  hurtling  against  you,  and  yet  you  can  follow  bravely  where  he 
leads  the  way  !    God  make  you  such  followers  of  the  Crucified  1    May 
your  feet  know  what  it  is  to  be  pricked  with  thorns,  or  your  head  wiU 
never  know  what  it  is  to  feel  the  weight  of  the  glory  diadem !     May 
you  be  willing  to  be  despised  and  rejected ;  for  if  not,   you  have 
thrown  away  your  crown !     God  bless  you,  dear  friends,  and  blessed 
be  his  name  for  helping  me  again  to  speak  to  you  to-night !     Amen. 


190  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

lExpositton  tij}  C.  !^.  Spurgeon. 

JOHN  XVII.  1—12,  AND  XVIII.  1—14. 

1.  These  words  spake  Jesus,  and  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  heaven,  and  said. 
Father,  the  hour  is  come; 

This  is  in  a  very  special  sense  our  Lord's  prayer.  What  a  word  that  is 
from  the  lips  of  Jesus,  "Father"!  This  was  the  night  of  his  deepest 
sorrow  and  his  heaviest  woe ;  but  he  begins  his  prayer  with  this  tender 
expression,  "Father,  the  hour  is  com^ ;  "  the  hour  of  darkness,  the  hour 
of  his  passion  and  death,  had  now  arrived. 

1.  Olorify  thy  Son,  that  thy  Son  also  may  glorify  thee  : 

Did  Jesus  look  upon  his  suffering  as  his  glory  ?  He  does  not  merely 
pray,  "  Sustain  thy  Son,"  but,  "  Glorify  thy  Son."  In  truth,  our  Lord's 
lowest  stoop  was  his  highest  glory.  He  was  never  more  resplendent  than 
when  he  hung  upon  the  cross,  that  was  his  true  spiritual  throne ;  so  he 
prayed,  "  Glorify  thy  Son,"—"  Enable  him  to  bear  the  agony,  and  to  pass 
through  it  to  the  glory." 

"  That  thy  Son  also  may  glorify  thee."  The  death  of  Christ  was  a  great 
glorifying  of  God.  We  see  his  love  and  his  justice  rendered  more  glorious 
in  the  death  of  Christ  than  they  would  have  been  by  any  other  method. 

2.  As  thou  hast  given  him  power  over  all  flesh,  that  he  should  give  eternal 
life  to  as  many  as  thou  hast  given  him. 

In  this  verse  you  get  the  doctrines  of  general  and  particular  redemption 
blended.  By  his  death,  Christ  obtained  power  over  all  flesh  ;  his  death  had 
some  relation  to  every  man,  but  the  special  object  of  it  was  the  salvation 
of  the  elect.  The  purpose  of  the  shower  is  to  water  one  particular  field ; 
but  the  rain  falls  everywhere,  so  plenteous  is  the  bounty  of  God.  The 
object  of  Christ's  atonement  is  to  purchase  eternal  life  for  those  who  were 
given  to  him  by  his  Father  ;  but  he  has  also  obtained  power  over  all  flesh. 

3.  And  this  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  thee^  the  only  true  Ood,  and 
Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou  hast  sent. 

To  know  God,  is  eternal  life.  If  you  know  God,  if  you  know  Jesus 
Christ  whom  he  has  sent,  you  are  spiritually  quickened.  That  knowledge 
has  brought  to  you,  nay,  it  is,  in  itself,  the  new  life  :  "  This  is  life  eternal," 
— not  life  for  a  few  years,  but  life  eternal.  Mark  the  final  perseverance  of 
the  saints,  how  they  shall  hold  on  and  hold  out  for  ever. 

4.  /  have  glorified  thee  on  the  earth  :  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thou 
gavest  me  to  do. 

Jesus  regards  his  work  as  already  done  ;  although  he  had  yet  to  die,  to 
pay  the  ransom  price  for  his  people,  yet  by  a  leap  of  holy  faith  he  says, 
"  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thou  gavest  me  to  do." 

5.  And  now,  0  Father,  glorify  thou  me  with  thine  own  self  with  the  glory 
which  I  had  with  thee  before  the  world  was. 

Jesus  had  laid  aside  his  glory  for  our  sakes  ;  now  lie  asks  that,  his  work 
being  regarded  as  done,  his  glory  may  be  given  to  him  again. 

6.  T  have  manifested  thy  name  unto  the  men  which  thou  gavest  me  out  of 
the  world:  thine  they  were,  and  thou  gavest  them  me:  and  they  have  kept 
thy  word. 

God's  people  belong  to  him,  he  gives  them  to  his  Son,  Christ  gives  them 
his  word,  and  they  keep  it :  "  They  have  kept  thy  word."  Do  we  keep 
God's  word  ?  Do  we  hold  to  it  ?  Do  we  make  it  the  guide  of  our  whole 
lif^     Do  we  seek  to  obey  it  ?     This  is  the  token  of  God's  chosen  people. 


EXPOSITION. 


191 


7—12.  Now  they  have  known  that  all  things  whatsoever  thou  hast  given  me 
are  of  thee.  For  I  have  given  unto  them  the  words  which  thou  gavest  me;  and 
they  have  received  them,  and  have  known  surely  that  I  came  out  from  thee,  and 
they  have  believed  that  thou  didst  send  me,  I  pray  for  them  :  I  pray  not  for 
the  world,  hut  for  them  ivhich  thou  hast  given  me  ;  for  they  are  thine.  And  all 
mine  are  thine,  and  thine  are  mine ;  and  I  am  glorified  in  them.  And  noiu  1 
am  no  more  in  the  world,  hut  these  are  in  the  world,  and  I  come  to  thee.  Holy 
Father,  keep  through  thine  own  name  those  whom  thou  hast  given  me,  that  they 
may  he  one,  as  we  are.  While  I  was  with  them  in  the  world,  I  kept  them  m 
thy  name :  those  that  thou  gavest  me  I  have  kept,  and  none  of  them  is  lost,  but 
the  son  of  perdition ;  that  the  scripture  might  he  fulfilled. 

Christ  always  has  kept  his  people,  he  still  keeps  his  people,  and  he  will 
keep  his  people  for  ever.  The  sheep  shall  be  delivered  into  the  hand  of 
the  Father  in  full  number,  there  shall  not  be  one  of  them  missing  in  that 
day  when  they  shall  pass  under  the  rod  of  the  great  Shepherd. 

We  cannot  read  all  this  prayer  of  our  Lord  to-night ;  we  must  now  go, 
in  the  language  of  the  next  chapter,  with  the  Master  into  the  garden  ol 
his  grief. 

Chapter  xviii.  Verse  1 .  When  Jesus  had  spoken  these  words,  he  went  forth 
with  his  disciples  over  the  brook  Cedron, 

A  dark,  foul  brook,  through  which  flowed  the  blood  and  refuse  from  the 
temple.  King  David  crossed  that  brook  one  night  in  bitter  sorrow ;  and 
now  the  Saviour  crossed  it  when  it  was  near  to  midnight :  "  He  went  forth 
with  his  disciples  over  the  brook  Cedron." 

1,  2.  Where  tuas  a  garden,  into  the  which  he  entered,  and  his  disciples. 
And  Judas  also,  luhich  betrayed  him,  knew  the  place :  for  Jesus  ofttimes  resorted 
thither  luith  his  disciples. 

Our  Lord  went  there  to  pray,  and  Judas  knew  that  this  was  his  custom. 
Are  we  such  men  of  prayer  that  others  know  where  we  pray  ?  Have  you 
some  familiar  place  where  you  go  to  meet  your  Lord  ?  I  am  afraid  that 
many  know  where  we  trade,  and  many  know  where  we  preach ;  but 
perhaps,  few  know  where  we  pray.  God  grant  that  we  may  be  often  at  the 
mercy-seat!  We  should  be  better  men  and  women  if  we  were  more 
frequently  at  the  throne  of  grace. 

3.  Judas  then,  having  received  a  band  of  men  and  officers  from  the  chiej 
-priests  and  Pharisees,  cometh  thither  with  lanterns  and  torches  and  weapons 

"  Lanterns  "  to  give  light  to  the  Sun  ;  "  torches  "  to  find  out  tLo  ^ignt  ot 
the  world  ;  "  weapons  "  with  which  to  fight  with  the  Lamb  of  God,  the 
unarmed  Sufferer.  Strange  treatment  this  for  him  who  came  to  save 
and  bless ! 

4,  5.  Jesus  therefore,  knowing)  all  things  that  should  come  upon  him,  tuent 
forth,  and  said  unto  them,  Whom  seek  ye?  They  answered  him,  Jesus  of 
Nazareth.     Jesus  saith  unto  them,  I  am  he. 

Or,  "  I  am."  It  is  remarkable  that  Jesus  should,  in  his  betrayal,  twice 
use  this  expression,  tkus  uttering  the  very  name  of  Jehovah. 

o.     And  Judas  also,  which  betrayed  him,  stood  with  them. 

What  a  hardened  wretch  he  must  have  been  to  be  able  to  stand  with 
them  I  One  would  have  thought  that,  heaving  betrayed  his  Master,  he 
would  have  hidden  himself  away  for  shame ;  but  no,  "  Judas  also,  which 
betrayed  him,  stood  with  them."     His  heart  must  have  been  steeled. 

6.  As  soon  then  aa  he  had  said  unto  them,  lam  he,  they  went  backward,  and 
fell  to  the  ground. 

Christ's  almighty  power  cast  them  down  at  once.  He  needed  not  to  lift 
his  hand  or  even  his  finger  ;  he  only  said,  "I  am,"  and  "  they  went  back- 
ward, and  fell  to  the  ground." 


192 


METROPOLITAK   TABERNA.CLB   PULPIT. 


7.  Then  aaked  he  them  again^  Whom  seek  yef  And  they  said,  Jesua  of 
Nazareth. 

Do  they  return  again  to  the  fray  ?  Having  once  felt  Christ's  divine 
power,  do  they  summon  courage  enough  to  attack  him  ag^in  ?  Yes,  for 
there  is  no  limit  to  the  malice  and  impudence  of  the  human  heart. 

8 — 10.  Jesua  answered,  I  have  told  you  that  I  am  he  :  if  therefore  ye  seek 
me,  let  these  go  their  way  :  that  the  saying  might  he  fulfilled,  which  he  spake.  Of 
them  which  thou  gavest  me  have  I  lost  none.     Then  Simon  Peter — 

Always  ready  to  boil  over,  ever  full  of  zeal  and  rash  impetuosity,  Peter — 

10.  Having  a  sword  drew  it,  and  smote  the  high  priesfs  servant,  and  cut  off 
his  right  ear.     The  servant's  name  was  Malchus. 

Peter  struck  at  his  head ;  he  was  not  content  with  trying  to  wound,  he 
meant  to  kill  Malchus,  and  he  did  **  out  off  his  right  ear." 

11 — 14.  Then  said  Jesus  unto  Peter,  Put  up  thy  sword  into  the  sheath  :  the 
*iup  which  my  Father  hath  given  me,  shall  I  not  drink  it  ?  Then  the  hand  and 
the  captain  and  officers  of  the  Jews  took  Jesus,  and  hound  him,  and  led  him 
away  to  Annas  first;  for  he  wa^  father  in  law  to  Gaiaphas,  which  was  the  high 
priest  that  same  year.  Now  Caiaphas  was  he,  which  gave  counsel  to  the  Jews, 
that  it  was  expedient  that  one  man  should  die  for  the  people. 

Saying  a  great  deal  more  than  he  thought  he  was  saying,  for  he  uttered 
a  great  gospel  truth  when  he  said,  ''  It  was  expedient  that  one  man  should 
*die  for  the  people." 

Hymns  from  **  Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 382,  401,  293. 


THE  CAPTIVE  SAVIOUR  FREEING   HIS  PEOPLE. 


Delivered  on  Sunday  Morning,  November  25th,  1866,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  Jesus  answered,  I  have  told  you  that  I  am  he  :  if  therefore  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go 
their  way  :  that  the  saying  might  be  fulfilled,  which  he  spake,  Of  them  which  thou 
gavest  me  have  I  lost  none," — John  xviii.  8,  9. 

The  whole  story  of  our  Lord's  passion  is  exceedingly  rich  in  meaning. 
One  is  tempted  to  linger  over  every  separate  sentence  of  the  narratives 
given  by  the  evangelists.  It  were  possible  to  preach  several  series  of 
sermons  upon  the  whole  story,  and  there  is  not  a  single  incident,  though 
it  may  seem  to  be  but  accidental,  which  might  not  furnish  a  wealth  of 
holy  thought  to  the  careful  student.  In  looking  through  this  chapter 
one  was  greatly  tempted  to  speak  awhile  upon  the  Master's  selecting  the 
place  of  his  prayer  as  the  place  of  his  agony  and  betrayal:  the  holy  pru- 
dence and  forethought  by  which  he  had  as  it  were  cast  up  his  entrench- 
ments, and  made  his  defences  upon  the  very  spot  where  he  knew  he 
should  meet  the  shock  of  the  evening's  first  onslaught;  a  lesson  to  us. 
Christians,  not  to  venture  out  into  the  day's  battle  without  girding 
on  our  armour,  nor  make  a  voyage  upon  the  sea  of  life  without  having 
seen  to  it  that  the  vessel  is  well  supplied  against  every  possible  danger 
which  may  be  encountered  upon  the  storm-tossed  sea.  Jesus  prays  before 
he  fights,  and  so  must  we  if  we  would  overcome.  One  was  tempted  also 
to  dwell  upon  that  remarkable  expression,  "  Judas  also  which  betrayed 
him  knew  the  place;"  to  show  the  futility  of  knowledge  apart  from 
sincerity,  nay,  the  injuriousness  of  knowledge  if  it  be  not  attended  with 
corresponding  grace.  Had  the  traitor  not  known  he  could  not  have  be- 
trayed, and  had  he  not  been  an  intimate  friend  he  could  not  have  been  so 
base  a  wretch.  Strange,  but  strangely  true  is  it,  that  the  ability  to  become 
the  child  of  perdition  by  betraying  his  Master  was  found  in  the  fact  of 
his  having  been  the  near  acquaintance  of  the  Saviour.  He  could  never 
have  been  so  sevenfold  an  inheritor  of  hell  if  he  had  not  been  so  largely 
a  receiver  of  the  privilege  of  companionship  with  Christ.  Direful  truth, 
that  to  be  educated  to  take  the  highest  degree  in  hell  it  is  almost  neces- 
sary to  enter  hypocritically  into  the  school  of  Christ.  Terrible  reflection, 
which  should  well  check  any  of  us  who  make  high  professions  without 
a  corresponding  weight  of  sincerity.  But  as  time  does  not  allow  us  like 
the  bee  to  gather  honey  from  every  flower  we  shall  dwell  upon  the  text. 
In  this  passage  there  is  much  instruction^  and  we  shall  endeavour  to  draw 
No.  722.  13 


194  METROPOLITAN  TABERNAOLH   PUTjPIT. 

t/  forth ;  and  then,  we  shall  take  the  liberty  to  spiritualize  it^  to  set  the- 
words  in  another  sense  in  order  that  we  may  still  be  promoting^  our 
great  object  of  setting  forth  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

I.  When  we  observe  the  words  of  the  text,  we  notice  upon  the  very 
surface  a  sure  proof  of  THE  willingness  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
TO  give  himself  TO  SUFFER  FOR  OUR  SINS.  The  voluntary  cha- 
racter of  Christ's  suffering  makes  it  beam  with  a  matchless  splendour 
of  love.  He  needed  not  to  have  died.  If  it  had  been  his  good 
pleasure  he  might  have  tarried  gloriously  amongst  the  songs  of 
angels.  He  came  not  to  earth  to  win  a  crown,  because  he  had  none,  for 
all  honour  and  glory  are  his  by  right.  It  was  not  to  earn  a  dominion,  or 
because  he  was  not  Lord  of  principalities  and  powers,  that  he  descended 
from  the  skies:  "Who  though  he  was  rich  yet  for  our  sakes  he  became 
poor,  that  we,  through  his  poverty,  might  be  made  rich."  It  was  a 
disinterested  mission  upon  which  the  Redeemer  came  to  the  abodes  of 
sinful  men.  He  had  nothing  to  gain,  rather  he  had  everything  to  lose; 
and  yet,  let  me  say  to  correct  myself,  by  that  losing  he  did  gain,  for 
now,  as  our  Mediator,  he  is  clothed  with  a  special  glory  of  unrivalled 
grace,  unequalled  by  any  other  manifestation  of  the  divine  perfections. 

The  proofs  that  the  Master  went  voluntarily  to  his  death  are  very 
abundant.  He  rose  from  supper  when  he  knew  that  Judas  had  gone 
out  to  betray  him,  and  he  did  not  seek  a  hiding-place  in  the  corners  of 
Jerusalem,  or  retire  to  the  calm  retreat  of  Bethany.  If  he  had  chosen 
to  parry  his  betrayer's  thrust  that  night  and  to  wait  until  the  day^ 
the  fickle  multitude  would  have  gathered  around  him,  and  protected  him 
from  his  foes,  for  they  would  soon  have  been  won  to  his  side,  if  he  would 
have  consented  to  become  their  king.  Instead  of  retreating  even  for  a 
moment,  Jesus,  attended  by  his  disciples,  boldly  advanced  to  the  spot 
where  Judas  had  planned  to  betray  him;  he  went  as  calmly  as  though 
he  had  made  an  appointment  to  meet  a  friend  there,  and  would  not 
be  behindhand  when  he  arrived.  He  entered  upon  his  terrible  suffer- 
ings with  his  whole  heart,  with  the  full  concurrence  of  his  whole 
being,  having  a  baptism  to  be  baptized  with,'and  being  straitened  until  it 
was  accomplished.  What  true  courage  is  there  in  those  words,  "  Arise,, 
let  us  go  hence"!  when  he  knew  that  he  was  going  to  the  cross.  When 
the  band  came  to  take  him,  it  appears  that  they  did  not  know  him. 
He  said  to  them  twice,  "  Whom  seek  ye?  "  He  had  to  reveal  himself, 
or  the  lanterns  and  the  torches  would  not  have  discovered  him.  He  was 
not  after  all  taken  by  Judas*  kiss;  the  kiss  was  given,  but  in  the  con- 
fusion they  may  have  missed  the  token.  Jesus  had  to  ask,  "  Whom 
seek  ye? "  and  to  announce  himself  plainly  twice  with  the  words, 
« I  am  he."  He  yielded  himself  to  his  blood-thirsty  foes,  and  went 
willingly  with  his  tormentors.  You  are  clear  that  he  went  willmgly, 
for  since  a  single  word  made  the  captors]  fall  to  the  ground,  what  could 
he  not  have  done  ?  Another  word  and  they  would  have  descended 
into  the  tomb;  another,  and  they  would  have  been  hurled  into  hell. 
He  put  forth  just  that  little  finger  of  his  potency  in  order  to  let  them 
feel  what  he  could  have  done  if  he  had  chosen  to  lay  bare  the  arm  of 
his  strength,  and  to  utter  but  one  word  of  wrath  against  them.  You 
are  sure  that  he  went  cheerfully,  for  how  should  he  have  gone  at  all 
if  not  with  his  own  consent?     There  was  no  power  on  earth  that  could 


THE  CAPTIVE   SAVIOUR   FREEING   HIS   PEOPLE.  195 

possibly  have  bound  the  Lord  Jesus,  had  he  been  unwillins^.  He  who 
said,  '*  Let  these  go  their  way,"  and  by  that  word  secured  the  safety 
of  all  his  disciples,  it  is  certain  could  have  said  the  same  of  himself, 
and  so  have  gone  his  way  whither  he  would.  Men  miofht  as  well  speak 
of  loading  the  sun  with  chains,  or  holding  the  lightning  flash  in  bondage, 
or  like  the  foolish  king  of  old,  fettering  the  wild  uproarious  sea,  as  to 
suppose  that  they  could  constrain  the  Lord  of  Life  and  Glory,  and  lead 
him  a  captive  against  his  will.  He  was  led,  and  led  bound  too,  but  he 
could  have  snapped  those  bonds  as  Samson  did  the  Philistines'  bonds 
of  old.  There  were  other  cords  that  bound  him,  invisible  to  carnal 
sense;  the  bonds  of  covenant  engagements,  the  bonds  of  his  own  oath 
and  promise,  the  bonds  of  his  love  to  you  and  to  me,  my  brethren,  the 
mighty  bonds  of  his  marriage  union  to  our  souls,  which  constrained  him, 
without  a  word,  to  yield  himself  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter.  The  will- 
ingness of  Jesus!  let  us  see  it  clearly,  and  let  us  reverently  adore  him 
for  it.  Blessed  Master!  thou  goest  of  thyself  to  die  for  us.  No  com- 
pulsion but  that  of  thine  own  heart!  Nothing  brought  thee  to  the 
tomb  but  thine  almighty  love  to  us. 

I  do  not  intend  to  dwell  upon  this  thought,  but  having  brought  it 
before  you,  the  practical  use  of  it  is  just  this  :— Let  us  take  care  that 
our  service  of  Christ  shall  ever  be  most  manifestly  a  cheerful  and  a 
willing  one.  Let  us  never  come,  for  instance,  up  to  the  place  of  worship 
unwillingly,  merely  because  of  custom,  or  because  it  is  the  right  thing 
to  do,  which  we  would  gladly  avoid  doing  if  we  dare.  Let  us  never 
contribute  of  our  substance  to  the  Master's  cause  with  a  grudging  hand, 
as  though  a  tax-gatherer  were  wringing  from  us  what  we  could  ill 
afford.  Let  us  never  enter  upon  Christian  exercises  as  a  slave  would 
enter  upon  his  labour,  hearing  the  crack  of  the  whip  behind  him;  but 
let  love  put  wings  to  our  feet,  and  inspire  our  souls  with  a  sacred 
alacrity,  that  as  the  seraphs  fly  upon  the  high  behests  of  heaven,  we  may 
run  upon  our  Saviour's  commands  with  as  much  swiftness  as  mortals 
can  command.  Let  our  duty  be  our  delight.  Let  the  service  of  Christ 
be  a  kingdom  to  us.  Let  us  count  it  to  be  our  highest  gain  to  suffer 
loss  for  him,  and  our  greatest  ease  to  be  fully  immersed  in  abundant 
labours  for  his  sake.  His  willing  sacrifice  ought  to  ensure  our  willing 
sacrifice.  The  Saviour  bleeds  freely  like  the  camphor  tree  that  needs  no 
pressure,— let  us  as  freely  from  our  very  hearts  pour  forth  our  love,  and 
all  the  kindred  graces  and  deeds  of  virtue. 

11.  Turning  from  this  thought,  I  beg  you,  secondly,  to  notice  dub 
Lord's  oare  for  his  people  in  the  hours  of  his  greatest 
DISTURBANCE  OF  MIND.  "  If  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way." 
That  v7ord  was  intended,  in  the  first  place,  to  be  a  preservation  for  his 
immediate  attendants.  It  is  singular  that  the  Jews  did  not  surround 
that  little  handful  of  disciples,  put  them  in  prison,  and  then  execute 
them  in  due  season.  If  they  had  done  so,  where  would  have  been  the 
Christian  church?  If  they  should  have  destroyed,  as  it  seems  easy  for 
them  to  have  done,  the  first  nucleus  of  Christianity,  whero  would  have 
been  the  church  of  after  ages?  But  that  word  "  Let  these  go  their  way," 
very  efficiently  protected  all  the  weak  and  trembling  fugitives;  why  did 
not  the  soldiers  capture  John?  He  seems  to  have  gone  in  and  out  of 
the  palace  without  even  a  single  word  of  challenge.     Why  did  they  n<y 


196  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

seize  upon  Peter?  they  were  searching  for  witnesses,  why  did  they  not 
examine  Peter  under  torture,  as  was  the  Roman  custom,  in  order  to 
have  extorted  from  him  some  railing  accusation  against  his  Lord,  whom 
he  so  readily  denied?  Where  were  the  others  ?  Timid,  trembling  folk, 
they  had  fled  like  harts  and  roes,  when  they  first  heard  the  baying 
of  the  dogs  of  persecution;  why  were  they  not  hunted  up?  The  Jews 
did  not  lack  for  will,  for  afterwards  they  were  gratified  when  James  was 
killed  with  the  sword,  and  pleased  when  Peter  was  laid  in  prison — why 
were  they  suffered  to  go  unharmed?  Was  it  not  because  the  Master  had 
need  of  them?  The  Holy  Ghost  had  not  yet  been  poured  out  upon 
them,  and  they  were  not  fit  to  be  martyrs  ;  they  were  like  green  wood 
that  would  nol  burn;  they  were  as  yet  unbroken  to  the  sacred  yoke  of 
suffering,  and  unendowed  with  that  irresistible  spiritual  strength,  which 
made  them  able  to  bear  tribulation  with  rejoicing,  and  therefore  that 
good  Shepherd,  who  tempers  the  wind  to  shorn  lambs,  tempered  the  wind 
to  these  young  beginners. 

Those  words,  "  If  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way,"  were  like  coats 
of  mail  to  them,  or  those  fabled,  invisible  garments  which  concealed  their 
wearers  from  their  enemies.  Under  the  more  than  brazen  shield  of 
their  Lord's  words,  the  disciples  walked  securely  in  the  midst  of  the 
boisterous  mob,  and  we  find  John  and  others  of  the  disciples  even 
standing  at  the  foot  of  the  cross  while  those  who  gnashed  their  teeth  at 
Christ  and  laughed  at  him,  and  revealed  their  savage  malice  in  a 
thousand  ways,  did  not  touch  so  much  as  a  hair  of  their  heads,  or,  as  far 
as  we  know,  utter  one  jest  against  them.  The  word  of  Jesus  proved  to 
be  a  right  royal  word;  it  was  a  divine  word;  and  men  were  constrained 
to  obey  it.  The  Lord  had  said,  "  Touch  not  mine  anointed,  and  do  my 
prophets  no  harm,"  and  therefore  for  the  time  his  disciples  were  safe. 

It  strikes  me  that  the  expression  was  not  only  a  guard  for  the 
disciples  for  the  time,  but,  as  no  Scripture  is  of  private  interpretation, 
I  believe  that  such  a  royal  passport  has  been  given  to  all  Christ's 
people  in  the  waif  of  providence.  Fear  not,  thou  servant  of  Christ,  thou 
art  immortal  till  thy  work  is  done.  When  thou  art  fit  to  suffer,  and 
if  needs  be  even  to  die,  Christ  will  not  screen  thee  from  so  high  an 
honour,  but  permit  thee  to  drink  of  his  cup,  and  to  be  baptized  with 
his  baptism ;  but  until  thine  hour  is  come,  thou  mayest  go  and  return 
secure  from  death.  Though  cruel  men  may  desire  thine  ill,  and  devise 
mischief  against  thee,  thou  art  safe  enough  until  the  Lord  shall  be 
pleased  to  let  loose  the  lion,  and  even  then  thou  shalt  suffer  no 
permanent  injury.  It  is  wonderful  in  the  lives  of  some  of  God's 
ministers  how  strikingly  they  have  been  preserved  from  imminent 
peril.  We  cannot  read  the  life  of  Calvin  without  being  surprised  that 
he  should  have  been  permitted  to  die  peaceably  in  his  bed,  an  honoured 
man,  surrounded  by  the  town  councillors  and  the  great  ones  of  the 
very  city  from  which  he  had  been  once  expelled.  It  seems  astounding 
that  a  poor  weak  man  whose  body  was  emaciated  with  diseases  of  all 
kinds,  who  had  no  arms  to  wield  against  the  furious  hosts  of  Rome, 
should  yet  live  in  usefulness  and  then  die  in  circumstances  of  peace 
and  comfort.  It  is  not  less  remarkable  that  the  brave  hero  of  the 
cross,  Martin  Luther,  should  seem  as  if  he  had  carried  a  safe  conduct 
which  permitted  him  to  go  anywhere  and  everywhere.    He  stood  up  m 


. 


THE   CAPTIVE    SAVIOUR    FREEING    HIS   PEOPLE.  197 

the  Diet  of  Worms  expecting  to  die,  but  he  came  out  unscathed.  He 
passed,  as  it  were,  between  the  very  jaws  of  death  and  yet  remained 
unharmed.  Though,  as  I  have  said  before,  Christ  has  suffered  many  of 
his  people  to  die  for  him,  and  they  have  rejoiced  so  to  do,  yet,  when  he 
has  willed  to  preserve  any  of  his  servants  who  were  needed  for  a  special 
work,  as  Calvin  and  Luther  undoubtedly  were,  he  had  a  way  of  taking 
care  of  them,  and  saying,  "  Let  these  go  their  way."  Take,  for  instance, 
another  ilhistration,  the  life  of  our  remarkable  reformer,  John 
Wickliffe.  Many  times  his  life  was  not  worth  a  week's  purchase,  and 
yet  the  old  enemy  of  the  saints  were  robbed  of  their  prey, 
and  could  never  touch  a  bone  of  him  until  years  after  he  had  been 
buried.  When  he  was  brought  up  for  trial  before  the  bishop,  at  St. 
Paul's,  it  was  a  very  singular  circumstance  that  John  of  Gaunt  should 
stand  at  his  side  fully  armed,  proudly  covering  the  ijodly  man  with  the 
prestige  of  his  rank  and  the  arm  of  his  power.  When  Wickliffe  was 
faint  with  standing,  and  begged  to  be  allowed  to  sit,  the  bishop  tells 
him  that  heretics  shall  have  no  seats,  but  John  of  Gaunt  with  rough, 
uncourtly  words  swears  that  he  shall  sit  when  he  wills,  and  when  the 
time  comes  the  good  man  goes  forth  through  the  midst  of  the  rabble 
protected  by  his  friend.  I  know  not  that  John  of  Gaunt  knew  the 
truth,  but  yet  God  touched  the  man's  heart  to  protect  his  servant  in  the 
hour  of  peril.  Vultures,  when  God  has  willed  it,  have  protected  doves, 
and  eagles  have  covered  with  their  wings  defenceless  children  whom 
God  would  save.  When  the  Lord  wills  it,  if  all  hell  should  shoot  such 
a  shower  of  arrows  as  should  put  out  the  sun,  and  if  all  those  arrows 
were  aimed  at  one  poor  heart,  yet  not  a  single  shaft  should  hit,  but  all 
be  turned  aside  by  an  invisible  but  irresistible  power  from  the  man 
whom  Jehovah  ordained  to  save.  We  understand,  then,  that  Jesus  has 
issued  a  royal  passport  for  all  his  servants,  which  enables  them  to  live 
on  in  the  midst  of  deaths  innumerable. 

Mystically  understood  the  words  have  a  far  deeper  meaning.  The 
true  seizure  of  Christ  was  not  by  Romans  or  by  the  envious  Jews,  but 
by  our  sins;  and  the  true  deliverance  which  Jesus  gave  to  his  disciples 
was  not  so  much  from  Roman  weapons  as  from  the  penalty  of  our  sins. 
How  anxiously  do  I  desire  that  those  here  this  morning  whose  sins  have 
been  tormenting  them  would  hear  the  voice  of  Jesus,  "  If  ye  seek  me, 
let  these  go  their  way."  The  law  of  God  comes  out  to  seek  us  who  have 
violated  it.  It  has  many  and  just  demands  against  us,  but  Jesus  who 
stood  in  our  place  puts  himself  before  the  law,  and  he  says,  ''  Dost  thou 
seek  me?  Here  I  am;  but  when  thou  takest  me  a  prisoner  let  these,  for 
whom  I  stood,  go  their  way."  So  then,  beloved,  when  the  law  met  with 
the  Lord  Jesus  and  made  him  its  servant,  and  constrained  him  to  bear 
its  penalty,  all  those  for  whom  Christ  stood  were  by  his  being  bound, 
absolutely  and  for  ever  set  free.  Christ's  suffering  the  penalty  of  the 
law  was  the  means  of  removing  his  people  for  ever  from  under  the  legal 
yoke.  Now  let  me  try  to  apply  that  truth  to  your  case.  A  poor  soul 
under  distress  of  mind  has  gone  to  the  priest,  and  he  says,  "  If  thou 
wouldst  be  pardoned  do  penance."  While  he  is  flogging  his  back  and 
laying  on  the  stripes  most  earnestly  I  think  I  hear  the  Saviour  saying 
to  the  whole  tribe  of  priests,  "  Let  these  poor  souls  go  their  way.  My 
shoulders  have  borne  all  they  ought   to  have  borne;  my  heart  has 


198 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


suffered   all  the   griefs   that   they    were    condemned   to   know.      The 
ctiastisement  of  their  peace  was  upon  me,  and  by  my  stripes  they  are 
healed.     Let  these  go!"     Pat  up  your  whip,  cease  from  your  bodily 
tortures,  they  are  of  no  service.     The  law  has  taken  the  Redeemer,  it 
does  not  want  you.     You  need  not  suffer,  Christ  has  suffered,  and  all 
your  sufferings  will  now  be  useless  and  vain.     Christ  has  paid  the  debt, 
no  need  for  you  to  attempt  it  again.    Another  poor  trembler  has  been 
sitting  under  a  legal  ministry,  and  he  has  been  told  that  if  he  would  be 
saved  he  must  keep  the  commandments.     He  has  therefore  endeavoured 
to  forego  this  sin  and  the  other,  and  as  far  as  possible  to  be  perfect  in 
holiness.     But  he  has  made  no  advance;  his  soul  is  as  much  in  bondage 
as  ever,  unsaved  with  all  his  exertions,  destitute  still  of  true  peace  not- 
withstanding all  his  good  works.    This  morning  my  Master  cries  to  the 
preacher  who  talks  after  this  fashion,  "  Let  these  poor  bondaged  ones 
go  their  way.     Do  not  preach  to  them  salvation  by  their  own  doings. 
Do  not  tell  them  that  they  are  to  merit  admittance  to  heaven,     I  have 
wrought  out  and  finished  their  redemption;  their  salvation  is  complete 
in  me.    There  is  nothing  for  sinners  to  do  to  win  forgiveness.     All  they 
have  to  do  is  to  receive  what  I  have  done  for  them.    All  the  righteous- 
ness they  need  to  recommend  them  before  God  is  my  righteousness, 
which  requires  not  that  theirs  be  added  to  it,  for  why  should  their 
rags  be  joined  to  my  cloth  of  gold?     All  the  merit  a  sinner  can  plead 
is  the  merit  of  my  passion.     Wherefore  should  they  seek  after  merit 
through  their  repentance  and  their  good  works?     Why   should  such 
stagnant  water  be  poured  into  the  midst  of  the  wine  of  my  merit? 
Away  with  your  fancied  good  works,  away  with  your  boastings,  your 
religious  doings,  your  weepings,  and  your  prayings,  for  if  they  be  used 
as  a  ground  of  confidence  instead  of  the  work  of  Jesus  they  are  things 
of  nought,  mere  rottenness  and  dung  to  be  cast  upon  the  dunghill. 
Since  Jesus  was  accepted  and  punished  by  the  law,  sinners  believing  in 
him  are  free  from  the  law's  exactions,  and  may  go  their  way. 

Perhaps  there  are  here  some  in  whose  hearts  the  law  of  God  is 
making  terrible  confusion.  You  feel  that  you  have  broken  the  law  and 
that  you  cannot  keep  it,  and  now  the  law  is  flogging  you;  it  has  tied 
you  up  as  they  tie  up  soldiers  in  the  army  to  the  hafberts,  and  it  has 
been  laying  on  the  great  cat  of  ten  tails  to  your  back,  the  ten  com- 
mandments of  the  law,  till  you  are  smarting,  smarting  all  over.  Your 
whole  conscience  is  troubled.  Now  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  says  to  the 
Law,  "  Put  up,  put  up  that  whip!  do  not  smite  the  sinner  any  more! 
Didst  thou  not  smite  me,  why  shouldst  thou  vex  him."  But,  sinner,  the 
only  way  in  which  thou  canst  escape  from  the  law's  whip  is  this,  hasten 
to  Jesus  Christ.  Thou  must  flee  to  Christ,  thou  must  trust  in  Jesus, 
and  if  thou  shalt  trust  in  Jesus  he  will  cast  his  skirt  over  thee,  he  will 
lift  up  the  broad  buckler  of  his  merit  and  protect  thee  from  the  shaft* 
of  the  foe,  so  that  thou  canst  say  to  the  law,  "  I  am  not  under  the  curse 
of  the  law  now,  for  I  have  fulfilled  it  in  the  person  of  my  Surety,  and 
I  have  suffered  its  penalty  in  the  person  of  my  Saviour. 

"  The  terrors  of  law  and  of  God 
With  me  can  have  nothing  to  do ; 
My  Saviour's  obedience  and  blood 
Hide  all  my  transgressions  from  view.** 


THE   CAPTIVE  SAVIOUR   FREEING   HIS  PEOPLE.  199 

Jesus  Christ  then,  as  he  stands  before  the  law  and  is  bound  by  the  law,  and 
flogged  by  the  law,  and  crucified  by  the  law,  and  buried  by  the  law,  says  to 
you  who  trust  in  him,  "  Go  your  way,  the  law  cannot  touch  you,  for  it  has 
•smitten  me  instead  of  you.  I  was  your  substitute,  and  you  may  go  free." 
Why  you  all  know  that  this  is  simple  justice;  if  another  person  shall 
have  paid  your  debts,  you  are  not  afraid  of  being  amerced  again  in 
those  debts;  and  if  you  are  drafted  for  the  army  and  a  substitute  has 
taken  your  place,  you  are  not  afraid  of  being  drawn  a  second  time.  So 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  substitute  for  all  his  people,  and  if  he  was 
a  substitute  for  you,  the  law  has  no  further  penal  claims  upon  you. 
Christ  has  obeyed  it;  Christ  has  suffered  its  penalty;  you  may  rejoice 
in  the  law  as  being  now  to  you  a  gracious  rule  of  life,  but  it  is  not 
to  you  a  yoke  of  bondage;  you  are  not  under  it  as  a  slave,  you  are 
free  from  its  dominion;  you  are  not  under  the  law,  but  you  are  under 
grace.     What  a  blessing  is  this! 

Further,  these  words  seem  to  me  to  bear  such  a  meaning  as  this,  that 
as  we  are  delivered  from  legal  exaction  so  are  we  also  delivered  from 
all  penal  iiifliction.  I  wish  that  some  children  of  God  were  clearer  on 
this  point.  When  you  suffer  tribulation,  affliction  and  adversity,  do 
not  think  that  God  is  punishing  you  for  your  sins,  for  no  child  of  God 
can  be  punished  for  sin  penally.  Let  me  not  be  misunderstood.  A 
man  is  brought  before  God  first  of  all  as  a  criminal  before  a  judge. 
You  and  I  have  stood  there.  Through  Christ's  blood  and  righteousness 
we  have  been  absolved  and  acquitted  as  before  God  the  Judge,  audit  is 
not  possible  for  the  law  to  lay  so  much  as  the  weight  of  a  feather  upon 
us  since  we  have  been  perfectly  acquitted.  In  all  the  pains  and  suffer- 
ings which  a  Christian  may  endure,  there  is  not  so  much  as  a  single 
ounce  of  penal  infliction.  God  cannot  punish  a  man  whom  he  has 
pardoned.  But  that  criminal  being  pardoned,  is  then  adopted  into  the 
family  and  becomes  a  child.  Now,  if  he  shall  as  a  child  offend  against 
his  father's  rule,  he  will  be  chastened. for  it.  Everyone  can  see  the 
distinction  between  the  chastening  of  a  father  and  the  punishment  of 
a  judge.  If  your  child  were  to  steal  you  would  not  think  of  punishing 
that  child  in  the  light  in  which  the  judge  would  do  it,  who  would 
€ommit  him  to  imprisonment  for  having  broken  the  law;  but  you  chasten 
your  child  yourself,  not  so  much  to  avenge  the  law  as  for  the  child's 
good,  that  he  may  not  do  this  evil  thing  again.  So  our  heavenly  Father 
chastens  his  people  with  the  rod  of  the  covenant,  but  he  never  punishes 
them  with  the  sword  of  vengeance.  There  is  a  difference  betvreen 
chastening  and  punishing.  Punishing  is  from  a  judge  ;  Christ  has 
suffered  all  such  punishment,  so  that  no  penal  infliction  can  fall  upon  a 
soul  that  believes  in  him;  but  we  may  have  chastisement  which  conies 
to  us  as  the  result  of  a  father's  love,  and  not  as  the  result  of  a  judge's 
anger;  we  have  felt  such  chastisement,  and  have  reason  to  bless  God  for 
it.  Our  Lord  Jesus  says  with  regard  to  all  legal  penalty,  *'  If  ye  seek 
me,  I  have  borne  it:  let  these  go  free." 

Once  more,  this  text  will  have  its  grandest  fulfilment  at,  the  last. 
When  the  destroying  angel  shall  come  forth  with  his  sword  of  fire  to 
smite  the  sinner,  when  the  gulf  of  hell  shall  open  and  vomit  forth  its 
floods  of  flame,  when  the  dread  trumpet  shall  sound  and  shall  make  all 
ears  to  hear  the  voice  of  an  avenging  God,  Christ  shall  stand  forth  in 


200  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

the  front  of  all  the  blood-bought  souls  that  came  to  trust  under  the 
shadow  of  the  wings  of  his  mercy,  and  he  will  say  to  Justice,  "  Thou 
hast  sought  me  once,  and  thou  hast  found  all  thou  canst  ask  of  me. 
Then  let  these  go  their  way."  And  up  the  glorious  steeps  of  the 
celestial  hills  the  happy  throng  shall  stream,  singing  as  they  pass 
through  the  gate  of  pearl  and  tread  the  pavement  of  transparent  gold, 
"  Unto  him  that  loved  us  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  blood,  unto 
him  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever."  Then  shall  the  great  manumission 
of  the  slave  take  place,  because  Christ  was  bound;  then  shall  the 
deliverance  of  the  captive  come,  because  Christ  slept  in  the  prison-house 
of  the  tomb.  "  If  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way."  I  would  to 
God  that  some  here  would  perceive  that  the  way  of  deliverance  is  for 
the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  bound  in  their  stead.  Trust  thou  in  Jesus,  and  it 
shall  be  so. 

III.  Thirdly,  but  very  briefly,  notice  why  our  Lord  exhibited  this 
great  care  for  his  people;  ponder  over  his  saying  concerning  them, 
"That  the  saying  might  be  fulfilled  which  he  spake.  Of  them  which  thou 
gavest  me  I  have  lost  none."  Here  is  much  of  matter  for  thought  at 
your  leisure.  Do  not  you  know  that  that  text  was  a  prayer  ?  Now 
here  it  is  made  into  a  promise.  What,  then,  is  everything  that  Christ 
asks  for  guaranteed  to  his  people,  so  that  his  prayer  is  God's  promise  ? 
It  is  so. 

Notice  next  that,  verbally  understood,  this  expression,  which  is  quoted 
from  the  seventeenth  of  John,  could  only  relate  to  the  souls  of  God's 
people;  but  here  it  is  taken  as  though  it  related  to  their  bodies.  From 
which  I  gather  that  we  are  never  wrong  in  understanding  promises  in  the 
largest  possible  sense.  It  is,  I  believe,  a  rule  of  law  that  if  a  man 
should  get  a  privilege  from  the  king  that  privilege  is  to  be  understood 
in  the  widest  sense;  whereas  a  punishment,  or  penalty,  is  always  to  be 
understood  in  the  narrowest  sense.  In  the  olden  times,  when  princes 
and  kings  used  to  grant  monopolies,  if  a  king  had  granted  a  monopoly 
upon  all  kinds  of  foreign  fruits,  if  the  words  had  so  run,  you  may  rest 
assured  that  the  person  obtaining  that  monopoly  would  have  put  every- 
thing down  as  foreign  fruit  that  could  possibly  bear  the  name,  and  he 
would  have  been  justified  by  the  law  for  so  doing.  Now,  when  the 
great  King  gives  a  promise,  you  may  encompass  everything  within  its 
range  which  can  possibly  come  under  the  promise,  and  we  may  be  sure 
that  the  Lord  will  not  run  back  from  his  word.  God's  words  are  never 
to  be  taken  with  a  rebate,  or  discount,  but  with  such  blessed  interest 
as  your  faith  is  able  to  put  thereto.  The  grant  of  eternal  life  includes 
such  providential  protections  and  provisions  as  shall  be  necessary  on 
the  road  to  heaven.  The  house  is  secured  for  the  sake  of  the  tenant, 
and  the  body  because  of  the  soul. 

There  is  also  one  more  remark  I  cannot  help  making,  namely,  that 


THE  CAPTIVE   SAVIOUR  FREEING   HIS  PEOPLE.  201 

this  text  is5  not  in  the  form  of  a  promise  at  all.  "  Of  them  which  thou 
gavest  me  have  I  lost  none."  It  relates  to  the  past,  but  here  it  is  used 
as  a  reason  why  none  should  be  lost  of  the  present;  from  which  I  gather, 
that  as  Jesus  has  done  in  the  past  so  will  he  act  in  the  future,  and  that 
all  he  sver  was  to  his  people  he  will  be  to  them  for  evermore.  We  may 
look  upon  every  past  act  of  grace  as  being  a  token  and  guarantee  of 
future  grace,  and  we  may  gather  from  all  our  experience  of  the  Lord's 
goodness  in  the  days  that  are  gone  that  he  will  do  yet  again  unto  us  as 
he  has  done,  and  still  more  abundantly  until  we  see  his  face  in  heaven. 

The  gracious  words  before  us  read  as  follows:  "  Of  all  them  which 
thou  hast  given  me  I  have  lost  none."  Then  some  are  given.  There 
is  an  elect  nation.  Oh  that  we  may  be  found  in  that  happy  number! 
Then  Jesus  keeps  those  who  are  given;  they  cannot  keep  themselves, 
but  he  can  keep  them  and  will.  He  so  well  preserves  them  that  not  «4o 
much  as  one  is  lost.  I  have  sometimes  thought  I  might  imagine  such 
a  scene  as  this  at  the  gates  of  heaven,  when  the  great  Shepherd  comes  to 
give  in  his  charge.  "  Here  am  I,"  saith  he,  "  and  the  children  which  thou 
hast  given  me."  But  are  they  every  one  brought  safely  here?"  "  Y^s," 
saith  the  great  Shepherd,  "  of  all  whom  thou  hast  given  me  I  have  lost 
none."  "  But  where  is  Peter?  Did  he  not  deny  thee  to  thy  face  in  the 
hall?  Did  he  not  three  times  say,  'I  know  him  not!'"  "Yes,  but  I 
made  him  go  out  and  weep  bitterly,  and  then  I  washed  him  in  my 
precious  blood,  and  here  he  is,"  and  Peter  sings  as  sweetly  as  any.  Then 
perhaps  the  question  may  be  asked,  "  And  where  is  such  a  one, 
the  least  of  all  saints?"  Brother,  you  feel  yourself  to  be  the  weakest, 
the  meanest,  the  most  useless,  but  an  enquiry  will  be  made  for  you,  and 
the  answer  will  be,  "  He  is  here;  of  all  whom  thou  hast  given  me  I  have 
lost  none."  Oh,  happy  sheep  in  the  care  of  such  a  Shepherd!  Oh 
happy,  happy  hearts  that  can  rely  upon  such  a  keeper!  Dear  hearer,  ia 
Jesus  yours?  Are  you  depending  upon  him  ?  Say,  have  you  cast  your- 
self upon  him?  Then  do  not  fear  concerning  your  last  days;  it  must 
be  well  at  the  last,  if  it  is  well  now.  If  you  are  now  in  Christ,  he 
never  did  cast  away  any,  and  he  never  will.  Oh  if  you  have  but  come 
to  him  and  are  now  depending  on  him  — 

"  His  honour  is  engaged  to  save 
The  meanest  of  his  sheep  ; 
All  that  his  heavenly  Father  gave 
His  hands  securely  keep." 

He  suffered  for  you  and  therefore  you  shall  go  your  way,  and  the  cove- 
nant shall  be  fulfilled.  "  Of  those  whom  thou  hast  given  me  I  have  lost 
none." 

I  have  thus  used  the  text  as  briefly  as  I  could.  I  shall  want  your 
patience  a  few  minutes  while  I  apply  this  text  in  a  sort  of  spiritual 

SENSE. 


202 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULITT. 


The  flrst  remark  in  this  department  of  the  subject  is — many  smk  JastM 
but  do  not  know  who  he  is.  So  that  Christ  says  to  them,  "  Whom  seek 
ye?  "  Some  here  this  morning  are  seeking  rest,  but  they  do  not  know 
that  Jesus  is  the  rest.  You  feel  an  aching  void  in  your  hearts.  You  are 
not  happy;  the  theatre  does  not  give  you  the  pleasure  it  once  did. 
Somehow  life  has  grown  insipid  to  you.  There  is  a  still  small  voice 
within  your  soul  like  the  voice  of  wailing,  like  Rachel  weeping  for  her 
children  and  refusing  to  be  comforted.  You  are  seeking  you  know  not 
what.  You  have  begun  to  read  your  Bible;  you  are  eager  to  attend 
upon  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  but  you  do  not  know  what 
it  is  you  want.  Ah  well,  it  is  a  good  thing  to  be  a  seeker;  though  you 
cannot  tell  what  it  is  you  need,  for  if  you  do  but  desire  and  lift  up  your 
voice  to  God  sincerely  and  earnestly,  he  will  be  found  of  you. 

We  now  note  the  fact,  viz.,  that  those  tvho  seek  Christ  will  find  him, 
but  they  find  him  only  because  he  reveals  himself  to  them.  These 
men  sought  Christ  to  kill  him,  yet  he  came  and  said.  "  I  am  he."  There 
was  a  woman,  if  you  remember,  at  the  well  of  Syohar,  who  sought  him 
for  a  very  different  purpose.  She  said,  "  I  know  that  Messias  cometh, 
which  is  called  Christ;  when  he  is  come  he  will  tell  us  all  things."  And 
Jesus  said,  "  I  that  speak  unto  thee  am  he."  Whoever  seeks  Jesus, 
Jesus  will  show  himself  to  them.  They  came  with  lanterns  and  with 
torches,  but  they  did  not  find  Christ  with  lanterns  and  with  torches. 
And  you  may  come,  my  dear  friend,  with  a  great  many  of  your  own 
inventions,  a  great  many  fancies  and  imaginings,  but  you  will  not  so  find 
him.  How  could  you  expect  to  find  the  sun  with  a  lantern?  No. 
Christ  must  come  and  reveal  himself  to  you,  and  if  you  seek  him  he  will 
do  so.  Only  continue  to  seek  him.  Let  not  past  disappointments  make 
you  leave  off  seeking.  Long  as  you  have  breath  continue  in  prayer.  1 
charge  you  before  the  living  G-od  if  you  have  sought  in  vain,  do  not  let 
Satan  make  thee  give  it  up;  but  ask  that  Christ  would  lead  thee  in  the 
right  way,  for  if  thou  didst  but  know  the  right  way  thou  needst  not 
seek  long  for  he  is  here  now.  Jesus  can  forgive  this  morning;  before 
you  leave  that  seat  you  shall  have  a  fiill  assurance  of  your  interest  in 
him,  if  you  be  led  to  understand  the  way  of  salvation.  That  way  is 
simply  to  trust  Christ,  simply  to  believe  that  he  can  and  will  save  you, 
and  to  trust  yourself  with  him.  I  will  never  believe  that  he  will  let  a 
sincere  soul  go  hungering  and  thirsting  after  him,  and  let  that  soul  die 
without  him;  but  though  he  may  be  pleased  for  a  while  to  let  that  spirit 
wander  even  in  apparent  blackness  and  darkness,  yet  he  will  at  the  last 
lift  the  veil  from  his  blessed  face,  and  ah!  the  sight  of  that  face  will  weU 
repay  you  for  all  the  sighs  and  cries  with  which  you  sought  him;  and 
to  hear  him  say,  "  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love,  therefore 
with  lovingkindness  have  I  drawn  thee,"  will  so  wake  up  the 
music  of  heaven  within  your  soul  that  you  will  think  of  the  months  o\ 


THE  CAPTIVE  SAVIOUR  FREEING  HIS  PEOPLE.        203 

weariness  and  the  nights  of  waiting  as  all  too  little,  and  more  than 
enough  repaid. 

One  thing  more,  tvhen  Jesus  is  found,  there  is  ahvays  much  to  be  given 
wp.  "If  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way."  There  are  always  many 
things  that  you  will  have  to  let  go  if  you  have  Christ,  and  this  is  very 
often  the  testing  point.  If  a  man  keeps  a  public-house  which  he  opens 
on  Sunday,  in  which  cursing  and  swearing  abounds,  if  he  has  en- 
couraged all  sorts  of  vice,  in  order  to  increase  his  custom,  can  he 
continue  in  this  and  yet  have  Christ?  Impossible.  Now  that  man  would 
like  to  go  to  heaven,  but  if  he  would  he  must  let  go  his  evil  occupation. 
Yonder  is  a  woman  who  has  tasted  the  pleasures  of  sin.  She  would 
fain  have  a  Saviour,  but  if  she  will  have  a  Saviour  she  must  let  her  sins 
go.  There  is  a  young  man  over  yonder,  proud,  vain,  giddy;  if  he 
would  have  Christ,  he  must  let  all  these  evils  go.  Our  sins  must  be 
abandoned,  or  we  cannot  receive  a  Saviour.  Christ  Jesus  will  pardon 
sin,  but  he  will  never  dwell  in  the  same  heart  with  sin.  Though  you 
may  have  been  as  base  as  base  could  be,  it  can  all  be  forgiven  you  now; 
but  if  you  continue  in  it,  there  is  no  mercy  for  you.  He  that  con- 
fessethhis  sin  and  forsake th  it,  shall  find  mercy;  but  not  the  man  who 
with  hypocritical  lip  bewails  it,  and  then  with  vicious  heart  plunges 
into  it  again.  "  If  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go."  What,  cannot  you  give 
them  up?  Silly  companions,  idle  habits,  foolish  songs,  pleasure-seeking, 
so-called,  are  these  too  dear  to  be  renounced?  Really,  some  of  the  things 
which  give  pleasure  to  men  now-a-days  are  so  absurd,  so  empty,  so 
devoid  of  true  wit,  that  I  wonder  the  swine  do  not  revolt  against  the 
mouldy  husks  which  they  are  fed  with  now-a-days.  We  cannot  wonder 
that  swine  do  eat  husks,  it  is  natural  they  should,  and  we  would 
not  deny  them  their  native  food.  If  I  were  a  swine,  I  thmk  I  should 
like  to  have  husks  that  have  some  sort  of  substance  in  them,  but  the 
world's  pleasure  grows  more  and  more  vapid  and  worthless,  the  pleasure 
of  idiots  rather  than  of  men.  Cannot  you  give  these  poor  things 
up?  Are  they  such  dear  attractions,  such  precious  things,  that  you  let 
heaven  go,  and  Christ  go,  sooner  than  let  them  go?  Nay,  I  hope  it 
will  be  a  voice  of  power  to  you,  and  that  you  will  say,  "  My  Saviour,  let 
them  all  go!  what  are  they  to  thee?  I  shall  find  ten  thousand  times 
more  pleasure  and  more  profit  too  in  following  thee  than  in  following 
the  best  of  them.  So  let  them  go  for  ever,  and  may  they  never  entice 
me  more.'*  Have  you  any  self-righteousness  remaining?  Are  you 
in  your  own  conceit  better  than  other  people?  Do  you  secretly  trust 
in  your  works?  Now  if  you  want  Christ,  you  must  let  all  that  go. 
Christ  will  tread  the  wine-press  alone,  and  of  the  people,  there 
must  be  none  with  him;  and  if  you  seek  to  be  saved  by  Christ 
it  must  not  be  by  the  works  of  the  law,  but  by  grace  alone.  WouK' 
to  God  that  there  might  be  a  clean  sweep  made  in  some  of  your  hearts. 


204 


METROPOLITA/f   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


TS  ^^^^J^^  ^^^^^  co"^e  to  Jesus  all  empty-handed  as  you  are,  and  say, 
*  Yes,  Master,  thy  precious  blood,  thy  triumphant  resurrection,  thine 
effectual  plea;  these  are  our  hope  and  these  our  joy.  We  would  serve- 
thee  in  life,  and  bless  thee  in  death.  Thine  we  are,  thou  Son  of  God^ 
and  all  that  we  have.  Take  us  and  keep  us,  and  thine  be  the  praisel 
Amen.  ^ 


PoRTiox  OF  Scripture  read  before  Sermon— John 


ZTUl. 


THE   BETRAYAL. 
Delivered  on  Sunday  Morning,  February  15th,  1863,  by  the 

REV.  C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"And  while  he  yet  spake,  behold  a  multitude,  and  he  that  was  called  Judas,  one  of 
the  twelve,  went  before  them,  and  drew  near  unto  Jesus  to  kiss  him.  But  Jesus  said 
unto  him,  Judas,  betrayest  thou  the  Son  of  man  with  a  kiss  ?" — Luke  xxii.  47,  48. 

When  Satan  had  been  entirely  worsted  in  his  conflict  with  Christ  in 
the  garden,  the  man-devil  Judas  came  upon  the  scene.  As  the  Parthian 
in  his  flight  turns  round  to  shoot  the  fatal  arrow,  so  the  arch-enemy- 
aimed  another  shaft  at  the  Eedeemer,  by  employing  the  traitor  into 
whom  he  had  entered.  Judas  became  the  devil's  deputy,  and  a  most 
trusty  and  serviceable  tool  he  was.  The  Evil  One  had  taken  entire 
possession  of  the  apostate's  heart,  and,  like  the  swine  possessed  of  devils, 
he  ran  violently  downwards  towards  destruction.  Well  had  infernal 
malice  selected  the  Saviour's  trusted  friend  to  be  his  treacherous  betrayer, 
for  thus  he  stabbed  at  the  very  centre  of  his  broken  and  bleeding  heart. 
But,  beloved,  as  in  all  things  God  is  wiser  than  Satan,  and  the  Lord 
of  goodness  outwitteth  the  Prince  of  Evil,  so,  in  this  dastardly  betrayal 
of  Christ,  prophecy  was  fulfilled,  and  Christ  was  the  more  surely 
declared  to  be  the  promised  Messiah.  Was  not  Joseph  a  type  ?  and,  lo ! 
like  that  envied  youth,  Jesus  was  sold  by  his  own  brethren.  Was  he  not 
to  be  another  Samson,  by  whose  strength  the  gates  of  hell  should  be 
torn  from  their  posts  ?  lo !  like  Samson,  he  is  bound  by  his  countrymen, 
and  delivered  to  the  adversary.  Know  ye  not  that  he  was  the  anti-type 
of  David?  and  was  not  David  deserted  by  Ahithophel,  his  own  familiar 
friend  and  counsellor  ?  Nay,  brethren,  do  not  the  words  of  the  Psalmist 
receive  a  literal  fulfihnent  in  our  Master's  betrayal  ?  What  prophecy 
can  be  more  exactly  true  than  the  language  of  the  forty-first  and  fifty- 
fifth  Psalms  ?  In  the  first  we  read,  "  Yea,  mine  own  familiar  friend, 
in  whom  I  trusted,  which  did  eat  of  my  bread,  hath  lifted  up  his  heel 
against  me ;"  and  in  the  fifty-fifth  the  Psalmist  is  yet  more  clear,  "  For 
it  was  not  an  enemy  that  reproached  me ;  then  I  could  have  borne  it : 
neither  was  it  he  that  icited  me  that  did  magnify  himself  against  me ; 
No.  494. 


206  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

then  I  would  have  hid  myself  from  him :  but  it  was  thou,  a  man  mine 
equal  my  guide,  and  mine  acquaintance.  We  took  sweet  counsel 
too-ether,  and  walked  unto  the  house  of  God  in  company.  He  hath  put 
forth  his  hands  against  such  as  be  at  peace  with  him :  he  hath  broken 
his  covenant.  The  words  of  his  mouth  were  smoother  than  butter,  but 
war  was  in  his  heart :  his  words  were  softer  than  oil,  yet  were  they 
drawn  swords."  Even  an  obscure  passage  in  one  of  the  lesser  prophets, 
must  have  a  literal  fulfilment,  and  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  the 
price  of  a  base  slave,  must  the  Saviour  be  betrayed  by  his  choice 
friend  Ah !  thou  foul  fiend,  thou  shalt  find  at  the  last  that  thy  wisdom 
is  but  intensified  folly ;  as  for  the  deep  plots  and  plans  of  thy  craft,  the 
Lord  shall  laugh  them  to  scorn ;  after  all,  thou  art  but  the  unconscious 
drudge  of  him  whom  thou  abhorrest ;  in  all  the  black  work  thou  doest 
so  greedily,  thou  art  no  better  than  a  mean  scullion  in  the  royal  kitchen 
of  the  King  ot  kings.  ,  .    .    n         x     ;i, 

Without  further  preface,  let  us  advance  to  the  subject  of  our  Lord  s 
betrayal.  First,  concentrate  your  thoughts  upon  Jesus,  the  Utrayed  one; 
and  when  ye  have  lingered  awhile  there,  solemnly  gaze  into  the  viUanous 
countenance  of  Judas,  the  betrayer— hQ  may  prove  a  beacon  to  warn  us 
against  the  sin  which  gendereth  apostacy. 

I.    Let  us  tarry  awhile,  and  see  our  Lord  ungratefully  and 

DASTARDLY  BETRAYED.  ,     ,,  i      ^  n  •    ^     ^i,     i       a 

It  is  appointed  that  he  must  die,  but  how  shall  he  fall  into  the  hands 

of  his  adversaries?     Shall  they  capture  him  in  conflict?     It  must  not 

be.  lest   he  appear   an   unwilling   victim.      Shall   he  flee  before  his 

foes  until  he  can  hide  no  longer?     It  is  not  meet  that  a  sacrifice  should 

be  hunted  to  death.    Shall  he  offer  himself  to  the  foe?   ^ That  were  to 

excuse  his  murderers,  or  be  a  pai-ty  to  their  crime.    Shall  he  be  taken 

accidentally  or  unawares?    That  would  withdraw  from  his  cup  the 

necessary  bitterness  which  made  it  wormwood  mingled  with  gall     JNo; 

he  must  be  betrayed  by  his  friend,  that  he  may  bear  the  utmost  depths 

of  suffering,  and  that  in  every  separate  circumstance  there  may  be  a  well 

of  grief.     One  reason  for  the  appointment  of  the  betrayal,  lay  m  the 

fact^A^^  it  was  ordained  that  man's  sin  shauld  reach  its  culminating  point 

in  his  death.    God,  the  great  owner  of  the  vineyard,  had  sent  many 

servants,  and  the  husbandmen  had  stoned  one  and  cast  cnt  another; 

last  of  all,  he  said,  "I  will  send  my  Son;  surely  they  will  reverence 

mv  Son"      When   they  slew  the  heir  to  win  the  mheritance,  their 

rebellion    had  reached    its    height.      The    murder    of   our    blessed 

Lord  was    the    extreme  of   human  guilt;    it  developea  ^e  deadly 

hatred  against  God  which  lurks  in  the  heart  of  man.     When  man 

became  a    deicide,   sin   had   reached   its   fulness;    and  m   the  black 

deed  of  the  man  by  whom  the  Lord  was  betrayed,  that  fulness  was  aJ 

displayed.     If  it  had  not  been  for  a  Judas,  we  had  not  known  liow 

black/how  foul,  human  nature  may  become.    I  scorn  the  men  who  try 

to  apologize  for  the  treachery  of  this  devil  m  human  form,  this  son  of 

perdition,  this  foul  apostate.     I  should  think  myself  a  villain  it  I  tried 

to  screen  him,  and  I  shudder  for  the  men  who  dai'e  extenuate  his  crimes. 

My  brethren,  we  should  feel  a  deep  detestation  of  this  master  of  infamy ; 

he  has  gone  to  his  own  place,  and  the  anathema  of  David,  part  of  which 


THE    BETRAYAL.  207 

WRS  quoted  by  Peter,  has  come  upon  him,  "  When  he  shall  be  judged, 
let  him  be  condemned:  and  let  his  prayer  become  sin.  Let  his 
days  be  few;  and  let  another  take  his  office."  Surely,  as  the 
devil  was  allowed  unusually  to  torment  the  bodies  of  men,  even 
so  was  he  let  loose  to  get  possession  ot  Judas  as  he  has  seldom 
gained  possession  ot  any  other  man,  that  we  might  see  how  foul,  how 
desperately  evil  is  the  human  heart.  Beyond  a  doubt,  however,  the  main 
reason  for  this  was  that  Christ  might  offer  a  perfect  atonement  for  sin. 
We  may  usually  read  the  sin  in  the  punishment.  Man  betrayed  his  God. 
Man  had  the  custody  of  the  royal  garden,  and  should  have  kept  its 
green  avenues  sacred  for  communion  with  his  God;  but  he  betrayed  the 
trust;  the  sentinel  was  false;  he  admitted  evil  into  his  own  heart,  and 
so  into  the  paradise  of  God.  He  was  false  to  the  good  name  of  the 
Creator,  tolerating  the  insinuation  which  he  should  have  repelled  with 
scorn.  Therefore  must  Jesus  find  man  a  traitor  to  him.  There  must 
be  the  counterpart  of  the  sin  in  the  suffering  which  he  endured.  You 
and  I  have  often  j^etrayed  Christ.  We  have,  when  tempted,  chosen  the 
evil  and  torsaken  the  good;  we  have  taken  the  bribes  of  hell,  and  have  not 
tollowed  closely  with  Jesus.  It  seemed  most  fitting,  then,  that  he  who 
bore  the  chastisement  ot  sin  should  be  reminded  of  its  ingratitude  and 
treachery  by  the  things  which  he  suffered.  Besides,  brethren,  that  cup 
must  be  bitter  to  the  last  degree  luhich  is  to  he  the  equivalent  for  the  wrath 
of  God.  There  must  be  nothing  consolatory  in  it;  pains  must  be  taken 
to  pour  into  it  all  that  even  Divine  wisdom  can  invent  of  awful  and 
unheard  of  woe,  and  this  one  point — "  He  that  eateth  bread  with  me 
hath  lifted  up  his  heel  against  me,"  was  absolutely  necessary  to  intensify 
"".he  bitterness.  Moreover,  we  feel  persuaded  that  by  thus  suffering  at 
the  hand  ot  a  traitor  the  Lord  became  a  faithful  High  Priest,  able  to 
sympathize  with  us  when  we  fall  under  the  like  affliction.  Since  slander 
and  ingratitude  are  common  calamities,  we  can  come  to  Jesus  with 
full  assurance  of  faith ;  he  knows  these  sore  temptations,  for  he 
has  felt  them  in  their  very  worst  degree.  We  may  cast  every 
care,  and  every  sorrow  upon  him,  for  he  careth  for  us,  having 
suffered  with  us.  Thus,  then,  in  our  Lord's  betrayal,  Scripture  was 
fulfilled,  sin  was  developed,  atonement  was  completed,  and  the  great 
all-suffering  High  Priest  became  able  to  sympathize  with  us  in  every 
point. 

Now  let  us  looh  at  the  treason  itself  You  perceive  how  black  it  was. 
Judas  was  Christ's  servant,  what  if  I  call  him  his  confidential  servant. 
He  was  a  partaker  in  apostolic  ministry  and  the  honour  ot  miraculous 
gifts.  He  had  been  most  kindly  and  indulgently  treated.  He  was  a 
sharer  in  all  the  goods  of  his  Master,  in  fact  he  fared  far  better  than 
his  Lord,  tor  the  Man  of  Sorrows  always  took  the  lion's  share  of  all 
the  pains  of  poverty  and  the  reproach  of  slander.  He  had  food  and 
raiment  given  him  out  of  the  common  stock,  and  the  Master  seems  to 
have  indulged  him  very  greatly.  The  old  tradition  is,  that  next  to 
the  apostle  Peter  he  was  the  one  with  whom  the  Saviour  most  commonly 
associated.  We  think  there  must  be  a  mistake  there,  for  f  arely  John  was 
the  Saviour's  greatest  friend ;  but  Judas,  as  a  servant  had  been  treated  with 
the  utmost  confidence.    Ye  know,   brethren,   iiow  «ore  is  thai  blow 


208  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

which  comes  from  a  servant  in  whom  we  have  put  unlimited  trust. 
But  Judas  was  more  than  this :  he  was  a  friend,  a  trusted  friend.  That 
little  bag  into  which  generous  women  cast  their  small  contributions 
had  been  put  into  his  hands,  and  very  wisely  too,  for  he  had  the  finan- 
cial vein.  His  main  virtue  was  economy,  a  very  needful  quality  in 
a  treasurer.  As  exercising  a  prudent  foresight  for  the  little  company, 
and  watching  the  expenses  carefully,  he  was,  as  far  as  men  could  judge, 
the  right  man  in  the  right  place.  He  had  been  thoroughly  trusted.  I 
read  not  that  there  was  any  annual  audit  of  his  accounts ;  I  do  not  discover 
that  the  Master  took  him  to  task  as  to  the  expenditure  of  his  privy 
purse.  Everything  was  given  to  him,  and  he  gave,  at  the  Master's 
direction,  to  the  poor,  but  no  account  was  asked.  This  is  vile  indeed, 
to  be  chosen  to  such  a  position,  to  be  installed  purse-bearer  to  the 
King  of  kings.  Chancellor  of  God's  exchequer,  and  then  to  turn  aside 
and  sell  the  Saviour;  this  is  treason  in  its  uttermost  degree.  Re- 
member that  the  world  looked  upon  Judas  as  colUagm  and  partner 
with  our  Lord.  To  a  great  extent  the  name  of  Judas  was  associated 
with  that  of  Christ.  When  Peter,  James,  or  John  had  done  anything 
amiss,  reproachful  tongues  threw  it  all  on  their  Master.  The  twelve 
were  part  and  parcel  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  One  old  commentator  says 
of  Judas—"  He  was  Christ's  alter  ego"— to  the  people  at  large  there  was 
an  indent ification  of  each  apostle  with  the  leader  of  the  band.  And  oh! 
when  such  associations  have  been  established,  and  then  there  is  treachery, 
it  is  as  though  our  arm  should  commit  treason  against  our  head,  or 
as  if  our  foot  should  desert  the  body.  This  was  a  stab  indeed !  Perhaps, 
dear  brethren,  our  Lord  saw  in  the  person  of  Judas  a  representative 
man,  the  portraiture  of  the  many  thousands  who  in  after  ages  imitated 
his  crime.  Did  Jesus  see  in  Iscariot  all  the  Judases  who  betray  truth, 
virtue,  and  the  cross  ?  Did  he  perceive  the  multitudes  of  whom  we 
may  say,  that  they  were,  spiritually,  in  the  loins  of  Judas  ?  Hymeneus, 
Alexander,  Hermogenes,  Philetus,  Demas,  and  others  of  that  tribe,  were 
all  before  him  as  he  saw  the  man,  his  equal,  his  acquaintance,  bartering 
him  away  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver. 

Dear  friends,  the  position  of  Judas  must  have  tended  greatly  to 
aggravate  his  treason.  Even  the  heathens  have  taught  us  that  ingrati- 
tude is  the  worst  of  vices.  When  Caesar  was  stabbed  by  his  friend 
JBrutus,  the  world's  poet  writes — 

"  This  was  the  most  unkindest  cut  of  all; 
For  when  the  noble  Caesar  saw  him  stab. 
Ingratitude,  more  strong  than  traitor's  arms, 
Quite  vanquish'd  him ;  then  burst  his  mighty  heart; 
And,  in  his  mantle  muffling  up  his  face, 
Even  at  the  base  of  Pompey's  statua, 
great  Caesar  fell," 

3Iany  ancient  stories,  both  Greek  and  Roman,  we  might  quote  to  show 
the  abhorrence  which  the  heathens  entertain  towards  ingratitude 
and  treachery.  Certain,  also,  of  their  own  poets,  such,  for  instance,  as 
Sophocles,  have  poured  out  burning  words  upon  deceitful  friends ;  but 
we  have  no  time  to  prove  what  you  will  all  admit,  that  nothing  can  be 


THE    BETRAYAL.  209 

more  cruel,  nothing  more  full  of  anguish,  than  to  be  sold  to  destruction 
by  one's  bosom  friend.  The  closer  the  foeman  comes  the  deeper  will 
be  the  stab  he  gives ;  if  we  admit  him  to  our  heart,  and  give  him  our 
closest  intimacy,  then  can  he  wound  us  in  the  most  vital  part. 

Let  us  notice,  dear  friends,  while  we  look  at  the  breaking  heart  of 
our  agonizing  Saviour,  the  manner  in  which  he  met  this  affliction.  He 
had  been  much  in  prayer ;  prayer  had  overcome  his  dreadful  agitation 
he  was  very  calm;  and  we  need  to  be  very  calm  when  we  are  tor 
saken  by  a  friend.  Observe  his  gentleness.  The  first  word  he  spake  to 
Judas,  when  the  traitor  had  polluted  his  cheek  with  a  kiss,  was  this — 
"  Friend  !"  Friend  ! !  Note  that !  Not  "  Thou  hateful  miscreant," 
but  "  Friend,  wherefore  art  thou  come  ?"  not  "  Wretch,  wherefore  dost 
thou  dare  to  stain  my  cheek  with  thy  foul  and  lying  lips?"  no, 
"  Friend,  wherefore  art  thou  come  ?  "  Ah !  if  there  had  been  anything 
good  left  in  Judas,  this  would  have  brought  it  out.  If  he  had  not  been 
an  unmitigated,  incorrigible,  thrice-dyed  traitor,  his  avarice  must  have 
lost  its  power  at  that  instant,  and  he  would  have  cried — "  My  master ! 
I  came  to  betray  thee,  but  that  generous  word  has  won  my  soul ;  here, 
if  thou  must  be  bound,  I  will  be  bound  with  thee ;  I  make  a  full  con- 
fession of  my  infamy !"  Our  Lord  added  these  words — there  is  reproof 
in  them,  but  notice  how  kind  they  are  still,  how  much  too  good  tor  such 
a  caitifi: — "  Judas,  betrayest  thou  the  Son  of  Man  with  a  kiss  ?"  I  can 
conceive  that  the  tears  gushed  from  his  eyes,  and  that  his  voice  laltered, 
when  he  thus  addressed  his  own  familiar  friend  and  acquaintance — 
"  Betrayest  thou,''  my  Judas,  my  treasurer,  "  betrayest  thou  the  Son  of 
Man,''  thy  suffering,  sorrowing  friend,  whom  thou  hast  seen  naked  and 
poor,  and  without  a  place  whereon  to  lay  his  head.  Betrayest  thou  the 
Son  of  Man — and  dost  thou  prostitute  the  tondest  of  all  endearing 
signs — a  kiss — that  which  should  be  a  symbol  of  loyalty  to  the  King, 
shall  it  be  the  badge  of  thy  treachery — that  which  was  reserved  for 
affection  as  her  best  symbol — dost  thou  make  it  the  instrument  of  my 
destruction  ?  Betrayest  thou  the  Son  of  Man  with  a  kiss  ?"  Oh !  if 
he  had  not  been  given  up  to  hardness  of  heart,  if  the  Holy  Ghost  had 
not  utterly  left  him,  surely  this  son  of  perdition  would  have  fallen 
prostrate  yet  again,  and  weeping  out  his  very  soul,  would  have  cried — 
"No,  I  cannot  betray  thee,  thou  suffering  Son  of  man;  forgive,  forgive; 
spare  thyself;  escape  from  this  bloodthirsty  crew,  and  pardon  thy 
treacherous  disciple!"  But  no,  no  word  of  compunction,  while  the 
silver  is  at  stake !  Afterwards  came  the  sorrow  that  worketh  death, 
which  drove  him,  like  Ahithophel,  his  prototype,  to  court  the  gal- 
lows to  escape  remorse.  This,  also,  must  have  aggravated  the 
woe  of  our  beloved  Lord,  when  he  saw  the  final  impenitence  of 
the  traitor,  and  read  the  fearful  doom  of  that  man  of  whom  he 
had  once  said,  it  would  be  better  for  him  that  he  had  never  been 
bom. 

Beloved,  I  would  have  you  fix  your  eyes  on  your  Lord  in  your  quiet 
meditations  as  being  thus  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  a  man  of  sor- 
sows  and  acquainted  with  grief;  and  gird  up  the  loins  of  your  minds, 
counting  it  no  strange  thing  if  this  fiery  trial  should  come  upon  you, 
but  being  determined  that  though  your  Lord  should  be  betrayed  by  his 

14 


210  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

most  eminent  disciples,  yet,  through  his  grace  you  will  cling  to  him  in 
shame  and  in  suffering,  and  will  follow  him,  if  needs  be,  even  unto 
death.  God  give  us  grace  to  see  the  vision  of  his  nailed  hands  and 
feet,  and  remembering  that  all  this  came  from  the  treachery  of  a  friend, 
let  us  be  ver}'  jealous  of  ourselves,  lest  we  crucify  the  Lord  afresh  and 
put  him  to  an  open  shame  by  betraying  him  in  our  conduct,  or  in  our 
words,  or  in  our  thoughts. 

II.  Grant  me  your  attention  while  we  make  an  estirante  of  the  man 
by  whom  the  Son  of  man  was  betrayed — Judas  the  betrayer. 

I  would  call  your  attention,  dear  friends,  to  hispositwn  and  public 
character.  Judas  was  a  preacher;  nay,  he  was  a  foremost  preacher, 
"he  obtained  part  of  this  ministry,"  said  the  Apostle  Peter.  He 
was  not  simply  one  of  the  seventy;  he  had  been  selected  by  the 
Lord  himself  as  one  of  the  twelve,  an  honourable  member  of  the 
college  of  the  apostles.  Doubtless  he  had  preaxjhed  the  gospel  so  that 
many  had  been  gladdened  by  his  voice,  and  miraculous  powers  had  been 
vouchsafed  to  him,  so  that  at  his  word  the  sick  had  been  healed,  deaf 
ears  bad  been  opened,  and  the  blind  had  been  made  to  see  ;  nay,  there 
is  no  doubt  that  he  who  could  not  keep  the  devil  out  of  himself,  had  cast 
devils  out  of  others.  Yet  how  art  thou  fallen  from  heaven,  0  Lucifer, 
son  of  the  morning !  He  that  was  as  a  prophet  m  the  midst  of  the 
people,  and  spake  with  the  tongue  of  the  learned,  whose  word  and 
wonders  proved  that  he  had  been  with  Jesus  and  had  learned  of  him — 
he  betrays  his  Master.  Understand,  my  brethren,  that  no  gifts  can 
ensure  grace,  and  that  no  position  of  honour  or  usefulness  in  the  Church 
will  necessarily  prove  our  being  true  to  our  Lord  and  Master.  Doubtless 
there  are  bishops  in  hell,  and  crowds  of  those  who  once  occupied  the 
pulpit  are  now  condemed  for  ever  to  bewail  their  hyprocrisy.  You  that 
are  Ohurch-offiners,  do  not  conclude  that  because  you  enjoy  the  con- 
fidence of  the  Church,  that  therefore  of  an  absolute  certainty  the  grace 
of  God  is  in  you.  Perhaps  it  is  the  most  dangerous  of  all  positions  for 
a  man  to  become  well  known  and  much  respected  by  the  religious  world, 
and  yet  to  be  rotten  at  the  core.  To  be  where  others  can  observe  our 
faults  is  a  healthy  thing  though  painful;  but  to  live  with  beloved  friends 
who  would  not  believe  it  possible  for  us  to  do  wrong,  and  who  if  they 
saw  us  err  would  make  excuses  for  us — this  is  to  be  where  it  is  next  to 
impossible  for  us  ever  to  be  aroused  if  our  hearts  be  not  right  with  God. 
To  have  a  fair  reputation  and  a  false  heart  is  to  stand  upon  the  brink 
of  hell. 

Judas  took  a  very  high  degree  officially.  He  had  the  distinguished 
honour  of  being  entrusted  with  the  Master's  financial  concerns,  and 
this,  after  all,  was  no  small  degree  to  which  to  attain.  The  Lord, 
who  knows  how  to  use  all  sorts  of  gifts,  perceived  what  gift  the 
man  had.  He  knew  that  Peter's  unthinking  impetuosity  would 
soon  empty  the  bag  and  leave  the  company  in  great  straits,  and  if  he 
had  entrusted  it  to  John,  his  loving  spirit  might  have  been  cajoled  into 
unwise  benevolence  towards  beggars  of  unctions  tongue;  he  might  even 
have  spent  the  little  moneys  in  buying  alabaster  boxes  whose  precious 
ointments  should  anoint  the  Master's  head.  He  gave  the  bag  to  Judas, 
and  it  was  discreetly,  prudently,  and  properly  used;  there  is  no  doubt  he 


THE    BETRAYAL.  2^11 

•WHS  the  most  judicioTis  person,  and  fitted  to  occupy  the  post.  But  oh! 
clear  friends,  if  the  Master  shall  choose  any  of  us  who  are  ministers  or 
Church-officers,  and  give  us  a  very  distinguished  position;  if  our  place 
m  the  ranks  shall  be  that  of  commanding  officers,  so  that  even  our 
brother  ministers  look  up  to  us  with  esteem,  and  our  fellow-elders  or 
deacons  regard  us  as  being  fathers  in  Israel— oh!  if  we  turn,  if  we  prove 
false,  how  damnable  shall  be  our  end  at  the  last!  What  a  blow  shall 
we  give  to  the  heart  of  the  Church,  and  what  derision  will  be  made 
in  hell ! 

You  will  observe  that  the  character  of  Judas  was  openly  an  admwahU 
one  I  find  not  that  he  committed  himself  in  any  way.  Not  the 
slightest  speck  defiled  his  moral  character  so  far  as  others  could 
perceive.  He  was  no  boaster,  like  Peter;  he  was  free  enough  from 
the  rashness  which  cries,  "Though  all  men  should  forsake  thee  vet  will 
not  1.  He  asks  no  place  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne,  his  ambition 
is  ot  another  sort.  He  does  not  ask  idle  questions.  The  Judas  who 
asks  questions  is  "not  Iscariot."  Thomas  and  Philip  are  often  prying 
into  deep  matters  but  not  Judas.  He  receives  truth  as  it  is  taught 
him  and  when  others  are  offended  and  walk  no  more  with  Jesus,  he 
taithtully  adheres  to  him,  having  golden  reasons  for  so  doing.  He  does 
not  indulge  in  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  or  in  the  pride  of  life.  None  of 
the  disciples  suspected  him  of  hypocrisy;  they  said  at  the  table,  "  Lord, 

If      Ih-  ^^^^  ""^^^^^  '^^^'  "^^'^'  ^«  i*  Judas?"     It  was  true  he  had 
been  filching  for  months,  but  then  he  did  it  by  littles,  and  covered  his 
defalcations  so  well  by  financial  manipulations  that  he  ran  no  risk  of 
detection  from  the  honest  unsuspecting  fishermen  with  whom  he  asso- 
ciated.   Like  some  merchants  and  traders  we  have  heard  of— invaluable 
gentlemen  as  chairmen  of  speculating  companies  and  general  managers 
ot  swindling  banks— he  could  abstract  a  decent  per-centage  and  vet 
make  the  accounts  exactly  tally.     The  gentlemen  who  have  learned  of 
Judas,  manage  to  cook  the  accounts  most  admirably  for  the  shareholders 
so  as  to  get  a  rich  joint  for  their  own  table;  over  which  they,  no  doubt! 
entreat  the  divine  blessing.     Judas  was,  in  his  known  life,  a  most  admirl 
ableperson.    He  would  have  been  an  alderman  ere  long  there  is  no  doubt 
and  being  very  pious  and  richly-gifted,  his  advent  at  churches  or  chapels 
would  have  created  intense  satisfaction.   "  What  a  discreet  and  influential 
person,^^    say  the  deacons.     "Yes,"   replies  the  minister;    "what  an 
acquisition  to  our  councils;  if  we  could  elect  him  to  office  he  would 
be  ot  eminent  service  to  the  Church."     I  believe  that  the  Master  chose 
film  as  apostle  on  purpose  that  we  might  not  be  at  all  surprised  if  we 
nnd  such  a  man  a   minister   in  the  pulpit,  or  a   colleague  of  the 
mimster,  working  as  an  officer  in  Christ's  Church.    These  are  solemn 
things,  my  brethren;  let  us  take  them  to  heart,  and  if  any  of  us  wear  a 
good  character  among  men  and  stand  high  in  office,  let  this  question 

wh?«^Ti'^?''  ^?  ^J-"  ^^"^'  '^'^^'     ^^^^'  i«  ^^  I  ?"    Perkaps  he 
S^d  it  first  question  is  just  the  man  who  ought  to  have 

But,  secondly,  I  call  your  attention  to  Ms  real  nature  and  sin 
^ida^was  a  man  with  a  conscience.  He  could  not  afford  to  do  without 
«     He  was  no  Sadducee  who  could  fling  religion  overboard;  he  had 


212  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

strong  religious  tendencies.    He  was  no  debauched  person;  he  never 
spent  a  two-pence  in  vice  on  his  life,  not  that  he  loved  vice  less,  but 
that  he  loved  the  two-pence  more.    Occasionally  he  was  generous,  but 
then  it  was  with  other  people's  money.    Well  did  he  watch  his  lovely 
charge,  the  bag.     He  had  a  conscience,  I  say,  and  a  ferocious  con- 
science it  was  when  it  once  broke  the  chain,  for  it  was  his  conscience 
which  made  him  hang  himself.    But  then  it  was  a  conscience  that  did 
not  sit  regularly  on  the  throne ;  it  reigned  by  fits  and  starts.    Conscience 
was  not  the  leading  element.    Avarice  predominated  over  conscience. 
He  would  get  money,  if  honestly,  he  liked  that  best,  but  if  he  could 
not  get  it  conscientiously,  then  anyhow  in  the  world.    He  was  but 
a  small  trader ;  his  gains  were  no  great  things,  or  else  he  would  not 
have  sold  Christ  for  so  small  a  sum  as  that — ten  pounds  at  the 
outside,  of  our  money  at  its   present  value — some   three   or    four 
pounds,   as  it  was  in  those  days.      It  was  a  poor    price    to    take 
for   the  Master;    but  then    a  little   money  was   a   great   thing  to 
him.    He  had  been  poor ;   he  had  joined  Christ  with  the  idea  that 
he  would  soon  be   proclaimed   King  of  the  Jews,  and  that  then  he 
should  become  a  nobleman,  and  be  rich.    Finding  Christ  a  long  while 
in  coming  to  his  kingdom,  he  had  taken  little  by  little,  enough  to  lay 
by  in  store ;  and  now,  fearing  that  he  was  to  be  disappointed^  in  all  his 
dreams,  and  never  having  had  any  care  for  Christ,  but  only  for  himself 
he  gets  out  of  what  he  thinks  to  have  been  a  gross  mistake  in  the  best 
way  he  can,  and  makes  money  by  his  treason  against  his  Lord.  Brethren, 
I  do  solemnly  believe,  that  of  all  hypocrites,  those  are  the  persons  of 
whom  there  is  the  least  hope  whose  God  is  their  money.    You  may  re- 
claim a  drunkard;  thank  God,  we  have  seen  many  instances  of  that; 
and  even  a  fallen  Christian,  who  has  given  way  to  vice,  may  loathe  his 
lust,  and  return  from  it ;  but  I  fear  me  that  the  cases  in  which  a  man 
who  is  cankered  with  covetousness  has  ever  been  saved,  are  so  few,  that 
they  might  be  written  on  your  finger-nail.    This  is  a  sin  which  the  world 
does  not  rebuke ;  the  most  faithful  minister  can  scarce  smit  its  forehead. 
God  knoweth  what  thunders  I  have  launched  out  against  men  who  are  all 
for  this  world,  and  yet  pretend  to  be  Christ's  followers;  but  yet  they 
always  say,  "  It  is  not  for  me."    What  I  should  call  stark  naked  covet- 
ousness, they  call  prudence,  discretion,  economy,  and  so  on;  and  actions 
which  I  would  scorn  to  spit  upon,  they  will  do,  and  think  their  hands 
quite  clean  after  they  have  done  them,  and  still  sit  as  God's  people  sit, 
and  hear  as  God's  people  hear,  and  think  that  after  they  have  sold  Christ 
for  paltry  gain,  they  will  go  to  heaven.    0  souls,  souls,  souls,  beware, 
beware,  beware,  most  of  all  of  greed!     It  is  not  money,  nor  the  lack 
of  money,  but  the  love  of  money  which  is  the  root  of  all  evil.    It  is  not 
getting  it ;  it  is  not  even  keeping  it ;  it  is  loving  it ;  it  is  making 
it  your  god;  it  is  looking  at  that  as  the  main  chance,   and  not 
considering  the  cause   of  Christ,  nor  the  truth   of  Christ,  nor  the 
holy  life  of  Christ,  but  being  ready  to  sacrifice  everything  for  gams 
sake.    Oh !  such  men  make  giants  in  sin ;  they  shall  be  set  up  for 
ever  as  butts  for  infernal  laughter ;  their  damnation  shall   be  sure 

and  just.  .    7       j  ^i. 

The  third  point  is,  the  warning  which  Judas  received,  and  the  way  m 


THE    BETKAYAL.  213 

which  he  persevered.  Just  think— the  night  before  he  sold  his  Master 
what  do  you  think  the  Master  did  ?  Why,  he  washed  his  feet !  And 
yet  he  sold  him  I  Such  condescension !  Such  love !  Such  familiarity ! 
He  took  a  towel,  and  girded  himself,  and  washed  Judas' s  feet !  And 
yet  those  very  feet  brought  Judas  as  a  guide  to  them  that  took  Jesus ! 
And  you  remember  what  he  said  when  he  had  washed  his  feet — "  Now 
ye  are  clean,  but  not  all ;"  and  he  turned  a  tearful  eye  on  Judas.  What 
a  warning  for  him !  What  could  be  more  explicit  ?  Then  when  the 
Supper  came,  and  they  began  to  eat  and  drink  together,  the  Lord  said — 
"  One  of  you  shall  betray  me."  That  was  plain  enough ;  and  a  little 
farther  on  he  said  explicitly — "  He  that  dippeth  with  me  in  the  dish  the 
game  is  he."  What  opportunities  for  repentence  !  He  cannot  say  he 
had  not  a  faithful  preacher.  What  could  have  been  more  personal?  If 
he  does  not  repent  now,  what  is  to  be  done?  Moreover,  Judas  saw  that 
which  was  enough  to  make  a  heart  of  adamant  bleed;  he  saw  Christ  with 
agony  on  his  face,  for  it  was  just  after  Christ  had  said,  "  Now  is  my  soul 
troubled,"  that  Judas  left  the  feast  and  went  out  to  sell  his  Master.  That 
face,  so  full  of  grief,  ought  to  have  turned  him,  must  have  turned  him,  if 
he  had  not  been,  given  up  and  left  alone,  to  deliver  over  his  soul  unto  his 
own  devices.  What  language  could  have  been  more  thundering  than  the 
words  of  Jesus  Christ,  when  he  said,  "Woe  unto  that  man  by  whom  the  Son 
of  man  is  betrayed ;  it  had  been  good  for  that  man  if  he  had  not  been  born." 
He  had  said,  "  Have  not  I  chosen  you  twelve,  and  one  of  you  is  a  devil." 
Now,  if  while  these  thunders  rolled  over  his  head,  and  the  lightning- 
flashes  pointed  at  his  person,  if,  then,  this  man  was  not  aroused,  what 
a  hell  of  infernal  pertinacity  and  guilt  must  have  been  within  his 
soul !  Oh !  but  if  any  of  you,  if  any  of  you  shall  sell  Christ  for  the 
sake  of  keeping  the  shop  open  on  Sunday,  if  you  shall  sell  Christ 
for  the  extra  wages  you  may  earn  for  falsehood — oh!  if  you  shall 
sell  Christ  for  the  sake  of  the  hundred  pounds  that  you  may  lay 
hold  of  by  a  villanous  contract — if  you  do  that,  you  do  not  perish  un- 
warned. I  come  into  this  pulpit  to  please  no  man  among  you.  God 
knoweth  if  I  knew  more  of  your  follies  you  should  have  them  pointed 
out  yet  more  plainly;  if  I  knew  more  of  the  tricks  of  business, 
I  would  not  flinch  to  speak  of  them !  But,  0  sirs,  I  do  conjure 
you  by  the  blood  of  Judas,  who  hanged  himself  at  last,  turn  you— 
if  such  there  be — turn  you  from  this  evil,  if  haply  your  sin  may  be 
blotted  out ! 

Let  us  for  one  minute  notice  the  act  itself.  He  sought  out  his  own 
temptation.  He  did  not  wait  for  the  devil  to  come  to  him ;  he  went  after 
the  devil.  He  went  to  the  chief  priests  and  said,  "  What  will  ye  give  me?  *' 
One  of  the  old  Puritan  divines  says,  "  This  is  not  the  way  people  generally 
trade;  they  tell  their  own  price."  Judas  says  "  What  will  ye  give  me  ? 
Anything  you  like.  The  Lord  of  life  and  glory  sold  at  the  buyer's  own 
price.  What  will  ye  give  me?"  And  another  very  prettily  puts  it,  "What 
could  they  give  him?  What  did  the  man  want?  He  did  not  want  food 
and  raiment;  he  fared  as  well  as  his  Master  and  the  other  disciples ;  he 
had  enough;  he  had  all  that  his  needs  could  crave,  and  yet  he  said, 
What  will  ye  give  me?  What  will  ye  give  me?  What  will  ye  gire 
me?"     Alas !  some  people's  religion  is  grounded  on  that  one  question— 


214 


METEOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


"What  will  you  give  me?"  Yes,  they  would  go  to  church  if  there 
are  any  chanties  given  away  there,  but  if  there  were  more  to  be  got  by 
not  going  they  would  do  that.  "  What  will  you  give  me  ?"  Some  of 
these  people  are  not  even  so  wise  as  Judas.  Ah  !  there  is  a  man  over 
yonder  who  would  sell  the  Lord  for  a  crown,  much  more  for  ten  pounds, 
as  Judas  did !  Why,  there  are  some  who  will  sell  Christ  for  the  smallest 
piece  of  silver  in  our  currency.  They  are  tempted  to  deny  their  Lord, 
tempted  to  act  in  an  unhallowed  way,  though  the  gains  are  so  paltry  that 
a  year's  worth  of  them  would  not  come  to  much.  No  subject  could  be 
more  dreadful  than  this,  if  we  really  would  but  look  at  it  carefully. 
This  temptation  happeneth  to  each  of  us.  Do  not  deny  it.  We  all  like 
to  gain ;  it  is  but  natural  that  we  should ;  the  propensity  to  acquire  is 
in  every  mind,  and  under  lawful  restrictions  it  is  not  an  improper  pro- 
pensity;  but  when  it  comes  into  conflict  with  our  allegiance  to  our  Master, 
and  in  a  world  like  this  it  often  will,  we  must  overcome  it  or  perish. 
There  will  arise  occasions  with  some  of  you  many  times  in  a  week 
in  which  it  is  "  God — or  gain  ;"  "  Christ,  or  the  thirty  pieces  of 
silver  ;"  and  therefore  I  am  the  more  urgent  in  pressing  this  on  you. 
Do  not,  though  the  world  should  bid  its  highest,  though  it  should  heap 
its  comforts  upon  one  another,  and  add  fame,  and  honour,  and  respect, 
do  not,  I  pray  you,  forsake  your  Master.  There  have  been  such  cases; 
cases  of  persons  who  used  to  come  here,  but  they  found  they  did  not  get 
on,  because  Sunday  was  the  best  day's  trade  in  the  week;  they  had  some 
good  feelings,  some  good  impressions  once,  but  they  have  lost  them  now. 
We  have  known  others  who  have  said,  "  Well,  you  see,  I  did  once  think 
I  loved  the  Lord,  but  my  business  went  so  badly  when  I  came  up  to  the 
house  of  God,  that  I  left  it;  I  renounced  my  profession/'  Ah,  Judas! 
ah,  Jndas!  ah,  Judas  !  let  me  call  thee  by  thy  name,  for  such  thou  art ! 
This  is  the  sin  of  the  apostate  over  again ;  God  help  thee  to  repent  of  it,^ 
and  go,  not  to  any  priest,  but  to  Christ  and  make  confession,  if  haply  thou 
mayest  be  saved.  You  perceive  that  in  the  act  of  selling  Christ,  Judas 
was  faithful  to  his  master.  "  Faithful  to  his  master  ?  "  you  say.  Yes, 
his  master  was  the  devil,  and  having  made  an  agreement  with  him  he 
carried  it  out  honestly.  Some  people  are  always  very  honest  with  the 
devil.  If  they  say  they  will  do  a  wrong  thing  they  say  they  ought  to 
do  it  because  they  said  they  would;  as  if  any  oath  could  be  binding 
on  a  man  if  it  be  an  oath  to  do  wrong ?  "I  will  never  go  into 
that  house  again,"  some  have  said,  and  they  have  said  afterwards, 
"  Well,  I  wish  I  had  not  said  it."  Was  it  a  wrong  thing  ?  What 
is  your  oath  then?  It  was  an  oath  given  to  the  devil.  What 
was  that  foolish  promise  but  a  promise  to  Satan,  and  will  you  be 
faithful  to  him?  Ah !  would  God  that  you  were  faithful  to  Christ! 
Would  that  any  of  us  were  as  true  to  Christ  as  Satan's  servants  are  to 
their  master ! 

Judas  betrayed  his  Master  with  a  kiss.  That  is  how  most  apostates 
do  it;  it  is  always  with  a  kiss.  Did  you  ever  read  an  infidel  book  in 
your  life  which  did  not  begin  with  profound  respect  for  truth?  I  never 
have.  Even  modern  ones,  when  bishops  write  them,  always  begin  like 
that.  They  betray  the  Son  of  man  with  a  kiss.  Did  you  ever  read  a 
book  of  bitter  controversy  which  did  not  begin  with  such  a  sickly  lot  of 


k 


THE   BETRAYAL.  215 

humility,  such  sugar,  such  butter,  such  treacle,  such  everything  sweet 
and  soft,  that  you  said,  "  Ah  !  there  is  sure  to  be  something  bad 
here,  for  when  people  begin  so  softly  and  sweetly,  so  humbly  and 
so  smoothly,  depend  upon  it  they  have  rank  hatred  in  their  hearts." 
The  most  devout  looking  people  are  often  the  most  hypocritical  in  the 
world. 

We  conclude  with  the  repentance  of  Judas.  He  did  repent;  he  did 
repent;  but  it  was  the  repentance  that  worketh  death.  He  did  make  a 
confession,  but  there  was  no  respect  to  the  deed  itself,  but  only  to  its 
consequences.  He  was  very  sorry  that  Christ  was  condemned.  Some 
latent  love  that  he  had  once  had  to  a  kind  Master,  canie  up  when  he 
saw  that  he  was  condemned.'  He  did  not  think,  perhaps,  it  would  come 
to  that;  he  may  have  had  a  hope  that  he  would  escape  out  of  their 
hands,  and  then  he  would  keep  his  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  and  perhaps 
sell  him  over  again.  Perhaps  he  thought  that  he  would  rid  himself 
from  their  hands  by  some  miraculous  display  of  power,  or  would  pro- 
claim the  kingdom,  and  so  he  himself  would  only  be  hastening  on  that 
very  blessed  consummation.  Friends,  the  man  who  repents  of  conse- 
quences does  not  repent.  The  ruffian  repents  of  the  gallows  but  not  of 
the  murder,  and  that  is  no  repentance  at  all.  Human  law  of  course 
must  measure  sin  by  consequences,  but  God's  law  does  not.  There  is  a 
pointsman  on  a  railway  who  neglects  his  duty;  there  is  a  collision  on 
the  line,  and  people  are  killed;  well,  it  is  manslaughter  to  this  man 
tirough  his  carelessness.  But  that  pointsman,  perhaps,  many  times 
before  had  neglected  his  duty,  but  no  accident  came  of  it,  and  then  he 
walked  home  and  said,  "  Well,  I  have  done  no  wrong."  Now  the  wrong, 
mark  you,  is  never  to  be  measured  by  the  accident,  but  by  the  thing 
itself,  and  if  you  have  committed  an  offence  and  you  have  escaped  unde- 
tected it  is  just  as  vile  in  God's  eye;  if  you  have  done  wrong  and  Pro- 
Tidence  has  prevented  the  natural  result  of  the  wrong,  the  honour 
of  that  is  with  God,  but  you  are  as  guilty  as  if  your  sin  had  been 
carried  out  to  its  fullest  consequences,  and  the  whole  world  set  ablaze. 
Never  measure  sin  by  consequences,  but  repent  of  them  as  they  are  in 
themselves. 

Though  being  sorry  for  consequences,  since  these  are  unalterable, 
this  man  was  led  to  remorse.  He  sought  a  tree,  adjusted  the  rope,  and 
hanged  himself,  but  in  his  haste  he  hanged  himself  so  badly  that  the 
rope  broke,  he  fell  over  a  precipice,  and  there  we  read  his  bowels  gushed 
out;  he  lay  a  mangled  mass  at  the  bottom  of  the  cliff,  the  horror  of 
«very  one  who  passed.  Now  you  that  make  a  gain  of  godliness — if 
there  be  such  here — ^you  may  not  come  to  a  suicide's  end,  but  take  the 
lesson  home.  Mr.  Keach,  my  venerable  predecessor,  gives  at  the  end  of 
one  of  his  volumes  of  sermons,  the  death  of  a  Mr.  John  Child.  John 
Child  had  been  a  Dissenting  minister,  and  for  the  sake  of  gain,  to  get  a 
living,  he  joined  the  Episcopalians  against  his  conscience;  he  sprinkled 
infants;  and  practised  all  the  other  paraphernalia  of  the  Church  against 
his  conscience.  At  last,  at  last,  he  was  arrested  with  such  terrors  for 
having  done  what  he  had,  that  he  renounced  his  living,  took  to  a  sick 
bed,  and  his  dying  oaths,  and  blasphemies,  and  curses,  were  something 
10  dreadful  that  his  case  was  the  wonder  of  that  age.    Mr.  Keach  wrote 


216  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

a  full  account  of  it,  and  many  went  to  try  what  they  could  do  to  comfort 
the  man,  but  he  would  say," "Get  ye  hence;  get  ye  hence;  it  is  ol  no 
use;  I  have  sold  Christ."  You  know,  also,  the  wonderfal  death  of  Francis 
Spira.  In  all  literature,  there  is  nothing  so  awful  as  the  death  of  Spira. 
The  man  had  known  the  truth ;  he  stood  well  among  reformers ;  he  was 
an  honoured,  and  to  a  certain  extent  apparently  a  faithful  man;  but  he 
went  back  to  the  Church  of  Rome;  he  apostatized;  and  then  when  con- 
science was  aroused  he  did  not  fly  to  Christ,  but  he  looked  at  the  conse- 
quences instead  of  at  the  sin,  and  so,  feeling  that  the  consequences  could 
not  be  altered,  he  forgat  that  the  sin  might  be  pardoned,  and  perished 
in  agonies  extreme.  May  it  never  be  the  unhappy  lot  of  any  of  us  to 
stand  by  such  a  death-bed ;  but  the  Lord  have  mercy  upon  us  now,  and 
make  us  search  our  hearts.  Those  of  you  who  sav,  "  We  do  not  want 
that  sermon,"  are  probably  the  persons  who  need  it  most.  He  who  shall 
say,  "Well,  we  have  no  Judas  amongst  us,"  is  probably  a  Judas  himself. 
Oh !  search  yourselves ;  turn  out  every  cranny ;  look  in  every  comer  of 
your  soul,  to  see  whether  your  religion  be  for  Christ's  sake,  and  for  truth's 
sake,  and  for  God's  sake,  or  whether  it  be  a  profession  which  you  take  up 
because  it  is  a  respectable  thing,  a  profession  which  you  keep  up  because 
it  keeps  you  up.  The  Lord  search  us  and  try  us,  and  bring  us  to  know 
our  ways. 

And  now,  in  conclusion— there  is  a  Saviour,  and  that  Saviour  is 
willing  to  receive  us  now.  If  I  am  not  a  saint,  yet  I  am  a  sinner. 
Would  it  not  be  best  for  all  of  us  to  go  again  to  the  fountain,  and 
wash  and  be  clean.  Let  each  of  us  go  anew,  and  say,  "  Master,  thou 
knowest  what  I  am ;  I  know  not  myself;  but,  if  I  be  wrong,  make  me 
right ;  if  I  be  right,  keep  me  so.  My  trust  is  in  thee.  Keep  me  now, 
for  thine  own  sake,  Jesus."    Amen. 


JESUS  DECLINING  THE  LEGIONS. 


Delivered  on  Loed's-day  Morning,  March  27th,  1887,  bt 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"  Thinkest  thou  that  I  cannot  now  pray  to  my  Father,  and  he  shall  presently  gi^e 
me  more  than  twelve  legions  of  angels  ?  but  how  then  shall  the  scriptures  be  fulfilled, 
that  thus  it  must  be?"— Matthew  xxvi.  53,  54. 

It  is  the  garden  of  Gethsemane.  Here  stands  our  Lord,  and  yonder  is 
the  betrayer.  He  is  foremost  of  the  multitude.  You  know  his  face,  the 
face  of  that  son  of  perdition,  even  Judas  Iscariot.  He  comes  forward, 
leaving  the  men  with  the  staves,  and  the  swords,  and  the  torches,  and 
lanterns,  and  he  proceeds  to  kiss  his  Master  ;  it  is  the  token  by  which 
the  officers  are  to  know  their  victim.  You  perceive  at  once  that  the 
disciples  are  excited :  one  of  them  cries,  "  Lord,  shall  we  smite  with  the 
sword  ? "  Their  love  to  their  Master  has  overcome  their  prudence. 
There  are  but  eleven  of  them,  a  small  band  to  fight  against  the  cohort 
sent  by  the  authorities  to  arrest  their  Master  ;  but  love  makes  no 
reckoning  of  odds.  Before  an  answer  can  be  given,  Peter  has  struck 
the  first  blow,  and  the  servant  of  the  high-priest  has  narrowly  escaped 
having  his  head  cleft  in  twain  ;  as  it  is,  his  ear  is  cut  off. 

One  is  not  altogether  surprised  at  Peter's  act;  for,  in  addition  to  his 
headlong  zeal,  he  had  most  likely  misunderstood  the  saying  of  his 
Lord  at  supper—"  He  that  hath  no  sword,  let  him  sell  his  garment,  and 
buy  one."  There  was  not  time  for  our  Lord  to  explain,  and  they  were 
so  accustomed  to  his  concrete  style  of  speech,  that  they  should  not  have 
misunderstood  him  ;  but  they  did  so.  He  had  simply  told  them  that  the 
days  of  peace,  in  which  they  could  go  in  and  out  among  the  people, 
and  be  joyfully  received  by  them,  had  now  come  to  an  end  ;  for  as  he 
himself,  who  had  once  been  in  favour  with  all  the  people,  would  now 
be  "  reckoned  among  the  transgressors  "  (see  Luke  xxii.  35—38),  so 
would  they  be  counted  among  the  offscouring  of  all  things.  Now  they 
-could  no  longer  reckon  on  the  hospitality  of  a  friendly  people,  but  must 
carry  their  own  purse  and  scrip  ;  and  instead  of  feeling  sate,  wherever 
they  went,  they  must  understand  that  they  were  in  an  enemy's 
country,  and  must  travel  through  the  world  like  men  armed  for 
self-defence.  They  were  now  to  use  their  own  substance,  and  not 
to  hope  for  cheerful  entertainment  among  a  grateful  people;  and 
they  would  need  to  be  on  their  guard  against  those  who  in  killing 
No.  1,955. 


218 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


them  would  think  that  they  were  doing  God  lervice.  They  took 
his  language  literally,  and  therefore  replied,  "  Lord,  behold,  here  are  two 
swords."  Methinks  he  must  have  smiled  sadly  at  their  blunder  as  he 
answered,  "  It  is  enough."  He  could  neyer  have  thought  of  their 
fighting  that  he  might  not  be  delivered  unto  the  Jews,  since  for  that 
purpose  two  swords  were  simply  ridiculous.  They  had  missed  his 
meaning,  which  was  simply  to  warn  them  of  the  changed  circumstances 
of  his  CHUse  :  but  they  caught  at  the  words  which  he  had  used,  and 
exhibited  their  two  swords.  Possibly,  as  some  have  supposed,  these  were 
two  loniT  sacrificial  knives  with  which  they  had  killed  the  Pa.-^chal 
lamb  ;  but,  indeed,  the  wearing  of  weapons  is  much  more  general  in 
the  East  than  with  us.  Our  Lord's  disciples  were  largely  GaUleans,^ 
and  as  the  GalilertUB  were  more  of  a  fighting  sort  than  other  Jews,  the 
wearing  of  swords  was  probably  very  general  among  them.  However, 
two  of  the  apostles  had  swords  ;  not  that  they  were  fighting  men,  but 
probably  because  it  was  the  fashion  of  their  country,  and  they  had 
thought  it  needful  to  wear  them  when  passing  through  a  dangerous 
district.  At  any  rate,  Peter  had  a  sword,  and  instantly  used  it.  He 
smites  the  first  man  he  could  reach.  I  wonder  he  haa  not  smitten 
Judas,  one  might  have  excused  him  if  he  had  ;  but  it  is  a  servant  of 
the  high-priest  who  bears  the  blow  and  loses  his  ear. 

Then  the  Saviour  comes  forward  in  all  his  gentleness,  as  self-possessed 
as  when  he  was  at  supper,  as  calm  as  if  he  had  not  already  passed 
through  an  agony.  Quietly  he  says,  **  Suffer  it  to  be  so  now";  he 
touches  the  ear,  and  heals  it,  and  in  the  lull  which  followed,  when 
even  the  men  that  came  to  seize  him  were  spell-bound  by  this 
wondrous  miracle  of  mercy,  he  propounds  the  great  truth,  that 
they  that  take  the  sword  shall  perish  with  the  sword,  and  bids  Peter 
put  up  his  weapon.  Then  he  utters  these  memorable  words : 
*'  Thinkest  thou  that  I  cannot  now  pray  to  my  Father,  and  he  shall 
presently  give  me  more  than  twelve  legions  of  angels  ?  But  how  then 
shall  the  scriptures  be  fulfilled,  that  thus  it  must  be?"  And  he  also 
said  what  John  alone  appears  to  have  heard — **  The  cup  which  my 
Father  hath  given  me,  shall  I  not  drink  it?"  (John  xviii.  11). 

The  wound  of  Malchus  served  a  gracious  purpose ;  for  it  enabled  our 
Lord  to  work  a  new  miracle,  the  like  of  which  he  had  never  wrought 
before,  namely,  the  restoration  of  a  member  maimed  or  cut  off  by 
violence.  The  blunder  of  the  apostles  was  also  overruled  to  answer 
a  very  instructive  purpose.  You  wonder  that  the  Lord  should,  even  in 
appearance,  encourage  his  disciples  to  have  swords,  and  then  forbid 
them  to  use  them.  Follow  me  in  a  thought  which  is  clear  to  my  owq 
mind.  For  a  man  to  abstain  irom  using  force  when  he  has  none  to 
use  is  no  great  virtue :  it  reminds  one  of  the  lines  of  Oowper's  ballad  :— 

**  Stooping  down,  as  needs  he  must 
Who  cannot  sit  upright.*' 

But  for  a  man  to  have  force  ready  to  his  hand,  and  then  to  abstain  from 
using  it,  is  a  case  of  self-restraint,  and  possibly  of  self-sacrifice,  of  a  far 
nobler  kind.  Our  Saviour  had  his  sword  at  his  side  that  night,  though 
he  did  not  use  it.  **  What  I  "  say  you,  "  how  can  that  be  true  ?"  Oar 
Lord  says,  "  Can  I  not  now  pray  to  my  Father,  and  he  will  give  m^ 


JESUS  DBCLTNING  THE  LEGION&  219 

twelve  legions  of  angels  ? "  Our  Lord  had  thus  the  means  of  self- 
defence  ;  something  far  more  powerful  than  a  sword  hung  at  his  girdle; 
but  he  refused  to  employ  the  power  within  his  reach.  His  servants 
could  not  bear  this  test ;  they  had  no  self-restraint,  the  hand  of  Peter  is 
on  his  sword  at  once.  The  failure  of  the  servants  in  this  matter  seems 
to  me  to  illustrate  the  grand  self-possession  of  their  Master.  '*Alas," 
he  seems  to  say,  "  you  cannot  be  trusted  even  with  swords,  much  less 
could  you  be  entrusted  with  greater  forces.  If  you  had  the  angelic 
bands  at  your  command,  down  they  would  come  streaming  from  the  sky- 
to  execute  works  of  vengeance,  and  so  mar  my  great  life-work  of  love." 
Brethren,  we  are  better  without  swords  and  other  forms  of  force  than 
with  them  ;  for  we  have  not  yet  learned,  like  our  Lord,  to  control  our- 
selves. Admire  the  glorious  self-restraint  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
who,  armed  not  with  a  sword  but  with  the  embattled  hosts  of  "  helmed 
cherubim  and  sworded  seraphim,"  yet  refused  even  by  a  prayer  to  bring 
them  down  to  his  relief.  Peter's  passionate  use  of  the  sword  illus- 
trates the  happy  self-control  of  his  Lord,  and  this  is  the  use  of  the 
incident. 

Let  us  now  proceed  to  learn  from  the  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus  which 
we  have  selected  as  our  text. 

I.  First,  brethren,  I  would  have  you  notice  from  the  text  OUR 
Lord's  grand  resource.  "Thinkest  thou  that  I  cannot  now  pray 
to  my  Father  ?  "  Our  Lord  is  surrounded  by  his  adversaries,  and  there 
are  none  about  him  powerful  enough  to  defend  him  from  their  malice  ; 
what  can  he  do  ?  He  says,  "  I  can  pray  to  my  Father."  This  is  our 
Lord's  continual  resource  in  the  time  of  danger ;  yea,  even  in  that 
time  of  which  he  said,  "  This  is  your  hour  and  the  power  of  darkness," 
He  can  even  now  pray  to  his  Father.  \ 

First,  Jesus  had  no  possessions  on  earth,  but  Ice  had  a  Father.  I 
rejoice  in  his  saying,  "Thinkest  thou  that  I  cannot  ikmv  pray  to  my 
Father  ? "  He  is  a  betrayed  man ;  he  is  given  up  into  the  hands  of 
those  who  thirst  for  his  blood ;  but  he  has  a  Father  almighty  and  divine. 
If  our  Lord  had  merely  meant  to  say  that  God  could  dehver  him,  he 
might  have  said,  *'  Thinkest  thou  not  that  I  can  pray  to  Jehovah  ?"  or, 
**to  God"  :  but  he  uses  the  sweet  expression  "my  Father,"  both  here 
and  in  that  text  in  John,  where  he  says,  "  The  cup  which  my  Father 
hath  given  me,  shall  I  not  drink  it  ?  "  0  brethren,  remember  that 
we  have  a  Father  in  heaven.  When  all  is  gone  and  spent,  we  can 
say,  **  Our  Father."  Relatives  are  dead,  but  our  Father  lives.  Sup- 
poshed  friends  have  left  us,  even  as  the  swallows  quit  in  our  wintry 
weather  ;  but  we  are  not  alone,  for  the  Father  is  with  us.  Cling  to 
that  blessed  text,  *'  I  will  not  leave  you  orphans  ;  I  will  come  unto 
you."  In  every  moment  of  .distress,  anxiety,  perplexity,  we  have  a 
Father  in  whose  wisdom,  truth,  and  power,  we  can  rely.  Your  dear 
children  do  not  trouble  themselves  much,  do  they  ?  If  they  have  a 
want,  they  go  to  father;  if  they  are  puzzled,  they  ask  father  ;  if  they 
are  ill-treated,  they  appeal  to  father.  If  but  a  thorn  is  in  their  finger, 
they  run  to  mother  for  relief.  Be  it  little  or  great,  the  child's  sorrow 
is  the  parent's  care.  This  makes  a  child's  life  easy :  it  would  make 
ours  easy  if  we  would  but  act  as  children  towards  God.  Let  us  imitate 
the  Elder  Brother,  and  when  we,  too,  are  in  our  Gethsemane,  let  us. 


220  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

as  he  did,  continue  to  cry,  "  My  Father,  My  Father."    This  is  a  better 
defence  than  shield  or  sword. 

Our  Lord's  resource  tvas  to  approach  his  Father  with  prevailing 
prayer.  "  Can  I  not  now  pray  to  ray  Father  ?  "  Our  Lord  Jesus 
could  use  that  marvellous  weapon  of  All-prayer,  which  is  shield,  and 
sword,  and  spear,  and  helmet,  and  breast-plate,  all  in  one.  When  you 
can  do  nothing  else  you  can  pray.  If  you  can  do  many  things  besides, 
it  will  still  be  your  wisdom  to  say,  "  Let  us  pray ! "  But  I  think  I 
hear  you  object,  that  our  Lord  had  been  praying,  and  yet  his  griefs  were 
not  removed.  He  had  prayed  himself  into  a  bloody  sweat  with  prayer, 
and  yet  he  was  left  unprotected,  to  fall  into  his  enemies'  hands.  This  is 
true,  and  yet  it  is  not  all  the  truth ;  for  he  had  been  strengthened,  and 
power  for  deliverance  was  at  his  disposal.  He  had  only  to  press  his 
suit  to  be  rescued  at  once.  The  Greek  word  here  is  not  the  same 
word  which  would  set  forth  ordinary  prayer  :  the  Revised  Version 
puts  it,  "  Thinkest  thou  that  I  cannot  beseech  my  Father  ? "  We 
make  a  great  mistake  if  we  throw  all  prayer  into  one  category,  and 
think  that  every  form  of  true  prayer  is  alike.  We  may  pray  and 
plead,  and  even  do  this  with  extreme  earnestness,  and  yet  we  may 
not  use  that  mode  of  beseeching  which  would  surely  bring  the  blessing. 
Hitherto  our  Lord  had  prayed,  and  prayed  intensely,  too ;  but  there  was 
yet  a  higher  form  of  prayer  to  which  he  might  have  mounted  if  it  had 
been  proper  so  to  do.  He  could  so  have  besought  that  the  Father 
must  have  answered ;  bub  he  would  not.  0  brethren,  you  liave 
prayed  a  great  deal,  perhaps,  about  your  trouble,  but  there  is  a  re- 
serve force  of  beseeching  in  you  yet :  by  the  aid  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
you  may  pray  after  a  higher  and  more  prevailing  rate.  This  is 
a  far  better  weapon  than  a  sword.  I  was  speaking  to  a  brother 
}esterday  about  a  prayer  which  my  Lord  had  remarkably  answered  in 
my  own  case,  and  1  could  not  help  saying  to  him,  "  But  I  cannot  always 
pray  in  that  fashion.  Not  only  can  I  not  so  pray,  but  I  would 
not  dare  to  do  so  even  if  I  could."  Moved  by  the  Spirit  of  God, 
we  sometimes  pray  with  a  power  of  faith  which  can  never  fail  at  the 
mercy-seat ;  but  without  such  an  impulse  we  must  not  push  our  own 
wills  to  the  front.  There  are  many  occasions  upon  which,  if  one  had  all 
the  faith  which  could  move  mountains,  he  would  most  wisely  show  it  by 
saying  nothing  beyond,  *'  Nevertheless  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt." 
Had  our  Lord  chosen  to  do  so,  he  had  still  in  reserve  a  prayer-power 
which  would  have  effectually  saved  him  from  his  enemies.  He  did  not 
think  it  right  so  to  use  it ;  but  he  could  have  done  so  had  he  pleased. 

Notice,  that  our  Lord,  felt  that  he  could  even  then  pray.  Matters  had 
not  gone  too  far  for  prayer.  When  can  they  do  so  ?  The  word 
**now"  practically  occurs  twice  in  our  version,  for  we  get  it  first 
as  "  now,"  and  then  as  "  presently."  It  occurs  only  once  in  the  original ; 
but  as  its  exact  position  in  the  verse  cannot  easily  be  decided,  our  trans- 
lators, with  a  singular  wisdom,  have  placed  it  in  both  the  former  and 
the  latter  part  of  the  sentence.  Our  Saviour  certainly  meant — "  I  am 
come  now  to  extremities;  the  people  are  far  away  whose  favour 
formerly  protected  me  from  the  Pharisees;  and  I  am  about  to  be 
seized  by  armed  men  ;  but  even  now  I  can  pray  to  my  Father."  Prayer 
is  an  ever  open  door.     There  is  no  predicament  in  which  we  cannot 


I 


a! 


JESUS  DECLINING  THE  LEGIONS.  221 

pray  If  we  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth,  we  can  now  pray 
effectually  unto  our  Father,  even  as  he  could  have  done.  -Do J  hear 
you  say,  ''The  fatal  hour  is  near"  ?  You  may  now  pray.  'But  the 
danger  is  imminent!"  You  may  now  pray.  If,  like  Jonah, 
you  are  now  at  the  bottom  of  the  mountains,  and  the  weeds  are 
wrapped  about  your  head,  you  may  even  now  pray.  Prayer  is  a 
weapon  that  is  usable  in  every  position  in  the  hour  of  conflict  Ihe 
Greeks  had  long  spears,  and  these  were  of  grand  service  to  the  phalanx 
so  long  as  the  rank  was  not  broken;  but  the  Komans  used  a  short 
sword,  and  that  was  a  far  more  effectual  weapon  at  close  quarters. 
Prayer  is  both  the  long  spear  and  the  short  sword.  Yes,  brother,  be- 
tween the  jaws  of  the  lion  you  may  even  now  pray.  We  glory  m  our 
blessed  Master,  that  he  knew  in  fulness  of  faith  that  if  he  would  bring 
forth  his  fall  power  of  prayer  he  could  set  all  heaven  on  the  wing.  As 
soon  as  his  beseeching  prayer  had  reached  the  Father's  ear,  immediately, 
like  flames  of  fire,  angels  would  flash  death  upon  his  adversaries.    ^ 

Our  Lord's  resort  was  not  to  the  carnal  weapon,  but  to  the  mighty 
endne  of  supplication.  Behold,  my  brethren,  where  our  grand  resort 
must  always  be.  Look  not  to  the  arm  of  flesh,  but  to  the  Lord  our 
God  Church  of  God,  look  not  piteously  to  the  State,  but  fl-y  to  the 
mercy-seat.  Church  of  God,  look  not  to  the  ministry,  but  resort  to  the 
throne  of  grace.  Church  of  God,  depend  not  upon  learned  or  moneyed 
men,  but  beseech  God  in  supplicating  faith.  Prayer  is  the  tower  of 
David  builded  for  an  armoury.  Prayer  is  our  battle-axe  and  weapons 
of  war  We  say  to  our  antagonist :  "  Thinkest  thou  that  I  cannot  now 
pray  to  my  Father."  Let  this  sufiice  to  display  our  Saviour  s  grand 
resource  in  the  night  of  his  direst  distress.  ^ 

II  Secondly,  let  me  invite  your  attention  to  OUR  Lord  s  undi- 
minished POWER  IN  HEAVEN  at  the  time  when  he  seemed  to  have  no 
power  on  earth.  He  says,  when  about  to  be  bound  and  taken  away  to 
Caiaphas,  "I  can  presently  call  down  twelve  legions  of  angels  from 
the  skies."  He  had  influence  in  heaven  with  the  Father,  the  great 
Lord  of  angels.  He  could  have  of  the  Father  all  that  the  Father 
possessed.  Heaven  would  be  emptied  if  needful  to  satisfy  the  wish 
of  the  Beloved  Son.  The  man  Christ  Jesus  who  is  about  to  be  hung 
upon  the  cross  has  such  power  with  the  Father  that  he  hf  but  to 
ask  and  to  have.  The  Father  would  answer  him  at  once  •  He  shah 
mesently  send  me  twelve  legions  of  angels."  There  would  be  no  delay, 
no  hesitation.  The  Father  was  ready  to  help  hini  waiting  to  deliver 
him.  All  heaven  was  concerned  about  him.  All  the  angelic  bands 
were  waiting  on  the  wing,  and  Jesus  had  but  to  express  the  desire,  and 
instantaneously  the  garden  of  Gethsemane  would  have  been  as  populous 
with  shining  ones  as  the  New  Jerusalem  itself.    ^    .     ,  .  ... 

Our  Lord  speaks  of  angels  that  his  Father  would  give  him,  or  send  him 
We  may  interpret  it  that  the  Father  would  at  once  put  at  his  disposa 
the  glorious  inhabitants  of  heaven.  Think  of  seraphs  at  the  disposa 
of  the  Man  of  Sorrows  !  He  is  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  and  yet 
angels  that  excel  in  strength  are  at  his  beck  and  call.  Swift  ot  wing, 
and  quick  of  hand,  and  wise  of  thought,  they  are  charmed  to  be  the 
messengers  of  the  Son  of  Man,  the  servitors  of  Jesus.  Think  of  this, 
beloved,  when  you  bow  before  the  thorn-crowned  head,  and  when  you 


222  JIBTROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

gaze  upon  the  nailed  hands  and  feet.  Remember  that  angels  and 
principalities  and  powers,  and  all  the  ranks  of  pure  spirits  by  whatso- 
ever name  they  are  named,  were  all  at  the  beck  of  Jesus  when  he 
was  newly  risen  from  his  agony,  and  was  about  to  be  led  away  bound, 
to  the  High-priest.  He  is  our  Lord  and  God,  even  at  his  lowest  and 
weakest 

Jesus' speaks  of  "twelve  legions."  I  suppose  he  mentions  the  num- 
ber twelve  as  a  legion  for  each  one  of  the  eleven  disciples  and  for 
himself.  They  were  only  twelve,  and  yet  the  innumerable  hosts  of 
heaven  would  make  forced  marches  for  their  rescue.  A  legion  in  the 
Roman  army  was  six  thousand  men  at  the  very  lowest.  Twelve  times 
six  thousand  angels  would  come  in  answer  to  a  wish  from  Jesus.  Nay, 
he  says,  *'  more  "  than  twelve  legions.  There  can  be  no  limit  to  the 
available  resources  of  the  Christ  of  God.  Thousands  of  thousands 
would  till  the  air  if  Jesus  willed  it.  The  band  that  Judas  led  would 
be  an  insignificant  squad  to  be  swallowed  up  at  once  if  the  Saviour 
would  but  summon  his  allies.  Behold,  dear  brethren,  the  glory  of  our 
betrayed  and  arrested  Lord.  If  he  was  such  then,  what  is  he  now.  when 
all  power  is  given  him  of  his  Father !  Bear  in  your  minds  the  clear 
idea  that  Jesus  in  his  humiliation  was  nevertheless  Lord  of  all  things, 
and  especially  of  the  unseen  world,  and  of  the  armies  which  people  it. 
The  more  clearly  you  perceive  this,  the  more  will  you  admire  the  all- 
conquering,  all-abjuring  love  which  took  him  to  the  death  of  the  cross. 

Tarry  here  just  a  minute  to  recollect  that  the  angels  also  are,  accord- 
ing to  your  measure  and  degree,  at  your  call.  You  have  but  to  pray  to 
God,  and  angels  shall  bear  you  up  in  their  hands  lest  you  dash  your  foot 
against  a  stone.  We  do  not  think  enough  of  these  heavenly  beings  ;  yet 
are  they  all  ministering  spirits  sent  forth  to  minister  to  those  that  are 
heirs  of  salvation.  Like  Elijah's  servant,  if  your  eyes  were  opened 
you  would  see  the  mountain  full  of  horses  of  fire  and  chariots  of 
fire  round  about  the  servants  of  God.  Let  us  learn  from  our  Master 
to  reckon  upon  forces  invisible.  Let  us  not  trust  in  that  which  is 
seen  of  the  eye,  and  heard  of  the  ear ;  but  let  us  have  respect  to 
spiritual  agencies  which  evade  the  senses,  but  are  known  to  faith. 
Angels  play  a  far  greater  part  in  the  affairs  of  providence  than  we  wot 
of  God  can  raise  us  up  friends  on  earth,  and  if  he  does  not  do  so  he 
<jan  find  us  abler  friends  in  heaven.  There  is  no  need  to  pluck  out  the 
sword  with  which  to  cut  off  men's  ears ;  for  infinitely  better  agencies  wul 
work  for  us.  Have  faith  in  God,  and  all  things  shall  work  for  your  good. 
The  angels  of  God  think  it  an  honour  and  a  delight  to  protect  the 
least  of  his  children.  ..      .    j 

IIL  But  I  cannot  linger,  although  I  feel  a  great  temptation  to  do 
fio.  My  text  is  full  of  teaching,  but  a  main  point  is  the  third  one  — 
OUR  lord's  perpeot  willingness  in  suffering.  I  hope  I  have 
alreadv  brought  that  before  you.  Oar  Lord  would  be  betrayed  mto 
the  hands  of  sinners,  but  he  would  go  with  them  wii.ingly.  He  had  not 
shunned  the  garden  though  Judas  knew  the  place.  No  part  of  our  Lord  s 
«utferings  came  upon  him  by  the  necessity  of  his  nature.  iSeither  as 
Ood  nor  as  sinless  man  was  he  bound  to  suffer.  There  was  no  necessity 
that  Christ  should  endure  any  of  the  inflictions  laid  upon  him,  except 
the  uHcessitv  of  his  fulfilling  the  Scriptures,  and  performing  the  work  <.f 


] 


JESUS  DECLINING  THB  LEGIONS.  223 

mprcy  which  he  came  to  do.  He  must  die  because  he  became  the  great 
i^acrifice  for  sin;  but  apart  from  that,  no  necessity  of  death  was  on 
him.  They  scourged  him ;  but  they  could  not  have  lifted  the  thong  if  he 
had  not  permitted  it.  He  thirsted  on  the  cruel  tree;  but  all  the  springs  of 
water  in  the  world  he  makes  and  fills,  and  therefore  he  needed  not  to 
have  thirsted  if  he  had  not  chosen  to  submit  thereto.  When  he  died, 
he  did  not  die  through  the  failure  of  his  natural  strength  ;  he  nied 
because  he  had  surrendered  himself  to  death  as  our  great  Propitiation. 
Even  in  his  expiring  moment  our  Lord  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  to 
show  that  his  life  was  in  him  still.  He  "  gave  up  the  ghost,"  freely 
parting  with  a  life  which  he  might  have  retained.  He  voluntarily 
surrendered  his  spirit  to  God.  It  was  not  snatched  from  him  by 
a  force  superior  to  his  own  will :  he  willingly  bore  our  sins,  and  willingly 
died  as  our  Substitute.     Let  us  love  and  bless  the  willing  Sufferer. 

Indeed,  our  Lord  was  not  merely  submissive  to  the  divine  will,  but, 
if  I  may  use  words  in  a  paradoxical  manner,  I  would  say  that  he  was 
actively  submissive.  A  single  prayer  would  have  brought  our  Lord 
deliverance  from  his  enemies  ;  but  he  exercised  force  upon  himself,  and 
held  in  his  natural  impulse  to  beseech  the  Father.  He  held  in  abeyance 
that  noblest  of  spiritual  j^ifts,  that  choicest  of  all  forms  of  power — the 
power  of  prayer.  One  would  have  thought  that  a  good  man  might 
always  exercise  prayer  to  the  full  of  his  bent,  and  yet  Jesus  laid  his 
hand  upon  his  prayer-power  as  if  it  had  been  a  sword,  and  he  put  it  back 
into  its  sheath.  "  He  saved  others,  himself  he  could  not  save."  He 
prayed  for  others  ;  but,  in  this  instance,  for  himself  he  would  not  pray, 
as  he  might  have  done.  He  would  do  nothing,  even  though  it  were  to 
pray  a  prayer  which  even  in  the  slightest  degree  would  oppose  the  will 
of  the  Father.  He  was  so  perfectly  submissive,  yea,  so  eager  to 
accomplish  our  salvation,  that  he  would  not  pray  to  avoid  the  cruelty 
of  his  enemies  and  the  bitterness  of  death.  He  sees  it  is  the  Father  s 
will,  and  therefore  he  will  not  have  a  wish  in  opposition  to  it.  "  The 
cup  which  my  Father  hath  given  me,  shall  I  not  drink  it  ?  "  Remember, 
that  he  needed  not  to  commit  any  wrong  thing  to  prevent  his  being 
taken  and  slain  :  a  good  thing,  namely,  a  prayer,  would  do  it ;  but  he 
will  not  pray  :  he  has  undertaken  the  work  of  redemption,  and  he  must 
and  will  go  through  with  it.  He  has  such  a  desire  for  your  salvation 
and  for  mine,  such  a  thirst  to  honour  and  glorify  his  Father  in  the 
work  which  he  had  engaged  to  do,  that  he  will  not  even  prevent  his 
sufferings  by  a  prayer. 

Wonderful  is  that  question,  "  How  then  shall  the  scriptures  be 
fulfilled  ?  "  It  is  as  much  as  to  say,  "  Who  else  can  drink  that  cup  ? 
Who  else  can  tread  the  wine-press  of  Almighty  wrath  ?  No,  I  must  do 
it.  I  cannot  lay  this  load  upon  any  other  shoulders."  Therefore,  for 
the  joy  that  was  set  before  him  he  endured  the  cross,  despising  the 
shame.  He  was  willing,  ay,  willing  from  beginning  to  end,  to  be  our 
suffering  Saviour.  He  was  willing  to  be  born  at  Bethlehem,  to  work  at 
Nazareth,  to  be  mocked  at  Jerusalem,  and  at  last  to  die  at  Calvary. 
At  any  one  point  he  could  have  drawn  back.  No  constraint  was  upon 
him  but  that  of  a  love  stronger  than  death. 

I  want  you,  dear  hearers,  to  draw  the  inference  that  Jesus  is  willing  to 
r«ave.    A  willing  Sufferer  must  be  a  willing  Saviour.     If  he  willingly 


224  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

died,  he  must  with  equal  willingness  be  ready  to  give  to  us  the  fruit  of 
his  death.  If  any  of  you  would  have  Jesus,  you  may  surely  have  him 
at  once.  He  freely  delivered  himself  up  for  us  all.  If  he  was  so  willing 
to  become  a  sacrifice,  how  willing  must  he  be  that  the  glorious  result  of 
his  sacrifice  should  be  shared  in  by  you,  and  by  all  who  come  to  God 
by  him !  If  there  be  unwillingness  anywhere,  you  are  unwilling.  He 
rejoices  to  be  gracious.  I  wish  the  charm  of  this  truth  would  affect 
your  heart  as  it  does  mine.  I  love  him  greatly,  because  I  see  that  at 
any  moment  he  might  have  drawn  back  from  redeeming  me,  and  yet 
he  would  not.  A  single  prayer  would  have  set  him  free ;  but  he  would 
not  pray  it,  for  he  loved  us  so  I 

**  This  was  compassion  like  a  God, 
That  when  the  Saviour  knew 
The  price  of  pardon  was  his  blood, 
His  pity  ne'er  withdrew." 

Do  not  grieve  him  by  thinking  that  he  is  unwilling  to  forgive,  that 
he  is  unwilling  to  receive  a  sinner  such  as  you.  Has  he  not  said, 
"  Him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out"  ?  You  will  delight 
him  if  you  come  to  him,  whoever  you  may  be.  If  you  will  but  draw 
near  to  him  by  simple  trust,  he  will  see  in  you  the  purchase  of  his 
agony ;  and  all  the  merit  of  his  death  shall  flow  out  freely  to  you.  Come 
and  welcome,  sinner,  come. 

IV.  Now  I  must  lead  you,  with  great  brevity,  to  notice  our  Lord's 
GREAT  RESPECT  FOR  HoLY  SCRIPTURE.  He  cau  have  twelve  legions 
of  angels,  but  "  how  then  shall  the  scriptures  be  fulfilled,  that  thus  it 
must  be?" 

Notice,  that  our  Lord  believed  in  the  dwinity  of  Scripture.  He  says, 
"How  then  shall  the  scriptures  be  fulfilled?"  But  if  the  Scriptures 
are  only  the  writings  of  men,  there  is  no  necessity  that  they  should  be 
fulfilled.  If  they  are  merely  the  fallible  utterances  of  good  men,  I  see 
no  particular  necessity  that  they  should  be  fulfilled.  Our  Lord  Jesua 
Christ  insisted  upon  it  that  the  Scriptures  must  be  fulfilled,  and  the  reason 
was,  that  they  are  not  the  word  of  man,  but  the  Word  of  God.  The- 
Scriptures  were  evidently  the  Word  of  God  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
He  never  trifles  with  them,  nor  differs  from  them,  nor  predicts  that  they 
will  vanish  away.  It  is  he  that  saith,  "  Think  not  that  I  am  come  to 
destroy  the  law,  or  the  prophets  :  I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil. 
For  verily  I  say  unto  you,  Till  heaven  and  earth  pass,  one  jot  or  one- 
tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the  law,  till  all  be  fulfilled." 

He  believed  in  the  divine  origin  of  the  Scriptures  and  also  in  their 
infallihility.  "  How  then  shall  the  scriptures  be  fulfilled,  that  thus  it 
must  be?"  He  does  not  hint  that  the  Scriptures  might  be  a  little 
mistaken.  He  does  not  argue,  "I  will  bring  the  twelve  legions  of 
angels  down  to  deliver  myself,  and  it  is  no  matter  to  me  that  then 
the  Scriptures  will  be  made  void."  Oh,  no  !  the  Scriptures  must  be 
true,  and  they  must  be  fulfilled,  and  therefore  he  must  be  betrayed  into 
the  hands  of  men.  He  settles  it  as  a  matter  of  necessity  that  Scripture 
must  infallibly  be  verified,  even  to  its  jots  and  tittles. 

See,  brethren,  the  priceless  taorth  of  Scripture  in  the  estimation  of 
our  Lord.     In  effect  he  says,  ''  I  will  die  rather  than  any  Scripture 


J 


JESUS   DECLINING   THE   LEGIONS.  225 

shall  be  unfulfilled.  I  will  go  to  the  cross  rather  than  any  one  word  of 
God  should  not  be  carried  out."  The  prophet  Zechariah  has  written, 
"Awake,  0  sword,  against  my  shepherd,  and  against  the  man  that 
is  my  fellow,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  :  smite  the  shepherd,  and  the 
sheep  shall  be  scattered  abroad."  The  fulfilment  of  that  prophecy 
fell  due  that  ni^ht,  and  the  Son  of  God  was  prepared  to  be  smitten 
as  the  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  rather  than  the  word  of  the  Father 
should  fall  to  the  ground.  Skin  for  skin,  yea,  all  that  a  man  hath  will 
he  give  for  his  life ;  but  Jesus  would  give  his  life  for  the  Scriptures. 
Brethren,  it  were  worth  while  for  the  whole  church  to  die  rather  than  any 
truth  of  Scripture  should  be  given  up.  Let  all  our  thousands  be  con- 
sumed upon  the  altar  as  one  great  holocaust  sooner  than  the  Scriptures 
should  be  dishonoured.  The  Word  of  the  Lord  must  live  and  pre- 
vail whether  we  die  or  not.  Our  Lord  teaches  us  to  prize  it  beyond 
liberty  or  life. 

The  force  of  our  Lord's  language  goes  further  yet.     Let  me  repeat 
the  words  and  then  enlarge  upon  them.      "  How  then  shall  the  scrip- 
tures be  fulfilled,  that  thus  it  must  be  ?"     Holy  Scripture  is  the  tran- 
script of  the  secret  decree  of  God.     We  do  not  believe  in  fate,  a  blind, 
hard  thing  ;  but  we  believe  in  predestination,  the  settled  purpose  of  a  wise 
and  loving  Father.     The  Book  of  Fate  is  cruel  reading,  but  the  book 
of  divine  Fore-ordination  is  full  of  charming  sentences,  and  those  lines 
out  of   it  which  are  written  in  the   Scriptures  we  joyfully   choose 
to  have  fulfilled.     It  is  the  will  of  our  Father  who  is  in  heaven  which 
settles  the  things  which  must  be ;  and  because  of  this  we  cheerfully 
yield  ourselves  up  to  predestination.     Once  being  assured  that  God  has 
appointed  it,  we  have   no  struggles,  nay,  we  will  not  even  breathe 
a  wish  to   have  the   matter  otherwise.     Let  the  will  of  the  Father 
be  the  supreme  law.     It    ought    to  be    so.      We    find   a    depth   of 
comfort  in  saying,  "It  is  the  Lord,  let  him  do  what  seemeth  him 
good."    Now,  the  prophecies  of  Scripture  were  to  the  Lord  Christ  the 
revelation  of  the  predestination  of  God  that  so  it  must  be,  and  he  cheer- 
fully, joyfully,  even  without  a  prayer  against  it,  gives  himself  up  at 
once  to  that  which  must  be,  because  God  has  appointed  it.    If  any  of 
you  do  not  believe  in  the  predestination  of  God,  you  will,  probably,  in 
some  hour  of  depression,  ascribe  your  sorrows  to  a  cruel  fate.    The 
human  mind,  somehow  or  other,  is  driven  at  last  to  this  decision,  that 
some  things  are  beyond  the  control  of  man  and  of  his  will,  and  that  these 
are  fixed  by  necessity.     How  much  better  to  see  that  God  has  fixed 
them  !    There  is  the  wheel  revolving  surely  and  unalterably  ;  would  it 
not  comfort  you  to  believe  that  it  is  full  of  eyes,  and  that  it  is  moving 
according  to  the  settled  purpose  of  the  Lord  ?    That  man  who  says, 
"  It  is  my  Father's  will  "  is  the  happy  man.     Predestination  is  as  sure 
and  as  certain  as  fate ;  but  there  is  at  the  back  of  it  a  living  and  loving 
personality,  ordering  all  things.    To  this  we  cheerfully  yield  ourselves. 
Beloved,  let  us  value  Scripture  as  much  as  Christ  did  ;  I  was  going 
to  say,  let  us  value  it  even  more  :  for  if  our  Lord  valued  unfulfilled 
Scripture— which  was  but  a  shell  till  he  became  its  kernel— how  much 
more  should  we  value  it,  to  whom  the  Scriptures  are  fulfilled  in  a  large 
degree,  because  the  Christ  has  suffered  and  has  done  even  as  it  was 
"written  of  him  by  the  prophets  of  God  I 

15 


226  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Time  flies  so  quickly  that  I  must  pass  on.  You  perceive  that  I  have 
a  pregjnant  text ;  it  is  full  of  living  instruction  to  those  who  desire  to 
learn.     God  help  us  to  receive  with  joy  all  its  holy  teaching ! 

V.  But  I  must  come  to  the  last  point.  We  will  consider  our 
Lord's  lessons  to  each  one  of  us  in  this  text. 

The  first  lesson  is  this  :  Desire  no  other  forces  for  God's  work  than 
God  himself  ordains  to  use.  Do  not  desire  that  the  Government  should 
come  to  your  rescue  to  support  your  church.  Do  not  desire  that  the 
charms  of  eloquence  should  be  given  to  ministers,  that  they  may  there- 
with command  listening  ears,  and  so  maintain  the  faith  by  the  wisdom 
of  words.  Do  not  ask  that  learning  and  rank  and  prestige  may  come 
upon  the  side  of  Christianity,  and  so  religion  may  become  respectable 
and  influential.  Means  that  God  has  not  chosen  to  nse  should  not  be 
looked  upon  by  us  with  covetous  eyes.  Has  he  not  said,  "2^ot  by 
might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts"? 
Jesus  has  all  those  squadrons  of  angels  at  his  disposal ;  do  you  not  wish 
that  he  would  use  them  ?  What  a  glorious  vision  is  before  us  as  we 
see  their  serried  ranks  and  mark  their  glittering  splendour  !  But  Jesus 
bids  them  stand  still  and  see  the  salvation  of  God  wrought  out  without 
their  interposition.  To  them  he  has  not  put  in  subjection  the  new 
world.  They  must  not  meddle  with  the  redemption  of  men.  The  con- 
flict for  truth  is  to  be  a  spiritual  battle  between  man  and  the  serpent : 
nothing  but  spiritual  force  is  to  be  employed,  and  that  not  by  angels,  but 
by  men.  Man  must  overcome  sin  by  spiritual  means  only.  Put  up  the 
sword,  Peter!  Jesus  does  not  want  its  keen  edge.  Keep  your  swords  in 
your  sheaths,  ye  seraphim  !  Jesas  does  not  want  even  your  blades  of 
celestial  temper.  His  weakness  has  done  more  than  human  or  angelic 
strength.  His  suffering  and  death  have  done  the  deed  which  all  the 
hierarchy  of  angels  could  never  have  accomplished.  The  truth  is  to 
win  the  fight.  The  Spirit  is  to  subdue  the  powers  of  evil  Brethren, 
do  not  ask  anybody  else  to  interfere.  Let  us  have  this  fight  out  on  the 
ground  which  God  has  chosen.  Let  us  know  that  God  is  omnipotent 
in  the  realm  of  mind,  and  that  by  his  truth  and  Spirit  he  will  over- 
come. He  holds  back  all  forces  other  than  those  of  argument,  and 
suasion,  and  enlightenment  by  his  Spirit :  do  not  let  us  even  wish  to 
put  our  hand  to  any  force  other  than  he  ordains  to  use. 

And,  next,  take  care  that  when  other  forces  are  within  reach,  you  do 
not  use  them  for  the  promotion  of  the  heavenly  kingdom.  When  yoa 
are  in  argument  for  the  truth,  do  not  grow  angry  ;  for  this  would  be  to 
fight  the  Lord's  battles  with  the  devil's  weapons.  Do  not  wish  to 
oppress  a  person  whose  views  are  erroneous  or  even  blasphemous.  The 
use  of  bribes  for  the  propagation  of  opinions  is  mean,  and  the  refusal 
of  charities  to  those  who  differ  from  us  in  sentiment  is  detestable.  Let 
no  threat  escape  your  lip,  nor  bribe  pollute  your  hand.  It  is  not  thus 
that  the  battles  of  truth  are  to  be  fought.  If  you  ever  feel  inclined  to 
shut  a  man's  mouth  by  wishing  him  banishment,  or  sickness,  or  any 
sort  of  ill,  be  grieved  with  yourself  that  so  unchristly  a  thought  should 
have  entered  your  head.  Desire  only  good  for  the  most  perverse  of 
men.  Fighting  for  Christ  would  be  wounding  him  sorely.  The 
French  king  heard  of  the  cruelties  perpetrated  upon  our  Lord,  and  he 
exclaimed,  **  Oh,  if  I  had  been  there  with  a  troop  of  my  guards,  I 


JESUS  DECLINING  THE  LEGIONS.  227 

should  have  cut  the  villains  in  pieces  !"  Yes,  but  Jesus  did  not  want 
the  King  of  France  nor  his  guards  :  he  came  not  to  destroy  men's 
lives,  but  to  save  them.  The  Lord  Jesus  desires  you,  my  brethren,  to 
fight  for  him  by  your  faith,  by  your  holy  life,  by  your  confidence  in 
truth,  by  your  reliance  upon  the  Spirit  of  God ;  but  whenever  your 
hand  begins  to  itch  for  the  sword-hilt,  then  may  you  hear  him  say, 
"Put  up  thy  sword  into  its  sheath."  He  will  conquer  by  love,  and  by 
love  alone.  If  at  this  present  moment  I  could  take  this  church  and 
endow  it  with  all  the  wealth  of  the  Establishment,  and  gather  into 
its  midst  all  the  wisdom  and  talent  and  eloquence  which  now  adorns 
society,  and  if  I  could  do  this  by  one  single  prayer,  I  should  long 
hevsitate  to  offer  the  petition.  These  might  prove  idols,  and  provoke  the 
living  God  to  jealousy.  Infinitely  better  for  us  to  be  poor  and  weak  and 
devoid  of  that  which  is  highly  esteemed  among  men,  and  then  to  be 
baptized  into  the  Holy  Ghost,  than  to  become  strong  and  be  left  of  our 
God.  We  shall  war  this  warfare  with  no  unsanctified  weapons,  with  no 
instrument  other  than  God  appoints.  Speaking  the  truth  in  the  power 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  we  are  not  afraid  of  the  result.  Surely  this  is  what 
Christ  means :  "  I  could  pray  to  my  Father  and  receive  at  once  a  body- 
guard of  angels,  but  I  will  do  nothing  of  the  kind,  for  by  other  means 
than  these  must  my  kingdom  come." 

And  the  next  lesson  is :  Never  attempt  to  escape  suffering  at  the  expense 
of  truth :  "  How  then  shall  the  scriptures  be  fulfilled  ?  "  says  Christ :  "  I 
can  escape  being  taken,  and  bound,  and  made  a  felon  of ;  but  then  how 
are  the  Scriptures  to  be  fulfilled?"  Would  you  like  to  be  throughout 
life  screened  from  all  affliction  ?  I  think  I  hear  a  great  many  say, 
"I  should."  Would  you?  Would  you  be  always  free  from  sick- 
ness, poverty,  care,  bereavement,  slander,  persecution  ?  How,  then, 
could  that  word  be  true,  *'  I  have  chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  afflic- 
tion "  !  What  would  that  text  mean,  *'  What  son  is  he  whom  the 
Father  chasteneth  not "  ?  Jesus  said,  "  Except  a  man  take  up  his 
cross  and  follow  me,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple."  Are  you  to  be  an  ex- 
ception to  the  rule  ?  Oh,  do  not  kick  against  suffering,  for  in  so  doing 
you  may  be  fighting  against  God.  When  Peter  drew  his  sword  he  was 
unconsciously  fighting  to  prevent  our  redemption.  When  we  struggle 
against  tribulation  or  persecution  we  may  be  warring  against  untold 
benefit.  Do  you  desire  to  ride  through  the  world  like  princes  ?  Do 
not  desire  such  a  dangerous  fate  ;  for  how  then  could  the  Scriptures  be 
fulfilled,  that  the  disciple  is  not  above  his  Lord  ?  Bow  your  spirit 
before  the  majesty  of  Scripture,  and  patiently  endure  all  things  for  the 
elect's  sake. 

Again,  never  tremble  when  force  is  on  the  wrong  side.  You  see  they 
are  coming,  Pharisees  and  priests  and  the  posse  comitatus  sent  by  the 
authorities  to  arrest  the  Saviour  ;  but  he  is  not  afraid.  Why  should  he 
be  ?  He  could  command  twelve  legions  of  angels  to  beat  off  the  foe. 
The  man  who  knows  he  has  a  reserve  behind  him  may  walk  into  an 
ambush  without  fear.  The  multitude  think  that  there  stands  before 
Au?^  ^  "^^^®  ^^^'  ^  ^^^^^^  "^^^'  strangely  red  as  with  bloody  sweat. 
Ah  I  they  know  neither  him  nor  his  Father.  Let  him  give  a  whistle 
and  from  behind  the  olives  of  the  grove,  and  from  the  walls  of  the  garden' 
and  from  every  stone  of  the  Mount  of  Olives  would  spring  up  warriors 


228  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

mightier  than  those  of  Caesar,  valiant  ones  before  whom  armies  wonld) 
be  consumed.   One  of  these  mighties  of  God  slew  of  Sennaohenb  s  army 
one  hundred  and  eighty-five  thousand  men  in  a  single  mght  ;  another 
smote  all  the  first-born  of  Egypt.     Tlunk  then,  what  more  than  twelye- 
leffions  of  them  could  accomplish  !    Brethren,  all  these  holy,  heavenly 
beings  are  on  our  side.    "  Oh,  but  there  are  so  many  against  us  1      Yes, 
I  know  there  are  ;  but  more  are  they  that  are  for  us.     AW  the  myriads 
of  heaven  are  our  allies.     See  ye  not  the  legions  waimg  for  the  sum^ 
mons  ?    Who  wants  to  give  the  word  of  command  till  our  grea   Oom- 
mander-in-Ohief  decides  that  the  hour  is  come  ?     Let  us  patiently  wait 
till  he  shall  descend  from  heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  ot  the 
archangel,  and  the  trump  of  God ;  then  will  the  reserves  pour  forth  from 
heaven^s  gate,  and  all  the  holy  angels  shall  swell  the  pomp  of  the  great 
appearing.    Till  that  moment,  wait  1     In  your  patience  possess  ye  your 
souls  '     The  Lord  Jesus  waited  ;  his  angels  waited  ;  his  Father  waited. 
They 'are  all  still  waiting.     Heaven's  long-sufi'ering  still  runs  like  a 
silver  thread  through  the  centuries.     Jesus  will  come  with  his  angels  m 
all  the  glory  of  the  Father ;  but  dream  not  that  he  must  come  to-morrow 
or  else  be  charged  with  being  slack  concerning  his  Pj-omise     Desire 
that  he  may  come  in  your  lifetime,  and  look  out  for  him;   but  it  he 
tarrieth  be  not  dismayed.    If  he  tarry  for  another  century  do  not  be 
weary  ;  if  another  thousand  years  should  intervene  between  us  and 
the  bright  millennial  day,  yet  stand  ye  fast  each  man  m  his  place,  fearing 
nothinl  but  setting  up  your  banners  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.        iiie 
Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us,  the  God  of  Jacob  is  our  refuge.'     We  have- 
no  lack  of  strength,  it  is  only  that  God  wills  that  it  be  not  put  forth 
and  that  our  weakness  for  he  present  should  be  the  instrument  of  his 
most  majestic  conquests.    Lord,  we  are  content  to  trust  ^  thee  a^* 
wait  patiently  for  thee  ;  but  leave  us  not,  we  beseech  thee.    Amen. 


Portions  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon— Luke  xxii.  31—53  $,' 
Matthew  xxvi.  47—54. 


Hymns  from  *'Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 307,  291,  293. 


CHRIST  BEFORE  ANNAS* 


tt\\\is\\ 

Intended  for  Reading  on  Lord's-day,  Makch  1st,  1903, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Thursday  Evening,  October  26th,  1882. 


"Then  the  band  and  the  captain  and  officers  of  the  Jews  took  Jesus,  and  bound  him, 
■and  led  him  away  to  Annas  first :  for  he  was  father  in  law  to  Caiapha?,  which  was 
the  high  priest  that  same  year.  .  .  .  The  high  priest  then  asked  Jesus  of  his  disciples, 
and  of  his  doctrine.  Jesus  answered  him,  I  spake  openly  to  the  world  ;  I  ever  taught 
in  the  synagogue,  and  in  the  temple,  whither  the  Jews  always  resort ;  and  in  secret 
have  I  said  nothing.  Why  askest  thou  me?  ask  them  which  heard  me,  what  I  have 
said  unto  them:  behold,  they  know  what  I  said.  And  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  one 
of  the  oificers  which  stood  by  struck  Jesus  with  the  palm  of  his  hand,  s^ying, 
Answerest  thou  the  high  priest  so  ?  Jesus  answered  him,  If  I  have  spoken  evil,  bear 
witness  of  the  evil :  but  if  well,  why  smitest  thou  me  ?  "—John  xviii.  12,  13,  19—23. 

Note  the  words  in  verse  13  :  "  and  led  him  away  to  Annas  first." 
This  man  Annas' has  not  become  so  infamous  as  Pontius  Pilate, 
because  his  name  did  not  happen  to  be  mentioned  in  the  Creed; 
but,  in  some  respects,  he  was  even  more  guilty  than  the  Roman 
governor.  He  was  one  of  those  who  handed  over  our  Lord  to 
Pilate,  and  he  is  included  in  the  judgment,  "he  that  delivered  me 
Tinto  thee  hath  the  greater  sin."  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that 
he  was  first  in  trying  the  Saviour;  let  him  have  the  full  benefit 
•of  it :  "  they  led  him  away  to  Annas  first." 

Who  was  this  man,  to  whose  palace  the  Lord  Jesus  was  first 
-oonducted?  He  was  a  man  who  had  been  high  priest  actually 
for  a  time,  and  had,  for  some  fifty  years,  been  regaorded  as  high 
priest  by  the  Jews,  while  members  of  his  family,  one  after  another, 
had  in  turns  nominally  held  the  ofiice.  The  high-priesthood  had 
been  degraded  from  its  permanence  to  become  little  more  than  an 
annual  office,  and  hence  the  evangelist  significantly  says  of  Caiaphas 

*  The  first  portion  of  this  sermon  was  revised  by  Me.  Spuegeon,  and  the  unusually 
long  introductory  paragraphs  are  set  up  from  his  own  handwriting.  Four  other 
discourses  in  the  same  series  will  (d.v.)  be  published  for  reading  on  March  15th  and 
29th,  and  April  ,5th  and  12th,  after  which  the  whole  set  on  "The  Last  Days  of  awr 
Lord's  Passion"  will,  possibly,  be  issued  in  a  volume,  in  accordance  witl»  M%. 
Spuegeon's  original  plan  in  preaching  the  sermons. 
No.  2.820. 


230  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

that  "  he  was  the  high  priest  that  same  year."  But  Annas  would 
aeem  to  have  been  secretly  regarded  by  the  Jews  as  the  real  high 
priest,  and  respect  to  him  in  that  capacity  was  the  more  easily 
offered  because,  according  to  Josephus,  five  of  his  sons,  and  his 
son-in-law,  Caiaphas,  had  succeeded  him  in  the  sacred  office.  To 
him,  then,  it  was  due  that  the  victim  of  the  priests  should  be  first 
taken ;  he  shall  have  this  mark  of  distinction :  "  they  led  him  away 
to  Annas  first."  The  Sacrifice  of  G-od,  the  Lamb  of  his  passover, 
the  Scapegoat  of  the  Lord's  atonement,  shall  be  brought  before 
the  priest,  ere  he  be  slain. 

The  house  of  Annas  was  united  to  that  of  Caiaphas,  and  it  was 
proposed  to  detain  the  prisoner  there  till  the  Sanhedrim  could  b© 
hastily  convened  for  his  trial.  If  he  should  be  brought  into  the 
palace  of  Annas,  the  old  man  would  be  gratified  by  a  sight  of  Jesus, 
and  by  conducting  a  preliminary  examination,  acting  as  deputy  for 
his  son-in-law.  Without  leaving  his  own  house,  he  could  thus 
indulge  his  malice,  and  have  a  finger  in  the  business.  Priestly 
hate  is  ever  deep  and  unrelenting.  To-day,  none  are  such  enemies 
of  Christ's  holy  gospel  as  those  who  delight  in  priestcraft,  and  it  is 
not  without  prophetic  meaning  that  our  Lord  must  be  led,  as  a 
prisoner,  first  to  a  priest's  house :  "  they  led  him  away  to  Annas 
first."  Not  in  the  soldiers'  barracks^  nor  in  the  governor's  hall, 
but  in  the  high  priest's  palace  must  Jesus  meet  witli  his  first 
captivity :  there  it  is  that  a  Christ  in  bonds  seems  not  altogether 
out  of  place. 

"  See  how  the  patient  Jesus  stands, 
Insulted  in  his  lowest  case  ! 
Sinners  have  bound  the  Almighty  hands. 
And  spit  in  their  Creator's  face." 

Annas  bore  a  very  promising  name,  for  it  signifies  clement  or 
merciful^  yet  he  was  the  man  to  begin  the  work  of  ensnaring  the 
Lord  Jesus  in  his  speech,  if  he  could  be  ensnared.  He  examined 
him  first  in  a  semi-private  manner,  that,  by  cunning  questions,  he 
might  extract  from  him  some  ground  of  accusation.  Under  pre- 
tence of  mercy,  he  turned  inquisitor,  and  put  his  victim  to  the 
question.  This  priest,  whose  name  was  clemency,  showed  the 
usual  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked,  which  are  proverbially  cruel. 
When  Jesus  is  to  be  ill-treated  in  his  servants,  there  is  usually  a 
pretence  of  pity  and  compassion.  Persecutors  are  grieved  to  feel 
forced  to  be  harsh ;  their  tender  spirits  are  wounded  by  being  com- 
pelled to  say  a  word  against  the  Lord's  people !  Fain  would  they 
love  them  if  they  would  not  be  so  obstinate !  With  sweet  language, 
they  inflict  bitter  wounds ;  their  words  are  softer  than  butter,  but 
inwardly  they  are  drawn  swords. 

If  I  read  aright  tho  character  of  this  man  Annas,  he  was  one 
of  the  Saviour's  bitterest  enemies.  He  was  a  Sadducee.  Is  not 
this  the  "liberal"  side?  Do  we  not  reckon  Pharisees  to  be  the 
atraitest  sect  of  the  Jews?  Why  he  should  have  been  so  bitter 
against  the  Saviour,  is  pretty  clear,  since,  if  Pharisees,  in  their 
multiplication    of   ceremonies    and    self-righteousnesses,    hate    the 


CHRIST     BEFORE     ANNAS. 


231 


Christ,  30  also  do  the  Sadducees,  in  their  unbelief  and  rejection  of 
the  great  truths  of  revelation.  Here,  Ritualism  and  Rationalism 
go  hand  in  hand,  and  the  free-thinker,  with  all  his  profession  of 
liberality,  usually  displays  none  of  it  toward  the  followers  of  the 
truth.  The  Broad  Church  is  usually  narrow  enough  when  the 
doctrine  of  the  cross  is  under  discussion.  Whether  this  Sadducee 
had  an  interest  in  the  sales  that  were  effected  in  the  temple,  and 
whether,  as  some  suppose,  he  was  greatly  irritated,  and  touched  in 
a  very  tender  point,  namely,  in  his  pocket,  when  Jesfus  overthrew 
the  tables  of  the  money-changers,  and  the  seats  of  them  that  sold 
dovea,  I  cannot  tell;  but,  certainly,  for  some  reason  or  other, 
Annaa  was  among  the  first  of  our  Lord's  persecutors,  not  only  in 
order  of  time,  but  also  in  point  of  malice.  The  wealthy  latitu- 
dinarian  has  a  fierce  enmity  to  the  gospel  of  Christ  Jesus,  and  will  be 
found  second  to  none  in  hunting  down  the  adherents  of  Christ. 

Did  the  military  tribune  and  his  cohort  halt  at  the  house  of 
Annas  because  he  had  been  at  the  bottom  of  the  business,  and 
Pilate  had  ordered  them,  for  the  time,  to  do  the  will  of  the  high 
priest  and  his  father-in-law?  Was  this  long-headed  old  gentleman 
the  counsellor  of  the  conspirators?  Did  the  force  of  character, 
which  kept  him  to  the  front  for  half  a  century,  make  him.  a  leader 
at  this  juncture?  Is  it  possible  that  they  called  at  the  house  of 
Annas  to  hand  over  their  victim,  that  Judas  might  receive  the 
blood-money?  At  all  events,  we  hear  no  more  of  the  traitor  as 
being  in  the  company  of  those  who  had  seized  upon  his  Lord. 

At  any  rate,  the  Lord  is  led  to  Annas  first,  and  we  feel  sure  that 
there  was  a  motive  for  that  act.  Annas,  in  some  sense,  had  a 
priority  in  the  peerage  of  enmity  to  Jesus;  he  was  malignaait,  cruel, 
and  unscrupulous  enough  to  be  premier  in  the  ministry  of  perse- 
cutors. In  all  matters,  there  are  first  as  well  as  la^,  and  this  man 
leads  the  van  among  the  unjust  judges  of  our  Lord.  He  was  a 
favourite  of  the  first  and  most  detestable  of  the  Herods,  and  a 
friend  of  Pilate,  the  governor,  and  so,  a  fit  ringleader  in  procuring 
the  judicial  murder  of  the  innocent.  All  hope  of  justice  was  gone 
when,  the  Holy  One  and  the  Just  was  delivered  into  those  cruel 
and  unrighteous  hands.  He  was  as  determined  as  he  was  cold- 
blooded, and  a  lamb  might  a^  well  look  for  favour  from  a  wolf  as 
Jesus  expect  candour  from  the  old  deputy  high  priest.  For  many 
a  long  yeao",  he  had  held  his  own  by  fiattering  Herod,  and  the 
Roman,  and  the  Jew ;  and  he  set  about  the  work  of  mastering  the 
Nazarene  with  cool  determination  and  deep  subtlety,  hoping  to  pave 
the  way  for  the  men  of  the  Sanhedrim  who  were  even  then  being 
mustered  to  do  the  deied  of  blood  on  which  their  hearts  were  set. 

In  the  house  of  this  man,  then,  who  is  very  properly  called  the 
high  priest,  having  quite  as  good  a  right  to  the  title  as  Caiaphas 
had,  we  see  these  two  things.  First,  we  see  our  Lord  under  examina- 
tion ;  and,  secondly,  we  see  our  Lord  wrongfully  smitten. 

I.  First,  let  us,  tenderly,  lovingly,  adoringly,  look  at  our  Divine 
Master  under  examination. 

My  first  remark  is,  that  this  examination  was  informal,  and  extra- 
judicial.    Jesus    was   not   yet    accused    of  anything;     so    far,    no 


232  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

judge  had  taken  his  place  upon  the  judgment-seat,  neither  were 
any  witnessea  called  to  give  evidence  against  the  prisoner.  It  was 
a  sort  of  private  examination,  held  with  the  view  of  extorting 
something  from  the  captive,  which  might  afterwards  be  used  against 
him.  You  know  how  strongly  and  how  properly  our  law  forbids 
anything  of  the  kind ;  and,  though  it  may  not  have  been  contrary 
to  Jewish  law,  it  was  certainly  contrary  to  the  eternal  laws  of  right. 
A  prisoner  should  not  thus  be  questioned  with  the  object  of 
entangling  him  in  his  speech,  and  making  him  incriminate  himself. 
If  there  is  no  charge  formulated  against  him,  let  him  go  his  way. 
If  the  entries  on  the  charge-sheet  are  not  completed,  let  him  be 
remanded ;  but  let  him  not  be  set  before  one  of  his  most  cruel  foes 
to  be  questioned  to  his  own  hurt. 

This  is  what  was  done  in  our  Saviour's  case  when  he  was 
brought  before  Annas,  and  I  think  that  I  know  many  who  treat 
him,  at  this  time,  quite  as  badly.  They  ask  questions  about  him, 
and  make  enquiries  concerning  him ;  but  they  do  not  do  it  honestly 
and  sincerely,  or  according  to  the  rules  of  justice.  You  know  how 
captious  unbelievers  often  are,  how  they  pick  up  any  misquoted 
text,  or  half  ^  text  rent  from  its  connection,  and  say  that  they  are 
enquiring  about  Christ,  when  they  are  not  doing  it  either  judicially 
or  as  they  would  wish  to  be  questioned  were  they  themselves  under 
examination.  I  fear  that  the  bulk  of  those,  who  cavil  at  the  faith 
of  Christ,  do  it  not  as  honest  men,  and  not  as  they  would  wish  to 
have  their  own  characters  investigated.  The  last  book  which  some 
of  them  think  of  reading  is  the  New  Testament,  and  the  last  thing 
that  they  try  to  understand  is  Christ's  true  character ;  and  one  of 
the  last  things  that  they  will  ever  listen  to  is  a  full  and  fair  state- 
ment of  what  his  gospel  really  is.  Still,  to  this  day,  the  representa- 
tives of  Annas  are  here,  and  there,  and  almost  everywhere,  question- 
ing the  followers  of  Christ,  with  the  design  of  finding  out  something 
to  jeer  at,  something  which  may  be  hawked  about  as  a  discrepancy, 
or  held  up  as  obsolete,  and  inconsistent  with  the  spirit  of  this 
wonderful  century,  of  which  I  hear  so  often  that  I  am  utterly  sick 
of  it,  and  long  for  the  time  when  the  nineteenth  century  shall  go 
down  to  its  ignoble  grave. 

Next,  this  questioning  of  Christ  was  one-sided :  "  the  high  priest 
then  asked  Jesus  of  his  disciples,  and  of  his  doctrine."  Why  did 
he  not  ask  him  about  himself, — who  and  what  he  was,  and  enquire 
specially  conceming  his  miracles,  and  his  whole  course  of  life  ?  Why 
did  not  Annas  enquire,  "Didst  thou  raise  the  dead?  Didst  thou 
open  blind  eyes?  Didst  thou  heal  the  lepers?  Didst  thou  go  about 
doing  good  ? "  Oh,  no !  there  was  no  question  about  any  such 
things ;  they  were  all  passed  over  as  of  no  importance. 

The  questions  began  with  the  weakest  point  of  all,  or  that  which 
men  have  often  regarded  as  the  weakest ;  he  "  asked  Jesus  of  his 
disciples."  Can  a  leader  help  the  follies  and  weaknesses  of  his 
followers?  I  suppose  Annas  put  his  question  thus,  "  Where  are  your 
disciples? "  Ah !  there  was  Peter  down  there  in  the  hall,  but  Christ 
could  not  call  him  up  to  witness  for  him ;  John  was  probably  some- 
where in  the  background,  but  the  rest  had  forsaken  their  Lord,  and 


CHRIST     BEFORE     ANNAS.  233 

:fled.  Annas  no  doubt  asked,  "  Wko  are  these  disciples  of  thine? 
Where  didst  thou  pick  them  up?"  I  daresay  he  knew  that  they 
were  men  of  Gralilee,  mostly  plain  fishermen,  and  he  meant  to  cast 
-a  slur  upon  Christ  o-n  that  account.  If  he  had  known  more  about 
those  disciples,  he  might  have  put  a  great  many  questions  which 
would  have  reflected  but  little  honour  upon  the  religion  of  Jesus. 

This  is  just  as  men  do  now,  they  ask  concerning  Christ's  disciples. 
I  do  not  deny  that  it  is  quite  fair  to  enquire  what  is  the  influence 
of  Christianity  upon  the  men  who  believe  it ;  but,  oftentimes,  that 
one  point  is  thrust  so  prominently  into  the  front  that  the  wonders 
which  Christ  himself  wrought  are  thrown  into  the  background,  and 
the  investigation  thus  becomes  one-sided.  We  are  quite  willing 
that  Christ  himself,  and  his  work,  all  that  has  been,  all  that,  is  to 
be,  all  his  designs  and  purposes,  should  be  examined ;  but,  for  the 
most  part,  men  search  for  that  which  they  think  to  be  the  weakest 
point  of  assault,  and  they  say,  "  Look  at  So-and-so,  one  of  Christ's 
disciples;  and  look  at  So-and-so,  one  of  his  ministers.  See  what 
divisions  there  are  in  the  churches;"  and  so  forth.  Yes;  but, 
surely,  if  Christ  be  examined  at  all,  he  deserves  to  have  a  full  and 
fair  examination,  it  should  not  be  upon  one  point  alone.  Blessed 
be  his  name,  it  matters  not  upon  what  point  he  is  examined,  he 
always  has  his  answer  ready,  and  a  glorious  one  it  is.  If  men  were 
really  willing  to  know  the  truth,  they  would  take  an  all-round 
view  of  him,  and  look  at  him  from  this  point  and  from  that,  and 
then  judge  him. 

Further,  this  examination  was  very  disorderly,  for  the  high  priest 
asked  Christ  "  of  his  disciples,  and  of  his  doctrine."  Now,  logically, 
the  enquiry  should  have  been  first  concerning  his  doctrine,  and  then 
with  respect  to  his  disciples, — ^first  as  to  his  teaching,  and  then  as 
to  the  people  influenced  by  it.  But  men  like  Annas  put  their 
questions  anyhow, — upside  down,  the  first  last  and  the  last  first,—- 
so  that  they  may  secure  some  accusation  against  Christ.  Now,  if 
any  man  will  sit  down  quietly,  and  really  study  the  life,  and 
character,  and  teaching  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  we  shall  be  delighted 
to  hear  what  he  has  to  say  about  it ;  but  let  him  study  it  in  due 
order.  Let  him  not  pick  out  this,  and  leave  out  that,  and  put 
everything  out  of  gear,  so  as  to  make  a  monster  of  him.  Let  him 
be  looked  at  after  the  same  manner  as  one  would  look  at  any  other 
religious  teacher,  or  as  we  might  examine  the  character  of  any  man 
brought  before  a  court  of  law.  I  ask  those,  if  there  be  any  siuch 
now  present,  who  have  spoken  harshly  of  our  blessed  Lord  and 
Master,  to  do  themselves  the  justice,  and  to  do  Christ  the  justice, 
to  adopt  another  course,  and  to  examine  him  as  they  would  wish  to 
be  examined  themselves,  if  their  character  and  their  designs  were 
called  in  question. 

Annas  did  not  so,  for  his  examination  of  Christ  was  concerniiig 
his  disciples  and  his  doctrine.  With  regard  to  his  disciples,  our 
Master  said  nothing.  He  had  been  saying  much  about  them  to 
his  Father,  and,  in  his  almighty  love  and  wisdom,  he  could  have 
said  much,  there  and  then,  concerning  his  disciples,  if  he  had 
chosen  to  do  so ;  but  he  did  not.  and  therein  he  proved  his  wisdom. 


234  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

All  through  the  Scriptures,  we  find  comparatively  little  said  con 
ceming  Grod's  people.  The  record  is  mostly  of  their  faults  and 
their  failings.  The  reason  for  that  is  that  this  is  not  the  day  of 
their  manifestation.  That  day  comes  on  apace ;  and,  "  when  he 
ahall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  him;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is." 
"  Then  shall  the  righteo-us  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom 
of  their  Father."  Annaa  thought  that  Christ's  followers  were  a 
set  of  fanatics, — ignorant,  unskilled,  worthless  people,  the  lower 
orders.  The  catacombs  tell  us,  as  we  read  the  rude  inscriptions 
there,  how  few  of  those  godly  folk,  of  whom  the  world  was  not 
worthy,  were  men  of  education;  the  most  of  them  were  evidently 
plain,  humble,  common  j>eople.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  no 
great  reverence  for  earthly  rank  or  grandeur ;  he  loves  the  man, 
but  cares  little  for  the  garb  he  wears;  and  of  the  poorest  saints 
it  is  true  that  "  he  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren." 

It  is  a  mercy  for  us,  who  are  on  Christ's  side,  and  who  have  been 
despised  in  consequence,  that,  in  the  resurrection,  there  will  also 
be  a  resurrection  of  reputations  as  well  as  of  bodiea  There  will  be  a 
bestowal  of  honour  that  has  been  denied  here,  and  of  credit  that 
has  been  refused  on  the  earth.  G-od  has  said  it,  so  it  must  be  true, 
"  Light  is  sown  for  the  righteous,"  and  their  glad  harvest  time  shall 
surely  come ;  and  then  the  glory  will  for  ever  blot  out  the  shame  and 
derision  which  may  have  been  poured  upon  the  faithful  for  the  sake 
of  Jesus  Christ  their  Lord  and  Master.  As  yet,  we  will  not  ask  him 
concerning  his  disciples;  but  that  is  the  point  that  the  adversary 
harps  upon.  Therefore,  O  ye  disciples  of  Jesus,  watch  and  pray, 
and  seek  to  be  like  your  Master!  Pray  to  be  kept  from  the 
evil  which  is  in  the  world;  and,  as  for  the  rest,  if  men  despise 
you,  count  that  as  part  of  the  bargain  upon  which  you  have  entered, 
a  bargain  which  shall,  in  due  season,  fill  you  with  bliss  eternal. 

Annas  also  asked  Christ  concerning  his  doctrine, — what  it  was 
that  he  taught  to  those  who  listened  to  him.  I  will  not  go  into 
that  matter,  for  I  want  to  speak  at  some  length  upon  the  answer 
which  Christ  gave  to  Annas.  He  first  protested  that  it  was  not  fair 
for  him  to  be  thus  questioned  in  private  as  to  what  he  had  said  in 
public.  The  proper  thing  was  to  ask  those  who  had  heard  him, 
"  for,"  said  he,  " '  I  spake  openly  to  the  world ;  I  ever  taught  in  the 
synagogue,  and  in  the  temple.'  I  chose  the  most  public  places  for 
my  teaching;  I  had  no  hole-and-corner  gatherings,  no  little  con- 
venticle in  which  I  urged  my  followers  to  sedition.  No,  '  I  spake 
openly.'  The  heavens  heard  me.  On  the  side  of  the  hills,  I  pro- 
claimed my  message.  By  the  seashore,  I  spake  to  all  who  gathered 
around  me;  multitudes  were  often  present  at  my  services;  they 
know  what  I  said,  and  they  could  bear  witness  concerning  it  if  they 
were  asked  to  do  so." 

There  was  great  openness  about  Christ.  There  was  an  utter 
absence  of  anything  like  the  Jesuitical  plan  of  saying 
one  thing  and  meaning  another,  or  using  expressions  that 
had  a,  double  meaning  in  them.  It  is  true  t-hat  our  Lord  did 
not  explain  to  the  great  mass  of  the  people  all  that  he  said  to 
them,  for  they  were  so  stupid  that  they  would  not  receive  it;  but. 


CHRIST     BEFORE     ANNAS.  235 

at  the  same  time,  there  was  nothing  that  hia  hearers  really  needed 
to  know  tha.t  he  concealed  from  them.  He  carried  his  heart  where 
all  might  read  it;  and  even  in  his  common  teaching  to  the 
multitude,  there  was,  if  they  had  but  had  eyes  to  see  it,  all  that  he 
taught  to  hia  disciples  in  the  most  private  place.  There  was  no- 
wish,  on  his  part,  to  keep  back  any  truth  that  ought  to  be  made 
known  to  those  who  gathered  to  hear  him. 

I  have  heaxd  it  said  that  there  are  certain  truths  in  God's  Word 
which  it  is  better  for  us  not  to  preach.  It  is  admitted  that  they  are 
true,  but  it  is  alleged  that  they  are  not  edifying.  I  will  not  agree 
to  any  such  plan;  this  is  just  going  back  to  old  Rome's  method. 
Whatsoever  it  has  seemed  good  to  God's  wisdom  to  reveal,  it  is  wise 
for  God^s  servants  to  proclaim.  Who  are  we  that  we  are  to  judge 
between  this  truth  and  that,  and  to  say  that  this  we  are  to  preach,, 
and  that  we  are  to  withhold  ?  This  system  would  make  us  to  be, 
after  all,  the  judges  of  what  Christ's  gospel  is  to  be.  It  must  not 
be  so  among  us,  beloved ;  that  would  be  assuming  a  responsibility 
which  we  are  quite  unable  to  bear.  I  believe  that  it  is  because  the 
doctrines  of  grace  have  been  too  much  kept  from  the  pulpit,  that 
the  pews  are  getting  so  empty.  Leave  the  doctrines  of  grace  out  of 
the  preaching,  and  you  have  left  the  marrow  and  fatness  out  of  it. 
What  is  there  to  make  the  people  rush  to  your  houses  of  prayer, 
and  crowd  them,  if  there  be  no  preaching  of  the  election  of  grace, — 
no  declaration  of  pai^ticular  redemption,  and  effectual  calling, — 
no  proclamation  of  the  blessed  final  perseverance  of  the  saints  ?  If 
you  leave  these  glorious  truths  out  of  your  preaching,  you  have 
put  on  the  table  nothing  but  the  horseradish  and  the  parsley,  but 
the  joint  of  meat  is  conspicuous  by  its  absence. 

Some  people  say  that  these  things  are  to  be  talked  ol  among  the 
saints,  but  must  not  be  preached  to  sinners.  Oh,,  say  not  so !  Every 
doctrine  of  God'sf  Word  is  good;  every  truth  in  the  Bible  is 
precious ;  and  the  omission  of  any  one  part  of  it,  wilfully,  and  with 
design,  may  so  impair  the  whole  of  our  testimony  that,  instead  of 
being,  like  Hermon,  wet  with  dew,  our  ministry  will  be  like  the 
accursed  Gilboa,  upon  which  no  dew  descended.  Whatsoever  the 
Lord  has  taught  to  you  by  his  Spirit,  my  brother,  tell  to  others. 
According  as  you  have  opportunity,  reveal  to  theim  what  God  has 
revealed  to  you  ;  remember  how  Christ  himself  charged  his  disciples, 
"What  I  tell  you  in  darkness,  that  speak  ye  in  light;  what  ye 
hear  in  the  ear,  that  preach  ye  upon  the  housetops."  And,  to-day, 
the  sublime  and  majestic  truths,  which  cluster  around  the 
sovereignty  of  God,  are  as  much  to  be  proclaimed  as  the  softer,  and 
tenderer,  and  apparently  more  winsome  words  which  tell  of  infinite 
mercy  to  the  chief  of  sinners.  All  truths  are  to  be  preached  in  due 
proportion ;  there  is  a  time  for  this,  and  a  time  for  that,  and  none 
must  be  omitted.  There  is  a  particular  stone  which  is  to  be  the 
key  of  the  arch,  and  another  which  is  to  go  on  this  side,  another 
lower  down,  and  yet  another  lower  down  still,  and  the  omitting  of 
any  one  stone,  because  it  does  not  happen  to  be  of  what  we  reckon 
to  be  the  orthodox  shape  for  usefulness,  may  spoil  the  whole  bridge, 
and  it  may  come  down  with  a  crash.     Oh,  that  we  may  so  build 


-236  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

•in  our  teaching,  thab  our  building  will  lastb  throughout  eternity! 
At  the  end  of  our  ministry,  may  we  be  able  to  aay,  "  I  have  kept 
back  nothing ;  all  that  Ohriat  taught  to  me,  I  have  taught  to  others, 
and  30  I  have  made  full  proof  of  my  ministry."  Christ  was  able  to 
appeal  to  those  who  had  heard  him,  and  who  could  tell  what  his 
testimony  had  been.  May  G-od  give  us  grace  to  imitate  him  in 
this  respect! 

Our  blessed  Lord  answered  Annas  by  referring  him  to  his  public 
life  and  teaching.  There  was  no  need  for  any  other  defence.  We 
cannot  imagine  anything  more  convincing.  No  eloquence  of  speech, 
or  forcibleness  of  argument,  could  have  so  completely  put  the  wily 
adversary  out  of  the  field.  The  inquisitor  himself  was  so  ashamed, 
and  for  the  moment  so  confounded^  that  a  zealous  official  struck 
Jesus  with  his  open  hand.  The  innocent,  unabashed  face  of  the 
persecuted  Nazarene  was  thus  smitten  because  his  simple  defence 
had  silenced  his  cruel  opponent.  What  a  wonderful  answer  it  was ! 
How  it  commends  his  whole  character  to  us,  and  makes  him  seem 
to  be  even  more  truly  majestic  than  ever! 

I  am  sure  there  is  not  one  of  us  who  would  dare  to  say  of  our 
lives,  at  least  not  so  unreservedly,  what  Jesus  could  truly  say  of 
his.  Our  Lord's  life  was  emphatically  lived  among  men.  He  was 
•no  recluse.  From  early  morning  to  the  last  thing  at  night,  he  was 
associated  with  men ;  and,  therefore,  all  that  he  did  was  done  before 
the  eyes  of  men.  That  "  fierce  light  that  beats  about  a  throne " 
ever  beat  about  him.  He  was  constantly  being  watched ;  every 
word  that  he  uttered  was  remembered.  Again  and  again,  his 
enemies  endeavoured  to  catch  him  in  his  speech.  He  could  scarcely 
bo  allowed  a  moment's  leisure,  when  he  might  unbosom  himself, 
like  one  at  his  own  fireside.  He  was  always  before  the  Argus-eyes 
^f  the  ungodly  world,  who  would  see  faults  where  there  were  none, 
-and  who,  if  there  had  been  the  least  speck  of  blame,  would  have 
magnified  it,  and  published  it  to  the  ends  of  the  earth. 

Moreover,  our  Lord  was  by  no  means  a  silent  man.  He  spoke, 
and  spoke  often.  Witness  the  Books  that  we  have  by  way  of 
Tecord  of  that  quiet  life  of  his ;  and  the  things  that  he  said  and  did 
were  far  more  than  those  that  are  recorded,  for  John  says,  "  And 
there  are  also  many  other  things  which  Jesus  did,  the  which, 
if  they  should  be  written  every  one,  I  suppose  that  even  the  world 
itself  could  not  contain  the  books  that  should  be  written."  Yet 
there  was  never  any  act  or  word  of  Christ's  in  which  friend  or  foe 
could  find  a  single  speck  of  sin  at  all.  He  could  even  challenge 
Satan  himself  to  find  a  flaw  in  his  life :  "  The  prince  of  this  world 
cometh,  and  hath  nothing  in  me." 

His  speech,  too,  was  not  only  very  frequent,  but  it  was  also 
very  plain.  He  spoke  ao  simply  that  even  little  children  could 
understand  him ;  I  should  think  there  was  never  one  person  in  his 
audience  who  could  truthfully  say  that  he  could  not  comprehend 
what  the  Preacher  meant ;  and  yet,  though  they  could  all  tell 
what  his  meaning  was,  they  could  not  honestly  find  fault  with  that 
aneaning. 

Another  thing  that  is  worthy  of  observation  is  that,  frequently, 


CHRIST     BEFORE     ANNAS.  237" 

he  spoke  under  great  provocation;  yet  he  never  lost  his  temper,, 
nor  spoke  unadvisedly  with  his  lips.  You  and  I  know  that,  if  we 
ever  lose  our  temper,  we  are  apt  to  say  all  manner  of  unwise,  and 
foolish,  and  wicked  words ;  but  our  blessed  Saviour  never  sinned  in 
that  way,  however  great  was  the  provocation  to  which  ho  was  sub- 
jected. He  was  also  often  misrepresented;  and  our  tendency  is, 
when  men  speak  falsely  of  us,  to  go  beyond  the  bounds  of  truth  or 
prudence  in  replying  to  them.  Our  Lord  Jesus  never  did  that. 
The  pendulum  of  the  great  clock  of  his  wonderful  life  never  swung 
too  far  either  one  way  or  the  other.  You  have  not  to  correct  any 
one  saying  of  the  Saviour  by  what  he  said  at  some  other  time; 
all  his  utterances  are  absolute  truth,  whether  taken  separately, 
or  taken  together.  Even  th©  false  witnesses,  who  were  bribed  to 
bring  accusations  against  him,  altogether  failed  to  find  anything, 
that  could  be  laid  to  his  charge. 

It  must  not  be  forgotten,  also,  that  our  blessed  Master  frequently 
spoke  in  the  midst  of  turmoil.  He  did  not  always  ha,ve  such  a. 
quiet,  orderly  assembly  as  we  have  when  we  gather  for  public 
worship;  but  he  had  to  speak,  often,  amidst  the  clamour  of  the 
angry  mob,  and  the  opposition  and  even  the  maledictions  of  those 
who  hated. him.  Yet,  even  under  these  trying  circumstances,  he 
spoke  so  that  he  could  fearlessly  challenge  them  all  to  find  fault 
with  anything  that  he  had  said  in  their  hearing.  Our  Lord  had 
spoken  to  all  sorts  of  characters; — bad,  good,  and  indifferent;  — 
and  there  was  especially  one,  who  betrayed  him,  who  had  heard 
many  of  his  most  secret  speeches.  Judas  had  been  with  him  in 
his  retirement,  and  had  listened  to  his  words  when  only  the  favoured 
few  had  been  present,  yet  there  was  no  single  sentence  or  syllabi© 
that  even  he  could  plead  in  extenuation  of  his  great  crime  in 
betraying  his  Lord. 

II.  I  have  spoken,  at  such  length,  upon  this  first  part  of  my 
subject  that  I  have  very  little  time  left  for  the  second  portion, 
namely,  our  Lord  Jesus  wrongfully  smitten  :  "  When  he  had 
thus  spoken,  one  of  the  officers  which  stood  by  struck  Jesus  with 
the  palm  of  his  hand,  saying,  Answerest  thou  th©  high  priest  sol" 

His  answer  was  a  very  simple  one,  and  a  very  proper  one  in  all 
respects;  yet,  at  the  same  time,  it  must  have  been  a  very  stinging 
one  if  Annas  was  the  kind  of  man  that  I  think  he  was,  for  our 
Saviour  seemed  to  say,  (you  may  read  it  between  the  lines,)  "  /  am  not 
plotting  in  secret  against  another  man's  life.  /  have  not  talked  with 
another  man  with  th©  object  of  entangling  him  in  his  speech.  / 
have  not  been  a  conspirator,  but  I  have  spoken  publicly  in  the 
synagogues,  and  taught  in  the  temple,  in  th©  very  centre  of  the 
place  of  concourse;  but  'in  secret  have  I  said  nothing.'"  This, 
must  have  been  a  very  sharp  rebuke  to  Annas,  if  any  conscience 
was  left  in  the  wretched  man;  so  one  of  the  abjects  that  stood 
around  the  hierarch  smote  Christ,  and  said,  "  Answerest  thou  the- 
high  priest  so?  " 

Now,  in  the  first  instance,  Christ  met  with  the  opposition  of  so- 
called  enquiry ;  but  here  he  had  the  vulgar  opposition  of  persecu- 
tion.    Alas!  there  are  still  many,  who  never  enquire  about  Christ 


238  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

at  all,  but  they  decide  against  him,  and  then  they  begin  to  persecute 
wife,  child,  friend,  neighbour,  or  whoever  it  may  b©  that  is  on 
Christ's  side;  and,  often,  they  strike  him  as  this  officer  struck  our 
Lord.  This  was  a  most  cowardly  act,  for  Christ  was  bound  and 
helpless.  Yet  we  have  the  same  sort  of  conduct  in  our  own  day. 
It  does  seem  to  me  a  wretched  thing  that,  if  some  people  choose  to 
go  through  the  streets  singing  hymns,  they  shall  be  pelted  with 
stones  and  mud  while  their  own  hands  are  bound.  They  cannot 
turn  round,  and  fight  their  aagailants,  for  their  Christianity  has  tied 
their  hands^  and  the  cruel  mobs  know  it.  If  these  men  want  to 
^ght,  why  do  they  not  find  some  fellows,  like  themselves,  walking 
through  the  streets,  and  attack  them,  and  then  see  what  will  come 
of  it?  They  are  afraid  to  do  that;  for,  to  this  day,  persecution  is 
always  against  men  whose  hands  are  bound.  If  our  religion  taught 
us  to  answer  sharply,  and  to  give  cuff  for  cuff,  and  kick  for  kick, 
it  would  be  all  fair;  but  when  we  are  commanded  not  to  resist  evil, 
and  our  very  faithfulness  to  Christ  prevents  our  replying  to  the 
foul  language  that  is  used  against  us,  it  is  brutally  cruel  that  we 
should  be  thus  persecuted.  Bead  all  history  through,  and  see 
-whether  some  have  not  degraded  themselves  utterly  beneath  con- 
tempt by  burning  men  who  would  not  have  touched  a  hair  of  their 
heads, — and  putting  to  death  poor  men  and  women  who  could  not 
have  done  them  any  injury,  and  who  never  wished  to  do  so.  That 
is  the  story  of  Christ  and  his  followers  all  the  way  through, — ^first, 
to  be  questioned  by  people  who  do  not  want  to  know  the  truth ; 
and,  next,  to  be  persecuted  by  people  who  really  have  not  anything 
to  say  against  them. 

To  the  man  who  thus  wrongfully  smote  him,  our  Saviour  said, 
"  If  I  have  spoken  evil,  bear  witness  of  the  evil :  but  if  well,  why 
smitest  thou  me?  "  We  also  may  say  to  those  who  wantonly  smite 
Christ's  followers,  "Why  do  ye  so?  Has  Christianity  done  any 
harm  to  manhood  in  general,  or  to  you  in  particular? "  What  has 
been  the  force  that  has  broken  the  power  of  tyrants?  At  the 
bottom,  in  many  countries,  it  has  been  the  Word  of  G-od  that  has 
made  men  free.  In  our  own  times,  what  ended  the  slave  trade, 
and  set  the  negro  free?  What  is  it  that,  to-day,  is  the  most  potent 
force  against  the  drunkenness  of  our  land?  Surely,  nothing  but 
the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  Have  we,  as  Christians,  any  aim,  in 
all  the  woHd,  of  which  anyone  can  accuse  us?  Are  we  doing 
mischief  to  our  fellow-men?  Bo  we  teach  drunkenness,  or  lust,  or 
oppression?  Do  you  hear  from  us  anything  about  robbing  you  of 
your  birthright,  or  injuring  you  in  any  way  whatsoever?  Nay,  you 
know  that  it  is  not  so.  Our  war  is  for  peace.  Every  blow  that 
we  strike  is  against  blows.  If  we  have  to  denounce  anything,  we 
do  most  of  all  denounce  denunciation ;  and  if  we  are  bitter  at  all, 
most  of  all  are  we  bitter  against  bitterness,  and  envy,  and  malice, 
and  all  uncharitableness. 

Oh,  that  we  could  always  give  to  our  persecutors  such  an  answer 
as  our  blessed  Master  gave  to  the  officer  who  smote  him,  "If  I 
have  spoken  evil,  bear  witness  of  the  evil :  but  if  well,  why  smitest 
thou  me?"     There  are  times  when  we  dare  not  say  that,  but  we 


CHRIST     BEFORE     ANNAS,  289 

would  rather  say,  "  If  I  have  spoken  evil,  do  not  recall  it,  do  not 
bring  it  to  my  recollection.  If  I  have  spoken  evil,  try  to  forget  it ; 
or,  at  least,  if  thou  rememberest  it,  repeat  it  not  to  another,  for  I 
a-m  afraid  that  I  may  ha.v0  said  much  that  might  stain  my  profes- 
sion, and  grievei  my  Grod."  I  think  that,  if  we  had  our  choice  as  to 
whether  we  would  be  smitten  on  the  face,  or  have  our  own  words 
brought  up  as  witnesses  against  us,  we  should  each  one  say,  "  If  I 
have  spoken  evil,  do  not  bear  witness  of  the  ©vil;  but  much  rather 
smit€'  me  than  bear  witness  against  me." 

Yet  it  ia  not  always  so;  there  are  times  when,  in  conscious 
integrity,  or  concerning  certain  words  or  actsi  of  ours,  we  can 
challenge  any  man  to  find  fault  with  us;  but,  taking  the  whole 
range  of  our  lives,  in  public  and  in  private,  most  of  us  would  be 
loth  to  ask  for  such  a  test  as  that.  When  our  adversaries  persecute 
U3,  we  might  say  to  them,,  "  Ah !  did  you  really  know  all  that  we 
have  been,  you  would  not  so  much  persecute  us  for  our  goodness, 
but  punish  us  for  our  badness."  When  I  have  been  slandered,  I 
have  often  said  to  myself,  "Ah!  they  have  spoken  a  lie  against 
me ;  but,  if  they  had  known  me  better,  they  might  have  said  quite 
as  bad  a  thing  as  that,  and  yet  have  only  spoken  what  was  true." 
There  is  not  one  man  living,  who  is  in  his  right  senses,  who  would 
like  to  have  all  hia  thoughts  written  down,  or  all  his  words  and 
acts  recorded.  We  have  often  wished  that  half  our  words  could  be 
blotted  out  with  our  teaors,  and  then  the  other  half  would  have 
to  be  washed  with  blood  before  we  could  ourselves  endure  it,  and 
much  less  could  our  Lord  endure  it  without  the  application  of  that 
precious  blood  of  Jesus,  that  cleanseth  from  all  sin. 

Now,  I  think  that  all  this,  of  which  I  have  been  speaking  to 
you,  ought  very  much  to  endear  the  Master  to  us ;  and  it  will  do 
so  if  we  remember  and  believe  that  God  "  hath  made  him  to  be 
sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteous- 
ness of  God  in  him."  Here  is  a  Lamb  that  is  fit  for  sacrifice. 
The  high  priest  and  all  his  officers  may  examine  it  as  much  asi  they 
please ;  they  will  find  that  it  is  perfect.  There  is  not  a  blemish  in 
it.  There  is  no  redundance,  and  there  is  no  omission.  There  ia 
neither  speck  nor  spot  of  sin  in  Christ;  we  cannot  find  any  fault 
in  him.  Whether  we  look  at  him  within  or  without,  in  his  youth, 
or  in  his  childhood,  or  in  his  manhood, — in  his  life  or  in  his  death, — 
in  his  speech  or  in  his  silence,  in  his  feelings,  or  in  his  tlionghts,  or 
in  his  acts, — he  is  good,  and  only  good,  and  blessed  be  his  holy 
name  for  ever  and  ever!     Amen. 


Hymns  from  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book  "—289,  274,  268. 

(In  closing  his  discourse,  Mr.  Spurgeon  intimated  that  he  had 
mtended  also  to  speak,  in  that  sermon,  upon  Annas  sending  Christ 
bound  to  Caiaphas  ;  but  that  he  had  been  obliged,  through  want  of 
time,  and  the  importance  of  that  topic,  to  leave  it  to  be  dealt  with  in 
another  discourse.  This  will  be  the  one  to  be  published  for  reading 
on  Lord's-day,  March  15th,  and  will  be  entitled  "  Christ  in  Bonds.") 


CHRIST  IN    BONDS. 


%   $^n»oi( 


Intended  fob  Reading  on  Lord's-day,  Mabch  15th,  1903, 
delivered  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Thursday  Evening^  November  2nd,  1882. 


"  Now  Annas  had  sent  him  hound  unto  Caiaphas  the  high  priest."  (The  Revised 
Version  says,  "Annas  therefore  sent  him  hound  unto  Caiaphas  the  high  priest. ") — 
John  xviii.  24. 

Our  only  sfubject,  on  this  occasion,  is,  Christ  in  Bonds, — the  Son 
of  God  as  an  Ambassador  in  bonds,  a  King  in  chains, — the  God-man 
sent,  boundj  to  take  his  trial  in  the  court  of  the  high  priest, 
Caiaphas. 

It  seems  to  me  that  this  binding  of  our  Lord  shows,  first,  some- 
thing of  fear  on  the  part  of  his  captors.  Why  did  they  bind  him? 
He  would  not  attack  them ;  he  had  no  desire  to  escape  out  of  their 
hands;  yet,  probably,  they  thought  that  he  might  break  loose  from 
them,  or  in  some  way  outwit  them.  Alas!  that  men  should  ever 
have  been  thus  afraid  of  him  who  came  alone  from  heaven,  neither 
bearing  arms  nor  wearing  armour, — who  came  to  injure  none,  nor 
even  to  protect  himself  against  the  hurts  that  any  might  inflict 
upon  him, — at  first,  lying  as  a  ba,be  in  a  manger,  and  all  his  life 
long  exhibiting  rather  the  weakness  of  manhood  than  its  strength ; 
yet  were  his  adversaries  often  afraid  of  him.  So  is  it  still;  there 
is  a  latent,  secret  conviction,  in  the  minds  of  men,  that  the  Christ 
is  greater  than  he  aeems  to  be.  Even  when  they  attack  him  with 
their  infidel  weapons,  they  never  seem  to  be  satisfied  with  their  own 
arguments,  and  they  are  continually  seeking  fresh  ones.  To  this  very 
day,  the  ungodly  are  afraid  of  Christ,  and,  often,  their  raging 
against  him  resembles  the  noise  made  by  the  boy  who,  when 
Taurrying  through  the  graveyard,  whistles  to  keep  his  courage  up. 

They  also  bound  Christ,  no  doubt,  to  increase  the  shame  of  his 
condition.  Our  Saviour  said  to  those  who  came  to  arrest  him  in 
the  garden,  "  Are  ye  come  out  as  against  a  thief,  with  swords,  and 
with  staves  to  take  me  ?  "  And  now  they  bound  him  fast  as  though 
he  were  a  thief, — perhaps  tied  his  hands,  with  tight  cords,  behind 
iia  back,  to  show  that  they  regarded  him  as  a  felon,  and  that  thev 
No.  2,822.  Ig      " 


242  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

were  not  taking  him  into  a  civil  oourb  where  some  case  of  law 
might  be  pending,  but  they  already  condemned  him  by  the  very 
act  of  binding  him.  They  treated  him  as  if  he  were  already 
sentenced,  and  were  not  worthy  to  stand,  a  free  man,  and  plead  for 
himself  before  the  judgmentrseat.  Oh,  what  a  ahanie  that  the 
Lord  of  life  and  glory  should  be  bound,— that  he,  whom  angels 
delight  to  worship,  that  he  who  is  the  very  sun  of  their  heaven, 
should  yet  be  bound  as  though  he  were  a  malefactor,  and  be  sent 
away  to  be  tried  for  his  life !  «    ,      «     . 

We  may  also  look  at  this  matter  of  the  binding  of  the  Saviour 
as  an  increase  of  his  pain.     I  suppose  none  of  you  have  ever  been 
bound  as  our  Lord  was  at  that  time;   if  you  had  been,  you  would 
know   the   discomfort   and   pain  which  must   attend   such   axjtion. 
John  tells  us  that,  in  Gethsemane,  "  the  band  and  the  captain  and 
officers  of  the  Jews  took  Jesus,  and  bound  hiuL"     He  had  scarcely 
risen  from  his  knees,   and  the  bloody  sweat  was  like  fresh   ruby 
dew  upon  him,  yet  these  men  "  bound  him,  and  led  him  away  to 
Annas  first."     I  do  not  find  any  indication  that  his  bonds  were 
unloosed  by  Annas,  or  that  he  had  even  a  moment's  relief  or  relaxa- 
tion granted  to  him;   but,  with  the  cruel  ropes  still  binding  him 
fast    he  was  sent  across  the  great  hall  into  the  other  wing  of  the 
paiace  in  which  Caia^has  resided :    "  Annas  sent  him  bound  unto 
Caiaphaa."     Then  this,  surely,  must  have  been  done  in  very  wanton- 
ness of  malice.     I  have  abready  said   that  they  seemed  to  have 
some  sort  of  fear  Idiat  their  captive  would,  after  all,  escape  from 
fchem;   yet  tiiey  might,   readily  enough,   have  banished  that  fear 
from   their   minds.     There   was   no  need   to   bind   Him.     O   cruel 
pOTsecutors,  look  into  his  face!     If  you  are  resolved  to  lead  him 
away  to  his  death,   you  may  lead  him  like  a  sheep  goes  to  the 
slaughter.     He  will   not   even    open   his   mouth    to   upbraid  you. 
There  was  no  need  to  put  any  bonds  upon  One  so  gentle  as  he  was. 
Out  of  very  wantonness,  I  say,  they  must  have  done  it,  that  they 
mi^ht  express  their  hatred  by  every  conceivable  method,  both  in 
the  little  details,  and  in  the  great  end  at  which  they  were  aiming 
all  the  while,  namely,  to  put  him  to  a  most  painful  death.     Ah, 
me'  how   shamefully   was   our  bleesed  Master  maltreated   m  this 
inhospitable  world!     Men  had  often  been  regicides,  and  we  need 
not  wonder  at  that  when  we  think  what  tyrants  they  were  who  were 
thus  slain;   but  these  men  were  turning  into  deacides,  putting  to 
death  the  Son  of  God  himself;  and,  ere  they  did  it,  they  heaped 
upon  him  every  mark  of  scorn  and  dishonour  that  was  possible,  that 
they  miffht  cause  him  to  die  with  opprobrium  as  well  as  with  pam. 

You  who  love  your  Saviour,  will  think,  with  tender  sympathy, 
of  how  he  was  bound  by  these  wicked  men;  my  special  object  is, 
to  try  to  find  out  what  are  the  lessons  which  we  may  learn  from 
the  bonds  of  Christ. 

L  The  first  lesson  is  this.  From  the  binding  of  ourdear 
Redeemer,  I  learn  a  lesson  concerning  sin.     The  bonds  of  CJhrist 

TEACH  us  WHAT  SIN  WOULD  DO  TO  GoD  IF  IT  COULD. 

The  unregenerate  heart,  in  its  enmity  against  God,  would  treat 
him  exactly  as  the  men  of  nineteen  hundred  years  ago  served  the 


CHRIST    IN    BONDS.  243 

Son  of  God.  What  was  done  to  Jesus  is  just  what  man  would  do, 
if  he  could,  to  the  Lord  Grod  of  heaven  and  earth  himself.  "  What !  " 
say  you,  "  would  men  bind  God  ?  "  Ah,  sirs !  they  would  do  much 
more  than  that  if  they  could,  but  they  would  certainly  do  that. 
They  would  annihilate  God  if  they  could,  for  "  the  fool  hath  said 
in  his  heart,  No  God," — that  is  to  say,  "  No  God  for  me !  "  He 
would  kill  God  if  it  were  possible.  There  would  be  no  gladder 
news  to  many  men,  who  are  living  to-day,  than  for  them  to  be 
informed,  with  absolute  certainty,  that  there  was  no  God  at  all; 
all  their  fears  would  be  at  once  silenced  by  such  tidings.  As  for  us, 
who  love  and  trust  him,  all  our  joys  would  be  gone,  and  our  worst 
fears  would  be  realized,  if  G^d  were  gone ;  but,  as  for  the  ungodly, 
it  would  be  the  gladdest  news  that  ever  was  rung  out  from  church 
steeple  if  they  could  be  assured  that  God  was  dead.  They  would 
kill  him  if  they  could;  but,  as  they  cannot  kill  him,  they  seek  to 
bind  him. 

Observe  how  they  try  to  do  this  hy  denying  his  power.  There 
are  many  men,  who  say  that  they  believe  in  God,  yet  what  sort  of 
God  is  it  in  whom  they  believe?  It  is  a  QcoA.  who  is  fettered  by  his 
own  laws.  "  Here  is  the  world,"  they  say,  "  but  let  not  anyone 
suppose  that  God  has  anything  to  do  with  the  world."  They  seem 
to  have  a  theory  that,  somehow  or  other,  it  got  wound  up,  like  a 
great  clock,  and  it  has  been  going  on  ever  since.  God  has  not  even 
been  to  see  it ;  indeed,  the  probability  is  that  he  cannot  see.  Their 
god  does  not  see,  and  does  not  know  anything ;  he  is  not  the  living 
God.  They  pretend  to  pay  him  the  compliment  of  saying  that  there 
may  be  some  grea-t  first  cause;  they  do  not  know  even  that  for 
certain,  because  tbey  do  not  know  anything.  We  live  in  an  age 
in  which  the  man,  who  professes  to  be  a  learned  man,  calls  himself 
"  an  agnostic ", — a  Greek  word  which,  in  the  Latin,  signifies  "  an 
ignoramus."  That  is,  when  you  get  to  be  a  very  clever  man,  then 
you  become  an  ignoramus,  knowing  nothing  at  all.  Such  people  go 
crowing,  all  over  the  world,  that  they  do  not  know  anything  at  all ; 
— they  do  not  know  whether  there  is  any  God  at  all,  or  if  there  is 
a  God,  they  do  not  know  that  he  has  anything  to  do  with  the 
world.  They  gay  that  it  is  going  on  just  on  its  own  account.  God 
may  set  worlds  going  if  he  pleases,  but  he  has  nothing  to  do  with 
them  afterwards. 

Ah,  beloved !  but  the  truth  is,  that  God's  laws  are  simply  the  ways 
in  which  he  acts.  There  is  no  force  in  the  world  apart  from  God. 
All  the  potency  of  attraction  is  sdmply  because  God  still  lives,  and 
poura  his  energy  into  the  matter  that  attracts.  Every  moment, 
it  is  God  who  works  in  all  things  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of 
his  own  will.  Omnipotence  is,  in  fact,  the  source  of  all  the  potency 
that  there  is  in  the  universe.  God  is  everywhere ;  and,  instead  of 
being  banished  from  the  world,  and  the  world  going  on  without 
him,  if  God  were  not  here,  this  planet,  and  the  sun,  and  moon,  and 
stars,  would  retire  into  their  native  nothingness,  as  a  moment's 
foam  subsides  into  the  wave  that  bears  it,  and  is  gone  for  ever.  God 
alone  is.  All  the  rest — call  them  what  you  please, — are  appearances 
that  oome  out   of   his   ever-existing   power.     God   is.     The   other 


244  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

things  may  be  or  may  not  be ;  but  God  is.  Well  did  David  write, 
under  the  Spirit'a  inspiration,  "  God  hath  spoken  once ;  twice  have 
I  heard  this :  that  power  belongeth  unto  God."  But  that  is  not 
the  kind  of  God  that  the  ungodly  want ;  they  want  one  whose  hands 
they  can  bind  so  as  to  make  him  powerless. 

Especially  will  they  do  this  with  regard  to  providence.  "  Look," 
say  they ;  "  you  Christian  people  pray,  and  you  are  foolish  enough 
to  believe  that,  because  you  pray,  God  hears  you,  and  sends  you  the 
blessings  that  you  ask  for."  It  is  assumed  that  we  are  fools;  but, 
I  think,  it  is  a  mere  assumption.  Probably,  these  gentlemen,  who 
are  so  generous  in  disposing  of  their  epithets,  may  be  giving  away 
what  really  belongs  to  themselves.  We  are  fools;  so  they  say, — 
these  men  of  culture,  the  thinking  people;  at  least,  they  are  the 
people  who  call  themselves  by  tJbese  high-sounding  names,  and 
having  done  so,  then,  to  prove  that  their  culture  has  made  perfect 
gentlemen  of  them,  they  call  all  the  rest  of  us,  and  especially  all 
Christians,  fools.  Well,  we  are  not  anxious  to  contend  with  them 
as  to  that  matter^  and  we  are  quite  satisfied  to  take  the  position 
that  we  do  take,  and  to  be  called  fools,  because  we  believe  that  God 
does  hear  and  answer  our  petitions.  Even  when  these  people  are 
willing  to  own  that  there  is  a  God  in  providence  at  all,  he  is  hand- 
tied,  so  that  he  can  do  nothing.  Well,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned,  I 
would  as  soon  believe  in  a  god  made  out  of  the  mud  of  the  Ganges, 
or  in  the  fetish  of  the  Hottentot,  as  bow  my  knee  to  a  god  who 
could  not  hear,  and  could  not  answer  me. 

Some  unbelievers  talk  of  a  God  who  is  hamdbound  so  far  as  the 
punishment  of  sin  is  concerned.  "  Men  will  die  like  dogs ; "  so  some 
of  these  doggish  men  say.  "  God  will  not  punish  sin ; "  so  say  some 
sinners,  who  imagine  that  they  have  prepared  a  dunghill  for  thent- 
selves  to  fall  upon  whenever  God  shall  fling  them  out  of  window 
as  utterly  worthless.  They  imbibe  ideas  that  are  contrary  to  the 
truth  about  the  Most  High  in  order  that  they  may  be  able  to 
sin  with  impunity.  But,  whatever  they  may  think  or  say,  let  us 
rest  assured  that  there  is  a  God,  and  that  he  is  a  God  before  whom 
everyone  of  us  must  appear  to  give  an  a-ccount  of  the  deeds  done 
in  the  body,  whether  they  be  good  or  whether  they  be  evil.  We 
may  be  quite  certain  that,  although,  in  his  longsuffering,  he  may 
patiently  wait  a  while  before  punishing  iniquity,  yet  his  hand  ia 
not  bound,  and  he  will  lift  it  ere  long ;  and  when  he  raises  it  to 
smite  the  man  who  has  broken  his  laws,  he  will  do  it  so  effectually 
that  the  sinner  shall  know  that,  verily,  there  is  a  God  who  will  not 
pass  by  transgression,  or  wink  at  ain,  when  it  remains  unrepented. 
Let  us,  then,  be  ever  happy  to  bear  our  testimony  that  God  cannot 
be  bound,  but  let  us  always  expect  to  see  unconverted  men,  in  one 
way  or  another,  attempting  to  bind  the  hands  of  the  Most  High 
as  these  sinners  in  Jerusalem  bound  the  Christ  of  God. 

Some  people  think  that  God  ought  to  do  this,  and  he  ought  not 
to  do  that;  and  the  moment  you  begin  to  reason  with  them,  they 
do  not  refer  to  what  the  Scripture  says,  but  they  have  a  precon- 
ceived notion  as  to  what  ought  to  be  done  or  not  done.  That  is  to  say, 
you  would  tie  his  hands,  so  that  he  must  do  what  you  judge  to  be  right ; 


CHRIST    IN    BONDS.  245 

but,  if  he  judges  any  particular  course  to  be  right,  and  it  does  not 
meet  your  taste,  then,  straightway,  you  will  either  have  no  God  at  all, 
or  else  a  god  that  shall  be  handcuffed  by  your  reason,  and  held  in 
bonds  to  do  your  bidding.  In  the  person  of  our  blessed  Master 
brought  from  Gethsemane  with  his  hands  tightly  bound,  we  see 
an  exact  picture  of  what  wicked  men  would  always  do  with  God  if 
they  could,  and  what  they  actually  do  to  him,  spiritually,  in  their 
own  minds  and  hearts.  God  save  us  from  being  guilty  of  such  a 
sin  as  that !  Oh,  that  the  precious  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
may  cleanse  that  sin  away  if  it  lies  as  a  load  upon  the  conscience  of 
anyone  whom  I  am  now  addressing ! 

II.  Secondly,  we  have  here  a  lesson  of  love. 
Our  Lord  Jesus  was  sent  away,  bound,  by  Annaa  to  Caiaphas; 
but,  before  they  bound  him,  there  were  other  bands  upon  him.  Christ 
was  hound  hy  the  cords  of  love  ;  and  who  but  himself  had  bound 
him  thus?  Of  old,  or  ever  the  earth  was,  his  prescient  eye  foresaw 
all  his  people,  and  their  sin,  and  he  loved  them,  and  he  gave  him- 
self to  them  then,  in  the  eternal  purpose;  and  often  did  he  look, 
through  the  vista  of  the  ages,  upon  the  men  and  women  who  were 
yet  to  be  born,  and,  with  a  near  and  dear  love  to  each  one  of  them, 
he  pledged  himself  that,  for  them,  he  would  bear  the  shame,  and 
the  spitting,  and  that  he  would  even  die  in  their  room  and  stead, 
that  he  might  redeem  them  unto  himself.  So,  when  I  see  our 
Divine  Master  thus  led  to  the  judgment-seat,  I  grieve  over  the 
bonds  of  cord  with  which  men  tied  him,  but  my  heart  exults  over 
those  invisible  bands  with  which  he  bound  himself  by  p'Urpose,  by 
covenant,  by  oath,  by  infinite,  immutable  love,  that  he  would  give 
himself  to  be  a  ransom  for  his  people. 

Then,  following  upon  those  cords  of  love,  if  you  look  closely,  you 
will  see  his  love  again  displayed  in  that  he  was  hound  with  our  honds. 
We,  dear  friends,  had  sinned  against  God,  ajid  so  had  incurred  the 
sentence  of  infallible  justice,  and  now  that  sentence  must  fall  upon 
him.  We  ought  to  have  been  bound,  but  Christ  was  bound  instead 
of  us.  If  you  and  I  had  been  bound  with  despair,  and  hopelessly 
led  away  to  that  prison  from  which  none  shall  ever  escape ;  if  this 
had  been  the  moment  when  we  were  commencing  to  feel  the 
torments  of  the  hell  which  our  sins  deserve,  what  could  we  have 
said?  But,  lo!  in  our  room,  and  place,  and  stead,  Jesus  is  led 
away  to  bear  the  wrath  of  heaven.  He  must  not  lift  his  hand  in 
his  own  defence,  or  raise  his  finger  for  his  own  comfort,  for  he  is 
bearing, — 

"  That  we  might  never  bear, 
His  Father's  righteous  ire.* 

III.     But  now,  thirdly,  learn  hence  a  lesson  of  great  privilege. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  bound,  and  there  flows  from  that  fact 
its  opposite,  then,  his  people  are  all  free.  When  Christ  was  made 
a  curse  for  us,  he  became  a  blessing  to  us.  When  Christ  was  made 
sin  for  us,  we  were  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him.  When 
he  died,  then  we  lived.  And  so,  as  he  was  bound,  we  are  set  free. 
The  type  of  that  exchange  of  prisoners  ia  seen  in  the  fact  that 


246 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


Barabbas  waa  aet  free  when  the  Lord  Jesua  Christ  waa  given  up  to 
be  crucified ;  and  still  more  in  hia  plea  for  hia  disciples  in  the  garden, 
"If  therefore  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way."  It  ia  with 
wondrous  joy  in  our  hearts  that  we  sing, — 

"  We  were  sore  in  bondage  bound, 
But  our  Jesus  set  us  free." 

Do  we,  think  you,  dear  friends,  -use  our  liberty  aa  we  should? 
Do  we  not,  sometimes,  pray  to  God  as  if  we  were  tongue-tied,  and 
had  the  bonds  upon  our  tongue?  Do  we  not  go  to  the  great  coffers 
full  of  grace,  and,  instead  of  helping  ourselves,  as  we  have  the  right 
to  do,  we  stand  there  as  if  our  hands  were  bound,  and  we  could  not 
take  a  single  pennyworth  of  the  abundant  fulness  that  ia  laid  up 
there  for  us  ?  Sometimes,  when  there  ia  work  to  be  done  for  Christ, 
we  feel  as  if  we  were  in  bonds.  We  dare  not  stretch  out  our  hands, 
we  are  afraid  to  do  so ;  yet  Jesus  has  set  us  free.  O  believer,  why 
dost  thou  go  about  aa  if  thou  still  didst  wear  the  gyves  and  fetters 
on  thy  feet?  Why  dost  thou  stand  like  one  who  is  still  in  bonds? 
Thy  freedom  is  sure  freedom,  and  it  is  righteous  freedom.  Christ, 
the  great  Emancipator,  has  made  thee  free,  and  thou  art  "free 
indeed."  Enjoy  thy  liberty ;  enjoy  access  to  G-od ;  enjoy  the  privilege 
of  claiming  the  promises  which  God  has  given  to  you.  Enjoy  the 
exercise  of  the  power  with  which  God  has  endowed  you,  enjoy  the 
holy  anointing  with  which  the  Lord  has  prepared  you  for  hia 
service.  Do  not  sit  and  mope  like  a  bird  in  a  cage,  when  you  are 
free  to  soar  away.  I  can  conceive  of  a  bird,  that  has  been  in  a 
cage  for  years;  the  cage  may  be  all  taken  away, — every  wire  of  it; 
and  yet  the  poor  thing  has  been  so  accustomed  to  sit  on  that  perch, 
inside  the  cage,  that  it  takes  no  notice  of  the  fact  that  its  prison- 
house  is  gone,  and  there  it  sits  and  mopes  still.  Away  with  thee, 
sweet  songster!  The  green  fields  and  the  blue  sky  are  all  thine 
own.  Stretch  thy  wings,  and  soar  away  above  the  clouds,  and  aing 
the  carol  of  thy  freedom  as  though  thou  wouldst  make  it  reach  the 
ears  of  the  angels.  So  let  it  be  with  your  spirit,  and  with  mine, 
beloved.  Christ  has  set  us  free ;  therefore,  let  us  not  go  back  into 
bondage,  or  sit  still  as  though  we  were  in  prison,  but  let  us  rejoice 
in  our  liberty  this  very  hour,  and  let  us  do  so  all  our  daya. 

rV.     The  fourth  lesson,  from  the  binding  of  Chriat,  is  a  lesson  op 

OBLIGATION. 

This  may  seem  like  a  paradox  in  contrast  with  the  previous  lesson, 
yet  is  it  equally  tnie.  Beloved,  was  Jesus  bound  for  you  and  for 
me?  Then,  let  us  he  hound  for  him  and  to  him.  I  rejoice  in  the 
aweet  inability  that  results  from  perfect  love  to  Christ.  "  Inability  ? " 
you  ask.  Yes,  I  mean  inability.  The  true  child  of  God  "  cannot 
SLQ,  because  he  is  bom  of  God."  There  are  many  other  things  that 
he  cannot  do ;  he  cannot  forsake  his  Lord,  for  he  says,  with  Peter, 
"  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go?  Thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  life." 
He  cannot  forget  his  obligations;  he  cannot  withhold  his  time, 
hia  strength,  hia  substance,  from  hia  Lord;  he  cannot  become 
an  earthworm  and  a  money-grabber.  He  cannot  wed  his  soul  to 
any  other,  for  Christ  has  espoused  him  to  himself  as  a  chaste  virgin. 


CHRIST    IN    BONDS. 


247 


There  are  times  when  the  child  of  God  says,  with  Nehemiah, 
"Should  such  a  man  as  I  flee?"  Or,  "How  can  such  a  privileged 
individual  as  I  am  indulge  in  such-and-such  a  sin?"  Tlie  ungodly 
sometimes  jeer  at  u^,  and  say,  "Ah,  you  cannot  do  so-and-so !  We 
can."  And  we  reply,  "  We  have  lost  no  power  that  we  ever  wish  to 
have,  and  we  have  gained  the  power  of  concentrating  all  our  force 
upon  righteousness  and  truth;  and,  now,  our  heart  is  bound  too 
fast  to  Christ  for  us  to  go  after  your  idols.  .  Our  eyes  are  now  so 
taken  up  with  the  sight  of  our  Saviour  that  we  cannot  see  any 
charms  in  the  things  with  which  you  would  bewitch  us.  Our 
memory  is  now  so  full  of  Christ  that  we  have  no  desire  to  pollute 
the  precious  stores  that  lie  therein  by  memories  of  sin." 

Henceforth,  we  are  crucified  with  Christ,  and  that  brings  to  us 
^  blessed  inability  in  which  we  greatly  rejoice.  Our  heart  may  stir, 
perhaps,  a  little,  but  our  hands  and  feet  are  fastened  to  the  wood, 
and  cannot  move.  Oh,  blessed  is  the  inability  when,  at  last,  neither 
heart  can  love,  nor  brain  can  think,  nor  hand  can  do,  nor  even 
imagination  can  conceive  anything  that  goes  beyond  the  sweet  circle 
of  a  complete  consecration  to  the  Lord,  and  absolute  dedication  to 
his  service!  Come,  then,  ye  angels  of  the  Lord,  and  bind  us  to 
him !  Let  this  be  the  prayer  of  every  believer,  "  Bind  the  sacrifice 
with  cords,  even  unto  the  horns  of  the  altar."  Let  nothing  ever 
tempt  us  away  from  our  Lord.  Ye  may  count  the  cost  of  all 
Egyptia's  treasure,  and  then  let  it  go ;  and  it  shall  vanish  like  a 
dream,  for  there  is  nothing  in  it. 

"  Solid  joys  and  lasting  treasure, 

None  but  Zion's  children  know ;  " — 

-and  these  shall  remain  with  you  who  are  bound  to  Christ,  with  him 
to  live,  and  for  him  to  die,  if  need  be.  So,  whenever  we  see  Christ 
in  bonds,  let  us  pray  that  we  also  may  wear  his  bonds,  and  be  just 
as  much  bound  as  he  was.  "  O  God !  "  let  every  Christian  say,  "  I 
am  thy  servant,  and  the  son  of  thine  handmaid.  Thou  hast  loosed 
my  bonds,  now  bind  me  to  thyself  and  to  thy  blessed  service  once 
for  all." 

V.  The  last  lesson  is  one  which  I  pray  that  we  may  all  of  ua 
learn,  whether  we  are  saints  or  sinners ;  it  is  a  lesson  of  waening. 

Dear  friends,  I  have  tried  to  picture,  though  I  have  done  it  in  a 
very  feeble  way,  Christ  being  bound  with  cords;  and  now  I  want 
very  solemnly  to  say  to  all  of  you, — Do  not  you  bind  Christ  with 
cords.  Beware,  you  who  are  unconverted,  that  you  never  bind 
Christ.  You  may  do  so  hy  not  reading  his  Word.  You  have  a 
Bible  at  home,  but  you  never  read  it;  it  is  clasped,  laid  away 
in  a  drawer  with  your  best  pocket  handkerchiefs?  Is  it  not  so? 
'That  is  another  picture  of  Christ  in  bonds, — a  poor  shut-up  Bible, 
that  is  never  allowed  to  speak  with  you, — nay,  not  even  to  have 
half  a  word  with  you,  for  you  are  in  such  a  hurry  about  other 
1>hings  that  you  cannot  listen  to  it.  Untie  the  cords;  let  it  have 
its  liberty.  Commune  with  it  sometimes.  Let  the  heart  of  God 
in  the  Bible  speak  to  your  own  heart.  If  you  do  not,  that  clasped 
3ible — that  shut^up  Bible — that  precious  Book  hidden  away  in  the 


248 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


drawer — is  Christ  in  prison ;  and,  one  day,  when  you  little  expect 
it,  you  will  hear  Christ  say,  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  did  this  to  the  greatest 
of  all  my  witnesses,  ye  did  it  unto  me.  You  kept  Moses,  and 
Isaiah,  and  Jeremiah,  and  all  the  propheta,  in  prison;  and  all  the 
apostles,  and  the  Master  himself,  you  bound  with  cords,  and  you 
would  not  hear  a  word  that  they  had  to  say.  Let  not  that  be  true 
of  any  one  of  you,  dear  friends. 

There  are  others,  who  will  not  go  to  hear  the  Word.  They  do  not 
attend  any  place  of  woVship.  They  may  have  dropped  in  here  for 
once;  but,  as  a  rule,  they  never  go  anywhere  to  worship  God. 
Here,  in  London,  people  live  in  the  street  where  there  is  a  soul- 
saving  ministry,  yet  many  of  them  never  cross  the  threshold  of  the 
house  of  prayer.  In  some  streets,  not  one  in  a  hundred  ever  darkens 
the  doors  of  the  pleice  where  God's  people  gather  for  worship.  Is 
not  that  tying  Christ's  hands?  How  can  the  gospel  get  to  people 
who  will  not  hear  it, — absolutely  refuse  to  listen  to  it?  They  are 
really  gagging  our  blessed  Master,  and  that  is  even  worse  than 
binding  him  with  cords.  They  thrust  a  gag  between  his  teeth,  and 
make  him  hold  his  tongue  so  far  as  they  are  concerned.  Some  of 
them,  if  they  could,  would  gag  the  messenger  as  well  as  his  Master^ 
for  they  want  him  not.  "  Trouble  us  not,"  they  say.  "  Art  thou 
come  to  torment  us  before  the  time?"  And  so  they  bind  Christ,- 
and  send  him  away,  just  as  Annas  sent  him  bound  to  Caiaphas. 

Some  there  are,  who  both  read  the  Bible,  and  go  to  hear  the 
gospel,  but  they  tie  Christ  up,  all  the  same,  by  prejudice.  Some 
people  can  never  get  a  blessing,  through  certain  ministers,  because 
they  have  made  up  their  minds  that  they  will  not  be  profited  by 
them.  You  know  how  they  come,  with  some  preconceived  notion ; 
and  though  an  angel  from  heaven  were  to  speak,  they  would  pick 
holes  in  whatever  he  might  say,  because  of  the  prejudice  which  exists 
in  their  mind.  Probably,  they  can  give  no  better  reason  for  their 
Rntagonism  than  the  person  gave  who  did  not  like  Dr.  Fell, — 

« I  do  not  like  you,  Dr.  Fell, 
The  reason  why,  I  caunot  tell ; 
But  this  I  know,  and  know  full  well, 
I  do  not  like  you.  Dr.  Fell." 

I  have  known  men  bind  Christ  in  another  way,  by  delaying  their 
decision.  They  have  heard  a  sermon,  and  have  felt  its  power,  their 
soul  has  been  impressed  by  it;  but  their  chief  idea  has  been  to 
try  to  escape  from  Christ,  or  to  bind  his  hands,  if  possible.  I 
think  I  have  told  you  before  that,  once,  when  I  was  preaching  in 
the  country,  the  gentleman,  with  whom  I  stayed,  suddenly  got  up,, 
towards  the  end  of  the  sermon,  and  went  out;  and  a  dear  friend, 
who  had  gone  with  me,  followed  him  outside,  and  asked  him, 
"What  brought  you  out  here?"  He  replied,  "If  I  had  stopped 
there  another  five  minutes,  I  should  have  got  converted.  Mr. 
Spurgeon  seems  to  treat  me  just  as  if  I  were  made  of  india  rubber ; 
he  squeezes  me  into  any  shape  he  likes,  so  I  was  obliged  to  come 
out."  "  But,"  my  friend  said,  "  might  it  not  have  been  a  great 
blessing  to  you  if  you  had  been  converted? "    "  Well,  no,"  he  replied ,:. 


CHEIST    IN    BONDS.  24^ 

"  at  least,  not  just  now.  I  have  some  things  in  prospect  that  I  really 
could  not  miss,  so  I  cannot  afford  to  be  converted  just  now."  There 
are  others,  who  do  not  act  quit«  like  that,  but  the  result  is  the 
same.  They  say,  by  their  actions,  if  not  in  so  many  words,  "  Now, 
Lord,  I  am  going  to  tie  you  up  for  a  little  while.  I  mean  to  give 
heed  to  you  by-and-by ;  I  hope  your  blessed  hand  will  be  laid  upon 
me  for  my  salvation,  but  not  just  now,  please; — not  just  now." 
Such  people  always  use  silken  cords,  but  the  binding  is  just  as 
effective  as  it  would  be  if  they  took  an  ugly  pair  of  handcuffs, 
such  as  a  policeman  pulls  out  for  a  thief.  The  man  says,  "  Permit 
me  just  to  tie  your  hands  for  a  little  while; — another  month, 
perhaps, — possibly  another  year."  Oh,  that  accursed  procrastina- 
tion! How  many  have  been  ruined  to  all  eternity  by  it!  It  is 
the  bond  that  binds  the  hand  of  Christ  the  Saviour,  who  says,  "  Now 
is  the  day  of  salvation." 

Other  men  bind  the  hands  of  Christ  hy  seeling  pleasure  in  sin. 
After  having  been  impressed  under  a  sermon,  they  go  straight  away 
to  some  ungodly  meeting-place, — a  public-house,  perhaps;  or,  on 
the  morrow,  they  go  into  society  where  every  serious  thought  will, 
in  all  probability,  be  stamped  out  as  men  stamp  out  a  fire;  and 
what  is  this  but  binding  the  hands  of  Christ?  I  know  some, — 
I  tremble  as  I  think  of  them, — who  persistently  do  that  which  they 
know  will  prevent  them  from  ever  feeling  the  power  of  the  Word 
of  God.  Oh,  that,  by  some  means,  they  could  be  wrenched  out  of 
their  present  position,  and  be  carried  right  away  where  truth  might 
influence  them,  that  so  they  might  be  led  to  Jesu's  feet !  I  think  I 
hear  someone  say,  "  That  is  a  shocking  way  to  bind  Christ's  hands." 
Then  mind,  my  friend,  that  you  do  not  yourself  fall  into  that  sin. 

Now,  in  closing,  I  want  to  speak  to  the  Lord's  own  people  just 
for  a  minute  or  two. 

Do  you  not  think,  beloved,  that  you  and  I  have  sometimes  tied 
Christ's  hands?  You  remember  reading  this  sentence,  "He  could 
not  do  many  mighty  works  there."  His  hands  were  tied ;  but  what 
tied  them  ?  Finish  the  quotation  :  "  because  of  their  unbelief.^'  Are 
there  not  many  churches  where  they  have  tied  the  hands  of  Christ 
because  they  do  not  believe  he  can  do  any  mighty  works  there? 
If  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  were  to  convert  three  thousand  people, 
at  one  time,  under  their  pastor's  preaching,  what  do  you  think  the 
deacons  and  elders  of  that  church  would  probably  say  ?  "  Well,  we 
never  thought  that  we  should  see  such  excitement  as  this  here; 
to  think  that  it  should  have  come  into  our  place  of  worship !  We 
must  be  very  careful  now.  No  doubt  these  people  will  be  wanting 
to  join  the  church.  We  shall  have  to  summer  them,  and  winter 
them,  and  try  them  a  good  deal;  we  do  not  like  such  excitement." 
Ah,  sirs,  you  need  not  trouble  yourselves  with  any  such  expectation  ! 
God  is  not  likely  to  give  such  a  blessing  to  you ;  he  never  sends  his. 
children  where  they  are  not  wanted ;  and,  as  a  rule,  until  he  pre- 
pares his  people  to  receive  the  blessing,  the  blessing  will  not  come. 

Do  you  not  think,  also,  that  a  minister  may  very  easily  tie  the 
hands  of  Christ?  I  am  afraid  I  have  done  so,  sometimes,  without 
meaning  it.     Suppose  I  were  to  preach  some  very  fine  aecrmons;  — 


250  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


I  do  not  do  that,  mark  you ;  —but  just  suppose  I  were  to  preach 
some  very  fine  sermons  that  went  right  over  people's  heads,  and  a 
good  old  woman  were  to  say,  "  I  would  not  have  the  presumption 
to  understand  it,  but  it  is  very  wonderful,"  do  you  not  think  that  I 
should  be  tying  Christ's  hands  with  garlands  of  flowers?  And  may 
we  not  come  into  the  pulpit,  and  talk  a  lot  of  theological  jargon, 
and  use  words  which  are  appropriate  to  us  in  the  class-room,  but 
quite  misunderstood,  or  never  understood  at  all,  by  the  mass  of  the 
people?  Is  not  that  tying  Christ's  hands?  And  when  a  preacher 
is  what  they  call  very  "  heavy  ", — by  which  is  not  meant  that  he  is 
weighty, — but  dull;  or  when  he  is  very  cold  and  heartless,  and 
preaches  as  if  he  were  working  by  the  piece,  and  would  be  glad  to 
get  it  all  over, — when  that  is  the  case,  do  you  not  think  that  Christ's 
hands  are  tied?  Have  you  never  heard  sermons  of  which  you 
might  fairly  say,  "  Well,  if  God  were  to  convert  anybody  by  that 
discourse,  it  certainly  would  be  a  miraculous  kind  of  miracle, — 
something  altogether  out  of  the  common  way  of  miracles,  for  he 
would  be  using  an  implement  that  was  positively  calculated  to 
produce  just  the  opposite  effect,  and  making  it  accomplish  his 
purposes  of  grace"?  I  have  heard  such  sermons,  now  and  then, 
to  my  great  sorrow.  And  you  Sunday-school  teachers  must  take 
care  that  you  do  not  so  teach  as  really  to  be  hindrances  to  your 
scholars  rather  than  helps,  for  that  is  to  tie  the  hands  of  Christ, 
and  to  lead  him  into  your  class,  like  Samson  bound,  rather  to  make 
sport  for  Philistines  than  to  get  honour  to  himself.  May  we  all 
have  the  grace  given  to  us  to  avoid  such  an  evil  as  that ! 

And  do  you  not  think,  dear  friends,  that  we,  who  do  love  Christ, 
bind  his  hands  when  we  are  cowardly  and  retiring,  and  never  say  a 
word  for  him?  How  can  the  gospel  save  sinners  if  it  is  never 
spoken  to  them?  If  you  never  introduce  Christ  to  your  com- 
panions,— never  put  a  little  book  on  your  friend's  table, — never  try 
to  say  just  a  word  about  the  Saviour  to  him,  is  not  that  tying 
Christ's  hands?  The  next  thing  to  having  no  Christ  at  all  is  for 
the  church  to  be  silent  concerning  him.  It  is  an  awful  thing  to 
contemplate  what  it  would  be  if  there  were  no  Saviour ;  but  what 
improvement  is  it  if  there  be  a  Saviour,  but  men  never  hear  of  him? 
Come,  you  very  retiring  people,  do  not  excuse  yourselves  any  longer. 
"Oh,  but!  "  says  one,  "  I  always  was  of  a  very  retiring  disposition." 
So  was  that  soldier,  who  was  shot  for  running  away  in  the  day  of 
battle;  he  was  guilty  of  cowardice,  and  was  put  to  death  for  it. 
If  you  have  been,  up  to  the  present  time,  binding  the  Master  by 
your  retiring  spirit,  you  should  at  once  come  forward,  and  declare 
what  Christ  has  done  for  you,  that,  with  unbound  hands,  he  may  do 
the  like  for  others. 

And  do  you  not  think  that,  whenever  we  are  inconsistent  in  our 
conduct,— especially  in  the  family,— we  tie  the  hands  of  Christ? 
There  is  a  father  praying  for  his  children  that  they  may  live  before 
God.  Five  minutes  after,  listen  to  him.  Why,  his  boys  hate  the 
sight  of  him !  He  is  such  a  tyrant  to  them  that  they  cannot  endure 
him.  There  is  a  mother,  too,  who  is  praying  God  to  save  her 
daughters.     She  goes  upsUirs,  and  pleads  very  earnestly  for  them ; 


EXPOSITION.  251 

jet  she  comes  down,  and  lets  them  have  whatever  they  like  to  ask, 
and  never  says  a  word  by  way  of  checking  them  in  their  evil 
courses.  She  acts  like  a  female  Eli  to  every  one  of  them ;  is  not  she 
tying  the  hands  of  Christ?  What  can  she  expect  but  that  G-od, 
who  works  according  to  rules,  will  be  more  likely  to  let  her  unkind 
kindness  influence  her  girls  for  evil,  than  to  answer  her  prayers 
for  their  conversion?  Let  us  be  holy,  dear  friends,  for  then  we 
shall,  by  faith,  see  the  holy  God  freely  moving  and  working  among 
us,  and  doing  great  deeds  to  his  own  glory.  So  may  he  do,  for  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake !     Amen. 


lExjjositton  bs  (S:.  ©•  Spurseon* 

JOHN  XVIII.  12—14, 19—24  ;  MARK  XIV.  53—65  ;  and  LUKE  XXII.  63     71 ; 

XXIII.  1. 

The  passages,  which  we  are  about  to  read  from  three  of  the  Evangelists, 
make  up  a  continuous  narrative  of  our  Lord's  trial  before  the  high  priest. 

First,  John  gives  us  an  account  of  our  Saviour's  appearance  before 
Annas,  of  which  I  need  not  say  mucb,  as  I  recently  preached  upon  it.* 

John  xviii.  Verses  12 — 14.  Then  the  band  and  the  captain  and  officers  of  the 
Jews  took  Jesus,  and  hound  him,  and  led  him  away  to  Annas  first ;  for  he  was 
father  in  law  to  Caiaphas,  which  was  the  high  priest  that  same  year.  Noiu 
Caiaphas  was  he,  which  gave  counsel  to  the  Jews,  that  it  was  expedient  that  one 
man  should  die  for  the  people. 

19 — 21.  The  high  priest  then  asked  Jesus  of  his  disciples,  and  of  his  doctrine. 
Jesus  answered  him,  I  spake  openly  to  the  world  ;  I  ever  taught  in  the  synagogue, 
and  in  the  temple,  whither  the  Jews  always  resort;  and  in  secret  have  1  sai^ 
nothing.  Why  askest  thou  me  ?  ask  them  which  heard  me,  what  I  have  said 
unto  them  :  hehold,  they  know  what  I  said. 

What  an  admirable  answer  that  was  !  Whatever  he  might  have  said 
about  his  doctrine,  they  would  have  twisted  into  a  ground  of  accusation 
against  him,  so  he  simply  said,  **  Mine  has  been  public  teaching,  open  to 
all.  I  was  not  found  in  holes  and  comers,  secretly  fomenting  sedition.  I 
spoke  in  the  streets  ;  I  spoke  in  the  synagogue  ;  I  spoke  in  the  temple  ;  ask 
those  who  heard  me  to  tell  you  what  I  said."  What  more  convincing 
answer  could  he  have  given  ? 

22 — 24.  And  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  one  of  the  officers  which  stood  hy 
struck  Jesus  with  the  palm  of  his  hand,  saying,  Answerest  thou  the  high  priest 
so  f  Jesus  answered  him.  If  I  have  spoken  evil,  hear  witness  of  the  evil  :  but  if 
well,  why  smitest  thou  me  9  Now  Annas  had  sent  him  hound  unto  Caiaphas 
the  high  priest. 

So  there  we  see  him  standing,  bound,  before  Caiaphas,  the  acting  high 
priest  for  that  year. 

Now  follow  the  narrative  as  given  by  Mark. 

Markxiv.  Verses  53,  54.  And  they  led  Jesus  away  to  the  high  priest :  and 
with  him  were  assembled  all  the  chief  priests  and  the  elders  and  the  scribes.  And 
Peter  followed  him  afar  off,  even  into  the  palace  of  the  high  priest :  and  he  sat 
with  the  servants,  and  warmed  himself  at  the  firi. 

We  may  regard  what  was  said  to  Jesus,  by  Annas  and  Caiaphas,  as  a 
fiort  of  unofficial  preliminary  examination  ;  and,  meanwhile,  their  fellow- 

*  See  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Fulpit,  No.  2,820,  "CliriBt  before  Annas." 


262 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


conspirators  were  scouring  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  to  gather  together  the- 
members  of  the  Sanhedrim,  and  also  searching  among  the  slums  in  order 
to  find  witnesses  who  could  be  bribed  to  give  false  evidence  against  Jesus. 

65.  And  the  chief  priests  and  all  the  council  sought  for  witness  against  Jesus- 
to  put  him  to  death ;  and  found  none. 

A  pretty  court  that  was,  occupied  in  seeking  for  witnesses  who  might 
enable  them  to  condemn  to  death  a  prisoner  against  whom  no  charge  had 
yet  been  formulated. 

56 — 59.  For  many  hare  false  witness  against  him^  hut  their  witness  agreed 
not  together.  And  there  arose  certain^  and  hare  false  witness  against  himy 
saying^  We  heard  him  say,  I  will  destroy  this  temple  that  is  made  with  hands, 
and  within  three  days  I  will  huild  another  made  without  hands.  But  neither 
80  did  their  witness  agree  together. 

It  was  a  rule  that  they  should  be  examined  separately,  and  there  had  not 
been  time  for  them  to  be  coached  up  as  to  what  they  were  to  say,  so  one 
contradicted  the  other,  and  it  looked  as  if  the  trial  must  break  down. 

60.    And  the  high  priest  stood  up  in  the  midst y 

Losing  all  patience,  he  stood  up,  in  a  furious  rage  at  the  turn  thing* 
were  taking. 

60,  61.  And  asked  Jesus,  saying,  Answerest  thou  nothing  ?  what  is  it  lohich 
these  witness  against  thee  ?  But  he  held  his  peace,  and  answered  nothing. 
Again  the  high  priest  asked  him,  and  said  unto  him,  Art  thou  the  Christ,  the 
Hon  of  the  Blessed  f 

This  time,  according  to  Matthew's  account,  the  high  priest  said  to  Jesus,. 
'♦  I  adjure  thee  by  the  living  God,  that  thou  tell  us  whether  thou  be  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God."  Being  thus,  as  it  were,  put  upon  his  oath,  the 
Saviour  felt  compelled  to  answer.  He  could  not  remain  silent  when  such  a- 
great  and  important  question  was  at  stake. 

62—65.  And  Jesus  said,  I  am  :  and  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  on 
the  right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven.  Then  the  high 
priest  rent  his  clothes,  and  saith.  What  need  we  any  further  witnesses  ?  Ye 
have  heard  the  blasphemy  :  what  think  ye  ?  And  they  all  condemned  him  to  he 
guilty  of  death.  And  some  began  to  spit  on  him,  and  to  cover  his  face,  and  to 
buffet  him,  and  to  say  unto  him,  Prophesy :  and  the  servants  did  strike  him 
with  the  palms  of  their  hands. 

Perhaps  we  have  the  same  narrative  in  Luke ;  possibly,  however,  he  gives- 
us  a  continuation  of  the  sad  story ;  it  is  difficult  to  say  which  is  the  case. 

Luke  xxii.  Verses  63 — 71.  And  the  men  that  held  Jesus  mocked  him,  and 
smote  him.  And  when  they  had  blindfolded  him,  they  struck  him  on  the  face, 
and  asked  him,  saying,  Prophesy,  who  is  it  that  smote  thee  9  And  many  other 
things  blasphemously  spake  they  against  him.  And  as  soon  as  it  was  day,  the 
elders  of  the  people  and  the  chief  priests  and  the  scribes  came  together,  and  led 
him  into  their  council,  saying,  Art  thou  the  Christ  ?  tell  us.  And  he  said  unto 
them.  If  I  tell  you,  ye  will  not  believe  :  and  if  I  also  ask  you,  ye  will  not 
answer  me,  nor  let  me  go.  Hereafter  shall  the  Son  of  man  sit  on  the  right  hand 
of  the  power  of  God.  Then  said  they  all.  Art  thou  then  the  Son  of  Ood  ?  And 
he  said  unto  them.  Ye  say  that  L  am.  And  they  said,  What  need  we  any 
further  luitness  ?  for  we  ourselves  have  heard  of  his  own  mouth. 

Chapter  xxiii.  Verse  1.  4nd  the  whole  multitude  of  them  arose,  and  led 
him  unto  Pilate, 


Hymns  FBOM  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 426,  291,  806. 


MAJESTY   IN    MISERY. 


Intended  fob  Eeading  on  Lord's-day,  April  5th,  1903, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTOIT, 

On  Lord's-dai/  Evening^    October  7th,   1883. 


"  And  the  men  that  held  Jesus  mocked  him,  and  smote  him.  And  when  they  had 
blindfolded  him,  they  struck  him  on  the  face,  and  asked  him,  saying,  Prophesy,  who  is 
it  that  smote  thee  ?  And  many  other  things  blasphemously  spake  they  against  him." 
—Luke  xxii.  63—65. 

I  SUPPOSE  that  all  this  cruelty  took  place  while  our  Lord  was  before 
Caiaphas,  in  the  dead  of  night,  before  the  Sanhedrim  had  been  fully- 
gathered  together  to  hold  their  trial  at  daybreak.  His  enemies 
were  in  so  great  a  hurry  to  condemn  him  that,  as  soon  as  he  arrived 
at  the  high  priest's  house,  they  must  needs  have  a  kind  of  pre- 
liminary examination  that  they  might  try  the  tack  upon  which 
they  meant  to  sail  in  endeavouring  to  procure  a  conviction  against 
him.  After  he  had  been  thus,  in  an  informal  and  illegal  way, 
condemned  without  any  proper  trial,  they  left  him  in  the  custody 
of  their  officers  until,  early  in  the  morning,  they  should  have 
summoned  the  resit  of  their  companions,  so  aa  again  to  go  through 
the  farce  of  trying  him  whom  they  knew  to  be  innocent. 

While  these  officials  had  Christ  in  their  keeping,  they  might  at 
least  have  left  him  in  peace  and  quietness.  According  to  the  rules 
of  all  civilized  nations,  a  prisoner  detained  in  custody  should  be 
guarded  from  insult  and  ill-treatment  while  in  that  condition. 
Whatever  his  ultimate  punishment  may  be,  after  he  has  been  tried, 
and  found  guilty,  while  he  is  as  yet  uncondemned,  he  is  reckoned 
to  be  under  the  protection  of  the  state  that  has  arrested  him,  and 
he  ought  not  to  be  subjected  to  insult  or  injury.  But  here,  as  if 
they  had  been  so  many  savages,  the  judges  of  our  Lord  abandoned 
him  to  those  abjects  whom  they  employed  to  do  their  foul  work, 
and  those  wretched  creatures  treated  him  with  mingled  cruelty 
and  scorn :  "  The  men  that  held  Jesus  mocked  him,  and  smote  him." 
Could  they  not  have  allowed  him  a  little  time  of  rest?  The  traces 
of  the  bloody  sweat  must  still  have  been  upon  him.  They  could 
jiee,  by  the  emaciation  of  his  person,  that  he  was,  as  it  had  been 


Dy  zn.{ 
No.  2, 


825. 


254 


METBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


long  before  foretold  that  he  would  be,  "  a  man  of  sorrows,  and' 
acquainted  with  grief."  He  must  already  have  been  ready  to 
faint  under  the  rough  usage  which  had  been  meted  out  to  him 
both  before  and  at  his  preliminary  trials  before  Annas  and 
Caiaphas.  His  tormentors  must  have  seen  how  exhausted  he  was, 
yet  they  had  no  pity  for  him  in  their  hard,  unfeeling  hearts,  and 
they  allowed  him  no  respite,  and  gave  him  no  opportunity  to 
prepare  himself  to  answer  the  charges  that  were  about  to  be 
brought  against  him.  There  were  none  found  to  vindicate  his 
character,  or  to  plead  his  cause;  but  the  intervals  between  the 
informal  and  the  more  formal  trials  were  spent  in  mockery  and 
in  scorn. 

These  men  were  gross  cowards.  I  am  sure  that  they  must  have 
been,  because  they  were  so  cruel,  for  cruelty  is  one  of  the  badges 
of  cowardice  wherever  you  find  it.  These  are  the  very  men  who,, 
in  the  garden,  "went  backward,  and  fell  to  the  ground,"  when 
Christ  did  but  say,  "  I  am  he,"  in  answer  to  their  declaration  that 
they  were  seeking  "Jesus  of  Nazareth."  They  went  out,  with 
swords  and  staves,  to  take  him  prisoner,  yet  they  fell  to  the  ground 
when  he  did  but  speak  a  word  or  two  to  them ;  but  now  that  they 
had  him  in  their  power,  and  perceived  that  he  was,  apparently, 
not  inclined  to  exert  the  divine  energy  with  which  he  was  endowed, 
but  that  he  was  as  submissive  aa  a  sheep  before  her  shearers,  they- 
determined  to  be  as  cruel  83  they  could  to  him.  God  grant  that 
the  ain  of  cruelty  to  anything  that  lives  may  never  be  justly  laid! 
to  the  charge  of  any  one  of  \is !  If  you  have  acted  cruelly,  even 
though  it  be  to  the  meanest  thing  in  creation,  despise  yourself, 
for  you  are  of  a  lower  order  than  the  creature  that  you  tortured ; 
and  if  these  men  could  have  judged  themselves  aright,  they  would' 
have  despised  themselves.  They  seem  to  me  to  have  been  the 
very  meanest  of  mankind  who,  having  such  a  gentle  sufferer  in 
their  power,  instead  of  showing  any  humanity  to  him,  seemed  as  if 
they  could  not  sufficiently  abuse  him,  and  indulged  their  vile 
nature  to  the  utmost  in  mocking  and  persecuting  him. 

L  I  hope  that  some  spiritual  profit  may  come  to  us  while  we  are 
considering  this  terrible  part  of  the  suffering  of  our  Lord ;  and, 
first,  I  want  you,  in  imagination,  to  gaze  upon  Majesty  in  misery. 

There  stands  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  I  will  not  attempt  to  picture 
him.  There  has  never  yet  been  a  painter  who  could  pourtray  the 
lineaments  of  that  wondrous  face.  The  highest  art  has  never  yet 
been  able  to  satisfy  itself  upon  that  point  even  though  it  has 
borrowed  its  outline  and  its  colours  from  the  Scriptures  themselves. 
The  most  skilful  hand  grows  unsteady  in  the  presence  of  One  so 
glorious  in  his  griefs.  I  will  not,  therefore,  attempt  to  draw  a 
portrait  of  my  Lord  and  Master,  but  will  simply  ask  you,  by  faith, 
to  behold  him,  clothed  with  the  garment  that  was  without  seam, 
bound,  delivered  over  to  the  officers,  and  surrounded  by  them 
while  they  mocked  and  scoffed  at  him.  Letting  your  eye  rest  upon 
him  in  a  loving  look,  regarding  him  as  the  great  centre  of  your 
heart's  affection,  what  do  you  see, — you  who  believe  in  his  Deity^ 
and  who  can  say  that  he  is  "  very  God  of  very  God  "  to  you  ? 


i 


MAJESTY     IN     MISERY.  255 

If  jour  ©yea  are  opened  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  you  will  her©  see 
Omnipotence  held  captive.  "The  men  that  held  Jesus"  did  not 
really  know  who  he  was;  he  appeared  to'  them  to  be  a  poor 
Galilean  peasant,  speaking  the  country  brogue,  they  saw  that  he 
was  a  humble,  lowly,  einaciated  man;  and,  as  he  had  been  com- 
mitted to  their  charge,  they  held  him  as  their  prisoner.  But  they 
did  not  recognize  that  he  was  the  Almighty  God,  the  very  Deity 
that  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  for  "  all  things  were  made 
by  him ;  and  without  him  was  not  anything  made  that  was  made." 
He  was',  at  that  very  moment,  "  upholding  all  things  by  the  word 
of  his  power;"  and,  amid  all  his  weakness,  and  in  all  his  sufferings, 
he  was  still  "over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever,"  whom  all  the  holy 
angels  continued  to  adore.  Is  it  not  a  great  mystery  that  omnipo- 
tence should  thus  be  hedd  captive?  What  a  marvellous  thing  it  is 
that  he,  who^  can  create  or  who  can  destroy,  according  to  the  good 
pleasure  of  his  own  will,  should  take  upon  himself  our  nature,  and 
in  that  nature  should  sink  so  low  as  to  become  subject  even  to  the 
very  coarsest  and  most  cruel  of  mankind !  What  a  wondrous  stoop 
of  condescension  is  here!  Omnipotence  allows  itself  to  be  bound, 
and  never  proves  itself  more  truly  omnipotent  than  when  it 
restrains  itself,  and  permits  itself  to  be  held  as  a  prisoner  by 
sinful  men. 

Look  again  at  this  Majesty  in  misery,  and  you  will  see  glory 
mocked,  for  "  the  men  that  held  Jesus  mocked  him."  To  them,  he 
seemed  to  be  a  fit  saibject  for  ridicule  and  derision  in  professing  to 
be  a  king,  when  he  had  neither  an  armed  host  nor  multitudes  of 
followers  who  could  hope  to  stand  for  a  single  second  against  the 
mighty  Caesao:  who  held  Israel  in  bondage.  Ay,  but  there  was  a 
glory  in  Christ,  which  he  had  deigned  to  veil  and  to  conceal  for 
a  while,  but  which  angels  still  beheld  and  adored ;  yet  these  men 
were  mocking  him !  There  are  some  themes  which  seem  to  strike 
a  speaker  dumb,  and  this  subject  has  something  like  this  effect  upon 
me.  It  appears  to  me  amazing  that  the  God,  who  had  reigned  in  glory 
over  myriads  of  holy  angels,  should  be  mocked  by  miscreants  who 
could  not  even  have  lived  an  instant  longer  in  his  presence  if  he  had 
not  permitted  them  to  do  so;  yet  I  see,  in  my  text,  that  he,  who 
made  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  stood  there  to  be  despised  and 
rejected  of  men,  and  to  h&  treated  with  the  utmost  contumely  and 
scorn.  I  can  make  that  statement,  but  you  cannot  realize  what  it 
means.  This  is  one  of  those  great  mysteries  of  the  faith  that  seem 
to  stagger  you.  You  believe  it  without  the  slightest  hesitation  • 
yet,  the  more  you  try  really  to  grasp  and  comprehend  it,  the  more 
It  seems  to  elude  you,  and  to  tower  above  you. . 

Thus,  we  see  omnipoteno©  held  captive,  and  glory  mocked. 

Next,  we  see  goodness  smitten,  perfect,  infinite,  unutterable  good- 
ness stricken,  bruised,  assailed,  assaulted:  "The  men  that  held 
Jesus  mocked  him,  and  smote  him."  To  smite  wickedness,  is  an 
act  ot  justice;  and  even  to  lift  the  sword  against  oppresision  may 
not  alw-ays  be  a  thing  to  be  condemned;  but  to  smite  him'  who 
never  did  any  man  a  wrong,  but  who  has  done  all  men  some 
measure  of  good,  and  who  has  given  to  some  men  all  conceivable. 


■256  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

«ood,— ah,  this  is  brutish  indeed  1  The  blessed  Son  of  God,  who 
stood  there,  had  within  his  soul  that  mercy  which  endureth  for 
ever  yet  they  smote  him;— there  burned  in  his  heart  a  love  which 
many  waters  could  not  quench,  and  which  the  floods  could  not 
drown  yet  they  smote  him!  He  had  come  here  upon  no  errand 
of  vengeance,  but  to  bring  peace  and  goodwill  to  men,  and  to 
set  up  a  kingdom  of  joy  and  love;  yet  they  bound  him!  Ah,  me! 
it  is  wonderful  that  goodness  should  be  so  good  a^  to  ^^J^^  to 
this  shameful  indignity;    none  but  divine  goodness  would   have 

submitted  to  it.  . ,  ^  t     j      rm. 

See  what  these  mockers  and  smiters  did  next  to  our  Lord,     iney 

produced  a  handkerchief,  or  a  cloth  of  some  kind,  and  they  put 

it  over  his  eyes.     Omniscience  must  seem  to  be  blinded ;  which,  m 

truth,  it  cannot  be;  yet,  in  the  Christ,  there  was  the  omniscience 

of  the  Godhead,  and,  to  the  utmost  of  their  power,  these  men  blinded 

him,  in  the  hope  that  he  might  not  see  what  they  were  domg. 

I  know  some  who  are  trying  to  act  thus  at  this  present  time.     The 

only  god  that  they  have  is  a  blind  god.     They  believe  in  what 

they   call   "  the  forces  of  nature,"  and   then  they  condescendingly 

talk  as  though  God  was  only  the  aggregate  of  the  forces  of  nature 

working  according  to  certain  mechanical  laws  that  can  never  be 

altered.     The  god  in  whom  they  profess  to  believe  is  a  god  that 

does  not  see.     They  tell  us  that  it  is  idle  to  pray,  or  to  think  that 

God  takes  any  interest  in  such  insignificant  individuals  as  we  are. 

Ah!   I  remember  reading   about  those  gods  of  the  philosophers: 

*'  They  have  mouths,  but  they  speak  not :  eyes  have  they,  but  they 

-see  not:  they  have  ears,  but  they  hear  not:  noses  have  they,  but 

they  smell  not :   they  have  hands,  but  they  handle  not :   feet  have 

they,  but  they  walk  not :  neither  speak  they  through  their  throat. 

-They  that  make  them  are  like  unto  them;    so  is  every  one  that 

trusteth  in  them."     "  But  our  God  is  in  the  heavens,"  seeing  all  that 

happens  and  doing  as  he  pleases  among  the  hosts  above  and  among 

men  below.     He  is  not  now  to  be  blindfolded,   as  he  was  once,    % 

when  he  condescended  to  wear  our  nature,  and  to  bear  our  sm. 

Yet  it  is  wonderful  that    he    should    ever    have    permitted    this 

indignity  to  be  put  upon  him.     The  spouse  in  the  Canticles  truly 

sings   "  His  eyes  are  as  the  eyes  of  doves  by  the  rivers  of  waters, 

washed  with   milk,    and  fitly   set,"— exceeding   the  very  stars  of 

heaven   for  brightness,— yet   they   covered   them  over!     His  eyes 

flamed  with  love,  and  in  them  there  did  gleam  bright  diamonds  of 

pity  for  all  the  sorrows  of  mankind;  yet  those  cruel  men  did  hide 

those  precious  eyes  of  his,  blindfolding  the  Christ  of  God ! 

Now,  surely,  they  had  made  him  suffer  enough,  far  too  much; 
vet  affain  the  infinite  beauties  of  his  blessed  countenance  were  to  be 
marred,  for  "they  struck  him  on  the  face."  "Oh,  but,  had  we 
been  there,"  we  say,  "  our  indignation  would  have  burned  against 
them  for  striking  that  dear  face !  "  Yet  we  had  need  lay  a^de  our 
indignation,  and  bring  forward  penitence  instead  for  we  also  Have 
sometimes  smitten  that  dear  face  of  Jesus,  which  is  as  tli©  /^  «* 
heaven,  far  brighter  than  the  sun  which  lights  up  the  world  Ail 
other  beauties  put  together  cannot  equal  the  marvellous  charms 


i 


MAJESTY     IN     MISERY.  257 

«of  that  countenance  which  was  marred  more  than  any  man^s. 
There  is  nothing  under  heaven,  or  in  heaven  itself,  that  can  rival 
the  face  of  the  Well-beloved ;  yet  these  men  struck  it !  I  think  an 
angel  might  well  shiver  with  horror  if,  for  the  first  time,  he  heard 
4>hat  men  had  struck  the  face  of  his  Lord.  It  was  but  his  human 
face,  it  is  true ;  but  therein  they  struck  at  all  of  Deity  that  they 
■could  reach.  It  was  man  smiting  God  in  the  face.  A  slap  in  the 
face  of  Deity  was  what  it  really  meant.  Ah,  me !  that  my  Master 
should  ever  have  had  to  endure  such  insult  and  pain, — that  he 
should  ever  have  been  willing  to  suffer  such  indignity  as  this, — 
was  there  ever  love  like  unto  his? 

Then  the  mockers  said,,  "Prophesy,  who  is  it  that  smote  thee?" 
That  was  justice  defied.  They  seemed  to  say  to  our  Lord,  as  they 
«mote  him,  "  Tell  us  what  our  name  is ;  say  who  struck  that  blow. 
Thou  canst  not  resist  it;  thou  canst  not  avenge  thyself;  but, 
at  least,  see  if  thou  canst  tell  the  nam©  of  him  that  smote  thee. 
We  defy  thee  so  to  do."  Ah!  he  had  written  down  their  names, 
and  they  will  find  out,  one  day,  that  he  knows  them  all,  for  there 
are  none  who  smite  the  Saviour  who  will  not  have  their  blows  come 
back  upon  themselves  unless  they  repent  of  their  sin.  There  was 
justice  defied,  as  "they  struck  him  on  the  face,  and  asked  him, 
saying.  Prophesy,  who  is  it  that  smote  thee  ?" 

I  say  again  that  I  am  not  able  worthily  to  speak  on  such  a  theme 
as  this,  and  I  think  I  never  shall  be  however  long  I  may  live.  It 
is  not  within  the  compass  of  lips  of  clay,  with  words  of  air,  to 
describe  the  condescending  sufferings  of  him  who,  though  he  waa 
rightly  called  "Wonderful,  Counsellor,  The  mighty  God,  The 
everlasting  Father,  The  Prince  of  Peace,"  nevertheless  stooped  so 
low  as  to  be  mocked,  smitten,  blindfolded,  and  smitten  again  for 
your  sakea  and  mine. 

"  Vexed,  I  try  and  try  again, 
Still  my  efforts  all  are  vain  : 
Living  tongues  are  dumb  at  besf, 
"We  must  die  to  speak  of  Christ." 

The  wonder  of  this  Majesty  in  misery  can  be  described  in  four 
words.  The  first  wonder  is  that,  under  all  this  torture,  our  Lord 
was  so  patient.  Not  a  flush  of  anger  appeared  on  his  cheek,  not  a 
flash  of  wrath  from  his  eyes.  He  bore  it  all,  bore  it  in  his  very 
soul,  with  divine  patience,  the  very  patience  of  "the  God  of 
patience." 

The  next  wonder  is,  that  he  was  silent  under  all  this  cruelty; 
not  a  word  did  he  utter  either  in  complaint  or  in  condemnation  of 
his  assailants.  This  proved  his  true  greatness.  Eloquence  is  easy 
as  compared  with  silence,  and  perhaps  it  would  not  have  been  true 
of  Christ  that  "never  man  spake  like  this  Man,"  if  it  had  not 
also  been  true  of  him  that  never  man  was  silent  like  this  Man. 
He  fulfilled  to  the  letter  the  ancient  prophecy,  "  He  is  brought  as 
a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,  and  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  ia  dumb, 
so  he  openeth  not  his  mouth."  Lord,  teach  us  how  to  imitate  thy 
patience  and  thy  silence! 

17 


258  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Notice,  in  the  third  place,  how  eloquent  he  was  by  that  very 
silence.  He  said  more  for  us,  and  more  to  us,  by  holding  his  tongue 
than  if  he  had  delivered  himself  of  many  burning  sentences.  It  is 
matchless  eloquence  that  is  seen  in  the  calm  serenity  of  Christ  in 
the  presence  of  these  cruel  persecutors,  in  the  forgiving  character 
of  Christ  under  the  most  exasperating  circumstances,  and  in  the 
patience  of  Christ  under  unparalleled  sufferings. 

And  yet  again,  I  see  something  so  triumphant  in  our  Saviour's 
griefs  that,  while  I  call  him  patient,  silent,  and  eloquent,  I  must 
also  call  him  victorious.  His  persecutors  could  not  make  him  give 
way  to  anger.  They  could  not  destroy  his  mercy ;  they  could  not 
slay  his  love;  they  could  not  cause  him  to  think  of  himself;  they 
could  not  make  him  declare  that  he  would  go  no  further  with  his 
work  of  saving  sinners  now  that  men  began  to  scoff  at  him,  and 
smite  him,  and  despitefully  use  him.  No ;  the  strong-souled  Christ 
still  perseveres  in  his  merciful  work,  even  as  a  mighty  hunter 
pursues  his  game  upon  the  mountain,  leaping  from  crag  to  crag, 
and  cliff  to  cliff,  defying  danger  and  death  that  he  may  secure  the 
creature  on  whose  track  he  has  gone.  So,  O  thou  mighty  Christ, 
thou  didst  accomplish  thy  glorious  purpose  of  love  and  mercy  I 
Thou  didst  lead  captivity  captive  by  suffering,  to  the  bitter  end, 
all  that  was  inflicted  upon  thee,  even  unto  the  death  of  the  cross. 

Thus  have  I  tried  to  picture  Majesty  in  misery ;  but  I  have  not 
been  able  to  describe  either  Christ's  Majesty  or  his  misery  as  they 
deserve  to  be  described.  Muse  on  them,  and  pray  the  Spirit  of  Grod 
to  give  you  such  a  sight  of  them  as  human  nature  by  itself  can  never 
afford  you. 

II.  Now  I  pass  on  to  notice,  secondly,  that  my  text  seems  to 
me  to  show  us  sin  at  its  sport. 

All  this  sad  scene  represents  what  sin  did  when  it  had  the 
opportunity, — when  all  restraining  bands  were  loosed,  and  it  could 
act  according  to  its  own  evil  will.  It  also  represents  what  sin  is  still 
doing,  as  far  as  it  can,  and  what  would  always  be  the  action  of  sin 
if  it  were  not  hindered  by  the  almighty  power  of  God. 

What,  then,  does  sin  do  in  the  hour  of  its  liberty?  I  invito 
you  to  notice,  first, — and  to  pay  particular  attention  to  any  part 
that  may  come  home  to  yourself, — the  levity  of  sin.  These 
men  are  grossly  insulting  the  Christ  of  God;  but,  to  them,  it 
is  a  sport,  a  game-.  They  play  at  blindfolding  him;  it 
is  simply  mirth  and  amusement  to  them.  Sad  indeed  is 
it  that  sin  should  ever  be  what  men  call  sport,  yet  I  need 
scarcely  remind  you  how  often  it  is  so,  even  now,  to  many.  They 
run  after  it  wi^-h  the  utmost  eagerness,  and  they  call  it  pleasure;  — 
they  call  tha »  which  is  provoking  God  pleasure, — they  call  that 
which  crucified  Christ  pleasure!  They  say  that  "they  must  seo 
life,"  and  they  call  that  "  life  "  which  forced  from  Jesus  a  bloody 
sweat,  and  which  afterwards  dragged  him  to  a  cruel  death.  And, 
alas !  they  say  of  many  a  sin,  "  What  a  delight  it  is  to  us !  Would 
you  make  our  life  miserable  by  taking  away  our  enjoyments?"  So 
it  becomes  a  matter  of  enjoyment  to  them  to  smite  Christ  on  the 
face,  and  to  mock  him !     Perhaps  I  am  addressing  some  who  have 


MAJESTY     IN     MISERY.  259 

even  made  the  Bible  into  a  jest-book;  their  puns  and  mirth  have 
been  pointed  with  passages  of  Holy  Writ.  Possibly,  others  have 
made  rare  fun  out  of  some  venerable  Christian,  some  faithful  servant 
of  the  living  and  true  God.  Well,  sirs,  if  you  have  done  so,  I 
would  have  you  know  how  heinous  is  your  sin  in  thus  making  sport 
of  the  godly;  such  "sport"  as  that,  unless  you  repent  of  it,  will 
damn  you  fw  eyer;  as  surely  as  you  live,  it  will  shut  you  out  from 
the  great  Father's  love,  and  close  the  door  of  mercy  against  you 
world  without  end.  Yet  that  is  how  sin  acts  when  it  has^its 
Ai  {>:  t^^^l  It  sports  even  with  the  wounds  of  a  crucified  Godi 
Alas,  that  it  should  ever  do  so ! 

^^ff"?  ""f '  ''"  """■  «"'»'«»""«  of  sin.  If  these  men  really 
W  w?=f°  ^  A  ^""^f^°t  o"\°^  ^"'^'  *hey  were  able  to  get  it} 
but  what  need  was  there  for  them  also  to  smite  him  ?  What  need 
..as  there  of  all  that  superfluity  of  cruelty  by  which  they  put  him  to 
™ch  shame  and  pain?  If  Christ  must  die,  at  least  let  him  die  in 
peace;  why  that  spitting  in  his  face-,  that  terrible  scourgL  thLt 
awful  aggrava  ion  of  his  griefs?  It  was  because  men  will  In  out 
of  sheer  wantonness  I  have  known  some  persons  sin  in  such 
strange  ways  that  I  have  wondered  why  they  did  it  It  was^ot 
for  pleasure;  at  least,  I  could  not  see  any  pleLre  in    t.     It  cau^d 

and  Timse'lfToo'T"^  '^  "^  ""^^'^  "''^"^^'^'  -'l  brought  tSem. 
J'w.W  'i  A'^^^u"  '"  Po^^rty;  what  mirth  or  merriment  could 
there  be  in  that?     There  are  some  who  seem  as  if  they  could  never 

for  ev^e^and  "^  "'%"''"  '''^'^'^  '"^  '"^•^'"?  themselves  unhappy 
for  ever  and  ever.  They  are  not  content  without  committing  some 
extravagance  in  sin,  and  making  their  whole  lives  an  outrfgeo^t 

gviilty  of  such  wantonness  in  sin,  may  the  Holy  Spirit  cause  a 
gracious  influence  to  steal  over  you,  so  that  you  wilfnoknger  grieve 
the  Christ  of  God,  but  will  yourself  grieve  that  you  should  evir 
have  sinned  so  shamefully  against  him  i  ^ 

T,.  "\?u''''  "'^''^  "''  "■'"^''^  "f  ''"■■  I  have  already  asked  and 
theTaviou^rwt^t'"!'^'"'  need  was  there  for  these  L^t  strike 
Me  baviour?     What  pleasure  could  they  derive  from  a-ll  the  nain 

&  TT!^ 'u  ^""^  ^y  ^^^  '""'^t''  °f  his  ancient  prophets ^Z 
Lord  said.     Oh  do  not  this  abominable  thing  that  I  hate  M'     It  wa^ 

not  tv  °r  '°*''^''^  *'}'-^  ^^  '^"^  Pl^^ded  with  men,  for  he  wouH 
not  have  them  injure  themselves;  and  sin  is  ever  self-injury  it  b 
a  sort  of  suicide.  Whenever  a  man  does  wrong  mischief 'mui 
certainly  come  of  it;  and  God  knows  this,  so  he  bte^hes  menT^ 

ei  "ts  Chri^^'f  ^.  '^''  ""^ '  .'^^°  -  "-°  mocks  :r?ru:  "  igio^ 
alTn  fW  ^'  i  P°^P?"^^  the  day  of  repentance,  he  is  piefcing 
tha  bW  /l"^  •?'*^'^  **'*'  hied  for  the  v^worthy  and  |riev  nf 
hets  ofH  v5lT*  ^}°  "*"'  1"^^^  ^'^  *he  sons  of  men,^S,ough 
«    f„v  J  r  ^'^  ^"'^  grievously  provoked  by  them.     Why  are  vou 

crmt;^Virrsin^°a^lHir'^'  ^'^-^  -"  '^  nonecLlt;^ 
Thl^rr;!^""'^^!^^^'  ^<^.:p.m^6  unbelief  that  there  often  is  in  sin 


260 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 


because  they  had  no  faith  whatsoever  in  him.  This  is  the  great  evil 
that  lies  at  the  root  of  most  men's  sins, — ^they  believe  not  in  Jesus 
Christ,  whom  Grod  hath  sent.  It  is  this  of  which  the  Spirit  of  God 
convinces  men,  as  our  Saviour  foretold  concerning  him :  "  He  will 
convince  the  world  of  sin  .  .  .,  because  they  believe  not  on  me." 
Tet  there  is  nothing  more  reasonable,  nothing  more  worthy  to  be 
believed,  than  the  revelation  of  God  as  given  to  us  in  the  Holy 
Scriptures ;  and  a  man  has  only  to  test  and  try  for  himself  whether 
it  be  true,  or  not,  and  he  shall  soon  have  the  proof  of  ita  verity 
in  his  own  bosomi  Let  him  really  believe  it,  and  then  see  whether 
it  does  not  make  him  both  holy  and  happy;  and  that  shall  he  to 
him  the  test  of  its  truth. 

Notice,  again,  how  often  there  is  in  sin  a  kind  of  defiance  of  God. 
If  a  boy  were  to  come  to  his  father,  and  were  to  say  to  him,  "  I 
will  do  all  manner  of  rude  and  unkind  things  to  you,  yet  you  will 
not  chastise  me,"  it  would  not  be  long  before  that  father  would 
make  his  son  smart  if  he  were  himself  worthy  to  be  a  father ;  but 
sinners  act  towards  God  in  that  kind  of  way.  They  often  do  to 
God  what  these  persecutors  did  to  Christ ;  so  far  as  they  can,  they 
mock  him,  and  smite  him,  and  defy  him.  Am  I  addressing  anyone 
who  has  ever  called  down  upon  his  own  person  the  curse  of  God? 
Beware  lest  that  blasphemous  prayer  of  yours  be  answered  the 
next  time  you  utter  it,  for  it  is  God's  way  to  answer  prayer,  and, 
nayhap,  he  will  answer  yours,  and  then  where  will  you  be? 
Some  have  even  dared  to  defy  God  thus :  "  Well,  even  if  it  be  as 
you  say,  I  am  willing  to  take  my  chance ;  but  I  will  not  submit  to 
God."  Ah,  sir!  Pharaoh  tried  that  plan,  and  he  repented  of  it,  I 
think,  when  it  was  too  late.  In  the  midst  of  the  Red  Sea,  when 
the  waters  began  to  overwhelm  him  and  all  his  mighty  host,  then 
he  learned  what  were  the  consequences  of  saying,  "  Who  is  the  L#ord, 
that  I  should  obey  his  voice? "  Every  sin  has  in  it  a  measure  of 
defiance  of  God,  it  is  like  these  men  striking  Christ  upon  the  face, 
and  saying  to  him,  "  Prophesy,  who  is  it  that  smote  thee?  " 

I  will  not  linger  longer  upon  this  part  of  my  theme  except,  just  to 
say  that  there  is  one  more  thing  about  sin  that  is  peculiarly  lament- 
Able,  namely,  the  multiplicity  of  sin.  Read  the  65th  verse :  "  And 
many  other  things  blasphemously  spake  they  against  him."  One 
thing,  two  things,  twenty  things,  will  not  content  them ;  they  must 
«ay  "  many  other  things "  against  him.  When  a  man  once  gives 
himself  up  to  sin,  it  is  like  getting  into  a  current  which  bears  him 
onward  where,  at  first,  he  had  no  thought  of  going.  If  you  wade 
into  the  waters  of  sin,  it  will  not  be  long  that  you  will  be  able  to 
retain  a  foothold;  and,  by-and-by,  unless  the  Lord  shall,  in  his 
grace,  prevent  such  a  calamity,  the  rapid  current  will  bear  you 
away  to  your  everlasting  destruction.  It  is  no  use  for  you  to  say, 
"Thus  far  will  I  go  in  sin,  but  no  farther."  You  cannot  stop 
when  you  please;  if  you  once  commit  yourself  to  the  influence  of 
sin,  you  know  not  whither  it  will  carry  you.  Alas !  alas !  some  men 
seem  as  if  they  never  could  sin  enough  to  satisfy  themselves.  They 
multiply  their  transgressions  beyond  all  count.  Every  iron  of 
iniquity  that  they  have  is  thrust  into  the  fire.     Both  their  hands 


I 


MAJESTY     IN     MISEKY.  261 

are  diligently  engaged  in  doing  misichief.  Sometimes,  they  rise 
up  early ;  but,  more  often,  they  sit  up  late, — possibly,  all  the  night 
through,  that  they  may  wast©  the  more  precious  hours  in  their 
wickedness.  So  God  is  aggrieved,  and  Christ  is  wounded  afresh 
by  the  sin  of  man.  It  is  a  sad,  sad  picture ;  I  cast  a  veil  over  it, 
and  turn  to  something  brighter  and  better. 

III.  We  have  seen  Majesty  in  misery,  and  sin  at  its  sport;  now, 
thirdly,  let  us  see  love  at  its  labour. 

All  that  sham©  and  suffering  was  endured  by  our  Saviour  for 
love  of  each  of  us  who  can  truly  say,  "  He  loved  me,  and  gave 
himself  for  ma"  All  this  blindfolding,  and  mocking,  and  smiting 
was  borne  by  Christ  for  your  sake,  beloved,  and  mine.  I  will  not 
try  to  describe  it  further,  but  I  will  ask  you  just  to  spend  a  minute 
or  two  in  trying  to  realize  that  sad  scene.  For  you, — as  much  as  if 
there  were  no  other  person  in  th©  whol©  universe, — for  you,  the 
King  of  glory  became  the  King  of  scorn,  and  bore  all  this  despising 
and  rejection  of  men.  For  you,  John;  for  you,  Mary;  for  you, 
old  friend;  for  you,  in  your  youth.  If  thou,  whoever  thou  art, 
believest  in  him.,  he  was  thy  Substitute.  Thy  faith  give®  thee  the 
assurance  that  he  was  enduring  all  this  for  thee; — for  thee,  I  say, 
as  much  as  if  he  had  no  other  redeemed  one,  but  had  paid  the 
ransom  price  all  for  thee.  Less  than  this  would  not  have  sufficed 
for  thee,  though  it  is,  indeed,  sufficient  for  all  th©  innumerablch 
host  redeemed  by  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus: 

Let  us,  then,  see  love  at  its  labour.  I  mean,  our  lov©  to  our 
Lord ;  though  I  might  also  spea»k  of  our  Lord's  lov©  to  us,  and  what 
it  did  for  us.  What  shall  our  love  do  to  show  how  grateful  we  are 
to  Jesus  for  all  that  he  endured  for  us?  Well,  first,  let  it  set 
penitence  to  confess.  Come,  my  heart,  her©  is  room  for  the  display 
of  thy  grief.  Why  was  Christ  mocked  in  Jerusalem?  Surely  it 
was  because  thou  hast  mocked  God  with  prayers  that  were  no 
prayers,  with  hymns  carelessly  sung,  with  Scriptures  read  as  if  they 
were  merely  the  writings  of  men,  with  professions  of  religion  that 
were  hollow  and  empty.  Brothers  and  sisters,  have  not  you  some 
of  these  things  to  repent  of?  If  you  have  mocked  him  thus,  the 
mocking  that  he  endured  in  the  hall  of  the  high  priest  was  on  your 
account. 

And  as  he  was  blindfolded,  let  us  weep  because  our  unbelief 
has  often  blindfolded  him.  We  imagined  that  h©  did  not  know 
about  us,  or  that  he  had  forgotten  us.  We  thought  that  he  could 
not  see  the  end  from  the  beginning,  and  that  he  would  not  be  able 
to  bring  good  out  of  evil.  Let  me  ask  you,  dear  friends, — Have 
you  not  often  made  Christ  to  be  a  blindfolded  Christ  so  far  as 
your  apprehension  of  him  was  concerned  ?  If  so,  because  you  have 
thus  blindfolded  God  by  your  unbelief,  you  are,  by  your  sin, 
imitating  the  guilt  of  these  men  who  literally  blindfolded  Christ. 

And  as  we  behold  him,  smitten,  let  us  again  grieve  as  we  remember 
how  it  was  written  of  him,  "  He  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities : 
the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him ;  and  with  his  stripes 
we  are  healed."  Every  sin  that  we  have  ever  committed  mad©  a 
gory  furrow  upon  his  precious  back.     Those  black  and  blue  bruises, 


262  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

that  alternate  upon  his  sacred  shoulders,  wer&  caused  by  the  cruel 
scourging  to  which  each  of  us  contributed  our  share  by  our  trans- 
gressions. O  beloved,  weep  as  you  see  him  bearing  what  you  ought 
to  have  borne ! 

And  when  you  read  that  they  asked  him  taunting  questions 
while  his  eyes  were  blindfolded,  ask  thyself,  O  child  of  God,  whether 
thou  hast  not  often  done  the  same?  Have  you  never  asked  for  a 
sign,  instead  of  walking  by  faith?  I  confess  that  I  have  sometimes 
ivished  that  I  could  have  some  token  or  indication  of  what  my 
Lord  thought.  Ah,  that  is  what  these  cruel  men  sought  from  Christ ; 
they  tried  to  get  him  to  convince  tliem  that  h©  knew  them  when 
^liis  eyes  were  blinded.  O  brothers  and  sisters,  let  us  never  seek  a 
sign,  as  that  wicked  and  adulterous  generation  did ;  but  let  us  walk 
by  faith,  and  not  by  sight,  and  implicitly  trust  our  Lord.  Because 
we  have  not  trusted  him  as  we  should  have  done,  but  have 
demanded  of  him  signs  and  tokens,  we  have  been  too  much  like 
these  men  who  asked  him,  saying,  "  Prophesy,  who  is  it  that  smote 
thee?" 

I  said  that  we  would  see  love  at  its  labour,  so  I  want  you,  next, 
to  let  your  love  urge  faith  to  confide  in  Christ.  Come,  dear 
friends,  in  all  this  suffering  of  our  Saviour,  let  us  see  fresh  reasons 
for  trusting  ourselves  more  entirely  in  the  hands  of  Christ.  Those 
men  held  Jesus  in  order  that  neither  death  nor  hell  might  ever  be 
able  to  hold  us.  He  was  held  in  our  stead,  so  he  says  concerning 
u^,  as  he  said  concerning  his  disciples  in  the  garden,  "  If  therefore 
ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way."  The  great  Substitute  is  held  as 
a  prisoner  so  that  all,  for  whom  he  stood  as  Surety,  might  be  set 
At  liberty  for  ever. 

He  also  was  mocked;  and  to  what  end  was  that!  We  deserve 
eternal  shame  and  contempt  because  of  our  sin,  but  he  took  all  that 
shame  upon  himself,  and  made  this  wonderful  exchange.  As  he 
put  on  the  rags  of  our  shame,  he  said  to  us,  "  Take  my  glittering 
vesture,  and  wear  it ! "  and  now,  the  glory  which  he  had  with  the 
Father  from  eternity,  he  has  put  upon  his  people,  that  they  may 
be  like  him,  and  may  be  with  him  where  he  is  for  ever  and  ever. 
What  a  wonderful  exchange  is  this !  As  Thomaa  read  the  Deity  of 
Christ  in  his  wounds,  so  do  I  read  the  eternal  glory  of  his  people  in 
the  mockery  which  he  endured  on  their  behalf. 

When  you  see  your  Lord  smitten,  why  is  that  but  that  there 
may  be  no  smitings  and  no  woundings  for  you  now  or  for  ever? 
You  shall  go  free,  for  Jesus  has  borne  all  that  you  deserved  to 
bear;  he  bore  blow  afte<r  blow  that  not  one  might  ever  fall 
upon  you. 

Why,  too,  was  Jesus  blindfolded  but  that  we  might  be  able  to 
see?  Our  sin  had  blinded  us  to  all  that  was  worth  seeing,  but 
his  death  has  taken  away  the  scales,  and  we  can  now  see  because 
he  was  caused  not  to  see.  Because  he  suffered  these  miserable 
miscreants  to  bind  his  eyes,  therefore  are  our  eyes  unbound  to-day, 
and  they  shall  be  yet  more  unbound  in  that  day  when  we  shall 
behold  him  face  to  face,  and  be  no  more  parted  from  him. 

And  why  was  Jesus  blasphemed  by  the  "  many   other  things " 


MAJESTY     IN     MISERY.  2B3 

which  they  falsely  laid  to  his  charge?  He  was  blasphemed  that  we 
might  be  justified.  He  was  unrighteously  accused  and  slandered 
in  order  that  we  might  be  able  boldly  to  say,  "  Who  shall  lay  any 
thing  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect?  It  is  God  that  justifieth.  Who 
is  he  that  condemn eth?  It  is  Christ  that  died."  Therefore,  bo 
ye  glad,  beloved.  While  ye  sorrow  over  your  Lord's  griefs,  rejoice 
over  what  those  griefs  have  brought  to  you,  and  what  they  will 
continue  to  bring  to  you  throughout  eternity. 

Now,  lastly,  let  our  love  at  its  labour  arouse  our  zeal  to  consecra- 
tion to  our  Lord.  Was  he  held  captive?  Then  come,  my  most 
burning  zeal,  and  inflame  me  with  devotion  to  his  cause.  Waa  he 
held  thus  for  me?  Then  he  shall  hold  me  fast,  and  never  let  me  go. 
My  Lord,  I  do  surrender  myself,  my  life,  my  all,  to  thee,  to  be  thy 
willing  captive  for  ever !  Take  these  eyes,  these  lips,  these  hands, 
these  feet,  this  heart,  and  as  thou  wast  and  art  altogether  mine, 
so  let  me  be  altogether  thine.  Is  not  this  a  fair  requital?  Does 
any  child  of  God  demur  to  that? 

Then,  next,  as  they  did  despise  him,  come,  my  soul,  what  sayesrt 
thou  to  this?  Why,  that  I  will  despise  the  world  that  did  despise  my 
Lord  and  Saviour.  O  world,  world,  world,  thou  art  a  blind,  blear- 
eyed,  black-hearted  thing  to  have  treated  my  Master  so !  Shall  I 
conform  to  thy  customs?  Shall  I  flatter  thee?  Shall  I  ask  for  thine 
applause?  Nay,  thou  art  crucified  to  me.  As  a  felon  nailed  up  to 
the  cross,  so,  O  world,  art  thou  to  me  because  thou  hast  crucified 
the  Christ,  the  infinitely-lovely  Son  of  God !  Henceforth,  the  world 
is  crucified  unto  us,  and  we  unto  the  world. 

And  as  they  blindfolded  Jesus,  what  then?  Why,  I  will  be 
blindfolded,  too  ;  I  will  henceforth  see  no  charm,  no  attraction,  any- 
where but  in  my  Lord.  Mine  eyes  shall  behold  him,  and  not 
another,  in  the  glory  that  is  yet  to  be  revealed ;  and,  to-day,  I  can 
aay,  with  the  psalmist,  "Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  thee?  and 
there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  desire  beside  thee."  Go  through  the 
world,  beloved,  blindfolded  to  all  but  Christ,  and  you  shall  do  well. 

And,  as  they  struck  Jesus  on  the  face,  what  will  you  and  I  do 
to  show  how  much  we  love  that  face  which  was  so  shamefully  ill- 
treated?  My  heart  brings  up  before  me  a  vision  of  that  "sacred 
head,  once  wounded,"  encircled  by  the  crown  of  thorns,  that  dear 
face,  go  bruised  and  battered,  yet  even  then  more  beautiful  than 
all  the  other  loveliness  of  heaven  beside.  Jesu,  Son  of  God,  and 
Son  of  man,  we  do  adore  thee ;  and  we  haste  to  kiss  those  blessed 
feet  of  thine,  in  loving  adoration,  and  we  do  it  all  the  more 
because  wicked  men  did  smite  thee  upon  the  cheek  !  Reverence  and 
love  we  gladly  give  to  him  who  once  was  clouted  by  abjects,  and 
who  afterwards  was  nailed  to  the  accursed  tree. 

And,  inasmuch  as  these  men  said  "many  other  things  bla^ 
phemously  against  him,"  come,  my  brothers,  let  us  say  many  things 
in  his  praise;  and,  sisters,  join  us  in  the  holy  exercise.  No  one 
shall  close  our  lips,  faulty  as  they  are,  from  speaking  in  honour  of 
our  dear  Lord.  Sometimes,  with  the  prophet,  we  are  ready  to 
confesa  that  we  are  men  of  unclean  lips,  and  that  w©  dwell  in  the 
midst  of  people  of  unclean  lips;  but,  such  aa  we  are,  we  will  render 


264 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


to  him  the  calves  of  our  lips,  and  give  glory  to  his  holy  name. 
Never  be  ashamed  to  speak  up  for  your  Lord,  beloved.  Never  blush 
to  own  that  you  belong  to  him.  Nay,  if  you  do  blush  at  all,  blush, 
with  ahame  that  you  do  not  love  him  more,  and  serve  him  better. 
By  the  memory  of  that  dear  faoe,  blindfolded  and  smitten,  while> 
cruel  men  all  around  slander  him  with  their  blasphemous  accusa- 
tions, I  charge  you  to — 

"Stand  up,  stand  up  for  Jesus, 
Ye  soldiers  of  the  cross  I  ** 

God  help  you  so  to  do! 

Oh,  that  some  here,  who  have  never  believed  in  Jesfus  Christ, 
would  now  begin  to  trust  him!  I  do  not  invite  you,  just  now, 
so  much  to  believe  in  him  in  his  glory  as  to  believe  in  him  in  his: 
shame.  Was  he  really  the  Son  of  God,  and  did  he  suffer  for  guilty 
men  all  that  we  have  been  thinking  of,  and  far  more  than  that? 
Then,  I  must  believe  in  him.  To  me,  Jesus  Christ  seems  to  be  & 
character  that  men  could  never  have  invented.  He  must  h& 
historical,  for  he  is  so  original.  Unaided  human  minds  could  never 
have  thought  out  such  a  character.  There  are  strange  things  in 
Buddhism,  and  other  false  religions,  and  men  with  wild  imagina- 
tions have  conceived  curious  notions  concerning  their  gods;  but 
I  challenge  anyone  to  show  me,  in  any  book  except  God's  Book,. 
anything  that  can  parallel  the  story  of  the  Eternal  God  himself 
becoming  man  in  order  to  make  atonement  for  the  sins  of  his. 
creatures,  that  is,  the  sins  committed  by  them  against  himself. 
Yes,  brothers  and  sisters,  I  must  believe  in  him.  What  is  more,. 
I  must  believe  that  he  died  for  me^ — 

"That  on  the  cross  he  shed  his  blood 
From  sin  to  set  me  free." 

Having  so  believed, — I  speak  as  God's  witness  to  all  who  can  hear 
me, — I  feel  an  inward  peace  that  nothing  can  break,  a  holy  joy 
that  nothing  can  disturb,  and  a  sacred  calm  which  death  itself 
shall  not  be  able  to  destroy.  I  have  been  at  the  deathbeds  of 
many  of  our  brethren  and  sisters  who  have  been  accustomed  to 
worship  here,  and  who  have  been  members  of  this  church;  and — 
note  this  testimony,  I  pray  you, — I  have  never  seen  one  of  them 
afraid  to  die.  I  have  not  met  with  one  coward  among  them  all; 
but  I  have  heard  some  of  them  singing  triumphantly  in  their  last 
hours,  as  merrily  as  though  it  were  their  marriage  day,  while  others 
have  been  as  calm  and  quiet  as  if  to  die  were  but  to  go  to  bed,  and 
sleep  a  while,  and  wake  again  in  the  morning.  Believe  ye  in  th& 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  this  very  Lord  who  stooped  from  the  heights 
of  glory  to  the  depths  of  shame  and  suffering ;  and  you  also  shall  find  I 
that  your  confidence  in  him  shall  be  rewarded  even  in  this  life; 
while,  as  for  the  world  to  come, — ah !  then,  when  there  shall  be  no 
blindfolded  eyes  for  him, — no  mockery  and  scorn  and  smiting  for 
him, — but  all  shall  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever,  then  you  and  I,  if 
we  are  believers  in  him,  shall  eternally  share  his  glory.  God  grant 
it,  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake  I     Amen. 


OUR  LORD'S  TRIAL  BEFORE  THE  SANHEDRIM. 


Delivered  on  Lokd's-day  Mokninq,  February  5th,  1882,  bt 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


«'  And  they  all  condemned  him  to  be  guilty  of  death."— Mark  xiv.  64. 

This  one  sentence  is  selected  because  custom  demands  a  text  ;  but  in 
reality  we  shall  follow  the  entire  narrative  of  our  Lord's  trial  before  th& 
high-priests.  We  shall  see  how  the  Sanhedrim  arrived  at  their  un- 
ri<?hteous  sentence,  and  what  they  did  afterwards,  and  so,  in  a  sense,  we 
shall  be  keeping  to  our  text.  We  have  just  been  reading  three  passages 
^John  xxiii.  12—24  ;  Mark  xiv.  53-65  ;  and  Luke  xxii.  66—71. 
Please  to  carry  these   in  your  minds  while  I  rehearse  the  mourntul 

^  The  narrative  of  our  Lord's  grief,  if  it  be  carefully  studied,  is  har- 
rowing in  the  extreme.  One  cannot  long  think  of  it  without  tears  ;  m 
fact  I  have  personally  known  what  it  is  to  be  compelled  to  leave  my 
meditations  upon  it  from  excess  of  emotion.  It  is  enough  to  make 
one's  heart  break  fully  to  realize  the  sufferings  of  such  an  One,  so 
lovely  in  himself  and  so  loving  toward  us.  Yet  this  harrowing  ol  the 
feelings  is  exceedingly  useful :  the  after  result  of  it  is  truly  admirable. 
After  mourning  for  Jesus  we  are  raised  above  our  own  mourning. 
There  is  no  consolation  under  heaven  at  all  like  it;  for  the  sorrows  of 
Christ  seem  to  take  the  sting  out  of  our  own  sorrows,  till  they  become 
harmless  and  endurable.  A  sympathetic  contemplation  of  our  Lord  & 
grief  so  dwarfs  our  griefs  that  they  are  reckoned  to  be  but  light  attlic- 
tions  too  petty,  too  insignificant,  to  be  mentioned  m  the  same  day.  ^^  e 
dare  not  write  ourselves  down  in  the  list  of  the  sorrowful  at  all  when 
we  have  just  seen  the  sharp  pains  of  the  Man  of  Sorrows.  The  wounds 
of  Jesus  distil  a  balm  which  heals  all  mortal  ills. 

Nor  is  this  all,  though  that  were  much  in  a  world  of  woe  like  this  ^ 
but  there  is  a  matchless  stimulus  about  the  passion  of  the  Lord. 
Though  you  have  been  almost  crushed  by  the  sight  of  your  Lord  s^ 
agonies  you  have  risen  therefrom  strong,  resolute,  fervent,  consecrated. 
Nothing  stirs  our  hearts'  depths  Hke  his  heart's  anguish.  Nothing  is^ 
too  hard  for  us  to  attempt  or  to  endure  for  One  who  sacrificed  himself 
for  us.  To  be  reviled  for  his  dear  sake  who  suffered  such  shame  for  ua 
becomes  no  great  affliction ;  even  reproach  itself  when  borne  for  him 
No.  1,643. 


266  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

becomes  greater  riches  than  all  the  treasures  of  E.ijypt.  To  suffer  m 
body  and  in  mind,  even  unto  death,  for  him  were  ratlier  a  privilege  than 
an  exaction  :  such  love  so  swells  our  hearts  that  we  vehemently  pant 
for  some  way  of  expressing  our  indebtedness.  AYe  are  grieved  to  think 
that  our  best  will  be  so  little  ;  but  we  are  solemnly  resolved  to  give 
nothing  less  than  our  best  to  him  who  loved  us  and  gave  himself  for  us. 

I  believe  also  that  full  often  careless  hearts  have  been  greatly 
affected  by  the  sufferings  of  Jesus  :  they  have  been  disturbed  in  their 
indifference,  convinced  of  their  ingratitude,  weaned  from  their  love  of 
sin,  and  attracted  to  Christ  by  hearing  what  he  bore  on  their  behalf.  No 
loadstone  can  draw  human  hearts  like  the  cross  of  Christ.  His  wounds 
cause  even  hearts  of  stone  to  bleed.  His  shame  makes  obstinacy  itself 
ashamed.  Men  never  so  plentifully  fall  before  the  great  bow  of  God 
as  when  its  arrows  are  dipped  in  the  blood  of  Jesus.  Those  darts  which 
are  armed  with  his  agonies  cause  wounds  such  as  never  can  be 
healed  except  by  his  own  pierced  hands.  These  are  the  weapons 
which  slay  the  sin  and  save  the  sinner  ;  killing  at  one  stroke  both  his 
self-confidence  and  his  despair,  and  leaving  him  a  captive  to  that  con- 
queror whose  glory  it  is  to  make  men  free. 

This  morning  I  would  not  only  preach  the  doctrines  that  come  out 
of  the  cross,  but  the  cross  itself.  1  suppose  that  was  one  of  the  great 
differences  between  the  first  preaching  of  all  and  the  preaching  after 
the  Reformation.  After  the  Reformation  we  had  clearly  ringing  out 
from  all  pulpits  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  and  other  glorifjua 
truths,  which  I  hope  will  be  made  more  and  more  prominent ;  but  the 
first  fathers  of  the  church  set  forth  the  same  truths  in  a  less  theological 
fashion.  If  they  dwell  little  upon  justification  by  faith  they  were  won- 
derfully full  upon  the  blood  and  its  cleansing  power,  the  wounds  and 
their  healing  efficacy,  the  death  of  Jesus  and  our  eternal  life.  We  will 
go  back  to  their  style  for  awhile,  and  preach  the  facts  about  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  rather  than  the  doctrinal  inferences  therefrom.  Oh,  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  would  so  bring  the  sorrows  of  our  Lord  near  to 
each  heart  that  every  one  of  us  may  know  the  fellowship  of  his 
sufferings,  and  possess  faith  in  his  salvation  and  reverent  love  for  his 
person. 

I.  We  will  begin  our  narrative  this  morning  by  first  asking  you 
to  think  of  the  preliminary  examination  of  Our  Blessed  Lord 
AND  Master  by  the  high  priest.  They  brought  in  our  Lord  from 
the  garden  bound ;  but  they  also  kept  fast  hold  upon  him,  for  we  read  of 
•*'  the  men  that  held  him."  They  were  evidently  afraid  of  their  prisoner, 
even  when  they  had  him  entirely  in  their  power.  He  was  all  gentleness 
and  submission;  but  conscience  made  cowards  of  them  all,  and  tiiey 
therefore  took  all  a  coward's  care  to  hold  him  in  their  grasp.  As  the 
court  had  not  yet  gathered  in  sufficient  numbers  for  a  general  examina- 
tion, the  high  priest  resolved  that  he  would  fill  up  the  time  by  personally 
interrogating  his  prisoner. 

He  commenced  his  malicious  exercise.  The  high  priest  asked  Jesus 
concerning  his  disciples.  We  cannot  tell  what  were  the  questions,  but  I 
suppose  they  were  something  like  these :  "  How  is  it  that  thou  hast 
gathered  about  thee  a  band  of  men?  What  did  they  with  thee?  What 
was  thine  ultimate  intention  to  do  by  their  means  ?     Who  were  they  ? 


OUR  lord's  trial  before  the  sanhedrim. 


267 


Were  they  not  a  set  of  fanatics,  or  men  discontented  and  ready  for 
sedition?'"'  I  do  not  know  how  the  crafty  Caiaphas  put  his  question  : 
but  the  Saviour  gave  no  reply  to  this  particular  enquiry.  What  could 
he  have  said  if  he  had  attempted  to  answer?  Ah,  brothers,  what  good 
could  he  have  said  of  his  disciples  ?  AVe  may  be  sure  he  would  say  no  ill. 
He  might  have  said,  "  Concerning  my  disciples,  one  of  them  has  betrayed 
me  ;  he  has  still  the  blood-money  in  his  hand  which  you  gave  him  as 
my  price.  Another  of  them,  down  in  the  hall  there,  before  the  cock 
crows  will  deny  that  he  ever  knew  me,  and  add  oaths  and  cursing  to  his 
denial :  and  as  for  the  rest,  they  have  all  forsaken  me  and  fled."  There- 
fore our  Lord  said  nothing  concerning  his  disciples,  for  he  will  not  turu 
the  accuser  of  his  own,  whom  he  came,  not  to  condemn,  but  to  justify. 

The  high  priest  also  asked  him  concerning  his  doctrine.  1  suppose 
he  said  to  him,  "  What  new  teaching  is  this  of  thine  ?  Are  ive  not 
eufficient  to  teach  the  people — the  Scribes  so  learned  in  the  law,  the 
Pharisees  so  attentive  to  ritual,  the  Sadducees  so  philosophical  and 
speculative?  Why  needest  thou  intrude  into  this  domain?  I  suppose 
thee  to  be  little  more  than  a  peasant's  son :  what  is  this  strange 
teaching  of  thine?" 

To  this  enquiry  our  Lord  did  answer,  and  what  a  fnumphrmt  reply  it 
was  I  Oh  that  we  could  always  speak,  when  it  is  right  to  speak,  as 
meekly  and  as  wisely  as  he !  He  said,  "  I  spake  openly  to  the  vvorld ;  I 
ever  taught  in  the  synagogue  and  in  the  temple,  whither  the  Jews  always 
resort,  and  in  secret  I  have  said  nothing.  Why  askcst  thou  me?  ask 
them  which  heard  me  what  I  have  said  unto  them:  behold,  they  know 
what  I  have  said."  Oh,  brethren,  no  reply  to  slander  can  be  compared 
with  a  blameless  life,  .lesus  had  lived  in  the  full  blaze  of  day  where  all 
could  see,  and  yet  lie  was  able  to  challenge  accusation  and  say,  "  Ask 
them  which  heard  me."  Happy  is  the  man  who  has  no  need  to 
defend  himself  because  his  works  and  words  are  solid  testimonials  to 
his  uprightness  and  goodness.  Our  Saviour  answered  his  questioner 
very  gently,  but  yet  most  eifectually,  by  his  appeal  to  facts.  He  stands 
before  us  at  once  the  mirror  of  meekness  and  the  paragon  of  perfection, 
with  slander  like  a  wounded  snake  writhing  at  his  feet.  What  a  delight 
to  have  this  triumphant  pleader  for  our  advocate,  to  urge  his  own 
righteousness  in  our  defence  !  None  can  impugn  his  absolute  perfection, 
and  that  perfection  covers  all  his  saints  this  day.  Who  shall  accuse  us 
now  that  Jesus  has  undertaken  to  plead  for  us  ? 

This  overwhelming  answer,  however,  brought  the  Saviour  a  Mow 
from  one  of  the  officers  of  the  court  who  stood  by.  Was  not  this  a 
most  shocking  deed  ?  Here  was  the  first  of  a  new  order  of  assaults. 
Hicheito  we  have  not  heard  of  strokes  and  blows;  but  now  it  is  ful- 
filled, "  They  shall  smite  the  Judge  of  Israel  with  a  rod  upon  his  cheek." 
This  was  the  first  of  a  long  series  of  assaults.  I  wonder  who  the  man 
was  that  struck  the  Master  so.  I  could  wish  that  the  Master's  reply  to 
him  may  have  influenced  his  heart  to  repentance ;  but  if  not,  it  is  certain 
that  he  led  the  van  in  personal  assaults  upon  our  Lord's  person :  hia 
impious  hand  first  struck  him.  Surely  if  he  died  in  impenitence  the  memory 
of  that  blow  must  remain  as  a  never-dying  worm  within  him.  To-day 
he  cries,  "I  was  the  first  to  smite  him:  I  struck  him  on  the  mouth 
with  the  palm  of  my  hand."    The  old  writers  upon  the  Passion  give  U3 


268 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


Tarious  details  of  the  injuries  inflicted  upon  the  Saviour  by  that  blowi 
but  we  attach  no  importance  to  such  traditions,  and  therefore  will  not 
repeat  them,  but  simply  say  that  there  was  general  belief  in  the  churcl 
that  this  blow  was  a  very  grievous  one,  and  caused  the  Saviour  mucl 
pain.  Yet  while  he  felt  that  blow,  and  was  perhaps  half  staggered  bj 
it,  the  Master  did  not  lose  his  composure,  or  exhibit  the  least  resent- 
ment. His  reply  was  everything  it  ought  to  be.  There  is  not  a  won 
too  much.  He  does  not  say,  "  God  shall  smite  thee,  thou  whited  wall," 
as  did  the  Apostle  Paul.  AV"e  will  not  censure  the  servant,  but  we  wil 
far  more  commend  the  Master.  He  meekly  said,  "  If  I  have  spokei 
evil,  bear  witness  of  the  evil:  but  if  well,  why  smitest  thou  me?* 
Enough,  surely,  if  there  remained  any  tenderness  in  the  heart  of  the 
aggressor,  to  have  made  him  turn  his  hand  upon  his  own  breast  ii 
penitential  grief.  One  would  not  have  wondered  had  he  cried  outj 
"  Forgive  me,  0  thou  divinely  meek  and  gentle  One,  and  let  me  heac 
forth  be  thy  disciple." 

Thus  have  we  seen  the  first  part  of  our  liord's  sufferings  in  the  hous 
of  the  high  priest,  and  the  lesson  from  it  is  just  this — Let  us  be  meel 
and  lowly  in  heart  as   the  Saviour  was,  for  herein  lay  his  strengtl 
and  dignity.     You  tell  me  I  have  said  that  before.     Yes,  brethrei 
and   I  shall   have   to   say   it   several   more   times  before  you  and 
have  learned  the   lesson  well.     It  is  hard  to  be  meek  when  falsely 
accused,    meek   when   roughly   interrogated,   meek   when   a  cunninj 
adversary  is  on  the  catch,  meek  when  smarting  under  a  cruel  bloi 
which  was  a  disgrace  to  a  court  of  justice.     You  have  heard  of  tl 
patience  of  Job,  but  it  pales  before  the  patience  of  Jesus.     Admire  hi^ 
forbearance,  but  do  not  stop  at  admiration;  copy  his  example,  writ 
under  this  head-line  and  follow  every  stroke.     0  Spirit  of  God,  evei 
with  Christ  for  an  example,  we  shall  not  learn  meekness  unless  thou  dost 
teach  us  ;  and  even  with  thee  for  a  teacher  we  shall  not  learn  it  unless 
we  take  his  yoke  upon  us  and  learn  of  him ;  for  it  is  only  at  his  feet, 
and  under  thy  divine  anointing  that  we  shall  ever  become  meek  and 
lowly  of  heart,  and  so  find  rest  unto  our  souls. 

The  preliminary  examination  is  therefore  over,  and  it  has  ended  in  no 
success  whatever  for  the  high  priest.  He  has  questioned  Jesus  and  he 
has  smitten  him,  but  the  ordeal  brings  nothing  to  content  the  adversary. 
The  prisoner  is  supremely  victorious,  the  assailant  is  baffled. 

II.  Now  comes  a  second  scene,  the  search  for  witnesses  against 
HIM.  "  The  chief  priests  and  all  the  council  sought  for  witness  agaii 
Jesus  to  put  him  to  death;  and  found  none."  A  strange  court  thj 
meets  with  the  design  to  find  the  prisoner  guilty,  resolved  in  some  waj 
or  other  to  compass  his  death.  They  must  proceed  according  to  th^ 
forms  of  justice,  and  so  they  summon  witnesses,  though  all  the  whil^ 
they  violate  the  spirit  of  justice,  for  they  ransack  Jerusalem  to  find  wit' 
nesses  who  will  perjure  themselves  to  accuse  the  Lord.  Every  man 
the  council  is  writing  down  somebody's  name  who  may  be  fetched  in  froi 
the  outside,  for  the  people  have  come  from  all  parts  of  the  land  to  kee| 
the  Passover,  and  surely  some  may  be  hunted  up  who,  in  one  ^^ace  ot 
another,  have  heard  him  use  an  actionable  mode  of  speech.  The}  fetci 
in,  therefore,  everyone  that  they  can  find  of  that  degraded  class  wh( 
will  venture  upon  perjuring  themselves  if  the  bribe  be  fortlicomingj 


OUR  lord's  trial  bkfoee  the  sanhededl  2f.9 

They  sconr  Jerusalem  to  bring  forth  witnesses  against  Jesus  ;  but  they 
had  great  difficulty  in  accomplishing  their  design,  because  they  were 
bound  to  examine  the  witnesses  apart,  and  they  could  not  make  them 
ao-ree.     Lies  cannot  be  easily  made  to  pair  with  each  other,   whereas 
truths  are  cut  to  the  same  pattern.     Moreover,  many  sorts  of  witnesses 
that  they  coald  readily  find  they  did  not  dare  to  bring  forward.     Wit- 
nesses were  forthcoming  who  could  testify  that  Jesus  had  spoken  agamst 
the  tradition  of  the  elders ;  but  in  that  some  who  were  in  the  council, 
namely,  the  Sadducees,  were  agreed  with  him  to  a  large  extent.     It 
would  never  do  to  bring  forward  a  charge  about  which  they  would  not  be 
unanimous.    His  denunciations  of  the  Pharisees  could  not  be  the  charge, 
for  these  pleased  the  Sadducees ;  neither  could  they  allege  his  outcry 
aj^ainst  the  Sadducees,  for  in  this  the  Pharisees  were  agreed  with  him. 
You  recollect  how  Paul,  when  brought  before  this  Sanhedrim,  took  ad- 
vantage of  their  division  of  opinion  and  cried,  "  I  am  a  Pharisee,  the 
son  of  a  Pharisee ;  of  the  hope  and  resurrection  of  the  dead  I  am  called 
in  question";  and  in  this  manner  created  a  dissension  among  the  con- 
clave, which  for  a  time  wrought  in  his  favour.     Our  Lord  took  higher 
and  nobler  ground,  and  did  not  stoop  to  turn  their  folly  to  his  own  benefit ; 
yet,  they  being  conscious  of  their  internal  feuds,  cautiously  avoided 
those  points  upon  which  they  were  not  in  harmony.     They  might  have 
brought  forward  their  old  grievance  that  the  Lord  Jesus  did  not  observe 
the  Sabbath  after  their  fashion  ;  but  then  it  would  have  come  out  more 
publicly  that  he  had  healed  the  sick  on  the  Sabbath.     It  would  not  do 
to  publish  that  fact,  for  who  would  think  of  putting  a  person  to  death 
for  having  opened  the  eyes  of  one  born  blind,  or  having  restored  a 
withered  arm  on  the  Sabbath-day?     That  kind  of  witness  was  therefore 
set  aside.    But  might  they  not  have  found  some  witnesses  to  swear  that 
he  had  talked  about  a  kingdom  that  he  was  setting  up  ?    Might  not  this 
readily  have  been  made  to  mean  sedition  and  rebellion  ?     Yes,  but  then 
that  was  rather  a  charge  to  allege  against  him  before  Pilate's  civil  court, 
whereas  theirs  was  an  ecclesiastical   tribunal.     Moreover,  there  were 
Herodiaus  in  the  council  who  were  very  restive  under  the  Roman  yoke, 
and  could  not  have  had  the  face  to  condemn  anyone  for  being  a  patriot ; 
and  beside,  the  people  outside  would  have  sympathized  with  Jesus  all 
the  more  if  they  had  supposed  that  he  would  lead  them  on  rebelling 
against  Csesar.     Therefore  they  could  not  urge  that  point.     They  must 
have  been  greatly  puzzled  to  know  what  to  do ;  especially  when  even  on 
those  points  which  they  decided  to   bring  forward   the  witnesses  no 
sooner  opened  their  mouths  than  they  contradicted  each  other.     At  last 
they  had  it.  There  came  two  whose  evidence  was  somewhat  agreed ;  and 
they  asserted  that  on  a  certain  occasion  Jesus  Christ  had  said,  "  I  will 
destroy  this  temple  that  is  made  with  hands,  and  within  three  days  I 
will  build  another  made  without  hands."     Here  was  blasphemy  against 
the  holy  and  beautiful  house  of  the  Lord,  and  this  would  serve  their 
turn.     Now,  the  Saviour  had  said  something  which  was  a  little  like 
the  testimony  of  these  false  witnesses,  and  a  misunderstanding  had 
made  it  more  like  it ;  but  still  their  statement  was  a  lie,  and  none  the 
less  a  lie  because  a  shadow  of  truth  had  fallen  upon  it,  for  the  worst 
kind  of  lie  is  that  which  is  manufactured  out  of  a  truth  :  it  does  more 
mischief  a  great  deal  than  if  it  were  a  falsehood  from  stem  to  stern. 


270 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


The  Saviour  had  not  said,  "I  will  destroy  this  temple":  he  saW 
"Destroy  this  temple,"  that  is  to  say,  "Ye  will  destroy  it,  and  ye 
may  destroy  it."  He  had  not  referred  to  the  Jerusalem  temple  at 
all;  this  spake  he  concerning  the  temple  of  his  body  which  would 
be  destroyed.  Christ  has  never  said,  "Destroy  this  temple  which 
is  made  with  hands,  and  I  will  build  another  without  hands":  in 
his  language  there  is  no  allusion  to  hands  at  all.  These  refine- 
ments were  of  their  own  inventing,  and  his  language  gave  no  colour 
for  them.  He  had  not  said,  "I  will  build  another'^  he  had  said, 
"  I  will  raise  it  up,"  which  is  quite  a  different  thing.  He  meant  that 
his  body,  after  being  destroyed,  would  be  raised  up  again  on  the 
third  day.  They  had  altered  a  word  here  and  a  word  there,  the  mood 
of  one  verb  and  the  form  of  another,  and  so  they  made  out  our  Lord  to 
say  what  he  never  thought  of.  Yet  even  on  that  charge  they  did  not 
agree.  One  said  one  thing  upon  it,  and  another  said  another,  so  that 
even  this  paltry  accusation  could  not  be  brought  against  the  Saviour. 
Their  patched-up  falsehood  was  made  of  such  rotten  stuff  that  the 
pieces  would  not  hold  together.  They  were  ready  to  swear  to  anything 
that  came  into  their  perjured  imaginations,  but  they  could  not  be  got 
to  swear  any  two  of  them  to  the  selfsame  thing. 

Meanwhile  the  Lord  himself  stands  silent;  like  the  sheep  before  her 
shearers,  he  is  dumb,  and  openeth  not  his  mouth ;  and  I  suppose  the 
reason  was  partly  that  he  might  fulfil  the  prophecy,  partly  because  the 
grandeur  of  his  soul  could  not  stoop  to  contend  with  liars,  and  most  of 
all  because  his  innocence  needed  no  defence.  He  that  is  in  some 
measure  guilty  is  eager  to  apologize  and  to  extenuate :  his  excuses 
usually  suggest  to  men  of  experience  the  belief  that  there  may  be  some 
ground  for  the  accusation.  He  that  is  perfectly  innocent  is  in  no  haste 
to  answer  his  slanderers,  for  they  soon  answer  one  another.  Our 
Lord  did  not  desire  to  get  into  a  vain  jangle  with  them,  and  so  to 
lead  them  on  to  utter  still  more  falsehoods.  If  speech  can  do  no  good 
then  indeed  silence  is  wise:  when  the  only  result  would  have  been  to 
provoke  his  enemies  to  add  to  their  iniquities  it  was  magnanimous 
compassion  which  led  the  slandered  Saviour  to  hold  his  speech. 

AVe  must  not  refrain  from  noticing  the  comfort  which  in  some  degree 
had  been  ministered  to  our  Lord  by  the  accusation  which  came  most  to 
the  front.     He  stands  there,  and  he  knows  they  are  about  to  put  him  to 
death,  but  they  themselves  remind  him  that  their  power  over  him  has 
no  longer  lease  than  three  days,  and  at  the  end  of  that  short  time  hej 
will  be  raised  up  .again,  no  more  to  be  at  their  disposal.     His  enemies 
witnessed  the  resurrection  to  him.  I  say  not  that  his  memory  was  weak, 
or  that  he  would  possibly  have  forgotten  it  amid  his  sorrows,  but  yet 
our  Lord  was  human,  and  modes  of  comfort  which  are  valuable  to  us 
were  also  useful  to  him.     When  the  mind  is  tortured  with  malicious 
falsehood,  and  the  whole  man  is  tossed  about  by  pains  and  griefs,  it  is  good 
for  us  to  be  reminded  of  the  consolations  of  God.    We  read  of  some  who 
were  "tortured,  not  accepting  deliverance,*'  and  it  was  the  hope  of 
resurrection  which  sustained  them.    Our  Lord  knew  that  his  soul  would 
not  be  left  in  the  abodes  of  the  dead,  neither  should  his  flesh   see 
corruption,  and  the  false  witnesses  brought  this  vividly  before  his  mind. 
Now,  indeed,  could  our  Redeemer  say,  "  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in 


OUR  LORD'S  TRIAL  BEFORE  THE  SANHEDRIM.        271 

three  days  I  will  raise  it  dp."  These  ravens  have  brought  the  Saviour 
bread  and  meat.  In  these  dead  lions  our  glorious  Samson  has  found 
honey.  Sustained  by  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him  he  despises  the 
shame.  Strange  that  out  of  the  mouths  of  those  who  sought  his  blood 
there  should  come  the  memorial  of  one  of  his  greatest  glories. 

Now,  brethren,  here  again  we  learn  the  same  lesson  as  before,  namely^ 
let  us  gain  meekness,  and  prove  it  by  our  pov\er  to  hold  our  tongues. 
Eloquence  is  difficult  to  acquire,  but  silence  is  far  more  hard  to 
practise.  A  man  may  much  sooner  learn  to  speak  well  than  learn  not 
to  speak  at  all.  We  are  in  such  a  hurry  to  vindicate  our  own  cause  that 
we  damage  it  by  rash  speech :  if  we  were  calm,  gentle,  quiet,  forbearing 
as  the  Saviour  was,  our  pathway   to  victory  would  be  much  more  easy. 

Observe,  again,  the  armour  with  which  Christ  was  clad:  see  the 
invulnerable  shield  of  his  holiness.  His  life  was  such  that  slander 
could  not  frame  an  accusation  against  him  which  would  last  long  enough 
to  be  repeated.  So  frail  were  the  charges  that,  like  bubbles,  they 
vanished  as  soon  as  they  saw  the  light.  Our  Lord's  enemies  were 
utterly  baffled.  They  hurled  their  darts  against  him,  but,  as  if  they 
fell  upon  a  shield  of  blazing  diamond,  every  arrow  was  broken  and  con- 
sumed. 

Learn  also  this  other  lesson  that  we  must  expect  to  be  misrepresented : 
we  may  reckon  that  our  words  will  have  other  meanings  to  ungracious 
ears  than  those  which  we  intended ;  we  may  expect  that  when  we  teach 
one  thing  which  is  true  they  will  make  us  out  to  have  stated  another 
which  is  false;  but  let  us  not  be  overwhelmed  by  this  fiery  trial  as 
though  it  were  some  strange  thing.  Our  Lord  and  Master  has  endured 
it,  and  the  servants  must  not  escape.  Wherefore  endure  hardness  as 
good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  be  not  afraid. 

Amid  the  din  of  these  hes  and  perjuries,  I  hear  the  still  small  voice  of 
a  truth  most  precious,  for  like  as  Jesus  stood  for  us  at  the  bar,  and  they 
could  not  cause  an  accusation  to  abide  upon  him,  so  when  we  shall 
stand  in  him  at  the  last  great  day,  washed  in  his  blood  and  covered 
with  his  righteousness,  we  too  shall  be  clear.  ''Who  shall  lay  anything 
to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ? "  If  Satan  should  appear  as  the  accuser 
of  the  brethren,  he  will  be  met  by  the  voice,  "  The  Lord  rebuke  thee, 
0  Satan,  even  the  Lord  that  hath  chosen  Jerusalem  rebuke  thee  :  is  not 
this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  burning  ?"  Yes,  beloved,  we  too  shall 
be  cleared  of  slander.  Then  shall  the\'ighteous  shine  forth  as  the  sun 
in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father.  The  glorious  righteousness  of  him 
who  was  falsely  accused  shall  deliver  the  saints  and  all  iniquity  shall 
stop  her  mouth. 

III.  But  I  must  not  dwell  too  long  even  on  such  themes  as  these, 
and  therefore  I  pass  on  to  the  personal  interrogation  which  fol- 
lowed upon  the  failure  to  bring  forward  witnesses.  The  high  priest,  too 
indignant  to  sit  still,  rises  and  stands  over  the  prisoner  like  a  lion 
roaring  over  his  prey,  and  begins  to  question  him  again.  It  was  an  un- 
righteous thing  to  do.  Should  the  judge  who  sits  to  administer  law  set 
himself  to  prove  the  prisoner  guilty,  or,  what  is  worse,  shall  he  try  to 
extort  confession  from  the  accused  which  may  be  used  ajrainst  him  ? 
It  Avas  a  tacit  confession  that  Christ  had  been  proved  innocent  up  till 
then.    The  high  priest  would  not  have  needed  to  draw  something  out 


272  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

of  the  accused  one  if  there  had  been  sufficient  material  against  him 
elsewhere.  The  trial  had  been  a  dead  failure  up  to  that  point,  and  he 
knew  it,  and  was  red  with  rage.  Now  he  attempts  to  bully  the  prisoner, 
tliat  he  may  extract  some  declarati9n  from  him  which  may  save  all 
further  trouble  of  witnesses,  and  end  the  matter.  The  question  was 
forced  home  by  a  solemn  adjuration,  and  it  effected  its  purpose,  for  the 
Lord  Jesus  did  speak,  though  he  knew  that  he  was  thereby  furnishing 
a  weapon  against  himself.  He  felt  under  bond  to  answer  the  high 
priest  of  his  people  when  he  used  such  adjuration,  bad  man  as  that  high 
priest  was  ;  and  he  could  not  draw  back  from  a  charge  so  solemn  lest  he 
should  seem  by  his  silence  to  deny  the  truth  upon  which  the  salvation 
of  the  world  is  made  to  hinge.  So  when  the  high  priest  said  to  him, 
**  Arc  thou  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Blessed  ?  "  how  distinctly  and 
outspoken  was  the  Master's  reply.  Though  he  knew  that  his  death 
would  thus  be  compassed,  he  witnessed  a  good  confession.  He  plainly 
said,  **  I  am,"  and  then  he  added  to  that  declaration,  "Ye  shall  see  the 
Son  of  man," — so  he  brings  out  his  humanity  as  well  as  his  deity,  "sitting 
on  the  right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven."  What 
a  majestic  faith  !  It  is  wonderful  to  think  that  he  should  be  so  calm 
as  to  confront  his  mockers,  and  assert  his  glory  while  he  was  in  the 
depths  of  shame.  He  did  as  good  as  say,  **  You  sit  as  my  judges,  but  I 
shall  soon  sit  as  your  judge  :  I  seem  to  you  to  be  an  insignificant 
peasant,  but  I  am  the  Son  of  the  Blessed  ;  you  think  that  you  will 
crush  me,  but  you  never  will ;  for  I  shall  speedily  sit  at  the  right 
hand  of  the  power  of  God,  and  come  in  the  clouds  of  heaven."  He 
speaks  boldly,  as  well  became  him.  I  admire  the  meekness  that  could 
be  silent,  I  admire  the  meekness  that  could  speak  gently,  but  I  still 
more  wonder  at  the  meekness  that  could  speak  courageously,  and  still 
be  meek.  Somehow  or  other,  when  we  rouse  ourselves  to  courage,  we 
let  in  harshness  at  the  same  door,  or  if  we  shut  out  our  anger,  we  are 
very  apt  to  forget  our  firmness.  Jesus  never  slays  one  virtue  to  make 
room  for  another.  His  character  is  complete,  full-orbed,  perfect,  which- 
ever way  we  look  at  it. 

And  surely,  brethren,  this  must  have  brought  another  sweet  consola- 
tion to  our  divine  Master's  heart.  While  smarting  under  that  cruel 
blow,  while  writhing  under  those  filthy  accusations,  while  enduring  such 
contradiction  of  sinners  against  himself,  he  must  have  felt  satisfied 
from  within  in  the  consciousness  of  his  Sonship  and  his  power,  and  in 
the  prospect  of  his  glory  and  triumph.  A  well  of  water  springs  up 
within  his  soul  as  he  foresees  that  he  shall  sit  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  and  that  he  shall  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead,  and  vindicate  his 
redeemed.  It  is  a  wise  thing  to  have  these  consolations  always  ready 
to  hand.  The  enemy  may  not  see  their  consolatory  power,  but  we  see 
it.  To  us  from  beneath  the  altar  there  issues  forth  a  stream  whose 
gentle  flow  supplies  our  spirits  with  a  quiet  gladness  such  as  all  earth's 
waters  can  never  rival.  Even  now  we  also  hear  the  Father  say,  "  I  am 
thy  shield  and  thy  exceeding  great  reward." 

Notice,  ere  we  pass  away  from  this  point,  that,  practically,  the  trial 
and  the  interrogation  ended  in  our  Lord's  being  condemned  because  of 
his  avowal  of  his  deity.  They  said,  **Ye  have  heard  the  blasphemy: 
what  think  ye  ?    And  they  all  condemned  him  to  be  guilty  of  death," 


OUR  lord's  trial  before  the  sanhedrim.  273 

I  cannot  make  out  at  all  those  people  who  call  themselves  Unitarians, 
and  deny  our  Lord's  deity.  Unitarians  we  also  are,  for  we  believe  in 
one  God,' and  one  God  only  ;  but  they  tell  us  that  this  blessed  Christ 
our  Master  is  not  God,  and  yet  they  own  that  he  was  the  most  excellent 
of  men,  the  most  perfect  of  human  beings.  I  cannot  see  it  myself. 
He  seems  to  me  to  be  a  blasphemer,  and  nothing  else,  if  he  be  not  God ; 
and  the  Jews  evidently  held  that  opinion,  and  treated  him  accordingly. 
If  he  had  not  said  that  God  was  his  Father,  they  would  not  have  been 
so  enraged  against  him.  They  put  him  to  death  because  of  the  asser- 
tion of  his  deity,  and  the  declaration  that  he  would  sit  at  the  right 
hand  of  power  and  judge  the  world.  To-day  multitudes  are  willing  to 
take  Christ  as  a  teacher,  but  they  will  not  have  him  as  the  Son  of  God. 
I  do  not  doubt  that  the  Christian  religion  might  be  received  in  many 
places  if  it  were  shorn  of  its  strength ;  if,  in  fact,  its  very  soul  and 
bowels  were  torn  out  of  it,  by  setting  forth  Jesus  as  one  of  the  prophets 
and  nothing  more.  Hear  how  our  wise  men  talk  of  him  as  one  of  a 
line  Df  great  reformers,  such  as  Moses,  Samuel,  Elijah,  and  they  often 
add  Confucius  and  Mahomet.  Do  we  give  place  to  this?  No,  not  for 
an  instant.  He  is  verily  the  Son  of  the  Blessed.  He  is  divine,  or 
false.  The  accusation  of  blasphemy  must  lie  against  him  if  he  be  not 
the  Son  of  the  Highest. 

IV.  We  must  now  pass  on  and  linger  for  a  second  or  two  over  the 
CONDEMNATION.  They  condemned  him  out  of  his  own  mouth  :  but 
this,  while  it  wore  the  seuiblatice  of  justice,  was  really  unjust.  The 
prisoner  at  the  bar  has  affirmed  that  he  is  the  Son  of  God.  What  next? 
May  he  not  speak  the  truth  ?  If  it  be  the  truth  he  must  not  be  con- 
demned, but  adored.  Justice  requires  that  an  enquiry  be  made  as  to 
whether  he  be  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Blessed,  or  not.  He  has  claimed 
to  be  the  Messiah.  Very  well,  all  those  in  the  court  are  expecting  the 
Messiah  ;  some  of  them  expect  him  to  appear  very  speedily.  May 
not  this  be  the  sent  one  of  the  Lord  ?  Let  an  enquiry  be  made  into 
his  claims.  What  is  his  lineage  ?  Where  was  he  born  ?  Have  any 
prophets  attested  him  ?  Has  he  wrought  miracles  ?  Some  such 
enquiries  are  due  to  any  man  whose  life  is  at  stake.  You  cannot  justly 
condemn  a  man  to  die  without  examining  into  the  truth  of  his  defence,, 
for  it  may  turn  out  that  his  statements  are  correct.  But,  no,  they  will 
not  hear  the  man  they  hate,  the  mere  claim  condemns  him  ;  it  is^ 
blasphemy,  and  he  must  die. 

He  says  he  is  the  Son  of  God.  Come,  then,  Caiaphas  and  council,, 
call  for  witnesses  for  the  defence.  Enquire  whether  blind  eyes  have  been 
opened  and  the  dead  raised  up.  Ask  whether  he  has  wrought  miracles 
such  as  no  man  ever  wrought  in  the  midst  of  Israel  throughout  all  time. 
Why  not  do  this  ?  0  no,  he  must  be  taken  from  prison  and  from  judg- 
ment, and  none  shall  declare  his  generation.  The  less  enquiry  the 
more  easy  to  condemn  him  unjustly.  He  has  said  he  is  the  Christ  and 
the  Son  of  God,  he  is  therefore  guilty  of  death.  Alas,  how  many  there 
are  who  condemn  Christ's  doctrine  without  making  due  enquiries  into  it,. 
— condemn  it  on  the  most  trivial  grounds.  They  come  to  hear  a  sermon, 
and  perhaps  find  fault  with  the  mannerism  of  the  preacher,  as  if  that 
were  sufficient  reason  for  denying  the  truth  which  he  preaches ;  or  else 
they  say,  "  This  is  so  strange — we  cannot  believe  it."     Why  not  ?    Are 

18 


274  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

not  strange  things  sometimes  true,  and  is  not  many  a  truth  wondronslr 
-   itrange  until  you  get  familiar  with  it  ?     These  men  will  not  condescend 
io  hear  Christ's  proof  of  claim  :  they  will  make  no  enquiry.     In  this 
like  the  Jewish  priests,  they  practically  cry,  "Away  with  him  '    \way 
with  him!"  '' 

He  is  condemned  to  die,  and  the  high  priest  rends  his  clothes.  I  do 
not  know  whether  he  wore  at  that  time  the  robes  in  which  he  minis- 
tered, but  doubtless  he  wore  some  garb  peculiar  to  his  sacerdotal  office 
and  this  he  rent.  Oh,  how  significant !  The  house  of  Aaron  and  the 
tribe  of  Levi  had  their  garments  rent,  and  the  temple,  within  a  few 
hours,  rent  its  veil  from  the  top  to  the  bottom  :  for  priests  and  temple 
were  alike  abolished.  They  little  knew  it,  but  in  all  they  did  there  was 
a  singular  significance  :  those  rent  garments  were  an  index  of  the  fact 
that  now  the  Aaronic  priesthood  was  for  ever  rent,  and  the  great  Mel- 
chisidec  priesthood  had  come  in,  for  the  true  Melchisidec  there  and 
then  stood  before  them  in  all  the  majesty  of  his  patience. 

Observe  that  they  were  all  agreed  ;  there  were  no  dissentients ;  they 
had  taken  care,  I  have  no  doubt,  not  to  let  Nicodemus  and  Joseph  of 
Arimathaea  know  anything  about  this  meeting  of  theirs.  They  held  it 
in  the  night,  and  they  only  rehearsed  it  in  the  early  morning,  for  the 
sake  of  keeping  their  old  Rabbinical  law  that  they  must  try  prisoners  bv 
daylight.  They  hurried  up  the  trial,  and  any  that  might  have  spoken 
against  their  bloodthirsty  sentence  were  kept  out  of  the  way.  The 
assembly  was  unanimous.  Alas  for  the  unanimity  of  ungodly  hearts  against 
Christ!  It  is  wonderful  that  there  should  be  such  quarrels  among 
Christ's  friends,  and  such  unity  among  his  foes,  when  the  point  is  to  put 
him  to  death.  I  never  heard  of  quarrels  among  devils,  nor  did  I  ever 
read  of  sects  in  hell:  they  are  all  one  in  their  hatred  of  the  Christ  and 
of  God.  But  here  are  we  split  up  into  sections  and  parties,  and  often  at 
war  with  one  another.  0  Lord  of  love,  forgive  us:  King  of  concord, 
come  and  reign  over  us,  and  bring  us  into  a  perfect  unity  around 
thyself. 

The  sentence  was  "  death."  I  say  nothing  of  it  but  this.  Death  wa?. 
the  sentence  due  to  me,  the  sentence  due  to  you,  and  they  laid  it  upon 
our  Substitute.  '*  Worthy  of  death,"— they  said— all  of  them.  All 
hands  were  held  up ;  all  voices  said  ''  Yea,  yea  "  to  the  verdict.  Yet 
there  was  no  fault  in  him.  Say  rather,  there  was  every  excellence  in 
him.  As  I  hear  Jesus  condemned  to  die  my  soul  falls  at  his  feet  and 
cries,  "  Blessed  Lord,  now  hast  thou  taken  my  condemnation  ;  there  is, 
therefore,  none  for  me.  Now  hast  thou  taken  my  cup  of  death  to  drink, 
and  henceforth  it  is  dry  to  me.  Glory  be  to  thy  blessed  name,  hence- 
forth and  for  ever." 

V.  I  am  almost  glad  that  my  time  is  so  far  advanced,  for  I  must 
needs  set  before  you  the  fifth  and  most  painful  scene.  No  sooner  have 
these  evil  men  of  the  Sanhedrim  pronounced  him  guilty  of  death,  than  the 
servants,  the  guards,  and  those  that  kept  the  high-priests'  hall,  eager  to 
please  their  masters,  and  all  touched  with  the  same  brute-like  °spirit 
which  was  in  them,  straightway  began  to  abuse  the  infinite  majesty  of 
our  Lord.  Consider  the  abuse.  Let  me  read  the  words:  "Some 
began  to  spit  on  him."  "  Began  to  spit  on  him  !  "  Thus  was  contempt 
expressed  more  effectively  than  by  words.    Be  astonished,  0  heavens, 


OUR  lord's  trial  before  the  sanhedrim.  275 

and  be  horribly  afraid.  His  face  is  the  light  of  the  universe,  his  person 
is  the  glory  of  heaven,  and  they  "  begon  to  spit  on  him!"  Alas,  my 
God,  that  man  should  be  so  base !  Some  went  further,  and  they 
"covered  his  face."  It  is  an  Eastern  custom  to  cover  the  face  of  the 
condemned,  as  if  they  were  not  fit  to  see  the  light,  nor  fit  to  behold  their 
fellow  men.  I  know  not  whether  for  this  reason,  or  in  pure  mockery, 
they  covered  his  face,  so  that  they  could  not  see  it,  and  he  could  not  see 
them.  How  could  they  thus  put  out  the  sun  and  shut  up  bliss.  Then 
when  all  was  dark  to  him  we  read  that  they  began  to  say,  "  Prophesy, 
Who  is  he  that  smote  thee?"  Then  another  did  the  like,  and  many 
were  the  cruel  cuffs  they  laid  about  his  blessed  face.  The  mediaeval 
writers  delighted  to  talk  about  the  teeth  that  were  broken,  the  bruises 
on  the  cheeks,  the  blood  which  flowed,  the  flesh  that  was  bruised  and 
blackened ;  but  we  dare  not  thus  imagine.  Scripture  has  cast  a  veil, 
and  there  let  it  abide.  Yet  it  must  have  been  an  awful  sight  to  see  the 
Lord  of  glory  with  his  face  bestained  by  their  accursed  phlegm  and 
bruised  with  their  cruel  fists.  Here  insult  and  cruelty  were  combined: 
ridicule  of  his  prophetic  claims  and  dishonour  to  his  divine  person. 
Nothing  was  thought  bad  enough.  They  invented  all  they  could  of 
shame  and  scorn,  and  he  stood  patient  there  though  a  single  flash  of  his 
eye  would  have  consumed  them  in  a  moment. 

Brothers,  sisters,  this  is  what  our  sin  deserved.  A  shameful  thing 
hrt  thou,  0  sin !  Thou  dost  deserve  to  be  spit  upon  I  This  is  what 
sin  is  constantly  doing  to  Christ.  Whenever  you  and  I  sin  we  do,  as  it 
were,  spit  in  his  face :  we  also  hide  his  eyes  by  trying  to  forget  that  he 
sees  us ;  and  we  also  smite  him  whenever  we  transgress  and  grie\'e  his 
Spirit.  Talk  not  of  cruel  Jews :  let  us  think  of  ourselves,  and  let  us  be 
humbled  by  the  thought.  This  is  what  the  ungodly  world  is  ever 
doing  to  our  blessed  Master.  They  also  would  hide  his  eyes  which  are 
the  light  of  the  world:  they  also  despise  his  gospel,  and  spit  upon  it  as 
an  utterly  worn  out  and  worthless  thing :  they  also  do  despite  to  the 
members  of  his  body  through  his  poor  afflicted  saints  who  have  to  bear 
slander  and  abuse  for  his  dear  sake. 

And  yet  over  all  this  I  seem  to  see  a  light  most  blessed.  Christ  must  be 
spit  upon,  for  he  has  taken  our  sin:  Christ  must  be  tortured,  for  he  is 
standing  in  our  stead.  Who  is  to  be  the  executioner  of  all  this  grief? 
Who  shall  take  upon  himself  the  office  of  putting  Christ  to  shame  ?  Our 
redemption  was  being  wrought  out  this  way, — who  shall  be  the  drudge 
to  perform  this  miserable  work  ?  Fling  in  the  clusters  richer  than  the 
grapes  of  Eshcol ;  fling  them  in,  but  who  shall  tread  them  out  and 
^  laboriously  extract  tlie  wine,  the  generous  wine  which  cheereth  God  and 
iUan?  The  feet  shall  be  the  willing  feet  of  Christ's  own  adversaries: 
they  shall  extort  from  him  that  which  shall  redeem  us  and  destroy  all 
evil.  I  rejoice  to  see  Satan  outwitted,  and  his  malice  made  to  be  the 
means  of  his  own  overthrow.  He  thinks  to  destroy  Christ,  and  by 
that  deed  he  destroys  himself.  He  pulls  down  evil  upon  his  own  head 
and  falls  into  the  pit  which  he  has  digged.  Thus  shall  all  evil  ever 
work  for  the  good  of  the  Lord's  people ;  yea,  their  greatest  good  shall 

Iofttimes  come  out  of  that  which  threatened  their  ruin,  and  wrought  in 
them  the  utmost  anguish.     Three  days  must  the  Christ  suffer  and  die 


276 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


and  lead  captivity  captive,  and  that  by  the  means  of  the  very  suffering: 
and  shame  which  he  is  now  enduring  ;  in  like  manner  shall  it  happea 
to  his  mystical  body,  and  Satan  shall  be  bruised  under  our  feet  shortly. 

I  leave  this  subject,  hoping  that  you  will  pursue  it  in  your  medita- 
tions.    Here  are  three  observations.  ,.,.-,    ^     t 

First  how  ready  should  we  be  to  bear  slander  and  ridicule  tor  Jesus 
sake  bo  not  get  into  a  huff,  and  think  it  a  hard  thing  that  people 
should  mock  at  you.  Who  are  you,  dear  sir  ?  Who  are  you?  What 
can  you  be  if  compared  with  Christ  ?  If  they  spat  upon  him,  why 
should  thev  not  spit  upon  you?  If  they  buffeted  him,  why  should 
they  not  buffet  you?  Shall  your  Master  have  all  the  rough  ot  it? 
Shall  he  have  all  the  bitter,  and  you  all  the  sweet  ?  A  pretty  soldier 
you,  to  demand  better  fare  than  your  Captain  ! 

How  earnestly,  next,  ought  we  to  honour  our  dear  Lord.  It  men 
were  so  eager  to  put  him  to  shame,  let  us  be  ten  times  more  earnest  to 
brino-  him  glory.  Is  there  anything  we  can  do  to-day  by  which  he 
may^be  honoured?  Let  us  set  about  it.  Can  we  make  any  sacrifice? 
can  we  perform  any  difficult  task  which  would  glorify  him?  Let  us  not 
deliberate,  but  at  once  do  it  with  our  might.  Let  us  be  inventive  in 
modes  of  glorifying  him,  even  as  his  adversaries  were  ingenious  in  the- 
methods  of  his  shame.  „     ,     ,   ,.       .    i_. 

Lastly,  how  surely  and  how  sweetly  may  all  who  believe  in  him  come 
and  rest  their  souls  in  his  hands.  Surely  I  know  that  he  who  suffered 
this  since  he  was  verily  the  Son  of  the  Blessed,  must  have  ability  to 
save  us.  Sucli  griefs  must  be  a  full  atonement  for  our  transgressions. 
Glory  be  ^o  Cod,  that  spittle  on  his  countenance  means  a  clear,  bright  face 
for  me.  Those  false  accusations  on  his  character  mean  no  condemnation 
for  me  That  putting  him  to  death  proves  the  certainty  of  our  text  last 
Sabbath  morning,  "Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  he  that  believeth  on 
me  hath  everlasting  life."  Let  us  sweetly  rest  in  Jesus,  and  li  ever  our 
faith  is  agitated,  let  us  get  away  to  the  hall  of  Caiaphas,  and  see  the  Just 
standino-  for  the  unjust,  the  Faultless  One  bearing  condemnation  for 
sinners."  Let  us  in  the  high-priest's  hall  judge  and  condemn  every  sin 
and  every  doubt,  and  ov.me  forth  glorying  that  the  Christ  has  conauered 
for  us,  and  that  we  now  wait  for  his  appearing  with  delight.  God  bless 
jou,  brothers,  for  Christ's  sake.     Amen. 


^^ORTioNS  OF  Scripture  read  before  Sermon— John  xxiii.  12—24 
Mark  xiv.  53—65;  Luke  xxii.  66—71. 


flYi£NS  from  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book  "—333,  275,  286. 


NEVERTHELESS.    HEREAFTER. 


DELIVERED   BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACIiE,   NEWINGTON. 


**  ffesus  saith  saith  unto  him,  Thou  hast  said  (or  said  so),  nevertheless,  I  say  unto 
you.  Hereafter  shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power,  and 
<!omingin  the  clouds  of  heaven." — Matthew  xxvi.  64. 

Our  Lord,  before  his  enemies,  was  silent  in  his  own  defence,  but  he 
faithfully  warned  and  boldly  avowed  the  truth.  His  was  the  silence  of 
patience,  not  of  indifference  ;  of  courage,  not  of  cowardice.  It  is  written 
that  "before  Pontius  Pilate  he  witnessed  a  good  confession,"  and  that 
statement  may  also  be  well  applied  to  his  utterances  before  Caiaphas, 
for  there  he  was  not  silent  when  it  came  to  confession  of  necessary  truth. 
If  you  will  read  the  chapter  now  open  before  us,  you  will  notice  that 
the  high  priest  adjured  him,  saying,  "  Art  thou  the  Christ,  the  Son  of 
<3rod  ?"  to  which  he  replied  at  once,  "  Thou  hast  said  it."  He  did  not 
•disown  his  Messiahship ;  he  claimed  to  be  the  promised  one,  the  mes- 
tsenger  from  heaven,  Christ  the  anointed  of  the  Most  High.  Neither  did  he 
for  a  moment  disavow  his  personal  deity  :  he  acknowledged  and  con- 
fessed that  he  was  the  Son  of  God.  How  could  he  be  silent  when  such 
a  vital  point  as  to  his  person  was  in  question  ?  He  did  not  hold  them 
in  suspense,  but  openly  declared  his  Godhead  by  saying,  "  I  am  ;"  for 
so  are  his  words  reported  by  one  of  the  evangelists.  He  then  proceeded  to 
reveal  the  solemn  fact  that  he  would  soon  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
€ven  the  Father.  In  the  words  of  our  text  he  declared  that  those  who 
were  condemning  him  would  see  him  glorified,  and  in  due  time  would 
stand  at  his  bar  when  he  would  come  upon  the  clouds  of  heaven  to  judge 
the  quick  and  dead  according  to  our  gospel.  See,  then,  dear  brethren, 
dn  a  few  words,  the  great  truths  of  our  holy  religion  clearly  set  forth 
by  our  Lord  Jesus  :  he  claimed  to  be  the  Christ  of  God,  and  the  Son  of 
Ood,  and  his  brief  statement  by  implication  speaks  of  Jesus  dead, 
buried,  and  risen,  and  now  enthroned  at  the  right  hand  of  God  in  the 
power  of  the  Father,  and  Jesus  soon  to  come  in  his  glorious  second 
advent  to  judge  the  world  in  righteousness.  Our  Lord's  confession  waa 
?ery  full,  and  happy  is  he  who  heartily  embraces  it. 
No»     1,364 


278  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PUIiPlT. 

I  intend  to  dwell  upon  three  catch-words  around  which  there  jrathers 
a  world  of  encouraging  and  solemn  thought.  The  first  is  "  tiPvertheUss,'' 
and  the  second  is  ^^  hereafter ;  "  what  the  third  is  you  shall  know  here- 
after, but  not  just  now. 

I.  "Nevertheless,"  said  Christ,  "hereafter  shall  ye  see  the  Son 
of  man  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of 
h-aven."  This,  then,  is  the  string  from  which  we  must  draw  forth 
music.  *^ Nevertheless^'  which  being  interpreted  by  being  pulled  in 
pieces,  signifies  that  truth  is  never-the-less  sure  because  of  opposition. 
*' Nevertheless,"  not  one  atom  the  less  is  the  truth  certain  to  prevail,  for  all 
that  you  say  or  do  against  it.  Jesus  will  surely  sit  at  the  right  hand  of 
power,  p-^'l  come  in  due  season  upon  the  clouds  of  heaven.  Let  us  dwell 
for  a  little  time  upon  this  important  fact,  that  truth  is  none  the  less 
certain  because  of  the  opposition  of  men  and  devils.. 

Observe,  first,  that  the  Saviour's  condition  when  he  made  use  of  that 
*^  nevertheless  "  was  no  proof  tJiat  lie  would  not  rise  to  power.  There  he 
stood,  a  poor,  defenceless,  emaciated  man,  newly  led  from  the  night- 
watch  in  the  garden  and  its  bloody  sweat.  He  teas  a  spectacle  of  meek 
and  loivly  sufcving,  led  by  his  captors  like  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,  with 
none  to  speak  a  word  on  his  behalf.  He  was  surrounded  by  those  who 
hated  him,  and  he  was  forsaken  by  his  friends.  Scribes,  Pharisees,  priests, 
were  all  thirsting  for  his  heart's  blood.  A  lamb  in  the  midst  of  wolvet 
is  but  a  faint  picture  of  Christ  standing  there  before  the  Sanhedrim  in  pa- 
tient silence.  And  yet,  though  his  present  condition  seemed  to  contradict 
it,  he  who  was  the  faithful  and  true  witness  spake  truly  when  he  testified, 
"Nevertheless,  hereafter  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  the 
clouds  of  heaven.  Despite  my  present  shame  and  suffering,  so  it 
ghall  be." 

He  gives  himself  that  lowly,  humble  title  of  Son  of  man,  as  best  indi- 
Qating  himself  in  his  condition  at  that  time.  "  Hereafter  ye  shall  see  the 
k^on  of  man  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds 
of  heaven."  The  humiliation  of  Christ  did  not  in  the  least  endanger  his 
after  glory.  His  sufferings,  his  shame,  his  death,  did  not  render  it  any 
the  less  certain  that  he  would  climb  to  his  throne. .  Nor  did  the  cavil- 
lings of  his  opposers  keep  him  for  one  instant  from  his  place  of  honour. 
I  wish  you  to  remember  this,  for  there  is  a  great  principle  in  it.  There 
are  many  poor  weakminded  people  who  cannot  take  sides  with  a  perse- 
cuted truth,  nor  accept  anything  but  the  most  popular  and  fashionable 
form  of  religion.  They  dare  not  be  with  truth  when  men  spit  in  its 
face,  and  butt'et  it,  and  pour  contempt  upon  it ;  but  it  will  be  victorious 
none  the  less,  although  cowards  desert  it  and  falsehearted  men  oppose 
it.  If  it  stand  alone  at  the  bar  of  the  world,  a  culprit  to  be  con- 
demned,— if  it  receive  nothing  but  a  universal  hiss  of  human  execra- 
tion,— yet,  if  it  be  the  truth,  it  may  be  condemned,  but  it  will  be 
justified  ;  it  may  be  buried,  but  it  will  rise  ;  it  may  be  rejected,  but  it 
will  be  glorified,  even  as  it  has  happened  to  the  Christ  of  God.  Who 
would  be  ashamed  of  truth  at  any  time  when  he  knows  the  precious- 
ness  of  it?  Who  will  tremble  because  of  present  opposition  when  he 
foresees  what  will  yet  come  of  it  ?  W^hat  a  sublime  spectacle— tlie  man 
of  sorrows  standing  before  his  cruel  judges  in  all  mHnner  o!'  weakn-ss 
and   poverty  and  contempt,  at  the  same  time   heir  of  all   thinirs,  aiu! 


NEVERTHELESS.   HEREAFTER.  279 

appointed,  nevertheless,  to  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  power  and  to  come 
in  the  clouds  of  heaven. 

Nor  may  we  think  only  of  his  condition  as  a  despised  and  rejected 
man  ;  for  he  was,  on  his  trial,  charged  with  grievous  wrong,  and  about 
to  be  midemned  lij  the  ecclesiastical  authorities.  The  scribes  learned  in 
the  law  declared  that  he  blasphemed  :  and  the  priests,  familiar  with  the 
ordinances  of  God,  exclaimed,  "  Away  with  him  ;  it  is  not  meet  that  he 
should  live."  The  high  priest  himself  gave  judgment  that  it  was  ex- 
pedient for  him  to  be  put  to  death.  It  is  a  very  serious  thing,  is  it 
not,  when  all  the  ecclesiastical  authorities  are  against  you, — when  they 
are  unanimous  in  your  condemnation  ?  Yes,  verily,  tod  it  may  cause 
great  searching  of  heart ;  for  no  peaceable  man  desires  to  be  opposed 
to  constituted  authority,  but  would  sooner  have  the  good  word  of  those 
who  sit  in  Moses'  seat.  But  this  was  not  the  last  time  in  which  the 
established  ecclesiastical  authorities  were  wrong,  grievously  wrong.  They 
were  condemning  the  innocent,  and  blaspheming  the  Lord  from  heaven. 
Nor,  I  say,  was  this  the  last  time  in  which  the  mitre  and  the  gown 
have  been  upon  the  side  of  cruel  wrong :  yet  this  did  not  un- Christ' 
our  Saviour  or  rob  him  of  his  deity  or  his  throne.  On  the  same 
principle  human  history  brings  before  us  abundance  of  instances  in 
which,  nevertheless,  though  scribes,  priests,  bishops,  pontiffs,  and  popes 
condemned  the  truth,  it  was  just  as  sure,  and  became  as  triumphant,  as 
it  had  a  right  to  do.  There  stands  the  one  lone  man,  and  there  are 
all  the  great  ones  around  him— men  of  authority  and  reputation,  sanctity 
and  pomp — and  they  unaminously  deny  that  he  can  ever  sit  at  the  right 
hand  of  God  :  "  But,  nevertheless,"  saith  he,  "  hereafter  ye  shall  see  the 
Son  of  man  at  the  right  hand  of  power."  He  spoke  the  truth:  his 
declaration  has  been  most  gloriously  fulfilled  hitherto.  Even  thus  over 
the  neck  of  clergy,  priests,  pontiffs,  popes,  his  triumphant  chariot  of 
salvation  shall  still  roll,  and  the  truth — the  simple  truth  of  his  glorious 
gospel— shall,  despite  them  all,  win  the  day,  and  reign  over  the  sons  of 
men. 

Nor  is  this  all.  Our  Lord  at  that  time  was  surrounded  ly  those  ivho 
were  in  possession  of  earthly  potver.  The  priests  had  the  ear  of  Pilate, 
and  Pilate  had  the  Roman  legions  at  his  back.  Who  could  resist  such 
a  combination  of  force?  Craft  and  authority  form  a  dreadful  league. 
One  disciple  drew  a  sword,  but  just  at  the  time  when  our  Lord  stood 
before  the  Sanhedrim  that  one  chivalrous  warrior  had  denied  him ;  so 
that  all  the  physical  force  was  on  the  other  side.  As  a  man  he  was 
helpless  when  he  stood  bound  before  the  council.  I  am  not  speaking  now 
of  that  almighty  power  which  faith  knows  to  have  dwelt  in  him  ;  but 
as  to  human  power,  he  was  weakness  at  its  weakest.  His  cause  seemed 
at  the  lowest  ebb.  He  had  none  to  stand  up  in  his  defence— nay, 
none  to  speak  a  word  on  his  behalf;  for,  "  Who  shall  declare  his  genera- 
tion ?"  And  yet,  for  all  that,  and  even  because  of  it,  he  did  rise  to  sit 
at  the  right  hand  of  power,  and  he  shall  come  in  the  clouds  of  heaven. 
So  if  it  ever  comes  to  pass,  my  brother,  that  thou  shouldst  be  the  lone 
advocate  of  a  forgotten  truth,— if  thy  Master  should  ever  put  thee  in  all 
thy  weakness  and  infirmity  in  the  midst  of  the  mighty  and  the  strong, 
do  not  thou  fear  or  tremble ;  for  the  possession  of  power  is  but  a  trifle' 
compared  with  the  possession  of  truth,  and  he  that  hag  the  right  may 


280 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


safely  defy  the  might  of  the  world.  He  shall  win  and  conquer,  let  the 
princes  and  powers  that  be  take  to  themselves  what  force  and  craft 
they  choose.  Jesus,  nevertheless,  wins,  though  the  power  is  all  against 
him,  and  so  shall  the  truth  which  he  represents,  for  it  wears  about  it  a 
hidden  power  which  baffles  all  opponents. 

Nor  was  it  merely  all  the  power,  there  was  a  great  deal  of  furious  rage 
against  him.  That  Caiaphas,  how  he  spoke  to  him  !  "  I  adjure  thee," 
saith  he,  *'by  God."  And  after  he  has  spoken  he  rends  his  garments 
in  indignation,  his  anger  burns  like  fire ;  but  the  Christ  is  very  quiet, 
the  Lamb  of  God  is  still,  and  looking  his  adversary  in  the  face,  he  says, 
*'  Nevertheless,  hereafter  thou  shalt  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  at  the 
right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven."  He  was 
strong,  and  therefore  calm ;  confident,  and  therefore  peaceful ;  fully  as- 
sured, and  therefore  patient.  He  could  wait,  for  he  believed  ;  and  his  pro- 
phecy was  true,  notwithstanding  the  high  priest's  rage.  So  if  we  meet 
with  any  man  at  any  time  who  gnashes  his  teeth  upon  us,  who  foams 
in  passion,  who  dips  his  pen  into  the  bitterest  gall  to  write  down  our 
holy  faith,  who  is  indefatigable  in  his  violent  efforts  against  the  Christ 
of  God,— what  mattereth  it  ?  "  Nevertheless,  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man 
sitting'at  the  right  hand  of  power."  "Yet  have  I  set  my  king  upon 
my  holy  hill  of  Zion,"  said  Jehovah  ;  and  he  declared  the  decree  though 
the  heathen  raged  and  the  people  imagined  a  vain  thing.  Well  may  he 
smile  at  rage  who  is  so  sure  of  victory. 

Yes,  but  it  was  not  one  person  that  raged  merely.  The  people  of 
Jerusalem,  and  the  multitudes  that  had  come  up  to  the  passover, 
bribed  and  egged  on  by  the  priests  and  the  Pharisees,  were  all  hot 
after  our  Saviour's  death,  clamouring,  "  Crucify  him,  crucify  him ;"  and 
yet  there  he  stood,  and  as  he  heard  their  tumult,  and  anticipated  its 
growing  demand  for  his  blood,  he  k)st  not  his  confidence,  but  he  calmly 
said,  "  Nevertheless,  hereafter,  shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  at  the 
right  hand  of  power."  Behold  his  perfect  inward  peace,  and  see  how 
he  manifests  it  by  a  bold  confession  in  the  very  teeth  of  all  his  adversaries. 
"Ye  may  be  as  many  as  the  waves  of  the  sea;  and  ye  may  foam  and 
rage  like  the  ocean  in  a  storm,  but  the  purpose  and  the  decree  of  God 
will,  nevertheless,  be  fulfilled ;  ye  cannot  let  or  hinder  it  one  whit. 
Ye, 'to  your  everlasting  confusion,  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  at 
the  right  hand  of  power." 

Beloved,  you  know  that  after  he  had  said  this  our  Lord  was  taken 
before  Herod  and  Pilate,  and  at  last  was  put  to  death :  and  he  knew  all 
this,  foreseeing  it  most  clearly,  and  yet  it  did  not  make  him  hesitate. 
He  knew  that  he  would  be  crucified,  and  that  his  enemies  would  boast 
that  rhere  was  an  end  of  him  and  of  his  kingdom.  He  knew  that  his 
disciples  would  hide  themselves  in  holes  and  corners,  and  that  nobody 
would  dare  to  say  a  word  concerning  the  man  of  Nazareth :  he  foreknew 
that  the  name  of  the  Nazarene  would  be  bandied  about  amid  general 
opprobrium,  and  Jerusalem  would  say,  "  That  cause  is  crushed  out :  that 
egg  of  mis(;hief  has  been  broken  ;  "  but  he,  foreseeing  all  that,  and  more, 
declared,  "  Nevertheless,  hereafter  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  at 
the  right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven.'  1  can- 
not help  harping  upon  the  text— I  hope  I  shall  not  weary  you  with  it, 
for  to  me  it  is  music.  I  do  not  like  running  over  the  word  ''  nevei'thel£ss 


K  EVARTHELESS.      HEREAFTER.  281 

too  quickly,  I  like  to  draw  it  out  and  repeat  it  as  "  never — the — less." 
No,  not  one  jot  the  less  will  his  victory  come.  Not  in  the  least  degree 
was  his  royal  power  endangered  or  his  sure  triumph  imperilled.  Not 
even  by  his  death  and  the  consequent  scattering  of  his  disciples  was  the 
least  hazard  occasioned  ;  but,  indeed,  all  these  things  wrought  together 
for  the  accomplishment  of  the  divine  purpose  concerning  him,  and  tbe 
lower  he  stooped  the  more  sure  he  was  to  rise  ultimately  to  his  glory. 

And  now,  beloved,  it  is  even  so.  The  man  Christ  Jesus  was  despised 
and  rejected  of  men,  but  at  this  moment  he  sits  at  the  right  hand  of 
power :  all  power  is  given  to  him  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  and  therefore 
does  he  bid  us  proclaim  his  gospel.  There  is  not  an  angel  but  does  his 
bidding;  providence  is  arranged  by  his  will,  for  "the  government  shall 
be  upon  his  shoulder,  and  his  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful,  Coun- 
aellor,  tlie  mighty  God,  the  everlasting  Father,  the  Prince  of  Peace." 
Atoning  work  is  done,  and,  therefore,  he  sits.  His  work  is  well  done, 
and,  therefore,  he  sits  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  in  the  place  of  honour 
and  dignity.  Before  long  he  will  come.  We  cannot  tell  when  :  he  may 
come  to-night,  or  he  may  tarry  many  a  weary  year :  but  he  will  surely 
come  in  person,  for  did  not  the  angels  say  to  the  men  of  Galilee,  as 
they  stood  gazing  into  heaven,  "  This  same  Jesus  shall  so  come  in  like 
manner  as  ye  have  seen  him  go  into  heaven"?  He  shall  come  with 
blast  of  trumpet  and  with  thousands  of  angelic  beings,  all  doing  him 
honour.  He  shall  come  with  flaming  fire  to  visit  the  trembling  earth. 
He  shall  come  with  all  his  Fathers  glories  on,  and  kings  and  princes 
shall  stand  before  him,  and  he  shall  reign  amongst  his  ancients  gloriously. 
The  tumults  of  the  people,  and  the  plotting  of  their  rulers,  shall  be 
remembered  in  that  day,  but  it  shall  be  to  their  own  eternal  shame :  his 
throne  shall  be  none  the  less  resplendent. 

I  beg  you  to  learn  the  spiritual  lesson  which  comes  out  of  this.  I 
have  already  indicated  it,  and  it  is  this — never  be  afraid  to  stand  by  a 
losing  cause.  Never  hesitate  to  stand  alone  when  the  truth  is  to  be  con- 
fessed. Never  be  overawed  by  sacerdotalism,  or  daunted  by  rage,  or 
swayed  by  multitudes.  Unpopular  truth  is,  nevertheless,  eternal,  and  that 
doctrine  which  is  scouted  and  cast  out  as  evil  to-day  shall  bring  immortal 
honour  to  the  man  who  dares  to  stand  by  its  side  and  share  its  humiliation. 
Oh,  for  the  love  of  the  Christ  who  thus  threw  a  "  nevertheless  "  at  the 
feet  of  his  foes,  follow  him  whithersoever  he  goeth.  Through  flood  or 
flame,  in  loneliness,  in  shame,  in  obloquy,  in  reproach,  follow  him !  If 
it  be  without  the  camp,  follow  him !  If  every  step  shall  cost  you  abuse 
and  scorn,  follow  still ;  yea,  to  prison  and  to  death  still  follow  him,  for 
as  surely  as  he  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  power  so  shall  those  who 
love  him  and  have  been  faithful  to  his  truth  sit  down  upon  his  throne 
with  him.  His  overcoming  and  enthronement  are  the  pledges  of  the 
victory  both  of  the  truth  and  of  those  who  courageously  espouse  it. 

Thus  have  we  sounded  our  first  great  bell—"  nevertheless."  Let 
its  music  ring  through  the  place  and  charm  each  opened  ear. 

II.  The  second  bell  is  "hereafter."  "Nevertheless,  hereafter.'* 
I  like  the  sound  of  those  two  bells  together  :  let  us  ring  them  again. 
**  Nevertheless,  hereaft&r:'  The  hereafter  seems  in  brief  to  say  to  me 
that  the  main  glwy  of  Christ  lies  in  the  future.  Not  to-day,  perhaps, 
nor  to-morrow  will  the  issue  be  seen !     Have  patience !     Wait  a  while. 


282  METROPOLITAlf  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

**  Yoiar  Blrength  is  to  sit  still."  God  has  gi-eat  leisure,  for  he  is  the 
Eternal.  Let  us  partake  in  his  restfulness  while  we  sing,  "  NeverlheJesSy 
liereaftery  0  for  the  Holy  Spirit's  power  at  this  moment ;  for  it  is 
written,  "  he  will  show  you  things  to  come." 

It  is  one  great  reason  why  the  unregenerate  sons  of  men  cannot  see 
any  glory  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  because  to  them  it  is  such  a  future 
thing.  Its  ho])es  look  into  eternity :  its  great  rewards  are  beyond  this 
present  time  and  state,  and  the  most  of  mortal  eyes  cannot  see  so  far. 
Unregenerate  men  are  like  Passion  in  John  Bunyan's  parable  :  they  will 
have  all  their  good  things  now,  and  so  they  have  their  toys  and  break 
them,  and  they  are  gone,  and  then  their  hereafter  is  a  dreary  outlook  of 
regret  and  woe.  Men  of  faith  know  better;  and  like  Patience  in  the 
Bame  parable,  they  choose  to  have  their  best  things  last,  for  that  which 
comes  last,  lasts  on  for  ever.  He  whose  turn  comes  last  has  none  to 
follow  him,  and  his  good  things  shall  never  be  taken  away  from  him. 
The  poor,  purblind  world  cannot  see  beyond  its  own  nose,  and  so  it 
must  have  its  joys  and  riches  at  once.  To  them  speedy  victory  is  the 
main  thing,  and  the  truth  is  nothing.  Is  the  cause  triumphant  to-day  ? 
Oif  with  your  caps,  and  throw  them  up,  and  cry  *'  HuiTah  !  "  no  matter 
that  it  is  the  cause  of  a  lie.  Do  the  multitudes  incline  that  way  ? 
Then,  sir,  if  you  be  worldly-wise,  run  with  them.  Pull  off  the  palm 
branches,  strew  the  roads,  and  shout  **  Ilosanna  to  the  hero  of  the 
hour  !  "  though  he  be  a  despot  or  a  deceiver.  But  not  so — not  so  with 
those  who  are  taught  of  God.  They  take  eternity  into  their  estimate, 
and  they  are  contented  to  go  with  the  despised  and  rejected  of  men  for 
the  present,  because  they  recollect  the  hereafter.  They  can  swim  against 
the  flood,  for  they  know  whither  the  course  of  this  world  is  tending. 
0  blind  world,  if  thou  wert  wise,  thou  wouldst  amend  thy  line  of 
action,  and  begin  to  think  of  the  hereafter  too  ;  for,  brethren,  the 
hereafter  will  soon  be  here.  What  a  short  time  it  is  since  Adam 
walked  in  the  garden  of  Eden  :  compared  with  the  ages  of  the  rocks, 
compared  with  the  history  of  the  stars,  compared  with  the  life  of 
God,  it  is  as  the  winking  of  an  eye,  or  as  a  flash  of  lightning.  One 
has  but  to  grow  a  little  older,  and  years  become  shorter,  and  time 
appears  to  travel  at  a  much  faster  rate  than  before,  so  that  a  year 
rushes  by  you  like  a  meteor  across  the  midnight  heavens.  When  we 
are  older  still,  and  look  down  from  the  serene  abodes  above,  I  suppose 
that  centuries  and  ages  will  be  as  moments  to  us ;  for  to  the  Lord 
they  are  as  nothing.  Suppose  the  coming  of  the  Lord  should  be  put 
off  for  ten  thousand  years — it  is  but  supposition — ^but  if  it  were,  ten 
thousand  years  will  soon  be  gone,  and  when  the  august  spectacle  of 
Christ  coming  on  the  clouds  of  heaven  shall  really  be  seen,  the  delay 
will  be  as  though  but  an  hour  had  intervened.  The  space  between 
now  and  then,  or  rather  the  space  between  what  is  "  now"  at  this  time, 
and  what  will  be  "  now  "  at  the  last — how  short  a  span  it  is  !  Men  will 
look  back  from  the  eternal  world  and  say,  "  How  could  we  have  thought 
BO  much  of  the  fleeting  life  we  have  lived  on  earth,  when  it  was  to  be 
followed  by  eternity  ?  What  fools  we  were  to  make  such  count  of 
momentary,  transient  pleasures,  when  now  the  things  Avhich  are  not 
Been,  and  are  eternal,  have  come  upon  us,  and  we  are  unprepared  for 
them  !  "     Christ  will  soon  come,  and  at  the  longest,  when  he  cometh. 


NKVEllTHELKSS.      HEREAFTER.  283 

the  interval  between  to-daj  and  then  will  S'jem  to  be  just  nothing-  at 
all ;  so  that  "  hereafter  "  is  not  as  the  sound  of  far-off  cannon,  nor  as 
the  boom  of  distant  thunder,  but  it  is  the  rollingr  of  rushing  wheels 
hastening  to  o\ertake  us. 

*'  Hereafter  !  "  "  Hereafter  !  "  Oh,  when  that  hereafter  comes,  liow 
overwhelming  it  will  be  to  Jesus'  foes  !  Now  where  is  Caiaplias  ? 
Will  he  now  adjure  the  Lord  to  speak?  Now,  ye  priests,  lift  up 
your  haughty  heads  !  Utter  a  sentence  against  him  now  !  There 
sits,  your  victim  upon  the  clouds  of  heaven.  Say  now  that  he  blas- 
phemes, and  hold  up  your  rent  rags,  and  condemn  him  again.  But 
where  is  Caiaphas  ?  He  hides  his  guilty  head  :  he  is  utterly  con- 
founded, and  begs  the  mountains  to  fall  upon  him.  And,  oh,  ye  men  of 
the  S  jnhedrim,  who  sat  at  midnight  and  glared  on  your  innocent  victim, 
with  your  cold,  cruel  eyes,  and  afterwards  gloated  over  the  death  of 
your  martyred  Prince,  where  are  ye  now — now  that  he  has  come  with 
all  his  Father's  power  to  judge  you  ?  They  are  asking  the  hills  to  open 
their  caverns  and  conceal  them  :  the  rocks  deny  them  shelter.  And 
where,  on  that  day,  will  you  be  ;  you  who  deny  his  deity,  who  profane 
his  Sabbath,  who  slander  his  people,  and  denounce  his  gospel — oh, 
where  will  you  be  in  that  tremendous  day,  which  as  surely  comes  as 
comes  to-morrow's  rising  sun  ?  Oh,  sirs,  consider  this  word — "  Here- 
after !  "  I  would  fain  whisper  it  in  the  ear  of  the  sinner,  fascinated 
by  his  pleasures.  Come  near  and  let  me  do  so — hereafter !  I  would 
make  it  the  alarum  of  the  bed-head  of  the  sleeping  transgressor,  who 
is  dreaming  of  peace  and  safety,  while  he  is  slumbering  himself  into 
hell.  Hereafter!  Hereafter!  Oh,  yes,  ye  may  suck  the  sweet,  and 
eat  the  fat,  and  drink  as  ye  will  ;  but  hereafter  !  hereafter  !  What  will 
ye  do  hereafter  when  that  which  is  sweet  in  the  mouth  shall  be  as  gall 
in  the  belly,  and  when  the  pleasures  of  to-day  shall  be  a  mixture  of 
misery  for  eternity  ?  Hereafter  !  Oh,  hereafter  !  Now,  0  Spirit  divine, 
be  pleased  to  open  careless  ears,  that  they  may  listen  to  this  prophetic 
Bound. 

To  the  Lord's  own  people  there  is  no  sound  more  sweet  than  that 
of  "hereafter."  "Hereafter  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  the 
clouds  of  heayen."  Welcome,  welcome,  welcome,  welcome.  Redeemer, 
Saviour  !  Welcome  in  every  character  in  which  thou  comest.  AVhat 
acclamations  and  congratulations  will  go  up  from  the  countless 
myriads  of  his  redeemed,  when  first  the  ensigns  of  the  Son  of  man 
shall  be  seen  in  the  heavens !  On  some  one  of  earth's  mornings,. 
W'hen  the  children  of  men  shall  be  "  marrying  and  giving  in  mar- 
riage," while  saints  shall  be  looking  for  his  appearing,  they  shall 
first  of  all  perceive  that  he  is  actually  coming.  Long  desired,  and 
come  at  last.  Then  the  trumpet  shall  be  heard,  waxing  exceeding 
loud  and  long,  ringing  out  a  sweeter  note  to  the  true  Israel  than 
ever  trumpet  heard  on  the  morn  of  Jubilee.  What  delight  I  What 
lifting  up  of  gladsome  eyes  !  What  floods  of  bliss  !  Oppression  is 
over,  the  idols  are  broken,  the  reign  of  sin  is  ended,  darkness  shall 
no  more  cover  the  nations.  He  cometh,  he  cometh  :  glory  be  to  his 
name  1 

**  Bring  forth  the  royal  diadem, 
Aod  crown  him  Lord  of  all." 


284 


METROPOi>ITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


0  blessed  day  of  acclamations  !  liow  shall  heaven's  vault  be  rent  with 
them  when  his  saints  shall  see  for  themselves  what  was  reserved  for 
him  and  for  them  in  the  "  hereafter."  "  Ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  at 
the  right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven." 

That  word  "  hereafter,"  my  brothers  and  sisters,  is,  at  this  moment, 
our  grandest  solace,  and  I  wish  to  bring  it  before  you  in  that  light. 
Have  you  been  misunderstood,  misrepresented,  slandered  because  of 
fidelity  to  the  right  and  to  the  true?  Do  not  trouble  yourself. 
Vindicate  not  your  own  cause.  Refer  it  to  the  King's  Bench  above, 
and  say,  "Hereafter,  hereafter."  Have  you  been  accused  of  being 
mad,  fanatical,  and  I  know  not  what  besides,  because  to  you  party  is 
nothing,  and  ecclesiastical  pride  nothing,  and  the  stamp  of  popular 
opinion  nothing;  because  you  are  determined  to  follow  the  steps  of 
vour  Master,  and  believe  the  true  and  do  the  right  ?  Then  be  in  no 
hurry ;  the  sure  hereafter  will  settle  the  debate.  Or  are  you  very 
poor,  and  very  sick,  and  very  sad  ?  But  are  you  Christ's  own  ?  Do 
you  trust  him  ?  Do  you  live  in  fellowship  with  him  ?  Then  the  hope 
of  the  hereafter  may  well  take  the  sting  out  of  the  present.  It  is  not  for 
long  that  you  shall  suffer  ;  the  glory  will  soon  be  revealed  in  you  and 
around  you.  There  are  streets  of  gold  symbolic  of  your  future  wealth, 
and  there  are  harps  celestial  emblematical  of  your  eternal  joy.  You 
shall  have  a  white  robe  soon,  and  the  dusty  garments  of  toil  shall  be 
laid  aside  for  ever.  You  shall  have  a  far  more  exceeding  and  an  eternal 
weight  of  glory  ;  and  therefore  the  light  affliction  which  is  but  for  a 
moment  may  well  be  endured  with  patience.  Have  you  laboured  in 
vain  ?  Have  you  tried  to  bring  souls  to  Christ,  and  had  no  recom- 
pense ?  Fret  not,  but  remember  the  hereafter.  Many  a  labourer,  un- 
successful to  the  eye  of  man,  will  receive  a  "  Well  done,  good  and 
faithful  servant"  from  his  Master  in  that  day.  Set  little  store  by 
anything  you  have,  and  wish  but  lightly  for  anything  that  you  have 
not.  Let  the  present  be  to  you,  as  it  really  is,  a  dream,  an  empty 
show,  and  project  your  soul  into  the  hereafter,  which  is  solid  and 
enduring  ;  for,  oh !  what  music  there  is  in  it ! — what  delight  to  a  true 
child  of  God  !     "  Nevertheless,  hereafter." 

I  feel  half  inclined  to  have  done,  and  to  send  you  out  of  the  place, 
ringing  all  the  way,  "Nevertheless,  hereafter."  The  people  outside 
might  not  understand  you,  but  it  would  be  a  perfectly  justifiable 
■enthusiasm  of  delight. 

III.  Now,  thirdly.  Where  am  I  to  look  for  my  third  bell  ?  Where  is 
the  third  word  I  spoke  of  ?  In  truth,  I  cannot  find  it  in  the  version 
which  we  commonly  use,  and  there  is  no  third  word  in  the  original, 
and  yet  the  word  I  am  thinking  of  is  there.  The  truth  is  that  the 
second  word,  which  has  been  rendered  by  "  hereafter,"  bears  another 
meaning  ;  I  will  gi\e  you  what  the  Greek  critics  say,  as  nearly  as  can 
be,  the  meaning  of  the  word  is,  "  Henceforward."  "  Henceforward 
ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  power,  and 
coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven."  " Hencefoiward."  That  is  another 
word,  and  the  teaching  gathered  out  of  it  is  this :  eve?i  in  the  present 
there  are  tokens  of  the  victmy  of  Christ.  "  But,"  says  one,  "did  Christ 
«ay  to  those  priests  that  henceforward  they  should  see  him  sitting  at  the 
right  hand  of  power  ?"     Yes,  yes,  that  is  what  he  meant.     He  meant. 


NEVERTHELESS.      HEREAFTER.  285 

"  You  look  at  me  and  scorn  me  ;  but,  sirs,  you  shall  not  be  able  to  do 
this  any  longer,  for  henceforward  you  shall  see  for  yourselves  that  I  am 
not  what  I  appear  to  be,  but  that  I  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  power. 
Henceforward,  and  as  long  as  you  live,  you  shall  know  that  galling 
truth."  And  did  that  come  true  ?  Yes,  it  came  true  that  night  ;  for 
when  the  Saviour  died  there  came  a  messenger  unto  the  members  of 
the  Sanhedrim  and  others,  and  told  them  that  the  veil  of  the  temple 
was  rent  in  twain.  In  that  moment,  when  the  man  of  Nazareth  died, 
that  splendid  piece  of  tapestry  seemed  to  tear  itself  asunder  from  end  to 
end  as  if  in  horror  at  the  death  of  its  Lord.  The  members  of  that 
council,  when  they  met  each  other  in  the  street  and  spoke  of  the  news, 
must  have  been  dumb  in  sheer  astonishment ;  but  while  they  looked 
upon  each  other  the  earth  they  stood  upon  reeled  and  reeled  again, 
and  they  could  scarcely  keep  their  feet.  This  was  not  the  first  wonder 
which  had  that  day  startled  them,  for  the  sun  had  been  beclouded  in 
unnatural  darkness.  At  midday  the  sun  had  ceased  to  shine,  and  now 
the  earth  ceases  to  be  stable.  Lo,  also,  in  the  darkness  of  the  evening, 
certain  members  of  this  council  saw  the  sheeted  dead,  newly  arisen 
from  their  sepulchres,  walking  through  the  streets ;  for  the  rocks  rent, 
the  earth  shook,  and  the  graves  opened,  and  the  dead  came  forth  and 
appeared  unto  many.  Thus  early  they  began  to  know  that  the  man  of 
Nazareth  was  at  the  right  hand  of  power. 

Early  an  the  third  morning,  when  they  were  met  together,  there 
came  a  messenger  in  hot  haste,  who  said,  ''  The  stone  is  rolled  away 
from  the  door  of  the  sepulchre.  Remember  that  ye  placed  a  watch,  and 
that  ye  set  your  seal  upon  the  stone.  But  early  this  morning  the  soldiers 
say  that  he  came  forth.  He  rose,  that  dreaded  One  whom  we  put  to 
death,  and  at  the  sight  of  him  the  keepers  did  quake  and  became  as 
dead  men."  Now,  these  men — these  members  of  the  Sanhedrim — 
believed  that  fact ;  and  we  have  clear  evidence  that  they  did  so,  for  they 
bribed  the  soldiers,  and  said, "  Say  ye,  his  disciples  came  and  stole  away 
his  body  while  we  slept."  Then  did  the  word  also  continue  to  be  ful- 
filled, and  they  plainly  saw  that  Jesus  whom  they  had  condemned  was 
at  the  right  hand  of  power.  A  few  weeks  passed  over  their  heads, 
and,  lo,  there  was  a  noise  in  the  city,  and  an  extraordinary  excitement. 
Peter  had  been  preaching  and  three  thousand  persons  in  one  day  had 
been  baptized  into  the  name  which  they  dreaded  so  much  ;  and  they 
were  told,  and  they  heard  it  on  the  best  of  evidence,  that  there  had 
been  a  wonderful  manifestation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  such  as  was  spoken 
of  in  the  book  of  the  prophet  Joel.  Then  they  must  have  looked  one 
another  in  the  face,  and  stroked  their  beards,  and  bitten  their  lips,  and 
said  one  to  another,  "  Did  he  not  say  that  we  should  see  him  at  the 
right  hand  of  power  ?  "  They  had  often  to  remember  that  word,  and 
again  and  again  to  see  its  truth,  for  when  Peter  and  John  were  brought 
before  them,  it  was  proven  that  they  had  restored  a  lame  man,  and 
these  two  unlearned  and  ignorant  men  told  them  that  it  was  through 
the  name  of  Jesus  that  the  lame  were  made  to  leap  and  walk.  Day 
after  day  they  were  continuously  obliged,  against  their  will,  to  see,  m 
the  spread  of  the  religion  of  the  man  whom  they  had  put  to  death, 
that  his  name  had  power  about  it  such  as  they  could  not  possibly  gainsay 
or  resist.     Lo,  one  of  their  number,  Paul,  had  been  converted,  and  was 


1286 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULl  IT. 


preaching  the  faith  which  he  had  endeavoured  to  destroy.  They  must 
have  been  much  amazed  and  chagrined,  as  in  this  also  they  discerned 
that  the  Son  of  man  was  at  the  right  hansl  of  power. 

Yes,  say  you,  but  did  they  see  him  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven  ? 
I  answer,  yes.  Henceforth  they  saw  that  also,  for  they  began  to  ii:ivc 
upon  their  minds  forebodings,  and  dark  thoughts.  The  Jewish  nation 
wa^  in  an  ill  state,  the  people  were  getting  disquieted,  impostors 
were  rising,  and  the  leading  men  of  the  nation  trembled  as  to  what  the 
Romans  would  do.  At  last  there  came  an  outbreak,  and  the  imperial 
power  was  defied,  and  then  such  of  them  as  still  survived  began  to 
realize  the  words  of  Christ.  When  they  saw  the  comet  in  the  sky,  and 
the  drawn  sword  hanging  over  Jerusalem,  when  they  saw  the  city  com- 
passed about  with  armies,  when  they  marked  the  legions  dig  the 
trenches,  and  throw  up  the  earthworks  and  surround  the  devoted  city, 
while  all  around  was  fire  and  famine  ;  when  from  every  tower  upon  the 
walls  they  could  see  one  of  their  own  countrymen  nailed  to  a  cross, 
for  the  Romans  put  the  Jews  to  death  by  crucifixion  by  hundreds,  and 
even  by  thousands, — then  must  they  have  begun  to  see  the  coming  of 
the  Son  of  man.  And  when,  at  last,  the  city  was  destroyed  and  a  fire- 
brand was  hurled  even  into  the  holy  place,  and  the  Jews  were  banished 
and  sold  for  slaves  till  they  would  not  fetch  the  price  of  a  pair  of 
shoes,  so  many  were  they  and  so  greatly  despised, — then  they  saw  the 
Son  of  man  €oming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven  to  take  vengeance  on  his 
adversaries. 

Read  the  text  as  meaning,  "  Henceforward,  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of 
man  at  the  right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven." 
It  is  not  the  full  meaning  of  the  passage,  but  it  is  a  part  of  that  meaning, 
beyond  all  question. 

Beloved,  even  at  the  present  time  we  may  see  the  tokens  of  the 
power  of  Christ  among  us.  Only  tokens,  mark  you  ;  I  do  not  want 
to  take  you  off  from  the  hereafter,  but  henceforward  and  even  now 
there  are  tokens  of  the  power  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  Look  at  revivals. 
When  they  break  out  in  the  church  how  they  stagger  all  the  adversaries 
of  Christ.  They  said — yes,  they  dared  to  say — that  the  gospel  had  lost 
ail  its  power — that,  since  the  days  of  Whitefield  and  Wesley,  there  was  no 
hope  of  the  masses  being  stirred,  yet  when  they  see,  even  in  tliis  house, 
from  Sabbath  to  Sabbath,  vast  crowds  listening  to  the  word,  and  when 
some  few  months  ago  no  house  could  be  built  that  was  large  enough 
to  accommodate  the  thronging  masses  who  sought  to  hear  our  Ame- 
rican brethren,  then  were  they  smitten  in  the  mouth,  so  that  they  could 
speak  no  more,  for  it  was  manifested  that  the  Lord  Christ  still  lives, 
and  that,  if  his  gospel  be  fully  and  simply  preached,  it  will  still  draw 
all  men  to  him,  and  souls  will  be  saved,  and  that  not  a  few. 

And  look  ye,  in  the  brave  world  outside,  apart  from  religion,  what 
influences  there  are  abroad  which  are  due  to  the  power  of  the  Christ  of 
God.  Would  you  have  believed  it  twenty  years  ago  that  in  America 
there  should  be  no  more  a  slave  ;  that  united  Italy  should  be  free  of 
her  despots  ?  Could  you  have  believed  that  the  Pope  would  be  puling 
about  his  being  a  prisoner  in  the  Vatican,  and  that  the  power  of  anti- 
christ would  be  shorn  away  ?  No,  the  wonders  of  history,  even  within 
the  last  few  years,  are  enough  to  show  us  that  Chiist  is  at  .the  right 


NEVERTHELESS.      HEREAFTER.  287 

hand  of  power.  Come  what  will  in  the  future,  mark  ye  this,  my 
brethren,  it  will  never  be  possible  to  uphold  tyranny  and  oppression 
long,  for  the  Lord  Christ  is  to  the  front  for  the  poor  and  needy  of  the 
earth.  0  despots,  you  may  do  what  you  will,  and  use  your  craft  and 
policy,  if  you  please,  but  all  over  this  world  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has 
lifted  up  a  plummet  and  set  up  a  righteous  standard,  and  he  will  draw 
a  straight  line,  and  it  will  pass  through  everything  that  offends,  that  ifc 
may  be  cut  off";  and  it  will  also  pass  over  all  that  is  good  and  lovely, 
and  right,  and  just,  and  true,  and  these  shall  be  established  in  his  reign 
among  men.  I  believe  in  the  reign  of  Christ.  Kings,  sultans,  czars — 
these  "are  puppets  all  of  them,  and  your  parliaments  and  congresses  are 
but  vanity  of  vanity.  God  is  great,  and  none  but  he.  Jesus  is  the 
King  in  all  the  earth.  He  is  the  man,  the  King  of  men,  the  Lord  of 
all.  '  Glory  be  to  his  name.  As  the  years  progress  we  shall  see  it  more 
and  more,  for  he  has  had  long  patience,  but  he  is  beginning  now  to  cut 
the  work  short  in  righteousness.  He  is  baring  his  right  arm  for  war  and 
that  which  denies  manhood's  just  claims,  that  which  treads  upon  the 
neck  of  the  humanity  which  Christ  has  taken,  that  which  stands  against 
his  throne  and  dominion,  must  be  broken  in  pieces  Hke  a  potter's  vessel, 
for  the  sceptre  in  his  hand  is  a  rod  of  iron,  and  he  will  use  it  mightily. 
The  Christ,  then,  gives  tokens  still  of  his  power.  They  are  only  tokens, 
but  they  are  sure  ones,  even  as  the  dawn  does  not  deceive  us,  though 
it  be  not  the  noontide. 

And  oh,  let  me  say,  there  be  some  of  you  present  who  are  enemies  of 
Christ,  but  you  also  must  have  perceived  some  tokens  of  his  power.  I 
have  seen  him  shake  the  infidel  by  the  gospel  till  he  has  said,  '*  Almost 
thou  persuadest  me  to  be  a  Christian."  He  has  taken  him  in  the 
silence  of  the  night  and  probed  his  conscience  :  in  his  gentleness  and 
love,  and  pity  he  has  led  the  man  to  think,  and  though  he  has  not 
altogether  yielded,  yet  he  has  felt  that  there  is  a  ^:olemn  power  about  the 
Christ  of  God.  Some  of  the  worst  of  men  have  been  forced  to  own  thac 
Christ  has  conquered  them.  Remember  how  Julian,  as  he  died,  said, 
*'  The  Nazarene  has  overcome  me  :  the  Nazarene  has  overcome  me." 
May  you  not  have  to  say  that  in  the  article  of  death,  but  oh  that  you  may 
say  it  now.  May  his  love  overpower  you,  may  his  compassion  win 
you,  and  you  will  see  in  your  own  salvation  tokens  of  his  power. 

But  I  must  have  done,  for  my  time  has  fled,  but  I  desire  to  add  that 
it  Avill  be  a  blessed  thing  if  everyone  here,  becoming  a  believer  in  Jesus, 
shall  henceforward  see  him  at  the  right  hand  of  power  and  coming  in 
the  clouds  of  heaven.  Would  to  God  we  could  live  with  that  vision 
full  in  view,  believing  Jesus  to  be  at  the  right  hand  of  power,  trusting 
him  and  resting  in  him.  Because  we  know  him  to  be  the  Lord,  strong 
and  mighty,  the  Lord  mighty  in  battle,  we  ought  never  to  have  a  doubt 
when  we  are  doing  what  is  right.  We  ought  never  to  have  a  doubt 
when  we  are  following  Jesus,  for  he  is  more  than  a  conqueror,  and  so 
shall  his  followers  be.  Let  us  go  on  courageously,  trusting  in  him  as 
a  child  trusts  in  his  father,  for  he  is  mighty  upon  whom  we  repose  our 
confidence. 

Let  us  also  keep  before  our  mind's  eye  the  fact  that  he  is  coming. 
Be  ye  not  as  the  virgins  that  fell  asleep.  Even  now  my  ear  seems  to 
hear  the  midnight  cry,  "  Behold,  the  bridegroom  cometh  !"     Arise,  ye 


288 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


virgins,  sleep  no  longer,  for  the  bridegroom  is  near.  As  for  you,  ye 
foolish  virgins,  God  grant  that  there  may  yet  be  time  enough  left 
to  awake  even  you,  that  you  may  yet  have  oil  for  your  lamps  before 
he  comes.  He  comes  we  know  not  when,  but  he  comes  quickly.  Be 
ye  ready,  for  in  such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not  the  Son  of  man  cometh. 
Be  ye  as  men  that  watch  for  their  Lord,  and  as  servants  that  are  ready 
to  give  in  their  account,  because  the  master  of  the  house  is  near. 

In  that  spirit  let  us  come  to  the  Lord's  table,  as  often  as  we  gather 
there,  for  he  has  said  to  us,  "  Do  this  until  I  come."  Outward  ordi- 
nances will  cease  when  he  comes,  for  we  shall  need  no  memorial  when 
the  Lord  himself  will  be  among  us.  Let  us  here  pledge  him  in  the  cup. 
That  he  is  coming  we  do  verily  believe ;  that  he  is  coming  we  do 
joyfully  proclaim.     Is  it  a  subject  of  joy  to  you  ?     If  not — 

"  Ye  sinners  seek  Lis  face, 

Whose  wrath  ye  cannot  bear  ; 
Bow  to  the  sceptre  of  his  grace, 
And  find  salvation  there." 

God  bless  you  for  Christ's  sake. 


Portion  of  Scripti'uk  read  ukfore  Sermon — Matt.  xxvi.  47 — 75. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  I^mn  Book"— 414,  746. 


AN    AWFUL    C0NTKA8T. 


Intended  for  Reading  on  Lord's-day,    July  12th,   1896, 
delivered  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lord*$-day  Evening,  July  lUA,  1886. 


*'  Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face.  "—Matthew  xxvi.  67. 

"  And  I  saw  a  great  white  throne,  and  him  that  sat  on  it,  from  whose  face  the  earth 
and  the  heaven  fled  away." — Revelation  xx.  11. 

Guided  by  our  text  in  Matthew's  Gospel,  let  us  first  go  in  thought  to 
the  palace  of  Caiaphas  the  high  priest,  and  there  let  us,  in  deepest 
sorrow,  realize  the  meaning  of  these  terrible  words  :  "  Then  did  they 
spit  in  his  face."  There  is  more  of  deep  and  awful  thunder  in  them 
than  in  the  bolt  that  bursts  overhead,  there  is  more  of  vivid  terror 
in  them  than  in  the  sharpest  lightning  flash  :  "  Then  did  they  spit  in 
his  face." 

Observe  that  these  men,  the  priests,  and  scribes,  and  elders,  and 
their  servitors,  did  this  shameful  deed  after  they  had  heard  our  Lord 
say,  "  Hereafter  shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  on  the  right  hand 
of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven."  It  was  in  contempt 
of  this  claim,  in  derision  of  this  honour  which  he  foretold  for  himself, 
that  "  then  did  they  spit  in  his  face,"  as  if  they  could  bear  it  no  longer, 
that  he,  who  stood  to  be  judged  of  them,  should  claim  to  be  their 
Judge ;  that  he,  whom  they  had  brought  at  dead  of  night  from  the 
garden  of  Gethsemane  as  their  captive,  should  talk  of  coming  in  the 
clouds  of  heaven  :   "  Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face." 

Nor  may  I  fail  to  add  that  they  thus  assaulted  our  Lord  after  the 
high  priest  had  rent  his  clothes.  My  brethren,  do  not  forget  that  the 
high  priest  was  supposed  to  be  the  representative  of  everything  that 
was  good  and  venerable  among  the  Jews.  The  high  priest  was  the 
earthly  head  of  their  religion ;  he  it  was  who,  alone  of  mortal  men, 
might  enter  within  the  mysterious  veil ;  yet  he  it  was  who  condemned 
the  Lord  of  glory,  as  he  rent  his  clothes,  and  said,  "  He  hath  spoken 
blasphemy  ;  what  further  need  have  we  of  witnesses  ?  behold,  now  ye 
have  heard  his  blasphemy."  It  makes  me  tremble  as  I  think  of  how 
No.  2,473.  19 


290  METBOPOLITAN   TABBBNAOLE   PULPIT. 

eminent  we  may  be  in  the  service  of  God,  and  yet  how  awfully  we^ 
may  be  enemies  of  the  Christ  of  God.  Let  none  of  us  think  that^ 
though  we  even  clamber  up  to  the  highest  places  in  the  church,  we 
are  therefore  saved.  We  may  be  high  priests,  and  wear  the  Urim  and 
the  Thummim,  and  put  on  the  breastplate  with  all  its  wondrous  mystic 
stones,  and  bind  around  us  the  curious  girdle  of  the  ephod,  and  yet, 
for  all  that,  we  may  be  ringleaders  in  expressing  contempt  of  God 
and  of  his  Christ.  It  was  when  Caiaphas,  the  high  priest,  had  pro- 
nounced the  word  of  condemnation  against  Christ,  that  **  then  did  they 
spit  in  his  face."  God  grant  that  we  may  never  take  upon  ourselves 
any  office  in  the  Church  of  God,  and  then,  girt  about  with  the  authority 
and  influence  which  such  an  office  might  lend  to  us,  be  the  first  to 
pour  derision  and  contempt  upon  the  Christ  of  God !  Yet  I  do  not 
hesitate  to  say  that  when  men  look  to  the  earthly  priesthood  instead 
of  looking  to  Christ,  the  great  High  Priest,  when  men  are  taught  to 
trust  in  the  mass  instead  of  trusting  in  Christ's  one  sacrifice  for  sin 
upon  the  cross,  it  is  then  that  the  very  priests  do  lead  the  way  in 
spitting  in  his  face.  Antichrist  never  more  surely  dwells  anywhere 
than  in  the  place  where  Christ  is  thus  dishonoured,  and  none  do  him 
such  dire  disgrace  as  those  who  ought  to  bow  at  his  feet,  and  lift  him 
high  among  the  sons  of  men,  yet  who  reject  him,  and  refuse  his  rightful 
claims. 

"Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face,"  after  he  had  proclaimed  his 
Godhead  as  King  and  Judge  of  all,  and  after  the  man  who  ought  to 
have  been  his  principal  earthly  servant  had  turned  arch-traitor,  and 
led  the  way  in  contempt  of  him  by  accusing  him  of  blaspheming.^ 
"  Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face." 

There  are  two  or  three  thoughts  that  come  to  my  mind  when  I  think 
that  these  wicked  men  did  actually  spit  in  Christ's  face, — in  that  face 
which  is  the  light  of  heaven,  the  joy  of  angels,  the  bliss  of  saints,  and 
the  very  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory.  This  spitting  shows  us, 
first,  how  far  sin  will  go.  If  we  want  proof  of  the  depravity  of  the 
heart  of  man,  I  will  not  point  you  to  the  stews  of  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah,  nor  will  I  take  you  to  the  places  where  blood  is  shed  in 
streams  by  wretches  like  to  Herod  and  men  of  that  sort.  No,  the 
clearest  proof  that  man  is  utterly  fallen,  and  that  the  natural  heart  is 
enmity  against  God,  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  they  did  spit  in  Christ's  face, 
did  falsely  accuse  him,  and  condemn  him,  and  lead  him  out  as  a  male- 
factor, and  hang  him  up  as  a  felon  that  he  might  die  upon  the  cross. 
Why,  what  evil  had  he  done?  What  was  there  in  his  whole  life  that 
should  give  them  occasion  to  spit  in  his  face  ?  Even  at  that  moment, 
did  his  face  flash  with  indignation  against  them  ?  Did  he  look  with 
contempt  upon  them  ?  Not  he  ;  for  he  was  all  gentleness  and  tender- 
ness even  towards  these  his  enemies,  and  their  hearts  must  have  been 
hard  and  brutal  indeed  that  "  then  did  they  spit  in  his  face."  He 
had  healed  their  sick,  he  had  fed  their  hungry,  he  had  been  among 
them  a  very  fountain  of  blessing  up  and  down  Judaea  and  Samaria ;  and 
yet,  "then  did  they  spit  in  his  face."  I  say  again,  relate  not  to  me 
the  crimes  of  ancient  nations,  nor  the  horrible  evils  committed  by  un- 
civilized men,  nor  the  more  elaborate  iniquities  of  our  great  cities ; 
tell  me  not  of  the  abominations  of  Greece  or  Eome  ; — this — this,  in- 


AN   AWFUL    CONTKAST.  291 

the  sight  of  the  angels  of  God,  and  in  the  eyes  of  the  God  of  the 
angels,  is  the  masterpiece  of  all  iniquity  :  *'  Then  did  they  spit  in  his 
face."  To  enter  into  the  King's  own  palace,  and  draw  near  to  his 
only-begotten  Son,  and  to  spit  in  his  face, — this  is  the  crime  of  crimes 
which  reveals  the  infamous  wickedness  of  men.  Humanity  stands 
condemned  of  the  blackest  iniquity  now  that  it  has  gone  as  far  as  to 
spit  in  Christ's  face. 

My  meditation  also  turns  towards  the  Well-beloved  into  whose  face 
they  spat ;  and  my  thought  concerning  him  is  this,  how  deep  was  the 
humiliation  he  had  to  endure  !  When  he  was  made  sin  for  us,  though 
he  himself  knew  no  sin ;  when  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  took  upon  him- 
self the  iniquities  of  his  people,  and  was  burdened  with  the 
tremendous  weight  of  their  guilt,  it  became  incumbent  upon  the 
justice  of  God  to  treat  him  as  if  he  were  actually  a  sinner.  He  was 
no  sinner,  and  he  could  be  none  ;  he  was  perfect  man  and  perfect  God, 
yet  he  stood  in  the  place  of  sinners,  and  the  Lord  caused  to  meet  upon 
him  the  iniquity  of  all  his  people.  Therefore,  in  the  time  of 
humiliation,  he  must  not  be  treated  as  the  Son  of  God,  neither  must 
he  be  held  in  honour  as  a  righteous  man ;  he  must  first  be  given  up  to 
shame  and  to  contempt,  and  then  to  su:ffering  and  to  death ;  and, 
consequently,  he  was  not  spared  this  last  and  most  brutal  of  insults  : 
"Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face."  0  my  Lord,  to  what  terrible 
degradation  art  thou  brought !  Into  what  depths  art  thou  dragged 
through  my  sin,  and  the  sin  of  all  the  multitudes  whose  iniquities 
were  made  to  meet  upon  thee  !  0  my  brothers,  let  us  hate  sin  ;  0  my 
sisters,  let  us  loathe  sin,  not  only  because  it  pierced  those  blessed 
hands  and  feet  of  our  dear  Eedeemer,  but  because  it  dared  even  to  spit 
in  his  face  !  No  one  can  ever  know  all  the  shame  the  Lord  of  glory 
sufEered  when  they  did  spit  in  his  face.  These  words  glide  over  my 
tongue  all  too  smoothly;  perhaps  even  I  do  not  feel  tTiem  as  they 
ought  to  be  felt,  though  I  would  do  so  if  I  could.  But  could  I  feel 
as  I  ought  to  feel  in  sympathy  with  the  terrible  shame  of  Christ,  and 
then  could  I  interpret  those  feelings  by  any  language  known  to  mortal 
man,  surely  you  would  bow  your  heads  and  blush,  and  you  would  feel 
rising  within  your  spirits  a  burning  indignation  against  the  sin  that 
dared  to  put  the  Christ  of  God  to  such  shame  as  this.  I  want  to  kiss 
his  feet  when  I  think  that  they  did  spit  in  his  face. 

Then,  once  more,  my  thoughts  run  to  him  again  in  this  way,  I  think 
of  the  tender  omnipotence  of  his  love.  How  could  he  bear  this  spitting 
when,  with  one  glance  of  his  eye,  had  he  been  but  angry,  the  flame 
might  have  slain  them,  and  withered  them  all  up  ?  Yet  he  stood  still 
even  when  they  did  spit  in  his  face ;  and  they  were  not  the  only  ones 
who  thus  insulted  him,  for,  afterwards,  when  he  was  taken  by  the 
soldiers  into  Pilate's  hall,  they  also  spat  upon  him  in  cruel  contempt 
and  scorn. 

"  See  how  the  patient  Jesus  stands, 
Insulted  in  his  lowest  case  I 
Sinners  have  bound  the  Almighty  hands, 
And  spit  in  their  Creator's  face." 

How  could  he  bear  it  ?  Friends,  he  could  not  have  borne  it  if  he  had 
not  been  omnipotent.     That  very  omnipotence,   which   would   have 


292  METROPOLITAN   TABERXAOLE   PTJLPIT. 

eimbled  him  to  destroy  them,  was  omnipotence  of  love  as  well  as 
omnipotence  of  force.  It  was  this  that  made  him — if  I  may  so  say, — 
'*  restrain  himself,"  for  there  is  no  omnipotence  like  that  which  doth 
restrain  omnipotence.  Yet  so  it  was  that  he  could  endure  this  spitting 
from  men ;  but  can  you  think  of  this  marvellous  condescension  with- 
out feeling  your  hearts  all  on  fire  with  love  to  him,  so  that  you  long 
to  do  some  special  act  of  homage  to  him,  by  which  you  may  show  that 
you  would  fain  recompense  him  for  this  shame  if  you  could  ? 

I  will  not  say  more  about  that  point,  for  the  shameful  fact  stands 
indelibly  recorded  in  the  Scripture  :  "Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face ;  " 
but  I  want  to  bring  the  truth  home,  brethren,  and  to  show  you  how 
we  may  have  done  to  Christ  what  these  wicked  men  did.  *'  Oh  !  " 
says  one,  **  I  was  not  there;  I  did  not  spit  in  his  face."  Listen; 
perhaps  you  have  spat  in  his  face,  perhaps  even  you  have  spat  in  his 
face.     You  remember  that  touching  hymn  that  we  sometimes  sing, — 

**  My  Jesus  !  say  what  wretch  has  dared 
Thy  sacred  hands  to  bind  ? 
And  who  has  dared  to  buffet  so 
Thy  face  so  meek  and  kind  P 
**  My  Jesus  !  whose  the  hands  that  wot« 
That  cruel  thorny  crown  ? 
Who  made  that  hard  and  heavy  cross 
That  weighs  thy  shoulders  down  P 

•*  My  Jesus !  who  with  spittle  vile 
Profaned  thy  sacred  brow  P 
Or  whose  unpitying  scourge  has  made 
Thy  precious  blood  to  flow  ? 

**  'Tis  I  have  thus  ungrateful  been. 
Yet,  Jesus,  pity  take  ! 
Oh,  spare  and  pardon  me,  my  Lord, 
For  thy  sweet  mercy's  sake  !  " 

There  are  still  some  who  spit  in  Christ's  face  by  denying  his  Godhead. 
They  say,  "  He  is  a  mere  man ;  a  good  man,  it  is  true,  but  only  a 
man ; "  though  how  they  dare  say  that,  I  cannot  make  out,  for  he 
would  be  no  good  man  who  claimed  to  be  God  if  he  was  not  God. 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  the  basest  of  impostors  who  ever  lived  if  he 
permitted  his  disciples  to  worship  him,  and  if  he  left  behind  him  a 
life  which  compels  us  to  worship  him,  if  he  was  not  reaUy  and  truly 
God;  therefore,  of  all  those  who  declare  that  he  is  not  God, — and 
there  is  a  very  great  company  of  them  even  amongst  the  nominally 
religious  people  of  the  present  day, — we  must  sorrowfully,  but  truth- 
fully say,  "  Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face." 

They  also  do  the  same  who  rail  at  his  gospel.  There  are  many,  in 
these  days,  who  seem  as  if  they  cannot  be  happy  unless  they  are 
tearing  the  gospel  to  pieces.  Especially  is  that  divine  mystery  of  the 
substitutionary  sacrifice  of  Christ  the  mark  for  the  arrows  of  the  wise 
men,  I  mean  those  who  are  wise  according  to  the  wisdom  of  this 
world.  "We  delight  to  know  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  suffered  in 
the  room  and  place  and  stead  of  his  people. 

"  He  bore  that  we  might  never  bear 
His  Father's  righteous  ire." 


AN    AWFUL    CONTRAST. 

Yet  I  have  read  some  horrible  things  which  have  been  written 
against  that  blessed  doctrine,  and  as  I  read  them  I  could  only  say  to 
myeeK,  "  Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face."  If  there  is  anything  that 
is  beyond  all  else  the  glory  of  Christ,  it  is  his  atoning  sacrifice ;  and  if 
ever  you  thrust  your  finger  into  the  very  apple  of  his  eye,  and  touch 
his  honour  in  the  tenderest  possible  point,  it  is  when  you  have  aught 
to  say  against  his  ofEering  of  himself  a  sacrifice  unto  God,  without 
blemish  and  without  spot,  that  he  might  put  away  the  iniquities  of 
his  people.  Wherefore  judge  yourselves  in  this  matter,  and  if  ye 
have  ever  denied  Christ's  Deity,  or  if  ye  have  ever  assailed  his  atoning 
sacrifice,  it  might  truly  have  been  said  of  you,  "  Then  did  they  spit  in 
his  face." 

Further,  this  evil  is  also  done  when  men  prefer  their  own  righteousness 
to  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  There  are  some  who  say,  "  We  do  not 
need  pardon,  we  do  not  want  to  be  justified  by  faith  in  Christ,  we  are 
good  enough  already,"  or,  "  We  are  working  out  our  own  salvation  ; 
we  mean  to  save  ourselves."  0  sirs,  if  you  can  save  yourselves,  why 
did  Jesus  bleed  upon  the  cross  ?  It  was  a  superfluity  indeed  that  the 
Son  of  God  should  die  in  human  form  if  there  be  a  possibility  of  sal- 
vation by  your  own  merits ;  and  if  you  prefer  your  merits  to  his,  it 
must  be  said  of  you  also,  **Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face."  Tour 
righteousnesses  are  only  filthy  rags  ;  and  if  you  prefer  these  to  the  fair 
white  linen  which  is  the  righteousness  of  saints,  if  you  think  to  wash 
yourselves  in  your  tears,  and  so  you  despise  that  precious  blood  apart 
from  which  there  is  no  purging  of  our  sin,  still  to  you  does  our  text 
apply,  "  then  did  they  spit  in  his  face,"  when  they  preferred  their 
own  righteousness  to  Christ's. 

I  have  often  spoken  to  you  about  the  parable  of  the  prodigal 
son ;  but,  possibly,  your  case  is  more  like  that  of  the  elder  brother 
in  the  parable;  you  have  your  portion  of  goods,  it  is  all  your 
own,  and  you  are  keeping  it.  You  are  rich,  and  increased  in  goods, 
and  have  need  of  nothing.  You  are  self-righteous,  you  think  that 
you  can  do  very  well  without  God  and  without  Christ,  and  you  half 
suspect  that  God  can  hardly  do  without  you.  You  are  doing  so  very 
well  in  the  observance  of  rites  and  ceremonies,  and  the  performance 
of  charity  and  devotions  that,  if  you  go  into  the  far  country,  you  will 
cut  a  very  respectable  figure ;  you  will  be  one  of  those  excellent 
citizens  of  that  country  who  will,  in  due  time,  send  some  poor  prodigal 
into  your  fields  to  feed  your  swine.  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  your 
case  is  even  more  sad  and  hopeless  than  that  of  the  prodigal  himself. 
You,  too,  have  gone  far  away  from  God,  you  are  living  without 
him.  He  is  not  in  all  your  thoughts,  you  could  almost  wish  that  there 
were  no  God,  for  then  there  would  be  no  dark  cloud  hovering  in  the 
distance  to  spoil  your  summer's  day,  no  fear  of  storms  to  come  to  mar 
the  joy  of  the  liour.  Just  as  truly  as  of  the  avowed  infidel  who 
openly  rejects  Christ,  it  must  be  said  of  you,  **  Then  did  they  spit  in 
his  face." 

The  same  thing  is,  oh !  so  sadly  true  when  anyone  forsakes  th« 
profession  of  heing  a  follower  of  Christ.  There  are  some,  alas  !  who,  for 
a  time,  have  appeared  to  stand  well  in  the  Church  of  God, — I  wiU  not 
judge  them, — but  there  have  been  some  who,  after  making  a  profession 


294  MBTBOPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PtJLPIT. 

of  religion,  have  deliberately  gone  back  to  the  world.  After  seeming 
for  a  while  to  be  very  zealous,  they  have  become  worldly,  gay,  and 
perhaps  even  lascivious  and  vile.  They  break  the  Sabbath,  they 
neglect  the  Word  of  God,  they  forsake  the  mercy-seat ;  and  their  last 
end  is  worse  than  their  first.  When  a  man  forsakes  Christ  for  a  harlot, 
when  he  gives  up  heaven  for  gold,  when  he  resigns  the  joys  he  pro- 
fessed to  have  had  in  ^Christ  in  order  that  he  may  find  mirth  in  the 
company  of  the  ungodly,  it  is  another  instance  of  the  truth  of  these 
words,  **Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face."  To  prefer  any  of  these 
things  to  Christ,  is  infamous ;  and  the  mere  act  of  spitting  from  the 
mouth  seems  little  compared  with  this  sin  of  spitting  with  the  very 
heart  and  soul,  and  pouring  contempt  upon  Christ  by  choosing  some 
sin  in  preference  to  him.  Yet,  alas !  how  many  are  thus  still  spitting 
in  Christ's  face.     Perhaps  some  now  present  are  doing  it. 

If,  dear  friends,  our  conscience  in  any  measure  accuses  us  of  this  sin, 
let  m  at  once  confess  it ;  let  us  humble  ourselves  before  the  Lord ;  and 
with  the  very  mouth  that  spat  upon  him,  let  us  kiss  the  Son  lest  he  be 
angry,  and  we  perish  from  the  way,  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a 
little. 

And  when  we  have  confessed  the  sin,  let  us  believe  that  he  is  able  and 
willing  to  forgive  us.  I  know  that  it  requires  a  great  act  of  faith,  when 
sin  is  consciously  felt,  to  believe  in  the  splendour  of  divine  mercy ; 
but,  dear  friends,  do  believe  it.  Do  the  Lord  Jesus  the  great  honour 
of  saying  to  him,  **  Gracious  Lord,  wash  me  in  thy  precious  blood ; 
though  I  did  spit  in  thy  face,  wash  me  in  that  cleansing  fountain, 
and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow ;  "  and  according  to  your  faith,  so 
shall  it  be  done  unto  you.  You  shall  have  the  forgiveness  even  of 
this  great  sin  if  you  confess  it,  and  believe  that  Christ  is  both  able  and 
willing  to  forgive  it. 

And  when  you  have  done  that,  then  let  yovr  whole  life  be  spent  in 
trying  to  magnify  and  glorify  him  whom  you  and  others  have  defamed 
and  dishonoured.  Oh,  I  think  that,  if  I  had  ever  denied  Christ's 
Deity,  I  should  want  to  stand  in  this  pulpit  night  and  day  to  revoke 
what  I  had  said,  and  to  declare  him  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with 
power !  I  think  that,  if  I  had  ever  set  up  anything  in  opposition  to 
him,  I  should  want  day  and  night  to  be  setting  him  up  above  every- 
thing else,  as  indeed,  I  long  to  do.  Come,  Christian  brethren  and 
sisters,  let  us  do  something  unusual  in  Christ's  honour  ;  let  us  find  out 
something  or  invent  something  fresh,  either  in  the  company  of  others 
or  all  by  ourselves,  by  which  we  may  further  glorify  his  blessed  name. 

Yet  once  more,  if  ever  anybody  should  despise  us  for  Christ's 
sake,  let  us  not  count  it  hard,  but  let  its  be  willing  to  bear  scorn  and  contempt 
for  him.  Let  us  say  to  ourselves,  *'  *  Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face.' 
What,  then,  if  they  also  spit  in  mine  ?  If  they  do,  I  will  *  hail  re- 
proach, and  welcome  shame,*  since  it  comes  upon  me  for  his  dear  sake." 
See,  that  wretch  is  about  to  spit  in  Christ's  face !  Put  your  cheek  for- 
ward, that  you  may  catch  that  spittle  upon  your  face,  that  it  fall  not 
upon  him  again,  for  as  he  was  put  to  such  terrible  shame,  every  one 
who  has  been  redeemed  with  his  precious  blood  ought  to  count  it  an 
honour  to  be  a  partaker  of  the  shame,  if  by  any  means  we  may  screer 
him  from  being  further  despised  and  rejected  of  men. 


AN    AWFUIi    CONTHAST. 


295 


There,  dear  friends,  I  have  not  preached,  I  have  just  talked  very, 
very  feebly,  and  not  at  all  as  I  wished  and  hoped  I  might  be  able 
to  do,  about  this  wonderful  text  :  "  Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face." 

Now  try  to  follow  me,  just  for  a  few  minutes,  while  I  let  you  see 
that  same  face  in  a  very  different  light.  Our  second  text  is  in  the 
20th  chapter  of  the  Revelation,  at  the  11th  verse: — "And  I  saw  a 
great  white  throne,  and  him  that  sat  on  it,  from  whose  face  the  earth 
and  the  heaven  fled  away  ;  and  there  was  found  no  place  for  them." 

This  passage  needs  no  words  of  mine  to  explain  it.  Notice  how  the 
apostle  begins  :  ^^  I sawV  Oh,  I  wish  I  had  the  power  to  make  you 
also  see  this  great  sight !  Sometimes,  vividly  to  realize  a  truth  even 
once,  is  far  better  than  to  have  merely  heard  it  stated  ten  thousand 
times.  I  remember  the  story  of  a  soldier  who  was  employed  in  con- 
nection with  one  of  the  surveys  of  Palestine.  He  was  with  some 
others  of  the  company  in  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  and  without  thinking 
seriously  of  his  words,  he  said  to  his  comrades,  "  Some  people  say  that, 
when  Christ  shall  come  a  second  time  to  judge  the  world,  the  judgment 
will  take  place  in  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  in  this  very  place  where 
we  now  are."  Then  he  added,  **  When  the  great  white  throne  shall  be 
set,  I  wonder  whereabouts  I  shall  be."  It  is  said  that  he  carelessly 
exclaimed,  "I  shall  sit  here  upon  this  big  stone,"  and  he  sat  down  ; 
but  in  an  instant  he  was  struck  with  horror,  and  he  fainted,  because 
in  the  act  of  sitting  down  he  had  begun  to  realize  somewhat  of  the 
grandeur  and  the  terror  of  that  tremendous  scene.  I  wish  I  knew 
how  to  do  or  say  anything  by  which  I  could  make  you  realize  this 
scene  that  John  saw  in  vision.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  went  up  to 
heaven  from  the  top  of  Olivet  in  his  own  proper  body,  and  he  shall 
so  come  in  like  manner  as  he  was  taken  up  into  heaven  ;  but  he  shall 
come,  not  the  lowly  Man  of  sorrows,  but  as  Judge  of  all  seated  upon 
a  great  white  throne;  and  John  says,  "I  saw  it."  As  we  sang,  a  tew 
minutes  ago, — 

"  The  Lord  shall  come  !  but  not  the  same 
As  once  in  lowliness  he  came  ; 
A  silent  lamb  before  his  foes, 
A  weary  man,  and  full  of  woes. 

•*  The  Lord  shall  come  !  a  dreadful  form, 
With  rainbow  wreath  and  robes  of  storm ; 
On  cherub  wings,  and  wings  of  wind, 
Appointed  Judge  of  all  mankind." 

I  wish,  dear  friends,  that  even  in  your  dreams  you  might  see  this 
sight,  for,  though  I  have  no  trust  in  dreams  by  themselves,  yet  any 
realization  of  this  great  truth  will  be  better  than  the  mere  hearing 
of  it. 

**I  saw,"  said  John,  "  a  great  white  throne."  He  saw  a  throne,  for 
■Christ  now  reigns,  he  is  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords ;  and  when 
he  comes  again,  he  will  come  in  the  power  of  universal  sovereignty  as 
the  appointed  Judge  of  all  mankind.     He  will  come  upon  a  throne. 

That  throne  is  said  to  be  white.  What  other  throne  can  be  so 
described?     The   thrones   of  mere   mortals   are   often  stained   with 


296  METEOPOLITAlf   TABERNACLE    PULPIT.      ^ 

injustice,  or  bespattered  with  the  blood  of  cruel  wars  ;  but  Christ's 
throne  is  white,  for  he  doeth  justice  and  righteousness,  and  his  name 
is  truth. 

It  will  also  be  a  great  white  throne, — a  throne  so  great  that  all  the 
thrones  of  former  kings  and  princes  shall  be  as  nothing  in  comparison 
with  it.  The  thrones  of  Assyria,  and  Babylon,  and  Persia,  and  Greece, 
and  Rome,  shall  all  seem  only  like  tiny  drops  of  dew  to  be  exhaled 
in  a  moment ;  but  this  great  white  throne  shall  be  the  recognized  seat 
of  the  King  of  kings,  the  Sovereignty  over  all  sovereignties :  "I  saw 
a  great  white  throne." 

John  not  only  saw  the  great  white  throne,  but  also  **  Him  that  sat 
upon  it.'"  What  a  wondrous  sight  was  that !  John  saw  him,  whose 
eyes  are  **  as  a  flame  of  fire,  and  his  feet  like  unto  fine  brass,  as  if 
they  burned  in  a  furnace."  John  saw  him  whose  divine  majesty  shall 
shine  resplendent  even  through  the  nail-prints  which  he  shall  still 
wear  when  seated  on  the  great  white  throne.  What  a  sight  it  was  to 
John,  who  had  leaned  his  head  upon  Christ's  bosom,  to  behold  that 
same  Master,  whom  he  had  seen  die  upon  the  cross,  now  sitting  upon 
the  throne  of  universal  judgment :  **  I  saw  a  great  white  throne,  and 
him  that  sat  upon  it." 

Now  notice  what  happened:  ^^ from  whose  face  the  earth  and  the 
heaven  fled  away.^^  As  soon  as  ever  this  great  white  throne  appeared, 
heaven  and  earth  began  to. roll  away  like  a  wave  receding  from  the 
shore.  What  must  He  be  before  whose  face  heaven  and  earth  shall 
retreat  as  in  dismay  ? 

Observe,  first,  Chrisfs  power.  He  does  not  drive  away  the  heavei\ 
and  the  earth ;  he  does  not  even  speak  to  them ;  the  sight  of 
his  face  is  all  that  is  needed,  and  the  old  heaven,  and  the  old  sin- 
stained  earth,  shall  begin  to  flee  away,  **  the  elements  shall  melt  with 
fervent  heat,  the  earth  also  and  the  works  that  are  therein  shall  be 
burned  up  ;  "  and  all  that  by  the  mere  showing  of  Christ's  face.  He 
does  not  have  to  lift  his  arm,  he  has  not  to  seize  a  javelin,  and  to  hurl 
it  at  the  condemned  earth  ;  at  the  sight  of  his  face,  heaven  and  earth 
shall  flee  away. 

Behold  the  terror  of  Chrisfs  majesty.  And  what  will  you  do  in  that 
day, — you  who  did  spit  in  his  face,  you  who  did  despise  him  ?  What 
will  you  do  in  that  day  ?  Suppose  the  great  judgment  day  had 
already  come,  suppose  that  the  great  white  throne  was  just  over 
yonder,  and  that  when  this  service  was  over,  you  must  appear  with  all 
the  risen  dead  before  your  Judge.  One  would  have  to  say,  **I  have 
refused  him  ;  how  shall  I  dare  to  look  in  his  face  ?  "  Another  would 
cry,  **  He  drew  me  once,  I  felt  the  tugging  of  his  love,  the  drawings  of 
his  Spirit ;  but  I  resisted,  and  would  not  yield.  How  can  I  meet 
him  now  ?  How  can  I  look  him  in  the  face  ?  "  Another  will  have  to 
say,  "I  had  to  strive  hard  to  escape  from  the  grasp  of  his  hand  of 
mercy ;  I  stifled  conscience,  and  I  went  back  into  the  world."  You 
will  all  have  to  look  into  that  face,  and  that  face  will  look  at  all  of 
you.  One  will  have  to  say,  "  I  gave  up  Christ  for  the  world." 
"I  gave  him  up  for  the  theatre,"  another  must  say.  *'I  gave 
him  up  for  the  dancing  saloon,"  another  will  say.  "I  gave  him  up 
for  the  love  of  women,"  another  will  say.     **  I  gave  him  up  that  I 


EXPOSITIONS.  297 

might  carry  on  my  business  as  I  could  not  carry  it  on  if  I  was  a  true 
Christian ;  I  gave  up  Christ  for  what  I  could  get."  You  will  have  to 
say  all  this,  and  that  very  soon.  As  surely  as  you  see  me  upon  this 
platform  now,  you  shall  see  the  King  upon  the  great  white  throne 
then,  that  King  who  was  once  despised  and  rejected  of  men. 

0  sirs,  I  would  that  ye  would  think  of  all  this !  It  is  not  one 
hundredth  part  so  much  my  concern  as  it  is  yours ;  I  am  not  afraid  to 
see  Christ's  face,  for  he  hath  looked  on  me  in  love,  and  blotted  out  all 
my  sin,  and  I  love  him,  and  long  to  be  with  him  for  ever  and  ever. 
But  if  you  have  never  had  that  look  of  love,  if  you  have  never  been 
reconciled  to  him,  I  ask  you,  by  the  love  you  bear  yourselves,  to  begin 
to  think  about  this  matter.  Begin  to  prepare  to  meet  this  King  of 
men,  this  Lord  of  love,  who,  as  surely  as  he  is  the  Lord  of  love,  will 
be  the  King  of  wrath,  for  there  is  no  anger  like  the  anger  of  love. 
There  is  no  indignation  like  "  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb,"  of  which  we 
read  a  few  minutes  ago.  Divine  love,  when  it  has  become  righteous 
indignation,  burns  like  coals  of  juniper,  and  is  quenchless  as  hell. 
Wherefore, — 

*'  Ye  sinners,  seek  his  grace, 
Whose  wrath  ye  cannot  bear  ; 
Fly  to  the  shelter  of  his  cross. 
And  find  salvation  there  ;  " 

and  ere  heaven  and  earth  begin  to  flee  away  from  the  face  of  him  who 
sits  upon  the  throne,  and  ere  ye  yourselves  begin  to  cry  to  the  rocks 
to  cover  you  and  the  mountains  to  hide  you  from  that  face, — seek  ye 
his  face  with  humble  penitence  and  faith,  that  you  may  be  prepared 
to  meet  him  with  joy  in  that  last  tremendous  day. 

If  what  I  have  been  saying  be  all  a  dream,  dismiss  it,  and  go  your 
ways  to  your  sins ;  but  if  these  things  be  the  very  truth  of  God, — and 
verily  they  are, — do  act  as  sane  men  should,  think  them  over,  and 
prepare  to  meet  your  Judge.  God  help  you  to  do  so,  for  Christ's 
sake !     Amen. 


Expositions  h^  C  ^.  Spurgron. 

MATTHEW  XXVL  57—68  ;  REVELATION  VI.  12—17,  XIX.  11—16, 

XX.    11  —  15,    AND   XXI.    I. 

We  shall  read  two  or  three  short  portions  of  God's  Word  in  order  to 
bring  before  you  the  wonderful  contrast  to  which  I  am  about  to  direct 
your  thoughts. 

Matthew  xxvi.  Verse  57.  And  they  that  had  laid  hold  on  Jesus  led  him 
away  to  Caiajphas  the  high  priest,  where  the  scribes  and  the  elders  were- 
assembled. 

It  was  night,  but  these  wicked  men  could  sit  up  for  this  cruel  deed,  to 
judge  the  Lord  of  glory,  and  to  put  the  innocent  One  to  shame.  They 
"  led  him  away  to  Caiaphas  the  high  priest,  where  the  scribes  and  the  elders- 
were  assembled." 


298  METEOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

68.  But  Peter  followed  him  afar  off  unto  the  high  priea  fa  palace,  and  went 
-in,  and  sat  with  the  servants,  to  see  the  end. 

I  have  heard  Peter  represented  as  if  he  did  wrong  to  follow  Christ  **  afar 
ofP."  I  think  he  was  the  bravest  of  all  the  apostles,  for  scarcely  one  of  them 
followed  Christ  at  all  at  that  time.  Afterwards,  John  bethought  himself, 
and  came  into  the  judgment  hall.  Peter  kept  at  a  distance  from  his  Lord, 
but  he  did  follow  him,  and  he  did  go  into  the  high  priest's  palace.  He 
"went  in,  and  sat  with  the  servants,  to  see  the  end."  Peter  was  right 
enough  in  following  Christ;  it  was  afterward,  when  the  temptation  came, 
that  he  fell  so  grievously. 

59,  60.  Now  the  chief  priests,  and  elders,  and  all  the  council,  sought  false 
witness  against  Jesus,  to  put  him  to  death  j  hut  found  none : 

Because  they  did  not  agree,  they  would  not  hold  together.  This  is  the 
weakness  of  falsehood,  that  it  contradicts  itself.  These  men  felt  that  they 
must  have  some  show  of  truth-likeness  even  in  condemning  Christ,  and  this 
they  could  not  get  at  first  even  from  their  false  witnesses. 

60,  61.  Yea,  though  many  false  witnesses  came,  yet  found  they  none.  At  the 
last  came  two  false  witnesses,  and  said,  This  fellow  said,  I  am  able  to  destroy 
the  temple  of  God,  and  to  build  it  in  three  days. 

Brethren,  observe,  that  this  was  a  little  twisting  of  Christ's  words,  but  that 
slight  wresting  made  them  as  different  as  possible  from  what  Christ  had 
really  said.  I  suppose  that,  if  you  want  to  know  how  this  twisting  or 
wresting  is  done,  any  one  of  our  general  elections  will  give  you  the  most 
wonderful  examples  of  how  everything  that  any  man  may  say  can  be 
twisted  to  mean  the  very  reverse  of  what  he  said.  If  there  is  one  thing  in 
which  English  people  are  expert  beyond  all  others,  it  is  in  the  art  of  mis- 
quoting, misstating,  and  misrepresenting.  As  our  Lord  was  wronged  in 
this  fashion,  nobody  need  be  surprised  if  the  like  should  happen  unto  him. 
"This  fellow  said,  I  am  able  to  destroy  the  temple  of  God,  and  to  build  it 
in  three  days." 

62.  And  the  high  priest  arose,  and  said  unto  him,  Answerest  thou  nothing  f 
what  is  it  which  these  witness  against  thee  ? 

What  was  the  good  of  answering  ?  What  is  ever  the  good  of  answering 
when  the  only  evidence  brought  against  one  is  palpable  and  wilful  mis- 
representation ?  So  the  Saviour  was  silent ;  and  thus,  he  not  only  proved 
his  wisdom,  but  he  also  fulfilled  that  marvellous  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  "  He 
was  oppressed,  and'  he  was  afflicted,  yet  he  opened  not  his  mouth :  he  is 
brought  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,  and  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  is 
dumb,  so  he  openeth  not  his  mouth." 

63.  But  Jesus  held  his  peace.  And  the  high  priest  answered  and  said  unto 
him,  I  adjure  thee  by  the  living  God,  that  thou  tell  us  whether  thou  be  the  Christ, 
the  Son  of  God. 

Now  came  the  answer,  the  good  confession  that  our  Lord  witnessed  before 
his  cruel  adversaries. 

64.  Jesu^  saith  unto  him.  Thou  hast  said:  nevertheless  I  say  unto  you. 
Hereafter  shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power,  and 
coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven. 

How  that  sentence  must  have  come  with  the  vividness  of  a  lightning  flash 
before  their  faces  !  What  a  declaration  of  power  from  One  who  stood  there 
bound  before  his  enemies,  apparently  helpless,  and  about  to  die  ! 

65 — 68.  Then  the  high  priest  rent  his  clothes,  saying.  Re  hath  spoken 
blasphemy;  what  further  need  have  we  of  witnesses  ^  behold,  now  ye  have  heard 
his  blasphemy.  What  think  ye?  They  answered  and  said.  He  is  guilty  of 
death.     Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face^  and  buffeted  him;  and  others  smote  him 


EXPOSITIONS.  299 

with  the  palms  of  their  hands,  saying.  Prophesy  unto  us,  thou  Christ,  Who  is 
he  that  smote  thee  ? 

Our  Lord  had  told  these  mockers  that  they  should  one  day  see  him 
coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven.  Let  us  read  in  the  Book  of  the  Revelation 
concerning  that  great  event. 

Revelation  vi.  Verses  12— 16.  And  I  beheld  when  he  had  opened  the  sixth 
seal,  and,  lo,  there  was  a  great  earthquake  ;  and  the  sun  became  black  as  sack- 
cloth of  hair,  and  the  moon  became  as  blood ;  and  the  stars  of  heaven  fell  unto 
the  earth,  even  as  a  fig  tree  casteth  her  untimely  fi^s,  when  she  is  shaken  of  a 
mighty  wind.  And  the  heaven  departed  as  a  scroll  when  it  is  rolled  together  ; 
and  every  mountain  and  island  were  moved  out  of  their  places.  And  the  kings 
of  the  earth,  and  the  great  men,  and  the  rich  men,  and  the  chief  captains,  and 
the  mighty  men,  and  every  bondman,  and  every  free  man,  hid  themselves  in  the 
dens  and  in  the  rocks  of  the  mountains;  and  said  to  the  mountains  and  rocks, 
Fall  on  us,  and  hide  us  from  the  face  of  him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne,  and 
from  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  : 

^  Think  of  the  contrast  between  this  awful  cry  and  the  sentence  we  read 
just  now  :  *'  Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face."  "  Mountains  and  rocks,  fall  on 
us,  and  hide  us  from  the  face  of  him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne."  Think,  too, 
of  the  contrast  of  which  we  were  reminded  in  our  opening  hymn, — 

"  While  sinners  in  despair  shall  call, 
'  Rocks,  hide  us ;  mountains,  on  us  fall  I ' 
The  saints,  ascending  from  the  tomb, 
Shall  joyful  sing,  *  The  Lord  is  come  ! ' " 

17.  For  the  great  day  of  his  wrath  ia  come;  and  who  shall  he  able 
io  stand  f 

Let  us  read  further  on  in  the  same  Book. 

Revelation  xix.  Verses  11,  12.  And  I  saw  heaven  opened,  and  behold  a 
white  horse  ;  and  he  that  sat  upon  him  was  called  Faithful  and  True,  and  in 
righteousness  he  doth  judge  and  make  war.  His  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire, 
und  on  his  head  were  m^ny  crowns  y  * 

**  Bright  with  all  his  crowns  of  glory, 
See  the  royal  Victor's  brow." 

Again  note  the  contrast :  **  Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face."  "  And  on  his 
nead  were  many  crowns ;  " — 

12—16.  And  he  had  a  name  written,  that  no  man  knew,  but  he  himself.  And 
newas  clothed  with  a  vesture  dipped  in  blood  :  and  his  name  is  called  The  Word 
1  L  ^*  ^^^  *^^  armies  which  were  in  heaven  followed  him  upon  white  horses, 
clothed  in  fine  linen,  white  and  clean.  And  out  of  his  mouth  goeth  a  sharp 
sword,  that  with  it  he  should  smite  the  nations  :  and  he  shall  rule  them  with  a 
rod  of  iron  :  and  he  treadeth  the  winepress  of  the  fierceness  and  wrath  of 
^^^IQhtyGod.  And  he  hath  on  his  vesture  and  on  his  thigh  a  name  written, 
KING  OF  KINGS,  AND  LORD  OF  LORDS. 
And  this  is  he  in  whose  face  his  enemies  did  spit. 

Now  turn  to  the  next  chapter. 

Revelation  xx.  Verse  11.  And  I  saw  a  great  white  throne,  and  him  that 
-tat  on  it,  from  whose  face  the  earth  and  the  heaven  fled  away;  and  there  was 
/(nmd  no  place  f&r  them.  "^ 

Driven,  like  ohofP  before  the  wind,  from  the  face  of  him  who  iat  upon 
the  throne.  ^ 


300  METKOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

12 — 15.  And  I  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  before  Ood;  and  the 
hooks  were  opened :  and  another  book  was  opened,  which  is  the  book  of  life :  and 
the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those  things  which  were  written  in  the  books, 
according  to  their  works.  And  the  sea  gave  up  the  dead  which  were  in  it ;  and 
death  and  hell  delivered  up  the  dead  which  were  in  them  :  and  they  were  judged 
every  man  according  to  their  works.  And  death  and  hell  were  cast  into  the  lake 
of  fire.  This  is  the  second  death.  And  whosoever  was  not  found  written  in  the 
look  of  life  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire. 

Revelation  xxi.  Verse  1.  And  I  saw  a  new  heaven  and  a  n£w  earth  :  for 
the  first  heaven  and  the  first  earth  were  passed  away ;  and  there  was  no 


SECOND-HAND. 


%    $it«nrt| 


I^"TBNDED  FOR  Eeading  ON  Lord's-day,  May  28th,  1899, 

DELIVERED    BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTOIT, 
On  Lord's-day  Evening^  February  I2th^  1882. 


"  Sayest  thou  this  thing  of  thyself,  or  did  others  tell  it  thee  of  me  ?  " — John  xviii.  34. 

I  EXPLAINED,  this  moming,*  why  our  Saviour  put  that  question  to 
Pilate.  The  Eoman  governor  had  asked  him,  "  Art  thou  the  King  ol 
the  Jews?  "  And  Jesus  as  good  as  said  to  him,  "■  Have  you,  of  your 
own  knowledge,  seen  anything  in  me  that  looks  like  setting  up  to  be  a 
king  in  opposition  to  Csesar?  You  intend,  by  asking  me  that 
question,  to  enquire  whether  I  have  led  a  rebellion  against  your 
government,  or  the  imperial  authority  which  you  represent.  Now, 
has  there  been  anything  which  you  have  observed  which  would  have 
led  you  to  make  this  enquiry,  or  do  you  only  ask  it  because  of  what  the 
Jews  have  been  saying  in  their  enmity  against  me  ?  "  You  will  see, 
dear  friends,  that  our  Lord  asked  this  question  in  order  that  he  might 
get  from  Pilate's  own  lips  the  acknowledgment  that  he  had  not  seen  any 
sign  of  sedition  or  rebellion  in  him,  and  that  it  might  be  proved  that 
the  charge  had  been  brought  to  Pilate  by  those  outside,  and  had  not 
come  from  the  Roman  governor  himself. 

We  will,  now,  forget  Pilate  for  a  while,  for  I  want  to  use  this 
question  in  two  ways  with  reference  to  ourselves.  Pirst^  I  shall  utilize 
it  as  a  warning  against  second-hand  cavils  at  Christ  and  his  gospel. 
Some  people  have  a  large  stock  of  them,  and  we  might  say  to  each 
one  of  these  cavillers,  '*  Sayest  thou  this  thing  of  thyself,  or  did  others 
tell  it  thee?"  Then,  in  the  second  place,  I  shall  use  the  text  as  a 
warning  against  all  second-hand  religion^  pressing  this  question  home 
upon  each  one  who  speaks  up  for  Christ,  "  Sayest  thou  this  thing  of 
thyself,  or  did  others  tell  it  thee  ?  " 

I.  We  will  begin  with  the  opponents  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
consider  our  text,  first,  as  a  warning  against  second-hand  cavils  at 
Christ  and  his  gospel. 

There  are  a  great  many  people  in  the  world  who  really  do  not  know 

*  See  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit,  No.  1,644,  "Our  Lord's  first  appearance 
before  Pilate." 

No.  2,624. 


802  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

why  they  oppose  religion ;  and  if  you  ask  them  the  reason,  they^ 
repeat  some  old  bit  of  scandal,  some  stale  slander  upon  Jesus  and  his- 
cross,  and  they  give  that  as  their  answer.  I  firmly  believe  that  there 
are  thousands,  who  are  ranked  among  the  opposers  of  the  gospel,  who 
have  not  anything  to  say  against  Christ  of  their  own  knowledge ;  but 
others  have  told  them  something  or  other,  and  they  go  on  repeating 
and  reiterating  the  old  exploded  obsolete  objections  that  have  been 
demolished  thousands  of  times,  and  I  s^ippose  they  and  others  of  their 
kind  will  keep  on  doing  the  same  thing  right  to  the  end  of  time. 

As  soon  as  ever  Jesus  Christ's  gospel  was  launched  upon  the  world's- 
sea,  it  had  to  encounter  opposing  winds,  and  storms,  and  tempests. 
Like  a  scarred  veteran,  the  gospel  has  had  battle  after  battle  to  fight. 
In  our  Lord's  own  day,  it  was  opposed  most  vigorously.  His  apostles 
found  that,  wherever  they  went,  their  feet  were  dogged  by  those  who- 
railed  at  Jesus  and  his  Word ;  and  when  the  apostles  had  all  fallen 
asleep,  the  early  churches  found  that  they  had  need  of  an  order  of 
men  who  became  the  apologists  for  the  gospel,  and  who  bravely  stoodi 
up  to  defend  it  against  the  attacks  of  divers  heathen  philosophers,  and 
sceptics,  and  heretics  who  arose  wherever  the  truth  was  preached. 
Everywhere,  there  was  opposition  to  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus- 
Christ,  and  his  servants  girded  up  their  loins  to  do  battle  for  him  and 
for  his  truth. 

That  great  campaign  has  continued  even  down  to  this  day,  and  there 
is  this  very  remarkable  fact  about  it,  that,  at  the  present  moment, 
most  of  the  objections  that  are  brought  against  the  gospel  are 
those  that  were  answered  and  silenced  some  hundreds  of  years 
ago;  and,  even  when  they  appeared,  all  those  centuries  back,  they 
were  then  only  reproductions  of  some  older  objections  which  had  been 
answered,  and,  as  the  defenders  of  the  faith  thought,  had  been 
trampled  out,  like  sparks  of  fiire  trodden  under  foot.  But,  somehow, 
an  ill  wind  has  begun  to  blow  again,  and  the  fire,  which  some  hoped 
was  finally  extinguished,  has  burned  up  once  more.  Originality  in 
scepticism  has  almost  ceased  to  be ;  we  scarcely  ever  hear  anything 
fresh  in  the  way  of  heresy  nowadays.  "We  are  troubled  with  the 
very  errors  which  our  forefathers  answered  a  hundred  years  ago ; 
yet  the  adversaries  of  the  truth  go  on  cleaning  and  sharpening 
again  their  blunted  shafts,  that  they  may  once  more  shoot  them 
at  the  great  shield  of  faith,  which  is  impervious  to  their  puny 
assaults,  for  it  can  quench  even  the  most  fiery  darts  of  the  devil 
himself.  The  modern  arrows  of  scepticism  will  be  broken  against 
that  glorious  shield,  yet  they  will  probably  be  gathered  up  by 
another  generation  that  will  follow  the  present  one,  and  the  heretics 
and  objectors  in  the  future  will  do  just  as  their  fathers  did  before 
them.  I  want,  at  this  time,  to  put  to  any  caviller  whom  I  may  be 
addressing,  the  question  of  our  Lord  to  Pilate,  "Say est  thou  this 
thing  of  thyself,  or  did  others  tell  it  thee  ?  " 

And,  first,  I  ask  you  to  observe  that  there  are  many  unreasonable 
prejudices.  Some  persona  have  great  prejudices  against  the  Bihle.  I 
will  not  repeat  what  they  say  ;  but  I  should  like  to  ask  every  person 
who  thinks  ill  of  this  blessed  Book,  "  Have  you  read  the  Bible 
through,  and  read  it  thoroughly  ?     Have  you  studied  it  ?    Are  your 


SECOND-HAND.  393; 

0)7 


objections  your  own  ?  Come,  now  ;  did  you  make  them  yourself  t 
It  is  almost  always  found  that  objections  are  like  the  axe  the  young 
prophet  was  using,  they  are  borrowed ;  and  often,  they  are  objections 
agamst  a  Book  which  has  not  been  read  at  all,  and  which  has  not  been 
allowed  to  exercise  its  own  influence  upon  the  heart  and  the  judg- 
ment of  the  person  who  is  prejudiced  against  it  to  his  own  hurt. 
Other  people  have  told  men  such-and-such  things,  so  they  shut  the 
Book,  and  refuse  to  look  into  it  for  themselves. 

There  are  other  people  who  are  prejudiced  against  public  worship. 
You   see,  I  am  starting  at  the  very  beginning,  those  matters  with 
regard  to  religion  which  are  elementary.     Of  course,  we  are  told  that 
we  shut  ourselves  up  on  a  Sunday  in  these  dreary  buildings  of  ours, 
and  here  we  sit,  in  a  horrible  state  of  misery,  listening  to  the  most 
awful  twaddle  that  ever  was  taught,  our  singing  being  nothing  better 
than  droning,  and  the  whole  of  our  worship  being  something  very 
terrible!     If  I  were  to  read  to  you  the  descriptions  of  an  English 
Sabbath  which  I  have  sometimes  seen  in  newspapers,  they  might  make 
you  almost  weep  tears  of  blood  to  think  that  we  poor  souls  should 
suffer  so  much  as  we  do  ;    only  you  know  that  we  are  altogether  un- 
conscious of    any  such  suffering.     We  really  have  been  under  the 
notion  that  we  very  much  enjoyed  ourselves  while  worshipping  the 
Lord  in  his  house.     Many  of  us  have  the  idea  that  the  Sabbath  is  the 
happiest  day  in  all  the  week  to  us,  and  that,  when  we  hear  the  gospel 
preached,  it  is  sweeter  than  music  to  us,  and  makes  our  hearts  leap 
within  us  for  very  joy.     Of  course,  we  are  very  much  obliged  to  our 
friends  for  telling  us  how  dull  and  how  unhappy  we  are,  and  for  wish- 
iDg  us  to  be  in  a  better  condition.     We  can  only  say  that,  not  being 
enabled  to  perceive  any  of  these  sorrows,  we  would  advise  them  to 
retain  their  pitj^,  and  exercise  it  upon  themselves,  for  they  certainly 
need  it  far  more  than  we  do.     To  any  of  you  who  make  remarks  of 
the   kind  I  have  indicated,  I  say,— Do  your  difficulties  concerning 
puMic  worship  really  arise  out  of  your  attending  the  house  of  God,— 
out  of  your  hearing  the  gospel  preached,— out  of    your    joining  in. 
the  songs  and  praises  of  God's  people  ?     Oh,  no  !  it  is  those  people 
who  never  come  to  our  services  who  believe  the  Sabbath  to  be  dull,  the 
house  of  God  to  be  dreary,  and  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  to  be  a 
monotonous  sound  from  which  every  sensible  man  would  escape.     I 
put  the  question  of  my  text  to  every  person  who  is  prejudiced  against 
the  Bible,  and  prejudiced  against  our  public  worship  in  God's  house, 
**  Sayest  thou  this  thing  of  thyself,  or  did  others  tell  it  thee?" 

Sometimes,  the  prejudice  concerns  the  preacher.  I  will  not  say  that 
it  is  so  about  myself,  though  I  have  had  in  my  time  more  than  my 
fair  share  of  it.  "  Hear  him  ?  "  says  one ;  "I  would  not  go  across 
the  road  to  listen  to  such  a  fellow."  Many  have  said  that,  and  the 
preacher,  whoever  he  may  be,  is  condemned  without  a  hearing.  If 
the  objector  were  asked  to  give  a  reason  for  his  prejudice,  he  might 
answer  by  quoting  the  old  lines, — 

**  I  do  not  like  you,  Dr.  Fell  ; 
The  reason  why,  I  cannot  tell  ; 
But  this  I  know,  and  know  full  well,— 
I  do  not  like  you,  Dr.  Fell." 


304:  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

I  should  like  to  say  to  everybody  who  is  prejudiced  against  any 
servant  of  Christ,  '*  Say  est  thou  this  of  thyself?"  Those  absurd 
stories  about  the  preacher, — did  you  really  hear  them  yourself,  or  did 
somebody  tell  you  them  ?  Would  you  like  to  be  judged  by  the  mere 
idle  tittle-tattle  of  the  street  or  of  the  newspapers  ?  And  if  you  would 
not,  then  be  an  honest,  reasonable  man,  and  at  least  give  the  servant 
of  God  a  hearing  before  you  condemn  him  or  his  message ;  and,  take 
my  word  for  it,  the  most-abused  preacher  is  very  likely  to  be  the 
very  man  whom  God  will  bless  the  most.  Not  the  one  who  is  most 
praised,  but  the  one  who  is  most  censured  by  the  world,  is  probably 
the  man  who  has  been  most  faithful  to  his  Master  and  to  the  gospel 
committed  to  his  charge.  At  any  rate,  be  honest  enough  to  reply  to 
the  question  which  our  Lord  put  to  Pilate,  "  Sayest  thou  this  thing 
of  thyself,  or  did  others  tell  it  thee  ?  '* 

There  is  a  remark  sometimes  made,  and  I  fear  it  is  a  very  common 
one,  "  Oh,  I  would  not  be  a  Christian,  I  would  not  be  religious, 
ioT  it  makes  men  so  dreadfully  miserable !^^  Now,  friend,  sayest  thou 
this  of  thyself,  or  did  somebody  else  tell  it  thee  ?  Come,  now,  you 
say  that  religion  is  such  a  miserable  thing ;  have  you  tried  it  for 
yourself?  Have  you  experienced  the  misery  that  comes  out  of 
prayer, — out  of  faith, — out  of  repentance, — out  of  love  to  God,— out  of 
being  pardoned, — out  of  having  a  good  hope  of  heaven  ?  Have  you 
ever  proved  what  that  dreadful  misery  is  ?  I  think,  if  you  had  ever 
really  tested  these  things  for  yourself,  you*-  verdict  would  be  the  very 
reverse,  and  you  would  join  with  us  in  singing  the  lines  that 
express  what  many  of  us  most  firmly  believe  about  this  matter, — 

"  'Tis  religion  that  can  give 
Sweetest  pleasures  while  we  live ; 
*Tis  religion  must  supply 
Solid  comfort  when  we  die." 

Yet  you  go  on  repeating  that  slander  upon  religion  though  you  cannot 
prove  it  to  be  true,  and  might  easily  learn  its  falseness.  Do  let  me 
appeal  to  you.  Had  you  a  godly  mother  ?  "  Yes,"  you  say,  "  and  it 
was  her  life  that  prevents  my  being  altogether  an  unbeliever."  I 
thought  so ;  but,  if  I  remember  her  aright,  she  was  a  quiet  good  soul 
who,  in  her  home,  tried  to  make  everybody  happy ;  and  though  she 
had  not  much  pleasure  in  her  son,  for  he  was  wayward  and  wilful, 
yet  there  was  no  unkindness  on  her  lip,  the  law  of  love  always  ruled 
the  house.  She  was  a  weak  and  feeble  creature,  who  derived  but 
slender  gratification  from  any  of  the  outward  enjoyments  of  life  ;  but 
she  had  a  deep,  secret  spring  of  peace  and  joy  which  kept  her  calm, 
and  quiet,  and  happy ;  and  now  that  she  has  gone  to  be  with  God, 
she  has  left  a  gleam  of  sunlight  still  behind  in  her  sweet  memory. 
You  did  not  get  from  your  mother,  nor  from  other  godly  friends,  your 
belief  that  religion  makes  men  miserable  ;  and  I  venture  to  say  that, 
so  far  as  you  have  had  any  actual  personal  observation  of  it,  you 
have  been  inclined  to  come  to  quite  the  opposite  verdict,  and  to  confess 
that,  though  you  do  not  know  how  it  is,  yet,  somehow  or  other, 
godliness  does  give,  to  the  people  who  possess  it,  peace  of  mind,  and 
happiness  of  heart,  and  usefulness  of  life. 


SECOND-HAND.  305 

There  is  another  slander  that  is  spread  abroad  very  widely,  and 
that  is,  that  the  doctrine  of  the  grace  of  God — the  doctrine  which  we  try 
to  preach  from  this  pulpit, — has  no  sanctifying  effect, — that,  on  the 
contrary,  it  is  likely  to  lead  people  into  sin, — that  if  we  preach,  "  He 
that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life,"  and  do  not  preach  up 
good  works  as  the  way  of  salvation,  it  is  clear  that  such  teaching  will 
lead  people  into  sin.  Clear,  is  it  ?  It  is  not  so  to  me  ;  but,  my  friend, 
will  you  answer  this  question,  "  Sayest  thou  this  thing  of  thyself,  or 
did  others  tell  it  thee  ? "  Is  it  not  a  matter  of  history  that  there 
never  have  been  stricter-living  men  than  the  Puritans  ?  What  is  the 
great  quarrel  against  John  Calvin  himself  but  that,  when  he  ruled  in 
Geneva,  he  was  too  stern  and  too  exacting  in  his  requirements  ?  It 
is  an  odd  thing, — is  it  not  ? — that  these  doctrines  of  grace  should,  on 
the  one  hand,  make  men  too  strict  as  a  matter  of  fact,  and  yet  that 
the  wiseacres  who  object  to  them  should  say  that  these  doctrines  are 
likely  to  lead  into  sin  those  who  accept  them  V  It  is  not  found  to  be 
so  by  those  who  believe  them.  Let  me  again  appeal  to  any  candid 
objector.  My  dear  sir,  did  you  ever  prove  what  it  is  to  believe  in  the 
great  love  of  God  to  you, — that,  for  the  sake  of  his  dear  Son,  out  of 
pure,  unmerited  grace,  he  has  chosen  you,  and  saved  you,  and 
appointed  you  to  eternal  life  ?  Did  you  ever  believe  that,  and  then 
feel,  as  a  natural  consequence,  that  you  would  go  and  live  in  sin  ?  I 
know  that  you  never  did,  but  that  it  was  quite  the  reverse.  **  Here," 
said  some  boys  to  a  companion,  "  we  are  going  to  rob  an  orchard ; 
come  along  with  us,  Jack."  "  No,"  said  he,  *'  my  father  would  not 
approve  of  such  a  thing."  "  But  your  father  is  very  fond  of  you,  and 
never  beats  you  as  our  fathers  do."  "  Yes,"  said  the  boy,  "  mj 
father  loves  me  very  much,  and  I  love  him  very  much,  and  that  is  the 
reason  why  I  am  not  going  to  rob  the  orchard,  and  so  to  grieve  him." 
Now,  you  believe  in  the  beating  of  the  boys  by  the  rod  of  the  law, 
do  you  not  ?  And  we,  on  the  other  hand,  feel  that,  because  God  loves 
us,  and  will  in  his  infinite  mercy  continue  to  love  us,  therefore  we 
must  keep  out  of  sin  as  much  as  we  possibly  can.  We  cannot  do  that 
horrible  thing  which  would  grieve  his  blessed  Spirit.  So  I  ask  you, 
as  truthful  men,  not  to  repeat  that  old  slander  concerning  the  doctrines 
of  grace  leading  to  sin,  until  you  have  really  had  some  reason  to  assert 
it  because  of  what  you  yourselves  have  witnessed  in  the  lives  of 
Christian  people.  Do  not  say  it  again  until  you  can  truly  say  it  from 
your  own  experience  or  observation ;  do  not  repeat  it  simply  because 
others  tell  it  to  you. 

Yes,  and  there  are  some  who  say  that  there  is  no  power  in  prayer, — 
that  we  may  pray,  if  we  like,  but  that  we  cannot  change  the  purposes 
of  God, — that  the  laws  of  nature  are  fixed  and  immutable,  and, 
therefore,  to  pray  is  a  piece  of  absurdity.  **  Sayest  thou  this  thing  of 
thyself,  or  did  others  tell  it  thee?  "  I  will  speak  personally  to  you. 
Did  you  ever  try  to  pray  ?  Did  you  ever  put  this  matter  to  the  test, 
— whether  God  will  hear  prayer  or  no  ?  I  do  not  think  you  can  have 
put  it  to  a  fair  test,  and  I  would  like  you  to  see  whether  God  will  or 
will  not  hear  even  your  prayer  if  you  cry  to  him.  If  any 
say  to  me,  "  God  does  not  hear  prayer,"  I  have  scarcely  the  patience 
to  give  them  an  answer.     I  live  from  day  to   day  crying   to   God 

20 


806  METEOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

for  this  or  that  favour  which  I  receive  as  certainly  and  as  constantly 
as  ever  my  sons  had  their  meals  when  they  sat  at  my  table.  I  knew 
how  to  give  good  gifts  to  my  children,  and  I  know  that  my  Heavenly 
Father  gives  good  gifts  to  me.  My  evidence,  of  course,  is  only  that 
of  one  man,  and  it  may  not  suffice  to  convince  others,  though  many  of 
you  here  could  add  your  testimony  to  mine;  but  I  should  like  all 
objectors  just  to  give  prayer  a  fair  trial  before  they  are  quite  so  sure 
about  the  inefficacy  of  it.  Let  them  see  whether  real  prayer,  offered 
in  the  name  of  Jesus,  will  not  be  heard  even  in  their  case.  Certain  I 
am  that  there  is  not  anywhere  on  the  face  of  the  globe  a  praying  man 
who  does  not  bear  this  testimony, — that  God  hears  him.  Aid  if  any 
say,  "We  do  not  pray,  and  do  not  believe  that  God  hears  prayer," 
what  evidence  have  you  to  bring  ?  You  are  out  of  court  altogether, 
for  you  know  nothing  about  the  matter ;  bnt  the  man  who  does  pray, 
and  then  says,  '*  God  hears  me,"  is  the  man  to  be  a  witness,  and  the 
one  who  has  a  right  to  be  heard.  I  have  told  you,  more  than  once, 
what  the  Irishman  said  when  there  were  five  witnesses  to  prove  that 
he  had  committed  murder.  He  said  to  the  judge,  "You  must  not 
condemn  me  on  their  evidence ;  there  are  only  five  people  here  who 
saw  me  do  it,  but  I  can  bring  fifty  people  who  did  not  see  me  do  it ;  " 
but  that  was  no  evidence  at  all ;  and,  in  like  manner,  there  are  many 
who  say,  **  You  bring  a  certain  number  of  people,  who  pray,  to  prove 
that  God  hears  them ;  but  we  can  bring  ten  times  as  many,  who  do 
not  pray,  and  who  do  not  get  heard."  What  has  that  to  do  with 
the  matter?  Where  is  the  evidence?  You  say  it  not  of  yourself, 
but  merely  repeat,  second-hand,  what  has  been  said  by  others,  so  often, 
and  so  foolishly,  that  it  sickens  one  to  hear  it. 

It  is  beginning  to  be  questioned,  in  many  quarters,  nowadays, 
whether  there  is  any  real  effect  produced  by  prayer,  except  that  of 
exciting  certain  pious  emotions  in  the  breasts  of  those  who  pray. 
This  i^  a  very  pretty  statement !  We  ought  to  be  extremely 
obliged  to  those  superior  persons  who  allow  that  even  so  much  may 
be  done !  I  wonder  they  do  not  assert  that  prayer  is  ridiculous,  or 
hypocritic£il,  or  immoral  Their  moderation  puts  us  under  obligations. 
And  yet  I  do  not  know :  when  I  look  again  at  their  admission,  I 
thank  them  for  nothing,  for  they  as  good  as  call  us  fools.  Do  they 
think  that  we  perform  a  useless  exercise  merely  for  the  sake  of 
exciting  pious  emotions?  We  must  be  grievous  idiots  if  we  can 
receive  benefit  from  a  senseless  function.  We  are  not  willing  to 
whistle  to  the  wind  for  the  sake  of  the  exercise.  We  should  not  be 
content  to  go  on  praying  to  a  God  who  could  be  proved  to  be  both  deaf 
and  dumb.  We  have  still  some  little  common  sense  left,  despite  what 
our  judicious  friends  consider  to  be  our  fanaticism.  We  are  sure  that 
we  obtain  answers  to  prayer.  Of  this  fact  I  am  certain,  and  I  solemnly 
declare  that  I  have  received  of  the  Lord  that  which  I  have  asked  at 
his  hands.  I  am  not  alone  in  such  testimdny,  for  I  am  associated 
with  multitudes  of  men  and  women  who  bear  witness  to  the  same 
fact,  and  declare  that  they  sought  the  Lord,  and  he  heard  them. 
Take  care,  brethren  and  sisters,  to  record  all  instances  of  answered 
prayer,  so  as  to  leave  this  unbelieving  generation  without  excuse. 
Accumulate  the  facts,  and  demonstrate  the  grand  truth.     Multiply 


SECOia)-HAND. 


307 


the  testimonies,  tiU  even  the  philosophers  are  obliged  to  admit  both 
'the  phenomena  and  the  deduction  rightly  drawn  from  them 
^    Ihere  IS  one  other  gross  slander  to  which  I  would  reply,  and  that 
IS  a  saying  that  goes  round  among  troubled  consciences-that  Christ 
mil  not  receive  smners, -^th^t  the  very  guilty  cannot  be  saved,-that 
Christ  can  forgive  and  dehver  up  to  a  certain  point;  but  if  you  get 
beyond  that,  he  is  no  longer  wiUing  to  pardon.     Dear  hearer,  has 
that  foolish  and  wicked  notion  entered  thy  head  ?    Then,  I  ask  thee, 
Sayest  thou  this  thmg  of  thyself  ?  "     Didst  thou  ever  p^ove  it  to  be 
true  ?     Hast  thou  ever  sought  his  face  ?     Hast  thou  cried  to  him  for 
naercy?     -Yes"  you  say,   -I  have."     And  then,  further,  have  you 
thrown  yourself  at  his  feet,  trusting  him  to  save  you,  and  have  you 
beenrefused?    I  knowyou  have  not;  there  was  never  a  sinner  yet, 
who  feU  down  before  him,  and  determined  to  lie  there  and  perish  if 
he  did  not  speak  a  word  of  mercy,  to  whom  the  Lord  has  not,  sooner 
or  later,  spoken  the  grace-word  which  has  sent  that  poor  sinner  on 
his  way  rejoicing.     I  would  at  least  like  you  to  go  and  see  whether 
'Christ  wiU  receive  you  or  not,  before  you  say  that  he  will  not  do  so. 
Say  not  that  the  door  of  his  mercy  is  shut,  but  go  in  while  it  is  stiU 
open.     If  he  casts  you  out,  then  he  will  have  broken  his  word,  for  he 
has  said,   ;  Him  that  cometh  to  me,  I  wiU  in  no  wise  cast  out."     Do 
not  give  him  the  lie,  and  say  that  he  wiU  cast  you  out  till  you  have 
yourself  proved  that  it  is  so;  and  that,  I  know,  wiU  never  be  the 
case.      I   am   afraid   that    there   is   another   being   who    has    been 
whispering  that  vile  insinuation  into  your  ear,  and  he  is  your  arch- 
enemy who  is  seeking  your  destruction,  and  therefore  he  has  come, 
and  told  you  this  falsehood  against  the  infinitely-loving  and  gracious 
Saviour.     Beheve  him  not ;  but  come  even  now,  and  put  your  trust  in 
Jesus,  and  you  shall  find  that  he  wiU  give  to  you  eternal  life 

1  have  thus  examined  the  question  of  my  text  with  reference  to  the 
opponents  of  the  gospel,  and  I  shall  now  leave  that  part  of  the 
subject,  praying  the  Holy  Spirit  to  bless  it  to  all  whom  it  mav 
'Concern.  ^ 

n.  Now,  in  the  second  place,  I  am  going  to  speak  briefly,  but 
mth  much  earnestness,  to  the  many  here  present  who  are  friends  of 
me  gospel,  but  who  have  only  a  second-hand  religion,  if  they  have 
any  at  all  I  want  to  have  a  word  with  you,  dear  friends,  about  this 
matter  You  and  I  have  been  talking  a  great  deal  about  Christ 
^ow,  have  we  been  simply  quoting  what  others  have  said  ?  Have  we 
been  making  extracts  from  other  people's  experience;  or  is  what  we 
have  said  something  that  we  can  say  of  ourselves,  and  not  what  others 
nave  told  us  r 

For,  brethren,  first,  a  second-hand  testimony  for  Christ  is  a  powerless 
thmg  Take  a  man— as  I  am  afraid  is  often  done,— with  no  grace  in 
his  heart,  and  send  him  to  Oxford  or  Cambridge,  with  the  view  of 
making  him  a  parson;  teach  him  the  sciences,  and  languages  and 
mathematics,  and  give  him  a  degree.  His  friends  want  to  get  a  iivinff 
lor  mm,  and  the  bishop's  chaplain  proceeds  to  examine  him.  The  first 
question  ought  to  be.  Is  this  young  man  a  Christian  ?  Is  he  trulv 
converted?  Does  he  know  the  Lord?  Does  he  understand  in  hL 
-own  soul  the  things  he  is  going  to  preach  to  others  ?    For,  if  he  does 


308  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

not,  what  good  can  he  do  in  the  Christian  ministry  ?  Perhaps  he  is- 
sent  to  a  school  of  theology,  to  learn  the  various  systems  of  doctrine. 
He  must  read  the  judicious  Hooker,  he  must  study  Jeremy  Taylor,  he 
must  take  lessons  in  elocution  and  rhetoric.  Then,  possibly,  his  friends- 
buy  him  some  lithographed  sermons  that  he  may  read,  and  they  get 
him  some  books,  that  he  may  make  extracts  from  them  to  put  into  the 
sermons  he  preaches.  Suppose  that  man  is  all  the  while  unconverted, 
suppose  that  he  does  not  know  anything  about  the  working  of  the 
grace  of  God  in  his  own  soul,  what  is  the  good  of  him  as  a  teacher  of 
others  ?  No  good  at  all ;  at  any  rate,  at  the  best,  he  may  be  only  as 
good  as  one  of  those  newly-invented  phonographs  which  can  repeat 
what  is  spoken  into  them.  This  man  can  read  out  what  he  has  selected 
from  other  books  ;  but  that  is  all.  We  will  suppose  that  he  is  a  very 
decent  sort  of  fellow, — an  amiable  gentleman,  well-instructed,  well- 
behaved,  and  so  on ;  but  all  that  he  has  to  say  is  what  other  people 
have  told  him. 

But  now  put  into  that  man's  pulpit,  only  for  one  Lord's-day,  a- 
preacher  who  has  known  what  it  is  to  feel  the  burden  of  sin,  and  to 
have  it  removed  by  faith  in  Jesus.  Let  him  begin  to  speak  to  the 
people,  in  downright  earnest,  about  the  pangs  and  sorrows  of  true 
repentance  ;  let  him  tell  them  about  their  need  of  the  new  birth,  and 
about  his  experience  of  obtaining  that  great  blessing ;  and  how,  by 
sovereign  grace,  he  was  brought  out  of  the  darkness  into  the  light, 
and  even  from  death  to  life.  Let  that  man  be  moved  to  speak  of  the 
peace  of  pardon  through  the  precious  blood,  and  of  the  joys  of  heaven 
laid  up  for  all  believers,  and  then  the  people  will  wake  up,  I  will 
warrant  you.  This  is  something  very  different  from  the  preaching  to 
which  they  have  been  accustomed,  and  they  will  soon  feel  the  power 
of  it. 

Yet  the  Lord  sometimes  uses  even  a  preacher  who  does  not  him- 
self understand  the  truth  he  proclaims.  I  know  a  man,  who  went 
and  heard  a  certain  minister  preach,  or  rather,  read  a  sermon,  and  it 
was  such  a  good  one  that  the  hearer's  conscience  was  smitten  by  it. 
The  discourse  was  about  the  new  birth ;  and,  the  next  morning,  the 
man  went  off  to  the  clergyman,  and  said,  **  Sir,  I  want  you  to 
explain  this  matter  further  to  me,  for  I  am  dreadfully  distressed  by 
what  you  preached  last  night."  What,  think  you,  did  this  preacher 
say?  He  said,  **  Well,  Jonathan,  I  am  sure  I  never  meant  to  cause 
anybody  any  uneasiness  ;  what  was  it  that  gave  you  such  trouble  ?  " 
"Why,"  replied  he,  **it  was  that  part  of  the  sermon  where  you  said 
that  we  must  be  born  again."  So  the  preacher  said,  "Well,  here  is 
the  discourse.  You  see,  by  the  dates  upon  it,  that  I  have  used  it 
thirteen  times  before,  so  I  could  not  have  made  it  with  any  special 
view  to  your  case.  I  am  very  sorry,  indeed,  that  it  caused  you  any 
discomfort,  and  I  will  never  preach  it  again  if  it  brings  people  into 
trouble  in  this  style."  That  was  all  the  help  the  poor  man  could  get 
from  the  parson,  so  he  went  out,  and  found  a  true  servant  of  God, 
who  knew  the  truth  himself,  and  was  not  a  second-hand  retailer  of  it, 
and,  through  conversation  with  him,  and  prayer,  and  the  reading  of 
the  Scriptures,  he  was  brought  into  peace  and  liberty.  I  need  hardly 
tell  you  that  he  does  not  go  to  hear  that  second-hand  preacher  now ;.. 


SECOND-HAND.  309 

he  listens  to  a  far  humbler  minister,  who,  nevertheless,  preaches  what 
he  has  tasted  and  handled  of  the  good  Word  of  life.  Now,  if  any  of 
jou  are  going  to  be  Sunday-school  teachers,  or  street-preachers,  do 
not  begin  to  talk  about  what  somebody  else  has  told  you.  Go  and  say 
what  you  yourself  know,  of  a  heart  first  broken  by  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  and  then  bound  up  by  the  application  of  the  atonement 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Tell  out  your  message,  in  a  living  way 
from  the  heart  to  the  heart,  or  else  your  hearers  will  feel  that  there  is 
no  power  about  it,  however  nicely  you  put  the  truth,  and  ho  wever 
sweetly  you  describe  it.  There  is  all  the  difference  between  personal 
testimony  to  the  truth  and  a  parrot-like  repetition  of  it,  that  there  is 
between  the  living  and  the  dead.  Let  us  only  bear  witness  to  what 
we  do  really  know,  and  then  no  one  will  need  to  ask  us  what  our 
Lord  asked  Pilate,  **  Say  est  thou  this  thing  of  thyself,  or  did  others 
tell  it  thee  ?  " 

Now,  further,  the  same  thing  is  true  with  regard  to  professors.  "We 
have  many  friends  who  come,  at  different  times,  to  join  the  church, 
and  their  stories  greatly  vary.  Some  who  come  to  see  me  cannot  say 
much,  and  they  think  that  I  shall  be  very  dissatisfied  with  them 
because  they  make  a  great  muddle  of  their  narrative,  and  there  is  not 
much  that  comes  out  after  all.  But  the  people  with  whom  I  am  least 
satisfied  are  those  who  reel  off  their  yarn  by  the  yard ;  they  have  it 
all  ready  to  repeat,  and  everything  is  arranged  as  prettily  as  possible. 
Yes  ;  and  as  I  listen  to  it,  I  know  that  someone  has  told  them  what  to 
say,  and  they  have  learned  it  all  for  me  to  hear.  But  I  like  far 
better  the  testimony  that  I  have  to  pick  out  in  little  bits,  but  which  I 
know  comes  fresh  from  the  heart  of  the  trembling  convert.  Some- 
times, it  costs  the  poor  soul  a  tear  or  a  real  good  cry,  and  I  have  to 
go  round  about  in  all  manner  of  ways  to  get  hold  of  the  story  at 
all ;  but  that  shows  that  it  is  true,  and  that  the  man  never  borrowed 
it.  I  like  to  hear  the  experience  of  a  believer,  when  he  comes  straight 
out  of  the  world  and  out  of  the  ways  of  sin,  to  confess  his  faith  in 
Christ.  He  does  not  know  anything  about  the  terms  that  Christian 
people  use.  He  has  not  learned  our  phrases ;  and  it  is  a  great  delight 
to  hear  it  all  fresh  and  new.  Yet  it  is  always  the  same  story  in  all 
the  essential  parts  of  it.  However  strangely  he  may  narrate  it,  it 
tallies  with  that  of  others  in  the  main  points.  Take  the  experience  of 
a  Christian  man  who  has  been  brought  up  in  the  sanctuary  from  his 
childhood,  and  extract  the  pith  and  marrow  of  it.  Now  take  the 
experience  of  a  man  who  has  been  a  horse-racer,  a  drunkard,  a 
swearer,  but  who  has  been  truly  converted,  and  extract  the  pith  of 
that.  Talk  to  a  peer  of  the  realm  who  has  become  an  heir  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  and  take  the  pith  of  his  experience.  Now  get 
a  chimney-sweep  who  has  been  brought  to  the  Lord,  and  get  the 
pith  of  his  experience ;  put  them  all  side  by  side,  and  you  will  not 
know  one  from  the  other.  There  are  always  the  same  essential 
marks, — death,  birth,  life,  food, — Christ  in  the  death,  the  life,  the 
birth,  the  food, — repentance,  faith,  joy,  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
But  it  is  very  sweet  to  hear  the  story  told  in  the  many  different  ways 
in  which  the  converts  tell  it.  The  true  child  of  grace  is  ever  the  same 
in  heart,  although  the  outward  appearance  may  continually  vary. 


810  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

But,  dear  friends,  whenever  you  begin  to  make  a  profession  of' 
religion,  take  care  that  you  never  profess  more  than  you  really  possess. 
Go  just  as  far  as  you  can  go  yourself,  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  do 
not  repeat  what  others  tell  you.  To  borrow  another  man's  experience 
is  dishonest.  If  it  is  not  mine,  how  dare  I  say  that  it  is  ?  It  is  also 
very  apt  to  be  self-deceptive,  for  a  man  may  repeat  another  person's 
experience  until  he  really  thinks  he  did  pass  through  it  himself,  just 
as  a  man  may  repeat  a  lie  until  it  almost  ceases  to  be  a  lie  because  he 
himself  gets  to  believe  what  at  first  he  knew  was  not  true.  That 
borrowing  of  the  experience  of  others  is  usually  unavailing  with  those 
who  have  had  much  to  do  with  men,  for  we  who  do  know  the  Lord, 
and  are  familiar  with  his  people,  very  readily  trip  up  those  who  only 
repeat  what  they  have  learned.  Freemasons  recognize  one  another  by 
various  grips  and  signs.  A  man  may,  perhaps,  find  out  one  of  the 
grips,  but  he  does  not  learn  them  all,  and  at  last  he  gets  caught,  and 
people  say  to  him,  "  You  are  pretending  to  be  what  you  really  are 
not."  Take,  again,  a  man's  handwriting ;  someone  may  imitate  my 
writing  for  a  long  while,  but,  at  last,  he  does  not  copy  some  peculiar 
dash,  or  stroke,  or  mark,  which  is  characteristic  of  my  style,  and  those 
who  know  say,  *'  That  is  not  Mr.  Spurgeon's  writing  ;  it  is  a  forgery.'* 
So  there  is  a  something — a  sort  of  freemasonry — about  Christianity. 
People  may  learn  some  of  our  grips,  and  signs,  and  passwords ;  but, 
by-and-by,  they  make  a  blunder,  and  we  say,  "  Ah !  you  are  an  im> 
postor."  They  may  try  to  write  after  the  fashion  of  a  child  of  God, 
and  they  may  make  the  pot-hooks,  and  hangers,  and  straight  strokes ; 
but,  as  they  get  on  further,  there  is  a  something  or  other  that  comes 
out  in  the  long  run,  which  proves  that  they  are  only  copyists  after  all. 
Therefore,  I  say  to  you,  dear  friends, — Do  not  attempt  to  repeat  what 
others  have  told  you  about  experimental  godliness,  but  let  your  testi- 
mony only  consist  of  what  you  can  truly  say  out  of  your  own  heart 
and  soul. 

Let  this  be  the  case  also  with  regard  to  every  man,  whether  he  makes  a 
profession  of  religion  or  not.  Mslj  God  grant  that  all  that  we  think  we 
know,  we  may  really  know  in  our  own  souls,  and  not  have  because  we 
have  borrowed  it  from  others !  In  religion,  proxies  and  sponsors  are 
altogether  out  of  place.  I  pray  you  never  to  be  guilty  of  that 
horrible  blasphemy — for  I  think  that  it  is  nothing  less  than  that, — 
of  standing  up  before  God,  and  promising  that  a  child  shall  keep  his 
commandments,  and  walk  in  the  same  all  the  days  of  its  life. 
Remember  that,  in  religion,  there  are  certain  things  that  must  be 
personal.  For  instance,  every  man  must  be  himself  born;  another 
person  cannot  be  born  for  you.  In  like  manner,  "Ye  must  be  born 
again," — personally,  for  yourself.  There  is  no  possibility  of  another 
person  experiencing  that  new  birth  for  you.  If  a  man  lives,  he  must 
eat  for  himself.  You  cannot  take  my  meals  for  me ;  it  is  I  myself 
who  must  eat  them.  And  we  must  eat  the  flesh  and  drink  the  blood 
of  Christ  by  faith,  each  one  for  himself  or  herself ;  nobody  can  do  it 
for  another.  In  daily  life,  each  man  must  be  clothed  for  himself. 
You  may  wear  silk  and  satin,  you  may  be  dressed  in  the  best  broad- 
cloth; but  you  cannot  be  clothed  on  my  behalf,  I  must  be  myself 
dressed,  or  else  go  naked.     So  must  each  man  put  on  the  robe   of 


SECOND-HAND.  311 

Christ's  righteousness,  or  be  naked  to  his  shame  before  God.  Every- 
man must  repent  of  his  own  sin, — make  confession  oi  his  own  sin, — 
believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  for  himself, — love  God  for  himself, — 
obey  the  Lord  for  himself ;  and  there  is  no  possibility  of  any  other 
person,  by  any  means,  doing  this  for  you.  There  must  be  personal 
godliness,  or  else  there  is  no  godliness  at  all.  So,  whenever  you  feel 
inclined  to  say  for  yourself,  *'  I  believe  that  I  am  a  Christian ;  I 
believe  this  and  I  believe  that ;  "  let  this  question  come  home  to  you, 
"  Say  est  thou  this  thing  of  thyself,  or  did  others  tell  it  thee  ?  " 

And,  lastly,  brethren  and  sisters  in  Christ,  let  me  utter  a  word 
specially  for  your  ears.  Never  get,  in  your  prayers^  or  in  your  talky  an 
inch  beyond  your  actual  experience.  Our  calling  is  a  very  high  one ;  and 
one  of  the  most  serious  difficulties  in  the  way  of  ever  attaining  its 
greatest  height  is  the  impression  that  we  have  reached  it  when  we 
have  not.  My  own  impression  is,  that  some  brethren  might  havs 
been  well-nigh  perfect  if  they  had  not  thought  that  they  were  so 
already,  but  they  missed  the  blessing  through  that  very  thought, 
Many  a  man  might  have  become  wise,  but  he  imagined  that  he  had 
learned  wisdom,  so  he  never  really  was  wise.  You  know  that,  if  you 
see  a  man  who  thinks  that  he  is  wise,  you  say  to  yourself,  "  How  very 
foolish  he  is ! "  And  you  speak  truly,  too.  The  doorstep  of  wisdom  is 
a  consciousness  of  ignorance,  and  the  gateway  of  perfection  is  a  deep 
sense  of  imperfection.  Paul  was  never  so  nearly  perfect  as  when 
he  cried,  *'  0  wretched  man  that  I  am !  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the 
body  of  this  death?"  But  if  he  had  sat  down,  and  said,  **I  have 
attained,  and  am  already  perfect,"  then  would  he  have  been  in  a  fair 
way  of  missing  the  blessing  of  God.  No,  dear  brothers  or  sisters,  say 
no  more  than  you  can  justify.  There  are  many  who  do  that  in  business ; 
mind  that  you  do  not  so  act  in  spiritual  matters.  Look  at  that  shop- 
window  :  what  a  wonderful  display !  Now  go  inside  the  shop  ;  why, 
there  is  nothing  there !  No,  for  the  man  has  all  his  goods  in  the 
window.  You  would  at  once  say  to  yourself,  if  he  wanted  to  deal 
with  you,  "  I  shall  not  trust  him  very  deeply."  Ah !  and  do  we  not 
know  some  who,  spiritually,  have  all  their  goods  in  the  window  ?  It 
is  a  grand  thing  to  have  a  great  stock  in  reserve.  Never  mind  if  it  is 
in  the  cellar,  where  you  cannot  yourself  see  it ;  it  is  none  the  worse 
for  being  out  of  sight. 

The  great  thing  for  aU  Christians  is  to  have  a  good  back- 
ground, something  behind  that  is  real  ;  so  that,  if  you  pray, 
or  if  you  speak  to  another,  you  will  be  prepared  to  back  it  up. 
I  remember  trying  to  be  a  blessing  to  a  very  shrewd  boy  in  a  Sunday- 
school  class  when  first  I  knew  the  Lord.  I  told  him  the  gospel :  "  He 
that  beHeveth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved."  Then  he  asked  me  a 
straight  question,  "Teacher,  have  you  believed?"  I  replied,  "Yes,  I 
hope  so."  He  said,  "Don't  you  know,  teacher?  You  ought  to." 
"Yes,"  I  answered,  "yes,  I  do  know;  I  have  believed  in  Jesus." 
"Well,  teacher,"  he  enquired  next,  "have  you  been  baptized?"  I 
replied,  "Yes,  I  have."  "Then,"  said  he,  "teacher,  you  are  saved." 
I  said,  "I  hope  so."  "But,"  he  insisted,  "you  a/re^  Just  so,  and  I 
found  that  I  must  say  so,  too,  and  that  I  must  not  use  even  Christ's 
words  unless  I  meant  to  back  them  up  by    my    own    consistent 


9\% 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


character;   otherwise    I    was    throwing    suspicion   on    my   Master's 
veracity.     May   the   Lord   bring   us   up   to   this   point   of  Christian 
honesty, — that,  when  we  cannot  truthfully  say  a  thing  from  our  own 
experience,  we  will  be  honest  enough  to  resolve,  "  I  shall  not  say  it  till 
I  can  truly  say  it.''     When  you  think  of  a  verse  of  a  hymn,  and  it  is  a 
little  in  advance  of  your  own  position,  wait  till  you  come  up  to  that 
point.     There  are  numbers  of  hymns  that  I  laid  by,  in  that  fashion, 
years  ago.     I  wished  that  I  could  sing  them,  yet  they  seemed  to  stick 
in  my  throat,  and  I  could  not.     But  my  throat  has  been  cleared  a 
good  deal  lately,  and  I  have  been  obliged  at  last  to  feel  that  I  must 
have  those  very  hymns,  for  they  have  become  true  to  my  soul,  and 
have  made  my  experience  a  very  happy  one.     Do  not  be  in  too  much 
of  a  hurry  in  spiritual  things  any  more  than  in  temporal  affairs.     If 
you  cannot  eat  meat,  stick  to  your  milk.     Milk  is  for  babes,  so  keep  to 
milk  till  you  outgrow  it.     You  will  choke  with  that  tough  bit  of 
meat ;  you  had  better  leave  it  for  somebody  else.     Do  not  find  fault 
with  it;  it  is  good  for  strong  men,  they  do  not  want  to  be  always 
drinking  milk.     Do  not  deny  the  strong  man  his  meat,  but  let  him 
have  as  much  as  he  likes  of  it ;    as  for  yourself,  if  you  are  a  babe  in 
grace,  *keep  to   your  milk   diet.     "As  newborn  babes,   desire   the 
imadulterated  milk  of  the  Word,  that  ye  may  grow  thereby :  if  so  be 
ye  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious."     But,  in  all  your  testimony, 
do  not  go  beyond  what  is  actually  true  to  yourself,  and  often  let  my 
text  lay  its  hand  upon  your   shoulder,   and  repeat  this   searching 
enquiry,    **  Say  est  thou  this  thing  of  thyself,   or  did  others  tell  it 
thee?"  .     ^      ^ 

May  God  grant  a  rich  blessing  to  you  all,  dear  fnends,  for  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake !     Amen. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 103  (Version  II.),  553,  645. 


THE   KING    IN    PILATE'S   HALL. 


i   |<tm*t| 


Intended  for  Reading  on  Lord's-day,  April  12th,  1903, 

DELIVERED    BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE    metropolitan    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lord'*8-day  Evening,  May  ith^  1884. 


"Pilate  therefore  said  unto  him,  Art  thou  a  king  then?  Jesus  answered.  Thou 
sayest  that  I  am  a  king.  To  this  end  was  I  born,  and  for  this  cause  came  I  into  the 
world,  that  I  should  bear  witness  unto  the  truth.  Every  one  that  is  of  the  truth 
heareth  my  voice." — John  xviii.  37. 

Our  Lord  was  being  cross-questioned  by  an  unscrupulous, 
vacillating,  contemptuous  Roman  official.  So,  as  our  blessed  Lord 
and  Master  did  not  escape  the  ordeal  of  malicious  questioning,  let 
no  disciple  of  his  imagine  that  he  will  escape.  "  The  disciple  is  not 
above  his  master,  nor  the  servant  above  his  lord.  It  is  enough  for 
the  disciple  that  he  be  as  his  master,  and  the  servant  as  his  lord." 
Sooner  or  later,  the  day  will  come  when  the  profession  that  you 
have  made  shall  be  questioned  and  tested.  To  some  of  Christ's 
followers,  this  time  of  trial  comes  very  soon  after  their  conversion ; 
others  are  assailed  at  a  later  period.  The  cool,  calm,  calculating 
doubter  suggests  a  question  about  this  or  that,  and  everything  that 
can  be  moved  is  shaken.  Just  as  Pilate  said  to  Christ,  "  Art  thou 
a  king  then  ?  "  so  will  men  say  to  you,  "  Are  you  a  Christian  ?  Are 
you  really  believing  in  Jesus?  Have  you  been  born  again?  Are 
you  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus  ?  Are  you  fully  sanctified  ? " 
And  they  will  make  these  enquiries  in  such  a  tone  of  contemptuous 
ridicule  that  you  will  need  all  your  strength,  and  all  your  patience, 
and  an  increase  in  your  faith,  and  in  all  your  graces,  if  you  are  to 
witness  a  good  confession,  as  your  Master  did  before  Pontius  Pilate. 
When  such  a  time  comes  to  you,  I  cannot  sfuggest  to  you  a  better 
model  for  your  answer  than  that  which  your  Lord  gave  to  the 
Roman  governor.  At  first,  he  did  not  answer  Pilate :  "  Jesus  gave 
him  no  answer."  And  a  large  portion  of  the  inquisitive  questioning 
to  which  we  have  to  submit  is  not  worth  answering ;  nor  is  it  worth 
while  for  you  and  me  to  go  up  and  down  the  world  fishing  for 
questions,  or  inviting  the  objections  and  cavillings  of  sceptics, 
because  we  think  ourselves  so  exceedingly  clever  that  we  are  easily 
No.  2,826. 


314  METBOPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

able  to  ansfwer  them  Believe  me,  you  will  have  quite  enough  to  do« 
if  you  catch  on  your  shield  all  the  fiery  darts  that  come  without 
your  invitation.  You  will  have  no  need  to  ask  to  be  led  into 
temptation,  or  to  seek  permission  to  rush  into  it.  Our  Saviour 
invited  no  questions  from  Pilate;  he  did  not  even  condescend  to 
answer  all  that  Pilate  had  to  say  to  him;  and  the  best  thing 
for  a  Christian  to  do,  in  many  of  his  times  of  trial,  is  to  aay,  with 
David,  "  I  was  dumb  with  silence.  I  held  my  peace,  even  from 
good ;  and  my  sorrow  was  stirred." 

When  the  Master  did  reply,  he  aet  us  an  example  that  we  may 
safely  follow.  Observe  how  he  replied, — without  any  tartness, 
without  even  the  appearance  of  anger.  He  was  very  courteous 
towards  Pilate ;  he  put  what  he  had  to  say  in  a  fashion  which  would 
commend  itself  to  him.  He  knew  that  Pilate's  chief  jealousy  was- 
about  his  being  a  king,  and  he  tried  to  remove  it  by  explaining  that 
his  kingdom  was  not  of  this  world,  else  would  his  servants  fight  for 
him  so  that  he  should  not  be  delivered  to  the  Jews.  I  cannot 
conceive  of  replies,  to  such  a  man  as  Pilate,  more  suitable,  more 
calculated  to  have  done  him  good  if  there  had  been  any  soil  in 
Pilate's  heart  upon  which  the  good  seed  could  have  faJlen  with  the 
hope  of  growth.  I  pray  that  you  and  I,  when  we  are  assailed  and 
questioned,  may  be  wise  as  serpents,  and  harmless  as  doves,  giving 
a  reason  for  the  hope  that  is  in  us  with  meekness  and  fear, 
answering,  not  with  the  object  of  displaying  our  own  skill  or 
learning,  but  always  with  the  motive  of  seeking  the  good  of  the 
questioner,  if,  peradventure,  God  may  grant  unto  him  repentance 
tiiat  he  may  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  I  admire,  and  hold 
up  as  an  example  to  you,  the  exceeding  sweetness  of  our  Saviour's 
replies  to  his  carping  critic. 

Note,  however,  how  bold  he  was,  as  well  as  wise  and  gentle: 
"  Thou  sayest  that  I  am  a  king."     He  does  not  flinch  from  admitting 
the  truth,  however  distasteful  it  may  be  to  his  hearer.     If  this 
truth   troubles    Pilate    after    our  Saviour's    explanation    that    his 
kingdom  is  not  of  this  world,  he  cannot  deny  the  fact  that  ho- 
really  is  a  king,  for  he  must  speak  the  truth  come  what  may  of  it. 
I  fear  that,  sometimes,  in  our  endeavours  to  be  sweet  in  disposition, 
we  have  not  been  strong  in  principle.     "  Charity  "  is  a  word  that  is 
greatly  cried  up  nowadays;  but,  often,  it  means  that,  in  trying  to> 
bo  courteous,  we  have  also  been  traitorous.     Our  speech  has  been 
soft  and  smooth^  but  it  has  not  been  sincere  and  time.     Did  you 
never  catch  yourself  wishing  to  trim  off  the  corners  of  a  truth, — or, 
at   least,  seeking   if  you   could    not   omit    something   that   might 
prejudice  your  hearer?     If  so,  let  me  tell  you  plainly  that  he  who 
wishes  to  alter  any  truth  has  already  begun  to  lie.     Though  he 
may  not  actually  do  it,  yet  the  very  wish  to  change  the  truth  in 
any  degree  is  a  proof  of  perversity  of  heart  which  needs  to  be 
repented  of  and  forgiven.     We  have  already  turned  aside  from  the^ 
right  path  when  we  do  not  dare  to  say  what  God  has  taught  us. 
Our  Saviour  never  acted  like  that ;  he  was  always  true,  transparent, 
clear,  faithful.     There  was  never  in  him  any  holding  back  even  in 
the  least  degree;   so  he  said  to  Pilate,  "Thou  sayest  that  I  am  a 


THE   KINO    IN   PILATE'S   HALL.  315 

king.  To  this  end  was  I  born,  and  for  this  cause  came  I  into  the 
world,  that  I  should  bear  witness  unto  the  truth."  Oh^  that  we 
might  learn  from  our  Saviour  the  sacred  art  of  blending  Christlike 
gentleness  with  holy  courage,  and  Christlike  courage  with  gentleness 
such  as  his ! 

Observe,  too, — for  it  is  worthy  of  notice, — how  modestly  and 
unobtrusively  our  Saviour  answered  Pilate's  questioning.  It  is  an 
unhappy  circumstance  that  some  men  seem  aa  if  they  cannot  speak 
boldly  without  having  somewhat  of  pride  mixed  with  their  courage. 
Full  often,  our  very  virtues  lie  quite  near  to  the  borders  of  vice. 
We  aim  at  what  is  right;  but,  alas!  we  go  beyond  it,  or  we  fall 
short  of  it,  or  hit  the  target  where  our  shots  do  not  count.  Ah, 
Lord,  what  imperfect  creatures  we  are!  But  our  Saviour  was 
perfect  in  every  respect.  He  only  answered  the  questions  of  Pilate 
when  it  was  right  for  him  to  answer  them,  and  even  then  he  seemed 
to  take  the  words  wherewith  to  frame  his  answer  out  of  Pilate's  own 
mouth  :  " '  Thou  sayest  that  I  am  a  king.'  It  is  even  as  thou  hast 
said.."  Our  gracious  Master  is  very  straightforward,  yet  how  modest 
he  is !  He  seems  to  hide  himself*  even  behind  Pilate's  words.  He 
does  not  hide  the  truth ;  yet,  in  a  perfectly  sinless  way,  he  somewhat 
conceals  himself.  I  wish  we  could  imitate  him  in  that  respect. 
Even  when  we  are^  like  Bayard,  "  without  fear,  and  without 
reproach,"  we  are  very  apt,  at  the  same  time,  to  be  without  any 
desire  for  the  conflict  against  evil,  or  any  wish  to  obtrude  ourselves, 
in  the  least  degree,  upon  the  attention  of  others,  even  if  a  protest 
would  be  right  from  us.  We  never  see  any  of  this  false  shame  in 
our  Saviour;  so,  if  we  have  at  all  given  way  to  it  in  the  past,  let  us- 
never  repeat  that  sin. 

The  words  of  Paul,  in  his  first  Epistle  to  Timothy,  are  very 
properly  rendered  in  the  Revised  Version,  "  Christ  Jesus,  who  before 
Pontius  Pilate  witnessed  the  good  confession."  It  was  more  than  a. 
good  confession  that  our  Lord  Jesus  witnessed  before  Pontius  Pilate, 
so  the  definite  article  is  rightly  used,  and  "  the  good  confession  " 
stands  out  prominently  as  an  example  for  all  his  followers.  It  is 
concerning  that  good  confession  that  I  am  about  to  speak  as  the 
Holy  Spirit  shall  graciously  guide  me. 

I.     First,   let  us  ask, — ^What  was  "  the  good   confession  "  that 
Jesus  witnessed  before  Pontius  Pilate? 

I  think  the  good  confession  of  our  Lord  was,  first,  his  avowal  of 
his  kingship :  "  Thou  sayest  that  I  am  a  king."  Dear  friends,  do 
not  forget  that  our  Saviour  was,  at  that  time,  a  prisoner  in  bonds, 
on  trial  for  his  life.  As  far  as  the  eye  could  see,  he  appeared  to  be 
absolutely  in  the  power  of  Pilate, — a  man  who  was  destitute  of  any 
kind  of  conscience,  and  who  oared  nothing  what  means  he  employed 
so  long  as  he  could  attain  his  own  evil  ends.  There  stands  Jesus,  a 
bound  prisoner,  before  one  who  can  order  him  to  be  put  to  death ; 
and  the  judge  contemptuously  says  to  him,  "  Art  thou  a  king  then  ?  " 
and  he  answers,  with  great  gentleness,  but  most  decidedly  and 
undoubtedly,  "  I  am  a  king,  even  as  thou  sayest."  I  think  I  see 
Pilate's  lip  curl ;  I  can  imagine  the  supreme  contempt  with  which 
he  looked  upon  the  miserable  victim  before  him,  disowned  by  his; 


316  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

own  countrymen,  who  had  brought  him  there  because,  in  their 
hate,  they  wished  to  have  him  put  to  death;  yet  he  talks  about 
being  a  king!  It  may  have  been  a  merry  jest  for  Pilate  at  the 
moment,  but  he  did  not  dare  to  make  it  one  afterwards.  His  wife 
would  have  stopped  him  had  he  sought  to  find  amusement  in  Jesus 
of  Nazareth.  At  the  time,  it  must  all  have  seemed  very  strange 
to  him.  It  takes  a  great  deal  of  courage  for  a  man  to  avow  that 
which  seems  to  be  improbable ;  and,  indeed,  impossible.  He  knows 
it  is  true,  but  the  other  man.  thinks  it  is  a  piece  of  fanaticism. 
"  Ridiculous  nonsense,"  says  he ;  and  he  scorns  the  idea  with  a 
sardonic  grin.  It  is  not  easy,  then,  for  a  humble-minded  spirit  just 
as  determinedly  to  avow  it.  I  believe  that  there  is  many  a  man, 
who  could  stand  upon  a  public  platform,  and  announce  his  convic- 
tions to  an  infuriated  crowd,  who  would  not  dare  to  say  the  same 
things  to  a  single  individual.  It  took  more  courage  for  Christ  to 
speak  to  Pilate  alone  as  he  did,  than  it  has  done  for  many  a  man 
to  stand  and  bum  at  the  stake;  yet  the  Saviour  did  it.  Calmly, 
and  deliberately,  he  avowed  the  truth,  blessed  be  his  holy  name! 
"  I  am  a  king,"  said  he,  and  so  he  is.  In  our  hearts,  we  own  his 
sovereignty  over  us  as  individuals,  and  his  supremacy  over  the 
entire  Church.  Nay,  more,  his  Father  hath  given  him  power  over 
all  flesh,  that  he  should  give  eternal  life  to  as  many  as  he  has  given 
him.  He  hath  said  it,  "  Yet  have  I  set  my  King  upon  my  holy 
bill  of  Zion,"  "  and  he  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever,"  and  all  loyal 
hearts  cry,  "  Hallelujah ! "  It  was  a  good  confession  for  the 
Nazarene,  clothed  in  the  common  smock-frock  of  a  Galilean  peasant, 
with  gory  sweat  still  upon  his  brow,  with  the  ropes  that  bound  him 
still  about  his  wrists,  with  the  howling  savagery  of  his  countrymen 
behind  him,  to  say  to  Pilate,  "  I  am  a  king." 

Next,  Christ's  "good  confession"  was  his  announcement  of  a 
spiritual  kingdom.  Pilate  could  not  comprehend  what  he  meant 
when  he  said,  "  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world ;  if  my  kingdom 
were  of  this  world,  then  would  my  servants  fight,  that  I  should  not 
be  delivered  to  the  Jews."  A  spiritual  kingdom!  Pilate  would 
not  have  given  the  smallest  Roman  coin  for  such  a  kingdom  as  that. 
Our  Saviour's  own  countrymen  did  not  understand  what  he  meant 
by  a  spiritual  kingdom,  "  not  of  this  world."  They  were  looking 
for  a  temporal  prince,  an  earthly  leader  who  would  deliver  them 
from  the  Roman  yoke ;  but  Jesus  asserts  that  his  kingdom,  whatever 
it  is,  and  wherever  it  is,  is  a  spiritual  thing.  This  is  the  testimony 
that  we  also  are  trying  to  bear  to-day;  and,  sometimes,  we  have  to 
bear  it  before  the  very  temporal  power  that  thinks  the  church  to 
be  an  instrument  to  be  used  for  its  own  purposes, — a  sort  of  mental 
and  moral  police  force  to  keep  people  in  order,  the  officers  them- 
selves to  be  kept  in  order,  and  dressed,  governed,  fed,  and  main- 
tained by  Act  of  Parliament,  and  not  able  to  lift  so  much  as  a  little 
:finger  should  the  State  forbid  them  to  do  so.  This  is  a  doctrine 
which  needs  some  courage  to  utter  it  even  now;  but  it  is  to  be 
spoken,  and  must  be  spoken,  more  and  more  loudly.  Christ's 
kingdom  is  not  of  this  world;  it  borrows  no  power  from  the 
■secular  arm,  and  would  not  accept  it  if  it  were  offered.     It  is  a 


THE    KING    IN   PILATE'S    HALL  317 

rule  of  spirit  over  spirit,  of  mind  over  mind,  of  truth  over  the 
souls  of  men ;  and  that  man  is  a  faithful  witness  for  Christ  who  can 
unflinchingly  bear  this  testimony  even  before  the  greatest  and  the 
proudest  of  the  land.  Our  Saviour  did  so  when  he  said  to  Pilate,. 
"  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world," 

Another  part  of  Christ's  "  good  confession  "  was  a  declaration  of 
his  life  purpose :  "  To  this  end  was  I  born,  and  for  this  cause  cama 
I  into  the  world,  that  I  should  bear  witness  unto  the  truth."  There 
is  many  a  man  who  is  pursuing  a  calling  which  he  would  scarcely 
like  to  own,  and  there  are  others  who  think  that  their  calling  can 
be  best  pursued  by  stealthy,  crafty,  Jesuitical  plans;  but  it  was 
not  so  with  the  Saviour.  He  boldly  declared  the  purpose  for  which 
he  had  come  into  the  world;  why  should  he  conceal  it?  He  who 
seeks  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth  should  himself  be  true  enough  to 
avow  what  the  object  of  his  witness  is;  and  the  Saviour  did  so, 
before  Pilate,  and  wherever  he  was.  All  his  life  long  he  was  a 
witness  to  the  truth,  he  was  himself  the  truest  man  who  ever 
lived.  It  is  beautiful  to  notice  the  truth  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
even  in  small  particulars.  There  is  no  rhetoric  about  our  Saviour's 
speech,  because  rhetoric  is  too  often  but  a  lie.  He  speaks  as  simply 
as  a  child ;  there  is  no  attempt  at  any  display  of  learning  in  our 
Saviour's  teaching.  Because  it  is  all  solid  truth,,  and  divine  revela- 
tion, there  is  no  need  that  he  should  use  the  jargon  of  the  schools, 
or  call  himself  a  Rabbi,  or  doctor.  He  spake  with  authority,  and 
you  can  see  how  simply,  how  plainly,  how  heartily,  he  did  it.  There 
was  no  particular  garb  to  attract  attention  to  the  Saviour,  no  priestly 
robes  with  which  to  dignify  a  kind  of  babyish  authority ;  but  he  was 
a  man  among  men,  speaking  what  he  knew  in  the  language  of  the 
people  which  they  could  understand.  There  was  no  pomp,  or 
ceremony,  or  show  about  his  life;  and,  especially,  there  was  no 
sham  or  pretence.  He  was  what  he  seemed  to  be,  and  he  seemed 
to  be  just  what  he  was.  If  you  look  upon  any  other  man,  you  can 
see  some  attempt  to  hide  his  deficiencies,  or  to  increase  his  influence 
by  an  appearance  of  greater  strength  than  actually  exists.  In  the 
Saviour,  you  see  him  altogether  as  he  is.  He  wears  his  heart  upon 
his  sleeve.  He  speaks  straight  on,  and  never  turns  aside  to  crooked 
ways.  He  never  blushes  or  stammers;  why  should  he  do  so?  What 
has  he  to  conceal?  His  teaching  is  delivered  as  from  a  mountain- 
top,  and  men  may  stand,  and  gaze;  and,  the  longer  they  gaze,  the 
better  will  they  see  what  he  wishes  them  to  see.  He  has  no  curtain 
behind  which  there  is  something  concealed;  all  is  as  open  as  the 
day.  As  a  truthful  man,  he  was  a  fit  witness  to  bear  testimony  to 
the  truth.  And  what  a  breaker  of  idols,  what  a  smasher  of  all 
shams,  he  was !  Phaorisees,  and  Sadducees,  and  Herodians  got  but 
short  shrift  from  him.  Nothing  false  could  stand  before  him. 
Even  a  scourge  of  small  cords,  when  it  was  held  in  his  hands,  sufficed 
to  sweep  the  buyers  and  sellers  from  the  temple ;  but  when  he  used 
the  sledge-hammer  of  denunciation,  who  could  resist  him?  His 
fan  was  in  his  hand,  and  he  did  throughly  purge  his  floor.  And 
this  was  his  life  purpose, — that  he  might  bear  witness  to  the  truth, 
and  he  avowed  that  purpose  even  before  Pontius  Pilate. 


:518 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


Our  Saviour  also  witnessed  "  the  good  confession  "  hy  his  avowal 
that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  positive  truth :  "  To  this  end  was  I  bom, 
and  for  this  cause  came  I  into  the  world,  that  I  should  bear  witness 
unto  the  truth."  There  is  need  of  just  such  witness  as  that  to-day. 
"  Now  be  very  careful  upon  that  point,"  says  one ;  "  do  you  mean  to 
say  that  there  really  is  such  a  thing  as  '  the  truth  ' "  ?  By  your 
leave,  dear  sir,  or  without  it,  I  will  venture  to  assert  that  there  is. 
"  That  reply  is  a  very  bigoted  one ;  because,  if  there  is  a  doctrine 
that  is  '  the  truth  \  then  that  which  is  contrary  to  it  is  a  lie," 
Precisely  so;  and  by  your  leave,  or  without  your  leave,  again  I  say 
that  it  is  so,  and  it  must  be  so  in  the  natural  order  of  things.  If 
this  doctrine  be  true,  then  that  which  contradicts  it  cannot  be 
true.  If  God  has  spoken  thus,  that  which  is  opposed  to  God,  and 
his  truth,  is  not  from  him,  and  cannot  stand  on  the  same  footing 
with  that  which  is  divinely  revealed.  It  takes  a  good  deal  of 
courage  to  say  that  nowadays.  If  you  go  into  society,  you  will  get 
three  cheers  if  you  declare  that  you  are  an  Agnostic, — that  you  do 
not  know  anything,  you  are  not  sure  of  anything.  Others  say  that, 
whatever  a  man  believes,  or  does  not  believe,  it  really  does  not 
matter  provided  he  is  perfectly  sincere;  that  is  to  say, 
if  a  man  sincerely  takes  prussic  acid,  it  will  not  kill 
him;  and  if  he  sincerely  goes  without  food,  he  will  not 
starve;  and  if  he  sincerely  refuses  to  breathe,  he  will  do  as 
well  as  those  that  do  breathe,  which  is  another  lie.  The  statue  of 
Christ  was  set  up  among  the  statues  of  Plato,  and  Socrates,  and 
other  notable  men ;  and  some  thought  it  was  an  honour  to  Christ, 
but  it  was  not.  They  would  crown  Christ,  so  they  say,  among 
the  great  ones  of  earth.  Ah!  but  they  cannot  crown  him  unless 
they  "  crown  him  Lord  of  all"  Our  blessed  Saviour  is  honestly 
intolerant.  He  says,  "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be 
saved,  but  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  Because  he 
loves  the  souls  of  men,  he  will  not  bolster  up  the  fiction  of  universal 
charity,  ajid  even  before  the  Broad-church  or  No-church  Pilate,  he 
says  that  he  has  come  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth ;  so  there  is  the 
truth,  and  that  which  is  contrary  to  it  is  not  truth. 

One  other  point  in  our  Lord^s  "  good  confession  "  was  his  separa- 
tion of  characters,  for  he  went  on  to  say  to  Pilate, — and  I  fear  that 
most  of  us  would  have  left  out  that  sentence, — "  Every  one  that  is 
of  the  truth  heareth  my  voice."  Do  you  hear  that  declaration, 
Pilate?  You  are  the  Roman  procurator, — a  very  great  man,  and 
this  poor  prisoner  of  yours,  whose  life  is  now  at  your  mercy,  tells 
you  plainly  that  every  one  that  is  of  the  truth  heareth  his  voice. 
Then,  Pilate,  if  you  are  of  the  truth,  you  will  have  to  sit  at  his 
feet,  and  listen  to  his  words,  and  learn  of  him.  I  can  well  con- 
ceive what  Pilate  thought  as  he  turned  on  his  heel,  and  con- 
temptuously asked,  "  What  is  truth  ?  "  He  had  heard  quite  enough 
of  such  talk  as  that;  he  did  not  want  any  more  of  such  close  dealing. 
But  therein  lies  the  glory  of  the  Master,  that  he  is  not  content  with 
merely  teaching  truth,  but,  in  his  good  confession  before  Pontius 
Pilate,  he  presses  it  home  even  upon  his  judge,  and  divides  and  sepa- 
rates between  the  precious  and  the  vile.     So  must  you  and  I  do,  dear 


THE   KING   IN  PILATE'S   HALL.  319 

friends,  if  we  are  faithful  followers  of  "  the  faithful  Witness."  I 
dare  not  preach  to  this  congregation  £i3  if  you  were  all  Christians, 
for  you  are  not.  I  dare  not  deliver  even  one  discourse  under  the 
delusion  that  all  my  hearers  are  saved;  for,  alas!  they  are  not. 
This  is  the  fault  with  multitudes  of  sermons, — that  they  seem  to 
carry  the  whole  congregation  to  heaven  when,  possibly,  the  major 
part  of  those  present  may  be  going  down  to  helL  That  will  not 
do.  Remember  what  the  Lord  said  to  the  prophet  Jeremiah,  "  If 
thou  take  forth  the  precious  from  the  vile,  thou  shalt  be  as  my 
mouth."  But  if  there  be  no  winnowing  fan  in  our  hand,  to  separate 
the  chaS  from  the  wheat,  we  are  not  like  to  Christ,  nor  has  Christ 
sent  us  on  his  service.  In  this  "good  confession"  of  his,  we  see 
how  clearly  and  solemnly, — gently,  I  admit,  but  still  most  decidedly, 
— he  made  a  division  and  separation  of  characters,  and  gave  a  test 
by  which  Pilate  could  judge  himself  if  he  had  been  willing  to  do  so. 

II.  The  time  will  not  suffice  for  me  to  go  fully  into  all  the  teaching 
of  my  text,  but  I  want  to  ask,  in  the  second  place, — To  what  truth 
DID  OUR  Lord  witness? 

He  said  to  Pilate  that  he  was  bom;  that  proves  his  humanity. 
He  also  said  that  he  came  into  the  world ;  and  that,  I  think,  shows 
his  Divinity  as  well  as  his  humanity.  He  came  on  purpose  to  bear 
witness  to  the  truth,  and  I  believe  that  the  life  of  Christ  witnessed, 
not  only  to  all  doctrinal  truth,  but  also  to  everything  that  is  true, 
especially  to  truenheartedness,  simplicity,  sincerity.  His  life  was 
a  testimony  against  all  guile,  craftiness,  cunning,  concealment;  in 
that  sense,  it  was  a  testimony  to  the  truth. 

But  with  regard  to  special  truths  to  which  he  testified,  did  not 
his  very  coming  here,  and  being  born,  bear  witness  to  the  grand 
truth  that  God  is  love,  and  that  God  loves  men?  The  Infinite  takes 
upon  himself  the  nature  and  form  of  an  infant.  The  Illimitable  is 
encased  within  a  human  body.  "The  Word  was  made  flesh,  and 
dwelt  among  us."  We  never  can  have  a  clearer  testimony  to  the 
thoughtful  care  of  Cod  tO'  men  than  we  find  in  the  coming  of 
the  Son  of  G-od  as  the  Son  of  man,  except  this, — that,  being  found 
in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  proved  the  love  of  God  to  sinners  by  the 
tears  which  he  wept  over  the  guilty  and  perishing,  and,  best  of  all, 
by  the  blood  which  he  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins. 
As  ye  see  Christ  dying  on  the  accursed  tree,  say,  "  Behold,  what 
manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us."  He  willeth 
not  the  death  of  any,  but  longs  that  they  should  turn  unto  him  and 
live.  The  Saviour's  death  for  the  guilty  proves  that  "  Cod  so  loved 
the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever 
believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  All 
his  life  long,  the  Saviour  was  bearing  witness  to  this  grand  truth. 
Oh,  that  we  may  none  of  us  dare  to  doubt  it  after  he  has  backed  it 
up  by  a  life  of  self-abnegation,  and  a  death  of  sublime  self-sacrifice ! 

He  also  bore  witness,  all  through  his  life,  to  the  spirituality  of 
true  religion.  He  waa  always  teaching  truth  like  this :  "  G-od  is  a 
Spirit:  and  they  that  worship  him  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and 
in  truth."  He  wore  no  phylactery,  he  assumed  no  airs  of  an  ascetic  ; 
-even  in  his  eating  and  drinking,  he  was  like  other  men,  insomuch 


320  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

that  they  said  of  him  that  he  was  "  a  man  gluttonous,  and  a  wine- 
bibber," — a  vile  charge,  without  an  atom  of  truth  in  it.  He  taught 
that  true  religion  consisted  not  in  long  prayers,  but  in  entering 
into  the  closet,  and  sincerely  seeking  the  Father's  face ;  it  was  not 
fasting  thrice  in  the  week,  but  it  waa  truly  praying,  "  G-od  be 
merciful  to  me  a  sinner;"  it  was  not  giving  alma  in  public,  and 
sounding  a  trumpet  before  him,  and  in  secret  devouring  widows' 
houses ;  but  it  consisted  in  love  to  God  and  love  to  man.  It  was 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  heart  that  Jesus  preached, 
and  he  grandly  witnessed  against  all  the  idolatrous  and  false  forms 
of  faith  which,  even  down  to  this  day,  prostitute  his  blessed  name. 
In  that  sad  hour,  our  Lord  Jesus  was  also  a  wonderful  Witness 
to  the  enmity  of  men  to  God.  He  in  whom  there  was  no  roughness 
or  sternness,  as  there  was  in  John  the  Baptist,  came  as  the  Messenger 
of  love  and  mercy,  for  God  sent  him  not  into  the  world  to  condemn 
the  world,  but  that  the  world  through  him  might  be  saved.  He 
was  the  great  Householder's  Son,  who  was,  "last  of  all/'  sent  to 
receive  the  fruits  of  the  vineyard,  but  the  husbandmen  said,  "  This 
is  the  heir ;  come,  let  us  kill  him,  and  let  us  seize  on  his  inherit- 
ance." The  men  of  this  world  were  never  so  base — they  never 
displayed  so  much  of  their  utter  malice  against  God  as  when  they 
took  his  Son,  and  put  him  to  a  cruel  and  ignominious  death.  This 
was  the  culmination  of  human  guilt.  All  the  adulteries,  and 
murders,  and  unnatural  vices,  and  accursed  blasphemies,  that  had 
ever  defiled  the  race  of  mankind  have  not  so  certainly  proved  it  to 
be  a  desperately  fallen  thing  as  the  murder  of  the  Son  of  God,  bhe 
Saviour  and  the  Friend  of  men.  This  appalling  crime  of  Deicide 
stands  out  without  a  parallel  in  the  history  of  the  universe.  There 
was  no  guilt  in  the  Lord  Jesus  for  which  he  deserved  to  die;  yet, 
with  wicked  hands,  they  crucified  and  slew  him. 

Our  Saviour  was  also  ever  a  Witness  to  the  great  necessity  of  a 
new  creation,  a  change  of  heart,  a  regeneration.  To  Nicodemus 
he  said,  "  Ye  must  be  bom  again ;"  and  to  his  disciples,  "  Except  ye 
be  converted,  and  become  as  little  children,  ye  shall  not  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  heaven."  He  also  preached  the  absolute  necessity 
of  faith  in  himself,  and  did  not  mince  the  matter  in  the  least :  "  He 
that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life :  and  he  that  believeth 
not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life,  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on 
him."     To  all  this,  Jesus  steadfastly  witnessed  in  life  and  in  death. 

And  to  this  truth  also  he  bore  witness,  that  salvation  was  to  he  found 
only  in  himself.  "  As  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness, 
even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up ;  that  whosoever  believeth 
in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  eternal  life."  "If  any  man 
thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me,  and  drink."  His  teaching  was  always 
concerning  himself:  "I  am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life." 
"  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will 
give  you  rest."  He  never  hesitated  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth,  so 
it  was  but  natural  that  part  of  his  "  good  confession  "  before  Pilate 
should  be  this  plain  declaration,  "  To  this  end  was  I  bom,  and  for 
this  cause  came  I  into  the  world,  that  I  should  bear  witness  unto, 
the  truth." 


THE    KING    IN    PILATE'S    HALL.  321 

III.  Now  I  will  try  briefly  to  answer  a  third  quesfcion, — What 

rfiAD  THIS  "  GOOD  CONFESSION  "  OF  JeSUS  TO  DO  WITH  PiLATE  ? 

I  answer,  first,  that  it  gave  Pilate  a  reason  for  acting  justly.  It 
ought  to  have  helped  to  stir  any  little  conscience  that  Pilate  still 
had  left,  and  also  to  allay  the  jealousy  which  he  may  have  felt 
-because  of  the  Saviour's  royal  claims.  Our  Lord  spoke  thus  out  of 
kindness  to  Pilate. 

I  think,  however,  that  the  main  reason  for  our  Saviour's  testimony 
was  that  it  gave  Pilate  an  opportunity  to  learn  the  truth.  Had  his 
soul  been  like  the  good  soil,  had  he  really  ever  been  the  subject  of 
sovereign  grace,  he  would  have  said  to  J  es.ug,  "  I  will  gladly  hear 
what  this  truth  is  if  thou  wilt  tell  it  to  me,."  He  would,  at  least, 
have  spared  time  enough  to  hear  from  his  strange  prisoner  what 
this  truth  was.  There  must  have  been  an  unusual  force  about  our 
Saviour's  few  short  sentences  that  ought  to  have  convinced  even 
Pontius  Pilate  of  his  evident  sincerity.  Those  eyes,  so  gentle,  yet 
so  piercing,  must  have  looked  Pilate  through  and  through.  The 
tones  of  his  voice  must  have  been  very  different  from  anything  to 
which  Pilate  had  been  accustomed  in  the  courts  of  Nero*.  Jesus 
■spoke  aa  no  other  man  had  ever  spoken  in  Pilate's  hall  before;  and 
had  there  been  anything  hopeful  about  him,  he  would  have  said, 
*"  Good  Master,  tell  me  what  that  truth  is  to  which  thou  bearest 
witness." 

And  I  say  to  you,  who  are  not  converted,  if  you  desire  to  be  right 
with  God,  you  will  want  to  know  what  this  truth  is  for  which  the 
Lord  Jesus  lived  and  died.  And  when  you  do  know  it,  if  there  is 
the  right  principle  in  your  heart,  then  you  will  believe  it;  and, 
believing  it,  you  will  be  assuredly  saved.  There  is  such  life-giving 
truth  in  the  Saviour's  teaching  that  you  have  but  to  hear  it,  and 
turn  it  over  in  your  mind,  and  weigh  it  with  the  best  judgment  thati 
you  have,  to  be  convinced  that  it  is  most  certainly  true.  So  I  put 
it  to  you,  if  it  be  true,  will  you  not  believe  it?  Believing  it,  will 
you  not  yield  to  it,  and  let  it  reign  over  your  whole  being,  for  it  is 
truth  from  the  mouth  of  the  King?  It  is  the  sceptre  in  the  hand 
of  King  Jesus,  with  which  he  rules  over  the  hearts  of  all  his  loyal 
subjects. 

IV.  Now,  to  finish,  I  have  to  ask, — What  has  this  to  do  with 

OURSELVES  ? 

It  has  something  to  do  with  every  one  of  us,  whether  we  own 
Christ  or  not.  First,  it  suggests  to  our  hearts  this  question, — Are 
we  of  the  truth  ?  For,  if  we  are  of  the  truth,  we  shall  hear  Christ's 
voice.  It  is  the  voice  of  the  King  eternal,  immortal,  invisible.  He 
is  the  King  of  truth,  and  he  rules  over  truthful  minds.  Coming  to 
be  the  chief  Witness  to  all  truth,  he  really  occupies  the 
throne  of  truth.  Now,  dear  friends,  are  we  of  the  truth? 
For,  if  we  are  not,  we  shall  not  accept  Christ;  but  if  we 
are,  we  shall  be  glad  to  have  him  as  our  King.  I  ask  any  man 
here,  who  has  hitherto  refused  Christ,  whether  he  is  not  conscious 
of  something  misedng  from  his  life.  Are  you  not  sometimes  half 
inclined  to  believe  in  Jesus?  Do  you  not  have  to  do  violence  to 
your  conscience  by  what  you  call  rea3on,  but  by  what  I  venture  %o 


322  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

say  is  a  mosb  unreasonable  travesty  of  all  good  reasoning?  If  you 
would  but  let  that  reason  of  yours  go  its  own  way,  and  follow  the 
track  of  truth,  I  believe  that,  ere  long,  by  God's  grace,  you  would 
be  sitting  at  the  Saviour's  feet,  and  learning  of  him. 

The  next  thing  that  this  testimony  of  Christ  has  to  do  with  us 
is  this.  If,  on  our  behalf,  he  witnessed  "  the  good  confession  "  for 
the  truth  before  Pontius  Pilate,  then  it  behoves  you  and  me,  not 
only  to  believe,  but  to  hear  witness  to  the  truth.  Brothers  and 
sisters  in  Jesus,  this  looks  to  me  to  be  but  a  small  thing  for  us  to 
do.  If  the  Son  of  God  has  come  into  this  world  on  our  l^half,  and 
has  not  been  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren,  and  to  espouse  our  cause 
even  at  the  cost  of  his  life,  I  say  that  it  looks  to  me  to  be  but  a 
small  thing  that  he  should  ask  of  us  that,  if  with  our  heart  we 
believe  in  him,  we  should  with  our  mouth  make  confession  of  him; 
— that,  if  we  believe  in  him^  we  should  also  be  baptized  in  his 
name,  for  it  is  his  will  that  we  should  mak©  an  open  confession 
before  men  if  we  really  are  his  disciples. 

There  are  new  fashions  in  theology,  and  new  gods  lately  come  up, 
and  new  christs,  and  all  manner  of  nonsense  and  novelty;  but  I 
am  a  follower  of  the  old  Christ,  who  is  the  same  yesterday,  and 
to-day,  and  for  ever;  and  I  glory  in  being  a  fool  for  Christ's  sake 
if  it  be  a  foolish  thing  to  follow  the  Man  of  Nazareth,  the  Christ  of 
Calvary,  who  died  as  the  Substitute  for  all  who  believe  in  him; 
that,  by  the  shedding  of  his  precious  blood,  h©  might  reconcile  them 
unto  God  for  ever. 

I  appeal  to  some,  who  I  believe  do  really  love  my  Lord  and 
Master,  but  who  are,  like  Saul  of  old,  hiding  away  out  of  sight. 
Are  you  never  going  forth  to  fight  for  your  King?  Will  you  still 
continue  in  the  ways  of  the  world,  and  yet  profess  to  bo  a  lover  of 
the  Lord  ?  Cowards  that  you  are,  come  out  boldly  for  Jesus !  If  you 
are  on  Christ's  side,  avow  it.  There  never  was  a  cause  that  better 
deserved  to  be  openly  confessed  than  his.  If  Christ  be  God,  follow 
him;  but  if  Satan  be  God,  serve  him.  If  the  world  be  worth  your 
love,  give  your  love  to  the  world,  and  say  so,  and  do  not  come 
sneaking  in  among  Christians  as  if  you  belonged  to  them.  But  if 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  worthy  of  your  love,  give  it  to  him,  and 
say  that  you  have  done  so.  Come  to  the  front,  unite  with  his 
people,  share  the  scorn  that  falls  upon  them;  and  whenever  any 
man  wishes  to  set  Christ  in  the  pillory,  say  to  him,  "  Put  me  there, 
too,  for  I  am  one  with  him,  and  have  taken  up  his  cause."  When 
he  comes, — and  he  soon  will  come  in  all  the  glory  of  his  Father 
and  of  his  holy  angels,  he  who  has  denied  him  before  men  he  will 
deny  before  the  assembled  universe ;  but  he  who  has  confessed  him 
before  men,  him  will  he  confess  in  the  presence  of  his  Father  and  of 
his  holy  angels.  May  that  be  my  lot,  and  yours,  dear  friends, 
without  a  single  exception,  for  his  dear  name's  sake !     Amen. 

Expositions  Ijg  (£>.  ?&♦  Spurgrom 

JOHN    XVIII.   28—40;    and  PSALM    II. 
John  xviii.  Verse  28.     Then  led  they  Jesua  from  Caiaphas  unto  the  hall  of 
Judgment : 


EXPOSITIONS.  323 

That  is  to  say,  Pilate's  hall.  Pilate,  at  that  time,  was  probably  residing 
in  one  of  the  old  and  sumptuous  palaces  of  Herod,  there  holding  his 
court  during  the  time  of  the  Passover. 

28.     And  it  was  early; 

They  were  very  eager  to  prove  their  enmity  to  Christ ;  they  had  spent 
the  night,  and  the  earliest  moments  of  the  dawn,  in  examining  their  illus- 
trious prisoner,  condemning  him,  and  abusing  him,  and  now  they  were  off 
to  Pilate. 

28.  And  they  themselves  went  not  into  the  judgment  hall,  lest  they  should  he 
defiled ;  hut  that  they  might  eat  the  passover. 

What  could  defile  such  wretches  as  these  ?  Yet  they  were  afraid  of 
ceremonial  defilement,  though  neither  afraid  nor  ashamed  to  imbrue  their 
hands  in  the  blood  of  Jesus. 

29.  Pilate  then  went  out  unto  them. 

He  loathed  and  detested  them,  yet,  for  his  own  evil  purposes,  he  would 
yield  to  their  wishes  and  whims. 

29,  30.  And  said.  What  accusation  hring  ye  against  this  man?  They 
answered  and  said  unto  him,  If  he  were  not  a  male/actor,  we  would  not  have 
delivered  him  up  unto  thee. 

As  much  as  to  say,  "You  may  take  that  for  granted.  We  would  not 
liHve  brought  him  if  he  had  not  done  wrong.  You  need  not  examine  into 
the  matter ;  we  have  already  heard  the  evidence,  and  convicted  him,  and  so 
saved  you  all  the  trouble  of  trying  him ;  we  only  bring  him  here  for  you  to 
Condemn  him.'' 

31.  Then  said  Pilate  unto  them,  Take  ye  him,  and  Judge  him  according  ta 
your  law. 

"That  is  your  way  of  doing  such  things,  but  it  is  not  a  method  into 
which  we  shall  fall.  Our  law  does  not  condemn  a  man  before  it  hears  the 
evidence  agaiust  him.  I  am  not  going  to  be  your  tool,  to  put  this  man  to 
death  without  hearing  what  is  laid  to  his  charge,  and  the  proofs  of  his 
guilt.     If  you  want  that  done,  you  must  do  it  yourselves." 

31.  The  Jews  there/ore  said  unto  him,  It  is  not  lawful  for  us  to  put  any 
man  to  death  : 

"  You  Romans  have  taken  from  us  the  power  of  life  and  death ;  and  we 
want  him  put  to  death."  There  was  a  clear  confession  that  nothing  short 
of  Christ's  death  would  satisfy  them. 

32.  That  the  saying  of  Jesus  might  he  fulfilled,  which  he  spake,  signifying 
what  death  he  should  die.  ^     i>    j  a    n 

Crucifixion  was  a  Roman,  not  a  Jewish  method  of  capital  punishment 
so  God  overruled  the  wanton  wickedness  of  the  worst  of  men  for  the 
accomplishment  of  his  own  eternal  purposes,  without,  however,  diminishing 
their  responsibility  and  guilt  in  the  least  degree.  It  was  "by  the  deter- 
minate counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God  "  that  Christ  was  put  to  death 
yet  it  was  «  with  wicked  hands  "  that  they  took  him,  and  crucified  him.        ' 

33.  Then  Pilate  entered  into  the  judgment  hall  again,  and  called  Jesus,  and 
%aid  unto  him.  Art  thou  the  King  of  the  Jews  f 

He  did  not  look  much  like  it.  There  was  little  enough  about  his  appear- 
ance or  his  apparel  to  suggest  the  idea  of  royalty. 

,  7?^i  ?,^*    *^^*"*  answered  him,  Sayest  thou  this  thing  of  thyself,  or  did  other* 
tell  it  thee  of  me  ?    Pilate  answered.  Am  I  a  Jew  f 

I  can  imagine  him  throwing  all  the  scorn  and  contempt  possible  into  the 
question.  It  was  characteristic  of  the  Romans,  as  we  learn  from  the  works 
Of  their  great  writers,  that  they  utterly  despised  and  detested  the  Jews. 


324  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACJLB   PULPIT. 

35 — 37.  Thine  own  nation  and  the  chief  priests  have  delivered  thee  unto 
mf  :  what  haat  thou  done  ?  Jesus  answered.  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world  : 
if  wy  kingdom  were  of  this  world,  then  would  my  servants  fi<jht,  that  I  should 
not  U  delivered  to  the  Jews  :  but  now  is  my  kingdom  not  from  hence.  /'Hate 
therefore  said  unto  him,  Art  thou  a  king  then  f  JestiS  answered.  Thou  sayest 
that  I  am  a  king.  To  this  end  was  I  horn,  and  for  this  cause  came  I  into  the 
worlds  that  1  should  hear  witness  unto  the  truth.  Every  one  that  is  of  the  truth 
heareth  my  voice. 

We  might  have  expected  that  he  would  have  said,  "I  came  into  the 
world  that  I  might  be  a  king."  But  he  explains  that,  as  a  Witness  to  the 
truth,  he  was  a  King. 

38.  Pilate  saith  unto  him,  What  is  truth  t  And  when  he  had  said  this,  he 
went  out  again  unto  the  Jews,  and  saith  unto  them,  I  find  in  him  no  fault  at 
all. 

He  did  not  want  an  answer.  He  merely  thought  it  such  an  unnecessary 
piece  of  trifling  to  talk  about  truth,  he  himself  had  so  slight  an  idea  of 
what  the  word  might  mean,  that,  when  he  had  said,  "  What  is  truth  ?"  "  he 
went  out  again  unto  the  Jews,  and  saith  unto  them,  I  find  in  him  no  fault 
at  all."  That  was  the  truth  about  tA«  Truth,  from  the  lips  of  a  man  who 
cared  nothing  about  truth,  yet  who  was  compelled  to  bear  this  testimony, 
"  I  find  in  him  no  fault  at  all." 

39.  But  ye  have  a  custom,  that  I  should  release  unto  you  one  at  the  passover  : 
will  ye  therefore  that  I  release  unto  you  the  King  of  the  Jews  f 

Now,  Pilate  may  have  thought,  if  Christ  was  their  King,  they  would 
certainly  prefer  him  to  a  thief  and  a  robber;  so  he  was  putting  before 
himself  an  opportunity  of  escaping  from  judging  Christ,  and  before  them 
a  test  as  to  whether  there  really  was  in  them  any  liking  for  the  Christ,  or 
any  possibility  of  his  becoming  their  King. 

40  Then  cried  they  all  again^  saying^  Not  this  mant  h%it  Barahboi.  Now 
Barahbas  was  a  robber. 

Psalm  iL  Verses  1,  2.  Why  do  the  heathen  rage^  and  t?ie  people  imagine 
a  vain  thing  f  The  kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves,  and  the  rulers  take  counntl 
together,  against  the  LORD,  and  against  his  anointed,  saying, 

This  raging  company  of  the  Jews  was  but  a  specimen  of  the  universal 
opposition  which  there  is  to  the  reign  of  Christ ;  for  it  is  not  alone  in 
Israel,  but  among  the  heathen,  and  among  all  people,  that  there  is  this 
opposition  to  the  Christ  of  God. 

3.  Let  us  break  their  hands  asunder,  and  cast  away  their  cords  from  ua. 
The  bands  of  Jehovah,  and  the  bands  of  the  Christ,  his  Anointed. 

4,  5.  He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh  :  the  Lord  shall  have  them 
in  derision.  Then  shall  he  speak  unto  them  in  his  wrath,  and  vex  them  in  his 
4ore  displeasure. 

His  word,  it  seems,  vexes  them  ;  there  is  no  need  of  sword  or  javelin. 
The  weapons  of  God's  warfare  are  his  words. 

6—12.  Vet  have  I  set  my  king  upon  my  holy  hill  of  Zion.  I  will  declare 
the  decree:  the  LoRD  hath  said  unto  me.  Thou  art  my  Son;  this  day  have  T 
begotten  thee.  Ask  of  me,  and  I  shall  give  thee  the  heathen  for  thine  inheritance, 
and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  thy  possession.  Thou  shalt  break  them 
with  a  rod  of  iron :  thou  shalt  dash  them  in  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel.  Be 
wise  now  therefore,  0  ye  kings  :  be  instructed,  ye  judges  of  the  earth.  Serve  the 
Lord  with  fear,  and  rejoice  with  trembling.  Kiss  the  Son^  lest  he  be  angry, 
and  ye  perish  from  the  way,  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  hui  a  little.  Blessed  are 
all  they  thai  put  their  trust  in  him. 


JESUS,   THE   KING   OF   TRUTH. 


gi    pennon 


C7 

X)ELTVERED  ON   THURSDAY   EVENING,    DECEMBER    19TH,    1872,   BT 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     METROPOLITAN     TABERNACLE,     NEVVINGTON. 


"Pilate  therefore  said  unto  him,  Art  thou  a  king  then  ?  Jesus  answered,  Thou 
sayest  that  I  am  a  king.  To  this  end  was  I  horn,  and  for  this  cause  came  I  into  the 
world,  that  I  should  hear  witness  unto  the  truth.  Every  one  that  is  of  the  truth 
heareth  my  voice." — John  xviii.   37. 

The  season  is  almost  arrived  when  by  the  custom  of  our  fellow- citizens 
we  are  led  to  remember  the  birth  of  the  holy  child  Jesus,  who  was  born 
"  king  of  the  Jews."  I  shall  not,  however,  conduct  you  to  Bethlehem, 
but  to  the  foot  of  Calvary  ;  there  we  shall  learn,  from  the  Lord's  own 
lips,  something  concerning  the  kingdom  over  which  he  rules,  and  thus 
we  shall  be  led  to  prize  more  highly  the  joyous  event  of  his  nativity. 

We  are  told,  by  the  apostle  Paul,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  before 
Pontius  Pilate  witnessed  a  good  confession.  It  was  a  good  confession 
fis  to  the  manner  of  it,  for  our  Lord  was  truthful,  gentle,  prudent, 
patient,  meek,  and  yet,  withal,  uncompromising,  and  courageous.  His 
spirit  was  not  cowed  by  Pilate's  power,  nor  exasperated  by  his  sneers.  In 
his  patience  he  possessed  his  soul,  and  remained  the  model  witness  for 
the  truth — both  in  his  silence  and  in  his  speech.  He  witnessed  a  ^ood 
confession  also,  as  to  the  matter  of  it ;  for,  though  he  said  but  little, 
that  little  was  all  that  was  needful.  He  claimed  liis  crown  rights,  and, 
at  the  same  time,  declared  that  his  kingdom  was  not  of  this  world,  nor 
to  be  sustained  by  force.  He  vindicated  both  the  spirituality  and  the 
essential  truthfulness  of  his  sovereignty.  If  ever  we  should  be  placed 
in  like  circumstances,  may  we  be  able  to  witness  a  good  confession  too  1 
We  may  never,  like  Paul,  be  made  to  plead  before  Nero ;  but,  if  we 
sliould,  may  the  Lord  stand  by  us,  and  help  us  to  play  the  man  before 
the  lion !  In  our  families,  or  among  our  business  acquaintances,  we 
may  have  to  meet  some  little  Nero,  and  answer  to  some  petty  Pilate ; 
may  we  then  also  be  true  witnesses.  0  that  we  may  have  grace  to  be 
prudently  silent  or  meekly  outspoken,  as  the  matter  may  require,  in  either 
case  being  faithful  to  our  conscience  and  our  God  !  May  the  sorrowful 
viaage  of  Jesus,  the  faithful  and  true  witness,  the  Prince  of  the  kings 
No.  1,086. 


326  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

of  the  earth,  be  often  before  our  eye,  to  check  the  first  sign  of  flinching, 
and  to  inspire  us  with  dauntless  cournce  ! 

We  have  before  us,  in  the  words  of  the  text,  a  part  of  our  Saviour's 
good  confession  touchinor  his  kingdom. 

I.  Note,  first  of  all,  that  our  Lord  claimed  to  be  a  king.  Pilnte 
said,  "Art  thou  a  king,  then?"  asking  the  question  with  a  sneering 
surprise  that  so  poor  a  being  should  put  forth  a  claim  to  royalty. 
Do  you  wonder  that  he  should  have  marvelled  greatly  to  find  kingly 
claims  associated  with  such  a  sorrowful  condition  ?  The  Savi(>ur 
answered,  in  effect,  **  It  is  even  as  thou  sayest,  I  am  a  king."  The 
question  was  but  half  earnest ;  the  answer  was  altogether  solemn:  *'I 
am  a  king."  Nothing  was  ever  nttered  by  our  Lord  with  greater  cer- 
tainty and  earnestness. 

Now,  notice,  that  our  Lord's  claim  to  be  a  king  was  made  without 
the  slightest  ostentation  or  desire  to  be  advantaged  thereby.  There 
were  other  times  when,  if  he  had  said  "I  am  a  king,"  he  might  have 
been  carried  upon  the  shoulders  of  the  people,  and  crowned  amid 
general  acclamations.  His  fanatical  fellow  countrymen  would  gladly 
have  made  him  their  leader  at  one  time ;  and  we  read  that  they  would 
have  **  taken  him  by  force  and  made  him  a  king."  At  such  times  he 
«aid  but  little  about  his  kingdom,  and  what  he  did  say  was  uttered  in 
parables,  and  explained  only  to  his  disciples  when  they  were  alone. 
Little  enough  did  he  say  in  his  preaching  concerning  his  birthright  as 
the  Son  of  David  and  a  scion  of  the  royal  house  of  Judah  ;  for  he 
shrank  from  worldly  honours,  and  disdained  the  vain  glories  of  a 
temporal  diadem.  He  who  came  in  love  to  redeem  men,  had  no  ambition 
for  the  gewgaws  of  human  sovereignty.  But  now,  when  he  is  betrayed 
by  his  disciple,  accused  by  his  countrymen,  and  in  the  hands  of  an 
unjust  ruler;  when  no  good  can  come  of  it  to  himself;  when  it  will 
bring  him  derision  rather  than  honour ;  he  speaks  out  plainly  and 
replies  to  his  interrogator,  "  Thou  sayest  that  I  am  a  king." 

Note  well  the  clearness  of  our  Lord's  avowal  ;  there  was  no  mis- 
taking his  words :  '*  I  am  a  king."  When  the  time  has  come  for  the 
tnith  to  be  spoken,  our  Lord  is  not  backward  in  declaring  it.  Truth 
has  her  times  most  meet  for  speech,  and  her  seasons  for  silence.  We 
are  not  to  cast  our  pearls  before  swine,  but  when  the  hour  has  come  for 
speech  we  must  not  hesitate,  but  speak  as  with  the  voice  of  a  trumpet, 
giving  forth  a  certain  sound,  that  no  man  may  mistake  us.  So,  though 
a  prisoner  given  up  to  die,  the  Lord  boldly  declares  his  royalty,  though 
Pilate  would  pour  derision  upon  him  in  consequence  thereof.  0,  for 
the  Master's  prudence  to  speak  the  truth  at  the  right  time,  and  for  the 
Master's  courage  to  speak  it  when  the  right  time  has  come.  Soldiers 
of  the  cross,  learn  of  your  Captain. 

Our  Lord's  claim  to  royalty  must  have  sounded  very  singularly  in 
Pilate's  ear.  Jesus  was,  doubtless,  very  much  careworn,  sad,  and 
emaciated  in  appearance.  He  had  spent  the  first  part  of  the  night  in 
the  garden  in  an  agony ;  in  the  midnight  hours  he  had  been  dragged 
from  Annas  to  Caiaphas,  and  from  Caiaphas  to  Herod  ;  neither  at  day- 
break had  he  been  permitted  to  rest,  bO  that,  from  sheer  weariness,  he 
must  have  looked  vei'y  unlike  a  king.  If  you  had  taken  some  poor 
ragged  creature  in  the  street,  and  paid  to  him,  **  Art  thou  a  king, 


JESUS,    THE   KI^G   OF   TRUTH.  827 

then  ?  "  the  question  could  scarcely  have  been  more  sarcastic.  Pilate> 
in  his  heart,  despised  the  Jews  as  such,  but  here  was  a  poor  Jew,  por- 
eecuted  by  his  own  people,  helpless  and  friendless;  it  sounded  like 
mockery  to  talk  of  a  kingdom  in  connection  with  him.  Yet  never  earth 
saw  truer  kinc^ !  None  of  the  line  of  Pharaoh,  the  family  of  Nimrod,  or 
the  race  of  the  Csesars,  was  so  intrinsically  imperial  in  himself  as 
he,  or  so  deservedly  reckoned  a  king  among  men  by  virtue  of  his 
descent,  his  achievements,  or  his  superior  character.  The  carnal 
€ye  could  not  see  this,  but  to  the  spiritual  eye  it  is  clear  as  noon- 
day. To  this  day,  pure  Christianity,  in  its  outward  appearance,  is 
an  equally  unattractive  object,  and  wears  upon  its  surface  few  royal 
tokens.  It  is  without  form  or  comeliness,  and  when  men  see  it,  there 
is  no  beauty  that  they  should  desire  it.  True,  there  is  a  nominal  Christ- 
tianity  which  is  accepted  and  approved  of  men,  but  the  pure  gospel  is 
still  despised  and  rejected.  The  real  Christ  of  to-day,  among  men,  is 
unknown  and  unrecognised  as  much  as  he  was  among  his  own  nation 
eighteen  hundred  years  ago.  Evangelical  doctrine  is  at  a  discount, 
holy  living  is  censured,  and  spiritual-mindedncss  is  derided.  "  What," 
gay  they,  "  This  evangelical  doctrine,  call  you  it  the  royal  truth  ?  Who 
believes  it  now-a-days  ?  Science  has  exploded  it.  There  is  nothing 
great  about  it ;  it  may  afford  comfort  to  old  women,  and  to  those  who 
have  not  capacity  enough  fur  free  thought,  but  its  reign  is  over,  never 
to  return."  As  to  living  in  separation  from  the  world,  it  is  called 
Puritanism,  or  worse.  Christ  in  doctrine,  Christ  in  spirit,  Christ  in  life 
— the  world  cannot  endure  as  king.  Christ  chanted  in  cathedrals, 
Christ  personified  in  lordly  prelates,  Christ  surrounded  by  such  as  are 
in  king's  houses,  he  is  well  enough  ;  but  Christ  honestly  obeyed, 
followed,  and  worshipped  in  simplicity,  without  pomp  or  form, 
they  will  not  allow  to  reign  over  them.  Few  now-a-days  will  side 
witli  the  truth  their  fathers  bled  for.  The  day  for  covenanting  to 
follow  Jesus  through  evil  report  and  shame  appears  to  have  gone  by. 
Yet,  though  men  turn  round  upon  us,  and  say,  "Do  you  call  your 
gospel  divine  ?  Are  you  so  preposterous  as  to  believe  that  your  religion 
comes  from  God  and  is  to  subdue  the  world?  " — we  boldly  answer; 
"Yes!"  Even  as  beneath  the  peasant's  garb  and  the  wan  visage  of  the 
Son  of  Mary  we  can  discern  the  Wonderful,  the  Counsellor,  the  Mighty 
Ood,  the  Everlasting  Father  I  so  beneath  the  simple  form  of  a  despised 
gospel  we  perceive  the  royal  lineaments  of  truth  divine.  We  care 
nothing  about  the  outward  apparel  or  the  external  housing  of  truth ; 
we  love  it  for  its  own  sake.  To  us,  the  marble  halls  and  the  alabaster 
columns  are  nothing,  we  see  more  in  the  manger  and  the  cross.  We 
are  satisfied  that  Christ  is  the  king  still  where  he  was  wont  to  be 
king,  and  that  is  nob  among  the  great  ones  of  the  earth,  nor 
among  the  mighty  and  the  learned,  but  amongst  the  base  things  of 
the  world  and  the  things  which  are  not,  which  shall  bring  to  nought 
the  things  that  are,  for  these  hath  God  from  the  beginning  chosen  to  be 
his  own. 

Let  us  add,  that  our  Lord's  claim  to  be  a  king  shall  be  acknowledged 
one  day  by  all  mankind.  When  Christ  said  to  Pilate,  according  to  our 
version,  "  Thou  sayest  that  I  am  a  king,"  he  virtually  prophesied  the 
future  confession  of  all  men.    Some,  taught  by  his  grace,  shall  in  tliia 


328  METROPOLITAH  TABERNACLE  PtLPlT. 

life  rejoice  ia  him  as  their  altocrether  lovely  Kino:.  Blessed  be  God,  tb(v 
Lord  Jesus  might  look  into  the  eyes  of  many  of  us,  and  say,  "  Tho> 
gayest  that  I  am  a  kin^,"  and  we  would  reply,  *'We  do  say  it  joyfully." 
But  the  day  sl^all  come  when  he  shall  sit  upon  his  great  white  throne, 
and  then,  when  the  multitudes  shall  tremble  in  the  presence  of  hisawlul 
majesty,  even  such  as  Pontius  Pilate,  and  Herod,  and  the  chief  priests, 
shall  own  that  he  is  a  king !  Then  to  each  of  his  astounded  and  over- 
whelmingly convinced  enemies  he  mijrht  say,  "  Now,  O  despiser,  thou 
sayest  that  I  am  a  king,"  for  to  him  every  knee  shall  bow,  and  every 
tongue  shall  confess  that  lie  is  TiOrd  I 

Let  us  remember,  here,  that  when  our  Lord  said  to  Pilate,  "  Tho» 
sayest  that  I  am  king,"  he  was  not  referring  to  his  divine  dominion. 
Pilate  was  not  thinking  of  that  at  all,  nor  did  onr  Lord,  I  think,, 
refer  to  it:  yet,  forget  not  that,  as  divine,  he  is  the  King  of  kings  ani 
Lord  of  lords.  We  must  never  forget  that,  though  he  died  in  weakness- 
as  man,  yet  he  ever  lives  and  rules  as  God.  Nor  do  I  think  he  referred* 
to  his  mediatorial  sovereignty,  which  he  possesses  over  the  earth  for  his- 
people's  sake ;  for  the  iiord  has  all  power  committed  unto  him  in  heaven 
and  in  earth,  and  the  Father  has  given  him  power  over  all  flesh,  that  he 
may  give  eternal  life  to  as  many  as  are  given  him.  Pilate  was  not  alluding 
to  that,  nor  our  Lord  either,  in  the  first  place  ;  but  he  was  speaking  of 
that  rule  which  he  personally  exercises  over  the  minds  of  the  faithful,, 
by  means  of  the  truth.  You  remember  Napoleon's  saying,  "  I  have- 
founded  an  em])ire  by  force,  and  it  has  melted  away  ;  Jesus  Christ, 
established  his  kingdom  by  love,  and  it  stands  to  this  day,  and  will 
stand."  That  is  the  kingdom  to  which  our  Lord's  word  refers,  thi> 
kingdom  of  spiritual  truth  in  which  Jesus  reigns  as  Lord  over  those 
who  are  of  the  truth.  He  claimed  to  be  a  king,  nnd  the  truth  which  he: 
revealed,  and  of  which  he  was  the  personification,  is,  therefore,  the- 
Bceptre  of  his  empire.  He  rules  by  the  force  of  truth  over  those  hearts- 
which  feel  the  power  of  right  and  truth,  and  therefore  willingly  yield) 
themselves  to  his  guidance,  believe  his  word,  and  are  governed  by  liis- 
will.  It  is  as  a  spiritual  Lord  that  Christ  claims  sovereignty  among 
men;  he  is  king  over  minds  that  love  him,  trust  him,  and  obey  him,, 
because  they  see  in  him  the  truth  which  their  souls  ;  pine  for.  Other 
kings  rule  our  bodies,  but  Christ  our  souls,  they  govern  by  force,  but 
he  by  the  attractions  of  righteousness ;  theirs  is,  to  a  great  extent,  a> 
fictitious  royalty,  but  his  is  true,  and  finda  its  force  in  truth. 

So  much,  then,  upon  Christ's  claims  to  be  a  king. 

IL  Now,  observe,  secondly,  that  OUE  Lord  declared  this  king- 
DOM  TO  BE  HIS  MAIN  OBJECT  IN  LIFE.  **  To  this  end  was  I  born,  an(f 
for  this  cause  came  I  into  the  world."  To  set  up  his  kingdom  was  the- 
reason  why  he  was  born  of  the  virgin.  To  be  King  ot  men,  it  was- 
necessary  for  him  to  be  born.  He  was  always  the  Lord  of  all ;  he- 
needed  not  to  be  born  to  be  a  king  in  that  sense,  but  to  be  king 
through  the  power  of  truth,  it  was  essential  that  he  should  be  born  in: 
our  nature.  Why  so  ?  I  answer,  first,  because  it  seems  unnatural  that 
a  ruler  should  be  alien  in  nature  to  tlie  people  over  whom  he  rules. 
An  angelic  kiug  of  men  would  be  unsuitable  ;  there  could  not  exist  tlie 
sympathy  which  is  the  cement  of  a  spiritual  empire.  Jesus,  that  he 
might  govern  by  force  of  love  and  truth  alone,  became  of  one  natur© 


JESUS,   THE   KliU}   OF   TRUTH. 


82^ 


with  mankind ;  he  was  a  man  among  men,  a  real  mtn— but  a  right 
noble  and  kingly  man,  and  so  a  King  of  men. 

Bnt,  oi^ain,  the  Lord  was  born  that  he  might  be  able  to  save  hia 
people!  'Subjects  are  essential  to  a  kingdom  ;  a  king  cannot  be  a  kmg 
if  there  be  none  to  govern.  But  all  men  must  have  perished  through 
sin  had  not  Christ  come  into  the  world  and  been  born  to  save.  Hia 
birth  was  a  necessary  step  to  his  redeeming  death;  his mcarnation  waa 
necessary  to  the  atonement.  ,        •    •        u  j-  a 

Moreover,  truth  never  exerts  such  power  as  when  it  is  embodiecf. 
Truth  spol<en  may  be  defeated,  but  truth  acted  out  in  the  life  of  a  man 
is  omnipotent,  throui^h  the  Spirit  of  God.  Now,  Christ  did  not  merely 
speak  the  truth,  buthe  was  truth.  Had  he  been  truth  embodied  in  an 
angelic  form,  he  had  possessed  small  power  over  our  hearts  and  lives  | 
but  perfect  truth  in  a  human  form  has  royal  power  over  renewed 
humanity.  Truth  embodied  in  flesh  and  blood  has  power  over  flesh 
and  blood.  Hence,  for  this  purpose  was  he  born.  So  when  ye  hear  th& 
bells  rin^ring  out  at  Christmas,  think  of  the  reason  why  Jesus  was  born ; 
dream  not  that  he  came  to  load  your  tables  and  fill  your  cups  ;  but  in 
your  mirth  look  higher  than  all  earth-born  things.  When  you  hear 
that  in  certain  churches  there  are  pompous  celebrations  and  ecclesias- 
tical displays,  think  not  for  this  purpose  was  Jesus  born.  No  ;  bub 
look  within  your  hearts,  and  say,  for  this  purpose  was  he  born  :  that  he 
might  be  a  King,  that  he  might  rule  through  the  truth  m  the  souls  of  a 
people  who  are  by  grace  made  to  love  the  truth  of  God. 

And  then  he  added,  "  For  this  cause  came  I  into  the  world  ;"  that  is,, 
he  came  out  of  the  bosom  of  the  Father  that  he  might  set  up  his  king- 
dom, by  unveiling  the  mvsteries  which  were  hid  from  the  foundation  of 
the  world.     No  man  can  "reveal  the  counsel  of  God,  but  one  who  has  been 
with  God ;  and  the  Son  who  has  come  forth  of  the  ivory  palaces  of  glad- 
ness, announces  to  us  tidings  of  great  joy  !     For  this  cause  also  came 
he  into  the  world,  from  the  obscure  retirement  of  Joseph's  workshop, 
where,  for  many  years  he  was  hidden  like  a  pearl  in  its  shell.     It  was 
needful  that  he  should  be  made  known,  and  that  the  truth  to  which  he 
witnessed  should  be  sounded  in  the  ears  of  the  crowd.     Since  he  was  to 
be  a  King,  he  must  leave  seclusion,  and  come  forth  to  do  battle  for  his 
throne;    he  must  address  the  multitudes  on  the  hill-side;  he  must 
speak  by  the  sea-shore ;  he  must  gather  disciples,  and  send  them  forth 
bv  two  and  two  to  publish  on  the  housetops  the  secrets  of  mighty- 
truth  !    He  came  not  forth  because  he  loved  to  be  seen  of  men,  or 
courted  popularity;  but  for  this  purpose— that,  the  truth  being  pub- 
lished, he  might  set  up  his  kingdom.     It  was  needful  that  he  should 
come  out  into  the  world  and  teach,  or  truth  would  not  be  known,  and 
consequently  could  not  operate.    The  sun  must  come  forth,  like  a  bride- 
groom out  of  his  chamber,  or  the  kingdom  of  light  will  never  be  estab- 
lished; the  breath  must  come  forth  from  the  hiding-place  of  the  winds, 
or  life  will  never  reign  in  the  valley  of  dry  bones.     During  three  years^ 
our  Lord  lived  conspicuously,  and  emphatically  "came  into  the  world." 
He  was  seen  of  men  so  closely  as  to  be  beheld,  looked  upon,  touched,  and 
handled.     He  was  intended  to  be  a  pattern,  and  therelore,  it  was  need- 
ful that  he  should  be  seen.     The  Ure  of  a  man  who  lives  in  absolute- 
retirement  may  be  admirable  for  himself  and  acceptable  with  (jlod,  but 


330 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


it  cannot  be  exemplary  to  men  :  for  this  cause  the  Lord  came  forth  into 
the  world,  that  all  he  did  might  influence  mankind.  His  enemies 
were  permitted  to  watch  his  every  action,  and  to  endeavour  to  entrap 
him  in  his  speech,  by  way  of  test ;  his  friends  saw  him  in  privacy, 
and  knew  what  he  did  in  solitude;  thus  his  whole  life  was  reported — 
he  was  observed  on  the  cold  mountain-side  at  midnight,  as  well  as  in 
the  midst  of  the  great  congregation.  This  was  permitted  to  make  the 
truth  known,  for  every  action  of  his  life  was  truth,  and  tended  to  set  up 
the  kingdom  of  truth  in  the  world. 

Let  us  pause  here.  Christ  is  a  king,  a  king  by  force  of  truth  in 
a  spiritual  kingdom  ;  for  this  purpose  was  he  born  ;  for  this  cause  came 
he  into  the  world.  My  soul,  ask  thyself  this  question: — Has  this 
purpose  of  Christ's  birth  and  life  been  answered  in  thee  ?  If  not,  what 
avails  Christmas  to  thee  ?  The  choristers  will  sing,  "  Unto  us  a 
child  is  born  ;  unto  us  a  Son  is  given."  Is  that  true  to  thee  ?  How 
can  it  be  unless  Jesus  reigns  in  thee,  and  is  thy  Saviour  and  thy  Lord  ? 
Those  who  can  in  truth  rejoice  in  his  birth  are  those  who  know  him  as 
their  bosom's  Lord,  ruling  their  understanding  by  the  truth  of  his  doc- 
trine ;  their  admiration  by  the  truth  of  his  life  ;  their  affections  by 
the  truth  of  his  person.  To  such  he  is  not  a  personage  to  be  pour- 
trayed  with  a  crown  of  gold  and  a  robe  of  purple,  like  the  common 
theatrical  kings  of  men ;  but  one  brighter  and  more  heavenly,  whope 
crown  is  real,  whose  dominion  is  unquestionable,  who  rules  by  truth 
and  love  !     Do  we  know  this  King  ? 

This  question  may  well  come  home  to  us,  for,  beloved,  there  are  many 
who  say,  "  Christ  is  my  King,"  who  know  not  what  they  say,  for  they 
do  not  obey  him.  He  is  the  servant  of  Christ  who  trusts  in  Christ, 
who  walks  according  to  Christ's  mind,  and  loves  the  truth  which  Jesus 
has  revealed  ;  all  others  are  mere  pretenders. 

III.  But  now  I  must  pass  on.  Our  Lord,  in  the  third  place,  revealed 
THE  NATURE  OF  HIS  ROYAL  POWER.  I  have  already  spoken  on  that,  but 
I  must  do  so  again.  We  should  have  thought  the  text  would  have  run 
thus :  "  Thou  sayest  that  I  am  a  king  ;  to  this  end  was  I  born,  and  for 
this  cause  came  I  into  the  world,  that  I  should  establish  my  kingdom." 
It  is  not  so  in  words,  but  so  it  must  mean,  for  Jesus  was  not  incoherent 
in  his  speech.  We  conclude  that  the  words  employed  have  the  same 
meaning  as  that  which  the  context  sufrgests,  only  it  is  differently  ex- 
pressed. If  our  Lord  had  said,  "  That  I  might  establish  a  kingdom," 
he  might  have  misled  Pilate ;  but  when  he  availed  himself  of  the 
flpiritual  explanation,  and  said  that  his  kingdom  was  truth,  and  that  the 
establishment  of  his  kingdom  was  by  bearing  witness  to  the  truth,  then, 
though  Pilate  did  not  understand  him — for  it  was  far  above  his  com- 
prehension— yet,  at  any  rate,  he  was  not  misled. 

Our  Lord,  in  effect,  tells  us  that  truth  is  the  pre-eminent  charac- 
teristic of  his  kingdom,  and  that  liis  royal  power  over  men's  hearts  is 
through  the  truth.  Now,  the  witness  of  our  Lord  among  men  was 
emphatically  upon  real  and  vital  matters.  He  dealt  not  with  fiction, 
but  with  facts;  not  with  trifles,  but  with  infinite  realities.  He  speaks 
not  of  opinions,  views,  or  speculations,  but  of  infallible  verities.  How 
many  preachers  waste  time  over  what  may  be  or  may  not  be !  Our 
Lord's  testimony  was  pre-eminently  practical  and  matter-of-fact,  full  of 


JESUS,  THE  KING   OP  TRUTH.  831 

▼erities  and  certainties.  I  have  sometimes,  when  hearing  sermons, 
wished  the  preacher  would  come  to  the  point,  and  would  deal  with 
something  that  really  concerned  our  soul's  welfare.  What  concern  have 
dying  men  with  the  thousand  trivial  questions  which  are  flitting  around 
us  ?  We  have  heaven  or  hell  before  us,  and  death  within  a  stone's- 
throw  ;  for  God's  sake  do  not  trifle  with  us,  but  tell  us  the  truth  at  once  ! 
Jesus  is  king  in  his  people's  souls,  because  his  preaching  has  blessed 
us  in  the  grandest  and  most  real  manner,  and  set  us  at  rest  upon  points  of 
boundless  importance.  He  has  not  given  us  well-chiselled  stones,  but 
real  bread.  There  are  a  thousand  things  which  you  may  not  know,  and 
you  shall  be  very  little  the  worse  for  not  knowing  them ;  but  0,  if 
you  do  not  know  that  which  Jesus  has  taught,  it  shall  go  ill  with  you. 
If  you  are  taught  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  you  shall  have  rest  for  your  cares, 
balm  for  your  sorrows,  and  satisfaction  for  your  desires.  Jesus  gives 
sinners  who  believe  in  him  the  truth  which  they  need  to  know ;  the 
assurance  of  sin  forgiven  through  his  blood,  favour  ensured  by  his 
righteousness,  and  heaven  secured  by  his  eternal  life. 

Moreover,  Jesus  has  power  over  his  people  because  he  testifies  not  to 
symbols,  but  to  the  very  substance  of  truth.  The  Scribes  and  Pharisees 
were  very  fluent  upon  sacrifices,  offerings,  oblations,  tithes,  fastings,  and 
the  like  ;  but  what  influence  could  all  that  exert  over  aching  hearts  ? 
Jesus  has  imperial  power  over  contrite  spirits,  because  he  tells  them  of  his 
one  real  sacrifice  s.nd  of  the  perfection  which  he  has  secured  to  all 
believers.  The  priests  lost  their  power  over  the  people  because 
they  went  no  further  than  the  shadow,  and  sooner  or  later  all  will 
do  so  who  rest  in  the  symbol.  The  Lord  Jesus  retains  his  power 
over  his  saints  because  he  reveals  the  substance,  for  grace  and  truth  are 
by  Jesus  Christ.  What  a  loss  of  time  it  is  to  debate  upon  the  fashion 
of  a  cope,  or  the  manner  of  celebrating  communion,  or  the  colour 
suitable  for  the  clergyman's  robes  in  Advent,  or  the  precise  date  of 
Easter.  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity  !  Such  trifles  will  never  aid 
in  getting  up  an  everlasting  kingdom  in  men's  hearts.  Let  us  take 
care  lest  we  also  set  great  store  by  externals,  and  miss  the  essential, 
spiritual  life  of  our  holy  faith.  Christ's  kingdom  is  not  meat  and 
drink,  but  righteousness  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost! 

The  power  of  King  Jesus  in  the  hearts  of  his  people  lies  much  in  the 
fact  that  he  brings  forth  unalloyed  truth,  without  mixture  of  error.  He 
has  delivered  to  us  pure  light  and  no  darkness  ;  his  teaching  is  no 
combination  of  God's  word  and  man's  inventions;  no  mixture  of  inspi- 
ration and  philosophy;  silver  without  dross  is  the  wealth  which  he 
gives  his  servants.  Men  taught  of  his  Holy  Spirit  to  love  the  truth, 
recognise  this  fact  and  surrender  their  souls  to  the  royal  sway  of  the 
Lord's  truth,  and  it  makes  them  free,  and  sanctifies  them  ;  nor  can 
anything  make  them  disown  such  a  sovereign,  for  as  the  truth  lives 
and  abides  in  their  hearts,  so  Jesus,  who  is  the  truth,  abides  also.  If 
you  know  what  truth  is,  you  will  as  naturally  submit  yourselves  to  the 
teachings  of  Christ  as  ever  children  yield  to  a  father's  rule. 

The  Lord  Jesus  taught  that  worship  must  be  true,  spiritual,  and  of 
the  heart,  or  else  it  would  be  nothing  worth.  He  would  not  take  sides 
with  the  temple  atGerizim  or  that  on  Zion,  but  he  declared  that  the 
time  was  come  when  thosis  who  worshipped  God  would  worship  kim 


232 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 


i!>  spirit  and  in  trnt  h.  Now,  reg^enerate  hearts  feel  the  power  of  this,  anc^ 
rejoice  that  it  emancipntes  them  from  the  begg:arly  elements  of  carnHl 
ritualism.  They  accept  eladly  the  truth  that  pious  words  of  prayer  or 
praise  are  vanity,  unless  the  heart  has  living  worship  within  it.  In  the 
great  truth  of  spiritual  worship,  believers  possess  a  Magna  Charta,  dear 
as  life  itself.  We  refuse  to  be  again  subject  to  the  yoke  of  bondage,  and 
cleave  to  our  emancipating  king. 

Our  Lord  taught,  also,  that  all  false  livinc:  was  base  and  loathsome. 
He  poured  contempt  on  the  phylacteries  of  hypocrites  and  the  broad 
borders  of  the  garments  of  oppressors  of  the  poor.  With  him,  osten- 
tatious' alms,  long  prayers,  frequent  fasts,  and  the  tithe  of  mint  and 
cummin,  were  all  nothing  when  practised  by  those  who  devoured  widows* 
houses.  He  cared  nothing  for  white-washed  sepulchres  and  platters  with 
outsides  made  clean,  he  judged  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart. 
What  woes  were  those  which  he  denounced  upon  the  formalists  of  his 
day !  It  must  have  been  a  grand  sight  to  have  seen  the  lowly  Jesus 
roused  to  indignation,  thundering  forth  peal  on  peal  his  denunciations 
of  hypocrisy.  Elias  never  called  fire  from  heaven  one  half  so  grandly. 
'*  Woe  unto  you  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites,"  is  the  loudest  roll 
of  heaven's  artillery  !  See  how,  like  another  Samson,  Jesus  slays  the 
shams  of  his  age,  and»piles  them  heaps  upon  heaps  to  rot  for  ever. 
Shall  not  he  who  teaches  us  true  living  be  king  of  all  the  sons  of  truth  ? 
Let  us  even  now  salute  him  as  Lord  and  King. 

Besides,  beloved,  our  Lord  came  not  only  to  teach  us  the  truth, 
but  a  mysterious  power  goes  forth  from  him,  through  that  Spirit 
which  rests  on  him  without  measure — which  subdues  chosen  hearts  to 
truthfulness,  and  then  guides  truthful  hearts  into  fulness  of  peace  and 
joy.  Have  you  never  felt  when  you  have  been  with  Jesus,  that  a  sense 
of  his  purity  has  made  you  yearn  to  be  purged  of  all  hypocrisy  and 
every  false  way  ?  Have  you  not  been  ashamed  of  yourself  when  you 
have  come  forth  from  hearing  his  word,  from  watching  his  life,  and, 
above  all,  from  enjoying  his  fellowship — quite  ashamed  that  you  have  not 
been  more  real,  more  sincere,  more  true,  more  upright,  and  so  a  more 
loyal  subject  of  the  truthful  King  ?  I  know  you  have.  Nothing: 
about  Jesus  is  false  or  even  dubious ;  he  is  transparent— from  head  to 
foot  he  is  truth  in  public,  truth  in  private,  truth  in  word,  and  truth 
in  deed.  Hence  it  is  that  he  has  a  kingdom  over  the  pure  in  heart, 
and  is  vehemently  extolled  by  all  those  whose  hearts  are  set  upon 
righteousness. 

IV.  And  now,  in  the  fourth  place,  our  Lord  disclorf.d  the  method 
OP  HIS  CONQUEST.  "  To  this  end  was  I  born,  and  for  this  cause  came 
I  into  the  world,  that  I  should  bear  tvitness  for  the  truth:'  Christ  never 
yet  set  up  his  kingdom  by  force  of  arms.  Mahomet  drew  the  sword, 
and  converted  men  by  giving  them  the  choice  of  death  or  conversion  ; 
but  Christ  said  to  Peter,  *' Put  up  thy  sword  into  its  sheath."  No 
compulsion  ought  to  be  used  with  any  man  to  lead  him  to  receive  any 
opinion,  much  less  to  induce  him  to  espouse  the  truth.  Falsehood  re- 
quires the  rack  of  the  Inquisition,  but  truth  needs  not  such  unworthy 
aid  ;  her  own  beauty,  and  the  Spirit  of  God,  are  her  strength.  More- 
over, Jesus  used  no  arts  of  priestcraft,  or  tricks  of  superstition.  Ihe 
toolish  are  persuaded  of  a  dogma,  by  the  fact  that  it  is  promulgated  by 


JESUS,  THE  KING  OF  TRUTH.  33$ 

a  learned  doctor  of  hi^h  degree,  but  our  Rabboni  wears  no  sounding 
titles  of  honour ;  the  vulgar  imagine  that  a  statement  must  be  correct 
if  it  emanates  from  a  person  who  wears  lawn  sleeves,  or  from  a  place 
where  the  banners  are  of  costly  workmanship,  and  the  music  of  the 
sweetest  kind  :  these  things  are  arguments  with  those  who  are  amen- 
able to  no  other  ;  but  Jesus  owes  nothing  to  his  apparel,  and  influences 
none  by  artistic  arrangements.  None  can  say  that  he  reigns  over  men 
by  the  glitter  of  pomp,  or  the  fascination  of  sensuous  ceremonies.  His 
battle-axe  is  the  truth ;  truth  is  both  his  arrow  and  his  bow,  his  sword 
and  his  buckler.  Believe  me,  no  kingdom  is  worthy  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
but  that  which  has  its  foundations  laid  in  indisputable  verities ;  Jesus 
would  scorn  to  reign  by  the  help  of  a  lie. 

True  Christianity  was  never  promoted  by  policy  or  guile,  by  doing 
a  wrong  thing,  or  saying  a  false  thing.  Even  to  exaggerate  truth  is 
to  beget  error,  and  so  to  pull  down  the  truth  we  would  set  up.  There 
are  some  who  say,  "  Bring  out  one  line  of  teaching,  and  nothing  else,  lest 
you  should  seem  inconsistent."  What  have  I  to  do  with  that  ?  If  it 
be  God's  truth,  I  am  bound  to  deliver  it  all,  and  to  keep  back  none  of 
it.  Policy,  like  a  sailing  vessel,  dependant  on  the  wind,  tacks  about 
hither  and  thither;  but  the  true  man,  like  a  vessel  having  its  motive 
power  within,  goes  straight  onward  in  the  very  teeth  of  the  hurricane. 
When  God  puts  truth  into  men's  souls,  he  teaches  them  never  to  tack 
or  trim,  but  to  hold  to  truth  at  all  hazards.  This  is  what  Jesus  always 
did.  He  bore  witness  to  the  truth,  and  there  left  the  matter ;  being 
guileless  as  a  lamb. 

Here  it  will  be  fit  to  answer  the  question,  *'  What  truth  did  he  wit- 
ness to  ?"  Ah,  my  brethren,  what  truth  did  he  not  witness  to  ?  Did 
he  not  mirror  all  truth  in  his  life  ?  See  how  clearly  he  set  forth  the 
truth  that  God  is  love.  How  melodious,  how  like  a  peal  of  Christmas 
bells,  was  his  witness  to  the  truth  that  "  God  so  loved  the  world,  that 
he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  might 
not  perish  but  have  everlasting  life."  He  also  bore  witness  that  God 
is  just.  How  solemnly  he  proclaimed  that  fact !  His  flowing  wounds, 
his  dying  agonies  rang  out  that  solemn  truth,  as  with  a  knell  which 
even  the  dead  might  hear.  He  bore  witness  to  God's  demand  fur 
truth  in  the  inward  parts  ;  for  he  often  dissected  men  and  laid  them 
bare,  and  opened  up  their  secret  thoughts  and  discovered  them  to 
themselves,  and  made  them  see  that  only  sincerity  could  bear  the  eye 
or  God.  Did  he  not  bear  witness  to  the  truth  that  God  had  resolved 
to  make  for  himself  a  new  people  and  a  true  people  ?  Was  he  not  always 
telling  of  his  sheep  who  heard  his  voice,  of  the  wheat  which  would  be 
gathered  into  the  gamer,  and  of  the  precious  things  which  would 
be  treasured  up  when  the  bad  would  be  thrown  away  ?  Therein  he  was 
bearing  witness  that  the  false  must  die,  that  the  unreal  must  be  con- 
sumed, that  the  lie  must  rust  and  rot;  but  that  the  true,  the  sincere, 
the  gracious,  the  vital,  shall  stand  every  test,  and  outlast  the  sun.  In 
an  age  of  shams,  he  was  always  sweeping  away  pretences  and  estab- 
lishing truth  and  right  by  his  witness.  And  now,  beloved,  this 
is  the  way  in  which  Christ's  kingdom  is  to  be  set  up  in  the  world. 
For  this  cause  was  the  church  born,  and  for  this  end  came  she 
into  the  world,  that  she  might  set  up  Christ's  kingdom  by  bearing 


334  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

witness  to  the  truth.  I  long,  my  beloved,  to  see  you  all  witness- 
bearers.  If  you  love  the  Lord,  bear  witness  to  the  truth.  You 
must  do  it  personally  ;  you  must  also  do  it  collectively.  Never  join 
any  chuich  whose  creed  you  do  not  entirely  and  unfeignedly  believe, 
for  if  you  do  you  act  a  lie,  and  are,  moreover,  a  partaker  in  the  error 
of  other  men's  testimonies.  I  would  not  for  a  moment  say  any- 
thing  to  retard  Christian  unity,  but  there  is  something  before-  unity, 
and  that  is,  **  truth  in  the  inward  parts  "  and  honesty  before  God.  I 
dare  not  be  a  member  of  a  church  whose  teaching  I  knew  to  be  false  in 
vital  points.  I  would  sooner  go  to  heaven  alone  than  belie  my  conscience 
for  the  sake  of  company.  You  may  say,  "  But  I  protest  against  the  error 
of  my  church."  Dear  friends,  how  can  you  consistently  protest  against 
it  when  you  profess  to  agree  with  it,  by  being  a  member  of  the  church 
which  avows  it  ?  If  you  are  a  minister  of  a  church,  you  do  in  effect  say 
before  the  world,  "  I  believe  and  teach  the  doctrines  of  this  church;  "  and 
if  you  go  into  the  pulpit  and  say  you  do  not  believe  them,  what  will  people 
conclude  ?  I  leave  you  to  judge  that.  I  saw  a  church  tower  the  other  day, 
with  a  clock  upon  it,  which  startled  me  by  pointing  to  half-past  ten  when 
I  thought  it  was  only  nine ;  I  was,  however,  quite  relieved  when  I  saw 
that  another  face  of  the  clock  indicated  a  quarter  past  eight.  "  Well," 
thought  I,  "  whatever  time  it  may  be,  that  clock  is  wrong,  for  it  con- 
tradicts itself."  So  if  I  hear  a  man  say  one  thing  by°his  church- 
membership  and  another  by  his  private  protest,  why,  whatever  may  be 
right,  he  certainly  is  not  consistent  with  himself. 

Let  us  bear  witness  to  the  truth,  since  there  is  great  need  of  doing 
BO  just  now,  for  witnessing  is  in  ill  repute.  The  age  extols  no  virtue 
BO  much  as  "  liberality,"  and  condemns  no  vice  so  fiercely  as  bigotry, 
alias  honesty.  If  you  believe  anything  and  hold  it  firmly,  all  the  doga 
will  bark  at  you.  Let  them  bark :  they  will  have  done  when  they  are 
tired !  You  are  responsible  to  God,  and  not  to  mortal  men.  Christ 
came  into  the  world  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth,  and  he  has  sent  you  to 
do  the  same ;  take  care  that  you  do  it,  offend  or  please  ;  for  it  is  only 
by  this  process  that  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  to  be  set  up  in  the 
world. 

Now,  the  last  thing  is  this.  Our  Saviour,  having  spoken  of  his  king- 
dom and  the  way  of  establishing  it,  described  his  sdbjects  :  "  Everyone 
that  is  of  the  truth  heareth  my  voice."  That  is  to  say,  wherever  the 
Holy  Spirit  has  made  a  man  a  lover  of  truth,  he  always  recognises 
Christ's  voice  and  yields  himself  to  it.  Where  are  the  people  who  love 
the  truth  ?  Well,  we  need  not  enquire  long.  We  need  not  Diogenes' 
lantern  to  find  them,  they  will  come  to  the  light ;  and  where  is  light 
but  in  Jesus  ?  Where  are  those  that  would  not  seem  to  be  what  they 
are  not  ?  Where  are  the  men  who  desire  to  be  true  in  secret  and 
before  the  Lord  ?     They  may  be  discovered  where  Christ's  people  are 


JESUS,    THE   KING   OF   TRUTH.  335 

discovered  ;  they  will  be  found  listening:  to  those  who  bear  witness  to  the 
truth.  Those  who  love  pure  truth,  and  know  what  Christ  is,  will  be 
sure  to  fall  in  love  with  him  and  hear  his  voice.  Judge  ye,  then,  this 
day,  brethren  and  sisters,  whether  ye  are  of  the  truth  or  not  ;  for  if 
you  love  the  truth,  you  know  and  obey  the  voice  which  calls  you  away 
from  your  old  sins,  from  false  refuges,  from  evil  habits,  from  everthing 
which  is  not  after  the  Lord's  mind.  You  have  heard  him  in  your  con- 
science rebuking  you  for  that  of  the  false  which  remains  in  you  ; 
encouraging  in  you  that  of  the  true  which  is  struggling  there.  I  have 
done,  when  I  have  urged  on  you  one  or  two  reflections. 

The  first  is,  beloved,  Dare  we  avow  ourselves  on  the  side  of  truth  at 
this  hour  of  its  humiliation  ?  Do  we  own  the  royalty  of  Christ's  truth 
when  we  see  it  every  day  dishonoured.  If  gospel  truth  were  honoured 
everywhere,  it  would  be  an  easy  thing  to  say  "  I  believe  it ;"  but  now, 
in  these  days,  when  it  has  no  honour  among  men,  dare  we  cleave  to  it 
at  all  costs  ?  Are  you  willing  to  walk  with  the  truth  through  the 
mire  and  through  the  slough  ?  Have  you  the  courage  to  profess 
unfashionable  truth  ?  Are  you  willing  to  believe  the  truth  against 
which  science,  falsely  so-called,  has  vented  her  spleen  ?  Are  you 
willing  to  accept  the  truth  although  it  is  said  that  only  the  poor  and 
uneducated  -will  receive  it  ?  Are  you  willing  to  be  the  disciple  of  the 
Galilean,  whose  apostles  were  fishermen  ?  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
you,  in  that  day  in  which  the  truth  in  the  person  of  Christ  shall  come 
forth  in  all  its  glory,  it  shall  go  ill  with  those  who  were  ashamed  to 
own  it  and  its  Master. 

In  the  next  place,  if  we  have  heard  Christ's  voice,  do'we  recognise 
our  life-object  ?  Do  we  feel,  "  For  this  end  were  we  born,  and  for  this 
cause  came  we  into  the  world,  that  we  might  bear  witness  to  the 
truth  ?"  I  do  not  believe  that  you,  my  dear  brother,  came  into  the 
world  to  be  a  linendraper,  or  an  auctioneer,  and  nothing  else.  I  do 
not  believe  that  God  created  you,  my  sister,  to  be  merely  and  only  a 
sempstress,  a  nurse,  or  a  housekeeper.  Immortal  souls  were  not 
created  for  merely  mortal  ends.  For  this  purpose  was  I  born,  that,  with 
my  voice  in  this  place,  and  everywhere  else,  I  might  bear  witness  to  the 
truth.  You  acknowledge  that :  then  I  beg  you,  each  one,  to  acknow- 
ledge that  you  have  a  similar  mission.  '*  I  could  not  occupy  the 
pulpit,"  says  one.  Never  mind  that :  bear  witness  for  the  truth  where 
yeu  are,  and  in  your  own  sphere.  0  waste  no  time  or  energy,  but  at 
once  testify  for  Jesus. 

And  now,  last  of  all,  do  you  own  Christ's  superlative  dignity, 
beloved  ?  Do  you  see  what  a  King,  Christ  is  ?  Is  he  such  a  King 
to  you  as  none  other  could  be  ?  It  was  but  yesterday  .a  prince 
entered  one  of  our  great  towns,  and  they  crowded  all  their  streetb 
to  welcome  him — ^yet  he  was  but  a  mortal  man.      And  then  at  night 


36 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


they  illuminated  their  city,  and  made  the  heavens  ^low  as  though  the 
avm  had  risen  before  liis  appointed  hour.  Yet  what  had  this  prince 
<lone  for  them  ?  Loyal  subjects  were  they,  and  that  was  the  reason  of 
their  joy.  But  0,  beloved,  we  need  not  ask,  "What  has  Christ  done 
for  us  ?  " — we  will  ask,  '*  "What  has  he  not  done  for  us  ?"  Emmanuel, 
we  owe  all  to  thee !  Thou  art  our  new  creator,  our  Redeemer  from  the 
lowest  pit  of  hell  1  In  thyself  resplendent  and  altogether  lovely,  tliy 
beauties  command  our  adoration  1  Thou  hast  lived  for  us,  thou  hast 
bled  for  us,  thou  hast  died  for  us;  and  thou  art  preparing  a  king- 
dom for  us,  and  thou  art  coming  again  to  take  us  to  be  with  thee  where 
thon  art  I  All  this  commands  our  love.  All  hail  !  all  hail  1  Thou  art 
our  King,  and  we  worship  thee  with  all  our  soul ! 

Beloved,  I  beseech  you  love  Christ,  and  live  for  him  while  you  can. 
Work  while  opportunity  serves.  While  I  have  been  laid  aside,  and  able 
to  do  nothing,  the  great  sorrow  of  my  heart  has  been  my  inability  to 
do  him  service.  1  heard  my  brethren  shouting  in  the  battle-field,  and 
I  saw  my  comrades  marching  to  the  fight,  and  I  lay  like  a  wounded 
soldier  in  the  ditch,  and  could  not  stir,  save  that  I  breathed  a  prayer  that 
you  might  all  be  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power  of  his  might. 
This  was  my  thought :  "  Oh,  that  I  had  preached  better  while  I  could 
preach,  and  lived  more  for  the  Master  while  I  could  serve  him  !" 
Don't  incur  such  regrets  in  the  future  by  present  sluggishness,  but  live 
now  for  him  who  died  for  you  ! 

If  any  present  in  this  assembly  have  never  obeyed  our  King,  m;iy 
they  come  to  trust  in  him  to-night ;  for  he  is  a  tender  Saviour,  and  is 
willing  to  receive  the  biggest  and  blackest  sinner  who  will  come  to  hi.n. 
Whosoever  trusts  in  him,  will  never  find  him  fail ;  for  he  will  save  to 
the  uttermost  them  that  come  unto  God  by  him.  May  he  bring  you  co 
his  feet,  and  reign  over  you  in  love.     Amen. 


VoRTioN  OF  Scripture  read  before  Sermon— Psalm  Ixxx?. 


OUR  LORD'S  FIRST  APPEARANCE   BEFORE   PILATE. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  February  12th,  1882,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


"Pilate  saith  unto  them,  I  fiud  in  him  no  fault  at  all." — John  xviii.  38. 

I  SHOULD  like,  if  God  spares  us,  to  present  to  you  on  Sabbath  mornings 
the  full  story  of  our  Saviour's  sufferings.  We  began  last  Lord's-day 
by  going  with  him  to  the  hall  of  Caiaphas,  and  it  was  a  sadly  solemn 
time  when  we  beheld  the  Prince  of  Peace  a  prisoner,  heard  hini  falsely 
accused  and  unjustly  condemned,  and  then  saw  him  abused,  till  servants 
and  abjects  did  spit  in  his  face  and  make  a  mockery  of  him.  I  hope  that 
you  will  not  be  wearied  with  this  subject.  If  so,  it  will  be  the  fault  of  the 
preacher,  for  the  subject  is  ever  full  and  fresh :  or  if  the  preacher  be  not 
to  blame,  there  will  be  something  of  censure  due  to  his  hearers.  If  we  do 
grow  tired  of  the  story  of  the  cross  it  will  be  a  sad  indication  of  secret 
soul-sickness,  and  it  will  be  well  to  observe  the  symptom  and  hasten  to 
the  great  Physician  for  healing.  To  true  saints  in  a  healthy  condition 
there  is  no  place  more  attractive  than  the  place  of  our  Lord's  passion^ 
where  he  accomplished  the  glorious  work  of  our  redemption.  They  love 
to  linger  along  that  Via  Dolorosa  which  leads  from  Gethsemane  tO' 
Golgotha ;  let  us  linger  with  them. 

When  I  stand  and  view  my  Lord,  like  the  bush  in  Horeb,  burning  but 
not  consumed,  I  hear  a  voice  saying  unto  me,  "  The  place  whereon  thou 
standest  is  holy  ground."  Nothing  is  more  holy  than  the  person  of  our 
divine  Master  ;  it  is,  therefore,  well  to  be  with  him.  The  anguish 
which  he  endured  when  he  devoted  his  person  as  a  sacrifice  for  us  is 
holy  too,  and  so  it  is  well  to  be  with  him  in  his  sufferings.  His  sorrows 
have  a  most  sanctifying  influence  upon  all  who  consider  them  with 
believing  love.  lam  persuaded  that  if  we  lived  more  in  the  atmosphere 
of  the  cross  sin  would  lose  its  power,  and  every  grace  would  flourish. 
When  we  draw  very  near  to  him  and  have  fellowship  with  him  in  his 
sufferings  we  raise  a  hue  and  cry  against  the  sin  which  slew  him,  and 
resolve  to  be  revenged  upon  it  by  departing  from  it  ourselves,  and  by 
warring  against  it  whenever  we  see  it  in  others.  The  cross  is  that  holy 
implement  with  which  we  make  war  with  sin  till  it  be  utterly  destroyed. 
Blessed  and  holy,  then,  are  the  thoughts  which  are  aroused  by  qui-  great 
sacrifice. 

No.  1,644,  .    .  22 


338  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

Nor  is  it  only  so;  but  the  medicine  which  brings  us  health  is  in  itself 
a  joy. 

**  Sweet  the  moments,  rich  in  blessing, 
Which  bpfore  the  cross  I  spend, 
Lite,  and  health,  and  peace  possessing, 
In  the  sinner's  dying  Friend." 

Here  is  no  noise  as  of  them  that  make  merry  over  their  wine,  no  shout 
of  them  that  triumph,  no  song  of  them  that  feast ;  but  here  is  a  grnve, 
sweet  melody  as  of  hearts  that  have  foCind  rest.  At  the  cross  we  find  a 
substantial  joy,  a  far-reaching  satisfaction,  "  the  peace  of  God,  which 
passe th  all  understanding."  Here,  ye  restless  ones,  is  the  cure  of  rest- 
lessness :  here  shall  you  say,  "  0  God,  my  heart  is  fixed,  my  heart  is 
fixed.  I  will  sing  and  give  praise."  I  shall  not,  therefore,  make  any 
excuse,  even  if  for  weeks  to  come  I  should  lead  you  to  the  place  of 
dragons  where  your  Lord  was  sore  broken,  and  help  you  to  drink  of  his 
€up,  and  to  be  baptized  with  his  baptism.  May  the  Spirit  of  God  come 
upon  and  open  our  eyes  to  read  the  sacred  heart  of  him  whose  sorrows 
are  unrivalled, — sorrows  borne  for  love  of  us. 

Let  us  go  to  the  narrative  at  once  with  loving  and  lowly  carefulness. 
Our  Lord  was  condemned  by  the  chief  priests  for  blasphemy,  because 
he  declared  himself  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  and  told  them  that  they 
should  hereafter  see  him  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven  to  be  their 
judge.  Rending  his  garments,  the  high  priest  said,  "  AVhat  need  have 
we  of  any  further  witness  ?  Ye  have  heard  his  blasphemy."  When 
the  morning  light  had  come,  and  they  had  gone  through  the  formality 
of  a  set  trial  by  daylight,  having  really  condemned  him  in  the  night, 
they  led  Jesus  away  to  Pilate.  According  to  tradition,  he  was  led  with 
a  rope  about  his  neck,  and  his  hands  bound  ;  and  I  can  fully  believe 
in  the  tradition  when  I  remember  the  words  of  Isaiah  :  "  He  was  led 
as  a  sheep  to  the  slaughter."  It  was  a  strangely  sad  procession  which 
moved  through  Jerusalem  a  little  after  six  in  the  morning.  Those  men 
of  the  Sanhedrim  in  all  their  pomp  and  power  surrounding  this  one 
poor  victim,  whom  they  were  about  to  deliver  to  the  Gentiles  with  the 
one  design  that  he  might  be  put  to  death  !  Those  wicked  men  of 
pride  were  as  the  dogs  of  whom  the  Psalmist  sang  when  the  hind  of 
the  morning  was  his  tender  theme. 

When  they  came  to  the  house  of  the  Roman  governor,  they  would 
not  themselves  enter  within  its  doors.  It  is  said  to  have  been  one 
of  the  many  magnificent  palaces  which  Herod  the  Great  built  for 
himself;  the  architecture  was  gorgeous,  the  floors  were  inlaid  with 
choice  marbles,  and  all  the  chambers  were  richly  gilded  and  furnished 
with  Oriental  splendour.  Into  the  great  hall  these  scrupulous  hypocrites 
would  not  enter  because  they  must  by  no  means  be  defiled  by  the  touch 
of  a  Gentile,  for  they  had  already  commenced  to  keep  the  Passover. 
So  they  waited  in  the  courtyard,  and  Pilate  condescended  to  come  out 
to  them  and  learn  the  pressing  business  which  brought  them  there  so 
early  in  the  morning.  The  Roman  governor  was  proud,  and  cruel, 
and  abhorred  the  Jews ;  but  still,  knowing  their  fanaticism  and  the 
readiness  with  which  they  broke  loose  at  Passover  times,  he  stood  at  his 
palace-gate  and  heard  their  demands.  He  soon  ascertained  that  they 
had  brought  him  a  prisoner,  evidently  a  poor  man,  and  in  personal 


OUR  lord's  first   appearance   before   PILATE.  339 

appearance  emaciated,  weary,  and  suffering.  About  hina  there  was  a 
mysterious  dignity  combined  with  singular  gentleness,  and  Pilate  for 
this  and  other  reasons  evidently  took  a  singular  interest  in  him. 
Fixing  his  gaze  first  upon  the  extraordinary  prisoner,  he  turned  to 
the  angry  priests  and  demanded,  "What  accusation  bring  ye  against 
this  man  ?  " 

The  one  object  of  the  priests  in  bringing  Jesus  to  Pilate  was  to  get 
him  put  to  death  ;  for  when  Pilate  told  them  to  go  and  judge  him 
according  to  their  law,  they  replied  that  they  would  gladly  do  so,  but 
that  the  power  of  life  and  death  had  been  taken  from  them,  implying 
that  nothing  but  his  death  would  content  them.  They  were,  however, 
very  anxious  at  this  stage  to  lay  the  responsibility  of  his  death  upon 
the  Romans,  for  the  fear  of  the  people  was  still  upon  them,  and  if  they 
could  secure  his  death  by  Pilate,  then  they  might  in  after  days  protest 
that  they  merely  handed  him  over  to  the  Roman  governor  and  could 
not  foresee  that  he  would  be  handled  so  roughly.  They  had  not  yet 
bribed  the  populace  to  cry,  "  Crucify  him,"  and  they  were  Avilling  to  be 
on  the  safe  side  should  the  people  make  an  uproar  on  his  behalf. 
Humanly  speaking,  they  could  have  put  him  to  death  themselves,  for 
he  was  entirely  in  their  power,  and  they  frequently  forgot  the  Roman 
law  and  slew  men  in  riotous  fury,  as  when  they  stoned  Stephen.  They 
had  frequently  attempted  to  stone  our  Lord  himself,  so  that  they  were 
not  always  so  mindful  of  Roman  law.  They  might  have  taken  his  life 
on  this  occasion,  but  they  were  led  by  a  mysterious  impulse  to  desire 
that  the  actual  responsibility  of  the  deed  should  rest  on  Pilate.  Further 
on  they  were  willing  to  join  with  the  fickle  throng  in  sharing  the  guilt 
of  his  blood,  but  as  yet  they  would  fain  throw  it  upon  others.  During 
their  great  festivals  if  they  took  innocent  blood,  their  hypocrisy  made 
them  wish  to  do  it  by  forms  of  law  and  by  an  alien  hand.  To  do  this 
they  must  bring  an  accusation,  for  no  Roman  ruler  would  condemn  a 
man  till  an  accusation  had  been  made. 

We  shall,  this  morning,  consider  the  hvo  accusations  that  they  brought, 
and  after  that  we  shall  hear  the  verdict  of  acquittal  which  Pilate  gave 
in  the  language  of  the  text  :  "  I  find  in  him  no  fault  at  all." 

I.  The  first  accusation,  if  you  will  turn  to  the  chapter  and  read  the 
thirtieth  verse,  was  that  he  was  A  malefactor.  "  They  answered  and 
said  unto  him,  If  he  were  not  a  malefactor,  we  would  not  have  delivered 
him  up  unto  thee."  He  was  said  to  be  a  factor,  or  doer  of  that  which 
is  evil ;  a  person  of  such  a  mischievous  life  that  he  ought  not  to  live. 

Upon  which  we  remark,  first,  that  it  was  a  novel  charge.  It  was  hot 
^.from  their  mint;  for  when  he  stood  before  Caiaphas  nothing  was  said 
'  of  any  evil  that  he  had  done,  but  only  of  evil  that  he  had  spoken. 
They  charged  him  with  saying  this  and  that,  but  not  with  doing  any 
evil  deed.  The  accusation  of  evil  speaking  had  broken  down,  and  they 
did  not  venture  upon  it  a  second  time,  because  they  knew  very  well 
that  Pilate  did  not  care  what  the  man  had  said  ;  all  he  would  attend  to 
would  be  some  actual  breach  of  law  by  act  and  deed.  The  Romans 
were  a  practical  people,  and  so  when  Pilate  led  our  Lord  into  the 
audience  chamber  he  said  to  him,  "  What  hast  thou  done?"  He  did 
not  say  to  him,  "  What  hast  thou  taught  or  preached  ?  "  but,  "  What 
hast  thou  done  ? "     For  this  reason,  the  priests  brought  forward  this 


3)0  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

newly-inTented  accusation  and  totally  unfounded  charge  that  he  was  t^ 
bad  doer,  which  might  mean  little  or  much,  as  the  hearer  chose  to  in- 
terpret it, — malice  is  seldom  specific  in  its  charges.  The  accusation  of 
being  a  malefactor  grew  out  of  their  malevolence,  and  not  out  of  any 
action  of  our  Lord's  perfect  life.  One  is  surprised  that  even  hate- 
should  be  80  blind  as  to  assail  his  perfections.  Whatever  men  may 
think  of  our  Lord  as  a  teacher,  candour  demands  that  they  admire  his. 
example  and  award  it  the  highest  meed  of  honour. 

Observe,  the  priests  herein  brought  against  our  Lord  a  charge  which 
ihey  did  not  attempt  to  sustain.  How  craftily  they  evaded  the  task  of 
supplying  proof !  They  brought  no  witnesses,  their  suborned  perjurer* 
were  left  behind;  they  even  forbore  from  specific  charges^  but  the 
general  statement  that  he  was  a  malefactor  was  supported  only  by  their 
reputation.  **If  he  were  not  a  malefactor,  we  would  not  have  delivered 
him  up  unto  thee,"  as  much  as  to  say,  "You  must  take  it  for  granted  that, 
he  is  guilty,  or  we  would  not  say  so.  Here  is  our  high  priest :  can  it 
be  supposed  that  such  a  gem  of  an  individual  would  bring  a  false 
accusation  ?  We  also  are  the  chief  priests  and  the  scribes,  and  teachers 
of  Israel :  can  it  be  imagined  that  persons  of  our  station  and  sanctity 
could  by  any  possibility  have  brought  an  innocent  person  before  you  to- 
be  condemned  !"  This  style  of  argument  I  have  heard  even  in  these- 
days :  we  are  expected  to  give  up  the  faith  because  scientists  condemn: 
it,  and  they  are  such  eminent  persons  that  we  ought  to  accept  their  dicta, 
without  further  delay.  I  confess  I  am  not  prepared  to  accept  their  in- 
fallibility any  more  than  that  which  hails  from  Rome.  The  Roman 
governor  was  not  to  be  overriden  by  priests,  neither  are  we  to  be  led 
by  the  nose  by  pretendedly  learned  men.  "  If  he  were  not  a  malefactor,, 
we  would  not  have  delivered  him  up  unto  thee."  Oh,  the  hypocrisy  of 
this  speech !  They  had  tried  to  bring  witnesses,  and  no  witness  had  been 
found.  They  had  suborned  false  witnesses,  but  these  had  so  differed 
in  their  testimony  that  the  whole  thing  broke  down.  They,  therefore, 
go  upon  another  tack,  and  put  their  own  names  at  the  back  of  the  indict- 
ment, as  if  that  were  quite  enough,  and  enquiry  need  go  no  further.  I 
think  I  see  the  scornful  glance  of  Pilate  as  he  bade  them  judge  him 
themselves  if  that  was  their  style  of  justice ;  as  for  him,  he  must  hear 
an  accusation  or  dismiss  them  to  do  their  own  pleasure  if  they  dare* 
He  knew  that  through  envy  they  had  brought  Jesus  unto  him,  and  h& 
loathed  the  hypocrites  as  he  heard  the  wretched  syllables  sibillating 
from  their  sanctimonious  lips. 

They  could  not  have  sustained  the  charge,  and  so  far  they  were  wise  in 
not  attempting  the  impossible.  They  might  be  foolhardy  enough  to 
wrest  his  words,  but  they  hesitated  before  the  task  of  attacking  his 
deeds.  Before  his  awful  holiness  they  were  for  the  moment  out.of  heart, 
and  knew  not  what  slander  to  invent..  0  Lord,  we  marvel  that  any  men 
should  find  fault  with  thee,  for  thou  art  altogether  lovely,  and  there  is  in 
thee  no  spot  for  falsehood  to  light  upon.  But  I  want  to  call  your  atten- 
tion to  this  remarkable  fact,  that  although  this  charge  of  being  a  male- 
factor was  a  grievous  one,  a  trumped  up  one,  and  unsustained  by  any 
evidence,  yet  it  was  never  denied  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  was 
useless  to  deny  it  before  the  priests.  He  had  already  challenged 
them    to    find  fault    with    his   life,  saying,  "I  spake   openly   to  the 


OUE  LORD'S  FIKST   APPEiRANOB  BEFORE   PUATB.  841 

^orld-  I  ever  taught  in  the  synagogue    and  in  the  te^P'^;  «''\'^'«' 

ing,  for  t  was  as  useless  to  aigue  with  tliem  as  loi  a  i 

.controversy  with  a  pack  of  -°  -,^,-f  VX'Vnswerfng  to  pLte  Ibr 

■^f^an     What  have  I  done?    Certainly  nothing  wherefore  they  could 
itr-tolat'rut  everything  why  they  should  accej,t  me  as      er 

■The  death  ordained  for  b"n;vascruc,hx,on    John    ajs  .n  ^^ 

chapter  at  the  thuty-second  verse,  j^'f  ""■ 'X  =  l^uld  die."  What 
fulflVd,  wl,ich  l-;P"ke,  ^'g^);;;^  lyin'  '  th  ttlfth  chapter  of 
was  that   suy  mg .'     Is   it  not   tue   saym     u.  i  i 

John's  gospel  at  the  thirty-second  TS!;  ',,/;,' ^^ 5,  Kl  at  deatl. 
^arth  will  d-w  allmen  mUo  m  .    T^n     >e^  '^,.,^'8 „  y,^"^,„,,  „..,  , 

^:atr:lf.ch^':ou,d7l|»^^  -  ^—  -s/rconVeri 
l^'tl^^rrr  ro^4tr4^^^^^^^^^  He  had  s^ea 


842 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


even  more  expressly  in  a  passage  recorded  by  Matthew,  in  the  twentieth 
chapter  at  the  seventeenth  verse,  where  he  had  declared  how  he  shoulri 
die.  "  And  Jesus  going  up  to  Jerusalem  took  the  twelve  disciples  apart 
in  the  way,  and  said  unto  them,  Behold,  we  go  up  to  Jerusalem  ;  and 
the  Son  of  man  shall  be  betrayed  unto  the  chief  priests  and  unto  tlie 
scribes,  and  they  shall  condemn  him  to  death,  and  shall  deliver  him 
to  the  Gentiles  to  mock,  and  to  scourge,  and  to  crucify  him  r 
and  the  third  day  he  shall  rise  again."  In  order  that  the  word 
which  he  had  spoken  might  be  fufiUed,  our  blessed  Master  refused  to- 
plead  before  Pilate  anything  in  answer  to  the  question, "  What  hast  thou 
done  ? "  He  stands  as  a  transgressor,  to  die  a  transgressor's  death  ; 
wherefore  for  ever  blessed  be  his  adorable  name  for  his  voluntary 
endurance  of  penalty  for  our  sakes. 

When  I  think  of  that  word  "malefactor,"  another  word  leaps  to  my 
lips  directly.  Cull  him  not  malefactor,  but  benefactor.  What  a  benefac- 
tor must  he  be  who  in  order  to  benefit  us  allows  himself  to  be  branded 
&%  a  "  malefactor  "  !  Only  think  that  he  who  at  this  moment  sits  in  the 
centre  of  adoring  angels  should  have  been  called  "  malefactor ;  "  that  he 
from  whose  inexhaustible  store  of  goodness  all  the  saints  in  heaven  and 
on  earth  are  fed  should  yet  be  called  "  malefactor ; "  that  he  who  never 
thought  of  harm  to  men,  but  whose  very  soul  is  love,  whose  every  word 
and  thought  has  been  kindness  towards  this  fallen  race,  should  yet  be 
called  "malefactor."  0  earth,  how  couldst  thou  bear  so  grave  a  lie 
against  the  infinite  goodness  of  the  Son  of  God !  And  yet,  for  ever 
blessed  be  his  name,  he  does  not  hurl  back  the  charge,  for  that  would 
have  been  to  ruin  us.     He  meekly  bears  the  scandal  for  our  sakes. 

Should  not  this  sweeten  every  title  of  reproach  that  can  ever  fall  upon 
us  ?  What  if  they  call  us  ill  names  !  They  called  the  Master  of  the  home 
**  malefactor,"  can  they  call  us  anything  worse?  Shall  we  look  for 
honour  where  our  Captain  found  nothing  but  shame?  Wherefore  let  it 
be  our  glory  to  bear  shame  and  reproach  for  Jesus'  sake.  So  much  for 
the  first  accusation. 

II.  Secondly,  when  the  priests  and  scribes  found  that  merely  calling 
him  a  malefactor  was  not  sufficient,  these  wretched  men  changed  their 
tactics,  and,  according  to  Luke,  they  charged  him  with  setting  up  to  be 
A  KING.  They  said  that  he  wrought  sedition,  that  he  forbade  to  pay 
tribute  unto  Caisar,  and  made  himself  out  to  be  a  king.  These  were 
three  great  lies,  for  Jesus  had  preached  peace,  and  not  sedition ;  his- 
example  was  submission,  not  rebellion;  his  spirit  was  that  of  a  sers^ant,. 
not  that  of  a  turbulent  party  l(;ader.  Ue  had  never  said  that  mea 
were  not  to  pay  tribute  to  Cicsar ;  on  the  contrary,  he  had  said,. 
"Render  unto  Ciosar  the  things  that  are  Ctcsar's,"  and  submittei 
himself  to  every  ordinance  of  authority.  He  had  never  in  their  sense 
set  himself  up  to  be  a  king  ;  if  he  had  done  so,  many  who  were  no.y- 
his  accusers  might  have  been  his  partisans.  The  charge  against  Jesus 
of  setting  up  to  be  a  king  in  the  sense  in  which  they  desired  Pilate  to 
understand  them  ivas  uliedij  false,  lor  when  the  multitude  had  been 
fed,  they  would  have  taken  him  and  made  him  a  king,  bu:  he  hid 
himself.  Nay,  so  far  from  wishing  to  be  a  king,  when  one  said 
to  him,  **  Master,  speak  to  my  brother  that  he  divide  the  ijiheritance' 
with  me,"  he  said,  "  Who  made  me  a  judge  or  a  divider  over  you."  H^. 


OUR  lord's  first  ArPKARANCE  BEFORE  PILATE.  343 

pnt  aside  any  approach  to  interference  with  the  reigning  powers.  IIU 
accusers  must  have  known  that  if  he  had  willed  he  had  power  at  his  back 
to  have  supported  his  claims,  even  as  he  said  to  Pilate  that  if  he  had 
been  a  kino-  of  a  worldly  dominion,  his  servants  would  have  tought  tor 
him.  His  followers  had  been  brave  and  courageous,  and  enthusiastic, 
and  they  would,  no  doubt,  have  given  no  end  of  trouble  both  to  the  Jews 
atid  to  the  Romans  if  their  leader  had  claimed  a  temporal  sovereignty 
But  our  Lord  had  made  Peter  put  up  his  sword  into  its  sheath,  and 
healed  the  wound  which  he  had  given.  All  his  life  long  he  had  preached 
peace  and  love,  and  a  kingdom  which  is  righteousness  and  peace,  lie 
was  no  rival  to  Caesar,  and  they  knew  it.  .      ,    .  ^  -       ^-^ 

And  please  to  notice  that  this  charge  of  Christ  being  a  king  dta 
not  come  from  the  governing  power.  When  Pilate  asked  our  Lord, 
"Art  thou  the  King  of  the  Jews?"  our  Saviour  wisely  replied, 
"Sayest  thou  this  of  thyself,  or  did  another  tell  thee  it  of  me  ? 
Have  you  any  reason  to  think  that  I  am  a  leader  of  sedition?  As 
the  governor  of  this  nation  you  have  to  watch  carefully,  for  the  people 
are  seditious;  have  you  ever  seen  or  heard  anything  of  me  that 
looks  like  au  attack  on  your  authority  ?  Have  you  anything  of  your 
own  knowledge  that  would  lead  you  to  bring  a  charge  against  me  r; 
Pilate,  knowing  nothing  whatever  against  him,  and  indeed  scorning  the 
idea  that  he  knew  anything  about  the  Jewish  people,  whom  he  detested, 
replied  haughtily,  "Am  I  a  Jew  ?  Your  own  nation  and  your  own  rulers 
have  brought  this  charge  against  you,  not  L"  A  great  point  was 
gained  when  Pilate  said  this;  the  charge  was  shown  to  be  a  mere  in- 
vention, since  the  eagle^  eye  of  the  Roman  procurator  had  never  seen 
the  slightest  ground  for  it.  ^  .,      tt  u  tu  j. 

//  ivas  a  frivolous  charge  on  the  yery  face  of  it.  How  could  that 
harmless,  forsaken  man  be  a  peril  to  Caesar  ?  What  had  the  Roman 
leo-ions  to  fear  from  that  solitary  sufferer  ?  He  was  too  meek  and  pure  to 
tlfreaten  warfare  and  strife  in  the  domain  of  Tiberius.  Look  at  him,  and 
realize  the  absurdity  of  the  situation.  Moreover,  it  would  seem  a  strange 
thing  that  the  Jewish  people  should  bring  before  the  Roman  governor 
their  own  king.  Is  this  the  way  that  subjects  treat  their  monarehs  ? 
If  he  be  a  leader  of  sedition  he  does  not  seem  to  have  succeeded  with 
his  countrymen,  for  the  heads  of  the  people  are  seeking  his  death. 
There  could  be  upon  the  face  of  it  no  chance  of  danger  whatever  Irom 
rebellion  which  was  so  summarily  put  down  by  the  Jews  themselves  if 
they  had  not  been  besotted  by  their  rage,  they  would  themselves  have 
shrunk  from  so  absurd  a  position.  „     ,    ,  ..     r    ^  ^     •  7 

But  yet  I  want  you  to  note  very  carefully  that  the  Lord  never  amied 
this  cha.qe  in  the  sense  in  which  he  chose  to  understand  it.  He  lirst 
explained  what  he  meant  by  his  being  a  king,  and  when  he  had  explained 
it  then  he  openly  confessed  that  it  was  even  so. 

First,  I  say,  he  explained  tvhat  he  meant  hg  being  a  king,  and  notice 
carefully  that  he  did  not  explain  it  away.  He  said,  "My  kingdom, 
and  also  when  Pilate  said,  "  Art  thou  a  king  then  ?  he  said,  "  Ihou 
sayest  that  I  am  a  king."  He  was  there  and  then  a  real  king,  and 
he  avowed  it  without  reserve.  We  are  constantly  told  that  the  kingdom 
of  Christ  is  a  spiritual  kingdom,  and  this  saying  is  true;  but  1  would 
have  you  take  heed  that  you  do  not  spirit  away  his  kingdom  as  il  it 


^i  IIETROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

were  only  a  pious  dream.  Spiritual  or  not,  the  kingdom  of  Christ  on 
earth  is  real  and  powerful.  It  is  real  none  the  less,  but  all  the  more, 
because  it  may  fitly  be  called  spiritual.  Jesus  is  even  now  a  king. 
He  said,  "  I  am  a  king."  Some  say  that  his  kingdom  is  not  yet,  but  is 
reserved  for  the  latter  days ;  but  I  aver  that  he  is  a  king  to-day,  and 
that  even  now  Jehovah  hath  set  him  as  king  upon  the  holy  hill  of  Zion. 
I  bless  God  that  he  hath  translated  us  **  Into  the  kingdom  of  his  dear 
Son."  ''Thou  art  the  king  of  glory,  0  Christ."  When  I  say,  "Thy 
kingdom  come,"  I  do  not  mean  that  it  may  begin  to  be  set  up  on 
earth,  but  that  it  may  continue  to  be  set  up  in  new  places,  may  be 
extended  and  grow,  for  Jesus  has  at  this  very  moment  a  kingdom 
upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  they  that  know  the  truth  belong  to  it, 
and  recognise  him  as  the  royal  witness  by  whom  the  kingdom  of  truth 
has  been  founded  and  maintained.  You  remember  the  remarkable 
saying  which  is  attributed  to  Napoleon  Buonaparte  in  his  later  days  at 
St.  Helena  :  "  I  have  founded  a  kingdom  by  force,  and  it  has  passed 
away  ;  but  Jesus  founded  his  empire  upon  love,  and  therefore  it  will  last 
for  ever."  Verily,  Napoleon  spoke  the  truth — Jesus,  the  right  royal 
Jesus,  is  Master  of  innumerable  hearts  to-day.  The  world  knoweth  him 
not,  but  yet  he  has  a  kingdom  in  it  which  shall  ere  long  break  in 
pieces  all  other  kingdoms.  True  and  loyal  hearts  are  to  be  found  among 
the  sons  of  men,  and  in  them  his  name  still  wakes  enthusiasm,  so  that 
for  him  they  are  prepared  to  live  and  die.  Our  Lord  is  every  inch  a  king, 
he  has  his  throne  of  grace,  has  his  sceptre  of  truth,  his  officers  who,  like 
himself,  witness  to  the  truth,  and  his  armies  of  warriors  who  wrestle 
not  with  flesh  and  blood,  and  use  no  carnal  weapons,  but  yet  go  forth 
conquering  and  to  conquer.  Our  Lord  has  his  palace  wherein  he  dwells, 
his  chariot  in  which  he  rides,  his  revenues,  though  they  be  not  treasures 
of  gold  and  silver,  and  his  proclamations,  which  are  law  in  his  church. 
His  reigning  power  affects  the  destiny  of  the  world  at  this  present 
moment  far  more  than  the  counsels  of  the  five  great  powers :  by  the 
preaching  of  the  truth  his  servants  shape  the  ages,  and  set  up  and  cast 
down  the  thrones  of  earth.  There  is  no  prince  so  powerful  as  Jesus, 
and  no  empire  so  mighty  as  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

Our  Lord  also  said  that  his  kingdom  came  not  from  this  world ;  for 
that,  I  take  it,  is  the  more  correct  translation  of  the  passage:  "My 
kingdom  is  not  of  this  world."  It  came  not  from  this  world  ;  it  is  a 
substantial  kingdom,  but  it  did  not  spring  from  the  same  sources  as  the 
kingdoms  of  the  world,  neither  is  it  supported,  maintained,  or  in- 
creased by  the  same  power  as  that  which  the  kingdoms  of  the  world 
depend  upon.  Christ's  kingdom  does  not  depend  upon  the  force  of 
arms  :  he  would  have  his  followers  lay  these  weapons  all  aside. 
Christ's  kingdom  does  not  depend,  as  earthly  kingdoms  too  often  do, 
upon  craft,  policy,  and  duplicity.  It  used  to  be  said  that  an  ambas- 
sador was  a  gentleman  who  was  sent  abroad  to  lie  for  the  good  of 
his  country,  and  I  fear  it  might  still  describe  full  many  an  ambassador. 
What  is  the  science  of  diplomacy  but  the  art  of  deceit  ?  When  statesmen 
are  thoroughly  honest,  and  are  guided  by  principle,  they  are  generally 
suspected,  and  an  outcry  is  raised  that  the  interests  of  the  country  will 
be  sacrificed.  But  there  is  no  diplomacy  in  Christ's  rule ;  everything 
like  crooked  policy  is  of  the  devil,  a^id  not  of  Christ.     He  comes  to 


OUR   lord's   first   appearance   before   PITiATE.  345 

bear  witness  to  the  truth,  and  it  is  by  the  truth,  not  by  force  nor  by 
craft,  that  his  throne  is  established  among  the  sons  of  men,  and  there- 
fore it  is  not  from  this  world. 

To  be  a  king  is  indeed  so  little  wrong  in  the  sight  of  Jesus  that  it 
is  the  ultimate  purpose  of  his  coming  to  earth.  He  came  to  save  men, 
did  he  not?  Yes,  but  still  he  says,  "  For  this  purpose  was  I  born,  and 
for  this  cause  came  I  into  the  world,  that  I  should  bear  witness  unto 
the  truth";  which  is  another  way  of  saying,  "  that  I  might  be  a  king." 
jThis  is  his  ultimatum.  Christ  is  a  teacher  that  he  may  be  a  king; 
Christ  is  an  exemplar  that  he  may  be  a  king;  Christ  is  a  Saviour  that 
he  may  be  a  king ;  this  is  the  great  end  and  object  that  he  hath  in  his 
fife,  his  death,  his  resurrection,  and  his  second  coming, — that  he  may 
set  up  a  kingdom  among  the  sons  of  men  to  the  glory  of  God.  Oh 
that  this  great  object  of  his  mission  might  be  furthered  in  our  time, 
and  consummated  speedily  in  the  long-promised  age  of  gold. 

Tlie  Master  tells  us  that  the  main  force  and  power  of  his  kingdom 
lies  in  the  truth.  He  came  to  be  a  King,  but  where  is  his  sceptre?  The 
truth.  Where  is  his  sword  ?  It  cometh  out  of  his  mouth  :  he  bears  wit- 
ness to  the  truth.  Where  are  his  soldiers  ?  They  are  men  of  truth, 
Jesus  Christ  leads  on  a  band  of  whom  he  says,  "  And  ye  are  my 
witnesses."  His  kingdom  consists  in  witnessing  to  the  truth,  and  who 
are  they  that  become  his  subjects?  AVhy,  those  that  are  of  the  truth, 
men  who,  hearing  the  truth,  know  the  joyful  sound  and  accept  it,  and 
feel  its  power. 

Dear  hearers,  let  each  one  of  us  ask  himself,  "  Do  I  belong  to  his 
kingdom  ?  Will  I  have  this  man  to  reign  over  me  ?  Do  I  desire  to  get 
rid  of  everything  in  myself  that  is  not  true?  Am  I  anxious  to  put 
down  around  me  everything  that  is  false  and  wicked  ?  Do  I  wish  to 
uphold  God's  laws,  for  they  are  truth?  Do  I  desire  to  spread  the 
principles  of  love  and  kindness,  for  they  are  truth  ?  Am  1  willing 
to  learn,  and  so  become  the  disciple  of  the  greatest  of  all  teachers,  and 
then,  am  I  willing  to  bear  witness  to  what  I  have  learned,  and  so  spread 
the  sway  of  truth?  If  so,  then  I  am  of  his  kingdom.  I  know  that  I 
address  many  who  desire  in  their  hearts  to-day  that  Christ  and  his  truth 
may  triumph,  and  they  little  mind  what  becomes  of  themselves.  Let 
but  his  gospel  spread  and  the  principles  of  righteousness  prevail ;  and  as 
for  us,  let  us  live  or  die,  it  shall  be  a  matter  of  small  concern.  0  King, 
live  for  ever,  and  we  shall  find  our  life  in  thy  life,  and  glory  in  promoting 
thy  glory,  world  without  end.  Such  a  spirit  is  of  the  truth,  and  we  may 
assure  ourselves  that  Jesus  is  our  King. 

Oiir  Lord  having  explained  his  meaning,  confessed  that  he  ivas  a  King. 
This  is  that  to  which  Paul  refers  when  he  says,  "  The  Lord  Jesus, 
who  before  Pontius  Pilate  witnessed  a  good  confession."  He  did  not 
draw  back  and  say,  "lam  no  King."  Pilate  might  have  delivered  him 
then  ;  but  he  spake  boldly  concerning  his  blessed,  mysterious,  and  won- 
derful kingdom,  and  therefore  it  was  not  possible  that  he  should  be 
set  free.  This,  indeed,  was  his  accusation  written  over  his  cross,  "  This 
is  Jesus  the  King  of  the  Jews." 

Poor  Pilate,  he  did  not  understand  our  Lord,  even  as  the  men  of  this 
world  understand  not  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  He  said  to  him,  "  What 
is  truth  ?  "  and  without  waiting  for  a  reply  he  went  out  to  the  Jews. 


«  .g  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT 

Ah,  brethren,  let  US  never  onrsekes  deny  that  Jesus  is  a  king ;  but  we 
sliall  deny  it  if  we  do  not  live  according  to  his  bidding.  Oh  you  that 
claim  to  be  Christ's,  but  do  not  live  according  to  Christ's  laws,  you 
practically  deny  that  he  is  a  king.  I  dread  the  men  who  say,  "We 
believe,  and  therefore  we  are  saved,"  and  then  do  not  live  in  holiness ; 
for  these  divide  our  Lord's  offices,  setting  up  his  priesthood  and 
denying  his  kingship.  Half  a  Christ  is  no  Christ — a  Christ  who  is  a 
priest  but  never  a  king  is  not  the  Christ  of  God.  Oh  brethren,  live 
as  those  who  feel  that  every  word  of  Jesus  is  law,  and  that  you  must 
do  what  he  bids  you,  as  he  bids  you,  and  because  he  bids  you ;  and 
BO  let  all  men  know  that  unto  you  Jesus  is  both  Lord  and  God. 

in.  I  conclude  by  noticing  the  acquittal  which  Pilate  gave  to 
our  Lord  Jesus.  He  had  heard  the  charge  of  being  a  malefactor,  to 
which  the  prisoner  pleaded,  nothing  ;  he  had  heard  the  charge  of  his 
being  a  king,  which  the  prisoner  had  most  satisfactorily  explained;  and 
now  Pilate  coming  out  to  the  people  said,  ^'I  find  in  him  no  fault  at  all." 
Pilate,  thou  hast  well  spok--  .  Tliy  verdict  is  typical  of  the  verdict  of 
all  who  have  ever  examined  Christ.  Some  have  examined  him  with  an 
unfriendly  eye,  but  in  proportion  as  they  have  been  candid  in  the 
observation  of  facts,  they  have  been  struck  with  his  life  and  spirit.  It 
is  a  very  rare  thing  to  hear  even  the  infidel  rail  at  the  character  of 
Jesus ;  in  fact,  some  of  the  foremost  sceptics  as  to  our  Lord's  teacliing 
liave  been  remarkably  impressed  with  admiration  of  his  life.  No 
character  like  that  of  Jesus  is  to  be  seen  in  history,  nay  not  even  in 
romance.  If  anyone  says  the  four  gospel  are  forgeries,  let  him  try  to 
Avrite  a  fifth,  which  shall  be  like  the  other  four.  Why,  you  cannot  add 
an  incident  to  the  life  of  Christ;  its  details  are  unique;  the  fancy 
cannot  imagine  a  fresh  incident  which  could  be  safely  joined  on  to 
that  which  is  recorded.  Every  critic  would  cry  out,  "  This  is  not 
genuine."  The  life  of  Jesus  is  a  roll  of  cloth  of  gold,  of  the  manufacture 
of  which  the  art  is  utterly  lost.  His  spotless  character  stands  alone 
and  by  itself,  and  all  true  critics  are  compelled  to  say  they  fiud  no 
fault  at  all  in  him. 

Let  me  add  that  this  verdict  of  Pilate  is  the  verdict  of  all  that  have 
ever  associated  with  Christ.  One  disciple  who  was  with  Christ  betrayed 
him,  but  he  spoke  nothing  against  him.  Nay,  the  last  witness  of 
Judas  before  he  hanged  himself  was  this,  "I  have  sinned  in  that  I 
have  betrayed  the  innocent  blood."  If  there  had  been  a  fault  in  Jesus, 
the  traitor  would  have  spied  it  out;  his  unquiet  conscience  would  have 
been  glad  enough  to  find  therein  a  sedative,  but  even  he  was  compelled 
to  say,  "  I  have  betrayed  the  innocent  blood."  "  Which  of  you  convinceth 
me  of  sin  ?  "  is  the  challenge  of  Jesus,  to  which  there  is  no  reply. 

Some  of  us  have-  lived  ivilh  Christ  spiritually.  In  the  course  of  his 
providence  he  has  brought  some  of  us  very  low  by  sickness,  or  by 
bereavement,  or  loss.  Everyone  saved  by  our  Lord  has  come  under 
the  discipline  of  his  house,  for  "  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth, 
and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  he  receiveth."  Now,  what  is  the 
verdict  of  all  here  present  who  know  Jesus,  our  king  ?  For  my 
part,  I  find  no  fault  at  all  in  him.  He  is  everything  that  is  lovely. 
He  is  all  my  salvation  and  all  my  desire.  ,  Do  you  not  think  that  out 
of  the  millions  of  Christians  who  have  lived  hoping  in  Christ  some  one 


OUR  LOKD'S   first   appearance   before   PILATE.  347 

would  have  told  us  if  it  is  his  habit  to  disappoint  his  people?  Out  of 
so  many  believers  who  dwell  with  him  surely  some  one  or  other  of  them, 
when  they  came  to  die,  would  have  told  us  if  he  is  not  all  that  he  pro- 
fesses to  be.  Would  not  some  one  or  other  have  confessed,  "  I  trusted 
in  Christ  and  he  has  not  delivered  me;  it  is  all  a  delusion"?  Surely, 
out  of  the  many  we  have  seen  depart  we  should  have  found  some  one 
or  two  that  would  have  let  out  the  secret,  and  have  said,  "  He  is  a 
deceiver.  He  cannot  save,  he  cannot  help,  he  cannot  deliver."  But 
never  one  dying  believer  throughout  the  ages  has  spoken  ill  of  him,  but 
all  have  said,  "  We  find  no  fault  at  all  in  him." 

Mark  you,  that  will  be  the  verdict  of  everyone  among  you  all.  If  any 
of  you  reject  Christ,  when  you  shall  stand  at  his  judgment-seat  to  be 
condemned  because  you  believe  not  on  him,  and  when  that  withering 
word,  "  Depart,  ye  cursed  ! "  shall  consign  you  to  your  everlasting 
portion,  you  shall  then  be  obliged  to  say,  "  I  find  no  fault  at  all  in  him:' 
There  was  no  failure  in  his  blood,  the  failure  was  in  my  want  of  faith  ;  no 
failure  in  his  Spirit— the  failure  was  in  my  obstinate  will  ;  no  failure 
in  his  promise— the  failure  was  that  I  would  not  receive  him  ;  there  was. 
no  fault  at  all  in  him.  He  never  spurned  me.  He  never  refused  to  hear  my 
])rayers.  If  my  Sabbaths  were  wasted,  it  was  no  fault  of  his  ;  if  I  defied 
the  gospel,  it  was  no  fault  of  his  ;  if  I  have  perished,  my  blood  is  at  my 
own  door.  I  find  no  fault  at  all  in  him."  From  all  parts  of  creation 
shall  go  up  one  general  attestation  to  his  perfection.  Heaven  and  earth 
and  hell  shall  all  join  the  common  verdict,  "  We  find  no  fault  at  all  in 
him." 

I  will  send  you  away  when  I  give  you  three  practical  words  to  think 
of.  The  first  is  this  :— Beware  of  an  external  religion,  for  the  men 
that  called  Jesus  malefactor  and  falsely  accused  him  were  very  religious 
people,  and  would  not  gp  into  Pilate's  hall  for  fear  of  polluting  them- 
selves. They  were  strong  in  rituals,  but  weak  in  morals.  None  are  so- 
inveterate  against  the  principles  pf  the  gospel  as  those  ^  whose  rcligioit. 
consists  in  form  and  ceremony  but  does  not  affect  thqir  hearts.  I 
charge  you  rend  your  hearts  and  not  your  garments.  Follow  Christ. 
spiritually  ;  follow  Christ  in  your  very  souls,  or  else  sacraments  will  be 
your  ruin,  and  even  in  trying  to  keep  yourselves  from  ceremonial 
defilement  you  will  be  defiling  yourselves  \\  ith  hypocrisy. 

The  next  thing  is  to  charge  you,  dear  friends,  and  to  charge  myself 
also,  to  shun  all  proud  worldliness  like  that  of  Pilate.  Pilate  treats  the 
whole  matter  cavalierly  ;  he  is  a  proud  and  haughty  Roman  ;  he  hates 
the  people  whom  he  governs,  and 'though  he  has  a  conscience,  and  at  the 
first  he  shows  a  tenderness  towards  his  prisoner,  yet  his  chief  end  and 
aim  was  to  keep  his  office  and  amass  money,  and  therefore  innocent, 
blood  must  be  spilt  He  must  please  the  Jews,  even  if  he  murder 
the  "Just  One."  This  selfish  worldliness  in  which  a  man  makes  his- 
gold  and  himself  his  god  always  treats  religion  with  contempt. 
The  man  minds  the  main  chance,  and  sneeringly  cries,  *'AVhat  is- 
truth  ?"  He  knows  what  money  is  and  what  power  is,  but  v\hat  ii> 
truth  ?  It  is  a  dream,  a  folly  to  him,  and  he  despises  it.  There  are 
persons  around  us  now,  clever  time-serving  men,  with  grand  notions  of 
their  own  abilities,  and  to  them  Jesus  and  his  gospel  are  matters  for 
old  women,  servant  girls,  and  what  they  call  a  Puritan  crew.    Such  topics 


348 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNAOT.K   PULPIT. 


nro  not  for  gentlemen  of  thoujjhfc,  culture,  and  understnu'^linc^,  like  fho\t 
hio^h  and  mighty  selves.  "  What  is  truth  ?"  say  they.  Tliey  are  rather 
favourably  inclined  to  religion,  that  is  to  say,  they  do  not  persecute,  but 
they  despise,  which  in  some  respects  is  worse.  They  say,  "  We  are 
agnostics  ;  we  have  no  particular  views ;  we  are  large-hearted,  and  let 
€very  man  think  as  he  chooses,  but  still  there  is  notiiing  in  it;  it  is  all 
matter  of  opinion.  One  man  says  this  is  the  truth,  and  another  says 
that  is  the  truth,  and  how  are  we  to  know  ?  The  fact  is,  there  is  no 
fsuch  thing  as  fixed  truth  at  all. 

"For  differing  creeds  let  graceless  zealots  figbt; 
He  can't  be  wrong  whose  life  is  in  the  right." 

This  is  this  great  man's  conclusion  of  the  matter,  and  yet  it  so  happens 
that  this  gentleman's  life  is  not  in  the  right  at  all,  and  therefore  on 
his  own  showing  he  has  not  much  joy  of  his  pretty  rhyme.  I  think 
I  see  him  as  he  turns  on  his  heel  with,  "What  is  truth  ?  "  Let  him  be 
a  warning  to  you.  Gome  not  near  to  such  arrogant  trifling.  Be  always 
foolish  enough  to  be  willing  to  judge  candidly.  Be  so  little  clever 
as  to  be  willing  still  to  learn.  Be  so  little  certain  of  your  own  infallibility 
that  you  will  at  least  hear  reason,  and  will  enquire  whether  these  things 
be  so.  Alas,  I  fear  that  through  worldly  pride  many  will  have  it  said  of 
them,  as  it  is  said  of  the  Roman  governor  every  day  in  the  creed: 
*'  Suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate."  Oh,  how  many  times  has  Christ 
suffered  under  just  such  people  as  Pontius  Pilate  ! 

Last  of  all,  let  us  all  submit  ourselves  to  Jesus  our  King.  Wayworn 
and  weary,  emaciated  and  broken  down,  with  his  face  more  marred  than 
that  of  any  man,  yet  let  us  bow  before  him  and  say,  **A11  hail,  thou 
King  of  the  Jews.  Thou  art  our  King  for  ever  and  ever."  If  we  are 
willing  thus  to  acknowledge  him  as  our  King  in  his  shame  and  derision, 
iie  will  by-and-by  honour  us  when  he  cometh  in  the  glory  of  the 
Father,  and  all  his  holy  angels  with  him.  Then  shall  he  cause  it  to  be 
seen  that  he  hath  made  us  who  follow  him  to  be  kings  and  priests  unto 
Ood,  and  we  shall  reign  with  him  for  ever  and  ever.    Amen. 


Portions  of  Scripture  Read  before  Sermon — John  xviii.  28— 40j 

Psalm  ii. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 414,  431,  360. 


BAEABBAS  PREFERRED  TO  JESUS. 

i)BLIVERED  ON  SUNDAT  MORNING,   OCTOBER   16TH,    1864,  BT 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"  Then  cried  they  all  again,  saying,  Not  this  man,  but  Barabbas.     Now  Barabbai 
was  a  robber." — John  xviii.  40. 

The  custom  of  delivering  a  prisoner  upon  the  day  of  the  passover  was 
intended  no  doubt  as  an  act  of  grace  on  the  part  of  the  Roman 
authorities  towards  the  Jews,  and  by  the  Jews  it  may  have  been 
accepted  as  a  significant  compliment  to  their  passover.  Since  on  that 
day  they  themselves  were  delivered  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt, 
they  may  have  thought  it  to  be  most  fitting  that  some  imprisoned 
person  should  obtain  his  liberty.  There  was  no  warrant  however  in 
Scripture  for  this,  it  was  never  commanded  by  God,  and  it  must 
have  had  a  very  injurious  effect  upon  public  justice,  that  the  ruling 
authority  should  discharge  a  criminal,  some  one  quite  irrespective  o 
his  crimes  or  of  his  repentance;  letting  him  loose  upon  society,  simply 
and  only  because  a  certain  day  must  be  celebrated  in  a  peculiar  manner. 
Since  some  one  prisoner  must  be  delivered  on  the  paschal  day,  Pilate 
thinks  that  he  has  now  an  opportunity  of  allowing  the  Saviour  to 
escape  without  at  all  compromising  his  character  with  the  authorities  at 
Rome.  He  asks  the  people  which  of  the  two  they  will  prefer,  a  notorious 
thief  then  in  custody,  or  the  Saviour.  It  is  probable  that  Barabbas  had 
been  up,  till  that  moment,  obnoxious  to  the  crowd;  and  yet,  notwith- 
standing his  former  unpopularity— the  multitude,  instigated  by  the 
priests,  forget  all  his  faults,  and  prefer  him  to  the  Saviour.  "Who 
Barabbas  was,  we  cannot  exactly  tell.  His  name,  as  you  in  a  moment 
will  understand,  even  if  you  have  not  the  slightest  acquaintance  with 
Hebrew,  signifies  "his  father's  son,"  ''Bar''  signifying  "son,"  as  when 
Peter  is  called  Simon  Bar-jonas,  son  of  Jonas;  the  other  part  of  his  name 
''Abbas,''  signifying  "  father "— "  abbas "  being  the  word  which  we  use  iD 
'  our  filial  aspirations,  "  Abba  Father."  Barabbas,  then,  is  the  "  son  of 
his  father;"  and  some  mysticists  think  that  there  is  an  imputation 
here,  that  he  was  particularly  and  specially  a  son  of  Satan.  Others 
conjecture  that  it  was  an  endearing  name,  and  was  given  him  because 
he  was  his  father's  darling,  an  indulged  child;  his  father's  boy,  as  we 
say;  and  these  writers  add  that  indulged  children  often  turn  out  to  be 
imitators  of  Barabbas,  and  are  the  most  likely  persons  to  become 
injurious  to  their  country,  griefs  to  their  parents,  and  curses  to  all 
No.  595. 


350  MBTROPOLTTAN  TABERNACLE  FtJLPIT. 

about  them.  If  it  be  so,  taken  in  connection  with  the  case  of  Absalom, 
and  especially  of  Eli's  sons,  it  is  a  warning  to  parents  that  they  err  not 
in  excessive  indulgence  of  their  children.  Barabbas  appears  to  have 
committed  three  crimes  at  the  least:  he  was  imprisoned  for  murder, 
for  sedition,  and  for  felony — a  sorry  combination  of  offences,  certainly; 
we  may  well  pity  the  sire  of  such  a  son.  This  wretch  is  brought  out  and 
set  in  competition  with  Christ.  The  multitude  are  appealed  to.  Pilate 
thinks  that  from  the  sense  of  shame  they  really  cannot  possibly  prefer 
Barabbas;  but  they  are  so  bloodthirsty  against  the  Saviour,  and  are  so 
moved  bv  the  priests,  that  with  one  consent — there  does  not  appear  to 
have  been  a  single  objecting  voice,  nor  one  hand  held  up  to  the  contrary — 
with  a  marvellous  unanimity  of  vice,  they  cry,  "Not  this  man,  but 
Barabbas,"  though  they  must  have  known,  since  he  was  a  notable 
well-known  offender,  that  Barabbas  was  a  murderer,  a  felon,  and  a 
traitor. 

This  fact  is  very  significant.  There  is  more  teaching  in  it  than  at 
first  sight  we  might  imagine.  Have  we  not  here,  first  of  all,  in  this  act 
of  the  deliverance  of  the  sinner  and  the  binding  of  the  innocent,  a  sort 
of  type  of  that  great  work  which  is  accomplished  by  the  death  of  our 
Saviour?  You  and  I  may  fairly  take  our  stand  by  the  side  of  Barabbaj. 
We  have  robbed  God  of  his  glory;  weTiave  been  seditious  traitors  against 
the  government  of  heaven:  if  he  who  hateth  his  brother  be  a  murderer, 
we  also  have  been  guilty  of  that  sin.  Here  we  stand  before  the  judgment- 
seat;  the  Prince  of  Life  is  bound  for  us  and  we  are  suffered  to  go  free. 
The  Lord  delivers  us  and  acquits  us,  while  the  Saviour,  without  spot  or 
blemish,  or  shadow  of  a  fault,  is  led  forth  to  crucifixion.  Two  birds 
were  taken  in  the  rite  of  the  cleansing  of  a  leper.  The  one  bird  was 
killed,  and  its  blood  was  poured  into  a  basin;  the  other  bird  was  dipped 
in  this  blood,  and  then,  with  its  wings  all  crimson,  it  was  set  free  to  fly 
into  the  open  field.  The  bird  slain  well  pictures  the  Saviour,  and  every 
soul  that  has  by  faith  been  dipped  in  his  blood,  flies  upward  towards 
heaven  singing  sweetly  in  joyous  liberty,  owing  its  life  and  its  liberty 
entirely  to  him  who  was  slain.  It  comes  to  this,  Barabbas  must  die 
or  Christ  must  die;  you  the  sinner  must  perish,  or  Christ  Immanuel,  the 
Immaculate,  must  die.  He  dies  that  we  may  be  delivered.  Oh  !  have 
we  all  a  participation  in  such  a  deliverance  to-day  ?  and  though  we 
have  been  robbers,  traitors,  and  murderers  yet  we  can  rejoice  that 
Christ  has  delivered  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  having  been  made  a 
curse  for  us  ?  .       , 

The  transaction  has  yet  another  voice.  This  episode  in  the  Saviours 
history  shows  that  in  the  judgment  of  the  people,  Jesus  Christ  was  a 
greater  offender  than  Barabbas;  and,  for  once,  I  may  venture  to  say,  that 
voxpopuli  (the  voice  of  the  people),  which  in  itself  was  a  most  infamous 
injustice,  if  it  be  read  in  the  light  of  the  imputation  of  our  sins  to 
Christ,  was  vox  Dei  (the  voice  of  God).  Christ,  as  he  stood  covered 
with  his  people's  sins,  had  more  sin  laid  upon  him  than  that  which 
rested  upon  Barabbas.  In  him  was  no  sin;  he  was  altogether  incapable 
of  becoming  a  sinner:  holy,  harmless,  and  undefiled  is  Christ  Jesus,  but  he 
tekes  the  whole  load  of  his  people's  guilt  upon  himself  by  imputation, 
and  as  Jehovah  looks  upon  him,  he  sees  more  guilt  lying  upon  the 
Saviour,  than  even  upon  this  atrocious  sinner,  Barabbas.  Barabbas 
ijoes  free—innocent— in  comparison  with  the  tremendous  weight  which 


BARABBAS  PREFERRED  TO  JESUS.  35 1 

rests  upon  the  Saviour.     Think,  beloved,  then,  how  low  your  Lord  and 
Master  stooped  to  be  thus  numbered  with  the  transgressors.     Watts  has 
put  it  strongly,  but,  I  think,  none  too  strongly — 
"  His  honour  and  his  breath 

Were  taken  both  away, 
Join'd  with  the  wicked  in  his  death, 
And  made  as  vile  as  they." 

He  was  so  in  the  estimation  of  the  people,  and  before  the  bar  of  justice, 
for  the  sins  of  the  whole  company  of  the  faithful  were  made  to  meet 
upon  him.  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  upon  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  What 
that  iniquity  must  have  been,  no  heart  can  conceive,  much  less  can  any 
tongue  tell.  Measure  it  by  the  griefs  he  bore,  and  then,  if  you  caa 
guess  what  these  were,  you  can  form  some  idea  ©f  what  must  have  been 
the  guilt  which  sunk  him  lower  before  the  bar  of  justice  than  even 
Barabbas  himself.  Oh!  what  condescension  is  here!  The  just  One  dies 
tor  the  unjust.  He  bears  the  sin  of  many,  and  makes  intercession  for 
the  transgressors. 

Yet,  again,  there  seems  to  me  to  be  a  third  lesson,  before  I  come  to 
that  which  I  want  to  enforce  from  the  text.  Our  Saviour  knew  that  his 
disciples  would  in  all  ages  be  hated  by  the  world  far  more  than  outward 
sinners.  Full  often  the  world  has  been  more  willing  to  put  up  with 
murderers,  thieves,  and  drunkards,  than  with  Christians;  and  it  has 
fallen  to  the  lot  of  some  of  the  best  and  most  holy  of  men  to  be  so 
slandered  and  abused  that  their  names  have  been  cast  out  as  evil, 
scarcelv  worthy  to  be  written  in  the  same  list  with  criminals.  Now, 
Christ  "has  sanctified  these  sufferings  of  his  people  from  the  slander  of 
their  enemies,  by  bearing  just  such  sufferings  himself,  so  that,  my  brethren, 
if  you  or  I  should  find  ourselves  charged  with  crimes  which  we  abhor, 
if  our  heart  should  be  ready  to  burst  under  the  accumulation  of 
slanderous  venom,  let  us  lift  up  our  head  and  feel  that  in  all  this  we 
have  a  comrade  who  has  true  fellowship  with  us,  even  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  who  was  rejected  when  Barabbas  was  selected.  Expect  no  better 
treatment  than  your  Master.  Remember  that  the  disciple  is  not  above 
"Fis"  Lor3r~if  theyTiave  called  the  Master  of  the  house  Beelzebub,  much 
more  will  they  call  them  of  his  household  ;  and  if  they  prefer  the  mur- 
derer to  Christ,  the  day  may  not  be  distant  when  they  will  prefer  even  a 
murderer  to  you. 

These  things  seem  to  me  to  lie  upon  the  surface;  I  now  come  to  our 
more  immediate  subject.  First,  we  shall  consider  the  sin  as  it  stands  in 
the  Evangelical  history;  secondly,  we  shall  observe  that  this  is  the  sin  of 
the  whole  world;  thirdly,  that  this  sin  we  ourselves  were  guilty  of  before 
conversion;  and  fourthly,  that  this  is,  we  fear,  tlm  sin  of  very  many 
persons  who  are  here  this  morning:  we  shall  talk  with  them  and 
expostulate,  praying  that  the  Spirit  of  God  may  change  their  hearts  and 
lead  them  to  accept  the  Saviour. 

L    A  few  minutes  may  be  profitably  spent  in  considering,  then, 

THE   sin  as  we   find   IT   IN  THIS  HISTORY. 

They  preferred  Barabbas  to  Christ.  The  sin  will  be  more  clearly  seen 
if  we  remember  that  the  Saviour  had  done  no  ill.  No  law,  either  of 
God  or  man,  had  he  broken.  He  might  truly  have  used  the  words  of 
Samuel — "Behold,  here  I  am:  witness  against  me  before  the  Lord,  and 
before  his  anointed:  whose  ox  have  I  taken?  or  whose  ass  have  I  taken? 


352 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


or  whom  have  I  defrauded  ?  whom  have  I  oppressed  ?  or  of  whose  hand 
have  I  received  any  bribe  to  blind  mine  eyes  therewith  ?  and  I  will 
restore  it  you."  Out  of  that  whole  assembled  crowd  there  was  not  one 
who  would  have  had  the  presumption  to  accuse  the  Saviour  of  having 
done  him  damao^e.  So  far  from  this,  they  could  but  acknowledge  that 
he  had  even  conferred  great  temporal  blessings  upon  them.  0  ravening 
multitude,  has  he  not  fed  you  when  you  were  hungry?  Did  he  not 
multiply  the  loaves  and  fishes  for  you?  Did  he  not  heal  your  lepers 
with  his  touch?  cast  out  devils  from  your  sons  and  daughters?  raise  up 
you  paralytics?  give  sight  to  your  blind,  and  open  the  ears  of  your 
deaf?  For  which  of  these  good  works  do  ye  conspire  to  kill  him? 
Among  that  assembled  multitude,  there  were  doubtless  some  who 
owed  to  him  priceless  boons,  and  yet,  though  all  of  them  his  debtors 
if  they  had  known  it,  they  clamour  against  him  as  though  he  were 
the  worst  trouble  of  their  lives,  a  pest  and  a  pestilence  to  the  place 
where  he  dwelt.  Was  it  his  teaching  that  t/iey  complained  of?  Wherein 
did  his  teaching  offend  against  morality?  Wherein  against  the  best 
interests  of  man  ?  If  you  observe  the  teaching  of  Christ  there  was 
never  any  like  it,  even  judged  of  by  how  far  it  would  subserve  human 
welfare.  Here  was  the  sum  and  substance  of  his  doctrine,  "  Thou  shalt 
love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  thy  neighbour  as  thyself.'* 
His  precepts  were  of  the  mildest  form.  Did  he  bid  them  draw  the 
sword  and  expel  the  Roman,  or  ride  on  in  a  ruthless  career  of  carnage, 
and  rapine?  Did  he  stimulate  them  to  let  loose  their  unbridled  passions? 
Did  he  tell  them  to  seek  first  of  all  their  own  advantage  and  not  to  care 
for  their  neighbour's  weal?  Nay,  every  righteous  state  must  own 
him  to  be  its  best  pillar,  and  the  commonwealth  of  manhood  must 
icknowledge  him  to  be  its  conservator ;  and  yet,  for  all  this,  there  they 
are,  hounded  on  by  their  priests,  seeking  his  blood,  and  crying,  "  Let 
him  be  crucified!  let  him  be  crucified!"  His  tvJwle  i^itent  evidently  was 
their  good.  What  did  he  preach  for?  No  selfish  motive  could  have 
been  urged.  Foxes  had  holes,  and  the  birds  of  the  air  had  nests,  but 
he  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head.  The  charity  of  a  few  of  his  dis- 
ciples alone  kept  him  from  absolute  starvation.  Cold  mountains,  and 
the  midnight  air,  witnessed  the  fervour  of  his  lonely  prayers  for  the 
multitudes  who  now  are  hating  him.  He  lived  for  others:  they  could 
see  this;  they  could  not  have  observed  him  during  the  three  years  of  his 
ministry  without  saying,  "Never  lived  there  such  an  unselfish  soul  as 
this;"  they  must  have  known,  the  most  of  them,  and  the  rest  might 
have  known,  had  they  enquired  ever  so  little,  that  he  had  no  object 
whatever  in  being  here  on  earth,  except  that  of  seeking  the  good  of 
men.  For  which  of  these  things  do  they  clamour  that  he  may  be  crucified? 
For  which  of  his  good  works,  for  which  of  his  generous  words,  for  which 
of  his  holy  deeds  will  they  fasten  his  hands  to  the  wood,  and  his  feet  to 
the  tree?  With  unreasonable  hatred,  with  senseless  cruelty,  they  only 
answer  to  the  question  of  Pilate,  "  Why,  what  evil  hath  he  done  ? " 
"  Let  him  be  crucified !  let  him  be  crucified ! "  The  true  reason  of 
their  hate,  no  doubt,  lay  in  the  natural  hatred  of  all  men  to  perfect 
goodness.  Man  feels  that  the  presence  of  goodness  is  a  silent  witness 
against  his  own  sin,  and  therefore  he  longs  to  get  rid  of  it.  To  be  too 
holy  in  the  judgment  of  men  is  a  great  crime,  for  it  rebukes  their  sin. 
If  the  holy  man  has  not  the  power  of  words,  yet  his  life  is  one  loud 


I 


BARABBA6    PREFERRED  TO  JESUS.  353 

witness-bearing  for  God  againit  the  sins  of  his  creatures.  This  incon- 
venient protesting  led  the  wicked  to  desire  the  death  of  the  holy  and 
just  One.  Besides,  the  priests  were  at  their  backs.  It  is  a  sad  and 
lamentable  thing,  but  it  is  often  the  case  that  the  people  are  better 
than  their  religious  teachers.  At  the  present  moment  the  laity  of 
the  Church  of  England,  as  a  whole,  have  honest  consciences,  and 
would  have  their  Prayer  Book  revised  to-morrow  if  their  voices 
could  be  heard.  But  their  clerics  care  far  too  little  about  truth, 
and  are  not  very  particular  how  they  swear,  or  with  whom  they 
associate.  So  long  as  their  Church  can  be  kept  together,  ^  Father 
Ignatius  shall  be  heard  in  their  assemblies,  although  Christ's  call 
to  the  Church  to  purify  herself,  awakens  only  resentment  and  ill- 
will.  No  matter  that  the  throats  of  certain  clergymen  were  exercised 
in  hissing  for  a  moment  at  the  apparition  of  the  bold  Anglican  monk, 
he  is  one  of  themselves,  a  brother  of  their  own  order,  and  their  Church 
is  responsible  for  all  that  he  does.  Let  them  come  out  and  separate 
themselves,  and  then  we  shall  know  that  they  abhor  this  modem 
popery;  but  so  long  as  they  sit  in  the  same  assembly  and  are  members 
of  the  same  Church,  the  sin  is  theirs,  and  we  shall  not  cease  to 
denounce  both  it  and  them.  If  Evangelical  clergymen  remain  in  com- 
munion with  Papists,  now  that  they  come  out  in  their  full  colours,  I 
will  cease  to  say  that  they  violate  their  consciences,  but  I  shall  doubt 
whether  they  have  any  consciences  at  all.  Brethren,  it  is  still  the  case 
that  the  people  are  better  than  their  teachers.  This  people  would 
not  have  crucified  Christ  had  not  the  clergy  of  the  day,  the  priests, 
the  endowed  ministers,  cried  out,  "  Let  him  be  crucified ! "  He  was  the 
Dissenter,  the  heretic,  schismatic,  the  troubler  in  Israel.  He  it  was 
who  cried  aloud  against  the  faults  of  their  Establishment.  He  it  was 
who  could  not  be  put  down,  the  ignorant  man  from  Galilee,  who  would 
continue  to  clamour  against  them,  the  mischief-maker,  and  therefore 
"Let  him  be  crucified!  Let  him  be  crucified!"  Anything  is  good 
enough  for  the  man  who  talks  about  reform,  and  advocates  changes 
in  established  rules."  No  doubt  bribery  also  was  used  in  this  case. 
Had  not  Rabbi  Simon  paid  the  multitude?  Was  there  not  a  hope 
of  some  feast  after  the  passover  was  over  to  those  who  would  use 
their  throats  against  the  Saviour?  Beside,  there  was  the  multi- 
tude going  that  way;  and  so  if  any  had  compassion  they  held 
their  tongue.  Often  they  say  that  "  Discretion  is  the  better  part  of 
valour;"  and  truly  there  must  be  many  valorous  men,  for  they  hare 
much  of  valour's  better  part,  discretion.  If  they  did  not  join  in  the 
shout,  yet  at  least  they  would  not  incommode  the  others,  and  so  there 
was  but  one  cry,  "  Away  with  him!  away  with  him!  It  is  not  fit  that 
he  should  live."  What  concentrated  scorn  there  is  this  fortieth  verse. 
It  is  not  "  this  Jesus,"  they  would  not  foul  their  mouths  with  his  name, 
but  i\\\9,  fellow — "this  devil,"  if  you  will.  To  Barabbas  they  give  the 
respect  of  mentioning  his  name;  but  "this — "  whom  they  hate  so  much, 
they  will  not  even  stoop  to  mention.  We  have  looked,  then,  at  this 
gi'eat  sin  as  it  stands  in  the  history. 

II.     But  now  let  us  look,  in  the  second  place,  at  this  incident  as 

SETTING  FORTH   THE   SIN  WHICH  HAS  BEEN  THE   GUILT   OF  THE  WORLD 
[N  ALL  AGES,   AND  WHICH   IS  THE   WORLD'S  GUILT  NOW. 

When  the  apostles  went  forth  to  preach  the  gospel,  and  the  truth 

23 


354  METEOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

had  spread  through  many  countries,  there  were  severe  edicts  passed  hj 
the  Roman  Emperors.  Against  whom  were  these  edicts  framed  ? 
Against  the  foul  oifenders  of  that  day?  It  is  well  known  that  the  whole 
Roman  Empire  was  infested  with  vices  such  as  the  cheek  of  modesty 
would  blush  to  hear  named.  The  first  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Romans  is  a  most  graphic  picture  of  the  state  of  society  throughout  the 
entire  Roman  dominions.  When  severe  laws  were  framed,  why  were 
they  not  proclaimed  against  these  atrocious  vices  ?  It  is  scarcely  fit 
that  men  should  go  unpunished  who  are  guilty  of  crimes  such  as  the 
apostle  Paul  has  mentioned,  but  I  find  no  edicts  against  these  things — 
I  find  that  they  were  borne  with  and  scarcely  mentioned  with  censure;, 
but  burning,  dragging  at  the  heels  of  wild  horses,  the  sword,  imprison- 
ment, tortures  of  every  kind,  were  used  against  whom  think  you? 
Against  the  innocent,  humble  followers  of  Christ,  who,  so  far  from 
defending  themselves,  were  willing  to  suffer  all  these  things,  and  pre- 
sented themselves  like  sheep  at  the  shambles,  willing  to  endure  the 
butcher's  knife.  The  cry  of  the  world,  under  the  persecutions  of 
Imperial  Rome,  was  "  Not  Christ,  but  Sodomites,  and  murderers,  and- 
thieves— we  will  bear  with  any  of  these,  but  not  with  Christ;  away 
with  his  followers  from  the  earth."  Then  the  world  changed  its- 
tactics;  it  became  nominally  Christian,  and  Antichrist  came  forth  in^ 
all  its  blasphemous  glory.  The  Pope  of  Rome  put  on  the  triple 
crown,andcalledhimself  the  Vicar  of  Christ;  then  came  in  the  abomi- 
nation of  the  worship  of  saints,  angels,  images,  and  pictures;  then 
came  the  mass,  and  I  know  not  what,  of  detestable  error;  and  what  did 
the  world  say?  "Popery  for  ever!*'  Down  went  every  knee,  and 
every  head  bowed  before  the  sovereign  representative  of  Peter  at  Rome. 
The  Church  of  Rome  was  equal  in  sin  to  Barabbas;  nay,  I  do  but 
compliment  Barabbas  when  1  mention  him  in  the  same  breath  with 
many  of  the  popes,  for  their  character  was  foul  and  black  right  through 
and  through,  till  even  those  who  superstitiously  looked  upon  them  as- 
infallible  in  their  office,  could  not  defend  their  personal  characters. 
The  world  chose  the  harlot  of  Rome,  and  she  who  was  drunk  with  the 
wine  of  her  abominations  had  every  eye  to  gaze  upon  her  with  admira- 
tion, while  Christ's  gospel  was  forgotten,  buried  in  a  few  old  books,  and 
almost  extinguished  in  darkness.  Since  that  day  the  world  has  changed 
its  tactics  yet  again;  in  many  parts  of  the  earth  Protestantism  is  openly 
acknowledged,  and  the  gospel  is  preached,  but  what  then  ?  Then  comes 
in  Satan,  and  another  Barabbas,  the  Barabbas  of  mere  ceremonialism, 
and  mere  attendance  at  a  place  of  worship  is  set  up.  "  Yes,  we  are 
orthodox;  so  orthodox,  so  sound.  Yes,  we  are  religious,  strictly  religious; 
we  attend  our  meeting-house,  or  go  to  our  Church.  We  are  never  absent. 
We  attend  every  form,  but  we  have  no  vital  godliness;  we  have  not 
been  bom  again;  we  have  not  passed  from  death  unto  life."  However, 
this  will  do;  so  long  as  we  are  as  good  as  our  neighbours,  and  keep  the 
outward  rite,  the  inward  does  not  matter.  This  which  is  a  foul 
robbery  of  God's  glory,  this  which  murders  men's  souls,  is  the  Barabbas 
of  the  present  age.  An  outward  name  to  live  is  set  up,  and  is  received 
by  those  who  are  dead;  and  many  of  you  now  present  are  quite  easy 
and  content,  though  you  have  never  felt  the  quickening  Spirit  of  God: 
though  you  have  never  been  washed  in  the  atoning  blood,  yet  you  are 
satisfied  because  you  take  a  seat  in  some  place  of  worship;  you  give: 


BARA.BBAS  PREFERRED  TO  JESUS.  355 

your  guinea,  your  donation  to  an  hospital,  or  your  subscription  to  a  good 
object,  forgetting  and  not  caring  to  remember  that  all  the  making  clean 
of  the  outside  of  the  cup  and  the  platter  will  never  avail,  unless  the 
inward  nature  be  renewed  by  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God.  This  is  the 
great  Barabbas  of  the  present  age,  and  men  prefer  it  before  the 
Saviour. 

That  this  is  true,  that  the  world  really  loves  sin  better  than  Christ,  I 
think  I  could  prove  clearly  enough  by  one  simple  fact.  You  have 
observed  sometimes  Christian  men  inconsistent,  have  you  not?  The 
inconsistency  was  nothing  very  great,  if  you  had  judged  them  according 
to  ordinary  rules  of  conduct.  But  you  are  well  aware  that  a  worldly 
man  might  commit  any  sin  he  liked,  without  much  censure;  but  if  the 
Christian  man  commits  ever  so  little,  then  hands  are  held  up,  and  the 
whole  world  cries,  "  Shame  ! "  I  do  not  want  to  have  that  altered,  but 
I  do  want  just  to  say  this:  "  There  is  Mr.  So-and-So,  who  is  known  to 
live  a  fast,  wicked,  gay  life;  well,  I  do  not  see  that  he  is  universally 
avoided  and  reprobated,  but  on  the  contrary,  he  is  tolerated  by  most, 
and  admired  by  some."  But  suppose  a  Christian  man,  a  well-known 
professor,  to  have  committed  some  fault  which,  compared  with  this, 
were  not  worth  mentioning,  and  what  is  done?  "Oh!  publish  it!  pub- 
lish it!  Have  you  heard  what  Mr.  So-and-So  did?  Have  you  heard  of 
this  hypocrite's  transgression?  "  "  Well,  what  was  it?"  You  look  at  it: 
"  Well,  it  is  wrong,  it  is  very  wrong,  but  compared  with  what  you  say 
about  it  is  nothing  at  all."  The  world  therefore  shows  by  the  difference 
between  the  way  in  which  it  judges  the  professedly  religious  man,  and 
that  with  which  it  judges  its  own,  that  it  really  can  tolerate  the  most 
abandoned,  but  cannot  tolerate  the  Christian.  Of  course,  the  Christian 
never  will  be  altogether  free  from  imperfections;  the  world's  enmity 
is  not  against  the  Christian's  imperfections  evidently,  because  they 
will  tolerate  greater  imperfections  in  others;  the  objection  must  there- 
fore be  against  the  man,  against  the  profession  which  he  has  taken 
up,  and  the  course  which  he  desires  to  follow.  Watch  carefully, 
beloved,  that  ye  give  them  no  opportunity;  but  when  ye  see  that 
the  slightest  mistake  is  laid  hold  of  and  exaggerated,  in  this  you 
see  a  clear  evidence  that  the  world  prefers  Barabbas  to  the  followers  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Now  the  world  will  change  its  various  modes  of 
dealing,  but  it  will  never  love  the  Church  better  than  it  does  now.  We 
do  not  expect  to  see  the  world  lifted  up  to  become  more  and  more 
absorbed  into  the  Church.  The  union  of  the  world  with  the  Church 
was  never  the  object  of  our  religion.  The  object  of  Christ  is  to  gather 
to  himself  a  people  from  among  men;  it  is  not  the  lifting  up  of  all,  but 
the  calling  out  of  the  some,  the  making  of  men  to  differ,  the  manifesta- 
tion of  his  special  and  discriminating  grace,  the  gathering  together  of  a 
people  whom  he  has  formed  for  himself.  In  this  process  morality  is 
promoted,  men  are  civilised  and  improved,  but  this  is  only  indirectly 
God's  object,  and  not  his  immediate  end;  the  immediate  end  of  the 
gospel  being  the  salvation  of  the  people  whom  he  has  ordained  unto 
eternal  life,  and  who,  therefore,  in  due  season  are  led  to  believe  in  him. 
The  world,  to  the  end  of  the  chapter,  will  be  as  much  at  enmity  with 
true  believers  as  ever  it  was.  Because  "  ye  are  not  of  the  world,  there- 
fore the  world  hateth  you,"  this  will  be  as  true  when  Christ  shall  come 
as  at  the  present  moment.    Let  us  expect  it;  and  when  we  meet  with 


gljg  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

scorn  and  persecution,  let  us  not  be  surprised  as  though  some  strange 
thing  had  happened  unto  us. 

III.     I  come  in  the  third  pla^e,  and  0  for  some  assistance  from  on 
high,  to  observe  that  the  sin  op  preferring  Barabbas  to  Christ 

WAS  THE  SIN  OF  EVERY  ONE  OF  US  BEFORE  OUR  CONVERSION. 

Will  you  turn  over  the  leaves  of  your  diary,  now,  dear  friends,  or  fly 
upon  the  wings  of  memory  to  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  you  were  digged. 
Did  you  not,  0  you  who  live  close  to  Christ,  did  you  not  once  despise  him? 
What  company  did  vou  like  best?    Was  it  not  that  of  the  frivolous,  if 
not  that  of  the  profane?    When  you  sat  with  God's  people,  their  talk 
was  very  tedious;  if  they  spoke  of  divine  realities,  and  of  experimental 
subjects,  you  did  not  understand  them,  you  felt  them  to  be  troublesome. 
I  can  look  back  upon  some  whom  I  know  now  to  be  most  venerable  be- 
lievers, whom  I  thought  to  be  a  gross  nuisance  when  I  heard  them  talk  of 
the  things  of  God.   What  were  our  thoughts  about?   When  we  had  time 
for  thinking,  what  were  our  favourite  themes?    Not  much  did  we  medi- 
tate upon  eternity;  not  much  upon  him  who  came  to  deliver  us  from 
the  misery  of  hell's  torments.    Brethren,  his  great  love  wherewith  he 
loved  us  was  never  laid  to  heart  by  us  as  it  should  have  been;  nay,  if 
we  read  the  story  of  the  crucifixion,  it  had  no  more  effect  upon  our 
mind  than  a  common  tale.     We  knew  not  the  beauties  of  Christ;  we 
thought  of  any  trifle  sooner  than  of  him.    And  what  were  our  pleasures? 
When  we  had  what  we  called  a  day's  enjoyment,  where  did  we  seek  it? 
At  the  foot  of  the  cross?    In  the  service  of  the  Saviour?    In  com- 
munion with  him?    Far  from  it;  the  further  we  could  remove  from 
.^odly  associations  the  better  pleased  we  were.    Some  of  us  have  to 
<5onfess  with  shame  that  we  were  never  more  in  our  element  than  when 
we  were  without  a  conscience,  when  conscience  ceased  to  accuse  us  and 
we  could  plunge  into  sin  with  riot.     What  was  our  reading  then?  any 
book  sooner  than  the  Bible:  and  if  there  had  lain  in  our  way  any- 
thing that  would  have  exalted  Christ  and  extolled  him  in  our  under- 
standings, we  should  have  put  by  the  book  as  much  too  dry  to  please 
tis.     Any  three-volume  heap  of  nonsense,  any  light  literature;  nay, 
perhaps,  even  worse  would  have  delighted  our  eye  and  our  heart;  but 
thoughts  of  his  eternal  delight  towards  us— thoughts  of  his  matchless 
passion  and  his  glory  now  in  heaven,  never  came  across  our  minds,  nor 
would  we  endure  those  who  would  have  led  us  to  such  meditations. 
What   were  our  aspirations  then?     We  were  looking  after  business, 
aiming  at  growing  rich,  famous  for  learning  or  admired  for  ability. 
Self  was  what  we  lived  for.     If  we  had  some  regard  for  others,  and 
some  desire  to  benefit  our  race,  yet  self  was  at  the  bottom  of  it  all. 
We  did  not  live  for  God— we  could  not  honestly  say,  as  we  woke  in  the 
morning,  "I  hope  to  live   for  God  to-day;"  at  night,  we  cou  d  not 
look  back  upon  the  day,  and  say,  *'  We  have  this  day  served  God.      Me 
was  not  in  all  our  thoughts.    Where  did  we  spend  our  best  praise  ? 
Did  we  praise  Christ  ?    No ;  we  praised  cleverness,  and  when  it  was  in 
association  with  sin,  we  praised  it  none  the  less.     We  admired  those 
who  could  most  fully  minister  to  our  own  fleshly  delights,  and  felt  the 
greatest  love  to  those  who  did  us  the  worst  injury.     Is  not  this  our 
confession  as  we  review  the  past?     Have  I  not  read  the  very  histoij  of 
your  life?     I  know  I  have  of  my  own.     Alas!  for  those  dark  days, 
in  which  our  besotted  soul  went  after  any  evil,  but  would  not  lollow 


BARABBAS  PREFERRED  TO  JESUS.  357 

after  Christ.  It  would  have  been  the  same  to-day  with  us,  if 
almighty  grace  had  not  made  the  difference.  We  may  as  well  expect 
the  river  to  cease  to  run  to  the  sea,  as  expect  the  natural  man  to  turn 
from  the  current  of  his  sins.  As  well  might  we  expect  fire  to  become 
water,  or  water  to  become  fire,  as  for  the  unrenewed  heart  ever  to 
love  Christ.  It  was  mighty  grace  which  made  us  to  seek  the  Saviour. 
And  as  we  look  back  upon  our  past  lives,  it  must  be  with  mingled 
feelings  of  gratitude  for  the  change,  and  of  sorrow  that  we  should  have 
been  so  grossly  foolish  as  to  have  chosen  Barabbas,  and  have  said  of 
the  Saviour,  "Let  him  be  crucified!" 

IV.  And  now  I  shall  come  to  the  closing  part  of  the  sermon,  which 
is,  that  there  are  doubtless  many  here  who  this  day  prefer 
Barabbas  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Let  me  first  state  your  case,  dear  friends.  I  would  describe  it  honestly, 
but  at  the  same  time  so  describe  it  that  you  will  see  your  sin  in  it;  and 
while  I  am  doing  so,  my  object  will  be  to  expostulate  with  you,  if  haply 
the  Lord  may  change  your  will.  There  are  many  here,  I  fear,  who 
prefer  sin  to  Christ.  I  may  say,  without  making  a  guess,  I  know  that 
there  are  those  here  who  would  long  ago  have  been  followers  of  Christ, 
but  that  they  preferred  drunkenness.  It  is  not  often,  it  is  not  every 
day,  it  is  not  even  every  week,  but  there  are  occasions  when  they  feel 
as  if  they  must  go  into  company,  and  as  a  sure  result  they  return  home 
intoxicated.  They  are  ashamed  of  themselves — they  have  expressed  as 
much  as  that ;  they  have  even  gone  so  far  as  to  pray  to  Cod  for  grace 
to  overcome  their  habit ;  but  after  being  the  subject  of  convictions  for 
years,  they  have  hitherto  made  no  advance.  It  did  seem  once  as  if  they 
had  conquered  it.  For  a  long  time  there  was  an  abstinence  from  the 
fault,  but  they  have  gone  back  to  their  folly.  They  have  preferred  the 
bestial  degrading  vice — shall  I  say  bestial?  I  insult  the  beasts,  for  they 
are  not  guilty  of  such  a  vice  as  this — they  prefer  this  degrading  vice  to 
Christ  Jesus.  There  stands  drunkenness,  I  see  it  mirrored  before  me 
with  all  its  folly,  its  witlessness,  its  greed  and  filth;  but  the  man  chooses 
all  that,  and  though  he  has  known  by  head  knowledge  something  con- 
cerning the  beauty  and  excellency  of  Christ,  he  virtually  says  of  Jesus, 
"  Not  this  man,  but  drunkenness." 

Then  there  are  other  cases,  where  a  favourite  lust  reigns  supreme  in 
their  hearts.  The  men  know  the  evil  of  the  sin,  and  they  have  good 
cause  to  know  it;  they  knowalso  something  of  the  sweetness  of  religion, 
for  they  are  never  happier  than  when  they  come  up  with  Cod's  people ; 
and  they  go  home  sometimes  from  a  solemn  sermon,  especially  if  it  touches 
their  vice,  and  they  feel,  "  God  has  spoken  to  my  soul  to-day,  and  I  am 
brought  to  a  standstill."  But  for  all  that,  the  temptation  comes  again, 
and  they  fall  as  they  have  fallen  before.  I  am  afraid  there  are  some  ol 
you  whom  no  arguments  will  ever  move;  you  have  become  so  set  on 
this  mischief,  that  it  will  be  your  eternal  ruin.  But  oh  !  think  you,  how 
will  this  look  when  you  are  in  hell — "  I  preferred  that  foul  Barabbas  of 
lust  to  the  beauties  and  perfections  of  the  Saviour,  who  came  into  the 
world  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost!"  and  yet  this  is  the 
case,  not  of  some,  but  of  a  great  multitude  who  listen  to  the  gosoel,  and 
yet  prefer  sin  to  its  saving  power. 

There  may  be  some  here,  too,  of  another  class,  who  prefer  gain.  It 
has  come  to  this:  if  they  become  truly  the  Lord's  people,  they  cannot 


358  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

do  in  trade  what  they  now  think  their  trade  requires  them  to  do;  if  they 
become  really  and  g:enuinely  believers,  they  must  of  course  become 
honest,  mi  their  trade  would  not  pay,  they  say,  if  it  were  conducted 
upon  honest  principles;  or  it  is  such  a  trade,  and  there  are  some  few 
such,  as  ought  not  to  be  conducted  at  all,  much  less  by  Christians. 
Here  comes  the  turning-point.  Shall  I  take  the  gold,  or  shall  I  take 
Christ  ?  True,  it  is  cankered  gold,  and  gold  on  which  a  curse  musi 
come.  It  is  the  fool's  pence,  may  be  it  is  gain  that  is  extorted  from 
the  miseries  of  the  poor;  is  money  that  would  not  ever  stand  the 
light  because  it  is  not  fairly  come  by;  money  that  will  bum  its  way 
right  through  your  souls  when  you  ^et  upon  your  death-beds;  but 
yet  men  who  love  the  world,  say,  "  No,  not  Christ,  give  me  a  full 
purse,  and  away  with  Christ."  Others,  less  base  or  less  honest,  cry, 
"We  know  his  excellence,  we  wish  we  could  have  him,  but  we  cannot 
have  him  on  terms  which  involve  the  renunciation  of  our  dearly-beloved 
gain."    "  Not  this  man,  but  Barabbas." 

Others  say,  "  I  fain  would  be  a  Christian,  but  then  I  should  lose  so 
many  of  my  acquaintances  and  friends.  For  the  matter  of  what  it 
comes  to,  my  friends  are  not  much  good  to  me;  they  are  such  friends 
as  are  fondest  when  I  have  most  money  to  spend  with  them;  they  are 
friends  who  praise  me  most  when  I  am  oftenest  at  the  ale-house,  when 
I  am  seen  plunging  deepest  into  their  vices.  I  know  they  do  me 
mischief,  but,"  says  the  man,  "  I  could  not  venture  to  oppose  them. 
One  of  them  has  such  a  glib  tongue,  and  he  can  make  such  telling 
jokes,  I  could  not  bear  to  have  him  down  upon  me;  and  there  is  another, 
I  have  heard  him  give  Christians  such  stinging  names,  and  point  at 
their  faults  in  such  a  sarcastic  manner,  I  could  not  run  the  gauntlet  of 
bis  tongue;  and  therefore,  though  I  fain  would  be  a  Christian,  yet  I 
will  not.'*  That  is  the  way  you  prefer  to  be  a  serf,  a  slave  to  the  tongue 
of  the  scomer,  sooner  than  be  a  free  man,  and  take  up  the  cross  and 
follow  Christ.  You  prefer,  I  say,  not  merely  by  way  of  allegory,  but 
as  matter  of  fact,  you  prefer  Barabbas  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

I  might  thus  multiply  instances,  but  the  same  principle  runs  through 
them  all.  If  anything  whatever  keeps  you  back  from  giving  your  heart 
to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  you  are  guilty  of  setting  up  an  opposition 
candidate  to  Christ  in  your  soul,  and  you  are  choosing  "  not  this  man, 
but  Barabbas." 

Let  me  occupy  a  few  minutes  with  pleading  Christ's  cause  with  you. 
Why  is  it  that  you  reject  Christ  ?  Are  you  not  conscious  of  the  many 
good  things  which  you  receive  from  him?  You  would  have  been  dead  if 
it  had  not  been  for  him;  nay,  worse  than  that,  you  would  have  been 
in  hell.  God  has  sharpened  the  great  axe;  justice,  like  a  stern  wood- 
man, stood  with  the  axe  uplifted,  ready  to  cut  you  down  as  a  cumberer 
of  the  ground.  A  hand  was  seen  stopping  the  arm  of  the  avenger, 
and  a  voice  was  heard  saying,  "  Let  it  alone,  till  I  dig  about  it  and 
dung  it."  Who  was  it  that  appeared  just  then  in  your  moment  of 
extremity?  It  was  no  other  than  that  Christ,  of  whom  you  think  so 
little  that  you  prefer  drunkenness  or  vice  to  him!  You  are  this 
day  in  the  house  of  God,  listening  to  a  discourse  which  I  hope  is  sent 
from  him.  You  might  have  been  in  hell— think  one  moment  of  that— 
shut  out  from  hope,  enduring  in  body  and  soul  unutterable  pangs.  That 
you  are  not  there,  should  make  you  love  and  bless  him,  who  has  said. 


BARABBAS  PREFERRED  10  JESUS.  359 

^'  Deliver  him  from  going  down  into  the  pit."    Why  will  you  prefer  your 
own  gain  and  self-indulgence  to  that  blessed  One  to  whom  you  owe^  so 
.much.    Common  gratitude  should  make  you  deny  yourself  something 
ifor  him  who  denied  himself  so  much  that  he  might  bless  you.     Do  I 
hear  you  say  that  you  cannot  follow  Christ,  because  his  precepts  are  too 
severe?     In  what  respect  are  they  too  severe?     It  you  yourself  were  set 
to  judge  them,  what  is  the  point  with  which  you  would  find  fault? 
They    deny    you   your   sins— say,    they    deny    you    your    miseries. 
They  do  not  permit  you,  in  fact,  to  ruin  yourself.    There  is  no  precept 
of  Christ  which  is  not  for  your  good,  and  there  is  nothing  which  he 
forbids  you  which  he  does  not  forbid  on  the  principle  that  it  would 
harm  you  to  indulge  in  it.     But  suppose  Christ's  precepts  to  be  ever 
so  stern,  is  it  not  better  that  you  should  put  up  with  them  than  be 
ruined?      The  soldier  submits  implicitly  to  the  captain's  command, 
because  he  knows  that  without  discipline  there  can  be  no  victory,  and 
the  whole  army  may  be  cut  in  pieces  if  there  be  a  want  of  order.    When 
the  sailor  has  risked  his  life  to  penetrate  through  the  thick  ice  of  the 
north,  we  find  him  consenting  to  all  the  orders  and  regulations  of 
authority,  and  bearing  all  the  hardships  of  the  adventure,  because  he  is 
prompted  by  the  desire  of  assisting  in  a  great  discovery,  or  stimulated  by 
a  large  reward.  And  surely  the  little  self-denials  which  Christ  calls  us  to 
will  be  abundantly  recompensed  by  the  reward  he  offers;  and  when  the 
soul  and  its  eternal  interests  are  at  stake,  we  may  well  put  up  with  these 
temporary  inconveniences  if  we  may  inherit  eternal  life.     I  think  I 
hear  you  say  that  you  w^ould  be  a  Christian,  but  there  is  no  happiness 
in  it.     I  would  not  tell  you  a  falsehood  on  this  point,  I  would  speak  the 
truth  if  it  were  so,  but  I  do  solemnly  declare  that  there  is  more  joy  in 
the  Christian  life  than  there  is  in  any  other  form  of  life;  that  if  I  had  to 
die  like  a  dog,  and  there  were  no  hereafter,  I  would  prefer  to  be  a  Chris- 
tian.    You  shall  appeal  to  the  very  poorest  among  us,  to  those  who  are 
most  sick  and  most  despised,  and  they  will  tell  you  the  same.    There  is 
not  an  old  country  woman  shivering  in  her  old  ragged  red  cloak  over  a 
handful  of  fire,  full  of  rheumatism,  with  an  empty  cupboard  and  an  aged 
body,  who  would  change  with  the  very  highest  and  greatest  of  you  if  she 
had  to  give  up  her  religion;  no,  she  would  tell  you  that  her  Redeemer 
was  a  greater  comfort  to  her  than  all  the  luxuries  which  could  be  heaped 
upon  the  table  of  Dives.    You  make  a  mistake  when  you  dream  that  my 
Master  does  not  make  his  disciples  blessed;  they  are  a  blessed  people 
who  put  their  trust  in  Christ.     Still  I  think  I  hear  you  say,  "  Yes,  this 
is  all  very  well,  but  still  I  ipvefeY  present  pleasure."     Dost  thou  not  in 
this  talk  like  a  child;  nay,  like  a  fool,  for  what  is  present  pleasure?  How 
long  does  that  word  "  present"  last?     If  thou  couldst  have  ten  thousand 
vears  of  merriment  I  might  agree  with  thee  in  a  measure,  but  even  there 
I  should  have  but  short  patience  with  thee,  for  what  would  be  ten  thon- 
sand  years  of  sin's  merriment  compared  with  millions  upon  millions  of 
vears  of  sin's  penalty.     Why,  at  the  longest,  your  life  will  be  but  very 
'short.     Are  you  not  conscious   that   time   flies   more  hurriedly  every 
(lay  ?     As  you  grow  older,  do  you  not  seem  as  if  you  had  iived  a  shorter 
time  instead  of  longer?  till,  perhaps,  if  you  could  live  to  be  as  old  as 
Jacob,  you  would  say,  "Few  and  evil  have  my  days  been,  for  they 
iippear  fewer  as  they  grow  more  numerous."     You  know  that  this  life  is 
^but  a  span,  and  is  soon  over.     Look  to  the  graveyards,  see  bow  thej 


860  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

are  crowded  with  green  mounds.  Remember  your  own  companions, 
how  one  by  one  they  have  passed  away.  They  were  as  firm  and 
strong  as  you,  but  they  have  gone  like  a  shadow  that  declineth.  Is 
it  worth  while  to  have  this  snatch  space  of  pleasure,  and  then  to  lie 
down  in  eternal  pain?  I  pray  you  to  answer  this  question.  Is  it 
worth  while  to  choose  Barabbas  for  the  sake  of  the  temporary  gain 
he  may  give  you,  and  give  up  Christ,  and  so  renounce  the  eternal 
treasures  of  joy  and  happiness  which  are  at  his  right  hand  for 
evermore?  I  wish  that  I  could  put  these  questions  before  you 
as  they  ought  to  be  put.  It  needs  the  earnest  seraphic  voice  of  Whit- 
field, or  the  pleading  tongue  of  Richard  Baxter,  to  plead  with 
you,  but  yet  I  think  I  talk  to  rational  men;  and  if  it  be  a  matter  of 
arithmetic,  it  shall  need  no  words  of  mine.  I  will  not  ask  you  to 
take  your  life  at  the  longest  that  you  expect  it  to  be — at  eighty,  say — 
crowd  it  full  of  all  the  pleasures  you  can  imagine;  suppose  yourself  in 
good  health;  dream  yourself  to  be  without  business  cares,  with  all  that 
heart  can  wish;  go  and  sit  upon  the  throne  of  Solomon  if  you  will,  and 
^et  what  will  you  have  to  say  when  it  is  all  over  ?  Looking  back  upon 
it,  can  you  make  more  of  it  than  Solomon  did,  when  he  said, 
"  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity " — "  All  is  vanity  and  vexation  of 
spirit"?  When  you  have  cast  up  that  sum,  may  I  ask  you  to  calculate 
how  much  you  will  have  gained,  if,  in  order  to  possess  this  vanity,  you 
have  renounced  eternal  happiness,  and  have  incurred  everlasting  woe? 
Do  you  believe  the  Bible  ?  You  say,  *'  Yes."  Well,  then,  it  must  be 
so.  Many  men  profess  to  be  believers  in  Scripture,  and  yet,  when  you 
come  to  the  point  as  to  whether  they  do  believe  in  eternal  woe  and 
eternal  joy,  there  is  a  kind  of  something  inside  which  whispers,  "  That 
is  in  the  Book — but  still  it  is  not  real,  it  is  not  true  to  us."  Make  it 
true  to  yourselves,  and  when  you  have  so  done  it,  and  have  clearly  proved 
that  you  must  be  in  happiness  or  woe,  and  that  you  must  here  either 
have  Barabbas  for  your  master,  or  have  Christ  for  your  Lord,  then,  I 
say,  like  sane  men,  judge  which  is  the  better  choice,  and  may  God's 
mighty  grace  give  you  spiritual  sanity  to  make  the  right  choice;  but 
this  I  know,  you  never  will  unless  that  mighty  Spirit  who  alone  leads 
us  to  choose  the  right,  and  reject  the  wrong,  shall  come  upon  you  and 
lead  you  to  fly  to  a  Saviour's  wounds. 

I  need  not,  I  think,  prolong  the  service  now,  but  I  hope  you  will 
prolong  it  at  your  own  houses  by  thinking  of  the  matter.  And 
may  I  put  the  question  personally  to  all  as  you  separate,  whose  are  you? 
On  whoiAe  side  are  you?  There  are  no  neuters;  there  are  no  betweenitest 
you  either  serve  Christ  or  Belial ;  you  are  either  with  the  Lord  or  with 
his  enemies.  Who  is  on  the  Lord's  side  this  day?  Who?  Who  is 
lor  Christ  and  for  his  cross;  for  his  blood,  and  for  his  throne?  Who,, 
on  the  other  hand,  are  his  foes?  As  many  as  are  not  for  Christ,  are 
numbered  with  his  enemies.  Be  not  so  numbered  any  longer,  for  th<> 
gospel  comes  to  vou  with  an  inviting  voice — "  Believe  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and'thou  shalt  be  saved."  God  help  thee  to  believe  and 
cast  thyself  upon  him  now;  and  if  thou  trustest  him,  thou  art  saved 
now,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved  for  ever.    Amen. 


OUE  LOED  BEFORE  HEROD. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  February  19th,  1882,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"And  when  Herod  saw  Jesus,  he  was  exceeding  glad  :  for  he  was  desirous  to  see  him 
of  a  long  season,  because  he  had  heard  many  things  of  him  ;  and  he  hoped  to  have  seen 
Bome  miracle  done  by  him.  Then  he  questioned  with  him  in  many  words ;  but  he 
answered  him  nothing." — Luke  xxiii.  8,  9. 

After  Pilate  had  declared  to  the  chief  priests  and  scribes  that  he  found 
no  fault  at  all  in  Jesus,  they  were  afraid  that  their  victim  would  escape, 
and  therefore  their  fury  was  raised  to  the  highest  pitch,  and  they  cried 
out  the  more  vehemently  against  him.  In  the  course  of  their  outcries 
they  made  use  of  the  word  '•  Galilee ;"  going,  as  it  seems  to  me,  a  little 
out  of  their  way  in  order  to  drag  in  the  name:  "He  stirreth  up  the 
people,  teaching  throughout  all  Jewry,  beginning  from  Galilee  to  this 
place."  Galilee  was  a  region  held  in  very  great  contempt,  and  they 
mentioned  it  to  cast  a  slur  upon  our  Lord,  as  if  he  were  a  mere  boor  from 
among  the  clowns  of  Galilee.  To  Pilate  they  thought  that  the  mention  of 
the  name  would,  perhaps,  act  like  the  proverbial  red  rag  held  before  an 
infuriated  bull ;  for  he  appears  to  have  been  troubled  by  seditious  persons 
from  that  province.  We  all  remember  that  they  were  Galileans  whose 
blood  Pilate  had  mingled  with  their  sacrifices.  The  Galileans  were  reputed 
to  be  an  ignorant  people,  apt  to  be  led  astray  by  impostors,  and  so  enthu- 
siastic- that  they  ventured  their  lives  against  the  Romans.  The  priests 
would  not  only  cast  contempt  upon  Jesus,  whom  they  were  wont  to  call 
the  Galilean,  but  also  excite  the  prejudices  of  Pilate,  so  that  he  might 
condemn  him  to  die  as  one  of  a  nest  of  rebels. 

They  were  mistaken,  however,  in  the  consequences  of  their  device,  for 
Pilate  caught  at  the  word  "  Galilee  "  directly.  That  province  was  not 
immediately  under  his  rule  ;  it  was  under  the  sway  of  the  tetrarch 
Herod  Antipas,  and  therefore  he  thought  within  himself,  "  I  cai^  kill 
two  birds  with  one  stone  :  I  can  get  rid  of  this  troublesome  business  by 
sending  this  prisoner  to  Herod,  and  I  can  also  greatly  gratify  the  king 
by  showing  him  this  attention."  Pilate  had  quarrelled  with  Herod,  and 
now  for  some  purpose  of  his  own  he  resolved  to  patch  up  a  friendship 
by  pretending  great  deference  to  his  sovereign  powers  by  sending  one  of 
his  subjects  to  be  tried  by  him.  Pilate,  therefore,  asked,  **  Is  this  man 
a  Galilean  ?  "  and  when  they  told  him  that  he  was  so, — for  he  was  so 
No.  1,645. 


"562  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

by  repute,  his  birth  at  Bethlehem  having  been  wilfully  ignored, — thftn 
Pilate  at  once  commanded  that  he  be  led  to  Herod,  for  Herod  was  m 
his  palace  at  Jerusalem  attending  the  Passover  festival. 

See,  then,  my  brethren,  our  divine  Master  conducted  in  his  third  march 
of  sorrow  through  Jerusalem.  First,  he  was  led  from  the  garden  to  the 
house  of  Annas,  then  he  was  conducted  through  the  streets  from  the 
hall  of  Caiaphas  to  the  judgment  hall  of  Pilate,  and  now  by  Pilate's 
•orders  he  is  led  a  third  time  by  the  angry  crowd  of  priests  through  the 
streets  to  the  palace  of  Herod,  there  to  await  his  fourth  examination. 
Certain  of  the  old  writers  delight  to  remark  that  as  there  were  four 
•  evangelists  to  do  honour  to  our  Lord,  so  were  there  four  judges  to  do 
him  shame.  Annas  and  Caiaphas,  Pilate  and  Herod.  We  are  on  safer 
ground  when  we  observe  with  the  early  church  the  coalition  of  the 
heathen  and  the  Jews :  "  For  of  a  truth  against  thy  holy  child  Jesus, 
whom  thou  hast  anointed,  both  Herod,  and  Pontius  Pilate,  with  the 
Gentiles,  and  the  people  of  Israel,  were  gathered  together,  for  to  do 
whatsoever  thy  hand  and  thy  counsel  determined  before  to  be  done." 

This  morning  I  shall  endeavour  to  set  forth  this  portion  of  the  sad 
narrative  under  two  heads,  which  will  be  these :  Herod  before  Jesus,  and 
Jesus  befei'e  Herod. 

I.  I  call  your  attention  first  to  Herod  before  Jesus,  because  you 
must  know  something  of  his  character,  something  of  the  meaning  of 
his  questions,  before  you  can  rightly  understand  the  sorrow  which  they 
-caused  to  Jesus  our  Lord  and  Master. 

This  Herod  Antipas  was  the  son  of  the  old  Herod  the  Great,  who  had 
put  to  death  the  babes  at  Bethlehem  in  the  hope  of  destroying  the  King 
of  the  Jews.  He  was  a  chip  of  the  old  block,  but  still  he  was  several 
degrees  baser  than  his  sire.  There  was  nothing  of  the  grandeur  of  his 
father  about  him:  there  was  the  same  evil  disposition  without  the 
courage  and  the  decision.  He  did  not  in  somethings  out-Herod  Herod, 
for  in  certain  points  he  was  a  more  despicable  person.  Herod  the 
Great  may  be  called  a  lion,  but  our  Lord  very  descriptively  called  this 
lesser  Herod  a  fox,  saying,  "Go  and  tell  this  fox."  He  was  a  man  of 
dissolute  habits  and  frivolous  mind  ;  he  was  very  much  under  the  sway 
of  a  wicked  woman,  who  destroyed  any  little  good  there  might  have 
been  in  him:  he  was  a  lover  of  pleasure,  a  lover  of  himself,  depraved, 
weak,  and  trifling  to  the  last  degree.  I  almost  grudge  to  call  him  a 
man,  therefore  let  him  only  be  called  a  tetrarch. 

This  petty  tetrarch  had  once  been  the  subject  of  religious  impressions. 
These  Herods  all  more  or  less  felt  the  influence  of  religion  at  times, 
though  they  were  by  no  means  benefited  thereby.  Tlie  impressions 
made  upon  his  conscience  by  John  did  not  last  with  Herod.  They 
were  at  first  powerful  and  practical,  for  we  are  informed  that  *^  Herod 
feared  John,  knowing  that  he  was  a  just  man  and  an  holy,  and 
observed  him  ;  and  when  he  heard  him,  he  did  many  things,  and 
heard  him  gladly."  I  suppose  he  reformed  many  matters  in  his  king- 
dom, and  cast  off  perhaps  some  of  his  grosser  vices  ;  but  when  at  last 
John  began  to  denounce  him  for  having  taken  his  brother's  wife  to  be 
his  paramour,  while  yet  the  brother  lived,  he  cast  his  reprover  into 
prison,  and  then  you  remember  how,  with  reluctance,  Herod,  to  please 
his  mistress,  beheaded  John  in  prison.     Mark  this :  probably  there  is  no 


OUR  LORD   BEFORE  HEROD.  S63 

more  dangerous  character  living  than  a  man  who  has  once  come  under 
religious  influences  so  as  to  be  materially  affected  by  them,  and  yet  has 
broken  loose  and  cast  off  all  fear  of  God.  He  has  done  despite  to  his 
conscience  so  violently  that  henceforth  he  will  know  few  qualms.  In 
such  a  man  is  fulfilled  the  saying  of  our  Lord  "  When  the  unclean 
spirit  is  gone  out  of  a  man,  he  walketh  through  dry  places,  seeking 
rest,  and  findeth  none.  Then  he  saith,  I  wilfreturn  into  my  house 
from  whence  I  came  out ;  and  when  he  is  come,  he  findeth  it  empty, 
swept,  and  garnished.  Then  goeth  he,  and  taketh  with  himself  seven 
other  spirits  more  wicked  than  himself,  and  they  enter  in  and  dwell 
there  :  and  the  last  state  of  that  man  is  worse  than  the  first."  The 
mind  of  Herod  Antipas  was  in  the  condition  of  the  chamber  which 
has  been  swept  and  garnished,  for  his  life  had  been  somewhat  reformed, 
but  the  unclean  spirit  with  the  terrible  seven  had  come  back  to  his  old 
den,  and  now  he  was  a  worse  man  by  a  great  deal  than  he  had  ever 
been  before.  The  dog  returned  to  his  vomit,  and  the  sow  that  was 
washed  to  her  wallowing  in  the  mire.  This  Herod  was  an  Idum^an, 
that  is  to  say,  one  of  the  descendants  of  Esau,  an  Edomite,  and  though 
he  had  professedly  become  a  Jew,  yet  the  old  blood  was  in  him,  as  it  is 
written  concerning  Edom,  "  He  did  pursue  his  brother  with  the  sword, 
and  cast  off  all  pity."  The  true  Jacob  stood  before  one  of  the  seed  of 
Esau,  a  tetrarch,  profane  and  worldly  like  his  ancestor,  and  scant  was 
the  pity  which  he  received.  Esau  was  descended  from  Abraham 
according  to  the  flesh,  but  with  Jacob  was  the  covenant  according  to 
the  spirit  :  it  bodes  no  good  to  the  spiritual  seed  when  it  comes  even 
for  a  moment  under  the  power  of  the  carnal  seed.  We  see  how  the 
child  of  the  flesh  takes  to  mocking,  while  the  child  according  to  promise 
is  called  to  patience. 

Herod  was  in  such  a  state  of  mind  that  he  furnishes  me  with  a 
typical  character  which  I  would  use  for  the  instruction  and  admonition 
-of  you  all.  He  is  a  type  of  some  who  frequently  come  to  this  Taber- 
nacle, and  go  to  other  places  of  worship  occasionally, — people  who  were 
^once  under  religious  impressions,  and  cannot  forget  that  they  were  so, 
but  who  will  never  be  under  any  religious  impressions  again.  They  are 
now  hardened  into  vain  curiosity :  they  wish  to  know  about  everything 
that  is  going  on  in  the  church  and  kingdom  of  Christ,  but  they  are  far 
enough  from  caring  to  become  part  and  parcel  of  it  themselves.  They 
are  possessed  witli  an  idle  curiosity  which  would  lift  the  golden  hd  of 
the  ark,  and  intrude  behind  the  veil.  They  like  to  gather  together  all 
the  absurd  stories  which  are  told  about  ministers  and  to  retail  all  the 
odd  remarks  that  were  ever  made  by  preachers  for  centuries.  All  the 
gossip  of  the  churches  is  sure  to  be  known  to  them,  for  they  eat  up  the 
sins  of  God's  people  as  they  eat  bread.  It  is  not  likely  that  their 
knowledge  of  religious  things  will  be  of  any  use  to  them,  but  they  are 
ever  eager  after  it ;  the  church  of  God  is  their  lounge,  divine  service  is 
their  theatre,  ministers  are  to  them  as  actors,  and  the  gospel  itself  so 
much  play-house  property.  They  are  a  sort  of  religious  Athenians, 
spending  their  time  in  nothing  else  than  in  hearing  some  new  thing : 
hoping  that  perhaps  some  singular  and  unexpected  discourse  may  be 
dehvered  in  their  hearing  which  they  can  retail  in  the  next  company 
vwhere  they  would  raise  a  laugh.     To  them  preaching  is  all  a  farce,  and. 


364  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

worked  up  with  a  few  falsehoods  of  their  own,  ic  makes  excellent  fnn 
for  them,  and  causes  them  to  be  regarded  as  amusing  fellows.  Let  them 
look  at  Herod,  and  see  in  him  their  leader,  the  type  of  what  they  really 
are  or  may  soon  become. 

First,  let  us  see  idle  curiosity  at  its  best.  Look  here,  sirs,  and  then 
."ook  in  a  glass  and  trace  the  likeness. 

To  begin  with,  we  find  that  Herod's  curiosity  had  been  created  in 
him  by  his  having  heard  many  things  concerning  Jesus.  How  did  he 
come  to  hear  of  him  ?  His  great  deeds  were  common  talk :  all  Jeru- 
salem rang  with  the  news  of  his  miracles  and  wondrous  words.  Herod, 
a  convert  to  the  Jewish  faith,  such  as  he  was,  took  interest  in  anything 
that  was  going  on  among  the  Jews,  and  all  the  more  so  if  it  touched 
upon  the  kingdom,  for  the  jealousy  which  set  his  father  in  a  rage  was 
not  altogether  absent  in  his  son.  No  doubt  also  he  had  heard  of  Christ 
from  John.  John  would  not  long  have  preached  to  Herod  without 
using  his  own  grand  text,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh 
away  the  sin  of  the  world."  I  am  sure  that,  though  he  was  a  preacher 
of  righteousness,  he  had  not  left  off  being  the  herald  of  the  coming 
Saviour,  and  so  from  the  stern  lips  of  the  great  Baptist  Herod  had 
heard  concerning  the  King  of  the  Jews,  and  something  concerning  his 
kingdom.  When  John  was  dead  Herod  heard  still  more  of  Christ,  so 
that,  astonished  with  what  was  being  done,  he  said,  "  This  is  John  the 
Baptist  whom  I  have  beheaded :  he  is  risen  from  the  dead."  Jesus 
became  a  kind  of  nightmare  to  his  conscience :  he  was  disturbed  and 
alarmed  by  what  he  heard  that  the  prophet  of  Nazareth  was  doing. 
Besides  that,  there  was  one  in  his  household  who  doubtless  knew 
a  great  deal  about  the  Saviour  ;  for  in  Herod's  court  was  the  husband 
of  a  woman  who  ministered  unto  the  Lord  of  her  substance.  The 
lady's  name  was  Joanna,  and  her  husband  was  Chuza,  Herod's  steward 
— 1  suppose  Herod's  butler  and  manager  of  his  household.  From 
Chuza  he  could  readily  have  learned  concerning  Jesus,  and  we  may  be 
sure  that  he  would  enquire,  for  the  fear  of  the  great  prophet  was  upon 
him.  Thus  Herod's  curiosity  had  been  excited  about  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  for  a  considerable  time,  and  he  longed  to  see  him.  I  am  not 
sorry  when  this  happens  to  any  of  my  hearers  :  I  am  right  glad  that  they 
should  hear  something  about  the  Lord  from  his  friends,  something  about 
him  from  his  ministers,  and  from  those  of  us  whose  highest  glory  it  is 
that,  though  we  are  not  worthy  to  unloose  the  latchets  of  his  shoes,  yet 
it  is  all  our  business  here  below  to  cry,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  !  "  So  these 
rumours,  this  talk,  these  admonitions,  had  begotten  in  Herod's  mind 
the  desire  that  his  eyes  should  light  on  Jesus  ;  so  far,  so  good.  Often 
men  at  this  day  come  up  to  the  house  of  prayer  that  they  may  hear 
the  preacher  ;  not  because  they  want  to  be  converted,  not  because  they 
have  any  idea  of  ever  becoming  followers  of  Jesus,  but  because  they  have 
heard  something  about  true  religion  which  excites  their  curiosity,  and 
they  would  know  what  it  is  all  about ;  they  are  fond  of  curiosities  of 
literature,  and  so  they  would  study  curiosities  of  religion,  oddities  of 
oratory,  and  things  remarkable  of  a  theological  kind. 

It  is  said  of  Herod,  in  consequence  of  this  curiosity,  that  he  rejoiced 
lo  see  Jesus.  It  is  said  that  he  was  *'  exceeding  giad."  What  a  hopeful 
fctate  to  be  in  !     May  we  not  expect  great  things  when  a  man  sees  Jesua 


OUR  LORD  BEFORE  HEROD.  365 

and  is  exceeding  glad  ?  As  I  read  this  passage  to  myself,  I  thought. 
Why,  the  language  might  well  describe  a  child  of  God  ;  our  text 
might  fitly  be  spoken  concerning  ourselves  ;  let  me  read  it  line  by  line, 
and  remark  upon  it.  "  When  Herod  saw  Jesus,  he  was  exceeding  glad ;" 
so  were  the  apostles  when  Jesus  manifested  himself  to  them  ;  for  it  is 
Av^tten,  "Then  were  the  disciples  glad  when  they  saw  the  Lord." 
What  other  sight  could  bring  to  a  true  believer  such  joy  ?  *'  For  he 
was  desirous  to  see  him."  Are  we  not  ?  Are  not  all  his  people  longing 
for  that  blessed  vision  which  will  make  their  heaven  throughout 
eternity  ?  "  For  he  was  desirous  to  see  him  of  a  long  season."  This  is 
also  true  of  us :  our  hearts  are  weary  with  watching,  and  our  eyes  fail  for 
the  sight  of  his  face.  "  AVhy  tarries  he  ?  "  we  cry.  "  Make  haste,  my 
beloved,  and  be  thou  like  to  a  roe  or  to  a  young  hart  upon  the  mountains 
of  spices."  "  Because  he  hud  heard  many  things  of  him ;  and  he  hoped 
to  have  seen  some  miracle  done  by  him."  This,  also,  is  our  hope:  we 
would  both  see  and  feel  some  gracious  miracle, — upon  our  eyes,  that 
they  may  be  opened  ;  or  upon  our  hands,  that  we  may  have  greater 
power  in  the  Master's  work  ;  or  upon  our  feet,  that  we  may  run  in  the 
ways  of  obedience  ;  and  especially  upon  our  hearts,  that  we  may  be  ever 
soft  and  tender,  pure  and  gracious,  to  feel  the  mind  of  God.  Yes,  these 
words  read  very  prettily  indeed  ;  but  yet,  you  see,  the  meaning  was 
not  the  high  and  spiritual  one  which  we  could  put  into  them,  but  the 
low  and  grovelling  one,  which  was  all  that  Herod  could  reach. 
He  was  "exceeding  glad;"  but  it  was  a  frivolous  gladness,  because 
he  hoped  that  now  his  curiosity  would  be  satisfied.  He  had  Jesus  in 
his  power,  and  he  hoped  now  to  hear  some  of  the  oratory  of  the  prophet 
of  whom  men  said,  "  Never  man  spake  like  this  man."  He  hoped  to 
see  him  work  a  miracle,  even  he,  of  Avhom  the  record  was,  "  He  hath 
done  all  things  well."  Could  not  the  great  prophet  be  induced  to  mul- 
tiply loaves  and  fishes  ?  Might  he  not  persuade  him  to  heal  a  blind 
beggar,  or  make  a  lame  man  leap  as  a  hart  ?  Would  not  a  miracle 
make  rare  mirth  in  Herod's  palace,  and  cause  a  new  sensation  in  the 
mind  of  the  worn-out  debauchee  ?  If,  for  instance,  a  corpse  were  dug 
up,  and  Jesus  would  restore  it  to  life,  it  would  be  something  to  tell  of 
when  next  the  king  sat  down  to  a  drinking  bout  with  Herodias  and 
her  like.  When  each  was  trying  to  exceed  the  other  in  telling  strange 
tales  Herod  would  match  them  all!  In  this  style  many  people  come  to 
hear  the  gospel.  They  want  to  have  an  anecdote  of  their  own  about  a 
notorious  preacher,  and  if  they  do  not  see  something  ludicrous,  or  hear 
something  striking,  they  will  invent  a  tale,  and  swear  that  they 
heard  it  and  saw  it,  though  the  lie  might  well  choke  them.  They  act 
thus  because  they  come  to  hear  for  nothing  but  to  feed  their  hungry 
curiosity.  None  carry  this  to  such  an  extreme  as  those  who  did  at  one 
time  feel  a  measure  of  the  power  of  the  word  of  God,  but  have  shaken 
it  off.  These  are  the  mockers  whose  bands  are  made  strong ;  these  are 
the  idlers  who  turn  even  the  testimony  of  the  Lord  into  food  for  mirth. 
Still,  at  the  first  blush,  there  is  something  that  looks  very  hopeful 
about  them,  and  we  are  pleased  that  they  exhibit  such  gladness  when 
Christ  is  set  forth  before  them. 

One  ill  sign  about  Herod  was  the  fact  that  his  conscience  had  gone  to 
sleep  after  having  for  awhile  troubled  him.     For  a  little  he  had  been 


36  g  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

afraid  of  Jesua,  and  trembled  lest  John  had  risen  from  the  dead  ;  but 
that  fear  had  subsided,  and  superstition  had  given  way  before  his  Sad- 
ducean  scepticism.  He  hoped  that  Jesus  would  perform  some  wonderful 
thinf^  in  his  presence ;  but  he  had  lost  all  dread  of  the  Just  and  Holy  One. 
He  was  a  man  of  vain  mind :  the  man  whom  he  feared  one  day  he  mur- 
dered the  next,  and  he  whom  he  welcomed  with  gladness,  he  hurried  off 
with  derision.  There  was  left  to  Herod  no  feeling  towards  Jesus  but 
the  craving  after  something  new,  the  desire  to  be  astonished,  the  wish 
to  be  amused.  I  think  I  see  him  now,  sitting  on  his  throne,  expectant 
of  wonders,  like  the  trifler  that  he  was.  *'  Now  we  shall  see,"  saith  he, 
"now  we  shall  see  what  we  shall  see  !  Perhaps  he  will  deliver  himself 
by  sheer  force  ;  if  he  walked  the  sea,  he  will  probably  fly  away  in  the 
air.  Perhaps  he  will  render  himself  invisible,  and  so  pass  away  through 
the  midst  of  the  chief  priests.  I  have  heard  that  many  a  time  when 
they  would  have  stoned  him  or  cast  him  down  from  the  brow  of  a  hill, 
he  departed,  gliding  through  their  midst :  perhaps  he  will  do  the  sauie 
this  morning."  There  sits  the  cunning  prince,  divining  what  the 
wonder  will  be  ;  regarding  even  displays  of  divine  power  as  mere  show- 
man's tricks,  or  magician's  illusions. 

When  Jesus  was  set  before  him  he  began  to  ask  him  questions  : 
"Then  he  questioned  with  him  in  many   words."      I  am  glad   the 
questions  are  not  recorded:  they  could  have  done  us  no  good;  and, 
besides  our  modern  Herods  nowadays  are  great  masters  of  the  art,  and. 
need  not  that  any  man  teach  them.    We  need  not  to  be  furnished  with 
the  old-fashioned  quibbles   and  questions  ;   for  the   supply  is  quite 
equal  to  our  requirements.     Fools  can   ask   more   questions  in   ten 
niinutes  than  wise  men  are  able  to  answer  in  fifty  years.     I  say  we  do 
not  want  the  old  questions,  but  I  daresay  they  would  run  somewhat  in 
this  hne,  "  Are  you  that  King  of  the  Jews  whom  my  father  strove  to 
slay  ?     How  came  you  to  be  a  Nazarene  ?     Have  you  been  a  miracle- 
worker,   or  is  it  all  legerdemain  or  necromancy?      John  told    me 
something  about  you;   did  you  deceive  him,  or  is  it  true?      Have 
you  raised  the  dead  ?     Can  you  heal  the  sick  ?       Trying  all  the  while 
to  excite  him  to  work  a  miracle,  he  raised  doubts  and  chopped  logic 
volubly,  for  the  text  suggestively  mentions  his  *'  many  words.       i  he 
carious  in  religion  are  generally  very  apt  at  question-asking  ;  not  that 
thev  want  Christ,  not  that  they  want  heaven,  not  that  they  want  pardon 
of  sin,  not  that  they  want  any  good  thing  ;  but  still  they  would  like  to 
know  everything  that  is  dark  and  mysterious  in  theology  ;  they  would 
like  to  have  a  list  of  the  difficulties  of  behef,  a  catalogue   of   the 
curiosities  of  spiritual  experience.     Some  men  collect  ferns,  others  are 
learned  upon   beetles,   and  these  persons   pry  into   church  hfe    its 
doctrines,  pursuits,  aims,  and  infirmities,--especially  the  latter^     ihey 
could  write  a  book  upon  orthodox  England  and  unorthodox  England, 
and  dwell  with  unction  upon  mental  vagaries.     It  furnishes  them  with 
something  new,  and  adds  to  their  store  of  information,  and  so  they  spare 
no  pryin?  questions;  for  they  would  analyze  manna  from  heaven,  and 
dL^l  the  tears  of  Christ:  nothing  is  sacred  to  them  ;.  they  put  Scripture 
on  the  rack,  and  cavil  at  the  words  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Thus  have  I  set  forth  idle  curiosity  in  its  better  stage.     Now  let  us  pass 
on  and  see  how  Jesus  treated  this  curio&ity,  considering  it  under  ttie- 


OUR  LORD  BEFORE  HEROD.  qqj 

head  of  idle  curiosity  disappointed.  "  He  questioned  with  him  in 
many  words,  but  he  answered  him  nothing  !"  If  Herod  had  wanted  to 
believe,  Jesus  would  have  been  ready  enough  to  instruct;  if  Herod  had 
possessed  a  broken  heart,  Jesus  would  have  hastened  with  tender  words 
to  bind  it  up  ;  if  Herod  had  been  a  candid  enquirer,  if  his  doubts  had 
been  sincere  and  true,  the  faithful  and  true  Witness,  the  Prince  of  the 
kings  of  the  earth,  would  have  been  delighted  to  speak  with  him.  But 
Jesus  knew  that  Herod  would  not  believe  in  him  and  would  not  take 
up  his  cross  and  follow  him  ;  and  therefore  he  would  not  waste  words 
on  a  heartless,  soulless  profligate.  Had  he  not  said  to  his  own  disciples, 
"  Give  not  that  which  is  holy  unto  the  dogs,  neither  cast  ye  your 
pearls  before  swine"?  He  saw  in  this  man  one  so  mean,  cunning, 
cowardly,  and  heartless,  that  he  viewed  him  as  a  fox  to  be  let  alone 
rather  than  a  lost  sheep  to  be  sought  after.  He  was  a  tree  twice  dead,, 
and  plucked  up  by  the  roots.  All  the  Master  did  was  to  maintain  an 
absolute  silence  in  his  presence;  and,  let  him  question  as  he  might, 
*'  he  answered  him  nothing." 

Observe,  my  brethren,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  came  not  into  this 
world  to  be  a  performer  :  he  did  not  leave  his  glory  to  earn  the  wonder- 
ing approbation  of  men  ;  and  as  Herod  regarded  him  as  a  mere  wonder- 
worker, and  would  have  turned  his  court  into  a  theatre  wherein  Jesus 
should  be  the  chief  actor,  our  Lord  very  wisely  held  his  peace  and  did 
nothing  at  all.  And  sometimes  his  ministers  might  be  wise  if  they 
were  silent  too.  If  they  know  that  men  have  no  desire  to  learn,  no 
spiritual  wish  or  aspiration,  I  say  they  might  be  wise  if  they  held  their 
tongue  altogether.  I  have  sometimes  admired  George  Fox,  who,  on 
one  occasion,  when  the  crowd  had  gathered  round  him,  expecting  him 
to  deliver  some  fiery  address,  stood  still  by  the  space  of  two  hours 
while  they  clamoured  that  he  would  speak.  Never  a  word  did  they 
get  from  him.  He  said  he  would  famish  them  of  words  ;  for  words 
were  all  they  wanted,  and  not  the  power  of  the  Spirit.  Probably  they 
recollected  his  silence  better  than  they  would  have  remembered  his; 
most  vehement  discoursing.  Sometimes  silence  is  all  that  men  deserve, 
and  the  only  thing  which  in  any  probability  will  impress  them.  As 
the  Lord  Jesus  was  no  performer,  he  did  not  gratify  Herod,  but  answered 
him  not  a  word. 

Moreover,  be  it  recollected  that  Herod  had  already  silenced  the 
Voice,  and  no  marvel  that  he  could  not  hear  the  Word.  For  what  was 
John  ?  He  said,  "  I  am  the  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness." 
What  was  Jesus  but  the  Word  ?  He  that  silences  the  Voice  may  well  be 
denied  the  Word.  Had  not  his  shallow  soul  been  moved, — I  was 
about  to  say,  to  its  deptlis,  such  depths  as  they  were  ?  Had  he  not 
been  admonished  by  one  of  the  greatest  of  the  children  of  men  ?  For 
among  them  that  were  born  of  women  there  had  not  then  been  a 
greater  than  John  the  Baptist.  Had  not  a  burning  and  shining  light 
shone  right  into  his  very  eyes  ?  And  if  he  refused  to  hear  the  greatest 
of  the  sons  of  men,  and  to  see  the  brightest  hght  that  God  had  then 
kindled,  it  was  but  right  that  the  Saviour  should  refuse  him  even  a 
ray  of  light,  and  let  him  perish  in  the  darkness  which  he  had  himself 
created.  Ah,  sirs,  you  tiannot  trifle  with  religious  impressions  with 
impunity.     God  thinks  it  no  trifle.     He  who  has  once  been  moved  in  hi? 


3^g  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

soul  and  has  put  away  the  heavenly  word  from  him,  may  fear  that  it  will 
be  said  of  him,  "  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  man.  Ephraim  is 
joined  to  idols  :  let  him  alone."  May  not  some  conscience  here,  if  it 
has  but  a  little  life  in  it,  be  alarmed  at  the  memory  of  former  rejections 
of  the  gospel,  frequent  quenchings  of  the  Spirit,  repeated  tramplings 
upon  the  blood  of  Jesus  ?  If  God  never  speaks  to  you  again  in  the  way 
of  mercy,  you  have  no  right  to  expect  that  he  should  do  so  ;  and  if  from 
this  day  to  the  day  of  judgment  the  Lord  should  never  give  you  another 
word  of  mercy,  who  shall  say  that  you  have  been  treated  harshly  ? 
Have  you  not  deserved  it  at  his  hands  as  Herod  had  done  ? 

Furthermore,  recollect  that  Herod  might  have  heard  Christ  hundreds 
of  times  before  if  he  had  chosen  to  do  so.  Jesus  was  always  to  be  found 
by  those  who  desired  to  listen  to  him.  He  did  not  go  sneaking  about 
Galilee,  or  holding  secret  conventicles  in  holes  and  corners.  He  ever 
spake  in  the  synagogue,  and  Herod  might  have  gone  there  ;  he  spake  in 
the  street  or  by  the  seashore,  or  on  the  mountain  side,  and  Herod  might 
have  gone  there.  Jesus  stood  out  boldly  before  the  people,  and  his 
teaching  was  public  and  free  ;  if  Herod  had  wished  to  hear  him,  he 
might  have  done  so  times  beyond  number  :  therefore  now,  having  de- 
spised all  these  opportunities,  the  Saviour  will  not  furnish  him  with 
another,  which  he  would  have  treated  in  the  same  manner.  He  answers 
him  nothing,  and  by  so  doing  answered  him  terribly.  Beware  how  you 
waste  opportunities.  Dear  hearers,  beware  how  you  waste  your  Sab- 
baths. There  may  come  a  day  when  you  would  give  a  thousand  worlds 
for  another  Sabbath,  but  it  shall  be  denied  you.  There  may  come  a  day 
when  you  would  count  out  all  your  wealth  to  have  another  invitation  to 
Christ,  but  it  will  be  denied  you  ;  for  you  must  die,  and  the  voice  of 
mercy  will  never  ring  in  your  ears  again.  They  that  will  not  when  they 
may,  shall  not  when  they  would.  Many  will  knock  after  the  Master  of 
the  house  has  risen  up  and  shut  to  the  door ;  but  when  he  shutteth,  no 
man  openeth.     The  door  was  shut  on  Herod. 

Observe,  that  our  Master  had  good  reason  for  refusing  to  speak  to 
Herod  this  time,  over  and  above  what  I  have  mentioned  ;  because  he 
would  not  have  it  supposed  that  he  yielded  to  the  pomp  and  dignity  of 
men.  Jesus  never  refused  an  answer  to  the  question  of  a  beggar  ;  but 
he  would  not  gratify  the  curiosity  of  a  king.  Herod  dreams  that  he  has 
a  right  to  ask  whatever  impertinent  questions  he  may  choose  to  invent ; 
but  Jesus  knows  nothing  of  men's  rights  in  such  a  matter :  it  is  all 
grace  with  him,  and  to  him  the  prince  upon  the  throne  is  not  an  atom 
better  than  the  peasant  in  the  cottage,  and  so  when  Herod  in  all  his 
pride  and  glory  thinks  full  sure  that  Christ  will  pay  deference  to  him 
and,  perhaps,  will  pay  him  court  to  win  his  favour,  Jesus  disregards 
him.  He  wants  nothing  of  the  murderer  of  John  the  Baptist.  Had 
Herod  been  the  poorest  and  most  loathsome  leper  throughout  all  Judea, 
had  he  been  the  meanest  •  mendicant  in  the  street,  who  was  lame  or 
blind,  his  voice  would  at  once  have  been  heard  by  the  Lord  of  mercy  ; 
but  he  will  not  answer  the  prince  who  hopes  for  homage  at  his  hands, 
nor  feed  the  idle  wishes  of  a  crafty  reprobate.  What  favour  did  he 
want  at  Herod's  hand  ?  He  had  not  come  to  be  set  free  ;  he  had  come 
to  die,  and  therefore  his  face  is  set  like  a  flint,  and,  with  heroic  courwge, 
he  answers  him  not  a  word. 


Oim  LORD  BEFORE  HEROD,  369 

Now,  then,  you  have  seen  frivolous  curiosity  at  its  best,  and  you  have 
seen  it  disappointed,  as  it  generally  is  to  this  day.  If  people  come  to 
hear  the  gospel  out  of  this  frivolous  curiosity,  they  usually  retire  saying, 
«*  Really,  I  do  not  see  anything  in  it.  We  have  heard  nothing  eloquent, 
nothing  profound,  nothing  outrageous."  ,  Just  so  ;  there  is  nothing  in 
the  gospel  to  please  the  luxurious,  though  everything  to  bless  the 
poor.  Jesus  answered  Herod  nothing,  and  he  will  answer  you  nothing 
if  vou  are  of  Herod's  order.  It  is  the  doom  of  triflers  that  they  should 
get  no  answer  from  the  gospel :  neither  the  Scriptures,  nor  the  ministry, 
nor  the  Spirit  of  God,  nor  the  Lord  Jesus  will  speak  with  them. 

What  was  the  result  of  this  disappointment  upon  Herod?  IdU 
curiosity  curdles  into  derision.  He  thinks  the  man  is  a  fool,  if  not  an 
idiot,  and  he  says  so,  and  begins  to  deride  him.  With  his  men  of 
war  he  mocks  him,  and  "  set  him  at  nought,"  which  signifies  to  make 
nothing  of  him.  He  calls  his  soldiers  and  says,  "Look  at  this 
creature :  he  will  not  answer  a  word  to  what  I  have  to  say :  is  he 
bereft  of  his  senses  ?  Rouse  him  up,  and  see."  Then  they  mock  and 
laugh  and  jest  and  jeer.  "Here,"  says  Herod,  "he  calls  himself  a 
kino- !  Bring  out  one  of  my  shining  white  robes,  and  put  it  on  him  : 
we  will  make  a  king  of  him."  So  they  put  it  about  his  blessed  person, 
and  again  heap  contumely  upon  him.  Was  it  not  strange— this 
decking  him  in  a  gorgeous  robe  of  dazzling  white  ?  The  mediaeval 
writers  delight  to  dwell  on  the  fact  that  Herod  arrayed  our  liord  in 
white  and  afterwards  Pilate  clothed  him  in  red.  Is  he  not  the  Lily  of 
the  valley  and  the  Rose  of  Sharon  ?  Is  he  not  matchlessly  white  for 
innocence,  and  then  gloriously  red  in  his  atoning  blood  ?  Thus,  in 
their  very  mockery,  they  are  unconsciously  setting  forth  to  us  both  his 
spotless  holiness  and  his  majestic  royalty.  When  they  had  insulted  to 
their  full,  they  sent  him  back  to  Pilate,  kicking  him  from  foot  to 
foot  at  their  pleasure,  as  if  he  were  a  football  for  their  sport.  Then 
our  Lord  made  his  fourth  sorrowful  march  through  the  streets  of  the 
city  over  which  he  had  wept.  ^      i    •     t- 

That  is  what  idlers  in  the  long  run  do  with  Christ ;  m  their  dis- 
appointment they  grow  weary  of  him  and  his  gospel,  and  they  cry, 
"  Put  him  away  ;  there  is  nothing  in  him,  nothing  of  what  we  looked 
for,  nothing  to  satisfy  curiosity,  nothing  sensational ;  take  him  away.'' 
Away  goes  Jesus,  never  to  return  ;  and  that  is  the  end  of  Herod,  and 
the  end  of  a  great  many  more.  ,  .,     «         ^ 

II.  My  time  is  nearly  gone ;  but  bear  with  me  while  tor  a  tew 
minutes  I  try  to  set  forth  Jesus  in  the  presence  of  Herod. 
Although  no  blows  are  recorded,  I  greatly  question  whether  our  givme 
Master  suffered  anywhere  more  than  he  did  in  the  palace  of  Herod. 
You  and  I,  perhaps,  apprehend  most  easily  the  woe  of  the  coarser  suf- 
ferings when  they  scourged  him  and  when  they  plaited  the  crown  of 
thorns  and  put  it  upon  his  head,  but  the  delicate  and  sensitive  mmd  ol 
our  Master  was,  perhaps,  more  touched  by  what  he  suffered  m  the 
palace  of  Herod  than  by  the  rougher  torture.  For,  first,  here  is  a  man 
fully  in  earnest  for  the  salvation  of  our  souls,  and  in  the  midst  of  his 
grievous  passion  he  is  looked  upon  as  a  mountebank  and  a  mere  per- 
former, who  is  expected  to  work  a  miracle  for  the  amusement  of  an 
impious  courL     How  it  cuts  an  earnest  man  to  the  quick  when  he  findi 


370  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACT.E  PULPIT. 

that,  let  him  do  what  he  may,  people  do  not  sympathise  with  him  in 
earnestness,  but  are  coolly  criticizing^  his  style,  or  imitatin^r  his  man- 
nerisms, or  admiring  his  expressions  as  matters  of  literary  taste.  It  is 
heart-breakinf?  when  your  ardour  makes  you  self-forgetfiil  to  find  others 
pecking  at  trifles,  or  making  your  efforts  into  a  kind  of  show.  The 
Christ  must  have  been  wounded  in  his  very  soul  when  he  was  treated 
as  a  mere  performer,  as  if  he  had  left  the  Father's  bosom  and  was 
about  to  give  himself  to  death,  and  yet  was  aiming  to  amuse  or 
to  astonish.  I  know  how  it  saddens  my  Lord's  servants  when  they 
preach  their  very  hearts  out  to  bring  men  to  repentance,  and  the 
only  result  is  to 'elicit  the  remark  that  "  his  arjyuments  were  very  tell- 
ing, and  that  pathetic  passage  was  very  fine."  There  is  a  thorn  in  such 
chill  words  to  pierce  deeper  than  the  crown  of  thorns  :  horrible  indif- 
ference smites  like  the  Roman  scourge. 

Then  to  think  of  our  Lord's  being  questioned  by  such  a  fop  as  Herod  ! 
A  man  of  earnest  and  intense  soul,  living  for  one  thing  only,  and  that 
the  redemption  of  mankind,  is  here  worried  by  the  foolish  questions  of 
a  man  of  the  world.  Were  you  ever  in  an  agony  of  bodily  pain  your- 
self, and  did  some  frivolous  person  call  upon  you  and  begin  to  torture 
you  with  the  veriest  inanities  and  absurdities  ?  Have  you  not  felt  that 
his  chatterings  were  worse  than  the  pain  ?  It  must  have  been  so  with 
Jesus.  When  the  ridiculous  must  needs  question  the  sublime  the  resilt 
is  misery.  With  the  bloody  sweat  yet  damp  upon  his  brow,  and  with 
the  accursed  spittle  still  defacing  his  blessed  countenance,  the  Man  of 
Sorrows  must  be  tortured  by  the  drivellings  of  a  heartless  idler.  With 
his  heart  all  bowed  down  under  a  sense  of  the  awful  penalty  of  sin,  the 
great  Substitute  for  sinners  must  be  molested  by  the  petty  small  talk 
and  ribald  jests  of  the  meanest  of  mankind.  Solving  eternal  problems, 
and  building  up  an  everlasting  temple  unto  the  living  God,  he  must  be 
twitted  by  a  vainglorious  tetrarch,  tormented  and  tortured  by  foolish  ques- 
tions fit  only  to  be  asked  of  a  mountebank.  We  think  the  cross  itself 
was  not  a  worse  instrument  of  torture  than  the  haughty  tongue  of  this 
debauched  monarch. 

Then  the  ribaldry  of  the  whole  thing  must  have  tortured  our  Lord. 
The  whole  of  them  gathered  round  about  him  with  their  hoarse 
laughter  and  coarse  jests.  He  has  become  a  by-word  and  a  proverb 
to  them.  When  you  are  merry  you  can  enjoy  merriment ;  but  when 
the  heart  is  sad  laughter  is  wreto.hedly  discordant,  and  embitters  your 
grief  Now  this  one  laughs,  and  then  another  sneers  ;  while  a  third 
thrusts  out  the  tongue,  and  they  are  all  uproariously  jovial.  In  harmony 
they  are  all  making  nothing  of  him,  though  with  awful  earnestness  he  is 
lifting  the  world  out  of  the  slough  of  despair,  and  hanging  it  in  its 
place  again  among  the  stars  of  glory.  Jesus  was  performing  more  than 
Herculean  labours,  and  these  little  beings,  like  so  many  gnats  and  flies, 
were  stini^ing  him.  Small  things  are  great  at  torturmg,  and  these 
worthless  beings  did  their  utmost  to  torment  our  Lord.  Oh,  the  torture 
of  the  Master's  spirit !  i      ,      -i     ^    v      f  ii 

Eemember,  it  was  no  small  sorrow  to  our  Lord  to  be  silent,  lou  tell 
me  that  he  appears  majestic  in  his  silence.  It  is  even  so  ;  but  the  pain 
of  it  was  acute.  Can  you  speak  well  ?  Do  you  love  to  speak  for  the 
good  of  your  fellow  men,  and  do  you  know  that  when  you  speak  full  oaeu 


OUR  LORD  BEFORE  HEROD.  371 

jour  words  are  spirit  and  life  to  those  who  hear  you  ?  It  will  be  very 
hard  to  feel  compelled  to  refuse  them  a  good  word.  Do  not  imagine 
that  the  Lord  despised  Herod  as  Herod  despised  the  Lord.  Ah,  no  ! 
The  pity  of  his  soul  went  out  to  this  poor  frivolous  creature  who  must 
needs  make  sport  of  the  Saviour's  sufferings,  and  treat  the  Son  of  the 
Highest  as  though  he  were  a  court  fool,  who  must  play  before  him. 
The  Saviour's  infinite  love  was  breaking  his  heart ;  for  he  longed  to 
bless  his  persecutor,  and  yet  he  must  not  speak,  nor  give  forth  a  warning 
word.  True,  there  was  little  need  for  words,  for  his  very  presence  was  a 
sermon  which  ought  to  have  melted  a  heart  of  stone  ;  but  yet  it  cost 
the  Saviour  a  mighty  effort  to  keep  down  the  flood-gates  and  hold  in 
the  blessed  torrents  of  his  holy  speech,  which  would  have  flowed  out  in 
compassionate  pleadings.  Silent  he  must  be  ;  but  the  anguish  of  it  I 
can  scarcely  tell.  Sometimes  to  be  permitted  to  speak  a  word  is  the 
greatest  comfort  you  can  have.  Have  you  never  been  in  such  a  state 
that  if  you  could  cry  out,  it  would  have  been  a  relief  to  you  ?  What 
anguish,  then,  to  be  forced  to  be  as  a  dumb  man  !  What  woe  to  be 
forced  to  be  silent  with  all  these  mockers  about  him,  and  yet  to  be 
pitying  them  all !  As  a  man  might  pity  a  moth  that  flies  into  the  flame 
of  the  candle,  and  will  not  be  delivered,  so  did  our  Lord  pity  these 
creatures.  How  sad  that  they  could  make  sport  of  their  own  damnation, 
fling  the  salvation  of  God  to  the  ground,  and  tread  it  down  as  swine 
tread  down  their  husks.  Oh,  it  grieved  the  Master's  heart  ;  it  moved, 
his  soul  to  its  very  centre. 

Think  of  the  utter  contempt  that  was  poured  upon  him.  I  do  not 
judge  that  this  was  the  bitterest  of  his  woes,  for  their  contempt  was  an 
honour  to  him  ;  but  yet  it  was  one  ingredient  of  his  cup  of  mingled 
woruiwood  and  gall,  that  they  should  so  despise  him  as  to  clothe  him  in 
a  white  robe,  and  mock  his  kingship,  when  on  that  kingship  their  only 
hope  was  hung.  They  "set  him  at  nought,"  that  is,  put  him  down 
as  nothing,  jeered  and  jested  at  him,  and  if  there  was  nothing  even 
about  his  manhood  which  they  could  respect,  they  invented  ways  by 
which  they  could  pour  scorn  upon  him.  Luke  is  the  gospel  of  the  man  ; 
if  you  want  to  read  about  Jesus  in  his  manhood,  read  Luke  ;  and  here 
you  will  see  how  his  very  manhood  was  trampled  in  the  mire  by  these 
inhuman  creatures,  who  found  their  joy  in  despising  him. 

See,  then,  your  Lord  and  Master,  and  let  me  put  two  or  three 
questions  to  you.  Do  you  not  think  that  this  peculiar  silence  of  Jesus 
was  a  part  of  his  anguish,  in  which  he  was  bearing  the  punishment  for 
your  sins  of  the  tongue  ?  Ah  me,  ah  me  !  Redeemed  of  the  Lord, 
i.ow  often  have  you  misused  your  speech  by  wanton  words  !  How  often 
have  we  uttered  murmuring  words,  proud  words,  false  words,  words  of 
despite  to  holy  things  ;  and  now  our  sins  of  the  tongue  are  all  coming 
upon  him,  and  he  must  stand  silent  there  and  bear  our  penalty. 

And  is  it  not  possible  that  when  they  put  the  gorgeous  robe  upon 
him,  he  was  bearing  your  sins  of  vanity,  your  sins  of  dress  and  pride, 
when  you  made  yourselves  glorious  to  behold,  and  arrayed  yourselves 
in  gorgeous  robes  and  glittering  apparel  ?  Know  ye  not  that  these 
things  are  your  shame  ?  For  had  you  had  no  sin,  you  would  have 
needed  none  of  tliese  poor  rags  ;  and  may  not  the  Christ  in  white  and 
red  be  bearing  your  sins  of  folly  ?     And  do  you  not  think  that  when 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 
372 

they  were  making  him  nothing,  and  despising  him,  he  was  t^ie?  ]>e»^ng 
our  sins,  when  w^sethim  atnought-our  words  of  despite  and  der  s.on 
when,  perhaps,  in  our  ungodly  days  we,  too  made  sport  of  holy  things 
Tnd  ested  at  the  word  of  God  ?  Ah  me,  I  think  it  was  so  and  I  ask 
you  to  bok  ^t  him,  and  say  as  you  see  W-.there,"  It  is  -t  Herod  after 
all  •  it  is  mv  tonsue,  my  vanity,  my  trifling  with  holy  things,  which 
^used  hi^this  exquisite  torturk  iord  Jesus,  substitute  for  me,  let 
all  these  transgressions  of  mine  be  put  away  once  for  all  by  thy  meri- 

'"SyTtr'read  that  Herod  and  Pilate  were  made  friends  from 
that  day,  and  I  do  hope  if  there  are  any  here  that  are  true-hearted 
Christians  if  they  have  had  any  iU-wiU  towards  one  another  they  will 
rti^nk  Ta  greafshame  that  Herod  and  Pilate  should  be  fnends,  and 
tetany  two  followers  of  Jesus  should  not  be  friends  at  the  s.ght 
of  the  suffering  Master.    As  for  those  two  foxes,  Pilate  and  Herod, 
?heywerf  tied  fail  to  tail  that  day  by  our  great  Samson. .  Our  Lord  has 
often  been  a  point  of  union  for  wicked  men,  not  by  his  intent  and  pur- 
nose  but  because  they  have    oined  together  to  oppose  him.     I  have 
Xn  smiled  in  my  heart  to  see  how  Superstition  and  scepticism  will 
march  together  when  they  are  anxious  to  oppose  the  gospel.    Then 
The  SaddScee  says,  "Give  me  your  hand,  dear  Pharisee;  J, have  a 
common  interest  here,  for  this  man  would  over  urn  ns  all.        ihe 
gospel  is  the  mortal  enemy  both  of  the  seep  ical  Sadducee  and  the 
funStitious  Pharisee,  and  so  they  lay  aside  their  differences  to  assail  it. 
Northerif  the  wicked  unite  before  our  Lord  Jesus  when  he  wears 
fhe  ;hite  ^be,  should  not  his  people  much  more  be  united  ejecialy 
when  they  remember  that  he  said,  "  A  new  commandment  give  I  unto 
you,  that  ye  love  one  another."    I  charge  you  by  your  homage  to  him 
Ton  call  Master  and  Lord,  if  you  have  any  difference  of  ^nyjort  with 
iny  Christian  brother,  let  not  yon  sun  go  down  till  you  have  ended  it 
by  hearty  love  for  Jesus'  sake.    Let  it  be  seen  that  Christ  is  the  great 
uniter  of  all  those  who  are  in  him.    He  would  have  us  love  one  another 
evenas  he  has  loved  us,  and  hisprayer  is  that  we  may  be  one    May  the 
Lord  hear  that  prayer,  and  make  us  one  in  Christ  Jesus.    Amen. 

POETIONS  OF  SOBIPTUBB    READ   BEFORE   SeEMON— Luke  XXiiu  4—15  ) 

and  Proverbs  viii. 


SETTING  JESUS  AT  NOUGnT. 


Intended  foe  Eeading  on  Lord's-day,  November  11th,  18ft8. 


DELIVERED   BY 


C.   H.  SPURGE  ON, 

AT   THE    METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lordh-day  Evenivg,  Septembei-  2nd,  1888. 


"  And  Herod  with  his  men  of  war  set  him  at  nought." — Luke  xxiii.  11. 

It  is  your  Lord  whom  Herod  set  at  nought !  Once  worshipped  of  angels 
and  all  the  heavenly  host,  he  is  made  nothing  of  by  a  ribald  regiment. 
In  himself  "the  brightness  of  his  Father's  glory,  and  the  express 
image  of  his  person  "  ;  but  now  set  at  nought  by  men  not  worthy  of 
the  name.  Soon  to  reassume  all  his  former  glory  with  the  Father,  and 
to  descend  in  infinite  splendour  to  judge  the  earth  in  righteousness,  and 
reign  as  King  of  kings ;  and  yet  here  he  is  set  at  nought !  It  is  a 
sight  of  horror  and  of  shame.  How  could  angels  bear  to  see  it?  This 
paltry  prince  and  his  rough  retinue  made  nothing  of  him  who  is  All 
in  all ;  they  treated  him  as  beneath  their  contempt.  The  veriest 
abjects  flouted  him.  The  meanest  soldier  in  the  petty  army  of  a  petty 
princelet  made  unholy  mirth  of  heaven's  high  Lord  and  earth's 
Redeemer.  What  a  sorrowful  and  shameless  business  !  May  we  be 
helped  to  sorrow  over  it!  These  wretches  were  of  our  race.  May 
we  mourn  because  of  him  !  When  the  thorns  of  grief  and  repentance 
are  at  our  breast,  may  God  grant  that  they  may  act  as  lancets  to  let 
out  the  foul  blood  of  our  pride,  for  we,  too,  are  partakers  in  this 
tremendous  crime,  since  our  sin  involved  our  Saviour  in  the  necessity 
of  bearing  this  barbarous  scorn. 

Herod  himself  set  him  at  nought.  In  this  loathsome  being  I  see  the 
most  likely  person  to  think  nothing  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Let  me  just 
say  a  word  or  two  about  this  member  of  a  detestable  family,  that  I 
may  see  whether  his  like  can  be  found  here  to-night.  I  will  not  give 
you  any  history  of  this  Herod.  It  is  not  worth  while.  This  "  fox  " 
is  not  worth  unearthing.  The  page  of  history  is  stained  by  the 
Herodian  name.  I  will  give  you  enough  concerning  him  to  help  you 
to  answer  the  question — Are  you  like  him  ?  Have  you  set  Christ  at 
nought  ? 

No.  2,05L 


374  METR0P0LITA2«  TABERNACLE  PCLPIT. 

I.     This   shall   be   our   first   enquiry:    who   is    the  most   likely 

PERSON    TO    set    OUR   LoRD    AT    NOUGHT? 

Herod  was  a  man  who  had  once  heard  the  Word  of  God ;  yes,  hoard  it 
with  a  measure  of  attention,  and  apparent  benefit.  We  read,  "  Herod 
feared  John,  knowing  that  he  was  a  just  man  and  an  holy,  and  ob- 
served him ;  and  when  he  heard  him,  he  did  many  things,  and  heard 
him  gladly."  According  to  the  margin,  Herod  "  kept  him  or  saved 
him  " — preserving  him  from  those  who  would  have  laid  violent  hands 
upon  him.  But  he  broke  away  from  his  respectful  regard  of  John, 
and  now  that  Jesus  stands  before  him,  his  memory  of  the  Baptist  does 
not  restrain  him  from  mocking  the  Baptist's  Lord.  He  had  silenced 
that  eloquent  tongue,  and  now  he  had  no  care  to  listen  to  anything 
which  might  further  bestir  his  conscience.  We  often  find  that  the 
greatest  despisers  of  Christ  are  those  who  formerly  were  hearers 
and  readers  of  his  Word,  but  have  turned  from  it.  An  apostate 
Methodist  is  a  scoffer :  a  runaway  Baptist  is  an  infidel.  It  looks  as 
if  men  must  have  some  knowledge  of  the  truth  to  be  able  to  fight 
against  it  in  the  most  malicious  way.  The  viper  must  be  warmed  in 
the  man's  bosom  that  he  may  have  strength  to  bite  him.  Is  not  this 
a  wretched  business  ?  Am  I  talking  to  any  here  who,  not  so  many 
years  ago,  were  regular  attendants  upon  a  faithful  ministry,  but  who 
have  grown  weary  of  it,  and  given  it  up  ?  I  do  not  know  what  reason 
you  give ;  but  I  suppose  the  real  reason  is,  that  you  love  the  world 
better  than  Christ,  and  so  you  have  left  his  people  and  his  Word.  It 
troubles  your  conscience  that  you  have  done  so,  and  now  you  try  to 
conceal  j^our  uneasiness  by  picking  holes  in  your  former  minister,  and 
finding  fault  with  the  truths  which  he  preached  to  you.  I  know  the 
tricks  and  manners  of  apostates.  Wanting  an  opiate  for  your  con- 
sciences, you  invent  a  fault  in  the  gospel,  or  try  to  disbelieve  it 
altogether.  What  an  unhappy  thing  that  the  hopeful  hearer  should 
decline  into  a  hopeless  despiser !  Herod  heard  John,  but  he  ridiculed 
Jesus.     See  to  what  unconverted  hearers  may  come ! 

If  I  look  at  Herod  again,  I  see  in  him  a  man  who,  after  hearing 
the  Word  faithfully  preached,  had  distinctly  done  violence  to  his  con- 
science.  He  heard  John  until  John  came  home  to  him  about  the 
woman  with  whom  he  was  living  in  an  incestuous  union.  Herodias 
would  have  killed  John  at  once ;  and  though  Herod  did  not  dare  to  go 
so  far  as  that,  yet  he  shut  him  up  in  prison.  A  filthy  lust  must  not 
be  rebuked  :  Herod  imprisons  his  reprover.  He  knew  that  John  was 
rigliT;,  and  he  trembled  at  his  rebuke ;  but  he  could  not  give  up  his 
sin,  and  so  he  put  the  servant  of  God  in  a  dungeon.  He  was  held 
fast,  as  many  a  man  before  and  since  has  been  held  fast,  by  an  evil 
woman.  She  demanded  of  him  that  at  the  very  least  the  man  of  God 
should  be  cast  into  prison.  How  dare  he  speak  against  what  the 
prince  chose  to  do  ?  How  dare  a  peasant  censure  so  great  a  man 
as  Herod  about  his  personal  life  ?  So,  instead  of  bowing  before  the 
supreme  authority  of  right,  and  listening  to  the  voice  of  truth  as 
uttered  by  the  Lord's  Elijah,  he  must  needs  exercise  his  royal  power, 
and  lay  his  reprover  by  the  heels.  The  man  who  could  do  this  was  in 
training  for  the  more  daring  act  of  setting  the  Lord  Jesus  at  nought. 
First  despise  the  man,  and  then  the  Master.     First  do  violence  to 


SETTING   JESUS   AT   NOUGHT.  375 

your  better  self,  and  tlien  scofE  at  godliness.  My  friend,  do  you  re- 
member that  night  when  you  distinctly  decided  for  the  devil  ?  Do 
you  recollect  when,  after  having  the  evil  set  before  you,  and  seeing 
it,  and  counting  the  cost,  you  decided  to  continue  in  it  ?  Then  you 
turned  with  bitterness  u^Don  the  honest  reprover  whose  rebuke  you  had 
aforetime  endured.  Perhaps  it  was  your  wife  upon  whom  you  turned 
with  anger.  What  hard  words  you  said  to  her  for  the  gentle  remark 
she  ventured  to  make !  It  was  an  effort  for  you.  You  gave  conscience 
an  awful  wrench  ;  and  therefore  you  put  yourself  into  a  passion,  and 
talked  like  an  injured  man.  Or  was  it  your  brother  ?  It  may  be  you 
quitted  his  society  in  order  ^o  be  free  from  his  remarks.  Was  it  your 
child,  or  your  friend  ?  You  could  not  put  them  in  prison  ;  but  you 
were  determined  that  you  would  not  bear  any  more  of  their  protests. 
You  abused  and  silenced  them  ;  not  because  you  thought  they  were 
wrong,  but  because  they  made  you  feel  that  tjou  were  wrong.  By  all 
this  you  have  prepared  yourself  to  set  the  Lord  at  nought ;  and  we 
cannot  wonder  that  you  do  so. 

This  man  also  had  yielded  to  sinful  companions,  and  had  committed  a 
gross  sin  as  the  result  •/  it,  for  when  Herodias  danced,  and  he  promised 
to  give  her  whatsoever  she  desired,  she  asked  the  head  of  John  the 
Baptist  in  a  charger ;  and  he,  not  liking  to  break  his  word  in  the 
presence  of  the  assembled  guests,  and  not  willing  to  stand  out  against 
the  woman  with  whom  he  lived  in  unhallowed  intercourse,  yielded, 
and  the  Baptist's  head  was  taken  from  his  shoulders.  Ah,  well !  you 
may  not  have  sinned  quite  in  that  way ;  but  you,  too,  once  had  better 
thoughts  and  higher  aims.  Your  companions  were  too  many  for  you, 
and  drove  all  good  out  of  you.  I  do  not  mention  this  that  you  may 
dare  to  cast  the  blame  upon  others  of  that  which  was  really  your  own 
act  and  deed.  If  there  had  been  a  spark  of  true  manhood  in  you,  you 
would  have  resisted  the  suggestion  of  those  enemies  in  the  garb  of 
friends.  But  you  are  soft  and  plastic,  like  wax,  in  the  hand  of  evil ; 
instead  of  being,  as  you  ought  to  be,  like  granite  towards  evil,  and 
like  wax  towards  good.  You  now  feel  as  if  you  had  gone  too  far  to 
turn  back.  You  are  now  fixed  in  an  evil  estate.  A  black  sin  seems  to 
bar  the  way  to  repentance.  Truly,  even  now  you  will  be  welcomed 
to  the  bosom  of  mercy,  but  you  are  not  anxious  enough  for  it.  It  is  a 
long  lane  that  has  no  turning,  but  you  seem  to  have  got  into  such  a 
lane,  and  you  are  driven  along  it  by  evil  forces.  This  is  the  man  that 
thinks  nothing  of  Christ— the  man  who  thinks  so  much  of  drinking 
and  dancing,  and  of  the  companions  which  such  things  have  brought 
around  him.  Of  course  he  does  not  think  anything  of  Christ,  for  his 
ways  would  take  from  him  these  vile  associates.  How  should  he  value 
the  holy  Jesus  ?  Will  swine  ever  think  much  of  pearls  ?  It  is  vain 
that  we  set  before  you  beauties  for  which  you  have  no  eyes,  hopes 
for  which  you  have  no  heart.  Jesus  cannot  be  valued  by  a  man  of 
Herod's  sort,  who  puts  so  high  a  value  upon  the  opinion  of  those  who 
flit  with  him  at  his  banquets. 

Once  more  :  the  man  who  thinks  nothing  of  Christ  is  the  man  that 
means  to  go  on  in  sin,  even  as  Herod  did.  The  die  was  cast;  his 
mind  was  made  up  for  evil.  He  would  be  very  glad  to  hear  Christ : 
he  has  no  objection  still  to  go  to  a  place  of  worship  and  listen  to  a 


376 


METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 


preacher.  He  would  be  very  pleased  to  see  a  miracle :  he  would  join 
in  a  revival,  for  he  would  be  glad  to  enjoy  something  sensational, 
but  he  does  not  mean  to  give  up  the  sin  in  which  he  lives,  nor  the 
company  which  eggs  him  on  in  it.  He  does  not  mean  to  cut  off  the 
right  hand,  and  pluck  out  the  right  eye.  Not  he !  He  is  too  fond  of 
the  vice,  too  much  ensnared  and  bird-limed  by  his  passions  ;  and  so, 
as  he  gives  his  heart  to  his  lust,  he  takes  away  his  heart  from  Christ ; 
nay,  he  treats  religion  with  derision,  because  it  is  opposed  to  his  bent 
and  inclination.  What  a  sad  thing  !  I  generally  find,  when  man  speaks 
against  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  if  you  follow  him  home,  he  would  rather 
not  have  you  go  indoors,  for  fear  his  inner  life  should  be  known.  He 
does  not  want  you  to  see  the  skeleton  in  the  cupboard.  I  have  so 
often  met  with  this  fact  in  actual  life,  that  when  I  have  heard  a  man 
speak  bitterly  of  my  Master,  I  have  formed  my  opinion,  and  have  not 
been  wrong.  A  little  enquiry  has  revealed  so  much  that  I  have  said, 
"It  is  not  at  all  surprising  that  such  a  man  should  speak  evil  of 
Christ.  It  is  as  natural  to  such  a  man  to  talk  against  Christ  as  for  a 
dog  to  bark."  When  a  bad  fellow  once  praised  Socrates,  that  philo- 
sopher said,  '*  I  wonder  what  I  can  have  been  doing  amiss,  that  such 
a  man  should  speak  well  of  me."  If  lustful  lips  praised  the  Saviour, 
one  might  begin  to  be  afraid ;  but  when  they  denounce  and  deride 
him,  we  feel  that  it  is  the  only  homage  which  vice  can  pay  to  purity. 

This,  then,  is  the  man  who  sets  Jesus  at  nought.  I  wonder  whether 
he  is  here  to-night !  Possibly  it  is  a  woman  who  is  doing  this.  Women 
fall  into  precisely  the  same  evils  as  men  from  their  own  side  of  the 
house,  and  the  same  remarks  apply  to  both  sexes.  You  who  once 
were  hearers,  you  who  once  were  impressed,  you  who  did  wilful 
violence  to  conscience,  you  who  persist  in  sin,  you  who  are  the  slaves 
of  evil  company,  and  dare  not  do  right  for  the  life  of  you,  for  fear  of 
ridicule — you  are  the  kind  of  people  of  whom  Herod  was  a  sad 
specimen :  you  set  Jesus  at  nought. 

II.  Having  tried  to  find  out  Herod,  let  us  now  answer  a  second 
question — on  what  ground  did  he  set  our  Lord  at  nought  ? 

Men  have  some  reason  or  other  for  their  acts,  although  often  those 
reasons  are  most  unreasonable.  Before  we  consider  the  unhallowed 
reasons  for  this  great  crime,  let  us  do  homage  to  the  name  of  the  Son  of 
G-od.  0  Lord  Jesus,  even  in  thy  lowest  humiliation  thou  art  worthy 
of  all  reverence.  To  thy  friends  thou  art  all  the  more  dear  and 
the  more  honoured  because  thou  wast  greatly  despised.  Thou,  bound 
and  brought  a  prisoner  before  the  tetrarch,  art  free  to  rule  our  hearts. 
Thou  wert  charged  with  sedition,  but  we  fall  at  thy  blessed  feet,  and 
proclaim  thee  King  of  kings ! 

Herod  sets  him  up  as  the  butt  of  his  ridicule,  and  makes  nothing 
of  him.     As  Herbert  puts  it — 

"  Herod  and  all  his  bands  do  set  me  light, 
Who  teach  all  hands  to  war,  fingers  to  fight,     ' 
And  only  am  the  Lord  of  hosts  and  might. 
Was  ever  grief  like  mine  ?  " 

I  suppose  that  part  of  the  reason  why  he  and  his  men  of  war  made 
nothing  of  our  Lord  was  because  of  his  gentleness  and  patience.     Our 


SETTING   JESUS   AT   NOUGHT.  377 

Lord  had  no  sword,  and  none  of  the  temper  of  men  who  wear  weapon*. 
His  visage  was  not  like  the  face  of  a  man  of  war :  it  was  marred  with 
orief ,  but  not  with  anger  ;  worn  with  sorrow,  but  not  with  battle.  He 
was  the  lamb  and  not  the  lion,  the  dove  and  not  the  eagle,  and  there- 
fore the  fighting  men  despised  him.  If  he  had  any  weapons  they 
were  his  tears  and  his  almighty  love ;  but  these  the  Herodian  ruffians 
utterly  despised.  All  unarmed  he  stood  before  them,  and  when  he  was^ 
reviled  he  reviled  not  again.  You  know  how  men  of  muscular  strength 
and  physical  bravado  value  men  by  their  thews  and  bones,  and  think 
nothing  of  those  who  are  feeble  in  arm  and  body.  The  Saviour,  in 
his  emaciation  and  faintness,  must  have  seemed  a  poor  creature  to 
these  hectors.  The  Christian  religion  teaches  us  to  be  meek  and 
gentle,  to  forgive  injuries,  and  even  to  give  up  our  own  rights  rather 
than  to  inflict  wrong.  Such  precepts  savour  of  cowardice  to  the 
blustering  world.  Non-resistance  they  cannot  hear  of.  They  do  not 
like  the  word  "  Forgive."  "  Surely,"  say  they,  "a  worm  will  turn?'* 
Thus  they  think  so  little  of  Christ  that  they  prefer  an  earthworm's 
example  to  that  of  the  Lord.  The  sweet  savour  of  gentle  forbearance, 
which  the  spirit  of  Jesus  breathes  into  the  hearts  of  his  people,  is  by 
many  held  in  contempt.  They  call  it  cant  and  hypocrisy,  because  it  is 
so  alien  to  their  nature,  so  inconsistent  with  their  ideas  of  manly 
conduct. 

Furthermore,  our  Lord  was  ridiculed  by  Herod  because  lie  refused  to 
gratify  his  curiositij  and  amuse  his  love  of  sensation.  The  wicked  Herod 
virtually  said  to  the  holy  Jesus,  "  Come,  work  us  a  miracle.  We  hear 
that  thou  didst  deliver  from  death,  now  release  thyself  from  our  hands. 
"We  hear  that  thou  didst  multiply  loaves  and  fishes,  and  feed  multi- 
tudes, give  us  a  banquet  here.  Thou  canst  do  all  things,  so  report 
says  of  thee — come,  do  some  little  thing  that  we  may  see  and  believe. 
Did  not  Moses  work  miracles  before  Pharaoh  ?  Work  a  miracle  before 
us."  There  stands  our  Lord,  with  all  power  in  his  hands,  but  he  will 
not  lift  a  finger  for  his  own  deliverance  and  Herod's  amusement.  O 
blessed  Jesus,  it  is  the  same  still,  thou  wilt  not  dazzle  nor  amuse,  and 
therefore  men  prefer  any  charlatan  to  thee. 

Herod  then  begins  to  question  him.  He  asks  him  this,  and  that, 
and  the  other,  with  many  a  jest  rolled  in  between  ;  but  he  receives  no 
answer.  He  who  answered  blind  beggars  when  they  cried  for  mercy 
is  silent  to  a  prince  who  only  seeks  to  gratify  his  own  irreverent 
curiosity.  Then  the  men-at-arms  laugh  at  their  silent  victim.  ' '  Why, " 
they  say,  "  the  man  is  dumb.  Either  he  can  say  nothing  for  himself, 
or  he  is  obstinate  and  ill-mannered.  He  speaks  not  when  he  is  spoken 
to.  Has  he  lost  his  wits  ?  "  Thereupon  they  multiply  their  profane 
jests,  and  make  nothing  of  the  silent  One.  I  do  not  doubt  that  often 
men  turn  away  from  the  faith  because  their  curiosity  is  not  gratified, 
and  they  see  nothing  marvellous  in  it.  A  gospel  for  the  age !  A 
brand  new  gospel  every  year  might  suit  them ;  but  the  old  is  stale : 
they  know  all  about  it,  and  sneer  at  it.  Plain  gospel  is  too  plain  for 
them.  They  desire  adornment,  or  at  least  mystery,  and  the  pomp  which 
veils  the  unknown.  They  would  rather  go  where  there  are  gorgeous 
ceremonies,  and  mutterings  in  an  unknown  tongue  amid  the  smoke  of 
incense  and  the  harmony  of  music.     The  simple  gospel  of  "Believe 


378 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


and  live  "  does  not  suit  them ;  for  it  seems  fit  only  for  the  poor  anu 
unintellectual :  thus  they  set  Jesus  at  nought. 

Moreover,  the  royal  claims  of  Jesus  excited  their  scorn.  I  think  I  hear  the 
*'  Aha !  aha  !  aha !  "  of  Herod  as  he  said,  "  Call  him  a  King  ?  You  could 
find  such  kings  as  this  in  every  street  of  Jerusalem.  Talk  of  a  kingdom 
for  him !  Gro  to  the  pool  of  Bethpsda,  and  fetch  up  some  poor  wretch 
who  lies  waiting  there  for  the  moving  of  the  water,  and  call  him  a 
king  !  King  ?  What  hosts  art  at  thy  command  ?  What  kingdom 
dost  thou  govern  ?  What  laws  canst  thou  make  ?  Here !  Put  the 
white  robe  upon  him.  Let  him  at  least  look  like  a  monarch.  Yes, 
that  old  robe  will  do  !  Is  he  not  every  inch  a  King?  "  Then  the 
soldiery  took  up  the  jest !  How  bitterly,  how  derisively  did  they 
make  his  royalty  the  football  of  contempt !  Thus  to-day  the  world 
makes  nothing  of  the  royalty  of  King  Jesus.  A  nominal  king  he  may 
be,  but  as  a  real  king  they  will  not  have  him.  Those  who  would  be 
in  the  dust  before  the  meanest  princelet  have  no  esteem  for  him. 
There  is  no  pomp  about  the  pure  religion  of  Jesus  ;  there  is  no  glory 
of  philosophy  about  his  teaching ;  and  so  they  set  him  and  his  cause 
at  nought.  Ah,  me  !  what  will  a  rebellious  people  do  in  the  day  when 
he  appeareth  to  claim  his  throne  and  punish  sedition  ? 

Then,  too,  they  denied  his  prophetic  office.  "Look!"  said  Herod, 
**  he  will  not  speak.  I  have  asked  him  twenty  questions,  and  he  will 
not  answer  one  of  them.  This  is  a  pretty  prophet !  John  was  the 
voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness,  but  this  man  has  no  voice  at  all. 
A  dumb  prophet !  Why,  he  is  mute  as  a  fish,  and  has  nothing  to  say 
for  himself."  With  such  unhallowed  merriment  did  Herod  and  his 
men  of  war  set  the  Lord  at  nought.  How  they  provoked  him  !  But 
he  stands  in  the  majesty  of  his  self-government,  quiet  to  the  end. 
Here  was  an  omnipotence  which  restrained  the  lips  of  omnipotence. 
It  was  a  wondrous  power,  that  Grodlike  patience  which  enabled  indignant 
holiness  to  withhold  its  word  of  condemnation.  The  prophet  proved 
his  commission  by  his  silence  ;  and  yet  he  provoked  their  scorn,  so  that 
they  set  him  at  nought.  At  this  time,  because  the  Christian  faith 
is  silent  upon  a  great  many  questions,  certain  men  deride  it.  When 
men  come  to  it  with  captious  questions  they  receive  no  answer,  and 
they  are  irritated  thereby.  When  they  idly  demand  a  miracle,  and 
it  does  not  yield  to  their  desires,  they  have  fresh  jeers  for  it. 
*'You  preach  up  the  faith  of  Christ  as  the  only  true  and  divine 
religion  :  let  us  see  it  work  wonders.  Where  are  your  miracles  ?  We 
have  asked  you  fifty  questions  about  the  past  and  the  future,  and  you 
do  not  reply;  where  is  the  ground  for  your  boastings  ?"  Thus  they 
make  nothing  of  Christ,  and  disdain  his  claim  to  teach  with  authority. 

Those,  I  suppose,  were  the  grounds  upon  which  Herod,  and  such  as 
Herod,  make  light  of  Christ.  Poor  grounds  they  are,  and  such  as 
will  fail  to  justify  them  before  the  bar  of  Q-od. 

III.  Now,  dear  friends,  let  us  consider,  how  do  men  now  set  our 
Lord  at  nought  ?  Herod  is  dead  and  buried,  and  there  is  no  sort  of 
reason  why  we  should  not  let  him  rot  into  oblivion.  I  therefore  speak 
to  you,  and  try  to  discover  whether  you  are  setting  Christ  at  nought. 
I  fear  there  are  such.     Who  are  they  ? 

Some  set  him  at  nought,  for  they  will  not  even  consider  his  claims. 


SETTING   JESUS   AT   NOUGHT.  879 


«♦  Oh  "  say  they,  ''  we  have  plenty  else  to  think  about  besides  religion. 
What  is  there  in  it  which  will  fill  our  pockets  ?  There  is  nothing  at 
all  in  it  worth  a  moment's  attention."  How  do  they  know  ?  They  do 
not  know.  Nothing  in  it  ?  God  gives  his  own  Son  to  die  for  guilty 
men,  and  there  is  nothing  in  it !  The  highest  thoughts  of  God  are  set 
forth  in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  you  do  not  think  it 
worth  while  even  to  consider  what  God  has  therein  revealed  ?  A  man 
goes  to  a  bookstall,  and  turns  over  a  book.  It  is  a  novel :  he  reads 
a  page,  and  would  like  to  buy  it.  But  suppose  it  is  a  book  upon  the 
glories  of  Christ.  Does  he  read  then  ?  Does  he  wish  to  buy  it  ?  JN  o, 
it  is  one  of  those  dry  theological  books,  and  he  shuts  it  up.  He  will 
make  no  bid  for  a  volume  on  so  dull  a  subject.  He  would  like  to 
know  of  Alexander  the  Great  or  even  of  Tom  Thumb,  but  for  the 
world's  Eedeemer  he  cares  nothing.  He  makes  nothing  of  Christ.  Do 
I  not  convict  some  here  present  to-night  ?  They  have  never  set  apart 
one  solitary  hour  in  their  lives  to  the  honest  and  candid  consideration 
of  the  claims  of  Jesus,  the  divine  Saviour.  H  it  be  so,  you  have  indeed 
made  Christ  very  cheap  ;  and  if  you  perish  for  lack  of  him,  your  blood 
be  on  your  own  heads  I  If  this  be  the  medicine  that  will  heal  your 
disease,  and  you  huff  at  it,  and  will  not  even  hear  of  the  cures  it  has 
wrought,  who  is  to  blame  if  you  perish  ?  Who  is  to  save  the  man  who 
will  not  listen  when  salvation  is  put  before  him  ?  Yet  the  great  mass 
of  our  fellow  citizens  are  of  this  kind.  In  London  there  are  miUions 
who  make  so  little  of  Christ  that  they  will  not  even  come  to  hear  what 
his  ministers  have  to  say  about  him,  nor  read  their  Bibles,  nor  show 
the  least  interest  in  the  matter.  In  many  a  house  in  London  Mahomet 
is  practically  as  much  esteemed  as  Jesus.     Ah  me  ! 

There  are  mamj  others  who  prefer  their  business  to  Jesus.  They  would 
not  mind  giving  some  little  attention  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  but  then  they 
are  too  busy  just  now.  They  say  that  they  really  cannot  afford  the 
time  0  my  busy  hearer  !  you  will  have  to  find  time  to  die  before 
long  :  why  not  think  of  that  solemn  certainty?  You  are  very  busy, 
and  yet  you  find  time  to  eat.  Have  you  no  time  to  feed  your  soul? 
You  find  time  to  put  on  your  dress,  have  you  no  time  to  dress  your 
souls  ?  You  seek  out  the  surgeon  when  you  are  ill ;  have  you  no  time 
to  seek  out  a  Saviour  for  your  sin-sick  soul  ?  Ah !  it  is  not  that :  you 
have  the  time,  but  you  have  not  the  heart. 

Others  prefer  amusements  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  "  WeU,"  says  one,  "  we 
must  have  recreation.  In  my  spare  time  I  like  a  game."  I  know  that. 
I  am  not  for  denying  you  healthy  recreation,  but  everything  should 
be  in  order,  and  I  claim  first  place  for  Jesus  Christ  and  his  salvation. 
What !  is  it  not  worth  while  to  give  up  a  sport  to  seek  Jesus  ?  Do  you 
think  a  game  of  cards  more  important  than  seeking  the  pardon  of  your 
sin  ?  An  evening  at  the  theatre  or  the  music-hall ;  do  you  really  think 
so  little  of  Jesus  that  you  can  live  without  him,  and  satisfy  your  mmd 
with  these  poor  things  ?  Can  you  suffer  the  paltry  amusements  of  the 
world  to  stand  before  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  Yet  it  is  so  with  some  of  you  : 
I  wish  it  were  not.  My  Master's  blood  and  righteousness,  the  salva- 
tion of  a  soul  from  hell,  the  preparing  of  a  heart  for  heaven— these  are 
laid  away  in  the  lumber-room,  to  allow  the  childish  pleasures  of  a  vam 
world  to  engross  your  thoughts.    You  will  know  better  one  day.     God 


380  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

ffrant  you  mav  learn  wisdom  while  yet  it  may  be  of  use  to  you.  Too 
late '  What  awful  words !  May  you  even  now  feel  that  if  the  Son  of 
God  has  lived  and  died  for  men,  it  is  of  the  first  importance  that  you 
put  business  and  pleasure  in  their  proper  places,  and  seek  first  the 
kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness. 

Another  sort  of  persons  make  nothing  of  Christ,  because  they  profess 
to  see  nothing  profound  and  philosophical  in  the  faith  which  he  has 
revealed.  These  are  the  Greeks,  to  whom  the  doctrine  of  the  cross 
is  f ooHshness.  0  foolish  Greeks !  These  wise  men  wiU  not  hear  some 
of  us  because  we  can  be  understood  of  the  people.  "Anybody  can 
understand  you,"  say  they,  "you  speak  after  the  manner  of  the  crowd, 
and  what  you  say  is  simple  enough  to  be  clear  to  the  most  ignorant. 
We  like  something  deeper,  something  too  profound  to  be  readily 
grasped.  We  are  above  common-place  people,  and  need  something 
more  inteUectual  and  philosophical."  A  man  of  note  once  said  to  me, 
"  Why  do  you  keep  on  preaching  to  those  thousands  at  Newington  ? 
Preach  so  that  the  mob  will  leave  you,  and  the  elite  wiU  support  you." 
To  whom  I  answered,  that  if  one  man's  soul  was  of  less  value  than 
another,  his  was  of  the  least  value  who  could  talk  so  slightingly  of 
others.  Those  who  make  no  pretence  to  culture,  are  often  far  more 
sensible  people  than  those  who  affect  superiority.  The  man  who 
thinks  that  he  is  inteUectual,  and  talks  in  that  fashion,  is  a  miserable 
Bnob,  and  has  scarcely  a  soul  at  aU.  When  a  man  despises  the 
multitude,  he  deserves  to  be  despised  himself.  But,  my  dear  sir,  if  the 
salvation  of  Christ  be  very  simple,  and  very  plain,  is  it  not  so  much 
the  better  ?  Have  you  not  enough  of  philanthropy  to  make  you  teei 
that  if  you  could  have  a  gospel  only  for  the  elite,  it  would  be  a  matter 
of  deep  regret?  Is  not  a  gospel  for  the  multitude  the  thing  to  be 
desired?  Do  you  not  desire  the  vast  mass  to  be  saved?  I  hope  you 
do.  But  I  fear  you  make  nothing  of  Christ  when  you  despise  his 
ffospel  because  you  imagine  that  it  is  not  deep  enough  and  philo- 
sophical enough  for  you.  The  most  profound  science  m  the  world  is 
the  science  of.  the  cross !  Christ  himself  is  the  highest  wisdom,  for  h« 
is  the  wisdom  of  God.  ..7     .     ^i        7 

Others  make  nothing  of  the  Lord  because  they  confide  tn  themselves. 
They  think  themselves  quite  good  enough  without  a  Saviour.  If  they 
are  not  quite  perfect,  they  believe  that  they  can  make  themselves  so, 
and  be  saved  without  an  atoning  sacrifice,  ^r  a  new  heart,  or  union  to 
Christ.  They  are  doing  their  best,  and  they  make  no  doubt  whatever 
that  they  will  find  their  way  to  heaven  as  well  as  others.  Do  you 
thus  think  ?  You  are  in  grave  error.  There  was  a  learned  Eomanist 
who  once  ventured  to  say  that  if  salvation  could  only  be  had  on  terms 
of  free  grace,  he  would  not  have  it.  Do  you  know  what  happened  t 
Why  he  did  not  have  it :  that  was  all.  And  that  is  what  will  happen 
to  you.  If  you  wiU  not  have  salvation  as  a  free  gift  of  grace,  without 
any  merit  wherewith  to  purchase  it,  then  you  must  go  without  it,  and 
perish  in  your  sin;  for  the  terms  of  free  grace  will  never  be  altered 
to  suit  the  pride  of  the  human  heart.  If  any  man  sets  up  his  righteous 
ness  in  the  place  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  sin-removing  Lamb,  why  then 
he  has  made  nothing  of  Christ,  and  the  Lord  will  make  less  than 
nothing  of  him.     Alas !  that  any  man  should  be  so  profane  as  to  thinJs 


SETTING   JESUS   AT   NOUGHT.  381 

himself  so  good  that  he  does  not  need  God's  grace  and  the  atoning 
blood!  Such  pride  insults  the  Lord  Christ,  and  will  bring  sure 
destruction  upon  the  man  who  is  guilty  of  it. 

I  have  no  doubt  that  there  are  many  also  who  make  nought  of 
Christ  because  they  have  no  conscience  tvliatever  as  to  his  present  claims 
upon  them.  0  dear  sirs,  if  you  did  but  know  his  kindness  to  the  sons 
of  men,  even  to  his  enemies,  and  how  he  sought  them  with  his  tears, 
and  then  bought  them  with  his  blood,  you  would  feel  forced  to  love 

him. 

**  Sure  Christ  deserves  the  noblest  place 
In  every  human  heart." 

Truly  know  Jesus,  and  you  must  love  him.  But  some  men  do  not  think 
that  they  owe  him  anything,  or  are  in  any  need  of  him.  It  is  nothing 
to  such  that  he  died,  for  they  did  not  require  his  death  to  save  them  : 
in  their  judgment  they  are  not  lost.  Those  who  are  of  this  mind  will 
leave  this  Tabernacle  to-night,  and  will  go  back  to  the  world  just 
as  they  came  in,  practically  saying,  "Whether  Jesus  lived  or 
whether  he  died,  and  whatever  he  did  or  was,  I  care  nothing,  for  I  owe 
him  nothing."  And  yet  you  owe  him  everything.  You  had  not  been 
here  to-night  if  it  were  not  for  the  mercy  which  has  spared  you,  and 
which  has  come  to  you  through  him.  The  axe  would  have  had  you 
down  long  ago  but  for  his  intercession.  There  had  been  no  gospel  to 
set  before  you  to-night  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  death  agony  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  You  owe  the  very  opportunity  of  hearing  the  gospel,  and 
the  opportunity  of  accepting  it  to  his  dying  love.  Oh,  that  you  had  a 
conscience  which  would  make  you  just  towards  Jesus  !  Oh,  that  you 
felt  that  you  were  bound  to  love  him  and  live  for  him,  because  of  all 
that  he  has  done  for  guilty  men ! 

As  they  have  no  conscience  of  his  claims  upon  them,  so  many  have 
no  fears  concerning  the  day  of  his  appearing.  Whether  you  believe  it  or 
not,  Jesus,  as  your  Judge,  is  at  the  door.  He  said,  years  ago,  "  Behold, 
I  am  coming  quickly."  He  is  still  coming,  and  must  soon  arrive 
to  commence  the  last  dread  session  of  justice.  What  matters  it  how 
many  more  years  may  elapse?  They  will  fly  like  the  wind.  ThedaywiU 
come  when  heaven  and  earth  shaU  be  ablaze.  The  thick  darkness 
wiU  lower  down, 

••And,  withering  from  the  vault  of  night, 
Tke  stars  shall  pale  their  feeble  light." 

The  hour  will  come  when  the  earth  and  sky  will  rock  and  reel,  and  pass 
away,  rolled  up  like  a  worn-out  vesture.  Then  shall  the  trumpet  ring 
out  exceeding  loud  and  long— "Awake,  ye  dead,  and  come  to 
judgment !  "  How  will  you  endure  that  voice  which  shall  disturb  the 
stiUness  of  the  sepulchre?  "Come to  judgment !  Come  to  judgment! 
Come  to  judgment !  "  How  it  wiU  peal  forth  !  None  of  you  will  be 
able  to  resist  the  caU.  From  your  beds  of  dust  you  will  start  up 
amazed  to  a  terrible  awakening.  From  the  sea,  from  the  land,  from  the 
teeming  cemetery,  from  the  lonely  grave,  men  will  rise,  and  all  of  them 
stand  before  Christ !  In  that  day  you  will  see  nothing  but  the  great 
white  throne,  and  him  that  sits  upon  it.     You  will  be  unable  to  close 


382 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


your  eyes,  or  to  turn  your  gaze  elsewhere.  There  will  he  sit,  and  you 
will  know  him  by  his  scars. 

"How  resplendent  shine  the  nail-prints! 
Every  eye  shall  see  him  move." 

Still  shall  the  trumpet  thrill  out  the  summons,  **  Come  to  judgment ! 
Come  to  judgment !  Come  away !  "  And  you  must  come,  whether 
you  will  or  not ;  and  if  you  have  despised  the  Lord  as  Saviour,  you 
will  tremble  before  him  as  Judge.  You  will  then  hear  his  voice,  which 
in  itself  is  sweeter  than  the  harps  of  heaven,  but  to  the  ungodly  it  will 
be  more  full  of  thunder  than  the  crash  of  tempest— ' '  Depart !  Depart ! 
Depart !  "  0  my  hearer,  what  will  then  become  of  you  ?  The  prospect 
is  terrible  :  but  you  have  no  concern  about  it.  To  die,  to  rise,  to  be 
judged,  to  be  condemned :  you  take  no  account  of  it.  Like  Herod, 
you  set  him  at  nought.  How  dare  you  do  so  ?  How  dare  you  despise 
the  great  Judge?  Ah,  my  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  them!  Have 
mercy  upon  them  now,  and  turn  them  from  doing  to  thee  and  to  them- 
selves this  grievous  wrong  of  making  nothing  of  the  Lord  of  all.  They 
set  him  at  nought ! 

This  is  very  heavy  preaching  to  me.  If  it  is  as  painful  to  you  to 
hear  as  to  me  to  speak,  you  will  be  glad  when  I  have  done.  I  pray 
that  these  solemn  words  may  long  remain  upon  your  hearts.  Oh,  that 
they  might  bring  you  to  Jesus  at  once  by  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost ! 

IV.  But  I  close  with  this :  what  do  believers  say  about  their 
Lord  ?     Herod  made  nothing  of  him  :  what  do  we  make  of  him  ? 

Well,  we  say,  first,  that  we  mourn  and  lament  that  there  ever  was  a 
time  when  we  ourselves  made  nothing  of  the  glorious  One.  It  is  many 
years  ago  with  some  of  us ;  but  we  cannot  forget  it,  nor  cease  to  bewail 
it.  There  were  a  certain  number  of  years  in  our  lives  in  which  it  was 
nothing  to  us  that  Jesus  should  die.  0  my  dear  hearers,  perhaps 
some  of  you  have  been  lately  converted  after  forty,  or  fifty,  or  sixty 
years  of  sin.  Repent  with  aU  your  hearts  that  you  were  Herods  so 
long.  Christ  has  forgiven  you  ;  but  can  you  forgive  yourselves  ?  No; 
I  think  that  you  still  smite  on  your  breast,  and  say,  "Lord,  I  grieve 
that  ever  I  lived  a  moment  without  acknowledging  my  Lord— that  I 
ever  ate  a  meal  or  drew  in  a  breath  without  bowing  before  him." 
Lord,  bury  those  years  in  forgetfulness  which  we  spent  in  forgetfulness 

of  thee  I 

Next,'  it  is  now  our  grief  that  any  others  should  set  the  Lord  Jesus  at 
nought.  '  It  must  be  a  great  grief  to  any  man  here  if  she  who  lies  in  his 
bosom  sets  the  Lord  at  nought.  Dear  woman,  I  know  what  your  daily 
burden  must  be  if  the  husband  who  is  so  dear  to  you  does  not  love  your 
Saviour,  whom  you  love  with  a  higher  love.  What  an  anguish  it  is  to 
nourish  and  bring  up  children,  and  see  them  refuse  our  Lord !  ^  i 
have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that  my  children  walk  in  the  truth  ; 
and  no  greater  sorrow  than  to  see  them  running  into  evil  ways. 
Could  we  reaUy  see  the  heart  of  an  unregenerate  man  or  woman  it 
would  cause  us  the  utmost  distress.  If  we  felt  as  we  ought  to  ±eel,  if 
there  were  only  Due  unconverted  person  in  this  Tabernacle,  we  should 
make  a  Bochim  of  it  till  that  heart  was  yielded  to  Christ.     If  there 


BETTING   JESUS   AT   NOUGHT.  383 

existed  only  one  man  or  woman  who  did  not  love  the  Saviour,  and  if 
that  person  lived  amongst  the  wilds  of  Siberia,  and  if  it  were  necessary 
that  all  the  millions  of  believers  on  the  face  of  the  earth  should 
journey  thither,  and  every  one  of  them  plead  with  him  to  come  to 
Jesus,  before  he  could  be  converted ;  it  would  be  well  worth  all  the 
zeal,  and  labour,  and  expense  of  all  that  e:ffort.  One  soul  would  repay 
.the  travail  in  birth  of  myriads  of  zealous  Christians.  Lord,  we  cannot 
bear  it  that  there  should  go  on  existing  men  and  women  who  make 
nothing  of  the  bleeding  Son  of  God  !  It  is  an  awful  thing :  as  awful 
as  hell  itself  !  Out  in  that  street  to-night  think  of  the  thousands  who 
will  be  hunting  for  the  precious  life.  Walk  along  -our  crowded 
thoroughfares,  and  think  of  the  myriads  even  of  this  city  who  live  and 
die  without  God,  and  without  hope,  making  nothing  of  Jesus,  and  you 
will  feel  a  heartbreak  which  will  make  life  a  burden.  I  could  wish 
that  you  felt  that  heartbreak  for  their  sakes,  and  for  Christ's  sake. 

But  then,  dear  friends,  what  do  we  make  of  Christ  ourselves  now  ? 
Well,  that  I  cannot  tell  you,  except  it  be  in  one  word — Christ  is  all. 
Herod  made  nothing  of  him ;  we  make  everything  of  him. 

**  All  my  capacious  powers  can  wish, 
In  thee  doth  richly  meet ; 
Nor  to  my  eyes  is  light  so  dear, 
Nor  friendship  half  so  sweet." 

Could  any  of  you  who  love  my  Lord  tell  me  what  you  think  of  him  ? 
I  am  sure  that  you  would  break  down  in  the  attempt.  For  my  own 
part,  I  always  fail  in  the  glad  endeavour. 

•*  When  my  tongue  would  fain  express 
All  his  love  and  loveliness, 
Then  I  lisp  and  falter  forth 
Broken  words  not  half  his  worth.*' 

If  we  could  give  every  drop  of  our  blood  for  Jesus ;  if  we  could  be 
burnt  at  a  slow  fire  for  a  century  for  him,  he  deserves  all  our  suffering 
and  all  our  life.  Could  our  zeal  no  respite  know,  a  whole  eternity  of 
service  would  not  adequately  set  forth  what  we  think  of  him. 

I  close  with  this  practical  thought.  Sometimes  believers  show  their 
love  and  their  appreciation  of  their  Master  by  special  acts  of  homage. 
Herod,  you  see,  when  he  made  nothing  of  him,  said,  ' '  Here,  bring  out 
that  glittering  white  robe  of  mine,  and  put  it  on  him,  that  we  may 
heap  contempt  upon  him.  He  calls  himself  a  King !  Let  us  pay  him 
homage !  "  They  mocked  him,  and  they  put  the  robe  upon  him,  and 
then  sent  him  back  to  Pilate.  Now,  I  want  you  to  imitate  Herod  in 
tiie  opposite  direction.  Let  us  do  our  Lord  special  honour  to-night. 
Let  us  crown  him.  As  soon  as  we  have  opportunity,  let  us  make  some 
special  offering  of  our  substance  to  his  cause.  Let  us  set  apart  a 
season  for  adoration  and  reverent  worship.  Let  us  resolve  that  for  his 
sake  we  will  speak  well  of  his  name  to  somebody  to  whom  we  have 
not  yet  spoken.  It  may  be  that  some  of  you  can  sing  a  hymn  to  Jesus 
with  choice  music,  or  write  a  glorious  verse  for  his  dear  sake.  Go, 
take  your  pen,  and  dip  it  in  your  heart,  and  write  a  fresh  tract  in 
honour  of  his  blessed  name.     Herod  set  him  at  nought,  but  let  us  set 


334  METROPOLITAN   TABEKNACLE   PTTLPIT. 

him  on  high  in  onr  test  manner.     Set  him  at  the  highest  fig^-ie  t^' 
1?.  rt,™  Iht  and  vour  imagination  can  reach.    It  may  be  that  some 
CaM  A-a^h  afont  his  Lord,  and  yet  ^e^-  -*  °pe-d 
his  mouth  from  timidity.     Come,  try,  my  friend     Shake  oil  your 
hlsMuCss     Itmaybe  that  some  sister  here  might  teach  women  or 
^et  together  a  cSss^of  youngsters,  and  glorify  Christ  by 'n^tructin^ 
gem  ^  I  long  to  undo  what  Herod  did,  and  pay  tli«  Well-beloved  a 
™t)ense  for  his  shame.    Oh,  how  would  I  honour  him !     But  what 
2T?    What  can  one  person  do?    Come,  all  of  you,  -7  l>re%«=' 
^,1  heir,  to  crv  "  Hosanna ! »    Alas !  what  are  we  aU  together  ?    The 
music  ha    iTvoCe  in  it,  compared  with  what  he  deserves.     Come 
Xve  satntsand  worship  him !   And  what  are  aU  the  saints  on  earth  r 
S^e   ye  in  heaven,  who  bear  the  palm,  redeemed,  perfected    and 
whUe-robed  as  ye  ar; ;  come,  worship  him  who  washed  your  robes  in 
to  own  blood!    And  what  are  all  they?    Even  the  armies  of  the 
redeemed  suffice  not.     Come,  aU  holy  ones  and  praise  hmi ! 

"  Angels,  assist  our  mighty  joys ! 
Strike  all  your  harps  of  gold ! 
But  when  you  raise  your  highest  notes, 
His  love  can  ne'er  be  told." 

Therefore  do  I  summon  all  things  that  are  to  praise  the  Lord,  without 
whom  was  not  anything  made.  I  charge  all  hving  thmgs  to  adore 
Urn  who  is  the  resurrection  and  the  Ufe.  Let  space  become  one  great 
Xth  for  song.  Let  time  unceasingly  flow  with  hallelujahs.  Let 
Sernity  become  an  orchestra  to  the  praise  of  Jesus,  who  IL^s  "jo^^d 
of  HeTod  and  his  men  of  wax.  Glory  be  to  his  name !  Hallelujah ! 
HaEelujah!    Amen. 

POKTIOH  OF  SOEIPTUBE  READ  BEEORE  SeRMON— Luke  Xxiii. 

Hymhsfrom  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book "-282,  802,  580. 


ECCE     REX. 


Dbliveeed  on  Lord's-Day  Moening,  May  6th,  1877,  bt 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


*'  He  saith  unto  the  Jews,  Behold  your  King  ! '  '—John  xix.  14. 

PiLATE  said  much  more  than  he  meant,  and,  therefore,  we  shall  not 

restrict  our  consideration  of  his  words  to  what  he  intended.     John  tells 

us  considering  Caiaphas,  "  and  this  spake  he  not  of  himself,    and  we  may 

say  the  same  of  Pilate.     Everything  said  or  done  in  connection  with 

the  Saviour  during  the  day  of  his  crucifixion  was  lull  of  meaning,  far 

fuller  of  meaning  than  the  speakers  or  actors  were  aware,     iranstormed 

by   the   cross,  even    the   commonplace  becomes   solemn   and  weighty. 

When  Caiaphas  said  that  it  was  expedient  that  one  man  should  die  for 

the  people,  that  the  whole  nation  perish  not,  he  httle  thought  that  he 

was  enunciating  the  great  gospel  principle  of  substitution.     When  the 

Jewish  people  cried  out  before  Pilate  "His  blood  be  on  us  and  on  our 

children/'  they  httle  knew  the  judgment  which  they  were  bringing 

upon  themselves,  which  would  commence  to  be  fulfilled  at  the  siege  of 

Jerusalem,  and  follow  them,  hanging  hke  a  heavy  cloud  over  their  race, 

for  centuries.     When  the  soldier  with  a  spear  pierced  his  side  he  had  no 

idea  that  he  was  bringing  forth  before  all  eyes  that  blood  and  water 

which  are  to  the  whole  church  the  emblems  of  the  double  cleansing 

which  we  find  in  Jesus,  cleansing  by  atoning  blood  and  sanctifying 

grace     The  fulness  of  time  had  come,  and  all  things  were  full.     Each 

movement  on  that  awful  day  was  brimming  with  mystery,  neither  couhd 

the  Master  or  those  around  him  stir  or  speak  without  teaching  sorue 

gospel,  or  enforcing  some  lesson.     Whereas  on  certain  days  frivolity 

seems  to  rule  the  hour,  and  httle  is  to  be  gathered  from  much  that  is 

spoken ;  on  the  day  of  the  passion  even  the  most  careless  spake  as  men 

inspired.     Pilate,  the  undecided  spirit,  with  no  mmd  of  his  own, 

uttered  language  as  weighty  as  if  he  too  had  been  among  the  prophets 

His  acquittal   of  our  Lord,  his  mention  of  Barabbas,  his  writing  of 

the  inscription  to  be  fixed  over  the  head  of  Jesus,  and  many  other 

matters,  were  all  fraught  with  instruction. 

No.  1,353.  25 


3S5  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

It  was  to  the  Jews  that  Pilate  brought  forth  Jesus  arrayed  in  garments 
of  derision,  and  to  them  he  said,  "  Ecce  rex  "— "  Behold  your  King  !  "  It 
was  by  the  seed  of  Abraham  that  he  was  rejected  as  their  King ;  but 
we  shall  not  think  of  them  in  order  to  blame  that  unhappy  nation,  but 
to  remind  ourselves  that  we  also  may  fall  into  the  same  sin.  As  a  nation 
favoured  with  the  gospel  we  stand  in  many  respects  in  the  same  privileged 
condition  as  the  Jews  did.  To  us  is  the  word  of  God  made  known,  to 
our  keeping  the  oracles  of  God  are  committed  in  these  last  days,  and  we, 
though  by  nature  shoots  of  the  wild  olive,  are  engrafted  into  that 
favoured  stock  from  which  Israel  have  for  a  while  been  cut  ofiF.  Shall 
•we  prove  equally  unworthy?  Shall  any  of  us  be  found  guilty  of  the 
blood  of  Jesus  ?  We  hear  of  Jesus  this  day ;  are  we  rejecting  him  ? 
The  suffering  Messiah  will  be  brought  forth  again  this  morning,  not 
by  Pilate,  but  by  one  who  longs  to  do  him  honour,  and  when  he  stands 
before  you,  and  is  proclaimed  again  in  the  words,  "  Behold  your  King !  '* 
will  you  also  cry,  "  Away  with  him,  away  with  him  "  ?  Let  us  hope  that 
there  will  not  be  found  here  hearts  so  evil  as  to  imitate  the  rebellious 
nation  and  cry,  "We  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  us."  Oh  that 
^ach  one  of  us  may  acknowledge  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  his  King,  for 
beneath  his  sceptre  there  is  rest  and  joy.  He  is  worthy  to  be  crowned  by 
^very  heart,  let  us  all  unite  in  beholding  him  with  reverence  and  receiving 
him  with  delight.  Give  me  your  ears  and  hearts  while  Jesus  is  evidently 
set  forth  as  standing  among  you,  and  for  the  next  few  minutes  let  it  be 
your  only  business  to  "  Behold  your  King." 

I.  Come  with  me,  then,  to  the  place  which  is  called  the  Pavement, 
but  in  the  Hebrew  Gabbatha,  and  there  "behold  your  King."  I  shall 
first  ask  you  to  behold  your  King  preparing  his  throne,  yea, 
And  making  himself  ready  to  sit  thereon.  When  you  look  in  answer  to 
the  summons, "  Behold  your  King,"  what  do  you  see  ?  You  see  the 
"  Man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief, "  wearing  a  crown  of  thorns 
.an(?  covered  with  an  old  purple  cloak,  which  had  been  thrown  about 
him  rn  mockery;  you  can  see,  if  you  look  narrowly,  the  traces  of  his 
streaming  blood,  for  he  has  just  been  scourged,  and  you  may  also  dis- 
cover that  his  face  is  blackened  with  bruises  and  stained  with  shamelul 
spittle  from  the  soldiers'  mouths. 

"  Thus  trimmed  forth  they  bring  him  to  the  rout. 
Who  '  Crucify  him'  cry  with  one  strong  shout, 
God  holds  his  peace  at  man,  and  man  cries  out." 

It  is  a  terrible  spectacle,  but  I  ask  you  to  gaze  upon  it  steadily  and  see 
ihe  establishment  of  tiie  Redeemer's  throne.  See  how  he  becomes  your 
mediatorial  King.  He  was  setting  up  a  new  throne  on  Gabbatha,  where- 
on he  would  reign  as  the  King  of  pardoned  sinners  and  the  Prmce  of 
Peace  He  was  King  before  all  worlds  as  Lord  of  all  by  right  of  his 
eternal  power  and  Godhead  ;  he  had  a  throne  when  worlds  were  made, 
as  King  of  all  kings  by  creation  ;  he  had  also  always  filled  the  throne  ot 
providence,  upholding  all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power.  On  his  head 
were  many  crowns,  and  to  Pilate's  question,  "Art  thou  a  king  then ?  he 
did  fitly  answer,  "  Thou  sayest  that  I  am  a  king."  But  here  before  Pilate 
and  the  Jews,  in  his  condition  of  shame  and  misery,  he  was  about  to 
r.«oeiid,  and  first  of  all  to  prepare  the  throne  of  the  heavenly  grace,  which 


ECCE   REX. 


887 


now  is  set  up  among  the  sons  of  men,  that  they  may  flee  to  it  and  find 
eternal  salvation.  Mark  how  he  is  preparing  this  throne  of  grace,  it  is 
by  pain  and  shame  endured  in  our  room  and  stead.  Sin  was  in  the  way 
of  man's  happiness,  and  a  broken  law,  and  justice  requiring  a  penalty  : 
and  all  this  must  be  arranged  before  a  throne  of  grace  could  be  erected 
among  men.  If  you  look  at  our  suffering  Lord  you  see  at  once  the 
ensigns  of  his^«m,  for  he  wears  a  crown  of  thorns  which  pierce  his  brow. 
Pain  was  a  great  part  of  the  penalty  due  for  sin,  and  the  great  Substi- 
tute was  therefore  sorely  pained.  When  Pilate  brought  forth  our  martyr 
Prince  he  was  the  very  mirror  of  agony,  he  was  majesty  in  misery, 
misery  wrought  up  to  its  full  height  and  stature.  The  cruel  furrows  of 
the  scourge,  and  the  trickling  rivulets  of  his  blood  adown  his  face  were 
but  the  tokens  that  he  was  about  to  die  in  cruel  pangs  upon  the  cross, 
and  these  together  were  incumbent  upon  him  because  there  could  be  no 
throne  of  grace  till  first  there  had  been  a  substitutionary  sacrifice.  It 
behoved  him  to  suffer  that  he  might  be  a  prince  and  a  Saviour. 
Behold  your  King  in  his  pains,  he  is  laying  the  deep  foundations  of  his 
kingdom  of  mercy.  Many  a  crown  has  been  secured  by  blood,  and  so 
is  this,  but  it  is  his  own  blood  ;  many  a  throne  has  been  estabhshed  by 
suffering,  and  so  is  this,  but  he  himself  bears  the  pain.  By  his  great 
sacrificial  griefs  our  Lord  has  prepared  a  throne  whereon  he  shall  sit 
till  all  the  chosen  race  have  been  made  kings  and  priests  to  reign  with 
him.  It  is  by  his  agony  that  he  obtains  the  royal  power  to  pardon :  by 
his  stripes  and  bruises  he  wins  the  right  to  absolve  poor  sinners.  We 
shall  have  no  cause  to  wonder  at  the  greatness  of  his  mediatorial  power 
if  we  consider  the  depth  of  his  sacrificial  sufferings :  as  his  misery 
is  the  source  of  his  majesty,  so  the  greatness  of  his  pains  has 
secured  to  him  the  fulness  of  power  to  save.  Had  he  not  gone  to  the 
end  of  the  law,  and  honoured  justice  to  the  highest  degree,  he  had  not 
now  been  so  gloriously  able  to  dispense  mercy  from  his  glorious  high 
throne  of  mediatorial  grace.  Behold  your  King,  then,  as  he  lays  deep 
in  his  own  pain  and  death  the  basis  of  his  throne  of  grace. 

Nor  is  it  only  pain,  for  he  wears  also  the  tokens  of  scorn.  That  crown 
of  thorns  meant  mainly  mockery :  the  soldiers  made  him  a  mimic 
monarch,  a  carnival  king,  and  that  scarlet  robe,  too,  was  cast  upon  his 
shoulders  in  bitter  scorn:  thus  did  this  world  deride  its  God.  The 
evangelists  give  you  the  description  in  brief  sentences,  as  if  they  stopped 
between  each  line  to  cover  their  faces  with  their  hands  and  weep.  So 
there  he  stands  before  the  crowd,  helpless,  friendless,  with  none  to  declare 
his  generation  or  give  him  a  good  word.  He  is  deserted  by  all  who 
formerly  called  him  Master,  and  he  has  become  the  centre  of  a  scene  of 
rioting  and  ridicule.  The  soldiers  have  done  their  worst,  and  now  the 
chief  men  of  the  nation  look  at  him  with  contempt,  and  are  only  kept 
back  from  the  most  ribald  scorn  by  a  hate  too  furiously  eager  for 
death  to  afford  them  leisure  for  their  scoffs.  His  enemies  had  done 
everything  in  their  power  to  clothe  him  with  scorn,  and  they  were  ask- 
ing for  permission  to  do  more,  for  they  cried,  "  Let  him  be  crucified." 
Behold  ye,  how  he  has  left  all  the  honour  of  his  Father's  house,  and 
his  own  glory  among  the  angels,  and  here  he  stands  with  a  mock  robe, 
a  mimic  sceptre,  and  a  thorny  crown,  the  butt  of  ridicule,  scoffed  at  by 
all !     Yet  this  must  be,  because  sin  is  a  shameful  thing,  and  a  part  of 


888  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  penalty  of  sin  is  shame,  as  they  will  know  who  shall  wake  up  in  the 
day  of  judgment  to  everlasting  contempt.  Shame  fell  on  Adam  when 
he  sinned,  and  then  and  there  he  knew  that  he  was  naked ;  and  now 
shame  has  come  down  in  a  tremendous  hail  upon  the  head  of  the  Second 
Adam,  the  substitute  for  shameful  man,  and  he  is  covered  with  con- 
tempt. **  All  they  that  see  me  laugh  me  to  scorn."  It  is  hard  to  say 
whether  cruelty  or  mockery  had  most  to  do  with  the  person  of  our 
Lord  at  Gabbatha ;  but  by  enduring  these  two  things  together  he  laid 
on  an  immovable  foundation  the  corner  stone  of  his  dominion  of  love 
and  grace.  How  could  he  have  been  the  king  of  a  redeemed  people  if 
he  had  not  thus  redeemed  them  ?  He  might  have  been  lord  over  a  people 
doomed  to  die,  the  stern  ruler  of  a  people  who  continued  in  sin,  and 
would  so  continue  till  they  perished  for  ever  from  his  presence  ;  but  no 
such  a  kingdom  did  he  seek ;  he  sought  a  kingdom  over  hearts  that 
should  eternally  be  under  obligation  to  him,  hearts  that,  being  redeemed 
from  the  lowest  hell  by  his  atoning  death,  would  for  ever  love  him  with 
the  utmost  fervency.  His  sorrow  secured  his  power  to  save,  his  shame 
endowed  him  with  the  right  to  bless. 

"  Behold  your  King."  Look  at  him  with  steady  eye  and  see  what  a 
King  he  now  is  by  right  of  bemfit  conferred.  Behold,  he  hath  put  away 
sin  for  ever  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself,  and  therefore  all  the  ransomed 
ones  agree  that  he  should  be  king  who  smote  the  great  dragon  which 
devoured  the  nations.  Behold  by  his  stooping  to  shame  he  hath  de- 
throned Satan,  who  was  the  prince  of  this  world;  and  who  should 
occupy  the  throne  but  he  who  has  won  it,  and  cast  out  the  strong  one 
who  ruled  aforetime.  Christ  has  done  more  for  men  than  the  prince 
of  darkness  could  or  would,  for  he  has  died  for  them,  and  so  he  has 
earned  a  just  supremacy  over  all  grateful  hearts.  As  for  death,  Jesus, 
by  yielding  to  death,  has  conquered  it.  Let  him  be  crowned  with  the 
victor's  wreath  who  has  destroyed  the  world's  destroyer.  In  his  shame 
you  also  see  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  fulfilling  the  law  and  making  it 
honourable.  He  who  could  honour  that  law,  which  else  would  have 
cursed  us,  deserveth  to  have  all  honour  and  homage  paid  to  him  by  the 
sons  of  men,  whom  he  has  rescued  from  the  curse.  You  see,  then,  our 
Lord,  when  he  put  on  the  old  red  cloak,  and  submitted  his  brows  to  be 
environed  with  thorns,  was  really  establishing  for  himself  an  empire  the 
foundations  of  which  shall  never  be  shaken :  he  was  performing  that 
saving  work  which  has  made  him  king  among  sinners  whom  he  saves, 
and  Lord  of  the  kingdom  of  grace,  which  through  his  death  is  bestowed 
upon  men. 

Note  this,  too,  that  men  are  kings  among  their  fellows  when  they  can 
show  deep  sympathy ,  and  give  substantial  succour.  He  who  can  sym- 
pathise wins  power  of  the  best  sort,  not  coarse  force,  but  refined  spiritual 
influence.  For  this  cause  our  Lord  was  afflicted,  as  you  see  him 
afflicted,  that  he  might  have  sympathy  with  you  in  your  direst  grief, 
and  in  your  most  grievous  dishonour.  As  the  children  were  partakers 
of  flesh  and  blood,  he  himself  also  took  part  of  the  same,  and  as  they 
must  suffer,  so  the  Captain  of  their  salvation  was  made  perfect  by  suffer- 
ing. This  gives  him  his  glorious  power  over  us.  He  is  a  faithful  high 
priest,  for  he  can  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  and 
this  ability  to  enter  into  our  infirmities  and  sorrows  makes  him  supreme 


ECCE   REX.  389 

ill  our  hearts.  Look  at  your  King  in  pain  and  mockery,  and  see  how 
royal  he  is  to  your  heart!  How  sovereignly  he  commands  your 
heart  to  rejoice.  With  what  regal  power  he  commands  your  fears 
to  lie  still,  and  how  obediently  your  despondency  yields  to  his  word. 
Now,  as  it  is  with  you,  so  is  it  on  a  larger  scale  in  the  world. 
The  suffering  nations  will  yet  see  their  true  deliverer  in  their  suffer- 
ing Lord.  That  sceptre  of  a  reed  will  secure  him  power  far  greater 
than  a  rod  of  iron.  His  love  to  man  is  proved  by  his  suffering  to 
the  death  on  their  behalf,  and  this,  when  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  made 
men  wise,  shall  be  to  the  myriads  of  our  race  the  reason  for  proclaiming 
him  Lord  of  all.  The  kings  and  princes  who  rule  mankind  by  reason 
of  their  descent  or  by  the  force  of  arms  have  but  the  names  of  kings, 
the  true  kings  are  the  great  benefactors.  The  heroes  are  our  kings 
after  all.  We  look  upon  those  as  royal  who  can  risk  their  lives  for 
their  fellow  men,  to  win  them  liberty,  or  to  teach  them  truth.  The 
race  forgets  its  masters,  but  it  remembers  its  friends.  Earth,  but  for 
Jesus,  had  been  a  vast  prison,  and  men  a  race  of  condemned  criminals, 
but  he  who  stands  before  us  in  Gabbatha,  in  all  his  shame  and  grief, 
hath  delivered  us  from  our  lost  estate,  and  therefore  he  must  be  King. 
Who  shall  say  him  nay  ?  If  love  must  ultimately  triumph  ;  if  disinter- 
ested seli-sacrifice  must  obtain  homage,  then  Jesus  is  and  shall  be  King. 
If  eventually  when  the  morning  breaketh  and  man's  heart  is  purged 
from  the  prejudice  and  injustice  occasioned  by  sin,  the  might  shall  be 
with  the  right,  and  truth  must  prevail ;  then  Jesus  must  reign.  The 
eternal  fitness  of  things  demands  that  the  best  should  be  highest,  that 
he  who  does  men  most  service  should  be  most  honoured  among  them  ;  in 
a  word,  that  he  who  was  made  nothing  of  for  man's  sake  should  become 
everything  to  him.  See  you,  then,  how  the  crown  of  thorns  is  mother 
to  the  crown  which  Jesus  wears  in  his  church  !  The  scarlet  robe  is  the 
purchase  price  of  the  vesture  of  universal  sovereignty,  and  the  mock 
sceptre  of  reed  is  the  precursor  of  the  rod  of  nations  wherewith  the 
whole  earth  will  yet  be  ruled.  "  Behold  your  King,"  and  see  the 
sources  of  his  mediatorial  power. 

II.  0  you  who  see  in  your  bleeding  and  rejected  Lord  "  the  King 
in  his  beauty,''  come  ye  hither  yet  again  and  behold  him  claiming 
YOUR  HOMAGE.  See  in  what  way  he  comes  to  win  your  hearts.  What 
is  his  right  to  be  King  over  you  ?  There  are  many  rights,  for  on  his 
head  are  many  crowns,  but  the  most  commanding  right  which  Jesus 
has  over  any  of  us  is  signified  by  that  crown  of  thorns :  it  is  the  right 
of  supreme  love  :  he  loved  us  as  none  other  could  have  loved.  If  we 
put  all  the  loves  of  parents  and  of  wives  and  children  all  together,  we 
can  never  rival  even  for  a  moment  the  love  of  Christ  to  us,  and  when- 
ever that  love  touches  us,  so  that  we  feel  its  power,  we  crown  him  King 
directly.  Who  can  resist  his  charms  ?  One  look  of  his  eyes  overpowers 
us.  See  with  your  heart  those  eyes  when  they  are  full  of  tears  for 
perishing  sinners,  and  you  are  a  willing  subject.  One  look  at  his 
blessed  person  subjected  to  scourging  and  spitting  for  our  sakes  will 
give  us  more  idea  of  his  crown  rights  than  anything  besides.  Look  into 
his  pierced  heart  as  it  pours  out  its  life-flood  for  us,  and  all  disputes 
about  his  sovereignty  are  ended  in  our  hearts.  We  own  him  Lord  be- 
cause we  see  how  he  loved.     How  could  we  do  otherwise  ?     Love  in 


390  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

action,  or  rather  love  suffering,  carries  an  omnipotence  about  it.   Behold 
what  his  love  endured,  and  so  "  Behold  your  King." 

Jesus  in  the  garb  of  mockery,  marred  with  traces  of  his  pain,  also 
reminds  us  of  his  complete  purchase  of  us  by  his  deeds  and  death. 
"Ye  are  not  your  own,  ye  are  bought  with  a  price.''  Behold  your 
King,  and  see  the  price.  It  is  the  price  of  suffering  immense,  of  shame 
most  cruel.  It  is  an  incalculable  price,  for  the  Lord  of  all  is  set  at 
nought.  It  is  an  awful  price,  for  lie  who  only  hath  immortality  yields 
himself  to  die.  It  is  the  price  of  blood.  It  is  the  scourging  and  bleed- 
ing and  woe  of  Jesus ;  nay,  it  is  himself.  If  you  would  see  the  price 
of  your  redemption, ''  Behold  your  King."  'Tis  he  that  hath  redeemed 
us  unto  God  by  his  blood,  he  that  "  made  himself  of  no  reputation, 
and  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant, ;  and  being  found  in  fashion 
as  a  man,  humbled  himself,  and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  cross."  You  own  that  claim,  the  love  of  Christ  con- 
straineth  you ;  you  feel  that  henceforth  you  live  for  him  alone,  and 
count  it  joy  that  in  all  respects  he  should  reign  over  you  with  unlimited 

sway.  ,  .  1   . 

Jesus,  because  he  suffered,  hath  acquired  a  power  over  us  which  is 
far  superior  to  any  which  could  be  urged  in  courts  of  law,  or  enforced 
by  mere  power,  for  our  hearts  have  voluntarily  surrendered  to  him  and 
given  him  the  right  of  our  Jree  submission,  charmed  to  own  allegiance 
to  such  imperial  love.'  Is  it  possible  for  a  believer  to  look  at  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  without  feeling  that  he  longs  to  be  more  and  more  his 
servant  and  disciple?  Do  you  not  thirst  to  serve  him?  dm  you 
behold  him  in  the  depth  ol  shame  without  pining  to  lift  him  up  to  the 
heights  of  glory  ?  Can  you  see  him  stooping  thus  for  you  without 
pleading  with  God  that  a  glorious  high  throne  may  be  his,  and  that  he 
may  sit  upon  it  and  rule  all  the  hearts  of  men?  There  is  no  need  to 
argue  out  the  right  of  King  Jesus,  for  you  feel  it ;  his  love  has  carried 
you  by  storm,  and  it  holds  fast  its  capture.  You  cannot  have  a  Saviour 
without  his  being  your  King,  and  seeing  such  a  Saviour  in  such  a  con- 
dition, you  cannot  even  think  of  him  without  delighting  to  ascribe  to 
him  all  power  and  dominion.  Could  we  escape  his  sway  it  would  be 
bondage  to  us,  and  when  we  at  any  time  fail  to  own  it,  it  is  our  worst 
affliction.  . 

"  Behold  your  King,"  then,  for  he  himself  is  his  own  claim  to  your 
obedience.  'See  what  he  suffered  for  you,  my  brethren,  and  henceforth 
never  draw  back  from  any  labour,  shame,  or  suffering  for  his  dear  sake. 
"  Behold  your  King,"  and  reckon  to  be  treated  like  him.  Do  you 
expect  to  be  crowned  with  gold  where  he  was  crowned  with  thorns  ? 
Shall  lilies  grow  ibr  you  and  briars  for  him  ?  Never  again  be  ashamed 
to  own  his  glorious  name,  unless  indeed  you  can  be  so  vile  as  to  prove  a 
traitor  to  such  a  Lord.  See  to  what  shame  he  was  put,  and  learn 
from  him  to  despise  all  shame  for  his  truth's  sake.  Shall  the  disciple 
be  above  his  master,  or  the  servant  above  his  lord  ?  if  they  have  thus 
maltreated  the  master  of  the  house,  what  shall  they  do  to  the  house- 
hold ?  Let  us  reckon  upon  our  share  of  this  treatment,  and  by  accepting 
it  prove  to  all  men  that  .the  despised  and  rejectod  of  men  is  really  the 
King  over  us,  and  that  the  subjects  blush  not  to  be  like  their  monarch. 
Even  tliou'>h  the  cost   be   all  the  shame  the  world  can   possibly  pour 


ECCE   REX.  391 

upon  US,  or  all  the  suffering  that  flesh  and  blood  can  in  any  condition 
endure,  let  us  be  faithful  in  our  loyalty,  and  cry,  "  Who  shall  separate 
us  ?  Shall  persecution,  or  distress,  or  tribulation  divide  us  from  our 
King  ?  Nay,  in  all  these  things  we  are  more  than  conquerors.  King 
of  griefs,  thou  art  King  of  my  soul !  0  King  of  shame,  thou  art 
absolute  monarch  of  my  heart.  Thou  art  King  by  right  divine,  and 
King  by  mine  own  voluntary  choice.  Other  lords  have  had  dominion 
over  ns,  but  now,  since  thou  hast  revealed  thyself  after  this  fashion,  thy 
name  only  shall  govern  our  spirit."  Do  you  not  see,  then,  that  Jesus 
before  Pilate  reveals  his  claim  in' the  appearance  which  he  wears.  "  Be- 
hold yom'  King." 

III.  "  Behold  your  King,"  for  a  third  time,  that  you  may  see  him 
SUBDUING  HIS  DOMINIONS.  Dressed  in  robes  of  scorn,  and  with  a  visage 
marred  with  pain,  he  comes  forth  conquering  and  to  conquer.  This  is 
not  very  apparent  at  a  superficial  glance,  for  he  is  not  arrayed  like  a  man 
of  war.  You  see  no  sword  upon  his  thigh,  nor  bow  in  his  hand.  No 
fiery  threatenings  fall  from  his  lips,  nor  does  he  speak  with  eloquent 
persuasion.  He  is  unarmed,  yet  victorious  ;  is  silent,  but  yet  conquer- 
ing. In  this  garb  he  goeth  forth  to  war.  His  shame  is  his  armour,  and 
his  sufferings  are  his  battle  axe.  How  say  you  ?  How  can  it  be  so  ? 
I  speak  no  fiction,  but  sober  fact,  and  it  shall  be  proved. 

Missionaries  have  gone  forth  to  win  the  heathen  for  Christ,  and  they 
have  commenced  with  the  uncivilized  sons  of  sin  by  telling  them  that  there 
is  a  God,  and  that  he  is  great  and  just :  the  people  have  Hastened  unmoved, 
or  have  only  answered,  "  Dost  thou  think  we  know  not  this?"  Then 
they  have  spoken  of  sin  and  its  punishment,  and  have  foretold  the  coming 
of  the  Lord  to  judgment,  but  still  the  people  stirred  not,  but  coolly  said, 
"  'Tis  true,"  and  then  went  on  their  way  to  hve  in  sin  as  before.  At  last 
these  earnest  men  have  let  fall  the  blessed  secret,  and  spoken  of  the  love 
of  God  in  giving  his  only  begotten  Son,  and  they  have  begun  to  tell  the 
story  of  the  matchless  griefs  of  Immanuel.  Then  have  the  dry  bones 
stirred,  then  have  the  deaf  begun  to  hear.  They  tell  us  that  they  had 
not  long  told  the  story  before  they  noticed  that  eyes  were  fastened  on 
them,  and  that  countenances  were  beaming  with  interest  which  had 
been  listless  before,  and  they  have  said  to  themselves,  "  Why  did  we  not 
begin  with  this  ? "  Ay,  why  indeed  ?  for  this  it  is  that  touches  men's 
hearts.  Christ  crucified  is  the  conqueror.  Not  in  his  robes  of  gloiy 
does  he  subdue  the  heart,  but  in  his  vestments  of  shame.  Not  as  sitting 
upon  the  throne  does  he  at  first  gain  the  faith  and  the  affections  of  sinners, 
but  as  bleeding,  suffering,  and  dying  in  their  stead.  "  God  forbid  that 
I  should  glory,"  said  the  apostle,  "  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ";  and  though  every  theme  that  is  connected  with  the  Saviour 
ought  to  play  its  part  in  our  ministry,  yet  this  is  the  master  theme. 
The  atoning  work  of  Jesus  is  the  great  gun  of  our  battery.  The  cross 
is  the  mighty  battering-ram  wherewith  to  break  in  pieces  the  brazen 
gates  of  human  prejudices  and  the  iron  bars  of  obstinacy.  Christ 
coming  to  be  our  judge  alarms,  but  Christ  the  man  of  sorrows  subdues. 
The  crown  of  thorns  has  a  royal  power  in  it  to  compel  a  willing  allegiance, 
the  sceptre  of  reed  breaks  hearts  better  than  a  rod  of  iron,  and  the  robe 
of  mockery  commands  more  love  than  Caesar's  imperial  purple.  There  is 
nothing  like  it  under  heavon.    Victories  ten  .thousand  times  ten  thousand 


392  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

have  been  achieved  by  him  whom  Pilate  led  forth  to  the  multitude, — 
victories  distinctly  to  be  ascribed  to  the  thorny  crown  and  vesture  of 
mockery,  are  they  not  written  in  the  book  of  the  wars  of  the  Lord  ? 
There  will  be  more  such  as  he  is  more  frequently  set  forth  in  his  own 
fashion,  and  men  are  bidden  in  the  Man  of  son-ows  to  behold  their 
King. 

Has  it  not  been  so  at  home  as  well  as  among  the  far-off  heathen  ? 
What  winneth  men's  hearts  to  Christ  to-day  ?  What  but  Christ  in 
shame  and  Christ  in  suffering  ?  I  appeal  to  you  who  have  been  newly 
converted  ;  what  has  bound  you  as  captives  to  Jesus'  chariot  ?  What 
has  made  you  henceforth  vow  to  be  his  followers,  rejoicing  in  his  name  ? 
What  but  this,  that  he  bowed  his  head  to  the  death  for  your  sake  and 
hath  redeemed  you  unto  God  by  his  blood  ?    You  know  it  is  so. 

And  oh,  dear  children  of  God,  if  ever  you  feel  the  power  of  Christ 
upon  you  to  the  full,  till  it  utterly  overcomes  you,  is  it  not  the 
memory  of  redeeming  grief  which  doeth  it  ?  When  you  become  like 
harps,  and  Jesus  is  the  minstrel  and  layeth  his  finger  amongst  your 
heart-strings  and  bringeth  out  nothing  but  praise  for  his  dear  name, 
what  is  it  that  charms  you  into  the  music  of  grateful  love  but  the 
fact  of  his  condescension  on  your  behalf?  Is  not  this  your  song,  that 
he  was  slain  and  hath  redeemed  you  unto  God  by  his  blood  ?  I  confess 
I  could  sit  me  down  at  his  cross'  foot  and  do  nothing  else  but  weep 
until  I  wept  myself  away,  for  his  sufferings  make  my  soul  to  melt  within 
me.  Then  if  the  call  of  duty  is  heard  I  feel  intensely  eager  to  plead  with 
others,  ready  to  make  any  sacrifice  to  bring  others  under  my  Lord's 
dominion,  and  full  of  a  holy  passion  that  even  death  could  not  quench — 
all  this,  I  say,  if  I  have  but  just  come  from  gazing  on  the  Redeemer's 
passion,  and  drinking  of  his  cup  and  being  baptized  with  his  baptism. 
The  sceptre  of  reed  rules  as  nothing  else  ever  did,  for  it  rouses  enthusiasm. 
The  thorn-crown  commands  homage  as  no  other  diadem  ever  did,  for  it 
braces  men  into  heroes  and  martyrs.  No  royalty  is  so  all-commanding 
as  that  which  has  for  its  insignia  the  chaplet  of  thorn,  the  reed,  the  red 
cloak,  and  the  five  wounds.  Other  sovereignties  are  forced,  and  feigned, 
and  hollow  compared  with  the  sovereignty  of  "  the  despised  of  men  ": 
fear,  or  custom,  or  self-interest  make  men  courtiers  elsewhere,  but  fer- 
vent love  crowds  the  courts  of  King  Jesus.  We  do  not  merely  say 
that  the  marred  countenance  is  the  most  majestic  ever  seen,  but  we  have 
felt  it  to  be  so  on  many  an  occasion,  yea,  and  feel  it  to  be  so  now.  Do 
you  want  to  make  our  hard  hearts  soft  ?  Tell  us  of  Jesus'  grief.  Would 
you  make  us,  strong  men,  into  children  ?  Set  the  Man  of  sorrows  in  our 
midst ;  there  is  no  resisting  him. 

Look  ye  also  at  backsliders  if  ye  would  see  the  power  of  the  despised 
Nazarene.  If  they  have  gone  away  from  Christ,  if  they  have  become 
lukewarm,  if  their  hearts  have  become  obdurate  to  him  who  once  could 
charm  them,  what  can  bring  them  back  ?  I  know  but  one  magnet 
which  in  the  hands  of  the  Holy  Spirit  will  attract  these  sadly  fallen  ones  : 
it  is  Jesus  in  his  shame  and  pains.  We  tell  them  that  they  crucified  the 
Son  of  God  afresh,  and  put  him  to  an  open  shame,  and  they  look  on  him 
whom  they  have,  pierced,  and  mourn  for  him.  0  ye  that  after  having 
sipped  of  the  communion  cup  have  gone  to  drink  at  the  table  of 
Bacchus,  ye  who  after  having  talked  of  love  to  Christ  have  followed . 


ECCE   REX.  393 

after  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  ye  who  after  singing  his  praises  have  blas- 
phemed the  sacred  name  with  which  ye  are  named— may  his  omnipotence 
of  love  be  proved  in  you  also.  What  can  ever  bring  you  back  but  this 
sad  reflection,  that  ye  also  have  twisted  for  him  a  crown  of  thorns  and 
caused  him  to  be  blasphemed  among  his  enemies  ?  Still  the  merit  of 
his  death  is  available  for  you :  the  power  and  efficacy  of  his  precious 
blood  have  not  ceased  even  for  you,  and  if  you  come  back  to  him— and 
oh,  may  a  sight  of  him  draw  you— he  will  receive  you  graciously  as  ;  t 
the  first.  I  say  to  you,  "  Behold  your  King,"  and  may  the  sovereignty 
of  his  humiliation  and  suffering  be  proved  this  morning  in  some  of  you 
as  you  shall  come  bending  at  his  feet,  conquered  by  his  great  love 
and  restored  to  repentance  and  faith  by  his  marvellous  compassion. 
A  sight  of  his  wounds  and  bruises  heals  us,  so  that  we  grieve  at  our 
rebellions  and  long  to  be  brought  home  to  God,  never  to  wander  more. 

Ah,  dear  brethren,  we  shall  always  find,  as  long  as  the  world  standeth, 
that  among  saints,  sinners,  backsliders,  and  all  classes  of  men  Jesus 
Christ's  power  is  most  surely  felt  when  his  humihation  is  most  faith- 
fully declared  and  most  believingly  known.  It  is  by  this  that  he  will 
subdue  all  things  to  himself.  If  we  will  but  preach  Jesus  Christ  to  the 
Hindoo  it  will  not  be  necessary  to  answer  all  his  metaphysical  subtleties 
— the  sorrows  of  Jesus  are  as  a  sharp  sword  to  cut  the  Gordian  knot. 
If  we  will  go  down  amongst  the  degraded  inhabitants  of  Africa  we 
shall  not  need  first  to  civilize  them  ;  the  cross  is  the  great  lever  which 
lifts  up  fallen  men  :  it  conquers  evil  and  establishes  truth  and  righteous- 
ness. The  most  depraved  and  hardened  learn  his  great  love,  and  hearts 
ol  stone  begin  to  beat  ;  they  see  Jesus  suffering  to  the  death  out  of 
nothing  else  but  love  to  them,  and  they  are  touched  by  it,  and  eagerly 
enquire  what  they  must  do  to  be  saved  by  such  a  Saviour.  The  Holy 
Spirit  worketh  in  the  minds  of  many  by  setting  forth  the  great  love 
and  grief  of  Jesus.  May  we  who  are  his  ministers  have  great  faith  in 
his  cross,  and  henceforth  say,  as  we  preach  the  suffering  Jesus,  "  Be- 
hold your  King." 

IV.  In  the  fourth  place  I  beg  you  to  "  Behold  your  King"  setting 
FORTH  THE  PATTERN  OF  HIS  KINGDOM.  When  you  look  at  him  you 
are  struck  at  once  with  the  thought  that  if  he  be  a  king  he  is  like  no 
other  monarch,  for  other  kings  are  covered  with  rich  apparel  and 
surrounded  with  pomp,  but  he  has  none  of  these.  Their  glories  usually 
consist  in  wars  by  which  they  have  made  others  suffer,  but  his  glory  is 
his  own  suffering  ;  no  blood  but  his  own  has  flowed  to  make  him 
illustrious.  He  is  a  king,  but  he  cannot  be  put  in  the  list  of 
sovereigns  such  as  the  nations  of  the  earth  are  compelled  to  serve. 
When  Antoninus  Pius  set  up  the  statue  of  Jesus  in  the  Pantheon  as 
one  of  a  circle  of  gods  and  heroes,  it  must  have  seemed  strangely  out 
of  place  to  those  who  gazed  upon  its  visage  if  the  sculptor  was  at  al/ 
true  to  life.  It  must  have  stood  apart  as  one  that  could  not  be  num- 
bered with  the  rest.  Neither  can  you  set  him  among  the  masters  of  the 
human  race  who  have  crushed  mankind  beneath  their  iron  heel.  He 
was  no  Caesar ;  you  cannot  make  him  appear  like  one  :  call  him  not 
autocrat,  emperor,  or  czar, — he  has  an  authority  greater  than  all  these, 
yet  not  after  their  kind.  His  purple  is  difierent  from  theirs,  and  his 
crown  also,  but  his  face  differs  more,  and  his  heart  most  of  all.     **  My 


394  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

kingdom,"  saith  he,  "  is  not  of  this  world."  For  troops  he  has  a  host  of 
sorrows,  for  pomp  a  surrounding  of  scorn,  for  lofty  bearing  humility, 
for  adulation  mockery,  for  homage  spitting,  for  glory  shame,  for  a 
throne  a  cross.  Yet  was  there  never  truer  king,  indeed  all  kings  are 
but  a  name,  save  this  King,  who  is  a  real  ruler  in  himself  and  of  himself, 
and  not  by  extraneous  force.  Right  royal  indeed  is  the  Nazarene,  but 
he  cannot  be  likened  unto  the  princes  of  earth,  nor  can  his  kingdom  be 
reckoned  with  theirs  I  pray  that  the  day  may  soon  come  when  none 
may  dream  of  looking  upon  the  church  as  a  worldly  organization  capable 
of  alliance  with  temporal  sovereignties  so  as  to  be  patronized,  directed, 
or  reformed  by  them.  Christ's  kingdom  shines  as  a  lone  star  with  a 
brightness  all  its  own.  It  standeth  apart  like  a  hill  of  light,  sacred  and 
sublime  :  the  high  hills  may  leap  with  envy  because  of  it,  but  it  is 
not  of  them  nor  like  unto  them.  Is  not  this  manifest  even  in  the 
appearance  of  our  Lord  as  Pilate  brings  him  forth  and  cries,  "  Behold 
your  King !"  ? 

Now  as  he  sets  before  us  in  his  own  person  the  pattern  of  his  king- 
dom, we  may  expect  that  we  shall  see  some  likeness  to  him  in  his 
subjects  ;  and  if  you  will  gaze  upon  the  church,  which  is  his  kingdom 
from  the  first  day  of  her  history  until  now,  you  will  see  that  it  too  is 
wearing  its  purple  robe.  The  martyrs'  blood  is  the  purple  vesture  of 
the  church  of  Christ ;  the  trials  and  persecutions  of  believers  are  her 
crown  of  thorns.  Think  of  the  rage  of  persecution  under  Pagan 
Rome,  and  the  equally  inhuman  proceedings  of  Papal  Rome,  and  you 
will  see  how  the  ensign  of  Christ's  kingdom  is  a  crown  of  thorns;  a 
crown  and  yet  thorns,  thorns  but  still  a  crown.  The  bush  is  burning, 
but  it  is  not  consumed.  If  yon,  beloved,  are  truly  followers  of  Jesus, 
you  must  expect  to  take  your  measure  of  shame  and  dishonour,  and  you 
may  reckon  upon  your  allotment  of  griefs  and  sorrows.  The  "  Man  of 
sorrows  "  attracts  a  sorrowful  following.  The  lamb  of  God's  passover 
is  still  eaten  with  bitter  herbs.  The  child  of  God  cannot  escape  the 
rod,  for  the  elder  brother  did  not,  and  to  him  we  are  to  be  conformed. 
We  must  "  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ  for 
his  body's  sake,  which  is  the  church  "  (Colossians  i.  24). 

Recollect,  however,  that  Christ's  sufferings  as  a  pattern  were  not  for 
his  own  sins,  nor  brought  upon  him  as  a  chastisement  for  his  own 
faults,  so  that  the  sufferings  which  belong  to  his  kingdom  are  those 
which  arj  endured  for  his  name  and  for  his  glory's  sake,  and  for  the 
good  01  others.  If  men  lie  in  prison  for  their  own  crimes,  that  has 
nothing  to  do  with  his  kingdom  ;  if  we  suffer  for  our  sins,  that  is  no 
part  of  his  kingdom  ;  but  when  a  man  loseth  of  his  substance  for 
Christ's  cause,  layeth  out  himself  to  toil  even  unto  death,  beareth  con- 
tempt and  suffers  hardness  as  a  Christian— this  is  after  the  type  of 
Christ's  kingdom.  When  the  missionary  goeth  forth  with  his  life  m 
his  hand  among  die  heathen,  or  when  a  believer  in  any  way  divesteth 
himself  of  comfort  for  the  good  of  others,  it  is  then  that  he  truly 
copies  the  pattern  set  him  in  Pilate's  hall  by  our  great  King.  I  say 
to  you  Christians  who  court  ease,  to  you  who  are  hoarding  up  your 
gold,  to  you  who  will  do  nothing  that  would  bring  you  under  the 
criticism  of  your  fellow  men,  to  you  who  live  unto  yourselves, — would 
it  not  be  irony  of  the  severest  kind  if  I  were  to  point  to  Jesus  before 


J 


ECCE   REX.  J595 

Pilate  and  say,  "  Behold  your  King."  Living  in  undue  luxury,  amass- 
ing wealth,  rolling  in  ease,  living  to  enjoy  yourselves !  Is  that  your 
King  ?  Poor  subjects  you,  and  very  unlike  your  Lord ;  but  if  there 
be  among  us  those  who  for  his  sake  can  make  sacrifices,  we  may  look 
upon  our  King  without  fear.  You  who  are  undaunted  by  contempt, 
and  who  would  give  all  that  you  have,  yea,  and  give  yourselves  to 
know  Jesus,  and  are  doing  so,  to  such  1  say,  "Beholdyour  King," 
for  you  are  of  his  kingdom  and  you  shall  reign  with^  him.  In  your 
youi-  conquest  of  yourselves  you  have  already  become  kings.  In  reign- 
ing over  your  own  desires  and  carnal  inclinations,  for  the  sake  of  his 
dear  love,  you  are  already  kings  and  priests  unto  God,  and  you  shall 
reign  for  ever  and  ever  He  who  is  ruled  by  his  passions  in  any  degree 
is  still  a  slave,  but  he  who  lives  for  God  and  his  fellow  men  hath  a  royal 
soul.  The  insignia  of  a  prince  unto  God  are  still  shame  and  suffering  : 
which  adornments  are  readily  worn  when  the  Lord  calls  him  so  to  do. 
In  Christ's  kingdom  those  are  peers  of  the  highest  rank  who  are  most  like 
their  Lord  and  are  the  lowest  and  humblest  in  mind,  and  most  truly  the 
ser\ants  of  all.  The  secondary  princes  of  his  kingdom  approximate  less 
closely  to  him,  and  the  lower  you  descend  in  the  scale  the  less  you  are 
like  him  in  those  respects.  The  Christian  surrounded  with  every  com- 
fort, who  never  endured  hardness  for  Christ,  who  never  knew  what  it 
was  to  be  sneered  at  for  Jesus'  sake,  who  never  made  a  sacrifice  which 
went  so  far  as  to  pinch  him  in  the  least,  he,  if  indeed  he  be  a  Christian, 
is  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Proud,  rich  men  who  give  but  trifles 
to  Christ's  cause  are  pariahs  in  his  kingdom,  but  they  are  the  chief  who 
are  willing  to  be  least  of  all,  they  are  princes  who  make  themselves  the 
off*scouring  of  all  things  ibr  his  name's  sake,  such  as  were  the  npostles 
and  first  martyrs,  and  others  whom  his  love  has  greatly  constrained. 
V.  Our  concluding  remark  shall  be,  "  Behold  your  King  " — proving 
THE  CERTAINTY  OF  HIS  EMPIRE, — for  if,  beloved,  Christ  was  King 
when  he  was  in  Pilate's  hands,  after  being  scourged  and  spit  upon,  and 
while  he  was  wearing  the  robe  and  crown  of  mockery,  when  will  he  not 
be  King?  If  he  was  King  ac  his  worst,  when  is  it  that  his  throne  can 
ever  be  shaken?  They  have  brought  him  very  low,  they  have  brought 
him  lower  than  the  sons  of  men,  for  they  have  made  him  a  worm  and 
no  man,  despised  of  the  people,  and  tjet  he  is  King!  Marks  of  royalty 
were  present  on  the  day  of  his  death.  He  dispensed  crowns  when  he 
was  on  the  cross, — he  gave  the  dying  thief  a  promise  of  an  entrance  into 
Paradise.  In  his  death  he  shook  the  earth,  he  opened  the  graves,  he 
rent  the  rocks,  he  darkened  the  sun,  and  he  made  men  smite  on  their 
breasts  in  dismay.  One  voice  after  another,  even  from  the  ranks  of  his 
foes,  proclaimed  him  to  be  King,  even  when  dying  like  a  malefactor. 
Was  he  a  King  then?  When  will  he  not  be  King?  and  who  is 
there  that  can  by  any  means  shake  his  throne  ?  In  the  days  of  his 
flesh  "  the  Kings  of  the  earth  stood  up,  and  the  rulers  took  counsel 
together,  saying,  Let  us  break  his  bonds  asunder,  and  cast  his  cords 
from  us";  but  he  that  sat  in  the  heavens  did  laugh,  the  Lord  did  have 
them  in  derision,  and  Christ  on  the  cross  was  acknowledged,  in  Hebrew, 
and  Greek,  and  Latin,  to  be  still  the  King  of  the  Jews.  When  will  he 
not  be  King  ?  If  he  was  King  before  he  died  and  was  laid  in  the 
grave,  what  is  he  now  that  he  has  risen  from  the  dead,  now  that  he  haa 


og*  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

yanquished  the  destroyer  of  our  race,  and  lives  no  more  to  die  ?  What 
is  he  now  ?  Ye  angels,  tell  what  glories  surround  him  now !  If  he  was 
King  when  he  stood  at  Pilate's  bar,  what  will  he  be  when  Pilate  shall 
stand  at  his  bar,  when  he  shall  come  on  the  great  white  throne  and 
summon  all  mankind  before  him  to  judgment  ?  What  will  be  his  ac- 
knowledged sovereignty  and  his  dreaded  majesty  in  the  day  of  the 
Lord  ?  Come,  let  us  adore  him  ;  let  us  pay  our  humble  homage  in  the 
courts  of  the  Lord's  house  this  day ;  and  then  let  us  go  forth  to  our 
daily  service  in  his  name,  and  make  this  our  strong  resolve,  his  Spirit 
helping  us,  that  we  will  live  to  crown  him  in  our  hearts  and  in  our 
lives,  in  every  place  where  our  lot  may  be  cast,  till  the  day  break  and 
the  shadows  flee  away,  and  we  behold  the  King  in  his  beauty  and  the 
land  that  is  very  far  off.  None  can  overturn  a  kingdom  which  is  founded 
on  the  death  of  its  King ;  none  can  abolish  a  dominion  whose  deep 
foundations  are  laid  in  the  tears  and  blood  of  the  Prince  himself. 
Napoleon  said  that  he  founded  his  empire  by  force,  and  therefore  it  had 
passed  away ;  but,  said  he,  "  Jesus  founded  his  kmgdom  upon  love, 
and  it  will  last  for  ever."  So  it  must  be,  for  whatever  may  or  may  not 
be,  it  is  written — '*  He  must  reign:' 

As  for  us,  if  we  wish  to  extend  the  Redeemer's  kingdom  we  must  be 
prepared  to  deny  ourselves  for  Christ,  we  must  be  prepared  for  weari- 
ness, slander,  and  self-denial.  In  this  sign  we  conquer.  The  cross 
will  have  to  be  borne  by  us  as  well  as  by  him  if  we  are  to  reign 
with  Jesus.  We  must  both  teach  the  cross  and  bear  the  cross.  We 
must  participate  in  the  shame  if  we  would  participate  in  the  glory.  No 
thorn  no  throne.  When  again  shall  be  heard  the  voice,  "  Behold  your 
King,"  and  Jew  and  Gentile  shall  see  him  enthroned,  and  surrounded 
with  all  his  Father's  angels,  with  the  whole  earth  subdued  to  his 
power,  happy  shall  he  be  who  shall  then  in  the  exalted  Saviour  behold 
his  King.  The  Lord  grant  us  this  day  to  be  loyal  subjects  of  the 
Crucified  that  we  may  be  favoured  to  share  his  glory. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — John  xix.  1 — 30. 


THE  DREAM  OF  PILATE'S  WIFE. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  February  26th,  1882,  bt 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


«*  When  he  was  set  down  on  the  judgment  seat,  his  wife  sent  unto  him,  saying.  Have 
thou  nothing  to  do  with  that  just  man :  for  I  have  suffered  many  things  this  day  iu  a 
dream  because  of  him."— Ma-tthew  xxvii.  19. 

I  EARNESTLY  wished  to  pursue  the  story  of  our  Saviour's  trials  previous 

to  his  crucifixion,  but  when  I  sat  down  to  study  the  subject  I   found 

myself  altogether  incapable  of  the  exercise.    "When  I  thought  to  know 

this,  it  was  too  painful  for  me."     My  emotions  grew  so  stror.g,  and  my 

sense  of  our  Lord's  grief  became  so  extremely  vivid,  that  I  felt  I  must 

waive  the  subject  for  a  time.     I  could  not  watch  with   him  another 

hour,  and  yet  I  could  not  leave  the  hallowed  scene.     It  .vas,  therefore, 

a  relief  to  meet  with  the  episode  of  Pilate's  wife  and  ner  dream  :  it 

enables  me  to  continue  the  thread  of  my  narrative,  and  yet  to  relax 

the  extreme   tension  of  the   feelings  caused   by  a  near  view  of  the 

Master's  grief  and  shame.     My  spirit  failed  before  the  terrible  sight. 

I  thought  I  saw  him  brought  back  from  Herod  where  the  men  of  war 

had  set  him  at  nought.     I  followed  him  through  the  streets  again  as  the 

cruel  priests  pushed  through  the  crowd  and  hastened  him  back  to  Pilate's 

hall.     I  thought  I  heard  them  in  the  streets  electing  Barabbas,  the 

robber,  to  be  set  free,  instead  of  Jesus,  the  Saviour,  and  I  detected  the 

first  rising  of  that  awful  cry,  "Crucify,  crucify,"  which  they  shrieked  out 

from  their  bloodthirsty  throats  :  and  there  he  stood,  who  loved  me  and 

gave  himself  for  me,  like  a  lamb  in  the  midst  of  wolves,  with  none  to 

pity  and  none  to  help  him.     The  vision  overwhelmed  me,  especially 

when  I  knew  that  the  next  stage  would  be   that  Pilate,  who   had 

exculpated  him  by  declaring,  ''I  find  no  fault  in  him,"  would  give 

him  over  to  the  tormentors  that  he  might  be  scourged,  that  the  mer-- 

cenary  soldiery  would  crown  him  with  thorns  and  mercilessly  insult  him, 

and  that  he  would  be  brought  forth  to  the  people  and  announced  to  them 

with  that  heart-rending  word,  "  Behold  the  man  ! "     Was  there  ever 

sorrow  like  unto  his  sorrow  ?     Rather  than  speak  about  it  this  day  I 

feel  inclined  to  act  like  Job's  friends,  of  whom  it  is  written,  that  at  the 

sight  of  him  "  they  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  wept ;  and  sat  down  with 

him  upon  the  ground  seven  days  and  seven  nights,  and  none  spake  a 

word  unto  him  :  for  they  saw  that  his  grief  was  very  great." 

No..  1,647-8. 


398  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

We  leave  the  Master  awhile  to  look  at  this  dream  of  Pilate's  wife, 
which  is  only  spoken  of  once  in  the  Scriptures,  and  then  by  Matthew. 
I  know  not  why  that  evangelist  only  should  have  been  commissioned  to 
record  it ;  perhaps  he  alone  heard  of  it ;  but  the  one  record  is  suffi- 
cient for  our  faith,  and  long  enough  to  furnish  food  for  meditation. 
We  receive  the  story  as  certified  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Pilate  throughout  his  term  of  office  had  grossly  misbehaved  himself. 
He  had  been  an  unjust  and  unscrupulous  rulei  of  the  Jews.  The  Gali- 
leans and  the  Samaritans  both  felt  the  terror  of  his  arms ;  for  he  did 
not  hesitate  to  massacre  them  at  the  slightest  sign  of  revolt;  and 
among  the  Jews  themselves  he  had  sent  men  with  daggers  into  the  midst 
of  the°crowds  at  the  great  gatherings,  and  so  had  cut  off  those  who  were 
obnoxious  to  him.  Gain  was  his  object,  and  pride  ruled  his  spirit. 
At  the  time  when  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  brought  before  him  a  com- 
plaint against  him  was  on  the  way  to  Tiberius  the  Emperor,  and  he 
feared  lest  he  should  be  called  to  account  for  his  oppressions,  extortions, 
and  murders.  His  sins  at  this  moment  were  beginning  to  punish  him : 
as  Job  would  word  it,  "  The  iniquities  of  his  heels  compassed  him  about." 
One  terrible  portion  of  the  penalty  of  sin  is  its  power  to  force  a 
man  to  commit  yet  further  iniquity.  Pilate's  transgressions  were  now 
howling  around  him  like  a  pack  of  wolves;  he  could  not  face  them, 
and  he  had  not  grace  to  flee  to  the  one  great  refuge  ;  but  his  fears  drove 
him  to  flee  before  them,  and  there  was  no  way  apparently  open  for  him 
but  that  which  led  him  into  yet  deeper  abominations.  He  knew  that 
Jesus  was  without  a  single  fault,  and  yet  since  the  Jews  clamoured 
for  his  death  he  felt  that  he  must  yield  to  their  demands,  or  else  they 
would  raise  another  accusation  against  himself,  namely,  that  he  was 
not  loyal  to  the  sovereignty  of  Caesar,  for  he  had  allowed  one  to  escape 
who  had  called  himself  a  king.  If  he  had  behaved  justly  he  would 
not  have  been  afraid  of  the  chief  priests  and  scribes.  Innocence  is 
brave;  but  guilt  is  cowardly.  Pilate's  old  sins  found  him  out  and 
made  him  weak  in  the  presence  of  the  ignoble  crew,  whom  otherwise 
he  would  have  driven  from  the  judgment  seat.  He  had  power  enough 
to  have  silenced  them,  but  he  had  not  sufficient  decision  of  character  to 
end  the  contention  :  the  power  was  gone  from  his  mind  because  he  knew 
that  his  conduct  would  not  bear  investigation,  and  he  dreaded  the  loss 
of  his  office,  which  he  held  only  for  his  own  ends.  See  there  with  pity 
that  scornful  but  vacillating  creature  wavering  in  the  presence  of  men 
who  were  more  wicked  than  himself  and  more  determined  in  their  pur- 
pose. The  fell  determination  of  the  wicked  priests  caused  hesitating 
policy  to  quail  in  their  presence,  and  Pilate  was  driven  to  do  what  he 
would  gladly  have  avoided. 

The  maimer  and  the  words  of  Jesus  had  impressed  Pilate.  I  say  the 
manner  of  Jesus,  for  his  matchless  meekness  must  have  struck  the 
governor  as  being  a  very  unusual  thing  in  a  prisoner.  He  had  seen  in 
captured  Jews  the  fierce  courage  of  fanaticism;  but  there  was  no 
fanaticism  in  Christ.  He  had  also  seen  in  many  prisoners  the  mean- 
ness which  will  do  or  say  anything  to  escape  from  death  ;  but  he  saw 
nothing  of  that  about  our  Lord.  He  saw  in  him  unusual  gentleness 
and  humility  combined  with  majestic  dignity.  He  beheld  submission 
blended  with  innocence.    This  made  Pilate  feel  how  hfi^nl  goodness  is. 


THE  DREAM  OF  PILATE'S  WIFE.  899 

He  was  impressed— he  could  not  help  being  impressed— with  this 
unique  sufferer.  Besides,  our  Lord  had  before  him  witnessed  a  good 
confession— you  remember  how  we  considered  it  the  other  day — and 
though  Pilate  had  huffed  it  off  with  the  pert  question,  ''  What  is 
truth?"  and  had  gone  back  into  the  judgment-hall,  yet  there  was  an 
arrow  fixed  within  him  which  he  could  not  shake  off.  It  may  have  been 
mainly  superstition ;  but  he  felt  an  awe  of  one  whom  he  half  suspected 
to  be  an  extraordinary  personage.  He  felt  that  he  himself  was  placed 
in  a  very  extraordinary  position,  being  asked  to  condemn  one  whom  he 
knew  to  be  perfectly  innocent.  His  duty  was  clear  enough,  he  could 
never  have  had  a  question  about  that ;  but  duty  was  nothing  to  Pilate 
in  comparison  with  his  own  interests.  He  would  spare  the  Just  One  if 
he  could  do  so  without  endangering  himself ;  but  his  cowardly  feara 
lashed  him  on  to  the  shedding  of  innocent  blood. 

At  the  very  moment  when  lie  was  vacillating,  when  he  had  proffered 
to  the  Jews  the  choice  of  Barabbas,  or  Jesus  of  Nazareth  ;— at  that  very 
moment,  I  say,  when  he  had  taken  his  seat  upon  the  bench,  and  was 
waiting  for  their  choice,  there  came  from  the  hand  of  God  a  warning  to 
him,  a  warning  which  would  for  ever  make  it  clear  that,  if  he  condemned 
Jesus,  it  woutd  be  done  voluntarily  by  his  own  guilty  hands.  Jesus 
must  die  by  the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God,  and  yet 
it  must  be  by  wicked  hands  that  he  is  crucified  and  slain  ;  and  hence , 
Pilate  must  not  sin  in  ignorance.  A  warning  to  Pilate  came  from  his ' 
own  wife  concerning  her  morning's  dream,  a  vision  of  mystery  and 
terror,  warning  him  not  to  touch  that  just  person;  "for,"  said  she,  "I 
have  suffered  many  things  this  day  in  a  dream  because  of  him."  There 
are  times  in  most  men's  lives  when,  though  they  have  been  wrong, 
yet  they  have  not  quite  been  set  on  mischief,  but  have  come  to  a  pause 
and  have  deliberated  as  to  their  way  ;  and  then  God  in  great  mercy  has 
sent  them  a  caution,  and  has  set  up  a  danger-signal  bidding  them  stop 
in  their  mad  career  ere  they  plunged  themselves  finally^  into  irre- 
trievable ruin.  Somewhere  in  that  direction  lies  the  subject  of  our 
present  discourse.  0  that  the  Spirit  of  God  may  make  it  useful  to 
many. 

I.  And,  first,  I  call  your  attention  to  the  co-operation  of  Provi- 
dence WITH  THE  woiiK  OF  GoD.  I  call  it  the  work  of  God  to  warn 
men  against  sin,  and  I  call  your  attention  to  Providence  working  with 
it  to  bring  the  preventives  and  cautions  of  divine  mercy  home  to  men's 
minds. 

For,  first,  observe  the  providence  of  God  in  sending  this  dream.  If 
anything  beneath  the  moon  may  be  thought  to  be  exempt  from  law,  and 
to  be  the  creature  of  pure  chance,  surely  it  is  a  dream.  True,  there 
were  in  old  time  dreams  in  which  God  spake  to  men  prophetically ;  but 
ordinarily  they  are  the  carnival  of  thought,  a  maze  of  mental  states,  adance 
of  disorder.  The  dreams  which  would  naturally  come  to  the  wife  of  a  Roman 
governor  would  not  be  likely  to  have  much  of  tenderness  or  conscience  in 
them,  and  would  not,  in  all  probability,  of  themselves  run  in  the  line  of 
mercy.  Dreams  ordinajrily  are  the  most  disorderly  of  phenomena,  and 
yet  it  seems  that  they  are  ordered  of  the  Lord.  I  can  well  understand 
that  every  drop  of  spray  which  flashes  from  the  wave  when  it  dashes 
against  the  cliff  has  its  appointed  orbit  as  truly  as  the  stars  of  heaven; 


400 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


but  the  thoughts  of  men  appear  to  be  utterly  lawless,  especially  the 
thoughts  of  men  when  deep  sleep  falleth  upon  them.  As  well  might 
one  foretell  the  flight  of  a  bird  as  the  course  of  a  dream.  Such  wild 
fantasies  seem  to  be  ungoverned  and  ungovernable.  Many  things  ope- 
rate naturally  to  liishion  a  dream.  Dreams  frequently  depend  upon 
the  condition  of  the  stomach,  upon  the  meat  and  drink  taken  by  the 
sleeper  before  going  to  rest.  They  often  owe  their  shape  to  the  state 
of  the  body  or  the  agitation  of  the  mind.  Dreams  may,  no  doubt, 
be  caused  by  that  which  transpires  in  the  chamber  of  the  house  ;  a 
little  movement  of  the  bed  caused  by  passing  wheels,  or  the  tramp  of 
a  band  of  men,  or  the  passing  of  a  domestic  across  the  floor,  or  even 
the  running  of  a  mouse  behind  the  wainscot,  may  suggest  and  shape 
a  dream.  Any  slight  matter  affecting  the  senses  at  such  time  may 
raise  within  the  slumbering  mind  a  mob  of  strange  ideas.  Yet  what- 
ever may  have  operated  in  this  lady's  case,  the  hand  of  providence 
was  in  it  all,  and  her  mind,  though  fancy  free,  wandered  nowhere  but 
just  according  to  the  will  of  God,  to  effect  the  divine  purpose.  She 
must  dream  just  so,  and  no  how  else,  and  that  dream  must  be  of 
such  and  such  an  order,  and  none  other.  Even  dreamland  knows  no 
god  but  God,  and  even  phantoms  and  shadows  come  and  go  at  his 
bidding,  neither  can  the  images  of  a  night-vision  escape  from  the 
supreme  authority  of  the  Most  High.  See  the  providence  of  God 
in  the  fact  that  the  dream  of  Pilate's  wife,  however  caused,  should 
be  of  such  a  form  and  come  at  such  a  time  as  this.  Certain  old 
writers  trace  her  dream  to  the  devil,  who  thus  hoped  to  prevent  the 
death  of  our  Lord,  and  so  prevent  our  redemption.  I  do  not  agree 
with  the  notion  ;  but  even  if  it  were  so,  I  admire  all  the  more  the 
providence  which  overrules  even  the  devices  of  Satan  for  the  purposes 
of  wisdom.  Pilate  must  be  warned,  so  that  his  sentence  may  be  his 
own  act  and  deed,  and  that  warning  is  given  him  through  his  wife's 
dream.     So  doth  Providence  work. 

Note,  next,  the  providence  of  God  in  arranging  that  with  this  dream 
there  should  he  great  mental  suffering.  "  I  have  suffered^  many  things 
in  a  dream  concerning  him  I  "  I  cannot  tell  what  vision  passed  before 
her  mind's  eye,  but  it  was  one  which  caused  her  terrible  agony.  A 
'modern  artist  has  painted  a  picture  of  what  he  imagined  the  dream 
to  be,  bui  I  shall  not  attempt  to  follow  that  great  man  in  the  exercise 
of  fancy.  Pilate's  wife  may  have  realized  in  her  sleep  the  dreadful 
spectacle  of  the  thorn-crown  and  the  scourge,  or  even  of  the  crucifixion 
and  the  death-agony  ;  and  truly  I  know  of  nothing  more  calculated  to 
make  the  heart  suffer  many  things  concerning  the  Lord  Jesus  than 
a  glance  at  his  death.  Around  the  cross  there  gathers  grief  enough 
to  cause  many  a  sleepless  night,  if  the  soul  has  any  tenderness  left  in 
it.  Or  her  dream  may  have  been  of  quite  another  kind.  She  may 
have  seen  in  vision  the  Just  One  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven. 
Her  mind  may  have  pictured  him  upon  the  great  white  throne,  even 
the  man  whom  her  husband  was  about  to  condemn  to  die.  She  may 
have  seen  her  husband  brought  forth  to  judgment,  himself  a  prisoner 
to  be  tried  by  the  Just  One,  who  had  aforetime  been  accused  betore 
him.  She  may  have  awoke,  startled  at  the  shriek  of  her  husband  as 
he  fell  back  into  the  pit  that  knows  no  bottom.      Whatever  it  was, 


THE   DREAM   OF   PILATE^S   WIFE.  401 

she  had  suffered  repeated  painful  emotions  in  the  dream,  and  sh« 
awoke  startled  and  amazed.  The  terror  of  the  night  was  upon  her, 
and  it  threatened  to  become  a  terror  to  her  for  all  her  days,  and 
she  therefore  hastens  to  stay  her  liusband's  hand.  Now,  herein  is  the 
hand  of  God,  and  the  simple  story  goes  to  prove  that  the  wandering 
Zingari  of  dreamland  are  still  under  his  control,  and  he  can  cause 
them  to  produce  distress  and  anguish,  if  some  grand  end  is  to  be 
served  thereby. 

Equally  remarkable  is  it  that  she  should  have  sent  to  her  husband  the 
message,  "  Have  nothing  to  do  with  this  just  person."  Most  dreams  we 
quite  forget ;  a  few  we  mention  as  remarkable,  and  only  now  and  then 
one  is  impressed  upon  us  so  that  we  remember  it  for  years.  Scarcely 
have  any  of  you  had  a  dream  which  made  you  send  a  message  to  a 
magistrate  upon  the  bench.  Such  an  intention  would  only  be  resorted 
to  in  an  urgent  case.  Though  the  judge  were  your  own  husband  you 
would  be  very  hard  pressed  before  you  would  worry  him  with  your 
dreams  while  he  was  occupied  with  important  public  business.  Mostly 
a  dream  may  wait  till  business  is  over.  But  so  deep  was  the  impression 
upon  this  Roman  ladys  mind  that  she  does  not  wait  until  her  lord 
comes  home,  but  sends  to  him  at  once.  Her  advice  is  urgent — "  Have 
thou  nothing  to  do  with  this  Just  One."  She  must  warn  him  now, 
before  he  has  laid  a  stroke  on  him,  much  less  imbrued  his  hands  in  his. 
blood.  Not  "  have  a  little  to  do  and  scourge  him,  and  let  him  go,"  but 
"have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  him.  Say  not  an  unkind  word,  nor  do- 
him  any  injury  !  Deliver  him  from  his  adversaries  !  If  he  must  die, 
let  it  be  by  some  other  hand  than  thine !  My  husband,  my  husband,  my 
husband,  I  beseech  thee,  have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  this  just  person.. 
Let  him  alone,  I  pray  thee !  "  She  words  her  message  very  emphatically.. 
"  Have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  this  just  person :  for  I  have  suffered 
many  things  in  a  dream  concerning  him.  Think  of  thy  wife  !  think  of 
thyself !  Let  my  sufferings  about  this  Holy  One  be  a  warning  to  thee. 
For  my  sake  let  him  alone  !  "  And  yet,  do  you  know,  her  message  to 
my  ear  sounds  rather  authoritative  for  a  woman  to  her  husband,  and  he 
a  judge !  There  is  a  tone  about  it  that  is  not  ordinarily  in  the  address- 
of  wives  to  husbands.  "  Have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  that  jnst  man: 
for  I  have  suffered  many  things  this  day  in  a  dream  because  of  him." 
It  shows  a  wonderful  providence  of  God  that  this  lady  was  moved  to 
send  so  strong  a  message  to  her  self-willed  husband,  to  beseech,  to 
entreat,  to  implore,  almost  to  demand  of  him,  that  he  let  this  just  man 
go.  0  Providence,  how  mightily  canst  thou  work!  0  Lord,  the 
seraphim  obey  thee,  but  thou  findest  an  equally  willing  servitor  in  a 
wife  who,  at  thy  bidding,  stands  between  her  husband  and  a  crime. 

Once  more,  about  this  providence  I  want  you  to  notice  the  peculiar 
time  in  which  her  teaming  came.  It  was  evidently  a  dream  of  the 
niorning :  "  I  have  suffered  many  things  in  a  dwram  this  day."  The 
day  had  not  long  broken— it  was  yet  early  in  the  morning.  The  Romans 
had  a  superstition  that  morning  dreams  are  true.  I  suppose  it  was  after 
her  husband  had  left  her  that  she  thus  dreamed.  If  I  may  be  allowed, 
not  to  state  a  fact,  but  to  make  a  conjecture,  which  seems  to  me  most  ' 
probable,  she  was  a  dearly  beloved  wife,  but  sickly,  and  therefore  needed 
to  rest  further  into  the  day  than  her  husband ;  and  when  he  had  left 

26 


402  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

his  couch  she  had  yet  another  sleep,  and  being  a  sensitive  person,  and 
all  the  more  likely  to  dream,  she  awoke  from  her  morning  sleep  op- 
pressed with  a  terror  which  she  could  not  shake  off.  Pilate  was  gone, 
and  she  was  told  that  he  was  in  the  judgment- hall.  She  asked  her 
attendants  why  he  was  there  so  early,  and  they  replied  that  there  had 
been  an  unusual  clamour  in  the  courtyard,  for  the  high  priests  and  a  mob 
of  Jews  had  been  there,  and  the  governor  had  gone  out  to  them.  They 
might,  perhaps,  also  tell  her  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  brought  therp 
a  prisoner,  and  the  priests  were  entreating  Pilate  to  put  him  to  death, 
though  they  had  heard  the  governor  say  that  he  found  no  fault  in  him. 
"  Go,"  she  said  to  her  maid,  "call  to  one  of  the  guards,  and  bid  him  g  > 
at  once  to  my  husband,  and  say  what  I  tell  you.  Let  him  speak  aloud, 
that  some  of  the  cruel  Jews  may  hear  it,  and  be  moved  from  their  cruel 
purpose:  let  him  say  that  I  implore  my  husband  to  have  nothing  to  do 
with  this  just  person,  for  I  have  suffered  many  things  this  very  morning 
in  a  dream  concerning  him."  Just  at  the  moment,  you  see,  when  he 
had  sat  down  on  the  judgment-seat,  the  warning  came  to  him.  When 
there  was  a  little  lull,  and  he  was  anxious  to  acquit  his  prisoner,  at  that 
instant  of  time  which  was  the  most  hopeful  this  weight  was  thrown  into 
the  right  side  of  the  scale,  thrown  in  most  wisely  and  mercifully  to  keep 
back  Pilate  from  his  grievous  sin.  The  warning  calne  at  the  nick  of 
time,  as  we  say,  though,  alas,  it  came  in  vain  !  Admire  the  punctuality 
of  Providence.  God  never  is  before  his  time ;  he  never  is  too  late.  It 
shall  be  seen  concerning  all  that  he  doeth  that  on  the  selfsame  day 
determmed  by  the  prophecy  the  fulfilment  came.  My  soul  stands  trem- 
bling while  she  sings  the  glory  of  her  God,  whose  providence  is  high, 
even  like  Ezekiel's  wheels;  but  the  wheels  are  full  of  eyes,  and,  as  they 
turn,  all  the  surroundings  are  observed  and  provided  for,  so  that  there 
are  no  slips,  or  oversights,  or  accidents,  or  delays.  Prompt  and  effectual 
is  the  operation  of  the  Lord. 

Thus  much  concerning  Providence,  and  I  think  yon  will  all  agree 
that  my  point  is  proven— that  providence  is  always  co-working  with  the 
grace  of  God.  A  great  writer  who  knows  but  little  about  divine  things, 
yet,  nevertheless,  tells  us  that  he  perceives  a  power  in  the  world  which 
works  for  righteousness.  Exactly  so  !  It  is  well  spoken,  for  this  is 
the  chief  of  all  powers.  When  you  and  I  go  out  to  warn  men  of  sin, 
we  are  not  alone,  all  Providence  is  at  our  back.  When  we  preach  Christ 
crucified,  we  are  workers  together  with  God ;  God  is  working  with  us 
as  well  as  by  us.  Everything  that  happens  is  driving  towards  the  end 
for  which  we  work,  when  we  seek  to  convince  men  of  sin  and  of 
righteousness.  Where  the  Spirit  of  God  is,  all  the  forces  of  nature  and 
providence  are  mustered.  The  fall  of  empires,  the  death  of  desp.jts, 
the  uprise  of  nations,  the  making  or  the  breaking  of  treaties,  temfic 
wars  and  blighting  famines,  are  all  working  out  the  grand  end.  Yea, 
and  domestic  matters,  such  as  the  death  of  children,  the  sickness  of 
wives,  the  loss  of  work,  the  poverty  of  the  family,  and  a  thousand  other 
things  are  working,  working,  ever  working,  for  the  improvement  of 
men;  and  you  and  I,  lending  our  poor  feebleness  to  co-operate  with 
God,  are  marching  with  all  the  forces  of  the  universe.  Have  com- 
fort, then,  in  this.  0  workers  for  Jesus,  suffering  many  thmgs  for 
him,  be  of  good  cdurage,  for  the  stars  in  their  courses  light  for  tht 


THE  DREAM  OP  PILATE's  WIPE.  4Q3 

«ervants  of  the  living  God,  and  the  stones  of  the  field  are  in  league 
with  you.  ° 

II.     Secondly,  I  gather  from  this  story  the  accessibility  op  con- 
science TO  God.    How  are  we  to  reach  Pilate  ?    How  are  we  to  give  him 
warning?   He  has  rejected  the  voice  of  Jesus  and  the  sight  of  Jesus— 
•could  not  Peter  be  fetched  to  expostulate  with  him  ?    Alas,  he  has  denied 
his  Master.     Cou  d  not  John  be  brought  in  ?     Even  he  has  forsaken  the 
Lord.  Where  shall  a  messenger  be  found?  It  shall  be  found  in  a  dream. 
Ixod  can  get  at  men  s  hearts,  however  hardened  they  may  be.  Never  ^ive 
them  up,  never  despair  of  arousing  them.   If  my  ministry,  your  ministry, 
•and  the  ministry  of  the  blessed  Book  should  all  seem  to  be  nothing 
God  can  reach  the  conscience  by  a  dream.     If  the  sword  cometh  not  at 
•them  at  close  quarters,  yet  what  seems  but  a  stray  arrow  from  a  bow 
drawn  at  a  venture  shall  find  out  the  joints  in  their  harness.     We  ought 
to  believe  m  God  about  wicked  men,  and  never  say  of  them,  *at  is  im- 
possible that  they  should  be  converted. "     The  Lord  can  wound  leviathan, 
tor  his  weapons  are  many,  and  they  are  suited  to  the  foe.     I  do  not 
think  a  dream  would  operate  upon  mij  mind  to  convince  me  ;   but 
certain  mmds  lie  open  in  that  direction,  and  to  them  a  dream  may  be 
a  power.      God  may  use  even  superstition  to  accomplish  his  beneficent 
purposes.     Many  besides  Pilate  have  been  warned  by  dreams. 

Better  still    Pilate  was  accessible  through   the   dream  of  Ms  wife. 
Henry  Melvill  has  a  very  wonderful  discourse  upon  this  topic,  in  which 
he  tries  to  show  that  probably  if  Pilate  had  dreamed  this  dream  himself  ' 
Jt  would  not  have  been  so  operative  upon  him  as  when  his  wife  dreamed 
It.    Me  takes  it  as  a  supposition,  which  nobody  can  deny,  that  Pilate 
bad  an  attectionate  and  tender  wife,  who  was  very  dear  to  him      The 
one   brief  narrative  which  we  have  of  her  certainly  looks  that  way  • 
it  IS  evident  that  she  loved  her  husband  dearly,  and  would  therefore  pre- 
vent his  acting  unj  ustly  to  Jesus.     To  send  a  warning  by  her  was  to  reach 
Filates  conscience  through  his  affections.     If  his  beloved  wife  was  dis- 
tressed  it  would  be  sure  to  weigh  heavily  with  him:  for  he  would  not  have 
her  troubled.     He  would  fain  shield  his  tender  one  from  every  breath  of 
wind  and  give  her  perfect  comfort,  and  when  she  pleads  it  is  his  delight 
to  yield:  it  is,  therefore,  no  small  trouble  to  him  that  she  is  sufferino- 
«uttering  so  much  as  to  send  a  message  to  him,  suffering  because  of  one 
Who  deserves  her  good  opinion— one  whom  he  himself  knows  to  be 
without  fault.     If  this  lady  was  indeed  the  wife   of  Pilate's  youth 
tender  and  dearly  beloved,  and  if  she  was  gradually  sickening  before 
his  eyes,  her  pale  face  would  rise  before  his  loving  memory,  and  her 
words  would  have  boundless  power  over  him  when  she  said,  "I  have 
suttered  many  things  in  a  dream."    O  Claudia  jProcula,  if  that  were  thy 
name,  well  did  the  Lord  of  mercy  entrust  hl^TSiessage  to  thy  persuasive 
lips,  tor  trom  thee  it  would  come  with  tenfold  influence.  Tradition  declares 
this  lady  to  have  been  a  Christian,  and  the  Greek  church  have  placed  her 
in  their  calendar  as  a  saint.     For  this  we  have  no  evidence  j  all  that  we 
tnow  IS  that  she  was  Pilate's  wife,  and  used  her  wifely  influence  to  stay 
him  trom  this  crime.     How  often  has  a  tender,  suffering,  loving  woman 
exercised  great  power  over  a  coarse,  rough  man!     The  All-wise  One 
Knows  this,  and  hence  he  often  speaks  to  sinful  men  by  this  influential 
«igency.     He  converts  one  in  a  family  that  she  may  be  his  missionary 


40 i  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACTiE   PULPIT. 

fco  the  rest.  Thus  he  speaks  with  something  better  than  the  tongnes  of 
men  and  of  angels,  for  he  uses  love  itself  to  be  his  orator.  Affection  has 
more  might  than  eloquence.  That  is  why,  my  friend,  God  sent  you  for  a 
little  while  that  dear  child  who  prattled  to  you  about  the  Saviour.  She 
is  gone  to  heaven  now,  but  the  music  of  her  little  hymns  rings  in  your 
ear  even  now,  and  her  talk  about  Jesus  and  the  angels  is  yet  with  you. 
She  has  been  called  home  ;  but  God  sent  her  to  you  for  a  season  to  charm 
you  to  himself  and  win  you  to  the  right  way.  Thus  he  bade  you  cease  from 
sin  and  turn  to  Christ.  And  that  dear  mother  of  yours,  who  is  now  before 
the  throne,  do  you  remember  what  she  said  to  you  when  she  was  dying  ? 
You  have  heard  me  a  great  many  times,  but  you  never  heard  a  sermon 
from  me  like  that  address  from  her  dying  couch.  You  can  never  quite 
forget  it,  or  shake  yourself  free  from  its  power.  Beware  how  you  trifle 
with  it.  To  Pilate  his  wife's  message  was  God's  ultimatum  ;  he  warned 
him  never  again,  and  even  Jesus  stood  silent  before  him.  0  my 
friend,  to  you  it  may  be  that  your  child,  your  mother,  or  your  affectionate 
wife  may  be  God's  last  messenger,  the  final  effort  of  the  warning  angel  to 
bring  you  to  a  better  mind.  A  loving  relative  pleading  with  tears  is 
often  the  forlorn  hope  of  mercy.  An  attack  so  skilfully  planned  and 
wisely  conducted  may  be  regarded  as  the  last  assault  of  love  upon  a 
stubborn  spirit,  and  after  this  it  will  be  left  to  its  own  devices.  The  selec- 
tion of  the  wife  svas  no  doubt  made  by  infinite  wisdom  and  tenderness, 
that  if  possible  Pilate  might  be  arrested  in  his  career  of  crime  and 
strengthened  to  the  performance  of  an  act  of  justice  by  which  he  would 
have  avoided  the  most  terrible  of  crimes. 

So,  then,  we  may  safely  conclude  that  the  Lord  has  his  missionaries 
where  the  city  missionary  cannot  enter  ;  he  sends  the  little  children  to 
sing  and  pray  where  the  preacher  is  never  heard  ;  he  moves  the  godly 
woman  to  proclaim  the  gospel  by  her  lip  and  life  where  the  Bible  is  not 
read.  He  sends  a  sweet  girl  to  grow  up  and  win  a  brother  or  a  father 
where  no  other  voice  would  be  allowed  to  tell  of  Jesus  and  his  love.  We 
thank  God  it  is  so ;  it  gives  hope  for  the  households  of  this  godless 
city, — it  gives  us  hope  even  for  those  for  whom  the  Sabbath-bell 
rings  out  in  vain.  They  will  hear,  they  must  hear  these  home  preachers, 
these  messengers  who  tug  at  their  hearts. 

Ay,  and  let  me  add  that  where  God  does  not  employ  a  dream,  nor  use 
a  wife,  yet  he  can  get  at  men's  conscience  by  no  visible  means  but  bi/ 
thoughts  which  come  unbidden  and  abide  upon  the  soul.  Truths  long 
buried  suddenly  rise  up,  and  when  the  man  is  in  the  very  act  of  sin  he 
is  stopped  in  the  way,  as  Balaam  was  when  the  angel  met  him.  How 
often  it  has  happened  that  conscience  has  met  a  guilty  man  even  in  the 
moment  when  he  meant  to  enjoy  the  pleasure  bought  with  wrong,  even 
as  Elijah  met  Ahab  at  the  gate  of  Naboth's  vineyard !  How  the  king 
starts  back  as  he  beholds  the  prophet :  he  would  sooner  have  seen  the 
very  fiend  than  Elijah.  Angrily  he  cries,  "  Hast  thou  found  me, 
0  mine  enemy  ?  "  Though,  indeed,  Elijah  was  his  best  friend,  had  he 
known  it.  Often  does  conscience  pounce  upon  a  man  when  the  sweet 
morsel  of  sin  has  just  been  rolled  under  his  tongue,  and  he  is  sitting 
down  to  enjoy  it :  the  visitation  of  conscience  turns  the  stolen  honey 
into  bitterness,  and  the  forbidden  joy  into  anguish.  Conscience  often 
lies  like  a  lion  in  a  thicket,  and  when  the  sinner  comes  along  the  broad 


THE  DREAM   OF   PILATE*S  WIFE.  405 

road  it  leaps  upon  him,  and  for  a  while  he  is  sorely  put  to  it.  The 
bad  man  is  comparable  to  leviathan,  of  whom  we  read  that  his  scales 
are  his  pride,  shut  up  together  as  with  a  close  seal;  so  that  the 
sword  of  him  that  layeth  at  him  cannot  hold,  the  spear,  the  dart,  nor 
the  javelin ;  and  yet  the  Lord  hath  a  way  of  coming  at  him  and  of 
fiore  wounding  him.  Let  us,  therefore,  both  hope  and  pray  for  the  very 
worst  of  men. 

Brothers  and  sisters,  use  for  the  good  of  men  anything  which  comes 
in  your  way.  Use  not  only  sober  argument  and  sound  doctrine,  but 
even  if  a  dream  has  touched  your  heart,  do  not  hesitate  to  repeat  it 
where  it  may  have  effect.  Any  weapon  may  be  used  in  this  war.  But 
see  to  ib  that  you  do  seek  the  souls  of  men,  all  of  you.  You  who  are 
wives  should  be  especially  stirred  up  to  this  sacred  work.  Remember 
Pilate's  wife,  and  think  of  her  as  affectionately  giving  the  warning  to 
her  husband,  and  go  and  do  likewise.  Never  keep  back  from  an  un- 
godly husband  the  word  which  may  convert  him  from  the  error  of  his 
ways.  And  you,  dear  children,  you  sisters,  you  of  the  gentler  sort,  do 
not  hesitate,  in  your  own  quiet  way,  to  be  heralds  for  Jesus  wherever 
your  lot  is  cast.  As  for  us  all,  let  us  take  care  that  we  use  every 
occasion  for  repressing  sin  and  creating  holiness.  Let  us  warn  the 
ungodly  at  once  ;  for  perhaps  the  man  to  whom  we  are  sent  has  not 
yet"  performed  the  fatal  deed.  Let  us  stand  in  the  gap  whileyet  there 
is  space  for  repentance.  Pilate  is  even  now  sitting  on  the  judgment- 
seat.  Time  is  precious.  Make  haste  !  Make  haste,  ere  yet  he  commits 
the  deed  of  blood !  Send  the  messenger  to  him !  Stop  him  ere  the 
deed  is  done  ;  even  though  he  should  complain  of  your  interference. 
Say  to  him,  "  Have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  this  just  person  :  foi*  I 
have  suffered  many  things  because  of  him,  and  I  pray  thee  do  nothing 
against  him." 

That  is  our  second  point.  God  bless  it ;  although  I  cannot  preach 
upon  it  as  I  would,  the  Spirit  of  God  can  put  power  into  it. 

IIL     Thirdly,  we  have  now  the  lamentable  task  of  observing  the 

FREQUENT   FAILURE   EVEN    GF   THE   BEST  MEANS.      I   have   ventured    tO 

say  that,  humanly  speaking,  it  was  the  best  means  of  reaching  Pilate's 
conscience  for  his  wife  to  be  led  to  expostulate  with  him.  He  would 
hear  but  few,  but  her  he  would  hear  ;  and  yet  even  her  warning  was  in 
vain.     What  was  the  reason  ? 

First,  self-interest  was  involved  in  the  matter,  and  that  is ",  powerful 
factor.  Pilate  was  afraid  of  losing  his  governorship.  TLe  Jews  would 
be  angry  if  he  did  not  obey  their  cruel  bidding  ;  they  might  complain 
to  Tiberius,  and  he  would  lose  his  lucrative  position.  Alas,  such  things 
as  these  are  holding  some  of  you  captives  to  sin  at  this  moment.  You 
cannot  afford  to  be  true  and  right,  for  it  would  cost  too  much.  You 
know  the  will  of  the  Lord  ;  you  know  what  is  right ;  but  you  renounce 
Christ  by  putting  him  off",  and  by  abiding  in  the  ways  of  sin  that  you 
may  gain  the  wages  thereof.  You  are  afraid  that  to  be  a  true  Christian 
would  involve  the  loss  of  a  friend's  goodwill,  or  the  patronage  of  an 
ungodly  person,  or  the  smile  of  an  influential  worldling,  and  this  you 
cannot  afford.  You  count  the  cost,  and  reckon  that  it  is  too  high.  You 
resolve  to  gain  the  world,  even  though  you  lose  your  soul !  What  then  ? 
You  will  go  to  hell  rich  !     A  sorry  result  this  !     Do  you  see  anything 


40S  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

desirable  in  such  an  attainment  ?     Oh  that  you  would  consider  your 
ways  and  listen  to  the  voice  of  wisdom  ! 

The  next  reason  why  his  wife's  appeal  was  ineffectual  was  the  fact 
that  Pilate  was  a  coward.  A  man  with  legions  at  his  back,  and  yet 
afraid  of  a  Jewish  mob,— afraid  to  let  one  poor  prisoner  go  whom 'he- 
knew  to  be  innocent ;  afraid  because  he  knew  his  conduct  would  n  't 
bear  inspection  !  He  was,  morally,  a  coward !  Multitudes  of  people 
go  to  hell  because  they  have  not  the  courasje  to  fight  their  way  to- 
heaven.  "  The  fearful  and  unbelieving  shall  have  their  portion  in  the* 
lake  which  burneth  with  fire  and  brimstone,  which  is  the  second  death." 
So  saith  the  word  of  God.  They  are  afraid  of  encountering  a  fool's- 
laugh,  and  so  rush  upon  everlasting  contempt.  They  could  not  bear  to 
tear  themselves  away  from  old  companions,  and  excite  remarks  and 
sarcasm  among  ungodly  wits,  and  so  they  keep  their  companions  and 
perish  with  them.  They  have  not  the  pluck  to  say  "  No,"  and  swim 
against  the  stream  ;  they  are  such  cowardly  creatures  that  they  will 
sooner  be  for  ever  lost  than  face  a  little  scorn. 

Yet  while  there  was  cowardice  in  Pilate,  there  was  •presumption  too. 
He  who  was  afraid  of  man  and  afraid  to  do  right,  yet  dared  to  incur 
the  guilt  of  innocent  blood.  Oh,  the  cowardice  of  Pilate  to  take  water 
and  wash  his  hands,  as  if  he  could  wash  oif  blood  with  water ;  and  then, 
to  say,  "I  am  innocent  of  his  blood," — which  was  a.  lie, — "see  ye  to- 
it."  By  those  last  words  he  brought  the  blood  upon  himself,  for  ha 
consigned  his  prisoner  to  their  tender  mercies,  and  they  could  not 
have  laid  a  hand  upon  him  unless  he  had  given  them  leave.  Oh,, 
the  daring  of  Pilate  thus  in  the  sight  of  God  to  commit  murder  and 
disclaim  it.  There  is  a  strange  mingling  of  cowardliness  and  courage 
about  many  men ;  they  are  afraid  of  a  man,  but  not  afraid  of  the 
eternal  God  who  can  destroy  both  body  and  soul  in  hell.  This  is 
why  men  are  not  saved,  even  when  the  best  of  means  are  used,  because 
they  are  presumptuous,  and  dare  defy  the  Lord. 

Besides  this,  Pilate  was  double-minded :  he  had  a  heart  and  a  heart.. 
He  had  a  heart  after  that  which  was  right,  for  he  sought  to  release 
Jesus  ;  but  he  had  another  heart  after  that  which  was  gainful,  for  he 
would  not  run  the  risk  of  losing  his  post  by  incurring  the  displeasure 
of  the  Jews.  We  have  plenty  around  us  who  are  double-minded.  Such 
are  here  this  morning;  but  where  were  they  last  night?  You  will  be 
touched  by  to-day's  sermon  !  How  will  you  be  affected  to-morrow  by 
a  lewd  speech  or  a  lascivious  song  ?  Many  men  run  two  ways  ;  tliey^ 
seem  earnest  about  their  souls,  but  they  are  far  more  eager  after 
gain  or  pleasure.  Strange  perversity  of  man  that  he  should  tear 
himself  in  two.  We  have  heard  of  tyrants  tying  men  to  wild  horses 
and  dragging  them  asunder,  but  these  people  do  this  with  themselves. 
They  have  too  much  conscience  to  neglect  the  Sabbath,  and  to  forega 
attendance  at  the  house  of  prayer ;  too  much  conscience  to  be  utterly 
irreligious,  to  be  honestly  infidel ;  and  yet  at  the  same  time  they  have- 
not  enough  conscience  to  keep  them  from  being  hypocrites.  They  let. 
"I  dare  not"  wait  upon  'I  would."  They  want  to  do  justly,  but  it 
would  be  too  costly.  They  dare  not  run  risks,  and  yet,  meanwhile,  they 
run  the  awful  risk  of  being  driven  for  ever  from  the  presence  of  God 
to  the  place  where  hope  can  never  come.     Oh  that  my  words  were  shot 


THE   DREAM  OF  PILATE'S  WIFE.  407 

as  from  a  culverin!  Oh  that  they  would  hurl  a  caunon-shot  at  inde- 
dsiou  '  Oh  that  I  could  speak  like  God's  own  thunder,  which  maketh 
the  hinds  to  calve,  and  breaketh  the  rocks  in  pieces  :  f^^n  so  would  I 
warn  men  against  these  desperate  evils  which  ^^wart  the  efforts  of 
mercy,  so  that,  even  when  the  man's  own  wife,  with  tendere^st  love, 
hids  him  escape  from   the  wrath  to  come,  he  still  chooses  his  own 

^IV^^  Lastly,  we  have  a  point  which  is  yet  more  terrible,  the  over- 
whelming CONDEMNATION  OF  THOSE  WHO  THUS  TRANSGRESS  ihlS 
Pilate  was  guilty  beyond  all  excuse.  He  deliberately  and  of  his  own 
free  will  condemned  the  just  Son  of  God  to  die,  being  informed  that  h 
was  the  Son  of  God,  and  knowing  both  from  his  own  examination  and 
from  his  wife  that  he  was  a '*  just  person."  ,.  ,.     ,      t. 

Observe  that  the  message  which  he  received  was  most  distinct,     it 
was  sug<?ested  by  a  dream  ;  but  there  is  nothing  dreamy  about  it     It  is 
as  plam\s  words  can  be  put:— ''Have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  that 
iust  man:  for  I  have  suffered  many  things  this  day  in  a  dream  because 
of  him  "     He  condemned  the  Lord  with  his  eyes  open,  and  that  is  an 
awful  way  of  sinuing.     Oh,  my  dear  friends,  am  I  addressing  any  here 
who  are  purposing  to  do   some  very  sinful  thing,  but  have  lately 
received  a  warning  from  God  ?     I  would  add  one  more  caution.     I  pray 
you  by  the  blessed  God,  and  by  the  bleeding  Saviour,  and  as  y6u  love 
yourself,  and  as  you  love  her  from  whom  the  warning  may  have  come  to 
you    do  stop,  and  hold  your  hand!     Do  not  this  abominable  thing! 
You  know  better.     The  warning  is  not  put  to  you  m  some  mysterious 
and  obscure  way;  but  it  comes  point  blank  to  you  m  unmistakable 
terms     God  has  sent  conscience  to  you,  and  he  has  enlightened  that 
conscience,  so  that  it  speaks  very  plain  English  to  you.     This  morning  s 
discourse  stops  you  on  the  highway  of  sin,  puts  its  pistol  to  your  ear 
and  demands  that  you  "  Stand  and  deliver."     Stir  an  inch,  and  it  will 
be  at  your  own  soul's  peril.     Do  you  hear  me  ?     Will  you  regard  the 
heaven-sent  expostulation  ?     Oh,  that  you  would  stand  still  awhile  and 
hear  what  God  shall  speak  while  he  bids  you  yield  yourself  to  Christ  to- 
flay      It  may  be  nciv  or  never  with  you,  as  it  was  with  Filate  that  day. 
He  had  the  evil  thing  which  he  was  about  to  do  fully  described  to  him, 
and  therefore  if  he  ventured  on  it,  his  presumption  would  be  great,     tlis 
wife  had  not  said,  ''  Have  nothing  to  do  with  this  man,   but ''  with  this 
just  man,"  and  that  word  rang  in  his  ears,  and  again  and  again  repeated 
Itself  till  he  repeated  it  too.     Read  the  twenty-fourth  verse      When  he 
was  washing  his  wicked  hands  he  said,  ''I  am  innocent  of  the  blood  of  this 
just  Derson,"— the  very  name  his  wife  had  given  to  our  Lord     The 
arrows  stuck  in  him  !    He  could  not  shake  them  off  !    Like  a  wild  beast, 
he  had  the  javelin  sticking  in  his  side,  and  though  he  rushed  into  the 
forest  of  his  sin,  it  was  evidently  rankling  in  him  still:—   that  just 
person  "  haunted  him.    Sometimes  God  makes  a  man  see  sin  as  sm,  and 
makes  him  see  the  blackness  of  it ;  and  if  he  then  perseveres  in  it,  he 
becomes  doubly  guilty,  and  pulls  down  upon  himself  a  doom  intolerable 
beyond  that  of  Sodom  of  old.  ,.,...  •  n 

Beside  that,  Pilate  was  sinning  not  only  after  distinct  warning,  and  a 
warning  which  set  out  the  blackness  of  the  sin,  but  he  was  sinning  after 
his  conscience  had  been  touched  and  moved  through  his  affections.     It 


408  METROPOLirAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

it  a  dreadful  thing  to  sin  against  a  mother's  prayer.  She  stands  in 
your  way ;  she  stretches  out  her  arms,  with  tears  she  declares  that 
she  will  block  your  road  to  perdition.  Will  you  force  your  way  to 
ruin  over  her  prostrate  form  ?  She  kneels  !  She  gra3ps  your  knees, 
she  begs  you  not  to  be  lost.  Are  you  so  brutal  <%»  co  trample  on  her 
love  ?  Your  little  child  entreats  you ;  will  you  disregard  her  tears  ? 
Alas,  she  was  yours,  but  death  has  removed  her,  and  ere  she  departed 
she  entreated  you  to  follow  her  to  heaven  and  she  sang  her  little  hymn— 

**  Yes,  we'll  gather  at  the  river." 

Will  you  fling  your  babe  aside  as  though  you  were  another  Herod  that 
would  slay  the  innocents,  and  all  in  order  that  you  may  curse  yourself 
for  ever  and  be  your  own  destroyer  ?  It  is  hard  for  me  to  talk  to  you  thus, 
if  it  is  coming  home  to  any  of  you  it  will  be  very  hard  for  you  to  hear 
it ;  indeed,  I  hope  it  will  be  so  haid  that  you  will  end  it  by  saying,  "  I 
will  yield  to  love  which  assails  me  by  such  tender  entreaties." 

It  will  not  be  a  piece  of  mere  imagination  if  I  conceive  that  at  the 
last  great  day,  when  Jesus  sits  upon  the  judgment-seat,  and  Pilate 
stands  there  to  be  judged  for  the  deeds  done  in  the  body,  that  his 
wife  will  be  a  swift  witness  against  him  to  condemn  him.  I  can 
imagine  that  at  the  last  great  day  there  will  be  many  such  scenes 
as  that,  wherein  those  who  loved  us  best  will  bring  the  most  weighty 
evidences  against  us,  if  we  are  still  in  our  sins.  I  know  how  it 
affected  me  as  a  lad  when  my  mother,  after  setting  before  her  children 
the  way  of  salvation,  said  to  us,  "If  you  refuse  Christ  and  perish,  I 
cannot  plead  in  your  favour  and  say  that  you  were  ignorant.  No,  but 
I  must  say  Amen  to  your  condemnation."  I  could  not  bear  ihat !  Would 
my  mother  say  "  Amen  "  to  my  condemnation  ?  And  yet,  Pilate's  wife, 
what  canst  thou  do  otherwise  ?  When  all  must  speak  the  truth,  what 
canst  thou  say  but  that  thy  husband  was  tenderly  and  earnestly  warned 
by  thee  and  yet  consigned  the  Saviour  to  his  enemies  ? 

Oh,  my  ungodly  hearers,  my  soul  goes  out  after  you.  "  Turn  ye,  turn 
ye,  why  will  ye  die  ?  "  Why  will  ye  sin  against  the  Saviour  ?  God  grant 
you  may  not  reject  your  own  salvation,  but  may  turn  to  Christ  and 
find  eternal  redemption  in  him.  "Whosoever  belie veth  in  him  hatb 
everlasting:  life." 


PoR'iioN  OF  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Romans  iii. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 21,  5,  473. 


PILATE    AND    OURSELVES    GUILTY   OF   THE 
SAVIOUR'S  DEATH. 


Deltvkrkd  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  March  5th,  1882,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THK  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


"  When  Pilate  saw  that  he  could  prevail  nothinor,  but  that  rather  a  tumult  was  made, 
he  took  water,  and  washed  his  hands  before  the  multitude  saying,  I  am  innocent  of  tlie 
blood  of  this  just  person :  see  ye  to  it.  Then  ans^yered  all  the  people,  and  said,  Hia 
blood  be  on  us,  and  on  our  children."— Matthew  xxvu.  24.  Zo. 

The  crucifixion  of  Christ  was  the  crowning  sin  of  our  race.  In  his 
death  we  shall  find  all  the  sins  of  mankind  uniting  in  foul  conspiracy 
Envy  and  pride  and  hate  are  there,  with  covetousness,  falsehood  and 
blasphemy,  eager  to  rush  on  to  cruelty,  revenge,  and  murder  The  devil 
roused  around  the  seed  of  the  woaian  the  iniquities  of  us  all:  they  com- 
passed the  Lord  about,  yea,  they  compassed  him  about  like  bees  All 
the  evils  of  human  hearts  of  all  ages  were  concentrated  around  the 
cross-  even  as  all  the  rivers  run  into  the  sea,  and  as  all  the  clouds 
empty  themselves  upon  the  earth,  so  did  all  the  crimes  of  man  gather 
to  the  slaving  of  the  Son  of  God.  It  seemed  as  if  hell  held  a  levee, 
and  all  the  various  forms  of  sin  came  flocking  to  the  rendezvous;  army 
upon  army,  they  hastened  to  the  battle.  As  the  vultures  hasten  to  the 
body  so  came  the  flocks  of  sins  to  make  the  Lord  their  prey.  By 
all  the  assembled  troops  of  sins  there  was  consummated  the  foulesc 
crime  which  the  sun  has  ever  beheld.  By  wicked  hands  they  did  crucify 
and  slay  the  Saviour  of  the  world. 

We  have  been  singing  two  hymns  in  which  we  took  to  ourselves  a 
share  of  the  guilt  of  our  Lord's  death.     We  sang— 
"  Oh,  the  sharp  pangs  of  smarting  pain 
My  dear  Redeemer  bore, 
When  knotty  whips  and  rugged  ihorna 
His  sacred  body  tore. 
•*But  knotty  whips  and  rugged  thorns 
In  vain  do  I  accuse  ; 
In  vain  I  blame  the  Roman  bands. 
And  the  more  spiteful  Jews. 
»'Twas  you,  my  sins,  my  cruel  sins, 
>  His  chief  tormentors  were  ; 

Each  of  my  crimes  became  a  nail. 
And  unbelief  the  spear." 


410  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

And  then  after  the  same  manner  we  sorrowfully  asked  a  question,  anA 
sang  a  penitential  reply : 

*•  My  Jesus  !  who  with  spittle  vile 

Profaned  thy  sacred  Drow  ? 
Or  whose  unpitying  scourge  has  made 

Thy  precious  blood  to  flow?  , 

'Tis  I  have  thus  ungrateful  been, 

Yet,  Jesus,  pity  take ! 
Oh,  spare  and  pardon  me,  my  Lord, 

For  thy  sweet  mercy's  sake !  " 

Perhaps  some  of  you  hardly  understand  what  you  hare  been  singing  ; 
but  others  of  us  have  sincerely  and  intelligently  pleaded  guilty  of  the 
death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We  know  that  he  not  only  suffered 
for  our  transgressions,  but  by  our  iniquities.  This  is  not  clear  to  a 
great  many;  and  I  would  not  have  them  pretend  that  it  is.  They 
cannot  see  that  they  have  anything  to  do  with  the  matter  of  Jesus' 
death,  and  therefore  they  are  not  moved  to  repentance  by  hearing 
thereof;  indeed,  they  imitate  the  example  of  Pilate  in  our  text,  when 
he  took  water  and  washed  his  hands  before  the  multitude,  and  said,  *'  I 
am  innocent  of  the  blood  of  this  just  person."  The  object  of  our 
present  discourse  will  be  to  arouse  slumbering  consciences.  Without 
going  into  any  metaphysical  questions  as  to  whether  such  a  man  did 
or  did  not  actually  have  a  share  in  the  particular  action  by  which 
Jesus  died,  I  shall  show  you  that  in  many  ways  men  practically  commit 
a  like  crime,  and  so  prove  that  they  have  similar  dispositions  to  those 
ancient  Kill-Christs.  Though  they  repudiate  the  crucifixion,  they 
repeat  it,  if  not  in  form,  yet  in  spirit.  Though  Jesus  is  not  here  in 
flesh  and  blood,  yet  the  cause  of  holiness  and  truth  and  his  divine  Spirit 
are  still  among  us,  and  men  act  towards  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  which 
is  set  up  among  theui,  in  the  same  way  as  the  Jews  and  Romans  acted 
towards  the  incarnate  God.  True,  all  men  are  not  alike  inveterate 
against  him ;  for  the  Lord  spoke  of  some  who  have  "  the  greater  sin  ; " 
and  few  are  as  guilty  as  the  traitor  Judas,  that  son  of  perdition  ;  but  in 
every  form  of  it  the  rejection  of  Christ  is  a  great  sin,  and  it  will  be  a 
great  gospel  blessing  if  it  be  repented  of  after  the  fashion  of  the 
prophet  when  he  said,  "  They  shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have 
pierced,  and  they  shall  mourn  for  him,  as  one  mourneth  for  his  only  son. 
and  shall  be  in  bitterness  for  him,  as  one  that  is  in  bitterness  for  his^ 
firstborn." 

I  shall  now  take  up  the  story  of  our  Lord's  appearance  before 
Pilate,  from  the  moment  of  his  being  sent  back  to  Herod  to  the  time 
when  he  was  delivered  to  the  Jews  to  be  led  away  for  crucifixion,  and  I 
shall  try  to  exhibit  by  this  narrative  several  ways  in  which  men  virtually 
put  the  Christ  to  death,  and  therefore  become  partakers  of  the  ancient 
transgression  which  was  committed  at  Jerusalem. 

I.  First,  there  are  some — and  these  are  they  who  have  the  greater  sin 
— who  are  determinedly  and  avowedly  the  opponents  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  These  are  the  men  who  are  represented  by  the  chief  priests  and 
'  elders  of  the  Jews,  who  of  old  sought  the  Saviour's  blood,  because  they 
could  not  endure  his  teaching.  Nothing  else  would  satisfy  them  but  that 
he  should  be  removed  from  the  earth,  for  he  was  a  standing  protest; 


PIIiATE   AND   OURSELVES   GUILTY   OP   THE   SAVIOUR'S   DEATH.      411 

against  their  evil  deeds.  They  hated  him  because  by  his  light  their 
wicked  lives  were  reproved.  These  were  the  true  murderers  of 
Christ,  who  gloried  in  their  shame  and  defied  the  punishment  of  it,, 
crying,  "His  blood  be  on  us,  and  on  our  children."  We  have  still 
among  us  those  who  cannot  endure  the  teaching  of  our  Lord  Jesus. 
His  very  name  seems  to  excite  their  worst  passions  ;  they  rave  at  the 
mention  of  it.  Oh,  the  atrocious  things  that  some  have  said  of  late 
of  the  Christ  of  Cod.  They  have  gone  out  of  their  way  to  insult 
him.  If  anyone  else  had  been  slandered  as  he  has  been,  society  would 
not  have  tolerated  the  loathsome  tongues.  Accusations  against  Jehovah 
and  his  Son  would  seem  to  be  delectable  morsels  to  modern  blasphemers, 
dainties  upon  which  they  feed  greedily.  My  flesh  trembles  when  I 
think  of  the  hard  speeches  which  the  ungodly  still  utter  against 
him  who  in  the  day  of  his  humiliation  endured  such  contradiction  of 
sinners  against  him.self.  Absurd  many  of  these  calumnies  would  have 
been,  and  to  be  dismissed  with  uttermost  contempt,  if  it  were  not  for 
the  guilt  of  the  men  themselves ;  for  in  these  speeches  we  see  that  the 
poison  of  asps  is  under  their  lips  ;  their  mouth  is  full  of  cursing  and 
bitterness.  They  treat  not  so  the  heroes  of  war,  the  philosophers  of 
antiquity,  nor  even  the  notorious  scourges  of  the  race  ;  to  all  of  these 
they  show  some  candour,  and  often  award  honours  which  are  doubtfully 
due  ;  but  when  they  touch  upon  the  person  and  life  of  our  blessed  Lord,, 
candour  and  honesty  are  dismissed :  anything  like  an  attempt  to  under- 
stand him  is  refused,  and  he  and  his  are  treated  with  ridicule,  misrepre- 
sentation, and  falsehood.  They  heap  up  their  coarsest  epithets,  they  put  the 
worst  interpretation  upon  his  words,  they  give  the  vilest  misrepresen- 
tations of  his  deeds,  and  attribute  to  him  motives  to  which  he  was 
an  utter  stranger.  Such  men  are  among  us,  clamouring  to  be  heard. 
There  have  been  unbelievers  and  deriders  of  Jesus  in  all  time  ;  but 
just  now  the  race  is  of  fouler  speech  than  usual.  Once  infidelity  was 
philosophical  and  thoughtful,  and  great  names  were  to  be  found  upon 
her  roll  ;  but  now  her  noisiest  advocates  are  bullies  after  the  manner 
of  Tom  Paine,  men  who  seem  to  delight  in  wounding  the  feelings  of 
the  godly  and  crushing  every  sacred  thing  under  their  feet.  These 
are  the  true  followers  of  the  men  whose  mouths  were  full  of  '*  Crucify 
liim!  Crucify  him!"  They  cannot  endure  that  Jesus  should  be  re- 
membered, much  less  revered.  They  claim  to  be  "liberal,"  and  to  be 
large-hearted  towards  all  religions  ;  but  their  unmitigated  scorn  of  the 
faith  of  Jesus  is  displayed  on  every  possible  occasion,  proving  that  the 
spirit  of  persecution  burns  within  them.  It  would  be  idle  for  these  to 
£ay  that  they  would  not  crucify  Christ,  for  they  do  crucify  him  to  the 
utuiost  of  their  power  by  their  profane  speeches  against  him. 

By  a  certain  number  their  main  attack  is  aimed  against  the  royal 
authority  and  reigning  power  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  They  exclaim 
against  him  because  he  claims  universal  sovereignty.  They  might 
not  object  so  much  to  Christianity  as  one  of  various  creeds  ;  but  as  it. 
claims  to  be  supreme  they  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.  The 
Roman  Senate  was  willing  to  set  up  Jesus  in  the  Pantheon,  among 
other  gods,  but  when  they  learned  that  the  Christ  claimed  to  be  wor- 
shipped alone,  then  he  was  denied  a  place  in  the  circle  of  adoration. 
If  the  gospel  claims  to  be  truth,  and  judges  other  systems  to  be  false,. 


412  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

straightway  it  arouses  the  opposition  of  the  broad  school.  We  hare 
men  among  us  to-day  who  say,  "  Yes,  there  is  something  good  in 
Christianity  as  there  is  in  Buddhism."  Of  this  precious  Buddhism 
they  seem  of  late  to  be  wonderfully  fond  ;  any  idol  will  suit  men  so 
long  as  they  can  be  rid  of  the  living  God.  A  Christ  who  will  be 
everything  or  nothing  is  not  to  their  taste.  When  he  saith  that  the 
idols  he  will  utterly  demolish,  and  break  his  enemies  in  pieces  as 
with  a  rod  of  iron,  they  give  him  the  cold  shoulder,  for  they  are 
distinctly  the  enemies  of  Jesus  Christ  if  he  be  set  forth  as  Lord  of  all. 

And  we  have  some  of  milder  cast  who,  nevertheless,  join  with  this 
oand  ;  for  their  opposition  is  to  the  deity  of  Christ.  These  in  effect 
cry,  *'  We  have  a  law,  and  by  our  law  he  ought  to  die,  because  he  made 
himself  the  Son  of  God."  They  grow  indignant  over  the  claims  which 
Christians  advance  for  their  God  and  Saviour.  Christ  the  best  of  men, 
Christ  the  noblest  of  prophets,  Christ  near  akin  to  Deity,  possibly  a 
delegated  God,  they  will  fj^o  as  far  as  that,  but  further  they  will  not  stir. 
"  That  all  men  should  honour  the  Son  even  as  they  honour  the  Father" 
is  not  to  their  mind.  If  Jesus  be  preached  as  "very  God  of  very  God," 
straightway  we  hear  from  them  the  cry,  "  Away  with  him !  away  with 
him  ! "  When  we  proclaim  Jesus  as  King  upon  God's  holy  hill  of  Zion, 
and  say  of  him,  "  Thy  throne,  0  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever,"  they  refuse 
to  bow  before  his  divine  majesty.  They  do,  so  far  as  they  are  able, 
destroy  the  divinity  of  Christ  and  reduce  him  to  a  mere  man.  How 
can  such  people  blame  the  Jews  and  the  Romans  ?  They  could  but  slay 
his  manhood,  but  these  would  destroy  his  deity.  Is  not  their  guilt  as 
great  ?  I  charge  all  deniers  of  the  godhead  of  our  Lord  with  being,  as 
far  as  they  can  be,  his  murderers ;  for  they  strike  at  his  noblest  nature 
by  assailing  his  divine  power  and  godhead.  May  the  Spirit  of  God  be 
here  to  convince  them  of  their  error  and  lead  them  to  worship  Jesus, 
who  is  exalted  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father. 

I  must  charge  home  the  accusation  in  the  name  of  God  and  truth. 
Avowed  opposers  of  Christ,  had  they  been  alive  in  the  days  of  his  flesh, 
would  have  wished  him  to  be  put  to  death,  for,  so  far  as  they  are  con- 
cerned, he  is  either  dead  to  them  in  his  true  character,  or  else  they  are 
doing  their  best  in  their  own  conscience  and  upon  the  conscience  of 
others  to- sweep  him  out  of  existence.  If  they  say  they  would  not  have 
put  Jesus  to  a  literal  death  on  the  cross,  I  say  they  are  putting  him  to 
a  death  which  he  would  deprecate  even  more,  namely,  the  destruction 
of  all  his  influence  over  the  minds  of  men.  By  decrying  his  atonement 
by  which  he  reconciles  men  to  God,  by  setting  men's  hearts  against  him 
and  causing  them  to  refuse  his  salvation,  these  men  do  as  far  as  they 
can  rob  him  of  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him,  for  which  he  endured 
the  cross,  despising  the  shame.  Is  this  nothing  ?  Put  me  to  death  if 
you  will,  for  1  shall  live  when  I  am  dead  by  the  words  which  I  have 
spoken :  I  should  count  it  a  far  worse  murder  if  you  could  sweep  out 
of  men's  minds  all  that  I  have  taught,  and  overthrow  all  the  good  which 
I  have  attempted  to  do.  And  if  it  be  so  of  a  mere  man,  much  more 
must  it  be  so  of  Jesus — that  merely  to  murder  him  upon  a  cross  is 
comparatively  little  compared  with  declaring,  "  We  will  not  be  in- 
fluenced by  him,  nor  believe  m  him  as  Saviour  and  God,  and  to  the 
bast  of  our  power  we  will   prevent  others   froir   believing  in  him." 


PILATE  AND  OURSELVES  GUILTY  OF  THE   SAVIOUR'S  DEATH.    413 

What  a  wretched  object  for  a  man  to  live  for,  what  a  horrible  fame  for 
a  man  to  seek  after— to  stamp  out  the  gospel  of  Jesus.  Terrible  will 
be  the  punishment  of  this  sin.  Oh  opponent  of  Jesus,  instead  of 
being  less  guilty  than  the  Jews  of  our  Lord's  day,  you  are  even 
more  culpable.  You  are  not  slaying  him  in  one  way,  but  you  are 
doing  it  in  another,  and  the  crime  is  the  same  in  spirit.  I  see  a 
mystic  cross  to  which  your  cruel  words  do  nail  my  Lord ;  I  see  before 
my  mental  eye  a  Calvary  whei-eon  the  Lord  Jesus  is  crucified  afresh 
and  put  to  an  open  shame  by  infidel  sarcasms  and  sceptical  insinuations; 
1  see  him  derided  and  made  nothing  of  by  those  who  deny  his  deity  and 
refuse  to  believe  in  his  sacrifice.  Enough  of  this.  May  conscience  be 
present  here,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  be  present  too,  that  men  may  not  dare 
to  wash  their  hands  in  innocency  if  they  have  been  the  open  antagonists 
of  Jesus  and  are  so  still.  Oh  that  you  would  turn  to  him,  and  become 
his  disciples.  His  beauties  are  such  ^hat  they  might  well  charm  every 
honest  heart:  his  teaching  is  so  tenderly  reasonable,  so  full  of  sweet- 
ness and  of  light,  that  it  is  marvellous  that  men  do  not  receive  it  with 
joy.  His  cross  is  unique,— a  bleeding  sufferer,  bearing  offences  that  were 
not  his  own,  thathis  own  enemies  might  live !  The  conception  is  so  strange 
that  it  could  never  have  originated  in  the  selfish  mind  of  fallen  man. 
It  bears  its  own  witness  on  its  brow.  AVoe  unto  those  that  fight  against 
it,  for  it  shall  cost  them  dear.  He  that  stumbleth  upon  this  stone  shall 
be  broken,  but  upon  whomsoever  this  stone  shall  fall  it  shall  grind  him 
to  powder.  See  what  came  to  these  Jewish  people  :  they  were  them- 
selves crucified  by  Titus  in  such  numbers  that  they  could  no  longer 
find  wood  enough  for  their  execution.  Jerusalem  destroyed  is  the 
result  of  Jesus  crucified.  Beware,  ye  that  fight  against  him,_  for  the 
omnipotent  Father  will  take  up  his  quarrel,  and  all  the  forces  of 
creation  and  of  providence  will  be  at  his  command  to  wage  war  for 
truth  and  righteousness.  The  Nazarene  has  triumphed,  and  he  will 
triumph  even  to  the  end,  when  he  shall  have  all  his  enemies  under  his 
feet.  0  ye  that  hate  him,  be  wise  betimes,  and  close  the  hopeless 
contest  in  which  you  chiefiy  fight  against  your  own  souls. 

IL  I  hope  there  are  not  many  here  to  whom  this  first  part  of  my 
sermon  applies  ;  we  will  advance  to  a  second  point.  Pilate  having  a 
conscience  which  troubled  him  was  exceedingly  anxious  not  to  put  Jesus 
to  death,  and  yet  could  not  see  how  he  could  avoid  domg  so,  seeing  that 
the  Jews  threatened  to  accuse  him  of  want  of  loyalty  to  Ciesar,  and  that 
Csesar  the  gloomy  tyrant  Tiberius,  who  was  unrelenting  in  his  fury. 
After  first  sending  his  prisoner  to  Herod,  he  finds  that  he  cannot  escape 
in  that  way,  and  therefore  he  catches  at  a  second  hope.  He  tells  the  mob 
that  the  custom  of  the  feast  required  that  one  prisoner  should  be  re- 
leased, and  that  the  choice  remained  with  them.  He  hopes  that  they  will 
choose  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  A  vain  hope  indeed !  It  so  happened  that  there 
was  another  Jesus  in  prison  at  the  time,  namely,  Jesus  Barabbas,  who 
had  been  a  murderer,  and  was  guilty  both  of  sedition  and  robbery. 
Pilate  brings  out  the  two,  and  he  gives  the  Jews  their  choice.  It  would 
make  a  wonderful  picture  if  it  were  really  so,  as  a  writer  on  the  Life 
of  Christ  suggests,  that  Pilate  actually  set  the  two  individuals  before 
the  crowd.  See  there  the  dark-browed,  scowling  assassin,  with  fierce 
looks,  and  every  mark  of  fury  and  hate  upon  his  fajce,  the  man  taken 


A14:  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

red-handed,  familiar  with  blood,  the  brigand  whose  very  profession  was 
strife!  There  he  stands  like  a  wolf,  and  by  his  side  is  set  the  gentle 
Lamb  of  God.  See  there  in  his  face  and  bearing  all  that  is  good, 
tender,  benevolent,  heroic.  The  incarnations  of  hate  and  love  are  before 
them;  and  Pilate  gives  the  crowd  their  choice.  Without  hesitation 
they  cry,  "Not  this  man,  but  Barabbas.  Now  Barabbas  was  a  robber." 
The  murderer  walks  away  free,  and  the  innocent  Jesus  is  left  to  die. 
In  this  I  shall  have  to  impeach  a  second  class  of  men  in  the  matter 
OF  THEIR  CHOICE.  Many  among  us  have  by  divine  grace  chosen 
Jesus  to  be  our  Saviour,  King,  and  Lord.  He  is  the  groundwork  of  our 
eternal  hope,  and  the  spring  of  our  present  joy  :  we  have  selected  Christ 
to  be  the  guide  and  leader  of  our  lives,  and  we  are  not  ashamed  of  the 
choice.  It  has  been  made  deliberately  and  solemnly,  and  we  renew  it 
from  day  to  day. 

"  High  heaven  that  heard  the  solemn  vow, 
That  vow  renewed  shall  daily  hear, 
Till  in  life's  latest  hour  we  bow, 
And  bless  in  death  a  bond  so  dear." 

I  fear  that  some  among  you  have  not  chosen  Christ ;  but  what  have 
you  chosen  ?  Let  me  mention  two  or  three  objects  of  human  choice, 
worthy  to  be  ranked  with  Barabbas  of  old.  Too  many  have  chosen 
lust  to  be  their  delight :  I  will  not  paint  the  hideous  monster ;  I 
ha\e  no  colours.  It  is  a  foul  and  bestial  thing :  the  cheek  of  modesty 
crimsons  at  the  very  mention  of  it.  Yet,  for  the  pleasures  of  wantonness, 
Christ  is  set  aside.  For  the  strange  woman  many  a  man  has  thrown 
away  his  soul,  and  chosen  infamy  instead  of  glory.  I  half  excuse  the 
Jews  for  choosing  Barabbas  when  I  see  a  man  obeying  the  lusts  of  the 
flesh  instead  of  Christ ;  and  yet  I  am  probably  addressing  individuals 
who  secretly  indulge  their  baser  passions,  and  are  thereby  held  back  from 
becoming  decided  Christians.  They  know  they  cannot  be  followers  of 
Christ  and  yet  indulge  in  wantonness  and  chambering,  and  therefore  for 
this  vile  self-indulgence  they  let  Jesus  go. 

Very  frequently  I  meet  with  persons  who  have  chosen  another  Barab- 
bas instead  of  Jesus.  What  if,  to  borrow  from  heathenism,  I  call  it 
Bacchus  ?  Brink  is  the  demon  which  enthrals  millions.  It  is  a  vice 
which  degrades  men,  and  defaces  the  image  of  God  in  them.  We  insult 
the  brutes  when  we  say  that  a  drunken  man  sinks  to  the  level  of  the 
beasts;  for  the  cattle  never  go  so  low  as  that.  Alas,  I  have  known 
men — ay,  and  women,  too — who  have  been  hearers  of  the  gospel,  ani 
have  in  a  measure  felt  its  power,  and  yet  for  this  sin  they  have  sold 
their  souls  and  given  up  their  Saviour.  No  drunkard  hath  eternal  life 
abiding  in  him ;  and,  to  speak  plain  English,  there  are  professing 
Christians  who  deserve  to  be  called  by  that  name.  I  say  that  they 
prefer  the  drink-demon  to  the  holy  Lord  Jesus.  You  condemn  the 
Jews  for  choosing  Barabbas :  where  will  you  find  a  counsellor  to  plead 
for  you  when  you  choose  drunkenness  ?  If  it  was  sinful  for  them  to 
-choose  a  murderer,  what  must  it  be  for  you  to  choose  this  cursed  vice, 
which  murders  its  hundreds  of  thousands  ?  Oh,  this  national  vice 
►  of  ours,  the  vice  which  makes  this  nation  a  byword  and  a  proverb 
among  the  nations  of  the  earth !      What  shall  I  say  of  it  ?     And 


PILATE   AND   OURSELVES  GUILTY   OF  THE    SAVIOUR'S   DEATH.     415 

is  this  to  be  set  in  rivalry  with  my  Lord  ?  Oh,  shame,  cruel  shame 
that  this  should  be  selected  in  preference  to  him  who  loved  us  and 
gave  himself  for  us ! 

"Well,  well," says  one,  "I  do  not  fall  into  that  sin."  No,  my  friend, 
but  what  is  it  that  you  do  choose  instead  of  Christ,  for  if  you  do  not 
set  him  on  the  throne  of  your  heart,  you  are  choosing  something  else. 
Is  it  that  you  do  not  want  to  be  a  Christian  because  you  wish  to  save 
yourself  trouble  and  would  be  happy  and  comfortable  and  enjoy 
yourself  ?  You  do  not  choose  any  openly  vicious  way  in  particular, 
but  you  prefer  to  be  moderately  sinful  and  to  take  care  of  yourself,  and 
save  all  care,  thought,  and  anxiety  about  death  and  heaven  and  hell. 
You  think  that  by  leading  a  careless  life  you  are  happier  than  if  you 
yielded  yourself  to  Jesus.  You  are  labouring  under  a  mistake  ;  but 
one  thing  is  clear,— self  is  your  god,  and  that  is  a  deity  as  grovelling 
as  any  other.  The  idolater  who  worships  a  god  of  gold  or  silver,  or 
even  of  stone  or  mud,  is  not  quite  so  degraded  as  the  man  who  worships 
himself.  Self-worship  is  coming  very  low  indeed.  When  I  am  my  own 
god,  or  my  belly  is  my  god,  can  there  be  a  lower  depth  ?  If  I  live 
merely  to  be  easy  and  comfortable,  and  have  no  care  for  Cod,  or  Christ, 
■or  heavenly  things  ;  what  a  choice  I  am  making.  Think  of  it,  and  be 
Hshamed.  Oh,  1  say  again,  in  many  a  man's  choice  of  what  should  be 
the  object  of  his  life,  he  sins  precisely  as  they  sinned  who  put  away 
JesLis  and  chose  Barabbas.  I  say  no  more.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  send 
home  this  sadly  convicting  truth. 

III.  Thirdly.  Pilate,  seeing  that  he  cannot  thus  set  his  prisoner 
free,  gives  him  over  into  the  hands  of  the  soldiers,  who  straightway 
make  merry  over  him  and  treat  him  as  an  object  of  contempt.  The 
words  are  cruel,  and  are  enough  to  draw  tears  from  all  eyes  as  we  read 
them  :  "  Then  Pilate  therefore  took  Jesus,  and  scourged  him.  And  the 
soldiers  platted  a  crown  of  thorns,  and  put  it  on  his  head,  and  they  put 
on  him  a  purple  robe."  "I  am  innocent  here,"  cries  one  of  my  hearers. 
What!  are  you  quite  sure  that  you  are  free  from  the  sin  of  contexMPt 
AND  or  CAUSING  PAIN  TO  Jesus  ?  Listen  a  while.  When  you  have 
been  so  busy  about  the  world  that  you  could  not  think  of  him  ;  when 
you  have  been  so  eager  to  be  rich  that  you  laughed  at  the  true  riches, 
do  you  not  know  that  you  were  plaiting  a  crown  of  thorns  to  put  upon 
his  head  ?  Your  folly  in  despising  your  own  soul  sorely  wounds  him. 
He  pities  you,  and  cannot  bear  to  see  that  the  thorns  of  this  world 
should  be  the  harvest  which  you  sow  and  reap.  If  he  were  not  so 
loving  of  heart  and  tender  of  spirit  it  would  not  matter,  but  this  un- 
kindness  to  yourself  is  unkindness  to  him,  and  virtually  when  you  have 
been  full  of  cares  and  anxieties  concerning  the  world,  and  have  had  no 
care  and  no  anxiety  about  him  or  about  your  own  soul,  you  have  put  a 
<:'rown  of  thorns  upon  his  head.     Is  this  nothing  ? 

Let  me  aak  you  when  you  have  gone  up  to  the  place  of  worship  on 
the  Sunday,  as  you  always  do,  and  have  pretended  to  adore  him,  though 
you  do  not  love  him,  do  you  know  what  you  have  done  ?  You  have 
mocked  him  by  a  feigned  worship,  and  thus  you  have  put  the  purple  robe 
upon  him.  For  that  purple  robe  meant  that  they  made  him  a  nominal 
king,  a  king  who  was  not  in  truth  a  king,  but  a  mere  show.  Your  Sunday 
religion,  which  has  been  forgotten  in  the  week,  has  been  a  sceptre  of 


^jg  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

reed,  a  powerless  ensign,  a  mere  sham.  You  h^ve  mocked  and  insulted 
him  even  in  your  hymns  and  prayers,  for  your  religion  is  a  pretence, 
with  no  heart  in  it;  you  brought  him  an  adoration  that  was  no  adora- 
tion, a  confession  that  was  no  confession,  and  a  prayer  that  was  no 
prayer.  Is  it  not  so  ?  I  pray  you  be  honest  with  yourselves.  Is  it  not 
so  ?  And  then  all  the  week  long  have  you  not  preferred  anyone  to 
Jesus  ?  any  book  to  the  Bible  ?  any  exercise  to  prayer  ?  any  enjoyment 
to  communion  with  himself?  Political  objects  have  aroused  you,  but 
not  the  Lord's  glory  nor  the  spread  of  his  kingdom.  Is  not  this 
despising  Jesus  ?     Is*  not  this  mocking  him  ? 

Are  there  not  among  you  some  who  are  weary  of  the  Lord?  weary  of 
the  Sabbath  ?  weary  of  sermons  about  Jesus  ?  weary  of  atoning  blood  ? 
weary  of  praising  the  Redeemer  ?     What  is  this  but  contempt  of  him  ? 

Too  many  have  even  jested  about  the  holiest  of  things:  if  they  have 
not  mocked  Jesus  personally  they  have  ridiculed  his  people  for  his  sake, 
and  made  mirth  of  his  gospel.  By  some  religion  is  set  up  as  a  scare- 
crow, and  piety  is  treated  as  a  byword,  conscientious  scruples  are 
laughed  at  as  old-fashioned  absurdities,  and  devotion  to  Christ  is 
set  down  as  next  of  kin  to  insanity.  We  know  it  is  so,  even  among 
some  who  are  hearers  of  the  gospel,  and  outwardly  its  upholders. 
There  is  contempt  for  the  life  and  power  of  it :  they  know  and  honour 
its  name,  but  the  reality  of  vital  godliness  they  do  not  value.  At 
times  their  conscience  thunders  heavily  at  them,  and  then  they  are 
compelled  to  wish  they  had  what  at  other  times  they  disdain.  They 
do  despite  to  the  blood  of  Jesus,  and  yet  would  fain  be  partakers 
in  its  pardoning  power. 

I  fear  me  none  of  us  dare  wash  our  hands  of  this  as  a  sm  ot  our 
fallen  estate.  Time  was  when  those  of  us  who  love  Jesus  now,  and 
could  kiss  every  wound  of  his,  vet  thought  so  little  of  him  that  any- 
thing was  better  than  he.  The  story  of  his  sufferings  was  as  wearisome 
as  a  worn-out  tale;  and  as  for  giving  our  whole  selves  to  him,  we 
deemed  it  a  fanatical  expression  or  an  enthusiastic  dream.  Blessed 
Saviour,  thou  hast  forgiven  us  :  forgive  oihers  who  are  doing  the  same. 

IV.  I  have  but  a  minute  to  spare  for  each  point ;  so  now  I  must 
turn  to  another  sin  of  which  many  are  guilty,  namely,  the  sin  of 

HEARTLESSNESS    WITH    REGARD    TO    THE    SUFFERINGS    OF    OUR    LORD. 

Pilate  thought  he  had  another  way  of  letting  his  prisoner  go,  and 
this  he  tried.  He  scourged  him.  I  will  not  tell  you  how  dreadful 
Roman  scourging  was.  It  could  not  now  be  equalled  except  it  be  by 
the  Russian  knout.  It  was  the  most  terrible  of  tortures.  Many  died 
under  it,  and  almost  all  the  victims  fainted  after  a  few  blows :  by  it  the 
human  frame  was  reduced  to  a  mass  of  bruised,  bleeding,  quivering 
flesh.  When  the  Saviour  was  all  a  mass  of  wounds  and  bruises,  Pilate 
brought  him  forth  and  said,  "  Behold  the  man,"  appealing  to  what  little 
humanity  he  hoped  there  still  might  be  in  the  chief  priests  and  elders. 
"  Behold  the  man  ! "  said  he.  "  Is  not  that  enough  ?  He  is  crushed  and 
battered  and  bleeding  all  over,  is  not  that  enough? "  But  they  had  no 
feeling  for  him  whatever,  and  only  cried,  "Away  with  him.  It  the 
spectacle  of  woe  which  our  Lord  presented  on  this  occasion  does  not 
touch  you,  it  is  a  lamentable  proof  of  hardness  of  heart.  Do  not  many 
read  the  story  of  his  sufferings  without  emotion  ? 


PILATE   AND   OURSELVES   GUILTY   OF   THE   SAVIOUR  S   DEATH.      417 

Despised,  reviled,  thorn-crowned,  and  scourged,  our  Lord  stands  alone 
as  the  Man  of  sorrows,  the  Monarch  of  miseries.  Griefs  without  parallel ! 
Woes  unique  and  by  themselves  !  Have  you  no  tears  to  shed  for  him 
whom  soldiers  mocked  and  Jews  derided  ?  No  ?  Is  it  possible  that 
you  answer  *'  No  "  ?  Have  you  heard  the  story  till  it  has  less  effect  than 
an  idle  romance  ?  For  shame  !  For  shame  !  And  the  worst  of  it  is 
that  it  should  not  affect  men  when  they  recollect  that  these  griefs  were 
voluntarily  borne  out  of  love,  and  neither  of  necessity  nor  from  any 
selfish  motive.  His  woes  were  borne  for  his  enemies.  He  bade  his 
disciples  begin  to  preach  at  Jerusalem  that  the  men  who  spat  in  his 
face  might  know  that  they  had  a  share  in  his  compassion,  and  that 
lie  who  drove  the  lance  into  his  heart  was  one  for  whom  he  tasted  death. 
He  dies  praying  for  his  murderers.  Ah  me  !  that  it  should  be  so. 
A  man  dying  for  his  friend  is  a  noble  sight ;  but  a  man  dying  for  those 
who  put  him  to  death  is  the  most  extraordinary  sight  that  angels  ever 
beheld. 

There  is  this  about  it  too,  which  touches  believers  most  tenderly  :  our 
Lord  suffered  thus  on  our  account.  In  his  death  is  our  hope,  or  else 
we  are  lost  for  ever.  If  we  have  not  part  and  lot  in  the  merits  of  the 
agony,  then  for  us  there  remains  nothing  but  a  fearful  looking  for  of 
judgment  and  of  fiery  indignation.  Do  we  not  mourn  when  we  see 
Jesus  dying  for  us.  0  feeling,  thou  art  fled  to  brutish  beasts,  and  men 
have  lost  their  reason.  Surely  our  hearts  will  be  like  the  rock  in  Horeb. 
Stricken  by  the  rod  of  the  cross,  our  souls  will  gush  with  rivers  of 
penitential  grief.  But  herein  is  a  marvellous  proof  of  our  guiltiness, 
that  w^e  have  compassion  for  everybody  but  the  Saviour ;  that  we  can 
cry  over  a  lapdog,  and  yet  can  hear  of  Christ  with  utter  indifference. 
There  are  multitudes  of  persons  of  this  kind,  and  I  pray  God's  Spirit  to 
touch  their  conscience  upon  this  matter  of  heartlessness  toward  Jesus. 

But  I  must  hasten  on,  though  I  might  wish  to  linger,  leaving  with 
your  meditations  tiie  enlargement  of  these  charges. 

V.  There  is  another  crime  of  which  many  are  guilty  which  was  seen  in 
Pilate  himself,  and  that  was  the  crime  of  cowardice.  No  less  than 
three  times  did  Pilate  say  of  our  Lord,  "  I  find  no  fault  in  him,"  and 
yet  he  did  not  let  him  go.  He  himself  owned,  '*I  have  power  to 
crucify  thee,  and  have  power  to  release  thee,"  and  yet  he  dared  not 
exercise  the  power  to  deliver.  Through  cowardice  he  dared  not  let  his 
perfectly  innocent  prisoner  go  free.  He  knew,  but  he  did  not  act  up  to 
his  knowledge.  Have  I  none  before  me  whose  knowledge  of  good 
things  far  outruns  their  practice  ?  This,  surely,  will  be  one  of  the 
never-dying  worms  of  hell — the  gnawing  of  an  instructed  and  dis- 
regarded conscience.  Over  the  door  of  their  prison-house  the  lost  shall 
read  this  inscription, — Ye  knew  your  duty  but  ye  did  it  not.  The 
knowledge  which  makes  men  responsible  for  their  deeds  increases 
that  responsibility  as  it  is  itself  increased,  and  with  it  their  guilt  and 
their  punishment.  Moreover,  Pilate  did  not  only  know  the  right,  but 
after  his  own  fashion  he  wished  to  do  it.  One  almost  pities  the 
vacillating  coward.  See  how  he  struggles  to  release  Jesus  in  some  in- 
direct fashion  which  may  cost  him  nothing.  He  washes,  he  resolves, 
and  then  hangs  back.  Like  a  vessel  tossed  with  contrary  winds,  he  is 
at  one  time  almost  in  harbour,  and  anon 'he  is  far  out  at  sea.     Oh,  the 

27 


418  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACIiE   PULPIT. 

quantities  of  dead  wishes  that  one  min^ht  ^father  in  this  Tabernacle, 
as  men  gather  untimely  fruit  whicli  the  wind  has  shaken  from  the 
tree.  Men  wish  to  repent,  wish  to  believe,  wish  to  decide,  wish  to  be 
holy,  wish  to  be  right  with  God  ;  but  their  wishing  leads  to  no 
practical  decision,  and  so  they  perish  at  the  threshold  of  mercy.  Their 
goodness  ends  in  empty  desires,  which  do  but  evidence  their  re- 
sponsibility, and  so  secure  their  condemnation.  Yet,  to  be  just,  we 
must  admit  that  Pilate  did  more  than  wish  ;  he  spoke  for  Christ.  But 
having  spoken  in  his  favour  he  did  not  proceed  to  action,  as  he  was 
bound  to  have  done.  It  is  possible  for  a  man  to  say  with  his  tongue, 
**  1  find  no  fault  in  him,"  and  then  by  his  actions  to  condemn  Jesus  by 
giving  him  up  to  die.  Words  are  a  poor  homage  to  the  Saviour.  Not 
by  words  does  he  save  mankind,  and  not  by  lip-service  is  he  to  be 
repaid.  Pilate  spake  boldly  enough,  and  then  retreated  before  the 
clamoui-s  of  the  crowd ;  and  yet  Pilate  could  be  firm  sometimes.  AVhen 
Jesus  was  nailed  to  the  cross,  the  priests  begged  Pilate  to  change  the 
accusation  which  was  written  over  his  head,  and  he  would  not,  bub 
replied,  "  What  I  have  written  I  have  written."  Why  could  he  not 
have  shown  a  little  backbone  when  Jesus  yet  lived  ?  He  was  not 
altogether  such  a  weak,  effeminate  being  as  to  be  incapable  of  putting 
his  foot  down  firmly  ;  if  he  did  so  once  he  might  have  done  it  before, 
and  so  have  saved  himself  from  this  great  transgression.  Are  there 
no  Pilates  here — persons  who  would  long  ago  have  been  Christians  if 
they  had  possessed  enough  moral  courage  ?  Some  foolish  companion 
would  laugh  at  them  if  they  became  religious,  and  this  they  could  not 
bear.  Poor  dastards  !  I  heard  the  other  day  of  a  lad  who  dared  not  pray 
in  the  room  where  two  or  three  others  slept ;  and  so,  like  a  craven,  he 
crept  into  bed  and  succumbed  to  the  fear  of  others.  I  fear  that 
some  men  would  sooner  be  damned  than  be  laughed  at.  Another  person 
has  a  wicked  companion,  and  he  knows  that  he  must  cut  his  acquaint- 
ance if  he  becomes  a  follower  of  Jesus :  this  he  would  do,  but  he  lacks 
courage.  0  ye,  who  shrink  back  from  that  which  Christ's  service 
involves,  because  of  the  fear  of  men,  know  ye  not  the  portion  of 
the  fearful?  0  ye  trembling  ones,  is  Jesus  covered  with  wounds 
and  shame  for  you,  and  are  you  ashamed  of  him  ?  Death  is  coming 
upon  him  speedily,  and  do  you  hide  your  faces  from  him?  This 
is  cruelty,  indeed,  both  to  Christ  and  to  yourself.  Can  you  not 
leave  his  enemies?  "Come  ye  out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye 
separate:  touch  not  the  unclean  thing."  Will  you  not  espouse  his 
cause  ?  "  If  any  man  will  serve  me  let  him  follow  me."  By  this 
cowardice  you  do  as  much  as  in  you  lies  to  put  the  Christ  to  death. 
''  How  ?"  say  you.  Well,  suppose  everybody  acted  as  you  do,  would 
*  there  be  any  Christianity  in  the  world?  If  everybody  was  cowardly, 
would  there  be  a  church  at  all  ?  Are  you  not  killing  Christ  and  burying 
Christ  as  far  as  ever  you  can  ?  Are  you  not  destroying  his  influence 
and  weakening  his  church  by  refusing  to  own  him  ?  Is  it  not  so?  Look 
at  it.  Whatever  influence  you  have  in  the  world  you  refuse  to  use  for 
Jesus.  Though  multitudes  are  active  in  despising  and  opposing  him.  you 
do  not  lift  a  hand  in  his  favour.  Why  do  you  not  come  out  and  say/'  I 
am  on  his  side"?  By  your  supposed  neutrality  you  act  as  his  foe.  You 
must  be  on  one  side  or  the  other  now  that  you  have  heard  the  gospel ;  for 


PILATE  AND   OURSELVES   GUILTY   OP   THE   SAVIOUR'S   DEATH.      419 

Jesus  lias  said,  "  He  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me :  he  that  gathereth 
not  with  me  scattereth  abroad."  You  are  against  him,  and  you  are  scat- 
tering abroad.  Suppose  others  follow  your  example  ?  ^'  Well,"  say  you, 
**  there  is  nothing  bad  in  my  example,  except  that  I  am  not  a  Christian." 
Just  so,  and  under  some  aspects  the  very  goodness  of  your  example  makes 
it  operate  all  the  more  powerfully  for  evil.  I  do  not  think  that  the 
example  of  a  thoroughly  drunken  man,  for  instance,  leads  many  young 
people  into  intemperance  ;  on  the  contrary,  many  take  warning  from 
the  spectacle,  and  fly  to  total  abstinence  for  security.  I  have  often  had 
young  men  and  women  coming  to  join  the  church  who  have  been  total 
abstainers  of  the  most  intense  kind  because  a  drunken  father  made 
their  childhood  so  wretched,  and  kept  the  home  so  poor  that  the} 
abhorred  the  accursed  thing.  See,  then,  how  an  ill  example  may 
lose  its  evil  power  by  very  excess.  Yours  is  another  case;  your 
example  is  in  some  respects  admirable,  and  then  you  throw  it  on  the 
side  of  the  devil.  The  better  man  you  are  the  more  mischief  you  are 
doing  by  siding  with  evil.  Inasmuch  as  you  are  that  which  is  moral, 
excellent,  amiable,  you  are  the  very  man  whose  influence  Christ  ought 
to  have  on  his  side,  and  if  you  cause  it  to  go  against  him  the  fact  is  all 
the  more  deplorable.  If  the  weight  of  your  character  goes  to  make  men 
ignore  the  claims  of  the  Son  of  God,  what  is  this  but  spiritually  to  com- 
pass his  death  ? 

Lastly,  and  oh  that  the  Spirit  of  God  may  bless  this  sharp  medicine 
to  some  heart  that  it  may  feel  the  pangs  of  penitence  this  morning — 
there  is  the  sin  of  self-righteous  hypocrlsy.  This  Pilate  committed 
in  set  form.  He  took  water  and  washed  his  hands,  and  said,  "  I  am 
innocent  of  the  blood  of  this  just  person:  see  ye  to  it."  What  a  con- 
tradiction! He  is  innocent,  but  he  gives  them  permission  to  be  guilty. 
They  could  not  murder  the  Lord  without  his  permission;  he  gives  the 
necessary  permit,  and  yet  he  says,  "lam  innocent."  Do  I  not  see 
another  of  the  same  class  over  yonder?  He  says,  *'I  do  not  despise 
Christ,  or  speak  a  word  against  him.  I  am  perfectly  innocent  of  any 
ill-will  tow^ards  him.  Of  course,  if  others  oppose  him  they  may,  for  it 
is  a  free  country :  let  them  do  as  they  like,  but  I  am  perfectly  clear  of 
it."  It  is  not  thus  that  a  man  acts  if  he  sees  another  being  murdered. 
He  does  not  look  on  and  say  that  he  would  rather  not  interfere. 
You  say  you  caunot  help  other  people's  opinions.  Have  you  no 
opinion  of  Jesus  of  your  own?  Do  you  say,  *'No;  I  never  think: 
of  him  ?"  Is  not  that  contempt?  Do  you  decHne  to  hold  any  opinion 
about  one  who  claims  to  be  your  God?  about  one  who  must  be  your 
Saviour,  or  you  must  perish  for  ever  ?  You  cannot  sheer  off  in  that 
way.  Now  that  rebellion  is  afoot  you  must  either  be  loyal  or  be  a 
traitor.  The  standard  is  unfurled,  and  each  man  must  take  his  side. 
Your  negligence  of  Jesus  contradicts  your  claim  to  be  neutral.  You 
pretend  to  let  him  alone,  but  that  letting  alone  is  fatal.  A  man  is 
yonder  in  the  upper  room  of  a  burning  house,  ^nd  you  can  save  him. 
You  refuse  to  touch  the  matter,  for  it  is  no  concern  of  yours  e^'-'  hei^  way, 
and  so  you  leave  it  to  the  firemen  and  their  helpers.  Meanfelle,  the 
man  perishes  because  you  will  not  help  him.  I  say  that  you  are  inex- 
cusable :  that  man's  blood  lies  at  your  door.  It  was  your  duty'tff  have 
rescued  him.     So  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  comes  here  among  men  and 


420  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT, 

he  is  persecuted.  You  quietly  say,  "No  doubt  it  is  a  pity,  but  I 
cannot  help  it."     Just  so ;  but  by  your  inaction  you  side  with  his  foes. 

Do  you  say  that  you  are  so  righteous  that  you  do  not  want  a  Saviour  ? 
That,  indeed,  is  smiting  him  on  the  face.  He  comes  to  be  a  Saviour, 
and  you  tell  him  that  he  is  superfluous ;  that  you  are  so  good  that  you 
can  do  without  being  washed  in  his  blood.  That  is  spitting  in  his  face, 
and  telling  him  that  he  was  a  fool  to  die  for  you.  Why  should  he 
shed  his  blood  if  you  are  innocent  enough  without  it?  In  effect  you 
charge  God  with  folly  for  providing  a  great  propitiation  when  such 
good  people  as  you  are  need  nothing  of  the  kind.  I  do  not  believe 
anybody  can  more  grossly  insult  the  Son  of  the  Highest!  This  is 
crucifying  him  indeed!  The  self-righteous  man  who  says,  "I  am 
clean,"  deprives  Christ's  sacrifice  of  its  glory,  his  life  of  its  end,  his 
person  of  its  dignity,  his  whole  work  of  its  wisdom.  The  very  heart 
of  God  is  set  upon  the  object  for  which  Christ  died,  and  yet  the  self- 
righteous  man  counts  this  a  folly. 

Come,  my  hearers,  there  is  no  room  for  any  one  of  us  to  accuse  hia 
fellow:  let  us  all  come  with  humble  confessions  to  the  feet  of  Jesus, 
now  risen  from  the  dead,  and  let  us  each  say  to  him  right  sorrowfully,— 

"  'Tid  I  to  whom  these  pains  belong, 
'Tis  I  should  suffer  for  my  wrong, 

Bound  hand  and  foot  in  heavy  chains ; 
Thy  scourge,  thy  fetters,  whatsoe'er 
Thou  bearest,  'tis  my  soul  sliould  bear, 
For  she  hath  well  deserved  such  pains. 

"  Yet  thou  dost  even  for  my  sake 
On  thee,  in  love,  the  burdens  take 

That  weighed  my  spirit  to  the  ground : 
Yes  ;  thou  art  made  a  curse  for  rae, 
That  I  might  yet  be  blest  throusfh  thee : 

My  healing  in  thy  wounds  is  found." 


Portion  of  Scripture  Read  before  Sermon — John  xix.  1 — 16. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 152,  581,  580. 


'i\ 


THE   WHOLE  BAND  AGAINST  CHRIST. 


Intended  for  Reading  on  Lord's-day,  November  5th,   1893, 
delivered  ey 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT   THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTOlf 
On  Lord's-day  Evening,  September  \bth,  1889. 


"  Then  the  soldiers  of  the  governor  took  Jesus  into  the  common  hall,  and  gathered 
unto  him  the  whole  band  of  soldiers."— Matthew  xxvii.  27. 

I  HAVE  not  observed  that  anyone  has  turned  to  account  the  fact  that 
"  the  whole  band  of  soldiers  "  gathered  in  the  Pr£etorium,  or  common 
hall,  for  the  purpose  of  mocking  our  Lord.  That  they  did  mock  him, 
has  often  been  noticed,  and  preached  upon;  but  that  they  should 
have  gathered  unto  him  the  whole  cohort,  that  all  should  have  been 
there,  is  mentioned  both  by  Matthew  and  by  Mark,  and  this  being 
twice  recorded  cannot  have  been  without  some  meaning  and  some 
lesson  for  us. 

To  begin  then,  our  blessed  Lord,  being  condemned  to  die,  was  given 
over  to  the  brutal  soldiery  who  garrisoned  Jerusalem.  They  lived  in 
quarters  round  about  the  palace  of  the  governor;  and  when  the 
Saviour  was  delivered  to  them  to  be  put  to  death,  they  must  needs 
make  him  the  centre  of  their  mockery  and  derision  before  they  exe- 
cuted the  terrible  sentence  upon  him.  Does  it  not  strike  you  that  any 
man  condemned  to  die  ought  to  be  protected  against  such  usage  as 
that  ?  If  he  must  die,  some  respect  should  be  paid  to  one  who  is 
about  to  endure  the  death-penalty.  I  think  that  there  should  be  great 
indulgence  shown  in  such  a  case;  at  any  rate,  nothing  should  be  done 
or  said  to  hurt  the  feelings,  or  to  wound  the  sensibilities.  Pity  seems 
to  say,  "If  the  man  must  die,  then  so  be  it;  but  let  us  not  for  a 
single  moment  jest  at  him.  Far  hence  be  mirth ;  that  is  a  brutality 
not  to  be  thought  of  at  such  a  time  as  this  ;  and  to  make  a  man,  about 
to  die,  the  subject  of  scorn,  is  a  superfluity  of  cruelty  and  wickedness," 
Methinks  that  even  a  devil  might  be  ashamed  of  such  savagery  as  this. 
But  there  was  no  law  to  protect  the  Saviour  from  these  soldiers! 
Every  man's  heart  seems  to  have  been  steeled  against  him;  the 
common  dictates  of  the  most  ignorant  humanity  appear  to  have 'been 
violated.  They  said  by  their  actions,  if  not  in  words,  ''  He  shall  not 
only  die,  but  he  shall  be  stripped  of  all  his  honour ;  he  shall  be  robbed 
No.  2,333. 


422  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

of  every  comfort ;  he  shall  become  the  butt  and  target  of  all  the  cruel 
arrows  of  contempt  that  we  can  shoot  at  him." 

Still,  why  is  it  said  that,  in  order  to  make  him  the  object  of  de- 
rision, they  gathered  together  "the  whole  band"?  I  do  not  know 
how  many  soldiers  constituted  the  garrison,  or  how  many  were  barracked 
round  about  the  governor's  palace  ;  but  they  gathered  together  "  the 
whole  band  "  ;  not  merely  a  few  of  them  who  were  on  duty  that  day, 
but  all  were  summoned  to  make  a  mock  of  Christ.  It  was  not  because 
he  needed  to  be  guarded  lest  he  should  escape,  for  he  had  no  desire  to 
be  set  free.  It  was  not  because  the  soldiers  would  be  wanted  to  keep 
him  securely  lest  the  people  should  attempt  to  rescue  him,  for  the 
Jews  did  not  want  him  to  be  rescued.  On  the  contrary,  it  was  by  their 
clamour  that  he  was  doomed  to  die.  They  had  cried^  "  Crucify  him ! 
Crucify  him !  "  He  had  no  friends  to  stand  up  for  him,  no  band  of 
disciples  to  come  and  force  the  soldiery  away,  and  set  him  free. 
Therefore  these  legionaries  did  not  guard  him  with  the  whole  strength 
of  the  band  on  that  account. 

Nor  were  they  all  wanted  to  execute  the  death-sentence.  With  a 
people  eager  for  his  death,  four  soldiers,  a  single  quaternion,  sufficed. 
He  carried  his  own  cross,  and  they  had  but  to  drive  the  nails  into  his 
hands  and  feet,  and  fasten  him  to  the  tree.  That  could  be  soon  done 
to  a  Victim  so  defenceless,  so  inoff-nsive;  it  did  not  need  that  they 
should  gather  together  "  the  whole  baud  ",  and  so  we  are  told  it,  as  a 
remarkable  circumstance  which  did  not  rise  necessarily  out  of  the 
narrative.  It  must  have  a  meaning  of  its  own,  ''  They  gathered  unto 
him  the  whole  band  of  soldiers." 

I  shall  speak  thus  upon  it.  First,  it  would  appear  that  the  soldiers 
were  unanimous  in  mocking  their  Prisoner ;  secondly,  so  are  men  united  in 
opposing  Christ ;  and,  thirdly,  what  shall  we  say  of  both  the  facts  whereof 
we  are  to  speak  to-night  f 

I.     First,  then,  it  is  clear  that  the  soldiers  were  unanimous  in 

MOCKING    THEIR   PRISONER. 

Upon  this,  I  remark,  first,  that  men  are  very  apt  to  go  together  when 
they  go  wrong.  You  notice,  in  a  workshop,  how  the  religion  of  Christ 
will  be  despised,  and  how  certain  men  will  lead  the  way  in  uttering 
calumnies  against  it,  and  then  the  rest  will  follow.  When  men  go 
astray,  they  are  like  a  flock  of  sheep ;  one  gets  through  the  hedge, 
and  all  the  rest  go  after  it.  We  have  heard  of  one  sheep  leaping  the 
parapet  of  a  bridge  into  a  river,  and  the  whole  flock  went  after  it,  and 
all  were  destroyed.  Men  are  such  curious  beings,  not  only  the  creatures 
of  their  own  habits,  but  the  imitators  of  other  men's  example.  I  know 
not  how  it  is,  but  persons  who,  alone  and  apart,  would  seem  to  have 
some  good  inclinations,  will  shake  them  all  o£E  when  they  get  into  evil 
company.  At  home,  they  will  talk  reasonably ;  but,  in  the  crowd, 
they  speak  madly.  At  home  and  alone,  they  are  amenable  to  rebuke 
and  conviction ;  but  when  they  get  with  other  men,  they  will  not  hear 
a  word  of  it ;  they  shut  their  ears  to  anything  like  good  teaching,  and 
they  run  greedily  to  do  mischief.  I  do  not,  therefore,  so  much  wonder 
that,  when  our  Lord  was  given  over  to  the  soldiers,  they  gathered 
together  the  whole  band,  for  it  is  so  usual  for  men  to  go  together  when 
they  go  wrong. 


THE   WHOLE    BAND   AGAINST   CHRIST. 


423 


Frequently,  too,  it  will  happen  tliat  there  is  7iot  one  man  to  hear  his 
protest.  Would  you  not  have  expected  that,  in  a  large  band  of  soldiers, 
there  would  have  been  at  least  one  man  of  noble  spirit,  who  would 
have  said,  "  Nay,  do  not  torture  him  ;  he  is  about  to  die  "  ?  Would 
it  have  been  at  all  wonderful  if  one  man  had  stood  forward,  and  said, 
<*  This  Man  has  done  nothing  amiss  ;  our  governor  has  said  that  he 
finds  no  fault  in  him.  Why,  therefore,  do  you  set  him  in  that  chair, 
and  robe  him,  and  bow  the  knee  in  mockery,  and  spit  upon  him?  " 
It  would  not  have  been  very  surprising  if  there  had  been  amongst  the 
Bom  an  soldiery  some  one  or  two  who  had  espoused  Christ's  cause  ; 
for,  truth  to  tell,  those  valiant  men,  although  they  grew  brutalized  by 
living  amidst  scenes  of  blood,  were  capable  of  deeds  of  high  virtue.  One 
has  but  toreadtheoldEoman  story,  to  stand  amazed  sometimes  that  such 
fair  flowers  of  virtue  and  benevolence  could  grow  on  such  a  dunghill 
as  the  Eoman  State  then  was.  Yet  you  see  that  not  one  out  of  the 
whole  band  of  soldiery  would  say  a  word  for  Christ,  or  absent  himself 
from  the  ring,  when  their  comrades  mocked  him. 

Peradventure,  I  address  some  men  here  who  work  together,  and 
who  are  in  the  habit  of  scoffing  at  the  cross  of  Christ.  I  hope  that  there 
is  not  a  workshop  in  London  without  one  man,  at  least,  who  will  stand 
forward,  and  defend  his  Master's  cause  ;  but  if  I  speak  to  one  to 
whom  that  thought  has  occurred,  and  yet  he  has  said,  "  I  dare  not;  I 
should  be  myself  the  subject  of  so  much  persecution,  that  I  could  not 
stand  forth  alone ;  "  now,  listen,  sir,  if  a  Cains,  or  a  Fabius,  or  a 
Julius,  had  stood  forth  alone  to  defend  the  Lord's  cause,  we  should 
have  had  his  name  here,  and  if  he  had  even  suffered  death  for  it,  he 
would  have  been  amongst  the  brightest  of  the  martyr  host.  And  you 
know  not  what  honour  you  lose  if  you  conceal  your  testimony.  If  you 
allow  the  whole  drift  of  the  talk  to  be  infidel  and  atheistic,  and  never 
put  in  your  good  word  for  him  whom  you  call  Master  and  Lord,  you 
dishonour  yourself ;  but  if  you  could  have  the  courage,  and  I  hope 
that  you  may,  to  say,  "  He,  of  whom  you  speak  thus  ill,  has  saved  my 
soul,  snatched  me  from  habits  of  vice,  and  renewed  my  character,"  if 
you  could  stand  forward,  and  bear  such  testimony  for  him,  I  wot  that 
it  were  a  short  road  to  glory,  and  honour,  and  immortality.  It  is  not 
likely  that  you  would  have  to  suffer  as  the  martyrs  did  ;  but  suppose 
that  you  did,  the  more  of  suffering,  the  brighter  that  ruby  crown 
which  would  be  set  upon  your  head  in  the  day  of  your  Lord's  appear- 
ing. I  hope  that  Christian  men  are  still  made  of  that  grand  old  stuff 
which  defied  the  Eoman  emperors,  and  made  them  weary  of  slaughter, 
for  they  could  not  mow  down  the  crops  of  the  Church  so  fast  as  they 
grew.  The  blood  of  the  martyrs  was  the  seed  of  the  Church  ;  and  the 
more  copiously  it  was  shed,  the  more  the  Church  multiplied. 

But,  once  more,  the  number  of  those  who  thus  mocked  Christ  made  their 
conduct  all  the  baser.  When  you,  young  fellow,  get  in  with  fifty  more, 
and  in  the  workshop  you  mock  at  some  solitary  Christian  youth,  when 
you  each  one  have  your  jibe,  when  you  give  him  what  you  call 
**  chaff  ",  which  is  sport  to  you,  but  cruel  enough  to  be  death  to  him, 
did  it  never  occur  to  you  that  it  was  a  most  cowardly  thing,  and 
altogether  unworthy  of  you,  that  ten,  twenty,  thirty,  forty,  fifty,  should 
aU  set  upon  one  ?     What  if  a  man  does  believe  in  religion  ?     Has  he 


424  METKOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

not  a  right  to  do  so  if  he  likes  ?  Some  of  you  who  talk  so  much  about 
freedom  are  the  biggest  buDies  in  the  world ;  you  boast  loudly  of 
religious  liberty,  but  to  you  it  means  liberty  to  be  irreligious.  Surely 
I  have  as  much  right  to  worship  Christ  as  you  have  to  despise  him ;  and 
if  my  views  of  religion  should  seem  to  you  to  be  peculiar,  yet,  if  peculiar^ 
have  I  not  as  good  reason  to  hold  them  as  you  have  to  reject  them  ?  I 
speak  thus  plainly  because  I  know  of  many,  many  cases  where,  if  men 
were  men  at  all,  they  would  cease  to  persecute  Christians,  seeing  that 
they  persecute  one  or  two  wherever  they  can  if  they  themselves  happen 
to  be  in  the  majority.  Think  of  this  lot  of  howling  dogs  around  this- 
one  gentle  Lamb  of  God,  the  Christ  who  had  never  even  a  hard  word 
for  them,  whose  mightiest  weapon  was  silence  and  patience  ;  think  of 
him  surrounded  by  all  these  men  of  war  from  their  youth  up,  these 
Roman  legionaries  with  their  imperial  eagles.  It  was  a  cruel  shame. 
The  more  there  were  of  them,  the  meaner  it  was  of  them  thus,  as  a 
whole  band,  to  gather  together  to  mock  the  Saviour. 

But  I  suppose  that  their  number  accounted  for  the  excess  to  which  thexf 
went.     If  there  had  only  been  two  or  three  of  them,  they  would  not 
have  thought  of  all  the  cruel  things  that  they  did  to  our  Lord.  To  put  an 
old  cloak  upon  him,  and  to  call  him  the  purpled  CsDsar,  is  common- 
place enough;  but  one  cries,   "Let  us  make  a  crown  for  him,"  and 
they  plait  the  thorns  with  cruel  hands,  piercing  his  temples  with  the 
sharp  spines.     Another  says,  '*  Fetch  a  sceptre,  and  put  it  in  his  hand* 
Set  him  in  that  chair,  and  let  us  bow  before  him,  let  us  cry,  '  Hail, 
King  of  the  Jews  ! ' "     They  would  have  stopped  at  that  point  had 
there  not  been  so  many  of  them ;  but,  being  so  large  a  band,  ona 
coarse  fellow  must  go  further  still,  and  he  spits  into  that  blessed  face  I 
**  See  how  the  patient  Jesus  stands, 
Insulted  in  his  lowest  case  I 
Sinners  have  bound  the  Almighty  hands, 
And  spit  in  their  Creator's  face." 

I  hardly  think  that  one,  two,  three,  or  even  half-a-dozen  by  themselvea 
could  have  been  guilty  of  such  detestable,  loathsome  conduct  to  Christ ; 
but  the  whole  band  being  together,  they  thought  of  fresh  insults. 

Take  heed  of  sinning  in  a  crowd.  Young  man,  abandon  the  ideathat 
you  may  sin  in  a  crowd.  Beware  of  the  notion  that,  because  many  do 
it,  it  is  less  a  guilt  to  any  one  of  them.  Eemember  that  the  broad  way 
always  was  the  wrong  road,  and  that  it  leads  to  destruction  none  the 
less  because  many  walk  in  it.  *'  Though  hand  join  in  hand,  the  wicked 
shall  not  be  unpunished."  Though  you  finish  up  the  day's  work  of 
sin  with  three  cheers  for  your  noble  selves,  you  shall  find  yourselves 
arraigned  each  one  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Q-od,  each  one  to  give 
account  for  the  deeds  done  in  his  body  according  to  what  he  hath  done, 
whether  it  be  good  or  whether  it  be  evil  Oh,  the  pitiful  story,  a 
whole  company  of  soldiers  united  against  Christ,  with  not  one  to  quit 
the  ranks,  and  say,  "  No,  comrades ;  do  not  so ;  "  but  all  wallowing  in 
their  cruelty,  like  swine  in  the  mire ! 

n.  That  leads  me  to  talk  to  you,  secondly,  about  another  point. 
As  these  soldiers  were  unanimous  in  mocking  their  illustrious  Prisoner, 

80   ARE   MEN   UNITED    IN    OPPOSING    ChRIST. 

Like  these  soldiers,  many  do  not  pass  Christ  by  with  neglect,     I  should 


THE   WHOLE    BAND    AGAINST    CHRIST  425 

hare  thouglit  tJtiat  many  a  brave  man  of  that  Eoman  legion  would  hare 
said,  **  Pshaw!  I  shall  not  go  to  taunt  the  poor  Jew  who  has  been 
hunted  down  by  the  priests.  Nobody  gives  him  a  good  word  ;  even 
his  own  followers  have  fled  from  him.  I  heard  one  of  them  declare 
that  he  did  not  know  him,  though  I  knew  that  man  was  a  liar,  for  I 
saw  him  in  the  garden  with  his  Master.  My  comrades  are  going  to 
the  Prsetorium  to  mock  him,  but  I  shall  not  go ;  such  mirth  is  un- 
worthy of  a  man,  especially  of  a  Eoman."  Instead  thereof,  they  were 
all  there.  Curiosity  fetched  them  up,  they  must  all  come  to  see  this 
Man  of  whom  they  had  heard  so  much ;  and  an  evil  conscience  made 
them  bitter  against  him,  for,  because  they  were  evil,  his  being  good 
was  a  protest  against  their  wicked  deeds. 

So  they  were  all  united  against  him,  and  they  came  up,  every  one  oj 
them,  to  show  their  scorn.  It  is  a  strange  thing ;  but  if  Christ  is  fully 
preached,  somehow  men  cannot  be  indifferent  to  him.  If  they  can  be 
right  away,  and  never  hear  of  him,  they  may  be  indifferent ;  but  the 
true  gospel  either  offends  men,  or  else  it  charms  them.  I  believe  that 
you  may  preach  a  certain  sort  of  gospel,  from  the  first  of  January  to 
the  end  of  December,  and  everybody  will  say,  ''Yes,  that  is  very  good, 
very,  very  good,  perfectly  harmless."  Yes,  a  chip  in  the  porridge, 
with  no  flavour  in  it ;  but  if  it  is  the  real  out-and-out  gospel  of  a  cruci- 
fied Saviour,  there  will  be  someone  who  will  say,  "  Ah,  that  is  what 
I  want !  I  like  that ;  ''  but  there  will  be  others  who  will  grind  their 
teeth,  and  say,  ''  I  will  never  hear  that  man  again;  I  cannot  bear  his 
talk ;  I  hate  it."  Do  not  be  surprised  when  I  say  that,  if  I  hear  that 
So-and-so  was  very  angry  at  one  of  my  sermons,  I  state  as  my  belief, 
"  That  man  will  go  to  heaven.  I  have  the  hook  in  that  fish,  and  I 
shall  catch  him  yet."  But  when  I  hear  people  simply  say,  "  Oh,  yes  ; 
we  heard  the  sermon  !  "  and  they  make  some  trifling  remark  about  it, 
and  go  their  way,  nothing  good  comes  of  it.  It  is  better  that  a  man 
should  be  in  a  downright  rage  against  Christ  than  be  utterly  indiffer- 
ent to  him  ;  and  where  he  really  comes  so  that  men  are  obliged  to  see 
him,  they  cannot  long  be  indifferent.  *'  That  the  thoughts  of  many 
hearts  may  be  revealed,"  is  one  of  the  objects  of  his  death.  The  cross 
of  Christ  is  the  great  detector  of  men.  Fix  it  up,  and  men  straightway 
go  to  the  right  or  to  the  left  of  it.  It  is  the  parter  and  divider  of  the 
ways.  Jesus  himself  said,  "  He  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me ; 
and  he  that  gathereth  not  with  me  scattereth  abroad."  Men  cannot 
pass  by  utterly  with  neglect  after  once  hearing  the  story  of  the  cross. 
They  must  gather  up  for  Christ  or  against  him,  and  alas !  many  of 
them  do  gather  up  to  pour  their  scorn  upon  him. 

Many  ungodly  jnQnfeel  an  inward  contempt  for  ChrisVs  claims.  "  No,'^ 
says  one,  "  I  have  no  such  contempt  for  Christ."  I  would  not  wish 
to  charge  you  wrongfully ;  but  if  you  are  not  a  believer  in  him,  if  you 
have  never  accepted  him  to  be  your  Saviour  and  your  Lord,  I  venture 
to  repeat  the  charge,  you  have  an  inward  contempt  for  his  claims,  my 
hearers.  Whether  you  are  Christians  or  not,  you  are  the  subjects  of 
King  Jesus.  God  has  put  you  into  his  hand,  and  you  will  have  to 
stand  before  his  judgment-seat  at  the  last.  The  Man  Christ  Jesus,  who 
died  on  Calvary,  and  rose  again,  and  went  to  heaven,  will  judge  every 
one  of  you  at  the  last  great  day ;  and  he  claims  that  you  now  should 


'426  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

become  his  servants,  and  yield  obedience  to  him.  Now,  I  know  that 
you  will  say  in  your  hearts,  **  We  shall  not  do  anything  of  the  kind." 
Just  so,  and  have  I  not  proved  what  I  said  ?  *'  The  carnal  mind  is 
enmity  against  God,"  and  that  carnal  mind  may  be  in  a  man  who 
always  goes  to  church,  or  to  chapel.  If  he  has  not  been  renewed,  he 
does  not  believe  in  Christ  as  King ;  and  as  far  as  his  heart  is  con- 
cerned, he  mocks  at  the  idea  of  his  being  a  servant  of  Christ,  and  Christ 
being  Lord  over  him.  In  his  very  soul  be  thinks  this  to  be  a  pre- 
posterous claim,  that  he  should  be  obedient  to  Christ  in  everything. 
Besides,  the  mass  of  men  do  not  seek  to  know  what  Christ's  claims  are. 
They  are  ignorant  of  his  royalty  and  sovereignty,  and  it  is  in  this  way 
that  their  minds  are  filled  with  an  indistinctly-expressed,  but  still  very 
powerful,  contempt  for  him. 

And  so  it  happens,  in  the  next  place,  that  men  invent  different  ways 
of  showing  their  derision.  It  is  very  curious  that  you  find  very  learned 
men  opposed  to  Christ,  and  they  go  to  work  usually  by  destructive 
criticism,  trying  to  get  rid  of  this  part  of  the  Bible  and  that ;  but  an 
ignorant  man  cannot  do  that,  so  he  says  that  he  does  not  believe  in  the 
Bible  at  all.  Here  you  find  a  rich  man  despising  Christ,  sneering  at 
**  the  common  people  ",  as  he  calls  Christ's  followers,  and  there  you 
see  another  man,  who  is  very  poor,  despising  Christ  by  wishing  to 
overthrow  all  the  rules  of  his  sacred  kingdom.  Herod  and  Pilate 
hate  one  another  tiU  Christ  comes,  and  then  they  join  together  in 
reviling  him. 

These  Roman  soldiers,  having  all  come  together,  found  employment 
in  mocking  Christ.  First,  some  of  them  stripped  him.  Oh,  have  I  not 
seen  men  at  it  in  these  days,  stripping  Christ  of  his  Deity,  stripping 
him  of  his  priesthood,  stripping  him  of  his  sovereignty,  stripping  him 
of  his  righteousness,  stripping  Christ  of  everything  that  makes  him 
Christ  ?  Is  not  that  the  way  with  many  of  the  rich,  and  the  great,  and 
the  ''advanced"  theologians  of  the  present  day?  They  show  their 
hatred  of  Christ  by  stripping  him. 

There  are  others  who  go  to  work  the  other  way ;  they  put  on  him  a 
scarlet  robe.  I  have  seen  them  do  it ;  put  other  men's  garments  upon 
him,  make  him  out  to  be  what  he  never  was,  travesty  the  doctrines  of 
grace,  caricature  the  gospel,  and  hold  it  all  up  to  contempt,  imputing 
to  Christ  the  faults  of  all  his  followers,  and  even  laying  at  his  door 
the  sin  of  men  who,  like  Judas,  have  betrayed  him.  That  is  another 
method  of  showing  enmity  to  Christ. 

Then  we  see  all  around  us  men  who  mock  at  Christ's  royalty.  They 
crown  him  with  a  crown  of  thorns  by  their  harsh  speeches  against  his 
people.  By  their  persecutions  of  those  who  love  him,  Christ  is  often 
crowned  again  with  thorns.  The  husband  has  done  it  in  his  unkind- 
noss  to  his  believing  wife;  parents  have  done  it  in  their  objection  to 
their  children  following  Christ ;  the  man  or  woman  who  has  given  the 
cold  shoulder  to  a  pious  friend  has  thus  put  another  crown  of  thorns 
upon  the  Saviour's  head.  And  have  we  not  seen  them  put  the  reed 
into  his  hand  by  representing  Christ  as  being  a  mere  myth,  and  his 
doctrine  as  a  dream,  a  holy  fancy,  a  proper  thing  to  keep  the  people 
quiet,  but  with  no  matter  of  fact  or  truth  in  it  ?  So  they  put  into  his 
hand  the   reed-sceptre  to  mock  him,  and  ho  regards  it  as  mockery. 


THE   WHOLE  BAND  AGAINST   CHRIST.  427 

And  thus,  around  the  Christ  to-day,  I  seem  to  see,  with  eyes  closed, 
but  by  the  vision  of  faith,  a  multitude  kneeling  before  him,  and 
pretending  to  worship  him,  hypocritical  worshippers,  those  who  even 
by  their  bedsides  are  hypocrites,  repeating  a  form  of  prayer,  and  yet 
never  really  praying,  drawing  near  to  him  with  their  lips,  while  their 
hearts  are  far  from  him.  Oh,  how  do  sinners  thus  prove  their 
unanimity  of  enmity  to  Christ !  Even  in  their  pretended  worship,  they 
do  but  show  the  opposition  of  their  hearts  to  him. 

Here  and  there,  also,  I  see  one  coarser  than  other  men,  who 
spits  upon  Jesus,  and  smites  him.  You  cannot  live  long  in  London 
without  hearing  from  men  who  are  opposed  to  the  cross  of  Christ 
expressions  that  disgust  you.  I  have  given  up  all  idea  now  that  we 
are  living  in  a  Christian  country.  Believers,  in  England,  are  a  band 
of  Christ's  soldiers  who  are  holding  the  fort  against  deadly  odds. 
Ours  is  a  heathen  country,  with  an  admixture  of  Christian  people,  and 
a  smear,  a  varnish,  of  pretended  religion,  but  a  heathen  country  still. 
And  every  now  and  then,  some  outspoken  heathen,  by  his  awful  pro- 
fanity, makes  us  wish  that  we  could  not  hear  at  all.  This  is  how  they 
3pit  on  Christ.  One  does  it  very  politely  with  a  bow ;  another  comes 
forward,  and  abuses  both  the  Christ  and  his  cross.  He  has  spat  in 
his  face,  and  honestly  let  us  know  where  he  stands.  One  will  under- 
mine the  truth  ;  another  brings  the  battering  ram,  in  open  day,  to  beat 
down  the  citadel;  but  thoy  are  so  united  together  that,  with  one 
accord,  the  whole  band  of  soldiers  is  gathered  against  Christ. 

Dear  friends,  if  men  attacked  any  one  doctrine,  you  would  find  only 
one  band  of  men  opposing  it ;  but  when  Christ  himself  is  the  object  of 
mockery,  the  whole  band  gathers  round  him.  If  I  preach  some  of  the 
doctrines  of  Calvinism,  I  shall  find  men,  who  are  fatalists,  and  neces- 
sitarians, and  the  like,  who  will  agree  with  me ;  but  if  I  preach  the 
whole  gospel  of  Christ,  these  very  men,  who  might  have  been  my 
friends  under  one  form  of  doctrine,  will  be  my  enemies  against  the 
whole  of  it.  Only  let  Jesus  appear,  and  Jews  and  Gentiles,  rich  and 
poor,  learned  and  unlearned,  until  they  are  renewed  by  grace,  count 
his  cross  to  be  a  stumbliDg-block  and  his  doctrine  to  be  foolishness. 

Now  notice  that  men  who  could  mock  Christ  like  this  were  capable  of 
doing  anything  evil.  If  they  could  revile  Christ,  it  was  no  wonder 
that  they  cast  lots  for  his  vesture  just  at  his  feet  when  he  hung  on  the 
cross.  I  am  often  astounded  at  things  that  I  read  about  gamblers, 
and  what  they  have  been  known  to  do.  It  is  fifty  years  ago  smce 
there  was  a  story  told  by  a  policeman,  and  I  do  not  doubt  its  truth, 
of  two  men  at  Hampstead  who,  having  bet  with  one  another  all  that 
they  had,  at  last  had  a  wager  as  to  which  should  hang  the  other,  and 
one  of  them  did  hang  the  other.  The  policeman  came  along  just  in 
time  to  save  him ;  and  when  the  man  was  cut  down,  what  do  you  think 
he  said  ?  Why,  he  said  that  he  would  have  hung  the  other  man,  if 
he  could,  to  win  the  bet  I  That  was  thought  to  be  very  extraordinary ; 
but  it  is  not  so  very  long  ago  since,  at  the  laying  of  the  first  stone  of  a 
chapel,  a  friend  of  mine  stood  behind  two  gentlemen  from  Newmarket ; 
and  when  one  whom  I  know  stood  up  to  pray  over  the  first  stone, 
these  two  made  a  bet  about  how  long  he  would  be  praying  \  Men  will 
do  anything  for  a  wager.     That  mischievous  vice,  which  is  becommar 


428 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


SO  common  nowadays,  leads  to  an  extraordinary  hardness  of  heart 
beyond  anything  else ;  and  I  cannot  so  much  wonder  that  men,  who 
were  brought  up  as  these  Boman  soldiers  were,  were  capable  of  mockery 
of  Christ,  and  of  anything  else  that  was  evil. 

III.  I  have  finished  when  I  have  asked  and  answered  this  question, 
What  shall  we  say  of  both  the  facts  whereof  we  have  spoken 

TO-NIGHT  ? 

These  cruel  soldiers  unanimously  came  together  to  see  Christ  as  a 
prisoner,  and  to  put  him  to  extraordinary  scorn ;  yet  out  of  this  band 
Christ  found  witnesses.  Their  chief  officer,  "the  centurion,  and  they 
that  were  with  him,"  as  they  stood  and  saw  Christ  die,  said, 
"  Truly  this  was  the  Son  of  God  "  ;  and  some  of  these  soldiers,  being 
appointed  to  watch  the  tomb  of  Christ,  came  and  declared  that  he  had 
risen  from  the  dead.  They  were  fine  witnesses,  were  they  not  ?  men 
who  were  too  rough  to  lie  to  help  a  sect.  They  came  forward  to  bear 
testimony  to  the  Christ.  0  God,  if  there  be  any  here  who  have 
blasphemed  thee,  who  have  cursed  Christ  to  his  face,  who  have  perse- 
cuted Christ's  people,  save  them  to-night,  and  make  them  witnesses  of 
thy  power  to  bless!  When  such  a  man  gets  saved,  he  is  a  good 
witness  for  Christ.  He  says,  *'  I  know  what  Christ  can  do,  for  he  has 
changed  my  heart,  he  has  appeared  to  me  by  the  way,  and  manifested 
himself  to  me ;  and  I  know  and  am  sure  of  that  which  I  testify,  that 
verily  this  is  the  Son  of  God." 

Next,  learn  another  lesson.  All  this  mockery  should  rebuke  the  back- 
wardness among  Christ's  friends.  When  he  was  to  be  mocked,  all  the 
soldiers  came  up.  Some  of  them  were  down  in  the  canteen,  but  they 
left  their  wine,  and  came  up  to  mock  him.  Some  of  the  soldiery, 
perhaps,  had  furlough  for  that  day  ;  but  thej'  gave  up  their  holiday 
to  go  to  mock  Christ.  Now,  then,  brethren  and  sisters,  if  his  enemies 
could  gather  together  the  whole  band  against  him,  let  us  gather 
together  the  whole  band  for  him.  Why,  just  look  at  some  of  you  on 
the  Lord' 8-day !  There  are  a  few  drops  of  rain,  that  might  spoil  your 
best  bonnets,  or  wet  your  new  clothes,  so  you  cannot  go  to  chapel. 
You  would  have  gone  to  market,  you  know,  rain  or  shine.  How  many 
there  are  who  will  not  be  able  to  come  to  the  prayer-meeting  to- 
morrow night !  One  pleaded,  some  time  ago,  at  the  prayer-meeting, 
**Lord,  bless  those  that  are  at  home  on  beds  of  sickness !  "  "Yes," 
said  the  preacher,  "  and.  Lord,  bless  those  that  are  at  home  on  sofas 
of  wellness ! "  There  are  plenty  of  that  kind,  who  stay  at  home 
because  they  have  not  enough  of  the  hearty  spirit  that  ought  to  be  in 
them  to  let  the  whole  band  gather  together  to  confess  Christ.  Do  you 
love  Jesus  Christ,  my  dear  sister  ?  Then,  come  and  confess  it.  Do 
you  love  Jesus  Christ,  my  brother  ?  Then  out  with  your  avowal  of  it. 
Do  not  try  to  go  to  heaven  behind  the  hedges.  Get  into  the  King's 
high  road,  and  travel  in  broad  daylight  as  a  soldier  of  Christ  should. 

'  **  I'm  not  ashamed  to  own  my  Lord, 

Or  to  defend  his  cause." 

Next,  I  think  that  these  mockers  chide  the  uninventiveness  of  many 
Christians.  See  how  they  brought  out  the  old  red  cloak,  and  plaited 
.the  crown  of  thorns,   and  cried,   "Put  them  on  him."     Then  they 


EXPOSITION.  429 

brought  the  sceptre  of  reed,  saying,  ''  Stick  it  in  his  hand,  and  shout, 
<  Hail,  King  of  the  Jews  ! '"     Then  came  the  spitting  and  the  smiting  ; 
they  could  not  have  made  the  mockery  more  complete.     They  soon 
rigged  up  aU  that  mimicry  of  royalty.     Come,   then,  brethren  and 
sisters,  let  us  be  inventive  in  honouring  Christ. 
"  Bring  forth  the  royal  diadem, 
And  crown  him  Lord  of  all." 
See,  is  there  not  some  new  plan  to  be  tried,  some  method  that  you 
have  not  yet  attempted  by  which  you  could  make  Jesus  loved  and 
honoured  in  the  soul  of  somebody,  be  it  only  a  poor  child,  a  servant 
girl,  or  the  humblest  man  in  the  street  ?     Surely,  if  enmity  was  so 
quick  to  deride  him,  love  ought  to  be  equally  alert  and  inventive  to 
find  out  ways  by  which  to  honour  him. 

But,  once  more,  all  this  mockery  should  excite  our  admiration  of  our 
patient  Lord.  Eemember  that,  as  he  sat  there,  flouted  and  made  a  jest 
of,  he  might  with  one  glance  of  his  eyes  have  flashed  hell  into  their 
souls,  and  slain  every  one  of  them.  Had  he  only  opened  those  lips, 
he  could  have  spoken  thunderbolts  that  would  have  destroyed  them 
at  once ;  but  he  sat  there,  and  patiently  bore  it  all.  As  a  sheep  before 
her  shearers,  he  was  dumb  ;  he  opened  not  his  mouth,  because  he  was 
bearing  all  this  to  save  you  and  to  save  me.  Blessed  Saviour !  Oh, 
come,  let  us  worship  and  adore  and  love  him ! 

The  last  lesson  is,  let  us  summon  all  our  faculties  to  honour  Christ  to- 
night. Gather  together  the  whole  band,  your  memory  of  all  his 
goodness,  your  judgment  of  all  his  greatness,  all  your  hopes,  and  all 
your  fears,  your  quieted  conscience,  your  soul  at  rest,  come,  and  with 
the  whole  band  of  faculties  that  God  has  given  you,  from  the  highest 
to  the  lowest,  bow  down  in  grateful  adoration  before  him  who  bowed 
so  low  that  he  might  lift  us  up  to  be  with  him  for  ever. 

Dear  hearers,  are  you  trusting  Christ  ?  There  is  no  other  trust  that 
will  do  for  a  soul  for  time  and  for  eternity.  On  a  dying  bed,  it  naust 
be  none  but  Jesus ;  let  it  be  none  but  Jesus  on  your  bed  to-night 
before  you  fall  asleep.  Do  not  dare  to  close  your  eyes  till  you  have 
committed  your  soul  into  the  keeping  of  him  who  holds  out  his  hands 
still,  as  he  did  upon  the  cross,  that  he  may  receive  you  with  open  arms, 
and  save  you  with  an  everlasting  salvation.     Amen. 

Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book*'— 282,  299,  267. 


Exposition  ijg  (^.  ©.  Spurgeon. 

MATTHEW  XXVII.  22—50. 

Our  Lord  was  brought  before  the  Roman  governor  Pilate.  He  waa 
anxious  to  let  Jesus  go  ;  but  he  was  a  weak-minded  man,  easily  swayed  by 
the  noisy  cry  of  the  people,  prompted  by  the  chief  priests  and  elders. 

Verses  22,  23.  Pilate  aaith  unto  them,  What  shall  I  do  then  with  Jesus  which 
18  called  Christ  ?  They  all  say  unto  him,  Let  him  be  crucified.  And  the 
governor  said,  Why,  what  evil  hath  he  done  f  But  they  cried  out  the  more,  say- 
ing, Let  him  he  crucified. 

A  blind,  unreasoning  hate  had  taken  possession  of  the  people.  They  gave 
no  answer  to  Pilate's  wondering  enquiry,  **  Why,  what  evil  hath  he  done  ?  " 


430  METBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

for  he  had  done  nothing  amiss;  they  only  repeated  the  brutal  demand, 
"  Let  him  be  crucifind  I  Let  him  be  crucified !  "  The  world's  hatred  of 
Christ  is  shown  in  similar  fashion  to-day.  He  has  done  no  evil,  no  one  has 
suffered  harm  at  his  liarids,  all  unite  to  pronounce  him  innocent ;  and  yet 
they  practically  say,  "  Away  with  him  !     Crucify  him  I " 

24.  When  Pilate  sarv  that  he  could  prevail  nothing,  hut  that  rather  a  tumuli 
was  made,  he  took  water,  and  mashed  his  hands  before  the  multitJide,  saying^ 
I  am  innocent  of  the  blood  of  this  just  person  :  see  y  to  it. 

Ah,  Pilate,  you  cannot  rid  yourself  of  responsibility  by  that  farce  !  He 
who  has  power  to  prevent  a  wrong  is  guilty  of  the  act  if  he  permits  others 
to  do  it,  even  though  he  does  not  actually  commit  it  himself.  If  you  are 
placed  in  positions  of  power  and  responsibility,  do  not  dream  that  you  can 
escape  from  guilt  by  merely  allowing  other  people  to  do  what  you  would 
not  do  yourself. 

25.  Then  answered  all  the  people^  and  said.  His  blood  be  on  us,  and  on  our 
children. 

All  the  people  willingly  took  upon  themselves  the  gui't  of  the  murder  of 
our  dear  Lord  :  "  His  blood  be  on  us,  and  on  our  children."  This  fearful 
imprecation  must  have  been  remembered  by  many  when  the  soldiers  of 
Titus  spared  neither  age  nor  sex,  and  the  Jewish  capital  became  the  veri- 
table Aceldama,  the  field  of  bloo-i. 

26  Then  released  he  Barabbas  unto  them  :  and  when  he  had  scourged  JeauSy 
he  delivered  him,  to  be  crucified. 

Why  scourge  him  before  delivering  him  up  to  be  crucified  ?  Surely  this 
was  a  superfluity  of  cruelty.  The  Roman  scourging  was  something  which  I 
scarcely  care  to  describe,  one  of  the  most  terrible  punishments  to  which 
anyone  could  be  subjected  ;  yet  Pilate  first  scourged  Jesus,  and  then  gave 
him  up  to  die  by  crucifixion. 

27,  28.  Then  the  soldiers  of  the  governor  took  Jesus  into  the  common  hall,  and 
gathered  unto  him  the  whole  band  of  soldiers.  And  they  stripped  him,  and  put 
on  him  a  scarlet  robe. 

Some  old  soldier's  coat,  that  they  found  lying  about,  they  cast  upon 
Christ  in  imitation  of  the  royal  robes  of  Ceesar  or  Herod. 

29 — 31.  And  when  they  had  platted  a  crown  of  thorns,  they  put  it  upon  his 
head,  and  a  reed  in  his  right  hand :  and  they  bowed  the  knee  before  him,  and 
mocked  him,  saying.  Hail,  King  of  the  Jews  !  And  they  spit  upon  him,  and 
took  the  reed,  and  smote  him  on  the  head.  And  after  that  they  had  mocked  him^ 
they  took  the  robe  off  from  him,  and  put  his  own  raiment  on  him,  and  led  him 
away  to  crucify  him. 

By  that  fact,  though  they  did  not  intend  it,  our  Lord  was  recognized  in 
the  street  as  the  same  Person  who  had  been  taken  into  the  Prsetorium  by 
the  soldiers.  Had  Jesus  been  brought  forth  in  the  scarlet  robe,  persons 
looking  at  him  might  not  have  known  him  to  be  the  same  Man  who  wore 
the  garment  woven  from  the  top  throughout ;  but  in  his  own  seamless 
raiment,  they  readily  recognized  the  Nazarene. 

32.  And  as  they  came  out,  they  found  a  man  of  Cyrene,  Simon  by  name: 
him  they  compelled  to  bear  his  cross. 

I  wonder  if  he  was  a  black  man.  There  was  a  Simon  in  the  early  Church  ; 
and  it  certainly  was  the  lot  of  the  Ethiopian  to  bear  the  cross  for  many  and 
many  an  age.  This  Simon  was  a  stranger,  anyhow,  and  a  foreigner;  truly 
honoured  was  he  to  be  compelled  to  bear  the  cross  after  Christ. 

33.  And  when  they  were  come  unto  a  place  called  Oolgotha,  that  is  to  say,  a 
place  of  a  skull. 

From  its  shape.     There  appears  to  be  to  this  day  a  hill  still  in  the  form 


EXPOSITION.  431 

of  a  human  skull  outside  the  p:ate  of  Jeru=!alem.     When  they  carae  to  that 
common  place  of  execution,  the  Tyburn  or  Old  Bailey  of  tlie  city, — 

34.  They  gave  JUm  vinegar  to  drink  mingled  with  gall  :  and  when  he  had 
tasted  thereof,  he  would  not  drink. 

A  stupefying  draught  was  given  to  the  condemned  ;  that  is  the  only 
mercy  that  there  was  about  the  whole  thing.  The  Eomans  did  give  to  the 
crucified  a  draught  of  myrrh  to  take  away  something  of  the  agony  of  cruci- 
fixion ;  but  our  Lord  came  not  to  be  stupefied,  he  came  to  suffer,  therefore 
he  would  not  take  anything  that  would  at  all  impair  his  faculties.  He  drank 
even  to  the  dregs  the  bitter  cup  of  grief  and  woe. 

35.  And  they  crucified  him, 

Horrible  scene,  to  see  those  blessed  hands  and  feet  pierced  with  nails,  and 
fastened  to  the  cross  ! 

35.     And  parted  his  garments,  casting  lots : 

Battling  the  dice-box  at  the  foot  of  the  cross !  Gambling  is  the  most 
hardening  of  all  vices.  I  believe  that  crimes  have  been  committed  by 
persons,  under  the  influence  of  gambling,  which  never  could  have  been  com- 
mitted by  them  in  any  other  condition  of  mind:  "They  parted  his 
garments*  casting  lo's."  See  here,  ye  gamblers  !  With  Christ's  blood 
bespattering  them,  these  soldiers  dared  still  to  raffle  for  his  robe. 

35,  36.  That  it  might  be  fulfilled  ivhich  was  spoken  by  the  prophet,  They 
parted  my  garments  among  them,  and  upon  my  vesture  did  they  cast  lots.  And 
sitting  down  they  watched  him  there ; 

His  enemies  gloating  their  cruel  eyes  with  the  sight  of  his  sufferings ;  his 
friends  with  many  tears  watching  his  amazing  griefs.  It  is  for  us,  to- 
night, with  humble  faith  and  grateful  love,  to  mark  the  incidents  con- 
nected with  his  painful  death. 

37,  38.  Aiid  set  up  over  his  head  his  accusation  written,  THIS  IS  JESUS 
THE  KINO  OF  THE  JEWS.  Then  were  there  two  thieves  crucified  luith 
him,  one  on  the  right  hand,  and  another  on  the  left. 

Giving  him  the  place  of  honour,  which  means  in  this  case  the  place  of 
dishonour.     He  was  the  apex  of  that  terrible  triangle. 

39,  40.  And  they  that  passed  by  reviled  him,  lu  igging  their  heads,  and 
iaying,  Thou  that  destroyest  the  temple,  and  buihlcst  it  in  three  days^  save  thyself. 
If  thou  be  the  Son  of  Ood,  come  down  from  the  cross. 

This  is  the  cry  of  the  Socinians  to-day,  "  Come  down  ^from  the  cross. 
Give  up  the  atoning  sacrifice,  and  we  will  be  Christians."  But,  by  rejecting 
his  vicarious  atonement,  they  practically  un-Christ  the  Christ,  as  those 
mockers  at  Golgotha  did. 

41,  42.  Likewise  also  the  chief  priests  mocking  him,  with  the  scribes  and 
elders,  said.  He  saved  others;  himself  he  cannot  save.  If  he  be  the  King  of 
Israel,  let  him  now  come  down  from  the  cross,  and  we  will  believe  him. 

Just  so.  Get  rid  of  a  crucified  Saviour,  then  they  will  believe  in  Him. 
Atonement,  substitution,  vicarious  sacrifice,  this  staggers  them.  They  will 
have  Christ  if  they  can  have  him  without  his  cross. 

43—46.  He  trusted  in  Ood ;  let  him  deliver  him  now,  if  he  will  have  him  : 
for  he  said,  I  am  the  Son  of  Ood.  The  thieves  also,  which  were  crucified  with 
him,  cast  the  same  in  his  teeth  Now  from  the  sixth  hour  there  was  darkness 
over  all  the  land  unto  the  ninth  hour.  And  about  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  cried 
with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Eli,  Eli,  lama  sabachthani  ?  that  is  to  say.  My  Ood, 
my  Ood,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ? 

Every  word  in  this  terrible  cry  from  the  cross  is  emphatic ;  every  syllable 
cuts  and  pierces  to  the  heart. 


432  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

47.  Some  of  them  that  stood  there,  when  they  heard  thaty  aaid,  This 
talleth  for  Elias. 

They  knew  better,  yet  they  jested  at  the  Saviour's  prayer 

48.  And  straightway  one  of  them  ran,  and  took  a  spunge, 

•  It  always  seems  to  me  very  remarkable  that  the  sponge,  which  is  the 
very  lowest  form  of  animal  life,  should  have  been  brought  into  contact  with 
Christ,  who  is  at  the  top  of  all  life.  In  his  death,  the  whole  circle  of 
creation  was  completed. 

48—50.  And  filed  it  with  vinegar,  and  put  it  on  a  reed,  and  gave  him  to 
drink.  The  rest  said,  Let  6e,  let  us  see  whether  Elias  will  come  to  save  him, 
Jestts,  when  he  had  cried  again  with  a  loud  voice,  yielded  up  the  ghost. 

Christ's  strength  was  not  exhausted ;  his  last  word  was  uttered  "  with  a 
loud  voice ",  like  the  shout  of  a  conquering  warrior.  He  need  not  have 
died  on  account  of  any  infirmity  in  himself  ;  but  voluntarily,  for  your  sake 
«nd  mine,  he  "  yielded  up  the  <i:host.*'     Blessed  be  his  holy  name  1 


THE   CROWN  OF  THORNS. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  April  13th,  1874,  bt 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTOW, 


"And  when  they  had  platted  a  crown  of  thorns,  they  put  it  upon  his  head."— 
Matthew  xxvii.  29. 

Before  we  enter  the  common  hall  of  the  soldiers,  and  gaze  upon  "  the 
sacred  head  once  wounded,"  it  will  be  well  to  consider  who  and  what 
he  was  who  was  thus  cruelly  put  to  shame.  Forget  not  the  intrinsic 
excellence  of  his  person  ;  for  he  is  the  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory, 
and  the  express  image  of  his  person  ;  he  is  in  himself  God  over  all,  blessed 
for  ever,  the  eternal  Word  by  whom  all  things  were  made,  and  by  whom 
all  things  consist.  Though  Heir  of  all  things,  the  Prince  of  the  kings 
of  the  earth,  he  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  "  a  man  of  sorrows 
and  acquainted  with  grief  ; "  his  head  was  scornfully  surrounded  with 
thorns  for  a  crown,  his  body  was  bedecked  with  a  faded  purple  robe,  a 
poor  reed  was  put  into  his  hand  for  a  sceptre,  and  then  the  ribald 
soldiery  dared  to  stare  into  his  face,  and  worry  him  with  their  filthy 
jests  :— 

•'  The  soldiers  also  spit  upon  that  face 
Which  angels  did  desire  to  have  the  grace, 
And  prophets  once  to  see,  but  found  no  place. 
Was  ever  grief  like  mine  ?" 

Forget  not  the  glory  to  which  he  had  been  accustomed  aforetime,  for 
ere  he  came  to  earth  he  had  been  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  adored 
of  cherubim  and  seraphim,  obeyed  by  every  angel,  worshipped  by  every 
principality  and  power  in  the  heavenly  places  ;  yet  here  he  sits,  treated 
worse  than  a  felon,  made  the  centre  of  a  comedy  before  he  became  the 
victim  of  a  tragedy.  They  sat  him  down  in  some  broken  chair,  covered 
him  with  an  old  soldier's  cloak,  and  then  insulted  him  as  a  mimiG 
monarch  :— 

•*  They  bow  their  knees  to  me,  and  cry,  Hail  king ; 
Whatever  scoffs  and  scornfulness  can  bring, 
I  am  the  floor,  the  sink,  where  they'd  fling. 
Was  ever  grief  like  mine  ?  " 
No.  1,168.  28 


434  '  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

What  a  descent  his  love  to  us  compelled  him  to  make  I  See  how  low 
he  fell  to  lift  us  from  our  fall !  Do  not  also  fail  to  remember  that 
at  the  very  time  when  they  were  thus  mocking  him,  he  was  still  the 
Lord  of  all,  and  could  have  summoned  twelve  legions  of  angels  to  his 
rescue.  There  was  majesty  in  his  misery  ;  he  had  laid  aside,  it  is 
true,  the  glorious  pomp  imperial  of  his  Father's  courts,  and  hp  was  now 
the  lowly  man  of  Nazareth,  but  for  all  that,  had  he  willed  it,  one  glance 
of  those  eyes  would  have  withered  up  the  Roman  cohorts  ;  one  word 
from  those  silent  lips  would  have  shaken  Pilate's  palace  from  roof  to 
foundation  ;  and  had  he  willed  it,  the  vacillating  governor  and  the 
malicious  crowd  would  together  have  gone  down  alive  into  the  pit,  even 
as  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram  of  old.  Lo,  God's  own  Son,  heaven's 
darling,  and  earth's  prince,  sits  there  and  wears  the  cruel  chaplet  which 
wounds  both  mind  and  body  at  once,  the  mind  with  insult,  and  the 
body  with  piercing  smart.  His  royal  face  was  marred  with  "  wounds 
which  could  not  cease  to  bleed,  trickling  faint  and  slow,"  yet  that 
**  noblest  brow  and  dearest "  had  once  been  fairer  than  the  children  of 
men,  and  was  even  then  the  countenance  of  Iramanuel,  God  with  us. 
Remember  these  things,  and  you  will  gaze  upon  him  with  enlightened 
*eyes  and  tender  hearts,  and  you  will  be  able  the  more  fully  to  enter  into 
fellowship  with  him  in  his  griefs.  Remember  whence  he  came,  and  it 
will  the  more  astound  you  that  he  should  have  stooped  so  low. 
Remember  what  he  was,  and  it  will  be  the  more  marvellous  that  he 
•should  become  our  substitute. 

And  now  let  us  press  into  the  guard-room,  and  look  at  our  Saviour 
wearing  his  crown  of  thorns.  I  will  not  detain  you  long  with  any 
ignesses  as  to  what  kind  of  thorns  he  wore.  According  to  the  Rabbis 
and  the  botanists  there  would  seem  to  have  been  from  twenty  to 
twenty-five  different  species  of  thorny  plants  growing  in  Palestine ; 
-and  different  writers  have,  according  to  their  own  judgments  or  fancies, 
selected  one  and  another  of  these  plants  as  the  peculiar  thorns  which 
■were  used  upon  this  occasion.  But  why  select  one  thorn  out  of  many  ? 
He  bore  not  one  grief,  bat  all ;  any  and  every  thorn  will  suffice  ; 
•the  very  dubiousness  as  to  the  peculiar  species  yields  us  instruction. 
It  may  well  be  that  more  than  one  kind  of  thorn  was  platted  in  that 
•crown :  at  any  rate  sin  has  so  thickly  strewn  the  earth  with  thorns  and 
thistles  that  there  was  no  difficulty  in  finding  the  materials,  even  as 
Ihere  was  no  scarcity  of  griefs  wherewith  to  chasten  him  every  morning 
and  make  him  a  mourner  all  his  days. 

The  soldiers  may  have  used  pliant  boughs  of  the  acacia,  or  shittim 
tree,  that  unrotting  wood  of  which  many  of  the  sacred  tables  and 
vessels  of  the  sanctuary  were  made  ;  and,  therefore,  significantly  used 
if  such  was  the  case.  It  may  have  been  true,  as  the  old  writers  generally 
consider,  that  the  plant  was  the  spina  Ghristi,  for  it  has  many  small 
and  sharp  spines,  and  its  green  leaves  would  have  made  a  wreath  such 
as  those  with  which  generals  and  emperors  were  crowned  after  a  battle. 
But  we  will  leave  the  matter  ;  it  was  a  crown  of  thorns  which  pierced 
his  head,  and  caused  him  suffering  as  well  as  shame,  and  that  suffices  us. 
Our  inquiry  now  is,  what  do  we  see  when  our  eyes  behold  Jesus  Christ 
crowned  with  thorns  ?  There  are  six  things  which  strike  me  most, 
and  as  I  lift  the  curtain  I  pray  you  watch  with  me,  and  may  the  Holj 


THE   CROWN   OF   THORNS.  435 

{Spirit  pour  forth  his  C^^ine  illumination  and  light  up  the  scene  before 
our  wondering  souls. 

I.  The  first  thing  which  is  seen  by  the  most  casual  observer,  before 
he  looks  beneath  the  surface,  is  a  sorrowful  spectacle.  Here  is 
the  Christ,  the  generous,  loving,  tender  Christ,  treated  with  indignity 
and  scorn ,  here  is  the  Prince  of  Life  and  Glory  made  an  object  of 
derision  by  a  ribald  soldiery.  Behold  to-day  the  lily  among  thorns, 
purity  lifting  up  itself  in  the  midst  of  opposing  sin.  See  here  the 
sacrifice  caught  in  the  thicket,  and  held  fast  there,  as  a  victim  in  o.ir 
stead  to  fulfil  the  ancient  type  of  the  ram  held  by  the  bushes,  which 
Abraham  slew  instead  of  Isaac.  Three  things  are  to  be  carefully  noted 
in  this  spectacle  of  sorrow. 

Here  is  Christ's  loivliness  and  ivealcness  triumphed  over  bj  the  lustf 
legionaries.  When  they  brought  Jesus  into  the  guard-room  they  felt 
that  he  was  entirely  in  their  power,  and  that  his  claims  to  be  a  kirg- 
were  so  absurd  as  to  be  only  a  theme  for  contemptuous  jest.  He  was 
but  meanly  dressed,  for  he  wore  only  the  smock  frock  of  a  peasant — - 
was  he  a  claimant  of  the  purple  ?  He  held  his  peace — was  he  the 
man  to  stir  a  nation  to  sedition?  He  was  all  wounds  and  bruises, 
fresh  from  the  scourger's  lash — was  he  the  hero  to  inspire  an  army's 
enthusiasm  and  overturn  old  Rome  ?  It  seemed  rare  mirth  for  them,  and 
as  wild  beasts  sport  with  their  victims,  so  did  they.  Many,  I  warrant 
you,  were  the  jibes  and  jeers  of  the  Roman  soldiery  at  his  expense, 
and  loud  was  the  laughter  amid  their  ranks.  Look  at  his  face,  how 
meek  he  appears !  How  different  from  the  haughty  countenances  of 
tyrants !  To  mock  his  royal  claims  seemed  but  natural  to  a  rough 
soldiery.  He  was  gentle  as  a  child,  tender  as  a  woman  ;  his  dignity 
was  that  of  calm  quiet  endurance,  and  this  was  not  a  dignity  whose 
force  these  semi-barbarous  men  could  feel,  therefore  did  they  pour 
contempt  upon  him.  Let  us  remember  that  our  Lord's  weakness  was 
undertaken  for  our  sakes :  for  us  he  became  a  lamb,  for  us  he  laid 
aside  his  glory,  and  therefore  it  is  the  more  painful  for  us  to  see  that 
this  voluntary  humiliation  of  himself  must  be  made  the  object  of  so 
much  derision  and  scorn,  though  worthy  of  the  utmost  praise.  He 
stoops  to  save  us,  and  we  laugh  at  him  as  he  stoops ;  he  leaves  the 
throne  that  he  may  lift  us  up  to  it,  but  while  he  is  graciously  descend- 
ing, the  hoarse  laughter  of  an  ungodly  world  is  his  only  reward.  Ah 
me  !  was  ever  love  treated  after  so  unlovely  a  sort  ?  Suieiy  the  cruelty 
it  received  was  proportioned  to  the  honour  it  deserved,  so  perverse  are 
the  sous  of  men. 

"  O  head  so  full  of  bruises  ! 

Brow  that  its  lifeblood  loses  I 
Oh  great  humility. 

Upon  his  face  are  falling 

Indignities  most  galling ; 
He  bears  them  all  for  me.** 

It  was  not  merely  that  they  mocked  his  humility,  but  fJiey  mocked 
his  claims  to  le  a  king.  "  Aha,"  they  seemed  to  say,  "  is  this  a  king  ? 
It  must  be  after  some  uncouth  Jewish  fashion,  surely,  that  this  poor 
peasant  claims  to  wear  a  crown.  Is  this  the  Son  of  David  ?  When  will 
he  drive  Caesar  and  his  armies  into  the  sea,  and  set  up  a  new  state, 


436  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  reign  at  Rome.  This  Jew,  this  peasant,  is  he  to  fulfil  hiR  nation's 
dream,  and  rule  over  all  mankind  ?  Wonderfully  did  they  ridicule  this 
idea,  and  we  do  not  wonder  that  they  did,  for  they  could  not  perceive 
his  true  glory.  But,  beloved,  my  point  lies  here,  he  tvas  a  King  in 
the  truest  and  most  emphatic  sense.  If  he  had  not  been  a  king,  then 
he  would  as  an  impostor  have  deserved  the  scorn,  but  would  not  have 
keenly  felt  it ;  but  being  truly  and  really  a  king,  every  word  must 
have  stung  his  royal  soul,  and  every  syllable  must  have  cut  to  the 
quick  his  kingly  spirit.  When  the  impostor's  claims  are  exposed  and 
held  up  to  scorn,  he  himself  must  well  know  that  he  deserves  all  the 
contempt  he  receives,  and  what  can  he  say  ?  But  if  the  real  heir  to 
all  the  estates  of  heaven  and  earth  has  his  claims  denied  and  his 
person  mocked  at,  then  is  his  heart  wounded,  and  rebuke  and  reproach 
fill  him  with  many  sorrows.  Is  it  not  sad  that  the  Son  of  God,  the 
blessed  and  only  Potentate,  should  have  been  thus  disgraced. 

Nor  was  it  merely  mockery,  but  cruelty  added  pain  to  insult.  If 
they  had  only  intended  to  mock  him  they  might  have  platted  a  crown 
of  straw,  but  they  meant  to  pain  him,  and  therefore  they  fashioned  a 
crown  of  thorns.  Look  ye,  I  pray  you,  at  his  person  as  he  suffers 
Bnder  their  hands.  They  had  scourged  him  till  probably  there  was 
no  part  of  his  body  which  was  not  bleeding  beneath  their  blows 
except  his  head,  and  now  that  head  must  be  made  to  suffer  too.  Alas, 
our  whole  head  was  sick,  and  our  whole  heart  faint,  and  so  he  must  be 
made  in  his  chastisement  like  to  us  in  our  transgression.  There  was 
no  part  of  our  humanity  without  sin,  and  there  must  be  no  part  of 
his  humanity  without  suffering.  If  we  had  escaped  in  some  measure 
from  iniquity,  so  might  he  have  escaped  from  pain,  but  as  we  had 
worn  the  foul  garment  of  transgression,  and  it  covered  us  from  head  to 
foot,  even  so  must  he  wear  the  garments  of  shame  and  derision  from 
the  crown  of  his  head  even  to  the  sole  of  his  foot. 
"  O  Love,  too  boundless  to  be  shown 

By  any  but  the  Lord  alone ! 

O  Love  offended,  which  sustains 

The  bold  offender's  curse  and  pains ! 

O  Love,  which  could  no  motive  have. 

But  mere  benignity  to  save." 

Beloved,  I  always  feel  as  if  my  tongue  were  tied  when  I  come  to  talk 
of  the  sufferings  of  my  Master.  I  can  think  of  them,  I  can  picture 
them  to  myself,  I  can  sit  down  and  weep  over  them,  but  I  know  not 
how  to  paint  them  to  others.  Did  you  ever  know  pen  or  pencil  that 
could  ?  A  Michael  Angelo  or  a  Raphael  might  well  shrink  back  from 
attempting  to  paint  this  picture ;  and  the  tongue  of  an  archangel  might 
be  consumed  in  the  effort  to  sing  the  griefs  of  him  who  was  loaded  with 
shame  because  of  our  shameful  transgressions.  I  ask  you  rather  to 
meditate  than  to  listen,  and  to  sit  down  and  view  your  Lord  with  your 
own  loving  eyes  rather  than  to  have  regard  to  words  of  mine.  I 
can  only  sketch  the  picture,  roughly  outlining  it  as  with  charcoal ;  I 
must  leave  you  to  put  in  the  colours,  and  then  to  sit  and  study  it,  but 
you  will  fail  as  I  do.  Dive  we  may,  but  we  cannot  reach  the  depths 
of  this  abyss  of  woe  and  shame.  Mount  we  may,  but  these  storm- 
swept  hills  of  agony  are  still  above  us. 


THE   CROWN   OF   THORNS.  437 

II.  Removing  the  curtain  again  from  this  sorrowful  spectacle,  I  see 
here  a  solemn  warning  which  speaks  softly  and  meltingly  to  us  out 
of  the  spectacle  of  sorrow.  Do  you  ask  me  what  is  that  warning  ?  It 
is  a  warning  against  our  ever  committing  the  same  crime  as  the  soldiers 
did.  "  The  same  !  "  say  you  ;  "why,  we  should  never  plat  a  crown  of 
thorns  for  that  dear  head."  I  pray  you  never  may ;  but  there  are 
many  who  have  done,  and  are  doing  it.  Those  are  guilty  of  this  crime 
who,  as  these  soldiers  did,  deny  his  claims.  Busy  are  the  wise  men  of 
this  world  at  this  very  time  all  over  the  world,  busy  in  gathering 
thorns  and  twisting  them,  that  they  may  afflict  the  Lord's  Anointed. 
Some  of  them  cry,  "  Yes,  he  was  a  good  man,  but  not  the  Son  of  God  ; " 
others  even  deny  his  superlative  excellence  in  life  and  teaching ;  they 
cavil  at  his  perfection,  and  imagine  flaws  where  none  exist.  Never 
are  they  happier  than  when  impugning  his  character.  I  may  be 
addressing  some  avowed  infidel  here,  some  sceptic  as  to  the  Redeemer's 
person  and  doctrine,  and  I  charge  him  with  crowning  the  Christ  of 
God  with  thorns  every  time  that  he  invents  bitter  charges  against 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  utters  railing  words  against  his  cause  and  his 
people.  Your  denial  of  his  claims,  and  especially  yonr  ridicule  of 
them,  is  a  repetition  of  the  unhappy  scene  before  us.  There  are 
some  who  ply  all  their  wit,  and  tax  their  utmost  skill  for  nothing  else 
but  to  discover  discrepancies  in  the  gospel  narratives,  or  to  conjure  up 
differences  between  their  supposed  scientific  discoveries  and  the  decla- 
rations of  the  Word  of  God.  Full  often  have  they  torn  their  own  hands 
in  weaving  crowns  of  thorns  for  him,  and  I  fear  some  of  tliem  will 
have  to  lie  upon  a  bed  of  thorns  when  they  come  to  die,  as  the  result 
of  their  displays  of  scientific  research  after  briers  with  which  to  afflict 
the  Lover  of  mankind.  It  will  be  well  if  they  have  not  to  lie  on 
worse  than  thorns  for  ever,  when  Christ  shall  come  to  judge  them  and 
condemn  them  and  cast  them  into  the  lake  of  fire  for  all  their  im- 
pieties concerning  him.  Oh,  that  they  would  cease  this  useless  and 
malicious  trade  of  weaving  crowns  of  thorns  for  him  who  is  the  world's 
only  hope,  whose  religion  is  the  lone  star  that  gilds  the  midnight  of 
human  sorrow,  and  guides  mortal  man  to  the  port  of  peace!  Ev^en 
for  the  temporal  benefits  of  Christianity  the  good  Jesus  should  be 
treated  with  respect ;  he  has  emancipated  the  slave,  and  uplifted  the 
down-trodden;  his  gospel  is  the  charter  of  liberty,  the  scourge  of 
tyrants,  and  the  death  of  priests.  Spread  it  and  you  spread  peace, 
freedom,  order,  love,  and  joy.  He  is  the  greatest  of  philanthropists, 
the  truest  friend  of  man,  wherefore  then  array  yourselves  against  him, 
ye  who  talk  of  progress  and  enlightenment  ?  If  men  did  but  know 
him  they  would  crown  him  with  diadems  of  reverent  love,  more 
precious  than  the  pearls  of  Ind,  for  his  reign  will  usher  in  the  golden 
age,  and  even  now  it  softens  the  rigour  of  the  present,  as  it  has 
removed  the  miseries  of  the  past.  It  is  an  ill  business,  this  carping 
and  cavilling,  and  I  beseech  those  engaged  in  it  to  cease  their  un- 
generous labours,  unworthy  of  rational  beings  and  destructive  to  their 
immortal  souls. 

This  crowning  with  thorns  is  wrought  in  another  fashion  by  hypo- 
critical prof  essio7is  of  allegiance  to  him.  These  soldiers  put  a  crown  ou 
Christ's  head,  but  they  did  not  mean  that  he  should  be  king ;  they 


438  METROPOLFfAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

put  a  sceptre  in  his  hand,  but  it  was  not  the  substantial  ivory  rod 
which  signifies  real  power,  it  was  only  a  weak  and  slender  reed. 
Therein  they  remind  us  that  Christ  is  mocked  by  insincere  professors. 

0  ye  who  love  him  not  in  your  inmost  souls,  ye  are  those  who  mock 
him  :  but  you  say,  "Wherein  have  I  ffiiled  to  crown  him  ?  Did  I  not 
join  the  church  ?  Have  I  not  said  that  I  am  a  believer  ?  "  Oh,  but 
if  your  hearts  are  not  right  within  you,  you  have  only  crowned  him 
with  thorns ;  if  you  have  not  given  him  your  very  soul,  you  have  in 
awful  mockery  thrust  a  sceptre  of  reed  into  his  hand.  Your  very 
religion  mocks  him.  Your  lying  professions  mock  him.  Who  hath 
required  this  at  your  hands,  to  tread  his  courts  ?  You  insult  him 
at  his  table  !  You  insult  him  on  your  knees !  How  can  you  say  you 
love  him,  when  your  hearts  are  not  with  him  ?  If  you  have  never 
believed  in  him  and  repented  of  sin,  and  yielded  obedience  to  his 
command,  if  you  do  not  own  him  in  your  daily  life  to  be  both  Lord  and 
King,  I  charge  you  lay  down  the  profession  which  is  so  dishonouring 
to  him.  If  he  be  God,  serve  him  ;  if  he  be  King,  obey  him ;  if  he  be 
neither,  then  do  not  profess  to  be  Christians.  Be  honest  and  bring 
no  crown  if  you  do  not  accept  him  as  King.  What  need  again  to 
insult  him  with  nominal  dominion,  mimic  homage,  and  pretended 
service  ?  0  ye  hypocrites,  consider  your  ways,  lest  soon  the  Lord 
whom  ye  provoke  should  ease  him  of  his  adversaries. 

In  a  measure  the  same  thing  may  be  done  by  those  who  are  sincere, 
but  through  want  of  watchfulness  ivalk  so  as  to  dlsho?wur  tlieir  profession. 
Here,  if  I  speak  rightly,  I  shall  compel  every  one  of  you  to  confess  it 
in  your  spirits  that  you  stand  condemned  ;  for  every  time  that  we  act 
according  to  our  sinful  flesh  we  crown  the  Saviour's  head  with  thorns. 
Which  of  us  has  not  done  this  ?  Dear  head,  every  hair  of  which  is 
more  precious  than  fine  gold,  when  we  gave  our  hearts  to  thee  we 
thought  we  should  always  adore  thee,  that  our  whole  lives  would  be  one 
long  psalm,  praising  and  blessing  and  crowning  thee.  Alas,  how  far 
have  we  fallen  short  of  our  own  ideal !  We  have  hedged  thee  about 
with  the  briers  of  our  sin.  AVe  have  been  betrayed  into  angry  tempers, 
BO  that  we  have  spoken  unadvisedly  with  our  lips  ;  or  we  have 
been  worldly,  and  loved  that  which  thou  abhorrest,  or  we  have  yielded 
to  our  passions,  and  indulged  our  evil  desires.  Our  vanities,  follies, 
forgetfulnesses,  omissions,  and  offencps  have  set  upon  thy  head  a 
coronet  of  dishonour,  and  we  tremble  to  think  of  it.  Oh,  cruel  hearts 
and  hands  to  have  so  maltreated  the  Well-beloved,  whom  it  should  have 
been  our  daily  care  to  glorify  !  Do  I  speak  to  any  backslider  whose 
open  sin  has  dishonoured  the  cross  of  Christ  ?  I  fear  I  must  be 
addressing  some  who  once  had  a  name  to  live,  but  now  are  numbered 
with  the  dead  in  sin.     Surely  if  there  be  a  spark  of  grace  in  you,  what 

1  am  now  saying  must  cut  you  to  the  quick,  and  act  like  salt  upon  a 
raw  wound  to  make  your  very  soul  to  smart.  Do  not  your  ears  tingle 
as  I  accuse  you  deliberatelv  of  acts  of  inconsistency  which  have  twisted 
a  thorny  crown  for  our  dear  Master's  head  ?  It  is  assuredly  so,  for  you 
have  opened  the  mouths  of  blasphemers,  taught  gainsayers  to  revile 
him,  grieved  the  generation  of  his  people,  and  made  many  to  stumble. 
Ungodly  men  have  laid  your  faults  at  the  door  of  the  innocent 
Saviour  j  they  have  said  **  This  is  your  religion."    You  have  grown  the 


THE  CROWN  OF  THORNS.  439 

thorns,  but  he  has  had  to  wear  them.  We  call  your  offences  incon- 
Bistencies,  but  worldly  men  regard  them  as  the  fruit  of  Christianity, 
and  condemn  the  vine  because  of  your  sour  clusters.  They  charge  the 
holy  Jesus  with  the  faults  of  his  erring  followers.  Dear  friends^  is 
there  not  room  to  look  at  home  in  the  case  of  each  one  of  us  ?  As  we 
do  so,  let  us  come  with  the  sorrowful  and  loving  penitent,  and  wash 
his  dear  feet  with  tears  of  repentance,  because  we  have  crowned  his 
head  with  thorns. 

Thus  our  thorn-crowned  Lord  and  Master  stands  before  us  as  a 
sorrowful  spectacle,  conveying  to  us  a  solemn  warning. 

III.  Lifting  the  veil  again,  in  the  person  of  our  tortured  and  insulted 
Lord  we  see  triumphant  endurance.  He  could  not  be  conquered, 
he  was  victorious  even  in  the  hour  of  deepest  shame. 

"  He  with  unflinching  heart 
Bore  all  disgrace  and  shame, 
And  'mid  the  keenest  smart 
Lov'd  on,  yea  lov'd  the  same  '* 

He  was  bearing  at  that  moment,  first,  the  substitutionary  griefs  which 
were  due  to  him  because  he  stood  in  our  place,  and  from  bearing  them 
he  did  not  turn  aside.    "We  were  sinners,  and  the  reward  of   sin  is 
pain  and  death,  therefore  he  bore  the  chastisement  of  our  peace.     He 
was   enduring   at   that   time  what  we  ought  to   have  endured,  and 
draining  the  cup  which  justice  had  mingled  for  us.     Did  he  start 
back  from  it  ?     Oh,  no.     When  first  he  came  to  drink  of  that  worm- 
wood and  gall  in  the  garden  he  put  it  to  his  lips,  and  the  draught 
seemed  for  an  instant  to  stagger  even  his  strong  spirit.     His  soul  was 
exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto  death.     He  was  like  one  demented, 
tossed  to  and  fro  with  inward  agony.     "  My  Father,"  said  he,  "  if 
it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me."     Thrice  did  he  utter  that 
prayer,  while  every  portion  of  his  manhood  was  the  battle-field  of 
legions  of  griefs.     His  soul  rushed  out  at  every  pore  to  find  a  vent 
for  its  swelling  woes,  his  whole  body  being  covered  with  gory  sweat. 
After  that  tremendous  struggle  the  strength  of  love  mastered  the  weak- 
ness of  manhood ;  he  put  that  cup  to  his  lips  and  never  shrank,  but 
he  drank  right  on  till  not  a  dreg  was  left ;  and  now  the  cup  of  wrath 
is  empty,  no  trace  of  the  terrible  wine  of  the  wrath  of  God  can  be 
found  within  it.     At  one  tremendous  draught  of  love  the  Lord  for 
ever  drank  destruction  dry  for  all  his  people.     "AVho  is  he  that  con- 
demneth  ?     It  is  Christ  that  died,  yea,  rather,  that  hath  risen  again,' 
and  "there  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  m 
Christ  Jesus,  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh  but  after  the  Spirit."     Now 
surely  endurance  had  reached  a  very  high  point  when  he  was  made 
to  endure  the  painful  mockery  which  our  text  describes,  yet  he  quailed 
not,  nor  removed  from  his  settled  purpose.     He  had  undertaken,  and 
he  would  go  through.    Look  at  him,  and  see  there  a  miracle  of  patieni 
endurance  of  griefs  which  would  have  sent  a  world  to  hell  had  he  not 
borne  them  on  our  behalf.  .         •  ,      ,  .  i     •      ,        i 

Besides  the  shame  and  suffering  due  for  sm,  with  which  it  pleased 
the  Father  to  bruise  him,  he  was  enduring  a  superfluity  of  malice  Jrom 
the  hate  of  men.     Why  needed  men  have  concentrated  all  their  scora 


^40  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  cruelty  into  his  execution  ?  Was  it  not  enough  that  he  must  die  I 
Did  it  give  pleasure  to  their  iron  hearts  to  rack  his  tenderest  sensibili- 
ties ?  Wherefore  these  inventions  for  deepening  his  woe  ?  Had  any  of 
us  been  thus  derided  we  should  have  resented  it.  There  is  not  a  man 
or  woman  here  who  could  have  been  silent  under  such  indignities, 
but  Jesus  sat  in  omnipotence  of  patience,  possessing  his  soul  right 
royally.  Glorious  pattern  of  patience,  we  adore  thee  as  we  see  how 
malice  oould  not  conquer  thine  almighty  love!  The  pain  which  he 
had  endured  from  the  scourges  caused  him  to  throb  with  exquisite 
anguish,  but  we  read  neither  of  tears  nor  groans,  much  less  of  angry 
complaints  or  revengeful  threats.  He  does  not  seek  for  pity,  or  make 
one  appeal  for  lenity.  He  does  not  ask  wherefore  they  torture  or  why 
they  mock.  Brave  witness !  Courageous  martyr !  Suffering  exqui- 
sitely thou  dost  also  suffer  calmly.  Such  a  perfect  frame  as  his,  his 
body  being  conceived  without  sin,  must  have  been  capable  of  tortures 
which  our  bodies,  unstrung  by  sin,  cannot  feel.  His  delicate  purity 
felt  a  horror  of  ribald  jests  which  our  more  hardened  spirits  cannot 
estimate,  yet  Jesus  bore  all,  as  only  the  Son  of  God  could  bear  it. 
They  might  heap  on  the  load  as  they  would,  he  would  only  put  forth 
more  endurance,  and  bear  it  all,  but  shrink  or  quail  he  would  not. 

I  venture  to  suggest  that  such  was  the  picture  of  patience  whidi 
our  blessed  Lord  exhibited  that  it  may  have  moved  some  even  of  the 
soldiery  themselves.  Has  it  ever  occurred  to  you  to  ask  how  Matthew 
came  to  know  all  about  that  mockery?  Matthew  was  not  there. 
Mark  also  gives  an  account  of  it,  but  he  would  not  have  been  tolerated 
in  the  guard-room.  The  Praetorians  were  far  too  proud  and  rough  to 
tolerate  Jews,  much  less  disciples  of  Jesus,  in  their  common  hall. 
Since  there  could  have  been  nobody  there  except  the  legionaries  them- 
selves, it  is  well  to  inquire — Who  told  this  tale  ?  It  must  have  been 
an  eye-witness.  May  it  not  have  been  that  centurion  who  in  the  same 
chapter  is  reported  to  have  said,  **  Certainly  this  was  the  Son  of  God"  ? 
May  not  that  scene  as  well  as  the  Lord's  death  have  led  him  to  that 
conclusion  ?  We  do  not  know,  but  this  much  is  very  evident,  the  story 
must  have  been  told  by  an  eye-witness,  and  also  by  one  who  sympathised 
with  the  sufferer,  for  to  my  ear  it  does  not  read  like  the  description 
of  an  unconcerned  spectator.  I  should  not  wonder — I  would  almost 
venture  to  assert — that  our  Lord's  marred  but  patient  visage  preached 
such  a  sermon  that  one  at  least  who  gazed  upon  it  felt  its  mysterious 
power,  felt  that  such  patience  was  more  than  human,  and  accepted 
the  thom-crowned  Saviour  as  henceforth  his  Lord  and  his  King. 
This  I  do  know,  that  if  you  and  I  want  to  conquer  human  hearts 
for  Jesus  we  must  be  patient  too  ;  and  if,  when  they  ridicule  and 
persecute  us,  we  can  but  endure  without  repining  or  retaliation,  we 
shall  exercise  an  influence  which  even  the  most  brutal  will  feel,  and 
to  which  chosen  minds  will  submit  themselves. 

IV.  Drawing  up  the  veil  again,  I  think  we  have  before  us,  in  the 
fourth  place,  in  the  person  of  the  triumphant  sufferer,  a  sacred 
MEDICINE.  I  can  only  hint  at  the  diseases  which  it  will  cure. 
These  blood-besprinkled  thorns  are  plants  of  renown,  precious  in 
heavenly  surgery  if  they  be  rightly  used.  Take  but  a  thorn  out  of 
this  crown  and  use  it  aa  a  lancet,  and  it  will  let  out  the  hot  blood  of 


THE   CROWN  OP  THORNS. 


441 


passion  and  abate  the  fever  of  pride ;  it  is  a  wonderful  remedy  for 
swelling  flesh  and  grievous  boils  of  sin.  He  who  sees  Jesus  crowned 
with  thorns  will  loathe  to  look  on  self,  except  it  be  through  tears  of 
contrition.  This  thorn  at  the  breast  will  make  men  sing,  but  not 
with  notes  of  self-congratulation,  the  notes  will  be  those  of  a  dove 
moaning  for  her  mate.  Gideon  taught  the  men  of  Succoth  with 
thorns,  but  the  lessons  were  not  so  salutary  as  those  which  we  learn 
from  the  thorns  of  Jesus.  The  sacred  medicine  which  the  good 
Physician  brings  to  us  in  his  thorny  chaplet  acts  as  a  tonic,  and 
strengthens  us  to  endure  without  depression  whatever  shame  or  loss 
his  service  may  bring  upon  us  : — 

"  Who  defeats  my  fiercest  foes  P 
Who  consoles  my  saddest  woes? 
Who  revives  my  fainting  heart, 
Healing  all  its  hidden  smart  ? 
Jesus  crowned  with  thorns." 

When  you  begin  to  serve  God,  and  for  his  sake  endeavour  to 
benefit  your  fellow-mortals,  do  not  expect  any  reward  IVom  men,  except 
to  be  misunderstood,  suspected,  and  abused.  The  best  men  in  tlie  world 
are  usually  the  worst  spoken  of.  An  evil  world  cannot  speak  well  of 
holy  lives.  The  sweetest  fruit  is  most  pecked  at  by  the  birds,  the  most 
heaven-nearing  mountain  is  most  beaten  by  the  storms,  and  the  loveliest 
character  is  the  most  assailed.  Those  whom  you  would  save  will  not 
thank  you  for  your  anxiety,  but  blame  you  for  your  interference.  If  you 
rebuke  their  sins  they  will  frequently  resent  your  warnings,  if  you 
invite  them  to  Jesus,  they  will  make  light  of  your  entreaties.  Are  you 
prepared  for  this  ?  If  not,  consider  him  who  endured  such  contra- 
diction of  sinners  against  himself  lest  ye  be  weary  and  faint  in  your 
minds.  If  you  succeed  in  bringing  many  to  Christ,  you  must  nob 
reckon  upon  universal  honour,  you  will  be  charged  with  self-seeking, 
popularity-hunting,  or  some  such  crime  ;  you  will  be  misrepresented, 
belied,  caricatured,  ai-.d  counted  as  a  fool  or  a  knave  by  the  ungodly 
world.  The  probabilities  are  that  the  crown  you  will  win  in  this  world, 
if  you  serve  God,  will  contain  more  spikes  than  sapphires,  more  briers 
than  beryls.  When  it  is  put  upon  your  head  pray  for  grace  to  wear 
it  right  gladly,  counting  it  all  joy  to  be  like  your  Lord.  Say  in  your 
heart,  "  I  feel  no  dishonour  in  this  dishonour.  Men  may  impute 
shameful  things  to  me,  but  I  am  not  ashamed.  They  may  degrade  me, 
but  I  am  not  degraded.  They  may  cast  contempt  upon  me,  but  I  am 
not  contemptible."  The  Master  of  the  house  was  called  Beelzebub  and 
spit  upon,  they  cannot  do  worse  to  his  household,  therefore  we 
scorn  their  scorn.  Thus  are  we  nerved  to  patience  by  the  patience  of 
the  despised  Nazarene.  i 

The  thorn  crown  is  also  a  remedy  for  discontent  and  affliction. 
When  enduring  bodily  pain  we  are  apt  to  wince  and  fret,  but  if  wa 
remember  Jesus  crowned  with  thorns,  we  say — 

"His  way  was  much  rougher  and  darker  and  mine; 
Did  Christ  my  Lord  suffer,  and  shall  1  repine  ?  " 

And  80  our  complaints  grow  dumb;  for  very  shame  we  dare  not  com- 


442 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


pare  onr  maladies  with  his  woes.     Resignation  is  learned  at  Jesns' 
feet,  when  we  see  our  great  Exemplar  made  perfect  through  suffering. 

The  thorn  crown  is  a  cure  for  care.  "We  would  cheerfully  wear  any 
array  which  our  Lord  may  prepare  for  us,  but  it  is  a  great  folly  to  plat 
needless  thorn  crowns  for  ourselves.  Yet  I  have  seen  some  who  are,  I 
hope,  true  believers  take  much  trouble  to  trouble  themselves,  and 
labour  to  increase  their  own  labours.  They  haste  to  be  rich,  they  fret, 
they  toil,  they  worry,  and  torment  themselves  to  load  themselves  with 
the  burden  of  wealth  ;  thej  wound  themselves  to  wear  the  thorny  crown 
of  worldly  greatness.  Many  are  the  ways  of  making  rods  for  our  own 
backs.  I  have  known  mothers  make  thorn  crowns  out  of  their  children 
whom  they  could  not  trust  with  God,  they  have  been  worn  with  family 
anxieties  when  they  might  have  rejoiced  in  God.  I  have  known  others 
make  thorn  crowns  out  of  silly  fears,  for  which  there  were  no  grounds 
whatever ;  but  they  seemed  ambitious  to  be  fretful,  eager  to  prick 
themselves  with  briers.  0  believer,  say  to  thyself,  "My  Lord  wore 
my  crown  of  thorns  for  me  ;  why  should  I  wear  it  too  ?  "  He  took  our 
gi'iefs  and  carried  our  sorrows  that  we  might  be  a  happy  people,  and  be 
able  to  obey  the  command,  "  Take  no  thought  for  the  morrow,  for  the 
morrow  shall  take  thought  for  th6  things  of  itself."  Ours  is  the  crown 
of  loving  kindness  and  tender  mercies,  and  we  wear  it  when  we  cast  all 
our  care  on  him  who  careth  for  us. 

That  thorn  crown  cures  us  of  desire  for  the  vainglories  of  the 
world,  it  dims  all  human  pomp  and  glory  till  it  turns  to  smoke. 
Could  we  fetch  hither  the  Pope's  triple  crown,  or  the  imperial  diadem 
of  Germany,  or  the  regalia  of  the  Czar  of  All  the  Russias,  what  of 
them  all  compared  with  Jesus'  crown  of  thorns  ?  Let  us  set  some 
great  one  on  his  throne,  and  see  how  little  he  looks  when  Jesus  sits 
beside  him.  What  is  there  kingly  in  being  able  to  tax  men,  and  live 
upon  their  labours,  giving  little  in  return  ?  The  royalest  thing  is  to  lay 
them  all  under  obligations  to  our  disinterested  love,  and  be  the  foun- 
tain of  blessing  to  them.  Oh,  it  takes  the  glitter  from  your  gold,  and 
the  lustre  from  your  gems,  and  the  beauty  from  all  your  dainty  gewgaws, 
to  see  that  no  imperial  purple  can  equal  the  glory  of  his  blood,  no  gems 
can  rival  his  thorns.  Show  and  parade  cease  to  attract  the  soul  when 
once  the  superlative  excellencies  of  the  dying  Saviour  have  been  dis- 
cerned by  the  enlightened  eye. 

Who  seeks  for  ease  when  he  has  seen  the  Lord  Christ  ?  If  Christ 
wears  a  crown  of  thorns,  shall  we  covet  a  crown  of  laurel  ?  Even  the 
fierce  Crusader  when  he  entered  ijito  Jerusalem,  and  was  elected  king, 
had  sense  enough  to  say,  "  I  will  not  wear  a  crown  of  gold  in  the  same 
city  where  my  Saviour  wore  a  crown  of  thorns."  Why  should  we 
desire,  like  feather-bed  soldiers,  to  have  everything  arranged  for  our 
ease  and  pleasure  ?  Why  this  reclining  upon  couches  when  Jesus 
hangs  on  a  cross  ?  Why  this  soft  raiment  when  he  is  naked  ?  Why 
these  luxuries  when  he  is  barbarously  entreated  ?  Thus  the  thorn 
crown  cures  us  at  once  of  the  vainglory  of  the  world,  and  of  our  own 
selfish  love  of  ease.  The  world's  minstrel  may  cry,  "  Ho,  boy,  come 
hither,  and  crown  me  with  rose  br.ds  ! "  but  the  voluptuary's  request 
is  not  for  us.  For  us  neither  delights  of  the  flesh  nor  the  pride  of 
life  can  have  charms  while  the  Man  of  Sorrows  is  in  view.     For  us  it 


THE   CROWN   OF   THORNS.  443 

remains  to  suffer,  and  to  labour,  till  the  King  shall  bid  ns  share  hia 
rest. 

Y.  I  must  notice  in  the  fifth  place  that  there  is  before  us  a  mystio 
CORONATION.  Bear  with  my  many  divisions.  The  coronation  of  Christ 
with  thorns  was  symbolical,  and  had  great  meaning  in  it,  for,  first,  it 
was  to  him  a  trivmplial  crown.  Christ  had  fought  with  sin  from  the  day 
when  he  first  stood  foot  to  foot  with  it  in  the  wilderness  up  to  the  time 
when  he  entered  Pilate's  hall,  and  he  had  conquered  it.  As  a  witness 
that  he  had  gained  the  victory  behold  sin's  crown  seized  as  a  trophy ! 
What  was  the  crown  of  sin  ?  Thorns.  These  sprang  from  the  ci:.rse. 
"Thorns  also  and  thistles  shall  it  bring  forth  to  thee,"  was  the  corona- 
tion of  sin,  and  now  Christ  has  taken  away  its  crown,  and  put  it  on 
his  own  head.  He  has  spoiled  sin  of  its  richest  regalia,  and  he  wears 
it  himself.  Glorious  champion,  all  hail!  What  if  I  say  that  the 
thorns  constituted  a  mural  crown?  Paradise  was  set  round  with 
a  hedge  of  thorns  so  sharp  that  none  could  enter  it,  but  our  cham- 
pion leaped  first  upon  the  bristling  rampart,  and  bore  the  blood-red 
banner  of  his  cross  into  the  heart  of  that  better  new  Eden,  which 
thus  he  won  for  us  never  to  be  lost  again.  Jesus  wears  the  mural 
chaplet  which  denotes  that  he  has  opened  Paradise.  It  was  a  wrest- 
ler's crown  he  wore,  for  he  wrestled  not  with  flesh  and  blood,  but  with 
principalities  and  powers,  and  he  overthrew  his  foe.  It  was  a  racer's 
crown  he  wore,  for  he  had  run  with  the  mighty  and  outstripped 
them  in  the  race.  He  had  well-nigh  finished  his  course,  and  had  but  a 
step  or  two  more  to  take  to  reach  the  goal.  Here  is  a  marvellous  field 
for  enlargement,  and  we  must  stay  at  once  lest  we  go  too  far.  It  was 
a  crown  rich  with  glory,  despite  the  shame  which  was  intended  by  it. 
We  see  in  Jesus  the  monarch  of  the  realms  of  misery,  the  chief  among 
ten  thousand  sufferers.  Never  say,  "I  am  a  great  sufferer."  What 
are  our  griefs  compared  with  his  ?  As  the  poet  stood  upon  the  Palatine 
Mount  and  thought  of  Rome's  dire  ruin,  he  exclaimed,  "What  are  our 
woes  and  sufferings  ?  "  even  so  I  ask.  What  are  our  shallow  griefs 
compared  with  the  infinite  sorrows  of  Immanuel  ?  Well  may  we  "  con- 
trol in  our  close  breasts  our  petty  misery."  Jesus  is,  moreover,  the 
prince  of  martyrs.  He  leads  the  van  among  the  noble  army  of 
suffering  witnesses  and  confessors  of  the  truth.  Though  they  died  at 
the  stake,  or  pined  in  dungeons,  or  were  cast  to  wild  beasts,  they  none 
of  them  claim  the  first  rank ;  but  he,  the  faithful  and  the  true  witness, 
with  the  thorn  crown  and  the  cross,  stands  at  the  head  of  them  alL 
It  may  never  be  our  lot  to  join  the  august  band,  but  if  there  be 
an  honour  for  which  we  might  legitimately  envy  saints  of  former  times, 
it  is  this,  that  they  were  born  in  those  brave  days  when  the  ruby 
crown  was  within  human  grasp,  and  when  the  supreme  sacrifice 
might  have  been  made.  We  are  cravens,  indeed,  if  in  these  softer  days 
we  are  ashamed  to  confess  our  Master,  and  are  afraid  of  a  little  scorn, 
or  tremble  at  the  criticisms  of  the  would-be  wise.  Rather  let  us  follow 
the  Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth,  content  to  wear  his  crown  of  thorna 
that  we  may  in  his  kingdom  behold  his  glory. 

YI.  The  last  word  is  this.  In  the  thorn  crown  I  see  a  mighty 
STIMULUS.  A  mighty  stimulus  to  what  ?  Why,  first,  to  fervent 
love  of  him.      Can  you  see  him  crowned   with   thorns  and   not  be 


444  METROPOLITAN  TABMRNACLE  PULPIT. 

drawn  to  him  ?  Methinks,  if  he  could  come  among  us  this  morning 
and  we  could  see  him,  there  would  be  a  loving  press  around  him  to 
touch  the  hem  of  his  garment  or  to  kiss  his  feet.  Saviour  thou 
art  very  precious  to  us.  Dearest  of  all  the  names  above,  my  Saviour 
and  my  God,  thou  art  always  glorious,  but  in  these  eyes  thou  art 
never  more  lovely  than  when  arrayed  in  shameful  mockery.  The 
Lily  of  the  Valley,  and  the  Rose  of  Sharon,  both  in  one  is  he,  fair  in 
the  perfection  of  his  character,  and  blood-red  in  the  greatness  of  his 
sufferings.  Worship  him  !  Adore  him  I  Bless  him  I  And  let  your 
Toices  sing  "Worthy  the  Lamb." 

This  sight  is  a  stimulus,  next,  to  repentance.  Did  our  sins  put 
thorns  around  his  head  ?  Oh,  my  poor  fallen  nature,  I  will  scourge 
thee  for  scourging  hira,  and  make  thee  feel  the  thorns  for  causing  him 
to  endure  them.  What,  can  you  see  your  best  Beloved  put  to  such 
ehame,  and  yet  hold  truce  or  parley  with  the  sins  which  pierced  him  ? 
It  cannot  be.  Let  us  declare  before  God  our  soul's  keen  grief  that 
we  should  make  the  Saviour  suffer  so ;  then  let  us  pray  for  grace  to 
hedge  our  lives  around  with  thorns  that  from  this  very  day  sin  may 
Bot  approach  us. 

_  I  thought  this  day  of  how  ofttimes  I  have  seen  the  blackthorn  grow- 
ing  m  the  hedge  all  bristling  with  a  thousand  prickles,  but  right  in 
the  centre  of  the  bush  have  I  seen  the  pretty  nest  of  a  little  bird. 
Why  did  the  creature  place  its  habitation  there  ?  Because  the  thorns 
become  a  protection  to  it,  and  slielter  it  from  harm.  As  I  meditated 
last  night  upon  this  blessed  subject,  I  thought  I  would  bid  you  build 
your  nests  within  the  thorns  of  Christ.  It  is  a  safe  place  for  sinners. 
Neither  Satan,  sin,  nor  death  can  reach  you  there.  Gaze  on  your 
Saviour's  sufferings,  and  you  will  see  sin  atoned  for.  Fly  into  his 
wounds !  fly,  ye  timid  trembling  doves !  there  is  no  resting-place  so  safe 
for  you.  Build  your  nests,  I  say  again,  among  these  thorns,  and  when 
you  have  done  so,  and  trusted  Jesus,  and  counted  him  to  be  all  in  all 
to  you,  then  come  and  crown  his  sacred  head  with  other  crowns.  What 
glory  does  he  deserve  ?  What  is  good  enough  for  him  ?  If  we  could  take 
all  the  precious  things  from  all  the  treasuries  of  monarchs,  they  would 
not  be  worthy  to  be  pebbles  beneath  his  feet.  If  we  could  bring  him  all 
the  sceptres,  mitres,  tiaras,  diadems,  and  all  other  pomp  of  earth,  they 
would  be  altogether  unworthy  to  be  thrown  in  the  dust  before  him. 
Wherewith  shall  we  crown  him  ?  Come  let  us  weave  our  praises 
together  and  set  our  tears  for  pearls,  our  love  for  gold.  They  will 
sparkle  like  so  many  diamonds  in  his  esteem,  for  he  Joves  repentance, 
and  he  loves  faith.  Let  us  make  a  chaplet  this  morning  with  our 
praises,  and  crown  him  as  the  laureate  of  grace.  This  day  on  which 
he  rose  from  the  dead,  let  us  extol  him.  Oh,  for  grace  to  do  it  in 
the  heart,  and  then  in  the  life,  and  then  with  the  tongue,  that  we  may 
praise  him  for  ever  who  bowed  his  head  to  shame  for  us. 

Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon— Matthew  xxvii.  11—54. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 336, 282, 275, 41 7 (v.  1  & 4). 


J 


MOCKED   OF    THE    SOLDIERS. 


%,  $ttm\[ 


Intended  for  Eeading  on  Lord's-day,  March  29th,  1903, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTOIT, 
On  Lord's-day  Evening,  June  Zrd,  1883. 


"And  when  they  had  platted  a  crown  of  thorns,  they  put  it  upon  his  head,  and  a 
reed  in  his  right  hand :  and  they  bowed  the  knee  before  h'm,  and  mocked  him,  saying, 
Hail,  King  of  the  Jews  !  " — Matthew  xxvii.  29. 

It  is  a  shameful  spectacle  where  cruelty  useis  its  keenest  instrument 
to  cut,  not  into  the  flesh,  but  into  the  very  spirit,  for  scorn,  con- 
tempt, insult,  and  ridicule,  are  as  painful  to  the  mind  and  heart 
as  a  scourge  is  to  the  body,  and  they  cut  like  the  sharpest  lance. 
These  Roman  soldiers  were  a  rough  body  of  men, — ^fierce, 
courageous,  terrible  in  fight,  uncouth,  untaught,  uncivilized,  little 
better  than  barbadians;  and  when  they  had  this  unique  King  in 
their  power,  they  made  the  most  of  their  opportunity  to  torment 
him.  Oh,  how  they  laughed  to  think  that  he  should  call  himself 
a  King, — this  poor,  emaciated  creature,  who  looked  as  if  he  would 
faint  and  die  in  their  hands,  whose  blessed  visage  was  marred  more 
than  that  of  any  of  the  song  of  men !  It  must  have  seemed  to  them 
a  sorry  jest  that  he  should  be  a  rival  to  imperial  Caesar,  so  they 
said,  "  If  he  is  a  King,  let  us  clothe  him  with  royal  purple,"  so  they 
flung  over  his  shoulders  a  soldier's  tunic.  "  As  he  is  a  King,  let  us 
plait  him  a  crown ;"  and  they  made  it  of  thorns.  Then  they  bowed 
the  knee  in  mock  homage  to  the  man  whom  his  own  people  despised, 
whom  even  the  mob  rejected,  and  whom  the  chief  men  of  the  nation 
abhorred.  It  seemed  to  them  that  he  was  such  a  poor,  miserable, 
dejected  creature  that  all  they  could  do  was  to  make  scorn  of  him, 
and  treat  him  as  the  butt  for  their  utmost  ridicule. 

These  Roman  soldiers  had  in  them,  asi  men,  a  spirit  which  I 
sometimes  grieve  to  see  in  boys  at  this  present  day.  That  same 
cruel  spirit  that  will  torture  a  bird  or  a  cockchafer,  or  hunt  a  dog 
or  cat  simply  because  it  looks  miserable,  and  because  it  is  in  their 
power,  that  was  the  sort  of  spirit  that  was  in  these  soldiers.  They 
had  never  been  taught  to  avoid  cruelty;  nay,  cruelty  was  the 
element  in  which  they  lived.  It  was  worked  into  their  very 
No.  2,824. 


446  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


being;  it  was  their  recreation.  Their  grandest  holiday  was  to  go 
and  sit  in  those  tiers  of  seats  at  the  Coliseum^  or  at  some  provincial 
amphitheatre,  and  see  lions  contending  with  men,  or  wild  beasts 
tearing  one  another  in  pieces.  They  were  trained  and  inured  to 
cruelty ;  they  seemed  to  have  been  suckled  upon  blood,  and  to  have 
been  fed  on  such  food  as  made  them  capable  of  the  utmost  cruelty ; 
and,  therefore,  when  Christ  was  in  their  hands,  he  was  in  a  sorry 
case  indeed.  They  called  together  the  whole  band,  and  put  upon 
him  a  purple  robe,  and  a  crown  of  thorns  upon  his  head,  and  a 
reed  in  his  right  hand ;  and  they  bowed  the  knee  before  him,  and 
mocked  him,  saying,  "Hail,  King  of  the  Jews!"  Then  they  spat 
upon  him,  and  took  the  reed  from  his  hand^  and  amote  him  on 
the  head. 

Now  we  will  leave  those  Roman  soldiers,  and  the  Jews  that  had 
a  hand  in  persecuting  him,  for  he  that  delivered  him  unto  them  had 
committed  even  greater  sin.  Neither  Pilate  nor  his  legionaries 
were  the  chief  criminals  at  that  time,  as  we  well  know.  From  this 
incident  in  our  Lord's  life,  I  think  we  may  learn,  first,  lessons  for 
the  heart ;  and,  secondly,  lessons  for  the  conscience. 

I.     First,  we  have  here  a  set  of  lessons  for  our  heart. 

Beloved,  we  begin  with  this  one.  Where  I  see  the  great  Substi- 
tute for  sinners  put  to  such  shame,  scorn,  and  ridicule,  my  heart 
gays  to  itself,  "  See  what  sin  deserves"  There  is  nothing  in  the  world 
that  more  richly  deserves  to  be  despised,  abhorred,  condemned, 
than  sin.  If  we  look  at  it  aright,  we  shall  see  that  it  is  the  most 
abominable  thing,  the  most  shameful  thing  in  the  whole  universe. 
Of  all  the  things  that  ever  were,  this  is  the  thing  which  most 
of  all  deserves  to  be  loathed  and  spumed.  It  is  not  a  thing  of 
God's  creating,  remember.  It  is  an  abortion;  a  spectre  of  the 
night,  which  plucked  a  host  of  angels  from  their  thrones  in  heaven, 
drove  our  first  parents  out  of  paradise,  and  brought  upon  tis 
unnumbered  miseries. 

Think,  for  a  minute,  what  sin  is,  and  you  will  see  that  it  deserves 
ridicule  for  its  folly.  What  is  sin?  It  is  rebellion  against  the 
Omnipotent,  a  revolt  against  the  Almighty.  What  utter  folly  that 
ia!  Who  shall  hurl  himself  against  the  bosses  of  Jehovah's  buckler, 
and  not  be  dashed  in  pieces?  Who  shall  rush  upon  the  point  of 
his  spear,  and  hope  to  vanquish  him?  Laugh  to  scorn  such  folly 
as  that.  Under  that  aspect,  sin  is  the  apex  of  folly,  the  climax  of 
absurdity;  for  what  power  can  ever  stand  up  against  God,  and 
win  the  day? 

But,  further,  sin  deserves  to  be  scorned  because  it  is  a  wanton 
attack  upon  One  who  is  full  of  goodness,  and  justice,  and  truth. 
Note  that  evil  thing  that  assails  the  Most  High,  and  brand  it 
so  that  the  mark  of  the  iron  shall  abide  on  it  for  ever.  Set  it  up 
in  the  public  pillory,  and  let  all  true  hearts  and  hands  hurl  scorn 
upon  it  for  having  disobeyed  the  perfect  law  of  God,  angered  the 
generous  Creator  and  Preserver  of  men,  done  despite  to  eternal 
love,  and  infinite  damage  to  the  best  interests  of  the  human  race. 
It  is  a  ridiculous  thing,  because  it  is  fruitless,  and  must  end  in  being 
defeated.     It  is  a  shameful  thing,  because  of  its  wanton,  malicious, 


MOCKED    OF    THE    SOLDIERS.  44:7 

unprovoked  attack  upon  God.  If  you  will  look  back  a  little,  and 
consider  what  sin  attempted  to  do,  you  will  see  the  reason  why 
ifc  should  be  shamed  for  its  audacity.  "  Ye  shall  be  as  gods,"  said 
he  who  was  the  mouthpiece  of  sin;  but  are  we,  by  nature,  like 
gods?  Are  we  not  more  like  devils?  And  he  who  uttered  that 
lie, — even  Satan, — did  he  succeed  as  he  expected  when  he  dared  to 
rebel  against  his  Creator  ?  See  how  his  former  glory  has  vanished  ! 
How  art  thou  fallen  from  heaven,  O  Lucifer,  son  of  the  morning, 
and  how  is  thy  brightness  quenched  in  everlasting  night!  Yet 
sin,  speaking  through  the  lips  of  Satan,  talked  about  being  a  king, 
and  of  making  all  of  us  kings;  but  it  has  degraded  us  to  the  dung- 
hill, and  to  utter  beggary;  ay,  to  worse  than  that,  to  death  and 
hell.  What  spitting  sm  deserves!  If  it  is  to  be  crowned,  let  it 
be  crowned  with  thorns.  Bow  not  your  knee  to  it,  but  pour  upon 
it  all  the  scorn  you  can.  Every  true  and  honest  heart,  in  heaven, 
among  the  angels  and  the  glorified  spirits,  and  on  earth,  among 
sanctified  men  and  women,  must  look  upon  sin  as  a  thing  worthy  of 
unspeakable  contempt.  May  God  make  sin  as  contemptible  in  our 
sight  aa  Christ  appeared  to  be  to  the  Roman  soldiers!  May  we 
scoff  at  its  temptations;  may  we  scorn  its  proffered  rewards;  and 
may  we  never  bow  our  hearts  to  it  in  any  degree  whatsoever,  since 
God  has  set  us  free  from,  its  accursed  thraldom  ! 

That  is  the  first  lesson  for  our  hearts  to  learn  from  the  mockery 
of  our  Saviour  by  the  soldiers, — see  what  a  contemptible  thing 
sin  is. 

Learn,  next,  my  dear  brethren  and  sisters,  hoiv  low  our  glorious 
Substitute  stooped  for  our  sake.  In  him  was  no  sin  either  of  nature 
or  of  act.  He  was  pure,  entirely  without  spot  before  God  himself ; 
yet,  as  our  Representative,  he  took  our  sin  upon  himself.  "  He  was 
made  sin  for  us,"  says  the  Scripture  most  emphatically;  and 
inasmuch  as  he  was  regarded  as  being  the  sinner,  though  in  him  was 
no  sin,  it  naturally  followed  that  he  should  become  the  object  of 
contempt.  But  what  a  wonder  that  it  should  be  so!  He,  who 
created  all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power,  and  by  whom  all 
things  consist, — he,  who  counted  it  not  robbery  (not  a  thing  to  be 
grasped)  to  be  equal  with  God, — sits  in  an  old  chair  to  be  made  a 
mimic  king,  and  to  be  mocked  and  spat  upon!  All  other  miracles 
put  together  are  not  equal  to  this  miracle;  this  one  rises  above 
them  all,  and  out-miracles  all  miracles, — that  God  himself,  having 
espoused  our  cause,  and  assoimed  our  nature,  should  deign  to  stoop 
to  such  a  depth  of  scorn  as  this.  Though  myriads  of  holy  angels 
adored  him,  though  they  would  have  gladly  left  their  high  estate 
in  heaven,  to  smite  his  foes,  and  set  him  free,  he  voluntarily  sub- 
jected himself  to  all  the  ignominy  that  I  have  described,  and  much 
more  which  is  utterly  indescribable; — for  who  knows  what  things 
were  said  and  done,  in  that  rough  guard-room,  which  holy  pens 
could  not  record,  or  what  foul  jests  were  made,  and  what  obscene 
remarks  were  uttered,  which  were  even  more  shocking  to  Christ 
than  the  filthy  spittle  which  ran  down  his  blessed  cheeks  in  that 
time  of  shameful  mockery?  Ah,  my  brothers  and  sisters,  you 
cannot  imagine   how   low   your   Lord    stooped   on   your   account! 


448  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

When  I  hear  any  say  that  they  have  been  so  slandered  for  his  sake 
that  they  cannot  endure  it,  I  have  wished  that  they  knew  what 
he  endured  on  their  account.  If  we  stood  in  the  pillory,  and  all 
mankind  hooted  at  us  for  a  million  million  years,  it  would  be  as 
nothing  compared  with  the  wondrous  condescension  of  him  who  is 
God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever,  stooping  as  he  did  for  our  sake. 

That  is  the  second  lesson  for  our  hearts  to  learn. 

Then  let  me  say  to  you  very  tenderly,  wishing  that  some  other 
voice  could  speak  of  it  more  effectively,  see  how  your  Redeemer  loved 
you.  You  know  that,  when  Christ  stood  by  the  grave  of  Lazarus, 
and  wept,  the  Jews  said,  "  Behold  how  he  loved  him ! "  Ah !  but 
look  at  him  there  among  those  Roman  soldiers, — despised,  rejected, 
insulted,  ridiculed ;  and  then  let  me  say  to  you,  "  Behold  how  he 
loved  us, — you,  and  me,  and  all  his  people ! "  In  such  a  case,  I 
might  quote  the  words  of  John,  "  Behold,  what  manner  of  love !  " 
But  this  love  of  Jesus  is  beyond  all  manner  and  measure  of  which 
we  can  have  any  conception.  If  I  were  to  take  all  your  love  to 
him,  and  heap  it  up  like  a  vast  mountain ;  if  I  were  to  gather  all 
the  members  of  the  one  Church  of  Christ  on  earth,  and  bid  them 
empty  their  hearts,  and  then  fetched  out  of  heaven  the  myriads 
of  redeemed  and  perfected  spirits  before  the  throne,  and  they 
added  all  their  hearts'  love ;  and  if  I  could  collect  all  the  love  that 
ever  has  been  and  that  ever  shall  be  throughout  eternity  in  all 
the  saints; — all  that  would  be  but  as  a  drop  of  a  bucket  compared 
with  the  boundless,  fathomless  love  of  Christ  to  us,  that  brought 
him  down  so  low  as  to  be  the  object  of  the  scorn  and  derision  of 
these  wicked  men  for  our  sake.  So,  beloved,  from  this  sad  scene 
let  us  learn  how  greatly  Jesus  loved  us,  and  let  each  one  of  us,  in 
return,  love  him  with  all  our  heart. 

I  cannot  leave  this  set  of  lessons  for  your  heart  without  giving 
you  one  more ;  that  is,  see  the  grand  facts  behind  the  scorn.  I  do 
believe — I  cannot  help  believing — that  our  blessed  Master,  when  he 
was  in  the  hands  of  those  cruel  soldiers,  and  they  crowned  him 
with  thorns,  and  bowed  before  him  in  mock  reverence,  and  insulted 
him  in  every  possible  way,  all  the  while  looked  behind  the  curtain 
of  the  visible  circumstances,  and  saw  that  the  heartless  pantomime, 
— nay,  tragedy, — only  partially  hid  the  divine  reality,  for  he  was  a 
King  even  then,  and  he  had  a  throne,  and  that  thorn-crown  was  the 
emblem  of  the  diadem  of  universal  sovereignty  that  shall,  in  due 
season,  adorn  his  blessed  brow;  that  reed  was  to  him  a  type  of  the 
sceptre  which  he  shall  yet  wield  as  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of 
lords;  and  when  they  said,  "Hail,  King  of  the  Jews!"  he  heard, 
behind  that  mocking  cry,  the  triumphant  note  of  his  future  glory, 
"Hallelujah!  Hallelujah!  Hallelujah!  the  Lord  God  omnipotent 
reigneth ;  and  he  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever !  "  for  when  they 
mockingly  bowed  the  knee  to  him,  he  saw  all  nations  really  bowing 
before  him,  and  his  enemies  licking  the  dust  at  his  feet.  Our 
Saviour  knew  that  these  ribald  soldiers,  unconsciously  to  them- 
selves, were  setting  before  him  pictures  of  the  great  reward  of  his 
soul-travail.  Let  us  not  be  discouraged  if  we  have  to  endure  anything 
of  the  same  sort  as  our  Lord  suffered.     He  was  not  discouraged, 


MOCKED    OF   THE    SOLDIERS.  449 

hut  remained  stesuifaait  through  it  all.  Mockery  ig  the  uninten- 
'tional  homage  which  falsehood  pays  to  truth.  Scorn  is  the 
■unconscious  praise  which  sin  gives  to  holiness.  What  higher 
tribute  could  these  soldiers  give  to  Christ  than  to  spit  upon  him? 
If  Christ  had  received  honour  from  such  men,  there  would  have 
been  no  honour  in  it  to  him.  You  know  how  even  a  heathen 
^moralist,  when  they  said  to  him,  "  So-and-so  spoke  well  of  you 
yesterday  in  the  market,"  asked,  "  What  have  I  done  amiss  that 
such  a  wretch  as  that  should  speak  well  of  me?"  He  rightly 
counted  it  a  disgrace  to  be  praised  by  a  bad  man;  and  because  our 
QL.ord  had  done  nothing  amiss,  all  that  these  men  could  do  was  to 
speak  ill  of  him,  and  treat  him  with  contumely,  for  their  nature  and 
character  were  the  very  opposite  of  his.  Representing,  as  these 
-soldiers  did,  the  unregenerate,  God-hating  world,  I  say  that  their 
^scorn  was  the  truest  reverence  that  they  could  offer  to  Christ  while 
rthey  continued  as  they  were;  and  so,  at  the  back  of  persecution, 
:at  the  back  of  heresy,  at  the  back  of  the  hatred  of  ungodly  men  to 
the  cross  of  Christ,  I  see  his  everlasting  kingdom  advancing,  and  I 
n^elieve  that  "  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  exalted 
above  the  hills,"  and  that  "all  nations  shall  flow  unto  it,"  even 
as  Isaiah  foretold ;  that  Jesus  shall  sit  upon  the  throne  of  David, 
and  that  of  the  increase  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no 
end,  for  the  kings  of  the  earth  shall  bring  their  glory  and  honour 
unto  him,  "  and  he  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever.  Hallelujah !  " 
Glory  be  to  his  holy  name! 

Have  all  our  hearts  truly  learned  these  four  grand  lessons,— the 
•shamefulness  of  sin, — the  condescension  of  our  Lord,-~the  immeasur- 
able love  which  made  him  so  condescending,— and  the  ineffable 
.glory  which  hides  behind  the  skirts  of  all  this  shame  and  sorrow? 
If  not,  let  us  beseech  the  Holy  Spirit  to  teach  them  to  us. 

II.     Now  I  want  to  give  you,  from  this  same  incident,  a  set  op 

LESSONS  FOR  YOUR  CONSCIENCE. 

And,  first,  it  ig  a  very  painful  reflection— let  your  conscience 
feel  the  pam  of  it^— that  Jesus  Christ  can  still  he  mocked.  He  hag 
gone  into  the  heavens,  and  he  sits  there  in  glory;  but  yet,  spiritu- 
■ally,  so  as  to  bring  great  guilt  upon  him  who  does  it,  the  glorious 
Christ  of  God  can  still  be  mocked,  and  he  is  mocked  by  those  who 
deride  his  people.  Now,  men  of  the  world,  if  you  see  faults  and 
failings  m  us,  we  do  not  wish  you  to  screen  us.  Because  we  are 
the  servants  of  God,  we  do  not  ask  for  exemption  from  honest 
criticism,  we  do  not  desire  that  our  sins  should  be  treated  with 
niore  leniency  than  those  of  other  men ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  we 
T>id  you  beware  that  you  do  not  slander,  and  scandalize,  and 
persecute  those  who  are  the  true  followers  of  Christ;  for,  if  you  do, 
you  are  mocking  and  persecuting  him.  I  believe  that,  if  it  be  the 
poorest  of  his  people,  the  least  gifted  and  the  most  faulty,  yet,  if 
they  are  evil  spoken  of  for  Christ's  sake,  our  Lord  takes  it  all'  as 
done  to  himself.  You  remember  how  Saul  of  Tarsus,  when  he  lay 
smitten  to  the  ground,  heaord  a  voice  which  said  to  him  "  Saul 
Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  me?  "  "  Well,  but,"  he  might  have  said' 
I   have   never   persecuted   thee,    Lord."      No;    but    he    dragged 

29 


450  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Christian  men  and  women  to  prison,  and  scourged  them,  and  com- 
J)elled  them  to  blaspheme ;  and  because  he  had  done  this  to  Christ's 
people,  Christ  could  truly  say  to  him,  "  Inasmuch  as  thou  hast  done 
it  unto  one  of  the  least  of  these  my  brethren,  thou  hast  done  it 
unto  me."  If  you  persecutors  want  to  amuse  yourselves,  you  can 
find  much  cheaper  sport  than  that  of  slandering  the  servants  of 
Christ.  Remember  that  the  Lord  has  said  concerning  them,  "  He 
that  toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple  of  his*eye."  If  you  were  to 
touch  the  apple  of  a  man's  eye,  you  would  be  provoking  him  to 
defend  himself ;  so  do  not  arouse  Christ's  righteous  anger  by  scoffing 
at  any  of  his  people.  I  say  no  more  upon  that  point;  if  the  message 
is  meant  for  any  man  here,  let  him  give  heed  to  the  warning. 

Next,  Christ  may  be  mocked  by  contemning  his  doctrine.  It 
seems  to  me  a  fearful  thing  that  men  should  ever  hold  up 
Christianity  to  scorn ;  yet,  nowadays,  there  is  scarcely  any  portion 
of  the  truth  of  God  which  is  not  ridiculed  and  carica^ 
tured.  It  is  stripped  of  its  own  clothes,  and  dressed  up  in  somebody 
else's  old  purple  cloak,  and  then  it  is  set  in  a  chair,  while  men 
pretend  great  homage  for  it,  and  salute  it,  saying  that  they  have 
great  reverence  for  Christ's  teaching;  but,  before  long,  they  spit 
in  its  face,  and  treat  it  with  the  utmost  disdain.  There  are  some 
who  deny  the  Deity  of  Christ,  others  who  hate  the  central  doctrine 
of  his  atoning  sacrifice,  while  many  rail  at  justification  by  faith, 
which  is  the  very  heart  of  the  gospel.  Is  there  any  doctrine — I 
scarcely  know  one — which  has  escaped  the  mockery  and  scorn  of 
ungodly  men.  In  the  present  day,  if  a  man  wants  to  make  himself 
a  name,  he  does  not  write  upon  something  which  he  understands, 
and  which  is  for  the  public  weal,  but  he  straightway  begins  to 
assail  some  doctrine  of  Scripture  of  which  he  does  not  know  the 
meaning ;  he  misrepresents  it,  and  sets  up  some  notion  of  his  own 
m  opposition  to  it,  for  he  is  a  "  modem  thought "  man,  a  person 
of  much  importance.  It  is  easy  work  to  scoff  at  the  Bible,  and 
to  deny  the  truth.  I  think  that  I  could  myself  pose  as  a  learned 
man,  in  that  way,  if  ever  the  devil  should  sufficiently  control  me  to 
make  me  feel  any  ambition  of  that  sort.  In  fact,  there  is  scarcely 
a  fool  in  Christendom  who  cannot  make  himself  a  name  among 
modem  thinkers  if  he  will  but  blaspheme  loudly  enough,  for  that 
soems  to  be  the  road  to  fame,  nowadays,  among  the  great  mass 
of  mankind.  They  are  dubbed  "  thoughtful "  who  thus  insult  the 
tinith  of  God  as  the  soldiers,  with  their  spittle^  insulted  the  Christ 
of  God. 

I  shall  come  closely  home  to  some  of  you,  who  attend  here 
regularly,  when  I  say  that  Christ  can  still  be  mocked  by  resolves 
which  never  lead  to  obedience.  Let  me  speak  very  softly  upon 
this  solemn  truth.  Give  me  your  hand,  my  friend;  let  me  look 
into  your  eyes;  I  would  fain  look  into  your  soul  if  I  could,  while 
I  put  this  matter  very  personally  to  you.  Several  times,  ere  leaving 
this  house,  you  have  said,  "  I  will  repent  of  my  sin ;  I  will  seek  the 
Lord ;  I  will  believe  in  Jesus."  You  meant  these  words  when  you 
uttered  them;  why,  then,  have  you  not  fulfilled  your  promises] 
I  do  not  care  what  excuse  you  give,  because  any  reason  which  you 


MOCKED    OF   THE    SOLDIERS.  451 

give  will  be  most  unreasonable,  for  it  will  only  amount  to  this, — 
that  there  was  something  better  than  to  do  what  Christ  bids  you, 
something  better  for  you  than  to  be  saved  by  him,  something  better 
than  the  forgiveness  of  your  sins,  something  better  than  regenera- 
tion, something  better  than  Christ's  eternal  love.  You  would  have 
chosen  Christ,  but  Barabbas  came  across  your  path,  so  you  said, 
"  Not  this  Man,  but  Barabbas."  You  would  have  thought  seriously 
about  the  salvation  of  your  soul,  but  you  had  promised  to  go  to  a 
certain  place  of  amusement,  so  you  put  off  seeking  the  Saviour 
till  a  more  convenient  season.  Possibly,  you  said,  "My  trade  is 
of  such  a  character  that  I  shall  have  to  give  it  up  if  I  become  a 
Ohriatian,  and  I  cannot  afford  to  do  that."  I  heard  of  one^  who 
listened  to  a  sermon  which  impressed  him, — and  he  did  not  often 
hear  sermons, — and  he  wished  that  he  could  be  a  Christian;  but 
he  had  made  various  bets  for  large  amounts,  and  he  felt  that  he 
could  not  think  of  other  things  till  they  were  ended. 

There  are  many  such  things  that  keep  men  from  Christ.  I  do 
not  care  what  it  is  that  you  prefer  to  the  Saviom-;  you  have 
insulted  him  if  you  prefer  anything  to  him.  If  it  were  the  whole 
world,  and  all  that  it  contains,  that  you  had  chosen,  these  things 
are  but  trifles  when  compared  with  the  sovereignty  of  Christ,  his 
crown  rights  to  every  man's  heart,  and  the  immeasurable  riches 
that^  he  is  prepared  to  give  to  every  soul  that  comes  and  trusts 
in  him.  Do  you  prefer  a  harlot  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ?  Then, 
tell  me  not  that  you  do  not  spit  in  his  face;  you  do  what  is  worse 
even  than  that.  Do  you  prefer  profits  wrongly  gained  to  accepting 
Jesus  as  your  Saviour?  Do  not  tell  me,  sir,  that  you  have  never 
bowed  the  knee  before  him  in  scorn ;  for  you  have  done  far  worse 
than  that.  Or  was  it  a  little  paltry  pleasure, — mere  trifling 
laughter  and  folly  of  an  hour, — that  you  preferred  to  your  Lord? 
Oh,  what  must  he  feel  when  he  sees  these  contemptible  things 
preferred  to  him,,  knowing  that  eternal  damnation  is  at  th©  back 
of  your  foolish  choice?  Yet  men  choose  a  moment's  folly  and  hell, 
instead  of  Christ  and  heaven !  Was  ever  such  an  insult  as  that 
paid  to  Christ  by  Roman  soldiers?  Go,  legionaries;  you  are  not 
the  worst  of  men!  There  are  some  who,  being  pricked  in  their 
conscience,  make  a  promise  of  repentance,  and  then,  for  the  world's 
sake,  and  for  their  flesh's  sake,  and  for  the  devil's  sake,  break  that 
promise;  the  soldiers  did  not  sin  against  Christ  so  grossly  as  that! 

Listen  once  more.  I  must  again  come  very  closely  home  to  some 
of  you.  Was  it  not  a  shameful  thing  that  they  should  call  Christ 
King,  and  yet  not  mean  it;  and,  apparently,  give  him,  a  crown,  a 
sceptre,  a  royal  robe,  the  bowing  of  the  knee,  and  the  salutation  of 
the  lips,  but  not  to  mean  any  of  it?  It  cuts  me  to  the  heart  to 
think  of  what  I  am  going  to  siay,  yet  I  must  say  it.  There  are  some 
professors, — members  of  Christian  churches, — members  of  this 
church, — who  call  Christ  Master  and  Lord,  yet  they  do  not  the 
things  which  he  says.  They  profess  to  believe  the  truth,  yet  it  is 
not  like  the  truth  to  them,,  for  they  never  yield  to*  its  povrer,  and 
they  act  as  if  what  they  call  truth  were  fiction  and  hump.n  inven- 
tion.    There  are  still  some,  like  those  of  whom  the  apostle  wrote^ 


452  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

and  I  can  say  aa  he  did, — "of  whom  I  have  told  you  often, 
and  now  tell  you  even  weeping,  that  they  are  the  enemies  of  the 
cross  of  Christ," — though  in  the  nominal  church.  Their  God  is  their 
belly,  they  glory  in  their  shame,  and  they  mind  earthly  things; 
yet  they  bow  the  knee  before  Christ,  they  sing,  "  crown  him,  crown 
him ; "  and  they  eat  the  bread  and  drink  the  wine  which  set  forth 
his  broken  body  and  shed  blood,  yet  they  have  no  part  nor  lot  in 
him.  It  has  always  been  so  in  the  nominal  church,  and  it  will  be 
so,  I  suppose,  till  Christ  comes  to  separate  the  ohafif  from  the 
wheat.  But,  oh,  how  dreadful  it  is!  To  insult  Christ  in  the 
Roman  guardroom,  was  bad  enough ;  but  to  insult  him  at  the  com- 
munion table,  is  far  worse.  For  a  Roman  soldier  to  spit  in  his  face, 
was  bad  enough;  but  Do  come  and  mingle  with  his  people,  and 
call  yourself  his  servant,  and  then  to  go  deliberately  to  drink  with 
the  drunkard,  or  to  be  unchaste  in  your  life,  or  dishonest  in  your 
trade,  or  false  in  your  talk,  or  foul  in  your  heart,  is  even  more 
abominable.  I  know  no  milder  word  that  can  express  the  truth. 
To  call  Christ  Master,  and  yet  never  to  do  his  bidding, — this  is 
mockery  and  scorn  of  the  worst  possible  kind,  for  it  wounds  him  at 
the  very  heart. 

I  was  reading,  to-day,  part  of  a  Welsh  sermon  which  struck  me 
much.  The  preacher  said,  "  Let  all  who  are  in  this  congregation 
avow  their  real  master.  I  will  first  call  upon  the  servants  of  the 
devil  to  own  him.  He  is  a  fine  master,  and  a  glorious  one  to  serve, 
and  his  service  is  joy  and  delight;  now,  all  of  you  who  are  serving 
him  say,  *  Amen.  Glory  be  to  the  devil !'  Say  it."  But  nobody 
spoke.  "  Now,"  said  he,  "  don't  be  ashamed  to  own  him  whom  you 
serve  every  day  of  your  life;  speak  out,  and  say,  '  Glory  be  to  my 
master,  the  devil ! '  or  else  hold  your  tongues  for  ever."  And  still 
nobody  spoke,  so  the  minister  said,  "  Then,  I  hope  that,  when  I  ask 
you  to  glorify  Christ,  you  will  speak."  And  they  did  speak,  till 
the  chapel  seemed  to  ring  again  as  they  cried,  "  Glory  be  to  Christ !  " 
That  was  good ;  but  if  I  were  to  test  you  in  a  similar  fashion,  I  feel 
tolerably  certain  that  nobody  here  would  own  his  master  if  his 
master  is  the  devil,  and  I  am  afraid  that  some  of  the  devil's  servants 
would  join  us  in  our  hallelujahs  to  Christ.  That  is  the  mischief  of 
it;  the  devil  himself  can  use  self-denial;,  and  he  can  teach  his 
servants  to  deny  their  master,  and  in  that  very  way  to  do  him  the 
most  honour.  O  dear  friends,  be  true  to  Christ ;  and,  whatever 
you  do,  never  mock  him !  There  are  many  other  things,  which  you 
can  do,  that  will  be  much  more  profitable  to  you  than  mocking 
Christ.  If  God  be  God,  serve  him ;  if  Christ  be  your  Master  and 
IfOrd,  honour  him ;  but  if  you  do  not  mean  to  honour  him,  do  not 
call  him  Master ;  for,  if  you  do,  all  your  faults  and  sins  will  be  laid 
at  his  door,  and  he  will  be  dishonoured  through  you. 

Now  I  think  that  I  hear  somebody  say,  "  I  am  afraid,  sir,  that  I 
have  mocked  Christ;  what  am  I  to  do?"  Well,  my  answer  is.— 
Bo  not  despair,,  because  that  would  be  mocking  himi  in  another 
way,  by  doubting  his  power  to  save  you.  "  I  am  inclined  to  throw 
it  all  up."  Do  not  act  so,  for  that  would  be  to  insult  your  Maker 
by  another  sin;  namely,  open  revolt  against  hinu     **  What  shall  I 


MOCKED    OF    THE    SOLDIERS.  453 

do,  then  ? "  Well,  go  and  tell  him  your  grief  and  sorrow.  He  told 
his  disciples  to  preach  the  gospel  first  at  Jerusalem,  because  that 
was  where  those  soldiers  lived,  the  very  men  who  had  mocked  him ; 
and  he  prayed  for  his  murderers,  "  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they 
know  not  what  they  do."  In  a  like  manner,  he  presents  his  mercy 
to  you  first.  Come  to  him,  then ;  and,  if  you  are  conscious  that 
you  have  mocked  him  in  any  one  of  these  ways  that  I  have 
mentioned,  say  to  yourself,  "  Then,  if  he  will  but  forgive  me,  I  will 
henceforth  live  all  the  more  to  his  praise.  I  cannot  wipe  out  my 
sn,  but  he  can ;  and  if  he  will  do  so,  I  will  love  him  much  because 
I  shall  have  had  much  forgiven ;  and  I  will  spend  and  bo  spent  to 
glorify  his  holy  name." 

My  time  has  almost  gone,  so  this  must  be  my  last  remark. 
Whether  we  have  mocked  Christ  or  not,  come,  dear  brothers  and 
sisters,  let  us  now  glorify  him.  This  very  hour,  let  us  crown  him 
with  our  heart's  love  and  trust.  Bring  forth  that  royal  crown, — 
the  crown  of  your  love,  of  your  trust,  of  your  complete  consecration 
to  him, — and  put  it  upon  his  head  now,  saying,  "  My  Lord,  my  Grod, 
my  King."  Now  put  the  sceptre  into  his  hand  by  yielding  absolute 
obedience  to  his  will.  Is  there  anything  he  bids  you  do?  Do  it.  Is 
there  anything  he  bids  you  give?  Give  it.  Is  there  anything  he  bids 
you  abstain  from?  Abstain  from  it.  Put  not  a  reed  sceptre  into  his 
hand,  but  give  him  the  entire  control  of  your  whole  being.  Let  him 
be  your  real  Lord,  reigning  over  your  spirit,  soul,  and  body.  What 
next?  Bow  before  him,,  and  worship  in  the  quiet  of  your  inmost  heart. 
You  need  not  bow  your  bodies,  but  let  your  spirits  fall  down  before 
him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  cry,  "  Unto  him  that  loved 
us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood,  and  hath  made 
us  kings  and  priests  unto  God  and  his  Father ;  to  him  b©  glory  and 
dominion  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen." 

And  when  you  have  worshipped  him,  then  proclaim  him  King. 
As  those  soldiers  said  in  mockery,  "  Hail,  King  of  the  Jews !  "  so  now 
do  you  in  real  earnestness  proclaim  him  King  of  Jews  and  Gentiles, 
too.  Go  home,  and  tell  your  friends  that  Jesus  is  King.  Tell  it 
out  among  the  nations  that  "  the  Lord  reigneth,"  as  the  old  version 
has  it,  "  reigneth  from  the  tree."  He  has  made  his  cross  to  be-  his 
throne,  and  there  he  reigns  in  majesty  and  in  mercy.  Tell  it  to 
your  children,  tell  it  to  your  servants,  tell  it  to  your  neighbours, 
tell  it  in  every  place  wherever  you  can  be  heard, — that  the  Lord, 
even  Jesus,  reigns  as  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.  Say  to 
them,  "  Kiss  the  Son,  le&t  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way, 
when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little." 

And  then,  when  you  have  proclaimed  him,  kiss  him  yourself. 
As  the  rough  soldiers  spat  upon  him,  so  do  you  give  to  him  the 
kiss  of  homage  and  affection,  saying,  "  Lord  Jesus,  thou  art  mine 
for  ever  and  ever."  Say,  with  the  spouse,  "  I  am  my  Beloved's,  and 
my  Beloved  is  mine."  I  suggest  to  you  that  each  individual  here, 
who  loves  his  Lord  much,  should  think  of  something  fresh  that  he 
can  do  for  Christ  during  this  week, — some  special  gift  that  you 
can  bestow  upon  him, — ^some  special  action  that  you  can  do,  which 
shall  be  quite  n<*w.  and  &ha.\l  be  only  for  Jesus,  and  altogether  for 


454  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Jesus,  aa  an  act  of  homage  to  hia  name.  I  often  wish  that  God's 
people  were  more  inventive,  like  that  woman  who  wanted  greatly 
to  honour  him,  so  she  brought  out  her  alabaster  box,  and  broke  it, 
and  poured  the  precious  ointment  upon  his  head.  Think  of  some- 
thing special  that  you  can  do  for  Christ,  or  give  to  him.  A  dear 
friend,  now  in  heaven,  but  who  used  to  worship  in  this  place,  had 
a  son  who  had  been  a  great  scapegrace,  and  was,  in  fact,  living 
a  vicious  life.  He  had  been  long  away  from  his  father,  and  his 
father  did  not  know  what  to  do  about  getting  him  home,  for  he 
had  treated  him  very  badly,  marred  his  comfort,  and  spoiled  his 
home.  But,  as  I  was  preaching,  one  night,  this  thought  came  to 
him,  "  I  will  find  out,  to-morrow  morning,  where  my  son  is,  and  I 
will  go  to  him."  The  father  knew  that  the  son  was  very  angry 
with  him,  and  very  bitter  against  him,  so  he  thought  of  a  certain 
fruit,  of  which  his  son  was  very  fond,  and  he  sent  him  a  basketful 
of  it  next  morning ;  and  when  the  son  received  it,  he  said,  "  Then, 
my  father  has  still  some  affection  for  me."  And  the  next  day  the 
father  called,  and  the  day  after  he  had  him  at  home  again,  and 
that  was  the  means  of  bringing  the  son  to  the  Saviour.  He  had 
worn  himself  out  with  vice,  and  he  soon  died,  but  his  father  told 
me  that  it  was  a  great  joy  to  his  heart  to  think  that  he  could  have 
a  good  hope  concerning  his  son.  Had  the  son  died  away  from 
home,  had  the  father  not  sought  him  out,  he  would  never  have 
forgiven  himself.  Now,  he  did  that  for  Christ's  sake ;  cannot  some 
of  you  do  a  similar  deed  for  the  same  reason?  Is  there  any 
skeleton  in  your  house?  Is  there  any  mischief  you  could  set  right; 
or  have  you  anything  you  can  give  to  your  Lord  and  Master? 
Think,  each  one  of  you  for  himself  or  herself,  what  you  can  do; 
and,  inasmuch  as  Christ  was  so  shamefully  despised  and  rejected, 
seek  to  honour  and  glorify  him  in  the  best  way  that  you  can,  and 
he  will  accept  your  homage  and  your  offering  for  his  love's  sake. 
May  he  help  you  so  to  do !     Amen. 


lExposttions  62  C*  38.  Spurgeon. 

MATTHEW   XXVII.    15-54;    and  JOHN    XVIII.   28-38. 

We  are  now  to  read  about  our  Lord  before  Pontiu«i  Pilate. 

Matthew  xxvii.  Verses  15—30.  Now  at  that  feost  the  governor  was  wont 
h  release  unto  the  people  a  prisoner,  whom  they  would.  And  they  had  then  a 
notable  prisoner,  called  Barabhas.  Therefore  ivhen  they  luere  gathered  together, 
Pilate  said  unto  them,  Whom  will  ye  that  I  release  unto  you?  Barabhas.  or 
Jesus  which  is  called  Christ  ?  For  he  knew  that  for  envy  they  had  dehvrtd 
him.  When  he  was  set  down  on  the  judgment  seat,  his  wife  sent  unto  him, 
saying.  Have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  thdjust  man  :  for  I  have  suffered  many 
things  this  day  in  a  dream  because  of  him.  But  the  chief  priests  and  elders 
persuaded  the  multitude  that  they  should  ask  Barabbas,  and  destroy  Jesus.  The_ 
governor  ansiuered  and  said  unto  them,  Whether  of  the  twain  ivill  ye  that  I 
release  unto  you  f  They  said,  Barabbas.  Pilate  saith  unto  them,  What  shall  I 
do  then  with  Jesus  which  is  called  Christ  f  They  all  say  unto  him,  Let  him  he 
crucified.  And  the  governor  said,  Why,  what  evil  hath  he  done  ?  But  they 
(Tied  out  the  more,  saying.  Let  him  be  crucified.  When  Pilate  saw  that  he  could 
prevail  nothing,  but  that  rather  a  tumult  was. made,  he  took  water,  and  washed 


.     J  EXPOSITIONS.  455 

his  hands  before  the  multitude,  saying ^  [am  innocent  of  the  blood  of  this  jusi 
person  :  see  ye  to  it.  2^hen  answtred  all  the  people,  and  said,  His  blood  he  on  us, 
■and  on  our  children.  Then  released  he  Barahhas  unto  them  :  and  when  he  had 
■scourged  Jesus,  he  delivered  him  to  he  crucified.  Then  the  soldiers  of  the 
(jovernor  took  Jesus  into  the  common  hall,  and  gathered  unto  him  the  whole  hand 
•of  soldiers.  And  they  stripped  him,  and  put  on  him  a  scarlet  robe.  And  luhen 
they  had  platted  a  crown  of  thorns,  they  put  it  upon  his  head,  and  a  reed  in  his 
rigid  hand  :  and  they  bowed  the  knee  before  him,  and  mocked  him,  saying.  Hail, 
King  of  the  Jews  !  And  they  spit  upon  him,  and  took  the  reed,  and  smote  him 
on  the  head. 

Surely,  mockery  could  have  gone  no  further ;  we  marvel  at  the  boldness 
and  ingenuity  of  their  scorn.  Oh,  that  we  were  half  as  earnest  in  seeking 
to  honour  him, — as  careful  to  think  of  everything  that  might  make  our 
homage  perfect.  But  we,  alas  !  too  often  fail  to  give  him  due  honour  and 
glory,  even  when  others  are  all  aflame  with  zeal  to  insult  him. 

31.  And  after  that  they  had  mocked  him,  they  took  the  robe  off  from  him, 
<ind put  his  own  raiment  on  him,  and  led  him  away  to  crucify  him. 

Perhaps  they  were  afraid  that  he  would  die  from  sheer  exhaustion  ;  and, 
60,  with  a  cruel  mercy,  they  would  keep  him  alive  for  the  infliction  of 
further  tortures, 

32.  And  as  they  came  out,  they  found  a  man  of  Oyrene,  Simon  by  name: 
him  they  compelled  to  hear  his  cross. 

Any  one  of  us  might  well  have  wished  to  have  been  Simon,  yet  we  need 
not  envy  him.  There  is  a  cross  for  evf-ry  one  who  is  a  follower  of  the 
Crucified  ;  may  we  have  grace  to  carry  it  after  him  ! 

33.  34.  And  when  they  were  come  unto  a  place  called  Oolgotha,  that  is  to  say, 
a  place  of  a  skull,  they  gave  him  vinegar  to  drink  mingled  luith  gall:  and 
when  he  had  tasted  thereof  he  ivould  not  drink. 

He  wholly  abstained  from  that  which  might  have  lessened  his  pain.  He 
<5ame  to  suffer,  and  he  intended  to  go  through  with  all  that  he  had  under- 
taken. He  would  do  nothing  that  would  blunt  the  edge  of  the  sacrificial 
knife.  He  forbids  not  the  soothing  draught  to  other  bufferers  who  are  in 
pain ;  but,  as  for  himself,  he  will  not  partake  of  it. 

35 — 37.  And  they  crucified  him,  and  parted  his  garments,  casting  lots  :  that 
it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by  the  prophet.  They  parted  my  garments 
■among  them,  and  upon  my  vesture  did  they  cast  lots.  And  sitting  down  they 
watched  him  there ;  and  set  up  over  his  head  his  accusation  written,  THIS  IS 
JESUS  THE  KING  OF  THE  JEWS. 

And  so  he  is,  and  so  he  shall  be, — King  of  the  Jews  even  on  that  cross, 
and  never  so  royal  as  when  he  had  surrendered  everything  for  love  of  those 
whom  he  came  to  redeem. 

38—43.  Then  were  there  two  thieves  crucified  with  him,  one  on  the  right 
hand,  and  another  on  the  left.  And  they  that  passed  by  reviled  him,  wagging 
their  heads,  and  saying,  Thou  that  destroyest  the  temple,  and  bnildest  it  in 
ihree  days,  save  thyself.  If  thou  he  the  Son  of  God,  come  down  from  the  cross. 
Likewise  also  the  chief  priests  mocking  him,  with  the  scribes  and  elders,  said, 
He  saved  others ;  himself  he  cannot  save.  If  he  he  the  King  of  Israel,  let  him 
now  come  down  from  the  cross,  and  we  will  believe  him.  He  trusted  in  God ; 
let  him  deliver  him  now,  if  he  ivill  have  him  :  for  he  said,  lam  the  Son  of  God. 

What  pain  this  taunt  must  have  caused  to  the  Saviour  !  Because  he  is  so 
pure,  and  never  yields  to  temptation,  we  are  very  apt  to  forget  that  temp- 
tation was  really  temptation  even  to  him,  and  that  it  grieved  his  pure  and 
iioly  soul  thus  to  be  tempted  to  turn  aside  from  the  path  of  perfect  trust 
in  his  Father,  and  complete  obedience  to  him.  No  doubt  the  pain  of  temp- 
tation is  in  inverse  ratio  to  our  willingness  to  yield  to  it.     When  we  yield 


456  METROPOLITAN   TABEBNACLE   PULPIT. 

to  temptation,  we  feel  a  pleasure  in  it ;  but  when  we  are  horrified  at  it,  and^ 
start  back  from  it,  then  we  feel  the  pain  of  it.  Ob,  for  a  mind  and  hearty, 
§o  perfectly  subject  to  the  will  of  God,  that  we  should  feel  such  a  tempta- 
tion as  this  to  be  the  very  agony  of  grief  to  us,  as  it  was  to  our  Lord ! 

44.  The  thieves  aUo^  which  were  crucified  with  him^  cast  the  same  in  his 
teeth. 

Nobody  seemed  to  look  upon  him  with  any  desire  to  help  him,  but  even 
the  lowest  of  the  low  would  contribute  their  portion  of  mockery  to  increase- 
his  misery. 

45 — 54.  Now  from  the  sixth  hour  there  was  darkness  over  all  the  land  unto< 
the  ninth  hour.  And  about  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying, 
Eli,  Eli,  lama  sahachthani  ?  that  is  to  say^  My  Ood.my  Ood,  why  hast  thou 
forsaken  me  f  Some  of  them  that  stood  there,  when  they  heard  that,  said,  'This, 
man  calltth  for  Elias.  And  straightway  one  of  them  ran,  and  took  a  spunge^ 
and  filled  it  with  vinegar,  and  put  it  on  a  reed,  and  gave  him  to  drink.  The 
rest  said,  Let  he,  let  us  see  whether  Elias  luill  come  to  save  him.  Jesus,  when  he- 
had  cried  again  with  a  loud  voice,  yielded  up  the  ghost.  And,  behold,  the  veil' 
of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  t<>p  to  the  bottom  ;  and  the  earth  did 
quake,  and  the  rocks  rent;  and  the  graves  were  opened;  and  many  bodies  of  thtt 
taints  which  slept  arose,  and  came  out  of  the  graves  after  his  resurrection,  and^ 
went  into  the  holy  city,  and  appeared  unto  many.  Now  when  the  centurioii,  and 
they  that  were  with  him,  watching  Jesus,  saw  the  earthquake,  and  those  things^' 
that  were  done,  they  feared  greatly,  saying,  Truly  this  was  the  Sun  of  Ood. 

John  gives  us  some  details  of  our  Lord  before  Pilate  which  Matthew 
does  not  mention. 

John  xviii.  Verses  28 — 38.  Then  led  they  Jesus  from  Caiaphas  unto  the- 
hall  of  fudgment :  and  it  was  early;  and  they  themselves  went  not  into  the- 
judgment  hall,  lest  they  should  be  defiled ;  but  that  they  might  eat  the  passover. 
Pilate  then  went  out  unto  them,  and  said,  What  accusation  bring  ye  against  this^ 
man  .*  They  answered  and  said  unto  him.  If  he  were  not  a  malefactor,  we 
would  not  have  delivered  him  up  unto  thee.  Then  said  Pilate  unto  them,  Take 
ye  him,  and  judge  him  according  to  your  law.  The  Jews  therefore  said  unto 
him.  It  is  not  lawful  fur  us  to  put  any  man  to  dtath :  that  the  saying  of  Jesus 
might  he  fulfilled,  which  he  spake,  signifying  what  death  he  should  die.  Then 
Pilate  entered  into  the  judgment  hall  again,  and  called  Jesus,  and  said  unto- 
him,  Art  thou  the  King  of  the  Jews  ?  Jesus  answered  him,  Sayest  thou  this 
thing  of  thyself,  or  did  others  tell  it  thee  of  me  f  Pilate  answered,  Am  I  a 
Jew  f  Thine  own  nation  and  the  chief  priests  have  delivered  thee  unto  me.; 
what  hast  thou  done  P  Jesus  answered.  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world  :  if 
my  kingdom  were  of  this  world,  then  would  my  servants  fight,  that  I  should  not' 
he  delivered  to  the  Jews:  hut  now  is  my  kingdom  not  from  hence.  Pilate 
therefore  said  unto  him,  Art  thou  a  king  then  ?  Jesus  answered,  Thou  sayest 
that  I  am  a  king.  To  this  end  was  1  born,  and  for  this  cause  came  I  into  the^ 
world,  that  I  should  bear  witness  unto  the  truth.  Every  one  that  is  of  the  truth' 
heareth  my  voice.  Pilate  saith  unto  him.  What  is  truth  f  And  ivhen  he  had 
said  this,  he  went  out  again  unto  the  Jews,  and  saith  unto  them,  I  find  in  him 
no  fault  at  all. 

Thus  did  all  who  came  into  contact  with  Jesus  bear  witness  that  the  Lamb, 
of  God  was  indeed  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners." 


T1yt£tss  tbom  "Que  Own  Hymn  Book'' — 414,  333. 


THE   PEOCESSION  OF  SOEROW. 

^  pennon 

DfiLIYBRBD    ON    SUNDAY    MORNING,    MaRCH    IST,    1863,    BY    THB^ 

REV.  C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"And  they  took  Jesus,  and  led  him  away." — John  xix.  16. 

Next  Saturday  all  eyes  will  be  fixed  on  a  great  Prince  who  shall  ride 
through  our  streets  with  his  Royal  Bride.  To-day  I  invite  your 
attention  to  another  Prince,  marching  in  another  fashion  through  his 
metropolis.  London  shall  see  the  glory  of  the  one :  Jerusalem  beheld 
the  shame  of  the  other.  Come  hither,  ye  lovers  of  Immanuel,  and  I 
will  show  you  this  great  sight — the  King  of  sorrow  marching  to  hig- 
throne  of  grief,  the  cross.  I  claim  for  the  procession  of  my  Lord  an. 
interest  superior  to  the  pageant  you  are  now  so  anxiously  expecting. 
Will  your  Prince  be  sumptuously  arrayed?  Mine  is  adorned  with  gar- 
ments crimsoned  with  his  own  blood.  Will  your  Prince  be  decorated 
with  honours?  Behold,  my  King  is  not  without  his  crown— alas,  a 
crown  of  thorns  set  with  ruby  drops  of  blood!  Will  your  thoroughfares 
be  thronged?  So  were  the  streets  of  Jerusalem;  for  great  multitudes 
followed  him.  Will  ye  raise  a  clamour  of  tumultuous  shouting?  Such 
a  greeting  had  the  Lord  of  glory,  but  alas,  it  was  not  the  shout  of 
welcome,  but  the  yell  of  "Away  with  him !  away  with  him."  High  in 
the  air  ye  bid  your  banners  wave  about  the  heir  of  England's  throne^ 
but  how  shall  ye  rival  the  banner  of  the  sacred  cross,  that  day  for  the 
first  time  borne  among  the  sons  of  men.  For  the  thousands  of  eyes- 
which  shall  gaze  upon  the  youthful  Prince,  I  offer  the  gaze  of  men  and 
angels.  All  nations  gathered  about  my  Lord,  both  great  and  mean  men 
clustered  around  his  person.  From  the  sky  the  angels  viewed  him  with 
wonder  and  amazement;  the  spirits  of  the  just  looked  from  the  windows 
of  heaven  upon  the  scene,  yea,  the  great  God  and  Father  watched 
each  movement  of  his  suffering  Son.  But  ye  ask  me  where  is  the 
spouse,  the  king's  daughter  fair  and  beautiful?  My  Lord  is  not  altogether 
without  his  espoused  one.  The  Church,  the  bride  of  Christ,  was  there,, 
conformed  to  the  image  of  her  Lord;  she  was  there,  I  say,  in  Simon,  bear- 
ing the  cross,  and  in  the  women  weeping  and  lamenting.  Say  not  thai 
No.  497. 


458 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


the  comparison  is  strained,  for  in  a  moment  I  will  withdraw  it  and  present 
the  contrast.  Grant  me  only  thus  much  of  likeness:  we  have  here  a  Prince 
with  his  bride,  bearing  his  banner,  and  wearing  his  royal  robes,  traversing 
the  streets  of  his  own  city,  surrounded  by  a  throng  who  shout  aloud,  and 
a  multitude  who  gaze  with  interest  profound.  But  how  vast  was  the  dis- 
parity! The  most  careless  eye  discerns  it.  Yonder  young  Prince  is 
ruddy  with  the  bloom  of  early  youth  and  health;  mj  Master's  visage 
is  more  marred  than  that  of  any  man.  See,  it  has  been  blackened  with 
bruises,  and  stained  with  the  shameful  spittle  of  them  that  derided 
him.  Your  heir  of  royalty  is  magnificently  drawn  along  the  streets  in 
his  stately  chariot,  sitting  at  his  ease:  my  princely  sufferer  walks  with 
weary  feet,  marking  the  road  with  crimson  drops  ;  not  borne,  but 
bearing;  not  carried,  but  cariying  his  cross.  Your  Prince  is. surrounded 
•by  a  multitude  of  friends ;  hark  how  they  joyously  welcome  him!  And 
well  they  may;  the  son  of  such  noble  parents  deserves  a  nation's  love.  But 
my  Prince  is  hated  without  a  cause.  Hark  how  their  loud  voices  demand 
that  he  should  be  hastened  to  execution !  How  harshly  grate  the  cruel 
syllables,  "  Crucify  him!  crucify  him! "  Your  noble  Prince  is  preparing 
for  his  marriage:  mine  is  hastening  to  his  doom.  Oh,  shame  that  men 
fihould  find  so  much  applause  for  Princes  and  none  for  the  King  of 
kings.  Yet,  dear  friends,  to  some  eyes  there  will  be  more  attraction  in 
the  procession  of  sorrow,  of  shame,  and  of  blood,  than  in  yon  display 
of  grandeur  and  joy.  Oh !  I  pray  you,  lend  your  cars  to  such  faint  wor^ 
«s  I  can  utter  on  a  subject  all  too  high  for  me,  the  march  of  the  world's 
Maker  along  the  way  of  his  great  sorrow;  your  Redeemer  traversing  the 
rugged  path  of  suffering,  along  which  he  went  with  heaving  heart  and 
heavy  footsteps,  that  he  might  pave  a  royal  road  of  mercy  for  hia 
enemies. 

I.  After  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  been  formally  condemned  by 
Pilate,  our  text  tells  us  he  was  led  away.  I  invite  your  attention  to 
Ohrist  as  led  forth. 

Pilate,  as  we  reminded  you,  scourged  our  Saviour  according  to  the 
<5ommon  custom  of  Roman  courts.  The  lictors  executed  their  cruel  office 
upon  his  shoulders  with  their  rods  and  scourges,  until  the  stripes  had 
reached  the  full  number.  Jesus  is  formally  condemned  to  crucifixion, 
hut  before  he  is  led  away  he  is  given  over  to  the  Praetorian  guards 
that  those  rough  legionaries  may  insult  him.  It  is  said  that  a 
•German  regiment  was  at  that  time  stationed  in  Judea,  and  I  should 
not  wonder  if  they  were  the  lineal  ancestors  of  those  German  theolo- 
:gians  of  modem  times  who  have  mocked  the  Saviour,  tampered 
with  revelation,  and  cast  the  vile  spittle  of  their  philosophy  into 
ihe  face  of  truth.  The  soldiery  mocked  and  insulted  him  in  every 
way  that  cruelty  and  scorn  could  devise.  The  platted  crown  of  thorns, 
the  purple  robe,  the  reed  with  which  they  smote  him,  and  the  spittle 
with  which  they  disfigured  him,  all  these  marked  the  contempt  in  which 
they  held  the  King  of  the  Jews.  The  reed  was  no  mere  rush  from  the 
brook,  it  was  of  a  stouter  kind,  of  which  easterns  often  make  walking- 
staves,  the  blows  were  cruel  as  well  as  insulting ;  and  the  crown  was 
not  of  straw  but  thorn,  hence  it  produced  pain  as  well  as  pictured 
«com.    When  they  had  mocked  him  they  pulled  off  the  purple  gar- 


THE   PROCESSION   OF   SORROW.  459 

ment  he  had  worn,  this  rough  operation  would  cause  much  pain. 
His  wounds  unstaunched  and  raw,  fresh  bleeding  from  beneath  the  lash, 
would  make  this  scarlet  robe  adhere  to  him,  and  when  it  was  dragged 
off,  his  gashes  would  bleed  anew.  We  do  not  read  that  thej  removed 
the  crown  of  thorns,  and  therefore  it  is  most  probable,  though  not 
absolutely  certain,  that  our  Saviour  wore  it  along  the  Via  Dolorosa,  and 
also  bore  it  upon  his  head  when  he  was  fastened  to  the  cross.  Those 
pictures  which  represent  our  Lord  as  wearing  the  crown  of  thorns  upon 
the  tree  have  therefore  at  least  some  scriptural  warrant.  They  put 
his  own  clothes  upon  him,  because  they  were  the  perquisites  of  the 
executioner;  as  modern  hangmen  take  the  garments  of  those  whom 
they  execute,  so  did  the  four  soldiers  claim  a  right  to  his  raiment. 
They  put  on  him  his  own  clothes  that  the  multitudes  might  discern 
him  to  be  the  same  man,  the  very  man  who  had  professed  to  be  the 
Messias.  We  all  know  that  a  different  dress  will  often  raise  a  doubt 
about  the  identity  of  an  individual ;  but  lo !  the  people  saw  him 
in  the  street,  not  arrayed  in  the  purple  robe,  but  wearing  his 
garment  without  seam,  woven  from  the  top  throughout,  the  common 
smock-frock,  in  fact,  of  the  countrymen  of  Palestine,  and  they 
said  at  once,  "Yes,  'tis  he,  the  man  who  healed  the  sick,  and 
raised  the  dead ;  the  mighty  teacher  who  was  wont  to  sit  upon  the 
mountain-top,  or  stand  in  the  temple  courts  and  preach  with  authority, 
and  not  as  the  Scribes."  There  can  be  no  shadow  of  doubt  but  that  our 
Lord  was  really  crucified,  and  no  one  substituted  for  him.  How  they 
led^  him  forth  we  do  not  know.  Romish  expositors,  who  draw  upon 
their  prolific  fancy  for  their  facts,  tell  us  that  he  had  a  rope  about  his 
neck  with  which  they  roughly  dragged  him  to  the  tree;  this  is  one  of 
the  most  probable  of  their  surmises,  since  it  was  not  unusual  for  the 
Romans  thus  to  conduct  criminals  to  the  gallows.  We  care,  however, 
far  more  for  the  fact  that  he  went  forth  carrying  his  cross  upon  his 
shoulders.  This  was  intended  at  once  to  proclaim  his  guilt  and  intimate 
his  doom.  Usually  the  crier  went  before  with  an  announcement  such  as 
this,  "  This  is  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  King  of  the  Jews,  who  for  making 
himself  a  King,  and  stirring  up  the  people,  has  been  condemned  to  die.^* 
This  cross  was  a  ponderous  machine ;  not  so  heavy,  perhaps,  as  some 
pictures  would  represent  it,  but  still  no  light  burden  to  a  man  whose 
shoulders  were  raw  with  the  lashes  of  the  Roman  scourge.  He  had 
been  all  night  in  agony,  he  had  spent  the  early  morning  at  the  hall  of 
Caiaphas,  he  had  been  hurried,  as  I  described  to  you  last  Sunday,  from 
Caiaphas  to  Pilate,  from  Pilate  to  Herod,  and  from  Herod  back  again 
to  Pilate ;  he  had,  therefore,  but  little  strength  left,  and  you  will  not 
wonder  that  by-and-bye  we  find  him  staggering  beneath  his  load,  and 
that  another  is  called  to  bear  it  with  him.  He  goes  forth,  then,  bearing 
his  cross. 

What  learn  we  here  as  we  see  Christ  led  forth?  Do  we  not  see  here 
the  truth  of  that  which  was  set  forth  in  shadow  by  the  scape-goatf 
Did  not  the  high-priest  bring  the  scape-goat,  and  put  both  his  hands 
npon  its  head,  confessing  the  sins  of  the  people,  that  thus  those  sins 
might  be  laid  upon  the  goat  ?  Then  the  goat  was  led  away  by  a  fit  man 
into  the  wilderness,  and  it  carried  away  the.  sins  of  the  people,  so  that 


4 CO  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

if  they  were  sought  for,  they  could  not  be  found.  Now  we  see  Jesu» 
brought  before  the  priests  and  rulers,  who  pronounce  him  guilty; 
God  himself  imputes  our  sins  to  him;  he  was  made  sin  for  us;  and,  as 
the  substitute  for  our  guilt,  bearing  our  sin  upon  his  shoulders — for  that 
cross  was  a  sort  of  representation  in  wood  of  our  guilt  and  doom — we 
see  the  great  Scape-goat  led  away  by  the  appointed  offijers  of  justice. 
Bearing  upon  his  back  the  sin  of  all  his  people,  the  offering  goes  with- 
out the  camp.  Beloved,  can  you  say  he  carried  your  sin  ?  As  you 
look  at  the  cross  upon  his  shoulders  does  it  represent  your  sin  ?  Oh  I 
raise  the  question,  and  be  not  satisfied  unless  you  can  answer  it  most 
positively  in  the  affirmative.  There  is  one  way  by  which  you  can  tell 
whether  he  carried  your  sin  or  not.  Hast  thou  laid  thy  hand  upon  hi& 
head,  confessed  thy  sin,  and  trusted  in  him  ?  Then  thy  sin  lies  not  on 
thee ;  not  one  single  ounce  or  drachma  of  it  lies  on  thee ;  it  has  all 
been  transferred  by  blessed  imputation  to  Christ,  and  he  bears  it  on 
his  shoulder  in  the  form  of  yonder  heavy  cross.  What  joy,  what  satis- 
faction this  will  give  if  we  can  sing — 

"  My  soul  looks  back  to  see 
The  burden  thou  didst  bear, 
When  hastening  to  the  accursed  tree, 
And  knows  her  guilt  was  there  I" 

Do  not  let  the  picture  vanish  till  you  have  satisfied  yourselves  once  for 
all  that  Christ  was  here  the  substitute  for  you. 

Let  us  muse  upon  the  fact  that  Jesus  was  conducted  without  the 
gates  of  the  city.  It  was  the  common  place  oj  death.  That  little  rising 
ground,  which  perhaps  was  called  Golgotha,  the  place  of  a  skull,  from 
its  somewhat  resembling  the  crown  of  a  man's  skull,  was  the  common 
place  of  execution.  It  was  one  of  Death's  castles ;  here  he  stored  hi& 
gloomiest  trophies;  he  was  the  grim  lord  of  that  stronghold.  Our 
great  hero,  the  destroyer  of  Death,  bearded  the  lion  in  his  den,  slew  the 
monster  in  his  own  castle,  and  dragged  the  dragon  captive  from  his  own 
den.  Methinks  Death  thought  it  a  splendid  triumph  when  he  saw  the 
Master  impaled  and  bleeding  in  the  dominions  of  destruction ;  little  did 
he  know  that  the  grave  was  to  be  rifled,  and  himself  destroyed,  by  that 
crucified  Son  of  man. 

Was  not  the  Redeemer  led  thither  to  aggravate  his  shamef  Calvary 
was  like  our  Old  Bailey ;  it  was  the  usual  place  of  execution  for  the 
district.  Christ  must  die  a  felon's  death,  and  it  must  be  upon  the 
felon's  gallows,  in  the  place  where  horrid  crimes  had  met  their  due 
reward.  This  added  to  his  shame;  but,  methinks,  in  this,  too,  he 
draws  the  nearer  to  us,  "  He  was  numbered  with  the  transgres- 
sors, and  bare  the  sin  of  many,  and  made  intercession  for  the  trans- 
gressors." 

But  further,  my  brethren ;  this.  I  think,  is  the  great  lesson  from 
Christ's  being  slaughtered  without  the  gate  of  the  city — let  us  go  forthy 
therefore,  without  the  camp,  hearkig  his  reproach.  You  see  there  the 
multitude  are  leading  him  forth  from  the  temple.  He  is  not  allowed  to 
worship  with  them.  The  ceremonial  of  the  Jewish  religion  denies  him 
any  participation  in  its  pomps  ;  the  priests  condemn  him  never  agdin  ta 


THE   PROCESSION   OF   SORROW.  461 

tread  the  hallowed  floors,  never  as^ain  to  look  upon  the  consecrated 
altars  in  the  place  of  his  people's  worship.  He  is  exiled  from  their 
friendship^  too.  No  man  dare  call  him  friend  now,  or  whisper  a  word  of 
comfort  to  him.  Nay  more ;  he  is  banished  from  their  society,  as  if  he 
were  a  leper  whose  breath  would  be  infectious,  whose  presence  would 
scatter  plague.  They  force  him  without  the  walls,  and  are  not  satisfied 
till  they  have  rid  themselves  of  his  obnoxious  presence.  For  him  they 
have  no  tolerance ;  Barrabas  may  go  free ;  the  thief  and  the  murderer 
may  be  spared  ;  but  for  Christ  there  is  no  word,  but  "  Away  with  such 
a  fellow  from  the  earth  !  It  is  not  fit  that  he  should  live."  Jesus  is 
therefore  hunted  out  of  the  city,  beyond  the  gate,  with  the  will  and  force 
of  his  own  nation,  but  he  journeys  not  against  his  own  will ;  even  as 
the  lamb  goeth  as  willingly  to  the  shambles  as  to  the  meadow,  so  doth 
Christ  cheerfully  take  up  his  cross  and  go  without  the  camp.  See, 
brethren,  here  is  a  picture  of  what  we  may  expect  from  men  if  we  are 
faithful  to  our  Master.  It  is  not  likely  that  we  shall  be  able  to  worship 
with  their  worship.  They  prefer  a  ceremonial  pompous  and  gaudy ;  the 
fiwell  of  music,  the  glitter  of  costly  garments,  the  parade  of  learning  all 
these  must  minister  grandeur  to  the  world's  religion,  and  thus  shut  out 
the  simple  followers  of  the  Lamb.  The  high  places  of  earth's  worship 
and  honour  are  not  for  us.  If  we  be  true  to  our  Master  we  shall  sooa 
lose  the  friendship  of  the  world.  The  sinful  find  our  conversation  distaste- 
ful ;  in  our  pursuits  the  carnal  have  no  interest ;  things  dear  to  us  are  dross 
to  worldlings,  while  things  precious  to  them  are  contemptible  to  us.  There 
have  been  times,  and  the  days  may  come  again,  when  faithfulness  to 
Christ  has  entailed  exclusion  from  what  is  called  "  society."  Even  now 
to  a  large  extent  the  true  Christian  is  like  a  Pariah,  lower  than  the 
lowest  caste,  in  the  judgment  of  some.  The  world  has  in  former  days 
counted  it  God's  service  to  kill  the  saints.  We  are  to  reckon  upon  all 
this,  and  should  the  worst  befal  us,  it  is  to  be  no  strange  thing  to  us. 
These  are  silken  days,  and  religion  fights  not  so  stern  a  battle.  I  will 
not  say  it  is  because  we  are  unfaithful  to  our  Master  that  the  world  is 
more  kind  to  us,  but  I  half  suspect  it  is,  and  it  is  very  possible  that  if 
we  were  more  thoroughly  Christians  the  world  would  more  heartily 
detest  us,  and  if  we  would  cleave  more  closely  to  Christ  we  might 
expect  to  receive  more  slander,  more  abuse,  less  tolerance,  and  less 
favour  from  men.  You  young  believers,  who  have  lately  followed 
Christ,  should  father  and  mother  forsake  you,  remember  you  were  bidden 
to  reckon  upon  it ;  should  brothers  and  sisters  deride,  you  must  put 
this  down  as  part  of  the  cost  of  being  a  Christian.  Godly  working-men, 
should  your  employers  or  your  fellow-workers  frown  upon  you ;  wives, 
should  your  husbands  threaten  to  cast  you  out,  remember,  without  the 
■camp  was  Jesus'  place,  and  without  the  camp  is  yours.  Oh  !  ye 
Christian  men,  who  dream  of  trimming  your  sails  to  the  wind,  who 
seek  to  win  the  world's  favour,  I  do  beseech  you  cease  from  a  course  so 
perilous.  We  are  in  the  world,  but  we  must  never  be  of  it ;  we  are  not 
to  be  secluded  like  monks  in  the  cloister,  but  we  are  to  be  separated  like 
Jews  among  Gentiles;  men,  but  not  of  men;  helping,  aiding,  befriend- 
mg,  teaching,  comforting,  instructing,  but  not  sinning  either  to  escape  a 
frown  or  to  win  a  smile.    The  more  manifestly  there  shall  be  a  gi*eat 


462  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

gulf  between  the  Churcli  and  the  world,  the  better  shall  it  be  for  both ; 
the  better  for  the  world,  for  it  shall  be  thereby  warned ;  the  better  for 
the  Church,  for  it  shall  be  thereby  preserved.  Go  ye,  then,  like  the 
Master,  expecting  to  be  abused,  to  wear  an  ill-name,  and  to  earn  re- 
proach ;  go  ye,  like  him,  without  the  camp. 

II.    Let  us  now  gaze  for  awhile  upon  Christ  carrying  his  Cross. 

I  have  shown  you,  believer,  your  position;  let  me  now  show  you  your 
service,  Christ  comes  forth  from  Pilate's  hall  with  the  cumbrous  wood 
upon  his  shoulder,  but  through  weariness  he  travels  slowly,  and  his 
enemies  urgent  for  his  death,  and  half  afraid,  from  his  emaciated  appear- 
ance, that  he  may  die  before  he  reaches  the  place  of  execution,  allow 
another  to  carry  his  burden.  The  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  are 
cruel,  they  cannot  spare  him  the  agonies  of  dying  on  the  cross,  they  will 
therefore  remit  the  labour  of  carrying  it.  They  place  the  cross  upon 
Simon,  a  Cyrenian,  coming  out  of  the  country.  We  do  not  know  what 
may  have  been  the  colour  of  Simon's  face,  but  it  was  most  likely  black. 
Simon  was  an  African  ;  he  came  from  Cyrene.  Alas  poor  African,  thou 
hast  been  compelled  to  carry  the  cross  even  until  now.  Hail,  ye  despised 
children  of  the  sun,  ye  follow  first  after  the  King  in  the  march  of  woe. 
"We  are  not  sure  that  Simon  was  a  disciple  of  Christ;  he  may  have  been 
a  friendly  spectator;  yet  one  would  think  the  Jews  would  naturally  select 
a  disciple  if  they  could.  Coming  fresh  from  the  country,  not  knowing 
what  was  going  on,  he  joined  with  the  mob,  and  they  made  him  carry 
the  cross.  Whether  a  disciple  then  or  not,  we  have  every  reason  to 
believe  that  he  became  so  afterwards;  he  was  the  father,  we  read,  of 
Alexander  and  Rufus,  two  persons  who  appear  to  have  been  well  known 
in  the  early  Church ;  let  us  hope  that  salvation  came  to  his  house  when 
he  was  compelled  to  bear  the  Saviour's  cross. 

Dear  friends,  we  must  remember  that,  although  no  one  died  on  the 
cross  with  Christ,  for  atonement  must  be  executed  by  a  solitary  Saviour, 
yet  another  person  did  carry  the  cross  for  Christ ;  for  this  world,  while 
redeemed  by  price  by  Christ,  and  by  Christ  alone,  is  to  be  redeemed  by 
divine  power  manifested  in  the  sufferings  and  labours  of  the  saints  as 
well  as  those  of  Christ.  Mark  you,  the  ransom  of  men  was  ajl  paid  by 
Christ ;  that  was  redemption  hj  price.  But  power  is  wanted  to  dash 
down  those  idols,  to  overcome  the  hosts  of  error ;  where  is  it  to  be 
found  ?  In  the  Lord  of  Hosts ;  who  shews  his  power  in  the  sufferings 
of  Christ  and  of  his  Church.  The  Church  must  suffer,  that  the  gospel 
may  be  spread  by  her  means.  This  is  what  the  Apostle  meant  when  he 
said,  "  I  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ  in  my 
flesh  for  his  body's  sake,  which  is  the  Church."  There  was  nothing  be- 
hind in  the  price,  but  there  is  something  behind  in  the  manifested  povver, 
and  we  must  continue  to  fill  up  that  measure  of  revealed  power,  carrying 
each  one  of  us  the  cross  with  Christ,  till  the  last  shame  shall  have  been 
poured  upon  his  cause,  and  he  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever.  We  see  in 
Simon's  carrying  the  cross  a  picture  of  what  the  Church  is  to  do 
throughout  all  generations.  •  Mark  then.  Christian,  Jesus  does  not 
suffer  BO  as  to  exclude  your  suffering.  He  bears  a  cross,  not  that  you 
may  escape  it,  but  that  you  may  endure  it.  Christ  does  exempt  you 
from  sin,  but  not  from  sorrow  ;  he  does  take  the  curse  of  the  cross,  but 


THE   PROCESSION  OP   SORROW.  46.? 

he  does  not  take  the  cross  of  the  curse  away  from  you.  Remember 
that,  and  expect  to  suffer. 

Beloved,  let  us  comfort  ourselves  with  this  thought,  that  in  our  case, 
as  in  Simon's,  it  is  not  our  cross,  but  Christ's  cross  which  we  carry. 
When  you  are  molested  for  your  piety ;  when  your  religion  brings  the 
trial  of  cruel  mockings  upon  you  ;  then  remember,  it  is  not  your  cross, 
it  is  Christ's  cross ;  and  how  delightful  is  it  to  carry  the  cross  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  ? 

You  carry  the  cross  after  him.  You  have  blessed  company ;  your  path 
is  marked  with  footprints  of  your  Lord.  If  you  will  look,  there  is  the 
mark  of  his  blood-red  shoulder  upon  that  heavy  cross.  'Tis  his  cross, 
and  he  goes  before  you  as  a  shepherd  goes  before  his  sheep.  Take  up 
your  cross  daily  and  follow  him. 

Do  not  forget,  also,  that  you  bear  this  cross  in  partnership.  It  is  the 
opinion  of  some  commentators  that  Simon  only  carried  one  end  of  the 
cross,  and  not  the  whole  of  it.  That  is  very  possible  ;  Christ  may  have 
carried  the  heavier  end,  against  the  transverse  beam,  and  Simon  may 
have  borne  the  lighter  end.  Certainly  it  is  so  with  you ;  you  do  but 
carry  the  light  end  of  the  cross ;  Christ  bore  the  heavier  end. 

"  His  way  was  much  rougher  and  darker  than  mine ; 
Did  Christ,  my  Lord,  suffer,  and  shall  I  repine  ?  " 

Rutherford  says,  "  Whenever  Christ  gives  us  a  cross,  he  cries,  *  Halves, 
my  love.'  *'  Others  think  that  Simon  carried  the  whole  of  the  cross. 
If  he  carried  all  the  cross,  yet  he  only  carried  the  wood  of  it ;  he  did 
not  bear  the  sin  which  made  it  such  a  load.  Christ  did  but  transfer  to 
Simon  the  outward  frame,  the  mere  tree;  but  the  curse  of  the  tree, 
which  was  our  sin  and  its  punishment,  rested  on  Jesus'  shoulders  still. 
Dear  friend,  if  you  think  that  you  suffer  all  that  a  Christian  can  suffer; 
if  all  God's  billows  roll  over  you,  yet,  remember,  there  is  not  one  drop 
of  wrath  in  all  your  sea  of  sorrow.  Jesus  took  the  wrath ;  Jesus 
carried  the  sin;  and  now  all  that  you  endure  is  but  for  his  sake,  that 
you  may  be  conformed  unto  his  image,  and  may  aid  in  gathering  his 
people  into  his  family. 

Although  Simon  carried  Christ's  cross,  he  did  not  volunteer  to  do  ii, 
hut  they  compelled  him.  I  fear  me,  beloved,  I  fear  me  that  the  most  of 
us  if  we  ever  do  carry  it,  carry  it  by  compulsion  ;  at  least  when  it  first 
comes  on  to  our  shoulders  we  do  not  like  it,  and  would  fain  run  from 
it,  but  the  world  compels  us  to  bear  Christ's  cross.  Cheerfully  accept 
this  burden,  ye  servants  of  the  Lord.  I  do  not  think  we  should  seek 
after  needless  persecution.  That  man  is  a  fool  and  deserves  no  pity,  who 
purposely  excites  the  disgust  of  other  people.  No,  no;  we  must  not 
make  a  cross  of  our  own.  Let  there  be  nothing  but  your  religion  to 
object  to,  and  then  if  that  offends  them  let  them  be  offended,  it  is  a  cross 
which  you  must  carry  joyfully. 

Though  Simon  had  to  hear  the  cross  for  a  very  little  while^  it  gav$ 
Mm  lasting  honour.  I  do  not  know  how  far  it  was  from  Pilate's  house 
to  the  Mount  of  Doom.  Romanists  pretend  to  know;  in  fact  they 
know  the  very  spot  where  Veronica  wiped  the  blessed  face  with  her 
handkerchief,  and  found  his  likeness  impressed  upon  it;  we  also  know 


464  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

very  well  where  that  was  not  done;  in  fact  they  know  the  veiy  spot 
where  Jesus  fainted,  and  if  you  go  to  Jerusalem  you  can  see  all  these 
different  places  if  you  only  carry  enough  credulity  with  you ;  but  the 
fact  is  the  city  has  been  so  razed,  and  burned,  and  ploughed,  that  there 
is  little  chance  of  distinguishing  any  of  these  positions,  with  the  excep- 
tion, it  may  be,  of  Mount  Calvary,  which  being  outside  the  walls  may 
possibly  still  remain.  The  Via  Dolorosa,  as  the  Romanists  call  it,  is  a  long 
street  at  the  present  time,  but  it  may  have  been  but  a  few  yards. 
Simon  had  to  carry  the  cross  but  for  a  very  little  time,  yet  his  name  is 
in  this  Book  for  ever,  and  we  may  envy  him  his  honour.  Well,  beloved, 
the  cross  we  have  to  car^y  is  only  for  a  little  while  at  most.  A  few 
times  the  sun  will  go  up  and  down  the  hill;  a  few  more  moons  will 
wax  and  wane,  and  then  we  shall  receive  the  glory.  "  1  reckon  that 
these  light  afflictions,  which  are  but  for  a  moment,  are  not  worthy  to 
be  compared  with  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  us."  We  should 
love  the  cross,  and  count  it  very  dear,  because  it  works  out  for  us  a  far 
more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory.  Christians,  will  you 
refuse  to  be  cross-bearers  for  Christ  ?  I  am  ashamed  of  some  professed 
Christians,  heartily  ashamed  of  them  I  Some  of  them  have  no  objec- 
tion to  worship  with  a  poor  congregation  till  they  grow  rich,  and  then, 
forsooth,  they  must  go  with  the  world's  church,  to  mingle  with  fashion 
and  gentility.  There  are  some  who  in  company  hold  their  tongues,  and 
never  say  a  good  word  for  Christ.  They  take  matters  very  gently ; 
they  think  it  unnecessary  to  be  soldiers  of  the  cross.  "  He  that  taketh 
not  up  his  cross  and  followeth  not  after  me,"  says  Christ,  "is  not 
worthy  of  me."  Some  of  you  will  not  be  baptized  because  you  think 
people  will  say,  "He  is  a  professor;  how  holy  he  ought  to  be." 
I  am  glad  the  world  expects  much  from  us,  and  watches  us  narrowly. 
A.11  this  is  a  blessed  clog  upon  us,  and  a  means  of  keeping  us  more 
near  the  Loi'd.  Oh  I  you  that  are  ashamed  of  Christ,  how  can  you  read 
that  text,  "  He  that  is  ashamed  of  me,  and  of  my  words,  of  him  will 
I  be  ashamed  when  I  come  in  the  glory  of  my  Father,  and  all  my 
holy  angels  with  me."  Conceal  your  religion  ?  Cover  it  with  a  cloak  ? 
God  forbid !  Our  religion  is  our  glory ;  the  Cross  of  Christ  is  out 
honour,  and,  while  not  ostentatiously  parading  it,  as  the  Pharisees  do, 
we  ought  never  to  be  so  cowardly  as  to  conceal  it.  "  Come  ye  out  from 
among  them,  and  be  ye  separate,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing. 
Take  up  your  cross,  and  go  without  the  camp,  following  your  Lord,  eve 
until  death. 

III.     I  have  now  a  third  picture  to  present  to  you— Christ  and 

HIS  mourners. 

As  Christ  went  through  the  streets,  a  great  multitude  looked  on.    In 
the  multitude  there  was  a  sparse  sprinkling  of  tender-hearted  women, 


WIE  PROCESSION   OF   SORROW.  465 

probably  those  who  had  been  healed,  or  whose  children  had  been  blessed 
by  him.  Some  of  these  were  persons  of  considerable  rank ;  many  of 
them  had  ministered  to  him  of  their  substance ;  amidst  the  din  and 
howling  of  the  crowd,  and  the  noise  of  the  soldiery,  they  raised  an 
exceeding  loud  and  bitter  cry,  like  Rachel  weeping  for  her  children,  who 
would  not  be  comforted,  because  they  were  not.  The  voice  of  sympathy 
prevailed  over  the  voice  of  scorn.  Jesus  paused,  and  said,  "  Daughters 
of  Jei'usalem,  weep  not  for  me ;  but  weep  for  yourselves  and  for  your 
children."  The  sorrow  of  these  good  women  was  a  very  proper  sorrow ; 
Jesus  did  not  by  any  means  forbid  it,  he  only  recommended  another 
sorrow  as  being  better ;  not  finding  fault  with  this,  but  still  commending 
tliat.  Let  me  show  what  I  think  he  meant.  Last  Sunday  the  remark 
was  made  to  me — "  If  the  story  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ  had  been 
told  of  any  other  man,  all  the  congregation  would  have  been  in 
tears."  Some  of  us,  indeed,  confess  that,  if  we  had  read  this  narra- 
tive of  suffering  in  a  romance,  we  should  have  wept  copiously,  but 
the  story  of  Christ's  sufferings  does  not  cause  the  excitement  and. 
emotion  one  would  expect.  Now,  I  am  not  sure  that  we  ought  to- 
blame  ourselves  for  this.  If  we  weep  for  the  sufferings  of  Christ  in 
t  he  same  way  as  we  lament  the  sufferings  of  another  man,  our  emotions 
will  be  only  natural,  and  may  work  no  good.  They  would  be  very  proper, 
very  proper ;  God  forbid  that  we  should  stay  them,  except  with  the  gentle 
words  of  Christ,  "  Daughters  of  Jerusalem,  weep  not  for  me."  The  most 
Scriptural  way  to  describe  the  sufferings  of  Christ  is  not  by  labouring  to 
excite  sympathy  through  highly-coloured  descriptions  of  his  blood  and 
wounds.  Romanists  of  all  ages  have  wrought  upon  the  feelings  of  the 
people  in  this  manner,  and  to  a  degree  the  attempt  is  commendable,  but. 
if  it  shall  all  end  in  tears  of  pity,  no  good  is  done.  I  have  heard 
sermons,  and  studied  works  by  Romish  writers  upon  the  passion  and 
agony,  which  have  moved  me  to  copious  tears,  but  I  am  not  clear 
that  all  the  emotion  was  profitable.  I  show  unto  you  a  more  excellent 
way. 

What,  then,  dear  friends,  should  be  the  sorrows  excited  by  a  view  of 
Christ's  sufferings  ?  They  are  these — Weep  not  iecause  the  Saviour  bled, 
hut  because  your  sins  made  him  bleed. 

"  'T  were  you  my  sins,  my  cruel  sins, 
His  chief  tormentors  were ; 
Each  of  my  crimes  became  a  nail, 
And  unbelief  the  spear." 

When  a  brother  makes  confession  of  his  transgressions,  when  on  his  knees 
before  God  he  humbles  himself  with  many  tears,  I  am  sure  the  Lord 
thinks  far  more  of  the  tears  of  repentance  than  he  would  do  of  the  mere 

30 


46G 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


drops  of  human  sympathy.    "  Weep  for  yourselves,"  says  Christ,  "  rather 
than  for  me." 

The  sufferings  of  Christ  should  make  us  weep  over  those  who  havi^ 
brought  that  Hood  upon  their  heads.  We  ought  not  to  forget  the  Jews«- 
Those  once  highly  favoured  people  of  God  who  cursed  themselves  with, 
"His  blood  be  upon  us  and  upon  our  children,"  ought  to  make  us 
mourn  when  we  think  of  their  present  degradation.  There  are  no 
passages  in  all  the  public  ministry  of  Jesus  so  tender  as  those  which 
have  regard  to  Jerusalem.  It  is  not  sorrow  over  Rome,  but  Jerusalem. 
I  believe  there  was  a  tenderness  in  Christ's  heart  to  the  Jew  of  a 
special  character.  He  loved  the  Gentile,  but  still  Jerusalem  was  the 
oity  of  the  Great  King.  It  was,  "  0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  how  often 
would  I  have  gathered  thy  children  together  as  a  hen  gathereth  her 
chickens  under  her  wings,  but  ye  would  not!"  He  saw  its  streets 
flowing  like  bloody  rivers;  he  saw  the  temple  flaming  up  to  heaven;  he 
marked  the  walls  loaded  with  Jewish  captives  crucified  by  command 
■of  Titus ;  he  saw  the  city  razed  to  the  ground  and  sown  with  salt,  and 
he  said,  "  Weep  not  for  me,  but  for  yourselves  and  for  your  children,  for 
the  day  shall  come  when  ye  shall  say  to  the  rocks.  Hide  us,  and  to  the 
mountains.  Fall  upon  us." 

Let  me  add,  that  when  we  look  at  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  we  ought 
io  sorrow  deeply  for  the  souls  of  all  unregenerate  men  and  women.  Re- 
member, dear  friends,  that  what  Christ  suffered  for  us,  these  unregenerate 
■ones  must  suffer  for  themselves,  except  they  put  their  trust  in  Christ.  The 
woes  which  broke  the  Saviour's  heart  must  crush  theirs.  Either  Christ 
must  die  for  me,  or  else  I  must  die  for  myself  the  second  death  ;  if  he 
did  not  carry  the  curse  for  me,  then  on  me  must  it  rest  for  ever  and  ever. 
Think,  dear  friends,  there  are  some  in  this  congregation  who  as  yet 
have  no  interest  in  Jesu's  blood,  some  sitting  next  to  you,  your  nearest 
friends  who,  if  they  were  now  to  close  their  eyes  in  death,  would  open 
ihem  in  hell !  Think  of  that !  Weep  not  for  him,  but  for  these. 
Perhaps  they  are  your  children,  the  objects  of  your  fondest  love,  with 
no  interest  in  Christ,  without  God  and  without  hope  in  the  world  !  Save 
your  tears  for  them;  Christ  asks  them  not  in  sympathy  for  himself. 
Think  of  the  millions  in  this  dark  world !  It  is  calculated  that  one 
soul  passes  from  time  into  eternity  every  time  the  clock  ticks !  So 
numerous  has  the  family  of  man  now  become,  that  there  is  a  death  every 
second ;  and  when  we  know  how  very  small  a  proportion  of  the  human  race 
have  even  nominally  received  the  cross — and  there  is  none  other  name 
given  under  heaven  among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved — oh  !  what  a 
tlack  thought  crosses  our  mind  !  What  a  cacaract  of  immortal  souls 
dashes  downwards  to  the  pit  every  hour  !  Well  might  the  Master  say, 
*  Weep  not  for  me,  but  for  yourselves."    You  have,  then,  no  true  sym- 


fl 


^     THE   PROCESSION  OF  SORROW.  467 

patLy  for  Christ  if  you  have  not  an  earnest  sympathy  with  those  who 
would  win  souls  for  Christ.  You  may  sit  under  a  sermon,  and  feel 
a  great  deal,  but  your  feeling  is  worthless  unless  it  leads  you  to  weep  for 
yourselves  and  for  your  children.  How  has  it  been  with  you  ?  Have 
you  repented  of  sin  ?  Have  you  prayed  for  your  fellow  men  ?  If  not, 
may  that  picture  of  Christ  fainting  in  the  streets  lead  you  to  do  so  this 
morning. 

IV.     In  the  fourth  place,  one  or  two  words  upon  Christ's  fellow- 
sufferers. 

There  were  two  other  cross-bearers  in  the  throng ;  they  were  male- 
factors ;  their  crosses  were  just  as  heavy  as  the  Lord's,  and  yet,  at  least, 
one  of  them  had  no  sympathy  with  him,  and  his  bearing  the  croaa 
-only  led  to  his  death,  and  not  to  his  salvation.  This  hint  only.  I  have 
sometimes  met  with  persons  who  have  suffered  much ;  they  have  lost 
money,  they  have  worked  hard  all  their  lives,  or  they  have  laid  for  years 
upon  a  bed  of  sickness,  and  they  therefore  suppose  that  because  they 
have  suffered  so  much  in  this  life,  they  shall  thus  escape  the  punish- 
ment of  sin  hereafter.  I  tell  you,  sirs,  that  yonder  malefactor 
■carried  his  cross  and  died  on  it ;  and  you  will  carry  your  sorrows,  and 
be  damned  with  them,  except  you  repent.  That  impenitent  thief  went 
from  the  cross  of  his  great  agony — and  it  was  agony  indeed  to  die  on  a 
■cross — he  went  to  that  place,  to  the  flames  of  hell ;  and  you,  too,  may 
go  from  the  bed  of  sickness,  and  from  the  abode  of  poverty,  to  perdi- 
tion, quite  as  readily  as  from  the  home  of  ease  and  the  house  of  plenty. 
No  sufferings  of  ours  have  anything  to  do  with  the  atonement  of  sin. 
No  blood  but  that  which  He  has  spilt,  no  groans  but  those  which  came 
from  His  heart,  no  suffering  but  that  which  was  endured  by  Him,  can 
€ver  make  a  recompense  for  sin.  Shake  off  the  thought,  any  of  you  who 
suppose  that  God  will  have  pity  on  you  because  you  have  endured  afflic- 
tion. You  must  consider  Jesus,  and  not  yourself;  turn  your  eye  to 
Ohrist,  the  great  substitute  for  sinners,  but  never  dream  of  trusting  in 
yourselves.  You  may  think  that  this  remark  is  not  needed;  but  I 
have  met  with  one  or  two  cases  where  it  was  required ;  and  I  have  often 
said  I  would  preach  a  sermon  for  even  one  person,  and,  therefore,  I 
make  this  remark,  even  though  it  should  rebuke  but  one. 
*  V.  I  close  with  the  Saviour's  warning  question—"//  they  do  tJies* 
things  in  the  green  tree,  wJmt  will  they  do  in  the  dry?''  Among  other 
things  methinks  he  meant  this—"  If  I,  the  innocent  substitute  for 
sinners,  suffer  thus,  what  will  be  done  when  the  sinner  himself— the 
dry  tree— whose  sins  are  his  own,  and  not  merely  imputed  to  him, 
shall  fall  into  the  hands  of  an  angry  God."  Oh !  ye  unregenerate  men 
and  women,  and  there  are  not  a  few  such  here  now,  remember  that 
when  God  saw  Christ  in  the  sinner's  place  he  did  not  spare  him,  and 


g  METKOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

when  he  finds  you  without  Christ,  he  will  not  spare  you.  You  have  seeit 

Jesus  led  away  by  his  enemies;  so  shall  you  be  dragged  away  by  fiend* 

to  the  place  appointed  for  you.     "  Deliver  him  to  the  tormentors,"  was* 

the  word  of  the  king  in  the  parable ;   it  shall  be  fulfilled  to  you 

"  Depart  ye  cursed  into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  hi 

angels."    Jesus  was  deserted  of  God;  and  if  he,  who  was  only  imputedly 

a  sinner,  was  deserted,  how  much  more  shall  you  be  ?   "  Eloi,  Eloi,  lamar 

saiachiham;'—yfha.t  an  awful  shriek !    But  what  shall  be  your  cry  when. 

you  shall  say,  "Good  God!  good  God!  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me':"^ 

and  the  answer  shall  come  back,   "Because  I  have  called,   and  yi 

refused;  I  have  stretched  out  my  hand,  and  no  man  regarded;  but 

ye  have  set  at  nought  all  my  counsel,  and  would  none  of  my  reproof 

I  also  will  laugh  at  your  calamity;  I  will  mock  when  your  fear  cometh ' 

These  are  awful  words,  but  they  are  not  mine;  they  are  the  very  word 

of  God  in  Scripture.     Oh !  sinner,  if  God  hides  his  face  from  Chris 

how  much  less  will  he  spare  you !   He  did  not  spare  his  Son  the  stripes 

Did  I  not  describe  last  Sabbath  the  knotted  scourges  which  fell  upo: 

the  Saviour's  back?   What  whips  of  steel  for  you,  what  knots  of  burniui 

wire  for  yon,  when    conscience  shall  smite  you,  when  the  law  shal 

scourge  you  with  its  ten-thonged  whip !     Oh !  who  would  stand  in  your 

place,  ye  richest,  ye  merriest,  ye  most  self-righteous  sinners— who  would 

stand  in  your  place  when  God  shall  say,  "  Awake  0  sword  against  the 

rebel,  against  the  man  that  rejected  me;  smite  him,  and  let  him  feel 

the  smart  for  ever!"     Christ  was  spit  upon  with  shame;  sinner,  what 

shame  will  be  yours  !     The  whole  universe  shall  hiss  you ;  angels  shalll 

be  ashamed  of  you;  your  own  friends,  yes,  your  sainted  mother,  shall 

say  "Amen"   to  your  condemnation;   and  those  who  loved  you  best 

bhall  sit  as  assessors  with  Christ  to  judge  you  and  condemn  you!     I 

cannot  roll  up  into  one  word  all  the  mass  of  sorrows  which  met  upon 

the  head  of  Christ  who  died  for  us,  therefore  it  is  impossible  for  me  tcyj 

tell  you  what  streams,  what  oceans  of  grief  must  roll  over  your  spirit 

if  you  die  as  you  now  are.    You  may  die  so,  you  may  die  now.    There-1 

are  more  unlikely  things  than  that  you  will  be  dead  before  next  Sunday. 

Some  of  you  will !     It  does  not  often  happen  that  five  or  six  thousand 

people  meet  together  twice;  it  never  does,  I  suppose;  the  scythe  of  death 

must  cut  some  of  you  down  before  my  voice  shall  warn  you  again!    Ohr 

souls,  I  do  beseech  you,  by  the  agonies  of  Christ,  by  his  wounds  and  by 

his  blood,  do  not  bring  upon  yourselves  the  curse;  do  not  bear  in  your 

own  persons  the  awful  wrath  to  come!    May  God  deliver  you!    Trust  in 

the  Son  of  God  and  you  shall  never  die. 

The  Lord  bless  you,  for  Jesu's  own  sake.    Amen. 


THE  GEEAT  CEOSS-BEAREE  AND  HIS  FOLLOWERS. 


%  ^mm 


•Betjvered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  October  8th,  1882,  bt 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    metropolitan    TABEHNACLE,    NKWINOTON. 


"  And  when  they  had  mocked  him,  they  took  off  the  purple  from  him,  and  put  his 
^Own  clothes  on  him,  and  led  him  out  to  crucify  him."— Mark  xv.  20. 

**  And  he  bearing  his  cross  went  forth.''— John  xix.  17. 

"  And  they  compel  one  Simon  a  Cyrenian,  who  passed  by,  commg  out  of  the  country, 
the  father  of  Alexander  and  Eufus,  to  bear  his  cross."— Mark  xv.  21. 

When  our  Lord  had  been  condemned  to  die,  the  execution  of  his 
-sentence  was  hurried.  The  Jews  were  in  great  haste  to  shed  his  blood  : 
•so  intense  was  the  enmity  of  the  chief  priests  and  Pharisees  that  every 
moment  of  delay  was  wearisome  to  them.  Besides,  it  was  the  day  of  the 
Passover,  and  they  wished  to  have  this  matter  finished  before  they  went 
with  hypocritical  piety  to  celebrate  the  festival  of  Israel's  deliverance. 
We  do  not  wonder  at  their  eagerness,  for  they  could  not  bear  themselves 
while  he  lived,  since  his  very  presence  reproved  them  for  their  false- 
hood and  hypocrisy.  But  at  Pilate  we  do  wonder,  and  herein  he  is  much 
^to  be  blamed.  In  all  civilized  countries  there  is  usually  an  interval 
-between  the  sentencing  of  the  prisoner  and  the  time  of  his  putting  to 
4eath.  As  the  capital  sentence  is  irreversible,  it  is  well  to  have  a  little 
:space  in  which  possible  evidence  may  be  forthcoming,  which  may  prevent 
Jthe  fatal  stroke.  In  some  countries  we  have  thought  that  there  has  beea 
a  cruelly  long  delay  between  the  sentence  and  the  execution,  but  with  the 
Romans  it  was  usual  to  allow  the  reasonable  respite  of  ten  days.  Now, 
1  do  not  say  that  it  was  incumbent  upon  Pilate  according  to  Roman 
'law  to  have  allow^ed  ten  days  to  a  Jew,  who  had  not  the  rights  of  Roman 
•citizenship  ;  but  I  do  say  that  he  might  have  pleaded  the  custom  of  his 
<;ountry,  and  so  have  secured  a  delay,  and  afterwards  he  might  have 
.released  his  prisoner.  It  was  within  his  reach  to  have  done  so,  and  he 
was  culpable,  as  he  was  all  along,  in  thus  yielding  to  the  clamour  for 
an  immediate  execution  for  no  other  reason  than  this,  that  he  was 
"  willing  to  content  the  people."  When  once  we  begin  to  make  the 
wishes  of  other  men  our  law  we  know  not  to  what  extremity  of  criimiiality 
me  may  be  led ;  and  so  the  Saviour's  hasty  execution  is  due  to  Pilate's 
Nvacillating  spirit,  and  to  the  insatiable  blood-thirstiness  of  the  scribe* 

'Ann   r  nfli'iRPPS 

Being  given  over  to  death,  our  Saviour  was  led  away ;  and  I  suppose 
No.  1,683. 


470  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  painters  are  riglit  when  they  put  a  rope  about  his  neck  or  his  loins; 
for  the  idea  of  being  led  in  an  open  street  would  seem  to  imply  some 
sort  of  bond  :  "  He  was  led  as  a  sheep  to  the  slaughter."  Alas,  that  the- 
Emancipator  of  our  race  should  be  led  forth  as  a  captive  to  die  ! 

The  direction  in  which  he  is  led  is  outside  the  city.  He  must  not  die 
in  Jerusalem,  though  multitudes  of  prophets  had  perished  there.  Though 
the  temple  was  the  central  place  of  sacrifice,  yet  must  not  the  Son  of 
God  be  offered  there,  for  he  was  an  offering  of  another  kind,  and  must 
not  lie  upon  their  altars.  Outside  the  city,  because  by  the  Jews  he  was- 
treated  as  a  flagrant  offender  who  must  be  executed  at  the  Tyburn  of 
the  city,  in  the  appointed  place  of  doom  known  as  Calvary  or  Golgotha. 
When  Naboth  was  unjustly  condemned  for  blasphemy,  they  carried  him 
forth  out  of  the  city,  and  stoned  him  with  stones  that  he  died ;  and 
afterwards  Stephen, — when  they  cried  out  against  him  as  a  blasphemer, 
they  cast  him  out  of  the  city,  and  there  they  stoned  him.  Our  Saviour 
therefore  must  die  in  the  ordinary  place  of  execution,  that  in  all  respects- 
he  might  be  numbered  with  the  "transgressors.  The  rulers  of  the  city  so- 
loathed  and  detested  their  great  Reprover  that  they  rejected  him,  and 
would  not  suffer  him  to  die  within  their  city  walls.  Alas,  poor  Jeru*  , 
salem,  in  casting  out  the  Son  of  David,  thou  didst  cast  out  thy  last  hope: 
now  art  thou  bound  over  to  desolation. 

lie  was  led  outside  of  the  city  because  from  that  time  no  acceptable 
sacrifice  could  be  offered  there.  They  might  go  On  with  their  offering- 
of  daily  lambs,  and  they  might  sacrifice  their  bullocks,  and  burn  the  fat 
of  fed  beasts  ;  but  from  that  day  the  substance  of  the  sacrifice  had  gone 
away  from  them,  and  Israel's  offerings  were  vain  oblations.  Because 
the  true  sacrifice  is  rejected  of  them  the  Lord  leaves  them  nothing  but 
a  vain  show. 

Still  more  forcible  is  the  fact  that  our  Lord  must  die  outside  the  city 
because  he  was  to  be  consumed  as  a  sin-offering.  It  is  written  in 
the  law,  "  And  the  skin  of  the  bullock,  and  all  his  flesh,  with  his  head,. 
and  with  his  legs,  and  his  inwards,  and  his  dung,  even  the  whole  bullock 
shall  he  carry  forth  without  the  camp  unto  a  clean  place,  where  the 
ashes  are  poured  out,  and  burn  him  on  the  wood  with  fire."  There  were 
several  sorts  of  offerings  under  the  law  :  the  sweet-savour  offerings  were 
presented  upon  the  altar,  and  were  accepted  of  God,  but  sin-oftering* 
were  burnt  without  the  camp  or  gate,  because  God  can  have  no  fellow- 
ship with  sin.  Once  let  sin  be  imputed  to  the  sacrifice  and  it  becomes- 
abhorrent  to  God,  and  must  not  be  presented  in  the  tabernacle  or  the 
temple,  but  burned  outside  the  circle  wherein  his  people  have  their 
'  habitations.  And  here  let  our  hearts  gratefully  contemplate  how  truly 
our  Lord  Jesus  became  a  sin-offering  for  us,  and  how  in  every  point  he 
followed  out  the  type.  With  his  face  turned  away  from  his  Father  » 
house  he  must  go  to  die :  with  his  face  turned  away  from  what  were  once 
his  Father's  people  he  must  be  led  forth  to  be  crucified.  Like  a  thing- 
accursed,  he  is  to  be  hung  up  where  felons  suffer  condign  punish- 
ment. Because  we  were  sinners,  and  because  sin  had  turned  our  back» 
to  God,  and  because  sin  had  broken  our  communion  with  God's  accepted 
one^.  therefore  must  he  endure  this  banishment.  In  that  sorrowhjl 
march  of  the  cross-bearing  Saviuur  my  soul  with  sorrow  sees  herself 
reptesenled  as  deserving  thus  to  be  made  to  depart  unto  deuth  ;  and  yet 


THE   GREAT  CROSS-BEARER   AND   HIS   FOLLOWERS.  47 ^ 

joy  mingles  with  this  emotion,  for  the  glorious  Siti-bearer  hath  thus 
taken  away  our  sin,  and  we  return  from  our  exile  :  his  substitution 
is  infinitely  effectual.  Well  may  those  live  for  whom  Jesus  died.  Well 
may  those  return  in  whose  place  the  Son  of  God  was  banished.  There 
is  entrance  into  the  holy  city  now,  there  is  entrance  into  the  temple  now, 
there  is  access  unto  God  himself  now,  because  the  Lord  hath  put  away 
our  sin  through  him  who  was  led  to  be  crucified  outside  the  city  gate. 

Nor  do  I  think  that  even  this  exhausts  the  teaching.  Jesus  dies  out- 
side Jerusalem  because  he  died,  not  for  Jerusalem  alone,  nor  for  Israel 
alone.  The  effect  of  his  atonement  is  not  circumscribed  by  the  walls  of 
a  city  nor  by  the  bounds  of  a  race.  In  him  shall  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth  be  blessed.  Out  in  the  open  he  must  die,  to  show  that  he  recon- 
ciled both  Jews  and  Gentiles  unto  God.  '*  For  he  is  the  propitiation  for 
our  sins,''  saith  Paul,  who  was  himself  a  Jew,  "  and  not  for  ours  only, 
but  also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world."  Had  he  been  the  Saviour  of 
Jews  only,  seclusion  in  the  place  of  his  offering  would  have  been  appro- 
priate, but  as  he  dies  for  all  nations,  he  is  hunuj  up  without  the  city. 

And  yet,  once  more,  he  suffered  outside  the  gate  that  we  might  go 
forth  unto  him  without  the  camp,  bearing  his  reproach.  "  Come  ye  out 
from  among  them;  be  ye  separate,  touch  not  the  unclean  thing,"  hence-  . 
forth  becomes  the  command  of  God  to  all  his  sons  and  daughters  : 
behold  the  Son  of  sons,  his  Only-begotten,  leads  the  way  in  noncon- 
formity to  this  present  evil  world,  being  himself  officially  severed  from 
the  old  Jewish  church,  whose  elders  seek  his  life.  He  dies  in  sacred 
separation  from  the  false  and  corrupt  corporation  which  vaunted  itself 
to  be  the  chosen  of  God.  He  protested  against  all  evil,  and  for  this 
he  died,  so  far  as  his  murderers  were  concerned.  Even  so  must  his 
followers  take  up  their  cross  and  follow  him  withersoever  he  goeth,  even 
though  it  be  to  be  despised  and  rejected  of  men.  See  what  instruction* 
is  found  in  the  choice  of  the  place  wherein  our  great  Redeemer  offers 
himself  unto  God. 

I.  Let  us  draw  near  to  our  Lord  for  awhile,  and  carefully  observe 
each  instructive  detail.  Our  imagination  pictures  the  Blessed  One 
standing  outside  the  gate  of  Herod's  palace  in  the  custody  of  a  band  of 
soldiers  with  a  centurion  at  their  head,  and  we  begin  at  once  to  observe 
HIS  DRESS.  That  may  seem  a  small  matter,  but  it  is  not  without  in- 
struction. How  is  he  dressed  ?  Our  text  tells  us  that  when  they  had 
mocked  him  they  took  off  the  purple  from  him  and  put  his  own  clothe*. 
on  him ;  but  we  are  nob  told  that  they  took  off  the  crown  of  thorns,  ujid 
hence  it  has  been  currently  believed  that  he  continued  to  wear  it  to  the 
cross  and  on  the  cross.  Is  not  this  highly  probable?  Surely  if  the 
thorny  crown  had  beerj,  withdrawn  this  would  have  been  the  place  to 
have  said,  *'  They  took  off*  the  purple  from  him  and  removed  the  crown 
of  thorns" ;  but  it  is  not  so  written,  and  therefore  we  may  believe  that . 
the  sorrowful  coronet  remained  upon  him.  Pilate  wrote  upon  his 
accusation  "the  King  of  the  Jews,"  and  it  was  not  unfitting  that  he 
should  continue  to  wear  a  crown.  Jesus  died  a  crowned  monarch,  king 
of  the  curse.  The  Lord  God  in  justice  said  to  rebel  man,  "Cursed  is 
the  ground  for  thy  sake  :  thorns  also  and  thistles  shall  it  bring  forth  to 
thee ;  "  and  lo,  the  man  by  whom  we  are  redeemed  is  crowned  with  thftt . 
product  of  the  earth  which  came*  of  the  curse. 


472  METROPOLITAN   TABBKNACriE    PULPIT. 

•O  sacred  head  surrounded 
By  crown  of  piercing  thorn  ; 
O  bleeding  head,  so  wound*  d, 
Keviled  and  put  to  scorn." 

Probably  also,  as  I  have  said,  he  was  bound;  for  they  led  him  as  a 
sheep  to  the  slaughter ;  but  this  binding  was  probably  more  abundant 
than  that  which  we  have  hinted  at,  if  it  be  indeed  true  that  by  Roman 
custom  criminals  were  bound  with  cords  to  the  cross  which  they  were 
doomed  to  carry.  If  this  was  the  case,  you  may  picture  our  Lord  with 
his  cross  bound  to  himself,  and  hear  him  say,  **  Bind  the  sacrifice  with 
cords,  even  to  the  horns  of  the  altar." 

But  the  chief  point  to  be  noted  is  that  Jesus  wore  his  own  clotheSy  the 
usual  garments  which  he  was  accustomed  to  wear,  and  this  no  doubt  for 
identification,  that  all  who  looked  on  might  know  that  it  was  the  same 
person  who  had  preached  in  their  streets  and  had  healed  their  sick. 
They  were  under  no  misapprehension ;  they  knew  that  it  was  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  :  the  keen  hate  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  would  not  have 
permitted  any  substitution  of  another.  It  was  none  other  than  he,  and 
his  garments  were  the  ensigns  of  that  truth.  He  wore  his  own  clothes 
also  for  another  reason,  namely,  that  there  might  be  a  fulfilment  of 
prophecy.  It  may  not  strike  you  at  first,  but  you  will  soon  see  it.  Our 
Lord  must  not  go  to  die  in  the  purple :  he  must  march  to  the  cross  in 
that  vestment  which  was  without  seam  and  woven  from  the  top  through- 
out, or  else  the  word  could  not  have  been  fulfilled,  "  They  parted  my 
garments  among  them,  and  upon  my  vesture  did  they  cast  lots."  Other 
raiment  could  readily  have  been  rent  and  divided,  but  this  garment, 
which  was  peculiar  to  the  Saviour,  could  not  have  been  so  rent  without 
destroying  it,  and  therefore  the  soldiers  cast  lots  for  it.  Little  did  they 
who  put  it  on  him  dream  that  they  were  thus  accessory  to  the  fulfilment 
of  a  prophecy.  Does  it  not  strike  you  as  strange  that  the  Pharisees,  who 
were  so  full  of  hatred  to  Christ,  did  not  carefully  draw  back  from  the 
fulfilment  of  so  many  types  and  prophecies  ?  Their  rabbis  and  teachers 
knew  the  prophecy  of  Zechariah,  that  the  Messiah  should  be  sold  for 
thirty  pieces  of  silver :  why  did  it  not  occur  to  them  to  make  their  bribe 
to  Judas  twenty-nine  or  thirty-one  silver  pieces?  Why,  again,  did  they 
cast  the  price  unto  the  potter  by  buying  of  him  the  field  of  blood  ? 
Could  they  not,  so  to  speak,  have  baulked  the  prophecy  thereby  ?  Here 
were  voluntarily  fulfilled  by  themselves  prophecies  which  condemned 
them.  I  shall  have  to  show  you  the  same  thing  further  on;  but 
meanwhile  observe  that  if  it  had  been  their  object  to  fulfil  type  and 
prophecy  they  could  not  have  acted  more  carefully  than  they  did.  Sc 
they  put  his  own  garments  on  him,  and  unwittingly  they  furnished  the 
possibility  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophet's  word :  "They  parted  my 
garments  among  them,  and  cast  lots  upon  my  vesture." 

To  me  there  occurs  one  other  thought  touching  his  wearing  his  own 
garments.  I  do  not  know  if  I  can  express  it,  but  it  seems  to  me  to 
indicate  that  our  Lord's  passion  was  a  true  and  natural  part  of  his  life  ; 
he  died  as  he  lived.  His  death  was  not  a  new  departure,  but  the  com- 
pletion of  a  life  of  self-sacrifice,  and  so  he  had  no  need  to  put  on  a  fresh 
garb.  Look  !  He  goes  to  die  in  his  ordinary  everyday  garments  !  Does 
not  it  almost  seem  as  if  people  put  on  their  Sunday  clothes  because 


THE   GREAT   CROSS-BEARER   AND   HIS   FOLLOWERS.  473 

they  regard  religion  as  something  quite  distinct  from  their  common  life? 
Do  you  not  wish  to  see  godliness  iu  work-day  clothes  ?  religion  in  its 
shirt-sleeves  ?  grace  in  a  smock-frock  ?  Do  you  not  almost  cry  concerniug 
•some  loud  talkers, —  "  Put  his  own  clothes  on  him,  and  then  lead  him  out 
and  let  us  see  him  "  ?  It  should  be  an  integral  part  of  our  life  to  live  and 
to  die  for  our  God.  Must  we  become  other  men  if  we  are  to  be  God's 
men  ?  Can  we  not  wear  our  own  clothes,  habits,  characteristics,  and 
peculiarities  and  serve  the  Lord?  Is  there  not  some  suspicion  of  un- 
naturalness  in  services  which  require  men  to  put  on  a  strange,  out- 
landish dress  ?  Surely  they  find  their  worship  to  be  on  another  level 
than  their  life  ;  fchey  must  step  out  of  their  way  and  dress  up  to  attend 
to  it.  It  is  ill  for  a  man  when  he  cannot  lead  his  fellows  in  prayer  till 
he  has  gone  to  the  wardrobe.  Time  was  when  vestments  meant  some- 
thing ;  but  ever  since  our  great  High-priest  went  up  to  his  one  sacrifice 
wearing  his  common  clothes,  all  types  are  fulfilled  and  laid  aside.  Now, 
we  pray  not  officially,  or  we  should  need  the  robe  ;  but  we  pray  per- 
sonally, and  oar  own  clothes  suit  us  well.  Jesus  continued  the  unity  of 
his  life  as  he  approached  its  close,  and  did  not  even  in  appearance  change 
his  way  ;  he  lived  to  die  a  sacrifice  ;  this  was  the  climax  of  his  life,  the 
apex  of  the  towering  pyramid  of  his  perfect  obedience.  No  mark  is  set, 
no  line  is  drawn  between  his  passion  and  all  the  rest  of  his  life  ;  nor 
should  there  be  a  screen  between  our  life  and  death.  Somehow,  I  dread 
a  death  which  is  meant  to  be  pictorial  and  exhibitional.  I  am  not  an 
admirer  of  Addison's  death,  as  some  are,  who  praise  him  because 
he  sent  for  a  young  lord,  and  cried,  "  Come,  see  how  a  Christiari 
can  die  I  "  I  like  better  Bengel's  wish  when  he  desired  to  die  just  as  a 
person  would  slip  out  from  company  because  some  one  beckoned  him  out- 
side. Such  a  person  modestly  thinking  his  presence  or  absence  to  be  of 
small  account  in  a  great  world,  quietly  withdraws,  and  friends  only  ob- 
serve that  he  is  gone.  Death  should  be  part  of  the  usual  curriculum, 
the  close  of  the  day's  work,  the  entrance  into  harbour  which  ends  the 
voyage.  It  is  well  to  feel  that  you  can  die  easily,  because  you  have  done 
it  so  many  times  before.  He  who  dies  daily  will  not  fear  to  die.  Bathe 
in  the  Jordan  often,  and  you  will  not  dread  the  fordiuir  of  it  when  your 
hour  has  come.  Our  blessed  Lord  lived  such  a  dying  life  that  he  made 
no  show  of  death,  he  did  not  change  his  tone  and  spirit  any  more  than 
his  garments,  but  died  as  he  lived.  They  put  his  own  clothes  on  him  : 
he  had  not  himself  taken  them  ofiP ;  it  was  no  wish  of  his  to  wear  the 
puri)le  even  for  an  hour  either  in  reality  or  in  mockery.  He  was  ever- 
more the  same,  and  his  own  vesture  best  beseemed  him. 

Truly,  blessed  Master,  we  may  well  say,  "  All  thy  garments  smell  of 
myrrh,  and  aloes,  and  cassia '' ;  even  though  they  take  thee  not  out  of 
"**  the  ivory  palaces  wherein  they  have  made  thee  glad"  ;  but  out  of  the 
oommon  guard-room,  where  they  had  made  thee  to  be  despised  and 
mocked  and  spit  upon.  Come  from  whence  thou  mayest,  thy  vesture 
hath  a  fragrant  smell  about  it,  and  all  thy  brethren  rejo     •  therein. 

II.  Brethren,  I  beg  jou  for  a  few  minutes  to  look  ac  his  company. 
Who  were  they  that  were  with  our  Lord  when  he  came  to  die  ?  First 
and  nearest  to  him  were  the  rough  Roman  soldiers,  strong,  muscular,  un- 
feeling men,  ready  to  shed  blood  at  any  moment.  In  them  human  affec- 
tion was  kept  down  by  stern  discipline,  they  were  the  iron  instruments 


474  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACa:iB  PULPIT. 

of  an  empire  of  iron.  Tliey  would  do  what  they  were  bidden,  and 
feeling  and  sympathy  were  not  allowed  to  interfere.  I  do  but  bid 
you  look  at  these  guards  to  remind  you  that  from  beneath  their  eagle 
our  Saviour  won  a  trophy ;  for  their  centurion  at  our  Lord's  death  uttered 
the  confession,  ''Certainly  this  was  the  Son  of  God."  This  was  a  blessed 
confession  of  faith,  and  I  delight  to  think  of  our  Lord  as  thus  becoming 
the  conqueror  of  his  conquerors  by  taking  one  out  of  them  to  be  his  dis- 
ciple and  witness,  as  we  would  fain  beheve  he  was.  Surely  afier  openly 
making  the  clear  confession  which  the  evangelist  has  recorded  we  may 
number  him  with  believers. 

Next  to  these  guards  were  two  malefactorSf  led  out  with  him  to  exe- 
cution. That  was  intended  to  increase  his  scorn.  He  must  not  be  sepa- 
rated from  the  basest  of  men,  but  he  must  be  led  forth  between  two 
thieves,  having  previously  had  a  murderer  preferred  to  him.  They 
seem  to  have  been  very  hardened  scoun>lrels,  for  they  reviled  him.  I 
mention  them  because  our  Lord  won  a  tropliy  by  the  conversion  of  one 
of  them,  who  dying  said,  "We  suffer  justly,  but  this  man  hath  done 
nothing  amiss,"  and  then  prayed,  "Lord,  remember  me  when  thou 
comest  into  thy  kingdom."  This  dying  thief  has  brought  more  glory 
to  Christ  than  hundreds  of  us,  for  in  every  place  wherever  this  gospel 
has  been  preached  this  has  been  told  as  a  memorial  of  him,  and  as  a  com- 
fort to  the  guiltiest  to  look  to  Jesus.  In  the  act  of  death  he  believed 
in  Christ,  and  believed  when  the  Lord  himself  was  in  the  act  of  death, 
and  that  day  he  was  with  him  in  paradise..    How  hast  thou  conquered, 

0  thou  despised  of  men  !  How  hast  thou  won  by  thy  gentleness  both 
Roman  legionaries  and  Jewish  thieves. 

Beyond  the  prisoners  were  the  scribes  and  Pharisees^  and  high  priests. 

1  could  not  picture  their  faces,  but  surely  they  must  have  been  about  the 
worst  lot  of  human  physiognomies  that  were  ever  seen,  as  with  a  fiendish 
delight  they  stured  at  Jesus.  He  had  called  them  "hypocrites":  he 
had  spoken  of  them  as  "  making  clean  the  outside  of  the  cup  and 
platter,"  while  their  inner  part  was  very  wickedness,  and  now  they  are 
showing  their  venom,  and  silencing  his  reproofs.  .  But  their  hate  was  so 
insatiable  that  it  was  accompanied  with  fear,  and  that  night  it  was  seen 
that  Christ  had  conquered  them,  for  they  crouched  before  Pilate  and 
begged  a  guard  to  prevent  their  victim  from  leaving  the  tomb.  In  their 
heart  of  hearts  they  feared  that  after  all  he  might  be  the  Son  of  God. 
Thus  were  they  also  vanquished:  though  to  them  the  Lord  Jesus 
was  a  savour  of  death  unto  death,  yet  they  could  not  but  be  affected  by 
him  and  vanquished  by  his  death.  Their  hate  brought  with  it  alarm, 
and  fear, '  and  agitation  :  they  trembled  before  the  Nazarene.  Look  at 
the  scene!  Though  the  despised  and  sorrowful  One  is  bowed  down 
beneath  his  cross  you  can  see  at  a  glance  the  majesty  which  dwells  in 
him ;  but  as  you  look  at  ihem^  the  mean,  wretched  seed  of  the  serpent, 
they  seem  to  go  upon  their  bellies,  and  dust  is  their  meat.  He  is  all 
truth  and  openness,  and  they  are  all  cunning  and  craft.  You  can  see  at 
a  glance  that  as  an  angel  is  to  the  fiends  of  hell,  so  is  the  Christ  to  his 
persecutors.  That  face  distained  with  spittle,  and  blackened  with  blows, 
and  encinctured  with  thorns  wears  a  more  than  imperial  glory,  while 
their  faces  are  as  the  countenances  of  slaves  and  criminals. 

Around  these  there  is  a  grmt  rabble^  and  if  you  look  into  the  mob  you 


THE   GREAT  CBOSS-BBARRR   AND   HIS   FOLLOWERS.  475' 

Bee  with  surprise  that  they  are  the  same  crowd,  who  a  week  a^o 
shouted  "  Hosaniia !  Hosanna  !  "  They  have  changed  their  note  and  cry^ 
«♦  Crucify  hira :  crucify  him  ";  for  a  few  pence  they  were  bribed  to  do  so :. 
they  were  an  ignorant,  fickle  mob.  When  such  do  hiss  at  you  for  doing 
right,  forgive  them.  When  they  point  the  finger  of  scorn  at  you  for  being- 
a  Christian,  regard  them  not.  It  httle  boots  what  they  may  say  or  do: 
they  yelled  at  him  who  was  their  best  Benefactor  and  ours.  The  Lord 
Christ  endured  the  popular  scorn  as  he  had  once  received  the  popular 
acclamation.  He  lived  above  it  all,  for  he  knew  that  men  of  low  degree  are- 
yanity.     *''  Vanity  of  vanities  "  ;  all  thac  comcth  of  vain  man  is  vanity. 

Ay,  but  there  was  a  little  change  for  the  better  in  the  company  :  there- 
was  just  a  streak  of  light  in  that  cloud,  fjr  kindly  ivomen  were  in  the- 
throng.  These  were  not  all  his  disciples,  perhaps  few  of  them  were 
such,  for  otherwise  he  would  not  have  bidden  them  weep  over  a  woe  which 
his  disciples  escaped ;  but  they  were  tender-hearted  women  who  could  not: 
look  upon  him  without  tears :  it  is  said  by  Luke  that  they  bewailed  and 
lamented  him.  They  knew  how  innocent  he  was,  and  how  kind  he  had 
been.  Perhaps  some  of  them  had  recei  ved  favours  at  his  hands,  and  there- 
fore they  wept  sore  that  he  should  die.  It  was  well  done  of  them.  In 
all  the  Evangelists  there  is  no  instance  of  a  woman  that  had  any  hand  in 
the  death  of  Christ.  As  far  as  they  are  connected  with  the  matter  they 
are  guiltless,  they  rather  oppose  his  death  than  promote  it.  Woman  was- 
last  at  the  cross  and  first  at  the  sepulchre,  and  therefore  we  can  never 
say  a  word  about  her  being  the  first  in  the  transgression.  Oh,  kindly 
eyes  that  gave  the  Lord  of  love  the  tribute  of  their  pity !  Blessed 
be  ye  of  compassionate  heaven!  But  the  Saviour  desired  not  at  that, 
time  that  human  sympathy  should  be  spent  upon  him,  for  his  great 
heart  was  big  with  sorrows  not  his  own.  He  knew  that  when  the  childrea 
of  those  women  had  grown  up,  and  while  yet  some  of  the  younger 
women  would  still  be  alive,  their  awful  woe  would  make  them  exclaim^ 
"  Blessed  are  the  barren  and  the  wombs  that  never  bear,  and  the  paps- 
that  never  gave  suck."  When  they  saw  the  slain  of  the  Romans,  and  the- 
slain  of  their  own  contending  factions  then  would  they  mourn.  The 
Master  therefore  said — 

"Weep  not  for  me!    Oh!  weep  not,  Salem's  daughters. 
Faint  though  ye  see  me,  stay  the  bursting  tear ; 
Turn  the  sad  tide — the  tide  of  bitter  waters-^ 
Back  on  yourselves  for  desolation  near." 

It  was  well  on  the  woman's  part;  it  was  better  still  on  his,  that  he 
gently  set  the  draught  of  sympathy  on  one  side,  because  their  coming 
sorrow  oppressed  him  more  deeply  than  his  own. 

We  must  now  leave  the  company,  but  not  till  we  have  asked,  Where 
are  his  disciples  ?  Where  is  Peter  ?  Did  he  not  say,  "  1  will  go  with 
thee  to  prison  and  to  death"?  Where  is  John?  Where  are  they  all  t 
They  have  fled,  and  have  not  yet  returned  to  speak  a  word  to  him  or  for. 
him.  Holy  women  are  gathering,  but  where  are  the  men?  Though  the 
women  are  brave  and  act  like  men,  the  men  are  fearful  and  act  as- 
women.  We  are  poor  helpers  to  our  Master.  Had  we  been  there,  we 
should  have  done  the  same  as  they  did,  if  not  worse,  for  they  were  the 
flower  of  our  Israel     Ah,  me,  how  little  worth  are  we .  for  whom  tha 


476  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACT.E   PULPIT. 

Ever-blessed  paid  so  much !  Let  us  give  clearer  proof  of  loyalty,  and 
follow  our  Prince  more  closely. 

III.  But  now,  come  closer  to  the  Saviour:  break  throu;s:h  the  com- 
pany, and  hear  my  third  talk  with  you  while  you  look  a  little  on  his 
BURDEN.  May  the  good  Spirit  teach  me  how  to  depict  my  Lord.  We 
%Te  told  by  John  that  our  Saviour  **  went  forth  bearing  his  cross." 
We  might  have  supposed,  so  far  as  the  other  three  evano^elists  are 
concerned,  that  Simon  the  Cyrenian  had  carried  the  cross  all  the 
way,  but  John  fills  up  the  blank  space  in  their  accounts.  Our  Lord 
carried  his  own  cross  at  the  commencement  of  the  sorrowful  pilgrimage 
to  Calvary. 

This  was  done,  first,  by  way  of  increasing  his  shame.  It  was  a 
custom  of  the  Romans  to  make  felons  bear  their  own  gibbet,  and  there 
is  a  word  in  the  Latin,  furcifer,  which  signifies  "  gallows  bearer,"  which 
was  hissed  at  men  in  contempt,  just  as  nowadays  a  despised  individual 
might  be  called  a  "gallows-bird."  Nothing  was  more  disgraceful,  and 
therefore  that  must  be  added  to  the  Redeemer's  load  of  shame.  He 
made  himself  of  no  reputation  for  our  sakes. 

Note,  next,  its  weight.  Usually  only  one  beam  of  the  cross  was  car- 
ried :  it  may  have  been  so  now.  It  does  not  look  so,  however ;  for  the 
expression,  **  bearing  his  cross,"  would  naturally  mean  the  whole  of  it. 
It  is  highly  probable  that,  although  that  load  could  easily  be  borne  by 
the  rough,  coarse  criminals  who  ordinarily  suflPered,  yet  not  so  readily  by 
the  tender  and  more  exquisite  frame  of  our  divine  Lord.  It  is  difficult 
to  find  any  other  reason  why  they  should  have  laid  the  cross  on  Simon, 
unless  it  be  true,  as  tradition  says,  that  he  fainted  beneath  the  burden. 
I  care  nothing  for  tradition,  nor  even  for  conjecture ;  but  still  there 
must  have  been  a  reason,  and  as  we  cannot  believe  that  these  people 
had  any  real  mercy  for  Christ,  we  think  they  must  have  acted  upon  the 
cruel  wish  that  he  might  not  die  on  the  road,  but  might  at  least  live  to 
be  nailed  to  the  tree.  "The  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  are  cruel.'* 
This  I  leave. 

And  now  I  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  there  was  a  typical 
•evidence  about  this.  If  Simon  had  carried  Christ's  cross  all  the  way,  we 
should  have  missed  the  type  of  Isnac,  for  Isaac  when  he  went  to  Mount 
Moriah  to  be  offered  up  by  his  father  carried  the  wood  for  his  own 
sacrifice.  I  think  if  I  had  been  a  Jew,  full  of  hate  to  Jesus  Christ,  I 
would  have  said,  '*  Do  not  let  him  carry  his  cross :  that  will  be  too 
much  like  Isaac  carrying  the  wood."  No;  but  knowing  the  type,  tliey 
wantonly  fulfil  it.  It  is  their  own  will  that  does  it,  and  yet  the  prc- 
•destination  of  the  Eternal  is  fulfilled  in  every  jot  and  tittle,  and  our 
great  Isaac  carries  the  wood  with  which  he  is  to  be  offered  up  by  his 
Father.  How  marvellous  it  is  that  there  should  be  a  fixed  decree  aud 
jet  an  altogethei-  unlimited  free  agency. 

The  spirimal  meaning  of  it,  of  course,  was  that  Christ  in  perfect 
■obedience  was  then  carrying  the  load  of  our  disobedience.  The  cross, 
which  was  the  curse,  for  "  Cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree," 
is  borne  on  those  blessed  shoulders  which  were  submissive  to  the  will  of 
■God  in  all  things.  Our  Lord's  cro>s-bearing  is  the  representation  of  his 
i^earjug  all  our  sin,  and  therefore  in  it  we  rejoice. 

ii  also  iias  a  piopheiw  meaning:  that  cross  which  he  carried  through 


THE  GREAT  CROSS-BEARER   AND  HIS  FOLLOWERS  477 

Jerusalem  shall  go  through  Jerusalem  again.  It  is  his  great  weapon 
with  which  he  conquers  and  wins  the  world  :  it  is  his  sceptre  with  which 
he  shall  rule,  governing  the  hearts  of  his  people  by  no  more  forceful 
means  than  bv  the  love  manifested  on  his  cross.  "  Tlie  government  shall 
be  upon  his  shoulder;"  that  which  he  bore  on  his  shoulder  shall  win  obe- 
dience, and  they  that  take  his  yoke  upon  them  shall  find  rest  unto  their 
souls. 

ly.  I  wish  I  had  an  hour  during  which  I  might  speak  upon  the  last 
head,  which  bristles  with  points  of  interest ;  but  I  must  give  its  lessons 
to  yon  rather  iu  rough  remarks  than  in  studied  observations. 

The  last  thing  to  consider  is  his  cross-bearer.  We  are  not  told 
why  the  Roman  soldiers  laid  the  cross  on  Simon.  We  have  made  a 
conjecture;  but  we  leave  it  as  a  conjecture,  although  a  highly  probable 
one.  If  it  be  true,  it  lets  us  see  how  truly  human  our  Master  was.  H'> 
had  been  all  night  in  the  garden,  sw^eating  as  it  were  great  drops  01 
blood  in  his  anguish :  he  had  been  before  the  Sanhedrim,  he  had  beer 
befnre  Pilate,  then  before  Herod,  then  before  Pilate  again;  he  hau 
endured  scourging;  he  had  been  mocked  by  the  soldiery;  and  it  would 
have  been  a  great  wonder  if  the  human  frame  had  not  shown  some  sign 
of  exhaustion.  Holy  Scripture,  by  its  example,  teaches  us  great  reticence 
about  the  sufferings  of  Jesus.  Some  of  the  mediaeval  writers  and  certain 
god  people  who  write  devotional  books  are  too  apt  to  dilate  upon  every 
Si  Imposed  grief  of  our  Master,  so  as  to  harrow  up  your  feelings  ;  but  it  is 
the  part  of  wisdom  to  imitate  the  ancient  painter  who,  when  he  depicted 
Agamemnon  as  sacrificing  his  daughter,  veiled  the  father's  face.  It  is 
indelicate  and  almost  indecent  to  write  as  some  have  done  who  would 
seem  to  be  better  acquainted  with  anatomy  than  awed  by  divinity. 
Much  that  Jesus  endured  must  for  ever  remain  veiled  to  us;  whether  he 
fainted  once  or  twice  or  thrice,  or  did  not  faint  at  all,  we  are  not  informed ; 
and  therefore  we  leave  the  idea  in  the  obscurity  of  probability,  and 
reverently  worship  him  who  was  tender  in  body  and  soul,  and  suffered 
even  as  we  do.  Oh,  love  surpassing  knowledge  which  could  make  him 
suffer  so ! 

There  was  a  great  singularity  in  the  providence  which  brought  Simon 
upon  the  scene  just  when  he  appeared.  The  right  man  came  forward  at 
the  right  moment.  That  Simon  did  not  come  at  first,  and  that  they  did 
not  place  the  cross  on  him  from  the  beginning  was  for  the  fulfilment  of 
the  type  of  Isaac  to  which  allusion  has  been  made:  thus  providence 
arranges  all  things  wisely. 

Observe  that  Simon  was  pressed  into  this  duty.  The  word  used 
signifies  that  the  person  is  impressed  into  the  royal  service.  Simon  was 
a  pressed  man,  and  probably  not  a  disciple  of  Christ  at  the  time  when  he 
was  loaded  with  the  cross.  How  often  has  a  burden  of  sorrow  been  the 
means  of  bringing  men  to  the  faith  of  Jesus  I  He  was  coming  in  from 
the  country  about  some  business  or  other,  and  him  they  compelled  to 
bear  his  cross,  impressing  him  into  the  service  which  else  he  would  have 
shunned,  for  "he  passed  by,"  and  would  have  gone  on  if  he  could. 
Roman  soldiers  were  not  accustomed  to  make  many  bones  about  what 
they  chose  to  do.  It  was  sufficient  for  them  that  he  came  under  their 
notice,  and  carry  the  cross  he  must. 

His  name  was  Simmi :  and  where  was  that  other  Simon  ?  What  a  silent, 


478  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACI.F,  PITT.PTT, 

but  Btronj?  rebuke  this  would  be  to  him.  Simon  Peter,  Simon  son  of 
Jonas,  where  wast  thou  ?  Another  Simon  has  taken  thy  place.  Some- 
times the  Lord's  servants  are  backward  whei-e  they  are  expected  to  be 
forward,  and  he  finds  other  servitors  for  the  time.  If  this  has  ever  hap- 
pened to  us  it  ought  gently  to  rebuke  us  as  long  as  we  live.  Brothers 
and  sisters,  keep  your  places,  and  let  not  another  Simon  occupy  your 
room.  It  is  of  Judas  that  it  is  said,  "his  bishopric  shall  another  take;" 
but  a  true  disciple  will  retain  his  office.  Remember  that  word  of  our 
Lord,  "  Hold  that  fast  which  thou  hast,  that  no  man  take  thy  crown." 
Simon  Peter  lost  a  crown  here,  and  another  head  wore  it. 

Simon  was  a  Cyrenian — an  African — I  wonder  if  he  was  a  black  man. 
In  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  at  the  thirteenth  chapter,  we  find  mention 
of  a  Simeon  that  was  called  Niger,  or  black.  We  do  not  know  whether 
he  was  the  same  man  or  no,  but  anyhow  he  was  an  African,  for  Gyrene 
lies  just  to  the  west  of  Egypt,  on  the  southern  coa»t  of  the  Mediterranean. 
Surely  the  African  has  had  his  full  share  of  cross-bearing  for  many  an 
age.  Oh  that  the  pangs  of  his  sorrow  may  bring  forth  a  birth  of  joy! 
Blessed  be  he,  whether  African  or  Englishman,  or  who  he  may,  that  has 
the  honour  of  bearing  the  cross  after  Christ. 

He  was  coming  in  from  the  country.  How  often  the  Lord  takes  into 
his  service  the  unsophisticated  country  people  who  as  yet  are  untainted 
by  the  cunning  and  the  vice  of  the  city.  Some  young  man  is  just  come 
up  from  the  country  this  very  week,  and  is  commencing  his  apprentice- 
ship in  London.  How  I  wish  my  Master  would  impress  him  at  the  city 
gates,  and  do  it  in  that  divine  way  of  his  to  which  the  will  of  the  im- 
pressed person  yields  a  sweet  consent.  Would  Grod  you  would  come  at 
once  and  take  up  the  cross  of  Jesus  just  at  the  city  gate,  before  you  learn 
the  city's  sin  and  plunge  into  its  dangers.  Happy  is  the  Simon  coming  in 
from  the  country  who  shall  this  day  be  led  to  bear  Christ's  cross.  Good 
Master,  fulfil  our  heart's  desire,  and  lay  thy  cross  on  some  unaccustomed 
shoulder  even  now. 

■  We  are  told  he  was  the  father  of  Alexander  and  Riifus.  Which, 
my  brethren,  is  the  greater  honour  to  a  man,  to  have  a  good  father,  or 
to  be  the  father  of  good  sons  ?  Under  the  Old  Testament  rule  we 
usually  read  of  a  man  that  he  is  the  son  of  such  an  one,  but  here  we 
come  to  another  style,  and  find  it  to  a  man's  honour  that  he  is  the  father 
of  certain  well-known  brethren, — "  the  father  of  Alexander  and  Rufus." 
Surely,  Mark  knew  these  two  sons,  or  he  would  not  have  cared  to  mention 
them ;  they  mijst  have  been  familiar  to  the  church,  or  he  would  not  have 
thus  described  their  father.  It  was  their  father  who  carried  the  cross. 
It  is  exceedingly  likely  that  this  Rufus  was  he  of  whom  Paul  speaks  in 
the  last  chapter  of  his  epistle  to  the  Romans,  for  Mark  was  with  Paul, 
and  by  this  means  knew  Simon  and  Rufus.  Paul  writes,  "  Salute  Rufus 
■chosen  in  the  Lord,  and  his  mother  and  mine."  His  mother  was  such  a 
motherly  person  that  she  had  been  a  mother  to  Paul  as  well  as  to  Rufus. 
Surely,  if  she  was  a  mother  to  Paul,  she  was  another  disciple  of  Jesus, 
and  it  would  look  as  if  this  man,  his  wife,  and  his  two  sons  all  bec:uae 
converts  to  our  Lord  after  he  had  carried  his  cross.  It  is  certainly  not 
the  most  unlikely  circumstance  that  has  beea  accepted  by  us  ou  the 
ground  of  pj-obabihty.  Oh,  what  a  blessing  to  a  man  to  be  known  by 
his  sons  I     Fray,  dear  Christian  friends,  you  that  have  an  Alexander  and 


THE  GtREAT   CROSS-BEARER   AND  HIS  FOLLOWERS.  479 

a  Rufas,  that  it   may  be   an   honour  to  you  to  be  known  as  their 
lather. 

"  Him  they  compelled  to  bear  his  cross," — perhaps  the  heavier  end 
of  it,  if  it  was  really  bound  to  Christ,  as  thpy  say;  or  as  I  judge,  the 
■whole  of  it.  It  matters  little  how  it  was ;  but  Simon  is  the  representative 
of  the  church  which  follows  Christ  bearing  his  cross.  Here  we  may 
recall  the  language  of  Paul :  *'  I  fill  up  that  which  is  behind/'  may  I 
paraphrase  it?— I  take  the  hinder  end, — "of  the  sufferings  of  Christ 
for  his  body's  sake,  that  is  the  church."  Everyone  that  will  live  godly 
in  Christ  Jesus  must  suffer  persecution.  Jesus  said,  "  Whosoever  doth 
not  bear  his  cross,  and  come  after  me,  cannot  be  my  disciple."  Here  is 
a  representative,  then,  of  all  the  godly — this  Simon  bearing  Christ's  cross. 

Mark,  it  was  not  a  cross  of  his  own  making,  like  those  of  monks  and 
nuns  who  put  themselves  to  pains  of  their  own  inventing.  It  was 
Christ's  cross  ;  and  he  carried  it  not  before  Christ,  as  some  do  who  talk 
of  their  poverty  as  though  it  would  get  them  to  heaven,  instead  of 
resting  on  Christ's  cross.  He  carried  it  after  Christ  in  its  right  place. 
This  is  the  order, — Christ  in  front  bearing  all  our  sin,  and  we  behind 
enduring  shame  and  reproach  for  him,  and  counting  it  greater  riches 
than  all  the  treasures  of  Egypt. 

There  is  Simon,  and  we  will  view  him  as  a  lesson  to  ourselves.  First, 
let  Simon  be  an  example  to  us  all,  and  let  us  readily  take  up  the  cross 
after  Christ.  AVhatever  is  involved  in  being  a  Christian,  rejoice  at  it. 
If  there  be  any  shame,  if  there  be  any  contumely,  if  there  be  any  loss,  if 
there  be  any  suffering,  even  if  it  were  martyrdom,  yet  gladly  take  up  the 
the  cross.     Behold,  the  Father  lays  it  upon  you  for  Christ's  sake. 

The  next  is  advice  to  any  of  you  that  have  been  compelled  to  suffer  as 
Christians  though  you  are  not  Christians.  I  wonder  whether  there  is 
anybody  here  who  is  only  a  press-man  and  yet  has  to  bear  the  cross. 
A  working  man  became  a  teetotaler :  he  did  not  mean  to  be  a  Christian, 
but  when  he  went  to  work  his  mates  tempted  him  to  drink,  and  as  he 
would  not  join  them  they  attacked  him  as  a  Christian,  and  said,  "  You 
are  one  of  those  canting  hypocrites,  those  Wesleyans,  those  Presbyterians, 
©r  those  Spurgeonites!  "  This  is  not  true  of  you :  but  thus  you  see  the 
cross  is  forced  on  you  :  had  you  not  better  take  it  up  and  bear  it  joyfully  ? 
They  have  pressed  you  into  this  service :  take  it  as  an  index  of  the  will 
of  providence,  and  say,  "  I  will  not  be  a  Dress-man  only ;  I  will  be  a 
volunteer,  and  I  will  cheerfully  carry  Christ's  cross."  I  know  a  man  who 
merely  comes  to  this  place  of  worship  because  he  is  somewhat  interested 
with  the  preaching,  though  he  has  no  idea  of  being  a  converted  man ; 
yet  in  the  street  where  he  lives  nobody  ever  goes  to  a  place  of  worship, 
and  therefore  they  set  him  down  as  a  pious  man,  and  some  have  even 
ridiculed  him  for  it.  Friend,  you  are  in  for  it  because  you  attend  here, 
and  you  put  me  in  for  it  too,  for  if  you  do  anything  wrong  they  are 
sure  to  lay  all  the  blame  on  me.  They  say — "  That  is  one  of  Spurgeon's 
people."  You  are  not:  I  do  not  own  you  as  yet;  but  the  outsiders  have 
pushed  you  into  the  responsibilities  of  a  religious  profession,  and  you  had 
better  go  in  for  its  privileges.  They  have  laid  the  cross  upon  you,  do  not 
throw  it  off.  Come  on,  and  bring  that  dear  motherly  wife  with  you, 
anil  Alexander  and  Rufus  too.  The  church  will  be  glad  to  take  you  all 
in,  and  then  as  a  volunteer  you  shall  bear  Christ's  cross.     It  is,  however, 


480 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


a  remarkable  thing  that  some  should  first  of  all  be  forced  into  it  and 
then  become  willing  followers. 

Last  of  all,  if  you  and  I  are  cross-bearers,  here  is  a  sweet  thought. 
Are  we  carrying  a  cross  which  presses  us  heavily  just  now?  You  know 
you  are  to  be  like  your  Master,  and  if  so  there  will  be  someone  found  to 
help  you  bear  your  cross.  They  found  Simon  to  bear  the  cross  of  Jesus, 
and  there  is  a  Simon  somewhere  to  help  you.  Only  cry  to  the  Lord 
about  it,  and  he  will  find  you  a  friend.  If  Simon  is  not  forthcoming  I 
will  tell  you  what  to  do.  Imitate  Simon.  If  Simon  was  what  I  think 
he  was,  he  became  a  converted  man,  and  before  long  found  himself  in 
trouble  through  it,  and  he  at  once  went  to  the  Lord  in  prayer,  and  said^ 
"  Lord  Jesus,  I  am  resting  in  thee  alone.  Thou  didst  give  me  the  honour 
to  carry  thy  cross  once,  now,  I  beseech  thee,  carry  mine  !  "  This  is  what 
I  want  you  to  do  with  your  crosses  at  this  time.  You  that  have  to 
endure  hardness  for  Christ,  and  are  glad  to  do  it,  ask  him  to  bear  your 
burden  for  you.  He  has  borne  your  sins,  and  if  you  will  but  commit 
your  troubles  to  him,  joy  and  peace  through  believing  shall  stream  into 
your  souls  by  his  Holy  Spirit.     God  bless  you,  for  Ovist's  sake. 


UP  FROM  THE  C0UN:TRY,  AND  PRESSED  INTO 
THE  SERVICE. 


Delivered  on  Loud's-day  Morning,  August  2nd,  1885,   beinq 
the  day  previous  to  the  general  holiday,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON 


"And  they  compel  one  Simon  a  Cyrenian.  who  passed  by,  coming  out  of  the  country, 
the  father  of  Alexauder  and  Rufus,  to  bear  his  cross."— Mark  xv.  21. 

John  tells  us  that  our  Saviour  went  forth  bearing  his  cross  (John  xix.  17). 
We  are  much  indebted  to  John  for  inserting  that  fact.     The  other  evan- 
gehsts  mention  Simon  the  Cyrenian  as  bearing  the  cross  of  Christ ;  but 
John,  who  often  fills  up  gaps  which  are  left  by  the  other  three,  tells  us 
that  Jesus  set  out  to  Calvary  carrying  his  own  cross.      Our  Lord  Jesus 
came  out  from  Pilate's  palace  laden  with  his  cross,  but  he  was  so  ex- 
tremely emaciated  and  so  greatly  worn  by  the  night  of  the  bloody  sweat, 
that  the  procession  moved  too  slowly  for  the  rough  soldiers,  and  there- 
fore they  took  the  cross  from  their  prisoner  and  laid  it  upon  Simon ;  or 
possibly  they  laid  the  long  end  upon  the  shoulder  of  the  strong  country- 
man, while  the  Saviour  stfll  continued  to  bear  in  part  his  cross  till  he  came 
to  the  place  of  doom.     It  is  well  that  we  should  be  told  that  the  Saviour 
bore  his  cross ;   for  if  it  had  not  been  so,  objectors  would  have  had 
ground  for  disputation.      I  hear  them  say  :    You  admit  that  one  of 
the  most  prominent  types,  in  the  Old  Testament,  of  the  sacrifice   of 
the   Son  of  God,  was  Abraham's   offering  up   his  son  Isaac;    now, 
Abraham  laid  the  wood  upon  Isaac  his  son,  and  not  upon  a  servant. 
Should  not  therefore  the  Son  of  God  bear  the  cross  himself  ?  ^  Had 
not  our  Lord  carried  his  cross,  there  would  have  been  a  flaw  in  his 
fulfilment  of  the   type  ;   therefore,  the  Saviour  must  bear   the  wood 
when  he  goes  forth  to  be  offered  up  as  a  sacrifice.     One  of  the  greatest 
of  English  preachers  has  well  reminded  us  that  the  fulfilment  of  this 
type  appeared  to  have  been  in  eminent  jeopardy,  since,  at  the  very 
first,  our  Lord's  weakness  must  have  been  apparent,  and  the  reason  which 
led  to  the  laying  of  the  cross  upon  the  Cyrenian  might  have  prevented 
our  Lord's  carrying  the  cross  at  all.     If  the  soldiers  had  a  little  earlier 
put  the  cross  upon  Simon,  which  they  might  very  naturally  have  done, 
then  the  prophecy  had  not  been  fulfilled ;   but  God  has  the  minds 
No.  1,853.  Si 


.^^  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

of  men  so  entirely  at  his  control,  that  even  in  the  minutest  circumstance 
he  can  order  all  things  so  as  to  complete  the  merest  jots  and  tittles  of 
the  prophecy.  Our  Lord  was  made  to  be,  in  all  points,  an  Isaac,  and 
therefore  we  see  him  going  forth  bearing  the  wood  of  the  burnt -offering. 
Thus  jou  see  that  it  was  important  that  Jesus  should  for  a  while  bear 
his  own  cross. 

But  it  was  equally  instructive  that  some  one  else  should  be  made  a 
partaker  of  the  burden  ;  for  it  has  always  been  part  of  the  divine 
counsel  that  for  the  salvation  of  men  from  sin  the  Lord  should  be 
associated  with  his  church.  So  far  as  atonement  is  concerned,  the  Lord 
hath  trodden  the  winepress  alone,  and  of  the  people  there  was  none 
with  him  ;  but  as  far  as  the  conversion  of  the  world  is  concerned,  and 
its  rescue  from  the  power  of  error  and  wickedness,  Christ  is  not  alone. 
We  are  workers  together  with  God.  We  are  ourselves  to  be  in  the 
hands  of  God  part  bearers  of  the  sorrow  and  travail  by  which  men  are 
to  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  sin  and  Satan,  and  brought  into 
the  liberty  of  truth  and  righteousness.  Hence  it  became  important  that 
in  the  bearing  of  the  cross,  though  not  in  the  death  upon  it,  there 
should  be  yoked  with  the  Christ  one  who  should  follow  close  behind 
him.  To  bear  the  cross  after  Jesus  is  the  office  of  the  faithful.  Simon 
the  Cyrenian  is  the  representative  of  the  whole  church  of  God,  and  of 
«ach  believer  in  particular.  Often  had  Jesus  said,  "  Except  a  man  take 
up  his  cross  daily,  and  follow  me,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple";  and  now 
■at  last  he  embodies  that  sermon  in  an  actual  person.  The  disciple  must 
be  as  his  Master  :  he  that  would  follow  the  Crucified  must  himself  bear 
the  cross  :  this  we  see  visibly  set  forth  in  Simon  of  Cyrene  with  the 
oross  of  Jesus  laid  upon  his  shoulder. 

**  Shall  Simon  bear  the  cross  alone, 

And  all  the  rest  go  free  ? 
No ;  there's  a  cross  for  every  one, 

And  there's  a  cross  for  me." 

The  lesson  to  each  one  of  us  is  to  take  up  our  Lord's  cross  without 
delay,  and  go  with  him,  without  the  camp,  bearing  his  reproach.  That 
many  among  this  vast  and  mixed  congregation  may  imitate  Simon  is 
the  anxious  desire  of  my  heart.  With  holy  expectancy  I  gaze  upon 
this  throng  collected  from  all  parts  of  the  earth,  and  I  long  to  find  in 
it  some  who  will  take  my  Lord's  yoke  upon  them  this  day. 

I.  I  will  begin  with  this  first  remark,  that  unexpected  persons  \rb 
OFTEN  CALLED  TO  CROSS-BEARING.  Like  Simon,  they  are  impressed  into 
the  service  of  Christ.  Our  text  says:  '*They  compel  one  Simon  a 
Cyrftnian.  who  passed  by,  coming  out  of  the  country,  the  father  of 
Alexander  and  Rufus,  to  bear  his  cross."  Simon  did  not  volunteer,  but 
was  forced  into  this  work  of  cross-bearing.  It  would  seem  from  another 
evangelist  that  he  speedily  yielded  to  the  impressment,  and  lifted  the 
burden  heartily ;  but  at  first  he  was  compelled.  A  rude  authority  was 
exercised  by  the  guard  ;  who  being  upon  the  Governor's  business  acted 
with  high-handed  rigour,  and  forced  whomsoever  they  pleased  to  do 
their  bidding.  By  the  exercise  of  such  irresponsible  power  they  com- 
pelled a  passing  stranger  to  carry  Christ's  cross.  It  was  specially 
singular  that  the  man  to  have  this  honour  was  not  Peter,  nor  James, 
nor  John,  nor  any  one  of  the  many  who  had  for  years  listened  to  the 


UP  FROM  THE   COUNTRY,   AND   PRESSED   IKTO   THE   SERVICE.     483 

Redeemer's  speech ;  but  it  was  a  stranger  from  Northern  Africa,  who 
had  been  in  no  way  connected  with  the  life  or  teachings  of  Jesus  of 
Nazareth. 

Notice,  first,  that  he  ivas  an  unknown  man.  He  was  spoken  of  "  as 
one  Simon."  Simon  was  a  very  common  name  among  the  Jews,  almost 
as  common  as  John  in  our  own  country.  This  man  was  just  "  one 
Simon  " — an  individual  who  need  not  be  further  described.  But  the 
providence  of  God  had  determined  that  this  obscure  individual,  this 
certain  man.  or  I  might  better  say,  this  uncertain  man,  should  be  selected 
to  the  high  office  of  cross-bearer  to  the  Son  of  God.  I  have  an  impression 
upon  my  mind  that  there  is  "one  Simon"  here  this  morning,  who  has 
to  bear  Christ's  cross  from  this  time  forward.  I  feel  persuaded  that  I 
am  right.  That  person  is  so  far  unknown  that  most  probably  he  does 
not  recognise  a  single  individual  in  all  this  throng,  neither  does  anybody 
in  this  assembly  know  anything  of  him:  certainly  the  preacher  doesnoc. 
He  is  one  John,  one  Thomas,  or  one  William  ;  or  perhaps,  in  the  femi- 
nine, she  is  one  Mary,  one  Jane,  one  Maggie.  P>iend,  nobody  knows 
you  save  our  Father  who  is  in  heaven,  and  he  has  appointed  you  to  have 
fellowship  with  his  Son.  I  shall  roughly  describe  you  as  "one  Simon," 
and  leave  the  Holy  Spirit  to  bring  you  into  your  place  and  service.  But 
this  "  one  Simon  "  was  a  very  particular  "  one  Simon."  I  lay  the  emphasis 
where  there  might  seem  to  be  no  need  of  any  :  he  was  one  whom 
God  knew,  and  chose,  and  loved,  and  set  apart  for  this  special  service. 
In  a  congregation  like  the  present,  there  may  be  somebody  whom 
our  God  intends  to  use  for  his  glory  during  the  rest  of  his  life.  That 
person  sits  in  the  pew  and  listens  to  what  I  am  saying,  and  perhaps  as 
yet  he  does  not  begin  to  enquire  whether  he  is  that  "  one  Simon,"  that 
one  person ;  «nd  yet  it  is  so,  and  ere  this  sermon  is  ended,  he  shall 
know  that  the  call  to  bear  the  cross  is  for  him.  Many  more  un- 
likely things  than  this  have  happened  in  this  house  of  prayer.  I 
pray  that  many  a  man  may  go  out  from  this  house  a  different  man 
from  the  man  he  was  when  he  entered  it  an  hour  ago.  That  man  Sau), 
that  great  persecutor  of  the  church,  afterwards  became  such  a  mighty 
preacher  of  the  gospel  that  people  exclaimed  with  wonder,  ''There 
is  a  strange  alteration  in  this  man."  "Why,"  said  one,  "when  I  knew 
him  he  was  a  Pharisee  of  the  Pharisees.  He  was  as  bigoted  a  man  as 
ever  wore  a  phylactery,  and  he  hated  Christ  and  Christians  so  intensely 
that  he  could  never  persecute  the  Church  sufficiently."  "  Yes,"  replied 
another,  "  it  was  so  ;  but  he  has  had  a  strange  twist.  They  say  that 
he  was  going  down  to  Damascus  to  hunt  out  the  disciples,  and  some- 
thing happened ;  we  do  not  know  exactly  what  it  was,  but  evidently 
it  gave  him  such  a  turn  that  he  has  never  been  himself  since.  In  fact, 
he  seems  turned  altogether  upside  down,  and  the  current  of  his  life  is 
evidently  reversed  :  he  lives  enthusiastically  for  that  faith  which  once 
he  destroyed."  This  speedy  change  happened  to  "  one  Saul  of  Tarsus.'* 
There  were  plenty  of  Sauls  in  Israel,  but  upon  this  one  Saul  electing 
love  had  looked  in  the  counsels  of  eternity ;  for  that  Saul  redeeming 
love  had  shed  its  heart's  blood  ;  and  in  that  Saul  effectual  grace 
wrought  mightily.  Is  there  another  Saul  here  to 'day?  The  Lord 
grant  that  he  may  now  cease  to  kick  against  the  pricks,  and  may  we 
soon  hear  of  him,  "  Behold  he  prayeth."    I  feel  convinced  the  counter- 


484 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACFiE  PULPIT. 


part  of  that  "one  Simon"  is  in  this  house  at  this  moment,  and  my 
prayer  goes  up  to  God,  and  I  hope  it  is  attended  with  the  prayers  of 
many  thousands  besides,  that  he  may  at  once  submit  to  the  Lord  Jesus. 
It  did  not  seem  likely  that  Simon  should  bear  the  cross  of  Christ,  for 
he  was  a  atrangei'  ivho  had  newly  come  up  from  the  country.  He  probably 
knew  little  or  nothing  of  what  had  been  taking  place  in  Jerusalem; 
for  he  had  come  from  another  continent.  He  was  "  one  Simon  a  Cyre- 
nian  ;  "  and  I  suppose  that  Cyrene  could  not  have  been  less  than  eight 
hundred  miles  from  Jerusalem.  It  was  situated  in  what  is  now  called 
Tripoli,  in  Northern  Africa,  in  which  place  a  colony  of  Jews  had  been 
formed  long  before.  Very  likely  he  had  come  in  a  Roman  galley  from 
Alexandria  to  Joppa,  and  there  had  been  rowed  through  the  surf,  and 
landed  in  time  to  reach  Jerusalem  for  the  Passover.  He  had  long 
wanted  to  come  to  Jerusalem  ;  he  had  heard  the  fame  of  the  temple 
and  of  the  city  of  his  fathers ;  and  he  had  longed  to  see  the  great 
Assembly  of  the  tribes,  and  the  solemn  Paschal  feast.  He  had  travelled 
all  those  miles,  he  had  hardly  yet  got  the  motion  of  the  ship  out  of  his 
brain,  and  it  had  never  entered  into  his  head  that  he  should  be  im- 
pressed by  the  Roman  guard,  and  made  to  assist  at  an  execution.  It 
was  a  singular  providence  that  he  should  come  into  the  city  at  the 
moment  of  the  turmoil  about  Jesus,  and  should  have  crossed  the  street 
just  as  the  sad  procession  started  on  its  way  to  Golgotha.  He 
passed  by  neither  too  soon  nor  too  late ;  he  was  on  the  spot  as  punctually 
as  if  he  had  made  an  appointment  to  be  there  ;  and  yet,  as  men  speak, 
it  was  all  by  mere  chance.  I  cannot  tell  how  many  providences  had 
worked  together  to  bring  him  there  at  the  nick  of  time,  but  so  the  Lord 
would  have  it,  and  so  it  came  about.  He,  a  man  there  in  Cyrene,  in 
Northern  Africa,  must  at  a  certain  date,  at  the  tick  of  the  clock,  be  at 
Jerusalem,  in  order  that  he  might  help  to  carry  the  cross  up  to  Mount 
Calvary ;  and  he  was  there.  Ah  !  my  dear  friend,  I  do  not  know  what 
providences  have  been  at  work  to  bring  you  here  to-day ;  perhaps  very 
strange  ones.  If  a  little  something  had  occurred  you  had  not  taken 
this  journey ;  it  only  needed  a  small  dust  to  turn  the  scale,  and  you 
would  have  been  hundreds  of  miles  from  this  spot,  in  quite  another 
scene  from  this.  Why  you  are  here  you  do  not  yet  know,  except  that 
you  have  come  to  listen  to  the  preacher,  and  join  the  throng.  But  God 
knoweth  why  he  hath  brought  you  here.  I  trust  it  will  be  read  in  the 
annals  of  the  future  : 

"  Thus  the  eternal  mandate  ran, 
Almighty  grace  arrest  that  man." 

God  has  brought  you  here,  that  on  this  spot,  by  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel,  you  may  be  comp'elled  to  bear  the  cross  of  Jesus.  I  pray  it  may 
be  so.  "  One  Simon  a  Cyrenian,  coming  out  of  the  country,"  is  here 
after  a  long  journey,  and  this  day  he  will  begin  to  live  a  higher  and  a 
better  life. 

Further,  notice,  Simon  had  corns  for  another  purpose.  He  had  journeyed 
to  Jerusalem  with  no  thought  of  bearing  the  cross  of  Jesus.  Probably 
Simon  was  a  Jew  far  removed  from  the  land  of  his  fathers,  and  he  had 
made  a  pilgrimage  to  the  holy  city  to  keep  the  passover.  Every  Jew  loved 
to  be  present  at  Jerusalem  at  the  Paschal  feast.  So,  to  put  it  roughly,  it  was 


UP   FROM   THE   COUNTRY,    AND   PRESSED   INTO   THE   SERVICE.     435 

fioliday-fcime  ;  it  was  a  time  for  making  an  excarsion  to  the  capital  :  it  was 
a  season  for  making  a  journey  and  going  up  to  the  great  city  which  was 
"beautiful  for  situation,  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth."  Simon  from  far- 
off  Gyrene  must  by  all  means  keep  the  feast  at  Jerusalem.  Mayhap  he 
had  saved  his  money  for  months,  that  he  might  pay  his  fare  to  Joppa; 
and  he  had  counted  down  the  gold  freely  for  the  joy  which  he  had  in 
going  to  the  city  of  David,  and  the  temple  of  his  God. 

He  was  come  for  the  passover,  and  for  that  only ;  and  he  would  be 
perfectly  satisfied  to  go  home  when  once  the  feast  was  over,  and  once 
he  had  partaken  of  the  lamb  with  the  tribes  of  Israel.  Then  he  could 
say  throughout  the  rest  of  his  life,  "  I,  too,  was  once  at  the  great  feast 
of  our  people,  when  we  commemorated  the  coming  up  out  of  Egypt.'* 
Brethren,  we  propose  one  way,  but  God  hath  other  propositions.  We 
say,  "  I  will  step  in  and  hear  the  preacher,"  but  God  means  that  the 
arrows  of  his  grace  shall  stick  fast  in  our  hearts.  Many  and  many  a 
time  with  no  desire  for  grace  men  have  listened  to  the  gospel,  and  the 
Lord  has  been  found  of  them  that  sought  him  not.  I  heard  of  one 
who  cared  little  for  the  sermon  till  the  preacher  chanced  to  use  that 
word  *'  eternicy,"  and  the  hearer  was  taken  prisoner  by  holy  thoughts, 
and  led  to  the  Saviour's  feet.  Men  have  stepped  into  places  of  worship 
even  with  evil  designs,  and  yet  the  purpose  of  grace  has  been  accom- 
plished ;  they  came  to  scoff,  but  they  remained  to  pray.  Some  have 
been  cast  by  the  providence  of  God  into  positions  where  they  have  met 
with  Christian  men,  and  a  word  of  adm  nition  has  been  blessed  to  them. 
A  lady  was  one  day  at  an  evening  party,  and  there  met  with  Csesar  Malan, 
the  famous  divine  of  Geneva,  who,  in  his  usual  manner,  enquired  of  her 
whether  she  was  a  Christian.  She  was  startled,  surprised,  and  vexed, 
and  made  a  short  reply  to  the  effect  that  it  was  not  a  question  she  cared 
to  discuss  ;  whereupon,  Mr.  Malan  replied  with  great  sweetness,  that  he 
would  not  persist  in  speaking  of  it,  but  he  would  pray  that  she  might 
be  led  to  give  her  heart  to  Christ,  and  become  a  useful  worker  for  him. 
Within  a  fortnight  she  met  the  minister  again,  and  asked  him  how 
she  must  come  to  Jesus.  Mr.  Malan's  reply  was,  "  Come  to  him  just  as 
you  are."  That  lady  gave  herself  up  to  Jesus  ;  it  was  Charlotte  Elliott, 
to  whom  we  owe  that  precious  hymn — 

"  Just  as  I  am — without  one  plea 
But  that  thy  blood  was  shed  for  me, 
And  that  thou  bidd'st  me  come  to  thee— 
O  Lamb  of  God,  I  come." 

It  was  a  blessed  thing  for  her  that  she  was  at  that  party,  and  that  the 
servant  of  God  from  Geneva  should  have  been  there,  and  should  have 
spoken  to  her  so  faithfully.  Oh  for  many  a  repetition  of  the  story  "of 
one  Simon  a  Cyrenian,"  coming,  not  with  the  intent  to  bear  the  cross,  but 
with  quite  another  mind,  and  yet  being  enlisted  in  the  cross-bearing 
army  of  the  Lord  Jesus! 

I  would  have  you  notice,  once  more,  that  this  man  was  at  this  par- 
ticular time  not  thinking  upon  the  subject  at  all,  for  he  was  at  that  time 
merely  passing  hy.  He  had  come  up  to  Jerusalem,  and  whatever  occupied 
his  mind  he  does  not  appear  to  have  taken  any  notice  of  the  trial  of  Jesus, 
or  of  the  sad  end  of  it.  It  is  expressly  said  that  he  *'  passed  by."  He 
was  not  even  sufficiently  interested  in  the  matter  to  stand  in  the  crowd 


436  METROPOLITAN   TABERNAOT.E  PULPIT. 

and  look  at  the  mournful  procession.  Women  were  weeping  there 
right  bitterly — the  daughters  of  Jerusalem  to  whom  the  Master  said, 
*'Weep  not  for  me,  but  weep  for  yourselves,  and  for  your  children'*; 
but  this  man  passed  by.  He  was  anxious  to  hurry  away  from  so  un- 
pleasant a  sight,  and  to  get  up  to  the  temple.  He  was  quietly 
making  his  way  through  the  crowd,  eager  to  go  about  his  business, 
and  he  must  have  been  greatly  surprised  and  distressed  when  a  roii^h 
hand  was  laid  upon  him,  and  a  stern  voic.^  said,  "  Shoulder  that 
cross.*'  There  was  no  resisting  a  Roman  centurion  when  he  gave  com- 
mand, and  so  the  countryman  meekly  submitted,  wishing,  no  doubt,  that 
he  were  back  in  Cyrene  tilling  the  ground.  He  must  naeds  stoop  his 
shoulder  and  take  up  a  new  burden,  and  tread  in  the  footsteps  of  the 
mysterious  personage  to  whom  the  cross  belonged.  He  was  only  passing 
by,  and  yet  he  was  enlisted  and  imp-essed  by  the  R)mans,  and,  as  I 
take  it,  impressed  by  the  grace  of  God  for  life;  for  whereas  Mark  says 
he  was  the  father  of  Alexander  and  Rafus,  it  would  seem  that  his  sons 
were  well  known  to  the  Christian  people  to  whom  Mark  was  writing.  If 
his  son  was  the  same  Rufus  that  Paul  mentions,  then  he  calls  her 
"his  mother  and  mine";  and  it  would  seem  that  Simon's  wife  and 
his  sons  became  believers  and  partakers  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ. 
His  contact  with  the  Lord  in  that  strange  compulsory  way  probably 
wrought  out  for  him  another  and  more  spiritual  contact  which  made 
him  a  true  cross-bearer.  0  ye  that  pass  by  this  day,  draw  nigh  to 
Jesus !  I  have  no  wish  to  call  your  attention  to  myself,  far  from  it ; 
but  I  do  ask  your  attention  to  my  Lord.  Though  you  only  intended  to 
slip  into  this  tabernacle  and  slip  out  again,  I  pray  that  you  m^iy  be 
arrested  by  a  call  from  my  Lord.  I  speak  as  my  Lord's  servant,  and  I 
would  constrain  you  to  come  to  him.  Stand  where  you  are  a  while,  and 
let  me  beg  you  to  yield  to  his  love,  which  even  now  would  cast  the  bands 
of  a  man  around  you.  I  would  compel  you,  by  my  Lord's  authority,  to 
take  up  his  cross  and  bear  it  after  him.  It  would  be  strange,  say  you. 
Ay,  so  it  might  be,  bat  it  would  be  a  glorious  event.  I  remember  Mr. 
Knill,  speaking  of  his  own  conversion,  used  an  expression  which  I  should 
like  to  use  concerning  one  of  you.  Here  it  is  :  "  It  was  just  a  quarter 
past  twelve,  August  2nd,  when  twang  went  every  harp  in  Paradise ; 
for  a  sinner  had  repented."  May  it  bo  so  with  you.  Oh  that  every 
harp  in  Paradise  may  now  ring  out  the  high  praises  of  sovereign  grace, 
as  you  now  yield  yourself  to  the  great  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  souls  I 
May  that  divine  impressment  which  is  imaged  in  the  text  by  the  com- 
pulsion of  the  Roman  soldier  take  place  in  your  case  at  this  very 
moment ;  and  may  it  be  seen  in  your  instance  that  unexpected  persons 
are  ofien  called  to  be  cross-bearers  ! 

IL  My  second  observation  is — cross-bearing  can  still  be  prac- 
TiSb^D.  Very  briefly  let  me  tell  you  in  what  ways  the  cross  can  still  be 
carried. 

First,  and  chiefly,  by  your  'becominy  a  Christian.  If  the  cros?  shall 
take  you  up,  you  will  take  up  the  cross.  Christ  will  be  your  hope,  his 
death  your  trust,  himself  the  object  of  your  love.  You  never  become  a 
cross-bearer  truly  till  you  lay  your  burdens  down  at  his  feet  who  bore  the 
cro=;sand  curse  for  you. 

Next,  you  become  a  cross-bearer  ivhen  you  inake  an  qpeji  avowal  of  the 


UP   FROM   THE   COUNTRY,   AND   PRESSED   INTO   THE   SERVICE.      487 

Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Do  not  deceive  yourselves— this  is  expected  of 
each  one  of  you  if  you  are  to  be  saved.  The  promise  as  I  read  it  in  the 
New  Testament  is  not  to  the  behever  alone,  but  to  the  believer  who 
confesses  his  faith.  "  He  that  with  his  heart  believeth  and  with  his 
mouth  maketh  confession  of  him  shall  be  saved."  He  saith,  "  He  that 
confesseth  me  before  men,  him  will  I  confess  before  my  Father  ;  but  he 
that  denieth  me  "—and  from  the  connection  it  should  seem  to  mean, 
he  that  does  not  confess  me — "  him  will  I  deny  before  my  Father  which 
is  in  heaven."  To  quote  the  inspired  Scripture,  "  He  that  believeth  and 
is  baptized  shall  be  saved."  Tiiere  should  be,  there  must  be,  the  open 
avowal  in  Christ's  own  way  of  the  secret  faith  which  you  have  in  him. 
Now  this  is  often  a  cross.  Many  people  would  like  to  go  to  heaven  by  an 
underground  railway  ;  secrecy  suits  them.  They  do  not  want  to  cross 
the  channel  ;  the  sea  is  too  rough  ;  but  when  tliere  is  a  tunnel  made 
they  will  go  to  the  fair  country.  My  good  people,  you  are  co\yardly,  and 
I  must  quote  to  you  a  text  which  ought  to  sting  your  cowardice  out  of 
you  :  "  But  the  fearful  and  unbelieving  shall  have  their  part  in  the 
lake  which  burnetii  with  fire  and  brimstone."  I  say  no  more,  and  make 
no  personal  applications;  but,  I  beseech  you,  run  no  risks.  Be  afraid 
to  be  afraid.  Be  ashamed  of  being  ashamed  of  Christ.  Shame  on  that 
man  who  counts  it  any  shame  to  say  before  assembled  angels,  and  men, 
and  devils,  '•  1  am  a  follower  of  Christ."  May  you  who  have  hitherto 
been  secret  followers  of  the  crucified  Lord  become  manifest  cross-bearers .» 
Do  you  not  even  now  cry  out,  "  Set  down  my  name,  sir  "  ? 

Further,  some  have  to  take  up  their  cross  by  commencing  Christian 
work.  You  live  in  a  village  where  there  is  no  gospel  preaching: 
preach  yourself.  You  are  in  a  backwoods  town  where  the  preaching  is 
very  far  from  being  such  as  God  approves  of :  begin  to  preach  the 
truth  yourself.  "Alas  !  "  say  you,  "  I  should  make  a  fool  of  myself." 
Are  you  ashamed  to  be  a  fool  for  Christ  ?  "  Oh,  but  I  should  break 
down."  Break  down  :  it  will  do  you  go  )d,  and  perhaps  you  may  brc^ak 
somebody  else  down.  There  is  no  better  preaching  in  the  world  than 
that  of  a  man  who  breaks  down  under  a  sense  of  un worthiness  :  if  that 
breakdown  communicates  itself  to  other  people,  it  may  begin  a  revival. 
If  you  are  choked  by  your  earnestness  others  may  become  earnest  too. 
Do  you  still  murmur, '*  Bat  I  should  get  the  ill-will  of  everybody"? 
For  Christ's  sake  could  you  not  bear  that  ?  When  the  good  monk 
said  to  Martin  Luther,  "  Go  thou  home  to  thy  cell  and  keep  quiet," 
why  did  not  Martin  take  the  advice  ?  Why,  indeed  ?  "  It  is  very  bad 
for  young  people  to  be  so  forward;  you  will  do  a  great  deal  of 
mischief,  therefore  be  quiet,  you  Martin.  Who  are  you  to  interfere 
with  the  great  authorities?  Be  holy  for  yourself,  and  don't  trouble 
others.  If  you  stir  up  a  reformation  thousands  of  good  people  will  be 
burnt  through  vou.  Do  be  quiet."  Bless  God,  Martin  did  not  go 
home,  and  was  not  quiet,  but  went  about  his  Masters  business,  and 
raised  heaven  and  earth  by  his  brave  witness-bearing.  Where  are  you, 
Martin,  this  morning?  I  pray  God  to  call  you  oat,  and  as  you  have 
confessed  his  name,  and  are  his  servant,  I  pray  that  he  may  make  you 
bear  public  testimony  for  him,  and  tell  out  the  saving  power  of  the 
Saviour's  precious  blood.  Come,  Simon,  I  see  you  shrink;  but  the 
crosr  has  to  be  carried;  therefore  bow  your  back.     It  is  only  a  wooden 


^38  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

cross,  after  all,  and  not  an  iron  one.  You  can  bear  it :  you  must 
bear  it.     God  help  you. 

Perhaps,  too,  some  brother  may  have  to  take  up  his  cross  by  tearing 
witness  against  the  rampa?il  sin  which  surrounds  him.  "  Leave  all  those 
dirty  matters  alone ;  do  not  say  a  word  about  them.  Let  the  people  go 
to  the  devil,  or  else  you  will  soil  your  white  kid  gloves."  Sirs,  we  will 
spoil  our  hands  as  well  as  our  gloves,  and  we  will  risk  our  characters,  if 
need  be ;  but  we  will  put  down  the  devilry  which  now  defiles  London. 
Truly  the  flesh  does  shrink,  and  the  purest  part  of  our  manhood  shrinks 
with  it,  when  we  are  compelled  to  bear  open  protest  against  sins  which 
are  done  of  men  in  secret.  But,  Simon,  the  Master  may  yet  compel  you 
to  bear  his  cross  in  this  respect,  and  if  so,  he  will  give  you  both  courage 
and  wisdom,  and  your  labour  shall  not  be  in  vain  in  the  Lord. 

Sometimes,  however,  the  cross-bearing  is  of  another  and  more  quiet 
kind,  and  may  be  described  as  submission  to  providence.  A  young  friend 
is  saying,  "  For  me  to  live  at  home  I  know  to  be  my  duty  ;  bub  father 
is  unkind,  and  the  family  generally  impose  upon  me.  I  wish  I  could 
get  away."  Ah  !  dear  sister,  you  must  bear  Christ's  cross  and  it  may 
be  the  Lord  would  have  you  remain  at  home.  Therefore  bear  the  cross. 
A  servant  is  saying,  "  I  should  like  to  be  in  a  Christian  family.  I  do 
not  think  I  can  stop  where  I  am."  Perhaps,  good  sister,  the  Lord  has 
put  you  where  you  are  to  be  a  light  in  a  dark  place.  All  the  lamps 
should  not  be  in  one  street,  or  what  will  become  of  the  courts  and  alleys  ? 
It  is  often  the  duty  of  a  Christian  man  to  say,  "  I  shall  stop  where  I 
am  and  fight  this  matter  through.  I  mean  by  character  and  example, 
with  kindness  and  courtesy  and  love,  to  win  this  place  for  Jesus."  Of 
course  the  easy  way  is  to  turn  monk  and  live  quietly  in  a  cloister,  and 
serve  God  by  doing  nothing;  or  to  turn  mm  and  dwell  in  a  convent,  and 
expect  to  win  the  battle  of  life  by  running  out  of  it.  Is  not  this 
absurd  ?  If  you  shut  yourself  away  from  this  poor  world,  what  is  to 
become  of  it  ?  You  men  and  women  that  are  Christians  must  stand  up 
and  stand  out  for  Jesus  where  the  providence  of  God  has  cast  you  :  if 
your  calling  is  not  a  sinful  one,  and  if  the  temptations  around  you  are 
not  too  great  for  you,  you  must  "  hold  the  fort "  and  never  dream  of 
surrender.  If  your  lot  is  hard,  look  upon  it  as  Christ's  cross  and  bow 
your  back  to  the  load.  Your  shoulder  may  be  raw  at  first,  but  you  will 
grow  stronger  before  long,  for  as  your  day  your  strength  shall  be.  "It 
is  good  for  a  man  that  he  bear  the  yoke  in  his  youth  ; "  but  it  is  good 
for  a  man  to  bear  the  cross  in  his  old  age  as  well  as  in  his  youth ;  in 
fact,  we  ought  never  to  be  quit  of  so  blessed  a  burden.  What  wings  are 
to  a  bird,  and  sails  to  a  ship,  that  the  cross  becomes  to  a  man's  spirit 
when  he  fully  consents  to  accept  it  as  his  life's  beloved  load.  Truly  did 
Jesus  say,  "  My  yoke  is  easy,  and  my  burden  is  light."  Now,  Simon, 
where  are  you  ?     Shoulder  the  cross,  man,  in  the  name  of  God  ! 

III.  Thirdly,  TO  cross-bearing  there  are  noble  compulsions. 
Simon's  compulsion  was  the  rough  hand  of  the  Roman  legionary,  and 
the  gruff  voice  in  the  Latin  tongue,  "Shoulder  that  cross;"  but  we 
hear  gentler  voices  which  compel  us  this  d:iy  to  take  up  Christ's  ciuss. 

The  first  compulsion  is  this — "  the  love  of  Christ  conslrainelh  tis." 
He  has  done  all  this  for  you  ;  therefore  by  sweet  but  irresistible  compul- 
sion you  are  made  to  render  him  some  return  of  love.    Does  not  Jesus 


UP  FROM   THE   COUNTRY,   AND   PRESSED  INTO  THE   SERVICE.    439 

appear  to  you  in  a  vision  as  you  sit  in  this  house  ?  Do  you  not  see  that 
thorn-crowned  head,  that  visage  crimsoned  with  the  bloody  sweat,  those 
hands  and  feet  pierced  Avith  the  nails  ?  Does  he  not  say  to  you  point- 
edly, "  I  did  all  this  for  thee  ;  what  hast  thou  done  for  me  "  ?  Startled 
in  your  seat,  you  cover  your  face,  and  inwardly  reply,  "  I  will  answer 
that  question  by  the  rest  of  my  life.  I  will  be  first  and  foremost  a 
servant  of  Jesus:  not  a  trader  first  and  a  Christian  next,  but  a  Christian 
first  and  a  business  man  afterwards."  You,  my  sister,  must  say,  "  I  will 
live  for  Christ  as  a  daughter,  a  wife,  or  a  mother.  I  will  live  for  my  Lord ; 
for  he  has  given  himself  for  me,  and  I  am  not  my  own,  but  bought  with  a 
price." 

The  true  heart  will  feel  a  compulsion  arising  from  a  second  reflection, 
namely,  the  glory  of  a  life  spent  for  God  and  for  his  Ghrist.  What  is  the 
life  of  a  man  who  toils  in  business,  makes  money,  becomes  rich,  and 
dies  ?  _  It  winds  up  with  a  paragraph  in  the  Illustrated  London  News, 
declaring  that  he  died  worth  so  much:  the  wretch  was  not  worth 
anything  himself;  his  estate  had  value,  he  had  none.  Had  he  been  worth 
anything  he  would  have  sent  his  money  about  the  world  doing  good; 
but  as  a  worthless  steward  he  laid  his  Master's  stores  in  heaps  to  rut.  The 
life  of  multitudes  of  men  is  self-seeking.  It  is  ill  for  a  man  to  live  the  life 
of  swine.  What  a  poor  creature  is  the  usual  ordinary  man  !  But  a  life 
spent  for  Jesus,  though  it  involve  cross-bearing,  is  noble,  heroic,  sub- 
lime. The  mere  earth-worm  leads  a  dunghill  life.  A  life  of  what  is 
called  pleasure  is  a  mean,  beggarly  business.  A  life  of  keeping  up 
respectability  is  utter  slavery — as  well  be  a  horse  in  a  pug-mill.  A  life 
wholly  consecrated  to  Christ  and  his  cross  is  life  indeed  ;  it  is  akin  to 
the  life  of  angels  ;  ay,  higher  still,  it  is  the  life  of  God  within  the  soul 
of  man.  _  0  ye  that  have  a  spark  of  true  nobility,  seek  to  live  lives 
worth  living,  worth  remembering,  worthy  to  be  the  commencement  of 
eternal  life  before  the  throne  of  God. 

Some  of  you  ought  to  feel  the  cross  coming  upon  your  shoulders  this 
morning  when  you  think  of  the  needs  of  those  among  ivhom  you  live. 
They  are  dying,  perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge,  rich  and  poor  alike 
ignorant  of  Christ ;  multitudes  of  them  wrapped  up  in  self-righteousness. 
They  are  perishing,  and  those  who  ought  to  warn  them  are  often  dumb 
dogs  that  cannot  bark.  Do  you  not  feel  that  you  ought  to  deliver  the 
sheep  from  the  wolf  ?  Have  you  no  bowels  of  compassion  ?  Are  your 
hearts  turned  to  steel  ?  I  am  sure  you  cannot  deny  that  the  times 
demand  of  you  earnest  and  forceful  lives.  No  Christian  man  can  now 
sit  still  without  incurring  awful  guilt.  Whether  you  live  in  London 
or  in  any  other  great  town  amidst  reeking  sin,  or  dwell  in  the  country 
amidst  the  dense  darkness  which  broods  over  many  rural  districts,  you 
are  under  bonds  to  be  up  and  doing.  It  may  be  a  cross  to  you,  but  for 
Jesus'  sake  you  must  uplift  it,  and  never  lay  it  down  till  the  Lord  calls 
you  home. 

Some  of  you  should  bear  the  cross  of  Christ  because  the  cause  of  Ghrist 
is  at  a  discount  where  you  dwell.  I  delight  in  a  man  in  whom  the  lord- 
lier chivalry  has  found  a  congenial  home.  He  loves  to  espouse  the  cause 
of  truth  in  the  cloudy  and  dark  day.  He  never  counts  heads,  but 
weighs  arguments.  When  he  settles  down  in  a  town  he  never  enquires, 
**  Where  is   the  most  respectable  congregation?     Where  shall  I  meet 


490 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


with  those  who  will  advantage  me  in  business?"  No,  he  atudles  hia 
conscience  rather  than  his  convenience.  He  hears  one  saj,  "  There  is  a 
Nonconformist  chapel,  but  it  is  down  a  back  street.  There  is  a  Biptisfc 
church,  but  the  members  are  nearly  all  poor,  and  no  gentlefolk  are 
ammg  thera.  Even  the  evangelical  church  is  down  at  the  hesl  :  the 
best  families  attend  the  high  church."  I  say  he  hears  this,  and  his 
heart  is  sick  of  such  talk.  He  will  go  where  the  gospel  is  preachel, 
and  nowhere  else.  Fine  architecture  has  scant  charms  for  him,  and 
grand  music  is  no  part  of  his  religion  :  if  these  are  substitutes  for  the 
gospel,  he  abhors  them.  It  is  meanness  itself  for  a  man  to  forsake  the 
truth  for  the  sake  of  respectability.  Multitudes  who  ought  to  be  found 
maintaining  the  good  old  cause  are  recreant  to  their  convictions,  if 
indeed  they  ever  had  any.  For  this  cause  the  true  man  resolves  to 
stick  to  truth  through  thick  and  thin,  and  not  to  forsake  her  because 
her  adherents  are  poor  and  despised.  If  ever  we  might  temporize, 
that  time  is  past  and  gone.  I  arrest  yonder  man  this  morning,  who 
has  long  been  a  Christian,  but  has  conceded  half  his  Christianity  in 
order  to  be  thought  respectable,  or  to  escape  the  penalties  of  faithful- 
ness. Come  out  from  those  with  whom  you  are  numbered,  but  with 
whom  you  are  not  united  in  heart.  Be  brave  eno:igh  to  defend 
a  good  cause  against  all  comers  ;  for  the  day  shall  come  when  he  shall 
have  honour  for  his  guerdon  who  accepted  dishonour  that  he  might  be 
true  to  his  Gad,  his  Bible,  and  his  conscience.  Blessed  be  he  that  can 
be  loyal  to  his  Lord,  cost  him  what  it  may — loyal  even  in  those  matters 
whicli  traitors  call  little  thiigs.  We  would  compel  that  Simon  the 
Cyrenian  this  day  to  bear  the  cross,  because  there  are  so  few  to  bear 
it  in  these  degenerate  days. 

Besides,  I  may  say  to  some  of  you,  you  ought  to  bear  the  cross 
because  you  know  you  are  not  satisfied  ;  your  hmrts  are  not  at  rest. 
You  have  prospered  in  worldly  things,  but  you  are  not  happy  ;  you 
have  g  >od  health,  but  you  are  not  happy  ;  yoi  have  loving  frienls,  but 
you  are  not  happy.  There  is  but  one  way  of  getting  rest  to  the  heart, 
and  that  is,  to  come  to  Jesus.  That  is  his  word  :  "Come  unto  me,  all 
ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  1  will  give  you  rest."  If  after 
this  you  need  a  further  rest  for  other  and  higher  longings,  then  you 
must  come  again  to  the  same  Saviour,  and  hearken  to  his  next  word: 
*'  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me ;  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  iu 
heart :  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls.  For  my  yoke  is  easy,  and 
my  burden  is  light."  Some  of  you  professors  have  not  yet  found  per- 
fect rest,  and  the  reason  is  because  you  have  looked  to  the  cross  for 
pardon,  but  you  have  never  taken  to  cross -bearing  as  an  occupation. 
You  are  hoping  in  Christ  but  not  living  /br  Christ.  The  finding  of  rest 
unto  your  soul  will  come  to  you  in  having  something  to  do  or  to  bear 
for  Jesus.  "  Take  my  yoke  upon  you :  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your 
Bouls." 

There  are  many  ways,  then,  of  bearing  the  cross  for  Christ,  and  there 
are  many  reasons  why  some  here  present  should  begin  at  once  to  carry 
the  load. 

IV.  To  close  :  bear  with  me  a  minute  or  two  while  I  say  that  cross- 
bearing  IS  A  BLKS3BD  OCCUPATION.  I  feel  sure  that  Simon  found  it 
80.     Let  me  mention  certain  blessings  which  must  have  attended  the 


UP  FROM   THE   COUNTRY,   AND  PRESSED   INTO  THE   SERVICE.      ^gj 

Bpecial  service  of  Simon.  First,  it  brought  him  into  Christ's  corrqmmj, 
When  they  compelled  him  to  bear  his  cross,  he  was  brought  close  to 
Jesus.  If  it  had  not  been  for  that  compulsion  he  might  have  gone  his 
way,  or  might  have  been  lost  in  the  crowd  ;  but  now  he  is  in  the  inner 
circle,  near  to  Jesus.  For  the  first  time  in  his  life  he  saw  that  bles^^ed 
form,  and  as  he  siw  it  I  believe  his  heart  was  enamoured  with  it.  As 
they  lifted  the  cross  on  his  shoulders  he  looked  at  that  sacred  Person, 
and  saw  a  crown  of  thorns  about  his  brow  ;  and  as  he  looked  at  his 
fellow-sulFerer,  he  saw  all  down  his  cheeks  the  marks  of  bloody  sweat, 
and  black  and  blue  bruises  from  cruel  hands.  As  for  those  eyes,  they 
looked  him  through  and  through  !  That  face,  that  matchless  face,  he 
had  never  seen  its  like.  Majesty  was  therein  blended  with  misery, 
innocence  with  agony,  and  love  with  sorrow.  He  had  never  seen  that 
counten  mce  so  well,  nor  marked  the  whole  form  of  the  Son  of  man  so 
clearly  if  he  had  not  been  called  to  bear  that  cross.  It  is  wonderful 
how  much  we  see  of  Jesus  when  we  suffer  or  labour  for  him.  Believing 
souls,  I  pray  that  this  day  you  may  be  so  impressed  into  my  Lord's 
service,  that  you  may  have  nearer  and  dearer  fellowship  with  him  than 
in  the  past.  *If  any  man  will  do  his  will  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine 
They  see  Jesus  best  who  carry  his  cross  most. 

Be-ide,  the  cross  held  Simon  in  Christ's  steps.  Do  you  catch  it  ?  If 
Jesus  carried  the  front  part  of  the  cross  and  Simon  followed  behind,  he 
was  sure  to  put  his  feet  down  just  where  the  Master's  feet  had  been 
before.  The  cross  is  a  wonderful  implement  for  keeping  us  in  the  way 
of  our  Lord.  As  I  was  turning  this  subject  over  I  was  thinking  how 
often  I  had  felt  a  cons  'ious  contact  between  myself  and  my  Lord  when 
I  have  had  to  bear  reproach  f  )r  his  sake  ;  and  how  an  the  same  time  1 
have  been  led  to  watch  my  steps  more  carefully  because  of  that  very 
reproach.  Brethren,  we  do  not  want  to  slip  from  under  the  cross.  If 
we  did  so,  we  might  slip  away  from  our  Lord  and  from  holy  walking. 
If  we  can  keep  our  shoulder  beneath  that  sacred  load,  and  see  our  L;)rd 
a  little  on  before,  we  shall  be  making  the  surest  progress.  This  being 
near  to  Jesus  is  a  blessed  privilege,  which  is  cheaply  purchased  at  the 
price  of  cross-bearing.  If  you  would  see  Jesus,  bestir  yourselves  to  work 
for  him.  Boldly  avow  him,  cheerfully  suffer  for  him,  and  then  you  shal/ 
see  him,  and  then  you  shall  learn  to  follow  him  step  by  step.  0  blessed 
cross,  which  holds  us  to  Jesus  and  to  his  ways ! 

Then  Simon  had  this  honour,  that  he  was  linked  ivith  Christ's  ivorh. 
He  could  not  put  away  sin,  but  he  could  assist  weakness.  Simon  did 
not  die  on  the  cross  to  make  expiation,  but  he  did  live  under  the  cross 
to  aid  in  the  accomplishment  of  the  divine  purpose.  You  and  I  cannot 
interfere  with  Jesus  in  his  passion,  but  we  can  share  with  him  in  his 
compassion ;  we  cannot  purchase  liberty  for  the  enslaved,  but  we  can 
tell  them  of  their  emancipation.  To  have  a  finger  in  Christ's  work  13 
glory.  I  invite  the  man  that  seeks  honour  and  immortality,  to  seek  it 
thus.  To  have  a  share  in  the  Redeemer's  work  is  a  more  attractive  thing 
than  all  the  pomp  and  glitter  of  this  world,  and  the  kingdoms  thereof. 
Where  are  the  men  of  heavenly  mind  who  will  covet  to  be  joined  unto 
the  Lord  in  this  ministry  ?  Let  them  step  out  and  say,  "Jesus,  I  my 
cross  have  taken.  Henceforth  I  will  follow  thee.  Come  life  or  death, 
I  will  cany  thy  cross  till  thou  shalt  give  me  the  crown." 


492 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


While  Simon  was  carrying  the  cross  through  the  crowd,  I  doubt  not 
that  the  rough  soldiery  would  deal  him  many  a  kick  or  buffet ;  but  I 
feel  equally  sure  that  the  dear  Master  sometimes  stole  a  glance  at  him. 
Smo7i  enjoyed  Christ's  smile.  I  know  the  Lord  so  well,  that  I  feel  sure 
he  must  have  done  so:  he  would  not  forget  the  man  who  was  hia 
partner  for  the  while.  And  oh,  that  look  !  How  Simon  must  have 
treasured  up  the  remembrance  of  it.  "  I  never  carried  a  load  that  was 
80  light,"  says  he,  "as  that  which  I  carried  that  morning;  for  when  the 
Blessed  One  smiled  at  me  amidst  his  woes,  I  felt  myself  to  be  strong  as 
Hercules."  Alexander,  his  first-born,  and  that  red-headed  lad  Rufus, 
when  they  grew  up  both  felt  it  to  be  the  honour  of  the  family  that  their 
father  earned  the  cross  after  Jesus.  Rufus  and  Alexander  had  a  patent 
of  nobility  in  being  the  sons  of  such  a  man.  Mark  recorded  the  fact 
that  Simon  carried  the  cross,  and  that  such  and  such  persons  were  his 
sons.  Methinks  when  the  old  man  came  to  lie  upon  his  death-bed 
he  said  :  "  My  hope  is  in  him  whose  cross  I  carried.  Blessed  burden  ! 
Lay  me  down  in  my  grave.  This  body  of  mine  cannot  perish,  for  it 
bore  the  cross  which  Jesus  carried,  and  which  carried  him.  I  shall  rise 
again  to  see  him  in  his  glory,  for  his  cross  has  pressed  me,  and  his 
love  will  surely  raise  me."  Happy  are  we  if  we  can  while  yet  we  live 
be  co-workers  together  with  him,  that  when  he  cometh  in  his  kingdom 
we  may  be  partakers  of  his  glory.  "  Blessed  is  the  man  that  endureth 
temptation  :  for  when  he  is  tried,  he  shall  receive  the  crown  of  life,  which 
the  Lord  hath  promised  to  them  that  love  him."  God  bless  you,  and 
especially  you  who  have  come  out  of  the  country.  God  bless  you. 
Amen  and  amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Mark  xv.  1 — 38- 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 122,  670,  660. 


THE  DETEEMINATION   OF   CHEIST  TO   SUFFER  FOR 
HIS  PEOPLE. 


tn\m\ 

Intended  fob  Eeadinq  on  Lord's-day,  December  15th,  1895, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

ilT   THE   NEW    PARK    STREET    CHAPEL,    SOtrTHWARK, 


"  And  they  gave  him  to  drink  wine  mingled  with  myrrh :  but  he  received  it  not  "— 
Mark  xv.  23. 

Our  Saviour,  before  he  was  nailed  to  the  cross,  and  on  the  cross 
several  times  had  drinks  of  different  sorts  offered  to  him.  Whilst  they 
were  nailing  him  to  the  cross,  they  endeavoured  to  make  him  drink 
wine,  or  vinegar  as  it  is  called,  mingled  with  gall ;  and  when  he  had 
tasted  of  it, — he  did  taste  it, — he  would  not  drink  it.  When  he  was 
on  the  cross,  the  soldiers,  mocking  him,  offered  him  vinegar,  or  their 
weak  drink  of  which  they  ordinarily  partook,  pledging  him  in  their 
cups  with  scorn.  And  once  more,  when  he  said,  *'  I  thirst,"  they  took 
a  sponge  filled  with  vinegar,  dipped  it  in  hyssop,  and  put  it  to  his  lips. 
This  occasion  of  offering  the  wine  mingled  with  myrrh  is,  I 
believe,  different  from  all  the  rest.  This  wine  mingled  with  myrrh 
was  given  to  him  as  an  act  of  mercy.  Matthew  Henry  seems  to  think 
that  it  was  prepared  by  those  holy  women  who  were  wont  to  attend 
to  the  necessities  of  our  Lord.  They  had  followed  him  in  all 
his  footsteps  whithersoever  he  went ;  it  was  by  their  boitoty  that  the 
bag  which  Judas  kept  was  generally  as  full  as  it  was  required  to  be, 
so  that  out  of  the  store  they  could  go  and  buy  meat  for  their  Master  and 
for  his  disciples.  It  was  these  holy  women  who  prepared  the  spices  to 
embalm  him  at  his  burial ;  and  Matthew  Henry  thinks  that  these 
women,  prompted  by  their  compassion  for  him,  got  ready  this  cup 
of  wine  mingled  with  myrrh,  «nat  he  might  be  strengthened  for  his 
miseries,  and  that  those  miseries  might  in  some  degree  be  alleviated 
by  the  partial  stupefaction  which  a  strong  draught  of  wine  and  myrrh 
would  give  to  him. 
No.  2,443. 


494 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 


This  time,  our  Saviour  positively  declined  the  cup :  "he  received 
it  not."  The  wormwood  he  tasted,  but  this  he  received  not  at  all; 
he  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.  Why?  The  answer  is  not 
to  be  found  in  our  Saviour's  abstemiousness,  for  he  was  not 
abstemious  j  he  was  never  self-indulgent,  but  he  certainly  was  never 
abstemious.  He  was  "the  Son  of  man"  who  "came  eating  and 
drinking ; "  he  felt  no  repugnance  to  wine ;  he  himself  made  it,  he 
himself  drank  it;  he  even  earned  for  himself  the  name,  "a  gluttonous 
man  and  a  winebibber";  not  deservedly,  but  because,  in  contrast  to 
John,  who  abstemiously  refrained  from  ordinary  food,  Jesus  Christ 
sat  down  with  publicans  and  sinners,  feasted  with  the  feasters,  and  ate 
and  drank  like  other  men.  Nor  do  I  think  the  reason  is  to  be  found 
in  any  love  of  pain  that  Christ  had,  nor  in  any  heartless  bravado,  which 
would  lead  him  to  say,  "  I  will  suffer,  and  I  will  put  the  cup  away  from 
me."  Far  be  that  fyom  Christ ;  he  never  thrust  himself  in  the  way  of 
suffering  when  it  was  unnecessary ;  he  did  not  go  to  give  himself  up 
into  the  hands  of  his  enemies  before  his  hour  was  come  ;  he  avoided 
persecution  when  the  avoidance  of  the  persecution  would  not  be  an 
injury  to  his  cause ;  he  withdrew  out  of  Judsea,  and  would  not  walk  in 
that  land,  because  of  Herod,  who  sought  to  slay  him.  I  believe  that, 
if  our  Saviour  had  not  been  the  atoning  sacrifice,  if  his  sufferings  had 
been  merely  those  of  a  martyr,  he  would  have  quaffed  to  the  very 
dregs  the  cup  that  was  offered  him,  and  would  not  have  left  any  of  it. 
The  reason  why  he  refused  the  cup,  I  think,  is  to  be  found  in  another 
thing  altogether. 

There  is  a  glorious  idea  couched  in  the  fact  that  the  Saviour  put 
the  myrrhed  wine-cup  entirely  away  from  his  lips.  On  the  heights  of 
heaven  the  Son  of  God  stood  of  old,  and  he  looked  down  and  measured 
how  far  it  was  to  the  utmost  depths  of  misery ;  he  cast  up  the  sum 
total  of  all  the  agonies  which  a  man  must  endure  to  descend  to  the 
utmost  depths  of  pain  and  misery.  He  determined  that,  to  be  a  faithful 
High  Priest,  and  also  to  be  a  suffering  one,  he  would  go  the  whole 
way,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  "  from  the  highest  throne  in  glory 
to  the  cross  of  deepest  woe."  This  myrrhed  cup  would  just  have  stopped 
him  within  a  little  of  the  utmost  limit  of  misery ;  therefore,  he  said, 
"  I  will  not  stop  half-way,  but  I  will  go  all  the  way  ;  and  if  this  cup  can 
mitigate  my  sorrow,  that  is  just  the  reason  why  I  will  not  drink  it,  for 
I  have  determined  that  to  the  utmost  lengths  of  misery  I  will  go,  that 
I  will  do,  and  bear,  and  suffer  all  that  Incarnate  God  can  bear  for  my 
people,  in  my  own  mortal  body." 

Now,  beloved,  it  is  this  fact  that  I  wish  to  bring  out  before  you — 
the  fact  that  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  suffer,  and  that 
because  the  myrrhed  cup  would  have  prevented  him  from  reaching  the 
lowest  step  of  misery,  "  he  received  it  not."  I  shall  have  to  show  you, 
first,  that  this  was  very  frequently  the  case  throughout  his  life,  that 
he  would  not  take  a  step  which  would  have  diminished  his  miseries, 
because  he  was  determined  to  go  the  whole  length  of  suffering.  Secondly, 
I  shall  try  to  show  you  the  reason  for  this  determination.  Then,  thirdly, 
I  shall  close  up  by  speaking  of  the  lesson  that  we  may  learn  from  it. 

I.  Our  Saviour  would  go  the  whole  length  of  misery;  he  would 
suffer  in  every  respect  like  as  we  suffer ;  he  would  bear  the  whole  of 


THE   DETERMINATIOX    OF   CHRIST   TO    SUFFER    FOR   HI3    PEOPLE.       495 

the  tortures  of  atoaement,  without  even  the  slightest  shadow  of  mitiga- 
tion or  alleviation.  Now,  I  think  I  can  show  you  that,  on  many 
occasions  in  Christ's  life,  he  determined  to  be  tempted  in  every  point 
in  which  men  are  tempted,  and  to  be  tempted  to  the  utmost  limit 
of  the  power  of  temptation  ;  nor  would  he  even  accept  anything  which 
would  have  limited  the  force  of  the  temptation  upon  man.  I  will  give 
you  some  proofs  of  this. 

First,  Christ  knew  that  you  and  I  would  he  exposed  to  peril ;  he 
therefore  determined  that  he  would  be  exposed  to  peril,  too,  and 
that  he  would  not  by  any  means,  when  it  was  in  his  power,  escape  from 
the  peril.  Let  me  show  him  to  you  high  up  there,  on  the  pinnacle  of 
the  temple;  there  stands  our  Master,  and  a  fiend  by  his  side,  on  a 
giddy  eminence,  with  but  little  beneath  his  feet ;  he  stands  poised 
aloft,  he  looks  down  the  hill  on  which  the  temple  is  built,  into  the  depths 
below;  and  the  enemy  says,  ''Cast  thyself  down,  commit  thyself  to 
the  care  of  the  angels."  It  was  like  this  myrrhed  cup— "  Do  not 
stand  in  this  peril ;  cast  thyself  upon  that  promise,  and  risk  thyself 
upon  the  angels'  wings,  for  they  shall  bear  thee  up  in  their  hands,  lest 
thou  dash  thy  foot  against  a  stone  "  But  like  as  he  would  not  receive 
this  cup,  so  neither  would  he  receive  this  deliverance  from  his  peril ; 
but  there  he  stood  erect,  confident  in  his  God,  not  using  the  means  of 
deliverance  which  the  tempter  wished  him  to  exercise,  even  as  he 
would  not  drink  this  cup. 

Take  another  case :  Jesus  Christ  knew  that  many  of  his  people  would 
have  to  suffer  bodily  wants^  and  poverty,  and  woe.  He  therefore 
hungered;  after  forty  days'  fast,  when  he  might  have  delivered 
himself  from  his  hunger  by  turning  stones  into  bread,  one  would  have 
said,  "  It  would  have  been  a  very  innocent  act  to  turn  stones  into  bread, 
and  feed  himself ;  "  but,  ''  No,"  says  Christ  to  the  gnawing  pangs  of 
hunger,  "  I  will  let  you  go  as  far  as  you  can ;  I  will  not  turn  these  stones 
into  bread;  I  will  let  hunger  exercise  all  its  power  upon  me;  I  will 
let  my  body  be  gnawed  by  its  fierce  teeth ;  I  will  not  mitigate  its 
misery."  He  would  not  receive  that  wine  mingled  with  myrrh  that  the 
devil  offered  him  in  the  wilderness,  when  he  tempted  him  to  make 
the  stones  into  bread;  he  would  not  take  the  mitigation  of  his 
misery. 

I  will  tell  you  another  case.  Many  men  have  attempted  to  have 
their  lives  cut  short  because  they  have  so  much  misery,  and  no  more 
hope  of  being  happy,  therefore  they  have  wished  for  death  ;  they  have 
wished  that  they  might  be  as  the  untimely  birth,  that  they  might  be 
shut  up  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth  for  ever.  They  have  longed  for  death, 
and^  desired  it ;  and  if  an  opportunity  had  cast  itself  in  their  way  in 
which  they  might  have  died  with  honour,  without  having  even  the 
disgrace  of  suicide,  how  many  would  kave  accepted  the  alternative  of 
death  !  Here  is  our  Saviour  in  the  same  condition ;  for  he  is  dragged 
to  the  brow  of  the  hill  of  Nazareth.  0  Son  of  man,  thy  wisest  choice 
is  to  be  dashed  down  the  sides  of  the  hill  on  which  the  city  is  built !  If 
thou  art  wise,  thou  wilt  let  them  hurl  thee  headlong ;  there  would  be  an 
end  of  all  thy  misery,  for  there  are  years  before  thee  through 
which  thou  wilt  be  roasted  at  the  slow  fire  of  persecution,  and  after- 
wards thou  wilt  have  to  pass  through  floods  of  deepest  misery.   Do  you 


i96  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

not  think  the  temptation  started  up  in  his  mind,  "  Let  yourself  be  cast 
down  "  ?  He  knew  all  about  it.  Had  he  been  cast  down,  he  would  have 
died  an  honourable  death,  like  the  death  of  a  prophet  slain  in  his  own 
countiy;  but  no,  "passing  through  the  midst  of  them,  he  went  his 
way,"  because,  as  he  refused  the  wine-cup,  so  he  refused  a  hasty  death, 
which  would  have  delivered  him  from  his  miseries. 

Do  you  not  observe  that  I  have  only  just  given  you  specimens  ? 
You  will  find  that  all  through  the  Saviour'' 8  life  it  was  just  the  same. 
You  will  not  find  him  in  one  instance  working  a  miracle  to  lessen  his  own 
bodily  fatigue,  or  to  alleviate  his  own  bodily  wants  and  necessities,  but 
always  letting  the  ills  of  this  life  wreak  themselves  upon  him  with  all 
their  fury.  He  hushed  the  winds  once,  but  it  was  for  his  disciples,  not 
for  himself ;  he  lay  in  the  ship  asleep,  and  let  the  waves  toss  him  up  and 
down  as  much  as  they  pleased.  He  multiplied  the  loaves  and  fishes : 
but  it  was  for  the  multitude,  not  for  himself.  He  could  find  money  in  a 
fish's  mouth  :  but  it  was  to  pay  the  tribute,  not  for  himself.  He  could 
scatter  mercies  wherever  he  went, — open  men's  eyes,  and  deliver  many 
of  them  from  pains :  he  never  exercised  any  of  his  skill  upon  himself. 
If  the  wind  blew,  he  let  it  spend  itself  upon  his  cheeks,  and  crack 
them  ;  if  the  cold  was  bitter,  he  let  the  cold  come  round  him,  as  it  did 
in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane;  if  journeying  was  troublesome,  he 
journeyed  where  he  might  have  travelled  as  his  Father  did ;  as  old 
Thomas  Stemhold  says  in  his  fine  translation  of  the  Psalms— 

"  The  Lord  descended  from  above, 
And  bow'd  the  heavens  most  high, 
And  underneath  his  feet  he  cast 
The  darkness  of  the  sky. 

'*  On  cherub  and  on  cherubim 
Full  royally  he  rode, 
And  on  the  wings  of  mighty  windl 
Came  flying  all  abroad." 

So  might  Jesus,  if  he  pleased,  but  he  journeyed  on  in  weariness.  He 
might  have  made  the  water  leap  out  of  the  well  to  his  hand,  but  there 
he  sat  and  thirsted,  while  he  had  power  to  make  fountains  gush  even 
from  the  stone  on  which  he  sat.  On  the  cross,  "  I  thirst,"  was  his  cry ; 
and  yet,  if  he  pleased,  he  might  have  opened  in  himself  rivers  of  living 
water ;  he  had  them  for  others,  but  he  had  none  for  himself.  You  wifi 
observe  this  fact  that,  in  all  the  history  of  Christ,  never  once  did  he 
take  anything  which  could  have  lessened  his  miseries,  but  he  went  the 
whole  length ;  and  as  on  this  occasion  he  refused  the  wine  drugged 
with  myrrh,  so  never  did  he  receive  anything  that  had  a  tendency  to 
prevent  him  from  going  to  the  requisite  lengths  of  suffering. 

II.  Now  let  me  show  you  the  reason  for  this.  Was  it  out  of  any 
love  to  suffering  that  he  thus  refused  the  wine-cup  ?  Ah,  no  ;  Christ 
had  no  love  of  suffering.  He  had  a  love  of  souls,  but  like  us  he  turned 
away  from  suffering,  he  never  loved  it.  We  see  he  did  not,  for  even 
in  the  garden  he  said,  **  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass 
from  me."  It  was  his  human  nature  struggling  against  suffering,  as 
human  nature  rightfully  does.  God  has  made  us  so  that  we  do  not 
naturally  love   suffering,  and  it  is  not  wrong  for  us  to  feel   some 


THE   DETERMESrATION   OF    CHRIST   TO    SUFFER   FOR   HIS   PEOPLE.      497 

repugnance  to  it,  for  God  has  implanted  that  repugnance  in  us.  Christ 
did  not  suffer  because  he  loved  suffering.  Why,  then,  did  he  suffer  ? 
For  two  reasons  :  because  this  suffering  to  the  utmost  was  necessary  to 
the  completion  of  the  atonement,  which  saves  to  the  utmost;  and 
because  this  suffering  to  the  utmost  was  necessary  to  perfect  his 
character  as  "  a  merciful  High  Priest"  who  has  to  compassionate  souls 
that  have  gone  to  the  utmost  of  miseries  themselves ;  that  he  might 
know  how  to  succour  them  that  are  tempted. 

First,  I  say  it  was  necessary  to  make  the  ato7iement  complete.  I  do  think 
that,  if  our  Saviour  had  drunk  this  myrrhed  cup,  the  atonement  would 
not  have  been  valid.  It  strikes  me  that,  if  he  had  drunk  this  wine 
mingled  with  myrrh,  he  could  not  have  suffered  to  the  extent  that  was 
absolutely  necessary.  We  believe  Christ  did,  on  the  cross,  suffer  just 
enough,  and  not  one  particle  more  than  was  necessary  for  the  re- 
demption of  his  people.  If,  then,  this  wine-cup  liad  taken  away  a  part 
of  his  sufferings,  the  ransom  price  would  not  have  been  f ullj^  complete, 
it  would  not  have  been  fully  paid.  And  if  it  had  but  taken  away  so 
much  as  a  grain,  the  atonement  would  not  have  been  sufficiently  satis- 
factory. If  a  man's  ransom  is  to  be  paid,  it  must  be  all  paid ;  for 
though  but  one  single  farthing  be  left  unpaid,  the  man  is  not  full^; 
redeemed,  and  he  is  not  yet  totally  free.  If,  then,  this  drinking  ol 
the  wine-cup  had  taken  out  the  smallest  amount  from  that  fearful 
price  of  agony  which  our  Saviour  paid,  the  atonement  would  have  been 
insufficient — insufficient  only  to  a  degree,  but  even  insufficiency  to  a 
degree,  however  small,  would  have  been  enough  to  have  caused  per- 
petual despair,  yea,  enough  to  have  shut  the  gates  of  heaven  against 
all  believers.  The  utmost  farthing  must  be  paid;  inexorable  justice 
never  did  yet  omit  so  much  as  a  fraction  of  its  claim.  Nor  would  it  in 
this  case  have  exonerated  in  any  measure ;  Christ  must  pay  it  all. 
The  wine-cup  would  have  prevented  his  doing  that,  therefore  he  would 
suffer  and  go  the  whole  length  of  suffering ;  he  would  not  stop,  but 
would  go  through  it  all. 

Again,  I  say  it  was  that  he  might  he  made  a  compassionate  Sigh  Priest. 
Someone  might  have  said,  "  When  my  Master  died,  he  did  not  suffer 
much.  He  suffered  somewhat,  but  the  wine-cup  prevented  much 
suffering.  I  dare  not  touch  the  wine-cup  ;  at  least,  I  dare  not  take  it 
so  as  to  alleviate  my  sufferings  at  all ;  then  I  must  suffer  more  than 
he,  for  that  drugged  wine  I  must  not  drink.  Surely,  then,  my  Master 
cannot  sympathize  with  me,  if  I  for  conscientious  motives  be^r  suffer- 
ing without  accepting  alleviations  which  some  think  are  wrong." 
**  Nay,"  said  the  Master,  **  nay,  you  shaJl  never  say  that.  If  you  have 
to  suffer  without  a  comfort,  I  will  lot  you  know  that  I  suffered  without 
a  comfort,  too,"  You  say,  "  Oh,  if  I  had  some  myrrh  given  me  which 
could  mitigate  my  woe,  it  were  well !  "  "  Ah !  "  says  the  Saviour,  '*  but 
I  have  had  it  offered  to  me,  and  I  will  not  drink  it,  in  order  that  you 
may  see  that  I  suffered  woe  without  the  comfort,  without  the  cordial, 
without  the  consolation,  which  you  think  would  enable  you  to  endure 
it."  0  blessed  Lord  Jesus,  thou  wast  ''  tempted  in  all  points  like  as 
we  are  "  !  Blessed  be  thy  name !  This  myrrh-cup  could  have  put  a 
plate  of  steel  upon  thy  breast,  it  would  have  blunted  many  darts  of 
suffering ;  therefore  thou  didst  put  it  aside  that  thou  mightest,  naked, 

32 


.qj.  itCETROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

suffer  eyery  shaft  to  find  its  target  in  thy  heart.  This  mj^rh-cup  would 
have  steeled  thy  feelings,  so  that  thou  couldst  not  be  rent  by  the  whips 
of  anguish ;  therefore  thou  wouldst  not  take  its  steeling  influence,  its 
hardening  qualities.  Thou,  who  didst  stoop  to  become  a  poor,  weak 
worm,  "  a  worm  and  no  man,"  didst  bear  the  agony,  without  making 
the  agony  less,  or  strengthening  thine  own  body  to  bear  it.  0  blessed 
High  Priest !  Oro  to  him,  ye  tried  and  tempted  ones ;  go  to  him,  and 
cast  your  burdens  on  him ;  he  can  bear  them,  he  has  borne  burdens 
heavier  than  yours  before.  Cast  your  burden  on  the  Lord,  as  his 
shoulders  can  sustain  it ;  and  his  shoulders,  that  have  borne  trouble 
without  comfort,  can  bear  your  troubles,  though  they  be  comfortless 
ones,  too.  Do  but  tell  them  to  your  Master,  and  you  shall  never  find 
a  lack  of  sympathy  in  him. 

III.  And  now,  what  have  we  to  say  by  way  of  a  lesson  for  this 
short  discourse  ? 

When  Christ  was  offered  this  cup,  he  would  not  receive  it. 
Sometimes,  beloved,  it  is  in  your  power  to  escape  from  sufferings  for 
Christ's  sake  ;  and  you  may  rightly  do  so,  if  you  can  escape  from  them 
without  injuring  the  mission  upon  which  your  Father  has  sent  you  ; 
for  as  he  sent  his  Son  into  the  world,  even  so  has  he  sent  you  into  the 
world.  You  have  your  mission;  and  there  are  times  when  the 
acceptance  of  a  cordial,  or  the  reception  of  an  escape  from  peril,  would 
be  a  degradation  to  your  high  dignity,  an  injury  to  your  office  ;  and 
therefore  there  are  times  when  you  should  decline  even  the  cup  of 
consolation  itself.  You  and  I  are  called  to  hold  fellowship  with  Christ 
in  his  sufferings ;  perhaps  our  business  places  us  where  we  have  to 
hold  fellowship  with  Christ  in  the  suffering  of  contempt.  The  finger 
is  pointed  at  us  ;  the  lip  is  sometimes  protruded  in  derision ;  sometimes 
an  expression  is  used  towards  us,  calling  us  a  hypocrite,  a  cant,  a 
formalist.  You  maybe  apt  to  think,  "  Oh,  that  I  could  avoid  all  this  ! 
I  wish  I  could  escape."  Can  you  avoid  it,  and  serve  your  Master  as 
well  ?  If  you  can,  then  drink  the  myrrh-cup,  and  avoid  the  misery ; 
but  if  you  cannot,  and  if  it  is  proven  that  your  position  is  one  of  duty, 
and  one  in  which  you  can  honour  your  Master,  it  is  at  your  peril  that 
you  exchange  your  situation  for  an  easier  one,  if  you  exchange  it  for 
one  less  useful. 

*'  Oh !  "  says  one,  **  I  work  among  wicked  men,  and  I  have  to  bear 
a  testimony  for  truth  in  their  midst ;  may  I  not  leave  the  place  at 
Dnce?  I  feel  that  I  am  doing  good  there;  but  the  jeers  aud  taunts 
are  so  hard  to  bear,  that  the  good  I  do  seems  to  be  always  counter- 
balanced by  the  misery  I  suffer."  Take  care,  take  care,  lest  you  let 
the  flesh  prevail  over  the  spirit.  It  would  be  like  a  myrrh-cup  to  you, 
for  you  to  leave  your  situation,  and  go  to  another ;  it  would  be  the 
removal  of  your  pain  ;  ponder  a  long  time  before  you  do  it,  weigh  it 
well.  If  your  Maker  has  put  you  there,  to  suffer  for  his  name's  sake, 
come  not  down  from  the  cross  to  which  he  has  nailed  you  by  a  daily 
crucifixion,  till  you  have  suffered  all ;  and  take  not  the  myrrh-cup  of 
an  escape  until  you  have  borne  all  for  Christ.  I  think  it  was  holy 
Polycarp  who,  when  the  soldiers  came  to  him  to  take  him  to  prison, 
made  his  escape ;  but  when  he  found  afterwards  that  his  doing  so  had 
dispirited  some  Christians,  and  had  been  attributed  to  his  cowardice, 


THE   DETERMINATI0:N-    of    CHRIST    TO    SUFFER    FOR   HIS    PEOPLE,      ^qq 

"when  next  the  soldiers  presented  themselves,  and  he  had  an  op^>or- 
tunity  to  escape,  "  No,"  he  said,  "  let  me  die."  It  had  been  foolhardy 
of  him,  if  he  had  run  into  the  teeth  of  men  the  first  time,  in  order  to  t;e 
put  to  death ;  but  when  he  saw  that  he  would  serve  his  Master  better 
by  his  death  than  by  his  life,  it  would  have  been  an  unrighteous  thing 
if  he  had  druak  of  the  wine-cup,  if  he  had  made  his  escape,  and  not 
died  for  his  Master's  sake. 

0  my  brethren,  1  do  think  that  there  are  many  cordials  which  the 
world,  too,  has  to  offer  to  the  Christian  which  he  must  not  drink  at  all, 
because  if  his  Master  wishes  him  to  have  fellowship  with  him  in  his 
suffering,  it  is  his  to  suffer  so  far  as  his  Master  wills.  You  are 
perhaps  a  man  or  a  woman  of  a  sorrowful  spirit ;  you  are  given  to 
solitude  and  loneliness.  There  are  certain  amusements,  which  some 
men  say  are  harmless  ;  they  tell  you  that  they  are  meant  for  you,  and 
ask  you  to  go  and  take  them.  You  think,  "  Well,  in  my  low  state, 
surely  I  might  take  these  things.  If  I  were  happy  and  joyous,  I 
should  not  need  them  ;  but  surely,  my  Father,  '  like  as  a  father  pitieth 
his  children,'  will  pity  me ;  and  if  I  do  these  things,  and  do  them 
merely  for  temporary  coiifort,  my  heart  seems  as  though  it  would 
break  if  I  had  not  this  little  temporary  excitement."  Take  care,  take 
care,  that  it  is  not  the  wine-cup  that  prevents  you,  my  friends.  If 
your  Master  gives  you  the  wine-cup,  the  golden  wine-cup  filled  with 
the  precious  wine  of  the  covenant,  the  strong  promises,  and  sweet 
fellowship  in  Christ,  drink  it  without  a  moment's  hesitation.  Drink  it 
and  be  glad,  for  God  has  said,  ''  Give  strong  drink  unto  him  that. 
is  ready  to  perish;  "  and  this  is  the  strong  drink  he  gives  to  you  in 
the  golden  wine-cup  of  the  Saviour's  fellowship.  Drink  it,  and  be 
^^PPy-  ^ut  if  Daen  would  offer  it  to  you,  look  many  a  time  before  you 
drink  it.  It  may  be,  you  may  be  right  in  drinking  it,  it  may  not  be  a 
wrong  thing ;  but  it  may  be,  too,  that  even  a  thing  that  is  innocent 
to  others,  may  be  wrong  to  you  ;  and  the  taking  of  that  amusement, 
and  pleasure  into  your  hand,  might  be  like  our  Saviour's  taking  the 
myrrh-cup  and  drinking  it.  It  would  be  a  stultifying  you,  a  preventing 
you  from  learning  all  the  lessons  of  your  misery,  from  going  in  all  the 
steps  of  your  Eedeemer,  who  wishes  us  to  follow  him  through  all  the 
miseries  which  he  has  ordained  for  us>  that  they  may  be  the  means  of 
fellowship  with  him  in  his  suffering. 

This  is  the  only  lesson  I  desire  to  give  you  at  this  time.  If  the 
Lord  impress  it  on  our  minds,  it  may  be  of  use  to  us.  Only  let  me  say, 
how  many  there  are  who  would  have  drunk  this  wine-cup,  if  it  had 
been  offered  to  them  !  Your  Saviour  has  taken  from  you  the  desire 
of  your  eyes  with  a  stroke  ;  he  has  robbed  you  of  one  who  is  dear  and 
near  to  you.  Say,  Christian,  if  you  had  had  the  myrrh-cup  put  before 
you,  if  it  had  been  said,  '*If  you  like,  that  loved  one  of  yours  shall 
live,"  if  it  had  been  offered  to  you  that  the  life  that  has  been  taken 
away  should  be  spared,  could  you  with  fortitude  have  said,  **  Not  my 
will,  but  thine,  be  done  "  ?  Could  you  have  put  it  away,  and  said,  "No, 
my  Master,  if  this  cup  may  not  pass  from  me  except  I  drink  it,  thy  will 
be  done.  And  what  is  more,  if  it  may  pass  from  me,  if  I  need  not 
suffering,  yet  if  I  can  honour  thee  more  by  suffering,  and  if  the  loss 
of  my  beloved  one  will  serve  thee  and  please  thee,  then  so  let  it  be. 


k 


-^-,  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PUXPIT. 


I  refuse  the  comfort,  when  it  comes  in  the  way  of  thine  honour ;  I  reject 
the  favoured  mercy  if  it  comes  in  the  teeth  of  thy  glory.  I  am  willing 
to  suffer ;  thy  consolations  I  care  not  for  ;  if  I  can  honour  thee  better 
without  them,  I  will  do  without  them  ? ''  ^ 

There  are  some  among  you  in  the  habiliments  of  mourning.  Let  me 
just,  in  conclusion,  note  a  very  beautiful  thought  of  a  good  man  on  a 
passage  of  Scripture.  Jesus  says  in  his  prayer,  '*  Father,  I  will  that 
they  also,  whom  thou  hast  given  me,  be  with  me  where  I  am."  Do  you 
know  why  good  men  die?  Do  you  know  why  the  righteous  die? 
Shall  I  tell  you  what  it  is  that  kills  them  ?  It  is  Christ's  prayer— 
*'  Father,  I  will  that  they  be  with  me."  It  is  that  that  fetches  them 
up  to  heaven.  They  would  stop  here,  if  Christ  did  not  pray  them  to 
death.  Every  time  a  believer  mounts  from  this  earth  to  heaven,  it  is 
caused  by  Christ's  prayer.  *'  Now,'*  says  this  good  old  divine,  "  many 
times  Christ  and  his  people  pull  against  one  another  in  prayer.  You 
bend  your  knee  in  prayer,  and  say,  *  Father,  I  will  that  they  whom 
thou  hast  given  me  be  with  me  where  /am;'  Christ  bends 
his  knee,  and  says,  'Father,  I  will  that  they  whom  thou  hast 
given  me  be  with  me  where  1  am.'"  So,  you  see,  one  gets 
hold  of  him,  and  the  other,  too.  He  cannot  be  in  both  places  ;  the 
beloved  one  cannot  be  with  Christ  and  with  you,  too.  Now,  what  shall 
be  the  answer?  Put  the  prayers  side  by  side;  you  are  praying, 
'*  Father,  I  will  that  they  whom  thou  hast  given  me  be  with  me  where 
I  am;"  'and  there  is  your  Saviour,  praying  that  they  may  be  with 
him  where  he  is.  Now,  if  you  had  your  choice  ;  if  the  King  should 
step  from  his  throne,  and  say,  "  Here  are  two  supplicants ;  they  are 
praying  opposite  to  one  another ;  their  prayers  are  clearly  contrary  to 
each  other;  I  cannot  answer  them  both;  "  oh,  I  am  sure,  though  it 
were  agony,  you  would  start  from  your  feet,  and  say,  "  Jesus,  not  my 
wiU,  but  thine,  be  done."  You  would  give  up  your  prayer  for  your 
sick  husband's  life,  for  your  sick  wife's  life,  for  your  dying  child's  life, 
if  you  could  realize  the  thought  that  Christ  was  praying  m  the 
opposite  direction,  "Father,  I  wiU  that  they  whom  thou  hast  given 
me  be  with  me  where  I  am." 

And  now  we  come  to  the  supper  of  our  Master ;  oh,  may  the  Master 
give  us  fellowship  with  him !  Poor  sinners  that  know  not  Christ,  I 
have  hardly  a  moment  in  which  to  address  you  ;  but  remember,  the 
separation  which  will  be  made  between  you  and  the  church  to-night 
is  but  a  picture  of  an  awful  separation  which  shall  be  made  between 
you  and  the  church  at  the  last  great  day.  You  wHl  sit  upstairs,  some 
of  you,  to  look  down  upon  the  solemnity  :  remember,  you  may  look 
upon  it  here,  but  you  will  not  look  upon  it  in  heaven,  unless 
your  hearts  be  made  new  by  Christ,  and  unless  you  be  washed  m  his 
precious  blood. 


EXPOSITIONS.  501 

lExposittons    b2    €.    ^.    ^purgeott. 

MARK    XV.     15—39;     and    LUKE    XXIII.    27—49. 

"We  will  read  two  short  passages  from  the  Gospels  this  evening.  May 
the  blessed  Spirit,  who  taught  the  Evangelists  to  record  the  sad  story  of 
our  Lord's  sufferings  and  death,  give  us  fally  to  enter  into  the  blessed 
meaning  of  it  while  we  read  it !     First  turn  to  Mark  xv.,  verse  15. 

Mark  xv.  Verses  15,  16.  And  so  Pilate,  willing  to  content  the  people, 
released  Barahhas  unto  them,  and  delivered  Jesus,  when  he  had  scourged  him,  to 
he  cracifitd.     And  the  soldiers  led  him  away  into  the  hall,  called  Frastoriutn ; 

The  guard-room  of  Herod's  palace,  where  the  Praetorian  guards  were 
wont  to  gather. 

16 — 20.  And  they  call  together  the  whole  hand.  And  they  clothed  him  with 
purple,  and  platted  a  crown  of  thorns,  and  put  it  ahout  his  head,  and  began  to 
salute  him,  Hail,  King  of  the  Jews  !  And  they  smote  him  on  the  head  with  a 
reed,  and  did  spit  upon  him,  and  bowing  their  knees  worshipped  him.  And  when 
they  had  mocked  him. 

To  the  utmost,  and  gone  the  full  length  of  their  cruel  scorn, 

20 — 23.  They  took  off  the  purple  from  him,  and  put  his  own  clothes  on  him, 
and  led  him  out  to  crucify  him.  And  they  compel  one  Simon  a  Gyreman,  who 
passed  by,  coming  out  of  the  country,  the  father  of  Alexander  and  Eufus,  to  bear 
his  cross.  And  they  bring  him  unto  the  place  Golgotha,  which  is,  being  inter- 
preted. The  place  of  a  skull.  And  they  gave  him  to  drink  wine  mingled  with 
myrrh  :  but  he  received  it  not. 

They  did  for  him  what  they  did  for  others  who  were  crucified,  they  gave 
him  myrrhed  wine,  as  a  stupefying  draught ;  "but  he  received  it  not."  He 
came  to  suffer,  and  he  would  bear  even  to  the  end  the  full  tale  of  hia 
suffering. 

24 — 27.  And  when  they  had  crucified  him,  they  parted  his  garments,  casting 
lots  upon  them,  what  every  man  should  take.  And  it  was  the  third  hour,  and 
they  crucified  him.  And  the  superscription  of  his  accusation  was  written  over^ 
THE  KING  OF  THE  JEWS.  And  with  him  they  crucify  two  thieves;  the 
one  on  his  right  hand,  and  the  other  on  his  left. 

They  gave  him  the  place  of  eminence,  as  if  he  were  a  greater  offender  than 
either  of  the  two  thieves. 

28.  And  the  scripture  was  fulfilled,  which  saith,  And  he  was  numbered  with 
ike  transgressors. 

Sinners  to  the  right  of  him,  sinners  to  the  left  of  him,  sinners  all  round 
him,  compassed  about  with  those  who  sinned  in  the  very  highest  degree  by 
putting  him  to  death :  "  He  was  numbered  with  the  trangressors."  Oh, 
that  sweet  word  !  It  is  the  hope  of  transgressors  now  that  he  was  counted 
with  them,  and  for  his  sake  all  the  benefactions  of  heaven  now  descend 
upon  transgressors  who  accept  him  as  their  Substitute  and  Saviour. 

29.  And  they  that  passed  hy  railed  on  him. 

Not  only  those  who  sat  down  to  gloat  their  cruel  eyes  upon  his  miseries, 
but  even  the  passers-by,  "  They  that  passed  by,  railed  on  him," — 

29,  30.  Wagging  their  heads,  and  saying.  Ah,  thou  that  destroyest  the 
temple,  and  buildest  it  in,  three  days,  save  thyself,  and  come  down  from 
the  cross. 

He  never  said  he  would  destroy  the  literal  temple.  He  did,  however,  say 
concerning  the  temple  of  his  body,  "  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days 
I  will  raise  it  up,"  and  he  did  raise  it  up  in  three  days  after  they  had 
destroyed  it. 


502  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

31.  Likewise  also  the  chief  priests  mocking  said  among  themselves  with  the 
icribes,  He  saved  others/  himself  he  cannot  save. 

What  they  said  in  bitter  scorn  was  true;  for  mighty  love  had  bound  his 
han'is  for  self- salvation.  InfinTte  in  ]ove,  found  guilty  of  excess  of  love  to 
men,  "  He  saved  others  ;  himself  he  could  not  save." 

32,  33.  Let  Christ  the  King  of  Israel  descend  now  from  the  cross,  that  we 
may  see  and  believe.  And  they  that  were  crucified  with  him  reviled  him.  And 
when  the  sixth  hour  was  come,  there  was  darkness  over  the  whole  land  until  the 
ninth  hour. 

A  supernatural  darkness,  which  could  not  have  occurred  according  to  the 
laws  of  nature.  It  did,  as  it  were,  ♦*  set  a  tabernacle  for  the  sun,'*— the  Sun 
of  Righteousness  was  canopied  a  while  in  darkness,  that  no  longer  might 
those  horrible  eyes  gaze  upon  his  terrible  anguish. 

34.  And  at  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Eloi,  Eloi, 
lama  sahachthani  f  which  is,  being  interpreted,  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast 
thou  forsaken  me  f 

There  was  a  denser  darkness  over  his  spirit  than  was  over  all  the  land, 
and  out  of  that  darkness  came  this  cry  of  agony. 

35.  And  some  of  them  that  stood  by,  when  they  heard  it,  said.  Behold,  he 
calleih  Elias. 

Ah,  me !  This  was  either  a  cruel  jest  upon  our  Saviour's  prayer,  or  an 
utter  misapprehension  of  it. 

36.  And  one  ran  and  filled  a  spunge  full  of  vinegar,  and  put  it  on  a  reed, 
and  gave  him  to  drink,  saying.  Let  alone;  let  us  see  whether  Elias  will  come  to 
take  him  down. 

Jesus  did  receive  this  vinegar,  and  so  fulfilled  Ps.  Ixix.  21 :  »'  In  my  thirst 
they  gave  me  vinegar  to  drink." 

37.  38.  And  Jes-ue  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  gave  up  the  ghost.  And  the 
veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom. 

Even  as  the  flesh  of  Christ,  which  is  the  veil  of  the  Incarnate  God,  was 
rent,  so  now  was  the  veil  of  mystery  taken  away.  The  temple  in  her  sorrow 
rent  her  veil.  The  old  ceremonial  law  passed  away  with  this  token  of  grief 
by  tho  rending  of  the  veil.  It  was  a  strong,  I  might  say,  a  massive  veil ;  it 
co\x\d  not  have  been  rent  by  any  ordinary  means ;  but  when  the  hand  of 
God  takes  hold  upon  the  veil  of  Jewish  types,  it  readily  rends,  and  into  the 
innermost  mystery  of  the  holy  of  holies  we  may  gaze,  yea,  and  through  it 
we  may  enter. 

39.  And  when  the  centurion,  which  stood  over  against  him,  saw  that  he  so 
cried  out,  and  gave  up  the  ghost,  he  said.  Truly  this  man  was  the  Son 
of  God. 

Convinced  by  the  cross.  Oh,  the  triumphs  of  Christ !  The  last  word 
he  speaks  won  this  testimony  from  the  centurion  in  charge  of  the 
crucifixion. 

Now  we  will  read  part  of  Luke's  narrative. 

Lukexxiii.  Verses  27—31.  And  there  followed  him  a  great  company  o/ 
people,  and  of  women,  which  also  bewailed  and  lamented  him.  But  Jisus 
turning  unto  them  said.  Daughters  of  Jerusalem,  weep  not  for  me,  but  weep  for 
yourselves,  and  for  your  children.  For,  behold,  the  days  are  coming,  in  the 
which  they  shall  say.  Blessed  are  the  barren,  and  the  wombs  that  never  bare,  and 
the  paps  which  never  gave  suck.  Then  shall  they  begin  to  say  to  the  mountains, 
Fall  on  us  J-  and  to  the  hills.  Cover  us.  For  if  they  do  these  things  in  a  green 
tree,  what  shall  be  done  in  the  dry  f 

Our  Saviour,  even  amidst  the  gi^eatest  sufferings,  seemed  almost  to  forget 


EXPOSITIONS.  503 

them  in  the  deep  sympathy  that  he  had  for  the  people  aroiwid  him.  He 
pictured  in  his  mind's  eye  that  awful  siege  of  Jerusalem.  Who  can  read  it, 
as  Josephus  describes  it,  without  feeling  the  deepest  horror?  Oh,  the 
misery  of  the  women  and  of  the  children  in  that  dreadful  day  when  the 
«eakts  turned  again^^t  each  other  within  the  city,  and  fought  to  the  death, 
aiQcl  wher  the  Eoman  soldiery,  pitiless  as  wolves,  at  last  stormed  the  place  ! 
Tml?  did  the  Saviour  say  of  it  that  there  should  be  no  day  like  to  it ; 
neither  wa:?  thert  It  was  the  concentration  of  human  misery  ,  and  our 
Lord  wept  becarsf  he  foresaw  what  it  would  be,  and  ho  bade  these  poor 
women  reserve  th&Ii  tears  for  tho&e  awful  sorrows 

32;  33  And  th^.'^\  were  also  twc  ether,  malefactors,  led  with  him  to  hepui 
to  death  And  when,  they  wtre  come  to  the  place,  which  is  called  Calvary, 
tier-,  they  crucified  hin^,  and  the  malefactors,  one  on  the  right  hand,  and  the 
other  on  the  left 

0  blesEf  d  Me»<=^ter  they  did  not  spare  thee  any  scorn !  There  was  no  mode 
of  eyp.-9ssing  t^heir  contempt  which  their  malignity  did  not  invent.  Truly, 
**  he  W3fi  numbered  with  the  transgressors."  You  could  not  count  the  three 
eufferers  c  n  Cplvfcry  without  coi>ntiog  him  ;  he  was  so  completely  numbered 
with  th-  otb.t.-i?  that  he  must  be  reckoned  as  one  of  them. 

34.  Then  said  Jesus,  Father,  forgive  them;  for  they  know  not  what 
they  do 

It  was  all  that  he  could  say  in  their  favour,  and  he  did  say  that.  If  there 
is  anything  to  be  said  in  thy  favour,  O  my  fellow-sinner,  Christ  will  say  it ; 
and  if  there  is  nothing  good  in  thee  that  his  eyes  can  light  upon,  he  will 
pray  en  his  own  accouut,  "  Father,  forgive  them  for  my  sake." 

34.  And  they  f.arted  his  raiment,  and  cast  lots. 

His  garments  we;e  the  executioners'  perquisites;  pitilessly  they  took 
them  from  him,  and  left  him  naked  in  his  shameful  sorrow. 

35.  And  the  people  stood  beholding. 

There  was  no  pity  in  their  eyes.  No  one  of  them  turned  away  his  face 
because  he  could  not  look  upon  so  disgraceful  a  deed. 

35.  And  the  rulers  also  with  them  derided  him,  saying,  He  saved  others  ; 
let  him  save  himself,  if  he  he  Christ,  the  chosen  of  God. 

1  have  already  reminded  you  that  there  was  a  deep  truth  hidden  away 
in  what  these  cruel  mockers  said,  for  Jesus  must  give  himself  up  as  a 
ransom  if  we  were  to  be  redeemed. 

36—38.  And  the  soldiers  also  mocked  him,  coming  to  him,  and  offering  him 
vinegar,  and  saying,  If  thou  be  the  king  of  the  Jews,  save  thyself.  And  a 
superscription  also  was  written  over  him  in  letters  of  Greek,  and  Latin,  and 
Hebrew, 

For  these  were  the  three  languages  known  to  the  throng,  and  Pilate 
invited  them  all  to  read  in  "  Greek,  and  Latin,  and  Hebrew," — 

38,39.  THIS  IS  THE  KING  OF  THE  JEWS.  And  one  of  the  male- 
factors which  were  hanged  railed  on  him,  saying.  If  thou  he  Christ,  save 
thyself  and  us. 

Poor  man;  even  though  he  is  dying  a  felon's  death,  he  must  be  in  the 
flwim  with  the  multitude,  he  must  keep  in  with  the  fashion,  so  strong,  so 
powerful,  is  the  popular  current  with  ail  mankind. 

40 — 42.  But  the  other  answering  rebuked  him,  saying,  Dost  not  thou  fear 
<}od,  seeing  thou  art  in  the  sarne  condemnation  ?  And  we  indeed  justly  y  for 
we  receive  the  due  reward  of  our  deeds  :  hut  this  man  hath  done  nothing  amiss. 
And  he  said  unto  Jesus,  Lord,  remember  me  when  thou  comest  into  thy 
kingdom. 

It  was  strange  that  Christ  should  And  a  friend  dying  on  the  cross  by  his 


504  MBTROPOLrrAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

side.  Nobody  else  spoke  to  him  about  a  kingdom.  I  am  afraid  that  even 
his  former  followers  began  to  think  that  it  was  all  a  delusion ;  but  this 
dymg  thief  cheers  the  heart  of  Jesus  by  the  mention  of  a  kingdom,  and  by 
making  a  request  to  him  concerning  that  kingdom  even  when  the  King  wa» 
in  his  death  agony. 

43.  And  Jesua  said  unto  him,  Verily  I  say  unto  thee,  To-day  shalt  thou  be 
with  me  in  paradise. 

The  Master,  you  see,  uses  his  old  phraseology.  In  his  preaching,  he  had 
been  accustomed  to  say,  '*  Verily,  verily,"  and  here  he  is,  even  on  the 
cross,  the  same  Preacher  still,  for  there  was  such  assurance,  such  confidence, 
such  verity,  in  all  his  words,  that  he  never  had  to  alter  his  style  of  speaking. 
*♦  Verily  I  say  unto  thee,  To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise.** 
Well  does  our  poet  put  it, — 

*•  He  that  distributes  crowns  and  thrones. 
Hangs  on  a  tree,  and  bleeds  and  groans." 

He  was  distributing  these  crowns  and  thrones  even  while  hanging  on  the 
tree.  "  Tell  it  out  among  the  nations  that  the  Lord  reigneth  from  the 
tree,"  may  not  be  an  exact  translation  of  the  Psalm,  but  it  is  true.  Psalm 
or  no  Psalm. 

44.  And  it  was  about  the  sixth  hour. 
About  noon,  when  the  sun  was  at  its  height 

44.  And  there  was  a  darkness  over  all  the  earth  until  the  ninth  hour. 
Three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon. 

45.  And  the  eun  was  darkened,  and  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in 
the  midst. 

As  if  the  great  light  of  heaven  and  the  pattern  of  heavenly  things  were 
both  disturbed.  The  sua  puts  on  inourning,  and  the  temple  rends  her  veiJ 
in  horror  at  the  awful  deed  enacted  on  the  cross. 

46.  And  when  Jesus  had  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  he  said.  Father, 

Is  it  not  sweet  to  see  how  Jesus  begins  and  ends  his  prayers  on  the  cross 
with  "Father"? 

46 — 48.  Into  thy  hande  I  commend  my  spirit :  and  having  said  thus,  he 
gave  up  the  ghost.  Now  when  the  centurion  saw  what  was  done,  he  glorified  God, 
saying.  Certainly  this  was  a  righteous  man.  And  all  the  people  that  came 
together  to  that  sight,  beholding  the  things  which  were  done,  smote  their  breasts, 
and  returned. 

A  strange  ending  to  that  day,  was  it  not  ?  The  three  hours'  darkness 
and  the  death-cry  of  the  Christ  had  not  converted  them,  but  it  had  con- 
victed them  of  sin.  They  felt  that  a  great  and  heinous  crime  had  been 
committed ;  and,  though  they  had  come  together  as  to  a  mere  show  or 
sight,  they  went  away  from  the  spectacle  impressed  as  they  had  never 
been  before:  "All  the  people  that  came  together  to  that  sight,  beholding 
the  things  which  were  done,  smote  their  breasts,  and  returned." 

49.  And  all  his  acquaintance,  and  the  women  that  followed  him  from 
Oalilee,  stood  afar  off,  beholding  these  things. 

In  these  doings  on  Calvary  you  and  I  have  a  share, — in  their  guilt,  or 
else  in  their  merit.  Oh,  that  we  may  not  be  condemned  with  those  who 
were  guilty  of  his  death,  but  may  we  be  cleansed  by  that  precious  blood 
which  puts  away  the  sin  of  all  who  believe  on  him  1 


CHEIST'S  PLEA  FOE  IGNORANT  SINNERS. 


ttm(f\\ 

Iktended  for  Eeading  on  Lord's-day,  July  3rd,  1892, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT   THE    metropolitan    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lord's-day  Evening,  October  5  th,  1890. 


"Then  said  Jesus,  Father,  forgive  them;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."— 
Luke  xxiii.  34. 

What  tenderness  we  have  here  ;  what  self-forgetfulness  ;  what 
ahnighty  love  !  Jesus  did  not  say  to  those  who  crucified  him, 
*'  Begone  I  "  One  such  word,  and  they  must  have  all  fled.  When  they 
came  to  take  him  in  the  garden,  they  went  backward,  and  fell  to  the 
ground,  when  he  spoke  but  a  short  sentence ;  and  now  that  he  is  on 
the  cross,  a  single  syllable  would  have  made  the  whole  company  fall 
to  the  ground,  or  flee  away  in  fright. 

Jesus  says  not  a  word  in  his  own  defence.  When  he  prayed  to  hi» 
Father,  he  might  justly  have  said,  "  Father,  note  what  they  do 
to  thy  beloved  8on.  Judge  them  for  the  wrong  they  do  to  him  who 
loves  them,  and  who  has  done  all  he  can  for  them."  But  there  is  no 
prayer  against  them  in  the  words  that  Jesus  utters.  It  was  written  of 
old,  by  the  prophet  Isaiah,  *'He  made  intercession  for  the  trans- 
gressors;" and  here  it  is  fulfilled.  He  pleads  for  his  murderers, 
"  Father,  forgive  them." 

He  does  not  utter  a  single  word  of  upbraiding.  He  does  not  say, 
"  Why  do  ye  this  ?  Why  pierce  the  hands  that  fed  you  ?  Why  nail 
the  feet  that  followed  after  you  in  mercy  ?  Why  mock  the  Man  who 
loved  to  bless  you  ?  "  No ;  not  a  word  even  of  gentle  upbraiding, 
much  less  of  anything  like  a  curse.  -' Father,  forgive  them."  You 
notice,  Jesus  does  not  say,  "I  forgive  them,"  but  you  may  read  that 
between  the  lines.  He  says  that  all  the  more  because  he  does  not  say 
it  in  words.  But  he  has  laid  aside  his  majesty,  and  is  fastened  to  the 
cross;  and  therefore  he  takes  the  humble  position  of  a  suppliant, 
rather  than  the  more  lofty  place  of  one  who  had  power  to  forgive. 
How  often,  when  men  say,  "I  forgive  you,"  is  there  a  kind  of  selfish- 
ness about  it !  At  any  rate,  self  is  asserted  in  the  very  act  of  for- 
giving. Jesus  takes  the  place  of  a  pleader,  a  pleader  for  those  who 
were  committing  murder  upon  himself.  Blessed  be  his  name  ! 
No.  2,263. 


506 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


This  word  of  the  cross  we  shall  use  to-night,  and  we  shall  see  if  we 
cannot  gather  something  from  it  for  our  instruction  ;  for,  though  we 
were  not  there,  and  we  did  not  actually  put  Jesus  to  death,  yet  we 
really  caused  his  death,  and  we,  too,  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory ;  and 
his  prayer  for  us  was,  "Father,  forgive  them;  for  they  know  not 
what  they  do." 

I  am  not  going  to  handle  this  text  so  much  by  way  of  exposition, 
as  by  way  of  experience.  I  believe  there  are  many  here,  to  whom 
these  words  will  be  very  appropriate.  This  will  be  our  line  of 
thought.  First,  we  were  in  measure  ignorant;  secondly,  we  confess  that 
this  ignorance  is  no  excuse;  thirdly,  we  bless  our  Lord  for  pleading  for  us  ; 
and  fourthly,  tve  now  rejoice  in  the  pardon  we  have  obtained.  May  the 
Holy  Spirit  graciously  help  us  in  our  meditation ! 

I.  Looking  back  upon  our  past  experience,  let  me  say,  first,  that 
WE  WERE  IN  MEASURE  IGNORANT.  We  who  havc  bccu  forgivcu,  we 
who  have  been  washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  we  once  sinned,  in 
a  great  measure,  through  ignorance.  Jesus  says,  ''They  know  not 
what  they  do."  Now,  I  shall  appeal  to  you,  brothers  and  sisters, 
when  you  lived  under  the  dominion  of  Satan,  and  served  yourselves 
and  sin,  was  there  not  a  measure  of  ignorance  in  it  ?  You  can  truly 
§ay,  as  we  said  in  the  hymn  we  sang  just  now, — 

"Alas  !  I  knew  not  what  I  did." 

It  is  true,  first,  that  we  were  ignorant  of  the  awful  meaning  of  sin. 
We  began  to  sin  as  children  ;  we  knew  that  it  was  wrong,  but  we  did 
not  know  all  that  sin  meant  We  went  on  to  sin  as  young  men ; 
perad venture  we  plunged  into  much  wickedness.  We  knew  it  was 
wrong ;  but  we  did  not  see  the  end  from  the  beginning.  It  did  not 
appear  to  us  as  rebellion  against  God.  We  did  not  think  that  we 
were  presumptuously  defying  God,  setting  at  naught  his  wisdom, 
defying  his  power,  deriding  his  love,  spurning  his  holiness;  yet  we 
were  doing  all  that.  There  is  an  abysmal  depth  in  sin.  You  cannot 
see  to  the  bottom  of  it.  When  we  rolled  sin  under  our  tongue  as  a 
sweet  morsel,  we  did  not  know  all  the  terrible  ingredients  com- 
pounded in  that  deadly  bittersweet.  We  were  in  a  measure  ignorant 
of  the  tremendous  crime  we  committed  when  we  dared  to  live  in 
rebellion  against  God.     So  far,  I  think,  you  go  with  me. 

We  did  not  know,  at  that  time,  God's  great  love  ft)  us.  I  did  not 
know  that  he  had  chosen  me  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world ; 
I  never  dreamed  of  that.  I  did  not  know  that  Christ  stood  for  me  as 
my  Substitute,  to  redeem  me  from  among  men.  I  did  not  know  that 
he  had  espoused  me  unto  himself  in  righteousness  and  in  faithfulness, 
to  be  one  with  him  for  ever.  You,  dear  friends,  who  now  know  the 
love  of  Christ,  did  not  understand  it  then.  You  did  not  know  that 
you  were  sinning  against  eternal  love,  against  infinite  compassion, 
against  a  distinguishing  love  such  as  God  had  fixed  on  you  from 
eternity.     So  far,  we  knew  not  what  we  did. 

I  think,  too,  that  we  did  not  know  all  that  we  were  doing  in  our 
rejection  of  Christy  and  putting  him  to  grief  He  came  to  us  in  our  youth  ; 
and  impressed  by  a  sermon  we  began  to  tremble,  and  to  seek  his  face ; 
but  we  were  decoyed  back  to  the  world,  and  we  refused  Christ.     Our 


Christ's  plea  for  ignorai^t  sinxers.  507 

mother's  tears,  our  father's  prayers,  our  teacher's  admonitions,  often 
moved  us  ;  but  we  were  very  stubborn,  and  we  rejected  Christ.  We 
did  not  know  that,  in  that  rejection,  we  were  virtually  putting  him 
away  and  crucifying  him.  We  were  denying  his  Godhead,  or  else  we 
should  have  worshipped  him.  We  were  denying  his  love,  or  else  we 
should  have  yielded  to  him.  We  were  practically,  in  every  act  of  sin, 
taking  the  hammer  and  the  nails,  and  fastening  Christ  to  the  cross ; 
but  we  did  not  know  it.  Perhaps,  if  we  had  known  it,  we  should  not 
have  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory.  We  did  know  we  were  doing  wrong ; 
but  we  did  not  know  all  the  wrong  that  we  were  doing. 

Nor  did  we  know  fully  the  meaning  of  our  delays.  We  hesitated ; 
we  were  on  the  verge  of  conversion  ;  we  went  back,  and  turned  again 
to  our  old  follies.  We  were  hardened,  Christless,  prayerless  still ;  and 
each  one  of  us  said,  ^'  Oh,  I  am  only  waiting  a  little  while  till  I  have 
fulfilled  my  present  engagements,  till  I  am  a  little  older,  till  I  have  seen 
a  little  more  of  the  world !  "  The  fact  is,  we  were  refusing  Christ,  and 
choosing  the  pleasures  of  sin  instead  of  him  ;  and  every  hour  of  delay 
was  an  hour  of  crucifying  Christ,  grieving  his  Spirit,  and  choosing 
this  harlot  world  in  the  place  of  the  lovely  and  ever-blessed  Christ. 
We  did  not  know  that. 

I  think  we  may  add  one  thing  more.  We  did  not  Icnoio  the  meaning 
of  our  self -righteousness.  We  used  to  think,  some  of  us,  that  we  had  a 
righteousness  of  our  own.  We  had  been  to  church  regularly,  or  we 
had  been  to  the  meeting-house  whenever  it  was  open.  We  were 
christened ;  we  were  confirmed  ;  or,  peradventure,  we  rejoiced  that 
we  never  had  either  of  those  things  done  to  us.  Thus,  we  put  our 
confidence  in  ceremonies,  or  the  absence  of  ceremonies.  We  said  our 
prayers  ;  we  read  a  chapter  in  the  Bible  night  and  morning ;  we  did 
— oh,  I  do  not  know  what  we  did  not  do  !  But  there  we  rested  ;  we 
were  righteous  in  our  own  esteem.  We  had  not  any  particular  sin  to 
confess,  nor  any  reason  to  lie  in  the  dust  before  the  throne  of  God's 
majesty.  We  were  about  as  good  as  we  could  be  ;  and  we  did  not 
know  that  we  were  even  then  perpetrating  the  highest  insult  upon 
Christ ;  for,  if  we  were  not  sinners,  why  did  Christ  die ;  and,  if  we 
had  a  righteousness  of  our  own  which  was  good  enough,  why  did 
Christ  come  here  to  work  out  a  righteousness  for  us  ?  We  made  out 
Christ  to  be  a  superfluity,  by  considering  that  we  were  good  enough 
without  resting  in  his  atoning  sacrifice.  Ah,  we  did  not  think  we 
were  doing  that !  We  thought  we  were  pleasing  Grod  by  our  religious- 
ness, by  our  outward  performances,  by  our  ecclesiastical  correctness  ; 
but  all  the  while  we  were  setting  up  anti-Christ  in  the  place  of  Christ. 
We  were  making  out  that  Christ  was  not  wanted ;  we  were  robbing 
him  of  his  office  and  glory  !  Alas  !  Christ  could  say  of  us,  with  regard 
to  all  these  things,  "  They  know  not  what  they  do."  I  want  you  to 
look  quietly  at  the  time  past  wherein  you  served  sin,  and  just  see 
whether  there  was  not  a  darkness  upon  your  mind,  a  blindness  in 
your  spirit,  so  that  you  did  not  know  what  you  did. 

II.  Well  now,  secondly,  we  confess  that  this  ignorance  is  no 
EXCUSE.  Our  Lord  might  urge  it  as  a  plea ;  but  we  never  could.  We 
did  not  know  what  we  did,  and  so  we  were  not  guilty  to  the  fullest 
possible  extent ;  but  we  were  guilty  enough,  therefore  let  us  own  it. 


508  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

For  first,  remember,  the  law  never  allows  this  as  a  plea.  In  our  own 
English  law,  a  man  is  supposed  to  know  what  the  law  is.  If  he 
breaks  it,  it  is  no  excuse  to  plead  that  he  did  not  know  it.  It  may  be 
regarded  by  a  judge  as  some  extenuation ;  but  the  law  allows  nothing 
of  the  kind.  God  gives  us  the  law,  and  we  are  bound  to  keep  it.  If 
I  erred  through  not  knowing  the  law,  still  it  was  a  sin.  Under  the 
Mosaic  law,  there  were  sins  of  ignorance,  and  for  these  there  were 
special  offerings.  The  ignorance  did  not  blot  out  the  sin.  That  is 
clear  in  my  text ;  for,  3  ignorance  rendered  an  action  no  longer 
sinful,  then  why  should  Christ  say,  "Father,  forgive  them"?  But 
he  does ;  he  asks  for  mercy  for  what  is  sin,  even  though  the  ignorance 
in  some  measure  be  supposed  to  mitigate  the  criminality  of  it. 

But,  dear  friends,  we  might  have  known.  If  we  did  not  know,  it  was 
because  we  would  not  know.  There  was  the  preaching  of  the  Word ; 
but  we  did  not  care  to  hear  it.  There  was  this  blessed  Book ;  but  we 
did  not  care  to  read  it.  If  you  and  I  had  sat  down,  and  looked  at 
our  conduct  by  the  light  of  Holy  Scripture,  we  might  have  known 
much  more  of  the  evil  of  sin,  and  much  more  of  the  love  of  Christ,  and 
much  more  of  the  ingratitude  which  is  possible  in  refusing  Christ,  and 
not  coming  to  him. 

In  addition  to  that,  we  did  not  think.  "  Oh,  but,"  you  say,  "  young 
people  never  do  think  !  "  But  young  people  should  think.  If  there  is 
anybody  who  need  not  think,  it  is  the  old  man,  whose  day  is  nearly 
over.  If  he  does  think,  he  has  but  a  very  short  time  in  which  to 
improve ;  but  the  yoimg  have  aU  their  life  before  them.  If  I  were  a 
carpenter,  and  had  to  make  a  box,  I  should  not  think  about  it  after  I 
had  made  the  box ;  I  should  think,  before  I  began  to  cut  my  timber, 
what  sort  of  box  it  was  to  be.  In  every  action,  a  man  thinks  before 
he  begins,  or  else  he  is  a  fool.  A  young  man  ought  to  think  more 
than  anybody  else,  for  now  he  is,  as  it  were,  making  his  box.  He  is 
beginning  hfs  life-plan ;  he  should  be  the  most  thoughtful  of  all  men. 
Many  of  us,  who  are  now  Christ's  people,  would  have  known  much 
more  about  our  Lord  if  we  had  given  him  more  careful  consideration 
in  our  earlier  days.  A  man  will  consider  about  taking  a  wife,  he  will 
consider  about  taking  a  business,  he  will  consider  about  buying  a 
horse  or  a  cow ;  but  he  will  not  consider  about  the  claims  of  Christ, 
and  the  claims  of  the  Most  High  God  ;  and  this  renders  his  ignorance 
wilful,  and  inexcusable. 

Beside  that,  dear  friends,  although  we  have  confessed  to  ignorance, 
in  many  sins  ive  did  know  a  great  deal.  Come,  let  me  quicken  your 
memories.  There  were  times  when  you  knew  that  such  an  action  was 
wrong,  when  you  started  back  from  it.  You  looked  at  the  gain  it 
would  bring  you,  and  you  sold  your  soul  for  that  price,  and  de- 
liberately did  what  you  were  well  aware  was  wrong.  Are  there  not 
some  here,  saved  by  Christ,  who  must  confess  that,  at  times,  they  did 
violence  to  their  conscience  ?  They  did  despite  to  the  Spirit  of  God, 
quenched  the  light  of  heaven,  drove  the  Spirit  away  from  them,  dis- 
tinctly knowing  what  they  were  doing.  Let  us  bow  before  God  in  the 
silence  of  our  hearts,  and  own  to  all  this.  We  hear  the  Master  say, 
*' Father,  forgive  them;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  Let  us 
add  our  own  tears  as  we  say,  "And  forgive  us,  also,  because  in  some 


chbist's  plea  for  ignorant  sinners.  509 

things  we  did  know ;  in  all  things  we  might  have  known ;  but  we 
were  ignorant  for  want  of  thought,  which  thought  was  a  solemn  duty 
which  we  ought  to  have  rendered  to  Grod." 

One  thing  more  I  will  say  on  this  head.  When  a  man  is  ignorant, 
and  does  not  know  what  he  ought  to  do,  what  should  he  do  ?  Well, 
he  should  do  nothing  till  he  does  know.  But  here  is  the  mischief  of 
it,  that  when  we  did  not  hnow^  yet  we  chose  to  do  the  wrong  thing.  If  we 
did  not  know,  why  did  we  not  choose  the  right  thing  ?  But,  being  in 
the  dark,  we  never  turned  to  the  right ;  but  always  blundered  to  the 
left,  from  sin  to  sin.  Does  not  this  show  us  how  depraved  our  hearts 
are  ?  Though  we  are  seeking  to  be  right,  when  we  are  let  alone,  we 
go  wrong  of  ourselres.  Leave  a  child  alone ;  leave  a  man  alone  ; 
leave  a  tribe  alone  without  teaching  and  instruction  ;  what  comes  of  it  ? 
Why,  the  same  as  when  you  leave  a  field  alone.  It  never,  by  any 
chance,  produces  wheat  or  barley.  Leave  it  alone,  and  there  are  rank 
weeds,  and  thorns,  and  briars,  showing  that  the  natural  set  of  the  soil 
is  towards  producing  that  which  is  worthless.  0  friends,  confess  the 
innate  evil  of  your  hearts  as  well  as  the  evil  of  your  lives,  in  that, 
when  you  did  not  know,  yet,  having  a  perverse  instinct,  you  chose 
the  evil,  and  refused  the  good ;  and,  when  you  did  not  know  enough 
of  Christ,  and  did  not  think  enough  of  him  to  know  whether  you 
ought  to  have  him  or  not,  you  would  not  come  unto  him  that  you 
might  have  life.  You  needed  light ;  but  you  shut  your  eyes  to  the 
sun.  You  were  thirsty  ;  but  you  would  not  drink  of  the  living  spring ; 
and  so  your  ignorance,  though  it  was  there,  was  a  criminal  ignorance, 
which  you  must  confess  before  the  Lord.  Oh,  come  ye  to  the  cross, 
ye  who  have  been  there  before,  and  have  lost  your  burden  there  ! 
Come  and  confess  your  guilt  over  again ;  and  clasp  that  cross  afresh, 
and  look  to  him  who  bled  upon  it,  and  praise  his  dear  name  that  he 
once  prayed  for  you,  "  Father,  forgive  them  ;  for  they  know  not  what 
they  do." 

Now,  I  am  going  a  step  further.  We  were  in  a  measure  ignorant ; 
but  we  confess  that  that  measurable  ignorance  was  no  excuse. 

III.     Now,  thirdly,  we  bless  our  Lord  for  pleading  for  tjs. 

Do  you  notice  when  it  was  that  Jesus  pleaded  ?  It  was,  ivhile  they 
were  crucifying  him.  They  had  just  driven  in  the  nails,  they  had  lifted 
up  the  cross,  and  dashed  it  down  into  its  socket,  and  dislocated  all  his 
bones,  so  that  he  could  say,  "  I  am  poured  out  like  water,  and  all  my 
bones  are  out  of  joint."  Ah,  dear  friends,  it  was  then  that,  instead  of 
a  cry  or  a  groan,  this  dear  Son  of  God  said,  "  Father,  forgive  them ; 
for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  They  did  not  ask  forgiveness  for 
themselves  ;  Jesus  asked  forgiveness  for  them.  Their  hands  were 
imbrued  in  his  blood ;  and  it  was  then,  even  then,  that  he  prayed  for 
them.  Let  us  think  of  the  great  love  wherewith  he  loved  us,  even 
while  we  were  yet  sinners,  when  we  rioted  in  sin,  when  we  drank  it 
down  as  the  ox  drinketh  down  water.  Even  then  he  prayed  for  us. 
''  While  we  were  yet  without  strength,  in  due  time  Christ  died  for  the 
ungodly."  Bless  his  name  to-night.  He  prayed  for  you  when  you 
did  not  pray  for  yourself.  He  prayed  for  you  when  you  were  crucify- 
ing him. 

Then  think  of  his  plea,  he  pleads  his  Sonship.     He  says,  ^^  Father y 


510  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

forgive  them."  He  was  the  Son  of  God,  and  he  puts  his  divine 
^  Sonship  into  the  scale  on  our  behalf.  He  seems  to  say,  "  Father,  as 
I  am  thy  Son,  grant  me  this  request,  and  pardon  these  rebels.  Father, 
forgive  them."  The  filial  rights  of  Christ  were  very  great.  He  was 
the  Son  of  God,  not  as  we  are,  by  adoption,  but  by  nature ;  by  eternal 
filiation,  he  was  the  Son  of  the  Highest,  "  Light  of  light,  very  God  of 
very  God",  the  second  Person  in  the  Divine  Trinity ;  and  he  puts  that 
Sonship  here  before  God,  and  says,  "Father,  Father,  forgive  them." 
Oh,  the  power  of  that  word  from  the  Son's  lip  when  he  is  wounded, 
when  he  is  in  agony,  when  he  is  dying!  He  says,  '*  Father,  Father, 
grant  my  one  request ;  O  Father,  forgive  them ;  for  they  know  not 
what  they  do  ;  "  and  the  great  Father  bows  his  awful  head,  in  token 
that  the  petition  is  granted. 

Then  notice,  that  Jesus  here,  silently,  but  really  pleads  his  sufferings 
The  attitude  of  Christ  when  he  prayed  this  prayer  is  very  noteworthy. 
His  hands  were  stretched  upon  the  transverse  beam ;  his  feet  were 
fastened  to  the  upright  tree ;  and  there  he  pleaded.  Silently  his 
hands  and  feet  were  pleading,  and  his  agonized  body  from  ever}'' 
\  sinew  and  muscle  pleaded  with  God.  His  sacrifice  was  presented 
there  before  the  Father's  face ;  not  yet  complete,  but  in  his  will 
complete  ;  and  so  it  is  his  cross  that  takes  up  the  plea,  "  Father,  for- 
\  give  them."  0  blessed  Christ !  It  is  thus  that  we  have  been  forgiven, 
for  his  Sonship  and  his  cross  have  pleaded  with  God,  and  have 
prevailed  on  our  behalf. 

fl  love  this  prayer,  also,  because  of  the  indistinctness  of  it.     It  is 
"  Father,   forgive  them."     He  does  not  say,    "  Father,  forgive  the 
soldiers  who  have  nailed  me  here."     He  includes  them.    Neither  does 
he  say,   ''Father,  forgive  the  people  who  are  beholding  me."     He 
means  them.     Neither  does  he  say,  "  Father,  forgive  sinners  in  ages 
to  come  who  will  sin  against  me."     But  he  means  them.     Jesus  does 
/    not   mention   them   by   any   accusing   name:    "Father,  forgive   my 
1^  ^    enemies.     Father,  forgive  my  murderers."     No,  there  is  no  word  of 
accusation  upon  those  dear  lips.     "  Father,  forgive  them."     Now  into 
that  pronoun  "  them  "  I  feel  that  I  can  crawl.     Can  you  get  in  there  ? 
Oh,  by  a  humble  faith,  appropriate  the  cross  of  Christ  by  trusting  in 
it ;  and  get  into  that  big  little  word  "  them  "  !    It  seems  like  a  chariot 
of  mercy  that  has  come  down  to  earth,  into  which  a  man  may  step, 
^and  it  shall  bear  him  up  to  heaven.     "  Father,  forgive  them." 

Notice,  also,  what  it  was  that  Jesus  asked  for ;  to  omit  that,  would 

j  be  to  leave  out  the  very  essence  of  his  prayer.      He  asked  for  full 

I  absolution  for  his   enemies :    "  Father,  forgive  them.     Do  not  punish 

i  them ;  forgive  them.     Do  not  remember  their  sin  ;  forgive  it,  blot  it 

out;  throw  it  into  the  depths  of   the  sea.     Remember  it   not,    my 

Father.     Mention  it  not  against  them  any  more  for  ever.     Father, 

forgive  them."     Oh,  blessed  prayer,  for  the  forgiveness  of  God  is 

broad  and  deep  !    When  man  forgives,  he  leaves  the  remembrance  of 

the  wrong  behind  ;  but  when  God  pardons,  he  says,  "  I  will  forgive 

\  their  iniquity,  and  I  will  remember  their  sin  no  more."     It  is  this 

I  that  Christ, asked  for  you  and  me  long  before  we  had  any  repentance, 

for  any  faith ;  and  in  answer  to  that  prayer,  we  were  brought  to  feel 

our  sin,  we  were  brought  to  confess  it,  and  to  believe  in  him ;  and 


CHRIST'S   PLEA   FOR   IGNOKANT    SINNERS.  511 

now,  glory  be  to  Ms  name,  we  can  bless  him  for  having  plea  led  for  ue, 
and  obtained  the  forgiveness  of  all  our  sins. 

lY.     I  come  now  to  my  last  remark,  which  is  this,  we  now  rejoice 

IN  THE  PARDON  WE  HAVE  OBTAINED. 

Have  you  obtained  pardon  ?     Is  this  your  song  ? 

*'  Now,  oh  joy  !  my  sins  are  pardon'd, 
Now  I  can,  and  do  believe." 

I  have  a  letter,  in  my  pocket,  from  a  man  of  education  and 
standing,  who  has  been  an  agnostic ;  he  says  that  he  was  a  sarcastic 
agnostic,  and  he  writes  praising  God,  and  invoking  every  blessing 
upon  my  head  for  bringing  him  to  the  Saviour's  feet.  He  says,  "I 
was  without  happiness  for  this  life,  and  without  hope  for  the  next." 
I  believe  that  that  is  a  truthful  description  of  many  an  unbeliever. 
What  hope  is  there  for  the  world  to  come  apart  from  the  cross  of 
Christ  ?  The  best  hope  such  a  man  has  is  that  he  may  die  the  death  of 
a  dog,  and  there  may  be  an  end  of  him.  What  is  the  hope  of  the 
Romanist  when  he  comes  to  die  ?  I  feel  so  sorry  for  many  devout  and 
earnest  friends,  for  I  do  not  know  what  their  hope  is.  They  do  not 
hope  to  go  to  heaven  yet,  at  any  rate ;  some  purgatorial  pains  must  be 
endured  first.  Ah,  this  is  a  poor,  poor  faith  to  die  on,  to  have  such  a 
hope  as  that  to  trouble  your  last  thoughts.  I  do  not  know  of  any 
religion  but  that  of  Christ  Jesus  which  tells  us  of  sin  pardoned,  abso- 
lutely pardoned.  Now,  listen.  Our  teaching  is  not  that,  when  you 
come  to  die,  you  may,  perhaps,  find  out  that  it  is  all  right,  but, 
''Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  Grod."  "He  that  believeth 
on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life."  He  has  it  now,  and  he  knows  it, 
and  he  rejoices  in  it.  So  I  come  back  to  the  last  head  of  my  discourse, 
we  rejoice  in  the  pardon  Christ  has  obtained  for  us.  We  are  pardoned. 
I  hope  that  the  larger  portion  of  this  audience  can  say,  "  By  the  grace 
of  God,  we  know  that  we  are  washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb." 

Pardon  has  corns  to  us  through  Chrisfs  plea.  Our  hope  lies  in  the 
plea  of  Christ,  and  specially  in  his  death.  If  Jesus  paid  my  debt,  and 
he  did  if  I  am  a  believer  in  him,  then  I  am  out  of  debt.  If  Jesus 
bore  the  penalty  of  my  sin,  and  he  did  if  I  am  a  believer,  then  there 
is  no  penalty  for  me  to  pay,  for  we  can  say  to  him, — 

"  Complete  atonement  thou  hast  made, 
And  to  the  utmost  farthing  paid 

Whate'er  thy  people  owed  : 
Nor  can  his  wrath  on  me  take  place, 
If  shelter'd  in  thy  righteousness. 
And  sprinkled  with  thy  blood. 

**  If  thou  hast  my  discharge  procured, 
And  freely  in  my  room  endured 

The  whole  of  wrath  divine : 
Payment  God  cannot  twice  demand, 
First  at  my  bleeding  Surety's  hand, 
And  then  again  at  mine." 

If  Christ  has  borne  my  punishment,  I  shall  never  bear  it.     Oh,  what 
joy  there  is  in  this  blessed   assurance !      Your  hope  that  you  are 


^-2  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

pardoned  Ues  in  this,  tliat  Jesus  died.     Those  dear  wounds  of  Ms 
bleed  life  for  you.  ,., 

We  praise  him  for  our  pardon  because  we  do  know  now  what  we  did. 
Oh  brethren,  I  know  not  how  much  we  ought  to  love  Christ,  because 
we' sinned  against  him  so  grievously!  Now  we  know  that  sm  is 
<' exceeding  sinful."  Now  we  know  that  sin  crucified  Christ.  JNow 
we  know  that  we  stabbed  our  heavenly  Lover  to  his  heart.  We 
slew,  with  ignominious  death,  our  best  and  dearest  Friend  and  Bene- 
factor AVe  know  that  now ;  and  we  could  ahnost  weep  tears  ot  blood 
to  think  that  we  ever  treated  him  as  we  did.  But  it  is  aU  forgiven, 
all  ffone.  Oh,  let  us  bless  that  dear  Son  of  God,  who  has  put  away 
even  such  sins  as  ours !  We  feel  them  more  now  than  ever  before. 
We  know  they  are  forgiven,  and  our  grief  is  because  of  the  pam  tJiat 
the  purchase  of  our  forgiveness  cost  our  Saviour.  We  never  knew 
what  our  sins  really  were  tiU  we  saw  him  in  a  bloody  sweat.  We 
never  knew  the  crimson  hue  of  our  sins  till  we  read  our  pardon 
written  in  crimson  lines  with  his  precious  blood.  Now,  \e  see  our 
sin,  and  yet  we  do  not  see  it;  for  God  has  pardoned  it,  blotted  it 
out,  cast  it  behind  his  back  for  ever.  ,   77  i    i  w  7  /. 

Henceforth  ignorance,  such  as  we  have  described,  shall  be  hatejul  to 
m  Ignorance  of  Christ  and  eternal  things  shaU  be  hateful  to  us.  it, 
through  ignorance,  we  have  sinned,  we  will  have  done  with  that 
ignorance  We  wiU  be  students  of  his  Word.  We  will  study  that 
masterpiece  of  all  the  sciences,  the  knowledge  of  Christ  crucified.  We 
wiU  ask  the  Holy  Ghost  to  drive  far  from  us  the  ignorance  that 
gendereth  sin.  God  grant  that  we  may  not  fall  into  sms  of  igno- 
rance any  more  ;  but  may  we  be  able  to  say,  ''I  know  whom  I  have 
believed;  and  henceforth  I  wiU  seek  more  knowledge,  till  I  com- 
prehend, with  all  saints,  what  are  the  heights,  and  depths,  and 
lengths,  and  breadths  of  the  love  of  Christ,  and  know  the  love  of 
God,  which  passeth  knowledge "  !  .  .       .1    ^ 

I  put  in  a  practical  word  here.  •  If  you  rejoice  that  you  are 
pardoned,  show  your  gratitude  hy  your  imitation  of  Christ.  There  was 
never  before  such  a  plea  as  this,  "  Father,  forgive  them ;  for  they  know 
not  what  they  do."  Plead  like  that  for  others.  Has  anybody  been 
iniuring  you  ?  Are  there  persons  who  slander  you  ?  Pray  to-nigHt, 
"Father,  forgive  them;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do.  Let  us 
always  render  good  for  evil,  blessing  for  cursing;  and  when  we  are 
called  to  suffer  through  the  wrong-doing  of  others,  let  us  believe  that 
they  would  not  act  as  they  do  if  it  were  not  because  of  their  igno- 
rance. Let  us  pray  for  thein;  and  make  their  very  ignorance  the 
plea  for  their  forgiveness :  "  Father,  forgive  them ;  for  they  know  not 

what  they  do."  .  „  ^      ,       •     ^  c!«« 

I  want  you  also  to  think  of  the  miUions  of  London  just  now.  bee 
those  miles  of  streets,  pouring  out  their  children  this  evening  ;  but 
look  at  those  public-houses  with  the  crowds  streaming  m  and  out. 
Go  down  our  streets  by  moonlight.  See  what  I  almost  blush  to  tell. 
FoUow  men  and  women,  too,  to  their  homes,  and  be  this  your  prayer : 
"  Father,  forgive  them ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do.  iliat 
silver  beil-keep  it  always  ringing.  What  did  I  say  ?  That  silver 
i^ll?     Nay,  it  is  the  golden  beU  upon  the  priest's  garments.     Wear  it 


CHRIST'S   PLEA   FOE    IGNORANT    SINNERS.  513 

on  your  garments,  ye  priests  of  God,  and  let  it  always  ring  out  its 
-golden  note,  "  Father,  forgive  them;  for  they  know  not  what  they 
■do."  _  If  I  can  set  all  Grod's  saints  imitating  Christ  with  such  a  prayer 
-as  this,  I  shall  not  have  spoken  in  vain. 

Brethren,  I  see  reason  for  hope  in  the  very  ignorance  that  surrounds  us.  ! 

1  see  hope  for  this  poor  city  of  ours,  hope  for  this  poor  country,  hope 
for  Africa,  China,  and  India.  ''  They  know  not  what  they  do."  Here 
as  a  strong  argument  in  their  favour,  for  they  are  more  ignorant  than 
we  were._  They  know  less  of  the  evil  of  sin,  and  less  of  the  hope  of 
'eternal  life,  than  we  do.  Send  up  this  petition,  ye  people  of  God ! 
Heap  your  prayers  together  with  cumulative  power,  send  up  this  fiery 
shaft  of  prayer,  straight  to  the  heart  of  God,  while  Jesus  from  his 
throne  shall  add  his  prevalent  intercession,  "Father,  forgive  them; 
for  they  know  not  what  they  do." 

If  there  be  any  unconverted  people  here,  and  I  know  that  there  are 
.«ome,  we  wiU  mention  them  in  our  private  devotion,  as  well  as  in  the 
public  assembly ;  and  we  wiU  pray  for  them  in  words  like  these, 
^'  Father,  forgive  them  ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  May  God 
i)less  you  aU,  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake !     Amen. 


33 


514 


METROPOLITAN^   TABERNACLE   PULPIT* 


3Expo]Sition  ibg  (C.  3g.  Spurgcon. 

LUKE  XXIII.    33—46.     JOHN  XIX.   25—30, 

We  have  often  read  the  story  of  our  Saviour's  sufferings ;  but  we  cannot 
read  it  too  often.  Let  us,  therefore,  once  again  repair  to  "  the  place  which 
is  called  Calvary."    As  we  just  now  sang,— 

**  Come,  let  us  stand  beneath  the  cross ; 
So  may  the  blood  from  out  his  side 
Fall  gently  on  us  drop  by  drop ; 
Jesus,  our  Lord,  is  crucified." 

We  will  read,  first,  Luke's  account  of  our  Lord's  crucifixion  and  death. 

Lukexxiii.  Verse  33.  And  when  they  were  come  to  the  place^  which  is  called 
Calvary^  there  they  crucified  him,  and  the  malefactors,  one  on  the  right  hand, 
and  the  other  on  the  left. 

They  gave  Jesus  the  place  of  dishonour.  Reckoning  him  to  be  the  worst 
criminal  of  the  three,  they  put  him  between  the  other  two.  They  heaped 
upon  him  the  utmost  scorn  which  they  could  give  to  a  malefactor;  and  m 
80  doing  they  unconsciously  honoured  him.  Jesus  always  deserves  the  chief 
place  wherever  he  is.  In  all  things  he  must  have  the  pre-eminence.  He  is 
king  of  sufferers  as  well  as  King  of  saints. 

34.     Then  said  Jesus,  Father,  forgive  them ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do. 

How  startled  they  must  have  been  to  hear  such  words  from  one  who  was 
about  to  be  put  to  death  for  a  supposed  crime !  The  men  that  drove  the 
nails,  the  men  thjvft  lifted  up  the  tree,  must  have  started  back  with  amaze- 
ment  when  they  heard  Jesus  talk  to  God  as  his  Father  and  pray  for  them : 
*•  Father,  forgive  them  ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  Did  ever  Roman 
legionary  hear  such  words  before?  I  should  say  not.  They  were  so  dis- 
tinctly and  diametrically  opposed  to  the  whole  spirit  of  Rome.  There  it 
was  blow  for  blow  ;  only  in  the  case  of  Jesus  they  gave  blows  where  none 
had  been  received.  The  crushing  cruelty  of  the  Roman  must  have  been 
startled  indeed  at  such  words  as  these,  "Father,  forgive  them;  for  they 
^ow  not  what  they  do." 

34,  35.    And  they  parted  hi$  raiment,  and  cast  lots.    And  the  people  stood 

heholding.  ,  ^n■,^'      ^.r.    a    - 

The  gambling  soldiers  little  dreamed  that  they  were  fulfilling  the  Scrip- 
tures while  they  were  raffling  for  the  raiment  of  the  illustrious  Sufferer  on 
the  cross  ;  yet  so  it  was.  In  the  twenty-second  Psalm,  which  so  fully  sets 
forth  oiJr  Saviour's  sufferings,  and  which  he  probably  repeated  whde  he 
hung  on  the  tree,  David  wrote,  -They  part  my  garments  among  them 
and^cast  lots  upon  my  vesture."  "And  the  People  stood  beholdmg" 
Inzms  looking  on  at  the  cruel  spectacle.  You  and  I  would  not  have 
done  that  ;the?e  is  a  public  sentiment  which  has  trained  us  to  hate  the  sight 
of  cruelty  especially  of  deadly  cruelty  to  one  of  our  own  race  ;  but  these 
people  thought  that  they  did  no  harm  when  they  "  stood  beholding.  They 
also  were  thus  fulfilling  the  Scriptures;  for  the  seventeenth  verse  of  the 
twenty-second  Psalm  says,  "  They  look  and  stare  upon  me. 

35.  And  the  rulers  also  with  them  derided  him, 
Laughed  at  him,  made  him  the  object  of  coarse  jests. 

35  36  Saying,  He  saved  others  ;  let  him  save  himself,  if  he  be  Christ,  the 
chosen  of  Qod.  And  the  soldiers  also  mocked  him,  coming  to  him,  and  offering 
him  vinegar,  .  -u,,*  :„ 

Tn  mockerv  not  giving  it  to  him,  as  they  did  later  on,  m  mercy  ,  but  in 
mo'krryrpre'ien^^^^^      present  him  with  weak  wine,  such  as  they  drank. 


EXPOSITION. 


515 


37.  And  saying,  If  thou  he  the  king  of  the  Jews,  save  thyself. 

I  fancy  the  scorn  that  they  threw  into  their  taunt :  "  If  thou  be  the  king 
of  the  Jews;  "  that  was  a  bit  of  their  own.  "  Save  thyself;  "  that  they 
borrowed  from  the  rulers.  Sometimes  a  scoffer  or  a  mocker  cannot  exhibit 
all  the  bitterness  that  is  in  his  heart  except  by  using  borrowed  terms,  as 
these  soldiers  did. 

38.  And  a  superscription  also  was  written  over  him  in  letters  of  OreeK  and 
Latin,  and  Hebrew,  THIS  IS  THE  KINO  OF  THE  JEWS. 

John  tells  us  that  Pilate  wrote  this  title,  and  that  the  chief  priests  tried 
in  vain  to  get  him  to  alter  it.  It  was  written  in  the  three  current  languages 
of  the  time,  so  that  the  Greek,  the  Eoman,  and  the  Jew  might  alike 
understand  who  he  was  who  was  thus  put  to  death.  Pilate  did  not  know 
as  much  about  Christ  as  we  do,  or  he  might  ha^e  written,  This  is  the 
King  of  the  Jews,  and  of  the  Gentiles,  too. 

39.  And  one  of  the  malefactors  which  were  hanged  railed  on  him,  saying 
If  thou  he  Christ,  save  thyself  and  us. 

He,  too,  borrows  his  speech  from  the  rulers  who  derided  Christ,  only 
putting  the  words  "  and  us  "  as  a  bit  of  originality.  "  If  thou  be  Christ 
save  thyself  and  us."  ' 

40.  41.  But  the  other  answering  rebuked  him,  saying,  Dost  not  thou  fear  God 
seeing  thou  art  in  the  same  condemnation  t  And  we  indeed  justly  ;  for  we  re- 
ceive the  due  reward  of  our  deeds :  hut  this  man  hath  done  nothing  amiss. 

A  fine  testimony  to  Christ:  "This  man  hath  done  nothing  amiss;" 
nothing  unbecoming,  nothing  out  of  order,  nothing  criminal,  certainly; 
but  nothing  even  "  amiss."  This  testimony  was  well  spoken  by  this  dvinff 
thief.  ^    ^ 

42—46.  And  he  said  unto  Jesus,  Lord,  remember  me  when  thou  comest  into 
thy  kingdom.  And  Jesus  said  unto  him.  Verily  I  say  unto  thee.  To  day  shalt 
thou  be  with  me  in  paradise.  And  it  ivas  about  the  sixth  hour,  and  there  luas  a 
darkness  over  all  the  earth  until  the  ninth  hour.  And  the  sun  luas  darkened 
and  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  the  midst.  And  when  Jesus  had  cried  with 
a  loud  voice,  he  said.  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit :  and  having 
said  thus,  he  gave  up  the  ghost. 

He  yielded  his  life.     He  did  not  die,  as  we  have  to  do,  because  our  ap- 

Sointed  time  has  come,  but  willingly  the  great  Sacrifice  parted  with  hia 
fe :  "  He  gave  up  the  ghost."     He  was  a  willing  sacrifice  for  guilty  men. 

Now  let  us  see  what  John  says  concerning  these  hours  of  agony  these 
hours  of  triumph.  ' 

John  xix.  Verse  25.  Now  there  stood  by  the  cross  of  Jesus  his  mother,  and 
his  mother's  sister,  Mary  the  wife  of  Cleophas,  and  Mary  Magdalene. 

Last  at  the  cross,  first  at  the  sepulchre.  No  woman's  lip  betrayed  her 
Lord ;  no  woman's  hand  ever  smote  him ;  their  eyes  wept  for  him ;  they 
gazed  upon  him  with  pitying  awe  and  love.  God  bless  the  Marys  !  When 
we  see  so  many  of  them  about  the  cross,  we  feel  that  we  honour  the  very 
name  of  Mary. 

26.  When  Jesus  therefore  saw  his  mother,  and  the  disciple  standing  by, 
whom  he  loved,  he  saith  unto  his  mother,  Woman,  behold  thy  son  ! 

Sad,  sad  spectacle  !  Now  was  fulfilled  the  word  of  Simeon,  **  Yea,  a 
sword  shall  pierce  through  thy  own  soul  also,  that  the  thoughts  of  many 
hearts  maybe  revealed."  Did  the  Saviour  mean,  as  he  gave  a  glance  to 
John,  "Woman,  thou  art  losing  one  Son  ;  but  yonder  stands  another,  who 
will  be  a  son  to  thee  in  my  absence  "  ?     "  Woman,  behold  thy  son  !  " 

27.  Then  saith  he  to  the  disciple,  Behold  thy  mother  ! 

*•  Take  her  as  thy  mother,  stand  thou  in  my  place,  care  for  her  as  I  have 


k 


rjg  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PITLPIT. 

cared  for  her  "  Thoso  who  love  Christ  best  shall  have  the  honour  of  talcing 
care  of  his  church  and  of  his  poor.  Never  say  of  any  poor  relative  or  friend, 
the  widow  or  the  fatherless,  "They  are  a  great  burden  to  me  Oh,  no ! 
Sav  "  They  are  a  great  honour  to  me  ;  my  Lord  has  entrusted  them  to  my 
care  "  John  thought  so ;  let  us  think  so.  ^esus  selected  the  disciple  he 
loved  best  to  take  his  mother  under  his  care.  He  selects  those  whotu  he 
loves  best  to-day,  and  puts  his  poor  people  under  their  wmg.  Take  them 
gladly,  and  treat  them  well. 

27.  And  from  that  hour  that  disciple  took  her  unto  hA$  own  home. 
You  expected  him  to  do  it,  did  you  not  ?    He  loved  his  Lord  so  well 

28.  After  this,  Jesus  knowing  that  all  things  were  now  accomplished,  that  the 
Bcripture  might  he  fulfilled,  saith,  I  thirst. 

There  was  a  prophecy  to  that  effect  in  the  Psalms  and  he  must  needs 
fulfil  that.  Think  of  a  dying  man  prayerfully  going  through  the  whole  of 
the  Scriptures,  and  carefully  fulfilling  all  that  is  there  written  concemmg 
him  :  "That  the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled,  Jesus  saith,  I  thirst. 

29  30  Now  there  was  set  a  vessel  fall  of  vinegar :  and  they  filled  a  sponge 
with  vinegar,  and  put  it  upon  hyssop,  and  put  it  to  his  mouth.  When  Jesus 
therefore  had  received  the  vinegar, 

For  he  did  receive  it.  It  was  a  weak  kind  of  wine,  commonly  drunk  by 
the  soldiery.  This  is  not  that  mixed  potion  which  he  refused,  wine  mingled 
with  myrrh,  which  was  intended  to  stupefy  the  dying  in  their  pams: 
-  When  he  had  tasted  thereof,  he  would  not  drink  ;  for  he  would  not  be 
stupefied.  He  came  to  suffer  to  the  bitter  end  the  peAalty  of  sm ;  and  he 
would  not  have  his  sorrow  mitigated  ;  but  when  this  slight  refreshment  was 
offered  to  him,  he  received  it.  Haying  just  expressed  his  l^«°i?;\^«^*^^^^ 
by  Baying  '« I  thirst,"  he  now  manifests  his  aU-sufficient  strength  by  crying, 
with  a  loJd  voice,  as  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke  all  testify. 
30.  He  said,  It  is  finished :  .  a  -l 

What  "  it »  was  it  that  was  finished  ?  I  will  not  attempt  to  expound  it. 
It  is  the  biggest  -  it  "  that  ever  was.  Turn  it  over  and  you  will  see  that  it 
wiU  grow,  !5d  grow,  and  grow,  and  grow,  tiU  it  fills  the  whole  earth:  It 
is  finished." 

30.     And  he  bowed  his  head,  and  gave  up  the  ghost. 

He  did  not  give  up  the  ghost,  and  then  bow  his  head  because  he  was 
deld ;  but  he  bowed^his  held  as'though  in  the  act  of  worship  or  as  leaning 
it  do^  upon  his  Father's  bosom,  and  then  he  gave  up  the  ghost. 

Thus  have  we  had  two  gospel  pictures  of  our  dying  Lord  May  wo 
remember  them,  and  learn  the  lessons  they  are  intended  to  teach  ! 

Hymns  from  "Oub  Own  Hymn  Book"— 561,  279,  278. 


THE  FIRST  CRY  FROM  THE  CROSS. 


g   Sermon 

Drtjvrrt]d  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  October  24th,  isno,  by 

C.  H.    8PURGE0N, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"  Then  said  Jesus,  Father,  forgive  them  ;  for  they  know  not  -what  they  do." — 

[Luke  xxiii.  34. 

Our  Lord  was  at  that  moment  enduring  the  first  pains  of  crucifixion ; 
the  executioners  had  just  then  driven  the  nails  through  his  hands  and 
feet.  He  must  have  been,  moreover,  greatly  depressed,  and  brought  into 
a  condition  of  extreme  weakness  by  the  agony  of  the  night  in  Geth- 
^emane,  and  by  the  scourgings  and  cruel  mockinjrs  which  he  had 
endured  all  through  the  morning,  from  Caiaphas,  Pilate,  Herod,  and 
the  Praetorian  guards.  Yet  neither  the  weakness  of  the  past,  nor  the 
pain  of  the  present,  could  prevent  him  from  continuing  in  prayer.  The 
Lamb  of  God  was  silent  to  men,  but  he  was  not  silent  to  God.  Dumb 
as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers,  he  had  not  a  word  to  say  in  his  own 
defence  to  man,  but  he  continues  in  his  heart  crying  unto  his  Father,  and 
no  pain  and  no  weakness  can  silence  his  holy  supplications.  Beloved, 
what  an  example  our  Lord  herein  presents  to  us!  Let  us  continue  in 
prayer  so  long  as  our  heart  beats;  let  no  excess  of  suffering  drive  us 
away  from  the  throne  of  grace,  but  rather  let  it  drive  us  closer  to  it. 

"  Long  as  they  live  should  Christians  pray, 
For  only  while  they  pray  they  live." 

To  cease  from  prayer  is  to  renounce  the  consolations  which  our  case 
requires.  Under  all  distractions  of  spirit,  and  overwhelmings  of  heart, 
great  God,  help  us  still  to  pray,  and  never  from  the  mercy-seat  may  our 
footsteps  be  driven  by  despair.  Our  blessed  Redeemer  persevered  in 
prayer  even  when  the  cruel  iron  rent  his  tender  nerves,  and  blow  after 
blow  of  the  hammer  jarred  his  whole  frame  with  anguish;  and  this 
perseverance  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  he  was  so  in  the 
habit  of  prayer  that  he  could  not  cease  from  it ;  he  had  acquired  a 
mighty  velocity  of  intercession  which  forbade  him  to  pause.  Those 
long  nights  upon  the  cold  mountain  side,  those  many  days  which  had 
been  spent  in  solitude,  those  perpetual  ejaculations  which  he  was  wont 
to  dart  up  to  heaven,  all  these  had  formed  in  him  a  habit  so  powerful, 
that  the  severest  torments  could  not  stay  its  force.  Yet  it  was  more 
than  habit.  Our  Lord  was  baptised  in  the  spirit  of  prayer ;  he  lived  in 
No.  897. 


518 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


^ 


it,  it  lived  in  him,  it  had  come  to  be  an  element  of  his  nature.  He  was 
like  that  precious  spice,  which,  leinjr  bruised,  doth  not  cease  to  give 
forth  its  perfume,  but  rather  yieldeth  it  all  the  more  abundantly  because 
of  the  blows  of  the  pestle,  its  frap:rance  being  no  outward  nnd  super- 
ficial quality,  but  an  inward  virtue  essential  to  its  nature,  which  the 
pounding  in  the  mortar  did  but  fetch  from  it,  causing  it  to  reveal  its 
secret  soul  of  sweetness.  So  Jesus  prays,  even  as  a  bundle  of  myrrh 
gives  forth  its  smell,  or  as  birds  sing  because  they  cannot  do  otherwise. 
Prayer  enwrapped  his  very  soul  as  with  a  garment,  and  his  heart  went 
forth  in  sach  array.  I  repeat  it,  let  this  be  our  example— never,  under 
any  circumstances,  however  severe  the  trial,  or  depressing  the  difficulty, 
let  us  cease  from  prayer. 

Observe,  further,  that  our  Lord,  in  the  prayer  before  us,  remains  in 
the  vigour  of  faith  as  to  his  Sonship.  The  extreme  trial  to  which  he 
now  submitted  himself  could  not  prevent  his  holding  fast  his  Sonship. 
His  prayer  begins,  "Father."  It  was  not  without  meaning  that  he 
taught  us  when  we  pray  to  say,  "  Our  Father,"  for  our  prevalence  in 
prayer  will  much  depend  upon  our  confidence  in  our  relationship  to 
■God.  Under  great  losses  and  crosses,  one  is  apt  to  think  that  God  is 
not  dealing  with  us  as  a  father  with  a  child,  but  rather  as  a  severe  judge 
with  a  condemned  criminal ;  but  the  cry  of  Christ,  when  he  is  brought 
to  an  extremity  which  we  shall  never  reach,  betrays  no  faltering  in 
the  spirit  of  sonship.  In  Gethsemane,  when  the  bloody  sweat  fell  fast 
upon  the  ground,  his  bitterest  cry  commenced  with,  ''My  Father,'* 
asking  that  if  it  were  possible  the  cup  of  gall  might  pass  from  him; 
he  pleaded  with  the  Lord  as  his  Father,  even  as  he  over  and  over 
again  had  called  him  on  that  dark  and  doleful  night.  Here,  again, 
in  this,  the  first  of  his  seven  expiring  cries,  it  is  "Father."  0 
that  the  Spirit  that  makes  us  cry,  "  Abba,  Father,"  may  never  cease 
his  operations!  May  we  never  be  brought  into  spiritual  bondage  by 
the  suggestion,  "If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God;"  or  if  the  tempter 
should  so  assail  us,  may  we  triumph  as  Jesus  did  in  the  hungry  wil- 
derness. May  the  Spirit  which  crieth,  ''Abba,  Father,"  repel  each 
unbelieving  fear.  When  we  are  chastened,  as  we  must  be  (for  what  son 
is  there  whom  his  father  chasteneth  not  ?)  may  we  be  in  loving  subjection 
to  the  Father  of  our  spirits,  and  live;  but  never  may  we  become 
captives  to  the  spirit  of  bondage,  so  as  to  doubt  the  love  of  our  gracious 
Father,  or  our  share  in  his  adoption. 

More  remarkable,  however,  is  the  fact  that  our  Lord's  prayer  to  his 
Father  was  not  for  himself.  He  continued  on  the  cross  to  pray  for 
himself,  it  is  true,  and  his  lamentable  cry,  "My  God,  my  God,  why 
hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  shows  the  personality  of  his  prayer;  but 
the  first  of  the  seven  great  cries  on  the  cross  has  scarcely  even  ac 
indirect  reference  to  himself.  It  is,  "  Father,  forgive  themr  The 
petition  is  altogether  for  others,  and  though  there  is  an  allusion  to 
the  cruelties  which  they  were  exercising  upon  himself,  yet  it  is  remote  ; 
and  you  will  observe,  he  does  not  say,  "  I  forgive  them"— that  is  taken 
for  L-ranted— he  seems  to  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  they  were  doing 
any  wrong  to  himself,  it  is  the  wrong  which  they  were  doing  to  the 
Father  that  is  on  his  mind,  the  insult  which  they  are  paying  to  the 
Father,,  in  the  person  of  the  Sou ;  he  thinks  not  of  himself  at  all.    Tha 


THE  FIRST  CRY  FROM  THE  CROSS,  5I9 

cry,  "Father,  forgive  them,"  is  altogether  unselfish.  He  himself  is,  in 
the  prayer,  as  though  he  were  not ;  so  complete  is  his  self-annihilation, 
•that  he  loses  sight  of  himself  and  his  woes.  My  brethren,  if  there 
had  ever  been  a  time  in  the  life  of  the  Son  of  man  when  he  might 
liave  rigidly  confined  his  prayer  to  himself,  without  any  one  cavilling 
thereat,  surely  it  was  when  he  was  beginning  his  death  throes.  AVe 
€Ould  not  marvel,  if  any  man  here  were  fastened  to  the  stake,  or  fixed 
to  a  cross,  if  his  first,  and  even  his  last  and  all  his  prayers,  were  for 
support  under  so  arduous  a  trial.  But  see,  the  Lord  Jesus  began  his 
prayer  by  pleading  for  others.  See  ye  not  what  a  great  heart  is  here 
revealed !  What  a  soul  of  compassion  was  in  the  Crucified !  How 
•Godlike,  how  divine !  Was  there  ever  such  a  one  before  him,  who, 
■even  in  the  verv  pangs  of  death,  offers  as  his  first  prayer  an  inter- 
■cession  for  others  ?  Let  this  unselfish  spirit  be  in  you  also,  my  brethren. 
Look  not  every  man  upon  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also  on  the 
things  of  others.  Love  your  neighbours  as  yourselves,  and  as  Christ 
has  set  before  you  this  paragon  of  unselfishness,  seek  to  follow  him, 
treading  in  his  steps. 

There  is,  however,  a  crowning  jewel  in  this  diadem  of  glorious  love. 
The  Sun  of  Righteousness  sets  upon  Calvary  in  a  wondrous  splendour; 
but  amongst  the  bright  colours  which  glorify  his  departure,  there  is 
this  one— the  prayer  was  not  alone  for  others,  but  it  was  for  his 
•cruellest  enemies.  His  enemies,  did  I  say,  there  is  more  than  that 
to  be  considered.  It  was  not  a  prayer  for  enemies  who  had  done  him 
^an  ill  deed  years  before,  but  for  those  who  were  there  and  then  mur- 
dering him.  Not  in  cold  blood  did  the  Saviour  pray,  after  he  had 
forgotten  the  injury,  and  could  the  more  easily  forgive  it,  but  while 
the  first  red  drops  of  blood  were  spurting  on  the  hands  which  drove 
the  nails;  while  yet  the  hammer  was  bestained  with  crimson  gore,  his 
blessed  mouth  poured  out  the  fresh  warm  prayer,  "  Father,  forgive 
them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  I  say,  not  that  that  prayer 
was  confined  to  his  immediate  executioners.  I  believe  that  it  was  a 
far-reaching  prayer,  which  included  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  Pilate  and 
Herod,  Jews  and  Gentiles— yea,  the  whole  human  race  in  a  certain  sense, 
«ince  we  were  all  concerned  in  that  murder;  but  certainly  the  immediate 
>persons,  upon  whom  that  prayer  was  poured  like  precious  nard, 
-were  those  who  there  and  then  were  committing  the  brutal  act  of 
fastening  him  to  the  accursed  tree.  How  sublime  is  this  prayer  if 
viewed  in  such  a  light  !  It  stands  alone  upon  a  mount  of  solitary 
glory.  No  other  had  been  prayed  like  it  before.  It  is  true,  Abraham, 
and  Moses,  and  the  prophets  had  prayed  for  the  wicked  ;  but  not  for 
wicked  men  who  had  pierced  their  hands  and  feet.  It  is  true,  that 
Christians  have  since  that  day  offered  the  same  prayer,  even  as  Stephen 
•cried,  "  Lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge;"  and  many  a  martyr  has  made 
his  last  words  at  the  stake  words  of  pitying  intercession  for  his  perse- 
cui>ors ;  but  you  know  where  they  learnt  this,  let  me  ask  you  where  did 
Jie  karn  it?  Was  not  Jesus  the  divine  original  ?  He  learnt  it  nowhere; 
it  leaped  up  from  his  own  Godlike  nature.  A  compassion  peculiar 
to  himself  dictated  this  originality  of  prayer ;  the  inward  royalty  of  his 
love  suggested  to  him  so  memorable  an  intercession,  which  may  serve 
«ifi  for  a  pattern,  but   of  which   no  pattern  had   eiListed  before.    I 


.^90 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


feel  38  though  I  could  better  kneel  before  my  Lord's  cross  at  thi» 
moment  than  stand  in  this  pulpit  to  talk  to  you.  I  want  to  adore  hin:j 
I  worship  him  in  heart  for  that  prayer;  if  I  knew  nothing  else  of  him 
but  tliifc  one  prayer,  I  must  adore  him,  for  that  one  matchless  plea  for 
mercy  convinces  me  most  overwhelmingly  of  the  deity  of  him  who- 
offered  it,  and  fills  my  heart  with  reverent  affection. 

Thus  have  I  introduced  to  you  our  Lord's  first  vocal  prayer  upon  the 
cross.  I  shall  now,  if  we  are  helped  by  God's  Holy  Spirit,  make  some 
use  of  ifc.  First,  we  shall  view  it  as  illustrative  of  our  Saviour's 
intercession ;  secondly,  we  shall  regard  the  text  as  instructive  of  th& 
church's  work;  thirdly,  we  shall  consider  it  as  suggestive  to  the  un- 
converted. 

I.  First,  my  dear  brethren,  let  us  look  at  this  very  wonderful  text  a» 

ILLUSTRATIVE  OF  OUR  LoRD'S  INTERCESSION. 

He  prayed  for  his  enemies  then,  he  is  praying  for  his  enemies  now ;. 
the  past  on  the  cross  was  an  earnest  of  the  present  on  the  throne.  He- 
is  in  a  higher  place,  and  in  a  nobler  condition,  but  his  occupation  is  the- 
same;  he  continues  still  before  the  eternal  throne  to  present  pleas  oit 
the  behalf  of  guilty  men,  crying,  "Father,  0  forgive  them."  All  hi». 
intercession  is  in  a  measure  like  the  intercession  on  Calvary,  and 
Calvary's  cries  may  help  us  to  guess  the  character  of  the  whole  of  his- 
intercession  above. 

The  first  point  in  which  we  may  see  the  character  of  his  intercession- 
^    is  this — it  is  most  gracious.     Those  for  whom  our  Lord  prayed,  according 
to  the  text,  did  not  deserve  his  prayer.     They  had  done  nothing  which- 
could  call  forth  from  him  a  benediction  as  a  reward  for  their  endeavours- 
in  his  service  ;  on  the  contrary,  they  were  most  undeserving  persons,, 
who  had  conspired  to  put  him  to  "^  death.     They  had  crucified  him,, 
crucified  him  wantonly  and  malignantly ;  they  were  even  then  taking- 
away  his  innocent  life.     His  clients  were  persons  who,  so  far  from> 
being  meritorious,  were  utterly  undeserving:   of  a  single   good  wish* 
from  the  Saviour's  heart.     They  certainly  never  asked  him  to  pray  for 
them — it  was  the  last  thought  in  their  minds  to  say,  "  Intercede  for  us,, 
thou  dying  King!     Offer  petitions  on  our  behalf,  thou  Son  of  God  I'*' 
I  will  venture  to  believe  the  prayer  itself,  when  they  heard  it,  was  either 
disregarded,  and  passed  over  with  contemptuous  indifference,  or  perhap* 
it  was  caught  at  as  a  theme  for  jest.  I  admit  that  it  seems  to  be  too  severe- 
upon  humanity  to  suppose  it  possible  that  such  a  prayer  could  have  been 
the  theme  for  laughter,  and  yet  there  were  other  things  enacted  around  the 
cross  which  were  quite  as  brutal,  and  I  can  imagine  that  this  also  might 
have  happened.    Yet  our  Saviour  prayed  for  persons  who  did  not  deserve^ 
the  prayer,  but,  on  the  contrary,  merited  a  curse — persons  who  did  not 
ask  for  the  prayer,  and  even  scoffed  at  it  when  they  heard  it.     Even  so- 
in  heaven  there  stands  the  great  High  Priest,  who  pleads  for  guilty- 
men — for  guilty   men,   my  hearers.      There  are  none  on  earth  that 
deserve  his  intercession.     He  pleads  for  none  on  the  supposition  that 
they  do  deserve  it.    He  stands  there  to  plead  as  the  just  One  on  the  behalf 
of  the  unjust.     Not  if  any  man  be  righteous,  but  "  if  any  man  sin,  we 
have  an  advocate  with  the  Father.'*     Remember,  too,  that  our  great 
Intercessor  pleads  for  such  as  never  asked  him  to  plead  for  them.     His- 
€lect,  while  yet  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  are  the  objects  of  his- 


THE  FIRST  CRY   FROM  THE   CROSS.  ^21 

Minpassionate  intercessious,  and  while  they  even  scoif  at  his  gospel,  hit 
heart  of  love  is  entreatinp:  the  favour  of  heaven  on  their  behalf.  See,, 
then,  beloved,  if  such  be  the  truth,  how  sure  you  arc  to  speed  with  Goi 
who  earnestly  ask  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  plead  for  you.  Some  of  you,, 
with  many  tears  and  much  earnestness;,  have  been  beseeching  the  Saviour 
to  be  your  advocate  ?  Will  he  refuse  you  ?  Stands  it  to  reason  that  h& 
can  ?  He  pleads  for  those  that  reject  his  pleadings,  much  more  for  you 
who  prize  them  beyond  gold.  Remember,  my  dear  hearer,  if  there  be- 
nothing  good  in  you,  and  if  there  be  everything  conceivable  that  is- 
nialignant  and  bad,  yet  none  of  these  things  can  be  any  barrier  to  prevent 
Christ's  exercising  the  office  of  Intercessor  for  you.  Even  for  you  he- 
will  plead.  Come,  put  your  case  into  his  hands;  for  you  he  will  find 
pleas  which  you  cannot  discover  for  yourselves,  and  he  will  put  the  case- 
to  God  for  you  as  for  his  murderers,  "  Father,  forgive  them." 

A  second  quality  of  his  intercession  is  this — its  careful  spirit.  You 
notice  in  the  prayer,  "  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what 
they  do."  Our  Saviour  did,  as  it  were,  look  his  enemies  through  and 
through  to  find  something  in  them  that  he  could  urge  in  their  favour; 
but  he  could  see  nothing  until  his  wisely  affectionate  eye  lit  upon  their 
ignorance  :  "  they  know  not  what  they  do."  How  carefully  he' surveyed 
the  circumstances,  and  the  characters  of  those  for  whom  he  impoi  tuned  .^ 
Just  so  it  is  with  him  in  heaven.  Christ  is  no  careless  advocate  i'or 
his  people.  He  knows  your  precise  condition  at  this  moment,  nnd  the- 
exact  state  of  your  heart  with  regard  to  the  temptation  through  which 
you  are  passing;  more  than  that,  he  foresees  the  temptation  which  is- 
awaiting  you,  and  in  his  intercession  he  takes  note  of  the  future  event 
which  his  prescient  eye  beholds.  *'  Satan  hath  desired  to  have  thee,  that. 
he  may  sift  thee  as  wheat;  but  I  have  prayed  for  thee  that  thy  faith 
fail  not."  Oh,  the  condescending  tenderness  of  our  great  High  Priest  X 
He  knows  us  better  than  we  know  ourselves.  He  understands  every 
secret  grief  and  groaning.  You  need  not  trouble  yourself  about  the- 
wording  of  your  prayer,  he  will  put  the  wording  right.  And  even  the^ 
understanding  as  to  the  exact  petition,  if  you  should  fail  in  it,  he  can- 
not, for  as  he  knoweth  what  is  the  mind  of  God,  so  he  knowetli  what  is- 
your  mind  also.  He  can  spy  out  some  reason  for  merey  in  you  which 
you  cannot  detect  in  yourselves,  and  when  it  is  so  dark  and  cloudy  with 
your  soul  that  you  cannot  discern  a  foothold  for  a  plea  that  you  may 
urge  with  heaven,  the  Lord  Jesus  has  the  pleas  ready  franied,  and 
petitions  ready  drawn  up,  and  he  can  present  them  acceptable  before- 
the  mercy-seat.  His  intercession,  then,  you  will  observe  is  very- 
gracious,  and  in  the  next  place  it  is  very  thoughtful. 

We  must  next  note  its  earnestness.  No  one  doubts  who  reads  these- 
words,  "Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do,"  that 
they  were  heaven-piercing  in  their  fervour.  Brethren,  you  are  certain,, 
even  without  a  thought,  that  Christ  was  terribly  in  earnest  in  that 
prayer.  But  there  is  an  argument  to  prove  that.  Earnest  people  are- 
usually  witty,  and  quick  of  understanding,  to  discover  anything  which, 
may  serve  their  turn.  If  you  are  pleading  for  life,  and  an  argument 
for  your  being  spared  be  asked  of  you,  I  will  warrant  you  that  you  wili 
think  of  one  when  no  one  else  might.  Now,  Jesus  was  so  in  earnest. 
for  the  salvation  of  his  enemies,  that  he  struck  upon  an  argument  for 


522 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


mercy  which  a  less  anxious  spirit  would  not  have  thought  of;  "They 
know  not  what  they  do."  Why,  sirs,  that  was  in  strictest  justice  hut 
a  scant  reason  for  mercy;  and  indeed,  ignorance,  if  it  be  wilful,  does 
not  extenuate  sin,  and  yet  the  ignorance  of  many  who  surrounded  the; 
cross  was  a  wilful  ignorance.  They  might  have  known  that  he  was  the 
Lord  of  glory.  Was  not  Moses  plain  enough?  Had  not  Esaias  been 
very  bold  in  his  speech?  Were  not  the  signs  and  tokens  such  iliat  one 
might  as  well  douLt  which  is  the  sun  in  the  firmament  as  the  claims  ofj 
Jesus  to  be  the  Messias?  Yet,  for  all  that,  the  Saviour,  with  marvel- 
lous earnestness  and  consequent  dexterity,  turns  what  might  not  have 
been  a  plea  into  a  plea,  and  puts  it  thus  :  "Father,  forgive  them, /or 
they  know  not  what  they  do."  Oh,  how  mighty  are  his  pleas  in  heaven, 
then,  in  their  earnestness!  Do  not  suppose  that  he  is  less  quick  of 
understanding  there,  or  less  intense  in  the  vehemence  of  his  entreaties. 
No,  my  brethren,  the  heart  of  Christ  still  labours  with  the  eternal  God. 
He  is  no  slumbering  intercessor,  but,  for  Zion's  sake,  he  doth  not  hold 
his  peace,  and  for  Jerusalem's  sake,  he  doth  not  cease,  nor  will  he,  till 
her  righteousness  go  forth  as  brightness,  and  her  salvation  as  a  lamp 
that  burneth. 

It  is  interesting  to  note,  in  the  fourth  place,  that  the  prayer  here 
offered  helps  us  to  judge  of  his  intercession  in  heaven  as  to  its  con- 
iimiance,  perseverance,  and  perpetuity.  As  I  remarked  before,  if  our 
Saviour  might  have  paused  from  intercessory  prayer,  it  was  surely  when 
they  fastened  him  to  the  tree;  when  they  were  guilty  of  direct  acts  a' 
<leadly  violence  to  his  divine  person,  he  might  then  have  ceased  to  present 
petitions  on  their  behalf.  But  sin  cannot  tie  the  tongue  of  our  inter- 
ceding Friend.  Oh,  what  comfort  is  here  !  You  have  sinned,  believer, 
jou  have  grieved  his  Spirit,  but  you  have  not  stopped  that  potent 
longue  which  pleads  for  you.  You  have  been  unfruitful,  perhaps,  my 
•brother,  and  like  the  barren  tree,  you  deserve  to  be  cut  down ;  but  your 
want  of  fruitfulness  has  not  withdrawn  the  Intercessor  fi  om  his  place.  He 
interposes  at  this  moment,  crying,  "  Spare  it  yet  another  year."  Sinner, 
you  have  provoked  God  by  long  rejecting  his  mercy  and  going  from 
i)ad  to  worse,  but  neither  blasphemy  nor  unrighteousness,  nor  infidelity, 
shall  fitay  the  Christ  of  God  from  urging  the  suit  of  the  very  chief  o' 
dinners.  He  lives,  and  while  he  lives  he  pleads;  and  while  there  is  ai 
dinner  upon  earth  to  be  saved,  there  shall  be  an  intercessor  in  heaven  to 
plead  for  him.  These  are  but  fragments  of  thought,  but  they  will  hel  ' 
jou,  I  hope,  to  realise  the  intercession  of  your  great  High  Priest. 

Think  yet  again,  this  prayer  of  our  Lord  on  earth  is  like  his  prayer' 
in  heaven,  because  of  its  wisdom.  He  seeks  the  best  thing,  and  that 
which  his  clients  most  need,  "  Father,  forgive  them."  That  was  the 
great  point  in  hand ;  they  wanted  most  of  all  there  and  then  forgive- 
ness from  God.    He  does  not  say,  "  Father,  enlighten  them,  for  they 


1 


THE   FIRST   CRY  FROM   THE  CROSS.  523 

know  not  what  they  do,"  for  mere  enlightenment  would  but  have 
created  torture  of  conscience  and  hastened  on  their  hell;  but  he  cricth, 
** Father,  forgive;"  and  while  he  used  his  voice,  the  precious  drops  of 
blood  which  were  then  distilling  from  the  nail  wounds  were  pleadins^ 
too,  and  God  heard,  and  doubtless  did  forgive.  The  first  mercy  which 
is  needful  to  guilty  sinners  is  forgiven  sin.  Christ  wisely  prays  for 
the  boon  most  wanted.  It  is  so  in  heaven;  he  pleads  wisely  and  pru- 
dently. Let  him  alone,  he  knows  what  to  ask  for  at  the  divine  hand. 
€o  you  to  the  mercy-seat,  and  pour  out  your  desires  as  best  you  can, 
but  when  you  have  done  so  always  put  it  thus,  "  0  my  Lord  Jesus, 
answer  no  desire  of  mine  if  it  be  not  according  to  thy  judgment ;  and  if 
in  aught  that  I  have  asked  I  have  failed  to  seek  for  what  I  want,  amend 
my  pleading,  for  thou  art  infinitely  wiser  than  I."  Oh,  it  is  sweet  to 
have  a  friend  at  court  to  perfect  our  petitions  for  us  before  they  come 
unto  the  great  King.  I  believe  that  there  is  never  presented  to  God 
anything  but  a  perfect  prayer  now;  I  mean,  that  before  the  great 
Father  of  us  all,  no  prayer  of  his  people  ever  comes  up  imperfect; 
there  is  nothing  left  out,  and  there  is  nothing  to  be  erased ;  and  this, 
not  because  their  prayers  were  originally  perfect  in  themselves,  but 
because  the  "Mediator  makes  them  perfect  through  his  infinite  wisdom, 
and  they  come  up  before  the  mercy-seat  moulded  according  to  the  mind 
of  God  himself,  and  he  is  sure  to  grant  such  prayers. 

Once  more,  this  memorable  prayer  of  our  crucified  Lord  was  like  to 
his  universal  intercession  in  the  matter  of  its  prevalence.  Those  for 
whom  he  prayed  were  many  of  them  forgiven.  Do  you  remember  that 
he  said  to  his  disciples  when  he  bade  them  preach,  "  beginning  at 
Jerusalem,"  and  on  that  day  when  Peter  stood  up  with  the  eleven,  and 
charged  the  people  that  with  wicked  hands  they  had  crucified  and  slain 
the  Saviour,  three  thousand  of  these  persons  who  were  thus  justly 
accused  of  his  crucifixion  became  believers  in  him,  and  were  baptised  in 
his  name.  That  was  an  answer  to  Jesus'  prayer.  The  priests  were  at 
the  boitom  of  our  Lord's  murder,  they  were  the  most  guilty  ;  but  it  is 
said,  "  a  great  company  also  of  the  priests  believed."  Here  was 
another  answer  to  the  prayer.  Since  all  men  had  their  share  re- 
presentatively, Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews,  in  the  death  of  Jesus,  the 
gospel  was  soon  preached  to  the  Jews,  and  within  a  short  time  it  was 
preached  to  the  Gentiles  also.  Was  not  this  prayer,  "Father,  forgive 
them,"  like  a  stone  cast  into  a  lake,  forming  at  first  a  narrow  circle, 
and  then  a  wider  ring,  and  soon  a  larger  sphere,  until  the  whole  lake 
is  covered  with  circling  waves  ?  Such  a  prayer  as  this,  cast  into  the 
whole  woild,  first  created  a  little  ring  of  Jewish  converts  and  of  priests, 
and  then  a  wider  circle  of  such  as  were  beneath  the  Roman  sway  ;  and 
to-day  its  circumference  is  wide  as  the  globe  itself,  so  that  tens  of 
thousands  are  saved  through  the  prevalence  of  this  one  intercessi  on 


524 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


*'  Fatlier,  forgive  them."  It  is  certainly  so  with  him  in  heaven,  he 
never  pleads  in  vain.  With  bleeding  hands,  he  yet  won  the  day;  with 
feet  fastened  to  the  wood,  he  was  yet  victorious ;  forsaken  of  God  and 
despised  of  the  people,  he  was  yet  triumphant  in  his  pleas;  how  much 
more  so  now  the  tiara  is  about  his  brow,  his  hand  grasps  the  universal 
sceptre,  and  his  feet  are  shod  with  silver  sandals,  and  he  is  crowned 
King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords !  If  tears  and  cries  out  of  weakness  were 
omnipotent,  even  more  mighty  if  possible  must  be  that  sacred  authority 
which  as  the  risen  Priest  he  claims  when  he  stands  before  the  Father'^ 
throne  to  mention  the  covenant  which  the  Father  made  with  him.  O 
ye  trembling  believers,  trust  him  with  your  concerns  1  Come  hither,  y& 
guilty,  and  ask  him  to  plead  for  you.  0  you  that  cannot  pray,  come, 
ask  him  to  intercede  for  you.  Broken  hearts  and  weary  heads,  and 
disconsolate  bosoms,  come  ye  to  him  who  into  the  golden  censer  will 
put  his  merits,  and  then  place  your  prayers  with  them,  so  that  they  shall 
come  up  as  the  smoke  of  perfume,  even  as  a  fragrant  cloud  into  the 
nostrils  of  the  Lord  God  of  hosts,  who  will  smell  a  sweet  savour,  and 
accept  you  and  your  prayers  in  the  Beloved.  We  have  now  opened  up 
more  than  enough  sea-room  for  your  meditations  at  home  this  afternoon, 
and,  therefore  we  leave  this  first  point.  We  have  had  an  illustration  in 
the  prayer  of  Christ  on  the  cross  of  what  his  prayers  always  are  in 
heaven. 

II.   Secondly,  the  text  is  instructive  of  the  church's  work. 

As  Christ  was,  so  his  church  is  to  be  in  this  world.  Christ  came  intoi 
this  world  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister,  not  to  be  honoured,, 
but  to  save  others.  His  church,  when  she  understands  her  work,  will 
perceive  that  she  is  not  here  to  gather  to  herself  wealth  or  honour, 
or  to  seek  any  temporal  aggrandisement  and  position;  she  is  here 
unselfishly  to  live,  and  if  need  be,  unselfishly  to  die  for  the  deliverance 
of  the  lost  sheep,  the  salvation  of  lost  men.  Brethren,  Christ's  prayer 
on  the  cross  I  told  you  was  altogether  an  unselfish  one.  He  does  not 
remember  himself  in  it.  Such  ought  to  be  the  church's  life-prayer,  the 
church's  active  interposition  on  the  behalf  of  sinners.  She  ought  to  live 
never  for  her  ministers  or  for  herself,  but  ever  for  the  lost  sons  of  men. 
Imagine  you  that  churches  are  formed  to  maintain  ministers?  Do  you 
conceive  that  the  church  exists  in  this  land  merely  that  so  much  salary 
may  be  given  to  bishops,  and  deans,  and  prebends,  and  curates,  and  I 
know  not  what?  My  brethren,  it  were  well  if  the  whole  thing  were 
abolished  if  that  were  its  only  aim.  The  aim  of  the  church  is  not  to 
provide  out-door  relief  for  the  younger  sons  of  the  nobility ;  when  they 
have  not  brains  enough  to  win  anyhow  else  their  livelihood,  they  are 
stuck  into  family  livings.  Churches  are  not  made  that  men  of  ready 
speech  may  stand  up  on  Sundays  and  talk,  and  so  win  daily  bread  from 
their  admirers.    Nay,  there  is  another  end  and  aim  from  this.     These 


THE   FIRST  CRY  FROM  THE   CROSS.  526 

places  of  worship  are  nofc  built  that  you  may  sit  here  comfortably,  and 
hear  something  that  shall  make  you  pass  away  your  Sundays  with 
pleasure.  A  church  in  London  which  does  not  exist  to  do  good  in  the 
filums,  and  dens,  and  kennels  of  the  city,  is  a  church  that  has  no  reason 
to  justify  its  longer  existing.  A  church  that  does  not  exist  to  reclaim 
heathenism,  to  fight  with  evil,  to  destroy  error,  to  put  down  falsehood, 
a  church  that  does  not  exist  to  take  the  side  of  the  poor,  to  denounce 
injustice  and  to  holdup  righteousness,  is  a  church  that  has  no  ris^ht  to 
be.  Not  for  thyself,  0  church,  dost  thou  exist,  any  more  than  Christ 
existed  for  him^self.  His  glory  was  that  he  laid  aside  his  glory,  and 
the  glory  of  the  church  is  when  she  lays  aside  her  respectability  and 
her  dignity,  and  counts  it  to  be  her  glory  to  gather  together  the  out- 
casts, and  her  highest  honour  to  seek  amid  the  foulest  mire  the  price- 
less jewels  for  which  Jesus  shed  his  blood.  To  rescue  souls  from  hell 
and  lead  to  God,  to  hope,  to  heaven,  this  is  her  heavenly  occupation. 
O  that  the  church  would  always  feel  this  !  Let  her  hav«  her  bishops 
and  her  preachers,  and  let  them  be  supported,  and  let  everything  be 
done  for  Christ^s  sake  decently  and  in  order,  but  let  the  end  be  looked 
to,  namely,  the  conversion  of  the  wandering,  the  teaching  of  the 
ignorant,  the  help  of  the  poor,  the  maintenance  of  the  right,  the 
putting  down  of  the  wrong,  and  the  upholding  at  all  hazards  of  the 
crown  and  kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Now  the  prayer  of  Christ  had  a  great  spirituality  of  aim.  You  notice 
that  nothing  is  sought  for  these  people  but  that  which  concerns  their 
Bouls,  "  Father, /or^we  them."  And  I  believe  the  church  will  do  well 
when  she  recollects  that  she  wrestles  not  with  flesh  and  blood,  nor  with 
principalities  and  powers,  but  with  spiritual  wickedness,  and  that  what 
fihe  has  to  dispense  is  not  the  law  and  order  by  which  magistrates  may 
be  upheld,  or  tyrannies  pulled  down,  but  the  spiritual  government  by 
•which  hearts  are  conquered  to  Christ,  and  judgments  are  brought  into 
subjection  to  his  truth.  I  believe  that  the  more  the  church  of  God 
«trains  after,  before  God,  the  forgiveness  of  sinners,  and  the  more  she 
seeks  in  her  life  prayer  to  teach  sinners  what  sin  is,  and  what  the  blood 
of  Christ  is,  and  what  the  hell  that  must  follow  if  sin  be  not  washed 
out,  and  what  the  heaven  is  which  will  be  ensured  to  all  those  who  are 
oleansed  from  sin,  the  more  she  keeps  to  this  the  better.  Press  forward 
as  one  man,  my  brethren,  to  secure  the  root  of  the  matter  in  the  forgive- 
ness of  sinners.  As  to  all  the  evils  that  afflict  humanity,  by  all  means 
take  your  share  in  battling  with  them ;  let  temperance  be  maintained, 
let  education  be  supported ;  let  reforms,  political  and  ecclesiastical,  be 
pushed  forward  as  far  as  you  have  the  time  and  effort  to  spare,  but  the 
first  business  of  every  Christian  man  and  woman  is  with  the  hearts  and 
consciences  of  men  as  they  stand  before  the  everlasting  God.  0  let 
nothing  turn  you  aside  from  your  divine  errand  of  mercy  to  undying 


526  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

souls.  This  is  your  one  business.  Tell  to  sinners  that  sin  will  damn 
them,  thart  Christ  alone  can  take  away  sin,  and  make  this  the  one 
passion  of  your  souls,  "  Father,  forgive  them,  forgive  them  !  Let  them 
know  how  to  be  forgiven.  Let  them  be  actually  forgiven,  and  let  me 
never  rest  except  as  I  am  the  means  of  bringing  sinners  to  be  forgiven, 
even  the  guiltiest  of  them." 

Our  Saviour's  prayer  teaches  the  church  that  while  her  spirit  should 
be  unselfish,  and  her  aim  should  be  spiritud,  the  range  of  her  mission  is 
to  be  unlimited.  Christ  prayed  for  the  wicked,  what  if  I  say  the  most 
wicked  of  the  wicked,  that  ribald  crew  that  had  surrounded  his  cross ! 
He  prayed  for  the  ignorant.  Doth  he  not  say,  "  They  know  not  what  they 
do  "?  He  prayed  for  his  persecutors;  the  very  persons  who  were  most 
at  enmity  with  him,  lay  nearest  to  his  heart.  Church  of  God,  your 
mission  is  not  to  the  respectable  few  who  will  gather  about  your 
ministers  to  listen  respectfully  to  their  words ;  your  mission  is  not  to 
the  elite  and  the  eclectic,  the  intelligent  who  will  criticise  your  words 
and  pass  judgment  upon  every  syllable  of  your  teaching;  your  mission 
is  not  to  those  who  treat  you  kindly,  generously,  affectionately,  not  to 
these  I  mean  alone,  though  certainly  to  these  as  among  the  rest ; 
but  your  great  errand  is  to  the  harlot,  to  the  thief,  to  the  swearer  and 
the  drunkard,  to  the  most  depraved  and  debauched.  If  no  one  else 
cares  for  these,  the  church  always  must,  and  if  there  be  any  who  are  first  in 
her  prayers  it  should  be  these  who  alas !  are  generally  last  in  our  thoughts. 
The  ignorant  we  ought  diligently  to  consider.  It  is  not  enough  for  the 
preacher  that  he  preaches  so  that  those  instructed  from  their  youth  up 
can  understand  him ;  he  must  think  of  those  to  whom  the  commonest 
phrases  of  theological  truth  are  as  meaningless  as  the  jargon  of  an 
unknown  tongue ;  he  must  preach  so  as  to  reach  the  meanest  compre- 
hension; and  if  the  ignorant  many  come  not  to  hear  him,  he  must  use 
such  means  as  best  he  may  to  induce  them,  nay,  compel  them  to  hear 
the  good  news.  The  gospel  is  meant  also  for  those  who  persecute 
religion  ;  it  aims  its  arrows  of  love  against  the  hearts  of  its  foes.  H 
there  be  any  whom  we  should  first  seek  to  bring  to  Jesus,  it  should  be 
just  these  who  are  the  farthest  off  and  most  opposed  to  the  gospel  of 
Christ.  "Father,  forgive  them-,  if  thou  dost  pardon  none  besides,  yet 
be  pleased  to  forgive  themy 

So,  too,  the  church  should  be  earnest  as  Christ  was ;  and  if  she  be  so, 
she  will  be  quick  to  notice  any  ground  of  hope  in  those  she  deals  with, 
quick  to  observe  any  plea  that  she  may  use  with  God  for  their 
salvation. 

She  must  be  hopeful  too,  and  surely  no  church  ever  had  a  more 
hopeful  sphere  than  the  church  of  this  present  age.  If  ignorance  be 
a  plea  with  God,  look  on  the  heathen  at  this  day — millions  of  them 
never  heard  Messiah's  name.     Forgive  them,  great  God,  indeed  they 


THE   FIRST   CRY   FROM   THE   CROSS.  627 

know  not  what  they  do.  If  ignorance  be  some  ground  for  hope,  ther» 
is  hope  enough  in  this  great  city  of  London,  for  have  we  not  around  u» 
hundreds  of  thousands  to  whom  the  simplest  truths  of  tlie  gospel 
would  be  the  greatest  novelties  ?  Brethren,  it  is  sad  to  think  that  this 
country  should  still  lie  under  such  a  pall  of  ignorance,  but  the  sting 
of  so  dread  a  fact  is  blunted  with  hope  when  we  read  the  Siiviour's 
prayer  aright — it  helps  us  to  hope  while  we  cry,  *'  Forgive  them,  for 
they  know  not  what  they  do." 

It  is  the  church's  business  to  seek  after  the  most  fallen  and  the 
most  ignorant,  and  to  seek  them  perseveringly.  She  should  never  stay 
her  hand  from  doing  good.  If  the  Lord  be  coming  to-morrow,  it  is  no 
reason  why  you  Christian  people  should  subside  into  mere  talkers  and 
readers,  meeting  together  for  mutual  comfort,  and  forgetting  the 
myriads  of  perishing  souls.  If  it  be  true  that  this  world  is  going  to 
pieces  in  a  fortnight,  and  that  Louis  Napoleon  is  the  Apocalyptic  beast^ 
or  if  it  be  not  true,  I  care  not  a  fig,  it  makes  no  diflFererice  to  ray  duty, 
and  does  not  change  my  service.  Let  my  Lord  come  when  he  will, 
while  I  labour  for  him  I  am  ready  for  his  appearing.  The  business  of 
the  church  is  still  to  watch  for  the  salvation  of  souls.  If  she  stood 
gazing,  as  modern  prophets  would  have  her ;  if  she  gave  up  her  mission 
to  indulge  in  speculative  interpretations,  she  might  well  be  afraid  of  her 
Lord's  coming ;  but  if  she  goes  about  her  work,  and  with  ince&sant  toil 
searches  out  her  Lord's  precious  jewels,  she  shall  not  be  ashamed  when 
her  Bridegroom  cometh. 

My  time  has  been  much  too  short  for  so  vast  a  subject  as  I  have 
undertaken,  but  I  wish  I  could  speak  words  that  were  as  loud  as 
thunder,  with  a  sense  and  earnestness  as  mighty  as  the  lightning.  I 
would  fain  excite  every  Christian  here,  and  kindle  in  him  a  right  idea 
of  what  his  work  is  as  a  part  of  Christ's  church.  My  brethren,  you 
must  not  live  to  yourselves;  the  accumulation  of  money,  the  bringing 
up  of  your  children,  the  building  of  houses,  the  earning  of  your  daily 
bread,  all  this  you  may  do ;  but  there  must  be  a  greater  object  than 
this  if  you  are  to  be  Christlike,  as  you  should  be,  since  you  are  bouglit 
with  Jesus'  blood.  Begm  to  live  lor  others,  make  it  apparent  unto  all 
men  that  you  are  not  yourselves  the  end-all  and  be-all  of  your  own 
existence,  but  that  you  are  spending  and  being  spent,  that  through  the 
good  you  do  to  men  God  may  be  glorified,  and  Christ  may  see  in  you 
his  own  image  and  be  satisfied. 

III.  Time  fails  me,  but  the  last  point  was  to  be  a  word  suggestivb 
TO  the  unconverted. 

Listen  attentively  to  these  sentences.  I  will  make  them  as  terse  and 
condensed  as  possible.  Some  of  you  here  are  not  saved.  Now,  some  of 
you  have  been  very  ignorant,  and  when  you  sinned  you  did  not  know 
what  you  did.    You  knew  you  were  sinners,  you  knew  that,  but  you  did 


528  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

not  know  the  far-reaching  guilt  of  sin.  You  have  not  been  attending' 
the  house  of  prayer  long,  you  have  not  read  your  Bible,  you  have  not 
■Christian  parents.  Now  you  are  beginning  to  be  anxious  about  your 
souls.  Remember  your  ignorance  does  not  excuse  you,  or  else  Christ 
would  not  say,  "  Forgive  them;"  they  must  be  forgiven,  even  those  that 
know  not  what  they  do,  hence  they  are  individually  guilty ;  but  still  that 
ignorance  of  yours  gives  you  just  a  little  gleam  of  hope.  The  times  of 
jour  ignorance  God  winked  at,  but  now  commandeth  all  men  every- 
where to  repent.  Bring  forth,  therefore,  fruits  meet  for  repentance. 
The  God  whom  you  have  ignorantly  forgotten  is  willing  to  pardon  and  ' 
ready  to  forgive.  The  gospel  is  just  this,  trust  Jesus  Christ  who  died 
for  the  guilty,  and  you  shall  be  saved.  0  may  God  help  you  to  do  so 
this  very  morning,  and  you  will  become  new  men  and  new  women,  a 
change  will  take  place  in  you  equal  to  a  new  birth ;  you  will  be  new 
creatures  in  Christ  Jesus. 

But  ah !  my  friends,  there  are  some  here  for  whom  even  Christ  himself 
could  not  pray  this  prayer,  in  the  widest  sense  at  any  rate,  "Father,  for- 
give them  ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do,"  for  you  have  known  what 
you  did,  and  every  sermon  you  hear,  and  especially  every  impression  that 
is  made  upon  your  understanding  and  conscience  by  the  gospel,  adds  to 
your  responsibility,  and  takes  away  from  you  the  excuse  of  not  knowing 
what  you  do.  Ah  !  sirs,  you  know  that  there  is  the  world  and  Christ" 
and  that  you  cannot  have  both.  You  know  that  there  is  sin  and  God,' 
and  that  you  cannot  serve  both.  You  know  that  there  are  the  pleasures 
of  evil  and  the  pleasures  of  heaven,  and  that  you  cannot  have  both. 
Oh !  in  the  light  which  God  has  given  you,  may  his  Spirit  also  come 
and  help  you  to  choose  that  which  true  wisdom  would  make  you  choose. 
Decide  to-day  for  God,  for  Christ,  for  heaven.  The  Lord  decide  you 
for  his  name's  sake.    Amen. 


Portion  OF  Scripturs  read  before  Sermon— Luke  xxiii.  1—34. 


4 


CEIE8  FEOxM  THE  CEOSS. 


1.   |ennoi( 

Intended  for  Eeadinq  on  Lord's-day,  March  27th,   1898, 
delivered  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT   NEW    PARK    STREET    CHAPEL,    80UTHWARK, 
On  Lord's-day  Evening^  November  2ndy  1856.* 


"  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  why  art  thou  so  far  from  helping 
me,  and  from  the  words  of  my  roaring  ?  " — Psalm  xxii.  1. 

We  here  behold  the  Saviour  in  the  depths  of  his  agonies  and  sorrows. 
No  other  place  so  well  shows  the  griefs  of  Christ  as  Calvary,  and  no 
other  moment  at  Calvary  is  so  full  of  agony  as  that  in  which  this  cry 
rends  the  air,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  At 
this  moment,  physical  weakness,  brought  upon  him  by  fasting  and 
scourging,  was  united  with  the  acute  mental  torture  which  he  endured 
from  the  shame  and  ignominy  through  which  he  had  to  pass ;  and  as 
the  culmination  of  his  grief,  he  suffered  spiritual  agony  which 
surpasses  all  expression,  on  account  of  the  departure  of  his  Father 
from  him.  This  was  the  blackness  and  darkness  of  his  horror ;  then 
it  was  that  he  penetrated  the  depths  of  the  caverns  of  suffering. 

"My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  There  is 
something  in  these  words  of  our  Saviour  always  calculated  to  benefit 
us.  When  we  behold  the  sufferings  of  men,  they  afflict  and  appal  us  ; 
but  the  sufferings  of  our  Saviour,  while  they  move  us  to  grief,  have 
about  them  something  sweet,  and  full  of  consolation.  Here,  even 
here,  in  this  black  spot  of  grief,  we  find  our  heaven,  while  gazing 
upon  the  cross.  This,  which  might  be  thought  a  frightful  sight, 
makes  the  Christian  glad  and  joyous.  If  he  laments  the  cause,  yet 
he  rejoices  in  the  consequences. 


*  This  waa  the  first  evening  Sermon  preached  by  Me.  Spiteoeon  after  the  fatal 
calamity  at  the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall,  a  fortnight  previously.  On  commencing 
his  discourse,  he  said,  "  The  observations  I  have  to  make  will  be  very  brief,  seeing  that 
afterwards  we  are  to  partake  of  the  Lord's  supper.  I  shall  make  no  allusion  to  the 
recent  catastrophe, — that  theme  of  my  daily  thoughts  and  nightly  dreams,  ever  sinte 
it  has  occurred,  I  hope,  however,  to  improve  that  event  at  some  future  period." 
This  Me.  Sptjegeon  did,  in  many  memorable  utterances  which  will  b^  ^"''•luded  in  Vdl. 
(  II.  of  his  Autobiography,  now  in  course  of  compilation 

No    2,562-  34 


530  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

I.  First,  in  our  text,  there  are  three  questions  to  which  I  shall 
call  jour  attention. 

The  first  is,  "  My  God^  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me'^  "  By  these 
■words  we  are  to  understand  that  our  blessed  Lord  and  Saviour  was  at 
that  moment  forsaken  by  God  in  such  a  manner  as  he  had  never  been 
before.  He  had  battled  with  the  enemy  in  the  desert,  but  thrice  he 
overcame  him,  and  cast  him  to  the  earth.  He  had  striven  with  that 
toe  all  his  life  long,  and  even  in  the  garden  he  had  wrestled  with  him 
till  his  soul  was  •'  exceeding  sorrowful.''  It  is  not  till  now  that  he 
experiences  a  depth  of  sorrow  which  he  never  felt  before.  It  was 
necessary  that  he  should  suffer,  in  the  stead  of  sinners,  just  what 
sinners  ought  to  have  suffered.  It  would  be  difficult  to  conceive  of 
punishment  for  sin  apart  from  the  frown  of  Deity.  With  crime  we 
always  associate  anger,  so  that,  when  Christ  died,  ••  the  Just  for  the 
unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to  God," — when  our  blessed  Saviour 
became  our  Substitute,  he  became,  for  the  time,  the  victim  of  his 
Father's  righteous  wrath,  seeing  that  our  sins  had  been  imputed  to 
him,  in  order  that  his  righteousness  might  be  imputed  to  us.  It  was 
necessary  that  he  should  feel  the  loss  of  his  Father's  smile,— for  the 
condemned  in  hell  must  have  tasted  of  that  bitterness  ; — and  therefore 
the  Father  closed  the  eye  of  his  love,  put  the  hand  of  justice  before 
the  smile  of  his  face,  and  left  his  Son  to  cry,  •*  My  God,  my  God,  why 
hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  " 

There  is  no  man  living  who  can  tell  the  full  meaning  of  these 
words;  not  one  in  heaven  or  on  earth, — I  had  almost  said,  in  hell; 
there  is  not  a  man  who  can  spell  these  words  out  with  all  their  depth 
of  misery.  Some  of  us  think,  at  times,  that  we  could  cry,  "  My  God, 
my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  There  are  seasons  when  the 
brightness  of  our  Father's  smile  is  eclipsed  by  clouds  and  darkness. 
But  let  us  remember  that  God  never  does  really  forsake  us.  It  is 
only  a  seeming  forsaking  with  us,  but  in  Christ's  case  it  was  a  real 
forsaking.  God  only  knows  how  much  we  grieve,  sometimes,  at  a 
little  withdrawal  of  our  Father's  love ;  but  the  real  turning  away  of 
God's  face  from  his  Son, — who  shall  calculate  how  deep  the  agony 
which  it  caused  him  when  he  cried,  **  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou 
forsaken  me  ?  " 

In  our  case,  this  is  the  cry  of  unbelief ;  in  his  case,  it  was  the 
utterance  of  a  fact,  for  God  had  really  turned  away  from  him  for  a 
time.  0  thou  poor,  distressed  soul,  who  once  lived  in  the  sunshine  of 
God's  face,  but  art  now  in  darkness, — thou  who  art  walking  in  the 
valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  thou  hearest  noises,  and  thou  art 
afraid ;  thy  soul  is  startled  within  thee,  thou  art  stricken  with  terror 
if  thou  thinkest  that  God  has  forsaken  thee !  Remember  that  he  has 
not  really  forsaken  thee,  for — 

*'  Mountains  when  in  darkness  shrouded, 
Are  as  real  as  in  day." 

God  in  the  clouds  is  as  much  our  God  as  when  he  shines  forth  in  all 
the  lustre  of  his  benevolence ;  but  since  even  the  thought  that  he  has 
forsaken  us  gives  us  agony,  what  must  the  agony  of  the  Saviour  have 
been  whe*^  he  cried,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  " 


CRIES   FROM   THE    CROSS.  631 

The  next  question  is,  "  Why  art  thou  so  far  from  helping  me  f  '* 
Hitherto,  God  had  helped  his  Son,  but  now  he  must  tread  the  wine- 
press alone,  and  even  his  own  Father  cannot  be  with  him.  Have  you 
•not  felt,  sometimes,  that  God  has  brought  you  to  do  some  duty,  and 
yet  has  apparently  not  given  you  the  strength  to  do  it  ?  Have  you 
never  felt  that  sadness  of  heart  which  makes  you  cry,  "  Why  art  thou 
so  far  from  helping  me  ?  "  But  if  God  means  you  to  do  anything, 
you  can  do  it,  for  he  will  give  you  the  power.  Perhaps  your  brain 
reels  ;  but  God  has  ordained  that  you  must  do  it,  and  you  shall  do  it. 
Have  you  not  felt  as  if  you  must  go  on  even  while,  every  step  you 
took,  you  were  afraid  to  put  your  foot  down  for  fear  you  should  not 
^et  a  firm  foothold  ?  If  you  have  had  any  experience  of  divine  things, 
it  muftt  have  been  so  with  yoa.  We  can  scarcely  guess  what  it  was 
that  our  Saviour  felt  when  he  said,  "  Why  art  thou  so  far  from 
helping  me  ?  "  His  work  is  one  which  none  but  a  Divine  Person 
■could  have  accomplished,  yet  his  Father's  eye  was  turned  away  from 
him !  With  more  than  herculean  labours  before  him,  but  with  none 
of  his  Father's  might  given  to  him,  what  must  have  been  the  strain 
«pon  him !     Truly,  as  Hart  says,  he — 

**  Bore  all  incarnate  God  could  bear,  P 

"With  strength  enough,  and  none  to  spare.*'  \ 

The  third  enquiry  is,  **  WTij/  art  thou  so  far  from  the  words  of  my 
roaring"^''''  The  word  here  translated  "roaring"  means,  in  the 
original  Hebrew,  that  deep,  solemn  groan  which  is  caused  by  serious 
sickness,  and  which  suifering  men  utter.  Christ  compares  his  prayers 
to  those  roarings,  and  complains  that  God  is  so  far  from  him  that  he 
•does  not  hear  him.  Beloved,  many  of  us  can  sympathize  with  Christ 
here.  How  often  have  we  on  our  knees  asked  some  favour  of  God, 
•and  we  thought  we  asked  in  faith,  yet  it  never  came  !  Down  we  went 
upon  our  knees  again.  There  is  something  which  withholds  the 
answer;  and,  with  tears  in  our  eyes,  we  have  wrestled  with  God 
again  ;  we  have  pleaded,  for  Jesu's  sake,  but  the  heavens  have  seemed" 
like  brass.  In  the  bitterness  of  our  spirit,  we  have  cried,  "  Can  there 
he  a  God?  "  And  we  have  turned  round,  and  said,  "  'My  God,  my 
God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?  Why  art  thou  so  far  from  the 
words  of  my  roaring  ?  '  Is  this  like  thee  ?  Dost  thou  ever  spurn  a 
sinner  ?  Hast  thou  not  said,  '  Knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  untc 
thee  ? '  Art  thou  reluctant  to  be  kind  ?  Dost  thou  withhold  thy 
promise  ?  "  And  when  we  have  been  almost  ready  to  give  up,  with 
everything  apparently  against  us.  have  we  not  groaned,  and  said,  "Why 
''art  thou  so  far  from  the  words  of  my  roaring?  "  Though  we  know 
something,  it  is  not  much  that  we  can  truly  understand  of  those 
'  direful  sorrows  and  agonies  which  our  blessed  Lord  endured  when  he 
asked  these  three  questions,  **  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  for- 
saken me  ?  why  art  thou  so  far  from  helping  me,  and  from  the  words 
of  my  roaring  ?  " 

II.    Let  us  now,  in  the  second  place,  answer  these  three  questions. 

The  answer  to  the  first  question  I  have  given  before.  Methinks  I 
hear  the  Father  say  to  Christ,  "  ify  Son^  I  forsake  thee  because  thou 
standest  in  the  sinnerh  stead.      As  thou  art  holy,  just,  and  true,  I  never 


^22  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

would  forsate  thee ;  I  would  never  turn  away  from  thee  ;  for,  even  as 
a  man,  thou  hast  been  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from 
sinners;  but  on  thy  head  doth  rest  the  guilt  of  every  penitent, 
transferred  from  him  to  thee ;  and  thou  must  expiate  it  by  thy  blood. 
Because  thou  standest  in  the  sinner's  stead,  1  will  not  look  at  thee 
till  thou  hast  borne  the  full  weight  of  my  vengeance.  Theviy  I  will 
exalt  thee  on  high,  far  above  all  principalities  and  powers." 

0  Christian,  pause  here,  and  reflect !     Christ  was  punished  in  this 
way  for  thee  !     Oh,  see  that  countenance  so  wrung  with  horror ;  those 
horrors  gather  there  for  thee  !   Perhaps,  in  thine  own  esteem,  thou 
art  the  most  worthless  of  the  family  ;  certainly,  the  most  insignificant ;. 
but  the  meanest  lamb  of  Christ's  flock  is  as  much  the  object  of  purchase-^ 
as  any  other.   Yes,  when  that  black  darkness  gathered  round  his  brow, 
and  when  he  cried  out,  *'  Eloi,  Eloi,"  in  the  words  of  our  text,  for  th< 
Lord  Omnipotent  to  help  him  ;  when  he  uttered  that  awfully  solei 
cry,  it  was  because  he  loved  thee^  because  he  gave  himself  for  theey. 
that  thou  mightest  be  sanctified  here,  and  dwell  with  him  hereafter.  • 
God    forsook  him,    therefore,    first,    because   he  was  the   sinner's-l 
Substitute. 

The  answer  to  the  second  question  is,  *'  Because  I  would  have  thee  get 
all  the  honour  to  thyself;  therefore  I  wiU  not  help  thee,  lest  I  should 
have  to  divide  the  spoil  with  thee."  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  lived  to: 
glorify  his  Father,  and  he  died  to  glorify  himself,  in  the  redemption 
of  his  chosen  people.  God  says,  *'  No,  my  Son,  thou  shalt  do  it  alone  ; 
for  thou  must  wear  the  crown  alone  ;  and  upon  thy  person  shall  all 
the  regalia  of  thy  sovereignty  be  found.  I  will  give  thee  all  the 
praise,  and  therefore  thou  shalt  accomplish  all  the  labour."  He  was- 
to  tread  the  winepress  alone,  and  to  get  the  victory  and  glory  alone  to- 
himself. 

The  answer  to  the  third  question  is  essentially  the  same  as  the  an- 
swer to  the  first.  To  have  heard  ChrisVs  prayers  at  that  time,  would  have- 
heen  inappropriate.  This  turning  away  of  the  Divine  Father  from 
hearing  his  Son's  prayer,  is  just  in  keeping  with  his  condition ;  as  th& 
sinner's  Surety,  his  prayer  must  not  be  heard  ;  as  the  sinner's  Surety^ 
he  could  say,  "  Now  that  I  am  here,  dying  in  the  sinner's  stead,  thou 
sealest  thine  ears  against  my  prayer."  God  did  not  hear  his  Son,  be- 
cause he  knew  his  Son  was  dying  to  bring  us  near  to  God,  and  th& 
Son  therefore  cried,  "■  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  " 

in.  In  conclusion,  I  shall  offer  you  a  word  of  earnest  expostula- 
tion AND  OF   affectionate  WARNING. 

Is  it  nothing  to  some  of  you  that  Jesus  should  die  ?  You  hear  the 
tale  of  Calvary ;  but,  alas !  you  have  dry  eyes.  You  never  weep 
concerning  it.  Is  the  death  of  Jesus  nothing  to  you?  Alas!  it 
seems  to  be  so  with  many.  Your  hearts  have  never  throbbed  in  sym- 
pathy with  him.  0  friends,  how  many  of  you  can  look  on  Christy 
thus  agonising  and  groaning,  and  say,  "He  is  my  Eansom,  my 
Bedeemer"?  Could  you  say,  with  Christ,  ''JfyGod"?  Or  is  God 
another's,  and  not  yours?  Oh,  if  you  are  out  of  Christ,  hear 
me  speak  one  word,  it  is  a  word  of  warning!  Remember,  to  he 
out  of  Christ,  is  to  he  without  hope ;  if  you  die  unsprinkled  with  his 
blood,  you  are  lost.     And  what  is  it  to  he  lost  ?      I  shall  not  try  to  tell 


CRIES   FEOM    THE   CROSS.  583 

-jou  the  meaning  of  that  dreadful  word  "  lost:'  Some  of  you  may 
know  it  before  another  sun  has  risen.  God  grant  that  you  may  not ! 
Do  you  desire  to  know  how  you  may  be  saved  ?  Hear  me.  "  God  so 
loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever 
believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  *'  He 
that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved."  To  be  baptized  is  to  be 
buried  in  water  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Have  you  believed  in  Christ  ?  Have  you  professed 
faith  in  Christ  ?  Eaith  is  the  grace  which  rests  alone  on  Christ. 
Whosoever  will  be  saved,  before  all  things  it  is  necessary  that  he 
should  feel  himself  to  be  lost,— that  he  should  know  himself  to  be  a 
ruined  sinner,  and  then  he  should  believe  this :  *'  It  is  a  faithful 
saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the 
world  to  save  sinners,"  even  the  very  chief.  You  want  no  mediator 
between  yourselves  and  Christ.  You  may  come  to  Christ  just  as  you 
^^©1 — guilty,  wicked,  poor ;  just  as  you  are,  Christ  will  take  you. 
There  is  no  necessity  for  washing  beforehand.  You  want  no  riches ; 
in  him  you  have  all  you  require,  will  you  bring  anything  to  "  all  "  ? 
You  want  no  garments ;  for  in  Christ  you  have  a  seamless  robe  which 
^will  amply  suffice  to  cover  even  the  biggest  sinner  upon  earth,  as  well 
as  the  least. 

Come,  then,  to  Jesus  at  once.  Do  you  say  you  do  not  know  how  to  come  ? 
•Come  just  as  you  are.  Do  not  wait  to  do  anything.  What  you  want 
is  to  leave  off  doing,  and  let  Christ  do  all  for  you.  What  do  you 
want  to  do,  when  he  has  done  all  ?  All  the  labour  of  your  hands  can 
never  fulfil  what  God  commands.  Christ  died  for  sinners,  and  you 
must  say,  "  Sink  or  swim,  I  will  have  no  other  Saviour  but  Christ." 
Oast  yourself  whoUy  upon  him. 

*'  And  when  thine  eye  of  faith  is  dim, 
Still  trust  in  Jesus,  sink  or  swim  ; 
Still  at  his  footstool  humbly  bow, 
O  sinner !   sinner !  'prostrate  now  !  " 

He  is  able  to  pardon  you  at  this  moment.  There  are  some  of  you 
who  know  you  are  guilty,  and  groan  concerning  it.  Sinner,  why 
i;arriest  thou?  ''Come,  and  welcome!"  is  my  Master's  message  to 
you.  If  you  feel  you  are  lost  and  ruined,  there  is  not  a  barrier  be- 
tween you  and  heaven ;  Christ  has  broken  it  down.  If  you  know 
your  own  lost  estate,  Christ  has  died  for  you ;  believe,  and  come  ! 
-Come,  and  welcome,  sinner,  come !  0  sinner,  come  !  Come  !  Come  ! 
Jesus  bids  thee  come;  and  as  his  ambassador  to  thee,  I  bid  thee 
come,  as  one  who  would  die  to  save  your  souls  if  it  were  necessary, — 

as  one  who  knows  how  to  groan  over  you,  and  to  weep  over  you, 

•one  who  loves  you  even  as  he  loves  himself,— I,  as  his  minister,  say 
to  you,  in  God's  name,  and  in  Christ's  stead,  "  Be  ye  reconciled  to  God." 
What  say  you  ?  Has  God  made  you  willing  ?  Then  rejoice  !  Eejoice, 
for  he  has  not  made  you  willing  without  giving  you  the  power  to  do 
what  he  has  made  you  willing  to  do.  Come  !  Come !  This  moment 
thou  mayest  be  as  sure  of  heaven  as  if  thou  wert  there,  if  thou  castest 
•-thyself  upon  Christ,  and  hast  nothing  but  Jesus  for  thy  soul's  reliance. 


i 


I  '• 


FAITH    AMONG    MOCKERS, 


^   i«niton 


DELIVERED    BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   MKTROPOLITAN   TABKRNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"He  trusted  on  the  Lord  that  he  would  deliver  him:  let  him  deliver  him,  seeing  he 
delighted  in  him." — Psalm  xxii.  8. 

David  experienced  what  Paul  afterwards  so  aptly  described  as  "cruel 
inockings."  Note  the  adjective  cruel:  it  is  well  chosen.  Mockings 
may  not  cut  the  flesh,  but  they  tear  the  heart;  they  may  shed  no 
blood,  but  they  cause  the  mind  to  bleed  internally.  Fetters  gall  the 
wrists,  but  the  iron  of  scorn  entereth  into  the  soul.  Ridicule  is  a 
poisoned  bullet  which  goes  deeper  than  the  flesh,  and  strikes  the  centre 
of  the  heart.  David  in  the  wilderness  hunted  by  Saul,  and  on  the 
throne  abused  by  Shimei,  knew  what  it  was  to  be  the  butt  of  scorn,  the 
football  of  contempt.  Many  a  time  and  oft  was  he  the  song  of  the 
drunkard,  and  the  byword  of  the  scoffer. 

But  what  have  I  to  do  with  the  son  of  Jesse?  my  heart  remembers 
the  Son  of  man.  What  if  David  suffered  despising  and  scorn  ?  He 
knew  it  but  in  small  measure  compared  with  our  blessed  Lord.  Well  is 
it  said,  "  The  disciple  is  not  above  his  master,  nor  the  servant  above 
his  lord."  It  is  not  wonderful  that  such  an  one  as  David  should 
have  to  cry,  "  My  soul  is  among  lions,*'  when  the  Lord  of  all,  the  per- 
fectly pure  and  Holy  One,  was  driven  to  utter  the  same  cry,  saying, 
*'A11  they  that  see  me  laugh  me  to  scorn:  they  shoot  out  the  lip,  they 
shake  the  head,  saying,  He  trusted  on  the  Lord  that  he  would  deliver 
him:  let  him  deliver  him,  seeing  he  delighted  in  him."  My  brethren 
and  sisters  in  Christ,  if  you  have  to  pass  through  a  like  painful  experience, 
count  it  no  strange  thing,  for  a  strange  thing  it  is  not.  Reproach  is 
the  common  heritage  of  the  godly.  Do  not  think  that  this  fire  which 
you  suffer  is  the  first  that  ever  burned  a  saint.  Others  have  had  to  bear 
the  enmity  of  the  world  long  before  you.  Remember  that,  of  old, 
from  the  first  moment  when  sin  came  into  the  world,  there  were  two  seeds, 
the  seed  of  the  woman  and  the  seed  of  the  serpent ;  and  between  these 
two  seeds  there  is  an  enmity  of  the  most  deadly  kind,  which  will  never 
cease.  It  may  assume  different  forms,  and  it  may  be  held  in  check  by 
many  forces,  but  it  will  always  continue  for  ever  the  same  while  men 
are  men,  and  sin  is  sin,  and  God  and  the  devil  are  opposed.  It  was  so, 
you  know,  in  the  house  of  Abraham :  he  was  a  man  that  walked  before  God, 
No.  1767. 


536  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  was  perfect  in  his  generation,  and  yet  in  his  family  there  were  the 
two  opposing  powers :  Ishmael,  born  after  the  flesh,  mocked  him  that  was 
bom  after  the  Spirit.  When  Rebekah  had  brought  forth  twin  sons, 
yet  the  fact  of  their  being  twin  sons  of  holy  Isaac  did  not  prevent  the 
enmity  that  arose  between  Jacob  and  Esau.  Nothing  will  prevent  the 
seed  of  the  serpent  from  exhibiting  its  spite  towards  the  seed  of  the 
woman  ;  even  kinship  and  brotherhood  go  for  little  in  this  strife ;  in  fact, 
a  man's  foes  full  often  are  they  of  his  own  household.  Count  it  no  marvel, 
then,  if  you  are  derided !  It  seems  to  be  a  necessity  of  the  holy  nature  of 
God  that  it  should  incur  the  enmity  of  the  evil  nature  of  fallen  man,  and 
that  this  evil  nature  should  show  itself  by  direct  and  bitter  attack. 
Remember  "  him  that  endured  such  contradiction  of  sinners  against 
himself,  lest  ye  be  wearied  and  faint  in  your  minds."  Henceforth,  bow 
your  shoulders  to  the  yoke ;  expect  that  if  you  follow  the  Crucified  you 
will  have  to  bear  the  cross,  for  so  it  will  be.  I  trust  that  our  present 
meditation  may  be  useful  to  any  of  God's  servants  who  are  feeling 
the  sharp  lash  of  envious  tongues,  that  they  may  not  be  driven  from 
their  steadfastness  thereby.  If  any  in  their  hearts  are  bowed  down 
because  they  are  conscious  that  possibly  they  have  given  the  scoffers 
some  opportunity  to  mock  at  them,  may  they  even  in  this  take  heart, 
for  David  had  done  so,  and  yet  he  was  not  crushed  by  the  blasphemies 
of  the  wicked. 

The  first  thing  to  which  I  shall  call  your  attention  at  this  time  is, 
that  a  truly  gracious  man  is  like  David  and  like  the  Lord  Jesus,  in  that 
HIS  TRUST  IN  God  is  known.  Even  the  enemies  of  this  holy  man 
who  is  mentioned  in  the  text,  and,  as  I  interpret  it,  even  the  enemies 
of  our  divine  Lord  and  Master,  never  denied  that  he  trusted  in  God. 
This,  indeed,  is  the  commencement  of  their  scoff:  '*He  trusted  on  the 
Lord  that  he  would  deliver  him."  From  which  I  gather  that  every 
gracious  man  should  have  an  apparent,  manifest,  public  trust  in  God. 
He  should  not  merely  trust  him  in  his  heart  alone,  but  that  trust  should 
so  enter  into  his  entire  nature  that  he  does  not  conceal  it  nor  think  of 
<x)ncealing  it.  He  should  be  so  open  in  the  avowal  of  his  confidence  that 
his  enemies,  before  whom  he  is  naturally  restrained  and  on  his  guard, 
nevertheless  are  able  to  spy  out  this  precious  thing  within  him,  and  are 
forced  to  bear  their  witness,  though  it  be  mockingly  and  jestingly,  that 
"  He  trusted  on  the  Lord."  Such  a  testimony  is  all  the  more  valuable  as 
coming  from  an  enemy.  You  know  our  character  is  not  likely  to  be 
drawn  too  prettily  by  those  who  hate  us;  the  utmost  will  be  sure  to  be 
said  against  us ;  but  if  even  our  enemies  say  of  us,  '*  He  trusted  on  the 
Lord,"  we  may  be  very  thankful  that  we  have  so  lived  as  to  extort  this 
testimony  from  their  lips. 

What,  then,  ought  a  child  of  God  to  do  in  order  to  show  that  he  really 
does  trust  in  the  Lord  ?  How  did  Jesus  do  this  ?  Well,  I  think  that 
in  our  Lord's  case  it  was  his  wonderful  calmness  which  compelled  every- 
body to  see  that  "he  trusted  on  the  Lord."  You  never  find  him  in  a 
durry  ;  he  is  never  won-ied  nor  confused.  He  is  beset  behind  and  before 
with  men  who  try  to  catch  him,  but  he  is  as  self-possessed  as  if  he  spoke 
among  friends.  He  does  not  appear  to  be  the  least  upon  his  guard,  and 
yet  instead  of  their  catching  him,  before  long  he  either  catches  them,  or 
else  they  retire  saying,  "  Never  man  spake  like  this  Man."     He  was 


FAITH  AMONG  MOCKERS.  537 

always  coo],  peaceful,  ready,  self-composed.  You  notice  his  inward 
quietude  not  only  when  enemies  are  round  about  him,  but  when  he  is 
surrounded  by  a  great  mob  of  people  all  hungry,  starving,  famishing : 
he  breaks  the  bread  and  multiplies  it ;  but  not  before  he  has  made  them 
all  sit  down  on  the  green  grass  by  hundreds  and  by  fifties.  He  will  have 
them  in  companies,  arranged  in  ranks,  for  convenient  distribution;  and 
when  they  are  all  placed  in  order,  as  if  it  had  been  a  well-marshalled 
royal  entertainment,  then  it  is  that  he  takes  the  bread,  and,  looking  up 
to  heaven,  with  all  deliberation  asks  a  blessing,  and  breaks  and  gives  the 
food  to  the  disciples.  The  disciples  make  no  scramble  of  it :  it  is  an 
orderly  festival,  and  the  thousands  are  all  fed  in  order  due,  in  majestic 
decorum ;  for  Christ  was  calm,  and  therefore  master  of  the  situation. 
He  never  looks  as  if  he  had  fallen  into  diiiiculties,  and  then  adopted 
expedients  to  get  out  of  them;  but  his  whole  life  is  pre-arranged  and 
ordered  in  the  most  prudent  and  peaceful  manner.  Nothing  upon  this 
earth,  although  he  was  so  reduced  that  he  had  nowhere  to  lay  his  head, 
although  he  was  sometimes  so  weary  that  he  sat  down  upon  a  well  to 
rest,  could  put  him  out  of  the  way,  or  disarrange  his  perfect  collected- 
ness.  He  was  always  ready  for  every  emergency ;  in  fact,  nothing  was 
an  emergency  to  him.  What  a  beautiful  picture  that  is  of  Christ  on 
board  ship  in  a  storm !  While  they  that  are  with  him  are  afraid  that 
they  will  go  down,  that  the  wind  will  blow  them  into  the  water,  or  blow 
the  water  over  them,  so  that  they  will  certainly  be  drowned,  what  is  he 
doing  ?  Why,  he  is  asleep :  not  because  he  forgot  them— no ;  but  because 
he  knew  that  the  vessel  was  in  the  great  Father's  hands.  It  was  his 
time  for  sleep ;  he  was  weary  and  needed  it,  and  so  he  carried  out  that 
-which  was  the  nearest  duty,  and  in  all  peacefulness  laid  his  head  on  a 
pillow,  and  slumbered.  His  sleep  ought  to  have  made  them  fe^  at 
«ase.  Whenever  the  captain  can  afford  to  go  to  sleep,  the  passengers 
may  go  to  sleep  too.  Depend  upon  if,  he  that  manages  everything 
would  not  have  gone  to  bed  if  he  had  not  felt  that  it  was  all  right  in  the 
hands  of  the  Highest,  who  at  any  moment  could  stay  the  raging 
storm.  I  wish  we  could  be  similarly  restful ;  for  then  even  our  enemies 
would  say  of  us,  '*  He  trusted  on  the  Lord."  I  wish  we  could  have  that 
steadfast,  imperturbable  frame  of  mind,  in  which  our  Lord  untied  the 
knots  wherewith  his  foes  would  have  bound  him ;  for  then  our  assailants 
would  marvel  at  our  quiet  confidence.  Jesus  knew  no  hurry,  but  calmly 
and  deliberately  he  met  each  matter  as  it  came,  and  grandly  kept  himself 
free  from  all  entanglement.  Oh,  for  the  holy  quiet  which  would  prevent 
our  going  about  our  business  in  haste !  "  He  that  believeth  shall  not  make 
haste,"  but  do  everything  as  in  the  infinite  leisure  of  the  Eternal,  who 
never  is  before  his  time,  and  never  is  behind.  If  we  could  do  that, 
and  did  not  get  so  flurried  and  worried,  and  tossed  about  and  driven 
to  our  wit's  end,  then  our  enemies  would  say  with  astonishment,  "  He 
trusted  on  the  Lord." 

Brethren,  this  ought  also  to  come  out  not  merely  in  our  calm  and 
quiet  manner,  but  also  hy  our  distmct  avowal,  I  do  not  think  that  any 
man  has  a  right  to  be  a  secret  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  this 
time.  You  will  tell  me  that  Nicodemus  was  so ;  that  Joseph  of 
Arimathea  was  so,  and  I  answer  "  Yes  "  ;  but  therein  they  are  not  our 
exemplars.    These  weak  brethren  were  forgiven  and  strengthened ;  but 


588  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT, 

we  may  not  therefore  presume.  Times,  however,  arc  different  now:  by 
the  death  of  Christ  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts  were  revealed,  and  from 
that  day  those  secret  disciples  were  among  the  foremost  to  avow  their 
faith.  Nicodemus  brought  the  spices,  and  Joseph  of  Arimathea  went  ia 
boldly  and  begged  the  body  of  Jesus.  Since  that  da/  when  the  Christ 
was  openly  revealed  upon  the  cross,  the  thoughts  of  otiie^  men's  heart* 
are  revealed  too ;  and  it  is  not  now  permissible  for  us  to  play  hide-and- 
seek  with  Christ.  No;  "He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be 
saved;"  "  He  that  with  his  heart  believeth  and  with  his  mouth  maketh 
confession  of  him,  shall  be  saved."  The  open  confession  is  constantly,  in 
Scripture,  joined  with  the  secret  faith.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  puts  it, 
"  He  that  denieth  me  before  men,  hiiu  will  I  deny";  and  if  you  read  it, 
the  text  sets  denying  in  opposition  to  confession,  so  that  it  really  means, 
"  He  that  does  not  confess  me  before  men,  him  will  I  not  confess  when  I 
come  in  the  glory  of  the  Father."  Our  Lord  does  not  reckon  upon 
leading  a  body  of  followers  who  will  always  keep  behind  the  hedge,  hiding 
themselves  in  holes  and  corners  whenever  there  is  anything  to  be  done 
for  his  glory,  and  only  running  out  at  meal-times  when  there  is  some- 
thing  to  be  got  for  themselves.  I  know  some  professors  of  that  sort, 
but  I  have  very  little  to  say  to  their  credit:  they  are  a  cowardly  crew. 
No,  no.  We  ought  distinctly  to  declare  that  we  believe  in  God,  and  we 
should  take  opportunities,  as  prudence  dictates,  of  telling  to  our  friends 
and  neighbours  what  our  experience  has  been  about  trusting  in  God ; 
telling  them  of  deliverances  we  have  received,  of  prayers  which  have  been 
answered,  and  of  many  other  tokens  for  good  which  have  come  to  us  as 
the  result  of  our  faith  in  God.  To  trust  in  man  is  a  thing  of  which  we 
may  be  ashamed,  for  we  find  man  to  be  as  a  broken  reed,  or  as  a  spear 
that  pierces  us  to  our  heart  when  we  lean  thereon ;  but  blessed  are  they 
that  trust  in  the  Lord,  for  they  shall  be  as  trees  planted  by  the  rivers  of 
water,  they  shall  bring  forth  their  fruit  in  their  season,  and  even  their  leaf 
shall  not  wither.  God,  in  whom  they  trust,  will  honour  their  faith,  and 
bless  them  yet  more  and  more;  let  them  therefore  honour  their  God, 
and  never  hesitate  to  speak  well  of 'his  name.  So,  then,  I  say  first  a  calm 
belief,  and,  secondly,  an  open  avowal  should  cause  even  our  adversaries 
to  know  that  we  have  trusted  in  the  Lord. 

And,  then,  I  will  add  to  that,  that  our  general  conduct  should  reveal 
our  faith.  The  whole  of  our  life  should  show  that  we  are  men  who 
rejoice  in  the  Lord ;  for  trusting  the  Lord,  as  I  understand  it,  is  not  a 
thing  for  Sundays  and  for  places  of  worship  alone :  we  are  to  trust  in 
the  Lord  about  everything.  If  I  trust  the  Lord  about  my  soul  I  must 
trust  him  about  my  body,  about  my  wife,  about  my  children,  and  all  my 
domestic  and  business  alFairs.  It  would  have  been  a  terrible  thing  if 
the  Lord  had  drawn  a  black  line  around  our  religious  life,  and  had 
said,  "  You  may  trust  me  about  that,  but  with  household  matters  I  will 
have  nothing  to  do."  We  need  the  whole  of  life  to  be  within  the  ring- 
fence  of  divine  care.  The  perfect  bond  of  divine  love  must  tie  up  the 
whole  bundle  of  our  affairs,  or  the  whole  will  slip  away.  Faith  is  a  thing 
for  the  closet,  and  the  parlour,  and  the  counting-house,  and  the  farm- 
house ;  it  is  a  light  for  dark  days,  and  a  shade  for  bright  days  ;  you 
may  carry  it  with  you  everywhere,  and  everywhere  it  shall  be  your  help. 
Oh,  that  we  did  so  trust  in  the  Lord  that  people  noticed  it  as  much  ^ 


i 


FAITH   AMONG   MOCKERS.  539 

they  notice  our  temper,  our  dress,  or  our  tone.  The  pity  is  that  too 
often  we  go  forward  hetter-skelter,  following  our  own  wisdom,  whereas- 
we  onght  to  say, "  No,  I  must  wait  a  little  while,  till  I  ask  counsel  of  the 
Lord.''  It  should  be  seen  and  known  that  we  are  distinctly  waiting 
upon  God  for  gaidance.  AYhat  a  stir  this  would  make  in  some  quar- 
ters !  I  wish  that  without  any  desire  to  be  Pharisaical,  or  to  display 
our  piety,  we  nevertheless  did  unconsciously  show  the  great  principle 
which  governs  us.  Just  as  one  man  will  say,  ''Excuse  me,  I  must  consult 
a  friend,"  or,  "  I  must  submit  the  case  to  my  solicitor,"  so  it  ought  to- 
be  habitual  with  a  Christian  before  he  replies  to  an  important  matter,  to- 
demand  a  moment  wherein  he  may  wait  upon  God  and  obtain  direction.. 
In  any  case  I  wish  that  it  may  be  so  usual  with  us  to  ask  guidance  from 
above  that  it  may  be  noticed  as  our  habit  to  trust  on  the  Lord. 

Once  more,  I  think  this  ought  to  come  out  most  distinctly  in  our 
behaviour  during  times  of  trouble ;  for  then  it  is  that  our  adversaries  are- 
most  likely  to  notice  it.  You,  dear  sister,  have  lost  a  child.  Well  now,, 
remember  that  you  are  a  Christian  woman,  and  sorrow  not  as  those  that 
are  without  hope.  Do  let  the  difference  be  real  and  true,  and  do  not  be- 
ashamed  that  others  should  observe  it.  When  your  neighbour  lost  her 
child  it  occasioned  a  quarrel  between  her  and  God,  but  it  is  not  so  with 
you,  is  it  ?  Will  you  quarrel  with  God  about  your  baby  ?  Oh,  no  ;  you 
love  him  too  well.  And  you,  brother,  you  are  perplexed  in  business^ 
and  you  know  what  a  worldling  does :  if  he  has  nothing  more  than 
outward  religion,  he  complains  bitterly  that  God  deals  hardly  with  him, 
and  he  quarrels  with  God ;  or,  perhaps,  to  make  things  better,  he  does- 
what  he  ought  not  to  do  in  business,  and  makes  them  a  great  deal  worse. 
Many  a  man  has  plunged  into  rash  speculations  until  he  has  destroyed 
himself  commercially ;  but  you,  as  a  Christian  man,  must  take  matters- 
calmly  and  quietly :  it  is  not  yours  to  speculate,  but  to  confide.  Your 
strength  lies  in  saying— "The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken 
away ;  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord."  You  must  not  be  so  eager 
to  be  rich  that  you  would  put  forth  your  hand  to  do  iniquity  in  order 
to  seize  the  golden  apples:  that  is  the  reverse  of  faith.  You  are  now 
to  play  the  man,  and  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  you  are  now  with 
resignation — with  more  than  that — with  a  sweet  acquiescence  in  the; 
Divine  will — to  show  men  how  a  Christian  can  behave  himself.  I  have  , 
never  admired  Addison's  words  as  some  have  done,  who,  when  he  came 
to  die,  sent  for  a  lord  of  his  acquaintance,  and  said,  "  See  how  a  Christian 
can  die.''  There  is  a  little  parade  about  that;  but  I  do  desire  that 
every  Christian  should  say  in  his  soul,  "I  will  show  men  how  a. 
Christian  can  live.  I  will  let  them  see  what  it  is  to  live  by  faith  in  the 
Sun  of  God  who  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me.  Those  who  do^  not 
believe  there  is  a  God  shall  yet  be  led  to  feel  there  must  be  a  God,, 
because  my  faith  in  him  doth  speed  so  well,  and  I  obtain  such  unnum- 
bered blessings  as  the  result  of  it."  I  say,  most  earnestly,  that  especially 
in  the  time  of  sorrow  and  bereavement,  when  other  people  are  sore  put 
to  it  because  they  have  lost  their  joy,  and  the  light  of  their  house  is- 
quenched,  it  is  the  believer  s  duty  and  privilege  by  his  holy  calm  of 
heart  to  show  his  trust  in  God.  If  religion  cannot  help  you  in  trouble^ 
it  is  not  worth  having  j  if  the  Spirit  of  God  does  not  sustain  you  when 
you  lose  your  dearest  friend,  you  ought  to  question  whether  it  is  thft 


540  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Spirit  of  God ;  you  ought  to  ask,  "  Can  this  be  the  Spirit  which  bore  up 
•the  martyrs  at  the  stake?"  if  now  that  you  are  passing  through  these 
waters  you  are  carried  away  by  them  ?  If  our  faith  shines  out  in  dark 
times,  even  as  the  stars  are  seen  by  night,  then  is  it  well  with  us. 

Oh,  that  you  and  I  might  in  all  these  ways  so  live  that  all  who  see  ua 
should  know  that  we  are  believers  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ !  It  would  be 
Tidiculous  if  a  man  went  into  society  with  a  label  on  his  breast,  "  This 
man  trusts  in  God''  and  it  would  be  a  pretty  clear  sign  that  he  needed 
•to  be  thus  ticketed.  I  would  have  you  shun  all  distinctive  phylacteries 
in  matters  of  religion  as  too  much  flavoured  with  the  leaven  of  the 
Pharisees ;  but  when  the  possession  of  godliness  proclaims  its  own  self, 
•even  as  a  box  of  precious  spikenard  tells  its  own  tale,  you  need  not  be 
ashamed  of  it.  Display  and  ostentation  are  vicious,  but  the  unrestrained 
use  of  influence  and  example  is  commendable.  In  these  days  when  men 
;glory  in  their  unbelief,  let  us  not  be  bashful  with  our  faith.  If,  in  a 
free  country,  men  should  not  persecute  an  infidel,  they  certainly  ought 
not  to  silence  a  believer.  We  do  not  intend  to  smuggle  our  religion 
through  the  land.  It  is  not  contraband,  and  therefore  we  shall  bear  it 
with  us  openly  in  the  sight  of  all  men,  and  let  them  say  if  they  please, 
*'  He  trusted  on  the  Lord" 

II.  Secondly,  this  trust  on  the  part  op  relieving  men  is  not 
UNDERSTOOD  BY  THE  WORLD.  "  He  trusted  ou  the  Lord  that  he  would 
•deliver  him."  Observe  that  they  restricted  the  Saviour's  trust  to  that 
point — *'  He  trusted  on  the  Lord  that  he  tvould  deliver  him.:'  But  now, 
in  the  first  place,  our  faith  is  not  confined  to  merely  receiving  from  God. 
No,  brethren  ;  if  the  Lord  does  not  deliver  us  we  will  trust  "him.  See 
how  firmly  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and  Abednego  stood  to  it  that  they 
would  not  bow  before  the  image  which  Nebuchadnezzar  had  set  up :  "  Our 
<jod  whom  we  serve  is  able  to  deliver  us  from  the  burning  fiery  furnace, 
and  he  will  deliver  us  out  of  thine  hand,  0  king.  But  if  not,  be  it 
.known  unto  thee,  0  king,  that  we  will  not  serve  thy  gods,  nor  worship 
ihe  golden  image  which  thou  hast  set  up."  There  was  great  faith  in 
that  "  if  not."  We  must  not  live  and  wait  upon  Grod  with  a  kind  of 
•cupboard  love,  just  as  a  stray  dog  might  follow  a  man  for  bones  ;  but  we 
must  speak  well  of  our  God  even  if  he  scourge  us,  for  therein  lies  both 
the  truth  and  the  strength  of  faith.  Job  has  put  it—"  Shall  we  receive 
^ood  at  the  hand  of  God,  and  shall  we  not  receive  evil  ?  "  "  The  Lord 
gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away;  blessed  be  the  name  of  the 
Lord."  Whatever  happens  to  us,  if  our  faith  is  the  work  of  the  Holy 
•Spirit  we  shall  hold  on  to  our  trust  in  God. 

Neither  is  our  faith  limited  to  what  men  call  deliverance.  It  is  a  mis- 
representation when  his  enemies  say,  "  He  trusted  on  the  Lord  that  he 
would  deliver  him ;  "  because  though  it  is  the  truth,  it  is  not  the  whole 
truth.  Our  blessed  Lord  continued  to  trust  in  the  Father  though  the 
K)up  did  not  pass  from  him,  and  though  no  legions  of  angels  were  sent  to 
-deliver  him  from  Pilate.  Though  the  enemy  was  permitted  to  exercise  all 
his  malice  upon  him  until  his  blessed  body  was  nailed  to  the  accursed 
tree,  yet  the  faith  of  our  divine  Lord  and  Master  was  not  moved  from 
its  steadfastness.  He  trusted  in  God  for  something  higher  than  deliver- 
-ance  from  death,  for  he  looked  beyond  the  gxave,  and  said,  "Thou 
^ilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell,  neither  wilt   thou  suffer  thine   Holy 


FAITH   AMONG   MOCKERS.  541 

One  to  see  corruption."  In  all  his  pains  his  heart  said,  "  It  is  the- 
Lord,  let  him  do  what  seemeth  him  good."  The  blind  world  cannot 
understand  this.  They  say,  like  their  father,  "  Dotli  Job  fear  God  for 
nought  ?  "  They  insinuate  that  Christian  people  trust  God  for  what. 
they  get  out  of  him.  Now  I  have  often  thought  that  if  the  devil  could; 
have  put  it  the  other  way  he  would  have  been  very  rejoiced  to  do  so. 
Suppose  he  could  have  said,  "Job  serves  God  for  nought,"  then  the- 
ungodly  world  would  have  shouted,  "  ^\e  told  you  so.  God  is  a  bad 
Paymaster  :  his  servants  may  serve  him  as  perfectly  as  Job,  but  he  never 
gives  them  any  reward."  Happily  the  accuser's  grumble  is  of  quite  the 
opposite  kind.  Neither  one  way  nor  another  is  there  any  pleasing  the 
devil,  and  it  is  not  a  tiling  we  desire  to  do.  Let  him  pat  it  as  he  likes. 
We  serve  God  and  we  have  our  reward  ;  but  if  the  Lord  does  not  choose 
to  give  us  exactly  what  we  look  for,  still  will  we  trust  in  him,  for  it  is 
our  delight.  It  is  a  misrepresentation  to  say  of  a  believer  that  "■  he 
trusted  on  the  Lord  that  he  ivould  deliver  him,'"  if  he  is  supposed  to  trust 
for  no  other  reason. 

And,  dear  friends,  our  faith  is  not  tied  to  time.  That  is  the  mistake  of 
the  statement  in  the  text.  They  said,  "  He  trusted  on  the  Lord  that  he 
would  deliver  him  " — as  much  as  to  say,  "If  God  does  not  deliver  him 
noiv  his  trust  will  have  been  a  folly,  and  God  will  not  have  answered  to- 
his  confidence."  Bat  it  is  not  so.  Brethren,  if  we  are  in  the  fire  to- 
night, and  we  are  trusting  in  God,  our  faith  does  not  mean  that  we  expect 
to  come  forth  from  the  furnace  at  this  very  hour.  Nay,  we  may  not  come 
out  to-night,  nor  to-morrow,  nor  next  month,  it  may  be  not  for  years. 
We  do  not  tie  God  down  to  conditions,  and  expect  him  to  do  this  and  that^ 
and  then  if  he  does  not  in  his  wisdom  see  fit  to  do  it,  threaten  that  we 
will  trust  him  no  more.  The  very  worst  we  could  do  would  be  to  make 
the  Eternal  God  a  slave  to  time,  as  though  he  must  do  everything  at  our 
bidding,  and  measure  his  divine  movements  by  the  ticking  of  a  clock. 
The  Lord  did  dehver  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  but  he  suffered  him  to  die 
first ;  he  was  put  into  the  grave  before  he  was  uplifted  from  the  power  of 
death  ;  and  if  it  had  not  been  that  he  died  and  lay  in  the  tomb  he  could 
not  have  had  that  splendid  deliverance  which  his  Father  did  vouchsafe 
him  when  he  raised  him  again  from  the  dead  ;  had  he  not  yielded  ta 
death  there  could  have  been  no  resurrection  for  him  or  for  us.  So, 
beloved,  it  may  be  God  has  not  effected  his  purpose  with  you  yet,  nor 
has  he  quite  prepared  you  for  the  height  of  blessing  to  which  he  has 
ordained  you.  Receive  what  he  is  going  to  give  you,  and  take  grate- 
fully the  painful  preliminaries.  High  palaces  must  have  deep  founda- 
tions, and  it  takes  a  long  time  to  excavate  a  human  soul  so  deep  that  God 
can  build  a  gorgeous  palace  of  grace  therein.  If  it  be  a  mere  cottage 
that  the  Lord  is  to  build  in  you,  you  may  escape  with  small  troubles ; 
but  if  he  is  going  to  make  you  a  palace  to  glorify  himself  withal,  then 
you  may  expect  to  have  long  trials.  Coarse  pottery  needs  not  the 
laborious  processes  which  must  be  endured  by  superior  vessels.  Iron 
which  is  to  become  a  sword  for  a  hero  must  know  more  of  the  fire  than 
the  metal  which  lies  upon  the  road  as  a  rail.  Your  eminence  in  grace 
can  only  come  by  affliction.  Will  you  not  have  trust  in  God  if  severe 
trials  are  ordained  for  you  ?  Yes,  of  course  you  will.  The  Holy 
Spirit  will  be  the  all-sulficient  helper  of  your  infirmities.     I  say  it  is 


542  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

misrepresentation  if  we  limit  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  to  any  form  for  our 
deliverance,  or  to  any  time  for  our  deliverance.  Let  not  the  Lord  of 
love  be  treated  like  a  child  at  school,  as  if  he  could  be  taught  anything 
by  us ! 

So,  also,  our  faith  must  not  judge  at  all  by  preseiit  circumstances. 
The  ungodly  world  judges  that  God  has  not  delivered  us  because  we  are 
now  in  trouble,  and  are  at  present  distressed  by  it.  Oh,  how  wrongly 
the  world  judged  of  Christ  when  it  judged  of  him  by  his  condition ! 
Covered  with  a  bloody  sweat  and  groaning  out  his  soul  to  God  beneath 
the  olives  at  midnight— why,  they  that  passed  by  who  did  not  know 
him  must  have  judged  him  to  be  a  man  accursed  of  God.  "  See,"  they 
would  have  said,  "  we  never  heard  of  a  man  that  sweat  blood  before — 
sweat  blood  in  prayer ;  and  yet  listen  to  his  groaning  ;  he  is  not  heard 
by  God,  for  evidently  the  cup  does  not  pass  from  him."  If  any  man 
had  looked  at  our  Lord  Jesus  when  he  was  on  the  cross  and  had  heard 
him  cry,  '*  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?"  they  would 
have  certainly  concluded  that  he  was  the  most  ungracious  and  un- 
deserving of  men  ;  for  had  he  been  a  saint,  surely,  they  say,  God  would 
not  have  forsaken  him.  Yes,  but  you  see  they  only  saw  a  little  of  our 
blessed  Master's  career ;  they  only  looked  upon  a  span  of  his  existence ; 
what  a  grievous  error  it  was  to  have  estimated  his  life  by  his  brief 
passion,  knowing  nothing  of  its  grand  intent !  See  him  now  while  harps 
unnumbered  sound  his  praises  and  all  heaven  rejoices  to  behold  his  glory, 
and  the  Father  looks  upon  him  with  inefiable  delight!  This  is  the 
same  Jesus  who  was  crucified !  AVhat  think  you  of  him  now  ?  You 
must  not  measure  a  man  by  a  little  bit  of  his  life,  nor  even  by  the  whole 
of  his  earthly  career;  for  it  is  nothing  compared  with  the  hidden  future 
of  his  life  in  eternity.  These  men  measured  David's  faith,  and  measure 
our  fiiith  by  what  they  see  of  us  on  one  day :  we  are  sick,  we  are 
sorry,  we  are  poor,  we  are  troubled,  and  then  they  say,  ''We  told  you 
so  !  This  faith  of  theirs  is  not  worth  having,  or  else  they  would  not  fare 
so  roughly  or  be  found  in  so  much  heaviness."  Faith  and  feeling  are  in 
contrast.  Outward  circumstances  must  never  be  made  the  tests  of  the 
value  of  pious  trust  in  our  God.  We  must  not  judge  God  by  his 
dealings  with  us  nor  judge  ourselves  thereby;  but  let  us  still  hold  on 
to  this  pure,  simple  faith  that  the  Lord  is  good  to  Israel.  Let  us  love 
the  Lord  for  a  whole  eternity  of  his  love,  and  then  for  everything,  for 
every  turn  of  his  hand,  for  every  frown  and  stroke  and  rebuke ;  for  he 
is  good  in  everything,  unalterably  good.  If  with  this  faith  of  ours  we 
are  praying  and  pleading  and  God  does  not  answer  us,  does  not  help  us, 
but  leaves  us  in  the  dark,  yet  still  let  not  our  trust  waver.  If  any  man 
walk  in  darkness  and  see  no  light,  let  him  trust  and  trust  on  until  the 
light  shall  come. 

So,  then,  we  have  just  touched  upon  two  points — that  a  true  man's 
faith  is  soon  made  known,  but  that,  though  it  be  known,  it  is  usually 
misunderstood.  We  Hve  among  blind  men ;  let  us  not  be  angry  because 
they  cannot  see. 

III.  Thirdly,  this  true  faith  will,  in  all  probability,  bb 
MOCKED  AT  SOME  TIME  OR  OTHER.  It  is  a  great  houour  to  a  man  to 
trust  in  God,  and  so  to  have  his  name  written  upon  the  Arch  of  Triumph 
wliich  Paul  has  erected  in  the  eleventh  chapter  of  the  Hebrews,  where 


FAITH   AMONG   MOCKERS.  543 

yon  see  name  after  name  of  the  heroes  who  served  God  by  faith.  It 
is  a  glorious  thing  to  mingle  our  bones  with  those  who  are  buried  in  that 
mausoleum  which  bears  this  epitaph,  "  These  all  died  in  faith."  It  is 
an  honourable  thing  to  be  a  believer  in  God,  but  there  are  some  who 
think  the  very  reverse,  and  these  begin  to  scoff  at  the  believer.  Some- 
times they  scoff  at  faith  itself:  they  count  faith  itself  to  be  a  folly  of  weak 
minds.  Or  else  they  insult  over  one  particular  Christian's  faith.  "  Oh," 
they  say,  ''he  professes  to  trust  in  God.  This  man  talks  after  this  mad 
fashion  I  Why,  he  is  a  working  man  like  other  people — works  in  a  shop 
along  with  me.  What  has  he  to  do  with  trusting  God  any  more  than 
I  have?  He  is  conceited  and  fanatical."  Or  in  other  circles  they  cry, 
*'This  is  a  man  of  business;  he  keeps  a  shop,  and  I  dare  say  he  knows 
as  much  of  the  tricks  of  the  trade  as  we  do,  and  yet  he  talks  about 
trusting  in  God.  No  doubt  he  pretends  to  this  faith  to  win  religious 
customers."  Sometimes  the  mockery  comes  from  one  of  your  own 
family,  for  faith's  foes  live  in  the  same  house  with  her.  The  husband 
has  been  known  to  say  to  his  wife,  "  Ridiculous  nonsense,  your  trusting 
in  God!  "  Ay,  and  parents  have  said  the  like  to  holy  children;  and, 
alas !  children  have  grown  up  to  speak  in  like  fashion  to  their  parents 
to  the  wounding  of  their  hearts.  As  if  faith  in  God  were  a  thing  that 
could  be  scoffed  at,  instead  of  being  the  most  wise,  and  proper,  and 
rational  thing  under  heaven.  Faith  in  God  is  a  thing  to  be  reverenced 
rather  than  reviled.  True  religion  is  sanctified  common-sense.  It  is  the. 
most  common-sense  thing  in  the  world  to  put  your  trust  in  One  that 
cannot  lie.  If  I  trust  myself,  or  trust  my  fellow-man,  I  am  thought  to 
be  in  the  first  case  self-reliant,  and  in  the  second  case  I  am  judged  to 
have  a  charitable  disposition;  yet  in  either  case  I  shall,  sooner  or  later, 
prove  my  folly  ;  but  if  I  trust  God,  who  can  bring  a  reason  against  my 
confidence?  What  is  there  to  be  ridiculed  in  a  man's  trusting  his 
Maker  ?  Can  he  fail  that  created  the  blue  heavens,  that  settled  the 
foundations  of  the  earth  and  poured  out  the  waters  of  the  great  sea  ? 
Can  the  Almighty  retract  his  promise  because  he  is  unable  to  fulfil 
it?  Can  he  break  his  word  because  circumstances  master  him  and 
prevent  his  performance  of  it  ?  "  Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever : 
for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlasting  strength."  The  day  shall 
come  when  it  will  be  known  by  all  intelligent  beings  that  unbelief 
of  God  is  folly,  but  that  faith  in  the  Eternal  is  essential  wisdom. 
God  give  us  more  faith  in  himself.  No  doubt  we  may  expect  to  have  all 
the  more  of  the  laughter  of  the  ungodly,  who  will  make  a  spectacle  of  us 
for  our  faith  :  but  what  of  that  ?  We  can  bear  mockery  and  much  mure 
for  his  sake  who  died  for  us. 

And  then  men  scoff  at  the  very  idea  of  divine  interposition.  They 
judge  the  Lord's  deUverance  to  be  the  main  point  of  our  faitli.  "  He 
trusted  God  that  he  would  deliver  him."  "  Look,"  they  say,  "  he  fancies 
that  God  will  deliver  him,  as  if  the  Creator  had  not  something  else  to  do 
besides  looking  after  him,  poor  miserable  creature  that  he  is  !  He  is 
nothing  to  God — a  mere  speck — the  insect  of  an  hour,  and  yet  he  trusts 
in  God  to  interfere  on  his  behalf."  The  philosophers  laugh  when- 
ever you  speak  of  divine  interposition,  and  count  that  we  must  be 
in  the  last  stage  of  lunacy  to  expect  anything  of  the  kind.  They  believe 
in  laws,  they  say — irreversible,  immutable  laws,  that  grind  on,  like  the 


^AA  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLlS  PULPIT. 

ereat  cogs  of  a  machine  which,  when  once  they  are  set  in  motion,  teap 
everything  to  pieces  that  comes  in  their  way.  They  do  not  believe  that 
Ood  fulfils  promises,  or  answers  prayers,  or  delivers  his  people.  Their 
God  is  a  dead  force,  without  mind,  or  thought,  or  love,  or  care.  He  who 
in  nature  acts  according  to  law  is  yet  believed  to  have  no  power  to 
carry  out  his  own  word,  which  must  always  be  law  to  a  truthful  being. 
Why  some  of  us  are  as  sure  that  God  has  interposed  for  us  as  if  he  had 
rent  the  heavens  and  thrust  forth  his  right  hand  visibly  before  the  eyes  of 
all  beholders.  The  wise  ones  laugh  at  us  for  this,  but  we  are  not  abashed  ; 
rather  do  we  reply,  *'  Laugh  if  you  like,  and  as  long  as  you  like ;  but  we 
daily  receive  unnumbered  blessings  from  God  in  answer  to  our  cries, 
and  your  laughter  no  more  affects  us  than  the  noise  of  the  dogs  by  the 
Nile  disturbs  the  flow  of  the  river.  We  shall  believe  for  all  your 
merriment,  and  if  it  please  you  to  go  on  with  your  laughter  we  also  will 
eo  on  with  our  faith."  The  object  of  the  ungodly  man's  scorn  is  the  idea 
that  God  should  ever  interfere  to  help  his  people  in  human  affairs ;  but 
do  you  stand  to  it,  0  true  believers;  for  he  does  still  show  himself 
strono-  on  the  behalf  of  them  that  trust  in  him.  Let  them  say,  and  laugh 
at  you  as  they  say  it,  *'  He  trusted  on  the  Lord  that  he  would  deliver 
him ; "  but  let  none  of  these  things  move  you. 

Further  we  have  known  this  mockery  to  extend  to  all  hinds  of  Jailk 
in  the  divine  love.  "Let  him  deliver  him,"  they  say,  *^ seeing  that  he 
deljo-hted  in  him."  Perhaps  you  have  unwisely  told  out  the  tale  ot 
God'^s  special  love  to  those  who  are  now  making  merriment  of  you  ;  you 
have  cast  your  pearls  before  swine,  and  they  turn  again  to  rend  you. 
They  say,  "  This  man  says  God  loves  him  above  others ;  that  he  chose 
him  before  the  world  began;  that  he  redeemed  him  from  among  men 
with  the  blood  of  Christ;  that  he  has  called  him  by  his  Holy  Spirit ; 
that  he  has  admitted  him  into  his  secrets  and  made  hiin  his  child  ;  and 
then  they  laugh  again  right  lustily,  as  if  it  were  a  rare  jest.  How  the 
world  rages  against  electing  love!  It  cannot  endure  any  speciality 
in  grace  The  idea  that  one  man  should  be  more  beloved  ot  heaven 
than  another  it  scouts  as  horrible.  The  heathen  could  not  make  out  a 
certain  brave  saint  because  he  called  himself  Theophorus,  or  God- 
bearer-"  but  he  stuck  to  it  that  he  was  so,  and  this  made  his  foes  the 
more  wrathful.  God  dwelt  in  him,  he  said,  and  he  would  not  give  up 
his  happy  belief,  therefore  they  ceased  not  to  mock.  It  was  a  carrying 
out  of  our  text,  "Let  him  deliver  him,  seeing  he  delighteth  m  him. 
Well  well-  we  can  afford  to  bear  these  mockings;  for  if  we  are  beloved 
.  bv  a 'king  it  will  not  much  matter  if  we  are  sneered  at  by  his  subjects; 
if  we  are  beloved  by  God  it  is  a  small  concern  though  all  men  should 
make  us  the  subject  of  their  jest.  ,   •    ,7     ,  ;./. 

Ungodly  men  are  exceedingly  apt  to  find  amusement  m  the  trials 
involved  in  the  life  and  walk  of  faith.  Their  cry  of  -  Let  him  deliver 
him  "  implies  that  their  victim  was  in  serious  difficulty  from  which  he 
could  not  extricate  himself.  This  is  no  novelty  to  the  believer,  bu  it 
makes  rare  fun  for  the  ungodly.  What  is  the  good  of  faith  if  the 
believer  suffers  like  others,  and  endures  the  same  pams,  and  losses, 
and  diseases  as  others?  So  the  men  of  the  world  argue.  Ihey 
would  be  believers  too  if  it  would  bring  theni  in  a  fortune  or  a  hand- 
some salary,  or  at  least  a  loaded  table  and  a  full  cup.     But  when  they 


FAITH  AMONG   MOCKERS.  545 


Bee  a  saint  on  the  dunghill  with  Job,  or  in  the  pit  with  Joseph,  or  m 
thedun<reon  with  Jeremiah,  or  among  the  dogs  with  Lazarus,  they  sneei 
and  cry,  Is  this  the  reward  of  piety  ?     Is  this  the  recompense  of  godli- 
ness '<'     They  like  to  spy  us  out  in  our  time  of  trouble  and  taunt  us  with 
our  confidence  in  God;  and,  alas,  there  is  so  much  unbehef  in  u^u p  f 
we  are  all  too  prone  in  such  seasons  to  question  the  justice  and  laithtul- 
nessof  the  Lord,  and  to  say  with  David,  "Yerily  I  hare  cleansed  my 
heart  in  vain,  and  washed  my  hands  in  innocency."     It  seems  hard 
for  us  to  be  mocked  by  the  base  ones  of  the  earth,  to  become  the  song 
and  the  byword  of  the  ungodly ;  yet  this  has  happened  to  the  excellent 
of  the  earth  and  will  happen  yet  again.     Set  your  account  that  this  is  a 
part  of  the  covenanted  heritage,  and  accept  it  with  joy  for  Christ  s  sake. 
lY.     Now,  I  must  close  with  this  point  (though  there  is  much  more 
to  be  said);   the  time  shall  come  when  the  faith  of  the  man 
WHO  has  trusted  in  God   shall   be  abundantly  justified.    I 
think  it  is  no  small  thing  to  have  the  ungodly  hearing  witness  that   ^  Ue 
trusted  in  God  that  he  would  deliver  him."     I  have  known  what  it  is  to 
be  exceedingly  grateful  to  ungodly  men  for  helping  me  to  believe  that 
I  am  truly  a  child  of  God.     Somebody,  years  ago,  uttered  an  atrocious 
lie  ao-ainst  me— an  abominable  slander.     I  was  very  low  and  heavy  ot 
spirirat  the  time ;  but  when  I  read  it  I  clapped  my  hands  for  joy,  for  1 
felt  "  Now  I  have  one  of  the  marks  and  seals  of  a  child  of  God,  for  it  is 
written,  'Blessed  are  ye,  when  men  shall  revile  you,  and  persecute  you, 
and  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  you  falsely,  for  my  sake.         IhQ 
love  of  the  Lord's  brethren  and  the  hatred  of  the  Lord's  enemies  are 
two  things  to  be  desired.     We  may  gather  that  we  are  not  of  the  wicked 
when  they  will  not  endure  us  in  their  company,  when  our  very  presence 
irritates  them,  and  they  begin  to  rail  and  jeer.     It  has  happened  unto 
us  even  as  Jesus  said :  ''  If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would  love  his. 
own :  but  because  ye  are  not  of  the  world,  but  I  have  chosen  you  out  ot 
the  world,  therefore  the  world  hateth  you."   So  that  there  is  justification^ 
as  it  were,  of  our  faith  even  from  the  lips  of  adversaries,  and  we  ought 
to  be  thankful  for  it  instead  of  being  downcast  about  it. 

Another  justification  awaits  us,  and  in  due  season  it  wiU  come. 
Brethren,  the  day  will  come  when  God  will  deliver  his  people,  lou  wi 
be  brought  out  of  your  trouble— it  may  not  be  immediately,  but  it  wilt 
be  seasonably.  You  may  most  wisely  in  the  meantime  learn  to  glory  m 
your  tribulation ;  your  bitters  shall  turn  into  sweets,  and  your  losses  into 
gains ;  your  sorrows  shall  be  your  joys,  your  struggles  your  triumphs-- 
perhaps  in  this  life  this  transformation  may  occur,  even  as  the  Lord 
gave  to  Job  twice  as  much  as  he  had  before ;  but  certainly  in  the  life  to 
come  you  will  find  the  tables  turned.  Then,  what  will  the  ungodly  say  ? 
They  say  now,  "  He  trusted  on  God  that  he  would  dehver  him  ;  but 
they  will  be  compelled  to  say  as  they  gnash  their  teeth,  "God  has  delivered 


him." 


Whereas  the  ungodly  ridicule  the  idea  that  God  delights  in  his  people, 
the  day  shall  come  when  they  shall  be  made  to  see  that  he  does  delight 
in  them.  When  the  Lord  appears  on  behalf  of  his  people,  and  gives 
them  "beauty  for  ashes,  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning,"  the  wicked  sha  1 
gnash  their  teeth,  and  be  filled  with  confusion.  When  the  Lord  shall 
turn  again  our  captivity,  even  our  most  desperate  foes  shall  be  made  to 

3o 


546  METROPOLITAN   TAhiiRNACLE  PULPIT. 

say,  "  The  Lord  hath  done  great  things  for  them."  They  shall  wondep 
and  be  sore  vexed  to  see  how  the  Lord  hath  a  favour  to  his  chosen.  If 
they  do  not  see  it  in  this  life,  oh,  what  an  exhibition  ungodly  men  will 
see  of  his  delight  in  his  people  in  the  world  to  come !  Dives  sees  Lazarus 
in  Abraham's  bosom :  what  a  sight  for  him !  They  that  scoff  at  God's 
poor  people  here,  shall  see  them  exalted  to  be  kings  and  priests,  to  reign 
with  Christ  for  ever  and  ever,  and  what  will  they  say  then  ?  What  can 
they  say  but  be  compelled  to  bear  witness  that  their  faith  was  justified. 

Brethren,  at  the  last  great  day  ungodly  men  will  be  witnesses  on 
behalf  of  the  saints.  If  any  doubt  whether  the  saints  trusted  in  God, 
the  wicked  will  be  compelled  to  come  forward  and  say,  **  They  did  trust, 
for  we  laughed  at  them  for  it."  Of  this  and  that  man  they  shall  say, 
"  He  trusted  on  God  that  he  would  deliver  him."  In  that  day  the 
unbelieving  will  be  swift  witnesses  against  themselves ;  for  as  they  ridi- 
culed the  children  of  God  here,  they  will  have  it  read  out  before  them  as 
evidence  of  their  enmity  against  the  Lord:  and  how  will  they  answer  it? 
A  man  is  generally  much  grieved  with  any  one  who  injures  his  children. 
i  have  known  a  man  behave  patiently  to  his  neighbours,  and  put  up 
with  a  great  deal  from  them ;  but  when  one  of  them  has  struck  his  child 
I  have  seen  him  incensed  to  the  last  degree.  He  has  said,  "  I  cannot 
stand  that,  I  will  not  look  on  and  see  my  own  children  ill-used."  The 
Lord  says,  *^  He  that  touches  you  touches  the  apple  of  my  eye."  Jesus 
rises  from  his  throne  in  glory  and  stands  up  indignantly  while  his 
servant  Stephen  is  being  stoned.  If  I  had  no  other  amusement  whatever, 
I  would  not  for  merriment  sake  mock  the  people  of  God ;  for  it  will  go 
hard  with  those  who  make  unhallowed  mirth  out  of  the  saints  of  the 
Most  High.  If  any  of  you  have  ever  done  so— if  you  have  done  so  igno- 
rantly — the  Lord  forgive  you,  and  bring  you  to  be  numbered  among  his 
people,  as  was  Saul  of  Tarsus;  and  if  any  of  you  have  done  so  know- 
ingly, be  humble  and  penitent,  and  the  Lord  will  forgive  you  and  receive 
you  amongst  his  people. 

But  whether  ye  revile  or  flatter,  it  is  all  one  to  us.  We  are  at  a  pass 
with  you :  we  do  trust  in  God  that  he  will  deliver  us,  and  we  cannot  be 
removed  from  this  confidence.  0  ye  mockers,  we  will  not  be  fooled  out 
of  our  hope,  nor  jested  out  of  our  peace.  We  cannot  find  any  one  like 
our  God  to  trust  to,  and  so  we  will  not  depart  from  him  in  life  or  death, 
but  will  rest  in  him,  come  what  may,  even  till  we  see  him  face  to  face. 


"LET  HIM  DELIVER  HIM  NOW.' 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  June  17th,   1888,  Bt 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON". 


"  He  trusted  in  God  ;  let  liim  deliver  him  now,  if  he  will  have  him  :  for  he  said,  I  am 
the  Son  of  God." — Matthew  xxvii.  43. 

These  words  are  a  fulfilment  of  the  propliecy  contained  in  the  twenty- 
second  Psalm.  Read  from  the  seventh  verse — "All they  that  see  me 
laugh  me  to  scorn  :  they  shoot  out  the  lip,  they  shake  the  head,  saying, 
He  trusted  on  the  Lord  that  he  would  deliver  him  :  let  him  deliver  him, 
seeing  he  delighted  in  him."  Thus  to  the  letter  doth  our  Lord  answer 
to  the  ancient  prophecy. 

It  is  very  painful  to  the  heart  to  picture  our  blessed  Master  in  his 
death-agonies,  surrounded  by  a  ribald  multitude,  who  watched  him 
and  mocked  him,  made  sport  of  his  prayer  and  insulted  his  faith. 
Nothing  was  sacred  to  them :  they  invaded  the  Holy  of  holies  of  his 
confidence  in  God,  and  taunted  him  concerning  that  faith  in  Jehovah 
which  they  were  compelled  to  admit.  See,  dear  friends,  what  an  evil 
thing  is  sin,  since  the  Sin-bearer  suffers  so  bitterly  to  make  atone- 
ment for  it !  See,  also,  the  shame  of  sin,  since  even  the  Prince  of 
Olory,  when  bearing  the  consequences  of  it,  is  covered  with  contempt ! 
Behold,  also,  how  he  loved  us !  For  our  sake  he  "  endured  the  cross, 
despising  the  shame."  He  loved  us  so  much  that  even  scorn  of  the  most 
cruel  sort  he  deigned  to  bear,  that  he  might  take  away  our  shame  and 
enable  us  to  look  up  unto  God. 

Beloved,  the  treatment  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  men  is  the 
clearest  proof  of  total  depravity  which  can  possibly  be  required  or  dis- 
covered. Those  must  be  stony  hearts  indeed  which  can  laugh  at  a 
dying  Saviour,  and  mock  even  at  his  faith  in  God !  Compassion 
would  seem  to  have  deserted  humanity,  while  malice  sat  supreme  on  the 
throne.  Painful  as  the  picture  is,  it  will  do  you  good  to  paint  it. 
You  will  need  neither  canvas,  nor  brush,  nor  palette,  nor  colours.  Let 
your  thoughts  draw  the  outline,  and  your  love  fill  in  the  detail ;  I  shall 
not  complain  if  imagination  heightens  the  colouring.  The  Son  of 
God,  whom  angels  adore  with  veiled  faces,  is  pointed  at  with  scornful 
fingers  by  men  who  thrust  out  the  tongue  and  mockingly  exclaim, 
No.  2,029. 


648  METROPOLITAN   TABERXACLE   PULriT. 

*'  He  trusted  on  the  Lord  that  he  would  deliver  him :  let  him  deliver 
him,  seeing  he  delighted  in  him." 

While  thus  we  see  our  Lord  in  his  sorrow  and  his  shame  as  our 
substitute,  we  must  not  forget  that  he  also  is  there  as  our  representa- 
tive. That  which  appears  in  many  a  psalm  to  relate  to  David  is  found 
in  the  Gospels  to  refer  to  Jesus,  our  Lord.  Often  and  often  the  student 
of  the  Psalm  will  say  to  himself,  *  *  Of  whom  speaketh  the  prophet  this  ?  " 
He  will  have  to  disentangle  the  threads  sometimes,  and  mark  off  that 
which  belongs  to  David  and  that  which  relates  to  the  Son  of  God ;  and 
frequently  he  will  not  be  able  to  disentangle  the  threads  at  all,  because 
they  are  one,  and  may  relate  both  to  David,  and  to  David's  Lord.  This 
is  meant  to  show  us  that  the  life  of  Christ  is  an  epitome  of  the  life  of  his 
people.  He  not  only  suffers  for  us  as  our  substitute,  but  he  suffers 
before  us  as  our  pattern.  In  him  we  see  what  we  have  in  our  measure 
to  endure.  "  As  he  is,  so  are  we  also  in  this  world."  We  also  must  be 
crucified  to  the  world,  and  we  ma}^  look  for  somewhat  of  those  tests  of 
faith  and  taunts  of  derision  which  go  with  such  a  crucifixion. 
"Marvel  not  if  the  world  hate  you."  You,  too,  must  suffer  without 
the  gate.  Not  for  the  world's  redemption,  but  for  the  accomplish- 
ment of  divine  purposes  in  you,  and  through  you  to  the  sons  of  men, 
you  must  be  made  to  know  the  cross  and  its  shame.  Christ  is  the 
mirror  of  the  church.  What  the  head  endured  every  member  of  the 
body  will  also  have  to  endure  in  its  measure.  Let  us  read  the  text  in 
this  light,  and  come  to  it  saying  to  ourselves,  "  Here  we  see  what  Jesus 
suffered  in  our  stead,  and  we  learn  hereby  to  love  him  with  all  our 
souls.  Here,  too,  we  see,  as  in  a  prophecy,  how  great  things  we  are 
•to  suffer  for  his  sake  at  the  hands  of  men."  May  the  Holy  Spirit  help 
us  in  our  meditation,  so  that  at  the  close  of  it  we  may  more  ardently 
love  our  Lord,  who  suffered  for  us,  and  may  the  more  carefully  arm 
ourselves  with  the  same  mind  which  enabled  him  to  endure  such  contra- 
diction of  sinners  against  himself. 

Coming  at  once  to  the  text,  first,  ohserve  the  acknowledgment  with 
which  the  text  begins :  "  He  trusted  in  God."  The  enemies  of  Christ 
admitted  his  faith  in  God.  Secondly,  consider  the  test  which  is  the 
essence  of  the  taunt :  **  Let  him  deliver  him,  if  he  will  have  him.'* 
When  we  have  taken  those  two  things  into  our  minds,  then  let  us  for 
a  while  consider  the  answer  to  that  test  and  taunt :  God  does  assuredly 
deliver  his  people  :  those  who  trust  in  him  have  no  reason  to  be 
ashamed  of  their  faith. 

I.  First,  then,  my  beloved  brethren,  you  who  know  the  Lord  by 
faith  and  live  by  trusting  in  him,  let  me  invite  you  to  observe  the 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  which  theso  mockcrs  made  of  our  Lord's  faith:  "He 
trusted  in  God."  Yet  the  Saviour  did  not  wear  any  pecuHar  garb  or 
token  by  which  he  let  men  know  that  he  trusted  in  God.  He  was  not 
a  recluse,  neither  did  he  join  some  little  knot  of  separatists,  who 
boasted  their  peculiar  trust  in  Jehovah.  Although  our  Saviour  was 
separate  from  sinners,  yet  he  was  eminently  a  man  among  men,  and  he 
went  in  and  out  among  the  multitude  as  one  of  themselves.  His  one 
peculiarity  was  that  "  he  trusted  in  God."  He  was  so  perfectly  a  man 
that,  although  he  was  undoubtedly  a  Jew,  there  were  no  Jewish 
peculiarities  about  him.     Any  nation  might  claim  him ;  but  no  nation 


549 

could  monopolize  him.  The  characteristics  of  our  humanity  are  so 
palpably  about  him  that  he  belongs  to  all  mankind.  I  admire  the 
Welch  sister  who  was  of  opinion  that  the  Lord  Jesus  must  be  Welch. 
When  they  asked  her  how  she  prored  it,  she  said  that  he  always 
spoke  to  her  heart  in  AVelch.  Doubtless  it  was  so,  and  I  can,  with 
equal  warmth,  declare  that  he  always  speaks  to  me  in  English. 
Brethren  from  Grermany,  France,  Sweden,  Italy — you  all  claim  that 
he  speaks  to  you  in  your  own  tongue.  This  was  the  one  thing  which 
distinguished  him  among  men — "he  trusted  in  God,"  and  he  lived 
such  a  life  as  naturally  grows  out  of  faith  in  the  Eternal  Lord. 
This  peculiarity  had  been  visible  even  to  that  ungodly  multitude  who 
least  of  all  cared  to  perceive  a  spiritual  point  of  character.  Was 
ever  any  other  upon  a  cross  thus  saluted  by  the  mob  who  watched 
his  execution  ?  Had  these  scorners  ever  mocked  anyone  before  for 
such  a  matter  as  this  ?  I  trow  not.  Yet  faith  had  been  so  manifest 
in  our  Lord's  daily  life  that  the  crowd  cried  out  aloud,  "He  trusted  in 
Ood." 

How  did  they  know  ?  I  suppose  they  could  not  help  seeing  that  he 
made  much  of  God  in  his  teaching,  in  his  life,  and  in  his  miracles. 
Whenever  Jesus  spoke  it  was  always  godly  talk  ;  and  if  it  was  not 
always  distinctly  about  God,  it  was  always  about  things  that  related 
to  God,  that  came  from  God,  that  led  to  God,  that  magnified  God.  A 
man  may  be  fairly  judged  by  that  which  he  makes  most  of.  The 
ruling  passion  is  a  fair  gauge  of  the  heart.  What  a  soul-ruler  faith 
is  !  It  swaj^s  the  man  as  the  rudder  guides  the  ship.  When  a  man  once 
g-ets  to  live  by  faith  in  God,  it  tinctures  his  thoughts,  it  masters  his 
purposes,  it  flavours  his  words,  it  puts  a  tone  into  his  actions,  and  it 
comes  out  in  everything  by  ways  and  means  most  natural  and  uncon- 
strained, till  men  perceive  that  they  have  to  do  with  a  man  who  makes 
much  of  God.  The  unbelieving  world  says  outright  that  there  is  no 
God,  and  the  less  impudent,  who  admit  his  existence,  put  him  down  at 
a  very  low  figure,  so  low  that  it  does  not  affect  their  calculations  ;  but 
to  the  true  Christian,  God  is  not  only  much,  but  all.  To  our  Lord  Jesus, 
\jrod  was  all  in  all ;  and  when  you  come  to  estimate  God  as  he  did, 
then  the  most  careless  onlooker  will  soon  begin  to  say  of  you,  "  He 
trusted  in  God." 

In  addition  to  observing  that  Jesus  made  much  of  God,  men  came 
to  note  that  he  was  a  trusting  man,  and  not  self-confident.  Certain 
persons  are  very  proud  because  they  are  self-made  men.  I  will  do 
them  the  credit  to  admit  that  they  heartily  worship  their  maker.  Self 
made  them,  and  they  worship  self.  We  have  among  us  individuals 
who  are  self-sufficient,  and  almost  all-sufficient;  they  sneer  at  those 
who  do  not  succeed,  for  they  can  succeed  anywhere  at  anything.  The 
world  to  them  is  a  football  which  they  can  kick  where  they  like.  If 
they  do  not  rise  to  the  very  highest  eminence  it  is  simply  out  of  pity 
to  the  rest  of  us,  who  ought  to  have  a  chance.  A  vat  of  sufficiency 
ferments  within  their  ribs !  There  was  nothing  of  that  sort  of  thing 
in  our  Lord.  Those  who  watched  him  did  not  say  that  he  had  great 
self-reliance  and  a  noble  spirit  of  self-confidence.  No,  no  !  They  said, 
"  He  trusted  in  God."  Indeed  it  was  so.  The  words  that  he  spake 
he  spake  not  of  himself,  and  the  great  deeds  that  he  did  he  never 


550  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

boasted  of,  but  said  ''the  Father  that  dwelleth  in  me,  he  doeth  the 
works."  He  was  a  truster  in  God,  not  a  boaster  in  self.  Brethren 
and  sisters,  I  desire  that  you  and  I  may  be  just  of  that  order.  Self- 
confidence  is  the  death  of  confidence  in  God ;  reliance  upon  talent, 
tact,  experience,  and  things  of  that  kind,  kills  faith.  Oh  that  we  may 
know  what  faith  means,  and  so  look  out  of  ourselves  and  quit  the  evil 
confidence  which  looks  within  ! 

On  the  other  hand,  we  may  wisely  remember  that,  while  our  Lord 
Jesus  was  not  self-reliant,  he  trusted,  and  was  hy  no  means  despondent :  he 
was  never  discouraged.  He  neither  questioned  his  commission,  nor  de- 
spaired of  fulfilling  it.  He  never  said,  "I  must  give  it  up:  I  can 
never  succeed."  No;  "He  trusted  in  God."  And  this  is  a  grand 
point  in  the  working  of  faith,  that  while  it  keeps  us  from  self-conceit, 
it  equally  preserves  us  from  enfeebling  fear.  When  our  blessed  Lord 
set  his  face  like  a  fiint ;  when,  being  baffled,  he  returned  to  the  con- 
flict ;  when,  being  betrayed,  he  still  persevered  in  his  love,  then  men 
could  not  help  seeing  that  he  trusted  in  God.  His  faith  was  not  mere 
repetition  of  a  creed,  or  profession  of  belief,  but  it  was  childlike  reliance 
upon  the  Most  High.     May  ours  be  of  the  same  order  ! 

It  is  evident  that  the  Lord  Jesus  trusted  in  God  openly,  since  even 
yonder  gibing  crowd  proclaimed  it.  Some  good  people  try  to  exercise 
faith  on  the  sly  :  they  practise  it  in  snug  corners,  and  in  lonely  hours, 
but  they  are  afraid  to  say  much  before  others,  for  fear  their  faith  should 
not  see  the  promise  fulfilled.  They  dare  not  say,  with  David,  "  My 
soul  shall  make  her  boast  in  the  Lord  :  the  humble  shall  hear  thereof, 
and  be  glad."  This  secrecy  robs  God  of  his  honour.  Brethren,  we  do  not 
glorify  our  God  as  he  ought  to  be  glorified.  Let  us  trust  in  him,  and 
own  it.  Wherefore  should  we  be  ashamed  ?  Let  us  throw  down  the 
gauge  of  battle  to  earth  and  hell.  God,  the  true  and  faithful,  deserves 
to  be  trusted  without  limit.  Trust  your  all  with  him,  and  be  not 
ashamed  of  having  done  so.  Our  Saviour  was  not  ashamed  of  trusting 
in  his  God.  On  the  cross  he  cried,  "  Thou  didst  make  me  hope  when 
I  was  upon  my  mother's  breast.".  Jesus  lived  by  faith.  We  are  sure 
that  he  did,  for  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  he  is  quoted  as  saying, 
*'  I  will  put  my  trust  in  him."  If  so  glorious  a  personage  as  the  only 
begotten  Son  of  God  lived  here  by  faith  in  God,  how  are  you  and  I 
to  live  except  by  trust  in  God  ?  If  we  live  unto  God,  this  is  the 
absolute  necessity  of  our  spiritual  life:  ''the  just  shall  live  by 
faith."  Shall  we  be  ashamed  of  that  which  brings  life  to  us  ?  The 
cruel  ones  who  saw  Jesus  die  did  not  say,  "He  now  and  then  trusted 
in  God";  nor  "he  trusted  in  the  Lord  years  ago";  but  they  ad- 
mitted that  faith  in  God  was  the  constant  tenor  of  his  life  :  they 
could  not  deny  it.  Even  though,  with  malicious  cruelty,  they  turned 
it  into  a  taunt,  yet  they  did  not  cast  a  question  upon  the  fact  that  "he 
trusted  in  God."  Oh,  I  want  you  so  to  live  that  those  who  dislike  you 
most  may,  nevertheless,  know  that  you  do  trust  in  God!  When  you 
come  to  die,  may  your  dear  children  say  of  you,  "  Our  dear  mother 
did  trust  in  the  Lord  "  !  May  that  boy,  who  has  gone  furthest  away 
from  Christ,  and  grieved  your  heart  the  most,  nevertheless  say  in  his 
heart,  "  There  may  be  hypocrites  in  the  world,  but  my  dear  father  does 
truly  trust  in  God" !    Oh,  that  our  faith  may  be  known  unmistakably  I 


"let  him  deliver  him  now."  551 

We  do  not  wish  it  to  be  advertised  to  our  own  honour.  That  be  far 
from  our  minds.  But  yet  we  would  have  it  known  that  others  may  be 
encouraged,  and  that  God  may  be  glorified.  If  nobody  else  trusts  in 
God,  let  us  do  so ;  and  thus  may  we  uplift  a  testimony  to  the  honour 
of  his  faithfulness.  When  we  die,  may  this  be  our  epitaph — "He 
trusted  in  God." 

David,  in  the  twenty-second  Psalm,  represents  the  enemies  as 
saying  of  our  Lord — "  He  trusted  on  the  Lord  that  he  would  deliver 
him."  ThiB  practical  faith  is  sure  to  be  known  wherever  it  is  in  opera- 
tion, because  it  is  exceedingly  rare.  Multitudes  of  people  have  a 
kind  of  faith  in  God,  but  it  does  not  come  to  the  practical  point  of 
trusting  that  God  will  deliver  them.  I  see  upon  the  newspaper  placards, 
"  Startling  News  !  People  in  the  Planets  !  "  Not  a  very  practical  dis- 
covery. For  many  a  day  there  has  been  a  tendency  to  refer  God's 
promises  and  our  faith  to  the  planets,  or  somewhere  beyond  this 
present  every-day  life.  We  say  to  ourselves,  "  Oh  yes,  God  delivers 
his  people."  We  mean  that  he  did  so  in  the  days  of  Moses,  and 
possibly  he  may  be  doing  so  now  in  some  obscure  island  of  the  sea. 
Ah  me  1  The  glory  of  faith  lies  in  its  being  fit  for  every-day  wear. 
Can  it  be  said  of  you,  "  He  trusted  in  God,  that  he  would  deliver 
him  "  ?  Have  you  faith  of  the  kind  which  will  make  you  lean  upon 
the  Lord  in  poverty,  in  sickness,  in  bereavement,  in  persecution,  in 
slander,  in  contempt  ?  Have  you  a  trust  in  God  to  bear  you  up  in 
holy  living  at  all  costs,  and  in  active  service  even  beyond  your 
strength  ?  Can  you  trust  in  God  definitely  about  this  and  that  ?  Can 
you  trust  about  food,  and  raiment,  and  home  ?  Can  you  trust  God 
even  about  your  shoes,  that  they  shall  be  iron  and  brass,  and  about 
the  hairs  of  your  head  that  they  are  all  numbered  ?  What  we  need  is 
less  theory  and  more  actual  trust  in  God. 

The  faith  of  the  text  was  personal :  "that  he  would  deliver  himV 
Blessed  is  that  faith  which  can  reach  its  arm  of  compassion  around  the 
world,  but  that  faith  must  begin  at  home.  Of  what  use  were  the 
longest  arm  if  it  were  not  fixed  to  the  man  himself  at  the  shoulder  ? 
If  you  have  no  faith  about  yourself,  what  faith  can  you  have  about 
others  ?  "He  trusted  on  the  Lord  that  he  would  deliver  him."  Come, 
beloved,  have  you  such  a  faith  in  the  living  God  ?  Do  you  trust  in 
God  through  Christ  Jesus  that  he  will  save  you  ?  Yes,  you  poor, 
unworthy  one,  the  Lord  will  deliver  you  if  you  trust  him.  Yes,  poor 
woman,  or  unknown  man,  the  Lord  can  help  you  in  your  present 
trouble,  and  in  every  other,  and  he  will  do  so  if  you  trust  him  to  that 
end.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  lead  you  to  first  trust  the  Lord  Jesus  for 
the  pardon  of  sin,  and  then  to  trust  in  God  for  all  things. 

Let  us  pause  a  minute.  Let  a  man  trust  in  God  ;  not  in  fiction  but 
in  fact,  and  he  will  find  that  he  has  solid  rock  under  his  feet.  Let 
him  trust  about  his  own  daily  needs  and  trials,  and  rest  assured  that 
the  Lord  will  actually  appear  for  him,  and  he  will  not  be  disappointed. 
Such  a  trust  in  God  is  a  very  reasonable  thing;  its  absence  is  most 
unreasonable.  If  there  be  a  God,  he  knows  all  about  my  case.  If  he 
made  my  ear  he  can  hear  me ;  if  he  made  my  eye  he  can  see  me ; 
and  therefore  he  perceives  my  condition.  If  he  be  my  Father,  as  he 
says  he  is,  he  will  certainly  care  for  me,  and  will  help  me  in  my  hour 


552 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


of  need  if  he  can.  We  are  sure  that  he  can,  for  he  is  omnipotent.  Ta 
there  anything  unreasonable,  then,  in  trusting  in  God  that  he  will 
deliver  us?  I  venture  to  say  that  if  all  the  forces  in  the  universe  were 
put  together,  and  all  the  kindly  intents  of  all  who  are  our  friends  were 
put  together,  and  we  were  then  to  rely  upon  those  united  forces  and 
intents,  we  should  not  have  a  thousandth  part  so  much  justification 
for  our  confidence  as  when  we  depend  upon  God,  whose  intents  and 
forces  are  infinitely  greater  than  those  of  all  the  world  beside.  "  It 
is  better  to  trust  in  the  Lord  than  to  put  confidence  in  man ;  it  is 
better  to  trust  in  the  Lord  than  to  put  confidence  in  princes."  If  you 
view  things  in  the  white  light  of  pure  reason,  it  is  infinitely  more 
reasonable  to  trust  in  the  living  God  than  in  all  his  creatures  put 
together. 

Certainly,  dear  friends,  it  is  extremely  comfortahle  to  trust  in  God. 
I  find  it  so,  and  therefore  speak.  To  roll  your  burden  upon  the  Lord, 
since  he  will  sustain  you,  is  a  blessed  way  of  being  quit  of  care.  We 
know  him  to  be  faithful,  and  as  powerful  as  he  is  faithful ;  and  our 
deiDcndence  upon  him  is  the  solid  foundation  of  a  profound  peace. 

While  it  is  comfortable,  it  is  also  uplifting.  If  you  trust  in  men, 
the  best  of  men,  you  are  likely  to  be  lowered  by  your  trust.  We  are 
apt  to  cringe  before  those  who  patronize  us.  If  your  prosperity 
depends  upon  a  person's  smile,  you  are  tempted  to  pay  homage  even 
when  it  is  undeserved.  The  old  saying  mentions  a  certain  person  as 
**  knowing  on  which  side  his  bread  is  buttered."  Thousands  are  prac- 
tically degraded  by  their  trusting  in  men.  But  when  our  reliance  is 
upon  the  living  God  we  are  raised  by  it,  and  elevated  both  morally 
and  spiritually.  You  may  bow  in  deepest  reverence  before  God,  and 
yet  there  will  be  no  fawning.  You  may  lie  in  the  dust  before  the 
Majesty  of  heaven,  and  yet  not  be  dishonoured  by  your  humility  ;  in 
fact,  it  is  our  greatness  to  be  nothing  in  the  presence  of  the  Most 
High. 

This  confidence  in  God  makes  men  strong.  I  shoidd  advise  the 
enemy  not  to  oppose  the  man  who  trusts  in  God.  In  the  long  run  he 
will  be  beaten,  as  Haman  found  it  with  Mordecai.  He  had  been  warned 
of  this  by  Zeresh,  his  wife,  and  his  wise  men,  who  said,  "  If  Mordecai 
be  of  the  seed  of  the  Jews,  before  whom  thou  hast  begun  to  fall,  thou 
shalt  not  prevail  against  him,  but  shalt  surely  fall  before  him."  Contend 
not  with  a  man  who  has  God  at  his  back.  Years  ago  the  Mentonese 
desired  to  break  away  from  the  dominion  of  the  Prince  of  Monaco. 
They  therefore  drove  out  his  agent.  The  prince  came  with  his  army, 
not  a  very  great  one,  it  is  true,  but  still  formidable  to  the  Mentonese. 
I  know  not  what  the  high  and  mighty  princeling  was  not  going  to  do  ; 
but  the  news  came  that  the  King  of  Sardinia  was  coming  up  in  the 
rear  to  help  the  Mentonese,  and  therefore  his  lordship  of  Monaco  very 
prudently  retired  to  his  own  rock.  When  a  believer  stands  out  against 
evil  he  ma}'-  be  sure  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  will  not  be  far  away.  The 
enemy  shall  hear  the  dash  of  his  horse-hoof  and  the  blast  of  his 
trumpet,  and  shall  flee  before  him.  Wherefore  be  of  good  courage, 
and  compel  the  world  to  say  of  you,  *'  He  trusted  in  the  Lord  that  he 
would  deliver  him." 

11.     Secondly,  I  want  you  to  follow  me  briefly  in  considering  the 


**LET    HIM   DELIYEB   HIM   NOW."  553 

TEST  WHICH  IS  THE  ESSENCE  OF  THE  TAUXT  wHch  was  liurled  bj^  the 
mockers  against  our  Lord—"  Let  him  deliver  him  now,  if  he  will  have 

him."  ^       ^  „ 

Such  a  test  will  come  to  all  believers.  It  may  come  as  a  taunt  ±rom 
enemies  ;  it  will  certainly  come  as  a  trial  of  your  faith.  The  arch- 
enemy will  assuredly  hiss  out,  "Let  him  deliver  him,  seemg  he 
delighted  in  him."  7.7         ^ 

This  taunt  has  about  it  the  appearance  of  leing  very  logical,  and 
indeed  in  a  measure  so  it  is.  If  God  has  promised  to  deliver  us,  and 
we  have  openly  professed  to  believe  the  promise,  it  is  only  natural  that 
others  should  say,  "Let  us  see  whether  he  does  deliver  him.  This 
man  believes  that  the  Lord  will  help  him  ;  and  he  must  help  him,  or  else 
the  man's  faith  is  a  delusion."  This  is  the  sort  of  test  to  which  we  our- 
selves would  have  put  others  before  our  conversion,  and  we  cannot 
object  to  be  proved  in  the  same  manner  ourselves.  Perhaps  we  incline 
to  run  away  from  the  ordeal,  but  this  very  shrinking  should  be  a  solenin 
call  to  us  to  question  the  genuineness  of  that  faith  which  we  are  afraid 
to  test.  "  He  trusted  on  the  Lord,"  says  the  enemy,  "that  he  would 
deliver  him  :  let  him  deliver  him";  and  surely,  however  malicious  the 
design,  there  is  no  escaping  from  the  logic  of  the  challenge. 

It  is  peculiarly  painful  to  have  this  stern  inference  driven  home  to 
you  in  the  hour  of  sorrow.  Because  one  cannot  deny  the  fairness  of 
the  appeal,  it  is  aU  the  more  trying.  In  the  time  of  depression  of 
spirit  it  is  hard  to  have  one's  faith  questioned,  or  the  ground  on  which 
it  stands  made  a  matter  of  dispute.  Either  to  be  mistaken  m  one's 
behef,  or  to  have  no  real  faith,  or  to  find  the  ground  of  one's  faith  fail 
is  an  exceedingly  grievous  thing.  Yet  as  our  Lord  was  not  spared 
this  painful  ordeal,  we  must  not  expect  to  be  kept  clear  of  it,  and  Satan 
knows  well  how  to  work  these  questions,  till  the  poison  of  them  sets 
the  blood  on  fire.  "  He  trusted  on  the  Lord  that  he  would  deliver  him; 
let  him  deliver  him  ;  "  he  hurls  this  fiery  dart  into  the  soul,  till  the  man 
is  sorely  wounded,  and  can  scarcely  hold  his  ground. 

The  taunt  is  specially  joom^<?f/  and  jyersonal.  It  is  put  thus:  ''He 
trusted  on  the  Lord  that  he  would  deliver  him  :  let  him  deliver  him  "  ,• 
"Do  not  come  to  us  with  your  fiddle-faddle  about  God's  helping  all  his 
chosen.  Here  is  a  man  who  is  one  of  his  people,  will  he  heli^him  ? 
Do  not  talk  to  us  big  things  about  Jehovah  at  the  Eed  Sea,  or  in  the 
Desert  of  Sinai,  or  God  helping  his  people  in  ages  past.  Here  is  a 
living  man  before  us  who  trusted  in  God  that  he  would  dehver  him : 
let  him  deliver  him  now."  You  know  how  Satan  will  pick  out  one  of 
the  most  afilicted,  and  pointing  his  fingers  at  him  will  cry,  "Let  him 
deliver  him."  Brethren,  the  test  is  fair.  God  will  be  true  to  every 
believer.  If  any  one  child  of  God  could  be  lost,  it  would  be  quite 
enough  to  enable  the  devil  to  spoil  all  the  glory  of  God  for  ever._  If 
one  promise  of  God  to  one  of  his  people  should  fail,  that  one  failure 
would  suffice  to  mar  the  veracity  of  the  Lord  to  all  eternity ;  they 
would  pubhsh  it  in  the  "Diabolical  Gazette,"  and  in  every  street  of 
Tophet  they  would  howl  it  out,  "God  has  failed.  God  has  broken  his 
promise.  God  has  ceased  to  be  faithful  to  his  people."  It  would  then 
be  a  horrible  reproach— "He  trusted  in  God  to  deliver  him,  but  he 
did  not  deliver  him." 


--*  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Much  emphasis  lies  in  its  being  in  the  present  tense:  "He  ti*U8ted  in 
G-od  that  he  would  deliver  him :  let  him  deliver  him  now^     I  see  Thee, 

0  Lord  Jesus,  thou  art  not  now  in  the  wilderness,  where  the  fiend  *is 
saying,  "If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  command  that  these  stones  be 
made  bread."  No.  Thou  art  nailed  to  the  tree  ;  thine  enemies  have 
hemmed  thee  in.  The  legionaries  of  Bome  are  at  the  foot  of  the 
cross,  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  and  raging  Jews  compass  thee 
about.  There  is  no  escape  from  death  for  thee!  Hence  their  cry 
— "  Let  him  deliver  him  wow?."  Ah,  brothers  and  sisters !  this  is 
how  Satan  assails  us,  using  our  present  and  pressing  tribulations 
as  the  barbs  of  his  arrows.  Yet  here  also  there  is  reason  and  logic 
in  the  challenge. 

If  God  does  not  deliver  his  servants  at  one  time  as  weU  as  another, 
he  has  not  kept  his  promise.  For  a  man  of  truth  is  always  true,  and 
a  promise  once  given  always  stands.  A  promise  cannot  be  broken 
now  and  then,  and  yet  the  honour  of  the  person  giving  it  be  main- 
tained by  his  keeping  it  at  other  times.  The  word  of  a  true  man 
stands  always  good :  it  is  good  now.  This  is  logic,  bitter  logic,  cold 
steel  logic,  logic  which  seems  to  cut  right  down  your  backbone  and 
cleave  your  chine.  "  He  trusted  on  the  Lord  that  he  would  deliver  him  : 
let  him  deliver  him  now."     Yet  this  hard  logic  can  be  turned  to  comfort. 

1  told  you  a  story  the  other  day  of  the  brother  in  Guy's  Hospital  to 
whom  the  doctors  said  that  he  must  undergo  an  operation  which  was 
extremely  dangerous.  They  gave  him  a  week  to  consider  whether 
he  would  submit  to  it.  He  was  troubled  for  his  young  wife  and 
children,  and  for  his  work  for  the  Lord.  A  friend  left  a  bunch  of 
flowers  for  him,  with  this  verse  as  its  motto,  "He  trusted  in  God; 
let  him  deliver  him  now."  "Yes,"  he  thought,  ''now:'  In 
prayer  he  cast  himself  upon  the  Lord,  and  felt  in  his  heart,  "Come 
on,  doctors,  I  am  ready  for  you."  When  the  next  morning  came, 
he  refused  to  take  chloroform,  for  he  desired  to  go  to  heaven  in 
his  senses.  He  bore  the  operation  manfully,  and  he  is  yet  alive. 
"He  trusted  on  the  Lord  that  he  would  deliver  him"  then  and 
there,  and  the  Lord  did  so.     In  this  lies  the  brunt  of  the  battle. 

A  Christian  man  may  be  beaten  in  business,  he  may  fail  to  meet  all 
demands,  and  then  Satan  yells,  "  Let  him  deliver  him  now.''  The 
poor  man  has  been  out  of  work  for  two  or  three  months,  tramping  the 
streets  of  London  until  he  has  worn  out  his  boots ;  he  has  been  brought 
to  his  last  penny.  I  think  I  hear  the  laugh  of  the  Prince  of  Darkness 
as  he  cries,  "Let  him  deliver  him  now."  Or  else  the  believer  is  very 
ill  in  body,  and  low  in  spirit,  and  then  Satan  howls,  "  Let  him  deliver 
him  now."  Some  of  us  have  been  in  very  trying  positions.  We  were 
moved  with  indignation  because  of  deadly  error,  and  we  spoke  plainly, 
but  men  refused  to  hear.  Those  we  relied  upon  deserted  us ;  good 
men  sought  their  own  ease  and  would  not  march  with  us,  and  we  had 
to  bear  testimony  for  despised  truth  alone,  until  we  were  ourselves 
despised.  Then  the  adversary  shouted,  "Let  him  deliver  him  wo «^." 
Be  it  so !  We  do  not  refuse  the  test.  Our  God  whom  we  serve  will 
deliver  us.  We  will  not  bow  down  to  modern  thought  nor  worship 
the  image  which  human  wisdom  has  set  up.  Our  God  is  God  both 
of  hills   and  of  valleys.     He  wiU  not  fail  his  servants,  albeit  that  for 


I 


"let  him  deliver  him  now."  555 

a  while  lie  forbears  that  lie  may  try  their  faith.  We  dare  accept  the 
test,  and  say,  "  Let  him  deliver  us  now.''^ 

Beloved  friends,  we  need  not  be  afraid  of  this  taunt  if  it  is  brought 
by  adversaries ;  for,  after  all,  the  test  will  come  to  us  apart  from  any 
malice,  for  it  is  inevitable.  All  the  faith  you  have  will  be  tried.  I  can. 
see  you  heaping  it  up.  How  rich  you  are  !  What  a  pile  of  faith  ! 
Friend,  you  are  almost  perfect !  Open  the  furnace  door  and  put  the 
heap  in.  Do  you  shrink  ?  See  how  it  shrivels!  Is  there  anything  left  ? 
Bring  hither  a  magnifying  glass.  Is  this  all  that  is  left  ?  Yes,  thia 
is  an  that  remains  of  the  heap.  You  say,  "  I  trusted  in  God."  Yes^ 
but  you  had  reason  to  cry,  "  Lord,  help  my  unbelief."  Brethren,  we 
have  not  a  tithe  of  the  faith  we  think  we  have.  But  whether  or  not,  all 
our  faith  must  be  tested.  God  builds  no  ships  but  what  he  sends  to  sea. 
In  living,  in  losing,  in  working,  in  weeping,  in  suffering,  or  in  strivings 
God  will  find  a  fitting  crucible  for  every  single  grain  of  the  precious 
faith  which  he  has  given  us.  Then  he  will  come  to  us  and  say — You 
trusted  in  God  that  he  would  deliver  you,  and  you  shall  be  delivered 
now.  How  you  will  open  your  eyes  as  you  see  the  Lord's  hand  of 
deliverance  !  AVhat  a  man  of  wonders  you  will  be  when  you  tell  in. 
your  riper  years  to  the  younger  people  how  the  Lord  delivered  you  I 
Why,  there  are  some  Christians  I  know  of  who,  like  the  ancient  mariner, 
could  detain  even  a  wedding  guest  with  their  stories  of  God's  wonders 
on  the  deep. 

Yes,  the  test  will  come  again  and  again.  May  the  gibes  of  adversaries 
only  make  us  ready  for  the  sterner  ordeals  of  the  judgment  to  come. 
0  my  dear  friends,  examine  your  religion.  You  have  a  great  deal  of 
it,  some  of  you ;  but  what  of  its  quality  ?  Can  your  religion  stand  the 
test  of  poverty,  and  scandal,  and  scorn  ?  Can  it  stand  the  test  of 
scientific  sarcasm  and  learned  contempt  ?  Will  your  religion  stand 
the  test  of  long  sickness  of  body  and  depression  of  spirit  caused  by 
weakness  ?  What  are  you  doing  amid  the  common  trials  of  life  ?  What 
will  you  do  in  the  swellings  of  Jordan  ?  Examine  well  your  f aith^ 
since  aU  hangs  there.  Some  of  us  who  have  lain  for  weeks  together, 
peering  through  the  thin  veil  which  parts  us  from  the  unseen,  have 
been  made  to  feel  that  nothing  will  suffice  us  but  a  promise  which  will 
answer  the  taunt,  "Let  him  deliver  us  now.'''' 

III.  I  shall  finish,  in  the  third  place,  dear  friends,  by  noticing  the 
ANSWER  to  the  test.  God  does  dehver  those  who  trust  in  him.  God's 
interposition  for  the  faithful  is  not  a  dream,  but  a  substantial  reality. 
"  Many  are  the  afflictions  of  the  righteous :  but  the  Lord  delivereth 
him  out  of  them  all."  All  history  proves  the  faithfulness  of  God. 
Those  who  trust  God  have  been  in  all  sorts  of  troubles;  but  they  have 
always  been  delivered.  They  have  been  bereaved.  What  a  horrible 
bereavement  was  that  which  feU  to  the  lot  of  Aaron,  when  his  twa 
sons  were  struck  dead  for  their  profanity  in  the  presence  of  Godl 
"And  Aaron  held  his  peace"!  What  grace  was  there!  Thus  wilL 
the  Lord  sustain  you  also  should  he  take  away  the  desire  of  your 
eyes  with  a  stroke.  Grave  after  grave  has  the  good  man  visited  till  it 
seemed  that  his  whole  race  was  buried,  and  yet  his  heart  has  not  been, 
broken ;  but  he  has  bowed  his  soul  before  the  wiU  of  the  ever-blessed 
One.    Thus  has  the  Lord  delivered  his  afflicted  one  by  sustaining  him. 


j»-g  METBOPOLITAlfl'   TABERNACLE    PTTLPIT. 

In  other  ways  the  bush  has  burned,  and  3'et  has  not  been  consumed. 
Eemember  the  multiplied  and  multiform  trials  of  Job.  Yet  God 
sustained  him  to  the  end  so  that  he  did  not  charge  God  foolishly,  but 
held  fast  his  faith  in  the  Most  High.  If  ever  you  are  called  to  the 
afflictions  of  Job  you  will  also  be  called  to  the  sustaining  grace  of  Job. 
Some  of  God's  servants  have  been  defeated  in  their  testimony.  They 
have  borne  faithful  witness  for  God,  but  they  have  been  rejected  of 
men.  It  has  been  their  lot,  like  Cassandra,  to  prophesy  the  truth,  but 
not  to  be  believed.  Such  was  Jeremiah,  who  was  born  to  a  heritage 
of  scorn  from  those  whose  benefit  he  sought.  Yet  he  was  delivered. 
He  shrank  not  from  being  faithful.  His  courage  could  not  be  silenced. 
By  integrity  he  was  delivered. 

Godly  men  have  been  despised  and  misrepresented,  and  yet  have  been 
delivered.  Eemember  David  and  his  envious  brethren,  David  and  the 
malignant  Saul,  David  when  his  men  spake  of  stoning  him.  Yet  he 
took  off  the  giant's  head ;  yet  he  came  to  the  throne ;  yet  the  Lord 
built  him  a  house. 

Some  of  God's  servants  have  been  bitterly  persecuted,  but  God  has 
delivered  them.  Daniel  came  forth  from  the  lions'  den,  and  the  three 
holy  children  from  the  midst  of  the  burning  fiery  furnace.  These  are 
only  one  or  two  out  of  millions  who  trusted  God  and  he  delivered 
them.  Out  of  all  manner  of  ill  the  Lord  delivered  them.  God  brought 
this  crowd  of  witnesses  through  all  their  trials  unto  his  throne,  where 
they  rest  with  Jesus,  and  share  the  triumph  of  their  Master  at  this 
very  day.  0  my  timid  brother,  nothing  has  happened  to  you  but 
what  is  common  to  men.  Your  battle  is  not  different  from  the  warfare 
of  the  rest  of  the  saints ;  and  as  God  has  delivered  them  he  will  deliver 
you  also,  seeing  you  put  your  trust  in  him. 

But  God's  ways  of  deliverance  are  his  own.  He  does  not  deliver 
according  to  the  translation  put  upon  "deliverance"  by  the  ribald 
throng.  He  does  not  deliver  according  to  the  interpretation  put  upon 
<'  deliverance  "  by  our  shrinking  flesh  and  blood.  He  delivers,  but  it 
is  in  his  own  way.  Let  me  remark  that,  if  God  delivers  you  and  me  in 
the  same  way  as  he  delivered  his  own  Son,  we  can  have  no  cause  of 
complaint.  If  the  deliverance  which  he  vouchsafed  to  us  is  of  the 
same  kind  as  that  which  he  vouchsafed  to  the  Only  Begotten,  we  may 
well  be  content.  Well,  what  kind  of  a  deliverance  was  that  ?  Did  the 
Father  tear  up  the  cross  from  the  earth  ?  Did  he  proceed  to  draw  out 
the  nails  from  the  sacred  hands  and  feet  of  his  dear  Son  ?  Did  he  set 
him  down  upon  that  '*  green  hill  far  away,  beyond  the  city  wall,"  and 
place  in  his  hand  a  sword  of  fire  with  which  to  smite  his  adversaries  ? 
Did  he  bid  the  earth  open  and  swallow  up  all  his  foes  ?  No;  nothing 
ol  the  kind.  Jehovah  did  not  interpose  to  spare  his  Son  a  single  pang; 
but  he  let  him  die.  He  let  him  be  taken  as  a  dead  man  down  from 
the  cross  and  laid  in  a  tomb.  Jesus  went  through  with  his  suffering 
to  the  bitter  end.  0  brothers  and  sisters,  this  may  be  God's  waj 
of  delivering  us.  .  We  have  trusted  in  God  that  he  would  deliver  us ; 
and  his  rendering  of  his  promise  is,  that  he  will  enable  us  to  go 
through  with  it ;  we  shall  suffer  to  the  last,  and  triumph  in  so  doing. 

Yet  God's  way  of  delivering  those  who  trust  in  him  is  always  the  best 
way.     If  the  Father  had  taken  his  Son  down  from  the  cross,   what 


i 


"let  him  deliver  him  now." 


557 


would  have  been  the  result  ?  Eedemption  unaccomplished,  salvation 
work  undone,  and  Jesus  returning  with  his  life-work  unfinished.  This 
would  not  have  been  deliverance,  but  defeat.  It  was  much  better 
for  our  Lord  Jesus  to  die.  Now  he  has  paid  the  ransom  for  his  elect, 
and  having  accomplished  the  great  purpose  of  atonement,  he  has  slept 
a  while  in  the  heart'  of  the  earth,  and  now  has  ascended  to  his  throne 
in  the  endless  glories  of  heaven.  It  was  deliverance  of  the  fullest 
kind ;  for  from  the  pangs  of  his  death  has  come  the  joy  of  life  to  his 
redeemed.  It  is  not  Grod's  will  that  every  mountain  should  be  levelled, 
but  that  we  should  be  the  stronger  for  climbing  the  Hill  Difficulty. 
God  will  deliver ;  he  must  deliver,  but  he  will  do  it  in  our  cases,  as 
in  the  case  of  our  Lord,  in  the  best  possible  manner. 

Anyhow,  he  will  deliver  his  chosen:  the  taunt  of  the  adver- 
sary shall  not  cause  our  Grod  to  forget  or  forego  his  people.  I  know 
that  the  Lord  will  no  more  fail  me  than  any  other  of  his  servants. 
He  will  not  leave  a  faithful  witness  to  his  adversaries.  "  I  know  that 
my  Avenger  liveth,  and  that  he  shall  stand  at  the  latter  day  upon  the 
earth  :  and  though  after  my  skin  worms  destroy  this  body,  yet  in  my 
flesh  shall  I  see  God  :  whom  I  shall  see  for  myself,  and  mine  eyes  shall 
behold,  and  not  another ;  though  my  reins  be  consumed  within  me." 
Is  this  also  your  confidence  ?  Then  do  not  sit  down  in  sorrow,  and 
act  as  though  you  despaired.  Quit  yourselves  like  men.  Be  strong, 
fear  not.  Cast  yourselves  on  the  love  that  never  changeth  and  never 
fainteth,  and  the  Lord  will  answer  all  the  revilings  of  Rabshakeh,  and 
the  blusterings  of  Sennacherib. 

There  are  times  when  we  may  use  this  text  to  our  comfort.  "Let 
him  deliver  him  now,"  saith  the  text,  "if  he  will  have  him."  You, 
dear  friends,  who  have  never  believed  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  before, 
how  I  wish  you  could  try  him  now  !  You  feel  this  morning  full  of 
sin,  and  full  of  need.  Come,  then,  and  trust  the  Saviour  now. 
See  whether  he  will  not  save  you  710 w.  Is  there  one  day  in 
the  year  in  which  Jesus  cannot  save  a  sinner  ?  Come  and  see  whether 
the  1 7th  of  June  is  that  day.  Try  whether  he  will  not  deliver  you 
now  from  the  guilt,  the  penalty,  the  power  of  sin.  Why  not  come  ? 
You  have  never,  perhaps,  been  in  the  Tabernacle  before,  and  when 
coming  here  this  morning  you  did  not  think  of  finding  the  Saviour. 
Oh,  that  the  Saviour  may  find  you  !  Jesus  Christ  is  a  Saviour  every 
day,  all  the  year  round.  Whoever  cometh  to  him  shall  find  eternal 
life  now.  "  Oh,"  you  say,  "  I  am  in  such  an  unfit  state  ;  I  am  in  all 
the  deshabille  of  my  carelessness  and  godlessness."  Come  along,  man, 
come  along,  just  as  you  are.  Tarry  not  for  improvement  or  arrange- 
ment, for  both  of  these  Jesus  will  give  you  ;  come  and  put  your  trust 
in  the  great  Sacrifice  for  sin,  and  he  will  deliver  you — deliver  you 
nov\     Lord,  save  the  sinner,  noiv  ! 

Others  of  you  are  the  children  of  God,  but  you  are  in  peculiar 
trouble.  Well,  what  are  you  going  to  do  ?  You  have  always  trusted 
in  God  before  ;  are  you  going  to  doubt  him  now  ?  "0  my  dear  sir,  you 
do  not  know  my  distress ;  I  am  the  most  afflicted  person  in  the  Taber- 
nacle." Be  it  so;  but  you  trusted  in  the  Lord  the  past  twenty  years, 
and  I  do  not  believe  that  you  have  seen  any  just  cause  for  denying  him 


.gg  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

your  confidence  now.  Did  you  say  that  you  have  known  him  from  your 
youth  up?  What !  you  seventy  years  of  age?  Then  you  are  too  near 
home  to  begin  distrusting  your  heavenly  Father.  That  will  never  do. 
You  have  been  to  sea,  and  have  weathered  many  a  storm  in  mid-ocean, 
and  are  you  now  going  to  be  drowned  in  a  ditch  ?  Think  not  so.  The 
Lord  will  deliver  you  even  now.  Do  not  let  us  suppose  that  we  have 
come  where  boundless  love  and  infinite  wisdom  cannot  reach  us.  Do 
not  fancy  that  you  have  leaped  upon  a  ledge  of  rock  so  high  as  to 
be  out  of  reach  of  the  everlasting  arm.     If  you  had  done  so  I  would 

still  cry Throw  yourself,  down  into  the  arms  of  God,  and  trust  that 

he  will  not  let  you  be  destroyed. 

It  may  be  that  some  of  us  are  in  trouble  about  the  church  and  the 
faith.  We  have  defended  God's  truth  as  well  as  we  could,  and  spoken 
out  against  deadly  error ;  but  craft  and  numbers  have  been  against  us, 
and  at  present  things  seem  to  have  gone  wrong.  The  good  are  timid, 
and  the  evil  are  false.  They  say,  '*  He  trusted  in  God  :  let  him  dehver 
him  now."  Sirs,  he  will  deliver  us  now.  We  will  throw  our  soul 
once  more  into  this  battle,  and  see  if  the  Lord  does  not  vindicate  his 
truth.  If  we  have  not  spoken  in  God's  name  we  are  content  to  go 
back  to  the  dust  from  whence  we  sprang ;  but  if  we  have  spoken  God's 
truth  we  defy  the  whole  confederacy  to  prevail  against  it. 

Peradventure,  I  speak  to  some  missionary,  who  is  mourning  over  a 
time  of  great  trial  in  a  mission  which  is  dear  to  his  heart.  Ah,  dear 
friend!  Christ  intended  that  the  gospel  should  repeat  his  own 
experience,  and  then  should  triumph  like  himself.  The  gospel  lives 
by  being  killed,  and  conquers  by  defeat.  Cast  it  where  you  will,  it 
always  falls  upon  its  feet.  You  need  not  be  afraid  of  it  under  any 
trial.  Just  now,  the  wisdom  of  man  is  its  worst  foe,  but  the  Lord  will 
deliver  it  now.  The  gospel  lives  and  reigns.  Tell  it  out  among  the 
heathen,  that  the  Lord  reigneth  from  the  tree,  and  from  that  tree  of 
the  curse  he  issues  his  supreme  commands.  The  self-same  day  in  which 
Jesus  died,  he  took  with  him  into  his  kingdom  and  his  inmost  paradise 
a  thief  who  had  hung  at  his  side.  He  liveth  and  reigneth  for  ever  and 
-ever,  and  calleth  to  himself  whomsoever  he  hath  chosen.  Let  us  drown 
the  taunts  of  the  adversary  with  our  shouts  of  Hallelujah  !  The  Lord 
shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever.     Hallelujah.     Amen! 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Psalm  cxix. 


Hymns  from  *'Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 196,  34,  37  (Part  II.). 


THE  THREE  HOURS'  DARKNESS. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  April  18th,  1886,  by 

C.   H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


"  Now  from  the  sixth  hour  there  was  darkness  over  all  the  land  unto  the  ninth  hour.** 
—Matthew  xxvii.  45. 

From  nine  till  noon  the  usual  degree  of  light  was  present ;  so  that  there 
was  time  enough  for  our  Lord's  adversaries  to  behold  and  insult  his 
sufferings.  There  could  be  no  mistake  about  the  fact  that  he  was 
really  nailed  to  the  cross  ;  for  he  was  crucified  in  broad  daylight.  We 
are  fully  assured  that  it  was  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  for  both  friends  and 
foes  were  eye-witnesses  of  his  agonies :  for  three  long  hours  the  Jews 
sat  down  and  watched  him  on  the  cross,  making  jests  of  his  miseries. 
I  feel  thankful  for  those  three  hours  of  light ;  for  else  the  enemies  of 
our  faith  would  have  questioned  whether  in  very  deed  the  blessed  body 
of  our  Master  was  nailed  to  the  tree,  and  would  have  started  fancies  as 
many  as  the  bats  and  owls  which  haunt  the  darkness.  Where  would 
have  been  the  witnesses  of  this  solemn  scene  if  the  sun  had  been  hidden 
from  morn  till  night  ?  As  three  hours  of  light  gave  opportunity  for 
inspection  and  witness-bearing,  we  see  the  wisdom  which  did  not  allow 
it  to  close  too  soon. 

Never  forget  that  this  miracle  of  the  closing  of  the  eye  of  day  at 
high  noon  was  performed  by  our  Lord  in  his  weakness.  He  had  walked 
the  sea,  and  raised  the  dead,  and  healed  the  sick,  in  the  days  of  his 
strength ;  but  now  he  has  come  to  his  lowest,  the  fever  is  on  him,  he  is 
faint  and  thirsty.  He  hangs  on  the  borders  of  dissolution  ;  yet  has  he 
power  to  darken  the  sun  at  noon.  He  is  still  very  God  of  very  God  : 
"  Behold,  a  purple  torrent  run 

Down  from  his  hands  and  head, 
The  crimson  tide  puts  out  the  sun ; 
His  groans  awake  the  dead." 

If  he  can  do  this  in  his  weakness,  what  is  he  not  able  to  do  in  his 
strength  ?  Fail  not  to  remember  that  this  power  was  displayed 
in  a  sphere  in  which  he  did  not  usually  put  forth  his  might.  The 
sphere  of  Christ  is  that  of  goodness  and  benevolence,  and  con- 
sequently of  light.  When  he  enters  the  sphere  of  darkness- 
making,  and  of  working  judgment,  he  engages  in  what  he  calls 
his  strange  work.  Wonders  of  terror  are  his  left-handed  deeds.  It 
is  but  now  and  then  that  he  causes  the  sun  to  go  down  at  noon,  and 
darkens  the  earth  in  the  clear  day  (Amos  viii.  9).  If  our  Lord  can 
No.  1896. 


-gQ  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


make  darkness  ab  will  as  he  dies,  what  glory  may  we  not  expect  now  that 
he  lives  to  be  the  light  of  the  city  of  God  for  ever  ?  The  Lamb  ig 
the  li^ht ;  and  what  a  light !  The  heavens  bear  the  impress  of  his 
dying^power,  and  lose  their  brightness  ;  shall  not  the  new  heavens  and 
the  new  earth  attest  the  power  of  the  risen  Lord  ?  The  thick  dark- 
ness around  the  dying  Christ  is  the  robe  of  the  Omnipotent  :  he  liveth 
again,  all  power  is  in  his  hands,  and  all  that  power  he  will  put  forth  to 

bless  his  chosen.  .  ,     ,         ,         ^     ^.         ^  , 

What  a  call  must  that  mid-day  midnight  have  been  to  the  cal-eless 
'sons  of  men  !     They  knew  not  that  the  Son  of  God  was  among  them  ; 
nor  that  he  was  working  out  human  redemption.     The  grandest  hour  in 
all  history  seemed  likely  to  pass  by  unheeded,  when,  suddenly,  night 
hastened  from  her  chambers  and  usurped  the  day.     Every  one  asked 
his  fellow,  "What  means  this  darkness  ?  "     Business  stood  still:  the 
plouo-h  stayed  in  mid-furrow,  and  the  axe  paused  uplifted.     It  was  the 
middle  of  the  day,  when  men  are  busiest  ;  but  they  made  a  general 
pause.     Not  only  on  Calvary,  but  on  every  hill,  and  in  every  valley^the 
o-loom  settled  down.     There  was  a  halt  in  the  caravan  of  life,    ^one 
could  move  unless  they  groped  their  way  like  the  blind.     The  master 
of  the  house  called  for  a  light  at  noon,  and  his  servant  treniblingrly 
obeyed  the  unusual  summons.     Other  lights  were  twinkling,  and  Jeru- 
salem was  as  a  city  by  night,  only  iiien  were  not  in  their  beds.     How 
stnrtled  were  mankind  !     Around  the  great  death-bed  an  appropriate 
quiet  was  secured.     I  doubt  not  that  a  shuddering  awe  came  over  the 
masses  of  the  people,  and  the  thoughtful  f.-resaw  terrible  things.     Those 
who  had  stood  about  the  cross,  and  had  dared  to  insult  the  majesty  ot 
Jesus  were  paralyzed  with  fear.     They  ceased  their  ribaldry,  and  with  it 
their  cruel  exultation.     They  were  cowed  though  not  convinced,  even 
the  basest  of  them  ;  while  the  better  sort  "  smote  their  breasts  and 
returned."      As  many   as  could  do  so,  no  doubt,   stumbled  to  their 
chambers,    and    endeavoured   to   hide    themselves,   for  fear   of  avvtul 
judgments  which  they  feared  were  near.     I   do  not  wonder  that  there 
should  be  traditions  of  strange  things  that  were  said  during  the  hush 
of  that  darkness.     Those  whispers  of  the  past  may  or  may  not  be 
true  •  they  have  been  the  subject  of  learned  controversy,  but  the  labour 
of  the  dispute  was  energy  ill  spent.     Yet  we  could  not  have  wondered 
if  one  did  say  as  he  is  reported  to  have  done,  "God  is  suffering,  or  the 
world  is  perishing."     Nor  should  I  drive  from  my  beliefs  the  poetic 
legend  that  an  Egyptian  pilot  passing  down  the  river  heard  among  the 
reedy  banks  a  voice  out  of  the  rustling  rushes,  whispering,  "  The  great 
Pan  is  dead."     Truly,  the  God  of  nature  was  expiring,  and  things  less 
tender  than  the  reeds  by  the  river  might  well  tremble  at  the  sound  thereol. 

We  are  told  that  this  darkness  was  over  all  the  land ;  and  Luke  puts  it, 
*  over  all  the  earth."  That  portion  of  our  globe  which  was  then  veiled 
in  natural  night  was  not  affected  thereby  ;  but  to  all  men  awake,  and 
at  their  employment,  it  was  the  advertisement  of  a  great  and  so  emn 
event.  It  was  strange  beyond  all  experience,  and  all  men  marvelled  ; 
for  when  the  light  should  have  been  brightest,  all  things  were  obscured 
for  the  space  of  three  hours.  ,  ^        . 

There  must  be  great  teaching  in  this  darkness  ;  for  when  we  come  so 
near  the  cross,  which  is  the  centre  of  history,  every  event  is  lull  of  meaning. 


THE  THREE   HOURS    DARKNE^  561 

Light  will  come  out  of  this  darkness.  I  love  to  feel  the  solemnity 
of  the  three  hours  of  death-shade,  and  to  sit  down  therein  and  meditate, 
with  no  companion  but  the  august  sufferer,  around  whom  that  darkness 
lowered.  I  am  going  to  speak  of  it  in  four  ways,  as  the  Holy  Spirit  may 
help  me.  First,  let  us  bow  our  spirits  in  the  presence  of  a  miracle  which 
amazes  us  ;  secondly,  let  us  regard  this  darkness  as  a  veil  which  con- 
ceals;  thirdly,  as  a  symbol  which  instructs ;  and  fourthly,  as  a  display 
of  sympathy,  which  forewarns  us  by  the  prophecies  which  it  implies. 

I.     First,  let  us  view  this  darkness  as  A  miracle  which  amazes  us. 

It  may  seem  a  trite  observation  that  this  darkness  was  altojiether 
out  of  the  natural  course  of  things.  Since  the  world  began  was  it 
not  heard  that  at  high  noon  there  should  be  darkness  over  all  the 
land.  It  was  out  of  the  order  of  nature  altogether.  Some  deny 
miracles  ;  and  if  they  also  deny  God,  I  will  not  at  this  time  deal  with 
them.  But  it  is  very  strange  that  any  one  who  believes  in  God  should 
doubt  the  possibility  of  miracles.  It  seems  to  me  that,  granted  the 
being  of  a  God,  miracle  is  to  be  expected  as  an  occasional  declaration  of 
his  independent  and  active  will.  He  may  make  certain  rules  for  his 
actions,  and  it  may  be  his  wisdom  to  keep  to  them  ;  but  surely  he  must 
reserve  to  himself  the  liberty  to  depart  from  his  own  laws,  or  else  he  has 
in  a  measure  laid  aside  his  personal  Godhead,  deified  law,  and  set  it  up 
above  himself.  It  'would  not  increase  our  idea  of  the  glory  of  his  Godhead 
if  we  could  be  assured  that  he  had  made  himself  subject  to  rule,  and  tied 
his  own  hands  from  ever  acting  except  in  a  certain  manner.  From  the 
self-existence  and  freedom  of  will  which  enter  into  our  very  conception 
of  God,  we  are  led  to  expect  that  sometimes  he  should  not  keep  to  the 
methods  which  he  follows  as  his  general  rule.  This  has  led  to  the 
universal  conviction  that  miracle  is  a  proof  of  Godhead.  The  general 
works  of  creation  and  providence  are  to  my  mind  the  best  proofs  ;  but 
the  common  heart  of  our  race,  for  some  reason  or  other,  looks  to  miracle 
as  surer  evidence  ;  thus  proving  that  miracle  is  expected  of  God. 
Although  the  Lord  makes  it  his  order  that  there  shall  be  day  and  night, 
he  in  this  case  with  abundant  reason  interposes  three  hours  of  night  in 
the  centre  of  a  day.  Behold  the  reason.  The  unusual  in  lower  nature 
is  made  to  consort  with  the  unusual  in  the  dealings  of  nature's  Lord. 
Certainly  this  miracle  was  most  congruous  with  that  greater  miracle 
which  was  happening  in  the  death  of  Christ.  Was  not  the  Lord  himself 
departing  from  all  common  ways  ?  Was  he  not  doing  that  which  had 
never  been  done  from  the  beginning,  and  would  never  be  done  again  ? 
That  man  should  die  is  so  common  a  thing  as  to  be  deemed  inevitable. 
We  are  not  startled  now  at  the  sound  of  a  funeral  knell :  we  have 
become  familiar  with  the  grave.  As  the  companions  of  our  youth  die 
at  our  side  we  are  not  seized  with  amazement ;  for  death  is  everywhere 
about  us  and  within  us.  But  that  the  Son  of  God  should  die,  this  is 
beyond  all  expectation,  and  not  only  above  nature,  but  contrary  thereto. 
He  who  is  equal  with  God  deigns  to  hang  upon  the  cross,  and  die.  I 
know  of  nothing  that  seems  more  out  of  rule  and  beyond  expectation 
than  this.  The  sun  darkened  at  noon  is  a  fit  accompaniment  of  the 
death  of  Jesus.     Is  it  not  so  ? 

Further,  this  miracle  was  not  only  out  of  the  order  of  nature,  but  it 
was  one  which  would  have  leen;pronounced  impossible.    It  is  not  possible 

36 


gg2  METROPOLITAN  TABBRNACLB   PULPIT. 

that  there  should  be  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  at  the  time  of  the  full 
moon  The  moon  at  the  time  when  she  is  m  her  full  is  not  ma 
position  in  which  she  could  possibly  cast  her  shadow  upon  the  earth. 
Tlie  Passover  was  at  the  time  of  the  full  moon,  and  therefore  it  was  not 
possible  that  the  sun  should  then  undergo  an  eclipse.  This  darkening 
of  the  sun  was  not  strictly  an  astronomical  eclipse ;  the  darkness  was 
doubtless  produced  in  some  other  way  :  yet  to  those  who  were  present 
it  did  seem  to  be  a  total  eclipse  of  the  sun— a  thing  impossible.  Ah, 
brothers !  when  we  come  to  deal  with  man,  and  the  fall,  and  sin,  and 
God,  and  Christ,  and  the  atonement,  we  are  at  home  with  impossibilities. 
We  have  now  reached  a  region  where  prodigies,  and  marvels,  and  sur- 
prises, are  the  order  of  the  day  :  sublimities  become  commouplaces 
when  we  come  within  the  circle  of  eternal  love.  Yea,  more  ;  we  have 
now  quitted  the  solid  land  of  the  possible,  and  have  put  out  to  sea, 
where  we  see  the  works  of  the  Lord,  and  his  wondere  in  the  deep. 
When  we  think  of  impossibiUties  in  other  spheres  we  start  back;  but 
the  way  of  the  cross  is  ablaze  with  the  divine,  and  we  soon  perceive  that 
"with  God  all  things  are  possible."  See,  then,  in  the  death  ot  Jesus, 
the  possibility  of  the  impossible  1  Behold  here  how  the  Son  of  God  can 
die  We  sometimes  pause  when  we  meet  with  an  expression  in  a  hymn 
which  implies  that  God  can  suffer  or  die;  we  think  that  the  poet  has 
used  too  great  a  license :  yet  it  behoves  us  to  refrain  from  hypercriti- 
cism,  since  in  Holy  Writ  there  are  words  like  it.  We  even  read  (Acts 
XX  28)  of  "  the  church  of  God  which  he  hath  purchased  with  his  own 
blood  ''—the  blood  of  God  I  Ah  well !  I  am  not  careful  to  defend  the 
language  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  but  in  its  presence  I  take  liberty  to  jastity 
the° words  which  we  sang  just  now  : 

**  Well  might  the  sun  in  darknees  hide, 
And  shut  his  glories  in. 
When  God,  the  mighty  Maker,  died 
For  man,  the  creature's  sin." 
I  will  not  venture  to  explain  the  death  of  the  incarnate  God.     I  am 
content  to  believe  it,  and  to  rest  my  hope  upon  it.        ^     _,,    ^    ,     j. 

How  should  the  Holy  One  have  sin  laid  upon  him  ?  That  also  1  do 
not  know.  A  wise  man  has  told  us,  as  if  it  were  an  axiom,  that  the  im- 
putation or  the  non-imputation  of  sin  is  an  impossibility.  Be  it  so: 
we  have  become  familiar  with  such  things  since  we  have  beheld  the 
cross  Things  which  men  call  absurdities  have  become  foundation 
truths  to  us.  The  doctrine  of  the  cross  is  to  them  that  perish  toolish- 
ness.  We  do  know  that  in  our  Lord  was  no  sin,  and  yet  he  his  own  selt 
bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree.  We  do  not  know  how  the 
innocent  Son  of  God  could  be  permitted  to  suffer  for  sins  that  were  not 
his  own  ;  it  amazes  us  that  justice  should  permit  one  so  perfectly  holy 
to  be  forsaken  of  his  God,  and  to  cry  out,  -  Eloi,  Eloi,  lama  sabach. 
thani  ?"  But  it  was  so  ;  and  it  was  so  by  the  decree  of  the  highest 
justice;  and  we  rejoice  therein.  As  it  was  so,  that  the  sun  was 
eclipsed  when  it  was  impossible  that  he  should  be  eclipsed,  so  has  Jesus 
performed  on  our  behalf,  in  the  agonies  of  his  death,  things  which  m  ^ 
the  ordinary  judgment  of  men,  must  be  set  down  as  utterly  impossible. 
Our  faith  is  at  home  in  wonder-land,  where  the  Lord  s  thoughts  are 
seen  to  be  as  high  above  our  thoughts  as  the  heavens  are  above  the  earth. 


THE  THREE  HOURS*  DARKNESS.  563 

Concerning^  this  miracle,  I  have  also  further  to  remark  that  Ms 
darkening  of  the  sun  surpassed  all  ordinary  and  natural  eclipses.  It 
lasted  longer  than  an  ordinary  eclipse,  and  it  came  in  a  different  manner. 
According  to  Luke,  the  darkness  all  over  the  land  came  first,  and  the 
sun  was  darkened  afterwards :  the  darkness  did  not  begin  with  tlie  sun, 
but  mastered  the  sun.  It  was  unique  and  supernatural.  Now,  among 
all  griefs  no  grief  is  comparable  to  the  grief  of  Jesus  :  of  all  woes  none 
can" parallel  the  woes  of  our  great  Substitute.  As  strongest  light  casts 
deepest  shade,  so  has  the  surprising  love  of  Jesus  cost  him  a  death 
such  as  falls  not  to  the  common  lot  of  men.  Others  die,  but  this  man 
is  "  obedient  unto  death."  Others  drink  the  fatal  draught,  yet  reck  not 
of  its  wormwood  and  gall  ;  but  he  "  tasted  death."  "  He  poured  out 
his  soul  unto  death."  Every  part  of  his  being  was  darkened  with  that 
extraordinary  death-shade  ;  and  the  natural  darkness  outside  of  him  did 
but  shroud  a  special  death  which  was  entirely  by  itself 

And  now,  when  I  come  to  think  of  it,  this  darkness  a^ppears  to  have 
teen  most  natural  and  fitting.  If  we  had  to  write  out  the  story  of  our 
Lord's  death  we  could  not  omit  the  darkness  without  neglecting  a  most 
important  item.  The  darkness  seems  a  part  of  the  natural  furniture  of 
that  great  transaction.  Read  the  story  through  and  you  are  not  at  all 
startled  with  the  darkness ;  after  once  familiarizing  your  mind  with  the 
thought  that  this  is  the  Son  of  Grod,  and  that  he  stretches  his  hands  to 
the  cruel  death  of  the  cross,  you  do  not  wonder  at  the  rending  of  the 
veil  of  the  temple ;  you  are  not  astonished  at  the  earthquake  or  at 
the  rising  of  certain  of  the  dead.  These  are  proper  attendants  of  our 
Lord's  passion  ;  and  so  is  the  darkness.  It  drops  into  its  place,  ip 
seems  as  if  it  could  not  have  been  otherwise. 

"  That  sacrifice ! — the  death  of  him — 
The  high  and  ever  Holy  One  !       * 
Well  may  the  conscious  heaven  grow  dim, 
And  blacken  the  beholding  sun." 

For  a  moment  think  again.  Has  not  it  appeared  as  if  the  death 
which  that  darkness  shrouded  was  also  a  natural  part  of  the  great 
whole  ?  We  have  grown  at  last  to  feel  as  if  the  death  of  the  Christ  of 
God  were  an  integral  part  of  human  history.  You  cannot  take  it  out  of 
man's  chronicle  ;  can  you  ?  Introduce  the  Fall,  and  see  Paradise 
Lost,  and  you  cannot  make  the  poem  complete  till  you  have  intro- 
duced that  greater  Man  who  did  redeem  us,  and  by  his  death  gave 
us  our  Paradise  Regained.  It  is  a  singular  characteristic  of  all  true 
miracles,  that  though  your  wonder  never  ceases  they  never  appear 
to  be  unnatural:  they  are  marvellous,  but  never  monstrous.  The 
miracles  of  Christ  dovetail  into  the  general  run  of  human  history: 
we  cannot  see  how  the  Lord  could  be  on  earth  and  Lazarus  not 
be  raised  from  the  dead  when  the  grief  of  Martha  and  Mary  had  told 
its  tale.  We  cannot  see  how  the  disciples  could  have  been  tempest- 
tossed  on  the  Lake  of  Galilee  and  the  Christ  not  walk  on  the  water  to 
deliver  them.  Wonders  of  power  are  expected  parts  of  the  narrative 
where  Jesus  is.  Everything  fits  into  its  place  with  surrounding  facts. 
A  Romish  miracle  is  always  monstrous  and  devoid  of  harmony  with  all 
beside  it.     What  if  St.  Winifred's  head  did  come  up  from  the  well  and 


-g.  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

speak  from  the  coping  to  the  astonished  peasant  who  was  about  to  draw 
water  !  I  do  not  care  whether  it  did  or  did  not  ;  it  does  not  alter  his- 
tory a  bit,  nor  even  colour  it ;  it  is  tagged  on  to  the  record,  and  is  no 
part  of  it.  But  the  miracles  of  Jesus,  this  of  the  darkness  among  them, 
are  essential  to  human  history  ;  and  especially  is  this  so  in  the  case  of 
his  death  and  this  great  darkness  which  shrouded  it.  All  things  in 
human  story  converge  to  the  cross,  which  seems  not  to  be  an  after- 
thought nor  an  expedient,  but  the  fit  and  foreordained  channel  through 
which  love  should  run  to  guilty  men. 

I  cannot  say  more  from  want  of  voice,  though  I  had  many  more 
things  to  say.  Sit  down,  and  let  the  thick  darkness  cover  you  till  you 
cannot  even  see  the  cross,  and  only  know  that  out  of  reach  of  mortal 
eye  your  Lord  wrought  out  the  redemption  of  his  people.  He  wrought 
in  silence  a  miracle  of  patience  and  of  love,  by  which  light  has  come  to 
those  who  sit  in  darkness  and  in  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death. 

II.  Secondly,  I  desire  you  to  regard  tins  darkness  as  A  veil  which 
CONCEALS.  The  Christ  is  hanging  on  yonder  tree.  I  see  the  dreadful 
cross.  I  can  see  the  thieves  on  either  side.  I  look  around,  and  I 
sorrowfully  mark  that  motley  group  of  citizens  from  Jerusalem,  and 
scribes,  and  priests,  and  strangers  from  different  countries,  mingled 
with  Roman  soldiers.  They  turn  their  eyes  on  him,  aud  for  the  most 
part  gaze  with  cruel  scorn  upon  the  Holy  One  who  is  in  the  centre.  In 
truth  it  is  an  awful  sight.  Mark  those  dogs  of  the  common  sort  and 
those  bulls  of  Bashan  of  more  notable  rank,  who  all  unite  to  dishonour 
the  meek  and  lowly  One.  I  must  confess  1  never  read  the  story  of  the 
Master's  death,  knowing  what  I  do  of  the  pain  of  crucifixion,  without 
deep  anguish  :  crucifixion  was  a  death  worthy  to  have  been  invented  by 
devils.  The  pain  which  it  involved  was  immeasurable;  I  will  not 
torture  you  by  describing  it.  I  know  dear  hearts  that  caunot  read  of 
it  without  tears,  and  without  lying  awake  for  nights  afterwards. 

But  there  was  more  than  anguish  upon  Calvary :  ridicule  and  contempt 
embittered  all.  Those  jests,  those  cruel  gibes,  those  mockeries,  those 
thrustings  out  of  the  tongue,  what  shall  we  say  of  these  ?  At  times  I 
have  felt  some  little  sympathy  with  the  French  Prince  who  cried,  "  If  I 
had  been  there  with  my  guards,  I  would  soon  have  swept  those  wretches 
away."  It  was  too  terrible  a  sight :  the  pain  of  the  victim  was  grievous 
enough,  but  the  abominable  wickedness  of  the  mockers  who  could  bear  ? 
Let  us  thank  God  that  in  the  middle  of  the  crime  there  came  down  a 
darkness  which  rendered  it  impossible  for  them  to  go  further  with  it 
Jesus  must  die ;  for  his  pains  there  must  be  no  alleviation,  and  from  death 
there  must  be  for  him  no  deliverance ;  but  the  scoffers  must  be  silenced. 
Most  effectually  their  mouths  were  closed  by  the  dense  darkness  which 
shut  them  in. 

What  I  see  in  that  veil  is,  first  of  all,  that  it  was  a  concealment  for 
those  guilty  enemies.  Did  you  ever  think  of  that  ?  It  is  as  if  God 
himself  said,  "  I  cannot  bear  it.  I  will  not  see  this  infamy  I  Descend, 
0  veill"     Down  fell  the  heavy  shades. 

"  I  asked  the  heavens,  '  What  foe  to  God  hath  done 
This  unexampled  deed  ?'     The  heavens  exclaiaa, 
♦  'Twas  man ;  and  we  in  horror  snatched  the  sun 
From  such  a  spectacle  of  guilt  and  shame.' " 


THE  THREE  HOURS'  DARKNESS.  565 

Thank  God,  the  cross  is  a  hiding-place.  It  furnishes  for  guilty  men  a 
shelter  from  the  all-seeing  eye,  so  that  justice  need  not  see  and  strike. 
When  God  lifts  up  his  Son,  and  makes  him  visible,  he  hides  the  sin  of 
men.  He  says  that  "  the  times  of  their  ignorance  he  winks  at."  Even 
the  greatness  of  their  sin  he  casts  behind  his  back,  so  that  he  need  not 
see  i\  but  mf^y  indulge  his  long-suffering,  and  permit  his  pity  to  endure 
their  provocations.  It  must  have  grieved  the  heart  of  the  eternal  God 
to  see  such  wanton  cruelty  of  men  towards  him  who  went  about  doing 
good,  and  healing  all  manner  of  diseases.  It  was  horrible  to  see  the 
teachers  of  the  people  rejecting  him  with  scorn,  the  seed  of  Israel,  who 
ought  to  have  accepted  him  as  their  Messiah,  casting  him  out  as  a  thing 
despised  and  abhorred.  I  therefore  feel  gratitude  to  God  for  bidding 
that  darkness  cover  all  the  land,  and  end  that  shameful  scene.  I  would 
say  to  any  guilty  ones  here  :  Thank  God  that  the  Lord  Jesus  has  made 
it  possible  f<r  your  sins  to  be  hidden  more  completely  than  by  thick 
darkness.  Thank  God  that  in  Christ  he  does  not  see  jou  with  that 
stern  eye  of  justice  which  would  involve  yotir  destruction.  Had  not 
Jesus  interposed,  whose  death  you  have  despised,  you  had  wrought  out 
in  your  own  death  the  result  of  your  own  sin  long  ngo ;  but  for  your 
Lord's  sake  you  are  allowed  to  live  as  if  God  did  not  see  you.  This 
long-suffering  is  meant  to  bring  you  to  repentance.    Will  you  not  come  ? 

But,  further,  that  darkness  was  a  sacred  concealment  for  the  blessed 
Perso7i  of  our  divine  Lord.  So  to  speak,  the  angels  found  for  their  King 
a  pavilion  of  thick  clouds,  in  the  which  his  Majesty  might  be  sheltered 
in  its  hour  of  misery.  It  was  too  much  for  wicked  eyes  to  gaze  so 
rudely  on  that  immaculate  Peison.  Had  not  his  enemies  stripped  him 
naked,  and  cast  lots  upon  his  vesture  ?  Therefore  it  was  meet  that 
the  holy  manhood  should  at  length  find  suitable  concealment.  It  was 
not  fit  that  brutal  eyes  should  see  the  lines  made  upon  that  blessed  form 
by  the  graving  tool  of  sorrow.  It  was  not  meet  that  revellers  should 
see  the  contortions  of  that  sacred  frame,  indwelt  with  Deity,  while  he 
was  being  broken  beneath  the  iron  rod  of  divine  wrath  on  our  behalf. 
It  was  meet  that  God  should  cover  him,  so  that  none  should  see  all  he  did 
and  all  he  bare  when  he  was  made  sin  for  us.  I  bless  God  devoutly  for 
thus  hiding  my  Lord  away  :  thus  was  he  screened  from  eyes  which  were 
not  fit  to  see  the  Sun  much  less  to  look  upon  the  Sun  of  Righteousness. 

This  darkness  also  warns  us,  even  us  who  are  most  reverent.  This 
darkness  tells  us  all  that  the  Passion  is  a  great  mystery,  into  which  we 
cannot  pry,  I  try  to  explain  it  as  substitution,  and  I  feel  that  where 
the  language  of  Scripture  is  ex[)licit,  1  may  and  must  be  explicit  too. 
But  yet  I  feel  that  the  idea  of  substitution  does  not  cover  the  whole  of 
the  matter,  and  that  no  human  conception  can  completely  grasp  the 
whole  of  the  dread  mystery.  It  was  wrought  in  darkness,  because  the 
full,  far-reaching  meaning  and  result  cannot  be  beheld  of  finite  mind. 
Tell  me  the  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus  was  a  grand  example  of  self- 
sacrifice — I  can  see  that  and  much  more.  Tell  me  it  was  a  wondrous 
obedience  to  the  will  of  God — I  can  see  that  aird  much  more.  Tell  me 
it  was  the  bearing  of  what  ought  to  have  been  borne  by  myriads  of 
sinners  of  the  human  race,  as  the  chastisement  of  their  sin — I  can  see 
that,  and  found  my  best  hope  upon  it.  But  do  not  tell  me  that  this  is 
all  that  is  in  the  cro^ss.     No,  great  as  this  would  be,  there  is  much  mora 


^gg  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

in  our  Redeemer's  death.  God  only  knows  the  love  of  God  :  Christ 
only  knows  all  that  he  a«complished  when  he  bowed  his  head  and  gave 
up  the  ghost.  There  are  common  mysteries  of  nature  into  which 
it  were  irreverence  to  pry ;  but  this  is  a  divine  mystery,  before  which 
we  put  our  shoes  from  off  our  feet,  for  the  place  called  Oalvary  is  holy 
ground.  God  veiled  the  cross  in  darkness,  and  in  darkness  much  of 
its  deeper  meaning  lies  ;  not  because  God  would  not  reveal  it,  but 
because  we  have  not  capacity  enough  to  discern  it  all.  God  was  mani- 
fest in  the  flesh,  and  in  that  human  flesh  he  put  away  sin  by  his  own 
sacrifice  :  this  we  all  know ;  but  "  without  controversy  great  is  the 
mystery  of  godliness." 

Once  again,  this  veil  of  darkness  also  pictures  to  me  the  way  in 
which  the poivers  of  darkness  will  always  endeavour  to  conceal  the  cross 
of  Christ.  We  fight  with  darkness  when  we  try  to  preach  the  cross. 
**  This  is  your  hour,  and  the  power  of  darkness,"  said  Christ ;  and  I 
doubt  not  that  the  infernal  hosts  made  in  that  hour  a  fierce  ass  lult  upon 
the  spirit  of  our  Lord.  Thus  much  also  we  know,  that  if  the  prince  of 
darkness  be  anywhere  in  force,  it  is  sure  to  be  where  Christ  is  lifted  up. 
To  becloud  the  cross  is  the  grand  object  of  the  enemy  of  souls.  Did 
you  ever  notice  it?  These  fellows  who  hate  the  gospel  will  let  every 
other  doctrine  pass  muster;  but  if  the  atonement  be  preached,  and  the 
truths  which  grow  out  of  it,  straightway  they  are  aroused.  Nothing 
provokes  the  devil  like  the  cross.  Modern  theology  has  for  its  mam 
object  the  obscuration  of  the  doctrine  of  atonement.  These  modern 
cuttle-fishes  make  the  water  of  life  black  with  tneir  ink.  They  make 
out  sin  to  be  a  trifle,  and  the  punishment  of  it  to  be  a  temporary  busi- 
ness; and  thus  they  degrade  the  remedy  by  underrating  the  disease. 
We  are  not  ignorant  of  their  devices.  Expect,  my  brethren,  that  the 
clouds  of  darkness  will  gather  as  to  a  centre  around  the  cross,  that  they 
may  hide  it  from  the  sinner's  view.  But  expect  this  also,  that  there 
darkness  shall  meet  its  end.  Light  springeth  out  of  that  darkness— 
the  light  eternal  of  the  undying  Son  of  God,  who  having  risen  from 
the  dead,  liveth  for  ever  to  scatter  the  darkness  of  evil. 

IIL    Now  we  pass  on  to  speak  of  this  darkness  as  A  symbol  which 

INSTRUCTS.  ,  .  ,  , 

The  veil  faUs  down  and  conceals  ;  but  at  the  same  time,  as  an  emblem, 
it  reveals.  It  seems  to  say,  "  Attempt  not  to  search  within,  but  learn 
from  the  veil  itself:  it  hath  cherub  work  upon  it."  This  darkness 
teaches  us  what  Jesus  suffered  :  it  aids  us  to  guess  at  the  griefs  which 
we  may  not  actually  see.  .  ^  ,     ■, .  i   r  n        ^i.    - 

The  darkness  is  the  symbol  of  the  wrath  of  God  which  fell  on  those 
who  slew  his  only  begotten  Son.  God  was  angry,  and  his  frown  re- 
moved the  light  of  day.  Well  might  he  be  angry,  when  sin  was  mur- 
dering his  only  Son  ;  when  the  Jewish  husbandmen  were  saying,  ihis 
is  the  heir ;  come,  let  us  kill  him,  and  let  us  seize  on  his  inheritance. 
This  is  God's  wrath  towards  all  mankind,  for  practically  all  men  con- 
curred in  the  death  of  Jesus.  That  wrath  has  brought  men  into  dark- 
ness; they  are  ignorant,  blinded,  bewildeied.  They  have  come  to  love 
darkness  lather  than  light  because  their  deeds  are  evil.  In  that  dark- 
ness  they  do  not  repent,  but  go  on  to  reject  the  Christ  of  God.  into 
this  darkness  God  cannot  look  upon  them  in  complacency ;  but  lie  viewa 


THE   THIiEE   HOURS'   DARKNESS.  667 

them  as  children  of  darkness,  and  heirs  of  wrath,  for  whom  is  reserved 
the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever. 

The  symbol  also  tells  us  luhat  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ondurpd.     ihe 
darkness  outside  of  him  was  the  figure  of  the  darkness  that  was  within 
him.     In  Gethsemane  a  thick  darkness  fell  upon  our  Lord's  spu-it.     He 
was  "exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto  death."     His  joy  was  communion 
with  God— that  joy  was  gone,  and  he  was  in   the  dark.     His  day  was 
the  lisht  of  his  Father's  face  :  that  face  was  hidden  and  a  terrible  night 
gathered  around  him.     Brothers,  I  should  sin  against  that  veil  if  I  were 
to  pretend  that  I  could  tell  you  what  the  sorrow  was   which  oppressed 
the  Saviour's  soul :  only  so  far  can  I  speak  as  it  has  been  given  me  to 
have  fellowship  with  him  in  his  sufferings.     Have  you  ever  felt  a  deep 
and  overwhelming  horror  of  sin— your  own  sin  and  the  sins  of  others  ? 
Have  you  ever  seen  sin  in  the  light  of  God's  love  ?     Has  it  ever  darkly 
hovered  over  your  sensitive  conscience  ?      Has  an  unknown  sense  of 
wrath  crept  over  you  like  midnight  gloom  ;    and  has  it  been  about 
jou,  around  you,  above  you,  and  within  yon?     Have  v on  felt  shut 
up   in   your   feebleness,   and   yet    shut   out   from   God  ?  _    Have   you 
looked   around   and    found    no    help,   no   comfort    even    in    God— no 
hope,  no  peace  ?      In  all  this  you  have  sipped   a  little  of  that  salt 
sea  into  which  our  Lord  was  cast.     If,  like  Abraham,  you  have  felt 
a  horror  of  great   darkness  creep   over   you,   then   have   you   had   a 
taste  of  what  your  divine  Lord  snftei-ed   when  it  pleased  the  Father 
to  bruise  him  and  to  put  hira  to  grief.     This  it  was  that  made  him 
sweat  great  drops  of  blood  falling  to  the  ground ;    and  this  it  was 
which  on  the  cross  made  him  utter  that  appalling  cry,  "My  God,  my 
God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  "  ?     It  was  not  the  crown  of  thorns,  or 
the  scourge,  or  the  cross  which  made  him  cry,  but  the  darkness,  the 
awful  darkness  of  deseriion  which  oppressed  his  mind  and  made  him 
feel  like  one  distraught.     All  that  could  comfort  him  was  withdrawn, 
and  all  that  could  distress  him  was  piled  upon  him.     "The  spirit  of  a 
man  will  sustain  his  infirmity  ;  but  a  wounded  spirit  who  can  bear'  ? 
Our  Saviour's  spirit  was  wounded,  and  he  cried,  "My  heart  is  like  wax; 
it  is  melted  in  the  midst  of  my  bowels."     Of  all  natural  and  spiritual 
€omfort  he  was  bereft,  and  his  distress  was  utter  and  entire.    The  dark- 
ness of  Calvary  did  not,  like  an  ordinary  night,  reveal  the  stars  ;  but  it 
■darkened  everv  lamp  of  heaven.     His  strong  crying  and  tears  denoted 
the  deep  sorrow  of  his  soul.     He  bore  all  it  was  possible  for  his  capa- 
cious mind  to  bear,  though  enlarged  and  invigorated  by  union  with  the 
Godhead.     He  bore  the  equivalent  of  hell ;  nay,  not  that  only,  but  he 
bore  that  which  stood  instead  of  ten  thousand  hells  so  far  as  the  vindi- 
cation of  the  law  is  concerned.     Our  Lord  rendered  in  his  death  agony 
a  homage  to  justice  far  greater  than  if  a  world  had  been  doomed  to 
destruction.     When  I  have  said  that,  what  more  can  I  say  ?     Well  may 
I  tell  you  that  this  unutterable  darkness,  this  hiding  of  the  Divine  face, 
expresses  more  of  the  woes  of  Jesus  than  words  can  ever  tell. 

Again,  I  think  I  see  in  that  darkness,  also  what  it  was  that  Jesus  was 
haitUng  with;  for  we  must  never  forget  that  the  cross  was  a  battle-field 
to  him,  wherein  he  triumphed  gloriously.  He  was  fighting  then  with 
darkness ;  with  the  powers  of  darkness  of  which  Satan  is  the  head ;  with 
the  darkness  of  human  ignorance,  depravity,  and  falsehood.     The  battle 


568 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


thus  apparent  at  Grolgotha  has  been  raging  ever  since.  Then  was  the 
conflict  at  its  height  ;  for  the  chiefs  of  the  two  great  armies  met  in 
personal  conflict.  The  present  battle  in  which  you  and  I  take  our  little 
share  is  as  nothing  compared  with  that  wherein  all  the  powers  of  dark- 
ness in  their  dense  battalions  hurled  themselves  against  the  Almighty 
Son  of  God.  He  bore  their  onset,  endured  the  tremendous  shock  of 
their  assault,  and  in  the  end,  with  shout  of  victory,  he  led  captivity 
captive.  He  by  his  power  and  Godhead  turned  midnight  into  dny 
again,  and  brought  back  to  this  world  a  reign  of  light  which,  blessed  be 
God,  shall  never  come  to  a  close.  Come  to  battle  again,  ye  hosts  of 
darkness,  if  ye  dare !  The  cross  has  defeated  you:  the  cross  shall  defeat 
you.  Hallelujah!  The  cross  is  the  ensign  of  victory  ;  its  light  is  the 
death  of  darkness.  The  cross  is  the  light-house  which  guides  poor 
weather-beaten  humanity  into  the  harbour  of  peace  :  this  is  the  lamp 
which  shines  over  the  door  of  the  great  Father's  house  to  lead  his 
prodigals  home. 

Let  us  not  be  afraid  of  all  the  darkness  which  besets  us  on  our  way 
home,  since  Jesus  is  the  light  which  conquers  it  all. 

The  darkness  never  came  to  an  end  till  the  Lord  Jesus  broke  the 
silence.  All  had  been  still,  and  the  darkness  had  grown  terrible.  At 
last  he  spoke,  and  his  voice  uttered  a  psalm.  It  was  the  twenty-second 
Psalm.  " My  God,"  saith  he,  *'  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?" 
Each  repeated  "  Eloi "  flashed  morning  upon  the  scene.  By  the  time 
he  had  uttered  the  cry  *'  Why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ? "  men  had  begun 
to  see  again,  and  some  even  ventured  to  misinterpret  his  words,  more  in 
terror  than  in  ignorance.  They  said,  **  He  calleth  Elias"  :  they  may 
have  meant  a  mock,  but  I  think  not.  At  any  rate  there  was  no  heart 
in  what  they  said,  nor  in  the  reply  of  their  fellows.  Yet  the  light  had 
come  by  which  they  could  see  to  dip  the  sponge  in  vinegar.  Brethren, 
no  light  will  ever  come  to  dark  hearts  unless  Jesus  shall  speak ;  and  the 
light  will  not  be  clear  until  we  hear  the  voice  oi  his  sorrows  on  our 
behalf,  as  he  cries,  "  Why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  His  voice  of  grief 
must  be  the  end  of  our  griefs:  his  cry  out  of  the  darkness  must  ciieer 
iway  our  gloom,  and  bring  the  heavenly  morning  to  our  minds. 

You  see  how  much  there  is  in  my  text.  It  is  a  joy  to  speak  on  such 
^  theme  when  one  is  in  good  health,  and  full  of  vigour ;  then  are  we  as 
Jfaphtali,  a  hind  let  loose ;  then  give  we  goodly  words :  but  this  day  I  am 
n  pain  as  to  my  body,  and  my  mind  seems  frozen.  Nevertheless,  the 
Lord  can  bless  my  feeble  words,  and  make  you  see  that  in  this  darkness 
there  is  meaning  deep  and  wide  which  none  of  us  should  neglect.  If 
God  shall  help  your  meditations  this  darkness  will  be  light  about  you. 

IV.  I  come  to  my  fourth  point,  and  my  closing  words  will  deal  with 
THE  SYMPATHY  WHICH  PROPHESIES.  Do  you  See  the  sympathy  of 
nature  with  her  Lord — the  sympathy  of  the  sun  in  the  heavens  with 
the  Sun  of  Righteousness  ?  It  was  not  possible  for  him  by  whom  all 
things  were  made  to  be  in  darkness,  and  for  nature  to  remain  in  the  light. 

The  first  sympathetic  fact  I  see  is  this :  all  lights  are  dim  token  Christ 
shines  not.  All  is  dark  when  he  does  nut  shine.  In  the  church,  if  Jesus 
^e  not  there,  what  is  there?  The  sun  itself  could  not  yield  us  light  if 
Jesus  were  withdrawn.  The  seven  golden  lamps  are  ready  to  go  out 
unless  he  walks  among  them,  and  trims  them  with  the  holy  oil.  Brethren, 


THE  THREE  HOURS*  DARKNESS.  569 

you  soon  grow  heavy,  and  your  spirits  faint,  and  your  hands  are  weary, 
if  the  Christ  be  not  with  you.  If  Jesus  Christ  be  not  fully  preached, 
if  he  be  not  with  us  by  his  Spirit,  then  everything  is  in  darkness. 
Obscure  the  cross,  and  you  have  obscured  all  spiritual  teaching.  You 
cannot  say,  "  We  will  be  perspicuous  in  every  other  point,  and  clear 
upon  every  other  doctrine,  but  we  will  shun  the  atonement,  since  so 
many  cavil  at  it.  No,  sirs,  if  that  candle  be  put  under  a  bushel  the 
whole  house  is  dark.  All  theology  sympathizes  with  the  cross,  and  is 
coloured  and  tinctured  by  it.  Your  pious  service,  your  books,  your 
public  worship,  will  all  be  in  sympathy  with  the  cross  one  way  or  another. 
If  the  cross  is  in  the  dark,  so  will  all  your  work  be. 
"  What  think  ye  of  Christ?  is  the  test 

To  trj  both  your  w^rk  and  your  scheme ; 
You  cannot  be  right  in  the  rest, 

Unless  you  think  rightly  of  him." 

Conjure  up  your  doubts  ;  fabricate  your  philosophies  ;  and  compose  your 
theories  :  there  will  be  no  light  in  them  if  the  cross  be  left  out.  Vain 
are  the  sparks  of  your  own  making,  you  shall  lie  down  in  sorrow.  All 
our  work  and  travail  shall  end  in  vanity  unless  the  work  and  travail  of 
Christ_  be  our  first  and  sole  hope.  If  you  are  dark  upon  that  poin^,  which 
alone  is  light,  how  great  is  your  darkness ! 

Next,  see  the  dependence  of  all  creation  upon  Christ,  as  evidenced  by 
its  darkness  when  he  withdraws  It  was  not  meet  that  he  who  made  all 
worlds  should  die,  and  yet  all  worlds  should  go  on  jnst  as  they  had  done. 
If  he  suffers  eclipse,  they  must  suffer  eclipse  too  ;  if  the  Sun  of  Righteous- 
ness be  made  to  set  in  blood,  the  natural  sun  must  keep  touch  with  him. 
I  believe,  my  friends,  that  there  is  a  much  more  wonderful  sympathy 
between  Christ  and  the  world  of  nature  than  any  of  us  have  ever  dreamed. 
The  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  together  until 
now,  because  Christ  in  the  Church  is  in  his  travail  pangs.  Christ  in  his 
mystical  body  is  in  travail,  and  so  the  whole  creation  must  wait  for  the 
manifestation  of  the  Son  of  God.  We  are  waiting  for  the  coming  of  the 
Lord  tVom  heaven,  and  there  is  no  hill  or  dale,  there  is  no  mountain  or 
sea,  but  what  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  waiting  church.  AVonder 
not  that  there  should  be  earthquakes  in  divers  places,  biasing  volcanoes, 
terrible  tempests,  and  sore  spreadings  of  deadly  disease.  Marvel  not 
when  you  hear  of  dire  portents,  and  things  that  make  one's  heart  to 
quail,  for  such  things  must  be  till  the  end  shall  come.  Until  the  great 
Shepherd  shall  make  his  crook  into  a  sceptre,  and  shall  begin  his  un- 
snffering  reign,  this  poor  earth  must  bleed  at  every  vein.  There  must 
be  darkness  till  these  days  of  delay  are  ended.  You  that  expect  placid 
history  till  Chiist  shall  come  expect  you  know  not  what.  You  that 
think  that  generous  politics  shall  create  order  and  content,  and  that  the 
extension  of  free-trade  shall  breathe  universal  peace  over  the  nations, 
look  for  the  living  among  the  dead.  Till  the  Lord  shall  come,  the  word 
has  gone  out,  *'  Overturn,  overturn,  overturn,"  and  overturned  all  things 
must  be,  not  only  in  other  kingdoms,  but  in  this  also,  till  Jesus  comes. 
All  that  can  be  shaken  shall  be  shaken,  and  only  his  immovable  throne 
and  truth  shall  abide.  Now  is  the  time  of  the  Lord's  battle  with  dark- 
ness, and  we  may  not  hope  as  yet  for  unbroken  light. 

Dear  friends,  the  sin  which  darkened  Christ  and  made  him  die  in  the 


570 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACfiE  PULPIT. 


dark  darkens  the  whole  world.  The  sin  tliat  darkened  Christ  and  made 
him  hang  upon  the  cross  in  the  dark  is  darkening  you  who  do  not  be- 
lieve in  him,  and  you  will  live  in  the  dark  and  die  in  the  dark  unless 
you  get  to  him  who  only  is  the  light  of  the  world,  and  can  give  light  to 
you.  There  is  no  \Uht  for  any  man  except  in  Christ  ;  and  till  you 
believe  in  him  thick  darkness  shall  blind  you,  and  you  shall  stumble  ia 
it  and  perish.     That  is  the  lesson  I  would  have  you  learn. 

Another  practical  lesson  is  this  :  If  we  are  in  the  dark  at  this  time, 
if  our  spiiits  are  sunk  in  gloom,  let  us  nob  despair,  for  the  Lord  Christ 
himself  was  there.  If  I  have  fallen  into  misery  on  account  of  sin,  let 
me  not  give  up  all  hope,  for  the  Father's  Well-beloved  passed  through 
denser  darkness  than  mine.  0  believing  soul,  if  thou  art  in  the  dark 
thou  art  near  the  King's  cellars,  and  there  are  wines  on  the  lees  well  re- 
fined lying  there.  Thou  hast  gotten  into  the  pavilion  of  the  Lord,  and 
now  mayelt  thou  speak  with  him.  You  will  not  find  Christ  in  the 
gaudy  tents  of  pride,  nor  in  the  foul  haunts  of  wickedness  :  you  will 
not  find  him  where  the  viol,  and  the  dance,  and  the  flowing,'  bowl  inflame 
the  lusts  of  men,  but  in  the  house  of  mourning  you  will  meet  the  Man 
of  Sorrows.  He  is  not  where  Herodias  dances,  nor  where  Bernice  dis- 
plays her  charms ;  but  he  is  where  the  woman  of  a  sorrowful  spirit 
moves  her  lips  in  prayer.  He  is  never  absent  where  penitence  sits  in 
darkness  and  bewails  her  faults. 

"  Yes,  Lord,  in  hours  of  gloom, 

When  shadows  fill  my  room, 

When  pain  breathes  forth  its  groans, 

And  grief  its  sighs  and  moans, 

Then  thou  art  near." 

If  you  are  under  a  cloud,  feel  after  your  Lord,  if  haply  you  may  find  him. 
Stand  still  in  your  black  sorrow,  and  say,  "  0  Lord,  the  preacher 
tells  me  that  thy  cross  once  stood  in  such  darkness  as  this — 0  Jesus  hear 
me  !  "  He  will  respond  to  you  :  the  Lord  will  look  out  of  the  pillar  of 
cloud,  and  shed  a  light  upon  you.  ♦'  I  know  their  sorrows,"  saith  he. 
He  is  no  stranger  to  heart-break.  Christ  also  once  suffered  for  sm.  Trust 
him,  and  he  will  cause  his  light  to  shine  upon  you.  Lean  upon  him, 
and  he  will  bring  you  up  out  of  the  gloomy  wilderness  into  the  land  of 
rest.     God  help  you  to  do  so ! 

Last  Monday  I  was  cheered  beyond  all  I  can  tell  you  by  a  letter 
from  a  brother  who  had  been  restored  to  life,  light,  and  liberty  by 
the  discourse  of  last  Sabbath  morning.  I  know  no  greater  joy  than  to 
be  useful  to  your  souls.  For  this  reason,  I  have  tried  to  preach  this 
morning,  though  I  am  quite  unfit  for  it  physically.  Oh,  I  do  pray  I 
may  hear  more  news  from  saved  ones  !  Oh  that  some  spirit  that  has 
wandered  out  into  the  dark  moorland  may  spy  the  candle  in  my 
window,  and  find  its  wav  home  !  If  you  have  found  my  Lord,  I  charge 
you  never  let  him  go,  but  cleave  to  him  till  the  day  break,  and  the 
shadows  flee  away.     God  help  you  so  to  do  for  Jesus'  sake  !    Amen. 

Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Matthew  xxvii.  26—54, 

Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 30G,  279,  280. 


"LAMA  SABACHTHANI?" 


%   ^ttm\\ 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  March  2nd,  1890,  by 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"And  about  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Eli,  Eli,  lama 
sabachthani?  that  is  to  say,  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  loisaken  me  r-  — 
Matthew  xxvii.  46. 

"  There  was  darkness  over  all  the  land  unto  the  ninth  hour  "  :  this  cry 
came  out  of  that  darkness.  Expect  not  to  see  through  its  every  word, 
as  though  it  came  from  on  high  as  a  beam  from  the  unclouded  Sun 
of  Eighteousness.  There  is  light  in  it,  bright,  flashing  hght ;  but 
there  is  a  centre  of  impenetrable  gloom,  where  the  soul  is  ready  to 
faint  because  of  the  terrible  darkness. 

Our  Lord  was  then  in  the  darkest  part  of  his  way.  He  had  trodden 
the  winepress  now  for  hours,  and  the  work  was  almost  finished. 
He  had  reached  the  culminating  point  of  his  anguish.  This  is  his 
dolorous  lament  from  the  lowest  pit  of  misery— "  My  God,  my  God, 
why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  I  do  not  think  that  the  records  of  tmie, 
or  even  of  eternity,  contain  a  sentence  more  full  of  anguish.  Here  the 
wormwood  and  the  gall,  and  aU  the  other  bitternesses,  are  outdone. 
Here  you  may  look  as  into  a  vast  abyss ;  and  though  you  strain  your 
eyes,  and  gaze  till  sight  fails  you,  yet  you  perceive  no  bottom ;  it  is 
measureless,  unfathomable,  inconceivable.  This  anguish  of  thefeaviour 
on  your  behalf  and  mine  is  no  more  to  be  measured  and  weighed  than 
the  sin  which  needed  it,  or  the  love  which  endured  it.  We  will  adore 
where  we  cannot  comprehend.  «  r.    ,  ^ 

I  have  chosen  this  subject  that  it  may  help  the  children  of  God  to 
understand  a  little  of  their  infinite  obligations  to  their  redeeming 
Lord  You  shall  measure  the  height  of  his  love,  if  it  be  ever  mea- 
sured, by  the  depth  of  his  grief,  if  that  can  ever  be  known.  See  with 
what  a  price  he  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law !  As 
you  see  this,  say  to  yourselves :  What  manner  of  people  ought  we 
to  be '  What  measure  of  love  ought  we  to  return  to  one  who  bore 
the  utmost  penalty,  that  we  might  be  deHvered  from  the  wrath  to 
come  ?  I  do  not  profess  that  I  can  dive  into  this  deep  :  I  will  only 
venture  to  the  edge  of  the  precipice,  and  bid  you  look  down,  and  pray 
the  Spirit  of  God  to  concentrate  your  mind  upon  this  lamentation  of 
No.  2,133. 


572 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PTTLPIT, 


our  dying  Lord,  as  it  rises  up  through  the  thick  darkness— "My  God, 
my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?  " 

Our  first  subject  of  thought  will  be  the  fact ;  or,  what  he  suffered — 
God  had  forsaken  him.  Secondly,  we  will  note,  the  enquiry ;  or,  why 
he  suffered  :  this  word  **  why"  is  the  edge  of  the  text.  ''Why  hast 
thou  forsaken  me?"  Then,  thirdly,  we  will  consider  the  answer ;  or, 
what  came  of  his  suffering.  The  answer  flowed  softly  into  the  soul 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  without  the  need  of  words,  for  he  ceased  from  his 
anguish  with  the  triumphant  shout  of,  **It  is  finished."  His  work 
was  finished,  and  his  bearing  of  desertion  was  a  chief  part  of  the 
work  he  had  undertaken  for  our  sake. 

I.  By  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  let  us  first  dwell  upon  the 
FACT  ;  or,  what  our  Lord  suffered.  God  had  forsaken  him.  Grief  of 
mind  is  harder  to  bear  than  pain  of  body.  You  can  pluck  up 
courage  and  endure  the  pang  of  sickness  and  pain,  so  long  as  the 
spirit  is  hale  and  brave ;  but  if  the  soul  itself  be  touched,  and  the 
mind  becomes  diseased  with  anguish,  then  ever}'  pain  is  increased  in 
severity,  and  there  is  nothing  with  which  to  sustain  it.  Spiritual 
sorrows  are  the  worst  of  mental  miseries.  A  man  may  bear  great 
depression  of  spirit  about  worldly  matters,  if  he  feels  that  he  has  his 
God  to  go  to.  He  is  cast  down,  but  not  in  despair.  Like  David,  he 
dialogues  with  himself,  and  he  enquires,  *'  Why  art  thou  cast  down, 
0  my  soul  ?  and  why  art  thou  disquieted  in  me  ?  Hope  thou  in  God : 
for  I  shall  yet  praise  him."  But  if  the  Lord  be  once  withdrawn,  if 
the  comfortable  light  of  his  presence  be  shadowed  even  for  an  hour, 
there  is  a  torment  within  the  breast,  which  I  can  only  liken  to  the 
prelude  of  hell.  This  is  the  greatest  of  all  weights  that  can  press 
upon  the  heart.  This  made  the  Psalmist  plead,  *'  Hide  not  thy  face 
from  me ;  put  not  thy  servant  away  in  anger."  We  can  bear  a  bleeding 
body,  and  even  a  wounded  spirit ;  but  a  soul  conscious  of  desertion  by 
God  is  beyond  conception  unendurable.  When  he  holdeth  back  the 
face  of  his  throne,  and  spreadeth  his  cloud  upon  it,  who  can  endure  the 
darkness  ? 

This  voice  out  of  "the  belly  of  hell"  marks  the  lowest  depth  of 
the  Saviour's  grief.  The  desertion  ivas  real.  Though  under  some  aspects 
our  Lord  could  say,  '*  The  Father  is  with  me  "  ;  yet  was  it  solemnly 
true  that  God  did  forsake  him.  It  was  not  a  failure  of  faith  on  his 
part  which  led  him  to  imagine  what  was  not  actual  fact.  Our  faith 
fails  us,  and  then  we  think  that  God  has  forsaken  us  ;  but  our  Lord's 
faith  did  not  for  a  moment  falter,  for  he  says  twice,  "J/y  God,  wy 
God."  Oh,  the  mighty  double  grip  of  his  unhesitating  faith !  He 
seems  to  say,  "Even  if  thou  hast  forsaken  me,  I  have  not  forsaken 
thee."  Faith  triumphs,  and  there  is  no  sign  of  any  faintness  of  heart 
towards  the  living  God.  Yet,  strong  as  is  his  faith,  he  feels  that  God 
has  withdrawn  his  comfortable  fellowship,  and  he  shivers  under  the 
terrible  deprivation. 

It  was  no  fancy,  or  delirium  of  mind,  caused  by  his  weakness  of 
body,  the  heat  of  the  fever,  the  depression  of  his  spirit,  or  the  near 
approach  of  death.  He  was  clear  of  mind  even  to  this  last.  He  bore 
up  under  pain,  loss  of  blood,  scorn,  thirst,  and  desolation ;  making 
no  complaint  of  the  cross,  the  nails,  and  the  scoffing.     We  read  not  in 


"  LAMA    SABACHTHANI  ?  "  ^73 

the  Gospels  of  anything  more  than  the  natural  cry  of  weakness,  "I 
thirst."  All  the  tortures  of  his  body  he  endured  in  silence  ;  but  when 
it  came  to  being  forsaken  of  God,  then  his  great  heart  burst  out  into 
its  "  Lama  sabachthani  ?  "  His  one  moan  is  concernmg  his  God.  It 
is  not,  "  Why  has  Peter  forsaken  me  ?  Why  has  Judas  betrayed 
me  ?  "  These  were  sharp  griefs,  but  this  is  the  sharpest.  This  stroke 
has'cut  him  to  the  quick :  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 
me  ?  "     It  was  no  phantom  of  the  gloom ;  it  was  a  real  absence  which 

he  mourned.  -.  j-  n   4  + 

This  was  a  very  remarhalle  desertion.  It  is  not  the  way  o±  brod  to 
leave  either  his  sons  or  his  servants.  His  saints,  when  they  come  to 
die,  in  their  great  weakness  and  pain,  find  him  near.  They  are  made 
to  sino-  because  of  the  presence  of  God  :  "  Yea,  though  I  walk  through 
the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  I  will  fear  no  evil:  for  thou  art 
with  me."  Dying  saints  have  clear  visions  of  the  living  God.  Our 
observation  has  taught  us  that  if  the  Lord  be  away  at  other  times,  he 
is  never  absent  from  his  people  in  the  article  of  death,  or  m  the  fur- 
nace of  affliction.  Concerning  the  three  holy  children,  we  do  not  read 
that  the  Lord  was  ever  visibly  with  them  till  they  walked  the  fires  of 
Nebuchadnezzar's  furnace;  but  there  and  then  the  Lord  met  with 
them  Yes,  beloved,  it  is  God's  use  and  wont  to  keep  company  with 
his  afflicted  people;  and  yet  he  forsook  his  Son  in  the  hour  of  his 
tribulation !  How  usual  it  is  to  see  the  Lord  with  his  faithful  wit- 
nesses when  resisting  even  unto  blood!  Eead  the  Book  of  Martyrs, 
and  I  care  not  whether  you  study  the  former  or  the  later  persecutions, 
you  will  find  them  aU  lit  up  with  the  evident  presence  of  the  Lord 
with  his  witnesses.  Did  the  Lord  ever  fail  to  support  a  martyr  at  the 
stake  ?  Did  he  ever  forsake  one  of  his  testifiers  upon  the  scaffold  t 
The  testimony  of  the  church  has  always  been,  that  while  the  Lord  has 
permitted  his  saints  to  suffer  in  body  he  has  so  divinely  sustained 
their  spirits  that  they  have  been  more  than  conquerors,  and  have 
treated  their  sufferings  as  light  afflictions.  The  fire  has  not  been  a 
''bed  of  roses,"  but  it  has  been  a  chariot  of  victory.  The  sword  is 
sharp,  and  death  is  bitter ;  but  the  love  of  Christ  is  sweet,  and  to  die 
for  him  has  been  turned  into  glory.  No,  it  is  not  God  s  way  to  forsake 
his  champions,  nor  to  leave  even  the  least  of  his  children  m  the  trial 

Ts  to  our  Lord,  this  forsaking  was  singular.  Did  his  father  ever 
leave  him  before  ?  WiU  you  read  the  four  Evangelists  through  and 
find  any  previous  instance  in  which  he  complains  of  his  Father  for 
having  forsaken  him  ?  No.  He  said,  - 1  know  that  thou  hearest  me 
always."  He  lived  in  constant  touch  with  God.  His  fellowship  with 
the  Father  was  always  near  and  dear  and  clear  ;  but  now,  for  the  first 
time  he  cries,  "  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  y  "  It  was  very  remark- 
aWe  It  was  a  riddle  only  to  be  solved  by  the  fact  that  he  loved  us 
and  gave  himself  for  us,  and  in  the  execution  of  his  loving  purpose 
came  even  unto  this  sorrow,  of  mourning  the  absence  of  his  God. 

This  forsaking  was  very  terrible.  Who  can  fuUy  tell  what  it  is  to  be 
forsaken  of  God  ?  We  can  only  form  a  guess  by  what  we  have  our- 
•elves  felt  under  temporary  and  partial  desertion.  God  has  never  lett 
us,  altogether ;  for  he  has  expressly  said,  "  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor 


574  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

forsake  thee  "  ;  yet  we  have  sometimes  felt  as  if  he  had  cast  us  off. 
We  have  cried,  *'  Oh,  that  I  knew  where  I  might  fiiK^  him!  ''  The 
clear  shillings  of  his  love  have  been  withdrawn.  Thus  we  are  able  to 
form  some  little  idea  of  how  the  Saviour  felt  when  his  God  had  for- 
saken him.  The  mind  of  Jesus  was  left  to  dwell  upon  one  dark 
subject,  and  no  cheering  theme  consoled  him.  It  was  the  hour  in 
which  he  was  made  to  stand  before  Q-od  as  consciously  the  sin-bearer, 
according  to  that  ancient  prophecy,  "He  shall  bear  their  iniquities." 
Then  was  it  true,  "  He  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us."  Peter  puts 
it,  "  He  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree." 
Sin,  sin,  sin  was  everywhere  around  and  about  Christ.  He  had  no  sin 
of  his  own ;  but  the  Lord  had  "laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all." 
He  had  no  strength  given  him  from  on  high,  no  secret  oil  and  wine 
poured  into  his  wounds;  but  he  was  made  to  appear  in  the  lone 
character  of  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the 
world ;  and  therefore  he  must  feel  the  weight  of  sin,  and  the  turning 
away  of  that  sacred  face  which  cannot  look  thereon. 

His  Father,  at  that  time,  gave  him  no  open  acknowledgment.  On 
certain  other  occasions  a  voice  had  been  heard,  saying,  "This  is  my 
beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased  " ;  but  now,  when  such  a 
testimony  seemed  most  of  all  required,  the  oracle  was  dumb.  He  was 
hung  up  as  an  accursed  thing  upon  the  cross;  for  he  was  "  made  a 
curse  for  us,  as  it  is  written.  Cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a 
tree";  and  the  Lord  his  God  did  not  own  him  before  men.  If 
it  had  pleased  the  Father,  he  might  have  sent  him  twelve  legions 
of  angels ;  but  not  an  angel  came  after  the  Christ  had  quitted 
Gethsemane.  His  despisers  might  spit  in  his  face,  but  no  swift  seraph 
came  to  avenge  the  indignity.  They  might  bind  him,  and  scourge 
him,  but  none  of  aU  the  heavenly  host  would  interpose  to  screen  his 
shoulders  from  the  lash.  They  might  fasten  him  to  the  tree  with 
nails,  and  lift  him  up,  and  scoff  at  him ;  but  no  cohort  of  ministering 
spirits  hastened  to  drive  back  the  rabble,  and  release  the  Prince  of 
life.  No,  he  appeared  to  be  forsaken,  "  smitten  of  God  and  afflicted," 
delivered  into  the  hands  of  cruel  men,  whose  wicked  hands  worked  him 
misery  without  stint.  Well  might  he  ask,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why 
hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  " 

But  this  was  not  all.  His  Father  now  dried  up  that  sacred  stream 
of  peaceful  communion  and  loving  fellowship  which  had  flowed 
hitherto  throughout  his  whole  earthly  life.  He  said  himself,  as  you 
remember,  "  Ye  shall  be  scattered,  every  man  to  his  own,  and  shall 
leave  me  alone  :  and  yet  I  am  not  alone,  because  the  Father  is  with 
me."  Here  was  his  constant  comfort :  but  all  comfort  from  this  source 
was  to  be  withdrawn.  The  divine  Spirit  did  not  minister  to  his  human 
spirit.  No  communications  with  his  Father's  love  poured  into  his  heart. 
It  was  not  possible  that  the  Judge  should  smile  upon  one  who  repre- 
sented the  prisoner  at  the  bar.  Our  Lord's  faith  did  not  fail  him,  as  I 
have  already  shown  you,  for  he  said,  "  My  God,  my  God  "  :  yet  no  sen- 
sible supports  were  given  to  his  heart,  and  no  comforts  were  poured  into 
his  mind.  One  writer  declares  that  Jesus  did  not  taste  of  divine  wrath, 
but  only  suffered  a  withdrawal  of  divine  fellowship.  What  is  the  differ- 
ence ?    Whether  God  withdraw  heat  or  create  cold  is  all  one.    He  was  not 


**  LAMA   SABACHTHANI  ?  "  575 

smiled  upon,  nor  aUowed  to  feel  that  he  was  near  to  God  ;  and  this, 
to  his  tender  spirit,  was  grief  of  the  keenest  order.  A  certain  saint 
once  said  that  in  his  sorrow  he  had  from  God  "necessaries,  but  not 
suavities  "  ;  that  which  was  meet,  but  not  that  which  was  sweet.  Our 
Lord  suffered  to  the  extreme  point  of  deprivation.  He  hnd  not  the 
light  which  makes  existence  to  be  life,  and  life  to  be  a  boon.  You 
that  know,  in  your  degree,  what  it  is  to  lose  the  conscious  pre- 
sence* and  love  of  God,  you  can  faintly  guess  what  the  sorrow  of  the 
Saviour  was,  now  that  he  felt  he  had  been  forsaken  of  his  God.  "If 
the  foundations  be  removed,  what  can  the  righteous  do  ?  "  To  our 
Lord,  the  Father's  love  was  the  foundation  of  everything  ;  and  when 
that  was  gone,  all  was  gone.  Nothing  remained,  within,  without, 
above,  when  his  own  God,  the  God  of  his  entire  confidence,  turned 
from  him.     Yes,  God  in  very  deed  forsook  our  Saviour. 

To  be  forsaken  of  God  was  much  more  a  source  of  anguish  fo  Jesur,  than 
it  would  he  to  us.  "  Oh,"  say  you,  "  how  is  that  ?  "  I  answer,  because 
he  was  perfectly  holy.  A  rupture  between  a  perfectly  holy  being  and 
the  thrice  holy  God  must  be  in  the  highest  degree  strange,  abnormal, 
perplexing,  and  painful.  If  any  man  here,  who  is  not  at  peace  with 
God,  could  only  know  his  true  condition,  he  would  swoon  with  fright. 
If  you  unf orgiven  ones  only  knew  where  you  are,  and  what  you  are  at 
this  moment  m  the  sight  of  God,  you  would  never  smile  again  till  you 
were  reconciled  to  him.  Alas !  we  are  insensible,  hardened  by  tho 
deceitfulness  of  sin,  and  therefore  we  do  not  feel  our  true  condition. 
His  perfect  holiness  made  it  to  our  Lord  a  dreadful  calamity  to  be 
forsaken  of  the  thrice  holy  God. 

I  remember,  also,  that  our  blessed  Lord  had  lived  in  unbroken 
fellowship  with  God,  and  to  be  forsaken  was  a  new  grief  to  him.  He 
had  never  known  what  the  dark  was  till  then  :  his  life  had  been  lived 
in  the  light  of  God.  Think,  dear  child  of  God,  if  you  had  always 
dwelt  in  full  communion  with  God,  your  days  would  have  been  as  the 
days  of  heaven  upon  earth ;  and  how  cold  it  would  strike  to  your 
heart  to  find  yourseK  in  the  darkness  of  desertion.  If  you  can  con- 
ceive such  a  thing  as  happening  to  a  perfect  man,  you  can  see  why  to 
our  Well-beloved  it  was  a  special  trial.  Eemember,  he  had  enjoyed 
fellowship  with  God  more  richly,  as  Mell  as  more  constantly,  than  any 
of  us.  His  fellowship  with  the  Father  was  of  the  highest,  deepest, 
fullest  order  ;  and  what  must  the  loss  of  it  have  been  ?  We  lose  but 
drops  when  we  lose  our  joyful  experience  of  heavenly  fellowship  ;  and 
yet  the  loss  is  killing :  but  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  the  sea  was  dried 
up — I  mean  his  sea  of  fellowship  with  the  infinite  God. 

Do  not  forget  that  he  was  such  a  One  that  to  him  to  be  without 
God  must  have  been  an  overwhelming  calamity.  In  every  part  he 
was  perfect,  and  in  every  part  fitted  for  communion  with  God  to  a 
supreme  degree.  A  sinful  man  has  an  awful  need  of  God,  but  he  does 
not  know  it ;  and  therefore  he  does  not  feel  that  hunger  and  thirst  after 
God  which  would  come  upon  a  perfect  man  could  he  be  deprived  of 
God.  The  very  perfection  of  his  nature  renders  it  inevitable  that  the 
holy  man  must  either  be  in  communion  with  God,  or  be  desolate. 
Imagine  a  stray  angel !  a  seraph  who  has  lost  his  God  !  Conceive  him 
to  be  perfect  in  holiness,  and  yet  to  have  fallen  into  a  condition  in 


576  METROPOLITAIT   TABERNACLE   PITLPIT. 

which  he  cannot  find  his  God !  I  cannot  picture  him ;  perhaps  a 
Milton  might  have  done  so.  He  is  sinless  and  trustful,  and  yet  he 
lias  an  overpowering  feeling  that  God  is  absent  from  him.  He  has 
drifted  into  the  nowhere — the  unimaginable  region  behind  the  back 
of  God.  I  think  I  hear  the  wailing  of  the  cherub :  "  My  God,  my 
God,  my  God,  where  art  thou  ?  "  What  a  sorrow  for  one  of  the  sons 
of  the  morning !  But  here  we  have  the  lament  of  a  Being  far  more 
capable  of  fellowship  with  the  Godhead.  In  proportion  as  he  is  'more 
fitted  to  receive  the  love  of  the  great  Father,  in  that  proportion  is  his 
pining  after  it  the  more  intense.  As  a  Son,  he  is  more  able  to  commune 
with  God  than  ever  a  servant-angel  could  be ;  and  now  that  he  is 
forsaken  of  God,  the  void  within  is  the  greater,  and  the  anguish 
more  bitter. 

Our  Lord's  heart,  and  all  his  nature  were,  morally  and  spiritually, 
so  delicately  formed,  so  sensitive,  so  tender,  that  to  be  without  God, 
was  to  him  a  grief  which  could  not  be  weighed.  I  see  him  in  the 
text  bearing  desertion,  and  yet  I  perceive  that  he  cannot  bear  it.  I 
know  not  how  to  express  my  meaning  except  by  such  a  paradox.  He 
cannot  endure  to  be  without  God.  He  had  surrendered  himself  to  be 
left  of  God,  as  the  representative  of  sinners  must  be,  but  his  pure  and 
hoi}-- nature,  after  three  hours  of  silence,  finds  the  position  unendurable 
to  love  and  purity ;  and  breaking  forth  from  it,  now  that  the  hour  was 
over,  he  exclaims,  "  "Why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?  "  He  quarrels  not 
with  the  suffering,  but  he  cannot  abide  in  the  position  which  caused  it. 
He  seems  as  if  he  must  end  the  ordeal,  not  because  of  the  pain,  but 
because  of  the  moral  shocli.  We  have  here  the  repetition  after  his 
passion  of  that  loathing  which  he  felt  before  it,  when  he  cried,  "  If  it 
be  possible  let  this  cup  pass  from  me :  nevertheless  not  as  I  will,  but  as 
thou  wilt."  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  is  the 
holiness  of  Christ  amazed  at  the  position  of  substitute  for  guilty  men. 

There,  friends  ;  I  have  done  my  best,  but  I  seem  to  myself  to  have 
been  prattling  like  a  little  child,  talking  about  something  infinitely 
above  me.  So  I  leave  the  solemn  fact,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  was  on  the 
tree  forsaken  of  his  God. 

II.     This  brings  us  to  consider  the  enquiry,  or,  why  he  suffered. 

Note  carefully  this  cry — "  My  God,  my  God,  wh}"-  hast  thou  forsaken 
me?"  It  is  pure  anguish,  undiluted  agony,  which  crieth  like  this; 
but  it  is  the  agony  of  a  godly  soul ;  for  only  a  man  of  that  order  would 
have  used  such  an  expression.  Let  us  learn  from  it  useful  lessons. 
This  cry  is  taken  from  "  the  Book."  Does  it  not  show  our  Lord's  love 
of  the  sacred  volume,  that  when  he  felt  his  sharpest  grief,  he  turned 
to  the  Scripture  to  find  a  fit  utterance  for  it  ?  Here  we  have  the 
opening  sentence  of  the  twenty-second  Psalm.  Oh,  that  we  may  so 
love  the  inspired  Word  that  we  may  not  only  sing  to  its  score,  but 
even  weep  to  its  music ! 

Note,  again,  that  our  Lord's  lament  is  an  address  to  God.  The 
godly,  in  their  anguish,  turn  to  the  hand  which  smites  them.  The 
Saviour's  outcry  is  not  against  God,  but  to  God.  "  My  God,  my  God  " : 
he  makes  a  double  effort  to  draw  near.  True  Sonship  is  here.  The 
child  in  the  dark  is  crying  after  his  Father — <'My  God,  my  God.'* 
Both  the  Bible  and  prayer  were  dear  to  Jesus  in  his  agony. 


'  LAMA    SABACHTHANI  ?  "  577    , 

Still,  observe,  it  is  a  faith-cry;  lor  though  it  asks,  ''Why  hast 
thou  forsaken  me ?  "  yet  it  first  says,  twice  over,  "My  God,  my  God. 
The  o-rip  of  appropriation  is  in  the  word  "  my  "  ;  but  the  reverence  of 
humility  is  in  the  word  "God."  It  is  "  '  My  God,  my  6^oc?,'  thou  art  over 
God  to  me,  and  I  a  poor  creature.  I  do  not  quarrel  with  thee.  Ihy 
rights  are  unquestioned,  for  thou  art  my  God.  Thou  canst  do  as  thou 
wilt,  and  I  yield  to  thy  sacred  sovereignty.  I  kiss  the  hand  that  smites 
me,  and  with  all  my  heart  I  cry,  '  My  God,  my  God.'  "  When  you 
are  delirious  with  pain,  think  of  your  Bible  still :  when  your  mmd 
wanders,  let  it  roam  towards  the  mercy  seat ;  and  when  your  heart  and 
your  flesh  fail,  still  live  by  faith,  and  still  cry,  "  My  God,  my  God 

Let  us  come  close  to  the  enquiry.  It  looked  to  me,  at  first  sight,  like 
»  question  as  of  one  distraught,  driven  from  the  balance  of  his  mmd— 
not  unreasonable,  but  too  much  reasoning,  and  therefore  tossed  about. 
"  Why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  Did  not  Jesus  know  ?  Did  he  not 
\ino\x  'why  he  was  forsaken  ?  He  knew  it  most  distinctly,  and  yet^  his 
manhood,  while  it  was  being  crushed,  pounded,  dissolved,  seemea  as 
thouo-h  it  could  not  understand  the  reason  for  so  great  a  grief.  He 
mus^be  forsaken;  but  could  there  be  a  sufficient  cause  for  so  sicken- 
ino-  a  sorrow  ?  The  cup  must  be  bitter  ;  but  why  this  most  nauseous  of 
ingredients?  I  tremble  lest  I  say  what  I  ought  not  to  say.  I  have  said 
it^and  I  think  there  is  truth— the  Man  of  Sorrows  was  overborne  with 
horror  At  that  moment  the  finite  soul  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus  came 
into  awful  contact  with  the  infinite  justice  of  God.  The  one  Mediator 
between  God  and  man,  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  beheld  the  holiness  of 
God  in  arms  against  the  sin  of  man,  whose  nature  he  had  espoused. 
God  was  for  him  and  with  him  in  a  certain  unquestionable  sense  ;  but 
for  the  time,  so  far  as  his  feeling  went,  God  was  against  him,  anc" 
necessarily  withdrawn  from  him.  It  is  not  surprising  that  tne  holy 
soul  of  Christ  should  shudder  at  finding  -itself  brought  into  pamiul 
contact  with  the  infinite  justice  of  God,  even  though  its  design  was 
only  to  vindicate  that  justice,  and  glorify  the  Law-giver.  Our  Lord, 
could  now  say,  "  All  thy  waves  and  thy  billows  are  gone  over  me  ; 
and  therefore  he  uses  language  which  is  all  too  hot  with  anguish  to  be 
dissected  by  the  cold  hand  of  a  logical  criticism.  Grief  has  smaU 
regard  for  the  laws  of  the  grammarian.  Even  the  holiest,  when  in 
extreme  agony,  though  they  cannot  speak  otherwise  than  according 
to  purity  and  truth,  yet  use  a  language  of  their  own,  which  only  the 
ear  of  sympathy  can  fully  receive.  I  see  not  all  that  is  here,  but  what. 
I  can  see  I  am  not  able  to  put  in  words  for  you.  r^       r     a 

I  think  I  see,  in  the  expression,  submission  and  resolve.  Our  Ijord 
does  not  draw  back.  There  is  a  forward  movement  in  the  question  : 
they  who  quit  a  business  ask  no  more  questions  about  it.  lie  cloe» 
not  ask  that  the  forsaking  may  end  prematurely,  he  would  only  under- 
stand anew  its  meaning.  He  does  not  shrink,  but  the  rather  dedicates, 
himself  anew  to  God  by  the  words,  "My  God,  my  God  and  by 
seeking  to  review  the  ground  and  reason  of  that  anguish  which  he 
is  resolute  to  bear  even  to  the  bitter  end.  He  would  fam  feel  anew  the 
motive  which  has  sustained  him,  and  must  sustain  him  to  the  end. 
The  cry  sounds  to  me  like  deep  submission  and  strong  resolve,  pleading 
with  God.  -37 


573  METROPOLITAN  TABEENACLE   PULPIT. 

Do  you  not  think  that  the  amazement  of  our  Lord,  when  he  torn 
"  made  sin  for  ««  "  (2  Cor.  v.  21),  led  him  thus  to  cry  out  ?  For  such 
a  sacred  and  pure  being  to  be  made  a  sin-offering  was  an  amazing 
experience.  Sin  was  laid  on  him,  and  he  was  treated  as  if  he  had  been 
guilty,  though  he  had  personally  never  sinned  ;  and  now  the  infinite 
horror  of  rebellion  against  the  most  holy  God  fills  his  holy  soul,  the 
unrighteousness  of  sin  breaks  his  heart,  and  he  starts  back  from  it, 
crjnng,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  Why 
must  I  bear  the  dread  result  of  conduct  I  so  much  abhor  ? 

Do  you  not  see,  moreover,  there  was  here  a  glance  at  his  eternal 
purpose,  and  at  his  secret  source  of  joy  ?  That  *'why"  is  the  silver 
lining  of  the  dark  cloud,  and  our  Lord  looked  wishfully  at  it.  He 
knew  that  the  desertion  was  needful  in  order  that  he  might  save 
the  guilty,  and  he  had  an  eye  to  that  salvation  as  his  comfort.  He  is 
not  forsaken  needlessly,  nor  without  a  worthy  design.  The  design  is 
in  itself  so  dear  to  his  heart  that  he  yields  to  the  passing  evil,  even 
though  that  evil  be  like  death  to  him.  He  looks  at  that  "  why,"  and 
through  that  narrow  window  the  light  of  heaven  comes  streaming 
into  his  darkened  life. 

"My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?'*  Surely  our 
Lord  dwelt  on  that  "why,"  that  we  might  also  turn  our  eyes  that  way. 
He  would  have  us  see  the  why  and  the  wherefore  of  his  grief.  He 
would  have  us  mark  the  gracious  motive  for  its  endurance.  Think 
much  of  all  your  Lord  suffered,  but  do  not  overlook  the  reason  of  it. 
If  you  cannot  always  understand  how  this  or  that  grief  worked  toward 
the  great  end  of  the  whole  passion,  yet  believe  that  it  has  its  share 
in  the  grand  "  why."  Make  a  life-study  of  that  bitter  but  blessed 
question,  *'  Why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  Thus  the  Saviour  raises 
an  inquiry  not  so  much  for  himself  as  for  us ;  and  not  so  much  because 
of  any  despair  within  his  heart  as  because  of  a  hope  and  a  joy  set 
before  him,  which  were  wells  of  comfort  to  him  in  his  wilderness  of 
woe. 

Bethink  you,  for  a  moment,  that  the  Lord  God,  in  the  broadest  and 
most  unreserved  sense,  could  never,  in  verj'  deed,  have  forsaken  his 
most  obedient  Son.  He  was  ever  with  him  in  the  grand  design  of 
salvation.  Towards  the  Lord  Jesus,  personally,  God  himself,  personally, 
must  ever  have  stood  on  terms  of  infinite  love.  Truly  the  Only  Begotten 
was  never  more  lovely  to  the  Father  than  when  he  was  obedient  unto 
death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross  !  But  we  must  look  upon  God  here 
as  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth,  and  we  must  look  upon  the  Lord  Jesus 
also  in  his  ofiicial  capacity,  as  the  Surety  of  the  covenant,  and  the 
Sacrifice  for  sin.  The  great  Judge  of  all  cannot  smile  upon  him  who 
has  become  the  substitute  for  the  guilty.  Sin  is  loathed  of  God  ;  and 
if,  in  order  to  its  removal,  his  own  Son  is  made  to  bear  it,  yet,  as  sin, 
it  is  still  loathsome,  and  he  who  bears  it  cannot  be  in  happy  communion 
with  God.  This  was  the  dread  necessity  of  expiation ;  but  in  the 
essence  of  things  the  love  of  the  great  Father  to  his  Son  never  ceased, 
nor  ever  knew  a  diminution.  Restrained  in  its  flow  it  must  be,  but 
lessened  at  its  fountain-head  it  could  not  be.  Therefore,  wonder  not 
at  the  question,  "  Why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  " 

III      Hoping  to  be  guided  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  I  am  coming  to 


**  LAMA    SABACHTHANI  ?  "  579 

THE  ANSWER,  concerning  which  I  can  only  use  the  few  minutes  which 
remain  to  me.  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?" 
"What  is  the  outcome  of  this  suffering  ?  What  was  the  reason  for  it  ? 
Our  Saviour  could  answer  his  own  question.  If  for  a  moment  his 
manhood  was  perplexed,  yet  his  mind  soon  came  to  clear  apprehen- 
sion ;  for  he  said,  **  It  is  finished  "  ;  and,  as  I  have  already  said,  he 
then  referred  to  the  work  which  in  his  lonely  agony  he  had  been  per- 
forming. Why,  then,  did  God  forsake  his  Son  ?  I  cannot  conceive 
any  other  answer  than  this — he  stood  in  our  stead.  There  was  no  reason 
in  Christ  why  the  Father  should  forsake  him:  he  was  perfect,  and  his 
life  was  without  spot.  God  never  acts  without  reason ;  and  since 
there  were  no  reasons  in  the  character  and  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
why  his  Father  should  forsake  him,  we  must  look  elsewhere.  I  do 
not  know  how  others  answer  the  question.  I  can  only  answer  it  in 
this  one  way. 

**  Yet  all  the  griefs  he  felt  were  ours, 
Ours  were  the  woes  he  bore  ; 
Pangs,  not  his  own,  his  spotless  soul 
With  bitter  anguish  tore. 

*'  "We  held  him  as  condemn'd  of  heaven, 
An  outcast  f»om  his  God  ; 
Whil-  for  our  sins  he  groaned,  he  bled, 
Beneath  his  Father's  rod." 

He  bore  the  sinner's  sin,  and  he  had  to  be  treated,  therefore,  as 
though  he  were  a  sinner,  though  sinner  he  could  never  be.  With  his 
own  full  consent  he  suffered  as  though  he  had  committed  the  trans- 
gressions which  were  laid  on  him.  Our  sin,  and  his  taking  it  upon 
himself,  is  the  answer  to  the  question,  "  Why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  " 

In  this  case  we  now  see  that  His  obedience  was  perfect.  He  came 
into  the  world  to  obey  the  Father,  and  he  rendered  that  obedience  to 
the  very  uttermost.  The  spirit  of  obedience  could  go  no  farther  than 
for  one  who  feels  forsaken  of  God  still  to  cling  to  him  in  solemn, 
avowed  allegiance,  still  declaring  before  a  mocking  multitude  his  con- 
fidence in  the  afflicting  God.  It  is  noble  to  cry,  "  My  God,  my  God," 
when  one  is  asking,  "  Why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  How  much 
farther  can  obedience  go  ?  I  see  nothing  beyond  it.  The  soldier  at 
the  gate  of  Pompeii  remaining  at  his  post  as  sentry  when  the  shower 
of  burning  ashes  is  falling,  was  not  more  true  to  his  trust  than  he 
who  adheres  to  a  forsaking  God  with  loyalty  of  hope. 

Our  Lord^s  suffering  in  this  particular  form  was  appropriate  and 
necessary.  It  would  not  have  sufficed  for  our  Lord  merely  to  have 
been  pained  in  body,  nor  even  to  have  been  grieved  in  mind  in  other 
waA's  :  he  must  suffer  in  this  particular  way.  He  must  feel  forsaken 
of  God,  because  this  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  sin.  For  a  man 
to  be  forsaken  of  God  is  the  penalty  which  naturally  and  inevitably 
follows  upon  his  breaking  his  relation  with  God.  What  is  death  ? 
What  was  the  death  that  was  threatened  to  Adam  ?  "  In  the  day 
that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die."  Is  death  annihila- 
tion ?  Was  Adam  annihilated  that  day  ?  Assuredly  not :  he  lived 
many  a  year  afterwards.  But  in  the  day  in  which  he  ate  of  the  for-- 
bidden  fruit  he  died,  by  being  separated  from  God.     The  separation 


580  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

of  the  soul  from  God  is  spiritual  death  ;  just  as  the  separation  of  th» 
soul  from  the  body  is  natural  death.  The  sacrifice  for  sin  must  be- 
put  in  the  place  of  separation,  and  must  bow  to  the  penalty  of  death. 
By  this  placing  of  the  Great  Sacrifice  under  forsaking  and  death,  it 
would  be  seen  by  all  creatures  throughout  the  universe  that  God, 
could  not  have  fellowship  with  sin.  If  even  the  Holy  One,  who- 
stood  the  Just  for  the  unjust,  found  God  forsaking  him,  what  must 
the  doom  of  the  actual  sinner  be !  Sin  is  evidently  always,  in  every 
case,  a  dividing  influence,  putting  even  the  Christ  himself,  as  a  sin- 
bearer,  in  the  place  of  distance. 

This  was  necessary  for  another  reason  :  there  could  have  been  no- 
laying  on  of  suffering  for  sin  without  the  forsaking  of  the  vicarious^ 
Sacrifice  by  the  Lord  God.  So  long  as  the  smile  of  God  rests  on  the 
man  the  law  is  not  afflicting  him.  The  approving  look  of  the  great 
Judge  cannot  fall  upon  a  man  who  is  viewed  as  standing  in  the 
place  of  the  guilty.  Christ  not  only  suffered  from  sin,  but /or  sin.  If 
God  will  cheer  and  sustain  him,  he  is  not  suffering  for  sin.  The 
Judge  is  not  inflicting  suffering  for  sin  if  ho  is  manifestly  succouring 
the  smitten  one.  There  could  have  been  no  vicarious  suffering  on  the 
part  of  Christ  for  human  guilt,  if  he  had  continued  consciously  to 
enjoy  the  full  sunshine  of  the  Father's  presence.  It  was  essential  to 
being  a  victim  in  our  place  that  he  should  cry,  **  My  God,  my  God, 
why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  " 

Beloved,  see  how  marvellously,  in  the  person  of  Christ,  the  Lord  our 
God  has  vindicated  his  law  !  If  to  make  his  law  glorious,  he  had  said, 
"These  multitudes  of  men  have  broken  my  law,  and  therefore  they 
shall  perish,"  the  law  would  have  been  terribly  magnified.  But, 
instead  thereof,  he  says,  *'  Here  is  my  Only  Begotten  Son,  my  other 
self ;  he  takes  on  himself  the  nature  of  these  rebellious  creatures, 
and  he  consents  that  I  should  lay  on  him  the  load  of  their  iniquity, 
and  visit  in  his  person  the  offences  which  might  have  been  punished, 
in  the  persons  of  all  these  multitudes  of  men  :  and  I  wiU  have  it  so." 
When  Jesus  bows  his  head  to  the  stroke  of  the  law,  when  he  sub- 
missively consents  that  his  Father  shall  turn  away  his  face  from  him, 
then  myriads  of  worlds  are  astonished  at  the  perfect  holiness  ani 
stern  justice  of  the  Lawgiver.  There  are,  probably,  worlds  innu- 
merable throughout  the  boundless  creation  of  God,  and  all  these  will 
see,  in  the  death  of  God's  dear  Son,  a  declaration  of  his  determination 
never  to  allow  sin  to  be  trifled  with.  If  his  own  Son  is  brought  before 
him,  bearing  the  sin  of  others  upon  him,  he  will  hide  his  face  from  him, 
as  well  as  from  the  actually  guilty.  In  God  infinite  love  shines  over 
all,  but  it  does  not  eclipse  his  absolute  justice  any  more  than  his 
justice  is  permitted  to  destroy  his  love.  God  hath  all  perfections  in 
perfection,  and  in  Christ  Jesus  we  see  the  reflection  of  them.  Beloved, 
this  is  a  wonderful  theme !  Oh,  that  I  had  a  tongue  worthy  of  this 
subject !  but  who  coidd  ever  reach  the  height  of  this  great  argument : 

Once  more,  when  enquiring.  Why  did  Jesus  suffer  to  be  forsaken  of 
the  Father  ?  we  see  the  fact  that  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  was  thus 
made  perfect  through  suffering.  Every  part  of  the  road  has  been  traversed 
by  our  Lord's  own  feet.  Suppose,  beloved,  the  Lord  Jesus  had  never 
been  thus  forsaken,  then  one  of  his  disciples  might  have  been  called 


"lama  sarachthani ? "  581 

to  that  sharp  endurance,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  could  not  have  sympa- 
thized with  him  in  it.  He  would  turn  to  his  Leader  and  Captain,  and 
say  to  him,  "  Didst  thou,  my  Lord,  ever  feel  this  darkness  ?  "  Then 
the  Lord  Jesus  would  answer,  "  No.  This  is  a  descent  such  as  I  never 
made.''  What  a  dreadful  lack  would  the  tried  one»  have  felt !  For  the 
servant  to  bear  a  grief  his  Master  never  knew  would  be  sad  indeed. 

There  would  have  been  a  wound  for  which  there  was  no  ointment, 
a  pain  for  which  there  was  no  balm.  But  it  is  not  so  now.  "  In  all 
their  affliction  he  was  afflicted."  "He  was  in  all  points  tempted 
like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin."  Wherein  we  greatly  rejoice  at  this 
time,  and  so  often  as  we  are  cast  down.  Underneath  us  is  the  deep 
experience  of  our  forsaken  Lord. 

I  have  done  when  I  have  said  three  things.  The  first  is,  you  and  I 
that  are  believers  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  are  resting  in  him 
alone  for  salvation,  let  us  lean  hard,  let  us  bear  with  all  our  weight 
on  our  Lord.  He  will  bear  the  full  weight  of  all  our  sin  and  care. 
As  to  my  sin,  I  hear  its  harsh  accusings  no  more  when  I  hear  Jesus 
cry,  "Why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  I  know  that  I  deserve  the 
deepest  hell  at  the  hand  of  God's  vengeance  ;  but  I  am  not  afraid.  He 
will  never  forsake  me,  for  he  forsook  his  Son  on  my  behalf.  I  shall 
not  suffer  for  my  sin,  for  Jesus  has  suffered  to  the  full  in  my  stead ; 
yea,  suffered  so  far  as  to  cry,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  for- 
saken me  ?  "  Behind  this  brazen  wall  of  substitution  a  sinner  is  safe. 
These  "  munitions  of  rock  "  guard  all  believers,  and  they  may  rest 
secure.  The  rock  is  cleft  for  me  ;  I  hide  in  its  rifts,  and  no  harm 
oan  reach  me.  You  have  a  full  atonement,  a  great  sacrifice,  a 
glorious  vindication  of  the  law ;  wherefore  rest  at  peace,  all  you  that 
put  your  trust  in  Jesus, 

Next,  if  ever  in  our  lives  henceforth  we  should  think  that  God  liath 
-deserted  us,  let  us  learn  from  our  Lord's  example  how  to  behave  ourselves. 
If  God  hath  left  thee,  do  not  shut  up  thy  Bible ;  nay,  open  it,  as  thy 
Lord  did,  and  find  a  text  that  will  suit  thee.  If  God  hath  left  thee, 
or  thou  thinkest  so,  do  not  give  up  prayer ;  nay,  pray  as  thy  Lord 
did,  and  be  more  earnest  than  ever.  If  thou  thinkest  God  has  for- 
saken thee,  do  not  give  up  thy  faith  in  him ;  but,  like  thy  Lord,  cry 
thou,  "My  God,  my  God,"  again  and  again.  If  thou  hast  had  one 
anchor  before,  cast  out  two  anchors  now,  and  double  the  hold  of  thy 
faith.  If  thou  canst  not  call  Jehovah  "Father,"  as  was  Christ's 
wont,  yet  call  him  thy  "  God."  Let  the  personal  pronouns  take  their 
liold — "  My  God,  my  God."  Let  nothing  drive  thee  from  thy  faith. 
Still  hold  on  Jesus,  sink  or  swim.  As  for  me,  if  ever  I  am  lost,  it 
shall  be  at  the  foot  of  the  cross.  To  this  pass  have  I  come,  that  if  I 
never  see  the  face  of  God  with  acceptance,  yet  I  will  believe  that  he 
will  be  faithful  to  his  Son,  and  true  to  the  covenant  sealed  by  oaths 
and  blood.  He  that  believeth  in  Jesus  hath  everlasting  life :  there  I 
<5ling,  like  the  limpet  to  the  rock.  There  is  but  one  gate  of  heaven/- 
and  even  if  I  may  not  enter  it,  I  will  cling  to  the  posts  of  its  door. 
What  am  I  saying  ?  I  shall  enter  in ;  for  that  gate  was  never  shut 
against  a  soul  that  accepted  Jesus ;  and  Jesus  saith,  "  Him  that  cometh 
to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out." 

The  last  of   the  three    points  is  this,    let   us  abhor   the   sin  which 


682 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


hrought  such  agony  upon  our  beloved  Lord.  What  an  accursed  thing 
is  sin,  which  crucified  the  Lord  Jesus !  Do  you  laugh  at  it  ?  Will 
you  go  and  spend  an  evening  to  see  a  mimic  performance  of  it  ?  Do 
you  roll  sin  under  your  tongue  as  a  sweet  morsel,  and  then  come  to 
God's  house,  on  the  Lord's-day  morning,  and  think  to  worship  him  ? 
Worship  him!  Worship  him,  with  sin  indulged  in  your  breast! 
Worship  him,  with  sin  loved  and  pampered  in  your  life !  0  sirs, 
if  I  had  a  dear  brother  who  had  been  murdered,  what  would  you  think 
of  me  if  I  valued  the  knife  which  had  been  crimsoned  with  his  blood  ? 
— if  I  made  a  friend  of  the  murderer,  and  daily  consorted  with  the 
assassin,  who  drove  the  dagger  into  my  brother's  heart  ?  Surely  I, 
too,  must  be  an  accomplice  in  the  crime  !  Sin  murdered  Christ ;  will 
you  be  a  friend  to  it  ?  Sin  pierced  the  heart  of  the  Incarnate  God ; 
can  you  love  it  ?  Oh,  that  there  was  an  abyss  as  deep  as  Christ's 
misery,  that  I  might  at  once  hurl  this  dagger  of  sin  into  its  deptlis, 
whence  it  might  never  be  brought  to  lights  again  !  Begone,  0  sin ! 
Thou  art  banished  from  the  heart  where  Jesus  reigns  I  Begone,  for 
thou  hast  crucified  my  Lord,  and  made  him  cry,  "  Why  hast  thou 
forsaken  me  ?  "  0  my  hearers,  if  you  did  but  know  yourselves,  and 
know  the  love  of  Christ,  you  would  each  one  vow  that  you  would 
harbour  sin  no  longer.     You  would  be  indignant  at  sin,  and  cry, 

"  The  dearest  idol  I  have  known, 
Whate'er  that  idol  be, 
Lord,  I  will  tear  it  from  its  throne, 
And  worship  only  thee." 

May  that  be  the  issue  of  my  morning's  discourse,  and  then  I  shall 
be  well  content.  The  Lord  bless  you !  May  the  Christ  who  suffered 
for  you, » bless  you,  and  out  of  his  darkness  may  yoiir  light  arise! 
Amen. 

Portion  of  Scripture  read  before   Sermon — Psalm  xxii. 


Hymns  from  ''Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 313,  299,  22  (Part  11). 


THE    SADDEST    CRY    FROM    THE    CROSS. 

Intended  for  Reading  on  Lord's-day,  November  2nd,  1902, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NBWINGTON, 

On  Lord's-day  Evening,  January  7th,   1877. 


"And  about  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Eli,  Eli,  lamar 
sabachthani?  that  is  to  eay,  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"— 
Matthew  xxvii.  46. 

During  the  time  that  "  Moses  kept  the  flock  of  Jethro,  his  father-in- 
law,"  he  "  came  to  the  mountain  of  God,  even  to  Horeb,"  and  there 
he  saw  a  strange  sight, — a  bush  that  burned  with  fire,  and  yet  was 
not  consumed.  Then  Moses,  apparently  constrained  by  curiosity,  was^ 
drawing  near,  in  order  to  examine  this  phenomenon,  when  he  heard 
God'a  voice  say  to  him,  "  Draw  not  nigh  hither :  put  off  thy  shoes^ 
from  off  thy  feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  is  holy 
ground."  We  also  may  well  feel,  as  we  think  of  our  Lord  Jesus  in 
his  agony,  that  the  voice  of  God  speaks  to  us  from  the  cross,  and 
says,  "  Curiosity, — bold,  daring,  prying  intellect, — draw  not  nigh 
hither;  put  off  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet,  for  the  place  whereon 
thou  standest  is  the  very  Holy  of  Holies,  unto  which  no  man  may 
come  except  as  the  Spirit  of  God  shall  conduct  him  thither." 

I  think  I  can  understand  the  words,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why 
hast  thou  forsaken  me  ? "  as  they  are  written  by  David  in  the 
22nd  Psalm;  but  the  same  words,  "My  God,  my  God,  why  hast 
thou  forsaken  me  ? "  when  uttered  by  Jesnis  on  tlie  cross,  I  cannot 
comprehend,  so  I  shall  not  pretend  to  be  able  to  explain  them.  There 
is  no  plummet  that  can  fathom  this  deep ;  there  is  no  eagle's  eye 
that  can  penetrate  the  mystery  that  surrounds  this  strange  question. 
I  have  read  that,  once  upon  a  time,  Martin  Luther  sat  him  down  in 
his  study  to  consider  this  text.  Hour  after  hour,  that  mighty  man 
of  God  sat  still;  and  those  who  waited  on  him  came  into  the 
room,  again  and  again,  and  he  was  so  absorbed  in  his  meditation 
that  they  almost  thought  he  w&s  a  corpse.  He  moved  neither  hand 
nor  foot,  and  neither  ate  nor  drank;  but  sat  with  his  eyes  wide 
open,  like  one  in  a  trance,  thinking  over  these  wondrous  words, 
"  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?  "  And  when,  after 
No.  2,803. 


584  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

many  long  hours,  in  which  he  seemed  to  be  utterly  lost  to  everything 
that  went  on  around  him,  he  rose  from  hfs  chair,  someone  heard 
him  say,  "  God  forsaking  God  !  No  man  can  understand  that;"  and 
so  he  went  his  way.  Though  that  is  hardly  the  correct  expression 
to  use, — I  should  hesitate  to  endorse  it, — yet  I  do  not  marvel 
that  our  text  presented  it-self  to  the  mind  of  Luther  in  that  light. 
It  is  said  that  he  looked  like  a  man  who  had  been  down  a  deep  mine, 
and  who  had  come  up  again  to  the  light.  I  feel  more  like  one  who 
has  not  been  down  the  mine,  but  who  has  looked  into  it, — or  like 
one  who  has  be^n  part  of  the  way  down,  and  shuddered  as  he 
passed  through  the  murky  darkness,  but  who  would  not  dare  to  go 
much  lower,  for  this  cry,  "Eli,  Eli,  lama  sabachthani? "  is  a 
tremendous  deep;  no  man  will  ever  be  able  to  fathom  it. 

So  I  am  not  going  to  try  to  explain  it;  but,  first,  to  utter 
some  thoughts  about  it;  and  then,  secondly,  to  draw  some  lessons 
from  it.  We  may  find  many  practical  uses  for  things  which  are 
beyond  the  grasp  of  our  minds,  and  this  saying  of  our  Lord  may  be 
of  great  service  to  us  even  though  we  cannot  comprehend  it. 

L  First,  then,  let  me  utter  some  thoughts  about  this  strange 
question:    "My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?  " 

Jesus  was  accustomed  to  address  God  as  his  Father.  If  you  turn 
to  his  many  prayers,  you  will  find  him  almost  invariably — if  not 
invariably — speaking  to  God  as  his  Father.  And,  truly,  he  st-ands 
in  that  relationship  both  as  God  and  as  man.  Yet,  in  this  instance, 
he  does  not  say,  "  Father;"  but  "  My  God,  my  God."  Was  it  that 
he  had  any  doubt  about  his  Sonship?  Assuredly  not;  Satan  had 
assailed  him  in  the  wilderness  with  the  insinuation,  "  If  thou  be  the 
Son  of  God,"  but  Christ  had  put  him  to  the  rout;  and  I  feel 
persuaded  that  Satan  had  not  gained  any  advantage  over  him,  even 
on  the  cross,  which  could  have  made  him  doubt  whether  he  was 
the  Son  of  God  or  not. 

I  think  that  our  Saviour  was  speaJcing  then  as  man,  and  that  this 
is  the  reason  why  he  ci^ied,  "  My  God,  my  God,"  rather  than  "  My 
Father*."  I  think  he  must  have  been  speaking  as  man ;  a«  I  can 
scarcely  bring  my  mind  to  the  point  of  conceiving  that  God  the 
Son  could  say  to  God  the  Father,  "  My  God,  my  God."  There  is 
such  a  wonderful  blending  of  the  hiunan  and  the  Divine  in  the  person 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  that,  though  it  may  not  be  absolutely 
accurate  to  ascribe  to  the  Deity  some  things  in  the  life  of  Christ, 
yet  is  he  so  completely  God  and  man  that,  often.  Scripture  does 
speak  of  things  that  must  belong  to  the  humanity  only  as  if  they 
belonged  to  tke  Godhead.  For  instance,  in  his  charge  to  the 
Ephesian  elders,  the  apostle  Paul  said,  "  Feed  the  church  of  God, 
which  he  hath  purcha^d  with  his  own  blood;" — an  incorrect 
expression,  if  judged  according  to  the  rule  of  the  logician;  but 
accurate  enough  according  to  the  Scriptural  method  of  using  words 
in  their  proper  sense.  Yet  I  do  think  that  we  must  draw  a  dis- 
tinction between  the  Divinity  and  the  humanity  here.  As  the 
Lord  Jesus  said,  "  My  God,  my  God,"  it  was  because  it  was  his 
humanity  that  was  mainly  to  be  considered  just  then. 

And  O  my  brethren,   does  it  not  show  us  what  a   real  man  the 


THE     SADDEST     CRY    FROM    THE     CROSS,  585 

'Christ  of  God  was,  that  he  could  be  forsalcen  of  his  God?  We  might 
have  supposed  that,  Christ  being  Emmanuel, — God  with  us, — the 
Godhead  and  the  manhood  being  mdissolubly  united  in  one  person, 
it  would  have  been  impossible  for  him  to  be  forsaken  of  God.  We 
might  also  have  inferred,  for  the  same  reason,  that  it  would  have 
been  impossible  for  him  to  have  been  sicourged,  and  spit  upon,  and 
-especially  that  it  would  not  have  been  possible  for  him  to  die. 
Yet  all  these  things  were  made,  not  only  possible,  but  also  sacredly 
-certain.  In  order  to  complete  the  redemption  of  his  chosen  people, 
it  was  necessary  for  him  to  be  both  God's  well-beloved  Son,  and  to 
Ido  forsaken  of  his  Father;  he  could  truly  say,  as  his  saints  also 
have  sometimes  had  to  say,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou 
forsaken  me? "  Persecuted  and  forsaken  believer,  behold  your 
Brother  in  adversity !  Behold  the  One  who  has  gone  wherever  you 
may  have  to  go,  who  has  suffered  more  than  you  can  ever  suffer, 
and  who  has  taken  his  part  in  the  direst  calamity  that  ever 
happened  to  human  nature,  so  that  he  had  to  cry  out,  in  the 
agony  of  his  soul,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?  " 

What  was  this  forsaking?  We  are  trying  to  come  a  little  closer 
to  this  burning  yet  unconsumed  bush, — with  our  shoes  off  our  feet, 
I  hope,  all  the  while; — and  in  this  spirit  we  ask,  "  What  was  this 
forsaking?"  A  devout  writer  says  that  it  was  horror  at  the  sight 
of  human  misery.  He  affirms,  what  is  quite  true,  that  our  Lord 
Jesua  Christ  saw  all  that  man  had  to  suffer  because  of  sin ;  that 
ie  perceived  the  total  sum  of  the  miseries  brought  by  sin  upon  all 
the  past,  present,  and  future  generations  of  the  human  race; — and 
that  he  must  have  had  a  holy  horror  as  he  thought  of  all  the  woes 
of  man,  caused  by  sin,  in  this  life,  and  in  that  which  is  to  come;  — 
and  being  completely  one  with  man,  he  spoke  in  the  name  of  man, 
and  said,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?  "  That 
is  all  true,  yet  that  explanation  will  not  suffice,  my  brethren; 
because  our  Saviour  did  not  say,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou 
forsaken  man?"  but,  "Why  hast  thou  forsaken  me^"  This  for- 
saking was  something  personal  to  himself. 

Others  have  said  that  it  was  a  dreadful  shrinking  in  his  soul 
on  account  of  human  sin.  I  have  read  of  a  child,  who  had  done 
wrong,  and  whose  father  had  faithfully  rebuked  and  punished  him; 
T3Ut  the  boy  remained  callous  and  sullen.  He  sat  in  the  same 
Toom  with  his  father,  yet  he  refused  to  confess  that  he  had  done 
wrong.  At  last,  the  father,  under  a  sense  of  his  child's  great 
wickedness,  burst  into  tears,  and  sobbed  and  sighed.  Then  the 
boy  came  to  h  s  father,  and  asked  him  why  he  sorrowed  so,  and 
he  answered,  "  Because  of  my  child's  hardness  of  heart."  It  is 
true  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  did  feel  as  that  father  felt;  only  far 
more  acutely ;  but  our  text  cannot  be  fully  explained  by  any  such 
illustration  as  that;  that  would  be  only  explaining  it  away,  for 
Christ  did  not  say,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  has  man  forsaken 
thee,  and  why  hast  thou  so  completely  left  men  in  their  sin?  "  No; 
his  cry  was.  "  Why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?  "  It  was  not  so  much 
the  God  of  man  to  whom  he  appealed,  but  "  My  God,  my  God." 
It  was  a  personal  grief  that  wrung  from  him  the  personal  cry,  "  My 


586  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  for  this  forsaking,  by 
his  Father  in  whom  he  trusted,  related  peculiarly  to  himself. 

What  was  this  forsaking?  Was  it  physical  weakness?  Some  of 
you  may  know  that,  when  the  body  is  in  a  low  condition,  the  soul 
also  sinks.  Quit©  involuntarily,  unhappiness  of  mind,  depression 
of  spirit,  and  sorrow  of  heart  will  come  upon  you.  You  may  be 
without  any  real  reason  for  grief,  and  yet  may  be  among  the  moait 
unhappy  of  men  because,  for  the  time,  your  body  has  conquered 
your  soul.  But,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  this  explanation  is  not 
supposablo  in  the  case  of  Christ,  for  it  was  not  many  moments  after 
this  that  he  shouted,  "  with  a  loud  voice,"  his  conquering  cry,  "  It  is 
finished,"  and  so  passed  from  the  conflict  to  his  coronation.  His 
brave  spirit  overcame  his  physical  weakness;  and  though  he  was 
"  brought  into  the  dust  of  death,"  and  plunged  into  the  deepest 
depths  of  depression  of  spirit,  yet,  still,  the  cry,  "  My  Grod,  my  God," 
which  also  was  uttered  "  with  a  loud  voice,"  proves  that  there  was 
still  a  considerable  amount  of  mental  strength,  notwithstanding  his 
physical  weakness,  so  that  mere  depression  of  spirit,  caused  by 
physical  reasons,  would  not  account  for  this  agonizing  cry. 

And,  certainly,  my  brethren,  this  cry  was  not  occasioned  by 
unbelief.  You  know  that,  sometimes,  a  child  of  God,  in  sore 
trial,  and  with  many  inward  struggles,  cries  out,  "  My  God,  my 
God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  when,  all  the  while,  the  Lord 
has  been  remembering  the  tried  soul,  and  dealing  graciously  with 
it.  As  long  ago  as  Isaiah's  day,  "  Zion  said.  The  L#ord  hath  for- 
saken me,  and  my  Lord  hath  forgotten  me."  But  the  Lord's  reply 
was,  "  Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child,  that  she  should  not 
have  compassion  on  the  son  of  her  womb?  yea,  they  may  forget, 
yet  will  I  not  forget  thee.  Behold,  I  have  graven  thee  upon  the 
palms  of  my  hands."  Unbelief  often  makes  us  talk  about  God 
forgetting  us  when  he  does  nothing  of  the  kind,  but  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  was  a  stranger  to  unbelief.  It  was  impossible  for 
him  to  cherish  any  doubt  about  the  faithfulness  and  lovingkindness 
of  his  Father ;  so  his  cry  did  not  arise  from  that  cause. 

And,  another  thing,  it  did  not  arise  from  a  mistake.  1  have 
known  believers,  in  sore  trouble,  make  great  blunders  concerning 
what  God  was  doing  with  them.  They  have  thought  that  he  had 
forsaken  them,  for  they  misinterpreted  certain  signs,  and  dealings 
of  God,  and  they  said,  "  All  these  things  are  against  us ;  the  hand 
of  God  has  gone  out  against  us  to  destroy  us."  But  Christ  made 
no  mistake  about  this  matter,  for  God  had  forsaken  him.  It  was 
really  so.  When  he  said,  "  WTiy  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  he  spoke 
infallible  truth,  and  his  mind  was  under  no  cloud  whatsoever.  He 
knew  what  he  was  saying,  and  he  was  right  in  what  he  said,  for 
his  Father  had  forsaken  him  for  the  time. 

What,  then,  can  this  expression  mean?  Does  it  mean  that  God 
did  not  love  his  Son?  O  beloved,  let  us,  with  the  utmost  detesta- 
tion, fling  away  any  suspicion  of  the  kind  that  we  may  have 
harboured !  God  did  forsake  his  Son^  but  he  loved  him  as  much 
when  he  forsook  him  as  at  any  other  period.  I  even  venture  to 
say  that,  if  it  had  been  possible  for  GckI's  love  towards  his  Son  to 


THE  SADDEST  CRY  FROM  THE  CROSS.  587 

be  increased,  he  would  have  delighted  in  him  more  when  he  was 
atandiiQg  as  the  suffering  Representative  of  his  chosen  people  than 
ever  he  had  (delighted  in  him  before.  We  do  not  indulge,  for  a 
single  moment,  the  thought  that  God  was  angry  with  him  per- 
sonally, or  looked  upon  him  as  unworthy  of  his  love,  or  regarded  him 
as  one  upon  whom  he  could  not  smile,  because  of  anything  dis- 
pleasing in  himself;  yet  the  fact  remains  that  God  had  forsaken 
him,  for  Christ  was  under  no  mistake  about  that  matter.  H& 
rightly  felt  that  his  Father  had  withdrawn  the  comfortable  light 
of  his  countenance,  that  he  had,  for  the  time  being,  lost  the  sense 
of  his  Father's  favour, — not  the  favour  itself,  but  the  consciousness 
of  that  divine  aid  and  succour  which  he  had  formerly  enjoyed;  — 
so  he  felt  himself  like  a  man  left  all  alone;  and  he  was  not  only 
left  all  alone  by  his  friends,  but  also  by  his  God. 

Can  we  at  all  imagine  the  state  of  mind  in  which  our  Lord  was 
when  he  cried,  "My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?" 
No;  that  is  not  possible,  yet  I  will  try  to  help  you  to  understand 
it.  Can  you  imagine  the  misery  of  a  lost  soul  in  hell, — one  who- 
is  forsaken  of  God,  and  who  cries,  in  bitterest  agony,  "  God  will 
never  look  upon  me  in  mercy,  or  delight,  or  favour," — can  you 
picture  that  sad  state?  Well,  if  you  can,  you  will  not,  even  then, 
have  got  anywhere  near  the  position  of  Christ,  because  that  soul  in 
hell  does  not  want  God's  favour,  and  does  not  seek  it,  or  ask  for  it. 
That  lost  soul  is  so  hardened  in  sin  that  it  never  troubles  about 
whether  God  would  receive  it  if  it  repented;  the  truth  is,  that  it 
does  not  want  to  repent.  Tli©  misery,  that  men  will  suflFer  in  the 
world  to  come,  will  be  self-created  misery  arising  out  of  the  fact 
that  they  loved  sin  so  much  that  they  brought  eternal  sorrow 
upon  themselves.  It  must  be  an  awful  thing  for  a  soul,  in  the 
next  world,  to  be  without  God;  but,  as  far  as  its  own  consciousness 
is  concerned,  it  will  be  so  hardened  that  it  will  abide  without  God, 
yet  not  realizing  all  that  it  has  lost  because  it  is  itself  incapable 
of  knowing  the  beauty  of  holiness,  and  the  perfection  of  the  God 
from  whom  it  is  separated  for  ever.  Yet  how  different  was  the  case 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  when  upon  the  cross !  iHe  knew,  as  no 
mere  man  could  ever  know,  what  separation  from  God  meant. 

Think  of  a  case  of  another  kind.  King  Saul,  when  the  witch 
of  Endor  brought  up  the  spirit  of  Samuel,  said  to  him,  "  God  is 
departed  from  me,  and  answereth  me  no  more."  You  recollect  the 
state  of  mind  that  he  was  in  when  the  evil  spirit  was  upon  him, 
and  he  needed  David's  harp  to  charm  it  away;  bu'/,  at  last,  even 
that  failed,  and  I  know  of  no  more  unhappy  character  than  Saul 
when  God  had  departed  from,  him.  But,  somehow,  there  was  not 
the  anguish  in  the  soul  of  Saul  that  there  would  have  been  if  he 
had  ever  really  known  the  Lord.  I  do  not  think  that  he 
ever  did  really,  in  his  inmost  soul,  know  the  Lord.  After  Samuel 
anonted  him,  he  was  "  turned  into  another  man,"  but  he  never 
became  a  new  man  ;  and  the  sense  of  God's  presence  that  he  had 
was  not,  for  a  moment,  comparable  to  that  presence  of  God  which 
a  true  saint  enjoys,  and  which  Christ  ever  enjoyed,  except  when  he 
was  on  the  cross.     So,   when    Saul    lost   the   consciousness   of  that 


438  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

presence,   he  did  not  suffer  so  great  a  loss,   and,   consequently,  so 
great  an  anguish,  as  afterwards  happened  to  our  Lord.  * 

Coming  nearer  to  our  own  circumstances,  I  remind  you  that  there 
are  some  of  God's  people,  who  do  really  love  him,  and  who  have 
walked  in  the  light  of  his  countenance,  yet,  for  some  reason  or  other, 
they  have  lost  the  comfortable  enjoyment  of  God's  love.  If  any 
of  you,  dear  friends,  know  what  that  sad  experience  is,  you  are 
getting  a  faint  impression  of  the  meaning  of  this  cry,  "  My  God, 
my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  Oh,  what  an  anguish  it 
is, — what  heart-break, — even  to  think  that  one  is  forsaken  of  God ! 
I  have  heard  of  people  dying  of  broken  hearts;  but  I  do  believe 
that  the  man,  who  has  been  made  to  utter  this  cry,  has  gone  as 
near  to  dying  of  a  broken  heart  aa  anyone  might  well  do  without 
actually  dying.  To  be  without  God,  is  to  be  without  life;  and 
we,  who  love  him,  can  say,  with  Dr.  Watts, — 

"  My  QofJ,  my  life,  my  love, 
To  th<>e,  to  thee  I  call : 
I  cannot  live,  if  thou  remove, 
For  thou  art  All-in-alL" 

But,  my  dear  brethren,  you  have  not  got  the  whole  truth  yet, 
:for  no  saint  knows  the  presence  of  God  as  Christ  knew  it.  No  saint 
has,  to  the  full,  enjoyed  the  love  of  God  as  Christ  enjoyed  it;  and, 
-consequently,  if  he  does  lose  it,  he  only  seems  to  lose  the  moonlight 
whereas  Christ  lost  the  sunlight  when,  for  a  time,  the  face  of  his 
Father  was  withdrawn  from  him.  Only  think  what  must  have 
been  the  anguish  of  the  Saviour,  especially  as  contrasted  with  his 
former  enjoyment.  Never  did  any  mere  human  being  know  so 
much  and  enjoy  so  much  of  the  love  of  God  as  Christ  had  done. 
He  had  lived  in  it,  basked  in  it ;  there  had  never  been  any  inter- 
ruption to  it.  "  I  do  always  those  things  that  please  him,"  said  he, 
-concerning  his  Father;  and  his  Father  twice  said,  concerning  him, 
•**  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  Now,  as 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  enjoyed  the  love  of  God  to  the  very 
full,  think  what  it  must  have  been  for  him  to  lose  the  conscious 
enjoyment  of  it.  You  know  that  you  may  go  into  a  room,  and  blow 
out  the  candle,  but  the  blind  people  will  not  miss  it.  They  miss 
the  light  most  who  have  enjoyed  it  most;  and  Christ  missed  the 
light  of  God's  countenance  most  because  he  had  enjoyed  it  most. 
Then,  reflect  upon  his  intense  love  to  God.  Jesus  Christ — the  man 
Christ  Jesus — loved  God  with  all  his  heart,  and  mind,  and  soul, 
and  strength,  as  you  and  I  have  never  yet  been  able  to  do.  The 
love  of  Christ  towards  his  Father  was  boundless.  Well,  then,  for  a 
frown  to  be  upon  his  Father's  face,  or  for  the  light  of  that  Father's 
face  to  be  taken  away  from  him,  must  have  made  it  correspondingly 
dark  and  terrible  to  him. 

Re?7iember,  too,  the  absolute  purity  of  Christ's  nature.  In  him 
there  was  no  taint  of  sin,  nor  anything  approaching  to  it.  Now, 
holiness  delights  in  God.  God  is  the  very  sea  in  which  holiness 
swims, — the  air  which  holiness  breathes.  Only  think,  then,  of  the 
perfectly  Holy  One,   fully  agreed  with   his   Father   in  everything. 


THE     SADDEST     CRY    FROM    THE    CROSS.  589- 

finding  out  that  the  Father  had,  for  good  and  sufficient  reasons, 
turned  away  his  face  from  him.  O  brother,  in  proportion  as  you 
are  holy,  the  absence  of  the  light  of  God's  countenance  will  be 
grief  to  you;  and  as  Jesus  was  perfectly  holy,  it  was  the  utmost 
anguish  to  him  to  have  to  cry  to  his  Father.  "  Why  hast  thou, 
forsaken  me?  " 

After  all,  beloved,  the  only  solution  of  the  mystery  is  this,  Jesus 
Christ  was  forsaken  of  God  because  we  deserved  to  he  forsaken  of  God, 
He  was  there,  on  the  cross,  in  our  room,  and  place,  and  stead ;  and 
as  the  sinner,  by  reason  of  his  sin,  deserves  not  to  enjoy  the  favour 
of  God,  so  Jesus  Christ,  standing  in  the  place  of  the  sinner,  and 
enduring  that  which  would  vindicate  the  justice  of  God,  had  to- 
come  under  the  cloud,  as  the  sinner  must  have  come,  if  Christ  had 
not  taken  his  place.  But,  then,  since  he  has  come  under  it,  let 
us  recollect  that  he  was  thus  left  of  God  that  you  and  I,  who 
believe  in  him,  might  never  be  left  of  God.  Since  he,  for  a  little 
while,  was  separated  from  his  Father,  we  may  boldly  cry,  "  Who 
shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ?"  and,  with  the  apostle 
Paul,  we  may  confidently  affirm  that  nothing  in  the  whole  universe 
"  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in- 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 

Before  I  leave  this  point,  let  me  say  that  the  doctrine  of  sub- 
stitution is  the  key  to  all  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  I  do  not  know 
how  many  theories  have  been  invented  to  explain  away  the  death 
of  Christ.  The  modem  doctrine  of  the  apostles  of  **  culture  "  is,, 
that  Jesus  Christ  did  something  or  other,  which,  in  some  way  or 
other,  was,  in  some  degree  or  other,  connected  with  our  salvation  ; 
but  it  is  my  firm  belief  that  every  theory,  concerning  the  death 
of  Christ,  which  can  only  be  understood  by  the  highly-cultured, 
must  be  false.  "  That  is  strong  language,"  says  someone.  Perhaps 
it  is,  but  it  is  true.  I  am  quite  sure  that  the  religion  of  Jesus 
Christ  was  never  intended  for  the  highly-cultured  only,  or  even 
for  them  in  particular.  Christ's  testimony  concerning  his  own 
ministry  was,  "  The  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  to  them ; "  so, 
if  you  bring  me  a  gospel  which  can  only  be  understood  by  gentle- 
men who  have  passed  through  Oxford  or  Cambridge  University,  I 
know  that  it  cannot  be  the  gospel  of  Christ.  He  meant  the  good 
news  of  salvation  to  be  proclaimed  to  the  poorest  of  the  poor;  in 
fact,  the  gospel  is  intended  for  humanity  in  general ;  so,  if  you 
cannot  make  me  understand  it,  or  if,  when  I  do  understand  it,  it  does 
not  tell  me  how  to  deliver  its  message  in  such  plain  language  that  the 
poorest  man  can  comprehend  it,  I  tell  you,  sirs,  that  your  new- 
fangled gospel  is  a  lie,  and  I  will  stick  to  the  old  one,  which  a  man, 
only  a  little  above  an  idiot  in  intellect,  can  understand.  I  cling  to- 
the  old  gospel  for  this,  among  many  other  reasons,  that  all  the 
modern  gospels,  that  leave  out  the  great  central  truth  of  substitu- 
tion, prevent  the  message  from  being  of  any  use  to  the  great  mass  of 
mankind.  If  those  other  gospels,  which  are  not  really  gospels, 
please  your  taste  and  fancy,  and  suit  tJie  readers  of  Quarterly 
Reviews,  and  eloquent  orators  and  lecturers,  there  are  the  poor- 
people  in  our  streets,  and  the  millions  of  working-men,  the  vast. 


590 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 


multitudes  who  cannot  comprehend  anything  that  is  highly  meta^ 
physical ;  and  you  cannot  convince  me  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
sent,  as  his  message  to  the  whole  world,  a  metaphysical  mystery 
that  would  need  volume  upon  volume  before  it  could  even  be  stated. 
I  am  persuaded  that  he  gave  us  a  rough  and  ready  gospel  like  this, 
■"  The  Son  of  man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was 
lost ; "  or  this,  "  With  his  stripes  we  are  healed ; "  or  this,  "  The 
chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him;"  or  this,  "He  died  the 
Just  for  the  unjust  to  bring  us  to  God."  Do  not  try  to  go  beyond 
this  gospel,  brethren ;  you  will  get  into  the  mud  if  you  do.  But  it 
ia  safe  standing  here;  and  standing  here,  I  can  comprehend  how 
our  Lord  Jesus  took  the  sinner's  place,  and  passing  under  the 
sentence  which  the  sinner  deserved,  or  under  a  sentence  which  was 
tantamount  thereto,  could  cry,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou 
forsaken  me  ? " 

IL  Now,  in  closing,  I  am  going  to  draw  a  few  lessons  from 
THIS  utterance  OP  Christ. 

The  first  lesson  is,  Behold  how  he  loved  us!  When  Christ  stood 
and  wept  at  the  grave  of  Lazarus,  the  Jews  said,  "  Behold  how 
he  loved  him !  "  But  on  the  cross  he  did  not  weep,  he  bled ;  and 
he  not  merely  bled,  he  died ;  and,  before  he  died,  his  spirit  sank 
within  him,  for  he  was  forsaken  of  his  God.  Was  there  ever  any 
other  love  like  this, — that  the  Prince  of  life  and  glory  should  con- 
descend to  this  shame  and  death  ? 

Then,  next,  brothers  and  sisters,  as  he  suffered  so  much  for  us, 
let  us  be  ready  to  suffer  anything  for  his  sake.  Let  us  be  willing 
even  to  lose  all  the  joy  of  religion,  if  that  would  glorify  God. 
I  do  not  know  that  it  would ;  but  I  think  the  spirit  of  Christ  ought 
to  carry  us  even  as  far  as  Moses  went,  when  he  pleaded  for  the 
guilty  nation  of  Israel,  and  was  willing  to  have  his  own  name 
blotted  out  of  the  book  of  life  rather  than  that  God's  name  should 
be  dishonoured.  We  have  never  had  to  go  so  far  as  that,  and  we 
never  shall;  yet  let  us  be  willing  to  part  with  our  last  penny, 
for  Christ's  name's  sake,  if  he  requires  it.  Let  us  be  willing  to  lose 
our  reputation.  Ah,  it  is  a  difficult  thing  to  give  that  up !  Some 
of  us,  when  we  first  came  into  public  notice,  and  found  our  words 
picked  to  pieces,  and  our  character  slandered,  felt  it  rather  hard. 
We  have  got  used  to  it  now ;  but  it  was  very  trying  at  first.  But, 
oh !  if  one  had  to  be  called  a  devil, — if  one  had  to  go  through  this 
world,  and  to  be  spat  upon  by  every  passer-by, — still,  if  it  were 
ondured  for  Christ's  sake,  remembering  how  he  was  forsaken  of 
God  for  us,  we  ought  to  take  up  even  that  cross  with  thankfulness 
that  we  were  permitted  to  bear  it. 

Another  lesson  is  that,  if  ever  you  and  I  should  feel  that  we  are 
forsaken  of  God, — if  we  should  get  into  this  state  in  any  way, 
remember  that  we  are  only  where  Christ  has  been  before  us.  If  ever, 
in  our  direst  extremity,  we  should  be  compelled  to  cry,  "  My  God, 
my  G  od,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  we  shall  have  gone  down 
no  deeper  than  Christ  himself  went.  He  knows  that  feeling,  and 
that  state  of  heart,  for  he  has  felt  the  same.  This  fact  should  tend 
greatly  to   cheer   you.     Your    deep  depression  is  not    a  proof    of 


THE  SADDEST  CRY  FROM  THE  CROSS.  591 

reprobation ;  that  is  evident,  for  Christ  himself  endured  even  more. 
A  man  may  say,  "  I  cannot  be  a  child  of  God,  or  else  I  should  not 
feel  as  I  do."  Ah  !  you  do  not  know  what  true  children  of  God  may 
feel ;  strange  thoughts  pass  through  their  minds  in  times  of  storm 
and  doubt.  A  Puritan  preacher  was  standing  by  the  death-bed 
of  one  of  his  members  who  had  been  for  thirty  years  in  gloom  of 
soul.  The  good  old  minister  expected  that  the  man  would  get  peace 
at  last,  for  he  had  been  an  eminent  Christian,  and  had  greatly 
rejoiced  in  his  Saviour ;  but,  for  thirty  years  or  more,  he  had  fallen 
into  deep  gloom.  The  minister  was  trying  to  speak  a  word  of 
comfort  to  him,  but  the  man  said,  "  Ah,  sir !  but  what  can  you  say 
to  a  man  who  is  dying,  and  yet  who  feels  that  God  has  forsaken 
him  ?  "  The  pastor  replied,  "  But  what  became  of  that  Man  who 
died,  whom  God  did  really  forsake?  Where  is  He  now?"  The 
dying  man  caught  at  that,  and  said,  "  He  is  in  glory,  and  I  shall  be 
with  him;  I  shall  be  with  him  where  he  is."  And  so  the  light 
came  to  the  dying  man  who  had  been  so  long  in  the  dark ;  he  saw 
that  Christ  had  been  just  where  he  was,  and  that  he  siiould  be 
where  Christ  was,  even  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father.  I  hope, 
brothers  and  sisters,  that  you  will  never  get  down  so  low  as  that; 
but  I  beseech  you,  if  you  ever  meet  with  any  others  who  are  there, 
do  not  be  rough  with  them.  Some  strong-minded  people  are  very 
apt  to  be  hard  upon  nervous  folk,  and  to  say,  "  They  should  not 
get  into  that  state."  And  we  are  liable  to  speak  harshly  to  people 
who  are  very  depressed  in  spirit,  and  to  say  to  them,  "  Really,  you 
ought  to  rouse  yourself  out  of  such  a  state."  I  hope  none  of  you 
will  ever  have  such  an  experience  of  this  depression  of  spirit  as  I 
have  had ;  yet  I  have  le-arnt  from,  it  to  be  very  tender  with  all 
fellow-sufferers.  The  Lord  have  mercy  on  them,  and  help  them  out 
of  the  Slough  of  Despond;  for,  if  he  does  not,  they  will  sink  in 
deep  mire,  where  there  is  no  standing. 

I  pray  God  specially  to  bless  this  inference  from  our  text.  There 
is  hope  for  you,  brother,  or  sister,  if  you  are  in  this  condition. 
Christ  came  through  it,  and  he  will  be  with  you  in  it;  and,  after 
all,  you  are  not  forsaken  as  he  was,  be  you  sure  of  that.  With  you, 
the  forsaking  is  only  in  the  apprehension ;  that  is  bad  enough,  but 
it  is  not  a  matter  of  fact,  for  "  the  Lord  will  not  forsake  his  people," 
nor  cast  away  even  one  of  those  whom  he  has  chosen. 

I  will  tell  you  what  is  a  much  more  awful  thing  even  than  crying 
out,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  If  you 
are  afraid  that  God  has  left  you,  and  the  sweat  stands  on  your 
brow  in  very  terror,  and  if  your  aoul  seems  to  long  for  death  rather 
than  life,  in  such  a  state  as  that,  you  are  not  in  the  worst  possible 
condition.  "  Why !  "  you  ask,  "  ia  there  anything  worse  than 
that  ? "  Yes,  I  will  tell  you  what  is  much  worse  than  that ;  that 
is,  to  be  without  God,  and  not  to  care  about  it; — to  be  living, 
like  some  whom  I  am  now  addreaadng,  without  God,  and  without 
hope,  yet  that  never  concerns  them  at  alL  I  can  pity  the  agony  of 
the  man  who  cannot  bear  to  be  without  hia  God ;  but,  at  the  saone 
time,  I  can  bless  the  Lord  that  he  feels  such  agony  a«  that,  for 
that  proves  to  me  that  his  soul  will  never  perish.     But  those,  whom 


592  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

I  look  upon  with  fear  and  trembling,  are  the  men  who  make  a- 
profession  of  religion,  yet  who  never  have  any  communion  with 
God,  and,  all  the  while,  are  quite  happy  about  it; — or  backsliders, 
who  have  gone  away  from  G-od,  and  yet  seem  perfectly  at  ease. 
You,  worldlings,  who  are  quite  satisfied  with  the  things  of  this 
world,  and  have  no  longings  for  the  world  that  is  to  come,  I  wish 
you  had  got  as  far  as  to  be  unhappy;  I  wish  you  had  got  as  far 
as  to  be  in  an  agony,  for  that  is  the  road  to  heavenly  joy.  It  was 
thus  that  Christ  won  it  for  us,  and  it  is  by  such  a  path  as  this, 
that  many  a  soul  is  first  led  into  the  experience  of  his  saving  power. 
Brethren,  weep  not  for  those  of  us  who  sometimes  have  to  cry  out 
in  anguish  of  soul ;  mourn  not  for  us  who  are  cast  down  because  w& 
cannot  live  without  Christ.  You  seo  that  our  Lord  has  made  us 
covet  the  highest  blessings;  our  heads  have  been  so  often  on  his 
bosom  that,  if  they  are  not  always  there,  we  keep  on  crying  till 
we  get  back  to  that  blessed  position  again.  This  is  a  sweet  sorrow ; 
may  we  have  more  and  more  of  it !  But,  oh  !  I  pray  you,  pity  those 
who  never  ate  the  bread  of  heaven, — never  drank  of  the  water  of 
life, — never  knew  the  sweetness  of  the  kisses  of  Christ's  mouth, — 
and  never  knew  what  it  was  to  have  a  heaven  begun  below  in  the 
enjoyment  of  fellowship  with  him.  In  such  cases,  your  pity  is- 
indeed  required. 

I  have  finished  when  I  have  just  said  this, — &a  you  come  to  the 
table  of  your  Lord,  come,  brothers  and  sisters,  with  this  cry  of 
Christ  ringing  in  your  ears,  to  make  you  love  him  more  than  ever; 
and,  as  you  eat  the  bread,  and  drink  the  wine,  do  it  all  out  of 
fervent  love  to  him ;  and  the  Lord  bless  you,  for  his  name's  sake  1' 
Amen. 


lExposition  bp  C«  ©.  Spurgeon, 

MATTHEW  XXVII.  27—54. 

Verses  27 — 30.  Then  the  soldiers  of  the  governor  took  Jesus  into  the  common 
hall,  and  gathered  unto  him  the  whole  band  of  soldiers.  And  they  strippeil  him^ 
and  put  on  him  a  scarlet  role.  And  when  they  had  platted  a  crown  of  th(>rns, 
they  pvi  it  upon  his  head,  and  a  reed  in  his  right  hand:  and  they  bowed  the 
knee  be/ore  him,  and  mocked  him,  saying,  Hail,  King  of  the  Jews  !  And  they 
spit  upon  hirrij  and  took  the  reed,  and  smote  him  on  the  head. 

These  soldiers  were  men  to  whom  the  taking  of  human  life  was  mere 
amusement,  or,  at  best,  a  duty  to  be  performed.  If  the  ordinary  Boman 
citizen  found  his  greatest  delight  in  the  amphitheatre,  where  men  fiercely 
fought  with  each  other,  and  shed  each  other's  blood,  or  were  devoured  by 
wild  beasts,  you  may  imagine  what  Roman  soldiery — the  roughest  part  of  the 
whole  population, — would  be  like ;  and  now  that  Oae  was  giveu  up  into 
their  hands,  charged  with  making  himself  a  king,  you  can  conceive  what  a 
subject  for  jest  it  was  to  them,  and  how  thev  determined  to  make  all  the 
mockery  they  could  of  this  pretended  king.  They  were  not  touched  by  the 
gentleness  of  his  demeanour,  nor  by  his  sorrowful  countenance ;  hnt  they 

groceeded  to  pour  all  possible  scorn  and  insult  upon  his  devoted  head, 
urely,  the  world  never  saw  a  more  marvellous  scene  than  this, — the  King 
of  kings  derided,  and  made  nothing  of, — treated  aa  a  mimic  monarch  by 
the  very  vilest  and  most  brutal  of  men. 


EXPOSITION.  593 

31.  And  after  that  they  had  mocked  him,  they  took  the  rohe  off  from  him 
<ind  put  his  own  raiment  on  him,  and  ltd  him  away  to  crucify  him. 

Their  action,  in  restoring  to  him  his  own  seamless  robe,  was  overruled  by 
God, — whatever  their  motive  may  have  been, — so  that  nobody  might  say 
that  some  other  person  had  been  substituted  for  the  Saviour.  He  went 
iorth  wearing  that  well-known  garment,  which  was  woven  from  the  top 
throughout,  which  he  had  always  worn  ;  and  all  who  looked  upon  him  paid, 
**  It  is  he, — the  Nazarene.  We  know  his  face,  his  dress,  his  person  " 
There  was  no  possibility  of  mistaking  him  for  anybody  else. 

32.  And  as  they  came  out,  they  found  a  man  of  Gyrene,  Simon  hy  name: 
him  they  compelled  to  bear  his  cross. 

It  was  too  heavy  for  him  to  carry  alone,  so  they  bade  Simon  help  him ; 
and,  truly,  I  think  that  Simon  was  thereby  higlily  honoured.  If  this  was 
Simon,  who  is  called  Niger,  then  there  may  be  some  truth  in  the  coimn  >n 
belief  that  he  was  a  black  man  ;  and,  assuredly,  the  coloured  race  has  long 
had  to  carry  a  very  heavy  cross,  yet  there  may  be  a  great  destiny  before  it. 

All  Christ's  followers  are  called  to  be  cross-bearers. 

"Shall  Simon  bear  the  cross  alone, 
A'ld  all  the  rest  go  free  ? 
N>>;   there's  a  cross  tor  every  one, 
And  there's  a  cross  for  me." 

If  we  belong  to  ChTi>*t,  we  must  be  as  willing  to  take  ap  his  cross  as  he 
^was  t<*  carry  ours,  and  die  upon  it. 

33.  34,  And  ivhen  fh^y  irere  come  unto  a  place  called  Oolyotha,  that  is  to 
say,  a  place  of  a  skull,  th^-y  gave  him  vint-ynr  to  drink  mingled  with  gall :  and 
when  he  had  tasted  thereof,  he  would  not  drink. 

It  was  not  because  of  its  bitterness  that  our  Lord  refused  it,  for  he  did 
not  decline  to  endure  anything  that  would  add  to  his  grief  ;  but  this  was 
a  stupefying  draught,  a  death  potion,  which  was  given  to  those  who  were 
executed,  in  order  somewhat  to  mitigate  their  pains;  but  the  Saviour  did 
not  intend  that  his  senses  should  be  beclouded  by  any  such  draught  as  that, 
so,  "  when  he  had  tasted  thereof,  he  would  not  drink." 

35.     And  they  crucified  him, — 

A  short  sentence,  but  what  an  awful  depth  of  meaning  there  is  in  it  ! 
**  They  crucified  him," — driving  their  iron  bolts  through  bis  hands  and  feet, 
and  lifting  him  up  to  hang  there  upon  the  gibbet  which  was  reserved  for 
felons  and  for  slaves :  **  They  crucified  him," — 

35.  And  parted  his  garments,  casting  lots:  that  it  might  he  fulfilled  which 
was  bpoken  hy  the  prophet,  They  parted  my  garments  among  them,  and  upon  my 
vesture  did  they  cast  lots. 

It  was  the  ext  cutioners'  perquisite  to  have  the  garments  of  the  man  they 
put  to  death  ;  to,  in  order  that  no  single  portion  of  the  shame  of  the  cross 
might  be  spared  to  the  Saviour,  these  soldiers  divided  his  garments 
amongst  them,  and  raffl<-d  for  his  seamless  robe.  It  must  have  taken  a 
hard  heart  to  gamble  at  the  toot  of  the  cross  ;  but  I  suppose  that,  of  all 
sins  under  heaven,  there  is  none  that  does  so  harden  the  heart  as  gambling. 
Beware  of  it ! 

36.  And  sitting  down  they  watched  him  there/ 

Some  to  gloat,  in  their  fiendish  malice,  over  his  suflferings ;  others,  to 
make  sure  thut  he  did  really  die ;  and,  possibly,  some  few  to  pity  him  in 
his  agony  :  "  Sitting  down  they  watched  him  there." 

37 — 44.  And  set  up  over  his  head  his  accusation  written,  THIS  IS  JESUS 
TUB  KINO  OF  THE  JEWS.  Then  were  there  two  thieves  crucified  with 
him,  one  on  the  right  hand,  and  another  on  the  left     And  they  that  passed  by 

38 


594 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 


reviled  him,  wagging  their  headt,  and  saying,  Thou  that  destroyest  the  temple^ 
and  buildest  it  in  three  days,  save  thyself.  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  Ood,  come 
doion  from  the  cross.  Likewise  also  the  chief  priests  mocking  him,  with  the 
scribes  and  elders,  said,  He  saved  others;  himself  he  cannot  save.  If  he  be 
the  King  of  Israel,  let  him  now  come  down  from  the  cross,  and  we  will  believe 
him.  Re  trusted  in  Ood:  let  him  deliver  him  now,  if  he  will  have  him:  for 
he  said,  I  am  the  Son  of  Ood,  The  thieves  aUOy  which  were  crucified  with  him, 
cast  the  sam^  in  his  teeth. 

So  that,  as  he  looked  all  around,  he  met  with  nothing  but  ribaldry,  and 
jest,  and  scorn.  His  disciples  had  all  forsaken  him.  One  or  two  of  them 
afterwards  rallied  a  little,  and  came  and  stood  by  the  cross ;  but,  just  then, 
he  looked,  and  there  was  none  to  pity,  and  none  to  help  him,  even  as  it  had 
been  foretold. 

45.  Now  from  the  sixth  hour  there  was  darkness  over  all  the  land  unto  the 
ninth  hour. 

From  twelve  o'clock  at  noon,  according  to  the  Koman  and  Jewish  time^ 
till  three  in  the  afternoon,  there  was  a  thick  darkness, — whether  over  all 
the  world,  or  only  over  the  land  of  Palestine,  we  cannot  very  well  say.  It 
was  not  an  eclipse  of  the  sun,  it  was  a  miracle  specially  wrought  by  God. 
Some  have  supposed  that  dense  clouds  came  rolling  up  obscuring  every- 
thing ;  but,  whatever  it  was,  deep  darkness  came  over  all  the  land.  Dore 
has,  in  his  wonderful  imagination,  given  us  a  sketch  of  Jerusalem  during 
that  darkness.  The  inhabitants  are  all  trembling  at  what  they  had  done  ; 
and  as  Judas  goes  down  the  street,  they  point  at  him  as  the  man  who  sold 
his  Master,  and  brought  all  this  evil  upon  the  city.  I  should  think  that 
such  darkness  at  mid-day  must  have  made  them  fear  that  ,the  last  day  had 
come,  or  that  some  great  judgment  would  overtake  them  for  their  wicked 
slaughter  of  the  innocent  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  Even  the  sun  could  no  longer 
look  upon  its  Maker  surrounded  by  those  who  mocked  him,  so  it  travelled 
on  in  tenfold  night,  as  if  in  very  shame  that  the  great  Sun  of  righteousness 
should  himself  be  in  such  awful  darkness. 

46 — 48.  And  about  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying, 
Eli,  Eli,  lama  sabachthani  f  that  is  to  say.  My  God,  my  Ood,  why  hast  thou 
forsaken  me  f  Some  of  them  that  stood  there,  when  they  heard  that,  said.  This 
man  calleth  for  Eliat.  And  straightway  one  of  them  ran,  and  took  a  tpunge^ 
and  filed  it  with  vinegar,  and  put  it  on  a  reed,  and  gave  him  to  drink. 

For  he  had  also  said,  "  I  thirst,"  which  John  records,  specially  mentioning 
that  he  said  this,  "  that  the  Scripture  might  be  fulfilled." 

49 — 51.  The  rest  said^  Let  be,  let  us  see  whether  Elias  will  come  to  save  him, 
Jesus,  when  he  had  cried  again  with  a  loud  voice,  yielded  up  the  ghost.  And, 
behold,  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom ; 

That  rending  of  the  great  veil  of  the  temple  was  intended  to  symbolize 
the  end  of  Judaism  ;  the  horror  of  the  sanctuary  that  its  Lord  was  put  to 
death ;  the  opening  of  the  mysteries  of  heaven ;  the  clearing  of  the  way  of 
access  between  man  and  God. 

61.     And  the  earth  did  quake,  and  the  rocks  rentj 
Well  says  our  poet, — 

"  Of  feeling,  all  things  show  some  sign 
But  this  unfeeling  heart  of  mine." 

62 — 64.  And  the  graves  were  opened;  and  many  bodies  of  the  saints  which 
slept  arose,  and  came  out  of  the  graves  after  his  resurrection,  and  went  into  the 
holy  city,  and  appeared  unto  many.  Now  when  the  centurion,  and  they  that 
were  with  him,  watching  Jesus,  saw  the  earthquake,  and  those  things  that  were 
done^  they  feared  greatly,  saying,  Truly  this  wcu  the  Son  of  Ood. 


THE  SHORTEST  OF  THE  SEVEN  CRIES. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  April  14th,  1878,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGE  ON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"After  this,  Jesus  knowing  that  all  things  were  now  accomplished,  that  the 
scripture  might  be  fulfilled,  saith,  I  thirst."— John  xix.  28.  ^  ,        t  m- 

It  was  most  fitting  that  every  word  of  our  Lord  upon  the  cross  should 
be  gathered  up  and  preserved.     As  not  a  bone  of  him  shall  be  broken,  so 
not  a  word  shall  be  lost.     The  Holy  Spirit  took  special  care  that  each  of 
the  sa<?red  utterances  should  be  fittingly  recorded.     There  were,  as  you 
know,  seven  of  those  last  words,  and  seven  is  the  number  of  perfection 
and  tulness  ;  the  number  which  blends  the  three  of  the  infinite  God  with 
the  four  of  complete  creation.    Our  Lord  in  his  death-cries,  as  in  all  else 
Avas  perfection  itself.     There  is  a  fulness  of  meaning  in  each  utterance 
which  no  man  shall  be  able  fiilly  to  bring  forth,  and  when  combined  they 
make  up  a  vast  deep  of  thought,  which  no  human  line  can  fathom.    Here^ 
as  everywhere  else,  we  are  constrained  to  say  of  our  Lord,  "  Never  man 
spake  like  this  man."     Amid  all  the  anguish  of  his  spirit  his  last  words, 
prove  him  to  have  remained  fully  self-possessed,  true  to  his  foro-iving 
nature,  true  to  his  kingly  office,  true  to  his  filial  relationship,  true1;o  his 
God,  true  to  his  love  of  the  written  word,  true  to  his  glorious  work,  and 
true  to  his  faith  in  his  Father. 

As  these  seven  sayings  were  so  faithfully  recorded,  we  do  not  wonder 
that  they  have  frequently  been  the  subject  of  devout  meditation, 
lathers  and  confessors,  preachers  and  divines  have  delighted  to  dwell 
upon  every  syllable  of  these  matchless  cries.  These  solemn  sentences 
have  shone  like  the  seven  golden  candlesticks  or  the  seven  stars  of  the 
Apocalypse,  and  have  lighted  multitudes  of  men  to  him  who  spake  them. 
Thoughtful  men  have  drawn  a  wealth  of  meaning  from  them,  and  in  so 
doing  have  arranged  them  into  different  groups,  and  placed  them  under 
several  heads.  I  cannot  give  you  more  than  a  mere  taste  of  this  rich  sub* 
ject,  but  I  have  been  most  struck  with  two  ways  of  regarding  our  Lord'a 
last  words.  First,  they  teach  and  confirm  many  of  the  doctrines  of  our 
holy  faith.  "  Fatfwrjorgive  them;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do  "  is  the 
nrst.  Here  is  the  forgiveness  of  sin— free  forgiveness  in  answer  to  ther 
No.  1,409. 


596  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Saviour's  plea.  "  To-day  shall  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise^  Here  is 
the  snfety  of  the  believer  in  the  hour  of  his  departure,  and  his  mstant 
admission  into  the  presence  of  his  Lord.  It  is  a  blow  at  the  fable  of 
pnrcratory  which  strikes  it  to  the  heart.  "  Woman,  behold  ihy  son! 
This  very  plainly  sets  forth  the  true  and  proper  humanity  ot  Christ, 
who  to  the  end  recognised  his  human  relationship  to  Mary,  of  whom  he 
was  born.  Yet  his  language  teaches  us  not  to  worship  h£r,  for  he  calls 
her  "  woman,"  but  to  honour  him  who  in  his  direst  agony  thought  of  her 
needs  and  griefs,  as  he  also  thinks  of  all  his  people,  for  these  are  his 
mother  and  sister  and  brother.  " Eloi,  Eloi,  lama  sabachfham?  is  the 
fourth  cry,  and  it  illustrates  the  penalty  endured  by  our  Substitute  when 
he  bore  our  sins,  and  so  was  forsaken  of  his  God.  The  sharpness  of 
that  sentence  no  exposition  can  fuUy  disclose  to  us  :  it  is  keen  as  the  very 
edge  and  point  of  the  sword  which  pierced  his  heart.  "  /  thirst  is  the 
fifth  cry,  and  its  utterance  teaches  us  the  truth  of  Scripture,  for  all  things 
were  accomplished,  that  the  Scripture  might  be  fulfilled,  and  therefore 
our  Lord  said,  "  I  thirst."  Holy  Scripture  remains  the  basis  of  our 
faith,  established  by  every  word  and  act  of  our  Redeemer,  ihe  last 
word  but  one  is,  «//  is  finished:'  There  is  the  complete  justification 
of  the  believer,  since  the  work  by  which  he  is  accepted  is  fully  accom- 
plished. The  last  of  his  last  words  is  also  taken  from  the  Scriptures,  and 
shows  where  his  mind  was  feeding.  He  cried,  ere  he  bowed  the  head 
which  lie  had  held  erect  amid  all  his  conflict,  as  one  who  never  yielded, 
"Father,  into  thy  /mnds  I  commend  my  spirits  In  that  cry  there  is 
reconciliation  to  God.  He  who  stood  in  our  stead  has  finished  al!  his 
work,  and  now  his  spirit  comes  back  to  the  Father,  and  he  brings  us  with 
him.  Every  word,  therefore,  you  see  teaches  us  some  grand  fundamental 
doctrine  of  our  blessed  faith.    "  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear. 

A  second  mode  of  treating  these  seven  cries  is  to  view  them  as  setting 
forth  the  person  and  offices  of  our  Lord  who  uttered  them.  /^//f » 
forgive  tJiem ;  for  they  hww  not  what  they  do  "-here  we  see  the  Mediator 
interceding:  Jesus  standing  before  the  Father  pleading  for  the  guilty. 
"  Verilii  Isay  unto  thee,  to-day  shall  thou  be  with  me  m  parailise  —this 
is  the  Lord  Jesus  in  kingly  power,  opening  with  the  key  of  David  a  door 
which  none  can  shut,  admitting  into  the  gates  of  heaven  the  poor  soul 
who  had  confessed  him  on  the  tree.  Hail,  everlasting  King  in  heaven, 
thou  dost  admit  to  thy  paradise  whomsoever  thou  wilt!  Nor  dost  thou 
set  a  time  for  waiting,  but  instantly  thou  dost  set  wide  the  gate  ot  pearl ; 
thou  hast  all  power  in  heaven  as  well  as  upon  earth.  ^  ihen  came, 
''  Woman,  behold  thy  son!''  wherein  we  see  the  Son  of  man  in  the  gentle- 
ness  of  a  son  caring  for  his  bereaved  mother.  In  the  former  cry  as  he 
opened  Paradise,  you  saw  the  Son  of  God ;  now  you  see  him  w^^^^^^ 
verily  and  truly  bora  of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law;  and  undei  he 
law  you  see  him  still,  for  he  honours  his  mother  and  cares  for  her  in  the 
last  article  of  death.  Then  comes  the  "  My  God,  my  God,  ivhyhast  thou 
forsaken  me .?"  Here  we  behold  his  human  soul  in  anguish,  hisinmost 
heart  overwhelmed  by  the  withdrawing  of  Jehovah  s  face  ^^cl  made  to 
cry  out  as  if  in  pei-plexity  and  amazement.  «7  thirst,  is  his  human 
bidy  tormented  by  grievous  pain.  Here  you  see  how  t^e  .^i^al  A  sh 
had  to  share  in  the  a^ony  of  the  inward  spirit  " //  ^' fi'^'f'f  '^^^^ 
last  word  bjt  one,  an5  there  you  see  the  perfected  Saviour,  the  Captain 


THE   SHORTEST   OF   THE    SEVEN   CRIKS.  597 

of  our  salvation,  who  has  completed  the  undertaking  upon  which  he  had 
entered,  finished  transgression,  made  an  end  of  sin,  and  brought  in  ever- 
lastiiig  righteousness.  The  last  expiring  word  in  which  he  commended  his 
.spirit  io  his  Father,  is  the  note  of  acceptance  for  himself  and  for  us  all. 
As  he  commends  his  spirit  into  the  Father's  hand,  so  does  he  bring  all 
believers  nigh  to  God,  and  henceforth  we  are  in  the  hand  of  the  Father, 
who  is  greater  than  all,  and  none  sliall  pluck  us  thence.  Is  not  this  a 
fertile  field  of  .thought  ?  May  the  Holy  Spirit  often  lead  us  .to  glean 
therein. 

There  are  many  other  ways  in  which  these  words  might  be  read,  and 
they  would  be  found  to  be  all  fidl  of  instruction.  Like  the  steps  of  a 
ladder  or  the  links  of  a  golden  chain,  there  is  a  mutual  dependence  and 
interlinking  of  each  of  the  cries,  so  that  one  leads  to  another  and  that 
to  a  third.  Separately  or  in  connection  our  Master's  words  overflow  with 
instruction  to  thoughtful  minds :  but  of  all  save  one  I  must  say,  "  Of 
which  we  cannot  now  speak  particularly." 

Our  text  is  the  shortest  of  all  the  words  of  Calvary  ;  it  stands  as  two 
words  in  our  language — "I  thirst,"  but  in  the  Greek  it  is  only  one.  I 
cannot  say  that  it  is  short  and  sweet,  for,  alas,  it  was  bitterness  itself  to 
our  Lord  Jesus  ;  and  yet  out  of  its  bitterness  I  trust  there  will  come 
great  sweetness  to  us.  Though  bitter  to  him  in  the  speaking  it  will  be 
sweet  to  us  in  the  hearing, — so  sweet  that  all  the  bittei-uess  of  our 
trials  shall  be  forgotten  as  we  remember  the  vinegar  and  gall  of  which 
he  drank. 

We  shall  by  the  assistance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  try  to  regard  these  words 
of  our  Saviour  in  a  five-fold  light.  First,  we  shall  look  upon  them  as 
THE  ENSIGN  OF  HIS  TRUE  HUMANITY.  Jcsus  Said,  "  I  thirst,"  and  this 
is  the  complaint  of  a  man.  Our  Lord  is  the  Maker  of  the  ocean  and  the 
waters  that  are  above  the  firmament :  it  is  his  hand  that  stays  or  opens 
the  bottles  of  heaven,  and  sendeth  rain  upon  the  evil  and  upon  the  good. 
"  The  sea  is  his,  and  he  made  it,"  and  all  fountains  and  springs  are  of 
his  digging.  He  poureth  out  the  streams  that  run  among  the  hills,  the 
torrents  which  rush  adown  the  mountains,  and  the  flowing  rivers  which 
enrich  the  plains.  One  would  have  said,  If  he  were  thirsty  he  would  not 
tell  us,  for  all  the  clouds  and  rains  would  be  glad  to  refresh  his  brow,  and 
the  brooks  and  streams  would  joyously  flow  at  his  feet.  And  yet,  though 
he  was  Lord  of  all  he  had  so  fully  taken  upon  himself  the  form  of  a 
servant  and  was  so  perfectly  made  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  that  he 
cried  with  fainting  voice,  "  I  thirst."  How  truly  man  he  is ;  he  is,  in- 
deed, "bone  of  our  bone  and  flesh  of  our  flesh,"  for  he  bears  our 
infirmities.  I  invite  you  to  meditate  upon  the  true  humanity  of  <  ur 
Lord  very  reverently,  and  very  lovingly.  Jesus  was  proved  to  be  rea  ly 
man,  because  he  sulfered  the  pains  which  belong  to  manhood.  Angds 
cannot  suffer  thirst.  A  phantom,  as  some  have  called  him,  could  not 
suffer  in  this  fashion  :  but  Jesus  really  suffered,  not  only  the  more  refined 
pains  of  delicate  and  sensitive  minds,  but  the  rougher  and  commoner 
pangs  of  flesh  and  blood.  Thirst  is  a  common-place  misery,  such  as  may 
happen  to  peasants  or  beggars ;  it  is  a  real  pain,  and  not  a  thing  of  a 
Jancy  or  a  nightmare  of  dreamland.  Thirst  is  no  royal  grief,  but  an  evil 
^of  universal  manhood :  Jesus  is  brother  to  the  poorest  and  most  humble 
of  our  race.     Our  Lord,  however,  endured  thirst  to  an  extreme  degree, 


ggg  MRTROPOl-ITAN   TABERNACI-P.   PU(,1>IT. 

for  it  «as  the  thirst  of  death  which  was  upon  him,  and  more,  it  was  the 
thirst  of  one  whose  death  was  not  a  common  one,  for      he  touted  death 
for  every  man."     That  thirst  was  caused,  perhaps,  in  part  by  the  loss 
of  blood  and  by  the  fever  created  by  the  irritation  caused  by  his  four 
^evous  wounds     The  nails  were  fastened  in  the  most  sensitive  ^te 
of  the  bodv  and  the  wounds  were  widened  as  the  weight  of  his  body 
dragged  the  nails  through  his  blessed  flesh,  and  tore  h.s  tender  nerves 
The  extreme  tension  produced  a  burning  feverishness.     I   w-as  pain  that 
dried  his  mouth  and  made  it  like  an  oven,  till  he  declared,  in  the  language 
of  the  twenty-second  psalm,  "  My  tongue  cleaveth  to  my  jaws.       U  was 
a  thii-st  such  as  none  of  us  have  ever  known,  for  not  yet  has  the  death 
dew  condensed  upon  our  brows.     We  shall   perhaps  know  it  m  our 
measure  in  our  dying  hour,  but  not  yet,  nor  ever  so  terribly  as  he  did. 
~ord  telt  that  gdevous  drought  of  dissolution  by  which  all  moisture 
seems  dried  up,  and  the  flesh  returns  to  the  dust  of  death:  this  tho^ 
,kno^%vho  have  commenced  to  tread  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death, 
/jesus,  being  a  man,  escaped  none  of  the  ills  which  are  allotted  to  man 
indeith.    lie  is  indeed  "Immanuel,  God  with  us    everywhere. 
^      Believing  this,  let  us  tenderly  feel  how  very  near  akin  to  us  our  Lord 
Jesus  has  become.    You  have  been  iU,  and  you  have  be^"  P^«!i«d^'  h 
fever  as  he  was,  and  then  you  too  have  gasped  oat  '  I  thiist.      Your 
path  runs  hard  by  that  of  your  Master.     He  said,  "I  '^irst     >n  order 
Lt  some  one  might  bring  him  drink,  even  as  you  have  washed  to  have 
a  cooling  draught  handed  to  yon  when  y;ou  could  not  he'P /ourself    Can 
Tou  help  feeUng  how  very  near  Jesus  is  to  us  when  his  I'Pf  m"«t  «« 
Moistened  witli  a  sponge,  and  he  must  be  so  dependent  upon  other^  f  ,'^ 
ask  drink  from  their  hand?    Next  time  your  fevered  hps  murmur     I  am 
very  thii-sty,"  you  may  say  to  yourseli, "  Those  are  saxjred  words,  for  my 
Lo7d  spake  in  that  fashion."''   The  words,  "I  thirst,"  are  a  common 
voT^  in  death  chambers.     We  can  never  tbrget  the  painful  scenes  ot 
wS  we  have  been  witness,  when  we  have  watched  the  dissolving  of  the 
human  frame.    Some  of  those  whom  we  loved  very  dearly  we  have  seen 
Juruuable  to  help  themselves;  the  death  sweat  has  been  upon  them 
and  this  has  been  one  of  the  marks  of  their  fPP-'r'^'nS/'f!  '^"'ttt 
they  have  been  parched  with  thirst,  and  could  only  mutter  between  their 
half-cW  lips  "Give  me  to  drink."    Ah,  beloved,  our  Lord  was  so 
tniym^  that' all  our  griefe  remind  ns  of  him:  the  next  time  we  are 
tSy  we  may  gaze  upon  him;  and  whenever  we  see  a  fi-iend  faint  and 
tSfng  while' lying  w'e  may  behold  our  Lord  d-ly,  but  truly,  mirro^^^ 
in  his  members.    How  near  akin  the  thirsty  Saviour  is  to  us ;  let  uS  lo%e 

r  "'HoT^eTt'trTove  which  led  him  to  such  a  condescension  as  this  ! 

!  Do  not  lit  ns  forget  the  infinite  distance  between  the  L"//^/ S^^^  ""^ 
Miis  throne  and  the  Crucified  dried  up  with  thirst.  A  river  "f  the  water 
of  life,  pure  as  crystal,  proceedeth  t«-day  out  of  the  ,  h-oje  of  bod  and 
of  the  Lamb,  and  yet  once  he  condescended  to  f  7- "  ^  «  "!''^^  X  is 
Lord  of  fountains  and  all  deeps,  but  not  a  «»?  of _cold  water  was  placed 
to  his  lips.  Oh,  if  he  had  at  any  time  said,  '  I  thirst,  before  his 
^gelic  guards,  they  would  surely  have  emulated  the  courage  of  the  .en 
ofV-id  when  they  cut  their  way  to  the  well  of  BetJi'ehem  that  was 
within  the  gate,  and  drew  water  in  ieopardy  of  their  lives.     Who  among 


THE   SHORTEST   OF  THE   SEVEN   CRIES.  599 

US  would  not  willingly  pour  out  his  soul  unto  death  if  he  might  but  give 
refieshnient  to  the  Lord  ?  And  yet  he  placed  himself  for  our  sakes  into 
a  position  of  shame  and  suffering  where  none  would  wait  upon  him,  but 
when  he  cried,  "  I  thirst,"  they  gave  him  vinegar  to  drink.  Glorious  stoop 
of  our  exalted  Head  !  0  Lord  Jesus,  we  love  thee  and  we  worship  thee  ! 
We  would  fain  lift  thy  name  on  high  in  grateful  remembrance  of  the 
depths  to  which  thou  didst  descend  ! 

While  thus* we  admire  his  condescension  let  our  thoughts  also  turn  with 
delight  to  his  sure  sympathy  :  for  if  Jesus  said,  "  I  thirst,"  then  he  knows 
all  our  frailties  and  woes.  The  next  time  we  are  in  pain  or  are  suffering 
depression  of  spirit  we  will  remember  that  our  Lord  understands  it  all, 
for  he  has  had  practical,  personal  experience  of  it.  Neither  in  torture  of 
body  nor  in  sadness  of  heart  are  we  deserted  by  our  Lord ;  his  line  is  parallel 
with  ours.  The  arrow  which  has  lately  pierced  thee,  my  brother,  was  first 
stained  with  his  blood.  The  cup  of  which  thou  art  made  to  drink,  though 
it  be  very  bitter,  bears  the  mark  of  his  lips  about  its  brim.  He  hath 
traversed  the  mournful  way  before  thee,  and  every  footprint  thou  leavest 
in  the  sodden  soil  is  stamped  side  by  side  with  his  footmarks.  Let  the 
sympathy  of  Christ,  then,  be  fully  believed  in  and  deeply  appreciated, 
since  he  said,  "  I  thirst." 

Henceforth,  also,  let  us  cultivate  the  spirit  of  resignation,  for  we  may 
well  rejoice  to  carry  a  cross  which  his  shoulders  have  borne  before  us. 
Beloved,  if  our  Master  said,  "  I  thirst,"  do  we  expect  every  day  to  drink 
of  streams  from  Lebanon  ?  He  was  innocent,  and  yet  he  thirsted ;  shall 
we  marvel  if  guilty  ones  are  now  and  then  chastened  ?  If  he  was  so  poor 
that  his  garments  were  stripped  from  him,  and  he  was  hung  up  upon  the 
tree,  penniless  and  friendless,  hungering  and  thirsting,  will  you  henceforth 
groan  and  murmur  because  you  bear  the  yoke  of  poverty  and  want  ? 
There  is  bread  upon  your  table  to-day,  and  there  will  be  at  least  a  cup 
of  cold  water  to  refresh  you.  You  are  not,  therefore,  so  poor  as  he.i 
Complain  not,  then.  Shall  the  servant  be  above  his  Master,  or  the  dis-/ 
ciple  above  his  Lord?  Let  patience  have  her  perfect  work.  You  dq( 
suffer.  Perhaps,  dear  sister,  you  carry  about  with  you  a  gnawing  disease 
which  eats  at  your  heart,  but  Jesus  took  our  sicknesses,  and  his  cup 
was  more  bitter  than  yours.  In  your  chamber  let  the  gasp  of  your 
Lord  as  he  said,  ''  I  thirst,"  go  through  your  ears,  and  as  you  hear  it  let  it 
touch  your  heart  and  cause  you  to  gird  up  yourself  and  say,  "  Doth  he 
say,  *  I  thirst '  ?  Then  I  will  thirst  with  him  and  not  complain,  I  will 
suffer  with  him  and  not  murmur."  The  Kedeemer's  cry  of  "  I  thirst "  is  a 
solemn  lesson  of  patience  to  his  afflicted. 

Once  again,  as  we  think  of  this  "  I  thirst,"  which  proves  our  Lord's 
humanity,  let  us  resolve  to  shun  no  denials,  but  rather  court  them  that 
we  may  be  conformed  to  his  image.  May  we  not  be  half  ashamed  of  our 
pleasures  when  he  says,  "  I  thirst "  ?  May  we  not  despise  our  loaded 
table  while  he  is  so  neglected  ?  Shall  it  ever  be  a  hardship  to  be  denied 
the  satisfying  draught  when  he  said,  "  I  thirst."  Shall  carnal  appetites 
be  indulged  and  bodies  pampered  when  Jesus  cried  "  I  thirst"  ?  What 
if  the  bread  be  dry,  what  if  the  medicine  be  nauseous ;  yet  for  his  thirst 
there  was  no  relief  but  gall  and  vinegar,  and  dare  we  complain  ?  For 
his  sake  we  may  rejoice  in  self-denials,  and  accept  Christ  and  a  crust  aa 
all  we  desire  between  here  and  heaven.    A  Christian  living  to  indulge 


GOO  METROPOLITAN   TABEIINACLE    PULPIT. 

the  base  appetites  of  a  bnite  beast,  to  eat  and  to  drink  almost  to  gluttony 
and  drunkenness,  is  utterly  unworthy  of  the  name.  The  conquest  of  the- 
appetites,  the  entire  subjugation  of  the  flesh,  must  be  achieved,  for  before 
our  great  Exemplar  said,  "  It  is  finished,"  wherein  methinks  he  reached 
the  greatest  height  of  all,  he  stood  as  only  upon  the  next  lower  step  tO' 
that  elevation,  and  said,  "  I  thirst."  The  power  to  suffer  for  another, 
the  capacity  to  be  self-denying  even  to  an  extreme  to  accomplish  some 
great  work  for  God — this  is  a  thing  to  be  sought  after,  and  must  be 
gained  before  our  work  is  done,  and  in  this  Jesus  is  before  us  our 
example  and  our  strength. 

Thus  have  I  tried  to  spy  out  a  measure  of  teaching,  by  using  that  one- 
glass  for  the  soul's  eye,  through  which  we  look  upon  "I  thirst"  as  the 
ensign  of  his  true  humanity. 

II.  Secondly,  we  shall  regard  these  words,  "  I  thirst,"  as  the  token 
OF  HIS  SUFFERING  SUBSTITUTION.  The  great  Surety  says,  "  I  thirst," 
because  he  is  placed  in  the  sinner's  stead,  and  he  must  therefore  undergo 
the  penalty  of  sin  for  the  ungodly.  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou 
forsaken  me?"  points  to  the  anguish  of  his  soul;  "I  thirst"  expressed 
vin  part  the  torture  of  his  body;  and  they  were  both  needful,  because  it 
is  written  of  the  God  of  justice  that  he  is  "  able  to  destroy  both  soul 
and  body  in  hell,"  and  the  pangs  that  are  due  to  law  are  of  both  kinds^ 
touching  both  heart  and  flesh.  See,  brethren,  where  sin  begins,  and 
mark  that  there  it  ends.  It  began  with  the  mouth  of  appetite,  when  it 
was  sinfully  gratified,  and  it  ends  when  a  kindred  appetite  is  graciously 
denied.  Our  first  parents  plucked  forbidden  fruit,  and  by  eating  slew 
the  race.  Appetite  was  the  door  of  sin,  and  therefore  in  that  point  our 
Lord  was  put  to  pain.  With  "  I  thirst "  the  evil  is  destroyed  and  receiver 
its  expiation.  I  saw  the  other  day  the  emblem  of  a  sei-pent  with  its  tail 
in  its  mouth,  and  if  I  carry  it  a  little  beyond  the  artist's  intention  the 
symbol  may  set  forth  appetite  swallowing  up  itself.  A  carnal  appetite  of 
the  body,  the  satisfaction  of  the  desire  for  food,  first  brought  us  down 
under  the  first  Adam,  and  now  the  pang  of  thirst,  the  denial  of  what 
the  body  craved  for,  restores  us  to  our  place. 

Nor  is  this  all.  We  know  fi'om  experience  that  the  present  effect  of 
sin  in  every  man  who  indulges  in  it  is  thirst  of  soul.  The  mind  of 
man  is  like  the  daughters  of  the  horseleech,  which  cry  for  ever  "  Give,, 
give."  Metaphorically  understood,  thirst  is  dissatisfaction,  the  craving 
of  the  mind  for  sometliing  which  it  has  not,  but  which  it  pines  for.  Our- 
Lord  says,  "  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me  and  drink,"  that, 
thirst  being  the  result  of  sin  in  every  ungodly  man  at  this  moment. 
Now  Christ  standing  in  the  stead  of  the  ungodly  suffers  thirst  as  a. 
type  of  his  enduring  the  result  of  sin.  More  solemn  still  is  the  reflection, 
that  according  to  our  Lord's  own  teaching,  thirst  will  also  be  the  eternal 
result  of  sin,  for  he  says  concerning  the  rich  glutton,  **In  hell  he  lift  up 
his  eyes,  being  in  torment,"  and  his  prayer,  which  was  denied  him,  was, 
"  Father  Abraham,  send  Lazai-us,  that  he  may  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger 
in  water  and  cool  my  tongue,  for  I  am  tormented  in  this  flame."  Now 
recollect,  if  Jesus  had  nut  thirsted,  every  one  of  us  would  have  thirsted 
for  ever  afar  off  from  God,  with  an  impassable  gulf  between  us  and 
heaven.  Our  sinful  tongues,  blistered  by  the  fever  of  passion,  must 
have  burned  for  ever  h^  not  liis  tongue  been  tormented  with  thirst 


THE    SHORTEST   OF   THE    SEVEN   CRIES.  60! 

in  onr  stead.  I  suppose  that  the  "I  thirst"  was  uttered  softly,  sO' 
that  pei-haps  only  one  and  another  who  stood  near  tJie  cross  heard 
it  at  all ;  in  contrast  with  the  louder  cry  of  "  Lama  sabachtham  " 
and  the  triumphant  shout  of  "It  is  finished":  but  that  soft,  expiring 
sigh,  "  I  thirst,"  has  ended  for  us  the  thirst  whi«h  else,  insatiably  fierce"^ 
had  preyed  upon  us  throughout  eternity.  Oh,  wondrous  substitution  of 
the  just  for  the  unjust,  of  God  for  man,  of  the  perfect  Christ  for  us 
guilty,  heU-deserving  rebels.  Let  us  magnify  and  bless  our  Redeemer's 
name. 

It  seems  to  me  very  wonderful  that  this  "  I  thirst  '*  should  be,  as  it 
were,  the  clearance  of  it  all.  He  had  no  sooner  said  "  I  thirst,"  andi 
sipped  the  vinegar,  than  he  shouted,  "It  is  finished ";  and  all  was  over: 
the  battle  was  fought  and  the  victory  won  for  ever,  and  our  great 
Deliverer's  thirst  was  the  sign  of  his  having  smitten  the  last  foe.  The 
flood  of  his  grief  had  passed  the  high-water  mark,  and  began  to  be^ 
assuaged.  The  "  I  thirst "  was  the  bearing  of  the  last  pang ;  what  if  I 
say  it  was  the  expression  of  the  fact  that  his  pangs  had  at  last  begun  tO' 
cease,  and  their  fury  had  spent  itself,  and  left  him  able  to  note  his  lesser 
pains?  The  excitement  of  a  great  krnggle  makes  men  forget  thirst  and 
faintness ;  it  is  only  when  all  is  over  that  they  come  back  to  themselves 
and  note  the  spending  of  their  strength.  The  great  agony  of  being  for- 
saken by  God  was  over,  and  he  felt  faint  when  the  strain  was  withdrawn. 
I  hke  to  think  of  our  Lord's  saying,  "It  is  finished,"  directly  after 
he  had  exclaimed,  "I  thirst";  for  these  two  voices  come  so  naturally 
together.  Our  glorious  Samson  had  been  fighting  our  foes ;  heaps 
upon  heaps  he  had  slain  his  thousands,  and  now  like  Samson  he  was 
sore  athirst.  He  sipped  of  the  vinegar,  and  he  was  refreshed,  and  no 
sooner  has  he  thrown  off  the  thirst  than  he  shouted  like  a  conqueror, 
"  It  is  finished,"  and  quitted  the  field,  covered  with  renown.  Let  us 
exult  as  we  see  our  Substitute  going  through  with  his  work  even  to  the 
bitter  end,  and  then  with  a  "  Consummatum  est "  returning  to  his  Father, 
God.     0  souls,  burdened  with  sin,  rest  ye  here,  and  resting  live. 

III.  We  will  now  take  the  text  in  a  third  way,  and  may  the  Spirit  of 
God  instruct  us  once  again.  The  utterance  of  "  I  thirst "  brought  out 
— A  TYPE  OF  man's  TREATMENT  OF  HIS  LORD.  It  was  a  confirmation  of 
the  Scripture  testimony  with  regard  to  man's  natural  enmity  to  God. 
According  to  modern  thought  man  is  a  very  fine  and  noble  creature,, 
strugghng  to  become  better.  He  is  greatly  to  be  commended  and  admired,. 
for  his  sin  is  said  to  be  a  seeking  after  God,  and  his  superstition  is  a. 
strugghng  after  light.  Great  and  worshipful  being  that  he  is,  truth  is  to- 
be  altered  for  him,  the  gospel  is  to  be  modulated  to  suit  the  tone  of  his 
various  generations,  and  all  the  arrangements  of  the  universe  are  to  be 
rendered  subservient  to  his  interests.  Justice  must  fly  the  field  lest  it  be 
severe  to  so  deserving  a  being  ;  as  for  punishment,  it  must  not  be  whis- 
pered to  his  ears  polite.  In  fact,  the  tendency  is  to  exalt  man  above  God 
and  give  him  the  highest  place.  But  such  is  not  the  truthful  estimate 
of  man  according  to  the  Scriptures  :  there  man  is  a  fallen  creature,  with. 
a  carnal  mind  which  cannot  be  reconciled  to  God  ;  a  worse  than  brutish 
creature,  rendering  evil  for  good,  and  treating  his  God  with  vile  ingrati- 
tude. Alas,  man  is  the  slave  and  the  dupe  of  Satan,  and  a  black-hearted: 
traitor  to  his  God.     Did  not  the  prophecies  say  that  man  would  give  to 

<1 


602  METIiOPOIilTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

his  incarnate  God  g^all  to  eat  and  vinegar  to  drink  ?  It  is  done.  He 
came  to  save,  and  man  denied  him  hospitality  :  at  the  first  there  was  no 
room  for  him  at  the  inn,  and  at  the  last  there  was  not  one  cool  cup  of 
water  for  him  to  drink  ;  but  when  he  thirsted  they  gave  him  vinegar  to 
drink.  This  is  man's  treatment  of  his  Saviour.  tJniversal  manhood, 
left  to  itself,  rejects,  crucifies,  and  mocks  the  Christ  of  God.  This  was 
the  act  too  of  man  at  his  best,  when  he  is  moved  to  pity  ;  for  it  seems 
clear  that  he  who  lifted  up  the  wet  sponge  to  the  Redeemer's  lips,  did 
it  in  compassion.  I  think  that  Roman  soldier  meant  well,  at  least  well 
for  a  rough  warrior  with  his  little  hght  and  knowledge.  He  ran 
and  filled  a  sponge  with  vinegar :  it  was  the  best  way  he  knew  of 
putting  a  few  drops  of  moisture  to  the  hps  of  one  who  was  suffering 
so  much ;  but  though  he  felt  a  degree  of  pity,  it  was  such  as  one 
might  show  to  a  dog ;  he  felt  no  reverence,  but  mocked  as  he  relieved. 
We  read,  "  The  soldiers  also  mocked  him,  offering  him  vinegar."  When 
our  Lord  cried,  "Eloi,  Eloi,"  and  afterwards  said,  "I  thirst,'*  the 
persons  around  the  cross  said,  "  Let  be,  let  us  see  whether  EHas  will 
come  to  save  him,"  mocking  him  ;  and,  according  to  Mark,  he  who  gave 
the  vinegar  uttered  much  the  same  words.  He  pitied  the  sufferer,  but 
he  thought  so  little  of  him  that  he  joined  in  the  voice  of  scorn.  Even 
when  man  compassionates  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  man  would  have 
ceased  to  be  human  if  he  did  not,  still  he  scorns  him ;  the  very  cup 
which  man  gives  to  Jesus  is  at  once  scorn  and  pity,  for  "  the  tender 
mercies  of  the  wicked  are  cruel."  See  how  man  at  his  best  mingles 
admiration  of  the  Saviour's  person  with  scorn  of  his  claims;  writing 
books  to  hold  him  up  as  an  example  and  at  the  same  moment  reject- 
ing his  deity ;  admitting  that  he  was  a  wonderful  man,  but  denying  his 
most  sacred  mission ;  extolling  his  ethical  teaching  and  then  trampling  on 
his  blood :  thus  giving  him  drink,  but  that  di-ink  vinegar.  0  my 
hearers,  beware  of  praising  Jesus  and  denying  his  atoning  sacrifice. 
Beware  of  rendering  him  homage  and  dishonouring  his  name  at  the 
same  time. 

Alas,  my  brethren,  I  cannot  say  much  on  the  score  of  man's  cruelty 
to  our  Lord  without  touching  myself  and  you.  Have  tue  not  often 
given  him  vinegar  to  drink  ?  Did  we  not  do  so  years  ago  before 
we  knew  him  ?  We  used  to  melt  when  we  heard  about  his  sufferings, 
but  we  did  not  turn  from  our  sins.  We  gave  him  our  tears  and  then 
grieved  him  with  our  sins.  We  thought  sometimes  that  we  loved  him  as 
we  heard  the  story  of  his  death,  but  we  did  not  change  our  lives  for  his 
sake,  nor  put  our  trust  in  him,  and  so  we  gave  him  vinegar  to  drink. 
Nor  does  the  grief  end  here,  for  have  not  the  best  works  we  have  ever 
done,  and  the  best  feelings  we  have  ever  felt,  and  the  best  prayers  we 
have  ever  offered,  been  tart  and  sour  with  sin  ?  Can  they  be  compared 
to  generous  wine  ?  are  they  not  more  like  sharp  vinegar  ?  I  wonder  he 
has  ever  received  them,  as  one  marvels  why  he  received  this  vinegar ; 
and  yet  he  has  received  them,  and  smiled  upon  us  for  presenting  them. 
He  knew  once  how  to  turn  water  into  wine,  and  in  matchless  love  he  has 
often  turned  our  sour  drink-offerings  into  something  sweet  to  himself, 
though  in  themselves,  methinks,  they  have  been  the  juice  of  sour  grapes, 
fihurp  enough  to  set  his  teeth  on  edge.  We  may  therefore  come  before 
him,  with  all  the  rest  of  our  race,  when  God  subdues  them  to  repentanc« 


THE   SHORTEST   OF  THE   SEVEN  CRIES.  606 

by  his  love,  and  look  on  him  whom  we  have  pierced,  and  mourn  for  him 
as  one  that  is  in  bitterness  for  his  firstborn.  We  may  well  remember 
our  faults  this  clay, 

**  We,  whose  proneness  to  forget 
Thy  dear  love,  on  Olivet 
Bathed  thy  brow  with  bloody  sweat ; 

*'  We,  whose  sins,  with  awful  power, 
Like  a  cloud  did  o'er  thee  lower, 
In  that  God-excluding  hour  ; 

*'  We,  who  still,  in  thought  and  deed, 
Often  hold  the  bitter  reed 
To  thee,  in  thy  time  of  need." 

I  have  touched  that  point  very  lightly  because  I  want  a  little  more 
time  to  dwell  upon  a  fourth  view  of  this  scene.  May  the  Holy  Ghost 
help  us  to  hear  a  fourth  tuning  of  the  dolorous  music,  "I  thirst. 

IV.     I   think,  beloved  friends,  that  the  cry  of  "I  thirst"  was ^ the 

MYSTICAL  EXPRESSION    OF   THE    DESIRE   OF    HIS    HEART — "  I  thirst.  '       I 

cannot  think  tliat  natural  thirst  was  all  he  felt.  He  thirsted  for  water 
doubtless,  but  his  soul  was  thirsty  in  a  higher  sense ;  indeed,  beseems 
onlvtohave  spoken  that  the  Scriptures  might  be  fulfilled  as  to  the  ^ 
offerino-  him  vinegar.  Always  was  he  in  harmony  with  himself,  and  his 
body  was  always  expressive  of  his  soul's  cravings  as  well  as  of  its  own 
lon^ino-s  "  I  thirst"  meant  that  his  heart  was  thirsting  to  save  men._ 
This  Thirst  had  been  on  him  from  the  earliest  of  his  earthly  days. 
"Wist  ye  not,"  said  he,  while  yet  a  boy,  "that  I  must  be  about 
.^my  Father's  business?"  Did  he  not  tell  his  disciples,  "I  have  a 
/baptism  to  be  baptized  with,  and  how  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  accom- 
plished ?  "  He  thirsted  to  pluck  us  from  between  the  jaws  ot  heU, 
to  pay  our  redemption  price,  and  set  us  free  from  the  eternal  condemna- 
tion which  hung  over  us  ;  and  when  on  the  cross  the  work  was  a  most 
done  his  thirst  was  not  assuaged,  and  coula  not  be  till  he  could  say, 
"  It  is  finished."  It  is  almost  done,  thou  Christ  of  God ;  thou  hast 
almost  saved  thy  people;  there  remaineth  but  one  thing  more,  that  thou 
shouldst  actually  die,  and  hence  thy  strong  desire  to  come  to  the  end 
and  complete  thy  labour.  Thou  wast  still  straitened  till  the  last  pang 
was  felt  and  the  last  word  spoken  to  complete  the  full  redemption,  and 
hence  thy  cry,  "  I  thirst." 

Beloved,  there  is  now  upon  our  Master,  and  there  always  has  been,  a 
thirst  after  the  love  of  his  people.  Do  you  not  remember  how  that  thirst 
of  his  was  strong  in  the  old  days  of  the  prophet  ?  Call  to  mmd  his  ^^^ 
plaint  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  Isaiah,  "  Now  will  I  smg  to  my  wellbeloved 
a  song  of  my  beloved  touching  his  vineyard.  My  wellbeloved  hath  a 
vineyard  in  a  very  fruitful  hill:  and  he  fenced  it,  and  gathered  out 
the  stones  thereof,  and  planted  it  with  the  choicest  ™e^f^^bullt  a 
iower  in  the  midst  of  it,  and  also  made  a  winepress  therein.  What  vras 
he  looking  for  from  his  vineyard  and  its  winepress  ?  What  but  tor  he 
juice  of  the  vine  that  he  might  be  refreshed  ?  "  And  he  looked  that  it 
Should  bring  forth  grapes,  and  it  brought  forth  wild  ^r^V^^;-^'''^^^' 
and  not  wine;  sourness,  and  not  sweetness.     So  he  was  thirsting  then. 


604  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

According  to  the  sacred  canticle  of  love,  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  8i)ii, 
of  Songs,  W3  learn  that  when  he  drank  in  those  olden  times  it  was  in  the;] 
garden  of  his  church  that  he  was  refreshed.  What  doth  he  say  ?  "  I  am  ;| 
come  into  my  garden,  my  sister,  my  spouse  :  I  have  gathered  my  myrrh 
with  my  spice  ;  I  have  eaten  my  honeycomb  with  my  honey ;  1  have  drunk 
my  wine  with  my  milk ;  eat,  0  fi'iends ;  drink,  yea,  drink  abundantly, 
0  beloved."  In  the  same  song  he  speaks  of  his  church,  and  says,  "  The 
roof  of  thy  mouth  is  as  the  best  wine  for  my  beloved,  that  goeth  down 
sweetly,  causing  the  lips  of  those  that  are  asleep  to  speak."  And  yet 
again  in  the  eighth  chapter  the  bride  saith,  "  I  would  cause  thee  to  drink 
of  spiced  wine  of  the  juice  of  my  pomegranate."  Yes,  he  loves  to  be 
with  his  people ;  they  are  the  garden  where  he  walks  for  refreshment, 
and  their  love,  their  graces,  are  the  milk  and  wine  of  which  he  delights 
to  drink.  Christ  was  always  thirsty  to  save  men,  and  to  be  loved  of 
men ;  and  we  see  a  type  of  his  life-long  desire  when,  being  weary,  he 
sat  thus  on  the  well  and  said  to  the  woman  of  Samaria,  "  Give  me  to; 
drink."  There  was  a  deeper  meaning  in  his  words  than  she  dreamed  of, 
as  a  verse  further  down  fully  proves,  when  he  said  to  his  disciples,  "  I 
have  meat  to  eat  that  ye  know  not  of."  He  derived  spiritual  refresh- 
ment from  the  \\inning  of  that  woman's  heart  to  himself. 

And  now,  brethren,  our  blessed  Lord  has  at  this  time  a  thirst  for  com- 
munion with  each  one  of  you  who  are  his  people,  not  because  you  can  do 
him  good,  but  because  he  can  do  you  good.  He  thirsts  to  bless  you  and 
to  receive  your  grateful  love  in  return  ;  he  thirsts  to  see  you  looking  with 
believing  eye  to  his  fulness,  and  holding  out  your  emptiness  that  he  may 
supply  it.  He  saith,  "  Beliold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock."  What 
knocks  he  for?  It  is  that  he  may  eat  and  drink  with  you,  for  he 
promises  that  if  we  open  to  him  he  will  enter  in  and  sup  with  us  and  we. 
with  him.  He  is  thirsty  still,  you  see,  for  our  poor  love,  and  surely  we 
cannot  deny  it  to  him.  Come  let  us  pour  out  full  flagons,  until  his  joy 
is  fulfilled  in  us.  And  what  makes  him  love  us  so  ?  Ah,  that  I  cannot 
tell,  except  his  own  great  love.  He  must  love  ;  it  is  his  nature.  He 
must  love  his  chosen  whom  he  has  once  begun  to  love,  for  he  is  the  same 
yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  His  great  love  makes  him  thirst  to 
have  us  much  nearer  than  we  are ;  he  will  never  be  satisfied  till  all  hi& 
redeemed  are  beyond  gunshot  of  the  enemy.  I  will  give  you  one  of  hi& 
thirsty  prayers — "  Father,  I  will  that  they  also  whom  thou  hast  given 
me  be  with  me  where  I  am,  that  they  may  behold  my  glory."  He 
w^ants  you  brother,  he  wants  you,  dear  sister,  he  longs  to  have  you 
wholly  to  himself.  Come  to  him  in  prayer,  come  to  him  in  fellowship, 
come  to  him  by  perfect  consecration,  come  to  him  by  surrendering 
your  whole  being  to  the  sweet  mysterious  influences  of  his  Spirit. 
Sit  at  his  feet  with  Mary,  lean  on  his  breast  with  John  ;  yea,  come 
with  the  spouse  in  the  song  and  say,  "  Let  him  kiss  me  with  the  kisses 
of  his  mouth,  for  his  love  is  better  than  wine."  He  calls  for  that: 
will  you  not  give  it  to  him  ?  Are  you  so  frozen  at  heart  that  not  a  cup 
of  cold  water  can  be  melted  for  Jesus?  Are  you  lukewarm?  O- 
brother,  if  he  says,  "  I  thirst "  and  you  bring  him  a  lukewarm  heart,, 
that  is  worse  than  vinegar,  for  he  has  said,  "  I  will  spue  thee  out  of  my 
mouth."  He  can  receive  vinegar,  but  not  lukewarm  love.  Come,  bring 
him  your  warm  heart,  and  let  him  drink  from  that  purified  chalice  as 


THE    SHORTEST   OF   THE   SEVEN  CRIES.  605 

much  as  he  wills.  Let  all  your  love  be  his.  I  know  he  loves  to  receive 
from  you,  because  he  deh\c:hts  even  in  a  cup  of  cold  water  that  you  give 
to  one  of  his  disciples  ;  how  much  more  will  he  delight  in  the  giviug  of 
your  whole  self  to  him  ?  Therefore  while  he  thirsts  give  him  to  drink 
this  day. 

V.  Lastly,  the  cry  of  "  I  thirst  "  is  to  us  the  pattern  of  our  death 
WITH  HIM.  Know  ye  not,  beloved, — for  I  speak  to  those  who  know  the 
Lord, — that  ye  are  crucified  together  with  Christ  ?  Well,  tiieii,  whnt 
means  this  cry,  "  I  thirst,"  but  this,  that  we  should  thirst  too  ?  We  do  not 
thirst  after  the  old  manner  wherein  we  were  bitterly  afflicted,  for  he  hath 
said,  "  He  that  drinketh  of  this  water  shall  never  thirst :"  but  now  we 
covet  a  new  thirst,  a  refined  and  heavenly  appetite,  a  craving  for  our 
Lord.  0  thou  blessed  Master,  if  we  are  indeed  nailed  up  to  the  tree  with 
thee,  give  us  to  thirst  after  thee  with  a  thirst  which  only  the  cup  of  "  the 
new  covenant  in  thy  blood"  can  ever  satisfy.  Certain  philosophers  have 
said  that  they  love  the  pursuit  of  truth  even  better  than  the  knowledge 
of  truth.  I  differ  from  them  greatly,  but  I  will  say  this,  that  next  to 
the  actual  enjoyment  of  my  Ix)rd*s  presence  I  love  to  hunger  and  to 
thirst  after  him.  Rutherford  used  words  somewhat  to  this  effect,  "I 
thirst  for  my  Lord  and  this  is  joy  ;  a  joy  which  no  man  taketh  from 
me.  Even  if  I  may  not  come  at  him,  yet  shall  I  be  full  of  consolation, 
for  it  is  heaven  to  thirst  aftei'  him,  and  surely  he  will  never  deny  a 
poor  soul  liberty  to  admire  him,  and  adore  him,  and  thirst  after  Mm."  As 
for  myself,  I  would  grow  more  and  more  insatiable  after  my  divine  Lord, 
and  when  I  have  much  of  him  I  would  still  cry  for  more ;  and  then  for 
more,  and  still  for  more.  My  heart  shall  not  be  content  till  he  is  all  in 
all  to  me,  and  I  am  altogether  lost  in  him.  0  to  be  enlarged  in  soul  so 
as  to  take  deeper  draughts  of  his  sweet  love,  for  our  heart  cannot  have 
enough.  One  would  wish  to  be  as  the  spouse,  who,  w^hen  she  had 
already  been  feasting  in  the  banqueting-house,  and  had  found  his  fruit 
sweet  to  her  taste,  so  that  she  was  overjoyed,  yet  cried  out,  "  Stay  me 
with  flagons,  comfort  me  with  apples,  for  I  am  sick  of  love."  She 
•craved  full  flagons  of  love  though  she  was  already  overpowered  by  it. 
This  is  a  kind  of  sweet  whereof  if  a  man  hath  much  he  must  have 
more,  and  when  he  hath  more  he  is  under  a  still  greater  necessity  to 
receive  more,  and  so  on,  his  appetite  for  ever  growing  by  that  which  it 
feeds  upon,  till  he  is  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God.  "  I  thirst," — 
ay,  this  is  my  soul's  word  with  her  Lord,  Borrowed  from  his  lips  it  well 
suite th  my  mouth. 

**  I  thirst,  but  not  as  once  I  did, 
The  vain  delights  of  earth  to  share  ; 
Thy  wounds,  Emmanuel,  all  forbid 
That  I  shoukl  seek  my  pleasures  there. 

*'  Dear  fountain  of  delight  unknown! 
No  longer  sink  below  the  brim  ; 
But  overflow,  and  pour  me  down 
A  living  and  life-giving  stream." 

Jesns  thirsted,  then  let  us  thirst  in  this  dry  and  thirsty  land  where 
no  water  is.  Even  as  the  hart  panteth  after  the  water  brooks,  our  souls 
would  thirst  after  thee,  0  God. 


606 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACT-E   PULPIT. 


Beloved,  let  us  thii-st  for  the  souls  of  our  fellow-men.  I  have  already 
told  you  that  such  was  our  Lord's  mystical  desire ;  let  it  be  ours  also. 
Brother,  thirst  to  have  your  children  saved.  Brother,  thirst  I  pray  you  to 
have  your  workpeople  saved.  Sister,  thirst  for  the  salvation  of  your  class, 
thirst  for  the  redemption  of  your  family  tliirst  for  the  conversion  of 
vour  husband.  We  ought  all  to  have  a  longino:  for  conversions.  Is  it  so 
with  each  one  of  you  ?  If  not,  bestir  yourselves  at  once.  Fix  your 
hearts  upon  some  unsaved  one,  and  thirst  until  he  is  saved.  It  is 
the  way  whereby  many  shall  be  brought  to  Christ,  when  this  blessed 
soul-thirst  of  true  Christian  charity  shall  be  upon  those  who  are  them- 
selves saved.  Remember  how  Paul  said,  "  I  say  the  truth  in  Christ,  I 
lie  not,  my  conscience  also  bearing  me  witness  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  I 
have  great  heaviness  and  continual  sorrow  in  my  heart  For  I  could 
wish  that  myself  were  accursed  from  Christ  for  my  brethren,  my  kinsmen 
according  to  the  flesh."  He  would  have  sacrificed  himself  to  save  his 
countrymen,  so  heartily  did  he  desire  their  eternal  welfare.  Let  this  mind 
be  in  you  also. 

As  for  yourselves,  thirst  atler  perfection.  Hunger  and  thirst  after 
righteousness,  for  you  shall  be  filled.  Hate  sin,  and  heartily  loathe  it; 
but  thirst  to  be  holy  as  God  is  holy,  thirst  to  be  like  Christ,  thirst  to 
bring  glory  to  his  sacred  name  by  complete  conformity  to  his  will. 

May  the  Holy  Ghost  work  in  you  the  complete  pattern  of  Christ; 
crucified,  and  to  him  shall  be  praise  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 


Portions  of  Scripture  Read  before  Sermon— Mark  xv.  15— 37i 
Psalm  Ixix.  1—21. 


CHRIST'S  DYING   WORD  FOR  HIS  CHURCH. 


%    $«rm0i| 


Intended  for  Eeading  on  Lord's-day,  January  21st,   1894, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE    METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lord's-day  Evening,  November  3rd,  1889. 


*'  It  is  finished," — John  xix.  30. 

In  tlie  original  Greek  of  John's  Gospel,  there  is  only  one  word  for 
this  utterance  of  our  Lord.  To  translate  it  into  English,  we  have  to 
use  three  words ;  but  when  it  was  spoken,  it  was  only  one, — an  ocean 
of  meaning  in  a  drop  of  language,  a  mere  drop,  for  that  is  all  that 
we  can  call  one  word.  "It  is  finished."  Yet  it  would  need  all  the 
other  words  that  ever  were  spoken,  or  ever  can  be  spoken,  to  explain 
this  one  word.  It  is  altogether  immeasurable.  It  is  high  ;  I  canuot 
attain  to  it.  It  is  deep;  I  cannot  fathom  it.  "Finished."  lean 
half  imagine  the  tone  in  which  our  Lord  uttered  this  word,  with  a 
holy  glorying,  a  sense  of  relief,  the  bursting  out  of  a  heart  that  had 
long  been  shut  up  within  walls  of  anguish.  "Finished."  It  was  a 
Conqueror's  cry  ;  it  was  uttered  with  a  loud  voice.  There  is  nothing 
of  anguish  about  it,  there  is  no  wailing  in  it.  It  is  the  cry  of  One 
who  has  completed  a  tremendous  labour,  and  is  about  to  die ;  and  ere 
he  utters  his  death-prayer,  "Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my 
spirit,"  he  shouts  his  life's  last  hymn  in  that  one  word,  "  Finished." 

May  God  the  Holy  Spirit  help  me  to  handle  aright  this  text  that  i& 
at  once  so  small  and  yet  so  great !  There  are  four  ways  in  which  I 
wish  to  look  at  it  with  you.  First,  I  will  speak  of  this  dying  saying 
of  our  Lord  to  Ms  glory  ;  secondly,  I  will  use  the  text  to  the  Church's 
comfort ;  thirdly,  I  will  try  to  handle  the  subject  to  every  believer's  joy  ; 
and  fourthly,  I  wiU  seek  to  show  how  our  Lord's  words  ought  to  lead 
to  our  own  arousement. 

I.  First,  then,  I  will  endeavour  to  speak  of  this  dying  saying  of 
Christ  TO  HIS  glory.     Let  us  begin  with  that. 

Jesus  said,  "  It  is  finished."    Let  us  glory  in  him  that  it  is  finished. 

You  and  I  may  well  do  this  when  we  recollect  how  very  few  things 

we  have  finished.    We  begin  many  things  ;  and,  sometimes,  we  begin 

well.    We  commence  running  like  champions  who  must  win  the  race  ; 

No.  2,344. 


'608  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

"but  soon  we  slacken  our  pare,  and  we  fall  exhausted  on  the  course. 
The  race  commenced  is  never  completed.  In  fact,  I  am  afraid  that 
we  have  never  finished  anything  perfectly.  You  know  what  we  say 
of  some  pieces  of  work,  "  Well,  the  man  has  done  it ;  but  there  is  no 
*  finish  *  about  it."  No,  and  you  must  begin  with  '*  finish  ",  and  go 
on  with  "finish",  if  you  are  at  last  able  to  say  broadly  as  the  Saviour 
-said  without  anj'  qualification,  "It  is  finished." 

TFliat  was  it  that  was  finished?  His  life-work  and  his  atoning  sacri- 
fice on  our  behalf.  He  had  interposed  between  our  souls  and  divine 
justice,  and  he  had  stood  in  our  stead,  to  obey  and  suffer  on  our  behalf. 
He  began  this  work  early  in  life,  even  while  he  was  a  child.  He 
persevered  in  holy  obedience  three  and  thirty  years.  That  obedience 
•cost  him  many  a  pang  and  groan.  Now  it  is  about  to  cost  him  his 
life ;  and  as  he  gives  away  his  life  to  finish  the  work  of  obedience  to 
the  Father,  and  of  redemption  for  us,  he  says,  "  It  is  finished."  It 
was  a  wonderful  work  even  to  contemplate ;  only  infinite  love  would 
have  thought  of  devising  such  a  plan.  It  was  a  wonderful  work  to 
•carry  on  for  so  long  ;  only  boundless  patience  would  have  continued 
at  it ;  and  now  that  it  requires  the  offering  of  himself,  and  the  yield- 
ing up  of  his  earthly  life,  only  a  Divine  Saviour,  very  God  of  very 
God,  would  or  could  have  consummated  it  by  tlin  surrender  of  his 
breath.  What  a  work  it  was  !  Yet  it  was  finished  ;  while  you  and  I 
have  l©ts  of  little  things  lying  about  that  we  have  never  finished. 
We  have  begun  to  do  something  for  Jesus  that  would  briu^-  him  a 
little  honour  and  glory  ;  but  we  have  never  finished  it.  We  did  mean 
to  glorify  Christ ;  have  not  some  of  you  intended,  oh !  so  much  ? 
Yet  it  has  never  come  to  anything  ;  but  Christ's  work,  which  cost  him 
heart  and  soul,  body  and  spirit,  cost  him  everything,  even  to  his  death 
on  the  cross,  he  pushed  through  all  that  till  it  was  accomplished,  and 
lie  could  say,  "It  is  finished." 

To  whom  did  our  Saviour  say^  ^^  It  is  finished  ^^  ?  He  said  it  to  all 
whom  it  might  concern ;  but  it  seems  to  me  that  he  chiefly  said  it  to 
his  Father,  for,  immediately  after,  apparently  in  a  lower  tone  of  voice, 
he  said,  "  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit."  Beloved,  it 
is  one  thing  for  me  to  say  to  you,  "I  have  finished  my  work," — 
possibly,  if  I  were  dying,  you  might  say  that  I  had  finished  my  work ; 
but  for  the  Saviour  to  say  that  to  God,  to  hang  in  the  presence  of 
him  whose  eyes  are  as  a  flame  of  fire,  the  great  Reader  and  Searcher 
of  all  hearts,  for  Jesus  to  look  the  dread  Father  in  the  face,  and  say, 
as  he  bowed  his  head,  "  Father,  it  is  finished ;  I  have  finished  the 
work  which  thou  gavest  me  to  do," — oh,  who  but  he  could  venture  to 
.make  such  a  declaration  as  that?  We  can  find  a  thousand  flaws  in 
our  best  works ;  and  when  we  lie  dying,  we  shall  still  have  to  lament 
our  shortcomings  and  excesses;  but  there  is  nothing  of  imperfection 
about  him  who  stood  as  Substitute  for  us  ;  and  unto  the  Father  him- 
self he  can  say,  concerning  all  his  work,  "It  is  finished."  Wherefore, 
glorify  him  to-night.  Oh,  glorify  him  in  your  hearts  to-night  that, 
even  in  the  presence  of  the  Great  Judge  of  all,  your  Surety  and 
your  Substitute  is  able  to  claim  perfection  for  all  his  service ! 

Just  think  also,  for  a  minute  or  two,  now  that  you  have  remem- 
bered what  J©§us  finished,  and  to  whom  he  said  that  he  had  finished 


Christ's  dying  word  for  his  church.  60& 

it,  how  truly  he  had  finished  it.  From  the  beginning  to  the  end  of 
Christ's  life  there  is  nothing  omitted,  no  single  act  of  service  ever  left 
undone ;  neither  is  there  any  action  of  his  slurred  over,  or  performed 
in  a  careless  manner.  "It  is  finished,"  refers  as  much  to  his  child- 
hood as  to  his  death.  The  whole  of  the  service  that  he  was  to  render 
to  God,  when  he  came  here  in  human  form,  was  finished  in  every 
single  part  and  portion  of  it.  I  take  up  a  piece  of  a  cabinet-maker's 
work  ;  and  it  bears  a  good  appearance.  I  open  the  lid,  and  am  satis- 
fied with  the  workmanship  ;  but  there  is  something  about  the  hinge 
that  is  not  properly  finished.  Or,  perhaps,  if  I  turn  it  over,  and  look 
at  the  bottom  of  the  box,  I  shall  see  that  there  is  a  piece  that  has 
been  scamped,  or  that  one  part  has  not  been  well  planed  or  properly 
polished.  But  if  you  examine  the  Master's  work  right  through,  if 
you  begin  at  Bethlehem  and  go  on  to  Golgotha,  and  look  minutely  at 
every  portion  of  it,  the  private  as  well  as  the  public,  the  silent  as  well 
as  the  spoken  part,  you  will  find  that  it  is  finished,  completed,  per- 
fected. We  may  say  of  it  that,  among  all  works,  there  is  none  like 
it ;  a  multitude  of  perfections  joined  together  to  make  up  one  absolute 
perfection.  Wherefore,  let  us  glorify  the  name  of  our  blessed  Lord. 
Crown  him  ;  crown  him  ;  for  he  hath  done  his  work  well.  Come,  ye 
saints,  speak  much  to  his  honour,  and  in  your  hearts  keep  on  singing 
to  the  praise  of  him  who  did  so  thoroughly,  so  perfectly,  all  the  work 
which  his  Father  gave  him  to  do. 

In  the  first  place,  then,  we  use  our  Lord's  words  to  his  glory.  Much 
might  be  said  upon  such  a  theme ;  but  time  will  not  permit  it  now. 

11.     Secondly,  we  will  use  the  text  to  the  Church's  comfort. 

I  am  persuaded  that  it  was  so  intended  to  be  used,  for  none  of  the 
words  of  our  Lord  on  the  cross  are  addressed  to  his  Church  but  this 
one.  I  cannot  believe  that,  when  he  was  dying,  he  left  his  people, 
for  whom  he  died,  without  a  word.  "  Father,  forgive  them  ;  for  they 
know  not  what  they  do,"  is  for  sinners,  not  for  saints.  "I  thirst,"  is 
for  himself  ;  and  so  is  that  bitter  cry,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast 
thou  forsaken  me?"  "Woman,  behold  thy  son!"  is  for  Mary, 
"  To  day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise,''  is  for  the  penitent  thief. 
"  Into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit,"  is  for  the  Father.  Jesus 
must  have  had  something  to  say,  in  the  hour  of  death,  for  his  Church ; 
and,  surely,  this  is  his  dying  word  for  her.  He  tells  her,  shouting  it 
in  her  ear  that  has  become  dull  and  heavy  with  despair,  "It  is 
finished."  "It  is  finished,  0  my  redeemed  one,  my  bride,  my  well- 
beloved,  for  whom  I  came  to  lay  down  my  life ;  it  is  finished,  the  work 
is  done ! " 

*'  Love's  redeeming  work  is  done  ; 
Fought  the  fight,  the  battle  won." 

"  Christ  loved  the  church,  and  gave  himseK  for  it."  John,  in  the 
Revelation,  speaks  of  the  Redeemer's  work  as  already  accomplished, 
and  therefore  he  sings,  "  Unto  him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from 
our  sins  in  his  own  blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto 
God  and  his  Father;  to  him  be  glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen."     This  truth  is  full  of  comfort  to  the  people  of  God. 

And,  first,  as  it  concerns  Christ,  do  you  not  feel  greatly  comforted 

39 


610  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

to  think  that  he  ia  to  be  humiliated  no  longer  ?  His  suffering  and  shamt 
are  finished.  I  often  sing,  with  sacred  exultation  and  pleasure,  those 
lines  of  Dr.  Watts,— 

**  No  more  the  bloody  spear, 

The  cross  and  nails  no  more, 
For  hell  itaelf  shakes  at  his  name, 
And  all  the  heavens  adore. 

♦«  There  his  full  glories  shine 

With  uncreated  rays, 
And  bless  his  saints'  and  angels'  eyes 

To  everlasting  days." 

I  like  also  that  expression  in  another  of  our  hymns,— 

'•Now  both  the  Surety  and  sinner  are  free.** 

Not  only  are  they  free  for  whom  Christ  became  a  Surety,  but  he 
himself  is  for  ever  free  from  all  the  obligations  and  consequences  of 
his  suretyship.  Men  will  never  spit  in  his  face  again ;  the  Eoman 
soldiers  will  never  scourge  him  again.  Judas,  where  art  thou? 
Behold  the  Christ  sitting  upon  his  great  white  throne,  the  glorious 
King  who  was  once  the  Man  of  sorrows!  Now  Judas,  come,  and 
betray  him  with  a  kiss!  What,  man,  dare  you  not  do  it?  Come 
Pilate,  and  wash  your  hands  in  pretended  innocency,  and  say  now 
that  you  are  guiltless  of  his  blood !  Come,  ye  Scribes  and  Pharisees, 
and  accuse  him ;  and  oh,  ye  Jewish  mob  and  GentHe  rabble,  newly- 
risen  from  the  grave,  shout  now,  "  Away  with  him  !  Crucify  him  ! 
But  see !  they  flee  from  him ;  they  cry  to  the  mountains  and  rocks, 
"  Fall  on  us,  and  hide  us  from  the  face  of  him  that  sitteth  on  the 
throne  1  "  Yet  that  is  the  face  that  was  more  marred  than  any  man  s, 
the  face  of  him  whom  they  once  despised  and  rejected.  Are  you  not 
glad  to  think  that  they  cannot  despise  him  now,  that  they  cannot  lU- 

treat  him  now  ? 

"  *Tis  past,— that  agomzmg  hour 
Of  torture  and  of  shame ;  '* 

and  Jesus  says  of  it,  '*  It  is  finished."  ^.  ^  ,,    ^       ,       , 

We  derive  further  comfort  and  joy  as  we  think  that,  not  only  are 
Christ's  pangs  and  sufferings  finished,  but  his  Father  s  will  and  word 
have  had  a  perfect  completion.  Certain  things  were  written  that  were  to 
be  done;  and  these  are  done.  Whatsoever  the  Father  required  has 
been  rendered.  -  It  is  finished."  My  Father  will  never  say  to  nie 
'♦  I  cannot  save  thee  by  the  death  of  my  Son,  for  I  am  dissatisfied  with 
his  work."  Oh,  no,  beloved ;  God  is  weU  pleased  with  Christ,  and 
with  us  in  him !  There  is  nothing  which  was  arranged  m  the  eternal 
mind  to  be  done,  yea,  not  a  jot  or  tittle,  but  what  Christ  has  done  it 
aU.  As  his  eye,  that  eye  that  often  wept  for  us,  reads  down  the 
ancient  writing.  Christ  is  able  to  say,  -  I  have  finished  the  work  which 
my  Father  gave  me  to  do.  Wherefore,  be  comforted,  0  my  people,  for 
my  Father  is  weU  pleased  with  me,  and  weU  pleased  with  you  m 
me!  "  I  like,  when  I  am  in  prayer,  sometimes  to  say  to  the  great 
Father,  -Father,  look  on  thy  Son.  Is  he  not  all  loveliness  ?  Are 
there  iot  in  him  unutterable  beauties?     Dost  thou  not  dehght  in 


Christ's  dying  word  for  his  church.  611 

him  ?  If  thou  hast  looked  on  me,  and  grown  sick  of  me,  as  well  thou 
mayest,  now  refresh  thyself  by  looking  on  thy  Well-beloved,  delight 
thyself  in  him  ; — 

**  •  Him,  and  then  the  sinner  see, 

Look  through  Jesus'  wounds  on  me.*** 

The  perfect  satisfaction  of  the  Father  with  Christ's  work  for  his 
people,  so  that  Christ  could  say,  "It  is  finished,"  is  a  ground  of 
solid  comfort  to  his  Church  evermore. 

Dear  friends,  once  more,  take  comfort  from  this  "  It  is  finished,"  for 
the  redemption  of  Christ's  Church  is  perfected.  There  is  not  another 
penny  to  be  paid  for  her  full  release.  There  is  no  mortgage  upon 
Christ's  inheritance.  Those  whom  he  bought  with  blood  are  for  ever 
clear  of  all  charges,  paid  for  to  the  utmofet.  There  was  a  handwriting 
of  ^  ordinances  against  us ;  but  Christ  hath  taken  it  away,  he  hath 
nailed  it  to  his  cross.  "  It  is  finished,"  finished  for  ever."  All  those 
overwhelming  debts,  which  would  have  sunk  us  to  the  lowest  hell, 
have  been  discharged ;  and  they  who  believe  in  Christ  may  appear 
with  boldness  even  before  the  throne  of  God  itself.  "It  is  finished." 
What  comfort  there  is  in  this  glorious  truth ! 

"  Lamb  of  God  !  thy  death  hath  given 
Pardon,  peace,  aLd  hope  of  heaven: 
'  It  is  finished  ;  '  let  us  raise 
Songs  of  thankfulness  and  praise  !  " 

And  I  think  that  wo  may  say  to  the  Church  of  God  that,  when  Jesus 
said,  "  It  is  finished,"  her  ultimate  triumph  was  secured.  "  Finished !  " 
By  that  one  word  he  declared  .that  he  had  broken  the  head  of  the  old 
dragon.  By  his  death,  Jesus  has  routed  the  hosts  of  darkness,  and 
crushed  the  rising  hopes  of  heU.  We  have  a  stern  battle  yet  to  fight  \ 
nobody  can  teU  what  may  await  the  Church  of  God  in  years  to  come^ 
it  would  be  idle  for  us  to  attempt  to  prophesy ;  but  it  looks  as  if  there- 
were  to  be  sterner  times  and  darker  days  than  we  have  ever  yet 
known  ;  but  what  of  that  ?  Our  Lord  has  defeated  the  foe  ;  and  we 
have  to  fight  with  one  who  is  already  vanquished.  The  old  serpent 
has  been  crushed,  his  head  is  bruised,  and  we  have  now  to  trample  on 
him.  We  have  this  sure  word  of  promise  to  encourage  us,  "  The  God 
of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet  shortly."  Surely,  "It  is 
finished,"  sounds  like  the  trumpet  of  victory ;  let  us  have  faith  to 
claim  that  victory  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  let  every 
Christian  here,  let  the  whole  Church  of  God,  as  one  mighty  army,  take 
comfort  from  this  dying  word  of  the  now  risen  and  ever-living 
Saviour,  "  It  is  finished."  His  Church  may  rest  perfectly  satisfied  that 
his  work  for  her  is  fully  accomplishod. 

III.     Now,  thirdly,  I  want  to  use  this  expression,  "It  is  finished," 

TO   EVERY   believer's   JOY. 

When  our  Lord  said,  "  It  is  finished,"  there  was  something  to  make 
every  believer  in  him  glad.  What  did  that  utterance  mean  ?  You 
and  I  have  believed  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth  ;  we  believe  him  to  be  the 
Messiah,  sent  of  God.  Now,  if  you  will  turn  to  the  Old  Testament, 
you  will  find  that  the  marks  of  the  Messiah  are  very  many,  and  very 


612  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

complicated ;  and  if  you  will  then  turn  to  the  life  and  death  of  Christ, 
YOU  will  see  in  him  every  mark  of  the  Messiah  plainly  exhibited.  Until 
he  had  said,  "  It  is  finished,"  and  until  he  had  actually  died,  there  was 
some  doubt  that  there  might  be  some  one  prophecy  unfulfilled ;  but 
now  that  he  hangs  upon  the  cross,  every  mark,  and  every  sign,  and 
every  token  of  his  Messiahship  have  been  fulfilled,  and  he  says,  "It  is 
finished."  The  life  and  death  of  Christ  and  the  types  of  the  Old 
Testament  fit  each  other  like  hand  and  glove.  It  would  be  quite  im- 
possible for  any  person  to  write  the  life  of  a  man,  by  way  of  fiction, 
and  then  in  another  book  to  write  out  a  series  of  types,  personal  and 
sacrificial,  and  to  make  the  character  of  the  man  fit  all  the  types ;  even 
if  he  had  permission  to  make  both  books,  he  could  not  do  it.  If  he 
were  allowed  to  make  both  the  lock  and  the  key,  he  could  not  do  it ; 
but  here  we  have  the  lock  made  beforehand.  In  all  the  Books  of  the 
Old  Testament,  from  the  prophecy  in  the  Garden  of  Eden  right  away 
down  to  Malachi,  the  last  of  the  prophets,  there  were  certain  marks 
and  tokens  of  the  Christ.  All  these  were  so  very  singular  that  it  did 
not  appear  as  if  they  could  all  meet  in  one  person ;  but  they  did  all 
meet  in  One,  every  one  of  them,  whether  it  concerned  some  minute 
point  or  some  prominent  characteristic.  When  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
had  ended  his  life,  he  could  say.  "It  is  finished ;  my  life  has  tallied 
with  all  that  was  said  of  it  from  the  first  word  of  prophecy  even  to  the 
last."  Now,  that  ought  greatly  to  encourage  your  faith.  You  are 
not  following  cunningly-devised  fables  ;  but  you  are  following  One  who 
must  be  the  Messiah  of  God,  since  he  so  exactly  fits  all  the  prophecies 
and  all  the  types  that  were  given  before  concerning  him. 

*'It  is  finished."  Let  every  believer  be  comforted  in  another 
respect,  that  every  honour  which  the  law  of  God  could  require  has  been 
rendered  to  it.  You  and  I  have  broken  that  law,  and  all  the  race  of 
mankind  has  broken  it,  too.  We  have  tried  to  thrust  God  from  his 
throne ;  we  have  dishonoured  his  law ;  we  have  broken  his  command- 
ments wilf  uUy  and  wickedly  ;  but  there  has  come  One  who  is  himself 
God,  the  Law-giver,  and  he  has  taken  human  nature,  and  in  that 
nature  he  has  kept  the  law  perfectly ;  and  inasmuch  as  the  law  had 
been  broken  by  man,  he  has  in  the  nature  of  man  borne  the  sentence 
due  for  all  man's  transgressions.  The  Godhead,  being  linked  with 
the  manhood,  gave  supreme  virtue  to  all  that  the  manhood  suffered  ; 
and  Christ,  in  life  and  in  death,  has  magnified  the  law,  and  made  it 
honourable ;  and  God's  law  at  this  day  is  raised  to  even  greater  honour 
than  it  had  before  man  broke  it.  The  death  of  the  Son  of  God,  the 
sacrifice  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  has  vindicated  the  great  moral  prin- 
ciple of  God's  government,  and  made  his  throne  to  stand  out  gloriously 
before  the  eyes  of  men  and  angels  for  ever  and  ever.  If  hell  were 
filled  with  men,  it  would  not  be  such  a  vindication  of  divine  justice  as 
when  God  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all, 
and  made  him  to  die,  the  Just  for  the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God. 
Now  let  every  believer  rejoice  in  the  great  fact  that,  by  the  death  of 
Christ,  the  law  of  God  is  abundantly  honoured.  You  can  be  saved 
without  impugning  the  holiness  of  God  ;  you  are  saved  without  putting 
any  stain  upon  the  divine  statute-book.  The  law  is  kept,  and  mercy 
triumphs,  too. 


Christ's  dying  word  for  his  church.  613 

And,  beloved,  here  is  included,  of  necessity,  another  comforting 
truth.  Christ  might  well  say,  *'  It  is  finished,"  for  every  solace  con- 
science can  need  is  now  given.  When  your  conscience  is  disturbed  and 
troubled,  if  it  knows  that  God  is  perfectly  honoured,  and  his  law 
vindicated,  then  it  becomes  easy.  Men  are  always  starting  some  new 
theory  of  the  atonement ;  and  one  has  said  lately  that  the  atonement 
was  simply  meant  as  an  easement  to  the  conscience  of  men.  It  is  not 
so,  my  brethren ;  there  would  be  no  easing  of  the  conscience  by  any- 
thing that  was  meant  for  that  alone.  Conscience  can  only  be  satisfied 
if  God  is  satisfied.  Until  I  see  how  the  law  is  vindicated,  my  troubled 
conscience  can  never  find  rest.  Dear  heart,  are  thine  eyes  red  with 
weeping  ?  Yet  look  thou  to  him  who  hangs  upon  the  tree.  Is  thy 
heart  heavy  even  to  despair  ?  Look  to  him  who  hangs  upon  the  tree, 
and  believe  in  him.  Take  him  to  be  thy  soul's  atoning  Lamb,  suffer- 
ing in  thy  stead.  Accept  of  him  as  thy  Eepresentative,  dying  thy 
death  that  thou  mayest  live  his  life,  bearing  thy  sin  that  thou  mayest 
be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him.  This  is  the  best  quietus  in 
the  world  for  every  fear  that  conscience  can  raise  ;  let  every  believer 
know  that  it  is  so. 

Once  more,  there  is  joy  to  every  believer  when  he  remembers  that, 
as  Christ  said,  "It  is  finished,"  every  guarantee  was  given  of  the  eternal 
salvation  of  all  the  redeemed.  It  appears  to  me  that,  if  Christ  finished 
the  work  for  us,  he  will  finish  the  work  in  us.  If  he  has  undertaken 
so  supreme  a  labour  as  the  redemption  of  our  souls  by  blood,  and  that 
is  finished,  then  the  great  but  yet  minor  labour  of  renewing  our 
natures,  and  transforming  us  even  unto  perfection,  shall  be  finished, 
too.  If,  when  we  were  sinners,  Christ  loved  us  so  as  to  die  for  us, 
now  that  he  has  redeemed  us,  and  has  already  reconciled  us  to  him- 
self, and  made  us  his  friends  and  his  disciples,  will  he  not  finish  the 
work  that  is  necessary  to  make  us  fit  to  stand  among  the  golden  lamps 
of  heaven,  and  to  sing  his  praises  in  the  country  where  nothing  that 
defileth  can  ever  enter  ? 

**  The  work  which  his  goodness  began, 
The  arm  of  his  strength  will  complete ; 
His  promise  is  yea  and  Amen, 
And  never  was  forfeited  yet : 
Things  future,  nor  things  that  are  now, 
Not  all  things  below  nor  above. 
Can  make  him  his  purpose  forego, 
Or  sever  my  soul  from  his  love." 

I  believe  it,  my  brethren.  He  who  has  said,  "It  is  finished,"  will 
never  leave  anything  undone.  It  shall  never  be  said  of  him,  "  This 
Man  began,  but  was  not  able  to  finish."  If  he  has  bought  me  with 
his  blood,  and  called  me  by  his  grace,  and  I  am  resting  on  his  promise 
and  power,  I  shall  be  with  him  where  he  is,  and  I  shall  behold  his 
glory,  as  surely  as  he  is  Christ  the  Lord,  and  I  am  a  believer  in 
him.     What  comfort  this  truth  brings  to  every  child  of  God ! 

Are  there  any  of  you  here  who  are  trying  to  do  something  to  make 
a  righteousness  of  your  own  ?  How  dare  you  attempt  such  a  work 
when  Jesus  says,  "  It  is  finished  "  ?  Aj-e  you  trying  to  put"  a  few  of 
your  own  merits  together,  a  few  odds  and  ends,  fig-leaves  and  filthy 


gl4  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

rags  of  your  own  righteousness?  Jesus  says,  ♦'  It  is  finished."  Why 
do  you  want  to  add  anything  of  your  own  to  what  he  has  completed  ? 
Do  you  say  that  you  are  not  fit  to  be  saved  ?  What !  have  you  to 
bring  some  of  your  fitness  to  eke  out  Christ's  work  ?  "  Oh  !  "  say  you, 
"  I  hope  to  come  to  Christ  one  of  these  days  when  I  get  better." 
What !  What !  What !  What !  Are  you  to  make  yourself  better, 
and  then  is  Christ  to  do  the  rest  of  the  work  ?  You  remind  me  of  the 
railways  to  our  country  towns ;  you  know  that,  often,  the  station  is 
half-a-mile  or  a  mile  out  of  the  town,  so  that  you  cannot  get  to  the 
station  without  having  an  omnibus  to  take  you  there.  But  my  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  comes  right  to  the  town  of  Mansoul.  His  railway  runs 
close  to  your  feet,  and  there  is  the  carriage-door  wide  open ;  step  in. 
You  have  not  even  to  go  over  a  bridge,  or  under  a  subway ;  there 
stands  the  carriage  just  before  you.  This  royal  railroad  carries  souls 
all  the  way  from  hell's  dark  door,  where  tliey  lie  in  sin,  up  to  heaven's 
great  gate  of  pearl,  where  they  dwell  in  perfect  righteousness  for 
ever.  Cast  yourself  on  Christ ;  take  him  to  be  everything  you  need, 
for  he  says  of  the  whole  work  of  salvation,  "  It  is  finished."  ^ 

I  recoUect  the  saying  of  a  Scotchwoman,  who  had  applied  to  be 
admitted  to  the  communion  of  the  kirk.  Being  thought  to  be  very 
ignorant,  and  little  instructed  in  the  things  of  God,  she  was  put  back 
by  the  elders.  The  minister  also  had  seen  her,  and  thought  that,  at 
loast  for  a  while,  she  should  wait.  I  wish  I  could  speak  Scotch,  so  as 
to  give  you  her  answer,  but  I  am  afraid  that  I  should  make  a  mistake 
if  I  tried  it.  It  is  a  fine  language,  doubtless,  for  those  who  can 
speak  it.  She  said  something  like  this,  "  Aweel,  sir;  aweel,  sir,  but 
I  ken  ae  thing.  As  the  lintbell  opens  to  the  sun,  so  my  heart  opens 
to  the  name  of  Jesus."  You  have,  perhaps,  seen  the  flax-flower  shut 
itself  up  when  the  sun  has  gone  ;  and,  if  so,  you  know  that,  whenever 
tlie  sun  has  come  back,  the  flower  opens  itself  at  once.  '*  So,"  said 
the  poor  woman,  ''  I  ken  one  thing,  that  as  the  flower  opens  to  the 
Kun,  so  my  heart  opens  to  the  name  of  Jesus."  Do  you  know  that, 
friends  ?  Do  you  ken  that  one  thing  ?  Then  I  do  not  care  if  you  do 
not  ken  much  else;  if  that  one  thing  is  known  by  you,  and  if  it  be 
really  so,  you  may  be  far  from  perfect  in  your  own  estimation,  but 
you  are  a  saved  soul. 

One  said  to  me,  when  she  came  to  join  the  church,  and  I  asked 
lier  whether  she  was  perfect,  **  Perfect?  Oh,  dear  no,  sir!  I  wish 
that  I  could  be."  "Ah,  yes  !  "  I  replied, ''  that  would  just  please  you, 
would  it  not?"  "Yes;  it  would  indeed,"  she  answered.  "Well, 
then,"  I  said,  "that  shows  that  your  heart  is  perfect,  and  that  you 
love  perfect  things  ;  you  are  pining  after  perfection ;  there  is  a  some- 
thing in  you,  an  '  I '  in  you,  that  sinneth  not,  but  that  seeketh  after 
that  which  is  holy ;  and  yet  you  do  that  which  you  would  not,  and 
you  groan  because  you  do,  and  the  apostle  is  like  you  when  he  says, 
'  It  is  no  more  I,  the  real  1,  that  do  it,  but  sin  that  dwelleth  in  me.'  ^^ 
Mavthe  Lord  put  that  "I"  into  many  of  you  to-night,  that  "I 
whfch  will  hate  sin,  that  "I"  which  will  find  its  heaven  in  being 
perfectly  free  from  sin,  that  "  I "  which  will  delight  itself  in  the 
Almighty,  that  "I  "  which  will  sun  itself  in  the  smile  of  Christ,  that 
"  I "  which  will  strike  down  every  evil  within  as  soon  as  ever  it  showa 


Christ's  dying  word  fou  his  chuiich.  615 

its  head  !     So  will  you  sing  that  familiar  prayer  of  Toplady's  that  we 
have  often  sung, — 

*'  Let  the  water  and  the  blood, 
From  thy  riven  side  which  flovv'd, 
Be  of  sin  the  double  cure, 
Cleanse  me  from  its  guilt  and  power  "  ! 

IV.  I  close  by  saying,  in  the  fourth  place,  that  we  shall  use  this 
text,  "  It  is  finished, "  to  our  own  arousement. 

Somebody  once  wickedly  said,  "Well,  if  Christ  has  finished  it, 
there  is  nothing  for  me  to  do  now  but  to  fold  my  hands,  and  go  to 
sleep."  That  is  the  speech  of  a  devil,  not  of  a  Christian  !  There  is 
no  grace  in  the  heart  when  the  mouth  can  talk  like  that.  On  the 
contrary,  the  true  child  of  God  says,  "  Has  Christ  finished  his  work  for 
me  ?  Then  tell  me  what  work  I  can  do  for  him."  You  remember  the 
two  questions  of  Saul  of  Tarsus.  The  first  enquiry,  after  he  had  been 
struck  down,  was,  "  Who  art  thou,  Lord  ? "  And  the  next  was, 
*•  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  If  Christ  has  finished  the 
work  for  you  which  you  could  not  do,  now  go  and  finish  the  work  for 
him  which  you  are  privileged  and  permitted  to  do.     Seek  to — 

"  Eescue  the  perishing, 

Cure  for  the  dyinjor, 
Snatch  them  in  pity  from  sin  nnd  the  grave ; 

Weep  o'er  the  erring  one, 

Lift  up  the  fallen, 
Tell  them  of  Jesus,  the  Mighty  to  save." 

My  inference  from  this  saying  of  Christ,  "  It  is  finished,"  is  this, — 
Has  he  finished  his  work  for  me  ?  Then  I  must  get  to  work  for  him, 
and  I  must  persevere  until  I  finish  my  work^  too  ;  not  to  save  myself,  for 
that  is  all  done,  but  because  I  am  saved.  Now  I  must  work  for  him 
with  all  my  might ;  and  if  there  come  discouragements,  if  there  come 
sufferings,  if  there  comes  a  sense  of  weakness  and  exhaustion,  yet  let 
me  not  give  way  to  it ;  but,  inasmuch  as  he  pressed  on  till  he  could 
say,  "  It  is  finished,"  let  me  press  on  till  I,  too,  shall  be  able  to  say, 
**  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thou  gavest  me  to  do."  You  know 
how  men  who  go  fishing  look  out  for  the  fish.  I  have  heard  of  a  man 
going  to  Keston  Ponds  on  Saturday  fishing,  and  stopping  all  day  Sun- 
day, Monday,  Tuesday,  Wednesday.  There  was  another  man  fishing 
there,  and  the  other  man  had  only  been  there  two  days.  He  said, 
"  I  have  been  here  two  days,  and  I  have  only  had  one  bite."  "Why  !" 
replied  the  other,  "I  have  been  here  ever  since  last  Saturday,  and  1 
have  not  had  a  bite  yet ;  but  I  mean  to  keep  on."  "  Well,"  answered 
the  other,  "  I  cannot  keep  on  without  catching  anything."  "  Oh  !  " 
said  number  one,  "  but  I  have  such  a  longing  to  catch  some  fish  that 
I  shall  stop  here  till  I  do."  I  believe  that  fellow  would  catch  some 
fish  ultimately,  if  there  were  any  to  be  caught ;  he  is  the  kind  of 
fisherman  to  do  it,  and  we  want  to  have  men  who  feel  that  they  must 
win  souls  for  Christ,  and  that  they  will  persevere  till  they  do.  It 
must  be  so  with  us,  brethren  and  sisters ;  we  cannot  let  men  go  down 
to  hell  if  there  is  any  way  of  saving  them. 

The  next  inference  is,  that  we  can  finish  our  worlc^  for  Christ  finished 


616 


METKOPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PXTLPTT. 


his.  You  can  put  a  lot  of  ''  finish  "  into  your  work,  and  yoxi  can  hold 
on  to  the  end,  and  complete  the  work  by  divine  grace  ;  and  that  grace 
is  waiting  for  you,  that  grace  is  promised  to  you.  Seek  it,  find  it,  get 
it  Do  not  act  as  some  do,  ah,  even  some  who  are  before  me  now ! 
They  served  God  once,  and  then  they  ran  away  from  him.  They  have 
come-back  again;  God  bless  them,  and  help  them  to  be  more  useful ! 
But  future  earnest  service  wiU  never  make  up  for  that  sad  gap  in  their 
earlier  career.  It  is  best  to  keep  on,  and  on,  and  on,  from  the  com- 
mencement to  the  close  ;  the  Lord  help  us  to  persevere  to  the  end,  till 
we  can  truly  say  of  our  life-work,  *'  It  is  finished  "  ! 

One  word  of  caution  I  must  give  you.     Let  us  not  think  that  our  work 
is  finished  till  we  die.     *'  Well,"  says  one,  "  I  was  just  going  to  say  of 
my  work, '  It  is  finished.'  "  Were  you  ?   Were  you  ?   I  remember  that, 
when  John  Newton  wrote  a  book  about  grace  in  the  blade,  and  grace 
in  the  ear,  and  grace  in  the  full  corn  in  the  ear,  a  very  talkative  body 
said  to  him,  "I  have  been  reading  your  valuable  book,  Mr.  Newton  ; 
it  is  a  splendid  work  ;  and  when  I  came  to  that  part,   '  The  full  corn 
in  the   ear,'    I   thought   how   wonderfully  you  had  described   me." 
*'  Oh ! "  replied   Mr.  Newton,   "•  but   you   could   not   have   read   the 
book  rightly,  for  it  is  one  of  the  marks  of  the  full  com  in  the  ear 
that  it  hangs  its  head  very  low."   So  it  is  ;  and  when  a  man,  in  a  care- 
less, boastful  spirit,  says  of  his  work,  "  It  is  finished,"  I  am  inclined 
to  ask,  ** Brother,  was  it  ever  begun?     If  your  work  for  Christ  is 
finished,  I  should  think  that  you  never  realized  what  it  ought  to  be." 
As  long  as  there  is  breath  in  our  bodies,  let  us  serve  Christ ;  as  long 
as  we  can  think,  as  long  as  we  can  speak,  as  long  as  we  can  work,  let 
us  serve  him,  let  us  even  serve  him  with  our  last  gasp  ;  and,  if  it  be 
possible,  let  us  try  to  set  some  work  going  that  will  glorify  him  when 
we  are  dead  and  gone.     Let  us  scatter  some  seed  that  may  spring  up 
when  we  are  sleeping  beneath  the  hillock  in  the  cemetery.     Ah,  be- 
loved, we  shall  never  have  finished  our  work  for  Christ  until  we  bow 
our  heads,  and  give  up  the  ghost !     The  oldest  friend  here  has  a  little 
somethinjj^  to  do  for  the  Master.     Someone  said  to  me,  the  other  day, 
**  I  cannot  think  why  old  Mrs.  So-and-so  is  spared  ;  she  is  quite  a 
burden  to  her  friends."     '*  Ah !  "  I  replied,  "  she  has  something  yet 
to  do  for  her  Lord,  she  has  another  word  to  speak  for  him."     Sister,. 
look  up  your  work,  and  get  it  done;  and  you,   brother,   see  what 
remains  of  your  life-work  yet  incomplete.     Wind  off  the  ends,  get  all 
the  little  comers  finished.     Who  knows  how  long  it  may  be  before 
you  and  I  may  have  to  give  in  our  account  ?     Some  are  called  away 
very  suddenly  ;  they  are  apparently  in  good  health  one  day,  and  they  are 
gone  the  next.     I  should  not  like  to  leave  a  half-finished  life  behind 
me.     The  Lord  JesiA  Christ  said,  **  It  ic   finished,"  and  your  heart 
should  say,  '*  Lord,  and  I  will  finish,  too;  not  to  mix  my  work  with 
thine,  but  because  thou  hast  finished  thine,  I  will  finish  mine." 

Now  may  the  Lord  give  us  the  joy  of  his  presence  at  his  table ! 
May  the  bread  and  wine  speak  to  you  much  better  than  I  can  !  May 
every  heir  of  heaven  see  Christ  to-night,  and  rejoice  in  his  finished 
work,  for  his  dear  name's  sake !     Amen. 


EXPOSITIONS. 


617 


Expositions  b5  (fT.  ^.  Spurgeon. 

PSALMS  CXXI.  AND  CXXII. 

Psalm  cxxi.  Verse  1.  I  will  lift  up  mine  eyes  unto  the  hills,  from  whence 
eomef.h  my  help. 

No  help  comes  from  anywhere  else  but  from  the  eternal  hills.  Let  us  lift 
up  our  eyes,  therefore,  hopefully  expecting  help  from  the  hills  ;  it  is  on  the 
road,  it  "  cometh."'  The  psalmist  with  the  eye  of  faith  could  see  it  coming, 
so  he  watched  its  approach. 

2.  My  help  cometh  from  the  LORD^  which  made  heaven  and  earth. 

He  would  sooner  unmake  them  than  desert  his  people.  He  that  made 
heaven  and  earth  could  certainly  find  shelter  for  us  either  in  heaven  or  in 
earth.  He  cannot,  he  will  not  leave  us  ;  he  will  make  room  for  us  in  heaven 
when  there  is  no  room  for  us  here.  What  a  blessed  thing  it  is  to  look  right 
away  from  the  creature  to  the  Creator  !  The  creature  may  fail  you ;  but  the 
Creator  is  an  ever-springing  well  of  all-sufficient  grace. 

3.  He  will  not  suffer  thy  foot  to  he  moved  : 

He  will  not  endure  it,  he  will  not  suffer  it.  Many  would  like  to  trip  thee 
up  ;  but  he  will  not  allow  it,  he  loves  thee  too  well. 

3.  He  that  heepeth  thee  will  not  slumber. 

Thou  mayest  slumber,  for  thou  art  frail ;  but  he  is  a  Watchman  to  whose 
eyes  sleep  never  comes.  You  are  always  safe.  Alexander  went  to  sleep,  he 
said,  because  Parmenio  watched  ;  and  you  may  take  the  sleep  of  the  beloved 
because  Jehovah  watches  over  you. 

4.  Behold,  he  that  keepeth  Israel  shall  neither  slumber  nor  sleep. 

Behold  it,  that  is,  mnrk  it;  put  a  nota  bene  at  the  side  of  it;  take 
cognizance  of  this  as  a  great  and  sure  truth.  Jacob  went  to  sleep  with  a 
stone  for  his  pillow,  but  he  that  kept  him  did  not  sleep  ;  he  came  to  him  in 
the  night-watches,  and  revealed  to  him  his  covenant. 

5.  The  Lord  is  thy  keeper  :  the  LORD  is  thy  shade  upon  thy  right  hand. 
Oh,  what  a  Keeper  we  have !     Can  you  not  trust  him  ?     Will  you  not  be 

at  peace  in  your  mind  if  it  be  indeed  true  that  Jehovah  keeps  you,  and  i» 
your  guard  in  the  hour  of  danger  ? 

6.  The  sun  shall  not  smite  thee  by  day,  nor  the  moon  by  night. 

Then,  when  canst  thou  get  hurt  ?  If  thou  art  protected  both  day  and 
night,  these  make  up  all  the  time.  God  does  not  make  »  new  sun  for 
his  people  ;  the  sun  would  smite  us  as  well  as  others,  but  he  takes  the  sting 
out  of  the  sun's  excessive  brightness  :  and  we  have  the  same  sickly  moon 
as  others  have,  with  the  same  influences  over  us ;  but  God  takes  care  that 
the  moonbeams  do  not  harm  his  people.  Neither  the  sun  of  prosperity  nor 
the  night  of  adversity,  neither  the  light  of  truth  nor  even  the  dimness  ol 
mystery,  shall  in j  ure  one  of  the  chosen  seed. 

7.  The  Lord  shall  preserve  thee  from  all  evil :  he  shall  preserve  thy  soul. 
That  is  the  soul  of  our  preservation ;  if  the  life,  the  soul,  be  kept,  then 

are  we  kept  altogether. 

8.  The  Lord  shall  preserve  thy  going  out  and  thy  coming  in — 

Thine  early  days  of  youth,  when  thou  art  going  out  into  life  ;  and  thy 
coming  in,  when  the  older  days  creep  over  thee,  and  thou  art  coming  in  to 
God  and  heaven  ;  thy  going  out  into  business,  and  thy  coming  in  to  private 
devotion. 

8.     From  this  time  forth,  and  even  for  evermore. 

Let  us,  therefore,  feel  restful  at  this  time,  and  even  for  evermore,  having 
the  Lord  for  our  Keeper  and  Preserver. 


618 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


Psalm  cxxii.  Verse  1.  I  was  glad  when  they  said  unto  me,  Let  us  go  inio 
the  house  of  the  Lord. 

I  was  glad  for  their  sake,  glad  to  think  they  were  so  willing  to  go.  I  was 
glad  also  for  my  own  sake,  for  I  was  glad  to  go,  too. 

2.  Our  feet  shall  stand  within  thy  gates,  0  Jerusalem. 
Happy  men  who  were  citizens  of  such  a  city  !    Happy  worshippers  coming 

together  to  the  place  whose  very  name  signifies  the  vision  of  peace,  the 
metropolis  of  God,  type  of  the  New  Jerusalem  which  is  from  above ! 

3.  Jerusalem  is  builded  as  a  city  that  is  compact  together : 

Not  a  conglomeration  of  huts,  but  builded  as  a  city  with  substantial 
structures  ;  and  not  a  straggling  city,  like  some  we  read  of,  that  have  been 
called  "cities  of  magnificent  distances",  but  it  was  ''compact  together." 
Happy  is  the  church  that  is  at  peace  ;  blessed  are  the  people  who  are  joined 
together  by  a  gracious  brotherly  love. 

4.  Whither  the  tribes  go  up,  the  tribes  of  the  LOBDt  unto  the  testimony  o/j 
Israel,  to  give  thanks  unto  the  name  of  the  Loud. 

The  Church  is  the  point  of  meeting  :  "Whither  the  tribes  go  up."     The 
Church  is  the  j)lace  of  "  testimony  "  ;  and  saints  go  to  hear  testimony,  and 
they  go  to  bear  it.     I  wish  there  was  more  of  this  bearing  testimony  among 
Christian  people,  and  that  they  looked  upon  it  as  a  sacred  duty  to  tell  to 
others  what  God  has  told  to  them.     "  To  give  thanks  unto  the  name  of  the 
Lord  "—that  is  another  part  of  true  worship,— praise,  joyful  thanksgiving, 
should  be  one  of  the  saints'  continual  avocations  ;  let  us  not  forget  it  at  this  j 
time.     Some  are  here  who  have  been  sick ;  let  them  give  thanks  unto  the; 
name  of  the  Lord.     Some  are  here  who  are  still  weak,  yet  able  to  come  up 
with  God's  people  ;  let  us  give  thanks  unto  the  name  of  the  Lord.  We  have  \ 
all  some  special  mercy,  some  choice  favour,  for  which  to  praise  his  name ; 
then  let  us  all  give  thanks  unto  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

6.     For  there  are  set  thrones  of  judgment,  the  thrones  of  the  house  of  David. 

If  any  of  the  people  had  been  wronged  by  the  petty  magistrates,  they 
went  up  to  Jerusalem,  and  made  their  appeal  to  the  king.  Here  may  we 
bring  our  suit  before  God,  and  order  our  case  before  him,  for  he  is  true  and 
just,  and  nothing  shall  go  amiss  that  is  left  with  him. 

6.     Fray  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem  : 

Ft&j  for  it  now,  breathe  a  silent  prayer  to  God. 

6.  They  shall  prosper  that  love  thee. 
God  loves  those  who  love  his  Church,  and  love  his  cause,  and  he  rewards! 

them  with  prosperity,  as  much  of  earthly  prosperity  as  they  can  bear,  and 
prosperity  to  their  souls  beyond  measure. 

7.  Feace  be  within  thy  walls,  and  prosperity  within  thy  palaces. 

The  psalmist  bade  us  pray,  and  now  he  himself  prays.  He  who  bids 
others  do  a  thing  should  be  prepared  to  set  the  example. 

8.  For  my  brethren  and  companions'  sakes,  I  will  now  say^  Peace  be  within^ 
thee. 

Let  us  say  it,  for  the  sake  of  beloved  ones  in  heaven,  and  dear  ones  on! 
earth  who  are  on  the  way  thither,  "  Peace  be  within  thee."  ■ 

9.  Because  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  our  Ood  I  will  seek  thy  good. 
Not  only  pray  for  it,  but  work  for  it,  give  for  it,  live  for  it  :  "I  will  seckj 

thy  good."  God  bless  to  us  these  two  Psalms,  and  put  us  all  in  a  right  state 
of  heart  to-night !     Amen. 


Hymns  from  ''  Ovr  Own  Hymn  Book  "—122  (Song  I),  944,  300. 


IT    IS    FINISHED!' 


Dkltvereh  on    Sunday   Morning,  Dkcember  1st,   1861,  by 

Iii:V.  C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TAHERNACLE,  NEWINOTON. 


"  When  Jesus  therefore  had  received  the  vinegar,  he  said,  It  is  finished  :  and  he  bowed  his  heaa, 
and  gave  up  the  ghost."— John  xix.  30. 

My  brethren,  I  would  have  you  attentively  observe  the  singular  clearness,  power, 
and  quickness  of  the  Saviour's  mind  in  the  last  agonies  of  death.  When  pains  and 
groans  attend  the  last  hour,  they  frequently  have  the  effect  of  discomposing  the  mind, 
so  that  it  is  not  possible  for  the  dying  man  to  collect  his  thoughts,  or  having  collected 
them,  to  utter  them  so  that  they  can  be  understood  by  others.  In  no  case  could  we 
expact  a  remarkable  exercise  of "  memory,  or  a  profoimd  judgment  upon  deep  subjects 
from  an  expiring  man.  But  the  Redeemer's  last  acts  were  full  of  wisdom  and  prudence, 
although  his  sufferings  were  beyond  all  measure  excruciating.  Remai  k  how  clearly  he 
perceived  the  significance  of  every  type !  How  plainlv  he  could  read  with  dying  eye 
those  divine  symbols  which  the  eyes  of  angels  could  only  desire  to  look  into  !  He  saw 
the  secrets  which  have  bewildered  sages  and  astonished  seers,  all  fulfilled  in  his  own 
body.  Nor  must  we  fail  to  observe  the  powei-  and  comprehensiveness  by  which  he 
grasped  the  chain  which  binds  the  shadowy  past  with  the  sun-lit  present.  We  must 
not  forget  the  brilliance  of  that  intelligence  which  threaded  all  the  ceremonies  and 
sacrifices  on  one  string  of  thought,  beheld  all  the  prophecies  as  one  great  revelation, 
and  all  the  promises  as  the  heralds  of  one  person,  and  then  said  of  the  whole,  "  '  It 
is  finished,'  finished  in  me."  What  quickness  of  mind  was  that  which  enabled 
him  to  traverse  all  the  centuries  of  prophecy ;  to  penetrate  the  eternity  of  the 
covenant,  and  then  to  anticipate  the  eternal  glories  !  And  all  this  when  he  is 
mocked  by  multitudes  of  enemies,  and  when  his  hands  and  feet  are  nailed  to  the  cross  ! 
What  force  of  mind  must  the  Saviour  have  possessed,  to  soar  above  those  Alps  of 
Agony,  which  touched  the  very  clouds.  In  what  a  singular  mental  condition  must 
he  have  been  during  the  period  of  his  crucifixion,  to  be  able  to  review  the  whole 
roll  of  inspiration  !  Now,  this  remark  may  not  seem  to  be  of  any  great  value, 
but  I  think  its  value  lies  in  certain  inferences  that  may  be  drawn  from  it.  We  have 
sometimes  heard  it  said,  "  How  could  Christ,  in  so  short  a  time,  bear  suffering  which 
should  be  equivalent  to  the  torments— the  eternal  torments  of  hell  ?  "  Our  reply  is,  we 
are  not  capable  of  judging  what  the  Son  of  God  might  do  even  in  a  moment,  much  less 
what  he  might  do  and  what  he  might  suffer  in  his  life  and  in  his  death.  It  has  been 
frequently  affirmed  by  persons  who  have  been  rescued  from  drowning,  that  the  mind  of 
a  drowning  man  is  singularly  active.  One  who,  after  being  some  time  in  the  water, 
was  at  last  painfully  restored,  said  that  the  whole  of  his  history  seemed  to  come  before 
his  mind  while  he  was  sinking,  and  that  if  any  one  had  asked  him  how  long  he  had 
been  in  the  water,  he  should  have  said  twenty  years,  whereas  he  had  only  been  there 
for  a  moment  or  two.  The  wild  romance  of  Mahomet's  journey  upon  Alborak  is  not 
an  unfitting  illustration.  He  affirmed  that  when  the  angel  came  in  vision  to  take 
him  on  his  celebrated  journey  to  Jerusalem,  he  went  through  all  the  seven  heavens,  and 
saw  all  the  wonders  thereof,  and  yet  he  was  gone  so  short  a  time,  that  tnougn  tne 
angel's  wing  had  touched  a  basin  of  water  when  they  started,  they  returned  soon  enough 
to  prevent  the  water  from  being  spilt.  The  long  dream  o£  the  epileptic  impostor  may 
,  really  have  occupied  but  a  second  of  time.  The  intellect  of  mortal  man  is  such  that, 
if  God  wills  it,  when  it  is  in  certain  states,  it  can  think  out  centuries  of  thought  at 
once  ;  it  can  go  through  in  one  instant  what  we  should  have  supposed  would  have 
taken  years  upon  years  of  time  for  it  to  know  or  feel.  We  think,  therefore,  that  from 
the  Saviour's  singular  clearness  and  quickness  of  intellect  upon  the  cross,  it  is  very 
possible  that  he  did  in  the  space  of  two  or  throe  hours  endure  not  only  the  a^oay 

No.    421. 


6 JO  "IT  a  finished!" 

wnich  might  have  been  contained  in  centuries,  but  even  an  equivalent  foj*  that  which 
might  be  comprehended  in  everlasting  punishment.  At  any  rate,  it  is  not  fo'.-  i;s  to  f-ay 
that  it  could  not  be  so.  When  the  Deity  is  arrayed  in  manhood,  then  manhood  becnmea 
omnipotent  to  suffer  ;  and  just  as  the  feet  of  Christ  were  once  almighty  to  tte.ad  the 
seas,  so  now  was  his  whole  body  become  almighty  to  dive  into  the  great  waters,  to 
endure  an  immersion  in  "  unknown  agonies."  Do  net,  I  pray  you,  let  us  attempt  to 
measure  Christ's  sufferings  by  the  finite  line  of  your  own  ignorant  reason,  but  let  ur 
know  and  believe  that  what  he  endured  there  was  accepted  by  God  as  an  equivalent 
for  all  our  pains,  and  therefore  it  could  not  have  been  a  trifle,  but  must  have  been  all 
that  Hart  conceived  it  to  be,  when  he  says  He  bore — 

"All  that  incarnate  God  could  bear, 
With  strength  enough,  but  none  to  spare." 

My  discourse  will,  I  have  no  doubt,  more  fully  illustrate  the  remark  with  which  I 
have  commenced  ;  let  us  proceed  to  it  at  once.  First,  let  us  hear  the  text  and  under- 
stand it :  then  let  us  hear  it  and  wonder  at  it ;  and  then,  thirdly,  let  us  hear  it  and 
proclaim  it. 

I.    Let  us  heab  the  text  and  understand  it. 

The  Son  of  God  has  been  made  man.  He  has  lived  a  life  of  perfect  virtue  and  of 
total  self-deniaL  He  has  been  all  that  life  long  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  a  man 
of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief.  His  enemies  have  been  legion  ;  his  friends  have 
been  few,  and  those  few  faithless.  He  is  at  last  delivered  over  into  the  hands  of  them 
that  hate  him.  He  is  arrested  while  in  the  act  of  prayer  ;  he  is  arraigned  before  both 
the  spiritual  and  temporal  courts.  He  is  robed  in  mockery,  and  then  unrobed  in  shame. 
He  is  set  upon  his  throne  in  scorn,  and  then  tied  to  the  pillar  in  cruelty.  He  is  declared 
innocent,  and  yet  he  is  deUvered  up  by  the  judge  who  ought  to  have  preserved  him  from 
his  persecutors.  He  is  dragged  through  the  streets  of  that  Jerusalem  which  had  killed 
the  prophets,  and  would  now  crimson  itself  with  the  blood  of  the  prophets'  Master.  He 
is  brought  to  the  cross  ;  he  is  nailed  fast  to  the  cruel  wood.  The  sun  burns  him.  His 
cruel  wounds  increase  the  fever.  God  forsakes  him.  **  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou 
forsaken  me  ? "  contains  the  concentrated  anguish  of  the  world.  While  he  hangs  there  in 
mortal  conflict  with  sin  and  Satan,  his  heart  is  broken,  his  limbs  are  dislocated.  Heaven 
fails  him,  for  the  sun  is  veiled  in  darkness.  Earth  forsakes  him,  for  "his  disciples 
forsook  him  and  fled."  He  looks  everywhere,  and  there  is  none  to  help  ;  he  casts  his 
eye  around,  and  there  is  no  man  that  can  share  his  toil.  He  treads  the  winepress  alone  ; 
and  of  the  people  there  is  none  with  him.  On,  on,  he  goes,  steadily  determined  to 
drink  the  last  dreg  of  that  cup  which  must  not  pass  from  him  if  his  Father's  will  be 
done.  At  last  he  cries — "  It  is  finished,"  and  he  gives  up  the  ghost.  Hear  it.  Christians:, 
hear  this  shout  of  triumph  as  it  rings  to-day  with  all  the  freshness  and  force  which  it 
had  eighteen  hundred  years  ago  !  Hear  it  from  the  Sacred  Word,  and  from  the  Saviour's 
lips,  and  may  the  Spirit  of  God  open  your  ears  that  you  may  hear  as  the  learned,  and 
understand  what  you  hear  ! 

1 .  What  meant  the  Saviour,  then,  by  this — "  It  is  finished  ? "  He  meant,  first  of  all, 
that  all  the  types,  promises,  and  prophecies  were  now  J  My  accomplished  in  fdm.  Those 
v?ho  are  acquainted  with  the  original  will  find  that  the  words—"  It  is  finished,"  occur 
twice  within  three  verses.  In  the  28th  verse,  we  have  the  word  in  the  Greek  ;  it  is 
translated  in  our  version  "accomplished,"  but  there  it  stands — "After  this,  Jesus 
knowing  that  all  things  were  now  jinished,  that  the  Scripture  might  be  fulfilled,  saith, 
I  thirst."  And  then  he  afterwards  said,  "  It  is  finished."  This  leads  us  to  see  his 
meaning  very  clearly,  that  all  the  Scripture  was  now  fulfilled,  that  when  he  said, 
"It  is  finished,"  the  whole  book,  from  the  first  to  the  last,  in  both  the  law  and 
the  prophets,  was  finished  in  him.  There  is  not  a  single  jewel  of  promise,  from 
that  first  emerald  which  fell  on  the  threshold  of  Eden,  to  that  last  saptihire- stone  of 
Malaehi,  which  was  not  set  in  th«  breast-plate  of  the  true  High  Priest.  Nay,  there  is 
not  a  tyi^e,  from  the  red  heifer  downward  to  the  turtle-dove,  from  the  hyssop  upwards 
to  Solomon's  temple  itself,  which  was  not  fulfilled  in  him  ;  and  not  a  prophecy,  whether 
spoken  on  Chebar's  bank,  or  on  the  shores  of  Jordan  ;  not  a  dream  of  wise  men,  whether 
they  had  received  it  in  Babylon,  or  in  Samaria,  or  in  Judea,  which  was  not  now  fully 
wrought  out  in  Christ  Jesus.  And,  brethren,  what  a  wonderful  thing  it  is,  that  a  mass 
of  promises,  and  prophecies,  and  types,  apparently  so  heterogeneous,  should  all  be 
accomplished  in  one  person  !  Take  away  Christ  for  one  moment,  and  I  will  give  the  Old 
Testaraen'-  to  any  wise  man  living,  and  say  to  him,  "Take  this  ;  this  is  a  problem  ;  go 
home  and  construct  in  your  imagination  an  ideal  character  who  shall  exactly  fit  all  that 


IT   IS  FINISHED 


621 


which  is  herein  foreshadowed  ;  remember,  he  must  be  a  prophet  like  unto  INIoses,  aud 
vet  a  champion  like  to  Joshua  ;  he  must  be  an  Aaron  and  a  Melchisedek  ;  he  must  be 
both  David  and  Solomon,  Noah  and  Jonah,  Judah  and  Joseph.  Nay,  he  must  not 
only  be  the  lamb  that  was  slain,  and  the  scape-goat  that  was  not  slam,  the  turtle-dove 
that  was  dipped  in  blood,  and  the  priest  who  slew  the  bird,  but  he  must  be  the  altar, 
the  tabernacle,  the  mercy-seat,  and  the  shewbread."  Nay,  to  puzzle  this  wise  man 
further,  we  remind  him  of  prophecies  so  apparently  contradictory,  that  one  would  think 
they  never  could  meet  in  one  man.  Such  as  these,  "  All  kings  shall  fall  dovyn  before 
him,  and  all  nations  shall  serve  him;"  and  yet,  "  He  is  despised  and  rejected  of 
men  "  He  must  begin  by  showing  a  man  born  of  a  virgin  mother—"  A  virgin  shall 
conceive  and  bear  a  son."  He  must  be  »  man  without  spot  or  blemish,  but  yet  one 
upon  whom  the  Lord  doth  cause  to  meet  the  iniquities  of  us  all.  He  must  be  a  glonoua 
one  a  Son  of  David,  but  yet  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground.  Now,  I  say  it  boldly,  it  all 
the  greatest  intellects  of  all  the  ages  could  set  themselves  to  work  out  this  problem,  to 
invent  another  key  to  the  types  and  prophecies,  they  could  not  do  it.  I  see  you,  ye  wise 
men,  ye  are  poiing  over  these  hieroglyphs  ;  one  suggests  one  key,  and  it  opens  two  or 
three  of  the  figures,  but  you  cannot  proceed,  for  the  next  one  puts  you  at  a  nonplus. 
Another  learned  man  suggests  another  clue,  but  that  fails  most  where  it  is  most  needed, 
and  another,  and  another,  and  thus  these  wondrous  hieroglyphs  traced  of  old  by  Moses 
in  the  wilderness,  must  be  left  unexplained,  till  one  comes  forward  and  proclaims,  ih© 
cross  of  Christ  and  the  Son  of  God  incarnate,"  then  the  whole  is  clear,  so  that  he 
that  runs  may  read,  and  a  child  may  understand.  Blessed  Saviour !  In  thee  we  see 
everything  fulfilled,  which  God  spoke  of  old  by  the  prophets  ;  in  thee  we  discover 
everything  carried  out  in  substance,  which  God  had  set  forth  us  m  the  dim  mist  of 
sacrificiafsmoke.  Glory  be  unto  thy  name  !  "  It  is  finislied  "—everything  is  summed 
up  in  thee.  ,,  ,  i      •  j 

2  But  the  words  have  richer  meaning.  Not  only  were  all  types,  and  prophecies,  and 
promises  thus  finished  in  Christ,  but  sJl  the  typical  sacrifices  of  the  old  Jewish  law,  were 
iiotv  abolished  as  well  as  explained.  They  were  finished— finished  m  him.  Will  you 
imaf^ine  for  a  minute  the  saints  in  heaven  looking  down  upon  what  was  done  on  earth- 
Abel  and  his  friends  who  had  long  ago  before  the  flood  been  sitting  m  the  glones  above. 
They  watch  while  God  lights  star  after  star  in  heaven.  Promise  after  promise  flashes  hght 
upon  the  thick  darkness  of  earth.  They  see  Abraham  come,  and  they  look  down  and 
wonder  while  they  see  God  revealing  Christ  to  Abraham  in  the  person  of  Isaac  ihey 
gaze  just  as  the  angels  do,  desiring  to  look  into  the  mystery.  From  the  times  of  Noah, 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  they  see  altars  smoking,  recognitions  of  the  fact  that  man 
is  guilty,  and  the  spirits  before  the  throne  say,  "Lord,  when  will  sacrifices  finish  ?— 
when  will  blood  no  more  be  shed  T  The  offering  of  bloody  sacrifices  soon  increases. 
It  is  now  carried  on  by  men  ordained  for  the  purpose.  Aaron  and  the  high  priests, 
and  the  Levites,  every  morning  and  every  evening  offer  a  lamb,  while  great  sacrifices 
are  offered  on  special  occasions.  Bullocks  groan,  rams  bleed,  the  necks  of  doves  are 
wrung,  and  all  the  while  the  saints  are  crying,  *'  O  Lord,  how  long  ?— when  shall  the 
sacrifice  cease  ? "  Year  after  year  the  high  priest  goes  within  the  veil  and  sprinkles  the 
mercy-seat  with  blood  ;  the  next  year  sees  him  do  the  like,  and  the  next  and  ag^n, 
and  i^ain,  and  again.  David  offers  hecatombs,  Solomon  slaughters  tens  of  thousands, 
Hezekiah  offers  rivers  of  oil,  Josiah  gives  thousands  of  the  fat  of  fed  beasts,  and  the 
spirits  of  the  just  say,  "  Will  it  never  be  complete  ?— wiU  the  sacrifice  never  be  finished  — 
must  there  always  be  a  remembrance  of  sin  ?-  will  not  the  last  High  priest  soon  come  ?- 
will  not  the  order  and  line  of  Aaron  soon  lay  aside  its  labour,  because  the  whole  is 
finished  ? "  Not  yet,  not  yet,  ye  spirits  of  the  just,  for  after  the  captivity  the  slaughter 
of  victims  still  remains.  But  lo,  he  comes !  Gaze  more  intently  than  before-He 
comes  who  is  to  close  the  line  of  priests  !  Lo  !  there  he  stands,  clothed-not  now  with 
linen  ephod,  not  with  ringing  bells,  nor  with  sparkUng  jewels  on  his  breastplate- but 
arrayed  in  human  flesh  he  stands,  his  cross  his  altar,  his  body  and  his  soul  the  victim 
himself  the  priest,  and  lo  !  before  his  God  he  offers  up  his  own  soul  within  the  veil  of 
thick  darkness  which  hath  covered  him  from  the  sight  of  men.  Presentmg  his  own 
blood,  he  enters  within  the  veil,  sprinkles  it  there,  and  coming  forth  from  the  midsl 
of  the  darkness,  he  looks  down  on  the  astonished  earth,  and  upward  to  expectant 
heaven,  and  cries,  '' It  is  finished  !  it  is  finished !  "—that  for  which  ye  looked  so  long, 
is  fully  achieved  and  perfected  for  ever.  j?   .    j,  ,• 

3.  The  Saviour  meant,  we  doubt  not,  that  in  this  moment  his  perfect  obedience  wa* 
inished.  It  was  necessary,  in  order  that  man  might  be  saved,  that  the  law  of  God 
should  be  kept,  for  no  man  can  see  God's  face  except  he  be  perfect  in  nghteousneas. 


622  "it  IS  finished!" 

Christ  undertook  to  keep  Gou's  law  for  his  people,  to  obey  its  every  mandate,  and 
preserve  its  every  statute  intact.  Throughout  the  6rst  years  of  his  life  he  privately 
obeyed,  honouring  his  father  and  his  mother  ;  during  the  next  three  years  he  publicly 
obeyed  God,  spending  and  being  spent  in  his  service,  till  if  you  would  know  what  a  man 
would  be  whose  life  was  wholly  conformed  to  the  law  of  God,  you  may  see  him  in 
Christ. 

"  My  dear  Redeemer  and  my  Lord, 

I  read  my  duty  in  thy  word, 

But  in  thy  life  the  law  appears 

Drawn  out  in  living  characters." 

It  needed  nothing  to  complete  the  perfect  virtue  of  life  but  the  entire  obedience  of 
death.  He  who  would  serve  God  must  be  willing  not  only  to  give  all  his  soul  and  his 
strength  while  he  lives,  but  he  must  stand  prepared  to  resign  life  when  it  shall  be  for 
God's  glory.  Our  perfect  substitute  put  the  last  stroke  upon  his  work  by  dying,  and 
therefore  he  claims  to  be  absolved  from  further  debt,  for  "it  is  finished."  Yes,  glorious 
Lamb  of  God,  it  is  finished  !  Thou  hast  been  tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are,  yet 
hast  thou  sinned  in  none !  It  tra«  finished,  for  the  last  arrow  out  of  Satan's  quiver 
had  been  shot  at  thee ;  the  last  blasphemous  insinuation,  the  last  wicked  temptation 
had  spent  its  fury  on  thee  ;  the  Prince  of  this  world  had  surveyed  thee  from  head  to 
foot,  within  and  without,  but  he  had  found  nothing  in  thee.  Now  thy  trial  is  over, 
thou  hast  finished  the  work  which  thy  Father  gave  thee  to  do,  and  so  finished  it  that 
hell  itself  cannot  accuse  thee  of  a  flaw.  And  now,  looking  upon  thine  entire  obedience, 
thou  sayest,  "It  is  finished,"  and  we  thy  people  believe  most  joyously  that  it  is  even 
BO.  Brothers  and  sisters,  this  is  more  than  you  or  I  could  have  said  if  Adam  had  never 
fallen.  If  we  had  been  in  the  garden  of  Eden  to-day,  we  could  never  have  boasted  a 
finished  righteousness,  since  a  creature  can  never  finish  its  obedience.  As  long  as  a 
creature  lives  it  is  bound  to  obey,  and  as  long  as  a  free  agent  exists  on  earth  it  would 
be  in  danger  of  violating  the  vow  of  its  obedience.  If  Adam  had  been  in  Paradise 
from  the  first  day  until  now,  he  might  fall  to-morrow.  Left  to  himself  there  would  be 
no  reason  why  that  king  of  nature  should  not  yet  be  uncrowned.  But  Christ  the 
Creator,  who  finished  creation,  has  perfected  redemption.  God  can  ask  no  more.  The 
law  has  received  all  it  claims ;  the  largest  extent  of  justice  cannot  demand  another 
hour's  obedience.  It  is  done  ;  it  is  complete  ;  the  last  throw  of  the  shuttle  is  over, 
and  the  robe  is  woven  from  the  top  throughout.  Let  us  rejoice,  then,  in  this  that  the 
Master  meant  by  his  dying  cry  that  his  perfect  righteousness  wherewith  he  covets 
us  was  finished. 

4.  But  next,  the  Saviour  meant  that  the  satisfaction  which  he  rendered  to  the 
justice  of  God  was  finished.  The  debt  was  now,  to  the  last  farthing,  all  discharged. 
The  atonement  and  propitiation  were  made  once  for  all,  and  for  ever,  by  the  one 
offering  made  in  Jesu  s  body  on  the  tree.  There  was  the  cup  ;  hell  was  in  it ;  the  Saviour 
drank  it — not  a  sip  and  then  a  pause ;  not  a  draught  and  then  a  ceasing ;  but  he  drained 
it  till  there  is  not  a  dreg  left  for  any  of  his  people.  The  great  ten-thonged  whip  of  the 
law  was  worn  out  upon  his  bads  ;  there  is  no  lash  left  with  which  to  smite  one  for  whom 
Jesus  died.  The  great  cannonade  of  God's  justice  has  exhausted  all  its  ammunition ;  there 
is  nothing  left  to  be  hurled  against  a  child  of  God.  Sheathed  is  thy  sword,  0  Justice ! 
Silenced  is  thy  thunder,  0  Law  !  There  remaineth  nothing  now  of  all  the  griefs,  and 
pains,  and  agonies  which  chosen  sinners  ought  to  have  suflfered  for  their  sins,  for  Christ 
has  endured  all  for  his  own  beloved,  and  "it  is  finished."  Brethren,  it  is  more  than 
the  damned  in  hell  can  ever  say.  If  you  and  I  had  been  constrained  to  make  satisfac- 
tion to  God's  justice  by  being  sent  to  hell  we  never  could  have  said,  "It  is  finished,** 
Christ  has  paid  the  debt  which  all  the  torments  of  eternity  could  not  have  paid.  Lost 
golds,  ye  sufier  to-day  as  ye  have  suffered  for  ages  past,  but  God's  justice  is  not  satisfied  ; 
his  law  is  not  fully  magnified.  And  when  time  shall  fail,  and  eternity  shall  have  heen 
flying  on,  still  for  ever,  for  ever,  the  uttermost  farthing  never  having  been  paid, 
the  chastisement  for  sin  must  fall  upon  unpardoned  sinners.  But  Christ  has  done 
what  all  the  flames  of  the  pit  could  not  do  in  all  eternity ;  he  has  magnified  the  law 
and  made  it  honourable,  and  now  from  the  cross  he  cries — "It  is  finished." 

5.  Once  again  :  when  he  said,  "  It  is  finished,"  Jesus  had  totally  destroyed  the  power 
of  Satan y  of  sin,  and  of  death.  The  champion  had  entered  the  lists  to  do  battle  for  our 
Boul's  redemption,  against  all  our  foes.  He  met  Sin.  Horrible,  terrible,  ail-but  omni- 
potent Sin  nailed  him  to  the  cross  ;  but  in  that  deed,  Christ  nailed  Sin  aho  to  the  tree. 
There  they  both  did  hang  together — Sin,  and  Sin's  destroyer.  Sin  destroyed  Christ,  and 


"IT  IS  finished!"  623 

by  that  destruction  Christ  destroyed  Sin.  Next  came  the  second  enemy,  Satan,  He 
assaulted  Christ  with  all  his  hosts.  Calling  up  his  myrmidons  from  every  corner  and 
quarter  of  the  universe,  he  said,  "Awake,  arise,  or  be  for  ever  fallen  !  Here  is  qui 
great  enemy  who  has  sworn  to  bruise  my  head  ;  now  let  us  bruise  his  heel !  "  They 
shot  their  hellish  darts  into  his  heart ;  they  poured  their  boiling  cauldrons  on  his  brain  ; 
they  emptied  their  venom  into  his  veins  ;  they  spat  their  insinuations  into  his  face  ; 
they  hissed  their  devilish  fears  into  his  ear.  He  stood  alone,  the  lion  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah,  hounded  by  all  the  dogs  of  hell.  Our  champion  quailed  not,  but  used  his  holy 
weapons,  striking  right  and  left  with  all  the  power  of  God-supported  manhood.  On 
came  the  hosts  ;  volley  after  volley  was  discharged  against  him.  No  mimic  thunders 
were  these,  but  such  as  might  shake  the  very  gates  of  hell.  The  conqueror  steadily 
advanced,  overturning  their  ranks,  dashing  in  pieces  his  enemies,  breaking  the  bow  and 
cutting  the  spear  in  sunder,  and  burning  the  chariots  in  the  fire,  while  he  cried,  **  In 
the  name  of  God  will  I  destroy  ye  !"  At  last,  foot  to  foot,  he  met  the  champion  of  hell, 
and  now  our  David  fought  with  Goliath.  Not  long  was  the  struggle  ;  thick  was  the 
darkness  which  gathered  round  them  both  ;  but  he  who  is  the  Son  of  God  as  well  as  the 
Son  of  Mary,  knew  how  to  smite  the  fiend,  and  he  did  smite  him  with  divine  fury, 
till,  having  despoiled  hiui  of  his  armour,  having  quenched  his  fiery  darts,  and  broken 
his  head,  he  cried,  "It  is  finished,"  and  sent  the  fiend,  bleeding  and  howling,  down  to 
hell.     We  can  imagine  him  pursued  by  the  eternal  Saviour,  who  exclaims  : — 

"Traitor! 
My  bolt  shalt  find  and  pierce  thee  through, 
Though  under  hell's  profoundest  wave 
Thou  div'st,  to  seek  a  shelt'ring  grave." 

His  thunderbolt  o'ertook  the  fiend,  and  grasping  him  with  both  his  hands,  the  Saviour 
drew  around  him  the  great  chain.  The  angels  brought  the  royal  chariot  from  on  high, 
to  whose  wheels  the  captive  fiend  was  bound.  Lash  the  coursers  up  the  everlasting 
hills  !  Spirits  made  perfect  come  forth  to  meet  him.  Hyrftn  the  conqueror  who  drags 
death  and  hell  behind  him,  and  leads  captivity  captive!  "Lift  up  your  heads, 
0  ye  gates,  and  be  ye  lifted  up,  ye  everlasting  doors,  that  the  King  of  glory  may 
come  in  !"  But  stay  ;  ere  he  enters,  let  him  be  rid  of  this  his  burden.  Lo  !  he  takes 
the  fiend,  and  hurls  him  down  through  illimitable  night,  broken,  bruised,  with  his  power 
destroyed,  bereft  of  his  crown,  to  lie  for  ever  howling  in  the  pit  of  hell.  Thus,  when 
the  Saviour  cried,  "It  is  finished,"  he  had  defeated  Sin  and  Satan  ;  nor  less  had  he 
vanquished  Death.  Death  had  come  against  him,  as  Christmas  Evans  puts  it,  with  his 
fiery  dart,  which  he  struck  right  through  the  Saviour,  till  the  point  fixed  in  the  cross,  and 
when  he  tried  to  pull  it  out  again,  he  left  the  sting  behind.  What  could  he  do  more  ? 
He  was  disarmed.  Then  Christ  set  some  of  his  prisoners  free ;  for  many  of  the  saints  arose 
and  were  seen  of  many :  then  he  said  to  him,  "  Death,  I  take  from  thee  thy  keys  ;  thou 
must  live  for  a  little  while  to  be  the  warder  of  those  beds  in  which  my  saints  shall  sleep, 
but  give  me  thy  keys."  And  lo  !  the  Saviour  stands  to-day  with  the  keys  of  death 
hanging  at  his  girdle,  and  he  waits  until  the  hour  shall  come  of  which  no  man 
knoweth  ;  when  the  trump  of  the  archangel  shall  ring  like  the  silver  trumpets  of 
Jubilee,  and  then  he  shall  say,  "  Let  my  captives  go  free."  Then  shall  the  tombs  be 
opened  in  virtue  of  Christ's  death,  and  the  very  bodies  of  the  saints  shall  live  again  in 
an  eternity  of  glory. 

"'Itisfinish'd!' 
Hear  the  dying  Saviour  cry." 

II.    Secondly,  let  us  hear  and  wonder. 

Let  us  perceive  what  mighty  things  were  effected  and  secured  by  these  words, 
"It  is  finished."  Thus  he  ratified  the  covenant  That  covenant  was  signed  and 
sealed  before,  and  in  all  things  it  was  ordered  well,  but  when  Christ  said,  "  It  is 
finished,"  then  the  covenant  was  made  doubly  sure ;  when  the  blood  of  Christ's 
heart  bespattered  the  divine  roll,  then  it  could  never  be  reversed,  nor  could  one  of  its 
ordinances  be  broken,  nor  one  of  its  stipulaticms  fail.  You  know  the  covenant  was  on 
this  wise.  God  covenants  on  his  part  that  he  would  give  Christ  to  see  of  the  travail 
of  his  soul ;  that  all  who  were  given  to  him  should  have  new  hearts  and  right  spirits  ; 
that  they  should  be  washed  from  sin,  and  should  enter  into  life  through  him.  Christ's 
■ide  of  the  covenant  was  this — "Father,  I  will  do  thy  will ;  I  will  pay  the  ransom  to 
the  last  jot  and  tittle ;  I  will  give  thee  perfect  obedience  and  complete  satisfaction." 
Now  if  this  second  part  of  the  covenant  had  never  been  fulfilled,  the  first  part  would 


024  "nr  ra  fiktshbd!" 

have  been  invalid,  but  when  Jesus  said,  "  It  h  finished,"  then  there  was  nothing  l^'ft 
to  be  performed  on  his  part,  and  now  the  covenant  is  all  on  one  side.  It  is  God's  "  I 
will,"  and  "  They  shall."  "  A  new  heart  will  I  give  you,  and  a  right  spirit  will  I  put 
within  you."  "I  will  sprinkle  clean  water  upon  you  and  ye  shall  be  clean."  ''From 
all  your  iniquities  will  I  cleanse  you."  "  I  will  lead  you  by  a  way  that  ye  know 
not."  "  I  will  surely  bring  them  in."  The  covenant  that  day  was  ratified.  When 
Christ  said,  "  It  is  finished,"  his  FatJier  was  honoured,  and  divine  justice  was  fully 
displayed.  The  Father  always  did  love  his  people.  Do  not  think  that  Christ  died  to 
make  God  the  Father  loving.  He  always  had  loved  them  from  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world,  but — "It  is  finished,"  took  away  the  barriers  which  were  in  the  Father's 
way.  He  would,  as  a  God  of  love,  and  now  he  could  as  a  God  of  justice,  bless  poor 
sinners.  From  that  day  the  Father  is  well  pleased  to  receive  sinners  to  his  bosom. 
When  Christ  said — *'It  is  finished,"  he  himself  was  glorified.  Then  on  his  head 
descended  the  all-glorious  crown.  Then  did  the  Father  give  to  him  honours,  which  he 
had  not  before.  He  had  lionour  as  God,  but  as  man  he  was  despised  and  rejected  ; 
now  as  God  and  man  Christ  was  made  to  sit  down  for  ever  on  his  Father's  throne, 
crowned  with  honour  and  majesty.  Then,  too,  by  "It  is  finished,"  the  Spirit  was 
procured  for  tu. 

"  'Tis  by  the  merit  of  his  death 

VVhio  hung  upon  the  tree. 
The  Spirit  is  sent  down  to  breathe 

On  such  dry  bones  as  we." 

nien  the  Spirit  which  Christ  had  aforetime  promised,  perceiveil  a  new  and  living  way 
by  which  he  could  come  to  dwell  in  the  hearts  of  men,  and  men  might  come  up  to 
dwell  with  him  above.  That  day  too,  when  Christ  said—"  It  is  finished,"  the  toord$ 
had  effect  on  heaven.  Then  the  walls  of  chrysolite  stood  fast ;  then  the  jasper-light  of 
the  pearly -gated  city  shone  like  the  light  of  seven  days.  Before,  the  saints  had  been 
saved  as  it  were  on  credit.  They  hsS  entered  heaven,  God  having  faith  in  his  Sou 
Jesus.  Had  not  Christ  finished  his  work,  surely  they  must  have  left  their  shining 
spheres,  and  suffered  in  their  own  persons  for  their  own  sins.  I  might  represent  heaven, 
if  my  imagination  might  be  allowed  a  moment,  as  being  ready  to  totter  if  Christ 
had  not  finished  his  work ;  its  stones  would  have  been  unloosed ;  massive  and 
•tupendous  though  its  bastions  are,  yet  had  they  fallen  as  earthly  cities  reel  under 
the  throes  of  earthquake.  But  Christ  said,  "It  is  finished,"  and  oath,  and 
covenant,  and  blood  set  fast  the  dwelling-place  of  the  redeemed,  made  their  mansions 
safely  and  eternally  their  own,  and  bade  their  feet  stand  immoveably  upon  the  rock. 
Nay,  more,  that  word  "  It  is  finished  !  "  took  effect  in  the  gloomy  caverns  and  depths 
of  HELL.  Then  Satan  bit  his  iron  bands  in  rage,  howling,  "  I  am  defea,ted  by  the  very 
man  whom  I  thought  to  overcome ;  my  hopes  are  blasted  ;  never  shall  an  elect  one 
come  into  my  prison-house,  never  a  blood-bought  one  be  found  in  my  abode." 
Lost  souls  mourned  that  day,  for  they  said — "'It  is  finished !' and  if  Christ  him- 
self, the  substitute,  could  not  be  permitted  to  go  free  till  he  had  finished  all  his  punish- 
ment, then  we  shall  never  be  free."  It  was  their  double  death-knell,  for  they  said, 
"  Alas  for  us  !  Justice,  which  would  not  suffer  the  Saviour  to  escape,  will  never  suffer 
us  to  be  at  liberty.  It  is  finished  with  him,  and  therefore  it  shall  never  be  finished  f o» 
us."  That  day,  too,  the  earth  had  a  gleam  of  sunlight  cast  over  her  which  she  had 
never  known  before.  Then  her  hill-tops  began  to  glisten  with  the  rising  of  the  sun,  and 
though  her  valleys  still  are  clothed  with  darkness,  and  men  wander  hither  and  thither, 
and  grope  in  the  noonday  as  in  the  night,  yet  that  sun  is  rising,  climbing  still  its 
heavenly  steeps,  never  to  set,  and  soon  shall  its  rays  penetrate  thi'ough  the  thick  mists 
and  clouds,  and  every  eye  shall  see  him,  and  every  heart  be  made  glad  with  his  light- 
The  words  "  It  is  finished  !  "  consolidated  heaven,  shook  hell,  comforted  earth,  delighted 
the  Father,  gloiified  the  Son,  brought  down  the  Spirit,  and  confirmed  the  everlasting 
covenant  to  all  the  chosen  seed.  ^        ^  ^^ 

III.  And  now  I  come  to  my  last  point,  upon  which  very  briefly.  "  It  is  finished ! ' 
Let  ua  publish  it. 

Children  of  God,  ye  who  by  faith  received  Christ  as  your  allin  all,  tell  it  every  day 
of  your  lives  that  "  it  is  finished."  Go  and  tell  it  to  those  who  are  torturing  themselves, 
thinking  through  obedience  and  mortification  to  offer  satisfaction.  Yonder  Hindoo  is 
about  to  throw  himself  down  upon  the  spikes.  Stay,  poor  man !  wherefore  wouldst 
thou  bleed,  for  "  it  is  finished  "  ?  Yonder  Fakir  is  holding  his  hand  erect  till  the  naila 
grow  through  the  flesh,  torturing  himself  with  fastings  and  with  self-denials.     Ceasti 


"rr  IS  ftntshkd!"  625 

C?»9e,  poor  wretch,  from  all  these  pcains,  for  "  it  is  finished  ! "  In  all  parts  of  ths 
earth  there  aie  those  who  think  that  the  miser3^  of  the  body  and  che  soul  may  be  an 
atonement  for  sin.  Rush  to  them,  stay  them  in  their  madness  and  say  to  them, 
"  Wherefore  do  ye  this  ?  '  It  is  finished.'  "  All  the  paing  that  God  asks,  Christ  has 
sufiered ;  all  the  satisfaction  by  way  of  agony  in  the  flesh  that  the  law  demandeth, 
Christ  hath  already  endured.  "  It  is  finished  !  "  And  when  ye  have  done  this,  go  ye 
next  to  the  benighted  votaries  of  Rome,  when  ye  see  the  pnests  with  their  backs  to 
the  people,  offering  every  day  the  pretended  sacrifice  of  the  mass,  and  lifting  up  the 
host  on  high— a  sacrifice,  they  say— "an  unbloody  sacrifice  for  the  quick  and  the  dead,"— 
cry,  "  Cease,  false  priest,  cease  !  for  'it  is  finished  ! "  Cease,  false  worshipper,  cease 
to  bow,  for  'it  is  finished  ! '  "  God  neither  asks  nor  accepts  any  other  sacrifice  than 
that  which  Christ  offered  once  for  all  upon  the  cross.  Go  ye  next  to  the  foolish 
among  your  own  countrymen  who  call  themselves  Protestants,  but  who  are  Papists 
after  all,  who  think  by  their  gifts  and  their  gold,  by  their  prayers  and  their  vows,  by 
their  church-goings  and  their  chapel-goings,  by  their  baptisms  and  their  confirmations, 
to  make  themselves  fit  for  God;  and  say  to  them,  "Stop,  'it  is  finished  ;'  God  needs  not 
thisof  you.  He  has  received  enough  ;  why  will  ye  pin  your  rags  to  the  fine  linen  of 
Christ's  righteousness?  Why  will  you  add  your  counterfeit  farthing  to  the  costly 
ransom  which  Christ  has  paid  in  to  the  treasure-house  of  God  ?  Cease  from  your  pains, 
your  doings,  your  performances,  for  'it  is  finished ; '  Christ  has  done  it  all."  This  one 
text  is  enough  to  blow  the  Vatican  to  the  four  winds.  Lay  but  this  beneath  Popery, 
and  like  a  train  of  gunpowder  beneath  a  rock,  it  shall  blast  it  into  the  air.  This 
is  a  thunderclap  against  all  human  righteousness.  Only  let  this  come  like  a  two- 
edged  sword,  and  your  good  works  and  your  fine  performances  are  soon  cast 
away.  "  It  is  finished."  Why  improve  on  what  is  finished  ?  Why  add  to  that 
which  is  complete  ?  The  Bible  is  finished,  he  that  adds  to  it  shall  have  his  name- 
taken  out  of  the  Book  of  Life,  and  out  of  the  holy  city  :  Christ's  atonement  is  finished, 
and  he  that  adds  to  that  must  expect  the  selfsame  doom.  And  when  ye  shall  havo- 
told  it  thus  to  the  ears  of  men  of  every  nation  and  of  every  tribe,  tell  it  to  all  pooi 
despairing  souls.  Ye  find  them  on  their  knees,  crying,  "OGod,  what  can  I  do  to  makt 
recompense  for  my  offences  ?"  Tell  them,  "It  is  finished  ;  "  the  recompense  is  made 
already.  "  O  God!"  they  say,  "how  can  I  ever  get  a  righteousness  in  which  thou 
canst  accept  such  a  worm  as  I  am  ?  "  Tell  them,  '*  It  is  finished  ; "  their  righteousness^ 
is  wrought  out  already  ;  they  have  no  need  to  trouble  themselves  about  adding  to  it,  if 
"it  is  finished."  Go  to  the.poor  despairing  wretch,  who  has  given  himself  up,  not  for 
death  merely,  but  for  damnation — he  who  says,  "  I  cannot  escape  from  sin,  and  I  can- 
not be  saved  from  its  punishment."  Say  to  him,  "  Sinner,  the  way  of  salvation  is  finished 
once  for  all"  And  if  ye  meet  some  professed  Christians  in  doubts  and  fears,  tell 
them,  "It  is  finished."  Why,  we  have  hundreds  and  thousands  that  really  are  con- 
verted, who  do  not  know  that  "it  is  finished."  They  never  know  that  they  are 
safe.  They  do  not  know  that  "it  is  finished."  They  think  they  have  faith  to-daj--, 
but  perhaps  they  may  become  unbelieving  to-morrow.  They  do  not  know  that  "it  is 
finished."  They  hope  God  will  accept  them,  if  they  do  some  things,  forgetting  that 
the  way  of  acceptance  is  finished.  God  as  much  accepts  a  sinner  who  only  beheved 
in  Christ  five  minutes  ago,  as  he  will  a  saint  who  has  known  and  loved  him  eighty  years, 
for  he  does  not  accept  men  because  of  any  anything  they  do  or  feel,  but  simply  and 
only  for  what  Christ  did,  and  that  is  finished.  Oh  !  poor  hearts  !  some  of  you  do  love 
the  Saviour  in  a  measure,  but  blindly.  You  are  thinking  that  you  must  be  this,  and 
attain  to  that,  and  then  you  may  be  assured  that  you  are  saved.  Oh !  you  may  he 
assured  of  it  to-day — if  you  believe  in  Christ  you  are  saved.  "But  I  feel  imperfections." 
Yes,  but  what  of  that  ?  God  does  not  regard  your  imperfections,  but  he  covers  them 
with  Christ's  righteousness.  He  sees  them  to  remove  them,  but  not  to  lay  them  to  thy 
charge.  "Ay,  but  I  cannot  be  what  I  would  be."  But  what  if  thou  canst  not  ?  Yet 
God  does  not  look  at  thee,  as  what  thou  art  in  thyself,  but  as  what  thou  art  in  Christ. 
Come  with  me,  poor  soul,  a:id  thou  and  I  will  stand  together  this  morning,  while  the 
tempest  gathers,  for  we  are  not  afraid.  How  sharp  that  lightning  flash  '  but  yet  we 
tremble  not.  How  terrible  that  peal  of  thunder !  and  yet  we  are  not  alarmed,  and 
why  ?  Is  there  anything  in  us  why  we  should  escape  ?  No,  but  we  are  standing 
beneath  the  cross— that  precious  cross,  which  like  some  noble  lightning-conductor  in 
the  storm,  takes  itself  all  the  death  from  the  lightnin!,',  and  all  the  fury  from  the  tempest. 
We  are  safe.  Loud  mayest  thou  roar,  0  thundering  law,  and  terribly  mayest  thou 
flash,  O  avenging  justice  !  We  can  look  up  with  calm  delight  to  all  the  tumult  of  thti 
elements,  for  we  are  e  i£e  beneath  th«  ao&s. 

40 


^^6  "IT  IS  fiwtshed!" 

Come  with  me  again  There  is  a  royal  banquet  spread  ;  the  King  himself  sits  at  th« 
table,  and  angels  are  the  servitors.  Let  us  enter.  And  we  do  enter,  and  we  sit  down 
and  eat  and  drmk  ;  but  how  dare  we  do  this  ?  our  righteousness  are  as  filthy  ra^s- 
how  could  we  venture  to  come  here  ?  Oh,  because  the  filthy  rags  are  not  ours  any 
u^f^\  renounced  our  own  righteousness,  and  therefore  we  have  renounced 


are 


the  filthy  rags,  and  now  to-day  we  wear  the  royal  garments  of  the  Saviour,  and  ».« 
frorn  head  to  foot  arrayed  m  white,  without  spot  or  wrinkle  or  any  such  thing  :  standing 
in  the  clear  sunlight— black,  but  comely  ;  loathsome  in  ourselves,  but  glorious  in  him  • 
condemned  in  Adam,  but  accepted  in  the  Beloved.  We  are  neither  afraid  nor  ashamed 
^°  .u^n'^  u!"^  angels  of  God  to  talk  with  the  glorified  ;  nay,  nor  even  alarmed  to  speak 
with  God  himself  and  call  him  our  friend.  ^ 

And   now  last  of  all,    I  publish  this  to  sinners.    I  know  not  where  thou  art 

this  morning,  but  may  God  find  thee  out ;  thou  who  hast  been  a  drunkard    swearer 

thief ;  thou  who  hast  been  a   blackguard  of  the  blackest  kind  ;  thou  who  hast  dived 

into  the  veiy  kennel,  and  rolled  thyself  in  the  mire— if  to-day  thou  feelest  that  sin  is 

hateful  to  thee,  believe  m  Him  who  has  said,  "  It  is  finished."    Let  me  link  thy  hand 

in  mine  ;  let  us  come  together,  both  of  us,  and  say,  "  Here  are  two  poor  naked  souls 

good  Lord  ;  we  cannot  clothe  ourselves ;"  and  he  wiU  give  us  a  robe,  for  **it  is  finished  " 

u  5"\,J^o™«  !«  It  long  enough  for  such  sinners,  and  broad  enough  for  such  offenders  ?*" 

.I.-      'xi.  ',  "'*  ^^  finished."      "But  we  need  washing.  Lord!     Is  there  any. 

thing  that  can  take  away  black  spots  so  hideous  as  ours  ?"     "  Yea,"  saith  he    "  here 

18   the   bath   of   blood."      *' But  must  we  not  add  our  tears  to  it?"      "N^"   sayi 

'j  ".d""'    u  '!  fi^^^^ed,  there  is  enough."      "And  now.  Lord,  thou  hast  washed  us. 

and   thou   hast  clothed  us,  but  we  would  be  still  completely  clean  within,  so  that 

we  may  never   sin  any  more;   Lord,  is  there  a  way  by  which  this  can  be  done?" 

n^   •:  »  ^^.  A    !'   T     f^  ^^  *^®  ^**^  °^  "^^^^^  ^^^^^  floweth  from  the  wounded  side  of 

.,  ,«         '      .^'  ^^  ^^®^  enough  there  to  wash  away  my  guiltiness  as  well  as 

my  guilt?        "Ay,     saith  he,   "it  is  finished."      "Jesus  Christ  is  made  unto  you 

sanctification  as  well  as  redemption."     Child  of  God,  wilt  thou  have  Christ's  finished 

righteousness  this  morning,  and  wilt  thou  rejoice  in  it  more  than  ever  thou  hast  done 

before?     And  oh  !    poor  sinner,   wilt  thou  have  Christ  or  no?     "Ah,"  saith  one   "I 

am  wiUing  enough,   but  I  am  not  worthy."    He  does  not  want  any  worthiness.  'aU 

he  asks  18  willingness,  for  you  know  how  he  puts  it,  "Whoever  wiU  let  him  come.*' 

If  he  has  given  you  willingness,   you   may  believe  in   Christ's  finished  work  this 

moimng.     "Ah!      say  you,   "but  you  cannot  mean  me."     But  I  do,  for  it  says. 

Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth."    Do  you  thirst  for  Christ  ?    Do  you  wish  to  be  saved 

by  him?      "Every  one    that  thirsteth,"— not  only  that  young  woman  yonder,    not 

•imply  that  grey-headed  old  rebel  yonder  who  has  long  despised  the  Saviour,  but  this 

mass  below,  and  you  in  these  double  tiers  of  gaUery-"  Every  one  that  thirsteth,  come 

ye  to  the   waters,  and  he  that  hath  no  money  come."       6  that  I  could  "compel" 

you  to  come !     Great  God,  do  thou  make  the  sinner  willing  to  be  saved,  for  he  wills  to 

be  damned,  and  will  not  come  unless  thou  change  his  will !     Eternal  Spirit,  source  of 

light,  and  hfe,  and  grace,  come  down  and  bring  the  strangers  home  !     "  It  is  finished  ' 

Sinner,  there  is  nothing  for  God  to  do.     "  It  is  finished  ; "  there  is  nothing  for  you  to  do. 

It  IS  finished  ;     Christ  need  not  bleed.     "  It  is  finished  : "  you  need  not  weep.    "  It  is 

finished  ;"  God  the  Holy  Spirit  need  not  tarry  because  of  your  un worthiness,  nor  need 

you  tarry  because  of  your  helplessness.    "  It  is  finished  ; "  every  8tumblin<'-block  is  rolled 

out  of  the  road  ;  every  gate  is  opened  ;  the  bars  of  brass  are  broken,  the  gates  of  iron 

mn  burst  asunder.    "  It  is  finished  ; "  come  and  welcome,  come  and  welcome !    The  table 

18  laid  ;  the  fatlmgs  are  killed  ;  the  oxen  are  ready.     Lo  !  here  stands  the  messen^rer ! 

Come  from  the  highways  and  from  the  hedges  ;  come  from  the  dens  and  from  the  kens 

of  London  ;  come,  ye  vilest  of  the  vile  ;  ye  who  hate  yourselves  to-day,  come  '     Jesu« 

bids  you  ;  oh  I  wiU  you  tarry  ?     Oh !    Spirit  of  God,  do  thou  repeat  the  invitation, 

and  make  it  an  efiectual  call  to  many  a  heart,  for  Jesus'  sake  !     Amen. 


THE  DYING  THIKI^  IN  A  NEW  LiaHX. 

Intl^xDED  for  Reading  on  Lord's-day,  January  31st,  1886, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  TUE   METROPOLITAN   TABRRNAGLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Loed's-day  Eveninq,  August  23iid,  1885. 


"But  the  other  answering  rehuked  him,  saying,  Dost  not  thou  fear  God,  seeing  thou 
art  in  the  same  condemnation?  And  we  indeed  justly  ;  for  we  receive  the  due  reward 
of  our  deeds  :  but  this  Man  hath  done  nothing  amiss.  And  he  said  unto  Jesus,  Lord, 
remember  me  when  thou  comest  into  thy  kingdom." — Luke  xxiii.  40 — 42. 

A  GREAT  many  persons,  whenever  tliey  hear  of  the  conversion  of  the  dying 
thief,  remember  that  he  was  saved  in  the  very  article  of  death,  and 
they  dwell  upon  that  fact,  and  that  alone.  He  has  always  been  quoted 
as  a  case  of  salvation  at  the  eleventh  hour ;  and  so,  indeed,  he  is.  In  his 
case  it  is  proven  that  as  long  as  a  man  can  repent  he  can  obtain  forgive- 
ness. The  cross  of  Christ  avails  even  for  a  man  hanging  on  a  gibbet, 
and  drawing  near  to  his  last  hour.  He  who  is  mighty  to  save  was 
miglity,  even  during  his  own  death,  to  pluck  others  from  the  grasp  of  the 
destroyer,  though  they  were  in  the  act  of  expiring. 

But  that  is  not  everything  which  the  story  teaches  us ;  and  it  is 
always  a  pity  to  look  exclusively  upon  one  point,  and  thus  to  miss  every- 
thing else — perhaps  miss  that  which  is  more,  important.  So  often  has 
this  been  the  case  that  it  has  produced  a  sort  of  revulsion  of  feeling 
in  certain  minds,  so  that  they  have  been  driven  in  a  wrong  direction  by 
their  wish  to  protest  against  what  they  think  to  be  a  common  error.  I 
read  the  other  day  that  this  story  of  the  dying  thief  ought  not  to  be 
taken  as  an  encouragement  to  death-bed  repentance.  Brethren,  if  the 
author  meant — and  1  do  not  think  he  did  mean — that  this  ought  never 
to  be  so  used  as  to  lead  people  to  postpone  repentance  to  a  dying  bed, 
he  spoke  correctly.  No  Christian  man  could  or  would  use  it  so  in- 
juriously :  he  must  be  hopelessly  bad  who  would  draw  from  God's  lon^;- 
suff'ering  an  argument  for  continuing  in  sin.  I  trust,  however,  that  the 
narrative  is  not  often  so  used,  even  by  the  worst  of  men,  and  I  feel 
sure  that  it  will  not  be  so  used  by  any  one  of  you.  It  cannot  be 
properly  turned  to  such  a  purpose  :  it  might  be  used  as  an  encourage- 
uieiit  to  thieving  just  as  much  as  to  the  delay  of  repentance.  I  might 
Bay,  "  I  may  be  a  thief  because  this  thief  was  saved,"  just  as  rationally  as 
Na  1,881. 


€28  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

I  mi<i:ht  s;i},  "  I  may  put  off  repentance  because  this  thief  wag  aayed 
wlien  he  was  about  to  die."  The  face  is,  there  is  nothing  so  irood  bul 
men  ca'i  pervert  it  into  evil,  if  they  hnve  evil  hearts  :  the  justice  of 
God  is  made  a  motive  for  despair,  and  his  mercy  an  argument  for  sin. 
Wiclied  men  will  drown  themselves  in  the  rivers  of  truth  as  readily  as 
in  the  pools  of  error.  He  that  has  a  mind  to  destroy  himself  can 
c'loke  his  soul  with  the  Bread  (»f  life,  or  dash  himself  in  pieces  against 
the  Rock  of  ages.  There  is  no  doctrine  of  the  grace  of  God  so  gracious 
that  graceless  men  may  not  turn  it  into  licentiousness. 

I  venture,  however,  to  say  that  if  I  stood  by  the  bedside  of  a  dying 
man  to-night,  and  I  found  him  anxious  about  his  soul,  but  fearful  that 
Christ  could  not  save  him  because  repentance  had  been  put  off  so  late,  1 
should  certainly  quote  the  dying  thief  to  him,  and  I  should  do  it  with 
good  conscience,  and  without  hesitation.  I  should  tell  him  that,  though 
he  was  as  near  to  dying  as  the  thief  upon  the  cross  was,  yet,  if  he  repented 
of  his  sin,  and  turned  his  face  to  Christ  believingly,  he  would  find 
eternal  life.  I  should  do  this  with  all  my  heart,  rejoicing  that  I  had 
^uch  a  story  to  tell  to  one  at  the  gates  of  eternity.  I  do  not  think  that 
I  should  be  censured  by  the  Holy  Spirit  for  thus  using  a  narrative  which 
he  has  himself  recorded, — recorded  with  the  foresight  that  it  would  be 
80  used.  I  should  feel,  at  any  rate,  in  my  own  heart,  a  sweet  con-  i 
viction  that  I  had  trented  the  subject  as  I  ought  to  have  treated  it,  I 
and  as  it  was  intended  to  be  used  for  men  in  extremis  whose  hearts  are 
turning  towards  the  living  Grod.  Oh,  yes,  po  )r  soul,  whatever  your  age,  or 
whatever  the  period  of  life  to  which  you  have  come,  you  may  now  find 
eternal  life  by  faith  in  Christ ! 

"  The  dying  thief  rt^joiced  to  see 
Tiiiit  fountain  iu  his  day  ; 
And  there  may  you,  though  vile  as  he, 
Wash  all  your  sins  away. " 

Many  good  people  think  that  they  ought  to  guard  the  gospel ;  but  it 
is  never  so  safe  as  when  it  stands  out  in  its  own  naked  majesty.  It 
wants  no  covering  from  us.  When  we  protect  it  with  pro  vis  )S,  and 
guard  it  with  exceptions,  and  qualify  it  with  observations,  it  is  like 
David  in  Saul's  armour:  it  is  hampered  and  hindered,  and  you  may 
even  hear  it  cry,  "I  cannot  go  with  these."  Let  the  gospel  alone,  an  1 
it  will  save  ;  qualify  it,  and  the  salt  has  lost  its  savour.  I  will  venture 
to  put  it  thus  t) you.  I  have  heard  it  said  that  few  are  ever  converted 
in  old  age  ;  and  this  is  thought  to  be  a  statement  which  wi  1  prove  exceed- 
ingly arousing  and  impressive  for  the  young.  It  certainly  wears  that 
appearance;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  statement  ve.y  discouraging 
to  the  old.  I  demur  to  the  frequent  repetition  of  such  statements,  for 
I  do  not  find  their  counterpart  in  the  teaching  of  our  Lord  and  his 
apostles.  Assuredly  our  Lord  spake  of  some  wiio  entered  the  vineyard 
at  the  eleventh  hour  of  the  day;  and  among  his  miracles  he  not  only 
saved  those  who  were  dying,  but  even  raised  the  dead.  Nothing  can  be 
concluded  from  the  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus  against  the  salvation  of  men 
■at  any  hour  or  age.  I  tell  you  that,  in  the  business  of  your  acceptance 
with  God,  through  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  it  does  not  matter  what  age 
you  now  are  at.  The  same  promise  is  to  every  one  of  you,  "To-day  if 
ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts  "  ;  and  whether  you  are  in 


THE   DYING  THIEF   IN  A  NEW   LIGHT.  629 

the  earliest  stage  of  life,  or  are  within  a  few  hours  of  eternity,  if  now 
you  fly  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  you  in  the  gospel,  you  shall 
be  saved.  The  gospel  that  I  preach  excludes  none'  on  the  ground 
either  of  age  or  character.  Whoever  you  may  be,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,"  is  the  message  we  have  to  deliver 
to  you.  If  we  address  to  you  the  longer  form  of  the  gospel,  "  He 
that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved,"  this  is  true  of  every 
living  man,  be  his  age  whatever  it  may.  I  am  not  afraid  that  this  story 
of  the  dying  and  repenting  thief,  who  went  straight  from  the  cross  to 
the  crown,  will  be  used  by  you  amiss ;  but  if  you'are  wicked  enough  so 
to  use  it,  I  cannot  help  it.  It  will  only  fulfil  that  solemn  Scripture 
which  saith  that  the  gospel  is  a  savour  of  death  unto  death  to  some, 
even  that  very  gospel  which  is  a  savour  of  life  unto  life  to  others. 

But  I  do  not  think,  dear  friends,  that  the  only  speciality  about  the 
thief  is  the  lateness  of  his  repentance.  So  far  from  being  the  only  point 
of  interest,  it  is  not  even  the  chief  point.  To  some  minds,  at  any  rate, 
other  points  will  be  even  more  remarkable.  I  want  to  show  you  very 
briefly  that  there  was  a  speciality  in  his  case  as  to  the  means  of  his 
conversion;  secondly,  a  speciality  in  his  faith;  thirdly,  a  speciality  in  the 
result  of  his  faith  while  he  was  here  below ;  and,  fourthly,  a  speciah'tv  in 
(he  promise  won  hi/  his  faith— the  promise  fulfilled  to  him  in  Paradise. 

I.     First,  then,  I  think    you  ought  to   notice  very   carefully  the 

.SINGULARITY    AND    SPECIALITY   OF   THE  MEANS    BY   WHICH    THE   THIEF 
WAS  CONVERTED. 

How  do  you  think  it  was  ?  Well,  we  do  not  know.  We  cannot  tell. 
It  seems  to  me  that  the  man  was  an  unconverted,  impenitent  thief  when 
they  nailed  him  to  the  cross,  because  one  of  the  Evangelists  says,  "  The 
thieves  also,  which  were  crucified  with  him,  cast  the  same  in  his  teeth." 
I  know  that  this  may  have  been  a  general  statement,  and  that  it  is  recon- 
cilable with  its  having  been  done  by  one  thief  only,  according  to  the 
methods  commonly  used  by  critics  ;  but  I  am  not  enamoured  of  critics 
even  when  they  are  friendly.  I  have  such  respect  for  revelation  that  I 
never  in  my  own  mind  permit  the  idea  of  discrepancies  and  mistakes; 
and  when  the  Evangelist  says  "  they  "  I  believe  he  meant  "  they,''  and 
that  both  these  thieves  did  at  their  first  crucifixion  rail  at  the  Christ 
with  whom  they  were  crucified.  It  would  appear  that  by  some  means 
or  other  this  thief  must  have  been  converted  while  he  was  on  the 
cross.  Assuredly  nobody  preached  a  sermon  to  him,  no  evangelistic 
address  was  delivered  at  the  foot  of  his  cross,  and  no  meeting  was  held 
for  special  prayer  on  his  account.  He  does  not  even  seem  to  have  had 
an  in&cructiou,  or  an  invitation,  or  an  expostulation  addressed  to  him; 
and  yet  this  man  became  a  sincere  and  accepted  believer  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ. 

Dwell  upon  this  fact,  if  you  please,  and  note  its  practical  bearing  upon 
the  cases  of  many  around  us.  Tnere  are  many  among  my  hearers  who 
have  been  instructed  from  their  childhood,  who  have  been  admonished, 
and  warned,  and  entreated,  and  invited,  and  yet  they  have  not  come 
to  Christ ;  while  this  man,  without  any  of  these  advantages,  never- 
theless believed  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  found  eternal  life.  0  you 
that  have  lived  under  the  sound  of  the  gospel  from  your  childhood,  the 
thief  does  not  comfort  you,  but  he  accuses  you  !    What  are  you  doing 


QZO  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

to  abide  so  long  in  unbelief?  Will  you  never  believe  the  testimony  of 
divine  love  ?  What  more  shall  I  say  to  you  ?  What  more  ca  i  any 
one  say  to  you  ? 

What  do  you  think  must  have  converted  this  poor  thief?  It  striken 
me  that  it  may  have  been— it  must  have  been,  the  sight  of  our  great 
Lord  and  Saviour.  There  was,  to  begin  with,  our  Saviour's  wonderful 
behaviour  on  the  road  to  the  cross.  Perhaps  the  robber  had  mixed  up 
with  all  sorts  of  society,  but  he  had  never  seen  a  Man  like  this. 
Never  had  cross  been  carried  by  a  Oross-Bearer  of  his  look  and  fashion. 
The  robber  wondered  who  this  meek  and  majestic  Personage  could  be. 
He  heard  the  women  weep,  and  he  wondered  in  himself  whether  anybody 
would  ever  weep  for  him.  He  thought  that  this  must  be  some  very 
singular  Person  that  the  people  should  stand  about  him  with  tears  in 
their  eyes.  When  he  heard  that  mysterious  Sufferer  say  so^  solemnly, 
"  Daughters  of  Jerusalem,  weep  not  for  me,  but  for  your  children,"  he 
must  have  been  struck  with  wonder.  When  he  came  to  think,  in 
his  death-pangs,  of  the  singular  look  of  pity  which  Jesus  cast  on  the 
women,  and  of  the  self-forgetfulness  which  gleamed  from  his  eyes,  he 
was  smitten  with  a  strange  relenting  :  it  was  as  if  an  angel  had  crossed 
his  path,  and  opened  his  eyes  to  a  new  world,  and  to  a  new  form  of  man- 
hood, the  like  of  which  he  had  never  seen  before.  He  and  his  companion 
were  coarse,  rough  fellows  :  this  was  a  delicately-formed  and  fashioned 
Being,  of  superior  order  to  himself  ;  yes,  and  of  superior  order  to  any 
other  of  the  sons  of  men.  Who  could  he  be?  What  must  he  be? 
Though  he  could  see  that  he  suffered  and  fainted  as  he  went  along,  he 
marked  that  there  was  no  word  of  complaining,  no  note  of  execration,  in 
return  for  the  revilings  cast  upon  him.  His  eyes  looked  love  on  those 
who  glared  on  him  with  hate.  Surely  that  march  along  the  Via 
Dolorosa  was  the  first  part  of  the  sermon  which  God  preached  to  that 
bad  man's  heart.  It  was  preached  to  m;iny  others  who  did  not  regard 
its  teaching  ;  but  upon  this  mmi,  by  God's  special  grace,  it  had  a 
softening  etfect  when  he  came  to  think  over  it,  and  consider  it.  Was 
it  not  a  likely  and  convincing  means  of  grace  ? 

When  he  saw  the  Saviour  surrounded  by  the  Roman  soldiery— saw 
the  executioners  bring  forth  the  hammers  and  th6  nails,  and  lay  him 
down  upon  his  back,  and  drive  the  nails  into  his  hands  and  feet,  this 
crucified  criminal  was  suartle  I  and  astonished  as  he  heard  him  say, 
"  Father,  forgive  them ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  He  himself, 
probably',  had  met  his  executionprs  with  a  curse  ;  but  he  heard  this  man 
breathe  a  prayer  to  the  great  Father ;  and,  as  a  Jew,  as  he  probably 
was,  he  understood  what  was  meant  by  such  a  prayer.  Bat  it  didastoand 
him  to  hear  Jesus  pray  for  his  murderers.  That  was  a  petition  the  like 
of  which  he  had  never  heard,  nor  even  dreamed  of.  From  whose  lips 
could  it  come  but  from  the  lips  of  a  divine  Being  ?  Such  a  loving, 
forgiving,  GoJlike  prayer,  proved  him  to  be  the  Messias.  Who  else 
had  ever  prayed  so  ?  Certainly  not  David  and  the  kings  of  Israel,  who, 
on  the  contrary,  in  all  honesty  and  heartiness  imprecated  the  wrath  of 
God  upon  their  enemies.  Elias  himself  would  not  have  prayed  in  that 
fashion,  rather  would  he  have  called  fire  from  heaven  on  the  centurion 
and  his  company.  It  was  a  new,  strange  sound  to  him.  I  do  not  sup- 
pose that  he  appreciated  it  to  tlie  full  ;  but  I  can  well  believe  that  it 


THE   D?IXG   THIEP   IN   A   NEW   LiaHT.  631 

deeply  impressed  him,  and  made  him  feel  that  his  Fellow-Sufferer  was  a 
being  ab  )ut  whom  there  was  an  exceeding  mystery  of  goodness. 

And  when  the  cross  was  lifted  up,  that  thief  hanging  up  on  his  otii 
cross  looked  around,  and  I  suppose  he  could  see  that  inscription  written 
in  three  languages, — "Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  King  of  the  Jews.''  If 
so,  that  writing  was  his  little  Bible,  his  New  Testament,  and  he  inter- 
preted it  by  what  he  Icnew  of  the  Old  Testament.  Putting  this  and 
that  together — that  strange  Person,  incarnate  loveliness,  all  patience  and 
all  majesty,  that  strange  prayer,  and  now  this  singular  inscription,  surely 
he  who  knew  the  Old  Testament,  as  I  have  no  doubt  he  did,  would 
say  to  himself,  "  Is  this  He  ?  Is  this  truly  the  King  of  the  Jews  ?  This 
is  he  who  wrought  miracles,  and  raised  the  dead,  and  said  that  he  was 
the  Son  of  God  ;  is  it  all  true,  and  is  he  really  our  Messiah  ?  "  Then 
he  would  remember  the  words  of  the  prophet  Isaiah,  "He  was  despised 
and  rejected  of  men,  a  Man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief. 
Surely,  he  hath  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our  sorrows."  "  Why," 
he  would  say  to  himself,  ''  I  never  understood  that  passage  in  the 
prophet  Esaias  before,  but  it  must  point  to  him.  The  chastisement  of 
our  peace  is  upon  him.  Can  this  be  he  who  cried  in  the  Psalms— 'they 
pierced  my  hands  and  my  feet '  ? "  As  he  looked  at  him  again,  he  felt  in  his 
soul,  "  It  must  be  he  ?  Could  there  be  another  so  like  to  him  ?  "  He 
felt  conviction  creeping  over  his  spirit.  Then  he  looked  again,  and 
he  marked  how  all  men  down  below  rejected,  and  despised,  and  hissed 
at  him,  and  hooted  him,  and  all  this  would  make  the  case  the  more 
clear.  "  All  they  that  see  me-  laugh  me  to  scorn  :  they  shoot  out  the 
lip,  they  shake  the  head,  saying,  He  trusted  on  the  Lord  that  he  would 
deliver  him  :  let  him  deliver  him,  seeing  he  delighted  in  him." 

Peradventure,  this  dying  thief  read  the  gospel  out  of  the  lips  of 
Christ's  enemies.  They  said,— "  He  saved  others."  ''Ah  I"  thought 
he,  "  did  he  save  otliers  ?  Why  should  he  not  save  me  ?  "  What 
a  grand  bit  of  gospel  that  was  for  the  dying  thief,— "He  saved 
others  "  !  I  think  I  could  swim  to  heaven  on  that  plank,—"  He  saved 
others  "  ;  because,  if  he  saved  others,  he  can  of  a  surety  save  me. 

Thus  the  very  things  that  the  enemies  disdainfully  threw  at  Christ 
would  be  gospel  to  this  poor  dying  man.  When  it  has  been  my  misery  to 
read  any  of  the  wretched  prints  that  are  sent  us  out  of  scorn,  in  which 
our  Lord  is  held  up  to  ridicule,  I  have  thought,  "  Why,  perhaps  those 
who  read  these  loathsome  blasphemies  may,  nevertheless,  learn  the 
gospel  from  them  !  "  You  may  pick  a  jewel  from  a  dunghill,  and  find 
its  radiance  undiminished;  and  you  may  gather  the  gospel  from  a 
blasphemous  mouth,  and  it  shall  be  none  the  less  the  gospel  of  salvation. 
Peradventure  this  man  learned  the  gospel  from  those  who  jested  at  our 
dying  Lord  ;  and  so  the  servants  of  the  devil  were  unconsciously  made 
to  be  the  servants  of  Christ. 

But,  after  all,  surely  that  which  won  him  most  must  have  been  to 
look  at  Jesus  again,  as  he  was  hanging  upon  the  cruel  tree.  Possibly 
nothing  about  the  physical  person  of  Christ  would  be  attractive  to  him, 
for  his  visage  was  more  marred  than  that  of  any  man,  and  his  form  more 
than  the  sons  of  men ;  but  yet  there  must  have  been  in  that  blessed  face 
a  singular  charm.  Was  it  not  the  very  image  of  perfection  ?  As  I  con- 
ceive the  face  of  Christ,  it  was  very  different  from  anything  that  any 


632  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

painter  has  yet  been  able  to  place  upon  his  canvas.  It  was  all  goodness, 
and  kindness,  and  unselfishness  ;  and  yet  it  was  a  royal  face.  It  waa 
a  face  of  superlative  justice  and  unrivalled  tenderness.  Righteousness 
and  uprightness  sat  upon  his  brow  ;  but  infinite  pity  and  good-will  to 
men  had  also  there  taken  up  their  al)ode.  It  was  a  face  that  would  have 
struck  you  at  once  as  one  by  itself,  never  to  be  forgotten,  never  to  be 
fully  understood.  It  was  all  sorrow,  yet  all  love  ;  all  meekness,  yet  all 
resolution  ;  all  wisdom,  yet  all  simplicity ;  the  face  of  a  child,  or  an 
angel,  and  yet  peculiarly  the  face  of  a  man.  Majesty  and  misery,  suffer- 
ing and  sacredness,  were  therein  strangely  combined  ;  he  was  evidently 
the  Lamb  of  God,  and  the  Son  of  man.  As  the  robber  looked,  he 
believed.  Is  it  not  singular,  the  very  sight  of  the  Master  won  him  ? 
The  sight  of  the  Lord  in  agony,  and  shame,  and  death !  Scarcely  a 
word  ;  certainly  no  sermon;  no  attending  worship  on  the  Sabbath;  no 
reading  of  gracious  books  ;  no  appeal  from  mother,  or  teacher,  or  friend ; 
but  the  sight  of  Jesus  won  him.  I  put  it  down  as  a  very  singular  thing,  a 
thing  for  you  and  for  me  to  recollect,  and  dwell  upon,  with  quite  as 
iiiach  vividness  as  we  do  upon  the  lateness  of  this  robber's  conversion. 

Oh,  that  God  of  his  mercy  might  convert  everybody  in  this  Tabernacle ! 
Oh,  that  I  could  have  a  share  in  it  by  the  preaching  of  the  word  ! 
but  I  will  be  equally  happy  if  you  get  to  heaven  anyhow ;  ay,  if  the 
Lord  should  take  you  there  without  outward  ministries,  leading  you  to 
Jesus  by  some  simple  method  such  as  he  adopted  with  this  thief.  If  you 
do  but  get  there,  he  shall  have  the  glory  of  it,  and  his  poor  servant  will 
be  overjoyed !  Oh,  that  you  would  now  look  to  Jesus,  and  live  !  Before 
your  eyes  he  is  set  forth,  evidently  crucified  among  you  Look  to  him 
and  be  saved,  even  at  this  hour. 

II.  But  now  I  want  you  to  think  with  me  a  little  upon  the  speci- 
ality OP  this  man's  faith,  for  I  think  it  was  a  very  singular  faith  that 
this  man  exerted  towards  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

I  greatly  question  whether  the  equal  and  the  parallel  of  the  dying 
thief's  faith  will  be  readily  found  outside  the  Scriptures,  or  even  in 
the  Scriptures. 

Observe,  that  this  man  believed  in  Christ  when  he  literally  saw  him 
dying  the  death  of  a  felon,  under  circumstances  of  the  greatest  personal 
shame.  You  have  never  realized  what  it  was  to  be  crucified.  None  of 
you  could  do  that,  for  the  sight  has  never  been  seen  in  our  day  in 
England.  There  is  not  a  man  or  woman  here  who  has  ever  realized  in 
their  own  mind  the  actual  death  of  Christ.  It  stands  beyond  us.  This 
man  saw  it  with  his  own  eyes,  and  for  him  to  call  him  "  Lord  "  who 
was  hanging  on  a  gibbet,  was  no  small  triumph  of  faith.  For  him  to  as!c 
Jesus  to  remember  him  when  he  came  into  his  kingdom,  though  he  saw 
that  Jesus  bleeding  his  life  away,  and  hounded  to  the  death,  was  a 
splendid  act  of  reliance.  For  him  to  commit  his  everlasting  destiny  into 
the  hands  of  One  who  was,  to  all  appearance,  unable  even  to  preserve 
his  own  life,  was  a  noble  achievement  of  faith.  I  say  that  this  dying  thief 
leads  the  van  in  the  matter  of  faith,  for  what  he  saw  of  the  circuni- 
stances  of  the  Saviour  was  calculated  to  contradict  rather  than  help  his 
confidence.  What  he  saw  was  to  his  hindrance  rather  than  to  his  help,  for 
he  saw  our  Lord  in  the  very  extremity  of  agony  and  death,  and  yet  he 
believed  in  him  as  the  King  shortly  to  come  into  his  kingdom. 


THE  DYING   THIEF   IN   A   NEW   LIGHT.  683 

Recollect,  too,  that  at  that  moment  when  the  thief  believed  in  Christ, 
all  the  disciples  had  forsaJcen  him  and  fled.  John  might  be  lingering  at 
a  little  distance,  and  holy  women  may  have  stood  farther  off,  but  no 
one  was  present  bravely  to  champion  the  dying  Christ.  Judas  had 
gold  him,  Peter  had  denied  him,  and  the  rest  had  forsaken  him  ;  and 
it  was  then  that  the  dying  thief  called  him  "  Lord,"  and  said,  "  Remem- 
ber me  when  thou  comest  into  thy  kingdom."  I  call  that  splendid  fail  h. 
Why,  some  of  you  do  not  believe,  though  yon  are  surrounded  with 
Christian  friends— though  you  are  urged  on  by  the  testimony  of  those 
whom  you  regard  with  love  ;  but  this  man,  all  alone,  comes  out,  and 
calls  Jesus  his  Lord !  No  one  else  was  confessing  Christ  at  that  moment : 
no  revival  was  around  him  with  enthusiastic  crowds  :  he  was  all  by 
himself  as  a  confessor  of  his  Lord.  After  our  Lord  was  nailed  to  the 
tree,  the  first  to  bear  witness  for  him  was  this  thief.  Thecenturioirbore 
witness  afterwards,  when  our  Lord  expired  ;  but  this  thief  was  a  lone 
confessor,  holding  on  to  Christ  when  nobody  would  say  "Amen"  to  what 
he  said.  Even  his  fellow-thief  was  mocking  at  the  crucified  Saviour, 
so  that  this  man  shone  as  a  lone  star  in  the  midnight  darkness.  0  sirs, 
dare  you  be  Daniels  ?  Dare  you  stand  alone  ?  Would  you  dare  to 
stand  out  amidst  a  ribald  crew,  and  say,  "  Jesus  is  my  King.  I  only  ask 
him  to  remember  me  when  he  comes  into  his  kingdom"  ?  Would  you 
be  likely  to  avow  such  a  faith  when  priests  and  scribes,  princes  and 
people,  were  all  mocking  at  the  Christ,  and  deriding  him  ?  Brethren, 
the  dying  robber  exhibited  marvellous  faith,  and  I  beg  you  to  think  of 
this  next  time  you  speak  of  him. 

And  it  seems  to  me  that  another  point  adds  splendour  to  that  faith, 
namely,  that  he  himself  was  in  extreme  torture.  Remember,^  he  was 
crucified.  It  was  a  crucified  man  trusting  in  a  crucified  Christ.  Oh, 
when  our  frame  is  racked  with  torture,  when  the  tenderesc  nerves  are 
pained,  when  our  body  is  hung  up  to  die  by  we  know  not  what  great 
length  of  torment,  then  to  forget  the  present  and  live  in  the  future  is  a 
grand  achievement  of  faith  !  While  dying,  to  turn  one's  eye  to  Another 
dying  at  your  side,  and  trust  your  soul  with  him,  is  very  marvellous 
faith.  Blessed  thief,  because  they  put  thee  down  at  the  bottom,  as  one 
of  the  least  of  saints,  I  think  that  I  must  bid  thee  come  up  higher 
and  take  one  of  the  uppermost  seats  among  those  who  by  faith  have 
glorified  the  Christ  of  God!  i  .  »    ^  -.u 

Why,  see,  dear  friends,  once  more,  the  speciality  of  this  man  s  taith 
was  that  he  saw  so  much,  though  his  eyes  had  been  opened  for  so  short 
a  time !  He  saw  the  future  world.  He  was  not  a  behever  m  annihila- 
tion, or  in  the  possibihty  of  a  man's  not  being  immortal.  He  evidently 
expected  to  be  in  another  world,  and  to  be  in  existence  when  the  dying 
Lord  should  come  into  his  kingdom.  He  believed  all  that,  and  it  is 
more  than  some  do  nowadays.  He  also  believed  that  Jesus  would  have 
a  kingdom,  a  kingdom  after  he  was  dead,  a  kingdom  though  he  was 
crucified.  He  believed  that  he  was  winning  for  himself  a  kingdom  by 
<-hose  nailed  hands  and  pierced  feet.  This  was  intelligent  faith,  was  it 
not  ?  He  believed  that  Jesus  would  have  a  kingdom  in  which  others 
would  share,  and  therefore  he  aspired  to  have  his  portion  in  it.  But  yet 
be  had  fit  views  of  himself,  and  therefore  he  did  not  say,  "  Lord,  let  me 
sit  at  thy  right  hand ;"  or,  "  Let  me  share  of  the  dainties  of  thy  palace ; 


634  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

but  he  said  only,  "  Remember  me.  Think  of  me.  Cast  an  eye  my  way. 
Think  of  thy  poor  dyin^:  comrade  on  the  cross  at  thy  rit«;ht  hand.  Lord, 
remember  me.  Remember  me."  I  see  deep  humility  in  the  prayer, 
and  yet  a  sweet,  joyous,  confi  lent  exaltation  of  the  Christ  at  the  time 
when  the  Christ  was  in  his  deepest  humilintion. 

Oh,  dear  sirs,  if  any  of  you  have  thought  of  this  dying  thief  only  as 
one  who  put  off  repentance,  I  want  you  now  to  think  of  him  as  one  that 
did  greatly  and  grandly  believe  in  Christ ;  and  oh,  that  you  would  do 
the  same  !  Oh,  that  you  would  put  a  great  confidence  in  my  great 
Lord!  Never  did  a  poor  sinner  trust  Christ  too  much.  There  was 
never  a  case  of  a  guilty  one,  who  believed  that  Jesus  could  forgive  him, 
and  afterwards  found  that  he  could  not— who  believed  that  Jesus  could 
save  him  on  the  spot,  and  then  woke  up  to  find  that  it  was  a  delusion. 
No  ;  plunge  into  this  river  of  confidence  in  Christ.  The  waters  are 
waters  to°swim  in,  not  to  drown  in.  Never  did  a  soul  perish  that 
glorified  Christ  by  a  living,  loving  faith  in  him.  Come,  then,  with  all 
your  sin,  whatever  it  may  be,  with  all  your  deep  depression  of  spirit, 
with  all  your  agony  of  conscience.  Come  along  with  you,  and  grasp  my 
Lord  and  Master  with  both  the  hands  of  your  faith,  and  he  shall  be 
yours,  and  you  shall  be  his. 

•♦  Turn  to  Christ  your  lonjring  eyes. 

View  IIU  bl'»udy  sacrifice  : 

See  in  Him  your  sins  forgiven  ; 

Pardon,  holine-s,  and  heaven  ; 

Gi(»rify  the  K'ms  of  kings, 

Take  the  peace  the  gospel  brings." 

I  think  that  I  have  shown  you  something  special  in  the  means  of  the 
thief's  conversion,  and  in  his  faith  in  our  dying  Lord. 

IIL  But  now,  thirdly,  as  God  shall  help  me,  I  wish  to  show  you 
another  specialitv,  namely,  in  the  result  of  his  faith. 

Oh,  I  have  heard  people  say,  "  Well,  you  see,  the  dying  thief  was  con- 
yerted ;  but  then  he  was  not  baptized.  He  never  went  to  communion, 
and  never  joined  the  church"!  He  could  not  do  either;  and  that 
which  God  himself  renders  impossible  to  us  he  does  not  demand  of  us. 
He  was  nailed  to  the  cross  ;  how  could  he  be  baptized  ?  But  he  did  a 
great  deal  more  than  that;  for  if  he  could  not  carry  out  the  outward 
signs,  he  most  manifestly  exhibited  the  things  which  they  signified, 
which,  in  his  condition,  was  better  still. 

This  dying  thief  first  of  all  confessed  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  and  that 
is  the  very  essence  of  baptism.  He  confessed  Christ.  Did  he  not 
acknowledge  him  to  his  fellow-thief?  It  was  as  open  a  confession  as 
he  could  make  it.  Did  he  not  acknowledge  Christ  belbrti  all  that  were 
gathered  around  the  cross  who  were  within  hearing  ?  It  was  as  public 
a  confession  as  he  could  possibly  cause  it  to  be.  Yet  certain  cowardly 
fellows  claim  to  be  Christians,  though  they  have  never  confessed  Christ 
to  a  single  person,  and  then  they  quote  this  poor  thief  as  an  excuse. 
Are  they  nailed  to  a  cross  ?  Are  they  dying  in  agony  ?  Oh  no ;  and  yet 
they  talk  as  if  they  could  claim  the  exemption  which  these  circumstances 
would  give  them.     What  a  dishonest  piece  of  business  ! 

The  fact  is,  that  our  Lord  requires  an  open  confession  as  well  as  a 
Becret  faith ;  and  if  you  will  not  render  it,  there  is  no  promise  of  salvation 


THE   DYING  THIEF   IN   A  NEW   LIGHT.  635 

for  yon,  but  a  threat  of  being  denied  at  the  last.  The  apostle  puts 
it,  "If  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  shalt 
believe  in  thine  heart  that  God  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead,  thou 
shalt  be  saved."  It  is  stated  in  another  place  upon  this  wise,—"  Pie  that 
believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved  "—that  is  Christ's  way  of  making 
the  confession  of  him.  If  there  be  a  true  faith,  there  must  be  a  declara- 
tion of  it.  If  you  are  candles,  and  God  has  lit  you,  "  Let  your  light 
so  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify 
your  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  Soldiers  of  Christ  must,  lii^e  her 
Majesty's  soldiers,  wear  their  regimentals  ;  and  if  they  are  ashamed  of 
their  regimentals,  they  ought  to  be  drummed  out  of  the  regiment.  They 
are  not  honest  soldiers  who  refuse  to  march  in  rank  with  their  com- 
rades. The  very  least  thing  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  can  expect  of  us 
is  that  we  do  confess  him  to  the  best  of  our  power.  If  you  are  nailed 
up  to  a  cross,  I  will  not  invite  you  to  be  baptized.  If  yon  are  fastened 
up  to  a  tree  to  die,  I  will  not  ask  you  to  come  into  this  pulpit  and 
declare  your  faith,  for  you  cannot.  But  you  are  required  to  do  what 
you  can  do,  namely,  to  make  as  distinct  and  open  an  avowal  of  the  Lord 
Jesiis  Christ  as  may  be  suitable  in  your  present  condition. 

I  believe  that  many  Christian  people  get  into  a  deal  of  trouble  through 
not  being  honest  in  their  convictions.  For  instance,  if  a  man  goes 
into  a  workshop,  or  a  soldier  into  a  barrack-room,  and  if  he  does  not 
fly  his  flag  from  the  first,  it  will  be  very  difficult  for  him  to  run  it  up 
afterwards.  But  if  he  immediately  and  boldly  lets  them  know,  "  I 
am  a  Christian  man,  and  there  are  certain  things  that  I  cannot  do  to 
please  you,  and  certain  other  things  that  I  cannot  help  doing,  though 
they  displease  you  "—when  that  is  clearly  understood,  after  a  while  the 
singularity  of  the  thing  will  be  gone, and  the  man  will  be  let  alone;  but 
if  he  is  a  little  sneaky,  and  thinks  that  he  is  going  to  please  the  world 
and  please  Christ  too,  he  is  in  for  a  rough  time,  let  him  depend  upon 
it.  His  life  will  be  that  of  a  toad  under  a  harrow,  or  a  fox  in  a  dog- 
kennel,  if  he  tries  the  way  of  compromise.  That  will  never  do. 
Come  out.  Show  your  colours.  Let  it  be  known  who  yon  are,  and 
what  you  are  ;  and  althongh  your  course  will  not  be  smooth,  it  will  cer- 
tainly be  not  half  so  rough  as  if  you  tried  to  run  with  the  hare  and 
hunt  with  the  hounds— a  very  difficult  piece  of  business  that. 

This  man  came  out,  then  and  there,  and  made  as  open  an  avowal  of 
his  faith  in  Christ  as  was  possible.  _  tt         i     . 

The  next  thmg  he  did  was  to  rebuke  Ms  fellow -sinner.  He  spoke  to 
him  in  answer  tu  the  ribaldry  with  which  he  had  assailed  our  Lord.  I 
do  not  know  what  the  unconverted  convict  had  been  blasphemously 
saying,  but  his  converted  comrade  spoke  very  honestly  to  him.  "  Dost 
not  thou  fear  God,  seeing  thou  art  in  the  same  condemnation  ?  And 
we  indeed  justly  ;  for  we  receive  th§  due  reward  of  our  deeds :  but  this 
Man  hath  done  nothing  amiss."  It  is  more  than  ever  needful  in  these 
days  that  believers  in  Christ  should  not  allow  sin  to  go  unrebuked;  and 
yet  a  great  many  of  them  do  so.  Do  you  not  know  that  a  person  who 
is  silent  when  a  wrong  thing  is  said  or  done  may  become  a  participator 
in  the  sin  ?  If  you  do  not  rebuke  sin— I  mean,  of  course,  on  all  fit 
occasions,  and  in  a  proper  spirit— your  silence  will  give  consent  to  the 
sin,  and  you  will  be  an  aider  and  abettor  in  it.     A  man  who  saw  a  rob- 


636  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

bery,  and  who  did  not  cry,  "  Stop  thief !  '*  would  be  thong^ht  to  be  in 
league  with  the  thief  ;  and  the  man  who  can  hear  swearing,  or  see  im- 
purity, and  never  utter  a  word  of  protest  may  well  question  whether  he 
is  right  himself.  Our  "other  men's  sins"  make  up  a  great  item  in  our 
personal  guilt  unless  we  in  anywise  rebuke  them.  This  our  Lord  expects 
us  to  do.  The  dying  thief  did  it,  and  did  it  with  all  his  heart ;  and 
therein  far  exceeded  large  numbers  of  those  who  hold  their  heads  high 
in  the  church. 

Next,  the  dying  thief  made  a  full  confession  of  his  guilt.  He  said 
to  him  who  was  hanged  with  him,  *'  Dost  not  thou  fear  God,  seeing  thou 
art  in  the  same  condemnation  ?  And  we  indeed  justly.''  Not  many 
words,  but  what  a  world  of  meaning  was  in  ihem — "we  indeed  justly." 
"  You  and  I  are  dying  for  our  crimes,"  said  he,  "  and  we  deserve  to  die." 
When  a  man  is  willing  to  confess  that  he  deserves  the  wrath  of  God — 
that  he  deserves  the  suffering  which  his  sin  has  brought  upon  him — there 
is  evidence  of  sincerity  in  him.  In  this  man's  case,  his  repentance 
glittered  like  a  holy  tear  in  the  eye  of  his'  faith,  so  that  his  faith  was 
bejewelled  with  the  drops  of  his  penitence.  As  I  have  often  told  you, 
I  suspect  the  faith  which  is  not  born  as  a  twin  with  repentance  ;  but 
there  is  no  room  for  suspicion  in  the  case  of  this  penitent  confessor.  I 
pray  God  that  you  and  1  may  have  such  a  thorough  work  as  this  in  our 
own  hearts  as  the  result  of  our  faith. 

Then,  see,  this  dying  thief  defends  his  Lord  right  manfully.  He  says, 
**  We  indeed  justly,  but  this  Man  hath  done  nothing  amiss."  Was  not 
that  beautifully  said  ?  He  did  not  say,  "  This  Man  does  not  deserve  to 
die,"  but  "  Tliis  Man  hath  done  nothing  amiss."  He  means  that  he  is 
perfectly  innocent.  He  does  not  even  say  "  he  has  done  nothing  wicked  ", 
but  he  even  asserts  that  he  has  not  acted  unwisely  or  indiscreetly^ 
"This  Man  hath  done  nothing  amiss."  This  is  a  glorious  testimony  of 
a  dying  man  to  one  who  was  numbered  with  the  transgressors,  and 
was  being  put  to  death  because  his  enemies  falsely  accused  him.  Be- 
loved, I  only  pray  that  you  and  I  may  bear  as  good  witness  to  our  Lord 
as  this  thief  did.  He  outruns  us  all.  We  need  not  think  much  of  the 
coming  of  his  conversion  late  in  life ;  we  may  far  rather  consider  how 
blessed  was  the  testimony  which  he  bore  for  his  Lord  when  it  was  most 
needed.  When  all  other  voices  were  silent,  one  suffering  penitent  spake 
out,  and  said — "  This  man  hath  done  nothing  amiss." 

See,  again,  another  mark  of  this  man's  faith.  He  prays:  and  his 
prayer  is  directed  to  Jesus.  "  Lord,  remember  me  when  thou  comest 
into  thy  kingdom."  True  faith  is  always  praying  faith.  "  Behold, 
he  prayeth,"  is  one  of  the  surest  tests  of  the  new  birth.  Oh,  friends, 
may  we  abound  in  prayer,  for  thus  we  shall  prove  that  our  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ  is  what  it  ought  to  be!  This  converted  robber  opened  his  mouth 
wide  in  prayer;  he  prayed  with  great  confidence  as  to  the  coming 
kingdom,  and  he  sought  that  kingdom  first,  even  to  the  exclusion  of  all 
else.  He  might  have  asked  for  life,  or  for  ease  from  pain  ;  but  he  prefers 
the  kingdom ;  and  this  is  a  high  mark  of  grace. 

In  addition  to  thus  praying,  you  will  see  that  he  adores  and  worships 
Jesus,  for  he  says,  "  Lord,  remember  me  when  thou  comest  into  thy 
kingdom."  The  petition  is  worded  as  if  he  felt,  "  Only  let  Christ  think 
of  me,  and  it  is  enough.     Let  him  but  remember  me,  and  the  thought  of 


THE   DYING   THIEF   IN   A   NEW   LIGHT.  >)37 

his  mind  will  be  effectual  for  everything  that  I  shall  need  in  the  world 
to  come."  This  is  to  impute  Godhead  to  Christ.  If  a  man  can  cast  his 
all  upon  the  mere  memory  of  a  person,  he  must  have  a  very  high  esteem 
of  that  person.  If  to  be  remembered  by  the  Lord  Jesus  is  all  that  this 
man  asks,  or  desires,  he  pays  to  the  Lord  great  honour.  I  think  that 
there  was  about  his  prayer  a  worship  equal  to  the  eternal  hallelujalis  of 
cherubim  and  seraphim.  There  was  in  it  a  glorification  of  his  Lord 
which  is  not  excelled  even  by  the  endless  symphonies  of  angelic  spirits 
who  surround  the  throne.     Thief,  thou  hast  well  done  I 

Oh,  that  some  penitent  spirit  here  might  be  helped  thus  to  believe, 
thus  to  confess,  thus  to  defend  his  Master,  thus  to  adore,  thus  to 
worship  ;  and  then  the  age  of  the  convert  would  be  a  matter  of  the 
smallest  imaginable  consequence. 

IV.  Now,  the  last  remark  is  this  :  There  was  something  very  special 
about  the  dying  thief  as  to  our  Lord's  word  to  him  about  the 
WORLD  TO  COME.  He  Said  to  him,  "  To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in 
Paradise."  He  only  asked  the  Lord  to  remember  him,  but  he  obtained 
this  surprising  answer,  "To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  Paradise." 

In  some  respects  I  envy  this  dying  thief,  for  this  reason — that  when 
the  Lord  pardoned  me,  and  pardoned  the  most  of  you,  who  are  present, 
he  did  not  give  us  a  place  in  Paradise  that  same  day.  We  are  not  yet 
come  to  the  rest  which  is  promised  to  us.  No,  you  are  waiting  here. 
Some  of  you  have  been  waiting  very  long.  It  is  thirty  years  with 
many  of  us.  It  is  forty  years,  it  is  fifty  years,  with  many  others  since 
the  Lord  blotted  out  your  sins,  and  yet  you  are  not  with  him  in  Paradise. 
There  is  a  dear  member  of  this  church  who,  I  suppose,  has  known 
the  Lord  for  seventy-five  years,  and  she  is  still  with  us,  having  lonir  passed 
the  ninetieth  year  of  her  age.  The  Lord  did  not  admit  her  to  Paradise 
on  the  day  of  her  conversion.  He  did  not  take  any  one  of  us  from  nature 
to  grace,  and  from  grace  to  glory,  in  a  day.  We  have  had  to  wait  a 
good  while.  There  is  something  for  us  to  do  in  the  wilderness,  and  so 
we  are  kept  out  of  the  heavenly  garden.  I  remember  that  Mr.  Baxter 
said  that  he  was  not  in  a  hurry  to  be  gone  to  heaven ;  and  a  friend  called 
upo'i  Dr.  John  Owen,  who  had  been  writing  about  the  glory  of  Christ, 
and  asked  him  what  he  thought  of  going  to  heaven.  That  great  divine 
replied,  "I  am  longing  to  be  there."  "Why,"  said  the  other,  "1 
have  just  spoken  to  holy  Mr.  Baxter,  and  he  says  that  he  would 
prefer  to  be  here,  since  he  thinks  that  he  can  be  more  useful  on 
earth."  "Oh  !"  said  Dr.  Owen,  "my  brother  Baxter  is  always  full  of 
practical  godliness,  but  for  all  that  I  cannot  say  that  I  am  at  all 
desirous  to  linger  in  this  mortal  state.  I  would  rather  be  gone."  Each 
of  these  men  seems  to  me  to  have  been  the  half  of  Paul.  Paul  was  made 
up  of  the  iwo,  for  he  was  desirous  to  depait,  but  he  was  willing  to 
remain  because  it  was  needful  for  the  people.  We  would  put  both 
together,  and,  like  Paul,  have  a  strong  desire  to  depart  and  to  be  with 
Christ,  and  yet  be  willing  to  wait  if  we  can  do  service  to  our  Lord 
and  to  his  church.  Still,  I  think  he  has  the  best  of  it  who  is  converted, 
and  enters  heaven  the  same  night.  This  robber  breakfasted  with  the 
devil,  but  he  dined  with  Christ  on  earth,  and  supped  with  him  in 
Paradise.  This  was  short  work,  but  blessed  work.  What  a  host  of 
troubles  he  escaped  !    What  a  world  of  temptation  he  missed  1.    What 


(J3d  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

an  evil  world  he  quitted !  He  was  just  born,  like  a  lamb  dropped  in 
the  field  and  then  he  was  lifted  into  the  Shepherd's  bosom  strai^'ht 
away  I  do  not  remember  the  Lord  ever  saying  this  to  anybody  else. 
1  dare  say  it  may  have  happened  that  souls  have  been  converted  and 
have  gone  home  at  once  ;  but  I  never  heard  of  anybody  that  had  such 
an  assurance  from  Clirist  as  this  man  had  :  **  Verily,  I  say  unto  thee; 
such  a  personal  assurance :  "Verily  I  say  unto  Ihee,  To-day  shalt  thou 
be  with  me  in  Paradise."  Dying  thief,  thou  wert  favoured  above  many, 
"  to  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better,"  and  to  be  with  him  so  soon ! 

AVhy  is  it  that  our  Lord  does  not  thus  emparadis(3  all  of  us  at  once? 
It  is  because  there  is  something  for  us  to  do  on  eaith.  My  brethren, 
are  you  doing  it?  Are  you  doing  it?  Some  good  people  are  still  on 
earth  •  but  why  ?  But  why  ?  What  is  the  use  of  them  ?  I  cannot  make 
it  out.  If  they  are  indeed  the  Lord's  people,  what  are  they  here  lor  ? 
They  o-et  up  in  the  morning  and  eat  their  breakfast,  and  in  due  course 
eat  th?ir  dinner,  and  their  supper,  and  go  to  bed  and  sleep  ;  at  a  proper 
hour  they  get  np  the  next  morning,  and  do  the  same  as  on  the  previous 
day  Is  this  li  viu"-  fur  Jesus  ?  Is  this  life  ?  It  does  not  come  to  much. 
Can  this  be  the  life  of  God  in  man  ?  Oh,  Christian  people,  do  justify 
vour  Lord  in  keeping  you  waiting  here !  How  can  you  justify  him  but 
by  serving  him  to  the  utmost  of  your  power  ?  The  Lord  help  you  to 
do  so  '  Why,  you  owe  as  much  to  him  as  the  dying  thief !  I  kno^  i 
owe  a  great  deal  more.  What  a  mercy  it  is  to  have  been  converted 
while  you  were  yet  a  bov,  to  be  brought  to  the  Saviour  while  you  were 
yet  a  girl !  What  a  debt  of  obligation  young  Christians  owe  to  the 
Lord!  And  if  this  poor  thief  crammed  a  life  full  of  testimony  into 
a  few  minutes,  ought  not  you  and  I,  who  are  spared,  for  years  after 
conversion,  to  perform  good  service  for  our  Lord  ?  Come,  let  us  wake 
up  if  we  have  been  asleep  !  Let  us  begin  to  live  if  we  have  been  halt 
dead.  May  the  Spirit  of  God  make  something  of  us  yet :  so  that  we 
may  go  as  industrious  servants  from  the  labours  of  the  vineyard  to  the 
pleasures  of  the  Paradise  I  To  our  once  crucified  Lord  be  glory  for  ever 
and  ever !    Amen. 

Portion  op  Soriptuee  read  before  Sermon— Luke  xxiii.  27—49. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 872,  285,  548,  288. 


THE  BELIEVING  THIEF. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  April  7th,   1889,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  And  he  said  unto  Jesus,  Lord,  remember  m'>  wlien  thou  comest  into  thy  kingdom. 
A.nd  Jesus  said  unto  him,  Verily  I  say  unto  thee,  To  day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in 
paradise." — Luke  xxiii.  42,  43. 

Some  time  ago  I  preached  upon  the  whole  story  of  the  dying  thief.* 
I  do  not  propose  to  do  the  same  to-day,  but  only  to  look  at  it  from 
one  particular  point  of  view.  The  story  of  the  salvation  of  the  dying 
thief  is  a  standing  instance  of  the  power  of  Christ  to  save,  and  of  his 
abundant  willingness  to  receive  all  that  come  to  him,  in  whatever 
plight  they  may  be.  I  cannot  regard  this  act  of  grace  as  a  solitary 
instance,  any  more  than  the  salvation  of  Zacchseus,  the  restoration  of 
Peter,  or  the  call  of  Saul,  the  persecutor.  Every  conversion  is,  in  a 
sense,  singular :  no  two  are  exactly  alike,  and  yet  any  one  conver- 
sion is  a  type  of  others.  The  case  of  the  dying  thief  is  much  more 
similar  to  our  conversion  than  it  is  dissimilar  ;  in  point  of  fact,  his  case 
may  be  regarded  as  typical,  rather  than  as  an  extraordinary  incident. 
So  I  shall  use  it  at  this  time.  May  tlio  Holy  Spirit  speak  through  it 
to  the  encouragement  of  those  who  are  ready  to  despair ! 

Remember,  beloved  friends,  that  our  Lord  Jesus,  at  the  time  he 
saved  this  malefactor,  was  at  his  lowest.  His  glory  had  been  ebbing 
out  in  Gethsemane,  and  before  Caiaphas,  and  Herod,  and  Pilate ;  but 
it  had  now  reached  the  utmost  low- water  mark.  Stripped  of  his  gar- 
ments, and  nailed  to  the  cross,  our  Lord  was  mocked  by  a  yibald 
crowd,  and  was  dying  in  agony:  then  was  he  "numbered  with  the 
transgressors,"  and  made  as  the  offscouring  of  all  things.  Yet,  while 
in  that  condition,  he  achieved  this  marvellous  deed  of  grace.  Behold 
the  wonder  wrought  by  the  Saviour  when  emptied  of  all  his  glory, 
and  hanged  up  a  spectacle  of  shame  upon  the  brink  of  death  !  How 
certain  is  it  that  he  can  do  great  wonders  of  mercy  now,  seeing  that 
he  has  returned  unto  his  glory,  and  sitteth  upon  the  throne  of  light ! 
* '  He  is  able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  him, 
seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."  If  a  dying 
Saviour  saved  the  thief,  my  argument  is,  that  he  can  do  even  more  now 

*  No.  1881;     "  The  Dying  Thief  in  a  New  Light." 
No.  2.078. 


640  arETROPOLTTAN    TABERXACLE    PUT.  PIT. 

that  lie  Kveth  and  reigneth.  All  power  is  given  unto  him  in  heaven 
and  in  earth ;  can  anything  at  this  present  time  surpass  the  power 
of  his  grace  ? 

It  is  not  only  the  weakness  of  our  Lord  which  makes  tlie  salvation 
V  ^e  penitent  thief  memorable  ;  it  is  the  fact  that  the  dying  male- 
actor  saw  it  before  his  very  eyes.  Can  you  put  yourself  into  hit 
place,  and  suppose  yourself  to  be  looking  upon  one  who  hangs  in  agony 
upon  a  cross  ?  Could  you  readily  believe  him  to  be  the  Lord  of  glory, 
who  would  soon  come  to  his  kingdom?  That  was  no  mean  faith 
which,  at  such  a  moment,  could  believe  in  Jesus  as  Lord  and  King. 
If  the  apostle  Paul  were  here,  and  wanted  to  add  a  New  Testament 
chapter  to  the  eleventh  of  Hebrews,  he  might  certainly  commence  his 
instances  of  remarkable  faith  with  this  thief,  who  believed  in  a  crucified, 
derided,  and  dying  Christ,  and  cried  to  him  as  to  one  whose  kingdom 
would  surely  come.  The  thief's  faith  was  the  more  remarkable  because 
he  was  himself  in  great  pain,  and  bound  to  die.  It  is  not  easy  to 
exercise  confidence  when  you  are  tortured  with  deadly  anguish.  Our 
own  rest  of  mind  has  at  times  been  greatly  hindered  by  pain  of  body. 
When  we  are  the  subjects  of  acute  suffering  it  is  not  easy  to  exhibit  that 
faith  which  we  fancy  we  possess  at  other  times.  This  man,  suffering 
as  he  did,  and  seeing^  the  Saviour  in  so  sad  a  state,  nevertheless  believed 
unto  life  eternal.    Herein  was  such  faith  as  is  seldom  seen. 

Recollect,  also,  that  he  wa«  surrounded  by  scoffers.  It  is  easy  to 
swim  with  the  current,  and  hard  to  go  against  the  stream.  This  man 
heard  the  priests,  in  their  pride,  ridicule  the  Lord,  and  the  great  mul- 
titude of  the  common  people,  with  one  consent,  joined  in  the  scorning ; 
his  comrade  caught  the  spirit  of  the  hour,  and  mocked  also,  and 
perhaps  he  did  the  same  for  a  while ;  but  through  the  grace  of  God 
he  was  changed,  and  believed  in  the  Lord  Jesus  in  the  teeth  of  all  the 
scorn.  His  faith  was  not  affected  by  his  surroundings;  but  he, 
dying  thief  as  he  was,  made  sure  his  confidence.  Like  a  jutting  rock, 
standing  out  in  the  midst  of  a  torrent,  he  declared  the  innocence  of  the 
Christ  whom  others  blasphemed.  His  faith  is  worthy  of  our  imitation 
in  its  fruits.  He  had  no  member  that  was  free  except  his  tongue,  and 
he  used  that  member  wisely  to  rebuke  his  brother  malefactor,  and 
defend  iiis  Lord.  His  faith  brought  forth  a  brave  testimony  and  a 
bold  confession.  I  am  not  going  to  praise  the  thief,  or  his  faith,  but 
to  extol  the  glory  of  that  grace  divine  which  gave  the  thief  such  faith, 
and  then  freely  saved  him  by  its  means.  I  am  anxious  to  show  how 
glorious  is  the  Saviour — that  Saviour  to  the  uttermost,  who,  at  such 
a  time,  could  save  such  a  man,  and  give  him  so  great  a  faith,  and  so 
perfectly  and  speedily  prepare  him  for  eternal  bliss.  Behold  the  power 
of  that  divine  Spirit  who  could  produce  such  faith  on  soil  so  unlikely, 
and  in  a  climate  so  unpropitious. 

Let  us  enter  at  once  into  the  centre  of  our  sermon.  First,  note  Die 
man  who  was  our  Lord's  last  companion  on  earth  ;  secondly,  note  that  this 
same  man  was  our  Lords  first  companion  at  the  gate  of  paradise  ;  and  then, 
thirdly,  let  us  note  the  sermon  which  our  Lord  preaches  to  us  from  this  act 
of  grace.  Oh,  for  a  blessing  from  the  Holy  Spirit  aU  the  sermon 
through ! 

I.     Carefully  note  that  the  ceuoifibd  thief  was  oub  Loau's  last 


THE   BEMEVllfG   THIEF.'  641 

COMPANION  ON  EARTH.  What  sorry  company  our  Lord  selected  when 
he  was  here  !  He  did  not  consort  with  the  religious  Pharisees  or  the 
philosophic  Sadducees,  but  he  was  known  as  "  the  friend  of  publicans 
and  sinners."  How  I  rejoice  at  this  !  It  gives  me  assurance  that  he 
will  not  refuse  to  associate  with  me.  When  the  Lord  Jesus  made  a 
friend  of  me,  he  certainly  did  not  make  a  choice  which  brought  him 
credit.  Do  you  think  he  gained  any  honour  when  he  made  a  friend 
of  you  ?  Has  he  ever  gained  anything  by  us  ?  No,  my  brethren  ;  if 
Jesus  had  not  stooped  very  low,  he  would  not  have  come  to  me ;  and 
if  he  did  not  seek  the  most  unworthy,  he  might  not  have  come  to  you. 
You  feel  it  so,  and  you  are  thankful  that  he  came  **not  to  call  the 
righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance."  As  the  great  physician,  our 
Lord  was  much  with  the  sick  :  he  went  where  there  was  room  for  him 
to  exercise  his  healing  art.  The  whole  have  no  need  of  a  physician : 
they  cannot  appreciate  him,  nor  afford  scope  for  his  skill ;  and  there- 
fore he  did  not  frequent  their  abodes.  Yes,  after  all,  our  Lord  did 
make  a  good  choice  when  he  saved  j^ou  and  me  ;  for  in  us  he  has 
found  abundant  room  for  his  mercy  and  grace.  There  has  been  elbow 
room  for  his  love  to  work  within  the  awful  emptinesses  of  our  neces- 
sities and  sins ;  and  therein  he  has  done  great  things  for  us,  whereof 
we  are  glad. 

Lest  any  here  should  be  despairing,  and  say,  "He  will  never 
deign  to  look  on  me,"  I  want  you  to  notice  that  the  last  companion  of 
Christ  on  earth  was  a  si7iner,  and  no  ordinary  sinner.  He  had  broken 
even  the  laws  of  man,  for  he  was  a  robber.  One  calls  him  "  a 
brigand  "  ;  and  I  suppose  it  is  likely  to  have  been  the  case.  The 
brigands  of  those  days  mixed  murder  with  their  robberies  :  he  was 
probably  a  freebooter  in  arms  against  the  Eoman  government,  making 
this  a  pretext  for  plundering  as  he  had  opportunity.  At  last  he  was 
arrested,  and  was  condemned  by  a  Eoman  tribunal,  which,  on  the 
whole,  was  usually  just,  and  in  this  case  was  certainly  just ;  for  he 
himself  confesses  the  justice  of  his  condemnation.  The  malefactor  who 
believed  upon  the  cross  was  a  convict,  who  had  lain  in  the  condemned 
cell,  and  was  then  undergoing  execution  for  his  crimes.  A  convicted 
felon  was  the  person  with  whom  our  Lord  last  consorted  upon  earth. 
What  a  lover  of  the  souls  of  guilty  men  is  he  !  What  a  stoop  he  makes 
to  the  very  lowest  of  mankind !  To  this  most  unworthy  of  men  the 
Lord  of  glory,  ere  he  quitted-  life,  spoke  with  matchless  grace.  He 
spoke  to  him  such  wondrous  words  as  never  can  be  excelled  if  you 
search  the  Scriptures  through:  "To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in 
paradise."  I  do  not  suppose  that  anywhere  in  this  Tabernacle  there 
will  be  found  a  man  who  has  been  convicted  before  the  law,  or 
who  is  even  chargeable  with  a  crime  against  common  honesty ;  but 
if  there  should  be  such  a  person  among  my  hearers,  I  would  invite 
him  to  find  pardon  and  change  of  heart  through  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  You  may  come  to  him,  whoever  you  may  be;  for  this 
man  did.  Here  is  a  specimen  of  one  who  had  gone  to  the  extreme 
of  guilt,  and  who  acknowledged  that  he  had  done  so ;  he  made  no 
excuse,  and  sought  no  cloak  for  his  sin;  he  was  in  the  hands  of 
justice,  confronted  with  the  death-doom,  and  yet  he  believed  in  Jesus, 
and  breathed  a  humble  prayer  to  him,  and  he  was  saved  upon  the 

41 


642  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT 

Spot.  As  is  the  sample,  such  is  the  bulk.  Jesus  saves  others  of  like 
kind.  Lei  me,  therefore,  put  it  very  plainly  here,  that  none  may 
mistake  me.  None  of  you  are  excluded  from  the  infinite  mercy  of 
Christ,  however  great  your  iniquity :  if  you  believe  in  Jesus,  he  will 
save  you. 

This  man  was  not  only  a  sinner ;  he  was  a  sinner  newly  awakened.  I 
do  not  suppose  that  he  had  seriously  thought  of  the  Lord  Jesus  before. 
According  to  the  other  Evangelists,  he  appears  to  have  joined  with  his 
fellow  thief  in  scoffing  at  Jesus :  if  he  did  not  actually  himself  use 
opprobrious  words,  he  was  so  far  consenting  thereunto,  that  the 
Evangelist  did  him  no  injustice  when  he  said,  "  The  thieves  also> 
which  were  crucified  with  him,  cast  the  same  in  his  teeth."  Yet,  now^ 
on  a  sudden,  he  wakes  up  to  the  conviction  that  the  man  who  is  dying 
at  his  side  is  something  more  than  a  man.  He  reads  the  title  over 
his  head,  and  believes  it  to  be  true — *'  This  is  Jesus  the  Bang  of  the 
Jews."  Thus  believing,  he  makes  his  appeal  to  the  Messiah,  whom 
he  had  so  newly  found,  and  commits  himself  to  his  hands.  My 
hearer,  do  you  see  this  truth,  that  the  moment  a  man  knows  Jesus 
to  be  the  Christ  of  God  he  may  at  once  put  his  trust  in  him  and  be 
saved?  A  certain  preacher,  whose  gospel  was  very  doubtful,  said, 
"  Do  you,  who  have  been  living  in  sin  for  fifty  years,  believe  that  you 
can  in  a  moment  be  made  clean  through  the  blood  of  Jesus  ?  "  I 
answer,  "  Yes,  we  do  believe  that  in  one  moment,  through  the  precious 
blood  of  Jesus,  the  blackest  soul  can  be  made  white.  We  do  believe 
that  in  a  single  instant  the  sins  of  sixty  or  seventy  years  can  be  abso- 
lutely forgiven,  and  that  the  old  nature,  which  has  gone  on  growing 
worse  and  worse,  can  receive  its  death-wound  in  a  moment  of  time, 
while  the  life  eternal  may  be  implanted  in  the  soul  at  once."  It  was 
BO  with  this  man.  He  had  reached  the  end  of  his  tether,  but  all  of  a 
sudden  he  woke  up  to  the  assured  conviction  that  the  Messiah  was  at 
his  side,  and,  believing,  he  looked  to  him  and  Hved. 

So  now,  my  brothers,  if  you  have  never  in  your  life  before  been  the 
subject  of  any  religious  conviction,  if  you  have  lived  up  till  now  an  ^ 
utterly  ungodly  life,  yet  if  now  you  will  believe  that  God's  dear  Son  | 
has  come  into  the  world  to  save  men  from  sin,  and  will  uuf eignedly 
confess  your  sin  and  trust  in  him,  you  shall  be  immediately  saved. 
Ay,  while  I  speak  the  word,  the  deed  of  grace  may  be  accomplished  by 
that  glorious  One  who  has  gone  up  into  the  heaven  with  omnipotent 
povYcr  to  save. 

I  desire  to  put  this  case  very  plainly :  this  man,  who  was  the  last 
companion  of  Christ  upon  earth,  was  a  sinner  in  misery.  His  sins  had 
found  him  out:  he  was  now  enduring  the  reward  of  his  deeds.  1 
constantly  meet  with  persons  in  this  condition :  they  have  lived  a  life 
of  wantonness,  excess,  and  carelessness,  and  they  begin  to  feel  the 
fire-flakes  of  the  tempest  of  wrath  falling  upon  their  flesh ;  they  dwell 
in  an  earthly  hell,  a  prelude  of  eternal  woe.  Eemorse,  like  an  asp, 
has  stung  them,  and  set  their  blood  on  fire :  they  cannot  rest,  they 
are  troubled  day  and  night.  '*  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out." 
It  has  found  them  out,  and  arrested  them,  and  they  feel  the  strong 
grip  of  conviction.  This  man  was  in  that  horrible  condition  :  what  is 
more,  he  was  in  extremis.    He  could  not  live  long  :  the  crucifixion  was 


THE    BELIEVING   THIEP  643 

Btire  to  be  fatal ;  in  a  short  time  his  legs  would  be  broken,  to  end  his 
wretched  existence.  He,  poor  soul,  had  but  a  short  time  to  live — only 
the  space  between  noon  and  sundown ;  but  it  was  long  enough  for  the 
Saviour,  who  is  mighty  to  save.  Some  are  very  much  afraid  that 
people  will  put  off  coming  to  Christ,  if  we  state  this.  I  cannot  help 
what  wicked  men  do  with  truth,  but  I  shall  state  it  all  the  same.  If 
you  are  now  within  an  hour  of  death,  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  you  shall  be  Sctved.  If  you  never  reach  your  homes  again,  but 
drop  dead  on  the  road,  if  you  will  now  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus^  you 
shall  be  saved  :  saved  now,  on  the  spot.  Looking  and  trusting  to  Jesus, 
he  wiU  give  you  a  new  heart  and  a  right  spirit,  and  blot  out  your  sins. 
This  is  the  glory  of  Christ's  grace.  How  I  wish  I  could  extol  it  in 
proper  language !  He  was  last  seen  on  earth  before  his  death  in 
company  with  a  convicted  felon,  to  whom  he  spoke  most  lovingly. 
Come,  0  ye  guilty,  and  he  will  receive  you  graciously ! 

Once  more,  this  man  whom  Christ  saved  at  last  was  a  man  who  could 
do  no  good  works.  If  salvation  had  been  by  good  works,  he  could  not 
have  been  saved ;  for  he  was  fastened  hand  and  foot  to  the  tree  of 
doom.  It  was  all  over  with  him  as  to  any  act  or  deed  of  righteous- 
ness. He  could  say  a  good  word  or  two,  but  that  was  aU ;  he  could 
perform  no  acts  ;  and  if  his  salvation  had  depended  on  an  active  life  of 
usefulness,  certainly  he  never  could  have  been  saved.  He  was  a 
sinner  also,  who  could  not  exhibit  a  long-enduring  repentance  for  sin, 
for  he  had  so  short  a  time  to  live.  He  could  not  have  experienced 
bitter  convictions,  lasting  over  months  and  years,  for  his  time  was 
measured  by  moments,  and  he  was  on  the  borders  of  the  grave.  His 
end  was  very  near,  and  yet  the  Saviour  could  save  him,  and  did  save 
him  so  perfectly,  that  the  sun  went  not  down  till  he  was  in  paradise 
with  Christ. 

This  sinner,  whom  I  have  painted  to  you  in  colours  none  too  black, 
was  one  who  believed  in  Jesm^  and  confessed  his  faith.  He  did  trust  the 
Lord.  Jesus  was  a  man,  and  he  called  him  so  ;  but  he  knew  that  he 
was  also  Lord,  and  he  called  him  so,  and  said,  "Lord,  remember  me." 
He  had  such  confidence  in  Jesus,  that,  if  he  would  but  only  think  of 
him,  if  he  would  only  remember  him  when  he  came  into  his  kingdom, 
that  would  be  all  that  he  would  ask  of  him.  Alas,  my  dear  hearers ! 
the  trouble  about  some  of  you  is  that  you  know  all  about  my  Lord, 
and  yet  you  do  not  trust  him.  Trust  is  the  saving  act.  Years  ago 
you  were  on  the  verge  of  really  trusting  Jesus,  but  you  are  just  as  far  off 
from  it  now  as  you  were  then.  This  man  did  not  hesitate  :  he  grasped 
the  one  hope  for  himseK.  He  did  not  keep  his  persuasion  of  our 
Lord's  Messiahship  in  his  mind  as  a  dry,  dead  beHef,  but  he  turned  it 
into  trust  and  prayer,  "Lord,  remember  me  when  thou  comest  into 
thy  kingdom."  Oh,  that  in  his  infinite  mercy  many  of  you  would  trust 
my  Lord  this  morning  !  You  shall  be  saved,  I  am  sure  you  shall :  if 
you  are  not  saved  when  you  trust,  I  must  myself  also  renounce  all  hope. 
This  is  all  that  we  have  done  :  we  looked,  and  we  lived,  and  we  con- 
tinue to  live  because  we  look  to  the  living  Saviour.  Oh,  that  this 
morning,  feeling  your  sin,  you  would  look  to  Jesus,  trusting  him,  and 
confessing  that  trust !  Owning  that  he  is  Lord  to  the  glory  of  God 
the  Father,  you  must  and  shall  be  saved. 


^4  4  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PTJLPIT. 

In  consequence  of  having  this  faith  which  saved  him,  this  poor  mm 
breathed  the  humble  but  fitting  prayer,  "Lord,  remember  me.'  This 
does  not  seem  to  ask  much  ;  but  as  he  understood  it,  it  meant  aU  that 
an  anxious  heart  could  desire.  As  he  thought  of  the  kingdom,  he 
had  such  clear  ideas  of  the  glory  of  the  Saviour,  that  he  felt  that  if 
the  Lord  would  think  of  him  his  eternal  state  would  be  safe.  J  oseph, 
in  prison,  asked  the  chief  butler  to  remember  him  when  he  was  restored 
to  power  ;  but  he  forgat  him.  Our  Joseph  never  forgets  a  sinner  who 
oried  to  him  in  the  low  dungeon ;  in  his  kingdom  he  remembers  the 
meanings  and  groanings  of  poor  sinners  who  are  burdened  with  a 
sense  of  sin.  Can  you  not  pray  this  morning,  and  thus  secure  a  place 
\n  the  memory  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ? 

Thus  I  have  tried  to  describe  the  man ;  and,  after  having  done  my 
best,  I  shall  fail  of  my  object  unless  I  make  you  see  that  whatever  thia 
thief  was,  he  is  a  picture  of  what  you  are.  EspeciaUy  if  you  have 
been  a  great  offender,  and  if  you  have  been  living  long  without  caring 
for  eternal  things,  you  are  like  that  malefactor ;  and  yet  you,  even  you, 
may  do  as  that  thief  did ;  you  may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  and 
commit  your  souls  into  his  hands,  and  he  will  save  you  as  surely  as  he 
saved  the  condemned  brigand.  Jesus  graciously  says,  "Him  that 
Cometh  to  me  I  wiU  in  no  wise  cast  out."  This  means  that  if  you 
come  and  trust  him,  whoever  you  may  be,  he  will  for  no  reason, 
and  on  no  ground,  and  under  no  circumstances,  ever  cast  you  out.  Do 
you  catch  that  thought  ?  Do  you  feel  that  it  belongs  to  you,  and  that 
if  you  come  to  him,  you  shaU  find  eternal  life  ?  I  rejoice  if  you  so  far 
perceive  the  truth. 

Few  persons  have  so  much  intercourse  with  desponding  and  despair- 
ing  souls  as  I  have.  Poor  cast  down  ones  write  to  me  continually.  I 
scarce  know  why.  I  have  no  special  gift  of  consolation,  but  I  gladly 
lay  myself  out  to  comfort  the  distressed,  and  they  seem  to  know  it. 
What  joy  I  have  when  I  see  a  despairing  one  find  peace !  I  have  had 
this  joy  several  times  during  the  week  just  ended.  How  much  I 
desire  that  any  of  you  who  are  breaking  your  hearts  because  you 
cannot  find  forgiveness  would  come  to  my  Lord,  and  trust  him,  and 
enter  into  rest !  Has  he  not  said,  "  Come  unto  me,  aU  ye  that  labour 
and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest "  ?  Come  and  try  him, 
and  that  rest  shall  be  yours.  ^ 

11.  In  the  second  place,  note,  that  this  man  was  our  Lord  s 
COMPANION  at  the  GATE  OF  PARADISE.  I  am  uot  goiug  iuto  any  specu- 
lations as  to  where  our  Lord  went  when  he  quitted  the  body  which 
hung  on  the  cross.  It  would  seem,  from  some  Scriptures,  that  he 
descended  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth,  that  he  might  fill  all 
things.  But  he  very  rapidly  traversed  the  regions  of  the  dead. 
Bemember  that  he  died,  perhaps  an  hour  or  two  before  the  thief, 
and  during  that  time  the  eternal  glory  flamed  through  the  under- 
world, and  was  flashing  through  the  gates  of  paradise  just  when  the 
pardoned  thief  was  entering  the  eternal  world.  Who  is  this  that 
entereth  the  pearl-gate  at  the  same  moment  as  the  King  of  glory? 
Who  is  this  favoured  companion  of  the  Eedeemer?  Is  it  some 
honoured  martyr?  Is  it  a  faithful  apostle?  Is  it  a  patriarch,  like 
Abraham;  or  a  prince,   like  David?     It  is  none  of  these.     Behold, 


THE   BELTEVIXG   THIEF.     .      L  "  645 

and  be  amazed  at  sovereign  grace.  He  tliat  goeth  in  at  tlie  gate' 
of  paradise,  with  the  King  of  glory,  is  a  thief,  who  was  saved  in  tho 
article  of  death.  He  is  saved  in  no  inferior  way,  and  received  into  bliss 
in  no  secondary  style.     Verily,  there  are  last  which  shall  be  first !    ^    ; 

Here  I  would  have  you  notice  the  condescension  of  our  Lord's  choice. 
The  comrade  of  the  Lord  of  glory,  for  whom  the  cherub  turns 
aside  his  sword  of  fire,  is  no  great  one,  but  a  newly-converted  male- 
factor. And  why  ?  I  think  the  Saviour  took  him  with  him  as  a 
specimen  of  what  he  meant  to  do.  He  seemed  to  say  to  all  the  heavenly 
powers,  ''I  bring  a  sinner  with  me;  he  is  a  sample  of  the  rest." 
Have  you  never  heard  of  him  who  dreamed  that  he  stood  without  the 
gate  of  heaven,  and  while  there  he  heard  sweet  music  from  a  band  of 
venerable  persons  who  were  on  their  way  to  glory  ?  They  entered 
the  celestial  portals,  and  there  were  great  rejoicing  and  shouts. 
Enquiring  "  What  are  these  ?  "  he  was  told  that  they  were  the  goodly 
fellowship  of  the  prophets.  He  sighed,  and  said,  "  Alas!  I  am  not 
one  of  those."  He  waited  a  while,  and  another  band  of  shining  ones 
drew  nigh,  who  also  entered  heaven  with  hallelujahs,  and  when  he 
enquired,  "  Who  are  these,  and  whence  came  they?"  the  answer  was, 
"These  are  the  glorious  company  of  the  apostles."  Again  he  sighed, 
and  said,  *'  I  cannot  enter  with  them."  Then  came  another  body  of  men 
white-robed,  and  bearing  palms  in  their  hands,  who  marched  amid 
great  acclamation  into  the  golden  city.  These  he  learned  were  the 
noble  army  of  martyrs;  and  again  he  wept,  and  said,  "I  cannot  enter 
with  these."  In  the  end  he  heard  the  voices  of  much  people,  and  saw 
a  greater  multitude  advancing,  among  whom  he  perceived  Eahab  and 
Mary  Magdalene,  David  and  Peter,  Manasseh  and  Saul  of  Tarsus,  and 
he  espied  especially  the  thief,  who  died  at  the  right  hand  of  Jesus. 
These  all  entered  in— a  strange  company.  Then  he  eagerly  enquired, 
*' Who  are  these  ?  "  and  they  answered,  ''This  is  the  host  of  sinners 
saved  by  grace."  Then  was  he  exceeding  glad,  and  said,  "  I  can  go 
with  these."  Yet,  he  thought  there  would  be  no  shouting  at  the 
approach  of  this  company,  and  that  they  would  enter  heaven  without 
Bong;  instead  of  which,  there  seemed  to  rise  a  seven-fold  hallelujah 
of  praise  unto  the  Lord  of  love;  for  there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the 
angels  of  God  over  sinners  that  repent. 

I  invite  any  poor  soul  here  that  can  neither  aspire  to  serve  Christ,  nor 
to  suffer  for  him  as  yet,  nevertheless  to  come  in  with  other  believing 
sinners,  in  the  company  of  Jesus,  who  now  sets  before  us  an  open 
door. 

While  we  are  handling  this  text,  note  well  the  blessedness  of  the 
place  to  which  the  Lord  called  this  penitent.  Jesus  said,  "  To  day 
Shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise."  Paradise  means  a  garden,  a 
garden  fiUed  with  delights.  The  garden  of  Eden  is  the  type  of 
heaven.  We  know  that  paradise  means  heaven,  for  the  apostle 
speaks  of  such  a  man  caught  up  into  paradise,  and  anon  he  calls  it  the. 
third  heaven.  Our  Saviour  took  this  dying  thief  into  the  paradise  of 
infinite  delight,  and  this  is  where  he  will  take  all  of  us  sinners  who 
believe  in  him.    If  we  are  trusting  him,  we.  shall  ultimately  be  with 

liim  in  paradise.  ^      ,       ^    7         .  i.  •  1. 

Thte  next  .word  is  better  still.     Note  the  glory  of  the  society  to  whicJi 


646 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


this  sinner  is  introduced:  "To  day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in 
paradise."  If  the  Lord  said,  "To  day  shalt  thou  be  with  tne,"  we 
should  not  need  him  to  add  another  word ;  for  where  he  is,  is  heaven 
to  us.  He  added  the  word  "  paradise,"  because  else  none  could  have 
guessed  where  he  was  going.  Think  of  it,  you  uncomely  soul ;  you 
are  to  dwell  with  the  Altogether-lovely  One  for  ever.  You  poor  and 
needy  ones,  you  are  to  be  with  him  in  his  glory,  in  his  bliss,  in  his 
perfection.  Where  he  is,  and  as  he  is,  you  shall  be.  The  Lord  looks 
into  those  weeping  eyes  of  yours  this  morning,  and  he  says,  "  Poor 
sinner,  thou  shalt  one  day  be  with  me."  I  think  I  hear  you  say, 
"Lord,  that  is  bliss  too  great  for  such  a  sinner  as  I  am"  ;  but  he 
replies  —I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love :  therefore  with 
lovingkindness  will  I  draw  thee,  till  thou  shalt  be  with  me  where 
I  am. 

The  stress  of  the  text  lies  in  the  speediness  of  all  this.  "  Verily  I  say 
unto  thee.  To  day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise."  "  To  day." 
Thou  shalt  not  lie  in  purgatory  for  ages,  nor  sleep  in  limbo  for  so 
many  years ;  but  thou  shalt  be  ready  for  bliss  at  once,  and  at  once 
thou  shalt  enjoy  it.  The  sinner  was  hard  by  the  gates  of  hell,  but 
almighty  mercy  lifted  him  up,  and  the  Lord  said,  "  To  day  shalt  thou 
be  with  me  in  paradise."  What  a  change  from  the  cross  to  the 
crown,  from  the  anguish  of  Calvary  to  the  glory  of  the  New 
Jerusalem!  In  those  few  hours  the  beggar  was  lifted  from  the 
dunghill  and  set  among  princes.  "  To  day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in 
paradise."  Can  you  measure  the  change  from  that  sinner,  loathsome 
in  his  iniquity,  when  the  sun  was  high  at  noon,  to  that  same  sinner, 
clothed  in  pure  white,  and  accepted  in  the  Beloved,  in  the  paradise 
of  God,  when  the  sun  went  down  ?  0  glorious  Saviour,  what  marvels 
thou  canst  work  !     How  rapidly  canst  thou  work  them ! 

Please  notice,  also,  the  majesty  of  the  Lord's  grace  in  this  text.  The 
Saviour  said  to  him,  "  Verily  /  say  unto  thee.  To  day  shalt  thou  be 
with  me  in  paradise."  Our  Lord  gives  his  own  will  as  the  reason  for 
saving  this  man.  "I  say."  He  says  it  who  claims  the  right  thus  to 
speak.  It  is  he  who  wiU  have  mercy  on  whom  he  will  have  mercy, 
and  will  have  compassion  on  whom  he  will  have  compassion.  He 
speaks  royally,  "Verily  I  say  unto  thee."  Are  they  not  imperial 
words  ?  The  Lord  is  a  King  in  whose  word  there  is  power.  What 
he  says  none  can  gainsay.  He  that  hath  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death 
saith,  "I  say  unto  thee.  To  day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise." 
Who  shall  prevent  the  fulfilment  of  his  word  ? 

Notice  the  certainty  of  it.  He  says,  "  Verily."  Our  blessed  Lord 
on  the  cross  returned  to  his  old  majestic  manner,  as  he  painfully  turned 
his  head,  and  looked  on  his  convert.  He  was  wont  to  begin  his  preach- 
ing with,  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you  "  ;  and  now  that  he  is  dying 
he  uses  his  favourite  manner,  and  says,  "  Verily."  Our  Lord  took  no 
oath;  his  strongest  asseveration  was,  "Verily,  verily."  To  give  the 
penitent  the  plainest  assurance,  he  says,  "  Verily  I  say  unto  thee. 
To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise."  In  this  he  had  an  abso- 
lutely indisputable  assurance  that  though  he  must  die,  yet  he  would 
live  and  find  himself  in  paradise  with  his  Lord. 

I  have  thus  shown  you  that  our  Lord  passed  within  the  pearly  gate 


THE    BELIEVING    THIEF.  647 

in  company  witli  one  to  whom  lie  had  pledged  himself.  Why  should 
not  you  and  I  pass  through  that  pearl- gate  in  due  time,  clothed  in  his 
merit,  washed  in  his  blood,  resting  on  his  power  ?  One  of  these  days 
angels  will  say  of  you,  and  of  me,  "  Who  is  this  that  cometh  up  from 
the  wilderness,  leaning  upon  her  beloved?  "  The  shining  ones  will  be 
amazed  to  see  some  of  us  coming.  If  you  have  lived  a  life  of  sin  until 
now,  and  yet  shall  repent  and  enter  heaven,  what  an  amazement  there 
will  be  in  every  golden  street  to  think  that  you  have  come  there !  In 
the  early  Christian  church  Marcus  Caius  Yictorinus  was  converted ;  but 
he  had"^  reached  so  great  an  age,  and  had  been  so  gross  a  sinner,  that 
the  pastor  and  church  doubted  him.  He  gave,  however,  clear  proof 
of  having  undergone  the  divine  change,  and  then  there  were  great 
acclamations,  and  many  shouts  of  "Yictorinus  has  become  a  Christian  ! " 
Oh,  that  some  of  you  big  sinners  might  be  saved  !  How  gladly  would 
we  rejoice  over  you!  Why  not?  Would  it  not  glorify  God?  The 
salvation  of  this  convicted  highwayman  has  made  our  Lord  illustrious 
for  mercy  even  unto  this  day;  would  not  your  case  do  the  same? 
Would  not  saints  cry,  "  Hallelujah  !  hallelujah  !"  if  they  heard  that 
eome  of  you  had  been  turned  from  darkness  to  marvellous  light? 
Why  should  it  not  be  ?     Believe  in  Jesus,  and  it  is  so. 

III.  Now  I  come  to  my  third  and  most  practical  point :  note  the 
Lord's  sermon  to  us  from  all  this. 

The  devil  wants  to  preach  this  morning  a  bit.  Yes,  Satan  asks  to 
come  to  the  front  and  preach  to  you;  but  he  cannot  be  allowed. 
Avaunt,  thou  deceiver !  Yet  I  should  not  wonder  if  he  gets  at  certain 
of  you  when  the  sermon  is  over,  and  whispers,  "  You  see  you  can  be 
saved  at  the  very  last.  Put  off  repentance  and  faith ;  you  may  be 
forgiven  on  your  death-bed."  Sirs,  you  know  who  it  is  that  would 
ruin  you  by  this  suggestion.  Abhor  his  deceitful  teaching.  Do  not 
be  ungrateful  because  God  is  kind.  Do  not  provoke  the  Lord  because 
he  is  patient.  Such  conduct  would  be  unworthy  and  ungrateful. 
Do  not  run  an  awful  risk  because  one  escaped  the  tremendous  peril. 
The  Lord  will  accept  all  who  repent;  but  how  do  you  know  that 
you  will  repent  ?  It  is  true  that  one  thief  was  saved — but  the  other 
thief  was  lost.  One  is  saved,  and  we  may  not  despair ;  the  other  is 
lost,  and  we  may  not  presume.  Dear  friends,  I  trust  you  are  not  made 
of  such  diabolical  stuff  as  to  fetch  from  the  mercy  of  God  an  argument 
for  continuing  in  sin.  If  you  do,  I  can  only  say  of  you,  your  damnation 
will  be  just ;  you  will  have  brought  it  upon  yourselves. 

Consider  now  the  teaching  of  our  Lord ;  see  the  glory  of  Christy  m 
mlvation.  He  is  ready  to  save  at  the  last  moment.  He  was  just  passing 
away  ;  his  foot  was  on  the  doorstep  of  the  Father's  house.  Up  comes 
this  poor  sinner  the  last  thing  at  night,  at  the  eleventh  hour,  and  the 
Saviour  smiles  and  declares  that  he  will  not  enter  except  with  this 
belated  wanderer.  At  the  very  gate  he  declares  that  this  seeking 
«oul  shall  enter  with  him.  There  was  plenty  of  time  for  him  to 
have  come  before:  you  know  how  apt  we  are  to  say,  "You  have 
waited  to  the  last  moment.  I  am  just  going  off,  and  I  cannot  attend  to 
you  now."  Our  Lord  had  his  dying  pangs  upon  him,  and  yet  he 
attends  to  the  perishing  criminal,  and  permits  him  to  pass  through  the 
heavenly  portal  in  his  company.     Jesus  easily  saves  the  sinners  for 


648  METROPOttTAN   TABERXACLE   PULPIT. 

whom  lie  painfully  died.  Jesus  loves  to  rescue  sinners  from  going, 
down  into  the  pit.  You  wiU  be  very  happy  if  you  are  saved,  but  you 
wiU  not  be  one  half  so  happy  as  he  will  be  when  he  saves  you.  See  how. 
gentle  he  is ! 

"  His  hand  no  thunder  bears, 
No  terror  clothes  his  brow ; 
No  bolts  to  drive  our  guilty  souli 
To  fiercer  flames  below." 

He  comes  to  us  full  of  tenderness,  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  mercy  in  his 
hands,  and  love  in  his  heart.  Believe  him  to  be  a  great  Saviour  of 
great  sinners.  I  have  heard  of  one  who  had  received  great  mercy  who 
went  about  saying,  **  He  is  a  great  forgiver ;  "  and  I  would  have  you" 
say  the  same.  You  shall  find  your  traiis^gressions  put  away,  and  your 
sins  pardoned  once  for  all,  if  you  now  trust  him. 

The  next  doctrine  Christ  preaches  from  this  wonderful  story  is  faith 
in  its  permitted  attachment.  This  man  believed  that  Jesus  was  the 
Christ.  The  next  thing  he  did  was  to  appropriate  that  Christ.  He 
said,  *'  Lord,  remember  me."  Jesus  might  have  said,  "  What  have  f 
to  do  with  you,  and  what  have  you  to  do  with  me  ?  What  has  a  thief 
to  do  with  the  perfect  One  ?  "  Many  of  you,  good  people,  try  to  get 
as  far  away  as  you  can  from  the  erring  and  fallen.  They  might  infect 
your  innocence !  Society  claims  that  we  should  not  be  familiar  with 
people  who  have  offended  against  its  laws.  We  must  not  be  seen 
associating  with  them,  for  it  might  discredit  us.  Infamous  bosh !  Can* 
anything  discredit  sinners  such  as  we  are  by  nature  and  by  practice  ? 
If  we  know  ourselves  before  God  we  are  degraded  enough  in  and  of 
ourselves  ?  Is  there  anybody,  after  all,  in  the  world,  who  is  wors6 
than  we  are  when  we  see  ourselves  in  the  faithful  glass  of  the  Word  ? 
As  soon  as  ever  a  man  believes  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  let  him  hook 
himself  on  to  him.  The  moment  you  believe  Jesus  to  be  the  Saviour, 
seize  upon  him  as  your  Saviour.  If  I  remember  rightly,  Augustine 
called  this  man,  '•'-Latro  laudabilis  et  mirabilis,"  a  thief  to  be  praised 
and  wondered  at,  who  dared,  as  it  were,  to  seize  the  Saviour  for  his 
own.  In  this  he  is  to  be  imitated.  Take  the  Lord  to  bo  yours,  and 
you  have  him.  Jesus  is  the  common  property  of  all  sinners  who  make 
bold  to  take  him.  Every  sinner  who  has  the  will  to  do  so  may  take  the 
Lord  home  with  him.  He  came  into  the  world  to  save  the  sinful.  Take 
bim  by  force,  as  robbers  take  their  prey  ;  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
suffer eth  the  violence  of  daring  faith.  Get  him,  and  he  will  never  get 
himself  away  from  you.     If  you  trust  him,  he  must  save  you. 

Next,  notice  the  doctrine  of  faith  in  its  immediate  power, 

*'  The  moment  a  sinner  believes. 
And  trusts  in  his  crucified  God, 
His  pardon  at  once  he  receives, 
Eedemption  in  full  through  his  blood.** 

"To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise."  He  has  no  soone? 
believed  than  Christ  gives  him  the  seal  of  his  believing  in  the  full 
assurance  that  he  shall  be  with  him  for  ever  in  his  glory.  0  dear 
hearts,  if  you  believe  this  morning,  you  shall  be  saved  this  morning  I 


THE   BELIEVIJ^G   THIEF.  649 

God  grant  tliat  you,  by  his  rich  grace,  may  be  brought  into  salvation 
here,  on  the  spot,  and  at  once  ! 

The  next  thing  is,  the  nearness  of  eternal  things.  Think  of  that  a 
minute.  Heaven  and  hell  are  not  places  far  away.  You  may  be  in 
heaven  before  the  clock  ticks  again,  it  is  so  near.  Could  we  but  rend 
that  veil  which  parts  us  from  the  unseen  !  It  is  all  there,  and  all  near. 
"To  day,"  said  the  Lord;  within  three  or  four  hours  at  the  lougesty 
*'  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise  ;  "  so  near  is  it.  A  statesman  has 
given  us  the  expression  of  being  "  within  measurable  distance."  "We 
are  all  within  measurable  distance  of  heaven  or  hell ;  if  there  be  any 
difficulty  in  measuring  the  distance,  it  lies  in  its  brevity  rather  than 
in  its  length.  I 

*'  One  gentle  sigh  the  fetter  breaks, 
"We  scarce  can  say,  '  He's  gone,* 
Before  the  ransomed  spirit  takes 
Its  mansion  near  the  throne." 

Oh,  that  we,  instead  of  trifling  about  such  things,  because  they 
seem  so  far  away,  would  solemnly  realize  them,  since  they  are  so 
very  near !  Tliis  very  day,  before  the  sun  goes  down,  some  hearer, 
now  sitting  in  this  place,  may  see,  in  his  own  spirit,  the  realities  of 
heaven  or  hell.  It  has  frequently  happened,  in  this  large  congregation, 
that  some  one  of  our  audience  has  died  ere  the  next  Sabbath  has 
come  round :  it  may  happen  this  week.  Think  of  that,  and  let  eternal 
things  impress  you  all  the  more  because  they  lie  so  near. 

Furthermore,  know  that  if  you  have  believed  in  Jesus  you  are  prepare^ 
for  heaven.  It  may  be  that  you  will  have  to  live  on  earth  twenty,  or 
thirty,  or  forty  years  to  glorify  Christ;  and,  if  so,  be  thankful  for  the 
privilege ;  but  if  you  do  not  live  another  hour,  your  instantaneous 
death  would  not  alter  the  fact  that  he  that  believeth  in  the  Son  of 
God  is  meet  for  heaven.  Surely,  if  anything  beyond  faith  is  needed 
to  make  us  fit  to  enter  paradise,  the  thief  would  have  been  kept  a  little 
longer  here  ;  but  no,  he  is,  in  the  morning,  in  the  state  of  nature,  at 
noon  he  enters  the  state  of  grace,  and  by  sunset  ho  is  in  the  state  of 
glory.  The  question  never  is  whether  a  death-bed  repentance  is 
accepted  if  it  be  sincere  :  the  question  is — Is  it  sincere  ?  If  it  be  so, 
if  the  man  dies  five  minutes  after  his  first  act  of  faith,  he  is  as  safe  as 
if  he  had  served  the  Lord  for  fifty  years.  If  your  faith  is  true,  if  you 
die  one  moment  after  you  have  luilieved  in  Christ,  you  will  be  admitted 
into  paradise,  even  if  you  shall  have  enjoyed  no  time  in  which  to  pro- 
duce good  works  and  ofher  evidences  of  grace.  He  that  reads  the  heart 
will  read  your  faith  written  on  its  fleshy  tablets,  and  he  will  accept  you 
through  Jesus  Christ,  even  though  no  act  of  grace  has  been  visible  to 
the  eye  of  man. 

I  conclude  by  again  saying  that  this  is  not  an  exceptional  case, 
I  began  with  that,  and  I  want  to  finish  with  it,  because  so  many  demi- 
semi-gospellers  are  so  terribly  afraid  of  preaching  free  grace  too  fully. 
I  read  somewhere,  and  I  think  it  is  true,  that  some  ministers  preach 
the  gospel  in  the  same  way  as  donkeys  eat  thistles,  namely,  very,  very 
cautiously.  On  the  contrary,  I  will  preach  it  boldly.  I  have  not  the 
slightest  alarm  about  the  matter.  If  any  of  you  misuse  free-grace 
teaching,  I  cannot  help  it.     He  that  will  be  damned  can  as  well  ruin 


650 


METEOPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PXTLPIT. 


himself  by  perverting  the  gospel  as  by  anything  else.  I  cannot  help 
what  base  hearts  may  invent ;  but  mine  it  is  to  set  forth  the  gospel  in 
all  its  fulness  of  grace,  and  I  will  do  it.  If  the  thief  was  an  ex- 
ceptional case — and  our  Lord  does  not  usually  act  in  such  a  way — 
there  would  have  been  a  hint  given  of  so  important  a  fact.  A  hedge 
would  have  been  set  about  this  exception  to  aU  rules.  Would  not. 
the  Saviour  have  whispered  quietly  to  the  dying  man,  **  You  are  the 
only  one  I  am  going  to  treat  in  this  way  "  ?  Whenever  I  have  to  do 
an  exceptional  favour  to  a  person,  I  have  to  say,  '*  Do  not  mentiou 
this,  or  I  shall  have  so  many  besieging  me."  If  the  Saviour  had 
meant  this  to  be  a  solitary  case,  he  would  have  faintly  said  to 
him,  *'Do  not  let  anybody  know;  but  you  shall  to  day  be  in  the 
kingdom  with  me."  No,  our  Lord  spoke  openly,  and  those  about  him 
heard  what  he  said.  Moreover,  the  inspired  penman  has  recorded  it. 
If  it  had  been  an  exceptional  case,  it  would  not  have  been  written  in 
the  Word  of  God.  Men  wiU  not  publish  their  actions  in  the  news- 
papers if  they  feel  that  the  record  might  lead  others  to  expect  from 
them  what  they  cannot  give.  The  Saviour  had  this  wonder  of  grace 
reported  in  the  daily  news  of  the  gospel,  because  he  means  to  repeat 
tbe marvel  every  day.  The  bulk  shall  be  equal  to  sample,  and  there- 
fore he  sets  the  sample  before  you  aU.  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  utter- 
cust,  for  he  saved  the  dying  thief.  The  case  would  not  have  been  put 
there  to  encourage  hopes  which  he  cannot  fulfil.  Whatsoever  things 
were  written  aforetime  were  written  for  our  learning,  and  not  for  our 
disappointing.  I  pray  you,  therefore,  if  any  of  you  have  not  yet  trusted 
in  my  Lord  Jesus,  come  and  trust  in  him  now.  Trust  him  wholly  j  trust 
iiim  only ;  trust  him  at  once.     Then  will  you  sing  with  me— 

**  The  dying  thief  rejoiced  to  see 
That  fountain  in  bis  day, 
And  there  have  I,  though  vile  as  he. 
Washed  all  my  sins  away." 


OTJE   LOED'S   LAST   CEY   FEOM  THE   CEOSS. 


Intended  for  Eeading  on  Lord's-day,  June  4th,   1893, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lord's-day  Evening,  June  9th,  1889. 


"And  when  Jesus  had  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  he  said,  Father,  into  thy  hands  I 
commend  my  spirit :  and  having  said  thus,  he  gave  up  the  ghost."— Luke  xxiii.  46. 

These  were  the  dying  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  '^Eather, 
into^  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit."  It  may  be  instructive  if  I 
remind  you  that  the  words  of  Christ  upon  the  cross  were  seven. 
Calling  each  of  his  cries,  or  utterances,  by  the  title  of  a  word,  we 
speak  of  the  seven  last  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Let  me 
rehearse  them  in  your  hearing.  The  first,  when  they  nailed  him  to 
the  cross,  was,  "  Father,  forgive  them  ;  for  they  know  not  what  they 
do."  Luke  has  preserved  that  word.  Later,  when  one  of  the  two 
thieves  said  to  Jesus,  ''Lord,  remember  me  when  thou  comest  into 
thy  kingdom,"  Jesus  said  to  him,  "Verily  I  say  unto  thee.  To  day 
shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise."  This  also  Luke  has  carefully 
preserved.  ^  Farther  on,  our  Lord,  in  his  great  agony,  saw  his  mother, 
with  breaking  heart,  standing  by  the  cross,  and  looking  up  to  him 
with  unutterable  love  and  grief,  and  he  said  to  her,  "  Woman,  behold 
thy  son!"  and  to  the  beloved  disciple,  "Behold  thy  mother!"  and 
thus  he  provided  a  home  for  her  when  he  himself  should  be  gone 
away.     This  utterance  has  only  been  preserved  by  John. 

The  fourth  and  central  word  of  the  seven  was,  "  Eloi,  Eloi,  lama 
eabachthani  ?  "  which  is,  being  interpreted,  "■  My  God,  my  God,  why 
hast  thou  forsaken  me?  "  This  was  the  culmination  of  his  grief,  the 
central  point  of  all  his  agony.  That  most  awful  word  that  ever  fell 
from  the  lips  of  man,  expressing  the  quintessence  of  exceeding  agony, 
is  well  put  fourth,  as  though  it  had  need  of  three  words  before  it,  and 
three  words  after  it,  as  its  body-guard.  It  tells  of  a  good  man,  a  son 
of  God,  the  Son  of  God,  forsaken  of  his  God.  That  central  word 
of  the  seven  is  found  in  Matthew  and  in  Mark,  but  not  in  Luke  or 
John;  but  the  fifth  word  has  been  preserved  by  John;  that  is,  "I 
thirst,"  the  shortest,  but  not  quite  the  sharpest  of  all  the  Master's 
No.  2,311. 


652  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

words,  though  under  a  bodily  aspect,  perhaps  the  sharpest  of  them 
all.  John  has  also  treasured  up  another  very  precious  saying  of 
Jesus  Christ  on  the  cross,  that  is  the  wondrous  word,  *'  It  is  finished." 
This  was  the  last  word  but  one,  "It  is  finished,"  the  gathering  up  of 
all  his  lifework,  for  he  had  left  nothing  undone,  no  thread  was  left  a- 
ravelling,  the  whole  fabric  of  redemption  had  been  woven,  like  his 
garment,  from  the  top  throughout,  and  it  was  finished  to  perfection. 
After  he  had  said,  "  It  is  finished,"  he  uttered  the  last  word  of  all, 
"  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit,"  which  I  have  taken 
for  a  text  to-night;  but  to  which  I  will  not  come  immediately. 

There  has  been  a  great  deal  said  about  these  seven  cries  from  the 
cross  by  divers  writers ;  and  though  I  have  road  what  many  of  them 
have  written,  I  cannot  add  anything  to  what  they  have  said,  since 
they  have  delighted  to  dwell  upon  these  seven  last  cries ;  and  here 
the  most  ancient  writers,  of  what  would  be  called  the  Eomish  school, 
are  not  to  be  excelled,  even  by  Protestants,  in  their  intense  devotion 
to  every  letter  of  our  Saviour's  dyiug  words ;  and  they  sometimes 
strike  out  new  meanings,  richer  and  more  rare  than  any  that  have 
occurred  to  the  far  cooler  minds  of  modern  critics,  who  are  as  a  rule 
greatly  blessed  with  moles'  eyes,  able  to  see  where  there  is  nothing  to 
be  seen,  but  never  able  to  see  when  there  is  anything  worth  seeing. 
Modern  criticism,  like  modem  theology,  if  it  were  put  in  the  Garden ' 
of  Eden,  would  not  see  a  flower.  It  is  like  the  sirocco  that  blasts' 
and  burns,  it  is  without  either  dew  or  unction ;  in  fact,  it  is  the  very' 
opposite  of  these  precious  things,  and  proves  itself  to  be  unblest  of 
God,  and  unblessing  to  men. 

Now  concerning  these  seven  cries  from  the  cross,  many  authors  have  •. 
drawn  from  them  lessons  concerning  seven  duties.  Listen.  When  our 
Lord  said,  "  Father,  forgive  them,"  in  effect,  he  said  to  us,  "  Forgive 
your  enemies."  Even  when  they  despitefully  use  you,  and  put  you  to. 
terrible  pain,  be  ready  to  pardon  them.  Be  like  the  sandalwood  tree, 
which  perfumes  the  axe  that  fells  it.  Be  all  gentleness,  and  kindness, 
and  love  ;  and  be  this  your  prayer,  ''  Father,  forgive  them." 

The  next  duty  is  taken  from  the  second  cry,  namely,  that  of 
penitence  and  faith  in  Christ,  for  he  said  to  the  dying  thief,  "  To  day 
shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise."  Have  you,  like  him,  confessed 
your  sin?  Have  you  his  faith,  and  his  prayerf ulness ?  Then  you- 
shall  be  accepted  even  as  he  was.  Learn,  then,  from  the  second  cry,, 
the  duty  of  penitence  and  faith. 

When  our  Lord,  in  the  third  cr}",  said  to  his  mother,  '*  Woman, 
behold  thy  son  !  "  he  taught  us  the  duty  of  filial  love.  No  Christian 
must  ever  be  short  of  love  to  his  mother,  his  father,  or  to  any  of 
those  who  are  endeared  to  him  by  relationships  which  God  has, 
appointed  for  us  to  observe.  Oh,  by  the  dying  love  of  Christ  to  his 
mother,  let  no  man  here  unman  himself  by  forgetting  his  mother! 
She  bore  you;  bear  her  in  her  old  age,  and  lovingly  cherish  herr 
even  to  the  last. 

Jesus  Christ's  fourth  cry  teaches  us  the  duty  of  clinging  to  God, 
and  trusting  in   God:    *'My  God,  my  God."     See  how,  with  both, 
hands,  he  takes  hold  of  him;   "My  God,; my  God,  why  hast  thou 
forsaken  me  ?  "     He  cannot  bear  to  be  left  of  God ;  all  else  causes 


OUR  lord's  last  cry  from  the  cross.  653 

Kim  but  little  pain  compared  with  the  anguish  of  being  forsaken  of 
his  God.  So  learn  to  cling  to  God,  to  grip  him  with  a  double-handed 
faith  ;  and  if  thou  dost  even  think  that  he  has  forsaken  thee,  cry 
after  him,  and  say,  "  Show  me  wherefore  thou  contendest  with  me,  for 
I  cannot  bear  to  be  without  thee." 

The  fifth  cry,  "  I  thirst,"  teaches  us  to  set  a  high  value  upon  the 
fulfilment  of  God's  Word.  "  After  this,  Jesus  knowing  that  all  things 
were  now  accomplished,  that  the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled,  saith, 
I  thirst."  Take  thou  good  heed,  in  all  thy  grief  and  weakness,  still 
to  preserve  the  Word  of  thy  God,  and  to  obey  the  precept,  learn  the 
doctrine,  and  delight  in  the  promise.  As  thy  Lord,  in  his  great  anguish 
said,  "  I  thirst,"  because  it  was  written  that  so  he  would  speak,  do 
thou  have  regard  unto  the  Word  of  the  Lord  even  in  little  things. 

That  sixth  cry,  "It  is  finislied,"  teaches  us  perfect  obedience.  Go 
through  with  thy  keeping  of  God's  commandment;  leave  out  no 
command,  keep  on  obeying  till  thou  canst  say,  "It  is  finished." 
Work  thy  likework,  obey  thy  Master,  suffer  or  serve  according  to  his 
will,  but  rest  not  till  thou  canst  say  with  thy  Lord,  "  It  is  finished." 
"  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thou  gavest  me  to  do." 

And  that  last  word,  "  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit," 
teaches  us  resignation.  Yield  all  things,  yield  up  even  thy  spirit  to 
God  at  his  bidding.  Stand  still,  and  make  a  full  surrender  to  the 
Lord,  and  let  this  be  thy  watchword  from  the  first  even  to  the  last, 
"  Into  thy  hands,  my  Father,  I  commend  my  spirit." 

I  think  that  this  study  of  Christ's  last  words  should  interest  you ; 
therefore  let  me  linger  a  little  longer  upon  it.  Those  seven  cries 
from  the  cross  also  teach  us  something  about  the  attributes  and  offices 
of  our  Master.  They  are  seven  windows  of  agate,  and  gates  of 
carbuncle,  through  which  you  may  see  him,  and  approach  him. 

First,  would  you  see  him  as  Intercessor  ?  Then  he  cries,  "  Father, 
forgive  them  ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  Would  you  look  at 
him  as  King  ?  Then  hear  his  second  word,  "  Verily  I  say  unto  thee, 
To  day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise."  Would  you  mark  him  as 
a  tender  Guardian  ?  Hear  him  say  to  Mary,  "  Woman,  behold  thy 
son!"  and  to  John,  "Behold  thy  mother!  "  Would  you  peer  into 
the  dark  abyss  of  the  agonies  of  his  soul?  Hear  him  cry,  "My 
God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  Would  you  understand 
the  reality  and  the  intensity  of  his  bodily  sufferings  ?  Then  hear 
him  say,  "I  thirst,"  for  there  is  something  exquisite  in  the  torture 
of  thirst  when  brought  on  by  the  fever  of  bleeding  wounds.  Men  on 
the  battle-field,  who  have  lost  much  blood,  are  devoured  with  thirst, 
and  teU  you  that  it  is  the  worst  pang  of  all.  "  I  thirst,"  says  Jesus. 
See  the  Sufferer  in  the  body,  and  understand  how  he  can  sympathize 
with  you  who  suffer,  since  he  suffered  so  much  on  the  cross.  Would 
you  see  him  as  the  Finisher  of  your  salvation  ?  Then  hear  his  cry, 
'' Consummatum  ^s2l  "— "  It  is  finished."  Oh,  glorious  note!  Here 
you  see  the  blessed  Finisher  of  your  faith.  And  would  you  then  take 
one  more  gaze,  and  understand  how  voluntary  was  his  suffering? 
Then  hear  him  say,  not  as  one  who  is  robbed  of  life,  but  as  one  who 
takes  his  soul,  and  hands  it  over  to  the  keeping  of  another,  "  Father, 
into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit." 


654 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PTHiPIT. 


Is  there  not  mucli  to  be  learnt  from  these  cries  from  the  cross? 
Surely  these  seven  notes  make  a  wondrous  scale  of  music  if  we  do  but 
know  how  to  listen  to  them.  Let  me  run  up  the  scale  again.  Here, 
first,  you  have  Christ's  fellowship  with  men  :  ''  Father,  forgive  them.'* 
He  stands  side  by  side  with  sinners,  and  tries  to  make  an  apology  for 
them:  "They  know  not  what  they  do."  Here  is,  next,  his  kingly 
power.  He  sets  open  heaven's  gate  to  the  dying  thief,  and  bids  him 
enter.  "  To  day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise."  Thirdly,  behold 
his  human  relationship.  How  near  of  kin  he  is  to  us!  **  Woman, 
behold  thy  son  !  "  Eemember  how  he  says,  "  Whosoever  shall  do  the 
will  of  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven,  the  same  is  my  brother,  and 
sister,  and  mother."  He  is  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh. 
He  belongs  to  the  human  family.  He  is  more  of  a  man  than  any 
man.  As  surely  as  he  is  very  God  of  very  God,  he  is  also  very  man 
of  very  man,  taking  into  himself  the  nature,  not  of  the  Jew  only,  but 
of  the  Gentile,  too.  Belonging  to  his  own  nationality,  but  rising 
above  all,  he  is  the  Man  of  men,  the  Son  of  man. 

See,  next,  his  taking  our  sin.  You  say,  "Which  note  is  that?" 
Well,  they  are  all  to  that  eifect ;  but  this  one  chiefly,  "  My  God,  my 
God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  It  was  because  he  bore  our  sins 
in  his  own  body  on  the  tree  that  he  was  forsaken  of  God.  •*  He  hath 
made  him  to  be  sin  for  us  who  knew  no  sin,"  and  hence  the  bitter 
cry,  "  Eloi,  Eloi,  lama  sabachthani  ?  "  Behold  him,  in  that  fifth  cry, 
"I  thirst,"  taking,  not  only  our  sin,  but  also  our  infirmity,  and  all 
the  suffering  of  our  bodily  nature.  Then,  if  you  would  see  his  fulness 
as  well  as  his  weakness,  if  you  would  see  his  all-sufficiency  as  well  as 
his  sorrow,  hear  him  cry,  "  It  is  finished."  What  a  wonderful  fulness 
there  is  in  that  note !  Eedemption  is  all  accomplished  ;  it  is  all  com- 
plete ;  it  is  all  perfect.  There  is  nothing  left,  not  a  drop  of  bitterness 
in  the  cup  of  gall ;  Jesus  has  drained  it  dry.  There  is  not  a  farthing 
to  be  added  to  the  ransom  price  ;  Jesus  has  paid  it  all.  Behold  his 
fulness  in  the  cry,  "  It  is  finished."  And  then,  if  you  would  see  how 
he  has  reconciled  us  to  himself,  behold  him,  the  Man  who  was  made 
a  curse  for  us,  returning  with  a  blessing  to  his  Father,  and  taking  us 
with  him,  as  he  draws  us  all  up  by  that  last  dear  word,  **  Father,  into 
thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit." 

"  N6w  both  the  Surety  and  sinner  are  free." 

Christ  goes  back  to  the  Father,  for  "It  is  finished,"  and  you  and  I 
come  to  the  Father  through  his  perfect  work. 

I  have  only  practised  two  or  three  tunes  that  can  be  played  upon 
this  harp,  but  it  is  a  wonderful  instrument.  If  it  be  not  a  harp  of 
ten  strings,  it  is,  at  any  rate,  an  instrument  of  seven  strings,  and 
neither  time  nor  eternity  shall  ever  be  able  to  fetch  all  the  inusic  out 
of  them.  Those  seven  dying  words  of  the  ever-living  Christ  will 
make  melody  for  us  in  glory  through  all  the  ages  of  eternity. 

I  shall  now  ask  your  attention  for  a  little  time  to  the  text  itself : 
"  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit." 

Do  you  see  our  Lord  ?  He  is  dying  ;  and  as  yet,  his  face  is  toward 
man.  His  last  word  to  man  is  the  cry,  "  It  is  finished."  Hear, 
all  ye  sons  of  men,  he  speaks  to  you,  "It  is  finished."     Could  you 


omi  lord's  last  cry  from  the  cross.  655 

Lave  a  choicer  word  with  which  he  should  say  "  Adieu  "  to  you  in  the 
hour  of  death  ?  He  tells  you  not  to  fear  that  his  work  is  imperfect, 
not  to  tremble  lest  it  should  prove  insufficient.  He  speaks  to  you,  and 
declares  with  his  dying  utterance,  *' It  is  finished."  Now  he  has 
done  with  you,  and  he  turns  his  face  the  other  way.  His  day's  work 
is  done,  his  more  than  Herculean  toil  is  accomplished,  and  the  great 
Champion  is  going  back  to  his  Father's  throne,  and  he  speaks ;  but  not 
to  3^ou.  His  last  word  is  addressed  to  his  Father,  "Father,  into  thy 
hands  I  commend  my  spirit."  These  are  his  first  words  in  going 
home  to  his  Father,  as  "It  is  finished,"  is  his  last  word  as,  for  a 
while,  he  quits  our  company.  Think  of  these  words,  and  may  they  be 
your  first  words,  too,  when  you  return  to  your  Father!  May  you 
speak  thus  to  your  Divine  Father  in  the  hour  of  death !  The  words 
were  much  hackneyed  in  Eomish  times ;  but  they  are  not  spoilt  even 
for  that.  They  used  to  be  said  in  the  Latin  by  dying  men,  "  In  nuiinis 
tuas,  Domitie,  commendo  spiritum  meum.^^  Every  dying  man  used  to  try 
to  say  those  words  in  Latin  ;  and  if  he  did  not,  somebody  tried  to  saj" 
them  for  him.  They  were  made  into  a  kind  of  spell  of  witchcraft ; 
and  so  they  lost  that  sweetness  to  our  ears  in  the  Latin  ;  but  in  the 
English  they  shall  always  stand  as  the  very  essence  of  music  for  a 
dying  saint,  "Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit." 

It  is  very  noteworthy  that  the  last  words  that  our  Lord  used  were 
quoted  from  the  Scriptures.  This  sentence  is  taken,  as  I  daresay  most 
of  you  know,  from  the  thirty-first  Psalm,  and  the  fifth  verse.  Let  me 
read  it  to  you.  What  a  proof  it  is  of  how  full  Christ  was  of  the 
Bible  !  He  was  not  one  of  those  who  think  little  of  the  Word  of  God. 
He  was  saturated  with  it.  He  was  as  full  of  Scripture  as  the  fleece 
of  Gideon  was  full  of  dew.  He  could  not  speak  even  in  his  death 
without  uttering  Scripture.  This  is  how  David  put  it,  "  Into  thine 
hand  I  commit  my  spirit:  thou  hast  redeemed  me,  0  Lord  God  of 
truth."  Now,  beloved,  the  Saviour  altered  this  passage,  or  else  it 
would  not  quite  have  suited  him.  Do  you  see,  first,  he  wa-s  obliged, 
in  order  to  fit  it  to  his  own  case,  to  add  something  to  it  ?  What  did 
he  add  to  it  ?  Why,  that  word,  "  Father."  David  said,  "  Into  thine 
hand  I  commit  my  spirit ;  "  but  Jesus  says,  "  Father,  into  thy  hands 
I  commend  my  spirit."  Blessed  advance !  He  knew  more  than  David 
did,  for  he  was  more  the  Son  of  God  than  David  could  be.  He  was 
the  Son  of  God  in  a  very  high  and  special  sense  by  eternal  filiation  ; 
and  so  he  begins  the  prayer  with,  "  Father."  But  then  he  takes 
something  from  it.  It  was  needful  that  he  should  do  so,  for  David 
said,  "  Into  thine  hand  I  commit  my  spirit :  thou  hast  redeemed  me." 
Our  blessed  Master  was  not  redeemed,  for  he  was  the  Redeemer ;  and 
he  could  have  said,  "  Into  thine  hand  I  commit  my  spirit,  for  I 
have  redeemed  my  people ; "  but  that  he  did  not  choose  to  say. 
He  simply  took  that  part  which  suited  himself,  and  used  it  as  his  own, 
"  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit."  Oh,  my  brethren, 
you  will  not  do  better,  after  all,  than  to  quote  Scripture,  especially  in 
prayer.  There  are  no  prayers  so  good  as  those  that  are  full  of  the 
Word  of  God.  May  aU  our  speech  be  flavoured  with  texts  !  I  wish 
that  it  were  more  so.  They  laughed  at  our  Puritan  forefathers 
because  the  very  names  of  their  children  were  fetched  out  of  passages 


€56 


METEOPOLITAX   TABERNACLE    PtJLtlT. 


of  Scripture ;  but  I,  for  my  part,  had  much  rather  "be  laughed  at  for 
talking  much  of  Scripture  than  for  talking  much  of  trashy  novels — 
novels  with  which  (I  am  ashamed  to  say  it)  many  a  sermon  nowadays 
is  larded,  ay,  larded  with  novels  that  are  not  fit  for  decent  men  to 
read,  and  which  are  coated  over  till  one  hardly  knows  whether  he  is 
hearing  about  a  historical  event,  or  only  a  piece  of  fiction — from 
which  abomination,  good  Lord,  deliver  us  ! 

So,  then,  you  see  how  well  the  Saviour  used  Scripture,  and  how, 
from  his  first  battle  with  the  devil  in  the  wilderness  till  his  last  struggle 
with  death  on  the  cross,  his  weapon  was  ever,  '*  It  is  written." 

Now,  I  am  coming  to  the  text  itself,  and  I  am  going  to  preach  from  it 
for  only  a  very  short  time.  In  doing  so,  firstly,  let  us  learn  the  doctrine 
of  this  last  cry  from  the  cross ;  secondly,  let  us  practise  the  duty ;  and 
thirdly,  let  us  enjoy  the  privilege. 

I.  First,  LET  us  LEARN  THE  DOCTRINE  of  our  Lord's  last  cry  from 
the  cross. 

What  is  the  doctrine  of  this  last  word  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ? 
God  is  his  Father,  and  God  is  our  Father.  He  who  himself  said, 
*'  Father,"  did  not  say  for  himself,  "  Our  Father,"  for  the  Father  is 
Christ's  Father  in  a  higher  sense  than  he  is  ours ;  but  yet  he  is  not 
more  truly  the  Father  of  Christ  than  he  is  our  Father  if  we  have 
believed  in  Jesus.  *'Ye  are  all  the  children  of  God  by  faith  in 
Christ  Jesus."  Jesus  said  to  Mary  Magdalene,  **I  ascend  unto  my 
Father,  and  your  Father;  and  to  my  God,  and  your  God."  Believe 
the  doctrine  of  the  Fatherhood  of  God  to  his  people.  As  I  have 
warned  you  before,  abhor  the  doctrine  of  the  universal  fatherhood  of 
God,  for  it  is  a  lie,  and  a  deep  deception.  It  stabs  at  the  heart,  first, 
of  the  doctrine  of  the  adoption,  which  is  taught  in  Scripture,  for  how 
can  God  adopt  men  if  they  are  all  his  children  already?  In  the 
second  place,  it  stabs  at  the  heart  of  the  doctrine  of  regeneration, 
which  is  certainly  taught  in  the  Word  of  God.  Now  it  is  by  regenera- 
tion and  faith  that  we  become  the  children  of  God,  but  how  can  that 
be  if  we  are  the  children  of  God  already?  "As  many  as  received 
him,  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them 
that  believe  on  his  name  :  which  were  born,  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the 
will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God."  How  can  God 
give  to  men  the  power  to  become  his  sons  if  they  have  it  already  ? 
Believe  not  that  lie  of  the  devil,  but  believe  this  truth  of  God,  that 
Christ  and  all  who  are  by  living  faith  in  Christ  may  rejoice  in  the 
Fatherhood  of  God. 

Next  learn  this  doctrine,  that  in  this  fact  lies  our  chief  comfort.  In 
our  hour  of  trouble,  in  our  time  of  warfare,  let  us  say,  "  Father." 
You  notice  that  the  first  cry  from  the  cross  is  like  the  last ;  the  highest 
note  is  like  the  lowest.  Jesus  begins  with,  ''Father,  forgive  them," 
and  he  finishes  with,  "  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit." 
To  help  you  in  a  stern  duty  like  forgiveness,  cry,  "  Father."  To  help 
you  in  sore  suffering  and  death,  cry,  "  Father."  Your  main  strength- 
lies  in  your  being  truly  a  child  of  God. 

Learn  the  next  doctrine,  that  di/iny  is  going  home  to  our  Father.  I 
said  to  an  old  friend,  not  long  ago,  "Old  Mr.  So-and-so  has  gone 
home."     I  meant  that  he   was  dead      He  said,   "Yes,  where  else 


OTJB   LOHD's   last    CRY   FROM    THE   CROSS.  657 

should  he  go  ?  "  I  thought  that  was  a  wise  question.  Where  else 
should  we  go?  When  we  grow  grey,  and  our  day's  work  is  done, 
where  should  we  go  but  home  ?  So,  when  Christ  has  said,  "It  is 
finished,"  his  next  word,  of  course,  is  ''  Father."  He  has  finished 
his  earthly  course,  and  now  he  will  go  home  to  heaven.  Just  as  a 
child  runs  to  its  mother's  bosom  when  it  is  tired,  and  wants  to  fall 
asleep,  so  Christ  says,  "  Father,"  ere  he  falls  asleep  in  death. 

Learn  another  doctrine,  that  if  God  is  our  Father,  and  we  regard 
ourselves  as  going  home  when  we  die,  because  we  go  to  him,  then  he 
will  receive  us.  There  is  no  hint  that  we  can  commit  our  spirit  to  God, 
and  yet  that  God  will  not  have  us.  Remember  how  Stephen,  beneath 
a  shower  of  stones,  cried,  "  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit."  Let  us, 
however  we  may  die,  make,  this  our  last  emotion  if  not  our  last 
expression,  "Father,  receive  my  spirit."  Shall  not  our  heavenly  Father 
receive  his  children  ?  If  ye,  being  evil,  receive  your  children  at 
nightfall,  when  they  come  home  to  sleep,  shall  not  your  Father,  who 
is  in  heaven,  receive  you  when  your  day's  wore  is  done?  That  is  the 
doctrine  we  are  to  learn  from  this  last  cry  from  the  cross,  the  Fatherhood 
of  God  and  all  that  comes  of  it  to  believers. 

II.     Secondly,  let  tjs  practise  the  duty. 

That  duty  seems  to  me  to  be,  first,  resignation.  Whenever  anything 
distresses  and  alarms  you,  resign  yourself  to  God.  Say,  ''Father, 
into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit."     Sing  with  Faber, — 

"  I  bow- me  to  thy  will,  0  God, 
And  all  thy  ways  adore  ; 
And  every  day  I  live  III  seek 
To  please  thee  more  and  more." 

Learn,  next,  the  duty  of  prayer.  When  thou  art  in  the  very 
anguish  of  pain,  when  thou  art  sarrounded  by  bitter  griefs  of  mind 
as  well  as  of  body,  still  pray.  Drop  not  the  "Our  Father."  Let  not 
your  cries  be  addressed  to  the  air ;  let  not  your  moans  be  to  your 
physician,  or  your  nurse ;  but  cry,  "  Father."  Does  not  a  child  so 
cry  when  it  has  lost  its  way  ?  If  it  be  in  the  dark  at  night,  and  it 
starts  up  in.  a  lone  room,  does  it  not  cry  out,  "  Father  "  ;  and  is  not  a 
father's  heart  touched  by  that  cry?  Is  there  anybody  here  who  has 
never  cried  to  God  ?  Is  there  one  here  who  has  never  said  "  Father  "  ? 
Then,  my  Father,  put  thy  love  into  their  hearts,  and  make  them  to-night 
say,  "  I  will  arise,  and  go  to  my  Father."  You  shall  truly  be  known 
to  be  the  sons  of  God  if  that  cry  is  in  your  heart  and  on  your  lips. 

The  next  duty  is  the  committal  of  ourselves  to  God  hy  faith.  Give 
yourselves  up  to  God,  trust  yourselves  with  God.  Every  morning, 
when  you  get  up,  take  yourself,  and  put  yourself  into  God's  custody ; 
lock  yourself  up,  as  it  were,  in  the  casket  of  divine  protection ;  and 
every  night,  when  you  have  unlocked  the  box,  ere  you  fall  asleep, 
lock  it  again,  and  give  the  key  into  the  hand  of  him  who  is  able  to 
keep  you  when  the  image  of  death  is  on  your  face.  Before  you  sleep, 
commit  yourself  to  God ;  I  mean,  do  that  when  there  is  nothing  to 
frighten  3'ou,  when  everything  is  going  smoothly,  when  the  wind 
blows  softly  from  the  south,  and  the  barque  is  speeding  towards  its 
desired  haveii,  still  make  not  thyself  quiet  with  thine  own  quieting. 

42 


658 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


He  who  carves  for  himself  will  cut  his  fingers,  and  get  an  empty 
plate.  He  who  leaves  God  to  carve  for  him  shall  often  have  fat  things 
full  of  marrow  placed  before  him.  If  thou  canst  trust,  God  will 
reward  thy  trusting  in  a  way  that  thou  knowest  not  as  yet. 

And  then  practise  one  other  duty,  that  of  the  personal  and  continual 
realization  of  God's  presence.  "  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my 
spirit."  "  Thou  art  here ;  I  know  that  thou  art.  I  realize  that  thou 
art  here  in  the  time  of  sorrow,  and  of  danger  ;  and  I  put  myself  into 
thy  hands.  Just  as  I  would  give  myself  to  the  protection  of  a 
policeman,  or  a  soldier,  if  anyone  attacked  me,  so  do  I  commit  myself 
to  thee,  thou  unseen  Guardian  of  the  night,  thou  unwearied  Keeper  of 
the  day.  Thou  shalt  cover  my  head  in  the  day  of  battle.  Beneath 
thy  wings  will  I  trust,  as  a  chick  hides  beneath  the  hen." 

See,  then,  your  duty.  It  is  to  resign  yourself  to  God,  pray  to  God, 
commit  yourself  to  God,  and  rest  in  a  sense  of  the  presence  of  God. 
May  the  Spirit  of  God  help  you  in  the  practice  of  such  priceless  duties 
as  these ! 

III.    Now,  lastly,  let  us  enjoy  the  privilegb. 

First,  let  us  enjoy  the  high  privilege  of  resting  in  God  in  all  times  of 
danger  and  pain.  The  doctor  has  just  told  you  that  you  will  have  to 
undergo  an  operation.  Say,  "  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my 
spirit."  There  is  every  probability  that  that  weakness  of  yours,  or 
that  disease  of  yours,  will  increase  upon  you,  and  that  by-and-by  you 
will  have  to  take  to  your  bed,  and  lie  there  perhaps  for  many  a  day. 
Then  say,  **  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit."  Do  not 
fret ;  for  that  will  not  help  you.  Do  not  fear  the  future ;  for  that 
will  not  aid  you.  Give  yourself  up  (it  is  your  privilege  to  do  so)  to 
the  keeping  of  those  dear  hands  that  were  pierced  for  you,  to  the  love 
of  that  dear  heart  which  was  set  abroach  with  the  spear  to  purchase 
your  redemption.  It  is  wonderful  what  rest  of  spirit  God  can  give  to 
a  man  or  a  woman  in  the  very  worst  condition.  Oh,  how  some  of  the 
martyrs  have  sung  at  the  stake !  How  they  have  rejoiced  when  on 
the  rack !  Bonner's  coal-hole,  across  the  water  there,  at  Falham, 
where  he  shut  up  the  martyrs,  was  a  wretched  place  to  lie  in  on  a 
cold  winter's  night ;  but  they  said,  "  They  did  rouse  them  in  the  straw, 
as  they  lay  in  the  coal-hole ;  with  the  sweetest  singing  out  of  heaven, 
and  when  Bonner  said,  *  Fie  on  them  that  they  should  make  such  a 
noise ! '  they  told  him  that  he,  too,  would  make  such  a  noise  if  he  was 
as  happy  as  they  were."  When  j'ou  have  commended  your  spirit  to 
God,  then  you  have  sweet  rest  in  time  of  danger  and  pain. 

The  next  privilege  is  that  of  a  brave  confidence,  in  the  time  of  death, 
or  in  the  fear  of  death.  I  was  led  to  think  over  this  text  by  using  it  a 
great  many  times  last  Thursday  night.  Perhaps  none  of  3'ou  will 
ever  forget  last  Thursday  night.  I  do  not  think  that  I  ever  shall,  if 
I  live  to  be  as  old  as  Methuselah.  From  this  place  till  I  reached  my 
home,  it  seemed  one  continued  sheet  of  fire  ;  and  the  further  I  went, 
the  more  vivid  became  the  lightning  flashes ;  but  when  I  came  at  last 
to  turn  up  Leigham  Court  Eoad,  then  the  lightning  seemed  to  come 
in  very  bars  from  the  sky ;  and  at  last,  as  I  reached  the  top  of  the 
hill,  and  a  crash  came  of  the  most  startling  kind,  down  poured  a 
torrent  of  hail,  hailstones  that  I  wiU  not  attempt  to  describe,  for  you 


OUR  lord's  last  cry  from  the  cross.  659 

mig-ht  think  that  I  exaggerated,  and  then  I  felt,  and  my  friend 
with  me,  that  we  could  hardly  expect  to  reach  home  alive.  We 
were  there  at  the  very  centre  and  summit  of  the  storm.  All  around 
us,  on  every  side,  and  all  within  us,  as  it  were,  seemed  nothing 
hut  the  electric  fluid;  and  God's  right  arm  seemed  bared  for 
war.  I  felt  then,  "Well,  now  I  am  very  likely  going  home,"  and  I 
commended  my  spirit  to  God;  and  from  that  moment,  though  I 
cannot  say  that  I  took  much  pleasure  in  the  peals  of  thunder,  and  the 
flashes  of  lightning,  yet  I  felt  quite  as  calm  as  I  do  here  at  this 
present  moment ;  perhaps  a  little  more  calm  than  I  do  in  the  presence 
of  so  many  people;  happy  at  the  thought  that,  within  a  single 
moment,  I  might  understand  more  than  all  I  could  ever  learn  on 
earth,  and  see  in  an  instant  more  than  I  could  hope  to  see  if  I  lived 
here  for  a  century.  I  could  only  say  to  my  friend,  "  Let  us  commit 
ourselves  to  God ;  we  know  that  we  are  doing  our  duty  in  going  on  as 
we  are  going,  and  all  is  well  with  us."  So  we  could  only  rejoice 
together  in  the  prospect  of  being  soon  with  God.  We  were  not  taken 
home  in  the  chariot  of  fire ;  we  are  still  spared  a  little  longer  to  go  on 
with  life's  work ;  but  I  realize  the  sweetness  of  being  able  to  have 
done  with  it  all,  to  have  no  wish,  no  will,  no  word,  scarcely  a  prayer, 
but  just  to  take  one's  heart  up,  and  hand  it  over  to  the  great  Keeper, 
saying,  "Father,  take  care  of  me.  So  let  me  live,  so  let  me  die.  I 
have  henceforth  no  desire  about  anything ;  let  it  be  as  thou  pleasest. 
Into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit." 

This  privilege  is  not  only  that  of  having  rest  in  danger,  and 
confidence  in  the  prospect  of  death ;  it  is  also  full  of  consummate  joy. 
Beloved,  if  we  know  how  to  commit  ourselves  into  the  hands  of  God 
what  a  place  it  is  for  us  to  be  in !  What  a  place  to  be  in, — in  the 
hands  of  God !  There  are  the  myriads  of  stars ;  there  is  the  universe 
itself;  God's  hand  upholds  its  everlasting  pillars,  and  they  do  not 
fall.  If  we  get  into  the  hands  of  God,  we  get  where  all  things  rest, 
and  we  get  home  and  happiness.  We  have  got  out  of  the  nothingness 
of  the  creature  into  the  all-sufiiciency  of  the  Creator.  Oh,  get  you 
there ;  hasten  to  get  you  there,  beloved  friends,  and  live  henceforth 
in  the  hands  of  God  ! 

"  It  is  finished."  You  have  not  finished ;  but  Christ  has.  It  is  all 
done.  What  you  have  to  do  will  only  be  to  work  out  what  he  has 
already  finished  for  you,  and  show  it  to  the  sons  of  men  in  your 
lives.  And  because  it  is  all  finished,  therefore  say,  "  Now,  Father,  I 
return  to  thee.  My  life  henceforth  shall  be  to  be  in  thee.  My  joy  shall 
be  to  shrink  to  nothing  in  the  presence  of  the  All-in-all,  to  die  into 
the  eternal  life,  to  sink  my  ego  into  Jehovah,  to  let  my  manhood,  my 
creaturehood  live  only  for  its  Creator,  and  manifest  only  the  Creator's 
glory.  0  beloved,  begin  to-morrow  morning  and  end  to-night  with, 
"Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit."  The  Lord  be  with 
you  all !  Oh,  if  you  have  never  prayed,  God  help  you  to  begin  to 
pray  now,  for  Jesus'  sake  !     Amen. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 296,  700,  875, 


660  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Expositions  bj  (&,  3&,  Spurgeon. 

LUKE  XXIII.  27—49,  akd  MA.TTHEW  XXVIL  60—54. 

Luke  xxiii.  Verse  27.  And  there  followed  him  a  great  company  of  people f 
and  of  women,  which  also  bewailed  and  lamented  him. 

Their  best  Friend,  the  Healer  of  their  sick,  the  Lover  of  their  children, 
was  about  to  be  put  to  death,  so  they  might  well  bewail  and  lament. 

28 — 30.  But  Jeaus  turning  unto  them  said.  Daughters  of  Jerusalem,  weep 
not  for  me,  but  weep  for  yourselves,  and  for  your  children.  For,  behold,  the 
days  are  coming,  in  the  which  they  shall  say.  Blessed  are  the  barren,  and  the 
wombs  that  never  bare,  and  the  paps  which  never  gave  suck.  Then  shall  they 
begin  to  say  to  the  mountains,  Fall  on  us  ;  and  to  the  hills,  Cover  us. 

Our  Saviour  looked  forward  to  the  terrible  siege  of  Jerusalem,  the  most 
tragical  of  all  human  transactions.  I  think  I  do  not  exaggerate  when  I  say, 
that  history  contains  nothing  equal  to  it.  It  stands  alone  in  the  unutterable 
agony  of  men,  women,  and  children  in  that  dreadful  time  of  suffering. 

31.  For  if  they  do  these  things  in  a  green  tree^  what  shall  be  done  in 
the  dry  f 

If  the  Christ  of  God  is  put  to  death  even  while  the  Jewish  capital  seem» 
vigorous  and  flourishing,  what  shall  be  done  when  it  is  all  dry  and  dead, 
and  the  Roman  legions  are  round  about  the  doomed  city  ? 

32.  And  there  were  also  two  other,  malefactors^  led  with  him  to  be  put  to, 
death. 

Every  item  of  scorn  was  added  to  our  Saviour's  death ;  and  yet  the- 
Scriptures  were  thus  literally  fulfilled,  for  "He  was  numbered  with  the 
transgressors." 

33.  34.  And  when  they  were  come  to  the  place,  which  is  called  Calvary,  there 
they  crucified  him,  and  the  malefactors,  one  on  the  right  hand,  and  the  other  on 
the  left.  Then  said  Jesus,  Father,  forgive  them ;  for  they  know  not  what  they 
do.    And  they  parted  his  raiment,  and  cast  lots. 

Do  you  hear  the  hammer  fall  P  *•  Then  said  Jesus,  Father,  forgive  them ; 
for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  Do  you  see  the  bleeding  hands  and  feet 
of  Jesus  ?  This  is  all  that  is  extracted  by  that  fearful  pressure,  nothing  but 
words  of  pardoning  love,  a  prayer  for  those  who  are  killiug  him:  **  Father, 
forgive  them  ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do." 

35.  And  the  people  stood  beholding.  And  the  rulers  also  with  them  derided 
him,  saying,  He  saved  others  ;  let  him  save  himself,  if  he  be  Christ,  the  chosen 
of  God. 

You  know  how  mockery  puts  salt  and  vinegar  into  a  wound.  A  man  does 
not  at  any  time  like  to  be  reviled ;  but  when  he  is  full  of  physical  and 
mental  anguish,  and  his  heart  is  heavy  within  him,  then  ridicule  is  peculiarly 
full  of  acid  to  him. 

36,  37.  And  the  soldiers  also  mocked  him,  coming  to  him,  and  offering  him 
vinegar,  and  saying,  If  thou  be  the  king  of  the  Jews,  save  thyself. 

These  rough  legionaries  knew  how  to  put  their  jests  in  the  most  cruel 
shape,  and  to  press  home  their  scoffs  upon  their  suffering  victim. 

38.  And  a  superscription  also  was  written  over  him  in  letters  of  Greek,  and 
Latin,  and  Hebrew, 

These  were  the  three  languages  that  could  be  understood  by  all  the  people 
round  about. 

38.     THIS  IS  THE  KING  OF  THE  JEWS. 

And  so  he  is,  and  so  he  shall  be.  He  has  never  quitted  the  throne.  The 
Son  of  David  is  still  King  of  the  Jews,  though  they  continue  to  reject  him; 


EXPOSITION.  661 

but  the  day  shall  come  when  they  shall  recognize  and  receive  the  Messiah. 
"  Then  shall  they  look  upon  him  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  they  shall 
mourn  for  him,  as  one  mourneth  for  his  only  son,  and  shall  be  in  bitterness 
for  him,  as  one  that  is  in  bitterness  for  his  firstborn." 

39.  And  one  of  the  malefactors  which  were  hanged  railed  on  him,  saying, 
If  thou  he  Christ,  save  thyself  and  us. 

Matthew  and  Mark  speak  of  both  the  thieves  as  railing  at  Jesus.  We 
must  take  their  expressions  as  being  literally  correct ;  and  if  so,  both  the 
malefactors  at  first  cast  reproaches  in  Christ's  teeth. 

40.  41.  But  the  other  ansivering  rebuked  him^saying.  Dost  not  thou  fear  God, 
seeing  thou  art  in  the  same  condemnation?  And  ive  indeed  justly ;  for  we 
■receive  the  due  reivard  of  our  deeds  :  but  this  man  hath  done  nothing  amiss. 

Not  only  has  he  done  nothing  worthy  of  death,  but  he  has  done  nothing 
improper,  nothing  out  of  place  ;  "  This  man  hath  done  nothing  amiss."  The 
thief  bears  testimony  to  the  perfect  character  of  this  wondrous  Man, 
whom  he  nevertheless  recognized  to  be  divine,  as  we  shall  see  in  the 
next  verse. 

42 — 47.  And  he  said  unto  Jesus,  Lord,  remember  me  when  thou  comest  into 
thy  kingdom.  And  Jesus  said  unto  him.  Verily  I  say  unto  thee,  To  day  shalt 
thou  be  ivith  me  in  paradise.  And  it  ivas  about  the  sixth  hour,  and  there  tvas  a 
darkness  overall  the  earth  until  the  ninth  hour.  And  the  S7m  was  darkened, 
and  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  the  midst.  And  luhen  Jesus  had  cried  with 
<i  loud  voice,  he  said,  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit:  and  having 
said  thus,  he  gave  up  the  ghost.  Now  ivhen  the  centurion  saw  ivhat  was  done,  he 
glorified  Ood,  saying,  Certainly  this  ivas  a  righteous  man. 

He  was  set  there  at  the  head  of  the  guard,  to  watch  the  execution ;  and 
he  could  not  help  saying,  as  he  observed  the  wonderful  signs  in  heaven 
and  earth,  "  Certainly  this  was  a  righteous  man." 

48.  And  all  the  people  that  came  together  to  that  sight,  beholding  the  things 
which  were  done,  smote  their  breasts,  and  returned. 

What  a  change  must  have  come  over  that  ribald  crowd  !  They  had 
shouted,  *'  Crucify  him  ; ''  they  had  stood  there,  and  mocked  him  ;  and  now 
they  are  overcome  with  the  sight,  and  ihey  smite  their  breasts.  Ah,  dear 
friends,  their  grief  did  not  come  to  much  I  Men  may  smite  their  breasts  ; 
but  unless  God  smites  their  hearts,  all  the  outward  signs  of  a  gracious  work 
will  come  to  nothing  at  all. 

49.  And  all  his  acquaintance,  and  the  women  that  followed  him  from  Galilee, 
stood  afar  off,  beholding  these  things. 

Let  "  these  things  "  be  before  your  mind's  eye  this  evening,  and  think 
much  of  your  crucified  Lord,  all  you  who  are  of  his  acquaintance,  and  who 
are  numbered  amongst  his  followers. 

(As  the  Exposition  is  shorter  than  usual,  an  appropriate  extract  is  added 
from  Mr.  Spurgeon's  Commentary  on  the  Gospel  According  to  Matthew.) 

Matthew  xxvii.  Verse  50.  Jesus,  when  he  had  cried  again  with  a  loud 
voice,  yielded  up  the  ghost. 

Christ's  strength  was  not  exhausted ;  his  last  word  was  uttered  with  a 
loud  voice,  like  the  shout  of  a  conquering  warrior.  And  what  a  word  it  was, 
*' It  is  finished"!  Thousands  of  sermons  have  been  preached  upon  that 
little  sentence  ;  but  who  can  tell  all  the  meaning  that  lies  compacted  within 
it  ?  It  is  a  kind  of  infinite  expression  for  breadth,  and  depth,  and  length, 
and  height  altogether  immeasurable.  Christ's  life  being  finished,  perfected, 
completed,  he  yielded  up  the  ghost,  willingly  dying,  laying  down  his  life  aa 
he  said  he  would :  **  I  lay  down  my  life  for  the  sheep.  I  lay  it  down  of 
myself.     I  have  power  to  lay  it  down,  and  I  have  power  to  take  it  again." 


gg2  METKOPOLITAN  TABEBNAOLB  PULPIT. 

51—53.  And,  behold,  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to 
the  boUom;  and  the  earth  did  quake,  and  the  rocks  rent;  and  the  graves  were 
opened  •  and  many  bodies  of  the  saints  which  slept  arose,  and  came  out  of  the 
graves  after  his  resurrection,  and  went  into  the  holy  city,  and  appeared  unto  many. 
Christ's  death  was  the  end  of  Judaism :  The  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain 
from  the  top  to  the  bottom.  As  if  shocked  at  the  sacrilegious  murder  of  her 
Lord  the  temple  rent  her  garments,  like  one  stricken  with  horror  at  some 
stupendous  crime.  The  body  of  Christ  being  rent,  the  veil  of  the  temple 
was  torn  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom.  Now  was  there  an  entrance 
made  into  the  holiest  of  all,  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  ;  and  a  way  of  access  to 
God  was  opened  for  every  sinner  who  trusted  in  Christ's  atoning  sacnfice. 

See  what  marvels  accompanied  and  followed  the  death  of  Christ :  The 
earth  did  quake,  and  the  rocks  rent;  and  the  graves  were  opened.  Thus  did  the 
material  world  pay  homage  to  him  whom  man  had  rejected  ;  while  nature  » 
convulsions  foretold  what  will  happen  when  Christ's  voice  once  more  shakes- 
not  the  earth  only,  but  also  heaven.  ,  nx.  -  i. 

These  first  miracles  wrought  in  connection  with  the  death  of  Ohnst  were 
typical  of  spiritual  wonders  that  will  be  continued  till  he  comes  again,— 
rocky  hearts  are  rent,  graves  of  sin  are  opened,  those  who  have  been  dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins,  and  buried  in  sepulchres  of  lust  and  evil,  are 
quickened,  and  come  out  from  among  the  dead,  and  go  unto  the  holy  city, 
the  New  Jerusalem. 

64.  Now  when  the  centurion,  and  they  that  were  with  him,  watching  Jesus, 
saw  the  earthquake,  and  those  things  that  were  done,  they  feared  greatly,  saying. 
Truly  this  was  the  Son  of  God. 

These  Roman  soldiers  had  never  witnessed  such  scenes  in  connection  with 
an  execution  before,  and  they  could  only  come  to  one  conclusion  about  the 
illustrious  prisoner  whom  they  had  put  to  death:  **  Truly  this  was  the  Son 
of  Ood  "  It  was  strange  that  those  men  should  confess  what  the  chief  pnesta 
and  scribes  and  elders  defiied ;  yet  since  their  day  it  has  often  happened  thafe 
the  most  abandoned  and  profane  have  acknowledged  Jesus  as  the  Son  oi 
God  while  their  religious  rulers  have  denied  his  divinity. 


THE  LAST  WORDS  OF  CHRIST  ON  THE  CROSS. 


cnnotf 

>«         Intended  for  Reading  on  Lord's-day,  October  15th,  1899, 
'  delivered  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   metropolitan   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lord^s-day  Evening,  June  25th,  1882. 


*'And  when  Jesus  had  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  he  said,  Father,  into  thy  hands  I 
commend  my  spirit :  and  having  said  thus,  he  gave  up  the  ghost." — Luke  xxiii.  46. 

"  Into  thine  hand  I  commit  my  spirit :  thou  hast  redeemed  me,  O  Loed  God  of  truth." 
—Psalm  xxxi.  6. 

*'  And  they  stoned  Stephen,  calling  upon  God,  and  saying.  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my 
spirit."— Acts  vii.  59. 

This  morning,*  dear  friends,  I  spoke  upon  the  first  recorded  worde 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  when  he  said  to  his  mother  and  to  Joseph,  "  How 
is  it  that  ye  sought  me  ?  wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  my  Father's 
business?"  Now,  by  the  help  of  the  blessed  Spirit,  we  will  consider 
the  last  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  before  he  gave  up  the  ghost,  and 
with  them  we  will  examine  two  other  passages  in  which  similar  ex- 
pressions are  used. 

The  words,  "  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit,"  if  we 
judge  them  to  be  the  last  which  our  Saviour  uttered  before  his  death, 
ought  to  be  coupled  with  those  other  words,  "  It  is  finished,"  which 
some  have  thought  were  actually  the  last  he  used.  I  think  it  was 
not  so;  but,  anyhow,  these  utterances  must  have  followed  each  other 
very  quickly,  and  we  may  blend  them  together,  and  then  we  shall 
see  how  very  similar  they  are  to  his  first  words  as  we  explained  them 
this  morning.  There  is  the  cry,  "  It  is  finished,"  which  you  may  read 
in  connection  with  our  Authorized  Version :  "  Wist  ye  not  that  I 
must  be  about  my  Father's  business?"  That  business  was  all 
finished ;  he  had  been  about  it  all  his  life,  and  now  that  he  had  come 
to  the  end  of  his  days,  there  was  nothing  left  undone,  and  he  could 
say  to  his  Father,  "  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thou  gavest  me 
to  do."  Then  if  you  take  the  other  utterance  of  our  Lord  on  the 
cross,  "Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit,"  see  how  well 
it  agrees  with  the  other  reading  of  our  morning  text,  "  Wist  ye  not 
that  I  must  be  in  my  Father's  house  ? "     Jeeus  is  putting  himself 

*  See  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Fulpit,  No.  1,666,  "  The  First  Recorded  Words  of 
Jeeus." 

No.  2,644. 


6G4  METBOPOLITAN   TABEBNACLB   PULPIT. 

into  hhe  Father's  hands  because  he  had  always  desired  to  be  thjre, . 

in  the  Father's  house  with  the  Father ;  and  now  he  is  committing  his 
spirit,  as  a  sacred  trust,  into  the  Father's  hands  that  he  may  depart 
to  be  with  the  Father,  to  abide  in  his  house,  and  go  no  more  out  for 
ever. 

Christ's  life  is  all  of  a  piece,  just  as  the  alpha  and  the  omega  are 
letters  of  the  same  alphabet.  You  do  not  find  him  one  thing  at  the 
first,  another  thing  afterwards,  and  a  third  thing  still  later;  but  he 
is  "  Jesus  Christ ;  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever." 
There  is  a  wondrous  similarity  about  everything  that  Christ  said  and 
did.  You  never  need  write  the  name  "  Jesus  "  under  any  one  of  his 
sayings,  as  you  have  to  put  the  names  of  human  writers  under  their 
sayings,  for  there  is  no  mistaking  any  sentence  that  he  has  uttered. 

If  there  is  anything  recorded  as  having  been  done  by  Christ,  a 
believing  child  can  judge  whether  it  is  authentic  or  not.  Those 
miserable  false  gospels  that  were  brought  out  did  very  little  if  any 
mischief,  because  nobody,  with  any  true  spiritual  discernment,  was 
ever  duped  into  believing  them  to  be  genuine.  It  is  possible  to 
manufacture  a  spurious  coin  which  will,  for  a  time,  pass  for  a  good 
one ;  but  it  is  not  possible  to  make  even  a  passable  imitation  of  what 
Jesus  Christ  has  said  and  done.  Everything  about  Christ  is  like 
himself ;  there  is  a  Christlikeness  about  it  which  cannot  be  mistaken. 
This  morning,  for  instance,  when  I  preached  about  the  Holy  Child 
Jesus,  I  am  sure  you  must  have  felt  that  there  was  never  such  an- 
other child  as  he  was;  and  in  his  death  he  was  as  unique  as  in  his 
birth,  and  childhood,  and  life.  There  was  never  another  who  died 
as  he  did,  and  there  was  never  another  who  lived  altogether  as 
he  did.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  stands  by  himself ;  some  of  us  tiy  to 
imitate  him,  but  how  feebly  do  we  follow  in  his  steps !  The  Christ 
of  God  still  standeth  by  himself,  and  tliere  is  no  possible  rival  to  him. 

I  have  already  intimated  to  you  that  I  am  going  to  have  three 
texts  for  my  sermon ;  but  when  I  have  spoken  upon  all  three  of 
them,  you  will  see  that  they  are  so  much  alike  that  I  might  have  been 
content  with  one  of  them. 

I.  I  invite  you  first  to  consider  our  Saviour's  words  just  before 
HIS  DEATH :  "  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit." 

Here  observe,  first,  how  Christ  lives  and  passes  away  in  the 
atmosphere  of  the  Word  of  God.  Christ  was  a  grand  original 
thinker,  and  he  might  always  have  given  us  words  of  his  own.  He 
never  lacked  suitable  language,  for  "  never  man  spake  like  this  Man." 
Yet  you  must  have  noticed  how  continually  he  quoted  Scripture; 
the  great  majority  of  his  expressions  may  be  traced  to  the  Old 
Testament.  Even  where  they  are  not  exact  quotations,  his  words  drop 
into  Scriptural  shape  and  form.  You  can  see  that  the  Bible  has 
been  his  one  Book.  He  is  evidently  familiar  with  it  from  the  first 
page  to  the  last,  and  not  with  its  letter  only,  but  with  the  innermost 
soul  of  its  most  secret  sense;  and,  therefore,  when  dying,  it  seemed 
but  natural  for  him  to  use  a  passage  from  a  Psalm  of  David  as  his 
expiring  words.  In  his  death,  he  was  not  driven  beyond  the  power 
of  quiet  thought,  he  was  not  unconscious,  he  did  not  die  of  weakness, 
he  was  strong  even  while  he  was  dying.     It  is  true  that  he  sairl   "  I 


i 


THE    LAST   WORDS   OF    CHRIST   ON   THE    CROSS.  665 

thirst;"  but,  aft^r  he  had  been  a  little  refreshed,  he  cried  with  a  loud 
voice,  as  only  a  strong  man  could,  "  It  is  finished."  And  now,  ere 
he  bows  his  head  in  the  silence  of  death,  he  utters  his  final  words, 
"  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit."  Our  Lord  might, 
I  say  a^ain,  have  made  an  original  speech  as  his  dying  declaration ;  his 
mind  was  clear,  and  calm,  and  undisturbed ;  in  fact,  he  was  perfectly 
happy,  for  he  had  said,  "  It  is  finished."  So  his  sufferings  were  over, 
and  he  was  already  beginning  to  enjoy  a  taste  of  the  sweets  of 
victory;  yet,  with  all  that  clearness  of  mind,  and  freshness  of  intel- 
lect, and  fluency  of  words  that  might  have  been  possible  to  him,  he 
did  not  invent  a  new  sentence,  but  he  went  to  the  Book  of  Psalms, 
and  took  from  the  Holy  Spirit  this  expression,  "  Into  thy  hands  I 
commit  my  spirit." 

How  instructive  to  us  is  this  great  truth  that  the  Incarnate  Word 
lived  on  the  Inspired  Word !  It  was  food  to  him,  as  it  is  to  us ; 
and,  brothers  and  sisters,  if  Christ  thus  lived  upon  the  Word  of  God, 
should  not  you  and  I  do  the  same?  He,  in  some  respects,  did  not 
need  this  Book  as  much  as  we  do.  The  Spirit  of  God  rested  upon 
him  without  measure,  yet  he  loved  the  Scripture,  and  he  went  to  it, 
and  studied  it,  and  used  its  expressions  continually.  Oh,  that  you 
and  I  might  get  into  the  very  heart  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  get  that 
Word  into  ourselves !  As  I  have  seen  the  silkworm  eat  into  the  leaf, 
and  consume  it,  so  ought  we  to  do  with  the  Word  of  the  Lord;  — 
not  crawl  over  its  surface,  but  eat  right  into  it  till  we  have  taken 
it  into  our  inmost  parts.  It  is  idle  merely  to  let  the  eye  glance  over 
the  words,  or  to  recollect  the  poetical  expressions,  or  the  historic 
facts ;  but  it  is  blessed  to  eat  into  the  very  soul  of  the  Bible 
until,  at.  last,  you  come  to  talk  in  Scriptural  language,  and 
your  very  style  is  fashioned  upon  Scripture  models,  and,  what  is 
better  still,  your  spirit  is  flavoured  with  the  words  of  the  Lord.  I 
would  quote  John  Bunyan  as  an  instance  of  what  I  mean.  Read 
anything  of  his,  and  you  will  see  that  it  is  almost  like  reading  the 
Bible  itself.  He  had  studied  our  Authorized  Version,  which  will 
never  be  bettered,  as  I  judge,  till  Christ  shall  come ;  he  had  read  it 
till  his  very  soul  was  saturated  with  Scripture;  and,  though  his 
writings  are  charmingly  full  of  poetry,  yet  he  cannot  give  us  his 
Pilffrim's  Progress — that  sweetest  of  all  prose  poems — without  con- 
tinually making  us  feel  and  say,  "  Why,  this  man  is  a  living  Bible !  " 
Prick  him  anywhere;  his  blood  is  Bibline,  the  very  essence  of  the 
Bible  flows  from  him.  He  cannot  speak  without  quoting  a  text,  for 
his  very  soul  is  full  of  the  Word  of  God.  I  commend  his  example  to 
you,  beloved,  and,  still  more,  the  example  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  If  the 
Spirit  of  God  be  in  you,  he  will  make  you  love  the  Word  of  God ;  and,  if 
any  of  you  imagine  that  the  Spirit  of  God  will  lead  you  to  dispense 
with  the  Bible,  you  are  under  the  influence  of  another  spirit  which  ia 
not  the  Spirit  of  God  at  all.  I  trust  that  the  Holy  Spirit  will  endear 
to  you  every  page  of  this  Divine  Record,  so  that  you  will  feed  upon 
it  yourselves,  and  afterwards  speak  it  out  to  others.  I  think  it  is 
well  worthy  of  your  constant  remembrance  that,  even  in  death,  our 
blessed  Master  showed  the  ruling  passion  of  his  spirit,  so  that  his  last 
words  were  a  quotation  from  Scripture. 


666  METBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Now  notice,  secondly,  that  our  Lord,  in  the  moment  of  his  deaths 
recognized  a  personal  God :  "  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my 
spirit."  God  is  to  some  men  an  unknown  God.  "  There  may  be  a 
God,"  so  they  say,  but  they  get  no  nearer  the  truth  than  that.  "  All 
things  are  God,"  says  another.  "  We  cannot  be  sure  that  there  is  a 
God,"  say  others,  "  and  therefore  it  is  no  use  our  pretending  to  be- 
lieve in  him,  and  so  to  be,  possibly,  influenced  by  a  supposition." 
Some  people  say,  "  Oh,  certainly,  there  is  a  God,  but  he  is  very  far 
off!  He  does  not  come  near  to  us,  and  we  cannot  imagine  that  he 
will  interfere  in  our  affairs."  Ah!  but  our  blessed  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  believed  in  no  such  impersonal,  pantheistic,  dreamy,  far-off 
God;  but  in  One  to  whom  he  said,  "Father,  into  thy  hands  I 
commend  my  spirit."  His  language  shows  that  he  realized  the 
personality  of  God  as  much  as  I  should  recognize  the  personality  of  a 
banker  if  I  said  to  him,  "  Sir,  I  commit  that  money  into  your  hands." 
I  know  that  I  should  not  say  such  a  thing  as  that  to  a  mere  dummy, 
or  to  an  abstract  something  or  nothing ;  but  to  a  living  man  I  should 
say  it,  and  I  should  say  it  only  to  a  living  man.  So,  beloved,  men 
do  not  commit  their  souls  into  the  keeping  of  impalpable  nothings; 
they  do  not,  in  death,  smile  as  they  resign  themselves  to  the  infinite 
unknown,  the  cloudy  Father  of  everything,  who  may  himself  be 
nothing  or  everything.  No,  no;  we  only  trust  what  we  know;  and 
BO  Jesus  knew  the  Father,  and  knew  him  to  be  a  real  Person  having 
hands,  into  those  hands  he  commended  his  departing  spirit.  I  am 
not  now  speaking  materially,  mark  you,  as  though  God  had  hands 
like  ours ;  but  he  is  an  actual  Being,  who  has  powers  of  action,  who  is 
able  to  deal  with  men  as  he  pleases,  and  who  is  willing  to  take 
possession  of  their  spirits,  and  to  protect  them  for  ever  and  ever. 
Jesus  speaks  like  one  who  believed  that ;  and  I  pray  that,  both  in  life 
and  in  death,  you  and  I  may  ever  deal  with  God  in  the  same  way. 
We  have  far  too  much  fiction  in  religion,  and  a  religion  of  fiction 
will  bring  only  fictitious  comfort  in  the  dying  hour.  Come  to  solid 
facts,  man.  Is  God  as  real  to  thee  as  thou  art  to  thyself?  Come 
now ;  dost  thou  speak  with  him  "  as  a  man  speaketh  unto  his 
friend "  ?  Canst  thou  trust  him,  and  rely  upon  him  as  thou  dost 
trust  and  rely  upon  the  partner  of  thy  bosom  ?  If  thy  God  be  unreal, 
thy  religion  is  unreal.  If  thy  God  be  a  dream,  thy  hope  will  be  a 
dream ;  and  woe  be  unto  thee  when  thou  shalt  wake  up  out  of  it ! 
It  was  not  so  that  Jesus  trusted.  "Father,"  said  he,  "into  thy 
hands  I  commend  my  spirit." 

But,  thirdly,  here  is  a  better  point  still.  Observe  how  Jesus  Christ 
here  brings  out  the  Fatherhood  of  God.  The  Psalm  from  which  he 
quoted  did  not  say,  "  Father."  David  did  not  get  as  far  as  that  in 
words,  though  in  spirit  he  often  did;  but  Jesus  had  the  right  to 
alter  the  Psalmist's  words.  He  can  improve  on  Scripture,  though 
you  and  I  cannot.  He  did  not  say,  "  O  God,  into  thine  hand  I  com- 
mit my  spirit ; "  but  he  said,  "  Father."  Oh,  that  sweet  word !  That 
was  the  gem  of  our  thought,  this  morning,  that  Jesus  said,  "  Wist  ye 
not  that  I  must  be  at  my  Father's, — that  I  must  be  in  my  Father's 
house  ?  "  Oh,  yes !  the  Holy  Child  knew  that  he  was  specially,  and  in 
a  peculiar  sense,  the  Son  of  the  Highest ;  and  therefore  he  said,  "  My 


THE   LAST   "WORDS    OF   CHRIST   ON  THE   CROSS.  667 

Father;"  and,  in  dying,  his  expiring  heart  was  buoyed  up  and  com- 
forted with  the  thought  that  God  was  his  Father.  It  was  because 
he  said  that  God  was  his  Father  that  they  put  him  to  death,  yet  he 
still  stood  to  it  even  in  his  dying  hour,  and  said,  "  Father,  into  thy 
hands  I  commend  my  spirit." 

What  a  blessed  thing  it  is  for  us  also,  my  brethren,  to  die  conscious 
that  we  are  sons  of  God !  Oh,  how  sweet,  in  life  and  in  death,  to  feel 
in  our  soul  the  spirit  of  adoption  whereby  we  cry,  "  Abba,  Father  "  t 
In  such  a  case  as  that, — 

"  It  is  not  death  to  die." 

Quoting  the  Saviour's  words,  "It  is  finished,"  and  relying  upon  his 
Father  and  our  Father,  we  may  go  even  into  the  jaws  of  death  with- 
out the  "  quivering  lips  "  of  which  we  sang  just  now.  Joyful,  with 
all  the  strength  we  have,  our  lips  may  confidently  sing,  challenging 
death  and  the  grave  to  silence  our  ever-rising  and  swelling  music. 
O  my  Father,  my  Father,  if  I  am  in  thy  hands,  I  may  die  without 
fear! 

There  is  another  thought,  however,  which  is  perhaps  the  chief  one 
of  all.  From  this  passage,  we  learn  that  our  Divine  Lord  cheerfulli/ 
rendered  up  his  soul  to  his  Father  when  the  time  Jiad  come  for 
him  to  die :  "  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit."  None 
of  us  can,  with  strict  propriety,  use  these  words.  When  we  come  to 
die,  we  may  perhaps  utter  them,  and  God  will  accept  them ;  these 
were  the  very  death-words  of  Polycarp,  and  Bernard,  and  Luther,  and 
Melancthon,  and  Jerome  of  Prague,  and  John  Huss,  and  an  almost 
endless  list  of  saints  :  "  Into  thy  hands  I  commit  my  spirit."  The 
Old  Testament  rendering  of  the  passage,  or  else  our  Lord's  version  of 
it,  has  been  turned  into  a  Latin  prayer,  and  commonly  used  among 
Romanists  almost  as  a  charm;  they  have  repeated  the  Latin  words 
when  dying,  or,  if  they  were  unable  to  do  so,  the  priest  repeated  the 
words  for  them,  attaching  a  sort  of  magical  power  to  that  particular 
formula.  But,  in  the  sense  in  which  our  Saviour  uttered  these  words, 
we  cannot  any  of  us  fully  use  them.  We  can  commit  or  commend 
our  spirit  to  God;  but  yet,  brethren,  remember  that,  unless  the 
Lord  comes  first,  we  must  die;  and  dying  is  not  an  act  on  our  part. 
We  have  to  be  passive  in  the  process,  because  it  is  no  longer  in  our 
power  to  retain  our  life.  I  suppose  that,  if  a  man  could  have  such 
control  of  his  life,  it  might  be  questionable  when  he  should  surrender 
it,  because  suicide  is  a  crime,  and  no  man  can  be  required  to  kill 
himself.  God  does  not  demand  such  action  as  that  at  any  man's 
hand ;  and,  in  a  certain  sense,  that  is  what  would  happen  whenever 
a  man  yielded  himself  to  death.  But  there  was  no  necessity  for  our 
blessed  Lord  and  Master  to  die  except  the  necessity  which  he  had 
taken  upon  himself  in  becoming  the  Substitute  for  his  people.  There 
was  not  any  necessity  for  his  death  even  at  the  last  moment  upon  the 
cross,  for,  as  I  have  reminded  you,  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice  when 
natural  weakness  would  have  compelled  him  to  whisper  or  to  sigh. 
But  his  life  was  strong  within  him;  if  he  had  willed  to  do  sOy 
he  could  have  unloosed  the  nails,  and  come  down  into  the  midst  of  the 
crowd  that  stood  mocking  him.     He  died  of  his  own  free  will,  "  the 


668  METKOPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to  God.".    A  man  may 
righteously  surrender  his  life  for  the  good  of  his  country,  and  for  the 
safety  of  others.     There  have  frequently  been  opportunities  for  men 
to  do  this,  and  there  have  been  brave  fellows  who  have  worthily  done 
it;  but,  then,  all  those  men  would  have  had  to  die  at  some  time  or 
other.  They  were  only  slightly  anticipating  the  payment  of  the  debt  of 
nature;  but,  in  our  Lord's  case,  he  was  rendering  up  to  the  Father 
the  spirit  which  he  might  have  kept  if  he  had  chosen  to  do  so.     "  No 
man  taketh  it  from  me,"  said  he  concerning  his  life ;  "  I  lay  it  down 
of  myself ;"  and  there  is  here  a  cheerful  willingness  to  yield  up  his 
spirit  into  his  Father's  hands.     It  is  rather  remarkable  that  none  of 
the  Evangelists  describe  our  Lord  as  dying.     He  did  die,  but  they 
all  speak  of  him  as  giving  up  the  ghost,— surrendering  to  God  his 
spirit.     You  and  I  passively  die ;  but  he  actively  yielded  up  his  spirit 
to  his  Father.     In  his  case,  death  was  an  act ;  and  he  performed  that 
act  from  the  glorious  motive  of  redeeming  us  from  death  and  hell ; 
so,  in  this  sense,  Christ  stands  alone  in  his  death.     But,  oh,  dear 
brothers  and  sisters,  if  we  cannot  render  up  our  spirit  as  he  did,  yet, 
when  our  life  is  taken  from  us,  let  us  be  perfectly  ready  to  give  it  up. 
May  God  bring  us  into  such  a  state  of  mind  and  heart  that  there 
shall  be  no  struggling  to  keep  our  life,  but  a  sweet  willingness  to  let 
it  be  just  as  God  would  have  it, — a  yielding  up  of  everything  to  his 
hands,  feeling  sure  that,  in  the  world  of  spirits,  our  soul  shall  be 
quite  safe  in  the  Father's  hand,  and  that,  until  the  resurrection  day, 
the  life-germ  of  the  body  will  be  securely  in  his  keeping,  and  certain 
that,   when  the  trumpet  shall  sound,   spirit,   soul,   and  body, — that 
trinity  of  our  manhood, — shall  be  re-united  in  the  absolute  perfection 
of  our  being  to  behold  the  King  in  his  beauty  in  the  land  that  is 
very  far  oflF.     When  God  calls  us  to  die,  it  will  be  a  sweet  way  of 
dying   if  we  can,  like  our  Lord,  pass  away  with  a  text  of  Scripture 
upon  our  lips,  with  a  personal  God  ready  to  receive  us,  with  that 
God  recognized  distinctly  as  our  Father,  and  so  die  joyously,  resign- 
ing our  will  entirely  to  the  sweet  will  of  the  ever-blessed  One,  and 
saying,  "  It  is  the  Lord,"  "  my  Father,"  "  let  him  do  as  seemeth  him 
good." 

II.  My  second  text  is  in  the  31st  Psalm,  at  the  5th  verse ;  and  it 
is  evidently  the  passage  which  our  Saviour  had  in  his  mind  just 
then :  "  Into  thine  hand  I  commit  my  spirit :  thou  hast  redeemed 
me,  O  Lord  God  of  truth."  It  seems  to  me  that  these  are  words 
TO  BE  USED  IN  LIFE,  for  this  Psalm  is  not  so  much  concerning  the 
believer's  death  as  concerning  his  life. 

Is  it  not  very  singular,  dear  friends,  tliat  the  words  which  Jesus 
uttered  on  the  cross  you  may  still  continue  to  use?  You  may  catch 
up  their  echo,  and  not  only  when  you  come  to  die,  but  to-night,  to- 
morrow morning,  and  as  long  as  you  are  here,  you  may  still  repeat 
the  text  the  Master  quoted,  and  say,  "  Into  thine  hand  I  commit 
my  spirit." 

That  is  to  say,  first,  let  us  cheerfully  entrust  our  souls  to  God,  and 
feel  that  they  are  quite  safe  in  his  hands.  Our  spirit  is  the  noblest 
part  of  our  being ;  our  body  is  only  the  husk,  our  spirit  is  the  living 
kernel,  so  let  us  put  it  into  God's  keeping.     Some  of  you  have  never 


THE    LAST    WORDS    OF   CHRIST    ON    THE    CROSS.  o69 

yet  done  that,  so  I  invite  you  to  do  it  now.  It  is  the  act  of  faith 
which  saves  the  soul,  that  act  which  a  man  performs  when  he  says, 
"  I  trust  myself  to  God  as  he  reveals  himself  in  Christ  Jesus ;  I 
cannot  keep  myself,  but  he  can  keep  me;  by  the  precious  blood  of 
Christ  he  can  cleanse  me ;  so  I  just  take  my  spirit,  and  give  it  over  intc 
the  great  Father's  hand."  You  never  really  live  till  you  do  that; 
all  that  comes  before  that  act  of  full  surrender  is  death;  but  when 
you  have  once  trusted  Christ,  then  you  have  truly  begun  to  live. 
And  every  day,  as  long  as  you  live,  take  care  that  you  repeat 
this  process,  and  cheerfully  leave  yourselves  in  God's  hands  without 
any  reserve;  that  is  to  say,  give  yourself  up  to  God, — your  body,  to 
be  healthy  or  to  be  sick,  to  be  long-lived  or  to  be  suddenly  cut  off ; 
— ^your  soul  and  spirit,  give  them  also  up  to  God,  to  be  made  happy 
or  to  be  made  sad,  just  as  he  pleases.  Give  your  whole  self  up  to 
him,  and  say  to  him,  "  My  Father,  make  me  rich  or  make  me  poor, 
give  me  eye-sight  or  make  me  blind,  let  me  have  all  my  senses  or 
take  them  away,  make  me  famous  or  leave  me  to  be  obscure ;  I  just 
give  myself  up  to  thee;  into  thine  hand  I  commit  my  spirit.  I  will 
no  longer  exercise  my  own  choice,  but  thou  shalt  choose  my  in- 
heritance for  me.     My  times  are  in  thy  hands." 

Now,  dear  children  of  God,  are  you  always  doing  this?  Have  you 
ever  done  it?  I  am  afraid  that  there  are  some,  even  among  Christ's 
professing  followers,  who  kick  against  God's  will;  and  even  when 
they  say  to  God,  "  Thy  will  be  done,"  they  spoil  it  by  adding,  in  their 
own  mind,  "and  my  will,  too."  They  pray,  "Lord,  make  my  will 
thy  will,"  instead  of  saying,  "  Make  thy  will  my  will."  Let  us  each 
one  pray  this  prayer  every  day,  "Into  thine  hand  I  commit  my 
spirit."  I  like,  at  family  prayer,  to  put  myself  and  all  that  I  have 
into  God's  hands  in  the  morning,  and  then,  at  night,  just  to  look 
between  his  hands,  and  see  how  safe  I  have  been,  and  then  to  say  to 
him,  "  Lord,  shut  me  up  again  to-night ;  take  care  of  me  all  through 
the  night-watches.     *  Into  thine  hand  I  commit  my  spirit.'  " 

Notice,  dear  friends,  that  our  second  text  has  these  words  at  the 
end  of  it :  "  Thou  hast  redeemed  me,  O  Lord  God  of  truth."  Is  not 
that  a  good  reason  for  giving  yourself  up  entirely  to  God  ?  Christ  has 
redeemed  you,  and  therefore  you  belong  to  him.  If  I  am  a  redeemed 
man,  and  I  ask  God  to  take  care  of  me,  I  am  but  asking  the  King  to 
take  care  of  one  of  his  own  jewels, — a  jewel  that  cost  him  the  blood 
of  his  heart. 

And  I  may  still  more  specially  expect  that  he  will  do  so,  because 
of  the  title  which  is  here  given  to  him :  "  Thou  hast  redeemed  me, 
0  Lord  God  of  truth."  Would  he  be  the  God  of  truth  if  he 
began  with  redemption,  and  ended  with  destruction; — if  he  began 
by  giving  his  Son  to  die  for  us,  and  then  kept  back  other  mercies 
which  we  daily  need  to  bring  us  to  heaven  ?  No ;  the  gift  of  his  Son 
is  the  pledge  that  he  will  save  his  people  from  their  sins,  and  bring 
them  home  to  glory;  and  he  will  do  it.  So,  every  day,  go  to  him 
with  this  declaration,  "  Into  thine  hand  I  commit  my  spirit."  Nay, 
not  only  every  day,  but  all  through  the  day.  Does  a  horse  run  away 
with  you?  Then  you  cannot  do  better  than  say,  "Father,  into  thine 
hand  I  commit  my  spirit."     And  if  the  horse  does  not  run  awa-y 


670  METROPOLITAlf  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

with  you,  you  cannot  do  better  than  say  the  same  words.  Have  you 
to  go  into  a  house  where  there  is  fever ;  I  mean,  is  it  your  duty  to  go 
there?  Then  go  saying,  "Father,  into  thine  hand  I  commit  my 
spirit."  I  would  advise  you  to  do  this  every  time  you  walk  down  the 
street,  or  even  while  you  sit  in  your  own  house.  Dr.  Gill,  my 
famous  predecessor,  spent  very  much  time  in  his  study;  and,  one 
day,  somebody  said  to  him,  "  Well,  at  any  rate,  the  studious  man  is 
safe  from  most  of  the  accidents  of  life."  It  so  happened  that,  one 
morning,  when  the  good  man  left  his  famihar  arm-chair  for  a  little 
while,  there  came  a  gale  of  wind  that  blew  down  a  stack  of  chimneys, 
which  crashed  through  the  roof,  and  fell  right  into  the  place  where  he 
would  have  been  sitting  if  the  providence  of  God  had  not  just  then 
drawn  him  away ;  and  he  said,  "  I  see  that  we  need  divine  providence 
to  care  for  us  in  our  studies  just  as  much  as  in  the  streets." 
"  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commit  my  spirit."  I  have  often  noticed 
that,  if  any  of  our  friends  get  into  accidents  and  troubles,  it  is 
usually  when  they  are  away  for  a  holiday ;  it  is  a  curious  thing,  but 
I  have  often  remarked  it.  They  go  out  for  their  health,  and  come 
home  ill;  they  leave  us  with  all  their  limbs  whole,  and  return  to  us 
crippled ;  therefore,  we  must  pray  God  to  take  special  care  of  friends 
in  the  country  or  by  the  sea,  and  we  must  commit  ourselves  to  his 
hands  wherever  we  may  be.  If  we  had  to  go  into  a  lazar-house,  we 
should  certainly  ask  God  to  protect  us  from  the  deadly  leprosy; 
but  we  ought  equally  to  seek  tiie  Lord's  protection  while  dwelling  in 
the  healthiest  place  or  in  our  own  homes. 

David  said  to  the  Lord,  "  Into  thine  hand  I  commit  my  spirit ; " 
but  let  me  beg  you  to  add  that  word  which  our  Lord  inserted, 
"  Father."  David  is  often  a  good  guide  for  us,  but  David's  Lord  is 
far  better;  and  if  we  follow  him,  we  shall  improve  upon  David.  So, 
let  us  each  say,  "  Father,  Father,  into  thine  hand  I  commit  my 
spirit."  That  is  a  sweet  way  of  living  every  day,  committing  every- 
thing to  our  Heavenly  Father's  hand,  for  that  hand  can  do  his 
child  no  unkindness.  "Father,  I  might  not  be  able  to  trust  thine 
angels,  but  I  can  trust  thee."  The  psalmist  does  not  say,  "  Into  the 
hand  of  providence  I  commit  my  spirit."  Do  you  notice  how  men 
try  to  get  rid  of  God  by  saying,  "  Providence  did  this,"  and  "  Pro- 
vidence did  that,"  and  "  Providence  did  the  other "  ?  If  you  ask 
them,    "What  is   providence?" — they   will   probably   reply,    "W-ell, 

providence  is providence."     That  is  all  they  can  say.     There  is 

many  a  man  who  talks  very  confidently  about  reverencing  nature, 
obeying  the  laws  of  nature,  noting  the  powers  of  nature,  and  so  on. 
Step  up  to  that  eloquent  lecturer,  and  say  to  him,  "Will  you 
kindly  explain  to  me  what  nature  is?"  He  answers,  "Why,  nature, 
— well,  it  is — nature."  Just  so,  sir;  but,  then,  what  is  nature? 
And  he  says,  "  Well, — well, — it  is  nature ; "  and  that  is  all  you  will 
get  out  of  him.  Now,  I  believe  in  nature,  and  I  believe  in  provi- 
dence; but,  at  the  back  of  everything,  I  believe  in  God,  and  in  the 
Ood  who  has  hands; — not  in  an  idol  that  has  no  hands,  and  can 
do  nothing, — but  in  the  God  to  whom  I  can  say,  "  *  Father,  into  thine 
hand  I  commit  my  spirit.'  I  rejoice  that  I  am  able  to  put  myself 
there,  for  I  feel  absolutely  safe  in  trusting  myself  to  thy  keeping." 


THE   LAST   WORDS    Oif    CHRIST    ON   THE    CROSS.  671 

So  live,  beloved,  and  you  shall  live  safely,  and  happily;    and  you 
shall  have  hope  in  your  life,  and  hope  in  your  death. 

III.  My  third  text  will  not  detain  us  many  minutes ;  it  is  in- 
tended to  explain  to  us  the  use  of  our  Saviour's  dying  words  for 
OURSELVES.  Turn  to  the  account  of  the  death  of  Stephen,  in  the  7th 
chapter  of  Acts,  at  the  59th  verse,  and  you  will  see  there  how"  far  a 
man  of  God  may  dare  to  go  in  his  last  moments  in  quoting  from  David 
and  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ:  "And  they  stoned  Stephen, 
calling  upon  God,  and  saying,  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit."  So 
here  is  a  text  for  us  to  use  when  we  come  to  die :  "  Lord  Jesus,  re- 
ceive my  spirit."  I  have  explained  to  you  that,  strictly,  we  can 
hardly  talk  of  yielding  up  our  spirit,  but  we  may  speak  of  Christ 
receiving  it,  and  say,  with  Stephen,  "  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit." 

What  does  this  prayer  mean?  I  must  just  hurriedly  give  you  two 
or  three  thoughts  concerning  it,  and  so  close  my  discourse.  I  think 
this  prayer  means  that,  if  we  can  die  as  Stephen  did,  we  shall  die 
with  a  certainty  of  immortality.  Stephen  prayed,  "  Lord  Jesus, 
receive  my  spirit."  He  did  not  say,  "  I  am  afraid  my  poor  spirit  is 
going  to  die."  No;  the  spirit  is  something  which  still  exists  after 
death,  something  which  Christ  can  receive,  and  therefore  Stephen 
asks  him  to  receive  it.  You  and  I  are  not  going  upstairs  to  die  as  if 
we  were  only  like  cats  and  dogs ;  we  go  up  there  to  die  like  immortal 
beings  who  fall  asleep  on  eartli,  and  open  our  eyes  in  heaven.  Then, 
at  the  sound  of  the  archangel's  trumpet,  our  very  body  is  to  rise  to 
dwell  again  with  our  spirit;  we  have  not  any  question  about  this 
matter.  I  think  I  have  told  you  what  an  infidel  once  said  to  a 
Christian  man,  "  Some  of  you  Christians  have  great  fear  in  dying 
because  you  believe  that  there  is  another  state  to  follow  this  one. 
I  have  not  the  slightest  fear,  for  I  believe  that  I  shall  be  annihilated, 
and  therefore  all  fear  of  death  is  gone  from  me."  "Yes,"  said  the 
Christian  man,  "  and  in  that  respect  you  seem  to  me  to  be  on  equal 
terms  with  that  bullock  grazing  over  there,  which,  like  yourseK,  is 
free  from  any  fear  of  death.  Pray,  sir,  let  me  ask  you  a  simple 
question.  Have  you  any  hope?"  "Hope,  sir?  Hope,  sir?  No,  I 
have  no  hope ;  of  course,  I  have  no  hope,  sir."  "Ah,  then !  "  replied 
the  other,  "  despite  the  fears  that  sometimes  come  over  feeble  be- 
lievers, they  have  a  hope  which  they  would  not  and  could  not  give  up." 
And  that  hope  is,  that  our  spirit — even  that  spirit  which  we  commit 
into  Jesus  Christ's  hands, — shall  be  "  for  ever  with  the  Lord." 

The  next  thought  is  that,  to  a  man  who  can  die  as  Stephen  did, 
there  is  a  certainty  that  Christ  is  near, — so  near  that  the  man  speaks 
to  him,  and  says,  "Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit."  In  Stephen's 
case,  the  Lord  Jesus  was  so  near  that  the  martyr  could  see  him,  for 
he  said,  "Behold,  I  see  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of  man 
standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God."  Many  dying  saints  have  borne 
a  similar  testimony ;  it  is  no  strange  thing  for  us  to  hear  them  say, 
before  they  died,  that  they  could  see  within  the  pearly  gates;  and 
they  have  told  us  this  with  such  evident  truthfulness,  and  with 
such  rapture,  or  sometimes  so  calmly,  in  such  a  businesslike  tone  of 
voice,  that  we  were  sure  that  they  were  neither  deceived  nor  speak- 
ing falsehood.     They  spake  what  they  knew  to  be  true,  for  Jesus  was 


672.  MBTROPOLlTAJf   TABEHNACLE   PULPIT. 

there  with  them.  Yes,  beloved,  before  you  can  call  your  children 
about  your  death-bed,  Jesus  will  be  there  already,  and  into  his  hands 
you  may  commit  your  spirit. 

Moreover,  there  is  a  certainty  that  we  are  quite  safe  in  his  Iiunds. 
Wherever  else  we  are  insecure,  if  we  ask  him  to  receive  our  spirit, 
and  he  receives  it,  who  can  hurt  us?  Who  can  pluck  us  out  of  his 
hands?  Rouse  ye,  death  and  hell!  Come  forth,  all  ye  powers  of 
darkness!  What  can  you  do  when  once  a  spirit  is  in  the  hands  of 
,  the  omnipotent  Redeemer?     We  must  be  safe  there. 

Then  there  is  the  other  certainty,  that  he  is  quite  willing  to  take 
us  into  his  hands.  Let  us  put  ourselves  into  his  hands  now;  and 
then  we  need  not  be  ashamed  to  repeat  the  operation  every  day,  and 
we  may  be  sure  that  we  shall  not  be  rejected  at  the  last.  I  have 
often  told  you  of  the  good  old  woman,  who  was  dying,  and  to  whom 
someone  said,  "  Are  you  not  afraid  to  die? "  "  Oh,  no;"  she  replied, 
"  there  is  nothing  at  all  to  fear.  I  have  dipped  my  foot  in  the  river 
of  death  every  morning  before  I  have  had  my  breakfast,  and  I  am 
not  afraid  to  die  now."  You  remerciber  that  dear  saint,  who  died  in 
the  night,  and  who  had  left  written  on  a  piece  of  paper  by  her  bed- 
side these  lines  which,  ere  she  fell  asleep,  she  felt  strong  enough  to 
pencil  down, — 

*•  Since  Jesus  is  mine,  I'll  not  fear  undressing, 
But  gladly  put  off  these  garments  of  clay; 
To  die  in  the  Lord,  is  a  covenant  blepsing, 
Since  Jesus  to  glory  thro'  death  led  the  way." 

It  was  well  that  she  could  say  it,  and  may  we  be  able  to  say  the 
same  whenever  the  Master  calls  us  to  go  up  higher!  I  want,  dear 
friends,  that  we  should  all  of  us  have  as  much  willingness  to  depart 
as  if  it  were  a  matter  of  will  with  us.  Blessed  be  God,  it  is  not  left 
to  our  choice,  it  is  not  left  to  our  will,  when  we  shall  die.  God  has 
appointed  that  day,  and  ten  thousand  devils  cannot  consign  us  to  the 
grave  before  our  time.     We  shall  not  die  till  God  decrees  it. 

*•  Plagues  and  deaths  around  me  fly, 
Till  he  please  I  cannot  die ; 
Not  a  single  shaft  can  hit 
Till  the  God  of  love  sees  fit." 

But  let  us  be  just  as  willing  to  depart  as  if  it  were  really  a  matter 
of  choice;  for,  wisely,  carefully,  coolly,  consider  that,  if  it  were  left 
to  us,  we  should  none  of  us  be  wise  if  we  did  not  choose  to  go.  Apart 
from  the  coming  of  our  Lord,  the  most  miserable  thing  that  I  know 
of  would  be  a  suspicion  that  we  might  not  die.  Do  you  know  what 
quaint  old  Rowland  Hill  used  to  say  when  he  found  himself  getting 
very  old  ?  He  said,  "  Surely  they  must  be  forgetting  me  up  there ; " 
and  every  now  and  then,  when  some  dear  old  saint  was  dying,  he 
would  say,  "  When  you  get  to  heaven,  give  my  love  to  John  Berridge, 
and  John  Bunyan,  and  ever  so  many  more  of  the  good  Johns,  and 
tell  them  I  hope  they  will  see  poor  old  Rowly  up  there  before  long." 
Well,  there  was  common  sense  in  that  wishing  to  get  home,  longing 
to  be  with  God.     To  be  with  Christ,  is  far  better  than  to  be  here. 


,.    BXPOSITIOM",  .-. .  (^73 

Sobriety  itself  would  make  us  choose  to  die ;  well,  then,  do  not  let 
qis  run  back,  and  become  utterly  unwilling,  and  struggle  and  strive 
and  fret  and  fume  over  it.  When  I  hear  of  believers  who  do  not  like 
to  talk  about  death,  I  am  afraid  concerning  them.  It  is  greatly  wise 
to  be  familiar  with  our  resting-place.  When  I  went,  recently,  to 
the  cemetery  at  Norwood,  to  lay  the  body  of  our  dear  brother  Perkins 
there  for  a  little  while,  I  felt  that  it  was  a  healthy  thing  for  me  to 
^tand  at  the  grave's  brink,  and  to  walk  amid  that  forest  of  memorials 
of  the  dead,  for  this  is  where  I,  too,  must  go.  Ye  living  men,  come 
and  view  the  ground  where  you  must  shortly  lie;  and,  as  it  must  be 
so,  let  us  who  are  believers  welcome  it. 

But  what  if  you  are  not  behevers?  Ah!  that  is  another  matter 
altogether.  If  you  have  not  beHeved  in  Christ,  you  may  well  be 
afraid  even  to  rest  on  the  seat  where  you  are  sitting.  I  wonder  that 
the  earth  itself  does  not  say,  "  O  God,  I  will  not  hold  this  wretched 
sinner  up  any  longer !  Let  me  open  my  mouth,  and  swallow  him !  " 
All  nature  must  hate  the  man  who  hates  God.  Surely,  all  things 
must  loathe  to  minister  to  the  life  of  a  man  who  does  not  live  unto 
<^od.  Oh  that  you  would  seek  the  Lord,  and  trust  Christ,  and  find 
eternal  hf e !  If  you  have  done  so,  do  not  be  afraid  to  go  forth 
to  live,  or  to  die,  just  as  God  pleases. 


lExpositton  h^  €.  3g.  ^purQeoiu 

JOHN  XV.  1—8. 

Verse  1.     I  am  the  true  vine, — 

Now  we  know  where  to  find  the  true  Church.  It  is  to  be  found  only  in 
€hrist  and  in  those  who  are  joined  to  him  in  mystical  but  real  union  :  "] 
am  the  true  vine," — 

1.  And  my  Father  is  the  husbandman. 

Now  we  know  who  is  the  true  Guardian  of  the  Church.  Not  the  so-called 
*'  holy  father  »  at  Eome,  but  that  Father  above,  who  is  the  true  Guardian, 
Ruler,  Keeper,  Preserver,  Purifier,  Husbandman  of  the  one  Church,  the  vine. 

2.  Every  branch  in  me  that  beareth  not  fruit  he  talceth  aimy  : 

There  are  many  such  branches,  in  Christ's  visible  Church,  which  are  not 
fruit-bearing  branches,  and  consequently  are  not  partakers  of  the  sap  of 
life  and  grace  which  flows  into  the  branches  that  are  vitally  joined  to  the 
central  stem.     These  fruitless  branches  are  to  be  taken  away. 

2.  And  every  branch  that  beareth  fruit,  he  puryeth  it,  that  it  may  bring 
forth  more  fruit. 

There  is  some  work,  then,  for  the  knife  upon  all  the  branches  ;  cutting  off 
for  those  that  are  fruitless,  cutting  for  those  that  are  bearing  some  fruit, 
that  they  may  bring  forth  yet  more. 

3.  Now  ye  are  clean  [purged^  through  the  word  which  I  have  spoken  unto 
you. 

The  Word  is  often  the  knife  with  which  the  great  Husbandman  prunes 
"the  vine  ;  and,  brothers  and  sisters,  if  we  were  more  willing  to  feel  the  edge 
of  the  Word,  and  to  let  it  cut  away  even  something  that  may  be  very  dear 
to  us,  we  should  not  need  so  much  pruning  by  affliction.  It  is  because  that 
first  knife  does  not  always  produce  the  desired  result  that  another  sharp 
tool  is  used  by  which  we  are  effectually  pruned. 

43 


674  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

4.     Abide  in  me^  and  I  in  you. 

"Do  not  merely  find  a  temporary  shelter  in  me,  as  a  ship  runs  info 
harbour  in  stormy  weather,  and  then  comes  out  again  when  the  gale  is  over; 
but  cast  anchor  in  me,  as  the  vessel  does  when  it  reaches  its  desired  haven. 
Be  not  as  branches  that  are  tied  on,  and  so  can  be  taken  off,  but  be  livingly 
joined  to  me.     *  Abide  in  me.' " 

4.  Ab  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself t  except  it  abide  in  the  vine;  no 
more  can  ye,  except  ye  abide  in  me. 

You  must  bear  fruit,  or  else  be  cast  away  ;  but  you  cannot  bear  any  fruit 
except  by  real  union  and  constant  communion  with  Jesus  Christ  your  Lord^ 

6.  /  am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  branches  :  he  that  abidtth  in  me,  and  I  in  him, 
the  same  bringeth  forth  much  fruit :  for  without  me  ye  can  do  nothing. 

Not  merely  will  you  do  very  little,  but  you  can  do  nothing  at  all  if  you 
are  severed  from  Christ.  You  are  absolutely  and  entirely  dependent  upon 
Christ  both  for  your  life  and  for  your  fruit-bearing.  Do  we  not  wish  to 
have  it  so,  beloved  ?  It  is  the  incipient  principle  of  apostasy  when  a  man 
wishes  to  be  independent  of  Christ  in  any  degree,  when  he  says,  *'  Give  me 
the  portion  of  goods  that  falleth  to  me,  that  I  may  have  something  in  hand, 
some  spending  money  of  my  own."  No  ;  you  must,  from  day  to  day,  from 
hour  to  hour,  and  even  from  moment  to  moment,  derive  life,  light,  love, 
everything  that  is  good,  from  Christ.     What  a  blessing  that  it  is  so  ! 

6.  If  a  man  abide  not  in  me,  he  is  cast  forth  as  a  branch,  and  is  loithered  ; 
and  Tnen  gather  them,  and  cast  them  into  the  fire,  and  they  are  burned. 

There  is  a  sad  future  in  store  for  tares,  according  to  another  parable ; 
but,  somehow,  there  is  a  much  sadder  lot  reserved  for  those  that  were,  in 
some  sense,  branches  of  the  vine, — those  who  made  a  profession  of  faith  in 
Christ,  though  they  were  never  vitally  united  to  him  ;  those  who  for  a 
while  did  run  well,  yet  were  hindered.  What  was  it  that  hindered  them 
that  they  should  not  obey  the  truth  ?  Oh,  it  is  sad  indeed  that  any  should 
have  had  any  sort  of  connection  with  that  divine  stem,  and  yet  should  be 
cast  into  the  fire  ! 

7.  If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  wiU, 
and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you. 

Do  not  think  that  all  men  can  pray  alike  effectually,  for  it  is  not  so. 
There  are  some  whom  God  will  hear,  and  some  whom  God  will  not  hear. 
And  there  are  some  even  of  his  own  children,  whom  he  will  hear  in  things 
absolutely  vital  and  essential,  to  whom  he  never  gave  carte  blanche  after  thi" 
fashion  :  "  Ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you."  Nt 
if  you  will  not  hear  God's  words,  he  will  not  hear  yours  ;  and  if  his  words 
do  not  abide  in  you,  your  words  shall  not  have  power  with  him.  They  may 
be  directed  to  heaven,  but  the  Lord  will  not  listen  to  them  so  as  to  have 
regard  unto  them.  Oh,  it  needs  very  tender  walking  for  one  who  would  be 
mighty  in  prayer !  You  shall  find  that  those  who  have  had  their  will  at 
the  throne  of  grace  are  men  who  have  done  God's  will  in  other  places ;  it 
must  be  so.  The  greatest  favourite  at  court  will  have  a  double  portion 
of  the  jealousy  of  his  monarch,  and  he  must  be  specially  careful  that  he 
orders  his  steps  aright,  or  else  the  king  will  not  continue  to  favour  him  as 
he  was  wont  to  do.  There  is  a  sacred  discipline  in  Christ's  house,  a  part  of 
which  consists  in  this,  that,  as  our  obedience  to  our  God  declines,  so  will 
our  power  in  prayer  decrease  at  the  same  time. 

8.  Herein  is  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit/  so  shall  ye  be  my 
disciples. 

If  we  are  his  true  disciples,  we  also  shall  bring  forth  much  fruit. 


THE    EENT    VEIL. 


Beliyered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  March  25th,  1888,  by 

C.   H.  SPURGE  ON, 

AT  THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


V  I*  '^^f^l{  ^^®-?  ^?  ^^^  ^^^^  ^gain  With  a  loud  voice,  yielded  up  the  ehost     An<T 

^v^50    Ih  '  '""^  *''^^^'  ""^^  ''^*  ^  '^''^^  ^"""^  *^"  *°P  *°  t^^«  bottom  ''-Matt! 

"  Having  therefore,  brethren,  boldness  to  enter  into  the  hoUest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus 

s\^yrhTCh^^-S!bT:j;rx'i^,io'^*'  ^°"^^^^^*^^  ^^^  "^'  ^^-^^^  ^^«  veiiM^rs 

The  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  fitly  surrounded  by  miracles- 
yet  It  IS  Itself  so  much  greater  a  wonder  than  aU  besides,  that  it  as  far 
exceeds  them  as  the  sun  outshines  the  planets  which  surround  it  It 
seems  natural  enough  that  the  earth  should  quake,  that  tombs  should 
be  opened,  and  that  the  veil  of  the  temple  should  be  rent,  when  he 
who  only  hath  immortality  gives  up  the  ghost.  The  more  you  think 
of  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God,  the  more  will  you  be  amazed  at  it. 
As  much  as  a  miracle  excels  a  common  fact,  so  doth  this  wonder  of 
wonders  rise  above  all  miracles  of  power.  That  the  divine  Lord,  even 
though  veiled  in  mortal  flesh,  should  condescend  to  be  subject  to  the- 
power  of  death,  so  as  to  bow  his  head  on  the  cross,  and  submit  to  be 
laid  in  the  tomb,  is  among  mysteries  the  greatest.  The  death  of  Jesus 
IS  the  marvel  of  time  and  eternity,  which,  as  Aaron's  rod  swallowed 
up  all  the  rest,  takes  up  into  itself  all  lesser  marvels. 

Yet  the  rending  of  the  veil  of  the  temple  is  not  a  miracle  to  be  lightly 
passed  over.  It  was  made  of  "  fine  twined  linen,  with  cherubims  of 
cunning  work."  This  gives  the  idea  of  a  substantial  fabric,  a  piece  of 
lastmg  tapestry,  which  would  have  endured  the  severest  strain.  No 
human  hands  could  have  torn  that  sacred  covering ;  and  it  could  not 
have  been  divided  in  the  midst  by  any  accidental  cause ;  yet,  strange- 
to  say,  on  the  instant  when  the  holy  person  of  Jesus  was  rent  by 
death,  the  great  veil  which  concealed  the  holiest  of  aU  was  "rent 
in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom."  What  did  it  mean  ?  It  meant 
much  more  than  I  can  tell  you  now. 

It  is  not  fanciful  to  regard  it  as  a  solemn  act  of  mourning  on 

the  part  of  the  house  of  the  Lord.     In  the  East  men  express  their 

sorrow  by  rending  their  garments  ;  and  the  temple,  when  it  beheld  its 

Master  die,  seemed  struck  with  horror,  and  rent  its  veil.     Shocked  at 

No.  2,015. 


g76  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

the  sin  of  man,  indignant  at  the  murder  of  its  Lord,  in  its  sympathy 
with  him  who  is  the  true  temple  of  God,  the  outward  symbol  tore 
its  holy  vestment  from  the  top  to  the  bottom.  Did  not  the  miracle 
also  mean  that  from  that  hour  the  whole  system  of  types,  and  shadows, 
and  ceremonies  had  come  to  an  end?  The  ordinances  of  an  earthly 
priesthood  were  rent  with. that  veil.  In  token  of  the  death  of  the 
ceremonial  law,  the  soul  of  it  quitted  its  sacred  shrine,  and  left  its 
bodily  tabernacle  as  a  dead  thing.  The  legal  dispensation  is  over. 
The  rent  of  the  veil  seemed  to  say—"  Henceforth  God  dwells  no  longer 
in  the  thick  darkness  of  the  Holy  of  Holies,  and  shines  forth  no  longer 
from  between  the  cherubim.  The  special  enclosure  is  broken  up,  and 
there  is  no  inner  sanctuary  for  the  earthly  high  priest  to  enter  :  typical 
atonements  and  sacrifices  are  at  an  end." 

According  to  the  explanation  given  in  our  second  text,  the  rending 
of  the  veil  chiefly  meant  that  the  way  into  the  holiest,  which  was  not 
before  made  manifest,  was  now  laid  open  to  all  believers.  ^  Once  in  the 
year  the  high  priest  solemnly  lifted  a  corner  of  this  veil  with  fear  and 
trembling,  and  with  blood  and  holy  incense  he  passed  into  the  imme- 
diate presence  of  Jehovah ;  but  the  tearing  of  the  veil  laid  open  the 
secret  place.  The  rent  from  top  to  bottom  gives  ample  space  for  all 
to  enter  who  are  caUed  of  God's  grace,  to  approach  the  throne,  and 
to  commune  with  the  Eternal  One.  Upon  that  subject  I  shall  try  to 
speak  this  morning,  praying  in  my  inmost  soul  that  you  and  I,  with 
all  other  believers,  may  have  boldness  actually  to  enter  into  that  which 
is  within  the  veil  at  this  time  of  our  assembhng  for  worship.  Oh,  that 
the  Spirit  of  God  would  lead  us  into  the  nearest  fellowship  which 
mortal  men  can  have  with  the  Infinite  Jehovah ! 

First,  this  morning,  I  shall  ask  you  to  consider  what  has  been  done. 
The  veil  has  been  rent.  Secondly,  we  will  remember  what  we  there- 
fore have :  we  have  **  boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of 
Jesus."  Then,  thirdly,  we  will  consider  how  we  exercise  this  grace  :  we 
"  enter  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  by  a  new  and  living  way,  which  he 
hath  consecrated  for  us,  through  the  veil,  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh." 

I.  First,  think  of  what  has  been  done.  In  actual  historical  fact 
the  glorious  veil  of  the  temple  has  been  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to 
the  bottom  :  as  a  matter  of  spiritual  fact,  which  is  far  more  important 
to  us,  the  separating  legal  ordinance  is  abolished.  There  was  under  the 
law  this  ordinance— that  no  man  should  ever  go  into  the  holiest  of 
all;  with  the  one  exception  of  the  high  priest,  and  he  but  once  in  the 
year,  and  not  without  blood.  If  any  man  had  attempted  to  enter  there 
he  must  have  died,  as  guilty  of  great  presumption  and  of  profane  mtru- 
sion  into  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High.  Who  could  stand  m  the  pre- 
sence of  him  who  is  a  consuming  fire  ?  This  ordinance  of  distance  runs 
all  through  the  law  ;  for  even  the  holy  place,  which  was  the  vestibule 
of  the  Holy  of  Holies,  was  for  the  priests  alone.  The  place  of  the 
people  was  one  of  distance.  At  the  very  first  institution  of  the  law 
when  God  descended  upon  Sinai,  the  ordinance  was,  "  Thou  shalt  set 
bounds  unto  the  people  round  about."  There  was  no  invitation  to 
draw  near.  Not  that  they  desired  to  do  so,  for  the  mountain  was 
altogether  on  a  smoke,  and  "  even  Moses  said,  I  exceedingly  fear  and 
quake."     **  The  Lord  said  unto  Moses.  Go  down,  charge  the  people, 


il 


THE    RENT   VEIL.  677 


lest  they  break  through  unto  the  Lord  to  gaze,  and  many  of  them 
perish."  If  so  much  as  a  beast  touch  the  mountain  it  must  be  stoned,  or 
thrust  through  with  a  dart.  The  spirit  of  the  old  law  was  reverent 
distance.  Moses,  and  here  and  there  a  man  chosen  by  God,  might 
come  near  to  Jehovah ;  but  as  for  the  bulk  of  the  people,  the  com- 
mand was,  "  Draw  not  nigh  hither."  When  the  Lord  revealed  his 
glory  at  the  giving  of  the  law,  we  read, — "  When  the  people  saw  it, 
they  removed,  and  stood  afar  off."  All  this  is  ended.  The  precept 
to  keep  back  is  abrogated,  and  the  invitation  is,  *'  Come  unto  me,  all 
ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden."  ''Let  us  draw  near"  is  now  the 
filial  spirit  of  the  gospel.  How  thankful  I  am  for  this!  what  a  joy  it 
is  to  my  soul !  Some  of  God's  people  have  not  yet  realized  this 
gracious  fact,  for  still  they  worship  afar  oif.  Yery  much  of  prayer 
is  to  be  highly  commended  for  its  reverence ;  but  it  has  in  it  a  lack 
of  childlike  confidence.  I  can  admire  the  solemn  and  stately  language 
of  worship  which  recognizes  the  greatness  of  God ;  but  it  will 
not  warm  my  heart  nor  express  my  soul  until  it  has  also  blended 
therewith  the  joyful  nearness  of  that  perfect  love  which  casteth  out 
fear,  and  ventures  to  speak  with  our  Father  in  heaven  as  a  child 
speaketh  with  its  father  on  earth.  My  brother,  no  veil  remains.  Why 
dost  thou  stand  afar  off,  and  tremble  like  a  slave  ?  Draw  near  with 
full  assurance  of  faith.  The  veil  is  rent :  access  is  free.  Come  boldly 
to  the  throne  of  grace.  Jesus  has  made  thee  nigh,  as  nigh  to  God  as 
even  he  himself  is.  Though  we  speak  of  the  holiest  of  all,  even  the 
secret  place  of  the  Most  High,  yet  it  is  of  this  place  of  awe,  even  of 
this  sanctuary  of  Jehovah,  that  the  veil  is  rent ;  therefore,  let  nothing 
hinder  thine  entrance.  Assuredly  no  law  forbids  thee ;  but  infinite  love 
invites  thee  to  draw  nigh  to  God. 

This  rending  of  the  veil  signified,  also,  the  removal  of  the  seimrating 
sin.  Sin  is,  after  all,  the  great  divider  between  God  and  man.  That 
veil  of  blue  and  purple  and  fine  twined  linen  could  not  really  separate 
man  from  God :  for  he  is,  as  to  his  omnipresence,  not  far  from  any  one 
of  us.  Sin  is  a  far  more  effectual  wall  of  separation :  it  opens  an 
abyss  between  the  sinner  and  his  Judge.  Sin  shuts  out  prayer,  and 
praise,  and  every  form  of  religious  exercise.  Sin  makes  God  walk 
contrary  to  us,  because  we  walk  contrary  to  him.  Sin,  by  separating 
the  soul  from  God,  causes  spiritual  death,  which  is  both  the  effect  and 
the  penalty  of  transgression.  How  can  two  walk  together  except 
they  be  agreed  ?  How  can  a  holy  God  have  fellowship  with  unholy 
creatures  ?  Shall  justice  dwell  with  injustice  ?  Shall  perfect  purity 
abide  with  the  abominations  of  evil  ?  No,  it  cannot  be.  Our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself.  He  taketh 
away  the  sin  of  the  world,  and  so  the  veil  is  rent.  By  the  shedding 
of  his  most  precious  blood  we  are  cleansed  from  aU  sin,  and  that 
most  gracious  promise  of  the  new  covenant  is  fulfilled — "  Their  sins 
and  their  iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more."  When  sin  is  gone,  the 
barrier  is  broken  down,  the  unfathomable  gulf  is  filled.  Pardon,  which 
removes  sin,  and  justification,  which  brings  righteousness,  make  up  a 
deed  of  clearance  so  real  and  so  complete  that  nothing  now  dividea 
the  sinner  from  his  reconciled  God.  The  Judge  is  now  the  Father  :  he, 
who  once  must  necessarily  have  condemned,  is  found  justly  absolving 


g78  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  accepting.     In  tliis  double  sense  tlie  veil  is  rent ;  tlie  separating 
ordinance  is  abrogated,  and  the  separating  sin  is  forgiven. 

Next,  be  it  remembered  tbat  the  separating  sinfulness  is  also  taken 
away  through  our  Lord  Jesus.  It  is  not  only  wbat  we  have  done,  but 
what  we  are  that  keeps  us  apart  from  God.  We  have  sin  engrained  m 
"US :  even  those  who  have  grace  dweUinj;  in  them  have  to  complain, 
"  When  I  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with  me."  How  can  we 
commune  with  God  with  our  eyes  bHnded,  our  ears  stopped,  our 
hearts  hardened,  and  our  senses  deadened  by  sin  ?  Our  whole  natiure 
is  tainted,  poisoned,  perverted  by  evil ;  how  can  we  know  the  Lord  ? 
Beloved,  through  the  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  covenant  of  grace  10 
established  with  us,  and  its  gracious  provisions  are  on  this  wise: 
«*  This  is  the  covenant  that  I  will  make  with  them  after  those  days, 
eaith  the  Lord;  I  will  put  my  laws  into  their  mind,  and  write 
them  in  their  hearts."  When  this  is  the  case,  when  the  will  of 
God  is  inscribed  on  the  heart,  and  the  nature  is  entirely  changed, 
then  is  the  dividing  veil  which  hides  us  from  God  taken  away: 
"  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart :  for  they  shall  see  God."  Blessed  are 
all  they  that  love  righteousness  and  follow  after  it,  for  they  are  in  a 
way  in  which  the  Kighteous  One  can  walk  in  fellowship  with  them. 
Spirits  that  are  like  God  are  not  divided  from  God.  Difference  of 
nature  hangs  up  a  veil ;  but  the  new  birth,  and  the  sanctification 
which  follows  upon  it,  through  the  precious  death  of  Jesus,  remove 
that  veil.  He  that  hates  sin,  strives  after  holiness,  and  labours  to 
perfect  it  in  the  fear  of  God,  is  in  f eUowship  with  God.  It  is  a  blessed 
thing  when  we  love  what  God  loves,  when  we  seek  what  God  seeks, 
when  we  are  in  sympathy  with  divine  aims,  and  are  obedient  to  divine 
commands :  for  with  such  persons  wiU  the  Lord  dweU.  When  grace 
makes  us  partakers  of  the  divine  natui-e,  then  are  we  at  one  with  the 
Lord,  and  the  veil  is  taken  away. 

"Yes,"  saith  one,  "  I  see  now  how  the  veil  is  taken  away  m  three 
different  fashions ;  but  still  God  is  God,  and  we  are  but  poor  puny 
men :  between  God  and  man  there  must  of  necessity  be  a  separating 
veil,  caused  by  the  great  disparity  between  the  Creator  and  the  crea- 
ture. How  can  the  finite  and  the  infinite  commune  ?  God  is  all  in 
all,  and  more  than  all ;  we  are  nothing,  and  less  than  nothing ;  how 
can  we  meet  ?  "  When  the  Lord  does  come  near  to  his  favoured  ones, 
they  own  how  incapable  they  are  of  enduring  the  excessive  glory. 
Even  the  beloved  John  said,  "When  I  saw  him,  I  feU  at  his  feet  as 
dead."  When  we  have  been  specially  conscious  of  the  presence  and 
working  of  our  Lord,  we  have  felt  our  flesh  creep,  and  our  blood  chill ; 
and  then  have  we  understood  what  Jacob  meant  when  he  said,  "  How 
dreadful  is  this  place  I  this  is  none  other  but  the  house  of  God,  and 
this  is  the  gate  of  heaven."  All  this  is  true ;  for  the  Lord  saith, 
"  Thou  canst  not  see  my  face  and  live."  Although  this  is  a  much 
thinner  veil  than  those  I  have  already  mentioned,  yet  it  is  a  veil ;  and 
it  is  hard  for  man  to  be  at  home  with  God.  But  the  Lord  Jesus 
bridges  the  separating  distance.  Behold,  the  blessed  Son  of  God  has 
come  into  the  world,  and  taken  upon  himself  our  nature  !  "  Foras- 
much then  as  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also 
himself  Hkewise  took  part  of  the  same."     Though  he  is  God  as  God 


THE   RENT    VEIL.  679 

is  God,  yet  is  he  as  surely  man  as  man  is  man.  Mark  well  hov7  in 
the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  we  see  God  and  man  in  the  closest  con- 
ceivable alliance ;  for  they  are  united  in  one  person  for  ever.  The 
gulf  is  completely  filled  by  the  fact  that  Jesus  has  gone  through  with 
lis  even  to  the  bitter  end,  to  death,  even  to  the  death  of  the  cross. 
He  has  followed  out  the  career  of  manhood  even  to  the  tomb ;  and 
thus  we  see  that  the  veil,  which  hung  between  the  nature  of  God  and 
the  nature  of  man,  is  rent  in  the  person  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We 
enter  into  the  holiest  of  all  through  his  flesh,  which  links  manhood 
to  Godhead. 

Now,  you  see  what  it  is  to  have  the  veil  taken  away.  Solemnly 
note  that  this  avails  only  for  believers :  those  who  refuse  Jesus  refuse 
the  only  way  of  access  to  God.  God  is  not  approachable,  except 
through  the  rending  of  the  veil  by  the  death  of  Jesus.  There  was  one 
typical  way  to  the  mercy-seat  of  old,  and  that  was  through  the  turn- 
ing aside  of  the  veil ;  there  was  no  other.  And  there  is  now  no  other 
way  for  any  of  you  to  come  into  fellowship  with  God,  except 
through  the  rent  veil,  even  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ,  whom  God  has 
set  forth  to  be  the  propitiation  for  sin.  Come  this  way,  and  you 
may  come  freely.  Refuse  to  come  this  way,  and  there  hangs  between 
you  and  God  an  impassable  veil.  Without  Christ  you  are  without  God, 
and  without  hope.  Jesus  himself  assures  you,  "  If  ye  believe  not  that  I 
am  he,  ye  shall  die  in  your  sins."  God  grant  that  this  may  not  happen 
to  any  of  you  ! 

For  believers  the  veil  is  not  rolled  up,  but  rent.  The  veil  was  not 
unhooked,  and  carefully  folded  up,  and  put  away,  so  that  it  might 
be  put  in  its  place  at  some  future  time.  Oh,  no  !  but  the  divine 
hand  took  it  and  rent  it  from  top  to  bottom.  It  can  never  be 
hung  up  again  ;  that  is  impossible.  Between  those  who  are  in  Christ 
Jesus  and  the  great  God,  there  will  never  be  another  separation. 
^'  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God  ?  "  Only  one  veil  was 
made,  and  as  that  is  rent,  the  one  and  only  separator  is  destroyed. 
I  delight  to  think  of  this.  The  devil  himself  can  never  divide  me 
from  God  now.  He  may  and  will  attempt  to  shut  me  out  from  God  ; 
but  the  worst  he  could  do  would  be  to  hang  up  a  rent  veil.  What  would 
that  avail  but  to  exhibit  his  impotence  ?  God  has  rent  the  veil,  and 
the  devil  cannot  mend  it.  There  is  access  between  a  believer  and  his 
Ood ;  and  there  must  be  such  free  access  for  ever,  since  the  veil  is  not 
ToUed  up,  and  put  on  one  side  to  be  hung  up  again  in  days  to  come ; 
but  it  is  rent,  and  rendered  useless. 

The  rent  is  not  in  one  corner,  but  in  the  midst,  as  Luke  tells  us. 
It  is  not  a  slight  rent  through  which  we  may  see  a  little ;  but  it  is 
rent  from  the  top  to  the  bottom.  There  is  an  entrance  made  for  the 
greatest  sinners.  If  there  had  only  been  a  small  hole  cut  through  it, 
the  lesser  offenders  might  have  crept  through;  but  what  an  act  of 
abounding  mercy  is  this,  that  the  veil  is  rent  in  the  midst,  and  rent 
from  top  to  bottom,  so  that  the  chief  of  sinners  may  find  ample 
passage !  This  also  shows  that  for  believers  there  is  no  hindrance 
to  the  fullest  and  freest  access  to  God.  Oh,  for  much  boldness,  thia 
morning,  to  come  where  God  has  not  only  set  open  the  door,  but  has 
lifted  the  door  from  its. hinges ;  yea,  removed  it,  post,  and  bar,  and  aU  1 


680  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PTTLPIT. 

I  want  you  to  notice  that  tliis  veil,  when  it  was  rent,  was  rent  by 
God,  not  by  man.  It  was  not  the  act  of  an  irreverent  mob  ;  it  was  not 
the  midnight  outrage  of  a  set  of  profane  priests :  it  was  the  act  of  God 
alone.  Nobody  stood  within  the  veil ;  and  on  the  outer  side  of  it  stood 
the  priests  only  fulfilling  their  ordinary  vocation  of  offering  sacrifice. 
It  must  have  astounded  them  when  they  saw  that  holy  place  laid  bare 
in  a  moment.  How  they  fled,  as  they  saw  that  massive  veil  divided 
without  human  hand  in  a  second  of  time !  Who  rent  it  ?  Who  but 
God  himself?  If  another  had  done  it,  there  might  have  been  a. 
mistake  about  it,  and  the  mistake  might  need  to  be  remedied  by 
replacing  the  curtain ;  but  if  the  Lord  has  done  it,  it  is  done  rightly, 
it  is  done  finally,  it  is  done  irreversibly.  It  is  God  himself  who  has 
laid  sin  on  Christ,  and  in  Christ  has  put  that  sin  away.  God  himself 
has  opened  the  gate  of  heaven  to  believers,  and  cast  up  a  highway 
along  which  the  souls  of  men  may  travel  to  himself.  God  himself 
has  set  the  ladder  between  earth  and  heaven.  Come  to  him  now,  ye 
humble  ones.      Behold,  he  sets  before  you  an  open  door ! 

II.  And  now  I  ask  you  to  follow  me,  dear  friends,  in  the  second 
place,  to  an  experimental  realization  of  my  subject.  We  now  notice^ 
WHAT  WE  HAVE  :  **  Having  therefore,  brethren,  boldness  to  enter  into* 
the  holiest."  Observe  the  threefold  "having  "  in  the  paragraph  now 
before  us,  and  be  not  content  without  the  whole  three.  JFe  have- 
*^ boldness  to  enter  in.''^  There  are  degrees  in  boldness;  but  this  is  one 
of  the  highest.  When  the  veil  was  rent  it  required  some  boldness  to 
look  within.  I  wonder  whether  the  priests  at  the  altar  did  have  th& 
courage  to  gaze  upon  the  mercy-seat.  I  suspect  that  they  were  so- 
struck  with  amazement  that  they  fled  from  the  altar,  fearing  sudden 
death.  It  requires  a  measure  of  boldness  steadily  to  look  upon  the 
mystery  of  God:  "Which  things  the  angels  desire  to  look  into."  It 
is  well  not  to  look  with  a  merely  curious  eye  into  the  deep  things  of 
God.  I  question  whether  any  man  is  able  to  pry  into  the  mystery  of 
the  Trinity  without  great  risk.  Some,  thinking  to  look  there  with 
the  eyes  of  their  natural  intellect,  have  been  blinded  by  the  light 
of  that  sun,  and  have  henceforth  wandered  in  darkness.  It  needs- 
boldness  to  look  into  the  splendours  of  redeeming  and  electing  love. 
If  any  did  look  into  the  holiest  when  the  veil  was  rent,  they  were- 
among  the  boldest  of  men  ;  for  others  must  have  feared  lest  the  fate 
of  the  men  of  Bethshemesh  would  be  theirs.  Beloved,  the  Holy  Spirit 
invites  you  to  look  into  the  holy  place,  and  view  it  all  with  reverent  eye  ;. 
for  it  is  full  of  teaching  to  you.  Understand  the  mystery  of  the  mercy- 
seat,  and  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant  overlaid  with  gold,  and  of  the 
pot  of  manna,  and  of  the  tables  of  stone,  and  of  Aaron's  rod  that 
budded.  Look,  look  boldly  through  Jesus  Christ :  but  do  not  content 
yourself  with  looking !  Hear  what  the  text  says  :  "  Having  boldness 
to  enter  in."  Blessed  be  God  if  he  has  taught  us  this  sweet  way 
of  no  longer  looking  from  afar,  but  of  entering  into  the  inmost  shrin© 
with  confidence  !     "  Boldness  to  enter  in  "  is  what  we  ought  to  have. 

Let  us  follow  the  example  of  the  high  priest,  and,  having  entered, 
lei  us  perform  the  functions  of  one  who  enters  in.  "  Boldness  to  enter  in  ** 
suggests  that  we  act  as  men  who  are  in  their  proper  places.  To 
Btand  within  the  veil  filled  the  servant  of  God  with  an  overpowering 


.    THE    RENT   VEIL.  68i' 

tense  of  the  divine  presence.  If  ever  in  hig  life  he  was  near  to  God^ 
lie  was  certainly  near  to  God  then,  when  quite  alone,  shut  in,  an(l 
excluded  from  all  the  world,  he  had  no  one  with  him,  except  th» 
glorious  Jehovah.  0  my  beloved,  may  we  this  morning  enter  into  the- 
holiest  in  this  sense !  Shut  out  from  the  world,  both  wicked  and 
Christian,  let  us  know  that  the  Lord  is  here,  most  near  and  manifest. 
Oh  that  we  may  now  cry  out  with  Hagar,  "  Have  I  also  here  looked  after 
him  that  seeth  me  ?  "  Oh,  how  sweet  to  realize  by  personal  enjoyment 
the  presence  of  Jehovah !  How  cheering  to  feel  that  the  Lord  of  hosts 
is  with  us  !  We  know  our  God  to  be  a  very  present  help  in  trouble. 
It  is  one  of  the  greatest  joys  out  of  heaven  to  be  able  to  sing — Jehovah. 
Shammah — the  Lord  is  here.  At  first  we  tremble  in  the  divine- 
presence ;  but  as  we  feel  more  of  the  spirit  of  adoption  we  draw  near 
with  sacred  delight,  and  feel  so  fully  at  home  with  our  God  that  we 
sing  with  Moses,  "  Lord,  thou  hast  been  our  dwelling  place  in  all 
generations."  Do  not  live  as  if  God  were  as  far  off  from  you  as  the 
east  is  from  the  west.  Live  not  far  below  on  the  earth  ;  but  live  on 
high,  as  if  you  were  in  heaven.  In  heaven  you  will  be  with  God ;  but 
on  earth  he  will  be  with  you  :  is  there  much  difference  ?  He  hath 
raised  us  up  together,  and  made  us  sit  together  in  heavenly  places  in. 
Christ  Jesus.  Jesus  hatli  made  us  nigh  by  his  precious  blood.  Try 
dsij  by  day  to  live  in  as  great  nearness  to  God,  as  the  high  priest  felfc 
when  he  stood  for  a  while  within  the  secret  of  Jehovah's  tabernacle. 

The  high  priest  had  a  sense  of  commu7iion  with  God;  he  was  not 
only  near,  but  he  spake  with  God.  I  cannot  tell  what  he  said,  but  IT 
should  think  that  on  the  special  day  the  high  priest  unburdened  him- 
self of  the  load  of  Israel's  sin  and  sorrow,  and  made  known  his- 
requests  unto  the  Lord.  Aaron,  standing  there  alone,  must  have  been 
filled  with  memories  of  his  own  faultiness,  and  of  the  idolatries  and 
backslidings  of  the  people.  God  shone  upon  him,  and  he  bowed 
before  God.  He  may  have  heard  things  which  it  was  not  lawful  for 
him  to  utter,  and  other  things  which  he  could  not  have  uttered  if  they 
had  been  lawful.  Beloved,  do  you  know  what  it  is  to  commune  with 
God  ?  Words  are  poor  vehicles  for  this  fellowship ;  but  what  a  blessed 
thing  it  is !  Proofs  of  the  existence  of  God  are  altogether  superfluous 
to  those  of  us  who  are  in  the  habit  of  conversing  with  the  Eternal  One. 
If  anybody  were  to  write  an  essay  to  prove  the  existence  of  my  wife, 
or  my  son,  I  certainly  should  not  read  it,  except  for  the  amusement  of 
the  thing ;  and  proofs  of  the  existence  of  God  to  the  man  who  com- 
munes with  God  are  much  the  same.  Many  of  you  walk  with  Godt 
what  bliss !  Fellowship  with  the  Most  High  is  elevating,  purifying^, 
strengthening.  Enter  into  it  boldly.  Enter  into  his  revealed  thoughts, 
even  as  he  graciously  enters  into  yours :  rise  to  his  plans,  as  he  con- 
descends to  yours ;  ask  to  be  uplifted  to  him,  even  as  he  deigns  to- 
dwell  with  you. 

This  is  what  the  rent  of  the  veil  brings  us  when  we  have  boldness 
to  enter  in ;  but,  mark  you,  the  rent  veil  brings  us  nothing  until  we 
have  boldness  to  enter  in.  Why  stand  we  without  ?  Jesus  brings  us 
near,  and  truly  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  his  Son. 
Jesus  Christ.  Let  us  not  be  slow  to  take  up  our  freedom,  and  come 
boldly  to  the  throne.     The  high  priest  entered  within  the  veil  of  blue>. 


^82  METEOPOLITAN  TAUERNACLE   PULPIT 

and  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fine  twined  linen,  with  blood,  and  with 
incense,  that  he  might  ^ray /or  Israel;  and  there  he  stood  before  the 
Most,  High,  pleading  with  him  to  bless  the  people.  0  beloved, 
prayer  is  a  divine  institution,  and  it  belongs  to  us.  But  there  are 
many  sorts  of  prayers.  There  is  the  prayer  of  one  who  seems  shut 
out  from  God's  holy  temple ;  there  is  the  prayer  of  another  who  stands 
in  the  court  of  the  Q-entiles  afar  ofE,  looking  towards  the  Temple ;  there 
is  the  prayer  of  one  who  gets  where  Israel  stands  and  pleads  with  the 
Ood  of  the  chosen ;  there  is  the  prayer  in  the  court  of  the  priests, 
when  the  sanctified  man  of  G-od  makes  intercession ;  but  the  best 
prayer  of  aU  is  offered  in  the  holiest  of  all.  There  is  no  fear  about 
prayer  being  heard  when  it  is  offered  in  the  holiest.  The  veiy 
position  of  the  man  proves  that  he  is  accepted  with  God.  He  is 
fitanding  on  the  surest  ground  of  acceptance,  and  he  is  so  near  to  God 
that  his  every  desire  is  heard.  There  the  man  is  seen  through  and 
through ;  for  he  is  very  near  to  God.  His  thoughts  are  read,  his 
tears  are  seen,  his  sighs  are  heard ;  for  he  has  boldness  to  enter  in. 
He  may  ask  what  he  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  him.  As  the 
altar  sanctifieth  the  gift,  so  the  most  holy  place,  entered  by  the  blood 
of  Jesus,  secures  a  certain  answer  to  the,  prayer  that  is  offered 
therein.  God  give  us  such  power  in  prayer!  It  is  a  wonderful 
thing  that  the  Lord  should  hearken  to  the  voice  of  a  man  ;  yet  are  there 
8uch  men.  Luther  came  out  of  his  closet,  and  cried,  Vict — *'Ihave 
conquered.'*  He  had  not  yet  met  his  adversaries  ;  but  as  he  had  pre- 
vailed with  God  for  men,  he  felt  that  he  should  prevail  with  men  for 
Ood. 

But  the  high  priest,  if  you  recollect,  after  he  had  communed  and 
prayed  with  God,  came  out  and  blessed  the  people.  He  put  on  his 
garments  of  glory  and  beauty,  which  he  had  laid  aside  when  he  went 
into  the  holy  place,  for  there  he  stood  in  simple  white,  and  nothing 
olse ;  and  now  he  came  out  wearing  the  breast-plate  and  all  his  precious 
ornaments,  and  he  blessed  the  people.  That  is  what  you  will  do  if 
you  have  the  boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  : 
you  will  bless  the  people  that  surround  you.  The  Lord  has  blessed 
you,  and  he  will  make  you  a  blessing.  Your  ordinary  conduct  and 
oonversation  will  be  a  blessed  example  ;  the  words  you  speak  for  Jesus 
will  be  like  a  dew  from  the  Lord  :  the  sick  wiU  be  comforted  by  your 
words  ;  the  despondent  will  be  encouraged  by  your  faith ;  the  lukewarm 
will  be  recovered  by  your  love.  You  will  be,  practically,  saying  to 
each  one  who  knows  you,  "  The  Lord  bless  thee,  and  keep  thee  :  the 
Lord  make  his  face  shine  upon  thee,  and  give  thee  peace."  You 
-will  become  a  channel  of  blessing:  "Out  of  your  belly  shall  flow 
livers  of  living  water."  May  we  each  one  have  boldness  to  enter  in, 
that  we  may  come  forth  laden  with  benedictions !. 

If  you  will  kindly  look  at  the  text,  you  will  notice,  what  I  shall 
merely  hint  at,  that  this  boldness  is  well  grounded.  I  always  like  to  see 
the  apostle  using  a  "■  therefore  " :  "  Having  therefore  boldness."  Paul  is 
often  a  true  poet,  but  he  is  always  a  correct  logician ;  he  is  as  logical 
as  if  he  were  dealing  with  mathematics  rather  than  theology.  Here  he 
writes  one  of  his  therefores. 

Why   is   it   that  we   have   boldness?     Is   it   not   because  of   our 


THE   RENT   VEIL.  OOa 

rdlationsliip  to  Christ  whicli  makes  us  "  brethren  "  ?  "  Having  there- 
fore, brethren,  boldness."  The  feeblest  believer  has  as  much  right  to 
enter  into  the  holy  place  as  Paul  had  ;  because  he  is  one  of  the  brother- 
hood. I  remember  a  rhyme  by  John  Eyland,  in  which  he  says  of 
heaven — 

"  They  all  shall  be  there,  the  great  and  the  small ; 
Poor  I  shall  shake  hands  with  the  blessed  St.  Paul." 

I  have  no  doubt  we  shall  have  such  a  position,  and  such  fellowship. 
Meanwhile,  we  do  shake  hands  with  him  this  morning  as  he  calls  us 
brethren.  We  are  brethren  to  one  another,  because  we  are  brethren 
to  Jesus.  Where  we  see  the  apostle  go,  we  will  go ;  yea,  rather, 
where  we  see  the  Great  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  our  profession 
enter,  we  will  follow.     "  Having,  therefore,  boldness." 

Beloved,  we  have  now  no  fear  of  death  in  the  most  holy  place.  The 
high  priest,  whoever  he  might  be,  must  always  have  dreaded  that 
solemn  day  of  atonement,  when  he  had  to  pass  into  the  silent  and 
secluded  place.  I  cannot  tell  whether  it  is  true,  but  I  have  read  that 
there  is  a  tradition  among  the  Jews,  that  a  rope  was  fastened  to  the 
high  priest's  foot  that  they  might  draw  out  his  corpse  in  case  he  died 
before  the  Lord.  I  should  not  wonder  if  their  superstition  devised 
such  a  thing,  for  it  is  an  awful  position  for  a  man  to  enter  into  the 
secret  dwelling  of  Jehovah.  But  we  cannot  die  in  the  holy  place  now, 
since  Jesus  has  died  for  us.  The  death  of  Jesus  is  the  guarantee  of 
the  eternal  life  of  all  for  whom  he  died.  We  have  boldness  to  enter, 
for  we  shall  not  perish. 

Our  boldness  arises  from  the  perfection  of  his  sacrifice.  Eead  the 
fourteenth  verse :  "  He  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified." 
We  rely  upon  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  believing  that  he  was  such  a 
perfect  substitute  for  us,  that  it  is  not  possible  for  us  to  die  after  our 
substitute  has  died ;  and  we  must  be  accepted,  because  he  is  accepted. 
We  believe  that  the  precious  blood  has  so  effectually  and  eternally 
put  away  sin  from  us,  that  we  are  no  longer  obnoxious  to  the  wrath 
of  God.  We  may  safely  stand  where  sin  must  be  smitten,  if  there  be 
any  sin  upon  us  ;  for  we  are  so  washed,  so  cleansed,  and  so  fully 
justified  that  we  are  accepted  in  the  Beloved.  Sin  is  so  completely 
lifted  from  us  by  the  vicarious  sacrifice  of  Christ,  that  we  have  bold- 
ness to  enter  where  Jehovah  himself  dwells. 

Moreover,  we  have  this  for  certain,  that  as  a  priest  had  a  right  to 
dwell  near  to  God,  we  have  that  privilege ;  for  Jesus  hath  made  us 
kings  and  priests  unto  God,  and  all  the  privileges  of  the  office  come  to 
us  with  the  office  itself,  AVe  have  a  mission  within  the  holy  place ;  we 
are  called  to  enter  there  upon  holy  business,  and  so  we  have  no  fear 
of  being  intruders.  A  burglar  may  enter  a  house,  but  he  does  not 
enter  with  boldness ;  he  is  always  afraid  lest  he  should  be  surprised. 
You  might  enter  a  stranger's  house,  without  an  invitation,  but  you 
would  feel  no  boldness  there.  We  do  not  enter  the  holiest  as  house- 
breakers, nor  as  strangers  ;  we  come  in  obedience  to  a  call,  to  fulfil  our 
office.  When  once  we  accept  the  sacrifice  of  Christ, we  are  at  home 
with  God.  Where  should  a  child  be  bold  bui:  in  his  father's  house  ? 
Where  should  a  priest  stand  but  in  the  temple  of  his  God,  for  whose 


684  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

service  lie  is  set  apart  ?   Where  should  a  blood- washed  sinner  lire  hut 
with  his  God,  to  whom  he  is  reconciled  ? 

It  is  a  heavenly  joy  to  feel  this  boldness  !  We  hare  now  such  a 
love  for  God,  and  such  a  delight  in  him,  that  it  never  crosses  our 
minds  that  we  are  trespassers  when  we  draw  near  to  him.  We  never 
Bay,  "  God,  my  dread,"  but  "  God,  my  exceeding  joy."  His  name 
is  the  music  to  which  our  lives  are  set :  though  God  be  a  consuming 
fire  we  love  him  as  such,  for  he  will  onl}^  consume  our  dross,  and 
that  we  desire  to  lose.  Under  no  aspect  is  God  now  distasteful  to  us. 
We  delight  in  him,  be  he  what  he  may.  So  you  see,  beloved,  we 
have  good  grounds  for  boldness  when  we  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the- 
blood  of  Jesus. 

I  cannot  leave  this  point  until  I  have  reminded  you  that  tee  may 
have  this  boldness  of  entering  in  at  all  times,  because  the  veil  is  always- 
rent,  and  is  never  restored  to  its  old  place.  '*  The  Lord  said  untO' 
Moses,  Speak  unto  Aaron  thy  brother,  that  he  come  not  at  aU  times 
into  the  holy  place  within  the  veil  before  the  mercy-seat,  which  ia- 
upon  the  ark;  that  he  die  not;"  but  the  Lord  saith  not  so  to  us. 
Dear  child  of  God,  you  may  at  all  times  have  **  boldness  to  enter  in.'*" 
The  veil  is  rent  both  day  and  night.  Yea,  let  me  say  it,  even  when 
thine  eye  of  faith  is  dim,  still  enter  in ;  when  evidences  are  dark, 
Btill  have  ''boldness  to  enter  in";  and  even  if  thou  hast  unhappily 
sinned,  remember  that  access  is  open  to  thy  penitent  prayer.  Come  still 
through  the  rent  veil,  sinner  as  thou  art.  What  though  thou  hast 
backslidden,  what  though  thou  art  grieved  with  the  sense  of  thy 
wanderings,  come  even  now!  "To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden 
not  your  hearts,"  but  enter  at  once ;  for  the  veil  is  not  there  to  exclude 
thee,  though  doubt  and  unbelief  may  make  you  think  it  is  so.  The 
veil  cannot  be  there,  for  it  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom. 

III.  My  time  has  fled,  and  I  shall  not  have  space  to  speak  as  I 
meant  to  do  upon  the  last  point — how  we  exercise  this  grace.  Let 
me  give  you  the  notes  of  what  I  would  have  said. 

Let  us  at  this  nour  enter  into  the  holiest.  Behold  the  way !  We  come 
bi/  the  way  of  atonement:  "Having  therefore,  brethren,  boldness  to 
enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus."  I  have  been  made  to 
feel  really  ill  through  the  fierce  and  blasphemous  words  that  have  been 
used  of  late  by  gentlemen  of  the  modern  school  concerning  the  precious 
blood.  I  will  not  defile  my  lips  by  a  repetition  of  the  thrice-accursed 
things  which  they  have  dared  to  utter  while  trampling  on  the  blood  of 
Jesus.  Everywhere  throughout  this  divine  Book  you  meet  with  the 
precious  blood.  How  can  he  call  himself  a  Christian  who  speaks  in 
flippant  and  profane  language  of  the  blood  of  atonement  ?  My  brothers, 
there  is  no  way  into  the  holiest,  even  though  the  veil  be  rent,  without 
blood.  You  might  suppose  that  the  high  priest  of  old  brought  the 
blood  because  the  veil  was  there ;  but  you  have  to  bring  it  with  you 
though  the  veil  is  gone.  The  way  is  open,  and  you  have  boldntss  to- 
enter ;  but  not  without  the  blood  of  Jesus.  It  would  be  an  unholy 
boldness  which  would  think  of  drawing  near  to  God  without  the  blood 
of  the  great  Sacrifice.  We  have  always  to  plead  the  atonement.  As 
without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission  of  sin,  so  without 
that  blood  there  is  no  access  to  God. 


THE   RENT   VEIL.  6'85 

Next,  the  way  by  wMch  we  come  is  an  unfailing  way.  Please  notice 
that  word — "  by  a  neiv  way  "  ;  this  means  by  a  way  which  is  always 
fresh.  The  original  Greek  suggests  the  idea  of  **  newly  slain."  Jesus 
died  long  ago,  but  his  death  is  the  same  now  as  at  the  moment  of  its 
ocjcurrence.  We  come  to  God,  dear  friends,  by  a  way  which  is  always 
effectual  with  God.  It  never,  never  loses  one  whit  of  its  power  and 
freshness. 

*'  Dear  dying  Lamb,  thy  precious  blood 
Shall  never  lose  its  power." 

The  way  is  not  worn  away  by  long  traffic :  it  is  always  new.  If  Jesus 
Christ  had  died  yesterday,  would  you  not  feel  that  you  could  plead 
his  merit  to-day  ?  Very  well,  you  can  plead  that  merit  after  these 
nineteen  centuries  with  as  much  confidence  as  at  the  first  hour.  The 
way  to  God  is  always  newly  laid.  In  e:ffect,  the  wounds  of  Jesus 
incessantly  bleed  our  expiation.  The  cross  is  as  glorious  as  though 
he  were  still  upon  it.  So  far  as  the  freshness,  vigour,  and  force  of  the 
atoning  death  is  concerned,  we  come  by  a  new  way.  Let  it  be  always 
new  to  our  hearts.  Let  the  doctrine  of  atonement  never  grow  stale, 
but  let  it  have  dew  upon  it  for  our  souls. 

Then  the  apostle  adds,  it  is  a  ''''living  way^  A  wonderful  word! 
The  way  by  which  the  high  priest  went  into  the  holy  place  was  of 
course  a  material  way,  and  so  a  dead  way.  We  come  by  a  spiritual 
way,  suitable  to  our  spirits.  The  way  could  not  help  the  high  priest, 
but  our  way  helps  us  abundantly.  Jesus  says,  "I  am  the  way,  the 
truth,  and  the  life^  When  we  come  to  God  by  this  way,  the  way 
itself  leads,  guides,  bears,  brings  us  near.  This  way  givcd  us  life 
with  which  to  come. 

It  is  a  dedicated  way :  "  which  he  hath  consecrated  for  us."  When 
a  new  road  is  opened,  it  is  set  apart  and  dedicated  for  the  public  use. 
Sometimes  a  public  building  is  opened  by  a  king  or  a  prince,  and  so 
is  dedicated  to  its  purpose.  Beloved,  the  way  to  God  through  Jesus 
Ohrist  is  dedicated  by  Christ,  and  ordained  by  Christ  for  the  use  of 
poor  believing  sinners,  such  as  we  are.  He  has  consecrated  the  way 
towards  God,  and  dedicated  it  for  us,  that  we  may  freely  use  it.  Surely, 
if  there  is  a  road  set  apart  for  me,  I  may  use  it  without  fear  ;  and  the 
way  to  God  and  heaven  through  Jesus  Christ  is  dedicated  by  the 
Saviour  for  sinners  ;  it  is  the  King's  highway  for  wayfaring  men,  who 
are  bound  for  the  City  of  God ;  therefore,  let  ns  use  it.  "  Consecrated 
for  us  "  !     Blessed  word ! 

Lastly,  it  is  « .  Christly  way ;  for  when  we  come  to  God,  we  still  come 
through  his  flesh.  There  is  no  coming  to  Jehovah,  except  by  the 
incarnate  God.  God  in  human  flesh  is  our  way  to  God ;  the  substi- 
tutionary death  of  the  Word  made  flesh  is  also  the  way  to  the  Father. 
There  is  no  coming  to  God,  except  by  representation.  Jesus  represents 
us  before  God,  and  we  come  to  God  through  him  who  is  our  covenant 
head,  our  representative  and  forerunner  before  the  throne  of  the 
Most  High.  Let  us  never  try  to  pray  without  Christ ;  never  try  to  sing 
without  Christ;  never  try  to  preach  without  Christ.  Let  us  perform 
no  holy  function,  nor  attempt  to  have  fellowship  with  God  in  any  shape 
or  way,  except  through  that  rent  which  he  has  made  in  the  veil  by  his 
flesh,  sanctified  for  us,  and  offered  upon  the  cross  on  our  behalf. 


586  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Beloved,  I  have  done  when  I  have  just  remarked  upon  the  next 
two  verses,  which  are  necessary  to  complete  the  sense,  but  which  I 
was  obliged  to  omit  this  morning,  since  there  would  be  no  time  to 
handle  them.  We  are  called  to  take  holy  freedoms  with  God.  "  Let 
us  draw  near,*'  at  once,  **  with  a  true  heart  in  full  assurance  of  faith.'* 
Let  us  do  so  boldly,  for  we  have  a  great  high  priest.  The  twenty- 
first  verse  reminds  us  of  this.  Jesus  is  the  great  Priest,  and  we  are 
the  sub-priests  under  him,  and  since  he  bids  us  come  near  to  God,  and 
himself  leads  the  way,  let  us  follow  him  into  the  inner  sanctuary. 
Because  he  lives,  we  shall  live  also.  We  shall  not  die  in  the  holy  place, 
unless  he  dies.  God  will  not  smite  us  unless  he  smites  him.  So, 
*'  having  a  high  priest  over  the  house  of  God,  let  us  draw  near  with 
a  true  heart  in  full  assurance  of  faith." 

And  then  the  apostle  tells  us  that  we  may  not  only  come  with 
boldness,  because  our  high  priest  leads  the  way,  but  because  we  our- 
pelves  are  prepared  for  entrance.  Two  things  the  high  priest  had  to 
do  before  he  might  enter :  one  was,  to  be  sprinkled  with  blood,  and 
this  we  have ;  for  "  our  hearts  are  sprinkled  from  an  evil  conscience." 

The  other  requisite  for  the  priests  was  to  have  their  "  bodies  washed 
with  pure  water."  This  we  have  received  in  symbol  in  our  baptism, 
and  in  reality  in  the  spiritual  cleansing  of  regeneration.  To  us  has 
been  fulfilled  the  prayer — 

*•  Let  the  water  and  the  blood 
From  thy  riven  side  which  flowed, 
Be  of  sin  the  double  cure, 
Cleanse  me  from  its  guilt  and  power." 

We  have  known  the  washing  of  water  by  the  Word,  and  we  have  been 
sanctified  by  the  Spirit  of  his  grace ;  therefore  let  us  enter  into  the 
holiest.  Why  should  we  stay  away  ?  Hearts  sprinkled  with  blood, 
bodies  washed  with  pure  water — these  are  the  ordained  preparations 
for  acceptable  entrance.  Come  near,  beloved  I  May  the  Holy  Spirit 
be  the  spirit  of  access  to  you  now.  Come  to  your  God,  and  then  abide 
with  him !  He  is  your  Father,  your  all  in  all.  Sit  down  and  rejoice 
in  him;  take  your  fill  of  love;  and  let  not  your  communion  be 
broken  between  here  and  heaven.  Why  should  it  be?  Why  not 
begin  to-day  that  sweet  enjoyment  of  perfect  reconciliation  and  delight 
in  God  which  shall  go  on  increasing  in  intensity  until  you  behold 
the  Lord  in  open  vision,  and  go  no  more  out  ?  Heaven  will  bring  a 
great  change  in  condition,  but  not  in  our  standing,  if  even  now  we 
stand  within  the  veil.  It  will  be  only  such  a  change  as  there  is 
between  the  perfect  day  and  the  daybreak ;  for  we  have  the  same  sun, 
and  the  same  light  from  the  sun,  and  the  same  privilege  of  walking 
in  the  light.  **  Until  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away,  turn, 
my  beloved,  and  be  thou  like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart  upon  the  moun- 
tains of  Division."     Amen,  and  Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Hebrews  x. 


Hymns  FROM  '*  Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 318,  296,  395. 


THE  MIEACLES  OF  OUE  LOED'S  DEATH. 


I   $ttm^ 


iNTEJfDED   FOR   EeADING    OX    LoBD'S-DAY,    DECEMBER    30tH,    1888, 
DELIVERED   BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE    METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWIXGTON, 
On  Lord' i--day  Evening,  April  Ut,  1888. 


"Jesus,  when  he  had  cried  again  with  a  loud  voice,  yielded  up  the  ghost.  And,  behold,, 
the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom;  and  the  earth  did 
quake,  and  the  rocks  rent;  and  the  graves  were  opened  ;  and  many  bodies  of  the  saints 
which  slept  arose,  and  came  out  of  the  graves  after  his  resurrection,  and  went  into  the 
holy  city,  and  appeared  unto  many." — Matthew  xxvii.  50 — 53. 

Our  Lord's  death  is  a  marvel  set  in  a  surrounding  of  marvels.  It 
reminds  one  of  a  Kohinoor  surrounded  with  a  circle  of  gems.  As  the 
sun,  in  the  midst  of  the  planets  which  surround  it,  far  outshines  then^ 
all,  so  the  death  of  Christ  is  more  wonderful  than  the  miracles  whicln 
happened  at  the  time.  Yet,  after  having  seen  the  sun,  we  take  a  j)lea- 
sure  in  studying  the  planets,  and  so,  after  believing  in  the  unique 
death  of  Christ,  and  putting  our  trust  in  him  as  the  Crucified  One,  we 
find  it  a  great  pleasure  to  examine  in  detail  those  four  planetary 
wonders  mentioned  in  the  text,  which  circle  round  the  great  sun  of 
the  death  of  our  Lord  himself. 

Here  they  are :  the  veil  of  the  temple  ivas  rent  m  twain  ;  the  earth  did 
quake;  the  rocks  rent;  the  graves  ivere  02)ened. 

I.  To  begin  with  the  first  of  these  wonders.  I  cannot,  to-night, 
enlarge.     I  have  not  the  strength.     I  wish  merely  to  suggest  thoughts. 

Consider  the  rent  veil,  or  mysteries  laid  open.  By  the  death  of 
Christ  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the 
bottom,  and  the  mysteries  which  had  been  concealed  in  the  most  holy 
place  throughout  many  generations  were  laid  open  to  the  gaze  of  all 
believers.  Beginning,  as  it  were,  at  the  top  in  the  Deity  of  Christ. 
down  to  the  lowest  part  of  Christ's  manhood,  the  veil  was  rent,  and 
everything  was  discovered  to  every  spiritual  eye. 

1.  This  was  the  first  miracle  of  Christ  after  death.  The  first  miracle  of 
Christ  in  life  was  significant,  and  taught  us  much.  He  turned  the 
water  into  wine,  as  if  to  show  that  he  raised  all  common  life  to  a 


•688  METEOPOLITAW   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

higlier  grade,  and  put  into  all  truth  a  power  and  a  sweetness,  which 
•could  not  have  been  there  apart  from  him.  But  this  first  miracle  of 
his  after  death  stands  above  the  first  miracle  of  his  life,  because, 
if  you  will  remember,  that  miracle  was  wrought  in  his  presence.  He 
was  there,  and  turned  the  water  into  wine.  But  Jesus,  as  man,  was 
not  in  the  temple.  That  miracle  was  wrought  in  his  absence,  and  it 
enhances  its  wonder.  They  are  both  equally  miraculous,  but  there  is 
A  touch  more  striking  about  this  second  miracle — that  he  was  not  there* 
to  speak  and  make  the  veil  rend  in  twain.  His  soul  had  gone  from 
liis  body,  and  neither  his  body  nor  his  soul  was  in  that  secret  place 
of  the  tabernacles  of  the  Most  High ;  and  yet,  at  a  distance,  his  wiU 
sufficed  to  rend  that  thick  veil  of  fine  twined  linen  and  cunning  work. 

The  miracle  of  turning  water  into  wine  was  wrought  in  a  private 
.house,  amidst  the  family  and  such  disciples  as  were  friends  of  the 
family  ;  but  this  marvel  was  wrought  in  the  temple  of  God.  There  is  a 
singular  sacredness  about  it,  because  it  was  a  deed  of  wonder  done 
in  that  most  awful  and  mysterious  place,  which  was  the  centre  of 
hallowed  worship,  and  the  abode  of  God.  See !  he  dies,  and  at  the 
very  door  of  God's  high  sanctuary  he  rends  the  veil  in  twain.  There 
is  a  solemnity  about  this  miracle,  as  wrought  before  Jehovah,  which  I 
€an  hardly  convey  in  speech,  but  which  you  will  feel  in  your  own  souls. 

Do  not  forget  also  that  this  was  done  by  the  Saviour  after  his  death, 
iand  this  sets  the  miracle  in  a  very  remarkable  light.  He  rends  the 
•veil  at  the  very  instant  of  death.  Jesus  yielded  up  the  ghost,  and, 
behold,  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain.  For  thirty  years  he 
sseems  to  have  prepared  himself  for  the  fii-st  miracle  of  his  life ;  he 
works  his  first  miracle  after  death  in  the  moment  of  expiring.  As  his 
soul  departed  from  his  body  our  blessed  Lord  at  that  same  moment 
laid  hold  upon  the  great  veil  of  his  Father's  sjmabolical  house,  and 
rent  it  in  twain. 

2.  This  first  miracle  after  death  stands  in  such  a  place  that  we 
cannot  pass  it  by  without  grave  thought.  It  was  very  signijicant,  as 
^tandmg  at  the  head  of  what  I  may  call  a  new  dispensation.  The  miracle 
of  turning  water  into  wine  begins  his  public  life,  and  sets  the  key 
of  it.  This  begins  his  work  after  death,  and  marks  the  tone  of  it. 
What  does  it  mean  ? 

Does  it  not  mean  that  the  death  of  Christ  is  the  revelation  ana  explana' 
lion  of  secrets  ?  Vanish  all  the  types  and  shadows  of  the  ceremonial 
law ; — vanish  because  fulfilled  and  explained  in  the  death  of  Christ. 
The  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  key  of  all  true  philosophy :  God 
made  flesh,  dying  for  man — if  that  does  not  explain  a  mystery,  it 
cannot  be  explained.  If  with  this  thread  in  your  hand  you  cannot 
follow  the  lab}Tinth  of  human  affairs,  and  learn  the  great  purpose 
of  God,  then  you  cannot  follow  it  at  all.  The  death  of  Christ  is  the 
,  great  veil-render,  the  great  revealer  of  secrets. 

It  is  also  the  great  opener  of  entrances.  There  was  no  way  into  the  holy 
place  till  Jesus,  dying,  rent  the  veil ;  the  way  into  the  most  holy  of  all  was 
not  made  manifest  till  he  died.  If  you  desire  to  approach  God,  the  death 
of  Christ  is  the  way  to  him.  If  you  want  the  nearest  access  and  the 
closest  communion  that  a  creature  can  have  with  his  God,  behold,  the 
cacrifice  of  Christ  reveals  the  way  to  you.     Jesus  not  only  says,  *<I 


THB    MIRACLES   OF   OUR   I^ORD's  DEATH.  689 

ftm  the  way,"  but,  rending  the  Teil,  he  makes  the  way.     The  veil  oi  hia 
flesh  being  rent,  the  way  to  God  is  made  most  clear  to  every  behevmg 

BO  Til  • 

Moreover,  the  cross  is  the  clearing  of  all  obstacles.  Christ  by  death 
rent  the  veil.  Then  between  his  people  and  heaven  there  remains  no 
obstruction,  or  if  there  be  any— if  your  fears  invent  an  obstruction— 
the  Christ  who  rent  the  veil  continues  still  to  rend  it.  He  breaks  the 
gates  of  brass,  and  cuts  the  bars  of  iron  in  sunder.  Behold,  in  his 
death  "  the  breaker  is  come  up  before  them,  and  the  Lord  on  the  head 
of  them."  He  has  broken  up  and  cleared  the  way,  and  all  his  chosen 
people  may  foUolv  him  up  to  the  glorious  throne  of  God. 

This  is  significant  of  the  spirit  of  the  dispensation  under  which  we 
now  live.  Obstacles  are  cleared;  difficulties  are  solved;  heaven  ia 
opened  to  all  believers. 

3.  It  was  a  miracle  worthy  of  Christ.  Stop  a  minute  and  adore  your 
dying  Lord.  Does  he  with  such  a  miracle  signalize  his  death?  Does 
it  not  irovo  his  immortality?  It  is  true  he  has  bowed  his  head  in 
death.  Obedient  to  his  Father's  will,  when  he  knows  that  the  time 
has  come  for  him  to  die,  he  bows  his  head  in  willing  acquiescence; 
but  at  that  moment  when  you  call  him  dead,  he  rends  the  veil  of  the 
temple.     Is  there  not  immortality  in  him  though  he  died? 

And  sec  what  power  he  possessed.  His  hands  are  nailed ;  his  side 
is  about  to  be  pierced.  As  he  hangs  there  he  cannot  protect  himself 
from  the  insults  of  the  soldiery,  but  in  his  utmost  weakness  he  is  so 
strong  that  he  rends  the  heavy  veil  of  the  temple  from  the  top  to  the 

bottom.  J      •  • 

Behold  his  wisdom,  for  in  this  moment,  viewing  the  deed  spiritually, 
he  opens  up  to  us  all  wisdom,  and  lays  bare  the  secrets  of  God.  The 
veil  which  Moses  put  upon  his  face  Christ  takes  away  in  the  moment  of 
his  death.  The  true  Wisdom  in  his  dying  preaches  his  grandest  sermon 
by  tearing  away  that  which  hid  the  supremest  truth  from  the  gaze 
of  aU  believing  eyes. 

Beloved,  if  Jesus  does  this  for  us  in  his  death,  surely,  we  shaU  be 
saved  by  his  life.  Jesus  who  died  is  yet  alive,  and  we  trust  in  him 
to  lead  us  into  "  the  holy  places  made  without  hands." 

Before  I  pass  on  to  the  second  wonder,  I  invite  everyone  here,  who  . 
as  yet  does  not  know  the  Saviour,  seriously  to  think  upon  the  miracles 
which  attended  his  death,  and  judge  what  sort  of  man  he  was  who, 
for  our  sins,  thus  laid  down  his  life.  He  was  not  suffered  by  the 
Father  to  die  without  a  miracle  to  show  that  he  had  made  a  way  for 
sinners  to  draw  near  to  God. 

II.     Pass  on  now  to  the  second  wonder—"  the  earth  did  quake. 
The  immovable  was  stirred  by  the  death  of  Christ.      Christ  did  not  touch 
the  earth :  he  was  uplifted  from  it  on  the  tree.    He  was  dying,  but  m 
the  laying  aside  of  his  power,  in  the  act  of  death,  he  made  the  earth 
beneath  him,  which  we  caU  "the  soHd  globe,"  itself  to  ^uake.    What 

did  it  teach?  ^       /.  7.     ^v    7    ^  .      -17 

^id  it  not  mean^  first,  the  physical  universe  fore-feelmg  the  last  ternbla 
shake  of  its  doom?  The  day  will  come  when  the  Christ' will  appear 
upon  the  earOi,  and  in  due  time  all  things  that  are  shall  be  jroUed 
up^  like  garments  worn  out,  and  put  away.     Once  more  .W^'he  ^^ak, 


r>00  MBTKOPOLITAN   TABERNAOLB   PULPIT. 

and  then  will  he  shake  not  only  the  earth,  but  also  heaven.  The  things 
which  cannot  be  shaken  will  remain,  but  this  earth  is  not  one  of 
them:  it  will  be  shaken  out  of  its  place.  "The  earth  also  and  the 
works  that  are  therein  shall  be  burned  up."  Nothing  shall  stand 
before  him.  He  alone  is.  These  other  things  do  but  seem  to  be ; 
and  before  the  terror  of  his  face  all  men  shall  tremble,  and  heaven  and 
earth  shall  flee  away.  So,  when  he  died,  earth  seemed  to  anticipate 
its  doom,  and  quaked  in  his  presence.  How  will  it  quake  when  he 
that  lives  again  shall  come  with  all  the  glory  of  God !  How  will  you 
quake,  my  hearer,  if  you  should  wake  up  in  the  next  world  without  a 
Saviour !  How  will  you  tremble  in  that  day  when  he  shall  come  to 
judge  the  world  in  righteousness,  and  you  shall  have  to  face  the  Saviour 
whom  you  have  despised !     Think  of  it,  I  pray  you. 

Did  not  that  miracle  also  mean  this  ? — that  the  spiritual  world  is  to  he 
moved  hy  the  cross  of  Christ.  He  dies  upon  the  cross  and  shakes  the 
material  world,  as  a  prediction  that  that  death  of  his  would  shake 
^he  world  that  lieth  in  the  wicked  one,  and  cause  convulsions  in  the 
moral  kingdom.  Brothers,  think  of  it.  We  say  of  ourselves,  "How  shall 
we  ever  move  the  world?"  The  apostles  did  not  ask  that  question. 
They  had  confidence  in  the  gospel  which  they  preached.  Those  who 
heard  them  saw  that  confidence ;  and  when  they  opened  their  mouths 
they  said,  "The  men  that  have  turned  the  world  upside  down  have 
oome  hither  unto  us."  The  apostles  believed  in  shaking  the  world  with 
the  simple  preaching  of  the  gospel.  I  entreat  you  to  believe  the 
same.  It  is  a  vast  city  this — this  London.  How  can  we  ever  affect 
it  ?  China,  Hindostan,  Africa — these  are  immense  regions.  Will  the 
>cross  of  Christ  tell  upon  them  ?  Yes,  my  brethren,  for  it  shook  the 
earth,  and  it  will  yet  shake  the  great  masses  of  mankind.  If  we  have 
but  faith  in  it,  and  perseverance  to  keep  on  with  the  preaching  of  the 
Word,  it  is  but  a  matter  of  time  when  the  name  of  Jesus  shall  be 
known  of  all  men,  and  when  every  knee  shall  bow  to  him,  and  every 
tongue  confess  that  he  is  Christ,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father.  The 
earth  did  quake  beneath  the  cross ;  and  it  shall  again.  The  Lord  God 
\)e  praised  for  it. 

That  old  world — how  many  years  it  had  existed  I  cannot  tell.  The 
age  of  the  world,  from  that  beginning  which  is  mentioned  in  the  first 
verse  of  the  Book  of  Genesis,  we  are  not  able  to  compute.  However 
old  it  was,  it  had  to  shake  when  the  Redeemer  died.  This  carries 
us  over  another  of  our  difficulties.  The  system  of  evil  we  have  to  deal 
with  is  so  long- established,  hoary,  and  reverent  with  antiquity,  that 
we  say  to  ourselves,  "We  cannot  do  much  against  old  prejudices." 
But  it  was  the  old,  old  earth  that  quivered  and  quaked  beneath  the 
dying  Christ,  and  it  shall  do  so  again.  Magnificent  systems,  sustained 
by  philosophy  and  poetry,  will  yet  yield  before  what  is  called  the  com- 
paratively new  doctrine  of  the  cross.  Assuredly  it  is  not  new,  but  older 
than  the  earth  itself.  It  is  God's  own  gospel,  everlasting  and  eternal. 
It  will  shake  down  the  antique  and  the  venerable,  as  surely  as  the  „ 

Lord  liveth;   and  I  see  the  prophecy  of  this  in  the  quaking  of  the  I 

earth  beneath  the  cross. 

It  does  seem  impossible,  does  it  not,  that  the  mere  preaching  of 
Christ  can  do  this?    And  hence  certain  men  must  link  to  the  preaching 


THE  MIRACLES   OF   OUB  LORD's   DEATH.  691 

of  Christ  all  the  aids  of  music  and  architecture,  and  I  know  not  what 
beside,  till  the  cross  of  Christ  is  overlaid  with  human  inventions, 
crushed  and  buried  beneath  the  wisdom  of  man.  But  what  was  it 
that  made  the  earth  quake  ?  Simply  our  Lord's  death,  and  no  addition 
of  human  power  or  wisdom.  It  seemed  a  very  inadequate  means  to 
produce  so  great  a  result ;  but  it  was  sufficient,  for  the  "  weakness  of 
Ood  is  stronger  than  men,  and  the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than 
men  "  ;  and  Christ,  in  his  very  death,  suffices  to  make  the  earth  quake 
beneath  his  cross.  Come,  let  us  be  well  content  in  the  battle  in  which 
we  are  engaged,  to  use  no  weapon  but  the  gospel,  no  battle-axe  but 
the  cross.  Could  we  but  believe  it  the  old,  old  story  is  the  only  story 
that  is  needed  to  be  told  to  reconcile  man  to  God.  Jesus  died  in  the 
sinner's  stead,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  a  magnificent  display  of  God's 
grace  and  justice  in  one  single  act.  Could  we  but  keep  to  this  only, 
we  should  see  the  victory  coming  speedily  to  our  conquering  Lord. 

I  leave  that  second  miracle ;  wherein  you  see  the  immovable  stirred 
in  the  quaking  of  the  earth. 

III.     Only  a  hint  or  two  upon  the  third  miracle — the  eocks  rent. 

I  have  been  informed  that,  to  this  very  day,  there  are  at  Jerusalem 
certain  marks  of  rock-rending  of  the  most  unusual  kind.  Travellers 
have  said  that  they  are  not  such  as  are  usually  produced  by  earth- 
quake, or  any  other  cause.  Upon  that  I  will  say  but  little ;  but  it  is 
a  wonderful  thing  that,  as  Jesus  died,  as  his  soul  was  rent  from  his 
body,  as  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  two,  so  the  earth,  the  rocky 
part  of  it,  the  most  solid  structure  of  all,  was  rent  in  gulfs  and  chasms 
in  a  single  moment.  What  does  this  miracle  show  us  but  this — the 
insensible  startled  ?  What !  Could  rocks  feel  ?  Yet  they  rent  at  the 
sight  of  Christ^s  death.  Men's  hearts  did  not  respond  to  the  agonizing 
cries  of  the  dying  Eedeemer,  but  the  rocks  responded :  the  rocks  were 
rent.  He  did  not  die  for  rocks  ;  yet  rocks  were  more  tender  than  the 
hearts  of  men,  for  whom  he  shed  his  blood. 

"  Of  reason  all  things  show  some  sign, 
But  this  unfeeling  heart  of  mine," 

said  the  poet ;  and  he  spoke  the  truth.  Eocks  could  rend,  but  yet 
some  men's  hearts  are  not  rent  by  the  sight  of  the  cross.  However, 
beloved,  here  is  the  point  that  I  seem  to  see  here — that  obstinacy  and 
obduracy  will  be  conquered  by  the  death  of  Christ.  You  may  preach 
to  a  man  about  death,  and  he  will  not  tremble  at  its  certainty  or 
solemnity ;  yet  try  him  with  it.  You  may  preach  to  a  man  about 
hell,  but  he  will  harden  his  heart,  like  Pharaoh,  against  the  judgment 
of  the  Lord;  yet  try  him  with  it.  All  things  that  can  move  man 
•hould  be  used.  But  that  which  does  affect  the  most  obdurate  and 
obstinate  is  the  great  love  of  God,  so  strangely  seen  in  the  death  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I  will  not  stay  to  show  you  how  it  is,  but  I 
will  remind  you  that  it  is  so.  It  was  this  which,  in  the  case  of  many 
of  us,  brought  tears  of  repentance  to  our  eyes,  and  led  us  to  submit  to 
the  will  of  God.  I  know  that  it  was  so  with  me.  I  looked  at  a 
thousand  things,  and  I  did  not  relent  j  but  when 

"  I  saw  One  hanging  on  a  tree 
In  agonies  and  blood," 


692  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  dying  there  for  me,  then  did  I  smite  upon  my  breast,  and  I  was 
in  bitterness  for  him,  as  one  that  is  in  bitterness  for  his  first-born.  I 
am  sure  your  own  hearts  confess  that  the  great  rock-render  is  the- 
dying  Saviour. 

Well,  now,  as  it  is  with  you,  so  shall  you  find  it  with  other  m^n. 
When  you  have  done  your  best,  and  have  not  succeeded,  bring  out 
this  last  hammer — the  cross  of  Christ.  I  have  often  seen  on  pieces  of 
cannon,  in  Latin  words,  this  inscription,  "The  last  argument  of  kings." 
That  is  to  say,  cannons  are  the  last  argument  of  kings.  But  the  cros* 
is  the  last  argument  of  God.  If  a  dying  Saviour  does  not  convert  you, 
what  will  ?  If  his  bleeding  wounds  do  not  attract  you  to  God,  what 
will  ?  If  Jesus  bears  our  sin  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,  and  puts  it 
away,  and  if  this  does  not  bring  you  to  God,  with  confession  of  your 
sin,  and  hatred  of  it,  then  there  remains  nothing  more  for  you.  "How 
shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  "  The  cross  is  the 
rock-render.  Brothers  and  sisters,  go  on  teaching  the  love  of  th(v 
dying  Son  of  God.  Go  on  preaching  Christ,  You  will  tunnel  tho 
Alps  of  pride  and  the  granite  hiUs  of  prejudice  with  this.  You  shall 
find  an  entrance  for  Christ  into  the  inmost  hearts  of  men,  though  they 
be  hard  as  adamant ;  and  this  will  be  by  the  preaching  of  the  cross- 
in  the  power  of  the  Spirit. 

lY.  But  now  I  close  with  the  last  miracle.  These  wonders- 
accumulate,  and  they  depend  upon  each  other.  The  quaking  earth 
produced,  no  doubt,  the  rending  of  the  rocks  ;  and  the  rending  of  the 
rocks  aided  in  the  fourth  wonder.  "The  graves  were  opened.'* 
The  graves  opened,  and  the  dead  revived.  That  is  our  fourth  head. 
It  is  the  great  consequence  of  the  death  of  Christ.  The  graves  were^ 
opened.  Man  is  the  only  animal  that  cares  about  a  sepulchre.  Some 
persons  fret  about  how  they  shall  be  buried.  That  is  the  last  concern 
that  ever  would  cross  my  mind.  I  feel  persuaded  that  people  will 
bury  me  out  of  hatred,  or  out  of  love,  and  especially  out  of  love  to- 
themselves.  We  need  not  trouble  about  that.  But  man  has  often 
shown  his  pride  by  his  tomb.  That  is  a  strange  thing.  To  garland 
the  gallows  is  a  novelty,  I  think,  not  yet  perpetrated;  but  to  pile 
marble  and  choice  statuary  upon  a  tomb — what  is  it  but  to  adorn  a 
gibbet,  or  to  show  man's  great  grandeur  where  his  littleness  is  alone 
apparent.  Dust,  ashes,  rottenness,  putridity,  and  then  a  statue,  and 
all  manner  of  fine  things,  to  make  you  think  that  the  creature  that  goes 
back  to  dust  is,  after  aU,  a  great  one.  Now,  when  Jesus  died,  sepulchres 
were  laid  hare^  and  the  dead  were  exposed :  what  does  this  mean  ? 

I  think  we  have  in  this  last  miracle  "  the  history  of  a  man."  There 
he  lies  dead — corrupt,  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  But  what  a 
beautiful  sepulchre  he  lies  in!  He  is  a  church-goer;  he  is  a  dissenter 
—whichever  you  please  of  the  two;  he  is  a  very  moral  person;  he  is  a 
gentleman;  he  is  a  citizen;  he  is  Master  of  his  Company;  he  wiU  be 
Lord  Mayor  one  day ;  he  is  so  good— oh,  he  is  so  good !  yet  he  has 
no  grace  in  his  heart,  no  Christ  in  his  faith,  no  love  to  God.  You  see 
what  a  sepulchre  he  lies  in— a  dead  soul  in  a  gilded  tomb.  By 
his  cross  our  Lord  splits  this  sepulchre  and  destroys  it.  What  are 
our  merits  worth  in  the  presence  of  the  cross  ?  The  death  of  Christ  is- 
the  death  of  self -righteousness.     Jesus'  death  is  a  superfluity  if  we  can 


THE   MIBACLES   OF   OUR   LORD's   DEATH.  693 

save  ourselves.  If  we  are  so  good  that  we  do  not  want  the  Saviour, 
why,  then,  did  Jesus  bleed  his  life  away  upon  the  tree  ?  The  cross 
breaks  up  the  sepulchres  of  hypocrisy,  formalism,  and  self -righteousness 
in  which  the  spiritually  dead  are  hidden  away. 

What  next  ?  It  opens  the  graves.  The  earth  springs  apart.  There 
lies  the  dead  man :  he  is  revealed  to  the  light.  The  cross  of  Christ 
does  that !  The  man  is  not  yet  made  alive  by  grace,  but  he  is  dis- 
covered to  himself.  He  knows  that  he  lies  in  the  grave  of  his  sin. 
He  has  sufficient  of  the  power  of  God  upon  him  to  make  him  lie,  not 
like  a  corpse  covered  up  with  marble,  but  like  a  corpse  from  which  the 
grave-digger  has  flung  away  the  sods,  and  left  it  naked  to  the  light 
of  da3\  Oh,  it  is  a  grand  thing  when  the  cross  thus  opens  the  graves ! 
You  cannot  convince  men  of  sin  except  by  the  preaching  of  a  crucified 
Saviour.  The  lance  with  which  we  reach  the  hearts  of  men  is  that 
same  lance  which  pierced  the  Saviour's  heart.  "We  have  to  use  the 
crucifixion  as  the  means  of  crucifying  self-righteousness,  and  making 
the  man  confess  that  he  is  dead  in  sin. 

After  the  sepulchres  had  been  broken  up,  and  the  graves  had  been 
opened,  what  followed  next  ?  Life  was  imparted.  "  Many  of  the  bodies 
of  the  saints  which  slept  arose."  They  had  turned  to  dust ;  but  when 
jou  have  a  miracle  you  may  as  well  have  a  great  one.  I  wonder  that 
people,  when  they  can  believe  one  miracle,  make  any  difficulty  of 
another.  Once  introduce  Omnipotence,  and  difficulties  have  ceased. 
80  in  this  miracle.  The  bodies  came  together  on  a  sudden,  and  there 
they  were,  complete  and  ready  for  the  rising.  What  a  wonderful  thing 
is  the  implantation  of  life !  I  will  not  speak  of  it  in  a  dead  inan,  but 
I  would  speak  of  it  in  a  dead  heart.  0  God,  send  thy  life  into  some 
dead  heart  at  this  moment  while  I  speak !  That  which  brings  life  into 
•dead  souls  is  the  death  of  Jesus.  While  we  behold  the  atonement, 
and  view  our  Lord  bleeding  in  our  stead,  the  divine  Spirit  works  upon 
the  man,  and  life  is  breathed  into  him.  He  takes  away  the  heart  of 
«tone,  and  gives  a  heart  of  flesh  that  palpitates  with  a  new  life.  This 
is  the  wondrous  work  of  the  cross :  it  is  by  the  death  of  our  Lord  that 
regeneration  comes  to  men.  There  were  no  new  births  if  it  were  not 
for  that  one  death.  If  Jesus  had  not  died,  we  had  remained  dead. 
If  he  had  not  bowed  his  head,  none  of  us  could  have  lifted  up  our 
heads.  If  he  had  not  there  on  the  cross  passed  from  among  the  living, 
we  must  have  remained  among  the  dead  for  ever  and  for  ever. 

Now  pass  on,  and  you  will  see  that  those  persons  who  received  life, 
in  due  time  quitted  their  graves.  It  is  written  that  they  came  out  of 
their  graves.  Of  course  they  did.  What  living  men  would  wish  to 
fitay  in  their  graves  ?  And  you,  my  dear  hearers,  if  the  Lord  quickens 
you,  will  not  stay  in  your  graves.  If  you  have  been  accustomed  to 
€trong  drink,  or  to  any  other  besetting  sin,  you  will  quit  it;  you 
will  not  feel  any  attachment  to  your  sepulchre.  If  you  have  lived  in 
ungodly  company,  and  found  amusement  in  questionable  places,  you 
will  not  stop  in  your  graves.  We  shall  not  have  need  to  come  after 
you  to  lead  you  away  from  your  old  associations.  You  will  be  eager  to 
get  out  of  them.  If  any  person  here  should  be  buried  alive,  and  if  he 
should  be  discovered  in  his  coffin  before  he  had  breathed  his  last,  I 
am  sure  that,  if  the  sod  were  lifted,  and  the  lid  wore  taken  off,  he  would 


694  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

not  need  prayerful  entreaties  to  come  out  of  his  grave.  Far  from  it. 
Life  loves  not  the  prison  of  death.  So  may  God  grant  that  the  dying 
Saviour  may  fetch  you  out  of  the  graves  in  which  you  are  still  living ; 
and,  if  he  now  quickens  you,  I  am  sure  that  the  death  of  our  Lord 
will  make  you  reckon  that  if  one  died  for  all,  then  all  died,  and  that 
he  died  for  all,  that  they  which  Hve  should  not  Hve  henceforth  unto 
themselves,  but  unto  him  that  died  for  them  and  rose  again. 

Which  way  did  these  people  go  after  they  had  come  out  of  their 
graves  ?  We  are  told  that  "  they  went  into  the  holy  city.''^  Exactly 
80.  And  he  that  has  felt  the  power  of  the  cross  may  weU  make  the 
best  of  his  way  to  holiness.  He  wiU  long  to  join  himself  with  God's 
people ;  he  will  wish  to  go  up  to  God's  house,  and  to  have  fellowship 
with  the  thrice-holy  God.  I  should  not  expect  that  quickened  ones 
would  go  anywhere  else.  Every  creature  goes  to  its  own  company,  the 
beast  to  its  lair,  and  the  bird  to  its  nest ;  and  the  restored  and  regene- 
rated man  makes  his  way  to  the  holy  city.  Does  not  the  cross  draw  us 
to  the  church  of  God?  I  would  not  wish  one  to  join  the  church  from 
any  motive  that  is  not  fetched  from  the  five  wounds  and  bleeding  side 
of  Jesus.  We  give  ourselves  first  to  Christ,  and  then  to  his  people  foi 
his  dear  sake.     It  is  the  cross  that  does  it. 

**  Jesus  dead  upon  the  tree 
Achieves  this  wondrous  victory." 

We  are  told — to  close  this  marvellous  story — that  they  went  into  the 
Holy  City  ^^and  appeared  unto  many^  That  is,  some  of  them  who  had 
been  raised  from  the  dead,  I  do  not  doubt,  appeared  unto  their  wives. 
What  rapture  as  they  saw  again  the  beloved  husband !  It  may  be  that 
some  of  them  appeared  to  father  and  mother ;  and  I  doubt  not  that 
many  a  quickened  mother  or  father  would  make  the  first  appearance 
to  their  children.  What  does  this  teach  us,  but  that,  if  the  Lord's 
grace  should  raise  us  from  the  dead,  we  must  take  care  to  show  it  ? 
Let  us  appear  unto  many.  Let  the  life  that  God  has  given  us  be 
manifest.  Let  us  not  hide  it,  but  let  us  go  to  our  former  friends  and 
make  our  epiphanies  as  Christ  made  his.  For  his  glory's  sake  let  us 
have  our  mamfestation  and  appearance  imto  others.  Glory  be  to  the 
dying  Saviour !     All  praise  to  the  great  Sacrifice ! 

Oh,  that  these  poor,  feeble  words  of  mine  would  excite  some  interest 
in  you  about  my  dying  Master !  Be  ready  to  die  for  him.  And  you 
that  do  not  know  him — think  of  this  great  mystery — that  God  should 
take  your  nature  and  become  a  man  and  die,  that  you  might  not  die, 
and  bear  your  sin  that  you  should  be  free  from  it.  Come  and  trust 
my  Lord  to-night,  I  pray  you.  While  the  people  of  God  gather  at  the 
table  to  the  breaking  of  bread,  let  your  spirits  hasten,  not  to  the  table 
and  the  sacrament,  but  to  Christ  himself  and  his  sacrifice.     Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Matthew  xxvii.  35 — 54. 


Hymns  from  *'Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 300,  280. 


MOURNINO  AT  THE  SIGHT   OF  THE   CRUCIFIED. 


g  pennon 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  March  14th,  1869,  bt 

C.   H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE   METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"  And  all  the  people  that  came  together  to  that  sight,  beholding  the  things  which 
v,-ere  done,  smote  their  breasts,  and  returned." — Luke  xxiii.  48. 

Many  in  that  crowd  came  together  to  behold  the  crucifixion  of  Jesus, 
iu  a  condition  of  the  most  furious  malice.  They  had  hounded  tlie 
Saviour  as  dogs  pursue  a  stair,  and  at  last,  all  mad  with  rage,  they 
hemmed  him  in  for  death.  Others,  willing  enough  to  spend  an  idle 
hour,  and  to  gaze  upon  a  sensational  spectacle,  swelled  the  mob  until 
a.  vast  assembly  congregated  around  the  little  hill  upon  which  the 
three  crosses  were  raised.  There  unanimously,  whether  of  malice  or  of 
wantonness,  they  all  joined  in  mockery  of  the  victim  who  hung  upon 
the  centre  cross.  Some  thrust  out  the  tongue,  some  wagged  their 
heads,  others  scoffed  and  jeered,  some  taunted  him  in  words,  and  other* 
in  signs,  but  all  alike  exulted  over  the  defenceless  man  who  wa» 
given  as  a  prey  to  their  teeth.  Earth  never  beheld  a  scene  in  which 
so  much  unrestrained  derision  and  expressive  contempt  were  poured 
upon  one  man  so  unanimously  and  for  so  long  a  time.  It  must 
have  been  hideous  to  the  last  degree  to  have  seen  so  many  grinning 
faces  and  mocking  eyes,  and  to  have  heard  so  many  cruel  words  and 
scornful  shouts.  The  spectacle  was  too  detestable  to  be  long  en- 
dured of  heaven.  Suddenly  the  sun,  shocked  at  the  scene,  veiled 
his  face,  and  for  three  long  hours  the  ribald  crew  sat  shivering  in 
midday  midnight.  Meanwhile  the  earth  trembled  beneath  their 
feel,  the  rocks  "were  rent,  and  the  temple,  in  superstitious  defence  of 
whose  perpetuity  they  had  committed  the  murder  of  the  just,  had 
its  holy  veil  rent  as  though  by  strong  invisible  hands.  The  news  of 
this,  and  the  feeling  of  horror  produced  by  the  darkness,  and  the 
earth-tremor,  caused  a  revulsion  of  feelings;  there  were  no  more  gibe& 
and  jests,  no  more  thrustings  out  of  the  tongue  and  cruel  mockeries, 
but  they  went  their  way  solitary  and  alone  to  their  homes,  or  in  little 
silent  groups,  while  each  man  after  the  manner  of  Orientals  when  struck 
with  sudden  awe,  smote  upon  his  breast.  Far  different  was  the  pro- 
cession to  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  from  that  march  of  madness  which 
Had  come  out  therefrom.     Observe   the  power  which  Gc^d  hath  over 

No.  mo. 


696  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

human  minds  I  See  how  he  can  tame  the  wildest,  and  make  the  most 
malicious  and  proud  to  cower  down  at  his  feet  when  he  doth  but  mani- 
fest himself  in  the  wonders  of  nature  I  How  much  more  cowed  and 
terrified  will  they  be  when  he  makes  bare  his  arm  and  comes  forth  in 
the  judgments  of  his  wrath  •  to  deal  with  them  according  to  their 
deserts  1 

This  sudden  and  memorable  change  in  so  vast  a  multitude  is  the 
apt  representative  of  two  other  remarkable  mental  changes.  How  like 
it  is  to  the  gracious  transformation  which  a  sight  of  the  cross  has  often 
worked  most  blessedly  in  the  hearts  of  men  I  Many  have  come  under 
the  Bound  of  the  gospel  resolved  to  scoff,  but  they  have  returned  to 
pray.  The  idlest  and  even  the  basest  motives  have  brought  men  under 
the  preaching,  but  when  Jesus  has  been  lifted  up,  they  have  been 
savingly  drawn  to  him,  and  as  a  consequence  have  smitten  upon  their 
breasts  in  repentance,  and  gone  their  way  to  serve  the  Saviour  whom 
they  once  blasphemed.  Oh,  the  power,  the  melting,  conquering, 
transforming  power  of  that  dear  cross  of  Christ !  My  brethren,  we  have 
but  to  abide  by  the  preaching  of  it,  we  have  but  constantly  to  tell  abroad 
the  matchless  story,  and  we  may  expect  to  see  the  most  remarkable 
spiritual  results.  We  need  despair  of  no  man  now  that  Jesus  has  died 
for  sinners.  With  such  a  hammer  as  the  doctrine  of  the  cross,  the  most 
ftinty  heart  will  be  broken ;  and  with  such  a  fire  as  t]\e  sweet  love  of 
Christ,  the  most  mighty  iceberg  will  be  melted.  We  need  never 
despair  for  the  heathenish  or  superstitious  races  of  men ;  if  we  can  but 
find  occasion  to  bring  the  doctrine  of  Christ  crucified  into  contact 
with  their  natures,  it  will  yet  change  them,  and  Christ  will  be  their 
king. 

A  second  and  most  awful  change  is  also  foretold  by  the  incident  in 
our  text,  namely,  the  effect  which  a  sight  of  Christ  enthroned  will  have 
upon  the  proud  and  obstinate,  who  in  this  life  rebelled  against  him. 
Here  they  fearlessly  jested  concerning  him,  and  insultingly  demanded, 
*'Who  is  the  Lord,  that  we  should  obey  him?"  Here  they  boldly 
united  in  a  conspiracy  to  break  his  bands  asunder,  and  cast  his  cords 
from  them,  but  when  they  wake  up  at  the  blast  of  the  trump,  and  see 
the  great  white  throne,  which,  like  a  mirror,  shall  reflect  their  conduct 
upon  them,  what  a  change  will  be  in  their  minds!  Where  now  your 
quibs  and  your  jests,  where  now  your  malicious  speeches  and  your 
persecuting  words  ?  What  1  Is  there  not  one  among  you  who  can 
play  the  man,  and  insult  the  Man  of  Nazareth  to  his  face  ?  No,  not 
one  !  Like  cowardly  dogs,  they  slink  away  !  The  infidel's  bragging 
tongue  is  silent  1  The  proud  spirit  of  the  atheist  is  broken;  his 
blusterings  and  his  carpings  are  hushed  for  ever!  With  shrieks  of 
dismay,  and  clamorous  cries  of  terror,  they  entreat  the  hills  to  cover 
them,  and  the  mountains  to  conceal  them  from  the  face  of  that  very 
Man  whose  cross  was  once  the  subject  of  their  scorn.  0  take  heed, 
ye  sinners,  take  heed,  I  pray  you,  and  be  ye  changed  this  day  by  grace, 
lest  ye  be  changed  by-and-by  by  terror,  for  the  heart  which  will  not  be 
bent  by  the  love  of  Christ,  shall  be  broken  by  the  terror  of  his  name. 
If  Jefius  upon  the  cross  do  not  save  you,  Christ  on  the  throne  shall 
damn  you.  If  Christ  dying  be  not  your  life,  Christ  living  shall  be 
vour  death.     If  Christ  on  earth  be  not  your  heaven,  Christ  coming 


MOURNING  AT  THE   SIGHT   OF   THE   CRUCIFIED.  697 

from  heaven  shall  be  your  hell.  0  may  God's  grace  work  a  blessed 
turning  of  grace  in  each  of  us,  that  we  may  not  be  turned  into  hell  in 
the  dread  day  of  reckoning. 

We  shall  now  draw  nearer  to  the  text,  and  in  the  first  place,  a7ialijse 
the  general  mourning  around  the  cross;  secondly,  we  shall,  if  God  shall 
help  us,  endeavour  to  join  in  the  sorrowful  chorus;  and  then,  ere  we  con- 
•clude,  we  shall  remind  you  that  at  the  foot  of  the  cross  our  sorrow  must 
be  mingled  with  joy. 

I.  First,  then,  let  us  analyse  the  general  mourning  which  this 
text  describes. 

"  All  the  people  that  came  together  to  that  sight,  beholding  the 
things  which  were  done,  smote  their  breasts,  and  returned."  They 
all  smote  their  breasts,  but  not  all  from  the  same  cause.  They  were 
all  afraid,  not  all  from  the  same  reason.  The  outward  manifesta- 
tions were  alike  in  the  whole  mass,  but  the  grades  of  difference  in 
feeling  were  as  many  as  the  minds  in  which  they  ruled.  There  were 
many,  no  doubt,  who  were  merely  moved  with  a  transient  emotion. 
They  had  seen  the  death  agonies  of  a  remarkable  man,  and  the  attendant 
wonders  had  persuaded  them  that  he  was  something  more  than  an 
ordinary  being,  and  therefore,  they  were  afraid.  With  a  kind  of  inde- 
iinite  fear,  grounded  upon  no  very  intelligent  reasoning,  they  were 
alarmed,  because  God  was  angry,  and  had  closed  the  eye  of  day  upon 
them,  and  made  the  rocks  to  rend ;  and,  burdened  with  this  indistinct 
fear,  they  went  their  way  trembling  and  humbled  to  their  several 
homes;  but  peradventure,  ere  the  next  morning  light  had  dawned,  they 
had  forgotten  it  all,  and  the  next  day  found  them  greedy  for  another 
bloody  spectacle,  and  ready  to  nail  another  Christ  to  the  cross,  if  there 
had  been  such  another  to  be  found  in  the  land.  Their  beating  of  the 
breast  was  not  a  breaking  of  the  heart.  It  was  an  April  shower,  a 
dewdrop  of  the  morning,  a  hoar-frost  that  dissolved  when  the  sun  had 
risen.  Like  a  shadow  the  emotion  crossed  their  minds,  and  like  a  shadow 
it  left  no  trace  behind.  How  often  in  the  preaching  of  the  cross  has 
this  been  the  only  result  in  tens  of  thousands  !  In  this  house,  where 
€0  many  souls  have  been  converted,  many  more  have  shed  tears  which 
have  been  wiped  away,  and  the  reason  of  their  tears  has  been  forgotten. 
A  handkerchief  has  dried  up  tbsir  emotions.  Alas  !  alas  !  alas  !  that 
while  it  may  be  difficult  to  move  men  with  the  story  of  the  cross  to 
"weeping,  it  is  even  more  difficult  to  make  those  emotions  permanent. 
*'  I  have  seen  something  wonderlul,  this  morning,"  said  one  who  had 
listened  to  a  faithful  and  earnest  preacher,  "I  have  seen  a  whole  con- 
gregation in  tears."  *'  Alas  !"  said  the  preacher,  "  there  is  something 
more  wonderful  still,  for  the  most  of  them  will  go  their  way  to  forgei 
that  they  ever  shed  a  tear."  Ah,  my  hearers,  shall  it  be  always  so— 
always  so  ?  Then,  0  ye  impenitent,  there  shall  come  to  your  eyes  a 
tear  which  shall  drip  for  ever,  a  scalding  drop  which  no  mercy  shall 
•ever  wipe  away;  a  thirst  that  shall  never  be  abated;  a  worm  that  shall 
never  die,  and  a  fire  that  never  shall  be  quenched.  By  the  love  you 
bear  your  souls,  I  pray  you  escape  from  the  wrath  to  come ! 

Others  amongst  that  great  crowd  exhibited  emotion  based  upon  moie 
thoughtful  reflection.  They  saw  that  they  had  shared  in  the  murder 
of  an  innocent  person.     "Alas!"  saia  they,  "  we  see  through  it  all  now. 


698  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


That  man  was  no  offender.  In  all  that  we  have  ever  heard  or  seen  of 
him,  he  did  good,  and  only  good :  he  always  healed  the  sick,  fed  the 
hungry,  and  raised  the  dead.  There  is  not  a  word  of  all  his  teaching 
that  is  really  contrary  to  the  law  of  God.  He  was  a  pure  and  holy 
man.  We  have  all  been  duped.  Those  priests  have  egged  us  on  to 
put  to  death  one  whom  it  were  a  thousand  mercies  if  we  could  restore 
to  life  again  at  once.  Our  race  has  killed  its  benefactor."  "  Yes,'* 
saith  one,  '*  I  thrust  out  my  tongne,  I  found  it  almost  impossible  to 
restrain  myself,  when  everybody  else  was  laughing  and  mocking  at  his 
tortures;  but  I  am  afraid  I  have  mocked  at  the  innocent,  and  I 
tremble  lest  the  darkness  which  God  has  sent  was  his  reprobation  of 
my  wickedness  in  oppressing  the  innocent."  Such  feelings  would 
abide,  but  I  can  suppose  that  they  might  not  bring  men  to  sincere 
repentance ;  for  while  they  might  feel  sorry  that  they  had  oppressed 
the  innocent,  yet,  perceiving  nothing  more  in  Jesus  than  mere  mal- 
treated virtue  and  suffering  manhood,  the  natural  emotion  might  soon 
pass  away,  and  the  moral  and  spiritual  result  be  of  no  great  value. 
How  frequently  have  we  seen  in  our  hearers  that  same  description  of 
emotion !  They  have  regretted  that  Christ  should  be  put  to  death, 
they  have  felt  like  that  old  king  of  France,  who  said,  "  I  wish  I  had 
been  there  with  ten  thousand  of  my  soldiers,  I  would  have  cut  their 
throats  sooner  than  they  should  have  touched  him ;"  but  those  very 
feelings  have  been  evidence  that  they  did  not  feel  their  share  in  the 
guilt  as  they  ought  to  have  done,  and  that  to  them  the  cross  of  Jesus 
was  no  more  a  saving  spectacle  than  the  death  of  a  common  martyr. 
Dear  hearers,  beware  of  making  the  cross  to  be  a  common-place  thing 
with  you.  Look  beyond  the  sufferings  of  the  innocent  manhood  of 
Jesus,  and  see  upon  the  tree  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  Christ,  or  else  you 
look  to  the  cross  in  vain. 

No  doubt  there  were  a  few  in  the  crowd  who  smote  upon  their  breasts 
because  they  felt,  "  We  have  put  to  death  a  prophet  of  God.  As  of  old 
our  nation  slew  Isaiah,  and  put  to  death  others  of  the  Master's  ser- 
vants, so  to-day  they  have  nailed  to  the  cross  one  of  the  last  of  the 
prophets,  and  his  blood  will  be  upon  us  and  upon  our  children." 
Peradventure  some  of  them  said,  "  This  man  claimed  to  be  Messiah, 
and  the  miracles  which  attended  his  death  prove  that  he  was  so.  His 
life  betokens  it  and  his  death  declares  it.  What  will  become  of  our 
nation  if  we  have  slain  the  Prince  of  Peace !  How  will  God  visit  us  if 
we  have  put  his  prophet  to  death  I"  Such  mourning  was  in  advance 
of  other  forms;  it  showed  a  deeper  thought  and  a  clearer  knowledge, 
and  it  may  have  been  an  admirable  preparation  for  the  after  hearing  of 
the  gospel ;  but  it  would  not  of  itself  suffice  as  evidence  of  grace.  I 
shall  be  glad  if  my  hearers  in  this  house  to-day  are  persuaded  by  the 
character  of  Christ  that  he  must  have  been  a  prophet  sent  of  God,  and 
that  he  was  the  Messiah  promised  of  old ;  and  I  shall  be  gratified  if 
they,  therefore,  lament  the  shameful  cruelties  which  he  received  from 
our  apostate  race.  Such  emotions  of  compunction  and  pity  are  most 
commendable,  and  under  God's  blessing  they  may  prove  to  be  the  fur- 
rows of  your  heart  in  which  the  gospel  may  take  root.  He  who  thus 
was  cruelly  put  to  death  was  God  over  all  blessed  for  ever,  the  world's 
Redeemer,  and  the  Saviour  of  such   as  put  their  trust  in  him.     May 


1 


MOtJRNING  AT  TH«  SIGHT  OP  THE  CRUCIFIED.  69 ^ 

you  accept  him  to-day  as  your  deliverer,  and  so  be  saved  ;  for  if  not, 
the  most  virtuous  regrets  concerning  his  death,  however  much  they  may 
indicate  your  enlightenment,  will  not  manifest  your  true  conversion. 

In  the  motley  company  who  all  went  home  smiting  on  their  breasts,, 
let  us  hope  that  there  were  some  who  said,  "  Certainly  this  was  the  Son 
of  God,"  and  mourned  to  think  he  should  have  suffered  for  their  trans- 
gressions, and  been  put  to  grief  for  their  iniquities.  Those  who  came 
to  that  point  were  saved.  Blessed  were  the  eyes  that  looked  upon  the 
slaughtered  Lamb  in  such  a  way  as  that,  and  happy  were  the  hearts 
that  there  and  then  were  broken  because  he  was  bi'uised  and  put  to 
grief  for  their  sakes.  Beloved,  aspire  to  this.  May  God's  grace  bring 
you  to  see  in  Jesus  Christ  no  other  than  God  made  flesh,  hanging 
upon  the  tree  in  agony,  to  die,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  we  may 
be  saved.  0  come  and  repose  your  trust  in  him,  and  then  smite  upoo 
your  breasts  at  the  thought  that  such  a  victim  should  have  been  ne- 
cessary for  your  redemption ;  then  may  you  cease  to  smite  your  breasts,. 
and  begin  to  clap  your  hands  for  very  joy ;  for  they  who  thus  bewail 
a  Saviour  may  rejoice  in  him,  for  he  is  theirs  and  they  are  his. 

II.  We  shall  now  ask  you  to  join  in  the  lamentation,  each  man 
according  to  his  sincerity  of  heart,  beholding  the  cross,  and  smiting 
apon  his  breast. 

We  will  by  faith  put  ourselves  at  the  foot  of  the  little  knoll  of 
Calvary:  there  we  see  in  the  centre,  between  two  thieves,  the  Son  of 
God  made  flesh,  nailed  by  his  hands  and  feet,  and  dying  in  an  anguish 
which  words  cannot  portray.  Look  ye  well,  I  pray  you  ;  look  stead- 
fastly and  devoutly,  gazing  through  your  tears.  'Tis  he  who  was 
worshipped  of  angels,  who  is  now  dying  for  the  sons  of  men  ;  sit  down 
and  watch  the  death  of  death's  destroyer.  I  shall  ask  you  first  ta 
smite  your  breasts,  as  you  remember  that  you  see  in  him  your  own  sins. 
How  great  he  is  1  That  thorn-crowned  head  was  once  crowned  with 
all  the  royalties  of  heaven  and  earth.  He  wlio  dies  there  is  no  common 
man.  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  is  he  who  hangs  on  yonder 
cross.  Then  see  the  greatness  of  your  sins,  which  required  so  vast  a 
sacrifice.  They  must  be  infinite  sins  to  require  an  infinite  person  ta 
lay  down  his  life  in  order  to  their  removal.  Thou  canst  never  compass 
or  comprehend  the  greatness  of  thy  Lord  in  his  essential  character  and 
dignity,  neither  shalt  thou  ever  be  able  to  understand  the  blackness  and 
heinousness  of  the  sin  which  demanded  his  life  as  an  atonement. 
Brother,  smite  thv  breast,  and  say,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me,  the  greatest  of 
sinners,  for  I  am" such."  Look  well  into  the  face  of  Jesus,  and  see  how 
vile  they  have  made  him  !  They  have  stained  those  cheeks  with  spittle, 
they  have  lashed  those  shoulders  with  a  felon's  scourge ;  they  have  put  him 
to  the  death  which  was  only  awarded  to  the  meanest  Roman  slave ; 
they  have  hung  him  up  between  heaven  and  earth,  as  though  he  were 
fit  for  neither ;  thev  have  stripped  him  naked  and  left  him  not  a  rag 
to  cover  himl  See"  here  then,  0  believer,  the  shame  of  thy  sms.  A^hat 
a  shameful  thing  thy  sin  must  have  been;  what  a  disgraceful  and  abomm- 
able  thing,  if  Christ  must  be  made  such  a  shame  for  thee !  0  be  ashamed 
of  thyself,  to  think  thy  Lord  should  thus  be  scorned  and  made  nothmg 
of  for  thee  I  See  how  they  aggravate  his  sorrows  !  It  was  not  enough 
to  crucify  him,  they  must  insult  him ;  nor  that  enough,  they  must  mock 


■700  METROPOIITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

his  prayers  and  turn  his  dying  cries  into  themes  for  jest,  while  they 
offer  liim  vinegar  to  drink.  See,  beloved,  how  aggravated  were  your 
•fiiiis  and  mine !  Come,  my  brother,  let  us  both  smite  upon  our  breasts 
4ind  say,  '*  Oh,  how  our  sins  have  piled  up  their  guiltiness  I  It  was  not 
merely  that  we  broke  the  law,  but  we  sinned  against  light  and  know- 
ledge ;  against  rebukes  and  warnings.  As  his  griefs  are  aggravated, 
^ven  so  are  our  sins  !"  Look  still  into  his  dear  face,  and  see  the  lines 
of  anguish  which  indicate  the  deeper  inward  sorrow  which  far  trans- 
•cends  mere  bodily  pain  and  smart.  God,  his  Father,  has  forsaken  him. 
•God  has  made  him  a  curse  for  us.  Then  what  must  the  curse  of  God 
have  been  against  us?  What  must  our  sins  have  deserved?  If  when 
tfiin  was  only  imputed  to  Christ,  and  laid  upon  him  for  awhile,  his 
father  turned  his  head  away  and  made  his  Son  cry  out,  ''Lama 
43abachthani !"  Oh,  what  an  accursed  thing  our  sin  must  be,  and 
what  a  curse  would  have  come  upon  us ;  what  thunderbolts,  what  coals 
of  fire,  what  indignation,  and  wrath  from  the  Most  High  must  have 
heen  our  portion  had  not  Jesus  interposed !  If  Jehovah  did  not  spare 
his  Son,  how  little  would  he  have  spared  guilty,  worthless  men  if  he 
had  dealt  with  us  after  our  sins,  and  rewarded  us  according  to  our 
iniquities  I 

As  we  still  sit  down  and  look  at  Jesus,  we  remember  that  his  death 
was  voluntary — he  need  not  have  died  unless  he  had  so  willed :  here 
ithen  is  another  striking  feature  of  our  sin,  for  our  sin  was  voluntary 
too.  We  did  not  sin  as  of  compulsion,  but  we  deliberately  chose  the 
-evil  way.  0  sinner,  let  both  of  us  sit  down  together,  and  tell  the 
Lord  that  we  have  no  justification,  or  extenuation,  or  excuse  to  offer, 
we  have  sinned  wilfully  against  light  and  knowledge,  against  love  and 
mercy.  Let  us  smite  upon  our  breasts,  as  we  see  Jesus  willingly 
«uffer,  and  confess  that  we  have  willingly  offended  against  the  just  and 
Tighteous  laws  of  a  most  good  and  gi'acious  God.  I  could  fain  keep 
you  looking  into  those  five  wounds,  and  studying  that  marred  face,  and 
•counting  every  purple  drop  that  flowed  from  hands  and  feet,  and  side, 
but  time  would  fail  us.  Only  that  one  wound — let  it  abide  with  you — 
«mite  your  breast  because  you  see  in  Christ  your  sin. 

Looking  again — changing,  as  it  were,  our  stand-point,  but  still 
keeping  our  eye  upon  that  same,  dear  crucified  One,  let  us  see  there 
the  7ieglected  and  despised  remedy  for  our  sin.  Jf  sin  itself,  in  its  first 
•condition,  as  rebellion,  bring  no  tears  to  our  eyes,  it  certainly  ought  in 
/ts  second  manifestation,  as  ingratitude.  The  sin  of  rebellion  is  vile ; 
but  the  sin  of  slighting  the  Saviour  is  viler  still.  He  that  hangs  on 
the  tree,  in  groans  and  griefs  unutterable,  is  he  whom  some  of  you 
have  never  thought  of,  whom  you  do  not  love,  to  whom  you  never 
pray,  in  whom  you  place  no  confidence,  and  whom  you  never  serve.  I 
will  not  accuse  you;  I  will  ask  those  dear  wounds  to  do  it,  sweetly  and 
tenderly.  I  will  rather  accuse  myself;  for,  alas!  alas!  there  was  a  time 
when  I  heard  of  him  as  with  a  deaf  ear;  when  I  was  told  of  him,  and 
understood  the  love  he  bore  to  sinners,  and  yet  my  heart  was  like  a 
-fitone  within  me,  and  would  not  be  moved.  I  stopped  my  ear  and 
would  not  be  charmed,  even  with  such  a  master-fascination  as  the  dis- 
interested love  of  Jesus.  I  think  if  I  had  been  spared  to  live  the  life  of  an 
•ungodly  man,  for  thirty,  forty,  or  fifty  years,  and  had  been  converted  at 


MOURNING   AT  THE   SIGHT   GF   THE  CRUCIFIED.  701 

last,  I  should  never  have  been  able  to  blame  myself  sufficiently  for  reject- 
ing Jesus  during  all  those  years.  Why,  even  those  of  us  who  were^ 
converted  in  our  youth,  and  almost  in  our  childhood,  cannot  help- 
blaming  ourselves  to  think  that  so  dear  a  friend,  who  had  done  so  much 
for  us,  was  so  long  slighted  by  us.  Who  could  have  done  more  for  us- 
than  he,  since  he  gave  himself  for  our  sins  ?  Ah,  how  did  we  wronof  him 
while  we  withheld  our  hearts  from  him !  0  ye  sinners,  how  can  ye- 
keep  the  doors  of  your  hearts  shut  against  the  Friend  of  Sinners  ?  How 
can  we  close  the  door  against  him  who  cries,  "  My  head  is  wet  with  dew, 
and  my  locks  with  the  drops  of  the  night :  open  to  me,  my  beloved,- 
open  to  me  "  ?  I  am  persuaded  there  are  some  here  who  are  his  elect : 
you  were  chosen  by  him  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  and^ 
you  shall  be  with  him  in  heaven  one  day  to  sing  his  praises,  and  yet,. 
at  this  moment,  though  you  hear  his  name,  you  do  not  love  him.^and, 
though  you  are  told  of  what  he  did,  you  do  not  trust  him.  What !' 
shall  that  iron  bar  always  fast  close  the  gate  of  your  heart  ?  Shall  that: 
door  still  be  always  bolted?  0  Spirit  of  the  living  God,  win  an  en- 
trance for  the  blessed  Christ  this  morning !  If  anything  can  do  it, 
surely  it  must  be  a  sight  of  the  crucified  Christ ;  that  matchless  spec- 
tacle shall  make  a  heart  of  stone  relent  and  melt,  by  Jesus'  love  subdued, 
0  may  the  Holy  Ghost  work  this  gracious  melting,  and  he  shall  liave. 
all  the  honour. 

Still  keeping  you  at  the  cross  foot,  dear  friends,  every  believer  here 
may  well  smite  upon  his  breast  this  morning  as  he  thinks  of  who  it  tvas^ 
that  smarted  so  upon  the  cross.     Who  was  it  ?     It  was  he  who  loved   us- 
or  ever  the  world  was  made.     It  was  he  who  is  this  day  the  Bridegroom 
of  our  souls,  our  Best-beloved  ;  he  who  has  taken  us  into  the  banquet- 
ing house  and  waved  his  banner  of  love  over  us ;  he  who  has  made  us- 
one  with  himself,  and  has  vowed  to  present  us  to  his  Father  without 
spot.     It  is  he,  our  Husband,  our  Ishi,  who  has  called  us  his  Hephzibah 
because  his  soul  delighteth  in  us.     It  is  he  who  suffered  thus  for  us. 
Suffering  does  not  always  excite  the  same  degree  of  pity.    You  must  know 
something  of  the  individual  before  the  innermost  depths  of  the  soul  are 
stirred;  and  so  it  happens  to  us  that  the  higher  the  character  and  the  more 
able  we  are  to  appreciate  it,  the  closer  the  relation  and  the  more  fondly  we 
reciprocate  the  love,  the  more  deeply  does  suffering  strike  the  souL 
You  are  coming  to  his  table  some  of  you  to-day,  and  you  will^  partake 
of  bread :  I  pray  you  remember  that  it  represents  the  quivering  flesh 
that  was  filled  with  pain  on  Calvary.    You  will  sip  of  that  cup :  then  be- 
sure  to  remember  that  it  betokens  to  you  the  blood  of  one  who  lovea- 
you  better  than  you  could  be  loved  by  mother,  or  by  husband,  or  by 
friend.     0  sit  you  down  and  smite  your  breasts  that  he  should  grieve  ; 
that  heaven's  Sun  should  be  eclipsed;  that  heaven's  Lily  should  be 
spotted  with  blood,  and  heaven's  Kose  should  be  whitened  with  a  deadly 
pallor.     Lament  that  perfection  should  be  accused,  innocence  smitten,, 
and  love  murdered ;  and  that  Christ,  the  happy  and  the  holy,  the  ever 
blessed,  who  had  been  for  ages  the  delight  of  angels,  should  now  become 
the  sorrowful,  the  acquaintance  of  grief,  the  bleeding  and  the  dying. 
Smite  upon  your  breasts,  believers,  and  go  your  way ! 

Beloved  in  the  Lord,  if  such  grief  as  this  should  be  kindled  m  vou,. 
it  will  be  well  to  pursue  the  subject,  and  to  reflect  upon  how  unbelieving: 


702  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  how  cruel  we  have  been  to  Jesus  since  the  day  that  we  have  known 
him.  What,  doth  he  bleed  for  me  and  have  I  doubted  him?  Is  he  the  Son 
of  God,  and  have  I  suspected  his  fidelity  ?  Have  I  stood  at  the  cross 
foot  unmoved  ?  Have  I  spoken  of  my  dying  Lord  in  a  cold,  indifferent 
«pirit?  Have  I  ever  preached  Christ  crucified  with  a  dry  eye  and  a 
heart  unmoved  ?  Do  I  bow  my  knee  in  private  prayer,  and  are  my 
thou<rhts  wandering  when  they  ought  to  be  bound  hand  and  foot  to  his 
dear  bleeding  self  ?  Am  I  accustomed  to  turn  over  the  pages  of  the 
Evangelists  which  record  my  Master's  wondrous  sacrifice,  and  have  I 
never  stained  those  pages  with  my  tears  ?  Have  I  never  paused  spell- 
bound over  the  sacred  sentence  which  recorded  this  miracle  of  miracles, 
this  marvel  of  marvels  ?  Oh,  shame  upon  thee,  hard  heart  I  Well 
may  I  smite  thee.  May  God  smite  thee  with  the  hammer  of  his  Spirit, 
and  break  thee  to  shivers.  0  thou  stony  heart,  thou  granite  soul, 
thou  flinty  spirit,  well  may  I  strike  the  breast  which  harbours  thee, 
to  think  that  I  should  be  so  doltish  in  presence  of  love  so  amazing,  so 
divine. 

Brethren,  you  may  smite  upon  your  breasts  as  you  look  at  the  cross, 
and  mourn  that  you  should  have  done  so  little  for  your  Lord.  I  think 
if  anybody  could  have  sketched  my  future  life  in  the  day  of  my 
conversion,  and  have  said,  '*  You  will  be  dull  and  cold  in  spiritual 
things!  and  you  will  exhibit  but  little  earnestness  and  little  gratitude!" 
I  should  have  said  like  Hazael,  "  Is  thy  servant  a  dog,  that  he  should 
do  this  great  thing  ?"  I  suppose  I  read  your  hearts  when  I  say  that 
the  most  of  you  are  disappointed  with  your  own  conduct  as  compared 
with  your  too-flattering  prophecies  of  yourselves !  What !  am  I  really 
pardoned  ?  Am  I  in  very  deed  washed  in  that  warm  stream  which 
gushed  from  the  riven  side  of  Jesus,  and  yet  am  I  not  wholly 
consecrated  to  Christ?  What!  in  my  body  do  I  bear  the  marks 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  can  I  live  almost  without  a  thought  of 
him?  Am  I  plucked  like  a  brand  from  the  burning,  and  have  I  small 
care  to  win  others  from  the  wrath  to  come  ?  Has  Jesus  stooped  to  win 
me,  and  do  I  not  labour  to  win  others  for  him  ?  Was  he  all  in  earnest 
about  me,  and  am  I  only  half  in  earnest  about  him  ?  Dare  I  waste  a 
minute,  dare  I  trifle  away  an  hour?  Have  I  an  evening  to  spend 
in  vain  gossip  and  idle  frivolities?  0  my  heart,  well  may  I  smite 
thee,  that  at  the  sight  of  the  death  of  the  dear  Lover  of  my  soul,  I 
should  not  be  fired  by  the  highest  zeal,  and  be  impelled  by  the  most 
ardent  love  to  a  perfect  consecration  of  every  power  of  my  nature,  every 
affection  of  my  spirit,  every  faculty  of  my  whole  man  ?  This  mournful 
strain  might  be  pursued  to  far  greater  lengths.  We  might  follow  up 
our  confessions,  still  smiting,  still  accusing,  still  regretting,  still 
bewailing.  We  might  continue  upon  the  bass  notes  evermore,  and  yet 
might  we  not  express  sufficient  contrition  for  the  shameful  manner  in 


MOURNING  AT  THE  SIGHT  OF  THE  CRUCIFIED.  703 

which  we  have  treated  our  blessed  Friend.    We  might  say  with  one  of 
our  hymn  writers — 

**  Lord,  let  me  weep  for  nought  but  sin, 
And  after  none  but  thee  ; 
And  then  I  would — O  that  I  might — 
A  constant  weeper  be !" 

One  might  desire  to  become  a  Niobe,  and  realise  the  desire  of  Jeremy, 
"  0  that  my  head  were  waters."  Even  the  holy  extravagance  of  George 
Herbert  does  not  surprise  us,  for  we  would  even  sing  with  him  the  song 
of  Grief  : — 

"  Oh,  who  will  give  me  tears  ?     Come,  all  ye  springs, 
Dwell  in  my  head  and  eyes ;  come,  clouds  and  rain! 
My  grief  hath  need  of  all  the  wat'ry  things 
That  nature  hath  produc'd.     Let  ev'ry  vein 
Suck  up  a  river  to  supply  mine  eyes, 
My  weary  weeping  eyes ;  too  dry  for  me, 
Unless  they  get  new  conduits,  new  supplies. 
To  bear  them  out,  and  with  my  state  agree. 
What  are  two  shallow  fords,  two  little  spouts 
Of  a  less  world  ?     The  greater  is  but  small. 
A  narrow  cupboard  for  my  griefs  and  doubts, 
Which  want  provision  in  the  midst  of  all. 
Verses,  ye  are  too  fine  a  thing,  too  wise. 
For  my  rough  sorrows.     Cease !  be  dumb  and  mute ; 
Give  up  your  feet  and  running  to  mine  eyes. 
And  keep  your  measures  for  some  lover's  lute. 
Whose  grief  allows  him  music  and  a  rhyme ; 
For  mine  excludes  both  measure,  tune,  and  time. 
— Alas,  my  God!" 

in.  Having,  perhaps,  said  enough  on  this  point — enough  if  God 
bless  it,  too  much  if  without  his  blessing — let  me  invite  you,  in  the 
third  place,  to  remember  that  at  Calvary,  dolorous  notes  are  not 

THE  ONLY  SUITABLE  MUSIC. 

We  admired  our  poet  when,  in  the  hymn  which  we  have  just  sung, 
he  appears  to  question  with  himself  which  would  be  the  most  fitting 
tune  for  Golgotha. 

**  •  It  is  finished ;'  shall  we  rais© 
Songs  of  sorrow  or  of  praise  ? 
Mourn  to  see  the  Saviour  die, 
Or  proclaim  his  victory  ? 

If  of  Calvary  we  tell, 
How  can  songs  of  triumph  swell  t 
If  of  man  redeemed  from  woe. 
How  shall  notes  of  mourning  flow  ?" 

He  shows  that  since  our  sin  pierced  the  side  of  Jesus,  there  is  cause 
for  unlimited  lamentation,  but  since  the  blcod  which  flowed  from 
the  wound  has  cleansed  our  sin,  there   is  ground  for    unbounded 


704  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACliE   PULPIT. 

thanksgiving  ;  and,  therefore,  the  poet,  after  having  balanced  the  matter 
in  a  few  verses,  concludes  with— 

*♦  *  It  is  finished,'  let  us  raise 
Songs  of  thankfulness  and  praise." 

After  all,  yon  and  I  are  not  in  the  same  condition  as  the  multitude 
who  had  surrounded  Calvary;  for  at  that  time  our  Lord  was  still  dead, 
but  now  he  is  risen  indeed.  There  were  yet  three  days  from  that 
Thursday  evening  (for  there  is  much  reason  to  believe  that  our  Lord 
was  not  crucified  on  Friday),  in  which  Jesus  must  dwell  in  the 
regions  of  the  dead.  Our  Lord,  therefore,  so  far  as  human  eyes 
could  see  him,  was  a  proper  object  of  pity  and  mourning,  and  not  of 
thanksgiving ;  but  now,  beloved,  he  ever  lives  and  gloriously  reigns. 
No  chamel  house  confines  that  blessed  body.  He  saw  no  corruption; 
for  the  moment  when  the  third  day  dawned,  he  could  no  longer  be  held 
with  the  bonds  of  death,  but  he  manifested  himself  alive  unto  his  dis- 
ciples. He  tarried  in  this  world  for  forty  days.  Some  of  his  time  was 
spent  with  those  who  knew  him  in  the  flesh ;  perhaps  a  larger  part  of 
it  was  passed  with  those  saints  who  came  out  of  their  graves  after  his  re- 
surrection ;  but  certain  it  is  that  he  is  gone  up,  as  the  first-fruit  from  the 
dead ;  he  is  gone  up  to  the  righi  hand  of  God,  even  the  Father.  Do  not 
bewail  those  wounds,  they  are  lustrous  with  supernal  splendour.  Do 
not  lament  his  death :  he  lives  no  more  to  die.  Do  not  mourn  that 
shame  and  spitting : — 

**  The  head  that  once  was  crowned  with  thorns, 
Is  crowned  with  glory  now." 

Look  up  and  thank  God  that  death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  him. 
He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us,  and  he  shall  shortly  come 
with  angelic  bands  surrounding  him,  to  judge  the  quick  and  dead. 
The  argument  for  joy  overshadows  the  reason  for  sorrow.  Like  as  a 
woman  when' the  man-child  is  born  remembereth  no  more  her  anguish, 
for  joy  that  a  man  is  born  into  the  world,  so,  in  the  thought  of  the 
risen  Saviour,  who  has  taken  possession  of  his  crown,  we  will  forget  the 
lamentation  of  the  cross,  and  the  sorrows  of  the  broken  heart  of 
Calvary. 

Morever,  hear  ye  the  shrill  voice  of  the  high  sounding  cymbals,  and 
let  your  hearts  rejoice  within  you,  for  in  his  death  our  Redeemer  con- 
quered all  the  hosts  of  hell.  They  came  against  him  furiously,  yea, 
they  came  against  him  to  eat  up  his  flesh,  but  they  stumbled  and  fell. 
They  compassed  him  about,  yea,  they  compassed  him  about  like  bees ;. 
but  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  did  the  Champion  destroy  them.  Against 
fcbe  whole  multitude  of  sins,  and  all  the  battalions  of  the  pit,  the  Saviour 
stood,  a  solitary  soldier  fighting  against  innumerable  bands,  but  he 
has  slain  them  all.     "Bruised  is  the  dragon's  head."    Jesus  has  led 


MOURNING   AT  THE   aiGHT   OF   THE   CRUCIFlj:i).  705 

captivity  captive.     He  conquered  when  he  fell:  and  let  tlie  notes  of 
victory  drown  for  ever  the  cries  of  sorrow. 

Moreover,  brethren,  let  it  be  remembered  that  men  have  been  saved. 
Let  there  stream  before  your  gladdened  eyes  this  morning  the  innu- 
merable company  of  the  elect.  Robed  in  white  they  come  in  long 
procession;  they  come  from  distant  lands,  from  every  clime;  once 
scarlet  with  sin  and  black  with  iniquity,  they  are  all  white  and  pure, 
and  without  spot  before  the  throne  for  ever;  beyond  temptation,' 
beatified,  and  made  like  to  Jesus.  And  how?  It  was  all  through 
Calvary.  There  was  their  sin  put  away ;  there  was  their  everlasting 
righteousness  brought  in  and  consummated.  Let  the  hosts  that  are 
before  the  throne,  as  they  wave  their  palms,  and  touch  their  golden 
harps,  excite  you  to  a  joy  like  their  own,  and  let  that  celestial  music 
hush  the  gentler  voices  which  mournfully  exclaim — 

"  Alas  !  and  did  my  Saviour  bleed  ? 
And  did  my  Sovereign  die  ? 
Would  he  devote  that  sacred  head 
For  such  a  worm  i4s  I  ?  " 

Nor  is  that  all.  You  yourself  are  saved.  0  brother,  this  will 
always  be  one  of  your  greatest  joys.  That  others  are  converted  through 
your  instrumentality  is  occasion  for  much  thanksgiving,  but  your 
Saviour's  advice  to  you  is,  "  Notwithstanding  in  this  rejoice  not,  that 
the  spirits  are  subject  unto  you;  but  rather  rejoice,  because  your 
names  are  written  in  heaven."  You,  a  spirit  meet  to  be  cast  away, 
you  whose  portion  must  have  been  with  devils — you  are  this  day  for- 
given, adopted,  saved,  on  the  road  to  heaven.  Oh !  while  you  think 
that  you  are  saved  from  hell,  that  you  are  lifted  up  to  glory,  you 
cannot  but  rejoice  that  your  sin  is  put  away  from  you  through  the 
death  of  Jesus  Christ,  your  Lord. 

Lastly,  there  is  one  thing  for  which  we  ought  always  to  remember 
Christ's  death  with  joy,  and  that  is,  that  although  the  crucifixion  of 

Jesus  was  intended  to  be  a  blow  at  the  honour  and  glory  of  our  God 

though  in  the  death  of  Christ  the  world  did,  so  far  as  it  was  able,  put 
God  himself  to  death,  and  so  earn  for  itself  that  hideous  title,  "  a 
deicidal  world,"  yet  never  did  God  have  such  honour  and  glory  as  he 
obtained  through  the  sufferings  of  Jesus.  Oh,  they  thought  to  scorn 
him,  but  they  lifted  his  name  on  high  I  They  thought  that  God  was 
dishonoured  when  he  was  most  glorified.  The  image  of  the  Invisible, 
had  they  not  marred  it  ?  The  express  image  of  the  Father's  person, 
had  they  not  defiled  it  ?  Ah,  so  they  said  I  But  he  that  sitteth  in  the 
heavens  may  well  laugh  and  have  them  in  derision,  for  what  did  they  7 
They  did  but  break  the  alabaster  box,  and  all  the  blessed  drops  of  in- 
finite mercy  streamed  forth  to  perfume  all  worlds.  They  did  iat 
rend  the  veil,  and  then  the  glory  which  had  been  hidden  between  the 

45 


706  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

cherubim  shone  forth  upon  all  lands.  0  nature,  adoring  God  with  thine 
nncient  and  priestly  mountains,  extolling   him  with  thy  trees,  which 
clap   their   hands,   and   worshipping  with    thy   seas,  which   in   their 
fulness  roar  out  Jehovah's  praise;  with  all   thy  tempests  and  flames 
of  fire,   thy  drajrons    and   thy  deeps,   thy   snow  and   thy  hail,   thou 
canst   not    glorify   God    as    Jesus   glorified    him   when    he    became 
obedient  unto  death.     0  heaven,  with   all  thy  jubilant  angels,  thine 
ever   chanting    cherubim    and    seraphim,     thy    thrice    holy    hymns, 
thy  streets   of    gold   and    endless  harmonies,  thou  canst  not  reveal 
the  Deity  as  Jesus  Christ  revealed  it  on  the  cross.     0  hell,  with  all 
thine  infinite  horrors  and  flames  unquenchable,  and  pains  and  griefs 
and  shrieks  of  tortured  ghosts,  even  thou  canst  not  reveal  the  justice  of 
God  as  Christ  revealed  it  in  his  riven  heart  upon  the  bloody  tree.     O 
earth  and  heaven  and  hell  I  0  time  and  eternity,  things  present  and 
things  to  come,  visible  and  invisible,  ye  are  dim  mirrors  of  the  Godhead 
compared  with  the  bleeding  Lamb.    0  heart  of  God,  I  see  thee  nowhere  as 
at  Golgotha,  where  the  Word  incarnate  reveals  the  justice  and  the  love,  the 
holiness  and  the  tenderness  of  G^d  in  one  blaze  of  glory.     If  any  created 
mind  would  fain  see  the  glory  of  God,  he  need  not  gaze  upon  the  starry 
skies,  nor  soar  into  the  heaven  of  heavens,  he  has  but  to  bow  at  the  cross 
foot  and  watch  the  crimson  streams  which  gush  from  Immanuel's  wounds. 
If  you  would  behold  the  glory  of  God,  you  need  not  gaze  between  the 
gates  of  pearls,  you  have  but  to  look  beyond  the  gates  of  Jerusalem 
and  see  the  Prince  of  Peace  expire.     If  you  would  receive  the  noblest 
conception  that  ever  filled  the  human  mind  of  the  lovingkindness  and 
the  greatness  and  the  pity,  and  yet  the  justice  and  the  severity  and  the 
wrath  of  God,  you  need  not  lift  up  your  eyes,  nor  cast  them,  down,  nor  look 
to  paradise,  nor  gaze  on  Tophet,  you  have  but  to  look  into  the  heart  oi 
Christ  all  crushed  and  broken  and  bruised,  and  you  have  seen  it  all.  Oh,  the 
joy  that  springs  from  the  fact  that  God  has  triumphed  after  all  !  Death  is 
not  the  victor ;  evil  is  not  master.   There  are  not  two  rival  kingdoms,  one 
governed  by  the  God  of  good,  and  the  other  by  the  God  of  evil;  no, 
evil  is  bound,  chained,  and  led  captive ;  its  sinewg  are  cut,  its  head  is 
broken;  its  king  is  bound  to  the  dread  chariot  of  Jehovah- Jesus,  and 
as  the  white  horses  of  triumph  drag  the  Conqueror  up  the  everlasting 
hills  in  splendour  of  glory,  the  monsters  of  the  pit  cringe  at  his  chariot 
wheels.     Wherefore,  beloved,  we  close  this  discourse  with  this  sentence 
of  humble  yet  joyful  worship,  "  Glory  be  unto  the  Father,  and  to  the 
Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost :  as  it  was  in  the  beginning  is  now  and  ever 
shall  be,  world  without  end.    Amen. 


ToRTiON  OF  Scripture  read  before  Sermon— Luke  xxiii.  27— 56. 


ON  THE  CROSS  AFTER  DEATH. 


Dbliveked  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  April  3rd,  1887,  by 

C.    H.   SPURGEON. 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


The  Jews  therefore,  because  it  was  the  preparation,  that  the  todies  should  not 
remain  upon  the  cross  on  the  Sabbath  day  (for  that  Sabbath  day  was  an  high  day  ) 
besought  Pilate  that  their  legs  might  be  broken,  and  that  they  might  be  taken  away. 
Then  came  the  soldiers,  and  brake  the  legs  of  the  first,  and  of  the  other  which  was 
crucified  with  him.  But  when  they  came  to  Jesus,  and  saw  that  he  was  dead  already 
they  brake  not  his  legs :  but  one  of  the  soldiers  with  a  spear  pierced  his  side,  and  forth- 
with came  there  out  blood  and  water.  And  he  that  saw  it  bare  record,  and  his  record 
IS  true  :  and  he  knoweth  that  he  saith  true,  that  ye  might  believe.  For  these  things 
were  done,  that  the  scrii)ture  should  be  fulfilled,  A  bone  of  him  shall  not  be  broken. 
And  again  another  scripture  saith,  They  shall  look  on  him  whom  they  pierced  "—1 
John  xix.  31 — 37. 

Criminals  who  were  crucified  by  the  Romans  were  allowed  to  rot  upon 
tlie  cross.  That  cruel  nation  can  hardly  be  so  severely  condemned  as 
our  own  people,  who  up  to  a  late  period  allowed  the  bodies  of  those  con- 
demned to  die  to  hanji:  in  chains  upon  gibbets  ia  conspicuous  places. 
The  horrible  practice  is  now  abandoned,  but  it  was  retained  to  a  time 
almost,  if  not  quite,  within  living  memory.  I  wonder  whether  any  aged 
person  here  remembers  such  a  horrible  spectacle.  Among  the  Romans 
it  was  usual,  for  there  are  classical  allusions  to  this  horror,  showing  that 
the  bodies  of  persons  crucified  were  usually  left  to  be  devoured  by 
ravenous  birds.  Probably  out  of  deference  to  the  customs  of  the  Jews, 
the  authorities  in  Palestine  would  sooner  or  later  allow  of  the  inter- 
ment of  the  crucified  ;  but  they  would  by  no  means  hasten  it,  since 
t^'.ey  would  not  feel  such  a  disgust  at  the  sight  as  an  Israelite  would. 
The  Mosaic  law,  which  you  will  find  in  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy, 
runs  as  follows: — "If  thou  hang  him  on  a  tree,  his  body  shall  not 
remain  all  night  upon  the  tree,  but  thou  shalt  in  any  wise  bury  him  that 
day  "  (Deuteronomy  xxi.  22,  23).  This  alone  would  lead  the  Jews  to 
desire  the  burial  of  the  executed  ;  but  there  was  a  further  reason. 
Lest  the  land  should  be  defiled  upon  the  holy  Sabbath  of  the  Passover, 
the  chief  priests  were  importunate  that  the  bodies  of  the  crucified 
should  be  buried,  and  therefore  that  their  deaths  should  be  hastened  by 
the  breaking  of  their  legs.  Their  consciences  were  not  wounded  by  the 
murder  of  Jesus,  but  they  were  greatly  moved  by  the  fear  of  ceremonial 
pollution.  Religious  scruples  may  live  in  a  dead  conscience.  Alas !  this 
IS  not  the  only  proof  of  that  fact :  we  could  find  many  in  our  own  day. 
No.  1,956. 


yQg  METROPOLITAN  TABKRNACLE  PULPIT. 

The  Jews  hurried  to  Pilate,  and  sought  as  a  boon  the  raerciless  act  of 
having  the  legs  of  the  crucified  dashed  to  pieces  with  an  iron  bar.  That 
act  was  sometimes  performed  upon  the  condemned  as  an  additional 
punishment ;  but  in  this  instance  it  was  meant  to  be  a  finishing  stroke, 
hastening  death  by  the  terrible  pain  which  it  would  cause,  and  the 
shuck  to  the  system  which  it  would  occasion.  Ferocious  hate  of  oui 
Lord  made  his  enemies  forgetful  of  everything  like  humanity :  doubt-less 
the  more  of  pain  and  shame  which  they  could  cause  to  him  the  better 
would  they  be  pleased.  Not,  however,  out  of  cruelty,  but  out  of  regard 
to  the  ceremonials  of  their  rehgion,  they  "  besought  Pilate  that  their 
legs  might  be  broken,  and  that  they  miglit  be  taken  away."  I  have 
already  told  you  that  this  breaking  of  the  bones  of  the  crucified  was  a 
Roman  custom;  and  of  this  we  have  evidence,  since  there  is  a  Latin 
word,  crucifragkm,  to  express  this  barbarous  act.  Pilate  had  no  hesita- 
tion in  granting  the  desire  of  the  Jews :  what  would  he  care  about  the 
dead  body,  since  he  had  already  delivered  up  the  living  man  ? 

Soldiers  go  at  once  to  perform  the  hideous  operation,  and  they  com- 
mence with  the  two  malefactors.  It  is  a  striking  fact  that  the  penitent 
thief,  although  he  was  to  be  in  Paradise  with  his  Lord  that  day,  was 
not,  therefote,  delivered  from  the  excruciating  agony  occasioned  by  the 
breaking  of  his  legs.  We  are  saved  from  eternal  misery,  not  fr<)m 
temporary  pain.  Our  Saviour,  by  our  salvation,  gives  no  pledge  to  us 
that  we  shall  be  screened  from  suffering  in  this  life.  It  is  true,  as  the 
proverb  hath  it,  "  All  things  come  alike  to  all :  there  is  one  event  to 
the  righteous,  and  to  the  wicked  ;  to  the  clean,  and  to  the  unclean." 
Accidents  and  diseases  afflict  the  godly  as  well  as  the  ungolly. 
Penitent  or  impenitent,  we  share  the  common  lot  of  men,  and  are 
born  to  troubles  as  the  sparks  fly  upward.  You  must  not  expect  because 
you  are  pardoned,  even  if  you  have  the  assurance  of  it  from  Christ's  own 
lips,  that,  therefore,  you  shall  escape  tribulation  ;  nay,  but  from  his 
gracious  mouth  you  have  the  forewarning  assurance  that  trial  shall 
befall  you;  for  Jesus  said,  "These  things  I  have  spoken  unto  you,  that 
in  me  ye  might  have  peace.  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation." 
Suffering  is  not  averted,  but  it  is  turned  into  a  blessing.  The  penitent 
thief  entered  into  Paradise  that  very  day,  but  it  was  not  without 
suffering  ;  say,  rather,  that  the  terrible  stroke  was  the  actual  means  of 
the  prompt  fulfilment  of  his  Lord's  promise  to  him.  By  that  blow  he 
died  that  day  ;  else  might  he  have  lingered  long.  How  much  we  may 
any  of  as  receive  by  the  way  of  suffering  it  were  hard  to  guess  : 
mayhap,  the  promise  that  we  shall  be  with  our  Lord  in  Paradise  will 
be  fulfilled  that  way. 

At  this  point  it  seemed  more  than  probable  that  our  blessed  Lord 
must  undergo  the  breaking  of  his  bones  ;  but  "  he  was  dead  already." 
It  had  pleased  him,  in  the  infinite  williuirhood  with  which  he  went  to  his 
sacrifice,  to  yield  up  his  life,  and  his  spirit  had  therefore  departed.  Yet 
one  might  have  feared  that  the  coarse  soldiers  would  have  performed 
their  orders  to  the  letter.  See,  they  do  not  so  !  Had  they  conceived  a 
dread  of  one  around  whom  such  prodigies  had  gathered  ?  Were  they, 
like  their  centurion,  impressed  with  awe  of  this  remarkable  personage  ? 
At  any  rate,  perceiving  that  he  was  dead  already,  they  did  not  use  their 
hammer.      Happy  are   we  to  see  them  cease  from  such  loathsome 


ON  THE   CROSS   AFTER   DEATH.  709 

bnitality.  Bui  we  may  not  be  too  ^lad  ;  for  another  outrage  will  take 
its  place :  to  m  .ke  sure  that  he  was  dead,  one  of  the  four  soldiers  with  a 
spear  pierced  his  side,  probably  thrusting  his  lance  quite  through  the 
heart.  Here  we  see  how  our  gracious  God  ordained  in  his  providence 
thnt  there  should  be  sure  evidence  that  Jesus  was  dead,  and  that 
therefore  the  sacrifice  was  slain.  Paul  declares  this  to  be  the  gospel, 
that  the  Lord  Jesus  died  according  to  the  Scriptures.  Strange  to  say, 
there  have  been  heretics  who  have  ventured  to  assert  that  Jesus  did 
not  actually  die.  They  stand  refuted  by  this  spear-thrust.  If  oar  Lord 
did  not  die,  then  no  sacrifice  has  been  presented,  the  resurrection 
is  not  a  fact,  and  there  is  no  foundation  of  hope  for  men.  Our  Lord 
assuredly  died,  and  was  buried :  the  Roman  soldiers  were  keen  judges 
in  such  matters,  and  they  paw  that  "  he  was  dead  already,"  and, 
moreover,  their  spears  were  not  used  in  vain  when  they  meant  to  make 
death  a  certainty. 

When  the  side  of  Christ  was  pierced,  there  flowed  thereout  blood  and 
water,  upon  which  a  great  deal  has  been  said  by  those  who  think  it 
proper  to  dilate  upon  such  tender  themes.  It  was  supposed  by  some 
that  by  death  the  blood  was  divided,  the  clots  parting  from  the  wn.ter  in 
which  they  float,  and  that  in  a  perfectly  natural  way.  But  it  is  not 
true  that  blood  would  flow  from  a  dead  body  if  it  were  pierced.  Only 
under  certain  very  special  conditions  would  blood  gush  forth.  The  flow- 
ing of  this  blood  from  the  side  of  our  Lord  cannot  be  considered  as  a 
common  occurrence:  it  was  a  fact  entirely  by  itself.  We  cannot 
argue  from  any  known  fact  in  this  case,  for  we  are  here  in  a  new  region. 
Granted,  that  blood  would  not  flow  from  an  ordinary  dead  body;  yet 
remember,  that  our  Lord's  body  was  unique,  since  it  saw  no  corruption. 
Whatever  change  might  come  over  a  body  liable  to  decay,  we  may  not 
ascribe  any  such  chnnge  to  his  frame ;  and  therefore  there  is  no  arguing 
from  facts  about  common  bodies  so  as  to  conclude  therefrom  anything 
concerning  our  blessed  Lord's  body.  Whether,  in  his  case,  blood  and 
water  flowed  naturally  from  his  holy  and  incorruptible  body,  or  whether 
it  was  a  miracle,  it  was  evidently  a  most  notable  and  remarkable  thing, 
and  John,  as  an  eye-witness,  was  evidently  astonished  at  it,  and  so 
astonished  at  it  that  he  recorded  a  solemn  affirmation,  in  order  that  we 
might  not  doubt  his  testimony.  He  was  certain  of  what  he  saw,  and 
he  took  care  to  report  it  with  a  special  note,  in  order  that  we  might 
beUeve ;  as  if  he  felt  that  if  this  fact  was  truly  believed,  there  was  a 
certain  convincing  power  which  would  induce  many  to  believe  on  our 
Lord  Jesus  as  the  appointed  Saviour.  I  could  enter  into  many  details, 
but  I  prefer  to  cast  a  veil  over  this  tender  mystery.  It  is  scarcely 
reverent  to  be  discoursing  of  anatomy  when  the  body  of  our  adorable 
Lord  is  before  us.  Let  us  close  our  eyes  iu  worship  rather  than  open 
them  with  irreverent  curiosity. 

The  great  task  before  me  this  morning  is  to  draw  truth  out  ot  this 
well  of  wonders.  I  shall  ask  vou  to  look  at  the  events  before  us 
in  three  lights :  first,  let  us  eee  here  the  fulfilment  of  Scripture  ;  secondly, 
the  identification  of  our  Lord  as  the  Messiah ;  and  thirdly,  the  mstructwn 
which  he  intends. 

I.     I  ask  you  to  notice  the  fulfilment  of  Scripture. 

Two  things  are  predicted:  not  a  bone  of  him  must  be  broken,  and 


710  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

he  must  be  pierced.  These  were  the  Scriptures  which  now  remained 
to  be  accomplished.  Last.  Lord's-day  mornino:  we  were  all  of  us  de- 
lighted as  we  saw  the  fulfilment  of  Scripture  in  the  capture  of  our  Lord, 
and  his  refusal  to  deliver  himself  from  his  enemies.  The  the De  of  the 
fulfilment  of  Scripture  is  worth  pursuinjr  yet  further  in  an  age  when 
Holv  Scripture  is  treated  with  so  much  slight,  and  is  spoken  of  a-* 
having  no  inspiration  in  it,  or.  at  least,  no  divine  authority  by  whicii 
its  infallibility  is  secured.  You  and  I  favour  no  such  error;  on  the 
contrary,  we  conceive  it  to  be  to  the  last  degrea  mischievous.  '*  If  the 
foundations  be  removed,  what  can  the  righteous  do  ?  "  We  are  pleased 
to  notice  how  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  those  who  wrote  concerning 
him  treated  the  Holy  Scriptures  with  an  intensely  reverent  regard. 
The  prophecies  that  went  before  of  Christ  must  be  fulfilled,  and  holy 
souls  found  great  deliiiht  in  dwelling  upon  the  fact  that  they  were  so. 

I  want  you  to  notice  concerning  this  case,  that  it  was  singularly 
complicated.  It  was  negative  and  positive  :  tha  Saviour's  bones  mast 
not  be  broken,  and  he  must  be  pierced.  In  the  type  of  the  Passover 
lamb  it  was  expressly  enacted  that  not  a  bone  of  it  should  be  broken ; 
therefore  not  a  bone  of  Jesus  must  be  broken.  At  the  same  time, 
according  to  Zechariah  xii.  10,  the  Lord  must  be  pierctsd.  He  must  not 
only  be  pierced  with  the  nails,  and  so  fulfil  the  prophecy,  "They 
pierced  my  hands  and  my  feet " ;  but  he  must  be  conspicuously  pierced, 
so  that  he  can  be  emphatically  regarded  as  a  piercei  one.  How  were 
these  prophecies,  and  a  multitude  more,  to  be  accomplished  ?  Only  God 
himself  could  have  brought  to  pass  the  fulfilment  of  prophecies  which 
were  of  all  kinds,  and  appeared  to  be  confused,  and  even  in  contradic- 
tion to  each  other.  It  would  be  an  impossible  task  for  the  human 
intellect  to  construct  so  many  prophecies,  and  types,  and  fores hado wings, 
and  then  to  imagine  a  person  in  whom  they  should  all  be  embodied.  But 
what  would  be  impossible  to  men  has  been  literally  carried  oat  in  the  case  of 
our  Lord.  There  are  prophecies  about  him  and  about  everything  con- 
nected with  him,  from  his  hair  to  his  garments,  from  his  ^»irth  to  his 
tomb,  and  yet  they  have  all  been  carried  out  to  the  letter.  That  which 
lies  immediately  before  us  was  a  complicated  case  ;  for  if  reverence  to 
the  Saviour  would  spare  his  bones,  would  it  not  also  spare  his  flesh  ? 
If  a  coarse  brutality  pierced  his  side,  why  did  it  not  break  his  legs  ? 
How  can  men  be  kept  from  one  act  of  violence,  and  that  an  act 
authorized  by  authority,  and  yet  how  shall  they  perpetrate  anotier 
violence  which  had  not  been  suggested  to  them  ?  But,  let  the  case  be  as 
complicated  as  it  was  possible  for  it  to  have  been,  infinite  wisdom  knew 
how  to  work  it  out  in  all  points;  and  it  did  so.  The  Christ  is  the 
exact  substance  of  the  foreshadowings  of  the  Messianic  propaecies. 

Next,  we  may  sav  of  the  fulfilment  of  these  two  prophecies,  that  it 
was  specially  improbable.  It  did  not  seem  at  all  likely  that  when  the 
order  was  given  to  break  the  legs  of  the  crucified,  Roman  soldiers  would 
abstain  from  the  deed.  How  could  the  body  of  Christ  be  preserved 
after  such  an  order  had  been  issued  ?  Those  four  soldiers  are  evidently 
determined  to  carry  out  the  governor's  orders;  they  have  commenced 
their  dreadful  task,  and  they  have  broken  the  legs  of  two  of  the  executed 
three.  The  crosses  were  arranged  so  that  Jesus  was  hanging  in  the 
midst :  he  is  the  second  of  the  three.     We  natura.ly  suppose  that  they 


ON  THE  CROSS  AFTER   DEATH.  7H 

would  proceed  in  order  from  the  first  cross  to  the  second  ;  but  t'ley  seem 
to  pass  by  the  second  cross,  and  proceed  from  the  first  to  the  third. 

What  was  the  reason  of  this  singular  procedure  ?  The  supposition  is, 
and  I  think  a  very  likely  one,  that  the  centre  cross  stood  somewhat 
back,  and  that  thus  the  two  thieves  formed  a  sort  of  first  rank.     Jesus 

would  thus  be  all  the  more  emphatically  "in  the  midst."  If  he  was 
placed  a  little  back,  it  would  certainly  have  been  easier  for  the  penitent 
thief  to  have  read  the  inscription  over  his  head,  and  to  have  looked  to 
our  Lord,  and  lield  conversation  with  him.  Had  they  been  placnd 
exactly  in  a  line  this  might  not  have  been  so  natural ;  but  the  suggested 
position  seems  to  suit  the  circumstances.  If  it  were  so,  I  can  under- 
stand how  the  soldiers  would  be  taking  the  crosses  in  order  when  they 
performed  their  horrible  office  upon  the  two  malefactors,  and  came  last 
to  Jesus,  who  was  in  the  midst.  In  any  case,  such  was  the  order  which 
they  followed.  The  marvel  is  that  they  did  not  in  due  course  proceed 
to  deal  the  horrible  blow  in  the  case  of' our  Lord.  Roman  soldiers  are 
apt  to  fulfil  their  commissions  very  literally,  and  they  are  not  often 
moved  with  much  desire  to  avoid  barbarities.  Can  you  sec  them  intent 
upon  their  errand?  Will  they  not  even  now  mangle  that  sacred  body? 
Oommend  me  for  roughness  to  tiie  ordinary  Roman  soldier:  he  was 
so  used  to  deeds  of  slaughter,  so  accustomed  to  an  empire  which 
had  been^  established  with  blood  and  iron,  that  the  idea  of  pity  never 
orossed  his  soul,  except  to  be  scouted  as  a  womanly  feeling  unworthy  of 
a  brave  man.  Yet  behold  and  wonder !  The  order  is  given  to  break 
their  legs :  two  out  of  the  three  have  suffered,  and  yet  no  soldier 
may  crush  a  bone  of  that  sacred  body.  They  see  that  he  is  dead 
already,  and  they  break  not  his  legs. 

As  yet  you  have  only  seen  one  of  the  prophecies  fulfilled.  He  must 
be  pierced  as  well.  And  what  was  that  which  came  into  that  Roman 
soldier's  mmd  when,  in  a  hasty  moment,  he  resolved  to  make  sure  that 
the  apparent  death  of  Jesus  was  a  real  one  ?  Why  did  he  open  that 
sacred  side  with  his  lance  ?  He  knew  nothing  of  the  prophecy  ;  he 
had  no  dreams  of  Eve  being  taken  from  the  side  of  the  man,  and  the 
ohurch  from  the  side  of  Jesus.  He  had  never  heard  that  ancient  notion 
of  the  side  of  Jesus  being  like  the  door  of  the  ark,  through  which  an 
■entram  e  to  safety  is  opened.  Why,  then,  does  he  fulfil  the  prediction 
•of  the  prophet  ?  There  was  no  accident  or  chance  here.  V\^here  are 
there  such  things  ?  The  hand  of  the  Lord  is  here,  and  we  desire  to 
praise  and  bless  that  omniscient  and  omnipotent  Providence  which  thus 
fulfilled  the  word  of  revelation.  God  hath  respect  unto  his  own  word, 
and  while  he  takes  care  that  no  bone  of  his  Son  shall  be  broken,  he  als  i 
secures  that  no  text  of  Holy  Scripture  shall  be  broken.  That  our  Lord^fs 
bones  should  remain  unbroken,  and  yet  that  he  should  be  pierced, 
seemed  a  very  unlikely  thing  ;  but  it  was  carried  out.  When  next  you 
meet  with  an  unlikely  promise,  believe  it  firmly.  When  next  you  see 
things  working  contrary  to  the  truth  of  God,  believo  God,  and  believe 
nothing  else.  Let  God  be  true  and  every  man  a  liar.  Though  men  and 
■devils  should  give  God  the  lie,  hold  you  on  to  what  God  has  spoken  ; 
for  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  not  one  jot  or  tittle  of  his 
word  shall  fall  to  the  ground. 

Note  again,  dear  Iriends,  concerning  this  fulfilment  of   Scripture, 


712  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PiniPIT, 

that  it  ivas  altogether  i?idispens%bU.  If  they  had  broken  Christ's  bones, 
then  that  word  of  John  the  Baptist,  *'  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,"  had 
seemed  to  have  a  slur  cast  upon  it.  Men  would  have  objected,  "  But 
the  bones  of  the  Lamb  of  God  were  not  broken."  It  was  especially 
commanded  twice  over,  not  only  in  the  first  ordaining  of  the  Passover 
in  Et^ypt,  but  in  the  allowance  of  a  second  to  those  who  were  defiled  at 
the  time  of  the  first  Passover.  In  Numbers  as  well  as  in  Exodus,  we 
read  that  not  a  bone  of  the  lamb  must  be  broken.  How,  then,  if  our 
Lords  bones  had  been  broken,  could  we  have  said,  "  Christ  our  Pass- 
over is  sacrificed  for  us,"  when  there  would  have  been  this  fatal  flaw  ? 
Jesus  must  remaiu  intact  upon  the  cro*s,  and  he  must  also  be  pierced  ; 
for  else  that  famous  passage  in  Zechariah,  which  is  here  alluded  to^ 
**They  shall  look  on  me  whom  they  have  pierced,"  could  not  have 
been  true  of  him.  Both  prophecies  must  be  carried  out,  and  they  were 
BO  in  a  conspicuous  manner.  But  why  need  I  say  that  this  fulfilment 
was  indispensable  ?  Beloved,  the  keeping  of  every  word  of  God  is 
indispensable.  It  is  indispensable  to  the  truth  of  God  that  he  should  be 
true  always  :  for  if  one  word  of  his  can  fall  to  the  ground,  then  all  may 
fall,  and  his  veracity  is  gone.  If  it  can  be  demonstrated  that  one 
prophecy  was  a  mistake,  then  all  the  rest  may  be  mistakes.  If  one  part 
of  the  Scripture  is  untrue,  all  may  be  untrue,  and  we  have  no  sure 
ground  to  go  upon.  Faith  loves  not  slippery  places  ;  faith  seeks  the 
sure  word  of  prophecy,  and  sets  her  foot  firmly  upon  certainties.  Unless 
all  the  Word  of  God  is  sure,  and  pure  "  as  silver  tried  in  a  furnace  of 
earth,  purified  seven  times,"  then  we  have  nothing  to  go  upon,  and  are 
virtually  left  without  a  revelation  from  God.  If  I  am  to  take  the  Bible 
and  say,  "Some  of  this  is  true,  and  some  of  it  is  questionable,"  I  amna 
better  off  than  if  I  had  no  Bible.  A  man  who  is  at  sea  with  a  chart 
which  is  only  accurate  in  certain  places,  is  not  much  better  off  than  if  he 
had  no  chart  at  all.  I  S3e  not  how  it  can  ever  be  safe  to  be  '*  converted 
and  become  as  little  children"  if  there  is  no  infallible  teacher  for  us  to 
fjllow.  Beloved,  it  is  indispensable  to  the  honour  of  God  and  to  our 
confidence  in  his  Word,  that  every  line  of  Holy  Scripture  should  be  true. 
It  was  indispensable  evidently  in  the  case  now  before  us,  and  this  is 
only  one  instance  of  a  rule  which  is  without  exception. 

But  now  let  me  remind  you  that  although  the  problem  was  com- 
plicated, and  its  working  out  was  improbable,  yet  it  was  fulfilled  in  th& 
most  natural  manner.  Nothing  can  be  less  constrained  than  the  action 
of  the  soldiers  ;  they  have  broken  the  legs  of  two,  but  the  other  is  dead, 
and  they  do  not  break  his  legs  ;  yet,  to  make  sure  that  they  will  be- 
safe  in  omitting  the  blow,  they  pierce  his  side.  There  was  no  com- 
pulsion put  upon  them  ;  they  did  this  of  their  own  proper  thought. 
No  angel  came  from  heaven  to  stand  with  his  broad  wings  in  the  front  of 
the  cross,  so  as  to  protect  the  Saviour  ;  no  awful  aagis  of  mystery  was 
hung  over  the  sacred  body  of  the  Lord  so  that  intruders  might  be  driven 
back  with  fear.  No,  the  quaternion  of  soldiers  did  whatever  they 
wished  to  do.  They  acted  of  their  own  free  will,  and  yet  at  the  same 
time  they  fulfilled  the  eternal  counsel  of  God.  Shall  we  never  be  able 
to  drive  into  men's  minds  the  truth  that  predestination  and  free  agency- 
are  both  tacts?  Men  sin  as  i.  cly  as  birds  fly  in  the  air,  and  they 
are    altogether    responsible   for    their    sin;    and   yet    everything    ift 


« 


ON  THB  CROSS  AFTER  DEATK.  7lS 

ordained  and^  foreseen  of  God.  The  fo:e-oi'dinafcion  of  God  in  no 
degree  interferes  with  the  responsibility  of  man.  I  have  often  been 
asked  by  persons  to  reconcile  the  two  truths.  My  only  reply  is — They 
need  no  reconciliation,  for  they  ne\  er  fell  out.  Why  should  1  try  to  recon- 
cile two  friends  ?  Prove  to  me  that  the  two  truths  do  not  agree.  In  that 
request  I  have  set  you  a  task  as  difficult  ns  that  which  you  propose  to 
me.  These  two  facts  are  parallel  lines  ;  1  cannot  make  them  unite, 
bat  you  cannot  make  them  cross  each  other.  Permit  me  also  to  add 
that  I  have  long  ago  given  up  the  idea  of  making  all  my  beliefs  into  a 
system.  I  believe,  but  I  cannot  explain.  I  fall  before  the  majesty  of 
revelation,  and  adore  the  intinite  Lord.  I  do  not  understand  all  that 
God  reveals,  but  1  believe  it.  How  can  I  expect  to  understand  all 
the  mysteries  of  revelation,  when  even  the  arithmetic  of  Scripture 
surpasses  my  comprehension,  since  I  am  taught  that  in  the  Godhead 
the  Three  are  One,  while  in  the  undivided  One  I  see  most  manifestly 
Three?  Need  I  measure  the  sea  ?  Is  it  not  enough  that  I  am  upborne 
by  its  waves  ?  I  thank  God  for  waters  deep  enough  for  my  faith  to 
swim  in  :  understanding  would  compel  me  to  keep  to  the  shallows,  but 
faith  takes  me  to  the  main  ocean.  I  think  it  more  to  my  soul's  benefit 
to  believe  than  to  understand,  for  faith  brings  me  nearer  to  God  than 
reason  ever  did.  The  faith  which  is  limited  by  our  narrow  faculties  is 
a  faith  unworthy  of  a  child  of  God  ;  for  as  a  child  of  God  he  should 
begin  to  deal  with  infinite  sublimities,  like  those  in  which  his  great 
Father  is  at  home.  These  are  only  to  be  grasped  by  faith.  To  return 
to  my  subject :  albeit  the  matter  must  be  as  Scripture  foreshadowed,  yet 
no  constraint  nor  inducement  was  put  forth  ;  but,  as  free  agents,  the 
soldiers  performed  the  very  things  which  were  written  in  the  Prophets- 
concerning  Chiist. 

Dear  friends,  suffer  one  more  observation  upon  this  fulfilment  of 
Scripture:  it  ivas  marvellous 'y  complelc.  Observe  that  in  these  trans- 
actions a  seal  was  set  upon  that  part  of  Sjiipture  which  has  been  most 
exposed  to  sceptical  derision  :  f  >r  the  seal  was  set  first  of  all  upon  ike- 
iijpes.  Irreverent  readers  of  Scripture  have  refused  to  accept  the 
types:  they  say,  '*How  do  you  know  that  the  Passover  was  a  type- 
of  Christ  ? "  In  other  cases,  more  serious  persons  object  to  detailed 
interpretations,  and  decline  to  see  a  meaning  in  the  smalKr  particulars. 
Such  persons  would  not  attach  spiritual  imp  )rtance  to  the  law,  "  Not  a 
bone  of  it  shall  be  broken  "  ;  but  wonld  dismiss  it  as  a  petty  regulation 
of  an  obsolete  religious  rite.  But  observe,  beloved,  the  Holy  Spirit 
dees  nothing  of  the  kind;  for  he  fixes  upon  a  minor  particular  of  the 
type,  and  declares  that  this  must  be  fulfilled.  Moreover,  the  providence 
of  God  intervenes,  so  that  it  shall  be  carried  out.  Wherefore,  be  not 
scared  away  from  the  study  of  the  types  by  the  ridicule  of  the  worldly- 
wise.  There  is  a  general  timidity  coming  over  the  minds  of  many 
ab  ut  Holy  Scripture,  a  timidity  to  which,  thank  God,  I  ana  an  utter 
stranger.  It  would  be  a  happy  circiunstance  if  the  childlike  reverence 
of  the  early  fathers  could  be  restored  to  the  church,  and  the  present 
irreverent  criticism  could  be  repented  of  and  cast  away.  We  may 
delight  ourselves  in  the  types  as  in  a  very  paradise  of  revelation. 
Here  we  see  our  best  Beloved's  beauties  mirrored  in  ten  thousanJ 
deiightful  ways.     There  is  a  world  of  holy  teaching  in  the  books  of 


714  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  Old  Testament,  and  in  their  types  and  symbols.  To  pfive  np  this 
patrimony  of  the  saints,  and  to  accept  criticism  instead  of  it,  would  be 
like  selling  one's  birthright  for  a  mess  of  pottage.  I  see  in  our  Lord's 
unbroken  bones  a  setting  of  the  seal  of  God  upon  the  types  of  Scripture. 

Let  us  go  further.  I  see,  next,  the  seal  of  God  set  upon  unfulfilled 
prophecy ;  for  the  passage  in  Zechariah  is  not  yet  completely  fulfilled. 
It  runs  thus :  "  They  shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have  pierced." 
Jehovah  is  the  speaker,  and  he  speaks  of  *'  the  house  of  David  and  the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem."  They  are  to  look  on  Jehovah  whom  they 
have  pierced,  and  to  mourn  for  him.  Although  this  prophecy  is  not 
yet  fulfilled  on  the  largest  scale,  yet  it  is  so  far  certified ;  for  Jesus 
is  pierced  :  the  rest  of  it,  therefore,  stands  good,  and  Israel  shall 
one  day  mourn  because  of  her  insulted  King.  The  prophecy  was 
fulfilled  in  part  when  Peter  stood  up  and  preached  to  the  eleven,  when 
a  great  company  of  the  priests  believed,  and  when  multitudes  of  the 
seed  of  Abraham  became  preachers  of  Christ  crucified.  Still  it  awaits  a 
larger  fulfilment,  and  we  may  rest  quite  sure  that  the  day  shall  come 
when  all  Israel  shall  be  saved.  As  the  piercing  of  their  Lord  is 
true,  so  shall  the  piercing  of  their  hearts  be  true,  and  they  shall  mourn 
and  inwardly  bleed  with  bitter  sorrow  for  him  whom  they  despised  and 
abhorred.  The  point  to  mark  here  is,  that  a  seal  is  set  in  this  case  to  a 
prophecy  which  yet  awaits  its  largest  fulfilment ;  wherefore,  we  may 
regard  this  as  a  pattern,  and  may  lay  stress  upon  prophecy,  and  rejoice 
in  it,  and  receive  it  without  doubt,  come  what  may. 

I  have  said  this  much  upon  the  fulfilment  of  the  Word  concerning 
our  Lord ;  let  us  learn  hence  a  lesson  of  reverence  and  confidence  in 
reference  to  Holy  Scripture. 

IL  But  now,  secondly,  and  briefly,  thej  identification  op  our 
Lord  as  the  Messiah  was  greatly  strengthened  by  that  which  befell 
his  body  after  death.  It  was  needful  that  he  should  conclusively  be 
proved  to  be  the  Christ  spoken  of  in  the  Old  Testament.  Certain 
marks  and  tokens  are  given,  and  those  marks  and  tokens  must  be  found 
in  him :  they  were  so  found. 

The  first  mark  was  this:  God's  Lamb  must  have  a  measure  of  pre- 
sermtion.  If  Christ  be  what  he  professes  to  be,  he  is  the  Lamb  of 
God.  Now,  God's  lamb  could  only  be  dealt  with  in  God's  way. 
Yes,  there  is  the  lamb  ;  kill  it,  sprinkle  its  blood,  roast  it  with  fire, 
but  break  not  its  bones.  It  is  God's  lamb,  and  not  yours,  therefore 
hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  but  no  further.  Not  a  bone  of  it  shall  be  broken. 
Roast  it,  divide  it  among  yourselves,  and  eat  it,  but  break  no  bone  of  it. 
The  Lord  claims  it  as  his  own,  and  this  is  his  reserve.  So,  in  effect, 
the  Lord  says  concerning  the  Lord  Jesus  :  "  There  is  my  Son ;  bind 
him,  scourge  him,  spit  on  him,  crucify  him  ;  but  he  is  the  Lamb  of  my 
Passover,  and  you  must  net  break  a  bone  of  him."  The  Lord's  right 
to  him  is  declared  by  the  reservation  which  is  made  concerning  his 
bones.  Do  you  not  see  here  how  he  is  identified  as  being  "  the  Lamb  of 
God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world  "?  It  is  a  m  :rk  of  identity 
upon  which  faith  fixes  her  eyes,  and  she  studies  that  mark  until  she  sees 
much  more  in  it  than  we  can  this  morning  speak  about,  for  we  have 
other  things  to  dwell  upon. 

The  next  mark  of  identity  must  be,  that  Jehovah  our  Lord  should  be 


ON  THE  CROSS  AFTER  DEATH.  715 

ipiercfid  hy  Israel  So  Zechariah  said,  and  so  must  it  be  fulfilled.  Not 
merely  must  his  hands  and  feet  be  nailed,  but  most  conspicuously  must 
himself  be  pierced.  ''  They  shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have  piercer^, 
and  they  shall  mourn  for  him."  Pierced  he  must  be.  His  wounds 
are  the  marks  and  tokens  of  his  bein?  the  real  Christ.  When  they 
shnll  see  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  man  in  the  last  days,  then  shall  all 
the  tribes  of  the  earth  mourn ;  and  is  not  that  sign  his  appearing  as  a 
Lamb  that  has  been  slain  ?  The  wound  in  his  side  was  a  sure  mark  of 
his  identity  to  his  own  disciples ;  for  he  said  to  Thomas,  "  Reach  hither 
thy  hand,  and  thrust  it  into  my  side :  and  be  not  faithless,  but  believing." 
It  shall  be  the  convincing  token  to  all  Israel :  "  They  shall  look  upon  me 
whom  they  have  pierced,  and  they  shall  mourn  for  him,  as  one  that 
mourneth  for  his  only  son."  To  us  the  opened  way  to  his  heart  is  in 
his  flesh  the  token  that  this  is  the  incarnate  God  of  love,  whose  heart 
can  be  reached  by  all  who  seek  his  grace. 

But  I  have  not  finished  this  identification  ;  for  observe,  that  when 
that  side  was  pierced,  "forthwith  came  there  out  blood  and  water." 
You  that  have  your  Bibles  will  have  opened  them  already  at  Zechariah  xii. 
Will  you  kindly  read  on  till  you  come  to  the  first  verse  of  the 
thirteenth  chapter,  which  ought  not  to  have  been  divided  from  t^'e 
twelf(-h  chapter  ?  What  do  you  find  there  ?  "  In  that  day  there  sha  I 
\q  a  fountain  opened  to  the  house  of  David  and  to  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness."  They  pierced  him,  and  in  that 
day  they  began  to  mourn  for  him;  but  more,  in  that  day  there  was  a  foun- 
tain opened.  And  what  was  that  fountain  but  this  gush  of  water  and  of 
blood  from  the  riven  side  of  our  redeeming  Lord  ?  The  prophecies 
follow  quickly  upon  one  another  ;  they  relate  to  the  same  person,  and 
to  the  same  day  ;  and  we  are  pleased  to  see  that  the  facts  also  follow 
quickly  upon  one  another ;  for  when  the  soldier  with  the  spear  pierced 
the  side  of  Jesus,  ''forthwith  came  there  out  blood  and  water." 
Jehovah  was  pierced,  and  men  repented,  and  beheld  the  cleansing 
fountain  within  a  brief  space.  The  men  who  saw  the  sacred  fountain 
opened  rejoiced  to  see  in  it  the  attestation  of  the  finished  sacrifice, 
and  the  token  of  its  cleansing  effect. 

The  identification  is  more  complete  if  we  add  one  more  remark. 
Take  all  the  types  of  the  Old  Testament  together,  and  you  will  gather 
this,  that  the  purification  of  sin  was  ty^ncatty  set  f&rth  hy  Uood  and 
water.  Blood  was  conspicuous  always,  you  have  no  remission  of  sin 
without  it  :  but  water  was  exceedingly  "^prominent  also.  The  priests 
before  sacrificing  must  wash,  and  the  victim  itself  must  be  washed  with 
water.  Impure  things  must  be  washed  with  running  water.  Behold 
how  our  Lord  Jesus  came  by  water  and  by  blood  ;  not  by  water  only, 
but  by  water  and  blood.  John  who  saw  the  marvellous  stream  never 
forgot  the  sigiit  ;  for  though  he  wrote  his  Epistles,  I  suppose,  far  on  in 
life,  the  recollection  of  that  wondrous  scene  was  fresh  with  him.  Though 
I  suppose  he  did  not  write  his  Gospel  until  he  was  a  very  old  man, 
yet  when  he  came  to  this  passage  it  impressed  him  as  much  as  ever, 
and  he  uttered  aflBrmations  which  he  was  not  at  all  accustomed  to  use : 
*'  He  that  saw  it  bare  record,  and  his  record  is  true  :  and  he  knoweth 
that  he  saith  true."  In  solemn  form  he  thus,  after  a  manner,  gavo 
bis  affidavit  before  God's    people,   that  he    did   really  behold    thia 


716  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

extraordinary  sight.  In  Jesiis  we  see  one  who  has  come  to  atone  and 
to  sanctify.  He  is  that  High  Priest  who  cleanses  the  leprosy  of  sin  by 
blood  and  water.  This  is  one  part  of  the  sure  identirication  of  the 
great  Purifier  of  God's  people,  that  he  came  both  by  water  and  by 
blood,  and  poured  out  both  from  his  pierced  side.  I  leave  these 
identifications  to  you.  They  are  striking  to  my  own  mind,  but  they 
are  only  part  of  the  wonderful  system  of  marks  and  tokens  by  which  it 
is  seen  that  God  attests  the  man  Christ  Jesus  as  being  in  very  deed 
the  true  Messiah. 

III.  I  must  close  by  noticing,  thirdly,  the  instruction  intended 
FOR  us  in  all  these  things. 

The  first  instruction  intended  for  us  must  be  only  hmted  at,  like  all 
the  rest.  See  what  Christ  is  to  us.  He  is  the  Paschal  Lamb,  not  a 
bone  of  which  was  broken.  You  believe  it.  Come,  then,  and  act  upon 
your  belief  by  feeding  upon  Christ ;  keep  the  feast  in  your  own  souls 
this  day.  That  sprinkled  blood  of  his  has  brought  you  safety:  the 
Destroying  Angel  cannot  touch  you  or  your  house.  The  Lamb  himself 
has  become  your  food  ;  feed  on  him ;  remove  your  spiritual  hunger  by 
receiving  Jesus  into  your  heart.  This  is  the  food  whereof  if  a  man 
eat  he  shall  live  for  ever.  Be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God,  as  you 
now  receive  the  Lord  Jesus  as  God  and  man.  "  Ye  are  complete  in 
him."  Ye  are  *'  perfect  in  Jesus  Christ."  Can  you  not  say  of  him  : 
"He  is  all  my  salvation,  and  all  my  desire"?  "Christ  is  all  and  in 
all."  Do  not  merely  learn  this  lesson  as  a  doctrine,  but  enjoy  it  as 
a  personal  experience.  Jesus  our  Passover  is  slain,  let  him  be  eaten. 
Let  us  feast  on  him,  and  then  be  ready  to  journey  through  the  wilderness, 
in  the  strength  of  this  divine  meat,  until  we  come  to  the  promised  rest. 

What,  next  do  we  learn  from  this  lessjn  but  this  ?  See  man's  treat- 
ment of  Christ.  They  have  spit  upon  him,  thejr  have  cried,  "  Crucify 
him,  crucify  him,"  they  have  nailed  him  to  the  cross,  they  have  mocked 
his  agonies,  and  he  is  dead;  but  mm's  malice  is  not  glutted  yet.  The 
last  act  of  man  to  Christ  must  be  to  pierce  him  through.  That  cruel 
wound  was  the  concentration  of  man's  ill-treatment  of  Jesus.  His 
experience  at  the  hands  of  our  race  is  summed  up  in  the  fact  that  they 
pierced  him  to  the  heart.  That  is  what  men  have  done  to  Christ :  they 
have  so  despised  and  rejected  him  that  he  dies,  pierced  to  the  heart. 
Oh,  the  depravity  of  our  nature  !  Some  doubt  whether  it  is  t/)tal 
depravity.  It  deserves  a  worse  adjective  than  that.  There  is  no  word 
in  human  language  Which  can  express  the  venom  of  the  enmity  of  man 
to  his  God  and  Saviour :  he  would  wound  him  mortally  if  he  could. 
Do  not  expect  that  men  will  love  either  Christ  or  you,  if  you  are  like 
him.  Do  not  expect  that  Jesus  will  find  room  for  himself  in  the  inn, 
much  less  that  he  will  be  set  on  the  throne  by  guilty,  unrenewed  ui?n. 
Oh,  no  !  Even  when  he  is  dead  they  musL  insult  his  corpse  with  a 
spear-thrust.  One  soldier  did  it,  but  he  expressed  the  sentiment  of  the 
age.     This  is  what  the  world  of  sinners  did  for  him  who  came  into  the 

world  to  save  it.  ■»  i      ^   4.1,  * 

Now,  learn,  in  the  next  place,  ivhat  Jesus  didfm'  men,    Ueloved,  tnat 

waa  a  sweet  expression  in  our  hymn  just  now — 

♦♦Even  after  death  his  heart 

For  us  its  tribute  poured." 


i 


ON   THE   CROSS   AFTER   DEATH.  717 

111  his  life  he  had  bled  for  us  :  drop  by  drop  the  bloody  sweat  had  fallen 
to  the  ground.  Then  the  cruel  scourges  drew  from  him  purple  streams ; 
but  as  a  little  store  of  life-blood  was  left  near  his  heart,  he  poured  it  all 
out  before  he  went  his  way.  It  is  a  materialistic  expression,  but  there 
is  something  more  in  it  than  mere  sentiment — that  there  remains 
among  the  substance  of  this  globe  a  sacred  relic  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in 
the  form  of  that  blood  and  water.  As  no  atom  of  matter  ever  perishes, 
that  matter  remains  on  earth  even  now.  His  body  has  gone  into  glory, 
but  the  blood  and  water  are  left  behind.  I  see  much  more  in  this  fact 
than  I  will  now  attempt  to  tell.  0  world,  the  Christ  has  marked  thee 
with  his  blood  and  he  means  to  have  thee !  Blood  and  water  from  the 
heart  of  God's  own  Son  have  fallen  down  upon  this  dark  and  defiled 
planet,  and  thus  Jesus  has  sealed  it  as  his  own,  and  as  such  it  must  be 
transformed  into  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth 
righteousness.  Our  dear  Lord,  when  he  had  given  us  all  he  had,  and  even 
resigned  his  life  on  oar  behalf,  then  parted  with  a  priceless  stream 
from  the  fountain  of  his  heart  :  "  forthwith  came  there  out  blood  and 
water."  Oh,  the  kindness  of  the  heart  of  Christ,  that  did  not  only  for  a 
blow  return  a  kiss,  but  for  a  spear-thrust  returned  streams  of  life  and 
healing  ! 

But  I  must  hurry  on.  I  can  see  in  this  passage  also  the  safety  oj 
the  saints.  It  is  marvellous  how  full  of  eyes  the  things  of  Jcbus  are  ; 
for  his  unbroken  bones  look  backward  to  the  Paschal  lamb,  but  they 
also  look  forward  throughout  all  the  history  of  the  church  to  that  day 
when  he  shall  gather  all  his  saints  in  one  body,  and  none  shall  be 
missing.  Not  a  bone  of  his  mistical  body  shall  be  broken.  There  is  a 
text  in  the  Psalms  which  saith  of  the  righteous  man — and  all  righteous 
men  are  conformed  unto  the  image  of  Christ — "  He  keepeth  all  his 
bones :  not  one  of  them  is  broken."  I  do  rejoice  in  the  safety  of  Christ's 
elect ;  he  shall  not  permit  a  bone  of  his  redeemed  body  to  be  broken. 

'•  For  all  the  chosen  seed 
Shall  meet  around  the  throne, 
Shall  bless  the  conduct  of  his  grace, 
And  make  his  glories  known." 

A  perfect  Christ  there  shall  be  in  the  day  of  his  appearing,  when  all  the 
members  of  his  body  shall  be  joined  to  their  glorious  Head,  who  shall 
be  crowned  ibr  ever.  Not  one  living  member  of  Christ  shall  be  absent  ; 
"  Not  a  bone  of  him  shall  be  broken."  There  shall  be  no  lame,  maimed 
Christ,  no  half-wrought  redemption  ;  but  the  purpose  that  he  came  to 
accomplish  shall  be  perfectly  achieved  to  the  glory  of  his  name. 

I  have  not  quite  done,  for  I  must  add  another  lesson.  We  see  here 
the  salvation  of  sinners.  Jesus  Christ's  side  is  pierced  to  give  to  sinners 
the  double  cure  of  sin,  the  taking  away  of  its  guilt  and  power;  but, 
better  than  this,  sinners  are  to  have  their  hearts  broken  by  a  sight  of 
the  Crucified.  By  this  means  also  they  are  to  obtain  faith.  "  They 
shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  they  shall  mourn  for 
him."  Beloved,  our  Lord  Jesus  came  not  only  to  save  sinners,  but  to 
seek  them  :  his  death  not  only  saves  those  who  have  faith,  but  it  creates 
faith  in  those  who  have  it  not.  The  cross  produces  the  faith  and 
repentance    which    it    demands.     If    you    cannot    come    to     Chriat 


718  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

with  faith  and  repentance,  come  to  Christ  for  faith  and  repentance, 
for  he  can  give  them  to  you.  He  is  pierced  on  purpose  that 
you  may  be  pricked  to  the  heart.  His  blood,  which  freely  flows, 
is  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins.  What  you  have  to  do  is 
just  to  look,  and,  as  you  look,  those  blessed  feelings  which  are  the 
marks  of  conversion  and  regeneration  shall  be  wrought  in  you  by  a 
sight  of  him.  Oh,  blessed  lesson  !  Put  it  into  practice  this  morning. 
Oh,  that  in  this  great  house  many  may  now  have  done  with  self  and 
look  to  the  crucified  Saviour,  and  find  life  eternal  in  him !  For  this 
is  the  main  end  of  John's  writing  this  record,  and  this  is  the  chief 
design  of  our  preaching  upon  it :  we  long  that  you  may  believe.  Come, 
ye  guilty,  come  and  trust  the  Son  of  God  who  died  for  you.  Come,  ye 
foul  and  polluted,  come  and  wash  in  this  sacred  stream  poured  out  for 
you.  There  is  life  in  a  look  at  the  Crucified  One.  There  is  life  at  this 
moment  for  every  one  of  you  who  will  look  to  him.  God  grant  you 
may  look  and  live,  for  Jtsus  Christ's  sake !    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — John  xix.  13 — 42. 


Htmxs  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 910,  276,  277. 


JOSEPH  OF  ARIMATHJiA. 


Prbacurd  UN  Lord's-day  Morning,  July  6th,  1884.  by 

C.   H.  SPURGEON, 

AT   THK    MKTKOPOLirAN   TABKRXACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"Joseph  of  Arimathgea,  an  honourable  counsellor,  which  also  waited  for  the  kingdom 
of  God,  cam",  and  went  in  boldly  unto  Pilate,  and  craved  the  body  of  Jesus.  And 
Pilate  marvelled  if  he  were  already  dead  :  and  calling  unto  him  the  centurion,  he  asked 
him  whether  he  had  been  any  while  dead.  And  when  he  knew  it  of  the  centurion,  he 
gave  the  body  to  Joseph.  And  he  bought  fine  linen,  and  took  him  down,  and  wrapped 
him  in  the  linen,  and  laid  him  in  a  sepulchre  which  was  hewn  out  of  a  rock,  and  rolled  a 
stone  unto  the  door  of  the  sepulchre."— Mark  xv.  43—46. 

It  was  a  very  dark  day  with  the  church  of  God  and  with  the  cause  of 
Christ ;  for  the  Lord  Jesus  was  dead,  and  so  the  sun  of  their  souls  had 
set.  "  All  the  disciples  forsook  him,  and  fled."  "Ye  shall  be  scattered, 
every  man  to  his  own,  and  shall  leave  me  alone,"  were  the  sad  words  of 
Jesus,  and  they  had  come  true.  He  was  dead  upon  the  cross,  and  his 
enemies  hoped  that  there  was  an  end  of  him,  while  his  friends  feared 
that  it  was  even  so.  A  few  women  who  had  remained  about  the  cross, 
true  to  the  very  last,  were  found  faithful  unto  death ;  but  what  could 
they  do  to  obtain  his  sacred  body  and  give  it  honourable  burial  ?  That 
priceless  flesh  seemed  to  be  in  danger  of  the  fate  which  usually  awaited 
the  bodies  of  malefactors:  at  any  rate,  the  fear  was  that  it  might  be 
hurled  into  the  first  grave  that  could  be  found  to  shelter  it.  At  that 
perilous  moment  Joseph  of  Arimathaga,  a  city  of  the  Jews,  of  whom 
we  never  heard  before,  and  of  whom  we  never  hear  again,  suddenly 
made  his  appearance.  He  was  the  very  man  needed  for  the  occasion,  a 
man  of  influence,  a  man  possessing  that  kind  of  influence  which  was 
most  potent  with  Pilate — a  rich  man,  a  counsellor,  a  member  of  the 
Sanhedrim,  a  person  of  weight  and  character.  Every  evangelist  mentions 
him  and  tells  us  something  about  him,  and  from  these  we  learn  that  he 
was  a  disciple,  "a  good  man  and  a  just;  who  also  himself  waited  for 
the  kingdom  of  God."  Joseph  had  been  retiring,  and  probably 
cowardly  before ;  but  now  he  came  to  the  cross,  and  saw  how  matters 
stood,  and  then  went  in  boldly  unto  Pilate,  craved  the  body  of  Jesus, 
and  obtained  it.  Let  us  learn  from  this  that  God  will  always  have 
his  witnesses.  It  matters  not  though  the  ministry  should  forsake  the 
truth,  though  they  that  should  be  leaders  should  become  recreant, 
the  truth  of  God  will  not  fail  for  lack  of  friends.  It  may  be  with 
the  church  as  when  a  standard-bearer  fainteth  and  the  host  is  ready 
to  melt  with  dismay ;  but  there  shall  be  found  other  standard-bearers, 
No.  1,789. 


^20  METROPOLITAN  TABEUNACLR  PULPIT. 

and  the  banner  of  the  Lord  shall  wave  over  all.  As  the  Lord  liveth, 
go  shall  his  truth  live:  as  God  reigneth,  so  shall  the  .s:ospel  reij^n,  even 
though  it  be  from  the  cross.  "  Tell  it  out  among  the  heathen  that  the  Lord 
reio-neth  from  the  tree."  Such  is  a  singular  version  of  a  verse  in  the 
Psalms,  and  it  contains  a  glorious  truth.  Even  while  Jesus  hangeth 
on  the  cross  in  death  he  is  still  keeping  possession  of  the  throne,  and  he 
shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever.  .     ,      ,     .        j 

Let  this  be  remembered  for  your  encouraq:ement  m  the  cloudy  and 
dark  day.  If  you  live  in  any  place  where  the  faithful  fail  from  among 
men  do  not  wring  your  hands  in  grief  and  sit  down  in  despair,  as 
though  it  was  all  over  with  tlie  cause  you  love.  The  Lord  liveth,  and 
he  will  yet  keep  a  faithful  seed  alive  in  the  earth.  Another  Joseph  of 
Arimathsea  will  come  forward  at  the  desperate  moment:  just  whe-i 
we  cannot  do  without  him  the  man  will  be  found.  There  was  a  Joseph 
for  Israel  in  Egypt,  and  there  was  a  Joseph  for  Jesus  on  the  cross.  A 
Joseph  acted  to  him  a  father's  part  at  his  birth,  and  another  Joseph 
arranged  for  his  burial.  The  Lord  shall  not  be  left  without  friends. 
There  was  a  dark  day  in  the  Old  Testament  history  when  the  eyes  of 
Eh  the  servant  of  God,  had  fiiiled  him ;  and  worse  still,  he  was  almost 
as  blind  mentally  as  physically  ;  for  his  sons  made  themselves  vile,  and 
he  restrained  them  not.  It  seemed  as  if  God  must  forsake  his  Israel. 
But  who  is  this  little  boy  who  is  brought  in  by  his  mother?  this  tiny 
child  who  is  to  be  left  in  the  sanctuary  to  serve  his  God  as  long  as  h^ 
liveth  ?  this  pretty  little  man  who  wears  the  little  coat  which  his  mother's 
iiands  have  lovingly  made  for  him?  Look,  ye  that  have  eyes  of  faith ; 
for  the  prophet  Samuel  is  before  you,  the  servant  of  the  Lord,  by  whose 
holy  example  Israel  shall  be  led  to  better  things,  and  delivered  from  the 
oppression  which  chastised  the  iniquities  of  Eli's  sons. 

God  hath  to-day  somewhere,  I  know  not  where,  in  yon  obscure  cottage 
of  an  English  village,  or  in  a  log-hut  far  away  in  the  backwoods  of 
America,  or  in  the  slums  of  our  back  streets,  or  in  our  palaces,  a  man  who 
in  maturer  life  shall  deliver  Israel,  fighting  the  battles  of  the  Lord.  The 
Lord  hath  his  servant  making  ready,  and  when  the  time  shall  come, 
when  the  hour  shall  want  the  man,  the  man  shall  be  found  for  the  hour. 
The  Lord's  will  shall  be  done,  let  infidels  and  doubters  think  what  they 
please.  I  see  in  this  advent  of  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  exactly  at  the 
needed  time,  a  well  of  consolation  for  all  who  have  the  cause  of  God  laid 
upon  their  hearts.  We  need  not  worry  our  heads  about  who  is  to  suc- 
ceed the  pastors  and  evangelists  of  to-day :  the  apostolical  succession  we 
may  safely  leave  with  our  God. 

Concerning  this  Joseph  of  Arimathaea,  the  honourable  counsellor,  1 
want  to  speak  this  moruing,  praying  that  I  may  speak  to  your  souls 
all  along.  As  I  have  already  said,  we  hear  no  more  of  Joseph  than 
what  is  recorded  here.  He  shines  out  when  he  is  wanted,  and  anon  he 
disappears  :  his  record  is  on  high.  We  need  not  mention  the  traditions 
about  him,  for  I  think  that  even  the  quotation  of  legends  has  an  evil 
tendency,  and  may  turn  us  aside  from  the  pure,  unadulterated  Word  of 
God.  What  have  you  and  I  to  do  with  tradition  ?  Is  not  the  Scripture 
enough  ?  There  is  probably  no  truth  in  the  silly  tales  about  Joseph  an<l 
Glastonbury  ;  and  if  there  were,  it  could  be  of  no  consequence  to  us  ;  if 
any  fact  had  been  worthy  of  the  pen  of  inspiration,  it  would  have  been 


JOSEPH  OF  atrimath;ea.  721 

written,  and  because  it  is  not  written,  we  need  not  desire  to  know.  Let 
us  be  satisfied  to  pause  where  the  Holy  Spirit  stays  his  pen 

I  shall  use  Joseph  of  Arimathasa  this  morning  in  four  ways  :  first,  as 
our  ivarning, — he  was  a  di«ciple  of  Jesus,  "  but  secretly  for  fear  of  the 
Jews  ; "  secondly,  for  our  instrvcUon, — he  was  at  last  brought  out  by  the 
cross,  concerning  which  holy  Simeon  had  declared  that  by  the  death  of 
the  Lord  Jesns  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts  should  be  revealed  ;  thirdly, 
for  our  arousing^ — there  was  an  occasion  for  Joseph  to  come  forward, 
and  there  is  occasion  now  for  all  the  timid  to  grow  brave  ;  and  lastly, 
for  our  guidance, — that  we  may,  if  we  have  been  at  all  bashful  and 
fearful,  come  forward  in  the  hour  of  need  and  behave  ourselves  as  bravely 
as  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  did  on  the  eve  before  the  Paschal  Sabbath. 

3.  First,  then,  I  desire  to  look  at  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  as  our  warn- 
ing. He  was  a  disciple  of  Christ,  but  secretly,  for  fear  of  the  Jews:  we 
do  not  advise  any  one  of  you  to  imitate  Joseph  in  that.  Fear  which 
leads  us  to  conceal  our  faith  is  an  evil  thing.  Be  a  disciple  by  all  means, 
but  not  secretly  :  you  miss  a  great  part  of  your  life's  purpose  if  you  are. 
Above  all,  do  not  be  a  disciple  secretly  because  of  the  fear  of  man  ;  for 
the  fear  of  naan  bringeth  a  snare.  If  you  are  the  slave  of  such  fear 
it  demeans  you,  be-littles  you,  and  prevents  your  giving  due  glory  ta 
God. 

*'  Fear  bim,  ye  saints,  and  you  will  then 
Have  nothing  else  to  fear." 

Be  careful  to  give  honour  to  Christ  and  he  will  take  care  of  your  honour. 
Why  was  it  that  Joseph  of  Arimathasa  was  so  backward  ?  Perhaps  it 
was  owing  to  his  natural  disposition.  Many  men  are  by  nature  very 
bold-;  some  are  a  httle  too  much  so,  for  they  become  intrusive,  self-asser- 
tive, not  to  say  impudent.  I  have  heard  of  a  certain  class  of  persons 
who  "  rush  in  where  angels  fear  to  tread."  They  are  fearless  because 
they  are  brainless.  Let  us  avoid  fault  in  that  direction.  Many,  on 
the  other  hand,  are  too  retiring  :  they  have  to  Screw  their  courage  up 
even  to  say  a  good  word  for  the  Saviour  whom  they  love.  If  they  can 
do  so  they  fall  into  the  rear  rank  ;  they  hope  to  be  found  among  the 
victors  when  they  divide  the  spoil,  but  they  are  not  over  ambitious  to  be 
among  the  warriors  while  they  are  braving  the  foe.  Some  of  these  are 
true-hearted  notwithstanding  their  timidity.  It  was  found  in  the  martyr 
days  that  certain  of  those  who  endured  most  bravely  at  the  stake  were 
naturally  of  a  fearful  mind.  It  is  noted  by  Foxe  that  some  who  boasted 
of  how  well  they  could  bear  pain  and  death  for  Christ  turned  tail  and 
recanted ;  while  others  who  in  prison  trembled  at  the  thought  of  the  fire, 
played  the  man  in  death,  to  the  admiration  of  all  that  were  round  about 
them.  Still,  dear  friends,  it  is  not  a  desirable  thing  if  you  are  troubled 
with  timidity  to  foster  it  at  all.  Fear  of  man  is  a  plant  to  be  rooted  up, 
and  not  to  be  nurtured.  I  should  set  that  plant,  if  I  could,  where  it 
would  get  but  little  water,  and  no  sunshine,  and  meanwhile  I  would  beg 
a  cutting  from  a  better  tree.  Would  it  not  be  well  often  to  brace  our- 
selves with  such  a  hymn  as  this— 

**  Am  I  a  soldier  of  the  cross, 
A  follower  of  the  Lamb  ? 
And  shall  I  fear  to  own  his  cause, 
Or  blu«h  10  isMeak  his  name? 

46 


722  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACriK    IMJhPIT. 

"  Must  I  be  carried  to  the  skies 
On  flowery  beds  of  ease  ; 
While  others  fought  to  win  the  prize, 
And  sail'd  through  bloody  seas?" 

If  yoa  know  that  your  temptation  lies  in  the  direction  of  fear,  watch  and 
strive  against  it,  and  school  yourselves  evermore  to  dauntless  courage  by 
tlie  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

I  am  afraid,  too,  that  what  helped  to  intimidate  Joseph  of  Arimathaea 
was  the  fact  that  he  was  a  rih  man.  A  sad  truth  lies  within  our 
Lord's  solemn  exclamation,  "  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."  Riches  do  not  strengthen  the 
neart,  or  make  men  daring  for  the  good  cause.  Albeit  wealth  is  a  great 
talent  which  may  be  well  used  by  the  man  who  has  entered  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  yet  it  brings  with  it  snares  and  temptations,  and 
when  a  man  has  not  yet  entered  into  the  kingdom  it  is,  in  many  ways, 
a  terrible  hindrance  to  his  entrance.  "  It  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  go 
through  the  eye  of  a  needle,  than  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  king- 
dom." The  fishermen  of  the  Galilean  Lake  readily  left  their  bits  of 
boats,  and  their  fishing-tackle;  but  Joseph  of  Arimathatx  was  a  rich 
man,  and  was  therefore  slow  to  leave  all  for  Christ's  sake.  The  ten- 
dency of  great  possessions  is  seen  in  the  case  of  the  young  man  who 
turned  away  in  sorrow  from  the  Lord  Jesus,  when  put  to  the  unusual 
test  of  selling  all  he  had.  Strong  swimmers  have  saved  their  lives  when 
the  ship  has  struck  upon  a  rock,  by  casting  aside  every  weight;  while 
others  have  gone  straight  down  to  the  bottom  because  they  have  bound 
their  gold  around  their  waists.  Gold  sinks  men  as  surely  as  lead.  Take 
€are,  any  of  you  that  are  well  to  do  in  this  world,  that  you  do  not  permit 
the  liberality  of  God  to  be  a  cause  of  disloyalty  to  him.  Beware  of  the 
pride  of  life,  the  lust  for  rank,  the  desire  to  hoard ;  for  any  of  these  may 
prevent  your  service  of  your  Lord.  Riches  puff  men  up,  and  prevent  their 
stooping  to  find  the  pearl  of  great  price.  A  po  -r  man  enters  a  humble 
village  sanctuary  where  Christ  is  preached,  and  he  finds  eternal  life ; 
another  man  under  concern  of  soul  in  the  same  village  does  not  like  to 
go  down  to  the  poor  conventicle,  and  remains  unblest.  He  keeps  away 
because  he  puts  to  himself  the  question,  **  What  will  the  people  say  if 
the  squire  goes  to  hear  the  gospel  ?  What  a  stir  there  will  be  if  the  son 
of  a  lord  is  converted!"  Joseph  of  Arimathaja's  wealth  made  him 
unduly  cautious ;  and  possibly,  without  his  knowing  it,  prevented  his 
casting  in  his  lot  with  the  common  sort  of  people  who  followed  the  Lord 
Jesus.  His  heart  was  for  the  prize,  but  the  heavy  weight  of  his  sub- 
stance hindered  him  in  his  race ;  it  was  an  instance  of  abounding  grace 
that  he  was  helped  to  run  well  at  the  last. 

Possibly,  too,  he  may  have  been  checked  by  the  fact  that  hs  ivas  in 
office,  and  that  he  was  honourable  in  it.  It  needs  great  grace  to  carry 
human  honour ;  and,  truth  to  tell,  it  is  not  particularly  much  worth 
carrying  when  you  have  it.  For  what  is  fam^  but  the  breath  of  men's 
nostrils  ?  Poor  stuff  to  feed  a  soul  upon !  If  a  man  could  so  live  as  to 
gain  universal  plaudits,  if  he  could  write  his  name  athwart  the  sky  m 
letters  of  gold,  what  of  it  all?  What  is  there  in  the  applause  of  a 
thoughtless  multitude  ?  The  approbation  of  good  men  if  it  bo  gained 
bj  persevering  virtue,  is  better  to  be  desired  than  great  riches ;  but  even 


1 


JOSEPH   OF   ARIMATH^A.  723 

then  it  may  become  a  temptation ;  for  the  man  may  begin  to  question 
rather,  What  will  people  say?  than,  What  will  God  say?  and  the  mo- 
ment he  falls  into  that  mood  he  has  introduced  a  weakening  element 
into  his  life.  The  "Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant,"  of  the 
Master's  own  lip  is  worth  ten  thousand  thunders  of  applause  from 
senators  and  princes.  Honour  among  men  is,  at  best,  a  peril  to  the 
best.  Joseph  was  honoured  in  council,  and  this  is  apt  to  make  a  man 
prudently  slow.  The  tendency  of  office  is  towards  caution  rather  than 
enthusiasm.  I  would  have  those  placed  in  high  positions  remember 
this,  and  candidly  judge  themselves  as  to  whether  their  shrinking  from 
the  public  avowal  of  Christ  may  not  be  a  cowardice  unworthy  of  the 
position  in  which  the  Lord  has  placed  them. 

It  seems  clear  that  all  the  earthly  things  which  men  covet  may  not  be  so 
desirable  as  they  appear  to  be;  and  that  which  men  would  give  their 
eyes  to  procure,  they  might,  if  their  eyes  were  opened,  think  far  less  of. 
I  would  lovingly  enquire  of  you  at  this  time  (for  the  sermon  is  meant 
to  be  personal  all  the  way  through)  if  any  of  you  who  love  my  Lord  and 
Master  are  doing  so  secretly  because  of  the  fear  of  men.  You  have 
never  openly  confessed  your  faith,  and  why  not?  What  doth  hinder 
your  taking  up  a  decided  position  on  the  Lord's  side  ?  Are  you  wealthy  ? 
Are  you  honourable  ?  Do  you  occupy  an  enviable  position  in  society  ? 
And  are  you  such  a  mean-spirited  creature  that  you  have  become  proud 
of  these  glittering  surroundings,  like  a  child  that  is  vain  of  its  new  frock  ? 
Are  you  so  craven  that  you  will  not  cast  in  your  lot  with  the  followers  of 
truth  and  righteousness  because  they  are  persons  of  low  degree  ?  Are 
you  really  so  base  ?  Is  there  no  holy  chivalry  in  you  ?  Can  it  be  so, 
that,  because  God  has  dealt  so  well  with  you,  and  trusted  you  so  gene- 
rously, you  will  repay  him  by  denying  his  Son,  violating  your  conscience, 
and  turning  your  back  on  truth;  and  all  for  the  sake  of  being  in  the 
fashion?  1  know  it  may  seem  hard  to  receive  the  cold  shoulder  in 
society,  or  to  have  the  finger  of  scorn  pointed  at  you ;  but  to  bow  before 
this  selfish  dread  is  scarcely  worthy  of  a  man,  and  utterly  disgraceful  to 
y  a  Christian  man.  *'0h,  but  I  am  so  retiring  in  disposition."  Yes, 
but  do  not  indulge  it,  I  pray  you  ;  for,  if  all  were  of  such  a  mind, 
where  were  the  noble  advances  of  truth,  her  reformations,  her  revivals  ? 
AVhere  would  have  been  our  Luther,  or  our  Calvin,  or  our  Zwingle? 
where  would  have  been  our  Whitefield,  or  our  Wesley,  if  they  had  thought 
it  to  be  the  main  object  of  desire  to  walk  at  ease  along  the  cool  seques- 
tered vale  of  life  ?  Come  forth,  my  brother,  for  the  truth  and  for  the 
Lord.  Recollect  that  what  is  right  for  you  would  be  right  for  the  rest  of 
us :  if  you  do  not  join  the  Christian  church,  for  instance,  every  one  of  us 

"^  might  also  neglect  that  duty,  and  where  would  be  the  visible  church  of 
Christ,  and  how  would  the  ordinances  of  our  holy  faith  be  kept  up  as  a 

.  witness  among  the  sons  of  men  ?  I  charge  all  concealed  believers  to 
think  over  the  inconsistency  of  their  concealment  and  to  quit  that 
cowardly  condition. 

I  feel  sure  that  Joseph  of  Arimathsea  was  a  great  loser  by  his  secrecy ; 
for  you  see,  he  did  not  live  with  Jesus,  as  many  other  disciples  did.  During 
that  brief  but  golden  period  in  which  men  walked  and  talked,  and  ate 
and  drank  with  Jesus,  Joseph  was  not  with  him.  He  was  not  among  the 
twelve :  as  possibly  he  might  have  been  if  he  had  possessed  more  courage 


724  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

and  decision.  He  lost  many  of  those  familiar  balks  with  which  the  Lora 
indulged  his  own  after  the  multitudes  had  been  sent  away.  He  missed 
that  sacred  training  and  strengthening  which  fitted  men  for  the  noble 
hves  of  primitive  saints.  How  many  opportunities  he  must  have 
missed,  too,  of  working  for  the  Master  and  with  the  Master !  Perhaps  we 
hear  no  more  of  him  because  he  had  done  no  more.  Possibly  that  one  gran(i 
action  which  has  redeemed  his  name  from  forgetfulness,  is  all  that  is 
recorded  because  it  really  was  all  that  was  worth  recording.  Joseph 
must  have  been  a  weaker,  a  sadder,  a  less  useful  man  for  having  followed 
Christ  afar  off.  I  would  to  God  that  such  reflections  as  these  would 
fetch  out  our  beloved,  truly  faithful  and  honourable  Christian  men,  who 
hitherto  have  hidden  away  among  the  stuff,  and  have  not  come  to  the 
front  to  stand  up  for  Jesus. 

II.     Secondly,  having  viewed  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  as  a  warning,  1 
shall  go  on  to  speak  of  him  as  a  lesson  for  our  instruction. 

Joseph  did  come  out  after  all;  and  so  will  you,  my  friends.  If  you 
are  honest  and  sincere,  you  will  have  to  avow  your  Lord  sjoner  or  later. 
Do  you  not  think  it  would  be  better  to  make  it  sooner  rather  than  later  ? 
The  day  will  come  when  that  shame  which  you  are  now  dreading  will  be 
yours.  As  surely  as  you  are  a  sincere  believer,  you  will  have  to  en- 
counter that  reproach  and  derision  which  now  alarm  you :  why  not  face 
them  at  once  and  get  it  over  ?  You  will  have  to  confess  Christ  before  many 
witnesses,  why  not  begin  to  do  so  at  once  ?  What  is  the  hardship  of  it  ? 
It  will  come  easier  to  you,  and  it  will  bring  you  a  larger  blessing,  and  it 
will  be  sweeter  in  the  recollecti<)n  afterwards,  than  if  you  keep  on  post- 
poning it.  What  was  it  that  fetched  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  oat  ?  // 
was  the  pov)er  of  the  cross  !  Is  it  not  a  remarkable  thing  that  all  the 
life  of  Christ  did  not  draw  out  an  open  a*owal  from  this  man? 
Our  Lord's  miracles,  his  marvellous  discourses,  his  poverty,  and  self- 
renunciation,  his  glorious  life  of  holiness  and  benevolence,  all  may  have 
helped  to  build  up  Joseph  in  his  secret  faith,  but  it  did  not  suffice  to 
develop  in  him  a  bold  avowal  of  faith.  The  shameful  death  of  the 
cross  had  greater  power  over  Joseph  than  all  the  beauty  of  Christ's  life. 
Now  let  us  see,  you  timid,  backward  ones,  whether  the  cross  will  not  have 
the  same  influence  over  you  to-day.  I  believe  it  will  if  you  carefully  study 
it.  I  am  sure  it  will  if  the  Holy  Spirit  lays  it  home  to  your  heart. 
I  suppose  that  to  Joseph  of  Ariraa;>haea  Christ's  death  on  the  cross 
seemed  such  a  wicked  thing  that  he  must  come  out  on  behalf  of  one  so 
evil  entreated.  He  had  not  consented  to  the  deed  of  the  men  of  the 
Sanhedrim  when  they  condemned  Jesus  to  death;  probably  he  and  Nico- 
demus  withdrew  themselves  from  the  assembly  altogether;  but  when 
he  saw  that  the  crime  was  actually  committed,  and  that  the  innocent 
man  had  been  put  to  death,  then  he  said,  "I  cannot  be  a  silent  witness 
of  such  a  murder.  I  must  now  side  with  the  holy  and  the  just."  There- 
fore he  came  out,  and  was  found  the  willing  servant  of  his  crucified 
Master.  Come  what  may  of  it,  he  felt  that  he  must  own  himself  to  be 
on  the  right  side,  now  that  they  had  maliciously  taken  away  the  life  of 
the  Lord  Jesus.  It  was  late,  it  was  sadly  late,  but  it  was  not  too  late. 
Oh,  secret  disciple^  will  you  not  quit  your  hiding-place  ?  Will  you  not 
hasten  to  do  so?  Ton  who  are  quiet  and  retiring,  when  you  hear  the 
name  of  Jesus  blasphemed,  as  it  is  in  these  evil  days,  will  you  not  st.iud 


JOSEPH   OF   AHIMATll^A.  725 

«p  for  him?  Wlien  you  hear  his  Deity  denied,  when  his  headship  in 
the  church  is  o-iven  to  another,  when  his  very  person  is  by  lewd  fellows  of 
the  baser  sort  set  up  as  the  target  of  their  criticism,  will  you  not  speak 
np  for  him  ?  Will  you  not  be  shocked  by  such  evil  conduct  into  an 
open  avowal?  His  cause  is  that  of  truth  and  righteousness,  and  mercy 
and  hope  for  the  sons  of  men,  therefore  he  must  not  be  abused  while  you 
sit  by  in  silence.  Had  others  favoured  him  you  might,  perhaps,  have 
been  somewhat  excused  for  holding  back;  but  you  cannot  keep  back 
without  grievous  sin  now  that  so  many  deride  him.  Jesus  is  worthy  of 
all  honour,  and  yet  they  heap  scorn  upon  Mm  :  will  you  not  defend  him? 
He  is  your  Saviour  and  Lord  ;  oh,  be  not  slow  to  own  that  you  are  his. 
The  cross  laid  bare  the  heart  of  Joseph  ;  he  loathed  the  wickedness  which 
slew  the  Holy  and  the  Just,  and  thereiore  he  girded  himself  to  become 
the  guardian  of  his  sacred  body. 

But,  next,  it  may  have  been  in  part  the  ivonderful  patience  of  the 
Master's  death  which  made  Joseph  feel  he  could  not  hide  any  longer. 
Did  he  hear  him  say,  "  Father,  forgive  them ;  for  they  know  not  what 
they  do  "  ?  Did  he  mark  him  when  those  blessed  lips  said,  "  I  thirst  "  ? 
Do  you  think  he  observed  the  ribaldry  and  scorn  which  surrounded  the 
•dying  Lord  ?  and  did  he  feel  that  the  stones  would  cry  out  if  he  did  not 
«how  kindness  to  his  best  friend  ?  Since  Jesus  spake  not  for  himself, 
but  was  dumb  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers,  Joseph  is  bound  to  open 
his  mputh  for  him.  If  Jesus  answered  not,  but  only  breathed  out  prayers 
for  his  murderers,  the  honourable  counsellor  must  acknowledge  him. 
The  sun  has  owned  him,  and  veiled  his  face  in  sackcloth  !  The  earth 
has  owned  him,  and  trembled  to  her  very  heart  at  his  sufferings  !  Death 
has  owned  him,  and  yielded  up  the  bodies  which  the  sepulchre  had 
hitherto  detained !  The  temple  has  owned  him,  and  in  its  horror  haa' 
rent  its  veil,  like  a  woman  that  is  utterly  broken  in  heart  by  the  horrors 
•she  has  seen !  Therefore  Joseph  must  own  him,  he  cannot  resist  the 
impulse.  Oh,  brethren,  if  you  have  been  backward,  let  some  such  motive 
lead  you  unto  the  van  of  the  host. 

Then  there  were  all  the  wonders  of  that  death  which  he  saw,  and  to 
which  I  have  already  alluded.  They  sufficed  to  convince  the  centurion 
that  this  was  a  righteous  man.  They  convinced  others  that  he  was  the 
Son  of  God  ;  and  he  who  was  already  a  disciple  of  Christ  must  have  been 
greatly  confirmed  in  that  conviction  by  what  he  saw  around  the  cross. 
The  time  was  come  when  he  must  boldly  act  as  Christ's  disciple.  Have 
there  been  no  wonders  of  conversion  around  you  ?  no  answers  to  prtiyer  ? 
no  providential  deliverances  ?  Should  not  these  lead  the  secret  ones  to 
declare  themselves  ? 

I  do  not  suppose  he  fully  understood  the  design  of  our  hordes  death; 
he  had  some  knowledge  of  it,  but  not  sucfi  a  knowledge  as  we  have  now 
that  the  Spirit  of  God  has  appeared  in  all  his  fulness,  and  taught  us  the 
meaning  of  the  cross.  Oh,  listen,  sirs,  ye  that  are  not  upon  his  side 
openly,  ye  that  have  never  worn  his  livery,  nor  manifestly  entered  on 
ihis  service.  He  died  for  you  !  Those  wounds  were  all  for  you  ;  that 
bloody  sweat,  of  which  you  still  may  see  the  marks  upon  the  countenance 
«f)f  the  Crucified,  was  all  for  you.  For  you  the  thirst  and  fever,  for  you 
the  bowing  of  the  head,  and  the  giving  up  of  the  ghost ;  and  can  you 
i)e  ashamed  to  own  him  ?     Will  you  not  endure  rebuke  and  scorn  for 


726  JfETROPOLITAN   TABEUNACLB   PULPif. 

his  dear  sake  who  bore  all  this  for  you  ?  Now  speak  from  yonr  soitI 
and  say,  ''  He  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me."  If  you  cannot  say 
fchat,  you  cannot  be  happy  ;  but  if  you  can,  then  what  follows  ?  Must 
you  not  love  him,  and  give  yourself  for  him  ?  The  cross  is  a  wondrous 
magnet,  drawing  to  Jesus  every  man  of  the  true  metal.  It  is  as  a 
banner  lifted  on  high,  to  which  all  who  are  loyal  must  rally.  This  fiery 
cross,  carried  through  all  lands,  will  rouse  the  valiant  and  speed  them  to 
the  field.  Can  you  see  your  Lord  suffering  to  the  death  for  yoii,  and 
then  turn  your  backs  ?  I  pray  you  may  no  longer  hesitate,  but  may  at 
once  cry,  **  Set  down  my  name  among  his  followers ;  for  I  will  fight  it 
out  even  to  the  end,  till  I  hear  him  say — 

•Come  in,  come  in; 
Eternal  glory  thou  shalt  win.'** 

Thus  much  by  way  of  instruction  taken  from  the  life  of  Joseph  of 
Arimathaea.  If  the  cross  does  not  bring  a  man  out,  what  will  ?  If  the 
spectacle  of  dying  love  does  not  quicken  us  into  courageous  affection  for 
him,  what  can? 

III.  So  I  have  to  mention,  in  the  third  place,  something  for  OUR 
AROUSING.  Perhaps  you  are  saying  in  your  heart  that  the  season  in 
which  Joseph  lived  was  one  whicii  imperatively  demanded  that  he  should 
leave  his  hiding-place  and  should  go  in  to  Pilate,  but  that  you  are  under 
no  such  constraint.  Hearken,  friends ;  many  people  are  not  true  to 
their  occasions,  whatever  they  may  be  ;  they  do  not  consider  that 
they  have  come  to  the  kingdom  for  such  a  time  as  this.  The  Lord 
Jesus  is  not  hanging  on  a  cross  to-day  needing  to  be  buried  ;  but  other 
stern  necessities  exist,  and  call  for  your  exertions.  This  hour's  neces- 
sities imperiously  demand  that  every  man  who  is  right  at  heart  should 
acknowledge  his  Lord  and  do  him  service.  Every  man  that  loves 
Christ  should  at  this  hour  prove  it  by  his  actions.  A  buoy  off  the 
Mumbles  in  South  Wales  bears  a  bell  which  is  meant  to  warn 
mariners  of  a  dangerous  rock.  This  bell  is  quiet  enough  in  ordinary 
weather  ;  but  when  the  winds  are  out,  and  the  great  waves  rush  in 
towards  the  shore,  its  solemn  tones  are  heard  for  miles  around  as 
it  swings  to  and  fro  in  the  hands  of  the  sea.  I  believe  there  are  true 
men  who  are  silent  when  everything  is  calm,  who  will  be  forced  to  speak 
-when  the  wild  winds  are  out.  Permit  me  to  assure  you  that  a  storm  is 
raging  now,  and  it  is  growing  worse  and  worse.  If  I  rightly  read 
the  signs  of  the  times,  it  is  meet  that  every  bell  should  ring  out  its  warn- 
ing note  lest  souls  be  lost  upon  the  rocks  of  error.  You  that  have  fallen 
behind  because  the  fighting  did  not  seem  to  require  you,  must  quit  your 
positions  of  ease.  I  summon  you  in  the  Master's  name  to  the  war.  The 
Lord  hath  need  of  you.  If  you  come  not  to  his  help  against  the  mighty 
a  curse  will  light  upon  you.  Ye  must  either  be  written  across  the  back 
as  craven  cowards,  or  else  you  will  to-day  solemnly  espouse  the  cause 
of  Jesus.     Shall  I  tell  you  why  ? 

I  will  tell  you  why  Joseph  was  wanted,  and  that  was,  just  because 
Christ's  etumies  had  at  last  gone  too  far.  When  they  hunted  him  about 
and  took  up  stones  to  stone  him  they  went  a  very  long  way;  when 
they  said  he  had  a  devil  and  was  mad  they  went  much  too  far ;  when 
they  asserted  that  he  cast  out  devils  by  Beelzebub,  the  prince  of  the 


JOSEPH  OP  ARIMATir^A.  727 

devils,  that  was  a  piece  of  blasphemy  ;  but  now,  now  they  have  over- 
stepped the  line  most  fatally;  they  have  actually  taken  the  Kin^  of 
Jsrael  and  nailed  him  up  to  a  cross,  and  he  is  dead;   and  therefore 
Joseph  cannot  stand  it  any  longer.      He  quits  their  company  and  joms 
himself  to  the  Lord  Jesus.     See  how  far  men  are  going  in  these  days. 
In  the  outside  world   we   have  infidelity  of  so  gross,   so  brutish,   a 
character,  that  it  is  unworthy  of  the  civilization,  much   less  of  the 
Christianity,  of  our  age.     Now,  ye  fearful  ones,  come  out,  and  refuse 
to  be  numbered  with  the  unbelieving  world.     Besides,  in  the  outward 
Christian  church  we  see  men  who,  having  already  taken  away  every 
doctrine  that  we  hold  dear,   are  now  assailing  the  inspiration  of  God's 
own  word.     They  tell  us  plainly  that  they  do  not  believe  what  the 
Scriptures  say  further  than  they  choose  to  do.     The  Bible  to  them  is  a 
fine  book,  but  rather  out  of  date.     Now,  if  you  can  be  quiet,  I  cannot. 
The  citadel  of  Christendom  is  now  attacked.     Let  no  brave  man  shrink 
from  its  defence.      If  you  can  hold  your  tongues,  and  see  the  faith 
rent  to  pieces,  I  cannot.     Why,  it  is  enough  to  make  every  man  gird  on 
his  weapon  and  rush  to  the  fight.    Years  ago,  when  they  talked  of  the 
French  invading  England,  an  old  lady  grew  very  indignant,  and  threatened 
deadly  resistance.     When  she  was  asked  what  the  women  of  England 
could  do,  she  said  they  would  rise  to  a  man.     I  have  no^doubt  whatever 
that  they  would  do  their  best  in  any  such  emergency.     Every  iron  in  the 
fire-place,  whether  it  be  poker  or  shovel,  would  be  grasped  to  defend  our 
hearths  and  homes  ;  and  just  so  now,  when  error  knows  no  boun  Is,  we  must 
stand  up  for  the  defence  of  the  truth.    Since  they  push  error  to  extremes,  it 
becomes  us  to  hold  by  every  particle  of  the  faith.     I  will  not,  for  my  own 
part,  give  up  a  corne/of  my  creed  for  any  man.  Even  if  we  might  have  been 
prepared  to  modify  expressions  had  the  age  been  different,  we  are  not  in 
that  mood  now.     A  generation  of  vipers  shall  have  a  naked  file  to  bite  at. 
We  will  modify  nothing.      If    truth    bears   a   stern  aspect    we   will 
not  veil  it.     If  there  be  an  offence  in  the  cross  we  will  not  conceal 
it.     This   shall   be  my   answer  to   those   who   would  have  us   attune 
ourselves  to  the  spirit  'of  the  age,— I  know  no  Spirit  but  one,  nnd  he  is 
unchanging  in  every  age.     Your  extravagance  of  doubt  shall  have  no 
influence  over  us  except  to  make  us  bind  the  gospel  more  closely  to  oar 
hearts.     If  we  gave  you  an  inch  you  would  take  a  mile,  and  so  no  inch 
shall  be  given  yon.     Our  resolve  is  to  live  for  the  Book  as  we  read  it, 
for  the  gospel  as  we  rest  in  it,  for  the  Lord  as  he  made  atonement,  for 
the  kingdom  as  it  ruleth  over  all.     I  beg  every  trembling  Christian  to 
take  heart,  put  on  his  Lord's  livery,  and  advance  to  the  fray.     Gome 
out  now,  if  you  never  did  before !     Come  out,  if  there  is  any  manhncs 
in  you,  in  these  days  of  blasphemy  and  rebuke. 

*'  Ye  that  are  men,  now  serve  bim, 
Against  iinnumber'd  foes ; 
Your  courage  rise  with  danger. 
And  strength  to  strength  oppose.'* 

When  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  revealed  himself  as  our  Lord's  disciple, 
<mr  Lords  friends  had  mostly  fled—^Q  might  almost  say  they  had  alj 
departed.     Then  Joseph  said,  "  I  will  go  in  and  beg  for  the  body. 
When  everybody  else  runs  away,  then  the  timid  man  grows  brave ;  and 


728  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

often  have  I  noticed  it,  that  when  there  has  been  a  wide  desertion  from 
the  faith,  then  the  feeble  have  become  strong.  Those  poor  souls  who  had 
said,  "  We  hardly  know  whether  we  are  the  people  of  God  at  all,  we  are 
so  unworthy,"  have  crept  out  of  their  dens  and  have  waxed  valiant  in 
fight,  putting  to  flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens.  A  sister  was  asked  to 
tell  her  experience  before  the  church,  and  she  could  not  do  it ;  but  as  she 
went  away  she  turned  round  and  said,  "  I  cannot  speak  for  Christ,  but  I 
could  die  for  him."  "  Come  back,"  said  the  minister,  "  you  are  welcome 
here !  "  They  do  gloriously,  those  hidden  ones,  in  days  whereof  we  are 
apt  to  fear  that  no  witness  for  the  truth  will  remain  alive.  Oh,  that 
you  who  live  where  religion  is  declining  may  be  all  the  more  resolved 
to  serve  the  Lord  Jesus  faithfully ! 

And  then,  you  know,  in  Joseph's  time  the  people  that  were  trice  to  the 
Lord  Jesus  were  such  a  feeble  company.  Those  that  were  not  absolutely 
poor — the  women  that  could  minister  to  him  of  their  substance — were 
nevertheless  unable  to  go  in  unto  Pilate  and  beg  for  the  Lord's  body.  He 
would  not  have  received  them,  and  if  he  would  they  were  too  timid  to 
have  sought  an  interview;  but  Joseph  is  rich,  and  a  counsellor,  and 
therefore  he  seemed  to  say,  "  These  dear  good  women  need  a  friend ; 
they  cannot  get  that  precious  body  down  from  the  cross  alone.  I  will 
go  to  the  Roman  governor.  Together  with  Nicodemus,  I  will  provide 
the  linen  and  the  spices,  and  the  women  shall  help  us  take  Jesus  down 
from  the  tree  and  lay  him  in  my  new  tomb,  and  swathe  his  limbs  in  linen 
and  spices,  so  as  to  embalm  him  honourably."  Some  of  you  live  in 
country  towns  where  those  who  are  faithful  to  God  are  very  poor,  and 
have  not  much  ability  among  them.  If  anything  should  move  you  to 
be  the  more  decided,  it  should  be  that  fact.  It  is  a  brave  thing  to  help 
a  feeble  company  ;  any  common  people  will  follow  at  the  heels  of 
success,  but  the  true  man  is  not  ashamed  of  a  despised  cause  when  it  is 
the  cause  of  truth.  You  who  have  talent  and  substance  should  say,  "  I 
will  go  and  help  them  now.  I  cannot  leave  the  Master's  cause  to  this 
feeble  folk.  I  know  they  do  their  best,  and  as  that  is  little,  I  will  join 
them  and  lay  myself  out  to  aid  them  for  my  great  Master's  sake." 

Can  you  not  see  my  drift  ?  My  only  desire  this  morning  is  to  induce 
any  of  you  who  have  for  a  moment  faltered  to  "  stand  up,  stand  up  for 
Jesus,"  and  everywhere,  in  every  place  as  wisdom  may  suggest,  avow  his 
dear  and  sacred  name.  Perhaps  you  are  flowers  that  cannot  bloom  till 
the  light  is  darkened,  like  the  night-blooming  cereus  or  the  evening 
primrose.  Now  is  your  hour.  The  evening  is  already  come  ;  bloo.n, 
my  dear  friends,  and  fill  the  air  with  the  delightful  fragrance  of  youi- 
love.  When  other  flowers  are  closed,  take  care  to  open  to  the  dew.  In 
these  dark  hours  shine  out,  ye  stars!  The  sun  has  gone,  else  might  ye 
lie  hid  ;  but  now  let  us  see  you !  Joseph  and  Nicodemus  had  never 
been  seen  in  the  daylight  when  Jesus  was  alive ;  but  when  the  sun  was 
set  through  his  death,  then  their  radiance  beamed  at  its  full.  Oh,  my 
hesitating  brother,  now  is  your  time  and  your  hoar :  boldly  avail  yourself 
of  it,  for  our  great  Master's  sake  ! 

IV.  Lastly,  there  is  something  in  this  subject  for  our  guidance. 
Somebody  says,  "  Well,  what  do  you  mean  by  my  coming  out  ?  I  can 
see  what  Joseph  did  :  what  am  I  to  do  ?  I  do  not  live  at  Arimu- 
thaea,  and  there  is  no  Pilate  in  these  days.'* 


JOSEPH    OF   ARIMATH^^A.  729 

Joseph  in  ownin,!^  his  Lord  put  himseJf  under  personal  risk.  A  Christian 
slave  whose  master  was  executed  for  beino:  a  Christian,  went  to  the 
ind^e,  and  begged  the  body  of  his  master  that  he  might  bury  it.  The 
iudo-e  replied,  "  Wherefore  do  you  wish  for  your  master's  body  ?  "  "  Be- 
cause he  was  a  Christian,  and  I  am  one."  Upon  this  confession  he  was 
himself  condemned  to  die.  It  might  have  been  so  with  Pilate  ;  for  the 
Jewish  rulers  must  have  hated  Joseph  and  longed  for  his  death.  He  had 
been  backward  a  long  time,  but  now  he  put  his  life  in  his  hand,  and 
went  in  boldly  to  Pilate.  We  read,  "  He  craved  the  body  of  Jesus  "; 
but,  as  a  commentator  well  says,  he  was  not  a  craven,  tlioiigh  he  craved 
the  body.  He  simply  asked  for  it,  begged  for  it,  implored  to  have  it, 
and  the  procurator  yielded  to  his  wish.  Now,  do  you  think  that  if  it  were 
needful  for  you  to  jeopardize  your  best  earthly  interests  for  Christ,  you 
could  do  it  ?  Could  you  lose  your  character  for  culture  and  courage  by 
avowing  the  old  faith  in  these  apostate  days  ?  Can  you  leave  all  for  Jesus  ? 
Should  it  rend  the  fondest  connection,  should  it  break  up  the  brightest 
prospects,  could  you  take  up  the  cross  and  follow  your  Lord  ?  It  is  due 
to  him  who  died  for  you  that  you  should  count  the  cost,  and  reckon  it 
little  enough  for  his  dear  sake  if  you  may  but  do  him  honour. 

Remember,  again,  that  this  good  man,  Joseph  ot  Arimathaea,  when  he 
took  the  bodv  of  Jesus,  brought  upon  himself  ceremonial  pollution.  _  It 
may  seem  little  enough  to  you,  but  to  a  Jew  it  was  a  great  deal,  especially 
dariiio' rhe  Passover  week.  He  handled  that  blessed  body,  and  defiled 
himsetf  in  the  judgment  of  the  Jews.  But,  oh,  I  warrant  you  he  did 
not  think  it  any  defilement  to  touch  the  blessed  person  of  his  Lord, 
even  when  the  life  was  gone  out  of  that  matchless  frame.  Nor  was 
it  any  pollution.  It  was"  an  honour  to  touch  that  holy  thing,  that  body 
prepared  of  God.  Yet  thev  will  say  to  you,  if  you  come  out  for  Christ 
and  unite  with  his  people^  that  you  lower  yourself.  They  will  point  at 
you,  give  vou  some  opprobrious  name,  and  charge  you  with  fanaticism. 
Take  upon  yourself  this  blessed  shame,  and  say,  as  David  did,  *'  I  will 
be  vet  more  vile."  Dishonour  for  Christ  is  honour,  and  shame  for  him 
is  the  very  top  of  all  glory.  You  will  not  stand  back,  I  trust,  but  you 
will  come  forward  and  avow  your  faith,  though  you  thus  become  as  the 
offscouring  of  all  things. 

And  then,  this  man  having  risked  his  hfe,  and  given  up  his  honour, 
was  content  to  be  at  great  cost  for  the  burial  of  Ghnst.  He  went  and 
bought  the  fine  linen ;  and  that  rock-hewn  sepulchre  which  it  was  the 
ambition  of  every  Israehte  to  possess,  he  cheerfully  resigned,  that  the 
Lord  might  lie  there.  Now,  whenever  you  do  own  Christ,  own  him 
practically.  Do  not  keep  back  your  purse  from  him,  or  think  that  you 
are  to  say,  "  I  am  his,"  and  do  nothing  for  him.  I  was  reading  the 
story  of  a  good  old  deacon  in  Maine,  in  America,  who  came  m  to  a 
meeting  after  there  had  been  a  missionary  collection.  The  minister 
there  and  then  asked  «  our  good  brother  Sewell "  to  pray.  Sewe  1  did 
not  pray,  but  thrust  his  hand  in  his  pocket  and  stood  fumbling  about. 


money 

tm  i  had  VrsTgiven  something."    He  felt  obhged  first  to  do  something  tbi- 
the  great  mission  work,  and  baling  done  that  he  could  pray  lor  it.  Oh,  that 


730  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

all  Christ's  people  folt  the  justice  of  that  course  of  conduct !  Ts  it  not 
most  natural  and  proper?  Joseph  could  not,  when  the  Saviour  wanted 
burying,  have  been  true  to  him  without  burying  him.  And  now  that  the 
Saviour  does  not  want  burying,  but  wants  in  ail  his  living  power  to  be 
preached  among  the  sons  of  men,  if  we  love  him  we  must  do  all  that 
lieth  in  us  to  spread  the  knowledge  of  his  name.  Come  out  then,  come 
out  then,  ye  that  are  hidden  among  the  stuff !  Some  of  you  strangers 
from  the  country,  who  have  lived  in  the  village,  and  attended  the  ser- 
vices, but  never  joined  the  church,  do  not  let  another  Sunday  dawn  till 
you  have  sent  in  your  name  to  be  classed  with  the  people  of  God.  And 
any  of  you  that  have  come  often  to  the  Tabernacle,  and  say  that  nobody 
has  spoken  to  you,  just  you  speak  to  somebody  and  own  what  the  Lord 
has  done  for  you.  Joseph  of  Arimathaea,  where  are  you?  Come  forward, 
man!  Come  forth;  your  time  has  come!  Come  forth  now!  If  you 
have  followed  Christ  secretly,  throw  secrecy  to  the  winds !  Henceforth 
be  bravest  of  the  brave,  among  the  body-guard  of  Christ,  who  follow 
him  whithersoever  he  goeth.  Have  no  fear  nor  thought  of  fear,  but 
count  it  all  joy  if  you  fall  into  manifold  trials  for  his  name's  sake,  who 
is  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — John  xix.  23  —  12. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — ii58,  670,  674. 


A    EOYAL    FUNERAL. 


i  ^m\<ft[ 


Intex7)ed  for  Reading  on  Lord's-day,  December  Qth,   1894, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lord's-day  Evening,  October  Ith,  1888. 


"And  after  this  Joseph  of  Arimathfca,  being  a  disciple  of  Jesus,  hut  secretly  for  fear 
of  the  Jews,  besought  Pilate  that  he  uiight  take  away  the  body  of  Jesus  :  and  Pilate 
gave  him  leave.  He  came  therefore,  and  took  the  body  of  Jesus.  And  there  came 
also  Nicodtmus,  which  at  the  first  came  to  Jesus  by  night,  and  brought  a  mixture  of 
myrrh  and  aloes,  about  an  hundred  pound  weight.  Then  took  they  the  bo'ly  of  Jesus, 
ami  wouTid  it  in  linen  clothes  with  the  spices,  as  the  manner  of  the  Jews  is  to  bury. 
Now  in  the  place  where  he  was  crucified  there  was  a  garden  ;  and  in  the  garden  a  new 
sepulchre,  wherein  was  never  man  yet  laid.  There  laid  they  Jesus  theretore  because 
of  the  Jews'  preparation  day ;  for  the  sepulchre  was  nigh  at  hand.'  —John  xix.  38—42. 

Let  us  go  to  this  grave,  but  not  to  weep  there ;  nay,  not  to  shed  so 
much  as  a  single  tear.  The  stone  is  rolled  away,  our  Lords  precious 
body  is  not  there,  for  Christ  has  risen  from  the  dead.  It  may  bo 
that,  like  Mary  at  the  sepulchre,  we  shall  see  a  vision  of  angels  ;  but 
if  not,  we  may  behold  a  company  of  comforting  truths  which  still 
linger  about  the  empty  tomb  of  our  ascended  Lord. 

"We  are  expressly  told,  in  Holy  Scripture,  that  our  Lord  was  buried. 
It  was  evidently  not  sufficient  for  us  merely  to  be  told  that  he  died ; 
we  must  also  know  that  he  was  buried.  Why  was  this?  Was  it  not, 
first,  that  we  might  have  a  certificate  of  his  death  ?  We  do  not  bury 
living  men ;  and  the  Lord  Jesus  would  not  have  been  buried  if  the 
centurion  had  not  certified  that  he  was  certainly  dead.  The  Roman 
officer  had  probably  seen  Christ's  heart  pierced  by  the  soldier's  spear, 
when  blood  and  water  flowed  forth  from  his  side.  At  any  rate,  when 
his  men  went  to  execute  the  coup  de  grdce,  which  finished  the  lives  of 
the  other  two,  by  the  breaking  of  their  legs,  they  were  so  certain  that 
he  who  hung  in  the  middle  was  really  dead  that  they  brake  not  his 
legs  Christ's  being  given  up  for  burial,  was  Pilate's  certificate  that 
he  had  not  merely  pretended  to  die,  but  that  it  was  a  real  death,  and 
that  his  body  had  no  life  remaining  in  it.  This  is  an  essential  point, 
for  if  Jesus  did  not  die,  he  has  made  no  atonement  for  sm.  ^  If  he 
died  not,  then  he  rose  not;  and  if  he  rose  not,  then  your  faith  is  vain, 
No.  2,390. 


732  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULl'lT. 

ye  are  yet  m  your  sins.      The  sepulchre,   therefore,   occupies  a  very 
important  place  in  the  story  of  the  death  of  Jesus. 

Again,  was  he  not  buried  to  fulfil  a  type  which  he  had  himself 
chosen  ?  Like  as  Jonah  was  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the  belly 
of  the  fish,  in  the  heart  of  the  sea,  even  so  was  the  Son  of  man  to  lie 
for  that  time  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth.  The  casting  of  the  runaway) 
prophet  into  the  sea  quieted  the  angry  waves ;  the  tempest  fell  asleep 
when  he  was  given  up  as  a  victim;  and  Christ's  being  cast  into  the 
sea  of  death  has  quieted  the  storm  of  almighty  wrath ;  we  sail  to-day 
as  on  a  «ea  of  glass,  because  Christ  was  buried  in  those  awful  billows. 
He  must  fulfil  the  type  of  Jonah,  or  else  he  spoke  not  aright  concerning 
himself  when  he  said,  '*  An  evil  and  adulterous  generation  seeketh 
after  a  sign,  and  there  shall  no  sign  bo  given  to  it,  but  the  sign  of 
the  prophet  Jonas." 

Further,  was  not  our  Lord  buried  to  make  his  battle  with  death 
and  his  triumph  over  it  more  complete  ?  He  has  conquered  death  ; 
but  he  has  also  burst  open  the  castle  of  death,  that  is  the  grave.  He 
has  bearded  the  lion  in  his  den,  the  Douglas  in  his  hall.  In  this 
matchless  duel,  he  has  set  himself  to  fight,  not  only  with  death,  but 
with  death  and  the  grave  combined ;  and  heuce  the  paean  of  victory  is 
not  merely,  *'  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting?  "  but  it  is  also,  "  0  grave, 
where  is  thy  victory  ?  "  Christ's  victory  is  altogether  complete.  He 
hath  led  captivity  captive,  because  he  became  a  captive.  He  has 
vanquished  all  death's  allies,  as  well  as  death  itself,  by  going  down 
into  the  grave,  and  rending  its  bars  asunder. 

Beside  all  this,  did  not  our  Lord  die,  and  condescend  to  be  buried, 
to  sweeten  the  grave  for  his  people  ?  Eightly  did  we  sing  just  now 
concerning  the  tomb — 

"  There  the  dear  flesh  of  Jesus  lay, 
And  left  a  long  perfume." 

Unless  the  Lord  should  speedily  come,  as  he  may, — Grod  grant  that  he 
may ! — we  shall  fall  asleep,  and  these  bodies  of  ours  will  be  committed 
to  the  silence  of  the  grave.  We  must  not  dare  to  dread  the  sepulchre ; 
where  Christ  has  been,  we  may  safely  and  honourably  go.  As  I  told 
you,  the  other  day,  he  left  the  fine  linen  to  be  the  furniture  of  our  last 
bed ;  he  left  the  napkin  rolled  up  by  itself,  that  weeping  friends  might 
dry  their  tears  thereon ;  he  left,  beside,  the  myrrh  and  aloes,  about 
one  hundred  pounds'  weight,  which  Nicodemus  brought.  I  never 
heard  that  they  were  taken  away  from  the  tomb ;  Jesus  left  them 
there,  and  they  still  shed  their  sweet  fragrance  throughout  the  graves 
of  all  his  saints.  We  are  not  going  to  a  noisome  vault,  but  to  a  per- 
fumed chamber,  hung  with  the  fine  linen  sheets  that  encompassed  the 
Christ,  and  odorous  with  the  spices  that  shed  their  sweetness  upon 
him.  To  die,  is  now  our  gain ;  to  sleep  in  Jesus,  is  to  be  blest  indeed. 
I  may  add,  also,  that  I  think  our  Lord  was  buried  so  that,  from  his 
tomb,  he  might  leap  to  his  throne.  He  goes  to  the  lowest  depths  that 
.thence  he  may  rise  to  the  loftiest  heights.  You,  too,  believer,  may 
go  as  low  as  the  grave,  but  you  can  never  go  any  lower,  and  when  you 
•are  at  your  lowest,  you  are  then  on  your  way  to  j'our  highest.  Your 
Lord  stooped  to  conquer,  so  must  you.     You  will  have  won  the  victory 


A    ilOYAL    FUNERAL.  733 

over  death  when  you  lie,  stark  and  cold,  upon  your  last  bed.  The 
adversary  may  think  that  he  has  defeated  you, — 

"  When  silent  is  your  pleading  tongue 
And  blind  that  piercing  e>e," 

and  inactive  that  once  diligent  hand,  but  it  is  not  so  ;  you  shall  then 
have  broken  loose  from  everything  that  hinders  you  from  entering 
upon  your  highest  service  for  your  Lord,  and  you  shall  have  entered 
that  holy  place  where  you  shall  see  his  face,  and  serve  him  day  and 
night  in  his  glorious  temple. 

I  like  to  think  of  Jesus  as  going  down  into  the  lowest  parts  of  the 
earth,  when  I  remember  that  he  that  descended  is  the  same  who  also 
ascended.  This  should  encourage  us  to  feel  that,  sink  as  we  may,  lower 
and  yet  lower  still,  we  shall  rise  all  the  higher  because  of  that  sinkings 
and  shall  enter  still  more  completely  into  fellowship  with  Christ  both 
in  his  sufferings  and  in  his  glory.  It  was  needful,  then,  my  brother, 
that  there  should  be  a  new  tomb  in  the  garden  close  by  Golgotha, 
and  that  our  Lord  should  lie  there.  It  is  a  very  wonderful  thing  that 
he,  whose  face  is  the  light  of  heaven,  whose  hands  are  sceptred  with 
the  government  of  the  universe,  and  whose  very  feet  are  sandalled 
with  the  stars,  should  yet  bear  the  image  of  death  upon  his  pale 
countenance,  and  should  lie  there  lifeless,  to  be  handled  by  others,  and 
to  be  wrapped  as  any  other  dead  man  might  be,  in  fine  linen  and 
sweet  spices. 

But  my  subject  at  this  time  is  concerning  the  wonderful 
working  of  God  with  regard  to  the  burial  of  Jesus.  The  providence 
of  God  began  with  the  body  of  Christ  from  the  very  first,  even  from 
his  conception  ;  and  it  followed  him  right  to  the  last,  even  to  his 
burial.  You  see  the  holy  Child  in  the  manger,  and  you  notice  how 
all  things  round  about  minister  strangelj^  to  him.  Throughout  his 
life,  all  things  worked  together  for  his  good ;  not  to  screen  him  from 
suffering,  but  to  cause  him  to  suffer,  and  to  make  him  triumphant 
through  those  sufferings.  And  when  he  came  to  die,  I  see  the  finger 
of  God  displayed  at  every  part  of  that  dread  tragedy ;  but  now  that 
he  is  dead,  will  that  kind  providence  forsake  him  ?     Ah,  no ! 

I  want  to  stop  here,  and  say  to  you  who  anxiously  ask,  "What  will 
become  of  me  when  I  die  ?  I  am  so  very  poor  and  needy," — never 
think  about  that  matter ;  you  have  enough  to  do  to  trust  God  till  you 
die.  As  to  what  is  to  become  of  your  body  when  you  are  dead,  never 
fret  about  that.  It  is  wonderful  how  God  does  take  care  of  the  very 
dust  and  ashes  of  his  chosen,  how,  sometimes,  they  receive  in  death 
respect  and  honour  which  they  never  thought  would  have  come  to 
them,  and  after  they  have  passed  away,  their  children  and  their 
household  are  blessed  of  God  for  their  sake.  The  God  of  the  living 
forsakes  not  his  saints  in  dying,  or  after  death.  As  Ruth  would 
cleave  to  Naomi,  and  said,  ''  Where  thou  diest,  I  will  die,  and  there 
will  I  be  buried,"  so,  with  greater  faithfulness,  does  God  cleave  to 
his  people ;  he  will  see  them  buried,  and  take  care  of  their  children 
after  they  are  gone.  This  is  his  comforting  promise,  "Leave  thy 
fatherless  children,  I  wiU  preserve  them  alive ;  and  let  thy  widows 
trust  in  me." 


734  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Now  let  me  remind  you  how  God  took  care  of  the  Firstborn  among 
many  brethren.  Jesus  is  dead,  and  in  the  hands  of  wicked  men  ;  the 
executioners  have  him  in  their  charge,  those  same  executioners,  who 
j  ust  now  broke  the  legs  of  the  two  thieves,  have  hold  of  Christ ; 
but  that  precious  body  must  be  preserved,  not  a  bone  of  him  must  be 
broken,  no  disrespect  must  be  paid  to  that  immaculate  Being.  Death 
and  hell  would  have  revelled  in  insulting  Christ's  body  if  they  could. 
As  Achilles  dragged  Hector  by  the  heels  round  the  walls  of  Troy,  so 
would  Satan  have  liked  that  men  should  have  mauled  the  dead  body 
of  Christ.  He  would  have  cast  him  to  the  dogs  or  to  the  kites  if  he 
could  have  had  his  way ;  but  so  it  must  not  be.  Many  a  man  who 
has  been  a  prince  has  been  buried  with  the  burial  of  an  ass  ;  but  this 
great  Saviour,  whom  men  despised,  must  have  a  royal  funeral :  how  is 
he  to  have  it?  That  is  the  point  I  wish  to  bring  to  your  notice  i.  »vv  ; 
and,  before  I  have  finished  my  discourse,  I  hope  I  shall  be  able  to 
prove  to  you  that  everything  required  for  Christ's  burial  was  supplied. 

I.     The  first  requisite  was,  someone  to  obtain  the  body. 

The  law  has  executed  Jesus,  though  wrongfully,  and  his  body 
therefore  belongs  to  the  executioner,  or,  at  any  rate,  to  the  law.  Who 
is  to  rescue  that  precious  body  from  the  clutches  of  the  law  ?  Ah ! 
you  may  look  your  eyes  out,  but  you  cannot  see  the  man  who  can 
accomplish  this  task  ;  yet  God  knows  where  he  is.  There  is  one 
Joseph,  who  has  an  estate  at  Arimathsea,  a  wealthy  man,  a  member 
of  the  Sanhedrim,  "  an  honourable  counsellor."  He  appears  upon  the 
scene,  and  he  is  the  right  man  to  do  what  is  required,  for  he  is  a  secret 
disciple.  He  has  great  respect  for  that  dead  body ;  for  he  had  great 
regard  for  Jesus  while  he  was  alive.  As  we  look  Joseph  up  and  down, 
we  say,  ''Yes,  if  he  will  do  his  best,  he  is  the  very  man  for  this 
emergency."  He  is  under  great  arrears  of  obligation  to  his  Lord, 
whom  he  scarcely  owned  in  his  lifetime  ;  yet  he  is  a  real  disciple. 
Joseph,  if  thou  canst  do  anything  in  this  matter,  we  give  thee  this 
solemn  charge,  go  and  get  the  body  of  Christ. 

He  was,  besides,  an  official^  and  injliiential ;  therefore  he  could  gain 
an  entrance  where  a  private  person  could  not;  and  what  was  still 
more  to  the  point  with  such  a  man  as  Pilate,  he  was  a  rich  man,  for  in 
those  days,  in  the  courts,  everything  went  by  favour  The  poor  man's 
cause  might  be  just,  yet  he  could  not  secure  a  hearing;  but  the  gold 
in  a  rich  man's  hand  would  speak  more  loudly  than  the  most  convincing 
arguments  upon  a  poor  man's  tongue.  So  this  secret  disciple  is  the 
one  to  beg  the  body  of  Jesus,  because  he  is  an  honourable  counsellor, 
and  also  because  he  is  rich.  If  he  is  willing  to  undertake  the  task, 
he  is  the  man  to  accomplish  it. 

But  my  heart  misgives  me,  for  Joseph  has  been  secretly  a  discij^le, 
and  therefore  I  conclude  that  he  must  be  very  timid.  During  the  last 
two  years  or  so,  he  has  been  really  a  follower  of  Christ,  and  yet  he 
has  kept  in  the  council.  He  has  been  a  member  of  the  Sanhedrim, 
yet  he  has  not  spoken  out  against  its  evil  deeds.  Ah,  me !  I  am 
afraid  that  he  will  not  be  able  to  go  and  speak  to  Pilate.  But  note, 
brethren,  what  Mark  tells  us  about  him  :  "  Joseph  of  Arimatha3a 
went  in  boldly  unto  Pilate,  and  craved  the  body  of  Jesus."  God  can 
make  a  coward  bold  as  a  lion  in  the  day  when  he  needs  him ;  and 


A    ROYAL    FUNERAL. 


735 


this  good  man,  full  of  honour,  and  abounding  in  wealth,  said,  "  I  will 
go  to  Pilate."  Why !  this  cruel  vacillating  governor  will  put  a  man  to 
death  if  he  aggravates  him;  who  knows  how  this  interview  may  end  ? 
But  Joseph  says,  "I  will  go  to  Pilate."  He  obtains  admittance,  and 
he  asks  for  the  body  of  Jesus.  Pilate  exclaims,  *'  Why,  he  is  not  dead 
yet!"  '*Yes,  he  is,"  answers  Joseph,  "I  have  seen  him  die." 
When  the  centurion  comes,  he  certifies  that  he  is  dead.  Pilate  can- 
not imagine  what  Joseph  can  want  with  a  dead  man's  bones,  but  he 
says,  "  You  may  have  his  body.  Take  him  down,  you  may  have  him." 
So  Joseph  comes  back  to  the  cross ;  he  has  proved  that  he  was  the 
very  man  for  this  work.  We  should  never  have  thought  of  him,  but 
God  had  him  in  reserve  for  the  hour  of  need,  and  brought  him  to  the 
front  at  the  right  moment. 

Now  you  see  Joseph  hurrying  away  from  Pilate's  hall  to  the  hill 
of  Calvary,  where  the  crosses  are  still  standing.  He  has,  in  his  hand, 
the  order  signed  by  the  governor,  he  shows  it  to  the  officer  in  charge, 
and  he  is  a  man  of  such  prominence,  so  well  known  as  an  honourable 
counsellor,  an  official  gentleman,  and  a  person  of  wealth,  that  every- 
body is  ready  to  help  him.  He  himself  is  probably  first  and  foremost 
in  raising  the  ladder,  helping  to  pull  out  the  great  nails,  and  to  let 
down  the  blessed  body.  He  is  the  man  for  this  work,  for  he  is 
objectionable  to  nobody.  He  has  been  a  counsellor,  so  that  those  on  the 
side  of  the  Sanhedrim  do  not  object  to  him.  The  holy  women 
stand  watching  him,  but  they  have  no  fears  as  to  his  action ; 
they  know  him,  for  he  has  probably  done  them  many  a  kindness 
privately  in  days  gone  by ;  and  they  know  that  he  has  been  a  secret 
disciple  of  the  Lord.  He  has  brought  with  him  fine  white  linen,  which 
he  was  well  able  to  buy,  he  reverently  takes  the  body  of  Jesus 
down  from  the  cross,  and  tenderly  wraps  it  round  with  the  costly 
winding-sheets  which  he  has  purchased  ;  and  so  this  trying  business 
is  finished  without  interference  from  anyone. 

I  hope  that  these  details  do  not  seem  trivial  to  you,  for  nothing  is 
trivial  that  concerns  our  Lord  and  his  cause.  In  the  tabernacle  and 
the  temple,  even  the  nails  had  to  be  duly  prepared  ;  and  I  think 
that,  in  this  matter  of  providing  a  suitable  person  to  go  and  get  the 
body  of  Jesus  out  of  the  hand  of  the  legal  custodian,  we  ought  to 
admire  the  wonderful  goodness  of  God.  Depend  upon  it,  if,  at  any 
other  time,  there  should  be  some  great  and  terrible  task  to  be 
accomplished,  God  will  find  the  man  to  do  it.  If  one  shall  be  wanted, 
by-and-by,  at  peril  of  his  life  to  bear  witness  for  Christ,  the  right 
person  will  be  found;  and  until  this  chapter  of  divine  providence 
shall  come  to  an  end  in  our  Lord's  eternal  glory,  there  shall  never  be 
a  crisis,  however  crucial,  but  the  man  shall  be  found  whom  God 
wants,  or  the  woman  who  is  to  occupy  the  place  which  the  Lord  has 
for  her  to  fill. 

Thus,  Joseph  has  obtained  the  body  of  Jesus  from  the  hands  of 
Pilate,  and  he  may  do  what  he  will  with  it ;  that  is  the  first  point. 

II.     The  next  requisite  is,  someone  to  bury  the  body. 

We  do  not  want  one  man  to  carry  away  that  body,  and  lay  it  in  the 
grave,  for  such  a  person  as  Jesus  should  have  an  honourable  funeral. 
Now  see  what  happens.     There  is  another  man,  also  a  counsellor,  "a 


736  M  KTROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

ruler  of  the  Jews,"  **  a  master  of  Israel,"  yet  another  secret  disciple 
who  had  come  to  Jesus  by  night ;  he  appears  just  at  this  very  moment : 
"  There  came  also  Nicodemus,  which  at  the  first  came  to  Jesus  by 
night."  Now  we  have  two  mourners  for  our  Master't*  funeral.  James 
and  John, — where  are  you  ?  They  cannot  hear  my  question.  Peter 
and  Bartholomew,  where  are  you  ?  They  are  too  far  away ;  thev 
rannot  hear  me.  Who  will  follow  the  body  of  Jesus  to  the  grave  ? 
\V^ho  will  be  chief  mourner?  There  are  some  gracious  women,  brave 
enough  to  stand  afar  ofp,  and  willing  enough,  if  beckoned,  to  come 
and  join  the  sad  cortege  that  attends  the  corpse*  to  the  tomb.  But  how 
honourable  to  Christ  was  it  that  the  first  two  and  the  chief  mourners 
on  that  sorrowful  occasion  should  be  two  members  of  the  Sanhedrim, 
Joseph  of  Arimathfea  and  Nicodemus,  two  men  of  note,  two  reputable 
individuals  who  were  held  in  honour  even  among  the  Jews  who 
crucified  Christ ! 

First,  let  me  say  of  these  two  men  who  attended  the  burial  of  our 
Lord,  that  they  did  him  honour.  Thus  was  fulfilled  Isaiah's  prophecy, 
*'  He  made  his  grave  with  the  wicked,  and  with  the  rich  in  his  death  ; 
because  he  had  done  no  violence,  neither  was  any  deceit  in  his 
mouth."  All  the  while  until  Christ  had  paid  the  dreadful  price  of  our 
redemption,  he  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men  ;  but  as  soon  as 
ever  he  could  say,  *'  It  is  finished,"  and  the  debt  was  fully  paid,  ho 
must  not  be  depised  and  rejected  any  more.  Now,  rich  men  must 
come  and  do  him  homage;  and  accordingly  Joseph  and  Nicodemus 
came.  It  may  seem  only  a  little  thing,  but  it  indicates  the  turn  of 
the  tide,  just  as  the  floating  of  a  straw  may  do.  Jesus  is  no  longer 
derided,  nor  even  attended  alone  by  the  poorest  and  most  obscure  of 
Galileans ;  but  Joseph  from  Arimathaea,  and  Nicodemus,  a  ruler  of 
the  Jews,  attend  the  funeral  of  the  great  Lord  and  Saviour  of  men, 
and  so  pay  such  honour  as  they  can  to  his  dead  body. 

While  they  thus  did  him  honour,  they  received  from  him  mtcch  more 
honour.  Ah,  my  brethren,  it  was  a  great  privilege  that  was  accorded 
to  these  two  men !  I  stand  and  wonder  how  it  was  that  this  position 
was  allotted  to  two  who  had  kept  so  long  behind  the  scenes.  They 
had  lost — they  had  lost — I  cannot  tell  you  how  much  they  had  lost, 
two,  perhaps  three  years  of  constant  fellowship  with  Christ,  and  of 
instruction  from  his  own  dear  lips  ;  they  had  lost  incalculably.  They 
were  in  the  rear  of  all  Christ's  disciples ;  Mary  Magdalene  was  in 
front  of  them,  the  woman  that  was  a  sinner  was  far  ahead  of  them, 
they  were  right  in  the  rear  rank ;  yet  their  Master,  in  the  splendour  of 
his  grace,  gives  them  this  privilege  even  while  he  himself  lies  dead, 
to  them  is  accorded  the  high  honour  of  handling  his  blessed  flesh,  and 
laying  him  in  the  tomb.  I  am  afraid  that  some  of  you  secret 
Christians,  who  never  come  out  boldly  for  Christ,  will  not  have  such 
an  honour  as  this.  If  the  Lord  ever  uses  you  at  aU,  it  will  be  in 
some  sad  business,  such  as  a  funeral ;  and  even  that  will  be  an 
honour  to  you,  if  you  are  permitted  to  attend  him  in  his  death  though  you 
have  not  shared  the  glory  of  his  life.  You  lose — oh !  you  lose  incal- 
culable boons  by  not  avowing  your  discipleship.  Yet  I  pray  that 
there  may  come  a  time,  and  that  it  may  come  at  once,  when  even  you 
will  come  out,  and  do  what  you  can  for  your  Lord,  saying  to  yourself, 


A  ROYAL  fthsteral.  737 

"Now  is  the  hour  when  even  I,  timid  as  I  am,  must  avow  him." 
When  soul-murder  is  in  your  streets,  when  heresy  is  in  your  pulpits, 
when  apostacy  is  in  your  churches,  you  are  recreant  to  the  last  grain 
of  your  spiritual  manhood  if  you  who  love  Christ  do  not  come  out 
boldly  on  hi«  side,  and  declare  that  you  belong  to  him.  If  you  never 
have  confessed  him  before  men,  and  you  neglect  this  opportunity, 
wherein  there  is  the  greatest  and  most  urgent  of  need,  I  fear  that  you 
will  never  own  him  at  all. 

Joseph  of  Arimathsea  and  Nicodemus  were  both  wanted  for  this 
sad  task  ;  and  though  we  should  never  have  thought  of  inviting 
them  to  perform  it,  yet  they  were  the  only  two  men  connected  with 
Christ  who  were  exactly  fitted  for  the  office ;  and,  as  I  have  said,  they 
thus  honoured  Christ,  and  he  thus  honoured  them.  I  should  also  say, 
brethren,  that  among  all  the  disciples,  there  were  no  more  sincere 
mourners  for  Christ  than  these  two  men.  I  think  that  I  hear  Joseph 
fetch  a  deep  sigh,  and  say,  "Ah!  Nicodemus,  how  wicked  I  have 
been,  for  I  have  not  kept  with  Christ  as  I  ought  to  have  done ! 
I  ought  to  have  gone  with  him  to  prison  and  to  death ;  instead  of 
that,  I  have  been  among  the  ungodly,  rich  and  honoured."  "  Ah !  " 
says  Nicodemus,  "  and  I  went  to  him  by  night,  and  he  talked  so 
sweetly  to  me,  but  I  have  been  hiding  away  ever  since.  I  feel 
ashamed  to  touch  this  blessed  bleeding  hand ;  I  realize  that  it  is  a 
high  honour  to  be  allowed  to  handle  these  dear  feet,  and  to  wrap 
the  linen  all  about  them,  but  I  do  not  deserve  such  an  honour,  I  am 
sure ;  "  and  they  would  stop,  and  weep,  and  sigh  again,  to  think 
of  how  they  had  ill-treated  their  Lord,  by  what  they  may  have  thought 
was  modesty,  but  which  conscience  now  tells  them  was  nothing  else 
than  shameful  cowardice. 

And  I  do  not  think  that,  out  of  all  Christ's  followers,  there  were 
any  who  would  be  more  tender  with  that  Messed  body,  for  they  were 
gentlemen.  They  were  not  countrymen  or  fishermen,  used  to  handling 
and  being  handled  roughly ;  they  were  of  tenderer  mould,  and  when 
they  looked  on  that  dear  form,  how  gently  would  they  treat  it !  Being 
also  men  of  property,  they  would  have  many  servants  able  to  help 
them  in  all  sorts  of  ways.  In  his  wonderful  interment,  our  Lord 
Jesus  could  not  have  been  better  attended,  nor  have  been  buried  by 
men  who  would  have  performed  the  mournful  duty  with  more  solemn 
feelings,  more  hushed  reverence.  They  loved  him,  yet  felt  that  they 
had  acted  in  an  unloving  manner  towards  him,  and  now  also  felt  that 
the  best  they  could  possibly  do  was  all  too  little  for  the  blessed  One 
who  had  sealed  the  forgiveness  of  their  cowardice  by  permitting  himself 
to  be  entrusted  to  their  hands.  I  can  see  great  love  about  this  dead 
Christ,  and  great  pity,  and  great  kindness,  that  even  his  lifeless  body 
should  be  giving  life  to  the  faith  and  hope  of  Joseph  and  Nicodemus, 
and  should  be  firing  them  with  fresh  ardour.  While  they  looked 
upon  his  corpse,  they  must  have  been  compelled  to  resolve  that  never 
more  would  they  be  ashamed  of  him  whom  they  had  helped  to  lay  in 
the  grave. 

So  far  we  have,  in  imagination,  brought  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  into 
the  hands  of  two  most  suitable  persons  to  bury  him. 

III.    The  next  requisite  is,  the  materials  necessary  for  the  burial. 

47 


738  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

The  manner  of  the  Jews'  is  to  bury  the  body  wrapped  in  fine 
white  linen ;  where  is  that  ?  I  do  not  believe  that  Peter  has  a  yard  of 
it  anywhere,  I  hardly  think  that  James  and  John  have  anything  much 
finer  than  fishermen's  coats,  and  so  forth.  Fine  linen^ — let  it  be  the 
best  that  can  be  bought,  let  it  be  white  as  snow,  for  wrapping  around 
this  perfect  body ;  but  where  is  it  to  be  obtained  ?  Joseph  has  it ;  he 
is  a  man  of  wealth,  who  can  get  anything  that  is  wanted,  and  he  has 
brought  with  him  the  best  winding-sheets  in  which  to  wrap  the 
Saviour's  body. 

But  we  must  also  have  mixed  spices  in  abundance^  fifty  pounds'  weight 
at  the  least.  '*  Oh  !  "  says  Nicodemus,  **  I  have  brought  one  hundred 
pottnds'  weight  with  me,  and  if  I  could  have  foimd  a  conveyance,  and 
more  spices  had  not  been  superfluous,  I  would  have  brought  many 
hundred  pounds'  weight  of  myrrh  and  aloes,  well  mingled  according  to 
the  art  of  apothecary,  with  which  to  surround  that  blessed  form." 

See,  my  brothers,  Christ  wanted  for  nothing  when  he  was  dead  ;  do  you 
think  that  he  will  want  for  anything  while  he  is  alive?  **  Ah!  but 
our  little  church,  our  poor  cause,  is  wanting  money  badly,  and  we  are 
going  to  get  up  a  bazaar."  What !  and  you  have  not  thought  about 
going  to  your  Lord  for  what  you  lack  ?  The  fact  is,  the  Church  of 
God  has  been  looking  to  the  devil  to  find  funds  for  the  Lord's  work, 
instead  of  seeking  aid  from  the  Lord  himself.  It  is  a  pity  that  we 
cannot  come  back  to  him  who,  even  when  he  was  dead,  had  a  hundred 
pounds'  weight  of  myrrh  and  aloes  brought  to  him.  Cannot  we  trust 
him  for  all  that  is  required  for  his  service  ?  It  will  be  a  better  and  a 
brighter  day  for  the  Church  when  she  believes  that,  if  Christ  wants 
myrrh  and  aloes,  he  can  get  them.     Does  not  the  Lord  say,  "  The 

silver  is  mine,  and  the  gold  is  mine Every  beast  of  the  forest 

is  mine,  and  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills.  ...  If  I  were  hungry, 
I  would  not  tell  thee :  for  the  world  is  mine,  and  the  fulness  thereof  "  ? 
Let  us  go  forth  to  fight  the  Lord's  battles  without  any  doubts  con- 
cerning the  commissariat  of  his  army.  He  can  provide,  and  he  will 
provide  ;  only  let  us  trust  him,  and  not  go  down  to  Egypt  for  help, 
nor  lean  upon  an  arm  of  flesh. 

As  Nicodemus  gave  so  freely  to  the  dead  Christ,  how  generously 
ought  you  and  I  to  give  to  our  living  Lord  !  If  we  have  anything  in 
the  world,  let  us  give  it  all  up  to  Christ.  Even  if  we  have  nothing  left 
but  a  grave,  which  we  have  provided  for  our  own  funeral,  yet  let  us 
surrender  that,  as  Joseph  did  when  he  gave  up  his  new  tomb  that  his 
Lord  and  Master  might  lie  therein. 

Thus,  you  see,  that  all  that  is  needed  for  Christ's  burial  is  there 
already.     So  I  leave  that  part  of  our  subject,  and  go  on  to  the  next. 

IV.  Another  requisite  is,  a  place  wherein  to  bury  the  body. 
We  have  the  body,  Pilate  has  given  us  that ;  we  have  the  spices  and 
the  fine  linen ;  and  we  have  the  two  men  ready  to  bury  the  body ; 
now  we  want  a  tomb. 

It  would  be  very  convenient,  and  also  very  important,  if  we  could 
get  a  sepulchre  near  at  hand;  because,  you  see,  if  the  body  of  Christ 
had  to  be  carried  a  long  way  to  be  buried,  the  Jews  would  say,  "Ah! 
they  changed  it  on  the  road ;  they  took  it  a  mile  or  two  out  of  the 
city,  and  the  Christ  who  rose  from  the  dead  is  not  the  Christ  that  was 


A   ROYAL   FUNERAL.  739 

buried.''  But  here,  just  at  the  bottom  of  this  rocky  scarp  which  is 
called  Golgotha,  there  is  a  garden,  and  in  that  garden  there  is  a  tomb. 
Mark  the  providence  of  God  in  this  matter,  for  that  tomb  belongs  to 
Joseph,  and  there  the  Saviour's  body  is  lovingly  laid.  He  did  not 
and  he  could  not,  lack  a  tomb  when  it  was  required ;  when  the  time 
came  for  him  to  be  buried,  the  sepulchre  was  there  already  prepared 
hewn  out  of  the  rock.  ^  ^    r        > 

It  would  be  also  a  great  advantage  if  it  could  be  a  new  tomb, 
wherem  never  was  anybody  buried  ;  for  if  they  buried  him  in  an  old 
tomb  the  Jews  would  say  that  he  had  touched  the  bones  of  some 
prophet  or  other  holy  man,  and  so  came  to  life.  Ah  !  weU,  Joseph's 
IS  a  new  tomb ;  there  are  no  bones  there,  for  nobody  has  ever  been 
buried  there  before. 

It  would  seem,  too,  to  be  the  proper  thing  for  our  Lord  to  have  a 
tomb  m  a  rod.  You  cannot  fitly  put  him  in  sand  who  is  himself  the 
Eock  of  Ages.  Nay,  let  our  Lord  Jesus,  with  that  grand  immutable 
love  and  eternal  faithfulness  of  his,  let  him  lie  in  the  solid  rock.  There 
it  IS,  all  ready  for  him,  just  the  very  kind  of  tomb  that  is  wanted  for 
him  who  IS  the  Eock  of  our  salvation. 

If  it  should  also  be  a  tomb  in  a  garden,  there  would  be  a  touch  of 
familiar  beauty  about  that  arrangement.  One  likes  that  the  very 
surroundings  of  Christ's  grave  should  be  instructive.  I  cannot  stop 
to  tell  you  about  all  the  beauty  and  the  instruction  which  cluster 
around  a  garden  ;  the  gardens  of  Scripture  especially  are  most  fruitful 
subjects,  and  our  Lord's  garden-tomb  might  suggest  to  us  a  most 
profitable  theme  for  meditation. 

Thus,  Christ's  tomb  is  the  very  thing  we  would  wish  for  him.  In 
Ho  second-hand  grave,  in  no  town  fosse,  in  no  pauper's  grave  dug 
out  of  the  earth,  but  in  a  rich  man's  sepulchre,  worthy  of  a  king, 
it  is  there  that  the  Christ  must  lie.  See  how  God  provides  for  his 
Son,  and  learn  how  he  will  provide  for  you.  If  he  provides  for  his 
Son  when  dead,  he  will  provide  for  you  while  living ;  therefore  be 
you  comforted  whatever  your  condition  may  be. 

V.  There  is  one  more  difficulty,  and  perhaps  it  is  the  worst  of 
all,  for  it  concerns  the  time  for  the  burial.  You  see,  it  is  very  late  in 
the  afternoon,  and  besides,  it  is  the  "preparation"  for  a  very  im- 
portant Sabbath,  and  these  good  people  cannot  do  any  work  on  the 
Sabbath,  their  consciences  will  not  permit  them  to  do  so,  for  they  are 
strict  Jews.  But  it  so  happened  that  they  obtained  the  body  just  in 
time  to  wrap  it  round  about  with  the  spices  and  with  the  linen,  and 
then  we  are  told,  "  There  laid  they  Jesus  therefore  because  of  the  Jews' 
preparation  day;  for  the  sepulchre  was  nigh  at  handP  To  me,  it  is  a 
very  pretty  thought  that,  when  there  was  so  little  time,  the  place 
of  burial  was  so  near.  It  would  have  taken  aU  the  lingering  twilight 
to  have  carried  Jesus  far,  but  the  right  place  was  near.  Providence 
knew  all  about  the  difficulty,  and  provided  for  it. 

Next,  they  could  not  take  much  time  with  the  body,  and  the  ceremony 
was  the  more  fitting  for  Chrisfs  rising.  Beloved,  whenever  you  cannot  do 
anything  for  your  Lord  as  you  would  like  to  do  it,  do  the  best  you 
can,  and  you  may  depend  upon  it  that  you  have  done  just  what  ought 
to  be  done.     "  Oh,  no  !  "  they  say,  "  Oh,  no !  we  would  have  liked  to 


740  METROPOLITAK   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

have  wrapped  him  up  much  more  leisurely,  and  more  delicately ;  we 
would  have  made  a  finished  work  of  embalming  that  precious 
body."  Listen :  nothing  more  was  wanted.  Jesus  was  not  going  to  be 
in  the  sepulchre  long.  God's  Holy  One  could  not  see  corruption. 
He  did  not  need  to  be  embalmed,  for  he  was  to  be  up  again  so  soon, 
and  therefore  a  hurried  burial  was  quite  sufficient. 

Listen  again  :  there  is  another  thing  worth  mentioning.  The  in- 
completeness brought  them  early  to  the  sepulchre.  If  they  do  not  finish 
their  task  of  love  on  the  evening  of  the  crucifixion,  they  will  be  there 
early  in  the  morning,  when  the  Sabbath  is  over,  to  complete  it. 
That  was  precisely  what  was  wanted,  that,  as  soon  as  the  Master  wae 
risen,  on  that  first  day  of  the  week,  they  should  be  there  to  see  him  ; 
but  they  would  not  have  been  there  to  see  him,  perhaps,  if  they  had 
not  come,  as  the  holy  women  did,  with  more  spices  to  finish  the  work 
which  had  been,  comparatively  speaking,  so  roughly  and  hurriedly 
done  on  that  dread  evening. 

It  was  all  right ;  and  I  drew  much  comfort  and  joy  out  of  this 
fact  when  I  was  thinking  it  over.  I  said  to  myself,  "  Some- 
times, I  am  so  oppressed  with  the  care  of  the  many  things  entrusted 
to  me  that  I  cannot  study  my  sermon  as  I  would  like."  Perhaps  it  is 
all  the  better  for  that ;  the  Master  does  not  want  studied  sermons. 
It  may  be  also  that  it  suits  the  hearer  all  the  better.  If  you  cannot 
bury  Christ  as  you  would  like  to  because  there  is  not  time,  when  you 
have  done  the  best  that  you  could,  and  sorrowed  over  it,  you  have 
done  the  very  thing  that  your  Lord  wants  you  to  do.  Rest  you  content 
with  that,  and  just  say  to  yourself,  *'  He  takes  the  will  for  the  deed, 
and  all  my  blunderings  and  mistakes  he  overlooks  because  I  did  it 
all  out  of  love  for  his  dear  name." 

I  have  talked  thus  to  you  about  Christ's  dead  body.  Oh,  that 
I  had  an  opportunity  of  speaking  to  you  about  him  as  the  living 
Lord !  But  as  I  cannot,  for  our  time  is  gone,  I  would  ask  you  just  to 
stoop  down,  and  in  faith  and  love  to  kiss  those  wounds,  admire  that 
pierced  hand,  that  other  hand,  that  nailed  foot,  that  other  foot,  that 
side  with  the  spear  gash,  and  that  dear  face  with  closed  eyes,  and 
then  say,  *'  He  bore  all  this  for  me  ;  what  have  I  done  for  him?  " 
God  bless  you !     Amen. 


lExpojSittons  I12  ^^  ^^  Spurseon. 

MARK  XV.  34—47 ;  JOHN  XIX.  38—42 ;  and  1  CORINTHIANS  XV.  1—9. 

Concerning  the  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  we  shall  read  iu  three 
portions  of  the  New  Testament.  First,  in  the  Gospel  according  to  Mark,  the 
fifteenth  chapter,  beginning  at  the  thirty-fourth  verse. 

Mark  xv.  Verse  34.  And  at  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voices 
saying,  Eloi,  Eloi,  lama  sahachthani  ?  which  is,  being  interpreted,  My  God, 
my  Ood,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me? 

It  is,  "  My  El,  my  strong  God,  my  mighty  One,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 
me  ?  " — the  bitterest  words  that  were  ever  uttered  by  mortal  lips,  and 
expressing  the  quintessence  of  agony.  Alas  !  that  my  Saviour  should  ever 
have  had  to  say  as  much  as  this  when  he  hunp  npou  the  cr'*»s,  suflfering  and 
dying  for  me. 


EXPOSITIONS.  741 

85.  And  some  of  them  that  stood  hy,  when  they  heard  it,  said,  Behold,  he 
c^li'eth  Elias. 

Did  they  misunderstand  his  bitter  cry  of  woe  ?  Could  they  mistake  what 
he  meant  ?  Was  it  not,  on  the  part  of  these  people  that  stood  by,  a  wilful 
wicked  witticism  upon  what  our  Lord  Jesus  had  said  ?  We  fear  that  it 
was  so. 

36,  37.  And  one  ran  and  filled  a  sp^mge  full  of  vinegar,  and  put  it  on  a 
reed,  and  gave  him  to  drink,  saying,  Let  alone  ;  let  us  see  whether  Elias  will 
come  to  take  him  down.  And  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  gave  up  the 
ghost. 

His  last  words  were,  "It  is  finished." 

**  'It  is  finish'd  ! ' — Oh  what  pleasure 
Do  these  charming  words  afford  ! 
Heavenly  blessings  without  measure 
Flow  to  us  from  Christ  the  Lord : 

'  It  is  finish'd  ! ' 
Saints,  the  dying  words  record." 

38,  39.  And  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the 
bottom.     And  when  the  centurion,  which  stood  over  against  him, 

The  officer  who  had  charge  of  the  arrangements  for  the  execution :  "  when 
the  centurion,  which  stood  over  against  him," — 

39.  Saw  that  he  so  cried  out,  and  gave  up  the  ghost,  he  said,  Truly  this  man 
was  the  Son  of  God. 

Probably  saying  a  great  deal  more  than  he  understood.  There  was 
something  so  extraordinary  about  this  central  Sufferer  that  the  centurion 
could  not  understand  who  he  could  be  unless  he  was  truly  ''the  Son 
of  God." 

40,41.  There  were  also  women  looking  on  afar  off:  among  whom  was 
Mary  Magdalene,  and  Mary  the  mother  of  James  the  less  and  of  Joses,  and 
Salome;  (Who  also,  whe7i  he  luas  in  Galilee,  followed  him,  and  ministered 
unto  him  ;J  and  many  other  women  which  came  up  with  him  unto 
Jerusalem. 

Where  was  Peter  ?  We  know  that  John  was  near  the  cross  ;  but  Janaes 
and  the  rest  of  the  apostles  were  apparently  hiding  away  ;  yet  the  holy 
women  were  there. 

42,  43.  And  now  when  the  even  was  come,  because  it  was  the  preparation, 
that  is,  the  day  before  the  sabbath,  Joseph  of  Arimathcea,  an  honourable 
counsellor,  luhich  also  waited  for  the  kingdom  of  God,  came,  and  went  in  boldly 
unto  Pilate,  and  craved  the  body  of  Jesus. 

I  have  no  doubt  that  Pilate  was  very  surprised  that  a  member  of  the 
Sanhedrim  should  come  and  ask  for  the  body  of  Jesus,  when,  a  little  while 
before,  he  had  put  him  to  death  really  by  the  mandate  of  that  body 
of  men. 

44,  45.  And  Pilate  marvelled  if  he  were  already  dead  :  and  calling  unto  him 
the  anturion,  he  asked  him  luhether  he  had  been  any  while  dead.  And  when  he 
knew  it  of  the  centurion,  he  gave  the  body  to  Joseph. 

This  very  centurion,  who  had  declared  that  Jesus  was  the  Son  of  God, 
now  came  forward  to  bear  witness  that  he  had  seen  him  die ;  and  then 
Pilate  told  Joseph  that  he  might  go  and  take  the  body. 
46.     And  he  bought  fine  linen. 

This  was  probably  the  first  time  that  fine  linen  had  touched  the  flesh  of 
the  Son  of  man  ;  he  had  been  accustomed  to  much  coarser  stuff  in  his  life- 
time, but  now  Joseph  "  bought  fine  linen." 


742  METBOPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

46,  47.   And  took  him  down,  and  wrapped  him  in  the  linen,  and  laid  him  in 
sepulchre  which  was  hewn  out  of  a  rockj  and  rolled  a  stone  unto  the  door  of  the 
sepulchre.     And  Mary  Magdalene  and  Mary  the  mother  of  Josea  beheld  where 
he  was  laid. 

That  is  Mark's  account  of  our  Lord's  death  and  burial,  very  terse,  and  very 
suggestive.     Let  us  now  read  John's  description  of  the  sad  scene. 

John  xix.  Verses  38 — 40.  And  after  this  Joseph  of  Arimathcea,  being  a 
disciple  of  Jesus,  but  secretly  for  fear  of  the  Jews,  besought  Pilate  that  he  might 
take  away  the  body  of  Jesus :  and  Pilate  gave  him  leave.  He  came  therefore,  and 
took  the  body  of  Jesus.  And  there  came  also  Nicodemus,  which  at  the  first  came 
to  Jesus  by  night,  and  brought  a  mixture  of  myrrh  and  aloes,  about  an  hundred 
pound  weight.     Then  took  they  the  body  of  Jesus, 

Oh,  how  tenderly,  and  with  how  many  tears,  did  they  take  their  Lord's 
body  from  the  cross  ! 

40—42.  And  wound  it  in  linen  clothes  with  the  spices,  as  the  manner  of  the 
Jews  is  to  bury.  Now  in  the  place  where  he  was  crucified  there  was  a  garden; 
and  in  the  garden  a  new  sepulchre,  wherein  was  never  man  yet  laid.  There 
laid  they  Jesus  therefore  became  of  the  Jews'  preparation  day  ;  for  the  sepulchre 
was  nigh  at  hand. 

John's  Gospel  contains  some  particulars  not  mentioned  by  Mark  ;  and  the 
same  may  be  said  of  Matthew's  account,  and  Luke's.  Eead  them  all  when 
you  are  at  home,  and  ponder  the  wonderful  story. 

The  apostle  Paul,  speaking  of  our  Lord's  resurrection,  mentions  his 
burial.  We  will  now  read  in  his  first  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  just  a  few 
verses  from  the  fifteenth  chapter. 

1  Corinthians  xv.  Verse  1.  Moreover,  brethren^  I  declare  unto  you  the 
gospel — 

Mark  that  Paul  writes  concerning  "  the  gospel."  We  shall  see  now  what 
•*  the  gospel "  is. 

1 — 3.  Which  I  preached  unto  you,  which  also  ye  have  received,  and  wherein 
ye  stand;  by  which  also  ye  are  saved,  if  ye  keep  in  memory  what  I  preached 
unto  yoUy  unless  ye  have  believed  in  vain.  For  I  delivered  unto  you  first  of  all 
that  which  I  also  received,  how  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins  according  to  the 
scriptures; 

That  is  the  central  truth  of  the  gospel. 

4.     And  that  he  was  buried, 

That  is  an  essential  part  of  the  gospel. 

4.     And  that  he  rose  again  the  third  day  according  to  the  scriptures : 

This  is  the  bright  light  of  the  gospel,  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord  from 
the  dead — 

5 — 9.  And  that  he  was  seen  of  Cephas,  then  of  the  twelve  :  after  that,  he  was 
seen  of  above  five  hundred  brethren  at  once  ;  of  luhom  the  greater  part  remain 
unto  this  present,  but  some  are  fallen  asleep.  After  that,  he  was  seen  of  James; 
then  of  all  the  apostles.  And  last  of  all  he  was  seen  of  me  also,  as  of  one  born 
out  of  due  time.  For  I  am  the  least  of  the  apostles,  that  am  not  meet  to  be 
called  an  apostle,  because  I  persecuted  the  church  of  Ood. 

Yet  he  made  one  amongst  the  many  testifiers  to  the  fact  that  Jesus  really 
died,  and  was  buried,  and  rose  from  the  dead,  of  which  we  will  speak  more 
particularly  by-and-by. 


I 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book  "—306,  832. 


C.  H,  Spurgeon's  Books  of  Illustrations  and  Extracts,  fop 
THE  USE  of  Preachers,  Sunday-school  Teachers,  and 
OTHER  Christian  Workers. 

The  following  volumes  are  all  published  by  Messrs. 
Passmore  &  Alabaster,  Paternoster  BuiLDrrcs,  London. 

The  Salt- Cellars.  Being  a  Collection  of  Proverbs,  together  with 
Homely  Notes  thereon.  In  2  vols ,  3s.  6d.  each,  or  beautifully 
bound  in  French  Morocco,  Limp,  7s.  6d.  each. 

•'  This  is  a  book  to  be  kept  close  at  hand  for  a  spare  five  minutes ; 
there  is  not  a  sentence  in  it  which  does  not  fulfil  the  requirement  of 
the  motto  on  the  title-page  by  having  '  shortness,  sense,  and  salt.' 
The  arrangement  of  the  matter  is  masterly ;  while  the  get-up  of  the 
volume  reflects  great  credit  on  the  publishers." — Christian  Leader. 

Feathers  for  Arrows ;   or,  Illustrations  for  Preachers  and  Teachers, 

from  my  Note  Book.  Cloth,  2s.  6d.  (See  Lecture  V.,  page  88.) 
"  The  work  covers  a  wide  range  of  subjects ;  the  metaphors  are 
always  striking  and  frequently  brilliant,  while  the  truths  which  they 
illustrate  are  such  as  have  always  formed  the  staple  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
discourses.  A  choicer  collection  of  illustrations  we  do  not  know." 
— Freeman. 

"  The  collection  is  very  varied,  but  all  bearing  on  the  highest 
themes,   and  fitted  to  help  the  highest  purpose  of  the   Christian 
ministry.     There  is  an  admirable  index  of  subjects,  and  another  of 
texts." — Evangelical  Magazine. 
Barbed  Arrows  from  the  Quiver  of  Q.  H.  Spurgeon.     Cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Illustrations  and  Meditations  ;  or,  Flowers  from  a  Puritan's  Garden, 

Distilled  and  Dispensed  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon.  Cloth,  2s.  6d. 
«  The  volume  before  us  is  full  of  helpful  suggestions  and  beautiful 
illustrations.  Nowhere  have  we  met  with  more  characteristics  of 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  mind  and  heart  than  in  these  illustrations.  The 
book  ought  to  be  immensely  popular,  as  it  doubtless  will  be.  — 
Christian  Commonwealth. 
Sermons  in  Candles.     Illustrations  which  mav  be  found  in  Common 

Candles.     Stiff  Covers,  is. ;  Cloth   Gilt  Edges,  2s. 
«  For  originality  and  quaintness,  for  some  smartly-stated  views  on 
religious  truth,  this  litUe  work  stands  unsurpassed.     The  Lectures 
are  unique."— Fr^^waw.  r  n     r  -n      •     ^-   ^ 

"  It  is  needless  to  say  that  the  Lectures  are  full  of  illuminating 
grace  and  wisdom,  and  are  quite  monumental  in  thdr  ingenuity  and 
cleverness.  Light  and  heat  break  out  on  every  page.  —The  Christian. 
The  Bible  and  the  Newspaper;    Spurgeon's  Shilling  Series.      (See 

«  oiTwe  is'tha^m^y  will  read  this  book  and  find,  in  the  oyster- 
shell  of  a  parable,  the  pearl  of  great  price." -C.  H.  Spurgeon,  m 
The  Sword  and  the  Trowel.  ..     1  ^  u- 

« If  anyone  wishes  to  know  how  Mr.  Spurgemi  can  write,  let  him 
invest  a  shilling  in  one  of  these  little  books,--Spurgeon  s  Shilling 
Series,-and  he  will  readily  see  how  it  is  that  their  author  can 
attract  both  readers  and  hearers."— r^f  Bookseller. 


:Spurgeons  Birthday  Book.     Containing  a  metaphor^  simile^  allegory, 

or  illustration  for  every  day  in  the  year ^  compiled  from  the  works  of 

C.  H.  Spurgeon.     Cloth,  2s.  6'd. ;   Persian,  3s.  6d. ;   Morocco, 

5s.  ;  Russia,  with  Photographs,  ips.  6d. 

"  For  thirty  pence,  our  readers  may  possess  a  book  which  is  as  useful 

as  it  is  handsomely  got  up.     The  records  of  dates  which  are  dear 

to  the  household,  or  the  signatures  of  beloved  friends  and  visitors, 

will  find  here  the  happiest  method  of  preservation  and  reference." — 

Christian  Age, 

My  Sermon- Notes ^  containing  264  Sermon  Outlines.     Illustrated  by 
numerous  Anecdotes,  Extracts,  etc.     Complete  in  2  vols.,  5s.  each, 
or  may  be  had  in  four  parts,  2s.  6d.  each.     A  complete  index 
of  subjects  and  texts  in  each  volume. 
"  Preachers,  who  are  willing  to  learn  from  anyone  really  capable  of 
teaching  them,  mighc  do  many  a  worse  thing  than  buy  a  copy  of  this 
work,  which,  we  believe,  will  prove  really  helpful." — Church  Review. 
The  Art  of  Illustration  ;  Third  Series  of  Lectures  to  my  Students.    A 
selection  from  Addresses  delivered  to  the  Students  of  the  Pastors' 
College,  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.    By  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  President, 
2S.  6d. 
"  We  shall  be  surprised  if  preachers,  teachers,  and  speakers  of  all 
kinds  do  not  secure  a  copy  quickly.    It  is  a  book  that  will  captivate 
the  general  reader,  too,  written  as  it  is  in  a  style  that  is  full  of 
breezy,  robust  Saxon.     The  kindly  humour  that  bubbles  up  every- 
where makes  an  additional  charm  to  an  already  delightful  book." — 
Word  and  Work. 

Types  and  Emblems.  A  Collection  of  Sermons  preached  on  Sunday 
and  Thursday  evenings,  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  Price  3s. 
*To  characterize  these  discourses,  would  be  simply  superfluous. 
Every  reader  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermons  knows  the  worth  of  every- 
thing issuing  from  the  press  of  which  he  is  the  author.  The  volume 
is  very  tastefully  got-up." — Christian  Age. 

Flashes  of  Thought ;  Being  One  Thousand  Choice  Extracts  from  the 
Works  ofCn.  Spurgeon.     Alphabetically  arranged,  and  with  a 
copious  Index.     Price  5s. 
"■  The  idea  is  a  good  one ;  and  Flashes  of  Thought,  the  volume  in 
question,  containing  one  thousand  choice  extracts  from  the  works 
of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  is  sure  of  ready  acceptance  with  the  immense  body 
by  whom  he  is  admired  and  ioWowed."— Daily  Telegraph. 
Spurgeon's  Gems  :   Being  Brilliant  Passages  Selected  from  the  Dis- 
courses ofC.  H.  Spurgeon.     Large  Type,  3s.  6d. 
"A  selection  from  the  pages  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  containing^  specimens 
of  his  happiest  thoughts,  gems  from  his  discourses,  etc." — Extract 
from  Freface. 

Gleanings  among  the  Sheaves.  By  C.  H.  Spurgeon  Cloth,  is. 
"  These  extracts  are  quite  SpuTgeonic,— racy,  rich,  and  rare,  both  as 
to  style  and  matter,— full  of  exquisite  consolation,  faithful  advice, 
clear  analogies,  poetic  touches,  and  glorious  old  gospel.  We  do  not 
wonder  that  eight  thousand  copies  were  disposed  of  on  the  day  of 
publication,  and  we  trust  that  eight  times  eighty  thousand  will  find 
their  way  to  the  r&Ugious  public."— ^^^^Z;'  Review, 


