0\\v/V 




CORNELL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 





The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924098821527 



In compliance with current 

copyright law, Cornell University 

Library produced this 

replacement volume on paper 

that meets the ANSI Standard 

Z39.48-1992 to replace the 

irreparably deteriorated original. 

2004 




V» 'X>^ 



s^-^ 




OUR ENGLISH BIBLE 



ITS 



TRANSLATIONS AND TRANSLATORS. 



JOHN STOUGHTON, D.D, 

AUTHOR OF 

"HOMES AND HAUNTS OF MARTIN LUTHER," "LIGHTS OF THE WORLD," 
"THE PROGRESS OF DIVINE REVELATION," ETC. 




LONDON : THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY. 

NEW YORK : SCRIBNER AND WELFORD. 



/^cii^^ 



'>t,^ 



X. 



/J>-- 



LONDON : 

J. AND W. RIDER, PRINTERS, 

BARTHOLOMEW CLliSK. 



Presidc-.t White 
^ Library 




PREFATORY NOTE. 




T is nearly forty years since the Author began to 
study the history of " Our English Bible." At 
that period he spent several weeks in the British 
Museum, examining early versions and editions. He also 
visited Oxford, Cambridge, and Lambeth, to inspect some 
of their MS. treasures. The results of these investigations 
have already appeared in anonymous pubHcations; and now, 
having revised and abridged his original materials, he finally 
commits them to the press, in the present concise and more 
popular form. 

Within the last half-century many corrections have been 
made in the details of Bible history, and many important 
particulars have been added to our previous knowledge. 
The recent works of Dr. Westcott and Dr. Eadie have 



vi Prefatory Note. 

placed some facts in a new light ; Dr. Moulton's papers 
in the " Bible Educator " are also useful contributions ; and 
in the " Catalogue of the Caxton Exhibition " are found 
records of important discoveries by Mr. Stevens. In the 
fields thus recently opened the Author has largely reaped : 
a further examina,tion of Caxton's " Golden Legend" has 
confirmed what Mr. Stevens has said with regard to the 
long-neglected bearing of that curious work on Biblical 
history ; and his original suggestion as to Coverdale and 
Van Meteren has, with some modification, been adopted to 
the improvement of the present work. 

The origin and labours of the Biblical Eevision Com- 
panies, both in England and America, are also noticed, 
so far as they are pubUcly knovTn. 




rjgBj^Zj 




„ 




... T,.W 


jiuuiuimumji 








B%!^ 


gPS 






IB 


^^ 






^ 


1 







CONTENTS. 



CHAP. PAGE 

1. BAELY HISTOEY AND ASSOCIATIONS .... 1 

n. WYOLIFPE AND HIS VEESION 25 

III. TBANSLATOES APTER WYCLIPPB, AND EAELY 

FEINTED VERSIONS 43 

IV. WILLIAM TYNDALE 71 

V. MILES COVEEDALE 117 

Ti. MATTHEW'S BIBLE 138 

vn. THE GEEAT BIBLE 149 

vm. EDWAED THE SIXTH'S EEIGN 170 

IX. THE GENEVA VEESION 186 

X. THE BISHOPS' BIBLE 202 

XI. THE EHEMISH VEESION 221 

xn. THE "AUTHOEIZED VEESION," 1611 . . . , 229 

xin. THE BIBLE IN THE SEVENTEENTH AND 

EIGHTEENTH CBNTUEIES 260 

XIV. REVISION OP THE ENGLISH VEESION . . . .279 



OUE ENGLISH BIBLE. 



j!!5hapter 



EARLY HISTORY AND ASSOCIATIONS. 

HE fact of so many different tongues 
being spoken by the Innnan family is 
sometimes regarded as one of the in- 
felicities of our present condition ; but 
it brings counterbalancing advantages, 
in the bond of sympathy and brother- 
hood which it supplies to each 
nationahty. And radical differences of 
speech form an institution of Provi- 
dence, which, if it had not appeared at 
the building of Babel, would certainly have arisen sooner 
or later through the scattering of manldnd. It necessitates 
some kind of method by which a Eevelation made from 
heaven in one language may be made inteUigible in 
another. Eevelation is hidden — wherever there is ignorance 
of the original — like the sun behind dark clouds, or beneath 

B 




2 Our English Bible. 

hills Lefore the hour of dawn; we must either acquire a Icnow- 
ledge of Hebrew and Greek for ourselves, or the book must 
be translated into words with which we are famihar. The first 
process is no doubt the most effectual, but it must be con- 
fined in the nature of things to a few ; the second is in- 
dispensable for the vast majority. What cannot be done hy 
the multitude must be done for them ; the result of the 
Pentecost miracle must be accomplished in the best way it 
can by learning and labour on the part of scholars, that 
every man may ■ learn in his own tongue the wonderful 
works of God. The reading of what is divinely vmtten 
is subject to the same conditions as the hearing of what 
was divinely spoken. " Things without hfe giving sound, 
whether pipe or harp, except they give a distinction in the 
sounds, how shall it be known what is piped or harped? 
For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall pre- 
pare himself to the battle ? So hkewise ye, except ye utter 
by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be 
known what is spoken ? " " If I know not the meaning of 
the voice, I shall be unto him that speaketh a barbarian ; 
and he that speaketh shall be a barbarian unto me." * 

The traditions of the Jews discourage the translation of 
their Scriptures ; to this hour the Hebrew origiaal alone is 
read in the synagogues : and the rehgion of the Mahome- 
tans forbids a change of the Arabic Koran into any 
equivalent rendering ; because, say they, not only the sub- 
stance of it is uncreated and eternal, subsisting in the 
essence of Deity, but the words are " inscribed vpith a pen 
of hght on the table of His everlasting decrees." 

It is otherwise in this country, thank God ! and a 

* 1 Cor. xiv. 7-9, 11. 



Early History and Associations. 3 

succession of men have, with zeal and patience, devoted 
themselves to the translation of the Holy Scriptures. 

Our Enghsh Bible differs from aU other vernacular 
translations at least in two respects. First, it is the most 
widely circulated volume in the world. Copies of it have 
been multiphed to an unparalleled extent. They are read 
not only by a greater comparative number of persons at 
home than any book ia any other land, but throughout our 
colonial dependencies, and in the vast territory of the 
United States, there is no volume which can vie with it in 
the multitude of its copies, any more than in the interest 
which it has inspired and the effects which it has produced. 
And next, whilst most other versions, ancient and modem, 
have been produced by individuals who undertook the task 
single-handed, and all the versions have remained much as 
they were at first, our Bible is the work of successive 
scholars, covering a wide space of time, and only by slow 
degrees arriving at completion. Syriac, Latin, Gothic, 
Armenian, and Slavonic translations were accomphshed with 
considerable speed, and the same may be said of those 
which have been produced in foreign languages by modern 
missionaries : but the English Bible may be called a growth 
of centuries ; preparations were made for it before the 
sixteenth century, and not until the seventeenth did it take 
the form in which it now appears. We may ahnost say the 
Enghsh Bible is like the Enghsh constitution, not indeed as 
to its first origin and elements, but as to the successive steps 
by which it reached its present state. On these accounts 
the history of Enghsh translations and translators has an 
interest altogether its own. 

A thick haze rests over the early history of Christianity 
in Britain ; how, when, or where it was first proclaimed 



4 Our English Bible 

within our shores is a secret which no research has been 
" sufficient to discover. Traditions that Paul, or Joseph of 
Arimathsea, preached the gospel here are utterly worthless, 
and have long been rejected ; all that can be said upon 
the subject of the first planting of the Church among our 
fathers is, that probably during the first century some 
Romans who visited Britain, or some natives who had 
returned from the great city, brought tidings of the new 
faith which God had revealed to man. The landing of Csesar 
upon our coast, with its attendant events, leading to the 
establishment of a new earthly dominion, is a scene preserved 
on the page of history with vividness ; but the landing of 
the first Christians, as instruments in the hand of God for 
estabhshing His reign among our pagan ancestry, and what 
they said and did, how they were opposed, where they 
succeeded, and what was the measure of their success — aU 
this, so interesting to curiosity, and affording such play for 
imagination, is lost, for ever lost, amidst the shadows of 
the past. 

TertuUian expressly alludes to places in Britain inac- 
cessible to the Bomans, which had been subdued by Christ ;* 
so that, in his time, Christianity would seem to have 
penetrated further than the imperial arms, and to have 
reached, perhaps, as far as Scotland. The inspired records, 
at first in detached portions, and afterwards in their collective 
form, were prized, and circulated among early Christians as 
containing the authoritative rule of religious belief and 
conduct. Wherever the gospel was carried and embraced, 
the Book from which its facts and precepts were drawn 
would speedily foUow ; and we cannot question that the 
sacred writings were, at an early period, brought over to 

* Adversus Judceos, vii. 



Early History and Associations. 5 

enlighten and comfort the British Church. Where Eome 
extended her dominion, she endeavoured to estabHsh her 
language as an auxiliary to her power ; and, as it is likely 
the Britons were taught Latin, the version of the sacred 
book in that tongue would be intelligible to educated 
converts in this country. 

When pagan Saxons took possession of our island they 
introduced their own superstitions and idolatries, and, with 
the exception of western parts, where some few vestiges of 
Christianity were retained, the whole country relapsed into 
a state of heathenism. 

The monk Augustine visited Britain at the close of the 
sixth century, and tradition relates that he left the impress 
of his foot on the rock he touched as he stepped on shore. 
Putting aside this legend, it may be truly said that, by his 
labours in this country, he impressed an effect upon its cha- 
racter which has never been effaced. He and his companions 
were benefactors to England, far greater than any who had 
visited it since the time of the first Christians ; and how- 
ever we may deplore their errors, we must applaud their 
zeal, and rejoice in their success. Kent was the chief scene 
of the Eoman apostle's labours and triumphs ; the other 
parts of Saxon England were gradually reclaimed by differ- 
ent missionaries. Mixed up with absurd traditions relating 
to the events of that period, there are some of a far different 
character, full of truth and beauty, upon which the historian 
delights to Hnger. How touching is the story .of the 
courtier of the Northumbrian king, who, in council with his 
master and fellow-nobles respecting the missionary Paulinus, 
observed, " Man's life is hke a little sparrow, which, whilst 
your Majesty is feasting by the fire in your apartment with 
your royal retinue, flies in at one window and out at another. 



6 Our English Bible. 

Indeed, we see it that short time it remaiaeth ia the house, 
and then it is well sheltered from wind and weather ; but 
presently it passeth from cold to cold, and whence it comes 
and whither it goes we are altogether ignorant. Thus we 
can give some account of our soul during its abode in the 
body, while housed and harboured therein ; but where it 
was before, and how it fareth after, is to us altogether 
unknown. If, therefore, Paulinus's preaching will certainly 
inform us herein, he deserveth, in my opinion, to be 
entertained."* It was no small advantage to have some one 
in the regions of Northumbria to tell the inhabitants whence 
came the soul, and whither it fled. And a blessing above all 
price was that Book which preserved the Divine revelation 
respecting the destiny of man, and the realm into which he 
enters when the hand of death dismisses the soul from the 
body. Though httle known among the common people, the 
Scriptures were preserved and transcribed with care by 
Saxon monks ; and in Ireland and in Scotland, as early as 
the sixth century, there were monasteries in which the 
copying of the Word of Grod was a common employment. 
The famous Columba of lona is especially renowned for 
his dihgence and care in this respect. 

The language in which these Mss. were written 
was not the language of the inspfred vmters, but that of 
the Latia Church, into which its sacred books had been 
translated, and in which its sacred offices were commonly 
performed. There was an ancient version called the Vetus 
Itala, and another founded upon that, by the celebrated 
Jerome, who partly revised and partly translated it anew. 
This latter was distinguished as the Vulgate, and became 
common in the west of Europe, but not to the exclusion of 

* Bade, Ecclesiastical Bistcry, ii. 13, 



Early .History and Associations. 7 

the earlier one ; both being transcribed by ecclesiastical 
copyists, and read, in part at least, by the priest in public 
service. 

By the Anglo-Saxon tongue is meant that which came to 
be commonly spoken by our forefathers, from the shores of 
the Eider, the Elbe, theWeser, and the Baltic — tribes of Jutes 
and Angles as well as Saxons — who settled down together 
within our island borders, and managed to' communicate 
with each other after some indescribable fashion. Saxon was 
the main element of their common speech, and constituted 
the backbone of conversation and hteratm'e in the early 
days of our national history. So vigorous was its life, and so 
predominant its influence, that we are told, if our word- 
books at the present day contain 38,000 Enghsh terms, 
properly so called, five-eighths of them are of Saxon 
origin.* 

Such persons as were ignorant of Latin would, when 
interested in the truths of Christianity, naturally wish to see 
them written in their native language, provided they were 
able to read it ; and priests anxious to promote the spiritual 
weKare of their flocks would be glad to meet such a laudable 
desire . Hence a number of Christian books in the vernacuJ ar 
made their appearance at an early period ; and it has been 
common VTith historians, in treating of the earhest written 
attempts at Scripture instruction, to class them together, and 
to arrange them chronologically, as coming under the common 
denomination of Biblical Versions, But they differ so much 
from each other, that when presented in this way they are 
likely to make an incorrect impression upon the reader's 
mind. Some of the so-called Anglo-Saxon versions are, 
properly speaking, no versions at aU. 

* Eadie's English Bible, i. 7. 



Our Enoiish Bible, 



<b 



To prevent misapprehension, it will be best to notice the 
sacred Anglo-Saxon books under certain divisions. 

I. Those v^hich took the form of paraphrases, siim- 
maries, and Scripture lessons in rhyme. 

The earliest production of this kind is ascribed to 
Csedmon, a brother of the famous monastery vyhich over- 
looked the sea on Whitby Chff, where linger still venerable 
ruias, attractive to numerous visitors, who in summer 
months ramble in that interesting locality. Caedmon hved 
in the seventh century, and being fond of versification, he 
produced a metrical work, thus described by a modern 
author : 

" The inequality of the different parts of the poem 
attributed to Csedmon was first noticed by Conybeare. A 
fine poem on the Fall of the Angels, the Creation, and the 
Pall of Man, is awkwardly prefaced by a narration of the 
same story much more briefly told. Then we have a barren 
version of the chapters of Genesis to the close of the life of 
Abraham, except the accounts of the flood, and of the war 
of the kings against Sodom, which are told in a superior 
style. Suddenly, vnthout any connexion vsdth that of 
Abraham, we are introduced to the history of Moses, which 
again is told in a very different manner, and has all the 
marks of being a separate poem. After the history of 
Moses follows that of Nebuchadnezzar, equally distinct and 
complete in itseK, which occupies all the remainder of the 
first part. The second part comprises chiefly a poem on the 
descent of Christ into Hades, a favourite story, laiown in 
somewhat later times as the Harrovnng of Hell."* 

Judging from Thorpe's prose translation of Csedmon, 

* Wright's Literature and Superstitions of England in Middle Ages, i. 27. 



Early History and Associations. 9 

the reader will probably admit that his work was not 
destitute of a certain kind of force. 

Take the following specimen from the history of 
Abraham : 

" Then the chief began the powerful King to tempt, 
earnestly proved what the man's fortitude were : with words 
austere, he with his voice addressed him — ' Gro thou, with 
utmost haste, Abraham, journeying set thy steps, and with 
thee lead thine own child. Thou shalt Isaac to me sacrifice, 
thy son, thyseK as an offering, after thou mountest the 
steep downs (the ring of the high land which I from hence 
will show thee) up with thine own feet : there thou shalt 
prepare a pile, a bale-fire for thy child, and thyself sacrifice 
thy son, with the sword's edge, and then with swart flame 
bum the beloved's body, and offer it to me as a gift.' He 
delayed not the journey, but soon began to hasten for the 
way. To him was the Lord of angels' words terrific, and his 
Sovereign dear. Then the blessed Abraham his night's 
rest gave up, the Preserver's behest despised not, but him 
the holy man, girded with a gray sword, showed, that of the 
Guardian of Spirits, dread in his breast dwelt. 

' ' Began then his asses to saddle, the sage dispenser of gold, 
bade biTn two young men accompany, his own son was the 
third, and he the fourth himself. Then he hastily departed, 
from his own house, leading Isaac, a child unwaxen, as bim 
the Lord had bidden, hastened then much and speeded 
forth on the earth's way, as him the Lord had taught, the 
ways over the desert, till that, in glory bright, of the third 
day, upover the deep water the mom arose. . . . 

" Departed then the man and his own son, to the limit 
which bim the Lord had shown, passing over the wealds : 
the son bare wood, the father fire and sword. . . . 



lo Our English Bible. 

"Began then the pile to load, fire awaken, and fettered 
the feet and hands of his child, and then on the pile hove 
young Isaac, and then hastily griped the sword hy the hilt ; 
woxdd Mil his son with his hands, the fire quench with 
the youth's gore. . . . 

" To him then quickly, from the firmament ahove the 
glory spirit of God spake in words — ' Beloved Abraham, 
slay not thine own child, but take thou ahve the boy from 
the pile, thy son ; him the God of glory favoureth. Parent 
of the Hebrews, thou shalt meeds, through the hand 
of the holy King of heaven, true rewards of triumph, 
thyself receive ; — ample lasting gifts : thee will the Guardian 
of spirits requite with favours, for that to thee was dearer 
his peace and grace than thine own child.' "* 

Under the same division may be ranked what goes by 
the name oi Alfred's Booms, consisting of the substance of 
the Ten Commandments, thus translated from the original 
Anglo-Saxon by Mr. Thorpe : 

" The Lord spake these words to Moses, and thus said — 
I am the Lord thy God. I led thee out of the land of the 
Egyptians, and of their bondage. 

" 1. Love thou not other strange gods above Me. 

" 2. Utter thou not My name idly, for thou shalt not be 
guiltless towards Me if thou utter My name idly. 

" 3. Eemember that thou hallow the rest-day. "Work 
for yourselves six days, and on the seventh rest. For in 
six days Christ wrought the heavens and the earth, the 
seas, and all creatures that are in them, and rested on the 
seventh day : and therefore the Lord hallowed it. 

" 4. Honour thy father and thy mother, whom the Lord 

* Thorpe's Cadmort, pp. 172-17C, 



Early History and Associations. 1 1 

hath given thee, that thou mayest be the longer Hving 
on earth. 

"5. Slay thou not. 

" 6. Commit thou not adultery. 

" 7. Steal thou not. 

" 8. Say thou not false witness. 

" 9. Covet thou not thy neighbour's goods unjustly. 

"10. Make thou not to thyself golden or silver gods."* 

Such a method of presenting the contents of the Bible, 
however iateresting and valuable, cannot be justly described 
as translating the Holy Scriptures. 

Neither can the work of .^Ifric, written in the tenth 
century.f It contains an epitome of the Old and New Testa- 
ments. He gives often in an abridged form, and with omis- 
sions, the historical contents of the Pentateuch, the books of 
Joshua, Judges, the Kings, Esther, and Job ; also parts of the 
Apocrj^Dha. Sometimes JSlfuic gives accurate renderings, 
at other times they are incorrect ; and he commonly substi- 
tutes for the texts paraphi'ases and statements of his own. 

When Wilham the Norman, England's second great 
conqueror, stepped on the shore near Hastings, he came to 
effect changes in the language as well as the social habits 
and the general civihsation of the Anghcan race. A new 
dialect made its appearance. The old Enghsh tongue 
entered a transition state. It became mixed with words 
and inflexions of Norman origin. Bask, in his Anglo-Saxon 
grammar, fixes the boundary-line between the former and 
this new era in the history of our language about the year 
1100. Some marks of the change may be traced in the 
Saxon Chronicle, written between the years 1079 and 1140 ; 

* Thorpe's Ancient Laws and Institutions of England, vol. 1. p. 45. 
t Edited by Thwaites, 1623. 



12 Our English Bible, 

but the progress of a language is very gradual, and tlie 
change during a transition state is so fluctuating and 
confused, that it is difficult to determine to which dialect in 
particular any composition in question may belong. 

As this change was going on, some one named Orm, or 
Ormin, a canon of the Augustine order, wrote a feeble 
versified paraphrase of the Gospels and Acts, running out 
to the extent of 20,000 lines.* In this work the older 
case-endings of words disappear, though few foreign words 
are introduced; it exhibits our language under Henry II. 
Eespecting orthography the author was very particular, and 
forewarned transcribers against inaccuracy, conscious of 
changes going on at the time in that direction.-)- 

Another specimen of this class is the famous Balus 
Anitni or Soidehele, in the Vernon MS. of the Bodleian, 
which, according to the best critics, belongs to the thirteenth 
century. The following lines relate to the crucifixion : 

" Our ladi and liire sustur stoden under the roode, 
And seint John, and Marie Magdaleyn with wel sori moode 
Ur Ladi biheold hire sweete son ibrouht in gret pyne, 
For monnes gultea nouthen her and nothing for myne. 
Marie weop "wel sore, and bitter teres leet, 
The teres fullen uppon the ston doun at hire feet." 

One may hope that such productions were of some 
practical use, that there were earnest minds who studied 
these fragments, and caught the influence of the facts which 
they record ; but compositions of another class were sought 
for with greater avidity, and were commonly read with 
deeper interest. The Hves of the saiats were held in the 
highest esteem ; and some of them are found incorporated 

* Edited, with a glossary, by Dr. Meadows, 1852. 2 vols. 
+ Eadie'a BngUsh Bible, i. 30. 



Early History and Associations. 13 

ia the large thick volume of the Vernon MS., to which 
reference has been made as containiag the work entitled 
Souleliele. " This sumptuous volume was undoubtedly- 
chained in the cloister or church of some capital monastery. 
It is not improbable that the novices were exercised in 
reciting portions from these pieces. In the British Museum 
there is a set of legendary tales in rhyme, which appear to 
have been solemnly pronounced by the priest to the people 
on Sundays and hohdays. This sort of poetry was also sung 
to the harp by the minstrels on Sundays, instead of the 
romantic subjects usual at pubhc entertainments."* 

It should be also stated that there is preserved in 
the Library of Corpus Christi, Cambridge, a MS. Story of 
Genesis and Exodus, pubHshed in 1865, under the editor- 
ship of Eichard Morris. The author probably Hved about 
the middle of the thirteenth centiuy. 

II. A second class of productions includes Latin mss., 
with interlineary glosses. 

The first of these is the celebrated Durham Book of the 
Four Gospels, preserved in the British Museum. The Latin 
text was copied by Eadfrith, a monk, in the bleak Isle of 
Lindisfarne, where a famous convent existed, under St. 
Cuthbert.f Eadfrith died in 687, and his copy must 
have been made in the same century which witnessed the 

* Warton's History of English Poetry , i. 18. 

■)• " Cuthbert's spiritual inflnence extended far beyond Lindisfarne Priory. He 
preached zealously among the Northumbrians ; and when plague swept the country, 
and the people, frightened back into paganism, sought a fancied safety in heathen 
spells and amulets, he went to and fro among them to warn, to strengthen, and to 
bless the sufferers. He was accustomed to betake himself on horseback or on 
foot to mountain regions, wher -, gathering about him a population as wild as their 
country, he spent the day in teaching and baptizing, and the chief part of the 
night in chanting psalms in the open air with a voice so remarkable for compass 



14 Our English Bible. 

activity of Csedmon in the composition of his poem. Whitby 
and Lindisfarne thus became contemporaneously tmited in 
the work of Scripture instruction ; and about two hundred 
years later, in thp time of Alfred, an interlineary Anglo- 
Saxon interpretation of the Latin words was added, by a 
priest named Aldred. The gloss is given word for word, 
and no attempt is made to transfer the meaning from one 
idiom to another. 

It may interest the reader to peruse the rendering of the 
Lord's Prayer into the tongue spoken by our ancestors, and 
to trace in the rather uncouth-looking words some resem- 
blance in sound to the language of the present day : 

" Fader uren thu arth in heofnum, sie gehalgud noma 
thin : to cymeth ric thin ; sie willo tliin susels in heofne & in 
eortho ; hlaf userne ofer wisthc sel us todasg : & forgef us 
scylda usna suae use forgefon scyldgum usum : & ne inlsed 
usih in costunge uh gefrig usich from ylle."* 

The old quarto volume in which this glossary is preserved 
is a most beautiful specimen of ancient penmanship. One 
might almost fancy the letters were engraved. There are in 
the book many ornaments and pictures by St. Ethelwald, 
who succeeded Badfcith in the see of Durham. It contains 
four curious portraits of the Evangehsts, and the initial 
letter of each Gospel is finely illuminated. Among the 
stories told respecting the volume, the following is not the 
least remarkable and amusing. "When the monks of Lindis- 
farne were removing from their favourite monastery to 
avoid the depredations of the Danes, the vessel in wliich 

and power that the people were ready to beheve themselves visited by some 
heavenly messenger, and eagerly flocked to his feet." {Lindisfarne and Ruskworth 
Gospels, partiv. pref. p. xvii. Surtees Society, 1865.) 
* Cottonian mss., Nero, D. iv. fol. 36. 



Early History and Associations, 15 

the holy brethren were embarked was upset, and the Dur- 
ham Booh, which they were anxious to convey to some place 
of safety, fell into the sea ; but through the merits of St. 
Cuthbert the volume was preserved, for, the tide ebbing at 
the time much farther than usual, it was found lying high 
and dry on the sands, at the distance of full three miles 
fTom the shore. The Latin Gospels in the book had been 
used by St. Cuthbert himself, and therefore the volume had 
acquired the most precious associations in the thoughts of 
the brotherhood ; and it is asserted that it was found after 
the accident, " much more beautiful than before, both 
within and vnthout, being no way injured by the salt water, 
but rather pohshed by some heavenly hand :" but its present 
appearance, whilst confirming the fact of its temporary sub- 
mersion, disproves the assertion that it was uninjured by 
the waves. For greater safety it was afterwards placed upon 
the lid of the inner coffin of St. Cuthbert, where it was 
found in 1104, when the monks ended their wanderings at 
Durham, and there built a magnificent cathedral.* After- 
wards taken back to Lindisfarne, where a colony of the 
Durham monastics built what was called the Priory of Holy 
Island, it remained amongst the costly treasures of the 
fraternity until the dissolution of the monasteries under 
Henry viii. In some unknown way it feU into Sir Eobert 
Cotton's hands, and is now preserved in the splendid 
collection of mss. bearing his name in the British Museum. 
The rich binding is lost, but the cahgraphy and the illumi- 
nations exist in unfaded lustre. 

After the Durham, Book comes the Bushworth Gloss, a 
manuscript existing in the Bodleian Library. It is an inter- 

* Eaine's St. Cuthbert, pp. 34, 47. 



1 6 Our English Bible. 

lineary Saxon translation of the Gospels, written about the 
same time as the former work. It has coloured initials and 
ornamental dehneations of the Bvano;elists. The parties 
who executed the task have preserved their names — " Owen, 
that this book glossed, and Parmen, the priest at Hare- 
wood." The copyist has also taken care to perpetuate his 
memory in connexion with his labours, — one MacEeogol, 
who prays that the reader may not forget to intercede for 
the writer. The Anglo-Saxon Gloss, as in the case of the 
Durham Book, follows the Latin word for word, and 
resembles it in form, as probably it corresponds with it 
in age.* 

III. The third class of Anglo-Saxon Scriptures embrace 
what may be more properly called versions than any of those 
already mentioned. 

The earhest production of this kind of which we have 



* " The Eushwortli Book, though a nohle ms., yields in antiquity, as well as 
in beauty of execution, to the Lindiafarne Codex. It is written in lines extending 
through the page, and is abundantly ornamented with illuminated letters. Both 
MSB. abound with clerical errors; the older one is, however, the more correctly 
written of the two." (The Lindiafarne anS, Rushworth Gospels, part iii. pref. 
p, X. Surtees Society publication for 1863.) 

" In the Lambeth Library (1033, 4to., vellum) are two vols., written probably 
about 1430 ; mutilated at the beginning and end and in several other places, in 
parts much soiled. 

" This MS. contains the books of the Old Testament, from 2 Paral. (Chron.) 
ii. 7 to Baruoh inclusive, in the later version, with the prologues to Isaiah and 
Baruch. The textual glosses are numerous, and sometimes peoidiar. It has also 
occasional glosses in the margin. On Paa. cui. (civ.) 17, is a Latin note on the word 
gerfa%icun, which supposes WyolifPe the author of the version, and terms biTti 
'Latinitatia ignarus.' The note is in a hand of about 1500." (Forshall and 
Madden, p. xlvi.) 

It would be useless to give speoimena of these Saxon MSS., as they would 
need to be translated into modem English to be intelligible to general readers. 
Of course the Saxon renderings are intended to correspond with the Vulgate 
text. 



Early History and Associations. 19 

any account, is a version of the Gospel of St. John, executed 
by Bede, the monk of Jarrow. As we read the account of 
his death in the year 735, preserved by an eye-witness, 
we are transported, in imagination, to the monastery on 
the banks of the Tyne, where still, amidst clouds of 
smoke and noxious vapours, an old Saxon chancel may 
be seen in good preservation, connected with a now ruined 
monastery, and containing, near the communion table, a 
shattered high-backed seat, world-known as Bede's chair. 
There, in the monastery, we see the venerable ecclesiastic in 
his last hour, intently engaged in dictating to his amanu- 
ensis. " There remains now only one chapter; but it seems 
difficult for you to speak," exclaims the scribe, as his pen 
traces on the parchment the last verse of the 20th chapter 
of John. " It is easy," replied Bede : " take your pen, dip 
it in ink, and write as fast as you can." " Now, master," 
says the Jarrow scribe, after hastily penning dovm the 
sentences from his trembling hps, " now only one sentence 
is wanting." Bede repeated it. " It is finished," said the 
scribe. " It is finished," rephed the dying saint. " Lift up 
my head ; let me sit in my cell, in the place where I have 
been accustomed to pray ; and now glory be to the Father, 
and the Son, and the Holy Ghost." And with the utterance 
of these words his spirit fled. It was a noble distinction to 
die in the act of translating the Word of God. 

Bede is said to have acquired some acquaintance with 
Hebrew, and more with Greek, and to have had in his 
possession a codex of the Acts of the Apostles in the original, 
to the readings of which he refers in a commentary on that 
book.* He is thought by some to have translated the whole 

* Eadie's English Bille, i. H. 



20 Our English Bible. 

Bible. We should be glad to see an accredited MS. of such 
a version, but nobody knows where it can be found. John 
Foxe, in 1571, printed the Gospels of the four evangelists, 
translated in the old Saxon time out of Latin into the 
vulgar tongue of the Saxons ; but the worthy martyrologist 
was scarcely to be trusted as editor of such a work; and 
on examining it we discover that two-thirds only are 
composed of the version; the other third is made up by 
verses from the Bishops' Bible, which are sometimes made 
to harmonize with an earlier translation. It was conjectured 
by Marshall, who published another edition, on the basis of 
that by John Foxe, that the collection contained the sup- 
posed version by Bade ; but this is mere conjectm'e, and the 
text of that version, if there ever was one, continues to be 
a desideratum. 

Foxe rejoiced much that he could appeal to antiquity in 
favoLir of vernacular versions, then viewed vvdth so much 
jealousy by the Church of Eome; and the Eeformers generally 
were fond of this argument, considerably overstating the 
facts of the case, as might be expected in an uncritical age, 
and amidst the heats of controversy. Archbishop Parker 
observes, in his preface to the Bishops' Bible : "Their old fore- 
fathers, that have ruled in this realme, who in their times 
and in diuers ages did their dihgence to translate the whole 
bookes of the Scriptures to the erudition of the laytie, as yet 
at this day, to be scene diuers bookes translated into the 
vulgar tongue, some by kynges of the realme, some by 
bishoppes, some by abbottes, some by other deuout godly 
fathers ; so desirous they were of old tyme to haue the lay 
sort ediiied in godlynes by reading in their vulgar tongue, 
that very many bookes be yet extant, though for the age of 
the speache, and straungeness of the charect of many of them 



Early History and Associations. 21 

almost wome out of knowledge. In whiclie bookes may be 
seene euidently howe it was vsed among the Saxons, to haue 
in their Churches read the foure gospels so distributed and 
piked out in the body of the euangehstes' bookes, that to 
euery Sunday and festiuall day in the yere they were sorted 
out to the common ministers of the Churche in their 
common prayers to be read to their people." 

In fact, our knowledge of early Anglo-Saxon Grospels is 
altogether unsatisfactory ; for we are told by Sir Frederick 
Madden, a great authority on this subject, that of several 
Mss. in existence, "none appear to give the version in its 
original purity."* 

IV. The last division to be noticed consists of Anglo- 
Saxon and Early English Psalters. The Psalms formed so 
important a part of the church service, and so powerfully 
touched the hearts of men, that we do not wonder more 
attention was paid to them by our forefathers than to any 
other portion of Holy Writ. It is very remarkable that the 
Psalms have in all ages drawn towards them the affections 
of devout minds, and have been a true cardiphonia to man- 
kind in general ; so that in this fact we have a satisfactory 
answer to objections brought against them in modem tinles. 

An Anglo-Saxon Psalter, of the ninth century, has be6n 
edited by Stevenson for the Stirtees Society ; and an Anglo- 
Norman version of the Psalms and canticles of the church 
exists, regarded as earher than 1200.t The earhest prose 
translation of an entire book of Scripture is a Psalter by 
WiUiam de Schorham, vicar of Chart Sutton, near Leeds, 
in the county of Kent. It belongs to the fourteenth century 

* Preface to edition of Wycliffe's Bible, by Porshall and Madden, p. ii. 
t Tbid., p. iii. 



2 2 Otir Eitp-lisk Bible. 



'ia' 



— the beginning of Edward the Tlaird's reign; and ia a 
version of the Psalms attributed to John Hyde, and pre- 
served in Trinity College, Dublin, we have, probably, a revi- 
sion of Schorham's work. Belonging to about the same 
period is a ms. by Eichard Eolle, a chantry priest, who died 
1349. Having written a Latin commentary on the Psalms, 
he afterwards pubHshed an English version of the test, with 
an English commentary appended to it. 

He hved in sohtude, close by the convent of Hampole, a 
village about four miles from Doncaster ; and there he 
carried on his studies and wrote his works, after invoking 
the muse with more of perseverance than genius or taste. 
He is known in the annals of our literature as the author of 
several theological pieces in Latin, and especially of the 
Prick of Conscience ; a cuiious old Enghsh poem, of which 
the reader may find ample specimens in Warton's History 
of English Poetry * His prose translation of the Book of 
Psalms is found in several manuscripts — the one in Sidney 
CoUege claiming to be the original. The beginning of the 
first Psahn is translated thus : 

" Bhsful man, ye whilke way yede noght i ye counseyl of 
wicked, and in ye wey of sinfuUe stode noght, and in ye 
chajrr of pestilence he noght sate." 

Eolle, in his work of translation, was evidently bent 
upon doing good, and in a prologue he informs us that he 
sought no strange Enghsh, but what was easiest and most 
common, that he followed the letter of the Latin text as far 
as possible, and that, in expounding, "he followed the holy 
doctors, and aimed at reproving sin." This, as he further 
observes, was stated in order to meet the objections of 

* Vol. ii. p. 43 et seq. 



Early History and Associations. 23 

envious men, who might say that he did not understand 
what he was doing, and was thereby injuring himself and 
others. A short comment or gloss is inserted after each 
sentence, which, ia the simplest manner, explains the 
meaning of the passage ; as, for example, after the third 
verse of the first Psalm it is said, "He shall not only be 
good in himself, but he shall be as a tree that is profitable 
to many, and noyand to none." Hampole's gloss, though 
substantially the same in all the manuscripts examined, is 
more concise in some than others. 

A curious MS. of this version, copied in the time of 
Henry vi., states that the work was undertaken at the 
request of Dame Margaret Kirkby, a lady recluse, living 
probably at Hampole ; that the autograph MS. by the 
author was attached to a tomb by chains, and that many 
copies, corrupted by the Lollards, were at the time in circu- 
lation. It is amusing to find this note resxiecting one of the 
,MSS. : " Being distm'bed, I forgot to add that tliis book 
evidently appears to have lain long in water. Thus the 
famous Durham Gospels in the Cottonian Library, Nero, 
D, iv., were recovered from the sea. So also the comment 
of Johannes de Lathbury was taken from the bottom of the 
sea, and the works of Mr. Frith found in the belly of a 
great fish."* 

It may be mentioned here that the Hampole hermit, who, 
vdthout any poetical genius, was fond of versifying, composed 
metrical paraphrases of the Lord's Prayer, and of selections 
from the Book of Job ; but another and far more effective 
labom-er in the vineyard was in Eolle's day preparing for 
his work. God was raising up Wychffe to prepare an 

* Harl. Mss., described in Cat. ii. p. 2-14. 



24 Our Efiglish Bible. 

English version of the -whole Bible, to feed the minds of 
those who pined with spiritual hunger. It cannot he said, 
indeed, that no man gave unto them, for we have seen that 
some dihgent and faithful servants did convey refreshment, 
at least a few " crumbs from the Master's table ; " but, at 
the best, it a^'-rs a stinted supply. Gratefully do we trace 
remains of the least contributions of Scriptural knowledge 
among the reHcs of our old English literatiire ; but it is 
painful to think that, after aU, so little was done for the 
instruction of the people in the oracles of God. Happily, 
far different times have come over our country, and now by 
every cottager the Bible may be easily obtained. The night 
of those ages, as far as Scriptural knowledge was concerned, — 
to say nothing of other lands of knowledge, — was illumined 
only by a pale moon, whose rays, darting from amidst thick 
clouds, and lighting up here and there the wide waste, we 
love to watch, and think how some travellers to eternity 
might catch these beams, and, guided by them, pursue the 
path of safety ; but a bright morning long since davraed 
on our fathers, and we, thank God ! are living in the bright- 
ness of the full noon-day. 



- ^' 





jIJhaptef^ II. 

WYCLIFFE AND HIS VERSION. 

''o^^'DEiNG above the pleasant town of Lutter- 
worth, on the banks of the Swift, there 
stands the old Church of St. Mary, an 
interesting specimen of the pointed archi- 
tecture of this country in the thirteenth 
century. What with the decay produced 
by time, and the mutilation occasioned 
by accident, it has lost much of its 
original beauty; but there are associations 
which invest it with a charm which the 
skill of the architect could never impart. 
We look with feelings of pecuhar veneration on that 
time-worn edifice, as we remember that there John Wycliffe 
preached and laboured, and that probably under the shadow 
of those waUs he prosecuted his task of translating the 
Scriptm-es into the English tongue. The carved oak pulpit 
in which he taught, the table on which he wrote, the 
chair in which he died, and the robe, now torn and tattered, 
which he used to wear, are preserved as rehcs which can- 
not fail to operate as quickeners of the imagination. With 




Our' Enolish Bible. 



the aid of tlie XDorfcrait of his venerable form and face now 
hanging on the vestry wall, we can picture that true-hearted 
man, occupying the sacred desk, and proclaiming to his 
parishioners the gospel of Christ, and then retiring to 




JOHN WYCLIFFE S CHAIR. 



resume the study of the Word of God, and to write upon 
that oak table page after page oC his memorable version ! 
In 1372, WycUffe became a theological lecturer at Oxford. 
In April, 1374, he was presented by the Crown to the 



Wy cliff e and his Version. 27 

Lutterworth Eectory, and at tlie same time, it is presumed, 
lie relinquished tlie living of Ludgershall in Buckingham- 
shire. 

The same year he was sent to Bruges as a Commissioner 
with the Bishop of Bangor, to negotiate with a papal 
embassy in that city respecting the reservation of benefices. 
That visit made him better acquainted than before with 
the chicanery and corruption of the Eoman court, and roused 
his indignation against the papal system. At Oxford, where 
he was Warden of Balliol * as early as 1361, he had dis- 
tinguished himself as the inveterate opponent of the 
Mendicant Friars, who, whilst overrunning the university 
and the country, exerted all then- influence to ]Drop up the 
despotism of the Eoman see. In the controversy between 
Edward iii. and the Pope, respecting the papal claim, of 
tribute from England, Wychffe had fearlessly contended 
against the claim as unjust and arrogant. But, on his 
return from Bruges, reviewing what he had there seen and 
heard, he came out as a more decided champion than ever- 
for a reformation of the church. Indeed, so bold was the 
course he pursued, that he was cited to appear at St. Paul's 
to answer certain charges against him, when a scene of 
tumult occurred, quaintly described by Eoxe, which ended 
in the dehverance of WycUffe from his enemies, through the 
interposition of his illustrious friend, John of Gaunt, Duke 
of Lancaster. His enemies, however, would allow the 
reformer no peace, but continued their opposition ; happily 

* The preface to Forshall and Madden's edition of Wycliffe' s Bible, p. vii., note 5, 
says, " Irresistible evidence of the identity of the Warden of Canterbury Hall with 
the reformer is to be found in a passage from Will. Wydforde's Septuaginta duo 
questiones de Sacramento Euchanstice. ' ' But Professor Shirley, in an introduction 
to his edition of WyolifEe's Fasciculi Zizaniorum, questions the force of this 
evidence. 



28 07ir English Bible. 

without effect, the refractory ecclesiastic enjoying for a time 
the special favour and patronage of the Duke. 

All this excitement, whilst it increased his distaste for 
the papal system of government and doctrine, sharpened his 
love for the Holy Scriptures as the standard of rehgious 
principles and ecclesiastical discipline. He wrote a hook 
upon the Truth and Meaning of Scripture, in which he 
maintains that Christ's law is sufficient ; that a Christian 
man, well understanding it, may gather sufficient knowledge 
during his pilgrimage upon earth ; that all truth is contained 
in Scripture ; that we should admit of no conclusion not 
approved there ; that there is no court beside the court of 
heaven ; that though there were a hundred popes, and all 
the friars in the world were turned into cardinals, yet should 
we learn more from the gospel than we should from all that 
multitude ; and that true sons will in no wise go about to 
infringe the will and testament of their heavenly Father. 
His writings subsequent to the year 1378 exhibit abundant 
arguments in support of the sufficiency of Scripture, and in 
defence of vernacular translations. " As the faith of the 
church," he says, "is contained in the Scriptxires, the more 
these are laiown in an orthodox sense, the better. And 
since secular men should assuredly understand the faith, it 
should be taught them in whatever language is best laiown 
to them. Inasmuch also as the doctrines of our faith are 
more clearly and precisely expressed in the Scriptures than 
they may possibly be by priests, seeing, if one may venture 
so to speak, that many prelates are but too ignorant of 
Scripture, and as the verbal instructions of priests have 
many other defects, the conclusion is abundantly plain, that 
believers should ascertain for themselves the matters of their 
faith by having the Scriptures in a language wliich they 



Wycliffe and his Version. 29 

fully understand. According to the constant doctrine of 
Augustine, the Scriptures contain the whole of truth, and 
this translation of them should therefore do at least this 
good, namely, placing bishops and priests above suspicion 
as to the parts of it which they profess to explain. Other 
means also, as prelates, the pope, and friars, may prove 
defective ; and to ]3rovide against this, Christ and His 
apostles evangehzed the greater portion of the world, by 
making known the Scriptures in a language which was 
famihar to the people. To this end, indeed, did the Holy 
Spirit endow them with the knowledge of all tongues. 
Why, therefore, should not the hving disciples of Christ do 
as they did — opening the Scriptures to the people so clearly 
and plainly, that they may verily understand them, since, 
except to the unbehever, disposed to resist the Holy Spirit, 
the things contained in Scripture are no fiction ? "* 

Wycliffe appeared before a synod at Lambeth in 1378. 
when conclusions deduced from his writings were exhibited 
against him, and he returned answers, which he subse- 
quently pubhshed in an enlarged form. He referred to a 
papal prohibition of Scripture reading ; to doctrines which 
he deduced from the written Word as accounted tares, in 
allusion to an expression in one of the bulls, "Tares amidst 
pm'e gram;" and to applications for a papal censure of 
vulgate versions as heretical. Besides this, in a tract he 
afterwards composed in reply to an anonymous author, 
whom he styles Mixtus Theologus, he adverts to the condi- 
tion in which the doctrine of papal infalhbihty places Divine 
revelation, since, he says, the Pope might on that ground 
claim to exclude books from the canon of Scripture, and 
make Holy Writ itself heretical. 

* Vaughan's LiJ'e of Wycliffe. 



Oti,r Enf^lish Bible. 



i> 



" It seems probable that Wycliffe's first attempt at the 
interpretation of Scripture was his commentary on the 
Apocalypse. The fearful pestilence which, between 1345 
and 1349, swept away a large po'rtion of the human race, 
and other calamities, arising as well from the strife of nations 
and parties as from the discord of the natural elements, cast 
a general glopm over society. But perhaps nowhere within 
the realm of England was there a more melancholy spectacle 
than that which, for some years subsequent to the pestilence, 
was presented by the University of Oxford. Dwelling in 
such a spot, a man of sanguine temperament would almost 
of necessity become imbued with the notion, then generally 
prevalent, that things were preparing themselves for their 
great consummation, and that Antichrist's personal appear- 
ance was shortly to be expected. This feeling prompted 
that which is believed to be the earhest production of 
Wycliffe's pen. The Last Age of the Church. It was 
written in 1356." 

"It is a remarkable circumstance that about the time 
when Wycliffe must have been employed upon the commen- 
taries just mentioned, another, upon the Gospels, should have 
appeared, compiled upon a like principle. The name of the 
author has not been discovered, but the preface imphes that 
he knew of no previous exposition of the Gospels in Enghsh; 
and the language accords with the northern dialect in the 
middle of the fourteenth century." 

The commentary extends to Matthew, Mark, and Luke. 
The following is a characteristic extract : " Prechours thei 
calle hom self, and sey that thei be sent, bot contrary tho 
thinges to tho Apostels thei telle : thei magnyfie martirs, 
and bene pursuars of martirs. The apostels and martirs of 
Crist made no pursuynge, bot sufferd ; thei km^sed none, bot 



Wycliffe and his Version. 31 

sufferd cursynges and wariynges. Bot fals prophetes 
pursue men, and vndo cristen men, and blasfemen God, 
thof not in word, thei do in hor manere " (Matt. ix. 38.)* 

In the Harleian Mss. in the British Museum f5085) is 
one entitled Mirror of Sermons for the Year. It would 
appear to be the same work as that described by ForshaU 
and Madden. The Homilies abound in legendary tales, which 
are notified in the margin. The following is a rendering of 
the first few verses of the second chapter of Matthew: 
" Yan whan He was borne in bethleem of Jude, in ye dais 
of Herod Mnge : Se ye maistres come from ye est to Jeru- 
salem, and saiden. Where is he yat is born ye kinge of Jues, 
For whi we sen his sterre in ye est and we con to anoure 
him : And Herod ye Idnge whan he herd yis is gretehche 
troubled, and al ierlm wiy hi. And he gadred alle princes of 
prestes and maisters of ye folk, and asked of hem where yt 
crist was borne : And hy saide to liim In bethleem of Jude : 
For so is it writen yom ye prophete. And you bethleem 
lond of jude you nart noust lest in ye princes of Jude : For 
of ye schal com out aduk yat gouerney mi puple of isrl." 

The dates of commencing and of concluding the work 
which has made John Wychffe so famous in history cannot 
be determined with any precision. He accomphshed his 
task by degrees. He began with a translation of the 
Apocalypse ; next aj^peared the Gospels in English, with a 
commentary ; then followed the other books of the New 
Testament, which was believed to have been finished about 
ISBO.t A version of the Old Testament, as weU. as the New, 

* Forshall and Madden, preface to Wycliffe's Bible, ^. x. Three MSS. are men- 
tioned ! — Matthew, in Univ. Libr., Camb., li, 2. 12 j and Brit. Mna. Egerton, 842 ; 
Mark and Luke in Corp. Cliristi Camh., Nasmith xixii. Thia last MS. I shall notice 
on p. 47. 

f Westoott'a History of the English Bihle. Eadie considers it may have been 



Our Enpiish Bible. 



'<i 



appeared entire uot long afterwards, on wliicli he appears to 
have employed himself, and which is supposed to have been 
completed by him before 1384, when he peaceably died of 
paralysis at the Lutterworth Eectory, exempt from "the 
horrible judgment " which his enemies predicted would 
befall liim. "Admirable," says Fuller, "that a hare so often 
hunted with so many packs of dogs should die at last quietly 
sitting on his form." In the next century, however, he was 
not allowed to continue in his grave, for the Council of 
Constance ordered him to be disinterred and burnt, and 
his ashes to be thrown into the river Swift. " Thus this 
brook hath conveyed his ashes into Avon, Avon into Severn, 
Severn into the narrow seas, they into the main ocean. 
And thus the ashes of "WycLLffe are the emblems of his 
doctrine, which now is dispersed all the world over."* 

One loves to picture this remarkable man pursuing his 
BibHcal toils, now at his Lutterworth Eectory, then in his 
college at Oxford, worldng in the winter nights by his lamp, 
and early in the summer's morn as the sun beamed through 
his window. We see him with his long grey beard, some- 
tiraes alone, bending over the parchment inanuscript, care- 
fully writing down some well-laboured rendering ; and 
sometimes in company with others who sympathized in his 
sentiments, and loved to aid him in his hallowed enterprise. 
There was one who took a part with him at first, w]:o 
afterwards forsook the cause to which Wycliffe devoted his 
life. The name of Nicolas de Hereford appears as his 



finished by 1381. (Vol. i. p. 6.) Dr. Vauglian wrote to me in a letter, many yesirs 
ago, saying, " My impression was, and still is, that Wycliffe meditated his transla- 
tion in 1378, and that he probably commenced it at that time." 

* Fuller's Church Hintonj of Great Britain, ii. 457, 493. Ed. 1837. 



Wycliffe and his Version. . 33 

coadjutor ill a ms. of the Old Testament translation preserved 
in the Bodleian Library. This man for a while took part 
with the English reformers before the Eeformation; and 
on account of these circumstances he was suspected of 
heresy and thrown into prison. The displeasure of his 
ecclesiastical superiors induced Nicholas to recant ; and the 
abrupt close of the translation of the Old Testament in the 
middle of the Book of Baruch, as appears from his ms. in 
the Bodleian, is thought to have been occasioned by his 
departure from England for a time, just after he had been 
excommunicated for heresy. The work, however, was carried 
on by some one else, — ^Wycliffe himself is beheved to 
have been the person, thus completing what had been his 
own project, in the execution of which he had been assisted 
by another. Unfortunately for the fame of Nicholas de 
Hereford, he subsequently comes before us in history as 
persecutor of the very persons who held opinions similar to 
his ovyn at an earher period. He sat in commission in the 
Cathedral of Hereford, accompanied " with many other 
prelates, and worshipful men, and wise graduates in sundry 
faculties,"* to try and condemn some who had departed 
from Roman Cathohc doctrines and practices. 

In spite of efforts made to deprive Wycliffe of the honour 
of being the first Bnghsh translator of the Bible, his claims 
are now ia that respect generally acknowledged. Antiqua- 
rian investigation has fully refuted all rival claims. Sir 
Thomas More, when opposing Tyndale, to serve a purpose, 
maiutained that the " hole Bible was long before [Wycliffe's] 
days, by virtuous and weU-learned men translated iato the 
English tongue ; " but, strangely enough. Sir Thomas at 
the same time admitted that it would be a dangerous 

* Foxe, iii. 187. 
D 



34 Our English Bible. 

thing for a printer to publish a Bible, "and then hang 
upon a doubtful trial whether the first copy of his trans- 
lation was made before Wychffe's days or since."* Others 
have spoken of Bibles antecedent to Wycliffe's, but it has 
been satisfactorily shown that the versions to which they 
refer were made after Wycliffe's death. All the attempts 
to wrest from the rector of Lutterworth the honourable 
distinction of being the earliest translator or editor of a 
complete English collection of sacred writings have proved 
futile ; and to him, therefore, are due the admiration and 
gratitude of his country for the achievement of an enter- 
prise as unprecedented as it was important and beneficial. 
He opened the gates of revelation to all his countrymen. 
He wrote for the people. He intended his work not for 
the hbrary of the church and convent, not for a shelf in 
the priest's study, but for the table of every man who 
had ability to read. He pubhshed his translation, sent it 
abroad throughout the land, encouraged persons to tran- 
scribe it, and urged men to read in their own tongue the 
vronderful message from God. Nor would he guard by 
gloss or comment the pure truth of heaven, as almost 
all his predecessors had done, but he left the oracle to 
speak for itself, thus virtually asserting the right of 
private judgment. This is a peculiarity of the utmost 
importance. The Church authorities of the age were 
exceedingly jealous of any appeal to the right of private 
judgment. All religious instruction was to be conveyed 
by the priesthood, or to be under their control; and 
Holy Scripture was to be accompanied by ecclesiastical 
interpretations. Wycliffe was perhaps the first to break 
through these trammels, and to trust the Word of God 

* More's Dialogue, iii. o. IG. 



Wycliffe and his Version. 35 

to its own intrinsic power and efficacy, and to the 
operation of the Holy Spirit in connection with it. 
That this act was a novelty, that it gave a shock to 
ecclesiastical prejudices, is apparent from the pages of the 
historian Knighton, Wycliffe's contemporary, who mournfully 
deplores that the gospel pearl was thus scattered abroad and 
cast before swine. It may seem, in the present day, no 
mighty thing to make such a translation, and attempt its 
general circulation ; but those who are disposed on that 
ground to lessen the fair fame of our first great translator, 
should remember how well the detractors of Columbus, the 
first to sail on an untried ocean, were rebuked in the famihar 
story of the broken egg. In such an age as that in which 
"Wycliffe lived, to translate the whole Bible for popular 
use, to conceive the plan, and to execute the project, implied 
the possession of quahties of mind and heart such as belong 
only to the truly noble of our race. Wycliffe was the con- 
temporary of some whose brilUant genius streaked the early 
morn of our revived literature, and whose rich poetic splen- 
dour far eclipses any literary honours which adorn his name ; 
but we must be allowed to pronounce Wycliffe, on the whole, 
a greater character than our British Chaucer or the Italian 
Petrarch. The moral com'age of the reformer was beyond 
aU praise. There were others in his day, and before his time, 
who saw the corruptions of the Church, and assailed them, 
in a timid spirit and a covert form : they wrote in a double 
sense, concealing their more important meanings under the 
veil of allegory, "the trembHng muse, for its own safety, 
induced by fear to disguise itself in sacred vestments ; " but 
Wycliffe — ^bold, sincere, and earnest — brooked no trammels 
and feared no opposition, while with one hand he opened the 
Book of revelation before all the people, and with the other 



36 



Otir English Bible. 



hand laid bare, in the face of the world, and to the appre- 
hension of the humblest, the corruptions of the Church of 
Eome. 

It is a remarkable fact that though Wycliffe's version has 




*^% m^^A^tMi 



PORTION OP wyolhte's bible. 



been talked of and written about for centuries, it was never 
satisfactorily identified until lately, and consequently could 
not be judged of according to its intrinsic merits. It is now 
established as a fact that the version of the New Testament 



Wycliffe ana his Version. 37 

printed as Wycliffe's in the edition by Baber, and again 
printed in a revised form by Bagsterin the English Hexapla, 
is not the version executed by the reformer, but one prepared 
on his model by some who became his followers. The true 
text of WycHffe never appeared in print until ForshaU and 
Madden, after the toil of twenty-two years, brought it out in 
1850 — although the errors of earher editors had been detected 
byLeaWHson, who in 1848 published the New Testament 
from a genuine Wychffe MS. In Forshall and Madden's edi- 
tion every one may see what the reformer effected, and form 
an estimate of it for himself. The following are extracts : 

" Therfore when Jhesus was born in. Bethlem of Juda, 
in the days of kyng Herode, loo ! kyngis, or wijs men, camen 
fro the eest to Jerusalem, sayinge, Wher is he, that is borun 
kyng of Jewis ? forsothe we han seyn his sterre in the este, 
and we comen for to vdrshipe hym. Sothely kyng Herode 
herynge is trubhd, and al Jerusalem vsdth him. And he, 
gedrynge to gidre alle the princis of prestis and scribis of 
the peple, enquiride of hem wher Crist shulde be borun" 
(Matt. ii. 1-4). 

" Poul, seruaunt of Jhesu Crist, clepid apostle, departed 
into the evangelie of God ; the which he behi5t brfore by his 
prophetis in hooly scripturis of his sone, the which is maad 
to him of the seed of Dauith after the fleisch, the which is pre- 
destynat, or hifore ordeyned hi grace,th.e sone of God in virtu 
after the spirit of halewyng of the aSeyn rysynge of deed 
men, of Jhesus Crist oure Lord, by whom we han resseyuad 
grace and apostilhed, or stat of apostle, to obeische to the 
feith in alle folkis for his name, in which, and 3e ben clepid 
of Jhesu Crist, to alle that ben at Eome, the louede of God, 
clepid hooly, grace to Sou, and pees of God our fadir, and of 
the Lord Jhesu Crist " (Eom. i. 1-7). 



38 Our English Bible. 

Probably Wycliffe knew nothing or next to nothing of 
Greek : a few words in that language sprinlded over his 
writings afford no proof of much acquaintance with it. 
Certainly he did not make his translation of the New Tes- 
tament from the original, but from the Latin Vulgate, as he 
did his version of the Old Testament. In his Hteral render- 
ings he was anxious, no doubt, to avoid giving a handle to 
his adversaries for charging bim with perverting the Scrip- 
tures ; and in the use of plain and racy Anglo-Saxon he 
sought to instruct and interest the common people — thus, 
in both respects, proceeding on Hampole's principle of seek- 
ing " no strange Enghsh, but easiest and commonest, and 
such as is most like the Latin." Whether he derived any 
assistance from previous translations we are unable to say ; 
yet it appears very probable that he would seek out such 
fragmentary versions in existence as he could : certainly it 
was, at the best, only in certain portions of the Word of 
God that he could get help from his predecessors ; for, as 
already shown, till he undertook the task no one appears 
to have execiited anjrfching Hke a complete version. 

" One is surprised to see how, when Wycliffe's work is 
modernized in spelling, it so closely resembles subsequent 
translations in the general aspect of the version, in the flow 
and position of the words, in the distinctive terms and con- 
necting particles, in the rhythm of its clauses, and the mould 
of its sentences. Several of its phrases must have passed 
early into the language, especially those which from their 
currency had acquired a kind of proverbial power, such as 
'strait gate' and 'narrow way,' 'beam' and 'mote,' 
and being adopted by Tyndale, they have kept their place 
unto this present.' . . . Wychffe is easily read, though 
not a few of his words are obsolete. His theological nomen- 



Wy cliff e and his Version. 39 

clature, part of which he had learned fi-om Bradwardine, 
has not been changed to any great extent, and many 
of the terms explained in the margin of the MSS., as if 
needing explanation, are now part of the language, while the 
explanatory terms have themselves disappeared." * 

The effect of Wychffe's labom:s was immense. His 
translation was studied ; poor priests — as the preachers of 
his doctrines came to be called — went through the land 
diffusing the knowledge they had acquired by the study 
of that translation. They became popular, and in some 
quarters rivalled in influence the Mendicant order. " Men 
came to mock them, but went away struck to the heart, 
overawed, humbled, and converted. At the same time 
that they arrested the attention and commanded the 
passions of the vulgar, they challenged the most refined to 
the contest; and it seems to be generally admitted that 
no one was found able to cope with them in the field of 
argumentation. Though the multitude are not qualified 
to be direct judges of the higher powers of intellect, and 
though they are often made- the dupes of loquacious 
eflxontery, yet there is something in true genius and 
sterling merit which, when skilfully employed for that 
purpose, vtlU produce a more powerful and extraordinary 
effect than ignorant assurance can ever reach. "t The 
character of the times was also in favour of the success of 
Wycliffe's labours, for the fourteenth century was an age of 
revival in freedom, commerce, literature, and civib'zation. 
Men were waking up after the slumber of centuries, they 
were stimidated to thought and inquiry, and thus were 
prepared to listen to instruction on the most interesting of 

* Eadie's English Bible, i. 72, 73. 
t Godwin's Life of Chaucer, ii. 378. 



40 Oiw English Bible 



'£>' 



all subjects — religion. The corruptions of the Church, too 
which were exposed in so many quarters by poetry and 
satire, had produced a revulsion of feeling in the breasts of 
multitudes, and, sickened at heart with a system paljjably 
false, they turned to look for what was really true. Above 
all, there was doubtless the concurrent power of God — the 
disposal of His Providence, and the effusion of His grace — to 
aid the labours of Wychffe and his followers. 

That we have not overstated the effect of the toils of our 
reformer and translator may be proved by an appeal to the 
pages of his bitter enemy, Knighton. He compares the pro- 
gress of LoUardism to the shooting forth of saphngs from 
the root of a tree, and informs us that it filled the land vnth 
its fruit, and he goes so far as to aver that, if you met two 
men on the road, one was sure to be a WycHffite.* If it 
be conceded, as probably it ought, that many who bore 
Wychffe's name only partially adopted his doctrines, yet it 
must be admitted, on Knighton's testimony, that a very- 
large multitude of persons were thoroughly imbued with the 
spirit of the reformer's teaching. The number of manu- 
scripts still extant containing a vernacular version, which 
must have been written by his followers, substantiate the 
same fact. These manuscripts may justly be regarded at 
once as the proof and the means of Wycliffe's success. A 
cause which depended mainly on the circulation of the Holy 
Scriptures for its extension can leave httle doubt on one's 
mind as to whence it came, and with whose honour it ought 
to be identified. Wycliffe's character and distinctive work 
was evidently of God, and it was not in the power of man to 
overthrow it. No one ever was more mahgned; but, as in 
many other cases, time has reversed the judgment of the past, 
* Knighton de Eventibus, 2663. 



Wycliffe and his Version. 41 

and vindicated from aspersion the cHaracter of one among the 
greatest of the world's benefactors. The favourite title of 
" the morning star of the Eeformation " points to the prepa- 
ratory influences exerted by him in relation to the great 
change of the sixteenth century ; and that influence no doubt 
includes the vrhole effect of his career as a pohtician, a theo- 
. logian, and a translator. The most distinguished Churchmen 
of the Middle Ages took a leading part in State affairs ; and 
it must not be forgotten that "Wycliffe went to Bruges in 
the capacity of a Eoyal Commissioner, to negotiate business 
connected with the reservation of benefices. Opposed to the 
pohcy of the papal court, he promoted the policy of liberal 
Enghsh statesmen of the fourteenth century, who aimed at 
maintaining, as far as possible, the independence of their 
country. He held decided opinions on many social questions, 
which he boldly expressed. His religious convictions were 
very profound, and differed from those of many around him. 
AVhat exactly were his views on several important questions, 
in which he felt a deep interest, has not been ascertained. 
Though many new hghts are kindled round his biography, 
we should be glad to discover additional documents, such as 
might clear up remaining difficulties. Only by a careful study 
of his works can we acquire such knowledge as is within 
our reach ; but to see what he was all round, we need to 
recover some of his works, which, for the present, continue 
in obhvion. That he was perfectly wise and consistent in 
his teaching is more than can be imagined. Eash propo- 
sitions, no doubt, he maintained ; but perhaps, if we knew 
all he wrote, some perplexities relating to him might be 
cleared up. At all events, his moral character cannot be 
impugned ; nor can the evangehcal cast of his sentiments be 
denied ; neither are his spirituaUty of mind and devoutness 



42 



Otir English Bible. 



of life open to question. What lie was in ttese respects is 
found worthy of one who undertook to open the Word of 
God before the eyes of all the people. And by his work of 
translation, beyond all other kinds of influence exerted by 
him, was the cause of reformed Christianity advanced in 
his native land. In that point of view there is nothing 
to mar the beauty of his career and the efficiency of his 
labours. Whatever he might be as a politician, a divine, 
and a social instructor, his labours on an English version 
of the Scriptures entitle him to the eulogium pronounced 
on Simon, the son of Onias : "Even as the morning star 
being in the midst of a cloud, and as the moon being full 
in her course, and as the bright beams of the sun, so doth 
he shine and glisten in the temple and church of God." 







i.uttee'wohth church. 









t^^Pg 


W®1 


f^& 




/jM 1 f/fflraSvisi^^ 






sJRj^i^^^ 


I^M 




■^^^^»^^ 




^^^^^ 




^a 


|«$jij^^'<S 



jUHAPTf:^ 111. 



TRANSLATORS AFTER "WYCLIFFE, AND 
EARLY PRINTED VERSIONS. 

44?U^^$1b^ HAT there were two English versions of 
Scripture towards the end of the four- 
teenth century was long ago surmised, but 
only of late has the fact been clearly esta- 
bhshed and satisfactorily explained. Much 
confusion remained, even after the point 
of a double translation had been set at 
rest, since, for want of a careful coUation 
of Mss., and the employment of sufficient 
critical skQl upon the whole inquiry, it 
continued doubtful which of the two ascer- 
tained versions belonged to WycHffe. As previously stated, 
editors made serious though excusable mistakes, printing, as 
did Baber and Offor, the second version instead of the first, 
under the reformer's name. The labours of Forshall and 
Madden have done much to disentangle the confused skein. 
They examined about one hundred and seventy mss. and 
classified them, so as to obtain a distinctive text, which is 
entitled to the claim of priority. That is of right assigned 




44 Our English Bible. 

to Wycliffe, on grounds whicli appear in the preface to the 
valuable edition of 1850. Out of one hundred and seventy 
Mss., fifteen of the Old Testament and eighteen of the New 
belong to that version — ^the rest exhibit another of later date. 
Not one-fifth of these are earher than the year 1408 ; the 
greater part seem to belong to about the second quarter of 
the century. 

The second version appears to have been the VT'ork of John 
Purvey or Purnay, a zealous disciple of "Wycliffe, v7ho hved 
with his master and continued in his house to the day of his 
death. He was born near Olney, in^Bucldnghamshire, and 
after Wychffe's decease he removed to Bristol, where through 
his zealous preaching he fell into trouble. Being appre- 
hended, and also alarmed by the fate of the martyr Sautre, 
burnt for heresy, he retracted his opinions at St. Paul's 
Cross in the year 1400. After this Archbishop Chichele 
received the recanter, and gave him the vicarage of Hj''the. 
Again he was accused of heresy, and again cast into prison, 
where, it is supposed, he ended liis days. In a prologue to 
this version reference is made to " the Enghsh Bible late 
translated," by which Wycliffe's version is no doubt in- 
tended ; and the author says that, in executing his labour's, 
he had much travail with " divers fellows and helpers." As 
Purvey had been, for some time before Wychffe's death, his 
companion and fellow-labourer, I think it probable that he 
had taken some part in the first version ; but this second 
work, or rather revision, for it does not amount to more, 
was most hkely executed mainly by himself. He says, " At 
the beginning I purposed, with God's help, to make the 
sentences as true and open in Enghsh as it is in Latin, 
either more true and more open than it is in Latin ; and I 
pray for charity and for common profit of Christian souls, 



Translators after Wy cliff e. 45 

that if any -wise man find any default of the truth of trans- 
lation, let him set in the true sentence and open of holy 
writ . . . for . . . the common Latin Bibles have 
some need to be corrected, as many as I have seen in my 
life, than hath the Enghsh Bible late translated." * And, to 
show that Purvey did not lack an appreciation of moral as 
well as critical qualifications for such a task, another pas- 
sage may be quoted from the same prologue : " He hath 
need to Kve a clean Hfe, and be full devout in prayers, and 
have not his wit occupied about worldly things, that the 
Holy Spirit, author of wisdom and knowledge and truth, 
dress him in his work, and su£fe;t: him not to err." " By 
this manner, with good living and great travail, men may 
come to true and clear translating and true understanding 
of Holy Writ, seem it never so hard at the beginniag. God 
grant to us grace to ken well and keep well Holy Writ, 
and suffer joyfully some pain for it at the last." 

The word " Bihle " is used by Purvey to denote the Holy 
Scriptures. He speaks of " a simple creature who hath 
translated the Bible out of Latia in Enghsh." Again, as 
we have seen, he refers to " the Bible late translated." The 
Saxons had employed the word " ge-writ," but not the word 
Bible, as a designation of inspired writings. " Bible " is 
derived from the Greek Biblion ; and Greek Fathers have 
recourse to the plural Biblia as a designation of Holy Writ. 
BihUa was employed by the Latins ; and at length the 
neuter plural ghded into a feminine singular ; the French 
spoke of La Bible, and the Itahans of La Bibbia. Through 
French, the appellation found its way into England. 
Chaucer has it in his House of Fame, to describe any 

* The prologue was printed in 1536, nnder the title of The Door of Soly Scrip- 
ture, and in 1550 as The Pathway to Perfect Knowledge. 



46 Our English Bible. 

book. "Men might make of them a bible twenty foot 
thick." And he tells us, in the prologue to the Ganter- 
hury Tales, that the study of this doctor of physic "was 
but little on the bible."* As title-pages were unlcnown in 
those days, neither the title of " Bible " nor any other title 
was prefixed to the new translation. 

The following extracts from Purvey's version, as printed 
by Forshall and Madden, are given, that the reader may 
compare them with the corresponding passages taken from 
WycHffe : t 

" Therfor whanne Jhesus was borunin Bethleem of Juda, 
in the dales of King Eroude, lo ! astromyenes camen fro the 
eest to Jerusalem, and seiden. Where is he, that is borun 
King of Jewis ? for we han seyn his sterre in the eest, and 
we comen to worschipe him. But king Eroude herde, and 
was trublid, and al Jerusalen with hym. And he gaderide 
to gidre alle the prynces of prestis, and scribis of the puple, 
and enqueride of hem, where Crist shulde be borun" 
(Matt. ii. 1-4). 

" Poul, the seruaunt of Jhesu Crist, clepid an apostle, 
departid in to the Gospel of Grod ; which he hadde bihote 
tofore bi his profetis in holi scripturis of his sone, wliich is 
maad to hym of the seed of Dauid bi the flesch, and he was 
bifor ordeyned the sone of God in vertu, bi the spirit of 
halewyng of the a3en-risyng of deed men, of Jhesu Crist 
oure Lord, bi whom we han resseyued grace and the office 
of apostle, to obeie to the feith in alle follds for his name, 
among whiche 3e ben also clepid of Jhesu Crist, to alle that 
ben at Eome, derlyngis of God, and clepid hooli, grace to 
Sou, and pees of God oure fadir, and of the Lord Jhesu Crist" 
(Eom. i. 1-7.) 

* Chaucer's Worhs, 477, 5. f Soe page 37 



Translators after Wycliffe. 47 

There is a ms. version marked " Nasmith xxxii." con- 
tainiug a version of Mark and Luke, with comments, also 
the epistles of Paul, preserved in Corpus Christi (or 
Bennet) College 'Library. It is described in the catalogue 
as written in the fifteenth century; but Lewis thought it 
belonged to an earher period. Influenced by him, I once 
thought so too, and that after a personal inspection of the 
MS. ; but now I am incHned to regard it as of later date. 
It has been remarked that the comments contain no 
reflections on the Friars, a circumstance which contributed 
to raise a suspicion that the comments were written 
before Wycliffe's time ; but I think it is more probable that 
this work belongs to the fifteenth century, and represents a 
version used by a circle distinct from that of Wycliffe and 
his followers. Lewis remarks, the work seems "not to 
have been pubhshed, but made only for the translator's own 
use "* — a supposition which, if correct, would strengthen 
my inference. 

The following is copied from the first of Mark : — 
" The bigynnynge of the gospel of ihum crist god son, as it 
was wryten in ysaye the gphete, lo y sende myn aungelbyfore 
thi face, the whylke shal redye thi way byfore the. The 
voyce of the kryande in the deserte, redis the way of god ; 
ry3te make See the stretys of hym. Ihon was in the deserte 
baptysande & prechande the baptyme of penaunce in remys- 
syoun of synnes. Ande aUe the men of ierusalem wente 
forth to hym & aUe the kofitre of the iewry & were 
baptysede of hym in thee flode of lordane schryifande 
theire synnes. Ande Ihone was kladde with heris of 

* Lewis, History of Translations, 16. Forshall and Madden (see p. 31 of this 
work)' refer to the MS. so marked, as containing St. Matthew. This is a mistake ; 
the MS. seems to present a version different from the one which they describe. 



4S Otir English Bible. 

cameyls & a gerdil of a skyne aboute his lendis ; & lie 
ete honysokyls, & honye of the wood : & he prechyde 
seyande a stalworthar thanne I shal come eftir me, of 
whom I am not worthi downfallande, or knelande to louse 
the thonge of his chawceres." 

Th6 gloss on the two Gospels is copious, and sometimes 
is marked by a strong spiritualizing strain. " The thong of 
Christ's shoe" resembles the Incarnation ; " how that 
goddis sone was maad flessche, the whylke Ihon seith he is 
not worthi to louse, that is, to make inuestygacoun of." As 
to John's eating honey, it is remarked, "that his prechynge 
was so swete that menn, supposyde that he was crist ; hot 
sone this opynyoun fel awey, for he toldeopynly that he 
was not cryst, but the byfore goar of crist." 

From what has been said about the number of mss. 
collected for the edition of Wycliffe by Forshall and 
Madden, it follows that the second version must have had a 
large circulation ; most hkely a much larger one than the 
first, though it is difficult to come to a conclusion in this 
respect, as we cannot tell how many copies of both kinds 
have been destroyed. It is interesting to learn something 
of the possessors of these MSS. ; and we are informed that 
one belonged to Humphrey, the good Duke of Gloucester ; 
another to Henry vi., who gave it to the Charterhouse ; 
another, apparently, to Bichard iii. ; another to Henry 
VII., and another, perhaps, to Edward vi. ; another was 
given to Queen Elizabeth as a birthday present.* This 
statement only shows what value must have been attached 
to copies of the version, as literary curiosities. They came 
to be royal treasures — princely gifts. The first tlxree sove- 
reigns enumerated had no sympathy with the men who pre- 

* Westeott'g English Bible, 24. 



Translators after Wycliffe, 49 

pared and cixculated such publications, no sympathy with 
them in the cause they espoused and promoted; and therefore 
the possession of these books affords no proof of the owners' 
Wychf&te tendencies. However, the number altogether 
which has survived the storms of persecution, the law enacted 
against Bible circulation, presently to be noticed, and the 
testimony borne by Knighton to the spread of Wychf&te 
opinions, are sufficient to prove the rehgious value set upon 
these treasures in many quarters, and how widely the Word 
of God must have been disseminated from love to its 
sacred contents. With the effects of Bible circulation at that 
time the history of Lollardism is closely connected, and 
some notice of that vigorous movement is requisite in the 
present stage of our narrative. 

The name of LoUard is probably derived from the German 
lollen, or lullen, whence our Enghsh word lull, in allusion to 
the low murmuring of the human voice ; and it seems to 
have been applied originally to those rehgious people who 
were addicted to singing psalms. But, whatever its origin, 
it received an apphcation much wider than the etymology 
would imply. " I smell a Lollard," says roine host, in the 
Canterbury Tales, simply because, when he had uttered an 
oath, one of the merry party gravely said, " Benedicite ! what 
ails the man, so sinfully to swear ? " whence we may infer 
that anybody who seemed more than ordinarily rehgious 
incurred the reproach, or rather the honour, of LoUardism, 
however it might be esteemed. Certainly those who were 
tinctured with Wychffe's principles came to be chief bearers 
of the title, and they consisted of persons entertaining 
different shades of opinion. In looking over documents 
relating to these men, we find that disbelief in the papal 
doctrine of transubstantiation, in the efficacy of sacraments 

E 



50 Our English Bible. 

■when administered by immoral priests, in the virtue of 
pilgrimages and prayers to saiiits, was a common charge 
against people of this class. Some of them declared that the 
Pope was Antichrist, and, in connection with this view, 
speculated upon unfulfilled prophecy. The matter of tithes 
was a question with many, and it was contended that such 
contributions were to be freely offered, and not forcibly 
exacted — that wicked priests had no right to them. Lan- 
guage, also, was sometimes used with regard to property, 
which, though it might be guarded by after explanations, 
had a wild, Pifth Monarchy look. There is, no doubt, a 
spiritual sense in which, as Dr. Arnold says, " the good 
things of the world are stolen by many ; but they belong, by 
God's gift, to those only who are Christ's ; " and Wychffe 
himseh, in what he said on that subject, might mean no 
more ; but language used in one sense is sometimes caught 
up and employed in another, so as to ^cover designs not 
originally dreamt of. It is always the fate of popular move- 
ments that the foolish and the bad get hold of the skirts of 
the "wise and the good ; that, hke the camp followers of an 
army, aU manner of vagrants attach themselves to soldiers 
of truth and godliness. 

LoUardism is represented by some writers as if it 
were exclusively a rehgious movement, and by others as 
mainly a pohtical one, in which rehgion was employed 
for other ends. Neither of these extreme opinions can 
be supported by facts. That pohtics were mixed up with 
some phases and circumstances of LoUardism there can 
be no doubt. "What is related in history respecting John 
of Northampton, a Lord Mayor of London, and John of 
Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, is sufficient to show that these 
political reformers sought to avail themselves of contem- 



Translators after Wycliffe. 51 

porary religious excitements for the promotion of their 
objects. Theories of political economy ,'which became mixed 
up with theological opinions, point in the same direction ; and 
what is thus estabhshed by particular facts is in accordance 
with the natural tendency of the circumstances in which 
the Lollards and their opponents were placed. So bound 
together were the affairs of Church and State, so comph- 
cated were the political entanglements with rehgious ques- 
tions, that no attempt could be made at reforming the Church 
without its assuming a pohtical character. Heresy and 
schism had become so identified with treason and rebellion 
in the minds of Churchmen, that they treated dissentients 
from the established faith and order as troublers of the 
pubhc peace and disaffected subjects of government. Some 
reformers were forced, by their circumstances, into a pohti- 
cal position which they did not desire; and people into 
whose heads no political thoughts entered appeared to be 
undermining the constitution. On the other hand, it does 
not appear, from the facts of the case, that LoUardism was 
mainly a pohtical outbreak, that it aimed at a civil and social 
revolution under rehgious pretensions. The genuine rehgious 
element seems to have been primary and chief, the political 
secondary and subordinate. 

Sir John Oldcastle, Lord Cobham, has often been cited 
as an example of the political character of LoUardism. His 
conduct wore a pohtical aspect ; to effect such changes as he 
contemplated would require a pohtical revolution ; but of his 
piety, and of what we may call his Protestantism, there can 
be no doubt ; and to represent him as a traitor, a rebel, and the 
leader of an insurrection, is most unjust, because unsupported 
by ascertained facts. A story no doubt was told to Henry iv. 
about a Lollard plot ; that heretics were assembhng in 



52 Our English Bible. 

St. Grile's to act under Oldcastle ; that they meant to burn 
Westminster Abbey and other ecclesiastical buildings ; and 
that her Majesty went to the spot at night, and found 
these people, who said they were looking for the LoUard 
noble. But whether the story told the Idng was true be- 
comes another question. Any connection between Cobham 
and the plot, if there was one at all, is by no means 
plain. 

The pohtical element, so far as it did exist, and the 
rehgious principles which certainly influenced numbers of 
the Lollards, must be distinguished from each other. The 
former would arise from several causes, one of which has 
been just assigned ; but the latter must be ascribed to 
something of a different order. Here the distinctive 
spiritual teaching of Wychffe and his associates must be 
recognised, and with it — to a still larger extent of operation — 
the translating of Holy Writ and the reading of it by men 
and women of every class. The population was divided, in 
the language of the day, into priesthood, knighthood, and 
labourers ; and we have evidence that all ranks were imbued 
vsdth sentiments of rehgious Lollardism. In convents, 
monasteries, cathedrals, and churches, there was abundance 
of Lollard talk. Sisters of the veil, brothers of the cowl, 
showed sympathy v?ith Wycliffe and his poor priests, and 
were suspected, if not denounced. In castles . and baronial 
halls, on the battlements of towers and vsdthin oriel windows, 
and across pleasant gardens, there were whisperings of the 
Lollard faith, rebukes for Lollard piety, and readings of 
Lollard books dearer than gold and silver. In city houses, 
in the merchant's stone mansion,in the tradesman's huckster- 
hke shed or humble back-rooms, in the yeoman's cottage 
and the peasant's hut, Lollard truths were discussed. 



Translators after W y cliff e. 53 

Lollard teacters harboured, and Lollard hymns lowly sung 
in the ear of God. 

But though Lollardism was poxjular, it was perilous. 
"Brother," said one who had been touched by the new spirit 
of the age — "brother, I know well that I am holden by 
Christ's law to perform thy asking, but nevertheless we are 
now so fallen away from Christ's law, that if I would 
answer to thy askings, I must in case imdergo the death ; 
and thou wottest well that a man is beholden to keep his 
hfe as long as he may."* 

It is reported that as early as the year 1390 an attempt 
was made to suppress Wycliffe's translations by Act of 
Parliament, but that John of Gaunt, Wychffe's old friend, 
resisted the bill, declaring, " We will not be the dregs of all, 
seeing other nations have the law of God, which is the law 
of our faith, written in their own language."! Be this, 
however, as it may, a convocation at Oxford, in the year 
1408, enacted a law, commonly called Arundel's Con- 
stitution — from the part taken in the measure by the 
archbishop of that name — by which all unauthorized 
persons were forbidden to translate any part of the Scripture 
into English, and every one was warned, under pain of 
excommunication, against reading any version or treatise, 
made either in Wycliffe's time or since, except it should be 
approved by the diocesan or a provincial councU. 

Before this no law existed prohibiting the use of 
vernacular versions ; in fact, they had been countenanced 
and encouraged by Church authorities ; but now the Lollard 
movement had awakened susj)icion and excited fear — indeed, 
had aroused the utmost terror. The pohtical comphcations 

* Porshall and Madden's TTi/cKjfe BiiftZe, p. xv., note, 
t Lewis's History of Translations, 28. 



54 Our English Bible. 

of LoUardism went a long way towards producing this 
result. Doctrines about voluntary tithes and property 
founded in grace, and the invalid offices of immoral priests, 
alarmed the priesthood and the landowners. Movements 
in the direction of constitutional and social reforms added 
to the excitement, and all of this kind which went on came 
to be attributed by indiscrimmating people to the circulation 
of vernacular Bibles and Testaments. Moreover, it should 
be remembered that such circulation was a direct appeal to 
individual consciences, involving a concession of the right of 
private judgment ; people were to read and judge for them- 
selves ; an idea in oiir day extolled on all sides, and exalted 
to the sides, but then looked on as the mother of all 
heresy, the fountain of rebellion, anarchy, and mischief. 
The Constitution of Arundel is a thing tmrighteous enough, 
but, regarded in the hght of that age, it is no marvel. 

At any rate, here was a weapon put into the hands of the 
enemies of LoUardism, which they might wield at pleasure 
against any one found possessing one of theWychffe Bibles. 
The ecclesiastical courts were soon occupied with cases of 
this description ; and from the register of Alnwick, Bishop 
of Norwich, we learn that in 1429, Eichard Fletcher, of 
Beccles, had to appear before his lordship, on the charge of 
having a book of the new law in English. Nicholas Belward, 
too, was arraigned for pm-chasing a New Testament for four 
marks and forty pence, and teaching William Wright and 
Margery his wife the study of the same. Others were 
accused of belonging to the sect of the Lollards, on the 
ground that they could read English well, and did read in 
the presence of others the Word of God. As one muses 
over old entries in the records of persecution, they bring up 
illustrations of the state of the times. How revolting to 



Early Block Printing, 55 

modern feeling, that the study of Scripture should be alleged 
as a crime against a man in the spiritioal court ! How 
Mdde-spread must have been ignorance, when abiHty to read 
EngHsh attached to any one a suspicion of heresy ! How 
precious must books have been in days when a Testament 
was worth £2 16s. 8cZ., equal to £45 6s. %d. now, taking 
sixteen as the multiple for briuging down money to our 
standard.* 

Among the relics of that olden time, there are preserved 
Biblical curiosities, which deserve a passing notice. We 
remember examining, many years ago, in Corpus Christi 
College, Cambridge, a fine specimen of the Bihlia Pauperum, 
of which a few copies only are to be found in the present day, 
in very rare collections. It consists of rude plates, repre- 
senting Scripture figures and incidents, with a few Latin 
sentences explanatory of the subject. The work is printed 
from wooden blocks, in the way in which playing-cards were 
manufactured — a curious art, which was apphed to the 
production of books of a religious character, such as the 
Speculum Humance Salvationis. These block-books, Mr. 
Hallam considers, were executed in the Low Countries ;t 
but probably some of them found their way into England at 
an early period. They belong to the first half of the fifteenth 
century, and were precursors of nobler productions, whose 
appearance in the latter haK of the same century mark a 
memorable era in the history of mankind. Mr. Home, 
in his Introduction describes the Bihlia, Pauperum as 

* In one of the CompuH of Robert Trethewy, 1354-55, mention is made of the 
redemption of a Bible which had lain as secnrity for repayment of 60s. to 
" Langgeton'a cheat" (a loan fund which had been given some years before to the 
University by John Langton, Bishop of Chichester and Lord Chancellor). See 
Ausley's Munimenta Acad., p. 133 (Hist. MSS. Com. 11. 128). 

+ Introduction to Literature of Europe, vol. i., p. 207. 



56 Otir English Bible. 

deriving its name from its being a Catecliism. of the Bible 
for the common people, who were enabled to obtain it at a 
low price ; but it could be of little use to such persons, who 
cannot be supposed to have been able to read Latin, when 
so few could read their ovTn language. It seems much more 
likely that the volume took its name from the Franciscan 
Friars, the chief preachers of the day, who styled themselves 
Pauperes ; the volume, probably, beiug a sort of text-book 
to aid them in their ministrations. 

These imperfect specimens of printing were soon suc- 
ceeded by productions which fiUed the world with wonder. 
Let the reader imagine himseK in the city of Mentz in the 
middle of the fifteenth century. That thoughtful man now 
pacing the banks of the Ehine, and then entering his own 
habitation in some obscure street, toils in a secret apartment 
where no one, save an assistant at his unknov^m craft, is 
allowed to enter. He perseveres until volumes appear, all 
marvellously ahke, displaying gracefully formed letters, such 
as rival the fairest specimens of penmanship. The magic 
manuscripts increase in number. No scriptorium could 
multiply them so fast. Men marvel, and think there must 
be v^itchcraft in this business. The workman is Gutenberg, 
and his house is the first printing-office. 

The whole or a portion of the Scriptures was certainly 
the first book of a considerable size which issued from the 
press. The earhest bearing a date is the beautiful Psalter 
by Fust and Schoffer, in 1457, of which a sumptuous copy 
printed on vellum adorns the Royal Library at Windsor. 
But a Latin Bible, with the prologue of St. Jerome, printed 
probably by Gutenberg at Mentz, between 1450 and 1455, 
and commonly called the Mazarin Bible, on the very shght 
ground of a copy having been found in Cardinal Mazarin's 



EarLy Printed Versions. S7 

Library, is considered the earliest offspring of the noble 
invention; and we may see, exclaims Mr. Hallam, "this 
venerable and splendid volume leading up the crowded 
myriads of its followers, and imploring, as it were, a blessing 
on the new art, by dedicating its first fruits to the service 
of Heaven."* 

As was natural, early types for printing were formed on 
the model of written characters, and hence the earhest 
Bibles and Psalters in German presented letters such as had 
been used by scribes in missals and other rehgious books; 
but when German printers went to reside at the famous 
monastery of Subiaco, near Eome, they cut punches in 
imitation of the letters used in Italy. Thus printed books 
so much resembled manuscripts that they were sometimes 
mistaken for them ; and even until very lately a copy of the 
Mazarin or Gutenberg Bible, preserved at Lambeth Palace, 
passed as the work of a scribe, instead of the work of a 
printer.t 

Eecent researches have shown that many more Bibles in 
modem tongues than was once beheved were printed before 
the end of the fifteenth century. " Prior to the discovery of 
America, no less than twelve grand patriarchal editions of 
the entire Bible, being of several different translations, 
appeared from time to time in the German language ; to 
which add the two editions by the Otmars of Augsburg of 
1507 and 1518, and we have the total number of no less than 
fourteen distinct large folio pre-Eeformation or Ante- 
Lutheran Bibles." Two translations in Itahan appeared at 
Venice in 1471 : a French Testament in 1477, and in the 
same year a Dutch Old Testament :. a Bohemian version was 

* Introdiiction to Literature, i. 211. 
t Blades' Biography and Typography of W. Caxton, 43-45, 



58 Our English Bible. 

printed at Prague in 1488. " The first Bible in small octavo, or 
'the poor man's Bible,' was the earhest, or among the earhest 
books from the press of Joliann Proben of Basle, in 1491."* 
Until of late, it was generally believed in this country that 
the fathers of our Eeformation took the lead in Bibhcal 
labours, and were amongst the first to print and pubhsh the 
Sacred Scriptures in the vernacular ; but this is a great 
mistake ; and I have reason to beheve that other versions 
were printed abroad in the common languages of Europe, 
besides those just now enumerated. Numbers of foreign 
Bibles were printed before one in our native tongue issued 
from the press. 

Printing was introduced into England by William Caxton, 
who, in 1477, pubhshed his first book at Westminster, 
entitled The Dictes and Notable Wise Sayings of the Philo- 
sophers. Another pubhcation, vTithout place or date, but 
presenting the words Caxton me fieri fecit, and entitled, 
The Doctrinal of Sapience, was finished May 7th, 1489, 
and contains what the priests ought to learn and teach to 
their parishes. " Every crysten man and woman,'' it is 
said, " ought to bileve fermely the xii artycles of the 
Cristen faith.'' It ends with a prayer that God would 
grant His grace to us, so to hve in this short hfe, that 
Ave may come to His bliss, for to live and reign there 
withotit end for ever and ever.^f The Speculum Vitce Ghristi 
emprynted by Wyllyam Caxton (without place or date) sets 
before the reader " a devout meditation of the Great Council 
in Heaven for the restoring of man and his salvation," 
respecting which it is said, " aU the Court of Heaven, 
wondering and commending the sovereign, wisdom, assented 

* Stevens The Bibles in ihe Caxton Exhibition, pp. 28, 60. (No. 696.) 
t Blades' William Caxton, 321. 



Early Printed Versions. 



59 



\Yell hereto." Thus step by step the prmter at the Ahuonxy 
under the shadow of our great National Abbey approached 
nearer and nearer to the instruction of his fellow-country- 
men, by means of printing, knowledge of revealed truth. 




"iitir 'SN'Sii!. ^ 1 , "^ m.. 







CAXTON S HOUSE IN WESTMINSTEB. 



-cd, as it might be expected, with what he had learned 
from the Eoman Catholic Church of England, in which he 
had been brought up, and of which he remained a member. 

But he goes much further in his Golden Legend, dated 
1483, a work which has never received the attention which 



6o Our English Bible. 

it deserves from those who undertake to study the history of 
Enghsh translations of Scripture. 

It begins with the Advent of our Lord. 

After a reference to the moral weakness of man, thus 
quaintly expressed, " There lacketh non to comande, but 
there is none that accomphsheth the commandment," the 
book refers to the necessity of the Advent " by reson of the 
tyme, of whiche the appostle Paul speketh, ad galatas 
the uii chapitre, At ubi venit plenittido temporis, when the 
plenitude, or ful tyme of the grace of god was ordeyned, 
thene he sente his sone yt was god & son of the virgyne, 
and wyf, whiche was made subget to the lawe. To that, 
they be subget to ye lawe he bought hem aga3m & were 
receyued sones of god by grace of adopcion." Passing on to 
the Nativity of our Lord, we read, " Joseph whiche thene 
was of the hgnage of dauid , and dwellyd in Nazareth, wente 
into the cyte of Bethlem and ladde with him the virgyne 
marie his wyf. And whan they were comen theder bycause 
hostryes were alle taken up, they were constrayned to be 
withoutein a comyn place where alle peple wente. And ther 
was a stable for an asse that he brought -with hym and for an 
oxe. Li that nyght our blessed lady and moder of god was 
delyverd of our blessyd sauyour upon the heye that laye in 
the racke." Then follow, not only an account of the visit of 
the "thre Kynges " and of the angelic appearance to the 
Shepherds, but certain mediaeval legends of other wonders 
supposed to have occurred at the same time. 

The work further contains much of the history givei 

Genesis . The following extracts will afford a better idea of the 

contents than can be conveyed by any general description : 

" In the begynnyng god made and created heuen and 

erthe. The erthe was ydle ife voyde and couerd -with 



Early Printed Versions. 6r 

derknes. And the spyrite of god was born on the watres. 
And god said, Be made lyght, and anon lyght was made. 
And god sawe that lyght was good, and dyuyded the lyght 
fro derknes, & called the lyght day, and derkaes nyght. 
And thus was made lyght with heuen and erthe fyrst, and 
even and mornyng was raade one daye. The seconde day he 
made the firmamente, and dyuyded the watres that were 
under the firmament fro them that were ahoue, and called 
the firmament heuen. , The thyrde day were made on the 
erthe herbes and fru3d}es iu their kynde. The fourthe day 
god made the sonne and mone, and sterres, &c. The fyfthe 
day he made the fisshes in the water, and byrdes in the 
ayer. The sixthe day god made the beestis on the erthe 
eueryche in his kynd and gendre. And god sawe that all 
thyse werkes were good, and said Faciamus liominem, dec, 
Make we man unto our simihtude and ymage — here spack 
the fader to the sone and holy ghoste, or elhs as it were 
the comune voys of thre persones, whan it was sayd make 
we, & to cure, in pku'el nombre. Man was made to the jnnage 
of god in his sowle : here is to be noted, that he made not 
o/ily the sowle without the body, but he made both body 
and sowle, as to the body he made male and female. God 
gaf to man the lordship and power upon alle lyuyng beestis. 
"Whar God had made man it is not wxetun Et vidit quod 
esset bonum, quia in proximo sciehat eum lapsurum. For 
yet he was not parfyght til the woman was made. And 
therfore it is red, it is not good the man to be allone. 
Thus in sise dayes was heuen and erthe made, and alle the 
omaciou of them : and thenne he made the vii day in 
whiche he rested, not for that he was wery, but cessyd of 
hys operacion, and shewd the vii day whiche he blessyd." * 

* Polios xxxvi . ixxvii. 



62 Our English Bible. 

In the same style of abridgment and paraphrase is 
couched the story of the fall : ' ' The woman sawe that the 
tree was fayr to loke on, and clene and swete of sauour, 
toke and ete therof, and gaf unto Adam of the same, 
happyly desiryng hym by fayr wordes : but Adam anon 
agreed, for whan he sawe the woman not deed, he supposed 
that god hath said, that they shold dye to fere hem with. 
And thenne ete of the fruyt forboden. And anon theyr sight 
was opened that they sawe theyr nakydnes. And thene 
anon they xmderstode that they had trespaced." [What 
follows must be omitted.] " And thiis they knewe then that 
they were naked. And they toke figge leuis, and sowed 
them to gyder, for to couere theyr membres in maner of 
brechis." 

Then follow the history of Noah, the life of Abraham, the 
hfe of Isaac and his two sons, the story of Joseph, and the 
life of Moses, aU written in a similar way, the use of Scrip- 
ture phraseology beiag frequently blended with explanatory 
comments. Next come the histories of Saul, of David, of 
Solomon, of Tobit, Judith, St. Andrew and St. Nicholas,, 
These occupy eighty-nine double-paged leaves out of more 
than four hundred. 

Any one who compares the Golden Legend of Oaxton 
with the Legends doree in French must be struck with the 
immense difference between the two, for, whilst in the 
latter we meet at the commencement with a few pa^es 
respecting the Advent, and afterwards with a few lives ol 
Scriptm-e characters, the bulk of the volume relates to the 
Fathers of the Church and succeeding legendary saints. 
There is nothing in the French volume which; corresponds 
with the la,rge amount of matter which in Caxton we find 
to have been extracted from the Five Books of Moses and 



Early Printed Versions. 63 

other parts of Scripture. A similar difference exists between 
Caxton's volume and the Legenda Sanctorum of Jacobus 
de Voragiae, printed at Ulm (1480?). The latter contains 
eight and a half pages on The Time of Benovation and 
The Advent of our Lord. The remainder consists of 
the legends of saints, beginning with St. Andrew the 
Apostle. They are one hundred and ninety-two in number, 
and cover more than four hundred unpaged leaves printed 
on both sides. 

A very considerable portion of the lives of Adam and 
others described in Scripture, as given in Caxton's Golden 
Legend, is drawn immediately from that source ; fragments 
of a verbal though free translation of the Book of Genesis 
occur again and again on page after page, and I should 
think, if these were extracted and carefully put together, 
they would form, not, indeed, a fuU and accurate, but a 
decidedly approximate version of the first book of Holy 
Writ. Upon comparing the renderings in Caxton with the 
Wycliffe versions, it becomes plain that they are not derived 
from the works of early reformers. They seem to have 
come from the Vulgate, through the study either of the 
London printer, or some one who assisted him in his toils, 
unless indeed he borrowed from some ms. version not at 
present identified. Looking at the magnitude of the 
volume, and at the numerous other works on which Caxton 
was engaged, it would seem next to impossible that he 
"ould alone have executed the herculean task of vsrritiag 
such an immense quantity of matter. It seems to have 
been no unusual thing in early days for great workers to 
avail themselves, without acknowledgment, of the industry 
of others. As artists were indebted to the pencils of their 
pupils, so authors and translators might be indebted to the 



64 Our English Bible. 

pens of coadjutors — we cannot wonder if, in this respect, 
Caxton anticipated Tintoretto. 

About a fourth part of Caxton's Golden Legend being 
devoted to matter derived largely from the Bible, the re- 
mainder, amounting to about three hundred leaves, printed 
on both sides in double columns, is occupied with the legen- 
dary lore so popular in the mediaeval church. There seem to 
have been in his time three works which went by the name 
of the Golden Legend — the Latin Legenda aurea, com- 
piled by Jacobus de Voragine, Archbishop of Genoa, in 
1298; the French La Legende doree, translated first by 
Jean Belet, then by Jehan de Vignay, both in the fourteenth 
century, and an Bnghsh version well knovsm in Caxton's 
time. Some of the stories in these legendary works, which 
were transplanted into the "Westminster typographer's 
large foho, are of a kind to shock the modesty of most 
people in the present day ; and these are the portions fixed 
upon by certain bibliographers, to the neglect of the better 
elements which the book includes. 

It is of the legendary part that Caxton speaks when he 
says : "I have submised myseK to translate into EngHsh 
the Legend of Saints. Against me here might some 
persons say, that this legend hath been translated tofore, 
and truth it is ; but forasmuch as I had by me a legend 
in French, another in Latin, and the third in English, 
which varied in many and divers places ; and also many 
histories were comprised in the two other books which -p ;re 
not in the EngKsh book, therefore I have v/ritten one of the 
three books, which I have ordered otherwise than the said 
Enghsh legend is, which was tofore made." 

This is the account which Caxton gives of the origin of 
his text, so far as it relates to the traditionary tales of the 



Early Printed Versions. 



65 



cliurch ; but lie makes no remark respecting the Scripture 
portion of his volume, though that is by far the most 




PRINTINCI PBESS Ol? 1520. 



important and valuable. It places our EngHsh printer under 
a new aspect — even as one anxious, so far as the authority 
of the church, and his own judgment, as one of her sincere 

1? 



66 Our English Bible. 

sons would allow, to communicate to the English people 
in their own tongue BibUcal instruction on historical, doc- 
trinal, and practical points. He did not venture, like John 
Wycliffe, to set forth a complete vernacular version, with- 
out note or comment, but he walked in the footsteps of 
CEedmon, ^Elfric, Ormin, the author of the Soulehele MS., and 
Eichard EoUe ; and therefore he claims a place such as he 
has never received in the history of Enghsh translators.* 

Caxton, as an author, then, was, though imperfectly, 
doing a work as pioneer of the Bible, which the Lollards, 
with the prejtidices roused against them, could not have 
accomphshed ; and his services in this form ask for grateful 
acknowledgment ; above aU, we should honour Caxton, the 
printer, who, by his novel art, was paving the way for what 
was afterwards accomphshed by Nicholson, Grafton, and 
others, who consecrated the discovery to the printing of 
pure Scripture translations. Nothing could be more fitting 
than to celebrate the four hundredth anniversary of the 
momentous era in the life of our first typographer by a solemn 
musical service, and the dehvery of pertinent reHgious lessons 
within the walls of our National Abbey, close to which he 
pursued his toils. 

" What," asked the preacher on that occasion, " was the 

* Mr. Bladea liaa classified the books printed at the Caxton press according to 
the different types, which he numbers from 1 to 6. It is remarkable that under 
No. 1 there is but one religious book, Meditacions sur les sept pseaulmes 
penitenciaulx. Under No. 2, containing thirty-four books, we find Infancia Salva- 
toris. Under No. 3 there are Directorium, seu pica Sarum ; Horm ad usum 
Sarwm ; and a Latin psalter — the only other publication in this class is an adver- 
tisement. Under No. 4 there are thirty books, of which eight relate to religion, 
including two editions of the Golden Legend. Under No. 5, the ten books 
included all treat of morahty or religion. Under No. 6 are nineteen works, six 
of which are of a devotional nature, particularly jdrsmoriendi and the Chastising 
of God's Children. I have reason to believe that in the books thus indicated 
there are many English quotations from Scripture. 



Early Printed Versions. 67 

year 1477 in England ? It was, as has been duly described, 
one of those tranquil periods which immediately succeeds 
and immediately precedes events of extraordinary moment. 
The kneU of the Middle Ages had already been sounded. 
It was hardly more than twenty years since the last rehc of 
the old Grseco-Eoman world — Byzantium — had passed away 
before the conquering Ottomans. It was only five years 
before that the last echo of the Crusades had passed away. 
It was biit six years since the last of the barons had fallen 
on the field of Barnet. Old estates, old dominions, and old 
superstitions were then fast departing. 

' ' And not only so, for with the exiles from Constantinople 
came into Europe a flood of Greek learning, and, at the 
same time that the Cathohc warriors of Spain were driving 
the Ottomans from their country, Columbus discovered a 
new world. Just ten years before came into existence the 
greatest of scholars, Erasmus, and just four years after was 
to be born Luther, the greatest of reformers. The day of 
the Eeformation and the reorganization of Western Christ- 
endom had come. The sun that came out of the mists on 
the morning of the battle of Barnet was but the type of the 
new dawn that burst upon England when the feudal system 
passed away. ' The night was far spent, and the day was 
at hand.' And yet they that hved in that age knew not 
what was in store for them ; they knew not that under the 
shelter of Westminster Abbey had struck root in England 
an instrument without which, humanly speaking, even the 
learning of Erasmus and the genius of Luther would have 
failed to produce their world-vride effect. Mechanical and 
moral powers, by a marvellous Providence, leagued together 
to preserve all that was good in the past and to promote 
aU that was good in the future, at the greatest crisis 



68 Our Engiish Bible 



't> ' 



that had arisen in the world since the fall of the Roman 
Empire." * 

The earhest printed volume containing an express Eng- 
Hsh BibHcal translation is one by Wynkyn de Worde, at 
London, "in the Eletestrete, at the sygne of ye sonne." 
" This treatise," says the title-page, " concernynge the 
frujdifull sayinges of Dauyd the Isynge and prophete in 
the seven penytencyaU psalmes, deuyded in seuen sermons, 
was made and compyled by the ryght reiierente fader in 
god, Johan fyssher, doctour of dyuynite and bysshop of 
Eochester. 1508." The book contains one hundred and 
forty-six leaves ; the Latin text of the penitential psalms is 
printed in fragments and an English rendering accompanies 
it of a most imperfect, confused, and unsatisfactory de- 
scription. 

The following are specimens taken from the discourse on 
the sixth psalm, the first of the seven penitential ones : 

" Good Lorde, correcte me not in the euerlastinge payne 
of hell, neyther punysshe me in the paynes of purgatory. 
Have mercy on me, good lord, for I am feble and weyke." 
" Go ye cursed people into the eternaU fyre." " That fyre is 
prepared for the deuyll and his aungeUes." " Domine, ne 
in furore tuo arguas me " (left untranslated). " Correcte me 
not good lorde in the paynes of purgatory." " Blessyd 
Lord, haue mercy on me, for of myselfe I haue no strengthe." 
" Good lorde, make me hole." " The herte of a synfull 
persone is lyke unto the troublouse see whiche neuer hathe 
reste." " AH ye partes of my body be without reste, and 
my soule is sore troubled." " Whan thou, good lorde, 
tournest away thy face aU. thynges shall be troubled." 
" Be ye turned to me, and I shall be tourned to you." 

* Extraot from Daan Stanley's sermon, 1877. 



Early Printed Versions. 69 

"Good lorde, why taryest thou soo longe?" "Therefore, 
good lorde, be thou tourned unto me, and delyuer my soule 
from this trybulacyon." " Our lorde is bothe mercyfull 
inwarde, and also the doer of mercy outwarde, pacyent, 
and alwaye mercyfull." " They that be hole nedeth no phy- 
sycyen, but a physycyen is nedefuU unto them that be sake." 

These extracts, exhibiting now and then piecemeal 
versions of texts, and so far resembling those in Caxton's 
Golden Legend, follow, often inaccurately, corresponding 
passages in the Vulgate. They run into a form of para- 
phrase, according to the prevalent opinions of the day, and 
are embedded in the midst of tedious meditations. It will 
be observed that other texts are introduced besides those 
taken from the psalter. 

Before closing this chapter I would direct attention to 
one who deserves a passing notice ; not as a Bible trans- 
lator, for this honour, though ascribed to him, was not his ; 
but as one who walked so far in the footsteps of Wycliffe 
and his followers, as to maintain the sufficiency and to pro- 
mote the reading of Holy Writ. I refer to Pecock, Bishop of 
Chichester, in the middle of the fifteenth century. He seems 
to have been no one-sided man ; but whilst supporting the 
church of his day, exalting the Pope's supremacy, and de- 
fending his episcopal brethren, he ventured on the new path 
of appeal to Scripture as conclusive in controversy, and as 
inteUigible to the apprehension of devout readers. In a 
work written by him, entitled A Treatise on Faith, he 
says, " Holy Writ is such a ground and foimdation of our 
Christian general faith, that there is no greater or better, or 
more surer ground and foundation to us of our Christian 
general faith, than is written in Holy Writ. Very often 
Scripture expoundeth itself, inasmuch as by the reading of 



yo Otir English Bible. 

Scripture in one part, a man shall learn which is the Drue 
understanding of Scripture in all other parts, whereia he 
doubted or was ignorant before. Certain it may be, that 
one simple person, in fame or in state, is wiser for to laiow, 
judge, and declare what is the true sense of a certain por- 
tion of Scripture, and what is the truth of some article, and 
that for his long studying, labouring, and advising there- 
upon, than is a great general council. The writing made 
and found by God, and by the apostles, may ground suffi- 
ciently the same faith in every clerk or layman, notably 
reasoned for to understand what he readeth in the New 
Testament, though he learn not the same faith by any 
general cotincil or any multitude of clerks to be gathered 
together."* The life and proceedings of the au.thor of 
tliis passage have given rise to historical controversies 
not belonging to our subject, and into which there- 
fore I shall not enter; but whatever might be liis eccle- 
siastical opinions, whatever the ground of the accusations 
brought against him, and whatever the meaning of his 
recantation in the presence of Archbishop Bouchier, he did, 
by vmting such a passage as that just quoted, place him- 
self, as it relates to the study of the Bible, in a line with 
the rector of Lutterworth ; and it is remarkable that the 
two names are connected in one of the statutes of King's 
College, Cambridge, shovsdng that not only in vulgar esti- 
mation, but in the judgment of university authorities, 
Wycliffe and Pecock had sentiments in common, dividing 
them from the chief church rulers of their day.f 

* British Reformers, ii. 204. 
t ' ' Item statuimus — quod qualibet aoholaris in admiseione sua — jurat quod non 
I'avebit opinionibua damnatig, erroribua aut heresibus Johannis Wiolif, Eeginaldi 
Peoook," etc. — Le Bas, Life of Wiclif, 429. 



jUH/iPTf;R IV. 



WILLIAM TYNDALE. 







the commencement of the sixteenth 
century there lived in the manor-house 
of Little Sodbury, in Gloucestershire, a 
worthy knight of the name of Sir John 
Walsh. His dwelhng belonged to that 
class of which a few rehcs may still be seen 
in quiet country nooks, displaying fantastic 
gables and twisted chimneys embosomed 
among shrubs and trees. 
On visiting a few years ago the pleasant 
village where this modest mansion stands on 
the slope of the Cotswold HiUs, I was dehghted v?ith 
the prospect it commands of the Severn valley, dotted 
over with rich green woods, and found a portion of 
the residence of the "Walshes in existence, consisting of 
a good large dining-hall of the Tudor style, somewhat 
neglected, but not much out of repair. The old parish 
church is swept away, but two noble yews guard the en- 
trance of the new edifice, showing signs of an age reaching 
back beyond the sixteenth century. There was abiding in 



72 



Ortr English Bible. 



this mansion at tlie time of which we speak a humble 
priest, named WiUiam Tyndale, who filled the office of 
tutor in the family. 

He was a person of quiet and retired habits, devoted to 
study, and exemplary in his moral and religious character. 
But no one could look on him without perceiving at once 



«5&fc-'<- 



I 

I 



•^ * ^m< i> M wa utt . ', "vv j-»** j--'^ i" *** 'i. 



^^iv* 





HOUSE op SIR JOHN WALSH. 



that he was a man of no common stamp, for his expansive 
forehead indicated a comprehensive mind, his eyes betokened 
quick and penetrating thought, his whole countenance was 
expressive of extraordinary firmness, while round his Hps 
there lurked sometliing of quiet himiour. He often mingled 
with the guests who gathered round the social board in the 
dining-hall referred to, including the neighbouring eccle- 
siastics ; and it happened sometimes that conversation turned 



William. Tyndale. 73 

upon theological topics, when this tutor was wont to ex- 
press his opinions with considerable freedom. 

" As he was learned and well practised iu God's matters, 
so he spared not to show unto them simply and plainly his 
judgment ; and when they at any time did vary from his 
opinions, he would show them in the book, and lay before 
them, the manifest places of Scripture, to confute their 
errors, and to confirm his sayings." * When he accom- 
panied Sir John and his lady to the tables of these digni- 
taries, he scrupled not to talk "with the same boldness, 
tiU deep suspicion of his heterodoxy began to be felt by his 
ecclesiastical brethren. 

Even the knight himseK and his fair spouse entertained 
some fears on the subject, and thought it right to expostulate 
with the tutor respecting his sentiments. But he was not 
the man to yield any point which his judgment approved, 
and he firmly -maintained his opinion. " Well," said Lady 
Walsh, " there was such a doctor there as may dispend a 
hundred poiinds, and another two hundred, and another 
three hundred pomids ; and what were it reason, think you, 
that we should beheve you before them?" Her ladyship's 
logic was of a kind to which the tutor knew not how to reply, 
and he, therefore, politely held his tongue. But there were 
deep thoughts at work under that capacious brow, and 
mighty purposes springing up within that dauntless breast. 
On another occasion a priest observed to him, " We are 
better without God's laws than the Pope's." "I defy the 
Pope and aU his laws," he repUed, and added, " If God spare 
my hfe, ere many years I will cause the boy who driveth 
the plough to know more of the Scriptures than you do." 

This was the echo of a sentiment expressed by Erasmus 

* Foxe, T. 115. EeligioUB Tract Society's Edition. 



74 Our English Bible. 

in his Encomium Moria. " I wish," alluding to the Gospels 
and the Epistles of St. Paul, " that the husbandman may sing 
parts of them at his plough, that the weaver may warble them 
at his shuttle, that the traveller may with their narratives 
beguile the weariness of the way." 

William Tyndale was bom in Gloucestershire in 1477, 
and studied at Oxford, where " he grew up, and increased as 
well in the knowledge of tongues and other hberal arts, as 
especially in the knowledge of the Scriptures, whereunto his 
mind was singularly addicted." * 

From Oxford he proceeded to Cambridge, and, in remem- 
brance of his early studies he remarked long afterwards, 
"In the universities they have ordained that no man shall 
look at the Scriptures until he be noselled [or nursed] in 
heathen learning eight or nine years," — an allusion indicating 
the revival of classical studies at that period, the advantages 
of which "WilKam TjTidale shared — "and armed with false 
principles with which he is clean shut out of the under- 
standing of Scripture ; " " and when he taketh his first 
degree he is sworn that he shall hold none opinions con- 
demned by the church." f In another work Tyndale refers to 
a large party remaining in the university and in the church 
violently prejudiced against the revival of ancient learning ; 
" Remember ye not how within these thirty years and far 
less, and yet dureth to this day, the old barking curs. Dun's 
disciples and like daft called Scotish, the children of dark- 
ness, raged in every pulpit against Greek, Latiu, and Hebrew, 
and what sorrow the schoolmasters that taught the true 
Latin had with them ; some beating the pulpit with their 
fists for madness, and roaring out, with open and foaming 
mouth, that if there were but one Jerome or Virgil in the 

• Foie, T. 115. t Practice of Prelates, Works, " 



William Tyndale. 75 

world, and that same in their sleeves and a fire before them, 
they would burn them therein, though it should cost them 
their Uves; affirming that all good learning decayed and 
was utterly lost since men gave themselves unto the 
Latin tongue." * 

By the zealous study of classical tongues, Tyndale 
acquired that knowledge of Greek which quaUfied him for 
the task he was destined to execute ; and from the study 
of the Scriptures in the original language he imbibed that 
spiritual taste which inspired the subsequent toils of his 
industrious life. 

In the mansion at Sodbury he continued his sacred 
studies, and enlarged his acquaintance with Divine Eevela- 
tion, till the purpose just noticed then ripened into dehberate 
action. But he could not find, while he remained among the 
Gloucestershire priests, the quietude and Hberty necessary 
for the prosecution of his design ; and therefore, being " so 
turmoiled," as he says, he was glad to make his escape, and 
seek elsewhere a place in which to carry out his fixed reso- 
lution. " As I this thought," he teUs us, " the Bishop of 
London came to my remembrance, whom Erasmus (whose 
tongue maketh of httle gnats great elephants, and hfteth up 
above the stars whosoever giveth him a httle exhibition) 
praiseth exceedingly, among other in his Annotations on the 
New Testament, for his great learning. Then, thought I, if 
I might come to this man's service, I were happy. And so 
I gat me to London, and, through the acquaintance of my 
master, came to Sir Harry Gilford, the king's grace's comp- 
troller, and brought bim an oration of Isocrates, which I had 
translated out of Greek into Bnghsh, and desired him to 
speak unto my lord of London for me ; which he also did as 

* Answer to Sir Thomas More, Works, iii. 75. 



76 Otir English Bible. 

lie showed me, and willed me to write an epistle to my lord, 
and go to ^im myself, which I also did, and delivered my 
epistle to a servant of his own, one William HebiLthwayte, 
a man of mine old acquaintance. But God (which knoweth 
what is within hypocrites) saw that I was beguiled, and that 
that council was not the next way unto my purpose. And 
therefore He got me no favour in my lord's sight. Where- 
upon my lord answered me his house was full, he had more 
than he could well find, and advised me to seek in London, 
where he said I could not lack a service. And so in London 
I abode almost a year, and marked the course of the world, 
and heard our praters — I would say our preachers — ^how 
they boasted themselves and their high authority, and beheld 
the pomp of our prelates, and how busy they were, as they 
yet are, to set peace and unity in the world (though it be 
not possible for them that walk in darkness to continue long 
in peace, for they cannot but either stumble, or dash them- 
selves at one thing or another that shall clean unquiet all 
altogether,) and saw things whereof I defer to speak at this 
time, and understood at the last not only that there was 
no room in my lord of London's palace, to translate the 
New Testament, but also that there was no place to do it 
in all England, as experience doth now openly declare." * 

This was written in 1530, and relates to what took place 
in 1524. In vaia Tyndale sought the patronage of the 
metropohtan bishop — no encouragement from that quarter 
could he find for his momentous undertaking. Indeed, he 
had hard work to live in London, and would have been in 
positive destitution but for the friendship of a wealthy 
citizen and alderman named Humphry Monmouth. Hear- 
ing Tyndale preach at St. Dunstan's in the West, he inquired 

* Tyndale's Preface to the First Hook of Moses called Qenesis. 



William Tyndale. 77 

into his circumstances, and finding lie had no means of 
support, and being afterwards requested by Tyndale to 
render him some assistance, he kindly took him into his 
house for half a year; " and there," says Monmouth, "he 
lived Hke a good priest, as me thought. He studied most 
part of the day and of the night at his book, and he would 
eat but sodden meat by his good will, nor drink but small 
single beer. I never saw him wear linen about him in the 
space he was vnth me. I did promise him ten pounds 
sterling to pray for my father and mother, their souls, and 
aU Christian souls ; I did pay it to him when he made his 
exchange at Hamboro'." * 

This Humphry Monmouth was one of the earliest pro- 
fessors of the reformed doctrines in London, and was an 
eminently amiable and pious man. Latimer relates a 
beautiful anecdote of him in his Seventh Sermon on the 
Lord's Prayer. A poor man, a Papist, who was under great 
obhgations to Monmouth, incensed at his opposition to the 
errors and corruptions of Kome, went and accused him be- 
fore the bishops. The alderman sought to subdue the man's 
enmity, but for some time it was in vain. One day he met 
his poor but malignant neighbour in a narrow street, and 
walking up to him, seized him by the hand and inquired, 
" Neighbom-, what is come into your heart to take such dis- 
pleasure v?ith me ? What have I done against you ? Tell 
me, and I will be ready at all times to make you amends." 
Finally, he spake so gently, so charitably, so lovingly, and 
friendly, that it wrought so in the poor man's heart, that 
by-and-by he fell down upon his knees and asked him for- 
giveness. The rich man forgave him, and so took him again 
to his favour, and they loved as well as ever they did afore. 

* Strype's M&moriaXs, I. part ii. 363-7. 



78 0^i1'■ English Bible, 

Beautiful illustration of tlie passage, in reference to wMch 
Latimer quoted the circumstance, " We shall overcome our 
enemy with well-doing, and so heap up hot coals upon his 
head." * 

Both Tyndale and Monmouth were now but in a transition 
state from darkness to light. They saw clearly some of the 
errors of Eome, and some of the truths of the gospel, but old 
associations and habits still hung about them, as is evident 
from the monkish austerity of the one, the payment for 
prayers on behalf of the dead by the other, and the behef in 
purgatory stiU. cleaving to both. But Providence was pre- 
paring the way for Tyndale to execute the task upon which 
he had set his mind, and which was at once to purify his 
own rehgious sentiments, and to prove powerfully instru- 
mental in dispersing much of this darlaiess from the face of 
his beloved country. Yet, as it often happens in this world, 
the reformer had to perform his high behest amidst perse- 
cution and -suffering, and to receive from his fellow-men no 
other reward than the crown of martyrdom. Tyndale whilst 
tutor in Walsh's family had preached in the adjacent vil- 
lages and to crowds collected in Bristol on College Green. 
But " bhnd and rude priests," says Foxe, " flocking together 
to the alehouse, for that was their preaching-place, raged and 
railed against him, affirming that his sayings were heresy, 
adding moreover unto his sayings of their own heads more 
than ever he spake." Consequently he had been accused to 
the Chancellor of the Diocese, who " rated me," he declares, 
" as though I had been a dog, and laid to my charge things 
whereof there could be none accuser brought forth." f He 
had so defended himself, however, as to escape that time the 

* Latimer's Sermons, vol. i. p. 440. Parker Society, 
t Demans' Life of Tyndale, 56, 57. 



William Tyndale. 79 

clutch of persecution ; but a different destiny awaited him 
abroad, whither he departed, after his residence in London, 
not so much through apprehension of danger, as because 
on the Continent he could more successfully accomplish the 
completion and printing of his Scripture translations. 
Bidding adieu to his native shores — an everlasting adieu, 
as it proved in the sequel — Tyndale sailed over to Hamburg 
in the year 1524. 

Much mystery enshrouds his proceedings after his arrival 
at Hamburg ; and his biographers, in the absence of clear 
and sufficient information, have indulged in various con- 
ctures, to which I do not intend to make any addition. It 
J been asserted that in the commercial city to which he 
jected his way he at once proceeded to print the Gospels 
/ St. Matthew and St. Mark, which he had translated 
into English ; but Mr. Maitland has laboured to prove that 
for six-and-thirtj' years no printing-press had existed in the 
place ; * and other modem authorities, either following him, or 
proceeding on grounds of their own, have concluded that 
Hamburg as yet did not possess a single printer.f Why he 
went there in particular, except that he knew of Enghsh mer- 
chants in that German city, who sympathized in his under- 
taking, or because he chose it as a convenient landing-place 
to some other spot, is by no means apparent. That he after- 
wards found friends there who assisted him with money, is a 
fact; but whether he went anywhere else soon after his 
arrival, is a critical point with his biographers. Tyndale's 
contemporaries. Sir Thomas More, Cochlseus, John Foxe, 
and others, say that he went to Wittenberg ; but to that 
statement a determined contradiction has been set up by Mr. 
Anderson, in his Annals of the Bible,X and others who have 

* Reformation -in England, 371. t W« <>/ Tyndale, 92. t Annals, i. 45-47. 



8o Our English Bible. 

accepted his arguments. Nothing seems more intrinsically 
probable than that Tyndale should wish to see the great 
leader of the German Eeformation, whose writings he so much 
admired, and whose example, as a Scripture translator, he 
determined to follow. Moreover, abundance of evidence is at 
hand to show that he made much use of Luther's work in 
his own labours, as wiU presently appear. But chiefly, it would 
seem, from jealousy of their countryman's fame, and a 
fear lest he should be set down now, after the manner of his 
own day, as a copyist of the Wittenberg reformer, several 
modern writers have, with excessive zeal, contended that the 
Wittenberg expedition was a sheer impossibility. It is con- 
tended that Tyndale himself denied it, because he vsrrote in 
his answer to Sir Thomas More, " When he saith, ' Tyndale 
was confederate with Luther,' that is not truth ;" but to deny 
that he was confederate wdth Luther is by no means tanta- 
mount to a denial of having visited Luther. Further, it is 
alleged that Luther at that period was so engrossed with 
his own business as to have no time to spend with an Eng- 
Hsh visitor, and so absorbed in his own sacramental 
views, as to feel no disposition to notice any one who 
differed from him in that respect. But these allegations are 
unreasonable, in face of the fact that Luther was visited by 
aU sorts of people — that Wittenberg " was the common 
asylum of all apostates " — and that there is nothing known 
of Tyndale's sacramental opinions which would make him 
objectionable to the great Teutonic divine. On the contrary, 
Sir Thomas More asserts that Tyndale actually adopted the 
Lutheran view of the Lord's Supper.* La short, those who, 
for the sake of vindicating Tyndale's independence, deny 
that he ever went to Wittenberg, resemble those who, for 

* L'ife of Tyndale, 93, 96. 



William Tyndale. 8i 

the purpose of disproving St. Peter's Boman episcopate, 
maintaiD that he never entered the Eternal City. 

At all events, in 1525 v^e find Tyndale at Cologne ; and 
decisive evidence is afforded that he had then far advanced 
in the prosecntion of his purpose. The press had heen at 
work upon his New Testament. I wish we could minutely 
trace all the circumstances connected with his labours in 
preparing this version, but, as stated before, considerable ob- 
scurity rests upon his proceedings. In those times it was 
necessary, in order to succeed, that such a man should act 
vsdth silence and secrecy ; and the remembrance of his adven- 
tures in the execution of his work has utterly perished. 
Probably, at Hamburg, so long as he remaiaed there, he was 
employed on the translation, deriving support from Mon- 
mouth and other rehgious merchants who embraced the 
new learning; and if he did go to "Wittenberg, he might 
there avail himself of Luther's Table Talk touching Trans- 
lations, and of valuable assistance obtained from Melancthon, 
and other learned professors in the university. 

At Cologne, however, we clearly see him so far in advance 
with his Testament, as to be superintending the printers in 
bringing it through the press. An assistant was with him, 
one Eoye, a crafty and selfish person, who helped Tyndale 
for what he could get. The latter teUs us that they wrote 
and compared the texts together; and imagination can 
picture the two men, influenced by far different motives, at 
work in the far-famed city on the banks of the Ehine, in 
some poor-looking house in an obscure street, — while a priest 
or a pilgrim passed under the window, on their way to the 
Shrine of the Three Kings, little dreaming of the kind of 
emplojmaent going on there, and of the consequences to 
which it would lead. 



82 Our English Bible. 

But there was an Argus-eyed heresy-hunter, named 
Cochlseus, a deacon of the Church of the Blessed Virgin, at 
Frankfort, who got a ghmpse of what Tyndale was doing. 
Having become intimate and familiar with the Cologne 
printers, he sometimes heard them confidently boast, when 
in their cups, that whether the king and cardinal of England 
would or not, all England must in a short time be Lutheran. 
He heard also that there were two Englishmen lurking 
about, skOful in languages and fluent in speech, whom, how- 
ever, he could nowhere find. Calling, therefore, certain 
printers to his lodgings, after they were heated with wine, 
one of them, in private conversation, discovered to him 
the secret by which England was to be drawn over to the 
side of Luther, — namely, that three thousand copies of the 
Lutheran New Testament, translated into the EngKsh lan- 
guage were in the press, and already were advanced as far as 
the letter K, in ordine quaternionum ; and that the expenses 
were wholly supphed by Enghsh merchants, who were 
secretly to convey the work, when printed, and to disperse 
it Mddely through all England, before the long or the cardinal 
could discover or prohibit their doing so. 

" Cochlseus, being inwardly affected by fear and wonder, 
disguised his grief under the appearance of admiration. 
But another day, considering with himself the magnitude 
of the grievous danger, he cast in mind by what method he 
might expeditiously obstruct these very vyicked attempts. 
He went, therefore, secretly to Herman Einck, a patrician 
of Cologne, and military knight, familiar both with the 
Emperor and the King of England, and a councillor, and 
disclosed to him the whole affair, as, by means of the wine, 
he had received it. He, that he might ascertain all things 
more certainly, sent another person into the house where 




?fotfattituwtmeittt!geni0 

outoftt>2 bouffc/anb fatt l))»tb« feefyVyanb mo* 
cbapwpl* refortt^b tjiito l)itTr/fo flretlp t^al jje wet 
anb fatmaft);)J)i«/an\>alU()&paoij|t ftol»eojlt|)e 
■bMre.2(nbba ff<ihmavr^t\)]>intii t» t^jm inftmititttW/fa* 
Rinses bel)ol^fe/tbftfow«rxio«iil fortl) toforoc/an'b as^fo* 
toftb/ fowfc fellby tl)e wa:}e?> f)ibe/i tt)4 fowlW ca/anb bewou? 
Tibituppe. ©"otrtifdlcqpotJ flott))grot>lib6ii»bfcTe.itfca'DTtotti 
moe^uett^/atibatJonit ffronscnppc/befatje ilbflo nobC| 
p^t C)f'evtl)!ani> wbisntlie fonwflsvppe /]jUcav)t| l){et /anb 
for late of rot^ngero^bSteb aTpa^je.Somt fdl amo-rtgc tbot* 
n«s / aitb t^t fi^Orncs cTp fe /anb cljofffeb it . pattc (ell in 
SoobeSTOutibc/^iib broQ|)t fort^scob frutr. fo"m«M|)xia<^ 
bvebfoLb/fome f)fli folb/]om«t^yrt))fplbe«X10^ofo«Der()atl) 
tares f» beare/letpim ^mi* 

C2(nbbj)sbifctplis cam/apbfa^beto^linitDl)^ fpeaFcft 
tboiT totpcminfciTables: b^anftojreb anb faibe onto t^etn*. 
i^it i» gevcn vnto ^on to fnowt tl)4 fccvettf of tb& b^i^Sbw 
«, -lu -L L L ineofbei'an/buttotbsmitKnott gtvett. ;fovt»b9fowet>er, 
^tXJlz^A Wfe/tof'^ft't^Hbttbe^evetisanbbjfballljawabottnban* 
SKK?fi «ce* »»t wbofoecev bat^ nott: from biw fbalbe tafyna 
«bit m«itipiiet^7 u)a^« mtbatfametbaibaMb.^berfoTefpcafft^totbem 
waWJ) the mepU infimxKtub'f : Jortbougbt^e)' fe/tbcv fen^tt: omb bearvnge 
^^^}^Jr;Z&}li^, ^^^^ ^^^■'^^ notinctber tjnbetftonbj . ^Hn'b \ti tbm vs MUM 
SAiZJk tiJ^ p'^oP^efy orafa)./«bicbpropb2ri favt^ : Witt) >'o tire e arcs 
tmakUlj the focpie ;y«fbcillb£ar«/anb [ball not KjnbcT|tobfc/ anb loitb Voawcj/ea 
wofiiie. * 'j>4MRyAT»bfljciHi)0t^«ceavfc ^ort()i5:ijcop|esbert3j5 



I^AO-SIMILE FEOM ST. MATTHEW OF TTNDALE's FIRST NEW TESTAMENT, 1525. 
BUT ONE COPT IS NOW IN EXISTENCE. 



84 Otir English Bible. 

the work waS' printing, according to the discovery of Coch- 
Iseus ; and when he had understood from him that the matter 
was even so, and that there was great abundance of paper 
there, he went to the senate, and so brought it about that 
the printer was interdicted from proceeding farther in that 
work. The two Enghsh apostates, snatching away vsdth 
them the quarto sheets printed, fled by ship going up the 
Rhine to "Worms, where the people were under the full rage 
of Lutheranism, that there, by another printer, they might 
complete the work begun." * 

Often have vessels laden with stores of merchandise, or 
with spoils seized by robber lords, dwelling in castles on the 
banks of the Rhine, been seen gliding up that river ; but 
never before had a boat freighted with such a treasure as 
TjTidale's half-printed Testaments floated upon those swift- 
running waters. He hastened to Worms, the city which 
had been entered in triumph by Luther not long before, — 
when the herald of the emperor preceded him on horseback, 
and two thousand persons, including Saxon noblemen, 
accompanied him to his inn. No such welcome awaited 
our English exile. In which of the old streets of that 
picturesque city Tyndale resided during his stay, and where 
the printing press was worked, out of which came the sheets 
which created so much excitement, no one can tell ; but we 
Icnow that the famous typographer, Peter Schoeffer, son of 
Faust's associate at Mentz, had an establishment at Worms, 
where he successfully plied the new-found art. 

The Testament, interrupted in its progress at Cologne, 
was in quarto, and it had a prologue, and certain notes. It 
could easily be identified as Tyndale's, by those who had 

* Com. de Aotis et Scriptis Martini Znnerl, translated in Anderson's Aimah 
of the Bible, vol. i. p. 58. 



William Tyndale. 85 

discovered what lie was doing. At Worms, he changed 
his plan, and commenced an octavo edition of the hook, 
without prologue or notes. This he speedily finished, and at 
once issued it from the press. It was the first New Testa- 
ment printed in English that ever saw the hght. " That the 
rudeness of the work now at the first time offered, offend 
them not," are words of the translator in the postscript to 
his book. But, though the quarto edition was for a Httle 
while left incomplete, Tyndale resumed his labours, and 
completed them. First in design and partial execution, it 
was the last in pubHcation ; and this I take to be the true 
explanation of a bibhographical puzzle, upon which a good 
deal of antiquarian speculation has at different times been 
ex]pended. The whole matter may be seen ia Anderson's 
Annals, examined at length, and placed in as clear a hght 
as scanty and conflicting information renders possible. 

In the month of December, 1525, whilst Tyndale was 
occupied, perhaps in Schoeffer's of&ce, Lee, almoner of Henry 
VIII., and afterwards Archbishop of York, was staying in the 
city of Bordeaux ; and it is remarkable that thus early 
rumours reached him of what Tyndale had been doing. 
" Please your highness to understand," he writes to his royal 
master, " that I am certainly informed, as I passed in this 
country, that an Enghshman, your subject, at the solicitation 
and instance of Luther, with whom he is, hath translated 
the New Testament into Enghsh, and within a few days 
intendeth to return with the same impriated into England. 
I need not to advertise your grace what infection and danger 
may ensue hereby, if it be not withstanded. This is the 
next way to fulfil your realm with Lutherans." " AU our 
forefathers, governors of the Church of England, have with 
all diUgence forbid and eschewed pubhcation of English 



86 Our EnsHsh Bible. 



<b' 



Bibles, as appeareth in constitutions provincial of the 
Church of England." * The letter illustrates the behef 
at the time that Tyndale visited Luther, and it shows the 
wide-spread interest felt in the discovery then recently made 
by the busy Cochlseus. The news is further reported by 
Spalatin, while attending the Imperial Diet in the city of 
Spires. In his diary for Saturday, the morrow of St. Law- 
rence, being the 11th of August, 1526, he says, " Our prince, 
the Elector of Saxony [then at the Diet], having heard a 
sermon at the residence of the Landgrave of Hesse [who 
favoured the Eeformation], returned to his house." Further, 
"At Worms, 6,000 copies of the New Testament were printed 
in English. This work was translated by an EngHshman, who 
was staying there with two of his countrymen, and who was 
so learned in seven languages, Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Itahan, 
Spanish, Enghsh, and French, that whichever he spoke yoti 
would think his native tongue. The Enghsh, indeed, have 
such a desire for the gospel, although the king opposes and 
dislikes it, that they say they would buy a New Testament 
even if each copy cost 100,000 of money." In addition to 
this the New Testament was printed in French at Worms, t 
The learning of Tyndale must have been magnified by re- 
peated conversations on the subject ; and it is a httle curious 
that, while the most intimate acquaintance with Itahan and 
Spanish are attributed to him, nothing is said of German, a 
language which we weU know he had acquired. 

A precious relic of the old quarto Testament was some 
years since discovered by Mr. Eodd, containing the prologue, 
and the Gospel of Matthew, as far as the twenty-second 

* Ellis's Third Series, vol. ii. p. 71. 

f Amcenitates Literaricn, by Sohelhorn, vol. iv. p. 431. Arber's Tyndale's 
Test. p. 26. 



William Tyndale. 87 

chapter. The only complete copy of the octavo edition 
known to exist is preserved ia the Baptist College Library, 
Bristol, but this copy lacks the origiaal title-page. The only 
other copy known — a very imperfect one — ^is in the Library 
of the Dean and Chapter of St. Paul's. In the preface to 
the WickedL Mammon, pubhshed in May, 1528, Tyndale 
says that his New Testament was finished two years pre- 
viously ; and this statement is in harmony with the report 
of Cochlseus, whose story relates to the year 1525. I have 
no doubt that it was in the next year that Tyndale 'puh- 
lished his Testament — not in 1525, as Mr. Anderson has 
endeavoured to prove. After attentively considering all he 
has written, I do not see how the thing was possible as 
he represents it ; and, m the absence of direct and positive 
evidence to the contrary, I adhere to my opinion, that the 
Testament was issued in the former part of the year 1526. 

Stealthily brought over to England, the books were 
soon circulated. Eichard Horman, a merchant of the 
Enghsh factory at Antwerp, and Simon Fyshe, the author 
of a notable production of that day entitled, The Suppli- 
cacyon for the Beggers, appear to have been industrious 
agents in conducting this rather difficult enterprise. The re- 
sults appear in the confession of a man named Eobert Necton, 
who had engaged himself in selling the obnoxious volumes. 
He bought ten, twenty, and thirty copies at a time, of Fyshe, 
described as " dwelling by the White Friars in London." 
He sold five to "Sir William Furboshe, singing man in 
Stowmarket," in Suffolk, for seven or eight groats apiece, 
equal to £1 15s. or £2 now. He carried several to Lynn, 
and would have sold them to a young merchant man, which 
young man would not meddle with them because they were 
prohibited. About Christmas he acknowledges that he went 



88 Oui'- Enzlish Bible 



'i' 



about to buy a great number of New Testaments, when 
there came a Dutchman, who offered to sell two or three 
hundred copies. As to himself, he frankly stated that he 
had read the book through many times, to others as well as 
himself.* This confession seems to have been made about 
the year 1528 ; but it refers to incidents which occurred soon 
after the importation of Tyndale's version. As the stock of 
copies diminished, either in consequence of sales, or through 
forfeiture, fresh importations supplied the demand. This 
perplexed the ecclesiastical authorities, who unwisely deter- 
mined to buy up the edition as fast as possible ; and Archbishop 
Warham wrote on the subject to Nix, Bishop of Norwich, 
who pronounced the undertaldng " a gracious and blessed 
deed." Tonstall entered into the scheme, and endeavoured 
to promote it by purchasing the books abroad, before they 
could be brought over. He happened to be at Antwerp in 
1629, and there he employed a person named Augustine 
Packington, an Antwerp mercer, to carry out liis scheme. 

Tyndale had now reached that city. Leaving Worms, he 
had visited the pleasant town of Marburg, in the Valley of 
Lahn, where the castle of the Landgrave of Hesse, still 
retaining much feudal magnificence, overlooked the habi- 
tations of the industrious burghers. There, from the press 
of Hans Luft, he had pubhshed the Wicked Mammon, 
and other well-known works ; and he had also prepared for 
publication a version of the Pentateuch, which bears this 
colophon, " Emprented at Marlborow, in the land of Hesse, 
by me Hans Luft, the yere of om-e Lorde M.CCCCC.XXX., 
the XVII. dayes of Januarie." The five books of Moses 
thus pubhshed seem to have been intended for separate sale, 
as well as for sale in one volume. Before the work appeared, 

* Stiype'a Ecclesiastical Memorials, vol. i. part ii. p. 63. Oxford edition. 



lift* u ¥>T If 
mm in ^C 

'tl| 4 




,i| ji', ill 'if^i |:.^:'= t^^ 



' I. C [' 'I'l 



!M^ in 

hi" ,' 







I I 







William Tyndale. 91 

Tyndale left Marburg, perhaps to return again by the time 
it was issued; in any ease, however, we find him in the 
great seaport of the Netherlands in the course of 1529, 
when, if Foxe be correct in his date, he paid a visit to 
Hamburg.* 

As the old story goes, Augustine Pacldngton came to 
Tyndale, while in the city, and said, " William, I know thou 
art a poor man, and hast a heap of New Testaments and 
books by thee, for which thou hast both endangered thy 
friends and beggared thyseM, and I have now gotten thee a 
merchant, which, with ready money, shall dispatch thee of all 
that thou hast, if you think it profitable for yourself." " Who 
is the merchant ?" said Tyndale. " The Bishop of London," 
rephed Pacldngton. " Oh ! that is because he wiU burn 
them," rejoined Tyndale. " Yes," quoth Pacldngton. " I 
am the gladder," rejoined Tyndale ; " for these two benefits 
will come thereof — I shall get money to bring myself out of 
debt, and the whole world wiU cry out against the burning 
of God's Word, and the overplus of the money that shall 
remain to me shall make me more studious to correct the 
said New Testament, and so newly to imprint the same once 
again ; and I trust the second will much better hke [please] 
you than ever did the first." " So," remarks the chronicler. 
Hall, who preserves this narrative, "forward went the 
bargain ; the bishop had the books — Packington had the 
thanks — and Tyndale had the money."! Doubts about some 
particulars of the story may fairly be entertained. That 
Tyndale should be the man of whom the books were pur- 
chased seems unlikely, for the editions purchased must 
have been those produced by the Antwerp printers, to 

* Acts and Mon. vol. v. p. 120. 
t Hall's Chronicle, quoted in Demaus'a Life of Tyndale, pp. 221, 222. 



92 Otir English IS idle. 

whom, in all probability, tbey belonged. However, they 
were obtained in some way, and in tbe following year were 
publicly consumed. 

There was a great gathering in the churchyard of old 
St. Paul's, on the 4th of May, 1530. The spectacle-loving 
folks of those days might be seen wending up Ludgate Hill, 
and along the side of Chepe, to assemble round St. Paul's 
Cross. The promenade in the middle aisle of the old Gothic 
cathedral — where London citizens were wont to saunter 
and chat, transact business, and while away an idle hour — 
was almost emptied by the attractive influence of the scene 
to be enacted without the. walls. 

Tliis, and previous acts of the same order, were performed 
by virtue of ecclesiastical authority, which, in those days, by 
royal permission, in some respects reigned supreme. 

On this occasion Tonstall caused the books obtained at 
Antwerp to be committed to the flames. Testament after 
Testament was flung on the blazing pyre — the people were 
solemnly warned against the sin of reading vernacular 
versions. The church was the only teacher. The Bible 
was not for the people to read, but for the priest to explain. 
The version made in the Enghsh tongue was only fit for the 
flames ! The crowds about the old churchyard looked on 
the spectacle that day with varied feeHngs. Some thought 
all was right; others, that all was wrong. "This burning," 
says Burnet, " had such a hateful appearance in it, being 
generally called a burning of the Word of God, that people 
from thence concluded there must be a visible contrariety 
between that book and the doctrines of those who handled 
it ; by which both then- prejudice against the clergy, and 
their desire of reading the New Testament, was increased."* 

* History of the 'Reformation. 



William Tyndale. 95 

On the 24th of May, 1530, less than three weeks after 
the book-burning in St. Paul's Churchyard, a meeting was 
held at Westminster, composed of the King, Archbishop 
Warham, and several of the bishops, together with delegates 
from the universities. In a document they issued, reference 
is made to the translations of Scripture corrupted by 
Wyllyam Tyndall, as well in the Old Testament as in the 
New, among pernicious books, of which said the assembled 
ecclesiastics, through his majesty, "Detest them, abhor 
them ; keep them not in your hands, dehver them to the 
superiors such as call for them." Then he adds, "Thus I move 
and exhort you in God to do, this is your duty to do — this 
ye ought to do, and being obstinate, or denying and refusing 
this to do, the prelates of the church, hairing the care and 
charge of your souls, ought to compel you, and your prince 
to punish and correct you, not doing the same, unto whom 
St. Paul saith the sword is given by God's ordinance for that 
purpose." It is afterwards stated that "it has sometimes 
seemed proper for the Word of God to be circulated, while 
at other times it has been deemed needful for it to be 
restrained, and that the king, taking into consideration all 
circumstances, thinketh in Ins conscience, that the divulging 
of the Scripture at this time in the Enghsh tongue to be 
committed to the people, should rather be to their further 
confusion and destruction than the edification of their souls. 
We cannot require or demand Scripture to be divulged in 
the Enghsh tongue otherwise than upon the discretion of the 
superiors, so as whensoever they think in their consciences 
that it may do you good, they may and do weU to give it 
unto you." * 

* The original MS. is in Lambeth Library. It is printed in Wilkins' OoncUirt, 
vol. iii. p. 727. 



96 Otir English Bible. 

Among the names appended is that of Hugh Latimer, 
well known as an advocate for Bible circulation. What- 
ever might be the principle on which he was induced to 
sign the document, the views expressed in it were opposed 
to his own ; and this he avowed in a letter written to the 
Idng shortly afterwards, where he speaks of tliree or four 
dissentients to the proclamation, whose opinion was over- 
borne by a majority.* 

The crusade was kept up throughout such parts of the 
country as had received the proscribed volumes ; and many 
a strict search was made for them, while ingenious con- 
trivances were adopted for their concealment. 

But, in spite of searchings and burnings, proclamations, 
and buying up of editions, the Testaments still found their 
way from the Continent : sometimes enclosed in packages 
artfully covered with flax, sometimes conveyed among the 
wares of Jewish merchants. " Sir," said the Bishop of 
London to his agent, Paclrington, " how cometh this, that 
there are so many New Testaments abroad ? you promised 
me that you would buy them all?" "I bought all that 
were to be had," rejoined Packington; "but I perceive 
they have printed more since ; I see it will never be better 
so long as . they have letters and stamps ; wherefore you 
were best to buy the stamps too, and so you will be sure." 
The bishop smiled, and so ended the matter. •!■ 

It is an important fact, much overlooked, that at this 
time, when English Protestant books were burnt, and people 
were persecuted for reading them, no Act of Parliament 
stood in the way of importing such books into England 
after they had been printed abroad. Indeed, there was an 
Act which encouraged the importation. Por a proliibitory 

* Foxe, vol. vii. p. 609. \ Poxe, vol. iv. p. 670. 



William Tyndale. 97 

statute of Eicliard in., i., c. 9, in reference to Italians and 
other foreigners, expressly provided that it should not ex- 
tend to any stranger for bringing into this realm, or selling 
by retail, or otherwise, any books written or printed : or to 
any printer of such books dwelling in this country for 
such purpose. The prohibition of importing Enghsh Bibles 
printed abroad was for some time a purely ecclesiastical 
proceeding, the act of certain bishops. But in 1633 an Act was 
passed to repeal the proviso in the statute of Eichard iii., 
and to forbid the importation of foreign printed books ; a new 
proviso now being introduced of quite another kind, namely, 
one to prevent English printers from raising their prices in 
consequence of this barrier against continental competition. 
In this way, Parliament united with the Church in shutting 
the door through which the Scriptures had been conveyed 
to the people of England. 

While Tyndale's enemies on this side of the Channel 
were burning his books, he was pursuing his labours on the 
other, revising his translation, preparing a version of the 
Old Testament, and writing works in defence of principles 
drawn from the sacred oracles. As he had proceeded with his 
studies, and had marked what was going on in this country 
and abroad, his eyes had been opened to the true character 
of the Eomish court and of papal claims. He laid l)are the 
history of the papal see, and the evils which sprang from it. 

In the course of the year 1580, whilst at Marbm-g, he 
pubhshed his Practice of F relates, one of the bitterest of his 
controversial vyritings : provoked to do so by a misap- 
prehension of what was at the time going on in his own 
country.* From this work I quote the following passage : 

" And to see how our holy father came up, mark the 

* Dematis's Xi/e 0/ lyndale, p, 248. 
H 



98 Oiir English Bible. 

ensample of an ivy-tree : first it springeth out of the earth, 
and then awhile creepeth along by the ground till it find 
a great tree. Then it joineth itself beneath alow unto the 
body of the tree, and creepeth up a little and a httle, fair 
and softly. And at the beginning, while it is yet thin and 
small, that the burden is not perceived, it seemeth glorious 
to garnish the tree in the winter, and to bear off the 
tempests of the weather. But in the mean season it 
thrusteth roots into the bark of the tree, to hold fast withal ; 
and ceaseth not to chmb up, till it be at the top and above 
all. And then it sendeth his branches along by the branches 
of the tree, and overgroweth all, and waxeth great, heavy, 
and thict ; and sucketh the moisture so sore out of the tree 
and his branches, that it choaketh and stifleth them. And 
then the foul stinldng ivy waxeth mighty in the stump of 
the tree, and becometh a seat and a nest for all unclean 
birds, and for blind owls, which hawk in the dark, and dare 
not come at the hght. 

" Even so the bishop of Eome, now called pope, at the 
beginning crope along upon the earth ; and every man trod 
upon him in this world. But as soon as there came a 
Christian emperor, he joined himself unto his feet and 
kissed them, and crope up a httle with begging now this 
privilege, now that ; now this city, now that ; to find poor 
people withal, and the necessary ministers of God's Word. 
And he entitled the emperor vsrith choosing the pope and 
other bishops ; and promoted in the spiritualty, not whom 
virtue and learning, but whom the favour of great men com- 
mended; to flatter, to get friends, and defenders vidthal. 
And the alms of the congregation which was the food and 
patrimony of the poor and necessary preachers, that he 
called St. Peter's patrimony, St. Peter's rent, St. Peter's 



William Tyndale. 99 

lands, St. Peter's right; to cast a vain fear and a 
heathenish superstitiousness into the hearts of men, that no 
man should dare meddle with whatsoever came once into 
their hands for fear of St. Peter, though they ministered it 
never so evil; and that they which should think it none 
ahns to give them any more (because they had too much 
already) should yet give St. Peter somewhat (as Nabuchodo- 
nesser gave his god Beel) to purchase an advocate and an 
intercessor of St. Peter, and that St. Peter should at the 
first knock let them in. And thus, with flattering and 
feigning, and vain superstition, under the name of St. 
Peter, he crept up and fastened his roots in the heart of 
the emperor, and with his sword clamb up above all his 
feUow-bishops, and brought them under his feet. And as 
he subdued them with the emperor's sword, even so by 
subtilty and help of them (after that they were sworn 
faithful) he clamb above the emperor, and subdued bim 
also, and made him stoop unto his feet and kiss them 
another while. Yea, Pope Ccelestinus crowned the Emperor 
Henry the Fifth [Sixth], holding the crown between his 
feet : and when he had put the crown on, he smote it off 
with his feet again, saying, that he had might to make 
emperors and put them down again. 

"And he made a constitution, that no layman should 
meddle with their matters, nor be in their councils, or wit 
what they did ; and that the pope only should call the 
council, and the emperor should but defend the pope ; pro- 
vided alway that the council should be in one of the pope's 
towns, and where the pope's power was greater than the 
emperor's. Then, under a pretence of condemning some 
heresy, he called a general council, where he made one a 
patriarch, another cardinal, another legate, another primate. 



lOO Our EnsHsh Bible. 



'A' 



another archbishop, another bishop, another dean, another 
archdeacon, and so forth, as we now see. 

"And as the pope played with the emperor, so did his 
branches and his members, the bishops, play in every king- 
dom, dukedom, and lordship; insomuch that the very heirs of 
them by whom they came up, hold now their lands of them, 
and take them for their chief lords. And as the emperor 
is sworn to the pope, even so every king is sworn to the 
bishops and prelates of his realm : and they are the chiefest 
in all parhaments ; yea, they and their money, and they that 
be sworn to them, and come up by them, rule altogether. 

" And thus the pope, the father of aU hypocrites, hath 
with falsehood and guile perverted the order of the world, 
and turned the roots of the trees upward, and hath put 
down the Idngdom of Christ, and set up the kingdom of the 
devil, whose vicar he is ; and hath put down the ministers 
of Christ, and hath set up the ministers of Satan, disguised 
yet in names and garments bite unto the angels of light 
and ministers of righteousness. For Christ's kingdom is not 
of the world ; and the pope's Idngdom is all the world." * 

In 1531 Tyndale printed a version of Jonah ; and in 
1534 he reissued the Pentateuch, with shght changes in the 
text of Genesis, in the prefaces to the several parts of the 
volume, and in the explanatory tables appended to the work. 
But his most important task this year was a revised trans- 
lation of the New Testament. In it he sought to render the 
EngHsh more idiomatic, and was not above avaihng himself 
of hints derived from hostile criticisms oh the edition of 
1526. In his preface, there is a reference to George Joye, a 
person who had been employed by the Dutch printers in 
speedily bringing out the reprints of Tyndale's Testaments. 

* Tyndale's Works, Practice of Prelates, pp. 270-273, Parker Soo. Bdit. 



William Tyndale. loi 

From it we learn that Tyndale was much dissatisfied with 
the alterations Joye had ventm:ed to make. And the 
criticisms led to an answer on the part of Joye, in which he 
endeavoured to -vindicate himseK against the charges alleged 
by Tyndale. But what chiefly claims notice is what Tyn- 
dale states respecting his own translation : 

" Here thou hast, most dear reader, the New Testament 
or covenant made with us of God in Christ's blood, which I 
have looked over again (now at the last) with all dihgence, and 
compared it unto the Greek, and have weeded out of it many 
faults which lack of help at the beginning and oversight did 
sow therein. If ought seem changed, or not altogether 
agreeing with the Greek, let the finder of the fault consider 
the Hebrew phrase or manner of speech left in the Greek 
words, whose preterperfect tense and present tense is often 
both one, and the future tense is the optative mood also, 
and the future tense is often the imperative mood in the 
active voice, and in the passive ever. Likewise person for 
person, number for number, and an interrogation for a 
conditional, and such hke, is with the Hebrews a common 
usage. I have also in many places set hght in the margin 
to understand the text by. If any man find fault either with 
the translation or ought beside, which is easier for many to 
do than so weU to have translated it themselves of their 
own pregnant wits at the beginning, without forensample, to 
the same it shall be lawful to translate it themselves, and 
to put what they lust thereto. If I shall perceive either 
by myself or by the information of other, that ought be 
escaped me, or might be more plainly translated, I will 
shortly after cause it to be mended. Howbeit in many 
places methinketh it better to put a declaration in the 
margin than to run too far from the text, And in many 



I02 Our English Bible. 

places when the text seemeth at the first chop hard to 
be understood, yet the circumstances before and after, 
and often reading together, maketh it plain enough."* An- 
other and further revised edition was added by Tyndale in 
1535. 

For some time after the invention of typography, printers 
imitated copyists by not prefixing a title-page to their 
volumes. The first Bible with a separate title-page is a 
Latin one from the Venetian press, in 1487. We do not 
know what title-page was prefixed to Tyndale's translation 
of 1526 ; that of 1534 exhibits this description on the first 
leaf : " The Newe Testament dylygently corrected and 
compared with the Greke by WiUyam Tyndale," etc. I have 
indicated the origin of the word "Bible;" the origin of 
the word " Testament" also requires notice. Testament is 
a Latin word, used in the Western Church as equivalent 
to the Greek Diathek^, which, with the prefix Kain^ (new), 
about the fourth century became a common appellation for 
the Gospels, and other inspired Christian books, as distin- 
guished from the old Diathelce or sacred Jewish books. 
The first and more proper meaning, covenant, passed out 
of sight for the secondary meaning, Testament, as denoting 
a will. Wychffe has spoken of Divine Scripture as a Testa- 
ment, and New Testament, we see, is put on the title-page 
of Tyndale's translation of 1534. 

It is time to notice the merits of Tjmdale's work, 
as a Scripture translator. Of his scholarly quaHfications 
there remains no doubt on the part of any one who has 
studied his history. Eash assertions used to be made that 
he translated from the Vulgate ; and I am sorry to say 
that they have of late been repeated by men from whom 
better things might be expected, but who, unfortunately, 

* AAAreis to the Christian Reader, prefixed to edition of 1 534. 



William Tyndale. 103 

have not taken the trouble to mvestigate irresistible evidence 
on the other side. Tyndale's Oxford and Cambridge training, 
and his translation of the Greek oration of Isocrates, would, 
one would think, be sufficient to prove that he must have 
made considerable attainments in the language of the New 
Testament ; and the critical examination of his version, 
recently pubUshed by a distinguished Bibhcal scholar, estab- 
lished, beyond all dispute, that he made it, not from any 
other translation, but from the original itseK.* He wisely 
availed himself of existing helps — the Yulgate, Erasmus's 
New Testament, and Luther's German renderings — but 
these did not diminish the independence of his judgment ; 
they only helped bim to form his own conclusions. 

His knowledge of Hebrew, as well as Greek, has also 
been satisfactorily ascertained, and his care in the prepara- 
tion of his Old Testament translations is equally conspi- 
cuous with that in the New. 

" In his version of the New Testament," says Canon 
Westcott, " we have seen that Tyndale willingly faced the 
labours of minute correction. The texts of 1525, 1534, and 
1635 are specifically distinct, and each later edition offers a 
careful revision of that which preceded it. Though the 
evidence is less extensive in the case of the Old Testament, it 
is evident he expended no less pains upon this. The texts of 
' the epistles from the Old Testament,' appended to the New 
Testament of 1534 and 1535, differ in small details from 
the pubhshed Pentateuch of 1531, and, what is stiU. more 
interesting, from one another. Thus in these, as in the New 
Testaments themselves, there is a double revision ; and there 
is nothing to show that Tyndale bestowed less care upon the 
lessons from the Apocrypha than on those from the canonical 
books. 

* See Westoott'a History of the English Bible, pp. 173, 179. 



I04 Our Englis/i Bible. 

" This patience of laborious emendation completes the 
picture of the great translator. In the conception and style 
of his renderings he had nothing to modify or amend. 
Throughout aU his revisions he preserved intact the 
characteristics of his first work. Before he began he had 
prepared. himseK for the task, of vs^hich he could apprehend 
the full difficulty. He had rightly measured the momentous 
issues of a vernacular version of the Holy Scriptures, and 
determined once for all the principles on which it must be 
made. His later efforts were directed simply to the nearer 
attainment of Ms ideal. To gain this end he availed himself 
of the best help wliich lay vpithin his reach ; but he used it as 
a master, not as a disciple. In this work alone he felt that 
substantial independence was essential to success. In expo- 
sition oi: exhortation he might borrow freely the language 
or the thought which seemed suited to his purpose, but in 
rendering the sacred text he remained throughout faithful 
to the instincts of a scholar. From first to last his style 
and his interpretation are his own ; and in the originahty 
of Tyndale is included, in a large measure, the originahty of 
our English version. For not only did Tyndale contribute to 
it, directly, the substantial basis of haK of the Old Testa- 
ment (in aU probabiHty), and of the whole of the New, but 
he estabhshed a standard of Biblical translation which 
others followed. It is even of less moment that by far the 
greater part of his translation remains intact in our present 
Bibles than that his spirit animates the whole. He toUed 
faithfully himself, and where he failed he left, to those who 
should come after, the secret of success. The achievement 
was not for one, but for many ; but he fixes the type accord- 
ing to which the later labourers worked. His influence 
decided that our Bible should be popular and not Hterary, 



William Tyndale. 1 05 

speaking in a simple dialect, and that so, by its simplicity, 
it should be endowed with permanence. He felt, by a 
happy instinct, the potential af&nity between Hebrew and 
EngUsh idioms, and enriched our language and thought, 
for ever, with the characteristics of the Semitic sound."* 

How far Tyndale availed himself of the labours of 
Wycliffe and Purvey is a critical question. One so interested 
in the work of Bible translation could scarcely fail to be 
somewhat acquainted with its history. He must have known 
something about the LoUard version, though I am not aware 
of any allusion to it in his writings. Mr. Marsh is so con- 
fident, that he says, " Tyndale is merdy a fuU-grown Wychffe. 
The recension of the New Testament is just what his great 
predecessor would have made it, had he awaked again to see 
the dawn of the glorious day, of which his own hfe and 
labours kiadled the morning twilight. Not only does Tyn- 
dale retain the general grammatical structure of the older 
version, but most of its felicitous verbal combiaations, and, 
what is more remarkable, he preserves even the rhythmic 
flow of its periods, which is again repeated ia the recension 
of 1611. "t In aU criticism of this kind there is room for the 
play of a specious imagination, — ^fancy takes the place of fact. 
We must turn to see what Tyndale himself says on this 
subject. These are his own words : " Them that are learned 
Christianly, I beseech that they consider how that I had no 
man to counterfeit [or imitate] , neither was holpen with 
English of any that had interpreted the same or such like 
thing in the Scripture beforetime." This looks hke a 
disclaimer of having used any pre\'ious vernacular version 
in the execution of his own ; yet the words translated, 

* WestooU's History, pp. 208, 211. 

t Lectures on the English Language, p, 447. 



io6 Our English Bible. 

^,ii. s~ " pinnacle of the Temple," " comprehended," "tribulation 
0^ ■ /- -J^" and anguish," and " mote " and " beam," point in an opposite 
*™ ' ^' ^ direction ; and, what is very remarkable, in Matt. vii. 6, both 
WyclLffe and Tyndale adopt a rendering — ^not suggested 
either by the Greek or by the Latin — which refers the 
"tramphng" to the "swine," and the "rending" to the 
" dogs; " also in the 14th verse of the same chapter, both 
speak of the gate as strait, and the way as narrow.* In- 
■ genious surmises may be adopted to reconcile the fact of 
certain resemblances between the two translations and the 
high probabiHty of Tyndale's having read the work of his 
predecessor, with the statement he has so distinctly ex- 
pressed ; yet, after all, we meet here vnth another of the 
difficult, if not insoluble, problems of Tyndale's life and 
labours. 

Tyndale's renderings are remarkable in two respects : 
they are unconventional and popular ; they are also quaint 
and racy. Of the former class we have examples in the words 
" congregation," not church ; " favour," not grace ; " over- 
seer," not bishop ; " elder," not priest ; " love," not charity. 
Such renderings show that Tyndale wished to employ words 
in popular use, words that would explain themselves, rather 
than technical terms, however venerable from their eccle- 
siastical usage. Of the latter class — the quaint and racy — the 
foUovying are instances : In Matt. iv. 24, we find " divers 
diseases and gripinges ; " vi. 7, "bable not moche; " x. 9, 
"nor brasse yn youre gerdels ; " xiii. 33, "hyd in thre 
peckes off meele ; " xiv. 14, " his herte dyde melt uppon 
them ; " 20, " gaddered up of the gobbetes ; " xv. 27, " the 
whelppes eate of the crommes ; " xvii. 27, " thou shalt fynd a 
piece of twelve pens ; " xxvi. 17, " to eate the ester lambe ; " 

* Dr. Moulton, Bible Educator, vol. ii. p. 309, 



William Tyndale. loy 

Mark vi. 40, " sat doune, here arowe, and there arowe; " 
viii. 19, " how many baskettes of the levinges of broken 
meate toke ye up ? " xiv. 66, " won off the wenches off the 
hyest preste ; " Luke ii. 3, " his awne shyre toune ; " x. 34, 
"brought hym to a common hostry; " xi. 46, "yourselves 
touche not the packes ; " xv. 16, "filled his bely with the 
coddes that the swyne ate."* 

These details might be multiphed by numerous references 
to Tyndale's Old Testament. In comparing the quarto of 
Tyndale's Testament, 1526, with Luther's, 1522, the resem- 
blance, in respect of printing, is remarkable. The appear- 
ance of the page is the same, the arrangement of the text is 
the same, and the references in the margin are also the 
same, and, what is more important to be noticed, the marginal 
notes introduced into the quarto edition are to a large extent 
translations from those of Luther.f 

No doubt Tyndale made use of Luther in the translation 
of the text, as well as in the compilation of notes, but far 
less in the former than the latter. His revisions show his 
careful adherence to the original. About a third of the 
alterations in the edition of 1534, as compared wdth that of 
1525, show nearer approximations to the Greek, — some in 
the most dehcate minutise of the work. In one passage a 
rendering from Luther takes the place of a paraphrase in 
the earher edition ; " yet it must be remarked that, even 
in this revision, the changes are far more frequently at 
variance with Luther's renderings than in accordance with 
them."t 

A man Hke Tyndale, so incessantly and quietly plying 
his pen in translating Scripture truths, was not hkely to 

* See Eadie's English Bible, vol, i. pp. 166, 157, 
t Demaus'a Idfe of Tyndale, p. 122. Aiber, 67. 
t Westcott's Hist, p, 185. Ho gives the variations in App. iii. 



io8 Our English Bible. 

be unmolested by enemies to a free circulation of the Bible. 
Henry viii., though he had broken "wlthBome, and had com- 
menced a course which proved subservient to the cause of the 
Reformation, was an inveterate enemy to the use of Tyndale's 
version, and published a proclamation against it, for which no 
doubt he was the more ready because Tyndale had condemned 
the divorce of Catherine. At one period — it was soon after 
the monarch's marriage with AnneBoleyn — a rumour obtained 
currency that he had become favourably disposed towards 
the circulation of a vernacular version. Tyndale, in his last 
letter to Erith, 1533, remarks, " George Joye, at Candlemas, 
being at Barrow, printed two leaves of G-enesis, in a great 
form, and sent one copy to the Idng, and another to the new 
queen, with a letter to N. for to dehver them, and to purchase 
licence that he might so go all through the Bible. Out of this 
is sprung the noise of the new Bible, and out of that is the 
great seeking for EngHsh books at all printers and book- 
binders in Antwerp, and for an Enghsh priest that should 
print."* Hence it is clear that a notion prevailed of the king 
being favourable to an English translation of the Bible. 
Cranmer, too, who was just raised to the primacy, of whom 
miich will be said hereafter, exerted all his influence to effect 
this object. 

But, whatever were the real thoughts and purposes of the 
capricious sovereign at that raoment, no hope remained for 
Wilham Tyndale. His work could never be royally welcomed 
in England, because the offence committed by his opposing 
the divorce could not be forgiven. However, for some reason 
which it is difficult to ascertain, measures were employed 
to decoy him over to England. Sir Stephen Vaughan, 
Henry's agent in the Netherlands, did his utmost to persuade 

* Dematia's lAfi of Tyndale, p. 377, 







.I4« A \ '* I ll 



V 






I ■ J 



William Tyndale. 



Ill 



him to return ; but Tyndale, though ready to die in defence 
of truth, did not deem it a duty to put his head into the 
lion's mouth, and therefore preferred to remaia on the 
Continent. 

Yet he sought to vindicate himself to the king's minister. 
One day a stranger informed Sir Stephen that a person 
desired to speak with him. Conducted to a field by the 
walls of Antwerp, close to a running stream, he found the 
person in waiting to be Tyndale himself. "Sir," said he, "I 
have been exceeding desirous to speak vvdth you.* I am 
informed that the king's grace taketh great displeasure vdth 
me for putting forth of certain books which I lately made in 
these parts, but especially for the book named the Practice 
of Prelates, whereof I have no little marvel, considering 
that in it I did but warn his grace of the subtle demeanour 
of the clergy of his realm towards his person, and of the 
shameful abuses by them practised, not a little threatening 
the displeasure of his grace and weal of his realm; in which 
doing I showed and declared the heart of a true subject, 
which sought the safeguard of his royal person, and weal of 
his commons, to the intent that his grace thereof warned, 
might, in due time, prepare his remedies against the subtle 
dreams. If for my pains therein taken — ^if for my poverty — 
if for my exile out of my natural country, and being absent 
from my friends — if for my hunger, my thirst, my cold, the 
great danger wherewith I am everywhere compassed, and 
finally, if for innumerable other hard and sharp sicknesses 
which I endure, not yet feeling their asperity, by reason I 
hoped vdth my labours to do honour to God, true service to 
my prince, and pleasure to his commons — how is it that his 
grace, this considering, may either by himself think, or by 

* Cott. MSS., Titus, b. i., 67. 



1 1 2 Our English Bible. 

the persuasions of others be brought to think, that in this 
doing I should not show a pure mind, a true and incorrupt 
zeal, and affection to his grace ? " 

The interAdew between Tyndale andVaughan by the gates 
of Antwerp, in the meadow near the stream, while the former 
eloquently defended his character, is one of those interesting 
incidents in the bypaths of history which are more worthy 
of attention than many world-known facts standing out 
conspicuously, but insignificantly, on the high road. 

Vaughan had another interview with Tyndale, and seemed 
deeply touched by the earnestness and pathos with which 
he pleaded for hberty to perform the task on wliich his heart 
was set. 

" If it would stand with the king's most gracious pleasure 
to grant only a bare text of the Scripture to be put forth 
among his people, like it is put forth among the subjects of 
the emperor in these parts, and of other Christian princes, 
be it of the translation of what person soever shall please his 
majesty, I shall immediately make faithful promise never to 
write more, nor abide two days in these parts after the same ; 
but immediately to repair unto his realm, and there most 
humbly submit myseK at the feet of his royal majesty, offer- 
ing my body to suffer what pain or tortures, yea, what death 
his grace vsdU, so that this be obtained."* 

There was another exile on the Continent at the time, 
one hke-minded with Tyndale, his affectionate and constant 
friend, and probably a convert to Protestant truth through 
his instrumentality. I refer to the meek, amiable, and pious 
John Frith. Vaughan was exhorted by the king to use his 
influence with him, and get him also back to England. 

* Letter printed in EngUah Translations and Translators, prefixed to Bagstov's 
Sexapla, 



WUliam Tyndale. 1 1 3 

Whether through such influence or not, Frith certainly did 
soon after return, to experience the tender mercies of Henry 
and his myrmidons, manifested in his committal to the 
Tower and in his speedy martyrdom. Tyndale wrote a letter 
to Frith in prison, in which he said, " I call God to record 
against the day we shall appear before our Lord Jesus to 
give a reckoning of our doings, that I never altered one 
syllable of God's Word against my conscience, nor would 
this day, if aU that is in the earth, whether it be honour, 
pleasure, or riches, shall be given me." 

Addressing his friend in the prospect of martyrdom, 
Tyndale speaks ia a tone of deep piety:* "Dearly beloved, 
be of good courage, and comfort your soul with the hope of 
this high reward, and bear the image of Christ in your mortal 
body, that it may, at His coming, be made hke to His im- 
mortal ; and follow the example of all your other dear brethren 
which chose to suffer in hope of a better resurrection. Keep 
your conscience pure and undefiled, and say against that 
nothing. Stick at necessary things, and remember the 
blasphemies of the enemies of Christ, ' They find none but 
will abjure rather than suffer the extremity.' Moreover, the 
death of them that come again after they have once denied, 
though it be accepted with God and all that believe, yet it 
is not glorious ; for the hypocrites say, ' He must needs die ; 
denying helpeth not ; but might it have holpen, they would 
have denied five hundred times ; but seeing it would not 
help them, therefore of pure pride and mere malice together 
they speak with their mouths that their conscience kaoweth 
false.' If you give yourself, cast yourself, yield, yourself, 
commit yourseK wholly and only to your loving Father ; then 
shall His power be in you and make you strong ; and that so 

* Damans, Life of Tyndale, pp. 352, 375. The letter ia dated the Dth of May [1533J 

I 



114 



Otir English Bible. 



strong that you shall feel no pain, which shall be to another 
present death, and His Spirit shall speak in you, and teach 
you what to answer, according to His promise." 

These words of comfort were calculated to strengthen the 
sufferer, as in the July of 1533 he was led to Smithfield, 
where he perished at the stake. 




TILVOKDB CASTLE. 



Tyndale was betrayed into the hands of his enemies by 
an unprincipled Englishman, named Philips. . This man had 
professed friendsliip for the noble-hearted reformer, and had, 
on the very morning of the betrayal, borrowed of him forty 
shillings. Under the guidance of this second Iscariot the 
officers proceeded to Tyndale's place of abode, when PhiHps 



William Tyndale. 1 1 5 

entered, and bringing out his unsuspecting victim, " gave the 
men a sign," who immediately seized on their prey, and 
conveyed him to the castle of Vilvorde, near Brussels. The 
unresisting meelcness, the transparent simplicity of the good 
man affected the officers ; and during captivity his pious 
conversation was made useful to the gaoler and his family. 

In September, 1536, he was led forth to execution, and 
having been first strangled, his body was throvni into the 
flames. His last breath went up to heaven in the well-known 
prayer, " Lord, open the eyes of the King of England ! " "If 
they burn me," he had said eight years before, " they shaU 
do no other thing than that I looked for. There is none 
other way into the kingdom of life, than through persecution 
and suffering of pain, and of very death, after the example 
of Christ."* 

At whose instigation was Tyndale barbarously sacrificed? 
Much of obscurity rests on the transaction, but there can be 
httle doubt that enemies of the reformer in this country, if 
not prompters of the act, yet vnnked at its perpetration. 

His only friend in his last, as in his early days, was an 
Enghsh merchant. All honour to the name of Thomas 
Poyntz, Tyndale's host, in whose house he was captured, 
who pleaded hard to save him, and who even risked his hfe 
in the adventure! "Brother," he says, writing to John 
Poyntz, a gentleman at the Enghsh court, " the knowledge 
that I have of this man causes me to write as my conscience 
bids me ; for the king's grace should have of him, at this day, 
as high a treasure as of honour : one man living there is 
not that has been of greater reputation." Poyntz was im- 
prisoned at Brussels, on account of his intimacy with Tyndale, 
and saved himself — probably, from a death of violence — 

* Demans, JAfe of Tyndale, p. 482. 



1 1 6 Our English Bible. 

by escaping from prison, and maldng liis way to England. 
This friend of the translator now hes bm-ied in the Httle 
chnxch of South Oxenden, Essex. Many graves of far less 
interest than his are pointed out and visited with the 
highest honour. 

Tyndale was eminently a great man — great in mind, and 
heart, and enterprise. His intellectual endowments were of 
an order to render him a match in controversy with no less 
a personage than the illustrious Sir Thomas More. Logic, 
erudition, wit, and eloquence, may all be found in the pages 
of his answer to Sir Thomas; and that his opponent felt 
sensible of his intellectual and Hterary qualifications, there 
are obvious indications in the portly quartos which he wrote 
against him. The quaUties of his heart were as remarkable 
as those of his head. He combined a calm and steady heroism 
with a chUd-hke simplicity. No man was ever more free 
from duphcity, more full of meekness, and at the same time 
more elevated in soul by a manly courage. Ever, " as in his 
great Taskmaster's eye," he pursued his labours in obscurity 
and exile, reaping no earthly benefit whatever — looking for 
no reward but the smile of his heavenly Father. 

He dealt a blow at Romanism more effectual than any 
other aimed at it by his Protestant contemporaries. Other 
reformers have filled the field of vision and engrossed the 
attention of historians ; but to Tyndale, of right, belongs a 
chief place in the first rank of the noble band. 



-3*6- 



®«-,-^*:.X*_.^fc:.^ft;.^»iii..?*to_.Xfc_»f«_(/iL._»»!..^«^.-JM._(»;?._rt>^.yfeL.^4i@ 




f!H/.PTE^ V. 



MILKS COVERDALE. 




N the district of Coverdale, in the cottnty 
of York, there stood, at the close of the 
fifteenth century, in all its magnificence, 
the weU-known abhey of Coverham. 
Amidst the pleasant scenery which bor- 
dered upon that ecclesiastical edifice, 
amidst hiUs, meadows, and trout-streams, 
in all probability, the man first saw the 
light who was to be a coadjutor of Tyn- 
dale, and to go beyond him by beiug 
the first to pubhsh the whole of the Bible, 
translated from the original. Miles Coverdale, no doubt, 
derived his name from the district iu which he was born, 
and perhaps ia the monastic school at Coverham received 
the first elements of instruction. One pictures the sturdy 
little fellow running about the bills, sporting in the 
meadows, and fishing in the trout-streams, and then 
minghng with other boys, under the tutorship of the cowled 
monks, who little thought, as they looked on his counten- 
ance, the kind of man he was to make. 

In his youth he went to the Augustine monastery in 



ii8 



Our Englisk Bible. 



Cambridge, and there shared, no doubt, in the advantages 
derived from the revival of learning in the university, about 
the time of Erasmus's second \'isit to it in 1511. Dr. 
Barnes was among the chief instruments of that revival, 
and it was he who presided as prior over the brethren of 




MILES COVEKUALE. 



the house of the Augustines at Cambridge. The accommo- 
dation and habits of Cambridge men were then rather 
different from what they are now ; and if the reader 
would Hke to take a peep at them in the days of Coverdale, 
he may form a judgment of what they must have been 



Miles Coverdale. 119 

then from what they were in the reign of Edward vi., as 
thus described in a sermon by Thomas Lever,* 1550 : 
"There be divers there which rise daily between four and 
five of the clock in the morning, and from fivet until six of 
the clock use common prayer, with an exhortation of God's 
Word, in a common chapel, and from six until ten of the 
clock use ever either private study or common lectures. At 
ten of the clock they go to dinner, whereat they be con- 
tent with a penny piece of beef amongst four, having a few 
pottage made of the broth of the same beef, with salt and 
oatmeal, and nothing else. After this slender dinner, they 
be either teaching or learning until five of the clock iu the 
evening, when they have a supper, not much better than 
their dinner. Immediately after which they go either to 
reasoning in problems, or unto some other study, until it be 
nine or ten of the clock, and there being without fire are 
fain to walk or run up and down, half an hour, to get a 
heat in their feet when they go to bed." 

Perhaps there was better cheer in the monastery of the 
Augustines before the Reformation than it would seem, 
from Lever's sermon, many of the Cambridge men enjoyed 
afterwards ; however that might be, there Coverdale studied 
and worked, and laid in such an amount of learning as quali- 
fied bim for the great work which Providence intended him 
to perform. Dr. Barnes was brought to the knowledge of 
Evangelical truth, and was led to adopt the principles of the 
reformers, by Thomas Bihiey. Probably, Coverdale soon 
imbibed the spirit of his worthy prior, and thus began the 
noble career which secured such benefits for his country. In 
a letter vmtten from the Augustine monastery, to Thomas 

* Antiquarian Repertory (ed. 1809), vol. iv. p. 18. 

t Before the Reformation it would be the hour of prime. The Common Prayer 
was introduced by the reformers. 



I20 Our English Bible. 

Cromwell, on May day, 1527, Coverdale remarks : — "Now I 
begin to taste of Holy Scriptm-es ; now, honour be to God, I 
am set to the most sweet smell of holy letters, with the godly 
savour of holy and ancient doctors, unto whose knowledge I 
cannot attain without diversity of books, as is not unknown 
to your most excellent wisdom. Nothing in the world I 
desire hut books, as concerning my learning : they once had, 
I do not doubt but Almighty God shall perform that in me 
which He of His most plentiful favour and grace hath 
begun."* 

Thomas Cromwell, afterwards Earl of Essex, the favour- 
ite of Henry — one who played so conspicuous a part in the 
secular movements connected with the Eeformation — was 
Coverdale's early friend and patron ; and the connection 
of this great man, and the assistance which he rendered 
Coverdale in his undertaking, are obvious in the reformer's 
history up to the time of the minister's death. Perhaps it 
was the friendship of Cromwell which saved Coverdale from 
being involved in trouble when he came out as an antagonist 
to papal errors. Barnes was accused of heresy, and com- 
mitted to the Fleet. Coverdale attended him as a friend, 
amidst his trials ; and afterwards, in Essex, distinguished 
himself as a zealous preacher against transubstantiation, the 
worshipping of images, and the practice of confession. Yet we 
find him untouched by persecution. But in 1529 he appears 
to have left his native country for the Continent, no doubt 
induced so to do as the best plan for securing personal safety. 
There we lose sight of him for a while, unless we believe 
Foxe's unsupported statement, that he became connected 
with Tyndale at Hamburg in translating the Pentateuch. 

Besides Cromwell, who took a private interest in Coverdale, 

* Qnoted in WrnnonaXs of Miles Coverdale, p. 7. 



Miles Coverdale. 



121 



there were two other distinguished personages friendly Hke 
himself to the circulation of Bnghsh Scriptures. Anne 
Bole3m had appointed Latimer as one of her chaplains ; in 
other ways also she had favoured the Eeformation ; and it 




THOMAS CKOMWELL. 



can easily be conceived how considerable, for a time, would 
be the influence exerted by one "who reigned ia the king's 
heart as absolutely as he did over his subjects."* Cranmer, 
whose opinions are well known — and his exertions on behalf 

* Burnet's Sistory of the Reformation, vol. i. p. 269. 



1 2 2 Our English B ible. 

of Bible translations will be presently reviewed — was, just at 
this juncture, raised to the primacy on the death of Ai'ch- 
bishop Warham. AU these circumstances were propitious 
in relation to further attempts at translating the Bible by 
some one not personally obnoxious to the sovereign. 

In the Chapter House of old St. Paul's, in the vidnter of 
1534, four days before Christmas, Cranmer stood up before 
Convocation to recommend that something should be done 
in reference to Bibhcal translation. The members, though 
incHned to fall in vnth his views to some extent, clogged 
their concession by an order to the effect, that all persons 
having books of suspected doctrine in the vulgar tongue, 
imprinted beyond or on this side the sea, should, v^itliin 
three months, bring them in to officers appointed by his 
majesty, under penalties at the royal pleasure. The con- 
cession itself ran in the follovnng form : that the bishops, 
abbots, and priors of the upper house, "unanimously did 
consent, that the most reverend father the archbishop should 
make instance in their names to the Idng that . . . his majesty 
would vouchsafe to decree that the Scriptures should be 
translated into the vulgar tongue, by some honest and learned 
men, to be nominated by the king, and to be delivered unto 
the people according to their learning."* The reference to a 
royal decree, as an authority for what was to be done, shows 
the effect of the recent Act of Supremacy, which had trans- 
ferred so large a share of spiritual power into his majesty's 
hands. Previously, according to the Arundel Constitution 
of 1408, Convocation, independently of any other sanction, 
might have made such a decree, indeed, a single bishop 
might have done so in his own diocese.f 

* Strype, Mem. of Oranmer (Oxford edit.), vol. i. p, 34. 
t See Collier's Eccl. Hist., vol. iii. p. 280. 



Miles Cover dale. 123 

What followed will be noticed hereafter : in the mean- 
while, we must foUow Coverdale, who had for years been " set 
to the sweet smell of holy letters." Possibly he felt encou- 
raged by tidings of what went on in England, to hasten 
his preparations for a version of the whole Bible. Foxe 
says that Coverdale met Tyndale at Hamburg in 1529, 
and he helped him in translating the Pentateuch — a 
statement which, though sometimes questioned, contains 
in it nothing improbable ; but where Coverdale was, and 
what exactly he did until 1534, is not apparent. At that time, 
however, it is certain that he was fully absorbed in the 
accomplishment of his great design; and in the preface to his 
Bible he says, " Considering how excellent knowledge and 
learning an interpreter of Scripture ought to have in the 
tongues, and pondering also mine own insufficiency therein, 
and how weak I am to perform the office of a translator, I 
was the more loath to meddle with this work. Notwith- 
standing, when I considered what great pity it was that we 
should want it so long, and called to my remembrance the 
adversity of them who were not only of ripe knowledge, but 
would also, with all their hearts, have performed that they 
begun, if they had not had impediment ;" (here, probably, he 
alludes to Tyndale, then in prison ;) " considering, I say, that 
by reason of their adversity it could not so soon have been 
brought to an end as our most prosperous nation would fain 
have had it ; these and other reasonable causes considered, 
I was the more bold to take it in hand." 

In the edition of his Bible pubHshed in 1550, he further 
states, " For which cause, according as 1 was desired 
anno 1534, I took the same upon me to set forth the 
special translation, not as a checker, not as a reprover or 
despiser of other men's translations." And in the dedica- 



124 Our English Bible. 

tion of his work he also remarks, " The Holy Ghost moved 
other men to do the cost thereof." From these hints, it 
may be gathered that Coverdale was stimulated to his 
work by other persons ; that other persons bore the cost of 
the pubhcation ; and that he was careful not to cast any 
reflection on the enunent man who had preceded him ia his 
toils. 

Additional light has lately been thrown upon the history 
of Coverdale's Bible by the discovery of a passage in a brief 
biographical notice of Emanuel van Meteren, author of the 
History of Belgium, pubhshed in Flemish, 1614, and in 
French in 1618. Both editions issued from the Hague ; and 
the notice, long overlooked, is appended to the history. It 
appears from this sketch, that one Cornehus van Meteren, 
towards the close of the fifteenth century, removed from 
Breda to Antwerp, and afterwards became connected, by 
the marriage of his son, with a family named Ortelius. 
Another marriage hnked the two famiUes to John Eogers, 
a famous biblical translator, to be noticed hereafter. 
Cornehus van Meteren married Ottiha Ortehus, and they 
had a son named Jacob. Jacob is represented in the 
biography as zealously engaged in producing a translation 
of the Bible "for the advancement of the kingdom of 
Christ in England ;" " and for this purpose he employed a 
certain learned scholar named Miles Coverdale."* 

I subjoin the whole passage as it appears in the French 
work. The last sentence is all that I can find relating 
to Miles Coverdale. Spealdng of Jacob van Meteren, the 
writer says: " Luy avoit faict apprendre sa jeunesse I'art 
d'imprimerie, & estoit dou(^ de la cognoissance de plusieurs 
langues, & autres bones scieces tellement que des lors il 

* The Bibles in the Caxton ExMhitinn, p. SS. 



Miles Coverdale. 125 

sceust si bien distinguer la lumiere des tenebres, qu'il em- 
ploya sa peine, & monstra son zele en Anvers k la traduction 
de la Bible Angloise, & employa a cela vn certain docte 
Escolier nomme Miles Coverdal ce qu'il fit a I'avancement 
du Eoyaume de lesus Christ en Angieterre."* 

This very important passage has been brought into notice 
through the indefatigable researches of Mr. Stevens ; and it 
estabUshes beyond question a fact previously unknown — that 
Coverdale and Jacob van Meteren were connected with each 
other in bringing out an EngHsh Bible. Nor can there be 
any reasonable doubt that the Bible referred to is that 
which is so well known as Coverdale's. Such being the 
case, it seems to follow that Coverdale's Bible was printed 
at Antwerp ; and this serves to set at rest a long agitated 
question amongst bibliographers. Wanley and Fry have 
supposed the work was executed at Zurich ; and play has 
been given to the fancy, that Coverdale, when bringing the 
book through the press, was sojourning in the well-known 
cheerful city, embosomed among vine-clad knolls, meadows, 
and orchards, and surmounted by forests, above and beyond 
which appear the loftier summits of the Alps. The poetical 
dream is dispelled by a sentence in the old Dutch book just 
cited ; and we are summoned to the busy commercial city 
of Antwerp, to watch the advancement of the work so 
interesting to every Bnghshman. But there is nothing 
whatever in this valuable discovery to lead us to suppose 
that Jacob van Meteren did anything more than in some 
way " employ" Coverdale in this work — whether by money 
or by mechanical toil as printer, does not appear — though, 

* ia Fie et la Mart de I'honorable et Benormne Sistorien Emanuel de 
Meteren, printed at the end of L'Histoire des Pays-has d'Emamtel de Meteren, 
La Ha;e, 1618. 



126 Our English Bible. 

indeed, as Meteren was a scholar, learned in languages, 
it is possible he may have assisted Coverdale by some 
suggestions. 

The word " employa," used by the biographer of Van 
Meteren, who naturally looked at the transaction from the 
Antwerp point of view, would seem to refer to some 
arrangement arising oiit of pecuniary responsibility, and 
falls in with Coverdale's statement, just now quoted, " The 
Holy Ghost moved other men to do the cost thereof." But, 
in connection with the acknowledgment of Meteren's part, 
it must not be forgotten that Coverdale was an agent of 
CromweU, and enjoyed his patronage; perhaps, also, he 
had some pecuniary assistance from him in the matter. 
Coverdale's words suggest that more than one provided 
the cost. 

A curious incident is related in reference to the Meteren 
family, in 1535. Jacob was for a while absent in England. 
The London booksellers and stationers, finding the market 
filled with foreign books, especially Testaments, made com- 
plaint in 1533, and petitioned for relief; inconsequence 
of which the proviso in the Act of Eichard iii., already 
referred to, was repealed, and foreigners were compelled to 
sell their editions entire to some London stationer in sheets, 
so that the binders might not suffer. Business arising out 
of this circumstance probably took the printer from his 
home ; and during his absence his house was searched, 
" ostensibly for the person of Leonard OrteHus, the father 
of Abraham, and the uncle of Ottiha, to arrest him as a 
Lutheran, but really to search for forbidden books." Ottilia 
was at the time expecting the birth of a child ; and, praying 
to the Almighty for the safety of her family as well as her- 
self, she resolved that she would give the new-comer a name 



Miles Coverdale. 127 

commemorative of the Divine mercy. On the 9th of July, 
1535, a boy was born, whom she named Emanuel, " God 
■with us ;" and this boy is, by the bibhographer who makes 
knovm to us the fact, further named, " twin brother of the 
Coverdale Bible." 

It is truly affecting to learn that towards the end of the 
reign of Edward vi., finding Antwerp unsafe for them, on 
account of their rehgion, they resolved to remove, with all 
their effects and females, to London, and hve under the 
young king, who had offered them an asylum. On their 
passage from Antwerp, the ship which carried them was 
attacked by a French cruiser, burnt and sunk : and so 
perished Jacob and OttiHa van Meteren.* 

Much difficulty has been felt in determining the time 
occupied by the execution of Coverdale's work. His reference 
to Tyndale seems to fix the commencement of the under- 
taking to about the year 1534; and ia the preface to a 
subsequent edition, just noticed, the author gives that year 
as the date of taking upon him " to set forth this special 
translation." I cannot agree with those who suppose that 
"to set forth" means superintendence of the printing and 
correction of the sheets. Giving copy to the workmen, 
and receiving and examining proofs, surely could not be the 
business he was induced to undertake through the adversity 
of others — could not be the act he was specially desired by 
friends to perform ! 

In all probability, when he commenced, he had materials 
by him, besides earher translations, which would help him 
in the performance of his task. He is likely to have made 
versions of certain parts for his own use : but, allowing for 

* Stevens, Catalogue of the Caxton Exhibition pp. 87-91. 



128 Our Enzlish Bible. 



'0) 



such helps, what he accomplished must have been done in a 
short time, and was certainly a herculean achievement. 

Mr. Stevens, to whom we are indebted for information 
respecting Van Meteren, has also done much to unravel a 
mystery connected with the title-page to Coverdale's Bible. 
Different titles, and different preliminary leaves, are found 
in different copies, and they have occasioned much per- 
plexity. There is a Coverdale of 15.^5, in Sion CoUege 
Library, with a title-page probably taken from some other 
copy, as well as a fac-simile of the same page, made up 
by some ingenious imitator so skilfully that — as the librarian 
who showed it to me many years ago remarked — " it would 
deceive the very elect.'' A genuine title-page is prefixed to 
the copy belonging to the Earl of Leicester, which I had the 
privilege of examining at Holkham Hall, soon after it was 
brought to Hght, having been long concealed, so I was 
informed, within the bottom of an old chair. 

The title-page is bordered by woodcuts representing 
events in sacred history, King Henry viii. being depicted 
at the foot as receiving the Bible from the bishops and 
nobles kneeling before him. The letterpress of the page 
is as follows: "Biblia. The Bible, that is, the Holy 
Scripture of the Olde and New Testament faithfully and 
truly translated out of Douche and Latyn in to Englishe. 
MDXXSV. S. Paul, ii Tessa iii. Praie for us, that the 
worde of God maie have fre passage, and be glorified, &c. 
S. Paul Col. iii. Let the worde of Christ dwell in you 
plenteously in all wysdome, &c. Josue i.. Let not the 
boke of this lawe departe out of thy mouth, but exercyse 
thyselfe therin daye and nighte, &c." Mr. Fry, in his small 
volume, The Bible by Coverdale, remarks, "In the Bible 
of 1535, belonging to the Earl of Leicester, at Holkham 



Miles Coverdale. 129 

Hall, having the title before described, is one leaf printed in 
the same type as the title, and as the volume itself. It is 
the only one Icnown to exist printed in this type, and is most 
interesting, as proving that some introductory matter was 
printed in the same type as the work. It also affords strong 
evidence that the title, vnth the hst of books on the reverse 
of it, was not intended to accompany the dedication, etc., 
which was printed in the Enghsh black-letter." 

The Holkham Bible is considered by Mr. Stevens to be a 
perfect copy of the original book, as it came from an Antwerp 
press, in 1535 (the press which he claims to have been Van 
Meteren's), and he, as well as Mr. Fry, makes it appear 
probable that this Bible contained no royal dedication. 
Besides the perfect Holkham Coverdale, there is another 
Coverdale at Castle Ashby, the property of the Marquis of 
Northampton, printed in black-letter, and dated 1536. The 
title-page runs as foUows : " Biblia, the Byble, that is the 
Holy Scrypture of the Olde and New Testament, faythfully 
translated into Bnglysche, mdxxsvi. S. Paul, ii Tessal ui. 
praye for us that the Worde of God may have free passage 
and be glorified. S. Paul, CoUoss. iii.. Let the Worde of 
Christ dwell in you plenteously, in all vs^ysdome, &c. Josue i. 
Let not the boke of this lawe depart out of thy mouth, but 
exercyse thyselfe therin daye and nighte, that thou mayest 
kepe and do everye thynge accordynge to it that is wrjrtten 
therein." 

The difference between this title-page and the other is 
obvious at a glance. The words " out of Douche and 
Latyn " are dropped in the Northampton Bible, and the 
last text quoted as a motto, instead of being mutilated, as in 
the Holkham copy, is given complete. There is another and 
important difference between the two Bibles ; whereas the 



130 Our English Bible. 

Leicester Bible lacks a royal dedication, the Northampton 
copy contains one addressed to the most victorious prince 
King Henry the Eighth. Allusion is made in the first 
sentence to his " dearest first wife and most virtuous princess 
Queen Anne." 

Mr. Fry says, in his volume on Coverdale, just referred 
to, that if his " views are correct, the copy of the Sacred 
Scriptures in the hbrary at Castle Ashby is of the highest 
interest, since it must be regarded as the only example that 
is known to us of the first Bible in the Enghsh language 
surviving (except the map), exactly in the state in which it 
was issued in this country, and in the same year in which 
the printing of the text was finished." 

Another Coverdale is in the possession of the Earl of 
Jersey, and was included in the Caxton Exhibition. We 
find on the title-page, "Bibha. The Byble, that is the 
Holy Scrypture of the olde and newe Testament faythfully 
translated into Englyshe, mdxxxvi." Then follow the 
Scripture mottoes as they appear in the Northampton copy ; 
and the colophon is the same as in the Leicester Bible, 
" Prynted in the yeare of our Lord mdxxxv., and fynished 
the fourth day of October." The dedication has the name 
of Queen Jane, who was married to Henry viii.. May 
20, 1536. " It is, we beheve," says Mr. Stevens, " the only 
copy known perfect as it came from the hands of the 
publisher, Nicolson, that is, v\dth the title, reverse, blank, 
and the seven other preliminary leaves, together with the 
map, as added by Nicolson, while the rest of the volume is 
as it came from Van Meteren '' — whom this authority, as 
we have seen, supposes, but without sufficient reason, 
to have had a main hand in the translation as well as 
the printing. At all events, the book as a whole issued 



Miles Cover dale. 131 

in this form from the warehouse of the well-known 
London printer who figured so early ia the sale of English 
Bibles. 

It is worth noticing that as Coverdale's work is the first 
instance of the entire collection of sacred writiugs, priated 
in Enghsh, being published as a single volume, the title 
prefixed is that of Biblia. It is a rehc of Latin usage, not 
after the manner of Tyndale, who eschewed such words, 
and preferred the vernacular speech of his countrymen. 
" Bible " was a word used so early as the time of Purvey.* 
Taken from Norman Prench, it had become thoroughly 
Anghcised ; and it is curious to find it in Coverdale's title- 
page, in a secondary position, as an explanation of Biblia, 
the more ecclesiastical term, because a Latin one. It 
may be mentioned here that in Coverdale's Bible Hebrew 
letters are iutroduced, forming the name Jehovah; and 
that Hebrew characters also are prefixed to divisions in 
the Book of Lamentations. 

Coverdale embraces the Apocrypha in his translation, 
and places the Epistle to the Hebrews between the Third 
Epistle of John and the Epistle of James, James being 
followed by Jude and the Apocalypse. Though we find 
summaries at the beginning of books, there are no headings 
to each chapter, nor are chapters separated into verses ; 
explanatory notes are also absent. 

The blocks used in the title and in the body of the 
book at Antwerp, it is believed by Mr. Stevens, all passed 
into the possession of Nicolson, and can be traced in many 
books for many years in England. "Nicolson not only 
sold off this original edition in 1535 and 1536, but he 
inunediately printed two other editions in English type, 

* See page 45. 



132 Our English Bible. 

the one in folio and the other in quarto, both bearing the 
date of 1537, though probably printed mostly in 1636."* 

I'he advertisement in the title-page of the first edition, 
" translated out of Doiiche and Latyn," expressed a fact. 
His Bible is a secondary translation, based on the Swiss 
Zurich version of Zwingle and Leo Juda, 1524, 1529. 
He also made use of the Vulgate and of Luther. " The 
Pentateuch," says Professor Westcott, " unless a partial 
examination has misled me, may be fairly described as the 
Zurich translation rendered into English by the help of 
Tyndale, vsdth constant reference to Luther, Paginus, and 
the Vulgate." 

Some of the renderings in this Bible are curious ; for 
example, G-en. viii. 11, " She bare it [an olive leaf] in hir 
nebb," a Scotch expression. Judg. ix. 53, " Cast a pece of 
a mylstone upon Abimelechs heade and brake his brane 
panne ; " xv. 19, " Then God opened a gome tothe in the 
cheke-bone, so that water wente out;" xvii. 5, "An over- 
body cote" for ephod. 1 Sam. xxi. 13, "His slauerynges 
ranne dovme his beerd." 1 Kings xxii. 34, " And shott the 
kynge of Israel betwene the mawe and the longes." Psa. 
xci. 5, " Thou shalt not nede to be afrayed for eny bugges 
by night." Jer. viii. 22, " There is no triacle in G-alaad." 
It is also a noteworthy fact that, although Coverdale fol- 
lows Tyndale, he does not adhere to Tyndale's method of 
excluding old scholastic ecclesiastical terms. He has not 
only the word "repentance," but the word "penance" 
also ; not only " elder," but " priest ; " not only " love," 
but " charity. "t Amidst this inconsistency, however, he 
cleaves to the word " congregation," instead of " church." 

* OafnZopite of Camton Exhibition, p. 118. 

t In Coverdale's Teraion, Bom. xiv. 15, we find "charity." In other places 
" love " except Jude 12, when he haa " yonr kindness." 



Miles Cover dale. 133 

Vv'']iat was the fate awaiting the volmne ? 

The flattering dedication to the king, introduced into 
the book after its arriyal in England, did not secure the 
royal favour. No licence was given for its circiilation. Nor 
was it sanctioned by the spiritual, any more than the 
political authority of the realm. It lay open, notwith- 
standing the new title-page, to the censure expressed by 
Convocation in 1534 of all books of suspected doctrine, in 
the vulgar tongue, imprinted beyond the water. It came 
as much within the scope of ecclesiastical prohibition as 
did the translations of Tyndale. Moreover, about 1535, 
Cranmer was doing what he could to prepare for a new and 
authorized version, implying that such a one, at that time, 
did not exist. Instead of adopting Coverdale's, he arranged 
for executing one in England ; and connected with this 
intention is the following amusing story.* 

" He began with the translation of the New Testament, 
taking an old Enghsh translation thereof [whose was this ? 
Tyndale's or Wychffe's ?] , which he divided into nine or ten 
parts, causing each part to be written at large in a paper 
book, and then to be sent to the best learned bishops and 
others, to the intent that they should make a perfect 
correction thereof. And when they had done, he required 
them to send back their parts, so corrected, unto him at 
Lambeth, by a day limited for that purpose : and the same 
course, no question, he took with the Old Testament. It 
chanced that the Acts of the Apostles were sent to Bishop 
Stokesley to oversee and correct. When the day came, every 
man had sent to Lambeth their parts corrected; only 
Stokesley's portion was wantiag. My lord of Canterbury 
wrote to the bishop a letter for his part, requiring him to 

* Strype's lAje of Cranmer, vol. i. p. 48, Oxford edit. 



134 Our English Bible. 

deliver tliem unto the bringer his secretary. He received 
the archbishop's letter at Fulham, unto which he made this 
answer : ' I marvel what my lord of Canterbury meaneth, 
that thus abuseth the people in giving them liberty to read 
the Scriptures, which doth nothing else but infect them vnth 
heresy. I have bestowed never an hour on my portion, nor 
never will. And therefore my lord shall have this book 
again ; for I will never be guilty of leading the simple people 
into error.' My lord of Canterbury's servant took the book, 
and brought the same to Lambeth unto my lord, declaring 
my lord of London's answer. When the archbishop had 
perceived that the bishop had done nothing therein, ' I 
marvel,' said he, ' that my lord of London is so froward 
that he will not do as other men do.' One Mr. Thomas 
Lawney stood by, and hearing my lord speak so much of the 
bishop's untowardness, said, ' I can tell your grace why my 
lord of London vnll not bestow any labour or pains this 
way. Your grace knoweth well that liis portion is a piece of 
the New Testament. But he being persuaded that Christ 
had bequeathed him nothing in His Testament, thought it 
mere madness to bestow any labour or pain, where no gain 
was to be gotten. And besides this, it is the Acts of the 
Apostles, which were simple poor fellows, and therefore my 
lord of London disdained to have to do with any of them.' 
Whereat my lord of Canterbury, and others who stood by, 
could not forbear from laughter." 

A different treatment from that of the first edition of 
Coverdale was vouchsafed to one afterwards. In 153fi 
Cromwell held a council; " the bishops and prelates 
attending — as he was come in, rose up and did obeisance 
unto him as their Vicar-General, and he again saluted every 
one in their degree, and sat down in the highest place at 



Miles Cover dale. 135 

the table." After a discussion on the subject of Christian 
peace, by the great minister of State in the king's name, 
they took up the question of sacraments, -when Fox, Bishop 
of Hereford, remarked that they were commanded by his 
majesty " that these controversies should be determined 
only by the rule and judgment of the Scripture." " The lay 
people," he went on to observe, " the lay people do now know 
the Holy Scripture better than many of us; and the Germans 
have made the text of the Bible so plain and easy, by the 
Hebrew and Greek tongues, that now many things may be 
better understood without any glosses at all, than by all the 
commentaries of the Doctors. And, moreover, they have 
so opened these controversies by their writings, that women 
and children may wonder at the blindness and falsehood 
that have been hitherto." Then rising into a strain of real 
eloquence, the bishop added, " Truth is the daughter of time, , 
and time is the mother of truth ; and whatsoever is besieged 
of truth cannot long continue ; and upon whose side truth; 
doth stand, that ought not to be thought transitory, or that 
it will ever fall. All things consist not in painted eloquence, 
and strength, or authority : for the truth is of so great 
power, strength, and ef&cacy, that it can neither be defended 
vnth words, nor be overcome with any strength ; but after 
she hath hidden herself long, at length she putteth up her 
head and appeareth, as it is written in Esdras, ' A king is 
strong ; man is stronger ; yet women be more strong : but 
truth excelletli all.' "* This was an unanswerable argument 
for the circulation of the Scriptures ; but, like other vdse and 
weighty words uttered at the time, it would seem to have 
made very little impression ; but Cromwell and Cramner, and 
others present, felt its force, and used such influence in the 

• Poxe, vol. V. p. 382, 



136 Our Eriglish Bible. 

highest quarters that an edition of Coverdale's Bible, printed 
by Nicolson of Southwarkin 1537, " overseen and corrected," 
not, however, to an important extent, came out with these 
words, — " Set forth with the king's most gracious hcence." 
A wonderful step was this in the way of promoting the study 
of the Scriptures amongst all ranks, and involved, for 
the instant at least, a change in the royal ecclesiastical 
pohcy more momentous than historians generally seem to 
apprehend. 

It must have been to the sanction of this later pubHca- 
tion, not the edition of 1535, that Coverdale referred, when 
he said in a sermon at Paul's Cross, according to the 
testimony of Fulke, " After it was finished, and presented 
to King Henry vili. of famous memory, and by him com- 
mitted to divers bishops of that time to peruse, of which I 
remember Stephen Gardiner was one, after they had kept it 
long in their hands, and the king was divers times sued unto 
for the publication thereof , at the last, being called for by the 
king himseK, they re-dehvered the book, and being demanded 
by the king what they thought of the translation, they 
answered that there were many faults therein. ' Well,' said 
the Idng, ' but are there any heresies maintained thereby ? ' 
They answered that ' there were no heresies that the}'^ could 
find.' 'If there be no heresies,' said the king, 'then, in 
God's name, let it go abroad among our people.' "* 

If we are to trust this statement, it seems as if the first 
edition was submitted to the bishops, and that after their 
perusal of it the royal sanction was giv6n to the second. 

Though from an Bnghsh press there issued this new 
edition of Coverdale — followed by another in 1538, and in the 
same year by the Bnghsh New Testament, and editions of a 

* Fulte's Defence of Bihle Translations, p. 4. 



Miles Coverdale 



137 



Diglott Testament, exliibiting the Vulgate and English 
in parallel columns* — the main work of preparing and 
printing vernacular Scriptures for this country went on 
abroad ; and what was done there at this time will appear 
in the next chapter. 

* In an edition of Coverdale's Bible, by Grafton and AVMtohuroh, 1538, is a 
dedication to Cromwell, in which he laments the nnmerons errors which had crept 
into Nicolson's editions, printed in London during Coverdale's absence. A New 
Testament, both in Latin and English, " after theTnlgate teste, commonly called 
St. Jerome's, faythfully translated by Johan Hollybushe, " printed in Southwark 
by Nicolson, appeared the same year. The English is really CoTerdale's, and it 
answers to the first edition of Coverdale's, page for page. Like the first edition, it 
contains many blimdera. What is meant by the name of Johan Hollybushe no one 
knows, that I am aware. I suspect that Coverdale had fallen out with Nicolson, 
and that the printer issued this book on his own account. 




Phaptei\_ VI. 



m!atthew's bible. 



HE Bible, which is all the 

Holy Scriptures, in which 

are contayned the olde and 

i newe Testaments truely and 

£ purely translated into Eng- 

^ lysh by Thomas Matthew. 

Essaye 1. Hearken to ye 

Heavens, and thou earth geave 

eare : for the Lorde speaketh, 

MDXXsvii." This was the 

title-page of a foho volume 

which appeared at the date specified; 

and at the bottom we read in large red 

letters, " Set forth with the Ilinges 

y-- '' most gracyous lycenee." At the end 

are these words — " To the honoure and 

prayse of God was this Byble prynted and fynesshed, in 

the year of our Lorde God mdxsxvii." The book had been 

printed abroad, where and by whom we do not l^now ; but 




Matthews Bible. 139 

it was a publication of great consequence ; its results were 
important, and connected with its history are some difficul- 
ties, which after much exaggeration are partially cleared 
up : certain particulars, however, continue unexplained. 
The volume demands attentive consideration. 

1. On opening it, one of the first things which strikes an 
observer, is the collection of notes appended to the text. 
Wycliffe has sent forth his translation without notes. 
Tyndale had done the same, as respects his 8vo Testament, 
though he had given some in the 4to edition, and had 
written expositions of the Pentateuch and Jonah. Cover- 
dale's Bible contained no comment, no gloss whatever. 
This new Bible, bearing the name of Matthew, in this 
respect exhibits a new feature. The Psalms are more fully 
explained than other books : and in the Apocrypha, this 
passage arrests attention: 2 Mace, xii., "Judge upon this 
place whether the opinion hath been to pray for the dead, 
as to be baptized for them " (1 Cor. xv.), which thing was only 
done to confirm the hope of the resurrection of the dead, not 
to dehver them from any pain. St. Paul did not allow the 
ceremony of christening for the dead; no more doth any 
place of the canonical scripture allow the ceremony of offer- 
ing for the dead. Furthermore, this whole book of the 
Maccabees, and specially this second, is not of sufficient 
authority to make an article of our faith, as it is before 
sufficiently proved by the authority of St. Jerome in the 
prologue of the books called Apocrypha. 

The controversial bearing of this note is sufficiently 
obvious ; and it appears surprising when we refer to the 
announcement of " the Kinges most gracyous lycence." 

2. For a long time, no accurate knowledge was possessed 
by historians as to the nature of the text. It was not care- 



140 Our English Bible. 

fully examined ; all sorts of surmises were thrown out and 
repeated, some originating in vague and contradictory state- 
ments, made by early writers, now utterly unworthy of 
criticism, because set aside by collations and comparisons 
of the text, — especially those of which we possess results in 
the scholarly works of Canon Westcott and Dr. Eadie. 

It appears that the translation of the Pentateuch corre- 
sponds with that pubhshed by Tyndale. The translation 
from the book of Joshua to the Second Book of Chronicles 
inclusive, differs from any found in previously published 
versions. From Ezra to MalacM we have Coverdale's text, 
with slight alterations : this is also the case with the 
Apocrypha. The New Testament is taken from Tyndale's 
edition of 1535.* The Bible appearing under the name 
of Matthew may then be roughly described as consisting of 
two-thirds belonging to Tyndale, and one-third belonging to. 
Coverdale. It is by no means original, and is well denomi- 
nated a " composite " production. 

3. Loolring into the foho again, we notice ■ the name 
Thomas Matthew, standing at full length, at the close of the 
dedication to Henry vrii. An exhortation to the study of 
the Scriptures, following this, is signed " J. E." in large 
capitals adorned with flourishes. At the end of the Old 
Testament appear, in similiarly decorated capitals, W. T. 
These initials occasion much perplexity. No doubt J. E. 
means John Eogers, and W. T., WiUiam Tyndale. But 
what is WiUiam Tyndale's connection vnth that part of the 
volume to which his initials are attached, seeing that very 
part is the work of Miles Coverdale? One might have 
expected to find M. C. in that place, and W. T. at the end 
of the Pentateuch. And how are we to dispose of the 

* Weetcott's Eist. p. 221, et seq. ; Eadie's English. Bible, vol. i. p. 322. 



Matthews Bible. 141 

remaining difficulty as to who is " Thomas Matthew," and 
in what relation does his name stand to the initials, ^. E., 
at the end of the exhortation ? We know who John Eogers 
was; hut the question as to what person is intended by 
Thomas Matthew has created much perplexity in the minds 
of hibhographers. The appearance of the name of Matthew 
at the end of the dedication, and of the initials J. E. at the 
end of the exhortation, naturally conveys the idea that they 
potat to two persons. If one iadividual be the author of 
both compositions, it seems odd that he should sign the first 
in one way, and the second in another. So far, then, the 
conclusion seems inevitable, two persons, and not one, had 
to do with this Bible. Thomas Matthew is in some way 
responsible for the dedication; and John Eogers is the 
writer of the exhortation. But, at this point, it must be 
remembered, that iu the sentence pronounced on the latter 
before his death, he is four times called " Johannes Eogers . 
alias Matthew ; " and ia the Council Eegister of Mary's 
reign, it is written, "John Eogers alias Matthew, is ordered 
to keep his house at Paul's." * From this circumstance it 
would seem as if Eogers went by the name of Matthew ;t and 

* Eadie'a English Biile, vol. i. p. 313. 

■)■ There is in the British Museum a small "volume entitled The Newe Testa- 
ment, anno MDXXXiii. ; underneath appears this monogram, G — H. It is well 
known that William Tyndale was sometimes called William Hytohins ; and this 
circumstance, combined with the discovery of Van Meteren'a connection with Bible 
printing, has led Mr. Stevens to adopt the following conjecture : " Mr. Francis 
Pry," he says, "under his No. 4, calls this edition G. H., but haa hitherto been 
unable to explain the monogram. Our suggestion ia, that the G. H. means the 
translator, GuiHaume Hytohins, the assumed name of William Tyndale ; the 
other letters being the initials of the printer (P) and proprietor I. v M., that is, 
Jacob van Meteren." The latter part of the conjecture is not so plausible as the 
beginning. Mr. Stevens notices that this New Testament " has recently been 
proved by Mr. Francis Pry, of Bristol, to be a, reprint of Tyndale's last revision, 
the edition of 153.5." 



142 Our English Bible. 

it miglit be inferred, looldng at this alone, that Rogers and 
Matthew must be the same person. Moreover, the Bible 
that bears Matthew's name, and came to be so called, was 
also known as Eogers'. Looking at the contents of the 
volume alone, one would say Matthew and Eogers are 
different men ; looking at the proceedings in Queen Mary's 
reign against the martyr, we should say the names Matthew 
and Eogers meant one and the same person. So the matter 
stands ; and sweeping statements on the one side or the 
other, with these conflicting facts in sight, are unwar- 
rantable. The most that I feel warranted to say is, that 
the alias can be better reconciled with the idea of Matthew 
being one person, and J. E. another, than the fact of the 
two signatures in the Bible can be reconciled with the idea 
of Matthew and Eogers being one and the same person. 
It is possible that Eogers, having had to do with a Bible 
bearing Matthew's name, came to be laiownby that appella- 
tion ; not that he adopted it for any purpose of concealment 
or evasion ; but it seems impossible that one and the same 
person shoiild, in the same volume, assume two entirely 
different designations. As to who Thomas Matthew was, 
on the hjrpothesis of his being another man than Eogers, 
nobody loiows. That a name should appear on the title- 
page of a Bible, that a Bible should pass current under that 
name, and that no vestige should be found of his life and 
history, is certainly a very strange fact ; but many strange 
things meet us in the history of our Enghsh Bible. 

4. Another pecuharity of the book is that a blank page, 
and the commencement of a new numbering, are found 
before the Book of Isaiah, and on the opposite side of the 
page are the initials E. G. and E. W. : about what they 
mean, however, there can be no dispute. They evidently 



Matthews Bible. 143 

refer to Eichard Grafton and Edward Whitchurch, already 
printers of Coyerdale's Diglotts, the first of them, as we 
shall presently see, employed in Bible printing afterwards. 
Here it is easy to say that Grafton and Whitchnrcjh inter- 
posed, when the printing of the Bible abroad, no one knows 
where, had advanced as far as Solomon's Song ; that they 
purchased what had been struck off, and made arrange- 
ments for the completion of the work, whether abroad 
or at home ; * but such a statement rests entirely on the 
occurrence of certain initials iu the middle of the Bible. 
That these printers, in some way or other, at that point 
became connected with the undertaking is, however, a 
reasonable conclusion. 

5. We turn now to the contents of the volume. The part 
between the end of the Pentateuch and the beginning of 
Ezra is found ia no previous translation, and is by both 
Canon Westcott and Dr. Eadie identified in substance as 
the work of William Tyndale.t Eoxe relates that a packet 
of papers was sent by the martyr on the morning of his 
execution to his faithful friend Poyntz; and it is' supposed 
they included mss. of a translation of the Old Testament, 
carried on beyond the Pentateuch. These, it is further 
supposed, came into the hands of Eogers, and that he 
employed them in that part of the version which ha^ not 
been taken from the printed works of either Tyndale or 
Coverdale. With fragmentary translations of Jonah, and 
other parts of the Old Testament, which appear in Tyndale's 
works, Matthew's version does not correspond; but such 
a knowledge of Hebrew as was possessed by Tyndale is 
apparent ia the production, and Dr. Eadie thinks no one 
else could have accomphshed it. J This is not a satisfactory 

* Sadie's English Bible,i. Slii. + Weatoott'a Hist, 223 : Eadie, i. 321. J Eadie, i. 322. 



144 Our English Bible. 

argument ; for Eogers himseK was a learned man, and, if lie 
had the Mss. of Tyndale, might have added something of his 
own to that which had been prepared by his illustrious 
predecessor. At aU events, it is not unlikely that Tyndale's 
work in this particular part was in some way incorporated 
by Eogers in his edition of the Bible. The New Testament 
in Matthew's Bible is taken from Tyndale's revised edition 
of 1535, not from the edition of 1534.* 

One word with respect to Eogers himself. He was 
chaplain to an Enghsh congregation at Antwerp, and 
became acquainted vnth Tyndale during his residence in 
that city. His mind had been dissatisfied with the prin- 
ciples of Eoman Catholicism, in which he had been 
brought up, and to which he had once been devotedly 
attached ; but his friendship vsdth the exile, though it must 
have been brief, ripened his incipient Protestantism, and 
made him a zealous reformer. Having been educated at 
Cambridge, and possessing the reputation of being a " very 
able hnguist and general scholar," he was fitted to follow 
his friend in his ovni special path of usefulness. We 
shall meet vrith him hereafter in most distressing circum- 
stances. 

As soon as the Bible bearing the name of Matthewf was 
complete, Grafton and Whitchiurch forwarded it to Cranmer, 
who expressed his delightful surprise at the sight of the 

* Westeott, Bisl. p. 233. 

t Let me introduce here tlie words of Mr. Stevena, "The enterpriamg 
foreign citizen of Antwerp, Jacob van Meteren, who printed Coverdale's Bible, 
and sold the edition to Nioolaon, with cuts, map, and probably the tjpe (lost), got 
lip and printed this Bible also, and sold the whole edition to Grafton and Whit- 
church, together with the special plant thereto belonging. Eogers and Van Meteren 
were relatives by marriage." (Catalogue of the Caxton ExMhition, p. 123.) I give 
this simply on the authority of Mr. Stevens ; I should not say more myself than 
that it is a plausible conjecture. 



Matthews Bible. 145 

volume, and forwarded it to Cromwell. " I understand," 
says the archbishop afterwards, in a letter addressed to the 
powerful minister of state, "that your lordship, at my 
request, hath not only exhibited the Bible which I sent 
imto you to the king's majesty, but also hath obtained of 
his grace that the same shall be allowed, by his authority, 
to be bought and read within this realm." * Probably 
Cromwell's influence with Henry at that time had much to 
do with the obtaining of a royal sanction for the work, in the 
much-coveted words, " Set forth with the Kinges most 
gracyous lycence." 

As so large a part of the new Bible consisted of 
Tyndale's translation, and as Henry could scarcely fail to be 
ignorant of that fact, it is the more surprising that, after 
condemning Tyndale's version, the king should now be 
found openly giving to it the sanction of his gracious 
hcence. The 'Prologue to the Bomans had been condemned 
separately, and was not to be easily overlooked ; and the 
most superficial inspection would have shown the boldness 
of the notes with which the text was copiously furnished. 
He may have been glad to act independently of the bishops. 
But however this might be, by Cranmer's petition, by 
Cromwell's influence, and by Henry's authority, without 
any formal ecclesiastical decision, the book was given to the 
Enghsh people which is the foundation of the text of the 
present Bible. From Matthew's Bible — itself a combination 
of the labours of Tyndale and Coverdale — all later revisions 
have been successively formed.t 

Just about the time when Matthew's Bible appeared, in 
the year 1537, there occurred, according to documents in the 

* Cranmer's Works, Parker Society, Letter 197. 
+ West oott, History of the English Bible, p. 94. 
L 



146 Otir English Bible. 

State Paper Office, some curiotis incidents in connection with 
our history. " A circle of Protestants at Wincanton, in 
Somersetshire, wrote to Cromwell, complaining of the 
curate, who would not teach them, or preach to them, but 
' gave his time and attention to dicing, carding, bowling, 
and cross waster.' In their desire for spiritual food they 
applied to the rector of the next parish, who had come 
occasionally and given them a sermon, and had taught them 
to read the New Testament ; when suddenly, on Good 
Friday, the unthrifty curate entered the pulpit, where he had 
set no foot for years, and admonished his parishioners to give 
no credence to the new-fangled fellows which read the new 
books. 'They be like knaves and Pharisees,' he said; ' they 
be hke a dog that gnaweth a marry-bone, and never cometh 
to the pith ; therefore avoid their company ; and if any man 
will preach the New Testament, if I may hear him, I am 
ready to iight with him incontinent;' and, 'indeed,' the 
petitioners said, ' he applyeth in such wise his school of fence 
so sore continually, that he feareth all his parishioners.' 
So the parish clerk at Hastings made a speech to the 
congregation on the faults of the translation. ' It taught 
heresy,' he said ; ' it taught that a priest might have a wife 
according to God's law. He trusted to see the day that the 
book called the Bible, and all its maintainers and upholders, 
should be brent.' "* 

These circumstances indicate the welcome given to the 
Scriptures on the one hand, and the opposition made to 
them on the other ; whilst all this was going on, 
demands for copies of the English version increased. 

In the year 1538 a New Testament in Latin and 
English appeared under the name of John HoUybush, 
* Fi'oude'a Bisioi-y of England, toI. iii, p. 237. 



Matthews Bible. 14/ 

though the English version is Coverdale's, printed page 
for page from Nicolson's second edition ; and in the same 
year an edition ia Latia and Bnghsh was pubhshed by 
Grafton and Whitchurch, containing corrections by Cover- 
dale, of an edition pubhshed by Nicolson during Coverdale's 
absence from London. It contains a dedication to Crom- 
well, ia which Coverdale deplores that so many errors 
existed in that edition. 

In the year 1539 another edition of Matthew's Bible 
came forth, from the press of ByddeU and Bartlett, at the sign 
of the " Sun," in Fleet Street, edited by Eichard Taverner, 
who dedicated the volume to the king, remarking that his 
grace never did anything more acceptable to God than the 
act of licensing the most sacred Bible, containing the "un- 
spotted and holy word of God." He informs us, in his preface, 
that as the printers were desirous to have the Bible come 
forth as faultless as the shortness of the time for the recog- 
nising of the same would permit, they desired hnn to overlook 
and peruse the whole copy, and amend the same according to 
the true examplers, which, according to his talent, he had 
gladly done. He introduces a running commentaryin the text, 
thus departing from a course previously pursued : this is the 
more remarkable as he was a layman ; and it affords an 
instance of an unordained member of the Church of England 
undertaking not only to translate the Scriptures, but to give 
an interpretation of their meaning. Taverner was a strange 
genius. He was of the Inner Temple, where he loved to 
display his pedantry by citing the law in Greek. In the 
reign of Edward he became a preacher by royal hcence, and 
sometimes appeared in the pulpit dressed in a damask gown, 
velvet bonnet, and gold chain, in which uncanonical atthe 
he dehvered a discourse before the youthful sovereign ! In 



M-S Our English Bible. 

the reign of Elizabeth he resumed his pulpit exercises, and 
when High Sheriff of Oxfordshire he preached before the 
university, wearing, in addition to his other unclerical dress, 
a sword by his side. " Surely," says Fuller, " preaching 
now ran very low, if it be true what I read, that Mr. 
Tavernoiir, of Water Baton, in Oxfordshire, High Sheriff of 
the county, gave the scholars a sermon in St. Mary's, vnth 
his gold chain about his neck, and his sword by his side, 
beginning with these words, ' Arriving at the Mount of 
St. Mary's, in the stony stage where I now stand, I have 
brought you some fine biscuits, baked in the oven of charity, 
and carefully conserved for the chickens of the church, the 
sparrows of the Spirit, and the sweet swallows of salva- 
tion."'* 

The vanity and eccentricity of the editor might have been 
thought to disquaUfy him for the office he undertook, but 
the dedication is worthy of a vnse and prudent and honest 
man, and favourably contrasts with that which proceeded 
from the pen of Coverdale. He truly said, " This one thing 
I dare full well affirm, that amongst all your majesty's dis- 
coverings, your highness never did anything more acceptable 
unto God, more profitable to the advancement of true 
Christianity, more unpleasant to the enemies of the same 
and also your grace's enemies, than when your majesty 
licensed and willed the most sacred Bible, containing the 
unspotted and lovely word of God, to be in the English 
tongue set forth to your highness's subjects." 

* Fuller's Church History, vol. ii. p. 459. 



^^wag 


ftjvWflVVI 




^smm» 




mm^ 


P 


^WHiWXUfi^ 


jiiiiJ^W^^^XfiJ^ 


MiiiWMi 






Chapter^ yii. 



THE GREAT BIBLE. 



^EOMWBLL, Earl of Essex, for some time the 
chief minister and favourite of Henry, — with 
all his ambition and pride, his unprincipled 
conduct, and his reckless obstinacy, — was 
a man who professed, and perhaps felt, 
veneration for the Scriptures. It is said 
that in his youth, as he was travehing from 
Eome to England, he made Erasmus's 
Testament his constant companion, rehev- 
ing the tediousness of his journey by 
committing to memory the whole of the 
translation. It might be that impressions 
of the beauty and worth of the Scriptures, derived from his 
studies on that journey, led to the favour which this dis- 
tinguished statesman manifested towards their translation 
in the days of his palmy power. Certainly, to Cromwell 
is to be attributed the patronage, the pecuniary assistance, 
and the obtaining of a royal sanction, which enabled 
Coverdale to execute the task of bringing through the press 
the Great Bible in the years 1638 and 1539. Coverdale 




I- so Our Btiglis/i Bible. 

seems to liave been an agent of Cromwell in many ways — 
to have transacted a good deal of business for him abroad, 
and in the Biblical undertaking now to be described, acted 
under his control and direction. 

Paris was the place chosen for printing the work, because 
the best paper and presswork might be secured there. Grafton 
went ofer to Paris to superintend the mechanical part of the 
business, while Coverdale acted as editor and corrector. On 
the 23rd June, 1638, they wrote to Cromwell, in terms indi- 
cating that the enterprise in which they were embarked was 
really that of Henry's influential minister. " We be entered 
into your work of the Bible, whereof (according to our most 
bounden duty) we have here sent unto your lordship two 
ensamples, one in parchment, wherein we intend to print one 
for the Idng's grace, and another for your lordship, and the 
second in paper, whereof all the rest shall be made."* Hence 
we see that the workmen were, in the midsummer of 1538, 
engaged on the printing of the Bible in the city of Paris, 
under the superintendence of Coverdale, with Cromwell as 
responsible author of the undertaldng. Coverdale and Grafton 
in the same communication sought " favourable letters " from 
Henry's prime minister to the English ambassador in Paris, 
securing his protection — a request which was speedily granted. 
The Bishop of Winchester was then the representative of the 
Enghsh court in France, but he was shortly after succeeded 
by Bonner, Archdeacon of Leicester, who figures in the 
sanguinary annals of Mary's reign. Cromwell wrote to 
Bonner, and directed him to aid Coverdale in his work ; and 
it is but little in keeping with the subsequent history of the 
unhappy man to find him most attentive to Cromwell's sug- 

" This letter ia printed in the appendix to Memorials of Coverdale, p. 195 
also in the State Papers, vol, i. p. 575. 



Tke Great Bible. 151 

gestions, and most assiduous in his friendship towards the 
printers, even going so far as to invite them to his table, and 
condescending to visit them in return. "With the coun- 
tenance of the Bnghsh ambassador, and the express Hcence 
of the King of France, obtained by a letter from Henry, no 
doubt, at the soHcitation of Cromwell, the translator and his 
printers proceeded rapidly with their work, and were anti- 
cipating the successful completion of their toils, when indi- 
cations of peril made their appearance ; and in the month of 
December the Inquisition issued an order, prohibiting them, 
under canonical pains, to print the said Bible. 

At first it might seem as if the hand of ecclesiastical 
despotism snatched away the permission ceded by the civil 
power ; inasmuch as the history of Eoman Cathohc countries 
testifies to its having often been the case, that the royal pre- 
rogative grew pale before the assumptions of the Church of 
Borne ; but the fact is that in the present instance, a proviso 
was added to the licence, forbidding the pubhcation of any 
private and unauthorized opinions, and such a clause would 
invite, rather than otherwise, the interference of the Inqui- 
sition.* The parties engaged upon the Great Bible were 
summoned to appear before the inquisitors, but very naturally 
they sought to escape from the power of that court. Having 
before the outburst of the storm perceived the gathering 
clouds, they had forwarded to England aU the sheets of the 
book as far as they had gone, and now they would gladly 
have saved the remainder worked off since ; but this they 
found impossible ; therefore, seeking their own safety, they 
hastily decamped from Paris, leaving the residue of the 
printed sheets to be seized by the harpies of the Inquisition. 
Some of these were burned, but " four great dry fats full " of 

* The licence is in Strype'e Oranmer, p. 756, Oxford edit. 



1 5 2 Our English Bible. 

the obnojuoiis bales were sold to a haberdasher " to lap his 
caps in." The Enghshmen afterwards, by the encoiixage- 
ment of CromweU, returned to Paris, and happily succeeded 
in recovering the presses, types, and worknaen they had 
employed there. Grafton, thus well ftimished, set up business 
in London. 

In the next year, 1539, he proceeded to complete some 
copies which had been sent over to CromweU ; and at length 
the Bible appeared with the colophon, " Fynisshed Apryle, 
anno m.ccccc.xxxix." Grafton also tried to recover the 
four fats full which had been sold to the haberdasher. He 
earnestly sohcited Bonner to use his iafluence in the matter ; 
but with no success. Bonner was on the poiat of leaving 
France. From the archdeaconry of Leicester he had been 
promoted to the see of Hereford, and now he was translated 
to London. " Master Grafton," said he to the English 
printer when they parted at Paris, " so it is that the kiug's 
most excellent majesty hath by his gracious gift presented 
me to the bishopric of London ; for the which I am sorry, 
for if it would have pleased his grace, I could have been well 
content to have kept mine old bishopric of Hereford." 
Grafton replied, " I am right glad to hear of it, and so I am 
sure will be a great number of the city of London, for though 
they yet know you not, yet they have heard so much good- 
ness of you from hence, as no doubt they will heartily rejoice 
of your placing." " I pray God," rejoined the bishop elect, 
" I may do that may content them. And to tell you, Master 
Grafton, before God, the greatest fault that ever I found in 
Stokesley was for vexing and troubling of poor men, as 
Lobley the bookbinder and other, for having the Scriptm'e 
in English ; and, God willing, he did not so much hinder it, 
but I will as much further it ; and I will have of your Bibles 



The Great Bible. 1 5 3 

set up in the cliuicli of Paul's, at the least, in sundry 
places six of them, and I will pay you honestly for them, 
and give hearty thanks."* One would hope that Bonner 
was sincere in what he said ;| and if so, how would it 
have startled him to have been told that the time was 
coming when he would far surpass Stokesley in the per- 
secution of Bible readers ! After Bonner had left Paris, 
Grafton obtained the remaining sheets in the haberdasher's 
possession, returned to London with them, and forthwith 
completed more copies. 

This Bible consists of a revision of Matthew's version. 
Several variations from it occur. Cranmer certainly had 
nothing to do vdth the book. His name is not mentioned 
in the correspondence between Cromwell and Coverdale on 
the subject. The latter must have been the person who 
revised the translation. 

The editor speaks of following " the standing text of the 
Hebrew, with the interpretation of the Chaldaic and Greek " 
— an expression which points to the Chaldaic paraphrase and 
the Septuagint as having been consulted in the work. But, 
whatever use might be made of the original in this new 
revision, it is stated by one who has carefully examined the 
subject,t that Munster's Latin version of the Old Testament 
vyith the Hebrew text was largely employed in the course of 
the work. 

The New Testament was also revised, Erasmus^^eing 
employed here as Miinster was for the Old Testament ; and 
an apparatus was constructed for indicating diversity of 
readings, "with such armotations in another table, as shall 
doubtless elucidate and clear the same, as well without any 
singularity of opinions as all checkings and reproofs." The 

* PoxB, vol. V. p. 412. + Weatoott, History, p. 236. 



154 ^^^'' English Bible. 

distinctive marks were introduced into the Bible as it came 
from the press; but the annotations themselves were deferred, 
and never made their appearance. 

The book is a goodly foho, vpith this title, " The Byble in 
Engiyshe, that is to saye the content of all the Holy Scryp- 
ture, bothe of ye olde and newe testament, truly translated 
after the veryte of the Hebrue and Greke textes, by ye 
dylygent stiidye of dyuerse excellent learned men, expert in 
the forsayde tonges. Prynted by Bychard Grafton and 
Edward Whitchurch. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum 
solum. 1539." 

The designs surrounding this title form a choice specimen 
of the wood engravings of the day. Above sits Henry, 
enthroned in state, with bishops on the right hand and tem- 
poral peers on the left, to both of whom he gives a volume 
labelled " Verbum Dei." Over him, in the midst of clouds, 
appears the Lord Jesus, with the monarch kneeling, his 
crowa laid in the dust. On one side, below the title, appears 
the Primate Cranmer, and on the other the Lord Secretary 
Cromwell, employed in distributing the Scriptures. In one 
corner, at the foot of the ]3age, is a sketch of a preacher, who 
is supposed to be delivering a discourse from 1 Tim. ii., on 
the duty of praying for kings, while the congregation shout 
" Vivat Bex," or " God save the king," indicated by labels 
flowing from their lips ; in the other corner is a prison, with 
culprits peeping through the barred windows, and a concourse 
of people outside saluting them vpith the same cries as those 
of the neighbouring congregation. The motto of the order 
of the Garter is inscribed above. It is a fact too im- 
portant to be overlooked, that in the Great Bible we find 
there are not any notes, although some were intended to 
appear. Coverdale, in fact, as general editor, now, as he 




COPT OF THE HOLBEIN BOEDER IN THE OBEAT BIBLE OF 1539. 



The Great Bible. 1 5 7 

had done before, presented to his countrymen the volume 
of inspired truth to speak for itself. 

The master of the undertaking took measures for securing 
the extensive sale and use of the volume as soon as it v^as 
pubhshed. Certain injunctions to the clergy are preserved, 
requiring them, before the next Christmas to provide " one 
boke of the vrhole Bible of the largest volume in English to 
be set up in the churches." * 

From its size it came to be called the Great Bible, the 
name by vphich it is generally known, and to vphich it is seen 
to have an indisputable title, when the large goodly foHo 
is compared vrith copies of earHer editions. 

The date of the injunctions is 1538 ; but as the year did 
not end till March (1539, New Style),the next Christmas might 
be in this last year, leaving ample time, after the completion 
of the book in April, for the clergy to procure copies of it 
before the ensuing Christmas. A royal declaration was also 
issued about the same date, stating his majesty's zeal for the 
setting forth of God's Word, and his pleasure that the trans- 
lation of the Scriptures into the mother tongue should be 
taught and declared by the clergy, t But, strangely enough, 
the people were warned against forming a judgment for them- 
selves of the meaning of the Divine oracles — they were to 
have recourse to learned men, authorized to preach and 
declare the same. A singular inconsistency, — to give the 
Bible to a man, and yet forbid his using his own faculties 
for ascertaining what were the truths it contained — to tan- 
tahze inquisitive mortals by placing before them the means 
of gratifying their curiosity, and then to forbid their employ- 
ing such means ! The inconsistency in the royal declaration, 

* The injimotions are given in Burnet's Hist, of the Bef, vol. ii. p. 260. 
t Strype's Life of Cranmer, p. 65. 



158 Oiir English Bible. 

however, may be accounted for by supposing that it was 
by Cromwell's solicitation that Henry granted the use of the 
Bible; while the monarch was still himself disposed to keep 
the people under the yoke of human authority in matters of 
religion. He would not comply with his favourite's request 
without putting into the declaration the caveat just noticed. 
Still it was a great thing to permit the use of the Scriptures 
at all. It was the first time that such a measure of Hberty 
had been granted since the love of Scripture study had been 
awakened in the sovils of the English people. This sheathing 
of the sword of persecution would have dehghted Tyndale, 
and did delight Coverdale. Grateful must the latter have 
been to his old patron, Cromwell, for his efforts in this 
matter ; and surely he must have lamented that a man who 
showed such sincere zeal for the circulation of the Bible 
should be so practically unmindful of its righteous and 
merciful precepts ! 

What Strype says of the Bible in 1538 may be applied 
here. With what joy it was received, not only among the 
learned, and those noted for loving the Eeformation, " but 
generally aU England over, by the vulgar and common people, 
and with what greediness God's Word was read, and what 
resort to places where the reading of it was. Everybody 
that could, bought the book or busily read it, or got others to 
read it to them, if they could not themselves ; and divers more 
elderly people learned to read on purpose, and even little 
boys flocked among the rest to hear portions of the Holy 
Scriptures read," when Scripture reading was allowed in 
1538. 

Several poor men in the tovra of Chelmsford bought the 
New Testament, and read it on Sundays to their neighbours 
gathered round them " at the lower end of the church." A 









tf' f u sir 



■>A*i^ 



.^\ 












. .^ i'i 




The Great Bible. iCi 

lad named William Maldon joined the listeners, much to his 
father's displeasure ; whereupon he obtained a copy for him- 
self, and to " conceal it, laid it under the bed straw, to read 
it at convenient times." One night he and liis mother had a 
conversation on the subject of kneehng before a crucifix. He 
pronounced it to be a breach of the commandment, " Thou 
shalt not make any graven image, nor bow down to it, nor 
worship it ; " and when his father heard of this, he went 
into his chamber, and took him out of bed by his hair, and 
whipped bim unmercifully. ' ' And when the young man bore 
this beating, as he related, with a kind of joy, considering it 
was for Christ's sake, and shed not a tear, his father, seeing 
that, was more enraged, and ran down and fetched a halter, 
and put it about his neck, saying he would hang him." * 

In the month of April, 1540, another edition of the Bible 
was issued from the press of Edward Whitchurch, with a 
colophon, " Fynisshed in Apryl." This Bible had a preface 
by Cranmer ; and an examination of the volmne shows that 
the version had been revised, though it is substantially the 
same as in the Great Bible. I have noticed several variations 
in the Book of Isaiah, and am surprised that it should have 
been so commonly confounded with the Great Bible of 1539. 
Canon Westcott has pointed out this strange confusion, and 
the distinction between the two editions is now an estabhshed 
fact. Another edition came out in July, 1540 ; and yet another 
in the November of the same year. Three more were issued 
in 1541. " These six editions all have Cranmer's prologue, 
but the third and fifth bear the names of Tunstall and Heath 
upon the title-page, who are said to have ' overseen and 
perused ' the translation at the commandment of the Ifiag's 
Highness." " The edition of November, 1540, goes back from 

* Strypo'a JAje of Cranmer, p. 91, Oxford edit. 

M 



1 62 Otir English Bible 



ly" 



the text of April, 1540, to that of 1539, so that the edition of 
April, 1 540, exhibits the greatest approximation to Mlinster . ' ' * 
The revision in the new edition of Cranmer's Bible indicates 
a fresh use of Erasmus and the Vulgate ; and, grouping these 
Bibles together, a distinction is to be carefully made between 
them and the Great Bible of 1539. Those of 1540 and the 
following year are the true Cranmer Bibles. 

With reference to Cuthbert, Bishop of Durham, whose 
name appears, with that of Nicholas, Bishop of Rochester, 
on the title-pages of 1541, it shoxild be remembered that he 
was no other than Tunstall, once Bishop of London, who 
liad shown himseK such a stern enemy to Tyndale and his 
Testament. It is remarkable what an effect the royal will 
had on some of the bishops, who would one day very obse- 
quiously persecute people for reading the Bible, and another, 
when a gust of royal favour blew in the opposite direction, 
would encourage them to peruse the previously proscribed 
volume. The Bishop of Durham could not be ignorant 
whose version substantially he was sanctioning with his 
own name. Moreover, it is afiirmed in The Sufplication 
of Poor Commons, that he and his colleague Nicholas, of 
Eochester, "when they saw the world somewhat like to 
swing on the other side," denied that they had ever 
meddled vnth the book, and called upon the printers to leave 
out their names on the title-page ! 

That title-page, by the way, bears a significant token of 
the changed fate and fortune of the man who had emploj^ed 
his great power in promoting the translation and spread of 
the Scriptures. Cromwell's arms were emblazoned on a 
shield in the title-page of the Great Bible, but in the edition 
of 1541 that shield is blank. The star of the favourite of 

* AVestoott, Bist. Enrj. BibU, pp. 101 , 25 1. 



The Great Bible. 163 

Henry, so long in the political ascendant, had fallen. His 
own nefarious deeds, and his master's caprice, had brought 
him down from his proud elevation to the dust and the block. 
On the 28th July he was beheaded on Tower Hill . 

Among the many glaring inconsistencies and strange 
mutations of those exciting times is the example of Bonner, 
who now performed his old promise to Grafton, and set up 
the Bibles in St. Paul's, though he was then beginning his 
career as a persecutor. But still the Bible reading in 
St. Paul's — not the cathedral of Sir Christopher Wren, but a 
medisBTal Gothic edifice, with pointed arches and mulhoned 
windows — not a building preserved from profane intrusion, 
but one used as a pubhc walk, where people passed to and fro 
all the day long — the group gathering round the book chained 
to a desk by one of the piUars, while some professor of the 
new learning read its contents to a large Ustening throng — 
is a beautiful fact in the story of the day ; and, whatever 
might be Bonner's motive, let thanks be given him for ful- 
filhng his promise. Grafton, if he walked through the aisles, 
would stop, with no httle interest, to look at his own printed 
book, fastened in a corner, and to listen to, not only the 
reader, but also to the comments made by the auditors. 

Augustine, in his comment on the passage, " Thy youth 
shall be renewed like the eagle's," fancies that the eagle, 
when grown old, has an incrustation on its beak, which pre- 
vents it from taldng ahment tiU it chafes itself against a rock, 
and rubs off the excrescence, when returning to its food and 
eating with avidity, it restores its vigour and renews its 
plumage ; then spreading out its wings, it soars upwards in its 
congenial element as one risen from the dead. This strange 
notion supphes no unapt illustration of the state of the 
Church of Christ in the sixteenth century, as indicated by the 



164 Our English Bible. 

Bible reading in St. Patil's. Long debarred of its spiritual 
food, because its mouth bad been sealed up by spiritual des- 
potism, the true Churcb now liberated itseK from bondage 
— once more tasted the good Word of God, and renewing 
its strength like an eagle, rose toward heaven with shining 
plumage and a steady wing. 

What is very remarkable, the proclamation of May, 
1541, in reference to Bible reading, actually complained 
that many Enghsh towns had neglected their duty, and 
had not provided copies, in consequence of which the 
command to furnish them is repeated, and the curate and 
inhabitants remaining disobedient were threatened with a 
penalty of forty shillings for every month during which the 
book should be wanting. The proclamation fixed the price ■ 
of the Great Bible at a suna not exceeding ten shillings 
unbound, and twelve shillings " well and sufficiently bound, 
trimmed, and clasped." * 

If in some places the Scriptures were neglected, in 
others, people having tasted of them, and their rehsh for 
the contents being thereby increased, they craved more 
and more the perusal of existing translations ; and therefore 
some of the old Church party, with a view to neutrahze 
the effect of a royal permission, as far as it went, con- 
demned existing translations, and sought to supply one 
of their own, better suited to their purpose. 

A meeting of Convocation was held in February, 1542, 
when we find Archbishop Cranmer landing in his barge at 
St. Paul's Wharf, and thence proceeding on foot, with the 
cross carried before him, into the choir of St. Paul's. To the 
assembled clergy Gardiner, the same man who was ambas- 
sador at Paris before Bonner, and at Cromwell's request 

* Burnet's Reformation Records, u. iii., No. 24. 



The Great Bible. 165 

favoured Coverdale — a remarkable instance of these men 
changiaig sides in the course of their historj'' — proposed that 
the New Testament should he revised, and that certain majes- 
tic words in the Latin Vulgate should he transferred to the 
new version. Fuller gives a hst of high-sounding terms, and 
adds, " Gardiner's design plainly appeared in stickling for the 
preserving of so many Latin words to obscure the Scripture ; 
who, though wanting power to keep the light of the Word 
from shining, sought out of poHcy to put it into a dark lantern ; 
contrary to the constant practice of God in Scripture, level- 
ling high, hard expressions to the capacity of the meanest."* 
Cranmer, however, defeated the project, and no further 
revision was made in Henry's reign. 

But the tide was turning. Cromwell was gone, Cranmer 
had not the firmness of character and the power over Henry 
which the former possessed, and the monarch soon relapsed 
into his enmity against the general use of the Bible. His 
submissive Parhament, in the year 1543, passed an Act pro- 
hibiting the use of Tyndale's translation, and commanding 
that the annotations and preambles in all other Bibles should 
be destroyed ; nor was any one belonging to the class of 
apprentices, artificers, journeymen, servants, husbandmen, 
and labourers, to be permitted to read the Old or New 
Testament at all, either in pubhc or private. 

Bibles not of Tyndale's translation, provided all annota- 
tions and preambles were cancelled, would seem, according to 
the letter of the Act, to have been allowed ; but as the case 
stood with regard to printed versions, they all, more or less, 
contained the work of the deceased exile, so that it is difficult 
to say what construction was to be put upon the new statute. 

Perhaps the Act did not interfere with the order made 

* Church, Sistory, vol. ii. p. 108. 



1 66 Our English Bible. 

by Convocation in 1542, that, " every Sunday and holyday 
througlioTit the year, the curate of every parish church, after 
the Te Deum and the Magnificat, should openly read to the 
people one chapter of the New Testament in Enghsh, vdth- 
out exposition," and when the course was ended, that he 
was to commence another course of reading in the Old 
Testament.* 

No doubt the privilege of reading the Bible was often 
abused. Ignorant people misunderstood it, conceited people 
misinterpreted it, controversial people made it a subject of 
contention, and profane people turned it into ridicule. Henry 
complained that the book was " disputed, rhymed, simg, 
and jangled in every alehouse and tavern, contrary to the true 
meaning and doctrine of the same." All this, of course, 
would be turned to account by those who had from the 
beginning opposed the circulation of English versions ; and 
Henry, after having given his gracious hcence to Coverdale's 
as well as Matthew's and the Great Bible, in his last days 
put a fi-esh restriction on the rehgious hberty of his subjects. 
In 1546 he issued a new proclamation, prohibiting expressly 
the version of Coverdale as well as that of Tyndale, and also 
" amj other " than was "permitted " by the Act of 1543 ; but, 
with the obscurity of meaning which marked that strange 
page of our statute book, whatever favourable construction 
might be put upon it by a reader of any version not ex- 
pressly that of Tyndale or Coverdale, it is obvious that such 
a reader exposed himself to the peril of a far different inter- 
pretation of the ambiguous law. Nobody could safely read 
any Enghsh Bible whatever, vnth that proclamation hanging 
over his head. 

The Act and the proclamation together were engines of 

* Strype, Ecclesiasfical Memorials, vol. i. p. .581, Oxford edit. 



MarbecJis Concordance. 167 

persecution capable of being extensively applied by inimical 
lawyers ; but the monarch was not long spared to witness 
the effect of his proceedings, for on the 25th of January, 1547, 
the Great Disposer of life and death summoned him to 
another world. 

An episode in Henry's reign connected, not with the 
translation, but with the use of the Scriptures, is too inte- 
resting to be passed over. 

John Marbeck was organist of the royal chapel, Windsor, 
then in aU the freshness of its beautiful Tudor architecture. 
The groined roof and the perpendicular arches often rung 
with the music of his chants and responses — their echoes still 
Hnger in our cathedral services. The Book of Common 
Prayer noted by him was printed in 1550 by Eichard Grafton ; 
but his most noticeable employment here consisted in lead- 
ing the way towards an humble but useful walk of BibHcal 
hterature, the corapilation of an English concordance. His 
story, as related by Foxe, also throws hght on two points — 
first, the jealousy felt with respect to Bible reading, and 
secondly, the habit of concluding that any Bible reader was 
a heretic. 

Commissioners appointed to look after forbidden books 
caipe to Windsor the Thursday before Palm Sunday, 1543, 
and began their work just before midnight. Marbeck was a 
suspected person, and he was one of those who were appre- 
hended. AiTaigned before Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, 
he was asked, " Dost thou know wherefore thou art sent for ?" 
"No," said the accused. His attention was directed to 
some quires of paper lying on the table, containing part of 
a concordance translated out of Latin into Enghsh ; and the 
bishop proceeded to say that a concordance was for the help 
of a i^reacher, and that " if such a book should go forth in 



1 68 Our English Bible. 

English it would destroy the Latin tongue." Marbeck, 
according to Foxe, was sent to the Marshalsea, as it would 
appear from the story, not because he was an accused heretic, 
but in order that the Church authorities might gather from 
him evidence relative to certain Windsor people who were 
strongly suspected of heresy. But the organist declined to 
say anything, and his silence was construed into a proof of 
sympathy with heretical neighbom's . Gardiner is represented 
as using violeiit language, and urging the improbabihty of 
Marbeck's preparing a concordance without the help of 
others. " Truly, my lord," said Marbeck, " I camiot tell in 
what part your lordsliip doth take it, but howsoever it be, I 
will not deny but I did it Avithout the help of any man, save 
God alone." " Say what thou wilt," rejoined the prelate ; 
" except God Himself would come down from heaven and tell 
me so, I would not beheve it ! " And so, going forth to a 
window where two great Bibles lay upon a cushion, the one 
in Latin, the other in English, he called Marbeck to him, 
and pointing his finger to a place in the Latin Bible, said, 
" Canst thou English this sentence ? " " Nay, my lord, thow 
I be not so cunning to give it a perfect EngHsh, but I can 
fetch out the EngHsh thereof in the English Bible." The 
story is oddly told, and much of it is unintelligible. 

Benewed endeavours to obtain from Marbeck evidence 
against his friends were in vain, and his refusal greatly ex- 
asperated his persecutors. The Bishop of "Winchester now 
plainly accused him as a great heretic, because he had 
read more Scripture than any man in the realm. Five 
examinations -of the Windsor organist are recorded, and in 
one of them, before the Bishop of Salisbury, he thus describes 
how he worked at his concordance. " When Thomas 
Matthew's Bible came first in print, I was much desirous 



Marbeclis Concordance. 1 69 

to have one of them ; and being a poor man, not able to buy 
one of them, I determined with mj'seK to borrow one amongst 
my friends, and to write it forth. And when I had written 
out the five books of Moses in fair great paper, and was 
entered into the Book of Joshua, my friend Master Turner 
(of Magdalen College, Oxford, and afterwards of AVindsor) 
chanced to steal upon me unawares, and seeing me writing 
out the Bible, asked me what I meant thereby ; and when I 
had told him the cause, ' Tush!' quoth he, ' thou goest about 
a vain and tedious labour. But this were a profitable work 
for thee, to set out a concordance in Enghsh.' ' A concord- 
ance,' said I, ' what is that ? ' Then he told me it was a 
book to find out any word in the whole Bible by the letter, 
and that there was such an one in Latin already. Then I 
told him I had no learning to go about such a thing. 
' Enough,' said he, ' for that matter, for it requtreth not 
so much learning as dihgence ; and seeing thou art so 
painful a man, and one that cairaot be unoccupied, it were 
a good exercise for thee.' And this, my lord, is all the 
instruction that ever I had, before or after, of any man." At 
last Marbeck came to be indicted as a heretic, on the ground 
that he had spoken against the mass, and being found guilty 
was condemned to be burnt ; but he escaped the flames 
through the intercession of a friend.* Three "Windsor men, 
however, Pearson, Testwood, andFelmer, accused with him, 
were consumed to ashes in that part of the park which lies 
under the North Terrace of the Castle, near the spot where 
stands the South- Western Eailway Station. 

*Foxe, V. pp. 474r-49-l.. 




ChA.PTER^ VIII. 
EDWARD THE SIXTH'S REIGN. 



ENEY VIII. was buried on 16th February, 1547, 
in St. George's Chapel, Wiadsor, with all the 
pomp characteristic of that pageant-loving 
age, and with many of the rites and cere- 
monies of Popery ; on the Sunday after, 
young Edward was crowned in the Abbey of 
Westminster. It has often been said that 
when the royal insignia were presented to 
the boyish monarch, and he saw the three 
swords borne in state on such occasions, he 
■*" ~ asked ioi a. fourth. Some one, not catching 
the idea, iaquired what his majesty meant; when he rephed, 
" The Bible ; that book is the sword of the Spirit, and to be 
preferred before these swords. That ought, in all right, to 
govern us, who use them for the people's safety by God's 
appointment. Without that sword we are nothing, we can 
do nothing, we have no power ; from that we are what we 
are this day ; from that we receive whatsoever it is that we 




Edivard the Sixtlis Reign. 171 

at this present do assume. He that rules without it is not 
to be called God's minister or a Idng. Under that we ought 
to live, to fight, to govern the people, and to perform all our 
afi'airs. From that alone we obtain all power and virtue, 
grace and salvation, and whatsoever we have of Divine 
strength."* During the short reign of this young prince — 
embracing only six years and a haK — men could read their 
Bibles without molestation ; and no less than about fifty 
editions of the Scriptiires issued from the press during that 
brief space. 

Thirty-one out of fifty-seven English printers who phed 
their trade in the cities of London, Canterbury, and 
Worcester, and in the town of Ipswich — so greatly had the 
use of typography become extended — employed their presses 
in executing copies of the Scriptures, each selecting what- 
ever version he chose ; and it is curious to find that of 
Coverdale's Bible, in Edward's reign, three editions were 
published ; of Craimier's, seven of the whole Bible and eight 
of the New Testament ; of Matthew's, five ; of Taverner's, 
two ; of the New Testament of Tyndale, or Matthew, 
there were twenty-four, fifteen of them bearing' Tyndale's 
name. In each year there were eight issues of the Bible. 
That came to pass which is vyritten, " The plowman shall 

* I give these words as foimd in Strype's Ecclesiastical Memorials, vol. ii. 
p. 22. The author connects these words with the coronation, on the authority 
of one "who wrote about those times," and who relates " that he heard it from 
credible hands." Strype gires a minute account of the coronation of Edward in 
his Life of Oranmer, book ii. c. 1, but says nothing there of the presentation of 
a Bible. Camden's Remains have been cited as an authority for the anecdote. It 
is related there as follows ; King Edward the Sixth, when three swords were 
delivered at his coronation unto him as King of England, Prance, and Ireland, said 
there was yet another sword to be delivered unto him. Whereat, when the Lords 
marvelled, he said, I mean the sacred Bible, which is the sword of the Spirit, 
without which we are nothing, neither can do anything." Neither Strype nor 
Camden says that a Bible was presented to him. 



172 Ozi-r English Bible. 

overtake the reapers, and the treader of grapes him that 
soweth seed."* Of all versions, Tyndale's was the most 
popular. 

Yet there were no editions of the Scriptures published at 
the royal charge or by the royal command ; people were left 
to themselves, to moral influence, and the guidance of God's 
providence and Spirit ; and such was the result. Upon 
Tuesday, the 15th of November, in the House of Lords, 
a bill was introduced, by whom is not stated, though 
Cranmer was present, /o?" tlie reading of the Scriptures ; but 
it never reached a second reading, nor was any such measure 
even hinted at throughout the reign.t 

No new translation was pubhshed in the reign of Edward, 
except a translation of the paraphrase by Erasmus. The 
preparation of this book had been commenced in Henry's 
reign, at the request of Queen Catherine Parr. Nicholas 
Udal, a distinguished scholar, and Master of Eton College, 
translated the Gospel of Luke. Mark was translated bj' 
Thomas Key, Begistrar of Oxford. The translators of 
the Gospel of Matthew and the Book of Acts are unknown ; 
but the most remarkable circumstance connected with the 
volume was, that the Lady Mary — the future persecuting 
Queen of England — was employed on the translation of 
John ; " but when she had with overpainful study and labour 
of writing cast her weak body into a grievous and long sick- 
ness she committed the same work to Mr. Francis 

Mallet." J The courtly Master of Eton, Dr. Udal, takes 
care in the preface, which is the production of his pen, to 
compliment Queen Catherine and the Princess Mary on their 
connection with the work, by remarking, " It was now no 

* Eadie, Mist. Mng. BiUe, vol. i. p. 423. 

t Lords' Journal?, Anderson, vol. ii. p. 247. J Lewis, p. 165. 



Edward the Sixth's Reign. 173 

news at all to see queens and ladies, of most high estate and 
progeny, instead of courtly daUiance, to embrace virtuous 
exercises of reading and -writing, and with most earnest 
study, both early and late, to apply themselves to the 
acquiring of knowledge as well in other liberal arts and 
disciphne, as also most especially of God and His most holy 
Word."* The first volume was published in 1648; the 
second, containing the Epistles and the Revelation, in the 
following year. Dr. Old, Leonard Cox, and Edmund Allen 
were engaged in the production of the work ; Coverdale also 
took a part in it, for he wrote the dedication to Edward vi. ; 
and perhaps he also translated the four Gospels, the Acts, 
and the Epistles to the end of Galatians. 

Coverdale' s connection with the book no doubt arose 
from his position in Queen Catherine's household as ahnoner, 
which would bring him into frequent contact with that 
iUustrious lady, and would be the means of commending 
him to her as pecuharly fitted to take part ia such a work. 

It appears that the. archbishop contemplated a new 
translation of the Scriptures. Two very learned foreigners, 
Bucer and Eagius, were staying, ia the year 1549, at 
Lambeth, and were informed, " as it had been a great while 
his pious and most earnest desire, that the Holy Bible should 
come abroad in the greatest exactness and true agreement 
with the original text, so he laid this work upon these two 
learned men. Eirst, that they should give a clear, plain, and 
succinct interpretation of the Scripture, according to the 
propriety of the language. And secondly, illustrate difficult 
and obscure places, and reconcile those that seemed repugnant 
to one another. And it was his will and advice that to this 
end and purpose their public readings should tend. This 

• Lewis, p. 164. 



1 74 Our English Bible. 

pious and good work by the archbishop assigned to them, 
they most' gladly and readily undertook. For their more 
regularly carrjdng on this business they allotted to each 
other, by consent, then' distinct tasks ; Fagius, because Ms 
talent lay in the Hebrew learning, was to undertake the Old 
Testament, and Bucer the New." * But the scheme was 
frustrated, for Fagius died in the NoYember of the year 
1549 ; and the spirit of his friend, the amiable Bucer, 
followed him, in httle more than a year, to the regions of 
perfect intelUgence and undying friendship. 

Coverdale's relation to Catherine Parr, as almoner in her 
royal household, brought him to court, and thus made the 
indefatigable Bible worker known to the youthful king, and 
placed his feet in paths of earthly honour. In 1551 he 
was appointed to preach in Westminster Abbey a funeral 
sermon for the Lord Chamberlain ; and soon afterwards he 
rose to the bishopric of Exeter, a circumstance noticed by 
Peter Martyr, then at Cambridge, who wrote to Bullinger, 
saying that he thought nothing could tend more to promote 
true religion than to trust such men with the administration 
of Church affairs, t Coyerdale was nominated by Edward 
on the 14th of August, 1551, and on the next day royal 
letters authorizing his consecration were sent to Cranmer. 
The poverty, however, of the bishop designate occasioned 
delay, as he had no means of paying the firstfruits ; and it 
is further stated that difficulties were thrown in the way of 
his doing homage. Yet after all there could not have been 
much time lost, for on the 30th of August Coverdale was 
consecrated, with Scory, the elect for Eochester, and 
John, suffragan of Bedford, " all with their surphces and 

* Strype's it/e 0/ Oranmer, vol. i. p. 281. 
t JlfemoWnJs 0/ CovevAale, p. liG. 



Cover dale. 175 

copes, and Coverdale so habited also."* A window is opened 
into the domestic scenes of the good man's hfe, through 
which it is pleasant to catch the following ghmpses : 

"He most worthily did perform the office committed 
unto him, he preached continually upon every holy day, and 
did read most commonly twice in the week in some one 
church or other within this city. He was, after the rate of 
his living, a great keeper of hospitahty, very sober in diet, 
godly in life, friendly to the godly, liberal to the poor, and 
courteous to aU men, void of pride, full of hospitahty, 
abhorring covetousness, and an enemy to all wickedness and 
vidcked men, whose company he shunned, and whom he would 
in no wise shroud or have in his house or company. His 
wife, a most sober, chaste, and godly matron, his house and 
household another church, in which was exercised all 
godhness and virtue, no one person being in his house 
which did not from time to time give an account of his faith 
and rehgion, and also did hve accordingly ; and as he had a 
care for the good success in rehgion, so had he also for the 
dkection of the government in ecclesiastical causes ; and 
because he was most skilful therein, neither would he be 
hindered from his godly studies, and be encumbered with 
such worldly matters, which nevertheless he would have 
done in all uprightness, justice, and equity, he sent to Oxford 
for a learned man to be his chancellor." t 

As in the days of Hemy viii., so in the days of Edward vi. 
complaints were made of the diversity of opinion connected 
with a free circulation of the vernacular Scriptures; and 
once for all it may be observed that this is a fact to be 
expected, without implying any censure on the principle of 

* Strype's Cranmer, vol. i. p. 389. 

t Hoker's Catalogue of Bishops of Exeter. 



1 76 Our English Bible. 

private judgment ; nor is it at all surprising, neither does it 
vitiate the value of freedom, that some, in the frantic joy of a 
new-found liberty, adopted opinions extravagant and absurd. 
The agitation of the human intellect by breezes of hberty 
could not but throw up foam on the surface of the waters ; 
yet who but must regard this as preferable to the dead calm 
which existed before ? The wildness of some of the sectaries 
alarmed the sober-minded; and Protestant rulers, because 
of these abtises, adopted measures in imitation of Eoman 
Catholics. The effect of the recent change, however de- 
plorable, was only a natural reaction against the long- 
estabhshed tyranny over the realms of thought. In 
England as well as Germany, people propounded Anti- 
nomian tenets, and affirmed that the elect have a right to 
the things of this world, according to their necessities. The 
King's council considered that such an opinion came within 
their jurisdiction ; but, going beyond the suppression of 
anti-social principles, they also directed Craimier and others 
to search after and examine Anabaptists, heretics, and con- 
temners of the Common Prayer. A commission to that 
effect appeared in April, 1549, and again in January, 1551, 
when Coverdale was included am.ongst the commissioners.* 
Whether he was implicated in proceedings against certain 
Arians who were put to death as heretics, it is difficult to 
determine ; but there is no reason to beheve that he was 
more enlightened than many others of his day on the subject 
of toleration. The prevalent sentiment was that to burn 
men for false opinions was to do God service. 

In Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, there is a manu- 
script, written by Sir John Cheke, in the reign of Edward vi., 
containing a new translation of the Gospel of Matthew, 

Burnet's Mist, nfthe Beformation, toI. hi. p. 186. 



Cheke s Version. 



■II 



which shows that there was more than one attempt made at 
the tune to produce a new version ; but it remained incom- 
plete and unpublished^ Sir John Cheke was a distinguished 
Greek scholar, and was preceptor to the king. I have seen 
the manuscript and examined part of it. It appears to be 
an original version ; and the following is a specimen of the 
style, and of the spelling, when there was no fixed standard 
for the latter, and writers in that respect adopted all kinds 
of variation : 

" When Jesus was boorn in beethleem, a citi of Juri in 
king herod's dais, lo theny° wisards came from th 'est parties 
to Jerusalem, and asked wheer the King of Jewes was y' 
was new boom. For we saw his sterr in the 'eest, and we 
cam to worschip him. "When K. Herod herd this, he was 
trobled, and al Jerusale with him and he gatherd togither 
al y^ hed priests, and scribes of y° people and asked of them 
wheer Christ schold be born. And thei answerd in Bethleem 
of Juda, for so it is writen bi y° propheet : And thow Beth- 
leem of Juda, thow art no wais y* lest among the Princes of 
Juda, for out of y° schal come a ruler y' shall feed Jsrl mi 
people." * 

On the death of Edward vi., in 1553, a great change came 
over England in reference to the Bible. A proclamation in 
August, 1553, prohibited the open reading of the Scriptures. 
When "Philip and Mary, in 1554, passed in procession through 
the metropohs, and the citizens, in their wonted manner, 
adorned the streets with emblematic representations, they 
exhibited a picture of Henry viii., with a sword in one hand 
and a Bible in the other, giving the volume to his young 
son Edward. Brought before the Chancellor, who was Bishop 

* This veraion has been printed under the editorship of James Goodwin, b.d. 
London, 1843. 



I 78 Our English Bible. 

Gardiner, tlie unlucky artist received a violent reprimand, 
was called " villain and traitor," and had to daub over the 
book and paint a glove in its room — in doing vfhich, as the 
story goes, he spoiled the king's hand, for he " vviped aw^ay 
a portion of the fingers withal."* Scripture texts had been 
painted on the walls of churches, but in October, 1554, a 
mandate came from Bonner, now Bishop of London, for- 
bidding the practice, and commanding churchwardens and 
parishioners to " abolish and extinguish such manner of 
Scriptures, so that by no means they be either read or seen. 
If after monition this was neglected to be done, parish 
priests were to cause the aforesaid Scriptures to be razed, 
abohshed, and extinguished forthwith." 

In 1555 a London apprentice, found reading his Bible in 
Brentwood Church, was told by a priest that " it was never 
merry world, since the Bible came forth in English." After 
this he was accused of heretical opinions relative to the 
Lord's Supper ; and on that account, not as the penalty of 
his Bible reading, he was condemned to the stake, and 
suffered death accordingly, in the village of Brentwood. 
" In my little pain which I shaU suffer," said the 
youth, "which is but a short braid, Christ hath promised 
me, mother, a crown of joy; may you not be glad of 
that, mother?" She knelt down and cried, "I pray God 
strengthen thee, my son, to the end. Yea, I think thee as 
well bestowed as any child that I ever bare." t 

The press now ceased to be employed in Bible printing. 
No new editions appeared whilst Mary occupied the throne ; 
and in June, 1555, a proclamation appeared, forbidding the 
importation of works by Tyndale, Coverdale, Cranmer, Fryth, 
Latimer, Hooper, and others. 

* Eadie, vol. i. p. 427. t Foie, vol. vi. pp. 723, 727. 



Martyrdom of Rogers. 1 79 

Amongst the martyrs of Queen Mary's reign were two 
men who have come before us in these pages, both zealous in 
promoting the printing and circulation of the Bnghsh Bible. 
The first is John Eogers, who took the lead in suffering, and 
" bravely brake the ice." After editing Matthew's Bible, he 
had charge of a congregation at Wittemberg, being sufficiently 
acquainted with the German language for that purpose.* It 
is interestiag to think of this Enghshman residing at the 
head-quarters of the Saxon Eeformation, walking up and 
down these quaint streets, and dropping in at Luther's 
lodgings in the Augustinian convent, or at Melancthon's 
house in the Main Strasse. He returned to England under 
Edward vi., and became Canon of St. Paul's and a lecturer 
on divinity, holding at the same time the vicarage of 
St. Sepulchre. Tried and condemned as an obstinate heretic 
in January, 1553, he suffered from the revival of Henry rv.'s 
Act, " de heretico comburendo ; " and in connexion vyith his 
martyrdom one of those touching scenes occurred, which at 
the time, as witnessed by immense crowds, and afterwards 
as related in the chimney-nooks of England, did more than 
anything else, save the circulation of the Bible, to strengthen 
the Protestantism of our fathers. Bogers asked Gardiner 
that his wife, being a foreigner, might be allowed to visit 
him, " for," said he, " she hath ten children, which are liers 
and mine, and somewhat I would counsel her what were 
best for her to do." "No," rephed the chancellor; " she is 
not thy wife. She shall not come to thee." " Then I have 
tired out aU your charity," was the good man's meek reply. 
On February 4th he was led forth to execution from the 
walls of Newgate ; on the way, probably by the corner of 
St. Sepulchre's Church, where the martyr had been vicar, 

* Pole, vol. vi. p. 591. 



icSo Oti7' English Bible. 

and which is just opposite the prison, stood the poor 
German stranger, with her children, one a babe at the 
mother's breast. The sheriffs led the victim to Smithfield, 
priests and others chanting the Miserere, and " all the 
people," no doubt including many of his old parishioners, 
"wonderfully rejoicing at his constancy, with great praises 
and thanks to God for the same." " The fire was put under 
him, and when it had taken hold both upon his legs and 
shoulders, he, as one feeling no smart, waved his hand in 
the flame, as though it had been cold water. And after 
lifting up his hands unto heaven, not removing the same 
until such time as the devouring fire had consumed them, 
most mildly this happy martyr yielded up his spirit into 
the hands of his heavenly Father." * 

The death of Cranmer at Oxford need not be described. 
Community in suffering, as well as in labour, hnks his name 
to those of Tyndale and Rogers, who had preceded him, as 
in Bible work, so also in pains and penalties along the fiery 
way. And if the infirmity of the man triumphed over the 
heroism of the Christian, there was not wanting in the case 
of the faltering archbishop, at last, a strength of faith 
which made him more than conqueror, and illumined his 
exit from the world with radiance, like a broad flash 
bursting from the smoke which enveloped and darkened 
the pyre. 

Coverdale narrowly escaped. Through solicitation on 
his behalf addressed by his brother-in-law to the King of 
Denmark, that monarch wrote to Queen Mary for his 
liberation and pardon, supposing he was in prison. She 
wrote back that he was not under restraint for his rehgion, 
but because of debts he owed the Crov?n. She again v^rrote 

* Foxe, vol. vi. p. 611. 




THl? MAKTTKS' MEMORIAL, OXFOBH. 



Princess Elizabeth. 183 

to her royal brotlier of Denmark, informing him that 
although Coverdale was bound to pay certain sums of money, 
she much more valued the gratification of his majesty's 
desire, and would therefore cancel the obhgation. Coverdale 
received a passport in February, and soon reached the shores 
of Denmark.* 

To use the words of Canon Westcott, " Tyndale, who 
gave us our first New Testament from the Greek, was 
strangled for his work at Vilvorde : Coverdale, who gave us 
our first printed Bible, narrowly escaped the stake by exile : 
Eogers, to whom we owe the newly formed basis of our present 
version, was the first victim of the Marian persecution : 
Cramner, who has left us our Psalter, was at last blessed 
with a death of triumphant agony. The work was crowned 
by martyrdom, and the workmen laboured at it ia the faith 
and with the love of martyrs." t 

The Princess Ehzabeth, in those dark days, lived at 
"Woodstock, where she was kept in restraint, and whilst 
there, surrounded by sylvan scenes, she wrote in her New 
Testament the following quaint passage : " I walk many 
times into the pleasant fields of Holy Scriptures, where I 
pluck up goodly sentences by pruning, eat them by reading, 
chew them by musing, and lay them up at length in the high 
seat of memory ; that, having tasted their sweetness, I may 
the less perceive the bitterness of this miserable life." I 
And in ranks of society far below that of this royal lady, 
many there were who loved thek Bibles, and, in spite of 
persecution, studied the sacred volume. Individuals in 
secret would pore over Tyndale's Testament, and imbibe 
the martyr's spirit from the same source whence that 

* Eoxe, vol. yi. p. 706. t History of Englisli Bihle, p. 371. 

J Weston's Life of Sir T. Pope, p. 71. 



184 Ovr English Bible. 

heroic man drank in his. The hook was prized, concealed, 
and preserved for posterit^^ 

" Fierce whiskered giiarda that volume sought in rain, 
Enjoyed by stealth, and hid with anxious pain ; 
While all around was misery and gloom, 
This showed the boundless bliss beyond the tomb. 
Freed from the venal priest — the feudal rod. 
It led the weary sufferer's steps to God ; 
And when his painful course on earth was run, 
This, his chief wealth, descended to his son." 

Nor were little congregations wanting, who here ajid there, 
in houses and fields, secretly gathered together to hear the 
reading of the Word. One, at Islington, is specially noticed 
by Foxe ; and on the graphic pages of the Protestant 
chronicler we have a vivid picture of a piotis band on the 
borders of St. John's Wood, on the morning of May-day, 
when, as their neighbours were busy vdth rural games, and 
were dancing round the pole on the village green, they were 
employed in hstening to the Scriptures read by one of their 
number, and worshipping with primitive simphcity the 
Father of spirits ; till the constables, with their bills, 
approached the circle sitting under the trees, and commanded 
them to follow, upon which they were led to the magistrate's 
house, and most of them committed to prison. Soon after, 
thirteen of the number were consigned to the flames on 
charges of heresy.* On reading the examinations of these 
confessors and martyrs, one is forcibly struck vrith theii- 
intelligent views of rehgion, their extensive acquaintance 
with theology derived from the study of the Bible, their 
remembrance of Scripture texts, and their sagacity in 
meeting the objections of persecutors. Often were the 
learned doctors of Eome overcome in controversy with 

' Foxe, vol. viii. p. 468. 



Bible Readers. 



185 



these simple-hearted persons, who had no loaming but 
what they had derived from the oracles of inspired wisdom. 
It was shown that a sound and thorough knowledge of the 
Bible is more than a match for sophistries on the side of 
And the patience, constancy, and joy of these Bible- 



error. 



taught martyrs demonstrated the soul-sustaining power of 
Bible truths, and read a lesson for all generations, directing 
us to the study of Scripture as the secret of spiritual 
strength, hope, and consolation. 




vr^'Mswik: 




hjVqj^.Vy^yVTrr.,-' ^g 



g=^.r--^^*<7--w^ 



;n'.>-wv-''cz!:;aL 



Chapter ix. 

THE GENEVA VERSION. 

ENEVA is a name symbolical of the Eeforma- 
tion. It stands opposed to Eome, which 
embodies the idea of papal despotism. 
The far-famed city on the shores of Lake 
Leman was the home of Calvin and Beza. 
There they studied, preached, and sent 
forth their writings, rendering the city a 
source of hght, whose rays, scattered far 
and wide, pierced the darlcness of Europe. 
Many eyes were turned to that spot in the 
middle of the sixteenth century ; many 
bought instruction from the master spirits there. 

Intimately is Geneva connected with the history of our 
Enghsh Bible. To exiles there located was England 
indebted for the most popular translation in the sixteenth 
century, next to the work of Tyndale. A band of men, first 
driven from their own country by persecution, which led 
them to Frankfort, and then, differing from brethren 
there, settled in Geneva, to worship God with Puritan 
simplicity, according to the dictates of their conscience. 




Genevan Exiles. 189 

The Bible was their beloved book, and in its images they 
sought a rule of faith, and a spring of consolation amidst 
years of exile. The more imaginative among them, as they 
paced the shore of the beautiful waters, which, as the sun 
poured down his beams, resembled a sea of glass mingled 
wdth fire, might count it no unapt emblem of Divine 
Revelation. As the charming scenery soothed their spirits, 
they might well regard it as the image of that book which, 
contrasted — 

" With the world we dwell in, is a thing 
That warns us with its stillness to forsake 
Earth's troubled waters for a purer spring." 

Amongst the exiles were Miles Coverdale, WiUiam 
Whittingham, Thomas Sampson, Anthony Gilby, Thomas 
Bodley, and Thomas Bentham. They were hospitably treated 
by the Genevese, and were admitted to the privileges of 
citizenship. On the 10th of June, 1566, the city council 
were occupied on the subject of receiving the strangers, for 
in the register of that body it is reported that "the 
Eev. Jean Calvin has represented that certain Bnghshmen 
are desirous to repair hither for the sake of the Word of God, 
and asked that it may please the magistrates to open for 
them a church, to enable them to preach and administer 
the sacraments. Therefore decreed that we advise the select- 
ing of a proper place of worship for said EngHsh, and that 
the parties confer thereupon with Monsieur Calvin." The 
Church of Marie la Neuve was finally granted for the 
purpose.* 

Wihiam Whittingham was chosen minister of the con- 
gregation. He had been educated at Brazenose, Oxford, had 
been a student at Christ Church, had travelled in France, 

• Registres du Conseil, vol. i. de 1555, fol. 102 ; vol. ii. fol. 17, Si. 



iQo Otcr English Bible. 

and had spent some years at Orleans. There he married 
Catherine, daughter of Lewis Jaquemayne, and sister to the 
wife of John Calvin.* Afterwards he is found at Frankfort, 
taking part in the unhappy controversies there ; and as he 
adhered to the Puritan side of the question, he accompanied 
those with whom he agreed to the city of G-eneva. 

In the year 1557 there was pubhshed " The Newe 
Testament of our Lord Jesus Christ, conferred diligently 
with the Greke and best approved translations — vrith the 
arguments as wel before the chapters, as for every boke and 
epistle, also diuersities of readings, and moste proffitable 
annotations of all harde places : wherunto is added a copious 
table. At Geneva, printed by Conrad Badius mdlvii." 
"Whittingham was the man who prepared this work. It is 
plain from the address to the reader that it is the work of 
one man, though it has been strangely confounded with the 
whole Bible which followed, and which was the united 
production of several persons. Whittingham has been 
generally mentioned as one of the authors of the work ; and 
as there certainly was not more than one, and he was an 
excellent scholar, fitted for the undertaking, and certainly 
a leading man in preparing the Genevan Bible, I think it 
most likely that he was the person who rendered this 
valuable service to the Church of God. His pastoral 
character would well account for his undertaking the 
labour, and would agree with what is said in the preface, 
of the translation being " designed for the simple lambs in 
the fold of Christ at Geneva, the place where God had 
appointed them to dwell." 

* Brown Willis quotes from Wliittingham's tomb the inscription: " Mariti 
CatlierinBB Sororis Johannis Calvin theologi." "This monument," says a corre- 
spondent, Mr. Edwards, of the British and Foreign Bible Society, " however no 
longer exists, having been destroyed by the Soots in one of their inonrsiona 



Genevan Testament. 1 9 1 

The Genevan Testament was published in the year 
1557. An eloquent preface to it was written by John Calvin. 
The following is a specimen of the style in which the 
Genevese Eeformer introduced the volume to EngHsh 
readers: "For this is Mfe everlasting, to know our only 
true God, and Him whom He hath sent, Jesus Christ, in 
whom He hath appointed the beginning, midst, and end of 
our salvation. This is Isaac, the well-beloved Son of the 
Father, which was offered in sacrifice, and yet gave not 
place to death. This is the vigilant Shepherd, Jacob, 
which had so great care over the sheep which he had in 
keeping. This is the good and merciful Brother, Joseph, 
who, in his glory, was not ashamed to acknowledge His 
brethren, were they never so base and abject. This is the 
great High Priest and Bishop, Melchisedec, who made an 
everlasting sacrifice once for all. This is the excellent Law- 
maker, Moses, who writeth His law in the tables of our 
hearts by His Spirit. This is the faithful Captain and 
Guide, Joshua, to conduct us into the land of promise. 
This is the noble and victorious King David, smiting down 
with His hand aU rebellious power. This is the magnificent 
and triumphing King Solomon, governing His Idngdom in 
peace and prosperity. This is the strong and valiant Sam- 
son, who by His death overthrew all His enemies. And last 
of all, every good thing which heart can think or desire is 



wHen the oatliedral at Durham suffered. But when I was in Geneva, at the end of 
1866, 1 spoke to Dr. D'Aubign^ on the snhjeot, and with his aid I was enabled to 
inspect the archives of the Engflish exiles, which are preserved in the public 
library there, and I found this entry, ' WilUam WTiittinghani of Chester in 
England, and Catherine Jaquemayne of Orleans in Prance, were married Nov. 15, 
1556 ; presented a son for baptism 17th August, 1557.' His having married the 
sister of Calvin's wife accounts for the report commonly repeated and counte- 
nanced by the inscription on the old monument." 



192 Our English Bible. 

found in this only Jesus Christ. For He humbled Himself 
to exalt us ; He became servant to make us free ; He was 
impoverished to enrich us ; He vs^as sold to ransom us ; 
He became prisoner to bail us ; He was condemned to 
dehver us ; He was made the curse for our blessiag, an offer- 
ing for sin for our righteousness ; He was disfigured to 
fashion us ; He died for our life. Insomuch that by Him 
roughness is smoothed, anger appeased, darkness lightened, 
unrighteousness justified, weakness strengthened, discomfort 
comforted, sin bridled, despite contemned, fear boldened, 
debt paid, labour eased, sadness made glad, mishap good- 
hap, hardness easiness, disorder ordered, division united, 
ignominy made noble, rebellion subdued, menacing men- 
aced, ambush discovered, assaults assailed, violence 
oppressed, battle beaten, war foughten, vengeance punished, 
torment tormented, damnation damned, depth drowaed, 
hell chained, death dead, mortality immortal, and, to be 
short, mercy hath swallowed all misery, and bounty hath 
overcome all evil." Thus did the writer, in the style of his 
age, exhaust the power of language in expressing his love 
for the Saviour, and his conceptions of Divine redemption. 
This many-coloured imagery was fitted to dehght the 
Genevan exiles, and many more like-minded ia our own 
country. It was a quaintly adorned gate, displaying the 
characteristic workmanship of the day, and opening its 
leaves to admit the student into the temple of revelation. 

Tyndale's Testament is the basis of the Genevan, but 
Beza's translation is much used in the revision, and there 
are signs of the exercise of an independent judgment formed 
from a study of the original. Explanatory notes are 
introduced in the margin ; and, as might be inferred from the 
quarter whence they emanated, the doctrinal sentiments 



Genevan Testament. 193 

expressed in them are of the Calvinistic school. The 
Apocrypha is omitted, and certaia featm:es ia the typo- 
graphical arrangement of an English version appear for 
in the first time — the use of Eoman type, the insertion 
itahcs of words to develop the meaning of the origiaal, 
which italics have there no corresponding terms, and 
the division of chapters into verses. In this respect the 
Genevan follows Stephens' Greek Testament ; but it ex- 
hibits them in distinct paragraphs, which is quite a new 
feature. The book is a very beautiful specimen of typo- 
graphy upon good paper. 

It issued from the press while the fires were blazing in 
Smithfield, and found its way to England not long after- 
wards. A case connected with the volume, after it reached 
this country, is thus reported on the authority of Foxe : 

" There was a priest of some learning at Auburn, near 
Lincoln, who had been appointed to the place by old Long- 
land, the bishop, Henry's confessor, in the days of Wolsey. 
This man, named William Living, had married, and with 
his wife had taken up his abode in London, where he seems 
to have tried to support himself, in the time of Mary, by 
the sale of buttons. One Cox, a spy— or, as they phrased it, 
a promoter — having lodged information against him, the 
constable and his assistants soon came, and upon examin- 
ing his books, they made sure that he could not be a safe 
man. This happened to be in August or September, 1558, 
when the queen was far from beiag well. Among the 
books, Dean, the constable, had fastened his eye on one 
that was bound and gilt, which happened to be a work 
on astronomy, the De Sphmra of ManiHus. On observing 
the figures, round, triangular, and quadrilateral — this was 
enough. Carrying this book open with him in the street, 



194 Ottr English Bible. 

along with its owner and his wife — ' I have found him at 
length,' said the constable ; ' and it is no marvel the queen 
be sick, seeing there be such conjurers in privy comers ; 
but now, I trust, he shall conjure no more ! ' Delivering up 
both parties to Tho. Darbyshire, Bonner's relative, and the 
chancellor of London diocese, after ascertaining who Living 
was, and charging him with being a schismatic, he imme- 
diately ordered the husband to the bishop's coalhouse, and 
the wife afterwards to the Lollards' Tower. In conveying 
the former to his prison, however, the gaoler carried him 
first to his own house in Paternoster Eow, and ' there,' says 
Living himself, ' he robbed me of my purse, my girdle, my 
Psalter, and a New Testament of Geneva.' 

" Bringiug his victim to the nauseous coalhouse and to 
the stocks, ' Put in both your legs and your hands also,' 
said the cruel and avaricious man, ' and except you fine 
with me, I will put a collar about your neck.' ' What is 
the fine ? ' it was asked. ' Forty shillings,' said the gaoler ; 
a sum equal in value to at least twenty pounds of the 
present day. ' I am never able to pay it,' said Living. 
' You have friends that be able,' was the reply ; for well they 
laiew how to take advantage of the generosity and sym- 
pathy of the lovers of truth. He then ordered both limbs 
into the stocks tiU supper-time, or six o'clock, when a 
cousin of the prisoner's wife actually pa,id forty pence 
(equal to about two pounds) to this monster in waiting for 
one hour's ease to partake of food ! Then from seven that 
evening to two the next day he lay thus confined vdthout 
any intermission ; the man waiting, no doubt, for another 
fee. After this he also was carried to the Lollards' Tower, 
' having the favour,' says the prisoner himself, ' to put my 
leg in that hole which Master John Philpot's leg was in ; 



Genevan Bible. 195 

and so lay all that riiglit, nobody coming to me with either 
meat or drink.' Next day, however, Living was dehvered on 
the payment of fifteen shiUings for his fees. Thus, on the 
most moderate calculation, the imprisonment had cost a sum 
equal to about eleven pounds of our present money ; but 
had this happened one year earher, or had the queen, even 
now, been as Hvely as the man himself, he certainly would 
not have escaped with his hfe ! The ' Testament,' of 
course, which he most of all valued, was gone. 

"His partner in life had been separately handled; and 
one of her replies was sufficiently expressive. ' You be not 
ashamed,' said Dale, a promoter, ' to teU wherefore you 
come hither.' ' No,' replied the good woman ; ' that I am 
not, for it is for Christ's Testament.' " * 

The Genevan New Testament was in 1560 followed by 
a Genevan Bible. Lelong states that the chief persons 
employed on this work were Coverdale, Whittingham, and 
Gnby. He mentions also Goodman, Sampson, Cole, " and 
certain others," as sharing in it ; and some have supposed 
that John Knox, who was then in Geneva, took part ia the 
task. But a smaller number must have been employed, at 
least during the latter part of the work, if we are to beheve 
what Wood says : " "WMttingham with one or two more did 
tarry at Geneva a year and a haK after Queen Elizabeth 
came to the throne, being resolved to go through with the 
work." According to their own statement, the translators 
were occupied " two years and more, day and night." It was 
completed April, 1560, so that we may conclude, however 
many there might be employed at first, the number was 
reduced to two or three at last. They appear very clearly to 
have been Whittingham, Gilby, and Sampson. 

* Foxe, vol. -riii. p. 528, abridged by Anderson, AmmXs, vol. ii. p. 306. 



196 Our English Bible. 

Thomas Sampson was educated at Oxi'ord, and had 
studied in one of the inns of court. He went to Strasbuxg 
on Mary's accession ; but strongly sympathizing with the 
Puritan party, he removed to Geneva, and united himself to 
the congregation there. Anthony Gilby was a Cambridge 
man, and fled to the Continent at the commencement of 
Mary's reign. He was prominent in the Frankfort disputes, 
which led to his removal to Geneva ; and both these divines 
were distinguished by their learning, and their ardent zeal 
for the reformed faith. Coverdale, as already noticed, is 
sometimes mentioned as connected with them in their 
undertaking ; but it does not appear that he was at 
Geneva till the end of the year 1558, which was after the 
translation began ; and he left it again in 1559, before it was 
finished. Hence it is unlikely that he was one of the trans- 
lators ; stni I cannot think it improbable that, while he 
tarried in the city, he would be consulted about the work, 
being so distinguished a veteran in tliis field of enterprise. 

There was another person connected with the Genevan 
Bible, bearing a name that has long been honoured, because 
of the deeds of the son, though individually the father has 
been bu.t httle noticed. This was John Bodley, the father 
of the celebrated Sir Thomas, who founded at Oxford the 
noble Hbrary which bears his name. " In the time of Queen 
Mary," observes the latter, " after being cruelly threatened, 
and narrowly observed by those that mahced his rehgion, for 
the safety of himself and my mother (formerly Miss Joan 
Hone, an heiress in the hundred of Ottery St. Mary), who 
was wholly affected as my father, Imew no way so secure, as to 
fly into Germany ; where, after a little while, he found means 
to call over my mother, with all his children and family, 
whom he settled for a while at Wesel, in Cleveland ; and 



Genevan Version. 197 

from thence we removed to the town of Frankfort. Howbeit 
we made no long tarriance in either of these towns, for that 
my father had resolved to fix his abode in the city of Geneva, 
where, as far as I remember, the Enghsh church consisted of 
some hundred members."* Thus among that band of exiles, 
and under Whittingham's ministry, young Bodley, the future 
benefactor of Oxford, and one of the noblest patrons of 
hterature, had his early training; there too, probably, he 
imbibed that taste for books by which he was eminently 
distiaguished. The expense of preparing the Genevan 
Bible was borne by "such as were of most abihty" in 
Whittingham's congregation, and Bodley was one of the 
principal, probably by far the chief contributor ; for he 
evidently possessed an interest in the pubhcation of the 
Genevan Bible under Ehzabeth, who granted a patent to 
him, for the term of seven years, to print it solely, or 
cause it to be imprinted. 

Castaho, Beza, Calvin, and L. Bude, had aU been working 
at the same mine shortly before ; and the Genevan trans- 
lators would be hkely to avail themselves of what their 
brethren had accomphshed. " They started indeed with a 
far better foundation than the French revisers, and their 
labours show no impatient desire for change. In the 
historical books they preserved in the main the old rendering, 
altering here and there an antiquated word or a long 
periphrasis. In the Hagiographa, the Prophets, and the 
poetic books of the Apocrypha, the changes were necessarily 
far more numerous. The speUing and accentuation of the 
Hebrew names in the edition of 1560, as Jaak'ob, Izhak, 
Eebek'ah, Josh'ua, Zebulun, Abim'elech, are sHght but 
significant indications of a scholarly instinct. "t 

* Wood's Aihen. Ox. t Westoott, p. 275. 



igS 0^lr English Bible. 

The version of the New Testament in the Bible of 1560 
does not exactly agree with the separate Testament of 1557 : 
plainly it was to some degree revised ; and the Old Testament 
has a much better claim to be regarded as a thoroughly new 
revision than any other since Coverdale's. The men who 
prepared it were scholars, acquainted vnth the original ; and 
though they derived assistance from other versions, did not 
follow any of them with servility. " In all parts," says 
Canon Westcott, " they took the Great Bible as their basis, 
and corrected its text without ever substituting for it a new 
translation. Even where the changes are greatest the 
original foundation can still be traced, and the new work 
fairly harmonizes with the old. One chief aim of the revisers 
seems to have been to make the translation as nearly verbal 
as possible, and conseqiiently in a great number of passages 
they replace the renderings of the Zurich scholars (Cover- 
dale or Miinster) by those of Pagninus. At the same time 
there is abundant evidence to shew that they were perfectly 
competent to deal independently with points of Hebrew 
scholarship ; and minute expressions shew that they were 
not indifferent to style." The Genevan Bible has been 
nicknamed " the Breeches Bible," from the occurrence of 
that word in Gen. ui. 7 ; but it is curious to recollect that 
the word breeches in the same verse had been used by 
Caxton, in the fragmentary versions he introduced into his 
" Golden Legend." With the knowledge of that fact, only 
just brought to hght, the Genevan Bible loses its old 
appellation. 

The work is dedicated to EHzabeth, who had ascended 
the EngHsh throne before the pubhcation of the version ; and 
one regrets to find in it traces of that intolerant spirit which 
was so characteristic of the age. These worthy but mis- 



Genevan Version. 199 

taken men, exiles themselves ttrough religious intolerance, 
called upon her majesty to take out of the way such impedi- 
ments as might hurt or deform the work of reformation, 
animating her by an appeal to the example of Josias, "who 
burned in sign of detestation the idolatrous priests' bones 
upon their altars, and put to death the false prophets and 
sorcerers, to perform the words of the law of God." Strange 
that those who had suffered so severely from the inflictions 
of intolerance, and who were still in the land of exile, to 
which that intolerance had driven them, should have learned 
so little wisdom in this matter from that which they had 
endured ! But the duty of one man conceding to another 
the Hberty in religious profession and worship which he 
claims for himself is a lesson which few indeed, if any, in 
those days, fully understood. They confounded the Jewish 
theocracy with mere human governments. They thought it 
a duty to support what they conceived to be truth by the 
employment of temporal punishments ; and here was their 
grand error, not understanding the import of om' Lord's 
words and those of His apostles, " My kingdom is not of 
this world ;" " The weapons of our warfare are not carnal." 
But the Epistle to the Eeader in the Genevan Bible is 
written in a different spirit, and breathes sentiments of 
universal good- will. 

Amongst the comments is one on the observance of the 
Sabbath — aU the more remarkable from being written in 
a city where, under the sway of Calvin, no strict Sabbath 
observance was maintained. Exod. xxxi. 14 : " God re- 
peateth this point, because the whole keeping of the law 
standeth in the true use of the Sabbath, which is to cease 
from our works, and to obey the will of God." It would 
seem from this statement that the Genevan Puritans were 



200 Our English Bible. 

imbued -with the spirit wliich was so strongly manifested in 
England during the next century. The Calvinism of the 
translators comes out strongly in their comment on Eom. 
ix. 15 : "As the only "will and purpose of God is the chief 
cause of election and reprobation, so His free mercy in 
Christ is an inferior cause of salvation, and the hardening 
of the heart an inferior cause of condemnation." Nor can 
one help noticing the burst of feeHng against popery and 
prelacy in a note on Eev. ix. 3 : " Locusts are false 
teachers, heretics, and worldly subtle prelates, vnth monks, 
friars, cardinals, patriarchs, archbishops, bishops, doctors, 
bachelors, and masters, which forsake Christ to maintain 
false doctrine." 

The Church Book of the Puritans of Geneva, preserved 
in the Genevan archives, sheds interesting light upon their 
proceedings while these translations were beiug prepared.* 
By the aid of this record we are enabled to trace the 
arrivals and departures of the strangers, the marriages that 
took plaqe and the children who were born amongst them. 
The registers of the city council add to the information ; 
and there is sometMng very touching in the notices taken 
of the removal of the hospitably entertained refugees, after 
the accession of Queen Elizabeth. 

On the 24th of January, 1559, several of the exiles, with 
their miaisters, presented a formal request to the city 
authorities for a dismissal, on the ground of their being now 
able to return in peace to the home of their fathers. At the 
same time they thanked their hosts for the cordial entertain- 
ment they had vouchsafed to them. On the 24th of August 

• This book is in English, but it boars a French title, ii'tire des Anglais. An 
account of its contents may be found in the Memoirs and Docimnents of the 
SociSU d'Histoire et d'ArMologie de Geneve, 1853. There is a good article on 
the subject in the Bibliotheca Sacra, July, 1862 



Genevan Version. 201 

the same year a person described as a bishop from England 
— no doubt CoTerdale — made a similar appUcation.* 

The last departure was at the end of May, 1560, and is 
thus noticed in the city archives : " English citizens and 
residents, — Wm. Whittingham, citizen, ia his own name 
and that of his companions, came to thank messieurs for 
the good treatment which they have had in this city, and 
signified that to serve the Church ia their own country it 
is necessary that they should remove thither, praying us 
to retain them as humble servants of the State, and declar- 
ing that at aU times, and in every way in which they may 
be able to render service to the State and to individuals of 
the city, they will exert themselves to do so to the utmost 
of their power ; and requesting us to give them an attes- 
tation of their life and conversation while they have been in 
this city." Then follows a reference to the Church records 
which the EngHsh exiles left behind them, and which are 
stni preserved in the Town HaU. " They have presented 
the book of those of their nation who came to sojourn in the 
city, as a perpetual memorial. Decreed that an honourable 
dismission be granted to them, and an attestation of the 
contentment we have had with them; and that they be 
exhorted to pray for us, and to do to strangers among 
themselves as others have" done to them : and let them 
always be ready to bear good affection to this city. And it 
is agreed that we retain those that are citizens and subjects 
as such in future." t 

• Begistre du Oonseil, ii. vol. de 1559, fol. 81. 
Ih. de 1560, fol. 44. 





Chapter x. 



THE BISHOPS' BIBLE. 



i HE accession of Elizabeth created the 
deepest joy in the hearts of Enghsh 
Protestants, and in that pageant-loving 
age expression was given to the pre- 
dominant feeling in a congenial fashion- 
By the Little Conduit at the upper end 
of Cheapside, an old man appeared with 
scythe and wings, representing Father 
Time coming out of a cave, leading a second 
person clad in white silk, his own daughter, 
bearing the name of Truth. She had a 
book in her hand on which was written 
Verbum Veritatis. It was the Bible in English, and this, 
after a short speech, Truth handed to her Majesty. " As 
soon as she received it she Idssed it, and with both her 
hands held it up, and then laid it upon her breast, greatly 
thanking the city for that present, and said she would often 




f. 



1 ^ 



.* 



I bM. 



/ 



"•i "^'fvi 







i> ---f" 



&^f:i- 




??^'- 








ijTg^/SSi&i.: - __ 



Elizabeths Accession. 205 

read over that book. "Which passage shows as well how 
the citizens stood affected to reKgion (notwithstanding the 
persecution that had raged among them for some years 
before) as what hopes the kingdom might entertain of the 
queen's favour towards it."* This pageant met with a 
different fate from that in Queen Mary's time, when 
Gardiner made the painter daub out from his picture the 
Bible in Henry's hand. 

Queen EHzabeth, just before her coronation, it being the 
custom to release prisoners at the inauguration of a prince, 
went to the chapel, and in the great chamber one of her 
courtiers, who was well known to her, either out of his 
own notion, or by the instigation of a vdser man, presented 
her with a petition, and before a number of courtiers 
besought her with a loud voice, " That there were four or 
five prisoners unjustly detained in prison." It was inquired 
who they were, when he replied, " Those were the four 
evangehsts and the apostle St. Paul, who had been long 
shut up, in an unknown tongue, as it were in prison ; so 
as that they could not converse with the common people." 
The queen answered very gravely, ' That it was first best 
to inquire of them whether they would be set at hberty 
or no."t Her majesty, probably, had httle doubt as to 
the answer which would be obtained from an examination 
of these extraordinary captives ; but by this clever evasion 
she sought to get rid of difiictdties which might attend her 
avovnng thus early the Protestant principle of the free 
circulation of the Bible. There were Papists in the council 
of the queen, men who were influential in the former reign; 
and, with her wonted prudence and pohcy, she endeavoured 

* NiohoUs' Progresses of Queen EUiaheth, vol. i. p. 35. 

+ Felicities of Queen EUzabeth, Lord Bacon's Works, vol. iii. p. 476. 



2o6 Our English Bible. 

to avoid exciting any opposition on their part. But it" 
may be added that BHzabeth's zeal for the diffusion of the 
Scriptures was not so great as to render it necessary for 
her to put any powerful restraint upon her feehngs when 
she uttered her cool reply to the Protestant courtier. 

At all events, the Word of God was not bound after 
EHzabeth's accession. There was certainly no revival or 
enforcement whatever of the old prohibitory laws against 
Enghsh translations from that time; and in 1559 injunc- 
tions, substantially the same as those by Edward vi., were 
issued by the new queen's authority, directing that every 
parish church should be provided with a copy of the whole 
Bible of the largest volume, and of the paraphrases of 
Erasmus in Enghsh ; and that all parsons under the degree 
of A.M. should buy for their own use the New Testament, in 
Latin and Enghsh, with paraphrases.* 

The Bible " of the largest volume," or the Great Bible, 
was the book specified in the injunctions ; but very soon 
after the publication of the Genevan Bible, we find her 
majesty granting a patent to John Bodley for seven years to 
print the same, which was virtually giving her sanction to 
this new version, which soon became a great favourite with 
the Enghsh people. The Great Bible was placed on the 
church desk; but the Genevan translation was the book 
preferred by the private reader in the family and the closet. 
Yet Bodley's patent seems to have been of httle avail, for no 
edition of the Genevan Testament or Bible was pubhshed in 
England till the year 1575. This, perhaps, was owing to 
Archbishop Parker. He and Grindal, bishop of London, 
in a letter to Secretary Cecil, in 1565, spoke favourably of 
the version by the exiles, and recommended that the patent 

* Cardwell's Docimientary Annals, vol. i. pp.saW, 218. 



An Authorized Translation. 



207 



to Bodley might be extended for twelve years longer ; but 
they told the secretary that "they would take such order 
with the party in writing, under his hand, that no im- 
pression should pass but by their direction, consent, and 




MATTHEW PABKEK. 



ad-vice."* It is probable that Bodley would not consent 
to the exercise of a control of this sort, and that the 
archbishop objected to some things in the annotations, 
which Bodley was not willing to alter or suppress. The 
archbishop's interference, however, seems to have stood 

* Strype's Xi/e ofVarker, p. 207. 



2o8 Our English Bible. 

in the way of the reprint of the book in England. 
"What confirms this notion is that on the archbishop's 
death, in 1576, the version was immediately pubhshed in 
this country for the first time. Afterwards the Genevan 
version became an increasing favourite with the English 
people, and was frequently reprinted. 

Erom papers preserved in the House of Lords, it ap- 
pears that at an early period of EHzabeth's reign a bill was 
drafted, "for reducing of diversities of Bibles now extant 
m the Enghsh tongue to one settled vulgar, translated from 
the original." Errors arose, and papistry and atheism 
increased, it was thought, from varieties of translations, 
while many desired " an authorized translation," which the 
lords spiritual could complete, had they power to compel 
assistance from students of the universities. The lords 
spiritual, or any six of them, the Archbishop of Canter- 
bury being one, were, according to this biU, to assemble, 
treat, and deal touching the accomphshment of the work ; 
also to call for the assistance of students of either 
university, and to pay them out of moneys levied on such 
cathedral churches and colleges as should be thought 
requisite. "Any temporal person," it is added, "may give 
gift or legacy for furtherance of the work."* It has been 
sometimes asked, when did the expression " authorized " 
version originate? Here we find the word "authorized" 
used long before the date of King James's Bible, and it 
would seem to have been a current plarase for such a 
Bible as would secure general adoption, through being 
sanctioned by the chief authorities of the realm. Again, 

* Hist. MSB. Com. Report, iii. 4. The bill is not dated, and in the report it is 
assigned to "1558 or after." Elizabeth auooeeded her sister November 17, 1558 
(Nicholas's Chron. of Hist. p. 319). 



The Bishops Bible. 209 

as to men who should execute so desirable a work, we see 
that at this early period they were naturally looked for 
in Oxford and Cambridge. 

Parker certainly was bent on the production of a new 
version, or at least on a complete revision of the old 
one, and for that purpose obtained the assistance of his 
episcopal brethren. " The archbishop took upon him the ' 
labour to contrive and set the whole work agoing in a 
proper method, by sorting out the whole Bible into 
parcels, and distributing those parcels to able bishops and 
other learned men, to peruse and collate each of the 
book or books allotted them ; sending withal his instruc- 
tions for the order they should observe ; and they to 
add some short marginal notes for the illustration or 
correction of the text. And all these portions being 
finished and sent back to the archbishop, he was to add 
the last hand to them, and so to take care for printing 
and pubhshing the whole."* When the bishops had com- 
pleted their task, they sent back their portions of the 
version to the archbishop as arranged, upon which his 
grace, and certain learned divines in his household, re- 
perused and examined the whole work. The final accom- 
phshment of his undertaking filled the archbishop's hearb 
with so much joy that it is said he broke forth into 
Simeon's rapturous exclamation, ' Lord, now lettest Thou 
Thy servant depart in peace, according to Thy word : for 
mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, which Thou hast pre- 
pared before the face of aU people ; a light to hghten the 
Gentiles, and the glory of Thy people Israel.' " t The 
Bible was pubhshed in 1568. 

The parties who assisted Archbishop Parker in the 

* Strype's Por/cer, fol. 208. t IS'iJ-, fol. 272. 

P 



.210 Ottr English Bible. 

preparation of this volume are indicated by their initials 
subscribed to the portions executed by tbem respectively. 

W. E., at the end of the Pentateuch, point to WiUiam 
Exoniensis, or Wilham Alley, Bishop of Exeter, who 
succeeded Coverdale. He w^as an Oxford man of great 
learning, and in consequence of his Protestantism had 
been obliged to conceal himself during the reign of Mary. 
Practising medicine and teaching the young in the north 
of England — where he led a wandering kind of Hfe till 
EHzabeth's accession — ^were his employments and means of 
support till the estabUshment of the Protestant Church 
in England released him from his fears, and opened a 
pathway to promotion. 

E. M., at the close of the Second Book of Samuel, 
indicate Eicardus Menevensis, or Eichard Davies, Bishop of 
St. David's, an exile in the reign of Mary, and afterwards 
Bishop of St. Asaph, whence he was translated to St. 
David's. He laboured zealously for the spiritual good of 
Wales, of which country he was a native. 

E. W., at the end of the Second of Chronicles, are 
the initials of Edwin Wigornensis, the famous Edwin 
Sandys, Bishop of Worcester. He was Vice- Chancellor of 
Cambridge at the time of Edward the Sixth's death, and 
supported the title of poor Lady Jane Grey to the 
crown. For this he was stripped of all but his Bible, 
and was confined in prison iu company with the noble- 
hearted John Bradford. Like Paul and Silas at Philippi, 
these honoured captives for the sake of Christ were 
instrumental in the conversion of their gaoler, and in 
their dreary cell they were wont to commemorate with 
him the feast of redeeming mercy. Preserved from 
martyrdom, Sandys escaped to the Continent, but as he 



The Bishops Bible. 211 

was going on board the ship that was to convey him to 
a land of exile, he is said to have gathered round him a 
number of sailors on the beach, and to have preached to 
them the word of hfe. On Elizabeth's accession he was 
raised to the see of Worcester, afterwards to London, 
and finally to York. 

By A. P. C, at the conclusion of Job, probably we are to 
understand Andrew Pearson, Canon of Canterbury, an 
esteemed friend of Parker, to whom he was chaplain and 
almoner. 

T. B., at the end of the Psalms, have been by Burnet and 
others supposed to refer to Thomas Bentham ; but he was 
Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, and would have taken 
the name of his see. It is much more hkely that 
Thomas Becon, the w:ell-known author of many valued 
publications, is intended. This portion of the work was 
originally allotted to Guest, who returned it to the arch- 
bishop after making some slight alterations in the ver- 
sion taken from the Great Bible. Probably Becon was 
the final reviser.* 

A. P. C, at the end of Proverbs, most likely represent 
Andrew Pearson, Canon of Canterbury, as at the con- 
clusion of Job, and A. P. E., at the close of the Canticles, 
Andrew Perne, Canon of Ely. 

E. W., at the conclusion of the Lamentations, are the 
initials of Eobert Home, Bishop of Winchester, an exile in 
Mary's reign, and a zealous Protestant, one more lenient 
than some others to his brethren who differed from him 
as to the use of certain canonical habits. 

* In a letter by Becon to Parker he mentions a present "worthy to be pre- 
served and embraced for the antiquity's sake, namely, an Exposition upon 
the Gospels of St. Mark and St. Luke, and aU the Epistles of St. Paul, both in 
Latin and English." 



212 Our English Bible. 

T. C. L., at the end of Daniel, evidently denote Thomas 
Bentham, Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield. He was a 
man of distinguished learning, but still more eminent for 
his deep piety. He was pastor of that remarkable con- 
gregation which met in secret places about London during 
Queen Mary's reign, and it was he who accompanied to the 
stake the Ishngton martyrs, who died in Smithfield in June, 
1558. The queen had forbidden that any one should speak 
to them at the stake. Profound silence was enjoined, but 
the heroic Bentham turned to the people, and exclaimed in 
a loud voice, " We know that they are the people of God, 
and therefore we cannot choose but wish well to them, and 
say, God strengthen them." The queen's proclamation 
availed not — the murmur, hke the sound of many waters, 
rolled from Hp to lip, " Amen ! amen ! " Bentham was a 
refugee in the reign of Mary, going first to Zurich, then to 
Basle, lastly to Geneva, where he was received as resident 
citizen on the 29th of November, 15^. After the acces- 
sion of Elizabeth he was appointed Bishop of Lichfield 
and Coventry. 

E>. L. are the initials of Edmund Grindal, then Bishop 
of London, an exQe under Mary, and finally Archbishop of 
Canterbury. He was very lenient to the Puritan party 
in the Church ; and because he would not comply with 
the mandate of the queen, to put down certain meetings for 
exposition and prayer, conducted by clergymen, and com- 
monly called prophesjring, he was suspended from his 
archiepiscopal office. He undertook the Minor Prophets. 

The letters J. N. appear at the end of the Apocr5^ha, 
meaning John Parlihurst, Bishop of Norwich, a pious and 
learned divine, and very moderate in his views of the 
ecclesiastical questions of the day. 



Coverdale. 213 

E. E., at the end of Acts, denote Eichard Cox, Bishop 
of Ely. He had been early persecuted for circulating 
Tyndale's Testament, and in Mary's reign rendered himseK 
notorious by the part he took in the troubles of Erankfort. 
He was very zealous in enforcing the use of the English 
Prayer Book, and on his return to his native country 
was appointed by Ehzabeth Bishop of Ely. The same 
initials appear at the end of Eomans, and probably mean 
the same person. It is altogether improbable, as supposed 
by Strype, that they denote Edmund Guest, Bishop of Eo- 
chester, whose signature would be B. E., not E. B. Cox 
wrote to Parker in May, 1566, saying, " I trust your grace 
is weU forward with the Bible by this time. I perceive the 
greatest burden will lie upon your neck touching care and 
travail. I would wish that such usual words as the Enghsh 
people be acquainted with might still remain in their form 
and sound so far forth as the Hebrew will bear : inkhorn 
terms to be avoided."* 

G. G. are written at the end of the Eirst Epistle to 
the Corinthians ; they designate Gabriel Goodman, once 
an exile at Geneva, now Dean of Westminster. No other 
initials are given, and it cannot be determined who prepared 
the remainder. 

The name of Coverdale does not appear. He returned 
to England after Elizabeth's accession, but never resumed 
his bishopric, though he of&ciated episcopally at Parker's 
consecration. The reason of his not being restored to the 
bench probably was that he had Puritan scruples about 
vestments and other things in the Church of England. 
HowcA'er, he was appointed rector of St. Magnus, after 
having suffered much from neglect and poverty — the too 

* Starype'a VarUr, fol. 209. 



214 Our English £ible. 

common fate of the world's benefactors. He loved to 
preacli the gospel, though loaded with a burden of years 
and infirmities ; but he was not long permitted to do it 
without molestation ; for when the Act of Uniformity was 
passed, at the beginning of Elizabeth's reign, Coverdale, 
who could not fully conform, was deprived of his benefice. 
StiU he continued occasionally to preach. " Many of the 
people," says Strype, " ran after Father Coverdale, who took 
that occasion to preach the more constantly, but yet 
with much fear, so that he would not be known where, 
he preached, though many came to his house to ask 
where he would preach the next Lord's day."* He 
died in the year 1569, at the age of eighty-one. As the 
Bishops' Bible was pubhshed in 1568, Coverdale was then 
eighty, and this circumstance of itself would be sufficient 
to account for his not taking part in the work. His 
name lives with honour in the memories of posterity ; 
and well deserved was the tribute of gratitude paid to 
his memory on the occasion of the tercentenary of the 
English Bible, in the year 1835. " The righteous shall be 
had ia everlasting remembrance." " Since thou wast 
precious in My sight, thou hast been honourable, and I 
have loved thee." 

In 1568 this magnificent volume made its public 
appearance, printed by E. Jugge, " cum privilegio regise 
Majestatis." It has no dedication, which is a great wonder. 
But the queen's portrait is introduced on the engraved 
title-page, and portraits of Leicester and Burleigh are found 
in the Book of Joshua and the Book of Psalms. There is 
the device of a pelican feeding her young, and under it the 

• lAje of Parker, 242. When the church of St. Bartholomew was pxillocl down, 
the remains of Coverdale were removed to the church of St. Magnus. 



The Bishops Bible. 215 

words, " Matris ut hsec proprio stirps est satiata cniore, 
Pascis item proprio, Christe, cruore ttios." There are two 
prefaces in the volume — one for the Old and the other for the 
New Testament, both from the pen of Parker, and each con- 
tains admirable sentiments. " While this eternal Word of 
God be om: rock and anchor to stick unto, we will have 
patience with aU the vain inventions of men, who labour so 
highly to magnify their tongues, to exalt themselves above 
all that is God. We wiU take comfort by the Holy Scrip- 
tures against the maledictions of the adversaries, and doubt 
not to nourish our hope continually therewith, so to hve 
and die ia this comfortable hope, and doubt not to per- 
tain to the elect number of Christ's Church, how far soever 
we b,e excommunicated out of the synagogue of such who 
suppose themselves to be the universal lords of aU the 
world — fiords of our faith and conscience at pleasure." 

Again, in his preface to the New Testament, Parker 
remarks, " Here we may behold the eternal legacies of the 
New Testament bequeathed from God the Father in 
Christ His Son to all His elect, I say, the legacies lively 
renewed unto us, not of deKverance from Pharaoh his 
servitude, but from the bondage and thraldom of that 
perpetual adversary of ours, the devil. Here we may 
behold our inheritance — not of the temporal land of Canaan 
or of the translation of us to the place of worldly paradise, 
— but here may we see the fuU restitution of us both in 
body and soul to the celestial paradise, the heavenly 
city of Jerusalem above, there to reign with God the 
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost for ever. 
Which legacies of His Testament promised and bequeathed 
were notwithstanding recorded in the books of the Old 
Testament to our ancient fathers, which in hope beheved in 



2i6 Our English Bible. 

Christ to come, who was painted before them in figures and 
shadows, and signified in their old sacraments ordained for 
that time, but now more evidently renewed and exhibited 
unto us— not in figure, but in deed ; not in promise, but 
in open sight; in feehng, and handhng, and touching of 
this eternal hfe, most manifestly confirmed unto us in 
Christ His blood, in this His New Testament continued and 
revived, yet in new sacraments, the better to bear in our 
remembrance this His eternal testament of all joyful 
fehcities." 

Parker endeavoured by the help of Cecil to obtain some 
special sanction of this volume from her majesty, the result 
of which does not appear.* He wished to secure uniformity 
in Bible reading, as in other things, for in some churches the 
Genevan revision was used, whilst the Great Bible could not 
be honestly maintained. Convocation, on the 3rd of April, 
1571, took up the matter, and ordered that every archbishop 
and bishop should have at his house a copy of the Holy Bible 
of the largest volume, as lately printed at London ; and 
that it should be placed in the hall or large dining-room, that 
it might be useful to servants and strangers. f Each cathe- 
dral, too, it was enjoined, should have a copy ; and, as far as 
could be conveniently done, such a provision was to be 
extended to parish churches. 

This is one of those old ordinances which have a pictorial 
effect on the mind of a modern reader ; and I never think of 
it Tsdthout picturing to myself the entrance and dining halls 

• The letter from Parker to Cecil on this suhjeot is printed in BiftltotR. Sussex, 
vol. i. p. .111. 

t Poxe's Booli of Martyrs also was to be provided. " Looentur autem isti libri 
vel in aula vel in grandi oienaonlo ut et ipsorum famulia et advenis uaui esse pos- 
sint." — Synodalia, vol. i. p. 115. 



The Bishops Bible. 217 

of the old episcopal palaces of Lambeth, Norwich, Peter- 
borough, and other dioceses, with arched roofs or panelled 
walls, and aU the rude array of episcopal splendour, — so 
different from the more modest ■domestic life of bishops 
now-a-days, — and placing before such a background, figures 
of men-servants and women-servants, of guests and visitors, 
looking at the ample page with curiosity, devotion, or 
irreverence. The injunctions were so neglected, that six- 
teen years afterwards Archbishop "Whitgift had to take the 
matter anew into his hands. In truth, this Bible was never 
popular. It was chiefly used in churches, but the Genevan 
version was the pubhc favourite, and retained its place in 
the family and the closet. From the year 1560 to 1603 there 
were one hundred and thirty distinct issues of Bibles and 
Testaments of different revisions, ninety of which were of 
the Genevan text. 

As might be expected from the separate allocation of the 
work to different hands, the execution of the Bishops' Bible 
is diversified. On the whole, the Greek scholarship of the 
New Testament revisers appears superior to the Hebrew 
scholarship of those employed on the Old Testament. 

" The historical books of the Old Testament," says 
Canon Westcott, "follow the text of the Great Bible very 
closely. The Hagiographa, as far as I have examined them, 
are corrected with considerable freedom. The prophets are 
altered very frequently., but in those the new renderings can 
generally be traced to some other source. The influence of 
the Genevan revision is perceptible throughout, but it is 
more obvious in the prophets than elsewhere. Castaho was 
certainly consulted, and had some influence with the 
revisers ; but, with the exception of the Genevan version 
itself, no fcesh sources were open to them in addition to 



2i8 Our English Bible. 

those which the G-enevan exiles had used."* The revision 
of the New Testament is more important than that of the 
Old. As a general rule, the original renderings in the latter 
appear to be arbitrary, and at variance with the exact sense of 
the Hebrew text.t This Bible has obtained the nickname 
of the " Treacle Bible," from Jeremiah viii. 22, where we 
read, "Is there no tryacle in Gilead?" But here again, 
as in the case of the Genevan Bible, the odd rendering is 
not without parallel. The word triacle occurs at the same 
place in Coverdale's Bible of 1535. 

Anew edition, pubHshed in 1572, presents little or no 
alteration in the Old Testament ; but numerous differences, 
more or less important, are discovered on comparing the 
volume of 1572 with that of 1568. 

It is interesting to read the notes in the Bishops' Bible 
in connection with those in the Genevan version, and to 
recognise the character of Church theology at that period as 
reflected from the doctrinal remarks. It was really very 
much the same as that of the Genevan school. The follow- 
ing are extracts : 

" The mystery of man's redemption and salvation is 
perfected by the only sacrifice of Christ, the promises to the 
fathers fulfilled, the ceremonies of the law altered." — 
John xix. 30. 

" The vsdll and purpose of God is the cause of the election 
and reprobation : for His mercy and calling through Christ 
are the means of salvation, and the withdrawing of His 
mercy is the cause of damnation." — Rom. ix. 11. 

" Our health hangeth not on our works ; and yet axe they 
said to work out their health who do run in the race of 
justice ; for although we be saved freely in Christ by faith, 
" Weatoott, p. 301. t Ihid., p. 310. 



Bible Patent. 219 

yet must we walk by the way of justice unto our health." — 
Phil. ii. 12. 

" They that stick to the ceremonies of the law cannot 
eat, that is, cannot be partakers of our altar, which is thanks- 
giviag and Hberahty, which two sacrifices or offerings are 
now only left to the Christians." — Heb. xui. 10. 

There were other scholars in Ehzabeth's reign who devoted 
themselves to Bibhcal translations. Lawrence Tomson, an 
under-secretary to Sir Francis Walsiugham, prepared a new 
edition of the Genevan Testament. He entitled it, " The 
New Testament, translated from the Greek by Theodore 
Beza ;" but though he might avail himself of Beza's Latin 
version, it is quite certain he did not follow it entirely, but 
took the Genevan as his standard, altering it here and 
there. The book contains short expositions selected from 
distinguished authors. Hugh Broughton, a very learned 
man and eminent Hebraist, also devoted his time to a 
revision of translations. He was much dissatisfied with the 
Bishops' Bible, and was anxious for a new version by 
" some six of the longest students in the tongues." But 
though a learned man, he seems to have been one of those 
impracticable spirits with whom it is impossible to co-ope- 
rate, and therefore bis proposal fell to the ground. He 
then undertook to pubhsh himself a new translation of the 
books of " Daniel, Ecclesiastes, Lamentations, and Job." 

The pubhsher of the first edition of the Bishops' Bible in 
1568 was Bichard Jugge, who printed on the title-page, 
" Cum privilegio Begise Majestatis." A patent was necessary 
for the purpose, and this had to be obtained from a person 
named Wilkes, who enjoyed a monopoly of printing in the 
English language, and who granted royal hcences upon 
receiving a pecuniary consideration. John Jugge, the son 



220 



Otir English Bible. 



of Eichard Jugge, secured a portion of his father's patent ; 
but in 1579, Wilkes, for " a great sum," sold a more exten- 
sive patent to Christopher Barker. In 1579 Christopher 
included his son Eobert in a new patent, embracing " all 
Bibles and Testaments whatever in the Enghsh tongue, 
with notes or without notes, printed before then or after- 
wards." This Eobert obtained, in 1612, a patent for his 
son Christopher, upon whose death it was transferred to a 
brother. ■ The Barkers assigned their rights for a while to 
other- parties ; but in 1635 they were re-secured by the 
family, who remained royal printers of the BngHsh Bible 
down to the year 1709.* 

• Eadie, vol. ii. p. 288. 




Chapter xi. 



THE RHEMISH VERSION. 



> N the year 1582 a volume printed at a foreign 
press reached England with the following 
title-page : " The New Testament oe 
Jesus Christ, translated faithfully into 
EngHsh out of the Authentical Latin, ac- 
cording to the best corrected copies of the 
same, dihgently conferred with the Greek, 
and other editions in diuers languages, 
with Aegvments of bookes and chapters. 
Annotations, and other necessarie helpes, 
for the better vnderstanditig of the text, and specially for 
the discouerie of the Cobbitptions of diuers late translations, 
and for cleering the controuersies in rehgion of these daies ; 
IN THE English College of Ehembs. Ps. cxviii. : ' Da 
mihi intellectum et scrutabor legem tuam, et custodiam illam in 
toto corde meo ;' that is, ' Giue me Ynderstanding, and I wil 
searche Thy law, and wil keepe it with my whole hart.' 
S. Aug., tract ii. ia Epist. Joan : ' Omnia qua in Scrip- 




222 Our English Bible. 

hiris Sanctis ad instructionem et salutem nostram, intente 
oportet audire : maxime memoricB commendanda stmt, qucB 
aduersus Hcereticos valent plurimum ; quorum insidia, 
infirmiores quosque et negligentiores circumuenire tion 
cessant ;' that is, al things that are readde in Holy Scrip- 
tures we must hear with great attention to our iastruction 
and saluation; but those things specially must be com- 
mended to memorie which make raost against heretickes, 
whose deceites cease not to ciicumuent and beguile al 
the weaker sort and the more negligent persons. Printed 
AT Ehembs, by John Fogny. 1582. Cum pkivilegio." 

This title-page speaks for itseK, and with the title-page 
the preface is in perfect harmony. The translators begin 
by guarding against the idea that the Scriptures should 
always be printed in the mother tongue, and be freely read 
by all sorts of persons. Not on that principle did they 
pubhsh this book, but for special reasons connected with 
passing times and the condition of England. They eulogize 
the wisdom and moderation of the Eoman Catholic Chuich, 
in neither forbidding nor commanding vernacular versions ; 
and after reciting the names of illustrious translators, 
alluding to the Constitution of Arundel, and noticing what 
had been done since Luther's time by learned Romanists, 
they insist upon the decree of the Tridentine Council that 
the Scriptures " may not be indifferently read of all men, nor 
of any other than of such as have express hcence thereunto 
of their lawful ordinaries." They lament that, owing to the 
state of the times, this rule cannot in England be precisely 
observed, yet they trust wise and godly persons will use the 
matter in the meanwhile with moderation, meelmess, and 
subjection of heart. They deny that their forefathers 
suffered every sciolist to translate, or every husbandman, 



The Rhemish Version. 2,23 

artificer, prentice, maid, and man to read the Bible, making 
it the subject of table-talk for " ale-benches, boats, and 
barges." The Scriptures had been kept in monasteries, but 
"the poor ploughmen could then in labouring the ground 
sing the hymns and psabns in known or unknown languages 
as they heard them in the holy church, though they could 
neither read, nor know the sense, meaning, and mysteries of 
the same." They repudiate the idea that it is from envy 
that the priests keep the holy book from the people. The 
Church would have " the unworthy repelled, the curious 
repressed, the simple measured, the learned humbled, and 
all sorts so to use them, or to abstain from them, as is most 
convenient for every one's salvation." They explain away 
St. Chrysostom',s sanction of popular Bible reading, alleging 
that people are fonder of mysteries than morals, and that 
every heretic quotes Scripture. They charge Protestants 
with false renderings, and state that in this new volume 
large annotations are set forth, to correct fs^lse deductions, 
and to enforce patristic expositions. They prefer the Vul- 
gate because corrected by Jerome, commended by Augustine, 
used by the Fathers, and defined as exclusively authentic 
by the Council of Trent ; and, on principles of criticism 
convenient to themselves, prove to their own satisfaction 
that the Vulgate is as good, if not better, than the Greek 
original. Numbers of words are left untranslated in the 
text, rendering the book " a translation," as Thomas Fuller 
says, " needing to be translated." Pasche, azymes, 'neophyte, 
are amongst the mysterious terms — majestic words, as Bishop 
Gardiner would have called them. Odihle, coinquination, 
acception, correption, exprobate, obsecration, scenopegia, are 
further examples of words sprinkled over this strange book. 
"The spirituals of wickedness among the celestials" (Bph. 



2 24 Our English Bible. 

■vi. 12) ; " What to me and thee, woman?" (John ii. 4), are 
specunens of the appHcation of a rule they laid down, " not 
to molhfy the speech, but to keep to it word for word." 
The idiom of our native language and the dictates of com- 
mon sense are set at nought by such a version as this. " Do 
I mind according to the flesh, that there be with me It is 
and It is not ? But God is faithful, because our preaching 
which was to you, there is not in it It is and It is not; for 
the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who by us was preached 
among you, by me and Sylvanus and Timothy was not It is 
and It is not, but It is, was in Him ; for all the promises of 
God that are in Him It is, therefore also by Him amen to 
God, unto our glory" (2 Cor. i. 17-20). The similarly 
ludicrous exactness of John Wycliffe in the same passage 
would, one might think, redeem his character in the esti- 
mation of these Ehemish translators. Of course, Roman 
theology frequently appears. " Being justified therefore by 
faith, let us have peace toward God by our Lord Jesus 
Christ " (Eom. v. 1). " By faith Jacob dying blessed every 
one of the sons of Joseph, and adored the top of his rod" 
(Heb. xi. 21). " If you have not penance, you shall all 
likewise perish" (Luke xiii. 5). "Not vpiUing that any 
perish, but that all return to penance" (2 Pet. iii. 9). 
" Eemember your prelates which have spoken the word of 
God to you " (Heb. xiii. 7). " By Him therefore let us offer 
the host of praise " (ibid., 15). " Neglect not the grace that 
is in thee, which is given thee by prophecy with imposition 
of the hands of priesthood " (1 Tim. iv. 14). 

But in justice it must be said there are many correct 
and judicious renderings : " Hohness of the truth " (Eph. iv. 
24) ; " our lamps are going out " (Matt. xxv. 8) ; " you are 
not come to a palpable mountain " (Heb. xii. 18), are good 



The Rhemish Version. 225 

examples. And it has been well noticed that our version 
in common use has obtained from the Ehemish, "adjure" 
(Matt. xxvi. 63); " upbraideth not" (Jas. i. 5); "nothing 
wavering " (6) ; " the engrafted word" (21) ; " bridleth not " 
(26). "Every other English version," it is remarked, "is 
to be preferred to this, if it must be taken as a whole ; no 
other English version vsdll prove more instructive to the 
student, who will take the pains to separate what is good 
and useful from what is ill-advised and wrong." * 

One point of interest and importance connected with this 
translation arises from the esteem in which it is held by our 
Eoman Catholic feUow-countrymen ; and it maybe remarked 
that, disguised as are many of its renderings, and notwith- 
standing the array of annotations, which, sentinel-like, are 
stationed at the door of the temple, there remaiu what is 
suf&cient to prove the inconsistency of the papal system 
with the teachings of the New Testament, and to furnish a 
thoughtful reader with weapons to fight his way out of the 
strongholds of error. 

The notes in the margia are chiefly controversial, and are 
intended to guard the reader against the adoption of any 
view inconsistent with the authoritative teaching of the 
Church. In fact, the translators set forth Scripture as ex- 
plaiued by tradition, treating it as an oracle of dubious 
meaning, of which the utterances must pass through 
an interpreting priesthood. Unfortunately for the boasted, 
and almost immaculate purity of the Vulgate, so strenuously 
maintained by the Ehemish translators, within eight years 
after they had finished the New Testament a fresh edition 
appeared, under the sanction of Sixtus v., who, on account 
of the errors ia existing copies, found such an undertaking to 

* Prof. Moulton, Bible Educator, toI. iv. p. 363. 
Q 



2 26 Our English Bible. 

te necessary. But this corrected edition was pronounced by 
the next Pope to be incorrect ; and another edition, differing 
more than any other from the Sistine, was pubhshed in 
1592, under the auspices of Clement viii. Two Latin texts 
varying in numerous particulars were thus placed before 
the Church by two pontiffs ; an awkward circumstance 
for advocates of the Ehemish version, and of papal infaUi- 
bihty, which has not escaped the attention of controversial 
Protestants.* 

Three scholars are mentioned as employed upon the 
Ehemish Testament, WilHam Allen, Gregory Martin, and 
Bichard Bristow. The first was a distinguished Roman 
CathoHc priest. Principal of St. Mary's Hall, Oxford, and 
Canon of York, in Queen Mary's reign. On the accession of 
EHzabeth he fled to Douay, where he was made Doctor of 
Divinity, after which he was promoted to a canonry at Cam- 
bray, and then to a canonry at Eheims. There he estabhshed 
a seminary, and exerted himself in opposing Protestantism, 
for which he was rewarded with a cardinal's hat, and the 
archiepiscopal see of Mechlin. He is said to have been the 
designated Primate of England and the Legate of Eome, had 
the Spanish Axmada succeeded. Certainly he did what he 
could to foment troubles in this country during the reign of 
EUzabeth, whom he branded as a caitiff under God's and 
holy Church's curse, given up to a reprobate mind ; therefore 
her open enormities and her secret sins must be great and 
not numerable. 

Gregory Martin had been a scholar of St. John's, Oxford. 
In 1570 he went over to Douay, and then became divinity 
reader at Eheims. Wood speaks of him as " an excellent 
linguist, exactly read and versed in the Sacred Scriptures, 

* Seo Dr, James's Treatise of the Corruptions of Scripture Councils and Fathers, 



The Rhemish Version. 227 

and went beyond all of his time ia hmnane literature."* 
Eespectiag Eichard Bristow, or Briston, or Bristol, I can 
glean no particulars. 

A sort of appendix to the version was written by Gregory 
Martin, entitled " A Discovery of the Manifold Corruptions 
of the Holy Scriptures by the Heretics of our Days ; " he 
attempted to overturn all Protestant versions, and thus to 
clear the ground for a wide circulation of the Ehemish volume. 
An answer to such an attack was felt to be needful, and it is 
reported that Queen Ehzabeth sent for Beza to undertake the 
task, which he modestly declined, recommendiag Thomas 
Cartwright, as far abler than himself. Cartwright was dis- 
liked by Archbishop "Whitgift ; and when the former began to 
work upon the subject, whether ia consequence of anything 
said by Beza to Ehzabeth I cannot decide, he was forbidden 
by the primate to proceed any further.t Dr. WiUiam Fulke, 
Master of Pembroke Hall, Cambridge, published, ia 1583, a 
" defence of the sincere and true translation of the Holy 
Scriptures into the Enghsh tongue, against the manifold 
cavils, frivolous quarrels, and impudent slanders of Gregory 
Martin." Martin repubhshed the Ehemish version in 1589, 
with " a confutation " of what Eulke had written ; and this 
brought Cartwright again into the field, who left behind him 
a " counter confutation," published after his death in 1618. 
" No English champion in that age did with more valour 
or success charge and rout the Ehemish enemy in matters 
of doctrine. "J 

A remarkable anecdote is related by Dr. Eadie. " The 
Eheims Testament was once appealed to and rejected in 

* Wood, Aiken. Ox. vol. i. p. 487 (ed. BKas). 

t See preface to the Confutation of the Bhemdsh Translation. 

% See L-ife of Cartwright, prefixed to Hanbury's edit, of Hooker's Ecd. Polity. 



228 Our English Bible. 

tragic circumstances. On the evening before her execu- 
tion, iQ Fotheringay Castle, the unfortunate Queen of Scots, 
laying her hand solemnly on a copy that happened to be on 
her work-table, took a solemn oath of innocence, when the 
Earl of Kent at once interposed that the book on which she 
had sworn was false, and that her oath, therefore, was of no 
value. Her answer was prompt and decided : 'Does your 
lordship suppose that my oath would be better if I swore on 
your translation, in which I do not beheve ? '" * 

The Ehemish translators made a version of the Old 
Testament as well as the New. It issued from the press at 
Douay in 1609 , forming two volumes. The editors, who were 
not the translators, state that this work, executed thirty 
years before, had remained unpublished so long, " owing to 
their poor estate in banishment." After rehearsing the 
reasons given in the preface to the New Testament for 
adopting the Vulgate, they remark, in reference to the 
Clementine revision, to which they had confined their 
version : " By the way, we must give the vulgar reader to 
understand that very few or none of the former varieties 
touched controversies of this time, so that this recognition is 
no ■ way suspicious of partiahty, but is merely done for the 
more secure conservation of the pure text, and more ease 
and satisfaction of such as otherwise should have remained 
doubtful." In conclusion, the writers express their sym- 
pathy with their suffering brother Cathohcs in England ; 
and they remind them that the honours of martyrdom sur- 
pass description, that patience is necessary, and persecution 
profitable, and they exhort those who are in Christ's fold to 
remain there, and persevere to the end. 

* La Mort de la Reyne d'Escosse Douairiere de France, reprinted in Jebb's 
collection, vol. ii. p. 616. Eadie, vol. ii. p. 138. 



Chaptei^ 



XII. 



THE "AUTHORIZED VERSION," 1611. 




N the death of Elizabeth, James i. 
ascended the throne of England. His 
progress from Scotland to the capital of 
his new dominions was one scene of ex- 
travagant display and roj^al amusement. 



'^^ Making knights was his majesty's chief 
g|^ business ; hunting in the parks of the nobi- 
hty and gentry, and in the wild forests 
r^ which still spread over so many acres of 
the Old England of that day, was his 
chief recreation. The same employments were continued 
after he arrived at his metropohs and his coronation 
had taken place ; and it was during a sojourn at WUton, 
while enjoying his favourite field sports, that he issued 
a proclamation which introduces us to a new chapter 
in the history of our Enghsh Bible. On the 24th of 
October, 1604, James appointed a meeting to be held 
for the hearing and the determining " things pretended 
to be amiss in the Church." The meeting arose out of the 
complaints of the Puritans, who early saluted their new 



>30 



Our English Bible. 



sovereign with a list of ecclesiastical grievances, which they 
besought him to remove. The time fixed for this imiDortant 
conference was the 14th, 16th, and 18th of January, and the 
place appointed for holding it was Hampton Court. 



i^U^I* 41 siSiiL Ll It tBi ti.l_lEl rei lu l w W| 



'g<^j(§ (§> W O » 1; (g)| 








HAMPTON COUKT PALACE. 



That noble building had then stood nearly a hundred 
years, one of the monuments of Wolsey's wealth, pride, and 
greatness. The fine quadrangle of Tudor arcliitecture, and 
the magnificent hall, with some other apartments, still 
remain indicative of the state of the edifice as reared by 
the cardinal. The comparatively modern erections by 
Wilham iii. have quite altered the character of a consider- 
able portion of Hampton Court Palace ; but if the reader's 
imagination picture to him the whole of the building in 



Hampton Court. 231 

the style of the Tudor portion of it just referred to, he will 
have an idea of the appearance of the place when the 
famous conference was held out of which arose the 
translation of the Bible, now commonly used in this 
country. Of the multitudes who visit that specimen of our 
architectural antiquities, many more, it is probable, think of 
Wolsey's revels, or of Charles's misfortunes, in connexion 
with the building, than of the circumstance of its having 
been the birthplace of a design for furnishing the country 
with a new version of the Bible ; yet certainly no other 
event, however romantic and affecting, associated with the 
place, can be compared with this in point of real interest 
and importance. 

On Monday, the 16th of January — the only day of the 
conference which concerns us in the present work — there 
might be seen assembhng in the withdravping-room of the 
palace, in the presence of his majesty, who had no small 
taste for theological debate, certain prelates of the Bnghsh 
Church, and a few of the Puritan party, with the well- 
knowTi Dr. Eainolds at their head. The learniag and moral 
excellence of this remarkable man were so great as to 
inspire the admiration of his contemporaries generally, and 
Anthony Wood, in recording his merits, waxes into rapture 
which he finds it difficult to express. " The truth is," 
observes that historian, "he was most prodigiously seen in 
all kind of learning, and had turned over all writers, pro- 
fane, ecclesiastical, and divine, all the councils, fathers, and 
histories of the Church. He was also most excellent in all 
tongues, of a sharp and nimble vnt, of mature judgment, 
indefatigable industry, exceeding therein Origen, surnamed 
Adamantius, and so well seen in all arts and sciences as 
if he had spent his whole time in each of them. The 



232 Our English Bible. 

learned Cracanthorp tells its also that for virtue, probity, 

integrity, and, which is above all, piety and sanctity of life, 

he V7as so eminent and conspicuous, that, as Nazianzen 

speaketh of Athanasius, it might be said of him, to name 

Eainolds is to commend virtue itself. In a v7ord, nothing 

can be spoken against him, only that he, with Thomas 

Sparke, were the pillars of Puritanism, and grand favourers 

of Nonconformity, as the general part of writers say ; yet 

one of late date reports that Eainolds professed himself a 

Conformist, and died so."* Whatever the latter part of the 

statement may be, of the truth of which there is no good 

evidence, the former, by general consent, is indisputable ; 

and hence, in point of condition and piety, this illustrious 

Puritan was well quahfied to express an opinion on the 

merits of Biblical translations.t Eainolds objected to 

certain renderings in the extant versions, and he proposed 

to his majesty that there should be a new translation. 

Bancroft, the Bishop of London, no friend to the Puritans, 

and therefore no favourer of Eainolds, abruptly observed 

that " if every man's humour should be followed, there 

would be no end of translating." But James, in this one 

instance, sided vnth the Puritans, and professed himself 

friendly to a new translation. He objected, however, to 

any notes being appended, and railed against those in the 

Genevan version as untrue and seditious, though the cases 

he cited gave small countenance to the charge. t And 

• Wood's Aili&n, vol. ii. p. 14 (ed. Bliss.) 

t Dr. Eainolds' brother WiDiam was at first a Protestant, and afterwards a 
Papist. The doctor himself was first a Papist, and afterwards a Protestant. It is 
said a conference between the brothers led to this remarkable change of sentiment 
(Neal, vol. ii. 37). 

J The Genevan translation said of the Hebrew midwives, "Their disobe- 
dignee herein was lawful, but their dissembling evil " (Exod. i. 19.) The trans- 



The Conference. 233 

Eainolds concurred with hira in this view, for his proposi- 
tion was to the following effect : " That a translation be 
made of the whole Bible as consonant as can be to the 
original Hebrew and Greek, and this to be set out and 
printed without any marginal notes, and only to be used in 
all churches of England in time of Divine service."* 

The Hampton Court Conference, so far as an adjustment 
between the two parties ia the Church was concerned, came 
to nothing; but the suggestion of Dr. Eainolds led to a 
most important result, in the benefits of which England has 
long participated. To him we are indebted for the origin 
of our "Authorized Version," as it is commonly termed. 
Measures seem to have been taken soon after the confer- 
ence for securing suitable persons for the important task 
of preparing the new translation ; for in the month of June, 
in the same year, Bancroft wrote to Cambridge, stating that 
"his majesty being made acquainted vyith the choice of all 
them to be employed in the translating of the Bible in such 
sort as Mr. Lively can inform you, doth greatly approve of 
the said choice. And forasmuch as his highness is 
very desirous that the same so religious a work should 
admit no delay, he has commanded me to signify unto you 
in his name that his pleasure is you should, vsdth all 
possible speed, meet together in your university and begin 
the same." " I am persuaded his royal mind rejoiceth 
more in the good hope which he hath for the happy success 
of that work than, of his peace concluded with Spain." 

latora remark respecting Asa and Maachah (2 Chron. xt. 16), " Herein lie showed 
that he lacked zeal, for she ought to have died, both by the covenant (as verse 13) 
and by the law of God ; but he gave place to foolish pity, and would also seem 
after a sort to satisfy the law." This latter perhaps displeased James, because it 
justified the severe punishment of a royal personage. 
* Anderson's Annals, vol. ii. p. 371. 



234 Our English Bible. 

Very different were these subjects of joy which the prelate 
thus couples together ; and certainly the manner in which 
King James celebrated the ratification of the peace with 
Spain was little in accordance with his professed regard for 
the Bible. Sunday, of all days, was chosen for the ratifica- 
tion, and the nature of the rejoicings was such as to exhibit 
a profanation of that day, illustrative of the habits of the 
times, and forming a fit prelude to the introduction of the 
Book of Sports. " A most imposing pageant was exhibited 
by the procession in coaches and on horseback, all the 
parties clothed in the most gorgeous attire. In the royal 
chapel various pieces of church music were performed, 
after which the peace was ratified by the long's oath, on a 
copy of Jerome's Latin Bible, before the Duke de Frias, 
Constable of Spain, the ambassador : the air was rent by 
the general acclamation. Then came the grand banquet 
and drinking, which lasted about three hours. Meanwhile 
dancing had commenced in the dravnng-room, to which all 
repaired. The Prince of Wales opened the ball with a 
Spanish gallarda, and after various other dances it closed 
vnth a correnta danced by the Queen and Lord Southamp- 
ton. Upon this, from a window they had a view of an 
amphitheatre filled with people, where bears, the property 
of the king, were baited by greyhounds ; a bull running 
about, tossing and goring mastiffs let loose upon him, fol- 
lowed next ; the whole scene concluding vsdth rope-dancing 
and feats of horsemanship."* 

On the 22nd of July, 1604, the king wrote to the Arch- 
bishop of Canterbury. He stated that he had appointed 
fifty-foux learned men for the translating of the Bible, divers 
of whom had no ecclesiastical preferment ; and the main 

* Ellis's Zettere, vol. iii. p. 207 ; Anderson's Annals, toI. li. p. 372. 



The New Version. 235 

object of the letter was to enjoin upon Ms grace and the 
bishops that whenever a hviag of twenty pounds per 
annxLtn was vacant they should inform his majesty of it, 
that he might commend to the patron one of the said 
translators as a fitting person to hold it, as his reward for his 
service in the translation. He further required that the 
bishops should inform themselves of such learned men in 
their dioceses, and charged them to assist in the work by 
sending their observations to Mr. Lively, Dr. Harding, or 
Dr. Andrewes.* Here ended all the trouble — so far as 
history records — that James i. ever took respecting the 
translation which bears his name. The letter just noticed 
shows that his majesty was iatending to reward the trans- 
lators by means of the hberahty of others, not his own ; 
and it further appears, as will be presently noticed, that the 
expenses of preparing the work were borne by certain 
parties quite independently of any help from the sovereign. 
The Earl of Sahsbury, Chancellor of the University of 
Cambridge, wrote the same day (July 22) to the Vice- 
Chancellor and heads of houses, conveying to them the 
expression of his majesty's pleasure that they should join in 
the undertaking by recommendLag fit persons to assist, and 
by entertaining the translators at the colleges without any 
charge, — only the poor colleges were to look to the Bishop of 
London to defray any expenses in which they might be 
involved.! It is most amusing to see how careful the king 
was to shift all the expense on others ; and it is mortifying 
to think that the credit and honour of the undertaking have 
too commonly been transferred from those to whom they are 
due to the mean-spirited monarch, whose chief care in the 
matter was to rid his own shoulders of the pecuniary 
* Lewis's History of Translations, p. 312. f Ibid. p. 313. 



236 Our English Bible. 

responsibility. Nor were the letters just noticed the only 
ones written for the purpose of inducing other persons 
to hear the burden of the expense ; for we find Archbishop 
Bancroft writing to the Bishop of Norwich, on the 31st of 
July, telling him to acquaint the dean and chapter with the 
subject, and ascertain what they would contribute. " I do 
not think," he says, " that a thousand marks will finish the 
work."* Other bishops were appealed to in the same way. 
How much was contributed does not appear ; and it is now 
made pretty certain that the money expended in the trans- 
lation was largely supphed by Mr. Barker, the printer and 
patentee. " I conceive," says a writer in the year 1657, 
" that the sole printing of the Bible and Testament, with 
power of restraint in others, to be of right the property of 
one Matthew Barker, citizen and stationer of London, 
in regard that his father paid for the amended or corrected 
translation of the Bible £3,500, bj' reason whereof the trans- 
lated copy did of right belong to him and his assignees."! 
Out of this sum, paid by the patentee, some at least of the 
expenses most hkely were defrayed. On the 31st of July, 
Bancroft sent a copy of the king's letter to Cambridge, for 
the persons ^ho had been selected by the university as trans- 
lators, expressing his majesty's approbation of the choice, 
and his desire that they should meet as early as possible. 
He adds an expression of his own wish, that as soon as they 
were prepared for the business they would communicate 
with him.t 

The following instructions accompanied the letters : 

* Lewis, p. 321. 

f " 4 Brief Treatise concerning the Regulating of Printing. Humbly submitted 
to the Parliament of England by William Ball, Esq., London. Printed in 
tbe year 1651." Anderson's jlnnais, vol. ii. p. 384. 

J Lewis, p. 315. 



Rules. 237 

" 1. The ordinary Bible read in the Church, commonly 
called the Bishops' Bible, to be foUowed, and as httle altered 
as the original ■will permit. 

" 2. The names of the prophets and the holy writers, 
with the other names in the text, to be retained, as near as 
may be, accordingly as they are vulgarly used. 

" 3. The old ecclesiastical words to be kept, as the word 
' church,' not to be translated congregation. 

" 4. When any word hath divers significations, that to 
be kept which hath been most commonly used by the most 
eminent fathers, being agreeable to the propriety of the place 
and the analogy of faith. 

" 5. The division of the chapters to be altered, either 
not at all, or as little as may be if necessity' so require. 

" 6. No marginal notes at all to be affixed, but only for the 
explanation of the Hebrew or Greek words which cannot, 
without some circumlocution, so briefly and fitly be expressed 
in the text. 

" 7. Such quotations of places to be marginally set down 
as shall serve for the fit references of one scripture to 
another. 

" 8. Every particular man of each company to take the 
same chapter or chapters ; and, having translated or amended 
them severally, by himself, where he thinks good, all to meet 
together, to confer what they have done, and agree for their 
part what shall stand. 

" 9. As any one .company hath despatched any one book 
in this manner, they shall send it to the rest, to be considered 
of seriously and judiciously ; for his majesty is very careful 
in this point. 

"10. If any company, upon the review of the book so 
sent, shall doubt or differ upon any places, to send them 



238 Otir English Bible. 

word thereof, to note the places, and therewithal to 
send their reasons ; to which if they consent not, the 
difference to be compounded at the general meeting, which 
is to be of the chief persons of each company, at the end of 
the work. 

"11. When any place of special obscurity is doubted of, 
letters to be directed, by authority, to send to any learned in 
the land for his judgment in such a place. 

" 12. Letters to be sent from every bishop to the rest of 
his clergy, admonishing them of this translation in hand, 
and to move and charge as many as, being skilful in the 
tongues, have taken pains in that kind to send their parti- 
cular observations to the company, either at "Westminster, 
Cambridge, or Oxford, according as it was directed before in 
the king's letter to the archbishop. 

" 13. The directors in each company to be the deans of 
Westminster and Chester for Westminster, and the king's 
professors in Hebrew and Greek ia the two universities. 

" 14. These translations to be used when they agree better 
with the text than the Bishops' Bible — Tyndale's, Coverdale's, 
Matthew's, Whitchurch's, Geneva." 

Doubts having arisen in the minds of some of the Cam- 
bridge men as to the manner of observing the third and fourth 
rules, Bancroft wrote to them again, stating that it was the 
royal wish there should be three or four divines of the uni- 
versity appointed as overseers of the translation, especially 
with a view to carry out the third and fourth rules ; probably 
a similar plan, from the beginning, was contemplated with 
regard to Oxford ; certainly an instruction to that effect was 
sent to Dr. Eavis, one of the company who assembled at that 
university.* 

* Lewis, p. 319. Burnet, Sistory of the Beformation, pt. ii. b. iii. No. 10. 



Westminster Company. 239 

The list of the individuals to whoni the preparation of 
the new version vpas entrusted has been carefully preserved 
and often pubHshed. It includes the names of some of the 
most distinguished divines of the day; and as to others 
among them, of whom history has preserved scarcely any 
memorial, no reasonable doubt can be entertained of their 
competency to discharge their momentous trust. 

There is in the hbrary at Lambeth a curious MS. (No. 
933, art. 41), which seems to be part of a letter written by 
some one who had been requested to supply information 
respecting the translators. Neither the writer nor the person 
addressed can be ascertained, but he was evidently a contem- 
porary student with some of those employed in the version. 
He speaks of Dr. Stoughton as his tutor — probably Dr. John 
Stoughton, Fellow of Emmanuel, and author of numerous 
quaint sermons. The letter must have been written long 
after the pubhcation of King James's Bible, as the writer 
refers to a conversation which passed in 1622.* 

They were forty-seven in number, and were divided into 
six parties, two of which met at Westminster, two at Cam- 
bridge, and two at Oxford. 

The first company met at Westminster, and to them was 
committed the Pentateuch, with the other historical books, 
as far as the Second Book of Kings. Dr. Launcelot Andrewes, 
whose erudition called forth the praise of Europe, presided 
over this division. He was Dean of Westminster, and then 
promoted to the sees of Chichester, Ely, and Winchester. 
Casaubon,, Grotius, and Vossius have eulogized his attain- 
ments ; and Buckeridge, Bishop of Eochester, who preached 

* I cannot bnt mention the learning and courtesy manifested by the late 
Mr. Maitland, the archbishop's librarian, when, nearly forty years ago, I inspected 
this MS. 



240 Ozir English Bible. 

Ms funeral sermon, in 1626, stated that lie understood fifteen 
languages. Milton, in one of his early elegies, embalmed his 
name, and bewailed his loss in terms expressive of the 
prelate's wide and brilHant fame. 

As a hard student he has been rarely equalled, and his 
learning is said to have overflowed in his conversation, 
as it certainly does ia his writings. His sidll in repartee, 
and his prudent evasion of difficulties, are also recorded, of 
which the following anecdote presents an example: "Waller 
having one day gone to see James I. at dinner, saw the Bishop 
of Winchester and Dr. Neale, Bishop of Durham, standing 
behind the king's chair, and overheard the following con- 
versation. His majesty asked the bishops, ' My lords, cannot 
I take my subjects' money when I want it, without all this 
formahty ia Parliament ? ' The Bishop of Durham readily 
answered, ' God forbid, sir, but you should ; you are the 
breath of our nostrils.' Whereupon the king turned and 
said to the Bishop of Winchester, ' Well, my lord, what say 
you ? ' ' Sir,' rephed the bishop, ' I have no skill to judge of 
parhamentary cases ! ' The king answered, ' No put-offs, 
my lord ; answer me presently.' ' Then, sir,' said he, ' I 
think it lawful for you to take my brother Neale's money, for 
he offers it.' No doubt, in connection with the West- 
minster meetings, for, as Andrewes conversed with his coad- 
jutors, many a stream of learning would flow sparkling with 
the Hght of innocent pleasantry." * 

Amongst Andrewes' coadjutors was Dr. John Overall, 
Fellow of Trinity, Cambridge, and in 1596 raised to the 
Eegius professorship of Divinity in that university. In 1604 
he became Dean of St. Paul's, and was afterwards made 
Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, whence he was trans- 

• Life of Waller prefixed to his Works. 



Westminster Company. 241 

lated to Norwich. To the same company belonged Dr. 
Adrian de Saravia, the only foreigner engaged in the work. 
A Frenchman, and invited to Leyden as Professor of Divinity, 
he came over to England, became acquainted vsdth Eichard 
Hooker, and v^as installed first Prebendary of Canterbmry, 
and next Canon of Westminster, in 1601. He entered into 
controversy respecting episcopacy and sacrilege vyith the 
celebrated Beza, and in this v^ay pleased Archbishop Whit- 
gift, and displeased his early friends. He died at Canter- 
bury, in 1612, at the advanced age of eighty-two, and was 
buried in the cathedral. Wood speaks of him as " educated 
in aU kinds of hterature in his younger days, especially in 
several languages." 

Dr. Eichard Clarke, one of the six preachers at Canter- 
bury, and vicar of Mynstre and Monkton, in the Isle of 
Thanet, author of a volume of sermons full of erudition ; Dr. 
John Layfield, " skilled in architecture," whose judgment 
was much rehed on for the fabric of the tabernacle and 
temple ; Dr. Teigh, Archdeacon of Middlesex, and vicar of 
AllhaUows, Barking, an excellent textuary and a profound 
linguist, were among Andrewes' coadjutors.* The rest, of 
whom fame reports nothing save their learned education and 
connection with the universities, were Mr. Burgley, or Bur- 
leigh, Mr. GeofEry King, Mr. Eichard Thomson, and Mr. 
WilHam Bedwell. Of the last, however, it is said that he 
was tutor to the great Orientalist, Dr. Pocock, and greatly 
excelled in the knowledge of Eastern languages and lore. He 
spent many years in compiling an Arabic lexicon and a Per- 
sian dictionary. An Arabic translation of St. John's epistles 
by this same scholar is preserved in the Bodleian Library. 

* The author of the Lambeth ms. supposes that Dr. Teigh might be the same 
person as William Tye, who wrote a, catechism, which he dedicated to Prince 
Henry, 1612. 



242 Our English Bible. 

The second company, consisting of eight persons, met 
at Camhriclge ; and they prepared the translation from the 
beginning of Chronicles to the end of Canticles. Edward 
Lively, Begins Professor at Cambridge, and a man of great 
attainments, presided over the department ; with whom 
were associated John Eichardson, Fellow of Emanuel, and 
Dr. Laurence Chaderton, a man well skilled in Eabbinical 
literature. He was Master of Emanuel, Cambridge; and as 
indication of his theological bias it may be stated that for 
fear of an Arminian being appointed as his successor, he 
resigned his mastership in favour of a Calvinist. This person 
he survived, and then lived long enough to witness two other 
successors. Thomas Harrison, a Hebraist, Vice-master of 
Trinity ; Eoger Andrewes, brother to the bishop ; Eobert 
Spalding, Fellow of St. John's, and Lively's successor in the 
Hebrew chair ; and Dr. Andrew Byng, who subsequently 
occupied the same professorship, completed the number. 

The third company assembled at Oxford, and consisted 
of seven members, who undertook the rest of the Old Testa- 
ment from Isaiah to Malachi. Dr. John Harding, Eegius 
Professor of Hebrew, was chosen to preside over this party, 
which consisted besides of Dr. John Eainolds, the Puritan, 
who suggested the new version ; Dr; Thomas HoUand, a 
very ApoUos, "mighty in the Scriptures ;"* Dr. Eichard 
Kilbie, a great Hebraist ; Dr. Miles Smith, " who had 
Hebrew at his fingers' ends," says Anthony Wood ; Dr. Brett, 
a good Grecian and Orientahst ; and Mr. Fairclough.t Izaak 
Walton tells a story of Dr. Kilbie, in connection with the 

* He was no man for episcopacy, says the Lambeth ms. 

+ Dr. Daniel Peatley was called Fairolough ; but the writer of the Lambeth ms. 
thinks he was too young to be the person included in the Ust. He also mentions a 
Mr. Fairolough, minister of Ketton (Kedington), near HaveriU, Suffolk. 



Oxford Company. 243 

new Bible, worth repeating. " The doctor was to ride a 
journey into Derbyshire, and took Mr. Sanderson (afterwards 
Bishop of Lincoln) to bear him company ; and they going 
together on a Sunday with the doctor's friend to that parish 
church where they then were, found a young preacher to 
have no more discretion than to waste a great part of the 
hour allotted for his sermon in exceptions against the late 
translation of several words, not expecting such a hearer as 
Dr. Kilbie, and showed three reasons why a particular word 
should have been otherwise translated. When evening 
prayer was ended, the preacher was invited to the doctor's 
friend's house, where, after some other conference, the 
doctor told him he might have preached more useful 
doctrine, and not have filled his auditors' ears with needless 
exceptions against the late translation : and for that word, 
for which he offered to that poor congregation three reasons 
why it ought to have been translated as he said, he and 
others had considered all them, and found thirteen more 
considerable reasons why it was translated as now printed, 
and told him, ' If his friend then attending him should 
prove guilty of such indiscretion he should forfeit his favour ; ' 
to which Mr. Sanderson said, he hoped he should not : and 
the preacher was so ingenuous as to say he would not justify 
himself."* 

The fourth company was convened at Oxford, consisting 
of eight members, who received for their portion of labour 
the four Gospels, the Acts of the Apostles, and the Eevela- 
tion of John. Dr. Eavis, Dean of Christ Church, and after- 
wards Bishop of Gloucester, subsequently of London,t was 

•Walton's hives, p. 360. 

■(■ " He took all academical degrees, and enjoyed all collegiate dignity. He was 
a great man against the ministers who followed King James."— Lambeth MS. 



244 Our English Bible. 

president ; the famous George Abbott, Dean of Winchester, 
and afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury ; Dr. Eedes, Dean 
of Worcester ; Dr. Giles Tomson, Dean of Windsor, who 
hes buried in the royal chapel ; Sir Henry Saville, Provost 
of Eton ; Dr. Perrin, Greek professor ; Dr. Eavens ; and Mr. 
John Harman, were the members of this division. 

The fifth company met at Westminster, and translated 
the Epistles. It consisted of Dr. Barlowe, Dean of Chester, 
afterwards successively Bishop of Eochester and Lincoln ; 
Dr. Hutchinson, Dr. Spencer,* Mr. Eenton, Mr. Eabbett, 
Mr. Sanderson, and Mr. Daldns. 

The sixth company held their sittings at Cambridge, and 
undertook the translation of the Apocrypha. They were as 
follows : Dr. John Duport, Prebendary of Ely, and after- 
wards Master of Jesus College, Cambridge ;t Dr. Bran- 
thwaite. Fellow of Emanuel ; Dr. Jeremiah EadcHffe, Fellow 
of Trinity; Dr. Samuel Ward, of Emanuel, afterwards Master 
of Sidney, and Margaret Professor ;+ Andrew Downes, Greek 
Professor ; the celebrated Mr. Bois ; and Mr. Ward, Fellow 
of King's. Mr. Bois was most indefatigable in execut- 
ing his trust, for his biographer informs us that " all the 
time he was about his own part his diet was given him at 
St. John's, where he abode all the week till Saturday night, 
and then went home to discharge his cure, and returned 
thence on Monday morning ; and that when he had finished 
his own part, at the earnest request of him to whom it was 

* " There was a Dr. Spencer whq succeeded Dr. Eeynolds in his presidentship 
of Corpus Christi College, who had some pubHo place in the university — Lady 
Margaret Professor, I suppose." — Lambeth MS. 

t " He died a little before I came to Cambridge." — Lambeth ms. 

X Dr. Ward seems to have been well known to the person addressed in the 
Lambeth ms. "To speak of him to you is needless j yet one thing I will add — 
that ia, that he made the dial over the great gate in Emanuel College." 



Cambridge Company. 245 

assigned, lie undertook a second, and then was at commons 
at another college." " Eour years he spent in this service, 
at the end whereof (the whole work being finished, and 
three copies of the whole Bible being sent to London, one 
from Cambridge, a second from Oxford, and a third from 
Westminster) a new choice was to be made of six in all, two 
out of each company, to review the whole work, and extract 
one out of aU three to be committed to the press. For the 
despatch of this bnsiaess, Mr. Downes and he (Mr. Bois) 
out of the Cambridge company were sent for up to London, 
where, meeting their four feUow-labourers, they went daily to 
Stationers' HaU, and in three quarters of a year fulfilled 
their task. All which time they received duly thirty shil- 
lings each of them by the week from the Company of 
Stationers, though before they had nothing." * 

Though but forty-seven are mentioned in the Hst, fifty- 
four are spoken of in the king's letter — a discrepancy which 
some have explained by supposing that the original number 
was, from circumstances, reduced to forty-seven, t 

* Lewis, p. 322. Memoir of Bois, or Boys, MS. Harl. 7,053, printed in Peck's T)es 
Curiosa, extracts are given by Anderson, Annals, u. 381. Mr. Anderson discredits 
part of the narratire. That only six rcTisers were appointed is obviously a mistake, 
as there were six companies, and two from each would make twelve, the number 
stated by Dr. Samael Ward (Anderson, ii. 382). But Mr. A.'s argument against 
the idea of the Stationers' Company paying anything is, like many of his arguments, 
unsatisfactory. 

+ Wood, in his Annals, mentions two persons as engaged on the revision nob 
included in the foregoing Kst, John Aglionby, of Queen's CoU., Oxford, and Leonard 
Hutton, of Christ Church. Todd, in his Vindication of the English Translations, 
observes that " as Wood omits the name of Eedes (whom he has elsewhere men- 
tioned as one of the translators), and of Bavens, occurring in the original Ust, we 
may conclude that their places, vacated soon after the translation was resolved 
upon, by the death, as we know, of the former, and by some other circumstances 
now forgotten regarding the latter, were supplied by these learned persons "' 
— App. to Vind/ication, No. vi. 



246 Our English Bible. 

The mode in ■whicli the translators were to proceed in 
their undertaking is described in the regulations ; to which 
they, no doubt, carefully attended. Every member of a 
company was to take the same portion, and having trans- 
lated or amended it by himself, all were to meet together 
to compare what they had done, and to form one revised 
copy of the whole, in which they could agree. The oft- 
quoted anecdote relative to the translators, given in the 
learned Selden's Table Talk, most likely refers to this stage 
of the proceedings : " They met together, and one read the 
translation, the rest holding in their hands some Bible, 
either of the learned tongues, or French, Spanish, Italian, 
etc. If they found any fault, they spoke ; if not, he read 
on." Wlien a portion had thus been finished by any com- 
pany, it was to be sent to the rest for their examination ; 
and they were required, if they felt a doubt about any of 
the renderings, or could suggest an improvement, to state 
such doubt or improvement, and the reasons on which it 
was founded, to the company who had executed the portion. 
If the alteration were approved, it was to be adopted at 
once ; if not approved, it was to be referred to a committee 
of final revisers. While the labour was great, correctness 
was hkely to be secured by this plan ; for every portion 
would first be translated by each member of the party to 
whom it was assigned ; then considered by them all ; then 
examined by the other companies ; and then finally revised 
by the select committee appointed to complete the work : 
thus, after its first translation, passing through a number of 
ordeals varying from thirteen to sixteen, according to the 
number of persons in the company to which it belonged. 

The final revision of the whole work, as we have seen, 
was conducted in London. Delegates from Cambridge, 



The Final Revision. 247 

from Oxford, and from "Westminster devoted themselves to 
this important business. They met in the old hall of the 
Stationers' Company, and there spent three quarters of a 
year in completing their task. 

Bilson, Bishop of Winchester, is particularly mentioned 
in the manuscript of Bois as engaged upon this final 
revision, though he was not one of the originally appointed 
translators. 

From the preface written by Dr. MUes Smith, who, for 
his services, was rewarded with the bishopric of Gloucester, 
we learn that the translators were occupied for about three 
years in preparing the version. " The work," he says, " has 
not been huddled up in seventy-two days'" (referring to 
the haste with which the Septuagint was supposed to have 
been executed), " but hath cost the workmen, as hght as it 
seemeth, the pains of tvdce seven times seventy-two days, 
and more." It has been supposed that the work was not 
begun tni the year 1607 ; and that the delay was occasioned 
by the death of Mr. Lively, president of one of the Cam- 
bridge companies, who died va. the year 1605. But no 
positive evidence has been afforded in proof of the late 
commencement of the translation ; and it must be apparent 
to all that Mr. Lively's death would be no hindrance to 
the commencement or progress of the other companies, 
though it might be to the commencement and progress of 
his own. It would appear that FuUer considered the work 
was begun before Lively's death, for he says, " The un- 
timely death of Mr. Lively, much weight in the work lying 
in his skill in the Oriental tongues, happening about this 
time — (happy is that servant whom his Master when he 
Cometh findeth so doing) — not a little retarded their pro- 
ceedings. However, the rest vigorously, though slowly, 



248 Our English Bible. 

proceeded in this hard, heavy, and holy task ; nothing 
offended with the censures of impatient people condemning 
their delays, though indeed but due deliberation, for lazi- 
ness." * Moreover from Wood's Annals of the Oxford 
University it appears that the party V7ho met there had 
closed their work by the year 1607 ; for he informs us that 
the party met at Dr. Eainolds's lodgings, and there " per- 
fected the work, notwithstanding the said doctor, who had 
the chief hand in it, was all the while sorely afflicted with 
the gout." Now as Dr. Eainolds died in 1607, the portion 
undertaken by his company must have been finished in that 
year, and was most hkely begun soon after the preliminary 
arrangements, in 1604, were complete. Probably there was 
some delay vdth the other companies ; and this, in con- 
nexion with the repeated revisions, and the care that would 
be taken in printing the book, would account for the whole 
work being spread over so long a space as from 1604 to 
1611, when King James's Bible issued as a portty foho 
from the press. 

The title-page of the volume exhibits certain features 
in comparison vnth those of other versions. Pirst, it is 
stated that this Bible was newly translated out of the 
original tongues, and with the former translation diligently 
compared and revised by his Majesty's special commandmejit, 
in this respect agreeing with the Great Bible of 1541. The 
Bishops' Bible of 1568 has cum privilegio Begice Majcstatis. 
Secondly, we find the words appointed to he read in 
churches, resembhng on this point the Bible of 1540 and 
1541, where it is printed, this is the Bible appointed to the 
use of churches, a note which does not appear in the Bishops' 

• Puller's Church Hist. vol. iii. p. 230. 



The Version. 249 

Bible of 1568. But in the Bishops' Bible of 1602 the word 
"authorized" is used as well as the word " appoiated." 
The object of such words was, if possible, to secure uni- 
formity in the use of versions at pubhc worship; the 
Genevan Bible having divided popular attention, and 
rivalled the editions pubhshed by royal sanction. But 
whether the editors were in any way authorized to insert 
these words, or whether the printers followed the title-page 
of 1540 and 1541, I do not know. Certainly the version 
was not issued or sanctioned by royal proclamation, or by 
order of council, or by Act of Parliament, or by vote of 
Convocation. An episcopal mandate indeed appears en- 
forcing its use, for copies of the whole Bible of the largest 
volume and latest edition are required to be iu churches by 
the visitation articles of Laud, 1622, St. David's, 1628, 
London. In the Scotch Canons of 1636 it is said dis- 
tinctly, " The Bible shall be of the translation of King 
James." Thirdly — and the fact is important — there are no 
annotations annoimced on the title-page. In this respect, 
the Bible resembles several succeeding ones ; but it exhibits 
a marked contrast to the two conflicting translations which 
represented the Puritans on the one hand and the Eoman 
Cathohcs on the other. The first wished to point out in 
Scripture the great doctrines which they fervently beheved ; 
and the second would not trust a vernacular version to go 
out alone. The Bible of 1611 left the Divine contents to 
speak for themselves. "Whether this was a Puritan sugges- 
tion at the Hampton Conference, or one made by the king 
himself, is a disputed question.* 

The translation is considered to follow mainly the 
Bishops' Bible ; and here it is interesting to refer to what 

Cardweil's History of Conferences, pp. 213, 214, and Anderson, vol. ii. p. 371{ 



250 Our English Bible. 

has been said already respecting the sources from which 
that revision 'was derived. The Great Bible was a standard 
text, from which, however, the prelates frequently deviated, 
making large use of the G-enevan version. The editor of 
the Great Bible, whilst employing Munster and Beza, 
worked mainly upon what he found in the Bible which 
went by the name of Matthew's. To that Tyndale and 
Cover dale are discovered to be principal contributors; and 
when we reach the first of these names we come to the 
fountain-head of Protestant English versions, as the 
Wycliffe Bibles seem to have had little or no influence. The 
Vulgate, however, which Wycliffe and his followers rendered 
into the vernacular, had a decidedly appreciable effect in 
these successive volumes. The Bishops' Bible, the Genevan 
Bible, the Great Bible, and Matthew's Bible, with Tyndale's 
Testaments, then, were, together with the original learning 
of successive editors, the chief elements which entered into 
the composition of the version of 1611. But there must 
be added other influences. First, it appears that, besides 
the stream of Genevan influence flovsdng through the Bishops' 
Bible, it came also over the minds of the new translators 
vyith a direct and immediate force. They must have had the 
Bible and Testament of the exiles before them, and they must 
have largely consulted it. But, what is more remarkable, 
the effect of the Ehemish version is manifest. The com- 
panies must have had the Eoman Catholic Testament, as 
well as the whole volume of Puritan Scripture, by their 
side as they slowly accomphshed their task. 

There were probably other learned works lying on the 
table, around which gathered the different groups of 
scholars. New Latin versions of the Old Testament had 
been published by Arias Montanus and by Tremellius. 



The Version. 251 

New vernacular editions ia French, Italian, and Spanish had 
also appeared ; but little or nothing had been accompUshed 
in the way of coUatiag Greek and Hebrew mss., and correct- 
ing the text generally adopted. 

Canon Westcott has instituted a careful comparison of 
the last version with former ones. In the fifty-third chapter 
of Isaiah he finds that, " as far as the variations admit of 
being reduced to a numerical form, about seven-eighths are 
due to the Genevan version, either alone, or in agreement 
with one or both of the Latia versions ' of TremeUius and 
Pagninus.' " Professor Moulton says of another passage, in 
the fifty-fourth chapter, from the eleventh to the seven- 
teenth verse, that in more than sixty out of ninety-six words 
varying iu different versions, our version agrees with the 
Genevan, whereas its agreement with the Bishops' Bible 
does not extend to more than twelve out of that number. 
" Hence, though the Bishops' Bible furnished the basis for 
the new translation, it is clear that the Genevan exercised a 
much more powerful influence. Indeed, a glance will show 
that the five translations divide themselves into two classes, 
the Bibles of Coverdale, Cranmer, and the bishops, standing 
on the one side ; the Genevan and Authorized Version on 
the other." Tyndale and Whittingham, then, must be 
regarded as most important factors in the work wrought 
out by the six companies, showing that an honest endeavour 
to adopt the best translation of words must have guided them, 
apart from ecclesiastical prejudices, which might have been 
supposed to have turned them away from the Puritan exiles 
in Germany and Geneva. A further proof of their impar- 
tiahty is seen in the use they made of the Ehemish 
Testament. 

The repeated eulogiums pronounced by the first scholars 



252 Our English Bible. 

of this country upon the general accuracy of our Autho- 
rized Version render it unnecessary, and even presumptuous, 
for me to add an3d;hing to what they have said. Upon all 
the more important points of rehgious faith and practice, it 
is undoubtedly a safe and sufficient guide to those who are 
unable to examine the original Scriptures for themselves. 
While in this well-merited commendation there are few who 
will not agree, there are perhaps equally few who wiU not 
admit that there are minor inaccuracies which need correc- 
tion. The obscurity of some passages, especially in the Old 
Testament ; the infelicity and almost ludicrous effect of 
certain modes of expression employed, and the striking 
indehcacy of others ; the arbitrary rendering of certain 
terms ; and the unnecessary introduction in some instances 
of words distinguished by italics, are blemishes so fre- 
quently pointed out as to require no further notice. It 
should, however, be observed that the objections to some 
passages have undoubtedly arisen from a scrupulous adher- 
ence to the original, and from an attempt to transfer some of 
its idioms into our own language. It had been strange indeed 
if, in an age when Biblical criticism was in its infancy, a work 
had been produced in which the keen eye of modern scholar- 
ship could detect no imperfections or mistakes, and which 
could receive no improvement from rich treasuries of learn- 
ing amassed during the last two centuries. It is sufficient 
praise and a monument of fame glorious enough for any band 
of scholars to envy, that in a volume of such extent more 
alterations are not requisite to render it a perfect expression 
of the original. As a specimen of English style this Bible 
has received enthusiastic praise ; and here, perhaps, admira- 
tion for its sacred contents, and the delightful associations 
with its very phraseology, which piety and devotion cannot 



Address to the Reader, 253 

fail to form, may warp our judgment on the question of its 
literary merits ; yet, after all that can he said against it ia 
this point of view (and that it has literary defects as weU as 
excellences it were uncandid to deny), we must surely he 
struck with the fact that while our Bible possesses number- 
less specimens of Enghsh diction, full of rhythm, beauty, and 
grandeur, there are to be found in it so few words and modes 
of expression which the lapse of between two and three 
centuries has rendered obsolete or dubious. 

The dedication to King James is, in its way, somewhat 
of a hterary curiosity, but it is unworthy of the prominent 
place it retains in our Bibles, especially as the introduction, 
quite of another character, is frequently omitted. The king 
is styled Most High and Mighty Prince, and is described as 
succeeding the " bright occidental star," Queen Ehzabeth, as 
"the sun in his strength dispeUiag supposed and surmised 
mists ;" and then allusion is made to his majesty's " writing 
ia defence of the truth, which hath given such a blow unto 
that man of sin as will not be healed." Possibly some 
readers may not understand the reference. It is to two 
treatises, one entitled " Triplici nodo, triplus cuneus, or an 
apology for the Oath of Allegiance, against the two Breves of 
Pope Paulus Quintus, and the late letter of Cardinal 
Bellarmiae to G. Blackwel, the arch-priest; " the other " A 
Premonition to all most mighty monarchs, kings, free 
princes, and states of Chiistendom." 

If, on the one hand, the dedication to the king is 
strongly marked by the fulsome adulation of the age ; on the 
other hand, the address to the reader is a most valuable 
composition, abounding with much that is quaint and cha- 
racteristic, and also containing a great deal of useful 
information, blended with pious sentiment. It is to be 



2 54 ' Otir English Bible. 

regretted that, while the dedication appears in all the 
editions, the address to the reader is inserted in very few. 
It would be a good alteration entirely to cancel the former, 
and universally introduce the latter. 

It commences with a reference to the opposition which 
had been made to the undertaking, and then proceeds in a 
strain of characteristic illustration to unfold the excellences 
of the sacred volume. It vindicates the making and circu- 
lating of vernacular translations, and supphes a succinct 
account of ancient versions. The Eomanists are attacked 
for their unwillingness to place the Scriptures in the hands 
of the people, and the motives which induced the trans- 
lators to engage in the work are stated and justified. The 
need of a new version is proved, and the imputations of 
Popish opponents repelled. The writer shows how labo- 
rious had been the task of preparing this amended trans- 
lation, and he explains the reason for introducing marginal 
readings, for translating the same original expressions by 
different Enghsh terms, and for the retention of old 
ecclesiastical words. 

The following is an extract from this composition, and it 
shows how thoroughly the writer was convinced of the 
great principle of Protestantism — that is, the sufficiency of 
the Scriptures — and how highly he valued, and how deeply 
he venerated the holy volume : " ' I adore the fulness of the 
Scripture,' saith Tertulhan against Hermogenes. And 
again, to Apelles, an heretic of the hke stamp, he saith, ' I 
do not admit that which thou bringest in (or concludest) of 
thine own (head or store, cZe tuo) without Scripture.' So 
St. Justin Martyr before him, 'We must Imow by all 
means ' (saith he), ' that it is not lawful (or possible) to 
learn (anything) of God, or of right piety, save only out of 



Address to the Reader. 255 

the prophets, who teach us hy Divine inspiration.' So St. 
Basil, after Tertiallian, 'It is a manifest falling away from the 
faith, and a fault of presumption, either to reject any of 
those things that are written, or to bring in (upon the head 
of them, iviiaar^Hv) any of those things that are not written.' 
We omit to cite to the same effect St. Cyril, Bishop of 
Jerusalem, in his Fourth Catechism, St. Hierome against 
Helvidius, St. Augustine, in his Third Book against the 
Letters of Petilian, and in very many other places of his 
works. Also we forbear to descend to later Fathers, be- 
cause we will not weary the reader. The Scriptures then 
being acknowledged to be so fuU and so perfect, how can we 
excuse ourselves of neghgence if we do not study them? of 
curiosity, if we be not content with them ? Men talk much 
of slptaHwvri,* how many sweet and goodly things it had 
hanging on it ; of the philosopher's stone, that it turneth 
copper into gold ; of Cornu-copice, that it had all things 
necessary for food in it ; of Panaces the herb, that it was 
good for all diseases; of CathoUcon the drug, that it is 
instead of all purges ; of Vulcan's armour, that it was an 
armour of proof against all thrusts and aU blows, etc. Well, 
that which they falsely or vainly attributed to these things 
for bodily good, we may justly, and vyith full measure, 
ascribe unto the Scripture for spiritual. It is not only an 
armour, but also a whole armoury of weapons, both offen- 
sive and defensive ; whereby we may save ourselves, and put 
the enemy to flight. It is not an herb, but a tree, or rather 
a whole paradise of trees of Hfe, which bring forth fruit 
every month, and the fruit thereof is for meat, and the 
leaves for medicine. It is not a pot of manna, or a cruse 
of oil, which were for memory only, or for a meal's 
' An olire bough wrapped about with wool, whereon did hang figs, etc. 



256 Our English Bible. 

meat or two ; but, as it were, a shower of heavenly 
bread suf&cient for a whole host, be it never so great ; 
and, ' as it were, a whole cellar fuU of oil-vessels ; 
whereby all our necessities may be provided for, and our 
debts discharged. In a word, it is a panary of wholesome 
food against feuowed* traditions ; a physician's shop (St. 
Basil calleth it) of preservatives against poisoned heresies ; 
a pandect of profitable laws against rebellious spirits ; a 
treasury of most costly jewels against beggarly rudiments ; 
finally, a fountain of most pure water springing up unto 
everlasting life. And what marvel? the original thereof 
being from heaven, not from earth ; the Author being God, 
not man ; the iuditer, the Holy Spirit, not the wit of the 
apostles or prophets ; the penmen, such as were sanctified 
from the womb, and endued with a principal portion of 
Grod's Spirit ; the matter, verity, piety, purity, uprightness ; 
the form, God's word, God's testimony, God's oracles, the 
word of truth, the word of salvation, etc. ; the effects, light 
of understanding, stableness of persuasion, repentance from 
dead works, newness of hfe, holiness, peace, joy in the Holy 
Ghost ; lastly, the end and reward of the study thereof, fel- 
lowship with the saints, participation of the heavenly nature, 
fruition of an inheritance immortal, undefiled, and that 
never shall fade away. Happy is the man that dehghteth in 
the Scripture, and thrice happy that meditateth in it day 
and night." 

A work of such magnitude and extent, and one calcu- 
lated to awaken prejudice in certain minds, was not hkely 
to escape adverse criticism. Hugh Broughton is reported 
to have been the greatest Hebraist and the first Rabbinical 
scholar of his age. He had inveighed against the Bishops' 

• Mouldy. 



Broughton s Criticisms. 257 

Bible, and proposed a new translation " by some six in the 
longest students in the tongues." Being a man of immense 
conceit, lie numbered himseK amongst the six, and in 1596, 
1605, and 1606, published parts of a new translation of the 
Old Testament. He attacked Bancroft, and pxmningly 
branded hinn " as the bane of the banned croft," and con- 
signed him to Gehenna, whence he said King James, whom 
he flattered, would " behold him from Abraham's bosom." 
"When the version of 1611 came out, Broughton said, "It 
was sent me to censure, which bred in me a sadness which 
will grieve me while I breathe ; it is so iU done. Tell his 
majesty that I had rather be rent in pieces with wild 
horses than any such translation, by my consent, should be 
urged on poor churches." * It is curious to notice the 
lengths to which prejudice has carried some men on this 
subject. The translators were charged with introducing such 
words as "familiar spirit," "witch," and "wizard," to please 
King James ; whereas the Bishops', the Genevan, and the 
Great Bible had used "familiar spirit " and " witch " as weU 
as similar renderings. In later days the version has been 
condenmed for flattering James by the rendering, " God save 
the king ; " and the monarch himseK has been represented 
as the final reviser : " those royal hands, dripping with the 
blood of hundreds of innocent human beings, gave the 
final touches to it." Notwithstanding attacks made at 
the time on the work in some quarters, it met, on the 
whole, with a favourable reception, and soon, in a great 
measure, superseded the use of earher versions : in the 
attainment of this pre-eminence, perhaps it was aided by 
the royal authority expressed on the title-page. But the 
Genevan version continued in use a good while. 

< • Eadie, ffisi., vol ii. p. 265. 

S 



258 Our English Bible. 

In closing this chapter I cannot refrain from remarking 
liow great is the debt which EngHshmen owe to the men, 
who laboured through many a month and year of hard and 
prayerful study, to produce the translations described. Few 
who read cheap Bibles and Testaments ever think of the 
toil and expense, the patience and prayer, devoted to the 
preparation of the Book which has now happily become so 
easily procurable. The business of these early translators 
was a heavy task. It was hard work to roll back the gates 
of the temple of truth — so long closed ; to remove from the 
mouth of the well of Hving water the stones that covered 
it — so old and moss-grown. AU honour to them for their 
pious toils ! Let them have a place among our country's 
best benefactors. "We wiU inscribe, even above the names of 
poets, patriots, soldiers, and statesmen, those of WycUffe, 
Tyndale, Coverdale, and the rest ; yet with no feeHng of 
idolatry, but in a spirit akin to that of St. Paul, who, when 
speaking of those who rejoiced in his labours and success, 
devoutly acknowledged, " They glorified God in me." 

The persons engaged in the earlier period were not the 
great, the noble, the dignified in the world's estimation, but 
men for the most part poor, persecuted, and despised. 
Prouder names follow in the wake of these. " God hath 
chosen the foohsh things of the world to confound the wise ; 
and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to con- 
foimd the things which are mighty ; and base things of the 
world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, 
and things which are not, to bring to nought things that 
are : that no flesh should glory in His presence." 

There can be no reasonable doubt that the pre-eminence 
which distinguishes the history of England among the states 
of Europe for the last three hundred years is to be attributed 



Results of the Translation. 



259 



largely to the wide circulation of this volume, and the Bible- 
reading habits of the people. It has proved a pillar of strength, 
bearing up and giving stability to public and private virtue — 
to patriotism, loyalty, obedience, and domestic affection. 
It is a fountain of light and love, illuminating the intellect 
and purifying the heart — the true palladiuai of our liberties, 
our peace, and our prosperity. 




Chapter^ xiii. 



THE BIBLE IN THE SEVENTEENTH AND 
EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES. 




Iypogbaphy and bookbinding were matters 
regarded with much, interest in the sixteenth 
and seventeenth centuries. The perfection of 
the art of printing as soon as it was invented 
has been noticed in a former chapter ; and some 
early Bibles exhibit charming specimens of old 
EngHsh letters, sharply cut and carefully impressed 
upon thick, handsome paper. The binding was often 
worthy of the contents, embossed and gilded morocco being 
employed for the purpose. Black letter gave place to Eoman 
before the end of the sixteenth century. The quarto Geneva 
Bibles and Testaments, printed upon thin paper and exhibit- 
ing rude woodcuts, did by no means equal in beauty their 
foho predecessors of the Coverdale and Great Bible class. 

In the seventeenth century we meet with notices of 
handsome volumes, bound and ornamented for special pur- 
poses — for royal use, for service in parish churches, and for 
commemorating private friendship. Illustrations are at hand 
on all three points ; and as they are presented they" suggest 



Bookbinding. 261 

pictures, not only of persons and incidents witli which 
they are immediately connected, but of family groups in 
episcopal palaces, baronial halls and chambers, of rich citizens 
gathered round tall folios iu rich covers, ly^g on window- 
seats, beneath the light of sun-rays beaming through many- 
coloured panes. 

Notes are preserved of costly charges expended on 
royal copies. In a bookbiuder's bill for his majesty King 
James's Chapel there are the foUowiag items : " 1619, three 
large church Bibles, gilded, with silk strings, £9. Two 
Bibles for his majesty's use, fair gilded, with sOk strings, £8." 
Considering the value of money at that time, we have 
evidence of the ornate description of these royal volumes.* 
Another account shows that less was expended on books 
intended for the royal family. The charge for binding a 
large Bible in foho, for the Lady Ehzabeth — afterwards the 
ill-fated Palatine Electress and Bohemian Queen — ^was only 
the modest amount of thirty shillings. f 

Bishop Laud, on a Eochester visitation, 1634, inquired 
into the state of church furniture in his diocese, and one of 
the answers is to this effect : " For our church books we 
conceive that no church in England hath newer or fairer ; 
for our great church Bible, and all our service books being 
bought not above one year since, or little more, and all our 
prick song-books have been pricked out new and true, and 
fairly bound, within the same time, to the great charge of 
the Church." J 

A splendid edition was issued in 1638 by the famous 
printers Buck and Daniel. Sir Matthew Hale left Eichard 
Baxter forty shillings in token of his love. With the forty 
shillings, he says, " I purchased the largest Cambridge Bible, 

* Eeport of Hist. MSS. Com. vol. iv. p. 31 1. + IbiS,., p. 282. % Ibid., p. 146.. 



262 Our English Bible. 

and put his picture before it, as a momiment to my house. 
But waiting for my own death, I gave it to Sir William Ellis, 
who laid out about ten pounds to put it into a more curious 
cover and keep it for a monument in his honour. " "A shrewd 
observer of manners and habits tells of a lady in Edinburgh, 
who had fallen into poorer circumstances, and hved in a 
room on the highest stair of Covenant Close, that she never 
read a chapter, except out of a Cambridge Bible printed by 
Daniel, and bound in embroidered velvet."* 

These are trifles not without interest ; and there may be 
added to them another notice of the fact already mentioned 
that the printing of the Bible was a monopoly — a circum- 
stance which repressed private enterprise, but which some 
adventurous people sought to evade by getting the Scriptures 
printed abroad, and then importing them for home circula- 
tion. An entry in the calendar of the House of Lords 
brings to hght a case of this land, and the consequent trouble 
in which the invader of the patent involved himself. 

" 1640. January 15, petition of Thomas CovTper. Some 
years since petitioner imported 850 Bibles, 2,000 prayer-books, 
and 750 psalm-books, of the orthodox translation, which 
were seized at the Custom House and placed in the custody 
of the registrar of the High Commission Court. Petitioner 
has taken steps to recover possession — ^prays that in order 
the books may not be lost they may be removed to a room 
which he has hired, near the parhament-house, of which he 
shall have one key, and some officer of the House another."! 

A more important matter is brought to hght in the Eeport 
of the Historical mss. Commission. The library of Trinity 
College, Dublin, contains an EngUsh version of the Bible by 

* Baxter's Worta, vol. i. p. 337. Scott's UeAgauntl&t. Eadie, vol. ii. p. 296. 
f House of Lords Calendar ; Eeport of Hist. mss. Com., vol. iv- p. 40. 



Ussher's Version. 263 

Ambrose Ussher, brother to the archbishop of that name, in 
three volumes, belonging to about the year 1620. The author 
must have been a somewhat eccentric person, if we may 
judge of him from the " epistle dedicatorie" to James i. He 
considered his work would \>_q acceptable to one who had 
promoted the execution of the so-called Authorized Version, 
and who must be considered as desiring the perfection of 
such work. " Though your majesty," he says) " being pre- 
sently desirous of your dinner, have dined aforehand, yet if, 
after dinner, come in some dainty dish unto you, and well 
prepared, you assuredly will take the taste of it." The writer 
had evidently a good opiaion of what he offered. " Your 
majesty at your first coming were sharp set, and content 
with any, and the cook hasted you out a reasonable sudden 
meal ; in the whiles you have been dining on that, I have 
leisurely and seasonably dressed and served out this other 
dish." Then he goes on to say that there are two things 
essential to a new version, a change of matter and a change 
of words. He had attempted both, and had amended " a 
thousand chief places," and " the worth of one place found 
out is weU understood of them who in the Scriptures think 
to have eternal hfe — every place is a new Virginia to dwell 
in." As to matter, he said, he opposed to the new transla- 
tion not old renderings already weighed and rejected, but 
fresh ones " that yield new consideration, and that fight not 
only with our English Bible, but likely vntn aU translated 
Bibles, in what language soever." This brother of the 
archbishop was no conservative, but a determined advocate 
for what is new. As to words, what he did, said he, was this, 
to find and set down " due and just Enghsh phrase ia all 
congruity, squared to the original, and flatly incident." The 
prophets were perfect orators, and the translator, therefore, 



264 Our English Bible. 

sought out words, " that like as in water, face answereth to 
face, as Solomon speaketh, so they answer in appearance 
form to form." This, he says, was carefully observed by 
some of the translators of the "authorized Bible ; " but "other 
some, and therein deserving blame, in the body itseK of their 
translations strangely keep the very original specialities and 
properties, and so clap them into the text." Yet he observes : 
" The Hebrew tongue, as wanting cases, doth resemble our 
common languages, and seldom doth admit any more dislo- 
cation than do they." 

"Whether this dedication ever met the eyes of King James 
does not appear : at all events, judging from extracts in the 
report, one would not highly estimate Ambrose Ussher's 
labour, though after all he said, the changes made by him 
are not so new and startling as might be expected. A few 
verses taken from the first chapter of Genesis run thus : 

"And the earth was disordered and without shape (voyd 
and disordered), and darkness was upon ye face of ye deepe, 
and the Spirite of God overspread [the words "moved in" are 
substituted above] ye face of ye waters." " And God sayd, 
Lett there be a firmament in the middes of ye waters, and 
lett it distinguish between waters and waters. So God made 
ye firmament, and it distinguished between ye waters yt 
were beneath the firmament, and betweene the waters that 
were above the firmament, and it was so." " Then God 
sayd, Lett the earth bud forth ye bud of herbe, seeding seed, 
ye fruitefuU tree bearing fruite after his Icinde wliich hath his 
seed in it, upon ye earth, and it was so." " Then God sayd, 
Lett the waters spawne forth ye spawne of living creature [the 
words "bring forth in abundance every creeping thing yt hath 
life " are interlined], and lett ye foule flie upon ye earth, upon 
ye face of ye firmament [" ye open firmament " interUned] of 



"Souldiers Pocket Bible." 265' 

heaven. And God created the great whales, and euery hving 
thing yt creepeth ["yt hueth and moveth" interhned] which 
ye waters brought forth, in their kinde, and every winged 
[feathered] fonle, according to his kinde. And God saw yt it 
was good [well]." "And God blessed them, saying, Prnctifie 
and increase." "And God sayd, Lett ye earth bring forth ye 
hving creature [thing] after his Mnde, ye cattle and every 
creapiag thing ["yt which creapeth," inserted above], and 
the beast of the earth [animal terrestrie] after his kind, and 
it was so."* 

These specimens suf&ce to show that the author marred 
rather than mended what had been done by the six com- 
panies ; and a comparison of his renderings with those 
they were intended to rival serves to iacrease our wonder, 
how, in an age when so many oddities entered men's minds, 
our translators completely escaped them. 

Twenty-three years after the Archbishop of Armagh's 
brother had completed his Bibhcal toils, a very different 
method of Bibhcal instruction was adopted. As soon as the 
civil war broke out, the Parhamentarians deternuned to pro- 
vide the anny with portions of Scripture. It is often supposed 
that Cromwell's Ironsides had each a complete Bible put into 
his possession ; the supposition no doubt has arisen from 
the fact that a pubhcation was issued at an early period of 
the great strife with the following title : " The Souldier's 
Pocket Bible : printed at London by G. B. and E. W. for 
G. C, 1643, containing the most (if not all) those places 
contained in Holy Scripture which doe shew the quahfications 
of his iimer man, that is a fit souldier to fight the Lord's 
battels, both before the fight, in the fight, and after the 

* Hist. MSS. Com. vol. iv. pp. 589-9. 



2,66 Our English Bible. 

fight, which Scriptures are reduced to severall heads, and 
fully applyed to the souldier's several occasions, and so may 
supply the want of the whole Bible, which a souldier cannot 
conveniently carry about him : and may be also usefall for 
any Christian to meditate upon, now in this miserable time 
of warre. Imprimatur, Edm. Calamy." The texts are almost 
all taken from the Genevan version. The title fully explains 
the nature and object of the work. 

Not complete Bibles, but tracts of sixteen pages, were dis- 
tributed through the army ; and of them no original copy is 
known to exist, except that which may be found in the 
British Museum ; but, of course, the fact of such slender 
provision of BibUcal instruction being made for the invin- 
cible troopers does not preclude the belief that many a man 
carried in the pocket of his buff leathern coat an entire Bible 
or Testament, which he would devoutly read at his " tent 
door in the heat of the day."* 

In reference to the printing of Bibles at that period and 
at a still earlier period, it should be noticed that patents did 
not secure correctness, and complaints were made relative to 
inaccuracies. In the first and second issues of our present 
version many errors are found — some very gross. " Judas'' 
stands for ' ' Jesus ; " " Christ ' ' is spelt ' ' Chldst ;" we find "Let 

• There is also in the British Mueeum another Scripture tract, entitled "The 
Christian Soldier's Penny Bible, shewing from the Holy SAriptuies the soldier's 
duty and encouragement. A brief coUeotion of pertinent Scriptures under xx. 
heads, for the soldier's or seaman's pocket when he is not furnished with or cannot 
well carry a larger volume in time of war. London, printed by E. Smith for Sam. 
Wade, 1693." It is a reprint of " The Souldier's Pocket Bible," a little altered. 
In reference to this publication the following American extract is given: "Not 
less than five distinct editions have been issued here since the slaveholders' rebel- 
lion broke out in this country. The first American issue for our army consisted 
of 20,000 copies, and, I presume, 50,000 or more have already been circulated. — 
Boston, Miissaohusetts, October 23, 1861." 



Errors in Printing. 267 

■ my people go that they may serve thee" for " serve me." The 
edition of 1613 is worse, and there may be found " the fast of 
the beast" for " the fat of the beast ; '' " shall glean " for 
" shaU not glean; " " in the throne of David" for " in the 
room of David ; " " shined through darkness" for " walked 
through darkness ; " "dehghted herseK " for " deffled herself ; " 
and " I praise you " for "I praise you not." The hst 
could easily be enlarged.* Nor did the invasion of the 
patent promote accuracy. In 1644 some members of the 
Westminster Assembly complained to the House of 
Commons "that there were errors and corruptions in divers 
Bibles of an impression from beyond the seas," and they 
prayed the House to suppress the circulation of them. It was 
resolved, in consequence, that foreign Bibles should not 
be sold until they had been "passed and allowed." It was 
stated in 1646, at Amsterdam, that an Enghsh printer there 
had sent out in five years 40,000 copies ; thdt his last edition 
consisted of 12,000 copies, and that altogether in that Dutch 
city 150,000 Enghsh Bibles had been printed.f 

But whatever the state of printing might be, the seven- 
teenth century in England may be fitly described as a Bible 
age. From the beginning to the end of that period attention 
was paid to the study and criticism of the Enghsh version. 
Large editions were pubhshed and circulated; everywhere 
the book might be found, and it acquired more than ever a 
character of national importance. In this respect a com- 
parison between the seventeenth century and the preceding 
one is curious and instructive. Until about the middle of 
the sixteenth century, not an Enghsh Bible or Testament 
was printed within the corners of the kingdom ; other books 

* See Eadie, toI. ii. p. 291-294. t I^id; P- 297. 



268 Our English Bible. 

issued from the press, but not the Book of Life. Now 
printing offices in London teemed with copies in various 
forms, to slake the thirst of an ever-increasing demand. 
Down to the death of Henry viii., and indeed to the end of 
Ehzabeth's reign, the universities, as such, had taken no 
leading part in the work of translation. None of the repre- 
sentative scholars of Oxford or Cambridge are found among 
the earlier editors ; but now the flower of those schools of 
learning appear in connection with the Authorized Version, 
which owed much more to the great national seminaries 
than to any rulers in Church or State. For fifty years in the 
preceding century the vernacular Scriptures, save within a 
short interval, had been forbidden to the common people ; and 
when a Bible or Testament was in anybody's possession it 
had to be ingeniously secreted and read by stealth ; now 
copies were to be seen everyvrhere, not only in the bishop's 
hall or the nobleman's mansion, but in the citizen's tene- 
ment and the peasant's cottage. The Bible — which before 
the Eeformation was established, andwhilst Eomanist services 
were more or less strictly observed, formed no conspicuous 
object in the cathedral and parish church — was now, through- 
out a hundred years, to be seen on the reading-desk where 
Episcopalian worship was celebrated, and in the pulpit of the 
Presbyterian and the Congregationahst also ; amidst the con- 
troversies and battles of the age, the Enghsh Bible did really 
serve as a bond of union between church and church, class 
and class, man and man. The Anglo-Cathohc and Puritan, 
the Prelatist and the Presbyterian, the Independent and the 
Baptist, for the most part adopted the Authorized Version, 
though amongst Nonconformists of different shades a pre- 
ference for the translation by the Genevan exiles continued 
to Hnger. In many cases the Roundhead used the same 



A Bible Age. 269 

edition as the Cavalier. It might be found in the camps 
of two hostile armies, strikiag, amidst the clang of war, 
a note of union, " On earth peace, good will toward 
men." And it is worth observiag that at the installation 
of OHver Cromwell as Lord High Protector of England 
a copy of the Enghsh version, " ornamented with bosses 
and clasps richly gUt," was presented to his highness 
by the Speaker of the Commons, with these remarkable 
words : " The Bible is a book that contains the Holy 
Scriptures, ia which you have the happiness to be well versed. 
This Book of Life consists of two Testaments, the Old and 
the New. The first shows Christum velatum, the second 
Christum revelatum, Christ veiled and revealed. It is the 
Book of books, and doth contain both precepts and examples 
for good government." * 

It does not appear that any Bible had been presented 
to an Enghsh sovereign at his coronation. The story 
respecting Edward vi. related in this volume, whatever its 
claims may be on our belief, does not indicate that any 
Bible was used on that occasion. In records of the 
crowning of Ehzabeth, James, and Charles i., no mention 
is made of the sacred volume as given to them at the time, 
nor is there any accoimt of such a ceremony in connexion 
with Charles 11. and James 11. But what had been done 
under the Commonwealth was renewed at the Eevolution ; 
and ever since the coronation of WiUiam iii.t the Enghsh 
Bible has been laid on the altar of Westminster Abbey amidst 
the regaha, and placed in the sovereign's hands, as the 
holiest of offerings. The Puritan precedent has been 

* Forster'a Statesmen of the Commonwealth, vol. t. App. D. p. 423. 
t " This part of the ceremony was introduced (I believe for the first time) at the 
coronation of King WiUiam and Qneeu Mary." — Maskell, vol. iii. p. 199. 



270 Our English Bible. 

adopted by the Church of England ; and thus the English 
Bible binds together successive Governments, and hallovrs 
the hne of modern princes on the English throne. 

Although these pleasant generahzations are based 
on sufficient facts, it remains to be noticed that in some 
quarters there existed discontent in reference to the state of 
Enghsh Bibles. It has even been alleged that in some 
editions the text was tampered with by sectaries, who 
sought by certain alterations to give a Divine sanction to 
their own views. It is said, as reported by Isaac D'lsraeli, 
that Field received a present of i£l,500 from the Independ- 
ents to corrupt a text in Acts vi. 3, the corruption being 
the easiest possible, the putting a " ye " instead of a " we." 
But Field had nothing whatever to do with the error, for it 
had appeared fifteen years before, and is first found in 
the Cambridge folio of 1638, revised by Church divines. 
The story bears on it the stamp of party prejudice.* 

Yet the Puritans of the middle of the seventeenth century, 
Hke their predecessors m the middle of the sixteenth, were fond 
of annotations, and wished to foUow the Genevan fashion. 
' ' Divers of the printers and stationers of L ondon were induced 



* Curiosities of Lit. vol. iii. p. 427 ; Eadie, vol. ii. p. 299. 

In 1653 a little pearl Bible was issued, and in some of the copies there are 
these errors,—" Know ye not that the unrighteous shall inherit the kingdom of 
God?" 1 Cor. Ti. 9. — "Te cannot serve and mammon" (God left out), Matt. 
Ti. 24, 

An edition of 1631, described in the Catalogue of the Cawton Exhilition, p. 162, is 
called the " Wicked Bible," from the fact of the negative being left out in the 
seventh commandment. Laud fined the printer ^6300, with which he is said to 
have purchased a fount of Greek type forOriord. A German Bible just a century 
later contains the same error. In reference to this Mr. Stevens quotes from 
Cotton Mather, that " a blundering typographer made him exclaim, in a Bible 
printed before 1702, ' Printers have persecuted me without a cause ' " (Paa. cxix. 
161.) 



A nnotations. 271 

to petition the House of Commons for licence to print them 
after some, revision fitting to the present volume." The 
request was granted in 1644, and letters were directed to 
certain divines to undertake the task ; and hence arose 
the well-known work improperly styled the Assembly's 
Annotations ; others besides members were employed upon 
it, and it was never formally sanctioned by the Westminster 
divines.* StiU more characteristic was the Puritan dis- 
Hke to the Apocrypha, in which even Dr. Lightfoot shared. 
Preaching before the House of Commons in 1643, from 
the last verse in Malachi, he said, " Thus sweetly and 
nearly should the two Testaments join together, but that 
the wretched Apocrypha doth thrust in between, like the 
two cherubim in the temple oracle, as with their outer 
wings they touch the two sides of the house, from ' In 
the beginning ' to ' Come, Lord Jesus ; ' so with their 
inner, they would touch each other, the end of the law 
vnth. the beginning of the gospel, did not this patchery 
of human invention divorce them asunder." The aver- 
sion had so prevailed that the Apocrypha began to be 
dropped at a still earher period ; indeed, as early as 1633, 
such Bibles were becoming fashionable, for Chief Justice 
Eichardson interposed. On behalf of the Recorder of Sahsbury, 
suspected of Puritanism, saying, " I have been long ac- 
quainted vpith him ; he sitteth by me sometimes at church ; 
he brought a Bible to the church with him (I have seen it) 
VTith the Apocrypha and Common Prayer Book ia it, not of the 
new cut." And here it may be added, that Lightfoot, with 
his dishke to the Apocry3)ha, coupled a desire for a new 
revision of the canonical books, and urged in another 

» Calamy'a Airidg. vol. i. p. 86. 



I'ji Our English Bible. 

sermon before the House of Commons, delivered in 1645, " a 
review and survey of the translation of the Bible, that the 
three nations might come to understand the proper and 
genuine study of the Scriptures by an exact, vigorous, and 
lively translation." 

The matter came before the House of Commons in 1657. 
On the 16th of January the Grand Committee for Eehgion 
ordered a sub-committee to confer with Dr. Walton, Dr. 
Cudworth, and others, respecting translations and impres- 
sions. They met at Whitelock's house in Chelsea the next 
month. He says, " They had the most learned men in the 
Oriental tongues to consult vsdth in this great business, and 
divers excellent and learned observations of some mistakes 
in the translations of the Bible in Enghsh, which yet was 
agreed to be the best of any translation in the world."* 
This statement, perhaps, includes what followed at a later 
date. Mr. Bampfield made a report on the 11th of June 
from the Grand Committee of Eehgion, in consequence of 
which a sub-committee was empowered to send for godly 
and learned ministers and laymen, to consult respecting a 
better version of the Psalms. At the same time they noticed 
that the Scriptures had been grossly misprinted. " Know 
ye not, that the unrighteous shall inherit the kingdom of 
God?" instead of "not inherit;" "Neither yield ye your 
members as instruments of righteousness unto sin," instead 
of " unrighteousness," are alleged by the committee as 
instances. The committee further noticed the entire omis- 
sion of the words in John ix. 21, "Or who hath opfened his 
eyes, we know not." 

Some years ago a friend pointed out to me a document 

* Whitelook's Memorials, p. 654. 



Proposed New Version. 273 

iu the State Paper Office, wliich, proved to be a draft bill for 
revising the Enghsh translation. It recites that Dr. Hill 
charged the translators of the Authorized Version with 
making the New Testament speak a prelatical language ; 
and.it states that the most learned translators have found it 
necessary again and again to revise their work. Notice is 
taken of Ainsworth's Pentateuch, the Psalms, and Solo- 
mon's Song, "greatly commended by many of the learned." 
Then follows a Bill "for the reforming, rectifying, and 
repairing of the former injury to the new translation, and 
for preventing of so great inconveniences of such dangerous 
consequence, and for the furtherance (what in us Heth) and 
the benefit and education of many. Be it (enacted) that no 
person or persons whatsoever, within the dominions of 
England, Scotland, and Ireland, vyithout the approbation of 
persons hereafter named, or to be named by authority, shall 
presume to print or pubhsh any such translation of the 
Bible or New Testament." 

Dr. Owen,* Dr. Cudworth, Mr. Jenkins, Mr. WiUiam 
Greenhill, Mr. Samuel Slater, Mr. Wilham Cowper, Mr. 
Henry Jeffrey, Mr. Ealph Venninge, and Mr. John Eow, 
were authorized to search and observe wherein the last 
translation " appears to be wronged by the prelates, or 
printers, or others ;" that such places might be rectified, 
and the most material defects removed ; and that these 
persons should examine Ainsworth's translations, and those 
made by themselves or others, seeking the best assistance 
for the general good, and should also consider " the mar- 
ginal readings in Bibles, whether any of them should 
rather be in the Une." Dr. Goodwin, Dr. Tuckney, and 

* The name of Goodwin ia altered into that of John Owen. Caryl's name is 
struck out. 

T 



2 74 Our English Bible. 

Mr. Joseph Caryl, were appointed supervisors, witli this 
large power entrusted to them, " that what these persons 
shaU so approve of shall accordingly be printed and 
published for the general edification and benefit of the 
whole nation, to be read both privately and in the public 
congregation." 

That party feehng entered into the spirit of the enter- 
prise is manifest from this document, and that the bill came 
to nothing is also clear.* 

Nothing was done by authority in the work of revision 
at the end of the Commonwealth. Bibles and Testaments 
remained the same as before, save as printers paid more or 
less attention to the typography. But the Book of Common 
Prayer, in the translation of Scripture, exhibits some changes, 
only in the way of conformity to King James's Bible. 
The Psalter, indeed, remained as before in Coverdale's 
version. " When the last changes in the Prayer Book were 
made, it was foimd, it is said, smoother to sing ; but this is 
not a full account of the matter, and it cannot be mere 
famiharity which gives to the Prayer Book Psalter, with aU 
its errors and imperfections, an incomparable tenderness 
and sweetness. Bather we may believe that in it we can 
yet find the spirit of him whose work it mainly is, full of 
humihty and love, not heroic or creative, but patient to 
accomplish, by God's help, the task which had been set 
him to do, and therefore best in harmony with the tenor of 
our daily lives."t The introductory sentences to Morning 

* The doomnent belongs to Domestic Interreg., Bundle 662, f. 12. I have 
printed the whole in the appendix to my Church of the Gommomoealth, p. 543. 
Part is given in Dr. Eadie'.s English Bible, vol. ii. p. 341, without any clue as 
to where it may be found. He omita the opening paragraph, which is important. 

f Westoott, Hist. p. 368. 



Preaching Bibles. 275 

and Bvening Prayer, and tlie Epistles and Gospels for the 
Sundays of the year, were now taken from the Authorized 
Version. 

In the latter part of the seventeenth century a number 
of thin square volumes were printed for the convenience of 
divines, who used them in the pulpit ; hence they came to be 
called Preaching Bibles. The paper was thin, the type 
distinct, and a few notes were sprinkled over the margin. 
These were often incorrectly executed, and indeed succes- 
sive editions of the Bible in different forms exhibit various 
readings, attributable to carelessness or to the universal 
law of human imperfection. 

In 1683 the text was corrected, and many references to 
parallel passages were added by Dr. Scattergood; in 1700 
a fine edition was pubhshed in large foho, under the 
direction of Dr. Tenison, Archbishop of Canterbury, with 
chronological dates and index by Bishop Lloyd, and 
accurate tables of Scripture weights and measures by 
Bishop Cumberland ; this edition, however, is said to 
abound in typographical errors. A more complete revision 
was made by Dr. Blayney, under the direction of the vice- 
chancellor and delegates of the Clarendon Press at Oxford. 
In his edition, printed both in quarto and foho in 1769, the 
punctuation was thoroughly revised ; the words printed in 
itahcs were compared with the Hebrew and Greek originals ; 
proper names, to the etymology of which allusions are made 
in the text, were translated and entered in the margin ; 
summaries of chapters, and running titles at the top of 
each page, are corrected ; material errors in the chronology 
are rectified; and the marginal references re-examined and 
corrected, vsdth 30,496 new ones added. From the pains 



276 Otir English Bible. 

bestowed on this edition it came to be the standard from 
which subsequent impressions were executed. 

Another attempt in the same line seems to have been 
stni more successful. The booksellers of the metropolis, 
having applied to his majesty's printers to undertake a 
new and handsome edition, confided its execution to Mr. 
George Woodfall in 1804. The copy selected for the pur- 
pose was the current Cambridge edition, with which the 
new edition agrees page for page. The proofs were read 
twice, and compared with the Oxford impression then in 
use, and were then transmitted to the Eev. Launcelot 
Sharpe, by whom they were read again, and compared 
with Dr. Blayney's 4to. edition of 1769. After the proofs 
returned for press had been corrected, the formes were 
placed upon the press at which they were to be worked, 
and another proof was taken. This was read by Mr. 
WoodfaU's superintendent, and afterwards compared by 
Mr. W. himseK with Dr. Blayney's edition, and any errors 
previously overlooked wgre corrected, the formes not having 
been removed from the press after the last proofs had been 
taken off. By this precaution was avoided a danger of fre- 
quent occurrence and considerable magnitude, arising from 
a removal of the formes from a proof-press to those on 
which the sheets were to be finally worked off. Of this 
edition, which was ready for pubhcation in 1806, five 
hundred copies were printed on imperial 4to., two thousand 
on royal, and three thousand on medium quarto size. In 
the course of printing from the Cambridge copy a large 
number of gross errors were discovered in the latter ; while 
the errors in the common Oxford editions were not so few 
as twelve hundred. The London edition of 1806 being 
exhausted, a new impression was put to press in 1810, 



Circulation of the Scriptures. 277 

which was completed with equal beauty and accuracy in 
1812, and pubhshed in 1813.* 

The circulation of the Bible is intimately connected with 
the subject of this history. Before the end of the seventeenth 
century efforts were made to supply the poor with copies 
of the Enghsh Scriptures. Lord "Wharton, a benevolent 
Puritan nobleman, who hved at Wooburn House, in the 
county of Bucks, directed by instructions, dated April 24, 
1693, that 1,050 Bibles, with the singing psalms, should be 
provided for distribution in Yorkshire, Westmoreland, Cum- 
berland, and Buckinghamshire. t The Assembly's Catechism 
was to be distributed in hke manner. The Christian 
Knowledge Society, instituted in 1698, and the Society for 
the Propagation of the Gospel, instituted in 1701, promoted 
the dissemination of Bibles and Testaments. One private 
trust at least, J in the course of the same century, took up 
the same object, and a hke purpose no doubt animated 
many Christian minds ; but it was not until the commence- 
ment of the present century, that any large combined 
cathoMc effort was made for the universal diffusion of the 
Word of God, without note or comment. The Eev. Thomas 
Charles, of Bala, in Decem.ber, 1802, entertained " the idea 
of having a Bible Society esfcabUshed in London on a 
similar basis to that of the Eeligious Tract Society, — i. e., the 
union of different denominations in a common work." It was 
soon resolved " that it would be highly desirable to stir up 
the pubHc mind to the dispersion of Bibles generally, and 
that a paper in a magazine to that effect might be singu- 

* This account ia taken from Home's Introduction to the Bible, 5th Edit,, 
vol. ii. p. 253. I cannot find it in the last edition, 
f Hist, of Crendon Lane Meeting Souse, Wycombe. 
X Coward's Trust, of which I am an administrator. 



2/8 Our English Bible. 

larly useful." At length a committee met, when the object 
of the intended Society was maturely considered, and it 
was unanimously determined " to promote the circulation 
of the Holy Scriptures in foreign countries, and in those 
parts of the British dominions for which adequate pro- 
vision is not yet made, it being understood that no English 
translation of the Scriptures will be gratuitously circulated 
by the Society in Great Britain ; " and on the 1st February, 
1803, an important minute appears, — " That the transla- 
tion of the Scriptures estabHshed by pubHc authority be 
the only one in the EngUsh language to be adopted by this 
Society."* 

' Minutes of the Committee of the Eeligious Tract Society. 




Chi 



lAPTER XIY. 
REVISION OF THK ENGLISH VERSION. 




HE idea of a Eevision of our English 
Bible at the period of the Commonwealth 
we have seen came to nothing; and in 
the eighteenth century it attracted no 
large measure of attention. There were, 
however, learned men who saw the 
desirableness of attempting the object, 
and expressed an opinion to that effect. 
They felt that BibHcal criticism had 
made such strides, that so many mss. had been collected 
for the rectification of the original text, that the Hebrew of 
the Old Testament and the Greek of the New were being 
more carefully examined than they had ever been ; that 
the learned labours of much more than a hundred years 
had thrown additional light on the meaning of revelatiou, 
and that therefore these advantages ought to be made 
available for the improvement of our vernacular Scriptures. 
They appreciated the excellency of what is called the 
Authorized Version ; but as there are spots even in the sun, 



28o Our Enzlish Bible, 



'ti- 



they did not think it presumptuous, nor any just cause of 
offence to the most enthusiastic admirers of what was 
finished in 1611, to assert that it contained obvious im- 
perfections, which ought to be removed. Amongst those 
who took this view were Waterland, Blayney, Lowth, and 
Kennicott, not to mention others. But it was a long time 
before public opinion was ripe for a due consideration of 
the question. 

In the meanwhile distinguished scholars issued versions 
of particular books, accompanied by explanatory notes, and 
more or less of critical discussion. Lowth's translation of 
Isaiah, Blayney's of Jeremiah, Newcome's of the Minor 
Prophets, and (in the present century Henderson's version of 
all these books) also Campbell's work on the Gospels, and 
Macknight's on the Epistles, may be regarded as produc- 
tions of a tentative character preparing for a larger and a 
united effort. Boothroyd's Bible, AJford's Testament, and 
other books might be added to the list. The perusal of 
these volumes, though on some they produced the impres- 
sion, and not vnthout reason, of the superiority of the 
common version as a whole, on many they left the convic- 
tion that it was a great pity so noble a version as that 
universally used should not be made still more admirable, 
through a judicious use of modern scholarship for the 
purpose. More and more it came to be seen that objec- 
tions to a revision of King James's Bible were no more 
vahd than had been objections to a revision of the Great 
Bible, or of Matthew's Bible, or of any other ancient 
one. Every merely human work — and translation is 
necessarily such a work — it was felt must admit of 
improvement, and that a careful distinction should ever 
be made bet-ween the perfect writings of men inspired, 



New Revision. 281 

and the rendering of them into a modern tongue by men 
imiTi spired. 

In 1857 appeared a Eevision of the Gospel of St. John 
by five clergymen — Dr. Barrow, Dr. Moberly, Henry AJford, 
B.D., William Gr. Humphry, b.d., and Charles J. Ellicott, 
M.A. In the preface to this pubhcation they remark, " The 
subject of the revision of the Authorized Version of Holy 
Scripture has been for some time past brought before the 
minds of men in various ways. It has been urged in Con- 
vocation and in Parhament, and has been extensively 
debated iu pubhc journals, in pamphlets, and other pub- 
hcations, and at the meetings of rehgious societies. In 
America the same subject has attracted great notice ; and 
the design of revision has been pursued with considerable 
labour by the American Bible Union. In HoUand a 
revision of the Dutch Bible has been set on foot, and is 
now in progress, under the authority and supervision of 
the Synod of the Beformed Church." " The two objects of 
this tentative revision of one Gospel," the editors stated to 
be, " the one to exhibit in the fullest, most honest, and most 
loyal manner the actual meaning of the inspired Word of 
God, allowing no subjective preferences or preconceived 
views to interfere with the simple and faithful exposition 
in Enghsh of ' the original text of Holy Scripture ; the 
other to show, as far as is compatible with this first and 
chiefest object, that the Authorized Version is iudeed a 
precious and holy possession, and that the errors of it are 
very shght and few in comparison of its many and great 
excellences." 

In the year 1858 the then Dean of Westminster, 
Dr. Trench, now Archbishop of Dublin, boldly caUed 
public attention to the subject. "It is clear," he remarks. 



282 Otir English Bible. 

" that the question, Are we, or are we not, to have a new 
translation of Scripture ? or rather — some few would 
propose this who did not wish to loosen from its anchors 
the whole religious life of the Enghsh people, — shall we, 
or shall we not, have a new revision of the Authorized 
Version ? is one which is presenting itself more and more 
familiarly to the minds of men. This, indeed, is not by 
any means the first time that this question has been 
earnestly discussed ; but that which differences the present 
agitation of the matter from preceding ones is, that on all 
former occasions the subject was only debated among 
scholars and divines, and awoke no interest in circles beyond 
them. The present is apparently the first occasion on 
which it has taken the sHghtest hold of the popular mind. 
But now indications of the interest which it is awakening 
reach us from every side. America is sending us the instal- 
ments ... of a new version as fast as she can. The wish 
for a revision has for a considerable time been working among 
Dissenters here ; by the voice of one of these it has lately 
made itself heard in Parhament, and by the mouth of a 
Eegius Professor in Convocation. Our reviews, and not 
those only which are specially dedicated to religious 
subjects, begin to deal with the question of revision. There 
are, or a little while since there were, frequent letters in the 
newspapers, urging or remonstrating against such a step — 
few of them, it is true, of much value, yet at the same 
time showing how many minds are now occupied with 
the subject. 

" On the whole I am persuaded that a revision ought to 
come ; I am convinced that it will come. Not, however, 
I would trust, as yet, for we are not as yet in any respect 
prepared for it ; the Greek and the English which should 



Discussion. 283 

enable us to bring this to a successful end might, it is feared, 
be wanting alike."* 

Difficulties are discussed, and the writer seems to grow 
more hopeful as he proceeds, recommending that the work 
of revision, when attempted, should be a united one, con- 
ducted by Churchmen and Dissenters together. Then he 
faces the question as to how such a work would be received. 
"Just as our ancestors," he rephed, "grew gradually in 
love with our present translation. Churchmen weaning them- 
selves from the Bishops' Bible, and Puritans from the Geneva, 
just as one and the other of these versions fell quite out of use, 
though hving on, the latter especially, for some time after 
they had been formally superseded by the present version. 
Churchmen and Puritans finally agreeing in the decision, 
not that the old was better, but the new, so wQl it be here. 
What amount of difficulty those who lived in the reign of 
James i. found in reconciling themselves to the change, it is 
hard to say. We have curiously httle on the subject in the 
contemporary rehgious hterature, the very absence of such 
notices seeming to verify that the difficulty was not very 
great ; but in one respect it ought to be much less now, 
inasmuch as, careful as our then translators were not to 
change wantonly for mere change's sake, still the alterations 
which they made were considerable, many times more than 
would be necessary or desirable now."t 

This cautious treatment of a difficult subject scarcely 
augured that within a little more than ten years the matter 
would be effectually taken in hand. Yet so it was. In 1870 
the work timidly desired by some, decidedly opposed by 
others, began in earnest. 

* On the Authoriaed Version of the New Testament, by E. C. Trench, d.d., 
pp. 1-3. t Ibid. p. 140. 



2 84 Our English Bible. 

On the lOth of February the then Bishop of Winchester, 
Dr. Wilberforce, brought the subject before the Upper House 
of Convocation for the Province of Canterbury, and moved 
"that a committee of both Houses be appointed to confer 
with any committee appointed by the Convocation of the 
Nortliern Province, to report upon the desirableness of a 
revision of the New Testament, whether by marginal notes 
or otherwise, in all those passages where plain and clear 
errors, whether in the Hebrew or Greek text, originally 
adopted by the translators, or in the translation made from 
the same, shall, on due investigation, be found to exist." 
After advocating a revision, he expressed this oj)inion : 
" Without for a moment doubting that among the religious 
bodies outside ourselves there are men of great learning 
and abihty, well able to help in a movement of this land, or 
who might most profitably be consulted by those to whom 
it was entrusted, I think it would not be well to join them 
in a great authoritative or of&cial action, which in this 
way would revise the translation which we put forth to 
the people of England, as being the translation of the New 
Testament." 

The Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol, in advocating a 
revision, adverted to circumstances which had led his right 
reverend brother and himself to deem it necessary now to 
take action in regard to this most weighty subject, and 
proceeded to refer to the growing desire for as correct a text 
as possible of Holy Scripture, dwelHng upon the important 
results of the late discovery of the Sinaitic MS. of the New 
Testament. The Bishop of St. David's (Dr. Thirlwall) 
thought that an addition to the resolution of the Bishop of 
Winchester would be very desirable, that the Old Testament, 
as well as the New, should be revised, and did not see why 



Sermon by the Dean of Canterbury. 285 

it would not be perfectly practicable to call in the aid of 
some of the more eminent and distingnished among the 
Dissenters, as this would have the effect of reconcihng the 
minds of different religious bodies to this great undertaking. 
In Ulustrattng the importance of what was contemplated, he 
entered into some details, which excited considerable con- 
troversy, not needing to be described here. There was 
further discussion carried on by the Bishop of Llandaff, 
who pointed out passages in the Old Testament needing 
revision ; and by the Bishop of Lichfield (Dr. Selwyn), who 
stated that the Wesleyan missionaries had successfully aided 
in the revision of the version for the natives of New Zealand. 
The Bishop of Lincoln (Dr. Wordsworth) stated that he 
was not prepared for any alteration of the text ; and he 
dwelt at some length upon the value of the Authorized 
Version. The Bishops of Sahsbury (Dr. Moberly) and 
Exeter (Dr. Temple) supported the motion, and it was at 
last unanimously agreed to adopt the Bishop of Winchester's 
resolution, adding the revision of the Old Testament to that 
of the New. 

The resolution was presented to the Lower House on the 
10th of February, and members were immediately appointed 
to confer on the matter with those selected for the same 
purpose by the Upper House. 

On the 13th of the same month Dr. Alford, Dean of 
Canterbury, brought the subject under pubhc notice in a 
sermon from the pulpit of St. Paul's Cathedral. "We in 
this land," he said, " possess a version of Holy Scriptures 
which may challenge comparison for faithfulness, for sim- 
phcity, and for majesty with any that the world has ever 
seen. Perhaps its chief defect is that it admits of being too 
highly praised. Its pure use of our native tongue, the 



286 Our English Bible. 

exquisite balance and music of its sentences, the stately 
march of its periods, the hold on the memory taken by the 
very alliterations and antitheses, which were the manner of 
writiag when it was made, — these and a hundred other 
charms which invest almost every verse, make us love 
it even to excess ; and when we intensify all these claims to 
our affection by the fact that it has been for centuries, and 
is now, the vehicle to this great Enghsh race of all that is 
pure, and holy, and lovely, and of good report, — the first 
lesson of infancy, the guide of mature life, the comforter of 
siclaiess and death, — we can hardly be surprised that many 
and some of the best among us refuse to see its faults, and 
are unable to contemplate with any content the prospect of 
their being corrected. It is a spirit for which we ought to 
be deeply thankful, this earnest and affectionate cleaving to 
the English version of the Scriptures. 

" The character and spirit of our version are all that we 
can desire. But it is utterly impossible for any one capable 
of judging to deny that it is disfigured by numerous blemishes, 
far too important to be put by or condoned. The gravest of 
these are due to manifest errors in rendering, — errors about 
which there could be but one opinion among Biblical scholars 
of all religious views. Others have arisen from principles 
adopted and avowed by the translators themselves, as, for 
instance, from the unfortunate one of allowing a number of 
apparently equivalent EngHsh words an equal right to 
represent one and the same word in the original, whereby 
very important passages have been disguised and confused. 
Others, again, owe their source to causes which have come 
into operation since the version was made. Certain words 
have, as time has gone on, passed into new meanings. 
Others, which could formerly be read without offence, have 



Report of Convocation. 287 

now by their very occurrence become stumbling-blocks, and 
tend to remove all solemnity, and even all chance of fair 
audience, from the passages where they occur. Some few 
blemishes may also be due (and it is hardly possible alto- 
gether to put by this source) to doctrinal or ecclesiastical 
bias on the part of the translator." 

Taking up the question, How shall the revision be accom- 
phshed? he rephes : " Such a work should no more be done 
by one section of the Christian Church than by one man. 
The same concurrence and conflict of thought, the. same 
variety of experience, the same differing shades of feeling 
and apprehension which render many men requisite for the 
work, render also many churches requisite." 

On May 3, a report from the committee appointed by the 
two Houses was read in the Upper House, embodying these 
resolutions : 

" That it is desirable that a revision of the Authorized 
Version of the Holy Scriptures be undertaken. 

" That the revision be so conducted as to comprise both 
marginal renderings and such emendations as it may be foimd 
necessary to insert in the text of the Authorized Version. 

" That in the above resolutions we do not contemplate 
any new translation of the Bible, or any alteration of the 
language, except when, in the judgment of the most 
competent scholars, such change is necessary. 

" That in such necessary changes the style of the language 
employed in the existing version be closely followed. 

" That it is desirable that Convocation should nominate 
a body of its own members to undertake the work of revision, 
who shall be at hberty to invite the co-operation of any 
eminent for scholarship, to whatever nation or rehgious body 
they may belong." 



288 Otir English Bible, 

Eespecting these resolutions rauch discussion arose. 
The Bishop of Ely, Dr. Harold Browne, advocated caution, 
and said he was favourable to marginal readings rather than 
changes in the body of the translation : the Bishop of 
Lincoln protested against altering what had been called 
"favourite texts :" the Bishop of Bath and Wells was in 
favour of revision, and the Bishops of Llandaff and Salisbury 
commended the undertaking. 

The report of the committee came under consideration 
in the Lower House on the 3rd of May, when Canon Selwyn 
moved, and Archdeacon AHen seconded its adoption. Verbal 
alterations in the resolution were suggested by Chancellor 
Massingberd ; and Dr. Jebb thought it " a fatal thing that 
a version, of which we have been now in possession for more 
than 250 years, should be subject to the criticism of this very 
hasty and not very orthodox age." The Dean of St. Paul's, 
Dr. Mansell, maintained that, under existing circumstances, 
a revision was desirable ; Dr.- Fraser urged caution ; Arch- 
deacon Denison regarded the whole business vdth great 
suspicion, and lamented that so few members were present 
to discuss the question ; Archdeacon Eose conceived there 
was no ground to fear any rash innovations ; and another 
member was surprised that any opposition should be made 
to the resolutions of the committee. Dr. Kay beUeved there 
was unnecessary alarm at the proposal, and that the correc- 
tions made would be but few. Canon Woodgate, Canon 
Blakesley, Canon Gregory, Canon Hopkins, Archdeacon 
Clark, Lord A. Compton, and others shared in the dis- 
cussion. 

The Dean of Canterbury took an active part in the 
debate, and advocated the employment of any suitable 
assistance which could be obtained from learned Jews on 



speech by the Dean of Canterbury. 289 

the revision of the Old Testament — an idea which was 
favoured by some, but opposed by others. At a later hour 
of the day, when the number of members present had 
d imini shed, the dean, in his scarlet robe as Doctor of 
Divinity, rose at the upper end of the Jerusalem Chamber, 
and standing near the prolocutor, deHvered a speech which 
will not soon be forgotten by those who heard it. AUuding 
to the Jews, whose assistance had been a subject of debate, 
he said, " I regard that people, as we aU do, as a wonderful 
phenomenon ; but there is no part of that phenomenon 
which I regard as more wonderful than the ban that 
Providence seems to have placed upon every attempt to 
convert them to Christianity. I regard that people as 
wonderfully folded up by God's Providence for some purpose, 
and I regard them (whatever ridicule may hang about the 
expression) as a race in many respects superior to our own 
It has been well remarked by a very distinguished person 
that in most of the greatest acts of modern times that nation 
has had a part. I look forward into the dim distance of 
prophecy, and amid the mist which hangs over the end of 
the world, hghted by the settiug rays of mundane glory, and 
by the rising luminary of a world to come, I see that form, 
despised and degraded as it may now be, rising into grandeur 
and magnificence, seven men taking hold of the skirt of one 
that is a Jew, and saying, ' Let us go with you, for we have 
heard that God is vyith you ; ' and when a work is under- 
taken involviag the palladium of that race, it is out of all 
question that we should treat with scorn the idea of asking 
some of their learned men to come and teU us the meaning 
of phrases in their own language vpith which we beheve 
them to be famihar." I was present in the Jerusalem 
Chamber when my lamented friend delivered this speech, 

u 



290 Otir Etiglish Bible. 

and I felt it was imposBible for any one who heard him to 
resist the force of his vigorous eloquence. It should be 
mentioned that the Dean of Westminster, Dr. Stanley, who 
had taken a great interest in the object from the begin- 
ning, in the course of his advocacy on this occasion also 
earnestly enforced the following points — which, indeed, had 
been urged by Dean Alford : i.e., that there should be 
absolute imparfciahty in the selection of scholars to be em- 
ployed ; that the results of the labours of the committee of 
revision should be final; and that the question should not 
be brought back to the House for discussion. When the 
debate was concluded, the reported resolutions were carried 
by 23 against 7.* 

Whilst these discussions proceeded in the Houses of Con- 
voca.tion, various opinions were expressed on the subject in 
the newspapers of the day, some adverse, but most of them 
favourable. The Nonconformists could not but take a deep 
interest in so vital a question, and generally they supported 
the idea of a careful and cautious revision. 

At the annual meeting of the Congregational Union in 
the month of May, 1870, expression was given to the prevalent 
feeling of the Independent body in two papers, one read 
by Professor Newth, of New CoUege, St. John's Wood; 
and another by Professor Simon, of Spring Hill College, 
Birmingham. 

Professor Newth dwelt upon the immense amount of 
research which since the revision of 1611 had been given to 
the revision of the original texts. Also he pointed out the 
process of growth attaching to living language, and the 
consequent change which has taken place in the meaning 
of words since the time of the Tudors and Stuarts ; he 

* Chronicle of Convocation for 1870, p. 368. 



Congregational Union. 291 

likewise referred to the unfortunate fondness of the trans- 
lators for variety, leading them to render by different Enghsh 
terms words that are identical in the original. As regards 
the method of procedure in a new revision, he insisted 
upon two points : first, that in the selection of translators 
means should be adopted to secure the most approved 
BibHcal scholars in England and America, without regard 
to the denomination to which they might belong; and 
secondly, that each denomination should be invited to 
choose from amongst its own members a committee of 
correspondence, to which the revised translation should be 
submitted. 

Professor Simon read another paper, in which he advanced 
further considerations in favour of revision; that it was 
expedient, because not to accomphsh it was to be out of 
harmony with the spirit of the times ; because it was 
requisite for the sake of the faith ; because we owe it to the 
Bible itseK; and then, in reference particularly to the 
audience he addressed, because it was in harmony with 
Congregational principles. 

The committee appointed by Convocation held their 
fij:st meeting on the 25th of May, when certain resolutions 
and rules were agreed to as fundamental principles on 
which the revision was to proceed. 

The committee divided itself into two companies, — the 
one for the revision of the authorized version of the Old 
Testament, the other for the revision of the authorized 
version of the New Testament. 

The company for the revision of the authorized version of 
the Old Testament was to consist of the Bishops of St. David's 
(Dr. Thirlwall), Llandaff (Dr. OUivant), Ely (Dr. Harold 
Browne), Lincoln (Dr. Wordsworth), and Bath and Wells 



292 Our English Bible. 

(Lord Arthur C. Hervey, d.d.) ; and of the following members 
of the Lower House : Archdeacon Eose, Canon Selwyn, 
Dr. Jebb, and Dr. Kay. 

The company for the revision of the authorized version 
of the New Testament was to comprise the Bishops of 
Winchester (Dr. Wilberforce), Gloucester and Bristol (Dr. 
Ellicott), Sahsbury (Dr. Moberly) ; and the foUovdng 
members from the Lower House : the Prolocutor, the Deans 
of Canterbury (Dr. Alford) and "Westminster (Dr. Stanley), 
and Canon Blakesley. 

The first portion of the work to be undertaken by the 
Old Testament company was the revision of the authorized 
version of the Pentateuch. 

The first portion of the work to be undertaken by the 
New Testament company was the revision of the authorized 
version of the synoptical Gospels. 

The foUovsong scholars and divines were then invited to 
join the Old Testament company : Dr. W. L. Alexander, 
pastor of St. Augustine's Church, Edinburgh, and Professor 
in the Theological Hall of the Congregational Churches of 
Scotland ; T. Chenery, Professor of Arabic in the University 
of Oxford ; the Eev. Canon Cook, of Exeter ; Dr. David- 
son, Professor of Theology in the Free Church Hall, 
Edinburgh ; Dr. B. Davies, Professor in the Baptist College, 
Regent's Park, London ; Dr. Eairbairn, Professor in the 
United Presbyterian College, Glasgow ; the Rev. J. Field, 
Rector of Heigham, Norwich; Dr. Ginsburg ; Dr. Gotch, 
Principal of the Baptist College, Bristol; Archdeacon 
Harrison, Canon of Canterbury; Professor Leathes, of 
King's College, London; Professor McGill; Dr. Payne Smith, 
Canon of Christ Church, Oxford; Professor Perovnie, of 
Cambridge; Canon Plumptre, Professor in King's College, 



Committees of Revision. 293 

London; Canon Pusey, of Oxford; Dr. Wright, of the 
British Museum; and "W. Aldis Wright, of Trinity College, 
Cambridge. 

The following scholars and divines were iuvited to join 
the New Testament company : Archbishop of Dublin, Dr. 
Trench ; Dr. Angus, Principal of Baptist College, Eegent's 
Park ; Dr. Eadie, Professor in United Presbyterian College, 
Glasgow ; the Eev. P. G. Hort, Vicar of Great Wymondley, 
Herts; Canon Humphreys; Canon Kennedy, Eegius Professor 
of Greek, Cambridge ; Archdeacon Lee ; Canon Lightfoot, 
Professor at Cambridge ; Dr. MiUigan, Professor of Biblical 
Criticism, Aberdeen ; Professor Moulton, Wesleyan College, 
Eichmond ; Dr. J. H Newman, Oscott, Birmingham ; Pro- 
fessor Newth, New College, St. John's Wood; Dr. Eoberts, 
Professor, St. Andrew's University ; Eev. G. Vance Smith, 
EngHsh Presbyterian College, York; Dr. Scott, BaUiol 
College, Oxford ; Eev. F. Scrivener, Eector of Gerrans, Corn- 
wall ; Dr. Vaughan, Master of the Temple ; and Professor 
Westcott, Cambridge. 

The resolutions adopted by both companies were, — 
to introduce as few alterations as possible into the text of 
the Authorized Version consistently with faithfulness ; to 
limit as far as possible the expressions of such alterations to 
the language of the authorized and earlier versions ; to go 
twice over the portion to be revised, once provisionally, the 
second time finally ; to adopt the Text for which the evidence 
decidedly preponderates, and where it differs from that in 
the Authorized Version to indicate the fact in the margin ; 
to make or retain no change in the Text, on the second or final 
revision by each company, except by the approval of two- 
thirds of those present, but on the first revision to decide by 
simple majorities; in every case of proposed alteration which 



2 94 Oti,r English Bible. 

may give rise to discussion, to defer voting until the next 
meeting, v^henever the same is required by one-third of those 
present, the intended vote being announced in the notice ; 
to revise the headings of chapters and pages, the paragraphs, 
italics and punctuation ; and to refer on the part of each com- 
pany, when considered desirable, to divines, scholars, and 
hterary men, whether at home or abroad, for their opinions. 
It was further resolved, that the work of each company be 
communicated to the other as it is completed, in order that 
there may be as httle deviation from uniformity in language 
as possible : and that the bye-rules of each company be — to 
make all corrections in writing previously to the meeting ; to 
place all the corrections due to textual considerations on the 
left-hand margin, and all other corrections on the right- 
hand margin ; and to transmit to the chairman, in case of 
being unable to attend, the corrections proposed in the 
portion agreed upon for consideration. 

Of those members of Convocation who were originally 
appointed on the committee. Dr. "Wordsworth, Bishop of 
LincoLa, and Dr. Jebb, decHned to serve ; and amongst the 
scholars invited. Canon Pusey and Dr. J. H. Newman did 
not accept the invitation. 

On the 2nd of June there was a celebration of the Holy 
Communion in Henry vii.'s Chapel, Westminster Abbey, 
attended by members of the two companies. 

A pubhc notice early appeared from the pen of Dean 
Alford in reference to the proceedings of the companies, in 
which he said that what had passed taught a double 
lesson, of which, however, both the branches tend one way, 
and ultimately unite. " The iirst rather to leave the onward 
steps of our work to the unfolding of G-od's Providence, than 
to be restlessly and anxiously desiring them for ourselves. 



New Members of Revision Committee. 295 

Like those who have had to deal with another well-known 
' rehgious difficulty,' we encounter our greatest trouble, not 
in the matter of deeds, but of words." And the second 
lesson is the great fact that the Spirit of truth is opening the 
way before us both rapidly and surely. " Never was there 
a time in the course of history, never in the hfetime of the 
Church, when the intelligent Christian, when the faithful 
and loyal citizen, had more reason to thank Grod and to take 
courage." 

The health of this warm advocate for revision and this 
earnest labourer in the earhest stages of the enterprise 
broke down at the close of the year, and on the 12th of 
January, 1871, he departed to his rest. Others have followed 
him. Dr. WUberforce, Bishop of Winchester, died in 1873 ; 
Dr. ThirlwaU, Bishop of St. David's, died in 1875, also 
Canon Selwyn about the same year, and Professor Eadie 
in 1876 ; Dr. Scott, of BaUiol, Oxford, afterwards Dean of 
Rochester, Dr. Tregelles, who was named after the first Hst 
of revisers had been com.pleted, died at an early period. A 
few resignations have occurred ; and now, in addition to the 
original revisers who remain, there are the following names : 
E. L. Bensley, of the University Library, Cambridge ; Pro- 
fessor BirreU, St. Andrew's ; the Eev. T. K. Cheyne, Oxford ; 
Principal Douglas, Glasgow ; S. E. Driver, New College, 
Oxford ; the Eev. C. J. EHiot, Winkfield Vicarage, Windsor ; 
the Eev. J. D. Geden, Wesleyan College, Didsbury; the 
Eev. J. E. Lumby, Cambridge; the Eev. A. H. Sayce, Oxford; 
Professor W. E. Smith, Aberdeen; and Professor Weir, 
Glasgow. These scholars are members of the Old Testament 
Company ; and it should be noticed that Dr. Harold Browne, 
who succeeded Dr. Wilberforce in the see of Winchester, 
acts as chairman of this division, and Mr. Aldis Wright as 



296 Our English Bible. 

secretary. To the New Testament company have been 
added Dr. Wordsworth, Bishop of St. Andrew's, Professor 
David Brown, of Aberdeen, and Professor Pahner, Oxford. 
Dr. Ellicott, Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol, acts as chair- 
man, the Eev. J. Troutbeck as secretary. 

At an early period it was thought desirable by Bibhcal 
scholars on both sides of the Atlantic, that EngUshmen and 
Americans should combine in this great work for the benefit 
of the Anglo-Saxon race throughout the world. The steps 
taken for this purpose are described by the Eev. Dr. Philip 
Schaff, of New York, who from the commencement has 
taken a lively interest in the enterprise. 

" The British committee is fully competent, without 
foreign aid, to do justice to the work committed to its care. 
Yet, in view of its practical aim to furnish a revision not 
for scholars, but for the churches, it is of great importance 
to secure at the outset the sympathy and co-operation of 
Biblical scholars in the United States, where the Authorized 
Version is as widely used and as highly respected as in 
Great Britain. Eival revisions would only add new fuel to 
sectarian divisions already too numerous among Protestants. 
Let us hold fast by aU means to the strongest bond of 
interdenominational and international union which we have 
in a common Bible. The new revision, when completed, 
should appear with the imprimatur of the united Bibhcal 
scholarship of Enghsh-speakiag Christendom. In August, 
1870, Dr. Joseph Angus, President of Eegent's Park 
College, London, and one of the British revisers, arrived in 
New York with a letter from Bishop EDicott, chairman of 
the New Testament Company, authorizing him to open 
negotiations for the formation of an American Committee 
of Eevision. At his request I prepared a draft of rules fm- 



American Co-operation. 297 

co-operation, and a list of names of Biblical scholars who 
■would probably best represent the different denominations 
and literary institutions in 'this movement. The suggestions 
were submitted to the British committee and substantially 
approved. Then followed an interesting of&eial corre- 
spondence, conducted, on behalf of the British committee, 
by the Bishop of Winchester, the Dean of Westminster, the 
Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol, and Dr. Angus. I was 
empowered by the British committee to select and invite 
scholars from non-episcopal churches ; the nomination of 
members from the American Episcopal Church was, for 
obvious reasons, placed in the hands of some of its 
bishops ; but, as they declined to take action, I was re- 
quested to fill out the list. It is not necessary, in this 
place, to enter into details ; I will only state the result of 
the negotiations. 

List of Ambeican Ebvisbes. 
The Old Testament Company. 

Prof. Thomas J. Conant, d.d. . . Brooklyn, N.Y. 

George E. Day, d.d. . . . New Haven, Conn. 

John De Witt, d.d. . . . New Brunswick, N.J. 

Wilham Henry Green, d.d. . Princeton, N.J. 

George Genten Hare, d.d. . Philadelphia, Pa. 

Charles P. Kranth, d.d. . . Philadelphia, Pa. 

Joseph Packard, d.d. . . Fairfax, Va. 

Calvin E. Stowe, D.D. . . Cambridge, Mass. 

James Strong, s.T.D. . . Madison, N.J. 

C. V. A. Van Dyck, m.d. . Beyrut, Syria. 

Tayler Lewis, LL.D. . . Schenectady, N.Y. 



298 Our Endish Bible. 



't,- 



The New Testament Company. 
Eight Eev. Alfred Lee, d.d. . . . Wilington, Delaware. 

Prof. Ezra Abbot, D.D., ll.d. . . Cambridge, Mass. 

Eev. G-. E. Crooks, d.d New York. 

Prof. H. B. Hackett, d.d., ll.d. . Eocbester, N.Y. 

James Hadley, ll.d. . . . New Haven, Conu. 

Charles Hodge, D.D., LL.D. . Princeton, N.J. 

A. C. Kendrick, d.d. . . . Eochester, N.Y. 

Matthew B. Eiddle, d.d. . . Hartford, Conn. 

Charles Short, ll.d. . . . New York. 

Henry B. Smith, D.D., LL.D. . New York. 

J. Henry Thayer, d.d. . . . Andover, Mass. 

W. F. Warren, d.d. . . . Boston, Mass. 

Eev. Edward A. Washburn, d.d. . New York. 

,, Theo.D.Woolsey, D.D. , LL.D. New Haven, Conn. 

Prof. Philip Schaff, d.d New York. 

" In the dehcate task of selection, reference was had, first 
of all, to abihty, experience, and reputation in Bibhcal 
learning and criticism ; next, to denominational connection 
and standing, so as to have a fair representation of the 
leading churches and theological institutions ; and last, to 
local convenience, in order to secure regular attendance ; 
some distinguished scholars were necessarily omitted, but 
may be added hereafter by the committee itself." 

On the 7th of December, 1871, a number of American 
revisers assembled in New York " for the purpose of 
effecting a temporary organization to co-operate with the 
British committee in the revision of the Authorized Enghsh 
Version of the Scriptures." The Eev. Dr. Howson, Dean of 
Chester, at the time on a visit to America, attended this 



American Co-opei'ation. 299 

meeting, at whicli was presented the folio-wing resolution 
from England, dated October 23, 1871 : 

" That the Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol be requested 
to communicate with Dr. Schaff to the effect that the work 
of the New Testament revisers is at present only tentative 
and provisional, and that it may be considerably altered at 
the second revision ; but that, upon the assurance of Dr. 
Schaff that the work, so far as it is at present advanced, will 
be considered as strictly confidential, the company will send 
a sufficient number of copies for Dr. Schaff and his brother 
revisers, for their ovni private use, the copies to be in no 
way made pubhc beyond themselves. For this purpose 
that Dr. Schaff be requested to send the names and 
addresses of the scholars associated with him in this matter, 
so soon as the company is completely formed." 

The names were forwarded, and on the 17th of July, 1872, 
the New Testament company at Westminster resolved 
" that so many copies of the revised version of the first 
three Gospels be entrusted to Dr. Schaff for the use of the 
above-named, with the request that they be regarded as 
private and confidential, and with the intimation that the 
work itseM is provisional and tentative, and likely to undergo 
considerable modification." On the receipt of these copies 
the American committee, on the 4th of October, 1872, met 
together and commenced their labours, which have been 
continued down to the present time. 

We have seen that during the Middle Ages a few men 
devoted themselves to the translation of Scripture, and the 
series of versions thus produced formed a living rill trickhng 
along the desert waste. The age of WyclLffe showed noble 
and unprecedented attempts to put our countrymen in 



300 Otir English Bible. 

possession of the Divine treasure ; and the version which he 
executed, and v^hich his follow^ers revised, must ever remaia 
a monument of honour to his name. At the commencement 
of the EngUsh Beformation opened the grand era of Biblical 
translation, which extended to the commencement of the 
seventeenth century. The revival of Hterature, leading to 
a knov^ledge of the original languages of the two Testaments, 
lent its aid to the sacred cause ; whilst Christianity exerted 
a reflex influence, and gave a new and deeper impulse to the 
study of the Greek and Hebrew tongues. 

The translation of the Word of God formed a principal 
object in the view of our Eeformers ; the wide circula- 
tion of Bibles and Testaments tended more than anything 
else to secure for Protestantism the firm footing it soon 
obtained ; and their vdder circulation since has mainly con- 
tributed to the permanent ascendency of the Beformation. 
There is httle fear of inimical antagonism so long as that 
circulation continues accompanied by the devout study of 
the Divine oracles ; for the relapse of a nation, where the 
Bible has become a household book, into superstition and 
spiritual ignorance is an event unlaiown in the history of 
mankind, and seems to be a miracle not hkely to occur. 

Multitudes of Christians, in both hemispheres, anxious 
that the inhabitants of foreign lands should enjoy the 
blessing of vernacular translations, are supplying means 
for the achievement of the object ; and it is a pleasant 
exercise of imagination to anticipate the time when all the 
world over, nations shall look back on the history of their 
own Bible version, as we do on ours, and join in saying, 
Other men laboured, and we have entered into their labours. 

The translation into English of the Book of books is 
connected with another history still more sacred than that of 



Conchision. 30 1 

the production of the original volume. We are not left in 
ignorance respecting the origin of the Greek and Hebrew 
documents of which it is composed. Learned investigation 
has pointed out their source and estabhshed their authen- 
ticity. They are in this respect, as in others, unlike the 
sacred books of pagan nations. They have not been brought 
out from caverns of mystery and darkness ; but they 
rise on our view hke the stars of heaven, and we can 
point to the part of the horizon and teU the time when 
they rose upon the night of the world's ignorance. It 
is most satisfactory to take up an old English Bible and 
trace back its history, beyond the origin of printing and 
the period of its first Saxon translation, to the times of 
the early church, when the original was received in the 
form of Greek and Hebrew manuscripts, and thence fur- 
ther backward to the first century, to apostles and others 
who wrote the New Testament, and to the yet more remote 
origin of the Old Testament in the Jewish Church. The 
examination of the literary history of the Bible, of its trans- 
mission from ancient to modern times, and of its original 
production, inspires the student with an intelligent con- 
fidence in this collection of books, which no insinuation or 
attacks can shake. Erom this point an advance to the belief 
of the credibility of the Bible narrative is but natural and 
reasonable ; for it is contrary to all probabihty that persons 
should forge accounts of things that never took place, and 
successfully palm them upon persons who were contempo- 
raneous or nearly so with the times when those events were 
said to have occurred. Knowing as we do so much about 
the books of Scripture, we are compelled to admit that they 
are as credible as they are genuine — as true as they are 
authentic. A crowning fact is evolved at the conclusion of 



302 Our English Bible. 

this literary inquiry ; Christ promised inspiration to His 
apostles ; it was claimed by them ; the claim was confirmed 
by the reception which their writings met with from the 
early church ; and nothing appears in the New Testament 
to contradict the claim asserted and acknowledged. The 
inspiration of the Old Testament is recognised in the New, 
and thus the chain of evidence is complete. Sophistical 
arguments and wild speculation have in vain attempted 
to overthrow the truth and authority of Scripture. The 
volume asserts its Divine character in its invincibility 
under opposition, and in the saving effect it produces. Nor 
shall time destroy it. This book alone is immortal. Sir 
Thomas Brown has justly said of the sacred volume, " Men's 
works have an age like themselves ; and though they outlive 
their authors, yet have they a stint and a period to their 
duration. This only is a work too hard for the teeth of 
time, and cannot perish but in the general flames, when all 
things shall confess their ashes." 

A devout and obedient temper, a willingness to walk by 
its practical rules, is the best preparation for an insight into 
its mysteries, and for receiving an indubitable conviction of 
its truth and authority. " If any man vnll do His will, he 
shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God." Espe- 
cially let the student of the Bible remember the necessity of 
the Holy Spirit's influence for the appreciation of Scripture 
truth. " The natural man receiveth not the things of the 
Spirit of God : for they are foolishness unto him : neither 
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned." 
That passage, is receiving a daily verification. Multitudes, 
with the Bible in their hands, are blind to its truths. Any 
one who fervently offers the prayer of the Psalmist, " Open 
Thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of 



Conclusion. 303 

Thy law," shall find the study to be its own reward. The 
Bible will be to him amidst the scenes of life a treasure of 
matchless worth. "Bind it continually upon thine heart, 
and tie it about thy neck. When thou goest, it shall lead 
thee ; when thou sleepest, it shall keep thee ; and when thou 
awakest, it shall talk with thee. For the commandment is 
a lamp, and the law is hght ; and reproofs of instruction are 
the way of life." In youth it will form the character, 
stimulate the intellect, purify the taste, and yield richer 
pleasures than the world — so lavish in its promises, so poor 
in its performances — can supply; and in age it will strengthen 
under infirmities, and fill the soul with hopes of that state 
of being in which life shall never ebb, and health shall 
never languish ! In prosperity it will tiuge with brightest 
colours all our joys, while it leads to fehcity in the favour 
of Almighty God, and is ever teaching the beautiful song : 

" To Thee we owe our wealth and friends, 
And health and safe abode : 
Thanks to Thy name for meaner things ; 
But these are not my God." 

In adversity, ia sickness, ia mental depression — when even 
friendship loses its soothing power, and Hterature can no 
longer afford solace, — this volume will shine like a beauti- 
ful star amidst beclouded skies. 

Dr. Johnson relates ia his hives of the Poets that he 
visited CoUins — a genius of no mean name — ia his latter 
days, when he was broken down by physical debility and 
mental sohcitude. He had withdravyn from study, and he 
travelled with no other book than a New Testament, such as 
children carry to school. "When his friend took it ia his 
hand, out of curiosity to see what companion a man of 
letters had chosen, " I have but one book," said Collins ; 
" but that is the best ! " 



304 Our English Bible. 

There is no other hoo'k which associates itself in the 
same way and to the same extent with the joys and sorrows 
of human life, with hirths, marriages, and burials, with our 
journeys, our country walks, our conversation round the 
family hearth, our silence by the sick-bed side — no other 
which hke this would bear to be read over the coffin of the 
dead, at the mouth of the sepulchre. "Why is it that people 
in their troubles cleave to what is written here as they do to 
nothing else in this wide world? " The fairest flowers of 
human wit, after a few perusals, hke gathered flowers, wither 
in our hands and lose their fragrancy ; but these unfading 
plants of paradise become, as we are accustomed to them, 
more and more beautiful, their bloom appears to be daily 
heightened, fresh odours are emitted and new sweets ex- 
tracted from them. He who has tasted their excellences 
will desire to taste them yet again, and he who tastes them 
oftenest will reUsh them the most." • 

* Preface to Home's Commentari/ on the Psalms. 




INDEX. 



Abbot, Dr., 298 

Abbott, George, 244 

Abraham, 8, 9, 62 

Adam, 62, 63 

^IMo, 11, 66 

Aldred, 14 

Alford, Dean of Canterbury, 285, 290, 

292, 295 
Alfred, 14 
Alfred's dooms, 10 
Alexander, Dr., 292 
AUen, Edmund, 173 
AUeyn, Bishop of Exeter, 210 
Alnwick, Bishop of Norwich, 54 
Anderson, 79 
Andrew, St., 62 
Andrewes, Dr. (or Andrews), 289, 240, 

241 
Andrews, Boger, 242 
Anglo-Saxon sacred books, Set seq. 
Angus, Dr., 293, 297 
Anne Boleyn, 108, 121, 130 
Apocrypha, 103, 131, 189, 271 
Arnold, Dr., 50 

Arundel's Constitution, 53, 54, 122 
Asssembly's Annotations, 271 
Assembly's Catechism, 277 
Augustine, St., 29, 163 

Baber & Offor, 43 
Bampfield, 272 
Bancroft, 283, 236, 288, 257 
Barker, Christopher, 220 
Barker, Eobert, 220 
Barker, Matthew 236, 
Barlowe, Dr., 244 
Barnes, Dr., 118—120 
Barrow, Dr., 281 
Baxter, Bichard, 261 



Becon, Thomas, 211 

Bede, 19, 20 

BedweU, William 241 

Belet, Jean, 64 

Belward, Nicholas, 54 

Bensley, B. L., 295 

Bentham, Tnomas, 189, 211 212 

Beza, Theodore, 186, 197, 219, 227, 
250 

Bible, trajislations of, 3, MS copies, 
6 ; Anglo-Saxon version, 7, 16 — 24 ; 
WycUffe's translation, 31, 33—42 
54 ; later versions, 48—48 ; deriva- 
tion of the word, 45 ; early printed 
versions, 56—58, 68; Tyndale's 
translation, 81, 100—107; copies 
burnt, 92 ; revision of Tyndale's 
translation, 97 ; Title pages, 
102 ; translations mentioned by 
Cranmer before Convocation, 122 ; 
Ooverdale's version, 123 — 127 ; title 
pages, 128 ; Cranmer's attempt to 
prepare an authorized version, 133 ; 
Coverdale's, published by King's 
licence, 136 ; Matthew's Bible, 
138—148 ; the Great Bible, 149— 
161 ; prohibited, 166 ; editions pub- 
lished in Edward vi.'s reign, 171 — 
174; Cheke's version, 176; public 
reading forbidden, 177; Geneva 
version, 186 — 200; reading sanc- 
tioned by EHzabeth, Q06 ; an 
authorized translation, 208 et seq. 
Bhenish version, 221 — 228 ; autho- 
rized version, 233—259; printing 
and binding, 260 ; Ussher's version, 
268—265; Soldier's pocket Bible, 
265 ; errors in printing, 266 : in 
Cromwell's time, 269 ; presented 



306 



INDEX. 



to Sovereigns at coronation, 269 ; 

proposed new version, 273; for 

preaohiBg, 275 ; revision of English 

version, 279 et seq. 
Biblia pauperum, 55 
Bilney, Thomas, 119 
Bilson, Bishop of Winchester, 347 
Blakesley, Canon, 288, 292 
Blayney, Dr., 275, 276 
Block books, 55 

Bodleian Library, 15, 33, 196, 241 
Bodley, John, 196, 197, 206, 207 
Bodley, Thomas, 189 
Bois, or Boys, 244, 245 
Bonner, 150, 152, 158, 168, 178 
Boothroyd, 280 
Bouchier, Archbishop, 70 
Bradford, John, 210 
Bradwardine, 89 
Branthwaite, Dr., 244 
Breeches Bible, 198 
Brett, Dr., 242 
Bristow, Richard, 226, 227 
Broughton, Hugh, 219, 256 
Brown, Professor David, 296 
Browne, Dr. Harold, 288, 292, 296 
Bruges, 27, 41 
Bucer, 173, 174 
Buck and Daniel, 261 
Bude, L., 197 
BuUinger, 174 
Burgley, 241 
Burnet, 92 

Byddell and Bartlett, 147 
Bjmg, Dr. Andrew, 242 

Cssdmon, 8, 14, 66 

Gsesar, 4 

Calvin, 186, 189 ; his preface to New 

Testament, 191 
Cambridge, meetings of translators 

at, 242, 244 
Castalio, 197, 217 
Cartwright, Thomas, 227 
Caryl, Joseph, 274 
Catherine Parr, 172, 174 
Oaxton, William, 58 ; his Golden 

Legend, 59—66, 69, 198 
Cecil, Lord Burleigh, 206, 216 
Chaderfcon, Dr. Laurence, 242 
Charles, Bev. Thomas, 277 



Chaucer, 45 

Chenery, T., 292 

Oheke, Sir John, 176 

Cheyne, Rev. J. K., 295 

Chiohele, Archbishop, 44 

Chrysostom, St., 223 

Clarendon press, 275 

Clark, 288 

Clarke, Dr. Richard, 241 

Clement vm., 226 

Cochlaaus, 79, 82, 84, 86, 87 

Cole, 195 

Columba of Zona, 6 

Columbus, 67 

Commission, Historical MSS., 262 

Committee appointed for revision of 
Scriptures, 291 et seq. 

Common Prayer, Book of, 274 

Compton, Lord A., 288 

Conant, Dr., 297 

Conference at Hampton Court, 230 — 
233, 249 

Convocation, 122, 133, 164, 216, 284— 
290 

Conybeare, 8 

Cook, Rev. Canon, 292 

Cotton, Sir Robert, 15, 180 

Coverdale, Miles, 165, 176, 180, his 
childhood and youth, 117; patro- 
onized by Thos. Cromwell, 120 ; his 
possible meetingwithTyndale, 128 ; 
his Bible, 123 — 137 ; his great 
Bible, 149—161 ; Bishop of Exeter 
174 ; hiaexile, 183, 189 ; returns to 
England,213, his death, 214 

Cowper, Thomas, 262 

Cox, Leonard, 173 

Cox, Richard, 213 

Cranmer, 108, 121, 122, 133, 135, 144, 
161, 164, 165, 180, 183 

CromweU, Thomas, 120, 134, 135, 145, 
146; his efforts to circulate the 
Bible, 150—158, 162, 165 

Crooks, Dr. 298 

Cudworth, Dr. 272, 273 

Cuthbert, Bishop of Durham, 162 

Cuthbert, St. 13—15 

Dakins, 244 
David, 62 
Davidson, Dr. 292 



INDEX. 



Davies, Richard, 210 
Davies, Dr. B. 292 
Day, Dr. 297 
Denison, 288 
Diatheke, 102 
Douglas, Prinoipal, 295 
Downes, Andrew, 244, 245 
Driver, L. K., 295 
Duport, Dr. John, 244 
Durham book, 13—16, 23 
Dyok, Dr. Van, 298 

Eadfrith, 13, 14 

Eadie, Dr., 140, 143, 227, 293 

Edward ni. 27 

Edward Yi. 48, 118, 127, 170, 174, 269 

Eedes, Dr., 244 

Elizabeth, Queen, 48, 183, 198, 200, 

202, 226, 227, 269 
EUicott, Dr., 292, 296, 297 
Elliott, Rev. 0. J. 295 
EUis, Sir WiUiam, 262 
Erasmus, 67, 73, 75, 103, 118, 153 
Ethelwald, St., 14 

Pagius, 173, 174 

Pairbaim, Dr. 292 

Pairclough, 242 

Pehner, 169 

Penton, 244 

Field, Rev J., 292 

Fletcher, Richard, 54 

Porshall and Madden, 31, 37, 43, 48 

Pox, Bishop of Hereford, 135 

Foxe, John, 20, 27, 78, 79, 91, 120, 

123 
Praser, Dr., 288 
Prias, Duke de, 234 
Prith, John, 101, 112, 113 
Proben, Johann, 58 
Pry, 125, 128, 129, 130 
Pulke, Dr. William, 227 
Puller, Thomas, 148, 223 
Purboshe, Sir William, 87 
Fust & Schofier, 56 
Pyshe, 87 

Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, 167 
Gaunt, John of, 27, 50, 53 
Geden, Rev. J. D. 296 
Gilby, Anthony, 189, 195, 196 



Gilford, Sir Harry, 75 

Ginsburg, Dr., 292 

Golden Legend of Caxton, 59 — 66, 69 

Goodman, Gabriel, 195, 213 

Goodwin, Dr., 274 

Gospels, commentary on the, 30 

Gotoh, Dr., 292 

Grafton, 66, 147, 150, 152, 154, 163, 

167. 
Green, Dr., 297 
GreehhiU, 273 
Gregory, Canon, 288, 
Grey, Lady Jane, 210 
Grindal, Bishop of London, 206, 212 
Guest, 211, 213 
Gutenberg, 56, 57 

Hackett, Dr. 298 

Hadley, Dr., 298 

Hale, Sir Matthew, 261 

Hampton Court conference, 230 — 233, 

249 
Harding, Dr. John, 235, 242 
Hare, Dr., 298 
Harleian MSS., 31 
Harman, John, 244 
Harrison, Archdeacon, 293 
HebUthwayte, WiUiam, 76 
Henderson, 280 
Henry n., 12 
Henry rv., 51 
Henry vr., 48 
Henry, vn., 48 
Henry Yin. 108, 130, 136, 145, 149, 

165, 166, 177 
Hereford, ISTioolas de, 32, 33 
HiU, Dr., 273 
Hodge, Dr., 298 
Holkham Hall, 128 
Holland, Dr. Thomas, 242 
Hollybush, John, 146 
Hopkins, Canon, 288 
Horman, Eichard, 87 
Home, Robert, Bishop of Winchester, 

211 
Hort, Rev. P. G., 293 
Howson, Dr., Dean of Chester, 299 
Hmnphrey, Duke of Gloucester, 48 
Humphreys, Oanon, 293 
Hutchinson, Dr., 244. 
Hyde, John, 22. 



308 



INBEX. 



Jaoquemayns, Lewis, 190 

James i., 229, 231, 232, 234, 235, 253 

Jebb, Dr., 288, 292, 294 

Jenkms, 2Y3 

Jerome, St., 56 

Joseph, 62 

Joseph of Arimatheea, 4 

Joye, George, 100, 101, 108 

Jugge, John, 219 

Jugge, Richard, 214, 219, 220 

Kay, Dr., 288 

Kendriok, Dr., 298 

Kemiedy, Canon, 293 

Kennioott, 280 

Key, Thomas, 172 

Kilbie, Dr. Eichard, 242, 243 

King, Geoffry, 241 

Kirkby, Dame Margaret, 28 

Knighton, 35, 40 

Knox, John, 195 

Kranth, Dr., 298 

Lathbury, Johannes de, 23 

Latimer, Hugh, 77, 96, 121 

Laud, Archbishop, 261 

Lawney, Thomas, 134 

Layfield, Dr. John, 241 

Loathes, Professor, 298 

Lee, Dr., 298 

Lee, Archdeacon, 293 

Lelong, 195, 

Lever, Thomas, 119 

Lewis, Dr., 298 

Lightfoot, Dr,. 271 

Lindisfame, 13, 14, 15 

Lively, Edward, 233, 235, 242, 247 

Living, WiUiam, 193, 195 

Lloyd, Bishop, 275 

LoUards, the, 23, 49—55, 66 

Lowth, 280 

Luit, Hans, 88 

Lumbv. Eev. J. E. 296 

Luther, Martin, 67, 80—81, 82, 84, 85, 

103, 107 
Lutterworth Eectory, 27, 32 

McGiU, Professor, 293 
Maoknight, 280 
Madden, Sir Prederipk, 21 



Madden, Forshal and, 31, 37, 43, 

Maitland, 79 

Maldon, William, 161 

Mallet, Francis, 172 

ManseU, Dr., 288 

Marbeok, John, his concordance, 

—169 
Marburg, 88, 97 
Martin, Gregory, 226, 227 
Martyr, Peter, 174 
Mary, Queen, 177, 179, 180 
Mary, Queen of Scots, 228 
Matthew's Bible, 138—148 
Mazarin, Cardinal, 56, 57 
Melancthou, 81 
Meteren, Cornelius van, 124 
Meteren, Emanuel van, 124 
Meteren, Jacob van, 124 — 127 
MiUigau, Dr., 293 
Milton, John, 240 
Moberly, Dr. 281, 285 
Monmouth, Humphry, 76, 77, 78, 81 
Montanus, 250 

More, Sir Thomas, 33, 79, SO, 116 
Morris, Richard, 13 
Moses, 8, 10, 62 
Moulton, Professor, 293 
Munster, 250 

Neale, Dr. Bishop of Durham, 240 

Nebuchadnezzar, 8 

Necton, Eobert, 87 

Newcome, 280 

Newman, Dr., 293. 294 

Newth, Dr., 290, S93 

Nicholas, St., 62 

Nicholson, 130, 131 

Nix, Bishop of Norwich, 88 

Old, Dr., 173 

Oldcastle, Sir John, 51, 52 
OUivant, Dr., 292 
Orm or Omim, 12, 66 
Ortelius, 124, 126, 127 
Otmars of Augsburg, 57 
Overall, Dr. John, 240 
Owen, Dr., 273 

Oxford, meetings of translators at, 242, 
243 

Packard, Dr., 298 



INDEX. 



309 



Paokington, Augustine, 88, 91, 96 

Palmer, Professor, 296 

Parker, Archbishop, 20, 206, 209, 215, 

216 
Parkhurst, John, Bishop of Norwich, 

212 
Paul, St., 4 
PauliiLUS, 5, 6 
Pearson, 169 

Pecock, Bishop of Chichester, 69, 70 
Peerson, Andrew, 211 
Perowne, Professor, 293 
Perrin, Dr., 244 
Peter, St., 81, 98, 99 
PMUips, 114 
Plumptre, Canon, 293 
Pooook, Dr., 241 
Poyntz, Thomas, 115 
Practice of Prelates, 97—100, 111 
Prick of Conscience, 22 
Purvey, or Pumay, his version of the 

Bible, 44—48, 131 
Pusey, Canon, 293, 294 

Eabbett, 244 

Eadclifie, Dr. Jeremiah, 244 
Eainolds, Dr., 231—233, 242, 248 
Bask, 11 
Eavens, Dr., 244 
Eavis, Dr., 238, 248 
Eichard iii., 48 
Eichardson, Chief Justice, 271 
Eiddle, Dr.,298 
Einck, Herman, 82 
Eoberts, Dr., 293 

Eogers, John, 141, 144 ; his martyr- 
dom, 179, 180, 183 
EoUe, Eichard, 22, 23, 66 
Eose, Archdeacon, 288 
Eushworth gloss, 19 

Salisbury, Earl of, 285 

Salus Animi, 12 

Sampson, Thomas, 189, 195, 196 

Sanderson, 243 

Sandys, Bishop of Worcester, 210 

Saravia, Andrian de, 241 

Sautre, 44 

SaviUe, Sir Henry, 244 

Saxon Chronicle, 11 



Sayce, Eev. A. H., 296 

Scattergood, Dr., 275 

SchoefEer, 84, 85 

Schorham, William de, 21, 22 

Scott, Dr., 293, 295 

Scrivener, Eev. F., 293 

Selwyn, Dr., 285, 288, 292, 295 

Sharpe, Eev. Launcelot, 276 

Short, Dr., 298 

Sixtus V ., 225 

Slater, Samuel, 278 

Smith, Dr. Payne, 298 

Smith, Professor, 296 

Smith, Dr. H.B., 298 

Smith, Dr. Miles, 242, 247 

Soulehele MS., 66 

Sparke, Thomas, 232 

Spalding, Eobert, 242 

Spenser, Dr., 244 

Schaff, Dr. Philip, 296, 298, 299 

Simon, Professor, 290, 291 

Sports, Book of, 234 

Stanley, Dr., Dean of Westminster, 

290, 292 
Stevens, 130, 131 
Stokesley, Bishop, 133 
Stoughton, Dr., 239 
Stowe, Dr., 298 
Strong, Dr., 298 
Surtees Society, 21 

Tavemer, or Tavemour, Eichard, 

147, 148 
Teigh, Dr., 241- 
Temple, Dr., 285 
Tenison, Dr., 275 
Testwood, 169 
Thayer, Dr., 298 
Thorpe, 8, 10 

ThirlwaU, Dr., 284, 292, 295 
Thomson, Eichard, 241 
Tintoretto, 64 
Tomson, Dr. Giles, 244 
Tomson, Lawrence, 219 
TonstaU, 162 
Tregelles, Dr., 295 
TremeUius, 250, 251 
Trench, Dr., 281, 293 
Troutbeok, Eev. J., 296 
Tuokney, Dr., 274 
TunstaU and Heath, 161 



310 



INDEX. 



Tyndale, WiUiam, 33, 72, 131, 133, 
139, 140, 143, 145 ; Ma studies, 74 
MoTimouth's friendship for, 76 
visits Hamburg, 79 ; his probable 
visit to Wittenberg, 79 ; visit to 
Cologne, 81 ; his translation of Testa- 
ment, 81 ; his flight to Worms, 84 ; 
publishes Testament, 85 — 87 ; at 
Marburg, 88 ; story of his sellmg 
Testaments to be burnt, 91 ; revises 
translation, 97, 100 ; his practice of 
prelates,97 — 100, 111 ; his merits as 
translator, 102 — 107 ; his intervievf s 
with Vaughan, 112 ; his letter to 
Frith, 113; betrayed by Philips, 
114 ; taken prisoner, 115 ; his exe- 
cution, 115, 183 ; his character, 116 

Udal, Nicholas, 172 
Ussher, Ambrose, 263, 264 

Vaughan, Sir Stephen, 108, 111, 112 

Vaughan, Dr., 293 

Vetus Itala, 6 

Venninge, Ralph, 273 

Vignay, Jehan de, 64 

Voragine, Jacobus de, 63, 64 

WaUer, 240 

Walsh, Sir John, 71, 73 

Walton, Dr., 272 

Wanley, 125 

Ward, Dr. Samuel, 244 

Warham, Archbishop, 88, 95, 122 

Warren, Dr., 298 

Warton, 22 

Washburn, Dr., 298 



Waterland; 280 

Weir, Professor, 296 

Westoott, Canon, 103, 140, 161, 217, 
251 

Westminster Assembly, 267 

Westminster, meetings of translators 
at, 239—241, 244 

Wharton, Lord, 277 

WMtelock, 272 

Whitchurch, 144, 147, 154, 161 

Whitgift, Archbishop, 217, 227 

Whittingham, WiUiam, 189, 190, 195, 
201 

Wilberforce, Dr., 284, 292, 295, 296 

WiUiam, i., 11 

William m., 269 

Witt, Dr. de, 297 

Wilkes, 219 

Wittenberg, 80, 81 

WoodfaU, George, 276 

Woodgate, Canon, 288 

Woolsey, Dr., 298 

Wolsey, 230, 231 

Worde, Wyntyn de, 68 

Wordsvrorth, Dr., 285, 292, 294 

Wright, Dr., 293 

Wright, WiUiam, 54 

Wright, Dr., W. A., 293 

Wycliffe, John, 23, 43, 44, 50, 52-, 53, 
63, 70, 102, 105; at Lutterworth, 
25 ; visits Bruges, 27, 41 ; his 
writings, 28 ; appears before a 
synod, 29 ; his commentary, 30 ; 
his translation of the Bible, 31, 
33—42; his death, 32. 

Zwingle, 132 




PUBLICATIONS 

OF THE 

EELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY. 



BY THE REV. DR. STOUGHTON. 



Homes and Haunts of Luther. 

With many engravings by Whymper and 
others. Small 4to. 8s. cloth boards, gilt 
edges. 

The Progress of Divine Reve- 
lation ; or, the Unfolding Purpose of 
Scripture. Crown 8vo. 6s. 6d. cloth boards. 



The Lights of the World ", oi-, 

Illustrations of Character drawn from the 
Records of Christian Life. New Edition. 
Crown 8vo. 2S. 6d. cloth boards. 

Stars' of the East ; or, Prophetr, 

and Apostles. Foolscap 8vo. 3s. cloth 
boards. 



The New Pocket Paragraph Bible; being the Authorized Versior. 

arranged in paragraphs instead of in verses. By this arrangement sentences arc 
preserved in their completeness, and the meaning, which is sometimes obscured by the 
arbitrary division into verses, is more plainly seen. This Bible is an exceedingly usefu. 
one for the minister or Sunday school teacher. It contains a preface, references, 
marginal notes'containing improved renderings of many words and passages, chronologica": 
tables, and coloured maps, carefully printed on fine paper. 

Cloth boards, sprinkled edges, 4s. ; roan, with gilt edges, ss. ; Persian, calf grained 
gilt edges, 6s. 6d. ; morocco, limp, with flaps to cover edges, 7s. ; best morocco, limp, 
with flaps to cover edges, los. 6d. ; morocco, plain, gilt edges, 7s. 6d. ; morocco, extra 
medium quality, gilt edges, gs. ; best morocco, full gilt, los. 



Price 2S., cloth limp. 

The Handy Book for Bible Readers. Comprising— 

I. Twelve Coloured Maps. 

z. Concordance to the Old and New Testaments. 

3. Technical (Terms connected with Hebrew Poetry and Music in the Psalms. 

4. An Index to Scripture Persons, Places, and Subjects. 

5. Names, Titles, and Characters of Jesus Christ. 

6. An Alphabetical List of Scripture Proper Names ; with their Signification and 

Pronunciation. 

7. Prophecies relating to Jesus Christ. 

8. A Table of first Lines of Psalm?. 

9. Chronological Arrangement of Psalms 
10. Chronological Tables. 



A New Companion to the Bible, 

An Introduction to the Study of the Scrip- 
tures for Bible Classes, Sunday-schools, 
and Families. New and Cheap Edition. 
With Maps. Crown 8vo, 2s. fid. cloth 
boards. 

The Temple ; its Ministry and 

Services at the Time of Jesus Christ. 
Ey the Rev. Dr. Edersheim. Imperial 
i6mo., 55. cloth boards, gilt edges. 

The Golden Diary of Heart 

Converse with Jesus in the Book of 
Psalms. Arranged for every Sunday in 
the Year, By the Rev. Dr. Edersheim, 
, New and revised edition, 4s. cloth gilt. 



Sketches of Je'wish Social Life 

in the Days of Christ.. By the Rev. Dr. 
Edersheim. Imperial i6mo, 5s. cloth 
boards, gilt edges. 

The '\?Vorld before the Flood, 

and the History of the Patriarchs. By the 
Rev. Dr. Edersheim. With Map, Crown 
Svo., 2s. 6d. cloth boards. 

The Kxodus and the 'Wander- 
ings in the Wilderness. By the Rev. Dr. 
Edersheim. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d. cloth 
boards, 

Israel in Canaan under Joshua 

and the Judges. By the Rev, Dr. Eder- 
sheim, With Coloured Map. Crown 8vo, 
2s. 6d. cloth boards. 



RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY'S PUBLICATIONS 



A Handbook to the Grammar 

of the Greek Tesuinent. With complete 
Vocabulary, and an Explanation of the chief 
New Testament Synonyms. By the Rev. 
S. G. Green, d.d. Illustrated by numerous 
Examples and Comments, Post 8vo., 7s. 6d. 
cloth ; iQs. half-bound. 

The Bible Handbook : an Intro- 
duction to the Study of the Sacred Scrip- 
tures. By Joseph Angus, d.d. lamo. 
edition. Map. ijs. cloth boards ; 7s. half- 
bound ; 8s. 6a. calf. 

Meditations on the Miracles of 

Christ. First and Second Series. By the 
Very Rev. J. S . HowsoN, Dean of Chester. 
Crown 8vo., each 3s. cloth boards. 

The Pattern Prayer. By the Rev, 

F. BouRDiLLON, M. A., Author of "A Help 
to Family Worship," &c. Foolscap SvO., 
2s, cloth boards. 

Bible Readings from the Gos- 
pels. For Mothers' Meetings, &c. By 
Mrs. Frederick Locker. Crown Svo, in 
clear type, as. cloth boards. 

How to Answer Objections to 

Revealed Religion. By Miss E. J. Whate- 
LY. Foolscap 8\co. is. 6d. cloth boards. 

A Ne-w Introduction to the 

Study of the Bible. By E. P. Barrows, 
D.D,, Professor of Biblical Literaturci 8vo., 
6s. cloth boards ; 9s. half-bound. 

Biblical Geography and An- 
tiquities. By the Rev. E. P. Barrows, 
D.D. With Appendices by the Rev. Canon 
Tristram, B. Harris Cowper, and 
others. With Maps, Demy 8vo., 6s. 6d. 
cloth boards ; gs. 6d, half-bound- 

The Ti-ades and Industrial Oc- 
cupations of the Bible. By the Rev. W. 
G. Lewis. Crown 8vo., 3s. cloth boards. 

The Companions of the Lord, 

Chapters on the Lives of the Apostles. By , 
the Rev. Charles E. B. Reed, m.a. 
Crown 8vo., 4s. cloth boards. 

The Book of Ruth. A Popular 
Exposition. By the Rev. Samuel Cox, 
Editor of the Expositor. Crown 8vo., red 
edges, 2S. cloth boards. 

A Complete Concordance of the 

Scriptures, on the basis of Cruden. Edited 
by j. Eadie, D.D., LL.D. 3s. 6d. cloth 
, boards ; 5s; half-bound ; gs. calf. 



A Bible Kncyclopsedia ; or, a 

Dictionary of Eastern Antiquities, Geo- 
graphy, Natural History, Biography, 
Theology, and Biblical Literature. Edited 
by J. Eadie, D.D., LL.D. 8vo. 7s. 6d. cloth 
board.s ; los. 6d. half-bound ; 12s. 6d. calf; 
13s. 6d. morocco. 

The Bible Text Cyclopaedia, 

By James Inglis. Crown 8vo., 7s. 6d. 
cloth boards; gs. 6d. half-bound; 12s 6d, 
calf; 13s. 6d. morocco. 

The ^Word of Promise ; or, a 

Handbook to the Promises of Scripture. 
By the Rev. Horatius Eonar, d.d. 
Foolsaap 8vo., 3s. 6d. cloth boards, red 
edges. 

The Land of the Pharaohs ; 

EgyiDt and Sinai. Illustrated by Pen and 
Pencil. 1^ the Rev. Samuel Manning, 
LL.D. Profusely Illustrated with fine En- 
gravings. Imperial 8vo.. 8s., handsomely 
bound, gilt edges. 

"Those Holy Fields." Palestine 

Illustrated by Pen and Pencil. By the 
Rev. Sahiuel Manning, i.l.d. Profusely 
Illustrated. Imperial 8vo., 8s. cloth, gilt 
edges. 

Lyrics of Ancient Palestine : 

Poetical and Kctorial Illustrations of Old 
Testament Hlstoiy . Finely Illustrated . 
Royal 8vo., 8s. cloth elegant, gilt, edges ; 
or 20s. bound in best morocco. 

The Seven Golden Candle- 
sticks; or, the Seven Churches of Asia. 
By the Rev. Canon Tristram, ll.o., 
F.H.s. With Engravings. 6s. bevelled 
boards, gilt edges. 

Bible Studies for Family Read- 
ing. By the late Rev. W. B. Mackenzie, 
Foolscap 8vo, 3s. cloth boards. 

'William Tyndale ; a Contrihu- 

tion to the Early History of the English 
Bible. _ By the Rev. R. Demaus, ma. 
Portrait. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d. cloth boards. 

Hugh Latimer ; a IMography. 

From Origin.1l Documents. By ihe Rev. 
R. Demaus, m.a. With Portrait. Crown 
8vo., 7s. Gd. cloth boards. 



LONDON : THE RELIGIOUS TRA.CT SOCIETY, 

56, PATERNOSTJER ROW J 65, ST. PAUL'S CHURCHY AKD; AND 164, PICCADILLY. 



