presented    Coitf)    f^e   Second   Qolume 
J)ereO>5tb»   by 

Mr.  &  Mrs.  J.  K.  WADDILOVE. 


OAKHURST,    M  ANN  INGHAM, 
TR  A  DFO  R  D. 


OC=X>C=3  D  [IZX)4:^^^ 


OUR    OWN    ENGLISH    BIBLE 


TIIK    NATIONAL    M  KM<  >l:  I AL    TO    Till".    V  KN  F.IIAI'.I.K    r,KI>K, 

KIIKKI:,  SI-NIIKKLAND. 

DI.SKiN!  I)    AND    <  AKKIKI)    nl'T    I!Y    Ml:.    (  IIAKI.IN    C.     IH>n<:KS,     IIKMIAM 
(!'/,<,(„  I,,,  M,.  '/'.  I'.  l-:,Iir<n-ilis,  //<.<"',«„-.) 


OUR    OWN    ENGLISH 
BIBLE 

ITS  TRANSLATORS  AND  THEIR  WORK 
THE    \L1\L\SCRIPT  PERIOD 


HV  mi: 


RKV.  \V.  J.   HKATOX,  B.D. 

I.M'U    OF   Till.    KOY.M.    IllvroKKAI.    xxIK 
MKMKKK    UK    L'lNMIlL  1    1. 1    A<  AI'I.MIi: 


/•//•/T-.y/.V  /--ACS/MILES   A.\D 


Co  it  oo  it: 
FRANCIS    (iKIM'THIS 


I  -'I  - 


DKDICATEI)    TO 

SAMUEL    LLOYD,    Eso. 

A!"  1  IfitR    (  >K 

Tin.  CoKKK'TMn  KN<;I.IMI   Xi;\v  TK^IAMKNT 

AM) 

hn  i;-(  IMVKKNOK  01--  iin:  UKITISH  AND 

I'OKKKiN    Ullil.l.    SOi   !i;iY 


PREFACE  TO  THE  SKCOM)  EDITION 


IN  issuing  this  Second  Edition,  the  author  wi>hes  to  express 
his  wannest  thanks  for  the  cordial  way  in  which  the  first 
has  been  received.  They  are  especially  due  to  the  Riuht 
Honourable  Lord  Peckover,  LL.D.,  etc..  who  has  uiven 
him  the  use  of  his  splendid  collection  of  Bibles  and  Biblical 
literature  ;  and  presented  the  first  edition  to  a  number  of 
the  leading  Libraries.  We  both  travelled  through  the  same 
text-book  in  the  conduct  of  a  Bible-class,  where  those 
labours  originated,  and  his  hiu'h  scholarship  has  made  his 
patronage  and  friendship  a  memorable  encouragement. 

To  Lord  and  Lady  William  Cecil  also  the  warmest 
thanks  are  due.  and  are  hereby  presented.  Lady  Cecil 
assisted  her  father,  the  late  Baron  . \niherst.  for  years  with 
his  magnificent  library,  of  which  she  said.  "  It  was  very 
complete,  from  the  earliest  .Manuscripts  through  even- 
sta^e  of  the  printed  Editions.  I  can  never  forget  the  manv. 
many  happy  hours  I  spent  with  him  collating  and  com 
paring  each  precious  volume,  which  he  always  touched 
with  the  gentle  finder  of  a  true  book  lover.  ' 

Lady  Cecil  thought  so  hiiihlv  of  the  present  volume  that 
she  su^ested  its  purchase  to  Queen  Alexandra.  Both  she 
and  the  Dowager-Queen  of  Sweden  have  ordered  copies. 

1  wish  to  acknowledge  also  the  most  gracious  help  of 
Professor  Skeat.  I  have  often  sat  at  his  feet  in  that  uroat 
silent  room  in  the  British  Museum  during  the  fortv  vears 


x  PREFACE 

that  I  have  prosecuted  these  studies,  and  his  recent  friend 
ship  has  been  of  the  greatest  assistance.  He  tells  me  that 
the  mystery  about  .Elfric  is  now  cleared  up. 

It  lias  been  decidedly  embarrassing  to  be  in  doubt  as  to 
the  identity  of  such  a  scholar,  Bible  Translator,  and 
Homilist.  And  it  is  only  lately  that  we  have  come  to  feel 
that  we  are  on  sure  ground.  Professor  Skeat  has  shown 
quite  clearly,  however,  who  the  man  really  was  to  whom 
we  owe  so  much.  He  was  no  archbishop,  but  was  born 
about  955.  a  few  years  before  the  commencement  of  the 
reign  of  Edgar.  In  his  Life  oj  St.  Stcithun  he  refers  often 
to  his  early  days  in  Winchester,  where  he  became  a  priest. 
He  was  therefore  over  thirty  years  old  when  lie  was  sent  to 
Cerne  Abbas  in  Dorset,  where  he  was  a  monk',  and  where, 
or  at  Winchester,  he  wrote  many  of  his  works.  Then  lie 
became  Abbot  of  Eynesham,  near  Oxford,  being  elected  in 
1005.  The  monastery  at  Cerne  is  beautifully  situated,  and 
was  endowed  by  the  Thane  yEthelmcer,  to  whom  he  prob 
ably  owed  his  promotion  to  Eynesham  or  Ensham. 
.Ethelmoer  established  a  fraternity  of  monks  under  the 
Benedictine  rule  at  Cerne  in  087.  and  at  Eynesham  in 
1005,  so  that  ^Elfric  was  the  first  to  have  charge  of  the 
latter.  He  had  spent  many  years  in  the  school  at  Win 
chester,  and  evidently  profited  above  many,  Professor 
Skeat  speaking  of  his  "  amazing  industry."' 

He  was  a  distinct  person  from  .Elfric,  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  who  died  in  1005.  the  very  year  in  which  our 
.Elfric  was  transferred  to  Eynesham. 

And  certainly  he  was  distinct  from  the  violent  /Elfric 
Putta.  who  succeeded  Wulfstan  as  Archbishop  of  York. 
A  good  many  tilings  are  recorded  of  him  that  scarcely  suit 
the  gentle  scholar,  as  we  see  later  on.  But  the  true  jElfric 
will  stand  on  his  own  merits,  and  Professor  Earle, 
the  well-known  authority  on  An^lo-Saxon  literature  says — 


PREFA(  E  xi 

"  It  is  impossible  not  to  see  in  /Elfric  a  man  of  humble, 
honest,  and  upright  heart  ;  one  born  to  be  a  teacher,  who 
simply  strove  with  unflagjjin^  industry  to  do  his  duty  in 
instructing  men  in  all  such  truth  as  lie  believed  to  be  for 
their  profit.  He  was  a  true  patriot,  and  in  describing 
the  exploits  of  .Judith  and  Judas  Macabeus  against  their 
enemies,  his  thoughts  turned  towards  the  troubles  of  his 
own  country,  then  harassed  bv  the  Danes.  He  sets  before 
the  laity  the  best  of  examples,  the  stories  of  martyrs,  and 
saints,  and  heroes.  He  was  popular  and  successful,  and 
his  Homilies  continued  to  be  copied  out  lon.u  after  the 
Norman  ( 'onquest." 

.•Ethelmcer,  his  patron  and  friend,  was  the  ureat  up 
holder  of  Monastic-ism  in  the  West.  Professor  Skeat  lias 
edited  .Elfric's  Lircs  of  the  tfaints.  and  uives  an  account  of 
eighteen  of  his  principal  works.  He  say  the  English  of  the 
Homilies  is  splendid,  and  that  it  here  appears  fullv  qualified 
to  be  the  medium  of  the  highest  learning.  As  to  the 
identification  of  the  true  .Elfric.  so  lonjj  needed,  he  acknow 
ledges  his  obligation  to  an  excellent,  careful,  and  exhaustive 
article  by  Dr.  E.  Dietrich,  of  Marburg,  which  has  left 
little  more  to  be  said  on  the  subject.* 

A  most  valuable  volume  has  lately  been  issued,  however, 
bv  S.  Harvey  (Jem,  M.A.  It  is  entitled  An  Anglo-Saxon 
Aboot  ;  .-Elfric  of  J-J'/ /<*/>» ///.  He  says  that  home  defence 
(against  the  Danes  then),  temperance,  and  Christian 
knowledge,  amongst  all  classes,  were  the  three  things  for 
which  /Elfric's  name  stands. 

The  second  volume  of  the  present  work  is  now  published, 
and  is  called  Tin  Hible  of  flic  Reformation,  bemii  occupied 
entirely  with  the  reiLfn  of  Henrv  VIM.  Next  vear  I  hope 
to  complete  the  series  by  another  on  The  Puritan  Bible. 

*  Ni.-'lucr's  Z>:it<chri!l,  1H..V.  :>ti. 


CONTENTS 


PACE 

I.  THE  MANUSCRIPT  PKKIOD  1 

II.   KAKLY  DISSEMINATION  OF  THE  SCRIPTURES      .         .  11 

III.  THE  TRUTH  BANISHED  AND  DESTROYED  SOON  AFTER 

ITS  RECEPTION       .....  .20 

IV.  THE  BIIU.K   SOON  IN  ITS   PLACE  A<;AIN— AUOUSTINE 

AND  ins  MISSION            .....  27 

V.  C.ED.MON     ........  4.'{ 

\'I.     Al.DHELM     ........  (17 

VII.    BEDE           ......  SS 

\'III.  THE  SEVENTH  AND  KIOHTH  CENTURIES  — ALCUIN      .  114 

IX.   MONASTICS  AND  MISSIONARIES  12!) 

X.   KINO   ALFRED     .  144 

XI.     Ll.NDISFARNE    (JoSPELS,    OR    TllE    DlRHA.M     Book           .  l.~>!) 

XII.  THE   HUSH  WORTH  CLOSS,   AND  OTHER  ANOLO-S\XON 

CoSPELS              .  17l> 

XIII.  THE  ANOLO-SAXON    PSALTERS             ....  1S4 

Xl\'.   .KLFRIC       .........  111!) 

X\'.   AFTER    THE    COMIV;    OF    THK    NORMANS  -  Tin:    OK- 

MCU'M                 .             .             .             .             .             .             .             .  -JO  7 

XVI.  THE    Sou  1. 1:111:1.1:     KKIIXRD    lioi.i.E.    THE    II  \MPOLE 

A\<  HORIIE  224 

XVII.    .JUST      IJEFoRE      \\'V<   LIT       TllE        I''|RST      PlioHIPITIoN 

OF    THE     BlIiLE           ....  240 

X\"III.  JOHN  \\'Y(  i. IF  AND  in^i  I-!NTIRE  TR\N^I.\TIO\      I.  -JJ!) 

XIX.  .J,,n\   \Vv.  I.IF     II.      .  •_>(!•_> 

XX.   PUR\EV       .                   ......  2S."> 

XXI.  JOHN    \\'yi  I.IF     III.  -J!»o 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS 


THE  NATION  \i.  MEMORIAL  TO  THE  VENERABLE  BEDE    Frontispiece 

GLASTO.NBI-RY    ABBEY .'} 

GLASTO.NHI  KY  ..........  5 

C'l.  ASTON  HIKV                .........  7 

GLASTOXBTRY          ......... 

.\N<   IKNT    M  AM   S(  KII'TS    AM)    SVNAi.Ot.t   K    RoI.I.S       . 

STONEHEM.E,  RESTORED  AFTER  DR.  STI'KEI.EY 

EBBS- FLEET .         ...  -21 

ST.  MARTIN'S  Cm  KCH,  CANTKKIU  KY       .....  •_'!> 

Al'iil'STINK    IJEFORE     K'I'II  ELHERT    AND     BERTHA             .              .              .  .'{.'> 

ST.   A r<;i  STINK'S  CROSS.   NEAR   RAMSCATK       ....  :>7 

ST.     Ll'KE.     FROM    THE    (  JoSI'EL- BouK    ((F    ST.    AfCi  t'STl  N  K              .  II 

RCINS  OF   ION  v  (BEFORE  RESTORATION)         ....  4.~> 

WHITHY  (STREAN.ESH  M.CH)  AHHEY          ...                   .  4!» 

WHITHY   AHHEY  (\\'EST   FRONT)       ......  .11 

MEMOKIU.  TO  C.EDMON   AT  \Vnn  HV        .....  <»:> 

MAL.MESHI-RY   AHHEY  (KXTERIOR)             .....  <>!• 

MALMESHI  KY  AHHEY  (INTERIOR)             .         .         .         .  7-'> 

SHERHIIK.NE  MINSTER.   WHERE  AI.DHEI.M    WAS    FIRST    BISHOP 

(RECENTLY   |{ESTORED)     .......  77 

ALDHELM'S  CHI-RCH.   BRADFORD-ON-.\YON       .... 

PORCH  OF  AI.DHELM'S  Cmi'.c  H        ...... 

VKNERAHLE   BEDE'S  CHMR.  .1  \RROW  Cm  K<  n 
BENEDICT  Bisrop's  CHI  R<  H 


xvi  LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

PACK 

JARROW  CHURCH,  SAXON  CHANCEL         .....       07 

DAVID  AS  WARRIOR 101 

DAVID  AS  PSALMIST         ........     105 

THE  PRIORY  RUINS,  HOLY  ISLAND  (\"IEW  LOOKING  EAST)  .  107 
INTERIOR  OF  ST.  MARY'S  PARISH  CHURCH,  HOLY  ISLAND  .  100 
THE  VENERABLE  BEDE  DICTATING  THE  LAST  WORDS  OF  ins 

TRANSLATION  OF  THE  BIBLE  Ill 

BEDE'S  TOMB  IN  DURHAM  CATHEDRAL  .         .         .         .113 

MOSES  GIVING  THE  LAW 1-21 

ALCUIN'S  VULGATE,  NINTH  CENTURY     .....     125 

KING  ALFRED  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .145 

STATUE  OF  KING  ALFRED  AT  WINCHESTER  .         .         .149 

ALFRED'S  PSALTER 155 

ST.  MATTHEW,  NINTH  CENTURY KJ1 

ST.  JOHN  THE  EVANGELIST     .         .         .         .         .         .         .105 

BEGINNING  OF  ST.  LUKE'S  GOSPEI 109 

ENGLISH  GOSPELS  OF  THE  TENTH  CENTURY  .         .         .     173 

DAVID  AND  HIS  CHOIR   .          .         .         .         .         .         .         .185 

SOUTH-WEST  VIEW  OF  CROWLAND  ABBEY      .         .         .         .189 

GREEN STEAD  CHURCH,  ESSEX          ......     197 

FACSIMILE  OF  THE  "  BIBLIA  PAUPERUM ''       ....     259 

JOHN  WYCLIF 2(53 

A  PAGE  FROM  THE  MANUSCRIPT  or  WYCLIF'S  BIBLE    .         .     267 
WYCLIF  CHURCH  IN  13-10        .......     271 

WYCLIF 273 

LUDGAKSHALL    ClIUlUH      ........       275 

IN  LUTTERWORTH  STUDY         .......  277 

LUTTERWOKTH  ClIURCH    ........  279 

WYCLIF'S  CHAIR       .........  281 

PULPIT  IN  LUTTERWORTH  CHURCH           .....  283 

\\'Y<  LIE'S  VESTMENT        ........  284 

FACSIMILE  OF  PACE  IN  WYCLIF'S  BIBLE        ....  291 

THE   LOLLARDS'   PRISON,   LAMIJETII  PALACE    ....  297 

WYCLIF'S  .MONUMENT  303 


on;  OWN  ENGLISH  IJUJLE 


CHAPTER    I 

TIIK    MAM'SCKII'T    I'KKIOI) 


tory     n 
ature 


THK  English  Bible  is  perhaps  the  greatest  concrete  force 
on  the  side  of  truth  and  righteousness  which  the  world 
contains.  Its  influence  is  incalculable,  and  is  growing 
from  age  to  age.  At  Oxford  alone  the  presses  can  work 
at  the  rate  of  a  Bible  a  minute.  Multitudes  are  also 
printed  at  Cambridge,  London,  Edinburgh,  and  Dublin. 
At  New  York,  where  sixteen  steam  presses  are  employed, 
about  <S(H),(M)0  copies  of  either  whole  Bibles  or  New  Testa 
ments  are  produced  every  year.  The  total  Bible  pro 
duction  in  our  time  is  about  three  thousand  a  day,  or 
five  every  minute  of  working  time. 

And  these  Bibles  are  required.  More  copies  of  the 
Scriptures  are  demanded  in  the  English  tongue  than  in 
the  languages  of  all  the  other  nations  of  the  world  put 
together,  whilst  the  number  of  versions  to  which  this 
country  gives  encouragement  and  assistance  is  more  than 
a  hundred  and  fifty.  The  English  Bible  is  amongst  the 
most  sumptuous  and  the  cheapest  books  of  the  day. 
Everyone  can  be  suited,  from  the  richest  and  most  literary 
i 


2  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

to  the  humblest.  As  Mr.  Stevens  lias  tersely  put  it,  our 
earliest  Bibles  on  vellum  must  have  each  cost  the  price 
of  a  farm  ;  later,  they  could  be  had  for  a  cow  ;  but  now 
a  morning's  milking  of  a  single  cow  will  procure  for 
the  milkman  a  first-class  well-bound  Bible  in  his  own 
language. 

And  this  Bible  has  a  wonderful  history,  woven  into  the 
life  of  the  nation  as  it  is  inextricably,  and  revised  from 
time  to  time,  and  in  our  own  time  once  again.  The  only 
parallel  to  the  interest  thus  surrounding  a  vernacular 
Bible  is  supplied  by  that  of  Germany,  which  had  twelve 
editions  of  several  translations  before  the  discovery  of 
America,  and  fourteen  before  Luther's  celebrated  Wartburg 
Bible.  We  were  slow  to  avail  ourselves  of  the  miracle 
of  printing,  insomuch  that  no  English  Bible  taxed  the  new 
art  until  it  had  been  used  for  more  than  two  generations. 
But  we  soon  made  up  for  lost  time,  and  have,  ages  ago, 
printed  our  thousands  where  others  have  only  had  their 
hundreds.  And,  dubiously  as  some  of  the  facts  reveal 
themselves,  the  windings  of  the  river  of  the  water  of  life 
in  our  own  country,  connected  as  they  are  with  some  of 
the  most  eventful  epochs  in  our  national  history,  are 
eminently  suggestive. 

It  is  in  this  spirit  that  we  propose  to  treat  the  subject. 
The  literary  examination  of  the  Text,  showing  especially 
our  eternal  indebtedness  to  the  great  martyr-translator, 
William  Tyndale,  has  been  admirably  accomplished  by 
Dr.  Westcott  and  Dr.  Moulton.  And  this  will  always 
interest  the  scholar,  and  may  be  carried  farther  still  with 
profit,  on  the  lines  indicated  by  them.  But  we  propose 
to  look  upon  its  external  history  perhaps  in  a  more  leisurely 
fashion  than  has  yet  been  attempted  ;  to  see  how  it  grew, 
and  what  versions  preceded  it ;  how  far  it  influenced 
the  religious  life  of  the  nation,  and  sometimes  how  little  ; 
whether  it  was  a  sacred  power  above  the  battle  and  above 
the  banner  in  the  long  early  days  when  men  laid  about 
them  at  their  wills  and  died  ;  how  it  wandered  about  in 
sheepskins  and  goatskins  until  the  open  sesame  of  the 
printer  was  heard  ;  and  how  then  it  slowly  worked  its 


T1IK  MANUSCRIPT   PERIOD  5 

way  right  into  the  centre  of  all  Christian  teaching,  never 
to  be  dislodged.  English  people  commonly  feel  an  interest 
in  these  things,  and  it  s  for  them  we  write. 

Of  course,  before  we  had  the  Bible  in  an  English  dress 
at  all.  the  usual  manuscripts  reached  our  shores  and  were 
multiplied  by  hands  more  or  less  skilful.  No  line  of  the 
Old  Testament  ever  travelled  here  until  the  influence  of  the 
New  brought  it.  (Jod  spake  in  time  past  unto  the  Fathers 


by  the.  Prophets,  but  not  until  in  these  last  days  He 
spoke  b\-  His  Son  did  anv  such  message  reach  our  savage 
and  untutored  ancestors.  And  whom  Christianity  first  sent 
here  with  any  books  or  parchments  we  cannot  now  tell. 

On  the  authority  of  Sophronius  and  Theodoret,  St. 
Paul  came  across  to  Britain  from  (laid  after  his  second 
imprisonment.  Sophronius  was  Patriarch  of  .Jerusalem 
in  the  beginning  of  the  second  centurv,  and  in  a  discourse 
on  the  merits  of  the  apostles  celebrates  his  preaching  of 


6  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

the  Gospel  in  Spain  and  Britain.  Theodoret  was  Bishop 
of  Cyprus  in  the  fifth  century,  and  spoke  of  St.  Paul  as 
having  brought  salvation  to  the  islands  of  the  ocean, 
and  in  his  first  discourse  on  laws  included  the  Britons 
amongst  the  converts  of  the  apostles.  Venantius  Fortu- 
natus  bears  similar  testimony.  He  was  a  French  bishop 
living  in  the  sixth  century,  and  wrote  a  poem  in  Latin 
heroic  verse  in  eulogy  of  St.  Martin,  in  which  the  following 
occurs,  as  translated  by  Dr.  Alexander : — 

"  He  crossed  the  ocean,  and  where'er  he  found 
An  island-port,  he  bade  the  Gospel  sound  ; 
Till  British  lands  and  Thule's  distant  shore 
Had  heard  the  blissful  tidings  which  he  bore." 

Clement  also,  the  third  Bishop  of  Rome,  and  possibly 
fellow-labourer  with  St.  Paul  in  Philippi,  speaks  of  his 
travelling  to  the  extreme  boundaries  of  the  West,  and 
Jerome  says  that  he  imitated  the  sun  in  going  from  one 
ocean  to  the  other. 

Certainly  the  theory  of  the  great  Apostle's  advent  in 
Britain  cannot  be  pushed  aside  as  an  absurd  one,  when 
it  is  favoured  by  Usher,  Parker,  Stillingfleet,  Camden, 
Rapin,  and  many  others. 

On  the  slender  authority  of  Simeon  Metaphrastes, 
St.  Peter  is  said  to  have  preached  here.  This  writer  was 
a  lawyer  of  Constantinople  in  the  ninth  century,  and  he 
says  that  Eusebius  somewhere  narrates  that  Peter  spent 
twenty-three  years  at  Rome,  in  Britain,  and  in  cities  of  the 
West.  This  passage  no  one  has  ever  found,  however, 
and  Eusebius  distinctly  tells  us  in  his  extant  History  that 
Peter's  sphere  of  apostolic  action  was  in  the  East. 
Certainly,  there  are  very  early  traces  of  Christianity  in  the 
island.  Simon  Zelotes  probably  met  his  death  here,  and 
Claudia  Rufina,  the  wife  of  Aulus  Pudens,  may  have 
been  a  British  woman.  There  is  a  story  about  Bran,  the 
father  of  Caractacus,  going  with  his  son  when  he  was  led 
captive  to  Rome,  hearing  St.  Paul  preach  there,  and  receiv 
ing  the  truth.  Unhappily  for  this,  however,  Tacitus, 
who  gives  a  particular  account  of  the  fortunes  of  Caractacus 


THi;   MANUSCRIPT  PERIOD  7 

in  his  conflict  with  the  Romans,  and  who  mentions  the 
wife,  (laughters,  and  brothers  of  that  prince,  says  nothing 
of  his  father.  Nor  is  it  likely  that  the  father  would  he  still 
living  whilst  his  son  was  possessed  of  the  chieftainship. 

It  is  highly  probable,  however,  that  some  attempt 
would  be  made  to  introduce  the  true  faith  even  in 
apostolic  times.  Britain  was  then  governed  by  Roman 
viceroys,  and  was  no  doubt  a  frequent  topic  of  conversa 
tion  amon<r  the  Praetorian  soldiers  with  whom  St.  Paul 


lived  for  some  time.  The  sons  of  British  princes  were  sent 
to  Rome,  both  as  hostages  for  the  good  conduct  of  their 
fathers,  and  to  be  educated.  Seneca,  the  brother  of  the 
(Jallio  of  the  Acts,  had  large  possessions  in  Britain,  an 
indication  of  not  infrequent  intercourse.  Pomponia 
(Jnecina,  the  wife  of  Aulus  Plant  ins.  the  first  Roman 
governor  of  Britain,  was  a  firm  supporter  of  the  Christian 
Faith. 

Among   the    forty-eight   thousand    Roman   soldiers   who 


8  OUR  OWN   ENGLISH  BIBLE 

for  thirty  years  constituted  the  governing  power  here, 
succeeded  by  a  number  for  very  many  years  only  one- 
third  less,  some  were  doubtless  Christians.*  And  as  in 
the  first  generation  after  the  apostles  the  contents  of 
the  Gospel  were  fixed  within  their  present  limits,  and 
at  the  beginning  of  the  second  century  the  chief  portion 
of  the  apostolic  letters  of  the  New  Testament  was 
familiarly  known  and  used  by  Christians,  we  may  imagine 
that  some  New  Testaments,  or  parts  of  them,  would  find 
their  way  across  the  water  in  these  early  times.  The 
Divine  Julius,  as  Tacitus  calls  C^sar,  had  come  all  in 
good  time  to  establish  a  connection  between  the  Isles  of 
the  West  and  the  regions  beyond  the  Alps,  the  central 
sphere  of  the  arts,  learning,  and  civilisation  of  the  world. 

The  Glastonbury  legend  grew  to  a  portentous  size. 
All  the  fascination  of  the  spot  helped  it.  The  place  where 
King  Arthur  prayed,  where  Dunstan  ruled,  where  Eadgar 
the  Giver  of  Peace,  Eadmund  the  doer  of  doughty  deeds, 
and  the  mighty  Edmund  Ironside  had  their  shrines  or 
their  tombs,  was  naturally  looked  upon  as  the  original 
seat  of  Christianity.  The  first  legend  was  something 
like  this  : — Joseph  of  Arimathea  accompanied  the  Apostle 
Philip  into  the  country  of  the  Franks,  whence  he  was 
ordered  by  that  apostle  to  pass  over  into  Britain,  with 
twelve  disciples.  He  arrived  in  A.D.  G3,  and  the  king 
permitted  them  to  take  possession  of  an  island  covered 
with  wood  and  surrounded  by  marshes  and  brushwood, 
called  by  the  natives  Ynyswitrin.  In  a  vision  of  the 
angel  Gabriel,  they  were  commanded  to  erect  a  church, 
the  lower  part  of  which  consisted  of  a  wall  of  twisted 
twigs  —  a  shapeless  structure  indeed,  but  adorned  by 
manifold  manifestations  of  the  power  of  God. 

Then  the  thing  grew  to  this  : — The  number  of  Joseph's 
attendants  was  originally  six  hundred  men  and  women  ; 
of  these,  the  majority  having  broken  a  vow  that  they  had 
taken  of  abstinence  till  they  should  reach  the  land,  were 
not  permitted  to  cross  ;  the  rest,  to  the  number  of  one 

*  Under  the  Romans  (here  were  ninety-two  cities  in  Britain,  thirty- 
three  being  "  conspicuous  and  celebrated." 


THE  MANUSCRIPT  PERIOD  9 

hundred  and  fifty,  came  over  on  the  shirt  of  Joseph  ;  the 
remainder  having  repented,  a  ship  was  despatched  for 
them  which  had  been  built  by  King  Solomon  ;  with  them 
came  over  Xaeianus.  a  prince  of  the  Modes,  who  had  been 
formerly  baptized  by  Joseph  in  the  city  of  Sarum,  the 
king  of  which.  Mordraius,  also  came  "with  them  ;  on 
arriving,  they  found  Joseph  a  prisoner  to  a  king  of  North 
Wales,  whom  Mordraius  slew,  setting  Joseph  free  ;  they 


then  went  and  preached  to  the  people  under  King 
Arviragtis,  who  gave  them  the  island  Avalon  !  Now 
that  Tennyson  has  covered  the  place  with  the  glamour 
of  his  genius,  there  is  no  telling  what  the  legend  might 
have  grown  to,  but  for  the  incredulity  of  the  age.  This 
is  the  Avilion  of  King  Arthur,  of  which  he  says- 

"  Where   falls  not    rain,   or  hail,  or  any  snow, 
Nor  ever  wind   Mows  loudly  ;   l>ut   it   lies 
Deep  meadowed.   happy,   fair  with   orchard   lawns 
And   bowery  hollows  crowned   with  summer  sea, 
Where   I    uill   heal  me  of  my  grievous  wound." 


to  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   BIBLE 

As  for  Philip  being  with  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  authentic 
traditions  tell  us  that  he  laboured  in  Phrygia,  and  died 
and  was  buried  at  Hierapolis.  There  may  have  been 
someone  called  Joseph,  who  first  brought  the  Gospel  to 
those  parts.  Then,  as  the  place  grew  in  fame,  "  Joseph  " 
was  not  quite  important  enough  for  its  founder,  so  he  was 
made  Joseph  of  Arimathea.  No  doubt  Glastonbury  re 
ceived  the  truth  in  the  very  early  time,  and  Lappenburg 
is  possibly  right  in  saying  that  the  first  tidings  of  the  new 
Faith  may  not  have  come  from  Rome  at  all,  but  from  one 
of  those  Congregations  in  Asia  Minor  which  the  Mediter 
ranean  had  long  kept  in  connection  with  Gaul.  The 
Romans  were  not  our  first  civilisers,  by  any  means.  The 
Phoenicians  came  here  for  articles  of  commerce  six  hundred 
years  before  the  Christian  era,  running  upon  shoals  and 
suffering  shipwreck  sometimes,  if  pursued,  rather  than 
discover  the  track  by  which  others  might  come  to  share 
so  lucrative  a  connection. 

So  we  must  leave  the  matter  still  a  question  and  a 
doubt,  as  Wordsworth  does. 

"  Wandering  through  the  West, 
Did  holy  Paul  a  while  in  Britain  dwell, 
And  call  the  fountain  forth  by  miracle, 
And  with  dread  signs  the  nascent  stream  invest : 
Or  he  whose  bonds  dropped  oil',  whose  prison  doors 
Flew  open,  by  an  angel's  voice  unbarred ; 
Or  some  of  humbler  name  to  these  wild  shores 
Storm-driven,  who,  having  seen  the  cup  of  \\oe 
Pass  from  their  Master,  sojourned  here  to  guard 
The  precious  current  they  had  taught  to  flow  !  " 

Britain  may  mean  a  separated  part,  and  we  were 
doubly  separated  from  Europe,  by  the  Channel  and  our 
savagery.  But  let  us  continue  to  sail  in  these  uncertain 
seas,  though  we  may  often  be  reminded  of  Camden's 
words:  "Who  is  so  skilful  that,  struggling  with  time 
in  the  fog^y  dark  sea  of  antiquity,  may  not  sometimes 
run  upon  the  rocks  !  " 


CHAPTER    H 

KAKLY    DISSEMINATION    OF    THE    SCRIPTURES 

"It  i*   the   Hook  of  Coil.      What   if  I  should  say   '  Cod  of  fcoofc*  /  "' 

<;.  HEKHKKT. 

WHATEVER  legends  there  may  be,  no  doubt  the  truth 
was  received  here  in  the  earliest  times.  The  testimony  is 
abundant.  (Hildas  says  it  was  introduced  before  the  defeat 
of  Boadieea.  No  public  mission  was  sent  indeed,  nor  any 
general  attempt  made  to  convert  the  natives,  but  one 
writer  of  established  reputation  after  another  speaks  of  our 
early  Christianity  in  unmistakable  terms.  Origen,  early  in 
the  third  century,  says:  "'The  power  of  God  our  Saviour 
is  even  with  them  which  in  Britain  are  divided  from  our 
world."  Tertullian,  his  contrast  in  most  things,  agrees  with 
him  in  this,  and  says,  at  the  end  of  the  second  century,  or 
at  the  beginning  of  the  third  :  "  In  whom  other  than  in  the 
Christ,  who  has  already  come,  do  all  the  nations  believe  { 
Parthians,  Medes,  Klamites,  those  who  inhabit  Meso 
potamia,  Armenia,  Phrygia,  Cappadocia,  the  dwellers  in 
Pontus.  Asia  and  Pamphylia,  those  occupying  Kgypt, 
and  inhabiting  the  region  of  Africa  beyond  Cyrene,  Romans 
and  natives  ;  even  Jews,  dwelling  in  .Jerusalem  and  other 
nations,  nay.  the  different  Tribes  of  (letulians.  and  many 
territories  of  the  Moors;  all  parts  of  Spain,  the  different 
peoples  of  (Jaul.  and  parts  of  Britain  not  reached  by  the 
Romans,  but  subjugated  to  Christ  ...  in  all  these  the 
name,  of  the  Christ,  who  has  already  come,  reigns"  (Atlc. 
JitdcBos,  c.  vii. ). 

A  noble  testimony  to  be  given  to  the  power  of  the  truth 


12  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   JJII5LE 

against  the  many  and  the  mighty,  at  such  an  early  period, 
for  we  were  probably  least  as  well  as  last. 

Eusebius,  the  Church  historian,  living  in  the  early 
part  of  the  fourth  century,  is  also  said  to  assert  that  some 
of  the  apostles  "  crossed  the  ocean  to  those  islands  called 
British,"  and  there  won  trophies  for  Christ.  He  wrote 
the  life  of  the  Emperor  Constantino  (who  was  crowned  in 
Britain),  and  was  allowed  every  facility  for  examining 
the  public  archives  by  him. 

Jerome  and  Chrysostom  bear  similar  testimony  in  the 
fourth  century.  Jerome,  who  lived  so  long  in  his  cell  at 
Bethlehem,  and  thus  was  fitted  to  speak  in  such  a  way, 
says :  "  The  Britons  who  live  apart  from  our  world,  it'  they 
go  on  pilgrimage,  will  leave  the  Western  parts  and  seek 
Jerusalem,  known  to  them  by  fame  only,  and  by  the 
Scriptures." 

And  from  the  golden-tongued  Chrysostom  we  have  the 
following  :  ''  The  British  Isles  situate  beyond  our  sea, 
and  lying  in  the  very  ocean,  felt  the  power  of  the  Word, 
for  churches  and  altars  were  even  there  erected.  How 
often  in  Britain  did  men  eat  of  the  ile.sh  of  their  own 
kind;  now  they  refresh  their  souls  with  fasting."  Iremeus 
also  (A.D.  115  to  11)0)  mentions  the  existence  of  churches 
amongst  the  Celtic  nations,  but  we  must  remember  that 
this  term  was  applied  to  the  inhabitants  of  Western  Europe 
generally. 

If  the  story  of  Lucius,  a  Christian  British  king  of  the 
second  century,  is,  as  Dr.  Alexander  says,  "the  dream  of  a 
dream,  and  the  shadow  of  a  shade,"  it  is  almost  certain 
that  British  bishops  appeared  in  the  Synods  of  the  fourth 
century  at  Aries,  Sardica,  and  Rimini.  At  the  time  of 
the  bitter  persecution  of  Diocletian  also,  the  great  Vk  book- 
burner  "  sent  his  agents  here,  and  Gildas  bears  his  testimony 
that  parts  of  the  Scriptures  were  burnt  in  the  streets  of 
British  towns.  Alban  and  others  were  added  to  the  noble 
army  of  martyrs;  and  Constantine  the  Great,  who  brought 
all  the  persecutions  to  an  end,  was  here  saluted  as  Emperor 
at  the  old  Roman  town  of  Silchester,  being  the  son  of  a 
British  princess,  Helena.  One  other  distinction  we  had 


KAKl.Y   DISSEMINATION  Ol    THK  SCRIPTURES     13 

in  these  early  times,  the  giving  birth  to  a  famous  heretic 
The  real  name  of  Polagius  was  Morgan,  and  lie  was  a 
native  of  Wales,  and  a  man  of  much  learning  and  blame 
less  character.  His  doctrines  spread  far  and  wide,  and 
were  answered  by  Augustine,  giving  rise  to  the  greatest 
controversy  of  that  time.  Bede,  though  his  fellow-country 
man,  has  no  mercy  on  Pelagius,  and  quotes  Prosper's 
gentle  lines 

"  A   serihMer   vile,   inflamed   with   hellish  spite, 
Against    the  ^reat    Augustine  dared   to  write. 
Presumptuous  serpent  !  from  what  midnight   den 
D'.nst  tlmu  to  crawl  on  earth,  and  look  at   men? 
Sine  thoii   wast  fed  on    Britain's  sea-girt  plains, 
( >r  in   thv  breast   Vesuvian  sulphur  reigns!" 

So  that  to  the  great  and  first  Augustine  we  supplied  an 
antagonist,  whilst  from  his  namesake,  two  hundred  years 
later,  we  afresh  received  the  Gospel,  after  a  century  and  a 
half  of  Saxon  devastation.* 

We  see  then  our  calling  and  position  in  these  early  times 
very  clearly.  Christianity  was  aggressive  and  missionary, 
and  we  were  the  savages  which  the  far-reaching  influence 
of  the.  Gospel  gloried  over  as  amongst  its  most  conspicuous 
trophies.  If  there  had  boon  missionary  meetings  of  modern 
typo,  we  should  have  filled  up  a  place  largely  answer 
ing  to  that  of  the  converted  South  Sea  Islanders  of  the 
nineteenth  century.  Almost  the  last  that  Home  cared 
to  conquer,  almost  the  firs  that  she  flung  away,  isolated 
from  even  the  rough  civilisation  of  Gaul,  our  conversion, 
very  partial  as  it  was,  answered  somewhat  to  that  of  the 
Fijians  of  our  time.  The  Roman  mythology  accompanied 
the  Roman  arms  doubtless.  In  Scotland  stood  a  temple 
to  Mars;  in  Cornwall  one  to  Mercury;  at  Bangor  to 
Minerva  ;  at  Maldon  to  Victoria  ;  at  Bath  to  Apollo  ; 
at  Leicester  to  Janus  ;  and  at  York  to  Bcllona.  London 
had  two.  On  the  site  of  St.  Paul's,  tradition  places  a 

*  iVlai'iu-  \va-  a  \viilrr  of  for<-«-  MIU!  eloquence,  as  u  matter  <>f  fact, 
nn<l  though  AiiL'ii-tim-  strongly  oppowd  him.  he  wrote  to  him  as  "  the 
most  lM-l,,\ed  Ion  I  and  most'  denn-d  l.rother."  The  Maine  IVlav'ius 
MM-d  to  In-  r.-jarded  as  a  men-  t  r  inslat  ion  of  the  \V.-lsli  Morgan,  I. lit 
thin  i*  now  doul.ted. 


i4  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

temple  to  Minerva,  and  where  the  Abbey  rears  its  venerable 
pile,  one  to  Apollo.  Some  of  these  heathen  temples  may 
have  been  afterwards  converted  into  Christian  churches, 
as  was  common. 

How  far  the  Bible  was  instrumental  in  effecting  the 
change,  it  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  say,  but  we  have  a 
great  number  of  testimonies  to  the  rapid  multiplication 
of  portions  of  the  Scriptures  in  the  earliest  centuries  of 
Christianity. 

Chrysostom  says  that  the  abundance  of  Bibles  turned 
barbarians  into  philosophers,  and  that  every  encourage 
ment  was  offered  to  their  perusal.  "  The  grace  of  the  Spirit 
so  ordered  it,"  he  answers  an  objector  by  saying,  "  that 
the  Scriptures  should  originally  be  composed  by  publicans, 
fishers,  tentmakers,  shepherds,  and  private  men,  that 
none  of  the  ignorant  and  unlearned  might  have  this  excuse 
of  difficulty  to  fly  to  ;  that  the  handy-craftsman,  the 
servant,  and  the  most  illiterate  among  men  might  reap 
benefit."  An  argument  follows  why  business  men  should 
read  God's  Word  in  secret :  "  Remember  the  Ethiopian 
treasurer  who,  though  he  was  a  barbarian,  and  understood 
not  what  he  read,  yet  read  for  all  that,  sitting  in  his  chariot. 
If  he  would  not  omit  reading  it  in  the  time  of  a  journey, 
much  less  would  be  omit  it  when  he  sat  quietly  in  his 
house."  In  one  of  his  sermons  on  Lazarus,  he  says  again : 
*'  The  reading  of  the  Scriptures  is  our  great  guard  against 
sin.  Our  ignorance  of  them  is  a  dangerous  precipice  and 
a  deep  gulf." 

Theodoret,  Chrysostom's  disciple,  speaks  of  a  wide 
diffusion  of  the  Scriptures  in  his  day,  saying,  "  You  may 
commonly  see  that  our  doctrine  is  known  not  only  of  them 
that  are  the  Doctors  of  the  Church,  but  also  even  of  the 
tailors,  and  smiths,  and  weavers,  and  of  all  artificers,  yea, 
and  further  also  even  of  women,  and  that  not  only  of  them 
that  be  learned,  but  of  labouring  women,  of  sewsters, 
and  servants,  and  handmaids ;  not  only  the  citizens, 
but  also  the  country  folks  do  very  well  understand  the 
same.  You  may  find  even  the  very  ditchers  and  delvers 
and  cowherds  and  gardeners,  arguing  of  the  Holy  Trinity, 


EARLY  DISSEMINATION  OF  THE  SCRIPTURES     17 

and  of  the  creation  of  all  things."*  Numbers  wrote  for  a 
living  in  the  early  centuries,  and  books  were  comparatively 
cheap  and  numerous.  In  the  Augustan  age  in  Home  a 
body  of  trained  scribes  could  issue  a  hundred  copies  of  a 
book  in  almost  as  short  a  time  as  type  can  now  be  set  up, 
proofs  revised,  and  the  sheets  printed.  In  one  hour, 
twenty  copies  of  a  book  of  Martial,  containing  five  hundred 
and  forty  lines,  were  issued.  Pliny  says  that  Hegulus 
had  a  thousand  copies  of  his  son's  life  transcribed,  and  a 
copy  of  Horace  was  to  be  bought  probably  for  the  same 
price  as  the  last  volume  of  Tennyson  or  Browning. 
Andrews  Norton  thinks  that,  by  the  end  of  the  second 
century,  every  fifty  Christians  would  have  a  copy  of  at 
least  the  Gospels,  and  it  is  certain  that  the  translation 
of  the  Scriptures  into  the  mother  tongue  was  carried  out 
extensively  at  this  period.  The  Syrians,  the  Egyptians, 
the  Indians,  the  Persians,  the  Ethiopians,  and  others 
had  them.  Chrysostom  himself  prepared  an  Armenian 
version,  and  Jerome  a  Dalmatic,  Ulphilas  a  Gothic,  and 
Methodius  a  Sclavonic. 

Jerome,  indeed,  who  gave  the  Church  of  Rome  its 
cherished  Vulgate,  had  little  idea  of  the  Word  of  God 
being  locked  up  in  Latin  for  ever.  He  translated  many 
portions  of  it  for  Eustachia  and  Paula,  and  in  a  letter  to 
another  friend  urged  the  "  reading  now  of  one  book  and 
now  of  another  to  increase  herself  in  virtue."  Constant ine, 
after  giving  himself  up  to  the  reading  of  the  inspired 
oracles  in  his  palace,  ordered  Eusebius  to  provide  fifty 
copies  of  the  Scriptures,  to  be  written  on  prepared  skins 
by  skilled  scribes,  well  acquainted  with  their  craft,  for 
use  in  the  service  of  the  Churches  in  the  new  capital,  called 
after  himself  Constantinople.  Short  Iv  after  this,  the 
Canon  of  Scripture  was  fixed  for  the  first  time  at  the 
Council  of  Laodicea  (A.D.  \\i\\\),  which,  though  a  sub 
ordinate  Council,  had  its  decrees  fully  ratified  and  generally 
accepted  by  the  early  Church.  Erasmus,  in  the  Preface; 
to  his  Paraphrase,  quotes  Anastasius  Sinaita  (A.D.  f>lil), 
giving  this  reason  for  the  impossibility  <>f  the  Scriptures 

*    U'llll-t's  SVIIOIM.H. 


1 8  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   BIBLE 

being  corrupted,  that  the  Gospels  were  translated  into 
the  languages  of  seventy-two  nations.  It  was  not  till 
later  that  books  became  rare,  owing  in  part  to  the  destruc 
tion  of  libraries  in  the  violence  of  barbarian  warfare. 
By  the  seventh  century,  the  deposit  of  a  handsome  book 
had  come  to  be  a  most  valuable  security,  and  formidable 
anathemas  were  denounced  to  protect  a  manuscript 
from  being  alienated  or  purloined.  In  the  ninth  century, 
in  the  diocese  of  Lisieux  in  France,  there  was  not  a  single 
copy  of  the  Old  or  New  Testaments  to  be  found. 

We  had  no  early  version,  however,  and  how  far  the 
Latin  tongue  came  to  be  known  amongst  our  ancestors 
cannot  be  said.  Julius  Agricola  is  famous  for  his  care 
that  the  sons  of  the  principal  Britons  should  be  taught 
the  liberal  sciences,  and  though  at  first  disliking  all  such 
studies,  they  came  at  length  to  excel  in  them.  We 
certainly  have  some  significant  tokens  of  the  New  Testa 
ment  being  known  amongst  the  people.  For  instance, 
when  Germanus  and  Lupus  came  from  France  to  suppress 
Pelagianism,  there  was  a  public  discussion  at  St.  Albans, 
to  which  a  great  multitude  came,  the  only  authority 
appealed  to  being  the  New  Testament.  This  was  only  a 
short  time  before  the  coming  of  the  Saxons,  and  Bede 
gets  quite  excited  about  it.  "  On  the  one  side,"  he  cries. 
"  was  Divine  faith,  on  the  other  human  presumption  ; 
on  the  one  side  piety,  on  the  other  pride.  .  .  .  The 
venerable  Prelates  poured  forth  the  torrent  of  their 
Apostolical  and  Evangelical  eloquence.  Vanity  was  con 
vinced,  and  perfidiousness  confuted.  The  people  who 
were  judges  could  scarcely  refrain  from  violence,  but 
signified  their  judgment  by  their  acclamations." 

Of  Archbishop  David  also,  reputed  uncle  to  King  Arthur, 
we  are  told  that  he  privately  studied  the  Scriptures  ten 
years  before  he  would  presume  to  teach,  and  always 
carried  the  Gospels  about  with  him. 

So  if  we  do  not  know  who  brought  the  Word  of  God 
into  Britain,  we  may  be  tolerably  certain  that  it  was  here 
very  early.  We  cannot  tell  who  took  it  into  Africa,  and 
originated  the  Churches  in  that  land  which  afterwards 


EARLY    DISSEMINATION  OE  THE  SCRIPTURES     19 

became  so  distinguished.  We  know  nothing  of  its  intro 
duction  into  (Jaul.  and  with  regard  to  even  Italy  itself, 
the  stories  Rome  would  have  us  accept  are  as  doubtful 
as  any  in  a  monkish  chronicle.  But  certainly  we  had 
both  the  truth  and  its  witnesses  quite  early,  and  as  Dr. 
Alexander  has  said.  k>  the  multitude  of  the  isles  saluted 
their  King,  and  the  rugged  tones  of  Britain  were  not  un 
heard,  mingling  in  the  triumphant  chorus,  and  losing 
their  harshness  in  its  manifold  harmony." 


CHAPTER   III 

THE    TRUTH    BANISHED    AND    DESTROYED    SOON    AFTER 
ITS    RECEPTION 

"  But   Heaven's    high  will 
Permits  a  second  and  a  darker  shade 
Of  Pagan  night.     Afflicted  and  dismayed 
The  relics  of  the  sword  flee  to  the  mountains  ; 
O  wretched  land!  whose  tears  have  ilowed  like  fountains; 
Whose  arts  and  honours  in  the  dust  are  laid, 
By  men  yet  scarcely  conscious  of  a  care 
For  other  monuments  than  those  of  earth  ; 
Who,  as  the  iields  and  woods  have  given  them  birth. 
Will  build  their  savage  fortunes  only  there  ; 
Content,  if  foss  and  barrow  and  the  girth 
Of  long  drawn  rampart  witness  what  they  were." 

WORDSWORTH. 

IF  we  are  curious  to  know  the  appearance  of  the 
books  which  were  making  their  way  and  claiming 
their  place  in  this  early  period,  we  must  think  of  a 
lawyer's  parchment,  more  or  less  beautifully  em 
bellished.  All  sorts  of  things  have  been  used,  indeed, 
as  materials  on  which  to  write :  plates  of  lead  and 
copper,  the  bark  of  trees,  bricks,  stone,  wood,  the 
leaves  of  palm  and  other  trees,  the  Egyptian  papyrus, 
the  skins  of  goats  and  sheep,  linen,  silk  and  horn. 
The  verses  of  Hesiod,  the  earliest  Greek  poet,  were 
written  on  tables  of  lead,  the  laws  of  Solon  on  wooden 
planks. 

There  is  an  early  copy  of  the  Pentateuch,  in  the  Public 
Library  at  Cambridge,  which  is  written  on  thirty-seven 
skins  dyed  red ;  another  in  the  British  Museum  is  on 
forty  thick  brown  skins.  Perhaps  the  commonest 


THE  TRUTH   HANISHED  AND  DESTROYED     21 

ancient  method  was  to  take  such  skins,  and  make  a 
length  sometimes  as  great  as  fifty  yards  by  about  a  yard 
and  a  half  wide,  and  keep  it  rolled  up  on  a  stick,  so  called 
'"  volume  " — rolled  up.  The  wood  of  the  beech  tree  was 
also  in  use  at  a  later  time,  the  word  book — Saxon  boc — 
meaning  a  beech  tree. 

Doubtless  the  first  portions  of  the  Word  of  (Jod 
which  were  circulated  here  were  vellum  or  parch 
ment  manuscripts,  so  that  some  that  belong  to  the 
Saxon  period  are  legible  and  usable  to-day,  though 
more  than  a  thousand  years  old.  It  is  a  mercy  paper 
was  not  invented.  Paper  made  from  rags  was  not 
known  until  the  twelfth  century,  though  a  kind  of 
paper,  called  Charta  bomb  yd  na,  was  in  use  some  time 
before. 

Very  little  need  be  said  about  the  Druids  and  their 
dark  doings,  which  were  superseded,  as  the  higher  truths 
came  to  be  known.  The  way  was  somewhat  prepared, 
according  to  Origen,  by  the  Druidical  teaching  of 
one  (Jod,  but  with  this  monotheism  was  blended  wild 
polytheism  and  stupid  superstition,  belief  in  Hesus, 
Tentates.  the  mistletoe,  the  snake  egg,  etc.  No  doubt 
their  religious  system  had  its  birthplace  on  the  Plain 
of  Shinar,  for,  as  the  Celtic  tribes,  originally  a  branch 
of  the  .Japhetic  stock,  moved  Westwards,  they  carried 
with  them,  to  some  extent,  the  social  institutions  and 
the  traditionary  faith  of  the  patriarchs.  The  former 
was  corrupted  into  clanship  and  vassalage,  and  the 
latter  into  the  superstitions  of  the  Druids,  which  came 
to  be  full  of  monstrous  idols,  almost  surpassing  the 
very  devilish  devices  of  Egypt,  with  deformed,  terrible 
countenances.  What  we  know  about  them  is  gathered 
from  stray  notices  in  Latin  and  (Jreek  writers,  and 
from  some  few  reminiscences  in  old  Irish  songs.  The 
dark  oak  groves  were  their  temples,  and  human 
sacrifices  were  offered  up  with  peculiar  cruelty.  The 
Druids  wen;  the  teachers  and  poets,  the  prophets 
and  sorcerers,  the  judges  and  priests  of  the  people,  and 
were  divided  into  classes — bards,  vates,  and  Druids 


22  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

proper,  of  which  the  last  ranked  first.  The  con 
flict  between  Druidism  and  Christianity  appears  to 
have  been  long  and  severe,  but  very  little  is  known 
about  the  matter  except  that  the  true  Faith  was 
completely  victorious,  and  thus  the  one  system  coming 
from  the  East  was  superseded  by  another.  Stonehenge 
is  perhaps  naturally  looked  upon  as  the  great  British 
survival  of  the  early  superstition,  though  it  is  doubtful 
whether  it  had  anything  to  do  with  it. 

Not  only  did  the  Druids  disappear,  however,  but  the 
Roman  occupation  came  to  an  end.  Briton  was  left  as 
a  derelict  ship,  abandoned  of  her  crew,  and  Saxon 
freebooters  swept  over  the  land  in  their  place,  doing 
the  work  of  savages  here  just  as  it  was  done  in  Rome 
itself  by  Alaric,  Genseric,  and  Attila.  The  marks  of 
civilisation  and  Christianity  began  to  rapidly  disappear. 
"  High  towers,  fair  temples,  goodly  theatres,  strong 
walls,  rich  porches,  princely  palaces,  large  streets, 
brave  houses,  sacred  sepulchres,  sure  gates,  sweet 
gardens,  stately  galleries,  wrought  with  fair  pillars  and 
fine  imageries "  —  nearly  all  was  swept  away  by  the 
ruthless  hands  of  the  new  invaders,  and  Christianity, 
with  whatever  books  it  had,  was  driven  into  Cornwall, 
Wales,  and  Strathclyde.  We  never  entirely  lost  the 
Faith,  indeed,  after  its  preaching  in  or  just  after  the 
apostolic  age.  As  Fuller  says,  "  The  lamp  once  lit 
went  not  out  by  night,  neither  by  the  night  of  ignorance, 
nor  of  security,  nor  of  persecution."  A  very  miserable 
condition  we  dropped  down  to,  however;  for,  as  the 
same  quaint  writer  says,  "He  who  expects  a  flourishing 
Church  in  a  fading  Commonwealth,  let  him  try  whether 
one  side  of  his  face  can  smile  when  the  other  is 
pinched."  Milton  draws  a  dreadful  picture  of  the  con 
dition  of  the  country  after  the  Saxon  invasion,  saying 
that  there  was  a  complete  subversion  of  truth  and 
justice  in  the  minds  of  most,  "  scarce  the  least  footstep 
or  impression  of  goodness  being  left."  Our  Saxon 
ancestors  were  simply  Aryan  barbarians,  loving  war 
partly  for  war's  sake,  and  partly  for  its  plunder,  but 


23 


Till;  TIU'TH    IJANISHKI)  AND   DESTROYED      25 

without  any  love  for  the  arts  and  pursuits  of  peace. 
In  vain  some  of  the  Britons  sought  refuge  within 
the  walls  of  their  churches,  for  their  rage  burnt 
fiercest  against  everything  of  the  sort.  The  British 
called  them  wolves,  dogs,  whelps  from  the  kennel  of 
barbarism,  hateful  to  (Jod  and  man.  They  had  plenty 
of  rude  valour,  indeed,  and  the  Romans  dreaded 
them  above  all  others,  because  their  movements  were 
so  sudden.  Symmachus  once  provided  about  thirty  of 
them,  after  a  victory,  for  the  shows  at  Home,  but  the 
day  they  were  to  be  brought  into  the  theatre,  they  all 
strangled  themselves.  They  believed  themselves  to  be 
the  descendants  of  \Vodin,  and  had  the  usual  barbaric 
superstitions,  which  have  had  strength  enough  to  leave 
their  mark  on  our  familiar  words  of  to-day.  If  the  famous 
Arthur  of  romance  ever  had  an  existence,  neither  he  nor 
any  other  could  permanently  hinder  their  occupation  of 
the  country,  which  they  effected  by  fire  and  sword.  Under 
these  circumstances,  it  was  not  likely  that  the  conquered 
would  have  much  influence  over  the  conquerors,  with 
regard  to  any  Faith  whatever.  Bcde.  ({noting  Gildas, 
upbraids  the  Britons  for  never  giving  the  Saxons  the 
means  of  conversion;  but  Milton  says  more  reasonably, 
"'How  far  to  blame  they  were,  and  what  hope, 
then;  was  of  converting  in  the  midst  of  so  much 
hostility,  is  not  now  easy  to  determine."  Certainly,  it 
was  a  complete,  conquest,  though  it  took  a  long  time 
to  achieve,  and  those  who  achieved  it  scarcely  answered 
to  the  tvpical  idea  of  the  murderous,  ruthless  warrior. 
We-  are  prone  to  think  that  such  horrible  deeds  as 
theirs  would  be  better  matched  by  the  dark  and 
melancholy  physiognomies  of  Asia  and  Africa  than  tin- 
fair,  blue-eyed,  pleasing  countenances  of  our  Saxon 
ancestors.  But  every  good  propensity  had  been  per 
verted  by  their  direful  customs,  their  acquired  passions, 
and  their  barbarous  training,  however  nature  had 
supplied  them  with  the  germs  of  those  more  amiable 
qualities  which  have  become  the  national  characteristics 
of  their  descendants.  Mr.  Sharon  Turner  wisely  moralises 


26  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   BIl'.LK 

on  this,  and  exclaims:  "So  ductile  is  the  human 
capacity  that  there  is  no  colour,  climate,  or  constitution 
which  governs  the  moral  character  so  permanently  as 
the  good  or  evil  habits  and  discipline  to  which  it  is 
subjected." 


CHAPTER    IV 

THK     mill.K    SOON     IN     ITS    I'LACK     ACAIN       A  f< ;  t'STIN  K 
AND    HIS    MISSION 

"  I'hri-.t    sai.l   nut    to    His   lir.-t    diseipleship. 
(in   forth   and    preach    impo>t  HITS   to   the   world: 
lint    '_'ave   them    truth    to    Ituild   on;   and    the   sound 
\\'as   miuhty   on    their   lips;   nor   needed   they 

r.e.-lilc    the  'Cospcl.    citlier    spear    or    shield 

'!'<>  aid    th.-in   in   th-ir   warfare   for   the   faiiii." 

DANTE. 

BKFOKE     the     Saxons     had      finished     conquering     and 
taking   possession,     the     (lospel     conquered     them.     .Just 


wliero      Hen<rist     had    landed     at      Klilis      Fleet,     oil    tlio 
isle     of   Thanet.    with     all     the     rude    earlv    ajiparattis     of 


28  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

war,  there  landed  Augustine  a  century  and  a  half  later, 
with  the  message  and  the  instruments  of  peace  and 
goodwill. 

And  amongst  these  instruments  was  probably  a 
Bible,  others  coming  soon  afterwards.  When  the 
Pope  sent  Augustine  his  pall,  the  little  addition 
to  his  dress  which  marked  the  dignity  of  an 
archbishop,  he  sent  a  number  of  manuscripts.  Wanley 
gives  the  catalogue,  from  which  we  extract  the 
following : — 

1.  A  Bible,  adorned  with  some  leaves  of  a  purple  and 

rose   colour,  in  two   vols.,  which   were   extant   in 
the  time  of  James  i. 

2.  The  Psalms,  with  the  Creed,  Paternoster,  and  several 

Latin  Hymns. 

3.  Two  copies  of  the  Gospels,  with  the  ten  Canons  of 

Eusebius  prefixed.* 

4.  Another  Psalter,  with  Hymns. 

7.  An  Exposition  of  the  Epistles  and  Gospels,  which 
had  on  the  cover  a  large  beryl,  surrounded  with 
crystals. 

Augustine  also  brought  Gregory's  "Pastoral  Care,"  which 
King  Alfred  afterwards  translated. 

Here  then  we  are  on  solid  ground,  though  of  course  the 
Scriptures  were  all  locked  up  in  Latin,  and  were  thus 
books  simply  for  the  missionary  priests  who  came  chanting 
and  preaching  to  the  king  and  queen  sitting  on  the  green 
down  between  Ramsgate  and  Minster.  It  is  a  romantic 
story  altogether,  this  second  invasion  of  England  by  Rome, 
successful  like  the  first.  Gregory,  surnamed  the  Great, 

*  The  identical  volumes  are  most  likely  those  now  to  be  seen  in 
the  Hodleian  Library  ('>•  -•  14.  S.">7)  and  at  Corpus  Christ!  College, 
Cambridge  (2H<>).  Wanley  searched  the  kingdom  for  MSS.,  and  is  of 
this  opinion.  They  contain  .Anglo-Saxon  entries  a  thousand  years 
old,  connecting  them  with  St.  Augustine's  monastery  at  Canterbury. 
The  drawings  with  which  they  are  ornamented  are,  of  course,  the  most 
ancient  monuments  of  Roman  pictorial  art  in  the  country,  scarcely 
yielding  to  those  of  the  Vatican  Virgil  and  Terence. — WESTWOOD. 


THE   BIBLE  SOON   IN   ITS   PLACE   AGAIN        31 

whilst  still  a  monk,  saw  some  Saxon  boys  for  sale  in  the 
market-place  at  Rome  one  day.  He  was  a  mixture  of 
the  ascetic  and  the  wit,  belonging  to  a  distinguished 
family,  having  used  all  his  immense  wealth  to  found 
Benedictine  monasteries,  in  one  of  which  lie  fasted  so 
much  as  to  endanger  his  life.  As  for  the  boys  that 
attracted  him,  there  were  three  of  them,  and  they  possibly 
formed  part  of  the  spoil  taken  in  the  wars  incessant  at 
that  time,  and  had  been  brought  from  the  public  market 
in  London.  Gregory  was  struck  with  their  fair  and  hand 
some  lo:)ks.  and  inquired  whence  they  had  come.  Home 
often  amused  itself  by  describing  England  as  cut  of!  from 
the  whole  world,  and  approaching  the  frozen  and  half- 
fabled  Thule,  but  when  he  heard  that  they  came  from 
the  land  of  the  Angles,  he  gave  it  quite  another  turn, 
exclaiming.  "  It  suits  them  well  ;  they  have  angel  faces, 
and  ought  to  be  the  co-heirs  of  the  angels  in  heaven." 
Then  finding  that  they  came  from  Deira,  in  the  northern 
part  of  England,  "I)e  ira  !  "  he  cried.  "  Yes,  they  should 
be  delivered  from  the  wrath  of  (Jod."  Another  pun  he 
founded  on  the  name  of  their  King  Ella,  his  enthusiasm 
bursting  out  in  "  Hallelujah  !  the  praise  of  the  creating 
Deity  must  be  sung  in  these  regions  !  " 

It  was  no  mere  punning  and  funning. 

He  would  have  come  as  a  missionary  to  England  almost 
at  once,  if  he  had  not  been  positively  stopped  by  the  then 
Pope,  and  when  lie  became  Pope  himself,  he  resolved 
that  the  mission  should  be  set  about,  and  on  a  large  scale. 
His  motives  were  of  the  highest  and  purest,  though  doubt 
less  he  could  not  altogether  shut  out  from  his  mind  the 
glory  that  would  accrue  from  such  a  mission,  if  successful. 
Rome  was  in  a  pitiful  plight,  j  erhaps  touching  the  bottom 
of  her  decline  and  fall  just  at  that  time.  This  is  (libbon's 
description  of  what  she  had  sunk  to :  - 

"Amidst  the  arms  of  the  Lombards,  and  under  the 
despotism  of  the  (J reeks,  we  again  inquire  into  the  fate 
of  Rome,  which  had  reached,  about  the  end  of  the  sixth 
century,  the  lowest  period  of  her  depression.  The 
surrounding  parts  were  reduced  to  the  state  of  a  dreary 


32  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

wilderness,  in  which  the  land  is  barren,  the  waters  are 
impure,  and  the  air  is  infectious.  Curiosity  and  ambition 
no  longer  attracted  the  nations  to  the  Capital  of  the  World  ; 
but.  if  chance  or  necessity  directed  the  steps  of  a  wandering 
stranger,  he  contemplated  with  horror  the  vacancy  and 
solitude  of  the  City,  and  might  be  tempted  to  ask,  '  Where 
is  the  Senate,  and  where  the  people  ?  '  From  time  to 
time  the  Tiber  rushed  with  irresistible  violence  into  the 
valleys  of  the  Seven  Hills.  A  pestilential  disease  arose 
from  the  stagnation  of  the  deluge,  and  so  rapid  was  the 
contagion  that  eighty  persons  expired  in  an  hour  in  the 
midst  of  a  solemn  procession  which  implored  the  mercy 
of  Heaven.  A  society  in  which  marriage  is  encouraged 
and  industry  prevails  soon  repairs  the  accidental  losses 
of  pestilence  and  war  ;  but,  as  the  far  greater  part  of  the 
Romans  were  condemned  to  hopeless  indigence  and 
celibacy,  the  depopulation  was  constant  and  visible,  and 
gloomy  enthusiasts  might  expect  the  approaching  failure 
of  the  human  race." 

Certainly,  it  was  a  brave  deed  to  attempt  the  conversion 
of  Saxon  England  at  such  a  time,  and  an  eternal  argument 
in  favour  of  Foreign  Missions.  Mr.  Kemble  exclaims 
that  it  was  as  heroic  as  when  Scipio  marched  for  Zama, 
and  left  the  terrible  Carthaginians  thundering  at  the 
gates  of  the  city.  And  at  first  the  missionaries  had  not 
the  necessary  heroism,  and  turned  back  home,  daunted 
by  the  difficulties  of  the  way,  and  their  fears  of  worse 
things  still.  Gregory  encouraged  them,  however,  and 
they  came  on,  being  no  less  than  forty  in  number.  The 
way  was  prepared  for  their  labours  by  the  influence  of 
Queen  Bertha.  She  was  a  Christian,  and  was  only  allowed 
to  marry  Ethelbert  on  condition  that  she  had  the  free 
exercise  of  her  religion.  Luidhard,  Bishop  of  Soissons, 
came  over  with  her,  though  there  is  no  trace  of  his  having 
met  with  any  further  success. 

The  order  of  Italian  Benedictines,  to  which  Augustine 
and  his  followers  belonged,  had  only  recently  been  founded 
amid  the  fastnesses  of  Monti  Cassino.  Such  an  enterprise 
was  a  great  change  to  them  after  their  "  narrowing  convent 


THE   I'.ini.E  SOON   INT   ITS   PLACE  AC,  A  IN        35 

walls/'  where  they  had  led  lives  marked  out  by  lines 
that  could  not  bend,  content  with  the  "daily  pacings 
to  and  fro,  the  gray  set  life."  They  were  not  morbid 
men,  however,  believing  in  discipline,  but  without  carrying 
it  too  far.  They  taught  the  poor  children  around  them. 
copied  priceless  manuscripts  both  on  sacred  and  secular 
subjects,  and  lived  lives  of  industry,  mo.stly  safe  from 
the  robber  barons  of  the  day.  They  were  received  by 
Kthelbert  and  Bertha  in  the  open  air.  for  fear  of  possible 
spells  and  charms:  and  as  nothing  uncanny  happened. 
and  their  words  seemed  good,  they  were  permitted  to  come 
on  to  Canterbury,  and  take  up  their  residence  there.  As 
soon  as  they  settled  down,  they  built  barns  and  sheds  for 
cattle  side  by  side  with  their  newly  erected  churches,  and 
opened  schools  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood,  where 
the  youth  were  taught  reading  as  well  as  the  formulas 
of  their  Kaith.  It  was  A.D.  ~>(.i7  when  they  came,  a  hundred 
and  fifty  years  after  the  last  Roman  had  sailed  awav. 
but  the  Church  of  St.  .Martin,  built  during  their  occupation 
was  still  there,  and  had  been  used  by  (tMieeii  IVrtha  as 
her  Uratorv.  This  they  took'  possession  of.  and  before 
long  the  king  was  converted,  and  many  more.  He  was 
the  third  Bretwalda,  or  dominant  king,  and  llede  says 
he  had  extended  his  dominions  right  up  to  the  Number, 
by  which  the  Southern  Saxons  were  divided  from  the 
Northern,  so  that  his  conversion  had  far-reaching  results. 
As  for  Oregorv.  to  whom  all  was  owing  under  Cod. 
he  took  the  deepest  interest  in  the  mission  throughout. 
and  was  a  man  we  English  folk  may  well  delight  to  honour. 
The  unanimous  suffrages  of  the  Papal  electors,  the  voice 
of  the  people,  and  the  decision  of  the  Civil  I'owers  forced 
him  from  his  0,11  iet  life,  and  obliged  him  to  assume  the 
triple  mitre.  On  his  elevation,  he  adopted  the  title  of 
servant  of  the  servants  of  .Jesus  Christ,  and  distinguished 
himself,  amongst  other  things,  l»v  the  earnestness  with 
which  he  urged  the  reading  of  the  Scriptures.  These  he 
Compared  to  a  river,  in  some  places  so  shallow  that  a 
lamb  might  pass,  and  in  others  so  deep  that  an  elephant 
might  be  drowned.  '"  They  seem  to  expand  and  rise 


36  OUR  OWN   KXr.LISH   1UI5LE 

in  proportion  as  those  who  read  them  increase  in  knowledge. 
Understood  by  the  most  illiterate,  they  are  always  new 
to  the  most  learned/' 


''No  aue  so   youn;.r,   no   \vit  so  si 

Which   Scripture  doth   not   lit  ; 
There's  milk   for   babes,   and   yet  withal 
There's  meat   for  stronger  wit." 

Writing  to  a  physician,  he  represents  the  Word  of  God 
us  an  Kpistle  addressed  by  the  Creator  to  His  creatures  ; 
and  as  no  one  would  disregard  such  an  honour  from  his 
prince,  wherever  he  might  be,  and  whatever  might  be 
his  engagements,  but  would  be  eager  to  examine  its  contents, 
so  ought  we  never  to  neglect  the  Epistle  sent  to  us  by 
the  Lord  of  angels  and  men.  He  not  only  used  persuasions 
but  adduced  examples,  and  particularly  referred  to  the 
conduct  of  a  poor  paralytic  man  who  lived  at  Home, 
called  Servulus,  who.  unable  himself  to  read,  purchased 
a  Bible,  and  by  entertaining  religious  persons  whom  he 
engaged  to  read  to  him,  and  at  other  times  persuading  his 
mother  to  perform  the  same  ollire.  had  learned  the  Scriptures 
by  heart  ;  and  who,  when  he  came  to  die,  discovered  his 
love  to  them  by  obliging  his  attendants  to  sing  psalms 
with  him. 

Certainly  he  was  far  from  the  typical  Pope  of  later 
lime;;  and  writing  to  the  Bishop  of  Alexandria,  he  said 
hat  the  bishoprics  of  Antioch.  Alexandria,  and  Home 
were  equally  apostolical,  since  they  were  all  held  by 
Peter.  "  If  you  give  me  more  than  my  due,  you  rob 
yourself.  If  I  am  named  Pope,  you  own  yourself  to  be 
no  Pope.  Let  no  such  thing  be  named  between  us.  My 
honour  is  the  honour  of  the  universal  Church.  I  am 
honoured  in  the  honour  paid  to  my  brethren."' 

The  last  letter  Gregory  ever  wrote,  addressed  to  Theo- 
delinda.  Queen  of  the  Lombards,  discovers,  by  the  presents 
with  which  it  was  accompanied,  his  love  for  the  Scriptures 
and  their  diffusion.  "'I  send,"  says  he,  "to  the  Prince 
Adoaldus,  your  son.  a  cross,  and  a  book  of  the  Gospels, 
in  a  Persian  box.  and  to  your  daughter  three  rings,  desiring 


sr.   AU<-,r>nsi.  -  i  i;ov>,  M:\II   nil    MIL  or 

-T.    AUUfMINK's    MJKMU.N. 


Till;    IJIIII.K  SOON    IN    ITS   PLACK   AOAIN         39 

you  to  give  them  these  tilings  witli  your  own  hand,  to 
enhance  the  value  of  the  present." 

And.  though  already  tainted  with  some  error,  the  truth 
which  Rome  dispensed  in  the  sixth  century  was  mainly 
that  which  we  now  hold.  Her  errors  are  all  dated.  Trail- 
substantiation  was  never  broached  until  Kngland  had 
been  reconverted,  and  it  took  more  than  four  centuries 
to  settle,  until  at  last  it  was  adopted  by  the  fourth  Lateral! 
Council  in  A.D.  \'2\~>.  So  with  one  thing  after  another 
that  is  distinctively  Papal,  the  claim  of  "semper  eadem  " 
being  a  highly  absurd  one,  in  the  light  of  history.  It 
cannot  be  denied,  indeed,  that  there  was  some  taint  already. 
The  Cospel  had  to  fight  its  way  in  Koine  through  the  old 
prejudices  of  the  City,  and  it  was  a  maxim  of  soni"  of 
its  earlv  promoters  to  do  as  little  violence  to  these  prejudices 
as  possible.  Barnabas  might  be  confounded  with  Jupiter, 
and  Paul  with  Mercurius.  St.  Peter  stood  at  the  gate 
instead  of  Cardea  ;  St.  I'octjue  or  St.  Sebastian  in  the 
bedroom  instead  of  the  Phrygian  Penates;  St.  Nicholas 
was  the  Sign  of  the  Vessel  instead  of  Castor  and  Pollux  ! 
Doctrines  also  were  affected,  (Iregorv  himself  establishing 
sonic  belief  in  Purgatory,  though  without  the  blasphemous 
additions  which  practicallv  led  to  the  Reformation. 

But.  in  the  main,  it  was  the  truth  that  we  received,  and 
we  see  how  great  was  Oregorv's  solicitude  that  the  Scriptures 
should  be  known  and  prized.  England  was  no  such 
prize  then,  though  kings,  from  the  lirst.  became  the  nursing 
fathers  that  prophecy  had  spoken  of.  Once  when  a 
panic  came  by  reason  of  a  plague,  it  was  attempted  to 
revive  the  old  idolatrv.  and  there  was  very  little  reference 
to  Koine  at  lirst.  It  was  pestilential,  and  the  Alps  were 
formidable,  and  often  fatal  to  travellers.  The  seas.  too. 
were  full  of  danger.  It  was  a  wearv  way  from  Calais 
to  Marseilles,  one  of  the  usual  routes,  and.  as  Mr.  Blunt 
says,  "  If  the  political  aspect  of  things  rendered  a  Mavor 
suspicious  somewhere,  it  might  be  worse  than  a  weary 
way." 

So  things  were  left  to  shape  themselves  very  largely, 
without  a  great  deal  of  reference  to  Koine,  both  good  and 


40  OUR  OWN   KXOLISH    PJBLE 

evil  coming  of  this,  and  we   may  sing  Wordsworth's  ode 
without   much    misgiving  : — 

''  For  ever  hallowed  he  this  morning  fair, 

Blest   be  the  unconscious  shore  on   which  ye  tread, 

And  blest  the  silver  cross,   which  ye  instead 

Of  martial   banner   in    procession    bear1; 

The  cross  preceding   Him   who  floats  in  air, 
The  pictured  .Saviour  !   by  August ine  led 
They  come  and  onward  travel   without   dread. 

Chant  ing   in   barbarous  ears  a   tuneful   prayer. 
Sung   for  themselves  and   those   whom    they   \\ould    five; 
Rich   conquest   waits   them  :    -the   tempestuous  sea 

Of  ignorance   that    ran   so   roimh   and   hiifh. 
And   heeded   not    the   voice   of  clashing  swords. 
These  good    men   humble   hv  a    few    bare   words, 

And   calm    with    fear  of  Ood's    Divinity'/' 

We  shall  see  later  on.  however,  that  the  real  influence, 
of  the  '"  life-full  \\ord  v  in  our  country  was  due  far  more 
to  lona  than  Canterbury.  Augustine  himself  also  was 
not  a  man  to  be  specially  proud  of.  representing  as  he  did 
some  of  the  worst  faults  of  Rome.  He  drew  back  from 
his  enterprise  at  the  beginning  ;  he  claimed  additional 
power  over  his  companions  from  (Jregory  ;  he  had  to 
be  warned  that  he  was  not  to  be  pulled  up  by  the  wonders 
which  had  been  wrought  in  'Britain  :  he  treated  the  remnant 
of  British  Christians  in  Wales  with  haughty  severity,  and 
uttered  a  malediction  against  them  which  sanctioned, 
if  it  did  not  instigate,  their  massacre  later  on.  Dean 
Stanley,  indeed,  who.  as  Canon  of  Canterbury,  would 
naturally  look  at  him  in  the  most  favourable  light,  acknow 
ledges  that  he  was  often  thinking  of  himself  or  his  Order 
when  we  should  have  wished  him  to  be  thinking  of  the 
great  cause  lie  had  in  hand,  and  that  he  was  not  a  man 
of  any  great  elevation  of  character.* 

*  Jlixlnriral  Memorials  of  Canterbury. 


CHAPTER   V 


C.KDMON 

"Tin-   Word    \\liii-li   thev   ha. I   longed   to  hear. 
Mad   .•••in.-  at    last,   the   hfe-fiill    Word, 
Wlii.-li   tlii-y   ha.l  oft. -ii  almost    heard 
In    some   deep  silenee   of   tin-    In-cast  ; 
l-'or   with   a   sense  of  dun    unrest. 
That    Word    unl.orn   had   often    uroii'_'ht. 
And   striiL'Jed    in   the   womh   of   thought  ; 
Ainl    l<>.    it   nou    \\  as   horn   indeed  ; 
lien-   was   the   an-wer   to   their   need." 

I!.  ( '.  TKKNCII. 

"  We  >honld  repaid  St .  ( 'olninha  and  liis  a--«ria!es  \\  it  h  a  rever- 
rn<-e  \\hii-h  ue  .should  nlii-e  to  |»er.-oiia'jes  nierelv  historic;  inasniueh 
as  th'-ie  <  an  In-  no  ju^t  eomparison  Ix-tueeri  the  regenerator  and  the 
«li-troyer  of  a  people  ;  liet  \\eeii  the  enlightened  ini"ionary  and  the 
coni|iieroi-."  L\i:ii\  1:1:. 

WK  must  turn  now  in  (putc  a  nc\v  direction  t'>  discover 
the  genesis  of  tin-  lii'st  vernacular  paraphrase  OF-  poem 
based  on  tin-  Scriptures,  lor  this  is  all  that  ('.-rdmon's 
work  can  In-  called,  though  sometimes  spoken  of  as  a 
translation.  So  far  we  have  been  occupied  mainly  with 
the  South  of  Knjjand.  but  we  must  JM>  to  the  North  for 
the  first  elTort  of  this  kind,  and  we  shall  tind  that  we  owe 
it,  not  to  August iii'-.  or  anv  of  those  who  preceded  him. 
but  toColumba.  (  hid  and  Saint,  and  by  a  direct  spiritual 
genealogy  to  St.  Patrick'  and  Ireland. 

The  story  "I  Patrick's  life  is  that  of  a  Heaven-sent 
and  successful  missionary,  \\hcthcr  lie  belonged  to 
Brittany,  Scotland,  or  Cumberland  is  doubtful,*  but 

''I'll.-  |>rol>.iluhli<-s  are  in  la\our  of  I,,  heinu  l>oin  at  I  )iinil>ai  toll 
in  !X'i  He  'A. i-  a  I'oinan  .  iti/>  n  of  ~<iiue  rank 

•I  a 


44  OUR  OWN  F.NC.LTSTT  P.IP.LE 

he  was  taken  captive  in  one  <>!'  the  frequent  piratical 
excursions  made  by  the  Irish,  and  being  sold  as  a  slave, 
was  employed  in  herding  sheep,  under  the  name  of  Sureat. 
He  was  about  sixteen  years  old.  a  thoughtful  youth, 
and  his  meditative  habits  were  deepened  as  he  spent 
his  days  by  mountain  track  and  forest  glade.  At  about 
the  age  of  manhood  he  escaped,  and  began  at  once  to 
devote  himself  to  such  learning  as  was  attainable,  studying. 
to  prepare  himself  for  Christian  labour,  in  the  College 
of  the  Lateran.  at  Lerins  on  the  Tuscan  Sea:  and  at 
Auxerre  in  Caul,  under  Cermanus. 

Ireland  was  at  that  time  in  a  miserable  condition. 
Those  who  speak  of  its  ancient  glories  must  know  that 
they  had  not  yet  begun.  Instead  of  one  king,  bearing 
sway  from  the  Giant's  Causeway  to  Cape  Clear,  there 
were  five  separate  kingdoms,  alwavs  jealous  of  each  other, 
and  perpetually  at  war.  Tribute  was  paid  in  kind  :  and 
this  amongst  a  people  who  carrv  arms,  and  are  high  ot 
heart  and  hot  of  head,  is  only  another  name  for  frequent 
bloody  squabbles.  So  it  was  kingdom  against  kingdom, 
sept  against  sept,  brother  against  brother,  and  even 
son  against  father  perpetually. 

Ireland  suffered  from  the  misfortune  of  never  having 
been  conquered  by  Rome,  and  Christianity  had  so  Jar 
failed  to  reach  it.  Elsewhere  the  true  Faith  was  no  sooner 
preached  than  it  had  its  converts,  but  Ireland  remained 
the  prey  of  the  bigoted  Heathen  and  the  abode  ot  the 
deluded  or  coerced  Heathen  for  centuries  after  the  truth 
had  become  known  in  the  other  parts  of  Kurope.  Patrick 
had  seen  its  condition,  and  applying  himself  for  more 
than  twentv  vears  to  learning,  he  then  asked  the  Pope 
for  permission  to  preach  to  those  who  had  formerly 
captured  and  enslaved  him.  The  required  sanction 
was  given  at  once,  and  with  a  few  monks  he  landed 
at  Ulster,  after  an  absence  of  about  a  quarter  ot  a 
century. 

The  mission  was  one  of  the  most  successful  on  record. 
At  first  doubted,  and  almost  driven  back  to  their  vessels, 
they  rapidly  won  their  way.  until  in  a  very  short  time 


45 


idols  and  idol  worship  became  hateful  to  the  people.  the 
Christian  doctrines  wen-  received,  and  churches  and 
monasteries  arose,  where  the  flames  had  Init  recently 
devoured  the  victims  of  superstition.* 

This  was  all  in  the  middle  of  the  fifth  centurv.  Patrick's 
work  in  Ireland  l>cin^  nearly  conteinj)oraneoiis  with 
the  Saxon  invasion  in  Knglaiul.  Whilst  the  Saxons 
were  driving  the  Kaith  into  the  corners  of  our  land,  he 
was  planting  it  in  the  neighbouring  isle.  And  there. 


KK  KKS.TOUATION). 


where    it     had    lieen    so    much    needed,    it     took    root,   arid 
spread  all  over  the   land."'" 

Learned,  pious,  and  active.  Si.  Patrick's  preachers 
came  to  he  famous  1  hrou<_diout  Kurope.  Many  of  them 
traversed  foreign  countries  as  secular  and  religious  teachers, 

*  lli^',r>i  n,  /,-./,/,.,/.  Maiin.l.  r.  iVitri.k'-  M.IIH.  M  ;i.-  Mai:"iitiii-.  l-nl 
tin-  Patrick  »;t>  k«-|,t  tn  \\ln-n  tin-  l)ukc  of  (  'niui;niL'lil  w;i^  n,i!ii».|  ,ift.  r 
him  in  IS50.  tin-  full  naim-  l,i-in-  Arthur  Willijun  l';iiri«-k  AMn-rt. 

t  I'-ln-r  !-!io\s.<|  I'atrifk  I"  tli«  Morl'l  a-  a  .-iiiij'lf  an-l  inii'lilv  i'\aii- 
Bi-liral  |in-a--li.-r.  <i..»i-,  in  .  a  >iri,nt'  I'n.t,  -taiH  .  .  >tal.li-|i<  <|  in  ITs.'J 
Irclan.lV  only  «.nl.-r  of  kni-htlioo<l.  ih.-  Kniflits  of  St.  i'atri.k.  Tli.- 
Rolimous  Tract  Society  liav«-  pul.li!-lic<l  lu->  \\orks  in  thfir  "  (  'hrist  IHII 


4^>  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH    BIT.LE 

and  the  monasteries  of  Ireland  began  to  attract  the  best 
youth  even  of  England.  The  music  of  the  Irish  churches 
also  became  famous,  and  in  the  reign  of  Pepin  teachers 
were  sent  for  at  great  expense  to  instruct  the  nuns  of 
Nivelle  in  psalmody. 

But,  indirectly,  Scotland  also  owes  its  Christianisation 
to  St.  Patrick.  If  we  pass  over  rather  more  than  a  century, 
we  find  Columba,  an  Irish  abbot,  going  to  Scotland,  when 
about  forty  years  of  age,  and  working  for  more  than 
a  generation  as  a  Christian  missionary,  on  the  mainland  and 
in  the  Hebrides.  His  chief  station  was  lona,  a  rocky  island 
lying  oft'  the  south-western  extremity  of  Mull.  After  him 
it  was  called  Icolmkill  (lona-columb-kill),  and  the  com 
munity  there  became  the  headquarters  of  a  movement 
for  the  conversion  of  North  Britain,  the  missionaries 
being  devout  native  Celts. 

Columba  and  his  followers,  in  fact,  did  for  years  the 
work  both  of  a  Bible  Society  and  a  Divinity  College. 
Called  "  awful  ground  "  by  Dr.  Johnson,  the  burial-place 
afterwards  of  a  large  number  of  Scotch,  Irish,  and 
Norwegian  kings,  lona  became  at  this  period  the  light  of 
the  Western  World.  Portions  of  Scripture  were  constantly 
copied  and  studied  in  the  rude  College  which  arose,  and 
the  neighbouring  tribes  were  sought  for  Christ  from  this 

"  Isle  of  Colnmba's  fell. 

Where  Christian  piety's  soul-ehcering  spark. 
Kindled  from   Heaven   between  the  light  and  dark 
Of  time,  shone  like  the  morning  star." 

Columba  was  of  royal  blood,  but  circumstances  forced 
him  out  of  the  land  where  he  might  have  ruled.  The 
immediate  occasion  of  his  leaving  Ireland  was  an  adverse 
decision  of  the  Synod  of  Teltown.  A  young  prince, 
who  had  fled  to  him  for  protection,  was  slain,  and  Columba 
going  to  his  native  mountains  in  a  rage,  gathered  an 
army  of  revenge,  and  a  battle  was  fought.  Then  he 
left  his  country,  never  to  return,  and  resolved  to  devote 
himself  wholly  to  Christian,  Biblical,  and  Missionary 
labours.  He  had  founded  a  monastery  when  only  twenty- 


nine,  and  now.  at  the  age  of  forty-two  (A.D.  '>''•;{).  he  set 
out  in  a  wicker  boat,  accompanied  by  twelve  of  his  friends 
and  followers.  Once  landed  in  lona,  and  a  cairn  built 
to  mark"  the  spot,  whence  no  trace  oj  their  native  land 
could  be  seen,  the  whole  company  applied  themselves 
devotedly  to  the  work  so  much  needed. 

Columba  was  a  kingly  man,  with  a  magnificent  voice, 
great  familiarity  with  Scripture,  powers  ol  organisation, 
and  k'  in  his  habits  of  life,  like  unto  Paul  the  Apostle/' 
according  to  his  biographer,  Adamnan.  For1  thirty 
years  he  traversed  the  sea  in  his  frail  wicker  boat,  thai 
he  iniulit  visit  the  numerous  islands  about  lona.  Through 
every  strath  and  glen  where  there  were  Heathen  families 
he  went,  and  the  true  Faith  won  its  way  largely  through 
out  what  we  now  call  Scotland,  three  hundred  churches 
bein<r  founded  bv  him  and  his  associate's.  His  name 
means  dove-like,  but  he  was  naturally  passionate  to 
a  degree,  and  indeed  is  described  as  a  man  lull  oj  con 
tradictions,  "tender  and  irritable;  rude  and  courteous: 
ironical  and  compassionate;  caressing  and  imperious: 
grateful  and  revengeful."  Manv  were  killed  in  a  sanguinary 
feud  occasioned  by  him.  and  he  was  told  to  win  as  manv 
to  Christ  as  had  perished.  He  set  himself  to  do  it,  and 
far  exceeded  the  number. 

All  this  was  going  on  in  the  North  previous  to  Augustine's 
arrival  in  the  South,  the  dates  of  Columba's  death  and 
King  Kthelbert's  conversion  at  Canterbury  almost  coin 
ciding.* 

But  now  we  must  come  from  lona  to  Lindisfarne  and 
Whitbv.  The  English  settlers  in  Northumbria  asked 
the  followers  of  Coluniba  to  send  them  a  missionary. 
This  was  done  at  once,  but  the  brother  selected  returned 
discouraged,  saying  that  the  people  were  dull  and  obstinate. 
As  Fuller  savs.  however,  "  hard  with  haul  makes  no 
wall,"  and  Aidan,  with  a  milder  temper,  soon  had  a  ditTeivnt 

*  Tin-  Komanist  party  |MTM-<  ut<-<|  the  S<  «.t-  for  Muti-c.-sciitials.  Imt 
both  l>in»ar«l  ami  Allmn  I'.utl-r  writ<-  ••Saint  ('i.lumlia,  though  IK-  and 
such  men  a.s  ( 'olumlmnns,  Kurs«-y.  B«i-il,  ami  Anlan,  all  "  Saint«l," 
wen-  u.s  much  I'roN-stantn  as  Mdancthon. 


4<s  OUR  owx  ENGLISH  TUP.LK 

report  to  give.  He  founded  <)  monastery  ;it  Lindisfarnc, 
chief  of  the  Fame  Islands,  about  nine  miles  from  Berwick- 
on-Tweed,  attached  ai  low  water  to  the  coast.  The 
island  is  oidy  about  two  miles  lon<_r.  and  is  chiefly  covered 
with  sand,  but  here  the  followers  of  Columba  established 
themselves  in  such  force  that  it  came  to  be  called  Holy 
Island.  They  worked  effectually  from  this  point  for 
the  conversion  of  the  North  of  Finland,  just  as  Columba, 
had  done,  before  For  the  conversion  of  Scotland.  They 
trusted  the  wild  men  whom  thcv  sought  to  soften,  instead 
of  fearing  them,  went  up  into  their  hills  to  live  with  them 
as  comrades,  and  at  Lindistarne  itsclt  a  bishopric  was 
established,  which  was  not  removed  to  Chester  le  Street, 
and  then  Durham,  till  the  ravages  of  the  Danes  made 
it  imperative.  Bede  tells  us  that  Aidan  took"  care  that 
all  those  that  were  employed  bv  him  should  spend  a 
considerable  part  of  their  time  in  Bible  study,  and  there 
is  little  doubt  that  amongst  all  such  missionary-monks 
the  Word  of  (Jod  was  familiar  eii'tu^li  in  its  Latin  <_rarb. 
He  says,  however,  that,  having  none  to  bring  them  the 
Synodal  Decrees,  being  so  far  away  from  the  rest  of  the 
world,  they  only  practised  such  works  of  pietv  and  chastity 
as  they  could  learn  from  the  prophetical,  evangelical, 
and  apostolical  writings.  Poor,  unfurnished  creatures! 
Only  the  Bible,  and  no  Synodal  Decrees!  However, 
they  rooted  Christianity  amongst  a  Heathen  people. 

There  remains  now  only  one  more  link  in  the  chain 
which  connects  our  first  English  Bible-work,  the  Paraphrase 
of  Ca-dmon,  with  St.  Patrick.  Amongst  his  other  works, 
Bishop  Aidan  consecrated  Heia.  the  first  woman  who 
devoted  herself  to  missionary  labours  in  the  North  of 
England,  and  who  founded  the  religious  house  at  Herutea, 
Hartlepool.  She  was  succeeded  by  the  Abbess  and  Princess 
Hilda,  who  afterwards  moved  away  to  a  new  missionary 
station  on  the  East  Cliff  of  Whitby,  then  called  Streone- 
shalh. 

Fuller  tells  us  that  all  monastic  institutions  were  clear 
in  the  spring  but  muddy  in  the  stream  :  and  Bede,  our 
great  authority  for  this  period,  gives  us  a  beautiful  picture 


:  •' 


of  the  Whitbv  Abbey  when  it  was  thus  in  its  early  purity: 
"  Men  and  women  studied  and  were  taught  the  strict 
observance  of  justice,  piety,  chastity,  and  other  virtues, 
and  particularly  of  peace  and  love  ;  so  that,  after  the 
example  of  the  primitive  ('hurch.  no  person  was  there  rich, 
and  none  poor,  all  things  being  in  common  to  all.  and  none 
having  any  property.  Hilda's  prudence  was  so  great 
that  not  only  persons  of  the  middle  rank  but  even  kings 
and  princes  sometimes  asked  and  received  her  advice. 


WH1THY    (STUEANvKfJIALOH)    ABDEY. 


She  obliged  those  who  were  under  her  direction  to  attend 
so  much  to  the  reading  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  to 
exercise  themselves  so  much  in  works  of  justice,  that  many 
might  very  easily  be  found  there  fit  for  ecclesiastical 
duties.  In  short,  we  afterwards  saw  live  bishops  taken 
out  of  that  monasterv,  all  of  them  men  of  singular  merit 
and  sanctity.'5  * 


• 
i 


asters 
men.    i! 
Wiml.or 

.*•    of    St. 
I    Itrii 

4 


was     eall.-.|     the 
was    not     at     all     i 
this   ,-arly  period. 
.    and     Kepton 
I'-rid-et.         Aln 


May  of  the  Ij.jht  house,  and  Hilda's 
ui'|ue.  in  its  iii'-ludm"  lioth  men  and 
It  was  the  same  at  ('oldin^ham.  Hark 

and  in  Ireland  tin-re  was  the  ^n-at 
>ad  also  then-  wen-  . \iitun.  FonU'Vniult, 


50  OUR  OWN   ENGLISH    Bir.LF, 

To  this  place  then  belongs  the  work  of  Ciodmon,  with 
whom  the  literature  of  our  country  almost  begins.  What 
ever  there  may  have  been  before  his  time,  with  very  little 
exception,  has  perished,  and  it  is  surely  fitting  that  a 
literature  grand  and  musical  as  that  of  our  own  land 
should  have  its  keynote  struck  by  a  man  who  turned  the 
greatest  of  all  books  into  a  poem  for  the  people  of  his 
day.  "  No  one  could  ever  compare  with  him  !  "  exclaims 
Bede,  "  for  he  learnt  the  art  of  singing,  not  from  men,  but 
from  God." 

Caedmon  was  probably  one  of  the  converts  made  by 
the  Whitby  monks,  being  first  a  lay  brother  and  after 
wards  a  monk.  He  belongs  to  the  latter  half  of  the 
seventh  century,  when  rustic  feasts  were  common,  the 
guests  coming  often  from  some  distance,  and  the  cattle 
which  brought  them  being  watched  over  by  some  one 
of  the  company,  as  they  were  in  need  of  protection 
against  the  plundering  raids  so  frequent  in  such  rude 
times. 

It  was  common  for  the  harp  to  be  passed  round 
on  such  occasions,  and  one  day,  when  it  was  approach 
ing  Coodmon,  he  left  the  table  to  take  his  place  in 
mounting  guard  over  the  cattle  and  property.  He  could 
not  sing,  and  doubtless  he  would  wish  that  some 
better  lays  were  common  at  such  times.  But,  according 
to  Bede,  when  he  had  composed  himself  to  rest,  a 
person  appeared  to  him,  and  said,  "  Ca?dmon,  sing 
some  song  to  me."  He  answered.  "  I  cannot  sing,  for 
that  was  the  reason  why  I  left  the  entertainment,  and 
retired  to  this  place."  "  Yet  you  shall  sing,"  replied 
his  visitor.  "What  shall  I  sing?"  rejoined  Caodmon. 
"  Sing  the  beginning  of  created  things,"  was  the  answer, 
upon  which  our  poet  awoke,  and  soon  afterwards  pro 
duced  a  paraphrase  of  the  history  of  Genesis.  The 
Abbess  Hilda,  exhorting  him  to  quit  the  secular  habit, 
and  join  them  in  the  monastery,  he  did  so,  and  in 
Bede's  quaint  words,  "  like  a  clean  animal  chewing  the 
cud,  he  converted  the  sacred  story  into  most  harmonious 
verse." 


r.KDMON  5;, 

Hero  is  (Vdmon's  description  of  the  passage  of  the 
Red  Sea  :  - 

"  Then  the  mind  of  his  men 

Became  despondent,  after  they  saw 

From  the  .South  ways  the  hosts  of  Pharaoh 

Coming  forth,  moving  over  the  holt, 

The  hand  glittering. 

They  prepared  their  arms,  the  war  advanced, 

Bucklers  gleamed,  trumpets  sung. 

Standards  rattled  ;  they  trod  the  nation's  frontier  ; 

Around  them  screamed  the  fouls  of  war 

(J  reedy  of  battle,  dewy  feathered; 

Over  the  bodies  of  the  host, 

The  dark  choosers  of  the  slain. 

The  wolves  sung  their  horrid  evensong, 

In   hopes  of  food,   the  reckless  beasts 

Threatening  death  to  the  valiant."  * 

Take  another  example  of  this  early  poem  from  the 
recent  translation  of  Mr.  Thorpe  : — 

"  For  us  it   is  much  right 
That    we.   the  guardians  of   the  skies, 
The  glory   King  of  Hosts 
With  our  words  praise,  in  our  minds  love. 
He   is  of  power  the  essence. 
The  head  of  all   exalted  creatures, 
The  Lord   Almighty  ; 

To   Him   has   beL'inniim  never,   origin   been. 
Xor  ever  eometh  end  of  the   Eternal   Lord. 
But    He   is   ever   powerful 
Over  the    Heavenly  Thrones."  f 

Perhaps  from  such  extracts  the  reader  may  think 
that  such  writing  is  scarcely  to  he  classed  either  with 
the  patient  and  exact  translations  of  later  days,  or 
with  the  epics  of  Milton.  Mr.  Morley,  however,  has 
shown  us  that  a  version  of  this  earliest  poem  may  he 
given  which  is  not  wanting  in  fire  and  real  poetic  feeling. 
Here,  for  instance,  is  the  uprearing  of  the  firmament, 
which  is  illustrated  by  one  of  many  quaint  cuts  adorning 

*  HioijrniJiin  llritnimicn  I. it,  rnrin.  T.  U'n-lit.  M..\. 
t  English  Translation,  I'..  Thorp-.  K.S.A. 


54  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

the  original  manuscript,  now  in  the  Bodleian   Library  at 
Oxford :- 

"  Then  peace  was  among  dwellers  in  the  sky, 
Blaming  and  lawless  malice  were  gone  out, 
And  angels  feared  no  more,  since  plotting  foes 
Who  cast  off  Heaven  were  bereft  of  light. 
Their  glory  seats  behind  them  in  God's  realm, 
Enlarged  with  gifts,  stood  happy,  bright  with  bloom, 
But  ownerless,  since  the  cursed  spirits  went 
Wretched  to  exile  within  bars  of  Hell. 
Then  thought  within  His  mind  the  Lord  of  Hosts 
How  He  again  might  fix  within  His  rule 
The  great  Creation,  thrones  of  Heavenly  Light, 
High  in  the  Heavens  for  a  better  band, 
Since  the  proud  scathers  had  relinquished  them. 
The  Holy  God  therefore  in  His  great  might 
Willed  that  there  should  be  set  beneath  Heaven's  span 
Earth,  firmament,  wide  waves,  created  world, 
Replacing  foes  cast  headlong  from  their  home. 
Here  yet  was  naught  save  darkness  of  the  cave, 
The  broad  abyss,  whereon  the  stedfast  king 
Looked  with  his  eyes  and  saw  that  space  of  gloom, 
Saw  the  dark  cloud  lower  in  lasting  night, 
Was  deep  and  dim,  vain,  useless,  strange  to  God, 
Black  under  Heaven,  wan,  waste,  till  through  His  Word. 
The  King  of  Glory  had  created  life. 
Here  first  the  Eternal  Father,  guard  of  all 
Of  Heaven  and  earth,  raised  up  the  firmament. 
The  Almighty  Lord  set  firm  by  His  strong  power 
This  roomy  land  :  grass  greened  not  yet  the  plain, 
Ocean  far  spread  hid  the  wan  ways  in  gloom, 
Then  was  the  Spirit  gloriously  bright 
Of  Heaven's  keeper  borne  over  the  deep 
Swiftly.     The  life  giver,  the  angel's  Lord, 
Over  the  ample  ground  bade  come  forth  light. 
Quickly  the  high  king's  bidding  was  obeyed. 
Over  the  waste  there  shone  light's  holy  ray. 
Then  parted    He,  Lord  of  triumphant  might. 
Shadow  from  shining,  darkness  from  the  light. 
Light  by  the  Word  of  God  was  named   Day."  * 

Of  course  the  style  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  poetry  is  aban 
doned  here  for  the  sake  of  rhythm.  We  find  very  short 
lines,  as  a  rule,  in  this  early  poetry,  with  quick  transitions. 
"  The  verses  ring."  as  Longfellow  has  expressed  it,  tk  like 

*  Illustrations  of  Ktxjlitsh  ltdiyiun,  \\.  Morlt-y. 


C/KDMON  55 

the  sharp  blows  of  the  hammer  upon  the  anvil."  The 
harmony  of  the  short  verses  depended  chiefly  on  the 
alliteration,  or  the  recurrence  of  the  initial  letters  of  the 
words,  and  upon  a  loose,  varying  rhythm  regulated  rather 
by  the  ear  than  by  any  fixed  metrical  canon.  End  rhymes 
were  scarcely  used,  though  in  the  Exeter  MSS.  there  is  one 
poem  entirely  written  in  rhyme,  with  alliteration.  The 
Anglo-Saxons  had,  however,  a  store  of  poetical  expres 
sions,  differing  from  the  language  of  common  life,  and 
forming  the  stock  in  trade  of  the  bard,  rendered  familiar 
to  the  ear  by  their  constant  repetition,  and  therefore 
likelv  to  be  forcibly  impressed  on  the  memory.  This 
poetical  stock  in  trade  became  somewhat  copious,  new 
words  and  phrases  being  formed  of  compounds,  most  of 
which  became  naturali  ed  in  the  language.  In  Cscdmon's 
description  of  the  Flood,  for  instance,  there  are  no  less  than 
thirty  expressions  used  to  describe  the  Ark.  It  is  the 
sea-horse,  the  greatest  of  watery  chambers,  the  high 
mansion,  the  holy  wood,  the  great  sea-chest,  the  greatest 
of  treasure-houses,  the  palace  of  the  ocean,  the  wooden 
fortress,  the  floor  of  the  waves,  the  receptacle  of  Noah, 
the  moving  roof,  the  feasting  house,  the  nailed  building, 
etc.  Much  was  of  course  very  crude,  and  Lardner  compares 
Cii'dmon  with  St.  Avitus  of  Vienna,  who  lived  a  century 
and  a  half  before  the  Saxon.  But  the  Gallic  prelate  was 
acquainted  with  the  memorials  of  Latin  taste. 

Take,  as  another  example  of  this  seventh-century  poem. 
Caedmon's  account  of  the  fall  of  Satan.  In  the  early  Church 
it  was  not  uncommon  to  speak  of  Satan  as  Lucifer,  and  to 
apply  the  description  of  the  King  of  Babylon  and  his  fall  to 
the  author  of  all  pride.  Babylon  is  typical  of  tyrannical, 
selfish  power,  which  is  cast  down  by  the  powers  of 
Heaven.  But  we  must  not  go  beyond  a  short  extract: — 

"  Mis  mind  ur^ed  him 

That   North   and   South   IK-  should   l»e^in   to  work, 
Found   buildings  ;   said   he  questioned   whether  he 
Would  serve  (Jod.      Wherefore,   he  said,   shall    1    (oil? 
No  nerd   have    I   of  Master.      I   can   work 
With   my  o\\n   hands  yreat    marvels,   and   have   power 
To   Imild   a   throne   more   \\orthv  of  a   (iod. 


56  OUR  OWN   ENGLISH   IJIBLK 

]Jiglicr  in   Heaven.      Why  shall    I    for   His  smile 

Serve  Him,  bend  to  Him  thus  in  vassalage? 

1  may  be  God  as  He. 

Stand  by  me  !  strong  supporters,   firm  in  strife  ; 

Hard  mooded  heroes,   famous  warriors, 

Have  chosen  me  for  chief;   one  may  take  thought 

With  such  for  counsel,  and  with  surh  secure 

Large  following.     My  friends  in  earnest  they, 

Faithful  in  all  the  shaping  of  their  minds  ; 

I  am  their  master,   and  may  rule  this  realm. 

Therefore  it  seems  not  right  that  1  should  cringe 

To  God  for  any  good,  and  I  will  be 

No  more   His  servant.'' 

"  When  the  Almighty  heard 
With  how  great  pride  His  angel  raised  himself 
Against  his  Lord,   foolishly  spake  high  words 
Against  the  Supreme  Father,  lie  that   deed 
Must  expiate,  and  in  the  work  of  strife 
Receive  his  portion,  take  for  punishment 
Utmost  perdition.     So  doth  every  man 
That  sets  himself  in  battle  against   God, 
In  sinful  strife  against  the  Lord  Most   High. 
Then  was  the  Mighty  wroth  ;    Heaven's  highest  Lord 
Cast  him  from  his  high  seal,   for  he  had  brought 
His  Master's  hate  on  him." 

CcTcdmon  probably  did  not  turn  poet  till  rather  late  in 
life,  as  he  died  A.D.  (580.  King  Alfred  inserted  some  of 
his  poetry  in  his  translation  of  Bode,  but  the  collection 
that  goes  by  his  name  is  probably  the  work  of  more  than 
one  hand.  Hickes  thinks  part  of  it  is  in  the  Dano-Saxon 
dialect  of  the  tenth  century,  in  which  Astle  concurs.* 

*  Warton  says  the  only  genuine  C'anlmon  is  the  small  metrical 
fragment  inserted  in  Alfred's  version  of  the  Venerable  P.ede's  Ilixtori/, 
and  that  the  "spurious  I1;edmon  belongs  to  the  same  period  as  the 
Durhrnn  Hook.  JVrhaps  the  rude  Northumbrian  verses  of  Uanlinon 
were  regarded  by  the  .Klfrediau  and  later  ages  as  raw  materi  d  to  be 
elaborated.  Ten  P.rink's  idea  that  the  less  poetical  part  of  (Jeni'sis 
is  Ca'dmon's  mainlv,  and  that  is  ail.  is  refuted  by  the  evidence  of  the 
Ruthwell  Cross.  .Mr.  Henry  P.radley  points  out  that  Professor  Sievers 
also  is  wrong  in  saying  that  the  Temptation  and  Fall  are  translations 
of  an  old  Saxon  poem  bv  the  author  of  the  "  Heliand.''  Probably 
rather  the  ''  Heliand''  and  its  sister  poem  in  Anglo-Saxon  are  both  of 
them  translations  from  the  verses  of  the  Northumbrian  poet,  though 
much  altered.  This  result  is  conlirmed  by  the  testimony  of  the  Latin 
Preface  to  the  "  Heliand,"  which  virtually  ascribes  the  authorship  of 
the  poem  to  Cu'dmon  himself. —  LKSI.II;  S'riornicN. 


C.1.DMON  57 

God  is  called  the  "  blithe-hearted  King,"  the  patriarchs 
are  "'  Earls,"  Abraham  is  a  "  wise  hoedy  man,"  the  sons 
of  Reuben  are  "Vikings"  (sea-pirates),  and  the  Ethiopians 
are  "a  people  brown  with  the  hot  coals  of  Heaven."  This 
early  poetry  of  our  ancestors  came  to  extol  the  virtues 
of  courage,  generosity,  and  fidelity,  whilst  the  coward, 
the  niggard,  and  the  traitor  are  the  objects  of  its  special 
abhorrence.  Religion  and  war  were  its  themes,  and 
scarcely  love  at  all.  though  woman  is  treated  with 
delicacy  and  respect,  after  the  general  diffusion  of  Christian 
ideas. 

The  last  modern  rendering  of  Ca?dmon  we  take  from 
Conybeare's  Illustrations  of  Atiglo-Saxon  Poetry.  Mr. 
Conybeare  has  compiled  a  very  interesting  volume,  in 
which  he  says  that  our  vernacular  poetry  had  assumed 
as  early  as  the  eighth  century  the  form  and  character 
which  it  preserved  with  little  or  no  alteration  until  the 
Norman  Conquest.  He  remarks  on  Caedmon's  excessive 
prolixity,  the  mere  proposition,  "  Let  us  praise  (Jod.  the 
Maker  of  Heaven  and  Karth."  being  expanded  into  eighteen 
lines.  He  is  inclined  to  accept  the  whole  of  what  has 
come  to  us  under  Ca-dmon's  name  as  his  work,  and  thinks 
that  Hiekes  and  Wanley  are  for  putting  everything  insipid 
into  the  earlier  period,  and  better  work  into  the  Dano- 
Saxon. 

Surely  the  following  account  of  the  destruction  of 
Pharaoh's  host  only  wants  a  good  elocutionist: — 

"Tin-    Heathen   stood    aghast;    fierce   raged    the   Hood, 
And   wailing  spirits  gave   the  shriek  of  death: 
The   hlood   streamed   fresh   on   each   man's  destined   grave; 
The  sea   foamed  gore  ;   screams   were  amid   the   waves, 
As  though   the   waters   wept  ;   darkling   uprose 
The   whirlpool   mists  ;    Kgypt    was   backward   turned, 
Dismayed   they   fled;   fear  struck   their  inmost    sold; 
How   fallen   their   boasting  now!   how    would   they  joy 
Once  more  to  reach   their  home,   but    that    foul  surf 
Swift    rolling  in   its   force.   o'er\\  helmed   their   pride. 
That    none   returned   of  all   that    warrior  train. 
Midways  Jehovah   stayed    their  mad   career; 
Where   lay   their   path,    there   raged    the  ocean    wave. 
Ixjw   sunk   the   host  ;   the  streams  ascended   high, 


58  OUR  OWN   ENGLISH   BIBLE 

And  high  as  Heaven  uprose  the  vengeful  storm, 
Loud  wept  the  warriors  ;  from  each  dying  tongue 
The  shriek  of  woe  pierced  the  cloud  darkened  air. 
Mad  ocean  raged  ;   forth  from  his  slumbers  roused, 
In  all  his  terrors  stood  the  king  of  floods  ; 
With  horrid  din  lie  chased  the  warrior  host ; 
Corpse  rolling  upon  corpse,  the  unpitying  wave 
])eep  in  its  foaming  bosom  held  their  pride." 

Sir  F.  Palgrave.  in  acknowledging  that  there  may  be 
a  second  and  later  Ca?dmon,  called  by  some  "  the  spurious 
Cccdmon,"  says  that,  whoever  the  author  may  have  been, 
the  remote  antiquity  of  the  work  is  unquestionable,  and 
in  poetical  imagery  and  feeling  it  excels  all  the  other  early 
remains  of  the  North,  and  belongs,  not  only  to  Englishmen, 
but  to  every  branch  of  the  great  Teutonic  family. 

Mr.  Bosanquet  goes  beyond  this,  in  his  Fall  of  Man,  or 
Paradise  Lost,  of  Caedmon.  He  has  produced  a  very 
readable  volume  on  the  subject,  in  which  he  says  that 
the  earliest  poetry  of  the  English  or  Anglo-Saxons  is  far 
above  the  poetry  of  any  other  country  of  Europe  at  the 
same  period,  and  that  Ca'dmon's  poem  is  far  above  all 
other  Anglo-Saxon  poetry.  He  exclaims,  with  national 
pride  :  "  When  we  look  back  through  so  many  ages 
upon  our  old  bard,  the  monk  of  Whitby,  upon  his  con 
temporary  and  biographer,  the  venerable  Bede,  standing 
almost  alone  in  Europe  amid  the  ruins  of  the  literature 
of  the  Old  World,  presaging  the  greatness  of  the  future, 
we  become  impressed  with  the  large  share  our  country 
has  had  in  building  up  the  literature  of  the  Christian 
world,  and  with  the  great  antiquity  of  our  own.  And 
if  we  look  around  for  others  of  the  same  age,  \ve  find 
them  still  among  the  Angles  ;  Aldhelm  and  Alcuin  are 
ours." 

Certainly  we  are  not  to  claim  what  does  not  belong  to 
us,  through  national  pride  or  anything  else.  But  we  can 
only  judge  from  evidence  adduced,  and  that  is  decidedly 
in  favour  of  Mr.  Bosanquet's  contention.  Other  nations 
may  have  had  their  poems,  songs,  and  romances,  but  they 
have  not  come  down  to  us.  We  have  positive  proof  that 
Ca^dmon's  paraphrase  belongs  to  the  seventh  century, 


r.KDMOX  59 

ami  the  dates  oi  the  earliest  manuscripts  in  the  vernacular 
in  other  countries  are  as  follows  : — 

(ierman         ....... 

Northern  Frenrh  ..... 

Southern  Italian 

Provencal     .........  ,, 

Norse    "...  

Northern  Italian I'-'th 

Spanish         ......... 

And  as  to  a  large  portion  of  Caedmon  being  spurious, 
Mr.  Robert  Spence  Watson  may  almost  be  said  to  have 
disposed  of  that.* 

He  gives  a  description  of  the  MS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library, 
the  only  existing  one.  It  is  a  small  folio  of  22(.)  pages, 
the  first  "2\'2  being  written  in  a  clear  and  careful  hand, 
and  the  remaining  17  in  a  later  and  more  careless.  The 
MS.  is  illustrated  up  to  the  With  page,  and  spaces  are  left 
for  further  illustrations. 

As  to  the  lines  which  appear  in  Bede's  History,  given 
by  King  Alfred,  they  have  gone  through  the  process  of 
double  translation,  and  Bode  is  careful  to  state  that  he 
only  gives  Ca-dmon's  meaning,  and  not  his  words.  The 
MS.  was  the  property  of  the  famous  Usher,  Primate  of 
Ireland,  who  founded  the  Library  of  Trinity  College. 
Dublin,  early  in  the  seventeenth  century.  He  it  was  who 
put  the  dates  down  the  sides  of  our  Reference  Bibles, 
which  some  almost  regard  as  part  of  the  text.  It  was  in 
his  search  for  books  for  his  College  Library  that  he  dis 
covered  this  precious  manuscript,  most  likely  then  classed 
amongst  the  "  vetusta  et  inutilia."  At  this  time  (A.D. 
H520  .">(>)  there  was  living  in  England,  as  librarian  to 
the  Karl  of  Arundel.  a  learned  and  kindly  man,  Francis 
Dujon  the  youniier,  the  son  of  a  Professor  of  Divinity  at 
Leyden.  He  was  on  friendly  terms  with  Milton  and 
most  of  the  eminent  men  of  the  day.  and  is  known  in 
literature  as  .lunitis.  At  this  time  his  favourite  study 
was  Old  English,  and  in  it  he  thought  to  find  the  etymologies 
of  all  the  tongues  of  Northern  Europe,  t'sher  thought. 


60  OUR  OWN  KXr.LISH   PJliLK 

tliercfore,  that  lie  could  not  place  the  MS.  of  CVdmon  in 
better  hands  ;  and  so  it  proved,  for  Jnnins  had  it  published 
as  a  small  quarto  at  Amsterdam,  though  without  trans 
lation  or  notes,  and  then  bequeathed  it  to  the  Bodleian 
Library. 

It  is  interesting  also  to  know  that  this  early  poem  and 
paraphrase  possibly  inspired  Milton's  Paradise  Lost. 
Junius  printed  it  at  Amsterdam  in  1(555,  and  the  date  of 
Paradise  Lost  is  1G61.  Milton  was  interested  in  the 
studies  of  Junius,  and  a  few  years  before  had  written 
his  own  History  of  Britain,  dwelling  at  length  upon  early 
Saxon  times.  The  discovery  and  publication  of  such 
a  work  could  not  fail  therefore  to  make  a  deep  impression 
upon  a  mind  like  Milton's,  and  probably  suggested  his 
own  glorious  epic.  Bosanquet,  in  publishing  the  Miltonic 
portions  of  Cirdmon  in  English  heroic  verse,  gives  many 
traces  of  the  influence  of  the  earlier  and  ruder  poet  on 
Milton.  So  it  is  probable  that,  as  the  ^Icssiali  suggested 
the  Creation,  Csodmon  suggested  Milton's  great  epic.* 

Thus  from  the  north  of  England  comes  our  first  extant 
Bible-work.  The  boy  Succat  becomes  St.  Patrick  ; 
Columba  is  the  fruit,  seen  after  many  days,  of  his  teaching  ; 
he  wins  Scotland  for  Christ,  and  his  missionaries  are  sent 
to  Northumberland  and  Durham  ;  one  of  them  sets  apart 
Hilda  for  missionary  work  ;  she  and  her  fellows  are  the 
means  of  Grdmon's  conversion  ;  and  at  \Vhitby  his 
poetical  paraphrase  is  put  together.  So  there  is  a  more 
suitable  and  permanent  memorial  of  Hilda's  sainthood 
than  the  rollcd-up  stone  snakes  found  at  \Vhitby  on  the 
seashore,  and  which  tradition  ascribes  in  some  strange 
way  to  her  prayers  ;  or 

"  The  very  form  of  Hilda  f;iir 
Hovering  upon  the  sunny  nir." 

which  the  robust  in  faith  see.  at  favoured  times,  near  the 
northern  window  of  the  Abbey  Church  !  The  famous 

*  Masson  says,  however,  that  the  part  of  l'<trndi-«  L'i*t  most  resembling 
('iedmon  was  not  included  in  Milton's  original  conception,  and  docs 
not  seem  to  have  hern  added  till  alter  his  friend  .luniiis  had  shown 
him  his  version  of  Ca'dmon. 


6 1 

.John  of  Bcverley  was  trained  there,  and  the  still  more 
famous  Wilfrid.  But  more  even  than  Wilfrid,  with  his 
striking  character  and  romantic  life,  will  Whitby  he 
for  ever  associated  with  la-dmon,  whose  work  we  can 
turn  over  to-day  in  the  quiet  of  the  Bodleian  Library, 
though  twelve  centuries  have  passed  since  he  thought 
lie  could  not  sing,  and  out-sang  them  all.  His  death 
is  towhingly  given  by  Bede,  and  we  transcribe  his 
words  : 

"  When  the  time  of  his  departure  drew  near,  he  laboured 
for  the  space  of  fourteen  days  under  a  bodily  infirmity 
which  seemed  to  prepare  the  way,  yet  so  moderate  that 
he  could  walk  and  talk  all  the  time.  In  his  neighbourhood 
was  the  house  to  which  those  that  were  sick  and  like  shortly 
to  die  were  carried.  He  desired  the  person  that  attended 
him  in  the  evening  as  the  night  came  on  in  which  he  was 
to  depart  this  life,  to  make  ready  a  place  there  for  him 
to  take  his  rest.  This  person,  wondering  why  lie  should 
desire  it.  because  there  was  as  yet  no  sign  of  his  dying 
soon,  did  what  he  had  ordered.  He  accordingly  went 
there,  and  conversing  pleasantly  in  a  joyful  manner  with 
the  rest  that  were  in  the  house  before,  when  it  was  past 
midnight  he  asked  them  whether  they  had  the  Eucharist 
there.  They  answered,  '  What  need  of  the  Eucharist,  for 
you  are  not  likely  to  die,  since  you  talk  so  merrily  with  us, 
as  if  vou  were  in  perfect  health.'  'However,'  said  he, 
k  bring  me  the  Eucharist.'  Having  received  the  same 
into  his  hand,  he  asked  whether  they  were  all  in  perfect 
eharitv  with  him.  and  without  any  enmity  or  rancour. 
Thev  answered  that  they  were  all  in  perfect  charity  and 
free  from  anger  ;  and  in  their  turn  asked  him  whether  he 
was  in  the  same  mind  towards  them.  He  answered, 
I  am  in  charity,  my  children,  with  all  the  servants  of 
God.'  Then,  strengthening  himself  with  the  Sacrament, 
he  prepared  for  the  entrance  into  another  life,  and  asked 
how  near  the  time  was  when  the  brothers  were  to  be 
awakened  to  sing  the  nocturnal  praises  of  the  Lord.  They 
answered.  k  It  is  not  far  ofY."  Then  he  said,  '  Well. 
let  us  wait  that  hour/  and  he  laid  his  head  on  the  pillow, 


62  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH    IJIBLK 

and  falling  into  a  slumber,  ended  his  life  so  in  silence. 
Thus  it  came  to  pass  that,  as  he  served  God  with  a  simple 
and  pure  mind,  and  undisturbed  devotion,  so  he  now 
departed  to  His  presence,  leaving  the  world  by  a  quiet 
death  ;  and  by  what  has  been  said  he  seems  to  have  had 
foreknowledge  of  his  death."  Ctedmon  had  said  that, 
after  our  first  parents'  sin,  God  let  the  roof  of  Heaven, 
adorned  with  holy  stars,  remain  for  their  solace,  and  thus 
he  passed  into  its  brightness. 

The  Church  of  the  North  was  thus  distinct  from  the 
Church  of  the  South,  which  received  the  truth  again 
first-hand  from  Rome.  Augustine's  work  was  the  fruit 
of  a  Pope's  interest  in  fair-haired  Saxon  slave-boys, 
and  thus  the  Christianised  South  did  all  things  after 
the  Romish  pattern.  In  the  North  it  was  another  thing. 
Columba,  in  writing  to  Pope  Boniface,  could  use  such 
language  as  this:  "The  Word  of  God  is  the  only  Rule 
of  Faith  ;  it  is  your  fault  if  you  have  deviated  from  it." 
The  observance  of  Easter  and  other  matters  was  different, 
and  when  the  country  was  largely  won  for  Christ,  it 
remained  to  be  united  in  one  fold.  This  took  place  at 
the  time  of  Theodore,  and  the  general  laws  and  usages  of 
the  early  Church  were  accepted  almost  throughout  the 
British  Isles. 

It  was  the  joining  of  two  large  streams,  for  Columba 
had  founded  a  hundred  monasteries,  and  nearly  four 
hundred  churches,  and  ordained  three  thousand 
monks.  There  were  also  those  belonging  to  the  early 
British  Church,  and  we  hear  of  a  single  monastery  at 
Bangor,  where  there  were  no  less  than  three  thousand 
monks,  who  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  Augustine. 
Northumbria  indeed  took  the  lead  in  Teutonic  Britain  at 
this  time. 

No  doubt,  though  as  yet  we  had  nothing  but  the 
paraphrase  of  Caodmon  in  the  ancient  tongue  of  our  country, 
the  Latin  Bible  was  constantly  studied  in  Common's 
time,  and  Inett  closes  his  sketch  of  the  seventh  century 
by  saying  that  the  knowledge  of  Scripture  was  the 
best  qualification  for  the  highest  stations  in  the  Church, 


LVKDMON  r»5 

and  "  in  consequence  the  doctrines  of  transubstantiation 
and  the  worship  of  images  were  unknown,  and  the  doct'ine 
of  purgatory  was  unformed,  though  the  first  rude  lines  of 
it  were  drawn/' 

There  have  Id-en  a  number  of  editions  of  Qudnion. 
Junius  published  his  at  Amsterdam  in  10">5  in  Old  Saxon, 
without  translation  or  comments,  In  182(5  Conybeare's 
I II  nst  rat  i  "H*  <>i  Aw/ln-Saxon  Pocfr//  were  edited  by  his 
brother.  Here  are  portions  of  Ca'dmon.  (\rdmon  was 
edited  by  Mr.  B.  Thorpe.  F.8.A..  in  |s:fc>.  The  text  is 
given  in  Old  Saxon  and  is  translated.  .Mr.  Thorpe  says 
it  is  Sax«>n  as  pure  as  the  works  of  Alfred.  Bouterwek 
published  (Vdinon  in  IS-11.  with  a  valuable  introduction, 
literarv  and  historical,  and  a  translation  into  German  prose. 
A  large  collection  of  Saxon  Verse  was  also  published  by 
Grein  in  1^57.  It  is  untranslated,  but  Professor  March 
says  that  special  students  of  Saxon  must  spend  their 
days  and  nights  with  Grein.  In  Ettmiiller's  Scopus  (Did 
Hex-crux  there  are  also  substantial  portions  of  C;cdmon. 
America  has  entered  the  field  lately.  Theodore  W.  Hunt, 
of  Princeton  College,  has  published  Ctrdmon's  ti.roilus 
and  DfiH'fl  at  Boston  in  1K8II.  ft  constitutes  a  small 
cheap  primer. 

The  Society  of  Antiquaries  (London)  have  also  rendered 
valuable  service.  They  have  printed  the  whole  of  the 
plates  in  vol.  :M  ot  the  Arrhwoloqia,  with  facsimile  specimens 
of  the  MS.  There  is  also  a  valuable  introduction  by  Mr. 
Henry  Kllis.  K.K.S.,  Secretary  of  the  Bodleian  Library, 
when-  the  MS.  is  kept. 

A  memorial  has  recently  been  raised  to  Oa'dinon  at 
Whitby.  as  the  Father  of  Knglish  Poetry.  It  stands  in 
the  ehun-hyard  on  the  HilT.  under  the  crumbling  walls 
of  his  old  home,  and  was  unveiled  by  Mr.  Alfred  Austin. 
the  Poet  Laureate,  on  21st  September  I.S'JS.  Amongst 
others  who  took  part  in  the  ceremonies  of  the  day  were 
the  Bishops  of  Bristol  and  Hull.  Professors  Lebour  and 
Gollanz,  Canons  Kawnslev  and  Austen.  Mr.  Skeat,  and 
the  Marrjuess  of  Normanby.  The  following  hymn  was 

*  Ori'jinrs  A»'/ft<-nn>i . 

5 


66  OUR  OWN  KXr.LISII   BIBLE 

sung,    having   been    composed   by   Canon   Rawnsley,    and 
founded  on  Caxlmon's  first  verses:  — 

"Now  praise  we  the  Lord, 
Who  guards  the  J leaven's  height, 
Extolled  be  His  Wisdom 
His  Counsel  and  .Might. 
The  glorious  Creator, 
Who  wonders  began, 
Upbuilder  of  Nature 
And  Maker  of  man. 

Now  praise  we  the  Lord, 
Almighty  of  mind, 
The  Captain   Eternal, 
And  (iiiard  of  mankind, 
Whose  Wisdom  excelling, 
First  spread  Heaven  above. 
Then  gave  earth  for  dwelling 
To  men  of   His  love. 

Now  praise  we  the  Lord, 
Who  useth  us  all 
The  king  in  his  castle, 
The  hind  in  tin:  stall. 
On  high-born  and  lowly 
His  gifts  are  outpoured, 
And  hearts  that  are  holy 
Sing  praise  to  the   Lord. 

Now  praise  we  the  Lord, 
Inspirer  of  song, 
From  far  generations 
The  stream  flows  along. 
With  winds  and  with  waters, 
With  nights  and  with  days, 
Our  sons  and  our  daughters 
Shall  join  in   His  praise.     Amen." 

Certainly  this  distinguished  group  of  men  were  well 
engaged  in  doing  honour  to  the  Father  of  English  Minstrelsy. 
As  Wright  says,  his  advent  must  have  been  hailed  by 
the  Christian  teachers  of  the  time  much  as  if  a  native 
Milton  were  to  arise  now  in  some  Hindu  or  Chinese  village 
to  propagate  the  truth  amongst  his  own  countrymen. 
The  new  religion  had  been  introduced  amongst  the  upper 
ranks,  and  such  a  man  could  not  fail  to  propagate  it  amongst 
the  people  generally. 


CHAPTER    VI 

ALDHELM 

''  From  tin-  .\M'_rlo-Sa.\oM  ai_'e  down  to  WyclifTe,  we  in  England  can 
show  such  a  succession  of  Bildical  versions,  in  metre  and  in  prose, 
as  are  not  to  he  equalled  l>y  any  other  nation  in  Kumjte." 

SlK     I1'.     I'U.GKAVK. 

AT  the  commencement  of  the  eighth  century  Adelm,  or 
Aldhclni,  the  first  Bishop  of  Sherborne,  now  represented 
by  Salisbury,  translated  the  Psalms  into  the  vernacular. 
We  find  him  praisingthe  nuns  that,  "studying  the  Scriptures, 
they  had  manifested  their  industry  and  towardliness  in 
the  daily  reading  of  them/'  Hut  already  monastic  institu 
tions  were  beginning  to  present  a  different  picture,  for 
the  Council  of  Cloveslioe.  or  Cliff's  Hoe.  in  Kent,  as  early 
as  A.I).  717.  ordered  that  the  monasteries  should  not  be 
turned  into  places  of  amusement  for  harpers  and  buffoons, 
and  that  laymen  should  not  have;  too  free  access  to  them, 
lest  they  should  be  scandalised  at  what  they  saw  within 
their  walls. 

Aldhelm  was  a  scion  of  the  West  Saxon  kings,*  and 
was  educated  partly  by  the  famous  Abbot  Adrian,  and 
partly  by  Maildulph,  who  gave  his  name  to  Malmeshury, 
where  he  gathered  some  pupils.  This  Maildulph,  k>  a 
Scot  by  nation,  a  philosopher  by  erudition,  and  a  monk 
by  profession,"  as  William  of  Malmesbury  describes  him. 
had  a  sort  of  cell  where  his  scholars  learnt  and  almost 
starved.  He  had  been  driven  by  robber  raids  from  the 
Western  Highlands,  which  had  been  colonised  by  the 

*  I'Vri-inuii  thinks  lie  may  have  l>een  (lie  son  of  ( Vntwine,  Kin^r  of 
the  West  Saxons,  who  died  A.D.  <»sf>. 

, 


68  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH    IJTBLE 

Irish  missionaries.  About  037  a  group  of  scholars  were 
gathered  at  his  feet,  and  the  chair  of  the  master  was  set 
up  under  the  shadow  of  a  small  basilica,  or  chapel  of  wood, 
which  was  preserved  even  in  I  ho  twelfth  century.*  As 
at  St.  Albans  and  Westminster,  the  church  was  first  built, 
and  the  town  followed  in  due  time.  It  is  a  picturesque 
one  in  Wiltshire,  on  a  hill,  rising  out  of  a  low  land  watered 
by  little  streams  and  runnels.  The  lazar  hospital  of  St. 
John  speaks  of  the  past:  and  the  abbey  of  later  days, 
though  partly  ruinous,  is  used  for  worship. 

Aldhelm  became  the  Abbot  of  Malmesbury,  and  a 
characteristic  incident  of  him  is  preserved.  It  is  said 
that  observing  with  pain  the  carelessness  of  the  peasantry 
as  to  sacred  things,  he  stationed  himself  on  one  occasion 
in  the  character  of  a  minstrel  on  a  bridge  which  they  had 
to  pass  over  the  1vol.  and  soon  collected  thorn  by  the 
beauty  of  his  verse.  When  he  found  that  he  had  secured 
their  attention,  he  gradually  introduced  amongst  the 
popular  poetry  words  of  a  more  serious  turn,  till  at  length 
he  succeeded  in  impressing  upon  their  minds  a  truer 
feeling  of  devotion,  whereas,  says  William  of  Malmesbury, 
his  biographer,  if  he  had  acted  harshly  lie  would  have 
made  no  impression.  Our  forefathers  were  thus  evidently 
not  to  be  driven,  but  won.  like  most  of  their  successors. 
Leland  mentions  these  ( 1  ant  i  ones  Saxonicfe,  one  of 
which  continued  to  bo  commonly  sung  in  William  of 
Malmesbury's  time. 

Aldhelm  visited  Rome  whilst,  he  was  abbot,  at  the 
invitation  of  Pope  Sergius.  securing  grants  for  his  monas 
teries,  and  the  following  verses  have  been  preserved, 
which  may  be  found  interesting,  as  a  sample  of  early 
poetry  :-  - 

ON     KXTKKING    THK    ClU'RCH    OF    ST.     PETER    AND 

ST.  PAUL  AT  ROME. 

"•  See  here  this  new   built   Temple's  glories  rise. 
And  lift  its  sacred  banner  to  the  skies  : 


*  Malmcxlwry.  M.  E.  C.  Walrott,  B.D.  The  dates  of  Aldhelm's  life 
are  triven  by  William  of  Malmesburv  from  doubtful  or  forged  charters. 
Smith  and  \Vace. 


ALDHELM  71 

Here  Paul  and  Peter  shed  abroad  their  light. 

To  guide  a  world  where  all   before  was  night. 

To  them  this  land,   to  them   these  eourts  belong, 

Their  nam»'s  the  people  chant   in   hallowed  song. 

Hail,    Heavenly   Porter,    Keeper  of   Heaven's  (Jate, 

And   hear   the   prayers  of  those   who   in   thy  Temple  wait, 

Whilst   down   their  cheeks  doth   run   the   briny   tear. 

Do  thou   their  supplications  kindly  hear. 

With  ardent    vows  they  mourn   the  mis-spent   past 

And   vow   that   such   misdeeds  shall   be  their  last. 

And   thoi!,   great    teacher,  deign   to   hear  me.    Paul, 

Thou   who  didst    bear  the  former  name  of  Saul, 

And  spurn   Christ's   worship  for  each    Heathen   rite, 

Till  on   thy  eyes   He   poured    His  glorious   light  ; 

Oh.   kindly   hear  the   vows  to  thee  they   pay. 

And   lend   thy   hand   to  guide   the  suppliants'    way. 

Here  to  thy  Church   what  numerous  votaries  throng, 

To  the.-   the   keys  of   Heaven   and    Hell   In-long. 

Forth   let    the  springs  of   Heavenly   bounty   How 

To  cheer  Christ's  faithful  worshippers  below.""1 

Aldhelm's  version  of  the  Psalms  was  discovered  (!)  in  the 
beginning  of  the  last  century  in  the  Royal  Library  at 
Paris.  The  first  fifty  are  in  prose,  and  the  rest  in  verse. 
The  hymns  and  prayers  commonly  used  in  the  churches 
of  the  Saxons  were  in  the  Latin  language,  as  taught  by 
the  first  missionaries  from  Rome,  but  often  in  the  daily 
service  they  chanted  the  Lord's  Praver.  the  Creed,  and 
portions  of  the  Psalms  in  their  own  tongue.  And  it 
seems  that  these  portions  were  taken  from  Aldhelm's 
version.  Bede's  account  of  him  is  that  "  he  was  a  man 
most  learned  in  all  respects,  for  he  had  a  clean  style,  and 
was  wonderful  for  ecclesiastical  and  liberal  erudition." 
Clean  it  may  have  been,  but  there  are  a  multitude  of  far 
fetched  phrases,  for  which  William  of  Malmesbury  thinks 
it  right  to  explain  that  modes  of  expression  difler  in 
different  nations.  "The  (Jreeks.  for  instance,  express 
themselves  impliedly.  the,  Romans  dearly,  the  (Jauls 
gorgeously,  the  Angles  turgidly."  .Mr.  Turner  has 
collected  the  following  epithets  and  figures  out  of  a  few 

*  I'utr.i  Krrh. ->'„!•  .  I  ,,,jlir,inn ,  \ul.  i..  Dr.  Cilr*.  Sd-phi-n.  ImwvviT. 
thinks  that  Dr.  Cil.--.  following  Fan.  in-  in  this.  \\  r<.ir_'l y  attributes 
thcMc  verges  to  !iis  visit  to  Kumr.  Tin- v  inav  n-frr  to  .Malmr-biiry. 


72  OUR  OWN   KNOLISH    MinLK 

pages  of  his  prose  works:  "the  golden  semblances  of 
the  virtues  ;  the  white  jewels  of  merit  ;  the  purple  flowers 
of  modesty  ;  the  transparent  eyeballs  of  virginal  bash- 
fulness  ;  the  swan-coloured  hoarness  of  aue  ;  the  torrid 
courtesy  of  the  dogmas  ;  the  phlebotomy  of  the  Divine 
Word  ;  the  folding  doors  of  dumb  taciturnity  ;  the  shining 
lamps  of  chastity  burning  with  the  oil  of  modesty  ;  the 
fu'tid  sink  of  impurity  lamentably  overwhelming  the  ships 
of  the  soul."  *  His  verses  are,  however,  from  the  study 
of  better  models,  and  are  much  preferable  to  his  pompous 
prose,  with  alliteration  and  compound  words.  It  is 
Hale  who  says  that  Aldhelm  translated  the  Psalter, f  and 
the  writer  who  made  the  copy  was  an  Englishman  who 
seems  to  have  lived  about  A.D.  1000.  hi  modern  English, 
his  version  of  the  S4th  Psalm  is  :  — 

"  .Lord,   to   me  Tliv   minsters  are 
Courts  of   Honour,    passing   fair; 
And    mv  spirit   deems   it    well 
There   to    he,    and    there   to  duel!  ; 
Heart  and    Mesh    would   fain   he   there, 
Lord.   Thy   life.   Thy   love   to  share. 

There   the  sparrow  speeds   her  home, 
And   in   time  the  turtles  come; 
Sate  their  nestling  young  they  rear, 
Lord  of  Hosts,  Thine  altars  near. 
Dear   to   them   Thy   peace,   hut  more 
To   the   souls    who   there  adore/' 

Here   is   the   f>Sth    Psalm  :  — 

"  Cod   the  Word  of  Wisdom   gave  ; 
Preachers,   who   His  voice  have  heard, 
Taught   by    Him,    in   meekness   brave. 
Speed   the  message  of  that    Word. 


*  lli*l»ni  c/  AHtjh-Nn.ruiin,  Shan-n  Turner. 

•\Scripturutn    Ilia*!.    < 'alulo'ju^    lf>;>7.    p.    s|.      Mr. 
l-lii  rlil    I'lntjU-h    Church,    is   responsible    for    adopting    t 
Aldhelm    translated    the    Psalter,    and    thai    the   one 
Library  at  Paris,  and  edited  by  Thorpe,  is  to  be  attril 


a 


ALDHELM  75 

Mighty  King,  with   beauty  crowned, 
In  His  House  the  world's  proud  spoil 
Oft   in  almsdeeds  dealt  around, 
Cheers   the   poor  wayfarer's  toil. 


It  among   His  Clerks  you  rest 
Silver  plumes  shall  you  enfold  ; 
Fairer  than   the  culver's  breast. 
Hriirhter  than  her  Iwek  of  gold." 

The  harp  was  the  favourite  instrument  with  the  Saxons, 
and  these  Psalms  would  be  adapted  to  their  own  national 
melodies,  so  as  to  accompany  them.  Here  is  Psalm 
xciii.  !i  and  1  : 

"  When   the  tempest   wakes  to  wrath 
Many  waters  wide  and  far, 
On  the  ocean's  dreadful  path 
Loud  and  high  their  voices  are. 

Wondrous  ways  those  waters  move 
Win-re  the  sea  streams  swiftest  How; 
But   more  wondrous  far  above, 
llolv    Lord,  Thy  glories  show." 

And  as  a  last  example,  take  Psalm  cxvi.  15  : — 

"  As   the   beacon   lire   by   night 
That    the    Host    of    Israel   led, 
Such   the  glory,   fair  and   bright. 
Hound  the  good  man's  dying  bed  ; 
"I'is  a   beacon   bright  and   fail- 
Telling   that    the    Lord   is  there." 

Whilst  Aldhelm  ruled  the  affairs  of  the  monastery,  they 
flourished  exceedingly.  There  was  a  general  concourse 
of  monks  and  students,  some  admiring  the  sanctity  of 
his  life,  and  others  the  depth  of  his  learning.  "  For  he 
was  a  man  as  unsophisticated  in  religion  as  multifarious 
in  knowledge.,  whose  pietv  surpassed  even  his  reputation." 

He  was  the  chief  adviser  of  King  Ina  in  the  restoration 
of  (tlastonbury  Abbey,  and  his  exertions  in  the  work  of 
Christian  education  made  Wessex  a  rival  of  Xorthumbria, 
schools  being  multiplied  such  as  produced  Boniface. 


76  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

The  success  of  these  was  due  in  great  measure  to  Daniel, 
Bishop  of  Winchester  (70")-1">).  but  Aldhelm's  reputation 
as  a  scholar  has  won  for  him  the  larger  share  of  credit.* 
And  it  may  be  that  tins  same  general  reputation  has  led 
to  his  being  credited  with  the  Anglo-Saxon  version  of  the 
Psalms  published  by  Mr.  Thorpe  in  ISir>.  Mr.  W right 
thinks  it  extremely  doubtful  whether  he  had  anything 
to  do  with  it.  as  do  others. j" 

The  usual  legends  gather  about  his  name.  A  beam  of 
wood  was  once  lengthened  bv  his  pravers  ;  the  ruins  ot 
the  church  he  built,  though  open  to  the  skies,  were  never 
wet  during  the  worst  weather;  and  a  child  nine  (.lays  old. 
at  his  command,  once  spoke  to  clear  the  calumniated 
Pope  from  the  imputation  of  being  its  father.  The  critical 
Lappenberg,  comparing  him  with  Bede.  savs  he  merited 
greater  praise  for  the  cultivation  of  his  mother  tongue,  left 
him  far  behind  in  knowledge  of  the  Canon  of  Roman  Law. 
and  greatly  excelled  him  in  influential,  practical  activity. 

This  last  is  indisputable,  for  to  crown  his  other  labours, 
he  was  made  Bishop  of  Sherborne  in  7<>~).  though  he  died 
four  years  afterwards,  the  same  year  as  Wilfrid.  When 
he  went  to  Canterbury  to  be  consecrated  bv  his  old  friend 
Berthwold,  hearing  of  the  arrival  of  ships  at  Dover,  he 
went  to  see  if  they  had  brought  anything  in  hi,;  way. 
Amongst  other  books,  he  saw  one  containing  the  whole 
of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  which  he  bought,  and 
William  of  Malmesbury  tells  us,  in  the  twelfth  century, 
that  it  was  still  preserved  there. 

King  Ina  planted  the  episcopate  at  Sherborne,  and  it 
lasted  about  lour  hundred  years.  Then,  shorn  of  territory 
and  power  by  the  separation  therefrom  ol  divers  other 
sees,  the  bishopric  was  in  1U7S  removed  to  Old  Sarum, 
whence  it  was  again  transferred  to  Salisbury,  about  1225. 
A  magnificent  church  will  be  found  in  this  ancient  seat 
of  religion,  however,  the  work  of  restoration  having  been 
recently  completed  at  a  cost  of  £.'}('). onn.  In  ,\.n.  (.»08 
Aldhelm's  church  was  made  the  Church  n|  the  Benedictine 

*  Smith  and  Wacr. 

I  JJiuy.  Brit.  Litu-uriti,  T.  Wright,  M.A. 


77 

Monastery.  It  was  rebuilt  in  \\'2'2  in  Norman  style, 
although  the,  bishopric  had  been  recently  removed.  Then, 
in  the  fifteenth  century,  the  alteration  of  the  Norman 
church  took  place.  There  was  a  riot  in  1430,  when  the 
rebuilding  of  the  rhoir  was  in  process,  and  the  church  was 
set  on  fire,  the  marks  of  which  are  still  visible.  When 


•  l:M.    Ml.V-lT.i:,    Will.  UK   ALDHELM 

I:K'-KNTJ,Y  AM>   r.iA 


KIKST    HI>Hu 

KI  p. 


the   Dissolution   came,  a  century  later,  the    Abbe 
was  purchased  bv  the  inhabitants  for  !-.'{<>  ! 

Aldhelm  devoted  himself  very  earnestly  to  the  labours 
of  his  short  episcopate,  though  he  had  protested  against 
the  appointment  on  account  of  his  years,  being  seventy, 
and  by  no  means  strong.  Archbishop  Theodore  was, 
indeed,  about  the  same  age  when  he  entered  upon  his 
duties,  and  the  "  grand  old  man.''  as  the  Dean  of  Chichester 
calls  him,  held  the  see  of  Canterbury  for  twenty-two  years. 
Aldhelm  filled  up  his  short  term  well,  however,  travelling 


78  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   BIBLE 

about  from  place  to  place,  generally  with  his  "  ashen 
stock  "  to  help  him  forward.  Perhaps  also,  like  Augustine, 
he  carried  a  simple  wooden  cross,  and  held  up  before 
the  people,  or  fixed  in  the  ground,  this  symbol  of  the 
Faith  whilst  he  proclaimed  to  them  the  truth  of  Christ. 
Bishopstrow  is  a  remembrance  of  him,  as  Felixstowe  is 
of  the  first  East  Anglian  missionary.* 

He  died  at  Doulting,  leaning  upon  a  post  which  stood 
there,  being  fatigued  with  the  labours  of  the  day.  The 
inhabitants  erected  a  beautiful  church  on  the  site,  which 
Dunstan  specially  visited  to  do  honour  to  his  memory 
about  two  centuries  afterwards.  His  funeral  also  showed 
the  honour  in  which  he  was  held,  and  not  less  the  hold 
which  Christianity  had  already  upon  the  people.  His 
remains  were  carried  back  to  Malmesbury  under  the  care 
of  St.  Egwyn,  Bishop  of  Worcester,  and  we  are  told  that 
crowds  followed  the  bier,  and  "  gazed  with  loving  eyes 
on  the  sweet  expression  and  calm  beauty  of  the  dreamless 
face,  which  soothed  their  sorrow."  At  intervals  of  seven 
miles,  stone  crosses  were  set  up.  where  the  large  procession 
rested. 

Certainly,  such  a  life  and  such  a  death  afford  some 
justification  for  his  poem  on  the  might  of  Christianity 
in  its  triumph  over  the  old  Paganism,  now  rapidly  passing 
away.  He  cries — 

v'  Not  Mars,  the  Lord  of  wounds,  who  scatters  round 
The  seeds  of  war,  and  fills  the  rancorous  heart 
With  Gorgon  poisons,  can  assist  his  fanes  ; 
Nor  Venus  can  avail,  nor  her  vile  boy  ; 
The  golden  statues  of  Minerva  fall, 
Though  fools  proclaim  her  goddess  of  the  Arts  ; 
Nor  he  for  whom,  as  ancient  fictions  sing, 
The  leafy  vines  their  precious  branches  spread, 
Can  prop  the  columns  nodding  with  their  god  ; 
The  marbles  totter  with  terrific  crash, 
And  the  vast  fabric  rushes  into  dust, 
E'en  Neptune  surnamed  Sovereign  of  the  waves, 
Who,  by  his  swelling  billows,  rules  the  main, 


*  St.  Aldhdm,  Rev.  W.  H.  Jones,  F.S.A. 


ALDHELM  81 

He  eannot  save  his  sculptured  effigies, 

Whose  marble  brows  the  golden  leaves  surround  ; 

Not  e'en  Alcides.   who  the  Centaurs  crushed, 

And  dared  the  fiery  breath  of  prowling  Caeus 

When  from  his  throat   his  words  in  flame  were  poured. 

Though  his  right   hand  the  dreadful  club  may  grasp. 

Can  shield  his  temples  when  the  Christian  prays." 

Aldhelm  used  rhyme  before  the  Arabs  entered  Spain, 
who  are  supposed  to  have  brought  it.  Certainly,  he  was 
a  scholar  for  his  time,  though  his  style  was  not  what  we 
should  call  scholarly  to-day.  Dr.  Parr  has  given  us  in 
our  time  "  the  battering-ram  of  political  controversies,'* 
but  Aldhelm  preceded  him  with  "  the  bulwarks  of  the 
Catholic  Faith,  shaken  by  the  ballistic  of  secular  argument, 
and  overthrown  bv  the  battering-rams  of  atrocious 
ingenuity." 

It  is  possible  that  there  was  much  more  translation 
done  at  this  period  of  which  we  have  no  present  knowledge. 
The  Bible  was  not  so  far  accounted  a  dangerous  book, 
to  be  onlv  granted  with  faculties  and  dispensations.  In 
a  Consistory  held  at  Koine  \.i>.  <>7(.>.  about  British  affairs, 
it  was  ordained  that  lessons  out  of  the.  Divine  Oracles 
should  be  always  read  for  the  edification  of  the  Churches.* 
In  Bedc's  l/isfofi/  we  find  frequent  references  to  skill  in 
Scripture.  Of  Theodore,  Hadrian's  companion,  we  read 
that  he  gathered  a  great  crowd  of  disciples,  and  "  there 
daily  flowed  from  him  rivers  of  knowledge  to  water  the 
hearts  of  his  hearers,  from  Holy  Writ,  Poetry.  Astronomy, 
and  Arithmetic.''  Of  Berthwold,  who  succeeded  him 
in  the  archbishopric,  the  chief  commendation  was  that 
he  was  a  man  learned  in  the  Scriptures.  Adamnan. 
Columba's  biographer,  has  the  same  sign-manual  attached 
to  him — "  a  good  and  wise  man.  remarkably  learned  in 
Holy  Script  lire."  Such  references  are  frequent,  and 
it  is  likely  that,  when  there  was  such  general  love  for  and 
knowledge  of  the  Scriptures,  other  attempts  to  translate 
at  least  particular  books  would  be  made. 

Aldhelm    was    Abbot   of   Malniesburv    about    thirty-two 

6 


82  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

years.  Several  churches  came  to  be  grouped  together 
within  the  precincts,  as  at  Abingdon.  Bury  St.  Edmunds, 
and  Glastonbury — where  also  he  cut  his  name  deeply. 
In  one  of  them  probably  the  famous  .John  the  Scot,  witty 
and  wise,  the  friend  of  Charles  the  Bald  of  France,  was 
done  to  death  by  the  pointed  styles  of  his  pupils.  St. 
Dunstan  presented  bells  and  an  organ,  and  in  A.D.  986. 
apprehensive  of  the  coming  of  the  Danes,  he  removed 
the  body  of  St.  Aldhelm  from  its  shrine  into  a  stone 
structure  and  placed  beside  it  a  casket  filled  with  the 
sweetest  balsam.  The  dreaded  Northmen  came,  and  the 
legend  says  that  one  bolder  than  the  rest  drew  his  sword, 
and  was  about  to  hack  the  precious  stones  from  the  shrine, 
when  he  fell  stark,  as  if  smitten  by  some  unearthly  blow. 
The  Danes  fled  in  dismay,  and  among  all  the  neighbouring 
monasteries  Malmesbury  was  the  only  one  that  escaped 
sacrilege. 

In  the  days  of  William  of  Malmesbury,  the  whole  fabric 
stood  as  then  erected,  superior  in  size  and  beauty  to  every 
ancient  church  in  England.  King  Athelstan  gave  the 
town  a  royal  charter,  because  of  the  gallantry  and  good 
service  of  the  Malmesbury  men  in  his  great  victory  over 
the  Danes  at  Sodbury  Hill,  and  lie  was  buried  here,  near 
to  Aldhelm.  They  laid  the  devout  king  to  his  rest  in 
October  A.D.  9  19,  not  as  his  grandfather,  the  great  Alfred, 
clad  him  as  a  boy.  in  a  scarlet  cloak,  a  diamond-studded 
belt,  and  a  Saxon  sword  in  a  golden  scabbard,  but  with 
all  honour  and  decent  pomp. 

Dishonour  came  afterwards,  however,  to  this  home  of 
one  of  the  most  famous  of  early  Englishmen,  and  one  of 
the  best  known  of  our  early  historians.  Mr.  Stumpe 
bought  and  turned  the  abbey  into  a  cloth  manufactory. 
The  fate  of  the  library  has  been  piteously  recorded  by 
Aubrev,  who  says:  "  In  my  grandfather's  days,  the  MSS. 
Hew  about  like  butterflies.  The  glovers  at  Malmesbury 
made,  great  havoc,  of  them,  and  gloves  were  wrapped  up, 
no  doubt,  in  many  good  pieces  of  antiquity.  Mr.  W. 
Slumpe,  the  great-grandson  of  the  clothier,  had  several 
MSS.,  and  when  he  brewed  a  barrel  of  special  ale,  his  use 


- 


was   to  stop   the    bunghole    under    the    elav    with    a    sheet 
of  MS/' 

Tin-  destruction  of  the  manuscripts  and  convent  library, 
once  presided  over  by  William  of  Malmesbury,  precentor 
and  historian  of  the  abbey,  is  indeed  a  lamentable  and 
degrading  tale.  Kor  nearlv  a  century  the  brutal  waste 
went  on.  and  onlv  one  MS.  is  still  preserved  in  the  neigh 
bourhood.  Years  after  the  Dissolution,  a  traveller  passing 
through  the  town  found  that  even  the  bakers  had  not 
consumed  all  the  abhev  books  in  heating  their  ovens. 
Superstitious  fanaticism  also  destroyed  nianv  a  priceless 
volume,  though  let  us  hope  the  world  has  o;rown  saner, 
and  that  Wordsworth's  lines  will  be  true  for  the  future. 
"  <  Mir  ancestors/'  however,  were  often  far  from  beinj^  as 
wise  as  he  -jives  them  credit  for: 

"  Our  ancestors  did    feelingly   perceive 

What    ill    these    holv    structures    \\  e    possess 

of  ornamental   interest,  and   the  charm 
Of   pious  sentiment   diffused   afar; 
Thus  nevei1  shall   the  indignities  of  time 
Approach   their  reverend   graces   unopposed  ; 
Nor   shall    the   elements    he    free    to    hurt 
Their   fail-   proportions;   nor  the   Minder  ra^e 
(  >f   l»i«_'ot    x.eal.    m, idly    to  overturn." 

Aldhelm  wa>  useful  in  settling  the  differences  between 
the  ancient  British  Church  and  Augustine's  followers.*  and 
he  founded  cells  or  smaller  monasteries,  with  churches, 
at  Krome  and  Bradford-on-Avon.  The  little  church  at  the 
latter  Kcclcsiola  has,  been  discovered  in  our  time  by 

*  P,\  ..I'der  of  the  Synod,  he  wrote  a  book  a:_'ain-t  the  "  errors "  of  the 
Hritoiis.  and  though  onlv  a  tract,  it  made  a  sensation,  as  it  apjicared  in 
the  infancy  of  Anirlo-Saxon  authorship.  In  this  Aldhelm  says  that  the 
clcryv  of  South  Wales  (  I  )cmet  ia)  earned  their  abhorrence  of  the  ( 'atholic 
discipline  to. -tiii  h  an  extreme  that  tin  \  punished  the  most  trivial  con 
funnily  with  a  IOUL'  course  of  penance,  and  purified  with  fanatic  scrupu 
losity  every  utensil  uhich  had  heen  contaminated  hv  the  touch  of  a 
"  Roman  or  a  Saxon  pne.«,t."  No  douhl  there  \\as  a  -ood  deal  of  bitter 
ness  after  the  way  August  mo  treated  them  on  I  IK-  banks  of  the  Severn, 
and  the  massacre  at  Bangor.  In  the  same  way  Westminster  Abbes 
has  had,  either  in  whole  or  part,  not  less  than  six  consecrations  and  holy 
sprinklings. — Anci'.nt  linti*!i  >tnd  Irish  Churches,  \\ .  Cat  heart,  U.iJ. 


86  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   BITJLE 

the  vicar,  the  Rev.  W.  H.  Jones,  F.8.A.  It  is  one  of 
the  most  interesting  relies  in  England,  being  eleven 
hundred  years  old,  and  almost  exactly  as  Aldhelm  built 
it.*  Even  in  this  early  period  there  was  a  nave,  a  chancel, 
and  a  porch,  and  the  height  is  unusual  for  such  a  small 
building.  King  Alfred's  troubles  overtook  him  whilst 
living  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  doubtless  he  has  often 
knelt  in  it,  and  sung  the  psalms  of  deliverance  and  triumph. 
Edington —  Ethandune — his  great  decisive  victory,  is  only 
a  few  miles  away,  with  the  white  horse  cut  in  the  hillside 
to  commemorate  it. 

Let  us  close  with  the  103rd  Psalm  in  Aldhelm's  version, 
if  it  be  his  : — 

PSALM  (Mil.   1-12. 

"].    Bletsa,   mine  sawle,   blidhe  drihten  ; 

and  call  inin  inneran  his  tlui'ne  eeean  naman  ! 
2.  r>letsige,  mine  sawle,   bealde  dryhten  ! 

no  \\ylt    thu   ofergeottul  a'fre  Aveordhan. 
',}.    He  (hinuni   mnnda-dum   niiKsade  oallum  ; 

and   thine  adie  ealle  geha-Ide. 

4.  He  alysde  thin  lif  leof  of  forwyrde  ; 

lylde  thinnc  willan  f;vgere  mid  gode. 

5.  He  the  gesigefa'ste  sodbre  miltse 

and  the  mildheorte  mode  getrymcdc  ; 
eart    thu  eadnowe  came  gelieast 
on  geogudhe  nu  gleawe  geworden. 
G.   II  a  fast,  thu  milde  mod,  mihta  strange  drihten, 
domas  eallum   the  deope  her 
and  ful   trealliee   teonan   tholian. 

7.  He   his  Avegas  d\'de   \\ise  and    eudhe 

Moyse   tham    ma'i'an   on    ma'iiige   tid; 
Swylce  his   willan   eae   werum    Israhela. 

8.  Mildheort  thu  eart   and  mihtig,  mode  gcthyldig, 

eee  dryhtcn,  swa   thu  a  AvaTe, 
is  thin  milde  mod  mannum  eydhed. 
0.  Nelle  thu   odh   ende  yrre  hal>l>an, 

ne  on  eenesse  the  awa   belgan. 
10.  Na   thu   be  gewyrhtum,  Avealdend,  uruni 
\\ommum   Avyrhtum   A\  oldest    us  don, 
ne  a'fter  urum   unryhte  a\\ha'V  gyldan. 


:i'  I!i    limit  if  on  the  site  of  the  great  A'ietory  of  C'enwealh,  liis  uncle, 
if  indeed  Kimt  ('entwine  Avas  his  father. 


AT.nilKLM  8; 

1!.    FoitlioM   (1m   .-efter  heahweoree  lifufrnr-;  (liincs 

mildheortiivsse  niihti^  drihton. 

lustiiin   cydlidt'st    thain    the  lufi-dnn   lli<-. 
IL*.   Sua   ihas   foldaii    fa-dun'   l»f\\  indcdli, 

tlies  castrodor  and  a-fter  west, 

He  bctweonan  thain  teonaii  and  unriht 

us  frain   afyrde  a-^luva-r  svinhle."  * 

*  Member!,  English  Versions. 


CHAPTER   VII 


"  It  was  always  sweet    to  me   to  learn,   to  teach,   to  write." 

•'()    Venerable    Bede  ! 

The  saint,   the  scholar,   from    a  circle  freed 
Of  toil  stupendous,  in  a  hallowed  seat 
Of  learning,   where  thou  heardst   the   billows   heat 
On  a  wild  coast,  rough  monitors  to  feed 
Perpetual  industry.     Sublime  recluse  ! 
The  recreant  soul  that  dares  to  shun  the  debt 
Imposed  on   human  kind,    must  lirst    forget 
Thy  diligence,   thy  unrelaxing  use 
Of  a  long  life  ;   and   in  the  hour  of  death 
The  last  dear  service  of  thy  passing  breath." 

WORDSWORTH. 

BY  far  the  most  conspicuous  name  belonging  to  this 
early  age  is  that  of  Bede  himself,  whose  History  we  have 
so  often  quoted,  and  who,  amongst  a  great  variety  of 
labours,  translated  some  portions  of  the  Bible,  and  wrote 
Commentaries  on  nearly  all.  Such  was  his  influence  after 
death  that,  during  the  battles  of  the  Heptarchy,  his  body 
was  carried  about  in  a  bog  oak  coffin,  much  as  was  the 
Ark  of  ancient  Jewish  history ;  and  subsequent  ages  have 
confirmed  him  in  the  high  position  thus  superstitiously 
accorded.  He  was  called  Venerable,  and  there  is  a  curious 
legend  of  the  way  in  which  he  came  by  the  name,  which, 
however  unlikely,  shows  how  soon  our  forefathers  looked 
suspiciously  on  Rome.  It  is  said  that,  being  there,  he 
saw  an  iron  gate,  above  which  was  written 

P  P  P.  S  S  S.  ERR.  F  F  F., 


III!     \IM.1.AIILK    I;l.M.'>    <  HAIK,     JAKI.'jU     <]I!J.'J]. 


BEDE  oi 

of  which  no  OM»'  could  give  him  the  interpretation.  Hede 
having  stood  for  some  time  looking  at  this,  a  Roman, 
passing  by,  said,  "  What  are  you  looking  at,  English  bull  {  " 
"  1  am  looking  at  what  you  ought  to  be  ashamed  of," 
replied  Bede,  at  the  same  time  interpreting  the  letters 
thus  : 

"  I'atc-r   patria*   perditUH  est  ; 
Sapientia  seen  in  sublatn  ; 
Knit  Re^Mum  Roma-, 
Ferro,   Ha  mm;1.,   fame."  * 

Bede  never  set  foot  in  Home,  however,  and  his  claim 
to  the  title  rests  on  a  much  securer  basis.  The  tale  would 
have  suited  (Volfrid.  his  abbot,  much  better.  He  left  his 
monastery  at  three  days'  notice  once,  and  went,  never  to 
return.  The  tears  and  entreaties  of  his  monks  could  not 
keep  him,  and  from  a  skiff  he  gave  them  his  last  farewell, 
whilst  they  raised  the  cross  and  waved  their  burning 
tapers. 

No,  it  was  his  multifarious  labours  and  consequent 
eminence  that  led  to  Bede's  being  called  Venerable.  His 
llistoni  is  our  chief  guide  for  the  periods  it  treats  of,  and 
was  translated  by  King  Alfred;  his  expositions,  homilies, 
treatises,  and  hvmns  were  written  hv  the  score.  He 
possessed  a  good  knowledge  of  Latin  and  (Ireek.  with 
some  of  Hebrew,  and  was  such  MM  enthusiast  in  his  studies 
that  he  declined  to  be  raised  to  the  dignity  of  abbot, 
since  he  would  then  have  had  less  leisure  for  his  favourite 
pursuits.  It  came  to  be  said,  indeed,  that  though  living 
in  the  remotest  corner  of  Europe,  he  had  compassed  the 
whole  in  the  range  of  his  acquirements.  His  Homilies 
were  read  in  his  lifetime  in  the  churches,  a  dignity  accorded 
him  alone,  whence  chiefly,  say  some,  canit  his  title,  it 
being  a  middle  between  plain  Bede.  which  they  thought 
too  little,  and  Saint  Bede.  which  they  thought  too  much, 
whilst  he  was  still  living. 

*  "  Fall, -ii    i.s   the   father  of   this   folk; 
Lcarninu  Iruvi-s  you  likewise  ; 
Ruined   i.s  the  ri-ipn  of  Rome, 
By   war,   want,  and  waste." 


92  OUK   OWN   ENGLISH    nir.LE 

The  '"remote  corner"  in  which  he  lived  was  .larrow, 
on  the,  banks  of  the  Tyne,  not  a  very  picturesque  district 
to  the  modern  traveller.  The  crowded  houses  are  half 
lost  in  reeks  and  vapours  that  kill  everything  about  them 
except  those  that  make,  them,  as  the  old  woman  at  the 
church  said.  It  was  very  different,  however,  when  King 
Egfrid  founded  the  church  and  monastery  here.  A.D.  (>8~), 
after  a  victory,  and  in  fulfilment  of  a  vow.  Wearmouth 
and  Jarrow  were  built  almost  together,  and  were,  remarkable 
for  being  built  of  stone,  and  glazed,  so  that  they  said 
it  was  never  dark  in  old  -larrow  Church.  The  presiding 
genius  was  a  remarkable  example  of  the  power  of  early 
Christianity.  Benedict  Biscop  was  an  officer  of  noble 
birth,  in  the  service  of  Oswy,  King  of  Northumberland,  and 
\vas  munificently  rewarded  for  his  military  exploits. 
At  the  age  of  twenty-five,  however,  he  entirely  abandoned 
the  world,  and  went  to  Koine.  He  was  so  much  impressed 
that  he  soon  went  again,  and  would  have  taken  the  eldest 
son  of  the  king,  but  this  was  not  permitted.  A  fourth 
visit  resulted  in  his  bringing  back  books  and  other  things 
of  much  value,  and  it  was  then  that  Egfrid,  King  of  his 
native  Northumberland,  gave  him  a  grant  of  seventy 
hides  of  land  for  a  monastery  at  Monk  Wearmouth.  He 
got  masons  across  from  France,  and  had  service  within 
a  year  (A.D.  (571).  Soon  afterwards  (A.D.  f><^-),  Egfrid 
gave  him  forty  hides  at  Jarrow.  He  went  to  Rome  again,' 
and  brought  back  John,  the  arch  chanter  of  the  choir 
of  St.  Peter's  there,  who  pricked  out  for  them  a  course  of 
music  for  the  whole  year.  Some  Scriptural  paintings  also 
accompanied  the  music,  of  which  Bede  says:  "  Thus  the 
humble  disciple,  whose  ignorance  of  letters  excluded 
learning  at  one  inlet,  might  feel  his  faith  continued  and 
his  religious  impressions  strengthened  by  surveying, 
whithersoever  he  turned,  either  the  gracious  countenance 
of  the  Saviour,  the  awful  mystery  of  the  Incarnation, 
or  the  terrific  scene  of  the  Last  Judgment." 

When  Benedict  died,  lie  besought  them  not  to  elect  his 
brother,  "  who,  as  you  know,  walks  in  the  way  of  the 
ilesh,"  but  to  choose  someone  distinguished  by  piety  and 


REDE  95 

learning  rather  than  )>y  birth  and  rank.  Ceolfricl,  Abbot 
then  of  .larrow.  was  appointed  over  both,  and  it  was  this 
Ceolfrid  who  took  Bede  when  an  orphan  boy  into  the 
monastery.  We  are  told  that  Ceolfrid.  or  ('eolfrith. 
having  caused  three  copies  to  be  made  ot  the  entire  Bible, 
sent  'one  as  a  present  to  tin-  1'ope.  and  placed  the  otliers 
in  tin-  two  churches  doubtless  ot  his  monasteries,  vt  to 
the  end  that  all  who  desired  to  read  any  chapter  in  either 
Testament  might  lie  able  to  find  at  oner  what  they  desired." 

Bede  was  onlv  seven  vears  old  then,  but  could  sing  ill  the 
choir,  and  begin  to  learn  something.  His  own  words  are: 
"  All  inv  lil'e  I  spent  iii  that  same  monastery,  giving  my 
whole  attention  to  the  study  ot  the  Holy  Scriptures; 
and  in  the  intervals  between  the  hours  ot  regular  discipline 
and  the  duties  ot  singing  in  the  chinch.  I  always  took 
pleasure  in  learning,  or  teaching,  or  writing  something." 
Bovs  in  Saxon  monasteries  did  not  fare  badly,  as  we  know 
from  a  Colloquy  *  <>i  the  time.  He  had  llesh  meats,  beans, 
fish,  cheese,  butter,  and  worts  (kitchen  herbs),  and  for 
fifty-two  vears  he  devoted  himself  to  his  quiet  hut  in 
fluential  labours.  His  savings  about  the  Scriptures  are 
strong,  as  we  should  expect.  "  If  anyone  does  not  leed  on 
the  Word  ol  Cod.  he  is  dead  "  (Luke  iv.).  "  As  we  cannot 
be  perfectly  free  from  vain  thoughts,  as  far  as  we  can  we 
should  drive  them  away  by  the  introduction  of  good 
thoughts,  and  especially  by  frequent  meditation  on  the 
Scriptures,  according  to  the  example  of  the  Psalmist, 
who  says,  '  How  do  I  hive  Thy  law.  ()  Lord  ;  it.  is  mv 
meditation  all  t lie  day.' 

His  Commentaries  were  mostly  ext  racts  from  t  he  Kathers, 
and  comprised  almost  every  book'  of  the  Bible.  The 
Gospel  of  St.  .John  is,  however,  the  onlv  direct  transla 
tion  of  which  we  have  any  knowledge,  and  William  of 
Mahnesbury  gives  us  this  account  of  it  : 

"Because    this   Cosp«-l.    by    the    dilliciiltv    that    is    in    it. 
doth   so   much    exercise    tlif    wits   of   the    readers,    therefore 
he  did   interpret    it    into   the    Knglish    tongue,   and   so  did 
Condescend  to  them  which  were  not  skilful  in  the  Latin." 
*  The  Fat/urn  I  or  Knylidi  Jkuth  M,  K<-v.  (;.  !•'.  ISr.iwn,  M.A. 


96  OUR  OWN  EXGLISII   BIBLE 

He  may  have  translated  the  Psalter  also,  however  :  and  he 
writes  to  Egbert,  when  Primate  of  York,  exhorting  him 
to  cause  the  Lord's  Prayer  and  the  Creed  to  be  turned 
into  Anglo-Saxon  for  the  use  of  priests  as  well  as  the  laity, 
and  he  appeals  to  his  own  example,  for  he  had  prepared 
such  a  translation  for  native  teachers,  ignorant  of  Latin. 
There  was  a  little  stone  building  in  which  he  was  wont  to 
sit  and  meditate,  and  this  was  for  a  long  time  shown  to 
those  who  visited  the  ruins.  For  writing  his  History,  he 
had  help  from  the  Papal  Library  and  from  Saxon  ecclesi 
astics  in  every  kingdom  of  the  Heptarchy,  and  it  is  a 
better  performance  than  anything  else  of  the  period, 
though  his  credulity  is  seen  in  the  admission  of  a  number 
of  idle  tales.  He  dedicated  it  to  King  Ceolwulf,  the 
successor  of  King  Alfred,  of  Northumbria,  the  first  Saxon 
prince  who  cultivated  learning  in  those  parts.  And 
surely  it  was  no  idle  compliment  when  he  says  it  was  the 
king's  delight  not  only  to  hear  the  Scriptures  read,  but 
to  be  well  acquainted  with  the  deeds  and  sayings  of  his 
illustrious  predecessors. 

His  sermons  were  addressed  to  the  monastery,  and  thus 
contain  little  reference  to  the  morals  of  the  age.  These 
were  dreadful  enough,  however,  and  needed  some  refining 
and  civilising  influences,  with  a  vengeance.  Mr.  Grant 
Allen  savs  :  vk  A  single  story  from  the  Anglo-Saxon 
Chronicle  will  sufficiently  illustrate  the  type  of  men  whose 
actions  make  up  the  history  of  these  predatory  times. 
In  A.D.  7~)1  King  Cuthred.  of  the  West  Saxons,  died.  His 
kinsman  Sigehe.rht  succeeded  him.  One  year  later,  how 
ever.  (Ynewulf  and  the  Witan  deprived  Sigeberht  of  his 
kingdom,  making  over  to  him  only  the  petty  principality 
of  Hampshire,  while  Cynewulf  himself  reigned  in  his 
stead.  After  a  time  Sigeberht  murdered  an  alderman 
of  his  suite  named  Cymbra  ;  whereupon  Cynewulf 
deprived  him  of  his  remaining  territory,  and  drove  him  j 
forth  into  the  Forest  of  the  Weald.  There  he  lived  a  wild 
life,  till  a  herdsman  met  him  in  the  forest,  and  stabbed 
him.  to  avenge  the  death  of  his  master  Cymbra.  ( Ynewulf, 
in  turn,  after  spending  his  days  in  lighting  the  Welsh, 


REDE  99 

lost  his  life  in  a  quarrel  with  Cvneheard,  brother  of  the 
outlawed  Sigeberht.  He  had  endeavoured  to  drive  out 
the  Athelinp,  but  Cyneheard  surprised  him  at  Merton, 
and  slew  him.  with  all  his  thegns,  except  one  Welsh  hostage. 
Next  day  the  king's  friends,  headed  by  the  Alderman 
Osric.  fell  upon  tin;  Atheling.  and  killed  him.  with  all  his 
followers.  In  the  very  same  year,  Ethelbald,  of  Mercia, 
was  killed  fighting  at  Seckington  :  and  OfTa  drove  out 
his  successor,  Beornred.  Of  such  murders,  wars,  surprises, 
and  dynastic  quarrels,  the  history  of  the  eighth  century 
is  full,  attesting  the  wholly  ungoverned  and  ungovern 
able  nature  of  the  early  English  temper."  * 

It  is  a  dreadful  picture  of  Bede's  century,  but  under  the 
influence  of  men  like  him  things  began  to  improve.  In 
Northumbria  especially  the  pursuits  of  peace  came  to  be 
followed  more  and  more.  They  had  one  good  Christian 
king  after  another,  and  with  Lindisfarne,  .1  arrow,  Monk- 
Wearmouth,  Whit  by.  and  York  so  near  together,  there 
was  something  of  a  Christian  and  literary  centre  for  Western 
Europe.  The  famous  Cuthbert's  labours  only  closed 
when  Bede  was  a  boy  of  thirteen  :  and  though  he  had  an 
uncanny  way  of  walking  into  the  sea  up  to  his  neck,  and 
remainim:  in  it  all  night,  he  accomplished  a  great  missionary 
work.  Oswald,  one  of  the  earlv  kings,  used  to  act  as 
interpreter  to  his  missionary  friend  Aidan  as  he  went 
about  preaching,  and  once  had  his  hand  blessed  by  him, 
after  some  unusually  kind  act.  York  also  we  have  men 
tioned,  and  to  this  belongs  Alcuin,  worthy  of  a  more 
extended  reference.  England  was  in  fact  being 
Christianised,  as  we  shall  see  more  fully  in  the  next 
chapter. 

To  return,  however,  to  Bede,  what  a  remarkable  figure 
he  presents  for  such  an  untutored  age  !  No  Early  Church 
has  anything  like  him  to  produce.  A  very  short  time 
before  his  era  all  was  i'agan.  It  was  worse,  indeed,  for 
Christianity  itself  had  been  vanquished.  Forty  years 
before  his  birth  the  king  had  abjured  the  Faith  of  Christ, 
after  having  been  nominally  a  Christian.  Then,  not  onlv 


ioo  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  P.IP.LE 

did  kings  become  nursing-fathers  to  the  infant  Church, — 
giving  lands  too  profuse  indeed  for  their  purpose,  and 
not  taken,  as  Bode  significantly  remarks,  from  others, — 
but  the  Faith  of  Christ  was  largely  accepted  by  the  people. 
There  were  soon  six  hundred  monks  at  J arrow,  and  Beele 
quickly  gathered  into  himself  all  the  knowledge  of  the 
time.  This  child  of  Pagan  parents,  this  dweller  in  a 
remote  corner  of  the  earth,  knew  his  Bible  better  than 
most  of  us  do  in  these  days  of  civilisation,  and  drew 
together  nearly  everything  of  value  that  had  been  said 
upon  its  various  books.  He  went  on  to  the  classics,  and 
could  (junto  Plato,  Aristotle,  Seneca,  Cicero,  Lucretius, 
and  Virgil.  Whatever  little  knowledge  of  physics  there 
was  he  mastered,  and  first  amongst  English  theologians, 
historians,  and  scholars  it  is  in  the  monk  of  J  arrow  that 
English  literature  strikes  its  roots.* 

He  was  a  plain  priest  from  his  thirtieth  year  to  the 
end,  and  doubtless  performed  his  ordinary  duties.  What 
they  were  we  may  gather  partly  from  a  later  Saxon  exhorta 
tion  : — "  Priests  !  you  ought  to  be  well  provided  with 
books  and  apparel,  as  suits  your  condition.  The  Mass 
Priest  should  at  least  have  his  missal,  his  singing-book, 
his  reading-book,  his  Psalter,  his  hand-book,  his  penitential, 
and  his  numeral  one.  .  .  .  Take  care  that  you  be  better 
and  wiser  in  your  spiritual  craft  than  worldly  men  are 
in  theirs,  that  you  may  be  fit  teachers  of  true  wisdom. 
The  priest  should  preach  rightly  the  true  belief ;  read  fit 
discourses;  visit  the  sick;  and  baptize  infants.  Xo  one 
should  be  a  covetous  trader,  nor  a  plunderer,  nor  drink 
often  in  wine-houses,  nor  be  proud  or  boastful,  nor  wear 
ostentatious  girdles,  nor  be  adorned  with  gold,  but  do 
honour  to  himself  by  his  good  morals."  f 

The  extract  has  a  Catholic  ring  about  it,  but  wo  must 
not  disguise  for  a  moment  the  fact  that  Rome  was  in  these 
days  folding  England  beneath  her  wing.  There  was  a 
Synod  at  Whitby  in  A.D.  (>(M  which  went  in  favour  of  Rome 
with  regard  to  some  matters  in  dispute  between  the  more 

*  1/ixtnry  <>/  the  Kn<jli«l,  P«l},lc.  Crrrii. 
t  Wilkins's  Lcgc*  Anglo-Saxonica. 


ancient  Culdee  Christians  and  those  who  followed  the 
Roman  usages.  Four  years  later,  Theodore  and  Hadrian 
came,  and  the  result  of  their  long  labours  in  the  same 
direction  was  lasting.  The  very  monasteries  founded 
by  the  Culdees  at  Lindisfarne  and  elsewhere  passed  over 
to  the  Romish  party.  Cuthbert,  in  the  succession  of 
Aidan  and  Columba,  lay  dying  in  his  little  Hermitage, 
near  Lindisfarne.  in  A.D.  (1ST.  When  he  died,  a  signal 
was  given  to  a  monk  looking  out  from  the  watchtower, 
and  when  the  light  Hashed  over  the  two  miles  of  water, 
he  hurried  in  to  the  brethren,  who  wen;  singing.  They 
had  just  reached  "  Thou  hast  cast  us  out,  and  scattered 
us  abroad  :  Thou  hast  also  been  displeased  ;  Thou  hast 
given  us  a  drink  of  deadly  wine."  It  was  the  dirge  not  of 
Cuthbert,  who  accepte  1  Roman  ways,  but  of  his  Church 
and  people.  The  earlier  movement,  vigorous  and  pro 
ductive  as  it  had  been,  became  absorbed  in  the  mightier 
one  whose  seat  was  amongst  the  Seven  Hills.* 

The  remains  of  the  monastery  where  Bede  studied,  and 
possibly  the  chair  which  he  used,  are  still  to  be  seen  at 
Jarrow  bv  those  who  care  lor  such  memorabilia.  The 
chancel  is  the  part,  that  is  Saxon,  and  is  about  I'ortv  feet 
long.  There  is  a  beautiful  window  describing  the  death 
scene,  which  lias  become  so  celebrated  that  we  almost 
hesitate  to  give  it  again  at  length.  Our  sketch  of  P>ede 
would  be  very  imperfect  without  it,  however,  and  it  is 
touchingly  given  by  an  eye- witness  and  disciple.  He  was 
only  in  his  lifty-ninth  year  when  he  began  to  lail.  his  death 
being  due  probably  to  his  sedentary  occupation.  Ab.mt 
a  fortnight  before  Easter  A.D.  7  •&•">.  he  was  great  I  v  troubled 
with  shortness  of  breath,  but  was  mercifully  without 
much  pain.  He  lingered  for  some  weeks,  and  died  on 
Ascension  Day.  Continually  he,  was  giving  thanks  to 
God.  and  singing  psalms.  Many  times  also  he  repeated, 
**  God  scourgeth  every  son  whom  He  receiveth,''  and  sang 

*(,I,-.-M'S  Ht.lnni  <>!  tl*.    />,/,>/,   />,„,,/,.      |),,uMI.-ss.  MS   Hank,-  says, 

RoilK*    ><i    siidii     lud     SWilV     IliTr     IHTJIM*!'     IMCll     \VJ>I|"<|     In     l>;-|<>||_'     (<>     (lie 

great  I 'linn  h  communion   wliidi   then,   in   -till   nudnikm  freedom.  <-om- 
Drehcmlol   tli«-  mo-t   o!i*tant    nations. 


io4  OUR  OWN   ENGLISH  BIBLE 

some  English  verses  in  the  Northumbrian  dialect,  which 
have  been  rendered  as  follows  : — 

"  Ere  the  pilgrim  soul  go  forth 

On  its  journey,  far  and  lone, 
Who  is  he  that  yet  on  earth 
All  his  needful  part  hath  done  ! 

Who  foreweighs  the  joy  or  scathe 
That  his  parted  ghost  shall  know  ; 

Endless  when  the  da}r  of  death 
Seals  his  doom  for  weal  or  woe." 

Much  out  of  the  Scripture,  indeed,  he  repeated,  as  also 
this  sentence  from  St.  Ambrose  :  "  I  have  not  lived 
so  as  to  be  ashamed  to  live  amongst  you  ;  nor  do  I  fear 
to  die,  because  we  have  a  gracious  God."  During  these 
days  he  laboured  in  translating  the  Gospel  of  John,  and 
some  collections  out  of  the  book  of  notes  of  Bishop  Isidorus, 
saying,  "  I  will  not  have  my  pupils  read  a  falsehood, 
nor  labour  therein  without  profit  after  my  death."  It 
is  possible  that  he  had  in  his  hands  the  manuscript  of 
St.  John's  Gospel  sent  by  Gregory  the  Great  to  Augustine, 
and  which  is  still  to  be  seen  in  the  Bodleian  Library 
as  one  of  its  most  precious  treasures.  Two  days  before 
his  death,  he  said  to  the  young  monk  who  was  writing  at 
his  dictation — 

"  Go  on  quickly  ;  I  know  not  how  long  I  shall  hold  out, 
and  whether  my  Maker  will  not  take  me  away."  On 
the  next  day  one  said  to  him,  "  Most  dear  Master,  there 
is  still  one  chapter  wanting  ;  do  you  think  it  troublesome 
to  be  asked  any  more  questions!?"  (>It  is  no  trouble." 
was  the  reply  ;  l'  take  your  pen  and  make  ready,  and  write 
fast,"  * 

At  three  o'clock  on  Ascension  Day  he  bethought  him 
that  he  had  some  little  things  he  would  like  to  give  his 
friends  before  he  died.  They  were  only  pepper,  napkins, 
and  incense,  but  he  distributed  them,  begging  them  to 
say  prayers  for  him.  "  It  is  time."  he  said,  "  that  I 
returned  to  Him  who  formed  me,  out  of  nothing.  My 

*  So  savs  the  clock  at  Woolwich   Dockyard — "  fugio — fimi." 


105 


I5EDE 


icy 


merciful  .Jud^e  well  foresaw  my  lift;  for  me.  The  time  of 
my  dissolution  draws  ni;_'h,  for  I  desire  to  die  and  to  be 
with  Christ.''  As  the  night  drew  on,  his  hoy-scribe  said, 
"  Dear  Master,  there  is  yet  one  sentence  not  written." 
He  <;ave  it  him.  ami  on  the  (Jospel  beinjj  thus  finished, 
he  said,  "  It  is  well.  You  haye  said  the  truth.  It  is 
ended.  Receive  my  head  into  your  hands,  for  it  is  a  «reat 
satisfaction  to  me  to  sit  facing  my  holy  place,  where 
1  was  wont  to  pray,  that  I  may  also,  sitting,  call  upon  my 


i 


ri:ii)l;V    HI   INS,    1KM.Y 


Father."  And  thus,  on  the  pavement  of  his  iittle  cell, 
sin^inj^.  ''(Ilory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son  and  to 
the  Holy  (Jliost.''  when  he  had  named  the  Holy  Chost. 
he  breathed  his  last,  and  so  departed  to  the  Heavenly 
Kingdom. 

This  was  the  sentence,  but  we  can  scarcely  be  expected 
to  recognise  our  own  lan^ua^e  :- 

\\itodlice  odhre  mane^a  tiling  svnd  dhe  sc  Hoeland 
worhtc  <i\[  dha  ealle  a  writene  woeron.  ic  wene  ni  mihte 
dhes  middaneard  ealla  dha  bi<-  befon." 

So  doubtless  tli<1  j»rayer  with  which  he  closes  his  Jltstnrt/ 


icS  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   BIBLE 

was  answered  :  "  And  now,  I  beseech  Thee,  good  Jesus. 
that  to  whom  Thou  hast  graciously  granted  sweetly  to 
partake  of  the  words  of  Thy  wisdom  and  knowledge, 
Thou  wilt  also  vouchsafe  that  he  may  some  time  or  other 
come  to  Thee,  the  Fountain  of  all  wisdom,  and  always 
appear  before  Thy  face,  who  livest  and  reignest.  world 
without  end." 

Bede  was  buried  at  the  monastery  where  IK;  had  lived 
his  life,  close  by  the  Tyne, 

"  3Iost  likck   the  drowsy   flood    which    pods  feitrn 
Dark  Styx,  with  wreaths  of  moistful  osiers  hunsj. " 

About  four  hundred  years  after  his  death,  however,  his 
bones  were  removed  to  Durham,  where  Hugh  Pudsey. 
then  Bishop  of  that  see,  had  them  enclosed  in  a  casket 
of  gold  and  silver,  and  placed  in  the  chapel  at  the  western 
end  of  the  Cathedral,  under  a  plain  slab,  on  which  are 
the  words,  "  Hie  sunt  in  fossa  Bedrc  Venerabilis  ossa." 
Another  legend  of  his  name  is  connected  with  this.  It 
is  said  that  the  writer  of  the  inscription  was  unable  to 
find  a  suitable  adjective.  He  thought  of  holy,  pious, 
and  other  epithets,  but  they  did  not  seem  sufficiently 
expressive.  Night  came,  and  in  the  morning  he  was 
still  puzzled.  When  he  went  to  look,  however,  someone 
had  inserted  the  word  "  Venerable,"  which  was  exactly 
what  he  wanted.  Bede  was  called  Venerable  and  Admir 
able,  however,  by  the  Second  Council  of  Aix-la-Chapelle, 
about  a  century  after  his  death,  and,  however  he  got 
it,  it  has  stuck  to  him  as  much  as  "Judicious"  and 
'"Admirable"  to  Hooker  and  Crichton.  Jn  the,  .Middle 
Ages,  indeed,  such  titles  displaced  the  actual  names  of 
writers  of  distinction,  and  the  "  Angelic  Doctor."  the 
"  Seraphic  Doctor."  etc.,  were  quoted  under  those  names 
alone. 

Cuthbert  lies  beside  Bede  at  Durham  :  and  Fuller  tells 
us  that  a  foreign  ambassador,  some  long  time  after  their 
burial,  coming  there,  addressed  himself  first  to  the  high 
and  sumptuous  shrine  of  Cuthbert.  saying.  "  If  thou  art 
a  saint,  [tray  for  me."  Then  coming  to  the  plain  and 


i'.F.DK 


:og 


small    toinl)   of    Bod 
saint.  prav  lor  me. 

The    ,J  arrow    monastery 
Danes.      Fifty   years   alter 
anchored    just    outside    it. 
and    it 
of  c 


he.    "  thou    art 


was    soon    destroyed    by    the 
Bede's   death    they   came    and 
They    came    again    later    on. 

remaned  in  abandoned  desolation  for  a  couple 
Soon  after  the  Norman  Conquest,  however. 
it  had  another  brief  spasm  of  life,  but  it  was  only  brief. 
In  Jns.'J  the  monies  finally  moved  away  to  Durham,  and 


IVn.KiuU   OK    .-].    MAUY'.S    I'AKIHI    «nri;CH,    HUI.Y    ISLAM). 


it  became  a  small 
St.  Cuthbert.    To- 
under  its  shadow, 
of  hammers  amid 
of  Danish  destruc 
surroundings,  the 
of  the  church   in 
with    (Volfrid's    n 
he.  with  a  party 
Bede    was    a 
open  to  all   influe 


affair,  dependent  on  the  monastery  of 
dav  huge  iron  ships  are  being  built  nearly 
,  and  there  is  an  almost  unceasing  din 

a  forest  of  furnaces.  And  vet.  in  spite 
tions,  Norman  neglect,  and  incongruous 

\vry  chair  Bede  sat   in  lasts  on.  a  piece. 

which  he  sat.  and  its  dedication-stone, 
ame  upon  it.  recalling  the  time  when 

f  seventeen  monks,  was  sent  to  found  it. 

road-minded  man.  keeping  his  heart- 
nces  for  good,  whether  thev  came  from 


no  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   BIBLE 

lona  or  Rome,  Canterbury  or  Gaul.  He  condemned 
the  cruel  and  foolish  war  made  by  Ecgfrith,  the  benefactor 
of  his  monastery,  against  the  Irish  Scots,  and  narrated 
ungrudgingly  the  good  deeds  of  Wilfrid.  He  held  with 
Rome  as  to  the  date  of  Easter  and  the  form  of  the  tonsure, 
but  dwelt  much  on  the  holiness  of  Aidan,  and  wrote  the 
Life  of  Cuthbert  both  in  prose  and  verse. 

Wilfrid  was  eager  but  narrow-minded,  and  looked 
on  Cuthbert  and  John  of  Beverley  as  intruders.  To 
Bede  they  were  saints,  and  he  resents  Wilfrid's  driving 
out  of  Eata  and  Cuthbert  from  Ripon  to  make  room 
for  him.  He  had  a  somewhat  high  view  of  the  Sacrament, 
but  certainly  not  the  transubstantiation  taught  later 
on  by  Radbert,  and  into  which  the  Romish  Church  was 
beguiled. 

Thirty-seven  of  his  works  are  described  by  the  Rev.  Win. 
Hunt,  and  being  compiled  largely  from  the  Fathers, 
they  are  full  of  allegory.  Even  Tobit  is  made  to  teach 
something  about  Christ  and  the  Sacraments,  and  the 
six  waterpots  of  Cana  are  the  six  ages  of  the  world  ! 

He  loved  his  work,  and  never  wandered  away  from 
his  Northern  home,  or  was  absent  from  its  means  of  grace. 
He  would  say,  "  I  know  that  angels  visit  the  Congregation, 
and  what  if  they  should  not  find  me  !  Would  they  not 
say,  '  Where  is  Bede  ?  ' 

When  he  was  a  boy  the  angels  might  have  found  him 
almost  alone.  Food  was  so  poor,  and  sanitary  matters 
so  neglected,  that  the  pestilence  often  walked  in  darkness, 
and  destruction  at  noonday.  It  so  thinned  the  brother 
hood  at  Jarrow  in  Bede's  early  life,  that  there  was  not 
one  monk  leff  who  could  take  up  the  responses  with  the 
Abbot.  For  a  week  this  went  on,  until  the  dreariness  of 
it  could  be  borne  no  longer;  and  after  that,  Abbot  and 
child  laboured  day  by  day  through  the  customary  service. 
A  national  memorial  to  the  Venerable  Bede  has  lately 
been  erected  on  the  Cliff  at  Roker,  Sunderland.  It  is  a 
beautifully  sculptured  Saxon  cross,  twenty-five  feet  hi.uh, 
and  was  erected  in  clean  and  pure  air,  where  it  will  be 
seen  by  the  holiday  population  of  Wear  and  Tyne.  Fn 


mm 


TIIK  vr.M  i:.\i:i.        i  IM:  M<T\TIM:  TIII:  i.\-i-  wonns  in-  in 


BEDE 


'  :< 


the  sculpture  there  are  scroll  patterns  from  the  Lindis- 
farne  Gospels,  extracts  from  his  works,  busts  of  his  friends 
and  associates;  and  to  illustrate  his  love  of  nature,  a 
scroll  introducing  birds  and  animals,  springing  from 
a  harp,  emblematic  of  his  poetic  gifts.  There  was  a 
significant  ceremony,  largely  attended,  on  llth  October 
11)04,  when  the  Archbishop  of  York  handed  over  the 
cross  to  the  town,  saying  it  was  the  memorial  of  a  great 
scholar,  a  great  historian,  a  great  theologian,  and  a  great 
lover  and  interpreter  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  one  who, 
in  the  highest  sense,  was  a  man  of  God. 


UMH  IN   in  nn AM  I:AHU.I>KAL 


CHAPTER    VIII 

THE    SEVENTH    AND    EIGHTH    CENTURIES  —  ALCUIN 

"  Such   a    mail 
M  i<.fli  I    l)i'   a   copy   to   thcsi>   younger   times." 

DURING  these  centuries  tliere  can  be  no  doubt  that  Anglo- 
Saxon  Britain  was  won  for  Christ.  The  conquering  were 
conquered  ;  the  "  life-full  Word  "  swept  out  of  the  land 
the  superstitions  that  had  been  brought  into  it.  And 
the  spiritual  conquest  was  much  the  faster  of  the  two, 
though  there  was  many  a  discouraging  season.  It  took 
even  the  fierce  Saxons  a  long  time  to  conquer  England, 
for  they  had  to  contend  with  a  people  in  most  respects 
superior  to  themselves,  a  Christian  people,  with  schools, 
poetry,  music,  and  something  of  the  Roman  civilisation. 
It  was  only  their  brave  and  unwearied  hardihood  that 
prevailed,  and  this  they  had  been  trained  to  through  a 
long  history  of  struggle. 

Even  then  it  took  them  a  long  time.  It  was  A.D.  088 
before  Ina  became  the  first  Legislator- King  of  the  whole 
of  the  West  Saxons.  Two  hundred  and  thirty-nine  years 
had  elapsed  since  the  first  Saxons  came  to  Thanet.  and 
one  hundred  and  ninety-three  since  the  first  landing  of  the 
West  Saxons.  It  was  one  hundred  and  eleven  years  since 
the  great  conquests  of  Ceawlin  westwards,  and  ninety-one 
since  the  mission  of  Augustine  to  the  Kentish  Bretwalda.* 

The  progress  of  Christianity  was  much  more  rapid. 
Every  part  of  the  land  received  the  truth  within  about 
eighty-two  years.  The  conversion  of  Kent  was  begun 

*  LappcubiTg. 

114 


SEVENTH  AND  EIGHTH  CENTURIES— ALCUIN    115 

in  A.I).  "('.Hi  ;  Essex  received  the  truth  from  Mellitus  in 
601,  and  from  Cedda,  Bishop  of  Tilbury,  in  053;  North- 
umbria,  from  Paulinus  in  (527,  and  from  the  Culdees  in 
035  ;  East  Anglia  from  Felix,  a  Burgundian,  in  031  ; 
Wessex  from  Birinus  of  (Jenoa  in  033;  Mcrcia  and  the 
Middle  Angles  from  the  Culdees  and  their  disciples  in 
653  ;  Sussex,  last  of  all.  from  Bishop  Wilfrid  in  081. 

What  a  mercy  these  Saxons  were  laid  hold  of  by  Chris 
tianity  almost  before  they  were  well  settled  in  the  land, 
for  they  were  a  fierce,  wild  race,  neither  liberal  nor 
just,  neither  wise  nor  virtuous.  On  the  contrary,  they 
were  the  most  barbarous,  selfish,  and  bloodthirsty  of  the 
European  peoples.  Fire  and  sword  !  no  mere  conquest, 
but  a  driving  and  killing  out  of  the  population  they  found, 
was  their  motto.  As  Gildas  says,  with  Celtic  eloquence, 
"  The  red  tongue  of  flame  licked  up  the  whole  land  from 
end  to  end  till  it  slaked  its  horrid  thirst  in  the  Western 
Ocean."  And  their  "  religion  "  helped  them  on.  Its 
most  formidable  feature,  as  of  all  the  Teutonic  nations, 
was  its  neglect  of  the  pure  and  benevolent  virtues  of  life, 
and  its  indissoluble  union  with  war  and  violence.  It 
represented  their  Supreme  Deity  as  the  father  of  combats 
and  slaughter,  those  being  always  his  favourite  children 
who  fell  in  the  field  of  battle.  To  them  he  assigned  the 
Heavenly  Valhall  and  Vingolfa,  and  promised  to  salute 
them  after  their  death  as  heroes. 

The  sanguinary  sacrifices,  wild  rites,  and  turbulent 
festivals  of  the  mythology  of  Odin,  however,  were  better 
suited  to  the  native  regions  of  our  Saxon  conquerors 
than  to  the  gay  greenwood  and  more  tranquil  atmosphere 
of  Britain.  The  Christian  religion,  with  its  order,  humanity, 
and  peace,  appealed  to  them  when  they  settled  down, 
and  it  was  well  for  them  to  become  naturalised  in  tin; 
established  Faith  of  the  civilised  world  around  them. 

The  Christian  conquest  was  won  more  by  the  Culdees 
from  lona  than  the  monks  and  priests  from  Rome.  Indeed, 
tin-  little  kingdom  of  Kent,  with  its  bishoprics  of  Canter 
bury  and  Rochester,  was  the  onlv  part  of  the  island 
permanently  converted  by  Augustine  and  his  band. 


u6  OUR   OWN   ENOLISH   PJ15LE 

It  was  the  handful  of  Scots  that  principally  did  the 
work  ;  and  well  may  Fronde  say  that,  except  the  Athenians 
and  the  Jews,  no  people  so  few  in  number  have  made 
so  deep  an  impression  on  history  as  the  Scots. 

Montalembert  sums  up  their  work  by  saying  that  of  the 
eight  Anglo-Saxon  kingdoms,  four  were  wholly  and  two 
partially  Christianised  by  Scottish  missionaries  ;  and 
Lightfoot,  with  all  his  natural  leanings  the  other  way, 
exclaims  that  Augustine  of  Canterbury  was  the  Apostle  of 
Kent,  but  that  Aidan  of  lona  was  the  Apostle  of  England.* 

It  was  a  moral  conquest,  however,  by  whomsoever 
wrought.  Charlemagne  compelled  the  Saxons  in  Germany 
to  enter  the  Christian  pale,  with  the  sword  at  their  throats, 
and,  later  on,  King  Alfred  did  little  better  with  the  Danish 
Guthrum. 

Our  own  Saxon  forefathers  were  simply  persuaded 
by  Biblical  truth  ;  and  thus  they  loved  their  new  Faith 
more,  and  kept  it  more  steadfastly  afterwards,  though 
they  often  wavered  a  little  at  first. |  Ceadwalla  was  the 
only  English  king  that  ever  tried  to  turn  people  to  the 
Gospel  of  peace  by  the  sword  of  war. 

Of  course  they  wavered  a  little  at  first.  The  old 
Heathenism  was  not  likely  to  be  banished  without  many 
a  struggle,  and  sometimes  it  won  its  way  back  again  for 
a  brief  season,  after  Christianity  had  been  introduced. 
These  English  Saxons  were  the  one  purely  German  nation 
that  rose  upon  the  wreck  of  Rome,  and  originally  their 
hate  burnt  fiercest  against  Churches,  and  all  that  had  to  do 
with  them.  But  they  were  won  by  truth  and  kindness, 
and  finally  held  when  they  were  wron.  Look  at  the  closing 
scene  in  this  mild  conquest,  when  Wilfrid  went  down  to 
Sussex  in  A.D.  <>7S.  He  found  a  small  monastery  already 
established  at  Bosham,  near  Chichester,  but  it  had  little 
influence.  The  poor  monks  lived  within  their  walls, 
and  sang  their  psalms  like  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  in  New 
England — 

"  Amidst   the  Moods  they  sang. 
And   the  stars   heard  them,   and   the  sea." 

*  liaii-il  Ln-lufc.  |  Early  England,  F.  V.  1'ou  <.•!!. 


SFAT.NTI!  AND  KIC.HTH  CENTl'RIES     ALCriX     1.7 

When  Wilfrid  went,  the  people  were  so  miserable  through 
their  poverty  that  they  used  to  join  hands,  forty  or  fifty 
together,  and  throw  themselves  over  the  dill's  into  the 
sea.*  Wilfrid  began  by  teaching  them  how  to  go  out 
fishing,  which  they  soon  learnt  under  his  instruction, 
catching  on  one  occasion  three  hundred  fish  at  a  draught. 
It  was  a  good  preparation  for  missionary  teaching,  and  the 
one  net  so  cleared  the  way  for  the  other  that  the  last  piece 
of  England  was  speedily  won  for  Christ. 

Amongst  the  most  potent  influences  were  those  which 
streamed  from  the  labours  of  Theodore  and  Hadrian, 
more  than  once  referred  to.  They  came  over  together 
in  the  middle  of  the  seventh  centurv.  and  both  as  Bible- 
teachers  and  classical  masters,  as  organisers  and  Romanists, 
they  cut  a  deep  mark  into  the  England  of  this  early  time. 
Theodore  was  a  native  of  Tarsus,  and  a  monk  at  Rome. 
Hadrian  was  an  African,  and  the  abbot  of  a  monastery 
near  Naples,  and  when  the  archbishopric  of  Canterbury 
was  offered  tr>  him,  he  begged  that  it  might  be  given  to 
Theodore  instead,  he  promising  to  accompany  him.  They 
came  together,  escorted  to  Canterbury  by  Benedict  Biscop, 
who  had  formed  their  acquaintance  on  a  visit  to  Rome  ; 
the  Asiatic  monk,  with  the  African  counsellor,  to  preside 
over  a  Saxon  Church,  to  the,  language  and  manners  of 
which  they  were  utter  strangers.  Thev  worked  together 
for  twenty-one  years;  and  when  Theodore  passed  away, 
Hadrian  continued  to  direct  the  alTairs  of  the  monastery 
at  Canterbury  for  eighteen  more.  Both  were  good  (I  reek 
8nd  Latin  scholars,  as  well  as  being  well  versed  in  Biblical 
and  sacred  literature.  With  portions  of  the  Scriptures, 
they  brought  Homer,  .losephus,  Chrysostom,  and  manv 
of  the  Latin  writers.  Thev  taught  as  well  as  preached, 
establishing  schools  for  languages,  arithmetic,  astronomy, 
and  music,  and  enjoining  all  parents  to  see  that  their 
children  were  taught  to  say  the  Creed  and  the  Lord's 
Prayer  in  the  vulgar  tongue. 

It  was  largely  through  their  influence  that  England, 
though  chiefly  converted  by  Culdee  missionaries,  came  to 

*  l-:,i-jli*h  C/nircl,,  Churl. .M. 


n8  OUR  OWN   ENGLISH   BIBLE 

acknowledge  Rome.  Augustine  had  been  too  high  and 
haughty  with  the  remains  of  the  British  Church  which 
he  found  in  the  land.  In  the  West  they  were  neither 
few  nor  feeble,  and  a  very  few  years  before  his  arrival 
there  had  been  Bishop  Theonas  at  Lincoln,  and  Bishop 
Thadioc  at  York. 

He  should  have  treated  the  survivors  of  an  early  and 
interesting  Christian  Church  with  great  consideration,  but 
instead  of  that  he  used  high  words,  and  the  breach  was 
so  complete  that,  in  the  time  of  his  successor,  a  certain 
Scottish  prelate,  Dagan  by  name,  passing  through  Canter 
bury,  refused  to  eat  in  the  same  house  with  the  "  Italian 
Christians."  The  bishops  in  Wales,  indeed,  continued 
to  hold  themselves  independent  of  Canterbury  and  all  its 
doings  down  to  the  commencement  of  the  twelfth  century. 
Their  Church  was  only  finally  absorbed  into  the  English 
Church  when  the  Welsh  State  was  absorbed,  at  the  end 
of  the  thirteenth  century. 

Theodore  and  Hadrian  acted  more  judiciously.  Once 
Theodore  went  with  Egfrid,  King  of  Northumberland, 
to  Cuthbert,  then  living  as  a  recluse  on  Fame  Island,  and 
begged  him  on  bended  knee  to  accept  the  bishopric  of  that 
part,  which  he  did.  Cuthbert  was  a  Culdee,  though  he 
had  before  this  agreed  with  Rome  on  matters  frequently 
debated.  In  673  Theodore's  Canons  were  accepted  at 
Hertford,  and  Roman  practices  in  consequence  came  to 
be  generally  adopted. 

This  was  the  time,  too,  when  the  "life-full  Word"  was 
securing  its  natural  home.  Theodore  and  Hadrian  found 
scarcely  any  churches,  or  residences  of  single  ministers. 
According  to  the  laws  of  Athelstan,  a  thane's  rank  might 
be  obtained  by  a  Saxon  churl  or  franklin,  if  he  possessed 
about  five  hundred  acres  of  land,  if  he  was  entitled  to 
a  place  in  the  Council  of  the  Wise,  and  if  he  had  a  church 
with  a  bell-tower  on  his  estate.  This  doubtless  was 
a  great  stimulus  to  the  building  of  churches,  and  they  ; 
soon  became  numerous,  though  plain  enough.  In  North 
amptonshire,  at  the  Conquest,  there  were  sixty  village 
churches,  though  it  was  thinly  inhabited  ;  and  the  county 


SK  VIC  N'T  II  AND  KIC.IITII  < 'KNTl'RIKS     ALfT'IX     119 

town  had  inure  than  it  has  now.  In  Derbyshire  there 
were  about  fiftv.  and  live  in  the  count v  town.  In 
Lincolnshire  there  were  inure  than  two  hundred  village 
churches,  populous  and  thriving  as  it  was  before  the 
Conquest. 

Theodore  arranged  that  the  thanes,  or  country  gentle 
men,  who  built  churches  on  their  estates  should  be 
allowed  to  pay  a  portion  of  the  tithes  to  the  priest  of 
their  own  church,  instead  of  paying  all  to  the  Minster 
or  Cathedral. 

What  a  remark-able  figure  also  Alcuin  presents  !  Egbert, 
one  of  Bede's  scholars,  became  Archbishop  of  York, 
and  founded  a  school  and  library  there,  over  which  Alcuin 
was  appointed  librarian.  A  poem  of  the  eleventh  century 
says  that  he  translated  the  Pentateuch,  and  his  love 
for  the  Scriptures  is  seen  in  the  following  letter,  addressed 
to  a  friend:  "  1  wish  the  four  Gospels,  instead  of  the 
twelve  .Kin-ills,  tilled  your  breast.  He  studious  in  reading 
the  Sacred  Writings;  studv  Christ  as  foretold  in  the 
books  of  the  Prophets,  and  as  exhibited  in  the  Gospels; 
and  when  you  find  Him.  do  not  lose  Him,  but  introduce 
Him  into  the  home  of  thv  heart,  and  make  Him  the  ruler 
of  thv  life.  Love  Him  as  thy  Redeemer  and  thy  Governor, 
and  as  the  Dispenser  of  all  thv  comforts.  Keep  His 
commandments,  because  in  them  is  Eternal  Life."  He 
found  that  copies  of  the.  Scriptures  and  of  Service  Books 
had  in  many  places  disappeared  altogether,  and  in  others 
the  copies  were  inferior  and  incorrect.  He  examined 
some  of  the  best  manuscripts,  acted  as  a  reviser,  and 
then  had  them  copied  in  large  numbers,  and  the  copies 
sent  out  to  cathedrals  and  important  churches  and  abbeys, 
where  they  were  still  further  multiplied.*  Certainly, 

*  It  wa^  al  <  harleniaj/Me's  re«|iie>t  that  lit-  mult-Monk  this.  The 
uimiiltaneoiis  MM-  of  the  nM  Latin  and  Jerome's  nt-u  version  \\ns  harmful. 
He  n->tored  tin-  original  readings  nf  .li-mim-,  in  a  jjreat  measure,  ami 
•plendid  MSS.  n-main  \vliich  elaim  In  he  dirertlv  tlt-rivi-il  from  Almin's 
own  ri-vision,  one  nf  th«-  iim-.-t  of  the.-e  U-IIIL'  amount  the  chief  treasures 
Of  the  I'.ritish  .Mu-eimi  Lil.rarv,  and  knn\Mi  as  Thai  leiiiUL'Mr's  I'.ihle. — 
BiUr  II,  tin  Cl.nrrl,,  \\e>|,  ntt. 

He   pre.M-nted   tin-    Kni|ieror  ( 'liarleina'.'ii'-   with    a  mpy  .,f  the   Ke\  i.-ed 


120  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH    BIBLE 

such  a  piece  of  information  looks  as  if  there  were  a  much 
larger  circulation  of  the  Scriptures  than  we  have  any 
knowledge  of.  Alcuin  was  a  good  scholar  at  York  in 
the  eighth  century,  long  before  Oxford  or  Cambridge 
had  been  heard  of.  The  school  there  and  library  were 
by  no  means  small  affairs,  Egbert  continuing  to  teach 
after  he  became  archbishop.  Besides  the  Scriptures, 
there  was  some  instruction  in  rhetoric,  jurisprudence, 
poetry,  astronomy,  natural  history,  and  mathematics. 
Nothing  equal  to  it  was  to  be  found  in  Gaul  or  Spain, 
and  we  have  a  complete  list  of  the  classics  in  the  library 
after  which  Alcuin  sighed  when  living  abroad  afterwards. 
The  great  merit  of  such  men  lay  in  acquiring,  preserving, 
and  teaching  the  knowledge  which  other  times  and  countries 
had  produced.  They  separated  its  best  parts  from  the 
lumber  and  mere  verbiage  with  which  they  were  con 
nected  ;  and  had  it  not  been  for  a  succession  of  them, 
Europe  would  have  become  what  Turkey  is,  and  mankind 
would  now  be  slowly  emerging  into  the  infancy  of  literature 
and  science.  This  York  scholar  became  the  personal 
friend  and  adviser  of  Charlemagne,  the  greatest  sovereign 
of  the  time,  and  enjoyed  imperial  confidence  to  a  degree 
rarely  experienced  by  literature.  It  was  when  he  was 
sent  on  an  embassy  from  King  Off  a  to  Rome,  in  A.D.  782, 
that  he  met  Charlemagne  at  Pavia,  who  begged  him 
to  take  the  leadership  of  the  palatial  school  he  had  founded 
for  the  sons  of  Frankish  noblemen.  He  thus  became 
one  of  the  most  prominent  members  of  that  circle  of 
great  men  which,  with  Charlemagne  as  its  centre,  stood 
at  the  head  of  the  whole  religious  and  civilising  move 
ment  of  the  age. 

The  emperor  employed  him  several  times  on  political 
missions,  but  his  proper  place  was  as  the  religious  counsellor 
of  the  king,  and  in  this  field  his  influence  was  decisive. 
In  TOO  he  went  to  France,  and  settled  there,  retiring 

Text  when  lie  was  made  Kmperor  of  Home,  saving:  "  Nothing  appeared 
more  worthy  of  your  peaceful  Honour  than  the  j_rift  of  the  Sacred  Scrip 
tures,  which  by  the  dictation  of  the  Holy  ( I  host  and  tlie  mediation  of  ( 'hrist 
Cod  were  written  with  the  pen  of  celestial  <rraee  for  the  salvation  of 
mankind." — Historical  ('ttrioxitic*,  (_'.  J.  Smith. 


si;\  T.NTII  AND  KICHTH  CKN'ITRIKS    ALCTIN   12$ 

to  tin-  Abbey  of  St.  Martin  at  Tours,  where  lie  died  in 
A.I).  M>|.  Whilst  the  emperor  delighted  to  honour 
him.  he  had  a  large  retinue,  and  was  blamed  once  by 
a  Spanish  ecclesiastic  for  the  number  of  his  servants. 
Hi'  did  imt  contradict  the  fact,  but  denied  that  it  had 
corrupted  his  simplicity,  saying,  "  It  is  one  thing  to  possess 
the  world  ;  it  is  another  to  be  possessed  by  it."  In  fact, 
to  the  end.  he  always  called  himself  "the  humble  Le.vite." 
Thus,  as  IVter  Ramus  has  said,  Britain  was  twice  school 
mistress  to  France:  first  by  the  Druids,  and  then  by 
this  York  scholar,  whose  name  was  Latinised  to  Flaccus 
Albums.  He  was  a  poet  as  well  as  a  scholar,  and  some 
times  rh vines  in  his  Latin  verses,  of  one  of  which  this 
is  a  translation  : — 

TIIK   HorsK  OF  ("Ion. 

"Who   -eeks   to   enter    Heaven's   expanded   dates 
Mn-t    oft    within    these   sacred    walls   attend; 
Here    is   the   Cate  of  everlasting   Uiss. 
The   path   of   liL'ht.   of   pardon,   and   of   peace. 
The    ||oil-e    of    <;,,d,    the    treasures    of    His    power, 

And   numerous   relies  of  the   holiest    men. 

With    mind   devoted,    traveller,   enter   here. 

Here   -plead    vour   limlis,   and   till  your  heart    \\ith    Heaven; 

Hen-   sacred    hopes,    hen-   Cod    Himself  awaits   thee, 

If  >t.-adfa>t    faith   thv   hiiniMe   mind   control." 

We  have  said  that  the  distribution  of  the  Scriptures 
may  have  been  much  larger  than  is  often  imagined  at 
this  time,  and  the  following  extract  from  one  of  Alcuin's 
sermons  looks  like  it.  He  says:  "The  reading  of  the 
Scriptures  is  the  knowledge  of  everlasting  blessedness. 
In  them  man  mav  contemplate  himself  as  in  some  mirror, 
what  sort  of  person  he  is.  The  reading  cleanseth  the 
reader's  soul,  for,  when  we  pray,  we  speak  to  (Jod.  and 
when  we  read  the  Holv  Hooks,  (lod  speaks  to  us.  It 
is  a  twofold  jov  which  the  reading  of  the  Holv  Books 
bringetli  to  tin-  readers,  first  that  it  so  instructs  their 
understanding  as  to  render  them  sharper,  and  also  that 
it  leads  them  from  the  world's  vanities  to  the  living 
God." 


124  OUR  OWN   ENGLISH    15IBLK 

Alcuin  had  an  idea  which  Charlemagne  went  far  to  accom 
plish.  It  was  that  of  a  Christian  State,  in  which  religion 
was  supreme,  but  in  which  whatsoever  things  are  venerable 
find  a  place.  The  emperor  wras  to  establish  in  the  middle 
of  Europe  a  new  Athens,  of  a  higher  stamp,  in  which 
Christ  was  the  Master  of  the  Academy,  and  all  true  art 
and  science  harmonious  with  the  septuple  fulness  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  Classical  learning  was  by  no  means  to  be 
forsaken  for  theology,  for  classical  and  religious  traditions 
inhere  together,  and  by  combining  them  the  Christian 
Church  becomes  the  true  guardian  of  civilisation.  Many 
of  his  letters  have  been  preserved,  and  after  he  had  settled 
down  at  Tours  in  comparative  retirement,  he  writes 
to  his  emperor-master :  "  According  to  your  exhortations 
and  kind  wish,  I  endeavour  to  administer  in  the  schools 
of  St.  Martin  to  some  the  honey  of  the  Sacred  Writings  ; 
I  try  to  inebriate  others  with  the  wine  of  the  ancient 
classics  ;  I  begin  to  nourish  some  with  the  apples  of 
grammatical  subtlety  ;  I  strive  to  illuminate  many  by 
the  arrangement  of  the  stars,  as  from  the  painted  roof 
of  a  lofty  palace.  But  I  want  those  more  exquisite  books 
of  scholastic  erudition  which  I  had  in  my  own  country. 
May  it  then  please  your  wisdom  that  I  send  some  of  our 
youths  to  procure  what  we  need  ;  and  to  convey  into 
France  the  flowers  of  Britain,  that  they  may  not  be 
locked  up  in  York  only,  but  that  their  fragrance  and 
fruit  may  adorn  at  Tours  the  gardens  and  streams  of 
the  Loire."  *  It  is  Gale  that  lets  us  know  what  these 
flowers  of  Britain  were,  and  the  catalogue  is  worth  repro 
ducing,  as  showing  what  an  eighth-century  library  in  a 
Jar-away  island,  lately  savage,  could  be.  Of  the  ancient 
Fathers,  there  were  Jerome,  Hilarius,  Ambrose,  Augustine, 

is   Alcuin's   master.      Alcuin 


*  It    i 

was  not  born  till  the  year  after  Bede  had  dk 
depends   upon    a   double   coincidence   of   i  lines.      Venerab 
a  contemporary  called  Albinus  (a  name  1    -  which  Alcuin 
and    in  Charlemagne's   time   Alcuin   had   ;     contemporary 
There  was  this  connection,  however,  Alcuin  wrote  a  letter  t 
at   ,J  arrow  extolling   Bede  as  a  student  and  writer,  and   UI'L 
imitate  his  good  example. 


Bede  had 
as  known), 
ailed  Bede. 
>  the  monks 
n<r  them  to 


SEVENTH  AND  KIC.ITTH  rEXTURIES— AT/TIN 


; 


Athanasius,  Gregory,  Leo.  Fulgentius,   Basil.  Chrysostom, 

Lactantius.  Kutychius,  Clemens,  and  Paulinus.  Of  tlie 
classics,  there  were  Aristotle,  Pliny,  Cicero,  Virgil,  Statins, 
Lncan,  Boethins,  Cassiodorus,  Orosins.  and  Pompeius. 
Of  ancient  grammarians  and  scholiasts,  there  were  Prolws. 
Donatus,  Priscian,  Seryius.  and  Comminianus.  Of  other 
poets,  there  were  Victorinus,  Sedulius,  Jnvencus,  Fortu- 
natus.  Prosper,  and  Arator.  Here  is  Alcuin's  inscription 
for  his  Scriptorium  at  Tours  :— 

"  Write  then  the  sacred   hooks,  'tis  now  a  deed 
( )f  noblest   worth,  which  never  lacks  its  meed. 
'Tis  better  in  transcribing  hooks  to  toil. 
Than   vines  to  culture,   and   to  delve  the  soil  : 
Since   he  who  lives  to   meimcr  works  confined 
May  serve  his  body,   but    this   feeds  his  mind. 
Vet,   whatsoe'er  thou  writest,  old  or  new. 
Some   master  work   should   be   brought   forth   to   view  ; 
The  praise  of  numbers  on  such   labours  fall. 
The  Fathers  of  the  Church  are  read   by  all."  * 

Such  a  library  was  evidently  remarkable,  however, 
and  there  were  very  few  books  of  any  kind  in  England 
in  these  early  times,  and  very  few  who  could  read  them. 
It  was  not  necessary  for  the  ordinary  operations  of  life. 
Commerce  was  carried  on  principally  by  truck  or  barter, 
or  by  payments  in  ready  money,  and  sums  were  cast  up, 
as  amongst  the  Komans,  upon  an  abacus,  or  accounting- 
table,  the  amount  being  denoted  by  counters.  A  piece 
of  land  could  be  bought  as  easily  as  a  horse.  The  owner- 
cut  a  turf  from  the  greensward,  and  cast  it  in  the  lap  of 
the  purchaser,  as  a  token  that  the  possession  was  trans 
ferred  ;  or  lie  tore  off  the  branch  of  a  tree  and  put  it 
in  the  hand  of  the  grantee,  to  show  that  the  latter  was 
to  be  entitled  to  all  the  products  of  the  soil.  And  when 
the  purchasers  of  a  house  came  into  possession,  the  key 
of  the  door,  or  a  bundle  of  thatch  plucked  from  the  roof, 
signified  that  the  dwelling  had  been  given  up  to  them. 
All  nations  were  almost  equally  illiterate,  and  it  is  scarcely 
more  than  in  our  own  time  that  books  and  literature 

*  Hi.ttuncal  Curiosities.   ('.  .f.   Smith. 


i28  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

have  become  the  property  of  the  mass  of  the  people. 
Bede  and  Alcuin  may  be  compared  with  any  other  authors 
who  appeared  after  the  third  century. 

There  were  few  books  in  the  Manuscript  age,  except 
at  Rome  and  other  favoured  centres,  compared  with 
the  mighty  mass  which  printing  has  introduced.  And 
yet  printing  itself  was  not  altogether  unknown.  Stamps, 
with  raised  letters,  very  much  like  our  printing  types, 
only  immovable,  by  which  the  Romans  produced  short 
inscriptions,  are  yet  extant.  Tradesmen  employed  such 
stamps  for  printing  the  labels  of  their  wares.  The  silver 
letters  of  the  Codex  Argenteus,  the  volume  containing 
the  version  of  the  Gospels  made  by  Ulfilas,  Bishop  of 
the  Moeso-Goths,  were  possibly  produced  by  types  employed 
to  fix  the  leaf  upon  the  purple  parchment,  nearly  in  the 
manner  now  practised  by  bookbinders.  In  China,  block 
printing  came  into  active  operation  within  what  we  call 
the  Dark  Ages,  and  Roger  Bacon,  who  had  received 
much  information  concerning  China,  describes  the  process 
quite  plainly.  But,  for  Europe,  the  hour  was  not  yet 
come  ;  we  were  so  near  and  yet  so  far  from  the  mightiest 
discovery. 


MONASTICS  AND  MISSIONARIES 

"  I  do  nut  \\onder  that,  where  the  monastic  life  is  permitted,  every 
order  finds  votaries,  and  every  monastery  inhabitants.  .Men  will  submit 
to  any  rule  by  which  they  will  be  exempted  from  the  tyranny  of  caprice 
and  chance.  They  are  ^l.id  to  supply  by  external  authority  their 
own  want  of  constancy  and  resolution,  and  court  the  government  of 
others,  when  experience  has  convinced  them  of  thei'%  inability  to  govern 
themselves."  hit.  JOHNSON. 

COLKKIDCI-:  once  said  that  to  write  the  true  history  of 
the  Bible  and  its  influence  in  England  was  almost  to 
write  the  history  of  England  itself,  and  at  least  it  would 
be  a  verv  imperfect  sketch  of  this  period  which  did  not 
include  something  a  little  fuller  about  monastics  and 
missionaries.  They  seem  to  be  very  diverse,  but  often 
thev  were  identical.  The  monastic  found  a  quiet  home 
for  the  Word  of  (lod;  the  missionary  spread  abroad 
its  influence.  But  it  was  monks  that  brought  the  Bible 
to  Thanet  when  Ethelbert  was  Bretwalda.  and  refounded 
Christianity  in  the  southern  parts  of  the  island  ;  and 
often  the  monk  broke  away  from  his  "gray  set  life." 
and  went,  Testament  in  hand,  to  the  Heathen. 

Commonly,  however,  they  staved  where  thev  were, 
and  in  spite  of  Dr.  Johnson's  dictum  at  the  head  of  this 
chapter,  we  are  by  no  means  to  look  upon  the  monastic 
life  of  this  earlv  period  as  an  unmixed  evil.  In  the  monas 
tery  the  Scriptures  were  copied,  sometimes  very  beauti 
fully.  The  "Scriptorium."  where  this  was  done,  was 
often  no  mere  cell,  and  was  seldom  emptv.  Expositions 
were  gathered  together  ;  books  of  devotion  grew  out 

9 


1 30  OUR  OWN  KNOLISII    HIP.LK 

of  such  toil  ;  and  preaching  and  services  were  constant. 
Most  commonly  in  this  early  period  there  was  peace, 
and  order,  and  good  life.  Ariosto,  later  on,  represents 
an  angel  receiving  a  commission  to  send  peace  into  the 
Christian  host,  and  discord  among  the  Pagans.  The 
angel,  starting  on  his  journey,  came  to  a  monastery, 
and  went  in,  but  great  was  his  surprise  to  find  the  monks 
quarrelling  most  vehemently,  and  hurling  candlesticks 
at  one  another,  whilst  on  one  of  the  rafters  he  found 
Discord  perched  in  the  form  of  the  bird  of  darkness.  On 
the  contrary,  some  of  the  early  monasteries  present  a 
beautiful  picture  of  harmony,  labour,  and  prayer,  with  the 
newly  found  truth  in  the  centre  of  all. 

There  were  great  differences,  even  amongst  the  Bene 
dictines,  wrho  came  first.  At  Canterbury,  not  a  century 
after  Augustine,  an  almost  classical  course  of  study  wras 
combined  with  practical  theology  under  Hadrian,  as  we 
have  seen,  and  at  Bede's  monastery  in  the  North  the 
richest  fruits  of  all  sorts  of  useful  knowledge  were  being 
gathered.  At  others,  they  devoted  themselves  more  to 
the  cultivation  of  the  soil,  as  at  Abingdon.  Buckle 
says,  however,  that  where  the  classics  were  studied, 
it  was  with  fear  and  trembling;  and  well  it  might  be, 
considering  what  some  of  them  are.  They  never  turned 
the  leaves  of  a  Pagan  author  without  dreading  lest,  by 
imbibing  some  of  his  opinions,  they  should  involve  them 
selves  in  a  deadly  sin. 

The  fanatic  frowning  on  the  marriage  state  wrorked 
as  most  things  "  righteous  overmuch  "  do.  Pius  n. 
declared  that,  for  very  good  reasons,  priests  had  been 
forbidden  to  marry,  but  that,  for  still  better  ones,  it 
ought  to  be  allowed  them.  However,  their  state  of  single 
blessedness  gave  a  large  opportunity  for  literary  work 
of  any  sort,  and  we  may  perhaps  be  surprised  that  trans 
lations  of  the  Scriptures  did  not  abound.  Whilst  they 
were  constantly  copied,  however,  in  their  Latin  form, 
they  were  rarely  translated,  and  this  was  the  case  through 
out  Europe  generally.  There  was  a  prejudice  against 
the  employment  of  vernacular  tongues  as  written  languages. 


MONASTICS  AND   MISSIONARIES  131 

Tin*  dialects  of  (laul,  and  Spain,  and  Italy  were  broken 
Latin,  or  the  dialects  into  which  it  had  been  corrupted. 
Spanish  lias  been  described  as  such  Latin  as  might  have 
been  heard  from  the  mouth  of  a  sulky  slave.  By  culti 
vation,  irregular  dialects  have  acquired  beauty:  but  to 
the  learned  these  patois  must  have  sounded  almost  as 
ludicrous  as  the  talkee-talkee  of  our  negroes  in  the 
Colonies,  to  which  they  bear  some  analogy.  Discourses 
were  necessarily  delivered  from  the  pulpit  in  this  rustic, 
tongue,  but  it  was  a  diiYerent  tiling  to  employ  such  a 
jargon  in  a  literary  production. 

Such  was  the  case  in  the  Romanised  countries,  but 
there  is  a  difference  when  we  turn  to  the  Teutonic  peoples 
who  retained  their  nationalities.  They  delighted  in 
their  old  expressive  mother  tongue.  Their  speech  was 
a  token  of  nobility  and  superiority;  and  the  power  and 
regularity  of  their  forms  enabled  the  writers,  when  they 
had  become  acquainted  with  the  grammarians  of  Greece 
and  Koine,  to  treat  their  (Jothic  or  Saxon  with  the  same 
precision  as  the  cultivated  languages.  Thus  I'lfilas, 
Bishop  of  the  Mceso-Goths,  made  his  valuable  translation 
of  the  New  Testament.  The  Teutonic  nations  also  were 
accustomed  to  look  on  poetry  as  a  means  of  instruction. 
The  rhythm  helped  the  memory  of  the  learner,  and  the 
freedom  of  the  composition  enabled  the  translator  to 
produce  a  more  intelligible  version  than  he  could  other 
wise  have  effected.* 

If  translations  of  any  sort  were  rare,  however,  we  may 
be  thankful  for  the  universal  Latin  tongue,  and  for  Jerome's 
Vulgate,  which  could  be  read,  at  all  events  bv  a  great 
many,  in  every  country.  The  Romans  had  diffused 
their  language  as  their  conquests  and  colonies  spread, 
but  it  would  probably  have,  perished  when  the  (Jothic 
hordes  destroyed  their  empire,  if  Christianity  had  not 
preserved  it.  The  German  tribes  were  successively 
converted,  and  public  worship  was  everywhere  in  Latin. 
The  Fathers  of  the  Church  wrote  in  Latin.  The  ecclesi 
astics  of  Germanv,  France.  Britain.  Spain.  Ireland,  and 

*    |'alL'ra\i-. 


132  OUR  OWN   ENC.LISH    I5IBLK 

Italy  could  readily  correspond  in  this.  Thus  a  neces 
sary  attachment  to  the  Latin  authors  obtained,  and  the 
classics  were,  though  tremulously,  preserved  by  the 
clergy,  and  their  influence,  from  that  destruction  which 
has  swept  away  from  us  the  writings  of  Phoenicia,  Carthage, 
Babylon,  and  Egypt. 

Monastic  life  soon  became  fashionable,  and  not  less 
so  pilgrimages  to  Rome,  often  ending  in  permanent 
residence  there.  The,  widowed  queen  of  Edwin  took 
the  veil.  Oswy  devoted  his  daughter  Elfleda  to  a  convent. 
In  ()S.S  Ceadwalla  travelled  to  Rome  on  a  pilgrimage 
of  piety,  where  he  was  baptized  by  the  Pope,  and  died, 
before  he  was  thirty,  in  the  following  week.  In  70(.) 
Cenred  of  Mercia  and  Offa  of  Essex,  probably  affected 
by  the  example  of  Ceadwalla,  went  to  Rome,  and  became 
monks  there.  Thus  Ina  of  Wessex,  as  Sharon  Turner 
says,  obeyed  the  same  impression,  took  the  same  journey, 
and  found  his  grave  in  the  same  venerated  city.  An 
old  chronicler  tells  us  that  the  examples  of  these  kings 
produced  a  thousand  imitations. 

/Ethelwulph,  the  great  Alfred's  father,  paid  Rome 
back  somewhat  liberally.  He  sent  Alfred  to  Rome, 
when  only  four,  to  be  crowned.  He  went  himself  two 
years  later,  taking  Alfred  again.  He  made  over  the 
tithes,  with  the  sanction  of  the  Witenagemot.  He  was 
most  profuse  in  his  gifts,  indeed,  bestowing  gold  upon  all 
the  Roman  clergy  and  nobles,  and  silver  upon  the  people. 
As  for  the  Pope,  he  gave  him  a  crown  of  pure  gold,  weighing 
four  pounds,  which  must  have  given  him  a  bad  headache, 
if  he  ever  wore  it  ;  two  golden  vessels,  called  Baucas  ; 
a  sword  adorned  with  pure  gold  ;  two  golden  images ; 
and  four  Saxon  dishes,  besides  valuable  dresses. 

Certainly,  the  monastic  system  was  very  early  weighed 
in  the  balances,  and  found  wanting.  As  we  have  seen, 
it  was  only  in  A.D.  717  that  the  Council  of  Cloveshoe, 
or  Cliffs  Hoe.  in  Kent,  had  to  say  some  very  plain  things. 
The  convents  were  not  to  be  turned  into  places  of  amuse 
ment  for  harpers  and  buffoons,  and  laymen  were  not  to 
have  too  free  access  to  them,  lest  they  should  be  scandal- 


MONASTICS  AND    MISSIONARIES  133 

ised  at  what  thev  saw.  Long  befon;  Giraldus  Cambrensis 
told  the  world  how  the  monks  of  Canterbury  had  turned 
from  fast in«  to  the  most  luxurious  feasting,  there  was 
plenty  of  high  living,  and  a  good  deal  worse. 

••Round   many  a  Convent's   bla/.ing   lire 
I'nhallowcd    tlnvads  of  revelry  aiv  spun: 
There  Venus  sits  disguised  like  a  nun:  — 
While   Bacchus,   clothed   in  semblance  of  a   friar, 
Pours  out   his  choicest   beverage,   high  and  higher 
Sparkling,   until  it   cannot   choose  but   run 
Over  the   bowl,    \\hose   silver   lip  hath   won 
An   instant  kiss  of  masterful  desire, 
To  stay   the   precious    waste."  * 

Even  Bede  deplored  the  growing  numbers  crowding 
into  the  monasteries,  and  avowed  his  lears  that,  from 
the  increase  of  monks,  soldiers  would  be  wanting  to  repel 
any  invading  force. 

What  is  not  so  much  known,  however,  is  the  fact  that 
this  Early  Saxon  Church  became  imbued  with  the  true 
missionary  spirit  of  later  times.  Not  only  was  the  Word 
of  (}od  housed,  and  copied,  but  its  influence  was  spread 
abroad  amongst  neighbouring  peoples.  More  than  a 
thousand  years  ago  England  produced  a  succession  of 
self-denying,  heroic,  and  often  successful  missionaries, 
of  which  anv  countrv  may  be  proud.  Some  of  them 
were  added  to  the  noble  army  of  martyrs,  and  many 
of  them  breathed  the  spirit  of  the  glorious  company 
of  the  apostles.  Lappenberg  says  that,  oi  all  the  peoples 
of  unmixed  Germanic  race,  the  first  converted  to  the 
Faith  of  Christ,  the  Anglo-Saxons,  were  called  to  impart 
its  sanctity  to  the  rest  of  (lermanic  and  Northern  Europe. 
Modern  missionary  meetings  take  very  little  notice  of 
these  early  pioneers,  and  one  might  think  sometimes 
that  there  had  been  no  missions  worth  naming  until 
recent  times.  Let  us  then  linger  a  little  in  the  company 
of  these  brave  spirits,  whose  actions  so  emphatically 
"Smell  sucet.  and  blossom  from  the  dust." 


134  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   BIBLE 

One  of  the  leaders  of  them  was  Wilfrid,  who  was  born 
in  Northumbria  in  031.  He  was  a  strong  Romanist, 
and  at  the  Synod  of  Whitby  persuaded  king  and  clergy 
that  Rome  was  in  the  right  with  regard  to  the  vexed 
question  of  Easter,  and  also  as  to  the  tonsure.  As  a 
reward,  he  received  the  see  of  York,  which  he  held  a 
long  time.  He  was  deposed  and  expelled  several  times, 
however,  and  always  went  protesting  to  Rome,  and  getting 
decrees  in  his  favour,  which,  however,  were  little  heeded 
at  home.  On  one  of  these  journeys  he  suffered  ship 
wreck  on  the  Frisian  coast,  and  began  that  missionary 
work  amongst  the  people  which  was  afterwards  so  success 
fully  carried  on  by  Wilbrord. 

Wilfrid  erected  a  new  basilica  of  polished  stone  at 
Ripon,  and  we  are  told  that  his  patrons  presented  to 
it  a  beautiful  copy  of  the  four  Gospels,  with  letters  of 
gold  on  a  purple  parchment.  It  was  further  adorned 
with  paintings,  had  a  cover  inlaid  with  gold  and  precious 
stones,  and  was  enclosed  in  a  golden  casket. 

Wilbrord  was  the  first  Bishop  of  the  Frisians.  Like 
Wilfrid,  he  belonged  to  the  north  of  England,  being 
born  in  Northumbria  in  057.  He  went,  with  eleven 
companions,  to  Heligoland  in  01)2.  After  some  success 
there,  he  went  on  to  Friesland,  settled  at  Utrecht,  and 
preached  amongst  the  wild  Pagans.  His  associates 
also  spread  Christianity  amongst  the  Westphalians  and 
their  neighbours,  he  and  they  being  powerfully  supported 
by  the  victories  of  Pepin  and  Charles  Martel.  The  Danish 
Frisians,  on  the  western  coast  of  Sleswick,  also  received 
the  truth.  A\  ilbrord,  or  \Villibrord,  was  sometimes  called 
Clement,  and  died  in  730. 

Boniface  (P>onifacius  Moguntinensis),  also  called  Winfrid, 
has  been  called  the  Apostle  of  Germany.  He  was  born 
at  Kirton,  near  Exeter,  between  080  and  083,  of  noble 
parents.  He  was  educated  at  the  monasteries  of  Ades- 
cancastre  and  Nhutschelle,  and  had  already  acquired 
some  name  for  learning  and  piety  when,  in  710,  he  left 
his  native  country,  and  joined  Wilbrord  in  Friesland. 

The   conversion   of   even    Wessex,  the    most    Pagan   of 


MONASTICS  AM)  MISSIONARIES  135 

the  Saxon  kingdoms,  had  been  accomplished  in  part, 
and  he  longed  to  follow  others  in  work  amongst  those 
who  were  still  openly  Heathen.  His  longings  led  him 
to  the  old  country,  the  Fatherland  of  the  English,  and 
he  went  with  two  companions  amongst  the  Frisians. 
He  was  at  first  entirely  unsuccessful,  however.  Their 
king,  Radbod.  who  consented  to  he  baptized,  on  hearing 
that  the  souls  of  his  ancestors  were  amongst  the  lost, 
drew  back,  and  said  he  would  rather  go  to  hell  with  his 
unbelieving  forefathers  than  to  heaven  with  a  handful 
of  beggars  like  them.  These  eager  souls  had  to  learn 
to  add  to  their  virtue,  tact.  Boniface  was  absolutely 
refused  permission  to  preach  in  Hadhod's  dominions, 
and  returned  home  to  his  "  gray  set  life  ''  for  a  short 
time,  where  the  brethren  would  have  elected  him  abbot, 
but  he  declined. 

Soon  plucking  up  his  courage,  he  went  to  the  Pope, 
who  gave  him  authorisation  and  comfort.  He  worked 
for  a  time  near  to  \\  illibrord.  but  refused  to  succeed 
him  in  his  old  age,  and  went  to  Hessia  instead.  Here 
he  had  such  success  that  the  Pope  summoned  him  to  Rome 
again,  made  him  a  bishop,  and  bound  him  to  be  faithful 
to  Home  and  her  interests.  He  gave  him  also  a  letter 
of  introduction  to  Charles  Martel,  which  was  very  useful 
in  the  long  missionary  labours  which  followed. 

Returning  to  the  Hessians,  he  found  they  were  prac 
tising  a  strange  mixture  of  the  creed  of  the  Gospel  with 
Pagan  rites.  They  even  offered  sacrifices.  Boniface 
determined,  with  his  own  hands,  to  fell  OIK;  of  the  chief 
objects  of  superstitious  reverence,  the  great  oak  tree 
of  (Jlismar,  sacred  to  the  (Jod  of  Thunder.  Scarcely 
had  he  struck  the  first  blows  when  a  gust  of  wind  shook 
the  branches,  and  the  aged  tree  fell,  breaking  into  four 
pieces.  The  awe-stricken  Pagans  gave  up  their  gods, 
and  with  the  wood  of  the  tree  Boniface  partly  built  a 
chapel  to  Si.  IVter.  Churches  soon  began  to  rise  on 
every  side,  and  many  of  his  countrymen  and  women 
came  over  to  his  assistance.  He  was  made  an  arch 
bishop,  and  anointed  1'epin,  King  of  the  Francs,  in  7~>2. 


136  OUR  OWN   ENGLISH    I'.IBLK 

Whilst  moving  about,  lie  often  asked  for  books,  and  on 
one  occasion  he  asked  the  Abbot  Eadburga  to  cause  a 
copy  of  the  Gospels  to  be  written  magnificently  in  letters 
of  gold,  that  his  German  converts  might  be  impressed 
with  a  becoming  reverence  for  the  Sacred  Writings. 

Positively  at  about  the  age  of  seventy  this  heroic  early 
missionary  set  out  on  a  new  campaign.  Consecrating 
Eoban  to  the  see  of  Utrecht,  he  preached  with  him  amongst 
the  Heathen  tribes  of  Frisia.  Again  he  baptized  many 
thousands  ;  and  wishing  to  hold  a  Confirmation  of  some 
of  his  new  disciples,  he  appointed  the  evening  of  Whit 
Sunday,  5th  June  755,  for  the  ceremony,  at  a  place  near 
Dokkum,  on  the  Bordau,  between  Eastern  and  Western 
Frisia.  When  the  day  arrived,  however,  a  band  of  armed 
Pagans  surrounded  them.  The  younger  of  his  followers 
prepared  for  resistance,  but  Boniface  forbade  it,  exhorting 
them  to  submit  to  the  death  of  martyrs,  with  the  sure 
hope  of  salvation.  The  whole  company,  numbering 
fifty-two,  and  including  Bishop  Eoban,  as  well  as  Boniface, 
were  massacred  on  the  spot.  The  remains  of  Boniface 
were  carried  to  the  Monastery  of  Fulda,  which  he  had 
founded.  Three  of  the  books  that  he  then  had  with 
him  are  st  ill  preserved  there, — the  Gospels  in  his  own  hand 
writing,  a  Harmony  of  the  New  Testament,  and  another 
volume  stained  with  his  blood. 

Boniface  was  strongly  on  the  side  of  Home,  but  not 
absurdly  so,  and  Mosheim  and  others  are  wrong  in  calling 
him  a  missionary  of  the  Papacy  rather  than  of  Christi 
anity.  He  did  not  hesitate  to  speak  firmly  and  remonstrate 
against  the  views  of  the  Court  of  Home,  and  once  there 
was  nearly  a  rupture.  Besides,  we  must  not  for  a  moment 
confound  the  eighth  century  with  the  Middle  Ages  in 
any  one  particular.* 

Fifteen  years  later.  Si.  WMcltaiL  another  English  mission- 

*  (Vrtainlv.  however,  lie  was,  like  many  others  of  the  time,  much 
opposed  to  the  marriage  of  the  priests,  and  in  this  matter  all  he.  and 
such  as  he.  did  was  to  convert  a  holy  connection  into  one  of  much 
lower  charact-r.  The  author  of  his  life  tells  of  a  cclibat"  Bishop 
(ierohl,  who  held  the  see  of  .Mayence,  and  who  had  a  son  that  succeeded 
him! — The  Saxons  ut  Enylnnd,  Kemble. 


MONASTIC'S  AND   MISSIONARIES  137 

ary,  commenced  his  labours  at  tlie  very  spot  where  Boni 
face  and  his  companions  had  joined  the  noble  army  of 
martyrs.  He  was  born  in  Northumbria  about  730, 
educated  at  York  under  Alcuin,  and  went  out  as  a 
missionary  to  Friesland  in  770.  Here  he  had  success, 
and  then  went  on  to  parts  where  the  (Jospel  had  never 
been  preached  before.  Charlemagne  heard  of  the  im 
pression  he  had  made,  and  invited  him  to  come  and  preach 
in  the  regions  along  the  Lower  Weser,  where  the  Frisians 
and  the  Saxons  met  together.  Here,  however,  his  work 
was  thwarted  by  the  Saxon  chief,  and  he  went  for  a  time  to 
Rome.  Returning  to  the  field  of  labour,  success  returned 
also,  and  churches  were  built  at  Bremen  and  Blexen. 
He  was  made  a  bishop,  and  for  centuries  the  dates  of 
his  consecration  and  death  were  commemorated. 

»SV.  Willibald  is  also  connected  with  Boniface.  He 
was  a  relation  of  his.  and  was  born  in  England  about 
the  year  70O.  He  went  to  the  Holy  Land,  and  returning 
to  Italv.  spent  ten  years  there  in  a  monastery.  In  740 
he  met  Boniface  at  Rome,  and  accompanied  him  to 
Germany,  where  he  was  made  Bishop  of  Eichstadt.  dying 
in  7*0. 

Wunibald  was  his  brother.  They  were  the  sons  of 
a  king  or  prince  called  Stephen,  and  all  three  journeyed 
together  to  Rome.  Willibald  being  the  only  one  that 
went  on  to  the  Holv  Land.  On  the  invitation  of  Boniface, 
he  went  to  (lermanv  and  laboured  as  a  missionary  in 
Thuringia.  There  he  was  successful  in  establishing 
seven  churches  or  monasteries,  and  was  treated  with 
great  honour  bv  Duke  Otilo,  who  gave  him  a  residence. 
After  paying  a  visit  to  Boniface,  he  received  from  his 
brother  Willibald  the  charge  of  the  double  monastery 
at  Heidenheim,  to  which  his  sister  \\alburgis  was  also 
invited  from  Britain.  He  died  7<il.  aired  about  sixty. 

Ijebuin  was  another  of  these  earlv  missionaries,  and 
has  been  called  the  Apostle  of  the  Frisians.  He  was 
born  of  Saxon  parents,  in  England,  and  flamed  with  the 
same  zeal  which  had  already  borne  St.  Willibrord  and 
others  to  the  adjoining  parts  of  the  Continent,  having 


138  OUR  OWN  ENOLISH    BIBLE 

his  special  mission-field  in  Friesland  and  Westphalia. 
He  was  sent  by  the  Bishop  of  Utrecht  to  the  banks  of 
the  Yssel,  with  a  companion  named  Marchelm.  There 
he  lodged  with  a  widow,  and  taught  with  some  success 
amongst  the  Pagans.  Afterwards,  however,  he  met 
with  fierce  opposition,  his  church  being  burnt,  and  many 
of  his  people  slain.  His  spirit  rose  instead  of  sinking 
under  this,  and  he  set  out  to  meet  the  Saxons  at  a  National 
Assembly  at  Markle,  on  the  Weser,  and  either  convert 
them  or  perish.  Arrayed  in  his  priestly  garments,  and 
with  a  book  of  the  Gospels  in  his  hand,  he  entered  the 
Assembly,  and  proclaimed  the  duty  of  instant  submission 
to  Christ.  Tf  they  refused,  he  announced  the  speedy 
arrival  of  a  king  who  would  punish  and  destroy  them 
for  their  obstinacy,  doubtless  referring  to  Charlemagne. 
With  some  difficulty,  the  tumult  excited  against  him 
was  calmed  by  the  help  of  an  aged  chief,  named  Buto, 
and  he  received  permission  to  teach  and  preach  every 
where.  This  liberty  was  freely  used,  and  the  rest  of  his 
life  was  spent  in  spreading  the  Gospel, 

The  brothers  Hewald  had  scarcely  entered  on  their 
labours  before  they  were  martyred.  They  were  of  English 
birth,  and  having  spent  some  years  in  pious  study  in 
Ireland,  went  to  preach  to  the  Old  Saxons  of  Germany, 
about  A.D.  690.  They  were  called  the  Black  Hewald 
and  White  Hewald,  the  former  being  the  more  learned. 
They  were  equally  devoted,  however,  and  on  their  arrival 
in  the  country  of  their  destination  they  went  to  a  local 
magistrate,  and  obtained  from  him  a  promise  to  introduce 
them  to  the  Alderman  of  the  tribe.  Before  this  was 
effected,  however,  the  country  people,  in  dread  of  any 
novelties,  seized  and  murdered  them.  The  Black  Hewald 
was  tortured  and  torn  in  pieces,  the  White  Hewald  de 
spatched  with  the  sword,  and  both  their  bodies  thrown 
into  the  Rhine,  on  3rd  October.  They  had  better  have 
feared  such  conduct,  instead  of  the  strangers'  "  novelties," 
for  the  provincial  ruler  destroyed  the  village  when  he 
heard  of  it.  Legends  gathered  about  them.  It  was 
said  that  a  miraculous  light  attended  their  bodies,  which 


MONASTICS  AND   MISSIONARIES  139 

wen*  carried  against  the  stream  up  the  Rhine,  as  far 
as  the  place  where  the  headquarters  of  the  mission  had 
been  fixed.  A  spring  broke  forth  at  the  place  where 
thev  suffered,  which,  according  to  the  Gallican  Martyr- 
ologv.  was  in  Westphalia.  Their  arrival  had  been  made 
known  in  a  dream  to  Tilmon,  one  of  their  fellow-Christians, 
and  he  buried  them,  though  their  bodies  were  afterwards 
translated  to  Cologne.  They  are  sometimes  called  the 
Aewalds,  or  the  brothers  Ewald. 

As  there  were  two  Hewalds,  so  there  appear  to  have 
been  two  Adalberts,  but  belonging  to  different  eras.  One 
was  contemporaneous  with  Willibrord,  and  laboured 
amongst  the  Frisians.  His  Life  was  drawn  up  at  the 
bidding  of  Egbert,  Archbishop  of  Treves  and  grandson 
of  Theodoric  I.,  who  believed  himself  to  have  been  cured 
of  a  fever  by  this  saint's  intercession.  In  this  we  are 
told  that  a  certain  English  priest,  named  Egbert,  being 
Divinely  forbidden  to  undertake  a  personal  mission  amongst 
the  Heathen  of  North  (lermany,  Willibrord  and  others 
went  in  his  stead.*  The  villagers  of  Egmont,  as  late 
as  the  eighteenth  century,  still  kept  25th  June  sacred 
to  the  memory  of  Adalbert,  as  their  patron  saint. 

There  may  have  been  another  Adalbert,  who  went  to 
the  same  general  district  a  little  later.  Either  he  or 
this  one  was  of  royal  blood,  and  belonged  to  the  north 
of  England,  being  probably  grandson  of  Oswald.  King 
of  Deira. 

Hut  the  inspiration  of  all  this  early  and  successful 
missionary  labour  perhaps  came  from  Ireland.  Colum- 
banus.  St.  (Jail,  and  St.  Kilian  must  engage  our  attention 
before  we  dismiss  a  subject  so  interesting  to  all  in  this 
island-corner  of  Europe.  We  gave  no  promise  of  our 
colonising  propensities  in  this  early  time,  but  from 
both  England  and  Ireland  missionaries  sped  their  way, 
urged  by  that  Christian  fervour  and  self-sacrifice  which 
have  marked  our  own  age.  Columbanus  sallied  out 

*  Mohlii-im  says  tli«-y  w.-rc  Willil.mnl.  Smdl.rrt,  WiL'lx-rt,  Area, 
Willil.al.l.  Wunibalil,  lAiiin.  the  two  llrwulds,  Wrrrnfrid.  Miin-i-llin, 
nml  \.|.ill.,T, 


140  OUR  OWN   KNCL1SII    151 ULK 

from  Ireland  just  before  Augustine  came  to  Kent.  He 
went,  with  twelve  companions,  to  France,  paying 
England  a  short  visit  as  lie  passed.  He  was  a  little  over 
forty,  and  had  been  educated  at  the  Irish  Bangor.  For 
twenty  years  he  laboured  in  the  wilderness  of  the  Vosges, 
founding  a  monastery,  which  was  followed  by  others  at 
Luxeuil.  Fontaine,  Besancon,  etc.  These  were  so  suc 
cessful  that  all  the  most  prominent  of  the  clergy  of  Gaul 
were  educated  there  for  a  time.  He  did  not  accommodate 
himself  to  Rome,  however,  with  regard  to  Easter  and 
other  matters  in  dispute,  and  made  plenty  of  enemies 
in  consequence.  The  Court  was  notorious  for  its  profligacy 
also,  and  his  faithful  rebukes  were  resented.  At  last 
he  was  banished,  and  settled  down,  after  some  vicissitudes, 
on  the  shore  of  the  Lake  of  Constance.  This  he  was 
compelled  to  leave,  however,  and  he  then  went  to  Italy, 
where  he  obtained  the  protection  of  the  King  of  the 
Lombards,  dying  at  Bobbio.  His  name  is  thus  celebrated 
in  France,  Switzerland,  and  Italy,  as  a  zealous  preacher,  a 
laborious  founder  of  churches,  and  the  great  champion 
of  morals  at  a  dissolute  Court.  Xeander  has  pointed 
out  that  it  is  his  greatest  distinction,  however,  to  have 
first  given  the  example  of  that  missionary  enterpriss 
which  was  so  largely  followed  in  countries  of  the  Con 
tinent  of  Europe.  Perhaps  he  was  fired  in  turn  by  Columba, 
who  did  not  die  till  two  years  after  the  commencement 
of  Columbanus's  foreign  toils. 

St.  Gall,  called  the  Apostle  of  the  Suevi  and  the  Alemanni, 
appears  to  have  been  an  Irishman  of  noble  lineage,  his 
mother  being,  it  is  said,  Queen  of  Hungary.  He  was 
brought  up  by  Columban,  in  St.  Comgall's  Monastery, 
at  Bangor,  near  the  Bay  of  Carrickfergus.  When  Columban 
went  to  France,  St.  Gall,  originally  called  Cellach,  accom 
panied  him,  and  he  followed  him  when  he  was  driven 
from  Luxeuil.  During  his  master's  stay  at  the  Lake  of 
Constance,  St.  Gall  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  mission, 
and  his  ability  to  preach  to  the  people  in  their  own  tongue 
made  him  the  spokesman  of  the  party.  He  burnt  a 
place  of  idolatrous  worship,  and  threw  the  offerings  of 


MONASTICS  AND   MISSIONARIES  141 

the  worshippers  into  the  lake,  publicly  destroying  their 
images,  which  were  held  in  much  veneration.  The  mission 
was  also  chiellv  supplied  with  food  by  his  labour,  for 
lie  made  nets,  and  caught  much  fish.  As  a  sample  of 
the  legends  which  surround  such  a  man,  we  are  told  that 
one  night,  whilst  he  was  fishing,  he  heard  in  the  stillness 
the  voice  of  the  demon  of  the  mountains  crying  from 
the  heights  to  the  demon  of  the  lakes,  and  bidding  him 
arise  and  help  to  turn  out  the  strangers  who  were  casting 
down  their  altars.  The  lake  demon  answered  that  one 
of  them  was  even  then  troubling  him.  but  he  had  no 
power  to  break  his  nets  or  do  him  harm,  because  he  was 
for  ever  calling  on  a  Divine  name.  When  (Jail  heard 
these  voices,  he  adjured  the  demons  by  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  and  hastened  to  summon  his  brethren.  Before 
they  began  to  chant,  they  all  of  them  heard  the  voices 
of  demons  wailing  on  the  mountain-tops. 

Certain  it  is  that  spirits  more  real  and  terrible  were 
cast  out  before  the  victorious  missionaries,  and  it  is  not 
too  much  to  refer  to  St.  (Jail  the  evangelisation  of  the 
count rv  between  the  Alps,  the  Aar.  and  the  Sech.  He 
left  Columban  after  a  time,  and  establishing  a  fresh  centre 
for  mission  work,  retired  to  a  forest,  and  built  a  cell  on 
the  river  Steinach.  There  he  was  soon  joined  by  twelve 
others,  and  their  little  cluster  of  huts  was  the  origin  of 
the  famous  Monastery  of  St.  (Jail.  He  was  once  unani 
mously  elected  bishop,  but  persuaded  the  Assembly  to 
accept  (»ne  of  his  deacons  instead.  In  <>1.~>  he  was  in 
vited  by  Willibald  to  visit  Arbon,  and  while  there  fell 
sick  of  a  fever,  of  which  he  died,  after  fourteen  days' 
illness. 

»SV.  I\ilinn  was  called  the  Apostle  of  Kranconia.  He 
belonged  to  Ireland  also,  and  went,  with  a  number  of 
companions,  to  establish  a  mission  in  Wnr/burg.  Duke 
Gozbert  received  him  kindly,  and  was  converted ;  but 
St.  Kilian  fell  a  victim  to  the  hatred  of  <  Jeilana.  whose 
marriage  with  (lozbert  was  contrary  to  Christian  teaching. 
He  and  his  companions,  in  the  absence  of  the  duke. 
were  cruelly  murdered  A.D.  (»S1»  (.Jeilana  afterwards 


142  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   BIBLE 

becoming  insane.  Heavy  punishments  were  inflicted 
on  the  descendants  of  Gozbert,  Kilian  having  been  made 
a  bishop  about  two  years  before  his  martyrdom.  His 
relics,  with  those  of  his  companions,  Coloman  and  Totnan, 
were  translated  in  the  middle  of  the  next  century. 

Thus,  without  the  power  of  the  sword,  and  sometimes 
in  spite  of  its  teachers  perishing  by  the  sword,  Christianity 
moved  on  in  these  early  times  and  filled  the  Roman  world 
as  it  is  now  penetrating  every  region  of  the  globe.  And 
it  was  the  Word  of  the  Lord  that  ran,  had  free  course, 
and  was  glorified,  whether  it  came  from  Rome  or  lona. 
The  differences  were  often  ludicrously  small,  though 
they  were  irritating.  They  did  not  quarrel  as  to  whether 
Christ  suffered  for  our  sins,  was  crucified,  dead,  and  buried, 
and  rose  again  the  third  day,  but  as  to  what  time  Easter 
was  to  be  kept.  At  the  same  time,  it  was  highly  "  incon 
venient  "  for  some  to  be  rejoicing  in  Easter  festivities 
whilst  close  at  hand  were  others  who  were  observing 
Holy  Week.  The  monks  also  had  not  yet  filled  their 
heads  with  those  intellectual  errors  which  Rome  after 
wards  introduced,  but  they  became  very  excited  as  to 
how  they  should  dress  their  hair.  Still,  whatever  mis 
sionary  or  monk  it  might  be,  he  was  mighty  to  the  pulling 
down  of  strongholds  because  he  handled  the  sword  of 
the  Spirit,  which  is  the  WTord  of  God.  We  have  constant 
references  to  its  power  and  authority.  Those  that  went 
abroad  and  those  who  stayed  at  home  alike  honoured  it, 
used  it,  preached  it,  and  defended  it.  Visitors  who  go 
down  to  Margate  in  the  pleasant  summer  weather,  and 
look  at  the  strong  old  Towers  of  Reculver,  may  know 
that  Berthwold  was  promoted  to  the  Abbacy  there  because 
of  his  Scripture  learning.  He  was  Theodore's  successor, 
and  it  was  natural  for  Canterbury  to  have  a  "  branch 
establishment  "  at  the  seaside  near. 

In  780  King  Offa  gave  to  the  Church  at  Worcester, 
among  other  things,  a  Bible — Magnam  Bibliam.  In 
the  same  century  Theodulphus  made  his  great  Bible, 
the  Preface  being  written  in  gold.  He  was  one  of  those 
"men  of  light  and  leading''  invited  by  Charlemagne 


MONASTICS   AND  MISSIONARIES  14  ? 

to  join  him  in  spreading  religion  and  knowledge—  a  second 
Alcuin. 

Ceolirid,  first  Abbot  of  .Jarrow,  doubled  the  library 
there,  as  well  as  the  one  at  Wearmouth,  not  heeding 
Biscop's  warning  against  dissipating  the  books.  He 
gave  to  them  each  a  complete  Bible  "of  the  new  Trans 
lation,"  as  Bede  describes  Jerome's  Vulgate,  Benedict 
having  brought  the  older  one  from  Home. 

When  Cuthbert's  tomb  was  opened  in  I  MM.  a  copy  of 
St.  John's  (iosj)el  was  found  in  it.  a  sixth-century  MS. 
It  was  in  Latin,  and  is  now  at  Stonyhurst.  Perhaps 
the  instinct  which  led  to  this  was  a  reverential  one,  but 
it  \vas  a  pitv  to  waste  a  good  book  in  times  when  they 
were  so  valuable.  It  was  in  this  era  that  .Klfivd,  King 
of  Northumbria,  gave  Biscop  a  large  landed  estate  for 
a  single  book',  and  the  Countess  of  Anjou  gave  two  hundred 
sheep  and  a  large  parcel  of  rich  furs  for  another. 

In  Ireland  then'  was  the  same  reverence  for  the  Word 
of  (lod.  "The  Book  of  Kells."  preserved  in  the  library 
of  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  belongs  to  this  period.  It 
is  a  Latin  copy  on  vellum  of  the  four  (Jo-pels,  and  is  one 
of  the  most  beautiful  manuscripts  in  the  world.  "The 
Book  of  Armagh."  in  the  same  library,  is  also  a  splendid 
manuscript,  and  includes  a  complete  copy  of  the  New 
Testament.  It  was  written  a  little  later  by  a  scribe  called 
Ferdomnach.  who  oft^n  asks  the  reader  to  pray  for  his 
soul  in  inscriptions  distinctly  legible  to-day. 


CHAPTER    X 


KJ\(i    ALFRED 

"Virtute,   non   vi." 

'0  much   vexed  life,   for  us   too  snort,   tot 
The  laggard  body   lame   behind   the  soul  ; 
Pain,   that  ne'er  marred   the   mind's  serene  control; 
Breathing  on  earth    Heaven's  u'ther  atmosphere, 
(Joel  with  thee  and   the  lovo  that  easts  out    fear! 
A  sold   in  life's  salt  ocean  guarding  sure 
The  freshness  of  youth's  fountain,  sweet    and   pure, 
And  to  all  natural   impulse  eryst  d  clear; 


Equal  at   once  in  magnanimity  ; 

The  great  by  right    Divine  thou 

Fair  star  that  crowns  the  front 

Royal  with  nature's  royalty  inlx  rn 

And   English  to  the   very  heart  of  heart.'' 

F.  T.  PAUMIAVK. 

BUT  now  we  come  to  .King  Alfred,  "the  shepherd  of 
his  people,"  "  the  darling  of  the  English,"  "  the  truth- 
teller."  Very  different  from  the  "  pious  "  King  Buhred, 
his  brother-in-law,  who  embraced  a  so-called  religious 
life  when  the  Danes  drew  near,  and  left  his  people  to  do 
the  best  they  could,  Alfred  put  himself  at  the  head  of 
what  army  he  had,  and,  saving  England  from  becoming 
a  mere  outlying  part  of  the  Northmen's  dominions,  de 
voted  himself  with  equal  zeal  and  success  to  the  arts  of 
peace.  Though  not  always,  indeed,  yet  very  often,  the 
revival  of  learning  has  been  connected  with  the  revival 
of  religion,  and  it  was  so  in  his  day,  and  largely  by  his 
means.  Tn  his  encouragement  of  letters  and  religion, 
indeed,  he  rivals  Charlemagne,  and  is  one  of  the  first 

144 


10 


KING   ALFRED  147 

of  English  writers  and  translators.  Mr.  Sharon  Turner 
exclaims  that,  considering  how  recently  literature  of 
any  sort  had  hern  introduced,  no  country  has  ever  pro 
duced  an  intellect  amongst  its  sovereigns  that  combined 
so  manv  excellencies;  and  Mr.  (Jreen  bids  us  look  at 
the  mighty  roll  of  hooks  that  till  our  libraries,  and  realise 
that  all  be^an  with  his  translations  and  chronicles.  We 
must  divide  the  honour,  however,  with  those  we  have 
already  spoken  of:  but  certain  it  is  that,  amongst  his 
labour-.  A  It  red  translated  portions  ol  the  \Vord  of  (iod, 
and  s-i>  let  us  linger  lovingly  <>i>  his  history. 

lie  had  a  great  deal  against  his  ever  becoming  ,,ne  of 
the  Fathers  of  English  literatim-.  Both  his  parents  were 
dead  before  lie  was  ten  ;  he  was  on  the  throne  at  twentv- 
one  ;  he  was  immersed  lor  long  in  deadly  warfares  ;  he 
was  a  great  suhVrvr  much  of  his  life  ;  and  he  died  at 
fifty-two.  Hut  when  his  father  married  the  granddaughter 
of  Charlemagne,  she  came  Irom  Paris  to  England,  and 
brought  a  smattering  ol  learning  with  her.  and  some 
love  for  it.  She  was  sitting  one  day  surrounded  by  the 
family  of  her  adoption,  with  a  beautiful  volume  of  Saxon 
poetry  in  her  hands.  It  might  have  been  ('a-dmon; 
it  might  have  been  Aldhelm.  She  proposed  to  give  it 
to  whoever  soonest  learnt  to  read  it.  Of  Alfred's  elder 
brothers,  one  was  a  king,  and  the  cithers  in  mature  vouth 
or  manhood.  Allied  was  onlv  twelve,  and.  pleased  with 
the  illumination  of  the  initial  letter,  he  inquired  if  she 
reallv  meant  it.  She  repeated  the  promise  with  a  smile 
of  pleasure,  and  he  won  it.  this  French  princess  becoming 
thus  the  kind  Minerva  from  whom  arose  the  first  shoots 
of  that  intellectual  character  which  we  admire  in  Alfred.* 

*  Sharon   '1'urin-r.      Mr.    I'.ilui.ur   ha-   written  another  .-onnet   on  this 
famous  incident,  \\hidi  the  reader  \\ill  thank  us  for  reproducing  :  — 
••Tin-   fair-haired    IM.V   is   at    lii>   mother's   knee. 
A    liianv-coloured    pa::*1    l>etore    them    >|iread. 
(Juy   summer   har\c-t    tidd   of   ^old   and   red. 
With    lines   and   staves  of  inn-lent    min-t  rel-y. 
l'»nt    through    her  eyes  alone   the   child   <  an   sec. 
From    her   sweet    lips   partake   the   word-   of  SMIIJJ, 
And    l....ks  as   ,,ii.-    who   feels   a   hidden    uronu'. 
Or  gazes  or»  HOUR-   feat  of  witchery. 


T48  OUR  OWN   KXdLISH  UIBLE 

Later  on.  however,  when  lie  found  that  the  great  works 
were  written  in  Latin,  he  could  iind  no  one  to  teach  it 
him  in  all  Wessex.  And  no  wonder,  when  from  about 
A.I).  Slid  the  Danes  came  and  destroyed  all  before  them, 
treating  the  Saxons  very  much  as  they  (the  Saxons) 
had  treated  the  Britons  three  hundred  years  before. 
''  Tarn  aris  <|uam  aratris  "— Lindisfarne,  Coldingham, 
Tynemouth,  Bardney.  (Vovland.  Peterbro',  and  Kly 
wrere  visited  with  equal  furv.  There  was  a  good 
library  at  Peterbro".  where  the  lire  was  blazing  for  a 
fortnight.  Back  went  the  hand  on  the  dial,  and  if  it  had 
not  been  for  Alfred,  probably  the  victory  would  have 
been  as  complete  as  the  Saxons  themselves  had  enjoyed. 

So  Alfred  had  to  do  the  best  he  could,  and  that  seemed 
to  be  to  summon  capable  teachers  to  his  side.  Men 
of  learning  and  religion  came  at  his  call,  adorned  his 
Court,  and  taught  him  and  his  people.  Asser.  who  was 
one  of  them,  and  wrote  his  Life,  puts  it  quaintly  when 
he  says  :  "  He  would  avail  himself  of  every  opportunity 
of  procuring  coadjutors  in  his  good  designs  ;  and  like 
a  prudent  bird  which,  rising  in  summer  wit-h  the  early 
morning  from  her  beloved  nest,  steers  her  rapid  flight 
through  the  uncertain  tracks  of  ether,  and  descends  on 
the  manifold  and  varied  flowers,  of  grasses,  herbs  and 
shrubs,  essaying  that  which  pleases  most,  that  she  may 
bear  it  to  her  home;  so  did  he  direct  his  eyes  afar,  and 
seek  without  that  which  he  had  not  within  in  his  own 
kingdom.1' 

Urimbold  came  from  St.  Omer.  in  France,  to  preside 
over  the  new  abbey  at  Winchester.  Alfred  took  the 
trouble  to  send  an  embassy,  begging  him  to  come,  and 
there  is  ;i  legend  that  he  entertained  Alfred  during  one 
of  his  long  journeys  to  Home,  and  made  a  deep  impression 
on  tin;  little  fellow.  Asser  came  from  the  western  ex- 


U'heii    thon   canst    use   it,    thine   the    hook,'   she   cried. 

Unkindly   task  !  '    his  comrades  ITV   in    vain  ! 
All    work 'ennobles  m.Ucnos.   all   art. 
He   thinks;    head  governs  hand;   and   in   his  heart 
All  knowledge  for  his  province  he  ha>  ta'cu." 


;T  \  I  I   f.    f)l'     KINi;     U.I  111  H    AT    WINCIM. S' 


149 


KINC,  ALFRKI)  151 

tremities  of  Wales,  ami  it  \vas  agreed  that  lie  should 
spend  six  months  with  Alfred  and  six  in  his  own  eountrv. 
He  was  a  Celt,  and  became  Bishop  of  Shcrborne.  Krigcna, 
or  John  the  Irishman,  is  said  to  have  come  Ironi  the 
abbey  at  ( 'orbey  to  rule  a  school  and  monastery  at  Ath- 
elnev,  a  memorial  of  Alfred's  gratitude.  Other  names 
are  mentioned— Werfrith,  Bishop  of  Worcester,  "a  man 
skilled  in  the  Scriptures."  Pleginund,  who  became  Arch 
bishop  of  Canterbury,  Atlielstan.  and  Werwulf.  He 
rewarded  all  liberally,  Asser  receiving  two  monasteries 
and  all  they  contained  -Amesbury  in  Wilts,  and  Ban  well 
in  Somerset . 

Many  of  them  remained  with  him.  for  the  Court  of 
King  Alfred  was  no  mere  state  palace,  nor  even  a  roval 
home.  It  was  a  travelling  Cniversity,  ;i  British  Associa 
tion,  the  Court  of  Justice,  the  Board  oi  Trade,  t  he  Admiralty, 
and  the  Horse  (luards  of  the  kingdom.  Alfred's  cele 
brated  candles,  by  which  lie  divided  his  time,  had  to  have 
lanterns  of  wood  and  line  horn  to  protect  them  from 
the  draughts  that  came  from  the  doors  ami  "crevices 
in  the  walls."  The  learned  men.  pupils  or  pupils  of  pupils 
of  great  Knglishmen  manv  <>1  them,  shared  this  uncom 
fortable  nomadic  lite.* 

Alfred  insisted  on  tin-  earls  and  ihegns  learning  to 
read  and  write,  and  Asser  rxpres>es  the  lamentation 
of  these  well-born  but  untaught  men  that  they  had  not 
studied  these  things  in  their  youth.  Thev  clearly  wanted 
the  degree  ol  education  which  our  poorest  charity- 
children  receive  now.  Kin;*  Alfred  says  in  his  Preface  to 
Gregory's  Pnstnrnl  :  "  1  thought  how  I  saw.  before  it  was 
all  spoiled  and  burned,  how  the  churches  were  tilled 
with  treasures  of  books,  and  also  with  a  great  multitude 
of  God's  servants;  vet  they  reaped  very  little  fruit  ol 
these  book's,  because  thev  could  understand  nothing  of 
them,  as  they  were  not  writieii  in  their  own  native 
tongue.  I'Yw  persons  south  of  the  ilumber  could  under 
stand  the  service  in  Knglish.  or  tran>late  Latin  into 
English." 

*  ,S'/.-./r/i..f  of  (.'liri-ti-iH  Li]>  .  iSuyi-s. 


152  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

It  was  not  till  he  was  forty,  however,  that  he  began  his 
Latin,  calling  to  recollection  what  benefit  had  been  derived 
by  all  nations  by  the  translation  of  the  Scriptures  and 
other  suitable  works,  and  he  writes  to  Wulfsig,  then  Bishop 
of  London  :  "  I  think  it  better  if  you  think  so,  that  we 
also  translate  some  books,  the  most  necessary  for  all  men 
to  know  ;  and  we  may  do  this  very  easily  if  we  have 
peace." 

Asser  tells  us  that  his  first  attempts  at  translation 
were  made  upon  the  Bible,  and  the  immediate  occasion 
of  his  commencing  the  work  was  as  follows  : — Asser  and 
the  king  were  engaged  in  pleasant  conversation,  and  it  so 
chanced  that  Asser  quoted  a  passage  in  a  collection  of 
Psalms  and  Hymns  which  he  had  with  him  at  Athelney, 
and  which  he  always  carried  in  his  bosom  ;  but  not  a 
blank  leaf  could  be  found  in  the  book.  The  king  called 
for  a  clean  skin  of  parchment,  and  this  being  folded  into 
fours,  in  the  shape  of  a  book,  the  passage  from  the  Scriptures 
was  written  upon  it  in  Latin,  together  with  some  other  good 
texts  ;  and  the  king,  setting  to  work  upon  these  passages, 
translated  them  into  the  Anglo-Saxon  tongue.  He  also 
prefixed  to  his  laws  a  translation  of  the  Ten  Command 
ments  and  such  other  portions  of  the  Mosaic  injunctions 
in  the  three  following  chapters  in  Exodus  as  were  most 
to  his  purpose,  though  some  of  them  seem  very  inapplic 
able.  In  the  MS.  History  of  Ely  it  is  said  that  he  trans 
lated  a  large  portion  of  the  Scriptures,  but  a  little  soon 
becomes  exaggerated  to  much  when  a  king  is  the  penman. 
Perhaps,  however,  as  his  literary  labours  began  with  such 
work,  so  they  ended  with  it.  The  Danes,  though  beaten 
badly  at  Edington  and  elsewhere,  were  far  from  crushed. 
They  were  fond  of  burning  all  the  books  they  could  find, 
though  one  might  have  thought  that  the  pretty  illuminated 
letters  would  have  pleased  the  eyes  of  savages.  On  the 
news  of  some  fresh  inroad,  with  the  usual  result,  Alfred 
is  said  to  have  exclaimed  :  "  Then  let  us  have  Hod's 
Book  translated  into  the  people's  own  tongue,  so  that  if 
these  Pagans  land  in  greater  numbers,  and  burn  all  our 
books,  the  people  may  have  the  Bible  by  heart."  And 


KINO   ALFRED  15;, 

•t  about    (lie   Psalter,  though  lie  did  not  live  !<>  com- 
11. 

For  years  lie  carried  in  his  bosom  his  little  hook  in 
which  the  daily  order  of  the  Psalms  was  contained,  so 
that  he  might  read  them  at  leisure. 

Here  is  an  illustration  of  King  Alfred's  "Dooms." 
as  given  by  Mr.  Thorpe  :— 

2.  I'tter  thou    not    my    name    idlv,    for   thou   shalt  not 
be  guiltless  towards  me,  if  thou  utter  mv  name  idly. 

3.  Remember    that    thou    hallow    the    rest    day.     Work 
for  yourselves  six  days  and  on  the  seventh  rest.      For  in 
six  days  Christ  wrought  the   Heavens  and  the   Earth,  the 
Seas  and  all  creatures  that  are  in  them,  and  rested  on  the 
seventh  day  ;   and  therefore  the  Lord  hallowed  it. 

Alfred's  famous  saying,  "'  I  would  that  every  Englishman 
should  be  as  free  as  the  air  we  breathe/'  ranks  fitly  by  the 
side  of  these  etTorts  to  make  the  Bible  free  to  all.  His 
object  was  to  do  his  people  good.  There  was  that  practical 
and  moral  aim  even  in  his  literary  work  which  is  char 
acteristic  of  much  of  our  earliest  literature  as  well  as  our 
latest.  He  wanted  the  people  generally  to  have  some 
education.  Much  had  been  done  on  the  Continent  bv 
Charlemagne,  but  his  munificence  was  calculated  to  confine 
the  gift  within  the  pale  of  the  cloister.  Alfred  sought 
to  diffuse  knowledge  rather  than  to  centre  it  in  a  caste. 
His  own  example  had  immense,  influence,  and  he  stimulated 
his  subjects  both  bv  rewards  and  punishments,  allowing 
no  one  that  was  ignorant  to  aspire  to  anv  dignitv  in  the 
court.  At  least  everv  free-born  vouth  was  to  abide  at  his 
book  till  he  could  well  understand  English  writing,  and 
lit;  himself  kept  the  general  superintendence  of  the  school 
he  established  for  the  voung  nobles  of  his  court. 

Mr.  (In-cn  has  evidently  read  all  his  other  translations, 
and  tells  us  that  they  are  not  translations  merelv.  lie 
took  the  manuals  popular  in  his  age,  and  such  as  he  thought 

*  Maliiii-.-liury  is  an  authority  for  thi-.  Flor.  \\  IL'.  says  that  ii  uas 
on  the  fea-t.  of  St.  .Martin  in  ssT  that  In-  lieyan  it.  This  looks  precise. 
Huston  of  I'.ury  suys  thut  it  was  "almost  ull  thn  Tfstarwnt  "  that  he 
tranflatc-d.— Si>Er  M  \x's  Lir. 


154  OUR  OWN   ENGLISH   P.IBLK 

would  do  good,  enlivening  liis  moral  lessons  by  apologues 
or  fables.  Boethius  flourished  at  the  close  of  the  fifth 
century,  and  was  master  of  the  offices  to  Theodoric,  King 
of  the  Goths.  He  wrote  a  book  whose  object  was  to 
diminish  the  influence  of  riches,  dignity,  power,  pleasure, 
or  glory,  and  to  prove  their  inadequacy  to  produce  happi 
ness.  The  Author  of  existence  is  set  forth  as  the  sovereign 
good,  and  it  is  this  part  which  our  great  moralist  and  critic 
has  thus  rendered  :  — 

"()  Thou,   whose   power  o'er  moving  worlds  presides, 
Whose   voice   created,   and    whose   wisdom  guides, 
On  darkling  man   in   pure  effulgence  shine 
And   cheer  the  clouded   mind   with   light    Divine. 
'Tis  Thine  alone   to  calm   the   pious   breast 
With  silent   confidence  and   holy  rest  ; 
From   Thee,   (I rent    (Joel,    we  sprinir;   to  Thee   we   tend  — 
Path,   motive,   guide,   original,   and   end.'* 

Alfred  was  a  great  sufferer  for  a  large  part  of  his  life, 
but  in  his  very  free  translation  of  Bocthius  he  bursts  out 
into  an  enthusiastic  acknowledgment  of  the  goodness  of 
God.  Boethius  was  worthy  of  his  skill,  and  has  been  called 
the  last  of  the  ancients.  He  fell  a  victim  to  Theodoric, 
and  his  Consolation  <>j  Philosophy,  which  Alfred  trans 
lated,  was  written  in  prison,  like  the  words  of  the  "  immortal 
Dreamer/'  Mingling  an  almost  Christian  sanctity  with 
the  lessons  of  the  classic  writers,  he  speaks  from  his  prison, 
as  Hallain  says,  in  the  swan-like  tones  of  dying  eloquence. 
In  Alfred's  hands  the  Pagan  book  became  Christian, 
and  the  learned  book"  popular. 

Another  popular  manual  translated  by  Alfred  was 
Orosii'x.  This  was  then  the  one  accessible  handbook 
of  Universal  History,  and  he  enriched  it  by  an  outline 
of  the  state  of  Germany,  up  to  date.  The  Venerable  Bede's 
Ecclesiastical  Hixfor//  he  also  turned  into  Saxon,  freely 
interpolating  ideas  of  his  own,  such  as  that  on  the  theory 
of  good  government,  as  consisting  in  a  due  balance  of  the 
priest,  the  soldier,  and  the  churl. 

Pope   Gregory's   book   on   the   Pastoral  Office   we   have 

*  Sharon  Turner. 


KING  ALFRED  155 

alreadv  referred  to.  It  was  much  prized  throughout 
Europe,  is  twice  praised  by  Alcuin.  and  was  the  best  hand 
book  of  the  time  for  the  guidance  of  the  clergy,  lie 
translated  this,  and  collected  also  some  of  the  (lowers 
of  Augustine,  adding  prayers  to  his  soliloquies.* 

Here  is  a  praver  of  this  father  of  literature  and  religion  : — 

"  ( 'ome  now  to  help  me,  ()  Thou  who  art  the  only  Eternal, 

the  true  (Jod  of  glory;    Father  and  Son  and   Holy  Spirit, 

without   any  separation  and  mutability,  and  without  any 

necessity   or  diminution    of   power,   and    who   never  diest. 


.'#«£.<&*>     O  ORAT10 

P  Aiipjty.S  $av  u>  cv 


n  cam  ^crtin  u)r  UK  i  if 


AI.I  KI.Ii  >    I  SAI.TKK. 


Thou  art  alwa\'s  dwelling  in  the  highest  brightness  in 
perfect  unaniniit  v.  an<l  in  the  fullest  abundance.  With 
Thee  there  is  no  deficiency  ol  good,  but  Thou  art  ever 
abiding  replete  with  everv  felicity,  through  endless  time. 
To  The.-.  <)  Cod.  I  call.  Hear.  O'hear  me.  Lord,  for  Thou 
art  mv  (lod  and  mv  Lord  ;  mv  leather  and  mv  ('reator; 
my  ruler  and  mv  'hope;  mv  wealth  and  my  honour; 
my  house;  mv  countrv;  mv  salvation  and  mv  life. 
Hear,  hear  me.  < »  Lord.  Few  of  Thy  servants  comprehend 
Thee.  But  Thee  alone  I  love  indeed,  above  all  other 

*  In   liis  Anglo-Saxon  Chronicle  al.-o  wo  linvo  n  continuous  National 
Record  from  our  lir«t  coming  here. 


156  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

things  ;  Thee  T  seek  ;  Thee  \  will  follow  :  Thee  I  am 
ready  to  serve.  I'nder  Thy  power  I  desiiv  to  abide,  for 
Thou  alone  art  the  Sovereign  of  all.  1  pray  Thee  to 
command  me  as  Thou  wilt/' 

Alfred's  spirit  was  fervent.  Hearing  that  there  were 
some  colonies  of  Christian  Syrians  settled  on  the  coasts 
of  Malabar  and  Coromandel,  who  were  supposed  to  speak 
the  same  tongue  as  Christ  spoke  when  on  earth,  he  sent 
Swithelm,  then  Bishop  of  Sherborne.  and  an  embassy, 
by  the  k"  Overland  Route,"  to  interview  them.  It  was 
almost  as  great  an  undertaking  in  such  times  as  the  North- 
West  Passage  in  these;  but  instead  of  leaving  their  bones 
there,  they  brought  back  something  for  their  pains — 
presents  of  gems  and  Indian  spices. 

The  above  prayer  is  put  into  language  of  to-day,  though 
the  thought  is  Alfred's,  and  as  a  contrast  take  this  extract 
from  Orosius  in  Alfred's  own  tongue  :— 

"Nu  \ville  we  ymb  Enropa.  land-geiiiUM'c  recran,  s\vu  niycol 
swa  WJP,  hit  fynucst  witon,  fram  ]MMV  <'a  Danais  West  o^  Khin 
'u"a  ea,  seo  wyliN  of  ]KIMU  beorge  ]->e  man  Alpis,  liu-i,  and  yrno 
)'onnc  noi'uryhte  on  IXPS  garsccges  earm,  ]v  jiu.'l  land  utan-ymb 
li^i '  ]>e  man  liryttania  h<rt,  and  efl  su^  o]>  Donna  ]>a  ea,  }>oere 
(jLMvylnic  is  neah  ]KITO  ca  Hint's,  and  is 
Creca'and  ut  on  }IOIHI  \Vciidels(r,  and 
man  Cweiisao  lux-t,  hinnan  ]'irin  synd 
man  hmt  eall  ( icrmania."  :| 

Let  not  St.  Neot  be  forgotten  when  we  think  of  Xing 
Alfred's  many-sided  virtue.  It  was  largely  owing  to 
his  wisdom  and  faithfulness.  He  was  a  prince  and  a 
relative,  becoming  a  monk  oi  (JIastonburv,  visiting  Rome 
seven  times,  and  possibly  suggesting  the,  foundation  of 
Oxford  University,  and  becoming  one  of  the  first  teachers 
there."]"  He  tried  to  copy  the  predominant  virtue  of 
everyone  in  his  cloister,  and  in  Alfred's  earlier  life  taught 

*  liin-j.  liril.  Lit.,  Wright. 

Y  Mr.  Church  thinks  tin's  is  a  fancy,  but  Lrivcs  no  reasons,  ami  a  few 
years  ago  University  College  celebrated  its  thousandth  anniversary 
on  the  strength  of  the  story.  (Early  Britain,  A.  J.  Church,  M.A.) 
Stephen  calls  this  a  ;1  deliberate  and  interested  falsehood." 


KIXC,  ALFRED  157 

liirn  to  profit  by  the  adversities  which  happened  to  him. 
That  he  did  this  is  seen  in  his  dving  counsels  to  his 
son  :  — 

"  1  pray  thee.  for  thou  art  my  dear  child,  strive  to  be 
a  lather  and  a  lord  to  the  people,  lie  thou  the  children's 
father  and  the  widow's  friend.  Comfort  thou  the  poor 
and  shelter  the  weak  ;  and  with  all  thv  might  right  that 
which  is  wroiiLT.  And.  son.  govern  thyself  l>v  law.  then 
shall  the  Lord  love  thee.  and  (Jod  above  all  things  shall 
be  thv  reward,  ('all  thou  upon  Him  to  advise  thee  in 
all  thv  need,  and  so  shall  lie  help  thee  the  better  to 
compass  that  which  thou  wonkiest." 

Alfred's  work  seemed  to  fail  in  the  near'  future.  His 
example  and  his  princely  rewards  had  but  a  temporarv 
efYect.  and  in  the  time  of  ( )do  ignorance  again  brooded 
over  the  land,  lint  though  the  Danes  harried  and  burnt 
for  a  time.  Woden  soon  yielded  to  Christ.  The  fierce 
Northmen  were,  after  all.  the  same  blood  as  the.  Saxons, 
and  thev  settled  down  amongst  them,  instead  of  driving 
them  out  of  the  land,  as  the  Saxons  had  driven  out  the 
Britons.  Their  stupid  superstitions  died  the  death, 
and  the  whole  nation  once  more  presented  the  appearance 
of  a  ( 'hristian  people. 

Here  js  the  Lord's  Praver  of  King  Alfred's  time :— 

"  I  ifii    Fader  dliic  art   in  Heofnas, 
<);ir   Father   \\liidi   art    in    Heaven, 

Sic  gehalgocl  dhin  nonia, 
Halloued    he   Thy    N'ame. 

T<>  i  vmedh  dhin    rie, 
<  'nine  Thv    K  iii'_"li  mi. 

Sic  dhin   nuilla   sue   i>   in    Heofnas  and   in  earclho. 
lie   thv   \\ill  so  as   in    Heaven   and   in  earth, 


And   forgef  us  seylda   urnn. 
And   forgive  us  our  del>tn. 


158  OUR  OWN   KNOLISH   15II5I.E 

Sue  uue  forgefan  sculdgun   vruin, 
So  as  \\e  forgive  our  debts. 

And  no  inlcadh    vridk   in  eostnun^  al  jrefrig 
And  not   inlead   us  into  temptation   hut  deliver 


The  almost  inevitable  exaggerations  attached  to  great 
names  are  found  in  connection  with  Alfred's.  The  prin 
ciple  of  trial  by  jurv  is  as  old  as  the  Teutonic  race  itself, 
and  the  first  lines  of  its  actual  existing  shape  are  not 
discoverable  till  ages  alter  his  days.  His  division  of 
the  land  into  shires,  hundreds,  and  tithings  is  probably 
a  legend,  and  he  was  never  King  of  Kngland,  but  only 
of  the  West  Saxons. 

But  as  one  of  the  founders  of  our  noble  literature,  and 
a  true  king  and  father  of  his  people,  we  have  done  well 
lately  to  keep  up  his  millenary  with  all  honours. 


CHAPTER   XI 

L1NDISFAHXK     C<  tSI'KI.S,     OK     T1IK     Dl'HIIAM     HOOK 

"  For    uilh    tin-  el.l>  and   How   its  style 
Varies    from   ( 'oiitincn:    to   Isle  ; 
l>iv   shod   o'er   .-amis   twice  every   dav 
The    |iilL'rims   to   tlie   shrine   find    way'; 
Twice    everv   dav    the    waves   efl'aee, 
Of  stav.-,   and   sandalled    feet    the   trace." 

''In   Sa\«.n   strength    that    Alilwy   frowned 
Witli    massive   aivhes   broad   aiid   round. 
That    n»e   alternate,   row   and   row. 
On    ponderous   eolunms,   short   and    low." 

\Ym:\  tin:  libraries  of  tin-  monasteries  were  sacked,  whole 
shipfuls  of  books  were  sent  to  foreigners,  to  their  wonder. 
Some  were  sold  to  urocers  and  soapsellers.  Two  entire 
libraries  were  sold  for  l<>s.,  the  Universities  heinjj  by  no 
means  eleai'  in  t  he  mat  tei\* 

Some  valuable  manuscripts  have  escaped,  however, 
and  now  we  conn;  to  one  ol  the  finest,  carefully  preserved 
in  the  British  Museum.  It  is  indeed  one  ol  the  hooks 
of  the  world,  and  is  absolutely  priceless.  Sometimes 
it  is  called  the  Lindislanie  (Jospels.  which  is  preferable, 
and  sometimes  the  Durham  P>ook.  It  is  a  lari^e  folio 
manuscript  of  the  four  (lospels  in  both  Latin  and  Saxon, 
splendidly  bound,  illuminated,  and  enriched.  The  original 
Latin  is  traced  back  to  Kadfrith,t  Bishop  of  Lindisfarne, 
or  the  Holv  Isle.  \. i).  (it IS  Tl'l.  His  successor.  /Kthelwold, 
with  the  assistance  of  an  anchorite,  called  Bilfrith,  adorned 
it  with  golden  bosses  and  precious  stones,  and  decorated 

.'lnml,  >ti-.      Oxford.   ITS'J. 

(In-  four  names  as  >|N-|t  in  the  li.ii.U  it -elf. 


160  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

it  with  illuminations  of  an  intricate  and  beautiful  character. 
Then  last,  and  not  lill  two  or  three  centuries  afterwards, 
the  Saxon  version  was  written  between  the  lines  by  Aldred. 
Mr  Ingram,  Professor  of  Saxon  at  Oxford  in  his  day, 
says  that  the  language  is  Dano-Saxon,  and  that  it  was 
probably  written  by  the  same  Aldred  (Ealdred)  who 
was  promoted  to  the  see  of  York  in  A.D.  I0(i().  Humphrey 
Wanley  assigns  it  to  the  time  of  King  Alfred;  and  Mr. 
Skeat,  our  great  living  authority  at  Cambridge,  fixes 
the  probable  date  at  about  A.D.  '.'."Xl,  and  thinks  that  it 
was  executed  at  the  time  when  it  was  kept  at  Chester-le- 
Street,  near  Durham,  whither  it  had  been  removed  for 
fear  of  the  Danes. 

There  are  :T)S  leaves  of  vellum.  I-').1/  by  l)i',  and  in 
addition  to  the  (Jospels  there  are  St.  Jerome's  Epistle 
of  Pope  Damasus,  the  Eusebian  Canons,  two  Prefaces, 
short  notices  of  the  four  Evangelists,  arguments  of  the 
sections  into  which  the  (Jospels  are  divided  (not.  of  course, 
our  modern  Chapters),  and  Tables  of  Lessons  to  bo  read 
on  Sundays  and  Festivals. 

There  is  a  curious  story  attached  to  it,  told  Uy  Simeon 
of  Durham.  Its  original  depository  was  the  Episcopal 
Church  at  Lindisfarne,  and  when  this  was  ruined  by  the 
predatory  Danes,  the  monks  in  their  passage  to  the  coast 
of  Northumberland  let  it  fall  into  the  sea.  It  came  to 
shore,  however,  and  having  been  three  days  in  the  water, 
its  preservation  was  attributed  to  St.  Cuthbert,  and  it 
was  supposed  to  be  endowed  with  miraculous  powers, 
plenty  of  wonders  being  hereafter  told  about  it. 

The  pictures  of  the  Evangelists,  prefixed  to  their  respec 
tive  (Jospels,  remain  ;  with  four  tablets  containing  a 
fanciful  design  ol  the  Cross,  richly  painted. 

Dr.  Waagan  says  of  it  :  "  The  carefully  glazed  strong 
parchment,  beautiful  capital  letters  throughout,  the 
very  rich  ornaments  with  which  whole  pages  are  decorated, 
prove  that  all  the  art  of  the  age  was  spent  upon  it.  The 
four  Evangelists  are  taken  from  Byzantine  models,  but 
executed  with  only  mechanical  skill,  shadows  and  middle 
tints  beinu  wanting,  and  the  faces  quite  inanimate.  The 


MVIII    i  Il.VITKV    t.O.-1'Kl -HOOK    <>K    MAf    I'fKNAX, 
I  \M!II  If    I'AI.AfT.    I.II1HAHV. 

••/  .V.Mr*.  Macmil'an  .<  r<\  /.'•/) 


LIXPIS1  AKNK  OOSl'KLS,  OR    DURHAM    HOOK     163 

delicacy  of  the  calligraphic  work,  on  the  other  hand,  is 
very  great,  and  all  tho  colours  are  as  brilliant  as  if  laid 
on  yesterday."  * 

Dr.  \Vaa<_ran  thinks  the  execution  was  probably  done 
by  English  monks,  from  Irish  models.  St.  John's  Gospel 
is  written  in  red  ink.  in  a  different  hand,  and  there  is 
this  key  to  the  fact  at  the  end  :  '"  Eadfrith,  Bishop  of 
the  Lindisfarne  Church,  he  at  the  first  wrote  this  book  in 
honour  of  God  and  St.  Cuthbert  and  all  the  saints  in 
common  that  are  in  the  Island,  and  Edilwold,  Bishop  of 
the  people  of  the  Lindisfarne  Island,  made  it  firm  on 
the  outside  and  covered  it  as  well  as  he  could.  And 
Bilfrith,  the  anchorite,  he  wrought  in  smith's  work  the 
ornaments  that  are  on  the  outside,  and  adorned  it  with 
gold  and  also  with  gems,  overlaid  with  silver,  unalloyed 
metal.  And  Aldred.  an  unworthy  and  most  miserable 
priest,  with  the  help  of  God  and  St.  Cuthhert,  glossed 
it  above  in  English,  and  made  himself  at  home  with  the 
three  parts:  Matthew's  part  for  the  honour  of  God  and 
St.  Cuthhert  ;  Mark's  part  for  the  Bishop;  and  Luke's 
part  for  the  brotherhood,  together  with  8  oras  of 
silver  (deposited)  with  God  and  St.  Cuthbert ;  John's 
part  for  himself,  to  the  end  that  he  may  gain  admittance 
into  Heaven  through  God's  mercy,  and  on  earth  happiness 
and  peace,  promotion  and  dignity,  wisdom  and  prudence, 
through  St.  f'uthbert's  merits."  Perhaps  "for  himself" 
may  mean  that  lie  did  St.  John's  Gospel  in  his  own  hand 
writing,  but  in  any  case  it  is  pleasant  to  find  that  our 
unworthy  and  most  miserable  friend,  according  to  his 
own  showing,  could  make  himself  so  much  at  home  with 
the  Evangelists,  and  have  so  good  a  prospect  for  this 
world  and  the  next . 

In  ;•  marginal  note  he  calls  himself  the  eminent  son 
of  a  good  woman,  and  after  being  provost  in  the  middle 
of  the  tenth  century,  he  may  have  been  Bishop  of  Durham 
from  04fi-0<58.  The  precious  stones  in  the  binding  are 
genuine,  but  the  binding  is  modern,  being  a  restoration 
executed  about  IWt. 

*  7Y"T«»/r.-<  nf  Art  >n  Grmt  Britain. 


1 64  OUR  OWN  KNdLISH    HIPLE 

The  Palseographical  Society  have  published  this  splendid 
hook,  and  in  a  splendid  form,  the  whole-page  portraits 
and  illuminations  being  reproduced.  In  the  Preface 
they  say  that  on  their  own  merits  the  English  and  Irish 
schools  of  calligraphy  are  entitled  to  special  attention, 
for  their  productions  are  much  finer  than  Continental 
works  in  the  period  before  Charlemagne.  As  for  this 
volume,  on  account  of  its  beauty  of  writing  and  richness 
of  ornament,  its  great  antiquity,  its  excellent  condition, 
and  the  fortunate  circumstance  that  the  time  and  place 
of  its  production  an?  recorded,  it  becomes  a  type  by  which 
to  judge  MSS.  of  a  similar  character.  Mr.  F.  Astle,  F.R.S., 
in  his  Origin  of  Writing,  goes  more  at  length  into  its 
calligraphy,  saying  that  the  Romans  taught  us  how  to 
write,  and  that  h've  kinds  of  writing  prevailed  in  England 
from  the  coming  of  Augustine  (A.I>.  590)  to  the  Norman 
Conquest— Roman-Saxon,  Set-Saxon,  Running-hand  Saxon, 
Mixed  Saxon,  and  Elegant  Saxon. 

To  the  first  belongs  '"  this  most  noble  monument  of 
Anglo-Saxon  calligraphy,"  as  Mr.  Astle  calls  it.  The 
Roman-Saxon  writing  was  very  similar  to  the  Roman 
uncial.  Towards  the  middle  of  the  eighth  century  Set- 
Saxon  came  in,  and  was  not  entirely  disused  till  the  begin 
ning  of  the  tenth  century.  About  the  end  of  the  ninth 
century,  when  learning  was  diffused  under  the  auspices 
of  King  Alfred,  the  characters  became  loose  and  free,  and 
abbreviations  were  numerous.  Lastly,  after  the  Mixed 
came  the  Elegant  Saxon  writing,  which  became  common 
in  England  early  in  the  tenth  century,  lasted  till  the 
Norman  Conquest,  and  was  not  entirely  disused  till  the 
middle  of  the  twelfth.  Mr.  Astle  says  this  is  more  beau 
tiful  than  the  writing  in  France,  ftaly,  and  Germany 
during  the  same  period. 

Here  is  Mark,  chapter  i.  : 

"  Godspelles  fruma  Hoelendes  Crist  Godes  suna.  suoe 
awritten  is  in  Esaia  done  witgo  Heonu  ic  asendi  min 
engel  be  fora  onsione  den  sede  foregearwas  wegden." 

The  Latin  letters  are  very  large,  and  the  Saxon  small, 
as  if  they  scarcely  dare  find  themselves  in  such  company. 


I.IXDISFARXE  GOSPELS,  OK   DURHAM    BOOK      167 

We  see  what  were  the  traditional  ideas  of  the  Evangelists 
when  we  turn  over  such  a  book.  St.  Matthew  has  an 
lingo  1  above  him  with  a  trumpet  in  his  mouth,  and  a  man 
watching  him  as  he  writes.  Then  comes  Mark,  with  a 
lion  above  him  ;  he  also  is  writing,  and  wears  a  purple 
robe  -tripod  with  blue.  Luke  has  a  winged  animal  above 
him,  which  could  only  be  called  an  ox  by  courtesy.  He 
has  a  dress  similar  to  Mark's,  which  opens  and  shows 
a  lilac  undorvest.  with  light  green  stripes.  St.  John  has 
his  hand  to  his  heart,  and  an  eagle  for  his  companion. 
Our  ancestors  were  evidently  fond  of  rich  and  bright 
effects,  whether  the  Evangelists  had  such  coats  of  many 
colours  or  not.  The  same  taste  rules  in  the  other  orna 
mentation  of  the  book.  At  the  beginning  of  St.  Luke's 
Gospel  the  birds  haw  white  wings  and  heads,  yellow  legs 
and  crests,  and  ureon  or  blue  neck's.  The  cat's  head 
terminating  the  side  border  is  yellow,  the  muzzle  white, 
and  the  legs  blue!  Manv  of  the  ornaments  are  singu 
larly  tesselated  or  dovetailed  in  a  sort  of  mosaic  work, 
within  arabesque  compartments. 

Yes,  it  was  all  done  in  honour  of  St.  Cuthbert,  and  well 
it  might  be.  And  if  it  had  been  done  in  honour  of  St. 
Aidan,  another'  Lindisfarne  celebrity,  he  would  have 
richly  deserved  it  too.  The  first  church  between  the 
Tees  anil  the  Firth  of  Forth  was  built  here  by  him,  and 
he  built  it  of  split  oak.  and  thatched  it  with  tho  wiry  bent 
grass  which  <_rrows  in  such  abundance  on  the  island. 
Oswald,  the  king,  whose  royal  residence  was  at  Bambrough. 
had  seen  the  civilising  ellects  of  Christianity  while  an  exile 
from  his  throne  at  the  court  of  the  Scottish  king,  and 
when  recalled  to  his  country,  was  almost  immediately 
compelled  to  defend  \\\<  people  against  (Vdwell.  a  neigh 
bouring  king.  Oswald,  like  Constant  ino.  fought  under 
the  banner  of  the  Cross,  and  vowed  that,  if  victorious. 
he  would  adopt  and  support  it  throughout  his  dominions. 
He  proved  the  victor,  and  applied  to  Scotland  for  a 
missionary  to  come  and  teach  his  people.  From  lona 
came  ('oran  first  of  all.  but  he  soon  returned,  saving  the 
people  were  t oo  stupid.  Then  Aidan  took'  up  the  work. 


iftS  OUR  OWN    ENGLISH    15IIJLK 

and   succeeded    just   where    the    other    failed,    often    being 
accompanied  by  the  king  in  his  missionary  journeys. 

Cuthbert,  who  came  a  little  later,  is  the  popular  saint 
of  Lindisfarne.  whether  his  claims  be  greater  than  Aidan's 
or  not.  He  was  the  sixth  bishop,  and  became  a  hermit 
twice,  dying  at  the  little  island  of  Fame,  close  at  hand. 
Already  during  life  he  had  been  reverenced  as  a  saint. 
and  for  centuries  his  fame  went  on  increasing.  All  sorts 
of  miracles  were  ascribed  to  him,  and  they  did  not  end 
with  his  death.  For  instance,  certain  fishermen  having 
lost  their  gear  and  tackle,  and  being  overtaken  in  a  sudden 
squall,  invoked  the  aid  of  St.  Cuthbert.  who  duly  came, 
sat  in  the  seat  of  the  steersman,  and  with  his  pastoral 
staff  guided  their  frail  barque  into  safety— 

"They  saw  an  old  man  who  sat  on  the  'wale, 
His  beard  was  long  and  silver  grey, 
Like  the  rime  that  falls  at  break  ot  dav, 
His  locks  like  wool  and  his  color  wan. 
The  helmsman  turned  his  brow  to  the  sky, 
Upraised  his  cowl,   and  upraised  his  eye, 
And  away  shot  the  barque  on  the  wings  of  the  wind 
O'er  billow  and   bay.    like  an   image  of  mind." 

Before  he  died,  he  gave  permission  that  his  corpse 
might  be  brought  to  Lindisfarne,  on  condition  that  the 
monks  never  deserted  it.  In  80S  came  the  great  incursion 
of  the  Danes,  before  which  the  Bishop  (Eardulph)  and 
monks  fled  over  the  Kyloe  Hills  with  the  body  of  St. 
Cuthbert,  relics  of  St.  Aidan,  and  other  valuables.  When 
they  looked  behind  them,  they  saw  their  wooden  church 
in  flames,  and  they  dropped  their  splendid  Book  of  the 
Gospels  into  the  sea.  Two  hundred  and  forty-one  years 
had  gone  since  Aidan  came,  and  once  more  Lindisfarne 
was  given  up  to  tk  the  sad  sea  waves."  During  more 
than  a  centurv  of  troublous  times  thev  stayed  at  Chester- 
le-Street,  where  perhaps  the  Saxon  version  was  written 
between  the  lines  in  the  Gospels,  recovered  irom  the 
sea.  Then  on  to  Durham,  where  Cuthbert  now  rests. 

The  history  of  famous  Lindisfarne,  however,  does  not 
end  here.  It  was  called  "  Holv  Isle  v  soon  after  the 
Conquest,  and  in  lOH.'J  a  cell  of  Benedictine  monks  came 


-.    i  I'KI.N   i;f»slTT . 
c.      \l-.    i. ITT.    M'.r.ci    h.    iv. 


LINDIsFARXE  COSPF.T.S,  OR   DURHAM   BOOK      171 


and  took  possession  of  the  ruins.  In  lU(J3  they  began 
the  beautifully  proportioned  stone  monastery,  amid  the 
ruins  of  which  the  tourist  now  wanders.  The  work  was 
not  slow,  as  in  those  days  "  labour  was  praise,  and  labour 
was  prayer  :  so  thought  the  masons  as  they  fashioned 
the  stones,  and  the  labourers  as  they  shouldered  them. 
and  carried  them  to  their  appointed  places."  So  all  was 
finished  some  time  between  111"  and  I  I  L'U.  In  !">.%  the 
smaller  monasteries  were  dissolved,  and  this  one  amongst 
them,  being  used  for  secular  purposes  until  IU1U.  Tin- 
spirit  of , St.  (.'tithbeit  still  seemed  to  hover  around,  however, 
for  when  a  new  claimant  appeared,  his  spoliations  were 
promptly  judged.  This  was  the  Marl  of  Dunbar,  Lord 
Warden  <>i  the  .Marches.  IJy  an  art  of  usurpation,  he 
came  and  stripped  nlY  the  lead  from  the  roof,  and  carried 
away  the  bells  and  everything  valuable  14)011  which  he 
could  lay  hands.  The  ship,  however,  with  many  persons 
therein,  was  sunk  soon  after  leaving  the  land,  and  all  were 
drowned  except  one  or  two.  The  castle  was  built  a  tew 
years  alter  the  monastery  was  dissolved. 

This  beautiful  "(iospel  Book  remained  at  Lmdisiarne 
from  lu'.i.'i  till  the  time  of  Henry  vin.,  when  it  came  into 
the  hand-  <il  Sir  K.  Cotton.  It,  was  printed  by  K.  W . 
Bouterwek  in  |s">7.  who  turns  a  gloss  into  a  translation. 
It  was  also  edited  for  the  Surtees  Society  by  Stevenson 
and  \Variii'_r,  and  the  student  should  not  fail  to  turn  over 
the  facsimiles  of  miniatures  and  ornaments  of  Anglo- 
Saxon  and  Irish  manuscripts  published  by  \\estwood.* 

Let  us  dose  with  the  Lord's  I'raver.  as  given  in  this 
famous  and  beautiful  old  manusermt  : 


"  Fader   men    l  liu    in    Heolnas 
Sie  gehalgud    N.un.i    tliin. 
To  Cynieth    nc   thin  : 

Sie     ll'll.,     thill     Mlae     is     ill      llenl'lll-     Ull'l     ill      IvHth/l. 

Hlitf   iiM-rne  ofcnvirtlie   .-el   n>   to  duetj  ; 

And    forget    us  seylthu    nrna    su.ie   ue   forgofon    scylguin    nitiin. 

And    iii-    inleud    \\ntli    in    (  'd-niniLje. 

Al   L'ctn^uneh    In, in   evil." 

*  'I!.--  <;<^|..-|  el  Si.    M.itlliru    in   tins  vrr-ion  and    in  (io 
L'txK-x  Ar-cnten-,  wi-n    ul.-u  |.nlili-,ln-.|  ,n   |S(t7  l,\    l!ev.  Samu 


CHAPTER  XII 

THE    RUSHWORTH    GLOSS,    AND    OTHER    ANGLO-SAXON 
GOSPELS 

"  The  dim -discovered  world  where  lived  our  fathers." 

A  SOMEWHAT  similar  translation  of  the  Gospels  to  the 
Durham  Book,  belonging  to  about  the  same  period,  was 
executed  by  Owun  and  Farmen,  of  Harewood,  in  York 
shire,  nothing  more  being  known  about  them  than  that 
Farmen  was  a  priest.  This  is  commonly  called  the  "  Rush- 
worth  Gloss/'  because  it  was  for  a  long  time  the  property 
of  John  Rushworth,  Esq..  of  Lincoln's  Inn.  as  the  Mazarin 
Bible  has  been  called  after  the  Cardinal  of  that  name, 
in  whose  library  it  was  found,  instead  of  after  Gutenberg, 
whose  printing  of  it  was  a  real  achievement. 

The  MS.  consists  of  100  leaves  of  thick  vellum,  H'  by  IDA'. 
The  transcriber  of  the  MS.,  by  name  Macregol,  takes 
the  credit  of  his  work  in  a  little  Latin  sentence,  from 
which  we  learn  two  things  :  first,  that  such  vernacular 
translations  were  under  no  sort  of  ban  ;  and  second, 
that  the  transcriber  considered  that  in  multiplying  copies 
lie  was  doing  a  deed  which  might  fairly  claim  the  prayers 
of  those  that  handled  them. 

Wanley  supposes  it  to  have  belonged  to  Bede,  whilst 
the  Irish  Annals  of  A.D.  S20  record  the  death  of  a 
scribe  nanied  Mackia^oil.  an  abbot  at  Birr,  in  Queen's 
County. 

Harewood  is  on  the  Wharfe,  a  few  miles  iroin  Leeds, 
and  thus  the  gloss  is  Northern  English,  or  Yorkshire. 
Mr.  Skeat  says  it  belongs  to  the  latter  half  of  the  tenth 


Kt'SHWOKTI!   ('.LOSS,   AND  OTI1KK  OOSPLLS     17; 

century,  and  that  it  was  derived  directly  from  the  Lindis- 
farno  Uospels.  At  least,  there  is  a  distinction  and  a  differ 
ence.  St.  Matthew  being  in  Old  Mercian,  a  dialect  of  groat 
rarity,  whilst  the  other  three  are  in  the  Northern  dialect. 
It  is  an  independent  translation,  however,  Farnien  and 
Owun  frequently  exorcising  their  own  judgment.  It  is 
perhaps  correct  to  say  that,  whereas  the  gloss  in  the 


ntol  maml,  tcc-  mttro 


. 
piVrre  htf  fftfof.  JohanT?ja  fttf.cn  w 


KNdLISH   r.osi'Kis   or   THE   TENTH    <  KNTUI'.V. 
nri'-EM    K.USIMM.K    OK    A     r<H:TI"N    OF     \    l'AC;E. 

Lindisfarne  (lospels  depends  upon  the  Latin  text  of  that 
MS.  only,  the  ^loss  in  the  Hushworth  MS.  depends  upon 
the  Latin  texts  in  both.  Farnien  the  presbyter  was  a 
Midland  man.  and  Owun  belonged  to  the  Xortli.  Farmen 
probably  began  a  translation  of  St.  Matthew,  and  then 
got  the  use  of  the  Lindisfarne  (Jospels.  slavishly  following 
them  till  he  got  tired,  when  he  turned  it  over  to  Owun. 


i74  OUR  OWN   ENGLISH    I5IBLK 

Thus  the  marginal  notes  of  the  one  are  reproduced  in  the 
other.     This  is  the  inscription  :  - 

"  Let  him  that  makes  use  of  UK'  pray  for  Owun,  who  glossed 
this  book,  for  Foerman  the  priest  at  Han-wood. 

"Have  now  a  written  book; 
Tsc  it  with  good  will 
Ever  with  true  faith  ; 
Peace  is  dearest   to  every  man." 

The  MS.  is  now  in  the  Bodleian  Library  at  Oxford 
(3946),  and  Dr.  Waagan  says  of  it  that  the  pictures,  of 
which  there  are  many,  are  of  secondary  merit,  and  belong 
probably  to  the  eighth  century,  showing  a  decided  imitation 
of  Irish  art.  The  colours  are  in  golden  yellow,  vermilion, 
black,  and  the  transparent  crimson  peculiar  to  English 
and  Irish  monasteries.  The  drawings,  however,  are  very 
poor,  but  the  opening  words  of  each  Gospel  form  an 
elaborate  page  of  ornamental  work  in  the  usual  style  of 
Irish  art.  Mark,  Luke,  and  John  have  also  portraits, 
the  colours  being  red,  yellow,  purple,  and  green. 

Mr.  Rushworth,  whose  name  is  attached  to  this  early 
Book  of  the  Gospels,  was  Deputy-Clerk  to  the  House  of 
Commons  during  the  Long  Parliament. 

When  the  text  of  this  version  differs  from  the  Textus 
Receptus,  it  agrees  with  that  of  the  Codex  Bez;e.  The 
Surtees  Society  has  published  the  Rushworth  Gloss, 
under  the  editorship  of  the  Rev.  Jos.  Stevenson,  M.A., 
and  G.  Waring,  M.A. 

The  following  are  the  other  principal  Anglo-Saxon 
Gospels,  as  far  as  known  : — 

L.  The  MS.  in  Corpus  Christ i  Library,  Cambridge  (MO), 
said  to  be  copied  from  an  older  one  before  the  Conquest. 
Perhaps  WO  1030;  Mr.  Skcat  says  before  ,\.n.  1000. 
Several  manuscripts  mention  an  Abbot  of  Bath,  who 
died  1087.  At  the  end  of  St.  Matthew  we  read:  "1 
Klfric  wrote  this  book  in  the  monastery  of  Rath,  and 
gave  it  to  Britwold  the  Prior." 

Perhaps  this  was  the  Britwold  who  was  Bishop  of 
Sherborne  1006-46. 


RUSHWORTIl   CLOSS.   AND  OTIIKR   C.OSPKLS     175 

2.  The  small  folio  in  the  University  Library  at  Cambridge 
(li.  lM  1).     This  is  written  in  West  Saxon,  has  the  rubrics 
complete,  and  was  probably  written  about  the  time  of  the 
Norman     Conquest.     There     are     lO'J     pages     of    vellum, 
and   some   other   books   are    bound    up   with    the   Gospels. 
It  once  belonged  to  Bishop  Leofric.  and  was  given  by  him 
to   St.   Peter's,   Exeter.     In    15(K>   it  was   given    to   Arch 
bishop  Parker,  who  presented  it  to  the  great  Cambridge 
Library  in  1574,  his  bold,  clear  handwriting  being  on  the 
first  page — "  Mattha-us  Cantuor,  1.r>74." 

Leofric  was  Bishop  of  Devonshire  and  Cornwall  lo-MJ-73. 

The  Gospels  are  divided  into  paragraphs,  denoted  by 
large  plain  capital  letters  of  different  colours,  the  green  and 
light  blue  being  as  bright  as  if  just  done.  This  is  tin- 
only  copy  preserved  with  the  rubrics  complete. 

Here  is  the  commencement  of  St.  Matthew :  "  After 
Matheus  gerecednesse  her  is  encorisse  hoc  Hoelend's 
Cristes  Davides  suna,  Abrahame's  suna." 

It  is  imperfect  at  the  end,  and  the  last  words  are: 
kiGif  pa  ealle  awrytene  woeron  ic  were  ne  myhte  pes 
myddaneard  ealle  pa  bee  befon.  Amen.'1 

Mr.  Thorpe  collated  this  MS.  for  his  edition  of  the 
Anglo-Saxon  Gospels,  published  in  1842. 

The  volume  contains  the  pseudo-Gospel  of  Nicodemus, 
Gesta  Salvatoris  nostri,  and  another  work. 

3.  Tin-  Cotton  MS.  (Otho  C.  1). 

This  is  a  once;  fine  MS.  written  on  vellum  before  the 
Norman  Conquest,  and  is  in  the  British  Museum  Library. 
Wanley  described  it  in  1704,  as  he  did  all  the  Anglo-Saxon 
MSS..  in  one  mighty  and  almost  inaccessible  volume.  As 
most  of  the  collection  made  by  Archbishop  Parker  and 
his  scribe  Jocelin  went  to  Corpus  Christi,  Cambridge, 
so  Sir  R.  Cotton's  went  to  the  great  Museum  Library, 
and  this  portion  is  commonly  called  the  Cotton  Library. 
On  October  23,  1731.  a  fire  broke  out.  and  destroyed  wholly 
or  partially  a  large  number  of  volumes,  and  this  one 
amongst  them.  Through  the  skill  of  Sir  Frederick  Madden, 
however,  the  mischief  was  largely  repaired.  He  carefully 


176  OUR  OWN   ENGLISH    r.IIILK 

mounted  it,  sheet  by  sheet,  on  thick  folio  paper,  eut  away 
in  the  middle  to  fit  the  injured  vellum,  and  made  fast  l>y 
transparent  paper. 

Planta  said  the  binding  was  impossible,  but  it  is  done, 
and  the  MS.  is  legible  once  more.  There  are  no  rubrical 
directions,  and  only  a  few  badly  formed  capital  letters  of  a 
dingy  red  colour.  The  accents  are  neither  numerous  nor 
carefully  applied.  Between  St.  Luke  and  St.  -John  is  a 
charter  relating  to  Aldhelm.  The  MS.  is  of  about  the 
same  age  as  the  Corpus  Christi  MS.,  but  the  first  folio  now 
is  number  26. 

4.  Hatton  MS.  This  is  in  the  Bodleian  Library  (3S). 
and  probably  belongs  to  the  time  of  Henry  n..  being  thus 
Anglo-Saxon  in  its  latest  form.  It  is  uniformly  and 
beautifully  written,  but  the  accents  are  few  and  capriciously 
applied.  It  is  a  large  vellum  octavo,  and  the  Gospels 
are  arranged  in  this  order  :  Mark.  Luke.  Matthew.  John. 
It  belonged  to  the  Rev.. John  Parker,  son  of  the  Archbishop, 
who  neatly  wrote  and  inserted  a  missing  leaf.  Luke  lb'. 
There  is  only  one  rubric  in  Anglo-Saxon,  at  the  beginning 
of  John  :  "  Her  onginth  dhoet  god  spell  dlie  Johannes  se 
Godspellere  gewrat  on  Pathmos  dham  eiirlande." 

f).  Royal  MS.,  in  British  Museum. 

(I.  A.  I  1.)  This  is  very  similar  to  tin-  Hatton  MS., 
but  somewhat  smaller.  The  writing  is  a  little  earlier,  and 
less  regular.  The  rubrics  are  few,  and  of  a  brighter  red 
than  the  Hatton,  the  words  of  the  one  to  St.  -John  being 
exactly  the  same.  In  fact,  it  was  probably  copied  from 
the  Hatton  MS.  by  someone  with  plenty  of  leisure.  It  is 
octavo,  was  formerly  in  St.  Augustine's  Monastery,  at 
Canterbury,  and  afterwards  came  into  the  possession  of 
Archbishop  Cranmer.  Probably  it  belongs  to  Stephen's 
time. 

The  order  of  the  Gospels  seems  to  have  been  a  matter 
of  taste.  This  is  the  order  here  :  Mark.  Matthew,  Luke, 
John.  St.  Mark  begins  :  "  Her  ys  Godspelles  angin, 
Halendes  Cristes  Godes  sunc.  swa  awriten  is  on  thas 


RUSHWORTH   C.I.OSS,  AND  OTIIKK  C.OSI'KLS     177 

witetran  bee  Isaiah."  St.  Matthew  begins:  "  Sodhlice 
\vd  is  to  umlorstaiulcn  that  after  Matheus  gcrccednyssc 
her  his  oncncornysse  hoc  Hoelendcs  Cristes  Davides 
siuia/'  St.  Luke  begins:  "  Nu  we  willadh  her  eow  areccen 
Jjiicos  l)oc  dhaes  halgen  Godspellers. 

••  Fordham  dhe  wytodlice  manega  tliolite  thare  thinge 
wace  ge  endebyrden  dhe  on  us  gefylde  sint,  swa  us  betahten 
tha  the  hit  of  frimdhe  gesawon  and  dhare  sproece  tlie 
nas  woeron."  * 

(i.  The  Oxford  MS.,  in  the  Bodleian  Library  (HI). 
This  is  a  small  folio  written  before  the  Norman  Conquest, 
in  fine,  bold,  Anglo-Saxon  characters.  The  rubrics  have 
been  added  somewhat  later,  and  some  of  the  vowels  are 
accented.  It  is  closely  allied  with  the  best  MSS.,  though 
some  of  the  leaves  are  on  new  parchment  and  of  later 
date. 

This  was  the  basis  of  the  version,  from  an  Ante-Hiero- 
nvmian  Latin  text,  which,  at  the  suggestion  of  Archbishop 
Parker,  was  printed  under  the  care  of  .John  Koxe,  the 
martyrologist.  It  was  more  than  at  the  suggestion  of 
the  great  Protestant  Archbishop,  lor  he  bore  the  expense, 
and  it  was  fitting  that  this  copy  of  the  (Jospels  should 
be  the  first  Anglo-Saxon  book  printed  in  England,  its 
date  being  l.~>71.  The  Anglo-Saxon  Version  is  accom 
panied  bv  the  Bishop's,  occasionally  adapted  to  the 
earlier  text.  It  was  reprinted  bv  .lunius  the  younger 
and  Marshall  in  HJ.'JS  ;  and  by  the  same  editors  in  a  more 
correct  form,  with  the  (lothic  in  parallel  columns,  at 
Dordrecht  in  H ',<;."),  and  at  Amsterdam  in  HJSJ.  Dr. 
Marshall  was  Rector  of  Lincoln  College,  Oxford,  lie  being 
responsible  for  the  Saxon,  and  Francis  Junius  for  the 
Gothic. 

To  these  must  be  added  the  Lindisfarne  and  Rushworth 
Gospels,  already  described.  \Ye  are  afraid  most  of  our 
readers  are  nodding  over  these  "dry  details,"  but.  at 
at  all  risks,  we  must  go  a  little  farther,  and  summarise 

*  Moinln-rt. 


178  OUR  OWN  KNC.LISH    P,IBLI<: 

Mr.  Skeat's  findings  on  the  whole  subject.  Rev.  \V.  \V. 
Skeat,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Anglo-Saxon  at  Cambridge, 
tells  us  that  he  has  been  engaged  for  half  a  century  on 
this  work,  so  that  we  are  probably  safe  in  accepting  his 
conclusions.  In  1878  he  published  the  Gospels  in  the 
Anglo-Saxon  and  Northumbrian  Versions.  He  reiterates 
his  opinion  that  there  never  was  but  one  Anglo-Saxon 
version  ;  that  the  copies  of  it  were  never  numerous  ; 
and  that  there  is  little  to  show  that  many  copies  have 
been  lost.  Those  left  to  us  are  intimately  connected 
with  each  other,  though  written  at  different  places — one 
at  Bath,  and  another  apparently  at  Canterbury,  the 
opposite  sides  of  the  kingdom.  He  has  now  published  all 
four  Gospels  in  one  volume,  calling  it— 

•''  The  Holy  Gospels  in  Anglo-Saxon,  Northumbrian,  and 
Old  Mercian  Versions  synoptically  arranged,  together 
with  the  early  Latin  Version,  as  contained  in  the  Lindis- 
farne  MS.  collated  with  the  Latin  Version  in  the  Rush- 
worth  MS." 

In  his  Preface  to  St.  Luke,  Mr.  Skeat  adduces  further 
proof  that  the  following  can  be  depended  upon  : — The 
Cotton  MS.  is  an  absolute  duplicate  of  the  Bod  ley  MS., 
whilst  both  agree  so  closely  with  the  Corpus  MS.  that  all 
three  must  be  mere  copies  from  one  not  now  forthcoming. 
The  Cambridge  MS.  is  also  practically  the  same,  and 
there  were  probably  never  any  others,  these  all  belonging 
to  the  tenth  century.  These  remarks  apply  to  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  or  Wessex  MSS.,  the  Northumbrian  glosses  being 
altogether  distinct  from  and  independent  of  them,  though 
not  independent  of  each  other. 

Mr.  Skeat's  work  was  commenced  by  Mr.  Kemble,  son 
of  the  actor,  who,  however,  only  executed  a  small  portion 
of  it.  The  utmost  care  and  discrimination  are  exercised 
in  this  large  and  important  publication,  and  all  who 
desire  to  enter  into  the  minute  details  of  our  earliest 
Bible-work  must  not  fail  to  sit  at  the  feet  of  these  last 
and  safest  guides.  The.  volume  is  both  beautiful  and 
arranged  in  the  most  instructive  way.  On  one  page  is 
shown  the  Anglo-Saxon  and  Northumbrian  versions — 


Rl'SIIWOKTH    ('.LOSS,    AND  OTIIKK   C.OSPKLS      179 

that  is,  the  Kushworth  and  Durham  Books,  together 
with  the  Anglo-Saxon  .MS.  in  Corpus  Christi  Library, 
Cambridge,  and  the  Mutton  .MS.  from  the  Bodleian  Library, 
Oxford,  with  various  readings  from  the  other  MSS. 

Mr.  Kemble's  work  was  on  St.  Matthew  only,  though 
it  was  published  on  much  the  same  lines  as  Mr.  Skeat's. 
Whether  the  original  can  or  not,  .Mr.  Skeat  thinks  that 
most  of  these  extant  .MSS.  may  be  referred  to  the  tenth 
eenturv,  and  his  conclusions  mav  be  summarised  thus: — 

(  hiL'inal  .MS.  (now  lost). 


IJ.rtllry    .MS. 

(441). 


Mnttim  .MS. 

\\V  have  already  referred  to  the  printed  edition  of  the 
(lospels  published  by  Mr.  B.  Thorpe,  KS.A..  in  1S1:>. 
Me  based  his  text  on  the  MS.  in  the  Cambridge  Cniversitv 
Librarv,  consulting  also  the  Corpus  MS.,  the  Bodleian, 
and  the  Cottonian.  This  was  reprinted  in  New  York 
bv  Dr.  Klipstein  in  1S.~>1,  showing  that  the  New  World 
was  becoming  interested  in  such  studies  of  our  earliest 
literature.  In  his  Preface.  Mr.  Thorpe  calls  Archbishop 
Parker  the  preserver  oi  our  Saxon  MSS.  and  restorer  of 
Saxon  learning. 

Special  attention,  however,  must  be  given  to  the  splendid 
publication  of  Bnsworth  and  Waring  in  ISC").  This  contains 
the  (lot  hie  ( Jos  pi  -Is  of  I  'I  phi  las,  t  lie  Anglo-Saxon,  Wvclille's, 
and  Tyndale's.  The  (lot  hie  and  Anglo-Saxon  are  closelv 
allied,  both  being  of  Low  (lerman  origin,  according  to 
Maxmuller,  and  such  a  volume  is  extreme! v  interesting 
to  the  Knglishman. 

The  version  of  Clphilas  dates  back  to  the  fourth  eenturv, 
when  he  was  Bishop  amongst  the  Dacians.  The  Heathen 
Goths  settl.-d  iM  Dacia.  on  the  north-west  of  the  Black- 
Sea,  and  whilst  resident  there  thev  became  Christians. 


i  So  OUR   OWN   KNGLISH    JJI15LK 

Before  the  Ecumenical  Council  of  Nice  (:>^.">)  tlicy  had 
become  so  numerous  as  to  have  their  own  bishops,  and 
Ulphilas  was  the  most  celebrated  of  them.  It  became, 
indeed,  a  proverb  amongst  the  Goths :  "  Whatever  is 
done  by  Ulphilas  is  well  done."  He  discharged  his  epis 
copal  duties  for  forty  years,  and  died  at  Constantinople. 
Well  may  the  Preface  to  this  noble  volume  exclaim  : 
"  What  vigour  and  decision  of  mind,  when  Greek  and 
Latin  were  the  only  languages  employed  for  literary 
purposes  !  "  His  version  is  the  Codex  Argenteus,  or  the 
Silvery  Book,  the  letters  appearing  to  be  silver,  and  it 
is  now  in  the  Royal  Library  of  Upsala.  Here  is  a  com 
parison  of  the  three  texts  : — 

GOTHIC.         ANGLO-SAXON.       ENCLISH. 

]k  iin  thata  claur.  Ic  coin  goat.  I  am  the  door. 

Kaurno  whaiteis.  Huoetcnc  corn.  A  corn  of  wheat . 

Wheitos  swe  snaiws.         Swa  Invite  sua  snaw.  White  as  snow. 

A  second  edition  was  published  in  1X7-1- . 

Archbishop  Parker  was  assisted  by  his  "  learned  scribe," 
Jocelin,  and  the  splendid  collection  of  MSS.  collected  by 
him  and  bequeathed  to  Corpus  Christi  College  is  preserved 
according  to  his  exact  and  exacting  instructions.  He 
evidently  felt  that,  however  neglected  in  the  past,  such 
stores  would  have  a  high  value  in  the  future ;  and  their 
worth  to-day,  when  all  things  relating  to  the  origin  and 
beginnings  of  the  English  people  are  at  a  premium,  is 
incalculable. 

Of  course,  however,  throughout  all  this  period  the 
Latin  Version  completely  ruled  the  day.  These  Saxon 
glosses  were  curiosities  then,  as  they  are  curiosities  now. 
With  Augustine  came  two  copies  of  the  Gospels,  of  the 
same  size,  and  written  in  the  same  Roman  uncials.  One 
of  these  is  now  in  Corpus  Christi  Library,  and  the  other 
in  the  Bodleian.  From  the  Oxford  one  a  great  many 
copies  were  taken.  The  rubrics  direct  that  certain  por 
tions  of  Scripture  shall  be  read  at  particular  seasons.  When 
Kthelbert  made  his  laws,  thev  were  based,  no  doubt,  on 


RUSIIU'ORTH    CI.OSS,   AND  OTIIKR   C.OSl'KLS      iSi 

tliis  known  Scripture  teaching;  and  Alfred,  as  we  have 
seen,  placed  the  Commandments  at  the  head  of  his,  incor 
porating  also  many  passages  from  the  (Jospels. 

To  recur  to  the  subject  touched  on  before,  and  which 
it  is  important  to  observe,  it  is  beyond  doubt  that  the 
reading  and  writing  out  of  the  Scriptures  was  encouraged 
by  our  fathers  in  the  Saxon  Church.  Fn  their  Homilies, 
for  instance,  we  lind  the  following  :  ''  The  reading  of 
the  llolv  Scriptures  purges  the  soul  of  the  reader.  It 
brings  to  mind  the  fear  of  eternal  punishment  ;  it  lifts 
up  his  heart  to  things  above.  Whosoever  would  be 
together  with  (Jod,  he  ought  to  prav  often,  and  often  to 
read  the  Holy  Scriptures." 

Very  simple  directions  and  encouragements,  but  observ 
able  when  we  remember  what  a  very  different  language 
was  afterwards  held  on  the  subject,  and  how,  in  the  home 
of  freedom,  it  came  to  be  a  capital  offence  to  be  found 
even  possessing  a  single  (lospel  that  could  be  intelligently 
read.  Fuller  tells  us.  indeed,  of  one  Ricemarch,  a  Briton, 
son  of  Sulgen.  Bishop  of  St.  David's,  who  made  this  epigram 
on  those  who  translated  the,  Psalter  out  of  the  (Jreek,  so 
taking  it  second-hand  :  - 

"This   liarp   tin-  holy    Hebrew   text   doth   tender, 

\Vhieh,    to   their   power,    whilst    everyone   doth    render. 

In    Latin   tongue   with   inanv   variations 

He  clouds   the    Hebrew   rays   with   his   translations. 

Thus   liquors   when   twice  shifted   out    and   poured 

In   a    third    vessel,    are    both   cooled   and   soured; 

lint   holv  .Jerome   truth    to   lis/lit    doth    bring 

r.ri.-f.-r  and   fuller,   fetched    from   the    Hebrew   Spring." 

Rev.  II.  C.  Leonard,  M.A..  has  published  a  irans- 
of  the  Anglo-Saxon  version  of  St.  Mark,  which 
will  enable  us  to  read  a  chapter  as  our  forefathers  conceived 
it.*  The  text  followed  is  that  of  Professor  Bosworth, 
mainly  based  upon  the  MS.  in  Corpus  Christi  Library, 
Cambridge.  Mr.  Leonard  says  that  Anglo-Saxon  is  more 
correctly  "the  West  Saxon  dialect  of  Old  Knglish/'  and 
he  has  produced  a  decidedly  successful  modern  rendering. 

*  J.  (lark.    &  Co,  issl. 


182  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   WI'.LE 

Here  is  the  last  chapter,  which  we  give  the  whole  of,  it 
being  the  shortest  : — 

"  And  when  Saturn's  day  was  gone,  the  Magdalenish 
Maria  and  Jacobus's  Maria  and  Salome  brought  spice 
mixture  that  they  might  come  and  smear  him.  And 
very  early  on  rest  day  they  came  to  the  burying  place, 
the  sun  having  sprung  up.  And  they  said  between  them, 
Who  will  roll  us  the  stone  from  the  burying  place's  door  ? 
When  they  saw  it  they  saw  the  stone  rolled  away  ;  trulv 
it  was  very  great.  And  when  they  went  into  the  burying 
place  they  saw  a  young  man  sitting  on  the  right  side, 
covered  over  with  a  white  garment,  and  then  they  feared. 
Then  saith  he  to  them,  Fear  ye  not,  ye  seek  the  Nazarene 
Saviour,  hanged  ;  he  arose,  he  is  not  here  ;  here  is  the 
place  where  they  laid  him.  But  go  forth  and  say  to 
his  learning-knights  and  to  Petrus,  that  lie  goeth  before 
you  into  (Jalilee  ;  there  ye  shall  see  him  as  he  said  to 
you.  And  they  went  out  and  lied  from  the  burying  place, 
and  were  afraid  at  the  sight  that  they  saw,  and  they 
said  nought  to  no  man,  truly  they  dreaded. 

"  When  he  arose  in  the  early  morning  on  rest  day, 
first  he  showed  himself  to  the  Magdalenish  Maria  out  of 
whom  he  drove  out  seven  devil  sicknesses,  and  she  then 
went  out  and  told  it  to  them  that  were  with  him  mourning 
and  weeping.  When  they  heard  that  he  lived  and  that 
she  had  seen  him,  then  they  believed  her  not.  After 
that  he  was  shown  to  two  of  them  in  another  form  as 
they  went  into  the  field,  and  they  went  and  told  it  to 
the  others,  and  they  believed  them  not.  Then  next  he 
showed  himself  to  the  II,  where  they  sat  together, 
and  blamed  their  unbelief  and  their  heart  hardness,  for 
that  they  believed  not  them  that  had  seen  him  risen 
from  death. 

"And  He  said  to  them  :—  (Jo  into  the  middle  earth  and 
preach  the  good  news  to  every  creature.  Jle  that  believeth 
and  is  washed,  he  shall  be  safe  ;  truly  he  that  believeth 
not,  he  shall  be  condemned.  These  tokens  shall  follow 
them  that  believe  ;  in  Mv  name  they  shall  drive  out  devil 
sicknesses;  they  shall  speak  with  new  tongues;  they 


RUSHWORTH   CLOSS,  AND  OTIIKK  OOSl'KLS     iS3 

shall  do  away  with  serpents  ;  and  it  shall  not  hurt  them 
if  thcv  diink  what  is  death  hearing;  on  the  sick  they 
shall  set  thi-ir  hands  and  they  shall  be  hale. 

"  And  truly  tlie  Lord  the  Saviour  after  that  lie  spake 
to  them  He  was  taken  up  into  the  Heavens,  and  He  sitteth 
on  (Jod's  riglit  side.  Trulv  then,  they,  having  gone  forth, 
preached  everywhere,  the  Lord  working  with  them,  and 
confirming  the  Word  with  after  following  tokens." 

Mr.  Leonard  emphasises  the  value  of  the  Anglo-Saxon 
Version  as  being  made  from  the  Vetus  Italica  of  the  second 
centurv.  a  long  time  before  .Jerome's  Vulgate  ;  and  of  its 
being  a  real  translation,  and  not  a  transference  of  words, 
often  lull  of  idiomatic  energy. 


CHAPTER   XT  IT 

THE    ANGLO-SAXON    rSALTKKS 

"  The  liistory  of  our  childhood,  the  explanation  of  our  manhood." 

J.  M.  KE.MHLK,  M.A. 

WHILST  the  New  Testament  thus  chiefly  engaged  the 
attention  of  our  early  translators,  there  are  several  Psalters 
also  to  which  we  must  now  give  our  attention. 

A  noteworthy  illustration  of  the  power  of  the  Gospel 
is  found  in  Guthlac,  to  whom  we  perhaps  owe  one  of 
these.  He  was  born  in  (574,  and  was  known  as  the  hermit 
of  Crowland.  Belonging  to  a  noble  family,  he  soon  dis 
tinguished  himself  in  war  at  the  head  of  his  band,  but 
in  his  twenty-fourth  year  he  underwent  a  sudden  con 
version,  lasting  in  its  effects.  He  gave  up  military  pursuits 
and  all  that  had  been  connected  with  his  early  wild  life, 
repaired  to  a  monastery,  and  soon  afterwards  crossed 
over  to  Crowland.  then  a  desolate  island  in  the  midst  of 
the  swamps  off  the  extreme  south  coast  of  Lincolnshire. 
The  reputation  which  he  came  to  have  for  piety  led  to 
the  heaping  up  of  monkish  tales,  and  the  description  of 
what  poor  Guthlac  endured  from  evil  spirits  during  his 
novitiate  as  a  hermit  is  perhaps  scarcely  equalled  in 
literature.  It  was  Tatwin  that  guided  him  there,  in  a 
fisher's  boat,  telling  him  that  no  one  had  ever  been  able 
to  live  in  the  island.  Here  is  the  description  of  what 
happened  when  Guthlac  braved  it  out:- -"Not  long 
after,  St.  Guthlac  being  awoke  in  the  night-time,  betwixt 
his  hours  of  prayer,  as  he  was  accustomed,  of  a  sudden 
he  discerned  his  cell  to  be  lull  of  black  troops  of  unclean 


THF,  AXOI.O  SAXON   PSAT/IT.RS  187 

spirits,  whirl)  crept  in  under  the  door,  as  also  at  chinks 
and  holes,  and  coining  in  both  out  of  the  skv  and  from 
the  earth,  filled  the  air  as  it  \vere  with  dark  clouds.  In 
their  looks  they  were  cruel  and  of  form  terrible,  having 
great  heads,  hum  neck's,  lean  faces,  pale  countenances, 
ill-favoured  beards,  rough  ears,  wrinkled  foreheads,  fierce 
eves,  stinking  mouths,  teeth  like  horses,  spitting  lire 
out  of  their  throats,  crooked  jaws,  broad  lips,  loud 
voices,  burnt  hair,  great  cheek's,  high  breasts,  rugged 
thighs,  bundled  knees,  bended  legs,  swollen  ancles,  pre 
posterous  feet,  open  mouths,  and  hoarse  cries;  who  with 
such  mighty  shriek's  were  heard  to  roar  that  they  filled 
almost  the  whole  distance  from  I  leaven  with  their  bellowing 
muses,  and  by  and  bve  rushing  into  the  house,  first  bound 
the  holv  man;  then  drew  him  out  of  his  cell  and  cast  him 
over  head  and  ears  into  the  dirfv  fen;  and  having  so 
done,  carried  him  through  the  most  rough  and  troublesome 
parts  thereof,  drawing  him  amongst  brambles  and  briers 
for  the  tearing  of  his  limbs/'  * 

Here  is  the  piling  up  of  the  agony,  with  a  vengeance. 
Luther's  ima<_rmarv  encounter  with  Satan  at  the  \Vartburg, 
when  he  threw  the  inkstand  at  him.  Dunstan's  at  (ilaston- 
burv.  when  he  applied  tin;  red-hot  tongs  to  his  nose,  sink 
into  insignificance.  However,  he  continued  to  live  on 
as  a  hermit,  and  his  fame  for  piety  and  wisdom  attracted 
manv  to  Ins  marshv  swamp.  Amongst  them  were  "  nobles. 
bishops,  abbots,  and  rich  people,"  so  that  we  must  believe 
that  the  familv  to  which  he  be'onj^ed  had  something  to 
do  wit  h  his  popula rit  v. 

He  wa<  ordained  a 'priest  by  lledda.  Bishop  of  Lichfield, 
but  slaved  where  he  w.is ;  and  though  often  plagued  bv 
temptations  and  visions,  he  found  distraction  in  the 
cultivation  of  the  soil  and  the  giving  of  spiritual  counsel. 
One  dav  lie  said  to  a  visitor:  "Whoever  hath  led  his 
life  after  (lod's  will,  the  wild  beasts  and  wild  birds  have 
bee  line  more  intimate  with  him:  and  the  man  who  will 
pass  his  life  apart  from  worldly  men.  to  him  the  angels 
approach  nearer." 

*    (.oiijli.    (|iii>ti-il    111    the    lll.'lory    of   <  'loulali'!    Al.lM-y. 


iSS  OUR  OWN  KNCLIS1I   TUI5LE 

Felix  wrote  his  Life  at  the  request  of  King  Ethelbald, 
who  erected  a  monastery  on  the  site  of  his  cell  and  oratory. 
He  says  that  even  kings  visited  him,  and  speaks  of  his 
church  and  servants,  and  of  there  being  houses  on  the 
island.  Perhaps  this  was  later,  as  his  fame  grew,  for 
his  original  enthusiasm  led  him  to  wear  skins  only,  and 
to  make  his  diet  a  morsel  of  barley  bread  and  some  cups 
of  muddy  water  after  sundown.  His  sister  he  declined 
to  see  until  they  met  in  heaven,  though  she  was  living 
within  a  fewT  miles  of  him.  She  came,  when  he  had  died, 
to  place  his  corpse  in  the  sarcophagus,  as  he  had  requested. 
All  sorts  of  wonderful  miracles  and  cures  are  reported 
of  him.*  Willet  says  a  copy  of  Alfred's  Psalter  was 
found  in  Crowland  Abbey,  called  St.  Guthlac's  Psalter, 
as  "  Master  Lambert  witnesseth."  t  There  are  no  Psalms 
in  the  Exeter  Book,  however,  and  any  of  Guthlac's 
have  vanished  long  ago.  What  is  in  the  Exeter  Book 
is  Felix's  Life  or  Legend,  a  metrical  paraphrase  by  one  of 
the  monks  of  Crowland  Abbey,  called  Felix,  whose  Life 
of  St.  Guthlac  is  printed  in  the  A  eta  tianetonun  Jicne- 
dictonun.  It  is  given  in  very  short  sentences,  and  has 
to  do  with  his  temptations,  conquests  over  sin,  and  death. 
The  latter  part,  containing  the  journey  of  Beccel,  the 
friend  and  companion  of  Guthlac,  to  announce  the  death 
of  the  saint  to  his  sister,  is  expressed  with  great  beauty 
of  diction. 

This  Exeter  Book  is  a  small  but  very  thick  folio, 
containing  a  large  number  of  Anglo-Saxon  writings.  It 
was  written  on  vellum  in  a  fair  and  rather  fine  hand  about 
the  tenth  century,  and  was  published  by  the  Society  of 
Antiquaries  in  1812,  under  the  editorship  of  Mr.  B.  Thorpe, 
F.S.A.  It  contains  a  large  number  of  Saxon  riddles, 
and  a  miscellaneous  collection  of  poetry,  amongst  which 
is  the  inevitable  "harrowing  ol  Hell,"  a  poem  on  the 
panther,  the  departed  soul's  address  to  the  body,  the 

*  St.  (lutliloc,  \\.  de  Cray  Hireh.  ('.  W.  (Joodwin,  M.A..  also 
publish,  (1  St.  (luthlac's  Life  iii  lS4s.  Tin-  description  of  the  horrors 
is  from  the  Veieelli  Hook. 

t  Willet's  Synopsis.  U'il'.et  lived  lf>C>'J  to  Kl'JI.  so  this  represents 
what  \vn-i  current  then. 


'I'll!-:   ANC.LO  SAXON    I'SAI.TKRS  iS<; 

wonders  of  creation,  the  seafarer,  a  father's  instruction 
to  his  sons,  the  endowments  and  pursuits  of  men.  the 
wanderer,  a  leu-Mid  of  St.  .Juliana,  the  Pho-nix.  etc.  etc. 

Rather  an  extensive  ran^e  for  our  supposedly  untutoretl 
ancestors  !  It  was  presented  to  the  library  of  his  ( 'atlu  dral 
by  Leofric.  the  first  Bishop  of  Kxeter. 

\Ve  come  to  solid  ground  when  we  describe  the  volume 
published  bv  the  Surtees  Society  in  IS  1.1.  What  is  the 


\\  i.>  r  VIK\V). 


Surtees  Society  ?  some  of  our  readers  will  ask".  \\C11.  it 
is  a  Society  established  for  the  publication  of  works  which 
belong  to  the  north  of  KiiLiland.  illustrating  the  life  of 
the  period,  and  it  has  done  an  extremely  useful  work', 
and  is  doin^  it  st ill. 

At  a  meetiiiLj  of  the  Council  in  |s|."».  it  was  resolved 
that  the  Lindistarne  Psalter,  and  with  it  the  Karlv  Knylish 
Metrical  Translation  of  the  I'salms,  should  be  printed. 
They  were  edited  by  the  llev.  .) .  Stevenson,  who  savs 


IQO  OUR  OWN  KXCLISII    I5IIJLE 

tliat  tlic  Latin  version  differs  considerably  from  the  Vulgate, 
and  as  originally  written,  differed  much  more,  an  attempt 
having  been  made  to  produce  its  approximation  by  nume 
rous  erasures  and  alterations.  This  Latin  version  formerly 
belonged  to  the  monastery  of  St.  Augustine,  in  Canterbury, 
and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  it  is  one  of  the  books 
sent  by  Gregory  the  Great  to  Augustine  some,  time  after 
his  arrival  here.  The  veritable  book  can  be  w"  handled 
and  seen  "  in  the  British  Museum  Library,  where  it  is 
amongst  its  most  precious  treasures.*  It  corresponds 
with  Thomas  of  Elmham's  description  of  one  of  the  two 
Psalters  said  to  have  been  acquired  from  Augustine. 
The  interlinear  English  gloss  was  written  at  the  end  of 
the  ninth  or  the  beginning  of  the  tenth  century.  It  is 
probably  of  Northumbrian  origin,  since  it  agrees  closely 
with  the  Lindisfarne  and  Rushworth  Gospels,  and  the 
Durham  Ritual. 

The  corresponding  metrical  version  is  printed  from 
three  MSS.,  all  preserved  in  the  British  Museum.  The 
text  adopted  is  that  of  the  Cottonian  MS.,  Yesp.  1).  7, 
which,  upon  the  whole,  was  found  to  be  the  purest  and 
most  correct.  The  MS.  bears  the  name  of  a  former 
possessor,  whose  it  was  before  it  came  into  the  hands  of 
Sir  Robert  Cotton — "Sum  Gulielmi  Charci."  It  belongs 
to  the  reign  of  Edward  n. 

The  various  readings  given  at  the  bottom  of  the  page 
have  been  gathered  partly  from  the  Egerton  MS.  and  partly 
from  the  Harleian  MS.  The  former  is  a  quarto  volume, 
written  upon  vellum,  in  a  hand  little,  if  at  all,  later  than 
the  Cottonian  MS.  it  contains  100  leaves,  each  page 
consisting  of  about  32  lines.  It  formerly  belonged  to 
Gilbert  Barrell,  or  Barrett,  and  subsequently  to  .John 
Fauntleroy,  the  names  being  inscribed  on  the  fly-leaves. 
It  was  purchased  by  the  Trustees  of  the  British  Museum 
in  May  ISIJO,  from  Mr.  Rodd,  the  bookseller. 

The  Harleian  MS.  is  a  folio  volume,  written  upon  vellum 
in  a  bold,  rough  hand,  and  is  apparently  a  little  later. 
It  formerly  belonged  to  the  monastery  of  Kirkham,  in 

*  ('ottoman  .MS..  \Vs|>.  A.   I. 


TIII:  AN<;L<) SAXON*  PSALTKKS  K>I 

Yorkshire,  as  appears  l>v  an  inscription  which  describes 
i;  as  a  "  liber  inonasterii  de  Kirkham."  It  came  into 
the  possession  of  Lord  Oxford,  the  founder  of  the  Harleian 
Library,  from  the  collection  of  Mr.  Noble.  Besides  the 
Kn^lish  version,  it  contains  the  Psalter  in  Latin  and 
French. 

Valuable  help  in  connection  with  this  important  pub 
lication  was  rendered  by  K.  ("Janiett,  of  the  British  Museum 
Library.  \\e  ^ive  examples  ironi  the  1st  Psaim  and 
the  Sth  :  — 

P.S.M.M     I. 

"  I.   Sdi   bern,   that    iiouht    is  «MII 

In   ye   rede  of  wicked   mail  ; 

Aiul   ill   streta  of  sinfullc  nojjit    he  stode, 

lie  sat    in   sctcl  of  storme  un  <_r<>de 
•J.    Hot    ill   la.L'li   of   Laverd   his   \\illc   be  ai 

And   his  la«:!i   think   lie  ni.uht    and  dai 
,'J.   And   als  his  live,   s\va  sal  it    bo 

Als  it    fares   bi  a   tre, 

That    strenies  of  watres  set    in  here. 

That    <_ri\es   his   fruit    in   time  of  vhere  ; 

And    Iff  of  him    to  diwe   me  sal 

What   s\va   he  docs  sal   soiin  Irf'ullr  al 
4.   Xo^lit  sua   wicked   men,   noifht   s\\a, 

I'.ot    als  dustc   that    wind   ycrthe   las   iVa. 
.").   And   tharfore  wike  in  dome  no<_rht    rise, 

\c  sinfullc   in   n-dc  of  riuhtwisc. 
t'».    l-'or    Lavcrd   of  ri^'lit \\isc   \\atc   vc   \\ai, 

And  jjali-  of  \\ickcd    for   worth   sal  ai. 

Hlisse  to  yc   Fad  re  and  to  ve  Sone, 

And   to  ye    Hali   (.'a^te,   wil   with   am   \\ono: 

Als  iirst    was,   es,   and   ai  sal   lie  ; 

Jn   wcildc  of  \\crldcs  to  ye  Thrc." 


"2.    Lauerd,   oiin:    Laiienl,    how   selkoiith    is 
Name  thine   in   alle  land   this 
l''or  upehonen  cs  thi   my   Kelhedo 

(  )uer    heiiens    that    ere    brade 
:\.  Of  mouth  of  ehilder  and  soiikand 
Made   thou    lof  in    ilka   land 
For   thi    faes  ;    that    thou    forde 
Ye   faa.    ve   \\  n-l:er  him    unto."  * 


i92  OUR  OWN   ENOLISII    1UBLE 

The  Palajographical  Society  lias  published  a  splendid 
volume,  containing  the  Latin  Psalter,  with  an  English 
interlinear  gloss.  The  text  is  ornamented  by  finely 
coloured  borders  and  initials,  and  a  few  drawings.  Some 
of  these  are  delicately  drawn  in  outline,  tinted  very  slightly, 
and  with  light  colours.  The  English  text  was  probably 
written  about  the  time  of  Edward  the  Confessor  (lO-U-(iG).* 

In  L8:jr>,  also,  Mr.  1>.  Thorpe,  F.S.A.,  printed  an  English 
Psalter. 

This  has  been  thought  to  be  Aldhelnfs,  though  there 
is  no  sufficient  evidence. 

Here  is  a  specimen  of  it  :  "  Utan  to  brecan  hcora 
benclas  and  aweorpan  heora  geocu  of  us  "-  — "  Let  us  break 
their  bands  asunder,  and  cast  away  their  cords  from 
us." 

Mr.  Mombert  mentions  two  other  prose  versions  of  the 
Psalter, f  with  notes.  The  first  is  in  the  Harleian  Library 
(-).'>  D.  2),  and  the  following  may  serve  as  an  example  : — 

PSALM  IL  1. — "  Qua  re  fremuerunt  gentes — Why  gnastes 
the  gens  and  the  pep'e  thoughte  ydil  thingis  ?  The 
prophete  snybband  hem  that  tormentid  Crist  saies  whit 
the  gens  thoo  were  the  knyttes  of  rome  that  crucified 
Crist,  gnasted  as  bestes  with  oute  resoun  ;  and  the  peple 
thoo  were  the  iewes,  thoughte  vaynte  thoughtes  ;  that 
was  to  holde  Crist  ded  in  sepulchre,  that  thei  might  not 
doo,  forthi  in  veyne  thei  traucilde." 

The  other  MS.  is  an  imperfect  copy  of  a  translation  of 
the  Psalms  from  S(.)  to  I  18  (King's  Library,   I.~il7). 
Here  is  an  example  : — 

tk  PSALM  us  8(.)  (DOth  in  our  version). — Domine  refugium. 
Lord,  Thou  art  made  refuge  to  us  fro  generacioun  to 
generacioun.  Here  the  profete,  after  sliarp  reprouvnge  of 
vicious  men,  was  movid  of  the  hooly  goost  to  ymagin  and 
to  knowe  that  malicious  enmytee  and  feers  ])ursuying  wole 
sue  sone  after.'' 

*  SvrhniHx  <>i  A'"////  Knlixh,   Morris  aiul  Skcat,   IS!)4. 


THE  ANGLO-SAXON  PSALTERS  193 

In  the  Cambridge  Public  Library  is  an  Anglo-Saxon 
Psalter,  the  Saxon  being  written  underneath  the  Latin. 
This  was  given  by  Archbishop  Parker  to  Sir  Nicholas  Bacon, 
and  by  him  to  the  Cambridge  Library.  The  lettering  in 
this  is  large  and  handsome,  and  there  is  some  illumination. 

In  the  library  of  the  Marquis  of  Buckingham,  at  Stowe. 
is  another  of  these  ancient  Psalters,  and  one  of  the  oldest. 
It  is  in  Latin,  with  interlinear  Saxon,  and  tradition  says 
that  the  kings  and  queens  took  their  coronation  oaths 
on  it  previous  to  the  Reformation.  It  is  a  fine  volume, 
and  may  have  been  pressed  by  the  hands  of  Alfred. 

Sir  .John  Spelman's  Psalter  was  published  as  far  back 
as  1  »>!<).  It  is  a  handsome  quarto  volume,  dedicated 
to  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  in  it  he  gives  the 
various  readings  from  four  MSS.  The  tradition  about 
King  Alfred  comes  up  again  in  connection  with  this  Psalter, 
the  Rev.  A.  Johnson,  M.A.,  one  of  the  first  workers  in  this 
field,  who  published  his  "  Historical  Account  "  in  1730, 
saying  that  this  was  the  one  King  Alfred  translated. 

In  the  Corpus  Christi  Library  at  Cambridge,  also,  there 
is  a  metrical  version  of  the  Psalter.  Other  MSS.  of  a 
similar  version  are  in  the  Bodleian  Library  and  the  British 
Museum. 

Tn  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  is  an  admirable  Psalter, 
Latin  and  Saxon,  illuminated,  and  full  of  historical  pictures. 
At  the  end  is  the  figure  of  the  writer  Edwin,  supposed 
to  be  a  monk  of  Canterbury,  holding  a  pen  of  metal. 
This  probably  belongs  to  Stephen's  reign. 

One  thing  we  may  be  thankful  for,  that  in  this  early 
period  paper  was  not  invented,  and  the  far  more  durable 
parchment  or  vellum  was  constantly  used.  Doing  their 
work  on  such  lasting  and  expensive  a  material  also  doubt 
less  had  an  influence  on  the  scribes,  leading  them  to  write 
carefully  and  often  beautifully,  and  to  illuminate  and 
otherwise  adorn  their  productions.  How  almost  trivial, 
indeed,  do  our  much-vaunted  modern  ways  appear  when 
examining  some  of  these  beautiful  old  manuscripts  in  a 
inullioncd  window  of  the  great  University  Library  at 
Cambridge  by  the  side  of  the  imposing  King's  College 


i94  OUR  OWN    KNOLISH    mr.LK 

Chapel,  whore  the  magnificent  organ  has  been  heard  at 
intervals.  Here  is  a  little  volume  of  different  books 
of  the  Old  Testament,  very  plainly  bound,  but  how 
carefully  illuminated  and  embellished!  Red,  blue,  and 
black,  with  gold,  are  the  colours  used  in  the  illumina 
tions,  which  occur  frequently.  Stains  of  wet  appear 
here  and  there,  but  all  looks  as  if  it  would  last  another 
thousand  years,  though  it  is  a  thousand  years  old  now. 
At  the  end,  however,  is  a  note  : — 

"  I  found  this  MS.  mutilated  in  thirteen  different  places  ; 
how  long  it  has  been  the  case  I  can  form  no  conjecture, 
but  in  Nasmyth's  Catalogue  there  is  no  mention  of  any 
mutilation.  ,J.  P.,  Librarian. 

"Feb.  13,  1849." 

Here  is  the  same  sort  of  habit,  we  fear,  in  a  worse  form, 
as  the  common  one  of  cutting  one's  name,  carrying  off 
a  bit  of  wood  or  stone  from  some  famous  spot,  as  if  the 
connection  of  our  own  personality  with  it  were  anything 
so  very  desirable.  In  spite  of  all  such  and  worse  mishaps, 
however,  these  old  MSS.  are  preserved  to  us,  for,  as  Dr. 
Giles  has  well  said,  many  of  the  monuments  of  human 
genius  bear  a  certain  impress  of  eternity,  and  the  most 
imperishable  are  the  productions  of  the  pen,  which  will 
outlive  the  Pyramids  of  Egypt,  as  they  have  already 
outlived  the  fame  of  their  founders. 

And  they  deserved  to  live,  for  many  of  these  early  manu 
scripts  are  not  simply  interesting  to  the  scholar  and  the 
Christian,  but  they  are  amongst  the  loveliest  books  of 
the  world.  The  illuminators — at  least  the  later  ones — 
seem  to  have  been  in  possession  of  a  considerable  number 
of  colouring  materials,  and  to  have  known  the  arts  of 
preparing  and  mixing  them  so  as  to  form  a  great  variety 
of  colours.  Not  only  the  fine  primary  colours  are  found, 
but  also  various  combinations  of  them,  oil  being  probably 
mixed  up  with  some.* 

And   for   some   time    now   we    have   been    waking   up   to 

*  Pilxlin's   />il'lin-jrtii>ltic<i(   I>  nntu  n»i. 


Till-!  AN(IIX)  SAXON   PSALTKRS  195 

the  importance  and  value  of  these  treasures.  Sir  F. 
Palgrave  complained  in  ls:Jl  tliat  the  early  MSS.  of  Bibles 
remained  mouldering  on  our  shelves.  This  is  not  so 
much  so  now.  the  Anglo-Saxon  language,  or  to  name  it 
more  correctly,  the  West  Saxon  dialect  of  Old  English, 
being  no  longer  an  almost  unknown  tongue. 

And  we  must  remember  that  these  early  versions  have 
a  character  of  their  own.  as  the  following  will  show  : — 

1.  They  were  made  from  the  ancient  Latin  text, 
known  as  the  Veins  Italica.  produced  for  the  benefit 
of  those  parts  of  the  Roman  Kmpire  where  Greek  was 
little  known,  probably  before  the  end  of  the  second  century  ; 
and  not  from  the  Vulgate  of  Jerome,  which  was  used  by 
Wyclif  in  the  fourteenth  century,  and  largely  influenced 
all  subsequent  translations. 

'2.  The  Anglo-Saxon  translators  aimed  at  giving 
their  countrymen  a  version  which  should  be  thoroughly 
idiomatic.  What  is  thus  lost  in  precision  is  often  gained 
in  power. 

.").  In  the  choice  of  words  they  rarelv  transferred, 
where  it  was  possible  to  translate.* 

Thus  we  have  "  reste  tloeg,"  day  of  rest  ;  ''  dome's 
doeg,"  judgment  day  ;  "  big  spel."  parable  ;  "  tungel 
Witegan,"  the  .Magi  or  Star  knowers  ;  "  manfulle  and 
synfulle,"  publicans  and  sinners  ;  "  hundred  man." 
centurion  :  k'  learning  youth,"  disciple  ;  "  Woeter  seoc 
man,"  a  man  with  the  dropsy  ;  "  doed  bot  "  (an  amends 
deed),  repentance;  ''gold  hoard,"  treasury. 

So  that,  even  in  these  rude  times  of  anarchy  and  blood, 
when  men  "  laid  about  them  at  their  wills  and  died," 
times  through  which  it  seems  ordained  that  every  great 
nation  is  to  pass,  there  was  far  from  an  absolute  neglect 
of  that  body  of  truth  which  is  the  expanded  message  of 
peace  and  goodwill.  We  have  seen  that,  within  a  century 
of  Augustine's  landing,  every  kingdom  of  the  Heptarchy 
had  received  the  truth.  Sussex  bcinjr  the  last  to  yield 
to  its  influence.  Of  course,  it  is  not  likely  that  there  was 
any  large  circulation  of  the  different  manuscripts.  Some 


196  OUR  OWN   KNCUSH    KIBLK 

were  prepared  for  private  use  in  the  different  monasteries, 
and  others  for  the  small  circle  of  the  immediate  friends 
of  the  translator. 

Sir  F.  Palgrave  says  that—  "  The  rubrics  prefixed  to  the 
lessons  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  version  of  the  Gospels  leave  no 
reason  to  doubt  but  that  they  were  regularly  read  in  the 
churches  on  Sundays  and  Festivals.  Large  portions  of 
the  Scriptures  were  also  reproduced  in  the  Anglo-Saxon 
homilies  or  sermons."  AVe  may  gather  from  /Elfric's 
Epistles  that,  if  the  Latin  was  first  read,  the  sense  was 
given  afterwards.  Thus  we  find  in  France,  John  Belcth, 
an  eminent  Paris  divine,  saying  that  in  the  Primitive 
Church  it  was  forbidden  to  anyone  to  speak  in  an  unknown 
tongue,  unless  there  was  someone  to  interpret,  since  it 
was  a  thing  perfectly  useless  for  a  man  to  speak  and  not 
be  understood.  "  Hence,"  he  says,  "  grew  that  laudable 
custom  in  some  churches  that,  after  the  Gospel  was  pro 
nounced  according  to  the  letter,  or  read  in  Latin,  imme 
diately  it  was  explained  to  the  people  in  the  vulgar  tongue." 

Let  us  hope  it  got  explained  correctly,  in  the  main, 
but  often  the  priests  did  not  know  it  themselves.  In 
the  days  of  Pope  Zachary,  one  of  them  said  in  baptism, 
"  In  nomine  patria  filia,  et  spirita  sancta,"  which,  being 
called  in  question,  they  posted  up  to  Rome  at  last  to 
ask  if  the  baptism  were  legal.  The  Pope,  after  much 
consultation,  decreed  that,  though  the  Latin  was  bad, 
the  baptism  was  good. 

One  thing  is  certain,  that  the  Book  of  books  entirely 
supplanted  the  Saxon  superstitions,  as  it  had  before 
swept  a\vay  those  of  the  Druids,  and  that  Christianity 
was  for  centuries  the  distinctive  religion  of  our  impetuous, 
fair-haired  ancestors.  The  Danes  also  were  converted 
in  large  numbers.  Their  mythology  was  even  more 
extraordinary  than  that  of  the  Saxons,  their  heaven 
consisting  in  fighting  and  cutting  each  other  to  pieces 
every  morning,  and  then  returning  whole  to  dine  upon 
a  boar,  who  was  hunted  and  eaten  every  day,  and  restored 
to  life  every  night,  that  he  might  be  ready  for  the  morrow. 
Their  conversion  is  the  more  noteworthy  also,  inasmuch 


TIIK   ANC.LO-SAXON   1'SALTKKS 


197 


as  they  had  been  fiercely  prejudiced  against  Christianity 
by  Charlemagne,  whose  stern  victories  had  made  his 
Faith  odious  to  the  Northern  marauders.  In  fact,  they  had 
sought  refuge  in  .Jutland  and  Denmark  when  driven  out 
of  (iermany  by  fire  and  sword,  at  the  instance  of  the 
Christian  emperor.  So,  when  they  came  ravaging  in 
England,  they  made  a  special  point  of  destroying  all 


OUI-.KNSl  T.AH    (  lit'JM  II,    1>SKX. 
WonliKN     NAVK    KXTANT.J       WILT    A.l>.    1012. 


the  monasteries  and  churches  in  their  path,  leaving  nothing 
behind  them  at  Peterborough  but  "  old  walls  and  wild 
woods,"  as  Ethelwald  found  in  (.>r,:}.  Thev  were  a  cruel 
and  barbarous  race,  and  their  incursions  were  constantly 
the  great  hindrance  to  Christianity  and  civilisation.  As 
they  settled  down,  however,  they  became  converted. 
Alfred  compelled  those  whom  he  subdued  at  least  to 
receive  baptism,  and  before  the  Norman  Conquest  not 


198  OUR  O\VX   KNC.USII    BIBLE 

only  they,  but  all  the  Scandinavian  nations  had  received 
the  Faith,  (1annte  presenting  a  somewhat  fine  figure,  and 
being  greatly  beloved  by  all  classes,  in  spite  of  his  being 
an  alien  and  an  invader.* 

Thus  one  people  after  another  within  our  shores  in  this 
early  period  came  under  the  influence  of  the  Word  of 
truth.  Celt,  Saxon,  and  Dane  alike  received  it;  and 
though  sometimes,  like  the  fabled  holy  grail  of  the  same 
period,  it  seemed  to  mock  the  seeker  after  its  virtues, 
at  other  times  its  lustre  was  very  apparent,  and,  upon 
the  whole,  when  the  Norman  invasion  took  place,  we 
wrere  a  Christian  nation. 

Surely  we  in  England  should  know  something  of  the 
old  Saxon  literature  which  belongs  to  us,  though  it  be, 
as  Dr.  Angus  says,  no  modern  palace  of  story  or  of  song, 
but  a  weather-stained  ruin,  with  mouldering  walls,  and 
here  and  there  a  roofless  chamber. 

*  Alfred  followed  a  custom  common  enough  in  the  Huropc  of  C'lovis 
and  Charlemagne.  The  ordinance  vas  :  "If  any  do  reject  the  Christian 
religion,  or  show  his  esteem  for  Heathenism,  let  him  pay  his  were 
gild  (the  compensation  appointed  by  the  Saxons  to  be  made  for  offences 
against,  the  person),  or  a  mulct,  or  a  line  (a  Danish  penalty),  in  pro 
portion  to  the  fact."  The  Danes  settled  down  soon  after  this;  Alfred 
became  the  godfather  of  (Juthrum,  the  Danish  chief;  and  in  fact  the 
fruit  of  this  peremptory  dealing  seems  to  have  been  wholly  good. 


CHAPTER    XIV 

jELFRIC 

"\\i'ijuovn''fT(  o'irii'rs  (\d\ijirai'  r/uu-  rov  Xo-jof  roP  tffoP.  —  II  EH.  xiii.  7. 

WK  conic  now  to  anotlier  famous  name,  always  well 
known  amongst  scholars,  hut  more  widely  so  in  modern 
times  through  the  formation  of  the  .Klfric,  Society  in 
London  in  1S42,  with  Lord  Egerton  for  President,  and 
the  Chevalier  Bunsen  and  other  distinguished  men  in 
the  roll  of  its  membership.  This  was  established  in  order 
to  publish  his  works,  and  other  Anglo-Saxon  memorabilia, 
for  as  Alfred  was  the  founder.  .Eliric  was  the  model  oi 
Saxon  prose.  He  was  more  than  that,  and  no  doubt 
there  was  another  motive  present  with  many  of  the  members 
of  the  .Klfric  Societv.  For,  whilst  translating  large 
portions  of  the  Scriptures,  side  by  side  with  them  he  issued 
a  number  of  Homilies  containing  the  accepted  doctrine 
of  the  Anglo-Saxon  Church.  These  Homilies  are  numerous, 
and  in  them  almost  everv  vital  doctrine  which  distinguished 
the  Roman  from  the  Evangelical  Church  meets  with  a 
direct  contradiction.  They  formed  a  Harmony  of  the 
doctrinal  teaching  of  the  Fathers,  as  received  by  this 
Early  Church,  and  were  issued  by  Sigeric,  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  for  general  use.  As  such.  Queen  Elizabeth's 
first  Archbishop,  Matthew  Parker,  revived,  and  sought  to 
revive  in  others,  the  study  of  Early  English,  chiefly  that 
it  might  be  seen  from  such  writings  where  the  true  anti 
quity  was  to  be  found,  and  how  much  opposition  there 
was  between  our  own  Marly  Church  and  the  later  doctrines 
of  the  Church  of  Rome.  Some  of  these  comparatively 


200  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

modern  but  often  accounted  ancient  heresies  were  then 
raising  their  heads,  and  /Elfric  attacks  them  uncere 
moniously. 

It  is  decidedly  embarrassing,  however,  to  be  in  doubt, 
as  we  are  to  this  day,  as  to  the  identity  of  /Elfric  the 
scholar,  Bible  translator,  and  homilist. 

There  was  an  /Elfric  who  was  Archbishop  of  Canterbury 
996-1006,  and  there  was  another  who  was  Archbishop 
of  York  1023-1051.  Wharton,  in  his  Anglia  Sacra, 
holds  that  our  scholar  was  the  Primate  of  York.  Sharon 
Turner  speaks  of  two  /Elfrics — "  /Elfric  Bata,"  and  his 
scholar  ^Elfric,  the  abbot  and  bishop.  Leland  found 
three  ^Elfrics,  but  Usher  united  them  all  into  one,  saying 
that  he  was  first  Abbot  of  Peterbro'  in  100-1.  If  he  was 
Archbishop  of  York,  he  succeeded  Archbishop  Wulfstan, 
but  some  things  are  recorded  of  him  which  scarcely  suit 
the  "  gentle  scholar."  For  instance,  at  his  instigation, 
Hardacnut  caused  the  corpse  of  his  brother,  Harold  Hare- 
foot,  to  be  taken  from  the  grave,  decapitated,  and  after 
wards  thrown  into  the  Thames.  We  are  also  told  that, 
being  angry  with  the  people  of  Worcester,  who  had  rejected 
him  for  their  bishop,  he  again  instigated  the  same  king 
to  burn  their  city  and  confiscate  their  property,  under 
the  pretext  of  their  having  resisted  the  royal  taxgatherers. 
So  William  of  Malmesbury  tells  us ;  but  in  the  Saxon 
Chronicle  it  is  said:  ki  This  year  (1052)  died  /Elfric,  Arch 
bishop  of  York,  a  very  venerable  and  wise  man."  Perhaps, 
however,  they  were  always  venerable  and  wise,  when 
they  had  died. 

If  he  was  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  he  was  first 
a  monk  at  Abingdon  ;  then  he  took  charge  of  Cerne  Abbey, 
Dorset ;  afterwards  he  was  Abbot  of  St.  Albans  ;  then 
Bishop  of  Wilton  ;  and  finally  Primate  for  ten  years. 

Leslie  Stephens,  however,  says  no  name  was  commoner 
than  Elfric  at  this  period,  and  that  he  was  probably 
made  out  to  be  an  archbishop  because  of  the  importance 
of  his  writings.  They  wanted  to  father  them  well ;  but 
he  could  neither  have  been  Archbishop  of  Canterbury 
nor  of  York,  he  says.  It  is  probable  that  he  was  first  a 


monk  at  Abingdon,  and  then  at  Winchester  ;  then  Abbot, 
first  of  Cerne  and  afterwards  of  Ensham,  which  was  founded 
by  /EthelnuTr,  the  great  patron  of  monasticism  in  the  West.* 

Whichever  he  was,  or  whoever  he  was,  his  Homilies 
became  a  sort  of  authorised  publication  of  Anglo-Saxon 
beliefs,  and  are  thus  specially  valuable  as  showing  that 
the  Church  of  our  fathers  was  essentially  what  we  now 
understand  by  the  word  Protestant.  He  translated 
abridgments  of  the  Pentateuch,  Joshua,  Judges,  part 
of  Kings,  Esther,  Job,  and  some  of  the  Apocryphal  books, 
composing  also  an  analysis  of  Old  and  New  Testament 
history.  Matthew  Paris  tells  us  that  it  was  at  the  request 
of  Ethelward,  Ealderman  of  Cornwall,  that  he  undertook 
the  work,  the  Books  of  the  Maccabees  being  translated 
to  encourage  the  people  to  bear  up  manfully  against  the 
incursions  to  which  they  were  still  subject.  He  calls  his 
translation  English,  and  seems  to  have  had  a  practical 
aim  throughout.  It  is  in  Joshua  that  we  read  about 
Ethelward.  He  says  :  l'  This  book  I  turned  into  English 
for  Ealderman  Ethelward,  a  book  that  a  Prince  might 
study,  in  times  of  invasion  and  turbulence."  Of  Judith 
he  says  :  "  Englished  according  to  my  skill,  for  your 
example,  that  you  may  also  defend  your  country  by 
force  of  arms,  against  the  outrage  of  foreign  hosts." 

One  of  his  chief  designs,  however,  was  that  ministers 
should  have  a  better  understanding  of  (Jod's  Word,  and 
impart  it  to  others.  He  speaks  as  one  having  authority, 
and  in  the  Canons  gives  a  special  charge  that  the  people 
should  be  rightly  taught  the  Scriptures  in  their  own  tongue. 
H<-  required  that  every  clergyman  before  he  was  ordained 
priest  should  have  a  collection  of  all  the  books  used  in 
the  service  of  the  Church,  as  the  Psalter,  a  book  containing 
the  Epistles  and  (Jospels.  another  of  the  Communion  Office, 
a  book  of  Lessons,  a  guide  for  penitents,  a  Calendar,  a 
book  of  ('haunts  and  Hymns,  and  one  containing  an  account 

*  U'ritrht  says  that  .Klfrica  Hat  a.  who  died  in  |(»."i|.  was  probably 
a  disciple  of  tin-  elder  .Klfric.  ami  that  he  repiiblished  his  Colloquium 
un<l  (iraminar,  e.spoiiwd  the  same  opinions  as  his  master  mi  trail- 
substantiation,  and  was  made  Archbiehop  of  Y<  rk  — Hiaj.  Hrit  Lit. 


202  OUR  OWN  KXCJJS1I   1UBLK 

of  the  Saints  whose  days  were  kept.  He  endeavoured 
to  make  every  book  that  lie  translated  easy  of  comprehen 
sion,  and  thus,  whilst  some  of  his  work  is  literal  and  exaet, 
there  is  much  that  is  paraphrastic.  In  his  Latin  Preface, 
he  says  he  has  translated  into  the  ordinary  tongue  for 
the  edification  of  the  simple,  who  know  only  this  speech  : 
"  We  have  therefore  put  it,  not  into  obscure  words,  but 
into  simple  English,  that  it  may  easier  reach  the  heart 
of  those  who  hear  or  read  it."  The  clergy  were  strongly 
enjoined,  indeed,  to  expound  the  meaning  of  the  Gospel 
every  Sunday  in  English,  and  the  Creed  and  the  Lord's 
Prayer  as  often  as  they  could.  "  We  must  not  be  dumb 
dogs,"  he  cries,  "  that  cannot  bark.  We  must  teach 
the  lay  people,  lest  we  lose  them  for  lack  of  love.  If 
the  blind  man  be  the  blind  man's  leader,  they  will  both 
fall  into  a  blind  place.  And  blind  is  the  teacher  if  he 
kens  no  book  lore.  Such  teachers  as  take  their  examples 
and  doctrine  from  the  Holy  Books,  whether  it  be  out  of 
the  Old  Testament  or  New,  are  such  as  Christ  spake  of 
in  these  words:  'Every  learned  scribe  in  the  Church  of 
God  is  like  the  master  of  a  family  who  brings  forth  ever 
out  of  his  own  treasure  things  new  and  old.'  "  * 

The  Heptateuch  was  partly  translated  and  partly 
epitomised,  with  a  prologue,  imperfect  at  the  beginning. 
The  volume  is  now  in  the  British  Museum  Library,!  an(l 
there  are  157  leaves  of  vellum,  l.'i'  by  {)',  and  it  is  illus 
trated  by  numerous  coloured  drawings.  There  are  notes 
on  the  text  in  Latin,  and  occasionally  in  English,  founded 
on  Josephus,  Methodius,  Jerome,  Bede,  etc.,  introduced 
by  a  hand  belonging  to  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century. 
The  coloured  drawings  extend  across  the  page,  and  are 
set  in  frames,  often  two  and  sometimes  three  on  a  page. 
They  are  in  different  states  of  completion,  the  colours 
being  blue,  red,  and  violet.  The  hair  is  usually  blue  ! 

Here  is  a  specimen  :  "  Sothlice  this  fynd  yfrahela  naman 
the  inforon  on  egypta  lande.  He  mid  his  sunum.  Se 
phrum  cennida,  Ruben,  Rubene's  suna,  Enoh.  and  Phallu, 
and  Charm,  Simeone's  sune.  Gamuel.  and  Diamin,  and 

*  L'Lsle's  Translation,  t  '  'niton  MS.     Claudius,  15.  4. 


.l.LKRIC  203 

Aehod.    and    -Jachini,    and    Saher,    and    Saul    Chananides 
suna.  and  Leuias  suas  suna.  Jerson  and  Chaath." 

\\  hicli  is  :  "  Yerilv  these  are  the  names  of  the  Israelites 
that  entered  into  the  land  of  Egypt,  he  and  his  sons.  The 
firstborn,  Reuben,  the  sons  of  Reuben,  Enoch,  and  Phallu, 
and  Charnii.  The  sons  of  Simeon,  Samuel  and  Diamin 
and  Achod,  and  Jachim  and  Sahir,  and  Saul,  son  of  a 
Canaanitisii  woman's  son,  and  the  sons  of  Levi,  , lerson 
and  Choath  "  ((Jen.  xlvi.  S). 

Dr.  Mombert  gives  seveial  other  examples,  from  which 
we  extract  the  Fourth  Commandment:*— 

"(iehalga  thone  restedoeg.  Wire  six  dagas  ealle  thine 
weorc.  Se  seofotha  ys  Drihtnes  restedoeg  thines  (Jodes  : 
ne  wire  thu  non  weorc  on  thiim  doege,  ne  mm  thara  the 
mid  'lie  beo.  On  six  dagon  God  geworhte  heofenan  and 
eorthan  and  soe,  and  ealle  tha  thing  the  on  him  synd, 
and  reste  thy  seofothan  doeije.  and  gehalgode  hyne." 

He  says  the  obscurity  in  which  the  history  of  /Klfric 
is  shrouded  is  unquestionably  due  to  the  odium  theologicum 
of  the  Romish  party.  In  writing  to  Archbishop  Wulstan. 
.Klfric  says  it  becomes  them  as  bishops  to  unclose  that 
book-learning  which  the  Canons  teach,  especially  as  the 
priests  themselves  do  not  all  understand  Latin.  Evidently 
the  work  was  far  from  easv  for  him,  for  he  says  in  his 
dedication  of  Genesis  to  Ethelward  :  "You  bade  me 
dear,  that  I  should  turn  from  Latin  nto  English  the  book 
Genesis.  I  thought  it  would  be  a  heavy  thing  to  grant  this, 
and  you  said  that  I  need  not  translate  more  of  the  book 
than  to  Isaac,  because  some  other  man  had  translated 
this  book  from  Isaac  to  the  end.''  Later  on.  however, 
he  says  of  the  whole  Heptateuch— that  is,  the  five  hooks 
of  Moses.  Joshua,  and  Judges — "Moses  wrote  five  books 
by  wonderful  appointment.  \Ve  have  turned  them  truly 
into  English"-  is  this  the  first  instance  of  the  editorial 
we,  or  had  he  some  coadjutor  !  "  The  book  that 
.Joshua  made  I  turned  also  into  English  some  time  since 
for  Ethelward  Ealderman.  The  Book  of  -Judges  me?) 
may  read  in  the  English  writing  into  which  I  translated  it." 
*  E,njli*h  rirai'o«.«.  Key.  .!  T.  MomUit,  D.I). 


204  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   BIBLE 

He  adds  of  Job  :   "  L  turned  formerly  some  sayings  from 
this  into  English."  * 

^Elfric's  other  writings  are  as  valuable  as  his  translations. 
The  first  Anglo-Saxon  book  that  ever  issued  from  the 
English  press  was  his  sermon  on  Easter  Day,  which  was 
published  in  1567. |  He  wrote  a  book  of  Latin  Colloquies, 
and  his  Homilies  on  the  Saints  are  of  great  and  permanent 
interest.  We  have  seen  their  character,  and,  as  an  illus 
tration,  this  is  the  way  he  speaks  in  the  Homily  for  the 
Sixth  Sunday  after  Pentecost :  "  When  each  shall  show 
what  he  hath  gained  with  the  pound,  then  Peter  the 
Apostle  shall  lead  forth  the  Jewish  people,  whom  he 
through  his  doctrine  hath  reduced  to  the  Faith  ;  Paul  the 
Apostle  of  the  nations  shall  then  lead  forth  almost  all 
the  world." 

The  Homilies  were  by  no  means  controversial  as  a  rule, 
however,  and  are  full  of  biography  which  is  interesting 
as  showing  the  facts  accepted  then.  Here,  for  instance, 
is  the  account  of  the  first  British  martyr,  Diocletian's 
persecution  being  said  to  have  lasted  fully  ten  years : — 
"  When  asked  his  name  by  the  judge,  Diocletian's  creature, 
St.  Alban  replied  :  '  I  am  hight  Albanus,  and  I  believe 
in  the  Saviour,  who  is  the  true  God,  and  made  all  creatures  ; 
to  Him  I  pray,  and  Him  will  I  ever  worship.'  The  murderer 
answered  the  glorious  man  :  '  If  thou  wilt  have  the 
felicity  of  the  everlasting  life,  then  thou  must  not  delay 
to  sacrifice  to  the  great  gods  with  full  submission.'  Alban 
answered  him  :  '  Your  sacrifices  to  the  gods,  which  ye 
offer  to  devils,  cannot  help  you,  nor  profit  your  cause, 
but  ye  shall  receive  as  your  meed  everlasting  punishments 
in  the  wide  reaching  Hell.'  Lo,  then  the  judge  became- 
fiendishly  irate,  and  commanded  men  to  scourge  the  holy 
martyr.  The  executioner  refused  to  use  the  sword,  and 
was  afterwards  slain  himself."  J 

*  E.  Thwaites  printed  .Eljric  in  15DS. 

|  With  the  imprimatur  of  the  Archbishops  of  Canterbury  and  York, 
and  thirteen  Bishops  ;  and  with  an  interesting  introduction  on  the 
state  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  Church. 

*  The  MS.  is  in  the  Public  Library  at  Cambridge1,  small  folio.     There 
are  also  copies  in  the  British  Museum  and  Bodleian. 


.-V.LKRIC  205 

It  is  a  wonder  these  old  manuscripts  have  been  pre 
served  through  all  these  ages  to  adorn  the  libraries  of  the 
twentieth  century.  The  Danes  burnt  and  destroyed  such 
things  whenever  they  could,  and  the  Xonnan  nobility 
and  ecclesiastics  often  tossed  them  aside  as  old  and  useless. 
In  a  catalogue  in  \'2  IS  of  books  in  the  library  of  Glaston- 
burv.  this  entry  appears:  "Two  English  manuscripts, 
old  and  useless."  If  they  were  not  burnt  or  destroyed, 
however,  they  were  likely  to  last.  Books  were  rare  ; 
great  pains  were  taken  with  them  ;  and  parchment, 
ink.  and  illuminations  are  often  found  to  be  very  much 
as  they  were  a  thousand  years  ago.  From  some  of  the 
recipes  still  extant,  we  find  that  they  put  the  parchment 
under  lime,  and  let  it  lie  for  three  days  ;  then  they  stretched 
it,  scraped  it  well  on  both  sides,  dried  it,  and  stained 
it  with  any  colours  they  wished.  To  gild  their  skins,  we 
have  these  directions  : — 

"  Take  the  red  skin,  and  carefully  pumice  it.  and  temper 
it  in  tepid  water,  and  pour  the  water  on  it  till  it  runs 
off  limpid.  Stretch  it  afterwards  and  smooth  it  diligently 
with  clean  wood.  When  it  is  dry,  take  the  whites  of 
eggs,  and  smear  it  therewith  thoroughly  ;  sponge  it 
with  water,  press  it.  dry  it  again,  and  polish  it  ;  then 
rub  it  with  a  clean  skin,  and  polish  it  again,  and  gild  it.'1 

So  these  venerable  Fathers  of  our  Church  wandered 
about  a  long  time  in  sheepskins  and  goatskins,  till  the 
printer  came  with  his  art,  and  superseded  both  the  writing 
and  the  tiling  written  on.  .Klfric's  works  have  been 
published  a  number  of  times,  and  we  have  in  them  a 
worthy  conclusion  to  our  Anglo-Saxon  literature  proper. 
He  was  very  anxious  about  their  correct  reproduction, 
though  he  little  thought  of  such  an  art  as  that  of  the 
printer  enshrining  them,  and  cries  out  to  his  imaginary 
copyists 

"  Look',  you  who  write  this  book',  write  it  by  this 
example:  and  for  (iod's  love  make  it  that  it  be  less  to 
the  writer's  credit  for  beauty  than  for  reproach  to  me. 

••  I  pray  now  if  anyone  will  write  this  book',  that  he 
make  it  well  Ironi  I  his  example,  because  I  would  not 


206  OUR  OWN    FAGUSH   W1JLK 

yet  bring  into  it  any  error,  through  false  writers.  It 
will  be  then  his  fault,  not  mine.  The  unwriter  doth 
much  evil,  if  he  will  not  rectify  his  mistake." 

Yes,  the  time  has  come  when  these  beginnings  of  our 
literature  are  no  longer  "  vetusta  et  inutilia,"  though 
even  in  recent  times  there  was  woeful  neglect.  In 
1792  Archbishop  Newcome  published  his  Historical  View 
of  English  Biblical  Translations,  in  which,  after  giving 
one  single  page  to  all  the  known  Saxon  MSS.,  he  says  : 
"  Our  Reformers  alleged  these  and  other  Saxon  versions, 
which  I  need  not  enumerate,  as  proofs  that  allowing  the 
use  of  the  Scriptures  in  the  vulgar  tongue  was  not  a  new 
conceit." 

The  /Elfric  Society  published  the  Homilies,  under  the 
editorship  of  Mr.  B.  Thorpe,  F.S.A.,  in  1843.  They 
are  the  most  ancient  in  any  of  the  Germanic  tongues, 
and  a  timely  vindication  of  the  true  Protestant  character 
of  the  early  Saxon  Church.  Mr.  Thorpe  says  that  /Elfric 
must  have  been  the  Archbishop  of  York,  who  died  in 
1051.  From  the  words  of  his  own  Preface,  where  he 
speaks  of  King  /Ethelred's  days  as  past,  and  tells  us  that 
in  those  days  he  was  only  a  monk  and  mass  priest,  he 
could  not  have  been  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  who 
died  A.D.  1000,  or  ten  years  before  the  death  of  King 
/Ethelred.  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Elstob  endeavoured  to  publish 
/Elfric  at  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century,  but 
"  hindrances  strewed  all  the  way."  The  first  time  she 
only  got  as  far  as  the  thirty-sixth  page,  and  the  second 
only  to  the  second  leaf ! 


CHAPTER    XV 

.UTKK    THE    CO.MIXC    OF    THE    NOK.MAXS  —  THE    ORMULUM 

"  Tin-  revival  of  learn  mi:  in  most  countries  appears  (o  have  lir.st 
o\vi'il  its  rise  to  translation.  At  rude  periods  the  modes  of  original 
thinking  are  unknown,  and  the  arts  of  original  composition  have  not 
ln-en  studied.  The  writers  therefore  of  such  peiiods  are  chielly  and 
usefully  employed  in  importing  the  ideas  of  other  languages  into  their 
own.  They  do  not  venture  to  think  for  themselves,  hut  they  are  laying 
the  foundations  of  literature,  and  while  they  are  naturalising  the 
knm\l  -d'_'e  of  more  learned  a;_res  and  countries  by  translation  they  are 
imperceptibly  improving  the  national  language.'' 

WAKTON'S  lli«t<,nj  <>/  Enylid'.  I'm  try. 


THE  Norman  invasion  checked,  rather  than  otherwise, 
the  progress  of  Scriptural  knowledge.  The  Pope  had 
blessed  William  the  Conqueror's  banners,  and  Lanfranc, 
his  Primate,  as  one  of  the  means  to  strengthen  Pope 
Hildebrand's  power,  seized  all  the  copies  oi  the  Scriptures 
he  could  find,  under  pretence  ol  correcting  any  errors 
with  which  the  text  had  been  corrupted.*  In  every 
way.  indeed,  the  authority  of  Koine  was  henceforth  up 
held  far  more  than  formerlv,  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury 
becoming  the  Pope's  Legate.  In  fact.  Popery  was  nearly 
at  its  height,  and  without  William  the  Norman's  invasion 
would  soon  have  made  herself  more  strongly  felt  in  little 
Britain.  It  was  only  eleven  years  after  the  battle  of 
Hastings  that  (in-gory  vn..  the  founder  of  its  spiritual 
despotism,  put  his  ban  upon  Henry  iv.  of  (iermany,  ab 
solved  his  subjects  from  their  allegiance,  and  kept  the 
emperor  waiting  for  davs,  like  a  beggar,  at  the  door  of 
his  Castle  of  Caiiossa.  in  the  winter.  The  withdrawing 


208  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   BIBLE 

of  the  Bible  began  about  the  same  time.  John  vui.. 
Gregory's  predecessor,  had  allowed  the  use  of  the  vulgar 
tongue  in  the  public  worship  of  the  Church,  but  Gregory 
considered  this  very  objectionable,  and  he  added — 

"  God  has  ordained  that,  in  some  places,  Holy  Scripture 
should  remain  unknown,  because,  if  all  could  easily  under 
stand  it,  it  might,  through  being  despised  or  misinter 
preted,  lead  the  people  into  error." 

Here  we  have  that  fatal  jealousy  of  allowing  the  people 
to  read  the  Bible  for  themselves  which  afterwards  ripened 
into  the  Bible-burnings  at  St.  Paul's  Cross,  and  the 
Decrees  of  Trent.  Latin  soon  began  to  die  out  as  a  ver 
nacular,  and  this  opened  the  way  to  the  reservation  of  the 
Scriptures  from  the  people  altogether. 

Books  of  all  sorts  were  very  dear.  In  LI  74  the  Abbot 
of  Westminster  gave  to  the  monks  of  Dorchester,  for 
Bede's  Homilies  and  St.  Augustine's  Psalter,  twelve 
measures  of  barley  and  a  rich  pall  embroidered  with 
a  saintly  history  in  silver. 

The  Universities  were  very  small  affairs  as  yet.  Oxford 
and  Cambridge  were  successively  burned  and  plundered 
by  Danes  and  Normans,  and  Paris  was  the  city  to  which 
the  great  proportion  of  Norman  youths  went,  being  called 
the  City  of  Learning  by  writers  of  the  twelfth  century. 
Here  they  learnt  a  system  of  divinity  founded  largely 
on  Aristotle,  which  led  the  way  to  the  Schoolmen,  with 
their  pedantic  and  whimsical  discussions.  Oxford,  indeed, 
only  had  243  houses  when  Domesday  Book  was  compiled, 
and  in  1141  Stephen  reduced  to  ashes  all  that  remained 
of  the  city.  Almost  every  cathedral,  convent,  and  abbey, 
however,  was  practically  a  school. 

But  the  stream  of  Bible  translations  and  paraphrases 
did  not  cease  in  the  altered  conditions  of  the  people, 
and  we  now  come  to  the  Ormulum,  a  paraphrase  of  the 
Gospels  and  Acts  of  the  Apostles  preserved  in  the  Bodleian 
Library.  This  has  had  the  advantage  of  being  edited 
more  than  once  lately,  and  the  portion  preserved  contains 
about  20,000  lines,  the  words  used  numbering  2300. 
Some  rank  it  immediately  after  the  Conquest,  and  others 


AFTKR  THE  rOMINO  OK  THE  NORMANS     200 

about  the  commencement  of  the  thirteenth  century. 
Its  author's  name  was  Orme.  or  Ormin.  and  he  was  a 
monk  of  the  Order  of  St.  Augustine,  living  at  a  priory 
possiblv  in  the  north  of  England.  It  was  at  the  request 
of  his  threefold  k'  Brother  Walter,"  in  the  flesh,  in  baptism, 
and  in  the  Order,  that  he  planned  and  executed  his  work, 
the  object  of  which  was  doubtless  to  bring  the  CJospel 
story  straight  home  to  the  understanding  of  the  people. 
The  rhythm  which  he  provided  for  them  was  one  through 
which  pleasant  tales  might  be  told  to  them  by  the  wayside 
and  on  "  ember  eves  and  holy  ales,"  and  he  selected 
those  portions  of  the  New  Testament  which  were  read 
in  the  church,  each  part  having  a  Homily,  doctrinal 
and  practical. 

He  speaks  thus  of  himself  and  his  work  : — 

Nu   hrotherr  Wallter  brotherr  min  Now  brother  Walter,   brother  mine 

AtTter  the   tlaeshess   kmde  After  the  nature  of  the  tlesh 

And  brotherr  min  i  Crisstenndoni  And   brother  mine  in  Christendom 

Durrh   fiilluhht   and   thurrh  tn.uwthe  Through   baptism  and   belief 

And   hrotherr  min  i   (iodcss   bus  And   brother  mine  in  (Jod's  house 

Yet   o  the  thridde  wise  Vet   of  the  third   manner 

iMirrh  thutt   svitt   hafenn   taken   ha  Heeaiise  that    we  two  have  taken   both 

An    reyhell-hoe    to    follyhenn  One'    rule-hook    to    follow 

rnnderr   kanunnkess  had  and   In  I  nder  canon's   rank  and   life 

Swa  Mimm   Sannt   Awwstinn  sett'-  As  Saint    Austin  appointed. 

IIT  hafe   wennd   intill    Knn^lissh  I    have  turned   into   English 

(Jodd.spHh'SH   hallyhe  Ian;  The   C.,spe|'s  holy   learning 

Alfterr   thatt    little   witt   thatt    me  According  to  the   little   wit    that   to   UK 

Min    Dnhhtin   hafethth   l.-n.-dd.  \1\     Lord   has   granted. 

And   mine   birrth    bathe   tliannken   Cri-t  And   it    helits   us   both   to   thank   Christ 

Thatt    itt    i-^   brohtt    till  ende.  That    it   is   brought    to  an  end. 

lee    hafe    saminnedd    o    this    hoc  I    have    joined    ill    this    I k 

Tha  (ioddspelle-s  neh  alle  Tlie   (Jospels  nearly   all 

Thatt   smnd.-nn  o  the   me,seboc  That    are   in   the   mass-book 

Inn  all   the   \<r  att   me»e,  In  all   the   year  at    mass, 

And    ii\tti  attter  the  <;..dd-pel!  stannt  Ariel   ever   after   the   (iosprl   stand-' 

Thatt   tatt    te   (ioddspell    im-m-tlith.  That    \\indi    the    (iospel   meaiieth. 

We  mav  select  one  ot  these  Homilies  as  a  sample1  of  the 
Biblical  teaching  of  the  time.  Professor  Morlev  enables 
us  to  sit  at  the  feet  of  this  ancient  translator  and  com 
mentator.* 

He  gives  the  opening  of  the  Homilv  in  Ormin's  English, 
with  an  interlinear  translation,  and  then  modernises 

*  llln»tr'itii>n.s  •//  Knylixh  A'./**/'"".  «'<lit<-«l  ami  arraiiL'i-.l  l.\-  llcnrv 
Morli-y. 

'4 


210  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

the  rest,  but  without  attempting  to  reproduce,  in  our 
uninnected  language,  the  weak  fifteenth  syllable  once 
formed  by  an  inflection. 

"  Sic  Deus  dilexit  mundum  ut  filium  suum  unigenitum 
daret."- — JOHN  iii.  1(>. 

CHRIST'S  TEACHING  OF  NICODEMUS. 

Thurrh  thatt  te  Lafcrrd  seggde  *  thuss 
In  that  the  Lord  said  thus 

Till  Nicodem  \vithth  worde  : 

To  Nicodemus  with  word  : 
Swa  lufcde  the  Laferrd  Godd 
So  loved  the  Lord  God 

The  werelld  tatt  he  sennde 

The  World  that  he  sent 
His  ar/henn  sune  Allmahhtir/  Godd 
His  own  Son  Almighty  God 

To  wurrthen  mann  onn  erthe 

To  become  man  on  earth 
To  lescnn  mannkinn  thurrh  hiss  death 
To  release  mankind  through  his  death 

Ut  off  the  defless  walde, 

Out  of  the  deviVs  power, 
Thatt  whase  trowwenn  shall  onn  himm 
That  whosoever  shall  believe  in  him 

Wei  miif/he  \vurrthenn  born/henn  ; 

Surely  j  may  become  saved  ;  10 

Thflpr  thurrh  he  dide  Nicodem 
By  that  he  caused  Nicodemus 

To  sen  and  unnderrstanndenn, 

To  see  and  understand 

Thatt  he  wass  Godd  liiram  sellf,  off  Godd, 
That  he  was  God  himself,  from  God, 

And  Godess  Sune  ankennedd, 

And  God's  Son  acknowledged, 
And  wurrthenn  mann  o  moder  liallf 
And  become  man  on  mother's  side 

Thurrh  sothfasst  herrsummnes.se, 

Through  faithful  obedience, 


*  Ser/r/de.     The  italic  (j  stands  for  the  g  softened  to  y  or  yh  sound. 

|  1'he  old  c-oinniou  use  of  the  word  well  as  an  intensive,  still  found 
in  idiomatic  phrases  as  "  irrll  on  in  years,"  or  "  well-nigh  dead,"  or 
"  you  may  u-dl  say  that,"  is  so  far  weakened  that  its  sense  is  some 
times  better  given  by  another  word. 


AFTER  THE  C'OMINC,  OF  THE  NORMANS    211 

Thurr-thatt  his  Faderr  hatYde  hiinin  sennd 
litcauxt:  hi*  Fat  In  r  had  tint  him 

And  gifenn  liiinin  to  manne, 

And  t/ivoi  him  for  man, 
Tn  tholenn  death  o  rode  tre 
T<>  *  11  (fir  death  on  tin'  w>.«.s 

Fdrr  all  mannkinne  nede, 

/•'or  (ill  mankind'*  netd,  '2<l 

All  thurrh  tliatt   lufe,    and  thurrh  thatt  lusst 
All  throiujh  that  litre  and  through  that  desire 

That  tef/v'  till  niannkinn  haffdenn, 

'I' hat  tin  if  had  towards  mankind, 
F<irtli   withth   thatt    Hallf/he  Frofre  Cast 
J/.vo  (lie.  Holif  Ghost,  the.  Comforter 

Thatt  cmiH'thth  oil   hemm   bathe, 

Tli fit  n ninth  of  tli cm  loth, 

All  thurrh  thatt  lufe  and  thurrh   thatt   lusst 
All  throi/f/h  that  lore  and  tltroit'/lt  that  desire. 

That  tc</>j  till  niannkinn  hall'den, 

That  tiny  had  towards  mankind, 
To  lesenn  inenn  ofT  deHess  l>and 
'To  release.  tn<n  from  bonds  of  tin   devil, 

And  ut  oil   hcllt-  pine. 

And  out  of  the  }xiin  of  lull, 
That   \\liase  tro\v\venn   shollde  o  Crist 
That  u'hoxo  should  belied1  on   Christ 

\\'el  shdlldt!  \vurrthen   borrj/lu-n. 

Snnlif  should  be  sai'td.  30 

\\  hi  sef/f/de  Crist   to  Xieodein 
\\'hif  Haid  Christ  to  \icod<  mil* 

That    Drihhtin  (Jodd  oil'  In-line 

That  the   Lord  <i<4  of  llearni 
S\\a   lufede   tliiss   middell  a-rd, 
,S'o  to  rid  tlii*   mid-earth, 

Thiss  werelld.   tatt    he  sennde 

This   rrorld,   that  he  s<  ,tt 
Hiss   af/henn   ^une,    Alhiiahhtiy  (lodd, 
///x  (;irn   ,S'f///,   Almighty  (lod, 

To  tholenn  da-th  o  rode, 

To  xuf/ir  diath   on   the  cro*.?, 
Als    if)    he   shollde    leseim    lit 
.Vo  that  hi    should  dilirir 

Tin-  middrll  ;,  id  oil   l,ell,.  ? 

The  mid -earth   from   lull  / 
Thurrh   whatt   \vass  hellness  \\hel   forrpirrt 
For  irliat   ira*  Inarm'*   ir/ml  (tin    /irmamint) 

To  die'/heii    hell,-   pine  ? 

To  ttufjir   fxtin    of  lit II  f 


OUR   0\VX   FXC.LISH    I5II5LK 

And  lifft,  an:l   1  url,  and    waterrllod, 
And  air,  and  lan-L  an'l  water  jloo'L 

Hu  w.orenn   th 07,7   forrwrohhte 

How  were,  tftf'//  condemned 
To  dreyhenn   wa  \vithth  mikell  rihlit 
To  suffer  woe  with  much  r  if/lit 

Inn  hello  withth  the  defell  ? 

In  hell  with  the  devil  ? 
Off  thise  fowre  shatfte  iss  all 
Of  these  four  created  things  (element*}  is  nU 

Thiss  niiddell  werelld  tinnnbrodd, 

This  middle  icorld  built, — 
Of  heft'noss  whel  and  oil"  the  lill't, 
Of  the  firmament  and  of  the,  air, 

Oft'  waterr,  and  oft'  erthe  ; 

Of  water  an?/  of  earth  ; 
And  i  tha  fowre  shafl'tess  niss 
And  in  these  four  elements  is  (not) 

Nowwtherr, — no  lif  no  sawle 

Neither — nor  life,   nor  soni 
That  mihhto  gilltonn  anif/  gillt 
That  mif/ht  be  'juiltif  of  uni/  (juilt 

And  addlenn  hello  pine. 

And  deserve  puin  of  hell. 


We  ought  to  know  now  that   for  us 

The   World  here  signifies 
Created  thing   that    was  condemned 

To  suffer  pain  of  hell. 
The  World  here  signifies  for  us 

The  race  of  man   alone  ; 
And  since  man's  body  is  made  up 

Of  what   is   in   the 'world  :  GO 

Of  heaven's  fire,   and   of  the  air. 

Of  water,   and   of  earth  : 
And   since   man's  Soul  is  through   the  worl.l 

Here   surely   signified. 
For   both   of  them    fall   into  one 

After   the  (ireekish   speech. 
For  Cosmos*  all  the  world  is  called, 

So  as  the  Greeks  explain, 


*  f 'OX/HO*.  The  (ircck  KOO-/U.OS  means  in  the  first  instance  order  (from 
Ko/jLtu,  I  take  care  of),  that  which  depends  on  thought  and  care; 
order  of  dress,  clothes  (the  sense  on  which  Onnin  here  dwells);  order 
of  behaviour  ;  order  of  private  life  ;  order  of  a  state  ;  order  or  system 


AKTKK  Tin;  COMINC,  OK  Tin;  NORMANS    -^ 

Because  it   worthily   is  clothed 

With  sun  ami  moon  ami  stars  70 

All   round  aUmt  the  firmament. 

Through   Cod   that   wrought   it   so; 
And  eke   it   worthily   is  clothed. 

That   know'st   thou   well   forsooth, 
With   air  and   land   and   water-flood 

With   creatures  manifold, 
The   Soul,    too,    worthily    is   clothed 

By   Cod,   after   its   kind. 
With   immortality,   also 

With    wit    and   will   and   mind  :  SO 

And   therefore  saith   the    Lord  our  Cod 

The  Soul   is   his   likeness. 
For  thai    they   l>oth,   the  Soul  and   Cod, 

Are  ever   without    end. 
And   they   have   mind,   and    will   and   wit, 

But    not    upon   one    wise  : 
For  always  Cod    hath   it    in    Him, 

And   ever  and    ave   it    had  ; 
The   Soul    receives   her  excellence 

All   from    the   hand  of  Cod,  <)0 

When-'er   he  shapeth   Soul   from    nought 

All    as    himself   shall    please. 
And   the   World   therefore   in   {\\\<   place, 

But    signifies   mankind. 
For   l.oth   of   them   fall   into  one 

Kven    as    I    have   shown  : 
For  either   worthily    is  clothed, 

But    not    upon   one  wise. 
And   yet    the  clothing  of  them    hoth 

( 'osmos   \\ill  signify.  1<M) 

And    Man    therefore   thou    mayest    call 

After   the   Creekish   speech,' 
Mieroeosmos,   the   which   we  call 

After    the     Fimlish    Speech, 

The   little   World,   and   all   for   this: 

Because  the  Soul  of  man 
(lod    has  clothed    worthily   ;md    well 

With   Cod    and    righteousness. 
And    .-ven   as   this    World    is   clothe! 

With    creatures    I.eautifiil.  I  lit 

of  the  universe.      The  ranire  <if   the  uord   js  from   the  divine   order   tliat 
(ills  the  \\oild  \Mth  I.eauty  down  to  Livia's  cosmetic 

A     IJL'Ilt     fllCIIS 

To   touch    you    O'«T   withal." 

(|'.I:N  .Jos SON'S  S,  jumt.t. 


214  OUR  OWN   ENGLISH  UIHLE 

The  World  also  may  signify 

Mankind  therefore  the  better, 
Because  man's  body  is  made  up 

And  wrought  of  creatures  four, — 
Of  heaven's  fire,  and  of  the  air, 

Of  water,  and  of  earth. 
And  therefore  here  the  World  must  mean 

Only  the  race  of  Man 
That  Word  of  God  was  sent  by  Cod 

To  loosen  out  of  hell.  120 


And  of  the  Son  of  Man,  and  Son 

Also  of  Cod,  of  both, 
Christ  here  hath  told  to  Nicodemc 

The  one  truth  in  these  words  : 
That  whoso  shall  believe  on  him 

He  surely  shall  be  saved. 
And  that  was  said  as  if  he  thus 

With  open  speech  had  said  : 
For  this  I  have  come  down  from    Heaven 

To  be  a  man  on  earth,  130 

That  whoso  shall  believe  in  me 

And  shall  obey  my  laws, 
Worthy  shall  he  lie  with  me 

To  have  eternal  bliss. 
But  this  Christ  said  to  Nicodeme 

That  he  might  understand 
That  he  himself  was  Cod  and  Man, 

One  person,  that  should  save 
Mankind  from  hell  and  give  to  men 

To  win  the   bliss  of  heaven.  140 

And  that  the  Lord  hath  there  declared 

With  words  to  Nicodeme, 
That  the  Almighty  hath  not  sent 

His  Son  that  he  should  judge 
This  world,  but  that  he  should  redeem 

It  from  the  Devil's  power  ; — 
That  said  he  then  to  cause  him  so 

To  c»ee  and  understand 
That  he  was  sent  and  made  as  man 

To  rescue  men  from  hell.  1~»0 

Through  love  he  bore  himself,  and  through 

Love  of  his  Father  too 
And  Holy  Chost,  the  Comforter, 

Proceeding  from  them   both. 
Through  that  he  was  not   come  down  then 

To  judge  the  people  all. 


AFTER  TIIK  COMINO  OF  Till-:  NORMANS     215 

Hut  in  humility  to  save 

The  world   by  his  own  grace. 
And  that  he  there  to  Xieodeme 

Vet  spake  thus  of  himself:  160 

Whoso  believeth  upon  him 

That   man  is  not  condemned  :  — 
That   was  as  if  lie  had  thus  said 

To  him   with  open  speech  : 
The  man  that  shall  believe  on   me 

And  shall  obey  my  laws, 
That  same  man  will  not  be  condemned 

To  sulTer   pain   of  hell. 
And   that   he   there  to  Xieodeme 

Yet   spake   thus  of  himself:  170 

And   whoso  believes  not  in   him 

With    full   and   willing  truth 
Already   is  condemned   by  (Jod 

To  suffer  pain   of  hell  ;  — 
That   was  as  if  he   had   thus  said 

To  him   with  open  speech  : 
The  man   that   believes  not  on   me 

With  full  and  willing  truth. 
Hut   shall  through   haughtiness  and  hate 

Reject   all   that    1   teach,  180 

Already  is  condemned   by  me 

To  suffer   pain   of  hell  : 
For  since   that    I    am   truly   (Jod 

Full  easily    I    know 
All   those  in   whom    I   shall  be  pleased 

Who  earn   the   bliss  of  heaven, 
And   those   by   whom   I   shall   be  scorned 

Who  earn   the  pain  of  hell. 
Of  all   the   folk   that    from   this  day 

To    Doomsday  shall    be   born.  100 

For  all   the   folk    that    ever   was, 

And    all    that    yet    shall    be. 
It    is  already  judged   and   set 

In   book,   told,   measured   out, 
I'y   dod,    and    now    lie   sei-th    all 

That  each  one  man  shall  find, 
What    meed   shall   be   the  recompense 

()f  each   one   for  his  deeds. 
The    Highest    how    the  doom   shall   go 

All   knows,   and   ever  knew.  200 

For  eye  of  (Jod   and   wit   of  (Jod 

All  sees,   all   learns,   all   knows, 
Roth   that   that   was,   and   that   rtwt    is, 

And   that   that    yet   shall   be  ; 


OUR  OWN   ENCLISH   BIBLE 

And  if  them  art  redeemed  that  is 

All  through  the  Lord  Clod's  grace, 
And  through  thy  labour  to  win  that, 

Strong  with  the  Lord  God's  help. 
And  if  that  thou  art  not  redeemed, 

That  is  all  through  thy  sin,  210 

And  through  right  doom  thou'rt  then  condemne.l 

To  suffer  pain  of  hell 
According  to  what  thou  hast  earned, 

And  neither  less  nor  more. 


And  that  he  there  to  Nicodeme 

Yet  spake  thus  of  himself  : 
And  he  that  shall  not  upon  him 

Believe,  is  now  condemned 
Because  that  he  believeth  not 

As  he  ought  to  believe  220 

Upon  that  one  appointed  name 

Of  Clod's  Son  upon  earth, 
On  him  that  is  of  God  the  Lord 

Only   begotten  Son  ; — 
That  was  as  if  he  had  said  thus 

To  him  with  open  spceeli  : 
That  man  who  wholly  shall  refuse 

To  trust  and  to  believe 
That  I  am  by  my  Father  sent, 

Made  Saviour  on  earth,  2.'>0 

And  whoso  shall  through  hate  and  scorn, 

And  through  his  pride  of  heart, 
My  name  all  utterly  despise 

That  calls  me  Saviour, — 
The  name  that  shall  bring  health  to  all 

Who  ever  shall   be  healed, 
The  name  that  shall  redeem   all  who 

Shall  ever  be  redeemed 
Through   me  that  am  of  God  the  Lord 

Only  begotten  Son,  240 

Son  so  begotten  that  I  am 

All  one  in   Deity 
With  Father  and  with   Holy  Ghost 

Withouten  ord  and  end,* 


*  Ord  and  oid,  beginning  and  end.  This  is  the-  original  of  our  phrase 
"  odds  and  ends."  "  Ord  "  was  a  First-English  noun  that  meant 
"beginning/'  When  it  became  obsolete,  and  the  old  phrase  "  ords 
and  ends  "  still  held  its  ground,  the  obsolete  word  was  at  last  con 
founded  with  the  nearest  known  word  that  resembled  it.  That  is  a 


Al-TKK  THi;  ( OMINC  OK  Till;   NoUMANS     217 

That   am   come   to  choose   many   for 

.My    brethren   upon   earth 
That   cheerfully  shall   persevere 

And   do   inv    Fathers   will. 
So   that    lie  shall    hold   all  of  them 

For  children  of   His  own  2."(i 

And   give   them   to  abide   with   me 

Heirs  of  the   heavenly   realm, 
That   am    the  only  son  of   Him 

All   one   \\ith    him    in   kind. 
The   man    \\lio   \\holly   shall   refu.se 

To   trust    this   and    believe. 
That   man   is   now   condemned   and   set 

To  sutler   pain   of  hell, 
t'nless  he  can   '.--cape   therefrom 

Het'ore   he  come   to  die,  I'dO 

Believing   that    I    am    true  Cod, 

True  Saviour  on   earth. 


And    that    he   there    to    Xicodeme 

Y<-t    spake   thus   of   himself  : 
That    is  the  doom,   that    light   and   gleam 

Is  come   upon    the  earth, 
And   men    have   no   love   for  the   light, 

Hut    love   the  darkness   more, 
Bccau.se  that    their  own  deed   is  all 

Kvil   and   all    unclean  ;  — 
That    was   as   if   he   had    said    thus 

To   him    \\  it  h   ot  her   words  : 
All    that    that    any    man    shall    he 

Condemned    to   bear   in    hell. 
All    that    shall    I.e   for   that   he   shall 

Neglect,   scorn,   and    refuse 
To  come  unto  the  Christendom 

And    to   the   right    belief, 
To   know    me   and    to   follou    me, 

And    in    me   to   believe 
That    am    true   light    of   truth   and    right 

And    of   t!i«-    right    belief. 
And.    therefore,   shall   all   those   who  arc 

Knoun    by   the   name  of  men 
Because    they    follnw    their    own    flesh 

In    all   its    foul   desires. 


not  unusual  process,  to  \\hidi  uc  o\\«-  such  phrases  us  "  under  the  rose,'1 
"  set  the  Th.'-riics  un  lire,"  etc. 


218  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   BIBLE 

And  wholly  put  away  and  scorn 

To  do  the  Spirit's  will  ; 
And  hate  all  that  is  dear  to  Cod 

And  love  all  evil  ways,  290 

Are  ever  lying  deep  in  sin 

In  many  kinds  of  ways 
That  are  all  openly  enough 

By  darkness  signified, 
Because  that  sins  will  ever  draw 

Towards  the  gloom  of  hell, 
Away  from  heaven's  light  and  gleam, 

The  souls  that  follow  them, — 
Even  as  he  that  evil  cloth 

Aye  flies  from  light  of  day,  300 

For  him  is  loth  that  man  him  see 

Employed  in  his  foul  deeds, — 
Therefore,  shall  all  that  wicked  flock 

Be  sentenced  to  hell  pain, 
Because  that  all  their  life  on  earth 

With  darkness  is  beset 
In  all  the  evil  that  man  doth 

Through  heathendom  and  wrong. 


Before  that  our  Lord  Christ  was  come 

To  be  a  man  on  earth,  310 

This  middle  world  was  wholly  filled 

With  gloomy  shades  of  sin, 
Because  that  Christ,   the  world's  true  light, 

Was  then  not  yet  come  down 
With  his  rebuke  for  all  mankind 

Of  heathendom   and  wrong, 
And  with  his  showing  what  was  good 

And  what  was  evil  deed. 
And  how  a  man  might  please  his  Clod 

And  earn  the  bliss  of  heaven,  320 

And  stand  against  the  evil  one, 

And  turn  himself  from  hell. 
And  after  our  Lord  Christ  was  come 

To  be  a  man  on  earth. 
Thereafter  was  this  middle  earth 

Filled  full  of  heaven's  light. 
Because  that  our   Lord  Christ  himself 

And  his  disciples  too, 
Both  what  was  right  and  what  was  wrong 

Made  known  in  all  the  lands,  330 

And  how  a  man  might  please  his  God 

And  earn  the  bliss  of  heaven. 


AFTKR  TIIK  COMINC  OF  Till':  NORMANS     JKJ 

And  many  peoples  haughtily 

Withstood  and  still  denied. 
And   turned  them   from   the  light  of  heaven 

And  from   the  heavenly  lore, 
Jieeause   they   rather   chose   to    be 

In   darkness   that   they   loved. 
To  follow  lusts  of  their  own  flesh 

In  every  kind  of  sin,  34G 

Meeause   they   rattier  hated   light 

That   brought  rebuke  of  sin. 
And   other  peoples   well   received 

The   gift    of   heavenlv    lore. 
And  turned   them  to  the  Christendom 

And    to   the   right    belief  ; 
That    is   that    very   light   and  gleam 

That    leadeth    man    to   heaven; 
And   it    received   full   inwardly 

My   shrift    and   penitence,  .'{.~>0 

Accusing  all   their  own   misdeeds 

And    punishing   themselves, 
That    they   so   long   in    heithendom 

Had   angered    the   true    Lord. 
And   so   they   came   into   the   light, 

Into   the  'right    belief 
In   .Jesus  <  'hrist   our  Saviour, 

Whose   name   is    Faithfulness: 
For  all   that's   ever   true   and    right 

And    good,    and    pleases   Cod,  3(10 

Salvation    for    His   handiwork. 

All   comes   by   grace  of   ('hrist. 
And   so   they   come   into   the   light 

To   shew   and    to   make    kno\\n 
That    their  deeds   have    been   done   alight 

My   pattern   of  our    Lord  ; 
For  all   together  did   one  thing 

Moth   Christ   and    they   themselves. -- 
Christ    has   rebuked   them    for   their   v.  rong 

My   teaching  i  L'htcousncss.  .T7<» 

And    they   also   rebuke   their   wrong 

My  shrift    and   penitenee, 
So   all    together  did   one   thing 

Moth   Christ    and    they   themselves. 
And   so   through    that    was   plainly   seen 

That   any   good    they  did 
Was  all   in'  Cod   and   all    through   Cod, 

FlTected    by    His   help. 
And   Cod    Almighty  grant   us   here 

To   please  Christ    while   we   live.  M.so 


220  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   WIU.K 

All   pure  in   thought  and   pure  in  word, 

Pure  mannered,    pure   in  deed. 
>So  that  \ve  may  l>c  worthy  found 

To  win  the  grace  of  Christ.     Amen. 

Ormin  addressed  himself  to  the  low-born  as  well  as 
the  higher  classes  of  the  laity,  lie  may  have  belonged 
to  Peterborough,  and  Oliphant  says  his  work  is  the  most 
thoroughly  Danish  poem  ever  written  in  England  that 
has  come  down  to  tis,  abounding  in  Scandinavian  words 
and  forms,  and  containing  only  four  or  five  French  words. 
There  are  a  few  words  also  from  Ecclesiastical  Latin, 
but  case-endings  had  nearly  ceased,  and  the  forms  and 
arrangement  of  the  words  approach  more  nearly  to  the 
English  of  our  time.  Mr.  Baber  says  that  he  sometimes 
violates  Scripture  facts.  Eor  his  paraphrase  he  drew 
upon  Bede,  Gregory,  and  perhaps  Josephus  and  Isidore  ; 
l)ii t  Ten  Brink  has  pointed  out  that  there  seems  to  have 
been  little  knowledge  in  his  cloister  of  the  writers  of  the 
new  era — Anselm,  Abelard,  or  Bernard. 

All  we  have  left  of  the  Onnulum  is  a  single  folio  volume 
in  the  Junian  Collection  at  the  Bodleian  Library,  and  the 
first  to  publish  it  was  Dr.  R.  M.  White,  formerly  Professor 
of  Anglo-Saxon  at  Oxford.  In  the  Preface  to  this  work, 
which  is  dated  1S52,  Dr.  White  reviews  the  course  of 
Anglo-Saxon  study,  and  pays  a  tribute  to  Francis  Jnnius, 
to  whose  collection  the  Ormulum  belongs.  He  had  an 
unusually  protracted  life,  and  his  hardy  constitution, 
cheerful  temper,  and  methodical  mind  fitted  him  for 
the  arduous  task  of  the  glossarist.  He  left  his  MSS. 
and  books  to  the  Bodleian  Library,  and  they  are  now  of 
immense  value. 

In  1S7S  the  Rev.  R.  Holt,  M.A.,  edited  the  Onnxhun  in 
two  volumes.  This  is  simply  a  reproduction  of  Dr. 
White's  work,  with  his  valuable  Preface.  The  text, 
however,  is  carefully  corrected  by  collation  with  the  MS. 
in  the  'Bodleian,  the  notes  are  revised  and  added  to, 
and  the  glossary  is  verified  and  corrected. 

Mr.  Thorpe  says  that  for  smoothness  of  rhythm  the 
Ormulutn,  may  vie  with  many  modern  productions,  and 


A1-T1-R  Till-:  COMINC,  OK    HIE  NORMANS     221 

that  the  author  seems  to  have  been  a  critic  in  his  mother 
tongue.  Mr.  H.  Sweet.  M.A..  however,  does  not  like  it 
at  all.  In  giving  extracts  from  it,  he  says  that  it  has  no 
literary  merit,  and  that  the  author  was  in  fact  a  spelling 
reformer  and  philologist  who  mistook  his  vocation.  "  The 
old  English  picturesqueness  and  power  disappears  entirely 
from  his  verse,  together  with  the  traditional  alliteration, 
and  the  onlv  compensation  is  a  dry,  practical  directness 
of  stvle  and  metre  which  is  anything  but  poetical."  He 
calls  it  the  East  Midland  dialect,  and  dates  it  about  12(K). 
It  is  the  earliest  printed  English  work  which  has  come 
down  to  us  that  exhibits  the  uniform  employment  of 
the  termination  n  or  »•>/.  as  the  inflection  of  the  plural 
number,  present  tense,  indicative  mood.  Perhaps  those 
who  have  read  through  the  Homily  we  have  given  as  a 
sample  will  be  disposed  to  agree  with  Mr.  Sweet  that 
it  is  difficult  to  see  where  the  poo  try  comes  in.  The 
author's  intention  was  good,  however,  as  Dr.  Angus  says 
of  Hervey's  Meditation*  anxnit/tt  the  Tombs,  and  it  was 
possibly  written  after  the  Decree  of  the  Council  of 
Toulouse,  strictly  prohibiting  the  laity  from  possessing 
a  copy  of  the  Scriptures,  except  the  Psalter,  and  such 
portions  as  are  contained  in  the  offices  of  the  Church, 
any  translation  being  equally  forbidden.  This  might 
have  suggested  to  Walter  the  labour  he  imposed  on  his 
brother.  He  was  perhaps  of  the  mind  of  the  writer 
quoted  by  \\illet.  who  exclaimed.  "What  profiteth  it 
a  man  to  have  meat,  and  not  to  cat  it  ;  apparel,  and  not 
to  wear  it  (  So  what  good  doth  it  to  have  Scriptures  and 
not  to  read  them  !  " 

Whatever  opinions  there  may  be  about  it.  however,  at 
least  Onnin  was  very  particular  about  his  work  himself. 
There  was  provision  that  whoever  recited  anv  part  of  it 
for  the  instruction  of  the  people  should,  as  far  as  he  could 
contrive,  not  make  a  dead  language  of  its  English,  or  take 
the  pleasantness  out  of  his  rhythm  by  pronouncing  it 
amiss.  And  as  for  the  copyists,  he  says  to  them,  "  Whoso 
shall  will  to  write  this  book  again  another  time,  I  bid  him 
that  he  write  it  rightlv,  so  as  this  book  teacheth  him 


222  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   P,IP,LK 

entirely  as  it  is  upon  this  first  pattern,  with  all  such 
rhyme  as  is  here  set,  with  just  as  many  words,  and  that 
he  look  well  that  he  write  a  letter  twice  where  it  upon 
this  book  is  written  in  that  wise." 

He  speaks  of  rhyme,  but  there  is  very  little  in  it,  the 
verse  imitating  a  mediaeval  Latin  rhythm  in  verses  of 
fifteen  syllables,  in  two  sections,  the  metrical  point  being 
placed  at  the  end  of  the  eighth  syllable,  or  fourth  foot, 
and  the  fifteenth  syllable  unaccented,  almost  always  a 
syllable  of  inflection.  The  duplication  also,  which  he 
insists  on  to  his  copyists,  is  a  special  characteristic  of 
the  written  English  of  the  Ormulum.  He  always  doubled 
the  consonant  after  a  short  vowel  in  the  same  word,  and 
avoided  doubling  it  after  a  long  vowel. 

In  fact,  he  was  a  purist  in  orthography,  and  may  be 
called  the  first  of  English  phoneticians.  He  has  three 
sounds  of  g,  the  last  being  dzli,  as  discovered  recently 
by  Professor  A.  S.  Napier.*  Nobody  appears  to  have 
copied  his  work,  though  he  was  so  particular  about  it, 
or  perhaps  because  of  this,  and  there  is  no  evidence  of 
its  having  any  literary  importance  at  the  time.  It  is 
a  most  interesting  relic  to-day,  however,  being  the  first 
noteworthy  piece  of  Anglian  or  Northern  literature  after 
the  Conquest.  In  this  respect  it  is  to  be  put  side  by  side 
with  Layamon's  Brut,  which  about  the  same  time  marked 
the  reawakening  of  poetry  in  the  Southern  territory. 

In  appearance  the  Ormulum  is  something  like  a  rough 
day-book  or  ledger,  very  different  from  the  magnificent 
Vernon  MS.  in  the  same  library,  one  of  the  handsomest 
books  of  the  world.  Just  as  the  parchment  shapes  itself, 
it  is  written  upon,  so  that  though  the  book  is  about  22 
inches  long  and  S  wide,  some  of  the  leaves  diminish  in 
width  to  5  inches  and  less.  One  leaf  is  only  8'  by  (>' 
and  another  4'  by  .'V  ;  in  fact,  little  bits  are  put  in  all  the 
way  through,  giving  the  MS.  an  odd  and  mean  appearance. 
One  whole  page  is  crossed  out.  line  by  line,  till  close  to  the 
bottom.  It  is  a  minuscule  also,  that  is  a  small  letter. 
as  much  being  crowded  into  a  page  as  possible.  So  have 

*  Academy,  March  1890.     Leslie  Stephen. 


A1TKR  TIIK  f'OMIXr,  OF  TIIK 

our  MSS.  conic  down  to  us,  sonic  the  most  splendid  books 
that  the  world  holds,  in  spite  of  all  modern  art  and  taste, 
like  the  Vcrnon  and  Durham  Books  ;  others  in  very 
homely  puise,  and  with  the  marks  of  poverty  stamped 
plainly  upon  them. 


CHAPTER    XVI 

THE    SOWLEHELE — RICHARD    ROLLE,    THE    HAMPOLE 
ANCHORITE 

"  About  the  Anglo-Saxon  tongue  there  was  the  strength  of  iron, 
with  the  sparkling  and  the  beauty  of  burnished  steel,  which  made  it 
withstand  with  success  the  attacks  that  the  Norman  William  and  his 
courtiers  directed  against  it,  as  they  tried  in  vain  to  thrust  their  French 
into  the  mouths  of  the  English  people.  If  the  sword  of  the  Normans 
vanquished  the  Anglo-Saxons,  the  Anglo-Saxon  tongue  in  its  turn 
overthrew  the  French  of  the  Normans."  —  Do I.MAX. 

THIS  extract  from  Dolman  is  quoted  by  Thorpe,  in  his 
Analecta  Anglo-Saxonica,  and  it  is  not  wonderful  that 
it  should  be  so,  seeing  that  only  about  sixty  thousand 
Normans  came  to  dwell  amongst  two  millions  of  Saxons. 
They  were  conquerors,  however,  and  despisers  of  most 
things  Saxon.  Even  the  British  saints  were  scorned,  and 
it  was  a  burning  shame  that  at  St.  Albans,  where  the  first 
martyr  perished,  the  abbot  should  throw  down  the  tombs 
of  his  predecessors. 

The  Normans  were  the  aristocrats  also,  and  "  uplandish 
people  who  would  be  gentlemen  "  began  to  learn  Norman- 
French.*  A  strong  fusion  of  the  races  soon  began  to 
take  place,  however.  Henry  i.  was  taught  English  :  in 
Magna  Charta  no  mention  is  made  of  different  races  ; 
and  by  the  thirteenth  century  English  was  the  mother 
tongue  of  the  aristocracy.  So  that  we  do  not  by  any 
means  pass  into  a  new  language  in  examining  these  frag 
ments  of  Scripture  belonging  to  the  Norman  period.  There 
are  not  more  than  sixty  foreign  words  in  the  Ormuhim, 


THE  SOWLEHELE     RICHARD  ROLLK        225 

and  in  the  thirteenth  century  not  more  than  one  word  in 
ten  was  either  of  Latin  or  Romance  origin.* 

The  tiowlehele,  or  Saliis  Aninice,  is  a  metrical  summary 
of  the  leading  events  of  Bible  history.  It  probably 
belongs  to  the  thirteenth  century,  and  is  in  the  Bodleian 
Library,  where  it  is  known  as  the  Vernon  MS. 

It  is  a  large  volume,  but  cannot  be  classed  amongst 
translations,  being  a  paraphrase,  accompanied  by  a  very 
miscellaneous  collection  of  religious  poetry.  The  author 
is  unknown,  and  the  date  uncertain,  but  it  was  presented 
to  the  Bodleian  soon  after  the  termination  of  the  Civil 
War,  by  Edward  Vernon,  Esq.,  of  Trinity  College,  Oxford. 

The  subjoined  extract  is  from  \Varton,  History  oj 
Enijlis/t  Poi-'ry,  i.  1!>,  London  1774  : — 

"Our  ladi  and  hire  suster  stoden   under  the  rootle, 
And   saint   .John   and   .Marie   .Magdaleyn   with    wel  sori   inoode  ; 
Vr   ladi    hi   heold   hire  swete  son   i    brought   in   gret   pyne, 
For  monnes  gultes  nouthen   her  and  nothing  for  myne. 
.Marie   weop   wel  sore  and    bitter   teres   leet. 
The   teres   fullen   uppon   the  ston  doun   at    hire   feet. 
Alas,    mv   son,    for  serwe   wel   ofl    seide    heo 
Nabbe   iche    bote   the   one   that    hongust    on    the   treo  ; 
So   fid   ieham   of  serwe,   as   anv   wommen   may   beo. 
That   ischal   my  deore  ehilde   in   all   this   pvne   iseo  ; 
How  sehal   I   sone  deore,  how  ha<t    I   yougt    liven  withouten  the, 
Nusti   nevere  of  serwe   noiigt    sone,    what   seyst   you   me  '.' 
Then   spake  Jhesus   wordus  gode   to   his   modur  dere. 
There   he   heng   uppon   the   roode   here   I   the   take  a   fere, 
That   trewliehe  sehal   serve  ye,    thin   own   eosin   .Jon, 
The   while   that   you   alyve   beo   among   all   thi    fon  ; 
leh    the   hote  John,  he  seide,  you   wile  hire   both   day  and  niht 
That    the   (lywes   hire   fon    ne  don   hire   none   unriht."  f 

"  This  sumptuous  volume,''  says  Dr.  Watson,  "  was 
undoubtedly  chained  in  the  cloister  or  church  of  some 

*  Layamon'M  Unit,  for  instance,  which  belongs  to  this  period,  has 
5700  lines,  but  only  about  |O(t  words  are  foreign.  Saxon  is  still,  in 
the  main,  the  lari.u'iiaL"-  of  to-day.  If  word-books  contain  .'{8.0OO  words, 
far  the  most  are  Saxon,  though  some  are  out  of  date  :  — tungfl-witigan 
(star  knowers.  the  maj;i).  HtoofK-ild  (stepchild  or  orphan),  suuderhaliran 
(separate,  holy,  the  Pharisees  !),  woeter  seoeman  (one  having  the  dropsy). 
gcriht-wisiun  (to  justifv). 

f  Kmjlixh  \'<-rtii<m*.  SlomU-rt. 


226  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

monastery."  It  is  sumptuous  indeed,  and  is  described 
in  Bernard's  Catalogue,  1697,  as  a  vast  massy  MS.,  at 
once  the  largest  and  one  of  the  most  valuable  relics  of 
the  kind  that  has  been  preserved.  There  are  splendid 
illuminations,  and  large  margins  throughout,  a  perfect 
contrast  to  the  Ormuliun. 

The  book  is  chiefly  a  volume  of  Early  English  poetry, 
and  there  is  a  rendering  of  many  of  the  principal  parts 
of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  into  verse.  Warton 
thinks  this  was  made  before  the  year  1200,  and  several 
of  them,  including  the  story  of  Lazarus  and  other  Gospel 
stories,  have  been  copied  for  the  Early  English  Text 
Society,  with  the  Paternoster,  Ten  Commandments,  and 
Creed.  Later  on,  comes  some  of  the  early  ecclesiastic 
history  of  the  island.  We  read  of  St.  Cuthbert.  St.  Oswald, 
St.  Chadde,  and  others,  that  they  were  "  ibore  her  in 
Engelonde,"  and  of  St.  Aldhelm  that  he  was  a  confessor 
and  a  man  of  good  life.  The  first  part  contains  eight 
leaves,  not  foliated  with  the  remainder.  Those  who 
are  privileged  to  consult  it  must  sit  near  at  hand,  for 
they  will  find  it  impossible  to  carry  it  more  than  a  few 
yards,  unless  they  have  unusual  strength.  But,  heavy 
as  it  is,  doubtless  such  a  volume  is  worth  its  weight  in 
gold,  and  far  more. 

Another  version  of  the  history  contained  in  Genesis 
and  Exodus  is  preserved  in  the  library  of  Corpus  Christi, 
Cambridge.  It  is  an  Early  English  song  in  reality,  and 
was  edited  for  the  Early  English  Text  Society  by  the  Rev. 
R.  Morris,  LL.D.,  in  18(55.  Nothing  is  known  of  the  author, 
except  that  he  lived  in  the  southern  part  of  East  Anglia 
shortly  before  A.D.  1300.  He  introduces  his  subject  by 
telling  his  readers  that  they  ought  to  love  a  rhyming 
story  which  teaches  the  layman  how  to  love  and  serve 
God,  and  live  peaceably  and  amicably  with  his  fellow- 
Christians.  He  then  invokes  the  Deity,  and  there  follows 
the  Bible  narrative,  here  and  there  varied  by  the  intro 
duction  of  those  sacred  legends  so  common  in  the  mediaeval 
ages.  A  few  portions  of  Numbers  and  Deuteronomy 
are  also  included.  The  Corpus  MS.  is  a  small  volume, 


THE  SOWLKHKLK      RICHARD   ROI.I.K         227 

8'  by  1 ',  .  Ixmnd  in  vellum,  written  on  parchment,  clearly 
and  regularly.  The  illuminated  letters  are  chiefly  ver 
milion,  and  if  the  writer  of  the  Onnuhnn  belonged  to 
Lincoln,  this  one  may  have  hailed  from  Suffolk. 

A  manuscript  of  the  Psalter,  said  to  belong  to  the  thir 
teenth  century,  is  in  the  University  Library  at  Cambridge. 
It  is  a  copy,  on  paper,  and  there  is  a  note  at  the  end  saying 
that  it  cost  the  owner  £lo.  l±s.  -Id.  for  transcribing.  Here 
is  a  sample,  slightly  modernised  :  — 

'•PSALM  :U.  Which  is  that  man  that  will  that  life  that 
ever  shall  last,  and  loveth  to  see  good  days  {  Defend  thy 
tongue  from  evil,  and  thy  lips  that  they  speak  not  treachery. 
Turn  thee  from  evil  and  do  good  ;  seek  peace  and  follow  it. 
The  eves  of  the  Lord  be  upon  the  rightful,  and  his  ears 
to  hear  their  prayers." 

••  PSALM  !<>:}.  He  made  far  from  us  our  wickedness  as 
the  Kast  departeth  from  the  West.  As  the  father  has 
mercy  on  his  childer,  our  Lord  is  merciable  of  him  that 
dreds  Him." 

Here  is  the  1st  Psalm,  according  to  another  Psalter 
of  this  period,  now  preserved  in  the  British  Museum  :  — 

••  1.  Beonure  barun  chi  ne  alat  el  cunseil  des  feluns.  et 
en  la  veie  des  pecheurs  re  stout,  et  en  la  chaere  de  pestilence 
ne  sist. 

"I*.  .Mais  en  la  lei  de  nostre  seignor  la  volunted.  e  en 
la  sue  lei  purpense  rat  par  jurn  e  par  unit. 

"  .'{.  K  lert  eiisement  cunie  le  fust  <|iied  et  de  juste  les 
decurs  des  ewes,  ki  dunrat  sun  froit  en  son  tens. 

"  I.  K  sa  fuille  ne  decurrat,  e  tutes  les  coses  <jue  il  umjues 
ferad  sennit  fait  prospres. 

"  r>.  Xient  eissi  li  felun.  nient  eissi.  mais  ensement  cume 
la  puldre  <pie  li  vent/  getet  de  la  face  de  terre. 

"  <>.  Kn  pur  ico  ne  sur  dent  li  felun  en  juise.  ne  li  pecheor 
el  conseil  des  dreituriers. 

"7.  Kar  nostre  sire  cunuist  la  veie  des  justes  e  1'eire 
des  feluns  perirat." 


228  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

A  translation  of  the  four  Books  of  Kings  in  Anglo- 
Norman  has  also  been  printed  in  Paris,  under  the  editorial 
care  of  M.  Le  Roux  de  Lincy,  from  a  MS.  preserved  there 
but  written  in  England  in  the  first  half  of  the  twelfth 
century.  Here  is  a  sample  from  1  Sam.  viii.,  the  manner 
of  the  king:  "Samuel  issi  le  fist.  Revint  al  popli,  et  si 
lur  dit  :  Rei  m'avez  deman  ded.  Deus  1'ad  oi,  si  lad 
granted ;  mais  sur  vus  tele  seignurie  aura  que  voz  fiz  a  sun 
plaisir  prendra  ;  des  uns  en  frad  chevalers,  des  altres 
curliens  devant  sun  charrei." 

Towards  the  close  of  the  same  century  a  metrical  version 
of  the  Psalms  \vas  made  by  an  author  now  unknown, 
of  which  six  copies  are  still  extant. 

To  this  century  belongs  Grosseteste,  the  famous  Bishop 
of  Lincoln,  whose  friendship  to  vernacular  translations  is 
well  known.  ki  It  is  the  will  of  God,"  said  he,  "  that  the 
Holy  Scriptures  should  be  translated  by  many  translators, 
so  that  what  is  obscurely  expressed  by  one  may  be  more 
perspicuously  rendered  by  another." 

He  strenuously  resisted  the  Pope,  who  wanted  to  make 
provision  for  three  hundred  children  of  the  citizens  of 
Rome  in  the  bestowment  of  English  benefices.  Such  a 
purely  money-getting  system  had  Popery  already  become, 
without  faith  or  conscience  !  The  nobles  sided  with 
Grosseteste,  or  Grouthead,  as  he  is  variously  called,  and 
at  last  the  Pope's  Legate  was  told  that,  if  he  did  not  leave 
the  kingdom  in  three  days,  he  should  be  cut  in  pieces. 
Grosseteste  often  speaks  beautifully  of  the  Scriptures  and 
their  power.  Once,  in  a  charge  to  the  rectors  of  Oxford, 
he  says  : — 

"  Therefore  the  foundation-stones  of  the  building  of 
which  you  are  the  architects  are  the  books  of  the  prophets, 
amongst  whom  Moses  the  Lawgiver  is  rightly  to  be  num 
bered  ;  the  books  also  of  the  Apostles  and  Evangelists. 

"  The  time  especially  proper  for  laying  and  arranging  the 
aforesaid  stones  in  the  foundation  is  the  morning  hour 
in  which  ye  ordinarily  read  ;  it  is  becoming  therefore 
that  all  your  readings,  especially  at  such  a  time,  should 
be  from  the  New  or  Old  Testament,  lest,  if  it  should  be 


Till-:  SOWLEHKLE— RICHARD   KOI.1.K         229 

otherwise  done,  amongst  the  foundation  stones,  or  /or 
foundation  stones,  such  should  he  placed  which  are  not  so. 
Therefore  we  .  .  .  ask  that  all  your  readings  at  the 
morning  hour  of  reading  he  from  the  New  or  Old  Testament, 
that  you  may  he  like  fathers  of  families,  or  rather  that 
you  he  fathers  of  families  yourselves,  bringing  out  of 
your  treasures  things  new  and  old."  * 

During  this  century  also  lived  Roger  Bacon  (1214-1)4), 
who  did  not  flourish,  being  so  far  before  his  age.  He 
was  thought  heretical,  and  spent  twelve  of  his  last  years 
in  prison  in  consequence  :  and  it  is  only  in  modern  times 
that  he  has  ceased  to  be  regarded  as  a  sorcerer.  His 
heresies  and  sorceries,  however,  consisted  in  founding 
theology  upon  the  Scriptures  alone,  and  devoting  himself 
to  experimental  science.  He  doubted  the  scholastic 
reasonings  of  Anselm.  and  was  dissatisfied  with  the  con 
tradictory  opinions  brought  together  in  Peter  Lombard's 
text-book.  His  own  chief  work  was  called  "  the  roots  of 
wisdom.'"  but  he  formed  no  school,  though  one  of  the 
most  profound  and  original  thinkers  of  any  age.  His 
words  are:  "All  wisdom  as  to  its  principle  and  source 
is  contained  in  the  Scriptures,  of  which  canon  law  and 
philosophy  are  the  development."  He  attributed  the 
prevailing  evils  of  his  time  to  ignorance  of  the  Scriptures, 
and  exhorted  the  laity  to  the  diligent  reading  of  the  Bible 
in  the  original  languages. 

(Jreen  savs  that,  however  disappointed  in  his  lifetime, 
and  he  was  grievously  both  by  the  Pope  and  the 
University,  the  year  in  which  he  published  his  great 
work  was  the  annus  inirahilis  of  Knglish  science,  and  he 
quotes  Whewell,  who  says  that  this  work  was  at  once  the 
Encyclopaedia  and  the  Novuni  Organum  of  the  thirteenth 
century. 

"  \\ '<•  ought/'  he  exclaims,  k'  to  be  much  more  instructed 
in  the  knowledge  of  Christ  from  our  youth  than  we  are; 
for  the  law  of  (lod  ought  to  be  read  to  bovs,  that  thev 
might  ever  accustom  themselves  to  the  truth  of  the  Faith, 

*  Rnl,,  rt  firiKft'xti-  A'///. Wo/-/.  I'lililislii-il  under  lh«-  direction  of 
the  Master  of  Hulls. 


230  OUR  OWN   ENGLISH   MULIC 

and  especially  the  plainer  books,  and  the  more  moral  parts 
of  either  Testament.  For  a  man  should  first  be  instructed 
in  those  things  which  belong  to  the  safety  of  his  soul, 
that  ever  he  may  be  accustomed  to  advance  to  better 
things  ;  but  they  are  not  thus  instructed ;  but  in  the 
fables  and  follies  of  Ovid,  and  of  the  other  poets  where 
all  errors  in  faith  and  manners  are  put  forth."  He  laments 
that,  for  seventy  years  before  his  time,  scarcely  anyone, 
with  the  exception  of  Grouthead,  had  translated  the 
Scriptures,  adding,  "  Wonderful  is  the  neglect  of  the 
Church  !  "  But  he  speaks  of  one  who  had  thus  laboured, 
and  who  had  spent  almost  forty  years  in  literal  correction, 
and  in  expounding  the  literal  sense.* 

A  few  other  versions  of  the  Psalms,  with  amendments 
and  revisions,  which  belong  to  the  same  period,  and 
follow  the  Gallican  version,  are  also  to  be  found  in  the 
British  Museum  and  Bodleian  Libraries.  The  Gallican 
Psalter  is  that  version  corrected  by  St.  Jerome  in  accordance 
with  the  Greek  text  of  Origen's  Hexapla.  It  was  so 
called  because  generally  adopted  in  Gaul  about  the  sixth 
century. 

About  1320  a  faithful  and  literal  translation  of  the 
Psalter,  with  the  Latin  verse  by  verse  beside  it,  was  made 
by  William  de  Scorham,  vicar  of  Chart  Sutton,  near 
Sevenoaks.  It  contains  also  the  Canticles,  with  the 
Athanasian  Creed,  and  was  probably  intended  for  divine 
service.  Here  is  the  23rd  Psalm,  as  given  by  Dr.  Moulton : — 

PSALM  XXII.  (XXIII.),  SHOREHAM'S  VERSION. 

"  1.   Our  Lord  gouerneth  me,  and  nothyng  slial  dcfailen  to  me  ;  in 

the  stede  of  pasture  he  sett  me  ther. 
•2.  He  norissod  me  vp  water  of  fyllynge ;  he  turned  my  sonic  fram 

the  fende. 
.'}.    He  lad  me  vp  the  bistiges  of  rigtfulnes  ;   for  his  name. 

4.  For  gif  that  ieh  hauegon  amiddes  of  the  shadowe  of  deth  ;   Y 

shal  nougt  douten  iuels,  for  thou  art  •vvyth  me. 

5.  Thy  discipline  and  thyn  amendyng  ;  conforted  me. 

<>.  Thou  madest  radi  grace  in  my  sight  ;  ogayns  hem  that  trublen 
me. 


*  Historical  Associations  of  the  English  Bible,  J.  W.  Morris,  F.L.S, 


T1IK  SOWI.KIIKI.K      RICHARD   ROLI.K         231 

7.   Thou    inakcst    fatt    inyn  hnird  \\ytli  mercy  ;    and  my  drynke 

inakand  drunkni  ys  ful  clcre. 

S.    And  thv  inerci  shal  folucn  me  :   alle  daics  of  mi  lif. 
'.'.    And  that  idi  \\onne  in  the  hous  of  our   Lord  ;    in    lengthe   of 

daics.     * 

It  is  probably  a  revision  of  this  work  by  John  Hyde 
which  is  preserved  in  Trinity  College,  Dublin. 

Shoreham  became  widely  known  in  more  modern  times  as 
the  Vicarage  of  Vincent  IVrnmc-t.  The  Rev.  .John  Wesley 
constantly  visited  and  preached  here,  and  Mr.  Perronet 
has  been  called  the  Archbishop  of  the  Methodists. 

The  name  of  Rirhnnl  Rolle  looms  somewhat  large, 
and  belongs  to  about  the  same  period  (died  l.'M'.)). 
He  was  called  the  Hermit  of  Hampole,  near  Doncaster, 
and  translated  the  Psalter,  with  a  Commentary,  so  that 
both  the  north  and  the  south  of  Kngland  had  men  doing 
the  same  work  at  the  same  time,  though  probably  quite 
unknown  to  one  another. 

Rollers  personal  history  is  a  remarkable  one.  and  has 
been  latelv  given  by  two  writers  in  a  somewhat  complete 
form.t  Previously  to  this,  one  authority  has  simply 
copied  another  in  the  same  haphazard  mistakes,  without 
much  inquiry.  Pitz.  Leland.  Tanner.  Wharton.  and  Cave 
repeating  the  same  things,  some  ot  them  correct,  and  some 
mere  conjecture.  Rolle's  true  Lite,  however,  though 
with  legendary  additions,  is  found  in  the  Officiiutt  ct 
L<"/i  t,<l<i  <!<•  V  tt<t  Ricurdt  Rollf.  which  exists  in  the  library 
of  Lincoln  Cathedral,  being  probably  the  only  copy  remain 
ing  of  this  curious  document.  The  plan  of  this  service 
is  to  recite  a  short  piece  of  the  saint's  history  and  then 
to  break  of!  into  hvmns  and  psalms,  thus  giving  the  congre 
gation  an  opportunity  of  expressing  the  devout  feelings 
supposed  to  be  stirred  up  by  the  hearing  of  the  virtues 
of  the  hermit.  The  service  was  probably  drawn  up  under 

i'o/M.    Fur-hall   ami    .Mad.!«-n. 

n'1  I'liiiticl.x.  \v;th  a  Translation  and  K\|>(»jtj(>n  in 
r.  of  lla.np..!.-.  Kditrd  friim  MSS.  hy  the  K«-v.  II.  It. 
'lan-ndon  l'rr>s,  |ss|.  S-i-  al>.,  thV  Karly  Kiurlish 

T--\t    Society's  edition  of   Itollc,  i-ditcd    hy   'he    Kcv.   (Jt-orgo  (i.  i'frrv. 

M.A.  isr.ti 


232  OUR  OWN  KNr.USII    P.IHLK 

the  direction  of  the  nuns  of  Hampole,  in  anticipation 
of  Rolle's  canonisation,  and  from  it  we  learn  that  his 
father  was  the  intimate  friend  of  John  de  Dalton.  the 
gentleman  who  became  his  patron.  Richard  was  born 
at  Thornton,  near  Pickering,  and  sent  to  Oxford  by  the 
Archdeacon  of  Durham.  At  nineteen,  however,  fearing 
to  become  entangled  in  the  snares  of  sin.  he  left  Oxford, 
and  returned  to  his  father's  house.  Soon  afterwards  he 
changed  his  habit  and  became  a  hermit,  much  to  the 
amazement  of  the  family,  who  spread  the  report  that 
he  was  mad.  He  had  a  sister,  whom  he  dearly  loved. 
One  day  he  begged  of  her  two  of  her  kirtles.  a  white  one 
and  a  grey  one,  which  at  his  request  she  carried,  with 
the  hood  which  their  father  wore  in  wet  weather,  to  a 
neighbouring  wood.  Her  brother,  having  cut  off  the 
buttons  of  the  white  frock  and  the  sleeves  of  the  grey 
one,  stripped  off  his  clothes  and  put  on  the  white  frock 
next  his  skin,  and  the  grey  one  over  it.  thrusting  his  arms, 
with  the  white  sleeves,  which  he  had  sewed  up  as  well 
as  he  could,  through  the  holes  that  were  left  in  the  grey 
frock  ;  and  thus,  with  his  fathers  hood,  completed,  so 
far  as  he  was  able,  the  semblance  of  a  hermit.  With 
threatening  gestures,  he  then  ran  away  from  home,  and 
is  next  heard  of  at  a  church,  possibly  Topcliffe.  near 
Thirsk,  the  parish  of  which  includes  a  township  of  the 
name  of  Dalton.  Here  he  took  up  his  place  in  the  seat 
usually  occupied  by  the  wife  of  John  Dalton.  from  which 
her  servants  would  have  turned  him  away,  but  she  would 
not  allow  it.  Next  Sunday  morning  he  put  on  a  surplice, 
and  sang  in  the  choir.  After  the  Gospel,  having  obtained 
leave,  he  went  into  the  pulpit,  and  so  moved  the  hearts 
and  consciences  of  the  hearers  that  they  declared  they 
had  never  heard  such  a  sermon.  ]5y  this  time  he  had 
been  recognised  by  the  young  Daltons,  who  had  seen 
him  at  Oxford,  and  he  was  asked  to  dinner.  After  he 
had  made  several  attempts  to  escape  by  leaving  the  table 
before  the  meal  was  concluded  and  hiding  himself  in  an 
outhouse.  John  de  Dalton  took  him  aside,  and  having 
convinced  himself  of  the  purity  of  his  intentions,  provided 


TIIK  SOWLKI 

him  with  a  proper  habit  and  suitable  accommodation. 
Perhaps  he  imitated  somewhat  the  dress  of  the  Augus- 
tinian  Friars,  and  so  has  been  thought  to  belong  to  them, 
but  his  rule  of  life  was  unsanctioned  by  external  authority. 

The  record  of  his  early  travels  shows  that  few  could 
so  suitably  have  for  their  motto,  All  jor  Jesus.  He  turned 
from  earthly  love,  and  laboured  to  subdue  the  flesh, 
praying  with  sobs  and  sighs,  living  in  a  little  cottage, 
sleeping  on  a  board,  and  attaining  to  the  "  sound  and 
mirth  of  Heaven."  His  conversion  was  something  like 
Wesley's,  and  is  described  in  a  similar  way.  He  says 
(I)c  Inwndio  Atimris]  that  it  was  about  three  years  from 
the  alteration  in  his  life  to  the  time  when  he  saw  the 
opening  of  the  Heavenly  Door.  "  I  was  sitting  in  a  certain 
chapel,  and  being  much  delighted  with  the  sweetness 
of  prayer  or  meditation,  suddenly  I  felt  in  me  a  strange 
and  pleasant  heat."  After  this,  he  was  filled  with  celestial 
music. 

For  some  good  reason,  he  left  the  part  of  the  North 
Riding  where  he  had  lived,  and  went  to  Richmondshire, 
where  he  was  useful  in  turning  many  to  righteousness. 
He  was  an  irregular  sort  of  teacher,  and  in  a  great  measure 
self-instructed,  making  us  wonder  at  his  learning  and 
power,  though  he  was  at  Oxford  some  little  time.  He 
was  not  one  of  tho>e  eremites  satirised  by  the  author 
of  /Vr/'x  Plowman,  who  "clothed  them  in  copes  to 
be  knowe  fro  othire.  and  made  themselves  eremites  thare 
ease  to  have,"  and  his  biographer  is  specially  anxious 
that  he  should  not  be  confounded  witli  the  crowd  of  lazy 
and  debauched  hermits  who  went  about  collecting  alms 
from  the  people. 

\Ve  do  not  know  when  he  left  Richmondshire  and  went 
to  Hampole,  near  Doncaster,  with  which  the  rest  of  his 
life  is  connected. 

There  was  a  Cistercian  nunnery  here,  founded  by  William 
de  Clairefai  in  I17<».  [MI- fourteen  nuns,  and  he  lived  some- 
where  near  it.  !!'•  was  summoned  away  from  Richmond- 
shire  by  a  devout  recluse  at  Anderby  ((  Ainderby  Steeple, 
near  Northallerton),  Dame  Margaret,  whom  he  had  been 


234  OUR  OWN   KNC.LISII    151  HLE 

accustomed  to  instruct  in  the  love  of  (Jod,  and  to  whom 
lie  had  a  strong  attachment.  She  was  suffering  from  a 
severe  seizure,  in  which  she  had  lost  her  speech  for  thirteen 
days.  During  his  visit,  she  was  suddenly  relieved,  and 
after  the  removal  of  a  second  violent  attack,  he  promised 
her  she  should  never  be  so  disturbed  again  whilst  he  lived. 
Some  years  afterwards  the  disorder  returned,  though 
without  the  loss  of  speech.  She  inferred  that  he  was 
dead,  which  was  found  to  be  true  ;  she  then  removed 
to  Hampole,  where  she  was  interred  in  the  nuns'  church, 
having  suffered  no  further  relapse. 

So  great  became  Rolle's  absorption  in  his  studies  that 
his  friends  were  able  to  take  away  the  ragged  dress  which 
he  wore,  and  put  on  him  a  more  decent  garment  without 
attracting  his  attention  !  Perhaps  if  the  operation  had 
been  reversed,  it  would  have  been  attracted. 

He  composed  treatises  on  such  subjects  as  "  The  Religious 
Claims  of  the  Mixed  Life,"  "  The  Union  of  (Jod  with 
the  Soul  of  Man,"  lt  Explanation  of  the  Ten  Command 
ments,"  ''  The  Lessons  to  be  learnt  from  the  Bee,"  "  The 
Virtues  of  the  Name  of  Jesus,"  "  The  Prick  of  Conscience," 
and  they  are  genuine  specimens  of  the  old  Northern  dialect, 
perhaps  the  finest  form  of  the  ancient  English  tongue — 
*'  that  language  of  the  northern  lede.  that  can  nan  other 
Tnglis  rede."  *  The  "  Prick  of  Conscience  "  contains 
nearly  10,000  lines,  and  Professor  Morley  gives  the  following 
extract  from  it,  showing  that  the  hermit  life  had  not 
quite  destroyed  his  love  of  the  quaint  : — 

"  For  unnethes  es  a  child,  horn  fully 
That  it  no  bygynnes  to  youle  and  cry  ; 
And   by   that   cry   men   kna\v   than 
Whether  it   be  man   or   woman. 
For  when  it   os   born  it  cryos  swa  : 
Jf  it   be  a  man   it   says,   '  A,   a  !  ' 
That   the   first,   letter  es  of  the-   nam 
Of  our  forme-fader  Adam. 

*  Hygden  calls  it  "  sue  si-harp,  slittvng  and  frotyng  and  unschape 
that  we  soutlicrne  men  may  that  language  unnet he  understonde," 
but  it  seems  to  have  had  more  inlliienee  on  the  structure  of  our  language 
than  any  of  the  more  Southern  forms. 


mi-;  sou  I.I;HI;I.I;    RICHARD  ROLLK       255 

And   if   the  ehild   a    woman    be. 

When    it    is   born    it    says,    '  K,   e  !  ' 

K   cs   the   first    lettt-r   and    the   hede 

Of   the   name  of    Kve   that    bygan   our  de<le. 

Thurfor  a   clerk   made  on  this  manere 

This   vers  of  metre   that   es   \vroten   here: 

I)ieentes   K   vel   A   (|Uot(|Uot  nuseuntur  ah   Kva. 

'  Alle   thas.'    he   says,    '  that   comes  of   Kve 

(That   es  all   men   that    here   hyhoves  leve), 

When   thai   er   horn   \\hat-s\va   thai    he 

Thai   sav   outlier   A.   a  !   or    K,   e  !  ' 

/as  said  of  him  that  his  life  was  devotion  and  his 
meiit  study,  and  in  his  Expositions  he  is  careful 
to  say  thai  he  follows  the  "  holy  Doctors."  Like  most 
of  tin-  early  time,  he  indulged  in  paraphrasing,  and  he 
also  put  the  seven  penitential  Psalms,  the  Lord's  Prayer, 
and  some  portions  ol  .Job.  into  verse. 

His  Psalter  is  in  the  Bodleian  Library,  and  prefixed 
to  it  ar»'  some  verses  to  the  effect  that  it  was  be^un  at 
the  request  of  Dame  Margaret  Kirkby,  and  that  the 
autograph  copy  was  still  at  Hampole.  attached  by  chains 
to  the  authors  tomb.  He  describes  the.  Psalter  as  com 
prehending  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  and  teaching 
the  mysteries  of  the  Trinity  and  the  Incarnation. 
Here  is  the  i_'.">rd  Psalm  as  <jiven  by  Mr.  Baber : 

"Our  Lord  gourmet h  me,  and  nothyng  to  me  shal  \\ante;  sted  of 

pasture  thai   he  me  sette.      In  the  water  of  the  hetyng  forth 

he  me   broiiL'hte  ;    my  soul  he  ttinivde. 

He  l.ulde  me  on  the  stretis  of  rvgtwiKiirsse  ;   for  his  name. 
For  \\in   gif   I    liadde  goo  in  mvddel  of  the  shade\ve  of  deeth  :    I 

shal  not  dreede  yueles,  for  thou  art  with  me. 
Thy  geerde  and  thy  staf  ;    they  have  eomfortid   me.      Thou  ha.^t 

grrytliid  in  my  sgyt  a  hord  :   agens  hem  that  angry n  me. 
Thou    fattide  nivn  head  in  ovle  ;   and  inv  chalvs  drunkenyng 

\\  hat    is  eleer. 

And  thi  merev  shal  folrwe  me  ;    in  alle  the  daves  of  my  lyf. 
And   that    I    uoiie   in   the   house  of   oure   lord    in   the   lengthe  of 

dayes." 

*  f  n  in  tin  .•>,  M'areelv.  Fir>t  -  Kiighsh,  "  eathe,"  easily  :  "  iineatlie," 
uiiea-ilv.  Tlmn  ( First -Kngli^h,  "tlianne"),  then.  Sun,  so,  tlius, 
tin-  l''u-t-l''.tii:li>h  fnnn  of  the  \Mird.  Hi/lion*  (,  n  ,  have  to  live.  Fir>l- 
Kiiirli-li.  "  h.-hclian."  in  l,.-h,,\i..  IK-  lit',  have  nerd  of.  In  j m per- >M:I| 
form,  the  nieaniii'_'  is  lit  or  neeessary. 


236  OUR  OWN  ENC.LISH    HIBLE 

In  his  prologue  he  says  that  he  seeks  no  strange  English, 
but  that  which  is  "  lightest  and  commonest." 

Hollo  was  in  the  habit  of  writing  the  same  matter  both 
in  Latin  and  in  English.  There  is  an  English  Exposition 
of  the  Psalms,  of  which  there  is  also  a  Latin  version, 
and  in  the  Preface  to  this  it  is  said  : 

"  But  for  the  Psalms  ben  full  darke  in  many  a  place 
Who  \vol  take  hede 

And  the  sentence  is  full  merke  * — who  so  wol  rede 
It  neecleth  exposicyon  written  well  with  cunning  honde 
To  strive  toward  devocyon  and  hit   the  better  understonde 
Therefore  a  worthy  man  called  Richard  Hampole 
Whom  the  Lord  that  all  can   lered  lelely  t  on  his  scole 
(Jlossed  the  sauter  that  sues  here  in  English  tong  svkerlv  i 
At  a  worthy  recluse  prayer  called  Dame  Marget   Kirkby."  § 

In  foreign  collections  of  mediaeval  writers,  Hollo's 
name  figures  as  the  writer  of  Latin  treatises,  under  the 
disguise  of  Pampolitanus.  He  has  two  stories  about 
shrift,  which  contain  a  clear  testimony  against  the  opus 
operatum  view  of  religion  generally  attributed  to  mediaeval 
wrriters.  And  he  strongly  contends  for  the  paramount 
importance  of  the  duty  of  the  active  over  the  contem 
plative  life,  in  the  case  of  those  whose  position  gives  them 
influence. 

The  fame  of  our  translator's  sanctity  became  a  great 
source  of  profit  and  honour  to  the  Hampole  nuns.  Crowds 
flocked  to  pray  at  the  tomb  of  the  saint,  so  that  the  nuns 
were  careful  to  preserve  their  patron's  works,  which 
evil  men  of  Lollardry  had,  as  they  alleged,  in  many  cases 
perverted  to  their  own  base  purposes,  k'  feigning  to  lewd 
souls  that  their  noxious  compositions  were  the  works 
of  Richard  Hampole,  and  thus  propping  up  their  mis 
chievous  heresies  by  the  support  of  his  great  and  honoured 
name."  Which,  being  interpreted,  probably  means  that 
our  translator  had  something  of  the  reformer  in  him, 
like  his  illustrious  successor,  whose  work  we  are  now 
approaching. 

*  Difficult.  f  Truly,  heartily.  J  Securely. 

§  MS.  in  Bodleian.     Laud,  280. 


Till-    SOWLEHELE-    RICHARD  ROI.LE        237 

Rolle  was  born,  as  we  have  seen,  at  Thornton,  in  York 
shire,  and  the  writer  of  the  manuscript  still  preserved  was 
also  named  Thornton,  becoming  Archdeacon  of  Bedford 
in  the  fifteenth  century.  He  was  a  near  neighbour, 
and  it  was  during  his  lifetime  that  the  priory  of  Hampole 
became  the  favoured  resort  of  pilgrims,  Rolle's  works 
being  kept  in  "  chevn  bondes,"  to  preserve  them  from 
being  tampered  with,  \\arton,  in  his  History  of  Poetry, 
does  not  think  they  were  worth  it,  and  in  giving  some 
extracts  exclaims,  "  I  prophesy  that  I  am  their  last 
transcriber."  They  illustrate,  however,  the  teaching 
given  to  the  people  in  the  fourteenth  century,  and  are 
genuine  specimens  of  the  old  Northern  dialect,  perhaps  the 
finest  form  of  the  ancient  English  tongue. 

Here  is  the  '2m\  Psalm  : — "  \Vhi  gnastide  the  folke  ? 
and  the  puple  thoughte  ydil  thoughtis  ?  The  prophete 
snybbyng  hem  that  shulde  turmente  Crist  seith  whi  ? 
as  hoo  seith,  what  enchesun  hadde  thei  I  sotheli  none 
but  yuel  wille  for  he  contrariede  her  wele  lywing  in  werk 
and  word,  the  folke  thei  were  tha  knvghtis  of  rome,  that 
crucified  Crist,  thei  gnastide  aghen  hym  as  bestis  wode 
without  resoun  :  and  the  puple  that  was  the  juwes, 
thoughte  in  ydel  that  is,  in  vain  was  ther  thoughte  whon 
thei  wend  have  liolde  Crist  everi  deed  that  thei  myghte 
not  doo  for  thi  in  vayne  thei  travelide  as  eche  man  doth 
that  thoruh  pryde  and  ypocrisye  weneth  to  hude  Cristis 
lawful  ordenaunce." 

Some  of  the  wildest  extravagances  of  mysticism  are 
also  found  in  his  writings,  and  such  views  as  we  might 
perhaps  expect  from  anyone  leading  a  hermit  life.  For 
instance,  he  thought  that  the  death  of  even  the  righteous 
would  be  accompanied  by  such  fearful  terrors,  the  mani 
festation  and  sight  of  devils,  and  the  consciousness  of 
their  struggles  for  the  departing  spirit,  that  the  mind 
quails  at  the  contemplation.  Some  of  his  contemporaries, 
however,  arrived  at  a  Manichacan  hatred  of  everything 
material.  As  for  Purgatory,  the  doctrine  is  full  fledged 
in  his  writings.  We  are  told  what  it  is,  where  it  is,  what 
pains  are  ther".  what  souls  go  thither,  and  for  what  sin, 


238  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   HIBLR 

and  what  may  help  to  "  slake  their  pain."  Hell  is  in  th  > 
middle  of  the  earth,  like  the  hollow  in  the  yolk  of  an  egg, 

There  are  some  pretty  lines  about  the  hermits  : — 

"  Just  thus  in  woods  and  solitary  caves  the  ancient 
hermits  lived,  but  they  lived  happy,  and  in  their  quiet 
contemplations  found  more  real  comforts  than  societies 
of  men  could  yield,  than  cities  could  afford,  or  all  the 
lustres  that  a  court  could  give." 

Perhaps  the  writer  never  tried  it  :  the  poet's  eye  has 
an  imagination  that  '"  bodies  forth."  However,  Rolle's 
translation  of  the  Psalter  .appears  to  have  been  largely 
used,  and  several  times  revised,  until  the  glories  of  Hampole 
all  faded  away  in  Henry  vni.'s  time,  Isabella  Arthington 
being  the  last  prioress,  and  the  gross  annual  value  of  the 
priory  being  £83  at  its  dissolution.  Kolle  wrote  annota 
tions  on  the  Hymns  of  the  Old  Testament.  Job.  the  Song 
of  Solomon,  the  Lamentations,  the  Revelation,  the  Lord's 
Prayer,  and  the  Athanasian  and  Apostles'  Creeds,  and 
we  may  fitly  close  our  sketch  of  him  by  an  extract  on 
the  Holy  Scriptures  from  his  tract,  DC  Emendatione 
Peccatoris. 

He  says  :  "  If  you  desire  to  attain  to  the  love  of  God, 
and  to  be  influenced  with  the  desire  of  heavenly  joys, 
and  to  be  brought  to  the  contempt  of  earthly  things, 
be  not  negligent  in  reading  or  meditating  on  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  and  especinlly  those  parts  of  them  which 
inculcate  morality,  and  teach  us  to  beware  of  the  snares 
of  the  devil  ;  where  they  speak  of  the  love  of  (Jod,  and 
of  a  contemplative  life  ;  but  leave  the  more  difficult 
passages  to  disputants  and  ingenious  men,  who  have 
been  long  exercised  in  sacred  doctrines. 

'•  This  method  assists  us  greatly  to  improve  in  what 
is  good.  In  these  we  ascertain  our  failings  and  our  im 
provements  ;  in  what  things  we  have  offended,  and  in 
what  we  have  not  ;  what  we  should  avoid,  and  what 
we  should  practise.  They  discover  most  skilfully  the 
machinations  of  our  enemies;  they  inflame  us  to  love, 
and  move  us  to  tears  ;  and  thus  prepare  for  us  a  delicious 
feast,  if  we  delight  in  them  as  in  all  riches. 


THE  SOWI.F.IIEI.K     RICHARD   KOI.I.E         2.v; 

"  But  1ft  us  not  be  urged  to  a  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures 
by  any  desire  of  the  honour  or  favour  of  men.  but  only 
by  a  design  of  pleasing  Cod,  that  we  may  know  how 
to  love  Him.  and  that  we  may  teach  our  neighbour  the, 
same,  and  not  that  we  may  be  considered  as  learned 
by  the  people.  Nay.  we  ought  rather  to  conceal  our 
learning  than  to  exhibit  it  to  our  own  praise,  as  says 
the  Psalmist  :  '  Thy  word  have  I  hid  iu  my  heart  '  (that 
is,  from  vain  exhibition)  '  that  I  might  not  sin  against 
Thee.'  Therefore  let  the  cause  of  our  speaking  be  the 
glory  of  (Jod  and  the  edification  of  our  neighbour,  that 
we  may  fulfil  that  Scripture.  '  His  praise  shall  be  con 
tinually  in  my  mouth,'  which  is  done  when  we  do  not 
seek  our  own  praise,  nor  speak  contrary  to  His  glory."  * 

Dr.  Edgar  says  that  the  manuscript  in  the  possession  of 
Dr.  Adam  Clarke,  and  to  which  he  refers  in  his  Commentary, 
must  have  been  either  a  copy  of  Rolle's  translation,  or 
a  very  slight  amendment  of  it.t  The  learned  Wesleyan 
commentator  frequently  praises  it,  and  says  that  the  author 
was  well  acquainted  with  that  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  which  brings  peace  to  the  troubled  heart.  So 
opposite  a  critic  as  Dr.  Littledale  does  the  same,  affirming 
that  it  often  comes  very  little  short  of  Dionysius  the 
Carthusian  in  beauty  and  depth.  And  the  English 
martyrology  published  under  Jesuit  auspices,  in  a  second 
edition  in  J<ill>,  says  that  he  reposed  in  our  Lord,  full 
of  sanctitv  of  life,  and  venerable  old  age.  There  let  us 
leave  him.  unharmed  bv  the  slighting  remarks  of  Waterland. 
Lewis,  and  \\arton.  A  perpetual  fountain  of  water  gushes 
out  close  to  the  school  now  found  on  the  site  of  his  cell, 
an  emblem  of  his  doctrine.  And  the  school  itself  is  used 
every  Sunday  by  three  different  bodies  of  Christian  people, 
an  emblem  of  its  general  diffusion,  and  of  the  way  it 
unites  those  who  otherwise  difler. 

*  Townlry.       liililirul  Lit,  rntiiri'. 

t  A'/.1-/. «  uf  EnjltnL  A.  K.lfc'ar.  D.I). 


CHAPTER   XVII 

JUST    BEFORE   WYCLIF — THE    FIRST    PROHIBITION    OF 
THE    BIBLE 

"  Dulcius   ex    ipso    fonte    bibuntur    aqu;e." 

THERE  are  two  other  Psalters  the  date  of  which  is  about 
the  same  as  those  we  have  been  considering.  There  was 
also  an  attempt  made  to  translate  the  whole  of  the  New 
Testament  during  this  century,  a  gloss  on  many  of  the 
books  being  in  the  library  of  Benet  College.  It  was 
probably  the  work  of  a  priest  wishing  to  instruct  his 
people,  and  it  is  the  most  important  contribution  to  the 
Bible  literature  of  the  time  that  we  possess.  The  following 
example  we  derive  from  Professor  Morley  : — 

Mark  i.  : — "  And  He  prechyde  sayande  a  stalworthier 
thane  I  schall  come  after  me  of  whom  I  am  not  worthi 
down  fallande  or  knelande  to  louse  the  thwonge  of  his 
chawcers." 

This  is  described  in  the  Catalogue  as  written  in  the 
fifteenth  century,  but  Lewis  judged  it  to  be  before  the 
time  of  Wyclif.  There  are  the  Gospels  of  Mark  and 
Luke,  and  all  the  Epistles  of  Paul.  The  comments  on 
the  Epistles  are  much  shorter  than  those  on  the  Gospels, 
and  abound  in  allegory  and  mysticism.  It  is,  however, 
the  most  extended  attempt  at  an  English  version  before 
Wyclif. 

Here  is  Romans  i.  : — "  Poule  servaunt  of  Jhu  Cst  callid 
apostil  departed  unto  ye  evangelye  of  God,  ye  whiche 
before  he  hadde  behizt  bi  his  pphetis  in  holy  wryttis  of 
his  sone  ye  whiche  is  maad  to  hym  of  ye  seed  of  David 


Till-:  FIRST   PROHIBITION  OF  THE   BIBLE    241 

aft  ye  ilesch  ye  whiche  is  before  ordeyned  goddes  sone  in 
vtue  after  ye  sprvte  of  makyng  lioly  of  ye  resureccion  of 
yc  deade  of  our  Lorde  Jhu  Crste  bi  whom  we  liafe  grace 
and  oilice  of  Apostil  (or  power  of  ye  oflice  of  apostyl)  to 
•ill  folcs  obeische  to  ye  feiy  for  ye  name  of  liyni  among 
ye  wheche  zee  be  called  of  Jhu  Crste." 

A  partial  translation  of  the  (lospcls  in  the  Northern 
dialect  is  also  found  in  a  MS.  of  the  British  Museum, 
containing  the  (Jospels  for  the  Sundays  of  the  year,  together 
witli  an  exposition.  The  following  is  a  sample  of  it : — 

John  i.  P.*  :  "And  this  is  the  testimoninge  of  John 
whan  tin-  .hies  of  Jerulm  sent  prestis  and  dekenes  unto 
Jon  Baptist  for  to  aske  him  what  ertou.  And  he  graunted 
what  he  was,  and  agensaide  nogt.  And  he  graunted 
and  said,  for  ynam  nogt  Crist." 

The  sermons  afford  curious  specimens  of  the  superstitious 
and  ridiculous  legends  with  which  the  preachers  of  the 
Middle  Ages  sought  to  interest  their  people.  Husks  are 
they  chiefly,  instead  of  the  bread  of  life. 

These  scant  references  then  are,  at  all  events,  enough 
to  assure  us  that  both  our  Saxon  and  Norman  forefathers 
possessed  some  portions  of  the  Word  of  (lod  in  their  own 
tongue.  It  is  possible  that  many  earnest-minded  priests 
endeavoured  to  supply  their  own  people  with  such  portions, 
though  they  have  perished  amongst  the  "  inutilia  et 
vetusta."  For  instance,  in  the  Register  of  Wills  at  York'. 
it  is  recorded  that  Thomas  de  Farnvlaw.  Chancellor  of 
the  Church  at  York,  bequeathed  at  his  death,  in  I.'JTS,  a 
Bible  and  Concordance  to  the  Church  of  St.  Nicholas  at 
Newcastle,  "'  there  to  be  chained  for  a  common  use  for 
the  good  of  his  soul."1  This  was  before  \\yclif,  and  a 
Latin  book-  would  not  be  much  use. 

The  1'reface  to  the  Bishops'  Bible  of  loOS.  defending 
itself  as  the  manner  then  was.  and  with  abundant  justifica 
tion,  says  — 

"Our  old  forefather's,  who  ruled  in  this  realm,  in  their 
times  and  in  divers  ages  did  their  diligence  to  translate 
whole  books  of  the  Scriptures  to  the  erudition  of  the 
laity. 

16 


242  OUR  OWN  KNCLISII  TJIP.LE 

"  As  yet  to  this  day  are  to  be  seen  divers  books  translated 
into  the  vulgar  tongue,  some  by  Kings  of  the  Realm,  some 
by  Bishops,  some  by  Abbots,  some  by  other  devout  godly 
Fathers.  So  desirous  were  they  of  old  time  to  have  the 
lay-sort  edified  in  godliness  by  reading  in  their  vulgar 
tongue,  that  very  many  books  be  yet  extant,  though  for 
the  age  of  the  speech  and  strangeness  of  the  characters 
of  many  of  them,  almost  worn  out  of  knowledge." 

John  de  Trevisa  may  have  translated  a  large  portion 
of  the  Scripture,  and  it  is  possible  that  this  may  be  the 
volume  Dr.  Adam  Clarke  possessed,  and  from  which  he 
frequently  quoted  in  his  Commentary.* 

Nevertheless,  it  was  during  this  period  of  the  Normans 
that  the  first  actual  prohibition  was  issued,  as  far  as  has 
been  ascertained. 

A  change  in  the  attitude  of  the  Church  towards  the 
Scriptures  had  indeed  been  going  on  for  some  time.  The 
Council  of  Nica'a  (A.D.  325)  had  said  that  no  Christian 
should  be  without  them  ;  and  it  is  indisputable,  as  we  have 
seen,  that  in  the  early  centuries  they  were  circulated 
wherever  Christianity  found  a  footing.  There  followed, 
however,  a  gradual  growth  of  error ;  and  we  cannot  but 
regard  this  as  the  main  reason  why  the  Bible  came  to  be 
looked  on  suspiciously,  and  at  last  locked  away  from  the 
common  gaze.  Doubtless  as  the  Latin  tongue  fell  into 
disuse  the  Bible  suffered  with  it,  and  the  very  language 
which  had  been  its  vehicle  became  its  grave.  Fleury 
puts  it  that  the  Roman  Church,  in  order  to  stop  the 
disputes  amongst  schismatics,  and  to  prevent  heretics 
from  abusing  the  Sacred  Books,  adopted  the  wise  and 
effectual  measure  of  taking  away  the  key  of  knowledge 
altogether.  And  doubtless  there  were  real  heretics  and 
schismatics,  but  no  candid  student  of  the  second  seven 
centuries  will  now  fail  to  acknowledge  that  most  of  those 
so  called  were  opponents  of  such  perversions  of  the  Word 
of  God  as  nevertheless  were  described  as  dogma. 

*  See  Townley's  Illn*trti(i<>iiH  of  Hiblicnl  Lilirattire.  More  light  may 
be  thrown  on  this  matter,  to  which  Townlcy  gave  a  good  deal  of  atten 
tion,  but  without  result. 


Till:   FIRST  PROHIBITION  OF  THE  P.IP.LF    24;, 

It  became  politic,  in  fact,  to  speak  of  the  mystery  rather 
than  the  simplicity  of  the  Word  of  (Jod.  and  to  make  it  a 
priest's  liook  altoget her :  and  thus,  as  early  as  1  1 '.»'.). 
Innocent  in.  is  found  praising  the  zeal  of  the  Bishop  of 
Metz,  who  denounced  to  the  Holy  See  certain  people  of 
the  diocese,  who.  having  procured  a  French  version  of 
some  portions  of  the  Scriptures,  held  clandestine  assemblies 
at  which  they  read  them.* 

The  iirst  direct  prohibition,  however,  appears  to  have 
beer,  at  the  provincial  Council  of  Toulouse,  in  \'2'2{.)  :  and 
if  we  are  to  trust  the  writers  of  their  own  Church,  the  state 
of  things  amongst  the  Roman  Catholics  presented  a  great 
departure  from  the  earlier  times.  Peter  of  Ailly,  about 
this  time  Bishop  of  Cambray,  quotes  St.  Bernard,  where 
he  says  :  ''  A  putrid  disease  is  at  this  day  creeping  through 
the  whole  body  of  the  Church."  Then,  having  spoken 
of  some  excessive  abuses  of  ecclesiastics,  he  says  — 

"  Behold,  in  peace  is  my  bitterness  most  bitter!  Bitter 
first  in  the  slaughter  of  the  martyrs,  more  bitter  afterwards 
in  the  conflict  with  heretics,  most  hitter  now  in  the  manners 
of  those  of  her  own  household.  There  is  the  voice  of  one 
crying.  '  I  have  brought  up  children  and  exalted  them,  but 
they  have  despised  me.  They  have  despised  and  dis 
honoured  me  by  a  base  lite,  a  base  gain,  finally  by  a  trallic 
which  walks  in  darkness/  ' 

Things  were  worse  now.  and  it  was  in  vain  that  the 
people  looked  to  the  clergy  for  instruction  or  example. 
They  looked  therefore  elsewhere,  and  found  them  in  tin- 
Script  ures  which  had  been  translated.  The  perusal  of 
these  brought  to  light  the  errors  and  abuses  of  the  Church, 
and  those  who  opposed  these  evils  got  the  name  of  heretics. 
To  put  them  down,  the  Inquisition  was  established  ;  and 
with  a  view  to  their  final  extermination  in  the  territories 
of  the  Council  of  Toulouse  this  Synod  was  assembled, 
at  which  the  Pope's  Legate,  with  three  archbishops  and 
several  bishops,  enacted  forty-five  canons  for  the  rooting 
out  of  "heresy."  It  was  quite  in  the  spirit  of  the  rest 
that  the  fourteenth  canon  should  prohibit  the  laitv  from 

*  Inli-u-lnctiiiH  In  tin-  Scrii>lnrt«,  I  >r.   l>i\<>n. 


244  OUR  OWN  KXr.LISTT  BIBLE 

having  the  hooks  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  even  in 
their  possession.  The  exaet  words  of  this  famous  pro 
hibition  are  as  follows  : — 

"  We  also  forbid  the  laity  to  possess  any  of  the  Books 
of  the  Old  or  New  Testament,  except  perhaps  someone 
out  of  devotion  wishes  to  have  the  Psalter  or  the  Breviary 
for  the  Divine  Offices,  or  the  Hours  of  the  Blessed  Virgin. 
But  we  strictly  forbid  them  having  any  of  these  books 
translated  into  the  Vulgar  tongue."  * 

The  Inquisition  had  only  been  established  in  120S, 
so  that  this  may  be  looked  upon  as  its  offspring,  when 
it  was  just  of  age.  The  opposition,  however,  abroad  was 
considerable,  as  it  came  to  be  later  on  in  our  own  country. 
It  is  said  of  the  learned  Fulgentio  that  on  one  occasion  he 
preached  from  Matthew  xii.  3,  "  Have  ye  not  read  what 
David  did  when  he  was  an  hungered  ?  "  saying  that  if 
Christ  were  to  ask  the  question  now,  the  answer  would 
be,  "  Xo,  for  we  are  forbidden  to  read  the  book.''  At 
another  time  he  took  for  his  text,  "  What  is  truth  ?  " 
and  told  the  people  that,  after  much  searching,  he  had 
found  it  out,  holding  up  a  New  Testament.  Then,  return 
ing  it  straight  to  his  pocket,  he  added,  "  But  the  book- 
is  prohibited."  His  fate  was  like  most  of  those  who 
spoke  out.  He  trusted  to  the  Pope's  promise  of  safe 
conduct,  went  to  Rome,  and  after  being  feasted  at  first, 
was  burnt  to  ashes  on  the  field  of  Flora."}" 

The  state  of  the  clergy  got  worse  and  worse,  with  the 
light  shut  away.  William  had  separated  the  lay  and  the 
ecclesiastical  courts  when  he  took  possession,  but  this 
only  strengthened  the  clergy,  who  were  thus  thrown 
into  the  arms  of  the  Pope.  As  they  gained  in  power 
they  lost  in  influence,  and  their  nicknames,  such  as  the 
"  Rev.  Lack  Latin,"  "  Mumble  Matins,"  and  "  Babbling 
Sir  John,"  stuck  to  them.  This  was  the  era  of  the  Miracle 
Plays,  which  will  be  described  later  on,  and  in  which 
the,  devil  was  the  popular  buffoon.  Sunday  was  a  day 
of  rioting,  bowls,  dice,  gambling,  and  drunkenness.  The 

*  Vindiciir  Laicif,  Dulilin,  lSi>~>,  K.WII/M  on  l-Irrlniuxtical  Ili*t<iry. 
t  Life  of  histtup  Bcddl. 


T1IK   MRST   I'KOIIHUTION   OF  Till-:  r.IPJ.K    245 

monasteries  were  perliaps,  in  spite  of  many  corruptions, 
tin-  brightest  spots  in  the  picture.  Thev  were  the  almonries, 
alxxles  of  art,  learning,  and  medicine  ;  hospitals,  schools, 
and  retreats,  foundling  asylums,  and  hostelries  for  wav- 
fariii'j  men.  Thev  had  l>een  very  much  of  one  order, 
hut  at  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century  the  Fran 
ciscans  and  Dominicans  came  over  to  England,  and  soon 
gathered  numerous  disciples. 

('ertainlv.  the  material  progress  made  at  this  period 
was  verv  iireat.  Many  of  the  most  admired  cathedrals 
were  built  such  as  York,  Salisbury,  and  Winchester. 
The  number  of  abbeys,  priories,  and  religious  houses 
built  in  tiie  reign  of  Henry  in.  alone  amounted  to  157. 
The  most  solid  and  beautiful  buildings  went  up  side 
hv  side  wiih  the  meanest.  Wooden  houses,  soon  erected, 
and  soon  burnt  down,  tilled  even  the  cities,  whilst  stately 
towers  and  spires  rose  slowly  above  them.  Stowe  says 
that,  even  in  IIS!*,  London  was  nearly  all  built  of  wood, 
covered  over  with  thatch  of  reeds  and  straw.  Perhaps 
the  chief  agents  in  this  rapid  development  of  impressive 
buildings  were  the  "free  masons,"  a  band  of  ingenious 
architects  and  workmen  of  different  countries.  They 
were  distributed  into  classes,  everv  tenth  man  being  a 
warden  overlooking  the  other  nine,  whilst  a  master  in 
chief  directed  the  whole.  They  offered  their  services 
to  opulent  princes,  and  were  much  attached  to  llenrv  ill. 
and  Kdward  r. 

The  •'shutting  of  the  Bible"  was  by  no  means  unop 
posed.  .John  Thursby.  for  instance.  Archbishop  of  York, 
who  died  |.")7-">.  a  prelate  of  great  piety  and  learning, 
published  a  manual  in  Knglish  for  the  instruction  of  his 
diocese.  This  was  an  Kxposition  of  the  ('reed,  the  Lord's 
Prayer,  and  the  Ten  Commandments,  and  in  it  he  strongly 
condemns  those  who  were  then  beginning  to  withhold 
the  use  of  the  Scriptures  from  the  people. 

We  are  able  to  look  in  and  hear  the  preachers  of  this 
time.  The  Karlv  Knglish  Text  Societv  has  latelv  pub 
lished  a  number  of  Old  Knglish  Homilies  of  the  twelfth 
and  thirteenth  centuries,  edited  bv  Mr.  1!.  .Morris.  He 


246  OUR  OWN   KNdLISII    151  HI. K 

says  (ISfJT)  there  are  huge  mounds  of  Anglo-Saxon  Homilies 
and  other  MSS.  right  up  to  the  time  of  Elizabeth  which 
have  never  been  published.  "  Yet  the  glass  and  the 
spirit-level  are  pointed  at  them,  and  the  stroke  of  the 
Editor's  pick  has  been  long  heard  at  each  end  of  the  tunnel, 
whilst  a  train  of  70  texts  bears  witness  to  the  strength 
of  the  editorial  arm."  In  this  volume  we  have  a  fair 
sample  of  the  preaching  of  the  age,  which  our  readers 
will  thank  us  for  giving  specimens  of.  The  "  moral  ode  " 
is  an  excellent  sermon  in  verse.  It  exhorts  all  men  to 
grow  in  love  as  they  grow  in  years.  All  may  purchase 
Heaven,  the  poor  with  his  penny  and  the  rich  with  his 
pound.  At  the  day  of  Doom  everyone  will  be  his  own 
accuser,  wherefore  we  should  repent  whilst  we  have  health 
and  strength.  It  will  be  too  late  when  death  is  at  the 
door.  In  Hell  the  uncharitable  suffer  the  extremes  of 
hunger  and  thirst  ;  vowbreakers,  traitors,  thieves,  drunk 
ards,  unjust  judges,  unfaithful  stewards,  and  adulterers 
are  tortured  in  turn  by  fire  and  frost  ;  slanderers,  the 
envious,  and  proud  men  are  torn  and  fretted  by  adders, 
snakes,  and  ferrets. 

The  sum  of  human  duty  consists  of  two  loves — love  to 
God  and  to  man.  The  broad  way  is  our  own  will,  which 
leads  to  Hell  ;  we  must  choose  the  narrow  and  green 
way,  along  the  high  cliffs,  which  leads  to  Heaven. 

The  Homily  has  about  100  long  lines,  and  was  written 
by  someone  who  looked  back  regretfully  on  much  time 
wasted  or  misspent.  He  says  : — 

Ich  nin  eldre  luiu  icli  WPS  a  winter  :ui<l  I   am   older   than   I  was    in   years  and 

ek  on   lore.  in   lore. 

Ich   welde   more   hail   ich   dude,   my    wyt  I     wield     more     th;i:i     I     did.     my     wit 

auhte   lieo  more,  oujjht    to   have   l>eeii   more, 

Wei  lontre  ieh  habbe  child  iheo,  a  worde  V.'ull     loiiu'     have     I     been     a     child,     in 

and   eke  on  dede  :  words  and   in  deeds; 

Hah    ieh     beo    of    wyji'vr   old,    to    yo:i«  Thoimh      I      lie      Kdd      in     years,      too 

ieli  am  on  rede.  VOUIIK  am   1   in   wisdom. 

He  warns  others  to  do  good  while  thev  may  : 

Sende  uod  liiforen  him  man,  lie  hwile  Let  a  man  send  some  ^ood  hpforc 
he  mai,  to  hevene,  him.  the  while  he  may,  1o  hea\en, 

For  l>et  re  is  on  almesse  biforen,  han  For  lieticr  is  one  alms  before,  than 
bcu  after  seveuc.  seven  after. 


Till'    FIRST    PROHIBITION   OF  Till-    P.IP.LK    247 
Tin.1  jovs  of  life  arc  too  dearly  bought  with  wickedness: — 

Swines  hn-de  is  switln-  swete,  >\va  is  Swine's  tle-h  is  very  sweet,  so  is 

of  wild.-  don-  ;  that  uf  tin-  wild  cl.-.-r  ; 

Alt.,  dop-  h«-  lilt  huh,  In-  yi-fth  lierere  All  t.>..  <l,.;ir  he  buys  it,  \\lio  nives 

his  MVore.  for  it  his  neck. 

Thi'  jovs  of  Heaven  \\ill  ivc">mpense  us  for  all  troubles: — 

Cii-t    seal   one    beon    inou    alle    his    .lur-  Christ    shall    alone    he    ei 

linyes  ;  his  darlings  ; 

Me    one    is    inuchele    mare    and    brtere,  He  alone   is   imirh    er.-at. 

hanne  all.-  oh, -re   hinges.  than  all  other  things. 

Christ    yyve    us    kden   h,-r   >wile  hi',  and  Chri-t    urant    that    we    lead    here   Mieh 

hal.hen   her  *wil<-   ende,  a   life,   and   have   here     such   an   end. 

Hat    we    inoteii    huder    come,    \\aiine  we  '1'hat    we    may   thither    conn;   \vheii   we 

henne    wende.  j,'o    hence.* 

In  another  Homily  (Bispel),  after  describing  (Jod  as 
our  Father,  whose  earth  produces  for  us  corn  and  cattle, 
whose  sun  gives  us  light  and  life,  whose  water  produces 
drink  and  fishes,  and  whose  fire  serves  manifold  purposes, 
the  homilist  asks:  "May  we,  think  ye,  call  Him  at  all 
our  mother  ?  Yea.  we  may.  What  doth  the  mother 
to  her  child  ?  First,  she  cheers  and  gladdens  him  by 
the  light,  and  afterwards  puts  her  arm  under  him,  or 
covers  his  head  that  he  may  enjoy  a  quiet  sleep.  This 
does  the  Lord  of  you  all.  He  rejoices  us  with  the  daylight, 
and  sends  us  to  sleep  by  means  of  the  dark  night." 

In  the  first  six  Homilies,  "By  Christ,"  or  "so  help 
me,  Christ."  occur  frequently.  "Dear  men,''  "good 
men,"  "  dear  brethren  and  sisters."  are  constantly  found 
also. 

In  the  Homily  for  Palm  Sunday,  the  preacher  reminds 
his  hearers  that,  though  Jesus  might  have  ridden  upon 
a  rich  ste«>d.  a  palfrey  or  a  mule.  He  did  not  even  ride  on 
the  big  ass.  but  upon  the  little  foul,  to  teach  us  humility. 
It  is  no  use  singing  and  praying  lor  the  proud  and  unre 
pentant  sinner,  for  "who  is  he  that  mav  water  the  horse 
that  refuses  to  drink"  (  "  Some  confess  their  sins,  to  be  like 
other  people,  or  because  they  would  not  like  to  be  turned 
awav  from  the  Lord's  Table,  but  thev  had  far  better  stay 
away,  for  there  is  more  harm  in  going  than  in  abstaining. 
If  they  receive  the  bread,  an  anjjel  will  come  and  take  it 
*  liamll.nnl;  ,,f  Kn'jliah  Lit*  nitim  ,'ll.  M'Willium,  I',.  A.  Isss. 


248  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   BIBLE 

straight  away  with  him  to  Heaven,  and  instead  thereof 
will  remain  a  live  coal  that  will  utterly  consume  them. 

For  wrong-doing  nothing  will  avail  but  restitution. 
If  the  sinner  says,  foxlike,  that  he  has  spent  it  all — l'  This 
will  not  do ;  you  must  take  of  your  own  goods,  and  make 
restitution."  But  the  covetous  sinner  may  reply  that  he 
does  not  know  where  to  find  those  he  has  wronged — they 
are  either  dead  or  have  left  the  neighbourhood.  He 
must  then  be  exhorted  to  go  to  the  district  where  the 
theft  was  committed,  and  expend  a  sum  equivalent  in 
almsgiving,  and  the  repairing  of  churches  and  bridges. 
Then  let  him  look  to  (Joel,  for  the  priest  cannot  forgive 
any  man  his  sins,  nor  even  his  own  ;  all  he  can  do  is  to 
point  to  Christ. 

In  the  fifth  Homily,  we  find  that  female  blandishments 
found  place  even  then,  and  the  preacher  exclaims  that 
yellow  frogs  are  fit  emblems  of  those  women  who  wear 
saffron-coloured  clothes,  and  who  powder  their  faces 
with  kt  blaunchet "  to  make  themselves  fair  and  seductive. 
Such  as  these  are  the  devil's  mousetrap,  and  their  outer 
adornments  are  the  treacherous  cheese  whereby  many 
a  mouse  is  enticed  into  the  trap.  Their  cosmetic  is  the 
devil's  soap,  and  their  mirror  the  devil's  hiding-place. 

'*  Wherefore,  good  men,  for  God's  sake  keep  yourselves 
from  the  devil's  mousetrap,  and  see  that  ye  be  not  the 
spotted  adders  (slanderers  and  detractors),  nor  the  black 
toads  (rich  misusers  of  their  wealth),  nor  like  the  yellow 
frogs." 

In  the  sermon  on  the  Lord's  Prnyer,  there  is  a  curious 
division  of  men  into  sheepish,  neatish  (ox-like,  labouring 
well),  and  goatish.  The  thirty-third  discourse  is  also 
curious,  treating  of  the  traps  set  by  the  devil  in  the  follow 
ing  lairs — play,  drink,  market,  and  church. 


f'HAPTKR    XVIII 

.H»H\    WYCUF    AND    HIS    KNTIKK    TRANSLATION — I 

"He  lielieved  that  Cod  had  commit  ted  to  tin-  Church  the  sacred 
lamp  of  truth,  for  the  L'uidaiice  and  salvation  of  men.  and  he  saw  that 
the  Church,  jn  its  corruption,  had  tieeome  a  sepulchre  to  hide  the  lamp.'' 

Ko.MOLA. 

'  Since  secular  men  >hould  assuredly  understand  the  Faith,  it  should 
lie  taught  them  in  \\hate\er  laniruaL'e  is  In-st  known  to  them." 

J.   \V\ci.ll. 

"The    Avon    to   the   Sc\ern   runs. 

The   Severn    to   the   sea  : 
And    \Vy< 'life's   dust    shall    spread    ahn.ad 
\Vidc' a.-    the   \sorld   shall    k-." 

WVCLIK'S  name  is  spelt  in  twenty-eight  different  ways, 
and  perhaps  there  are  as  many  opinions  about  his  character 
and  work.  He  had  two  sorts  of  followers,  those  who  were 
disgusted  with  the  Popedom  of  that  day,  hut  cared  little 
for  Kvangelieal  religion  :  and  the  Puritans  of  the  earlier 
age,  who  followed  him  for  his  directly  spiritual  and  con 
structive  work.  He  had  many  sorts  of  foes,  however, 
religious  and  political,  in  his  lifetime  and  after  his  death, 
and  it  is  wonderful  that  all  the  harm  they  were  ever  per 
mitted  to  do  him  was  to  take  up  his  hones  forty  years 
after  thev  had  been  buried,  ami  throw  them  over  the 
bridge  into  the  neighbouring  stream. 

Here  are  two  samples  of  the  wav  in  which  he  has  been 
spoken  of ; 

"  Kven  as  the  morning  star  being  in  the  midst  of  a 
cloud,  and  as  the  moon  being  full  in  her  course,  and  as 
the  bright  beams  of  the  sun.  so  doth  he  shine  and  glister 


250  OUR  OWN  -ENGLISH   r.IliLK 

in  the  Temple  and  Church  of  Cod."  These  are  the  words 
of  Foxe.  the  martyrologist,  accommodating  the  language 
used  of  Simon  in  the  Hook  of  Ecclesiasticus. 

"  He  was  the  devil's  instrument,  the  church's  enemy, 
the  people's  confusion,  the,  heretic's  idol,  the  hypocrite's 
mirror  ;  a  sower  of  hatred,  a  forger  of  lies,  and  a  sink  of 
flattery  ;  who  at  his  death,  despised  like  Cain,  and  stricken 
by  the  horrible  judgment  of  Cod,  breathed  forth  his  wicked 
soul  to  the  dark  mansions  of  the  black  devil.''  This  is 
from  Walsingham,  a  Catholic  historian,  and  Fuller, 
who  quotes  it,  adds  that  surely  lie  with  whose  name  the 
epitaph  begins  and  ends  was  with  the  maker  "  clean 
through  the  contrivance  thereof.''  But,  as  Wyelif  says 
himself,  in  his  "  Poor  Caitiff,"'  "  ho\v  much  the  higher  the 
hill  is,  so  much  is  the  wind  there  the  greater."  The  hill 
stands,  however,  in  spite  of  the  wind,  and  Wyclif  is  per 
manently  honoured  as  one  of  England's  noblest  sons. 

All  must  be  looked  at  in  the  light  of  the  fact  that  he 
translated  the  entire  Bible,  with  the  help  of  his  coad 
jutors,  and  sent  itinerating  preachers  about  the  country 
to  set  fortli  ite  truths.  "  Ex  uno  disce  omnes."  S.>  the 
whole  Word  of  Cod  was  put  into  the  vernacular  long 
before  the  printer's  art  came  to  multiply  it  by  the  million, 
by  one  of  the  greatest  men  of  his  or  any  age.  It  was  the 
head  and  front  of  his  offending  ;  it  is  his  crown  and  glory 
through  all  time. 

And  need  enough  there  was  for  his  work,  if  superstition 
will  not  do  in  the  place  of  religion  ;  if  it  is  important 
whom  we  worship  and  how.  For  the  Church  of  Rome 
in  these  Middle  Ages  had  gone  on  multiplying  her  tricks 
on  the  one  hand,  and  her  heresies  on  the  other,  until  the 
country  was  in  a  state  difficult  for  us  now  to  understand. 
Let  us  try  to  understand  it.  however,  or  we  shall  fail  to 
see  the  great  importance  of  Wyclif's  labours. 

For  one  thing,  the  Church  had  grown  altogether  too  rich, 
and  was  constantly  getting  richer.  Even  in  .John's  time 
the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  endeavoured  to  outvie  his 
sovereign  in  magnificence,  leading  him  to  say  that  the 
proud  prelate  had  too  much  riches  and  too  little  dis- 


IOIIN    \\YCLIF   AND    HIS  TRANSLATION       251 

cretion.  Before  tlif  statute  of  Mortmain  was  passed  in 
JL'"'.*.  a  large  proportion  of  the  landed  property  of  the 
nation  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Church  of  Koine.  In 
the  petition  of  the  "(lood  Parliament,"  in  I.'*7<>,  the 
Commons  stated  that  the  taxes  paid  to  the  Court  of  Koine 
for  ecclesiastical  dignities  amounted  to  live,  times  more 
than  was  paid  to  the  king  from  the  whole  realm.  Favour 
itism  the  most  gross  and  absurd  was  practised  in  the 
bestowment  of  livings,  worthy  Englishmen  being  pushed 
aside  for  foreigners  who  were  never  seen.  Innocent  iv. 
at  one  time  commanded  (Jrosseteste,  the  famous  Bishop 
of  Lincoln,  to  bestow  a  valuable  benefice  upon  an  infant. 
The  bishop  tore  up  the  Hull,  and  wrote  to  the  Pope  declaring 
that  the  conduct  of  the  see  of  Kome  shook  the  very  founda 
tions  of  faith  and  security  amongst  mankind.  He  refused 
to  complv.  and  said  that  the  sins  of  those  who  attempted 
such  things  rose  as  high  as  their  offices.  "What."'  cried 
tin-  Pope,  "is  not  England  our  possession,  and  its  king 
our  vassal  !  '' 

A  threat  deal  of  money  was  made  by  the  sale  and  exhibi 
tion  of  relics,  real  or  supposed.  The  instruments  of  our 
Lord's  crucifixion,  the  spear  and  cross  having  been 
miraculously  preserved;  the  clothes  wherein  He  was 
wrapped  in  infancy,  the  manger  in  which  He  was  laid, 
the  vessels  in  which  He  converted  water  into  wine,  the 
bread  which  He  brake  at  tin;  Last  Supper,  His  vesture 
for  which  the  soldiers  cast  lots —these  were  all  to  be  seen 
in  one  place  or  another  for  a  consideration,  often  a  heavy 
one.  Portions  of  the  burning  bush  were  miraculously 
found,  the  manna  which  fell  in  the  wilderness,  some  of 
M'.ses'  rod.  of  Samson's  honeycomb,  of  Tobit's  fish,  of  the 
Virgin's  milk  ! 

Another  source  of  gain  was  the  saint-worship  which 
grew  up  side  bv  side.  Almost  everv  church  had  some 
wonder-working  image  or  images,  some  of  which  were 
pretended  to  have  been  made  without  hands,  and  others 
to  have  dropped  from  Heaven,  like  the  Diana  of  the 
Ephesians.  Sometimes  the  head  of  the  same  saint  was 
shown  at  the  same  time  in  several  places,  and  the  dispute 


252  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH    BIBLE 

was  settled  by  asserting  a  miraculous  multiplication, 
the  dead  man  having  doubled  or  trebled  himself  !  This 
saint  and  relic  worship  was  far  from  done  away  with  by 
the  partial  change  effected  under  Wyclif.  At  the  time 
of  the  Reformation  Bishop  Shaxton's  list  of  what  passed 
under  the  name  of  relics  may  serve  as  a  sample  of  other 
dioceses.  "  There  be  set  forth  and  commended  unto  the 
ignorant  people,"  he  says,  "  stinking  boots,  mucky  coombs, 
ragged  rochettes,  rotten  girdles,  pyl'd  purses,  great 
bullock's  horns,  locks  of  hair,  and  filthy  rags,  gobbets  of 
wood,  under  the  name  of  parcels  of  the  holy  cross,  and  such 
pelfry  beyond  estimation."  *  So,  as  Milton  says.  "  nearly 
all  the  inward  parts  of  worship,  which  issue  from  the  native 
strength  of  the  soul,  ran  lavishly  to  the  upper  skin,  and 
there  hardened  into  a  crust  of  formality." 

Almost  everyone  had  some  patron  saint,  but  high 
above  all  was  the  Virgin  Mary,  about  whom  the  language 
used  is  almost  incredible.  The  Saviour  is  represented 
as  needing  to  be  propitiated,  and  she.  as  the  advocate 
who  intercedes  for  sinners  and  obtains  their  pardon — not 
through  His  merit,  but  her  own.  She  is  represented 
as  the  great  channel  of  grace.  As  Eve  had  persuaded 
Adam  to  our  destruction,  it  was  necessary  that  Mary 
should  prevail  over  the  second  Adam  for  our  redemption  ! 
She  saved  the  angels,  many  of  whom  would  have  been 
treated  like  Lucifer  but  i'or  her  protection  ;  and  she 
saved  the  world  by  withholding  the  arm  of  her  offended 
Son,  when  raised  in  vengeance.  Hallam  gives  us  a  number 
of  instances  of  the  profanity  about  the  teaching  of  the 
Virgin,  acknowledging  that  much  of  it  would  have  been 
repudiated  by  many.  But,  as  he  justly  says,  we  are 
concerned  with  the  general  character  of  religious  notions 
among  the  people,  rather  than  with  the  views  of  a  few 
comparatively  learned  and  reflecting  men. 

Look  also  at  the  language  commonly  held  about  the 
Pope  during  this  period.  His  supposed  infallibility, 
though  a  new  dogma,  is  far  from  being  a  modern  idea. 
There  were  those  who  said  that,  though  the  Catholic 

*  Frond*-,  vol.  ii.  p.  1)2. 


JOHN  \\YCI.IF  AM)  HIS  TRANSLATION      25;, 

faith  teaches  all  virtue  to  be  good,  and  all  vice  evil,  never 
theless  it  the  Pope,  through  error,  should  prohibit  virtues, 
the  Church  would  sin  in  conscience  if  it  believed  otherwise. 
It  was  disputed  in  the  Schools  whether  he  could  not  add 
a  new  article  to  the  Creed  :  whether  he  did  not,  with  Christ, 
participate  in  both  natures;  and  whether  he  were  not 
more  merciful  than  Christ,  inasmuch  as  he  delivered 
souls  from  the  pains  of  Purgatory,  whereas  \ve  did  not 
read  that  this  had  ever  been  done  by  our  Saviour.* 

Whilst  such  discussions  were  going  on,  the  Popes  were 
enjoying  themselves.  In  1377  the  Pope  was  the  Count 
of  Aviirnon.  living  there  in  a  mighty  palace,  golden  brown, 
a  fortress  of  the  feudal  ages.  Jie  lived  most  luxuriously, 
his  rooms  full  of  money-brokers,  weighing  and  counting  out 
heaps  of  gold.  When  remonstrated  with,  and  told  that 
former  Popes  had  not  been  so  luxurious,  he  replied  that 
they  did  not  half  know  how  to  be  Popes. t 

As  for  the  Schoolmen  and  their  discus-ions,  they  were 
continually  leaving  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law  for 
>tale.  flat,  and  unprofitable  subjects.  Here  are  two 
samples:  —  "Does  the  glorified  body  of  Christ,  whilst 
resident  in  Heaven,  use  a  sitting  or  a  standing  posture  ?  " 
"  Is  the  bodv  of  Christ  received  at  the  sacrament  dressed 
or  undressed  (  "  1 

With  all  this  blasphemous  and  absurd  rubbish,  the 
land  was  in  as  low  a  condition  morally  as  we  should  expect 
it  to  be.  The  monasteries  inevitably  degenerated.  They 
promised  fair,  but  time  tried  them,  and  Chaucer,  a  con 
temporary  of  Wyclifs.  is  unsparing  in  his  satirical 
shafts  at  them.  The  famous  answer  ascribed  to  Richard  I. 
might  have  suited  Richard  n.  equally  well,  in  whose 
days  Wvclif  lived.  We  are  told  that  Fulke.  a  good 
man  of  that  earlier  time,  said  to  the  king.  "You  have 
three  daughters,  namelv.  Pride.  Luxury,  and  Avarice,  and 
as  long  as  thev  shall  remain  with  you.  you  can  never 
expect  to  be  in  favour  with  (!od."  Richard  replied, 

*   KniMini-,  \uli-s  on   I  Tim.  i. 

•;•  /•;«,/„/  !h,  J/ «/-//.  .-I//,*.  A.  M.  K.  i:.,i,inM,ii. 

+  Thomson'*   /// 'n*trnt inn*. 


254  OUR  OWN  EXC.LISTT  BIBLE 

after  a  short  pause,  ""  I  liave  already  given  away  those 
daughters  in  marriage — Pride  to  the  Templars,  Luxury 
to  the  Black  Monks,  and  Avarice  to  the  White." 

It  would  be  a  very  partial  view  of  Wyclifs  period, 
however,  which  did  not  notice  the  reforming  religious 
Orders,  which  came  ostensibly  to  mend  matters,  and 
certainly  exercised  a  remarkable  influence  within  and 
without  the  Church.  The  Franciscans  established  them 
selves  in  England  in  1:210,  and  the  Dominicans  immediately 
afterwards,  both  having  greatly  multiplied  by  Wyclifs 
time,  whilst  the  Knights'  Templars  became  extinct.  Mr. 
Southey,  in  his  Book  of  the  Church,  enables  us  to  realise 
the  action  of  these  friars,  or  cordeliers,  or  brethren,  as 
they  are  variously  called.  Let  us  enter  a  village  where 
there  is  a  priest  who  has  amassed  a  considerable  fortune, 
and  acquired  very  comfortable  habits  of  life.  His  house 
is  large  and  well  appointed,  his  grounds  are  extensive, 
and  his  treasures  various  and  uncommon.  He  hears 
that  a  Franciscan  is  coming  along  on  the  way  to  his  retreat, 
and  is  likely  to  pay  him  a  visit,  and  especially  his  people. 
It  is  not  pleasant  news,  for  his  brother  in  the  strait,  coarse 
dress  believes  that  a  voluntary  and  absolute  poverty 
is  part  of  the  very  essence  of  the  (Jospel,  and  prescribes 
this  poverty  to  all  alike,  as  a  sacred  obligation.  He 
has  a  good  many  other  views  which,  to  fairly  state  to  the 
people,  will  be  almost  like  preaching  a  sermon  against 
him.  And  yet  what  is  he  to  do  {  Ji  he  could  only  treat 
him  as  a  Dissenter,  it  would  not  matter  so  much,  but 
this  Hew  Society  is  under  the  sanction  of  his  own  Church. 
Innocent  in.  has  solemnly  approved  of  it  ;  it  has  been 
confirmed  in  its  privileges  by  Honorius  in.  ;  and  its 
founder  is  made  out  to  be  a  second  Christ.  So  his  brother 
must  come  and  have  his  say;  and  behold  he  comes  in 
the  strait,  coarse,  short  serge  dress  ;  the  people  Hock 
together  out  of  the  curiosity  which  has  become  universal  ; 
and  the  priest  cannot  very  well  stop  at  home.  He  ascends 
the  pulpit,  and  begins  in  the  way  expected.  He  denounces 
riches  in  the  hardest  terms  that  he  can  find  ;  he  does 
not  spare  his  brother  one  whit  :  sharper  and  keener  come 


JOHN   WYCI.IF  AND   HIS  TRANSLATION      255 

his  words.  There  must  be  absolute  poverty;  when 
Christ  said  that  (!<>d  cared  for  ravens  and  lilies,  and  much 
more  would  He  care  for  us.  He  meant  nothing  less  than 
that  we  are  to  trust  in  Him  to  provide  for  all  our  wants, 
and  live  from  hand  to  mouth  day  after  day.  He  points 
to  his  own  Order  as  the  proof  that  (lod  does  thus  meet 
the  wants  of  those  who  give  up  all  for  Him.  "A  few 
years  ago."  he  cries.  "  we  were  but  a  handful  of  men, 
and  people  said  we  should  starve,  but  now  there  are 
many  thousands,  and  the  number  is  constantly  increasing/' 
Certainly,  if  such  teaching  could  ever  have  any  force,  it 
was  when  one  Pope  had  died  leaving  two  million  florins 
of  gold,  and  another  was  trying  to  seixe  the  inheritance 
for  his  own  use.* 

But  this  is  only  the  prelude.  He  goes  on  to  speak 
of  St.  Francis  as  their  founder,  and  compares  him  un- 
blushingly  with  Christ.  The  conformity  in  their  characters 
was  so  complete,  indeed,  that  Christ  had  appeared  to 
him.  and  had  fixed  in  his  side  the  wound,  and  in  his  hands 
and  feet  the  nails,  \\orse  than  even  this,  he  declares 
that  the  religion  of  the  Apostles  is  now  practically  super 
seded.  The  scheme  of  Providence  he  declares  to  be  that, 
as  there  are  three  Persons  in  the  Trinity,  there  are  three 
Dispensations.  That  of  the  Father  terminated  when 
the  Law  was  abolished  by  the  Gospel;  that  of  the  Son 
was  now  drawing  to  a  close,  and  was  being  followed  by 
that  of  the  Spirit.  The  use  of  the  (iospel  was  therefore 
superseded  :  and  now  he  produces  from  some  part  of  his 
serge  dress  a  book'  which  he  calls  the  Kternal  (iospel, 
in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  Church  of  Koine 
cleared  itself  of  this  infamy,  after  a  time,  and  the  Kternal 
(iospel  proved  to  be  very  temporary. 

As  we  should  expect,  many  of  these  advocates  of  sim 
plicity  soon  abandoned  the  poverty  they  had  preached, 
overstrained  and  absurd  as  it  was;  the  worst  vices  of 
human  nature  wnv  found  in  them;  they  became  the 
pests  of  society,  worming  their  way  into  domestic  secrets, 
selling  pardons  for  money,  and  sometimes  tempting  to 
*  Ili.xturi/ uj  tl.<  Miiltll<  .I;/1-.  IV. u  on. 


256  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

crimes  that  they  might  absolve  the  culprits  on  the  payment 
of  heavy  fines. 

As  for  their  pretended  poverty,  it  became  the  greatest 
farce,  but  they  kept  up  the  pretence  of  being  true  to 
their  original  vows — Jesuits  before  the  time.  The  Fran 
ciscans  said  they  were  still  poor,  when  they  had  jewels 
and  money  in  abundance,  because  their  property  belonged 
to  the  Church  ;  the  Dominicans,  because  it  pertained  to 
the  Order ;  the  Conventuals  (a  variety  of  Franciscans), 
because  they  professed  only  to  enjoy  the  interest  of  money, 
the  principal  of  which  was  still  vested  in  the  donors. 
Well  may  Emily  Holt  exclaim  :  "  Is  there  any  length 
of  absurdity  to  which  a  blinded  intellect  and  a  fettered 
conscience  are  unable  to  go  !  "  * 

Wyclif  did  not  spare  these  Orders,  saying  the  Ru  e 
of  Christ  is  enough  for  His  servants,  without  any  of  thes^e 
inventions  of  men.  They  were  to  him  '"  stinking  orders 
who  love  more  their  idle  muck  than  they  do  their  brethren 
in  God,"  "  hypocrites,"  "  blind."  "  full  of  heresy,"  ''  limbs 
of  the  fiend,"  "'  tattered  clouts,"  and  "  live  devils." 

What  could  people  know  of  the  Word  of  God  in  such 
times  ?  There  was  scarcely  any  circulation  of  the  frag 
ments  we  have  already  noticed.  Certainly,  the  Gospel  and 
Epistle  for  the  day  were  read  in  the  vernacular,  and  there 
were  occasional  sermons  of  some  sort.  Another  rude 
means  of  instruction  was  attempted  through  the  Miracle 
Plays,  which  claim  more  than  a  passing  notice.  The 
taste  for  them  spread,  until  in  Wyclil's  century  they 
had  become  frequent,  and  were  performed  before  great 
crowds  at  Chester,  Coventry,  Wakefield,  York,  Newcastle, 
Preston,  Kendal,  Wymondham,  Dublin,  and  other  places. 
Gregory  Nazianzen,  Jerome's  master,  and  Patriarch  of 
Constantinople,  appears  to  have  led  the  way  by  composing 
plays  from  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  as  substitutes  for 
those  of  Sophocles  and  Euripides.  He  preserved  the 
Greek  model,  but  turned  the  choruses  into  Christian 

*  Sec  her  extremely  interesting  and  reliable  Joli)  <l<  ir///7///Y,  founded 
Upon  Itchier,  and  a  thorough  study  of  the  Reformers  works  as  published 
by  Arnold. 


JOHN  \VVCT.IF  AND  HIS  TRANSLATION      257 

hymns,  tin;  only  one  extant  now  being  that  on  tin1  Passion. 
Menestrier  thinks  that  Mysteries  were  introduced  amongst 
us  l)\-  tin-  pilurims  who  went  to  the  Holy  Land,*  the  play 
of  St.  Catherine  (A.D.  1 100)  being  the  first  known.  Often 
they  consisted  of  single  subjects,  such  as  the  conversion 
of  Saul,  or  the  casting  out  of  devils  from  Mary  Magdalene. 
In  <m<'  instance,  those  who  were  crucified  as  Christ,  or 
suspended  as  Judas,  nearly  lost  their  lives.  The  stage 
decorations  were  the  church  ornament*,  and  Steevens 
observes  that  there  was  always  a  buffoon  in  these  plays, 
which  was  the  devil,  vinegar  being  applied  to  his  nose  to 
make  him  roar.  His  tormentor  was  another  buffoon 
called  the  Vice,  having  a  cap  with  ass's  ears,  and  a  dagger 
made  of  a  thin  lath.  The  nimble  Vice  would  skip  up. 
like  a  jackanapes,  into  the  devil's  neck,  and  ride  him  a 
course,  belabouring  him  with  his  wooden  dagger.  His 
stage  directions  were  indeed  to  lay  about  him  with  a  long 
pole,  and  tumble  the  characters  one  over  the  other  with 
great  noise  ami  riot. 

In  the  Corpus  Christi  Plays  there  were  theatres  for 
the  several  scenes,  large  and  high,  placed  upon  wheels, 
and  drawn  to  ;dl  the  chief  parts  of  the  citv.  The  ancient 
stage  was  often  in  three  parts,  according  to  Strutt.  In 
the  uppermost  sat  (Jod,  surrounded  bv  His  angels.  In 
the  second  appeared  the  holy  saints,  and  in  the  lowest 
the  mere  mortals.  On  one  side  of  the  lowest  platform 
was  a  dark  pitchy  cavern,  whence  issued  appearances 
of  fire  and  flames,  and  when  necessary  the  audience  were 
treated  to  hideous  noises  and  yellings.  From  this  yawning 
cave  the  devils  themselves  constantly  ascended. 

Three  Biblical  Plays  of  this  period  are  extant,  having 
been  found  in  the  library  at  Tours.  The  first  sets  forth 
the  Kali  of  Adam  and  Kve.  ''  after  which.''  said  the  stage 
order.  "  devils  shall  take  them  and  put  them  into  Hell, 
and  they  shall  make  a  great  smoke  to  rise  in  it,  and  cry 
aloud."  The  second  play  is  the  Death  of  Abel,  after 
which  the  devils  coming,  Cain  is  led  to  Hell,  beinu  often 
struck',  but  the  <hall  fake  Abel  more  mildly;  then  th  ' 


258  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  P.IBLE 

Prophets  shall  lie  rva»lv.  cadi  in  a  convenient  place  of 
concealment."  The  third  plav  consists  of  these  concealed 
prophets  coining  forward  to  prophesy  of  Christ.  Hell  was 
always  represented  by  a  whale's  open  jaws,  made  of  painted 
pasteboard,  with  a  fire  lighted  behind  the  lower  jaw,  so 
that  it  might  seem  to  breathe  flame.  Often  on  the  Feast 
of  Corpus  Christi,  founded  bv  Crban  iv.  in  1204,  the 
Guilds  combined  to  01  ve  such  representations  :  the  tanners 
would  take  the  Kail  of  Lucifer:  the  drapers,  the  Creation, 
the  Fall,  and  the  Death  of  Abel;  the,  water-carriers,  the 
Flood  and  the  Ark;  the  barbers  and  wax  chandlers,  the 
histories  of  Lot.  and  Abraham.  This  was  at  Chester, 
and  they  were  continued  until  the  Bible  became  a  household 
book.  At  Coventry,  the  old  account-books  are  preserved, 
and  we  can  still  see  the  prices  of  "an  earthquake  and 
a  bowel  for  the  same."  "  three  worlds  painted."  and  as 
little  as  tivepence  for  "  setting  the  world  on  tire."*  In 
another  list  we  find  the  following,  though  perhaps  there 
was  no  intentional  irreverence  :—"  God's  coat  of  white- 
leather  ((')  skins),"  '"  Cheverel  (peruke)  for  God/'  "girdle 
for  God,"  "paid  to  God  Us./'  "item  to  the  divyll  and 
to  Judas,  I8d."  t 

*  IUn«tr<i1in,i«  <>j  l'.n<jli<li  Jti/it/t'uH.  II.  Morley.  Tlic  woodcuts  are 
taken  from  Iliis  work,  where  a  larue  section  of  one  of  the  Miracle  Plays 
will  be  found. 

t  The  "  Harrowing  of  Hell  "  was  a  favourite  performance,  and 
we  see  what  was  ncccssarv  for  it  from  the  accounts  still  preserved 
in  Bristol  : 

••  Item,  thai  .Master  (  'aiming  hath  delivered  this  lih  day  of  .July  1470 
to  Master  Nicholas  Peters,  Vicar  of  St.  Man  HedclilVe.  a  new  sepulchre 
well  <:ilt  and  a  cover  I  hereto. 

"  Item,  an  imau'e  of  (iod  . \lmijhtv  rising  out  of  the  same  sepulchre, 
with  a  lath  made  of  timber  and  I  lie  iron  work  thereof. 

"  Item,  thereto  helon«_feth   Tlca\en  made  of  limber  and  >tained  cloths. 

"  Item,  Hell  made  of  timber  and  iron  work,  with  devils  to  the  number 
of  thirteen. 

"  Item,  four  kui-hts  armed,  keeping  the  sepulchre,  with  their  weapons 
in  their  hands,  two  axes.  ( u  o  spears  and  two  shields. 

"  Item,  foui-  pair  of  au<:e]  win  us  for  four  aiuiels.  made  of  timber  and 
well  painted. 

"  Item,  t  he  Kat  h<  r.  t  he  < TO\\  n  and  visasje.  I  he  ball  \\  ith  a  cross  ii|>on  it, 
\\ell  '_'ilt  with  line  cold. 

"  Item,  I  he  llolv  Ch ost  com;n>j  out  of  Hca\cn  into  the  sepulchre. 


en  wiotv 
ufrtux^umtt^ 
loqitu 
nftut" 
uu  H :OffJ 0  =f  urn  Q |fi) | |JI^;TI 


V\<'-IMII.K    »F    TUT     "I'ir.I.IV    I'AUI'KHfM.  ' 

IIAVK.    IlKKV     I  \K(fTH>    I  I  TWKK.N'    A.T.     M'JO    AND    1435. 


JOHN  WVn.IF  AND   HIS  TRANSLATION      261 

Could  any  good  whatever  be  done  by  such  represent 
ations  (  The  harm  is  sufficiently  obvious  in  connecting 
sacred  limits  with  buffoonery. 

One  other  means  of  instruction  must  bo,  noticed,  the 
"  Biblia  L'aupcrum."  When  these  were  introduced,  how 
ever,  it  is  impossible  to  say,  but  as  common  paper  was 
made  from  rags  at  the  close  of  the  thirteenth  century, 
they  perhaps  came  into  use  soon  afterwards.  They 
consisted  <•!  a  number  of  rude,  woodcuts,  with  Biblical 
sentences,  and  were  most  likely  used  in  the  instruction 
of  children,  as  well  as  for  household  reading.  The  instruc 
tion  thev  gave  was  small,  but  the  price  was  no  doubt 
IONS,  and  they  were  a  good  deal  used,  the  few  extant  copies 
beinij  much  worn  and  mutilated.  Some  have  thought 
thev  were  later,  and  may  have,  been  Lawrence  Coster's 
work.  The  histories  and  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testa 
ment  figurative  of  Christ  were  mostly  employed.  Perhaps 
the  word  "  predicatorum "  should  be  added,  as  they 
are  in  fact  a  series  of  skeleton  sermons,  ornamented  with 
woodcuts  to  warm  the  preacher's  imagination,  and  stored 
with  texts  to  assist  Ins  memory.  Other  abridgments  of 
greater  extent  were  called  'l  Bibles  of  the  poor,"  notably 
St.  Bonaventure's,  consisting  of  extracts  for  the  use  of 
preachers.  The  (Jerman  editions  had  absurd  woodcuts, 
the  face  of  the  serpent  being  like  that  of  a  Bavarian  broom- 
girl-* 

"Item,  belotiiieth  to  tin-  four  angels,  four  chevelers  (or  supports — 
thr  angels  would  be  personified  by  four  boys  oryouirj  females)." 

Harrington's  \>n/"  .{ntnjmr,  by  I'ark.  Much  more  on  this  subject 
will  also  be  found  in  l.ardner. 

*  Other  particulars  will  be  found  in  Home.  Tin-  rarity  of  the  "  Biblia 
PaujHTiini  has  led  to  the>e  "  poor  men's  Bibles  "  being  bold  at  very  hiirh 
priees.  Mr.  U'illot's  was  >old  in  1813  for  two  hundred  and  forty-live 
guineas.  There  are  copies  in  the  Bodleian  Library. 


CHAPTER    XTX 

JOHN    WYCUF — II. 

"John  Wiolif  may  be  justly  accounted  one  of  the  watest  men  that 
our  country  has  produced,  lie  is  one  of  the  very  few  who  have  left 
the  impress  of  their  minds  not  only  on  their  own  a-e  but  on  all  time." 

I) KAN   HOOK. 

''  A    uood    man    tin-re    was   of   religion 
That  was  a   pooiv   par.-oii   of  a  town, 
l)ii(    I'ieh    he   \\'as   of   holv   thought    and    work. 
Me  was  also  a  learned    man,   a  clerk. 
That    ('hrislc'-s  gospel   truelv   wolde   preach; 
His   parishens  devoutly   would    lie   teach 
I'eniun   he   was,  and   wonder  diligent, 
And   in  adversity  full    patient: 
And  such    he   was  y proved   often   sithes. 
Full   loth    u-ere   him    to   cursen    for   his   tithes. 
r.ut    rather   would    he   yevon   out    of  doubt 
Unto   his   poor.''    parislu-us  aliout. 
Of   his   olferiiiL'.   and   eke   of   his   Mibstance. 
He   could    in    little    ihin.L's    have    sullisaticc. 
\\'ide   was   his   parish,   and    houses   far  asunder. 
Hut    he  ne   left    nought    for  no  rain  ne   thunder, 
In  sickness  and   in   mix-hief  (o  visite 
The   furthest    in    his    parish,    much   and    lite. 
Upon    his  feet,   and    in    his   hand   a   staff. 
This   noble  ensamplc   to   his   sheep   he  yaf. 
That    iirst    he   wrought,   and   afterward   he   tauirht. 
Out    of    (lie   (Jospel    he    the    wordrs   caught 
And. this  limire  lie  aded    vet    thereto, — 
That    if  -old   nis<.\   what  "should   iron  do? 
l-'o:-   if   a    priest    be    foul,    on    uhorii    we    (rust. 
Xo   wonder   is   a    leued    man   to   rust.    .   .    . 
Well   on-lit    a   priest    ensamplc   for   to   -ive 
By  his  eleanesst\   ho\\    his  sheep  should    live. 
Il'e  settc    not    his    benelice    to    hire. 
And   left   his  sheep  acuinbored   in   the   mire. 
And  ran   unto  London,    unto  Saint  Ponies, 
To  seeken  him   a  chanterie  for  souls, 
262 


Or   with   a   brotherhood  to   be   wit  hold  : 

But  dwelt  at  home,  and  kept-    well  his  f<>M. 

So  that    the   wolf  ne  made   it    not  miscarry. 

He  was  a  shepherd  and  no  mercenary. 

And   though   he  holy   wen-  and    virtuous, 

He   was  to  sinful   men  no)   dispitou.s, 

Ne  of  his  speech-'-  dangerous  ne  diirnc. 

lint    in   his  tearhin^  discreet   and    licnign. 

To   drawcn   folk   to    Heaven   with    faiivness 

Bv   :_'ood   ensample    was   his   business  : 

But    if   were   anv    person   obstinate. 

What    so   he   were  of   hi<_rh   or   low  estate, 

Him   would    he   suibben   shar|)ly   for   the  nonce. 

A    better   priest    I    trow    that   nowhere  none   is. 

He   waited   after  no   pomp   ne   reverence, 

He   maked   him   no  spiced   conscience  ; 

But   I'hrist.s  lore,  and   his   Apostles'   twelve. 

He  taught,   but   first   he  followed   it    himseUe." 

Cfifiurrr'.t  xiijtiinxid  description  nf  ]\  i/rlii. 

SritKi.Y  it  was  high  time  that  someone  should  set  before 
the  people  (Joel's  own  truth  in  its  clearness  and  fulness, 
that  by  its  light  the  darkness  might  be  dispelled.  And 
so,  let  us  turn  to  \Vyclif,  raised  up  by  Clod  for  this  very 
purpose,  living  to  see  it  accomplished,  and  dying  peace 
fully  in  his  old  age,  in  spite  of  all  the  attacks  made  upon 
him.  His  history  is  a  little  confused,  as  there  were  two 
Wyclifs  at  the  same  time,  pist  as  we  have  had  two 
/Elfrica.  The  principal  facts  stand  out  clearly,  however, 
and  are  for  ever  interesting  to  all  who  value  the  heritage 
into  which  the  Knglish  have  come. 

He  belonged  to  the  same  parts  of  Northern  Yorkshire 
apparently  from  which  Richard  Rolle  came,  and  was 
born  in  l.'JiM.  about  thirty  years  after  the  death  of  Roger 
Bacon,  who  had  preceded  him  as  a  scientific  reformer. 
The  family  was  a  good  one.  and  gave  its  name  to  the 
village  of  WvclifTe,  on  the  banks  of  the  \Vve.  Having 
received  the  b:ist  education  which  could  be  given  in 
the  neighbourhood,  he  was  sent  to  Oxford  when  about 
sixteen,  entering  Queen's  College  the  same  year  that  it 
was  founded,  and  though  not  poor,  becoming  in  his  main 
characteristics  one  of  Chaucer's  poor  students,  whose  only 
thought  of  life  was  as  of  a  space  in  which  a  man  should 
be  ever  learning  or  ever  teaching.  There  he  showed 


266  OUR   OWN   KXC.LISH   r.IP.LK 

uncommon  proficiency,  and  wns  chosen  Fellow  of  his 
College  ;  in  1.SH1,  Master  of  Balhol  ;  and  four  years  later 
Warden  of  Canterbury  Hall.  "  Ah,  Lord  !  "  he  exclaims, 
in  one  of  his  works,  looking  back  1o  these  days,  "if  all 
the  study  that  men  now  have  with  a  multitude  of  new 
and  costly  books  were  turned  into  the  making  of  Bibles, 
and  in  studying  and  teaching  of  them,  how  much  should 
God's  law  be  furthered  and  kept  where  now  it  is  hindered, 
unstudied,  and  unread/'  * 

The  University  was  in  a  strange  state  indeed,  between 
Schoolmen  and  Friars  ol  all  descriptions.  That  of  Paris 
had  decayed  somewhat,  owing  to  the  English  wars,  and 
Oxford  had  grown,  though  it  was  a  town  of  schools  rather 
than  of  colleges.  A  sufficient  proof,  however,  of  the 
neglect  of  Biblical  study  is  found  in  the  fact  that  even 
the  Latin  Bibles  were  very  scarce.  Armachanis  sent  two 
students  from  Ireland  about,  this  time  to  study  Divinity, 
but  after  two  years  they  returned,  not  having  been  able 
to  buy  themselves  a  Bible  in  all  Oxford. j  But  Wyclif 
was  to  work  a  change.  Following  in  the  track  of  such 
vigorous  and  independent  thinkers  as  Bacon,  Duns  Scotus, 
and  Ockham,  he  was  to  go  far  beyond  them  all.  Gradually 
his  fame  spread  abroad,  and  he  acquired  the  name  of  the 
"Gospel  Doctor/'  from  his  acquaintance  with  Scripture, 
and  the  supremacv  he  at  all  t imes  gave  to  it.  His  influence 
grew  to  be  considerable,  and  later  on,  when  a  Bull  was 
sent  to  the  University  bv  Pope  Gregorv  XL.  hostile  to 
the  views  of  Wyclif,  it  was  looked  very  coldly  at,  and 
the  University  may  be  said  to  have  practically  sided 
with  the.  Gospel  Doctor.  In  fact,  they  stood  by  him  till 
he  gave,  up  t  ransiibstantiation,  three  vears  before  his 
death. 

One  service  that  he,  rendered  in  his  earlier  Oxford  days 
was  rendered  to  the  whole  country,  and  indeed  to  all 
time.  The  Pope,  Urban  v.,  revived  his  claim  to  an  annual 
tribute,  of  a  thousand  marks  from  England,  with  the 
whole  of  the  arrears  for  thirty-three  years..  Henry  in. 

*  /iiiprr1i>ni'»t'i  EvnngclizriHtiuni,  Of  a  feigned  contemplative  life. 
T  Bagster\s  Jlcxapla,  introduction. 


JOHN  WYCLIF  269 

had  paid  the  money  occasionally,  when  he  had  any 
object  to  gain,  and  Edward  i.  for  some  years,  the 
latest  payment  on  record  being  in  the  seventeenth  of  his 
reign.* 

The  king.  Edward  in.,  brought  the  claim  before  Parlia 
ment,  who  decided  that  neither  King  John  nor  any  other 
king  could  bring  this  realm  into  such  thraldom  but  by 
common  consent  of  Parliament.  The  following  year, 
an  able  writer  took  up  the  Papal  cause,  and  published  a 
vindication  of  the  claim,  closing  with  a  challenge  to  Wyclif 
by  name,  as  chaplain  to  the  kinir,  which  he  had  now  become, 
to  confute  his  arguments,  if  he  could.  This  Wyclif  soon 
did  with  a  vengeance,  and  from  that  time  Peter's  pence 
and  tribute  have  been  abandoned. f 

Considerable  doubt  has  recently  been  thrown  on  his 
having  been  Warden  of  Canterbury  Hall,  there  having 
been  not  only  one  but  several  priests  of  the  Reformer's 
name  in  his  day.  But  it  may  be  taken  as  almost  con 
clusive  evidence  of  the  generally  received  opinion,  that  one 
of  his  opponents.  William  Woodlord.  who  wrote  against 
him  soon  after  his  death,  speaks  of  his  holding  the  pre 
ferment.;!:  It  was  taken  from  him,  however,  on  the 
death  of  Archbishop  Islip,  the  founder  of  the  Hall, 
the  matter  coming  before  the  Pope,  who  decided  it. 
against  him  in  l.'J70.  Two  years  later  he  took  his 
degree  of  Doctor  of  Divinitv,  and  became  Theological 
Lecturer. 

A  little  later  (1:47  l-7<'>)  his  hostility  to  the  Papacy  was 
further  increased  in  a  way  which  reminds  us  of  the  shock 
which  Martin  Luther  received  on  his  visit  to  Rome.  He 
was  appointed  one  ol  seven  ambassadors  to  the  Pope, 
the  conferences  being  held  at  Bruges.  Thev  were  long 
and  fruitless,  but  they  opened  his  eyes  more  than  ever 
to  the  rottenness  of  the  Papal  svstom.  and  he  returned 
from  them  with  a  strong  desire  to  oppose  it,  might  and 

*    I'l  VMIH-'s    <    <,ii*till<ti<»>,    \«\      III. 

I  l.rrlil,  i  think*  thai  Wy.-hl  hail  a  scat  in  tin-  Parliament  <>f  HUti  as 
a  '  liTiral  c\|K-rl  a  '  iiivrrnnicnl  Commissioner. 

J  Sri-  this  mutter  fully  u'«>ne  into  in  Vntiirhan'*  Joint  <!<'  \\'i/cltljt. 


270  OUR  OWN   ENGLISH   HIIJLE 

main.  Ho  had  appealed  to  the  Vope  once,  but  he  now 
began  to  call  him  v'  the  most  cursed  of  clippers  and  purse 
kervers." 

The  mission  to  Bruges  was  important  in  another  respect. 
Whilst  there  the  old  Flemish  city  became  the  seat  of 
negotiations  between  France  and  England,  and  amongst 
the  English  ambassadors  was  John  of  (Jaunt.  Doubtless 
the  powerful  patronage  which  he  threw  over  the  Reformer 
through  many  years  was  owing  in  part  to  the  friendship 
formed  between  them  at  this  time.  .John  of  (Jaunt,  a 
king's  son  and  a  king's  lather,  was  naturally  one  of  the 
most  powerful  men  of  the  day,  and  he  stood  bv  \Vyelif 
until  he  wrote  against  transubstantiation,  when,  like  his 
rniversity.  he  gave  him  up. 

The  Reformer's  views,  when  lie  settled  partly  down  to 
his  great  work  of  giving  the  entire  Bible  to  the  people, 
were  not  altogether  what  we  should  now  call  Protestant. 
They  were  mostly  so,  however,  and  he  was  saved  from 
incorporating  any  false1  doctrine.  He  condemned  the 
worship  of  images,  and  denounced  all  the  commerce  of 
indulgences.  It  was  a,  little  later  that  he  said  that 
Purgatory  had  no  foundation  in  Scripture,  but  was  a 
fable,  used  by  Anti-Christ  to  spoil  men  bv  means  of  indul 
gences  and  simoniacal  merchandise.  Faith  in  the  Saviour, 
working  by  love,  he  affirmed  to  be  the  condition  of  sal 
vation,  holding  that  we  are  justified  bv  the  righteousness 
of  Christ  alone.  His  views  of  the  Divine  authority  and 
sufficiency  of  Scrip!  lire  were  of  course  strong,  and  he 
rejected  the  Apocryphal  Books  from  the  Canon.  In  one 
of  his  sermons,  at  Lutterworth,  to  the  living  of  which  he 
was  presented  in  l-')75,  he  says  — 

"  Though  there  were  a  hundred  Popes,  and  though  all 
the  Friars  in  the  world  were  turned  into  Cardinals,  yet  we 
could  learn  more  from  the  Bible  than  from  that  vast 
multitude. 

Imagine  him,  then,  chiefly  in  n  quiet  Leicestershire 
retreat,  a  small  market,  town,  with  a  little  stream,  a  petrify 
ing  spring,  a  cai>e  for  the  detent  ion  of  evil  doers,  a  cucking- 
stool  for  scolds,  and  a  parish  cat-of -nine-tails.  Here  he 


273 

devoted  himself  to  the  congenial  task  of  turning  his  Latin 

Yiilnate  into  the  Knu'lish  of  his  time. 

"So  did  lie  Ir.ivd  <>n  life's  common  \v;iy 
In  eheerfiil  lowliness,  and  yd  liis  heart 
The  mk'hticst  duties  on  itself  did  lay." 

lie   was  not    trvin^   his   prentice   hand   exactly,   having 

made  a  heLnnninLj  no  earlier  than  1  .')•"><),  when  IK;  translated 
the  IIe\-elation  of  St.  .John,  with  a  short  Commentary 
of  liis  own,  which  was  several  times  revised.  The  occasion 


of  this  was  a  fearful  pestilence,  which  swept  away  vast 
multitudes,  and.  combined  with  other  causes,  produced 
a  general  L'looni,  Oxford  l)ein<{  more  wretched  than  most 
towns.*  lie  had  also  formerly  translated  the  Gospels, 
with  an  Exposition,  the  notes  hein^  chiefl\r  from  the 
Fathers. 

Doubtless  he  was  assisted  l>y  a  circle  of  friends,  hut  how 
far  their  participation  went  it  is  not  easy  to  sav. 

*  7Vc    Ln*t    .  !</.   «\  /A.     Chiirrh,  ;l   tract  for  tin-  tinu-?-,  may  b<-  wn-ntrly 
attnlnit.d    1..   him 


274  OUR  OWN   ENCLISII   BIl'.LE 

Forshall  and  Madden,  the  recent  and  laborious  editors 
of  the  whole,  say  "  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  accom 
plishment  of  the  work  must  be  attributed  mainly  to  his 
zeal,  encouragement,  and  direction.  He  was  led  to  the 
undertaking  slowly  and  gradually,  and  it  was  not  completed 
until  after  several  preliminary  efforts."  The  fifteen  JMSS. 
collated  by  them  show  a  great  diversity.  It  is  possible 
that,  whilst  Wyclif  took  the  New  Testament,  the  Old 
was  put  into  the  hands  either  of  tk  Nicholas  de  Hereford  " 
alone,  or  others  with  him,  the  whole  being  completed 
and  corrected  by  Wyclif.  In  Baruch  iii.  20  is  found 
"  Explicit  translationem  Nicolay  de  Hereford."  Of  course 
Wyclif  had  a  party,  and  Hereford  was  known  as  one  of 
them  at  Oxford.  He  belonged  to  Queen's  College,  and 
was  excommunicated  by  Archbishop  Courtney  in  1382: 
From  this  sentence,  however,  he  appealed  to  the  Pope, 
and  is  said  to  have  gone  to  Rome,  where  he  was  placed  in 
confinement.  During  an  insurrection  there,  he  was  set 
at  liberty  by  the  populace,  and  after  many  vicissitudes, 
was  made  Chancellor  of  Hereford  in  I.'WJ-,  and  in  1307 
Treasurer  in  that  Cathedral.  In  1417,  from  whatever 
cause,  he  resigned  his  office,  and  entered  the  Carthusian 
Monastery  of  St.  Ann,  Coventry,  where  he  died.  The 
probability  is  that,  as  his  contribution  breaks  off  abruptly 
in  the  middle  of  a  verse,  the  cause  was  his  citation  to 
appear  before  his  superiors,  which  gives  us  another  glimpse 
of  the  difficulties  under  which  the  work  was  done.  His 
translation  is  very  literal,  and  he  never  introduces  textual 
glosses. 

Wyclif 's  labours  were  carried  on  at  Oxford  in  part, 
as  well  as  at  Lutterworth,  and  it  was  in  the  midst  of 
them,  and  perhaps  as  the  result  of  excessive  toil,  that 
he  fell  ill  and  was  thought  to  be  dying.  It  is  a  famous 
and  probably  a  true  story  that,  in  the  severity  of  his 
illness,  a  body  of  mendicant  Friars  waited  on  him  to  set 
forth  his  heretical  views,  and  to  warn  him  of  his  supposed 
danger.  He  admitted  them,  and  listened  patiently  to 
what  they  had  to  say;  then,  "Raise  me  on  my  pillow," 
he  said  to  his  attendant,  and,  looking  at  them  as  they 


stood  before  liiin,  'k  I  shall   not  die,"  he  exclaimed,   "  but 
live,  still  further  to  declare  the  evil  deeds  of  the  Friars/' 

There  are  manv  references  in  \Vyclifs  works  to  the 
need  of  the  translation.  For  instance,  in  his  Office  of 
Cunt''*  we  read  :  "  They  dread  the  Pope's  Law  and  Statutes 
made,  by  Bishops  and  other  officers,  more  than  the  noble 
law  of  the  (lospel.  Therefore  they  have  many  jnvat 
and  costly  books  of  man's  law,  and  study  them  much, 


Tin.  ><T.vi;  OF  WYCMH'S  MINISTRATIONS,   l:{i5^   l:;7l. 

but   few   curates   have,   the   Bible   and    Expositions   of  the 
Gospel;    they  study  them  but  little  and  do  them  less." 

So  in  his  Tract  on  the  Sony;  of  the  Ordinal  of  Salisbury, 
Wyclif  reproves  the  li^ht  sin^in<;  then  newly  introduced 
in  public  worship,  which,  he  says,  "  hinders  much  the 
preaching  of  the  jjospel."  Then  he  adds  :  - 

If  all  the  study  and  labour  that  men  have  now.  about 
Salisbury  use,  with  multitudes  of  new  costly  portesses, 
and  all  other  such  books,  were  turned  into  makiii"  of 


276  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH    BIBLE 

bibles,  and  in  studying  and  teaching  thereof,  how  much 
should  God's  Law  be  furthered  and  known  and  kept !  And 
now  it  is  so  much  hindered,  unstudied,  and  unkept !  How 
should  rich  men  be  excused  that  spend  so  much  in  great 
chapelries,  and  costly  books  of  men's  ordinance,  for  fame 
of  the  world,  and  will  not  spend  so  much  about  books  of 
God's  Law,  and  to  study  them  and  teach  them,  since 
this  were  without  comparison  better,  easier,  safer." 

The  translation  was  taken  from  the  Vulgate,  as  a  matter 
of  course  in  this  still  early  era,  and  very  literally  was 
the  work  done.  Wyclif  was  fully  resolved  that,  whatever 
his  enemies  might  say  of  him,  they  should  never  say  that 
he  had  perverted  the  Word  of  God,  and  his  principle 
was  like  Rolle's,  "  no  strange  English,  but  that  which 
is  easiest  and  commonest."  As  regards  its  general  style, 
it  differed  from  that  of  his  two  chief  contemporaries, 
Chaucer  and  Langlande,  the  former  of  whom  addressed 
himself  more  to  the  higher  classes,  and  the  latter  to  the 
poor.  He  is  mostly  free  from  the  Romance  influence 
to  which  Chaucer  owed  so  much,  and  has  a  marked  pre 
ference  for  Saxon  words.  Perhaps  we  should  not  be  far 
wrong  in  saying  that  Wyclif's  translation  offers  us  a 
fairer  specimen  of  the  common  English  speech  of  the 
period  than  do  the  works  of  any  of  his  contemporaries.* 

None  of  the  principal  modern  languages  was  so  late  in 
its  formation,  or  in  its  application  to  the  purposes  of 
literature,  as  the  English,  arising  as  it  did  out  of  the  Saxon 
branch  of  the  great  Teutonic  stock,  modified  by  the  Norman 
Conquest.  The  slow  progress  of  the  language  is  chiefly 
to  be  ascribed  to  this,  the  native  inhabitants  being  degraded 
in  every  way,  and  all  power  transferred  to  the  foreigners. 
Robert  of  Gloucester  (A.D.  1290)  proves  that,  in  his  time, 
the  superior  ranks  continued  to  use  the  French  language. 
The  earliest  legal  instrument  in  English  known  to  exist 
bears  the  date  of  1343.  Sir  John  Mandeville  (A.D.  1350) 
may  pass  for  the  Father  of  English  prose,  no  original  work 
being  so  ancient  as  his  Trurds.  The  Academical  Library 
at  Oxford  in  1300  consisted  of  a  few  tracts  and  books 

*  Uhanjcs  in  the  Kn-jliah  Luivjunyc,  H.  T.  W.  Wood,  15. A.      1S70. 


• 


In  Luttrrworth  Stud'-. 


177 


JOHN   \VVrUF 


279 


kept  in  chests  under  St.  Mary's  Church.  By  the  account- 
books  of  Bulton  Abbey,  about  the  beginning  of  the  four 
teenth  century,  three  books  only  appear  to  have  been 
purchased  in  forty  years,  though  Bolton  was  perhaps 
more  notable  for  ignorance  and  jollity  than  the  average 
monastery. 


So  that,  for  the  end  of  tin-  fourteenth  centurv  to  produce 
a  ('haiieer.  worthy  to  stand  in  the  triumvirate  with 
Dante  and  Petrarch,  and  a  \Yvelif  with  the  complete 
Knulish  hible  in  his  hand,  is  memorable. 

Here  is  a  sample  of  it  extracted  from  Forshall  and 
Madden's  edit  ion  : 

"And    Caym    was    greet  li    wroth,    and     therewith     felle 


280  OUR  OWN  KNCLISII    mi'.LE 

his  chore.  And  the  Lord  seide  to  hym,  w  \Vlii  art  iliow 
wroth,  and  wlii  therwitli  fallith  tin  face.  Shall  tho\v 
not  reseyve  wel  if  thow  dost  ;  ellis  forsothe  euel.  anoon 
in  thi  gatis  tlii  synnes  shal  l)en  at  thee  ?  but  under  tliee 
shall  be  the  appetite  of  hym  and  thow  shalt  have  lord 
ship  of  hym.'  Anf  Oaym  seide  to  Abel  his  brother. 
'  Go  we  out.'  Whanne  thei  weren  in  the,  field  aroos 
there  with  Caym  agins  his  brother  Abel  and  slowe 
hym." 

Here  is  also  a  sample  from  the  Xew  Testament  :— "  He 
that  is  sowun  into  good  loond  is  this  that  herith  the  word 
and  understondith  and  bryngith  forth  fruyt,  and  summe 
makitli  an  hundred  fold  treuli  another  sixty  fold  and 
another  thritty  fold"  (Matt.  xiii.  1>:J). 

The  close  of  John,  1st  Epistle,  is:  "My  little  sones, 
Kepe  ye  you  fro  mawmites."  i.e.  ]>u])pet  dolls  and  such 
like. 

Such  extracts  begin  to  look  like  the  English  tongue,  and 
if  the  spelling  is  not  modern,  we  must  remember  that 
it  is  the  first  really  English  translation,  the  Saxon  MSS. 
that  we  have  considered  so  far  being  no  more  modern 
English  than  Latin  is  Italian. 

It  is  possible  enough,  however,  that  the  u'ap  between 
the  "easy  and  common"  English  of  Richard  Rolle  and 
Wyclif's  work  may  have  been  filled  up  by  others,  and 
we  are  not  careful  to  defend  him  in  this  matter.  In 
our  own  days  of  printing,  such  controversies  are  not 
likely  to  occur,  but  individual  MSS.  have  been  lost  beyond 
all  trace,  or  destroyed  with  malice  aforethought.  It 
is  certain  that  his  work  does  not  stand  alone.  About 
the  same  time  a  curious  volume  appeared,  in  which  is 
found  a  portion  of  St.  Matthew's  (Jospel.  several  of  the 
Epistles,  and  a  dialogue  introducing  portions  of  the  Old 
Testament.  Somewhere  also  in  the  latter  half  of  the 
fourteenth  century  a  version  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles  was 
made,  Latin  and  English  being  given  paragraph  bv  para 
graph.  These  authors,  whoever  they  may  have  been, 
have  given  no  clue  to  their  names,  recognising  possibly 
the  danger  of  their  work. 


JOHN   WYCLIF 


281 


Of  course,  words  distinctive  of  Popish  tenets  and  prac 
tices  were  excluded,  and  thus  we  need  not  he  surprised 
at  Sir  Tlmmas  Morn's  charge  that  lie  maliciously  planted 
in  the  Holy  Text  such  words  as  might  in  the  reader's 
ears  serve  to  the  proof  of  such  heresies  as  he  went  about 
to  sow. 

On  the  other  hand,  in  spite  of  the  Vulgate  having 
l»een  the  Authorised  Version  hitherto,  many  common 
Latinised  words  were  not  then  understood,  and  such 


glosses  as  the  following  are  found  in  the  margin  of  some 
of  th«-  MSS.  : 


srht'iules  chepe 
love 

a    lltrl    l.oUr 

ojx'M  Iwkbyters 

.L'oo.l    uill 

I  hcfl  of  food  things 
men 


\V  vclifs  version  is  "robust,  terse,  popular,  and  homely.'' 
and  it  is  the  parent  stock  of  our  Authorised  Version.  Dr. 
Momhert  gives  a  number  of  illustrations  of  this,  such 
as''streit  is  the  gate  and  narewe  the  weve,''  "  fer  be  it 
fro  thee.  Lord."  "the  depe  thingis  of  <lod,"  "the  cuppe 
of  blessvnge  the  whi<  h  we  blessen  ;  "  and  in  the  follow- 


282 


OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   BIBLE 


ing    extract   both   agreement   and   difference   are  seen  at 
once  : — 


S.  LUKE  vi.  20-2(>. 


WYCLIF  (1380). 

20.  And     whanne     his     iyen 
wercn  cast  vp  in  to  his  diseiplis  : 
ho    seide,    Blessid    be    ye    pore 
men,  for  the  Kyngdom  of  God 
is  yourc. 

21.  Blessid    be   ye    that   now 
hungren  :   for  ye  schuln  be  ful- 
fillid,    Blessid    be    ye    that    now 
wepen  :   for   ye    schuln    leiye. 

22.  blcssid  ye'sculen  bewhanne 
men   schuln   hate   you,    departe 
you    aweie,    and    putte    schcn- 
schip    to    you  ;  cast    out    youre 
name,  as  yuel  for  mannes  sone. 


23.  ioye  ye  in   that  dai,   and 
be  ye  glad  :   for  lo  youre  mede 
is    myche    in    heuene,    for   aftir 
these     thingis  :   the      fadirs     of 
hem   diden   to  profetis. 

24.  Netheles  wo  to  you  riche 
men  :   than   han  youre  comfort. 


25.  wo  to  you  that  ben 
fnllillid  ;  for  ye  sculn  hungre, 
AVO  to  you  that  now  leiyen  : 
for  ye  schuln  moorne  and 
wepe. 

2f>.  Wo  to  you  whanne  alle 
men  sehulen  blesse  you,  aftir 
these  thingis  tlie  fadris  of  hem 
diden  to  profetis.* 


AUTHORISED  VERSION  (1(511). 

And  hee  lifted  vp  his  eyes  on 
his  disciplis,  and  said,  Blessed 
bee  yee  poore  :  for  yours  is 
the  kingdome  of  God. 

Blessed  are  ye  that  hunger 
now  .  for  yee  shall  bee  filled. 
Bl.essid  are  yee  that  weepe 
now,  for  ye  shall' laugh. 

Blessed  are  yee  when  men 
shall  hate  you,  and  when  they 
shall  separate  you  from  their 
company,  and  shal  reproach 
you,  and  cast,  out  your  name 
as  euill,  for  the  Sonne  of  mannes 
sake. 

Kcjoice  ye  in  that  day,  and 
leape  for  joy  :  for  beholde,  your 
reward  is  great  in  heauen, 
for  in  the  liUo  maner  did  their 
fathers  vn(o  the  Prophets. 

Woe  unto  you  that  are  rich  : 
for  yee  haue  reeeimd  your 
consolation. 

Woe  unto  you  that  are  full  . 
for  yee  shall  hunger.  Woe 
vnto  you  that  laugh  now  :  for 
yee  shall  mourne  and  weepe. 


vnto   you   when 
seake    well    of 


Wo 
shall 

so     did     ther 
false   prophets. 


*  English  Versions,  J.  T.  Moinhcrt,  ]>.!>. 


It  is  said,  on  the  authority  of  Dr.  Tregelles,  that  not 
many  years  a^o.  \\  yclifs  version  was  read  aloud  in 
Yorkshire,  nearly  every  word  and  expression  being  under 
stood.  Dr.  Kadie  mentions  a  number  of  words  still 
surviving  in  Scotch,  and  many  others,  which  by  a  slight 


cliariL"1  of  spelling  may  be  easily  identified  :  abaished, 
bottler,  parfyt.  snybbe.  spitele,  etc. 

Of  course,  no  Hebrew  or  (IreeU  letter  was  looked  at 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  translation,  but  it  is 
probable  that  some  use  was  made  of  a  French  translation 
of  the  twelfth  century,  published  by  F.  .Michel  in  iSliO. 

It     was     emphatically    a    People's     Bible     that    \\yclif 


284  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  ?>IP,LR 

spent  his  strength  upon,  and  probably  a  great  number  of 
copies  of  it  were  made.  Knighton  looks  at  it  from  the 
old  Catholic  standpoint  when  he  says  :  "  This  Master 
John  Wyclif  translated  the  Gospels  out  of  Latin  into 
English,  and  by  that  means  laid  it  more  open  to  the  laity 
and  to  women  who  could  read  than  it  used  to  be  to  the 
most  learned  of  the  clergy,  and  those  of  them  who  had 
the  best  understanding,  and  so  the  gospel  pearl  is  cast 
abroad,  and  trodden  under  foot  of  swine,  and  that  which 
used  to  be  precious  both  to  clergy  and  laity  is  made 
as  it  were  the  common  jest  of  both  ;  and  the  jewel  of 
the  Church  is  turned  into  the  sport  of  the  people,  and 
what  was  before  the  talent  of  the  clergy  and  Doctors  of 
the  Church  is  made  for  ever  common  to  the  laity."  Yes, 
it  is  for  ever,  gentle  Knighton  ;  the  darkness  is  past, 
and  the  true  light  now  shineth,  and  will  go  on  shining. 
And  it  is  Knighton  himself,  a  Canon  of  Leicester,  one 
of  Wyclif 's  bitterest  foes,  who  perforce  gives  him  the 
highest  character  for  the  execution  of  such  a  work,  saying 
that  "  he  came  to  be  reckoned  inferior  to  none  of  his 
time  in  philosophy,  and  incomparable  in  the  performance 
of  school  exercises,  a  man  of  profound  wit  (intellect)  and 
very  strong  and  powerful  in  disputations,  and  by  the 
common  sort  of  Divine-;  esteemed  little  less  than  a  God."  : 

*  Quoted  by  Professor  JJurrows,   ll'tclif*  Place  in  ///*/<>/•//. 


\VVCI.IF  S    VKSJ'Ml.NT, 


CII. \PTKK    XX 

PURVEY 

"Sonic   seek   devotion,    toil,    war,   L'ood.   or  crime, 
At  cordiii'_r  as   their  souls   \\ere   formed    to  sink   or 

\Vvri.iF\s  work  was  continued  by  John  Purvey,  or 
Pumay,  who  brought  out  a  revised  translation  a  little 
later.  Hi-  was  an  eloquent  man.  famous  for  his  skill  in 
the  law.  and  was  called  the  Library  of  the  Lollards.  He 
appeal's  to  have  been  curate  at  Lutterworth,  and  no 
writings  of  his  appear  until  after  Wyclifs  death.  His 
improved  version  was  not  the  work  of  any  single  man, 
however,  as  is  discovered  from  an  account  of  the  process 
pursued.  Driven  by  Purvey  himself.  He  says  they  first  of 
all  gathered  many  old  Bibles  and  Doctors'  glosses  together, 
and  made  a  new  Latin  text.  Then  they  consulted  old 
grammarians  and  divines,  whenever  there  was  anything 
hard.  Then  they  translated  as  clearly  as  they  could, 
sentence  by  sentence,  having  "  many  good  fellows  and 
cunning"  at  the  work.  This  second  version  is  not  so 
literal  as  Wyclifs,  but  more  rhythmical  and  idiomatic. 
It  is  thought  that  Purvev  engaged  in  it  on  being  ordered 
not  to  preach,  a  mandate  being  issued  in  L'jJS?  bv  the  Bishop 
of  Worcester,  prohibiting  Nicholas  Hereford,  John  Purvev, 
and  three  others  from  preaching  in  his  diocese,  and  mention 
ing  them  as  being  leagued  together  in  a  certain  College 
disallowed  by  law. 

He  probably  wrote  "The  l)oor  of  Holv  Scripture," 
which  is  found  allixed  to  manv  of  the  manuscript  Bibles 
of  this  pi-rind. 


286  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  P.IP.LE 

In  this  he  contends  for  the  supremo  authority  and  entire 
sufficiency  of  the  Scriptures,  and  the  necessity  for  trans 
lating  them  into  English,  as  also  for  the  right  of  private 
judgment.  The  lay  people,  he  says,  had  long  thirsted 
and  hungered  for  the  Holy  Scripture,  and  had  kept  it 
with  great  danger.  "  So  for  these  considerations  and  mere 
charity,  for  comfort  and  salvation  of  my  poor  Christian 
brethren  of  this  Realm,  I,  a  poor  simple  creature  and  clerk, 
have  translated  the  Bible  out  of  Latin  into  English." 
The  close  of  the  chapter  is  very  touching.  He  has  been 
answering  those  who  objected  that  he  was  not  so  holy  a 
man  as  Jerome  by  saying  that  neither  was  Jerome  so 
holy  as  the  Apostles,  and  yet  he  made  the  best  translation 
he  could,  as  others  also.  He  then  cries  out:  "()  Lord 
God,  seeing  that,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Faith,  so  many 
men  translated  into  Latin  to  the  great  profit  of  the  Latin 
men,  suffer,  Lord,  one  creature  to  translate  the  Bible 
into  English  for  the  great  profit  and  wealth  of  English 
people.  For,  if  worldly  clerks  look  well  upon  their 
chronicles  and  other  stories,  they  shall  find  that  Bede, 
an  Englishman,  translated  the  Bible  into  Saxon  tongue  ; 
and  not  only  Bede,  but  also  King  Alfred,  that  founded 
Oxford,  translated  in  his  latter  day  the  beginning  of  the 
Psalter  into  the  Saxon  tongue.  And  so,  finally,  God  of 
His  mercy  grant  us  all  grace  to  know  well  the  under 
standing  of  Holy  Scriptures  and  so  to  live  Chris- 
tianly  according  to  the  same,  and  always  gladly  to 
bear  Christ's  cross,  that  is  to  suffer  meekly  pain  and 
sorrow  and  tribulation  in  this  life,  so  that  we  may 
obtain  the  glory  promised  to  us  by  our  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ." 

Purvey's  version  was  published  by  the  Rev.  W.  W.  Skeat 
in  1S79,  in  a  popular  form,  reprinted  from  the  splendid 
volume  of  Forshall  and  Madden.  For  this  fine  but  some 
what  inaccessible  work,  one  hundred  and  seventy  MSS. 
of  the  Middle  English  version  made  by  AVyclif  and  his 
followers  were  examined.  It  was  found  that  the  whole 
of  these  could  be  divided  into  two  families,  the  version 
in  one  being  close,  literal,  and  unpolished,  and  in  the  other 


I'URVEY  287 

less  laboured  and  smoother.  The  first  was  probably  by 
Wvclif  and  his  helpers,  and  the  second  bv  Purvey  and 
his. 

\Vitli  regard  to  the  language  being  Middle  English, 
Mr.  Skeat  says — 

"  The  chief  stages  of  the  English  language  are  three  : 
viz.,  Anglo-Saxon  from  the  earliest  times  of  which  we 
have  records  to  about  1 1~><);  Middle  English  from  about 
that  time  to  IDOU;  and  Modern  English  from  about  the 
fifteenth  century.  The  Anglo-Saxon  is  almost  free  from 
admixture  with  Norman  French  ;  the  Middle  English 
is  remarkable  for  the  numerous  Norman  French  words 
which  arc  mixed  up  with  it,  so  as  to  form  an  essential  part 
of  the  vocabulary;  the  Modern  English  is  marked  by  a 
still  larger  increase  in  its  vocabulary  by  the  help  of  borrowed 
words  taken  from  almost  every  language  of  any  note. 
( >f  Middle  English  we  find  three  well-marked  varieties  or 
dialects:  Northern,  including  what  is  now  often  called 
Lowland  Scotch  :  Midland,  chiefly  in  use  between  the 
Humber  and  the  Thames;  Southern,  chiefly  to  the  south 
of  the  Thames.  The  Midland  dialect  is  that  which  finally 
prevailed,  and  to  which  modern  literary  English  is  most 
nearlv  related.'' 

It  seems  extraordinary  that  there  should  be  one  hundred 
and  seventv  manuscript  Bibles  by  either  \\yclif  or  Purvey, 
which  can  be  handled  to-dav.  in  spite  of  all  the  opprobrium 
cast  upon  their  names,  and  the  proscription  to  which  their 
works  were  subjected.  Of  these,  one  belonged  to  Humphrey, 
the  "good"'  Duke  of  Gloucester;  another  to  Henry  vi., 
who  gave  it  to  the  Charterhouse;  another  apparently 
to  Richard  ill.:  another  to  Henry  vn.  ;  another  to 
Edward  vi.  ;  and  another  was  presented  to  Queen  Elizabeth, 
as  a  New  Year's  gift,  by  her  chaplain.* 

Evidently  this  great  Bible  work  influenced  the  higher 
classes  in  the  country  as  well  as  the  mass  of  the 
people. 

We  may  illustrate  the  distinction  between  \Yyclif 
and  Hereford's  translation  and  that  of  Purvey  by  the 

*  \\Vstcott. 


2S8  OUR   OWN    KNdLISII    mP.LK 

4(>th      Psalm     in    each,      as     given     in      Dr.      Moml>ert's 
selections  : — 

WYCLIF  AND   HEKEFOKD.  PURVEY. 

1.   (hire       (Jod       refut,       and          Oure    (Jod,    thou    art    refuyt, 

vertue  ;      hclpcre      in      tribula-  and    vertu  :  liclpere    in    tribula- 

eiouns,     that     founden     vs     fill  eions,      that      han      founde      vs 

myche.  greet  ly. 

•2.   Therfore     wee      shul      not  Tlierfor  we  sehulen  not  drede, 

(irede,    whil    the    erthe    shal    be  while  the  erthe  sehal  be  troblid, 

disturbid  ;   and     hillis     slnil     be  and  the  hillis  sehulen    be   borun 

born    oner    in    to    the    herte    of  ouer  in  to  the  herte  of  the  see. 
the  so. 

3.  Ther    souneden,    and    ben         The  watris  of  hem  sownedcn, 

disturbid    the    watris    of    hetn  :  and  \\eren  troblid  ;    hillis  weren 

the   hillis   ben   disturbid   in   the  troblid  togidere  in  the  strengthe 

strenglhe  of  it.  of  by  in. 

-4.   The      bure      of      the  ilod  The  feersnesse  of  Hood  inakith 

gladith    the    eite    of    (Jod,  the  glad     the     eitee     of     (Jod;    the 

altlier      heghist      halcwido  his  Iiigbeste  (Jod    bath   balewid    his 

tabernacle.  tabernacle. 

,">.  (Jod  in  the  myddel  of  it  (Jod  in  the  myddis  therof 
shal  not  be  stirid  ;  (Jod  slial  sehal  not  be  inoued  ;  (Jodschal 
belpen  it  erli  fro  the  niorutid.  helpo  it  eerli  in  the  great 

more  wt  id. 

(>.  Jenlilis  ben  disturbid,  and  llethene  men  \vercn  disturbid 
reuines  be  inbowid  ;  he  ghaf  togidere,  and  rewmes  weren 
his  vois,  moued  is  the  erthe.  bowid  doini.  (Jod  ghaf  his 

vois,  the  erthe  was  inoued. 

11.  The  Lord  of  vertues  with  The  Lord  of  vertues  is  with 
vs  ;  oure  vndertakere  (Jod  of  us;  (Jod  of  Jacob  is  oure  vp 
Jacob.  takere. 

There  are  a  number  of  notes  in  Purvey's  version,  and 
for  many  of  these  he  was  indebted  to  Lyra,  of  whom  it  was 
said,  "  Si  Lyra  non  lyrasset,  Luther  non  cantasset,"  but 
his  commentaries  are  completely  forgotten  now. 

Purvey  was  seized  and  cruellv  tortured  l>v  Archbishop 
Arundel.  His  taitb  proved  unequal  to  the  trial,  and  be 


pronounced  his  recantation  at  St.  Paul's  Cross  in  l.'MMJ. 
The  arrhl>isho|)  rewarded  liis  penitence  with  a  benefice. 
\Ve  find  him,  however,  a  second  time  imprisoned,  and  this 
lime  I iy  Archt)isho|)  Chicheley  in  li'_M,  and  lie  probably 
died  in  confinement.  In  his  sermons  he  is  said  to  have 
assailed  with  jjreat  vehemence  all  preachers  but  those  of 
his  own  partv,  more  especially  his  master's  chief  foes, 
the  mendicant  Friars  * 

*  Dr.  <;;iM|ii"t  has  lately  attempted  to  show  that  1'urvcy  or  other 
helper.-,  were  the  sole  translators,  ami  that  Wydif  cannot  be  pro  VIM! 
to  have  hail  any  hand  in  tin-  work.  He.  however,  thinks  that  when 
Knv_'hton.  (  'anon  of  Leicester,  and  a  contemporary,  savs  that  "  WvclilTc 
translated  from  Latin  into  Kn^'lish  the  <  iospel  u  hic'h  Christ  ^a'vc  to 
clerks  and  teachers  of  the  Church,"  ami  hacks  up  his  contention  hy 
references  from  William  dc  Sain'  Amour  aliout  the  evils  of  the  time 
u  hen  the  <!o-pel  should  he  made  too  cheap  and  common,  he  is  not 
referring'  to  the  New  Testament  at  all  !  He  denies  also  that  there 
is  anv  proof  in  the  often  quoted  7th  Article  of  the  Oxford  Svnod  : 
"  We'  command  and  ordain  that  hen-.-eforth  no  one  .  .  .'  read, 
wholly  ..r  in  part,  any  sue!)  Look,  hooklet,  or  tract  lately  written  in  the 
time  of  the  .-aid  John  Wychf.  or  since,  under  pain  of  excommunication." 
I'erhap>  no  absolute  proof,  standing  alone,  hut  when  connected  with 
the  umver-al  testimony  of  all  aies  that  Wyelif  was  himstlt  the  trans 
lator.  the>e  tuo  will  prohahly  he  enoimh  for  most  of  our  readers.-  The 
Old  Kn'jli«h  KM,,  V.  A.  Cu-squct,  D.D.,  O.S.I',. 


CHAPTER   XXI 

JOHN    WYCLIF       III 

"  Mut,    to    outweigh   all   harm,   the  sacred    Mook 
Jn  dusty  sequestration  wrapped  too  IOIILT, 
Assumes   the   accents  of  our  native   tongue  ; 
And   he   who  guides   the   plough,   or   wields   the  crook, 
With  understanding  spirit  now  may   look 
Upon   her  records,   listen   to   her  song, 
And   sift    her  laws— much   wondering   that   the   wrong. 
Which   faith  has  suffered,    Heaven  could  calmly   brook." 

WORDSWORTH. 

NOT  only,  however,  was  the  Bible  thus  put  into  a  complete 
English  dress  two  generations  before  the  invention  of 
printing,  but  Wyclif  organised  a  system  of  itinerant 
ministration  that  it  might  be  faithfully  set  forth.  By 
the  contagion  of  example,  he  had  gathered  around  him 
at  Oxford  a  number  of  lw  poor  priests,''  and  many  of  them 
now  went  out  preaching,  especially  in  his  own  counties, 
Oxfordshire  and  Leicestershire.  There  thus  arose  a  cry 
for  portions  of  the  Gospel,  and  copies  were  multiplied 
far  and  wide.  Milton's  words,  relating  to  the  later  and 
final  Reformation,  apply  also  to  its  beginnings  under 
Wyclif  :— 

"  Then  was  the  sacred  Bible  sought  otit  from  dusty 
corners  ;  the  schools  were  opened  ;  Divine  and  human 
learning  raked  out  of  the  embers  of  forgotten  tongues  ; 
Princes  of  cities  trooped  apace  to  the  newly  erected  banners 
of  salvation  ;  martyrs  with  the  unresistible  might  of 
weakness  shook  the  powers  of  darkness,  and  scorned  the 
fiery  rage  of  the  old  red  dragon."  * 

*  On  Reformation  in  Enylaiul. 


JOHN  WYCUF 


2QI 


Wyelif  also  published  a  groat  variety  of  pamphlets 
and  treatises,  contributing  as  much  to  the  literature  of 
the  period  as  Augustine  to  his.  In  some  of  these  he  met 
the  arguments  raised  against  his  work,  and  we  need  not 
be  surprised  that  he  sometimes  used  strong  language, 
the  title  of  one  of  them  being  :  "  How  Anti-Christ  and 


KACSIMII.K  OK  I-ACK  IN  WM  I.IK'S  nii'.i.r.. 


his  Clerks  travail  to  destroy  Holv  Writ,  and  to  make 
Christian  Men  unstable  in  the  Kaitli.  and  toset  their  ( iniiind 
in  Devils  of  Hull."  Tin-  errors  and  corruptions  of  the 
Church  of  Rome  were  laid  bare,  so  that  he  who  ran  could 
read,  and  he  often  encouraged  the  people  to  get  as  much 
of  the  Scripture  as  they  could,  though  without  note  or 
comment. 


292  OUR  OWN   ENGLISH   15I1JLE 

Of  course  this  could  not  but  raise  up  a  storm  of  opposition, 
though  he  remained  unhurt  through  it  all.  Dr.  Jenkyn 
says  :  *w  Whenever  some  Dr.  Angclicus  descends  and 
agitates  the  settled  waters,  then  always  a  great  multitude 
of  impotent  folk,  of  blind,  halt,  and  withered,  creep  from 
their  five  porches  to  brandish  their  crutches  at  the  intruder, 
or  to  mutter  their  anathemas  against  the  innovation, 
instead  of  welcoming  the  benignant  visitor,  sharing  in 
the  healthiness  of  the  agitation,  and  becoming  healed  of 
whatsoever  diseases  they  had."  * 

Wyclif  was  indeed  a  memorable  example  of  the  delivering 
hand  of  Clod  ;  troubled  on  every  side,  yet  never  cornered 
and  his  retreat  cut  oil'  ;  perplexed  and  seemingly  without 
a  path,  but  always  having  one  marked  out  for  him  ; 
persecuted,  but  never  alone  in  his  persecution,  like  the 
panting  hart  that  is  caught  at  last  ;  cast  down,  but  not 
destroyed  ('2  Cor.  iv.  S). 

There  was  always  some  thing  or  person  interposing 
for  his  help,  as  in  the  case  of  Cowper,  with  his  fits  of 
madness. 

He  \vas  cited  twice  before  Convocation  at  London, 
on  the  charge  of  heresy,  and  in  l.'3<^  at  Oxford,  where  he 
was  condemned.  His  cause  was,  however,  manfully 
espoused  by  John  of  daunt,  Duke  of  Lancaster,  who 
afterwards  said  in  Parliament,  when  it  was  proposed  to 
suppress  the  Translation— 

tk  We  will  not  be  the  dregs  of  all,  seeing  other  nations 
have  the  law  of  Cod.  which  is  the  law  of  our  Faith,  written 
in  their  own  language." 

At  one  of  his  citations,  the  Bishop  of  London  and  John 
of  (Jaunt  brawled  together  for  some  time  as  to  whether 
Wyclif  should  sit  or  stand,  but  the  bishop  was  the  better 
brawler,  so  that  the  duke  l*  blushed  and  was  ashamed 
because  he  could  not  overpass  the  bishop  in  brawling  and 
railing,  and  therefore  fell  to  plain  threatening."  The 
bishop  was  popular  with  the  assembly,  however,  who  would 
not  have  him  insulted,  and  the  Council  was  broken  up 
before  nine  o'clock. 

*  Life  of  tiuxtcr. 


JOHN   \VVrUF  2(>3 

John  of  (Jaunt's  friendship  may  remind  us  of  thai  of  the 
K  lector  for  Luther,  and  it  was  of  tin4  greatest  service  for  a 
long  time.  It  was  not  witliout  variableness,  however, 
and  when  his  assistance  was  sought  in  connection  with 
the  Synod  of  l.'JNL',  he  declined  it,  saying  that  lie  found 
the  new  opinions  more  fraught  with  danger  than  he  had 
supposed,  and  that,  in  his  judgment,  it  became  the  ac  used 
parties  to  submit  to  the  authorities  of  the  Church.  He 
was  indee  I  a  liberal  politician,  and  not  a  religious  reformer, 
and  was  at  that  time  intent  upon  conducting  an  expedition 
into  Portugal,  and  was  so  far  opposed  that  the  fear  of 
giving  further  ofTence  may  have  mingled  with  other  con 
siderations.  Besides.  Wyclit  had  lately  given  up  tran- 
substantiation,  the  head  and  front  of  all  offending.  The 
Reformer's  replv.  however,  both  to  the  Synod  and  to  John 
of  (Jaunt,  was  that  it  signified  nothing  that  the  Church 
had  erred  through  many  hundred  Winters,  and  saints  had 
died  in  error:  for  the  loosing  of  Satan,  as  foretold  by, John, 
had  filled  the  world  with  lies. 

The  Pope  also  took  action,  but  it  continually  came 
to  nothing,  though  Wvclif  was  perfectly  aware  of  the 
danger  he  incurred.  He  had  said  in  his  Trialogus  :  "  We 
Christians  need  not  visit  Pagans  to  convert  them  by 
enduring  martyrdom  on  their  behalf:  we  have  only  to 
declare,  with  consistency  the  law  of  (lod  before  Cirsarian 
Prelates,  and  straightway  the  ilower  of  martyrdom  will 
be  at  hand.''  But  he  was  never  imprisoned  even. 
(Jregorv  xi.  issued  five  Bulls  against  him  on  22nd  May 
l.'ITT,  but,  before,  thev  were  officially  delivered,  Edward  in., 
with  whom  the  execution  of  them  lay.  died  (June  '21). 
The  next  year,  when  Richard  n.  had  come  to  the  throne, 
(Jregorv  sent  another  Bull  rebuking  the  I  Diversity  of 
Oxford  for  suffering  Wyclifs  doctrine  so  long  to  take 
root. and  commandingthat  he  be  apprehended  immediately. 
To  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  and  the  Bishop  of 
London  also  (Jregorv  wrote,  demanding  that  he  be  cast 
into  prison.  So  he  was  brought  up  to  London  for  trial,  but 
whilst  matters  were  proceeding,  Lewis  Clifford  entered 
with  a  Royal  message,  prohibiting  them  from  passing  any 


294  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

sentence.  The  Londoners  also  plainly  showed  their 
objection  to  tyranny,  and  directly  afterwards  the  Pope 
died,  and  the  thirty-nine  years'  schism  between  the  rival 
Popes  began.  Urbane,  otherwise  called  Turbanus,  was 
so  hot  in  his  wars  against  Clement,  the  French  Pope,  that 
he  had  little  time  or  inclination  to  pay  much  heed  to 
Wyclif.  Barton,  however,  Vice-Chancellor  of  Oxford, 
called  together  some  Doctors  in  1380,  and  denounced  his 
doctrines,  and  in  1382  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury 
summoned  Wyclif  to  appear  before  Convocation  in 
London.  It  was  in  May,  and  they  met  in  the  great  hall 
of  the  Dominican  Monastery  in  Blackfriars,  ten  Bishops, 
sixteen  Doctors  of  Laws,  thirty  Doctors  of  Theology,  and 
four  Bachelors  of  Laws.  But  this  time  they  were  inter 
rupted  by  an  earthquake  !  The  whole  city  was  shaken 
by  it,  and  it  would  have  broken  up  the  assembly  but 
for  the  firmness  of  the  Primate.  As  William  the  Conqueror 
interpreted  his  fall  on  landing  in  England  favourably, 
saying  that  he  thus  seized  the  land,  so  the  archbishop 
construed  the  earthquake  as  a  favourable  omen.  The 
commotion  they  had  witnessed  was  produced  by  the 
expulsion  of  noxious  vapours,  and  in  the  same  way  the 
purity  and  peace  of  the  Church  could  only  be  secured 
by  the  expulsion  of  dangerous  men.  They  plucked  up 
their  courage,  and  proceeded,  as  the  earthquake  did  not, 
and  some  of  Wyclif 's  doctrines  were  pronounced  heretical 
and  others  erroneous. 

Wyclif  was  also  persecuted  by  the  Friars,  who  filled 
the  kingdom,  and  as  a  last  indignity  was  cited  before 
the  Pope  at  Rome,  which  a  shock  of  paralysis  prevented 
his  obeying.* 

He  professed,  however,  his  readiness  to  defend  himself 
before  all  true  men,  and  especially  the  Pope,  if  his  great 
ness  consisted,  not  in  worldly  pom]),  but  in  his  more 
eminent  conformity  to  the  law  of  Christ,  as  it  should  do. 
"  Let  him,"  he  says,  "  not  be  ashamed  to  perform  the 

*  Principal  Loriine.-'s  translation  of  ladder's  John  \Vifrlif  ami  ln'x 
i'.ntjlixh  1 'rent >•«<»•*  (London.  IS7S,  'J  vols.,  a  valuable  work)  says 
he  \vas  not  cited  before  (he  Pope  in  1 3S.'{. 


JOHN*  wyruK  295 

ministry  of  the  Church,  since  ho  is.  or  ought  to  be,  the 
servant  of  the  servants  of  (Joel.  But  a  prohibition  of 
reading  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  and  a  vanity  of  secular 
dominion,  would  seem  to  partake  too  much  of  a  disposition 
towards  the  blasphemous  advancement  of  Anti-Christ." 

Thus,  like  the  Wye-Cliff  from  which  his  name  is  probably 
taken,  he  stood  firm,  whilst  the  waters  foamed  at  his 
feet.  It  was  the  will  of  (Jod  that,  after  all  his  troubles 
and  dangers,  he  should  die  in  his  bed,  like  Luther.  On 
the  L'lfth  December  1384,  he  left  the  pulpit  for  the  Com 
munion  table  of  his  church  at  Lutterworth,  and  whilst 
in  the  sacramental  service  he  fell  back  into  the  chair, 
which  is  still  preserved,  and  was  carried  out  insensible. 
Two  <lays  he  lingered,  and  as  the  last  day  of  the  old  year 
waned  he  went  to  join  the  goodly  fellowship  of  the  prophets, 
whose  spirit  he  had  breathed ;  the  glorious  company 
of  the  Apostles,  whose  words  he  had  given  afresh  to  the 
people  ;  the  noble  army  of  martyrs,  of  whom  he  had 
almost  become  one  ;  and  the  innumerable  company 
who  have  served  (Jod  in  their  generation,  and  served 
their  generation  by  the  will  of  (Jod.  "Admirable," 
says  Fuller,  "  that  a  hare  so  often  hunted  with  so  many 
packs  of  dogs,  should  (lit;  quietly  at  last."  It  certainly 
was  remarkable.  Too  many  Reformers  have  been,  like 
Milo, 

"wedged   in   the  timber  which   thev  strove  to  rend," 

and  he  lived  in  times  of  persecution.  But,  if  he  died 
in  peace,  his  body  was  not  to  remain  undisturbed.  About 
a  generation  afterwards,  the  Council  of  Constance,  the 
same  that  burned  John  Huss,  ordered  his  corpse  to  be 
disinterred.  His  bones  were  taken  up  and  thrown  over 
a  bridge  into  the  little,  river  Swift;  the  Swift  conveyed 
them  to  the  Avon,  the  Avon  to  the  Severn,  the;  Severn 
into  the  narrow  seas,  and  they  into  the  main  ocean; 
and  thus,  in  Fuller's  oft  quoted  words,  "the  ashes  of 
\\yclif  are  the  emblem  of  his  doctrine,  which  now  is 
dispersed  all  the  world  over." 

The    sacrilegious    work    was    performed,    long    after    the 


296  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   T.IP.LE 

order  had  been  given,  by  Fleming.  Bishop  of  Lincoln, 
who  had  been  one  of  Wyclif's  coadjutors  in  earlier  days, 
and  who  was  afterwards  smitten  with  a  cruel  death.* 

But,  for  a  time,  the  new  doctrines  had  great  power 
amongst  all  classes.  The  translation  was  finished  the 
year  before  Queen  Anne  came  to  England  from  Bohemia, 
to  be  Richard  n.'s  first  queen.  She  loved  to  read  his 
Bible,  and  is  an  important  link  thus  in  the  succession 
of  spiritual  life  in  Europe,  for,  on  her  household  being 
scattered  abroad,  the  Reformer's  books  fell  into  the  hands 
of  Jerome  and  Huss,  thus  preparing  the  way  for  Luther. 
Archbishop  Arundel,  the  persecuting  Arundel  of  later 
times,  encouraged  the  queen  in  every  way  at  first. 
"  Against  them  that  say  the  Gospel  in  English  would 
make  men  err,"  he  said,  "  do  they  know  that  in  the  Latin 
are  more  heretics  than  of  all  others  ?  Sixty  Latin  heretics  ! 
but  God  forbid  that  any  language  should  be  hated  for 
heresy."  No  doubt  a  few  of  the  Lollard  preachers  gave 
some  occasion  to  their  enemies  to  confound  them  with 
the  promoters  of  insurrection  and  lawlessness,  and,  through 
these  black  sheep,  this  same  Arundel,  in  a  Convocation 
at  Oxford,  prohibited  the  reading  of  "  any  book,  pamphlet, 
or  treatise,  now  lately  composed — in  the  time  of  John 
Wyclif  or  since  .  .  .  upon  pain  of  greater  excommuni 
cation,  until  the  said  Translation  be  approved  by  the 
Ordinary  of  the  place." 

Our  own  Henry  iv.,  indeed,  as  well  as  Queen  Anne 
of  Bohemia,  was  supposed  to  have  imbibed  the  new 
doctrines,  previously  to  his  possession  of  the  throne — 
being  the  son  of  John  of  (Jaunt.  Wyclif's  great  patron. 
As  soon  as  that  came  about,  however,  he  sought  the 
favour  of  the  clergy,  and  a  law  was  enacted  that  any 
heretic  who  refused  to  abjure  his  opinions,  or  relapsed, 
should  be  burned  ;  William  Sautre,  a  London  clergy 
man,  soon  suffering  under  the  Act.  It  is  certain  that 
Wyclif's  work  at  first  influenced  the  higher  classes 
in  the  country  as  well  as  the  mass  of  the  people,  as  we 
have  seen.  Foxe  tells  us  that  some  gave  five  marks 

*  A  compendious  old  treatise-.      Arbcr's  Reprints. 


JOHN 


297 


for  a  Xe\v  Testament.  This  was  equivalent  to  about 
iM<)  no\v.  the  yearly  stipend  for  a  curate,  according  to 
Hallain.  Some  gave  a  load  of  hay  for  a  few  chapters. 

CVrtainly.  Wyclif  was  a  very  pronounced  lover  of  his 
kind,  and   his  followers  soon  began  to  feel  that  all  men 


were   brothers.     The   serf,    who   was   the   lowest    point    of 
the  feudal  system,  learnt  to  sing — 

"  When    Adam    delved,   and    Kve   span. 
Who  \vas  then   the  gentleman  ?" 

and  the  oppression  which  had  characterised  former  periods 
became  impossible. 

The  followers  of  Wyclif  were  called  Lollards  probably 
from  an  old  verb  "  loHeri."  to  sing,  every  such  movement 
of  freedom  finding  some  expression  in  music.  Fronde, 
however,  gives  the  preference;  to  "  lolium,*'  as  thev  were 
supposedly  the  tares  in  the  corn  of  Catholicism.  Langlande, 
in  his  /'irrs  Plowman,  plays  on  the  analogy  of  the  word 
to  "  loller."  or  idler,  and  so  easily  returns  it  to  the  Friars. 
Chaucer's  idea  of  it,  and  his  good  feeling  towards  those 


298  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

who  bore  it,  are  both  clear.  He  looks  upon  it  as  derived 
from  "  lolium."  When  the  host  swears,  in  asking  the  parson 
for  a  tale,  he  is  gently  rebuked.  "  I  smell  a  loller  in 
the  wind,"  quoth  he — "  this  loller  here  will  preach  some 
what  ;  "  and  the  shipman  who  stops  him  by  interposing 
a  tale,  says  of  the  good  town  parson— 

"  he  would  sow  some  difficulty 
Or  springing  cockle  in  our  clean  corn."* 

Yet  another  interpretation  is  given  in  the  Commentary 
of  the  Foundation  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford,  where  it 
is  said  to  be  a  corruption  of  "  low  lords,"  or  levellers. 
Certainly,  the  word  came  to  mean  heretic,  and  was  a 
term  of  reproach  to  the  opponents  of  Popery  amongst 
the  Bohemians,  the  Germans,  the  Swiss,  and  the  Pied- 
montese.  Knighton  says  that  here  they  multiplied 
like  suckers  growing  from  the  root  of  a  tree,  so  that 
of  two  men  whom  you  met  on  the  road  one  was  sure  to 
be  a  Lollard.  "  Let  me  make  the  ballads  of  a  nation,  and 
I  care  not  who  makes  the  laws  " — this  is  an  exaggerated 
saying,  which  would  look  for  one  of  its  strongest  con 
firmations  to  the  time  following  Wyclifs  death.  Men 
needed  to  sing  when  they  had  so  much  to  encounter, 
and  they  could  sing  when  they  felt  they  were  right  in 
spite  of  it  all.  For  the  most  part,  Lollardism  was  a  struggle 
at  the  greatest  disadvantage  of  a  true  desire  after  holi 
ness,  fed  and  strengthened  by  God's  Word,  against  the 
learning  and  culture  of  the  time.  Our  Lord  rejoiced 
that,  in  a  like  case,  it  pleased  the  Father  to  reveal  His 
truth  to  babes  rather  than  to  the  wise  and  prudent. f 

Of  course  the  principles  of  liberty  were  immediately 
dangerous,  as  Luther's  preaching  was  the  incidental 
cause  of  the  Peasants'  War  in  Germany,  however  much 
he  might  protest  against  it.  John  Ball,  for  instance,  of 
Kent,  would  harangue  his  neighbours  in  this  fashion  : — 

"  Ah,  ye  good  people,  matters  go  not  well  to  pass  in 
England,  nor  shall  do  till  we  all  be  united  together.  Why 

*  Knylixk  Jfi-li'jion,  Henry  Morlry. 

f  A  proper  dyaloguc.     Arbor's  Reprints. 


JOHN   \YYCLIF  299 

should  we  be  kept  tlius  in  bondage!  We  be  called  bonds 
men .  and  without  we  do  our  service  willingly  we  be  beaten. 
Let  us  to  the  King,  to  the  intent  we  be  made  free,  and 
when  the  King  seetli  us  we  shall  have  some  remedy,  either 
by  fairness  or  otherwise." 

They  demanded  that,  if  they  laboured  for  the  Lords, 
they  should  be  paid  wages  for  it  (sic),  and  that  power 
began  to  assert  itself  which,  in  the  shape  of  Parliament, 
should  surely  though  gradually  fight  their  battles,  and 
bring  to  an  end  their  slavery.  The  Wat  Tyler  insurrection, 
which  was  only  indeed  the  growth  of  these  new  feelings 
in  part,  was  put  down,  but  the  feelings  themselves  could 
not  be,  and  they  have  blossomed  into  the  freest  and 
securest  government  which  has  lasted  before  the  world. 
Jack  Straw  came  a  little  later,  and  he  too  perished  from 
the  way  when  the  wrath  of  the  sober-minded  was  kindled 
but  a  little.  His  movement  can  only  be  connected  with 
the  new  doctrines  in  a  very  small  degree.  According 
to  his  statement  before  execution,  the  design  of  his  insur 
gents  was  to  exterminate  all  "  possessioners  " — the  only 
ecclesiastics  to  be  spared  being,  not  Wyclifs  poor  priests, 
but  the  begging  Friars. 

We  are  slow  to  learn  that  "  strife  is  the  father  of  all," 
and   that   incidental   evil    will    be   found   wherever   much 
good  is  accomplished.     So  even  Christ  spoke  of  His  having 
come  to  bring  a  sword,  though  He  would  not  even  suffer 
one  to  be  used  in  His  own  self-defence.     And  if  the  Scrip 
tures  were  abused,  it  was  not  for  the  want  of  some  very 
1)lain   speaking    on   the  part  of  Wyclif  and   his   followers. 
''<>r    instance,    here    is    an    extract,    illustrating    the    plain 
dealing  of  the  ''Door  of  Holy  Scripture,"  already  referred 
to  :  — 

Alas,  what  do  proud,  stiff-necked,  covetous  wretches 
with  Holy  Scriptures!  They  deceive  themselves  and 
the  people  that  think  they  be  wise  when  they  appear 
to  be  very  foolish,  and  so  cause  themselves  to  be  deeper 
damned,  and  others  also  that  follow  their  folly,  and  blas 
pheme  (lod.  These  worldly  fools  should  know  that  a 
good  life  is  a  lantern  to  bring  a  man  to  the.  very  truth 


300  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH   BIBLE 

and  knowledge.  As  Chrysostom  writcth,  the  fear  and 
love  of  God  is  the  beginning  of  all  perfection  and  wisdom. 
When  these  fleshly  apes  and  worldly  moldewarps  have 
not  desired  the  beginning  of  wisdom,  what  do  they  with 
Holy  Scripture  but  to  the  hurting  of  themselves  and 
other  men !  For,  as  long  as  pride  and  covetotisness 
of  worldly  goods  and  honour  is  rooted  in  their  hearts, 
they  do  their  alms  to  the  devil,  and  offer  to  him  both 
body  and  soul." 

However,  Arundel  and  others  grew  determined  to  root 
out  what  they  called  heresy,  although  it  had  become 
so  general  that,  when  he  began  to  adopt  his  measures 
in  Oxford,  he  was  told  that  nearly  all  the  colleges  were 
infected  with  "  heretical  pravity."  Shortly  afterwards, 
Wyclif's  Tracts,  such  as  had  belonged  to  Sir  John  Old- 
castle,  Lord  Cobham,  were  seized  in  Paternoster  Row 
and  taken  to  Henry  v.  at  Kennington  Palace,  who,  after 
reading  a  few  pages  of  them,  expressed  his  horror  at  their 
contents.  Cobham,  though  a  baron  of  the  greatest  influ 
ence,  was  tried  as  a  heretic,  condemned,  and  finally  burnt, 
crying  out  :  "  Lo,  good  people,  for  the  breaking  of  God's 
Law  they  never  yet  cursed  me  ;  but,  for  their  own  laws 
and  traditions  most  cruelly  do  they  handle  both  me  and 
other  men.  And  therefore  both  they  and  their  laws, 
by  the  promise  of  God,  shall  be  utterly  destroyed."  * 

Arundel  died  in  141.'?.  He  had  done  all  he  could  to 
restrict  preaching  among  the  lower  orders  of  the  clergy, 
there  being  scarcely  any  amongst  the  higher  to  restrict. 

There  was  no  man  in  England  burnt  for  "  heresy " 
for  ages,  till  he  was  the  adviser  of  Sautre's  death,  and 
then  of  others.  Queen  Anne  of  Bohemia  exercised  influ 
ence  over  such  as  were  inclined  to  persecute,  as  long  as 
she  lived,  and  Arundel,  in  preaching  her  funeral  sermon, 
in  1394,  praised  her  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures  in  p]nglish, 
though  a  foreigner.  It  was  her  mother-in-law  also  that 
interfered  on  Wyclif's  behalf  when  he  was  cited  at 
Lambeth.  However,  Arundel  became  another  man,  and 
when  he  died,  after  re-lighting  the  fires  of  persecution, 

*  History  oj  Political  Literature,  Blakey. 


lie  hud  a  swelling  of  the  tongue,  and  men  said  that  (<od 
had  tied  his  tongue  for  having  tied  the  tongues  of  almost 
all  preachers,  because  some  few  pulpits  had  given  utterance 
to  '*  heretical  teaching." 

The  first  Act  of  the  wretched,  persecuting  Parlia 
ment  was  a  very  severe  statute  against  the  readers  of 
WycliPs  learning,  as  the  Bible  was  then  called.  This 
Act  said  that,  whoever  read  the  Scriptures  in  English, 
should  forfeit  land,  cattle,  goods,  and  life,  and  be  con 
demned  as  heretics  to  (Jod,  enemies  to  the  Crown,  and 
traitors  to  the  Kingdom  ;  that  they  should  not  have  the 
benefits  of  sanctuary,  though  this  was  a  privilege  granted 
then  to  notorious  malefactors;  and  that,  if  they  continued 
obstinate,  or  relapsed  after  pardon,  they  should  first  be 
hanged  for  treason  against  the  king,  and  then  burned  for 
heresy.  The  clergy  were  getting  afraid  of  their  revenues  ; 
but  the  storm  broke  out  against  their  pride  and  riches 
in  this  very  Parliament,  and  the  king  was  put  in  mind  of 
what  he  had  before  desired  relative  to  converting  some 
of  the  lands  and  possessions  of  the  clergy  to  the  service 
of  the  State.  "The  Bill  to  this  effect,"  says  Hall,  "made 
the  fat  Abbots  to  sweat,  the  proud  Abbots  to  frown,  the 
poor  Priors  to  curse,  the  silly  nuns  to  weep,  and  indeed 
all  her  merchants  to  fear  that  Babel  would  down."  Mainly, 
however,  through  the  influence  of  Chicheley,  Archbishop 
of  Canterbury,  the  king  was  diverted  to  the  war  with 
France.* 

The  persecutions  went  on,  however.  When  blood  is 
tasted,  the  appetite  seems  to  increase,  and  only  thus 
can  we  understand  the  treatment  of  Reginald  Pecock. 
He  wrote  a  book  called  the  Hcprcxxor  oj  Overmuch  Illdtn- 
itKj  <>j  the  Cleryy,  which  was  a  direct  though  courteous 
attack  on  the  Lollards  and  their  views.  In  this  production 
he  showed  great  vigour  and  liberality  of  sentiment,  together 
with  much  learning,  although  he  comes  forward  as  the 
partial  defender  of  images  and  pilgrimages,  the  invocation 
of  the  saints,  and  of  the;  Friars  as  a  well-governed  body 
of  men.  The  Lollards  had,  in  some  cases,  carried  their 

*  I'drlinincntary  J/ittury,  CoMx'tt. 


3o2  OUR  OWN   ENGLISH    I5II5LE 

reverence  for  Scripture  too  far,  and  Pecock  calls  upon 
them  to  regard  the  inward  Scripture  of  God's  Law,  written 
by  Himself  on  man's  soul,  as  well  as  the  outward  writings 
of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  He  smiles  at  the  over 
strained  notion  of  the  sufficiency  of  Scripture  which  had 
become  common,  and  says  it  would  be  puzzling  to  show 
that  ale  and  beer  might  be  used  lawfully  on  such  principles, 
wine  being  always  mentioned. 

Wyclif  had  said  that  human  ordinances  were  to  be 
accepted  when  they  were  founded  on  good  reason,  and 
were  for  the  common  profit  of  Christian  people,  but  these 
"  righteous  overmuch  "  followers  said  that  nothing  was 
lawful  unless  it  were  appointed  in  the  Scriptures,  by  which 
we  were  to  be  absolutely  guided,  even  in  things  indifferent. 

It  is  certainly  surprising  that  a  man  who  could  thus 
come  forward  as  the  champion  of  his  Order,  he  being 
Bishop  of  Chichester,  should  be  put  upon  his  trial  and 
forced  to  recant  or  die.  Such  is  nevertheless  the  fact, 
for,  after  a  long  examination,  the  archbishop  summed 
up  by  calling  him  a  heretic  blinded  by  the  light  of  his  own 
understanding,  and,  quoting  Jerome  and  Grosseteste  on 
the  province  of  the  Church  to  interpret  Scripture,  offered 
him  the  choice  between  a  public  abjuration  and  death. 
Pecock  stood  for  a  few  moments  in  motionless  silence, 
and  then  agreed  to  abjure.  Though  a  bishop,  he  found 
that  the  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  are  cruel.  He  was 
brought,  in  his  episcopal  habit,  to  St.  Paul's,  and  in  the 
presence  of  twenty  thousand  people  gave  up  his  writings 
to  be  burnt  and  then  read  his  abjuration,  in  which  he 
required  all  persons  "  as  they  tendered  their  souls  and 
his,  to  deliver  in  all  writings  of  his  which  they  might 
have  in  their  keeping,  that  the  same  might  be  openly 
burnt  as  an  example  and  terror  to  others."  He  was  then 
sent  to  confinement  in  Thorney  Abbey,  where  no  one  was 
allowed  to  speak  to  him  but  the  person  who  made  his  bed 
and  fire,  and  where  lie  was  allowed  no  books  except  a 
Mass  Book,  a  Psalter,  a  Legendary,  and  a  Bible. 

Of  course  it  was  a  Latin  Bible,  but  the  English  ones  were 
multiplied  far  and  wide,  and  the  light  could  not  be  alto- 


JOHN   WYCLIF  305 

get  her  hid.  There  still  exist  one  hundred,  and  seventy 
copies,  more  or  less  complete,  and  nearly  half  are  of  a 
small  size,  such  as  could  be  used  for  household  reading. 
Five  hundred  and  four  pounds  has  been  given  lately  for  one 
of  these,  written  on  vellum,  but  they  were  far  more  valuable 
in  reality  when  first  written.  Now  they  are  curiosities, 
for  the  rich  to  show  their  friends,  and  the  learned  occasion 
ally  to  consult  ;  then  they  were  the  bread  of  life  to  a 
hungry  people,  when  the  famine  was  sore  in  the  land. 

Soon,  however,  Gutenberg  was  to  come,  with  his  printing 
press,  and  now  on  the  very  spot  in  London  where  the 
Council  met  which  was  interrupted  by  an  earthquake, 
there  stands  the  house  of  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible 
Society,  which  yearly  prints  the  Word  of  (lod  by  the 
million.  The  Wyclif  Society  has  also  been  formed  (March 
I**:.')  to  do  honour  to  his  memory,  and  to  publish  his 
works. 


LITERATURE.  --There  are  many  editions  of  Wyclif  s 
English  works.  The  New  Testament  is  in  Bagster's 
Ih'j-ajJ1'!,  London  IS-ll;  in  Lea  Wilson's  quarto,  JS-lS  ; 
and  in  \V.  W.  Skeat's  1S71I  edition.  The  whole  Bible 
was  splendidly  printed  by  Forshall  and  Madden  in  lS."j(>, 
in  1  vols.  Dr.  A.  Clarke  printed  the  Song  of  Solomon 
in  his  Commentary  in  1S1O.  Mr.  Skeat  has  also  published 
.Job.  the  Psalms,  Proverbs,  Ecclesiastes,  and  the  Song  of 
Solomon,  as  revised  bv  Purvey  in  ISSi.  The  English 
works  of  Wyclif  were  edited  by  F.  1).  Matthew  for  the 
Earlv  English  Text  Society,  and  published  by  Trubner 
in  1*^0.  Mr.  Thomas  Arnold  also,  son  of  Dr.  Arnold 
of  Rugby,  published  his  "  Select  English  Works,""  in  which 
he  savs  that  there  are  sixty-live  known  English  works 
and  ninety-six  in  Latin.  It  is  these  latter  that  the  Wyclif 
Society  is  now  publishing.  This  Society  was  founded 
by  the  energetic  Mr.  F.  •) .  Furnivall.  Professor  Montague 
Burrows.  F.  I).  Matthew,  and  others,  and  thev  say,  "  It 
is  much  to  be  wished  that  the  live  hundreth  anniversary 
of  Wyclif  s  death  should  find  English  and  ( Jermans  engaged 
20 


306  OUR  OWN  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

in  the  joint  work  of  raising  a  memorial  to  this  vigorous 
Teutonic  mind  ;  a  monument  more  beautiful  and  durable 
than  marble  or  bronze,  not  formed  of  lifeless  stone,  but 
moulded  in  his  own  living  words  of  evangelical  faith, 
of  manly  frankness,  and  patriotic  highmindedness." 

The  wish  was  realised,  and  the  Quincentenary  saw 
plenty  of  honour  done  to  the  great  Reformer  through 
out  the  English-speaking  world.  Rudolph  Buddensieg 
(Lie.  Theol.  Leipsic)  edited  the  Polemical  Works  for  the 
Wyclif  Society,  published  by  Triibner  in  1883.  He  quotes 
the  comforting  sentence  from  Ranke  :  "  It  very  often 
happens  that  efforts  which  seem  to  have  perished  with 
those  who  made  them  exercise  a  more  enduring  influence 
upon  subsequent  events  than  the  conqueror  who  pre 
maturely  triumphs."  W.  Waddington  Shirley  also  has 
proved  himself  not  only  an  able  editor  of  Wyclif,  but  has 
pointed  out  very  clearly  to  his  Alma  Mater  what  a  debt 
of  gratitude  she  owes  him.  He  was  Professor  of  Ecclesi 
astical  History,  and  Canon  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford, 
and  died  in  1866.  Lechler  also  has  published  Wyclif's 
Trialogus,  and  there  are  a  number  of  valuable  Lives, 
including  his  own,  translated  by  Professor  Lorimer,  and 
Dr.  R.  Vaughan's.  The  Wyclif  Society  has  a  good  deal 
of  work  before  it.  There  are  nearly  40  vols.  in  Vienna,* 
consisting  either  entirely  or  chiefly  of  un printed  Latin 
works  by  Wyclif,  of  which,  in  some  instances,  not  a  copy 
is  to  be  found  in  England.  Owing  to  the  secularisation 
of  the  Bohemian  monasteries  under  Joseph  ii.,  they  are 
now  to  be  found  there,  and  are  evidence  of  the  pedigree 
of  the  Hussite  movement.  It  was  in  fact  "  Wycliffism  " 
pure  and  simple,  the  three  ancient  medallions  illustrating 
it,  in  which  Wyclif  is  striking  sparks  out  of  a  stone,  Huss 
setting  lire  to  the  coals,  and  Luther  bearing  a  torch. 

Milton  has  said  indeed  :  "  If  the  stiff-necked  obduracy 
of  our  Prelates  had  not  obstructed  Wyclif's  sublime  and 
exalted  spirit,  the  names  of  the  Bohemians.  Huss  and 
Hieionyrnus,  and  even  of  Luther  and  Calvin,  would  at  this 

*  Jn  the  Imperial  and  Royal  Library.  There  are  also  several  in  the 
University  Library  at  Prague. 


JOHN  \vvri.ir  307 

day  have  been  buried  in  obscurity,  and  the  glory  of  having 
reformed  our  neighbours  would  have  been  ours  alone." 

Recent  valuable  contributions  to  the  subject  have  also 
been  made  by  i  lie  Rev.  Herbert  B.  Workman,  M. A.,  the 
Rev.  W.  L.  Watkinson.  and  many  others,  the  Wyclif 
Literature  being  one  of  the  largest  in  our  own  or  any 
count  ry . 

If  anv  mind  has  been  disturbed  bv  Dr.  Gasquet's 
strange  theories,  to  which  we  ha\'e  already  referred,  an 
answer  to  them  will  be  found  in  the  English  Historical 
R<ri<  ,r  for  |s(.i.~).  It  is  the  inferences  on  Dr.  Gasquet's 
part  that  are  misleading.  He  cannot  explain  away 
Knighton.  though  he  airily  dismisses  John  Huss.  Arundel 
clearlv  ascribes  the  work  of  Translation  to  Wyclif,  and 
all  tradition  has  placed  him  at  the  head  of  the  little 
band  of  Translators.  Mr.  F.  D.  Matthew  completely 
deals  with  Dr.  Gasquet's  arguments,  if  anyone  wishes  to 
pursue  the  matter  further.  He  gives  three  instances  in 
which  Wyclif  advocates  having  the  Scriptures  in  the 
Vernacular,  and  there  is  another  in  DC  Officio  Pastnrali. 
Wyelifs  statements  also  about  the  activity  of  the  Friars 
against  the  Bible  are  explicit. 


I  N  I)  E  X 


Adalbert,  130. 

yEll'ric,  199. 

Aidan,  48,  99. 

Alba.ii,  204. 

Alcuin,  11-1,  119. 

Aldhelm,  67. 

Aldred,  1C,:}. 

Alfred,  86,  91,  132,  1-15. 

Allen,  Grant,  96. 

Angus,  198. 

Arinsto    130. 

Arthur,  King,  9,  25. 

Arundel,  300. 

Asser,  152. 

A.stle,  161.  • 

Augustine1.  l:j,  27,  118. 

Austin,  65. 


Baber,  'J:tf. 
Bacon,  ]{.,  22 
Ball,  2!»S. 
Bcde,   13,   18, 

154. 

Ucinard,  213. 
Bertha,  32. 
Bililia  Pauiier 
Biscop,  92. 
Bishojis'  liihlt- 
Boethius,  154. 
Books,  clit-aji.  17. 
Bosanqnct,  5s. 
Hoswortli  and  W 
Boniliicc.  131. 
Bu.-kl.-,  i:JO. 


48,   61,    71,    8J<. 


241. 


Cji'dniMii.   13. 
(  'anterlnirv,  29. 
Cathcait,  85. 
Chaileniagne,  124. 
Chaucer,  2<I  1. 
Chrysostoni,  12,  14. 
Clarke,  239. 
dill's  I!,,,',  l:)2. 
Cobhani,  300. 
Coleridge.  129. 
Columbu,   16,  62. 
(  'dliitiilianns.  139. 
Constantino,  12,  17. 
Cotton  MS;  17;"). 
Conybeare,  57. 
Cuthbcrt,  99,  1()3,  108,  113 

Dominicans,  25  1. 
Druids,  21. 
Durham  Book.  159. 

Kbbs  Fleet,  27. 
Ivlgar,  2:;!'. 
Kdward  in.,  269. 
Klstob,  206. 
Krasnuis.  17. 
Ethell.elt,  32. 
Kuscbius,  12. 
Exeter  Hook,  1>S. 

Farincn,  173. 

Knrshall  and  .Madrlen,  274. 
Franciscans.  251. 
Fronde,  1  16.  252. 
Fuller,  22,    17,  295. 


167. 


;  '11.  Siint.   l:V.i. 
:  I'M. -i.  I;M. 

lama,  .l..hn  .,t,  2'.'2. 
lil.t.on.  :;i. 
iiM.is.  11,  li:.. 
Ilistonhnry.  .'-. 
i:-  n.   lu:{,"  1.".:;.  -.-J'.!. 
Im-nstea.l,  I'.T. 
in-.Ty,  :;i.  :;.;.  if,]. 

iro<^te>te,    22^. 

:iith!:i",  !>•;, 


Xeot,  Saint,  l.'G. 

Xe\\-eo|||r,   20»!. 

Ori^eii.  1 1. 
Orine,  201». 
Onnultiiii.  207. 
Orosius,  l.M. 
Oswal.l.  11'7. 
(Jwiin,  17-'!. 
Oxtor.l  MS.  177. 

Tal^'iave,  .'iS,    Ml,    1  17,   I'.'a. 
Patriek,  C5. 
Parker,  1H!». 
P.-ro.-k,  :jQl. 

Purvey,  2^.r>. 


llmnola,  210. 
Koyal  MS,  170 
liuslnvortli  Clnss,  172. 

ons,  11.x 
Srui-Iiain.  2:50. 
Sherborni1,  7<>. 
Skrat.  172.  171,  17S,  286. 

Sn\vlrl,rlr.    221. 

Spclinan,  ll*:j. 
St'-venson,  1  .^'.i. 
Stonelici)','.-,  22. 
S\\v«-t,  221. 

'IVrtullian,  11. 

Thcudorr,  M.  117. 

Thoodnret,  1  }. 

Thorpe,  '>:',,  1",:!,  17'.".  1SS,  20<;.  220. 

T.)tllouse,   -Jl.'J. 

Tivn.-h,  4:;. 

Turner,  Shar.ni,  2.">,  1  17. 


N'ernon  MS,  222.  221. 

U'aa^an,   l»;o,   171. 
Waitoii,  .".G.  207,  225. 


3  TO 


INDF.X 


Watson,  59. 

Wcstcolt,  11!». 
Whitl.y.  4«.»,  100. 
White,  220. 
WilbroKl,  13-1. 
Wilfrid,  117,  134. 


Wili.-Ii.-id,  13(5. 
Willibald,  137. 

Wordsworth.  10.  20,  10,  N: 

WuiTiha'ld,  'l37.' 

Wyi'lil,  210,  307. 


OUR    OWN    ENGLISH    BIBLE 

ITS  TRANSLATORS   AND  THEIR   WORK. 

i;v 

Rev.   W.    J.    HEATON,  B.D.,  F.R.Hist.S. 

>Vith  .">d  facsimiles  and  Illustrations  hitherto  only  found 
in  expensive  works. 

Crown  8uo,   Cloth,   Gilt  Top.       Price  5s.  net. 


LONDON:   I-'.  GRIFFITHS,    M.   MAII.K.N   LANK,   STRAXP,  \V.C. 


••  Tliis  i-  a  n  .1  !••  work,  and  otic  hither!  .  -really  nci-.lt.-il.  \Ve  cordially  reccfmmeiHl 
it  M  all  llihle  Lover*  wlio  wMi  to  know  how  we  i;oi  our  I'.ihle.  It  is  well  illuMratt-i! 
with  go.,d  phot-  i^r.iphs  an.i  drawings."  --  />V///.v'p  ll't-ck/y. 

••  Mr.  Hcatons  v,,lumc  is  a  noli!  mine  of  info,  .nation  an.l  ought  to  ho  uidelyrcad. 
What  In-  says  is  tin.-,  thai  no  \Yina,  tilar  I'.ihle  possesses  such  a  remarkable  car  ly  hist,,,  y. 
'I  !..-  illustrations  scattered  throu-h  the  text  arc  ucll  ,  hnscii."-  Saint  .1  >„(>;•;,•.  ' 

••This  si., iy  is  ,,n<-  whi.  h  inusi  he  ,!ear  to  every  devout  heart.  No  pains  ha\c  been 
.pared  in  th.  ^atheiin^  of  materials  from  many  quarters,  aiul  hy  luci.l  description,  ample 
-Hiotalion.  a:i.!  e.\.  ell.-iit  pictorial  ilhistral  i  ..us,  there  is  lifod-lil  home  to  the  reader  a 
iii"st  \i\'i.l  pi<  f.ir.-  ot  ilr-  lon^  and  painful,  yet  marvellous  process  \,\  uhi.h.  on  the 
human  si,!.-,  ilie:.-  has  ,  ,,me  into  ,,ui  hauls  that  u..nd.-rful  Fn^li-h  I'.iMe  \\hich  the 
author  fitly  dc-  til  ••  -  as  th.-  -real.-st  ,  ,,n,  rete  for.  e  .,n  the  side  of  ti  nth  and  ri^hleoiisn,.ss 
v.  hi.  li  lh.-  uoild  .  .-:, tains."  (  In'isliaH. 

••  1  her,  i,  .,  ready  inaik-t  I'M  l-,.,k>  al.oul  lh,  l.ii-lish  llihlc-.  llui  the  Rev.  \V.  | 
M.-..ION  has  almost  n  .  t.oinpelitioi).  whiUt  h,-  ha,  all  the  popular  intnest,  « hen  h,- 
p.i'  li  1,,-s  a  l,o..k  on  thea.u-- l,ef,,rc  piinlin^.  He  t.-lls  the  difficult  story  easily,  and  it  if 

m. i'!.    m'-iiiotai-l<-  '  <\'  many  'v\.  el  lent  i-n-ia\  i  i^s. ''      /-.'  \  f>ositi<> y    /  :/;/,'\. 

••\\Vh.ne  1,,-,-n  charme.'.uith  il  from  L.-yinniiiK  Io  en,!.  \\'h,,eu,-  |.,.ke,l  for  dry 

1,  1-.  u-  h.i\-  found  a  st,,ry  nion-  pleasant  Io  read,  and  ••  lull  of  interesl  than  many 

a  n-.xel.  ll  is  utit!-n  f...  th.-  p.-.,plr.  it  is  Hit,-,  l.ut  its  t\t,y  p.,^f  heals  si-ns  of 
ciuditi  .:i.  r.s.ai.h.  and  skill  i:,  hai.dlin.:  lh.  f.,.  Is  (Jf  |iist,,,y.  II.-,,-  is  at  last  the 
loman- -  ,,f  th.  l.-i-li^h  Ilihl.-.  f,,i  uhi.h  u-  lia\.-  !  ,11-  l,e.-ii  waiting."  A';////  /,„„••,. 

••'Hi.  ,ir,-ply  inte  ^  s,,,,v  ,,|  .,  |ju|.  klio\Mi  pnio.l  i  s  u  ,-',  i  |.  ,1,1.  K\ ,-,  y  lu\  er  s,, 

th.-  I  iu!ish  I'.ihle  uill  thanl.  Ml.  ll-aton  asw-ll  for  lh.-  painst.,kiii-  res,..,rch  whi,  h 
has  rcsull.-d  in  llr  -  -.He,  lion  ,  .f  fa.  Is  ,,f  ||,.-  hi^h.  si  interesl  as  |,,r  ih-  sl.ii!  vxitli  which 
I..-  I,.,-  ma.sd.dled  them.  Il  d,  s,,  v.s  a  wide  .  ii,.  illation,  and  the  at  tia,  tiventss  ,,f  tilt- 
\  h.:iie  is  -i.ally  in.  -ca-td  !>  a  lai^e  laiin!  cr  uf  e.\.  ellenl  tnnra\  ings."-  .1/,-.7i,.,//...' 


"An  immense  amount  of  good  and  careful  work  has  been  clone  in  the  preparation  r°f 
this  history.  A  great  mass  of  valuable  infonnatiuii  ha.-,  been  collected,  ilhistralue  of 
t'ne  life  and  labours  of  the  early  translators  and  transcribers  of  the  Scripture-,  in  our 

"  He  gives  us  what  has  to  be  told  in  an  attractive  way.  Crudmon.  Aldhelm,  B;eda, 
are  described.  Further  on,  we  hear  of  Kin-  Alfred,  of  the  J.indi-farne  Gospels  and  the 
Kushworth  Gloss.  Finally  we  come  to  \Vycliffe,  of  whose  character  and  work  there  i- 
an  interesting  account,  written  in  a  judiciously  sympathetic  spirit." — Spectator. 


jk.      It 


jf  infc 


compass.     Mr.  Heaton  is  an  eminently  safe  guide."  —  Methodist  Time*. 

"  We  have  often  wondered  \\liy  no  expert  had  treated  this  period  with  the  fulness  it 
deserved.  We  must  therefore  congratulate  Mr.  Heaton  upon  his  much  needed  venture. 
and  are  persuaded  that,  having  read  the  present  volume  on  the  manuscript  period. 
readers  will  be  eager  to  see  its  successor."—  C,  loiiccstcr  J  onrnal. 

"Rev.  W.  J.  Heaton  has  written  a  volume  of  unusual  interest  and  value.  We  have 
many  noble  books  on  the  printed  Bible,  but  this  is  the  fullest  treatment  of  the  manuscript 
period  that  has  appeared.  He  is  never  dull  or  severely  technical,  and  every  lover  of  the 
Bible  will  rejoice  to  have  such  a  book.'  —  //  'esleyan  Methodist  Ma^aJnc. 

"We  cordially  recognise  the  admirable  manner  in  which  the  author  ha-  dealt  \\ith  the 
history  of  the  Sacred  Writings  prior  to  the  age  of  printing.  The  volume  bears  evidence 
of  laborious  research,  and  the  facts  collected  are  pre-ented  in  a  way  which  fixes  the 
interest  of  the  reader  from  the  first  page  to  the  last.  Mr.  Heaton  is  to  be  thanked  for 
this  noble  contribution  to  the  literature  relating  to  a  book  who.se  influence  grows  with 
the  ages."—  Isle  of  Wight  County  Press. 

"  He  writes  not  only  with  full  and  accurate  knowledge,  but  with  a  lurid  and   pleasant 
ch  carries   the  reader  on  from  uaee   to  na-e  with  unfhu'-in-  interest.      l.ate 


le  wh 


periods  of  this  entrancing  history  will  be  dealt  with  in  o 
—  Kafitist  Times  and  l-'rceman. 

"  It  is  a  fas  ..hutting  story  which  Mr.  Heaton  tells.  His  book  is  clearly  the  result  of 
much  original  research,  and  it  is  inspired  by  enthusiasm.  It  is  written  in  a  popular 
style,  and  the  general  reader,  as  well  as  the  student,  will  find  it  intere-ling  and  in 
structive.  Mr.  Heaton  says  the  total  Bible  production  of  our  time  is  about  3,000  a  day, 
or  five  for  every  minute  of  working  time.'' — Scotsman. 

"This  work  is  a  very  valuable  and  instructive,  besides  an  entirely  fa.-cinating  book. 
He  tells  the  tale  of  the  pioneers  of  the  Fn-lish  Bible  in  a  fashion  which  commends  his 
book  to  young  and  old  alike,  and  certainly  all  teachers  in  pulpit  and  Sunday  School 
should  make  themselves  acquainted  with  "Mr.  Heaton's  delightful  ww^,"— Christian 
Comiiioii-ica!th. 

"This  history  of  the  English  Ilible  ha.s  met  with  a  very  cordial  reception  on  the  part 
of  many  critics.1' — M'estir.inster  AYrvV:.'. 

"His  interesting  work  is  the  fullest  treatment  of  the  subject  that  has  appeared,  and 
reveals  accurate  knowledge  and  painstaking  rcsean  h."- -- Midland  Counties  Herald. 

'•  \  piece  of  work  which  needed  doing,  and  is  here  nobly  done.  Mr.  Ileiton  has 
performed  his  task  so  skilfully  that  his  book  should  become  indispensable."  Christian 
Globe. 

••  Mr.  H.-atoi,  has  dealt  skilfully  with  a  difficult  subject,  and  produced  a  book  which 
should  be  valued  by  all  lovers  of  the  Bible.  "—Record. 

"  Tlu-  work  bears  traces  of  profound  research,  but  the  subject  is  treated  in  popular 
language."— /.',  ,r<  k!<t,rn  Telegraph. 

"The  story  is  told  in  attractive  Unguage. "— S/iefield  Telegraph. 

"  This  work,  by  a  well-known  authority  on  the  Bible,  is  a  valuable  addition  to  the 
literature  relating  to  the  Scriptures,  and  shows  evidence  of  much  original  rc-earch."— 
Soi.th/>ort  Guardian. 


"The  M.hic.Tt  i-  treated  in  Mich  a  manner  that  to  us  there  IN  not  a  dull  or  drear 

in   the  ! k.      We  h..xx-  lead   it   half  .1  d.,/en  ti.no.  an.!   yd    ii   is   jn-t   a-  f.,.,  inat 

ever.  ••-.'.,-.  .,//'>., i. //<•-,•  .]/,,<.•„.-:,;,-. 

A  h.).k  of  entrancing  interest   '  --  Il\  ilty.in  .!/« •.'/;,..//.»•/  .S '////.; •',/!  SJwI  M-t^iJ 
A     '.iv-inatt.'U'.    insll  u>:ti\  e,    and     altogether     valuable    \  ..Itim*."  — On:', !,,,,: 
(.V,  :,•  r./X-). 

•'  Cle.ir,  co:npe:>  li  ..is,  and  inf.rniin.;.    —/>.»•.>,-.'  Csttit.'y  C/:>^n:\ .',: 

"Of  the  Utmost  Iiter.irya:i.l  liistori.-.il  interest."— (  V//-/v.'/,r«  .  -/./rMr.i.V  (  .\V:.-  1  '," 


Her  Majesty  Queen  Alexandra  and  the  Queen  Dowager  of  Sweden  have  ordered 
,    ,pies,,f  this  work. 
The  Right  Hon.  Lord  Peckover.  .,f  Wist,-,.,  h,  tlic  pos.  s.,,r  of  >ome  priceless  M>>. 

.,n-l  ..f  one  ..ft!.-  1:1  .st  valual.le  ...ll.-.-tioii-,of  Hil.les  ill  Kurope.  has  presented  a  nunil.er 
t,  L-.i.iiiu  I.i;.iaries,  and  says :  "  N'our  \v(,rl.  -i\es  tin-  !r-.t  a<:>-ou.it  «,f  the  early 
I'.n^lisl)  Ili-.i..-  that  1  ha\.-  ni.-i  with.  I  In.pe  if  span. 1  to  -o  thiotuh  it  a^.tin  before 

Lady  William   Cecil,  v  i  ste  1  her  father,  the  late  Kail  Amherst.  iii  his  ma^niticeni 

:i,-,ti,.n  -f  I'.iMes  and  l!i!.li,-.,l  Literature,  in  orderiiiR  some  copies,  says:  "My 
I,-!,1  and  and  I  have  read  it  with  the  greatest  pleasure.  It  is  M,  f,,l|  L,f  research  and 
inf.  .filiation  and  v.iitten  with  MI  h  a  full  knowledge  of  the  sul.ject." 

Professor     Sheat,    Can  "I     h..\e     read    it     nearly    all    through    with    inu<  h 

interest,  and  am  t;l. id  to  find  you  liave  taken  so  tnutli   tr.uil.le  in  des,  libm-   the  history 

Rev.  George  Parker,  (Ireei 

Rev.  R.  F.  M'Causland,  M.A.,  Ha\\ske: •  Vi.  aia^e 

Rev.  Canon  Adams,  K:ll    Ke,  tory  :  -"  I  shall  l.c  .ulad   to  hrinu        ur  work   under  the 
H.  J.   Farmer-Atkinson,  Esq.,  D.L.,   F.8.A.  :     '    I    think   the  l..,..k   sery  interesting. 

Rev.  J.  S.  Hicks  :        A    i 

Sir  R.  W.  Perks.  M.P.  :        I  kn 

Alderman    C.    J.    Lowe:     "  Vou    ha\e    e.vpeiide.l    -real    pains    an. 


Rev    H.  B.  Work-nan,  D.LIt.  :         I  ne 

Rev.  Henry  Smith:    -"    Ih.          .r«-   I   iea.1  y.v.n          >k    the    more    impie-.-d    MM   I   with    its 

Rev.  Jnmcs  Cooke 

Lady  Wantage          I •'>. '.!  .>f  intei.- 

Rev.   S.  Parkes  Cadman,  D.D.     N  -"I   ai 

The  Rev.  Dr.  Briggs,  '  ••'   {<  ""  '!"•  ''•    lk  '<  "      '"  ('-'" 

•    \\.     |,a\.-        .me    i 1.      -Ii    tliis    sul.ject.    hut    ..f   o.urse    i •    of    them    at    all   of    the 

The  Rev.  R.  Culley       '   V    .  It  is 

Walter  Morrison,  Esq.,  J.P    :-"  I  an 

Rev.  J.  Woode,   M.A.,    1  '   I'  > 

ihi     .:a,lyp.-,i.,d,  >  n.  must  ,..,!   Mi.    H-at  -r.'s  Look." 


Rev.  H.  Chellew,  B.D.  :— "Your  hook  appeared  most  opportunely,  and  is  a  valuahle 
miitrihiitit.ii  to  the  them.:  so  murh  Defected  amonv;  us  all." 

W.  P.  Workman,  M.A.,  B.Sc.,  Head  Master  of  KiiiK-.vv.wd  School:-  "An  ideal  hook 
for  pri/eh." 

J.  H.  Waterson,  Esq.,  Principal  of  Lytham  Colle-e  :  — '' A  literary  and  artisti.; 
a-.hievcment  of  a  very  hi.i;h  order.  Further  a.  qnaintanee  confirms  my  .  .pinion  of  its 
intrinsic  value.'' 

Rev.  W.  Classon,   .Mac'.ear,   South   Africa:—"]   read  the  hook  with   more  than  usual 

T.  C.  Osborn,  M.A.,  G.lwyn  Hay  :— "  It  is  a  hook  I  should  like  all  our  hoy-,  to  read, 
and  I  shall  not  fail  to  recommend  it  to  them." 

Mr.  R.  Harvey,  Yarmouth  :— "  A  very  fine  piece  of  work." 

Rev.  W.  F.  Moulton,  D.D.  (the  late),  Camhridge  :— "  1   am   mu,  h  interested,  and  your 

Rev.  A.  F.  Sheffield,   Ilarle.ston  :-    "A  first-class  !>ook." 

Rev.  J.  C.  Whiting  :— "  ll  is  surprising  what  a  vast  field  of  information  i.s  here  opened 
up." 

The  Principal,  Jersey  Ladies'  Colle-e  :— "  I  have  read  your  volume  with  ;-ery  great 
interest.  It  deserves  a  wide  .  irculation." 

Lady   Battersea  :— "  Your  most  interesting  hook." 

Rev.  T.  COOk,  Cliff  College  :— "  We  are  placing  your  work  on  special  shelves  for 
standard  works." 

The  Principal,  Ladies'  Colle-e,  Harroyate  :— "  I  have  lead  the  volume  with  very 
Ljreat  inlen-st  and  enjoyment,  and  recommended  it  to  several  Heads  of  Schools." 

Rev.  J.   E.  Page,  Sleights  :—"  It   is  splendidly  -ot  up  and   illustrated  — w,,rthy  of  its 

Rev.  R.  W.  Pitt,  M.A.,  Saxlingham  Rectory  :— "  Most  useful  in  connection  with  Bih'e 
Classes." 

Rev.  Dr.  Barber,  The  Leys,  Camhridge:  —  "  I  have  looked  through  your  hook  with 
pleasure  and  interest." 

Rev.  W.  Middleton  :— 1;  Your  hook  I  hi-hly  pri/e." 

Rev.    David    Young.    F.R.Hist.S.  :  — "  The    most    reliahle   and    deservin-    in    its    own 

Rev.  E.  L.  Anderson,  Cody  \Vyomin-.  I'.S.A.  :— "  1  shall  take  pleasure  in  recom 
mending  your  hooks  to  Ministers  of  my  1'rrshytery." 


ALSO  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR 

SHOULD  NOT  THE  REVISED  VERSION  OF  THE 
SCRIPTURES  BE  FURTHER  REVISED?" 

A  Popular  Tract.         6d. 

•'Able,  thorough,  and  convincing." — Publishers1  Circular. 


IS  A  WORLD  RELIGION   POSSIBLE?    lly  DAVID  BAI.SILI.IK, 

M.A.      C'rii\\  n  Svii,  4s.  net. 
Ihis  is  -  re,,,nditew,,rk  of  -4  real   value.      Mr.    Ualsillie  !,:,s  tlir-  neressary   learning. 

ill-     1  i^i    .1!    al.i   Il\,    .ill.l    the    fail-miude-llles,    to,     lus    task.        l;i    eitfllt    ,  hapters    he    deals 

with  siuh  Mii.ji-.'t,  as  th.-  Kco.ns'.ni.-tioii  "t"  l:«-!i».-f.  1'luralis,,,,  and  KeliJ-n,  \e... 
lle^e'.i.i!,  krluio:,.  the  IVis  ,n;ditv  of  |es,,sof  Xa/arelli.  the  -a>iius,.f  I-H-,  the 
Tru,  Kev,  lat:on.  and  .-so,,,,-  1  )•  .ul.tful  Saying  of  I.-MI-.  I  le  dies'  M  i  Mall...  k's  an.  I 
M:.  i  aiT.p'elTs  views,  ;illl|  ,:;,-  views  ,,f  I',  .,|-,-ss.,r"  William  lam-s  an.l  others.  and  the 
...:..lu-i  ..:•  I..-  .-..IIK-S  I..  is  that  a  w.,rl,l  religion  is  possible,  ami  that  Christianity 
must  ':.  Us  |,.,sis.  II,  s!Ves  emphati.ally  tlia!  he  would  nut  derive  his  materials  lo'r 
a  1,,-w  i,-lui...i  IL.,,,  any  ,!  .  iriiu-s  •  -f  Su'.-n.c  or  In;,,  any  ,.l,il,,,.,,,l,i,-al  system,  as 

llr,      i.-.llrl      at      al.y      latr      l.rlliT      ll'lls     wll.lt      Hot      to     |,-|i,-\r     l'h.,,1      what      to     hclifSc.          I  I  .- 

won!,!  ..':  :..in  his  matrrials  ttoin  S..MU-  .  o,,.  lot,-  realisation  ,,t  the  rcli-ious  ideal,  and 
no  irtt.r  ,  on.  ri-tt-  rrali^.ti.-n  in  his  ju.l-mnit  can  h<-  I'.,  mid  than  that  embodied  in 
the  ji.-is  .ji.dity  and  tia  hn,-  ot"  thr  I  ,.undei  cf  (  hiistianity. 

An  Em/list)  iciH/tn'ng.  by  the  Rei'.   W.  H.  Lowe,  of  a  Biblical  Trilogy, 
th-   u'ork  of  thi  popular  Russian  Author,  Ltonid  Andreyev. 

"JUDAS      ISCARIOT,"     together     with      "Eleazar" 
.(Lazarus)  and  "Ben  Tobit."    Crown  8\ 

A  -'..Mil.:.  >.-l  rr\L-r«-nt  attempt  t.i  tell,  fr.  .in  a  n.  -w  point  ..f  view,  th<-  Morv  of  the  ur.-at 
l..-tra\.d  l-i  the  lust  lim.-.  p.-rliaji-.  in  ill.-  history  of  literature  -  outside  the  I'.ii.le  - 
th-  •  ::,palli..ns  of  C'hll-t  are  presented  to  us  as  Hu,u  ,,.,n.  revealing  t  heliiseK  e  -  .  in 
ih-ii  li.alti.  s,  vim,,  -  and  .  hara.  t,  ii-ti.  s.  as  m-n  of  like  passion-  will,  ours-Kes.  The 
,  har..,  f  i  ..I  Indas  i>  a  m:  -leiU  sludv.  :.nd  w  ill  e.vule  II.IK  h  interest  and  ,  .,ii.inent.  'I  he 
r.-mai:  \i:+  M  .ri.  -.  "  I  h-a/ai  "  a'i.,i  "  lien  'I'ol.it.  'arc  e,|iial:y  hiilliant  ..I"  their  kind,  the 
,,,,.-  re\,a  r,_  i  .  th-  lull  the  imaginative  power,  as  w.ll  as  tin-  deraden.'-,  of  Andieyv  : 
whil-  the  ..th-  i  Is  a  l\pi.  al  example  of  th,  l^al!titlll  sjinpli,  ity  of  his  M\le.  of  his  'skill 

.  oi,si-,|.i-n,7-  to   tlie   destinies  of  niankinil    may  'pass   almost    unobserved    l.efoie   our   eyes, 

' 


A  hfiu    Work  on  the  Cathedrals  of  England. 

OUR   ENGLISH  CATHEDRALS.      !.y  the  Kcv.    |  AMI.  SIHKEE. 
—  .    l-nliy  Illiistr.it<-<l  l.\  I  Mx.t..  graphs  and  P.lock   I'laiis.      Iii  Two  Volumes. 

(  'n.\\  ;i  ,S\  .  i,  5s.  iR-t  i-ach. 

"Th-  aiilli  .r  has.  there:  -ie.  th  ,iuhl  that  llier.-  w..s  still  room  fir  ..  hook  on  th-se 
wonderful  •  :-ali  ..is  ,.l  on.  aiLje-t  „  /  skill  and  -,  -niiis,  on  somewhat  diffei.-nt  lines  fr.  m 
those  la.-'.  N  pt-vi  ..ns  w  .-ks  o,i  II.-  Mlhie,  I.  '  To  those  who  have  neither  time  nor  in- 

wh  ,    in'oin  own  .  oisntry.  o,   i:,  ,,m-  C  .l-.-ro.  or  in'the  l'nr.,1    Si  it-s.  m.,y  wish  to  have. 
in  a  I.  n-:  an.;  .    ,n.  p.i.  i  Ion.  i.  ..  -!..  !,  h  ot  l-.njisl,  C'..the«ir;..!s  .,,1  the  whole.'1 

In  I..,  .1..  how.-ver.  is  nrith-i  s,  rappyt.o;  m-a-ie.  The  i  .uildii.^s  are  ad.-.ptat.-ly 
cir  ni,-d.  i.uil.li-.^  dat-s  and  histori,  al  not-,  ate  -iv-n.  Th.  re  is  a  ,  hapt.-r  upon  the 
si^nilK.,  ,,•  .Hid  -i.  .wlh  ..)  (..,th,  All  hit.-,  lure,  upon  leferellL.-s  to  the  (.'.ilhedials  in 
l-.iu  isi,  Lite,  ami  (in,  Iti.l'n^  many  .pioialioiis),  and  also  i.p,,,,  tl,e  .elation  of  our 
Cathedrals  toti.e  lifr.il  lo-dav,  I  he  w  ,.k  i  ,  ,  omj.lete  and  th  ,|..n^hly  readable. 

THINGS   NEW   AND  OLD.      Hun- 

'I'liMinl-.u    C.istl.-    and    ,-ls,-\\!H-rr.        I'.y     I'M.  less.,  r     KMCIN.        Laroc 

ci  .  AS  1  1  S\  i  >.    ^s.   M.-I  . 


years. 

LOM>II.N  :   FRANCIS  <;i;IM-ll'IIS.  .54,  M  \IDKN  LANK,  STRANH,  VY.C. 


NEWMAN,  PASCAL,  LOISY,  AND  THE  CATHOLIC 
CHURCH.  I'.v  \V.  J.  WILLIAMS.  Large  rrnwn  Svo,  cloth. 
6s.  net. 

Spectator.  — "  Th«sc  who  de-ire  to  get  ri  better  understanding  of  the  Liberal  Roman 
Catholic  position  should  read  thi-  book.  Mr.  Williams  not  only  presses  the  claims  ,,f  the 
Rom. in  Cum-  h  upon  all  who  profess  and  call  then, selves  Christians,  but  on  all  who 
acknowledge  the  existence  of  a  religi  us  clement  in  man's  nature." 

Catholic  Weekly.—"  The  time  is  ripe  for  a  revival  of  Catlulic  philosophy  which  shall 
reflect  the  ntellectual  rigour  that  lias  been  such  a  marked  feature  oj  the  ^ciemific  w,.rk  of 
the  last  fifty  years,  a  rigour  which  owes  its  development  to  that  vast  order  of  ideas  known 
under  ih  •  liame  of  Kvoluti'-m.  I'o  those  Catholics  who  are  looking  tor  signs  of  MI.  h  a 
revival,  Mr.  \V.  ].  Willi  mis'  book  .  .  .  will  be  welcomed  with  enthusiasm.  To  many  it 
will  open  out  a  new  realm  of  philosophic  tlr  light,  a  new  country  whose  bree/es  stimulate 
the  mind  and  invigorate  our  very  lie-in-.  It  is  a  book  that  must  be  read  with  an  intensity 
that  will  not  be  satisfied  with  one  reading." 

Wt»->ii>i"  /W  —Mr  Wilfrid  \\'ard  says  in  a  two  column  review  :  ''The  juxtaposition 
of  the  names  of  Newman  and  Pascal  in  the  title  of  Mr.  Williams'  b,,,A-  suggests  at  once 
why  its  theme  is  interesting  and  important.  And  when  I  add  that  the  theme  is  treated 
by  the  writer  with  thoroughness  and  speculative  ability  of  a  very  high  order.  I  base  said 
enough  to  justify  me.  if  1  am  right,  in  speaking  of  the  w,,ik  at  some  length." 

ENGLISH  CHURCH  ARCHITECTURE,  From  the  Kailiest 
Times  to  the  Reformation.  Hy  G.  A.  T.  MIDDI.KTON,  A.K.I.IJ.A. 
Crown  Svo,  2s.  6d.  net. 

This  bo  -k  is  profusely  illustrated  by  many  well-executed  Sketches  and  Measured 
Drawings,  which  heighten  its  appeal  to  the  Archite  t.  It  is  especially  useful  to  young 
students  at  the  commencement  of  their  career,  but  also  contains  many  suggestions  which 
are  of  interest  to  older  men  also,  as  well  as  to  the  general  public. 

Arch /Ar/.  — "  This  little  hook  is  useful  as  a  first  aid  to  the  study  of  our  Knglish 
mediaeval  architecture  by  the  amateur,  or  even  the  youthful  professional  student.  .  .  . 
While  he  does  not  attempt  to  teach  everything  about  Kngl.sh  (Jothic,  what  he  does 
teach  is  put  clearly  and  simply,  so  that  his  reader  will  know  something,  and  that 
something  worth  knowing 

Scotsman.— "  ±n  excellent  little  handbook." 

(.'ailinlif  Hcralti.— "  A  delightful  essay  upon  the  growth  of  ecclesiastical  an  hitecture 
in  Kngland." 

A  striding  and  suyyestiue  booh  by  the  Rev.  J.  Forbes  Phillips. 
WHAT  WAS  THE  RESURRECTION?    Crown  8vo,  3*.  6d.  net. 

An  attempt  tore-state,  in  the  light  of  the  modern  spirit  and  of  modern  discoveries,  this 
fundamental  article  of  Christian  belief. 

Extract  from  tin-  Author  .<.  /'' I'/tici'.—"  Recent  years  have  witnessed  a  great  change 
in  the  spirit'and  methods  of  treating  the  fuiKlainent.il  doctrine  of  the  Haiti.,  and  more 
especially  the  belief  in  the  Res.,  rection.  There  is  a  -rowing  impre-MM,  that  many 
accepted  definitions  of  certain  articles  of  belief  ha\  e  seriously  obscured  the  (iieat  Truth's 
themselves,  and  that  views  have  a  way  of  supplanting  the  main  idea.  The  Resurrection 
is  a  notable  example.  Preachers  in  their  sermons,  and  theologians  in  their  lectures, 

animated  on  Kaster  I  lay.  and  that  this  was  the  stupendous  miracle;  whereas  the 
fundamental  iruth  is  that'the  Christ,  havi.  g  suffered  dealli,  showed  that  it  had  no  more 
dominion  over  Him,  that  He  hail  preserved  this  identity,  and  from  out  of  the  Unseen 
was  able  to  project  Himself  into  the  Seen,  and  satisfy  1  I  is  followers  that  He.  the  Very 
Christ,  was  livin-  and  still  bolding  communication  and  communion  with  them.  "I  hat 
was  the  mirai'le,  but  the  pro  .f  of  it  lies  in  the  fact  that  He  is  still  doing  this  '' 

THE  SECRET  OF  GENESIS.     An  Astro-Religious  Record.     The 

Li-^cnds  ani'l  their  Interpretation  from  the  Fall  of  the  Angels  to  the 
Building  of  the  Ikibel  Tower.  By  lihOKCli  ST.  Cl.MK.  'l)emy  Svo, 
6s.  net. 

MAN:  FIRST  AND  LAST.  From  Cave  Dweller  to  Christian. 
l!y  (  i  !•:<  iKr,i-;  Si.  (Ji.MK.  1  >emy  Svo,  ys.  net. 

LONDON  :   FRANCIS  GRIFFITHS,  34,  MAIDEN  LANK,  STRAND,  \V.C. 


THE  MEN  OF  THE  BIBLE: 

THEIR    LIVES    A.\D    TIMES. 

17  Volumes,  Crown  8uo,  bound  in  cloth.     Price  per  Volume, 
2s.  Gil.  net. 

ABRAHAA1:  His  Life  and  Times.  By  the  Rev.  W.  J. 
DEANB,  M.A.  2s.  6d.  net. 

"This  book  has  the  great  merit  of  throwing  on  the  life  of  Abraham  all  the 
light  of  recent  Oriental  learning,  and  therefore  of  making  an  entirely  fresh 
figure  of  him,  and  one  that  hannonises  with  his  contemporaries  and  enviruu 
meat. " — Evangelist. 

"As  the  first  volume  of  a  series  entitled  'Men  of  the  I'.iblr,'  we  have  an 
interes'.in^  and  carefully  written  account  of  'Abraham:  his  Life  and  Times,' 
by  the  Rev.  \V.  J.  Deane,  M.A.  The  biblical  record  of  the  career  of  th« 
patriarch  is  faithfully  followed,  but  is  elucidated  by  Mr.  Deane  from  the 
results  of  modern  scientific  research  a"nd  archaeological  discovery,  and  the  book 
embodies  a  great  amount  of  instructive  information  in  an  acceptable  form."— 
— Scotsman. 

DANIEL:  His  Life  and  Times.  By  the  Rev.  II.  DEANB, 
B.I).  2s.  6d.  net. 

"  It  makes  the  life  of  Daniel  and  his  surroundings  realities  in  a  new  sense. 
No  Bible  scholar  ought  to  try  to  do  without  it." — Standard. 

"The  '  Me:i  of  the  I'.ible  '  series,  which  we  have  had  again  and  again  to 
commend  as  beini;  specially  useful  to  our  teachers,  giving  them  the  latest 
information  and  opinion  on  their  respective  subjects."  —  Sunday  School 
ChronicU. 

DAVID:  His  Life  and  Times.  By  the  Rev.  W.  J.  DIANE, 
M.A.  2s.  6d.  net. 

"The  story  of  the  romantic  life,  from  cabin  to  palace,  is  told  in  simple, 
graceful  style,  giving  a  very  distinct  impression  of  his  life  and  character." — 
Advance. 

"These  are  very  useful  manuals  for  biblical  students  and  Sunday  School 
teachers." — Daily  Chronicle. 

ELIJAH:  His  Life  and  Times.  By  the  Rev.  Professor  W. 
MII.LH;A.N,  D.D.  2s.  6d.  net. 

"A  charming  addition  to  the  scries.  ...  A  strong,  interesting,  and  useful 
txxjk,  whifh  should  be  read,  while  its  literary  execution  and  finish  commend  it 
to  all." — l:f"iscof>al  Recorder. 

"  It  would  be  difficult  to  say  which  of  the  volumes  in  this  series  is  the  best. 
This  volume  takes  its  place  with  the  others  as  a  valuable  number  of  a  most 
excellent  set  of  books." 

EZRA  AND  N  EH  E  All  AH.  By  the  Rev.  Canon  GICOKCK 
RAWI.INSON,  M.A.  2s.  6d.  net. 

"An  enlightened  dissertation  upon  two  great  Jewish  leaders.  This  little 
volume,  which  has  evidently  beet,  most  conscientiously  prepared,  is  very  sug 
gestive." —  Daily  Chronicle. 

"Displaying  much  ability,  great  learning,  and  sound  judgment."  —  Churck 
Review 

"  No  man  living  is  letter  qualified  to  write  on  this  subject  than  the  Oxford 
professor  of  Ancient  History." — Onward. 

"  Worthy  of  becoming  a  classic  in  its  subject.' — Literary  Churchman. 

"  We  strongly  commend  this  book  to  the  reading  of  every  Protestant.  I'.riefly, 
clearly,  and  trustworiluly  the  narrative  of  the  icturn  from  the  Kxile  and  of  the 
tubsequent  incidents  is  detailed.  It  was  a  period  of  immense  moment,  and 
these  two  rulers,  Krrm  and  Nehemiab,  were,  under  God,  the  chief  actor*  in 
thu*e  memoraMe  *c«oe»." — Keck 


THE   MEN  OF  THE   BIBLE— Con  tinned. 

GIDEON  AND  THE  JUDGES:  Their  Lives  and  Times. 

A   Study,    Historical    and    Practical.       By   the    Rev.    JOHN 
MARSHALL  LAM;,  D.D.     2s.  6d.  net. 

"  r>y  means  of  an  animated  style,  ample  literary  lore,  and  a  reverent  yet 
powerful  grasp  ot  divine  truth,  Dr.  Lang  has  here  produced  a  commentary  on 
an  epoch  of  Jewish  history  fertile  in  striking  situations,  which,  though  pro 
foundly  thoughtful,  will  secure  the  gratified  attention  of  almost  any  reader  in 
almost  any  mood  of  mind." — Church  Reric'v. 

"  It  is  a  very  interesting  work,  attractive  in  style,  thoughtful,  Scholarly, 
practical,  and  abounding  in  instruction.  Dr.  Lang  shows  conspicuous_ability  in 
grappling  with  special  difficulties,  and  has  added  a  valuable  contribution  to  the 
literature  of  the  Old  Testament."—  Methodist  Recorder. 

"Here  we  have  a  feast  for  half  a  crown.  If  the  book  be  estimated  by  the 
number  of  sermons  to  be  got  out  of  it,  one  has  a  great  bargain." — Sward  nnd 
Trowel. 

ISAAC  AND  JACOB:    Their  Lives  and  Times.      By  the 

Rev.  Canon  GEORGE  RAWLIN'SON,  M.A.     2s.  6d.  net. 

"The  canon  has  made  his  book  an  interesting  one,  and  does  full  justice  to 
his  theme.  His  style  is  flowing,  at  times  rising  to  eloquence."— Literary 
World. 

"  Canon  Rawlinson  is  on  his  own  ground,  and  brings  his  vast  stores  of 
Oriental  learning  to  bear  on  a  period  and  on  characters  about  which  commenta 
tors  and  preachers  have  left  much  to  be  said." — Methodist  Times. 

"A  captivating  story  of  the  two  patriarchal  lives.  Give  us  a  day  at  the  sea- 
side,  and  either  this  volume  or  the  same  author's  '  Kings  of  Israel  and  Judah,' 
and  we  will  envy  no  monarch  on  his  throne  of  ivory." — Sword  and  Trowel. 

ISAIAH:   His  Life  and  Times.      By  the  Rev.  Canon  S.   R. 
DRIVER,   M.A.,  D.D.     as.  6d.  net. 

"A  careful  reading  of  this  work  by  Professor  Driver  is  fitted  to  add  greatly 
to  one's  interest  in  the  study  of  the  book  of  Isaiah.' — Advance. 

"  Cheaply  issued,  but  written  up  to  the  latest  information  on  their  respective 
subjects,  this  series  of  Scripture  biographies  is  of  unusual  interest  to  Sunday 
Schools."—  Sunday  Schojl  Chronicle. 

JEREMIAH:    His   Life  and   Times.      By  the   Rev.   Canon 
T.  K.  CHKYNK,  D.D.     2s.  6d.  net. 

"An  ideal  volume,  which  brings  the  history  and  the  book  vividly  before  the 
reader  in  a  simple,  picturesque  manner,  and  yet  leaves  none  of  the  religious 
elements  out  of  account." — Independent. 

''  Preachers  of  all  sorts  and  conditions  may  derive  no  little  benefit  from  many 
suggestive  passages." — Church  Times. 

JESUS  CHRIST  THE  DIVINE  MAN.      By  the  Rev.  J.  F. 
VALLINGS,  M.A.     2s.  6d.  net. 

"  This  piece  of  work  bears  examination,  and  grows  on  one.  .  .  .  We  believe 
the  divine  blessing  he  a^ks  for  will  be  bestowed  upon  his  efforts,  and  that  the 
bonk  will  become  a  favourite  with  appreciative  readers." — Churchman. 

"We  are  more  and  more  impressed  with  the  value  of  the  service  rendered  to 
religion  by  its  publishers  and  editor.  Excellent  alike  in  design  and  execution, 
these  handy  half-crown  volumes  are  calculated  to  be  of  immense  service  to 
young  students  and  Christian  workers.  They  are  just  the  thing  lor  the  shelvei 
of  a  Sunday  School  teacher's  or  local  preacher's  library." — Methodist  Recorder. 

JOSHUA:   His  Life  and  Times.     I'.y  the  Rev.  W.  J.  DEANE, 

M.A.     2s.  6d.  net. 

"These  books  are  easy  as  well  as  engaging  reading,  being  written  not  fot 
biblical  students  and  scholars  any  more  than  for  the  general  reader." — Ckrisffan 
Intelligencer. 

"  The  imposing  '  Men  of  the  Hible    <i«ri»»»." — Critical  Review. 


p 
b 


THE  MEN   OF  THE   BIBLE—  Continued. 

THE    KINGS  OF    ISRAEL   AND  JUDAH.      By  the   Rev 

Canon  GKORC.K  KAWI.INSON,   M.A.     2s.  6d.  net. 

"  It  would  be  difficult  to  give  a  more  complete  ami  rc.iil.iLle  account  of  all 
these  kings.  It  would,  peihaps,  be  impossible  to  find  any  one  better  qualified 
for  the  task  than  Canon  Raw  linson."  —  //></-. 

"  Canon  Rawlinson  has  added  yet  another  volume  to  that  useful  --cries,  '  Men 
of  the  Bible,'  which  cannot  fail  to  throw  much  light  on  those  bygone  clays,  and 
help  the  Bible  student  to  understand  better  the  character  anil  work  of  these 
eminent  men."  —  John  Hull. 

THE  MINOR  PROPHETS.     By  Dean  FARRAR,  D.D.     2s.  6.1. 

net. 

"  Its  pages  bristle  with  references  to  the  critics  and  interpreters  of  the  Old 
Testament.  The  book  is  packed  with  information,  which  is  presented  with 
consummate  literary  skill.  The  reader  who  has  his  Kngli-h  Bible  ojvn  will  find 
many  a  crooked  place  made  straight  and  rough  place  plain."—  Critical  Re.'ieiv. 

"  His  book  will  take  its  place  among  the  works  whit  h  n.nst  be  rca<l  by  all  who 
wish  to  understand  these  interesting.  and  precious  writings."  —  Leeds  Me>iU>y. 

MOSES  :   His  Life  and  Times.       Ry  the  Rev.  Canon  GEORGE 
RAWLINSON,  M.A.     2s.  6d.  net. 

"  As  easy  to  read  as  a  story-book.  Its  information  is  wonderful.  Our  author 
makes  Moses  live  before  your  eyes.  Such  is  the  writer's  acquaintance  with 
Kastern  history,  manners,  and  scenery,  that  he  becomes  the  Macaulay  of  Moses, 
only  without  the  inaccuracy  of  our  F.nglish  historian.  This  is  grand  change  lor 
halt  a  crown.  If  the  other  'Men  of  the  Bible'  find  such  biographers,  the 
uMibhcrs  will  have  to  enlarge  their  premises.  Friend,  1'iiy  this  Ixwk.  We 
elieve  you  will  thank  us  lor  the  advice  when  you  find  yourself  fairly  fascinated 
by  iL"—  Sword  and  Trowel. 

SAMUEL  AND  SAUL,      By  the   Rev.  W.  J.  DEANK,   M.A. 
2s.  6d.  net. 

"Treated  with  adequate  learning,  a  command  of  the  best  authorities,  anil 
excellent  judgment."  —  //  'atchntan. 

"  From  personal  experience  we  know  that  these  books  are  lil.ed  by  the 
thoughtful  working-man,  and  we  are  sure  the  present  volume  will  only 
strengthen  their  popularity."—  John  Hull. 

SOLOMON  :   His  Life  and  Times.     By  Dean  FARRAR,  D.D 
2s.  6(1.  net. 

"...  Such  a  magnific-nt  word-picture  of  the  great  king,  that  one  rives  from 
it  with  a  more  vivid  idea  of  the  Royal  Preacher  than  one  is  likely  to  obtain  hy 
any  other  means.  The  cost  is  only  half  a  crown  .  tin-  literary  taste  and  skill 
and  learning  are  worth  a  thousand  crowns  at  the  least."  —  Sii'fn/  anii  7>vi<r/. 

"These  books  form  pnrt  of  the  line  '  Men  of  the  Bible'  series  written  by  the 
ablest  scholars  of  Great  Britain.  Of  Dean  Farrar  it  may  b«-  said,  'he  tonchc.i 
nothing  which  he  did  not  a>!orn.'  He  makes  that  old  past  lucid  and  luminous 
with  light  and  th-obbing  with  life."—  (  >«7<  ad. 

ST.  PAUL:   His  Life  and  Times.     By  Rev.  Professor  IAMKS 

IVKRACII,  M.A..   D.D.      2s.  6(1.  net. 

"The  judicious  reader  will  count  himself  happy  to  fall  in  with  a  book  on  St 
Paul  wriitcn  by  a  thoroughly  competent  person,  who  is  neither  the  slave  of  his 
own  antiquarian  knowledge,  nor  of  the  historic  or  unhi-t<  ric  imagination,  nor 
evm  of  the  Tubingen  theory.  The  author  has  masteied  tin-  mo-t  recent  studi.-- 
of  his  subject,  both  critical  and  theological,  but  be  maintains  the  independence 
of  his  own  mind,  and  with  it  .1  satisfactory  sense  uf  the  true  propoi  lions  of 
things.  He  goes  fairly  and  honestly  to  work  on  the  materials  supplied  by  the 
New  Testament,  and  those  who  are  best  acquainted  with  the  ground  will  most 
admire  the  skill  and  solidity  with  which  his  narrative  is  compacicd.  The  hook 
i»  admirable,  far  truer,  in  its  appreciation  of  the  relative  imp»i  lance  of  events, 
than  many  larger  works.  It  is  manly  and  earnest."  —  /!>iti^h  H'tt-kly. 

:  FRANCIS  GRIFFITHS.  34  MAM-KN   IAN*.  STRAND.   WC 


English    Preachers. 


Crown  8vo,  Cloth.  Price  35.  net  each. 


Some  Elements  of  Religion. 

By  the  Rev.  W.  MANNING,  M.A. 

Difficulties  of  our  Day 

By  the  Ven.  ARCHDEACON  SINCLAIR,  D.D 

Adventus  Regni. 

By  the  Rev.  A.  L.  LILLE v,  M.A. 

The  World's  Desire. 

By  the  Rev.  JOSEPH  B.  MAYOR,  M.A.,  D.Lit. 

Ecclesia  Discens. 

By  the  Rev.  A.  W.  HUTTON,  M.A. 

St.  George  for  England 

And  other  Sermons  Preached  to  Children. 

By  the  Rev.  CANON  TEIGNMOUTH-SHORE,  M.A 

Seeking  a  Country. 

By  the  Rev.  Tnos.  F.  LOCKYFR,  B.A. 

New  Lights  on  the  Old  Faith. 

By  the  Rev.  N.  E.  EGERTON  SWANN,  B.A. 


LONDON : 
FRANCIS  GRIFFITHS,  34  MAIDKN  LANK,  STRAND,  \V.C. 


