5 

036 

061 


THOUSAND, 


and 


Ex  Libris 
C.  K.  OGDEN    ! 


Palestine  and  the  Bible. 


Illustrating  the  Manners, 
and  Customs  of  the  .  . 
People  in  Bible  Lands. 


THE    REV.    SAMUEL    SCHOR, 

A  Native  of  Jerusalem. 


NINTH   EDITION.  FORTIETH  THOUSAND. 


J.  A.  THOMPSOX  4  Co.,  LTD.,  1  4  11,  SOUTH  JOHN  STREET. 

lonfcon: 
JAMBS  NISBBT  &  Co.,  LTD.,  21,  BEKNKKS  STKKKT.  W. 


Introduction  to  the  Ninth  Edition, 


This  is  the  Ninth  Edition  of  this  little  Book. 
Altogether  40,000  copies  have  now  been  printed. 
God  .is  using  it  as  a  humble  handmaid  in  leading 
many  to  a  more  intelligent  study  of  His  Word.  A 
clergyman  in  recommending  his  people  to  get 
copies  said  "  I  have  learnt  more  from  this  little 
book  than  from  many  a  thick  half -guinea  com- 
mentary." 

This  book  was  originally  intended  to  be  the 
Catalogue  of  the  Palestine  Exhibitions  started  by 
the  author,  but  it  is  read  and  studied  again  and 
again,  as  a  reference-book  and  text-book  on  the 
Customs  of  the  East. 

May  God  continue  to  bless  this  book  and  the 
Exhibitions  with  which  it  is  connected. 

All  lovers  of  God's  Word  can  help  by  circulating 
this  book  far  and  wide. 

SAMUEL   SCHOE. 

2000097 


index  to  Subjects. 


A. 

Agriculture 
Altar  of  Burnt  Offerings 

PAGE 
...     14 
...  103 

City  Walls      ... 
Club      

PAGE 

...     29 

...     55 

Antiquities      
B. 

...     92 

Coats  of  many  Colours 
Coat  of  Treves 
,,    without  Seam    ... 
Corn,  Grinding 
Couch   ... 

...     51 
...     48 
...     48 
...     43 
...     36 

Babylonian  Bricks     ... 
Baker's  Boy 
Baskets            
Battlement 
Beans,  Locust... 
Beards  

..     94 
.      58 
..     3S 
..     27 
..     81 
..     60 

Cymbals 
Cruse  of  Oil    

D. 

...     74 
...     39 

Bed       
,,     Chambers 
Bible  and  the  Monuments 
Boots  and  Shoes 

.  .     .35 

..    :*<) 
..    9,: 

..     51 

Dancing 
Dedication,  Feast  of... 
Deluge  Tablets 
Doors    ... 

...     32 
...     87 
...    97 

...     24 

Bottles,  Skin  
„      of  Clay 
Bofctk,  Toilet  
Botany...         

..     42 
42 
..     60 

..     77 

Doorpost         
Dress,  Article  of 

...     85 
...     45 

Bracelet           
Bread,  Unleavened    ... 
Burials... 

..     62 
..     90 
.     33 

E. 
Eastern  Characters    ... 

...     54 

C. 

Candlesticks    
Cankerworm,  Meaning  of 
Caterpillar 
Ceremonies,  Jewish  ... 
Chanukah  Lights 
Climate  of  Palestine  . 
Cistern  

..     39 

..    78 
..     78 
..     82 
..     87 
.     15 
26 

,       House 
,       Fashions 
,       Furniture     ... 
,       Life    
Music 
Room 
„      Toilet 
Early  and  latter  Rains 
Encampment,  An 
Eye  of  Needle 
Education 

...     23 
...     45 

...     35 
...       9 
...     69 
...     23 
...     60 
...     18 
...   100 
...     29 
...     56 

INDEX  TO  SUBJECTS. 


F. 

K. 

Fan,  Winnowing 

...     21 

Kharoob          

...     81 

Feast  of  Lights 

...     87 

Kneading-trough       ... 

...     44 

Food,  Meat     

...     88 

Knives,  Slaughtering 

.-     88 

Fringes... 

84 

Kosher  Food  ... 

...     88 

Frontlets 

...     83 

Furniture,  Eastern    ... 

...     35 

|_ 

Lamps  

..,     39 

G. 

Lantern           

...     40 

Latter  Rains  

...     18 

Garments,  Rough 

...     48 

Law,  Roll  of  the 

...     90 

30 

T  iffhts    Feast  of 

87 

Girdles             

48 

Limestones  Soft 

...      ot 

Girding  Loins... 

...     49 

Locusts            

'.'.'.    77 

Goad        .         ...         ... 

16 

Trfvlcrp  in  a  OarHftn 

21 

Grinding  Corn 
Guest  Chamber 

...     43 

...     28 

Love  Songs      

1'     78 

M. 

H. 

Mandrake        ...        _ 

-.     81 

Mantles 

44? 

Hair,  Plaiting  
Handmill 

,     61 

...     43 

Market  Place  

Mezuzah 

~     31 
...     85 

Harp     

,.,     70 

Milk 

fiX 

Harvest            
Hebrew  Bible  
Hezekiah         
Hieroglyphs    

...     20 
...     91 
...     96 
...     99 

Mirrors            
Moabite  Stone 
Murex  Shell    ... 
Music   ... 

...    61 

...     97 
...     79 
69 

Holy  of  Holies 

...  102 

Muzzle  „ 

...     20 

Horns    .. 

73 

House  ...         ...         ... 

.     23 

Housetop         ...         ... 

...     26 

N. 

Nabbuteh        ...        _ 

...     55 

1. 

Natural  History 

...     77 

Nazerites         ... 

....     58 

Bhaf 

38 

Needle's  Eye  ...        ... 

...     29 

Inkhorn           ...         _ 

...     98 

Neginoth         ...         ... 

...     70 

Noserings        .„         „  . 

~    62 

J. 

0. 

Jael  and  Sicera 

...     66 

Olive  Branches           ... 

79 

Jewellery        

...     62 

,,     Wood  Articles... 

.1    80 

Jewish  Ceremonies 

...     82 

Organ    ... 

71 

,,      Passover 

...     90 

Ornaments,  Tinkling... 

-.    62 

INDEX  TO  SUBJECTS. 


p. 

Soap 

63 

Palestine,  Soil  of 
Palmerworm    ... 
Painting  Face    .         ... 

15 
...     78 
...     60 

Soil  of  Palestine        
Soft  Raiment  
Songs  of  Solomon      
Staff      

15 

46 
75 
5fi 

Pens,  Reed      
Phoenicians 
Phylacteries    
Pillows 
Piping  and  Dancing  ... 
Pitchers 

...     98 
...     99 
...     82 
...    37 
...    32 
...     42 

Street  Cries     
T. 

Tabernacle      
Tables  

57 

100 

SS 

Ploughs 
Porter's  Lodge 
Prophets          

...     16 
...     24 

.,.     50 

Tablets,  Lachish 
Tabrets            
Talith   

93 

74 
84 

Purple    ..           ...         ... 

...    79 

R. 

Rainfall  in  Palestine... 
Rehoboam       

...     17 
...    97 
94 

Tents  and  Tent  Life  ... 
Threshing  Instruments  
Tiglath  Pileser           
Timbrel            
Tombs,  Rock  Hewn  
Trays    

64 
20 
94 

74 
33 
38 

Rings                            .  .  . 

...     62 

Trumpet          

73 

Rock-hewn  Tomb 
Rod  and  Staff  
Rolling  Stone 
Rolls  of  the  Law 
Rooms,  Upper 

& 

...     33 
...     55 
...     34 
...     90 

...     28 

U. 

Unleavened  bread     
V. 

Veils     

90 
53 

Sabbath           

...     86 

,,     sheet 
Viol  

53 

19: 

Sackbufc 
Sandals 
Sargon  ... 

...     73 
...     51 
...     95 

W. 

Scorpion 
Scribe  ... 

...     79 

...     56 

Washing  the  hands  and  Feet 

41 

Seamless  Coat 

...     48 

Well     

57 
•>fi 

Sennacherib     
Shalmanezer    ... 
Shaving            
Shepherd's  Life 
Sheepskins      
Shoes 

...     96 
.  .     98 
...     60 
...     54 
...     52 
...     51 

Wheat  and  Tares 
Winnowing  Fan 

Y. 

81 
21 

Siloam  Inscription 
Singing  Girl    
Sitting  and  Reclining 
Skin  Bottles    
Slinsrs    ., 

...     99 
...     58 
...    37 
...     42 
56 

Yoke        ...         

Z. 

Zizith    . 

16 

84 

Palestine  and  the  bible. 


BY 


REV,   SAMUEL    SCHOR. 


CHAPTER  I. 
Eastern  Customs  and  Manners. 

/70D'S  Word  is  an  Eastern  Book.  It  was  written 
^  in  the  East,  by  Easterns  and  for  Easterns.  It 
is  therefore  only  obvious  that  a  study  of  that  Land, 
its  life  and  habits,  furniture  and  dress,  language 
and  expressions — in  short,  everything  connected 
with  the  Land  and  the  People — must  throw  a  flood 
of  light  on  many  passages  of  Scripture. 

And  God  has  made  it  possible  for  us  to  examine 
the  subject  thoroughly;  for  He  has,  in  a  most 
marvellous  way,  allowed  the  Land  and  its  in- 
habitants to  remain  quite  unchanged  throughout 
many  centuries.  Most  countries  have  changed  over 
and  over  again.  They  have  altered  their  habits, 
their  dress,  their  furniture  ;  they  have  advanced  in 


io  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

education  and  culture  ;  but  Palestine  has  practically 
remained  unchanged.  Its  life  to-day  is  the  life  of 
Bible  times.  Visit  that  land,  and  if  you  have  eyes 
to  see  and  ears  to  hear,  you  will  be  able  to  throw 
yourself  back  in  imagination  to  the  times  of 
Abraham,  David,  or  our  Lord. 

Moreover,  there  is  another  important  con- 
sideration. The  natives  of  the  land  to-day  are 
chiefly  Arabs,  descendants  of  Ismael  and  Esau. 
They  know  nothing  of  the  Scriptures.  They  do 
not  choose  their  mode  of  life,  their  habits,  their 
dress.  They  simply  live  this  primitive  life  because 
their  parents  and  grandparents  for  a  hundred 
generations  have  lived  the  same  life.  They  are 
therefore  unconsciously  living  the  life  of  Scripture, 
and  are  a  daily  witness  to  its  truth.  Undesigned 
witnesses  are  always  the  most  valuable  ones. 

This  little  book  is,  therefore,  no  record  of  a 
visit  to  Palestine.  We  have  far  too  many  such 
books  already.  Many  of  them  form  very  pleasant  but 
rather  useless  reading.  They  describe  ad  nauseam 
the  same  little  episode  of  the  landing  at  Jaffa,  the 
first  attempt  to  mount  the  Arab  steed,  the  obstinate 
donkey,  &c.,  &c.  We  then  have  the  very  beautiful 
but  very  stale  sentimental  talk  about  Bethlehem 
and  Nazareth,  Tabor  and  Olivet. 

Are  we  to  suppose  that  God  preserved  that 
land  through  countless  ages,  and  allowed  it  to 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  n 

remain  unchanged,  in  spite  of  a  hundred  battles  and 
sieges,  in  order  that  the  modern  tripper  may  fling 
his  little  joke  at  the  expense  of  an  ass  or  a  mule ! 

The  greatest  desire  of  Bible  students  is  to 
understand  the  Book.  Great  scholars  and  divines 
have,  by  their  knowledge  of  ancient  languages, 
given  us  perfect  translations  and  explanations.  But 
commentaries  lack  life.  It  is  one  thing  to  read 
about  the  Shepherd  King ;  it  is  another  to  follow 
a  shepherd  on  the  hills  of  Judea,  see  him  wear  the 
same  sheepskin  jacket,  armed  with  the  same  kind 
of  rod  and  staff,  watch  him  sling  his  stones,  call 
his  sheep  by  name,  take  the  new-born  lamb  to  his 
bosom,  carry  the  wounded  one  gently  on  his 
shoulders,  lead  them  to  their  resting  place,  go 
before,  while  they  follow  him  : — such  a  visit  makes 
the  Bible  a  living  Book ;  you  feel  as  though  the 
shepherd  of  Bethlehem  had  lived  this  year,  that 
you  had  just  paid  him  a  visit,  and  that  he  had 
fully  explained  to  you  his  whole  life.  All  this  is  so 
intensely  simple,  that  it  seems  beneath  the  con- 
sideration of  the  commentator  and  theologian.  It 
is  not  scientific,  it  is  not  critical.  It  is  far  more 
scientific  to  sit  in  one's  study,  and  to  prove  that 
the  story  of  the  blessings  and  curses  repeated  on 
Gerizim  and  Ebal  in  the  days  of  Joshua,  was  an 
utter  impossibility,  owing  to  the  distance  of  the  two 
mountains  from  one  another,  and  the  fact  that  it  is 


12  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

known  how  far  the  human  voice  can  travel.  It  may 
be  less  scientific  to  visit  those  two  mountains,  and  to 
see  if  any  spot  can  be  found  from  which  the  voice 
of  man  can  travel  across  the  intervening  valley, 
and  reach  the  hearers  on  the  opposite  hill ;  but  it 
has  been  tried,  the  very  words — the  blessings  and 
curses — were  repeated,  and  every  word  distinctly 
heard.  [Such  an  "unscientific  and  uncritical" 
method  must  demonstrate,  however,  to  the  study- 
critic,  beyond  the  powers  of  contradiction,  that 
there  is  a  screw  loose  in  his  philosophy." 

The  commentary  of  the  future  will  not  devote 
whole  pages  in  telling  us  why  it  does  not  agree  with 
Meyer  or  Lange ;  it  will  not  give  us  twenty-six 
reasons — all  very  learned  and  ingenious — to  prove 
that  Detitzsch's  interpretation  of  a  verse  must  be 
wrong,  and  forty-eight  equally  learned  reasons  as  to 
why  Alford's  explanation  of  a  sentence  cannot  be 
tight ;  it  will  devote  these  pages  in  letting  Eastern 
Customs  and  Manners  throw  all  their  light  upon  the 
Book  wherever  such  a  process  is  possible,  and  the 
result  will  be  that  many  difficulties  of  Scripture  will 
vanish,  and  many  apparently  meaningless  passages 
will  receive  quite  a  depth  of  meaning. 

ifor  years  the  author,  who  is  a  Native  of  the 
Holy  Land,  has  been  endeavouring  to  impress  these 
truths  upon  Bible  students,  by  means  of  the  Palestine 
Exhibitions,  which  he  started  in  the  year  1891,  and 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  13 

which,  by  their  very  popularity,  and  by  the  fact  that 
others  have  copied  them,  prove  how  welcome  to 
countless  thousands  is  the  light  which  the  Land  and 
the  People  sheds  upon  the  Book. 

It  is  his  earnest  prayer,  that  this  little  book  may 
be  of  some  assistance  in  helping  many  to  "  search  the 
Scriptures,"  and  "to  mad  eternal  life." 


CHAPTER  II. 

Agriculture. 

HJHE  Jews  were  essentially  an  agricultural  people. 
The  ideal  of  national  peace  and  prosperity  was 
summed  up  in  the  well-known  saying,  "  Every  man 
shall  sit  under  his  own  vine  and  fig-tree."  (Zech.  iii. 
10).  "We  are,  therefore,  not  surprised  to  find  frequent 
allusions  to  agricultural  customs  and  implements  in 
every  part  of  the  Bible.  And  remember  this :  the 
implements  used,  the  nature  of  the  country,  the 
climate,  the  soil — in  fact  everything  connected  with 
the  subject  of  agriculture — is  so  different  in  Palestine, 
that  you  cannot  make  a  more  fatal  mistake  in  the 
world  than  to  compare  Bible  customs  with  English 
customs.  It  is  wise  to  lay  it  down  as  a  general  rule  if 
you  want  to  understand  any  Bible  or  Eastern  custom  : 
think  of  the  very  reverse  of  your  own,  and  you  will 
not  be  very  far  wrong. 

Let  me,  therefore,  impress  upon  every  reader 
the  importance  of  studying  the  agricultural  allusions 
in  Scripture  in  the  light  of  agricultural  customs  of 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  15 

the  Palestine  of  to-day.      Such  a  study,  and  such  a 
study  only,  can  make  the  Bible  a  real  living  Book. 

Palestine  is  called  the  Land  flowing  with  milk 
and  honey  ;  (Josh.  v.  6),  it  was  a  very  fertile  country. 
There  are  two  features  which  tend  to  make  Palestine 
a  land  of  almost  unbounded  resources. 

(a)— ITS  CLIMATE.  Although  only  a  small 
country  it  has  every  variety  of  climate,  from  the  colds 
of  Norway  arid  Sweden  to  the  tropics  of  Central  Africa. 
We  have  our  coldest  climate  in  the  North,  on  the 
Lebanon  mountains,  and  the  temperature  rises  as 
you  descend  to  the  Highlands  of  Ephraim,  and 
Manasseh  and  Judah ;  it  rises  still  more  as  you 
descend  into  the  plain  of  Sharon  and  along  the  whole 
length  of  the  Mediterranean;  and  it  reaches  a 
tropical  heat  in  the  hot  valley  of  the  Jordan  and  the 
Dead  Sea.  Everything  can,  therefore,  practically 
grow  in  some  part  of  Palestine. 

(&)—  THE  SOIL  is  intensely  fertile.  No  artificial 
manure  is  used.  It  is  not  needed.  The  source  of 
the  fertility  of  the  country  to  a  great  extent  consists 
of  Small  Soft  Limestones,  which  are  found  scattered 
all  over  the  country,  sometimes  almost  completely 
hiding  tbe  soil  itself  from  view.  But  when  the  rains 
descend  and  the  floods  come,  part  of  the  lime  is 
dissolved  ;  it  mixes  freely  with  the  soil,  thus  enriching 
the  country  just  as  the  farmer  is  about  to  plough. 


16  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

EASTERN  PLOUGHS.— The  most  primitive 
ploughs  are  used  to-day,  and  were  no  doubt  used  in 
Bible  times.  They  are  very  light,  and  can  easily  be 
carried  by  one  man.  Notice  the  handle.  This  a  man 
holds  with  one  hand  (Luke  ix.  62),  and  thus  guides  the 
plough.  Being  light  and  small,  it  just  scratches  the 
earth  to  the  depth  of  a  very  few  inches.  The  plough 
is  fastened  to  the  neck  of  the  oxen  with  a  YOKE.  You 
have  nothing  like  it  here.  Then  notice  how  it  is 
fastened  to  the  neck  of  the  oxen.  The  oxen  pass 
under  it.  See  Jer.  xxvii.  8,  11.  The  weight  of  the 
yoke  naturally  makes  the  poor  animal  stoop.  Hence 
the  force  of  the  allusion  that  when  God  brought 
Israel  out  of  Egypt  and  broke  their  yoke  of  bondage, 
He  says,  "  I  made  you  to  go  upright.11  Lev.  xxvi.  13. 
The  yoke  is  often  used  as  a  figure  of  speech  to 
express  bondage.  See  Gen.  xxvii.  40 ;  1  Kings  xii. 
4 ;  Is.  xlvii.  6,  &c.  When  a  very  grevous  bondage 
was  referred  to,  no  stronger  expression  could  be  used 
than  a  yoke  of  iron.  Deut.  xxviii.  48 ;  Jer.  xxviii.  14. 
Yokes  of  iron  are  never  used  :  at  least,  I  have  never 
seen  or  heard  of  them:  It  would  be  used  as  a  figure 
of  speech.  Some  yokes  fit  better  than  others,  and 
could  be  used  with  greater  comfort  by  the  hard- 
working animals ;  thus  the  yoke  which  our  Lord 
imposes  on  us  "  is  easy."  Matthew  xi.  30. 

The  GOAD  is  a  long  pole  which  the  ploughman 
holds  in  his  other  hand.  One  end  has  a  metal  point, 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  17 

with  which  he  pricks  and  goads  the  animals  in  their 
work,  the  other  end,  containing  a  flat  piece  of  iron,  he 
uses  to  scrape  off  the  soil  from  the  ploughshare. 
Like  everything  else,  it  is  used  as  a  figure  of  speech 
in  Eccles.  xii.  11,  and  again  by  our  Lord  in  Acts  ix. 
6  and  xxvi.  14,  where  it  is  called  "pricks."  (See 
Eev.  Version.)  Young  animals  are  unaccustomed  to 
the  yoke.  Jer.  xxxi.  18.  They  fight  and  kick,  but 
to  no  purpose,  for  they  only  hurt  themselves  by 
"kicking  against  the  pricks." 

Many  farmers  will  often  plough  together,  each 
having  his  own  plough  and  yoke  of  oxen,  and  one 
following  close  behind  the  other.  Farmers  club 
together  in  this  way,  partly  for  protection  from  the 
roving  Bedouin  robbers,  and  partly  on  account  of  the 
size  of  some  of  their  fields.  Imagine  a  farmer 
making  a  single  furrow  one  mile  in  length  !  Thus 
Elisha  was  engaged  with  eleven  others  when  called 
by  Elilah.  1  Kings  xix.  19.  Again,  Elisha  boils  the 
oxen  which  he  slays  with  the  instruments  (1  Kings 
xix.  21),  showing  they  were  of  wood. 

Sometimes  animals  are  "  unequally  yoked  to- 
gether." A  camel  and  a  donkey,  or  a  donkey  with  a 
cow.  This  was  forbidden  by  the  Law.  Deut.  xxii.  10. 

RAINFALL.— Ploughing  is  always  done  after 
the  "  early  rains "  have  thoroughly  saturated  and 
softened  the  ground.  See  Ps.  Ixv.  10.  Here  again 


i8  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

you  can  find  no  parallel  in  England.  Palestine  has 
practically  two  seasons  only,  the  wet  and  the  dry. 
The  dry  season  commences  in  April  and  lasts  until 
October,  and  during  this  long  period  not  a  drop  of 
rain  falls.  The  first  rains,  or  early  rains,  come  about 
the  end  of  October  or  beginning  of  November,  and  the 
wet  season  closes  with  the  LAST  or  LATTER  RAINS 
in  March  or  the  beginning  of  April.  When,  there- 
fore, the  winter  is  passed,  "  the  rain  is  over  and 
gone."  Cant,  ii  11.  Not  a  drop  of  rain  falls  in 
summer.  Hence  "  snow  in  summer  or  rain  in 
harvest"  is  as  exceptional  a  thing  as  "honour  to  a 
fool."  Prov.  xxvi.  1.  When  Samuel  prayed  that  it 
might  rain  in  harvest,  it  would  at  once  be  connected 
with  a  judgment  from  God,  for  it  was  most  excep- 
tional. 1  Sam.  xii.  17,  18.  During  the  winter 
mouths  we  have  two  or  three  days  of  very  heavy 
showers  of  rain,  accompanied  often  with  thunder  and 
lightning,  hail  and  snow,  and  then  a  few  days  of 
bright  warm  sunshine. 

THE  EARLY  AND  LATTER  RAINS  do  not  imply 
two  distinct  seasons  of  rain,  with  a  dry  season 
between,  but  to  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  con- 
tinuous rainy  seasons.  Both  are  greatly  needed. 
Without  the  first  rains,  no  ploughing  or  sowing  can 
be  done ;  without  the  latter  rains  there  will  be  no 
harvest.  A  sad  distressing  picture  of  the  absence  of 
the  latter  rain  is  given  us  in  Joel  i.  7-20.  It 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  19 

implies  that  the  early  rains  had  come,  that  the  seed 
had  been  sown,  and  beginning  to  grow,  but  the  latter 
rains  in  February,  March  and  April  had  been  with- 
held, and  the  seed  wasted,  v.  10.  (See  2  Kings  xix.  26.) 

As  soon  as  the  first  rains  have  saturated  and 
softened  the  ground,  the  ploughman  begins  his 
work.  Until  the  early  rains  fall  he  cannot  plough. 
The  earth  is  as  hard  as  a  rock,  hence  the  strong 
and  natural  expression  in  Psalm  Ixv.  10,  "Thou 
dissolvest  it  with  showers,"  not,  "  Thou  makest  it 
soft." 

Sometimes  the  "  early  rains  "  are  very  late,  or 
insufficient  in  quantity  to  dissolve  the  hard  clods ; 
in  that  case  the  ploughman  has  to  wait  (James  v. 
7)  and  hope  and  pray  (1  Kings  viii.  35).  "  Waiting 
for  rain  "  implies  a  season  of  great  anxiety.  Job 
xxix.  23  ;  Jer.  xiv.  4.  But  when  once  the  rains  have 
come  in  sufficient  quantities,  he  must  begin  to  plough. 
He  may  have  to  plough  in  the  very  face  of  hail  and 
snow,  storm  and  tempest,  but  plough  he  must,  for  if 
he  does  not  plough  and  sow  with  the  early  rains,  he 
will  not  reap  after  the  latter  rains.  See  Prov.  xx.  4. 
"  The  sluggard  will  not  plough  by  reason  of  the  cold; " 
and  Eccles.  xi.  4,  "  He  that  observeth  the  wind  shall 
not  sow,  and  he  that  regardeth  the  clouds  shall  not 
reap."  No  doubt  our  Lord  is  thinking  of  a  man 
ploughing  in  a  storm  of  rain  and  hail  when  he  say?, 
"  He  that  putteth  his  hand  to  the  plough  andlooketh 


2O  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

behind."  Luke  ix.  62.  Before  him  the  poor  man 
faces  the  storm,  behind  him  he  perhaps  sees  his 
comfortable  home. 

During  the  harvest  the  farmer  produces  his 
THRESHING  INSTRUMENT.  It  is  a  "  sharp  instru- 
ment with  teeth."  Is.  xli.  15.  The  corn  is  cut  with 
a  sickle,  bound  into  sheaves,  and  conveyed  on  camels' 
backs  to  the  threshing  floor — a  field  with  a  hard 
surface.  Here  the  grain  is  trodden  out  by  animals. 
Threshing  instruments,  where  used,  are  made  of  two 
or  three  thick  boards  of  wood  (1  Chron.  xxi.  23), 
fastened  together,  side  by  side,  and  look  very  much 
like  a  sledge.  The  underneath  part  has  sharp  flint 
stones  or  pieces  of  iron  fixed  to  it.  These  sharp 
points,  "the  teeth,"  not  only  separate  the  corn  from 
the  ear,  but  cut  up  the  straw.  Look  at  the  sharp 
stones,  and  how  the  instrument  is  used,  and  you  will 
understand  Gideon's  threat,  "I  will  thresh  your 
flesh  with  thorns."  Judges  vi.  11.  God's  punish- 
ments are  often  compared  with  threshing.  Is.  xxv. 
10 ;  Hab.  iii.  12.  Very  often  no  instrument  is  used. 
The  oxen  are  made  to  tread  the  corn  until  it  has 
been  threshed. 

During  this  process  the  MUZZLE  comes  into 
operation.  Animals  are  generally  muzzled  during 
threshing  of  the  corn.  This  was  forbidden  in  Deut. 
xxv.  4. 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  21 

Another  important  implement  is  the  FORK  OR 
WINNOWING  FAN.  Wheat  and  chaff  are  separated 
with  Qtjork  or  winnowing  fan.  Matt.  iii.  12.  The 
grain  is  heaped  up,  and  men  dip  the  fork,  and  toss  it 
in  the  air.  The  wind  carries  the  light  chaff  away. 
leaving  the  heavier  grain  on  the  floor  (Is.  xxx.  24). 
Hence  the  frequent  connection  found  in  the  Bible 
between  the  wind  or  whirlwind  and  the  chaff.  Ps.  i.  4; 
xxxv.  5;  Is.  xvii.  17;  xli.  16;  Jer.  li.  2;  Hos.  xiii.  3. 
You  will  be  able  to  realize  John  the  Baptist's 
striking  reference,  Matt.  iii.  12,  He  will  thoroughly 
purge  his  threshing  floor,  i.e.,  Christ  will  separate 
the  chaff  from  the  wheat. 

Ears  of  corn,  neatly  plaited,  are  brought  to  the 
towns  by  farmers,  and  presented  to  their  patrons. 
Thus  were  they  probably  plaited  when,  as  the  first- 
fruit,  they  are  waved  as  a  wave-offering.  Ex.  xxix. 
24 ;  Lev.  viii.  27. 

It  is  during  the  period  of  harvest  that  you  will 
be  able  to  notice  the  LODGE  IN  A  GARDEN.  It  is 

well  worthy  of  a  careful  study,  as  illustrating  Is.  i.  8. 
During  harvest  time  many  of  the  farmers  leave  their 
villages  and  live  in  their  vineyards  or  olive  yards,  in 
booths  made  of  reeds.  These  represent  the  "cottage" 
of  the  above  verse,  the  sukkah.  The  same  word  is 
translated  "boofch"  in  Lev.  xxiii.  42,  where  the 
Israelites  are  commanded  to  make  booths  on 
the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  In  the  booth  or 


22  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

tent  the  farmer  himself  and  his  family  live. 
Should  he  have  any  field  in  which  some  inferior 
vegetables  or  fruit,  such  as  leeks,  onions,  cucumbers 
or  melons  are  growing,  he  makes  his  servant,  or  a 
labourer  watch  there.  The  watchman  takes  four 
long  poles,  which  he  cuts  from  some  trees  close  by, 
fixes  them  in  the  ground  so  as  to  form  a  square  of 
about  six  feet.  Fastened  to  these  he  fixes  a  platform 
of  wood  about  four  feet  from  the  ground,  which  he 
covers  with  an  old  straw  mat,  or  a  piece  of  coarse 
sacking,  over  which  he  throws  the  branches  of  trees ; 
it  shelters  him  from  the  burning  rays  of  an  Eastern 
sun.  This  is  the  "  lodge."  As  soon  as  the  harvest 
is  over  the  people  return  home,  leaving  the  booth  or 
lodge  to  its  fate.  The  autumn  and  winter  winds 
blow  away  part  of  the  branches  or  matting,  leaving 
them  most  realistic  pictures  of  desolation  and  ruin : 
a  striking  illustration  of  a  nation  without  God. 


CHAPTER  III. 

Houses    and    Homes. 

OASTERN  houses  are  as  unlike  Western  houses  as 
^  they  can  possibly  be  ;  hence  the  importance  of 
studying  the  subject  very  carefully,  since  every  part 
of  an  Eastern  house  is  mentioned  in  Scripture. 

AN  EASTERN  HOUSE.— We  examine  first  the 
exterior.  You  see  four  bare  ugly  walls.  There 
may  be  one  or  two  windows,  and  they  will  generally 
be  covered  with  lattice  work.  You  also  see  a  very 
uninviting  low  street  door.  And  this  is  more  or 
less  the  universal  custom  all  over  the  East,  and.  has 
been  so  from  times  immemorial.  Judged,  therefore, 
from  the  exterior,  Eastern  houses  are  uninteresting, 
ugly,  and  dirty.  But  it  is  only  the  exterior  that 
presents  so  uninviting  an  appearance,  the  interior 
may  be  beautiful,  comfortable,  and  clean.  There  is 
good  reason  why  the  exterior  should  be  so  un- 
attractive. Eulers  in  the  East  have  absolute  power, 
and  are  generally  unprincipled  men.  A  ruler  has 
but  to  covet  a  house  or  field  or  vineyard,  and  he  can 

S3 


24  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

soon  possess  it ;  or  he  can  always  find  his  wife,  or 
some  unscrupulous  time-serving  courtier,  ready  to 
help  him  in  robbing  and  plundering  the  rightful 
owner.  (Remember  Ahab  and  the  field  of  Naboth, 

1  Kings  xxi.)     It  is,  therefore,  customary  for  the 
wealthy  to  hide  their  wealth.     King  Solomon  re- 
minded his  contemporaries  of  this  fact  when  he  said 
"He   that  exalteth  his  gate    seeketh  destniction." 
Prov.  xvii.  19.     And  the  noblemen  and  gentry  of  the 
very    city    where    these   words   were   written  real- 
ized the  truth   of  King    Solomon's    saying    when 
Nebuchadnezzar  burnt  "  every  great  man's  house," 

2  Kings  xxv.  9.     Micah  denounces  those  who  rob 
and  plunder  houses.     Micah  ii.  2.      See  also  Amos 
iii.  15. 

Now  we  enter  THE  DOOR.  Doors  are  generally 
"  two-leaved."  Is.  xlv.  1.  This  explains  the  two 
leaves  in  1  Kings  vi.  32-34,  and  Ezek.  xli.  24. 
You  next  find  yourself — supposing  you  are  visiting 
the  house  of  a  wealthy  man— in  the  PORTER'S 
LODGE.  It  is  a  small  room  through  which  you  pass 
before  entering  the  house.  The  porter  is  called 
"  Bawab,"  literally,  a  door-keeper.  All  gates  of 
cities,  temples,  palaces,  &c.,  had  Bawabs.  See 
2  Sam.  xviii.  26  ;  2  Kings  vii.  20  ;  1  Chron.  ix.  21. 
When  the  doors  are  shut  and  anyone  knocks,  seeking 
admission,  the  porter  does  not  open  at  once.  He 
first  calls  out  "Who  is  there?"  Should  he  not 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLB.  25 

recognise  the  voice,  he  continues  questioning  until 
he  is  satisfied  that  "  all  is  well."  Hence  Rhoda 
first  questioned  Peter,  and  recognising  his  voice,  in 
her  joy  left  him  standing  without.  Acts  xii.  13-14. 
The  door  would  not  be  opened  to  any  suspicious  or 
unwelcome  stranger.  The  unfriendly  neighbour 
without  opening  the  door,  but  from  within,  says 
"  Trouble  me  not."  Luke  xi.  7.  Our  Saviour's 
gracious  promise  should  be  remembered  here,  "  To 
him  that  Itnocketh  it  shall  be  opened,"  Matth.  vii.  8, 
i.e.,  no  questions  will  first  be  asked  as  to  whether 
you  are  worthy  of  gaining  admittance.  All  who 
knock  are  welcome  ;  or,  "  the  very  fact  of  knocking  I 
consider  a  friendly  act,  and  gains  for  you  a  ready 
admittance." 

Now  we  enter  THE  COURT.  You  see  it  is  no 
covered  hall,  but  a  court  open  to  the  sky.  It  is 
called  A  KHOSH.  All  houses  have  courts.  The 
great  palaces  have  several.  Esther  v.  1.  The 
Temple  had  three.  Sometimes  one  court  led  into 
another.  See  Ezekiel's  description  of  such  a  court 
in  ch.  xlvi.  21.  They  are  generally  paved  with  stone, 
sometimes  with  beautiful  marble  slabs,  or  inlaid 
with  mosaics.  Here  they  keep  pots  of  flowers,  or 
trees  with  delightful  shade  or  still  more  delightful 
fruit,  such  as  oranges,  pomegranates,  figs,  dates. 
The  vine,  too,  is  made  to  grow  over  some  trellis- 
work,  forming  a  beautiful  bower.  It  is  probably  to 


26  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

the  fruit  trees  growing  in  these  courts  that  the 
prophets  refer  when  they  say,  "  Every  man  shall  sit 
under  his  own  vine  and  fig  tree."  Remembering  the 
refreshing  appearance  of  a  court  thus  covered  with 
trees,  Isaiah's  language  receives  fresh  force  when,  in 
foretelling  the  doom  of  the  city,  he  says  that  the 
courts  shall  be  covered  "  with  reeds  and  rushes." 
Isaiah  xxxv.  7. 

In  the  Court  we  generally  find  THE  WELL. 
It  is  A  CISTERN  in  which  the  rain  water  is  collected. 
During  the  dry  season  of  the  year  they  are  often 
empty,  and  form  a  good  hiding-place.  2  Sam.  xvii. 
18.  The  word  WELL  should  often  be  read  CISTERN 
e.g.,  Gen.  xxi.  19  ;  Num.  xx.  17  ;  2  Sam.  xvii.  18  ; 
2  Sam.  xxiii.  15.  But  substitute  the  word  SPRING 
in  Gen.  xxiv.  13,  and  in  xlix.  22. 

Now  we  enter  THE  ROOMS.  They  are  all  built 
round  the  courtyard,  with  all  the  doors  and  windows 
facing  it.  The  rooms  are  of  various  sizes,  and  built 
entirely  of  stone — walls,  floor  and  ceiling  included. 
As  the  weight  of  the  ceiling  must  necessarily  be  very 
great,  the  roofs  are  always  vaulted,  hence  the  small 
domes  which  are  so  general  a  feature  of  all  Oriental 
roofs. 

We  now  make  our  way  up  the  stairs.  They 
take  us  to  THE  HOUSETOP.  You  notice  that  it  is 
almost  flat.  A  wall  about  two  or  three  feet  high 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  27 

runs  right  round  it,  forming  a  very  necessary  pro- 
tection. This  parapet  is  called  "  BATTLEMENT  " 
in  the  Bible,  Deut.  xxii.  8.  The  wisdom  of  this  law 
will  be  apparent  to  all  who  remember  how  frequently 
they  are  used.  Samuel  spends  a  night  with  Saul  on 
the  housetop.  1  Sam.  ix.  25.  Imagine  a  dark  night 
on  a  housetop  without  the  "battlement!"  Here 
St.  Peter  prays,  Acts  x.  9.  Idolaters  would  naturally 
choose  the  housetop  v»hen  they  wished  to  "  worship 
the  host  of  heaven."  Zeph.  i.  5.  The  housetop  is 
paved  with  flat  stones.  In  course  of  time  the 
cement  wears  away,  the  stones  become  loose,  a  bird 
drops  a  stray  seed  into  the  crevice,  and  in  course  of 
time  grass  and  even  wild  flowers  mav  be  seen 
growing  on  the  housetop.  But  "  it  wither etli  afore 
it  groweth  up  "  (Ps.  cxxix.  6),  having  no  depth  of 
earth,  2  Kings  xix.  26,  and  Is.  xxxvii.  27. 

It  is  quite  possible  for  people  to  go  from  one 
house  to  another  by  just  stepping  across  the  ad- 
joining roof.  But  that  would  be  a  great  breach  of 
etiquette.  Only  under  very  exceptional  circum- 
stances would  it  be  permitted,  e.g.,  in  case  of  a 
hurried  flisht.  When  our  Lord  says,  "  Let  him 
who  is  on  the  housetop  not  come  down,"  &c..  Mattn. 
xxiv.  17,  He  no  doubt  refers  to  a  hurried  flight  from 
one  housetop  to  another  until  some  safe  place  is 
reached  by  which  one  could  descend  to  the  road  and 
escape.  It  would  thus  be  easy  to  pass  news  from 


28  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

house  to  house  by  proclaiming  it  from  the 
housetop.  Matth.  x.  27,  and  Luke  xii.  3.  Most 
houses  contain  one  storey  only,  but  some  possess  one 
or  two  rooms  on  the  housetop.  These  are  called 
"UPPER  ROOMS."  They  are  generally  the  best 
rooms — the  largest  and  coolest,  and  would  be  used  as 
GUEST-CHAMBERS.  Mark  xiv.  14;  Luke  xxii.  11. 
Hence  the  guest-chamber  in  which  our  Lord 
celebrated  His  last  Passover  was  also  called  an 
upper  room.  Mark  xiv.  15 ;  Luke  xxii.  12. 

Can  a  ROOF  be  UNCOVERED?  If  Eastern 
root's  are  of  stone  and  cemented,  how  could  the  man 
sick  of  the  palsy  be  let  down  through  the  roof? 
(Mark  ii.  4.)  We  have  to  remember  that  our  Lord 
was  "preaching  the  word"  (verse  2).  He  would 
choose  a  place  where  most  people  could  hear.  Now 
a  room  would  obviously  be  the  worst  place,  as  only 
those  actually  in  the  room  could  hear. 

But  on  many  an  Eastern  housetop,  containing 
perhaps  two  upper  rooms,  the  space  between  the 
two  is  covered  over  with  boards,  branches  of  trees, 
straw  matting  or  tiles,  and  thus  affords  grateful 
shelter  from  the  heat  of  the  sun.  Now  from  that 
spot  our  Lord  could  be  heard  by  most  of  the  people 
crowded  there.  And  what  the  four  men  would  have  to 
do  was  to  carry  their  friend  in  next  door,  ascend  on  to 
the  roof,  step  across  to  the  roof  of  the  house  occupied 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  29 

by  our  Lord,  and  proceed  to  remove   the  boards, 
branches,  &c. 

Having  examined  the  house,  we  will  now  visit 
the  CITY  WALL.  There  is  always  a  great  dis- 
tinction between  cities  and  villages  in  the  East, 
consisting  not  so  much  in  point  of  size,  as  in  the 
fact  that  all  cities  of  any  importance  have  walls. 
This  is  emphasized  in  Deut.  i.  28 ;  Num.  xiii.  28. 
There  existed  also  a  difference  in  the  law  between 
the  tenure  of  land  in  walled  cities  and  in  open 
villages,  Lev.  xxv.  29-30.  The  walls  are  very  high, 
strong  and  massive.  They  are  so  thick  that  people 
can  comfortably  walk  on  the  top.  From  the  top  of 
the  wall  the  besieged  would  of  course  seek  to  repel 
the  invaders.  2  Kings  xviii.  26 ;  2  Sam.  xi.  21 ; 
Joel  ii.  7-9.  Here  people  would  also  be  seen  in  time 
of  peace.  2  Kings  vi.  26.  Many  of  the  stones  are 
of  great  size.  Oue  stone  on  the  east  wall  of  the  city 
of  Jerusalem  measures  thirty-seven  feet  in  length, 
and  just  below  the  surface  some  have  been  found 
quite  forty  feet  in  length.  Houses  are  sometimes 
built  so  close  to  the  wall  as  to  form  part  of  it,  con- 
taining even  a  window  facing  the  exterior  of  the  city. 
Such  was  Eahab's  house  in  Jericho  (Josh.  ii.  15), 
aud  David's  (1  Sam.  xix.  12),  and  St.  Paul's  in 
Damascus  (2  Cor.  xi.  33). 

Let  us  next  examine  A  CITY  GATE  WITH 
NEEDLE'S  EYE.  Cities  are  pierced  with  several 


30  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

large  GATES  OF  IRON,  and  are  always  tioo-leaved. 
Isa.  xiv.  1.  When  we  read  that  Samson  took  the 
doors  of  the  gate  (Judg.  xvi.  3)  it  means  he  unhinged 
both  leaves  and  carried  both.  Gates  are  closed  at 
sunset,  and  not  opened  until  sunrise.  This  is  still 
the  case  in  all  Eastern  cities.  Neh.  vii.  3,  and  xiii. 
19.  And  when  once  the  gates  are  shut,  they  will 
not  be  opened  except  to  admit  a  great  official  who 
may  be  out  on  an  errand  of  importance.  The  chief 
captain  sends  St.  Paul  from  Caesarea  "  at  the  third 
hour  of  the  night"  Acts  xxiii.  23,  i.e.,  about  9  p.m. 
A  very  wise  precaution.  No  one  could  possibly 
pursue  them  until  the  gates  were  opened  at  about 
six  the  following  morning.  This  would  give  the 
Apostle  a  nine  hour's  start,  and  make  it  impossible 
for  any  Jews  to  overtake  them  on  the  way. 

It  is  interesting  to  know  that  for  the  last  few 
years  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  have  not  been  shut  day  cr 
night !  Is.  Ix.  11. 

When  anyone  has  to  be  admitted  or  allowed  to 
leave  the  city  by  night,  a  smaller  door  fixed  into  the 
larger  one  is  opened.  This  is  called  «  THE  NEEDLE'S 
EYE."  Matt.  xix.  24 ;  Mark  x.  25  ;  Luke  xviii.  25. 
Now,  try  and  picture  the  scene  to  which  our  Lord 
refers.  Camels  laden  with  large  sacks  of  wheat, 
barley,  charcoal  or  wood,  are  brought  into  town  daily. 
They  are  our  beasts  of  burden,  for  there  are  no  carts 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  31 


in  Palestine.  The  burdens  are  evenly  balanced  on 
either  side  of  the  camel's  back,  and  stand  out 
sometimes,  some  three  or  four  feet,  right  and  left. 
A  camel,  therefore,  needs  a  wide  gate  to  admit  it  and 
its  burden.  Every  traveller  in  the  East  knows  from 
experience  what  it  means  to  meet  a  laden  camel 
coming  up  a  street  only  just  wide  enough  for  it  to  pass 
through.  He  could  not  even  stand  against  the  wall,  his 
only  plan  is  to  stoop  low,  and  allow  the  camel  to  pass 
by,  whilst  the  burden  just  grazes  his  back  !  Hence 
the  meaning  of  our  Lord  was  obvious  to  his  hearers. 
A  camel  with  its  burden  could  not  possibly  enter  the 
"  needle's  eye  "  ;  its  only  chance  of  entering  was  to 
have  its  burden  removed  first.  The  point  our 
Lord  wished  to  inculcate  was  not  that  a  rich  man 
could  not  enter  heaven,  but  a  man  who  trusts  in  his 
riches.  Mark  x.  24. 

Gates  in  the  East  open  always  into  large 
squares  used  as  MARKET  PLACES.  HERE  people 
congregate,  not  only  to  transact  business,  but 
also  to  discuss  the  news  of  the  day.  At  the 
gate  sits  the  judge  to  administer  justice,  Deut. 
xxi.  19;  xxii.  24;  xxv.  7;  Euth  iv.  1-10.  The 
city  gate  is,  indeed,  the  centre  of  life  and 
activity  in  the  town.  Here  labourers  sit, 
waiting  to  be  HIRED,  Matt.  xx.  3.  Women  bring 
their  baskets  with  fruit  and  vegetables  for  sale. 
Proclamations  are  made  in  the  city  gate.  The 


32  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

wealthy  townspeople  sit  here  on  low  stools  sipping 
their  coffee  and  smoking  long  pipes,  which  they 
order  from  a  small  improvised  coffee-shop,  while 
they  discuss  the  news  of  the  day  ;  the  city-gate  takes 
the  place  of  a  gentlemen's  club  in  England.  To  be 
spoken  of  highly  in  the  city-gate  (Prov.  xxxi.  23), 
means  that  a  man  is  respected  by  high  and  low,  rich 
and  poor,  by  the  gentry  who  sit  there  gossiping,  or 
by  the  poor  peasant  women  or  labourers. 

Here  also  may  be  seen  the  SAKKAH,  or  water 
seller,  with  his  skin  bottle  slung  behind  his  back, 
shouting  out  "  Ho  ye  thirsty  ones,  come  buy  and 
drink ;  "  (Is.  Iv.  1.)  Here  also  sits  the  baker's  boy 
with  his  basket  of  barley  loaves — he  is  sure  to  be 
found  wherever  people  congregate.  John  vi.  9. 

EXPLANATION     OF    A    DIFFICULT    YERSE. 

Close  to  the  small  improvised  coffee-shop,  a  hired 
minstrel  sits,  playing  and  singing.  Very  often,  when 
the  song  happens  to  be  lively,  one  of  the  listeners 
will  rise,  and  treat  the  public  to  a  dance.  Eastern 
dancing,  it  should  be  remembered,  is  altogether 
different  from  the  dancing  in  European  countries. 
In  the  East  men  and  women  never  dance  together. 
Then  again,  dancing  consists  merely  in  certain 
peculiar  movements  of  the  body  and  limbs,  some* 
times  very  graceful,  sometimes  otherwise.  When 
the  hired  minstrel  has  succeeded  in  making  someone 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLK.  33 

rise  to  his  feet  and  go  through  the  usual  dancing 
performance,  he  is  pleased  and  flattered.  It  is  a 
sign  that  his  music  is  appreciated.  Sometimes  he 
will  change  his  note  to  a  sad  mournful  strain.  The 
tune  is  plaintive,  and  the  words  sad.  If  his  listeners 
are  touched,  they  will  actually  shed  tears,  and  the 
minstrel  is  again  pleased,  for  he  knows  his  music  has 
affected  his  audience.  Now  turn  to  Matth.  xi.  16-17. 
Our  Lord  compares  the  Jews  to  children  sitting  in 
the  market  place  and  saying,  "  we  have  piped  unto 
you  but  ye  have  not  danced,  we  have  mourned  unto 
you,  and  ye  have  not  lamented."  He  wished  to 
imply  that  their  hearts  were  so  hard,  that  neither 
the  thunders  of  the  Baptist's  preaching,  nor  yet  His 
own  still  small  voice  had  any  effect  upon  them. 
The  music  was  there,  but  there  was  no  response. 
Both  the  Saviour  and  St.  John  the  Baptist  had  piped, 
but  no  one  had  responded. 

Outside  the  city,  and  all  along  the  hillsides, 
may  be  seen  numberless  caverns.  Many  of  them 
are  ROCK-HEWN  TOMBS.  These  are  found  in  every 
part  of  Palestine.  They  are  either  natural  or 
artificial  caves,  with  niches  cut  into  the  sides  just  large 
enough  to  contain  one  body.  People  prepared  tombs 
for  themselves  and  families.  The  Cave  of  Machpelah 
was  the  burial-place  of  the  Patriarch  (Gen.  xxiii). 
Isaac  no  doubt  added  two  more  niches  for  himself 
and  Rebecca,-  Jacob  again,  for  himself  and  Leah 


34  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

(Gen.  i.  5).  Asa  prepared  his  own  grave  (2  Chron. 
xvi.  14),  and  Joseph  of  Arimathea  prepared  one  in 
his  own  garden,  in  which  the  body  of  our  Lord  was 
laid  (Matth.  xxvii.  60).  The  tomb  of  Lazarus  in 
Bethany  was  rock-hewn  (John  xi.  38-39).  You 
enter  the  cave  through  a  very  low  opening.  People 
therefore  have  to  stoop  to  look  in  (John  xx.  5).  A 
round  stone,  similar  to  a  millstone,  only  much 
larger,  in  an  upright  position,  is  rolled  against  the 
opening.  To  open  the  tomb  this  great  stone  has  to 
be  rolled  back  into  the  side.  The  ground  was  always 
on  an  incline,  lower  at  the  door  than  at  the  sides ; 
hence  it  was  easier  to  close  than  to  open.  This 
explains  the  question  of  the  women,  "  Who  shall  roll 
us  away  the  stone?  "  (Mark  xvi.  3). 

In  Palestine  the  body  was  always  wrapped  in 
Imen,  and  then  placed  in  the  tomb.  Spices  were 
used  for  sanitary  purposes  only,  the  art  of  embalming 
being  unknown.  The  Israelites  differed  entirely 
from  the  Egyptians  in  this ;  they  never  attempted 
to  preserve  the  body  from  decay.  There  are  how- 
ever two  bodies  buried  somewhere  in  Palestine  which 
were  embalmed,  the  bodies  of  Jacob  and  Joseph. 
But  they  died  and  where  embalmed  in  Egypt. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


Eastern    Furniture. 


njHE  first  thing  to  strike  a  European,  when  visiting 
an  Eastern  Home,  is  an  almost  total  absence  of 
furniture.  Eastern  rooms  look  very  bare  indeed. 
They  contain  low  couches,  called  divans,  placed 
round  three  sides  of  the  room,  some  rugs,  a  very 
small  low  table,  and  that  is  practically  all.  There 
are,  of  course,  houses  in  large  towns,  where  Western 
ideas  are  beginning  to  prevail,  and  where  many 
European  articles  of  furniture  are  to  be  found,  but  a 
truly  Eastern  home  is  sure  to  possess  very  few 
articles  of  furniture  beyond  those  named  above. 

In  2  Kings  iv.  10,  we  have  a  list  of  the  articles 
of  furniture  in  a  Guest  Chamber,  which  consisted  of 
a  "  bed,  a  table,  a  stool,  and  a  candlestick !  " 

THE  BED  OR  COUCH.  How  different  from  an 
English  bed  !  and  no  bedstead  !  Instead  of  the 
latter,  there  is  a  raised  platform  built  against  the 


36  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLB. 

wall.  These  are  found  in  most  houses,  and  take  the 
place  of  the  bedstead.  In  the  houses  of  the  wealthy, 
they  would  be  of  marble  and  other  beautiful  stones. 
In  Esther  i.  6,  we  read  that  the  couches  were  upon 
"A  PAVEMENT  of  red,  white,  yellow,  and  black 
marble."  Now  the  Hebrew  word  "MITTAH"  is 
sometimes  translated  bed  and  sometimes  couch,  and 
sometimes  even  bier !  2  Sam.  iii.  31.  Another 
word,  MISHKAY,  from  a  root  meaning  to  recline,  is 
sometimes  translated  bed  and  bedchamber.  It 
depended  entirely  upon  the  use  made  of  it.  A 
sleeping  place  by  night  was  sometimes  the  place  on 
which  guests  recline  by  day,  and  is  then  the  "  couch." 
Esther  was  not  in  bed  when  she  entertained 
Ahasuerus  and  Haman  at  the  banquet,  as  one  would 
imagine  from  the  use  of  the  words,  "And  he  was 
fallen  upon  the  bed,"  Esther  vii.  8,  but  on  her  couch, 
probably  similar  to  those  described  in  the  same  book, 
ch.  i.  6.  Of  course,  to  the  poor  man,  the  couch  by 
day  becomes  his  bed  by  night.  But  in  wealthier 
houses,  where  they  had  "  bedchambers,"  such  as  in 
Pharaoh's  palace  (Ex.  viii.  3),  or  Ishbosheth's 
mansion  (2  Sam.  iv.  7),  this  would  not  be  the  case. 
Sometimes,  however,  the  word  "  bedchamber " 
means  a  recess  in  the  wall,  or  a  small  closet,  in 
which  the  mattresses  and  bedding  are  put  out  of  the 
way  during  the  day-time.  In  such  a  place,  no 
doubt,  Joash  was  hid.  2  Kings  xi.  2. 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  37 

When  you  read  of  the  word  BED,  it  therefore  is 
of  some  importance  for  the  right  understanding  of 
the  passage  to  find  out  whether  bed  or  couch  is 
meant.  When  David  says,  "  Let  the  saints  sing 
aloud  in  their  beds,"  Ps.  cxlix.  5,  he  refers  to  the 
couch  or  DIYAN,  on  which  people  sit  and  sing. 
Notice,  too,  how  the  mattresses  are  covered  with 
fine  tapestry  or  linen.  Also  an  old  custom.  See 
Pro'v.  vii.  16. 

The  bedding  consists  of  a  mattress.  The 
PILLOW  OR  BOLSTER  is  a  matter  of  indifference  to 
the  people.  Michal  makes  one  of  an  inflated  goat's 
skin,  and  that  was  considered  fit  for  the  son-in-law 
of  a  king  !  1  Sam.  xix.  13.  Jacob  has  a  stone,  Gen. 
xxviii.  18,  and  probably  others  were  accustomed  to 
use  the  same  bead  rest.  It  was,  therefore,  the 
height  of  luxury  to  use  SOFT  PILLOWS.  Ezekiel, 
warning  the  Jews  against  luxury,  referred  to  them. 
Ezek.  xiii.  18,  20. 

In  Old  Testament  times  seats  were  used — a 
custom  which  had  been  brought  by  the  Israelites 
from  Egypt.  After  the  return  from  Babylon,  the 
Persian  custom  was  adopted  of  using  no  chairs  at 
all,  but  reclining  on  couches  or  DIYANS.  This 
reclining  instead  of  sitting,  is  referred  to  in  Esther, 
and  frequently  in  the  New  Testament.  At  the 
feeding  of  the  five  thousand,  our  Lord  says,  "  Make 
the  men  recline."  Matt.  viii.  11 ;  and  see  also  Luke 


38  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

ix.  14  ;  xiv.  8,  and  xxii.  27.  Again,  at  the  celebration 
of  the  last  Passover,  our  Lord  and  His  disciples 
reclined.  Mark  xiv.  18.  (See  Revised  Version  to 
above  passages.)  It  is  curious  to  know  that  the 
natives  of  Palestine  have  now  gone  back  to  the  older 
custom  of  sitting  at  a  meal,  but  they  sit  on  divans 
instead  of  chairs.  Hence  we  find  the  Old  Testament 
custom  in  the  posture  of  the  people,  and  the  New 
Testament  custom  in  the  seat  or  divan. 

The  poor  man's  bed  consists  of  a  rough  cotton- 
wool quilt,  called  Ilhaf.  When  our  Lord  said  to  the 
impotent  man,  "  Take  up  thy  bed  and  walk,"  John 
v.  8,  this  was  no  doubt  the  bed  he  had  to  take.  We 
need  not  suppose  that  he  was  asked  to  carry  a 
"  fovjposter." 

The  TABLE  is  a  low  stand  about  18  inches  high, 
on  which  is  placed  A.  TRAY  of  basket  work  or 
copper.  The  BASKET  TRAYS  (in  Hebrew  SAL) 
should  be  distinguished  from  the  larger  BASKETS 
(called  DUDIM  in  Hebrew.)  The  "  basket  of  bake- 
ments "  brought  to  Pharaoh  (Gen.  xl.  17)  was  the 
tray  or  Sal.  On  the  other  hand,  the  baskets  in 
which  the  heads  of  Ahab's  sons  were  placed  wero 
DUDIM.  2  Kings  x.  8. 

FRUIT  BASKETS.  Fruit  is  still  brought  into 
the  market  town  in  DUDIM  BASKETS.  Jer.  xxiv.  1. 

Gideon  used  the  SAL.     Judges  vi.  19. 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  39 


The  FIRE-HEARTH  is  made  of  rough  clay,  used 
for  cooking  and  warming  purposes.  Charcoal  is 
burnt.  When  burning  brightly,  it  is  carried  into  the 
room,  round  which  the  people  sit  in  the  evenings 
warming  their  hands.  Thus  St.  Peter  sat.  Wealthy 
people  use  copper  ones.  John  xviii.  18,  and  Jer. 
xxxvi.  22,  23.  Remember,  they  had  no  stoves,  and 
no  chimneys ! 

LAMPS  are  made  of  clay.  They  are  very  small. 
Olive  oil  is  always  used.  A  piece  of  cotton-wool  or 
flax  forms  the  wick.  When  the  oil  in  the  3RAJ  or 
lamp  is  nearly  exhausted,  a  very  unpleasant  smoke 
is  the  result.  But  the  moment  oil  is  added,  it  ceases 
to  smoke,  and  burns  up  brightly.  Is.  xliii.  17. 
This  is  what  "  the  Servant  of  the  Lord,"  the 
Saviour,  does  to  the  Soul.  The  same  small  lamps 
were  used  in  Bible  times. 

They  hold  very  little  oil,  and  need  replenishing 
about  once  every  hour  ;  hence  the  foolishness  of 
those  virgins  who  forgot  to  take  a  proper  supply. 
Matt.  xxv.  2,  8.  A  vessel  containing  this  supply  is 
to  be  found  in  every  house. 

It  is  the  CRUSE  OF  OIL  mentioned  in  the  case 
of  the  poor  widow,  in  1  King  xvii.  12,  and  in  Matt, 
xxv.  4. 

The  small  lamps  are  placed  in-  lampstands, 
called  CANDLESTICKS.  Matt.  v.  15.  They  are 


40  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 


made  of  wood,  though  sometimes  of  gold  or  some 
other  metal.  They  have  ONE  branch,  but  no  doubt 
in  houses  of  the  wealthy  they  would  have  more. 
Remember  the  SEYEN  BRANCHED  CANDLESTICK. 
Ex.  xxxvii.  17-21.  and  Eev  i.  20.  The  light  given 
is  very  poor,  but  quite  enough  to  serve  its  purpose ; 
Easterns  never  wort  alter  dark.  Candles  are  used 
more  for  comfort  than  actual  need.  Hence  some- 
times used  as  a  figure  of  comfort.  Ps.  xviii.  28  ; 
Micah  vii.  8.  A  lamp  going  out  is  often  used  to 
represent  the  extinction  01  a  family  or  race.  Prov. 
xiii.  9.  "  Lamp  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out," 
means  he  shall  die  childless.  See  also  Prov.  xx.  20 ; 
1  Kings  xv.  4  ;  2  Sam.  xxi.  17.  (Revised  Version.) 
This  probably  throws  some  fresh  light  on  Gen.  xv. 
17,  God's  covenant  with  Abraham  and  his  remarkable 
vision.  "A  flaming  torch  passed  between  those 
pieces."  Probably  to  indicate  that  not  only  would 
his  lamp  not  go  out,  but  that  it  would  be  a  bright 
flaming  torch. 

The  streets  of  Eastern  cities  are  not  lighted 
after  dark.  It  is  only  within  recent  years  that 
Jerusalem  was  favoured  with  street  lamps.  As  the 
streets  are  bad,  and  in  complete  possession  of  wild 
street  dogs,  a  man  cannot  go  anywhere  after  dark 
without  the  LANTERN.  When  carried  it  throws 
most  of  the  light  on  the  ground.  That  is  where  it  is 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  41 

of  course  most  needed,  hence  God's  word  compared 
with  a  lamp  for  one's  feet  and  a  light  to  the  path. 
Ps.  cxix.  67. 

A  very  pretty  ewer  and  basin  is  brought  into 
requisition  before  a  meal.  As  Easterns  use  no  forks 
or  knives,  this  is  very  necessary,  both  before  or  after 
a  meal.  It  is  a  very  ancient  custom.  A  slave  pours 
water  on  the  hands,  holding  the  basin  under  them. 
Elisha  is  thus  described  as  having  "  poured  water  on 
the  hands  of  Elijah."  2  Kings  iii.  11.  The  Jews 
ma^e  a  rigorous  rule  in  regard  to  the  washing  of 
hands  before  a  meal,  which  is  still  the  custom. 
Mark  vii.  3 ;  Matt.  xv.  2. 

When  coming  from  a  distance,  the  feet  too  are 
washed,  i.e.,  water  from  the  ewer  is  poured  over  the 
foot,  under  which  the  basin  is  held.  This,  too,  is  a 
very  ancient  custom.  The  three  angels  had  their 
feet  washed.  Gen.  xviii.  4  ;  Abraham's  servant  in 
Mesopotamia,  Gen.  xxiv.  32  ;  and  Joseph's  brethren 
in  Egypt,  Gen.  xliii.  24.  It  will  therefore  be  seen 
that  the  washing  of  the  feet  is  the  universal  custom 
in  the  East.  It  was  the  work  of  slaves  or  lowest 
menials.  When  Abigail  of  Carmel  wished  to  express 
her  sense  of  deepest  humility,  she  could  use  no 
stronger  expression  than,  "  Behold  thine  handmaid 
is  a  slave  to  wash  the  feet  of  the  servants  of  my 
lord."  1  Sam.  xxiv.  41.  See  also  Luke  vii.  38,  44 ; 


42  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 


John  xiii.  5,  10  ;  and  Song  v.  3.  Hence  our  Lord's 
lesson  of  humility  when  He  washed  His  disciples' 
feet.  The  Pharisees,  on  the  other  hand,  showed 
how  they  despised  our  Lord  by  not  having  His  feet 
washed  when  invited  to  a  feast.  Luke  vii.  44. 

EASTERN  BOTTLES.— These  are  made  of  the 
skins  of  animals,  cleaned  out  and  made  water-tight. 
They  are  of  various  sizes,  and  used,  not  only  for 
water,  but  for  wine.  2  Sam.  xvi.  1 ;  Jer.  xiii.  12 ; 
1  Sam.  i.  24;  x.  3;  and  xvi.  20;  and  milk,  Judges  iv. 
18.  Oil  was  generally  stored  in  earthen  vessels. 
Oar  Lord  refers  to  SKIN  BOTTLES  when  He  says 
'•  New  wine  must  be  put  into  new  bottles,"  and  for 
a  very  good  reason.  Old  bottles  are  weak,  and  while 
the  wine  was  fermenting,  would  burst.  Matt.  ix. 
17 ;  Job  xxxii.  19. 

Before  "  skin  "  bottles  are  fit  for  use  they  art 
smoked.  Ps.  cxix.  83  refers  to  this. 

The  large  skin  bottles  are  carried  by  men  only  ; 
a  smaller  size  is  carried  by  women.  The  bottle 
which  Abraham  gave  to  Hagar  was  of  this  kind. 
Gen.  xxi.  14. 

PITCHERS  AND  JUGS,  called  sometimes 
BOTTLES  OF  CLAY,  to  distinguish  them  from  skins, 
Jer.  xix.  1,  are  still  carried  to  the  fountain  or  well  to 
get  water,  and  generally  by  women.  See  case  of 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  43 

Kebekah,  Gen.  xxiv.  14 ;  the  woman  of  Samaria, 
John  iv.  28.  So  exceptional  was  it  for  a  man  to 
carry  a  pitcher  of  water,  that  our  Lord  was  able  to 
send  His  two  disciples  into  the  crowded  streets  Oi 
Jerusalem,  and  to  point  out  the  one  man  they  were 
to  follow  ;  they  were  to  follow  a  man  bearing  a 
pitcher  of  water.  They  were  likely  to  meet  many 
men  carrying  skin  bottles,  and  women  carrying 
pitchers,  but  not  many  men  bearing  a  pitcher. 
Mark  xiv.  3 ;  Luke  xxii.  10. 

HANDMILLS  are  found  in  every  household. 
People,  especially  in  the  villages  and  small  country 
towns,  grind  their  own  corn,  and  it  is  work  which 
has  to  be  done  daily,  for  people  only  bake  enough  for 
one  day's  consumption.  Being  so  necessary  a 
household  requisite,  without  which  the  daily  food 
cannot  be  prepared,  we  see  the  forethought  of  a 
loving  Father  who  forbad  any  part  of  a  millstone 
being  taken  as  a  pledge.  Deut.  xxiv.  6.  Women 
grind,  bake,  and  kriead  daily,  and  the  whole  process 
does  not  occupy  more  than  about  half-an-hour.  The 
handmill  consists  of  two  millstones,  the  upper  one 
and  the  lower.  Two  women  sit  facing  each  other 
and  grind  together,  on  account  of  the  weight  of  the 
stone.  Matt.  xxiv.  41.  Grinding  is  always  the 
work  of  women  and  slaves.  Ex.  xi.  1.  The 
Philistines  were,  therefore,  heaping  the  greatest 
indignity  on  Sampson  when  they  made  him  grind 


44  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

corn  in  prison.  Judges  xvi.  21.  Jeremiah  laments 
the  fact  that  the  Babylonians  fi  took  young  men  to 
grind"  Lam.  v.  13.  Isaiah  foretells  that  at  the 
destruction  of  their  city  the  Babylonian  ladies  would 
be  engaged  in  performing  the  slaves'  work  of 
grinding.  Is.  xlvii.  2.  The  sound  of  the  grinding, 
though  not  by  any  means  musical,  is  nevertheless 
pleasant  to  the  ears  of  Easterns,  for  it  is  always 
associated  with  home  comfort,  prosperity  and  plenty. 
Hence  the  days  must  be  very  evil  "  when  the  sound 
of  the  grinding  is  low."  Eccles.  xii.  4. 

THE  KNEADING-TROUGH  IS  also  found  in 
every  home.  It  is  made  of  wood,  and  of  various  sizes. 
Women  may  still  be  seen  daily  carrying  their 
kneading-troughs  on  their  heads  going  to  the  public 
bake-ovens.  Unleavened  cakes  are  always  baked 
when  a  meal  has  to  be  hastily  prepared.  Ex.  xii. 
34,  39.  Frogs  in  the  Egyptian  kueading-troughs 
must  have  been  particularly  obnoxious.  Ex.  viii.  3. 
God  promised  to  bless  the  kneading-troughs;  i.e., 
the  bread,  or  food  of  the  Israelites  if  they  obeyed 
Him.  Deut.  xxviii.  5. 


CHAPTER  V. 
Eastern  Dress, 

CASTERN  FASHIONS  are  as  changeless  as  the 
changeless  sun.  There  is  every  reason  to 
believe  that,  with  some  slight  modifications,  the 
people  we  meet  with  in  the  Holy  Land  to-day,  are 
wearing  the  same  kind  of  garments  worn  in  the  days 
of  Abraham,  David,  or  our  Lord.  Commentators 
and  translators  alike  have  singularly  failed  to 
appreciate  the  importance  of  the  study  of  Eastern 
customs  and  manners  with  the  object  of  elucidating 
many  passages ;  and  as  a  consequence,  many  a 
verse  which  should  be  easily  understood  is  mystified 
and  the  full  meaning  lost. 

One  general  rule  should  be  observed,  CLOTHING 
IN  THE  EAST  ALWAYS  MARKS  THE  SOCIAL 
RANK  OF  THE  WEARER.  It  does  so  to-day,  and 
it  did  so  in  Bible  times.  Hence  in  studying  this 
subject  we  shall  not  only  be  examining  articles  of 
dress,  we  shall  be  learning  much  of  the  character  and 
social  position  of  the  owners  of  these  garments.  In 


46  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

many  cases  the  difference  between  one  man's 
costume  and  another's  may  be  slight,  but  it  always 
marks  social  position  or  rank,  or  religion,  or  even 
home  and  country.  This  is  often  referred  to  in  the 
Bible.  The  woman  of  Samaria  at  once  recognised 
our  Lord  to  be  a  Jew,  no  doubt  by  his  garments. 
John  iv.  9.  Referring  to  St.  John  the  Baptist,  our 
Lord  wished  to  intimate  that  people  were  not 
attracted  to  him  on  account  of  any  pretensions  to 
rank  or  station  in  life  ;  He,  therefore,  contrasts  the 
difference  between  his  rough  garments  and  those  of 
the  noblemen  and  courtiers  who  wore  so/tf  raiment. 
Matt.  xi.  8.  John  the  Baptist  wore  the  garments  of 
a  poor  peasant,  consisting  of  a  mantle  of  camel's 
hair  and  a  leather  girdle.  Matt.  iii.  4.  Elijah  is  at 
once  recognised  by  his  clothing,  2  Kings  i.  8  ;  and  it 
appears  that  his  clothing  became  the  token  of  all 
prophets  (false  and  true).  Zech.  xiii.  4.  Now,  the 
Baptist's  clothing  being  the  same  as  Elijah's,  must 
at  once  have  attracted  the  Jews,  who  were  expecting 
Elijah  in  person.  Mai.  iv.  4,  5  ;  Matt.  xvii.  11 ; 
Mark  ix.  11. 

The  commonest,  and  probably  one  of  the  oldest 
garments  is  THE  EASTERN  MANTLE,  called 
'ABBAYEH  by  the  Arabs.  It  is  made  of  camel's 
hair  (Gen.  xxv.  25  ;  Matt.  iii.  4  ;  Zech.  xiii.  4),  very 
coarse  and  rather  shapeless.  Generally,  in  two 
colours,  white  and  brown,  or  white  and  red.  RED 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  47 

ONES  are  worn  by  women  only.  (Why  will  artists 
persist  in  making  the  most  absurd  mistakes? 
There  is  a  well-known  picture  of  the  Prodigal  Son's 
return,  which  graces  many  a  Schoolroom  or  Mission 
Hall,  and  the  father  is  seen  wearing  his  wife's 
mantle  ! — a  thing  he  would  never  do.  A  man  would 
sooner  go  without  his  mantle  than  put  on  any 
article  of  dress  belonging  to  a  woman.  It  is  an 
abomination  to  Orientals  to-day,  just  as  it  was  to  the 
Israelites.  It  was  forbidden  by  the  Law.  Deut. 
xxii.  5). 

Among  the  poor  people  the  mantle  by  day  forms 
the  only  covering  by  night.  That  it  was  used  for  a 
similar  purpose  in  Bible  times  is  seen  in  Ex.  xxii.  26, 
27,  and  Deut.  xxiv.  12,  13.  A  mantle  pledged  had 
to  be  returned  at  sunset,  for  "  that  is  his  covering 
only  it  is  his  raiment  for  his  skin  ;  wherein  shall 
he  sleep  /  "  Showing  again  God's  gracious  provision 
for  the  wants  and  comforts  of  the  poor.  Amos 
condemns  the  people  of  his  day  for  breaking  this 
law.  Amos  ii.  10.  (See  Revised  Version.)  When 
Sisera  went  to  sleep,  Jael  covered  him  with  a  mantle. 
Judges  iv.  18.  A  mantle  is  not  only  given  in  pledge 
for  a  debt,  but  also  as  a  token  that  a  certain  promise 
connected  with  some  business  transaction  will  be 
kept.  See  Deut.  xxiv.  10-13.  This  is  done  to  this 
day,  and  is  called  'Arabon,  the  same  as  one  of  the 
Hebrew  words. 


48  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

A  COAT  WITHOUT  SEAM  is  a  mantle  of  the 
same  material,  shape  and  colour,  but  consists  of  one 
piece  only.  They  are  still  worn  by  the  peasant 
classes  in  the  North.  Remember  that  Christ  came 
from  the  North.  John  xix.  23.  The  famous  GOAT 
OF  TREYES  cannot  be  the  identical  one  worn  by 
our  Lord,  as  its  appearance,  shape,  material,  and 
colour  are  altogether  different  from  the  'Abayehs — 
the  best  proof  that  that  famous  coat  is  a  fraud. 

There  are  mantles  of  softer  material,  though 
of  the  same  shape,  worn  by  the  effendis  or  gentry. 
These  are  the  "  Soft  Raiment  "  of  Matt.  xi.  8. 

Girdles  are  worn  by  all,  rich  and  poor  alike. 
But  there  is  a  great  difference  in  the  material.  The 
peasants  and  Bedouins  wear  LEATHERN  GIRDLES. 
Elijah  and  John  the  Baptist  belonged  to  this  class. 
2  Kings  i.  8 ;  Matt.  iii.  4  ;  Mark  i.  6. 

SOFT  LEATHER  GIRDLES  are  worn  by  the 
Bethlehem  gentlemen.  They  form  an  intermediate 
class,  higher  than  the  actual  peasant  but  somewhat 
lower  than  the  townsfolk.  Their  girdles  therefore 
are  not  quite  so  coarse  as  those  made  of  leather. 

The  SOFT  GIRDLES,  made  of  silk  or  linen,  are 
worn  by  the  upper  classes.  Again  soft  raiment ! 

Some  are  even  worked  in  gold.  See  Dan.  x.  5  ; 
Jer.  xiii.  1 ;  Ezek.  xvi.  10 ;  and  Rev.  i.  13  and  xv.  6. 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  49 

Girdles  are  worn  by  all,  men,  women,  and 
children.  When  resting  they  are  taken  off;  and 
they  "gird  their  loins"  when  preparing  for  work 
or  for  a  journey.  It  is  strapped  as  firmly  as 
possible,  and  serves  as  a  support  and  stay  in  working, 
running  or  riding.  Hence  the  order,  "  Gird  on  thy 
loins,"  always  meant — "prepare  for  action."  Luke 
xii.  37  andxvii.  8;  Acts  xii.  8;  Ex.  xii.  11.  Elijah 
girded  his  loins  when  hurrying  from  Carmel  with 
Ahab.  1  Kings  xviii.  46.  See  also  Gehazi  running 
to  Shun«m.  2  Kings  iv.  29  and  ix.  1.  A  girdle 
could  be  given  as  a  present.  1  Sam.  xviii.  11. 
Symbolically  the  act  of  girding  the  loins  meant, 
"  be  prepared  for  action,  now  is  not  your  rest." 
Luke  xii.  35;  1  Pet.  i.  3;  and  Eph.  vi.  14.  It  was 
foretold  that  the  Messiah  would  be  girded  with 
righteousness  and  faithfulness.  Is.  xi.  5.  Some  of 
the  girdles  contain  small  pockets,  where  money  and 
other  valuables  are  kept.  See  Eevised  Version  of 
Matthew  x.  9,  where  our  Lord  says,  "  Get  you  no 
gold  nor  silver  nor  brass  in  your  girdles."  The  word 
purse  is  a  mistranslation.  Natives  nse  no  purses. 
The  scribe  also  carried  his  inkhorn  in  his  belt.  Ezek. 
ix.  2,  11.  For  "  by  his  side  "  read  "  upon  his  loins  " 
or  in  his  girdle. 

THE  STOMACHER  of  Is.  iii.  25,  was  probably 
a  beautiful  sash  worn  as  a  girdle  by  ladies.  They 
are  still  worn,  and  are  often  of  exquisite  workman- 
ship, worked  in  silk  aod  gold. 


50  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

Priests  were  commanded  to  wear  linen  clothes. 
Ex.  xxviii.  42 ;  Lev.  vi.  10 ;  1  Sam.  ii.  18,  and 
xxii.  18.  They  were  effendis — gentlemen.  Prophets 
wore  coarse  clothing.  Zech.  xiii.  4  ;  2  Kings  i.  8  ; 
Matt.  iii.  4.  They  were  fellaheen — peasants.  Much 
food  for  thought  here  !  When  those  who  should 
have  been  the  shepherds  of  the  sheep  proved  faith- 
less to  their  trust  (Jer.  xxiii.  1,2),  God,  in  very  irony, 
chose  servants  from  the  lower  orders. 

Under  the  mantle  is  worn  a  tunic  very  much  in 
the  shape  of  a  dressing-gown.  The  poorest  wear 
them  rather  short,  not  reaching  much  below  the 
knee.  The  sheikh  wears  one  coloured,  and  much 
longer,  and  with  long  sleeves.  The  longer  the  sleeves 
the  more  respectable  the  wearer.  Joseph's  "  coat  of 
many  colours  "  was  really  a  long-sleeved  robe,  worn 
only  by  the  chief  and  his  heir.  Gen.  xxxvii.  3. 
Tamar's  robe  is  called  by  the  same  nanir  2  Sam. 
xiii.  18.  Among  the  Bedouins  the  chiet  will  often 
be  distinguished  not  so  much  by  the  richer  material 
of  his  robes  as  by  the  long  sleeves,  of  almost  exactly 
the  same  shape  as  the  surplice  sleeve ;  and  his  eldest 
son  or  heir  will  also  have  the  privilege  of  wearing 
these  long  sleeves.  This  would  account  for  the 
jealousy  of  the  elder  brothers.  It  was  not  the  fact 
that  Joseph's  coat  was  more  beautiful  tban  theirs, 
but  what  that  coat  implied.  It  meant  that  Jacob 
wished  his  youngest  son  to  be  the  heir. 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  51 

COATS  OP  MANY  COLOURS  are  nevertheless 
worn,  and  are  very  popular.  They  are  generally 
called  ROBES  in  the  Bible.  1  Sam.  ii.  19,  xxvii.  14, 
xv.  27,  xviii.  4 ;  1  Chron.  xv.  27;  Ezra  ix.  3,  5; 
Bzek  xxvi.  16. 

SANDALS  are  worn  by  the  very  poorest  only ; 
and  are  fastened  to  the  foot  with  straps,  called 
LATCHETS.  Matt.  iii.  11 ;  Mark  i.  7  ;  Luke  iii.  16 ; 
showing  that  our  Lord  wore  sandals.  So  also  St. 
Peter.  Acts  xii.  8. 

GENTLEMEN'S  SHOES  are  of  soft  leather,  and 
generally  yellow.  Shoes  of  sealskin  or  porpoise  skin 
are  referred  to  in  Ezek.  xvi.  10.  Ladies  wear  beauti- 
fully worked  slippers,  in  gold  and  silver,  and  often 
ornamented  with  a  variety  of  colours.  They  are 
mentioned  in  Ezek.  xvi.  10. 

Shoes  are  always  removed  when  entering  a  room 
or  a  sacred  place.  Ex.  iii.  6;  Josh.  v.  15.  Hence 
the  shoe  is  always  connected  with  everything  low  and 
contemptible.  To  unloose  the  shoe  was  the  meanest 
duty  of  a  slave.  Matt.  iii.  11;  John  i,  27.  Very 
strong,  therefore,  was  the  expression  of  Amos,  that 
th«  rulers  and  oppressors  had  "  sold  the  poor  for  a 
pair  of  shoes."  Amos  ii.  6  and  viii.  6.  "  To  cast  the 
shoe  upon  "  anyone  meant  to  degrade  and  humble 
him.  "  Over  Edom  will  I  cast  my  shoe,"  Ps.  Ix.  8. 
meant :  I  will  disgrace  and  conquer  Edom. 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 


To  walk  barefooted  was  a  sign  of  mourning,  2 
Sam.  xv.  30,  Is.  xx.  2,  4  ;  or  slavery,  2  Chron,  xxviii. 
15  ;  or  intense  poverty  ',  Luke  xv.  22,  and  xxii.  35 

Some  coats  won  by  roving  shepherds  are  the 
rough  SHEEPSKIN  JACKETS.  They  are  quite  in 
keeping  with  the  wild,  roving  life  of  the  shepherd.  It 
is  sometimes  not  even  made  into  a  jacket,  the  piece 
of  sheepskin  being  simply  wrapped  round  the  body, 
and  tied  round  with  some  string  or  rope.  Heb. 
xi.  37,  implies  that  the  persecuted  ones  lived  a 
wild  fugitive  life.  (See  Shepherd  Life). 

A  very  peculiar  headdress  is  the  SYRIAN  HORN, 

worn  by  women  in  the  north,  and  is  fast  becoming 
extinct.  The  white  veil  is  thrown  right  over  the 
horn,  and  hangs  gracefully  down  the  shoulders, 
making  the  woman  appear  very  tall.  It  is  supposed 
to  be  referred  to  in  the  passages,  "  Mine  horn  is 
exalted."  I  Sam.  ii.  1.  See  also  2  Sam.  xxii  3  ; 
Ps.  Ixxv.  4. 

Veils  are  worn  by  all  women,  though  it  is  only 
the  town's  women  who  veil  the  face.  They  are  of 
different  sizes  and  different  material.  The  peasants 
wear  very  long  veils,  almost  as  large  as  a  sheet, 
thrown  back  from  their  head.  They  do  not  hide 
their  face. 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 


53 


The  BETHLEHEM  VEIL  was  of  this  kind. 
Boaz  emptied  six  measures  of  barley  into  it.  Ruth 
iii.  15.  In  the  margin  it  is  called  a  sheet.  It  was 
indeed  a  sheet  veil.  Women  may  still  be  seen 
carrying  sheaves  of  corn  in  their  veils.  To  remove 
the  veil  from  a  woman  is  an  insult.  Song  v.  7. 


CHAPTER  VI. 
Some   Eastern    Characters. 

H|HE  EASTERN  SHEPHERD.  The  rough  garments 
he  wears  are  but  a  reflex  of  the  wild  life  he 
lives.  Wandering  about  the  wild  mountains,  taking 
his  sheep  and  goats  to  "  green  pastures  "  and  "  still 
waters,"  Ps.  xxiii.  2,  he  is  often  away  from  home  for 
many  weeks  at  a  time.  Jacob  refers  to  this  when  he 
says  to  Laban,  "  In  the  day  the  drought  consumed 
me,  and  the  frost  by  night."  Gen.  xxxi.  40.  Of 
course  there  are  shepherds  who  are  able  to  lead  their 
flocks  home  by  night,  and  take  them  out  again  by 
day  ;  but  these  are  the  exception. 

Shepherds  are  either  slaves  or  the  youngest  sons, 
or  daughters.  Taking  care  of  the  sheep  is  considered 
very  low  and  menial  work.  It  will  be  remembered 
that  the  youngest  son  of  Jesse  was  the  shepherd, 
while  the  elder  sons  were  engaged  in  the  far  more 
honourable  occupation  of  warring  or  hunting.  1  Sam. 
xvii.  13,  15.  It  will  also  be  remembered  that  Eachel 

*4 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  55 


looked  after  her  father's  sheep,  Gen.  xxix.  9,  and 
Jethro's  daughters  did  the  same,  Ex.  ii.  16,  17.  One 
remarkable  exception  is  to  be  found  in  the  case  of 
Jacob's  sons,  and  this  throws  on  altogether  fresh 
light  on  the  jealousy  of  Joseph's  brethren.  Jacob 
reverses  the  general  rule  and  custom  when  he  makes 
the  elder  sons  the  shepherds,  while  the  younger  ones 
stop  at  home.  This  no  doubt  was  the  origin  of  all 
their  jealousy  and  hatred  against  their  younger 
brother. 

Shepherds  are  always  well  armed  with  a  for- 
midable club  called  NABBUTEH.  With  these  they 
defend  themselves  and  their  sheep  against  any 
attacks  from  robbers  or  wild  beasts.  No  doubt 
David  attacked  the  lion  and  the  bear  with  a 
NABBUTEH.  When  climbing  up  the  mountains  he 
is  supported  by  a  long  STAFF  called  ASSAYEH, 
The  staff  or  stave  which  David  had  in  his  hand  when 
he  went  against  Goliath  was  the  LIGHT  ASSAYEH, 
1  Sam.  xvii.  40, — not  the  heavy  club.  This  evokes 
the  grim  wrath  of  the  giant,  "  Am  I  a  dog  that  thou 
comest  to  me  with  the  Assay  eh  ?  "  1  Sam.  xvii.  43. 
This  he  uses  as  a  support.  Very  beautiful  is  there- 
fore the  allusion  to  the  Nabbuteh  and  the  Assayeh 
in  Ps.  xxiii  4,  "  Thy  rod  and  Thy  staff  they  comfort 
me."  David  is  comparing  God's  protection  to  the 
rod,  His  support  to  the  staff. 


56  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

SLINGS  are  made  by  the  shepherds  themselves, 
and  used  when  their  sheep  stray  too  far  away.  Thej 
do  not  hit  the  sheep,  for  that  would  kill  it,  but  they 
throw  the  stone  just  near  enough  to  frighten  it.  As 
the  slings  are  in  daily  use,  the  shepherds  become 
very  proficient  in  their  use. 

SMOOTH  STONES  are  taken  from  the  rough 
torrent  bed,  and  kept  in  their  POUCHES.  See  1  Sam. 
xvii.  Slings  were  used  in  warfare.  We  read  of  the 
slingers  in  2  Kings  iii.  25 ;  2  Chron.  xxvi.  14,  and  of 
those  who  could  "sling  stones  at  a  hair's  breadth" 
Judges  xx.  16. 

THE  SCRIBE  is  described  to  us  in  Ezek.  ix. 
2,  3,  clothed  in  linen  and  having  the  inkhorn  by  his 
side,  or  rather  in  his  belt  or  girdle.  Customs  have 
not  changed  since  the  days  of  Ezekiel !  Very  few 
people  can  write.  The  scribe  is  therefore  a  man  of 
considerable  importance  in  a  town  or  village,  for  he 
may  be  the  only  person  in  a  community  who  can 
read  or  write  a  letter.  Fortunately,  through  the 
enterprise  of  Christian  Missions,  the  scribes  are  be- 
ginning to  lose  much  of  their  importance,  for  schools 
have  now  been  established  in  every  part  of  the 
country.  But  the  pioneer  of  education  in  the  land 
was  the  London  Jews'  Society.  Few  people  are 
aware  of  the  incalculable  blessing  this  Society  has 
been,  and  still  is,  to  the  cause  of  the  Gospel  in  tho 
East! 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  57 


The  inspired  psalmist  speaks  of  his  tongue  being 
as  ready  to  proclaim  the  attributes  of  the  coming 
Messiah  as  "a  ready  writer  "  is  to  write  a  letter 
from  dictation.  Ps.  xlv.  1. 

THE  SAKKAH  or  Water  Carrier.  Water  has 
often  to  be  bought,  for  no  water-supply  exists  in 
most  Eastern  cities.  It  has  to  be  carried  in  sldn 
bottles.  He  walks  through  the  streets  shouting, 
"  He  ya,  'atchan,  tahaloo  yishraboo."  "  Ho,  ye 
thirsty  ones,  come  ye  and  drink  " — the  same  cries 
heard  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  in  the  days  of 
Isaiah  !  Is.  Iv.  1.  Note  the  difference  and  the  sharp 
contrast  no  doubt  intended  by  the  passage  refered  to. 
The  "living"  water  is  given,  net  bought ;  this  should 
always  be  emphasizedin  passages  of  a  similar  character. 
John  vii.  37  ;  Rev.  xxi  6,  and  xxii.  17,  the  word 
freely  should  be  emphatic.  The  idea  being  that  the 
spiritual  water  is  given  without  money  and  without 
price. 

There  are  cases  where  a  man  wishing  to  perform 
an  act  of  charity,  will  pay  for  all  the  water  contained 
in  a  skin  bottle,  or  all  the  bread  carried  by  a  baker's 
boy.  The  water  and  bread  are  then  freely  distributed 
amongst  the  poor.  The  seller  will  then  change  his 
cry  and  will  literally  call  out,  "  Ho,  ye  thirsty  ones, 
come  and  drink  to-day  for  nothing,  for  nothing." 
The  word  "  balash  "  means  freely,  without  payment. 


58  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 


THE  BAKER'S  BOY.— These  lads  are  seen  with 
their  baskets  on  their  heads,  selling  small  loaves  of 
bread  wherever  people  congregate.  No  doubt  the 
"  lad  who  had  five  barley  loaves  and  two  small  fishes  " 
was  the  baker's  boy,  who,  seeing  crowds  going  out 
into  the  wilderness,  knew  he  would  be  very  welcome 
there  with  his  bread,  and  he  must  have  been  very 
successful  since  only  five  were  left.  John  vi.  9. 

SINGING  GIRLS  are  professioal  singers  and 
professional  mourners.  At  weddings  they  are  bright 
and  cheerful,  at  funerals  they  look  sad  and  dejected. 
They  thus  "  rejoice  with  them  that  rejoice,  and  weep 
with  them  that  weep."  Rom.  xii.  15.  Very  skilful 
are  they  too  in  the  art  of  improvising.  They  are 
born  poetesses.  They  make  up  the  words  without 
any  preparation  while  they  sing,  and  know  how  to 
touch  some  tender  chord  connected  with  the  life  of 
those  present,  thus  making  them  mourn.  The  Bible 
speaks  of  singing  men  as  well  as  of  singing  women. 
2  Sam.  xix.  35  ;  2  Chron.  xxxv.  25 ;  Ezra  ii.  65 ; 
Neh.  vii.  67.  They  are  still  to  be  seen  and  heard, 
but  they  have  no  special  dress. 

THE  DERYISH.  Very  wild  and  weird  he  looks 
with  his  long  hair — a  sign  of  special  sanctity  to-day. 
(May  this  not  be  a  remnant  of  the  ancient  custom  of 
the  Nazarites  ?  Numb.  vi.  2,  13, 18 ;  Judges  xiii.  5  ; 
Amos  ii.  12.)  The  modern  Dervish  is  the  truest 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 


59 


representative  01  the  prophets  of  Baal.  To  this  day 
they  delight  numberless  sightseers  in  the  market 
places  ny  cutting  themselves  with  knives,  and 
pierciui,'  their  cheeks  \vith  sharp  iron  skewers. 
1  Kings  xviii.  28.  That  the  prophets  of  Baal  did  the 
same  is  evident  from  the  expression,  "  They  cut 
themselves  after  their  manner."  It  appears  too  to 
have  been  a  custom  for  people  to  show  their  grief  by 
ciiiti'ig  themselves,  Jer,  xvi.  6,  xli.  5,  and  xlvii.  5. 
This  was  forbidden  in  the  law.  Lev.  xix.  28  and 
Deut.  xiv.  1. 


CHAPTER  VII. 
Eastern  Toilet  and  Ornaments. 

P.  IKE  a)i  Oriental  races,  the  Jews  are  very  fond  of 
ornaments.  We  are  therefore  not  surprised  to 
find  many  references  to  them  in  the  Scriptures. 
We  must  mention  first  of  all  the  TOILET  BOTTLES. 
Ladies  always  paint  their  eyelashes  and  eyebrows. 
In  these  bottles  the  black  powder  is  kept.  The  small 
probe  is  first  moistened,  then  dipped  in  the  bottle, 
and  next  passed  lightly  over  the  eyelashes  and 
eyebrows.  This  is  done  in  order  to  make  the  eyes 
appear  large.  Easterns  are  vqry  fond  of  large  eyes. 
This  is  referred  to  in  Jer.  iv.  30.  Jezebel  painted 
her  eyes — not  the  face,  as  in  the  authorized  version. 
2  Kings  ix.  30  (see  Revised  Version). 

SHAVING  was  forbidden  by  the  law.  Lev.  xxi.  5. 
The  Jews  are  therefore  always  depicted  as  wearing 
beards.  Beineinber  the  Ambassadors  of  David  who 
had  to  stop  in  Jericho  till  their  beards  were  grown 
2  Sum.  x.  4-5. 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  61 

Just  as  shaving  was  a  disgrace  in  Palestine,  so 
wearing  the  beard  was  a  disgrace  in  Egypt.  There 
men  always  shaved.  Joseph  was  shaved  before 
being  taken  to  Pharaoh.  Gen.  xli.  14. 

MIRRORS  were  in  use  long  before  the  Israelites 
brought  their  mirrors  to  Moses  and  Aaron.  Ex. 
xxxviii.  8.  They  were  not  glass,  but  pieces  of 
polished  metal,  and  naturally  the  reflection  could  not 
be  as  perfect  as  in  a  looking-glass,  hence  the  force  of 
St.  Paul's  saying,  "Now  we  see  through  a  glass 
darkly."  1  Cor.  xiii.  12.  Such  a  mirror  is  also 
referred  to  in  2  Cor.  iii.  18,  and  James  i.  23.  Isaiah 
foretells  that  the  Israelite  women  would  have  their 
GLASSES  (literally  mirrors)  taken  away  from  them. 
Is.  iii.  23. 

Ornaments  in  shape  of  a  half-moon,  called 
"  round  tires  like  the  moon  "  in  Is.  iii.  18,  are  worn 
round  the  necks  of  women,  and  often  put  by  princes 
and  kings  round  the  necks  of  their  horses  or  camels. 
Judges  viii.  21  (see  margin). 

PLAITED  HAIR  Women  wear  their  hair  in 
many  plaits  hanging  down.  The  number  of  the 
plaits  must  always  be  odd.  They  sometimes  have 
eleven,  thirteen,  nineteen — always  an  odd  number. 
St.  Peter  advises  the  Christian  women  to  think  more 
of  the  "  beauty  of  holiness  "  than  the  outward  adorn- 
ment of  plaited  hair.  1  Peter  iii.  3. 


62  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

JEWELLERY.  Ail  Orientals  are  iond  of 
Jewellery,  and  from  their  frequent  mention  in  the 
Bible  it  would  appear  that  in  those  early  days*  they 
were  equally  fond  of  them. 

The  ornaments  worn  are  of  various  kinds  ;  some 
are  of  glass  or  seeds  strung  together,  others  are  of 
metal,  brass,  bronze,  silver  and  gold. 

The  poor  peasants  always  wear  GLASS  RINGS 
AND  BRACELETS.  They  are  manufactured  in 
Hebron  and  elsewhere,  and  worn  by  aU  women  and 
girls.  Blue  is  the  favourite  colour  :  it  is  the  colour 
of  most  charms. 

TINKLING  ORNAMENTS  contain  small  bells  or 
chains.  Some  are  worn  as  bracelets,  others  as 
anklets.  See  Is.  iii.  18-20. 

Tinkling  Ornaments  are  great  favourites  in  the 
East  to-day. 

EARRINGS  AND  NOSESINGS  are  both  still  in 
use,  and  are  mentioned  in  the  Bible.  Nose-rings 
are  mentioned  in  Is.  iv.  21.  Notice  also  in  particular 
Ezek.  xvi.  12,  where  instead  of  "  I  will  put  a  jewel 
on  thy  forehead,1"  read  "  I  will  put  a  ring  upon  thy 
nose." 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 


SOAP.  It  will  probably  surprise  many  readers 
to  learn  that  Palestine  has  a  very  large  soap  industry. 
It  does  not  look  very  tempting,  yet  it  is  purer  than 
most  soaps  made  in  this  country  because  pure  olive 
oil  is  used  in  its  manufacture. 

Large  quantities  are  manufactured  and  shipped 
to  Egypt,  N.  Syria,  and  the  Levant.  Soap  is  twice 
mentioned  in  the  Bible,  in  Jer.  ii-  22,  and  Malachi 
iii.  2,  while  nitre  mentioned  in  Jer.  ii.  22,  was  also  a 
compound  of  soap. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


Tents   and   Tent   Life. 


TT  is  hardly  possible  to  over-estimate  the  importance 
of  this  chapter  if  we  wish  to  understand  many 
passages  of  God's  Holy  Word.  Many  objections 
raised  against  the  truth  of  the  Bible  exist  only 
because  so  many  passages  are  quite  misunderstood, 
and  commentators  do  not  always  throw  sufficient 
light  on  these  dark  passages.  Moreover,  even  many 
believers  have  very  serious  misgivings  in  regard  to 
certain  passages,  for  they  seem  so  contrary  to  the 
high  and  holy  standard  of  other  parts  of  the  Sacred 
Scriptures.  One  of  these  very  difficulties  finds  a 
most  simple  and  natural  solution  here. 

THE  TENT  is  made  of  thick,  coarse  material, 
of  goat's  or  of  camel's  hair,  dyed  black.  Tents  are 
always  black.  Hence  Solomon  may  well  compare 
them  to  black  eyes  in  Song  i.  5.  The  cloth  is  made 
by  "  tent-makers."  St  Paul,  Aquila,  and  Priscilla, 
were  weavers  of  the  cloth  from  which  tents  are 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  65 


made.  Acts  xviii.  3.  The  tents  are  raised  ON 
POLES  of  various  sizes  and  of  the  roughest  kind. 
The  poles  are  held  up  by  ropes  stretched  on  all  sides, 
and  fastened  to  the  ground  with  long  TENT  PEGS, 
called  NAILS  in  the  Bible.  Judges  iv.  21,  22,  and 
v.  26. 

These  tents  are  generally  put  up  and  taken  down 
by  women.  They  do  most  of  the  menial  work,  and 
from  constant  practice  are  well  accustomed  to  the 
huge  WOOD  HAMMER  or  mallet,  and  hammering 
the  "  nails  "  deep  down  in  the  ground.  It  was  with 
such  a  nail  that  Jael  killed  Sisera.  Judges  iv.  21. 

Tents  are  generally  divided  into  two  parts. 
One  completely  closed  for  the  WOMEN,  the  other 
open,  for  public  use.  In  the  latter  part  strangers 
are  admitted.  Gen.  xviii.  5.  No  strange  man  is 
allowed  to  enter  the  female  part  of  the  tent.  When 
men  therefore  are  entertained,  women  pass  within, 
and  can  not  be  seen.  Yet  they  can  hear  and  even 
join  in  the  conversation.  Gen.  xviii.  9,  15.  The 
various  pieces  of  coarse  cloth  are  often  not  sewn 
together,  but  pinned  with  small  wood  pins,  called 
"TACHES"  in  Ex.  xxxvi.  18.  The  Eevised 
Version  calls  them  clasps.  In  the  Tabernacle  they 
were  made  of  brass,  not  of  wood. 

In  a  large  encampment  the  chief's  tent  is  always 
placed  in  the  very  centre,  while  all  the  other  tents 


66  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

are  pitched  around  it.  This  was  done  all  through 
the  wanderings  of  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness. 
The  TENT  OF  THEIR  CHIEF— God's  tent,  the 
Tabernacle — always  occupied  the  centre  of  the  en- 
campment. Num.  ii.  The  chief's  tent  is  further 
distinguished  by  a  long  spear  about  fifteen  or 
eighteen  feet  in  length,  fixed  in  the  ground  in  an 
upright  position.  This  was  done  when  King  Saul 
sought  to  kill  David.  1  Sam.  xxvi.  7.  David  took 
Saul's  spear,  and  the  Israelites  must  have  known 
that  he  must  have  been  quite  close  to  Saul,  and  near 
enough  to  kill  him. 

WHY   DID  JAEL   KILL   SISERA? 

Have  you  ever  seen  a  satisfactory  answer  ?  It 
is  a  very  great  difficulty  to  Europeans,  and  yet,  the 
solution  could  have  been  settled  ages  ago  if  people 
had  done  the  simplest  thing  in  the  world — gone  to 
an  encampment  of  Bedouins  and  seen  something  of 
their  strange  life.  To  a  Bedouin  nothing  would  be 
more  natural  than  Jael's  action.  To  understand  the 
reason,  two  facts  must  be  borne  in  mind. 

First,  the  duty  of  entertaining  strangers  in  the 
East  is  an  unwritten  law,  yet  not  even  the  most 
unprincipled  would  dare  to  violate  it.  Bedouins  are 
most  hospitable  to  strangers.  Never  in  my 
wanderings  have  I  passed  an  encampment  of 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  67 

Bedouins  without  being  at  once  invited  to  corns  in 
and  rest.  The  words  they  u  e  are  exactly  ths  same 
asused  by  Jaei :  "  Come  in,  ii*y  Lord  come  in  and 
rest."  Judges  iv.  18. 

Secondly,  no  strange  man  is  permitted  to  enter 
the  FEMALE  PART  of  the  tent.  Another  unwritten 
law  declares  such  an  one  to  be  guilty  of  death,  and 
any  relation  is  bound  to  carry  this  law  into  execution. 
If  a  woman  allows  a  stranger  to  enter  her  part  of  the 
tent  she  is  guilty  of  death.  Now,  bearing  this  in 
mind,  turn  to  Judges  iv.  Sisera  was  escaping,  when 
he  passed  Jael's  tent.  She  at  once,  with  true 
Eastern  hospitality,  invited  him  to  enter  and  rest. 
This  she  would  do  with  double  cordiality,  for  in  this 
war  her  people  sided  with  Sisera  and  against  the 
Israelites  See  Judges  iv.  17.  She  of  course  wished 
him  to  enter  the  public  part  only.  But  he  wanted  a 
good  hiding  place,  and  no  place  could  be  safer  than 
the  female  part  of  the  tent,  for  no  Israelite  would 
intrude.  So  he  pushed  his  way  and  entered — of 
course  contrary  to  the  wishes  of  Jael.  But  she  had 
now  been  insulted  ;  what  was  she  to  do  ?  If  she 
protested,  her  own  instinct  told  her,  the  intruder 
was  in  despair,  and  would  kill  her.  If  she  allowed 
him  to  stay  there,  her  husband  would  believe  her  to 
be  faithless,  and  kill  her  h'.mself.  She  therefore  took 
the  law  into  her  own  hands,  and  while  he  had  fallen 
asleep,  she  pinned  him  to  the  ground. 


68  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

We  are  told  too  in  v.  19  that  she  gave  him  milk 
to  drink  when  he  asked  for  water.  The  same  milk 
is  called  butter  in  Judges  v.  25.  It  was  no  doubt  the 
fritter-milk  much  used  all  over  the  East.  This  is 
considered  by  some  as  an  aggravation  of  treachery, 
but  it  is  more  likely  that  she  gave  him  milk  because 
she  had  no  water.  Every  traveller  in  the  East  knows 
it  is  sometimes  easier  to  procure  milk  than  water. 
Shepherds  are  found  everywhere  on  the  mountains, 
and  they  are  always  ready  to  milk  the  goats  and 
quench  the  thirst  of  the  weary  traveller. 

She  is  therefore  called  blessed  in  ch.  v.  24,  not 
because  she  committed  a  treacherous  murder,  but 
because,  while  trying  to  defend  her  character  and 
honour,  she  was  unknowingly  ridding  the  Israelites 
of  a  great  and  cruel  tyrant. 


CHAPTER  IX. 
Eastern  Music. 

'OEBHAPS  on  no  subject  will  this  little  book  be  & 
more  complete  revelation  than  on  that  of  music. 
It  is  the  general  impression  that  the  musical  instru- 
ments of  the  Bible  were  capable  of  producing 
musical  effects  similar  to  those  of  a  complete  modern 
orchestra. 

Orientals  have  no  idea  of  harmony.  They  sing 
in  unison.  And  instruments  are  only  used  as  an 
accompaniment.  Instrumental  music,  strictly 
speaking,  does  not  exist.  Nor  did  it  in  Bible  times. 
When  we  read  "  Praise  the  Lord  with  lute  and  harp," 
&c.  (Ps.  xxxiii.  2  ;  cl.  3),  it  means  sing  to  the  Lord, 
and  accompany  the  singing  with  lute  and  harp. 

People  sang  and  played  in  unison,  and  the  music 
was,  as  it  is  to-day,  of  the  most  primitive  character. 
This  is  very  plainly  shown  by  the  very  names  given 


70  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 


to  musical  instruments.  In  Amos  vi.  5,  we  read  of 
K'elai  Shir,  invented  by  King  David,  i.e..  instrument 
of  song, 

The  principal  instruments  of  music  are  •— 

THE  HARP.  It  is  the  first  one  mentioned  in 
the  Bible  (Gen.  iv.  21),  and  consisted  of  an  instru- 
ment with  many  strings,  called  in  Hebrew  KINNOR, 
in  Arabic  Kannun.  From  the  frequency  with  which 
it  is  mentioo  3d  in  the  Bible,  it  would  appear  to  have 
been  the  national  instrument  of  the  Jews.  It  seems 
always  to  have  been  associated  with  joy  and  gladness. 
Hence  in  captivity  "  they  hung  their  harps  upon  the 
willows."  Ps.  clvii.  2. 

From  David's  time  it  seems  to  have  been 
generally  associated  with  the  worship  of  Jehovah. 
Hence  the  word  KINNOR  is  more  often  mentioned  in 
the  Psalms  than  any  other  instrument.  David,  as  a 
lad  played  on  the  KINNOR,  1  Sam.  xvi.  16-23,  and  to 
its  accompaniment  sang  some  of  his  sweet  Psalms. 
NEGINOTH  comes  from  Hebrew  NAGAN  "  to  play," 
and  is  always  connected  with  the  harp.  (Literally 
"  to  harp  upon  the  harp."  When  Elisha  sent  for  a 
minstrel,  2  Kings  iii.  15,  the  word  is  NAGAN,  again 
from  same  root,  hence  a  proper  translation  would  be 
HARPER.  It  is  interesting  to  compare  some  of 
David's  Psalms  which  have  the  title  NEGINOTH. 
Some  of  these,  if  sung  by  David  before  Saul,  would 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  71 

have  inspired  the  morose  king  to  something  like 
confidence  in  God.  See  Ps.  iv.  8;  "I  will  lay  me 
down  in  peace  and  sleep."  And  again,  Ps.  vi.,  "  A 
prayer  for  recovery  from  bodily  or  mental  affliction." 
Again  in  Ps.  Iv.,  after  complaining  of  sad  distress,  he 
adds  the  comfortable  words  (v.  22),  "  Cast  thy  burden 
upon  the  Lord."  Ps.  Ixi.  is  a  prayer  to  God  to 
preserve  and  prolong  the  king's  life."  (V.  6)  "  Thou 
shalt  prolong  the  king's  life."  Very  touching,  too 
is  the  petition  in  v.  7  :  "0  prepare  mercy  and  truth, 
which  may  preserve  him." 

It  must  have  been  very  unusual  for  a  poor 
shepherd  to  be  able  to  play  the  KINNOR.  Shepherds 
only  play  the  flute  or  pipe.  David,  the  shepherd 
lad,  must,  therefore,  have  been  noted  far  and  wide  as 
the  talented  shepherd  who  could  play  the  harp.  No 
wonder  that  even  Saul's  courtiers  had  heard  of  him. 
1  Sam.  xvi.  8. 

The  ORGAN,  like  the  Harp,  was  the  earliest 
invented  instrument.  Called  UGAY  in  Hebrew ; 
Gen.  iv.  21.  It  consists  of  reeds  of  different  lengths, 
the  player  passing  his  mouth  from  one  to  the  other. 
It  is  the  well-known  Pan's  pipe,  the  primitive  organ. 
Besides  the  passage  in  Genesis  it  is  mentioned  with 
KINNOR  only  in  Job  xxi.  12  and  xxx.  31.  Is  it  not 
curious  that  these  two  earliest  instruments,  invented 
by  Jubal,  should  be  mentioned  by  Job  only,  with 


72  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

just  one  exception  ?  May  not  this  be  an  internal 
evidence  of  the  antiquity  of  the  book  ?  It  is  also 
mentioned  once  with  a  long  list  of  other  instruments 
in  Ps.  cl.  4. 

The  PIPE  was  a  plain  reed  either  single  or 
double,  and  played  like  the  modern  flute  or  oboe. 
They  are  the  favourite  instruments  of  shepherds,  as 
they  are  easily  made,  and  easily  played.  Galled  in 
Hebrew  EHALIL.  Notice  plural  form  in  the  title  of 
Ps.  v.  NEHILOTH.  They  are  connected  with 
travelling  in  Is.  xxx.  29.  Mentioned  in  1  Sam.  x.  5 
and  1  Kings  i.  40.  From  these  three  passages  it 
would  appear  that  they  were  in  ancient  times 
connected  with  religious  worship,  hence  the  sad 
degeneracy  of  the  people  when  they  used  "  the  harp, 
viol,  tabret,  pipe,"  in  their  drunken  feasts.  Is-  v.  12. 

The  YIOL  was  a  one-stringed  instrument,  and 
the  prototype  of  the  modern  violin  ;  though  there 
appear  to  have  been  Viols  with  more  than  one  string. 
In  Ps.  xcii.  3  we  read  of  a  ten-stringed  NEYEL  also 
in  Ps.  clxiv.  9.  Dr.  Stainer  thinks  it  was  the  harp. 
It  seems  to  have  been  a  very  popular  instrument 
from  the  frequency  with  which  it  is  mentioned.  It 
is  sometimes  translated  Y7QL  in  Is.  v.  12,  xiv.  11 ; 
Amos.  v.  23  and  vi.  5 ;  and  sometimes  PSALTERY 
in  1  Sam.  x.  5 ;  2  Sam.  vi.  5 ;  1  Kings  x.  1_! ; 
1  Chron.  xvi.  4.  To  still  further  bewilder  the  Bible 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  73 

reader  the  word  NEYEL  is  translated  in  the  Prayer- 
book  Psalter  LUTE.  It  should  therefore  be  remem- 
bered, that  YIOL,  PSALTERY  and  LUTE  are  one 

and  the  same  instrument. 

The  next  instrument  is  the  HORN,  or  TRUMPET. 
The  Hebrew  word  is  SHOFAR,  the  ram's  horn,  and 
KHATZOZERAH,  a  metal  trumpet,  sometimes  trans- 
lated CORNET.  Trumpets  were  used  as  war-signals. 
See  Josh.  vi.  4,  &c. ;  Judges  iii.  27  ;  1  Sam.  xiii.  3  ; 
2  Sam.  xviii.  6,  <fec.  Also  on  certain  religious  festivals, 
in  ushering  in  the  year  of  Jubilee,  Lev.  xxv.  9,  and 
at  the  Feast  of  Trumpets,  Numb,  xxiii.  24  and  xxix. 
1.  This  is  still  kept  by  the  Jews.  It  was  also  used 
at  the  coronation  of  a  king,  1  Kings  i.  34 ;  2  Kings 
ix.  13 ;  2  Chron.  xxiii.  13.  With  the  Shophar  Joab 
recalled  the  scattered  Israelites.  2  Sam.  ii.  28.  And 
with  the  Shophar  God  will  restore  scattered  Israel, 
Is.  xxvii.  13.  And  v;ith  the  Shophar,  called  Salpynx, 
ni  1  Cor.  xv.  52,  God  will  call  the  armies  of  the  dead 
at  the  last  day.  "  The  trumpet  shall  sound  "  at  the 
last  day,  meaning  God  would  raise  the  scattered 
dead.  Some  of  the  KHATZOZERAH,  or  silver 
trumpets,  are  seen  on  the  bas-reliefs  on  the  arch  of 
Titus. 

The  SACKBUT  is  an  instrument  resembling  the 
Scotch  Bagpipe. 


74  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

Of  INSTRUMENTS  OP  PERCUSSION,  we  have 
the  TIMBRELS,  the  modern  tambourine.  Used  on 
all  festive  occasions.  Hebrew  word  TZELTZELIM, 
from  a  word  meaning  to  make  a  rustling,  rumbling 
noise,  like  the  noise  of  the  wings  of  a  swarm  of 
locusts.  It  is  generally  translated  CYMBALS.  See 
2  Sam.  vi.  5 ;  1  Chron.  xv.  16  ;  2  Chron.  v.  12 ; 
Ezra  iii.  10.) 

The  CYMBALS,  (Hebrew  METZILTAIM)  a  dual 
form  showing  that  they  consist  of  two  metal  plates 
which  are  struck  together,  producing  a  sharp, 
clashing  sound.  This  is  translated  cymbals  in  Ezra 
iii.  10,  and  Neh.  xii.  27.  Even  the  Revised  Version 
confuses  the  Tzilzelim  and  Metziltaim. 

The  TABRET  (Hebrew  Toph,  Arabic  Duff)  is 
the  Oriental  representative  of  the  modern  drum. 

They  are  of  various  shapes  and  sizes.  The 
smaller  ones  are  chiefly  used  by  females.  With  this 
TOPH  the  women  came  out  to  meet  Saul  (1  Sam. 
xviii.  6).  "With  it  Miriam  and  the  women  of  Israel 
sang  their  Psalm  of  Victory.  (Ex.  xv.  20).  It  is 
called  the  adornment  of  women.  (Jer.  xxxiv.  4). 
With  the  Toph  Jepthah's  daughter  met  her  father 
(Judg.  xi.  34),  and  thus  "brought  him  very  low." 
There  is  also  an  interesting  play  of  words  in 
connection  with  this  instrument  in  Is.  xxx.  32,  33. 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  75 

The  place  Tophet  seems  forced  until  you  see  its 
allusion  to  the  instrument  Toph  in  v.  32.  The  play 
of  words  is  a  thoroughly  Oriental  custom,  of  which 
there  are  frequent  specimens  in  the  Bible.  It  would 
make  many  dark  passages  clear  if  such  instances  were 
always  explained  by  a  note.  There  is  another  in 
Jer.  i.  11,  12.  Almond  tree  is  "  Shdked"  in  Hebrew. 
"  I  will  hasten  "  is  Shoked.  (See  Eevised  Version). 

EASTERN  SONGS  are  very  primitive.  One 
very  popular  one  begins  with  the  expression  "  Ahya- 
la-lallee."  It  is  an  expression  of  joy,  without  any 
meaning.  Yet  probably  a  similar  expression  may 
have  originated  the  Hebrew  word  "  hallel"  (to 
rejoice),  from  which  our  Hallelujah  is  taken. 

LOYE  SONGS  are  the  Oriental's  greatest  delight. 
He  will  sing,  and  others  will  listen,  for  hours.  The 
expressions  with  which  he  greets  his  love  are  very 
beautiful.  The  words  dove,  gazelle,  sparkling 
fountain,  beautiful  gardens,  the  rose,  the  lily,  the 
eyes,  &c.,  are  familiar  and  favourite  expressions. 
Then  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  Oriental 
story  of  love  is  simple  and  pure.  Expressions  which 
when  translated  into  an  European  language  seem 
harsh  and  coarse,  are  very  sweet  and  touching  in  an 
Eastern  garb.  Nay,  more  than  this,  expressions 
that  would  never  be  used  in  polite  societ}' 
in  England,  are  used  in  the  most  simple  and 


76  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

natural  manner  in  the  East.  It  should  be 
remembered  that  the  disuse  of  such  expressions 
is  not  always  a  sign  of  refinement ;  nor  the  use  of 
them  a  proof  of  the  want  of  refinement.  Always 
remember  this  when  reading  the  Songs  of  Solomon. 
In  fact,  before  reading  it,  you  should  throw  away 
your  Western  ideas  altogether,  and  try  to  live  aud 
think  like  an  Eastern ;  then  that  book  becomes  one 
of  the  choicest  of  the  books  of  the  Bible.  Westerns 
cannot  understand  it,  for  the  term  love  has  been 
dragged  to  the  very  dust  in  this  age  by  novels  of  the 
lowest  kind,  and  by  the  reports  of  the  proceedings  of 
the  Divorce  Courts.  Westerns  sometimes  speak  of 
"  falling  in  love  "  as  though  it  were  a  joke  to  be 
laughed  at.  To  a  true  Eastern,  love  is  a  sacred  word, 
and  he  would  no  more  think  of  making  it  a  subject  of 
mirth  than  of  laughing  at  religion. 


CHAPTER  X. 
Natural  History  and  Botany. 

TN  the  compass  of  this   small  book,  we  are  only 
able  to  refer  to  some  of  the  best-known  creatures 
and  plants. 

The  first  one  naturally  thinks  of,  is  the  LOCUST, 
the  great  plague  of  the  East,  and  belonging  to  the 
order  of  insects  called  Orthoptera.  They  undergo 
certain  changes  in  various  stages  of  their  existence, 
but  different  from  those  of  the  beetles  or  butterflies, 
their  changes  being  much  simpler.  They  exist  in 
three  stages — the  larva,  or  caterpillar  stage  ;  the 
pupa,  or  chrysalis  stage  ;  and  the  imago,  or  perfect 
stage.  The  great  difference  between  the  locust  and 
the  butterfly  is  this  :  when  the  locust  has  passed  into 
the  second  or  chrysalis  stage  it  does  not  become 
dormant  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  then  far  more 
voracious  and  destructive  than  when  full  grown.  In 
the  first  stage  it  is  very  small,  and  without  wings  or 
feet.  In  the  second  stage  it  has  feet,  but  no  wings. 


78  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

In  the  third  stage  it  is  full-grown.  In  all  three 
stages  they  are  most  destructive.  Moreover,  all 
three  stages  are  mentioned  in  the  Bible.  Joel  ii, 
25  ;  Nan.  iii.  15,  16  ;  and  their  destructiveness 
distinctly  referred  to  in  Joel  i.  4  ;  "  That  which  the 
palmer-worm  (the  pupa)  hath  left  hath  the  locust 
(full-grown)  eaten  ;  and  that  which  the  locust  hath 
left  hath  the  cankerworm  (larvae)  eaten."  The 
locust  deposits  its  eggs,  which  soon  hatch  and 
become  the  destructive  caterpillars. 

They  are  always  brought  by  the  East  wind,  Ex. 
x.  13,  and  carried  away  by  the  West  wind.  Ex  x.  19. 

They  form  the  food  of  the  people  to-day.  Being 
clean  they  were  permitted  by  the  law  of  Moses. 
Lev.  xi.  22.  They  formed,  no  doubt,  the  food  of  St. 
John  the  Baptist.  Matt.  iii.  4.  We  need  not 
suppose  that  the  Locust  beans  or  pods  of  the  Kharoob 
tree  were  referred  to. 

For  the  strange  customs  of  these  little  insects 
and  the  terrible  destruction  they  bring  with  them, 
see  an  interesting  description  in  Canon  Tristam's 
"  Natural  History  of  the  Bible,"  p.p.  316-318.  I  am 
indebted  for  much  of  the  information  I  give  on  the 
subject  of  Natural  History  and  Botany  to  this  most 
useful  and  interesting  book. 

When  flying,  they  most  vividly  portray  the 
millions  of  "  God's  army  "  going  to  battle  in  Rev. 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  79 

ix.  9,  "  the  sound  of  their  wings  was  as  the  sound  of 
chariots  of  many  horses  running  to  battle."  No 
doubt  the  "  day  of  gloominess  and  darkness "  in 
Joel  ii.  is  a  realistic  picture  of  the  locusts,  "  God's 
army."  They  come  in  millions,  and  darken  the  sky 
by  their  numbers. 

THE  SCORPION  is  a  very  venomous  creature, 
and  found  everywhere  in  Palestine.  You  can  hardly 
pick  up  a  stone  without  finding  one  there.  It  stings 
with  its  tail,  and  is  so  vicious  that  when  attacked, 
will  often  sting  itself  to  death.  Its  sting  is  not 
always  fatal,  but  people  do  sometimes  die  from  its 
effects.  Its  vicious  and  venomous  nature  is  always 
brought  out  in  the  Bible.  1  Kings  xii.  11 ;  2  Chron. 
x.  14 ;  Luke  x.  19  ;  Eev.  ix.  5,  10. 

MOREX  SHELLS.  The  famous  purple  dye  was 
procured  from  this  shell-fish.  The  whole  art  is  lost 
now,  although  in  ancient  times  Phoenicia  was  noted 
all  over  the  civilised  world  for  its  industry  in  pro- 
curing the  famous  colour  with  which  kings  and 
princes  adorned  themselves.  Purple  is  mentioned  in 
John  xix.  2.  Lydia  was  a  "  seller  of  purple."  Acts 
xvi.  14. 

THE  OLIYE  TREE  is  the  most  common  tree  in 
the  Holy  Land,  and  always  constituted  an  important 
part  of  the  wealth  of  the  country.  God  promised 
the  Israelites  "  a  land  of  oil,  olive,  and  honey." 


So  PALESTINE  A*ID  THE  BIBLE. 


Deut.  viii.  7,  8.  It  is  also  considered  the  most 
valuable  tree  in  Palestine  on  account  of  the  many 
useful  properties  it  possesses.  The  berries  are  the 
universal  article  of  daily  food.  Again,  from  the 
berries,  oil  is  extracted,  and  also  used  as  an  article  of 
food.  To  this  day  the  Arabs  "  dip  their  bread  in  the 
oil."  Oil  is  also  used  for  lighting  purposes.  It  was 
a  good  cure  for  wounds  (Luke  x.  34).  The  twigs 
and  branches  are  used  for  making  fires,  the  dry 
roots  of  the  decayed  trees  are  still  used  for  firewood  ; 
and  lastly,  the  timber  is  most  useful  for  ornamental 
purposes,  taking  a  beautiful  polish.  It  is  still  made 
up  into  a  variety  of  articles  both  useful  and  orna- 
mental. No  wonder,  then,  that  blessings  in  the 
East  and  in  God's  Holy  Word  are  always  connected 
with  oil.  >  The  blessing  of  Asher  (Deut.  xxxiii.  24), 
"  Let  him  dip  his  foot  in  oil "  was  an  expression 
which  every  Oriental  could  appreciate,  and  wish  he 
could  claim  as  his  own.  See  also  Is.  Ixi.  3. 

In  Palestine  every  olive  tree  is  now  taxed,  and 
very  often  when  a  farmer  is  too  poor  to  pay  the  tax 
he  will  cut  down  the  tree  and  sell  the  wood.  This 
accounts  for  the  fact  that  so  few  trees  are  found  in 
many  parts  of  the  country. 

WHEAT  AND  TARES  GROWING  TOGETHER. 

The  tares  called  Zewan  are  the  farmer's  great  plague 
in  the  East.  When  first  growing  they  look  just  like 
the  wheat ;  indeed  you  cannot  distinguish  between 


PALKSTIN'E  AND  THE  BIBLE  81 


them  until  the  full-grown  ear  appears,  then  the  tares 
are  seen  to  be  long  and  the  grains  almost  black.  It 
must  not  be  confounded  with  the  English  tares,  for 
it  is  a  species  of  Darnel,  called  by  naturalists  Lolium 
temulentum.  Each  grain  of  zewan  has  therefore  to 
bs  removed  before  the  corn  can  be  ground  into  flour, 
and  baked  into  bread,  otherwise  the  bread  would  be 
spoilt,  the  zewan  being  bitter  an  poisonous.  Matth. 
xiii.  24-30.  In  any  exposition  of  the  well-known 
parable  these  points  should  always  be  remembered — 
the  zewan  looks  like  the  wheat  until  the  fruit 
appears,  then  the  difference  is  seen ;  it  is  black,  the 
wheat  gold;  it  is  bitter  and  poisonous. 

LOCUST  BEANS  grow  on  a  large  beautiful  tree 
called  KJiaroob  tree.  It  is  supposed  to  have  been  the 
food  of  St.  John  the  Baptist  (Matth.  iii.)  But,  as 
we  have  already  seen,  he  ate  the  real  locusts.  These 
beans  are  eaten  by  the  poorest  classes,  but  more 
generally  form  the  food  of  cattle.  They  are  THE 
HUSKS  which  the  swine  did  eat.  (Luke  xv.  6.) 

MANDRAKE  ROOT.  The  root  of  the  Man- 
dragora,  called  in  Hebrew  " dudaiw,"  mentioned  in 
Gen.  xxx.  14,  16.  It  is  supposed  to  possess  the 
powers  of  assisting  or  producing  conception.  And 
no  wonder  that  ignorant  or  superstitious  people 
believed  this.  Examine  the  root ;  it  is  a  most 
remarkable  representation  of  the  human  form. 


CHAPTER  XI. 
Jewish    Religious    Ceremonies. 

/TVODEBN  Judaism  is  to  a  great  extent  not  the 
'  religion  of  Moses  and  the  Prophets.  It  con- 
tains the  shell  but  not  the  kernel.  Many  laws  found 
in  the  books  of  Moses  cannot  be  held,  and  many  laws 
not  emanating  from  Moses,  or  any  inspired  teacher, 
have  superseded  them,  and  are  held  with  a  tenacity 
and  zeal  worthy  of  a  better  cause. 

One  of  the  greatest  features  of  Modern  Judaism 
is  a  most  curious  admixture  of  superstition  on  the 
one  hand,  and  a  loose  teaching  on  the  other  hand  on 
many  subjects  of  vital  importance,  such  as  the 
Inspiration  of  God's  Holy  Word,  the  Doctrine  of  the 
Atonement,  Sacrifices,  and  the  Messiah.  Many  of 
these  superstitions  are  very  ancient,  and  were  already 
in  existence  in  our  Lord's  day. 

No  Jew  will  say  his  daily  prayers  without 
wearing  the  PHYLACTERIES.  They  are  small 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  83 

square  boxes  covered  over  with  leather,  in  which  are 
contained  the  four  passages  which  command  the  Jews 
to  bind  the  law  "  as  frontlets  between  their  eyes,  and 
upon  their  arms."  Ex.  xiii.  2-10,  xiii.  11-16  ;  Deut. 
vi.  4-9,  ix.  13-21.  One  is  worn  on  the  forehead  and 
the  other  on  the  arm.  The  Jews  took  those  passages 
in  their  strictly  literal  sense,  whereas  God  meant 
them  to  be  taken  figuratively ;  a  mistake  which 
others  besides  Jews  have  made,  not  only  in  the 
interpretation  of  the  Old  but  of  the  New  Testament. 

By  "binding  them  upon  the  forehead"  God 
wanted  them  to  have  the  whole  law  in  their  heads — 
they  were  to  know  it,  and  by  "binding  it  upon  the 
arm  "  God  wanted  them  to  do  it,  i.e.,  to  obey  the  law. 

They  have  to  be  prepared  most  carefully,  other- 
wise they  are  useless.  The  Talmud  says  that  even 
God  wears  Phylacteries,  though  with  what  object  we 
are  not  told.  They  are  of  various  sizes,  the  largest 
being  worn  by  the  strict  Jews,  the  modern  Pharisees. 
"  They  make  broad  their  Phylacteries  "  (Matt,  xxiii. 
5)  meant  they  wore  the  largest  they  could  get  so  as 
to  appear  very  pious  before  men. 

The  preparing  of  the  Phylacteries  is  most 
minutely  described  in  the  Talmud,  and  the  slightest 
infringement  of  these  rules  would  render  them  unfit 
for  use.  Special  reed  pens  have  to  be  used,  special 


84  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 


leather  only  may  be  employed,  even  the  writing  has 
to  be  on  a  certain  number  of  lines  ;  while  the  verses 
written  by  a  great  Eabbi  would  enhance  their  value. 
Thus  have  Jews  made  the  word  of  God  of  none  effect 
through  their  traditions.  Mark  vii.  18. 

Jewish  boys  begin  to  wear  the  Phylacteries  at 
the  age  of  twelve  or  thirteen,  when  they  go  through 
the  ceremony  of  Bar-mitzvah,  similar  to  our  Con- 
firmation Service.  On  that  day  he  has  to  stand  up 
in  the  synagogue  and  read  the  portion  of  the  Law. 
It  is  very  possible  that  our  Lord  was  taken  up  from 
Nazareth  to  Jerusalem  at  the  age  of  twelve  with  the 
object  of  being  confirmed.  Luke  ii. 

The  next  thing  a  Jew  has  to  put  on  is  the 
TALITH.  This  is  the  praying  robe  worn  over  the 
head.  It  contains  the  ZIZITH  or  fringes,  which  they 
reverently  touch  and  kiss.  This  wa»  commanded  : — 
"  Thou  shalt  wear  thee  fringes  to  the  borders  of  thy 
garments."  Numb.  xv.  38,  39,  and  Deut.  xxii.  12. 
This  fringe  was  intended  as  a  mark  of  distinction 
between  God's  people  and  the  surrounding  nations, 
on  the  principle  of  "  be  ye  separate,"  2  Cor.  vi.  17,  a 
law  which  many  Christians  break  to-day  by  con- 
forming to  wordly  practices.  God's  people  of  old 
were  not  even  to  dress  like  the  heathen  nations 
around  them.  There  is  «very  reason  to  believe  that 
this  law  was  kept  for  many  centuries.  But  during 


PALESTINE  AND  THB  BIBLE.  85 


the  Maccabaean  persecution,  the  fact  that  Jews  could 
so  easily  be  distinguished  by  their  dress,  exposed 
them  to  great  persecution,  and  the  Jewish  leaders, 
as  a  matter  of  expediency,  allowed  Jews  to  wear  tJu 
fringe  in  an  inner  robe,  and  only  use  the  fringe  on  an 
outer  robe  during  the  hour  of  prayer.  This  they 
have  continued  to  do  to  this  day.  But  it  is  likely 
that  the  more  strict  Jews  continued  to  wear  the 
fringe  on  an  outer  garment.  Our  Lord's  "  hem  of 
His  garment,"  was  the  Ziziih,  Luke  viii.  44;  Matt. 
ix.  34.  And  just  as  the  Pharisees  "  made  broad 
their  Phylacteries,"  so  they  "  enlarged  the  borders  of 
their  garments."  Matt,  xxiii.  5.  The  talith  is 
generally  a  bride's  present  to  the  bridegroom,  and 
the  text  is  her  own  work. 

Women  never  wear  the  Talith  or  Phylacteries, 
they  need  not  necessarily  pray. 

Fixed  to  the  right-hand  doorpost  of  every  Jewish 
house  is  the  MEZUZAH,  or  door-post.  The  idea  is 
taken  from  Deut.  vi.  9.  A  piece  of  parchment  upon 
which  are  written  in  Hebrew  the  following  verses  ; 
Deut.  vi.  4-9  and  xi.  13-21,  is  rolled  up  and  put  in  a 
case  made  of  wood,  tin,  or  glass.  The  case  contains  a 
small  opening  showing  the  Hebrew  word  "  Shaddai," 
which  means  Almighty.  The  case  is  nailed  in  the 
right-hand  door-post  of  every  Jewish  home,  and 
every  pious  Jew  passing  by,  reverently  touches  and 


86  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

kisses  it.  The  Jews  consider  the  Mezuzah  a  charm, 
keeping  away  the  evil  spirits.  They  flee  away  when- 
ever they  see  the  Great  Name.  Hence  the  Jews 
apply  Ps.  cxxi.  5,  "the  Lord  is  thy  Keeper,"  to  the 
Mezuzah. 

THE  SABBATH  is  still  most  rigidly  kept  by 
Jews,  particularly  in  Eastern  countries.  A  Jew  will 
not  even  open  a  letter  on  the  Sabbath  Day.  Many 
Christians  may  "  take  hold  of  the  skirts  of  him  that 
is  a  Jew  "  and  learn  from  the  Jew  how  "  to  keep  the 
Sabbath  Day  holy"  It  is  a  day  he  is  bound  to  honour 
in  every  way.  He  must  always  have  a  good  meal 
and  put  on  his  best  clothes — all  in  honour  of  the 
Sabbath.  It  is  a,  comely  Bride  welcomed  to  the  house 
each  week  with  a  beautiful  Hebrew  Psalm  beginning 
with  the  words  "  Enter  in  my  beloved  one : " 
reminding  one  of  the  Canticles.  Those  who 
ignorantly  think  King  Solomon  held  no  lofty  ideas 
when  writing  his  Spiritual  Love  Song  should  go  any 
Friday  evening  and  hear  the  Jews  welcoming  their 
Bride,  their  love,  the  Sabbath  !  And  if  such  endearing 
terms  could  be  used  of  the  approaching  day  of  rest, 
what  words  would  sufficiently  express  ones  love  and 
devotion  for  the  approaching  Saviour  \ 

Every  Friday  evening  the  wife  lights  the  Sabbath 
light  called  MANORA.  This  is  her  very  special 
privilege  for  which  she  thanks  God  in  the  words  "  I 
thank  Thee,  O  God,  that  thou  hast  commanded  me 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  87 

to  light  the  Sabbath  light."  This  is  not  commanded 
anywhere  in  Scripture,  it  is  enjoined  by  the  Talmud, 
which  the  Jews  consider  to  be  equal  in  importance 
to  the  Law  of  Moses. 

HAYDALLAH  TAPERS  are  wax  tapers  used  at 
the  close  of  each  Sabbath.  It  is  lighted,  and  the 
youngest  person  in  the  house  holds  it,  while  the  head 
of  the  house  takes  a  glass  of  wine  and  a  box  of  spices 
called  HADDAS.  He  then  pronounces  a  blessing 
while  looking  at  the  light,  tastes  the  wine,  and  smells 
the  spices.  With  this  ceremony  the  Sabbath  ends. 

CHANUKAH  LIGHTS  are  used  during  the  Feast 
of  the  Dedication  (John  x.  22),  in  commemoration  of 
the  cleansing  of  the  Temple  by  Judas  Maccabeus.  A 
tradition  says  a  miracle  took  place  while  the  Priests 
were  lighting  the  lamp,  for  although  there  was  not 
enough  sacred  oil  to  last  longer  than  one  day,  it 
actually  continued  to  burn  eight  days,  giving  them 
time  to  obtain  a  fresh  supply.  Hence  the  feast  is 
kept  eight  days.  On  the  first  night  one  lamp  is 
lighted,  on  the  second  two,  and  so  on,  until  on  the 
eighth  day  all  eight  are  burning.  Each  candlestick 
has  a  ninth  light,  from  this  one  the  others  are 
lighted.  The  feast  is  also  called  the  "  Fe.cat  of 
Lights."  The  feast  generally  falls  in  December, 
hence  the  expression  in  John  x.  22,  "  It  was  winter." 


86  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

JEWISH  SLAUGHTERING  KNIVES  are  used 
by  Jewish  butchers  in  slaughtering  the  animals  used 
for  meat  food.  Jews  are  not  allowed  to  buy  their 
meat  from  Gentile  butchers.  Not  only  must  they 
buy  it  from  a  Jewish  butcher,  but  from  one  wlw  holds 
a  license  from  the  Rabbi.  The  Jewish  slaughterer 
is  called  a  Shochet.  He  uses  knives  called  Chalufim, 
which  must  be  as  sharp  as  a  razor.  The  throat  is 
cut  and  the  animal  held  in  such  a  position  that  every 
drop  of  blood  escapes  while  yet  warm.  The  Jews 
have  the  greatest  horror  of  blood.  He  then  carefully 
examines  the  carcase,  and  the  slightest  flaw  renders 
it  unclean  or  Traifeh.  If  perfectly  sound  it  is 
stamped  with  a  RABBI'S  SEAL  and  called  Kosher, 
which  means  clean.  A  shochet  is  always  a  learned 
man.  The  care  with  which  the  best  meat  food  is 
secured  for  their  people  accounts,  to  a  great  extent, 
for  the  health  and  longevity  of  the  Jewish  race»  as 
compared  with  their  Gentile  neighbours. 

The  British  Medical  Journal,  in  an  article  on 
the  subject  of  Jewish  meat  compared  with  other 
meat,  said  : — "  According  to  a  return  of  the  Board  of 
Agriculture,  the  meat  supply  from  all  sources  in  1892 
•was  no  less  than  2,122,000  tons.  In  an  indirect 
manner  we  can  form  some  idea  as  to  how  much  of 
this  meat  was  <it  for  use.  A  return  has  been 
published  of  the  animals  slain  by  Jewish  slaughterers 
at  the  Foreign  Meat  Market,  Deptford,  and  at  the 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  89 

Whitechapel  and  Aldgate  Slaughter-houses.  From 
it  may  be  gathered  that  only  seventy-three  per  cent- 
of  the  oxen  and  sheep  were  pronounced  Kosher  (fit), 
the  remaining  twenty-seven  per  cent,  being  presum- 
ably sold  to  the  East-end  artisan.  Allowing  that  a 
portion  of  the  twenty-seven  per  cent,  was  registered 
on  account  of  what  may  be  called  technical  blemishes, 
we  shall  be  within  the  mark  in  asserting  than  ten 
per  cent,  of  the  meat  sold  each  year — that  zs  212,000 
tons — is  either  positively  deceased  or  unwholesome." 

The  Rabbis  have  complete  supervision  and 
control,  and  can  at  any  time  remove  the  license,  and 
issue  public  notices  to  the  effect  that  certain  butchers 
(giving  name  and  address)  are  not  licensed. 

LELITH  CHARMS  are  charms  connected  with  a 
very  peculiar  superstition.  Lelith  was  the  first  wife 
of  Adam,  but  as  they  did  not  live  happily  together 
(in  Paradise  !  !)  he  drove  her  out  and  married  Eve. 
Lelith  determined  in  bitter  hatred  to  revenge 
herself,  so  to  this  day  she  seeks  to  destroy  every 
new-born  descendant  of  Eve.  To  prevent  her  evil 
designs,  these  charms  are  hung  up  in  the  room. 
This  is  still  done  by  all  strict  Talmudic  Jews. 
Lelith  is  mentioned  in  Is.  xxxiv.  14,  and  is  trans- 
lated "  screech  owl."  Eevised  Version  translates  it 
"night  monster,"  but  in  the  margin  gives  the 
original. 


go  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

MAZZOTH,  or  unleavened  bread,  is  eaten  by  Jews 
during  the  Feast  of  the  Passover.  Unleavened  cake 
is  still  eaten  \>y  the  Bedouins  especially  when  on  a 
march,  or  when  food  has  to  be  hurriedly  prepared  for 
a  feast.  See  not  only  Ex.  xii.  39,  but  also  Josh.  v. 
1,  and  Judges  vi.  19.  The  bread  which  Sarah  pre- 
pared for  the  three  angels  was  also  unleavened.  Gen. 
xviii.  6. 

BOLLS  OF  THE  LAW,  written  on  parchment 
or  on  the  skins  of  animals.  No  printed  books  are 
used  in  the  reading  of  the  Law  in  synagogues  to-day. 
These  are  "  the  books "  so  frequently  mentioned 
in  the  Bible.  Such  a  roll  our  Lord  unrolled  in  the 
synagogue  in  Nazareth.  Luke  iv.  17. 

Skins  or  pieces  of  parchment,  are  cut  into 
square  pieces,  and  stitched  together,  and  when 
completely  unrolled  are  very  long  indeed.  The 
rolling  up  of  a  scroll  is  referred  to  in  Is.  xxxiv.  4, 
and  Kev.  vi.  14.  Jeremiah  writes  his  denunciations 
in  A  ROLL.  Jer.  xxxvi.  2.  They  are  written,  in 
parallel  columns,  for  the  word  "leaves"  in  Jer. 
xxxvi.  23,  which  King  Jehoiakim  cuts  with  a  knife 
and  throws  into  the  fire,  were  not  leaves  or  pages, 
but  columns.  See  margin  in  Revised  Version.  They 
are  written  on  one  side  only,  the  back  of  the  scroll 
being  left  blank.  Hence  when  written  on  both  sides 
the  fact  would  deserve  to  be  mentioned.  SceEzek. 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIUI.E.  91 


ii.  10  and  Zech.  v.  3.  Written  within  and  without 
with  threatenings  meant  that  God's  judgments  were 
very  Jull  and  would  be  very  severe. 

On  the  FEAST  OF  PORIM  the  whole  book  of 
Esther  is  read  in  the  synagogue.  Whenever  the 
word  "  Haman  "  occurs,  the  Jews  shout,  repeating 
the  words,  "  May  his  name  be  blotted  out."  Boys 
use  rattles,  and  produce  a  deafening  noise. 

JEWISH  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  HEBREW 
BIBLE  was  prepared  especially  for  home  use.  As 
one  would  suppose,  the  meaning  of  every  Messianic 
passage  is  altered  to  suit  the  Jewish  idea  of 
interpretation.  Isaiah  liii.,  according  to  modern 
Jewish  notions,  does  not  refer  to  a  suffering  Messiah, 
but  to  the  suffering  people  of  Israel  ?  But  as  certain 
verses  speak  very  forcibly  of  the  great  vicarious 
suffering,  the  text  is  somewhat  altered.  In  verse  10. 
the  sentence,  "  When  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an 
offering  for  sin,"  is  translated  "  When  (now)  his  soul 
hath  brought  the  trespass  offering !  "  Thus  has 
God's  Word  been  perverted. 

THE  MISRACH,  which  means  East,  is  a  picture 
hung  in  such  a  position  that  when  praying  the  Jew 
has  his  face  turned  towards  Jerusalem.  Daniel  vi. 
10).  Jews  love  Jerusalem.  They  greet  one  another 
on  their  great  feast  days  with  the  touching  words, 
"  This  year  in  captivity,  next  yeur  in  Jerusalem." 


CHAPTER   XII. 
Antiquities. 

TTEW  relics  have  as  yet  been  found  in  the  Holy 
Land.  This  is,  however,  accounted  for  by  the 
fact  that  the  country  formed  the  battlefield  of 
numberless  armies  from  different  parts  of  the  world 
and  at  different  periods  of  the  world's  history, 
Egyptian,  Syrian,  Assyrian,  Babylonian,  Persian, 
Greek,  Koman,  Saracen,  Frank  and  Turk.  Every 
invasion  was  accompanied  by  much  destruction,  and 
thus  most  of  the  ancient  temples,  palaces,  cities  and 
villages  have  been  so  completely  destroyed  that  few 
ti  aces  remain  on  the  surface. 

Then,  for  another  reason,  the  Turks  guard 
certain  spots  with  the  most  jealous  care,  and  will 
not  allow  any  work  of  exploration  to  go  on.  We 
hope  a  time  may  soon  come  when  these  localities 
•will  be  thoroughly  examined.  Wherever  the  Pales- 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  93 

tine  Exploration  Fund  have  been  allowed  to  work, 
many  most  valuable  discoveries  have  been  made 
confirming  and  explaining  God's  Word. 

Egypt  and  Assyria  have,  however,  received  a 
more  satisfactory  treatment  at  the  hand  of  the 
explorer,  with  the  result,  that  the  history  of  the  past, 
the  customs  and  manners,  live  again  in  our  own  day 
by  means  of  many  remarkable  discoveries,  which  not 
only  throw  a  flood  of  light  on  God's  Holy  Word, 
but  confirm  the  truth  of  its  sacred  pages,  and  even 
explain  many  a  difficulty  which  puzzled  Bible 
students  in  days  gone  by. 

TEAR  BOTTLES  were  made  of  glass  or  clay,  in 
which  tears  of  mourners  were  collected  at  funerals, 
as  a  token  of  their  grief.  The  bottles  were  then 
buried  with  the  dead.  They  are,  therefore,  found  in 
all  ancient  tombs.  This  custom  is  referred  to  in 
Ps.  Ivi.  8,  "  Thou  hast  put  my  tears  into  thy  bottle." 

TABLETS  FROM  LACKISH  were  discovered  a 
short  time  ago,  and  contain  inscriptions  in  cuneiform 
characters  of  the  highest  interest.  They  describe 
the  condition  of  things  in  Southern  Palestine  at  the 
time  the  Israelites  were  under  Joshua.  The  stones 
and  bricks  are  now  crying  out,  "  The  Bible  is  true." 

Clay  tablets  were  used  chiefly  in  Assyria  and 
Babylonia,  as  they  had  no  other  material.  But  they 


94  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

have  also  been  found  in  Palestine.  With  a  rod  of 
iron  (mentioned  in  Job  xix.  24)  the  characters  were 
inscribed  upon  pieces  of  soft  clay.  They  were  then 
either  baked  in  an  oven  or  simply  dried  and  hardened 
in  the  sun.  They  are  supposed  to  be  referred  to  in 
Jer.  xxxii.  11-13,  but  that  seems  somewhat  doubtful. 
Large  numbers  of  these  clay  tablets  have  been  found 
in  the  ruins  of  Nineveh,  some  of  them  being  exceed- 
ingly valuable,  as  throwing  light  upon  contemporary 
Sacred  History. 

BABYLONIAN  BRICKS  are  found  in  the  ruins  of 
Babylon,  containing  in  cuneiform  characters  the 
name  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  King  of  Babylon.  Daniel, 
it  will  be  remembered,  describes  that  king  as  a  very 
proud  and  haughty  monarch  (Dan.  vi.  30).  This  is 
confirmed  by  these  bricks,  hundreds  of  which  are 
found  among  the  ruins  of  Babylon.  Nebuchadnezzar 
was  so  vain  and  proud  that  he  had  his  name  stamped 
on  every  brick  used  in  the  buildings  of  Babylon. 

MANY  TABLETS  and  Cylinders,  discovered  in 
Nineveh,  are  of  the  most  priceless  value. 

One  was  found  recording  the  wars  and  sieges  of 
TIGLATHPILESER  II.  It  will  thus  be  seen  that 
these  tablets  are  official  records,  and  are  therefore  of 
the  very  greatest  historical  interest-  He  records 
how  he  besieged  Pekah,  king  of  Israel,  and  Rezin, 
king  of  Damascus.  He  also  tells  us  how  he  took 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 


Damascus  and  killed  Rezin.  He  says  that  King 
Ahaz,  who,  it  appears,  was  his  friend,  comes  to  meet 
him  in  Damascus.  Read  2  Kings  xvi.  and  you  see 
how  this  tablet  confirms  Scripture. 

Another  tablet  records  the  deeds  of  SARGON, 
and  tells  us  that  he  besieged  and  took  Ashdod. 
These  cylinders,  therefore,  not  only  explain  God's 
Holy  Word,  but  where  difficulties  really  exist,  they 
help  to  remove  them.  A  most  difficult  passage  was 
undoubtedly  Isaiah  xx.  1.  "In  the  year  that  Tartan 
came  to  Ashdod,  when  Sargon,  King  of  Assyria, 
sent  him,"  &c.  Who  was  this  Sargon  f  His  name 
is  mentioned  nowhere  else.  Did  such  a  king  really 
exist  ?  Or  was  it,  perhaps,  another  name  for  one 
of  the  more  familiar  kings,  Shalmanezer  or  Sen- 
nacherib ?  These  tablets  explain  all.  Sargon  was 
no  myth,  but  a  real  king,  and  a  great  king,  too.  He 
was  the  son  of  Shalmanezer  IV.,  and  the  father  of 
Sennacherib. 

A  remarkable  cylinder  was  also  found,  containing 
an  account  of  the  conquest  of  Samaria  by  Sargon. 
This  deserves  a  somewhat  close  inspection,  for  does 
not  this  contradict  the  Bible  ?  See  2  Kings  xviii.  9, 
10.  Here  it  appears  that  Shalmanezer  came  and 
besieged  Samaria,  not  Sargon.  So  it  would  seem ; 
but  the  answer  is  very  simple.  Shalmanezer  indeed 
commences  the  siege,  but  he  does  not  live  to  take 


96  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 


the  city  :  this  his  son  Sargon  accomplishes.  There 
is  a  very  long  rest  between  verse  9  and  10,  and  it  is 
also  shown  in  2  Kings  xvii.  5  and  6.  "  The  King  of 
Assyria,"  in  verse  5,  need  not  necessarily  be  "  the 
King  of  Assyria  "  in  verse  6. 

Colonel  Taylor's  cylinder  contains  a  complete 
account  of  the  wars  of  SENNACHERIB,  and  the 
invasion  of  Judah  and  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  in  the 
days  of  Hezekiah,  who  is  mentioned  by  name.  The 
whole  story  is  a  wonderful  confirmation  of  2  Kings 
xviii.  And  one  cannot  help  thinking  that  the 
omission  is  even  more  remarkable  than  what  it  con- 
tains. For  Senacherib  describes  every  part  of  the 
war,  he  brags  of  every  victory  gained,  however 
paltry,  every  town  or  village  taken,  however  small, 
he  says  he  besieged  Jerusalem,  "and  I  shut  up 
Hezekiah  like  a  bird  in  a  cage  "  ;  but  there  is  one 
remarkable  omission.  He  does  not  say  that  he  took 
Jerusalem !  Had  he  done  so  the  record  of  the 
capture  of  the  great  city  would  have  occupied  a  very 
prominent  place  on  this  cylinder.  But  he  does  not 
say  that  he  took  it ;  indeed  the  whole  record  seems 
to  end  most  abruptly,  and  one  would  hardly  know 
how  to  account  for  it,  but  by  the  sequel  of  that 
remarkable  siege  as  found  in  the  Bible.  We  read  in 
2  Kings  xix.  that  in  one  night  the  greater  part  of  the 
besieging  host  were  slain  by  an  angel  of  God,  and 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  97 


the  rest  escaped  never  again  to  molest  Judah  or 
Jerusalem.  This  part  Sennacherib  naturally  leaves 
out,  but  his  silence  is  wonderfully  eloquent  I 

A  picture   of  REHOBOAM,  KING  OF   JUDAH, 

may  be  seen  in  the  great  Temple  of  Thebes,  where 
the  siege  of  Palestine  in  the  days  of  Shishak  is 
recorded.  Another  wonderful  confirmation  of 
Scripture.  See  1  Kings  xiv.  25-28,  and  2  Chron. 
xii.  9. 

THE  MOABITE  STONE.  This  ancient  monument 
was  discovered  in  1869  in  the  land  of  Moab,  and  was 
set  up  by  a  king  called  Mesha,  who  records  his 
victories  over  his  enemies.  He  speaks  of  Omri,  king 
of  Israel,  of  "  men  of  Gad,"  of  Edom  as  combining 
with  Israel.  One  has  but  to  read  2  Kings  iii.  5,  9,  to 
see  how  remarkably  this  Moabite  Stone  confirms  the 
truth  of  God's  JWord.  Nor  should  it  be  forgotten 
that  we  have  here  a  confirmation  from  an  enemy  of 
Israel.  His  testimony  is,  therefore,  of  exceptional 
value. 

DELUGE  TABLETS.  For  many  years  infidels 
were  accustomed  to  speak  of  the  flood  as  though, 
beyond  question,  it  were  a  myth  and  fable,  hardly 
even  needing  a  word  of  proof.  Recent  discoveries 
have,  however,  brought  to  light  the  fact  that  nearly 
all  ancient  nations  had  traditions  of  a  flood  in  which 
all  had  perished  except  one  family,  who  were  saved 
in  a  ship  of  some  kind. 


98  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 


These  tablets  give  us  the  Chaldean  version  of 
that  event,  and  date  about  seven  centuries  B.C. 
They  speak  of  the  anger  of  the  gods,  who  determined 
to  send  a  flood.  They  describe  the  storm,  how  some 
are  saved  in  a  ship,  the  stranding  upon  a  mountain, 
a  dove  and  a  swallow  sent  out,  a  raven,  and  then  how 
they  went  out  and  sacrificed. 

On  the  BLACK  OBELISK  OF  SHALMANEZER 
II.  Jehu,  king  of  Israel,  is  mentioned  as  having 
paid  tribute  to  the  king.  Benhaded  is  also  mentioned 
and  Hazael.  These  were  contemporaries  of  Jehu. 

Jehu  is  shown,  bowing  to  the  ground  and 
presenting  his  offerings  of  gold  and  silver  and  other 
precious  things. 

WOOD  TABLETS  are  the  schoolboys'  slates, 
and  are  called  "  writing  tables "  in  Luke  i.  63. 
Probably  the  very  kind  used  all  over  the  East  to-day. 

REED  PENS.  These  are  the  only  pens  used  in 
the  East.  They  are  cut  with  a  knife.  These  were 
also  the  pens  used  in  Bible  times. 

INKHORNS  are  mentioned  in  Ezek.  ix.  2,  3, 11. 
The  case  contains  the  pens,  and  the  small  inkpot  the 
ink.  They  are  still  worn  in  the  girdles  of  scribes, 
just  as  they  were  in  Ezekiel's  day. 


PALESTINE  AXD  THE  BIBLE.  99 


The  Ancient  Hebrew  Alphabet  was  not  liKe  the 
modern  square  characters.  Those  in  use  before  the 
Babylonian  captivity  were  the  Phrenician.  We  can 
tell  what  they  were  from  the  very  important 
"SILOAM  INSCRIPTION"  giving  us  the  very 
characters  in  which  Isaiah  wrote  his  glorious 
prophecies.  That  inscription  was  made  by  Heze- 
kiah's  workmen. 

SOME  PHOENICIAN  MASONS'  MARKS  were 
found  80  feet  below  the  surface  of  the  present  city 
of  Jerusalem,  upon  the  foundation  stones  of  the 
Temple  wall,  giving  us  a  very  remarkable 
confirmation  of  Scripture ;  for  we  read  in  1  Kings 
v.  18,  that  Hiram's  builders  helped  in  preparing  these 
stones. 

HIEROGLYPHS.  The  ancient  language  of 
Egypt.  This  latter  was  only  the  language  of  the 
priests,  not  the  common  language.  Is  it  not  curious 
that  at  all  times  down  to  the  present  there  should 
always  have  been  in  Eastern  coutries  an  educated 
language  and  a  common  language  ?  This  is  probably 
referred  to  in  Is.  viii.  1,  for  "  the  pen  of  a  man  " 
read  "  the  pen  of  common  characters."  (See  margin 
of  Kevised  Version.) 


CHAPTER  XIII. 
The    Tabernacle. 

T70K  forty  years  the  Israelites  lived  in  tents  in  the 
wilderness.  Many  were  born,  lived,  and  died  in 
tents — just  like  the  Bedouins  of  to-day.  This  wild 
roving  life  accounts  for  the  want,  not  only  of  change, 
but  of  improvement  among  these  dwellers  of  tents. 
Arts  and  industries  can  never  flourish  while  the 
people  have  no  settled  life  in  cities  and  villages. 

Now,  there  roust  have  been  something  altogether 
exceptional,  nay  unique,  in  the  case  of  the  Israelites 
in  the  wilderness,  for  it  was  during  the  forty  years 
wanderings  that  those  wonderful  laws  were  produced 
which  are  the  wonder  and  the  model  of  all  laws 
amongst  civilised  nations. 

Picture  to  yourself  THE  ENCAMPMENT  OF 
THE  ISRAELITES.  It  is  the  best  commentary  to 
Numb  ii.  The  Israelites  lived  with  perfect  order 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  101 


during  their  forty  years  march  through  the  wilder- 
ness. There  was  a  division  between  the  tents  of 
each  tribe.  They  clustered  round  their  own  ensigns 
or  banners.  At  the  head  of  each  tribe  was  a  captain. 
Then  came  the  tents  of  the  Levites  ;  again,  nearer 
the  centre,  were  the  tents  of  the  great  men,  like 
Moses  and  Aaron.  In  the  centre  stood  the  taber- 
nacle of  the  congregation. 

A  description  of  the  perfect  order  of  march  is 
given  us  in  Numb.  x.  14-29.  This  encampment 
affords  a  great  proof  of  the  divine  origin  of  the 
Pentateuch.  The  Israelites  left  Egypt  a  nation  of 
slaves,  who  would  not  be  in  possession  of  any  degree 
of  culture  or  education.  Within  a  year  of  their 
leaving  Egypt,  we  find  them  in  a  wilderness,  and  yet 
with  perfect  order,  a  perfect  government,  a  code  of 
laws  as  perfect  as  any  the  world  has  produced,  and 
with  a  perfect  religion.  How  can  we  account  for 
this  sudden  change  from  barbarism  to  civilization  ? 
Jt  has  taken  England  centuries  to  emerge  from  a 
state  of  barbarism  to  its  present  state  of  civilization, 
but  in  the  case  of  Israel  "  a  nation  was  born  in  a 
day."  Surely,  those  laws  could  not  have  been  of 
human  origin. 

Just  as  the  centre  of  every  encampment  was 
set  apart  for  the  chief's  tent,  so  the  centre  of  the 
samp  of  Israel  was  set  apart  for  Israel's  Chief — God 


102  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

Himself.  A  large  oblong  space  was  separated  from 
the  rest  of  the  encampment  by  screens  150  feet  long, 
75  feet  wide.  Within  this  enclosure  stood  God's 
dwelling-place,  in  the  midst  of  his  people-  The 
tabernacle  consisted  of  a  framework  composed 
of  Shittim  wood,  probably  the  timber  of  the 
wild  acacia,  which  grows  in  the  wilderness.  The 
boards,  overlaid  with  gold,  were  placed  in  an  upright 
position,  the  lower  part  fixed  in  sockets  of  silver. 
Long  bars  of  Shittim  wood,  also  overlaid  with  gold, 
passed  through  the  rings.  These  kept  the  boards 
together.  Over  this  framework  of  wood  were  placed 
four  curtains ;  the  first,  or  inmost  one,  of  fine 
embroidered  linen,  containing  figures  of  Cherubim 
in  purple,  scarlet,  and  blue ;  the  second  was  a 
woollen  one  of  goat's  hair ;  the  third  of  ram's  skins 
dyed  red  ;  the  fourth  of  badgers'  skins. 

The  tabernacle  was  divided  into  two  parts.  The 
first  was  called  the  holy  place.  It  was  30  feet  in 
length,  15  feet  broad,  and  15  feet  high.  Beautiful 
curtains  closed  the  front.  It  contained  three  things 
—the  golden  altar  of  incense,  the  table  of  shew- 
bread,  and  the  seven-branched  candlestick.  Here  a 
priest  entered  daily  to  burn  incense.  It  was  in  the 
Holy  Place  in  the  temple  Zacharias  had  a  vision  of 
the  angel  (Luke  i.  9).  Still  more  magnificent 
curtains  divided  the  Holy  Place  from  the  Holy  of 
Holies,  which  was  only  fifteen  feet  long.  The  High 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 


103 


Priest  only  was  allowed  to  enter  here,  and  only  on 
the  Day  of  Atonement.  It  contained  the  Ark  of  the 
Covenant. 

The  outer  court  contained  the  altar  of  burnt 
offerings,  and  the  laver  made  of  the  metal  mirrors, 
given  by  the  women  of  Israel. 

The  Tabernacle  is  minutely  described  in  Exodus 
xxv.,  xxvii.,  and  xxxvii.  The  Tabernacle,  'its 
furniture  and  services,  should  be  studied  by  all  who 
wish  to  grasp  by  means  of  helpful  illustrations,  the 
teaching  of  the  Gospel.  This  is  too  wide  a  subject 
for  discussion  in  a  small  handbook,  but  many  good 
books  exist  which  should  be  well  studied. 


CHAPTBB  THE  LAST. 
Jewish    Missions. 

U  JTjHE  Jew  has  had  his  day,  and  is  played  out; 
nothing  more  to  expect  from  him."  "Jewish 
Missions  are  a  failure."  In  these  two  sentences  may 
be  summed  up  all  the  adverse  criticism  levelled 
against  Jewish  Missions ;  and  both  are  not  only 
wrong,  but  absurd.  If  the  Jew  "  has  had  his  day, 
and  is  played  out,"  then  why  has  he  been  allowed  to 
remain  in  a  most  miraculous  manner  a  separate 
people,  scattered  everywhere,  yet  not  absorbed  among 
other  nations? 

When  nations  are  played  out  they  become 
extinct.  When  a  watch  is  played  out,  it  stops. 
The  Jews  show  a  most  remarkable  vitality  in  every 
sphere  of  life  and  thought.  They  are  distinguished 
in  every  profession,  they  take  a  prominent  part  in 
politics,  finance,  literature  and  music.  Is  it  not  then 
absurd,  in  the  face  of  the  very  conviction  of  our 
eyes,  to  say  the  Jews  are  "  played  out?  " 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  105 

But  some  apply  this  phrase  to  religion  only,  and 
wish  to  imply  that  God  gave  the  offer  of  salvation, 
first  to  the  Jews,  which  they,  having  rejected,  have 
now  lost  all  chance.  But  is  there  any  passage  of 
Scripture  to  prove  this  ?  How  many  statements 
about  the  Jews  are  made  with  the  greatest  assurance, 
but  which  are  absolutely  wrong.  The  Jews  were 
condemned  without  a  hearing  by  a  spurious  Christ- 
ianity in  the  dark  ages  of  the  Church  ;  and  although 
we  have  reformed  many  of  our  doctrines  and  Church 
practices,  and  have  brought  them  into  line  with 
primitive  and  Apostolic  Christianity,  yet  we  have 
retained  to  a  very  great  extent  the  bitter  Jew-hatred 
of  the  Middle  Ages. 

To  take  one  illustration  only.  Note  the  mis- 
leading titles  which  are  placed  at  the  head  of  each. 
chapter  of  the  Bible,  more  particularly  in  the 
Prophets.  In  one  chapter  the  Jews  are  denounced 
for  their  sins,  and  threatened  with  severe  punish- 
ments. The  titles  rightly  attribute  this  to  the  Jews. 
In  another  chapter  God  is  promising  great  blessings 
to  the  same  people,  to  the  same  place.  The 
expressions,  Judah  and  Israel,  Zion  and  Jerusalem, 
occur  in  both  cases.  But  our  titles  refer  these 
blessings,  not  to  the  Jew,  but  to  "  the  Church." 
Now,  can  an  interpretation  be  right  which  applies 
"Judah  and  Jerusalem"  to  the  Jews  in  one  place, 
and  to  "  the  Church  "  in  another.  If  "  Judah  and 


106  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

Jerusalem  "  apply  to  the  Church  when  blessings  are 
mentioned,  then  surely  they  should  apply  to  the 
Church  when  curses  are  named.  But  this  would 
reduce  the  exposition  of  Scripture  to  an  absurdity. 
Now  if  the  curses  and  denunciations  cannot  be 
interpreted  of "  the  Church,"  but  can  only  refer  to 
the  Jews,  then  surely  the  promises  of  blessing  and 
prosperity  can  also  only  be  referred  to  the  Jews.  If 
Judah  and  Israel,  Zion  and  Jerusalem,  apply  to  th* 
Jews  where  the  curses  are  pronounced,  then  surely 
they  must  apply  to  the  Jews  where  blessings  and 
mercies  are  promised. 

When  we  are  clear  on  this  point,  and  turn  ta 
the  Sacred  Scriptures,  we  find  that  God  says  in  Jer., 
"  Though  I  make  a  full  end  of  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth,  yet  will  I  not  make  a  lull  end  of  thee."  St. 
Paul  predicted  a  time  when  "  all  Israel  should  be 
saved,"  and  Zechariah  says,  "  they  shall  look  on  Him 
whom  they  have  pierced  and  mourn."  "  Hath  God 
cast  away  His  people  ?  God  forbid,"  says  St.  Paul. 
And  we  have  the  distinct  command  of  our  Lord  to 
"  begin  at  Jerusalem  "  (Luke  xxiv.  47).  Like  other 
passages,  it  has  been  wrested  from  its  true  meaning. 
If  we  are  at  all  in  doubt  as  to  its  true  meaning,  we 
have  but  to  turn  to  the  men  who  were  likely  to  be 
the  best  judges,  namely,  the  Apostles. 

In  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  we  find  that  they 
always  went  to  the  Jew  first  in  every  city  they  came 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  107 


to,  showing  by  this  very  act  that  they  understood 
our  Lord  to  mean  they  were  always  to  go  to  the 
Jew  first  wherever  they  came  to. 

Our  Lord  would  surely  not  have  given  so  direct 
a  command,  nor  would  the  Apostles  have  obeyed  it 
so  faithfully,  if  they  had  believed  that  the  Jews 
were  "played  out." 

The  annals  also  of  Jewish  Missions  confirm  this. 

Jewish  Missions  are  not  very  popular,  and  do 
not  appeal  to  a  very  large  body  of  Christians  ;  the 
support  received  is  therefore  small.  Yet  God  has 
blessed  the  work  beyond  all  expectation ;  and  in 
any  comparison  between  Jewish  missionary 
enterprise  and  work  in  heathen  lands,  Jewish 
missions  certainly  take  the  first  place  so  far  as 
results  go.  Many  may  be  prepared  to  question  this. 
The  following  facts  I  would  venture  to  commend  to 
our  readers  : — 

1.  There   are   to-day  about  300  clergymen  of 
the   Church   of  England   who   are   descendants    of 
Abraham. 

2.  The  Jews  have  given  to  the  Church  three  of 
her  Bishops. 

3.  Christian  Jews  are  providing  some  hundreds 
of  preachers  on  Nonconformist  pulpits  at  home  and 
abroad. 


io8  PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE. 

4.  Some   chairs   of  the  great  Universities  in 
England    and   abroad   are    occupied    by    Christian 
Jews,   who   are   thus   helping    to   train   our  future 
theologians  and  clergymen. 

5.  They    have    produced   many   distinguished 
authors  like  Edersheim  and  Saphir,  Neander  and  Dr. 
Christlieb,     musicians     like     Felix     Mendelssohn, 
financiers  like    Sir   Moses    Salvador,    lawyers    like 
Lord  Herschell. 

6.  They   have   supplied   the  ranks   of    nearly 
every  Missionary  Society  with  some  of  their  most 
faithful  and  devoted  workers. 

7.  They  gave  the  Chinese  a  translation  of  the 
Old  Testament  in  the  Mandarin  dialect,  and  for  the 
Mongolians  one  who  was  able  to  translate  and  revise 
parts  of  God's  Word.      They  gave  to  the  Afghans 
t^eir  translation  of  the  Bible. 

8.  And  the  rank  and  file  of   Jewish  converts, 
on   the  authority   of    Professor  de  la  Koi,  number 
about  200,000. 

Can  any  mission  to  the  heathen,  nay,  can  all 
the  missions  of  the  world  put  together,  give  such  a 
record !  These  facts  must  not  be  misunderstood. 
"We  are  not  attempting  to  run  down  other  missions 
and  other  societies.  These  facts  must  be  plainly 
stated  because  Jewish  missions  have  been  run  down  ; 


PALESTINE  AND  THE  BIBLE.  109 

it  is  therefore  necessary  to  draw  a  comparative  state- 
ment, and  show  how  unfounded  are  the  attacks 
made  against  Jewish  missions. 

The  author  hopes  every  reader  of  this  little  book 
will  become  a  warm  friend  and  supporter  of  Jewish 
missions.  The  London  Society  for  Promoting 
Christianity  among  the  Jews,  the  Society  with  which 
he  has  the  honour  to  be  connected,  is  the  oldest  and 
largest,  with  a  staff  of  200  workers,  stationed  in 
about  54  missionary  centres,  and  doing  a  glorious 
work  for  the  ingathering  of  Israel. 

The  author  gratefully  acknowledges  his  great 
indebtedness  to  this  good  Society's  missionaries,  who 
were  the  means  of  leading  into  the  fold  of  Christ  his 
own  father  and  mother;  the  former  in  Egypt,  the 
latter  in  Jerusalem. 

Jesus  Christ  took  not  on  Him  the  nature  of 
angels,  but  the  seed  of  Abraham.  Christ  was  a 
Jew.  Do  you  believe  this  ?  Then  we  claim  your 
love  and  sympathy  on  behalf  of  our  Lord's  own 
brethren. 

"Go,  tell  my  brethren" 


J.  A.  THOMPSON  &  CO.  Ltd 


.,       ., 

Publishers  and  Printers, 


Liverpool. 

OFFICE— 


CHURCH  HOUSE,  (sg«™)  1,  South  Johq  Street. 

DEPOTS- 

CENTRAL  qALL  BUILDINGS,  Reqshaw  Street,  ««,  « 

43,  Great  Charlotte  Street. 

PRINTING  WORKS- 

CLARENDON  BUILDINGS,  11,  South  John  Street. 
Author's    Works    Printed    and    Published. 

—  ESTIMATES    GIVEN.— 

Plain  Words  on  Vexed  Questions— 

By  Rev.  J.  Gough  McCormick,  M.A.,  Vicar  of  St    Paul  s,  Prince's 
Park.     72  pages.     Crown  8vo.     Price  6d.,  Cloth  Is. 

Half  Hours  with  Pilgrim's  Progress- 

By   the   Rev.   Canon  Burbidge.     436  pages.     Demy   STO.      Cloth, 
gilt,  5s  ;  for  3s.  6cL  nett.     Post  free,  3s.  9d. 

Practical  Questions  for  the  Present  Day— 

By  William  C.  Procter.     Boards,  64  pages.     Royal  16aio.     Price  6d. 

Some  New  Year  Resolutions  and  How  to  Keep  Them— 

By  the  same  Author.     72  pages.     Crovrn  8vo.     Paper  covers,  Price 
6d.    Cloth  Is. 

Holy  Scripture  and  the  Temperance  Question- 

By  the  same  Author.     Crown  STO.     56  pages.     Price  3d. 


AUTHORS'     WORKS    (continued). 


Promises  of  God 

F>y  the  same  Atithor.     Crown  8vo.     48  pages.     Price  6d. 

The  Story  of  some  of  our  Favourite  Hymns— 

}\v  the  same  Author.     Crown  8vo.     52  pages.     Price  6d. 

Spiritual  Life  ;  or,  The  Awakening  and  Deepening  of  Spiritual  Life. 
the   Ttev.  H.  (T.  C.  Motile,  D.D.  ;     Archdeacon   Madden,  and 
\V.  ('.  Procter.     Boards  6cl. 

The  Bible  and  Science— 

A  paper   read   at   the  Liverpool  Diocesan  Conference  by  Rev.    T, 

'-nx   Lea.     Price  2<1. 


Why  should  we  believe  the  Bible  ?     or  Reasons  for  Faith  — 
}'y  Archdeacon  Taylor,  D.D.     Crown  8vo.     Price,  cloth,     Is.    6d. 
er  Is. 


J.  A.   THOMPSON   &  CO.,   Ltd., 

Printers  and   Publishers, 
I  &   11 ,  South  John  Street, 
LIVERPOOL. 


135 


l 


D 


A     000108568 


TpooJ, 

] 


