Wren apitw a 





fe ROO a Ce > 
_ Number Sch. Ro Srey 







A 


LIBRARY ; 3 


Trinity College 


ed 





A ; see 
tes ee 

DB eggasy, 
~ he ee 
Bu + 












meee 














REO 


















8B yy £¢ 
ths She 
ras seNees ee 





















Ts @. ST 
Natalee, é : 
SO eae 


7 
% 











Aaa: 
ne 
> ae 
ae 
7 


2 eee 
nt 









v 






Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2022 with funding from 
Duke University Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/paulservantofjesO1meye 





ety vant of Jesus Christ. 


BY 


er. MEYER, Bh, 


Re AUTHOR OF xh = 


en Or, The Obidizncs of Faith”; “eoazee A PPince with C 
JOSEPH”; “MOSES”; “Josxua”. ‘ “EuFAn”; “Davin” ; 
| “JEREMIAH” ; ; Etc, Etc. 


JL 88 


SS 


RNOSTER BUI LDINGS, BiG 
may be ordered ew any Bookseller. 








y a4 





—Ps74 Me 
a PREEACE: 


asi F the many Sacred Biographies I have written, 
this has been by far the most interesting. 

“For days and weeks together I have lived in 
the company of this glorious man; but only to feel 
that he transcended all one’s loftiest conceptions. 
Like some great mountain-range, the more his 
* character is traversed, the more it grows on the 
imagination. 

In these chapters I have used the Epistles more 
largely than the Acts, as I desired to describe his 
life from within, and as it appeared to himself. 
In many cases, therefore, the historical has been 
subordinated to the auto-biographical. 


I have taken advantage of some of the latest 
books which have dealt with this subject; but for 
a the most part the following pages contain the 

4 essence of years of my own thinking and preach- 

| 





ing. Such as they are, I send them forth, trusting 
_ that they may incite many to follow Paul as he 
| followed Christ; and to yield themselves, as he did, 
i) fo God, 


= ae 7h, tregir. 
$12e°¢ 


“CHRONOLOGY OF THE LIFE OF 


AS GIVEN BY ALFORD. 


_ First JOURNEY TO JERUSALEM . 
_ First Missionary JOURNEY 
32 | GREAT MEETING AT JERUSALEM 


: = MISSIONARY JOURNEY . 








CONTENTS. 


Sa 


PRE-NATAL GRACE é s 
“WHEN I WAS A CHILD” 3 : 
SEPARATED FROM THE BIRTH 

“THy MARTYR STEPHEN” 


A LIGHT FROM HEAVEN : — 


THE INNER REVELATION OF CHRIST . bie 


THE EMERGENCE OF THE LIFE-PURPOSE 
ALWAYS LED IN TRIUMPH is - 
THE APOSTLE OF THE GENTILES 
“FOURTEEN YEARS AGO” 

THE CONFLICT OF PAUL’S LIFE . 

A LESSON OF GUIDANCE 

“VE PHILIPPIANS” j 

FROM PHILIPPI TO ATHENS 

“IN WEAKNESS AND FEAR” - 
MORE THAN A CONQUEROR - : 
GATHERING CLOUDS. : s 
THE FURTHERANCE OF THE GOSPEL 
“MorE ABUNDANTLY THAN THEY ALL” 
“In A STRAIT BETWIXT Two” 


“How LarGe LETTERS” 2 5 


65 





— ie 


THE STONING OF STEPHEN. 

Pav.’s Escape FRoM DAMASCUS, 
HEALING THE CRIPPLE AT LyYSTRA. 
PAUL PREACHING AT ATHENS. 


PAUL BEFORE AGRIPPA. 


SHIPWRECK OF PAUL AT MELITA. ; 
i, MET BY THE BRETHREN AT APII F OF 
‘PAUL IN HIs OWN HirkeD House at RoME. 








A SERVANT OF JESUS CHRIST. 
é 


Hre-natal Grace. 
(1 TrwoTHy i. 14.) 


A city throned upon the height behold, 
; Wherein no foot of man as yet has trod; 
The City of man’s Life fulfilled in God— 
Bathed all in light, with open gates of gold.” 
PHILLIPS BROOKS, 


HE source of a stream must be sought, not where it 
arises in some green glen among the hills, making a 
tiny tarn of clear water, where the mountain sheep 


evaporation, or in the clouds that condense against the 
old slopes of the hills. So with the life of God within us. 
n its earlier stages we are apt to suppose that it originated 


But as we review it from the eminence of the years, we 
a discover that we chose because we were chosen; that we 


epulchral vault, crying, “‘Come forth!” All mature piety 
-extols the grace of God—that unmerited love, which each 
man thinks was magnified most abundantly in his own 
case. “By the grace of God, I am what I am,” is a con- 

- fession a which i is elicited from every man as he reaches the 






















10 Pre-natal Grace. 


crest of the hill, and looks back on the cities of the plain 
from which he has escaped. Pere 
Paul is very emphatic in his acknowledge * age 
pre-natal grace. He loves to trace back all the good that — 
was in his heart and life to a Love that was set on him — 
before the mountains were brought forth, or ever God had c 2 3 
formed the earth and the world. In the silence of eternity — 
God’s delights had already been with him as a son of man. 


I. ForEKNown.—“ Known unto God,” said the grave, 
linen-vested James, “are all his works from the beginning 
of the world”; and if his works were foreknown, how much 
more his saints! Again the evangelist tells us, that Jesus 
knew from the beginning who they were that believed not, . 
and who should betray Him; surely then He must — = 
known from the beginning who the believers were, and who — ee 
should become his devoted lovers and apostles. Before oe 
time began it was known in heaven who would be attracted” om has 
by the love of the cross to trust, love, and obey; who 
would be drawn to the dying and risen Son of God; who — sae" 
would have eternal affinity with Him in death and resurrec- Stacy 
tion: and of these it is said, ‘Whom He did foreknow, He - 
also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his 
Son, that He might be the firstborn among many brethren” 
(Rom. viii. 29). 

It is not a complete solution of the mystery of Predestin- 
ation, and only removes it one stage further back; yet the  — 
suggestion casts a gleaming torch-light into the darkness of 
the impenetrable abyss when we are told that God included 
in the eternal purposes of life all those whom He foresaw 
would be attracted to an indissoluble union of faith and 
life with his Son. All who come to Jesus show that they 
were included in the Father’s gift to his Son. The Father 
gave Him all those who in the fulness of times should 
come. But why some have an affinity with the Man of the 
cross, and not others; why some come and others stay 


"heal & liters 


— “ Greated unts Good Works.” II 


away; why some sheep hear the Shepherd’s voice and 
follow, while others persist in straying, is one of those 
secrets which are not revealed as yet to the children of 
men. 

But as the eye of omniscient love glanced down the 
ages, it must have lighted with peculiar pleasure on the 
eager, devoted soul of Paul. God foreknew and pre- 
destinated him. The divine purpose, descrying his capacity 
for the best, selected him for it, and it for him. And there 
is a gleam of holy rapture on his face when, reviewing the 
process of those eternal movements of love from his 
Roman prison, he writes, “ Blessed be the God and Father 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with every 
spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ; even as He 
chose us in Him before the foundation of the world” 
(Eph. i. 3, 4, R.V.). 


II. CREATED IN CHRIST JESUS UNTO GooD WorKs.— 
He has been showing the place of works in the gospel 
scheme, insisting, with unusual emphasis and sharpness of 
outline, that neither our salvation, nor our faith, is matter 
for boasting. “It is the gift of God; not of works,” he cries, 
and then proceeds to the magnificent assertion, ‘We are 
his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, 
which God afore prepared that we should walk in them” 
(Eph. ii. 10, R.v.). 

The Greek word translated workmanship is foem. We 
are God’s Poem. And as we review our life after the 
lapse of years—save where we have wilfully violated the 
obvious intention of our Creator—we shall perceive that 
there has been an underlying plan and conception, the 
development of which has proceeded in ever-widening 
circles. “I girded thee, though thou hast not known 
Me,” is as true of our life as of Cyrus, who was raised 
up to be the destroyer of Babylon, the liberator of the 
people God. God has a distinct thought in each 







12 Pre-natal Grace. 


human life. He creates with a purpose. As a great oet 
may adopt various kinds of rhythm and measure, such as 
may suit his conception, but has nevertheless a purpose — 
in each poem that issues from his creative fancy, so God — 
means something as He sends each life forth from the — 


silence of eternity; and if we do not hinder Him He ~ 


superintends the embodiment of that conception, fa 
our entire life, from the cradle to the grave, a symmetrical tid 


and homogeneous poem, dominated by one thought, ¥ 
though wrought out with an infinite variety of illustration ss 
and detail. OR 

In a poem the expression is adapted to the conception. 
A rugged strain befits strong and terse thinking, whilst 
more flowing and mellifluous measures are better adapted 
to tender and plaintive musings. Possibly we can thus 
account for the differences which characterize human lives. Ez 
Yonder is the fragment of a great epic, there the lyric or — 
dramatic, here the sonnet or elegy. Your life is smooth ~~ 
and flowing, or broken over stones of sorrow, or headlong 
in its impetuosity, because God’s thought must be mated — 
to the metre most suited for its expression. Paul’s career 
reminds us of the Odyssey, the J/iad, the Paradise Lost, 
or the mighty conception of Dante. It is ocean-like in 
depth, variety, and change. As in an oratorio, so here, 
the storehouse of expression is ransacked to convey the 
deep and varied transition of the Creators thought, 
emotion, and passion. 

The poet's art demands that no touch of description or 
narrative, in the earlier lines, should be fruitless or redundant. 
To allow the canvas to be covered by figures or objects 
which do not conduce to the main intention of a picture 
is in the highest degree reprehensible. Watch well the 
earlier chapters of a great tale, and you will notice that 
the touches and descriptions of every paragraph prepare 
for the ultimate unfolding of the story, and lead up to the 
climax to which the closing pages hurry. 


Raised in Christ's Resurrection. 13 
* oem So in human life. God knows the works which are 
____ prepared, that we should walk in them. And as He has 

created them for us, so He has created us for them, in 

Christ Jesus. The year of our birth, the place and scenes 
_ of early childhood, our parentage and education, the 

influences that have moulded us, whether of books or 

art, or the conditions of daily toil, have been planned with 

an unerring wisdom and predisposition, that through us 

might be made known unto the principalities and powers 
eo in the heavenly places the manifold wisdom of God, 
‘a according to the eternal purpose which He purposed in 
Christ Jesus our Lord; in whom we have boldness and 
access in confidence, through our faith in Him. 

It was, therefore, a matter of constant congratulation to 
the Apostle that he had not to cut or carve his way, but 
simply to discover the track which God had prepared for 
his steps from of old; and when he found it, it would not 
only be consistent with his place in the mystical Body of 
Christ, but be the very pathway for which his character 
and gifts were most adapted. 








III. Raisep IN Carist’s RESURRECTION. — Paul’s 
education differed widely from that of his fellow-apostles. 
They had grown up with Christ. It is likely that the 
Master was familiar with many.of them before He called 
them. No one has travelled down from the highland 
village of Nazareth to the blue waters of Galilee without 

realizing how easy and constant the intercourse must have 
been during those thirty silent years. They grew gradually 
therefore into the mysteries of his death and resurrection. 
They knew Jesus the man before they recognized Christ 
the Messiah. From the Jordan valley they had been 
ascending the hill of the Lord, and were therefore less 
amazed when the sharp steep spur of Calvary suddenly 
confronted them, surmounted by the peaks of resurrection 
and ascension rising in peerless beauty beyond. 


14 Pre-natal Grace. 










Maa in his risen glory. He knew perfectly, pes was 
common talk when he was resident in J 

Jesus had been crucified under Pontius Pilate ; but n 
he beheld Him risen, living, speaking, his face § 
with light above the brightness of the sun. It was a % 
spectacle that could never be effaced from his memory. 
Besides answering all his difficulties, it gave an aspect to 
his faith, which it never lost. The “yea rather, whois 
risen again,” of Romans viii. is very significant. He imakoe ‘ 
to think his way back from the ascension and reoeaeanes cos 





far-away scenes of the Lord’s nativity and early years.  —— 

But more than this, Paul had a very vivid belief in the 
identification of all who believe with the risen Lord,and 
that from the moment of his resurrection. He held and = 
taught, that all the members of the mystical body shared 
in the experiences and exploits of their Head. What os 4 
happened to Him happened to them also, and to each 
of them. There was no single believer, therefore, that _ 
could not avow as his own all that had befallen Jesus, _ 
though at the time he might have been dead in trespasses 
and sins, or had not begun to exist. 

The apostle never allowed his views of personal union 
with the Saviour to clash with his presentation of the E 
unique character of that death, by virtue of which He did 

oe 





for men what no one man, nor all men together, could have 
done. He always taught that the death of the cross was a * 
propitiating sacrifice for the sins of the whole world—a _ 
sacrifice which stands alone in its sublime and unapproach- _- 
able glory. But he loved to dwell on that other and ne 
secondary aspect of the Saviour’s death, by virtue of which, 
in the divine intention, all who believe are reckoned one P 
with Him in his death, resurrection, and ascension into 
the heavenlies. 

In one memorable text he connects these two aspects of 





the cross. ‘He loved me, He gave Himself for me,” is 
bound by a golden link to the words, “I have been 
crucified with Christ.” He is always clear in saying, 
“While we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.... 
We were reconciled to God by the death of his Son.” 
- But he is as clear and emphatic in saying, “‘ When we were 
dead through our trespasses, He quickened us together 
with Christ, and raised us up with Him, and made us to sit 
with Him in the heavenlies, in Christ.” ‘‘ That one died 
for all” was an undoubted article in his creed; but this 
was another, “Our old man was crucified with Him, that 
the body of sin might be done away, that we should no 
longer be in bondage to sin.” He loved to reckon that he 
had died with Christ, and to claim that he should daily 
recelve the power of his risen life. He longed to know 
Jesus Christ, and the power of his resurrection, being: 
quite prepared to taste the fellowship of his sufferings and 
to become conformed unto his death, if only he might day 
by day attain unto the resurrection from the dead (Phil. iii). 
This conception of his union with Christ in death and 
resurrection underlies the whole tenour of his appeals to 
a holy and consecrated life. “Ye were raised together 
with Christ, seek the things that are above. .. . Ye died, 
and your life is hid with Christ in God. . . . Christ, who 
is our life, shall be manifested” (Col. iii. 1-4). 
It was a radiant vision, and one of which the apostle 
never wearied. It was attributable to nothing less than the 
great love with which God had loved him, when he was a 
blasphemer and a persecutor, and injurious; living, as he 
confesses he did, in the lusts of his flesh, doing the desires 
of the flesh and of the mind, and by nature a child of 
wrath even as the rest (Eph. ii. 3).. For us too that vision 
waits; and in battling against the lusts of the flesh, the 
fascinations of the world, and the power of the devil, there 
is no position more fraught with the certainty of victory 
than this of our resurrection standing and privilege. When 


re 


















16 Pre-natal Grace. 


the world would cast the spell of its blandi: 
you, dare to answer the challenge by the a 
has no further jurisdiction over you, since you h 
from its territory and control, by virtue of ya = inic 
Him who, in that He died, died unto sin once, 
He liveth, liveth unto God. et 2 
Get up into the high mountains, believing € 
God, and view the everlasting love of your F; her : 
you in Jesus! Recount all that that love has brough 
you before you had any being! Is it likely to d dro} 
now because of any unworthiness it perce OC in 
thing appear in us which was not anticipated b y 
before taking us for his own possession sat ¢ ' 
counted the cost? Is there not comfort in kn : 
your keel is caught by a current which emanated from t 
purpose of Him who worketh all things after the ¢ 
his own will, and is bearing you towards his h 
the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and 
ledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgmen 
his ways past finding out! For of Him, and through B 
and to Him are all things. To Him be the glory for ey 
Amen.” 


II. 
“When I tras a Child.” 


(PHILIPPIANS ili, I-11.) 


‘*T was bred 
In the great city, pent mid cloisters dim, 
| And saw naught lovely save the sky and stars.” 
: COLERIDGE, 


| OT far from the easternmost bay of the Mediterranean, 
in the midst of a rich and luxuriant plain, stood 
Tarsus, “no mean city,” as one of its greatest sons tells 
us, but at the time of which we write a thriving emporium of 
trade, and a focus of intellectual and religious activity. On 
the edge of the plain, to the north, rose the mighty Taurus 
mountains, with their peaks of eternal snow, feeding with 
perpetual freshness and fulness the river Cydnus, which, 
after pouring over a cataract of considerable size, passed 
through the midst of the town, and so to the sea. During 
the last part of its course it was navigable by the largest 
vessels, which brought the treasures of East and West to 
the wharves that lined either bank. Here were piled 
‘merchandise and commodities of every kind, brought to 
exchange for the cloth of goats’ hair for which the town 
was famous, and which was furnished by the flocks of goats 
that browsed on the lower slopes of the Taurus, tended by 
‘the hardy mountaineers. Tarsus also received the trade 
which poured through the Cilician Gates—a famous pass 
through the mountains, which led upwards from the coast 
to Central Asia Minor, to Phrygia and Lycaonia on one 
side, and to Cappadocia on the other. 
_ In the Jew quarter of this thriving city at the beginning 
of this era (perhaps about 4 4.D.), while Jesus was still an 
B 



















18 “Wiben F tuas a Chi 


infant in his mother’s arms at Nazareth, a 
who by his life and words was destined to” 
in all after time, and to give a new impul 
religious convictions. At his circumcision 
received a double name, that of Saul for his far 
that of Paul for the world of trade and municipal life. 
The stamp of the great city left an ineffaceable im 
on the growing lad, and in this his early years were w 
different from his Master's. Jesus was nurtured in a 


Paul was reared amid the busy streets and coat az 
of Tarsus, thronged with merchants, students, and sailors _ 
from all parts of the world. Unconsciously, as the lad 
grew he was being prepared to understand human life un 
every aspect, and to become habituated to the thoughts — 
and habits of the store, the camp, the arena, the temple. ; 
He became a man to whom nothing which touched humar 
life was foreign. He loved the stir of city life, and drew 
his metaphors from its keen interests. 

He came of pure Hebrew stock. “A Hebrew of (sprang 
from) the Hebrews.” On both sides his genealogy was 
pure. There was no Gentile admixture in his blood, no 
bar sinister in his descent. His father must have been a 
man of considerable position, or he would not have 
possessed the coveted birthright of Roman citizenship. 
Though living away from Palestine, he was not a Hellenist 
Jew; but as distinctly Hebrew as any that dwelt in the 
Holy City herself. Perhaps given to sternness with his 
children; or it might not have occurred to his son, in after 
years, to warn fathers against provoking their children to 
wrath, lest they should become discouraged. The mother, 
too, though we have no precise knowledge of her, must 
have been imbued with those lofty ideas of which we catch 
a trace in the mothers of Samuel, John the Baptist, and 
Jesus, Perhaps she died in his early childhood; or her son 





“@be Son of a “barisee,” 19 


would not in after years have so lovingly turned to the 
mother of Rufus for motherhood (Rom. xvi. 13). 

The Hebrew tongue was probably the ordinary speech 
of that home. This may in a measure account for the 
apostle’s intimate acquaintance with the Hebrew Scriptures, 
'which he so often quotes. It was in Hebrew that Jesus 

spoke to him on the road to Damascus, and in Hebrew 
that he addressed the crowds from the steps of the castle. 
To him Jerusalem was more than Athens or Rome; and 
Abraham, David, Isaiah, than the heroes of the Ziad. He 
counted it no small thing to have as ancestors those holy 
atriarchs and prophets who had followed God from 
tr, wrestled with the Angel at the Jabbok, and spoken to 
im at Horeb, face to face. His pulse beat quick as he 
‘emembered that he belonged to the chosen race, God’s 
} first- born, whose were the adoption, and the glory, and the 
; Dovenants, and the giving of the law, and the service of 
, God, and the promises. However much birth and wealth 
+ ignited before his eyes, he held himself to have been born 
(of a nobler ancestry, to belong to a higher aristocracy. 
From his tribe had sprung the first king of Israel, whose 
ame he was proud to bear. 
\{ fits carly education was very religious. “He was a 
Pharisee, and the son of a Pharisee.” In our day the 
word Pharisee is a synonym for religious pride and 
_ \hypocrisy; but we must never forget that in those old 
| Jewish days the Pharisee represented some of the noblest 
traditions of the Hebrew people. Amid the prevailing 
_ indifference the Pharisees stood for a strict religious life. 
‘As against the scepticism of the Sadducees, who believed 
, in neither spirit nor unseen world, the Pharisees held to the 
resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come. 
* Amid the lax morals of the time, which infected Jerusalem 
) almost as much as Rome, the Pharisee was austere in his 
| ideals, and holy in life. The texts on his phylacteries at 





ee 


least evidenced his devotion to Scripture ; the tithing of 





st 


7t 


TT TSE 


Teteren tt 


: 


tebe este 


> a eS ae "S" >@ sz 


Pt aaes. 
Ae. 


7187 


5 


in the unseen. 


~ 


, 


’ 


i 


tatious, but they were conspicuous 


Such was the father of the future aes ‘His early 


home was dominated by these austere and strong religious 


conceptions, and the boy imbibed them. According to the 
Straitest sect of his religion, he lived a Pharisee. He was 
proud that at the earliest possible moment he had been 
initiated into the rites and privileges of his religion, being 
“circumcised the eighth day.” As he heard of prosely 
entering the covenant of his fathers in mature life, he con: 
gratulated himself that as a child he had been admitt 
into covenant relationship with God. 
He was blameless in outward life. As ends 
righteousness which is of the law, so far as outward ob! 
servances went, he was blameless. There was no precep 
in the moral or ceremonial law which he would conscious! 
disregard ; and though the rabbis had built upon the law 
of Moses an immense superstructure of casuistical com 
ments and minute injunctions, he bravely set himself te 
master them. He would hold it a crime to enter into thq 
house of a Gentile; and on leaving market or street hd 
would carefully =e his hands of any defilement con 
tracted through touching what had been handled by the 
uncircumcised. He often thanked God that he was not ag 
other men. He was taught to fast twice in the week, and 
give tithes of all he possessed. He would observe the 
Sabbath and festivals with punctilious and awful care 
“ Brethren,” he said on one occasion, “I have lived, beford 
God, in all conscience until this day.” 
The ardent soul of the young Pharisee was bent on 
standing in the front rank of saints. Early in life he had 
made up his mind to win the prize of God’s favour. He 
could imagine nothing more desirable than this. When, — 
therefore, in answer to his inquiry of the recognized 


















* Gis Sensitive Nature. 21 


‘religious teachers, he learned that absolute obedience to 
the words of the rabbis was the only method of achieving 
the object on which his heart was set, he determined with 
‘unremitting devotion to scale the perilous heights, and 
tread the glacier slopes. Perhaps he encountered dis- 
appointment from the first. Possibly the cry, “‘O wretched 
man that I am,” began to formulate itself long before he 
became a Christian. Though outwardly his conduct was 
exemplary, his soul may have been rent by mortal strife. 
Often he saw and approved the better, and did the worse; 
often he lamented the infirmity of his motives and the 
infirmity of his will. Conscious of shortcomings which no 
jother eye discerned; yearning for power to spend one 
“absolutely holy day, which the rabbis taught, if lived by 
-any one Israelite, would secure the immediate advent of 


the Messiah. 
a fiis nature must have been warm-hearted and fervid from 
“the first. The tears that flowed at Miletus, the heart that 
was nearly broken on his last journey to Jerusalem, the 
pathetic appeals and allusions of his epistles, his capacity 
for ardent and constant friendships—were not the growth 
of his mature years; but were present, in germ at least, 
from his earliest childhood. He must always have been 
‘extremely sensitive to kindness ; and the contrast between 
his remembrance of his friends in after life, and his entire 
-reticence about his parents, and brothers or sisters, shows 
how bitter and final was that disowning which followed on 
his avowal of Christianity. There is more than appears 
on the surface in his remark, “For whom I suffered the 
loss of all things.” 

The zeal, which in after years led him to persecute the 
church, was already stirring in his heart. “I am a Jew,” 
he once said, ‘‘ born in Tarsus of Cilicia, instructed accord- 
ing to the strict manner of the law of our fathers, being 
zealous for God.” Indeed, he tells us that he advanced 
in the Jews’ religion beyond many of his own age among 


- intense nature. 


~ 


law. But it is not likely that he received the culture of — 
















22 “@hen F tas a Child.” 
his countrymen, being more exceedingly ze for | 
traditions of the fathers. He did not hold truth 

lently or superficially, or as a necessity of © 


nurture and education; but as a tincture which 1 : 
saturated and dyed the deepest emotions of a 


There was a sense in which he might have opal to 
himself some older words, and said, “The zeal of Thine ~ 
house hath eaten me up.” May there not also have bead as 
an undefined hope that his zeal might atone for some of 
those defects of which he was so painfully conscious, nd- 


flesh, a eis for God, but not according to knowledge. 
* > * * * * oe 

Asa “child he would learn by heart Deut. vi. 4-9; Psalms 
Cxiii.-cxviii. The days of his childhood must have passed oD 
thus: At five he began to read the Scriptures; at six he J 
‘ would be sent to the school of a neighbouring Rabbi ; ar 3 
ten he would be instructed in the oral law; at thirtech Sat 333 
he would become, by a kind of confirmation, a son of the ‘ : 


the Greek Philosophy, for which Tarsus was rather famous. _ 


This was rendered impossible by the : ee 
attitude of the Jews of the Dispersion to all the Gentile — 
community around them. Between the ages of thirteen 
and sixteen he would be sent to Jerusalem, to pursue 
his training for the office of a rabbi, to which he was 
evidently designated by the ambition of his father. It | 
was easy for the boy to do thus, as he had a married ~ 
sister in Jerusalem with whom he could lodge during his — 
attendance on the classes of the illustrious Gamaliel “I 
was brought up in this city,” he said afterwards, “at the © 
feet of Gamaliel.” 

We must not omit to record that during these boyish 
years he acquired a trade, which served him usefully when 









Learning a Trade. 23 
hard pressed for means of livelihood. “He that teacheth 
not a trade is as though he taught his son to be a thief ”— 
so ran the old Jewish proverb. 

Every Jew was taught a trade, generally that of his 
father. Probably Paul’s family for generations back had 
been engaged in weaving a dark coarse cloth of goats’ 
hair. From his childhood he must have been familiar 
with the rattle of the looms, in which the long hair of 
the mountain goats was woven into a strong material, 
suitable alike for the outer coats of artizans or for tents, 
and known as Cilician cloth, after the name of the province 
in which Tarsus was situated. This handicraft was poorly 
remunerated ; but in Paul’s case it was highly suitable to 
the exigencies of a wandering life. Other trades would 
-* require a settled workshop and expensive apparatus ; but 
_ this was a simple industry, capable of being pursued 

anywhere, and needing the smallest possible apparatus 

and tools. 
* * * = * * * 
Across a gulf of fifty years from the confinement of 

a Roman prison, Paul had time to review these things 
__ which he had before counted gain. To the earnest 
_ gaze which he directed towards them, the receding shores 
_ Of his early life came near again; and as he counted up 
_ their treasures i wrote across them—loss, dross: “the 
= things that were gain to me, these I counted loss for 
_ Christ. Yea, doubtless, and I count all things but loss 
_ for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my 
Lord.” 

_ It was not a small thing to have come of noble and 

Godly parentage, to be a child of Abraham, and heir of 

_ the promises made to his seed. But he counted it loss. 

_ It was not a small thing to have built up by constant 
Obedience and scrupulous care a fabric of blameless 
reputation. But he counted it Loss. 

It was not a small thing to be conscious of the 











throbbing of a fervent spirit which would ect ‘no 
indolence or lethargy, and which transformed duty to. 
delight. But he counted it dross. 


There was calm deliberation in his tone. Youth may — 


be impassioned and hasty, but the man who speaks thus 
is not a youth; his brow is girt with mature wisdom, and 


his heart stored with the experience of several lives — 


crowded into one. He has spent long years in prison, 
where there has been plenty of time for reflection, and 
ample opportunity of weighing the past against the present; 
but notwithstanding all, and that the difficulties of the 
past are always minimised while those of the present 
are magnified, he twice over speaks of the advantages 
and achievements which had been the pride of his early 
manhood, as loss and worse. 

There was no irreverence in his allusions to the rites 
of the venerable system in which he had been nurtured. 
For long years Judaism had been the only interpreter to 
him of the Divine, the only nourishment of his religious 
instincts. The grounds of trust which he now deemed 
insufficient had at least been the landing-places on the 


stairway of his upward ascent. He could not forget 


that God Himself had been the Architect of the House 
in which his soul had found a shelter and home; that 
his voice had spoken in the Prophets, that his thoughts 
had inspired them, that his purposes had been fulfilled. 
No thoughtful man will talk contemptuously of his horn- 
book, or of his first teachers. In these probably lay the 
rudiments of all he has afterwards learnt. But, notwith- 
standing the noble reverence of the Apostle’s soul, he 
could not but affirm that what he had counted gain was 
loss. 

The grounds for this verdict are probably to be found 
in two directions. On the one hand, he discovered that 
the sacrifices of Judaism, as was obvious from their 
constant repetition, might bring sins to remembrance, 





eos! TST ER) PeeR 


ones “ei 4 i, 
we ee ae eae 
Ga aR aide ROW Fh 4 
ip shiny 2 hi 

OSS ee) 


A 





Got’s Atethod of Righteousness. 25 


but they could not remove them; he discovered that 


outward rites, however punctiliously observed, did not 
avail to cleanse the conscience; he discovered that in 
Judaism there was no power unto salvation, nothing to 
reinforce and renew the flagging energies of the soul. 


On the other hand, he had found something better. 


The young artist leaves his village home, inflated with 
pride at his achievements. Nothing like them has ever 
been seen by the simple neighbours. They count him 
a prodigy, and he is only too glad to accept their estimate. 
In his secret judgment he counts himself able to step 
forth into the arena of the world as a successful competitor 
for its prizes. So he fares forth, to Paris, to Milan, to 
Rome. But each month weakens his self-confidence, and 
gives him a lower estimate of his powers. Presently he 
becomes the pupil of some master-artist; and when, at 
the expiration of several years, he returns again to his 
home and opens the portfolio filled with the early studies, 
he closes it immediately with disgust. He wonders how 
he could ever have dared to count them art. What things 
were gain to him, those in the light of all that he has 
seen and learnt, he now counts loss. 

So Paul had seen Jesus. Before the glory of that 
heavenly vision all other objects of attraction had paled. 
He counted all things to be loss for the excellency of the 
knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord. In comparison with 
his finished work, all his own efforts were futile. It was a 
relief to turn from his own righteousness, which was of the 
law, and to avail himself of God’s method of righteousness, 
which was through faith in Christ. So long as he 
anticipated having to meet the demands of God’s infinite 
holiness by his own endeavours, he was haunted with the 
dread that there might be some fatal flaw; but directly he 
learnt that by renouncing all he might gain Christ; that by 
forsaking his own efforts and trusting Christ he might 
be found in Him, possessed of the flawless righteousness 





26 “When J tuas a hits.” P+ 


which had been wrought by his obedience unto death; 
that by confessing himself unable to do the good he would, 
and identifying himself with the death of Christ, he might 
come to know the power of his resurrection, and attain day 
by day to something of its likeness—then with great thank- 
fulness he abandoned his own strivings and efforts, and 
counted all his former gains but dross and dung, that he 
might win Christ and all that Christ could be and do. 

It is an awful experience, when the soul first awakes to 
find that he has been making a mistake in the most 
important of matters, and has nearly missed the deepest 
meaning of life; when it discovers that the rules it has 
made for itself, and the structure of character it has 
laboriously built up, are but wood, hay, and stubble; when 
it learns that it has been building on an insecure founda- 
tion, and that every brick must be taken down. Ah me! 
it is a discovery which, when it comes in early manhood, 
for the moment at least, paralyses—we fall to the ground, 
and spend three days and nights stunned and dazed; when 
it comes at the end of life, is full of infinite regret; when 
it comes in the other world, is black with the darkness of 
unutterable despair. The worm dieth not, and the fire is 
not quenched. 

There is one test only which can really show whether we 
are right or wrong: it is our attitude to Jesus Christ. If 
our religious life revolves around anything less than 
Himself—though it be the doctrines of Christianity, work 
for Him, the rules of a holy life—it will inevitably dis- 
appoint and fail us. But if He is Alpha and Omega; if 
our faith, however feebly, looks up to Him; if we press on 
to know Him, the power of his resurrection, and the 
fellowship of his sufferings ; if we count all things but loss 
for the excellency of his knowledge—we may possess 
ourselves in peace amid the mysteries of life, and the lofty 
requirements of the great white throne, 


~ 












II. 
Separated from the Birth. 


(GALATIANS i, 15.) 


** What to thee is shadow, to Him is day, 
And the end He knoweth; 
And not on a blind and aimless way, 
The spirit goeth. 


* Like warp and woof, all destinies 
Are woven fast, 
Linked in sympathy, like the keys 
Of an organ vast.” WHITTIER. 


HEN he became a man, Paul put away childish 
things ; but there were some things which he could 
: not put away, and there was no need that he 
Seronla, because they had been planned beforehand by God 
as a special qualification and preparation for his life-work. 
Over his cradle in the crowded Jewish quarter of Tarsus a 
Divine purpose hovered. As to Jeremiah, so to him, the 
Word of the Lord might have come, saying, ‘‘ Before I 
formed thee, I knew thee; and before thou camest forth 
I sanctified thee: I have appointed thee a prophet unto 
the nations.” He had some inkling of this when he said, 
in writing to the Galatians, “It was the good pleasure of 
God who separated me even from my birth, and called me 
through his grace, to reveal his Son in me, that I might 
‘preach Him among the Gentiles.” 
God has a purpose in every life; and where the soul is 
perfectly yielded and acquiescent, He will certainly realize 
it. Blessed is he who has never thwarted the execution of 
the Divine ideal. 


One of the most interesting studies in human life is to 
_ see how all the circumstances and incidents of its initial 


\ stages have been shaped by a determining will, and made 


t 


‘ 


Si kee Srl bc Ot f4tu 6.28) 





for the completed pattern ; every piece of equipment stands 
in good stead at the final test. 


The future Apostle must be deeply instructed in the Jewish 


aw. “The law” must stand here as a convenient term, 
not only for the moral and Levitical code, as given in the 
Pentateuch, but for the minute and laborious additions of 
the rabbis, who—to use one of their own illustrations— 
had so overlaid the sweet flute of truth with their gilding as 


to silence its music. The righteousness which was of the 


law consisted in meats, and drinks, and divers ordinances 
and washings; in the length of fringes and number of 
tassels ; the straining of wine lest there should be the dead 
body of a fly ; the tithing of the stalk as well as the flower 


- of mint; the punctilious measuring of the ground, that not 


a step might be taken beyond the legitimate Sabbath day’s 


journey. One great rabbi spent the whole week in con- 


sidering how to observe the coming Sabbath. 

No one could have appreciated the intolerable burden of 
this yoke of legalism—which even Peter said neither they 
nor their fathers were able to bear—unless he had been 
taught, as Paul was, “according to the perfect manner of 
the law of the fathers.” As Luther was reared in the 
Roman Catholic Church that he might appreciate the 
utter impotence of her system to pacify the conscience, or 
appease the heart, and that, having broken from it, he 
might show the way of escape to others; so Saul of Tarsus 
must needs tarry amid the experiences of which he speaks 
so often in the Epistle to the Galatians, that he might be able 
to magnify the freedom wherewith Christ hath made us free. 

He needed to be apt in his quotation and application of 
the Hebrew Scriptures. Every question in religious and 
ordinary Jewish life was settled by an appeal to the 
Scriptures. No speaker could gain the audience, or hold 
the attention of a Jewish congregation for a moment, 
unless he were able to show, the more ingeniously the 


ots oni 
ieee ree tl. 


Re hyd re net 6 ed 
Ne ee eee ‘ 


“Go the Late and the Gestimony.” 29 
better, that his statements could be substantiated from the 


Inspired Word. To the law and the testimony every 
assertion must be brought. Before that venerable bar 


_ every teacher must stand. 


It was above all things necessary that Christianity should 
be shown to be, not the destruction but the fulfilment of 
the ancient law—the white flower growing from the plant 
which God had brought from Ur of the Chaldees; the 


meridian day of which the dawn first streaked the sky at 


Moriah. What made Paul so “mad” against Christianity 
was its apparent denial and betrayal of the obvious meaning 
of Old Testament prophecies and types. Neither he nor 
any of his co-religionists were prepared to accept a 
humiliated, suffering, dying Messiah, unless it could be 
shown without controversy that such a conception were the 
true reading of Moses, the Prophets, and the Law. If any 
collection of sincere and earnest Jews had been asked the 
question, “ Ought not the Messiah to suffer such things and 
to enter into his glory?” they would have unhesitatingly 
answered /Vo; and would have required one who was 
thoroughly versed, not only in Scripture, but in the 
recondite interpretations of the rabbi, to prove to them 
from the entire range of the Old Testament that it 
behoved the Messiah to suffer. 

This qualification also Paul acquired during his years of 
trainmg under Gamaliel. Throughout the entire course, 
“the sacred oracles” were the only text-book; and every 


_ day was spent in the careful and minute consideration of 
words, lines, and letters, together with the interpretations 


of the various rabbis. 

Men might chafe at his renderings of the ancient words, 
but they could not dispute his intimate acquaintance with 
them, and his profound erudition. He knew the whole 
ground perfectly. There was not a single argument with 
which he was not familiar, and for which he was not 
instantly ready with a reply. The field of Scripture had 


Seg Dye ee 


ise Bee he ovin ea, 


‘ 


~ 


Pe 
y > 


see S eet! Sei ce Bere 






30 Separated from the | wih are a9) 


been repeatedly ploughed over by that ken mind, nd its 
harvests gathered into that retentive memory. There eS ey 
passages in his writings which are little else than stairways — Lun 
of quotation, one built up from another. His ri 
are clenched by an appeal to the Sacred Word, as though _ 


otherwise they would be inconclusive. For illustration he 


will go, not to the illuminated missal of nature, for which — 
he seems to have had no eye, but to the incidents and 
narratives which have made the Old Testament the story- 
book of all the ages. It was this power that gave him an — 
entrance into every synagogue, and carried conviction to so 
many candid Jews. How richly, for instance, it was apprecia- 
ted by Bible-students, like those whom he met at Bercea ! 

He needed to have large and liberal views. Jewish in- 
tolerance and exclusivism had reared a high wall of partition — 
between Jew and Gentile. The Jews had no dealings with 
the Samaritans ; how much less with the Gentile dogs that 
crouched beneath the well-spread table of the children! 
Here is a characteristic saying of one of the doctors of the ~ 
law: “If a Gentile fall into the sea, a Jew is not to pull 
him out; for it is written, Thou shalt not be guilty of thy — 
neighbour’s blood—but the Gentile is not thy neighbour.” 

The majority of the apostles were largely influenced by 
this caste spirit. It was hard for them, though they had 
been moulded by the Lord Himself, to break through the 
ring-fence of early training. Had the shaping of the 
primitive church been left to them, though theoretically 
they might have acknowledged the equality of Jew and 
Gentile in God’s sight, yet practically they would have 
drawn distinctions between the Jewish Christians and those 
other sheep which their Shepherd was bringing, but which 
were not of the Hebrew fold. Peter will go into a Gentile 
house, and eat with the uncircumcised beneath the pressure 
of the heavenly vision ; but when the glory of that memor- 
able day has faded, and certain come down from James, he 
makes an excuse to withdraw into the impregnable fastness 






the feet of Gamaliel.” 3r 





Jewish superiority, Evidently another than James, or 
absolute equality of all who by faith had become stones in 
_ the one church, or buildings in the one holy temple, that 
was growing into an habitation for God. The need of a 
trumpet voice was urgent, to proclaim that Jesus had 
_ abolished in his flesh the enmity, that He might create in 
Himself of the twain one new man, so making peace. 
| Through the ordering of Divine Providence this qualifi- 
cation also was communicated to the future Apostle of the 
Uncircumcision. 
By birth, as we have seen, he was a Hebrew: not 
_ otherwise could he have influenced Jews, or obtained 
_ admission into their synagogues. But he had been brought 
% “ at the feet of the great Rabbi, who, while reverenced 
“the beauty of the law,” was recognized also as the most 
Be -hearted of all the Jewish doctors. Grandson of the 
great Hillel, he was, as the story of the Acts indicates, one 
4 - of the leaders of the Sanhedrim: “A doctor of the law, had 
_ , in reputation among all the people” (Acts v. 34). But he 
_ | went so far as to permit and advocate the study of Greek 
} literature. In his speech before the Sanhedrim, given 
_' in Acts v., we trace the movements of a human and 
_ generous mind, willing to admit the workings of the Divine 
Spirit beyond the limits of rigid orthodoxy, and to follow 
_ the torch of truth wherever it might lead—a very holy 
man, deeply attached to the religion of his people, yet 
accustomed to look at all questions from the standpoint 
__ Of a large culture and wide charity. 
The influence of such a teacher must have been very 
2 _ potent on the young Tarsus student, who had come to sit at 
__his feet, and who regarded him with a boundless enthusiasm. 
_ Into the upturned furrows of that impressible nature may 
2 have been sown seeds, which under the sun of Christianity 
eat _ would ripen into such sayings as that “there is neither Jew 
nor Greek . . . for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.” 














' 


% 


He 


‘% 


? 


v 


CET Sp Cee Cee PLETE aa, 
#77? + UPee® PPaeae: 


papiissees, 


PEPE 


__. The man who was to be a missionary to men a know 


_ practical Romans, to barbarians and Scythians, to bond ~ 
| and free; to Festus the imperial governor, and Agrippa the ~ 
_ Hebrew ae to Onesimus the slave, and Philemon the 

master, as Paul did. Cho 


_ open places of the city, were thronged with the costumes, 









them. He who would be all things to all men, that by all 


_ means he might win some, must be familiar with their 


+ ag ae 


methods of life and thought. A Jerusalem-Jew could not 
possibly have adapted himself to cultured Greeks wae— 


But this qualification also was supplied without his = 
realizing its worth. From boyhood he was familiar with 
the tides of Gentile life that flowed up the Cydnus into his 
native city. Men from all the world came thither for =. 
purposes of trade. The wharves, baths, colonnades, and — ee 
and rang with the many tongues of all the lands that 
touched on the great inland sea. And thus insensibly the a 
horizon of the boy’s mind was widened to include the 
great outer world. a Ta ~ 

When his training at Jerusalem was complete he must 
have returned to Tarsus. This surely would be im- 
mediately before the appearance of John the Baptist, 
preaching repentance in the Jordan valley. Paul could — 
not have been in Judza at this time without making some 
reference to his marvellous ministry and tragic end. In 
the same way he must have missed the ministry and . 
crucifixion of Jesus of Nazareth, and the early years of 
the existence of the church. But during this interval his 
education was proceeding. In these years he probably 
married, else he would not afterwards have occupied a 
seat in the Sanhedrim; and steadily pursued his trade, 
or exercised his profession as a rabbi in the local — 
synagogue, or travelled far afield on some religious mission, — 
compassing sea and land to make proselytes. 

But imagine what those seven or eight years must have 





SAUL’S ESCAPE FROM DAMASCUS. 


“Then the disciples took him by night, and let him down by the wall 
in a basket.” —ACcTs ix. 25. 





Gis Broledge of the World. 33 


meant to the young Pharisee. Could the young athlete 
have restrained himself from encounters with the system of 
things by which he was surrounded? There was a school 
of heathen philosophy in search of the supreme good: 
would he not try a throw with its exponents? There was a 
vast system of idolatry, especially of Baal-worship: would 
he not reason with its votaries, arguing that they cannot be 
gods which are made with hands? There was wild in- 
dulgence of shameless, sensual passion: would he not 
contrast it with the comparative purity of his own race? 
_ And all the while he would be keenly observing and noting 
every phase of Gentile heathendom. The pictures of the 
world of that age given in the first chapter to the Romans 
and the first epistle to the Corinthians, and comprising such 
dark allusions to the depravity and abandonment of the 
Gentiles, could only have been given by one who obtained 


_his information first-hand, and by personal observation. 


What vivid touches there are in his entreaty not to walk 
“as the Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind, being 
darkened in their understanding, alienated from the life of 
God . . . who being past feeling give themselves up to 
lasciviousness, to make a trade of all uncleanness with 
greediness” (Eph. iv. 18, 19, R.V.). 
| He needed also to be equipped with the pre-requisites of a 
‘great traveller. For this there were three necessary 
conditions: speech, safety, sustenance, And each was 
forthcoming. 

Speech. Greek was the common language of the world, 
the medium of intercourse among educated persons, as 
English is in India to-day. And Paul was even more 
familiar with Greek than with the sacred Hebrew. When 
quoting the Scriptures he habitually employed the 
Septuagint (7.2, the Greek) version; and he was able to 
speak their tongue fluently and elegantly enough to hold 
the attention of Athenian philosophers. 

Safety. All the world was Roman. Roman governors 

c 








< 

34 Separated from the Birth. 
in every province; Roman usages in every city; Roman 
coins, customs, and officials. ‘To be a Roman citizen gave 
a man a standing and position in any part of the empire. 
He might not be beaten without trial; or if he were, the 
magistrates were in jeopardy of losing their office, and even 
their life. He could demand trial at the bar of Cesar; if 
he appealed to Czesar, to Cesar he must go. He would be 
permitted to plead for himself before the bar of Roman 
justice. So great were the advantages, that men like 
Lysias the chief captain thought it worth while to purchase 
the right of freedom with a great sum. How great an 
advantage, then, to be able to say as Paul could, 7 was free 
born! His family may have been originally settled in 
Tarsus as part of a Roman colony, and Jews were always 
considered excellent colonists, and so this inestimable 
privilege came to cast its sheltering folds around its most 
illustrious son. 

Sustenance. This also was secured to him. On what- 
ever shore he was cast there were always goats, and always 
the demand for the coarse cloth at which he had been 
wont to work from his boyhood. 

In all this how evidently was the Divine purpose at 
work, shaping all things after the counsel of its own will. 
And what was true in Paul’s case is as true for us all. 
A providence is shaping our ends; a plan is developing in 
our lives ; a supremely wise and loving Being is making all 
things work together for good. In the sequel of our life’s 
story we shall see that there was a meaning and necessity 
in all the previous incidents, save those which were the 


" result of our own folly and sin, and that even these have 


been made to contribute to the final result. Trust Him, 
child of God: He is leading you by a right way to the 
celestial City of Habitation; and as from the terrace of 
eternity you review the path by which you came from the 
morning-land of childhood, you will confess that He hath 
done all things well. 






~ 
Bee 











Liv. 
“Cho Martyr Stephen.” 


(AcTs xxii. 20.) 


**¥Ie heeded not reviling tones, 
Nor sold his heart to idle moans, 
Tho’ cursed, and scorn’d and bruised with stones. 


‘But looking upward, full of grace, 

He prayed, and from a happy place 

God’s glory smote him on the face,” 
TENNYSON. 
HE method of God’s introduction of his greatest ser- 
vants to the world differs widely. In some cases they 
rise gradually and majestically, like the dawn, from 
the glimmer of childhood’s early promise to the meridian 
of mature power and usefulness, In other cases they flash 
like the lightning on the dark abyss of night. Sometimes 


God charges a man with a message, and launches him forth 


suddenly and irresistibly. Such a man was Elijah, with his 
“Thus saith the Lord, before whom I stand”; John the 
Baptist, with his “It is not lawful for thee to have thy 
brother’s wife”; such also was Savonarola, of Florence; 
with many another. And such was Stephen. 

We know little or nothing of his antecedents. That he 
was a Hellenist Jew is almost certain; and that he had 
personally known and consorted with the Son of Man, 
whom he afterwards recognized in his glory, is more than 
probable. But of father, mother, birthplace, and education, 
we know nothing. We have the story of one day, the 
record of one speech—that day his last, that speech his 
apology and defence for his life. 

He reminds us of a cloud, not specially distinguishable 


ae _ from its companions, which has helped to form the leaden 


covering of the sky during an overcast afternoon; we had 


not noticed it, indeed, the sun had set without even 




















7 the surat the cloud catches its depasting ‘Tays, 

: =e _ becomes saturated and steeped with fire. See how it burns 
_-___ with glory! Its very heart is turned to flame! For a fe 
: eS moments the light remains, and it is gone! So 
- caught for a brief space the glory of the departed Lord, — 

and, reflecting it, was transformed into the same Pa 
"and all that sat in the council, fastening their eyes on 
him, saw his face, as it had been the face of an angel.” 

Stephen’s life and death must always have attracted one 
reverent interest; but how much more so as we trace 
his influence on the method, thought, and character of ‘the *, 
great Apostle, whose life-work it became to perpetuate and 
tender permanent what was rarest and noblest in the 
church’s first deacon and martyr. 

















Es. DUCT AND REPRESENTATIVE MAY FOR A MOMENT CLAIM OUR | 
ATTENTION.—It casts a suggestive sidelight on the career 
of “the young man Saul.” = 
Three streams of thought were meeting in tumultuous 
eddies in Jerusalem. tie 
There were the Jews of the Pharisee party, represented — a 
by Gamaliel, Saul of Tarsus, and other notable men. 
They were characterized by an intense religiousness, — o. 
which circled around their ancestry, their initial rite, 
their law, their temple. Were they not Abraham’s | 
children? Had not God entered into special covenant 
relations with them, of which circumcision was the out- __ 
ward sign and seal? Were they not zealous in their 
observance of the law, which had been uttered amid 
the thunder-peals of Sinai, not for themselves alone, . 
but for the world? Had not their rabbis added to “It; ox 


po aa: 





¥, 3 

iS an immense number of minute and careful ations, Li 
‘< to which they yielded scrupulous and anxious o ae 
eS And as for the Temple, the whole of their Pie s 


me 
- a 
4 





Cyt eos ae Oa 


ae we ee ea i » ma 
She RE Fae j 


Ghe Pharisees and the Ghristians. 37 


was anchored to the spot where it stood. There was 
the only altar, priesthood, shrine, of which their religion 
admitted. Though the Temple might be a den of thieves, 
and Jerusalem full of uncleanness, they felt that no harm 
could befall them, no fiery storm overwhelm. Like their 
forefathers in Jeremiah’s days, they trusted in lying words, 
saying, ‘The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the 
Lord, the Temple of the Lord, are these”; but had no 
thought of amending their ways and their doings. Narrow, 
casuistical, bigoted, intensely fanatical; priding themselves 
on their national privilege as the chosen people, but 
resentful against the appeals of the greatest of their 
prophets; counting on the efficacy of their system, but 
careless of personal character—such was the orthodox 
and conservative Jewish party of the time. 

Next came the Hebrew Christian Church, led and 
represented by the Apostles. To culture and eloquence 
they laid no claim. Of founding a new religious organiza- 
tion they had no idea. That they should ever live. 
to see Judaism superseded by the teaching they were 
giving, or Christianity existing apart from the system in 
which they had been nurtured, was a thought which, in 
the furthest flights of their imagination, never occurred 
tothem. Their Master had rigorously observed the Jewish 
rights and feasts; and they followed in his steps, and 
impressed a similar course of action on their adherents. 
The church lingered still in the portals of the synagogue. 
The disciples observed the hours of prayer, were found 
in devout attendance at the Temple’s services, had their 
children circumcised, and would not have dreamed of 
being released from the regulations that bound the 
ordinary Jews as with iron chains. And it seems certain 
that, if nothing had happened of the nature of Stephen’s 
apology and protest, the church would have become another 
Jewish sect, distinguished by the piety and purity of its ad- 
herents, and by their strange belief in the Messiahship of 


$e SPE ae Sy eee eee ee ee 


38 “Chu Martyr Stephen” 
Jesus of Nazareth, who had been crucified uiider Por 


Pilate. 
Lastly, there were the converts from among the Hellenist 


Jews. In Acts vi. 1, R.v., these are distinctly referred to; * ; 
and in verse g the varices synagogues in which they were 


wont to meet are enumerated—of these Stephen was the 
holy and eloquent exponent. 


The origin of the Hellenist or Grecian Jews must be rate 
traced back to the captivity, which God overruled to 


promote the dissemination of Jewish conceptions through- 
out the world. It was but a small contingent that returned 
to Jerusalém with Nehemiah and Ezra; the vast majority 


elected to remain in the land of their adoption for purposes — 


of trade. They slowly spread thence throughout Asia 
Minor to the cities of its seaboard and the highland 


* districts of its interior, planting everywhere the synagogue, 


with its protest on behalf of the unity and the spirituality 
of God. Egypt, and especially Alexandria; Greece, with 
her busy commercial seaports; Rome, with her imperial 
cosmopolitan influence—became familiar with the peculiar 
physiognomy and customs of this wonderful people, who 


always contrived to secure for themselves a large share of ~ 
the wealth of any country in which they had settled, 
But their free contact with the populace of many lands © 


wrought a remarkable change on them. 

Whilst the Jews of Jerusalem and Judea shrank from 
the defiling touch of heathenism, and built higher the wall 
of separation, growing continually prouder, more bitter, 
more narrow, the Jews that were scattered through the world 
became more liberal and cosmopolitan. They dropped 
their Hebrew mother-tongue for Greek; they read the 


Septuagint version of the Scriptures; their children were 


influenced by Greek culture and philosophy; they became 
able to appreciate the purposes of God moving through 
the channels of universal history; they learnt that though 
their fathers had received the holy oracles for mankind, 












yet God had nowhere left Himself without witness. Com- 
_ pelled, as they were, to relinquish the Temple with its holy 
"rites, except on rare and great occasions, when they travelled 
_ from the ends of the earth to be present at some great 
festival, they magnified in its place the synagogue, with its 

_ worship, its reading of the law, its words of exhortation ; 
_ and they welcomed to its precincts all who cared to avail 
themselves of its privileges, and to set their faces towards 
a. ‘the God of Abraham. Many of these open-minded 
- Hellenist Jews, when they had passed the meridian of 
a 3 their days in successful trade, came back and settled in 


t Jerusalem. The different countries from which they hailed 
f were represented by special synagogues: one of the Liber- 
tines who had been freed from slavery, one of the Cyrenians, 
~__ one of the Alexandrians, one of them of Cilicia and of Asia. 
aa The mention of the latter is specially interesting when we 
be recall that the chief city of Cilicia was Tarsus. 


Mee 


After some years of absence, Paul returned to settle at 
Jerusalem. It is possible that its Jewish leaders, having 
_ been impressed by his remarkable talents and enthusiastic 
devotion to Judaism, had summoned him to take part in, 
_-(or lead, that opposition to Christianity, to which events 
were daily more irrevocably committing them. It is almost 
= also, that to facilitate his operations he was at this 


sf 


igre! waar Baia eis 


s 


__ \time nominated to a seat in the Sanhedrim, which enabled 
him to give his vote against the followers of Jesus (Acts 
"xxvi. 10). 

His first impressions about the followers of ‘the Way,” 
as the early disciples were termed, were wholly unfavour- 
able. It seemed to him sheer madness to suppose that 
__the crucified Nazarene could be the long-looked-for 
_ Messiah, or that He had risen from the dead. He, 
_ therefore, threw himself into the breach, and took the 
lead in disputing with Stephen, who had just been raised 
to office in the nascent church; and, not content with the 
__- conservative and timid attitude which the Apostles had 





ae a ee ee 





“i aa 









< 


40 “Thy Martyr miata Pes oes a 


preserved for some five years, was now leading an agg) 
and forward policy. 


II. THe Burpen or STEPHEN’S Testis which he 
gave with such wisdom and grace in the synagogues of ee 
Jerusalem, and especially in the Cilician, may be gathered 
from his apology, which, while touching chords that 
vibrated most deeply in the hearts of his hearers, and 
appearing merely to rehearse the great story of the pas 
was intended as his own vindication and defence. Itis 
a marvellous address, the whole meaning of which can 
only be realized when his position and circumstances are 
borne in mind. It was the first attempt to read the story 
of God’s dealings with Israel in the light of Christ; the 
earliest commentary on the Old Testament by the New; 
the fragmentary draft of the Epistle to the Hebrews; 
the suggestion to at least one of his hearers of a deeper 
way of studying the lessons of Mosaism. ‘The mystery 
which had been hidden from ages and generations, and J 
which was probably still hidden even from the Apostles,  _ 
was made known to this Christian Hellenist Jew. His 
eyes were the first that were opened to see that the old 
covenant was becoming old, and was nigh to vanishing 
away, because on the point of being superseded by that 
better hope, through which all men might draw nigh ‘ 
to God. * 

Can we not imagine those eager disputings in the 
Cilician synagogue between these two ardent and vehement 
spirits, close akin at heart, as the future would show, 
though now apparently so far divided. Each thoroughly 
versed in Scripture, each agile in argument and strong of 
soul, each devoted to the holy traditions of the past; but 
the one blinded by an impenetrable vail, whilst to the other 
heaven was open, and the Son of Man was revealed 
standing at the right hand of God. 

Like most who speak God’s truth for the first time, 





Stephen's Testimony. 41 


Stephen was greatly misunderstood. We gather this from 
the charges made against him by the false witnesses, whom 
the Sanhedrim suborned. They accused him of uttering 
blasphemous words against Moses, of speaking against the 
Temple and the law, of declaring that Jesus of Nazareth 
would destroy the Temple, and change the customs 
delivered by Moses. And as we attentively follow his 
argument, we can see how it was that these impressions 
had been caused. 

Saul would expatiate on the glories of the Temple, stand- 
ing on the site where for centuries Jehovah had been 
worshipped. But Stephen would insist that any holy soul 
might worship God in the temple of his own soul; that 
there was no temple in the old time when God spake to 
Abraham and the patriarchs; that David was discouraged 
from building one; and that at the time of its dedication 
Solomon expressly acknowledged that God did not dwell in 
temples made with hands. 

Saul would insist on the necessity of the rite of circum- 
cision. But Stephen would argue that it could not be 
allimportant, since God made promises to Abraham long 
before that rite was instituted. 

Saul would show the unlikelihood of Jesus being God’s 


_ Deliverer, because He was unrecognized by the leaders and 


shepherds of Israel. Stephen would rejoin that there 
was nothing extraordinary in this, since Joseph had been 
sold for jealousy, and Moses rejected on three distinct 
occasions. ‘‘ Which of the prophets did not your fathers 
persecute P” 

Saul said that all the prophets pointed to the glorious 
advent of the Messiah. Stephen reviewed Moses, the 
Prophets, and the Psalms, and showed that it behoved 
the Christ to suffer. 

Saul affirmed that nothing could supersede Moses. 
Stephen quoted Moses himself as asserting that the Lord 
God would raise up a greater prophet than himself. 







a2 “Chy Mactye Stephen.” 

All this Stephen affirmed with the reall everence _ 
and awe. He spoke of the God of Glory; of the grest 
ones of the past as “our fathers”; of the angel that spake — 
at Sinai; and the living oracles of Scripture. And yet 
it is undeniable that he saw with undimmmed signee 
Jesus of Nazareth must change the customs which Moses — 
delivered, and lead his church into more spiritual aspects 
of truth. 

How little he weened that he was dropping seed-germs 
into the heart of his ‘chief opponent, that were to bear 
harvests to one hundred-fold—nay, to many millions-fold, 
through the centuries, and in the broad harvest-field of 
the world! Thus a plant may yield one white flower, but 
the seeds it drops may live and bloom again in uncounted 
springs. 

But as the battle rose and fell within the walls of that 
Cilician synagogue, it was an amazing conflict Here 
ancient authority, there individual responsibility. Here the 
bondage of the letter, there the freedom of the spirit. Here 
the priest and ecclesiastic, there the Spirit-taught and led 
of God. Here bigotry and pride, there humility and insight. 
Here the shackles of the prison of the soul, there the open 
heayen. In miniature it was the battle of all the ages, the 
one eternal conflict between form and spirit, between a 
false religiousness and the religion of the soul, which stands 
unveiled before God. 


eS wpe ee 


III. His Martyrpom.—We know little of Stephen's 
life. It was more than probable, as we have already said, 
that he knew Jesus in his earthly life, for he instantly 
recognized Him in the heavenly vision, Perhaps he had 
followed Him during the latter part of his ministry; he 
could at least describe Him as the Righteous or Just One, 
as though he had had ample opportunity of appraising his 
blameless worth. Surely he must have seen Him die; for 
the traits of his dying beauty moulded his own last hours, 









eee oes Ge Fell Asleep.” 


: ow meekly to bear his cross; to plead for his murderers 





43 


_ with a divine charity ; to breathe his departing spirit into 





unseen hands; to find in death the gate of life, and amid 
the horror of a public execution the secret of calm and 
_ peace—all these were rays of light caught from the Cross 
_ where his Master had poured out his soul unto death. 


This, too, powerfully affected Paul. That light on the 


_ martyr’s face; that evident glimpse into the unseen Holy; 
_ those words; that patience and forgiveness; that peace 


which enwrapt his mangled body, crushed and bleeding, 
as he fell asleep—he could never forget them. Long years 
after, when a similar scene of hate was environing himself, 
he reverted to Christ’s martyr, Stephen, and counted it a 
high honour meekly to follow in his steps. Not only did 
he mould his own great speeches on the model of that 


_ never-to-be-forgotten address; not only did those con- 


ceptions of the spiritual nature of Christ’s kingdom affect 


his whole after-teaching and ministry: but the very light 
_ that radiated from that strong, sweet, noble character 


seemed to have been absorbed by his spirit, to be radiated 
forth again in much patience, in afilictions, in necessities, 
in distresses, in strifes, in tumults, in pureness, in know- 
ledge, in long-suffering, in kindness, in the Holy Ghost, 
in love unfeigned. 

It is thus that the martyr church has ever overcome 


by the word of her testimony, because the saints have 


loved not their lives even unto death. The blood of 


the martyrs is the seed of the church, The destruction 
of the flower is the scattering of its pollen. The hammer 
is broken on its anvil. The power of the persecutor is 


overcome by the patience of his victims. Saul, at whose 


feet witnesses lay down their clothes, is catching up and 
assuming the mantle of the departing prophet and saint. 





tae 7. 





V. 
A Light from Beaben. 


(Acts xxvi. 13.) 
“* As to Thy last Apostle’s heart 
Thy lightning glance did then impart 
Zeal’s never-dying fire.” 
KEBLE, 

F the importance of events can be estimated by the 
amount of space given in Scripture to their narration, 
the arrest placed by the risen Lord upon the career of 

aul of Tarsus must take the second place in the story 
f the New Testament. It is described three times, with 
eat minuteness of detail—first by Luke, and twice by 
imself—and the narration occupies more space than the 
tory of any other event except the crucifixion of our 
Lord. 4 
This must be accounted for, partly because of the 
mportant part played by the Apostle in the moulding 
f the early church, and partly because his conversion __ 
was due to the personal agency of the risen Lord, who > 
appeared as literally as during any of the appearances of 
the Forty Days. This was no mere vision, like that which 
John had when he was in the Spirit, no mere transient 
impression on the sensitive plate of the imagination, no 
evanescent, dream-like fancy; but a manifestation of the 
risen Lord, like that which won the faith of Thomas. 

It was one of the deepest convictions of the Apostle 
in all his after life that he had veritably and certainly 
seen the Lord; and was therefore as really empowered 
to be a witness of his resurrection as any who had 
companied with Him, beginning from the baptism of 
John until the day that He was received up. “Am I not 
an Apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord?” he asks 









. On the Way to Damascus. 45 


(x Cor. ix. x, R.v.). And after enumerating the Lord’s 
appearances after his resurrection, he adds, placing that 
scene on the road to Damascus on a level with the rest, 
Last of all, as unto one born out of due time, He 
appeared to me also” (xv. 8, R.v.). Ananias used the 
same phrase when, entering the darkened chamber in 
which the Apostle lay like an eagle with broken wing, he 
said, “The Lord, even Jesus, who appeared unto thee in 
the way which thou camest, hath sent me.” 

Six days before, Saul had left Jerusalem with a small 

retinue furnished as his escort by the high priest. The 
journey was long and lonely, giving time for reflection, of 
which he had known but little during the crowding events 
of the previous months. He had been too closely 
occupied by those domiciliary visits, those constant trials, 
those scourgings, tortures, and martyrdoms; and in the 
incessant occupation he had been drifting with the rush of 
eyents, without taking his bearings or realizing their precise 
direction. 

It was high noon. Unlike most travellers, he forbore to 
spend even an hour in the retirement of his tent for shelter 
from the downward rays of the sun, piercing like swords, 
whilst all the air was breathless with the heat. He was too 
weary of his own musings, too eager to be at his work. 
Suddenly the little cavalcade left the stony wastes over 
which the track had lain, and began to pass beneath “the 
flickering shadows of ancient olives,” whilst Damascus 
suddenly came into view, amid a soft haze of verdure: 
its gardens, orchards, and groves making an emerald setting 
for its terraced roofs and white glistening cupolas. 

The goal of the long journey was well in sight. Within 
an hour or two he would be within the gates, and traversing 
the street called Straight, to deliver his commission to the 
authorities, and to ascertain the best point for commencing 
proceedings. But suddenly a great light—above the bright- 
ness of the Syrian noontide sun—shone around him ; and 


- 


_ garments grew white as the light, and all the snows around 


46 a Fight fs from on ee one 







his companions, though clear enough to himself, wan bea i 
speaking in the familiar Aramaic, and calling him by a ; 
(Acts xxvi. 14). 
There can be no doubt, in the light of the passages we 
have noticed, as to the origin of that light—it came straight 
from the face of the glorified Saviour. With some such ~~ 
light as this it had become illumined on the Mount of 
Transfiguration, when his face did shine as the sun, and his — 


reflected the golden sheen. Something of the same beauty 
and splendour was described by John in after years, when 
he tells of the vision given him in Patmos; but even this 
must have fallen far behind the Master’s actual appearance 
on the way to Damascus. In the one case his countenance 
was as when the sun shineth in his strength: in the other 
its glory was above the brightness of the sun. 

In the light of that moment the Apostle saw many 
things. It was like a sudden flashlight flung over an 
abyss, revealing secret things which had been entirely 
hidden, or but dimly understood. 

In the glory of that light he became convinced of the truth 
of Christianity. His objection to Christianity was not that 
Jesus of Nazareth had been crucified. Had this been 
all, the young Pharisee would have respected Him. His 
blameless life ; his teaching of the spirituality and unity of 
the Divine Nature; his belief in the resurrection of the 
dead ; his fearless exposure of what was false and vicious, 
would even have attracted his admiration. But it was 
intolerable that He should pose as the Messiah, or that his 
followers should charge the rulers with the murder of the 
long-expected King. 

There was only one thing that could convince him. He 
must see this Jesus of Nazareth, whom he knew to have 
been crucified, living on the other side of death: he must 
be able to recognize and establish his identity: he must 








» } ? 
eo Tu Se My, eo Se ik ae a 


The Rebelation of God. 





; hear Him speak. Such evidence given to himself would 
_ be conclusive; but nothing less would avail. If from 
heaven the Man of Nazareth and the Cross were to speak 


to Him, radiant with light, exerting Divine power—his 
objections would be scattered, and with another of his 
followers he would be compelled to cry, “My Lord and 
my God!” 

But this very revelation was made to him. It could not 
be a dream, a vision, an hallucination. He was too sane 
to base the entire change of his career upon anything so 
flimsy ; and in his writings he always distinguishes between 
these, and that appearance of the Lord on the road to 
Damascus. No, as Barnabas said afterwards, by way of 
explanation to the Apostles, “he saw the Lord in the 
way, and the Lord spoke to him.” He felt instantly 
that life must have henceforward a new meaning and 
purpose, and he must live to establish the faith of which 
he had made such determined havoc, 

Ln the glory of that light he beheld the suprente revelation, 
of God. Nature had told something of God. His glory 
had shone from rolling worlds, and from the outspread 
expanse of oceans and seas; had covered morning skies 
with daffodil, and evening clouds with crimson and gold; 
had goldened in the harvest fields and kindled around bush 
and brake, flower and bracken. From the first, God had 
not left Himself without witness, in that He did good, and 
gave rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling men’s 
hearts with food and gladness. The heavens had told his 
glory, and the firmament shown his handiwork. Day unto 
day had uttered speech of Him, though there was neither 
speech nor language. Night unto night had shown know- 
ledge, though their voice could not be heard. Thus 


_ through the things that had been made, the invisible things 


of God had been revealed, even his everlasting power and 


divinity. But 747s light was above the brightness of the 


sun, and made all Nature’s wonders pale, as stars at dawn. 





that shone on the face of Moses was emblematic of the - 


fuller disclosures of Himself which God gave to his chosen 


people. So excellent was that light that the children of 
Israel could not look stedfastly upon Moses for the glory 
of his face, and he was finally compelled to cover it with a 


vail. But that vail also had become emblematic of the 
blindness of Israel to the greatness of the revelation made 
to them. 

But the glory of God on the face of Jesus was above the 
brightness of any previous dispensation. That was of the 
letter, this of the spirit ; that was the ministration of death, 
this of life; that was temporary, and passed away, this was 
the final and permanent outshining of the love of God. 
There is no conceivable method of Divine manifestation 
that can excel the light which shines from the face of Jesus. 
They were human features that looked down on the per- 
secutor through the open doorway of heaven; but they were 
aglow with the light of that Shekinah which passed between 
the pieces of Abraham’s sacrifices, shone in the burning 
bush, lighted the march of Israel through the Red Sea, and 
at the dedication of Solomon’s Temple drove the priests 
before its waves of billowy glory from the holy place into 
the outer court. He beheld the glory of God in the face 
of Jesus whom he had persecuted. 

Would you know God? You must study Him in Jesus, 
So utterly did the Son of Man renounce his own words, 
and works, and will, that we know comparatively little of 
Him. All was from the Father, and to the Father. The 
words He spake were the Father’s ; the works He wrought 
the Father’s; the reconciliation perfected for erring man, 
achieved through Him by the Father, who was “in Christ 
reconciling the world to Himself.” We need nothing 
beyond; there is nothing beyond. In heaven itself we 
shall still behold the light of the glory of God in the face 
of Jesus, our eyes getting stronger to bear it, our insight 





. 
et £44.1% Pe. 2 








re 








HEALING THE CRIPPLE AT LYSTRA. 


** And Paul said with a loud voice, ‘Stand upright on thy feet!’ And 


he leaped and w alked.”—ACTS Xiv. 10. 


“he War.” 49 


being always deeper and more perfect. That light shone 
before the first ray of sunlight gleamed over the abyss ; 
and it will shine when sun, moon, and stars are dark and 
cold. 


In THE REVELATION OF THAT LIGHT SAUL OF TARSUS 
SAW THE REAL NATURE OF THE WAR WHICH HE HAD BEEN 
WAGING AGAINST THE RELIGION oF JESUS.—The earliest 
name of the new sect, as we have seen, was ¢he Way. 
In after years the Apostle was proud to adopt and use it: 
“T confess unto thee, that after the Way, which they call a 
sect, so serve I the God of our fathers.” It was a pathetic 
and significant title; these simple souls had found a new 
and living way to the knowledge and worship of God, 
consecrated through the rent flesh of Him whom their 
chief priests and rulers had delivered up to be condemned 
to death. 

The young man Saul was exceedingly mad against the 
pilgrims of the Way. He made havoc of them, and the 
word is that which would be used of wild boars uprooting 
tender vines. He devastated them with the fury of an 
invading army. Not content with attacks on their public 
meetings, he paid visits to their homes, dragging forth the 
patient, holy women as well as the uncomplaining men, 
scourging them, thrusting them in prison, putting them to 
death, and compelling them to blaspheme the holy name 
by which they were called. He breathed out threatening 
and slaughter, as a cruel monster might snort fire. He was 
so mad against them, that when the church at Jerusalem 
lay desolate, and its garden was torn and trampled into a 
desert, he pursued the same methods in distant cities, 
and on the present memorable occasion had received letters 
to bring those of the Way that were there in bonds unto 
Jerusalem to be punished. 

Great prospects began then to unfold before the persecutor, 
and though his tender nature must have revolted from his 

D 


™ay 


fy 
st ol 


Wil eee or as 
Surfs 
te : 


i 


7. a 4d 


¥ 


2) ee 





50 A Fight from Beaten 


sanguinary and ruthless efforts, though the sigh ofs su 
ing inflicted at his instigation must have been 
abhorrent, he was incited to pursue the path he had 
entered by the enthusiastic encomiums and plaudits of 
his co-religionists. 

There was, however, a deeper motive at work. “TI verily 
thought I ought.” This work of extermination seemed to 
him part of, his religious duty. He owed it to God to 
stamp out the followers of Jesus, and the more revolting 
it was to his nature, the more meritorious it was in the 
sight of heaven. Might not these efforts condone for a 
coming short in respect to the demands of God's law, 
which now and again forced itself home on his inner 
consciousness? Might not his victory over the reluctance 
of his heart be expiatory and atone for many failures? 
But, like the Roman soldiers who crucified the Lord, he 
knew not what he did. “I was a blasphemer, and a 3 
persecutor, and injurious; howbeit I obtained mercy, 
because I did it ignorantly in unbelief.” Ps 

As, however, that light fell upon his path, he suddenly 
awoke to discover that, instead of serving God, he was in 
collision with Him, and was actually uprooting and 
ravaging that for which the Son of his love had expended 
tears and blood. In persecuting the sect of the Nazarenes 
he was persecuting the Son of God. By every blow he 
struck at the infant church, he was lacerating those hands 
and piercing that side. By every sigh and groan extorted 
from the members of the Body he had elicited from the 
Head in heaven the remonstrance, “Saul! Saul! why 
persecutest thou Me?” It was a terrible and overwhelm- 
ing discovery, The earth seemed to yawn before him. 
Somehow his religion had brought him into collision with 
God in the person of those who were dear to Him, and 
evidently, instead of their being wrong and he right, they 
were right, and he wrong; instead of his fanatical zeal 
being pleasing to God it was grievous to Him, and heaping 





is hae An Awful Discobers. 
up wrath against a day of wrath. Ah! it is an awful 
discovery when a great light from heaven shows a man 


that what he has regarded his solemn duty has been one 
long sin against the dearest purposes of God. 


THAT LIGHT ALSO REVEALED THE INADEQUACY OF HIS 
Reicious Lire.—He had lived out all that he thought to 
be right. There was no prescription of the elders to which 
he had not conformed. So far as he knew what religion 
_ prescribed, he was blameless. Yea, had he not gone 
beyond its prescriptions in the zeal with which he had 
harried the church? But of late he had been compelled 
to confess to a dull sense of uneasiness and dissatisfaction. 
He studiously fought against it by immersing himself more 
sedulously than ever in the work of persecution ; yet there 
it was, and sometimes the evil thing (as he thought it) cast 
a petrifying glance upon his utmost efforts. 

Two causes further instigated this uneasiness. First, he 
felt that his religion did not satisfy him; it gave him no 
such tender views of the love of God as had impressed 
Moses or Daniel, and it seemed ineffective to curb the 
imperious demands of sin. Often the good he would he 
did not, whilst the evil he hated he did. Often he felt 
himself a captive, sold under sin. Often he cried aloud 
that he was a wretched man bound to an intolerable yoke, 
which chafed him to the quick. And there seemed no 
deliverance. Always those cases of minute casuistry, 
always the same exactions of outward obedience, always 
the same weary sense of failure as the attempt to spend one 
day of perfect obedience was reviewed from the evening 
hour. Was there nothing better? 

Then it seemed as though these humble disciples of 
_Jesus of Nazareth had something better. The meekness 
with which they bore their sufferings was far removed from 
obstinacy ; the purity of their home-life vindicated their 
professions ; the light that shone upon their dying faces; the 





= 


- ow , ee "_-tany 
onthe mgt 
— 

; ’ 
- SY 


SMe} Ratt ton te 
= ; yers for their persecutors, which they offered with th 


ae peas bee -piendi oop yun en eA 









~ koto 


‘yi breath, evidenced the possession of a secret of which — 
he knew that he was destitute. Could that religion be right — 
which threw him into antagonism with such lovely traits — 
and characteristics? Besides, he had often heard them 
speaking of their Teacher, his life of beneficence, his pure 
and lofty teachings, his maxims for the regulation of the 
inner life, his directions for the behaviour of his followers 
—and when they did so they touched chords which ~ 
responded deep down in his soul. It seemed to him 
sometimes as though this Nazarene had discovered the 
Pearl of great price, and held the secret of a Blessed Life, — 
Yet how could He be the Messiah who had come to such 
anend! And how absurd it was to say that He had risen, 
when the Roman sentries had solemnly averred that his” 
body had been stolen by his disciples, whilst they slept. — 
But all these questionings about his religious life were 
brought to a head and confirmed when suddenly he beheld 
Jesus of Nazareth enthroned on the right hand of power, 
and shining with a light above the brightness of the sun. 
What could he say of a righteousness which had led him to 
reject and persecute the Son of God? Of what value was 
it? Surely that which had led him to reject and persecute 
the Son of God Himself in the persons of his adherents 
must have been a deadly and pernicious delusion. He 
had thought himself blameless; but in the beam of that 
light he discovered that he was of all sinners the chief, 
that he was not worthy to be called a son, and might be 
thankful if he were numbered among the hired servants. 


TiretPeyesterserea PereET 


+2577, eh 


“ 
‘ 


Now, TOO, HE DISCOVERED THE SOURCE OF HIS UNEASI- 
NESS OF HEART AND CONSCIENCE. — Hitherto he may 
have attributed it to a morbid and melancholic element 
in his constitution, to the reaction of his mind from the 
sight of suffering, to a weakness of which he ought to rid 
himself as speedily as possible. He now saw that these 





’ cy : 
POR A et Fe oe a 
Peatiphie ths tn 


Sana . 


- Why Persecutest thon Mle?” 53 4 


strivings were the prickings of the great Husbandman’s 
goad, by which He had long been attempting to bring 
him into that attitude, and lead him to undertake that 
life-work which had been prepared for him from the 
foundation of the world. 

When the Master said, “It is hard for thee to kick 
against the goad,” his speech betrayed Him. It was said 
of Him during his earthly ministry that without a parable 
He did not speak to his people. Now from heaven his 
lips took up the wonted strain. He likened Himself to 
one who had purchased a young heifer at a great price. 
He has brought it into the field to drag the plough in a 
certain direction; but it resists and seeks another, com- 
pelling its owner to use the sharply-pointed goad, pressing 
it against its flanks till it obeys his will. Saul suddenly 
awoke to find that he had been purchased by the Lord, 


_who had been seeking for a long time to make him take 


the predestined track, and that all the bitter remorse of 
conscience had been intended for this sole purpose. It 


_ was a new conception of the religious life. Henceforth he 
- was not to do his own prompting, but God’s; not to be 


clothed in his own righteousness, but in God’s; not to 


cut up and destroy, but to construct; not to oppose the 


Nazarene, but to take his yoke, to bear his burden, to do 
his will. 


TuHat LIGHT ALSO REVEALED TO HIM THE COURSE OF 
His FuTuRE Lire.—Henceforth he was to be a minister and 
a witness of those things which he had seen, and of those 
in which Christ would still appear to him. All that was 
required of him was to live in unbroken accord with the 
risen Saviour, beholding his beauty, inquiring in his temple, 
receiving his messages for transmission to others. 

It was enough. He meekly asked what he must do; 
what the new and rightful Master of his life would have 
him do. And in answer, he was told to take the next step, 


> 
. ae 


wy iy 


ea J 


Ane 


Re oS 


» 


Pa 


Wen. kh See ee 
7 


‘he had expected to drag captive to Jerusalem. Such are 



























which lay just before him, and suffer himself to be led into 
the city. He little weened how great things he would have 
to suffer (Acts ix. 16). These were a secret which Christ 

whispered in the ear of his friend, Ananias. It would be — 
enough for the new convert to learn it afterwards. After 
all, men do as much by suffering as by active toil; and the 
world owes as much to the anguish of its martyrs as to the 4 
words and deeds of its apologists and workers, : 

And then there arose before him in a flash on the high 3 
road, and in fuller development during the three days’ retire- 
ment in the house of Judas, the Lord’s ideal of his life— 
that he should be sent to Jew and Gentile; that by his | 
simple witness he would be used to open blind eyes; that 
men might turn from darkness to light, from the power ~ 
of Satan unto God, so as to receive remission of sin 
and inheritance among the sanctified. That conception ~ 
moulded his life, lingered always in his memory, and ~ 
formed the basis of one of his noblest outbursts (Col. i.) 

To know the Divine will, to see the righteous One, to — 
hear a voice from his mouth, to be his witness and chosen 
vessel, to bear his name before Gentiles and kings and the 
children of Israel, such was henceforth the prize of the — 
mark of his high calling towards which he began to press 
(Acts ix. 15; xxii. 14). He felt that he had been appre- ~ 
hended ; he realized something of the purpose for which he 
had been apprehended ; and with patient faith he resolved, - 
so far as in him lay, to apprehend it. 

How could he be other than obedient to the heavenly — 
vision that summoned him to a life of self-sacrificing toil? — 
As a token of his meek submission, he allowed them to 
lead him by the hand into the city, which he had expected — 
to enter as an inquisitor; and bent low to receive in- 
struction from one of those simple-hearted believers, whom 


oe 


‘the triumphs of the grace of God, and in his case it was. ou 
shown to be exceedingly abundant. 





VI. 
Ghe Inner Rebelation of Christ. 


(GALATIANS i. 15-17.) 


“The proudest heart that ever beat, 
Hath been subdued in me; 
The wildest will that ever rose— 
To scorn thy cause, or aid thy foes— 
Is quelled, my God, by Thee! 


“Thy will, and not my will, be done: 
Henceforth I’d be for ever thine ; 
Confessing Thee, the living Word, 
My Saviour Christ, my God, my Lord, 
Thy Cross shall be my sign !” W. Hong. 


N these wonderful verses we have an epitome of 
the Apostle Paul’s life. There is, first, his separation 
in the Divine purpose before his birth for the high and 

blessed work of ministering the Gospel; then his vocation 
by the grace of God, when a voice called to him which his 
prepared ear detected, though to others it was as thunder ; 
then the three successive steps with which we have to 
do now—the vevelation of Christ; the ministration of 
human sympathy and help; and his ¢so/ation in Arabia ; 
whilst, to crown all, there is afforded an ixdication of his 
life-work of preaching among the Gentiles the unsearchable 
riches of. Christ. 

How different to his anticipation was Saul’s entrance 
into Damascus! He had probably often solaced himself 
during his weary six-days’ journey by picturing the re- 
ception which would be accorded to him by the authorities 
at Damascus, on his arrival at their city as the Commissioner 
of the High Priest, charged with the extirpation of the 


>> 


Nazarene heresy. 


understand what had taken place. Dismounted from his {3 
horse, he went afoot ; instead of the haughty bearing of the | 


Fes aba: 


pep ryra tse? COPPEPERET EST Tae greed ose set eter PeREET 













But instead of honour, th 
consternation and surprise. No one could quite aaiele ) 


Inquisitor, the helplessness of a sightless man appealed for | 
hands to lead him ; shrinking from notice and welcome, he | 
was only too eager to reach a lonely chamber, where he 
might recover from the awful effects of that collision 
between his mortal and sinful nature and the holy, glorious | 
Son of God, whom he had so ruthlessly persecuted. B 

“Trembling and astonished,” he seemed a stricken, — 
dejected, broken man—but his soul was radiant with the — 
light of the glory of God in the face of Jesus. The fire that — 
shone in the burning bush had suddenly kindled upon him. 
As a lightning flash illumines the ink-black night, revealing 
the precipice towards which the traveller was stumbling, 
and unveiling for one brief instant the city with its 
glistening buildings, or the country with its expanse of forest, 
river, and pastureland, so in a moment he had seen God, 


Christ, the Old Testament Scriptures, and the mistaken _ 
purpose of his life. a 

It is interesting to notice how much of the teaching, - 
which the Apostle gave out in after days, may be dis- . 
covered in germ in the records of his conversion. = 


believer’s identification with the Lord, involving all that 
wonderful teaching of the oneness of the Head and 
members. - 
“To appoint thee a minister and a witness”: ¢hereisthe 
origin of his constant reference to witness and testimony- 


“T am Jesus, whom thou persecutest”: ‘¢here is the 


“bearing. 


“The Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee”: om this fie 
rested his claim to be considered specially the Apostle 
of the Gentiles, and perhaps at this time those two great 
revelations may have passed for a moment before the eyes 
of his heart, to be elaborated in after years; the one that 


—— “ 
~* Paes “ 
thew my 
ee 
ee 
+ Ade 





Three Ciertibe Agencies. = 


the Gentiles should be fellow-members, fellow-heirs, and 
fellow-partakers with the chosen nation in all the privileges 
and rights of the Gospel; the other, to make all men 
see what is the fellowship of the mystery which from 
eternal ages hath been hidden in the heart of God—the 
riches of the glory of this mystery, which is Christ in you, 
the hope of glory—that even the hearts of Gentiles may 
become the dwelling-place and temple of the living Saviour 
(Eph. iii. ; Col. i.). 

In Acts xxyi. 17, 18, we find an epitome of the first 
chapter of the Epistle to the Colossians. It is, in fact, the 
seed-plot of the Apostle’s thoughts on the justification and 
sanctification of the soul. The whole of his message might 
be focussed around these two points—remission of sins, 
and an inheritance among the sanctified, through faith in 
the living Christ. 

At this formative period of his life three effective agencies 
were brought to bear on him: the work of God on his 
heart ; contact with Ananias; and the education of the 
desert solitudes. 


I. THE Work or Gop oN HIS HEART.— “It pleased 


God to reveal his Son in me.” The Apostle knew tog . 
much of the divine life to admit that the vast change in) 


him could be entirely accounted for by what he had seen 
with his mortal, and now blinded eyes. He was aware that 
a true and lasting work can only be achieved when the 
inner eye has perceived things that are hidden from 


Uh 


mortal sense. In other words, God, who commanded the © 
light to shine out of darkness, must shine zx the heart to | 


give the light of the knowledge of his glory in the face 


of Jesus. 

Imagine the abundance of revelations made to the 
blinded man during those three days and nights of silence 
and solitude in the house of Judas. Is it wonderful that 


he became oblivious to the needs of the body, and did 





_ eternal, but were manifested to him according to the com- 


' he lays especial stress. It was much to learn that Jesus of 







consciousness of earth, and already live in the heavenlies; 
when the soul loses count of the moments, Sets sail from — 
the coast-line of earth, and finds itself out on the broad 
bosom of the ocean of eternity. Such was the experience 
of this soul. he 
What mysteries began to pass before him, like the pro- — 
cession of the Divine Nature as God proclaimed his name 
to Moses down the mountain gorge! We talk about ~ 
discovery ; we should rather speak of disclosure. Is there — 
such a thing as discovery? Is it not rather true of all 
invention, of all fresh readings of nature, that God is 
taking man up into the mountain of vision and showing 
him the things which have been, and are, and shall be, 
bidding him write them in a book for the generations to¥ 
come? During those wondrous hours God unyeiled 
secrets which had been kept in silence through times 


mandment of the eternal God, that he might make them 
known unto all nations, unto obedience of faith. . 
But the crowning revelation of all was that on which 


Nazareth was in very deed the Son of the Highest, and 
that the Christ must suffer and be the first by his resurrec- 
tion from the dead to proclaim light unto the people and 
the Gentiles ; much to be taught that remission of sinsand 
the heritage of a holy life were the gift of God tothe open 
hand of faith; much to discover that there was no dis- 
tinction between Jew and Greek, but that the same God 
was Lord of all, and rich to all; but more than all was the 
unveiling of the indwelling Christ, living literally within 
him by his Spirit, so that whilst he was in Christ, Christ 
was also in him, as the branch has its place in the vine, and 
the vine lives through the branch. 

O soul of man, has this revelation ever been thy ex- 
perience? Dost thou know that Christ is in thee? If 


“Go pee the ia sa " 


thou truly believest in Him, there is no doubt of it. 
“Know ye not as to your own selves that Jesus Christ 
is in you? Unless, indeed, ye be reprobate.” And yet 
thou mayest be in ignorance of this transcendent posses- 
sion. Ask God to reveal his Son in thee, to make thee 
know experimentally the riches of the glory of this mystery. 
He will rend the vail of the inner life in twain from the 
top to the bottom, and in the most holy place of thy spirit 
disclose the Shekinah of his eternal presence. Two con- 
ditions only must be fulfilled. Thou must be prepared to 
yield thine own will to the cross; and to wait before God 
in the silence and solitude of thy spirit. 

God was pleased to make this known to Saul of Tarsus. 

He will be equally pleased to make it known to thee; 
" because He lives to glorify his Son, and afford ‘the full 





measure of blessedness to his children. Ask for a breath). ; 


of heavenly grace to part the veiling mist, and show thee 
the line of sun-lit Alps, irradiate with the morning glow! 


‘> 


II. Contact wiTH ANANIAS.—It is permitted to holy 


and humble natures greatly to help the spirit which is | 
on the point of .emerging from bondage. The little ’ 


maiden, awaking from her death swoon, required food; 
Lazarus, whom Jesus had summoned back te life, needed 
to be unswathed and loosed. The offices which one can 
perform for another are beautifully illustrated in that 
simple-hearted saint, Ananias, whom the Lord at this 
moment called upon the scene, and to whom He entrusted 
the keys of the kingdom, that he might unlock Saul’s 
way into perfect peace. 

_ We know very little of Ananias, except that he was a 
devout man according to the law and was well reported 
of by the Jews, but evidently he was on intimate terms 
with his Master; and the Lord was willing to enter into 


__ explanations and reassurances with him, before sending 
_ him forth. A very slender taper, if it has caught the 

















° $3 may communicate its glow to the powerful 


.: fully acquainted with the object of Saul’s visit to the — 
city, he accosted him with the sweet and generous term, : 


_ infilling, anointing, and equipping for blessed service. 


~ likenes 


a lighthouse tower. perenne 
He gave him a Brothers Welcome. Though hea 







- Brother, Brother Saul. What a thrill that address sent 





_ through the heart of the new convert! Pharisaism had : 





never spoken thus; and as he became conscious of the — 
presence of this new brother standing beside him and — 
laying his hand on his fevered brow, the human loye was 
the sign and symbol of the Divine. Ah! Love of God, — 
ae must not thou be, though I have persecuted thee 





Fle communicated Priceless Blessings ; for, first, beneath 
thea Jaying on of his hands, sight came clear to eyes which — 
had beheld nothing since they had been smitten by the 
_flory of “that light.” And the touch of this devout 
man, accompanied as it must have been with the upward 
glance of prayer and faith, was also the signal for the 
reception. of the anointing grace of the Holy Spirit, = os 


He baptized him, What a baptism must that have been! 
What a tidal wave of emotion must have swept over him, 
as h ee that he was being united with Jesus by the 

of his death! In years long after, the memory 
of that solemn moment was fresh to him, and he refers 
to it in the repeated we of Rom. vi. ‘“ We who were 
baptized into Christ Jesus.” “ We were buried with him.” — 
‘* We have become united with him by the likeness of his. 
death.” That baptism was his final and irreversible break — 
with his past life, the Pharisaic party, and his persecution - 
of the adherents of “the Way.” Henceforth he was 
avowedly one with the followers of the Nazarene. From 
that moment he took up his cross, and began to follow | 
his Master. The cross and grave of Jesus must now  __ 
stand between him and all that had been—all his friends, — | 
wee’ 











O a ee Fe re ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ew ASS 
ND df eae an wes Er Lond PENIS epi a KD $ Ma auch 
etme clos metilohray ty7 er 


ea eins 
Seer vee 


Ghrist, First ant Past. Gi 


ambitions, and opinions—whilst he must turn his face 
towards labour and travail, hunger and thirst, perils and 
persecutions, together with the daily deliverance unto 
death for Jesus’ sake. 

There was an even deeper thought. He knew that 
the root of sins was sin, the assertion of I, the body of 
the flesh. Too long had this been the motive-force of his 
career. His efforts after righteousness, as well as his zeal 
against the church, had manifested the intensity and 
virulence of this strong, selfish principle. Henceforth, 
however, he desired to be dead to it, and to accept the 
position offered to him in the risen Lord, wherein the 
body of sin should be done away as the centre and 
impulse of his being, because replaced by the indwelling 
Spirit of Life, which is in Christ Jesus. 

‘* Vea, thro’ life, death, thro’ sorrow and thro’ sinning, 
He shall suffice me, for He hath sufficed ; 


Christ is the end, for Christ is the beginning, 
Christ the beginning, for the end is Christ.” 


It does not appear that Ananias was cognizant of all 
that baptism meant to his new brother Saul. To him it 
was an act of obedience, a symbol of the washing away 
of sins. This simple soul had never trodden the difficult 
way of the cross. How little do we know what is passing 
in the thoughts of those next to us in life’s strange school ! 
But his honest help must have been very comforting to 
the new disciple as he united himself with the cross of 
Jesus, and henceforth began to fill up that which was 
behind of the sufferings of Christ for his Body’s sake. 
All Ananias knew was that the Lord had said, “I will 
show him how great things he must suffer for my Name’s 
sake.” 


Ill. THt EpucatTion oF THE DESERT SOLITUDES.— 
“Immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood; 
neither went I up to Jerusalem to them which were 








apostles before me; but I went away into Arat Le, 
is not quite clear whether he began to preach bef 
going; probably not. He wanted to be alone, to reflect — 
on all that he had seen; to co-ordinate, if possible, the 
new with the old, the present with the past. For this he ~ 
must have uninterrupted leisure, and he hungered for the 
isolation and solitude of the wilderness. Men like Ananias 
might reassure him; the apostles of the Lord might ~ 
communicate much of his teaching and wondrous ministry; c 
the holy beauty of the life of the infant church might — 
calm and elevate his spirit; but, above all things, he ~ 
wanted to be alone with Jesus, to know Him and the ¥ 
power of his resurrection, the anointing which makes 
human teaching needless, because it teaches all things. — 
Three years under such tuition would doubtless make 
him so proficient that when afterwards he met those who ~ 
were of repute among the apostles they would be able to 
add nothing unto him. Be 
Arabia probably stands for the Sinaitic peninsula, with 
its sparse population, its marked physical features, its 
associations with Moses, and the Exodus, and Elijah. ] 
How much it must have all meant to that eager spirit, 
who was to interpret to all time the inner meaning of the 
momentous events of which those gaunt mountain ~ 
solitudes had been the scene! Here the bush had burned 
with the fire that now burnt within his heart. Here 
Moses had seen God face to face, as he had seen Jesus. 
Here the plan of the tabernacle had been communicated, — 
as to him that of the church. Here the water flowed 
from the stricken rock, and that Rock was Christ. Here 
Elijah stood in the entrance to the cave, and the still 
small voice stole into his heart; and had he not heard 
that same voice? Beneath those heavens glowing at 
noon with sultry heat, and radiant at night with myriads 
of stars, the cloud had moved, directing the march of the ~ 
pilgrim hosts—for him, too, it shone. Month after month 





















































he wandered to and fro, now sharing the rough fare of 
some Essene community, or the lot of a family of Bedouins; 
now swept upwards in heavenly fellowship, and again 
plunged into profound meditation. The chariots of God 
are twenty thousand, even thousands upon thousands ; 
and they were all waiting at his beck and call to bear him 
aloft into the heavenly places. 

Probably the most important work of those yéars was 
to review the entire course of Old Testament truth from 
the new standpoint of vision suggested by the sufferings 
and death of the Messiah. There was no doubt that He 
had been crucified in weakness, and now lived in the 
power of God. But how was this consistent with the 
anticipations of the prophets and seers of the Old 
_ Testament, who had been understood by generations of 


_ rabbis to predict an all-victorious Prince? How eagerly 


he turned to all the well-known Messianic passages! 
What ecstasy must haye thrilled him as he discovered 
that they were all consistent with Christ’s suffering unto 
death as the way to enter His glory! And how greatly 
he must have wondered that he and all his people had 
been so blind to the obvious meaning of the inspired 
Word (2 Cor. iii.). 

We can well understand how, on his return to 
Damascus, he should straightway proclaim that Jesus 
was the Son of God; and that he should especially 
confound the Jews that dwelt there, proving that this is 
the Messiah. In those silent meditations over the Word 
he stored arguments for use in many a synagogue for the 
next twenty years, where he would reason from the 
Scriptures, opening and alleging that it behoved the 
Messiah to suffer and to rise again from the dead, and 
“that this Jesus is the Messiah.” 

It is almost certain also that he was led at this time to 
understand the relation of the law to the older covenant 
__ into which God had entered with Abraham. Up to this 













64 The Inner Rebelation of C br tO pe. - 


moment he had been a son of the law, laboriously | ulfilling 
its demands, but groaning beneath a perpetual sense of 
failure and condemnation. Now he was led to see that 


but on faith. To employ his own words, he realized that 
the law, which came four hundred and thirty years after the 
giving of the covenant, could not disannul it, so as to make 
the promise of none effect (Gal. iii. 17). He graduated 
backwards from Moses to Abraham. From the loftier — 
summits of Mamre he beheld the temporary and limited 
ministry of the Law, which was added because of trans- 
gressions, till the seed should come to whom the promise 
had been made. 
In the light of this revelation he could better under- 
stand his own call to minister to the Gentiles, for this was 
one of the special provisions of the Abrahamic covenant: 
“In thee and in thy seed shall all the nations of the ~ 
earth be blessed.” Se 
But deeper than all was God’s work with hissoul. Grain 
by grain his proud self-reliance and impetuosity were worn 
away. As it happened to Moses during the forty yearsof 
shepherd life, so it befell Saul of Tarsus. No longer con- 
fident in himself, he was henceforth more than content ~ 
to be the slave of Jesus Christ, going where he was sent, 
doing as he was bidden, and serving as the instrument 
of his will. We all need to go to Arabia to learn lessons 
like these. The Lord Himself was led up into the wilder- 
ness. And, in one form or another, every soul which has 
done a great work in the world has been passed through 
similar periods of obscurity, suffering, disappointment, or 
solitude, 





VIL. 


The Emergence of the Lite-Purpose. 
(AcTS xxii. 17-21.) 


“Ah! Fragments of a whole, ordained to be 
Points in the life I waited. What are ye 
But roundels of a ladder, which appeared 
Awhile the very platform it was reared 
To lift me on?” BROWNING. 


T is a matter of absorbing interest to a mother to 
watch the unfolding character of her child from the 
apparent shapelessness of infancy to the defined outlines 

of marked individuality. But it is still more interesting 
to trace the successive stages of the emergence of the life 
purpose of a new-born soul. At the moment of conversion 
there are two questions that arise naturally upon our lips: 
First, Who art Thou, Lord ? and next, What wilt Thou have 
metodo? As éo the first, we can only await the gradual 
revelation, as when the dawn slowly breaks on a wide- 
spread landscape. It will take an eternity to know all that 
Jesus Christ is and can be to his own. As /o the second, 
we are no less dependent on the Divine revealing hand, 
indicating the path we are to tread, showing the scheme 
which the Divine mind has conceived. 

Often at the beginning of the new life we attempt to 
forecast the work which we hope to accomplish. We take 
into account our tastes and aptitudes, our faculties and 
talents, our birth and circumstances. From these we infer 
that we shall probably succeed best along a certain line of 
useful activity. But as the moments lengthen into years, 
it becomes apparent that the door of opportunity is closing 


in that direction. It is a bitter disappointment. We refuse 


to believe that the hindrances to the fulfilment of our 
cone 












cherished hopes can be permanent. Patience, we cry, 
conquer every difficulty. The entrance may be strait, but 
surely it is passable. At last we shall reach the wide and — 
large place of successful achievement. We cast ourselves — 
against the closing door, as sea birds on the illuminated — 
glass of the lighthouse tower, to fall dazed and bewildered 


appointment that we come to perceive that God’s ways are ~ 
not as our ways, nor his thoughts as our thoughts; and 
that He has other work for us to do, for which He has been © 
preparing us, though we knew it not. When we are young — 
we gird ourselves, and attempt to walk whither we will; but — 
in after years we are guided by Another, and taken whither — 
we would not. é 

There is a marvellously apposite illustration of these — 
facts of common experience in the life-story which we are — 
considering. Without doubt, at the beginning of his ~ 
Christian career, the Apostle felt strongly drawn to ~ 
minister to his own people. He was a Hebrew, and the — 
son of Hebrews. The pure blood of the chosen race 
flowed through his heart, nourishing it with the great — 
memories of the past. What was the meaning of his — 
having been cradled and nourished in the heart of Judaism, — 
except that he might better understand and win Jews? 
Did not his training in the strictest sect of their religion, 
and at the feet of Gamaliel, give him a special claim on 
those who held “that jewel of the law” in special reverence 
and honour ? 

But he was destined to discover that his new-found 
Master had other purposes for his life, and that he had ~ 
been specially prepared and called to preach among the 
Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ, and make @/ 
men see the fellowship of the mystery which from all 
generations had been hid in God. How this discovery was 
made to him is an interesting study, because, though at the 
moment of his arrest it was clearly announced by the Lord 


, 
1 
: 
1 

’ 





Paul's Cherished Boge. 


Himself that he was to be sent to the Gentiles Faye 


apparently, it did not dawn on his mind then to how large 


an extent his energies and time would be monopolised 
by ministering to those who were, at that time, alienated 
from the commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the 
covenant of promise, having no hope and without God in 
the world. 


I. Paut’s CHERISHED Hope.— During his sojourn in the 
Sinattic peninsula we may well believe that his soul turned 
towards his people with ardent desire. Was he not an 
Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin ; 
and could he be indifferent to the needs of his brethren 
according to the flesh? Surely it would not be difficult to 
unfold the meaning of the sacred symbolism through which 
their forefathers had been disciplined in those very wastes. 
That the rock was Christ ; that the water which flowed over 
the sands foreshadowed his mission to the world; that the 
law given from Sinai had been fulfilled and re-edited in the 
holy life of Jesus of Nazareth; that the sacrifices, offered 
on those sands, had pointed to the death of the cross; and 
that the fire which burnt in the bush had also shone on his 
face—to teach all this, and much more, and to lead his 
people from the desert wastes of Pharisaism to the heavenly 
places of which Canaan was the type, was the hope and 
longing of his heart. What work could be more congenial 
to his tastes and attitudes than this? 
On /us return to Damascus he at once commenced his 
crusade in the synagogues. ‘‘Straightway,” we are told, 
_ “he preached Christ in the synagogues, that He is the Son 
of God. And all that heard him were amazed. But Saul 

increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews 
_ which dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is the very 
_ Christ.” How encouraged he was by these early successes! 
_ How evidently God seemed to be setting his seal and im- 
 primatur on his decisions! Visions of national repentance 















68 Che Gmergence of the Fife-Hr 


yee 
and conversion passed across his eager soul, and h 
dared to hope that he should live to see the dry be 
become a great army for God. ; 

But the vision was soon overcast. So violent was the 
hatred with which he was regarded by his fellow-country- 
men, that he was in imminent danger of his life. They — S 
seem to have instigated the governor, who held the city of — 
the Damascenes with a garrison, to assist them with patrols. — 
The gates were watched day and night, that he might be - 
killed if he endeavoured to escape. And finally he was” 
lowered under cover of the night by a basket over the 
city wall. : 

Still, however, his purpose was unchanged. We went = 
to Jerusalem with the intention of seeing Peter. But i 
this he would probably have failed had it not been for 
intervention of Barnabas, who, according to an old tradition, 
had been his fellow-student, educated with himself at the 
feet of Gamaliel. Through his good offices he was brought 
into contact with Peter and James, and was, not improb- ~ 
ably, received into the house of Mary, the mother of Mark, = 
and sister to the good Cypriote (Col, iv. 10). A blessed ~ 
fortnight followed. He was with them, coming in and 
going out at Jerusalem, and especially engaged in holy and ~ 
loving fellowship with Peter, the acknowledged leader of the ~ 
Church. 

It is surely an innocent use of the imagination to think — 
of these two sitting or walking together on the house-top, — 
when the sun was westering, conversing of the great past. — 
On one occasion their theme would be the Lord’s early — 
ministry in Galilee, so closely associated with Peter's 
opening manhood ; on another, the discourses and scenes 
of the last hours before his crucifixion; on another, the — 
precious death and burial, the glorious resurrection and — 
ascension, and the appearances of the forty days. “Tell me — 
all you can remember of the Master,” would be the frequent ; 
inquiry of the new disciple of him who had been so 





| specialiy privileged as a witness of that mystery of love. 


And it must often have come to pass that as they com-— 


muned together of all those things that had happened, 
Jesus Himself drew near, and their hearts burned within 
them. 

What Peter could not tell him, James could. For he 
had shared the home of Nazareth, but had remained 
unbelieving till the Resurrection convinced him. He 
would recount the story of the early years, and corroborate 
Peter’s narrative of events from the Easter dawn to the 
Day of Pentecost. 

But Saul had other business in those happy days. He 
seems to have avoided the churches of Judea which were 
in Christ, and to have again sought the synagogues. ‘He 
spake and disputed against the Grecian Jews.” On many 
a spot where he had contended against Stephen he stood 
now to contend for the truths which he had first heard 
from the martyr’s life. How well he could understand the 
passion with which his statements were received ; but how 
skilfully would he drive home the goad, which had at last 
compelled his own surrender! But here also his efforts 
were met by rebuffs: ‘“‘ They went about to slay him.” 

Yet in spite of coldness and antipathy, he clung 
tenaciously to his cherished purpose. He had great sorrow 
and unceasing pain in his heart; he could have wished 
himself anathema from Christ for his brethren’s sake, his 
kinsmen according to the flesh. And when he knelt 
quietly in the Temple and heard authoritatively from the 
Master’s lips that Jerusalem would not receive his testimony, 
he could hardly believe it, and clung still to his hope, and 
pleaded against the idea that the door was closing in 
his face. “Surely,” he cried, “it cannot be that Jerusalem 
will refuse my words! She has such ample proof of my 
sincerity, she must be willing at least to listen to the 
arguments which I have found so imperative; surely my 


marvellous change must arrest and impress her. Let me 


etd They went about to slaw him.” 69 






$3.) ee 


Mist NP eye re 


ss 


“i 
Py 


ve” a 


< 












Soa 
stay. To transfer me elsewhere would be a serious 
of power. I shall do better work here among people 
know me so well, and conditions I can understand, | 
would be possible anywhere else in the world.” - 

In a similar manner we have all cherished our life- < 
purposes. We have forecasted our future, as liable to 
lie in a certain direction, and have dearly desired that ‘ 
it should do so. When hindrances have been put in our — 
way, and when we have met with strong opposition and ~ 


rebuff, we have still clung to our hope. Only very slowly rf 


it has been like tearing out our heart. Not till long years 
have passed have we realized that the Lord’s plan was ~ 
so much wiser and grander than our own. Then suddenly — 


glory, and the lasting satisfaction of our own heart. 


II. Tue Crosinc Door.—It began to close at ~ 
Damascus ; it closed still further when persecution arose at 
Jerusalem ; but the final act was as Saul was prayingin the 
Temple. es 

It would appear that he had gone there to be alone, 
away from the many voices that were endeavouring to 
counsel him. For though he had been but a few days 
in the city, antipathy against him had already risen to such 
a height that his life was in danger; and it was necessary 
to consider seriously what to do—should he stay, or go? 
should he brave the storm, or flee before it? Some 
advised one course, and some another. The babble of 
voices confused him, deafening the whisper of the still, 
small voice; his attention was too distracted by human 
suggestions to be perfectly open to the directing finger 
of God. So he betook himself to the Temple, where his 
Master had so often been ; where so many symbols spoke 





 - PrP, 
% ~ Tel y 
ee 
ee 
ee i 





— “F twill send thee to the Gentil 
of Him; where holy associations gathered like troops of 
white-robed angels. And, as he knelt in prayer in some 
_ quiet spot, he saw Him, whom his soul loved and sought. 
How many visit the Temple without seeing Him! but if we 
see Him, we are oblivious to ali beside. There is One who 
is greater than the Temple. And the risen Lord gave clear 
and unmistakable directions, as He always will to those 
who can say with the Psalmist: “My soul is silent to 
the Lord, for my expectation is from Him.” “I saw Him 
saying unto me, Make haste, and get thee quickly out 
of Jerusalem; because they will not receive of thee 
testimony concerning Me.” 

It is easy to explain why they would not accept his 
testimony. ‘There was too much of the Cross in it. He 
had discovered aspects of the death of Jesus, which were 
in keen antagonism to all that savoured of Pharisaism. It 
was sufficiently mortifying to their pride to learn that the 
son of the carpenter was the long-anticipated Messiah ; but 
to be told further that the true life could only be entered 
- by union with that supreme act of self-renunciation was 
intolerable. This side of Christianity is now too little 
appreciated, and so the offence of the Cross has largely 
ceased. But wherever it is consistently advocated and 
practised, it is certain to arouse the sharpest controversy. 

Saul, as we have seen, did not willingly accept this as 
the ultimatum, and still argued that Jerusalem would afford 
the most suitable sphere for his ministry. It is a mistake 
to argue with God, as though to bend Him to our will. 
“Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker; let the 
potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth.” But 
all debate was at last summarily closed by the words, 
“ Depart, for I will send thee far hence to the Gentiles.” 

Ah, Saul! thou hast argued, and striven, and tried to 
carry thy way; thou hast almost demanded that the Lord 
should adopt thy views, and been very loth to believe 
that they may not hold. Thou hast knocked vehemently 


+1 









gs 7 i 


















knewest, and was sending thee into a yet wider and nore Lm 
productive sphere of service. - 


III. Tue Opened Door.—So the disciples brought 
the hunted preacher down to Czesarea, and sent him forth 
to Tarsus; and not improbably he resumed his tent 
making there, content to await the Lord’s will and bidding. — 
But the years passed slowly. Possibly four or five were 
spent in comparative obscurity and neglect. That he | 
wrought for Christ in the immediate vicinity of his homeis ~ 
- almost certain, as we shall see; but the word of the Lord — 
awaited fulfilment. 

At last one day, as he waited, he heard a voice saying in — : 
the doorway, “Does Saul live here?” And in another © 
2 moment the familiar face of his old college-friend was 

peering in on him, with a glad smile of recognition. Then — 
the story was told of the marvellous outbreak of God’s ~ 
work in Antioch, of the overflowing blessing and the 
breaking nets, and Barnabas pleaded with him to return 
to help him gather in the whitening harvest of the first 
great Gentile city which the Gospel had moved. “And he 
brought him to Antioch ; and it came to pass that a whole 
year they assembled themselves with the church and taught 
much people.” ~ 
Be not afraid to trust God utterly. As you go down the 
long corridor you may find that He has preceded you, and 
locked many doors which you would fain have entered ; but 
be sure that beyond these there is one which He has left 
unlocked. Open it and enter, and you will find yourself 
face to face with a bend of the river of opportunity, broader 
and deeper than anything you had dared to imagine in” 
your sunniest dreams. Launch forth on it; it conducts 
to the open sea. 


Vill. 


“Alans Led in Criumph.” 
(2 CORINTHIANS ii. 14-16.) 


** Christ ! I am Christ’s ! and let that name suffice you ; 
Ay, and for me He greatly hath sufficed ; 
So, with no winning words I would entice you ; 
Paul has no honour and no friend but Christ.” 
~ Myers, 


HILST Saul was tarrying in Tarsus, where he re- 
mained some four or five years, he appears to have 
concentrated his energies in the direction suggested 

by two references in Acts xv. In the 23rd verse, the 

Apostles and elder brethren address their circular letter ex- 

pressly to the brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch, 

_ Syria, and Cilicia. And in the 41st verse we learn that 
7 Paul, with Silas as his fellow-traveller, went through Syria 
and Cilicia, confirming the churches. Evidently there 

were infant churches scattered throughout Saul’s native 

~ province ; and the conclusion is almost irresistible that they 
were born into existence beneath the fervid appeals and 
devoted labours of the new disciple. 

Perhaps at this time Saul’s kinsmen, Andronicus and 
~ / Jania, Jason, Sosipater, and others, were brought to Christ ; 
but his father, deeply mortified at the blasting of his hopes 
by the conversion of his son from the old faith, cast him 
off (Romans xvi. 7; Phil. iii. 8). 

His work, however, was chiefly concerned with the 
synagogues, which, since the Dispersion, had been estab- 
_ lished in most of the large cities of the empire. As with 
the earliest churches in Judza, the main constituents of 
_ these would be converted Jews and proselytes. It is 

doubtful if the Apostle would have felt himself justified in 





Sibyl DPS 





. but pursuing his triumphant progress to his throne. 








receiving the Gentiles, as such, into the chu 
feeling his way in that direction, and was being prepared 
for the full acceptance of the commission with which he 

had been entrusted on the way to Damascus, and when 
worshipping in the Temple. 

It has been supposed that some of his deep experiance ; 
of privation and peril must have taken place in the course ~ 
of his efforts to spread the Gospel during these years. We — 
all remember that marvellous enumeration—labours more 
abundant, stripes above measure, deaths oft, five times the — 
forty stripes save one ; thrice beaten with rods, thrice ship- 
wrecked, a night and day in the deep; in perils, labour, 
travail, watchings, hunger and thirst, cold and nakedness — 
(2 Cor. xi.). There is positively no room in his life, as 
narrated by the chronicler of the Acts of the Apostles, for — 
many of these, especially when we call to mind that the 
Second Epistle to Corinth was written before his expulsion 
from Ephesus, and therefore before the long series of trials 
with which the Book of the Acts closes. 

It is, therefore, more than probable that we are to con- 
clude that from the very hour that he began to follow the 
Saviour he became identified with His sorrowful progress 
through the world. Hated, resisted, despised, and crucified, 


This conception was closely associated in the Apostle’s 
mind with his unprecedented experiences, as will appear 
to any thoughtful student of the Second ‘Epistle to the 
Corinthians. Mark especially the second chapter and 
fourteenth verse: ‘ Thauks be unto God, which always 
leadeth us in triumph in Christ, and maketh manifest 
through us the savour of his knowledge in every place. 
For we are a sweet savour of Christ unto God, in them 
that are being saved, and in them that are perishing.” 


THE METAPHOR was gathered from the scene of a Roman 
Triumph, one of the most notable events in the old world, 


ot rgetine’ * 90 
= 
>. See 7 UY ae 





ye when. some great general, a Cesar or Marius, returning — 
from distant scenes of triumph, ascended the Capitoline 
Hill, amid the plaudits of the assembled citizens and the 


fragrance of sweet odours. Before his chariot were paraded 
captive kings and princes; after it came long lines of 
prisoners laden with the spoils of war. About this time 
Claudius was celebrating his victories in Britain, and 
among his captive princes marched the brave Caractacus. 

_ To the vivid imagination of the Apostle—always more 
prone to use metaphors borrowed from the life of men in 
camps and cities, than from scenes of natural beauty—it 


seemed as though the pageantry of the scene, which so 


often stirred Rome to its heart, was a meet emblem of the 
progress of Christ through the world: Hades and death 
bound to his chariot wheels, his arms filled with spoils, his 
trains composed of the thousands whom He had con- 
quered, and amongst whom Paul was proud to count 
himself. 

Is not this an apt picture of every age? Each great 
crisis in the past has helped to advance the glorious reign 
of Christ. Was the fall of Babylon a crisis? It gave 
mankind a universal speech—the language spoken by 


Alexander and his soldiers—the delicate, subtle Greek in | 


which the New Testament was written. Was the fall of 
Rome a crisis? It opened the way to the rise of the 


' northern nations, which have ever been the home of 






Liberty and the Gospel. Was the fall of Feudalism, in 


the French Revolution, a crisis? It made the splendid 


achievements of the nineteenth century possible. And we 
may look without dismay on events that cast a shadow 


on our hearts. They also shall serve the cause of the 


Gospel. In ways we cannot tell, they shall prepare for 
the triumph of our King. Through the throes of the 
present travail the new heavens and earth shall be born. 
The agony is not as the expiring groan of the dying 


gladiator, but as the sigh of the mother bringing forth — 














Os Teel tele Se 


=—Ss 


ee ae mae oe er ren map et 






her first-born. These things, said our Lord, must needs 
be; and they are the beginning of travail (Matt. xxiv. a 
R. . And amid all Jesus rides in triumph to his destined 
glory and the crown of all the earth. 


THE AposTLE’s PERSONAL PosiTION in his Master's 
procession was clearly apprehended and perpetually 
accentuated. He never wearied of describing himself as 
the slave of Jesus Christ. ‘Paul, a slave of Jesus Christ, 
called to be an Apostle, separated unto the Gospel of 
God.” He had been a rebel chieftain. With fire and sword 
he had ravaged the flock of God. He had measured his _ 
strength with Jesus of Nazareth, but had met more than 
his match. The Stronger One had come upon him, taken 
away his armour, and bound him with fetters from which 
he could not get free. He would not, if he could; nor 
could he, if he would. From that hour in which he had 


—_ 
— 
3 
= 
“~ 
A 
_— 
a 
“a 
as 
= 
= 
we 
a 
Sie 
vey 
oh 
* 
on 
a 
° 
“ 
# 


been smitten to the ground on the road to Damascus, he ; 
had been content to be led from city to city, from continent 
to continent, in the triumphal progress of his Lord, a 


trophy of his mighty power to bring the most stubborn 
under his yoke. ‘Thanks be unto God,” he cries, “who 
always leadeth us in triumph.” 

Is this your conception of your life? Captured! 
Apprehended by Jesus Christ! Set apart for Himself! 
Do you realize that you are bound by the most sacred 
fetters to your Conqueror, and are following his chariot 
through the earth? Life would assume a new aspect if 
you realized this, and that all you are in your person, and 
own in your property, has become Emmanuel’s. 

Those whom Jesus leads in triumph share his triumph. 
They may be a spectacle to angels or to men. Sometimes 
in the stocks; often accounted the off-scouring of all 
things; yet, in the spiritual realm, they are made to 
triumph always. Conquered, they conquer ; enslaved, they 
are free; last in this world, but in the front rank of 





heavenly society. Poor, beaten, vanquished soul, lift up 
_ thy head and rejoice ; for if thou art conquered by Jesus, 
thou shalt be always made to triumph ! 


THE INFLUENCE OF CHRIST ON THE CHARACTER OF 
THOSE WHO FOLLOW Him is also clearly delineated. The 
metaphor is changed, and the Apostle deems himself no 
longer a slave, but a freed servant, a citizen, a friend 
bearing a bowl of incense from which redolent vapours 
steal into the air. God makes manifest through him in 
every place the sweet savour of the knowledge of Jesus. 
Wherever he went, men knew Jesus better; the loveliness 
of the Master’s character became more apparent. Men 
became aware of a subtle fragrance, poured upon the air, 
which attracted them to the Man of Nazareth. The world 
became purer, the tone of society healthier, the morals and 
manners of men more refined. 

What an ideal this is for us all, so to live that though 
we are unable to speak much or occupy a commanding 
position, yet from our lives a holy savour may be spread 


abroad, which will not be ours, but Christ’s! Let us live 


so near Him, that we may absorb his fragrance; and then 
go forth to exhale it again in pureness, in knowledge, in 
longsuffering, in kindness, in the Holy Spirit, in love 
unfeigned, in the word of truth, and in the power of God. 
Just as a piece of clay or sponge may become so impreg- 
nated with some aromatic spice, that it will scent the 
drawer, cupboard, or box in which it lies, so we may 
become impregnated with the sweetness of Jesus, and 
spread it by an irresistible influence in every place where 
we are called to live or work. 


YET ONCE AGAIN THE THOUGHT CHANGES.—The Apostle 
imagines himself to be no longer the hand that swings the 
incense-bowl, but the incense itself. He says, “We are 
unto God a sweet savour of Christ.” How marvellously 
scent awakens memory! In a moment it will waft us back 


7 





es 
re 
a eee 


~ 
| 





RAL STRY on eee 
78 “Alians Ped 


uu Te 

through long years to some old country lane, garden, 
orange-grove, summoning to mind people and eve 
associated with it in the happy past. 


When, therefore, we are told that we may be toGoda 
sweet savour of Christ, it must be meant that we may so 
live as to recall to the mind of God what Jesus was in his ~ 





mortal career. It is as though, as God watches us from 


day to day, He should see Jesus in us, and be reminded 


(speaking after the manner of men) of that blessed life Oe 4 
which was offered as an offering and a sacrifice to God for 


a sweet-smelling savour. 


What a test for daily living! Is my life fragrant of © 


Jesus? Do I remind the Father of the blessed Lord? 


Does He detect Jesus in my walk and speech? and that — 4 


there are in me the sweet savour of that daily burnt- 
offering, that delight in God’s will, that holy joy in suffering 
- for his glory, that absorption in his purposes which made 
the life of the Son of Man so well-pleasing to God? 

At the foot of the Capitoline Hill the ancient triumph 
divided. Some of the captives were led off to the dark 
precincts of the Tullianum, where they were put to death. 
Others were reserved to live. The same fragance was 
associated with the perishing on the one hand and the 
saved on the other. Thus it is in all Gospel-preaching and 
holy living. The sun that melts clay hardens wax; the 
light that bleaches linen tans the hands which expose it; 
the cloud is light to Israel, and darkness to Egypt. Those 
who have life are helped to intenser life, and those who 
lack it are only driven to further excesses of sin. To one 
we are the savour of life unto life, to the other of death 
unto death. 

It was in such a mood that Saul of Tarsus spent the 
years of preparation which preceded the great opportunity 
of his life. It was in the cultivation of such virtues that 
he awaited the coming of Barnabas. 


: Nate e 
Poe s.r 





7 





Ix 
ee he Apostle of the Gentiles. 


Fe (ROMANS xi. 13.) 


** He looked abroad, and spake of some bright dawn 
Of happiness and freedom, peace and love ; 
’ Day long desired, and now about to break 
> On all the nations.” TRENCH. 


e T is probable that during his years of quiet work in 
We. Cilicia and Syria, Saul of Tarsus was being led with 


increasing clearness to apprehend God’s purpose in his 


life—that he should be the Apostle of the Gentiles. The 
heavenly voices at the commencement of his Christian 
career had announced that he would be sent to them 

_ (Acts xxvi. 20). Ananias had been informed that he was 
to be a chosen vessel to bear the name of Jesus before the 
_ Gentiles and kings (ix. 15). The vision in the Temple had 

- culminated in the words, “Depart: for I will send thee 
far hence unto the Gentiles” (xxii. 21). And there is 

no doubt that the exigencies of his labour, for so many 
years, amid populations largely composed of Gentiles, made 
him feel the impulse of the current that was bearing the 
whole church towards a new departure. Up till now 

_ Judaism ‘had been the only door into Christianity; hence- 
forth the door of faith was to stand wide open to Gentiles 
also, without circumcision. Some suggestion of this is 
_ furnished by his own lips, “I declared both to them of 








4 that they should repent and turn to God, doing works 
worthy of repentance” (xxvi. 20). But still the true 
_ channel-bed of his life was hardly discovered until circum- 
stances transpired which will now demand our notice, 


“ 







Damascus first, and at Jerusalem—and also to the Gentiles, 


aes 





bey tne 


Hs “it 
tae Net path Se) 
riceh 0 


i Oe ay tae Mess 


We a J 
Sn intale 


{Seat 


Ne 
Me oe 















"ag 


? 


tans 


apa ’ 


is 
Be 4 


iindilis 


* 


Tea 


7 
5 


eEpetar ibert vitae 


narrative the centre of interest shifts from the 1 


artes 


I. Summonep To AntTiocH.—Half-way thr 





church at Jerusalem to one which had been founded — 
shortly before the time we are describing, in the gay, 
frivolous, busy, beautiful city of Antioch. Connected 
with the commerce of the Western world by the River 
Orontes, which flowed majestically through the marble 
palaces and crowded wharves that lined its banks, and — 
communicating with the thoughtful conservative East by 
the caravans that brought the merchandise of Mesopotamia — 
and Arabia through the passes of the Lebanon, Antioch — 
Was an emporium of trade, a mecting- place for es Old 











sentation.” It is for ever famous in Christian annals, 
because a number of unordained and unnamed disciples, 
fleeing from Jerusalem in the face of Saul’s persecution, 
dared to preach the Gospel to Greeks, and to gather the 
conyerts into a church, in entire disregard of the initial 
rite of Judaism. There, also, the disciples of “the Way” 
were first called Christians from the holy name which was _ 
constantly on the lips of teachers and taught. But the © 
imposition of that name shows that the people of Antioch 
were aware that a new body or sect was in process of 
formation. From Antioch issued the first missionary 
expedition for the evangelization of the world. In post- 
Apostolic days it was famous as the see of the great bishop, 
saint, and martyr, Ignatius. 

The population of Antioch was a rabble of all races; 
but the Greek element predominated, with its licentious 
rites, its vivacious, sparking intellect, its marvellously 
elegant and subtle tongue, its passion for the theatre, the 
arena, and the racecourse. There was need indeed that 
the river of Life should find its way into that swamp of 
beautiful but deadly corruption ; but probably none of the 
leaders of the church would have dared to take the initia 


- 
~ 
— 
forms of the capita’ life of the empire found some repre- 3 
x 
“ 


_f> “ eoetew oe 


Pd 
WA 
\- Perurprexa yy 


WOsf FOVT 92 


oor 
i 


NV INV 


ideo) 
ifs 34 
ait 
eo, 
oe 
om 
DY 
Te 





L 
Sy ay ix. 


_ aNOW Hea prApabue gan 


rma is 64 pine wv 


nwndwosunpauoniwant |e 


vomad yo rau ayp 


pir? 
Amory TS ery 
eau AY perponna a0 

wnod praoddis ayy, 




















PAUL PREACHING AT ATHENS 


Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, Him declare I unto you.” 
ACTS xvii. 24. 


A Great Problem. 81 


step of conducting its streams thither. Peter and the 
church at Jerusalem were only just learning, through 
amazing incidents in the house of Cornelius, that God 
was prepared to grant to Gentile proselytes repentance 
unto life. It was left, therefore, to a handful of fugitive, 
Hellenistic Jews, men of Cyprus and Cyrene, to break 
through the barriers of the centuries, and begin preaching 
the Lord Jesus to the Greeks at Antioch. Instantly the 
Divine Spirit honoured their word, gave testimony to the 
word of God’s grace, and a great number believed and 
turned to the Lord (Acts xi. 19-21). 

As soon as tidings of these novel proceedings reached 
Jerusalem, the church despatched Barnabas, who was 
himself a Cypriote, to make inquiries and report. His 
verdict was definite and reassuring. He had no hesitation 
in affirming that it was a definite work of God’s grace; 
he rejoiced that these simple souls had been thrust into 
so ripe and plentiful a harvest; and he carried on the 
work which had been inaugurated with such success 
that “much people was added unto the Lord.” 

His success, however, only added to the perplexity 
and difficulty of the situation, and he found himself face 
to face with a great problem. The Gentiles were pressing 
into the church, and taking their places on an equality 
with Jews at the Supper and Love-feasts, an action which 
the more conservative Jews greatly resented. The single- 
hearted man was hardly able to cope with the problem. 
But he remembered that at his conversion his old friend 
and fellow - student had been specially commissioned to 
preach to the Gentiles; and hoping that he might be 
ready with a solution, he departed to Tarsus to seek Saul, 
and having found him he brought him to Antioch. “And 
it came to pass that for a whole year they were gathered 
together with the church, and taught much people.” 

But this year’s experience at Antioch was of the utmost 
consequence to Saul. He learnt from Barnabas the 

EF 































82 The Apostle of the Gentile 


conclusion to which the church at Jerusalem had 
on hearing Peter’s recital of God’s dealings with Cornelius 
and his household (xi. 18); he noticed how ovideeay tn a 
Spirit of God set his seal upon appeals, whether by — 
himself or others, addressed directly to the Gentiles, and 
thus was led with that deep appreciation which comes © 
from the education of circumstances to see that believing 
Gentiles were fellow-members of the church and fellow- — 
heirs of the promises. God made no distinctions; why — 
should he? All the while his horizon was broadening, : 
his confidence increasing, his conception of God’s purposes — 
deepening, and he was formulating the Gospel which he ~ 
afterwards preached among them (Gal. ii. 2). “4 

We need not stay over his brief visit to Jerusalem at 
the end of his year’s ministry at Antioch, to carry alms 
from the Gentile Christians to their suffering Jewish © 
brethren. Suffice it to say that it established a precedent — 
which he followed in after life, and proved that there was 
no sort of antagonism between the new society and the 
old, but that all were one in Christ. On this occasion — 
he does not seem to have met the Apostles, who probably — 
had withdrawn from Jerusalem to avoid the murderous ~ 
hate of Herod (xii.); and the gift of the church at Antioch — 
was, therefore, left with the elders of the mother-church 
(xi. 30). And nothing occurred to divert the heart of the 
future Apostle from those resolves which were crystallizing 
with increasing clearness before him. 


II. Ser Apart BY THE Hoty Spirit.—It was a ~ 
momentous hour in the history of the church when, on 
the return of Barnabas and Paul from Jerusalem, they — 
met, with three others, for a season of fasting and prayer. “4 
What was the immediate reason for this special session 
we cannot say; but it is significant that the three prophets 
and two teachers represented between them five different 
countries. Were they yearning after their own people, — 





and wistful to offer them the Gospel, as they now saw 
they might offer it, apart from the trammels and restraints 
of Judaism? We cannot tell. That, however, was the 
birth-hour of modern missions. The Holy Ghost, Christ’s 
Vicar, the Director and Administrator of the church, 
bade the little group set apart two out of their number 
to a mission which He would unfold to them, as they 
dared to step out in obedience to his command. 

There was no hesitation or delay. The church set 
them free from their duties, and the Holy Spirit sent 
them forth. And that journey was a complete answer to 
all the questions by which they had been perplexed. 

In Cyprus, to which they were first attracted, because 
Barnabas was connected with it through his birth and 
estate, though they proclaimed the word of God from 
one end to the other in the synagogues of the Jews, 
they had no fruit till the Roman governor called them 
before him, and sought to hear their message, on hearing 
which he believed. 

After landing on the mainland, Paul, contrary to the 
judgment of John Mark, struck up from the sea-coast to 
the far-reaching table-lands of the interior, four thousand 
feet above the sea-level, with the evident intention of 
establishing churches on the great trade route which ran 
through Asia Minor from Tarsus to Ephesus. What might 
not be the result for East and West, if this great mutual 
bridge were to become a highway for the feet of the Son of 
God! But there the same experience awaited him. 

The Jews in Antioch and Pisidia refused, whilst the 
Gentiles welcomed them. Indeed he was compelled to 
turn publicly from his own countrymen, and hold up the 
_ Gospel as light and salvation to those whom the prophet 
described as at the uttermost end of the earth. Then it 
_ was that the word of the Lord spread throughout all the 

region, 

At Iconium, whither they fled before a persecution 





wise Oe ee er stab 
- Sea ee we Stree ae ayes 
Gaul and Barnabas sent forth. 83 





Weaay- Ly 


his first visit to the warm-hearted Galatians, whose country — 




























84 The Apostle of the Gentiles. as 


efile as 
which made it unsafe to remain in Antioch, they agz 
found the malice of the Jews so persistent that they were 
driven forth into the Gentile cities and district of Lycaonia, ~ 
where there were probably no synagogues at all. There, 
too, they preached the Gospel, and made many disciples. _ 

Everywhere it was the Jewish element that was 


to themselves, received them and their message with 
open arms. God gave manifest testimony to the word 
of his grace whenever they unfolded it to the Gentiles; ~ 
set before those eager seekers the open door of faith; and — 
granted signs and wonders to be wrought of His whl . 
hands (Acts xiv. 3, 27 ; xv. 12). 
As Paul quietly studied these indications of God’s will, “ 
he needed no angel to tell him that as Israel would not 4 
hear, God was provoking them to jealousy by them who 
were not a people. He saw that the original branches were — 
being broken off, that the wild olive grafts might take 
their place. Blindness was happening to Israel, until the ~ 
fulness of the Gentiles had been gathered in (Rom. xi. ~ 
8, 17, 25). His love was not abated. How could it be? ~ 
Were they not his brethren, his kinsmen according to the 
flesh? But he must follow the divine plan. Wy 
Probably Paul’s greatest experience of this journey was ~ 


is probably referred to in the vague allusion of Acts xiv. 24. 
In any case, his insistence in his epistle that he had 
preached to them the Gospel as he had received it direct — 
and undiluted from Christ, compels us to locate his first 
acquaintance with them at this time, and before that — 
memorable visit to Jerusalem, to which we shall refer 
presently, and in which he consulted the apostles con- 
cerning the Gospel he proclaimed (Acts xv,; Gal. ii.) — 
It is probable that he was detained amongst them by a 

painful attack of his habitual malady, aggravated by climatic — 
changes, or malaria. ‘‘ Ye know,” he says, “that because of 





ge oh re hs ee 


Recognized by the Apostles. 85 


an infirmity of the flesh, I preached the gospel unto you 
the first time; and that which was a temptation in my 
flesh ye despised not, nor rejected.” So far from rejecting 
him on this account, his sorrows and afflictions only touched 
them more to the quick, and bound them to him. “I bear 
you witness,” he says, “that, if possible, ye would have 
plucked out your own eyes and given them to me.” 

His success among this affectionate people was remark- 
able, and still further deepened the impression, which was 
becoming the guiding star of his career, that he must bend 
his strength to the salvation of the Gentiles, whose cause 
had been laid on his heart at the hour of his conversion. 


III. His APOSTOLATE RECOGNIZED BY THE APOSTLES. 
—We do not propose to add anything to the discussion in 
which so much has been urged on either side, as to the 
time when the visit to Jerusalem, referred to in Gal. ii, 
took place. After carefully considering the arguments of 
those who would identify it with the visit to bring alms 
mentioned above, and of those who would make it a 
separate visit for the special purpose of obtaining the 
opinion of the leaders on his ministry—we fall back on the 
more generally received view that Gal. ii. refers to the visit 
mentioned in Acts xv., when, as we shall see in a succeeding 
chapter, he was sent as a deputation from Antioch to 
Jerusalem to obtain the views of the Apostles on the 
admission of Gentiles into the church. 

It is sufficient for our present purpose to notice that 
Paul definitely sought the opinion of those in repute among 
the Apostles on his teaching, lest by any means he should 
be running, or had run, in vain. In the course of several 
interviews it became increasingly evident to James, Peter, 
and John, that their former persecutor had received a 
Divine commission to the Gentiles. They realized that he 
had been entrusted with the Gospel of the uncircumcision. 
Peter especially recognized that he who wrought in himself 
























unto the apostolate of the Jew was equally nergetic in th 
fervid soul unto the Gentile. The responsible le leade! of 
the mother-church could not help perceiving the grace th 
was given to him; and finally they gave to him the ri 
hand of fellowship, that he should go to the Gentiles, 
whilst they went to the circumcision. 
This was the further and final confirmation of the 
purpose which had been forming in his heart; and he 
recognized that he was appointed an herald and an apostle, — 
a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth. He gloried in” 
this ministry, and often spoke of the grace which had been ~ 
given to him, the least of all saints, to preach unto the 
Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ. He never — 
failed to begin his work in any place by an hone 
endeavour to save some of his own flesh; but he always — 
realized that his supreme stewardship was to those who — 
were called uncircumcision by that which was called 
circumcision in the flesh made by hands. _ 
By the hand of the risen Jesus he had been appointed 
to the apostleship. In nothing did he come behind the © 
ery chiefest of the Apostles; and truly the signs of an = 





Tt postle were wrought through his means, in all signs and ~ 
4 wonders and mighty works (1 Cor. ix. 1; xv. 9; Gal. i. 1). — 
Rn Surely, then, it is befitting that the church which 


bears his name should stand in the heart of the greatest 
Gentile city of the age, and bear the emblem of the death — 
: of Christ above its smoke and turmoil—the sign of the 

+ work and service of the great Apostle of the Gentiles. Fr 


X. 


“Fourteen Pears Ago.” 


(2 CORINTHIANS xii. 2-5.) 





i ‘* We are not free bee 
Z To say we see not, for the glory comes ia 
Nightly and daily, like the flowing sea ; eer 

His lustre pierceth through the midnight glooms; . ooee 


And, at prime hour, behold! He follows me 
With golden shadows to my secret rooms !” : 
C. T. TURNER. au 


TF we count back fourteen years from the writing of this 
epistle, we shall find ourselves amid the events narrated 
in the thirteenth and fourteenth chapters of the Book of 
_ the Acts; especially at that momentous hour in the history 
of Christianity when five men, representing five different 
: countries, met together to fast and pray about the state of — Ase 
2 the world and their duty in respect to it. The Evangelist 
3 tells us in two chapters the results of that conference,in — 
the separation and sending forth of the two missionaries ; 
and of the hardships, difficulties, and sufferings through 
which they fulfilled their high calling. But Paul draws 
aside the vail from his heart and shows us what his inner 
experiences were during those wonderful months. He was 
aman in Christ, caught up into Paradise, the third heaven, 
_ to hear unspeakable words. Luke dwells on the outside, — 
the covering of badger-skins ; Paul on the inside, the hang- 
‘ings of blue. Luke speaks of the man; Paul of the man — 
__ —in Christ. Luke depicts the sorrows and tears that beset 
- him; Paul the elation and joy which bore him to the very ~ 
bosom of Christ, so that many pains and sorrows were 
actually necessary as a make-weight, lest he should be 













, 


exalted above measure on account of the abundance 
revelations afforded him. *s 


How little we know of one another’s lives! Only the s 
little circle around us, or some twin-soul, and sometimes 


not these, realize the visions and revelations, or hear the 
unspeakable words, which fall to the lot of the favoured 
soul. Perhaps even Barnabas, who shared the toils and 
perils of this man of God, had little or no conception of 
what his companion was experiencing. He beheld the 
same scenes on which their outward gaze rested, but not 
the visions that were unfolded to the inner eye. He heard 
the voices that sounded in their ears, of blaspheming and 
reviling critics, with which so few notes of comfort and 
encouragement blended ; but he was not aware of the still 
small voice of Christ, which bade Paul have no fear. 

It would be a sorry thing if all our life could be summed 
up in our journeyings to and fro on life’s thoroughfares, 
our business engagements, or our glad intercourse with the 
dear ones of the home circle, if there were nothing except 
what a Barnabas might share, and a Luke record. A 
Chinese picture that lacks light, and shade, and depth, is 
not art. We need to dwell deep, to have a life beneath 
a life, to have windows in our heart that look across the 
river into the unseen and eternal. The pictures that 
fascinate are those that suggest more than they reveal, in 
which the blue distance fades into the heavens, and the 
light mist veils mountain, moorland, and sea. Oh for the 
peace that passeth understanding, the joy that is unspeak- 
able and full of glory, the deep things which eye hath not 
seen, nor ear heard, nor the heart of man conceived! We 
may be thankful, therefore, that we can supplement the 
narrative of Luke by the words of the Apostle, as he recalls 
what happened to him fourteen years before he wrote. 


I. Tue DESCRIPTION THE APOSTLE GIVES OF HIMSELF. 
—‘A man in Christ.” He was in Christ, but that did 


“ 


. 
‘ 







» 


- 


: 
: 
| 


ae 


leaner 


“4 Aten § tn Obrist.” 





not make him less a man. There are three afalities in a 
truly manly character: Resolution, Fortitude, and Courage. 

Resolution—that a man will take up one high ambition 
and aim, prosecuting it through good and evil report, 
through sun and storm. How evidently this characterized 
the Apostle, who pursued his purpose of ministering to the 
Gentiles from Antioch to Iconium, and thence to Lystra 
and Derbe. The hatred of the Jews did not dissuade; the 
fickleness of the crowds did not daunt; the hailstone 
storm of stones at Lystra did not turn him aside. It was 
his persistent ambition to preach the Gospel where Christ 
had not been named, so that they should see to whom no 
tidings of Him had come, and they who had not heard 
should understand. 

Ffortitude—that a man should be able to sustain sorrow 
and heart-rending anguish. Every true man needs this, 
for there is no one without his hours of heart-rending grief, 
when it seems as though the heart-strings must break and 
the life-blood be shed. Then to be strong, to steer straight 
onward, to dare to praise God, to sit alone and keep 
silence, because He hath laid it upon us, to put our 
mouths in the dust, if so be there may be hope —here 
is fortitude indeed. But Paul manifested this also, when he 
bore with uncomplaining nobility the cowardice of Mark, 
the relentless hatred of his fellow-countrymen, and after 
his stoning at Lystra, aroused from what had seemed to be 
his death-swoon, struggled back into the city from which he 
had been dragged to all appearance a corpse, and having 
saluted the brethren, and specially the young Timothy, 


started on the following morning to continue his loved work - 


in the neighbouring cities of Lycaonia. 

Courage—that a man should have a heart, like John 
Knox, the inscription on whose tomb tells us that one lies 
‘beneath who never feared the face of clay. Paul never 
lacked courage. He never flinched from facing an amphi- 
_ theatre full of raging fanatics, or braving consuls and 








‘souls of the disciples, exhorting them to continue in the 
faith, and that through many tribulations we must enter ~ 





procurators, or from withstanding an apt : 
to be blamed. And his heroic courage was 




















into the kingdom of God. At great personal risk he stayed : 
long enough in each place to appoint elders in the infant ~ 
communities, and to pray with fasting, commending them | 
to God, on whom they believed. a 

When we become Christian men we do not forfeit these p 
characteristics. No, but they become purified of ingredients ~ 
that might vitiate and corrupt them. Apart from Christ 
resolution may become obstinacy, fortitude stoicism, and — 
courage fatalism. ‘These are exaggerations, and therefore © 
defects. Directly, however, a man is in Christ—not only — 
in Christ for position, but in Christ for condition; not only 
in Christ for standing, but in Christ in his daily walk; not — 
only in Christ as before God, but for the environing : 
atmosphere of his daily life—then all danger of exaggera- 
tion is done away, and the native strength of manly 
character is invigorated from the Lion of the Tribe of ~ 
Judah, and sweetened by the meekness and gentleness of — 
the Lamb who was slain. a 


II. To sucH, BRIDAL MOMENTS COME.—Days of the © 
bridal of heaven and earth—high days—hours of vision — 
and ecstasy—when the tide runs high and fast, and the cup — 
of life brims to overflow. ‘I knew such an one caught up — 
even to the third heaven, to Paradise, and heard unspeak- 
able words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter. On 
behalf of such a man will I glory.” 

At first we might suppose that the Apostle was really ' 
describing the experience of some one else. He appears — 


~ 
wf uf 
ey Ae 













to distinguish between that blessed man, whose experience 
_ he was describing, and himself. ‘On mine own behalf I 


will not glory, save in my weaknesses.” But as his story 


- proceeds, and he tells us that by reason of the visions and 


revelations granted to him there was danger of his being 
exalted overmuch, it becomes clear that he is describing 


some radiant experiences through which he passed during 


that first missionary tour—so marked, so blessed, so full of 
transfiguring glory that their light had not entirely died 
from his heart, though a chasm of fourteen years lay 
between. 

Such experiences may come in hours of great pain. The 


- conjecture has been hazarded that this rapture into Paradise 
took place during the Apostle’s stoning at Lystra. But be 


this as it may, he could find no words to tell what he saw 
and heard. The disciple whom Jesus loved had a similar 
experience ; he too saw through heaven’s open door, but 
with all his wealth of language he has failed to do more 
than ransack creation and revelation for imagery and 
symbols which leave us in a condition of bewilderment, 
like the masses of colour in Turner’s later pictures. 


‘Paradise were indeed a poor place if words could describe 
it. The third heaven were not worthy of its Maker if its 


glories did not transcend our furthest imaginings. He hath 


set eternity in our heart, a capacity for the infinite, a 


yearning after the Divine. In hours of reverie, when 


_ stirred by certain notes in music, especially of the violin 


or organ, when under the spell of a sunset on a summer’s 
eve, when we wake up to love, we know that words are but 
the counters of thought, the signs and symbols of realities, 


and not the realities. Translate into words for me the 


sighings of the wind through the forest, and the withdrawal 


of the sea down a pebbly beach, and the spring sunlight 
playing on the hyacinth-strewn grass. You cannot! Then — 


you know why the Apostle described his experiences in 


_ Paradise as unspeakable. 


rn ner at. a ttt stiles, § Bitte aiken nn Se 
s > i > ep en Ty, Ne ee 


<n Gate’. 


But these hours are as evanescent as they are unspeak- 
able. Why? Jest we should be exalted above measure, — 
and become proud. If the Apostle feared this, much more — 


should we. Jes¢ we should come to trust in an experience, 
as an aim or object of life, instead of regarding it as God’s 
seal and testimony, which He may withhold, if we make 
more of it than we ought. We must not live in an 
experience ; but in Jesus, from whom, as from the sun, all 
- lovely and helpful experiences emanate. Zes# we should 
get out of touch with men and women around us, the 
majority of whom do not live on mountain-tops, but in 
valleys, where demons possess and worry the afflicted. 

Through God’s wise providence such radiant hours do 
not linger, because our strength is not fed from them. We 
shall not get much working strength out of whipped cream, 
however pleasant it taste to the palate ; and if we only rely 
on the raptures of Paradise for our sources of spiritual 
power, we shall come lamentably short of our true rein- 
forcements. So God, in his mercy, gives them once or 
twice, now and again; and at the time of sending them 
accompanies them with a make-weight, that we may be 
reminded of our utter weakness and helplessness, and be 
driven to avail ourselves of his grace, in which alone is our 
sufficiency. 

Do not expect the vision of Paradise to linger; it would 
dazzle you, and make life unnatural and unreal. Do not 
regret the passage of the blessed, rapturous hours, light of 
step and fleet of pace. Do not think that you have fallen 
from grace when their flush and glow are over. Whether 
they fall to your constant lot or not, or even if they never 
visit you, you are still in Christ, still joined to the Lord, 
still accepted in the Beloved ; and neither height of rapture 
nor depth of depression shall ever separate you from the 
love of God, which is in Jesus Christ our Lord. Be 
content, then, to turn, as Jesus did, from the rapture of 
Paradise, presented on the Transfiguration Mount, to 





oh 


% ’ 
s 7 . ’ i 
nie’ i | "ag ti chine’ N cs } ; ‘ y 7S 
es Lorre rhe eee 6 tS. ee oe Pee ee ee OE hae es 





“ My Grace is sufficient for thee.” 93 


take the way of the cross, through which you will become 
able to open Paradise to souls in despair, like the dying 
thief. 


III. Tue DiscipLine or Pain.—We need not stay to 
discuss what was the nature of Paul’s thorn in the flesh. 
It is not very material now and here. Enough that it was 
_ very painful. Paul calls it “a stake,” as though he were 
impaled ; and it must have been physical, as he could not 
have prayed thrice for the removal of a moral taint, and 
been refused. In infinite wisdom God permitted the 
messenger of Satan to buffet his servant; and all through 
that first missionary journey he had to face a long succession 
of buffetings. There were perils of robbers, of waters, of 
mountain-passes, and of violent crowds; but in addition to 
all, there was the lacerating thorn. 

He probably suffered from weak eyes, or some distress- 
ing form of ophthalmia. We infer this from the eagerness 
of his Galatian converts to give him their eyes, from his 
dependence on an amanuensis, and from the clumsy letters 
with which he wrote the postscripts to his epistles (Gal. 
vi. 11, R.v.). And if this were the case, the pain would be 
greatly aggravated as he faced the keen blasts that swept 
the mountain plateau on which the Pisidian Antioch was 
situated. 

Was it during this journey that he besought the Lord on 
three separate occasions for deliverance, and received the 
assurance that though the thorns were left, more than 
sufficient grace would be given? If so, like a peal of 
bells, at Antioch, Iconium, Derbe, and Lystra, he must 
have heard the music of those tender words: My grace is 
sufficient, szffictent, SUFFICIENT for thee! Sufficient when 
friends forsake, and foes pursue; sufficient to make thee 
strong against a raging synagogue, or a shower of stones; 
sufficient for excessive labours of body, and conflicts of 
soul ; sufficient to enable thee to do as much work, and 












94 “Fourteen Hears Ago.” 


even more, than if the body were perfectly whole—for 


my strength is made perfect only amid the conditions of 
mortal weakness. 

In estimating the greatness of a man’s life-work, it is 
fair to take into consideration the difficulties under which 
he has wrought. And how greatly does our appreciation 
of the Apostle rise when we remember that he was 
incessantly in pain. Instead, however, of sitting down 
in despair, and pleading physical infirmity as his excuse 
for doing nothing, he bravely claimed the grace which 
waited within call, and did greater work through God’s 
enabling might than he could have done through his own 
had it been unhindered by his weakness. 

Ah, afflicted ones, your disabilities were meant to unite 
with God’s enablings ; your weakness to mate His power. 
Do not sit down before that mistaken marriage, that 
uncongenial business, that unfortunate partnership, that 
physical weakness, that hesitancy of speech, that disfigure- 
ment of face, as though they must necessarily maim and 
conquer you. God’s grace is at hand —sufficient —and 
at its best when human weakness is most profound. 
Appropriate it, and learn that those that wait on God 
are stronger in their weakness than the sons of men in 
their stoutest health and vigour. 


eg ae 





















XI. 
Ghe Conflict of Paul's ite. 


(Acts xv. ; GAL. ii.) 


**« Some law there needs be, other than the law 
Of our own wills; happy is he who finds 
A Law wherein his spirit is left free, 
. ... I will not bend again 
My spirit to a yoke that is not Christ’s.” 
H. HAMILTON KING, 


'N the separation of Abraham from country, kindred, 
and father’s house, the story of his people was fore- 
shadowed. As Balaam, under the inspiration of the 
_ Almighty, said, Lo, it is a people that dwell alone, and 
4 shall not be reckoned among the nations. Their dress, 
“rites, customs, and religious habits, were carefully and 
; expressly determined to accentuate their separation, that, 
_ being withdrawn from the influence of surrounding nations, — 
_ they might be fitted to receive, keep, and transmit the 
_ knowledge of God. In no other way could they have 
_ borne the precious deposit entrusted to them down the 
centuries, and maintained their unbroken witness to the 
unity, spirituality, and holiness of God. Not otherwise 
could they have become the religious poets, prophets, and 
teachers of mankind. 

The laws of separation were so rigid that Peter did not — 
scruple to remind Cornelius and his friends of the risk — 
the ran in crossing the threshold of a Gentile’s house, 
although his host was a man of high rank, of irreproach- 
able character, and well reported of by all the nation of 
Jews. And when Peter was come up to Jerusalem, i 
even his fellow-believers, who were of the circumcision, 
found grievous fault with him: “They contended with — 


















- 


—— =" = Pao ee, iP « 
*% ~ ong > “ a? het 
- “, eo Ramet my 





















96 The Conflict of Paul's Kite. : 


him, saying, Thou wentest in to men uncircumcis ed, a: 
didst eat with them.” The law of commandm 
contained in ordinances, some of them ordained th 
Moses, and many superadded by successive ns 
of doctors and rabbis, stood like a middle wall of partitio 
between Jew and Gentile. 7 
All these barriers and restrictions were represented 
the initial act of Judaism, the rite of circumcision, the — 
importance of which had been magnified to a most 
preposterous extent. , It was affirmed by one rabbi that ~ 
but for circumcision heaven and earth could not exist; 
and by another that it was equivalent to all the command- 
ments of the law. It was counted more desirable for 
Gentile to submit to this rite than to obey all the 
affirmative precepts of Moses, or to love God and his” 
neighbour. It was supposed that Adam, Noah, Jacob, 
Joseph, Moses, and Balaam, had all been born circum- ~ 
cised ; and that subsequently the rite was under the special — 
and peculiar charge of the great prophet Elijah, who e 
always at hand to see to its due observance. .- <a 
The rigour of these observances was heavy enough it 
Jerusalem. But in foreign parts, amid great Gent 
communities, with whom the Jews were constantly en = (hers 
in commerce, it became customary to relax the stringent = 
of the bonds of Judaism, though always maintaining ~ 
circumcision, the intermarriage of Jew with Jew, and that — 
particular method of preparing animal fiesh for food which — 
is still in vogue amongst Jews. It was clear, therefore, — 
that any innovation which Christianity might introduce — 
into Judaism would be more likely to reveal itself at a 
distance from Jerusalem, where it would not be instantly 
repressed by the unbending conservative sentiment so — 
strongly entrenched in the metropolis of the national faith. 
We are not surprised, therefore, that Antioch became the — 
scene of that forward movement, led by Barnabas and 
Paul, which consisted in openly welcoming Gentile 


io 





PAUL AND SILAS IN PRISON AT PHILIPPI. 


“What must 1 dotobesaved? . . . Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, ‘and 
thou shalt be saved, and thy house.” —Acrrs xvi. 30, 31. 





: eee 





conyerts into the Christian community, without insisting 
on their previous conformity to the venerable rite of 
circumcision. 

This marked a great advance. Hitherto, especially in 
Judzea, the Christians were regarded by the people as a 
Jewish sect ; and so long as they were prepared to attend the 
Temple services, conform to the regulations, and maintain 
the institutions of Judaism, their belief in Jesus as the 
long-promised Messiah was regarded as a_ peculiarity 
which might be condoned and winked at. It was per- 
missible that they should meet in the love - feast, so 
long as they did -not forsake the Temple; they might 
pray to Jesus as God if they acted in all other respects 
as devout Jews. But if this rule had been universally 
maintained, Christianity, like a stream in a marshy land, 
would have speedily been lost to view. After a few brief 
years it would have been indistinguishable. And Judaism, 
with its intolerable burden and exaggerations, would have 
stood forth among men as the only representative of the 
purest faith which had ever visited our world. The world 
of the Gentiles would have been hopelessly alienated ; 
the coming of the Kingdom of God would have been 
put back for centuries, even if it had ever emerged from 
the stifling conditions of its cradle. 

All this, however, was prevented by the policy to which 
Barnabas and Paul had been led. In the Epistle to the 
Galatians (ii. 4, 12) we have a pleasant glimpse of the 
liberty which the converts in Antioch had in Christ Jesus. 
Circumcised and uncircumcised joined in the common 
exercises of Christian fellowship. They ate together with- 
out question ; and even Peter, when on a visit to Antioch, 
was so charmed with the godly simplicity and beauty of 


their communion, that he joined freely with them, and 
_ partook of their Love-feasts and common meals. 


The conservative party in the Jerusalem church, how- 
ever, on hearing these tidings, was ill at ease. They 
is 





a Great Adtance. ae ie OF ae 





















‘brook the thought that circumcision might fall into disuse, — 









saw that if this principle were allowed to be universal tS 
would undermine their authority, and eventually rend their ~ 
religious supremacy from their grasp. They could not 


and that the deep spiritual teaching of Moses might be 
come common coin for the handling of Gentile fingers; 
and, therefore, as the first step, sent down false brethren, 
who were privily brought in, and came to spy out the 
liberty which the church at Antioch practised. Then, 
when they were assured of the facts, certain men came 
down from Judza, and taught the brethren, saying, “Except 
ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be 
saved.” 

It was an important crisis, and led to the breaking out of 
a controversy which embittered many succeeding years in 
the Apostle’s life; but it led to some of his noblest 
epistles, and to his exposition of the principles of the 
Gospel with unrivalled clearness and beauty. 


I. GREAT QUESTIONS WERE AT STAKE.—This, for in- 
stance: Whether Christianity was to be a sect of Judaism, 
a chamber in the Temple, a bud confined in its green 
sheath, a dwarfed and stunted babe in swaddling clothes — 
that forbade its natural development? And this: Whether ~ 
the Levitical institutions of rites and ceremonies, of feasts 
and fasts, were of a piece with the great moral code of 
Sinai and Deuteronomy; or might be regarded as temporary 
and fugitive, brought in for a specific purpose, but to be 
laid aside when that purpose was fulfilled? But this most 
of all: What were the conditions on which men might be 
saved? 

The conditions of salvation are debated in the language — 
of every age. The terms vary, but the controversy is always — 
the same. Substitute Ritualism for Judaism, and the rites 
of the church for circumcision, and you are confronted by — 
the same questions and issues as were encountered by our — 


Pwr Vad fe ea eee Pe ee eer ee Leen oe ery ee pe ie 


Oe 5 














Apostle. Still men say, Except you be christened, con- 
firmed, and received into our church, ye cannot be saved. 
And it is from Paul’s store of arguments, with which 
apparently before his old age his adversaries were silenced, 
that we must find our weapons, as Luther found them 
before us. 

Salvation is not secured by obedience to a rite, by the 
observance of a code of rules, or even by obedience to a 
creed, pronounced orthodox. A man may be precise in all 
of these and yet be under the wrath of God, and his 
character be scarred by passion and self-indulgence. The 
only condition of salvation is faith, which believes in Him 
that justifies the ungodly, and receives into the heart the 
very nature of Jesus to become the power of the new life. 
How infinitely unimportant, then, compared with faith, is 
any outward rite. It may have its place, as the outward 
sign and seal of the covenant, but it has no efficacy apart 
from the spiritual act. 

But there is a constant tendency in the human heart to 
magnify the importance of the outward rite to the minimis- 
ing of the value of the spiritual attribute, which it should 
express or accompany. The outward is so much more 
accessible, manageable, and computable ; the spiritual so 
removed from human vision and manipulation. In these 
days men are prone to magnify the ordinances of Baptism 
and the Lord’s Supper in the precise manner in which these 
Judaizing Christians magnified circumcision. And when 
they are allowed to do so, their whole theory of religion 
becomes mechanical and formal. Those who punctiliously 
follow their precepts are hopelessly led into the ditch, whilst 
those who denounce their error are anathematised and con- 
signed to the uncovenanted mercies of God. 

Let us never forget, then, that circumcision availeth 
nothing, nor uncircumcision ; but faith which worketh by 


love, a new creature, and the keeping of the commandments — 
_ of God. And let us never fail to follow the Apostle’s 


F 
# 








\* 


» 


“= 5, 
L¥ i=: 


_ 


4 x 4 


ceremonial of Leviticus, which was imposed for a special | 





100 ‘ae Conflict of Paul's ¥ 
example, who said, “To whom we gave pling a the 


subjection, no, not for an hour, that the truth of the ( G 
might continue with you.” 





et 
-9 































II. THe ARGUMENTS ON EITHER Sak as was 
much contention.” a 
Did not Jesus fulfil the law of Moses? Was He not 
circumcised? And did He not rigorously observe the Temple — 
Jasts and feasts, and even pay his share in the Temple tax? 

Certainly, said Barnabas and Paul: but you must re 
member that when He died He said, “It is finished”; — 
and the vail of the Temple was rent from the top to the ~ 
bottom, to show that Judaism had finished its God-given 
mission. From that moment He became not a Saviour of — 
Jews only, but the world’s Redeemer. When God ratified — 
the new covenant with the blood of Calvary, He made the — 
first covenant old. And that which becometh old and z 
waxeth aged is nigh to vanishing away. y 

But surely the law given by Moses is permanent? Did — 
not Jesus of Nazareth assert that not one jot or tittle should 
pass away until all was fulfilled? " 

Precisely. But surely we must distinguish between the . 
outward and inward, the ritual and ethical, the form and — 
the substance? It is impossible to believe that the sublime — 


purpose, can be of the same binding force and moment _ 
as the ten words of the Law which are borne witness to by — 
the conscience of all men. = 
But if you do away with the restrictions of the Law, will > 
you not loosen all moral restraint, and lad to a generale 
relaxation of all bonds in the family and the State? : 
There is no fear of this, the stalwart defenders of the © 
simplicities of the faith answer from the other side. Souls 
that are united to Jesus Christ by faith are cleansed by 
receiving from Him tides of spiritual life and health; so 
that they become more than ever pure, and holy, and 











bas 





A Great Alission 


divine. Do we then make the law of none effect through Fe 


faith? God forbid; nay, we establish the law. The 
righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us, who walk not 
after the flesh, but after the Spirit. The law of the Spirit 
of life in Christ Jesus makes us free from the law of sin 
and death. 


III. Tur APPEAL TO JERUSALEM.—The disputing and 
questioning, however, showed no signs of abating, and it 
was finally decided that Paul and Barnabas, and certain 


others with them, should go up to Jerusalem to consult | 


the apostles and elders about this question. 

They travelled slowly through Phoenicia and Samaria, 
declaring the conversion of the Gentiles in each of the 
little Christian communities on their route, until they 
reached Jerusalem, where, in a great missionary convocation, 


specially convened, they told all things that God had done ~ 


with them—that is, in co-operation and fellowship with 
them ; as though by blessing them the living Christ were 
Himself implicated in the methods they had adopted. 
But their statements were interrupted by the uprising of 
certain of the sect of the Pharisees that believed, and the 
heated interjection of the reiterated statement, “It is 
needful to circumcise them, and to keep the law of 
Moses.” 

Again a special meeting was summoned: in which there 
was much questioning. Then Peter arose, and said, “ This 
matter was settled in my judgment by God Himself, 
when in the house of Cornelius the Holy Spirit descended 
on uncircumcised Gentiles, as on us at the beginning; and 
as He made no distinction, why should we?” 

Next Barnabas and Paul repeated their wondrous story, 
this time laying emphasis on the fact that they were only 
the instruments through whom God wrought, and showed 


_ how greatly the Gentiles had been blessed, and were being 


blessed, altogether apart from circumcision. 


ary Canbocation. oS oR? 


















it well to insist, for the right ordering of the 


communities ; but he did not mention circumcision ance’ . 


them, nor insist on obedience to the Mosaic and Levitical 
institutions. To his sage counsel the apostles and elders — 


agreed. 


This unanimity between the leading Apostles and the 3 


two Evangelists, who were the cause of the whole con- 


troversy, was probably largely due to the private interview 


which Paul had sought with them, and which most 
commentators allocate to this period (Gal. ii. 2). He 


tells us that he went up by revelation, as though, in 
addition to the request of the church, there were strong 
spiritual pressure exerted on him; and when he reached 
Jerusalem he laid before them who were of repute the 


Gospel he was preaching among the Gentiles, lest he were — 


running in vain. But to his great satisfaction they did not 
comment adversely upon his statements, nor insist upon 
Titus, a young Greek, being circumcised; and they even 
went so far as to recognize that the Gospel of the uncir- 
cumcision had been entrusted to him, giving him and 
Barnabas the right hand of fellowship, that they should go 
unto the Gentiles, as themselves unto the circumcision. 
The power of the risen Jesus was so mightily in his 
servants, that there was no gainsaying their vocation. 

The Pharisee party was defeated, and a decree signed in 
the sense of James’ address; but from that moment a 
relentless war broke out, which followed the Apostle for 
the next ten years of his life, and cost him many bitter 
tears. Every church he planted was visited by the 
emissaries of his virulent opponents, who were not content 
with insisting on the necessity of circumcision, but asserted 
that Paul was no Apostle, because he had only seen Christ 
in vision, and had never companied with Him during 
the days of his flesh. They traduced his personal character, 


Si ident) baie bs at 5 ee eee be 


ae 


7 





converts, dwelt with cruel animosity upon his personal 


and loyalty of his converts. 





® Epistles to the Galatians and Corinthians, and cut Paul 





threatenings and expostulations, the heroic lion-heart 
fought the good fight to the end; and, if we may judge 
' from the tone of his later epistles, was permitted to see the 
' close of the controversy, in which it was determined once 
4 for all that the new-wine Christianity should not be poured 
into the worn-out bottle-skins of Judaism. 
If the conditions of justification are now clearly defined 
as repentance towards God and faith in our Lord Jesus 
_ Christ ; if salvation is as free as the flowers of spring or the 
air of heaven ; if we are able to stand fast in the freedom 
with which Christ has made us free ; if we may preach to 
_ all and any that those who believe are justified from all 
__ things—it is due to the unflinching courage with which the 
_ great Apostle of the Gentiles contended for the faith once 
delivered to the saints, and which led him on one occasion 
to confront even the Apostle Peter himself, because he was 
to be blamed (Gal. ii. 11). 













misrepresented his reluctance to take the gifts of his — 
defects, and in many cases succeeded in alienating the love 
4 f This cruel persecution is constantly alluded to in the 


to the quick. However, he never owned himself vanquished. _ 
By prayers and tears, by arguments and persuasions, by 








XII. 


A Lesson of Guidance. 


(AcTs xvi.) 


**Oh, let thy sacred will 
All thy delight in me fulfil ! 
Let me not think an action mine own way, 
But as thy love shall sway, 
Resigning up the rudder to thy skill.” 
HERBERT, 


FTER a brief respite, Paul proposed to Barnabas 





that they should return to visit the brethren in every ~~ 
city wherein they had proclaimed the word of the ~ 
Lord, and see how they fared. This was the beginning ~ 
of his second missionary journey, which was to have far- 


reaching results. 

Barnabas suggested that they should take Mark with 
them as before, a proposition which his companion 
positively refused to entertain. Mark had deserted them 
on the threshold of their previous expedition, and there 
was grave fear that he might do so again. Barnabas was 
as strong on the other side. Perhaps he felt that he had 
some rights in the matter, as the senior in age, because 
of the tie of blood between himself and his sister’s son. 
At last the contention reached so acute a stage that the 
church became aware of it, and took Paul’s side, for the 
narrative of the Acts tells us that when Paul chose Silas, 
and went forth, ‘he was commended by the brethren to 
the grace of the Lord.” 

Whenever we are about to undertake some great enter- 


prise for God, in proportion to its importance we may — 


expect to encounter the strong man armed, “straddling 
across the way.” How often he attempts to overthrow 


ee td 





us through the temper or disposition of our associates! — 
The crew mutinies as Columbus nears the long-looked-— 
for coast! Nothing tests us more than this. It is difficult 
to be resolute and gentle, strong and sweet. Beware of 
temptation from this side, fellow-workers. If you are com- 
pelled to differ from your companions, let it be in love; 
let them feel that you have no interests to serve but ; 
those of truth. If Lot quarrels with you, it is best to 
give him his own terms and send him away; God will 
eye you ever so much more than he can take. Only do 















































B Pestoct love is the only atmosphere in which the Divine 

Spirit can manifest his gracious help. 

x * * * * * * + 

_ Through regions rich in flowers and natural beauty Paul 

SE and Silas traversed Syria and Cilicia, confirming the infant 

churches, which probably owed their existence to Paul’s 

earliest efforts. So through the Cilician Gates to Tarsus, 

his native city. But there was no welcome for him there, — 
Probably the old home was either broken up or for ever 
shut against him; and the two companions in travel 
threaded the defile in the mountains behind Tarsus, 
which led them up to the central plain with its volcanic 
deposits and biting winds. After some days’ toilsome 
journey they came to Derbe, Lystra, and Iconium, so 
_ tragically associated with the former journey. 

What a welcome Paul would receive! How many 
inquiries would be madé after Barnabas! How much to- 
tell and hear! There was, however, a special burden on ~ 
the Apostle’s heart. On the occasion of his previous 
_ visit his attention had been arrested by a mere lad, who 
sa Nae strongly attracted to him, watching with a lad’s 





* Jie..." 7’ ape * om te ae 


mia OSE tae, Tee OF they 
Noir hae dee ep es SH “ 
Pw a eae Bote wo zy a * AH . 
ty : pomp a nu 
A 
. mie 
106 A Sie of ¢ es 
“Ta = Ft ne 






















offered him worship. He asked for Timothy, ; Be 
glad to learn that he had not been faithless to the te 
ings and training of the godly women who had watched — 
over his opening character, and instructed him in the © 
Holy Scriptures. It would seem that the whole 
was more or less closely associated with the infant church- — 
life ; so much so that, though the mother was a Jewess, c 
had not urged her son’s compliance with the initial Je _ 
rite. It had therefore remained in abeyance, according to 
the broad and libera! views which Paul inculcated. 
All the reports about Timothy were favourable. He 
well reported of by the brethren that were at Lystra 2 
Iconium. The more Paul knew of him the more he was 
attracted to him, and finally proposed that he should ac-” 
company him on his travels as his own son in the faith. 
He administered the rite of circumcision, not because he © 
deemed it obligatory, but as a matter of convenience, that 
there might be no obstacle to the admission of his young 
assistant to Jewish synagogues. 
A simple ordination service was then held, in whic 
Timothy was solemnly set apart for his great work. e | 
elders gathered round and laid their hands on his bowed 
head, and prayed. In answer to their believing inte 
cession, he received the gift of sacred speech; and Paul, 
in after years, reminds him to stir up the gift that was in — 
him through the laying on of his own hands and of the . 
of the presbytery. 
Thus the Spirit of Jesus led his servant to call ne 
labourers into the harvest field and endow them with 
special qualifications for their work. It appears, indeed, 
that Paul had remarkable power in these directions ; for, in 
his Epistle to the Galatians, he expressly refers to his having — 
ministered to them the Holy Spirit by faith; and when he 
laid his hands on the twelve disciples at Ephesus, the — 
Holy Spirit came upon them, and they spake with tongues 
and prophesied. In the old time it seems to have been 


ao 
-% 







— 





i ibe Sea cae gee > 
he 





“ Forbidden of the Holy Ghost.” 107 
possible for men of God to receive for others, and trans- 
mit to them, by faith, spiritual gifts, adapting them better 
for their life-work. But this was altogether distinct from 
any mechanical communication of sacramental grace, and 
was the peculiar prerogative of those who were themselves 
richly endued with the Spirit of Jesus. 
* * * * * * * 

Leaving Lystra, Paul and his companions visited the 
churches in the highland region of Phrygia and Galatia, 
everywhere distributing the letter of James. They next 
essayed to go into the populous and influential cities of 
Asia Minor, such as Colossz, Laodiczea, and Ephesus. 
What could they do better than bear the light of the 
Gospel to those teeming multitudes who sat in darkness 
and the shadow of death? Yet it was not to be: “They 
were forbidden of the Holy Spirit to speak the Word in 
Asia.” In after years Paul would do some of the greatest 
work of his life in that very region; but just now the door 
was closed against him by the Holy Spirit. The time 
was not yet ripe for the attack on these apparently im- 
pregnable bastions of the kingdom of Satan. Apollos 
must come there for pioneer work. Paul and Barnabas 
are needed yet more urgently elsewhere, and must receive 
further training before undertaking this responsible and 
arduous task. 

The travellers therefore took a northern route, with the 
intention of entering the important province of Bithynia, 
lying along the shores of the Black Sea; but when they 
came to a point in the great Roman road, opposite Mysia, 
and were attempting to go out of Asia Minor into Bithynia, 
the Spirit of Jesus suffered them not. 

Checked when they attempted to go to the West, they 
were now stopped as they sought to go to the North-East ; 
and there was nothing for it but to keep straight on, until 
they came out at the terminus of the road, on the sea-coast, 
at the famous harbour of Troas, the ancient Troy. There 








108 A Lesson of Guidance. — S Pa . 


they met with Luke, whose presence is thenceforth 
by the significant personal pronoun we; and thence 
man of Macedonia beckoned the little missionary 
across the straits to set up the banner of Christ on 
hitherto untouched continent of Europe. 
What an extremely attractive title that is for the Holy ' 
Spirit! He is pre-eminently the Spirit of Jesus. When 
Jesus was glorified, He was given in Pentecostal fulness, — 
and the chief aim of his mission and ministry is to glorify 
the Lord Jesus and ‘gather together the members of his” 
Body, fitting them for union with their Head. He is also 
the Comforter and Guide of the saints until the church” 
is presented faultless to her Lord; as Eliezer condu 
Rebekah to his master’s son. q 
It is interesting to study the method of his guidance as it 
was extended towards these early heralds of the Cross. It 
consisted largely in prohibitions, when they attempted t 
take another course than the right. When they would ~ 
turn to the left, to Asia, He stayed them; and when they 
sought to turn to the right, to Bithynia, again He stayed © 
them. He shut all the doors along their route, and bolted ~ 
them ; so that they had no alternative but to go straight ~ 
forward. In the absence of any prohibition, they were left — 
to gather that they were treading the prepared path for ~ 
which they had been created in Christ Jesus. 
Whenever you are doubtful as to your course, submit © 
your judgment absolutely to the Spirit of God, and ask ~ 
Him to shut against you every door but the right one, 
Say, “Blessed Spirit, I cast on Thee the entire responsibility ~ 
of closing against my steps any and every course which is ~ 
not of God. Let me hear thy voice behind me whenever ~ 
I turn to the right hand or the left. Put thine arrest on 
me. Do not suffer me.” 
In the meanwhile, continue along the path which you — 
have been already treading. It lies in front of you; pursue = ; 
it. Abide in the calling in which you were 























Sic 


ep on as “you are, unless you 2 are clearly told to do — 
- something else. Expect to have as clear a door out as 
you had in; and if there is no indication to the contrary, 
consider the absence of indication to be the indication of 
-God’s will that you are on his track. 

_ The Spirit of Jesus waits to be to you, O pilgrim, what 
‘He was to Paul. Only be careful to obey his least pro- 
hibitions ; and where, after believing prayer, there are no 
"apparent i eee believe that you are on the way ever- 
__ lasting, and go forward with enlarged heart. ‘Teach me 
to do thy will, for Thou art my God: thy Spirit is good, 
lead me into the land of uprightness.” Do not be surprised 
if the answer comes in closed doors. But when doors 
are shut right and left, an open road is sure to lead to 
_Troas. There Luke awaits, and visions will point the way, 
where vast opportunities stand open, and faithful friends 
are waiting. 












































XIII. 
“Pe Philippians.” 


(PHIL. iv. 15.) 


‘* These are the tones to brace and cheer 
The lonely watcher of the fold, 
When nights are dark, and foemen near, 
When visions fade, and hearts are cold. 


** How timely then a comrade’s song 

Comes floating on the mountain air, * 

And bids thee yet be bold and strong— ¥ 

Fancy may die, but Faith is there.” “? 

KEBLE. a 

OR a busy, footsore, heart-weary man, misunderstood © 

and misrepresented, pursued by many anxieties and 

cares, there must be some place where the heated 

machinery can cool, and the soul unbend in the atmosphere — 

of love and on the couch of tender sympathy. Even Jesus 

needed a Bethany. It is well when this is found within the © 

precincts of Home; when the door which shuts out the uaa 

and glare of life shuts us in to love and sympathy, and 

those tender ministries which are the peculiar prowuice i - 

a woman’s life. How little does the great world realize t 

large share that woman’s influence has had in nourishing 

the patience and courage of its noblest heroes! In the 

privacy of the domestic life will be found those tende: - 

hands that wash the stripes, pour in the oil, and enable ther Y 
soldier again to take the field. ‘ 

To many, however, of the world’s greatest benefactors, _ 
though they have stood in profound need of this tender — 
sympathy, the home-life has been denied. Theirs has been 
a solitary and lonely lot; partly because of the exigencies — 
of their position, and partly because it has been difficult a 
find, or reveal themselves to, a kindred soul. This y 





ae the case a with Paul. A self-contained, strong, heroic 
soul, he resembles the lofty mountains of his native Tarsus, 
whose slopes are clad with rich verdure and vegetation, 
while their summits rear themselves in steep and solitary 
majesty. Few have been dowered with a tenderer, warmer 
disposition. The minute and particular greetings with 


which his Epistles close, the rain of hot tears in parting 


from his friends, his anguish of mind in having hurt those 
whom he was compelled to admonish and rebuke, his 


_ longing for companionship—are evidences of the genuine- 


ness and tenacity of his affection. But it was his appointed 
lot to have no settled dwelling-place—no spot he could call 


_ Home. 


‘Ves, without cheer of sister or of daughter ; 
Yes, without stay of father or of son ; 
Lone on the land and homeless on the water, 
Pass I in patience till the work be done.” 


Yet the Apostle had marvellous powers of attracting men 
and women to himself. We have seen how he threw the 
mantle of his magnetic influence over Silas and Timothy ; 
and the Galatians were ready to give him their eyes. But 
he was now to win a group of friends who would never 
cease to love him whilst life lasted; whoever else was 
alienated and weary, they would be true; whatever trouble 
threatened to engulf him, it would only elicit their more 
profuse ministrations ; and Philippi was to become to him 
the one bright sunny spot in all the earth, more than 
Tarsus which had disowned him, more than Jerusalem 
which would cast him out, and next to the “far better” of 
Paradise. 

‘¢ Hearts I have won of sister or of brother, 

Quick on the earth or hidden in the sod. 
Lo, every heart awaiteth me, another 

Friend in the blameless family of God.” 


Luxe.—The beloved physician seems to have met 


4 him first at Troas. This could hardly have been by 
































112 “Me Philippians.” 


prearrangement, as the Apostle found himself, so ‘to: is 
forced to take his journey to that ancient seaport, fami 
a its traditional interest as the scene of the Siege of Troy, ~ 
nd thriving on its mercantile relations with East and West. — 
‘All the northern provinces of Asia Minor sent their produce ~ 
thither for shipment to Macedonia and Greece, and there ~ 
the merchants of the West,*men of Macedonia, would bring — 
their freights in exchange. It is conjectured that Luke, ~ 
himself a native of Philippi, had followed in the wake of ~ 
commerce to pursue, his profession as a physician to his” 
countrymen, Paul’s temporary sojourn in the crowded 
ghetto may have induced a return of the acute disease ~ 
from which he had suffered in Galatia, or he may have” 
been laid low by malarial fever, to deal with which the” 
nearest available physician was summoned, and this 4 
Luke. In any case, here the two men met; and here” 


¢ 


in all likelihood the servant of God won his medical” 
attendant for the Saviour. In the enthusiasm of an ardent” 
attachment the new disciple elected to become his fellow-~ 
traveller, so as to be able at all times to minister to the 
much-suffering and frail tenement of his friend’s dauntless 
and vehement spirit. 
He is immediately taken into the closest oni re 
forms one of the little group to whom one morning Paul 
tells of the vision of the man of Macedonia; helps to 
formulate the conclusion, in which Silas and Timothy and 
he agreed, that the Apostle’s path lay across the blue wz 
of the A®gean, dancing and sparkling i in the morning light; s 
goes forth to seek a passage in one of the many craft that | 
lay at the wharves; and records with manifest love of the | 
sea and knowledge of the land the successive stages of thei 
voyage and journey to Philippi. ; 
How dear he became to the Apostle, and how tenaciou 
he clung to his charge, is clear from two expressions penned, — 
the one from the hired house of the first Roman imprison- 
ment, the other from the chill prison cell of the second, 


~ 
~ 
€ 





ol, iy. 14; 2 Tim. iv. i: 











 Lypra.—She was probably a widow; a woman of con- 
‘siderable business capacity, with energy enough to leave 
her native city of Thyatira, and cross the sea to establish 


iy 
‘ee 
a 

; 


herself in Philippi as agent for the sale of the purple-dyed — 
_ garments for which her native town was famous. The 










word indicates that she disposed of the finest class of — iY 
wares; and she must have possessed a considerable amount 
_ of capital to be able to deal in such expensive articles. 
She was withal an eager seeker after God. The Jewish 
. community at Philippi, being too small and poor to have a 
. Be pesogte of its own, was obliged to meet by the river- — ; 
side in an enclosure or garden screened from public ee 
x ‘observation. But thither she repaired as the Sabbath Mi a 
came round, with members of her household, listening to ie. 
the Jewish Scriptures, and seeking after God, if haply she 
‘might find Him, not realizing that He was not far from 
every one of them. 
- On one memorable Sabbath, when only women were 
ss present, four strangers, Jews, appeared in the little circle, 
a “sat down, and spake unto the women that were come 
together.” This was the first Gospel sermon in Europe. 
And it is somewhat remarkable that it was addressed to 
a handful of women in the open-air. Lydia was the first 
















The result of that morning service was Lydia’s con- 
ersion ; whether she received the Apostle’s message of 


: ar—most likely her heart opened as a flower to the sun; 
gut the result was that she, with her entire household, came — 
to believe in Jesus, whom Paul preached, and she felt 





he 
i+ 


. 
pod 


2 ees 

114 “Ye Philippians.” pe 
as sure about her own conversion as she was eager for F aul 
to come and abide in her house: “If ye have judged m 
to be faithful unto the Lord, come into my house 
abide there.” It was a blessed change, which led to f 
reaching conseqiiences in her own life, and in Paul's. 

She must have been a woman of considerable determin 
tion and perseverance, to have overcome Paul's reluctance” 
to be dependent on any of his converts. “What is my 
reward then?” he asks on one occasion. “That, when 
I preach the Gospel, I may make the Gospel withou 
charge. . . . It were good for me rather to die, than that” 
any man should make my glorying void.” He would bear 
anything rather than risk the imputation of the suspicic 
that he was making profit out of the Gospel. Rather t an 
this he wrought day and night, that he might be charges 
to none; and with his own hands ministered unto his own 
necessities and to those that were with him. But Lydiz 
was able to override all his objections—*“ She constrai 
us,” is Luke’s reflection as he reviews the scene. So t 
four companions in travel found asylum and entertainmen 
in her hospitable home. sal 

How much this large-hearted and resolute woman rc 
in after days, it is impossible now to decipher from the 
record of the past. We know of four separate occasions i 
' which the Philippian church sent supplies to their belovec 
founder and teacher (2 Cor. xi. 9; Phil. iv. 10-18). d 
this was very probably due to Lydia’s foresight anc 
generosity. No other church performed so large a minis= 
try, because no other church could perform it. As Pz 
intimates, they were for the most part in deep po erty 
And it is probable that the Philippians would have been a! 
paralysed as the rest had it not been for Lydia and h 
household, who throve on the proceeds of their trade. — 
has even been surmised that Paul owed much of the 
comfort of after days, when he spent two years in a 
Palace of Czsarea waiting for his trial, and two more yea 































end -* 
~~ 
“ae =—— 


te 
a a 










al ember eer my 


a ae Bragged before the Alagistrates. ri geo 


in his hired house at Rome, to the same source; and it 


may have been some inkling of the well-to-do friend who 
held Paul dear, that induced Felix to keep him in bonds. 
A statement gained credence in the early church that 
Paul and Lydia were wed, but there is no foundation what- 
ever for this in Scripture; and the probabilities against it 
are overwhelming. The whole argument of 1 Cor. vii. and 
ix. may be adduced to show that the stories of Lydia and 
Thekla are alike inadmissible. We are rather inclined, 
therefore, to think of Lydia as a noble, true-hearted, and 
devoted friend of the Apostle, who counted it her privilege 


as well as her joy that he should reap temporal benefits in 


return for the spiritual blessings which he had so richly 
sown in her heart; and her reward will be one day to hear 
from the Master’s lips that in making the burdens of his 
servant lighter she had been ministering to Himself, and 
that having received an Apostle in the name of an Apostle, 
she must have an Apostle’s reward. 


MINOR CHARACTERS are cast on the canvas, drawn 
from life, and filling up the picture. The hysterical girl, 
demon-possessed, who marked and followed the evangelists, 
designating them slaves of the Most High God, who pro- 
claimed the way of salvation. The syndicate of owners 
who fattened on the proceeds of her divination, as she 
showed miners where to find the gold, girls the day to 
wed, merchants the period to set forth their ventures ; 
and who were correspondingly chagrined when Paul’s 
challenge to the spirit emancipated his wretched victim 
and ended their hopes of further gain. The Roman 
magistrates, who strangely forgot the high traditions of 
their office, were swept off their feet by the urgency of 
the rabble, and, without going through even the formality 
of a trial, tore the clothes off the backs of the accused 
with their own hands, and laid “many stripes upon them,” 


- uncondemned, being Romans. Looking back on the way 









Se tasy S264 Os ES 






these petty officials treated him, Paul recalls hoy 
he suffered and how shamefully he was entreated 
(x Thess. ii. 2). There was also Silas, who well justified 
Paul’s choice of him, for he showed himself well able t 
bear shame and suffering for Jesus. It was good t 
Mark was not there! How would he have stood it? 
But from these our thought turns to the third principal 
actor in this scene, the story of whose conversion has 
shed the light of unspeakable comfort into myriads ¢ 

broken hearts. 

























Tue GaoLer.—A rough, coarse man, probably! What 
else could be expected from one who had spent his early 
days in the Roman army, and his later ones amid the 
hardening and brutalizing experiences of a provincia 
Roman prison? When superiors did not scruple to act 
in defiance of law and decency, their subordinate coul 
hardly be expected to be too particular. Barbarous usage 
would certainly be meted out by his hands to the & 
Jews, about whom he had received the significant hin 
that he was to keep them safely. The inner prison w 
a dark underground hole beneath his house (Acts xvi 
34, R.V.); into this he thrust them; they would probably 


lie extended on the bare damp ground, their bleeding 


backs in contact with the soil, and their legs stretches 
to such an extent by the stocks as to almost disloc 
their hips. 

By midnight the two prisoners became so happy tl 
they could no longer contain themselves, and began tc 
sing, chanting the grand old Hebrew Psalms, and in # 
intervals praying. No doubt they were in the best o 
company, and found their souls overflowing with exuberan 
joy. ‘Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is 
me, bless his holy name.” It was an unwonted soum 
to the prisoners who stood or lay around in the pite 


¥p 


dark, their chains stapled to the walls—not one of the 


% 


we 


aS 








The Gaoler’s Conbersion. 117 


thought of sleep; “the prisoners,” we are told, “were 
listening.” 

An earthquake broke in on the singing, the doors flew 
open, and the staples left their places. The gaoler being 
roused from sleep came into the prison yard, and found 
the doors open. As Paul and Silas caught sight of him 
standing against the glimmering starlight, to their horror 
they saw him draw his sword and prepare to kill himself 
rather than face an ignominious death for his infidelity 
to his charge. With a loud voice Paul arrested and 
reassured him; then the call for the light, the springing 
into the cell, the trembling limbs, the courtesy that led 
them out, the inquiry for salvation, the answer of peace, 
the motley midnight audience which gathered around 
the two servants of God, the loving tendance of their 
wounds, the baptism, the hastily-prepared food, the glad 
rejoicing of the transformed believer and of all his 
believing house. One event crowding on the heels of 
another, and making a swift glad series of golden links 
which bound the gaoler ever after to his Saviour and to 
Paul. 

He doubtless became one of the members of the 

. Philippian church, a community of singular purity and 
, loveliness, to whom the Apostle wrote his tenderest words 
_ without a syllable of rebuke. He could only thank God 
upon every remembrance of them, and in every suppli- 
cation for them made request with joy. They were 
beloved and longed for, his joy and crown. He longed 
after them all in the tender mercies of Christ Jesus. 
They were his Bethany, his Zarephath, his Well of 
Bethlehem. 























Witte 


ter 1a 644) | 
*6-¥% 


a * 


is known as Saloniki. It may be that Paul was specially” 


' He had appeared in the person of Jesus of Nazareth. He 
did this for three Sabbath days, maintaining himself and his” 


From Philippi to Athens. 


(ACTS xvii., xviii.) 


‘*Whoso hath felt the Spirit of the Highest 
Cannot confound nor doubt Him, nor deny: 
Yea, with one voice, O world, tho’ thou deniest, 
Stand thou on that side, for on this am I.” 
F. W. H. Myers. 


EAVING Luke at Philippi, Paul and his companions - 

: Oy travelled through Amphipolis and Apollonia to 
THESSALONICA, a2 name which lives for ever in the 
inscriptions of his two earliest epistles. The modern town” 
attracted to this city because of the synagogue and ¢ 
weekly Jewish service there, in which he could prosecute — 
his favourite work of opening and alleging from the 
Hebrew Scriptures that the Messiah must suffer, and that 


friends by the work of his own hands, and lodging with 
one Jason, who afterwards became a devoted disciple and” 
follower (Romans xvi. 21). 

At the end of that period the strong feeling raised amon 
the Jews made it unwise to continue in the synagogue: he 
therefore removed his conferences to some neutral ground. ~ 
How long he remained there we cannot tell; but it must 
have been long enough to give time for the formation of - 
a healthy and vigorous church, towards which the Apostle” 
bore himself with the gentleness of a nurse, and the en- 
couragement of a father. There was something ab 
these Macedonian converts which was immensely attrac! 
to him. In after days he speaks of them as his Joy 


‘The "Ghasalsainne, 


crown ; and says that he was so affectionately desirous for 
_ their growth in grace, that he would gladly have sacrificed 


his own life to promote it. They were very poor, and he 
wrought day and night with his own hands, even to travail, 
that he might not be burdensome to them ; but they were 
rich in faith, and love, and hope (1 Thess. ii. 6, 7, 11, 19)- 

More than in other cases, his teaching led them to 
anticipate the Advent of the Lord. The pressure of the 
anguish that lay sore upon them all may have made them 
peculiarly susceptible to those radiant visions of the Lord’s 
return that filled the Apostle’s thought. They even outran 
his teaching, and fell into the error of supposing that that 
day had already come—an error which the Apostle by a 
second epistle hastened to correct. It was a great joy, 
however, to that harassed heart to realize that, amid the 
furious opposition of man, God was working with him, 
and accompanying his words with the demonstration of his 
Spirit. He recalls, with lively satisfaction, that the Gospel 
came to them in power and the Holy Ghost; so that they 
became ensamples to all that believed in Macedonia and 
Achaia, and the Word of God sounded forth from them in 
clarion notes (1 Thess. iv. ; 2 Thess. ii.). 

Some months must have been occupied in this blessed 
ministry; and the strain on the Apostle was evidently 
greatly lessened by the gifts which came from Philippi, 
relieving him from the necessity of manual toil (Phil. 
iv. 16). 

i At last, however, Thessalonica was closed against them. 


; Paul and Silas were compelled to flee by night before the 
‘anger of the populace, incited by the Jews. The accusa- 


tion laid against them was a strange one, considering the 
quarter from which it emanated. It was suspicious that 
Jews should be so eager to maintain the integrity of the 
Roman Empire, in opposition to the claims of the other 
King, one Jesus. But “any stick will do to beat a dog 
with”; and the Jews were not scrupulous about the means 





ae yhtee 





| 


x ire ag h SMe oe y 
Pet FC tM CIRS Hoe ee 


ake 


So. -a8he sa: 


a + & 


‘evel Ges i’ 
Cae ee DRA e Soe eae Bow 


¢ 


Seliger, ees 


ee 
"SF 4 


> 


PVaEEy? toa! 


Sis 
reat’ 


Vg eS on 


s 


were" 


ft 
e484 2e 


ae a 


i 


.  & _ ts. 


wo 


= 


hoe 
w 


> 


ay ya en oe 
A aS 
4 + <= 
qv ; 


4 
a 
BS: 
recs 
oe 
~ 
Sak” 
M 


‘ 





‘ 


pursued his steps with relentless hate. There was at 4 
‘no help for it but to leave Silas and Timothy in Bercea, 
to see what further could be done to keep the pathway to” 


Jd% ‘ fm . 
eRe wis Tr hie ee 


Fern Bele ens. 


they employed, if only they could rid hemselves c 
powerful rival, who was probably thinning the crowd 
Gentile devotees that gathered in their synagogue. 7h 
Fifty miles of night-journey brought them to Bae s 
and there for a brief space they had respite, as the Je 
were less bigoted, and more willing to search the Sa 
to discover for themselves the reasonableness or otherwise — 
of Paul’s views. But his heart yearned for the beloved 
brethren whom he had left to stem the strong tide of 
hatred which his teaching had evoked; and more than 
once he would have returned had it not been for the 
fear of implicating Jason and others, who appear to —_ 
been bound over to prevent him from setting his foot a 
in Thessalonica. This was in his mind when he said Satan ~ 
hindered him (1 Thess. ii. 18). ‘ 
The project of Paul’s return to Thessalonica was, how- — 
ever, rendered quite impossible by the rising of another 
storm, caused by Jewish emissaries from that city, who 























the rear open, and to hurry down to the harbour to take 
the first boat that was sailing. This happened to be for 
Athens. Those that conducted him hurried him on board, : 
and we can imagine him standing on deck, and watching — 
wistfully the receding heights of Mount Olympus slowly ~ 
fading from view: dehind, the dearest, truest friends he had — 
ever known ; defore, what ? a 

ATHENS. —The messengers hastened back to Bercea, 
bearing the charge of the lonely Lion-heart, that Silas and — 
Timothy should come to him with all speed. While he + 
waited for them and hoped they would assure him that he ~ 
might return to the infant communities he had bua : 
he passed through the streets of Athens, surveying t 
monuments of their religion. On. every side were th 1 
achievements of human genius. Temples which a Phi¢ 





“had designed ; statues which a Praxiteles had wrought. 


glory had passed away a century and a half before, when 
she had fallen before Rome’s all-subduing might. She 
prided herself still on her heroic traditions, and her — 
_ eustodianship of the greatest monuments of that or any 
epoch of human history. But it was the afterglow of — 
sunset, xd 









3 _ with classic memories or artistic appreciation. To him the 
city was simply full of idols; and the innumerable multi- 
a tudes suggested the cahiflsed notions that prevailed of the 
% ‘unity and majesty of the Deity. He was greatly moved; 
and, not content with reasoning in the synagogue with ie 
Jews and proselytes, he went forth every day into the 
market-place to reason with whomsoever he met, urging all 
and sundry to turn from these vanities to worship the only 
God. It was his constant aim to be all things to all men; 
and at Athens he gave a conspicuous exhibition of his 
marvellous versatility. No ordinary Jew could have 
entered so thoroughly into the spirit of the place as the 
great Apostle did, or have excited sufficient interest among 
__ its philosophers to justify them calling a special assembly 
of the council of the Areopagus to hear a full statement of — 
the new teaching he brought to their ears. The evangelist 
indicates that the opinions formed about Paul were diverse 
and not entirely complimentary. Some compared him to a 
bird picking up seeds, others to a seeker after novelty ; and ~ 
_ perhaps there was more of hostility than friendliness in 
_ their taking hold of him and bringing him before their 
highest religious tribunal. 
It was the greatest audience Paul had ever addressed. 
- Before him philosophers, pedants, lecturers, and students 
accustomed to discuss the loftiest themes within the horizon — 
of human thought, and to make distinctions to which the — 




















But Greece was living Greece no more. Her political 


It is not clear that the heart of the Apostle was stirred 


de! cate refinement of the Greek language lent itself with 2a 





err Ee a game 8 eee lath teal “a; +. 4 
4 8 0 aha gat a ed: paeeaips a 
~ os 7 ss ee oa y Veorent 


itm = 


122° From Philippi to a e t 


marvellous subtlety. Epicureans were there tc taste the 
flow of words, or criticise the style, the choice of era 
the harmony of balanced sentences. Stoics, to study th 
theory of life, which this new theoriser, as he appeared, = . 
professed. For the whole crowd of Athenians and resident — 
strangers were interested only in saying or hearing some- — 
thing new. , 
The address Paul gave on that occasion is quite niga ; 
For its grace, intellectual sequence, grandeur of conception 
and range, stately march of eloquent words, it stands alone — 
among the addresses recorded for us by the evangelist. It 
was probably the result of deep thought and prayer, or ~ 
Paul had not so carefully passed it on to Luke, who was — 
not then with him. It reveals the opulence of the ~ 
Apostle’s intellect and power of ready sympathy, which — 
enabled hiih to adapt himself so easily to all sorts and 
conditions of men. We can only notice the contrasts — 
between himself and his audience, that reveal themselves 
in almost every sentence. To them it was a new sensation, 
a shift in the kaleidoscope of religious thought; to him it 
was a matter of tremendous urgency, his spirit was pressed 
and provoked within him. They confessed their ignorance _ 
of the Unknown God, who lay behind the world and all © 
things therein; Paul withdrew the vail and declared Him — 
unto them. They supposed that the temples around were — 
not unworthy of the Divine abode; he told them, as he — 
remembered Stephen to have said years before, that “ 
nothing less than heaven’s infinite dome could befit his 
+ supernal majesty, and that even this could not contain — 
Him. They thought to propitiate the Deity with gifts; he ~ 
insisted that He needed nothing at men’s hands, and that 
their blessedness consisted in giving, not goats and calves, 
but broken hearts, contrite spirits, and empty, outstretched 
hands. They taught a dreary kind of Pantheism, as ~ 
though God were no longer distinct from the matter of — 
the world; he said that He was a Person, a Father to be. 









— 











cf Rana ees EL OT BAIR FIO meaty, 
oom ranean ei tea nicest Seiten ay after igipeop eh ita! = And) Ne asleep: 
aS sce. nathan, "fincas hte 


Sight after, as well as the atmosphere in which they lived, 
and moved, and had their being. It did not seem un- 
becoming for them to fashion the similitude of the God- 
head in gold, and silver, and stone, graven by art and 
man’s device; but he insisted that He was a Spirit, to be 
worshipped im spirit and in truth. Some held the im- 
mortality of the soul, as Socrates had proclaimed it on 
that very spot, but they had no idea of the resurrection of 
the body; he, however, unhesitatingly affirmed that spirit 
would mate again with body, not only that there would be 
a literal resurrection, but that there had been one, and that 
a day was coming in which God would judge the world by 
the Man who died in mortal weakness, but whom He had 
raised from the dead. 

At this mention of the resurrection, many in his 
audience began to mock. The Greek found the perfect 
fruition and glory of life in the present, and had no idea of 
a future which should involve the reanimation of the body. 
So Paul departed from among them with comparatively 
small results, Dionysius, a member of the august tribunal 
before which he had stood; a woman, Damaris, who was 
probably the result of his more general work in the city; 
and a few others, clave unto him, and believed. The 
Gospel attracted the simple-minded merchants and artizans 
of Macedonia more readily than the educated /iterati of 
Athens. 

So far as we know the Apostle never visited Athens 
again. He went sadly on his way to Corinth, his heart filled 
with a tumult of thoughts, anxiety for the infant churches 
behind him, yearning to see Timothy and Luke, question- 
ing what reception he might receive amid the cultured and 
eloquent Corinthians ; but more than ever determined not 
to know anything among them save Jesus Christ and Him 
crucified, while stedfastly abjuring all attempts at wisdom 
or grace of speech, lest the Cross of Christ should be 
made void. 








aul's ane 123 


XV. 
“9n Weakness and. Fear.” 


(1 CoRINTHIANS ii. 3.) 


Ay, for this Paul, a scorn and a despising, 
Weak as you know him, and the wretch you see,— 
Even in these eyes shall ye behold him rising, 
Strength in infirmities and Christ in me.” 
F. W. H. Myers. 

IVE hours’ sail across the Saronic Bay brought the 
Apostle to Cenchrea, the port of Corinth to the east; 
for this great and busy city commanded two water- 
ways. Through her western port, Lechzum, she was in 
communication with the Adriatic; and through her eastern 
port, Cenchrea, with the A2gean. The wares of the East 
thus passed through her to supply the omnivorous appetite 
of the metropolis, and vast crowds were attracted to her 
precincts for the purposes of trade. This commanding 
position thus gave her a quite unusual importance in the 
eye of the Apostle, ever eager to seize on any advantage 
which he could use for the Gospel of his Lord. To 
establish a strong Christian church there would be to cast 
seeds of Christian teaching on waters that would bear them 
east and west. Christian missionaries should be strategists, 
expending their strength where populations teem and rivers 

of world-wide influence have their rise. 

But the Apostle entered the proud and beautiful city “in 
weakness, and fear, and much trembling.” He could not 
forget the frigid contempt which he had encountered at 
Athens, and which was harder to bear than violent opposi- 
tion. He may have been suffering from some aggravation 
of his habitual trouble, without Luke’s presence to treat it ; 
and he was profoundly conscious of being deficient in those 


gifts of learning and eloquence on which the Corinthians — 


set such store. He knew that his speech and his preaching 








The ee ae ee ee ee fee. by! 











125 


could never be in persuasive words of human wisdom, and 
it was his fixed determination to know nothing among them 
but Jesus Christ, and Him crucified. 

There were many other difficulties to be encountered, 
which made his ministry in Corinth the more difficult, and 
his consequent success the more conspicuous. 


I, Tue Necessity FoR ConTInNuAL Manuva. TOoIL.— 
In his first Epistle to Corinth, he lays great emphasis on 
this. Always maintaining the right of those who preached 
the Gospel to live by the Gospel, he did not use it; but 
suffered all things rather than hinder its progress or in- 
fluence. No chance should be given to the merchants and 
traders that thronged the city from all parts, prepared to 
sacrifice everything for purposes of gain, to allege that he 
was actuated by mercenary motives. He, therefore, re- 
sumed his trade of tent-making, and was thankful to come 
across two Christian Jews who had been flung on this shore 
by the decree of the Emperor, which expelled all Jews from 
Rome. Suetonius, the historian, tells us that this decree 
was due to tumults caused by one Chrestus, evidently 
referring to violent disputes in the Jewish community 
concerning the claims of Jesus to be the long-expected 
Messiah. With them, therefore, he abode and wrought, 
for they were of the same craft; and a friendship sprang 
up between him and Aquila, with his wife Priscilla, which 
was destined to have an important bearing on the spread 
of Christianity in the metropolis from which they had 
come, and in Ephesus, to which they would accompany 
their newly-made friend. Perhaps Paul was in their 
employ ; but in any case work was short and wages scant, 
so that he was not unfrequently in actual want (2 Cor. xi. 9; 
1 Cor. iv. 11, 12). 

How strange that the movement which was to give 
Corinth a greater fame than her games, or architecture, 
or eloquence, emanated from a poor shop in the Jewish 





we 
‘ 


ee ee ee tee ee me eR 
aie ee Ci -rh t rsh a > mitten igs ty 



























126 “Gn Weakness and yone 


ghetto, where a handful of fugitive Jews wrongit at the 
trade, speaking amid their toils of Jesus of Nazareth, who 
had been crucified in weakness, but was living through the ~ 
power of God. They also were weak with Him; but they 
were destined to live and reign with Him, over the hearts — 
of men, through the power of God. 


II. Tue ViruLeNtT HatReD OF THE Jews.—Accord- 
ing to his usual practice, Paul betook himself every Sabbath 
to the synagogue, and reasoned, persuading the Jews and — 
Greek proselytes that the conception of the Hebrew ~ 
Scriptures was precisely that of a suffering and crucified — 
Messiah. This went on for some weeks; but the measure 
of his labours was somewhat curtailed by the heavy drain 
of his daily toil. 4 was not till Timothy and Silas arrived, 
the one from Thessalonica, and the other from Bercea, bring- 


himself with more leisure and intensity to the cherished 
object of his life. “He was pressed in the spirit, and 
testified to the Jews that Jesus was Christ” (Acts xviii. 5). 
This was more than the influential men of the Jewish com- 
munity could bear; they opposed, blasphemed, and droye — 
him from the synagogue. Their attitude was more than ~ 
usually virulent. They were unreasonable and wicked; 
they were animated by the spirit which had led their nation — 
to kill the Lord Jesus and the prophets; they pleased not 
God, and were contrary to all men; they were filling up the 
measure of their sins (1 Thess. ii. 14-16; 2 Thess. iii. 2). 
_ Their hatred culminated when the Apostle gladly — 
‘accepted the offer of a God-fearing proselyte, Titus 
Justus, whose house was close to the synagogue, to hold — 
meetings there. This new move was attended with instant — : 
and remarkable success. Among those that migrated with — 
the Apostle from the synagogue was Crispus, its chief 
ruler, who believed in the Lord with all his se, 





call aie es before Gallic, a 


SoNiery of the people of Corinth, also, heard, believed, and mons 
were baptized. As the new meeting-house became more 
crowded, and the movement increased in numbers and 
influence, the Jews became more and more exasperated, 
and at last rose in a body, seized Paul, and dragged him 
before the Roman Governor, who happened to be Gallio, taal 
brother to Seneca, the famous philosopher, and Nero’s 
tutor. He was a man of unusual culture and refinement, 
sweetness, and loveableness. He represented the broad ne 
and liberal views of educated Romans, of the policy that 
Rome should exercise towards the various religions of the 
provinces ; and when he discovered that the charge against 
Paul was of no imperial importance, and had to do indeed 
not with facts, or civil wrong or moral outrage, but with 
words, and names, and Jewish law, he would have nothing 
more to do with it or them, but bade his lictors drive them 








from the judgment-seat. a 
The Greeks were only too glad that contempt should be 2 
heaped on the hated Jews, and took the opportunity of or 


seizing Sosthenes, the new chief ruler of the synagogue— ~ 
who had succeeded to the post vacated by Crispus—and 
beating him in the very presence of the Proconsul. He 
regarded their horse-play, however, with perfect indifference. 
« What did it matter if a Jew got a few stripes more or less? 
No doubt they were richly merited; and so long as there 
was no public disturbance, the castigation might serve a 
* useful purpose in cautioning the Jews against bringing their 
matters into public notice or trespassing on the public = 
patience. pas 
But the incident must have greatly aggravated the hatred 
of the Jews against the Apostle and his converts ; the more 
so when, as it would appear, Sosthenes himself became a 
convert, and so intimately associated with the Apostle as to 
be coupled in after years with himself in the inscription 
of the first Epistle to the Corinthians—“Sosthenes our 
brother.” 


© 

es HES 

EER US « Bae, © 
TS St Ge ae 


+ ” - 
4 kam 


2 ae 


Pe: 
r. 


tee Ee 



































128 “Gn Weakness and Fear.” is 2 


III. THe CHARACTER OF HIS ConVERTS.—Corinth I 
been compared to Paris for its vice; to Newmarket for the — 
preponderance of the sporting interest; to Chicago for the ¥ 
mixture of its population; to Vanity Fait for its frivolity 
and lightness. Thither gathered the scum of the world. ~ 
Soldiers and sailors, slaves and prostitutes, jockeys and ~ 
chariot drivers, athletes and wrestlers; Romans with their 
imperial bearing ; Greeks with their regular features; Jews 
with their unmistakable badge; Scythians from the shores — 
of the Black Sea; men of Mesopotamia, Pontus, Egypt, — 
and Asia Minor—all bent on business or amusement, and — 
daubed to a greater or less extent with the exceeding evil — 
of this grossly impure city. The Temple of Venus, with — 
its thousand priestesses, legalised vice; the Isthmian 
Games, held once in three years, established betting and — 
gambling; the motley character of the population en- — 
couraged a wild admixture of thought and opinion, for 
which there was no recognized standard or court of appeal. — 

To such a city Paul opened his message, encouraged by _ “ 
the assurance of the Lord that He had much people there. ~ 
How often to his tried and persecuted servants does the g 
Master come as He came to the Apostle! They may be — 
conscious of weakness and much fear, may speak his word 
in trembling, may be derided as a spectacle and laughing- 
stock, may be encompassed with toil and pain and per — 
secution; but He stands beside in a vision, and says: 
“Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace: for I 
am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee. 
They may gather themselves against thee, but not by Me. — 
Whosoever shall gather against thee shall fall for thy sake. — 
No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and 
every tongue that shall rise in judgment against thee thou — 
shalt condemn.” 

With this encouragement in his heart, Paul laboured fia > 
a year and six months in this gay and sinful city, with — 


marvellous success. It is true that not many of the wise, 
a 
ot 








PAUL BEFORE AGRIPPA’ 


““T am not mad, most noble Festus, but speak forth the words of 
truth and soberness.’ —AcTS xxvi. 25 





: 129 


or mighty, or noble of this world, were among the chosen 
ones ; they who were accounted as weak, and base, and 
contemptible, by the high-bred leaders of Corinthian 
society were selected as the foundation-stones of the newly- 
_ gathered church. There might be a Crispus and Gaius, a 
Stephanas and his household, all of whom, contrary to his 
usual practice, the Apostle baptized before Timothy and 
Silas arrived ; but these were exceptions to the general rule. 
Perhaps women preponderated in the young community, 
as the Apostle devotes so much space in his Epistle to 
regulating their behaviour. We know, at least, of Phoebe, 
the deaconess of the church at Cenchrea, who bore his 
epistle to Rome; and of Chloe, whose household slaves 
were the medium of intelligence when Paul was at Ephesus. 

The majority of his converts, however, were of the 
lowest caste, and of those who had been deeply stained 
with the vices that made Corinth notorious. The city 
was the resort of fornicators, idolaters, adulterers, 
effeminates, thieves, covetous, drunkards, revilers, and 
extortioners, and such had they been; but under the 
preaching of the Cross, in the power of the Holy Ghost, 
a marvellous change had passed over them—they had 
become washed, sanctified, and justified, in the name of 
the Lord Jesus, and in the Spirit of our God. Jesus had 
become their wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and 
redemption. Delivered from the power of darkness, they 
had become children of the light and of the day: heirs 
of God, and joint heirs with the Son of his love. 

What a contrast between that little Church and the 
great heathen world out of which it had been chosen! 
We may imagine one of its meetings towards the close 
of the Apostle’s visit. It is a Sabbath evening. Outside, 
the streets are full of pleasure-seekers and revellers. 
Groups of idlers are discussing the last chariot race, or 
staking their money on an approaching boxing- match. 
The varied costumes, vivid gestures, handsome equipages, 

I 


130 “$n Weakness and Fear.” 


the mimes and plays, the processions and shows, 
a never-palling picture of movement and colour. a 
within the little meeting-place all is hushed and still. 
Paul is speaking of things which eye hath not seen, nor ~ 
ear heard, nor the heart of man conceived; or the men 
in turn are contributing to the edification: of the rest, 
with a psalm, or a teaching, or a revelation, or the — 
interpretation of an unknown tongue; while the women, ~ 
modestly veiled, listen in silence. Now the love-feast is — 
being partaken of, each bringing some contribution of 
victuals to the common store; and presently the Lord’s” 
Supper will conclude the evening engagements, partaken 
of according to the method delivered to the Apostle by © 
the Lord Jesus Himself (1 Cor. xi. and xii.). 
This was a marvellous sequel to his timid and unadorned 
entrance among them. But it is evident that the Apostle ~ 
was far from satisfied. He complained that he could not — 
speak unto them as unto spiritual; but as unto carnal, as_ 
unto babes in Christ; that he was obliged to feed them ~ 
with milk, and not with meat. He, doubtless, detected ~ 
the first working of that unhallowed leaven which was — 
afterwards to break out in such fearful ferment. Even © 
before he left there were probably manifestations of party 
spirit, of the appraising of gift above grace, of the mis 
licence for liberty, of the undue prominence of women b 
in public assemblies, of greed in the love-feasts, confusion ~ 
in the ministrations, and heresy in the doctrine of the ~ 
resurrection. It must have been, therefore, with no small — 
misgiving that he tore himself away at the close of his 
protracted sojourn, leaving the infant community to the © 
tendance of God with much of the same solicitude with 
which Jochebed launched the cradle ark on the a 
waters of the Nile. 
But though he left the city, it produced an ineffaceable- 


effect upon his methods of thought and expression. Tt 





























From Corinth to Jerusalem. 131 


imperial conceptions which were embodied in Rome, 
the undisputed mistress of the world. There he wrote 
his first two epistles, those to the Thessalonians. There, 
also, he was compelled to study the intimate questions 
connected with the formation and government of churches 
so heterogeneously constituted ; and there he reached the 
final form of stating the Gospel. Years afterwards we 
find him alluding to the mingling of gold, silver, and 
precious stones, with wood, hay, and stubble, in the 
construction of temples and other buildings; or com- 
paring the body to a temple; or drawing illustrations 
from the boxing- match and the arena, the triumphal 
procession and the theatrical representation. It seemed 
as though his speech were dyed with the colouring 
borrowed from the spectacles with which he had grown 
so familiar in the streets of Corinth. 

At last, however, he resolved to leave Corinth. Many 
reasons prompted this step, and amongst them the desire 
to proceed to Jerusalem to ascertain the feeling of the 
mother church. Still further to conciliate the conservative 
element there, he had bound himself in the vow of a 
Nazarite, and was anxious to perform the concluding 
ceremonial within the Temple. He was obliged to have 
his head shorn at Cenchrea, because the month had 
expired; but he carried the hair with him to be burnt 
on the great altar within the Temple court. Aquila and 
Priscilla probably thought that Ephesus would be a better 
mart for their wares than Corinth, so they sailed with him. 
And thus the first memorable missionary tour in Greece 
came to an end, and for the fourth time since his 
conversion the Apostle approached the city which was 
doubly dear to him—memories of his Lord being now 
entwined with the sacred associations of David, Solonet 
Hezekiah, and Ezra, 





<i ' XVI. 
More than a Conqueror. 


(ROMANS viii. 36, 37.) 


“Servant of God, well done! Well hast thou fought 

The better fight, who single hast maintained 
i Against revolted multitudes the cause 
Lag Of Truth—in word mightier than they in arms.” 
2° MILTON. | _ 




















: 
2 HESE are among the greatest words ever spoken b 
; = man, and are the more remarkable when we consid el 
2 them as gathering up and recapitulating the ¢ 
‘ . periences which immediately preceded their utterance. 
; It was towards the close of Paul’s third missionary 
‘ journey. About three years before, he had left the Syrian” 
Antioch for the third time, after a sojourn of some duratior 
a (Acts xviii. 23). His eager spirit could not rest amid tf 
; comparative comfort and ease of the vigorous church-life 
which was establishing itself there, but yearned with tender 
solicitude over his converts throughout the region - R 
Galatia and Phrygia. He therefore again e 
. Cilician Gates, traversed the bleak tablelands of the upp Jer 
E or highland country, stablishing all the disciples, and 
. working towards the Roman province of Asia. bic: “ye 
the S.W., on the seaboard. He had been pre 
forbidden to enter it (xvi. 6); but his steps were n0¥ 
as clearly led to it as they had formerly been restrained. 
Thus does our Sovereign Lord withhold his servants fron 
the immediate fulfilment of their dreams, that they may 
return to them again when the time is ripe, and they, too 
are more thoroughly equipped. The experiences of Pa 
in Greece were of the utmost possible service in fittin 
him for his ministry in this thickly-populated and nigh! 
civilized district ; which resulted in a work of evang eliz ic 





_ formation of those seven churches, to which the risen Lord 
_ addressed his final messages. 
It was to redeem a pledge he had solemnly made that ~ 
_ the Apostle at last came down to Ephesus. He had spent 
_ one Sabbath-day there previously, on his way from Corinth 
to Jerusalem. On that occasion his ministrations had so 
_ deeply interested the Jews, that they had urged him to 
__ abide for a longer period; but this being impossible, on = 
_ account of the necessity of hastening to Jerusalem to fulfil — PP 
his vow, when taking his leave of them he said, “I will | <% 
return again unto you, if the Lord will.” It was in 3 










fulfilment of that promise that the Apostle now visited the = 

_ metropolis of Asia the Less. es 

___ A good deal had happened in the interval, in narrating = 
_ which the evangelist probably gives us the clue to the == 
' former prohibition of the Apostle’s visit. Apollos, the al 


wa 
. 


eloquent Alexandrian, had visited the city, had met there 


= Paul’s friends, Aquila and Priscilla, who were awaiting 
_ their fellow-worker’s return. By them he had been led 
into a clear appreciation of the truth, in consequence of 
_ which his ministry had become more fruitful, both in 
helping them which had believed, and powerfully confuting = 
_ the Jews. The strong ploughshare had turned up the at 
___ heavy clods, and prepared the soil for Paul’s further labours si 
(xviii. 24-28). ere 
+ But Apollos had now left for Corinth, and Paul arrived 

_ to take up and extend the work so auspiciously begun. 

_ He probably but dimly realized as he entered Ephesus how - 
long he would remain, or the far-reaching results of his 

= residence. It was enough for him to realize, as he after- 

__ wards wrote to the Ephesian converts, that there was a — 

_ prepared path awaiting him; but whether it should be 
smooth or rough was known only to Him whose he was | 







_ and whom he served. 
__ As a matter of fact it was a conflict from first to las. 


ame 





“. “I fought with beasts at Ephesus,” was his comment a 






















134 More than « Conqueror. — hx, a - 


it was all over. And here, again, in enumerating 
experiences, he compares them to a battlefield and himself 
to a combatant, crying—“ We are killed all the day long; 
we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter; but in all ~ 
these things we are more than conquerors through Him that ~ 
loved us.” In these words, written to Rome from Corinth, — 
after the close of his work at Ephesus, and whilst rs 


own conception of the entire situation. 


I. Tue BATTLEFIELD.—There were several difficulties. 
to be encountered, which must be taken into account if 
we would estimate the greatness of the victory 
through the grace of the living Saviour. 

In the first place there was the pressure of the strana 4 
eager mass of human beings, whose interests, aims, and 
methods of thought were so foreign to his own. No one © 
has stood alone in the midst of Benares, surrounded by 
that vast heathen population, worshipping on the banks ~ 
of the brown and muddy Ganges, or ascending the ~ 
thousand stairs of the marble temples which extend es 
the riverside, without a sense of loneliness and isolation, In 
the proximity of the great river, among those mighty and 
ancient pyramids of ‘stone, beneath those fagades and 
colonnades in which swarms the infinite life of India, how 
insignificant the life of the individual onlooker appears! ~ 
What is he in the presence of that teeming mass! How ~ 
can he hope to affect its habits of thought and life—he ~ 
might as well attempt to divert the course of the ancient 
stream. Did not Paul feel thus, as he spent his first weeks | S 
at Ephesus ? . 

But, besides, there was the vast system of organized — 
idolatry which centred in the temple of Diana. Her x 
image was said to have fallen from Jupiter (possibly a4 
meteorite), and it was enshrined in a temple, counted to — 





The Temple of Diana. 135 


be one of the wonders of the world. The magnificence 
of uncalculated wealth, the masterpieces of human art, the 
fame of splendid ceremonials, the lavish gifts of emperors 
and kings, the attendance and service of thousands of 
priests and priestesses, combined to give it an unrivalled 
eminence of influence and prestige. Sooner might some 
humble Protestant missionary working in a back street of 
Rome expect to dim the magnificence of St. Peter's, or 
diminish the attendance of its vast congregations, as Paul 
hope that his residence in Ephesus could have any effect 
whatever on the worship of Diana. Moreover, all the world 
knew that the city of the Ephesians was temple-keeper of 
the great Diana, and of the image which fell down from 
Jupiter (xix. 35), and therefore keen to avenge the least 
slight. 

In connection with the temple there throve a great trade 
in amulets and charms. Each individual in the vast crowds 
that came up to worship at the shrine was eager to carry 
back some memento of his visit, and the more so if the 
keepsake would serve as a preservative against evil omens 
and spirits, of which there was a great and constant dread. 
The trade in these articles must have been a large one, or 
the artificers in silver would not have been numerous 
enough to fill the city with confusion, and to necessitate 
the interference of the town clerk. What the trade in 
strong drink is among ourselves, that was the business in 
these miniature shrines manufactured by Demetrius and 
his fellow-craftsmen. How impossible it seemed that one 
man, in three years, employing only moral and spiritual 
weapons, could make any difference to this: ancient and 
extensive craft ! 

But still further, like many of the cities of the time, 
filled with motley populations — part Oriental and part 
Greek—Ephesus was deeply infected with the black arts 
of the exorcist, the magician, and the professor of cabalistic 
mysteries. The renegade Jews were foremost adepts in 






















tion with these practices, and treasured their books to ‘ha : 
amount of at least £2000. It is no child’s play to turn © 
a nation of savages from their confidence in witchcraft and ~ 
medicine-men to sane views of life and Divine Providence; ~ 
but how much harder to neutralize such insidious poison aS 
wrought through a great city like Ephesus! The people 
fixed the days of marriage and journeying, the engagements ~ 
they should make, and the business transactions on which ~ 
they should enter, after an appeal to the soothsayers and 
magicians ; and it was a formidable task to combat thei 
rooted prejudices and habits. * 

But perhaps Paul’s most inveterate foe was the Jewish ‘ 
synagogue, entrenched in ancient prejudices and persistent ~ 
disbelief. They were hardened and disobedient, speaking 
evil of “the Way” before the multitude. He also recalls, im 
his farewell address to the Ephesian elders, the trials which ~ 
befell him by the plots of the Jews. When the great riot — 
broke out, they were only too glad to show their hatred of 
the Christians by putting forward Alexander to disavow all 
connection with them. ; 


Aquila and Priscilla. But he looked far beyond the limits 
of his workshop to great victories for his Lord, much as 
Carey, who wrought at his cobbling with a map of the ~ 
world in front of him. But greater was He that was fe 
him than all that there were against him, and in all 
things he was destined to be more than a conqueror, 
Him that had loved him. 


Let us VERIFY THIS ASSERTION.—Let us turn to the ~ 
Acts of the Apostles, and ask if Paul were indeed ner << 
than conqueror. The answer is unmistakable. 












The Gonguest at Ephesus. 


three months’ conflict with the Jews in their synagogue, 
the Apostle was driven to the course he was wont to 
adopt under similar circumstances—he moved his disciples 
to the school-house of one Tyrannus, and taught there 
daily, as soon as noon was past, and a pause put alike on 
the labours of the schoolmaster and the artizan. In con- 
sequence of these ministrations, ‘‘all they which dwelt in 
Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and 
Greeks”—a very strong statement, when we bear in mind 
the populousness of that crowded province. Even the 
silversmiths who caused the riot acknowledged that not 
only at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, Paul had 


‘persuaded and turned away much people; and there was 


great danger that the temple would be depleted of its 
worshippers, and Diana deposed from her magnificence. 
With respect to the trade in amulets and charms, it fell 


off so seriously that the craftsmen realized that unless they 


bestirred themselves their gains would be at an end. 

With respect to the strongly-entrenched position of the 
magicians and exorcists, they were utterly baffled and con- 
founded by the much greater miracles which were wrought 
through Paul; so much so that the handkerchiefs he used 
to wipe the sweat from his brow and the aprons in which 
he wrought at his trade, were made the medium of healing 


' virtue as they were carried from his person to the sick 


and demon-possessed. So mighty was the impression that 
Christ had secrets superior to the best contained in their 
ancient books, that many of them that had believed came, 
confessing, and declaring their deeds. And not a few of 
those who practised magical arts brought their books 
together in one of the open squares and burned them 
in the sight of all. So mightily grew the word of the 
Lord, and prevailed. 

With respect to the exorcist Jews, they, too, were 
silenced. It would appear that the name of Jesus, spoken 


a eyen by those that did not believe in Him, had a potency 
























138 lore than a Conqueror, = se 
over evil spirits such as no other name exerted ; and ith a 1 
been blasphemously used by strolling Jews, obs had taken © 
upon themselves to call that sweet and holy name over 

some that were possessed. But in one notable instance — 
the demon himself had remonstrated, crying, “Jesus I 
know, and Paul I know; but who are ye?” and he had 
leapt on them, and ciastebeel them, so that they fled from , 


the house naked and wounded. 


LET us CoNSIDER THE TALISMAN OF VicTorY.—If ; 
turn from his outward life to study the diary of this” 
wonderful man, who seemed single-handed in his conflict 
and victories, we find a pathetic record of his sorrows ar i 
trials. Writing during these eventful months, he speaks of 
himself as a man doomed to death and made a spectacle 
to the world; for Christ’s sake, a fool, weak, and dis 
honoured; suffering hunger and thirst, when work was 
scant and ill-paid; having no certain dwelling-place, 
because unable to hold a situation long ogee hrough 
the plotting of his foes; hated, buffeted, reviled, persecuted, 
defamed ; made as the filth of the world, and the offscour- ~ 
ing of all things (1 Cor. iv. 9-13). * 

When he tells the story of the affliction which befell hir . 
during his residence in Asia, he says that he was veigness d 
down exceedingly beyond his power, insomuch that h 
despaired even of life; that he was pressed on 
side, perplexed, pursued, smitten down, groaning in 
tabernacle of his body, and always bearing about the dying 7 
of the Lord Jesus. In addition to all these things that 
were without, there pressed on him daily the care of all © 
the churches. There was also his anxiety about individu: 7 
as he ceased not to admonish every one of them night 
day with tears (2 Cor. i. 8; iv. 8; xi. 27, 28). : 

There is nothing more pathetic in the records of hum: 
suffering and patience than the story of his Ephes 
experiences, as he summoned them up on the shores 0 





\ 


“Through Bim that lobed.” 139 


Miletus, in his parting address to the elders of the church. 
In this passage also he quotes the old words of the 
Psalmist, about being killed all the day long, and counted 
as fit for the slaughter; and enumerates tribulation, anguish, 
persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, sword, as ingredients 
in his cup. Added to this, there was the constant suffering 
caused by the stake in the flesh. As the result of it all we 
wonder how such a man, under such drawbacks and in face 
of such opposing forces, could be more than a conqueror. 
Evidently we are driven to seek the source of his victory 
outside himself. It was through Him that loved. He not 
only overcame, but he was more than an overcomer; he 
overcame with ease; he brought off the spoils of victory— 
and this because he was in daily communication with One 
who had loved, did love, and would love him, world with- 
out end ; and who was ever pouring reinforcements into his 
soul, as men will pour fresh oxygen air to their comrade who 
is groping for pearls in the depth of the sea. 

The only matter about which the Apostle, therefore, felt 
any anxiety was whether anything could occur to cut him 
off from the living, loving Lord. ‘Can anything separate 
me from the love of Christ? ”—that was the only question 
worth consideration. 

Taking the extreme conditions of Being, he carefully 
investigates them, knowing that they include all between. 
First he interrogates the extremes of existence, “death and 
life”; next, the extremes of created intelligences, “angels 
and principalities and powers”; next, the extremes of time, 
‘things present and things to come”; next, the extremes 
of space, “height and depth”; lasily, the extremes of the 
created universe, “any other creature.” 

Each of these extremes has thus passed in review, and 
he has eagerly peered into its depths. He is like a man 
proving every link of the chain on which he is going to 
swing out over the abyss. Carefully and fervently he has 
tested all, and is satisfied that none of them can cut him 


: 
Bc. 


at ; pee 
Bet. Sie Mahomet oe 3 ates oe of ai: 
* a ; 
a Atore than a Ge nqueror. “Se 


+ Perea T 4 was & 


~ gaining by our losses, succeeding by our failures, triumph- 
























off from the love of God; and since hart is sae fe 
that nothing can ever intercept those supplies of the i 
and strength of God that shall avail to make him r 
than a conqueror. 
We strangely. misjudge the love of God. We think th 
our distresses and sufferings, our sins and failures, may 
make Him love us less, whereas they will draw Him nearer, 
and make his love exert itself more evidently and tenderl 
In the home, it is not the troop of sturdy children hata S a8 
engross the mother’s care, as the puny withered life that has 
lain in the cot for the last eleven years, unable to help 
itself and reciprocate her love. And in the world, death 
and pain, disease and sorrow, failure and sin, only dra y 
God nearer, if that be possible. So-far from separat 
from his love, they bind us closer. 
Oh, blessed love that comes down to us from the heart 
of Jesus, the essence of the eternal love of God dwelling 
there and coming through Jesus to us—nothing can ever 
staunch, nothing exhaust, nothing intercept it! It will not 
let us go. It leaps the gulf of space unattenuated, it 
bridges time unexhausted. It does not depend on ow 
reciprocation or response. It is not our love that holds 
God, but God’s that holds us. Not our love to Him, but 
his to us. And since nothing can separate us from the 
love of God, He will go on loving us for ever, and pouring” 
into us the entire fulness of his life and glory ; so that what- 
ever our difficulties, whatever our weakness and infirmity, 
whatever the barrels of water which drench the s; e 
and the wood on which it lies, we shall be kept stedfast, — 
unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, 
ing in our defeats, and ever more conquerors through Him 
that loved us. a 











XVII. 
Gathering Clouds. 


(AcTS xx, 22.) 


“'T know Thee, who hast kept my path, and made 
Light for me in the darkness, tempering sorrow 
So that it reached me like a solemn joy.” 

BROWNING. 





FTER the great uproar excited by Demetrius was 
. over, Paul sent for his disciples to come to his place 
of hiding, and exhorted them ; commending them to 
the grace of God, and taking a sad farewell. This done, 

e departed to go into Macedonia by way of Troas. — 
For the story of the next few months we must turn to 
the second Epistle to the Corinthians, which is the most 
‘remarkable of his epistles for its revelation of his heart.  —_ 
Bengel calls it an itinerary, and Dean Stanley says that 
he very stages of his journey are impressed on it; while 
. third says that the strong emotions under which it was 
yritten make it more difficult to translate than any other. 

_ At Troas, which he now visited for a second time, the 
Apostle expected to meet Titus, who had probably been 
the bearer of the first Epistle to Corinth—a letter elicited 
by the sad story of the dissensions and disorders of the  —_— 
church there, which had been brought to Ephesus by 
members of the household of Chloe. He had dealt 






















~~ 


ei. 
BP uk 
it 
e 


* 
Ba 


; 













ee ak The 


intensely anxious to learn the result of his words. Often 
since writing he had questioned whether he might not 
have imperilled his entire influence for good over his 
converts, and driven them into defiance and despair, — 
e delay of Titus confirmed his worst fears; and, though : 









no relief for his perturbed and eager spirit, but taking leay 
of them went forth into Macedonia (2 Cor. ii. 13). d 

In all probability Paul made at once for the bel 
Philippi ; but even there, since no tidings of Titus were 
hand, his flesh had no relief. He was afflicted on ever 
side ; without were fightings, and within were fears. 3 

At last, God that comforteth the lowly comforted f 
by the coming of the overdue traveller. He was re a} 
only to have his friend at his side, but to learn that the 
effect of his first letter had been wholesome, and had led 
to an outbreak of godly repentance and affectionate yearn- 
ing to himself, It was after conference with Titus on 
the whole state of affairs at Corinth that he indited his 
second Epistle. 4 



























I. His Muttirtrep Sorrows.—Throughout the Epistle 
Paul speaks of the great anguish through which he vas ; 
passing; and whilst he rebuts the many unkind an 
slanderous allegations made against him, he does so 
pathetic references to his sufferings. 

The treasure was in an earthen vessel. He was pressed, 
perplexed, pursued, and smitten down; always bearing 
about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus: the out 
ward man was decaying ; many groans escaped him, being — 
burdened, and he often longed to be absent from the body, 
that he might be present with the Lord. Sf 

In one of the most extraordinary enumeration of an- 
titheses in any language, he mentions, among other sources 
of anguish, his spells of sleeplessness, his repeated fasting s 
the blows, imprisonments, tumults, toils, and pressure ¢ 
his daily life. But there must have been other and deeper 
reasons—perhaps that he was being so persistently maligned, 
and his teachings so flagrantly misrepresented ; or becaust 
the love of many was waxing cold; or that the infant 
churches, on which he had expended so many prayers and 








= 


In Labours Abundant. 143 


tears, were proving themselves unworthy. But, however 
these things might be, the sufferings of Christ seem almost 
to have submerged him. 

But the Father of mercies and God of all comfort drew 
near and comforted him. There were many notes in that 
sweet and tender refrain that stole on the heart of his 
afflicted servant. The testimony of his conscience, that 
he had wrought in sincerity and holiness ; the divine faith- 
fulness, which never gave sign of fickleness or failure; the 


light of the knowledge of God that shone clear in his soul ; 


the thanksgiving of many to God which arose through his 
sorrows; the vision of the eternal weight of glory; the 
earnest of the Spirit in his soul, and the sure anticipation 
of the building of God which awaited him in the heavens ; 
the blessed sense of being an ambassador of Christ and a 
fellow-worker with God. God knows how to comfort; and 
fountains of divine consolation arose from unknown depths 
for him, as they will for thee and me. And thus, though 
the outward man decay, the inward man will be renewed 
day by day. 

But in spite of all, this deeply suffering soul never abated 
for a moment its devoted labours for the cause of God. 
His letters abound with references to the offertory which he 
was raising for the poverty-stricken saints at Jerusalem from 
all the churches he had established. Now he stimulates 
Corinth by citing the example of Macedonia ; and again he 
enumerates the precautions against the slanders of those 
who alleged that he was profiting by the contributions, 
There are indications also of his labours, not only toward 
the churches that knew and revered him, but in new and 
unexplored regions. Being ambitious to preach the Gospel 
where Christ had not been already named, and unwilling to 
build on another man’s foundation, he fully preached the 
Gospel even to Illyricum, on the Adriatic, 

Oh, incomparable man, no weights could stay the flight 
of thy devoted spirit! Nay, as the child’s kite must be 

























weighted to make it soar the higher, so did thy sc ‘ 
give thee new yearnings over souls, new ambitions for th 
Lord! Thou hast thy reward in the love of Gentile h 
until the sun-down of the present age, as thou hadst t 
glorying in Christ Jesus in things pertaining to God. We 
magnify Christ in thee, for we fully realize that He wrought 
through thee, for.the obedience of the Gentiles, by word 
and deed, in the power of signs and wonders, and in the 


power of the Holy Ghost. ‘A 


thy 


II, His Frrenps.—Some men have a marvellous power 
in attaching men to themselves. They possess a kind ¢ 
spiritual magnetism for others, who gather to their he: art 
and follow their lead. Paul had this power in a pre 
eminent degree. He was loved as few have been loved, 
and he loved in return. It must have therefore been 
peculiar pleasure to him, as at last he came to Corinth, 
to find himself the centre of a great assemblage of dey 
friends. . 

There was Timothy, his “beloved child,” his “true ch ., ; 
in faith”; Tychicus, “the beloved brother and faithful” 
fellow-servant in the Lord,” who was with him in his last 
imprisonment ; Titus, his “partner and fellow-worker,” his 
“true child after the common faith”; Luke, “the beloy ed 
physician,” who accompanied him to Rome, and was with 
him to the last; Trophimus, the Ephesian, who would have ~ 
been with him to death had not sickness detained him at ~ 
Miletus ; Aristarchus and Secundus, the former of whom — 
probably contrived to become his fellow-prisoner that h 
might minister to his illustrious friend ; Sopater, his hinged 
man, well known to the Roman Churcll Gaius, a trophy — 
of that first missionary tour which had taken him to Derbe; 
and the other Gaius, at this time his host; and Jason, who 
had sheltered him at Thessalonica at the risk of his life. 

And these were only a sheaf of the great harvest of his 
friends. Writing at this time from Corinth, he greets” 


“€ 
* 





SHIPWRECK OF PAUL AT MELITA. 


““And there came a viper out of the heat, and fastened on his hand.” 
ACTS xxviil. 3. 










oe tes. aga 


if ert, usw etn yi {ower ree 
To © \ Avice Sek 7 «te 


ee aria ee co — dg cna ey w> ae YD 


> rege 

emcees ie 

3 ‘ cd — 

Plotting for his Assassination. 145 aa 

twenty-six persons by name in the closing verses of the Be 


Epistle to the Romans. Priscilla and Aquila, who would 
have laid down their necks for him ; his beloved Epznetus; ‘ 
Amplias, his “beloved in the Lord”; Persis, the beloved 
and many others. If he were more bitterly hated tha 
most, he had a greater meed of love than most, and hi 
course through the world was constantly gathering aroun 
it the wealth of human hearts. And what love in the : 
annals of Love is comparable to that which unites souls é' 
in Christ ? ; 
‘* Hearts I have won of sister or of brother, 
Quick on the earth or hidden in the sod, 


; Lo, every heart awaiteth me, another 
* Friend in the blameless family of God.” 


“ 
: 
E 
s 
* 
“ 
< 
7 
be 

: 


i 


What blessed fellowship these elect souls must have had 
at Corinth, during those memorable three months in which 
thé Epistles to the Galatians and the Romans were being 
_ written! Probably those masterly arguments were first 
_ given in their reverent and rapt hearing. To them was 
uttered the first rough draft of Romans v. and viii.; or of 
Gal. i. and vy. The conversations—carried far on into the 
night—on the destiny of Israel, the counsels of God, the 
method of dealing with the scruples of weak consciences, 
_ may have engaged eager and intense discussion. 
: At last it became necessary for the party to break up. 
Paul was eager to get to Jerusalem for the Passover, and a 
_ passage had been taken for him in one of the pilgrim 
vessels that started each spring from every port on the 
fégean for Palestine. Before his embarkation, however, a 
plot was discovered on the part of the Jews for his assassi- 
' nation, and he was compelled to alter his route, going 
__ with an escort of friends through Macedonia, and taking up 
a sailing vessel from Troas. He took advantage of this 
change in his plans to say another farewell to the endeared 
circle at Philippi, always nearest his heart; and then 
hastened to rejoin the little band that awaited him at 


146 Gathering Clouds. 


Troas, sworn to care for him and the treasure wii h 
had been at such pains to collect. 






















III. Sap Foresopincs.—That journey from Troas, down 
the ragged shores of Asia Minor, sailing by day and anchor-~ 
ing by night, must in some senses have been sadder to the — 
little band of devoted followers than to Paul. a 

He had no doubt as to its bourne. He went bound in 
the spirit to Jerusalem, sure that there, as in every other — 
city, bonds and afflictions awaited him. Of this the Holy 
Spirit gave unequivocal testimony. He prolonged his speech ~ 
at Troas till midnight, and sent for the elders of th e 
Ephesian church to meet him at Miletus, because he knew ~ 
that all they among whom he had gone about preaching © 
the Kingdom should see his face no more. He said fare-~ 
well to the little groups, who waved their goodbyes across ~ 
the waters to his receding ship, as though it were his r 
What the Spirit said through the disciples at Tyre or Pe 
corroborated what He had said to the heart of Paul © 
(Acts xx. 23). What Agabus foretold in striking symbolism, ’ 
had been prognosticated already by that inward prophet 
whose voice cannot be bribed. Though he was quite — 
willing to adopt any course of action which James mi ht \. 
suggest, with the view of keeping him pent up in the uppe 
platform of the Temple, away from the streets, filled at the ~ 
feast-time with excited crowds, he knew it would not avail; 
and it excited no surprise when he found himself the ~ 
centre of a frenzied mob, hurrying him down the Temple 
steps to the lowest court, where they meant to take his 
life without sacrilege to the holy shrine. : 

To those that loved him, the successive and unanighell " 
prognostications of coming disaster were like the falling — 
of the earth-sods on a coffin containing the earthly remains — 
of one’s dearest friend. Luke gives us a pathetic picture 
of the scene in the house of Philip, their host at i. 
with whom Paul must have exchanged tender reminieoeaaa 






bir Bre Paul’s girdle bound himself with it, speaking in 
e power of the Holy Ghost, and announcing that in 





: like manner the Jews would bind its owner. ‘‘ And,” says 





that place besought him not to go up to Jerusalem.” They 
wept sore ; enough, Paul said, to break his heart. 








he were going rather to a bridal than a funeral. Was not 
lis spirit espoused to his Lord, and would not death land 
him in his presence, which was far better than the choice 
society of his friends? He was ready not to be bound 
only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the 
Lord Jesus. Indeed, he held not his life of any account, 


as dear unto himself, in comparison of accomplishing his 









** Yea, thro’ life, death, thro’ sorrow and thro’ sinning, 
; He shall suffice me, for He hath sufficed ; 

Bie _ Christ is the end, for Christ was the beginning, 

; Christ the beginning, for the end is Christ.” 








Luke, “when we heard these things, both we and they of 


_ But he was marvellously sustained. It seemed as though 
















XVIIL. 
The Furtherance of the Goxpie 


(PHILIPPIANS i, 12, 13.) 

















‘* My soul exults to dwell secure, 
Thy strong munitions round her ; 
She dares to count her triumphs sure, 
Nor fears lest hell confound her ; 
Though tumults startle earth and sea, - 
Thou changeless Rock ! they shake not Thee.” 
_. Ray Pa 


HAT was the one thing Paul cared for. If 
Gospel of the love of God made progress, 
Lord Jesus were magnified, he was more than conte 
to suffer to the uttermost. And now, as he reviews. hi 
things which had happened to him from the standpoint of t 
years, he rejoices with exceeding joy to be able to annount 
to his brethren at Philippi that they had fallen out to th 
furtherance of the Gospel. = : 
Our space forbids us to tell in detail the story of k 
transportation from the lower platform of the Temple : 
Jerusalem to the hired house at Rome; but we m 
least consider its successive stages beneath the light o 
the thought, which gave him such pleasure, that # ney ha 
all conduced to the furtherance of the Gospel, parth y 1 
giving him an opportunity of manifesting the t : 
true Christian character, and partly by cating 
give his testimony for Jesus before the highest t 
in the world. 
First, there was the awful riot in the Templec 
The Jews of Asia, perhaps led by Alexander the co 
smith, laid hold of Paul, under the impression that h 





@efore Annas. 


introduced Trophimus, whom they knew as an Ephesian, 


_ into the court reserved for Jews. They dragged him down 


the steps, furiously beating him the while, and with the 
intent of murdering him when they reached the bottom. 
With the greatest difficulty he was rescued by Lysias and 
his legionaries, who rushed down from the adjoining Castle 
of Antonia, surrounded him with their shields, and bore 
him back on their shoulders from the frenzied vehemence 
of the mob. It was not simply the result of natural cool- 
ness and self-command, but because he was at rest in 
Christ, and desired to magnify his Master, that he was able 
to hold a brief conversation with his deliverer in the midst 
of the tumult, and obtain permission to address the people 
in their national tongue, weaving the story of the risen 
Jesus so ingeniously into his personal narrative, that they 


~ could do no other than listen. 


7. fs J 


There was a manly strength in his quiet remonstrance 
with those who were set to examine him by scourging, and 
avowal of Roman citizenship, which must have filled them 
with profound respect. Here was no common criminal! 

Some have questioned the propriety of his behaviour, 
when on the following day he was arraigned before the 
Sanhedrim. But Annas, who sat to judge him, had really 
been deposed from the High Priesthood by right, though, 


_ as a matter of fact, he exercised that office still. And as to 


raising the question of the Resurrection, that, after all, was 
the one point at issue between him and the Jews. The 


Pharisees professed to believe in the Resurrection, and yet 


refused to admit that Jesus had risen. Paul, on the other 
hand, sought to establish not only that there would be a 
Resurrection, but that there had been one. 

That his efforts to use these trying scenes for the glory 
of his Master were appreciated and accepted was made 
abundantly clear by the vision of the Lord, who bade him 
be of good cheer, and assured him that the witness which he 
had given from the steps of the castle and in the halls of the 


ces 


ati tt artey : 
tesa ce Sey Be ees 


if 


3 
45328 


Mia, 2 
Bers ).> f 


150 Che Furtherance of the ined 


Sanhedrim should be repeated in Rome herself, at the v 
heart of the empire, where all the Gentiles should hear. 
There must have been something very noble and heroic ~ 
in his bearing; or his nephew, who was evidently in the 
secrets of his foes, and must have passed as a bigoted J 
would never have run the risk of being torn limb from I 
for divulging the secret plot of the zealots, who had b 
themselves by a solemn vow neither to eat nor drink t 
they had for ever silenced the tongue that gave them mic 
cause to fear than all the legions of Felix’s escort. , 
His Judicial Trials.—He was presently hurried by a 
strong body of soldiers in a forced march, by night, to ~ 
Antipatris, thirty-five miles distant, and twenty-five miles 
further, on the following day, to Caesarea, to undergo trial 
before Felix, the Roman Governor of Judzea. But as on 5 
repeated occasions he stood before him, he seemed SS 
eager for himself, and bent on snatching every opportunit te 
of so public a position to explain the nature of “the Way,” ~ 
and to reason with his judge concerning the faith in Christ 4 
Jesus. Indeed, on one occasion he spoke so powerfully 
righteousness, self-control, and judgment to come, in the 
presence of Felix and the woman with whom he was oe 
in adultery, that Felix trembled as the prisoner com ee 
him to review a life of shameless infamy beneath the search: y 
light of an awakened conscience. 
When Festus came in the room of Felix, who had been 
recalled in disgrace, the Apostle, within a few days, so far — 
impressed the new-comer with his faith in Jesus, who had 
died, but whom he affirmed to be alive, that the Governor ~ 
was able to state the case with wonderful accuracy to Kena 
Agrippa, who, with his sister Bernice, came to pay hen 
respects to the new representative of the Emperor, 
But perhaps Paul’s greatest opportunity, and one aa 
which he availed himself to the full, was that in which ~ 
he was able to preach the Gospel to an assembly that 
comprised all the fashion, wealth, and distinction of the 
























At Gesares. 151 


land. Festus was there in state, and the Herods, brother 
and sister, seated on golden chairs; the officers of the 
garrison, and the principal men of the city. How great a 
contrast between the splendid pomp of that occasion and 
the poor chained prisoner at the bar! Yet, in truth, 
though bending under the weight of sixty years and many 
sorrows, he was the noblest and fairest decked of all the 
glittering throng. How grandly he preached Christ that 
day under the guise of making his defence! The story of 
the suffering and risen Lord; the fulfilment of the pre- 
dictions of Moses and the prophets ; the opening of eyes ; 
the turning from darkness to light; the conditions of 
remitted sin and an inheritance among the saints—such 
topics were recited with all the passionate earnestness of 
which he was capable, till the Roman thought him mad, 
and the Jew princeling needed all his courtly wit to turn 
aside the barbed dart of the prisoner’s appeal. 

CasareEa. In one of the guard-rooms of the old palace 
of the Czsars, for two whole years, Paul was kept a 
prisoner, but permitted to see, and receive help from, his 
friends. How gladly must the saints in Casarea and 
from other places have availed themselves of the privi- 
lege! It is an old tradition that during this period Luke 
wrote the Third Gospel, in fellowship with his friend, and 
under his direction, If this were so, what an unfailing 
source of interest it must have been to the two to trace 
the course of all things accurately from the first, as 
they delivered them, which from the beginning were eye- 
witnesses and ministers of the Word. In another way that 
period of two years was very fruitful in the best sense. 
Paul’s appreciation of the truth as it is in Jesus, was 
greatly ripened and deepened. Contrast the Epistles to 
the Thessalonians, Corinthians, Romans, and Galatians, 
with those to the Ephesians, Philippians, and Colossians, 
and the advance is easily discernible. Less polemics and 
defence of his motives and actions, and more of the 
























hw 
ie ms 


= The Furtherance of the Gospel, = 
tan 


believer’s vital union with his Lord; ae doctrinal 
cussion of the work of Christ, and more absorption in 
Person ; less of the old covenant, more of the new, =a th 
King, and of the life in the heavenlies, Ah! those yea a 
spent within view of the dividing sea, restrained by the c 
castle walls, and the chain which he shook so pathetic We 
before Festus and his guests, notwithstanding that tes 
domitable spirit was stayed from its incessant labours and ~ 
journeys, were turned to good account, if only they enabled — 
him to give the church his priceless prison Epistles. aa 
At last this term of confinement came to anend. The ~ 
ecclesiastical authorities had never ceased to urge that he” 
should be handed over to their jurisdiction, a claim whic a 
in God’s good providence the Roman Governors stedfastly 
refused. They knew, and Paul knew, that to such a trial 
there would be only one end. But finally, when Fe tus 
showed signs of yielding, Paul claimed his right as a ~ 
Roman citizen to have his case tried by the Emperor ~ 
himself, partly because it would remove it from local 
prejudice, partly because he desired to secure for the 
Christian church the same recognition as was awarded to 
the Jewish synagogue, and partly that he might fulfil hi 
long-cherished purpose of proclaiming the Gospel 
Rome. o 
To that appeal nothing to the contrary could be alleged. 
He had appealed to Czsar, and to Czesar he must go. 
soon as possible he was placed under the care of a centurior 
for conveyance to the imperial city. 


_* 


THEN CAME THE VoyAGE.—At every stage of it the 
Apostle seems to have bent all his endeavours to use h 
opportunities, as far as possible, for the glory of his Last ~ 
To him to live was Christ. He reckoned always and e ~ 
where that he was a debtor to all men, and under oblig 
to repay to each some proportion of the momentous det 
he owed for his redemption. 


ippeea Ee ap aber oa 


The Shiptoreck. 


‘They set sail, first in an ordinary sailing vessel, then from 
_ Myra, in an Alexandrian corn-ship, one of the great fleet 
_ perpetually engaged in provisioning Rome. Contrary to 





Paul’s advice, who even at this stage of the voyage must 
_ have been considered as a person of distinction and ex- 
_ perience, the captain attempted to cross the open bay from 
_ the Fair Havens to Phoenice, each on the southern side of 
_ Crete. But, when half-way across, the wind changed, and 
— a sudden squall struck down from the mountains and 
carried the big ship out to sea. In the brief respite 
3 afforded of sailing under the lee of the little island of 
= Clauda, they hauled in the boat which had been tearing 
through the water behind them, and got ropes round the 
_ Straining vessel to strengthen her. This done, there was 
nothing for it but to drift through the open sea. Three 
_ days after, all hands (even of the prisoners) were called 
in to lighten the ship, by casting out cargo and other 
movyables ; and after many days of storm, in which neither 
sun nor moon appeared, all hope that they should be saved 
gradually faded away. 
It was then that Paul stood forth, calm, assured, with the 
message of God, to cheer and reanimate their fainting 
hearts. Like Peter before his execution, the servant o 
God had quietly slept amid the tumult. Like Peter, too, 
_ he had been ministered to by angels. Through the murky 
atmosphere one of these ministering spirits had found his 
ay to his side, uttering a ‘‘ Fear not!” fresh from the 
_ throne, and an assurance that he should yet stand before 
Cesar. Evidently the deliverance of the crew had been 
_ previously the subject of the Apostle’s prayer; for the 
_ angel added, “Lo! there have been granted unto thee by 
God all they that sail with thee.” Here was an oppor- 
_ tunity of preaching faith in God, and belief in the power 
of prayer. 
Always full of prompt common-sense, he detected the 
attempt of the sailors, when the vessel struck, to get away 


tT: TET Pe Se Te v7 iii eid iulit 


4 


vidi: 4 ij Petters nh 








“gt 


i 


a 


» Oe 
Py ie 
Mee: 

ik 

—— 

a 
ade 
aed 


F 


thagia't 


> 


4 


‘ 
7] 


4 


See ae Crys. © eoeet + Sey he 
oo Bey hap athba' of SB 84 Reh ee RS 


‘ 
a 


TE ele panne sy 


7 
oo 


Fi pe 


* 


cer eNay 


4 
Bh rte 
6 ohn 


ve Wh 


154 The Furtherance of the ¢ - 


in the boat ; but with something above common 
a sense of the Eternal and Divine, he took bread, at 
though he were presiding at the Lord’s table in Corin tho 
Philippi, he gave thanks to God in the presence of ae 
broke it, and began to eat. 
When they reached the shore of Malta on that ¢ 
November morning, it seemed as though nothing 1 or 
could be done to further the Gospel. But as the viper 
off Paul’s hand, and the father of the chief man in be 
island was healed of dysentery through his prayer, and all _ 
else who had diseases throughout the island were curec 
by his touch, much was done to magnify Him, concerning 
whom Paul was proud to say, “Whose I am, and 
I serve.” 
























So to Romz.—Did his heart misgive him as he at last 
approached the city, and signs of her splendour and cem -{ 
ing life multiplied at every step? He had often prep 
this moment, and longed for it. Some three years be a 
writing to the church at Rome, he said, “I long to s i. 
you, that I may impart some spiritual gift.” He confessed” 
that he had often prayed and purposed to come to ther yA: 
But he had never anticipated coming like this—one ¢ 
knot of prisoners in charge of Roman legionaries. 
almost certainly through his bonds he was able to effe 
very much more good than if he had been free. Had b 
been free, he might have gone from synagogue to ask 
gogue, but the opportunity would never have befallen t 
of speaking to the Pretorian guard and Czesar’s household aaa 

It is thus that God answers our prayers in ways and e 
methods we did not expect. We have set our hearts on 
realizing some project. For long years it has ag 
before us as an Alp through its long-drawn valley. 
have yearned, prayed, and wrought for it night and ¢ 
Assurances have been borne in upon our souls that one d 
we shall rejoice in a realization of our cherished 4 


As 
. 
Si 





nd our hands in fetters. 
God fulfilled Paul’s desire to see Rome in this way 
_ probably for two reasons. First, for safety’s sake, and 
: secondly for the wider audience that awaited him. And 









our Rome in chains. Were it otherwise, the very exube- 





our ambition might overbalance. It is best to have the 
_ chain. Not Rome without the chain, nor the chain without 
_ Rome; but Rome and the chain together. 
Do not fret at the limitations and disabilities of your life. 
_ They are required as the makeweight, and constitute your 
f ~ opportunity. Storm and shipwreck, centurion and sea- 
_ captain, soldier and fetter, Casarea and Rome—all are 
part of the plan, all work together for good, all are achiev- 





~ you have asked to become. 





Pieri lst we come to our Rome it sas prisoners, 


_ these two reasons may necessitate our being conducted to 


rance of our joy might intoxicate, or the gratification of 


_ ing God’s ideal, and making you what, in your best hours, — 

















XIX. 
“ More Abundanily than thep a” 


(1 CoRINTHIANS xv, 10.) 


‘© Would I describe a preacher, such as Paul, rent 
Were he on earth, would hear, approve, and own— 
Paul should himself direct me.” 

CowPeER. 


OD,” says the eloquent Adolphe Monod, “le 
the Jews the first twelve Apostles, and gay tc 
the Gentiles one only, whom He prepared ¢ expr bee: 

for them. Like a spiritual Atlas, Paul carries the whol 
heathen world upon his shoulders. That Roman em) Pi 
the most powerful on the face of the earth, which r 
seven ages to be established, he took only a quarter of : 
age to regenerate. The greatest among men was Jest 
Christ ; the greatest among apostles was Paul.” 
Even in these days of easy and universal communicati 
the Apostle’s record as a traveller would have bee 
markable one; but how much more remarkable it ap 
when we recall the banditti that infested the mounta 
passes of Asia Minor; the impetuous torrents that ero 
the track; the vast distances that had to be ed on 
foot ; the hardships of the wayside inns and caravanserais; 
the suspicion and dislike of which Jews must have alway 
been the objects. gone 
But what a record he has left! In his jirst missic na 
journey he establishes churches as Christian gar 
along the central highway of Asia Minor, and att 
enthusiastic Gauls with the tenderest affection—* preach 
both to Jews and Gentiles, converting a proconsul an 
silencing a false prophet; at one time adored as a god, 





















another stoned by the same people in their fury.” { In his 


second, he proclaims the Gospel to Europe, and founds 


churches in some of the most famous and influential cities 


CPT Seger 6a ee oe ee eee 


i 
3 a 


eae tere 


Bt 


—Philippi, Thessalonica, Bercea, Athens, Corinth, flame out 
as successive beacon-fires in the darkness. In the ¢hird, 


_ like a Colossus, he strides the Agean, planting one foot 
_ in Asia Minor and the other in Greece, where he preaches 


even to Illyricum. In the fourth, after pleading his cause 
before at least three different tribunals, he traverses the 


Mediterranean, saves the crew and passengers of the storm- _ 
_ driven corn-ship by his prayers and heroism, compels the 


‘respect and affection of an island of barbarians, and reaches 
Rome in the guise of a prisoner, but really as a conqueror, 
to unfurl the banner of his Master in the palace of the 
Cesars. After his release he again sets forth on journeys 


_ that carried him, perhaps to Spain, but certainly to familiar 


scenes in Asia Minor and Greece. So he fulfils his course 
till Rome and martyrdom again come in sight. 


When he began his work, the world was being borne to 


her grave, in spite of what philosophy, literature, and legis- 


lation could do to arrest its moral decay; but when he | 
closed it, some thirty years afterwards, germs of life and | 


salvation had been sown, and even nurtured into sturdy 
growth, which were destined, after three centuries, to dis- 
place the fcetid remnants of heathenism with the fresh 
young undergrowth of Christian civilization. — 

We may well inquire into the secret of this marvellous, 


_ work, to which, after that of our Lord, the position of 


- Christianity in the world at this moment is to be ascribed. 


And if we do, we shall discover it not in his intellectual 
talent and eloquent speech, for these were more than 
neutralised by his physical weaknesses, his “thorn,” and his 
“contemptible” utterance (2 Cor. xi. 6); but in sources of 


power which are within the reach of us all, however greatly 


‘we may come short of that commanding equipment, which, 
in the words of the great Neander, would have made him, 


ye 
a. 


ete  «. 
2) 05 ane 


44) 


Rav! 
ee REN OF 


4 


5) 


in» 
2 


7 si ae ae A 
diode 64 bod baie £8 ete 


ieee ~~ — Om 
ve a 
i! r ad 
, | ee bb bea he 


iy 
ge 


LEST ASA Ea TERLRELT OES CERT 
SEP TRC USTEOeTe SORPERL ROE PSE D ae aware 


all times of anguish, distress, and virulent opposition, 


. ao ‘ Bb 


158 “tore Abundantly than they 


had he sought it, shine in the highest rank am 
wise and the orators of all ages, so that he would r 
been second to any of those masters of thought 
language of whom ancient Greece boasted. 
In the forefront, we must place the Apostles pn 
brance J the mercy that had been shown him. “Wee 
mercy,” he says on one occasion, when attecnpta to e 
plain the sources of his indomitable perseverance throug 
obloquy, smiting down, and daily dying. It was as th 
he never could forget how deeply he had sinned, and how 
strenuously he had resisted that very grace which beg 
proclaimed. He was constantly returning to this p 
thought. How could he ever despair of men, since st 
a one as he had found mercy? How should he faint 
when the same grace that had laid hold of him waited to 
enable him? How could he ever repay the long-suffering 
which had brooded over his storm-driven nature, and hac 
abounded over his rebellion, until it made him a trophy of 
its power? Like a silver refrain, it came back on him 



























we 


obtained mercy, therefore I dare not, must not faint.” — 
From the commencement to the close of his career Paul — 
was impelled by the one master-thought that he had been — 
redeemed to serve ; saved that he might save others. 1 he 
memory of what he had been saved from and saved to was 
the constant incentive of his arduous and exhausting toils, 
And so it is well for us, if we can get away for a time from 
the bustle and rush of life, to stand beneath the Cros 
where Jesus died, realizing that every drop from his every 
wound appeals to our every pulse-throb to spend or be — 
spent for the cause that cost Him so dear. ; 
Closely connected with this, we must mention the great and 
simple purpose for which the Apostle lived. He bent his — 
strength to save men, and for this he was prepared to make ~ 
any sacrifice. He was equally careful to the very last to 
institute and organize little Christian communities, which 





The Apostle’s Life Purpose. 159 


were absolutely necessary to conserve and develop the life 
that had been implanted. But all such purposes were 
subordinated to that which he announced in his earliest 
Epistle, “‘not as pleasing men, but God, which trieth our 
hearts” (1 Thess. ii. 4). It mattered comparatively little 
what were the outward results of his endeavours, or what 
men might say or do, so long as he had the testimony shed 
through his heart that it pleased God. 

This motive is viewed under another light, when, in the 
next Epistle, he yearns “that the name of our Lord Jesus 
be glorified” (2 Thess. i. 12). We cannot forget that the 
passion of Christ’s heart, during his earthly ministry, was 
to glorify his Father; and there was a similar passion in 
the heart of Paul to glorify the Son. To the end of his 
ministry that purpose grew even stronger. It was always 
his earnest expectation and hope that in nothing he should 
be ashamed ; but that as always, so then, Christ should be 
magnified in his body, whether by life or death. 

Would that this also were our single aim! It would 
greatly simplify our lives. We are apt to set ourselves 
on the accomplishment of purposes which, though good 
in themselves, fail of the best; and when we do not 
succeed in them, when the revival does not ensue, or 
hosts of souls are not converted, or the church does not 
heed, we are apt to write hard things against ourselves and 
God ; whereas, if we simply sought the good pleasure and 
glory of our Master, we should discover that’ we succeed 
amid apparent failure, and are more than conquerors when 
fleeing for our lives. 

Happy is the man who can appeal from the verdict of 
obvious results, of his fellows, of the inner circle of dearest 
friends, and even of his own heart, and say, ‘“ With me it 
is a very small thing that I should be judged of you, or 
of man’s judgment: yea, I judge not mine own self. For 
I know nothing against myself; yet am I not hereby 
justified ; but he that judgeth me is the Lord. Wherefore 


pin iv 

























160 “More Abundautly than be al ‘ 


a rans . S 
judge nothing before the time, until the Lord ie 


will both bring to light the hidden things of darkness, 
make manifest the counsels of the hearts; and then shall 
each man have his praise from God” (1 Cor. iv. 
To each of us a stewardship is committed, of weal 
time, or influence, or talent in thought and eae 
Paul, each of us can say, “I have a stewardship er 
to me” (1 Cor. ix. 17, R.v.). Now surely it is quien 
stewards, not that they should realize all the drean 
suggest themselves to their imagination, but that th 
found faithful to Him that appointed them, Jud 
lives not by results, but by their motives, and by # 
of his good pleasure who appointed you. 
His plan of living also greatly ministered to hiss 
In point of fact, he had no plan at all. For him 
had been prepared in the counsels of God vefore 
worlds were made, and he had only to discover i 
The scheme of the temple of his life had been e 
by the Divine Architect ; he had only to get it b 
munion with Him on the Mount. He need do ne 
from himself, in the sense of self-origination, but ¥ 
saw his Saviour doing. His one aim was to repe t i n | 
time sphere what He was doing in the unseen ands € 
This made the Apostle so cautious in referring 
future programme. Whatever should betide, he mu 
in the current of the will of God. To purpose acce 
to the flesh, that there should be the Yea, yea, Nay, n 
human forecast, was foreign to the habit of his 
He was ever living in such dependence on the Holy 
for guidance, and for the unfolding of the Divine pu 
that from some apparently trivial circumstance he 
“gather” the movements of the pillar of cloud 
and of fire by night. And interval there was 
between his apprehension of the Divine purpose and i 
endeavour to strike his tent and follow wherever it n 
lead (Acts xvi. 6, 7). - 


eee: 





PAUL MET BY THE BRETHREN AT APII FORUM. 


““The brethren came to meet us as far as Apii Forum.” 


AcTs xxviii. 15. 








Bes ind ea pala Mies pt or 
wt Dalene Som 
‘ ee va ose 
vie 





ze Ohe Pattern in the AMtount. 161 





When, in the present century, the purpose presented 7 
itself of completing that magnificent specimen of Gothic 
architecture, the Cologne Cathedral, it was not necessary 
to prepare a plan for gathering up and carrying forward the 
results of previous centuries into a symmetrical and 
beautiful edifice. The architect to whom the task of 
completion was entrusted had but to exhume and study 
the plan as it was first conceived by Meister Gerard in 
the thirteenth century, and as it is still preserved in his 
own pen-and-ink outlines. So Christian workers should 

» never forget the injunction, four times repeated to Moses, 
of making all things according to the pattern shown them 
in the Mount. The pattern of the Body of Christ, of 
the position of each individual believer among its members, 
and of the work which each should accomplish, was fixed 
before the worlds were made. ‘ What didst Thou mean 
for me, O God, in my creation, redemption, and the 
ordering of my life? Teach me to do thy will, for Thou 
art my God. Thy Spirit is good: lead me into the land 
of uprightness.” Such should be the prayer of each 
Christian worker. 

But, perhaps, the secret of Paul’s success lay most of all ii 
his faculty of extracting power from his weaknesses. He had 
eminent gifts of character, of energy, of power to command 
and lead and organize, of thought and speech; but had it 
not been for the presence of his infirmity, he might never 
have become the great Apostle of the Gentiles, or accom- 
plished such splendid work. He might have yielded to 
self-confidence in his heart-depths, and relied on these 
extraordinary endowments, instead of casting himself abso- 
-lutely, as he was compelled to do, on the power of God; 
in consequence of which his life-work was accomplished, 
not by himself, but by God operating through the 
frail organism of his mortal body. 

Judging from the words of his detractors, which he 
seems to endorse, his bodily presence was weak, and his 

L 




























162 “ lore Abundantly than they ah aS 


speech contemptible (2 Cor. x. 10), the former 
referring to his thorn in the flesh, of which we have: 
and the latter to a lack of those graces of ones wh 
the Greeks were wont to expect in their public tea 
It was very humbling to the flesh; but it drained 
the last remains of human pride, and left him, as th 
forty years in the desert left Moses, a vessel meet ae he 
Master’s use, because so utterly dependent on the } s 
hand to direct and empower. 

In early life he was one of Gamaliel’s most pro 
pupils, strong, self-reliant, vehement, clear in 
incisive in speech, swift in action. Among the n of 
his age few could outmatch Saul of Tarsus, who earlier fi an 
was customary became a member of the Jewish Sanhedri 
Would you recognize him in the weakness, the fear, ai 
the much trembling of this broken man? Or, if ves 
might you not be tempted to regret that he had 
Christ in his strength, and had brought only his 
into his service? But such regrets would be l 
unnecessary. Had Paul been strong, he might have b 
—we borrow the expression—an Apollos, a Chrysostom, 
an Augustine, a Luther, but never Paul. Because he } les 
weak he was strong; because he bore chains he was the 
great emancipator from chains; because he was poor he 
succeeded in making so many rich. iy ae 

After this, let no one complain. The only thing of 
which we need to be sure is whether we have been’ 
of God to certain work for Him. Then, if limitation 
hindrances suggest the impossibility of ever accomp un r 
it, let us dare to glory in them, and discover in their 
presence the ground for believing that we have been 
selected for the work to which they might threaten to 
become a fatal barrier. In other words, let us do by faith 
the work which others do by human might. i 

Another element in the success of the Apostles work mit be 
found in his self-abnegation. He had large and liberal vi 


ot 





Self-Abnegation. 163 


of truth and life, and could probably have permitted to 
imself many ‘things which he carefully eschewed, lest his 

fluence for Christ should be impaired. In 1 Cor. viii. 13 

e tells us that if meat should make his brother to offend, 
he will eat no flesh while the world last. In 1 Cor. viii. he 

xplains that, though as far as his own conscience was 
oncerned, he could eat in an idol’s temple without con- 
demnation, yet he dare not do it, lest he should cast a 
tumbling-block before the undecided, halting, feet of some 

eak disciple. In 1 Cor. ix. he alleges his determination 
0 forego the delights of wife and child, though his was a 
ery tender nature; to forego the support which his con- 
lverts might voluntarily offer, though he had as much right 
to take it as oxen their corn, or priests their share of 
temple-offerings. And at the close of that chapter he 
explains how carefully he kept his body under, bringing it 
into subjection, lest he should fail to do the utmost possible 
for the souls of men, and compel the Lord to substitute an 
instrument more suited for his purpose. Again in 2 Cor. 
vi. 3 he speaks of giving no offence in anything, that the 
ministry might not be blamed. 

This, too, is a path in which we may follow the steps of 
this great servant of Jesus. All Christian workers, zealous 
for the coming of God’s Kingdom, must at once forego 
indulgences and practices which are not in themselves 
unlawful, that the ministry may not be blamed, nor souls 
hindered. Consideration of the effect which may be 
produced upon others is a very real and urgent factor 
in determining our action with regard to matters that 
lie in the great twilight borderland, between what is clearly 
defined as right and clearly defined as wrong. The more 
widespread our influence over souls, the more absolute the 
necessity of considering the effect on others of methods 
and actions in which we are left with large liberty of 
- self-determination and choice. 

In this exumeration let us not forget the eloquence of his 


ened 


oe a rae 

























“ wife eae 
164 More Abundantly than they ve - 
tears. “Remember,” he said to the elders of the Eph 
Church, “that by the space of three years I ceasec 
to warn every one night and day with tears” (Acts x 31) 
Each word is significant! Not content with appealing 
to them by day, he must needs invade his nights; wh 
worn by emotion, labour, and teaching, his tired t 
might surely claim repose. Nor was this a spasme 
devotion to be followed by spells of indoleaials : 
lethargy. He did not cease this ministry for three k — 
years ; but pursued it without relaxation, without inter pe > 
tion, without pause. Nor was this work prosecuted with — 
the persistence of a zealot or the eagerness of a parti n; fe 
but with the tears of a soul lover. oe ae 
“Do not complain,” says the eloquent writer 2 > 
face “of his importunity! You, unthankful, he dis- ~ 
turbs but once; his own repose is broken every night, if 
‘ not for you, for eee Nay, more; whatever you are, 
will not let you go until he has obtained aaa Sor 
ewan some kindness? Ah! the greatest favour, a 
' greatest kindness you can manifest is to be converted to” 
' the Lord Jesus Christ, or to serve Him with 
| fidelity. You refuse him, you repulse him, 
_ standing his entreaties; but before you leave him, 1 
| at him—he weeps. He weeps over the sins in hich 
| you continue; over the injury your example does to : 
' Church; over the stumbling-block you set before 
, world; and, above all, for the future you are prepar 
| for yourself. What do you say to this Apostle in tears 
before you—I was going to say prostrate at your feet? 
The God whom he serves once summed up in a single” 
sentence all that his Apostle ought to be: ‘Behold, 
prayeth.’ You—now in your turn, you to whom 
preaches, may sum up all that he does for you i 
single sentence—behold, he weeps.” = 
Why is it that this fount of tears seems denied t is? 
We have tears for all things else than the infinite loss” 









eerie LEY ener 
Eo Bee ies voes 
ty icles ae ia ne i =, 





oe : Ap ia 
Seam; he Se il ee er ee et 
e re @ ietabaieben! 
ae we! . . 


“Through Christ ho Strengtheneth.” 165 
of those who have rejected the Gospel. For this, alas! — 
no single drop trickles along the dry water-courses. We 
are smitten by a terrible drought, our heart a very Sahara: 
our water-springs frozen by remorseless cold or scorched 
by relentless heat. In losing the power of tears we have 
lost one great power of causing them. It is by broken 
hearts that hearts are broken; by wet eyes that eyes are 
made to brim over with the waters of repentant sorrow. 

Lastly, let us not forget the Apostle’s individual interest in 
his converts. “Warning every one of you night and day 
with tears,” is one evidence of this; and for another we 
turn instinctively to Col. i. 28: “Whom we preach, 
warning every man, and teaching every man, in all 
wisdom; that we may present every man perfect in 
Christ Jesus.” How he dwells on that phrase, “every 
man”! He had no sympathy with the reckless haste 
_ that shakes the boughs of the fruit-trees to obtain their : 

precious harvest. He knew too well the peril of injuring 4 
the delicate bloom. All the fruit he gathered for God "= 
was hand-picked. He was more fond of the hand-net 
| than the seine. Like his Master, he would go far out of 
: his way if he might cast the demon out of one possessed 
spirit, or persuade an Agrippa to become a Christian. 
. One soul, for whom Christ died, was in his sight of 
unspeakable worth. 

But underlying all these, there was the fundamental con- 
ception that it was not he, but the grace of God that was with . 
_- him, and the power of God which wrought through him. He 
energised according to the energy of a mightier than him- ye - 
self, who energised in him mightily. He wrought, yet not 3 
he, but Christ wrought in him. Anything save what Christ 
wrought in him was wood, hay, and stubble, of which he r. 
dared not take account. He did not work for Christ, but 
offered himself to Him without reserve, that Christ might 
penetrate and irradiate the inmost recesses of his being, 
and then, through its cleansed panes, go forth to illuminate 


ooo eet e eer ee) ro she ee eA 


Ay 
wr, “« 


ESOT SER 


ee ee Doh DAs eS Se. 
a rar. 


> a 


ae 
a 


166 “ More Abundantly than they ol 


the hearts of men. All his care was to purify i 
he might at all times be meet for the Maxtets Gat dis 
one desire was to yield himself to God, and that his 
members might be used as weapons in the great co 
against the powers of hell. R 
This is, after all, the first and last lesson for the Chri sti 
worker. Be clean, pure of heart, and simple in me 
See to it that there be no friction between yon 9 
Christ’s, Be adjusted, in gear, well set and jointed. 
due your own activities as much as your own natu 
lethargy. Stand still till God impels you. Wait till os 
works in you to will and to do of his good pleasure. 
Exercise faith that God should accomplish in you the ~ 
greatest results possible to the capacity of your na a 
Let there be no thought of what you can do for God, t 
all thought of what God can do through you. Nothi 
will make you so intense and ceaseless in your a 
as this. 
There will be an end of cowardice and of pride: © 
cowardice, because you will find yourself borne sig :) 7 at 
an irresistible impulse; of pride, because you will have — 
no occasion to boast. As soon might Milton’s pen have e- 
been proud of writing the Paradise Lost, as you of whi 
Christ may have done through you. “Shall the axe b 
itself against him that heweth therewith? or shall thei 
magnify itself against him that shaketh it?” " 
These words apply to us all, not less to those whom 
has given the ministry of suffering and pain, the care of 
little children, the daily round of familiar duty. In these — 
we minister to Him who judges, not by the character, but 
by the spirit of our work; not by its extent, but by its — 
depth ; not by results, but iy the spirit that animates and ' 
inspires. Ca 
In all such there is the certainty of the gracious co- 
operation of the Holy Spirit. Whenever they stand upto ~ 
























aa 


aa 





as: 
“In a Strait, Betiwist Tins.” 


(PHILIPPIANS i. 23.) 


“With the patriarch’s joy 
Thy call I follow to the Land unknown ; 
I trust in Thee, and know in whom I trust ; 
Or life or death is equal—neither weighs ! 
All weight in this—oh, let me live to Thee !” 
Youne, 
HROUGH the providence of God, and probably t y 
the kind intervention of the centurion—who had 
conceived a sincere admiration for him during thes ea 
months of travel together, and who, indeed, owed him 
life—Paul, on his arrival in Rome, was treated with gr 
leniency. He was permitted to hire a house or ap: — 
in the near neighbourhood of the great Pretorian barrack: 
and live by himself, the only sign of his captivity consi 
in the chain that fastened his wrist to a Roman leg gionary, — 
the soldiers relieving each other every four or six hours. — 
There were many advantages in this arrangemen 
secured him from the hatred of his people, and gave him - 
marvellous opportunity of casting the seeds of the Ge 
into the head of the rivers of population, that poured 
the metropolis throughout the known world. At the . 
time, it must have been very irksome. Always to be in the — 
presence of another, and that other filled with entil nol 
antipathy to Jewish habits and Pagan irresponsiveness to 
Christian fervour ; to be able to make no movement w 
out the clanking of his chain, and the consent of in: & 
custodian ; to have to conduct his conferences, utter h 
prayers, and indite his epistles, beneath those stolid eye 
-or amid brutal and blasphemous interruptions—all 
must have been excessively trying to a sensitive tem) 
ment like the Apostle’s. That must have been a h 

























> . nes 
VE inet wor seg ps Nex statin 
Span at See tinal ~ 

bE pe ee : 


«The detecars of the ox. 





bhi: ry 


yore? +5 Ae 


i 


, 


rm | eT: rryt elt a 


3 


o 


rm 


ere ee yen Cas 


- Jong schooling, which had taught him to be content even 


with this, for the sake of the Gospel. But this, also, he 
could do through Christ that strengthened him. And it 
also turned out greatly to the furtherance of the cause he 
loved. Many of these brawny veterans became humble, 
earnest disciples. With a glow of holy joy, he informs the 
_ Philippians, that his bonds in Christ have become manifest 
throughout the whole Pretorian guard; and we know that 
_ this was the beginning of a movement destined within 
‘three centuries to spread throughout the entire army, and 
_ compel Constantine to adopt Christianity as the religion of 
the State. This was a blessed issue of that period of 


- suffering which so often extorted the cry, ‘“‘ Remember my 


bonds.” 

Three days after his arrival in Rome, Paul summoned to 
his temporary lodging the leaders of the Jewish synagogues, 
of which there are said to have been seven, for the sixty 
thousand Jews who were the objects of the dislike and 
ridicule of the imperial city. At the first interview they 
cautiously occupied neutral ground, and expressed the wish 
to hear and judge for themselves, concerning the sect which 
was only known to them as the butt of universal execration. 


‘At the second interview, after listening to Paul’s expla- 


nations and appeals for an entire day, there was the usual 
division of opinion. ‘Some believed the things that were 
spoken, and some believed not.” His testimony having 
thus been first offered, according to his invariable practice, 
to his own people, there was now no further obstacle to his 
addressing a wider audience. The message of salvation 
was sent to the Gentiles, and these would certainly hear 
(Acts xxviii. 28). We are not, therefore, surprised to be 
told that for the next two years, whilst his accusers were 
preparing their case, or the emperor was permitting shame- 
less indulgence to interfere with the discharge of public 
business, ‘‘He received all that went in unto him, preaching 
the Kingdom of God, and teaching the things concerning 


bh 


toe EVA 


‘ 


tee 


ed Seis ; 
Ft 2h.an} Seva ees ce 


f 
| 


} bead Sade Re 


~ 
oat 
oa 


344 
és @ abs 2 


4 


‘hs « at ! 5 
Reeese . €£elewée a 


See rt ee ier: 





Pa. a)? ee 

































~ 


170 “Yn a Strait, Betwixt 4 


the Lord Jesus Christ with all noid ae 
him.” 
It might be said of the Apostle, as of his - 
they came to him from every quarter. Timothy, ie 
the faith; Mark, now “profitable”; Luke, with his q 
Bhinitian's eye and delicate sympathy; Aristarc! 
shared his imprisonment, that he might have an 0 
tunity of ministering to his needs; Tychicus, from E 
“the beloved brother and faithful minister in the L Lor 
Epaphras, from Colossz, a “beloved fellow-se ey: 
faithful minister of ‘Christ,” on the behalf of the 
there; Epaphroditus, from Philippi, who brought the 
liberal contributions of the beloved circle, that for | 
many years had never ceased to remember reed. r 
and teacher; Demas, who had not yet allowed the p 
to turn him aside from the eternal and unseen—th 
and others, are mentioned in the postscripts of his Epi: 
as being with him. Members of the Roman ke 
would always be welcomed, and must have poured 
his humble lodging in a perpetual stream; Epzenetus at 
Mary, Andronicus and Junia, Tryphena and phos 
Persis the beloved, and Apelles the approved, must oftet 
have resorted to that apartment, which was imac 
the perpetual presence of the Lord. They had ¢ 
to meet him on his first arrival as far as the 4 
Forum and the Three Taverns, and would not be li 
to neglect him, now he was settled among them. eg 
Then what interest would be aroused by the episod eS ¢ 
those two years! The illness of Epaphroditus, who wi 
sick unto death; the discovery and conversion of o 
mus, the runaway slave; the writing and desp 
the Epistles, which bear such evident traces of the 
cell. There could have been no lack of incident, ai 
the interest of which the two years must have sp 
more swiftly than the other two years spent in con ine 
at Ceesarea. % 








ast to engage again in his beloved work. He was _ 
evidently expecting this, when, writing to the Philippians, — 







Iso, he goes so far as to ask that a lodging may be 
_ prepared for him, as he hopes to be granted to their 
prayers. Universal tradition affirms an interspace of 
berty between his two imprisonments; and without this 
ypothesis, it is almost impossible to explain many of 
é incidental allusions of the Epistles to Timothy and 
tus, which cannot refer, so far as we can see, to the 
period that falls within the compass of the Acts. 

Whether his liberation were due to the renewed offices 
of the centurion, or to more explicit reports received from 
gesarea, history does not record; but it was by the 
decree of a greater than Nero that the coupling-chain 
was struck off the Apostle’s wrist, and he was free to 
go where he would. That he should abide in the flesh 
was, in the eye of the great Head of the Church, needful 
for the furtherance and joy of faith to the little com- 
munities that looked to him as their father; and their 
rejoicing was destined to be more abundant in Jesus 
Christ by his coming to them again. 

_ Once more a free man, Paul would certainly fulfil his 
intention of visiting Philemon and the church of Colossz. 
_ Thence he would make his way to the church at Ephesus, 
_ to hold further converse with them on those sacred mysteries 
which in his Epistle he had commenced to unfold. It 
_ was probably during his residence there that Onesiphorus 

































elicit a significant reference in the last Epistle (2 Timothy 
i, 18). Leaving Timothy behind him with the injunction 


said: “I myself am confident in the Lord, that I 
elf, too, shall come speedily.” In his letterto Philemon 


- ministered to him with such tender thoughtfulness as to” be 


to command some that they should preach no other Gospel a 
than they had heard from his lips (1 Timothy i. 3), he 




























eo 


. ’ a ang doen 

172 “Gn a Strait, Bettwizt Go.” 
hasan ttn 95 = 

wr. 


travelled onward to Macedonia and Philippi. — a 
greeting must have been accorded to him there! 1 
were his brethren, beloved and longed for, his j y n¢ 
crown, whom he ever held in his heart, and who ii 
defence and confirmation of the Gospel had so deep 
partaken with him. Lydia and Clement, Euodia a 
Syntyche, Epaphroditus and the gaoler, together with m 
other fellow-workers, whose names are in the Book of Life 
must have gathered around to minister to that till 
body, to be inspired by that heroic soul. - 
From Philippi he must have passed to other churches ° 
Greece, and amongst the rest to Corinth. Finally hei et 
sail with Titus for Crete, where he left him to set in ordet 
the things that were wanting, and to appoint elders in evel 
city (Titus i. 5). On his return to the mainland he 
an epistle to Titus, from the closing messages in which 
gather that he was about to winter at Nicopolis sur 
rounded by several friends, such as Artemas, Zenas, 
chicus, and Apollos, who were inspired with his own sp 
and were gladly assisting him in strengthening the or; 
zation and purifying the teaching in these young ch 1 
each of which had possibly to pass through some su 
phases of doctrinal and practical difficulty as are reflecte 
in the mirror of the Epistles to Corinth (1 Cor. iii. 12, 1 3. 
This blessed liberty, however, was summarily cut 
One of the most terrible events in the history of the a 
world—the burning of Rome—took place in the yea a 
64; and to divert from himself the suspicion which i A 
cated him as its author, Nero accused the Christ He 
being the incendiaries. Immediately the fierce | nes 
of the first general persecution broke out. Those 
were resident in the metropolis, and who must have 
well known and dear to the Apostle, were seized 
subjected to horrible barbarities, whilst a strict search) 
made throughout the empire for their leaders, the J 
abetting the inquisitors. It was not likely that so e 


31 
Jen 
eae 










eevee at oF. 


Gis Second Imprisonment. 


__ a Christian as the Apostle would escape. The storm that 


sweeps the forest will smite first and most destructively 
- the loftiest trees. 

He was staying for a time at Troas, in the house of 
-Carpus, where he had arrived from Nicopolis. His arrest 
was so sudden that he had not time to gather up his 
precious books and parchments, which may have included 
copies of his Epistles, a Hebrew Bible, and some early 
copies of the sayings of our Lord; or to wrap around him 
the cloak which had been his companion in many a wintry 
storm. ‘Thence he was hurried to Rome. 

A little group of friends accompanied him, with faithful 
tenacity, in this last sad journey. Demas and Crescens, 
Titus and Tychicus, Luke and Erastus. But Erastus abode 
at Corinth, through which the little band may have passed ; 
and Trophimus fell ill at Miletus, and had to be left there, 


~ as the Roman guard would brook no delay. So, for the 


second time, Paul reached Rome. 

But the circumstances of his second imprisonment 
differed widely from those of the first. Then he had 
his own hired house; now he was left in close confine- 
ment, and tradition points to the Mamertine prison as the 
scene of his last weeks or months. Then he was easily 
accessible ; now Onesiphorus had to seek him out very 
diligently, and it took some courage not to be ashamed of 


_ his chain. Then he was the centre of a large circle of 


friends and sympathisers; now the winnowing fan of trouble 
had greatly thinned their ranks, whilst others had been 
despatched on distant missions. ‘Only Luke is with me,” 
is the rather sad expression of the old man’s loneliness. 
Then he cherished a bright hope of speedy liberation ; 
now, though he had successfully met the first impeachment, 
which was probably one of incendiarism, and had been 
delivered out of the mouth of the lion, he had no hope 
_ of meeting the second, which would include the general 
charge of introducing new customs hostile to the stability 


o> Sag Be 
























174 “Gn a Strait, Betwist Cm 


of the imperial government. Its very vagueness 1 
so hard to combat, and it was inevitable that he : 


caught within its meshes. : 

He was already being poured out as a aon an 
the time had come for his loosing the anchor and set 
sail. But it caused him no sorrow. In earlier ¢ 
had greatly set his heart on being clothed gir 
the body that was from heaven, and on being sud 
caught up to be for ever with the Lord. It seem 
unlikely now that. such would be the method c 
transition to that rest of which he had kati 
pathetically. Not by the triumphant path of the air 
but by the darksome path of death and the grave, would 
he pass into the presence of the Lord. It was, howeve! ya 
matter of small importance what would be the method 
of his home-going; he was only too thankful, on his 
review of his career, to say humbly and truthfully, “1 
have striven the good strife, I have finished my course, 
I have kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up for 
me a crown of righteousness. ” “a 

How characteristic it is to find him boasting of h a 
great audience of Gentiles, to whom, at the first stage 
of his trial, he was able fully to proclaim the Go 
message. It is equally characteristic to hear him affirm 
that the ease and success of his witness-bearing was due 
not to himself, but to the conscious nearness of his Le 
who stood by and strengthened him. 

What were the following processes of that trial? 
long was he kept in suspense? Did Timothy anv fi 
time to see him, and to be with him at the last s 
moment? What was the exact method of his ma 
To these questions there is no certain reply. 
points to a spot, about three miles from Rome on the’ Os 
. road, where, at the stroke of the headsmans axe, he 
beheaded, and his spirit leaving its frail tenement, entered 
the house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. 


“ith Ghrist, which ts Late better.” 175 


But how vast the contrast. between that scene, which 
may have excited but little interest, save to the friends 
that mingled in the little group, and that other scene, 
in which an abundant entrance was ministered to this 
noble spirit, as it entered the presence of the Lord! 
If Christ arose to receive Stephen, may He not also 
have stood up to welcome Paul? Again he beheld the 
face that had looked down on him from the opened 
heavens at his conversion, and heard the voice that had 
called him by his name. His long-cherished wish of 
being “with Christ” was gratified, and he found it “far 
better” than he had ever thought. 

His was now the inheritance of the saints in light, 
of which the Holy Spirit had been the earnest and first- 
fruits. He had passed the goal, and had attained to the 
prize of his high calling in Christ. He had been found 
in Christ, not having his own righteousness, but the 
righteousness which is of God by faith. No castaway 
was he! As he had kept Christ’s deposit, so Christ had 
kept his. And as he gave in the account of his steward-. 
ship, who can doubt that the Lord greeted him with, 
“Well done, good and faithful servant, enter thou into 
the joy of thy Lord.” 

What a festal welcome he must have received from 
thousands whom he had turned from darkness to light, 
from the power of Satan unto God, and who were 
now to become his crown of rejoicing in the presence of 
the Lord! These from the highlands of Galatia, and 
those from the seaboard of Asia Minor. These from 
Judaistic prejudice, and those from the depths of Gentile 
depravity and sin. These from the degraded slave popu- 
lations, and those from the ranks of the high-born and 
educated. Nor have such greetings ceased; but through 
all the centuries that have succeeded there are com- 
paratively few that have passed along “the Way to the 
Celestial City” who have not had to acknowledge a deep 





176 “In a Strait, B 


debt of gratitude to him who, of all « ; 
to give a clearer apprehension of the D; 
justifying and saving sinners. oe 
What share the blessed ones within the vail m may 
hastening the Second Advent we cannot tell. — 
among those who eagerly anticipate that hour 
Bridegroom shall present the church to Himself, 
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, there is r 
eager than he, who looked so constantly, era ill 
for the blessed hope, thé appearance of the glor 
Saviour, and who did so much to prepare the church. 
her Lord! And, among the stones of the found 
of the New Jerusalem, on which are written the nat a 
of the twelye Apostles of the Lamb, will surely be fou 
at last that of Saul, also called Paul, who was befor 
blasphemer, a persecutor, and injurious but ad obtaii 
mercy and was counted faithful. 












© ie 
aaa tno 








PAUL ‘IN HIS OWN HIRED HOUSE AT ROME. 


**And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own'hired house, and received 


all that came in unto him.”—AcTS xxviii. 30, 


Se Ap ESA coh te SOR 


XXI. 
“Gotu Large Letters.” 


(GALATIANS vi. II.) 
** All his glowing language issued forth 


With God’s deep stamp upon its current worth.” 
CowPER. 


T has been supposed, with much show of reason, that at 
the close of the Epistle to the Galatians the Apostle 
took the pen from the hand of his amanuensis and 

wrote somewhat more than his usual brief autograph. 
Generally he contented himself with such words as those 
with which the Epistle. to the Colossians closes, ‘The 
salutation of me, Paul, with mine own hand. Remember 
my bonds. Grace be with you.” But in the case of the 
Galatians, among whom his authority had been greatly 
impugned, it seemed incumbent to give rather more 
emphasis and importance to his words by a prolonged 
personal closing paragraph. He practically begs them 
excuse the clumsy shape and appearance of his hand- 
writing, on account of his defective sight; to which he 
may also be alluding when he touchingly describes himself 
as branded with the marks of Jesus (Gal. vi. 17). 

We may take his words also in a metaphorical sense. 
How largely his letters bulk in the make-up of the New 
Testament! If we judge the question only by comparing 
their length with that of the New Testament, we shall find 
that they make a fourth part of the whole. And their 
importance must be measured not by length but by weight. 
Before you put them into the scale, consider the precious 
treasures you are handling. The sublime chapter on Loye, 
1 Corinthians xiii.; the matchless argument on Justification 

M 


0 
rant %, 


178 “Gow Large Cetters.” 


in Romans iy., v.; the glorious exposition of the worl 
the Holy Spirit 3 in Romans viii.; the triumphant Resurrec- 
tion Hope of 1 Corinthians xv.; the tender unveilin ng of 
the Love between Jesus and his own in Ephesians v.- _ 
what priceless treasures are these which the Church c ms 
first to the Holy Ghost, and next to the Apostle Paul 
acting as his organ and instrument. How many of th 1€ 
most precious and helpful passages in Seripture bear th 
mark of the tender, eager, fervent, and devout spirit “- 
Apostle of the Gentiles. Bei 
The Epistles marvelously reflect his personality. I “ 
been said of one of the great painters that he was wont tc 
mix his colours with blood drawn from a secret wou ar 
of Paul it may be said that he dipped his pen in the b 
of his heart. Whatever impression had last rested er 
sensitive nature coloured the flow of his thoughts and 
expressions, whether it was Philippian love expressed by 
the coming of Epaphroditus, or the story of the Corinthian 
division told by the members of the house of Chik 
Probably it is for this very reason, because he wrote 1 it 
all the freshness of speech, with the sparkle of conyersatior 
as though he were talking naturally in a circle of ff 
that he has so moved the heart of the world. 
But it is not too much to say that, humanly s 
the Gospel of Christ would never have taken such f 
hold on the strong, practical, vigorous nations of the We: 
had it not been for these Epistles. The mind of the Ape 
John is given to deep and spiritual insight, which 
rather than argues, its way into the truths of the Go: 
The mind of the Apostle Peter, again, is specially F 
he looks at everything from the standpoint of his’ 
education and training, on which the teachings of 
Master had been grafted. But with Paul, though he 
writes as a Hebrew of the Hebrews, employing met . 
of Scripture interpretation, which, being in the method 
the Rabbis, are recondite and unfamiliar to our though 
























" 
vi 


his 








; A Great Hostest 179 
yet his Epistles are characterized by a virility, a logical 
order, a style of argument, a definiteness of statement 
and phraseology, which are closely akin to our Western 


_ Civilization. When he was born the Roman Empire was 
in the summer of its glory, and Greek culture so infused 


_ exclusivism and bigotry of the Jewish ghettos were not 
_ wholly proof against it. The breath of the Western ocean 
__ is in these Epistles ; the tides of the coming centuries were 
already rolling into the estuary, and causing the barges 
of long stationary tradition to move uneasily and rattle 
their mooring-chains. It is for this reason that Paul has 
a been the contemporary of Western civilization through all 
_ the centuries. It was he who taught Augustine and in- 
Za spired Luther. His thoughts and conceptions have been 
; _ wrought into the texture, and woven into the woof of the 
_ foremost minds of the Christian centuries. The seeds he 
4 _ scattered have fruited in the harvests of modern education, 
_ jurisprudence, liberty, and civilization. 
‘: “Ah!” it has been eloquently said, ‘what does the 
world owe to this Apostle; what has it owed to him; what 
will it owe: of pious pastors, zealous missionaries, eminent 
_ Christians, useful books, benevolent endowments, examples 
of faith, charity, purity, holiness? Who can calculate it? 
The whole human race will arise and confess that amongst 
all the names of its benefactors whom it is pleased to 
enrol from age to age, there is no one whom it proclaims 
with so much harmony, gratitude and love, as the name of 
the Apostle Paul.” 
” We have thirteen Letters bearing the inscription and 
= - signature of Paul. The evidence of their genuineness 
_ and authenticity is generally admitted; even the extreme 
school of destructive criticism has been ‘compelled to admit 
_ that the Epistles to the Corinthians, Galatians, and Romans 
__ are undoubtedly his. They were written at different periods 
_ between the years 52 and 68 a.p. ; and under very different 













into the universal thought and speech, that even the © 


re os et 

























circumstances. These when hope was young z and 
in the first glad dawn; these amid the stress of s 
antagonism ; these with the shackles of the prison c 
wrist ; these when the sun was dyeing the horizon w 
last intense glow. Each largely tinctured with the 
plexion of the worlds without and within, but all 
that devotion to the risen Lord which led him to su 
himself so often as his devoted bond-servant. Pau 
bond-servant of Jesus Christ.” = 
Let us place these Epistles in the order of their ¢ 
sition, and see how they mark the successive sta 
progress in the Apostle’s conceptions of Christ. He 
always full of Love and Loyalty and the Divine Spirit; t 
according to his own words he was perpetually leaving 
things that were behind and pressing on to those before, that 
he might know Christ, and the power of his resurrection, 
and the fellowship of his sufferings. It is not surprisi 
therefore, that each of the Epistles contains some profe 
apprehension of the fulness and glory of the risen 
As Jesus is said to have increased in wisdom and ge 
his Apostle was transformed into his image feang zlc ony 
glory. All his life was a going from strength to stren 
And as he climbed the craggy steeps of obedience a 
faith, of growing likeness to Jesus, of self-sacrifice a 
experience of the cross, his horizon of knowledge wid 
to tread the lengths and heights and depths of the 
ledge of the love of Christ, which still passed his 
ledge. We have only to compare the first Epistle to th 
Thessalonians with that of the Ephesians, to perceive @ 
once how greatly this noble nature had filled out an n 
ripened under the culture of the Divine husbandman, 
The best and most natural division of the Epistles, tha 
I have met with, is the following : : 
The Eschatological Group: 1 and 2 Thessalonians. — 
The Anti-Judaic Group: 1 and 2 Corinthians, 
Romans. 


Thessalontans. 181 





The Christological, or Anti-Gnostic Group: Philippians, 
Colossians, Philemon, Ephesians. 
The Pastoral Group: 1 Timothy, Titus, and 2 Timothy. 


Let us consider them in this order. 


t and 2 THESSALONIANS.—The first of these was probably 
written towards the close of the year 52, and certainly from 
Corinth. Timothy had been left in Macedonia to complete 
the work from which the Apostle had been so summarily 
torn. After doing all he could to comfort and help the 
infant churches, he came with Silas to Paul, and the three 
held solemn and prayerful conferences on the best way of 
directing and assisting the disciples amid the great storm 
of opposition through which they were passing. It was 
_ impossible for any of them to go to their relief, and so this 
first Epistle was despatched. And the second from the 
same city, a few months afterwards, when the Apostle 
heard that the first had been interpreted to mean that the 
Lord’s coming was near enough to justify the expectation 
of the speedy dissolution of existing society. 

In each of these Epistles, the Apostle dwells more 
largely than in any of the others on the Second Advent, 
Its light was illuminating his whole being with its glow. 
The motive for every duty, the incitement to every Christian 
disposition, the ground for purity, hopefulness, comfort, 
and practical virtue, are found in the coming of the Son 
of God. ‘The Lord Himself shall descend from heaven 
with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the 
trump of God ; and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then 
we which are alive and remain shall be caught up.” 

The motive for Christian living is less in the sense of 
the indwelling Christ and more in the expectation of the 
coming Christ: there is less of the cross, and more of the 
glory; less of the invisible headship over all things in 
heaven and earth, which comes out so prominently in later 
Epistles, and more of the farousia, the personal presence 



























182 “Gotu Large Letters.” — 


of Jesus, To the end the Apostle bade the chu Te 
at her oriel window, looking for the coming of the glory of 
her great God and Saviour; but the ground covered b oy 
his later Epistles is much wider than that of his earliest. bs 


1 CORINTHIANS.—Towards the end of Paul’s three y 
residence in Ephesus, tidings came, partly through A 
and partly through members of the house of Chloe, ¢ 
very unfavourable condition of affairs at Corinth. 
the strongly sensuous influences of that voluptuous cit 
little band of converts seemed on the point of yie 
the strong current setting against them, and relapsing | 
the vices of their contemporaries. Shortly after this a le 
arrived from the church itself, brought to Ephesus 
Stephanas, Fortunatus, and Achaicus, asking advice 
number of practical difficulties. It was a terrible reve 
of quarrels, disputings, inconsistencies, and grosser é€ 
and was enough to daunt any man. How could he 
to remedy such a state of things without going in pe 
And if he went, how would he be received? At that 
he was pressed with the terrible conflict which was 
waged at Ephesus, and he must stay at his post. “ 
was nothing for it but to write as the Holy Spirit : 
direct; and the result is the marvellous Epistle, 
more than any other has supplied practical directior 
the church in the following centuries, showing her hoy 
apply the principles of the Gospel to the most complicatec 
moral and social problems, It was carried to Corinth t 
Titus. In this Epistle there is still the pulse-throb of th 
Second Advent; but there is, in addition, the sublime 
conception of the Second Adam, and the revelation by 
the Holy Spirit now and here, to spiritual minds, of thing 
which eye had not seen, nor ear heard, nor the he 
man conceived. . 


2 CORINTHIANS.—When the riot broke out in E o! 
the Apostle was eagerly looking for the coming of T 









| 183 

with tidings of the reception of his Epistle. On his 
expulsion from the city he went to Troas, making sure 
_ that he would meet him there; but failing to do so, he 
_ became feverishly anxious, and hastened on to Macedonia 
_ to seek him. He was afflicted on every side: “ without 
were fightings, within were fears,” till he was finally com- 
forted by the coming of Titus, who brought good news 
as he told of their longing, their mourning, their zeal for 
him. Thereupon he wrote his second Epistle, and sent it 
to the church by the hands of Titus and another. 

This is the most personal of all his Epistles. He lays 
_ bare his heart ; he permits us to see its yearning tenderness, 
its sensitiveness to love or hate, its eager devotion to the 
best interests of his converts. ‘All things are for your 
sakes . . . for which cause we faint not.” The deep 
spiritual aspects of the Christian life, which are so charac- 
teristic of the later Epistles, are specially unfolded. He 
writes as though, under the teaching of the Holy Spirit, 
he were enjoying increasing measures of the life hid with 
Christ in God. Though he was always delivered unto death 
for Jesus’ sake, the life of Jesus, which was in him, was 
manifesting itself in his mortal flesh (iv. 11). He now knew 
Christ, not after the flesh, but in the spirit ; the constraint 
of his love was perpetually leading to the denial of self, and 
the putting on of that new creation which was the gift of 
the risen Lord (v. 14-17). Whatever the difficulties and 
__ privations of his lot, he was amply compensated from the 
eternal and spiritual sphere in which he lived (vi. 4-10). 
. What though the stake in the flesh cost him continual 
anguish, the grace of Jesus made him glory in it, as 

positively a source of strength (xii. 10). 


a PRE an eee EL.” pay 
~ Segre bird...” aa 
; Ay gt oUF cay 
“ AE ee 
ve ee 


1S aaa" 


as 


i=ie ext. 
* . 


GALATIANS.—Paul followed Titus to Corinth, and 
remained there a happy three months. But the joy 
of fellowship with the large and happy band of friends 
that gathered around him there must have been greatly 






























184 “Bote Large Setters.” is Rr 


blurred by tidings of the fickleness of aac 
who were removing “from him that had called th 
into the grace of Christ unto another gospel.” Proselyt 
had gone amongst his converts professing to represent th 
church at Jerusalem, and in the name of prim sro 
Christianity had disparaged Paul’s apostleship, questio 


his authority, and insisted on the necessity of Gentiles” 
being circumcised and submitting to the Levitical 1 pi 
It was a critical hour. If these views had p 5 
Christianity must have dwindled into a Jewish oat 
the river of Christian life and work which had gus! 
from the ground at Pentecost must have lost itself r 
the sands of Rabbinical speculation. Gentile Christiani 
was in the balance; the hope of the world at 
Profoundly stirred in spirit, the Apostle’s righteous i 
nation flames in almost every sentence, and with glowing 
passion he meets the arguments of those who wel 
seducing the Galatians from the simplicity and freed 
of Christ: “As we said before, so say I now again 
any man preach any other gospel unto you than hac 
have received, let him be accursed.” 
Under the glow of his indignation there is not only @ clear 
and strong thinking, but there is indication of yet f 
regions of Christian knowledge which were being ont 
to Paul. Pressed by the exigencies of his position 
how often the arising of new heresies has driven G 
servants deeper into the fulness treasured in Christ | 
all needs and times—he is led to realize that not Moses 
but Abraham, not Sinai but the tents of the patriarch, 
were the true origin of the Jewish people. Abraham w: 
called when yet in uncircumcision ; he believed, and w: 
justified by faith thirty years before he received the di 
tinctive Jewish rite. It was as great a revelation as t 
shores of the New World to Columbus; and from th 
moment Paul sprang up to an altogether new posit 
from which he was able successfully to meet the 2 


rr 
sk ie 
ay 


Romans and Philippians. 185 
of the Judaizer, and vindicate all believing Gentiles as 


_ Children of believing Abraham, and heirs of the covenant 
of promise. 





Romans.—As his stay at Corinth drew to a close, the 
Apostle’s mind was attracted to the church in the world’s 
metropolis, which he hoped very soon to visit ; and by way 
of preparation for his coming he prepared a succinct and 
connected view of the truths which had been revealed 
to his profoundest thought by the Divine Spirit. Thus 
originated the greatest of his Epistles, that to the Romans. 

In this, as in the former, there is not only a clear appre- 
ciation and presentation of the great doctrine of justification 
by faith, but an ever-enlarging view of our identification 
with Christ, and of his indwelling. He says we were 
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, but we are 
saved by his “fe. He speaks of reigning in life through the 
abundance of grace treasured up in the one Man, Jesus 
Christ. His words glow with rapture as he speaks of 
being joined to Him that was raised from the dead, and of 
our freedom from the old bondage in which we were held. 
So entirely had Christ become one with him, and he one with 
Christ, that he felt the unutterable groans of His interces- 
sions, and something of His travail for the souls of men. 
He had yielded his members as weapons in his mighty 
warfare against sin; had been crucified with Christ, and 
now no longer lived, but Christ lived in him. His life was 
one of faith in the Son of God, who loved him and gave 
Himself for him. The cross was the means, not of justifica- 
tion only, but of sanctification, and stood between him and 
his past; while by the Holy Spirit the Son of God had 

become resident and regnant within him, 


PHILIPPIANS.—There is nothing polemical in this epistle. 
The former Epistles have met and silenced his detractors 
and enemies. The strife and divisions of the churches, if | 
such there were, do not reach him through the prison doors, 


186 * en om Ketter.” , ee 























of God that passeth all understanding keeps his 
heart, and out of that tranquil heart pours forth a 
deep and tender love to his beloved friends at Philig 
The hope of being alive at the coming of the 
still his heart’s guiding-star. His citizenship was in | 
whence he looked for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus 
but the possibility that perhaps the Lord might ee 
magnified by his death had already presented itself to 
mind. He saw, however, that the will of God was bes! 
learned from his Master the secret of sé 
humility. Epaphroditus had brought gifts of lve w 
Philippi, and by his hands this letter of love and g 
was returned. : 
Cotossians.—Among those who visited Paul in hi 
hired house, towards the end of his detention in Re 
was Epaphras of Colossz, who also represented 0 
and Hierapolis—cities of Asia Minor in the vali 
the Lycus. He told the Apostle of a strange new h 
which was developing with alarming rapidity a ‘th 
churches that had been planted in those distant citi 
The falsely-called Christian philosophy of the time 
endeavouring to fill the gulf between sinful man and f 
holy God by a ladder of mythical existences, through w 
man’s prayers might ascend to God and his blessir 
descend on man. The whole conception was ¢ 
imaginary, and in its furthest reach must fail of its ob bie 
for between the loftiest archangel or spirit and the ¢ 
God there is still the infinite chasm which conieea 
creature from the Creator, and is impassable unless tht 
Creator come across it. ae 
The necessity of dealing with this absurd tissue ¢ 
imagination was used by the Spirit of God to m1 
wider, deeper view of the fulness that there is in jena 
a disclosure was made to the Apostle of the full meanin 
of the Lord’s ascension to the right hand of power, E 


veil, 


i 





Colossians and Pbilemon. 187 


ences, all beings in heaven and earth, and under the earth, 
were beneath his feet. He was Lord and King, ruling 
ail, filling all, maintaining all. ‘In Him were all things 
_ created, in the heavens and upon the earth, things visible 
and things invisible, whether thrones, or dominions, or 
‘principalities, or powers, all things have been created 
through Him, and unto Him: and He is before all things, 
and in Him all things consist. . . . And ye are complete 
in Him, who is the head of all principality and power” 
(Col. i. 16, R.V.; ii. 10). 

At the same time, his conviction of his union with the 
risen Lord was ever more definite, and his appreciation 
of his indwelling more full of hope and glory. What did 
___ it matter if he was called upon to fill up what was behind 
___ of the sufferings? Had it not been given him to make 
fe known the riches of the glory of this mystery among the 
' Gentiles, which is Christ in the heart, the hope of glory? 
: Tychicus bore this letter and that to the Ephesians. 

PHILEMON.—Onesimus, the runaway slave, fugitive from 
his master Philemon, driven by want to the Apostle’s house 
or discovered in some low haunt of crime by his com- 
panions in their errands of mercy, had been begotten to a 


new life, and was now not a slave only, but a brother 
beloved. Paul sent him back to his master, who was a 


_ friend of his, and with whom he seems to have had a 

__ business account (vv. 18, 19). This Epistle, which is a 

- perfect model of Christian courtesy, was given him as an 
introduction to his owner. 

The chief point to notice here is the perfect patience 
and certainty with which the Apostle awaits the ultimate 
triumph of divine love. He must have felt that in the 
sight of God, Onesimus had a perfect night to freedom; 

_ but it would have been highly impolitic for him to interfere 
between master andman. Let Philemon be taught to look 
at Onesimus as joined to him in the Gospel, it would not 


_ saw that all principalities and powers, all creature exist- 





. 
% 


2 ee ON i 


9 i eySe Sep 
Ct eee tid ri 



























ae 
188 “Gow Large Betters.” 
be long before he would himself propose his em 
But till he did, Paul would not precipitate mat 
Onesimus must return to serve. The principle of 
this single instance doubtless became the ul 
the solution of many other difficult problems, wh 
left to the gradual conquest of the spirit of love. 


EPHESIANS.—This Epistle reiterates the great concepti 
of the empire of the Lord Jesus, and of his abil 
fill the whole gulf between God and man, 
former Epistle had ‘foreshadowed. The d : 
identification with Christ, in his death, resurrection, al 
ascension, is set forth with remarkable vividness and powe 
The conception of the church as the Body and 
of Christ is elaborated with peculiar beauty of ¢ 
But the commanding peculiarity of this Epistle << 
allusion to the home life of husband and pie, parer 
and child, master and slave. Fe - 

In earlier days, on account of the present distress, a 
without the distinct assurance of Inspiration, the Apos' 
had spoken as though the difficulties of married life pr 
ponderated over its sweets (x Cor. vii.) ; but in these lat 
Epistles he holds it up as the model of the love hic 
subsists between the Heavenly Bridegroom and His ¢ 
and, contrary to the opinion of his time, he goes So far a 
to assert that the true bond of marriage is hes 
sacrifice of the stronger for the weaker—of the husbani i 
the wife. Woman was no longer to be the slave or | 
man; but men were to be prepared to give themselves 
their wives in loving acts of unselfishness, as Christ le 
the church and gave Himself for it. : 


1 TIMOTHY AND Titus.—After his release, Paul ed 
the scenes of his former ministry around the shores of th 

Egean ; and it was during his journeys at this time | : at 
he indited these Epistles to direct the young evangelists it 


the right ordering of the churches under their care. 











Gimothy and Gitus. 189 


are of extreme interest because dealing with so many 


domestic and practical details. He is never weary of 
showing that the great principles of the Gospel are meant 
to elevate the commoner incidents and duties of life. 
“Godliness has promise of the life that now is.” “The 
grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared unto 


all men, teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly 


lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this 
present world” (1 Tim. iv. 8; Titus ii. 11, 12). 


2 TimoTHy.—It was a mellow and softened old age. 
Lonely so far as dear companions were concerned ; full of 


_ privations, without cloak, or books, or tendance; shivering 


in the prison; waiting to be offered, weigh anchor, and 
drop down the stream. He wanted once more to see his 
beloved son in the faith, and wrote to speed his steps. It 
is very pathetic, very beautiful, very human. But the ray 
of an indomitable courage and faith is flung across the 
heaving waters: he has kept his Lord’s deposit, and knows 


_ that the deposit which he had made years before had been 


no less safely kept. And so the pen is taken in hand for the 
last time. A few tender messages are added as a postscript. 
And with large letters he appends the closing sentences, 
“The Lord be with thy spirit. Grace be with you.” 


The Epistles of Paul resemble stereotyped plates, from 
which innumerable copies are produced. Who but God 
can number the myriads of souls that have come in contact 


with his words, and have themselves become epistles, 


ministered by him, “written not with ink, but with the 
Spirit of the living God.” And, till the Lord come, 
edition after edition of character, soul-life, and blessed 
victorious experience, shall be struck off from these blocks 
of holy thinking which we owe to the Apostle Paul. 


LONDON; MORGAN AND SCOTT, 12, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS. 








du! lished. “EDITION DE LUXE of Rey. F. B, Meyer’s Popular Work. 


THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


Printed in Two Colours on Art Enamel Paper, 
— with: Frontispiece and emblematic and *| ILLUSTRATIONS BY 


. other designs on every page. MARY A. LATHBURY. — 
m, Bound in Cloth (Watered Silk Finish), Bevelled Boards, Gilt Edges, 53.; 0%, 

Leather, Padded, Rolled Gold, Rounded Corners, Gilt Edges, 7s. 6d, : 
* As delightful to handle as it is profitable to read." —Methodist Times. 


: THE “BIOGRAPHICAL” SERIES. 
_ Each Volume contains NINE ORIGINAL ENGRAVINGS, and may be had in 
Cloth Boards, 2s. Gd.; Bevelled Boards, Gilt Edges, 3s. 6d. 


1 PAUL: A Servant of Jesus Christ. JUST PUBLISHED. 












































H 
{ 
ABRAHAM: Or, The Obedience of Faith. 
__ No Christian can rise from its perusal without feeling consciously strengthened.” : 
2 : Sunday School Chronicle. aA (& 
ISRAEL: A Prince with God. ee 
ore: a surpasses any book we have seen on Jacob and his eventful career.” = 
Irish Baptist Wocaser a> 
J OSEPH: Beloved—Hated—Exalted. ee 
“A very cheerful, wise, and helpful reading.” —Literary World. z , 
MOSES: The Servant of God. = 
“An exquisite series of vignette studies.”—Methodist Times. “S 
_JOSHUA: And the Land of Promise. 1 ta 
> ** Jesus, the Greater Joshua, is everywhere felt to predominate, and the savour of as S 
His name and presence scatters fragrance everywhere. "—Word and Work. : at 


DAVID : Shepherd, Psalmist, King. 


_ ** Bears the stamp of freshness and finish.” —British Messenger. 


ELIJAH: And the Secret of his Power. 


‘€Grandly written and of thrilling interest.”—Footsteps of Truth. 


_ JEREMIAH: Priest and Prophet. 


iY In Mr, Meryer’s hands the Old Testament is felt to be a living book.” 
Baptist Magazine, 


“The Jatter Rape Volumes in the ‘* Biographical” Series, attractively bound in library 
Es Style, and enclosed in a neat case, 16s. Gd. net (postage 11d. extra), 





SPOSOCOSOSSSSSSSCOSSOSSSOSCOOSD 


i 
| 
{ 
i 
| 
- Each Volume in Cloth Boards, 2s. 6d. ; Cloth, Bevelled Boards, Gilt Edges, 3s. 6d. | a 
1 





REVERIES AND REALITIES ; or, Life and Work in London. 


With Life-like Portrait ¥ the Author. 


és THE BELLS OF IS: or, Voices of Human Need and Sorrow. 


With Life-like Portrait of the Author, and several other Illustrations. 





d 
y* 


tie 


7) 
be 
Rae mes 


—-+ oe 
tonDoN MORGAN AND SCOTT, 12, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, &.C. 
And may be Ordered of any Bookseller. 


yea) ge 


i’ 
















THE ‘‘ EXPOSITORY” SERIE 
Each Volume in Cloth Boards, 2s. 6d. ; Bevelled Boards, 


Christ in Isaiah : 4 seems or xxrosrrioms. 


The Way into the Holiest: sn cor na ) 


“Mr. Meyer has large expository and homiletic gifts, as well 
insight."—Preachers’ Magazine. 


The Life and Light of Men: =xrosrrons or an 


“Will be useful to all classes of readers; especially 
seeking help in their spiritual life. "_Christian Lemont & 


‘Tried by Fire :” sxrosrrions or THE FIRST EPISTLE 0 
‘* Full of tender Christian wisdom,.”—British Weekly. 


aah 


THE “CHRISTIAN LIFE” SERIES. — 





The Four Volumes in this Series, attractively bound in 
a handsome case, 8s. 6d. net (postage 8d. 


























Saved and Kept. "sss 70 yoowa seueymns | 


** A simple manual for young believers and likely to be ie use! 


Christian Living. "4°71 coven concmmma 


LIE. 
“ Full of sweetness and light. No Christian can read it with a docile spirit 
fail to receive stimulus."—Cambridgeshire Congregational Magazine, 


The Future Tenses of the Blessed Life. 


“This choice little work cannot fail to soothe and hel [tet or show 
ground of the Christian’s hope.” —Wesleyan Sunday School 


The Present Tenses of the Blessed Life. 


‘This is a helpful volume, containing experimental teachi egard 
of the blessed assurances of Holy Scripture.”—Zz, ical Chri: 


The Shepherd Psalm: meprrarions on THe ra PSALM 
“ A book bringing forth many beautiful and comfortin Ja ns 
the despondent, and stimulate the believer.” —W% 


Key-Words of the Inner Life: pres xm 
* Simple, concise, and suggestive ; a gem of rare value."—Baptist Mi 


The Psalms: wrores anp READINGS. 
Cloth Boards, 1s. 6d. ; Bevelled Boards, Gilt Edges, 2s. 


“There is a deep insight, without laboured exposition and it is evident t 
brevity and helpfulness have both been studied."—Word and Work. 


SON Nee 
The latter Six Volumes in this Series, attractively bound in a and _ 
‘ ot 





in a handsome case, 6s. net (postage 6d. 





LONDON: MORGAN AND SCOTT, 12, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, EC. 
And may be Ordered of any Bookseller. ipod 








Date Due 






J 
a 


— “a 
ey Sa eel = gx 





Demco 293-5 





de 


\ ol By, 
Le 


re e a fs 
wea - 


a . 
oh 1 
9% j « 
ts 3 
3 : 





ggs.02 pszeue © +olaee 


ie 
ey 

: 
We 
aE School of Kehelom 
y : 
C4 

7 

. 

KI 

S| 





aia 


ante 





