^^ 


I     i 


If 


^W^r*S^ 


r? 


570 
■7 

>py  1 

nut  Patriotism 

and 

Pure  Patriotism 


R.  A.  TORREY 

Dean  of  the  Bible  Institute  of  Los  Angeles 


Our  Duty  to  God  and  Our  Country 
in  this  Time  of  Crisis 


Copyright  1918 
By  R.  A.  Torrey 


Peanut  Patriotism  and  Pure  Patriotism; 
Our  Duty  to  God  and  Our  Country 
in  this  Time  of  Crisis. 


"Curse  ye  Meroz,  said  the  angel  of  the  LORD, 
curse  ye  bitterly  the  inhabitants  thereof;  because 
they  came  not  to  the  help  of  the  LORD,  to  the  help 
of  the  LORD  against  the  mighty."    Judges  5  :23. 

Our  subject  this  morning  is  "Peanut 
Patriotism  and  Pure  Patriotism :  Our  Duty  to  God 
and  our  Country  in  this  Time  of  Crisis."  You  will 
find  the  text  in  Judges  5  :23,  "Curse  ye  Meroz,  said 
the  angel  of  the  LORD,  curse  ye  bitterly  the  inhabi- 
tants thereof;  because  they  came  not  to  the  help  of 
the  LORD,  to  the  help  of  the  LORD  against  the 
mighty."  The  speaker  is  the  angel  of  Jehovah.  It 
could  be  proven,  if  there  were  time  to  go  into  it,  that 
the  angel  of  Jehovah  was  the  second  person  of  the 
trinity  before  His  incarnation  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 
So  this  declaration  of  a  curse  upon  slackers  is  an 
utterance  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  whole  chapter  from 
which  our  text  is  taken.  Judges  5,  is  an  inspired 
hymn.  It  is  God's  hymn.  The  sentiments  of  the 
hymn  are  God's  sentiments,  and  it  is  Jehovah  God 
who  pronounces  the  curse  of  the  text.  God  had 
called  Israel  to  battle,  to  literal  war,  to  bloody  war 
against  His  enemies  and  theirs.  Sisera  was  the 
Kaiser  Wilhelm  II  of  that  day.  Some  had  heard 
the  call  of  God  and  rallied  to  His  war.  These  had 
conquered  the  enemies  of  God  and  their  enemies, 
and  won  a  glorious  victory.  God  had  fought  for 
them  and  with  them.  It  was  Jehovah  who  had 
"discomfited  Sisera  and  all  his  chariots,  and  all  his 
hosts,  with  the  edge  of  the  sword  before  Barak" 
(Judges  4:15).  But  in  that  time  of  God's  war  for 
liberty  and  righteousness,  Meroz  had  shirked  its 
duty.  They  had  proven  shirkers  and  slackers  and 
brought  the  curse  of  the  Almighty  upon  their  heads. 
It  is  clear  that  there  are  times  when  God  calls  His 
people  to  war,  when  a  war  is  God's  war.  If  there 
was  ever  a  time  in  the  history  of  this  country  when 
our  side  in  the  war  was  God's  side,  and  our  war  was 

0^' 


•>-fS2fc^|5.,,934S3^. 


GocPs  war,  it  is  in  this  present  war.  It  is  to  my 
mind  far  easier  to  justify  the  part  of  the  United 
States  in  this  war  than  to  justify  our  part  even  in 
the  War  of  the  Revolution,  or  to  justify  the  part  of 
the  North  in  the  Civil  War.  Indeed,  this  present  war 
'  was  forced  upon  us.  We  had  to  fight  or  else  to 
leave  our  citizens  and  our  women  and  children  to  be 
murdered  by  a  government  and  a  nation  that  knew 
no  law,  no  truth,  no  honor,  no  regard  for  the  most 
sacred  rights  of  other  nations,  or  even  of  women 
and  children.  Because  I  believe  in  justice,  because 
I  believe  in  the  rights  of  the  weak,  both  of  individ- 
uals and  nations,  because  I  believe  in  veracity  and  in 
keeping  of  treaties  and  covenants,  because  I  believe 
in  the  protection  of  the  honor  of  women  and  girls, 
because  I  believe  in  everything  that  is  high  and  holy 
and  pure  and  true,  I  believe  in  this  war,  and  in  the 
destruction  of  the  power  of  the  Hohenzollerns  and 
the  punishment  and  humiliation  of  the  people  that 
support  and  follow  William  the  Second  in  his  vil- 
lainies and  deviltries.  And  every  man,  woman  and 
child  in  the  land  has  a  duty  to  our  government  and 
nation  at  this  time,  and  those  who  fail  to  perform 
their  whole  duty  at  this  time,  who  fail  to  come  up 
to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty,  will 
bring  a  curse  upon  their  heads. 

There  is  a  most  cheering  display  of  pure  patriot- 
ism throughout  our  land.  I  have  spoken,  since  the 
war  began,  throughout  our  land  from  Boston  on  the 
Atlantic  to  Los  Angeles  on  the  Pacific,  and  from 
Vermont  on  the  north  to  Texas  on  the  south,  and  I 
have  seen  everywhere  an  enthusiasm  for  our  right- 
eous cause  that  has  cheered  my  heart.  But  along  with 
this  pure  patriotism  I  have  also  seen  a  cheap  and 
tawdry  patriotism,  a  peanut  patriotism,  a  patriotism 
that  in  no  sense  deserves  the  name  of  patriotism,  a 
patriotism  that  has  cost  nothing,  but  has  often 
brought  profit  to  the  alleged  patriot,  a  patriotism 
that  has  proved  profitable  in  money  or  in  applause 
to  the  alleged  patriot,  a  patriotism  for  example, 
that  has  tried  to  fatten  the  purse  of  flag  manufac- 
turers by  fostering  an  over-use  of  our  beautiful  and 
glorious  flag,  and  by  uses  of  the  flag  that  were  not 


honoring,  but  dishonoring,  using  the  flag,  for  exam- 
ple, as  a  mere  decoration,  or  thrown  over  chairs  to 
sit  on,  or  placed  on  platforms  to  trample  on,  or  even 
used  as  a  handkerchief  to  blow  your  nose  on  or  spit 
on,  or  that  has  sought  to  play  to  the  galleries  by 
attacking  people  who  were  falsely  alleged  not  to 
properly  display  the  flag,  or  not  to  display  the  flag 
sufiiciently,  while  the  man  who  was  courting  applause 
by  his  lying  attack  upon  others  was  making  no  per- 
sonal sacritices  by  going  to  the  war  himself  nor  by 
sending  any  one  who  was  dear  to  him  to  the  war, 
nor  giving  any  considerable  sum  to  Red  Cross,  or 
Y.  M.  C.  A.,  or  buying  Liberty  Bonds,  or  by  any 
other  of  the  thousand  and  one  ways  of  sacrifice  that 
have  been  open  to  the  one  who  is  not  seeking  ap- 
plause for  himself,  but  holds  what  he  has  and  is  at 
his  country's  and  his  God's  disposal.  I  believe  in  our 
flag;  I  believe  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart  that  it 
is  the  most  beautiful  national  emblem  that  floats. 
I  have  taken  my  hat  off  to  it  as  I  have  passed  be- 
neath it  on  German  soil.  I  have  carried  it,  not  only 
from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific  and  from  Labrador 
to  Georgia  over  our  continent,  but  in  China,  Japan, 
Australia,  New  Zealand,  Tasmania,  India,  Switzer- 
land, France,  England,  Scotland,  Ireland,  Holland, 
and  Belgium,  and  even  Germany,  but  I  do  not  take 
any  stock  in  that  form  of  patriotism  that  exhausts 
itself  in  seeing  how  many  flags  it  can  tuck  on  to  an 
automobile,  or  in  putting  out  a  service  flag  that  has 
as  many  stars  upon  it  as  you  have  distant  relatives 
that  are  mere  camp  hangers-on.  I  have  seen  a  large 
and  beautiful  flag  displayed  in  a  home  and  many 
flags  fluttering  from  automobiles  where  I  had  good 
reason  to  suspect  that  our  glorious  flag  was  simply 
used  as  a  camouflage  for  lurking  pro-Germanism  and 
I  have  seen  a  service  flag  fluttering  from  a  house 
with  five  stars  upon  it  when  there  was  only  one  man 
in  the  whole  household  old  enough  to  enlist. 

What  does  real  patriotism,  pure  patriotism  demand 
of  us  at  the  present  time? 

I.    JOINING  THE  ARMY. 

First  of  all,  pure  patriotism   demands  that  when 
we  are  drafted  we  should  go  to  the  war,  unless  there 

4 


is  something  else  we  can  do  that  will  be  more  for 
our  nation's  welfare,  and  for  the  honor  of  God,  and 
for  which,  therefore,  we  may  be  properly  exempted. 

1.  Why  do  I  say,  when  we  are  drafted?  Because 
I  believe  that  a  selective  draft  is  the  only  fair  way 
of  securing  soldiers  for  the  war.  We  cannot  all  go, 
some  must  stay  at  home  to  back  those  who  do  go. 
If  we  depend  upon  voluntary  enlistment  then  only 
the  best  go  and  the  worthless  and  comparatively 
worthless  stay  at  home  to  enjoy  the  fruit  of  the 
sacrifices  of  the  brave  and  true.  A  draft  is  the  fair, 
and  the  only  fair  way  of  securing  soldiers,  and  while 
our  own  draft  law  may  not  be  perfect,  it  is  certainly 
as  good  as  could  be  expected.  It  is  a  remarkably 
good  law.  In  fact,  taken  as  a  whole  it  is  a  thor- 
oughly wise  law. 

2.  There  are  sometimes  other  things  that  we  can 
do  than  going  to  the  war  whereby  we  will  help  our 
country  more  than  by  going  to  the  war.  Hoover 
can  do  more  at  the  present  time  by  using  his  peculiar 
abilities  and  his  unusual  experience  in  conserving 
the  food  stuffs  of  the  country  than  he  could  by  tak- 
ing a  gun  and  going  out  to  the  trenches.  Many  a 
man  can  do  more  by  inspiring  a  hundred  men  to  do 
their  duty  than  he  could  by  firing  one  rifle.  Many 
a  man  can  do  more  for  God  and  country  at  this  time 
by  preaching  the  pure  gospel  than  he  could  by 
shouldering  a  gun.  Of  course,  there  are  many 
preachers  who  do  no  good  either  for  their  God  or 
country,  and  would  be  of  much  more  use  in  the 
trenches  than  in  the  pulpit. 

3.  But  seme  one  will  ask,  "Is  it  right  for  a  Chris- 
tian to  bear  arms?  Doesn't  the  Bible  forbid  it?" 
The  Bible  certainly  does  not  forbid  our  bearing  arms 
under  all  circumstances.  Two  of  the  most  highly 
commended  men  in  the  Bible  were  soldiers.  In  the 
Gospel  of  Matthew,  the  eighth  chapter  and  the  tenth 
verse,  our  Lord  Jesus  gives  one  of  the  highest  com- 
mendations that  ever  fell  from  His  lips  to  a  captain 
in  the  Roman  army.  He  says  in  praise  of  his  faith. 
"I  have  not  found  so  great  faith,  no,  not  in  Israel." 
And  our  Lord  did  not  suggest,  even  in  the  remotest 
way.  that  this  man  of  towering  faith  should  quit  the 

5 


army.  And  in  the  tenth  chapter  and  the  eleventh 
chapter  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  we  have  a  pic- 
ture of  another  captain  in  the  Roman  army,  a  man 
of  such  exceptional  devotion  and  such  exemplary 
conduct  in  the  use  of  his  money  for  God  and  the 
poor  that  God  sent  an  angelic  messenger  to  him  to 
tell  him  that  his  prayers  and  his  alms  had  gone  up 
for  a  memorial  before  God.  Our  Lord  Jesus  did  not 
tell  the  Roman  centurion  to  quit  the  army,  nor  did 
the  angel  nor  Peter  tell  Cornelius  to  quit  the 
army.  While  Cornelius  was  still  in  the  army  the 
Holy  Ghost  came  in  a  remarkable  way  upon  Corne- 
lius and  his  whole  household,  in  which  numerous 
soldiers  were  included.  It  is  very  evident  that  a 
man  may  be  a  soldier  and  still  be  peculiarly  favored 
and  instructed  of  God  and  still  remain  a  soldier. 
Some  of  the  ripest  and  most  intelligent  Christians 
I  have  ever  known  have  been  in  the  army,  some  of 
them  officers  and  some  of  them  privates. 

II.     CONTRIBUTING     MONEY     TO     THE 
PROSECUTION  OF  THE  WAR. 

The  second  thing  that  pure  patriotism  demands  of 
us  is  that  if  we  cannot  ourselves  go  to  the  war  for 
one  reason  or  another,  that  we  contribute  of  our 
money  to  the  prosecution  of  the  war  and  the  com- 
fort of  those  who  are  bearing  the  heat  and  burden 
of  the  day.  Just  as  Christians  who  cannot  go  to 
the  foreign  field  themselves  should  contribute  to  the 
support  of  those  who  can,  so  also  the  patriot  who 
cannot  go  to  the  war  should  contribute  to  the  sup- 
port of  those  who  can  and  do.  Why  should  those 
who  are  drafted  bear  all  the  sacrifice?  Does  the 
drafted  man  owe  anything  to  the  country  that  we 
do  not?  There  may  be  reasons  why  we  should  not 
go,  but  there  are  no  reasons  why  we  should  not  make 
sacrifices  as  well  as  he.  There  are  many  ways  in 
which  we  can  contribute  to  the  prosecution  of  the 
war. 

1.  First  of  all,  by  paying  our  taxes  without  any 
attempt  to  evade  or  diminish  them,  and  paying  them 
promptly.  The  man  of  means  who  seeks  to  evade 
or   postpone   the   payment  of  his   income   tax   is   as 


truly  a  slacker,  a  traitor  and  a  criminal  as  the  man 
of  twenty-five  who  seeks  to  dodge  the  draft  by 
sneaking  out  of  the  country. 

2.  Second,  by  buying  Liberty  Bonds  and  War  Sav- 
ings Certificates  and  Thrift  Stamps.  I  speak  of 
that  as  a  sacrifice,  but  in  reality  it  is  little  or  no 
sacrifice.  Liberty  Bonds  and  War  Savings  Certifi- 
cates and  Thrift  Stamps  are  a  good  investment,  and 
those  who  buy  them  will  ultimately  gain  by  so  doing. 
How  well  I  remember  years  ago  one  of  the  leading 
men  of  wealth  of  New  Haven,  Conn.,  who  laid  the 
foundations  of  his  fortune  by  buying  United  States 
Bonds  in  the  time  of  the  Civil  War.  He  did  it  as  a 
patriotic  duty  and  it  proved  a  remarkably  good 
investment.  Certainly  we  far  better  put  our  money 
into  Liberty  Bonds  and  War  Savings  Certificates 
and  Thrift  Stamps  than  squander  it  in  all  kinds  of 
foolishness  of  dress,  amusement  and  physical  self- 
indulgence. 

3.  In  the  third  place,  we  can  contribute  money 
to  the  prosecution  of  the  war  by  giving  to  the  Red 
Cross,  or  the  Y.  M.  C.  A.  I  witnessed  the  work  of 
the  Y.  M.  C.  A.  during  the  Spanish-American  War, 
and  I  have  seen  something  of  it  during  the  present 
war  at  Camp  Bowie  and  Camp  Kearney.  I  have 
been  told  the  Y.  M.  «C.  A.  are  not  doing  the  same 
kind  of  work  in  this  war  that  they  did  in  the  Span- 
ish-American War,  but  my  experience  is  they  are 
doing  even  a  better  work,  and  not  only  a  larger 
work  but  a  more  intelligent  and  more  definite  work, 
a  work  with  better  results.  That  there  may  be  some 
things  in  connection  with  it  that  you  and  I  would 
not  believe  in,  I  do  not  doubt  for  a  moment,  but  no 
intelligent  man  expects  perfection  from  any  human 
organization,  and  no  fair  minded  man  refuses  to 
cooperate  with  an  organization  because  it  does  not 
do  everything  just  as  we  want  it  done. 

HL    HELPING  TO  CONSERVE   FOOD  FOR 
THE  ARMY  AND  FOR  OUR  ALLIES. 

The  third  thing  that  pure  patriotism  demands  of 
us  is  that  we  help  to  conserve  food  for  the  army  and 
for  our  allies.     Here  and  there  some  are  grumbling 


because  we  are  asked  to  go  without  meat  one  day 
in  the  week,  or  to  go  without  wheat  bread,  or  to 
economize  on  sugar  and  butter.  So  far  we  have 
been  called  upon  to  make  no  sacrifice  that  is  any 
real  sacrifice  at  all.  We  would  all  be  better  off  phy- 
sically any  way  if  we  went  without  meat  more  than 
one  day  in  the  week.  Rye  bread  is  as  wholesome  and 
as  toothsome  as  wheat  bread.  Most  of  us  eat  too 
much  sugar  any  how  and  most  of  us  too  much  but- 
ter. The  time  may  come,  and  I  suppose  it  will 
come,  when  the  Food  Administration  will  find  it 
necessary  to  call  upon  us  to  make  some  real  sacri- 
fices. It  will  be  remarkable  if  such  a  time  does  not 
come.  When  it  does  come  pure  patriotism  demands 
that  we  make  these  sacrifices  without  a  murmur,  yes, 
that  we  make  them  with  glad  hearts,  glad  that  we 
can  make  some  sacrifice  for  our  country's  sake  and 
for  God's  sake.  How  I  thank  God  that  I  was  born 
on  American  soil  and  underneath  the  Stars  and 
Stripes.  I  have  lived  in  many  other  lands.  I  know 
something  by  experience  of  what  a  privilege  it  is  to 
be  born  in  America  and  to  live  in  America,  and  shall 
I  make  no  sacrifices  for  my  country  and  for  my 
God  who  in  His  wondrous  grace  gave  me  the  privi- 
lege of  being  born  in  this  land? 

We  should  also  economize  even  where  the  Gov- 
ernment does  not  ask  it.  Why  squander  money, 
e.  g.,  on  candy  and  soft  drinks,  that  do  us  no  earthly 
good  and  often  do  us  positive  harm,  especially  when 
one  of  the  great  lacks  of  our  allies  is  sugar. 

In  this  connection  let  me  say  we  should  obey 
without  hesitation  all  the  war  laws  and  regulations. 
Some  of  them  may  not  appear  to  us  to  be  wise,  pos- 
sibly they  may  not  be  wise,  for  we  cannot  expect 
perfect  legislation  on  any  subject  from  imperfect 
men,  but  even  if  we  do  not  approve  of  the  law  it  is 
our  business  to  obey  it.  It  is  our  Christian  duty  to 
obey  it.  God  expressly  commands  us  in  His  Word 
to  "be  subject  to  every  ordinance  of  man  for  the 
Lord's  sake :  whether  it  be  to  the  king,  as  supreme, 
or  unto  governors,  as  sent  by  Him  for  vengeance 
on  evil  doers  and  for  praise  to  them  that  do  well. 
For  so  is  the  will  of  God  that  by  well  doing  (i.  e,, 


well  doing  in  being  in  subjection  to  men's  laws'*  ye 
should  put  to  silence  the  ignorance  of  foolish  men." 
(1  Peter  13:15).  In  these  days  of  anarchy  and 
I.  W.  Wism,  and  an  unintelligent,  unbalanced,  and 
German  inspired,  even  though  well-meaning,  pacif- 
ism, every  Christian  owes  it  to  his  God  and  to  his 
country  to  study  carefully  the  ordinances  that  our 
rulers  make  and  observe  them  with  the  most  scrupu- 
lous exactness,  even  though  there  is  no  danger  of 
our  being  discovered   if   we   should   violate   them. 

IV.     TO  PRAY. 

But  there  is  something  that  we  can  do  that  will 
mean  more  toward  the  winning  of  the  present  war 
than  our  going  into  the  trenches,  or  contributing  our 
money  for  the  promotion  of  the  war,  or  our  helping 
to  conserve  the  food  for  the  army  and  our  allies, 
WE  CAN  PRAY.  Prayer  has  won  many  battles  and 
conquered  many  apparently  unconquerable  despots 
and  nations.  The  United  States  at  the  time  of  the 
Revolution  won  more  by  the  prayers  of  the  Godly 
people  than  by  the  wisdom  or  the  bravery  of  its 
Washingtons.  So  we  too  should  pray.  This  is  our 
first  obligation  to  our  country  at  the  present  time. 
I  do  not  mean,  of  course,  that  we  should  pray  and 
do  nothing  else,  that  we  should  pray  and  shirk  our 
duty  of  shouldering  a  gun  or  contributing  our  money, 
or  obeying  the  laws,  or  being  willing  to  do  whatever 
lies  in  our  power  in  these  respects.  But  our  highest 
obligation  is  to  pray.  Furthermore,  in  order  that 
we  may  pray  effectively,  in  order  that  we  may  pray 
so  that  our  prayers  will  count,  in  order  that  we  may 
so  pray  that  our  prayers  will  bring  things  to  pass, 
we  must  in  our  own  lives  meet  the  conditions  of  pre- 
vailing prayer.  A  good  deal  of  praying  has  been 
done  already  that  we  might  win  the  war,  but  little 
seems  to  have  come  of  the  praying.  Why  has  not 
God  answered  the  prayers  of  England?  Why  has 
not  God  answered  the  prayers  of  America  more 
largely  than  He  has?  Because  neither  England  nor 
Am  erica  has  met  the  conditions  of  prevailing  prayer. 
God  told  His  people  that  He  would  answer  their 
prayers  in  the  hour  of  their  defeat  and  bondage  if 


they  would  repent  of  and  confess  their  sins  and  get 
right  with  Him,  and  observe  His  will  as  revealed  in 
His  Word.  He  said  in  Deut.  30:1-3,  "And  it  shall 
come  to  pass,  when  all  these  things  are  come  upon 
thee,  the  blessing  and  the  curse,  which  I  have  set 
before  thee,  and  thou  shalt  call  them  to  mind  among 
all  the  nations,  whither  the  LORD  thy  God  hath 
driven  thee,  and  shalt  return  unto  the  LORD  thy 
God,  and  shalt  obey  His  voice  according  to  all  that 
I  command  thee  this  day,  thou  and  thy  children, 
with  all  thine  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul;  that  then 
the  LORD  thy  God  will  turn  thy  captivity,  and  have 
compassion  upon  thee,  and  will  return  and  gather 
thee  from  all  the  peoples,  whither  the  LORD  thy 
God  hath  scattered  thee."  England  has  not  repented 
of  its  sins,  America  has  not  repented  of  its  sins. 
Have  we  as  individuals?  Much  prayer  to  God  is 
simply  making  a  convenience  of  God,  asking  God  to 
be  "mit  uns"  when  we  are  ignoring  God,  when  we 
are  neglecting  God's  holy  Word,  rejecting  God's 
holy  Son,  and  using  God's  holy  day  for  our  own  con- 
venience and  pleasure.  Pure  patriotism  demands 
that  we  repent  of  our  sins,  that  we  get  right  with 
God,  that  we  accept  the  Lord  Jesus  as  our  Saviour, 
and  surrender  absolutely  to  Him  as  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  and  that  we  confess  Him  publicly  as  such 
before  the  world,  and  live  to  please  Him  day  by  day. 
When  we  are  thus  right  with  God,  then  we  can  pray 
and  God  will  answer.  The  one  who  refuses  in  this 
time  of  crisis  to  get  right  with  God  in  order  that  he 
may  pray  in  power,  is  a  traitor  to  his  country.  He 
is  a  v/orse  slacker  than  the  one  who  refuses  to  reg- 
ister for  the  draft,  or  to  answer  the  draft  when  he 
is  called.  We  can  come  up  to  the  help  of  the  Lord 
against  the  mighty  more  by  prayer  and  by  being  fit 
to  pray  than  in  any  other  way. 

V.  TO  DO  WHAT  WE  CAN  TO  FIT  OUR 
EELLOW-COUNTRYMEN  EOR  WAR 
OR  PEACE. 

The  fifth  thing  that  pure  patriotism  demands  of 
us  is  that  we  do  all  that  lies  in  our  power  to  fit  our 
fellow-countrymen  for  war  or  peace.     We  are  suf- 

10 


fering  today  from  a  lack  of  preparedness.  We  must 
do  what  we  can  to  see  that  our  country  is  not  again 
caught  unprepared.  But  where  we  are  most  fatally 
unprepared  is  not  in  the  physical  unfitness  of  so 
many  of  our  young  men,  nor  in  the  lack  of  guns 
and  other  equipment,  but  in  our  moral  unfitness. 
Nothing  so  fits  a  man  for  righteous  war  as  a  true 
Christian  experience.  An  intelligent  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ  makes  a  soldier  brave;  it  fits  him  to  face  the 
danger  of  death  without  the  slightest  fear,  for  he 
knows  that  there  is  nothing  in  death  for  him  to  fear, 
for  to  die  means  "to  depart,  and  to  be  with  Christ," 
"which  is  very  far  better."  It  is  then  a  solemn  duty 
that  we  owe  to  our  country  to  do  everything  we  can 
in  our  power  to  bring  our  young  men  to  Christ,  not 
only  those  who  are  going  to  war,  but  those  who  re- 
main at  home,  that  they  may  be  fitted  to  do  their 
duty  to  their  country  in  this  hour  of  crisis.  There 
has  never  been  a  time  in  the  whole  history  of  our 
land  when  real  Christian  men  and  women  were  so 
much  needed  as  they  are  today.  We  owe  it  to  our 
God  and  to  our  country  at  all  times  to  do  everything 
that  lies  in  our  power  to  bring  others  to  an  intelli- 
gent acceptance  of  Christ,  but  an  unusually  solemn 
responsibility  rests  upon  us  at  this  present  time  to 
do  it.  There  is  but  one  thing  in  all  this  world  that 
produces  true  manhood  and  true  womanhood,  and 
that  is  an  intelligent  and  whole-hearted  acceptance 
of  Jesus  Christ.  True  manhood  and  true  woman- 
hood are  the  great,  crying  need  of  the  hour.  True 
Christian  men  and  true  Christian  women  are  more 
needed  than  great  statesmen  are  needed,  more 
needed  than  great  generals  are  needed,  more  needed 
than  large  armies  are  needed,  and  it  lies  within  the 
power  of  each  one  of  us  to  do  something,  yes,  to 
do  much  to  foster  true  manhood  and  true  woman- 
hood among  the  people  of  our  land.  There  is  an 
imperative  cry  that  many  of  our  young  men  go  to 
the  front.  There  is  an  imperative  cry  that  we  do 
what  lies  in  our  power  to  contribute  to  the  thorough 
and  effective  prosecution  of  the  war.  There  is  an 
imperative  cry  that  we  do  what  we  can  by  self- 
sacrifice  to  conserve  the  food  supplies  of  the  coun- 
try. There  is  a  more  imperative'  cry  that  we  pray 
11 


and  that  we  be  in  such  relations  to  God  that  we  can 
pray  with  power,  and  there  is  an  equally  imperative 
cry  that  in  every  way  in  our  power  we  do  what  we 
can  to  lead  as  many  of  our  young  people  as  we  can 
to  an  intelligent  acceptance  of  Jesus  Christ  as  their 
Saviour,  and  a  whole-hearted  surrender  to  Him  as 
their  Lord  and  King. 

CONCLUSION.  True  patriotism  is  an  essential 
part  of  true  Christianity.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
loved  all  mankind,  but  He  loved  His  own  country 
in  a  peculiar  way.  Who  was  it  wept  over  the  capitol 
city  of  His  land,  "O  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  thou  that 
killest  the  prophets  and  stonest  them  that  are  sent 
unto  thee,  how  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy 
children  together,  even  as  a  hen  gathereth  her 
chickens  under  her  wings,  but  ye  would  not?"  It 
was  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  Apostle  Paul  also  was  a 
patriot,  one  of  the  noblest  patriots  the  world  ever 
saw.  He  longed  to  work  for  his  people,  but  God 
sent  him  to  the  Gentile  nations.  But  even  still  he 
said,  "I  say  the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not,  my  con- 
science bearing  witness  with  me  in  the  Holy  Ghost, 
that  I  have  great  heaviness  and  continual  sorrow  in 
my  heart.  For  I  could  wish  that  I  myself  were 
anathema  from  Christ  for  my  brethren's  sake,  my 
kinsman  according  to  the  flesh"  (Rom.  9:1-3).  We 
need  today  a  patriotism  like  that  of  the  Apostle 
Paul.  We  need  today  a  patriotism  like  that  of  our 
Lord  Jesus,  a  real  patriotism,  not  a  patriotism  that 
parades  itself,  that  seeks  applause  for  itself,  that 
plays  to  the  galleries,  but  a  patriotism  that  puts  all 
that  a  man  is  and  has  at  the  disposal  of  his  God  and 
his  country. 

Price   5c   each ;   50c   a   dozen. 
Special  prices  in  quantities. 

THE  BIOLA  BOOK  ROOM 

Bible  Institute  of  Los  Angeles 

536-558  South  Hope  Street 

Lps;  Angeles,  California 

.  ;  *         12 


DR.  TORREY'S  WORKS 


STUDIES  IN  THE  LIFE  AND 
TEACHINGS  OF  OUR  LORD 

A  consecutive,  systematic  course  of  studies  in 
our  Lord's  life  and  teachings,  divided  into  140  les- 
sons, each  complete  in  itself,  and  adapted  either 
to  individual  or  class  use.  The  method  of  the  book 
is  that  of  modern  science;  first  a  discovery  of  the 
facts,  and  then  a  classification  of  the  teachings. 
Clc^h   $1.50 


HOW  TO  WORK  FOR  CHRIST 

An  encyclopedia  of  all  the  approved  methods  of 
personal,  pastoral  and  evangelistic  work.  The  re- 
sult of  the  experience  of  years  in  pastoral,  evan- 
gelistic, missionary  and  open  air  work.  518  pages. 
Cloth    $2.50 


THE  BIBLE  AND  ITS  CHRIST 

A  book  for  today.  Dr.  Torrey's  addresses  to 
business,  professional  and  university  men.  They 
state  in  a  scholarly  but  popular  way  the  proof  that 
the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God,  and  that  Jesus 
Christ  arose  frorr.  the  dead,  and  show  the  causes, 
consequences  and  cure  of  infidelity. 
Paper,    25c;    cloth,   75c 


THE  PERSON  AND  WORK  OF 
THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

A  thorough  study  of  all  that  the  Bible  has  to 
teach  about  the  Person  and  Work  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
as  tested  by  personal  experience.  It  discusses  fully 
and  frankly  all  the  modern  theories  and  vagaries  on 
this  important  subject,  and  subjects  them  to  the 
test   of   Scripture Cloth  $1.00 


BIOLA  BOOK  ROOM 
536-558    South    Hope  St.,    Los   Angeles,    Cal. 


DR.  TORRE Y'S  WORKS 

(Continued) 


WHAT  THE  BIBLE  TEACHES 


The  only  book  of  its  kind.  All  that  the  Bible 
gives  on  each  of  the  great  doctrines  is  brought 
together  and  the  teaching  summarized.  Everything 
built  upon  a  thorough  study  of  each  passage  in  its 
context.  A  comprehensive  and  thorough  compen- 
dium of  the  teachings  of  the  Bible.  535  pages, 
large    8    vo Cloth    $2.50 


THE  RETURN  OF  THE  LORD  JESUS 


A  sane,  systematic  and  thorough  presentation 
of  the  teaching  of  the  Bible  regarding  the  Second 
Coming  of  Christ.  One  of  the  best  books  to  put  in 
the  hands  of  any  one  beginning  the  study  of  this 
subject   Paper,  30c;  cloth,  60c 


HOW  TO  BRING  MEN  TO  CHRIST 


A  plain,  simple,  forceful  treatise  on  the  subject 
of  personal  work.  It  was  Dr.  Torrey's  first  book 
and  has  had  a  very  large  sale.  Not  so  compre- 
hensive as  Personal  Work Paper,  ISc;  cloth,  7^^ 


THE  SHEPHERD  PSALM 

By  Dr.  R.  A.  Torrey 

A   wonderful    exposition   of   this   famous   Psalm   in 
Dr.     Torrey's     masterly     style Paper    bound    25c 


BIOLA  BOOK  ROOM 
536-558   South   Hope  St.,   Los  Angeles,   Cal. 


BOOKS   ON   THE   SIGNS   OF   THE 
TIMES 

THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

By  Dr.  R.  A.  Torrey 

A  collection  of  Dr.  Torrey's  sermons  on  present 
day   subjects.     His  latest  work.    Bound  in  Cloth  $1.25 

OMINOUS  DAYS!  OR,  THE 
SIGNS  OF  THE  TIMES 

By  E.  L.  Langston.  Treats  of  Israel  and  tin- 
dispensations    Cloth    4Cc 

AT  HAND:    THINGS  WHICH  MUST 
SHORTLY  COME  TO  PASS 

An  outline  of  prophetic  future,  so  interesting 
that  once  begun  must  almost  be  finished  at  a  sit- 
ting.    A   masterly    exposition Cloth    85c 

GOD'S  OATH 

By  Ford  C.  Ottman.  A  practical  interpretation 
of  the  prophets  and  a  studv  of  the  spiritual  life  ot 
the   Old  and   New   Testaments Cloth  $1.25 

THE  EVOLUTION  OF  THE  KINGDOM 

By  William  B.  Riley.  Dr.  Riley  first  defines  the 
kingdom  of  God  and  then  gives  a  Scriptural  descrip- 
tion of  it.  Then  follow  chapters  on  the  tribulations 
and  the  translation,  the  kingdom  and  the  resurrec- 
tion body,  the  great  usurper's  short  reign,  the  Bib- 
lical order  of  millenial  events,  the  kingdom  of  God 
complete  "in  heaven,"  the  historical  ministry  of 
pre-millennialism,  and  the  significant  signs  of  the 
times    Cloth    75c 

FUTURE  EVENTS,  WITH  NUMEROUS 
PROPHETIC  DETAILS 

By  Walter  Scott.  Very  satisfactory  answers  to 
one  hundred  forty  questions  asked  by  eager  in- 
quirers, including:  "Will  the  Lord  come  personally 
or  by  the  spirit?"  "Will  the  Lord's  coming  be 
pre-millennial  or  post-millennial?"  "Will  evil  in- 
crease or  decrease  before  the  Lord  comes?"  and 
many  others  of  equal  interest Cloth  35c 

AFTER  CIVILIZATION— WHAT? 

By  Edward  G.  Rowland.  Bears  a  message  of 
the  weightiest  character,  one  which  is  of  the 
highest  importance  to  everyone  now  on  earth. 
Paper    15c 

THE  GREAT  APOSTACY  SET  IN 

By  A.  Sims.  Showing  the  falling  away  from 
sound  doctrine  among  the  professed  followers  of 
Christ    Paper   ISc 

BIOLA  BOOK  ROOM 
536-558   South   Hope  St.,   Los  Angeles,   Cal. 


LIBRPRY  OF  CONGRESS 

,..„, , Ill 

BOOKS  AND  P. 

"ISMS" 

WHY  I  AM  NOT  .     »  018  465  856 
SCIENTIST 

By  Wm.  Evans.  Dr.  Evan's  lecture  presents 
some  of  the  most  potent  arguments  against  this 
false  doctrine  ever  penned.     Price. ...Paper  Bound  15c 

CHRISTIAN  SCIENCE  AND  DIVINE 
HEALING 

By  William  B.  Riley.  Shows  the  fallacy  of 
Christian  Science  and  true  teaching  of  James  5:14, 
15,   16  Paper   10c 

MILLENNIAL  DAWNISM 

By  J.  M.  Haldeman.  The  blasphemous  religion 
which  teathes  the  annihilation  of  Jesus  Christ  is 
here   exposed   in  a   most   trenchant   way Paper   10c 

WHERE  ARE  THE  DEAD? 

By  F.  E.  Marsh.  Answer  to  Russelites  and 
others   who  believe  in   soul    sleeping _ Paper  6c 

THE  MORMONS  AND  THEIR  BIBLE 

By  M.  T.  Lamb.  The  object  of  this  book  is  to 
give  the  general  public  a  clearer  insight  into  the 
puzzling  problem  of   Mormonism Paper  25c 

IS  PRESENT  TONGUES  MOVEMENT 
OF  GOD? 

By  R.  A.  Torrey.  A  warning  word  from 
Dr.  Torrey  regarding  the  satanic  nature  of  this 
movement.      Price    ...^ 3c 

SEVENTH-DAY  ADVENTISM  RENOUNCED 

By  D.  M.  Canright.  The  author  of  this  expose 
was  for  twenty-eight  years  a  prominent  minister 
and  writer  of  that  faith Cloth  $1.00;   paper  60c 

SPIRITUALISM  EXPOSED 

By  A.  Sims.  Scriptural  evidence  and  facts  of 
experience  showing  the  evil  nature  and  awful  ten- 
dencies  of    spiritism Paper    15c 

CONCERNING  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS— 
ESPECIALLY  TONGUES 

By  Philip  Mauro.  The  author  shows  the  im- 
portance of  commending  to  those  who  are  inter- 
ested in  the  Tongues  Movement  a  more  excellent 
way    Paper    10c 

THE  SIGNS  OF  THE  TIMES 

By  I.  M.  Haldeman.  Vivid  and  startling  por- 
trayals  of   present-day    conditions Cloth   75c 

BIOLA  BOOK  ROOM 
536-558  South  Hope  St.,   Los  Angeles,   Cal. 


