001 of Theology at C1 are 


‘ll MA il 





all! 


1 ON ON Ge 





Theology Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 








Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2021 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/personalworkOOOOtorr 


Vi NGe: 2 ETS 


PERSONAL. 


BEING PART I OF 


How to Work for Christ 


A COMPENDIUM OF EFFECTIVE METHODS 





-_ 


B\ 
3790 
T63 


“Go work to-day in my vineyard.”’—Matt. 21: 28. 


bY wa yf 
y fer 


RA TORREY 456 - 192 


AUTHOR OF “‘WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES,” ‘“‘HOW TO BRING MEN TO CHRIST,” ETC. 


CHICAGO 
THE BIBLE INSTITUTE COLPORTAGE ASSOCIATION 
250 LA SALLE AVENUE 








TOPYRIGHT, IgOL 
BY Re Ae OR REY 





4 Evan gel): “o ‘Tic Widr fe 


wT. lt if ¢ 
TABLE OF OR ae 
Lik 
PERSONAL WORK 
CHAPTER 

I. THE IMpoRTANCE AND ADVANTAGES OF PERSONAL 

WorK ; : : ; : ‘ : 
‘II. THe ConpiTions oF SuccEss ; . ; : 
III. WuHereE To Do PERSONAL Work . ; ; : 
IV. How To BEGIN , 3 4 ; ; , ; 
V. How to DEAL WITH THOSE WHO REALIZE THEIR 
NEED OF A SAVIOUR AND REALLY DESIRE TO 
BE SAVED . : ; : J : : 
VI. How To DEAL WITH THOSE WHO HAVE LITTLE OR 
; NO CONCERN ABOUT THEIR SOULS . : : 
VII. How To DEAL WITH THOSE WHO HAVE DIFFICULTIES 
VIII. How to DEAL WITH THOSE WHO ENTERTAIN 
FatseE Hopes . : : : : : 
IX. How To DEAL WITH THOSE WHO LACK ES 
X. How to DEAL WITH BACKSLIDERS : ; A 
XI. How to DEAL wiTH PROFESSED SKEPTICS AND 
INFIDELS . 2 : - : ; : 
XII. How to DEAL WITH THOSE WHO Wied TO) PUT 
OFF A DECISION UNTIL SOME OTHER TIME . 
XIII. How tro DEAL WITH THE DELUDED . f ; 
XIV. How To DEAL WITH CHRISTIANS WHO NEED Coun- 
SEL, REBUKE, ENCOURAGEMENT OR COMFORT . 
XV. Some Hunts AND SUGGESTIONS FOR PERSONAL 


Work. é 3 , F A A : 


(aDXS 


PAGE 


15 
20 
28 


34 


39 


50 
61 


96 
109 


irs 


120 


139 
144 


156 


178 


NOTE 


This volume on PersonaL Work zs Part J of the 
author's more comprehensive book, entitled How To Work 
ror Curist. Jt zs presented in this form through the 


special permission of the publishers, Fleming [1. Revell 


Company, for special use as a text-book in the Moody 
Bible (ustetute of Chicago. 


CHAPTER I 


THE IMPORTANCE AND ADVANTAGES OF 
PERSONAL WORK 


In our study of the various forms of Christian activity, we 
begin with ‘‘Personal Work’; that is hand-to-hand dealing 
with men, women and children. We begin with it because it 
is the simplest form of Christian work, and one that every one 
can do. It is also the most effective method of winning lost 
souls. The Apostle Peter was brought to Jesus by the hand- 
to-hand work of his brother Andrew. Andrew first found 
Christ himself, then he went to Peter quietly and told him of 
his great find, and thus he led Peter to the Saviour he himself 
had found. I do not know that Andrew ever preached a ser- 
mon; if he did it is not recorded; but he did a great day’s 
work when he led his brother Peter to Jesus. Peter preached 
a sermon that led to the conversion of 3,000 people, but where 
would Peter’s great sermon have been if Andrew had not first 
led him to Christ by quiet personal work? Mr. Edward Kimball, 
a Boston business man, led D. L. Moody, the young Boston shoe 
clerk, to the Saviour. Where would all Mr. Moody’s wonder- 
ful work for Christ have been if he himself had not been led 
to the Saviour by the faithful personal work of his Sunday 
school teacher? I believein preaching. Itis a great privilege 
to preach the Gospel, but this world can be reached and evan- 
gelized far more quickly and thoroughly by personal work 
than by public preaching. Indeed, it can only be reached 
and evangelized by personal work. When the whole church 
of Jesus Christ shall rouse to its responsibility and priv- 
ilege in this matter, and every individual Christian become 
a personal worker, the evangelization of the world will be 
close at hand. When the membership of any local church 
shall rouse to its responsibility and privilege in this matter, 

15 


16 HOW TO WORK 


and each member become a personal worker in the power of 
the Holy Spirit, a great revival will be close at hand for the 
community in which that church is located. Personal work is 
a work that wins but little applause from men, but it accom- 
plishes great things for God. 

There are many who think personal work beneath their 
dignity and their gifts. A blind woman once came to me and 
said, ‘‘Do you think that my blindness will hinder me from 
working for the Master?’’ ‘‘Not at all; it may be a great help 
to you, for others seeing your blindness will come and speak 
to you, and then you will have an opportunity of giving your 
testimony for Christ, and of leading them to the Saviour.’’ 
‘Oh, that is not what I want,” she replied. ‘‘It seems to me 
a waste of time when one might be speaking to five or six hun- 
dred at once, just to be speaking to an individual.’’ I 
answered that our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ was able to 
speak to more than five thousand at once, and yet He never 
thought personal work beneath His dignity or His gifts. 
Indeed, it was the work the Saviour loved to do. We have 
more instances of our Saviour’s personal work recorded in the 
Gospels than of His preaching. The one who is above per- 
sonal work is above his Master. 


I. Its Advantages. 


Let us look at the advantages of personal work. 

1. Allcan dott. Inanaverage congregation there are not 
more than four or five who can preach to edification. It 
would be a great pity, too, should all attempt to become 
preachers; it would be a great blessing if all would become 
personal workers. Any child of God can do personal work, 
and all can learn to do effective personal work. The mother 
who is confined at home by multiplicity of home duties can 
still do personal work, first of all with her own children, and 
then with the servants in the home, with the butcher, the 
grocer, the tramp who calls at the door, in fact, with every- 
body who comes within reach. I once knew a mother very 
gifted in the matter of bringing her own children up in the 
nurture and admonition of the Lord, who lamented that she 
could not do some work for Christ. I watched this woman 


THE IMPORTANCE OF PERSONAL WORK 17 


carefully, and found that almost every one who came to the 
house in any capacity was spoken to about the Saviour, and she 
was, in point of fact, doing more for Christ in the way of 
direct evangelistic work than most pastors. 

Even the one shut up at home by sickness can do per- 
sonal work. As friends come to the sick bed, a word of testi- 
mony can be given for Christ, or even an extended conversation 
can be held. A little girl of twelve, the child of very poor par- 
ents, lay dying in the city of Minneapolis. She let her light 
shine for the Master, and spoke among others to a godless 
physician, to whom, perhaps, no one else had ever spoken 
about Christ. A poor girlin New York City, who was rescued 
from the slums and died a year or two afterwards, was used 
of God to lead about one hundred men and women to Christ, 
while lying upon her dying bed. 

Even the servant girl can do effective personal work. 
Lord Shaftsbury, the great English philanthropist, was won to 
Christ in a godless home by the effective work of a nurse 
girl. 

Traveling men have unusually good opportunities for 
doing personal work, as they travel on the trains from town to 
tawn, as they stop in one hotel after another and go from store 
to store. A professional nurse once came into my Bible class 
in Chicago, and at the close of the meeting approached me and 
said: ‘‘I was led to Christ by Mr. [a traveling man 
connected with a large wholesale house]. I was ina hotel 
parlor, and this gentleman saw me and walked across the par- 
lor and asked me if I was a Christian, and when I told him I 
was not, he proceeded at once to show me the way of life. I 
was so startled and impressed to find a traveling man leading 
others to Christ that I accepted Him as my Saviour then and 
there. He told me if I ever came to Chicago to come to your 





Bible class.’ I have watched this woman for years since, 
and she herself is a most devoted Christian and effective 
worker. 


How enormous and wonderful and glorious would be the 
results if all Christians should begin to be active personal 
workers to the extent of their ability! Nothing else would 
do so much to promote a revival in any community, and in 


18 HOW TO WOnk 


the land at large. Every pastor should urge this duty upon 
his people, train them for it, and see that they do it. 

2. It can be done anywhere. There are but few places 
where one can preach. There is no place where one cannot 
do personal work. How often, as we pass factories, engine 
houses, lodging houses and other places where crowds are 
cathered, do we wish that we might get into them and preach 
the Gospel, but generally this is impossible, but it is altogether 
possible to go in and do personal work. Furthermore, we can 
do personal work on the street, whether street meetings are 
allowed or not. We can do personal work in the homes of the 
poor and in the homes of the rich, in hospitals, workhouses, 
jails, station houses, and all sorts of institutions—in a word, 
everywhere. 

3. It can be done at any time. The times when we can 
have preaching services and Sunday schools are quite limited. 
As a rule, in most communities, we cannot have services more 
than two or three days in the week, and only three or four 
hours in the day, but personal work can be done seven days in 
the week, and any time of day or night. Some of the best 
personal work done in this country in the last twenty years 
has been done on the streets at midnight and after midnight. 
Those who love souls have walked the streets looking for 
wanderers, and have gone into dens of vice seeking the lost 
sheep, and hundreds upon hundreds of them have thus been 
found. 

4. Lt reaches allclasses. There are large classes of men that 
no other method will reach. There are the shut-ins who can- 
not get out to church, the street-car men, the policemen, rail- 
road conductors, sleeping-car men, firemen, the very poor and 
the very rich. Some cannot and others will not attend 
church or cottage meeting or mission meeting, but personal 
work can reach them all. 

5. lt hits the mark. Preaching is necessarily general; 
personal work is direct and personal. There is no mistaking 
who is meant, there is no dodging the arrow, there is no pos- 
sibility of giving what is said away to some one else. Many 
whom even so expert a Gospel preacher as Mr. Moody has 
missed have been afterwards reached by personal work. 


THE IMPORTANCE OF PERSONAL WORK 19 


6. lt meets the definite need, and every need of the person 
dealt with. Even when men are aroused and convicted, and 
perhaps converted, by a sermon, personal work is ncessary to 
bring out into clear light and into a satisfactory experience 
one whom the sermon has thus aroused, convicted and con- 
verted. 

7. Lt avails where other methods fail. One of my best 
workers told me a few weeks ago that she had attended 
church for years, and had wanted to become a Christian. She 
had listened to some of the best-known preachers, and still was 
unsaved, but the very first inquiry meeting she went into she 
was saved because some one came and dealt with her per- 
sonally. 

8. lt produces very large results. There is no comparison 
whatever between what will be effected by good preaching and 
what will be effected by constant personal work. Take a 
church of one hundred members; such a church under an 
excellent pastor would be considered as doing an exception- 
ally good work if on an average fifty were added annually to 
this membership. But suppose that that church was trained 
to do personal work, and that fifty of the one hundred mem- 
bers actually went atit. Certainly one a month won to Christ 
by each one would not be a large average. That would be six 
hundred a year instead of the fifty mentioned above. A 
church of many members, with the most powerful preaching 
possible, that depends upon the minister alone to win men to 
Christ by his preaching, would not accomplish anything like 
what would be accomplished by a church with a comparatively 
poor preacher, where the membership generally were per- 
sonal workers. 


) 


CHAPTER II 
THE CONDITIONS OF SUCCESS 


I. The first condition of success in personal work, and in 
all soul-saving work, is a personal experimental knowledge of 
Jesus Christ as a Saviour. It was because the Apostle Paul 
could say: 

‘This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ 
Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom Tam chief.”” 1 
Timers U5 

that he had power in bringing other men to that Saviour. It is 
the man who knows Jesus as his own Saviour, who will have a 
longing to bring others to this wonderful Saviour whom he has 
himself found; and it is the man who knows Jesus as his Sav- 
iour who will understand how to bring others to the Saviour 
whom he has found. There are many to-day who are trying 
to save others, who are not saved themselves. There are 
others, who, while they are probably saved men, have such a 
vague knowledge of Christ as their own Saviour, that they can- 
not hope to make the way of salvation clear to others. 

A personal, experimental knowledge of Jesus Christ asa 
Saviour includes three things: 

1. A knowledge that our own sins have been forgiven 
because Jesus bore them in His own body on the Cross; 

2, A knowledge that the risen Christ is delivering us. 
daily from the power of sin; 

3. An absolute surrender of our wills to Jesus Christ as 
our Lord and Master. 


II. The second condition of success in personal work is 
really involved in the first, and is a life clean within and 
without. 

In 2 Tim. 2; 21 we read, 


THE CONDITIONS OF SUCCESS 21 


“Ifa man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel 
unto honour, sanctified, and meet for the master’s use, and prepared 
unto every good work.”’ 

If a man is to be used of God, his life must be clean—not only 
his outward life as the world sees it, but his inward secret life 
as it is known only to God and to himself. One who holds on 
to any sin of act or thought or affection cannot expect to have 
power with a holy God, and consequently cannot expect to 
have power for God. Many a man and woman of great nat- 
ural gifts, and unusual knowledge of the Bible, are trying to 
do work for God and meet with little or no success. People 
wonder why it is that their work is so devoid of results, but if 
we knew their secret life as God knows it, we would under- 
stand their failure; there is sin before God. It has been 
often said, and well said, that ‘‘God does not demand a beav- 
tiful vessel for His work, but He does demand a clean one.”’ 
Many are working on in disappointment and failure, working 
hard but accomplishing nothing, because God sees sin in their 
inner life which they will not give up. 


III, The third condition of success in personal work is 
a@ surrendered life, a life wholly given up to God. Paul was 
mighty as a worker for Christ because he could say, 

“For to me to live is Christ.”’ 
The miracle of the five loaves and two fishes, (Matt. 14: 17-20) 
is deeply significant. The disciples said unto Jesus, ‘*We have 
here but five loaves, and two fishes.’’ ‘‘He said, Bring them 
hither to me.’’ We are told with a good deal of emphasis 


upon the definite article, He ‘‘took ¢he five loaves and the two 


-fishes,’’ that is, He took all that they had. It was not much, 
but they brought it all. Then He blessed it and broke it and 
there was an abundance for all. But if one of these insignifi- 
cant barley loaves had been kept back, or one of these little 
fishes, there would not have been enough to go around. We 
too, may not have much, it may be only five barley crackers 
and two little fishes, but if we will bring them all, absolutely 
all to Christ, He will take them, bless them and multiply 
them; but if we hold back one cracker or one fish, He will not 
bless and multiply. Here lies the secret of failure in many a 


22 HOW TO WORK 


one who would work for Christ; there is one cracker kept 
back, or one little fish. We talk very lightly of absolute sur- ~ 
render to God, but it means more than most people who 
profess it seem to realize. I would ask each reader of these 
pages, have you brought all to Christ—absolutely all—abso- 
lutely ALL? 


IV. The one who would have success in personal work 
must have a deep realization that men out of Christ are lost. 
Jesus had this. He said, 

‘“‘For the Son of man is come toseek and to save that which was Lost.”’ 

Luke 1g: 10. 

When He looked upon men living in sin, He knew and realized 
the utter ruin of their condition. The same thing was true of 
Paul. We readin Acts 20:31 that he ‘“‘ceased not to warn 
every one night and day wzth tears.’’ He knew that if one 
had not a saving knowledge of Jesus Christ he was eternally 
lost. This overwhelming conviction that men and women out 
of Christ are eternally lost, seems to be very rare in our day, 
and this is one great reason why so few have real power in 
soul-winning. How can we get this realization? 

1. First of all, by studying what the Bible has to say 
about the present standing and condition and future destiny 
of those who are out of Christ. 

2. By believing what the Bible says upon these points 
without trying to tone it down, and make it fit in with the 
popular notions of the day. 

3. By dwelling upon these truths about the lost condition 
of men out of Christ until they take hold upon our hearts and 
we realize their meaning. These things are not pleasant to 
think about, but they are true, and we ought to think about 
them until our souls are on fire to save men from the awful 
condition of utter ruin in which they now are, and from the 


destiny of eternal shame and despair to which they are hurry- 
ing. 


V. The fifth condition of success in personal work is love. 
Nothing wins like love. In the first place it leads to untiring 
effort for the salvation of others. If I really love men, I can- 
not bear the thought that they should be lost forever, and I 


THE CONDITIONS OF SUCCESS 28 


will be willing to work day and night to save them from such 
an awful destiny. In the second place, love attracts others to 
us. There is nothing soirresistible as love. It is Jesus Christ 
lifted up on the Cross, a revelation of God’s love and of His 
own love to man, that draws all men unto Him. (Jno. 12: 32.) 
Men will not put you off if they really believe that you love 
them, but they will never believe that you love them unless 
you really do. We need not only love to men, but love to 
Christ. It was the love of Christ that constrained Paul to his 
untiring efforts to bring men to a knowledge of Christ. The 
great men and women of Christian history have been the men 
and women who have hada great love to Christ, men and 
women whose hearts were all aglow with love to the glorious 
Son of God. 
But how can we get love? First of all, by dwelling upon 
Christ’s love to us. 

‘‘We love Him, because He first loved us.”” 1 Jno. 4: 19. 

We shall never appreciate Christ’s love to us until we see it 
against the black background of our own sin. It is the one who 
is forgiven much who loves much. (Luke 7: 47.) The one who 
has never been brought to a deep realization of his own sinful- 
ness before God, will have no warmth of love to that Saviour 
who, by His own atoning death on the Cross, redeemed him 
from the awful depth to which he had sunken. The Apostle 
Paul realized that he was the chief of sinners, and that Jesus 
loved him and gave Himself for him, so he was full of love to 
Jesus Christ. 

‘This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ 
Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief.”’ 1 
Tim. 1:15. 

“I am crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ 
liveth in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith 
of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.” Gal. 2: 20. 

If we are to have love to Christ and love to men, the Holy 

Ghost must impart it. The first fruit of the Spirit is love: 

‘But the fruit of the Spirit is Jove, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentle- 
ness, goodness, faith.’’ Gal. 5: 22. 

If we will look to the Holy Spirit to do His whole work 

in our hearts, He will soon fill them with love to Christ and 


love to our fellow-men. 


24 HOW TO WORK 


VI. The sixth condition of success in personal work is 
perseverance. No work requires so much patience and perse- 
verance as soul-winning. Men are not usually won to Christ 
ina day. You must hold on to men day after day, week after 
week, month after month, and if need be, year after year. 
You must not give them up even though you seem to make 
absolutely no headway at first, andeven though you seem to do 
more harm than good. When you start out to lead a man to 
Christ, keep after that man until he is saved, no matter how long 
ittakes. Study howtoget at men who areunreachable. Men 
who cannot be reached in one way can in another. There are 
very few men in the world to whose hearts there is not an open 
door somewhere, if we will only search diligently until we find 
it. If we cannot get in at the door, perhaps we can break up 
the roof and get in that way. Any one who wishes to win 
souls at the rate of one every fifteen minutes better go into 
some other business. Take time; never give up; and do 
thorough work. I waited and watched fifteen long years to 
get my chance with one man. Never a day passed for all those 
fifteen years that I did not speak to God about that man. At 
last my chance came, and it was my privilege to lead him to 
Christ. He afterwards became a preacher of the Gospel, and 
is now inheaven. I was with him the day before he died, and 
shall never forget that day as long as I live. When you 
undertake to bring a man to Christ, never give up. 


VII. The seventh condition of success in personal work is a 

practical knowledge of the Bible. 

“Every Scripture inspired of God is also profitable for teaching, for 
reproof, for correction, for instruction which is in righteousness: that 
the man of God may be complete, furnished completely unto every good 
DUMB CABIN, BIW Fy} ey WE, 

In the Bible is all the truth we need in dealing with men. 
The Word of God is the only instrument that God has 
appointed for the salvation of men, and the only instrument 
He honors is the Word. It is the Word that produces convic- 
tion of sin. It is the Word that regenerates. It is the Word 
that produces faith: 


‘‘Now when they heard this, they were Jriched in their heart, and 


THE CONDITIONS OF SUCCESS 25 


said unto Peter and to the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren, what 
shall we do?”’ Acts 2: 37. 
“Being Jorn again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by 
the Word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever.”” 1 Pet. 1: 23. 
“So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God.” 
Rom. 10:17. 
If then we are to be used in soul-winning, we must know the 
Bible. There are five texts that ought to sink deep into the 
heart of every personal worker. They are: 
1. ‘So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the Word of 
God.’ Rom. to: 17. 
2. ‘‘The seed is the Word of God."" Luke 8:11, last clause. 
3. *“‘Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, 
by the Word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever.’’ 1 Pet. 1: 23. 
4. ‘“‘And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, 
which ¢s the Word of God.’” Eph. 6:17. 
5. “Is not my Word like as a fire? saith the Lord; and lke a ham- 
mer that breaketh the rock in pieces?’ Jer. 23: 29. 
The personal worker who depends upon any other instrument 
than the Word of God is doomed to failure. But we must 
have a practical knowledge of the Bible, that is we must know 
how to use it for definite results. A great many men have a 
large theoretical knowledge of the Bible, but no practical 
knowledge. They do not know how to use the Bible so as to 
accomplish anything definite by its use. In an inquiry meet- 
ing one evening, I asked one of the best Bible scholars in 
America to speak to an inquirer and show her the way of life, 
and he whispered in my ear, ‘‘I don’t know how to do that.’’ 
A small practical knowledge of the Bible is better in personal 
work than a large theoretical knowledge. A practical knowl- 
edge of the Bible involves four things: 
1. A knowledge how to so use the Bible as to show men, 
and make men realize, their need of a Saviour. 
2, A knowledge of how to use the Bible so as to show men 
Jesus as just the Saviour who meets their need. 
3. A knowledge of how to use the Bible so as to show 
men how to make Jesus their own Saviour. 
4. A knowledge of how to use the Bible so as to meet the 
difficulties that stand in the way of their accepting Christ. 
A large part of the following pages will be devoted to 
imparting this particular kind of Bible knowledge. 


26 HOW TO WORK 


VIII. The eighth condition of success in personal work is 
prayer. God honors prayer. In nothing does He honor it 
more than in the matter of soul-winning. The one who is to 
be much used of God in soul-winning, must spend much time 
in prayer. There are four things for which we must especially 
pray: 

1. We must ask God to bring to us, or us to, the right 
persons. We cannot speak with every one. If we attempt it, 
we will spend much time in speaking where we can do no 
good, that we might have used in speaking where we could 
have accomplished something for Christ. God alone knows 
the one to whom He intends us to speak, and we must ask 
Him to point him out to us, and expect Him to do it. 

“Then the Spirit said unto Philip, Go near, and join thyself to zhzs 

chariot.’’ Acts 8: 29. 

2. We should ask God to give us the right message in each 
case where we do speak with any one. We can learn much by 
studying what is the right message for any given class of men, 
but after all our study, we must look directly to God for the 
right message in each individual case. Many cases will baffie 
us, but no case will baffle God. We need and must have the 
direct guidance of the Holy Spirit in each individual case. 
Every experienced worker could testify to many instances in 
which God has led him to use some text of Scripture that he 
would not otherwise have used, but which proved to be just 
the one needed. 

3. We must pray God to give power to that which He has 
given us to say. We need not only a message from God, but 
power from God to send the message home. Most workers 
have to learn this lesson by humiliating experiences. They 
sit down beside an unsaved person and reason, and plead, and 
bring forth texts from the Word of God, but the man does not 
accept Christ. At last it dawns upon them that they are try- 
ing to convert the man in their own strength, and they lift a 
short but humble prayer to God for His strength, and in a 
very little while this ‘‘very difficult case’ has settled the matter 
and is rejoicing in Christ. 

4. We must pray to God to carry on the work after we 
have done everything in our power, and our work has come to 


THE CONDITIONS OF SUCCESS 27 


an end. After having done that which seems to have been 
our whole duty in any given instance, whatever may have 
been the apparent result of our work, whether successful or 
unsuccessful, we should definitely commit the case to God in 
prayer. If there is anything the average worker in this 
hurrying age needs to have impressed upon him, it is the 
necessity of much prayer. By praying more, we will not work 
any less, and we will accomplish vastly more. 


IX. The ninth condition of success in personal work is the 

baptism with the Holy Ghost. In Acts 1:8 we read, 
“But ye shall rececve power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon 

you.”’ 

The supreme condition of power in the apostolic church was 
the definite baptism with the Holy Ghost. The supreme con- 
dition of success in soul-winning is the same to-day. Many in 
these days are trying to prove that there is no such thing as a 
special baptism with the Holy Spirit, but a candid and careful 
. study of the Acts of the Apostles will show that there is. 
Very many in our day also know by blessed experience that 
the baptism with the Holy Spirit is a present day reality. 
One ounce of believing experience along this line is worth 
whole tons of unbelieving exegesis, no matter how subtle and 
learned it may be. There are thousands of men and women 
in this and other lands who have been brought out of a place 
of powerlessness into a place of power in the Lord’s service, 
through meeting the conditions plainly laid down in the Bible 
for receiving the Holy Ghost. This baptism with the Holy 
Spirit.is for every child of God, and the one who would be 
largely used of God in personal work, must get it at any cost. 


CHAPTER III 
WHERE TO DO PERSONAL WORK 


I. Perhaps the easiest and most natural place to do per- 
sonal work is after a Gospel meeting. Whenever you attend a 
meeting, watch for some one to deal with after the meeting is 
over. Do not trust to chance in the matter, but as the minis- 
ter preaches the sermon keep your eyes on the audience and 
watch who it is that is hit and what hits them, then you can 
follow up the work that the minister has already done by his 
sermon. You will soon acquire good judgment in deciding 
with whom it is wisest to speak. Of course one must be on 
his guard against being obtrusive in watching others. Before 
you go to the meeting pray definitely to God to give you some 
one at the meeting, and then watch for an answer to your 
prayer. When you have found your man, go for him, and do 
not let him slip away under any consideration. It is often 
well to go as quickly as possible to one of the doors of the 
meeting-house, and without making oneself too prominent, 
watch people as they come out, and then gently and courteously 
approach some one, and deal with him about his soul. 

There is a great difference in Christian workers. Some 
seem to never get any one at the close of a meeting unless 
some one else takes them tothem. They wait around with 
their Bible under their arm for some one to come to them and 
take them to an inquirer; others keep their eyes open for 
themselves, and almost always manage to get hold of some 
one. 

In many of the more active churches, the church is divided 
into sections with an overseer over each division of the church, 
and individual workers under the overseer. ‘This is an excel- 
lent plan. When it is well carried out it prevents any hopeful 
cases from getting out without being dealt with personally. 

28 


WHERE TO DO PERSONAL WORK 29 


II. In homes. The Apostle Paul tells us that he preached 
the Gospel not only publicly, but ‘‘from house to house.’ 
(Acts 20: 20.) There is far too little Christian work done in 
the home. The best home to begin with is yourown. Jesus 
bade the demoniac of Gadara when he was healed to return to 
his own house and show how great things God had done unto 
him. (Luke 8:39.) Every man who is converted should 
begin to tell the saving power of Christ first in his own home, 
to his own relatives and friends. Many a mother with her 
family of children regrets that she has not a wider field of 
labor for Christ, but she will find one of the grandest of all 
fields in her own home. 

But we should not limit our personal work to our own 
homes, we should do it in the homes where we visit. In this 
way those who make us partakers of their hospitality, will 
entertain angels unawares. (Heb. 13:2.) A godly man who 
once visited in the home of Spurgeon’s parents, by a few 
words to the little boy, made an impression upon that boy that 
went far toward making him the mighty minister of the Gos- 
pel that he became in after years. 

Then we should do personal work in the houses that we 
enter in our house-to-house visitation. That man or woman 
is a poor church visitor who simply makes a pleasant call or 
talks upon religious generalities. The true visitor will find 
frequent opportunities for doing effective personal work with 
some of the inhabitants of the home, or with strangers they 
may find calling upon them. 


III. On the streets. Here again we have the Apostle Paul 
for anexample. Not only did he reason ‘‘in the synagogue 
with the Jews and the devout persons,’’ but also ‘‘in the 
market place every day with them that met with him.’”’ (Acts 
17:17, R.V.) As you walk the streets, be listening for the 
voice of God to say ‘‘Go and speak to that man.’’ Very often 
as one walks the street of a crowded city or the lonely roads 
of the country, if he is walking with God, the leading will 
come to speak to some one that he meets by the way, and 
countless are the souls that have been led out of darkness into 
light in this way. As you look upon the surging crowd, ask 


30 HOW TO WORK 


God if there is some one in this crowd with whom He desires 
you to speak. Sometimes it is well to stand to one side and 
watch the people as they pass. Soon there will come a face 
that interests you, a face it may be that tells a story of sin, or 
sorrow and need. You can quietly follow this person and 
watch for an opportunity to engage them in conversation, and 
then point them to the one who says, ‘‘Come unto me all ye 
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.”’ 


IV. In the parks and other resorts. The parks are often full 
of people who have plenty of leisure and are willing to talk 
upon almost any subject. Go through the park and find your 
man, engage him in a conversation, and as quickly as you can, 
lead him up to the great subject that is burning in your own 
heart. Oftentimes it is well to begin to talk about matters of 
passing interest, the burning questions cf the day, then lead 
by the shortest possible route to the great question. Some- 
times show the one with whom you are talking a tract, and ask 
his opinion of it, and this will lead easily to the matter upper- 
most in your mind. Not infrequently if you sit down in a 
park some one will come and sit down beside you and begin 
to talk to you, then of course it is very easy to lead them into 
a conversation about their own soul’s need. 


V. Ona walk or ride. In this we have our Saviour’s own 
example. He made the hearts of the two disciples burn 
within them while He spoke to them in the way, and opened 
to them the Scriptures. (Luke 24:32.) We also have the 
example of Philip the evangelist. The Spirit bade him go and 
join himself to the chariot of Queen Candace’s treasurer. 
The treasurer invited him up into the chariot to ride with him, 
and the memorable conversation and personal dealing that fol- 
lowed led to the conversion and baptism of the treasurer, and 
the carrying of the Gospel into Ethiopia. (Acts 8: 29-38.) 
There are few more favorable places"to do personal work than 
on a walk or ride with a friend or even with a stranger. 


VI. At the place of business. Here again we have the Sav- 
iour’s example. ‘‘As He passed by, He saw Levi the son of 
Alphaeus sitting at the receipt of custom, and said unto him, 





WHERE TO DO PERSONAL WORK at 


Follow me. And he arose and followed Him.’’ (Mark 2: 14.) 
Of course we ought not to interrupt men and hinder their 
proper performance of their business duties. Many a work- 
man has rare opportunities to speak with his fellow workmen, 
sometimes during work hours, sometimes during the noon 
rest. One of the most earnest Christian ministers I ever 
knew had been a godless employé in a factory, but the man 
who worked next to him was a Christian, took an interest in 
his fellow employé’s soul, and was instrumental under God in 
leading him to Christ. I have met a good many from one of 
the largest business institutions in our city who have been led 
to Christ by one consecrated young man in the establishment. 
This young man has since gone as a foreign missionary, but 
he was used of God to lead many of his fellow employés to 
Christ before he went. It is well wherever possible, to go 
into stores and factories and other places of business for the 
deliberate purpose of leading those who work there to Christ. 
Of course, as already said, it will not do to interrupt a man at 
his business, neither will it do generally to deal with him when 
others are around and listening, nor should he be taken at an 
hour when he is in a bad temper; but one who has that discre- 
tion that God is so ready to give (James 1:5) will find many 
opportunities for doing the Master’s work. It is quite possible 
oftentimes to drop a word, or even to have a little talk, when 
there is not a great pressure of business, with the clerk who 
sells us goods, or with the barber who shaves us, or with the 
boy who blacks our shoes. There are five marks of a good 
opportunity; when one is alone, unoccupied, in good humor, 
communicative and in a serious mood, 


VII. On cars and boats. Traveling on the steam cars 
affords a very rare opportunity for personal work. ‘Travelers 
usually have much time that hangs heavily upon their hands, 
and are glad to get into conversation with any one, but if one 
is a real Christian, there is one subject always uppermost in his 
mind, one subject that he would rather talk about than any other, 
and that is Jesus Christ. When you get into a train, get as 
good a seat for yourself as you can, put your coat and grip out 
of the way, move away over to the farther side of the seat, 


32 HOW TO WORK 


and make the vacant space beside you look as inviting as pos: 
sible. If the car is at all crowded, you will soon have a fellow- 
passenger, and the desired opportunity for personal work. 
Sometimes it is well to keep your coat and grip in the seat 
beside you until you see the man or woman that you want 
coming, and then remove them and move along in a way of 
silent invitation. 

It is well to talk with the trainmen and porters. They 
are usually willing to talk, and many of them have been led to 
Christ by Spirit-filled workers who were traveling with them. 

Many Christian workers go through trains and give tracts 
to every one on the train. I am not sure that this is the wisest 
thing to do, but I know that great blessing has come from it 
in many cases. Certainly it is well to carry a good supply of 
religious literature with you when you travel. Some of the 
books of the Bible Institute Colportage Association are excel- 
lent for this purpose, such, e.g., as ‘‘Probable Sons.’’ People 
are willing to read almost anything on a train, and these 
books without any comment oftentimes will lead the reader to 
Christ, and when they do not do this, they pave the way for a 
conversation. 

Street cars are not as favorable a place for personal work 
as steam cars. One does not have the time or opportunity 
that he does on a train, and yet good work can be done ona 
street car, both with the passengers and with the motorman 
and conductor. A minister once said to me, ‘‘I was greatly 
ashamed last night going down on the street car. I was sit- 
ting inside the car talking on unimportant matters with 
friends, and as I looked to the front end of the car, I saw one 
member of my church talking with the driver about his soul, 
and when I looked to the other end of the car I saw another 
member of my church talking to the conductor, and there I, 
the pastor of the church, was doing nothing but wasting my 
time.’’ 


VIII. Prisons, hospitals, and other public institutions. A 
fine place to do personal work is in public institutions, such as 
prisons and hospitals, where many people are gathered 
together and are at leisure from morning till night. Every 


WHERE TO DO PERSONAL WORK — 33 


Sunday, all over this land, devoted men and women are going 
into prisons, jails and hospitals, carrying the glad tidings of 
salvation, and thousands are being converted to God through 
their faithful personal work. Many of the best Christians 
that I know to-day were brought to Christ in prison, not so 
much through the public preaching, as through the personal 
work of some devoted child of God who went from cell to cell 
and talked to the men about Christ. But while so much is 
' being done already in this direction, there are many prisons 
and jails and hospitals where little or nothing is done. 

Nurses in hospitals have a rare opportunity of doing per- 
sonal work in the institutions where they are employed. For- 
tunately a very large proportion of trained nurses are devoted 
Christian women, and yet many of them do not realize the 
opportunities that God has put within their reach. <A very 
unusual opportunity is also open to the Christian physician. 
Indeed atrue Christian physician will oftentimes find oppor- 
tunities for doing personal work that even the minister of the 
Gospel cannot find. Sometimes it will be with the patient 
whom he is treating, sometimes with the relatives and friends 
of the patient who are in deep anxiety as to the outcome of the 
sickness. 

What has been said does not of course cover all the places 
where personal work can be done, but it will suggest rich 
fields of opportunity. To put it in a word, personal work 
should be done everywhere. We read of the early disciples 
that ‘‘they that were scattered abroad went everywhere 
preaching the Word”’ (Acts 8: 4), that is talking to individuals 
about Jesus, showing them the word of truth as it is found in 
the Bible, and leading them to accept it. Every child of God 
should be at all times on the lookout for opportunities to 
speak personally to some other man or woman about Christ. 


CHAPTER IV 
HOW TO BEGIN 


One of the most difficult points in personal work is begin- 
ning. It is comparatively easy to go on after one has got an 
opening. 


I. The first thing is to find the one to deal with. As has 
already been said, we should pray God to lead us to some one, 
or some one tous. When we goto church, or when we walk 
the street, when we are in the park, or on the train, or call- 
ing, in a word, whenever we have time that is not demanded 
by other duties, we should look up to God and definitely ask 
Him to lead us to the one with whom we are to speak, if it is 
His will that we employ that time in work for Him. Further 
than this, we should be on the lookout for opportunities. A 
fisherman cultivates a keen eye for opportunities to catch fish; 
and asoul-winner should cultivate a keen eye for opportunities 
for soul-winning. Whenever we are thrown into the company 
of a man or woman, the great probability is that it is a provi- 
dential opening, and we should be ready to meet it as such. 
It is said of one of the most distinguished Sunday school 
workers in this country, that he makes it a point whenever he 
is alone with any individual to speak to him about his soul. 
The story is told of Uncle John Vassar, that being left alone 
in a hotel parlor with a strange lady, he at once approached 
her and began to speak to her about her soul. After he had 
gone, the woman’s husband returned, and she told him what 
had happened. The husband wasina great rage, and said, 
“If I had been here, I would have sent him about his busi- 
ness.’’ His wife replied, ‘‘If you had been here, you would 
have thought he was about his business.”” We ought to make 
soul-winning our business, and improve every possible oppor- 
tunity. 


34 





HOW TO BEGIN 35 


II. Having found your man, begin a conversation. How 
shall that be done? In the inquiry room, by asking at once a 
few leading questions to find out just where the man stands, 
for example: ‘‘Are you a Christian?’’ ‘‘Are you saved?’’ 
**Have you been born again?’’ ‘‘Upon what do you base your 
hope of eternal life?’’ ‘‘Are you confessing Christ openly 
before the world?’’ ‘‘Have you surrendered all you have and 
are to Christ?”’ Sometimes it is well to begin in this direct 
way even when you meet some one casually. The question 
*‘Are you saved?’’ is as a general rule a better one to ask than 
*‘Are you a Christian?’’ It is more likely to set one to think- 
ing. Itis more definite and pointed. Many will take the ask- 
ing of such a question as an impertinence, but that will not 
prove that the question has not done good. Not a few people 
who have become angry at a stranger putting a question like 
this to them have afterward been converted in consequence of 
it. There are many other questions that one may ask that 
will set men to thinking and open the way for further conver- 
sation. For example you can ask a man, *‘Do you think that 
life is worth living?’’ and after you have engaged him in con- 
versation on this point you can lead him on and tell of the life 
that really is worth living. Or you can ask an utter stranger, 
*‘How do you think a man can get the most real satisfaction 
out of life, that is, of course, by accepting Jesus Christ asa Sav- 
iour. Or you can say to a man, “I have learned the great 
secret of happiness,’’ and when he asks you what it is, you can 
tell him. Of course these are only offered as suggestions of 
ways in which to begin a conversation. 

A good way to begin is by handing the person with whom 
you wish to deal, a well-chosen tract to read. When he has 
finished the tract, you can ask him what he thinks about it, 
and thus the way is opened to a conversation on the great sub- 
ject. Itis often well to begin by engaging the person in a 
general conversation, perhaps on subjects quite remote from 
religion, and gradually working around to the point. It was 
thus that Christ engaged the woman of Samaria, making a 
very simple request of her, that she would give Him a drink, 


36 HOW TO WORK 


(Jno. 4:7.) but before long, he was telling her of the living 
water. If the person with whom you wish to deal is older 
than yourself, you might begin by saying, ‘There is a subject 
in which I am deeply interested, and I am trying to get all 
the light upon it that I can; you are much older than I, and 
perhaps you can help me; the subject is ‘How to Be Saved.’ ”’ 

Showing people little kindnesses very often opens the way 
for a conversation on the great subject. For example, in a 
crowded car one can move along and invite some one who is 
standing to a seat by your side. It is the most natural thing 
in the world then to get into conversation, and the favor of 
the person who has been standing is gained, and it will be 
very easy to lead on tothe great subject. When one is riding, 
and sees some one else walking, an invitation to the walker to 
ride will afford a splendid opportunity for approaching him on 
the subject of hissoul’s salvation. Mr. Moody madea constant 
practice of inviting those with whom he wished to deal out 
riding with him. As he drew near to some quiet spot, he 
would speak to them of what was upon his heart, and then 
stop the horse and have a season of prayer. No one can teil 
how many were thus led to Christ. Sometimes it is well to 
show the people that you would lead to Christ, kindnesses for 
days and weeks, and even years, waiting for your opportunity 
to say a word. A devoted Chinese missionary who had made 
great sacrifices to go to that land, was received by the people 
with bitterest hatred, but he simply gave himself up to live 
among them and live for them. One by one opportunities 
came of showing them kindnesses, and after years of self-sacri- 
ficing living, he had so won their confidence that it was an 
easy matter for him to lead them to Christ, but he had to 
begin by showing them the most ordinary, every-day kind- 
nesses, far away, apparently, from the subject that was closest 
to his heart. 

Sometimes a person’s face will tell the story of discon- 
tent, unhappiness or unrest. In such a case it is easy to ask 
the person if he is happy, and when he says no, tell him you 
can tell him of One who can make him happy if he will only 
take Him. 


Tact in beginning will come with experience, but it is bet- 


HOW TO BEGIN 37 


ter to begin awkwardly than not to begin at all. I do not 
think that any one could begin more awkwardly in this work 
than I did with the first person whom I led to Christ. I felt 
that God wanted me to speak to this young man, and I called 
on him for that purpose, but when I met him I had not the 
slightest idea what tosay. I talked on and on waiting for an 
opportunity, and at last blundered out awkwardly what I had 
come for. God blessed the awkward but honest effort, and 
the young man was saved, and has become a very active and 
efficient worker for Christ. 

The best way to learn how to do personal work is by doing 
it, gaining wisdom from your mistakes. 


III. Having begun the conversation, find out as soon as 
possible where the person with whom you are dealing stands. In 
order to treat a case intelligently, you need just as much asa 
physician to know just where the man is at present. But how 
can we find out to what class any person belongs? 

1. First of all dy asking him questions, such questions as 
‘“Are you saved?’’ ‘“‘Have you eternal life?’’ ‘‘Have you 
been born again?’’ ‘‘Do you know that you area great sinner 
before God?”’ ‘‘Do you know that your sins are forgiven?’ 
Or you can ask a person directly, ‘‘Where do you stand, what 
do you believe??? He may answer these questions untruth- 
fully, either from ignorance or a desire to mislead you, never- 
theless the answers and his manner of giving them will show 
you a great deal about his real state. 

3. By watching theinqutrer’s face. A man’s face will often 
reveal that which his words try to conceal. Any one who 
cultivates a study of the faces of those with whom he deals, 
will soon be able to tell in many instances their exact state 
irrespective of anything they may say. 

3. By observing his tone and manner. A man’s tone or his 
manner often tells more than his words. A man who is not 
saved will very likely tell you that he is, but his tone and 
manner will reveal plainly that he isnot. If one gets angry 
at you for asking these questions, that of itself reveals an 
uneasy conscience. 

4. By the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit, if we look to 


38 HOW TO WORK 


Him to do it, will often flash into our minds a view of the 
man’s position, and just the Scripture that He needs. 


IV. When we have learned where the person with whom 
we are dealing stands, the next thing to do is to lead him as 
directly as we can to accept Jesus Christ as a personal Saviour, and 
to surrender to Him as his Lord and Master. We must always 
bear in mind that the primary purpose of our work is not to 
get people to join the church, or to give up their bad habits, 
or to do anything else than this, to accept Jesus Christ as 
their Saviour, the one who bore their sins in His own body on 
the tree, and the one through whom they can have immediate 
and entire forgiveness, and as their Master to whom they sur- 
render absolutely the guidance of their thoughts, purposes, 
feelings and actions. 


V. Having led any one to thus accept Christ, the next step 
will be to show him from God’s Word that he has forgiveness of 
sins and eternal life. Acts 10: 43; 13:39; John 3: 36; 5: 24 will 
answer for this purpose. 


VI. The next step will be to show him how to make a suc- 
cess of the Christian life upon which he has entered. 





CHAPTER V 


HOW TO DEAL WITH THOSE WHO REALIZE THEIR 
NEED OF A SAVIOUR AND REALLY 
DESIRE TO BE SAVED 


We come now to the question of how to deal with individual 
cases. We begin with those who realize their need of a Savior, 
and really desire to be saved. We begin with these because 
they are the easiest class to deal with. 


I. Show them Jesus as a sin-bearer. 

The first thing to show one who realizes his need of a 
Saviour is that Jesus has borne his sins in His own body on 
the cross. A good verse for this purpose is Is. 53:6: 

“All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to 

his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.” 
Get the inquirer to read the verse himself, then say to him, 
“The first half of this verse shows you your need of salvation, 
the second half shows you the provision that God has made for 
your salvation. Read again the first half of the verse. Is 
this true of you? Have you gone astray like a sheep? Have 
you turned to your own way?’ “‘Yes.’’ ‘‘Then what are 
you?’’ Get the inquirer to say, “I am lost.’’ ‘‘We will now 
look at the provision God has made for your salvation, read 
the last half of the verse. Who is the one in this verse upon 
whom our iniquity has been laid?’’ ‘‘Christ.’”” “‘What then 
has God done with yoursin?”’ LaiditonChrist.’’ ‘“‘Is it then 
on you any longer?’’ Go over it again and again until he sees 
that his sin is not on him, but that it ison Christ, and has been 
settled forever. I often use a simple illustration in making 
the meaning of the verse plain. I let my right hand repre- 
sent the inquirer, my left hand represent Christ, and my Bible 
represent the inquirer’s sin. I first lay the Bible on my right 
39 


40 HOW TO WORK 


hand and say, ‘‘Now where is your sin?’’ The inquirer 
replies of course, ‘‘On me.’’ I then repeat the last half of the 
verse, ‘‘the Lord hath /aid on him the iniquity of us all,’’ and 
transfer the Bible from my right hand to my left, and ask, 
‘‘Where is your sin now?’ The inquirer replies, “‘On Him, 
of course.’’ I then ask, ‘‘Isit on you any longer?’’ and he says, 
‘‘No, on Christ.”” Very many people have been led out into 
light and joy by this simple illustration. 

I sometimes put it in this way, in using this verse, ‘There 
are two things which a man needs to know, and one thing he 
needs to do in order to be saved. What he needs to know is, 
first, that he is a lost sinner, and this verse tells him that, and 
second, that Christ is an all-sufficient Saviour, and this verse 
tells him that. What he needs to do is to accept this all-suffi- 
cient Saviour whom God has provided. Now will you accept 
Him right here and now?” 

Another excellent verse to show Jesus as a sin-bearer, is 
Galiis7'33; 

“Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, dezxg made a 
curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth ona 
iceu 

The inquirer should be given the verse to read for himself. 
When he has read it, you may question him something like- 
this: “‘What does this verse tell us that Christ has redeemed 
us from?” ‘‘Whom has He redeemed?’ ‘‘How has He 
redeemed us from the curse of the law?’’ ‘*Do you believe 
that Christ has redeemed you from the curse of the law by 
being made acurse in your place?’’ ‘‘Will you read it then 
in the singular instead of in the plural?’’ Make it clear what 
you mean, until the inquirer reads the verse in this way: 
*“‘Christ has redeemed me from the curse of the law, being 
made a curse for me; for it is written, cursed is every one 
that hangeth on a tree.”’ 

Another good verse for this purpose is 2 Cor. 5: 21: 

“For he hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we 
might be made the righteousness of God in him.” 

Have him read the verse, and then ask questions somewhat as 
follows: ‘‘Who is it that hath been made sin for us?’ ‘‘For 
whom has Christ been made sin?’’ ‘For what purpose is it 


THOSE WHO REALIZE THEIR NEED 41 


that Christ has been made sin for us?” ‘‘Can you put this 
verse in the singular and read it this way: ‘For he hath made 
Him to be sin for me, who knew no sin; that I might be made 
the righteousness of God in Him’?’’ 

Sometimes it will be well to use all three of these passages, 
but as arule the first is sufficient; as far as my own experi- 
ence goes, it is more effective than either of the other pas- 
sages—in fact, I deal with very few men with whom I do not 
use Is. 53: 6 sooner or later. 


II. Show them Jesus as a risen Saviour, able to save to the 
uttermost. 

It is not enough to show them Jesus as a sin-bearer, for 
through believing in Jesus as a sin-bearer one merely gets 
pardon from sin, but there is something else that the sinner 
needs, that is deliverance from sin’s power. In order to get 
this, they need to see Jesus as a risen Saviour, able to save to 
the uttermost. By believing in Christ crucified, we get par- 
don, but by believing in Christ risen, we get deliverance from 
sin’s power. One of the best verses to use for this purpose is 
Heb. 7: 25: 

‘Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come 

unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them.”’ 
When the inquirer has read the passage, ask him who it is 
that is able to save, and to what extent He is able to save. 
Explain to the inquirer what ‘‘to the uttermost’’ means. 
Many read this passage as though it taught that Jesus was 
able to save from the uttermost. This is true, but it is not 
the truth of this text, it is save ¢o the uttermost. Then ask 
the inquirer why it is that Jesus is able to save to the utter- 
most.. Dwell upon this thought, that /esus ever liveth, that 
He is not only a Saviour who once died and made atonement 
for sin, but that He is a Saviour who lives to-day, and is able 
to keep from sin’s power. Then ask the inquirer if he is will- 
ing to trust Jesus as a living Saviour, one to whom he can look 
day by day for victory over sin. 

Another good verse to use for this purpose is Jude 24: 


“‘Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present 
you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy.” 


42 HOW TO WORK 


When the inquirer has read the verse, ask him what this verse 
says Jesus is able to do, emphasize ‘‘to keep you from falling.” 
Explain why it is that Jesus is able to keep from falling; 
because He is a risen, living Saviour to-day, and get the 
inquirer to see plainly that he is to look to the risen Christ to 
keep him from falling. 

Matt. 28: 18 is a good verse to use to bring out the extent 
of Christ’s power: 

‘And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All power is given unto 

me in heaven and in earth.” 

A young convert needs to realize that he is to stand, not in 
his own strength, but in the strength of Christ, and it is a 
great help for him to see that the one in whom he is to trust 
has all power in heaven and in earth. 

One can also use to advantage 1 Peter 1: 5: 

“Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation 

ready to be revealed in the last time’’ 

and 1 Cor. 15:1-4. The latter passage brings out clearly the 
thought that the doctrine that Christ died for our sins, as 
blessed as it is, is not the whole Gospel, but only half of it; 
that the rest of the Gospel is that He was buried and that He 
rose again. Always get an inquirer to believe not only in 
Christ crucified, but in Christ risen as well. A man once 
came to me in deep distress of soul. He was a perfect 
stranger to me, but told me that he had come quite a distance 
to tell me his story. He said, ‘‘When I was a boy seven years 
of age, I started to read the Bible through. I had not gotten 
through Deuteronomy before [I found that if one kept the 
whole law of God for one hundred years, and then broke it at 
one point, he was under the curse of a broken law. Was that 
right?’ ‘‘Yes,’’ I replied, “‘that is substantially the teaching 
of the law.’’ He then continued, that he was in deep distress 
of soul for about a year, but as a boy of eight, he read John 
3:16 and saw how Jesus Christ had died in his place, and 
borne the curse of the broken law for him, and he added, *‘My 
burden rolled away, and I had great joy. Was I converted?’’ 
I replied that that sounded very much like an evangelical con- 
version. ‘‘Well,” he said, “‘let me tell you the rest of my 
story. Years passed by; I came to Chicago to live; I worked 











THOSE WHO REALIZE THEIR NEED 43 


in the stockyards and lived in the stockyards region among 
many godless men; I fell into drink and I cannot break away; 
every little while this sin gets the mastery of me, and what I 
have come to ask you is, is there any way in which I can get 
the victory over sin?’’ I replied, ‘‘There is, I am glad you 
have come to me; let me show you the way.’’ I opened my 
Bible to 1 Cor. 15: 1-4, and had him read: 

“Moreover, brethren, I declare unto you the gospel which I preached 
unto you, which also ye have received, and wherein ye stand; by which 
also ye are saved, if ye keepin memory what I preached unto you, 
unless ye have believed in vain. ForI delivered unto you first of all 
that which I also received, how that Chrzst died for our sins according 
to the Scriptures; and that he was buried, and that he rose again the 
third day according to the Scriptures.’’ 


Then I said to him, ‘‘What is the Gospel that Paul preached?’’ 
He answered, ‘‘That Christ died for our sins according to the 
Scriptures, was buried, and rose again.’’ ‘That is right,’’ I 
said. Then I said, ‘‘Now you have believed the first part of 
this Gospel, that Christ died for your sins.” ‘*Yes,”’ 
“Through believing that you have found peace.’? ‘*Yes.’’ 
*“Well,’’ I continued, ‘‘this is only half the Gospel. If you 
will really believe the other half from your heart, you will get 
victory over yoursin. Do you believe that Jesus rose again?”’ 
**Yes, I believe everything in the Bible.’’ ‘‘Do you believe 
that Jesus is to-day in the place of power at the right hand of 
God?’ ‘“‘Ido.’’ ‘‘Do you believe that He has all power in 
heaven and on earth?’ ‘‘I do.’’ ‘‘Do you believe that 
this risen Christ with all power in heaven and on earth, has 
power to set you free from the power of your sin?’’ ‘*Yes,”’ 
he said slowly, ‘‘I do.” ‘“‘Will you ask Him to do it, and trust 
Him to doit right now?’’ ‘“‘I will.”” We knelt in prayer. I 
prayed and then he followed. He asked the risen Christ to 
set him free from the power of sin. I asked him if he really 
believed He had power to doit. ‘*Yes.’’ ‘‘Do you believe 
He will doit?’ ‘‘Yes, I do.’’ We rose and parted. Some 
time after I received a very joyous letter from him, telling me 
how glad he was that he had come to see me, and how the 
message he had heard was just the one that heneeded. There 
are thousands of professing Christians to-day who know Jesus 


A4 HOW TO WORK 


as a crucified Saviour, and have found pardon and peace 
through believing in Him, but they have never been brought 
toa definite, clear faith in Jesus as a risen Saviour who can 
save from the power of sin. 


III. Show them Jesus as Lord. 


It is not enough to know Jesus as a Saviour, we must 
know Him as Lord also. A good verse for this purpose is 
Acts 2: 36: 

‘Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God hath 

made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, doth Lord and Christ,” 
When the inquirer has read the verse, ask him what God hath 
made Jesus, and hold him to it until he replies, ‘‘Both Lord 
and Christ.’’ Then say to him, ‘“‘Are you willing to accept 
Him as your Divine Lord, the one to whom you will sur- 
render your heart, your every thought, and word, and act?”’ 

Another good verse for this purpose is Rom. 10:9: 

“That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth ¢/e Lord Jesus, and shalt 
believe in\ thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou 
shalt be saved.’’ 

When the inquirer has read the verse, ask him what we are to 
confess Jesus as. He should reply, ‘‘Lord.’’ If he does not 
so reply, ask him other questions until he does answer in this 
way. Then ask him, ‘‘Do you really believe that Jesus is 
Lord, that He is Lord of all, that He is rightfully the absolute 
Lord and Master of your life and person?’’ Perhaps it will be 
well to use Acts 10: 36 as throwing additional light upon this 
point: 

“The word which God sent unto the children of Israel, preaching 
peace by Jesus Christ: (Ae zs Lord of all)." 


IV. Show them how to make Jesus their own. 


It is not enough to see that Jesus is a sin-bearer, and that 
Jesus is a risen Saviour, and that Jesus is Lord; one must also 
see how to make this Jesus their own sin-bearer, their own 
risen Saviour, and their own Lord. There is perhaps no 
better verse to use for this purpose than John 1: 12: 


“But as many as recetved him, to them gave he power to become the 
sons of God, even to them that believe on his name.”’ 











THOSE WHO REALIZE THEIR NEED 45 


When one has read the verse, you can ask to whom it is Jesus 
gave power to become the sons of God. ‘‘As many as 
received Him.’’ ‘‘Received Him as what?’?’ Then make it 
clear from what you have already said under the preceding 
points, that it is to receive Him as sin-bearer, to receive Him 
as arisen Saviour, to receive Him as our Lord and Master. 
**Will you just take Him as your sin-bearer now, as your risen 
Saviour, as your Lord and Master? Will you take Him to be 
whatever He offers Himself to youto be?” ‘‘I will.’? ‘“‘Then 
what does this verse show you that you have a right to call 
yourself?’ ‘‘A son of God.’’ ‘‘Are you a son of God?’’ 
Oftentimes the inquirer will hesitate, but go over it again and 
again until it is as clear as day to him. 

Another excellent passage to use for this purpose is John 
ee (78 

‘“‘For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, 

that whosoever believeth zn him should not perish, but have everlasting 
titen? 

Ask the inquirer who it is that receives eternal life. ‘‘Who- 
soever believes in Him.’’ ‘‘Do you believe in Him as your 
sin-bearer?’’ ‘‘Do you believe in Him as your risen Saviour?’’ 
“‘Do you believe in Him as your Lord?’’ ‘*Well, then, what 
have you?”’ 

Another good passage to use is Acts 10: 43: 


“‘To him give all the prophets witness, that through his name who- 
socver believeth in him shall receive remission of sins.”’ 


still another, Acts 13:39: 
“And by him a// that belzeve are justified from all things, from which 
ye could not be justified by the law of Moses.” 


V. Show the need of confessing Christ with the mouth. 

No conversion is clear and satisfactory until one has been 
led to confess Christ with the mouth before men. Perhaps 
the best passage to show the need of such open confession with 
the mouth is Rom. 10:49, 10: 

“That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt 

believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou 


shalt be saved. For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; 
and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.” 


46 HOW TO WORK 


When the inquirer has read it, ask him what is the first thing 
this verse tells us that we must do if we are to be saved. 
“‘Confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus.” ‘‘Well, will you 
confess Jesus as your Lord with the mouth now?’’ Wherever 
possible, it is good to get the person dealt with to make a pub- 
lic confession of Jesus just as soon as possible. If you are 
dealing with them in an after-meeting, have them make this 
confession right then and there, if somewhere else, bring 
them to a prayer-meeting, or some other service where they 
can make the confession, as soon as possible. 


VI. Lead into assurance. 


It is not enough that one should be saved, one ought to 
have the assurance that he is saved. He ought to be brought 
to a place where he can say confidently and joyously, ‘J kvow 
I am saved, J know I have everlasting life.”’ After an 
inquirer has been led to the acceptance and confession of 
Christ, an excellent passage to use for this purpose is John 
3: 36: 


“He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that 
believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth 
on him.”’ 


When the inquirer has read the passage you can say, ‘‘Now 
this passage tells us that there is some one who has everlast- 
ing life; who is it?’’ ““He that believeth) on the Sen, 
‘‘What does God say in this passage that every one who 
believes on the Son has?” ‘‘Everlasting life.” ‘‘Is it abso- 
lutely sure that every one who believes on the Son has ever- 
lasting life?’’ ‘“‘It is, God says so.”’ ‘‘Well, do you believe 
on the Son?’’ ‘“‘Yes.’’ ‘‘What have you then?’ ‘‘Everlast- 
ing life.’’ ‘Are you absolutely sure that you have everlasting 
life?’’ ‘*Yes.”? ‘‘Why are you sure?’’ ‘‘Because God says so 
here.’’ In many cases, probably in the majority of cases, it 
will be necessary to go over this again, and again, before the 
inquirer says that he is absolutely sure that he has everlasting 
life because he believes on the Son, but do not let him go 
until he is thus absolutely sure. 





























THOSE WHO REALIZE THEIR NEED 47 


VII. Give directions as to how to live the Christian life. 


It is not enough that a person be led to accept Christ, that 
is only the beginning of the Christian life, and if one is not 
shown how to lead the Christian life which he has thus begun, 
his life is likely to be largely one of failure. The reason so 
many Christian lives are comparative failures is because of a 
lack of definite and full instruction to the young convert as to 
how to lead the life which he has begun. The following 
instructions should be given to every one who has been dealt 
with as described above; and not only to them, but to every 
other class of inquirers that may be led to the acceptance of 
Christ by the methods described in the following pages or in 
any other way. You will speak to the inquirer somewhat as 
follows: ‘“‘You have just begun the Christian life, now you 
wish to make a success of it. There are six very simple 
things to do, andit is absolutely sure that any one who does 
these six things will make a success of the Christian life.’’ 

1. ** You will find the first of these in Matt. 10: 32. Pleas+ 
read it very carefully: 

‘Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I con 

fess also before my Father which is in heaven.”’ 

This verse tells us that Christ confesses before the Fathe: 
those who confess Him before men. You will make a success 
of the Christian life only if Christ confesses you before the 
Father, so if you wish to succeed in this life that you have 
begun, you must make a constant practice of confessing Christ 
before men. Improve every opportunity that you get of show- 
ing your colors, and stating that you are upon Christ’s side, 
and of telling what the Lord hath done for your soul.” 

2. ‘Study the Word of God regularly, and hide it in your 
heart.’’ Tomake this point clear, use the following passages: 

“Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against 


thee.’”’ Ps. 119: 11. 
‘‘As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may 


grow thereby.” 1 Pet. 2:2. 
One of the most frequent causes of failure in the Christian life 
is neglect of the Word of God. One can no more thrive 
spiritually without regular spiritual food, than they can thrive 
physically without regular and proper physical nourishment. 


48 HOW TO WORK 


3. ‘‘Pray without ceasing.’’ To make this point clear, 

~ use 

“‘Pray without ceasing.’’ 1 Thess. 5:17. 

“But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they 
shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; 
and they shall walk, and not faint.”’ Isa. 4o: 31. 

Have the young convert read these verses again and again and 
mark them in his Bible. 

4. ‘Surrender your will absolutely to God, and obey Him in 

all things.’’ To make this plain use Acts 5: 32: 

‘‘And we are his witnesses of these things; and so is also the Holy 
Ghost, whom God hath given Zo them that obey him.” 

Show that obedience is a matter of the will more than of the 
outward life, and that God gives His Holy Spirit to them that 
obey Him, or surrender their will absolutely to Him. Insist 
upon the need of this absolute surrender of the will to God. 

5. ‘Be a constant and generous giver.’’ To make the 

necessity of this plain to the convert, use 2 Cor. 9: 6-8: 

‘But this I say, He which soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly; 
and he which soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully. Every 
man according as he purposeth in his heart, so let him give; not grudg- 
ingly, or of necessity: for God loveth a cheerful giver. And God is able 
to make all grace abound toward you; that ye, always having all suffi- 
ciency in all things, may abound to every good work.”’ 

It is well sometimes to use Mal. 3: 10 as a side light: 

‘Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat 
in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I 
will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, 
that there shall not be room enough to receive it.’’ 

Go over and over it again and again untilit is fixed in the 
young convert’s mind that if he is to enjoy the fullness of 
God’s blessing, if God is to make all grace abound toward him, 
he must give to the Lord’s work as the Lord prospers him, 
that he must be a constant and generous giver. Many young 
Christians make little headway in the Christian life because 
they are not plainly instructed on the necessity of regular, 
systematic and generous giving to the Lord. 

6. ‘Go to work for Christ and keep working for Christ.” 

To show the necessity of this, use Matt. 25: 14-30, explaining 
the teaching of the parable, that it is the one who uses what 





| 





THOSE WHO REALIZE THEIR NEED 49 


he has who gets more, but the one who neglects to use what 
he has, loses even that. 

Go over these six points again and again; write them 
down with the texts, and give them to the young convert to 
take with him. The directions given above may seem to be 
very full, and it may occur to the reader that it will take a 
long time to follow them out. ‘This is true, and oftentimes it 
will not be necessary to use all the texts, but at the same time 
it is best to be sure that you do thorough work. There isa 
great deal of superficial and shoddy work done in soul-win- 
ning to-day, and this kind of work does not stand. It is 
better to spend an hour, or two hours, on one person, and get 
him really rooted and grounded in the truth, than it is to get 
a dozen or more to say that they accept Christ, when they do 
not really understand what they are doing. One of the most 
common and greatest of faults in Christian work to-day is 
superficial dealing with souls. 


CHAPTER VI 


HOW TO DEAL WITH THOSE WHO HAVE LITTLE 
OR NO CONCERN ABOUT THEIR SOULS 


The largest class of men and women are those who have 
little or no concern about their salvation. There are some 
who contend that there is no use dealing with such, but there 
is. Itis our business when a man has no concern about his 
salvation to go to work to produce that concern. How shal] 
we do it? 


I. Show him that he is a great sinner before God. 
There is no better verse for this purpose than Meéett. 
eae y Stoo 
“‘Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. TZzzs zs the first 
and great commandment.” 
Before the one with whom you are dealing reads these verses, 
you can say to him, ‘*Do you know that you are a great sinner 
before God?’’ Very likely he will reply, “‘I suppose I ama 
sinner, but Ido not know that I am such a great sinner.’’ 
‘‘Do you know that you have committed the greatest sin that 
a man can possibly commit?’’ ‘‘No, I certainly have not.” 
‘‘What do you think is the greatest sin that a man can com- 
mit?’’ Probably he will answer, ‘‘Murder.’’ ‘‘You are 
greatly mistaken, let us see what God says about it.”? Then 
have him read the passage. When he has read it, ask him, 
‘‘What is the first and great commandment?’’ ‘‘Thou shalt 
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy 
soul, and with all thy mind.’’? ‘‘Which commandment is 
this?’’ ‘The first and great commandment.’’ ‘‘If this is the 
first and great commandment, what is the first and great sin?’ 
““Not to keep this commandment.’’ ‘‘Have you kept it? 
Have you put God first in everything; first in your affections, 
first in your thoughts, first in your pleasures, first in your 


5° 


THOSE WHO HAVE LITTLE CONCERN 51 


business, first in everything?’’ ‘‘No, I have not.” ‘‘What 
commandment, then, have you broken?’” ‘‘The first and 
great commandment.”’ 

Some time ago a young man came into our inquiry meet- 
ing. I asked him if he was a Christian, and he replied that he 
was not. I asked him if he would like to be, and he said that 
he would. I said, ‘‘Why, then, do you not become a Chris- 
tian to-night?’ He replied, ‘‘I have no special interest in the 
matter.’’ I said, ‘‘Do you mean that you have no conviction 
of sin?” ‘‘Yes,’’ he said, ‘‘I have no conviction of sin, and 
am not much concerned about the whole matter.’’ I said, ‘‘I 
hold in my hand a book which God has given us for the pur- 
pose of producing conviction of sin; would you like to have 
me use it upon you?’ Half laughing, he replied, ‘*Yes.”’ 
When he had taken a seat, I had him read Matt. 22: 37, 38. 
When he had read the passage I said to him, ‘‘What is the 
first and great commandment?’’ He read it from the Bible. 
I said, “‘If this is the first and great commandment, what is 
the first and great sin?’’ He replied, ‘‘Not to keep this com- 
mandment.’’ I asked, ‘‘Have you kept it?’’ ‘“‘I have not.’’ 
‘“What have you done then?’’ Said he, “I have broken the 
first and greatest of God’s commandments,’’ and broken down 
with a sense of sin, then and there he went down before God 
and asked Him for mercy, and accepted Christ as his Savior. 

Another excellent passage to use to produce conviction of 
sin is Rom. 14: 12. 

“So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God.”’ 

The great object in using this passage is to bring the careless 
man face to face with God, and make him realize that he must 
give account toGod. When he has read it, ask him, ‘‘Who has 
to give account?’ ‘‘Every one of us.’’ ‘*Who does that take 


in??? ‘‘Me.’? ‘‘Who then is to give account?’ ‘I am.’' 
“To whom are you to give account?’’ ‘“‘To God.’ ‘‘Of what 
are you to give account?’ ‘‘Of myself.’’ ‘Read it that 
way.”’ ‘‘I shall give account of myself to God.’? ‘‘Now just 


let that thought sink into your heart. Say it over to yourself 
again and again, ‘I am to give account of myself to God.’ 
‘I am to give account of myself to God.’ Are you ready to 
do it?’’ 


52 HOW TO WORK 


Amos 4:12 can be used in much the same way: 
‘Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel: and because I will do 
this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.” 
Another very effective passage with many a careless man 
is Rom. 2: 16: 
“In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ 
according to my Gospel.”’ 
When the one with whom you are dealing has read the verse, 
, Say ‘‘What is God going to do in some coming day?”’ ‘“‘Judge 
the secrets of men.’’ ‘‘Judge what?’’ ‘‘The secrets of men.’’ 
“Who is it that is going to judge the secrets of men?’’ “‘It 
is God.’’ ‘‘Are your ready to have the secret hidden things 
of your life judged by a holy God?’ 


II. Show him the awful consequences of sin. 
A very effective passage for this purpose is Rom. 6: 23, 


‘‘For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life 
through Jesus Christ our Lord.’’ 


When he has read the passage, ask him, ‘‘What is the wages 
of sin?’”’ ‘‘Death.’’ Explain to him the meaning of death, 
literal death, spiritual death, eternal death. Now say, ‘‘This 
is the wages of sin, have you earned these wages?’’ ‘“‘Are you 
willing to take them?’’ ‘‘No.’’ ‘‘Well, there is one alter- 
native, read the remainder of the verse.”’ ‘‘The gift of God 
is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.’’ ‘‘ Now you 
have your choice between the two, the wages that you have 
earned by sin, and the gift of God; which will you choose?’’ 

Another very useful passage along this line is Is. 57: 21: 

‘“There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked.’’ 

Another verse declaring the fearful consequences of sin, 
is Jno. 8: 34: 

‘Jesus answered them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever 

committeth sin is the servant of sin.’’ 

Have the one with whom you are dealing read the passage, 
then ask him what every one who commits sin is, ‘‘ The 
servant of sin.’’ ‘‘What kind of a service is that?’’ Bring it 
out that itis very degrading. Ask the inquirer if he appre- 
ciates that this is true of him, that he is the servant of sin, 
and then ask him if he does not want to be set free from this 
awful bondage. 


THOSE WHO HAVE LITTLE CONCERN 53 


There is another passage that one can use in much the 
same way, Rom. 6:16: 


‘‘Know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, 
his servants ye are whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of 
obedience unto righteousness?’’ 


III. Show him the awfulness of unbelief in Jesus Christ. 


Very few out of Christ realize that unbelief in Jesus 
Christ is anything very bad. Of course they know it is not 
just right, but that it is something awful and appalling, they 
do not dream for a moment. They should be shown that 
there is nothing more appalling than unbelief in Jesus Christ. 
A good passage for this purpose is Jno. 3: 18, 19: 

‘‘He that believeth on him is not condemned: but he that believeth 
not is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the name of 
the only begotten Son of God. And this is the condemnation, that 
light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, 
because their deeds were evil.”’ 

When the passage has been read, say, ‘‘Now this verse tells 
us of some one who is condemned already; who is it?’’ ‘‘He 
that believeth not.’’ ‘‘Believeth not on whom?’’ ‘On 
Jesus.’’ ‘‘How many that believe not on Jesus are con- 
demned already?’’ ‘‘Every one.’’ ‘‘Why is every one that 
believeth not on Jesus condemned already?’’ ‘‘Because he 
has not believed on the name of the only begotten Son of 
God.’”’ ‘‘Why is this such an awful thing in the sight of 
God?’’ ‘Because light is come into the world, and men loved 
darkness rather than light because their deeds are evil.’’ “In 
whom did the light come into the world?’’ ‘‘In Jesus.”’ 
*‘Jesus then, is the incarnation of light, God’s fullest revela- 
tion to man: to reject Jesus then, is the deliberate rejection 
Bt what?’ ‘‘Light.”” ‘The choice of what?’’ “Darkness.” 
“In rejecting Jesus, what are you rejecting?’ ‘‘Light.”’ 
‘“‘And what are you choosing?’’ ‘‘Darkness rather than 
light.’’ Ask all the questions that are necessary to impress 
this truth upon the mind of the unbeliever, that he is deliber- 
ately rejecting the light of God, and choosing darkness rather 
than light. 

Another very useful passage for the same purpose is 


Acts 2:36, 37: 


54 HOW TO WORK 


“Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God hath 
made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ. 
Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said 
unto Peter and to the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren, what shall 
we do?’’ 

When the passage is read, say, ‘‘Now here were certain men 
under deep conviction of sin, crying out, ‘Men and brethren, 
what shall we do?? What was the sin that they committed 
that produced such deep conviction?” ‘They had crucified 
Jesus.’’ ‘“‘What had God done with Jesus?” ‘‘He had made 
Him both Lord and Christ.’’? ‘‘These men had rejected One 
whom God hath made both Lord and Christ. Is that a serious 
sin??? ‘‘Yes.’? ‘‘And are you not guilty of that very sin 
to-day? You are rejecting Jesus, and this Jesus whom you 
are rejecting, is the very one whom God hath made both Lord 
and Christ. Is it not an awful sin to deliberately reject one 
whom God hath thus exalted?”’ 

Another good passage to use is John 16: 8, 9: 

“‘And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of right- 
eousness, and of judgment: of sin, because they believe not on me.”’ 

When the passage has been read, ask the one with whom you 
are dealing, ‘‘Of what sin is it, that the Holy Ghost who 
knows the mind of God, especially convicts men?’ ‘Of the 
sin of unbelief.’’ ‘‘What then, is the crowning sin in God’s 
sight?’’ ‘‘Unbelief in Jesus Christ.’’ ‘‘Why is unbelief in 
Jesus Christ the crowning sin in God’s sight?’’ Then bring 
out that it is because it reveals most clearly the heart’s 
deliberate choice of sin rather than righteousness, of darkness 
rather than light, of hatred to God rather than love to God. 

In some cases it is well to use Heb. 10: 28, 29: 

‘‘He that despised Moses’ law died without mercy under two or three 
witnesses: of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be 
thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath 
counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an 
unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit of grace?’’ 

When the passage has been read, ask the inquirer, ‘‘'How 
serious an offence was it in God’s sight to despise Moses’ 
law?’ *‘The one who did it died without mercy.’’ ‘‘Is there 
any offense more serious in God’s sight than despising the 
law of Moses?’’ ‘‘Yes, treading under foot the Son of God.”’ 


THOSE WHO HAVE LITTLE CONCERN 55 


“Does not every one who rejects Jesus Christ, practically 
tread under foot the Son of God, and count the blood of the 
covenant wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing?’ 
*““Yes, I suppose he does.’’ ‘‘Are you not committing this 
very sin?’’ 


IV. Show him the awful consequences of unbelief. 


For this purpose begin by using Heb 11: 6, the first of the 

verse: 

“But without faith it is impossible to please him.”’ 

*‘Now this verse tells you that there is one thing that God 
absolutely requires if we are to please him: what is it?’’ 
“Faith.’’ “And no matter what else we do, if we have not 
faith, what is impossible for us?” ‘‘To please him.’’ 

Follow this up by John 8: 24: 

“T said therefore unto you, that ye shall die in your sins: for if ye 
believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins.”’ 

**What does this verse tell us will happen to you if you do not 
believe in Jesus?’’ ‘“‘I shall die in my sins.’’ Then have the 
inquirer read verse 21, 

“Then said Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek 

me, and shall die in your sins: whither I go, ye cannot come.”’ 
That will show the result of once dying in his sins. 

Further follow this up by 2 Thess. 1:7-9: 

“‘And to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shail 
be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire taking 
vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of 
our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with everlasting destruc- 
tion from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.” 

Say to the inquirer, ‘‘This verse tells us of a coming day in 
which Jesus is to take vengeance upon a certain class of 
people, and they are to be punished with everlasting destruc- 
tion from the presence of the Lord and the glory of His 
power. Who is it that are to be thus punished?’’ ‘They 
that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord 
Jesus. Christ.’”’ ‘‘Are you obeying the Gospel of the Lord 
Jesus Christ.’’ ‘‘No.’’ “If then, Christ should come now, what 
would be your destiny?’’. ‘‘I should be punished with ever- 


56 HOW TO WORK 


lasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the 
glory of His power.”’ 

Then turn to Rev. 21:8. This verse needs no comment, 

it tells its own story: 

“But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and mur- 
derers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall 
have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: which 
is the second death.’’ 

Rev. 20:15 may also be used: 


“And whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast 
into the lake of fire.’’ 


V. Show him that all one has to do to be lost, is simply to 
neglect the salvation that is offered in Christ. 


A verse which will serve for this purpose is Heb. 2: 3: 
‘‘How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; which at the 
first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them 
that heard him.”’ 
When the verse has been read, ask, ‘What does this verse tell 
us is all that is necessary to be done in order to be lost?” 
‘‘Simply neglect the great salvation.’? ‘‘That is the very 
thing that you are doing to-day; you are already lost. God 
has provided salvation for you at great cost: all you need to 
do to be saved, is to accept the salvation, but you cannot be 
saved any other way; and all you need to do to be lost, is sim- 
ply to neglect it. You do not need to plunge into desperate 
vices, you do not need to be an open and avowed infidel, you 
do not need to refuse even to accept salvation, if you simply 
neglect it, you will be lost forever. Will you not let the ques- 
tion of the text sink deep into your heart? ‘How shall we 
escape if we neglect so great salvation?’ ’’ 
Another passage to use for this purpose is Acts 3: 22, 23: 


‘For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your 
God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear 
in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to 
pass, that every soul, which will not hear that Prophet, shall be 
destroyed from among the people.”’ 


**This passage tells us about a Prophet that Moses said the 
Lord would raise up. Who was that Prophet?’ ‘‘Jesus.”’ 


THOSE WHO HAVE LITTLE CONCERN 57 


‘““What does God tell us to do with that Prophet?’’ ‘‘Hear 
him ‘in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you.’”’ 
““What shall happen unto him who does not hearken unto the 


words of that Prophet?’’ ‘‘He shall be destroyed from among 
the people.’’ ‘‘Are you hearkening unto the words of that 
Prophet?”’ 


Still another passage to use is Acts 13: 38-41: 


“Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through 
this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins: and by him all 
that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be jus- 
tified by the law of Moses. 

‘‘Beware therefore, lest that come upon you, which is spoken of in the 
prophets; Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish: for I worka 
work in your days, a work which ye shall in no wise believe, though a 

‘man declare it unto you.” 

**These verses tell us about Jesus. They tell us of something 
that is preached tous through Him. Whatisit?’’ ‘‘Forgive- 
ness of sins.’’ ‘“‘They tell us what it is that a man has to do 
to obtain this forgiveness of sins, what is it?’’ ‘‘Believe on 
Him.’’ ‘‘What blessing comes to all that believe?’ ‘‘They 
are justified from all things.’’ ‘‘On the other hand, what 
comes to us if we neglect to believe?’’ ‘‘We shall perish.’’ 

Still another passage to use for this purpose is Jno. 3: 36: 

“He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that 
believeth not the Son shall shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth 
on him.” 

When the passage has been read, ask, ‘‘What does everyone 
who believes on the Son get?’’ ‘‘Everlasting life.’’ ‘‘But on 
the other hand, if one simply neglects to believe what will be 
the result?’”’ ‘‘He shall not see life, but the wrath of God 


abideth upon him.”’ 


VI. Show him the wonderful love of God to him. 

Oftentimes when every other method of dealing with the 
careless fails, a realization of the love of God breaks the 
heart, and leads to an acceptance of Christ. There is no 
better passage to show the love of God than Jno, 3: 16: 

“For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, 

that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting 
life.’’ 


58 HOW TO WORK 


Generally it will need no comment. I was once dealing 
with one of the most careless and vile women I ever met. 
She moved in good society, but in her secret life was vile as a 
woman of the street. She told me the story of her life ina 
most shameless and unblushing way, half-laughing as she did 
it. I made no further reply than to ask her to read Jno. 3: 16 
to which I had opened my Bible. Before she had read the 
passage through, she burst into tears, her heart broken by the 
love of God to her. 

Another excellent passage to use in the same way is Is. 

53:5: 

“But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our 
iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his 
stripes we are healed.”’ 

God used this passage one night to bring to tears and penitence 
one of the most stubborn and wayward young women with 
whom I ever dealt. I made almost no comment, simply read 
the passage to her. The Spirit of God seemed to hold up 
before her, her Saviour, wounded for her transgressions, and 
bruised for her iniquities. Her stubborn will gave way, and 
before many days she was rejoicing in Christ. 

Two other passages which can be used in the same way, 

are, Gal. 3-13 and 1 Pet, os245 

“Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a 


curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth ona 
tree ;”’ 


‘‘Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we, 


being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness: by whose stripes ye 
were healed.”’ 


After showing the love of God through the use of such 
passages as these mentioned, it is oftentimes well to clinch 
this truth by using Rom. 2:4, 5: 

“Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and 

long suffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to 
repentance? But after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up 


unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the right- 
eous judgment of God.”’ 


Before having the passage read, say, ‘‘Now we have been look- 
ing at the love of God to you, let us see what God tells us is 
the purpose of that love, and what will be the result of our 


THOSE WHO HAVE LITTLE CONCERN 59 


despising it.” Then have the passage, Rom. 2:4, 5 read by 
the one with whom you are dealing. When he has read it, ask 
him what is the purpose cf God’s goodness. ‘‘To lead to 
repentance.’’ “‘If it does not lead us to repentance, what 
does it show us about our hearts?’’ ‘‘That they are very hard 
and impenitent.’’ ‘‘And if we refuse to let the goodness of 
God lead us to repentance, what will be the result?” ‘‘We 
treasure up wrath unto ourselves against the day of wrath and 
revelation of the righteous judgment of God.’ 

Of course it will not always be possible to get a person 
who has little or no concern about his salvation to talk with 
you long enough to go over all these passages, but not infre- 
quently they will become so interested after the use of the 
first or second passage, that they will be glad to go through. 
Oftentimes it is not at all necessary to use all these passages. 
Not infrequently I find that the first passage, Matt. 22: 37, 38, 
does the desired work, but it is well to be thorough, and to 
use all the passages necessary. 

Sometimes one will not talk with you for any length of time 
at all. In such a case, the best thing to do is to select a very 
pointed and searching passage and give it to them, repeating 
it again and again, and then as taney go, say to them some- 
thing like this, ‘I am going to ask God to burn that passage 
into your heart;’’ and then do not forget to do what you said 
you were going to do. Good passages for this purpose are 
fou, 6:23; Mark 16:16; Jno. 3: 36; Is. 57: 21. 

When the inquirer has been led by the use of any or all of 
these passages to realize his need of a Saviour, and really desires 
to be saved, of course he comes under the class treated in the 
preceding chapter, and should be dealt with accordingly. It 
is not intended that the worker shall follow the precise method 
laid down here, it is given rather by way of suggestion, but 
the general plan here outlined, has been honored of God to 
the salvation of very many. But let us be sure, whether we 
use this method or some other, to do thorough-going and last- 
ing work. 

Of course it is not supposed that the inquirer will always 
answer you exactly as stated above. If he does not, make use 
of the answers that he does give, or if necessary ask the same 


60 HOW TO WORK 


question another way until he does answer you correctly. 
The answers given to the questions are found in the text, but 
people have a great habit of not seeing what is plainly stated 
in a Scripture text. Oftentimes when they do not answer 
right, it is well to ask them to look at the verse again, and 
repeat the question, and keep asking questions until they do 
give the right answer. Perhaps the inquirer will try to switch 
you off on to some side-track. Do not permit him to do this, 
but hold right to the matter in hand. 


CHAPTER VII 


HOW TO DEAL WITH THOSE WHO HAVE 
DIFFICULTIES 


We will find that a very large number of the persons 
whom we try to lead to Christ are really anxious to be saved, 
and know how, but are confronted with difficulties which they 
deem important or even insurmountable. Whenever it is pos- 
sible, it is well to show such persons their need of Christ 
before taking up a specific difficulty. In this way many of the 
supposed difficulties are dissipated. Oftentimes even when 
people really are anxious to be saved, there is not that deep, 
clear, and intelligent knowledge of their need of Christ that is 
desirable. It is usually a waste of time to take up specific 
difficulties until there is this clear and definite sense of need. 


I. “I am too great a sinner.” 

This is a difficulty that is very real, and very often met, 
but fortunately it is also one with which it is very easy to 
deal. The method of treatment is as follows: 

1. General treatment: 

There is no better passage to use to meet this’ difficulty 
Phan © Lim. “1: 15): 

“This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ 

Jesus came into the world ¢o save stnners,; of whom I am chief.” 
This verse so exactly fits the case, that there is little need for 
comment. At the close of a Sunday morning service, I spoke 
to a man of intelligence and ability, but who had gone down 
into the deepest depth of sin. When asked why he was nota 
Christian, he replied, ‘‘I am too great a sinner to be saved.”’ 
I turned him at once to1 Tim. 1:15. No sooner had I read 
the verse than he replied, ‘‘Well, I am the chief of sinners.’’ 
‘“That verse means you, then.’’ He replied, ‘‘It is a precious 
61 


62 HOW TO WORK 


promise.’’ I said, ‘‘Will you accept it now?’’ ‘“‘I will.”’ 
Then I said, ‘‘Let us kneel down and tell God so.’’ We knelt 
down and he confessed to God his sins, and asked God for 
Christ’s sake to forgive him. When he had finished his 
prayer, I asked him if he really had accepted Christ, and he 
said that he had. I asked him if he really believed that he 
was accepted, and he said he did. He took the first oppor- 
tunity afforded him of confessing Christ, and became an active 
Christian. His broken home was restored, and every day he 
was found witnessing for his Master. 

Another useful passage in dealing with this class is Matt. 

Ost21x3: 

“But when Jesus heard that, he said unto them, They that be whole 
need not a physician, but they that are sick. But go ye and learn what 
that meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: for ] am not come 
to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.”’ 

This shows the inquirer at once that his sin, instead of being 
an obstacle in the way of his coming to Christ, really fits him 
for coming to Christ, as He has not come to call the right- 
eous, but sinners to repentance. 

I have frequently used Rom. 5: 6-8: 

“For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died 
for the ungodly. For scarcely for a righteous man will one die: yet 
peradventure for a good man some would even dare to die. But God 
commendeth his love towards us, in that, while we were yet sinners, 
Christ died for us.”’ 

At the close of an evening service in Minneapolis, a man who 
had raised his hand for prayer, hurried away as soon as the 
benediction was pronounced. I hastened after him, laid my 
hand upon his shoulder, and said, ‘‘Did you not hold your 
hand up to-night for prayer?’’ ‘“‘Yes.’’ ‘‘Why then are you 
hurrying away?’’ He replied, ‘“‘There is no use talking to 
me.’’ I said, ‘‘God loves you.’’ He replied, ‘‘ You do not know 
whom you are talking to.” “‘I donot care whom I am talking to, 
but I know God loves you.’’ Hesaid, ‘‘I am the meanest thief 
in Minneapolis.’’ ‘‘Then I know God loves you;’’ and I opened 
my Bible to Rom. 5:6-8 and read the passage through. 
‘‘Now,”’ I said, “if you are the meanest thief in Minneapolis, 
you area sinner, and this verse tells us that God loves sinners.”’ 
‘She Spirit of God carried the message of love home to his 


THOSE WHO HAVE DIFFICULTIES 63 


heart, he broke down, and going with me into another room, 
he told me the story of his life. Hehad been released from 
confinement that day, and had started out that night to com- 
mit what he said would have been one of the most daring 
burglaries ever committed in Minneapolis. With his two 
companions in crime, he was passing a corner where we were 
holding an open-air meeting. He stopped a few moments to 
hear what was going on, and in spite of the oaths and protests 
of his companions, stayed through the meeting, and went with 
us into the mission. It so happened that a few days before he 
had dreamed in confinement of his mother, and the hearing of 
the Gospel added to this, and the few words that had been 
spoken to him personally, had completed the work. After he 
had told me his story, we knelt in prayer. Utterly overcome 
with emotion, through falling tears he looked to God for par- 
don, and left the room rejoicing in the assurance that his sins 
had all been forgiven. 

It is often well to say to the man who thinks that he is 
too great a sinner, ‘‘Your sins are great, greater far than you 
think, but they are all settled.”” In order to show him how 
they are settled, and to make it clear that they are settled 
turn to Is. 53:6: 

2. Special cases: 

Among those who regard themselves as too great sinners 
to be saved, there are special cases: 

(1) The man who says, ’’I am lost.”’ 

If the difficulty is stated in this way, it is well to use Luke 
19:10, as that fits so exactly the inquirer’s statement of the 
case; for the verse says: 


“For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost,” 


I was once speaking toa young man who was the complete 
slave of drink and other sins, and urging him to accept the 
Saviour. He turned to me ina despairing way and said, ‘‘Mr. 
Torrey go talk to those other men, there is no use talking to 
me, I am lost.” I replied, ‘‘If you are lost, I have a message 
from God’s Word addressed directly to you.” I turned to 
Luke 19:10 and read, ‘‘For the Son of man is come to seek 
and to save that which was lost.’’ The text fitted the case so 


64 HOW TO WORK 


exactly, that there was no need of comment or explanation on 
my part. 

(2) Murderers. 

Among those who think that they are too great sinners to 
be saved, murderers form an especial class. I find that not a 
few who have stained their hands with the blood of a fellow- 
man have a deep-seated impression that there is no hope for a 
man who has committed this sin. Is. 1:18 is very useful in 
such acase. One nightI was dealing with a man who was 
sure that he was beyond all hope. I asked him why he 
thought so, and he replied, because he had taken the life of a 
fellow-man. I said, ‘‘Let me read you something from God’s 
Word, and I read: 


“Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your 
sins be as scarlet, they shall? be as white as snow; though they be red 
like crimson, they shall be as wool.” 

I said, “If you have taken the life of a fellow-man, your sins 
are as scarlet.’’ ‘‘Oh,’’ he cried, ‘‘the bullet was scarlet, I 
can see it now.’’ Then I asked him to listen again to the 
promise, ‘‘Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as 
white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be 
as wool.’’ He saw how the promise exactly covered his case, 
and it brought hope into a heart that had been filled with 
despair. 

Another useful passage is Ps. 51: 14: 


“Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation,’’ 


In using this passage, I always call the inquirer’s attention to 
the fact that it is the prayer of aman who had himself stained 
his hands with the blood of a fellow-man. Then I tell him 
how God heard the prayer, and delivered him from blood 
guiltiness, and then turn to Ps. 32: 5 containing the Psalmist’s 
own statement as to how his sin of bloodguiltiness was for- 
given. 

“TI acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not 


hid. I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord; and thou 
forgavest the iniquity of my sin.” 


3. General Remarks: 
(1) Never give false comfort by telling the inquirer, ‘* You 
are not a very great sinner.’’ This mistake is often made. 


THOSE WHO HAVE DIFFICULTIES — 65 


Tender hearted people are greatly disturbed over the deep 
conviction of sin that the Spirit of God produces in the hearts 
of men, and try to give comfort by telling the inquirer that 
he is not so great asinner after all. This is false comfort. 
There is no man but who isa greater sinner than he ever 
thinks or realizes. 

(2) After meeting the specific difficulty, show the inquirer 
how to be saved. The method of doing this is explained in 
Chapter V. This remark applies not only to this difficulty, 
but to all the difficulties that follow. It is not enough to 
remove difficulties, we must bring inquirers to a saving knowl- 
edge of Christ. 


II. “My heart is too hard.” 

One of the passages given under the former difficulty will 
also be useful here, Luke 19:10. Before using it, it may be 
well to say, ‘‘Well then, if your heart is so hard and wicked, 
you must be lost.’’ ‘‘Yes, Iam lost.’? ‘‘Very well, I have a 


promise for you.’’ Turn to Luke 19:10 and let them read. 
‘You said that your heart was so hard and wicked that you 
were lost.’’ ‘‘Yes.’’ ‘‘And this verse tells us that Jesus 


Christ is come to seek and to save, whom?’’ ‘‘The lost.’’ 
‘‘And that means you, will you let Him save you now?’’ 

Another useful passage is John 6: 37, the last half of the 
verse, 

“‘Him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out.” 
You can say, ‘‘You think your heart is so hard and wicked that 
you cannot be saved, but would you be willing to come to Christ 
if He would accept you?’ ‘‘Yes.’’ ‘‘Well, let us listen to 
what He says.’’ Then read the passage, ‘‘Him that cometh 
to me I will in no wise cast out.’’ ‘‘Whom does Jesus say here 
that He will receive?’’ ‘‘Any one who comes.” ‘*‘Does He 
say He will receive any one who comes provided their heart 
is not too hard and wicked?’’ ‘‘No.’’? ‘‘What does He say?’ 
“That He will receive any one who comes.” ‘‘Then He will 
receive any one whocomes no matter how hard and wicked 
their heart?’ ‘‘Yes.”’ ‘‘Will you come now?”’ 

Ez. 36: 26, 27 is helpful in many cases. You can say to 
the inquirer, ‘‘Yes, your heart is too hard and wicked, but let 


66 HOW TO WORK 


us see what God promises to do.’’ Then have them read the 
passage: ; 

“A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within 
you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will 
give you an heartof flesh. And I will put my Spirit within you, and 
cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and 
do them.”’ 

‘‘What does God here promise to give?’’ ‘‘A new heart.’’ 
‘‘Are you willing that He should give you a new heart in 
place of that hard and wicked heart that you have?’’ 

Another passage which is helpfulin much the same way 

19.2 COP, 52117 

“Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things 

are passed away; behold, all things are become new.”’ 
““Yes,’’ you can say to the one in trouble, ‘‘your heart is too 
hard and wicked, what you need is to be made all over new; 
there is a way to be made all over, to get a new heart and to 
be anew man. Let me show you what that way is.’’ Then 
let them read the passage. When they have read it, ask 
them, ‘‘What does the one who accepts Christ become?’’ ‘‘A 
new creature.’’ ‘“‘What becomes of the old things?’’ ‘*They 


are passed away.’’ ‘‘Do you want to be a new creature, and 
have old things pass away?” ‘‘Yes.’’ ‘‘What then is all that 
you have to do?” ‘Accept Christ.’’ ‘‘Will you do it?’’ 


III. “I must become better before I become a Christian.” 

This is a very real difficulty with many people. They sin- 
cerely believe that they cannot come to Christ just as they are 
in their sins, that they must do something to make themselves 
better before they can come to Him. You can show them 
that they are utterly mistaken in this by having them read 
Matti ‘os12, 13: 

“But when Jesus heard that, he said unto them, They that be whole 
need not a physician, but they that are sick. But go ye and learn what 
that meaneth, I will have mercy and not sacrifice: for I am not come 
to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.”’ 

When they have read it, if they do not see the point for them- 
selves, you can ask, ‘*To what does Jesus compare Himself in 
this verse?’ ‘*Toaphysician.’’ ‘‘Who is it need a physician, 
well people or sick people?’’ ‘‘Sick people.’’ ‘‘Ought a 


THOSE WHO HAVE DIFFICULTIES 67 


person who is sick to wait until he gets well before he gets to . 
the doctor?’’ ‘‘No, of course, not.’’ ‘‘Ought a person who is 
spiritually sick to wait until he is better before he comes to 
Jesus?’ “‘No.’’? ‘‘Who is it Jesus invites to come to Him- 
self, good people or bad people?’’ ‘‘Bad people.’’ ‘‘Is then 
the fact that you are not good a reason for waiting or a reason 
for coming to Jesus at once?’’ 

Luke 15: 18-24 also fits the case exactly. Show the 
inquirer that we have in this story a picture of God’s relation 
to the sinner, and God wishes us to understand that He would 
have the sinner come in all his rags, and that He will give 
him a hearty welcome, a robe, a ring and a feast if he comes 
just as he is. 

Luke 18: 10-14 also applies. You can say, ‘‘Here are two 
men who came to God. One came on the ground that he was 
a sinner, the other came on the ground that he was righteous. 
Which of the two did God accept?’’ ‘*The one who came on 
the ground that he was a sinner.’’ ‘‘Well, God would have 
you come just the same way.”’ 


IV. “I cannot hold out,” (or “I am afraid I shall fail if I 
try”). 

1. General treatment. 

First see if the inquirer is in dead earnest, and if there is 
not some other difficulty lying back of this. Many a man 
gives this as a difficulty, when perhaps it is not the real one. 

There is perhaps no better verse in the Bible for this diffi- 
culty than Jude 24: 

“‘Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present 

you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy.” 
Its application is so plain as to need no comment. 
Another useful passage is 1 Pet. 1:5: 
“Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation 
ready to be revealed in the last time.” 
When the inquirer has read it, ask him by whose power it is 
that we arekept. Then you can say, “It is not then a ques- 
tion of our strength at all, but of God’s strength. Do you 
think that God is able to keep you?”’ 
Other passages which are helpful along the same line are: 


68 HOW TO WORK 


“Bor the which cause I also suffer these things: nevertheless I am 
not ashamed: for I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that 
he ts able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that 
day.”’? 2 Tim. 1: 12. 

“Pear thou not; for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy 
God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold 
thee with the right hand of my righteousness.”’ Is, 41: ro. 

“‘Ror I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee, 
Fear not; I will help thee.” Is. 41: 13. 


A passage which will help by showing the absolute 
security of Christ’s sheep, is Jno. 10: 28, 29: 

“And I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, 
neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. MyFather, which 
gave them me, is greater than all; and no man is able to pluck them 
out of my Father’s hand.”’ 

In many cases a good passage to use is Heb. 7: 25: 

“‘Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come 
unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them.” 

2. Special cases. 

(1) Those afraid of some temptation that will prove too 

strong. 

The best passage to use in such a case is 1 Cor. 10: 13: 

“There hath no temptation taken you but such as is common to man; 
put God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that 


ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, 
that ye may be able to bear it.” 


(2) Those who dwell upon their own weakness. 


“And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee; for my 
strength is made perfect tn weakness. Most gladly therefore will I 
rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon 
Mere COMgla gato: 

“‘He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he 
increaseth strength. Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the 
young men shall utterly fall: but they that wait upon the Lord shall 
renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they 
‘shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint.”’ Is. 
40: 29-31. 

One evening a lady called me to a man whom she was trying to 
lead to Christ and asked me if I could help him. I said to him, 
“What is your difficulty?’’ He replied, ‘‘I have no strength.”’ 
*‘Ah,’’ I said, ‘I have a message that exactly fits your case,”’ 
and read Is. 40: 29, ‘‘He giveth power to the faint, and to 


THOSE WHO HAVE DIFFICULTIES = 69 


them that have no might he increaseth strength.’? ‘You say 
you have no strength, that is no might; now this verse tells 
us that to those who have no might, that is to people just like 
you, God increaseth strength.’? The Holy Spirit took the 
word of comfort home to his heart at once, and he put his 
trust in Jesus Christ then and there. 


V. “I cannot give up my evil ways.” 


1. You must or perish, 

In order to prove this statement, use: 

“For the wages of sinis death; but the gift of God is eternal tife 
through Jesus Christ our Lord.’’ Rom. 6: 23. 

“Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, 
that shall he alsoreap. For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the 
flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit 
reap life everlasting.”’ Gal. 6:7, 8. 

“But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and mur- 
derers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, 
shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: 
which is the second death.’’ Rev. 21: 8. 

Drive this thought home. Show the inquirer no quarter, but 
keep ringing the changes on the thought, ‘‘You must give up 
your evil ways or perish.’”’ Emphasize it by Scripture. 
When the inquirer sees and realizes this, then you can pass 
on to the next thought. 

2. You can in the strength of Jesus Christ. 

To prove this, have the inquirer read Phil. 4: 13, and Jno. 
8: 36: 

“T can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me.”’ 

“Tf the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.”’ 

3. Show the risen Christ with all power in heaven and 
on earth. 

It is in the power of the risen Christ, and through union 
with Him, that we are enabled to give up our evil ways, so the 
one who has this difficulty should have the fact that Christ is 
risen made clear to him. The following passages will serve 


well for this purpose. 

‘“‘Moreover, brethren, I declare unto you the Gospel which I preached 
unto you, which also ye have received, and wherein ye stand; by which 
also ye are saved, if ye keepin memory what I preached unto you, 
unless ye have believed in vain. ForI delivered unto you first of alt 


70 HOW TO WORK 


that which I also received, how that Christ died for our sins according 
to the Scriptures; and that he was buried, and that he rose again the 
third day according to the Scriptures.’’ 1 Cor, 15: 1-4. 

“And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All power is given 
unto me in heaven and in earth.” Matt. 28:18. 

“Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come 
unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them.”’ 
Heb. 7: 25. 

4. Show how to get victory over sin. 

There is perhaps nothing in the Bible that makes the way 

of victory over sin more plain and simple than Rom. 6: 12-14: 

“Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey 
it in the lusts thereof. Neither yield ye your members as instruments 
of unrighteousness unto sin: but yzeld yourselves unto God, as those 
that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of right- 
eousness unto God. For sin shall not have dominion over you: for ye 
are not under the law, but under grace.”’ 


You can say to the inquirer, ‘‘In this verse we are told how to 
get victory over sin: we are told what not to do, and what to 
do. What is it we are told not to do?’’ ‘‘Not to let sin reign 
in our mortal body; not to yield our members as instruments 
of unrighteousness unto sin.’’ ‘‘What are we told to do?” 
*“To yield ourselves unto God as those that are alive from the 
dead; and to yield our members as instruments of righteous- 
ness unto God.’”’ ‘‘Now do you believe that through union 
with the risen Christ your Saviour, you are alive from the dead? 
Will you yield or present yourself unto God as one alive from 
the dead? Will you now and here present your members as 
instruments of righteousness unto God?’’ After the inquirer 
has been led to do this, show him that whatever we yield to 
God, God accepts, and that he can now rrust God for victory 
over sin, and have deliverance from his evil ways. 


VI. “I have tried before and failed.” 


Those who have tried to be Christians and have failed in 
the attempt, very naturally hesitate about trying again, and 
such a case needs to be dealt with, with great care, wisdom 
and ale sara 

. The first thing to do is to say to such a one, ‘‘/ can 
poe you how to try and not fail.’? Then point him to 2 Cor. 
9:8: 


THOSE WHO HAVE DIFFICULTIES We | 


“And God is able to make all grace abound toward you; that ye, 
always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good 
work.”’ 

When the person has read the verse, to be sure that he gets 
its meaning you can say, ‘‘This verse tells us that God is able 
to make all grace abound toward us, that we, ‘always hav- 
ing all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good 
work.’ Itis clear then, that there is a way to try and not 
fail.”” 

2. Lind out the cause of failure. 

In finding out the cause of failure, there are seven points 
to be looked into: 

(1) Did you put all your trust for pardon in the finished 
work of Christ? This is a very frequent cause of failure in 
the attempt to be a Christian, the person has never been led 
to see clearly the ground of his salvation, and to trust wholly 
in the finished work of Christ for pardon. Is. 53:6 is a use- 
ful passage at this point: 

“All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to 

his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.’’ 

(2) Did you surrender absolutely to God? Many are led to 
make a profession of faith in Christ without having been led 
to absolute surrender and the Christian life thus begun, is 
very likely to prove a failure. The passage to use at this 
point is Acts 5: 32: 

‘“‘And we are his witnesses of these things; and so is also the Holy 

Ghost, whom God hath given to them that obey him.”’ 


(3) Did you confess Christ openly before men? This is one 
of the most frequent causes of failure. I have talked with 
very many who have said that they have tried to be Christians 
and failed, and a very large proportion of them I have found 
failed at this very point, the lack of a constant, open confes- 
sion of Christ. Good passages to use at this point are Matt. 
fows2, 33 and Rom. 10; 10: 

“‘Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I con- 

fess also before my Father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall 
deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in 


heaven.”’ 
“For witu the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with the 


mouth confession is made unto salvation.”’ 


72 HOW TO WORK 


(4) Did you study the Word of God daily? Here is 
another frequent cause of failure, neglect of the Bible. Very 
few of those who have really begun the Christian life, and who 
have made a practice of daily study of the Word, fail in their 
attempt to be Christians. Good passages to use at this point 
are 1 Pet. 2:2 and Ps. 119: 11: 

‘As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may 

grow thereby.”’ 


“Thy Word have I hid in mine heart that I might not sin against 
thee.”’ 


(5) Did you look each day to God alone, and not to self at 
all, for strength and victory? Toemphasize this question, use: 


‘“‘He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he 
increaseth strength.”’ Is. 40: 29. 

“And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee; for my strength 
is made perfect in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory 
in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me.”’ 2 Cor. 
12: 9. 

‘Likewise, ye younger, submit yourselves unto the elder. Yea, all 
of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility: for God 
resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble.’’ 1 Pet. 5:5. 


(6) Did you pray constantly? Use at this point: 


“Pray without ceasing.’’ 1 Thess. 5: 17. 

“He giveth power to the faint; and, to them that have no might he 
increaseth strength. Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the 
young men shall utterly fall: but ¢ey that wazt upon the Lord shall 
renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they 
shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint.’ Is. 
40: 29-31. 


“Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may 
obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.’"’ Heb. 4:16. 


(7) Did you go to work for Christ? Were use Matt, 
25: 14-29. 


VII. “The Christian life is too hard.’’ 


1. If a person states this as his difficulty, first show him 
that the Christian life is not hard. In Matt. 11:30 Christ 
tells us His yoke is easy: 


“For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light."” 


THOSE WHO HAVE DIFFICULTIES = 73 


Prov. 3:17 shows us that wisdom’s ways are ways of pleasant- 
ness, 

‘‘Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.’’ 
i Jno. 5:3, that God’s commandments are not grievous: 

“For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments: and 

his commandments are not grievous.”’ 

1 Pet. 1:8 pictures the Christian life as a life of joy unspeak- 
able and full of glory: 

“Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom, though now ye see him 
not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.” 
In using the latter passage you might say, ‘‘We havea picture 
of the Christian life in 1 Pet. 1:8, let us see if it isa hard 
life.” Have the inquirer read the verse, and then ask, ‘‘What 
kind of a life according to this passage, is the Christian life?’’ 
‘A life of joy unspeakable and full of glory.” ‘‘Do you think 

that is hard?’’ 

2. Show him that the way of sin ts hard. 

Show the inquirer that it is not the Christian life, but the 
life without Christ that is the hard life. For this purpose use 
the last half of Prov. 13:15, and Is. 57: 21: 


“But the way of transgressors is hard.”’ 
‘There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked.” 


VIII. ‘‘There is too much to give up.” 

This is often the difficulty even when not stated. 

1. First show the inquirer, that xo matter how much there 
may be to give up, tt is better to give up anything than to_lose 
one’s soul. 

For this purpose use Mark 8: 36: 

“For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and 

lose his own soul?”’ 

2. Show the inquirer that the only things we have to give 
up are the things which will harm us. 

This is made clear by Ps. 84: 11: 

“For the Lord God isa sun and shield; the Lord will give grace and 

glory; xo good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.’’ 
When the inquirer has read the verse, ask him, ‘‘What does 
this verse tell us that God will not withhold from us?”’ ‘‘Any 
good thing.’’ ‘‘The things then that God asks you to give up, 


74 HOW TO WORK 


are what kind of things?’ ‘‘Evil things.’’ ‘‘Then all God 
asks you to give up are the things which are harmful to you. 
Do you wish to keep them?”’ 

I have found Rom. 8: 32 very effective, for it emphasizes 
the thought that if God loved us enough to give His Son to 
die for us on the Cross, He will freely give us all things: 

“He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how 

shall he not with him also freely give us all things?’’ 

I once had a long conversation with a young woman who was 
having a great struggle about accepting Christ. She was very 
fond of the world and certain forms of amusement, which she 
felt she would have to give up if she became a Christian. 
Finally I said to her, ‘‘Do you think God loves you?’’ ‘Yes, I 
know He does.”’ ‘‘How much does God love you?’’ ‘‘Enough 
to give His Son to die for me,’’ she replied. ‘‘Do you think if 
God loved you enough to give His Son to die for you, He will 
ask you to give up anything that is for your good to keep?’’ 
“No, certainly He will not.’’ ‘‘Do you wish to keep anything 
not for your good to keep?’ (No. si ben sdonyvousnor 
think you had better accept Jesus Christ right here and now?’’ 
““Yes,’’ and she did. 

Another verse which is useful as showing the inquirer that 
the things which he has to give up are the things which are 
passing away, is 1 Jno. 2: 15-17: 


“Love not the world, neither the things that arein the world. If any 
man love the world, the love of the Father is notin him. For all that is 
in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride 
of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world passeth 


away, and the lust thereof; but he that doeth the will of God abideth 
for ever.’’ 


3. Show the inquirer that what we give up is nothing to 
what we get. 
For this purpose use Phil. 3: 7, 8: 
“But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ. 
Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the 
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss 
of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ.” 
You can call the inquirer’s attention to the fact that it was 
Paul who spoke these words, that perhaps no one ever gave 
up more for Christ than he did, and yet he here tells us that 


THOSE WHO HAVE DIFFICULTIES 75 


what he gave up was to what he got only as the refuse of the 
street. 

4. Show the inquirer that if he rejects Christ for fear of 
what he will have to give up if he accepts Him, he will make a 
terrible mistake. 

Then you can say to him, ‘‘The Bible pictures to us a man 
who made this very mistake. Will you read the story of his 
folly and its consequences?’’ Then turn to Luke 12: 16-21 
and let the inquirer read it. When he has read it, ask him if 
he is willing to follow in the footsteps of the man in the pas- 
sage. 


TX. “I cannot be a Christian in my business.’’ (or ‘‘It will 
hurt my business,’’ or ‘‘I will lose my position.’’) 

This is a very real difficulty with many, and must be met 
honestly and squarely. 

1. It is well to bear in mind that even when a man really 
thinks this is true, it is not always so. Many people have an 
idea that it is impossible to be a Christian in any line of busi- 
ness except Christian work. They must be shown that this is 
amistake. When aman makes this excuse, it is often well to 
ask him what his business is, and why he cannot be a Christian 
init. Sometimes you will find that it is a business in which 
there are many Christians, and you can tell him that there are 
many Christians in the same business. 

2. But oftentimes it is true that the man with whom you 
are dealing is in a business in which it is impossible to bea 
Christian, for example, the man may be a bartender or a 
theatrical manager or something of that sort. In that case 
say to the man, ‘‘You had better lose your business (or posi- 
tion) than to lose your soul.” To drive this statement home, 
use Mark 8: 36: 

“For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and 

lose his own soul?’ 
Do not pass on to the next point until the man sees this and 
realizes it. Make the man feel that he better lose every dollar 
that he has in the world than to lose his soul. When the man 
sees this, and is ready te give up his business at any cost, you . 
can use Matt. 6: 33: 


76 HOW TO WORK 


“But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all 
these things shall be added unto you.” 
This verse will show him that if he puts God and His kingdom 
first, all needful things will be supplied to him. It is better 
to starve than to reject Christ, but no man who accepts Christ 
will be left to starve. 
Another very useful passage is Mark 10: 29, 30: 


“And Jesus answered and said, Verily I say unto you, There is no 
man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, 
or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the Gospel’s, but he shall 
receive an hundred fold now in this time, houses,and brethren, and 
sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions; and in 
the world to come eternal life.”’ 


X. ‘‘I will lose my friends.’’ 


Many a person who contemplates beginning the Christian 
life has none but ungodly companions, and he sees very clearly 
that if he becomes a Christian he will lose these friends, the 
only ones that he has; so this difficulty is a very real one. 

1. First show the inquirer that he is better off without 
these friends, for they are enemies of God. Use for this pur- 
pose James 4: 4: 

“Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of 
the world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of 
the world is the enemy of God.”’ 

Before giving it to the inquirer to read, say, ‘‘ Yes, it may be 
that you will lose your friends, but if your friends are godless, 
you are better off without them, see what God’s Word says 
about it.’” Then show them the passage. If this verse does 
not prove sufficiently effective, follow it up with Prov. 13: 20: 


“He that walketh with wise men shall be wise: but a companion of 
fools shall be destroyed.”’ 


Follow this up with Ps. 1:1, 2: 


“Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, 
nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scorn- 
ful. But his delight is in the law of the Lord; and in his law doth he 
meditate day and night.” 

Call the inquirer’s attention to the fact that God has promised 
an especial blessing to those who turn their backs upon god- 
less friendships in order to obey Him. 


: 


THOSE WHO HAVE DIFFICULTIES 77 


2. Having made this first point clear, you can say, ‘‘You 
may lose your godless friends, but you will get better friends,’’ 
and turn them to 1 John 1: 3: 

‘‘That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye 
also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the 
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.’’ 

When they have read it you can say, ‘‘If you do lose your god- 
less friends by coming to Christ, what two new friends do you 
get?’ “‘The Father and His Son Jesus Christ.’’ ‘Which 
would you rather have for friends, your godless worldly com- 
panions, or God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ?’ All 
this may be followed up again by Mark 10: 29, 30. 


XI. “I am afraid of ridicule.’’ 
1. Show the awful peril in being governed by the fear of 
man. Use Prov. 29: 25: 


“The fear of man bringeth asnare; but whoso putteth his trust in 
the Lord shall be safe.”’ 


You might explain that this snare into which the one who is 
afraid of ridicule and rejects Christ falls, often results in the 
eternal ruin of the soul. 

Next use Mark 8: 38: 

‘“‘Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words in 
this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man 
be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy 
angels.’’ 

2. Show that it is a glorious privilege to be ridiculed for 

Christ. Use for this purpose Matt. 5:11, 12: 

“Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and 
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, 
and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven: for so per- 
secuted they the prophets which were before you.” 


XII. “I will be persecuted if I become a Christian.’’ 

Never tell any one that he will not be persecuted. On 
the contrary say, ‘‘Yes, I presume you will be persecuted, for 
God tells us in His Word, that all who live godly in Christ 
Jesus shall suffer persecution.”” To prove it show him 2 Tim. 
Bs 12: 


78 HOW TO WORK 


“Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer perse- 
cution.’’ 

But then tell him that it is a great privilege to be persecuted 
for Christ’s sake, and brings an abundant reward. Have him 
read Matt. 5: 10-12, and drive home the thought that we ought 
to rejoice at the privilege of being persecuted rather than to 
shrink from being a Christian on that account. 

Then show him the result of suffering with Christ. Turn 
One) Lite cies 

“Tf we suffer, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he also 
will deny us.” 

Use Rom, 8:18 to show him how small are the sufferings 
of this present time in comparison with the glory that we 
shall obtain through them: 

“For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy 

to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.” (Comp. 
2 Cor. 4: 17.) 

Acts 5:40, 41 is useful as showing how the early church 
regarded persecution, rejoicing in it rather than shrinking 
from it: 

‘“‘And to him they agreed: and when they had called the apostles, 
and beaten them, they commanded that they should not speak in the 
name of Jesus, and let them go. And they departed from the presence 
of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame 
for his name.” 

Another passage which is also useful in such a case is 1 

Pety27 20.21: 

‘‘For what glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall 
take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it 
patiently, this is acceptable with God. For even hereunto were ye called; 


because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye 
should follow his steps.’’ 


XIII. ‘‘I have no feeling.’’ 


This is a very common difficulty. There are many who 
wish to come to Christ, but do not think they can come 
because they have not the proper feeling. The first thing to 
do in such a case, it to find out what feeling the inquirer 
thinks it is necessary to have in order to become a Christian. 

1. ‘‘The joy and peace that Christians tell about. 


° 


THOSE WHO HAVE DIFFICULTIES = 79 


The feeling that many inquirers are waiting for is the joy 
and peace that Christians speak of. Of course the thing to do 
in such a case, is to show the inquirer that this joy and peace 
is the result of coming to Christ, and that we cannot expect 
the result before we come. The first passage to use to show 
this is Gal. 5: 22: 

“But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentle- 

ness, goodness, faith.’’ 
This shows that joy and peace are the fruit of the Spirit, and 
we cannot expect to have the fruit of the Spirit until we have 
received the Spirit, and we cannot receive the Spirit until we 
have accepted Christ. This is brought out very clearly in 
Eph. 1:13: 

“In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the 
gospel of your salvation: in whom also, after that ye believed, ye were 
sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise.” 

Emphasize the point that it is after we believe that we aro 
sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise. 

Use also Acts 5: 32: 

‘‘And we are his witnesses of these things; and so is also the Holy 
Ghost, whom God hath given fo them that obey him.”’ 


This will show that the Holy Spirit is given to those who obey 
Christ, and we cannot expect to receive the Holy Spirit until 
we have obeyed God by putting our trust in Jesus Christ and 
confessing Him openly before the world. A verse which wilt 
be useful in this connection as showing that it is after we con- 
fess Christ that He confesses us before the Father, is Matt. 
10: 32: 

‘*Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I con- 

fess also before my Father which is in heaven.” 


And so we have noright to expect the sealing of the Holy 
Spirit until we have confessed Christ before men, 

It is after we have believed that we rejoice with joy 
unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1:8: 


“Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom, though now ye see him 
not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.” 


Our duty is believing with the heart and confessing with 
the mouth, leaving the matter of feeling to God; Rom. ro: 10: 


80 HOW TO WORK 


‘‘Por with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with the 
mouth confession is made unto salvation.’’ 


2. ‘Sorrow for sin.”’ 

The feeling that many are waiting for, is a feeling of sor- 
row forsin. If you find this to be the case with any indi- 
vidual with whom you are dealing, proceed as follows: 

(1) Use the passages already given to produce conviction 
of sin. (See Chapter VI, Section I.) 

(2) Show that it is not sorrow for sin, but turning away 
from sin and accepting Christ that God demands. For this 
purpose use the following passages: 

“Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his 
thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy 
upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.”’ Is. 55: 7. 

‘‘But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the 
sons of God, even to them that believe on his name.’’ John 1:12. 

‘And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be 
saved, and thy house.’’ Acts 16: 31. 

“Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of 


you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall 
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.” Acts 2: 38. 


XIX. “TI have been seeking Christ but cannot find Him.’’ 


1. It is well oftentimes to say to one who raises this diffi- 
culty ‘‘I can tell you just when you will find Christ.”” This 
will probably awaken surprise, but insist, ‘Yes, I can tell you 
just when you will find Christ. If you will turn to Jeremiah 
29:13, you will find the exact time when you will find Christ.’’ 
Then let him read: 

‘And ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me 

with all your heart.”’ 

‘‘Now this verse tells the time when you will find Christ, 
when is it?’’ ‘‘When ye shall search for me with all your heart.’’ 
“The fact is, up to this time, you have not been seeking for 
Him with all your heart. Are you ready to let go of every- 
thing else and seek Him to-day with all your heart?’’ This 
passage has been used in a great many cases to lead out one 
who has been seeking Christ for years, into a real acceptance 
of Him. 


2. It is well sometimes to say to one who raises this 


THOSE WHO HAVE DIFFICULTIES 81 


difficulty, ‘“‘Then you are seeking Christ? Well, did you know 
that Christ also is seeking you??? Then turn to Luke 19:10 
(or Luke 15: 3-10) and read. ‘‘Now you say you are seeking 
Christ, and Christ says He is seeking you, how long ought it 
to take for you to find one another? Will you just come to 
Christ and trust Him here and now?” 

3. Sometimes the best thing to do is to say, ‘‘Well, if you 
are earnestly seeking Christ, let me show you how to find 
Him.’’ Then deal with the inquirer in the way described in 
Chapter V. 


XX. “Christians are so inconsistent.’’ 


This is one of the most common difficulties that we meet. 
Probably the best passage to use is Rom. 14: 12: 


“So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God.” 


When a person raises this difficulty, you can say, ‘‘So you are 
troubled about the sins of Christians; let me show you from 
God’s own Word what He says about that.’’ Then have him 
read the passage. When he has read the passage, ask, ‘‘Who 
does God say you will have to give an account of?’’ ‘‘Myself.’’ 
‘‘Not of inconsistent Christians then?’ ‘‘No.’’ ‘‘Are you 
teady to give an account of yourself to God?’’ The mere 
reading of this verse without comment, has led many who 
have been dwelling upon the inconsistency of others, to see 
themselves lost and undone before God, and to turn and 
accept Christ right there. 

Another useful passage is Rom. 2:1-5. Hand it to the 
inquirer and ask him to read it carefully. When he has read 
it, ask him if this passage does not describe him, if he is not 
judging others for doing the very things he does himself. 
Then ask him what God says about those who judge others 
for what they are doing themselves. Ask him further what 
God says in the third verse that such a person will not escape. 
Ask him what the fourth verse tells him that he is really 
doing; and then ask him what the fifth verse tells him he is 
treasuring up for himself, 

In many cases Matt. 7: 1-5 will be found useful. 


82 HOW TO WORK 


XVI. “There is some one I cannot forgive.”’ 


This is often the difficulty even when it is not stated. I 
have frequently found that when people told me they could 
not accept Christ and did not know why, the real difficulty was 
here, there was some one who had wronged them, or who they 
thought had wronged them, and they would not forgive them. 

1. The first thing to do with such a one is to say, ‘‘ You 
must forgive or perish.’’ To prove this, use Matt. 6:15: 

“But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father 

forgive your trespasses.”’ 
Follow this up with Matt. 18: 21-35: 

2. Say to the person, ‘‘The wrong they have done you 1s 
nothing to the wrong you have done Jesus Christ.’’ Here use 
Hpas 42.32: 

“And be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving one 

another, even as God for Christ’s sake hath forgiven you.”’ 
You might also use Matt. 18: 23-35: 

3. Next show the inquirer that he can forgive the other 
in Christ’s strength. Use for this purpose Phil. 4: 13, and 
Gals 22,423: 

“T can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me.”’ 

“But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentle- 


ness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no 
law.’’ 


XVII. “A professed Christian has done me a great wrong.’’ 


1. First you can reply by saying, “‘That is no reason why 
you should wrong Christ; has He wronged you?” Use Jer. 
aub 

“Thus saith the ‘Lord, What iniquity have your fathers found zz me, 

that they are gone far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are 


become vain?’’ 
Ask the inquirer if he has found any evil in Christ, that that is 
what God is asking Him. One night I turned to an aged man 
and asked him if he was a Christian. He replied no, that he 
was a backslider. I asked him why he had backslidden, and 
he said Christian people had treated him badly. I opened my 
Bible and read Jer. 2:5 to him, and asked him, ‘‘Did you find 
any iniquity in God; did God not treat you well?’ With a 


THOSE WHO HAVE DIFFICULTIES 83 


good deal of feeling the man admitted that God had not 
treated him badly. I held him right to this point of God’s 
treatment of him and not man’s, and his treatment of God. 
It is well to follow this passage up with Is. 53:5 as bringing 
out very vividly just what Christ’s treatment of us has been. 

2. In the next place you can say to the one who raises this 

difficulty, *‘ The fact that a professed Christian has done you a 
great igury 1s no reason why you should do yourself a greater 
injury by refusing Christ and losing eternal life and being lost 
forever.”” ‘Then you can say, ‘‘Let me show you what injury 
you are doing yourself by rejecting Christ.’’ Use for this 
purpose Jno. 3: 36, and 2 Thess. 1: 7-9: 

“He that believeth onthe Son hath everlasting life; and he that 
believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth 
on him.”’ 

“And to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus 
shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire 
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the 
gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.’’ 


XVIII. “I have done a great wrong and will have to make it 
right and cannot.” 

1. Tell the inquirer to take Christ first, and leave the mat- 
ter of setiling the wrong with Him, that he cannot settle the 
matter as it ought to be settled until he has first taken Christ. 
Make it very plain that the only thing God requires of a sin- 
ner is to accept Christ, and all other questions must be left 
until that point has been settled. Use John 3:36 for this 
purpose, and Acts ro: 43. 

2. Show him further that zf there ts any wrong to be made 
right, Christ will give him strength to make it right, and use 
for this purpose Phil. 4: 13. 


XIX. “I have sinned away the day of grace.”’ 

This is a very serious difficulty. It often arises from a 
poor state of health and a morbid condition of mind, but I 
have never found a case that would not yield to prayerful and 
‘judicious treatment. The best passage to use, and one that 
generally proves sufficient, is Jno. 6: 37, the last clause: 

‘‘Him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out.” 


84 HOW TO WORK 


It is oftentimes necessary to read it over and over and over 
again, sometimes for days and days. Hold the inquirer to 
the one thought that God says He is ready to receive any one 
who will come, urging him to come now. 

Another useful passage is Rom. ro: 13: 

“Ror whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be 

saved.”’ 
Dwell upon the ‘‘whosoever.’’ 

The case of Manasseh as recorded in 2 Chron. 33: 1-13 is 
useful as showing the extent to which one can go and yet how 
God will receive them to Himself, if they only humble them- 
selves before him. 

Luke 23: 39-43 is oftentimes useful as showing how one 
was saved even in the hour of death. 


XX. “It is too late.’’ 


This difficulty is very much like the preceding one, and 
the same passage, Jno. 6: 37 is also useful in this case. Often- 
times, however, Deut. 4: 30, 31 will prove more helpful: 

“When thou art in tribulation, and all these things are come upon 
thee, even zn the latter days, if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and shalt 
be obedient unto his voice; (for the Lord thy God is a merciful God;) 
he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the covenant 
of thy fathers which he sware unto them.”’ 

In using the passage, emphasize the thought, ‘‘even in the 
latter days.’’ 

Still another passage is 2 Pet, 3:9: 

“The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count 
slackness; but is long suffering to us-ward, not willing that any should 
perish, but that all should come to repentance.”’ 

It shows that God is not willing that any should perish, 
and that the reason why He delays His judgment is that men 
may be brought to repentance. 

Luke 23: 39-43 is useful as showing that one was saved 
even as late as his dying hour, and Rev. 22:17 tells us that 
whosoever will may take of the water of life freely. 


XXI. “I have committed the unpardonable sin.”’ 


1. The first thing to doin this case is to show just what 
the unpardonable sin is. For this purpose use Matt. 12: 31, 32, 


THOSE WHO HAVE DIFFICULTIES 85 


noting the context. This passage taken in its context makes 
it plain that the unpardonable sin is blasphemy against the 
Holy Ghost, and that blasphemy against the Holy Ghost con- 
sists in deliberately attributing to the devil, the work which 
is known to have been wrought by the Holy Spirit. Having 
shown just what the unpardonable sin is, ask the inquirer, 
‘Have you done this? Have you deliberately attributed the 
work which you knew to be done by the Holy Spirit to the 
devil?’”” In almost every case, if not in every case, it will be 
found that the inquirer has not done this. 

2. Having shown what the unpardonable sin is, and that 
the inquirer has not committed it, use John 6: 37 as in the 
preceding case. Even if the inquirer thinks that he has com- 
mitted the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, use John 6: 37. 
Ask the inquirer what Jesus Christ says about those who 
come to Him, and then ask him if he will come to Christ right 
now. If he says, “‘I have committed the unpardonable sin,’’ 
reply that it does not say,‘‘Him that has not committed the 
unpardonable sin that comes to me I will in no wise cast 
out,’’? but, “Him that cometh to me, I will in no wise cast 
out,’’ and put the question again, ‘‘Will youcome?”’ To every 
new excuse that arises, simply repeat the promise, ‘‘Him that 
cometh to me I will in no wise cast out,’’ and repeat the ques- 
tion, ‘‘Will youcome?’’ If he raises some new difficulty as 
probably he will, simply say, ‘‘Jesus says, ‘Him that cometh 
to me, I will in no wise cast out,’ will you come?’ Repeat 
and repeat and repeat, over and over again, until this promise 
is fairly burned into the heart praying all the time for the 
Holy Spirit to carry it home. A man was once sent to me 
who was in the depths of despair. He had attempted suicide 
some five times. He felt that he had sinned away the day of 
grace, and committed the unpardonable sin, and that the devil 
had entered into him as he did into Judas Iscariot. Day after 
day I dealt with him, always using Jno. 6:37. To every 
excuse and difficulty he would bring up I would simply say, 
‘Jesus says, ‘Him that cometh to me I willin no wise cast 
out,” I met him at last one day for‘a final conflict. I said 
to him, ‘‘Do you believe what Jesus says?’’ He replied, *‘Yes, 
I believe everything in the Bible.’’ ‘‘Well,’’ I said, ‘‘Did not 


86 HOW TO WORK 


Jesus say, ‘Him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast 
out’??? ‘*Yes,’? he replied. I said, ‘‘Will you come?’’ He 
replied, ‘‘I have committed the unpardonable sin.”’ I said, 
‘‘Tesus did not say, ‘If any man has not committed the unpar- 
donable sin, and comes to me I will in no wise cast him out’; 
He said,‘Him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out’; 
Will you come?”’ He said, ‘tI am possessed of the devil.” I 
replied, ‘‘Jesus did not say, ‘If a man is not possessed of the 
devil and comes to me I willin no wise cast him out’; He 
said, ‘Him that cometh to me, I will in no wise cast out’; Will 
you come?’’ He said, ‘‘The devil has actually entered into 
me.’’ I replied,‘‘Jesus did not say, ‘If the devil has not 
entered into a man and he comes to me I will in no wise cast 
him out’; He said, ‘Him that cometh to me, I will in no wise 
cast out; Will you come?’’ He said, ‘‘My heart is too hard to 
come.’’ I replied, ‘‘Jesus did not say, ‘If a man’s heart is not 
too hard and he comes to me, I willin no wise cast him out’; 
He said, ‘Him that cometh to me, I will in no wise cast out’; 
Will you come???’ He said, ‘‘I don’t feel like coming.” I 
replied, ‘‘Jesus did not say, ‘If any man feels like coming, and 
comes to me, I will in no wise cast him out’; He said, ‘Him 
that cometh to me, I willin no wise cast out’; Will you come?’ 
He said, “‘I don’t know as I can come in the right way.”’ I 
replied, ‘‘Jesus did not say,‘If any man cometh unto me in the 
right way, I will in no wise cast him out’; He said, ‘Him that 
cometh to me, I will in no wise cast out’; Will you come?’’ 
He said, ‘‘I do not know as I want to come.’’ I replied, ‘‘Jesus 
did not say, ‘He that wants to come, and comes to mel will in 
no wise cast out’; He said, ‘Him that cometh to me, I willin 
no wise cast out’; Will you come?’’ He said, ‘“‘I don’t know 
as I know how to come.’’ I replied, ‘‘Jesus did not say, ‘He 
that knows how to come, and comes to me I will in no wise 
cast out’; He said, ‘Him that cometh to me, I will in no wise 
cast out’; Will you come? Will you get down here now and 
come just the best you know how?’’ Hesitatingly the man 
knelt down. I asked him to follow me in prayer. I prayed 
about as follows: ‘‘Lord Jesus, thou hast said ‘Him that 
cometh to me, I will in no wise cast out’; now the best I know 
how, I just come.’’ The man repeated the words after me. 


THOSE WHO HAVE DIFFICULTIES 87 


i said, “Did you really come?’’ ‘“‘Yes,’’ he said, ‘‘I did.” 
Then I said, ‘‘What has Jesus done? Never mind what you 
feel, but what does Jesus say He has done? ‘Him that com- 
eth to me I will in no wise cast out.’ What has Jesus done, 
what does He say He has done?’’ He replied, ‘‘He has 
received me.’’ I said, “‘Are you willing to stand there on the 
maxed Word of God?” He replied, “I will.’’ “‘Now,” I said, 
“You are going to yourroom. Ihave no doubt that the devil 
will give you an awful fight, but will you stand right there on 
the word of Jesus, ‘Him that cometh to me, I will in no wise 
Gast out... lle replied; “1 will.”’” He went: to: his room, 
The devil did come and assail him, and try to get him to look 
at his own heart, his own feelings, and his doubts, but he kept 
looking to the promise of Jesus, ‘‘Him that cometh to me, I 
will in no wise cast out’’; he believed that naked promise, he 
came out of his struggle a victor. This was eight or nine 
years ago. To-day he is one of the most useful men in 
America. 


XXII. Heb. 6: 4-6. 


“For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have 
tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, 
and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to 
come, 2 they shall fall away,to renew them agatn unto repentance, 
seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him 
to an open shame.”’ 

Very many men and women are in deep distress of soul 
over this passage. They fear that it describes them, and that 
there is no hope of their salvation. The way to deal with 
such a person is to explain tohim the exact meaning of the 
passage. 

1. Show him first of all, that it is addressed to Hebrew 
Christians who were in danger of apostatizing, renouncing 
Christ and going back to Judaism. Then ask him if this 
describes his case. Of course he will say that it does not. 
Furthermore show him that it does not describe a person 
who has merely fallen in sin, but one who has fallen away, 
that is apostatized, and deliberately renounced Christ. Ask 
him if this describes his case. In most cases, of course, it will 
be found that it does not. 


38 HOW TO WORK 


2. In the next place show him that the difficulty is not, 
that God is not willing to receive such a one back, but that it 
is impossible ‘‘to renew them again unto repentance.’’ that is, 
that their hearts are utterly hardened, and they have no 
desire to come to Christ. Then show him that this does not 
describe his case, the very fact of his being in anxiety and 
burden of heart proving that it does not. 

3. Sometimes all of this fails, if so, simply go over the 
fourth verse, and ask him if that has really been his experi- 
ence, if he has actually been made a partaker of the Holy Ghost. 

4. Show him by the case of Peter that one who has 
been a follower of Christ may fall into deep sin, and yet 
be restored and become more useful than ever. Use for this 
purpose, Luke 22:31, 34, Mark 14: 66-72, Jno. 21: 15-19. 

5. Finally use Jno. 6: 37, as described above. 


XXIII. Heb. 10: 26, 27. 

“For 7f we sin wilfully after that we have recetved the knowledge 
of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain 
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour 
the adversaries.’’ 

Many are troubled by this passage just as others are 
troubled by Heb. 6: 4-6. Ihave met many in deepest anguish 
because they thought that this described their experience. 
The way to deal with such a one is toshow him exactly the 
meaning of the verse. Explain to him that the word ‘‘wilfully”’ 
means deliberately, and of stubborn choice. It is the same 
word that is translated willingly in 1 Pet. 5:2. It does not 
describe a man who in weakness falls into sin, but a man who, 
with his whole heart, rejects obedience to God and the service 
of Christ, and throws himself with all his soulinto sin. Ask 
him if this describes his case. Finally use Jno. 6: 37. 


XXIV. “God seems to me unjust and cruel.” 


1. The shortest way of dealing with many who say this, 
is to take them at once to Rom. 9: 20: 


“Nay but, Oman, who art thou that repliest against God? Shall the 
thing formed say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus?” 


Apply the verse directly to the inquirer’s case. Ask him if 


THOSE WHO HAVE DIFFICULTIES = 89 


he realizes who God is, and who he himself is, and say, ‘You 
are replying against God. You are accusing God of sin. 
Now this is God’s message to you, ‘Nay but, O man, who art 
thou that repliest against God?’’’ This verse has been used 
of the Holy Spirit to break down in repentance and tears 
many a man who has complained against God. 

This may be followed up by Rom. 11: 33: 

*“‘O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! 

how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!” 

Show the inquirer that the reason God seems to him to be 
unjust and cruel is because such is the depth of the riches 
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, and so unsearch- 
able are His judgments, that he cannot find them out. 

This can be followed up still further by Is. 55: 8, 9: 


“For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my 
ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so 
are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your 
thoughts.’’ 

Another excellent passage to use is Job 4o: 2: 

“Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him? he that 
reproveth God, let him answer it.’’ 

When the complainer has read the verse, ask him if he wishes 
to contend with the Almighty. Show him further that he is 
_reproving God, and God says he must answer for it; ask him 

if he is ready to answer for it. 

2. Df the inquirer ts complaining of God's cruelty because 
of some sorrow or anguish in his own life, it is well to use 
- Heb. 12: 5-7, 10-12: 

‘“‘And ye have forgotten the exhortation which speaketh unto you as 
unto children, My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor 
faint when thou art rebuked of him; for whom the Lord loveth he chas- 
teneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. 

“If ye endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons; for 
what son is he whom the father chasteneth not?”’ 

‘‘For they verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure; 
but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness. 

‘“‘Now no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, but griev- 
nus; nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteous- 
mess unto them which are exercised thereby. 

“Wherefore lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees.” 


‘One should deal very tenderly with a case like this, yet at the 





90 HOW TO WORK 


same time faithfully. Show the inquirer that the sorrows and 
disappointments and afflictions that he has suffered are God’s 
loving dealings with him, to bring him into a life of holiness 
and higher joy, that God does not willingly afflict. 

One can follow the above passage with Is. 63:9: 

“In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence 
saved them; in his love and in his pity he redeemed them; and he bare 
them, and carried them all the days of old.’’ 

In order to lead the sorrow-stricken soul to see that the 
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared 
with the glory which shall be revealed in us, use Rom. 8: 18: 

“For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy 
to be compared with the glory which shalt be revealed in us.”’ 

Another useful passage is 2 Cor. 4:17, 18: 

“For our light affliction, which is du¢ for a moment, worketh for us a 
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; while we look not at 
the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the 
things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen 
are eternal.” 

3. Sometimes it is well to say in such a case, ‘‘You would 
not think that God was unjust and cruel if you only realized 
the depth of your own sin against Him,’’ and use Matt. 22: 37, 
38 to show him the greatness of his sin, in the way described 
in Chapter VI. 

4. It is a wise plan to follow up all the preceding methods 
by showing the complainer the wonderful love of God. Jno. 
3:16 and Is. 53: 5 will serve well for this purpose. 


XXV. “I cannot see why it was necessary that Christ should 
die in order that men be saved.’’ 


There are very many who will tell you this. Of course 
those who say this are frequently mere triflers, and trying to 
find a hiding place from God’s truth and their own duty, but 
some say this with a good deal of sincerity of purpose. I 
have found one of the most effective passages to use in such a 
case to be Rom. 9:20. It is well to follow this up by showing 
the doubter the greatness and depth of his own sin in the way 
described in Chapter VI. Noman after he has been led by 
the Word of God and His Spirit to see himself as God sees 


THOSE WHO HAVE DIFFICULTIES 91 


him, will any longer have any difficulty with God’s way of 
salvation, but will be only too glad to find that a sin-bearer 
has been provided for him. 


XXXVI. “There are so many things in the Bible that I can- 
not understand.’’ 

1. The first step in such a case is to show the objector 
why he cannot understand. <A good passage to use for this 
purpose is 1 Cor. 2:14: 

“But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: 
for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because 
they are spiritually discerned.” 

It can be used in this way: when the man has said, ‘‘There 
are so many things in the Bible that I cannot understand,’’ 
reply, ‘Yes, that is just what the Bible says.” Then show 
the man the passage, and say to him, “‘This verse tells you 
just why you cannot understand what is in the Bible, because 
‘the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of 
God: for they are foolishness uzto htm,’ and I suppose that 
many of them appear like foolishnessto you.’’ ‘“‘Yes.’’ ‘‘This 
verse tells you why it is, ‘because they are spiritually dis- 
cerned.’ The truth is, you are spiritually blind. If you will 
turn from sin and accept Christ, you will get spiritual sight, 
and then many things which you cannot understand now will 
become as plain as day.’”’ 

Is. 55: 8, 9 can also be used: 

‘‘For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my 
ways, saith the Lord. Foras the heavens are higher than the earth, 
so are my ways higherthan your ways, and my thoughts than your 
thoughts.”’ 

You can say to the one with whom you are dealing, ‘‘This 
tells why you cannot understand God’s truth. Why is it?” 
‘*Because His thoughts are higher than my thoughts.”’ 

Dan. 12: 10 is also useful: 

‘‘Many shall be purified, and made white, and ‘tried; but the wicked 
shall do wickedly: and none of the wicked shall understand, but the 
wise shall understand.” 


Before the man reads it, you can say to him, ‘‘I can show you 
a passage in the Bible that tells you just exactly why you can- 


92 HOW TO WORK 


gf 


not understand, and also how you can understand. When he 
has read it, ask him who it is that does not understand. ‘The 
wicked.’’ ‘‘And who shall understand?” ‘‘The wise.”’ 

A passage which can also be used to good effect is 2 Pet. 

3: 16-18: 

‘As also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these things; in which 
are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned 
and unstable wrest, as they do also the other scriptures, unto their own 
destruction. Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, 
beware lest ye also, being led away with the error of the wicked, fall 
from your own steadfastness.” 

1 Cor. 13: 11, 12 and Rom. 11: 33 can also be used. 

2. The second step is to show how to understand. Jno. 

7:17 makes this as plain as day: 

“Tf any man will do his wil, he shall know of the doctrine, whether 

it be of God, or whether I speak of myself.” 


Follow this up with Ps. 119: 18, and James 1: §: 


‘‘Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy 
law.’’ 

“If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all 
men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.” 


XXVII. “I cannot believe.’’ 


We will take up skeptics more at length in Chapter XI. 
At this point we take up the matter merely as an honest diffi- 
culty that some find in the way of accepting Christ. 

1. When one states this as a difficulty, it is often well to 
ask him what he cannot believe. A man once said to Mr. 
Moody, ‘‘I cannot believe.’” Mr. Moody said, ‘‘Who can’t you 
believe?’’ ‘‘He replied, ‘‘I cannot believe.’’ ‘‘Who can’t 
you believe, can’t you believe God?’’ ‘‘Yes,’’ the man 
replied, ‘‘I can believe God, but I cannot believe myself.’’ 
Mr. Moody said, ‘I don’t want you to believe yourself, I want 
you to believe God.’’ Oftentimes the difficulty is with some 
doctrine that has nothing directly to do with salvation; for 
example, a man will say, ‘“‘I cannot believe the account of 
creation given in the first chapter of Genesis, and I cannot 
believe the story about Jonah and the whale.’’ Now of course 
aman ought to believe the Bible account of creation given in 


THOSE WHO HAVE DIFFICULTIES = 93 


the first chapter of Genesis, and he ought to believe the story 
about Jonah, but these are not questions to discuss with an 
unsaved man. When a man states some such difficulty as 
this, the best thing to do is to say, ‘‘Can you believe in Jesus 
Christ?’” ‘Yes, I can believe in Jesus Christ.” ‘‘But will 
you believe in Him, will you accept'Him as your Saviour, your 
sin-bearer, and your Lord and Master?’’ Show the man that 
it does not say, believe this doctrine or that doctrine and thou 
shalt be saved, or this incident or that incident in the Bible, 
but ‘‘believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be 
saved.’’ For this purpose use Acts 16: 31, and Jno. 3: 16: 
“And they said, Belzeve on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be 
saved, and thy house.”’ 
“For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that 
whosoever Jelieveth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.”” 
After the man has really believed on Christ and been saved, 
and grown somewhat in Christian knowledge, he will be ina 
position to take up secondary questions. Many a well-mean- 
ing worker makes a great mistake in discussing secondary 
questions with an unsaved man, when he is in no position to 
understand them at all, but should be held tothe vital point of 
the acceptance of Jesus Christ as a Saviour and Lord and 
Master. 
2. In many cases, perhaps in most cases, when one says, 
“‘T cannot believe,’’ the real difficulty that lies back of their 
inability to believe, is unwillingness to forsake sin, and it is 
well to say to such a person, ‘“‘Is your unbelief the real diffi- 
culty, is there not some sin in your life that you are unwilling 
to give up?’ I was once called to deal with a man, and was 
told that he was a skeptic, and needed help along that line. 
I said to him, ‘‘Are you a skeptic?’’ He replied, ‘‘Yes.” I 
asked him what made him a skeptic, and he said because he 
could not see where Cain got his wife. Isaid to him, “‘Is that 
your real difficulty?’ ‘‘Yes.’’ I replied, ‘‘Then if I remove 
that difficulty, and show you where Cain got his wife, will you 
become a Christian?’ He said, ‘‘Oh, no, I cannot promise 
that.”’ ‘‘But,’’ I said, ‘‘you said that was your difficulty, the 
thing that kept you from accepting Christ; now if I remove 
that difficulty, and you are honest, of course you will accept 


94 HOW TO WORK 


Christ.’’ The man laughed and saw that he was cornered. 
- *Now,’’ I said, ‘‘Let me ask you a question; is not the real 
difficulty some sin in your life?’ The man broke down and 
confessed that it was, and he told me what the sin was, and 
professed to give it up and accept Christ then and there. 
when you are convinced that the real difficulty in the case is 
sin, a good passage to use is Jno. 5: 44: 

‘‘How can ye believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek 

not the honor that cometh from God only.”’ 


Say to the man before he reads it, ‘‘Yes, I suppose you cannot 
believe, but Jesus Christ tells us just why it is that men cannot 
believe,’’ and then have him read the passage. Then you can 
say to him, ‘‘The reason why you cannot believe according to 
this verse, is because you are seeking the honor that comes 
from man and not the honor that comes from God alone. Is 
this not so?’ Be courteous, but do not let the inquirer dodge 
that point. 

Is. 55: 7 is also a good passage to use: 

“Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his 


thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy 
upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.”’ 


This will show the man that he not only needs to forsake his 
way, but his thoughts as well, and that if he will, and return 
to the Lord, He will have mercy upon him and abundantly 
pardon. 

3. Finally in dealing with this difficulty, it is well to show 
aman how to believe. You can say to him after you have 
dealt with him along the lines already mentioned, ‘‘I can show 
you how to believe.”” Then give him Jno. 7:17: 


“Tf any man wzl/ do his wzll, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it 
be of God, or whether I speak of myself.” 


Ask him if he will will to do the will of God, if he will 
surrender his will to God. Then show him James 1: 5-7: 


“If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all 
men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given nim. But let 
him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave 
of the sea driven with the wind and tossed. For let not that man think 
that he shall receive any thing of the Lord.” 


THOSE WHO HAVE DIFFICULTIES ~— 95 


Follow this up with John 2o: 31: 


“But these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, 
the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his 
name.”’ 

Then give him the Gospel of John to study prayerfully. We 
will go into this more at length in Chapter XI. 





CHAPTER VIII 


HOW TO DEAL WITH THOSE WHO ENTERTAIN 
FALSE HOPES 


I. The hope of being saved by a righteous life. 


This is the most common of false hopes. Even among 
those who profess to be Christians, there are many who are 
really depending upon their lives as Christians for their accept- 
ance before God. Those who are depending upon their 
righteous lives for salvation, are readily known by their saying 
such things as this: “‘I am doing the best I can.’’ ‘‘I do more 
good than evil.’’ ‘‘I am not a great sinner.’’ ‘‘I have never 
done anything very bad.’’ This mistake can be directly met 
by Gal. 2: 16: 

‘Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but the 
faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we 
might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law: 
for dy the works of the law shall no flesh be justified.” 

After the passage has been read, you can say to the one with 
whom you are dealing, ‘‘Now you are expecting to be justified 
and accepted before God by what you are doing, by your own 
life and character; but God tells you in this passage, that ‘by 
the works of the law shall no flesh be justified.’’’ Follow 
this up by Rom. 3: 19, 20: 

‘Now we know that what things soever the law saith, it saith to them 
who are under the law: that every mouth may be stopped, and all the 
world may become guilty before God. Therefore dy the deeds of the 
law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight: for by the law is the 
knowledge of sin.”’ 

Call attention to the fact that here again we are told that, ‘‘by 
the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in his 
sight,’’ and furthermore, that the purpose of the law is to 
stop the mouths of men. Then take him to Gal. 3: 10: 

“For as many as are of the works of the law are under the curse: for 


it is written, Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things which 
are written in the book of the law to do them.” 


96 


THOSE WHO ENTERTAIN FALSE HOPES 97 


Before he reads it, say to him, ‘‘I want you to read a verse 
from the Word of God that tells you just how God regards one 
who is trying to be saved by his righteous life, as you are.’’ 
Then let him read the passage. When he has read the 
passage, ask him where God says that he is, and hold him to 
the point until he sees that in depending upon his good deeds 
for salvation, he is under the curse. 

James 2: 10 will also be found useful: 

“For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend zu one point, 

he is guilty of all.’”’ 

Before the man reads the verse you can say, ‘‘Well, if you 
are going to be saved by your righteous life, let us see what 
God requires in order that a man may be saved on that ground.” 
After he has read the verse, show him that if he is going to 
be saved by the law, he must keep the whole law, for if he 
offends in one point he is guilty of all. 

A verse which is useful in showing the kind of righteous- 
ness that God demands, is Matt. 5: 20: 


“For I say unto you, That except your righteousness shall exceed the 
righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into 
the kingdom of heaven.’’ 


This verse shows that no man’s righteousness comes up to 
God’s standard, and if a man wishes to be saved, he must find 
some other way of salvation than by his own deeds. It is 
sometimes well in using this passage, to say to the inquirer, 
‘“*You do not understand the kind of righteousness God 
demands, or you would not talk as you do. Now let us turn to 
God’s own Word and see what kind of righteousness it is that 
God demands.”’ 

2. There is another way of dealing with this class, by 
using such passages as these: 


“And he said unto them, Ye are they which justify yourselves before 
men; but God Luoweth your hearts: for that which is highly esteemed 
among men is abomination in the sight of God.’’ Luke 16: 15, 

“In the day when God shal’ judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ 
according to my gospel.’’ Rom. 2: 16. 

“But the Lord said unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, or on 
the height of his stature; because I have refused him: for the Lord seeth 
not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but ¢he 
Lord looketh on the heart.” 1% Sam, 16: 7. 


98 HOW TO WORK 


These passages show that God looks at the heart. Hold the 
inquirer right to that point. Every man, when brought face to 
face with that, must tremble, for he knows that whatever his 
outward life may be, his heart will not stand the scrutiny of 
God’s all-seeing and holy eye. No matter how self-righteous a 
man may appear, we need not be discouraged, for somewhere 
in the depths of every man’s heart is the consciousness of sin, 
and all we have to do is to work away until we touch that 
point. Every man’s conscience is on our side. 

3. Matt. 22: 37, 38 can also be used with those who expect 
to be saved by their righteous lives. You can say to the man, 
“If you expect to be saved by your righteous life, you are 
greatly deceived, and certainly entertain afalse hope. For so 
far from living a righteous life, you have broken the very first 
and greatest of God’s commandments.’’ Of course he may 
not believe this at first, but you can turn him to the passage 
mentioned, and show him what the first and greatest of God’s 
commandments is, and ask him if he has kept it. This 
passage is especially useful if a man says, ‘‘I am doing the 
best I can,’’ or if he says, ‘‘I am doing more good than evil.’’ 
You can say to him, ‘‘You are greatly mistaken about that. 
So far from doing more good than evil, you have broken the 
first and greatest of God’s laws,’’ and then show him the 
passage. 

4. A fourth method of dealing with this class is to use 
Heb..11: 6'and Jino,6: 29: 


“But wzthout fazth it is impossible to please him: for he that cometh 
to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that 
diligently seek him.’’ 

“Jesus answered and said unto them, 7%zs is the work of God, that 
ye believe on him whom he hath sent.” 

These passages show that the one thing which God demands is 
faith, that the work of God is to believe on Him whom He 
hath sent, and that without faith it is impossible to please God 
whatever else a man may possess. John 16:9 can also be 
used to show that unbelief in Christ is the greatest sin: 

“Of sin, decause they believe not on me.” 

5. Still another way of dealing with this class is by the 

use of Jno. 3: 36: 





La Ver: . 

THOSE WHE ENTERTAIN FALSE. HOPES” 99 

H$ite WeastLULiia 

“He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that 
believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on 
him.”’ 

This shows that the gift of eternal life depends solely upon a 
man’s acceptance of Jesus Christ. That the sin which brings 
the heaviest punishment is that of treading under foot the 
Son of God, can be shown by Heb. 10: 28, 29: 

“He that despised Moses’ law died without mercy under two or three 
witnesses: of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be ' 
thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath 
counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an 
unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit of grace?” 

Before using this passage, it is well to say, ‘‘You think you 
are very good, but do you know that you are committing the 
most awful sin in God’s sight which a man can commit?” If 
he replies, ‘I do not think so,’’ then tell him, ‘‘Let me show 
you from God’s Word that you are.’’ Then turn to this pas- 
sage and read it with great solemnity and earnestness. 

A very useful passage with many a self-righteous man is 
Luke 18:10-14. Youcan say to the man, ‘‘There is a picture 
in the Bible of a man just like you, who expected to be 
accepted before God on the ground of his righteousness, and 
who had, as men go, much righteousness to present to God, 
but let us see what God says to him.’’ Then have him read 
the passage. 

It is well to bring all those who expect to be saved by a 
righteous life into the presence of God, for in His holy pres- 
ence self-righteousness fades away. (See Is. 6:5 and Job 
42:5, 6.) But how shall we bring any one into the presence 
of God? By opening to them passages that reveal the holi- 
ness of God, and by praying the Holy Spirit to carry these 
passages home. It is also well whenever possible, to get the 
inquirer to pray. Many a man who is stoutly maintaining his 
excellence before God, has given way when he has been , 
brought to get down on his knees in God’s very presence. 


II. “God is too good to damn any one.” 
This is what another class of those who entertain false 


hopes think. 
1, When any one says this, you can reply, ‘‘We know 


100 HOW TO WORK 


nothing about God’s goodness, except what we learn from the 
Bible. If we give up the Bible, we have no conclusive proof 
that God is love, and can therefore build no hopes upon His 
goodness. But if we accept the Bible statement that God is 
love, we must also accept the Bible representations of the 
goodness of God. Let us then go tothe Bible and find out 
the character of God’s goodness.’ Then turn the inquirer to 
Rom. 23.49)5: 

‘Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and 
long suffering; ot knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to 
repentance ? But after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest 
up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the 
righteous judgment of God.”’ 

When the man has read the verse, you can say to him, ‘‘This 
verse tells us what the purpose of God’s goodness is; what 
is it?’’ ‘‘To lead us to repentance.” ‘‘And what does this 
verse tell us will be the result if we do not permit the good- 
ness of God to lead us to repentance, but trample it under foot 
and make it an excuse for sin?’? He will find the answer to 
this question in verse five, and hold him to it until he sees it, 
that if we despise the riches of His goodness, then we are 
treasuring up unto ourselves ‘‘wrath against the day of wrath 
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God.’’ You can 
also use Jno. 8:21, 24 and Jno. 3: 36 to show the man that 
however good we may be, if we do not believe in Jesus with a 
living faith, we shall die in our sins, and not go where Jesus is, 
and that we shall not see life, but that the wrath of God 
abideth upon us. 

2. Still another way to deal with this man is to show him 

_ that it is not so much God who damns men, as men who damn 
themselves in spite of God’s goodness, because they will not 
repent and come to Christ and accept the life freely offered. 
For this purpose use 2 Pet. 3: 9-11: 

“The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count 
slackness; but is long suffering to us-ward, ot w7lling that any should 
perish, but that all should come to repentance. But the day of the 
Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall 
pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent 
heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burned up. 
Seeing then that allthese things shall be dissolved, what manner of 
persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness?” 


THOSE WHO ENTERTAIN FALSE HOPES 101 


Another good passage to use in this way is Jno. 5: 40: 
“And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life.” 


Press the thought of this text home, that if any one does not 
obtain life, it is because they will not come to Christ, and that 
men therefore are damned in spite of God’s goodness if they 
will not come to Christ and accept life. In much the same way 
one can use Ez. 33:11: 

“Say unto them, As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in 
the death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live: 
turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of 
Israel?”’ 

It is sometimes well to say, ‘‘You are right in thinking that 
God is not willing to damn any one; furthermore He offers 
life freely to you, but there is one difficulty in the way. Let 
us turn to Jno. 5: 40 and see what the difficulty is.’”” When he 
has read it, you can say, ‘“‘You see now, that the difficulty is 
not that God wishes to damn you, but that you will not come 
to Christ that you might have life.’’ 

3. If these methods do not succeed, 2 Pet. 2: 4-6, 9 may 
prove effectual: 


“For if God spared not the angels that stunned, but cast them down 
to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto 
judgment; and spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth 
person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world 
of the ungodly; and turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into 
ashes condemned them with an overthrow, making them an ensample 
unto those that after should live ungodly; 

‘““The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and 
to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished.”’ 

Before using the passage you can say, ‘*The best way to judge 
what God will do is not by speculating about it, but by looking 
at what He has done in the past.’’ Then turn to these pas- 
sages and let him read. When he has read it, ask him, ‘‘What 
did God do with the angels that sinned?’’ ‘‘What did He do 
with the world of the ungodly in the days of Noah?”’ ‘‘What 
did He do with the wicked in the days of Sodom and 
Gomorrha? What then may you expect Him to do with you 
in spite of any theories that you may have about His character 
and actions.’’ ‘This should all be done not in a controversial 
way, but with great earnestness, tenderness and solemnity. 


102 HOW TO WORK 


You can say still further, ‘‘God has not left us to speculate as 
to what He will do with the persistently impenitent, He has 
told us plainly in Matt. 25: 41, 46’: 
‘‘Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, 
ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels: 


‘‘And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the right- 
eous into life eternal.”’ 


You may say still further, that God does bear long with man, 
but His dealings with man in the past show that at last His 
day of waiting will end, and in spite of man’s doubt of His 
word, and doubt of his severity in dealing with the persistently 
impenitent, He does at last punish. You might use 2 Chron. 
36: 11-21 as an illustrative case in point. 

4. It is well sometimes to add to all the other passages, 
Jno. -3: 18, 19: 

“He that believeth on him is not condemned: but he that believeth 
not is condemned a/ready, because he hath not believed in the name of 
the only begotten Son of God. And this is the condemnation, that light 
is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, 
because their deeds were evil.’”’ 

Before having the inquirer read the verses, you can say, ‘‘You 
say God is too good to damn anyone, but the truth is that you 
are condemned already. It is not a question of what is going 
to happen to you in the future, but a question of your present 
position before God.” When he has read the passage, ask 
him, ‘‘When is it that the one who believeth not is con- 
demned?”’ ‘‘Already.”” ‘‘Why is it that he is condemned?’’ 
‘‘Because light is come into the world, and he loves darkness 
rather than light.’’ 

5. Luke 13:3 is very effective in some case, for it shows 
how the ‘‘good’’ God deals with persons who persist in sin. 
The passage can be used in this way: ‘‘You say God is too 
good to damn any one, but let us see what God Himself says 
in His Word.” Then turn to the passage and read, ‘‘Except 
ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.’’ Repeat the passage 
over and over again until it has been driven home. An 
earnest missionary in the western part of New York was once 
holding meetings in a country village. The Universalist min- 
ister of the place was very anxious to engage the missionary in 


THOSE WHO ENTERTAIN FALSE HOPES 103 


a controversy, but the missionary always said that he was too 
busy for controversy. One day the Universalist minister came 
into the house where the missionary was calling; he was 
delighted to see him, for he thought that his opportunity for a 
discussion had come at last. He began the customary univer- 
salist argument about God being too good to damn any one. 
After he had gone through the usual volume of words, the 
missionary simply replied, ‘‘I am too busy for argument, but 
I just want to say to you, that except you repent, you shall 
likewise perish.’’ The Universalist was somewhat angry, but 
replied sneeringly, ‘‘That is not argument, it is simply a quo- 
tation from the Bible,’’ and then ran on with another stream 
of words. When he had finished his second speech, the mis- 
sionary simply replied, ‘‘I have no time for argument, but I 
just want to say to you, except you repent, you shall likewise 
perish.’’ Again the Universalist sneered and poured forth 
another torrent of what he called argument. When he had 
finished this time, the missionary again said, ‘‘I have no time 
for controversy, I simply want to say to you that except you 
repent, you shall likewise perish. Now I must go, but let me 
say, you will not be able to forget what I have said.’’ The 
Universalist preacher laughed, and said he guessed he would 
forget it quick enough, that the missionary had used no argu- 
ment whatever, but had simply quoted the Bible. The fol- 
jiowing day there was a knock at the missionary’s door, and 
when it was opened, the Universalist preacher came in. The 
missionary said, ‘‘I have no time for argument.’’ ‘‘O sir!’’ 
said the other, ‘‘I have not come to argue with you. You 
were right yesterday when you told me there was one thing I 
would not be able to forget; I feel that it is true, that except 
I repent I must perish, and I have come to ask you what I 
must do to be saved.’’ The missionary showed the man the 
way of life, and the result was, the Universalist became a real 
believer in Christ, and a preacher of the truth he had previ- 
ously labored to pull down. 


III. “I am trying to be a Christian.”’ 
The third class of those who entertain false hopes, are 
those who say, ‘‘I am trying to be a Christian.’’ 


104 HOW TO WORK 


1. Show the inquirer that it is trusting and not trying that 
saves. For this purpose use Is, 12: 2: 

“Behold, God is my salvation; J wz// ¢rus¢, and not be afraid: for the 
Lord Jehovah is my strength and my song; healso is become my 
salvation.”’ 

When he has read it, ask him what it is the prophet says, “‘I 
will try?’ ‘‘No, I will trust.’’ Another verse which can also 
be used to show that itis not trying to be a Christian, but 
believing on Christ that saves, is Acts 16: 31: 

‘‘And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be 
saved, and thy house.”’ 

Jno. 1:12 is very useful. Before using it, you can say, “‘What 
God asks of youis not to try to be a Christian, or to try to 
live a better life, or to try to do anything but simply to 
receive Jesus Christ who did it all.’” Then have the passage 
read and say to the inquirer, ‘‘Will you now stop your trying, 
and simply receive Jesus as a Saviour?’’ Make it very clear 
what this means and hold the inquirer to this point. 

2. Another way of dealing with this class is to show the 
inquirer that it is mot trying what we can do, but trusting 
what Jesus has done that saves from guilt. Use for this pur- 
pose Rom. 3: 23-26: 

“For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God; being 
justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ 
Jesus: whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in 
his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are 
past, through the forbearance of God; to declare, I say, at this time his 
righteousness: that he might be just and the justifier of him which 
believeth in Jesus.” 

When the inquirer has read the passage, ask him if this 
teaches us that we are justified by trying to do something. 
**No.”? ‘‘Then how are we justified?’? Hold him to it until 
he say, ‘‘Freely by His grace, through the redemption that is 
in Christ Jesus,” and sees that it is on the simple condition of 
faith. Another very effective passage to use in the same way 
is Rom. 4: 3-5: 

‘For what saith the scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was 
counted unto him for righteousness. Now to him that worketh is the 
reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt. But Zo him that worketh 


not, but belzeveth on him that justifieth the ungodly, hzs fazth is counted 
for righteousness,”’ 


THOSE WHO ENTERTAIN FALSE HOPES 105 


This makes it clear as day that it is not our trying, but our 
believing on Him that justifies us. Acts 10: 43 and 13: 38 can 
be used in a similar way. 

3. Itis also well to show the inquirer, that it is not our 
trying in our own strength, but our trusting in Christ’s 
strength that saves from the power of sin. To make this 
clear, use the following passages: 

“Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present 
you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy.’ 
Jude 24. 

‘‘For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world: and this is the 
victory that overcometh the world, even our faith. Who is he that over- 
cometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?’’ 
1 John 5: 4, 5. 

““For the which cause I also suffer these things: nevertheless I am 
not ashamed: for I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that 
he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that 
aywe2)cbim seri 12: 

“Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation 
ready to be revealed in the last time.’’ 1 Pet. 1:5. 

Do not let this class of inquirers go until they are perfectly 
clear that they are saved, and are no longer merely ‘‘trying to 
be Christians.”’ 


IV. “I feel saved’’: or “I feel that I am going to heaven.’’ 

There are very many in this class, very many who think 
that their entrance into heaven is sure because they ‘‘feel 
saved,’’ or feel that they are going to heaven. 

1. The first thing to do with this class is to show them the 
utter unreliability of our feeling as a ground of hope. An 
excellent passage for this purpose is Jer. 17: 9: 

“The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked: who 

can know it?’ 
Follow this up with Prov. 14: 12: 

“There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof 

are the ways of death.” 
After reading the latter passage, you can say to the inquirer, 
‘“The way you are going seems to be right, it seems to you as 
if it would lead to heaven, but what does this passage tell us 
about a way that seemeth to be right unto a man?’’ ‘The 
end thereof are the ways of death.’’ Then drive the thought 


106 HOW TO WORK 


home that it will not do to rest our hope upon anything less 
ysure than the Word of God. Luke 18: 9-14 may be used in 
this way. You can say, ‘‘We are told in the Bible abouta 
man who felt saved, and felt sure of going to heaven, let us 
read about him.’’ Then let him read the story of the Phari- 
see, and show how he was not saved for all his self-confidence. 
Is. 55:8 can also be used to enforce the thought that God’s 
thoughts are not our thoughts, and while we may think we 
are saved, God may clearly see that we are not. 
| z. Having shown how little confidence is to be put in our 
feeling, show the true ground of hope, namely God’s Word. 
Use for this purpose Titus 1: 2: 

‘‘In hope of eternal life, which God, that cannot lie, promised before 

the world began.’’ 

You can say, ‘‘Paul had a hope of eternal life. Upon what 
was that hope built?’’ ‘‘The Word of God ‘that cannot lie.’ ”’ 
Then say to the person, ‘‘Do you want a hope built upon that 
sure ground?’’ Take him then to John 3:36. That verse 
tells clearly how to get such a hope. One afternoon I was 
speaking to a woman who, a few weeks before, had lost her 
only child. At the time of the child’s death she had been 
especially interested, but her serious impressions had largely 
left her. After a time I put to her the question, ‘‘Do you not 
wish to go where your little one has gone?’’ She replied, “‘I 
expect to.’’ ‘‘What makes you think that you will,’’ I asked. 
She answered, ‘‘I feel so: I feel that I will go to heaven 
when I die.’’ I then asked her if there was anything she 
could point to in the Word of God which gave her a reason for 
believing that she was going to heaven when she died. She 
replied that there was not. She then turned to me and began 
to question me: ‘‘Do you expect to go to heaven when you 
die?’ ‘‘Yes, I know I shall.”’ ‘How do you know it? Have 
you any word from God for it?’’ ‘‘Yes,’’ I answered, and 
turned to Jno. 3:36. She was then led to see the difference 
between a faith that depended upon her feeling, and a faith 
that depended upon the Word of God. 


V. The hope of being saved by a mere profession of religion, 
or by a faith that does not save from sin and lead to repentance. 
In many communities it is very common to meet men and 


THOSE WHO ENTERTAIN FALSE HOPES 107 


women who believe they are saved because they hold to an 
orthodox creed, or because they have been baptized or made a 
profession of religion. This is one of the most dangerous of 
all false hopes, but it can be readily dealt with. 

1. A good passage to begin with is Titus 1: 16: 

“They profess that they know God; but in works they deny him, 
being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work 
reprobate.”’ 

You can say to the person, ‘‘You profess to know God, but 
God Himself tells us that many who profess to know Him are 
lost; let me show it to youin His Word.’’ When they have 
read the verse, you can say, ‘‘Now if one professes to know 
God, but denies Him in his life, what does God Himself say 
that such a one is?’ ‘‘Abominable and disobedient, and unto 
every good work reprobate.’’ Another passage which can be 
used in very much the same way is Matt. 7: 21, 22, 23. 


“Not every one that satth unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the 
kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is 
in heaven. Many willsay to meinthat day, Lord, Lord, have we not 
prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in 
thy name done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto 
them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity.”’ 


You might say, ‘‘God tells us plainly in His Word that one 
may make a profession of religion, may be active even in 
Christian work, and yet be lost after all.’’ Then have him 
read the verses. When they are read, you can say, ‘‘Accord- 
ing to these verses, will a mere profession of religion save any 
one?’ ‘‘No, doing the will of the Father which is in 
heaven.’’ ‘‘Are you doing His will?’’ 

2. A second way of dealing with this class is to say, ‘‘God 
tells us plainly that in order to be saved we must be born 
again.’’ Then show them John 3: 3-5: 

“Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, 
Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Nico- 
demus saith unto him, How can a man be born when he is old? can he 
enter the second time into his mother’s womb, and be born? Jesus 
answered, Verily, verily, 1 say unto thee, Except a man be born of 
water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.’’ 

When these verses are read, you can say, ‘‘Now these verses 
make it clear, that in order to enter the kingdom of God, one 


108 HOW TO WORK 


must be born again. Now let us turn to other parts of the 
Bible and see what it is to be born again.’’ For this purpose 
use the following: 


“Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin, for his seed 
remaineth in him: and he cannot sin, because heis born of God.’’ 1 


John 3:9. 
“If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that doeth 
righteousness is born of him.’’ 1 John 2: 29. 


“Therefore if any man be in Christ, Ze zs a new creature: old things 
are passed away; behold, all things are become new.’’ 2 Cor. 5: 17. 

3. A third method of dealing with this class is by saying, 

‘*Ves, faith does indeed save, but it is a certain kind of faith 
that saves.’’ To show what the faith that saves is, turn to Gal. 
5:6: 

“For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor 
uncircumcision; but fazth which worketh by love.” 

This passage says that it is faith which worketh by love. 
Rom. 10:9, ro that it is a faith of the heart: 

“That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt 
believe zz thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou 
shalt be saved. For wzth the heart man believeth unto righteousness; 
and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.”’ 

while James 2: 14 tells us that it is faith which shows itself in 
works: 

““‘What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, 
but have not works? can that faith save him?’ (R. V.) 

4. 1 Jno. 5:4, 5 isalso very useful as showing that one who 

really has faith in Jesus as the Son of God, and is born of God, 
overcomes the world. ‘The passage reads as follows: 


“For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world; and this is 
the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith. Who is he that 
overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of 
God?” 

The fact that one is living in sin and not overcoming the 
world, but being overcome by it, is conclusive proof that he 
really has not faith that Jesus is the Son of God, and that he 
has not been born of God. 


CHAPTER IX 


HOW TO DEAL WITH THOSE WHO LACK 
ASSURANCE 


It is not enough that a man be saved: to be of the most 
use to God he must know that he is saved, and no small part 
of our work as personal workers will be to lead into assurance 
of salvation, men and women who do not as yet know that 
they are saved. There are two classes of those who lack 
assurance, 


I. Those who lack assurance because of ignorance. 


1. There are many who lack assurance for the simple 
reason that they do not know that it is any one’s privilege to 
know that they have eternal life. Oftentimes if you ask 
people if they know that they are saved, or if they know that 
their sins are forgiven, they reply, ‘‘Why no, no one knows 
that.’’ You can say, ‘‘Yes, the Bible says that all who believe 
may know it,’’ and then show them 1 Jno. 5: 13: 

‘“‘These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of 

the Son of God; that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that 
ye may believe on the name of the Son of God.” 
It is well to begin with this passage, and not to leave it until 
it becomes very clear that it is every believer’s privilege to 
know that he has everlasting life. Follow this up with Jno. 
R212: 

“But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the 

sons of God, even to them that believe on his name.’’ 
This verse shows that Christ gives to as many as receive Him, 
power to become the sons of God. A good way to use this 
verse is to ask the inquirer questions regarding it. ‘‘What 
does every one who receives Him receive power to become?’’ 
**A son of God.’’ ‘Are you sure that every one who receives 

10g 


110 HOW TO WORK 


Jesus obtains power to become a son of God?’’ * Yes.” 
‘‘What makes you sure.” ‘God says so here.” ‘‘Have you 
received Jesus?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘‘What then have you received 
power to become?’’ Just hold the inquirer to the point that it 
is not what he feels he has power to become, but what God 
here in His Word says he has power to become. It will 
usually be necessary to go through it again and again and 
again. 

Jno. 3:36 can be used in asimilar way. ‘‘He that believ- 
eth on the Son hath everlasting life.’’ Ask the inquirer, 
‘Who does this verse say has everlasting life?’’ ‘‘He that 
believeth on the Son.’’ ‘‘How many that believe on the Son 
have everlasting life?’ ‘‘Why, every one.”’ ‘“‘Are you sure 
of that?’ ‘‘Yes.’’ ‘‘Why?’’ ‘‘Because God says so here.”’ 
‘“‘What is it God says?’ ‘‘He that believeth on the Son hath 
everlasting life.’ ‘‘Does God merely say that he that believ- 
eth on the Son ‘shall have’ everlasting life?’ ‘“‘No, He says 
he ‘hath’ it.” ‘‘Do you believe on the Son?” “1 dos" 
‘‘What then does God say you have?’”’ Ina little while he will 
see it and say, ‘‘Everlasting life.’’ Then have him say it 
over and over again, ‘‘I have everlasting life, I have everlast- 
ing life.’’ Have him stand by it because God says so, and 
then have him kneel down and thank God for giving him 
everlasting life. Do not let the inquirer go while he con- 
tinues to say, ‘‘I hope I have everlasting life.’’ Insist upon 
his resting absolutely upon what God says. One night I found 
a young man upon his knees in great distress at the close of 
an evening service. I showed him from the Bible how Jesus 
Christ had borne his sins, and asked him if he would accept 
Christ as his Saviour. He said he would, and seemed to do it; 
but he seemed to get no light, and went out of the meeting in 
deep distress still. The next night he was there again, pro- 
fessing to accept Christ, but with no assurance that his sins 
were forgiven. I tried to show him from John 3: 36 what God 
said of those who believed on the Son, but the light did not 
come. Finally he rose to leave the room. As he turned to 
leave me he said, ‘‘ Will you pray for me?’’ I said, ‘‘Yes.’’ 
He walked a few steps down the aisle and I called after him, 
**Do you believe I will pray for you?’’ He turned toward me 


THOSE WHO LACK ASSURANCE Ill 


with a look of astonishment, and said, ‘‘Yes, of course.’’ I 
said, ‘‘Why do you think I will pray for you?’’ ‘‘Because you 
said so.’’ I said, ‘‘Is not God’s Word as good as mine?” He 
saw it at once, that while he was willing to believe my word, 
he was not willing to believe God’s Word. He received 
assurance on the spot and knew that he had everlasting life. 

Another verse which can be used to advantage with this 
class is Jno. 5: 24: 

“Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and 
believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come 
into condemnation; but is passed;from death unto life.’’ 

This verse has been used of God to bring many into assurance 
of salvation. 1 Jno. 5:12 is also very plain: 

‘“‘He that hath the Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son of God 

hath not life.” 

Acts 13:39 has been greatly used of God in dealing with this 
class. ‘‘By him all that believe are justified from all things, 
etc.,’’ Ask the inquirer, ‘‘What does this verse say that all 
who believe are?’’ ‘‘Justified.’’ ‘“‘Justified from what?’’ 
‘*From all things.’’ ‘‘Do you believe?” ‘‘Ido.’? ‘‘What are 
you then?’’ It will probably be necessary to go over it sev- 
eral times before the inquirer answers, ‘‘I am justified’’; but 
when he does, tell him to thank God for justifying him, and to 
confess Christ before the world. See to it that he doesit. I 
was dealing one night with a young woman who was in great 
distress of soul because she could not see that she had forgive- 
ness of sin. I went carefully over the ground to find if she 
really had accepted Christ, and it appeared clear that she had. 
Then I had her read Acts 13: 39, ‘‘By him all that believe are 
justfied from all things.’’ ‘‘Now,’’ I said, ‘‘Who does God say 
in this verse are justified from all things?’’ ‘‘All that 
believe.’’ ‘‘Believe on whom?” ‘‘Believe on Christ.’”’ ‘‘Do 
you believe on Christ?”’ ‘‘I do.” ‘*Have you really accepted 
Him as your Saviour and Lord and Master?’ ‘“‘Yes.’’ ‘Then 
you are sure you believe on Him?’’ ‘‘Yes.’’ ‘“‘And what 
does this verse say that all who believe are?’’ ‘‘Justified.’’ 
‘*What then are you?’’ She would not say, ‘I am justi- 
fied,’’ but wept over the thought that her sins were not 
forgiven. I went over it again and again and again. At last 


112 HOW TO WORK 


the simple meaning of the words seemed to dawn upon her 
darkened mind. I asked her as before, ‘‘Who does God say 
are justified?’ ‘‘All that believe.” ‘‘From what are they 
justified?” ‘‘From all things.’”’ ‘‘Who is justified from all 
things?’ ‘‘All that believe.’ ‘Who says so?” **God says 
so.” ‘Do you believe?” “Ido.” ‘‘Whatare youthen?”’” A 
joyous light spread over her countenance, and she said, ‘‘Why 
I am justified from all things,’’ and immediately she turned 
toward her friend standing near and said to me, *‘Now won’t 
you speak to my friend about Christ?”’ 


2. Many inquirers of this class stumble over the fact that 
they have not the witness of the Holy Spirit. Show them 
that the witness of the Word to their acceptance is sufficient, 
from 1 Jno. 5: 10: 


‘‘He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in himself: he 
that believeth not God hath made him a liar; because he believeth not 
the record that God gave of his Son.”’ 


This verse tells us that if we believe not the witness of God, 
in His Word, we make Him a liar. I was once dealing with a 
very intelligent young man along this line. He professed 
that he had accepted Jesus Christ, but that he did not know 
that he had eternal life. I showed him God’s testimony that 
‘the that hath the Son hath life.’’ (x Jno. 5:12.) ‘“‘Now,’’ I 
said, ‘‘You have the Son.”’ ‘‘Yes.’’ ‘‘And God says that he 
that hath the Son hath what?’’ ‘“‘Life.’’ Then I read the 
tenth verse, ‘‘He that believeth not God hath made Him a liar; 
because he believeth not the record that God gave of His 
Son.’’ ‘‘Now,’’ I said, ‘‘God’s record concerning His Son is 
that eternal life is in Him,’’ (verse 11), and that ‘‘He that hath 
the Son hath life,’’ (verse 12). Now this is God’s record. If 
you do not believe it, no matter what your feelings are, what 
are you doing?’’ In a little while the man replied, I am 
making God a liar, but I never saw it before.’”’ Then and 
there he trusted the naked Word of God, and went out with 
the knowledge that his sins were forgiven, and that God had 
given him eternal life. 

Also show those who are waiting for the witness of the 
Holy Spirit, that it is after we believe the testimony of the 


THOSE WHO LACK ASSURANCE inane) 


Word that we are sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise, using 
Eph. 1: 13 for this purpose: 

“In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the 
gospel of your salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye were 
sealed with that holy Spirit of promise.” 

The natural order in assurance is this: First, assurance of our 
justification, resting upon the naked Word of God, (such pas- 
sages as Acts 13: 39); second, public confession of Christ with 
the mouth, (Rom. 10: 10); and third, the witness of the Holy 
Spirit, (Eph. 1:13, Rom. 8:16). The trouble with many is, 
that they wish to invert this order, and have the witness of the 
Holy Spirit before they confess Christ with the mouth. 

It is very important in using these texts, to make clear 
what saving faith is, because many say that they believe, 
when they do not in the sense of these texts, and so get a false 
assurance, and entertain false hopes, and never get deliver- 
ance. There is a good deal of careless dealing with those who 
lack assurance. Workers are so anxious to have inquirers 
come out clearly, that they urge them on to assurance when 
they have no right to assurance because they have not really 
accepted Christ. It is better for a man not to have assurance 
that he is saved, than for a man to have assurance that he is 
saved when in reality he is not. Jno. 1:12, 2 Tim. 1: 12 and 
Rom. 10:10 make very clear what the character of saving 
faith is. 


II. Those who lack assurance because of sin. 

Oftentimes the trouble with those who lack assurance is, 
that there is some sin or questionable practice in their lives 
which they ought to confess and give up. When this is the 
case, it will not do to deal with the inquirer along the lines 
mentioned above. Take him rather to such passages as John 
8:12: 

‘‘Then spake Jesus again untothem, saying, Iam the light of the 

world: he that followeth me shall not walkin darkness, but shall have 
the light of life.’’ 


When the man has read the passage you can tell him that 
Jesus’ promise was that if we follow Him we shall have the 
light of life. Say to him, ‘‘You have not the light of life, so 


II4 HOW TO WORK 


the probability is that you are not following Him. Are you 
following Him?’’ Push the inquirer along this line to find if 
there is not some point in which he is untrue to Christ, or to 
the leading of the Holy Spirit. One night in an after-meet- 
ing, I was passing around here and there asking different ones 
about their Christian experience. A gentleman and his wife, 
friends from another church, had come down to the meeting. 
I noticed the gentleman looked at his wife as much as to say, 
‘*Speak to her.’’ In a little while I came around to her, and 
asked her how she was getting on in her Christian life. She 
replied that she was all in the dark. I simply quoted Jno. 
8:12 and passed on, but the arrow went home. She and her 
husband stayed after every one else had gone, and I had a 
private conversation with her. I asked her if she was rebelling 
against the will of God at any place. She confessed that she 
was, that her husband had received a great anointing of the 
Holy Spirit and she had not, and what was more, she was 
afraid her husband would go into Christian work and she did 
not want him to, and so she had gotten utterly in the dark. 
After some conversation and prayer, she surrendered wholly 
to the will of God, and the next morning received a wonder- 
ful baptism with the Holy Spirit. 

Is. 55:7 is a good passage to use with those who lack 
assurance because of sin. Prov. 28:13 and Ps. 32:1-5 are 
good passages to use with those who have some unconfessed sin 
that is keeping them out of the enjoyment of fellowship with 
God. These passages show that when sin is forsaken and con- 
fessed we receive pardon and light and assurance. 

Oftentimes it is well when one lacks assurance, first, to 
put the question clearly to him, ‘‘Do you know of any sin 
which you are cherishing, or anything in your life which your 
conscience troubles you about?’’ 


CHAPTER X 
HOW TO DEAL WITH BACKSLIDERS 


One of the largest classes found in the inquiry room, and 
in all personal work in our day, are those who are, or call 
themselves backsliders. They are not all alike by any means, 
and they ought not all to have the same treatment. There 
are two classes of backsliders: 


I. Careless backsliders, those who have no great desire to 

come back to the Saviour. 

1. There is perhaps no better passage to use with such 

than Jer. 2:5: 

“‘Thus saith the Lord, What iniquity have your fathers found in me, 
that they are gone far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are 
become vain?”’ 

Drive God’s question contained in the text right home to their 
hearts, ‘‘What iniquity have you found in the Lord?’’ Dwell 
upon God’s wonderful love to them, and show them the base 
ingratitude and folly of forsaking such a Saviour and friend. 
Very likely they have wandered away because of the unkind 
treatment of some professed Christian, or of some minister, 
but hold them right to the point of how the Lord treated them, 
and how they are now treating Him. Use also Jer. 2:13: 

“For my people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me 
the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken 
cisterns, that can hold no water.”’ 

Have the inquirer read the verse, and ask, “‘Is not that verse 
true; what does the Lord say that you forsook when you for- 
sook Him?” ‘‘The fountain of living waters.’’ ‘‘And to what 
does He say you turned?”’ ‘Broken cisterns that can hold no 
water.’’ ‘‘Is not that true in your experience; did you not 
forsake the fountain of living waters, and have you not found 
the world broken cisterns that can hold no water?’’ I have 
yet to find the first backslider of whom this is not true, and I 


115 


116 HOW TO WORK 


have used it with many. Then illustrate the text by showing 
how foolish it would be to turn from a fountain of living 
water to broken cisterns or muddy pools. If this verse does 
not accomplish the desired result, use Jer. 2: 19: 


‘Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall 
reprove thee: know therefore and see that“it is an evil thing and bitter, 
that thou hast forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in 
thee, saith the Lord God of hosts.”’ 


When they have read it, ask them if they have not found it an 
‘‘evil thing and bitter’’ that they have forsaken the Lord their 
God. It is well sometimes to go over the misfortunes and 
troubles that have come since they forsook the Lord, for it is 
a fact as every experienced worker knows, that when a man 
who has had a real knowledge of Christ backslides, misfor- 
tune after misfortune is likely to overtake him. Prov. 14: 14, 


the first half of the verse, is also a good passage to use: 


“The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways.” 
1 Kings 11:9 can also be used: 

“‘And the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned 
from the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared unto him twice.” 

One of the best passages to show the folly and evil 

results of backsliding is Luke 15: 13-17. Go into detail in 
bringing out the point of the picture here given of the mis- 
eries that came to the backslider in the far country. 

z. It is well sometimes to use Amos 4:11, 12: 

‘IT have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gom- 
orrah, and ye were asa firebrand plucked out of the burning: yet have 
ye not returned unto me, saith the Lord. Therefore thus will I do unto 
thee, O Israel: and because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet 
thy God, O Israel.”’ 

Before the passage is read you can say, ‘‘There is a passage in 
the Old Testament that contains a message from God to back- 
sliding Israel, and I believe it is a message for you also. Then 
have him read the passage carefully and after he has read it, 
ask him what the message of God to backsliding Israel was. 
‘*Prepare to meet thy God.’’ Then say to him, “‘It is God’s 
message to you too, as a backslider to-night, ‘prepare to meet 
thy God.’’’ Go over this again and again until the thought 
rings in the heart of the man. 


BACKSLIDERS 117 


II. Backsliders who are sick of their wandering and sin, and 
desire to come back to the Lord. 


These are a very different class from those just men- 
tioned, though of course they are related. They are perhaps 
as easy a class to deal with as we ever find. There are many 
who once had a knowledge of the Lord who have wandered 
into sin, and who are now sick and tired of sin, and are long- 
ing to come back, but think that there is no acceptance for 
them. Point them to Jer. 3:12, 13, 22: 

“Go and proclaim these words toward the north, and say, Return, 
thou backsliding Israel, saith the Lord; and I will not cause mine 
anger to fall upon you: for Iam merciful, saith the Lord, and I will not 
keep anger forever. Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou hast 
transgressed against the Lord thy God, and hast scattered thy ways to 
the strangers under every green tree, and ye have not obeyed my voice, 
saith the Lord. 

“Return, ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings. 
Behold we come unto thee; for thou art the Lord our God.”’ 

This will show them how ready the Lordis to receive them 
back, and that all He asks of them is that they acknowledge 
their sin and return to Him. 

Hos. 14: 1-4, is full of tender invitation to penitent back- 
sliders, and also shows the way back to God. 


“O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God; for thou hast fallen by thine 
iniquity. Take with your words, and turn to the Lord: say unto him, 
Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: so will we render 
the calves of our lips. Asshur shall not save us; we will not ride upon 
horses: neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, Ye are 
our gods: for in thee the fatherless findeth mercy. I will heal their 
backsliding, I will love them freely: for mine anger is turned away from 
him,”’ 

I use this passage more frequently than almost any other with 
the class of whom we are speaking, especially the first and 
fourth verses. I show them first of all that God is inviting 
the backslider to Himself, and second that He promises to 
heal their basksliding and love them freely, and third, that all 
that He asks is that they take words of confession and return 
to Him (verse 2). The following verses all set forth God’s 
unfailing love for the backslider. and His willingness to 


receive him back. 


118 HOW TO WORK 


“But thou hast not called upon me, O Jacob; but thou hast been 
weary of me, O Israel. 

‘Thou hast bought me no sweet cane with money, neither hast thou 
filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices: but thou hast made me to serve 
with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thine iniquities. I, even I, am 
he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not 
remember thy sins.’’ Is. 43: 22, 24, 25. 

‘He feedeth on ashes: a deceived heart hath turned him aside, that 
he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is tnere not a lie in my right hand? 
Remember these, O Jacob and Israel; for thou art my servant: I have 
formed thee; thou art my servant: O Israel, thou shalt not be forgotten 
of me. I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and, as 
a cloud, thy sins: return unto me, for I have redeemed thee.” Is. 
44: 20-22. 

“For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, saith the Lord, 
thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end. Then 
shall ye call upon me, and ye shall goand pray unto me, and I will 
hearken unto you. And ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall 


search for me with all your heart.’’ Jer. 29: 11-13. 
“‘And there ye shall serve gods, the work of men’s hands, wood and 
stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell.’’ Deut. 4: 28. 


“(For the Lord thy God, isa merciful God;) he will not forsake 
thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the covenant of thy fathers which 
he sware unto them.’’ Deut. 4: 31. 


“If my people, which are called by my name shall humble them- 
selves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways; 
then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal 
their land.’’ 2 Chron. 7: 14. 

One of the most useful verses in dealing with an intelli- 
gent backslider who wishes to return to the Lord is, 1 Jno. 
13:9; 

“If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, 

and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.”’ 
It is well sometimes to follow this up with 1 Jno. 2:1, 2: 


“My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. 
And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ 
the righteous: and he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours 
only, but also for the sins of the whole world.”’ 

Often it is helpful to give illustrations of great backsliders 
who returned to the Lord, and how lovingly He received 
them. For this purpose you can use Mark 16: 7: 

‘‘But go your way, tell his disciples and Peter that he goeth before 

you into Galilee: there shall ye see him, as he said unto you.’’ 


This tells of Christ’s loving message to Peter after he had soe 


BACKSLIDERS 119 


grievously sinned, and deliberately denied his Master. 2 
Chron. 15: 4 and 33: 1-9, 12, 13 give illustrations of great back- 
sliders who returned to the Lord, and how lovingly He 
received them. 

Luke 15: 11-21 is perhaps the most useful passage of all 
in dealing with a backslider who wishes to return, for it has 
both the steps which the backslider must take, and also a pic- 
ture of the loving reception from God that awaits him. 

When a backslider returns to Christ, he should always be 
given instructions as to how to live so as not to backslide 
again. These instructions will be found in Chapter V., Sec. 
VII. 


CHAPTER XI 


HOW TO DEAL WITH PROFESSED SKEPTICS AND 
INFIDELS 


There are various classes of skeptics, and it is not wise to 
use the same methods in dealing with all. 


I. Skeptics who are mere triflers. 

A very large share of the skeptics of our day belong to 
this class. Their professed skepticism is only an excuse for 
sin, and a salve for their own consciences. As a rule it is not 
wise to spend much time on an individual of this class, but 
rather give him something that will sting his conscience and 
arouse him out of his shallowness. A good passage for this 
purpose is 1 Cor. 1:18: 

‘‘For the;preaching of the cross is to ¢hem that perish foolishness; 

but unto us which are saved it is the power of God.”” 
Very likely the skeptic will say, ‘‘The Gospel and the whole 
Bible is all foolishness to me.’’ You can reply by saying, 
‘*Yes, that is exactly what God says.’”’ ‘‘But,”’ the man will 
say, ‘‘You don’t understand me, the Gospel and the whole 
Bible is foolishness to me.’’ ‘*Yes,’* you can reply, ‘‘that is 
exactly what the Bible says.’” The man’s curiosity will be 
piqued, and his mind opened by his curiosity to receive a word 
of truth, off his guard. Then have him read 1 Cor. 1:18. 
Then you can say, ‘‘You said that the Gospel was foolishness 
to you, and God Himself says that ‘the preaching of the cross 
is to them that perish foolishness,’ and it is foolishness to you 
because you are perishing; ‘but unto us which are saved it is 
the power of God.’’’ Oftentimes it will be well to leave the 
man without another word of comment. Be careful not to 
laugh at him, and not to produce the impression that you are 
joking; but leave him with the thought that he is indeed per- 
ishing. 
120 


SKEPTICS AND INFIDELS 121 


2 Cor. 4:3, 4 can be used in much the same way. Before 
the passage is read you can say to the man, ‘‘You are a skeptic 
because the Gospel is hidden to you, but God Himself has told 
us in His Word to whom the Gospel is hidden, and why it is 
hidden to them.’’ Then let him read the passage: 

“But 7 our gospel be hid, tt ¢s hid to them that are lost : in whom the 
god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest 
the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should 
shine unto them.” 

When he has read it, you can say, ‘*That verse explains to you 
the secret of your difficulty. The Gospel is hidden to you 
because you are lost, and the reason it is hidden is because the 
god of this world has blinded your mind, lest the light of the 
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should 
shine upon you.’’ I have also found 1 Cor. 2: 14 useful: 

‘*But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for 
they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they 
are spiritually discerned.” 

I have used it to show the man that it was no more than was 
to be expected that the things of the Spirit of God would be 
foolishness unto him, because they were spiritually discerned. 
I was dealing one night with a very bright student. He could 
hardly be called altogether a trifler, for he was a young man 
of a good deal of intellectual earnestness. He said to me, 
‘This is all foolishness to me.’’ I replied by saying, ‘‘That 
is exactly what the Bible says.”” He looked very much aston- 
ished, and protested that I did not understand him, that he 
had said it was all foolishness to him. ‘‘Yes,’’ I replied, 
‘that is what the Bible says. Let me show it to you.”’ I 
opened my Bible to the passage and let him read. When he 
had readit, I said, ‘‘That explains why it is foolishness to you; 
‘the natural man cannot receive the things of the Spirit of God 
for they are foolishness unto him.’ ‘‘Why,” he said, “‘I 
never thought of that before.” The Spirit of God carried it 
home to his heart, and the man was lead to an honest accept- 
ance of Christ. 

2 Thess. 1:7-9 can be used with good results with a 
trifling skeptic or agnostic. If the man says in an uppish 
way, ‘‘I am an agnostic,” you can say, ‘Well, God has told us 


122 HOW TO WORK 


a good deal about agnostics and their destiny; let us see what 
He has said.’’ Then have him read this passage: 

‘‘And to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall 
be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire taking 
vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of 
our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with everlasting destruc- 
tion from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.” 


When it is read you can say, ‘‘Now an agnostic is one that 
knows not God; and this verse tells us exactly what is the 
destiny of an agnostic and all those who know not God. This 
is God’s own declaration of their destiny.’’ Then have him 
read it again if he will, and if he will not, quote it to him. He 
may laugh at you, and if he does, the Word of God often sinks 
deeply into the heart, even when it is treated with a sneer. 

Mark 16:16 has been found very useful in dealing with 
trifling skeptics; when a man says to you that he is a skeptic 
or an infidel, it is well sometimes to say to him, ‘‘God has said 
some very plain words about infidels.’’ Then give to him the 
passage: 

“He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that 

believeth not shall be damned.”’ 

and say, ‘‘I simply want to leave that message of God with 
you,’’ and pass on. Jno. 3: 36 can be used in a similar way. 

Sometimes it is well to say to the trifling skeptic, ‘‘I can 
tell you the origin of your skepticism, but I can do better, I 
can tell you what God says of the origin of your skepticism."’ 
Then show him Jno. 8: 47: 

“He that is of God heareth God’s words: ye therefore hear them not, 

because ye are not of God.” 

2 Thess. 2: 10-12 can be used in extreme cases: 


“And with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; 
because they recetved not the love of the truth, that they might be 
saved. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that 
they should believe a lie: ¢hat they all might be damned who believed 
not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.” 


You can say to the man, ‘‘There is a very interesting passage 
in the Bible regarding skeptics. It tells what is the origin of 
their skepticism and what is the outcome of it.’? Then have 
him read the passage. When he has read it, say, ‘Now what 


SKEPTICS AND INFIDELS 123 


does this passage say about the origin of skepticism?’’ Show 
him it is ‘““because they received not the love of the truth, that 
they might be saved.’’ ‘‘What is the result of their refusal to 
receive the truth?’’ ‘‘God shall give them over to strong 
delusion that they shall believe a lie.’’ ‘‘And what is the out- 
come of it all?’ ‘‘Thatthey all might be damned who believed 
not in the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. ’’ 

Ps. 14:1 is useful in some cases, though it needs to be 
used with discretion and kindness. Before giving it to the 
man to read, you can say, “‘I do not wish to say anything 
unkind to you, but God Himself has said avery plain word 
about those who say there is no God; let me show it to you.” 
Then let him read: 


‘The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God,” 


When he has read it, say, “‘I am not saying that, but God has 
said it. Now itis a matter between you and God, but I would 
advise you not to forget what God has said.’’ Of course this 
applies especially to one who is skeptical about, or denies the 
existence of God. 

In dealing with a skeptic who is a trifler, and in fact with 
all skeptics, don’t argue, don’t get angry, be very gentle but 
very solemn, and very much in prayer, depending upon the 
Holy Spirit to give you words to say and to carry them home. 


II, An earnest-minded skeptic. 


Many skeptics are not triflers. There are very many men 
and women in our day who are really very desirous of knowing 
the truth, but who are in an utter maze of skepticism. There 
is no more interesting class of people to deal with than this. 
In beginning work with them, it is well to ask them the fol- 
lowing preliminary questions: 

1. ‘* What can’t you believe?” 

Get as full an answer as possible to this question, for 
many a man thinks he is a skeptic when really he does believe 
the great fundamental truths. Furthermore, in finding out 
what a man does believe, no matter how little it is, you have a 
starting point to lead the man out to further faith. 

2. ‘*Why can’t you believe ?”’ 


124 HOW TO WORK 


This will oftentimes show the man how utterly without 
foundation are his grounds for unbelief. 

3. ‘Do you live up to what you do believe ee 

This will give you an opportunity in many cases to show 
a man that his trouble is not so much what he does not believe, 
as his failure to live up to what he does believe. Only the 
other night I was dealing with a man who told me that his 
trouble was that he could not believe, but we had not gotten 
far in the conversation until it became clear to us that his 
trouble was not so much that he could not believe, but that he 
did not live up to what he did believe. 

4. ‘‘What do you believe ?’’ 

A few important lines along which to carry out this 
inquiry are, ‘‘Do you believe that there is an absolute differ- 
ence between right and wrong?’’ ‘‘Do you believe that there 
isa God?”? ‘‘Do you believe in prayer?’’ ‘‘Do you believe 
any part of the Bible, if so what part?”’ 

Having asked the man these preliminary questions, pro- 
ceed at once to show him how to believe. I have found no 
passage in the Bible equal to John 7:17 in dealing with an 
honest skeptic: 

“Tf any man wll do his w7tl, he shall know of the doctrine, whether 

it be of God, or whether I speak of myself.” 

It shows the way out of skepticism to faith, and has been 
used of God to the salvation of countless skeptics and infidels. 
You can say to the skeptic, ‘‘Now Jesus Christ makes a fair 
proposition. He does not ask you to believe without evidence, 
but He asks you to do a thing that your own conscience 
approves, and promises that if you do it, you will come out of 
skepticism into knowledge. What Jesus asks in this verse, is 
that you will to do God’s will; that is, that you surrender your 
will to God. Will you do it?’”? When this point has been 
settled, next say to him, ‘‘Will you make an honest search to 
find out what the will of God is, that you may do it??? When 
this point has been settled, ask the man, ‘‘Do you believe that 
God answers prayer?’’ Very likely the skeptic will reply that 
he does not. You can say to him, ‘‘Well I know that He does, 
but of course I don’t expect you to accept my opinion, but 
here is a possible clew to knowledge. Now the method of 


SKEPTICS AND INFIDELS 125 


modern science is to follow out any possible clew to see what 
there is in it. You have given me a promise to make an hon- 
est search to find the will of God, and here is a possible clew, 
and if your promise was honest, you will follow it. Will you 
pray this prayer? ‘O God, show me whether Jesus is thy Son 
or not; andif You show me that He is, I promise to accept 
Him as my Saviour and confess Him as such before the 
world.’’’ It is well to have him make his promise definite by 
putting it down in black and white. After this is done, show 
him still another step. Take him to John 2o: 31: 

“But these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, 
the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his 
name.’’ 

Here we are told that the Gospel of John was written that we 
might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God. Tell 
him, ‘‘Now this Gospel is given for this purpose, to show that 
Jesus is the Christ the Son of God. Will you take this Gospel 
and read it, honestly and carefully?’’ Very likely he will say, 
“‘T have read it often before.’”’ Youcan say, ‘‘I want you to 
read itinanew way. Will you read itthis way? Read afew 
verses at a time, and each time before you read, will you ask 
God to give you light on the passage that you are about to 
read, and promise that if He does, you will follow as much as 
you see to be true. Now when you have read the Gospel 
through, come back to me and tell me the result.’’ I would 
again carefully go over all the points as to what he was to do. 
It would be well also to ask him to especially notice the fol- 
lowing verses in the Gospel: 1: 32-34; 3:2; 3:33; 3:16; 
B7tS, 10; 3:32; 3:34; 3:36; 4: 103 4:14; 4:23; 4:34; 4:52, 
533 5:8, 93 §:22-24; 5:28, 29; 5:40; 5:44; 6:8-14; 6:19; 
6:27; 6:29; 6:35; 6:40; 6:66-68; 7:17; 7: 37-393 7:45, 463 
8:12; 8:18; 8:21; 8:24; 8:31, 32; 8: 34; 8:36; 8:38; 8: 42; 
82473 9:17; 9:24, 253 9235-39; 10:9; TO:TI, 10: 27-39; 
10: 303 11: 25,26; 11: 43-45; 12:26; 12:32; 12: 35, 30; 12: 42,43; 
12:46; 12: 48-503; 13:33; 13:13; 14:3; 14:6; 14:9; 14:15, 16; 
IA: 213 14:24; 14:27; 15:53 15:7; 1529-113 15:18, 19; 
15: 23-26; 16:3; 16:7-11; 16:13, 14; 16:24; 17:3; 17:53 
172123 17:14; 17:22; 17:24; 17: 25, 26; 18: 37; 19: 6; 19: 7-8; 
20:8; 20:13-19; 20:24, 25; 20:27-29; 20:31, 21: 24. This 


126 HOW TO WORK 


method of treatment if it is honestly followed by the skeptic 
’ will never fail. 

If the skeptic does not believe even in the existence of 
God, you will have to begin one step further back. Ask him 
if he believes there is an absolute difference between right 
and wrong. If he says that he does not, which will be very 
rarely the case, itis just as well to tell him then and there 
that he is a mere trifler. If he says that he does, ask him if 
he will take his stand upon the right and follow it wherever it 
carries him. He will very likely try to put you off by saying, | 
‘‘What is right???’ You can say to him that you do not ask him 
to take your conception of right, but will he take his stand 
upon the right and follow it wherever it carries him, and 
make an honest attempt to find out what the rightis. Next 
say to him, ‘‘You do not know whether there is a God and 
whether He answers prayer or not. I know that there isa 
God and that He answers prayer; but I do not ask you to 
accept my opinion, but here is a possible clew to knowledge; 
will you follow it?’’ If he refuses, of course you will know at 
once that he is not an honest skeptic, and you can tell him so. 
If he is willing to try this clew have him offer this prayer, ‘‘O 
God, if there is any God, show me whether Jesus Christ is Thy 
Son or not, and if You show me that He is, I promise to accept 
Him as my Saviour and confess Him as such before the world,’’ 
then have him proceed by reading the Gospel of John, etc., as 
in the former case. If the man is not an honest skeptic, this 
course of treatment will reveal the fact, and you can tell him 
that the difficulty is not with his skepticism, but with his 
rebellious and wicked heart. Ifa man says he does not know 
whether there is an absolute difference between right and 
wrong, you can set it down at once that he is bad, and turn to 
him and say frankly but kindly, ‘‘My friend, there is some- 
thing wrong in your life. Noman who is living a right life 
will doubt that there is an absolute difference between right 
and wrong. You probably know what the wrong is, and the 
trouble is not with your skepticism but with your sin. 

A man who was a thorough-going agnostic once came to 
me and stated his difficulties. The man had had a very 
temarkable experience. He had dabbled in Unitarianism, 


SKEPTICS AND INFIDELS 127 


Spiritualism, Buddhism, Theosophy, and pretty much every 
other ism extant. He was in a state of absolute agnosticism. 
He neither affirmed nor denied the existence of God. He told 
me that I could not help him, for his case was ‘‘very peculiar,”’ 
as indeed it was, but I had Jno. 7:17 to build my hope upon, 
and the man seemed honest. I asked him if he believed there 
was an absolute difference between right and wrong, he said 
that he did. Iasked him if he was willing to take his stand 
upon the right and follow it whereverit carried him. He said 
that he was. I called out my stenographer and dictated a 
pledge somewhat as follows: ‘‘I believe that there is an abso- 
lute difference between right and wrong, and I hereby take 
my stand upon the right to follow it wherever it carries me. 
I promise to make an honest search to find if Jesus Christ is 
the Son of God, and if I find that He is, I promise to accept 
Him as my Saviour and confess Him as such before the world.’’ 
I handed the pledge to the man and asked him if he was will- 
ing to sign it. He read it carefully and then signed it. I 
then said to him, ‘‘You don’t know there is not a God?”’ 
**No,’’ he said, ‘‘I don’t know that there is no God. Any 
man is a fool to say that he knows there is not a God. I 
neither affirm nor deny.’’ ‘‘Well,” I said, ‘‘I know there is a 
God, but that will do you no good.’’ I said further, ‘‘You do 
not know that God does not answer prayer.’’ ‘‘No,’’ he said, 
**T do not know that God does not answer prayer, but I do not 
believe that He does.’’ I said, ‘‘I know that He does, but 
that will not do you any good, but here is a possible clew to 
knowledge. Now you are a graduate of a British university. 
You know that the method of modern science is to follow out 
a possible clew to see what there is in it. Will you follow out 
this clew? Will you pray this prayer: ‘O God, if there is any 
God, show me whether Jesus Christ is Thy Son or not, and if 
You show me that He is, I promise to accept Him as my 
Saviour and confess Him as such before the world’?’’ ‘‘Yes,’’ he 
said, ‘‘I am willing to do that, but there is nothing in it; my case 
is very peculiar.’’ I then turned to John 20:31 and read, 
‘““These are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the 
Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life 
through His name.’’ After reading the verse,I said, ‘‘John 


128 HOW TO WORK 


wrote this Gospel that ‘ye might believe that Jesus is the 
_ Christ, the Son of God,’ will you take this Gospel and read it, 
not trying to believe it, but simply with a fair mind, willing 
to believe it if it approves itself to you as true?’’ He said, 
“T have read it time and time again, and could quote a good 
deal of it.’’ I said, ‘‘I want you to read it in a new way; reada 
few verses at a time, ask God for light each time you read, and 
promise to act upon so much as you see to be true.’’ This the 
man promised to do, but closed by saying, ‘*There is nothing in 
it, my case is very peculiar.’’ I went over again the various 
points and bade the man good-bye. A short time after I 
met him again. He hurried up to me, and almost the first 
words he said were, ‘‘There is something in that.’’ I replied, 
‘**T knew that before.’’ ‘“‘Why,’’ he said, ‘‘ever since I have 
done what I promised you to do, itis just asif I had been 
taken up to the Niagara river and was being carried along.’’ 
Some weeks after I met the man again; his doubts had all 
gone. The teachings of the men he had formerly listened to 
with delight, had become utter foolishness to him. He had 
put himself in a way to find out the truth of God, and God had 
made it known to him, and he had become a believer in Jesus 
Christ as God’s Son, and the Bible as God’s Word. 

There is no more interesting class, and no easier class to 
deal with, than honest skeptics. Many are afraid to tackle 
them, but there is no need of this. There is a way out of 
skepticism into faith laid down in the Bible that is absolutely 
sure if any one will take it. As for skeptics who are triflers, 
it is not best to spend much time on them, but simply to give 
them some searching passages of Scripture, and to look to the 
Spirit of God to carry the Word home. 


III. Special classes of skeptics. 

1. Those who doubt the existence of God. 

The passages given under I. and II. may be used with this 
class, and usually it is wise to use them before the specific 
passages given under this head. 

(1) An excellent passage to use with those who claim to 
doubt the existence of God is Rom. 1: 19-22: 

‘‘Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them; for 


SKEPTICS AND INFIDELS 129 


God hath shewed it unto them. For the invisible things of him from 
the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the 
things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead; so that they 
are without excuse: because that, when they knew God, they glorified 
him not as God, neither were thankful, bat became vain in their imag- 
inations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing themselves 
to be wise, they became fools.”’ 
Ask the doubter to read this passage carefully. When he has 
done so, you can say to him, ‘‘Of course you never saw God, 
but this verse tells us how the invisible things of Him whom 
we have never seen can be known, and how is it?’’ ‘‘By the 
things that are made.’’ ‘‘What does Paul say we can under- 
stand by the things that are made?’’ ‘‘His eternal power and 
Godhead.’’ ‘‘Is not this true, do not the facts of nature prove 
an intelligent creator?’’ It is well sometimes to illustrate by 
a watch or something of that sort. Show the inquirer a watch 
and ask him if he believes it had an intelligent maker, and 
why he thinks so; then ask him about his eye which shows more 
marks of intelligence in its construction than a watch, or any- 
thing man ever made. Having dealt upon this argument and 
made it clear, ask him what God says those are who do not 
believe in God as revealed in His works. Bring out the fact 
that God says they are ‘without excuse.’’ Then you can say to 
him, ‘‘The twenty-first verse tells us why men get in the dark 
about God.’’ Have him read this verse also. ‘‘According to 
this verse, why is it that men get in the dark about God?’’. 
‘*Because that, when they knew God, they glorified Him not as 
God, neither were thankful.’’ “Is not this true about you? 
Was there not a time when you knew God, believed that there 
was a God, but did not glorify Him as God, neither returned 
thanks to Him? What does God say is the result of this 
course?’ ‘*They became vain in their imaginations,and their 
foolish heart was darkened.’’ ‘‘Now is this not precisely your 
case? Has not your foolish heart been darkened by not glori- 
fying God when you knew Him? Now the twenty-second 
verse describes such persons, exactly what does it say about 
them?’ ‘‘Professing themselves to be wise, they became 
fools.’’ 
In something the same way you can use Ps. 19:1, 2: 
“The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth 


130 HOW TO WORK 


his handiwork. Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night 

sheweth knowledge.”’ 
‘According to this passage, what declares to us the glory of 
God?’ “The heavens.’’ ‘‘What shows His handiwork?’ 
‘“The firmament.’’ ‘‘Do you know anything about the stars?’’ 
Let the skeptic tell what he knows about the stars. If he 
knowns nothing, tell him something about their greatness, 
their magnitude, and their wonderful movements, and then 
ask him if it does not indicate a wonderful creator. Endeavor 
to make him see that he is not honest in his denial of God. 

(2) Tell him that there is still one verse you wish to give 
him, and that you hope he wil! bear in mind that it is not you 
who says it, but God; and that it applies to his case exactly. 
Then have him read the first half of Ps. 14: 1: 

“The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God.”’ 
When he has read it, ask him who it is according to this verse, 
who says ‘‘there is no God.’’ ‘‘The fool.’’ ‘‘Where is it that 
he says there is no God?’’ ‘‘In his heart.’’ ‘‘Why is it then 
that the fool says there is no God; is it because he cannot 
believe in God, or because he does not wish to believe in 
God?’ You can add that the folly of saying in one’s heart 
there is no God, is seen in two points, first, because there is a 
God, and it is folly to say there is not one when there is; and 
second, because the doctrine that there is not a God always 
brings misery and wretchedness. Put it right to the man, 
and ask him if he ever knew a happy atheist. Before leaving 
him, you can tell him that he is losing the greatest blessing 
for time and for eternity, by doubting the existence of God. 
Turn him to Rom. 6: 23 and show him that this is so: 

‘The wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life through 

Jesus Christ our Lord.” 

When he has read the verse, say to him, ‘*This verse tells us 
that we have our choice between eternal death, which is the 
wages that we have earned by sin, and eternal life, which is 
the gift of God, but of course if we do not believe in God, we 
cannot look to Him for this gift.’” You can further tell him 
that in his present state of mind it is impossible for him to do 
anything that pleases God, and show him Heb. 11: 6 and have 
him read it if he will, and if he will not, read it to him. 


SKEPTICS AND INFIDELS 131 


2. Those who doubt that the Bible is the Word of God. 

The method of dealing with honest skeptics described 
above, is as a rule the best method of dealing with this class, 
but other plans will be useful with some. 

(x) Oftentimes men say, ‘‘I do not believe the Bible asa 
whole is the Word of God, but I accept what Jesus Christ 
says.’’ If one says this, get him to take his stand clearly and 
definitely upon this statement, that he accepts the authority of 
Jesus Christ. Get him to commit himself to this point. 
When he has done it, say to him, ‘‘Well, if you accept the 
authority of Jesus Christ, you must accept the authority of the 
whole Old Testament, for Jesus Christ has set the seal of His 
authority to the entire book.’’ This the man will not believe 
at first, but turn him to Mark 7:13; show him the context, 
thereby proving to him that Jesus here calls the law of Moses 
the Word of God. Then say to him, ‘‘If you accept the author- 
ity of Jesus, you must accept the authority of at least the first 
five books of the Bible as being the Word of God. You can 
follow this up by Matt. 5: 18: 

“For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one 

tittle shall in no wise pass from the law till all be fulfilled.’’ 
Here Jesus sets His authority to the absolute inerrancy of the 
Old Testament law. Then turn him to John 1o: 35: 
“Tf he called them gods unto whom the word of God came, and ¢he 
Scripture cannot be broken.” 
Show him how that here Jesus quotes a passage from the 
Psalms, (Ps. 82:6), and says that the Scripture cannot be 
broken, and hereby sets the stamp of His authority to the 
absolute inerrancy of the entire Old Testament Scriptures. 
Turn him next to Luke 24: 27: 
“And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto 
them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself.” 
Show him from this passage how Jesus quoted the entire Old 
Testament Scriptures, Moses and the prophets, as being of 
conclusive authority. Then go on to the 44th verse, and call 
his attention to the fact that Jesus said that “‘all things must 
be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the 
prophets, and in the Psalms.’’ Remind him that the Jew 
divided his Bible, the present Old Testament Scriptures. into 


m= = 


132 HOW TO WORK 


three parts, the Law, the Prophets and the Psalms, and that 
Jesus took up each one of these parts in detail, and set the 
stamp of His authority upon the whole. Therefore hold him 
to the point that if he accepts, the authority of Christ, he must 
accept the authority of the whole Old Testament, and he has 
already said that he did accept the authority of Christ. 

To prove that Christ set the stamp of His authority to the 

New Testament, take him to Jno. 14: 26: 

‘‘But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will 
send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to 
your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.”’ 

Here Jesus plainly declares that not only would the teaching 
of the apostles be true, but that it would contain all the truth, 
and furthermore, that their recollection of what He Himself 
said, would not be their own recollection, but the recollection 
of the Holy Ghost. Follow this up with Jno. 16: 12, 13: 

“T have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them 
now. Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you 


into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall 
hear, that shall he speak: and he will shew you things to come.”’ 


Show him that Jesus Himself, said, ‘I have many things to 
say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit when 
He, the Spirit of truth, is come, He will guide you into all 
truth.’’ Therefore, tell him, that Jesus said the apostles 
would be taught of the Holy Spirit, that the Holy Spirit would 
guide them zxto all the truth, and that their teaching would 
be more complete than His own. ‘‘Therefore, if you accept 
the authority of Jesus, you must accept the authority of the 
entire New Testament.” 
(2) If the objector says that Paul never claimed that his 
teachings were the Word of God, turn him to1 Thess. 2:13: 
‘‘For this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because, when ye 
received the word of God whith ye heard of us, ye received it not as 
the word of men, but as zt 7s tn truth, the word of God, which effectually 
worketh also in you that believe.’’ 
(3) A passage which is useful as describing the character 
of Bible inspiration is 2 Peter 1: 21: 


“For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man» but holy 
men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.” 


SKEPTICS AND INFIDELS 133 


1 Cor. 2:14 is useful as proving verbal inspiration, (see espe- 
cially Am. R. V.). 

(4) Sometimes it is well to say to the doubter, ‘‘The 
Bible itself xplains why it is that you do not believe the Bible 
is the Word of God.’”’ Then show him Jno. 8:47. Follow 
this up by saying, ‘‘That you do not believe the Bible is God’s 
word does not alter the fact,” and show him Rom. 3:3, 4: 

“For what if some did not believe? shall their unbelief make the 
faith of God without effect? God forbid: yea, let God be true, but 
every man a liar; as it is written, That thou mightest be justified in thy 
Sayings, and mightest overcome when thou art judged.” 

You can go further yet and say, that God Himself tells us that 
there is awful guilt attaching to the one who will not believe 
the record that He has given, and then show him 1 Jno. 5: 10: 

“He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in himself: Ze 
that belteveth not God hath made him a liar; because he believeth not 
the record that God gave of his Son.’’ 

Ask him when he has read it, ‘‘What does God say here of the 
one who does not believe the record that He has given of His 
Son?” and make him see that God says he has made God a liar. 

(5) Finally you may use Luke 16: 30, 31: 

“‘And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from 
the dead, they will repent. And he said unto him, If they hear not 
Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose 
from the dead.”’ 

Before reading it, say, ‘‘Well, God says that the case of one 
who will not listen to the Bible is very desperate. Just read 
and see what He says upon this point,’’ and then have him 
read the verse. 

3. Those who doubt the divinity of Christ. 

It is very common in our day to have men say that they 
believe in God, but they do not believe that Jesus Christ was 
the Son of God. The best way, as arule, to deal with such, 
is along the line described in I. and II., especially under IL. ; 
but sometimes there is a man who has real difficulties on this 
point, and it is well to meet him squarely. 

(1) Inthe first place, show such a one that we find several 
divine titles applied to Christ, the same titles being applied to 
Christ in the New Testament that are applied to Jehovah in 
the Old, Acts 10: 36 and 1 Cor. 2:8, compare Ps. 24: 8-10: 


134 HOW TO WORK 


“The word which God sent unto the children of Israel, preaching 
peace by Jesus Christ: (he is Lord of all).’’ Acts 10: 36. 

“Which none of the princes of this world knew: for had they known 
it, they would not have crucified che Lord of glory.”” 1 Cor, 2: 8. 

“Who is this King of glory? The LORD strong and mighty, the LORD 
mighty in battle. Lift up your heads, O ye gates; even lift them up, 
ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall come in. Who zs thes 
King of glory? The LORDof hosts, he is the King of glory. Selah.’’ 
Ps. 24: 8-10. 


Heb. 1:8; Jno. 20: 28, Rom. 9:5, Rev. 1: 17, compare Is. 44: 6: 


“‘But unto the Son he saith, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever: 
a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of thy kingdom.”” Heb. 1:8. 

“And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord and my God.” 
John 20: 28. 

‘‘Whose are the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ 
came, who is over all, God blessed forever.”” Rom. 9:5. 

“And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead. And he laid his 
right hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not; Jam the first and the 
LEST IRCVenL cL 

“Thus satth the LORD the King of Israel, and his redeemer the 


LORD of hosts; J am the first,and I am the last; and beside me there 
is no God.”’ Is. 44:6. 


(2) Show him further that offices are ascribed to Christ 
that only God could fill. For this purpose use Heb. 1: 3, 10: 


‘‘Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of 
his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when 
he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the 
Majesty on high.”’ 

“And, thou, Lord, in the beginning hast Jazd the foundation of the 
earth; and the heavens are the work of thine hands.” 


(3) Show him that the Bible expressly declares that Jesus 
Christ should be worshiped as God. Use for this purpose 
Heb. 1:6, Phil. 2:10, Jno. 5: 22, 23, compare Rev. s2.13° 


‘And again, when he bringeth in the first begotten into the world, he 
saith, Aud let all the angels of God worship him.”” Web, 1:6. 

‘That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in 
heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth.’? Phil. 2: ro. 

“For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment 
unto the Son: that all men should honour the Son, even as they honour 
the Father. We that honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father 
which hath sent him.’’ John 5:22, 23. 

*‘And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under 
the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I 


SKEPTICS AND INFIDELS 135 


saying, Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto him that 
sitteth upon the'throne, and unto the Lamé forever and ever.’’ Rev. 5:13. 

(4) Show him that Jesus claimed the same honor as His 
_ Father, and either He was divine, or the most blasphemous 
impostor that ever lived. For this purpose use Jno. 5: 22, 23. 
Drive home the truth that the one who denies Christ’s divinity 
puts Him in the place of a blasphemous impostor. Mark 
14: 61, 62: 

“But he held his peace, and answered nothing. Again the high priest 
asked him, and said unto him, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the 
blessed? And Jesus sacd, I am: and ye shall see the Son of man 
sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.” 
(cf. vs. 63, 64.) 

(5) In the next place show him that the Bible says the 
one who denies the divinity of Christ, no matter who he may 
be, isa liar and an antichrist. For this purpose use 1 Jno. 
2:22, 23, compared with 1 Jno. 5:1, 5: 

“Who ts a liar but he that denteth that Jesus zs the Christ? He is 
antichrist, that denieth the Fatherand the Son. Whosoever denieth the 
Son, the same hath not the Father: [but] he that acknowledgeth the Son 
hath the Father also.”’ 

‘‘Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God: and 
every one that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten of 
him.”’ 

*‘Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that 
Jesus is the Son of God?’’ 

1 Jno. 5: 10-12 shows that he who does not believe that Jesus 
is divine makes God a liar, ‘‘because he believeth not the 
record that God gave of his Son.”’ 

(6) Make it clear to the inquirer that God regards it asa 
matter of awful folly and guilt deserving the worst punish- 
ment, to reject Christ as the Son of God. For this purpose 
use Heb. 10: 28, 29: 

“He that despised Moses’ law died without mercy under two or three 
witnesses: of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be 
thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath 
counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an 
unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit of grace?”’ 

follow this up with Jno. 8:24 which shows beyond a question 
that one who does not believe in the divinity of Christ cannot 
be saved, and Jno. 20:31 which shows that we obtain life 
through believing that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God. 


136 HOW TO WORK 


(7) I have found that making clear the fact that Christ 
rose from the dead, and that this was God’s seal to His claim 
to be divine, is very helpful in dealing with many who have 
doubts as to His divinity. I have also found Acts 9g: 20 very 
helpful: 

“And straightway he preached Christ in the synagogues, ¢hat he zs 

the Son of God.” 
I call attention to who it was in this verse that declared Jesus 
to be the Son of God, namely Saul of Tarsus. I then bring 
out what it was that led Paul to say this; that is, his actually 
seeing Jesus in the glory, and hearing the words that He spoke 
to him. Then I make it clear that one of three things is true; 
either Saul actually saw Jesus in the glory, or else he lied 
_about it, or else he was deceived, being in a heated state of 
imagination or something of that kind. ‘Then I show how he 
could not have lied about it, for men do not manufacture a 
lie for the sake of suffering for it thirty or thirty-five years. 

Second, I show that the circumstances were such as to pre- 
clude the possibility of an optical delusion, or anoverheated state 
of the imagination, for not only did Paul see the light, but those 
who were with him, and those who were with him also heard 
the voice speaking, though they did not hear what the voice 
said. Furthermore, there was a second man, Ananias, who 
received a commission independently, to go to Saul and lay 
hands upon him, and his eyes would be opened, and Saul’s 
eyes were opened, which of course could not be the result of 
imagination. So Saul of Tarsus must actually have seen 
Christ in the glory, and if he did, in the way described, it 
settles it beyond question that Jesus is the Son of God; so the 
divinity of Christ is not a theological speculation, but an estab- 
lished fact. 

4. Those who doubt the doctrine of future punishment, or 
the conscious, endless suffering of the lost. 

As a rule it is not wise to discuss this difficulty with one 
whois not an out and out Christian. No one who has not sur- 
rendered his will and his mind to Jesus Christ is in a position to 
discuss the details of future punishment, but if one is skeptical 
on this point, though a Christian (in that he has accepted 
Christ as a personal Saviour) it is well to show him the teach- 


SKEPTICS AND INFIDELS 137 


ing of God’s Word. A great deal is made by those who deny 
the conscious, endless suffering of the lost, of the words 
**death’”’ and ‘‘destruction,’’ which are said to mean annihila- 
tion, or at least non-conscious existence. Say to such a one, 
*‘Let us see how the Bible defines its own terms.’’ Rev. 21:8 
defines what death means when used in the Scriptures as the 
punishment of the wicked: 
‘‘But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murder- 
ers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall 


have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: 
which ts the second death.” 


Rev. 17: 8, cf. Rev. 19: 20 shows what ‘‘perdition’’ (same Greek 
word as translated elsewhere ‘‘destruction’’), means in the 
Scriptures: 

“The beast that thou sawest was, and is not; and shall ascend out of 
the bottomless pit, and go zzto perdztion,; and they that dwell on the 
earth shall wonder, whose names were not written in the book of life 
from the foundation of the world, when they behold the beast that was, 
and is not, and yet is.’” Rev. 17:8. 

“And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet that wrought 
miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received 
the mark of the beast, and them that worshiped his image. These 
both were cast alive zzto a lake of fire burning with brimstone.” Rev. 
19: 20. 

Rev. 17:8 tells us that the beast was to go into ‘“‘perdition,’’ 
(destruction), Rev. 19: 20 tells us just where the beast went, 
‘*intoa lake of fire burning with brimstone.’’ This then is “‘per- 
dition.’’ But Rev. 20: 10 shows us the beast still there at the 
end of one thousand years, aud being still consciously tor- 
mented, and to be tormented day and night forever and ever. 
This then is what the Bible means by ‘‘perdition”’ or ‘‘destruc- 
tion,’’ conscious torment forever and ever in a lake of fire. 
Rev. 20: 15 shows that those who are subjected to the terrible 
retribution here described, are those who are not found writ- 
ten in the book of life: 

“And whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast 
into the lake of fire.”’ 

Matt. 10:28 shows that there is a destruction for the soul 
apart from the destruction for the body: 

‘*And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the 


138 HOW TO WORK 


soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body 
in hell.’’ 
(Luke 12:5 shows that after one is killed, (and is of course 
dead), there is still punishment in hell: 

“But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear: fear him, which after 
he hath killed hath power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear 
him.”’ 

Mark 3: 28, 29, R. V., shows that there is such a thing as an 
eternal sin: 

“Verily I say unto you, All their sins shall be forgiven unto the sons 
of men, and their blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme: 
but whosoever shall blaspheme against the Holy Spirit hath never for- 
giveness, but is guilty of az eternal sin.”’ 

Luke 16: 23-26 shows that the condition of the wicked dead is 
one of conscious torment. 

Mark 14: 21 shows that the retribution visited upon the 
wicked is of so terrible a character, that it would be better 
for him upon whom it is visited if he had never been born: 

“The Son of man indeed goeth, as it is written of him: but woe to 


that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! good were it for that 
man if he had never been born.”’ 


2 Pet. 2:4 and Jude 6 show that hell is not a place where the 
inhabitants cease to exist, but where they are reserved alive 
for the purposes of God: 

“For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down 


to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, fo be reserved unto 
judgment.” 


‘‘And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own 
habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto 
the judgment of the great day.”’ 

Heb. 10:28, 29 shows that while the punishment for the 
transgression of the Mosaic law was death, sorer punishment 
awaits those who have trodden under foot the Son of God. 

Matt. 25:41 shows that the wicked go tothe place pre- 

pared for the devil and his angels, and share the same endless 
conscious torment: 


‘Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, 
ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.” 


The character of this place and the duration of its punishment 
is very clearly stated in Rev. 19: 20 and 20: ro. 


CHAPTER XII 


HOW TO DEAL WITH THOSE WHO WISH TO PUT 
OFF A DECISION UNTIL SOME OTHER TIME 


Oftentimes when you have swept away every difficulty, 
and the way of salvation is made as clear as day, still the 
inquirer is not ready to decide then and there. He wishes to 
put off a decision until some future time. There are several 
classes of those who wish to put off a decision: 


I. One of the largest classes is composed of those who 
say, “I want to wait,’’ or “ Not to-night,’’ or “I will think about 
it,’’ or “I will come to-morrow night,’’ or some other such 
thing. 

Give to such a person Is. 55: 6: 

‘Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he 

is near.’’ 

When the inquirer has read the passage, ask him when it is 
that he is to seek the Lord. When he says, ‘‘While He may 
be found,’’ ask him when that is. Make it clear that the only 
time when he can be absolutely sure of finding the Lord is 
right now. Ask him if he can be sure of finding the Lord 
to-morrow if he does not seek Him to-day. Sometimes it is 
well to give illustrations from life concerning those who put 
off seeking the Lord, and when the next day came it was too 
late to find Him. 

Prov. 27:1 is also a good verse to use: 

“Boast not thyself of to-morrow; for thou knowest not what a day 

may bring forth.”’ 
When the verse has been carefully and intelligently read, (if 
it is not read carefully and intelligently at first, ask the one 
with whom you are dealing to read it again), ask him what it 
is that God says it is unwise to boast one’s self of. ‘To-mor- 
row.’’ Ask him why it is unwise to boast one’s self of to-mor- 


139 


140 HOW TO WORK 


row. ‘Because thou knowest not what a day may bring 
forth.’’ Ask him if he knows what a single day will bring 
forth. Suggest to him some of the things that it may bring 
forth, and then ask him if he does not think he better take 
Christ then and there. 

Prov. 29:1 has often been used of the Holy Spirit to 

bring men to an immediate decision: 

‘‘He, that being often reproved hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be 
destroyed, and that without remedy.” 

It is well after the verse has been read, to ask the one with 
whom you are dealing, ‘‘What becomes of the one who being 
often reproved hardeneth his neck?’’ When he answers, ‘‘He 
shall suddenly be destroyed,’’ ask him if he is willing to run 
the risk. Or you can use Matt. 25: 10-12: 

“And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that 
were ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut. 
Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. 
But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not.”’ 

Ask him who it was that went in to the marriage, and when 
he answers, ‘‘They that were ready,’’ ask him if he is ready. 
Then ask him what happened afterward to those who were 
not ready. Ask him who those who were not ready were. 
Then put it to him, ‘‘Are you willing to be on the outside?”’ 

Another excellent passage to use is Luke 12: 19, 20: 

“And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for 
many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said 
unto him, Thou fool, ¢hzs nzght thy soul shall be required of thee: then 
whose shall those things be, which thou hast provided?”’ 

After the verses have been read, ask, ‘‘For how many years 
did this man think that he had his goods laid up?’’ ‘‘Many 
years.’’ ‘But what did God say to him?’’ ‘‘How many years 
do you think you have before you still? But what may God 
say to you? When may He say it?’’ 

A passage especially effective in dealing with those who 

say, ‘‘I am not ready,’’ is Matt. 24: 44: 

“Therefore be ye also ready: for in such’an hour as ye think not the 
Son of man cometh,.”’ 

Another passage which can also be used with good effect is 
1 Kings 18: 21: 


THOSE WHO WISH TO DELAY 14! 


“And Elijah came unto all the people, and said, How long halt ye 
between two opinions? if the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal, 
then follow him.” 

An excellent way to use this verse is by asking the person 
whether he would be willing to wait a year and not have an 
opportunity under any circumstances, no matter what came 
up, of accepting Christ. When he answers, No, I might die 
within a year,’’ ask him if he would be wiiling to wait a 
month, a week, a day. Ask him if he would like God, the 
Holy Spirit, and all Christians to leave him alone for a day, 
and he not have the opportunity under any circumstances of 
accepting Christ. Almost any thoughtful person will say 
““No.’’ Then tell him if that is the case, he better accept 
Christ at once. Dr. Chalmers was the first one to use this 
method, and it has been followed by many others with great 
Success. 

Other passages which can be used with this class are: 

“Go to now, ye that say, To-day or to-morrow we will go into such a 
city, and continue there a year, and buy andsell, and get gain: 
whereas ye know not what shall be onthe morrow. For what is your 
life? It is even a vapour, that appeareth for a little time, and then van- 
isheth away.’? James 4: 13-14. 

‘‘Because there is wrath, beware lest he take thee away with his 
stroke: then a great ransom cannot deliver thee.” Job 36: 18. 

Luke 13: 24-28. 

‘“‘Then said Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek 
me, and shall die in your sins: whither I go, ye cannot come.” John 
S20, 

“Then Jesus said unto them, Yet a little while is the light with you. 
Walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you: for he that 
walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he goeth.’’ John 12: 35. 

“Then said Jesus unto them, Yet a little while am I with you, and 
then I go unto him that sent me. Ye shall seek me, and shall not find 
me: and where I am, thither ye cannot come.”’ John 7:33, 34. 


II. Those who say, “I must get fixed in business first, and 
then I will become a Christian.’’ 
With such persons use Matt. 6: 33: 


‘‘But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and 
all these things shall be added unto you.” 


This verse makes it very clear that we must seek the kingdom 
of God first, and everything else must be made secondary: 


142 HOW TO WORK 


III. Those who say, “I am waiting for God’s time.”’ 

Quite frequently this is said in all honesty. Many people 
have an idea that God has a certain time for saving people, 
and we must wait until this time comes. If any one says this, 
ask him if he will acc>pt Christ in God’s time if you will show 
him just when God's time is. When he says he will, turn him 
to 2 Cor. 6; 2: 

“(For he saith, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day 
of salvation have I succcured thee: behold, xow zs the accepted time, 
behold, now is the cay of salvation.)”’ 

This verse shows him that God’s time is now. Or turn to 
FIG 3 157 

“While it is said, 70-day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your 

hearts, as in the provocation.” 


This shows that God’s time is to-day. 


IV. Those who say, “I am too young to be a Christian,’ or 
“I want to wait until I am older.” 

With such a person open your Bible to Eccl. 12:1 and 
read: 

“Remember now thy Creator zz the days of thy youth, while the evil 
days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no 
pleasure in them.”’ 

Matt. 19:14 and 18:3 are also good passages to use, as they 
show that youth is the best time to come to Christ, and that 
all must become as children, even if they are old, before they 
can enter into the kingdom of heaven. 

It is oftentimes wise in dealing with persons who wish to 
put off a decision until some time in the future, to use the 
passages given for dealing with those who have little or no 
concern about their salvation, (Chapter VI.), until such a deep 
impression is made of their need of Christ, that they will not 
be willing to postpone accepting Him. Asa rule in dealing 
with those under I., it is best to use only one passage, and 
drive that home by constant repetition. One night I was 
dealing with a man who was quite excited, but kept saying, 
“I cannot decide to-night.’? Over and over again I quoted 
Prov. 29:1. In reply to every answer he made, I would give 
this passage. I must have repeated it a great many times in 


THOSE WHO WISH TO DELAY 143 


the course of the conversation, until the man was made to feel, 
not only his need of Christ, but the danger of delay, and the 
necessity of a prompt decision. He tried to get away from 
the passage, but 1 held him to this one point. The passage 
remained with him, and it was carried home by the providence 
of God, for he came nearly being destroyed on the street that 
night; he was assaulted. He came back to the meeting the 
next night with his head all bandaged, and then and there 
accepted Christ. The pounding he received from his assailant 
would probably have done him little good, if the text of the 
Scripture had not been previously pounded into his head, 


CHAPTER XIII 
HOW TO DEAL WITH THE DELUDED 


I. Roman Catholics. 


1. Very few Roman Catholics have assurance of salvae 
tion, indeed very few understand that it is our privilege to 
know that we have forgiveness of sins and eternal life. A 
good way then to deal with a Roman Catholic is to ask him 
if he knows that his sins are forgiven. Very likely he will 
say that he does not, and that no one else knows it either. 
Then you can show him that it is the believer’s privilege 
to know that he has forgiveness of sins. For this purpose 
use Acts 13:39, ‘‘By Him all that believe are justified, etc.”’ 
and Eph. 1:7: 

“In whom we have redemption through his blood, ¢he forgzveness of 

sins, according to the riches of his grace.’’ Eph. 1: 7. 
In a similar way, you can show him that it is our privilege to 
know that we have eternal life. For this purpose use 1 Jno. 
5:13. Oftentimes when he is brought to see that itis our 
privilege to know that we have forgiveness of sins and eternal 
life, he will desire to know it too, and will begin to see that 
we have something that he does not possess. There is one 
point at which we always have the advantage in dealing with 
a Roman Catholic, namely, there is a peace and power in 
Christianity as we know it, that there is not in Christianity as 
he knows it, and he can be made to appreciate the difference. 

2. Another good way to deal with a Roman Catholic is to 
show him the necessity of the new birth, and what the new 
birth is. When the one with whom you are dealing tells you 
that he is a Roman Catholic, it is well to ask him if he has been 
born again. Very likely he will say that he does not know 
what that means, (though oftentimes Roman Catholics do talk 
about the new birth). Show him Jno. 3: 3-5, 7, and empha- 
size what Jesus says, that we must be born again. If he asks 
what the new birth is, show him the following passages: 


144 


THE DELUDED 145 


“Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things 
are passed away; behold, all things are become new.’’ 2 Cor, 5:17. 

““Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises: 
that by these ye might be partakers of the divine nature, having 
escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust.”’ 2 Pet. 1: 4. 

“‘Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: 
from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse you. 4 
new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: 
and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give 
you an heart of flesh. AndI will put my spirit within you, and cause 
you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do 
them.’’ Ez. 36: 25-27. 


Many Roman Catholics understand the new birth to mean 
baptism, and oftentimes if you ask a Roman Catholic if he has 
been born again, he will say ‘‘Yes,’’ and if you ask him when, 
he will tell you at his baptism. It will then be necessary to 
show him that baptism is not the new birth. For this pur- 
pose use 1 Cor. 4:15: 

“For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye 
not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus 1 have begotten you through the 
gospel.” 

Here Paul tells the believers in Corinth that in Christ Jesus 
he had begotten them through the Gospel. If the new birth 
meant baptism, he must have baptized them, but in 1 Cor. 
1: 14 he declares he had not baptized them. 

Or you can say, “‘No, baptism is not the new birth, for I 
can show you a person who we are told was baptized, and yet 
St. Peter told him he had not been born again. Then turn to 
Acts 8:13: 

“Then Simon himself believed also: and when he was baptized, he 

continued with Philip, and wondered, beholding the miracles and signs 
which were done.”’ 


When you have made it clear that Simon had been baptized, 
turn to Peter’s statement in the 21st to the 23d: verses, to 
show that he had not been born again. It is well to goa step 
further and show the inquirer what the Biblical evidences of 
the new birth are. For this purpose use the following pas- 
sages: 

“If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that doeth 

righteousness is born of him.’’ 1 John 2: 29. 


146 HOW TO WORK 


“Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin; for his seed remain- 
eth in him: and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. 
““We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we 
love the brethren. He that loveth not his brother abideth in death. 
‘But whoso hath this world’s good, and seeth his brother have need, 
and shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth the 
love of God in him?’’ 1 John 3:9, 14, 17. 
If the inquirer is sufficiently interested, he will now want to 
know how to be born again. This question is answered in: 
“But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the 
sons of God, even to them that believe on his name.’’ John 1: 12. 
“Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, dy 
the word of God, which liveth and abideth forever.”” 1 Pet. 1: 23. 
“Of his own will begat he us w7th the word of truth, that we should 
be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures.’’ Jas. 1: 18. 
3. A third way of dealing with a Roman Catholic is to use 
Acts 3:19: 
‘Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blot- 


ted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of 
the Lord.”’ 


This shows the necessity of repentance and conversion in 
order that our sins may be blotted out. What repentance is 
will be shown by Is. 55: 7 and Jonah 3: ro: 


“Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his 
thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy 
upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.’’ 

“And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way; 
and God repented of the evil, that he had said that he would do unto 
them; and he did it not.’’ 


In a similar way Acts 16: 31 can be used to show that the way 
to be saved is by simply believing on the Lord Jesus Christ; 
then to show what it is to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, 
use Jno. 1:12 and 2 Tim. 1:12. 

4. Another good text to use in dealing with Roman 
Catholics, and one which comes right at the heart of their 
difficulties, is 1 Tim. 2:5: 


‘For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the 
man Christ Jesus.” 


The Roman Catholic, if he is a true Roman Catholic, is 
always seeking some mediator beside Jesus Christ, and this 


THE DELUDED 147 


verse declares expressly that there is but ‘‘one mediator 
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus,’’ and not the 
priests or saints or the Virgin Mary or any one else. Some- 
times it is well to follow this up with 1 Tim. 4: 1-3, but it is 
not well as a rule to use this passage until one has made some 
headway. 

It is also well to show the advantage of Bible study, for as 
a rule the Roman Catholic does not study his Bible at all, and 
in many cases is practically forbidden by the priest to study it. 
For this ptirpose use Jno. 5; 39; 1 Pet. 2:1, 2; 2 Tim. 3: 13-17; 
Pemeseost, 227 Psst) (o.s9;osh. 1:8; Mark °7:.7,)'8,"092> 
Matt. 22:29. These texts, except the one in 1 Pet. 2:1, 2 are 
all practically the same in the Douay or Roman Catholic 
Bible as they are in the Protestant Bible. 

5. Still another way to deal with a Roman Catholic is to 
use the same method that you would with any sinner who does 
not realize his need of a Saviour, and has no real concern about 
his salvation (See Chapters VI and XII), that is to awaken 
a sense that he is a sinner and needs Christ. This as a rule is 
the best way if youcan get the Roman Catholic to listen to you. 

Many people think there is no use talking with Roman 
Catholics, that they cannot be brought to Christ. This isa 
great mistake. Many of them are longing for something they 
do not find in the Roman Catholic Church, and if you can 
show them from the Word of God how to find it, they come 
very easily, and make some of the best Christians. Always 
be sure of one thing, do not attack the Roman Catholic 
Church. This only awakens their prejudice and puts them in 
a bad position to be helped. Simply give them the truth, and 
the errors in time will take care of themselves. Not infre- 
quently our attacks upon the Roman Catholic Church, only 
expose our ignorance, for oftentimes they do not believe just 
what we suppose they do. It is frequently desirable to use a 
Roman Catholic Bible in dealing with a Roman Catholic. Of 
course if one is going to do that, he should study up the texts 
beforehand in that version. Very many of the texts are for 
all practical purposes the same in the Roman Catholic version 
of the Bible asin our own. One of the chief differences is 


that they translate ‘‘repent,” ‘do penance.” 


148 HOW TO WORK 


II. Jews. 


A great many Jews to-day are inquiring into the claims of - 
Jesus the Nazarene, and are open to approach upon this sub- 
ject. The best way to deal with a Jew is to show him that his 
own Bible points to Jesus as the Christ. Among the most 
useful passages for this purpose are Is. 53 (the entire chapter). 

“And after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but 
not for himself: and the people of the prince that shall come shall 
destroy the city and the sanctuary; and the end thereof shall be with a 
flood, and unto the end of the war desolations are determined.’’ Dan. 
g: 26. 

*‘And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants 
of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications: and they shall 
look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, 
as one mourneth for his only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as 
one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.’’ Zech. 12: 10. 

“But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the 
thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is 
to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, from 
everlasting.’’ Micah 5:2. 


If the Jew objects that these passages are different in his 
Hebrew Bible, do not allow yourself to be put off in this way, 
for they are not. He may say that Is. 53 does not refer to 
the Messiah. In that case ask him to whom it does refer. If 
he is a well-posted Jewish controversialist, very likely he will 
say, to suffering Israel. If he does say so, go through the 
chapter and show that it cannot refer to suffering Israel, 
because the one who suffers is plainly suffering for the sins of 
another, Is. 53:4, 5, and 8, and the other for whom he is 
suffering is God’s people Israel, so of course the sufferer can- 
not himself be Israel. 

The whole book of Hebrews is excellent to use with a 
Jew, especially the ninth and tenth chapters, and the seventh 
chapter, the 25th to the 28th verses. 

The great difficulty in the way of the Jew coming out as a 
Christian, is the terrific persecution which he must endure if he 
does. Undoubtedly it costs a great deal to-day for a Jew to 
become a Christian, but if he brings up this question as he 
undoubtedly will, show him the passages already given under 
the head of those who are afraid of persecution, Chapter VII, 
SEC all 


THE DELUDED 149 


There are a number of good tracts for Jews which can be 
had from the Mildmay Mission to the Jews, 79 Mildmay Road, 
London. and also from the publishers of ‘‘Our Hope,’’ 80 
Second St., New York, N. Y. 


III. Spiritualists. 


Many people who call themselves Spiritualists, claim to 
believe in the Bible. Such persons make a great deal of 
Samuel’s appearing to Saul, 1 Sam. 28: 11-20. It is not neces- 
sary to deny that Samuel really appeared to Saul, but show 
the one with whom you are dealing what the result was to 
Saul, of thus consulting one who had a familiar spirit. 

A good passage to use in dealing with all Spiritualists, is 
1 Chron. 10: 13, 14: 


“So Saul died for his transgression which he committed against the 
Lord, even against the word of the Lord, which he kept not, and also 
Jor asking counsel of one that hada familiar spirit, to inquire of it; 
and inquired not of the Lord: therefore he slew him, and turned the 
kingdom unto David the son of Jesse.’’ 


Another excellent passage is Is. 8: 19, 20: 


‘‘And when they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have 
familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter: should 
not a people seek unto their God? for the living to the dead? Jo the law 
and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is 
because there zs no light tn them.” 


1 Jno. 4: 1-3 is also a useful passage, as it brings out how not 
all spirits are to be believed. 2 Thess. 2: 9-12 is also useful. 
All these passages can be followed up by: 


‘‘Regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after wizards, 
to be defiled by them: Iam the Lord your God.”’ Lev. 19:31. 

‘‘And the soul that turneth after such as have familiar spirits, and 
after wizards, to go a whoring after them, I will even set my face 
against that soul, and will cut him off from among his people.’’ Lev. 20: 6. 

“There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son 
or his daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or an 
observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch, or a charmer, ov @ 
consulter with famditar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer. For 
all that do these things are an abomination unto the Lord: and because 
of these abominations the Lord thy God doth drive them out from 
before thee.’? Deut. 18: 10-12. 

‘‘Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign, and reigned 
fifty and five years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Hephzi- 
bah. And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, after the 


150 HOW TO WORK 


abominations of the heathen, whom the Lord cast out before the chil: 
dren of Israel. 

“And he made his son pass through the fire, and observed times, 
and used enchantments, and dealt with familiar spirdts and wizards: 
he wrought much wickedness in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him 
to anger.’’ 2 Kings 21:1, 2, 6. 

These passages all show how God regards consulting spiritual- 
ists and mediums. 


IV. Christian Scientists. 


Many people in our day are being led astray into Christian 
Science, and we need to be ready to help them. Most Chris- 
tian Scientists claim to believe the Bible. Take them to 
1 Jno. 4: 1-3: 

‘“‘Beloved, believe not every spirit but try the spirits whether they 
are of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the world. 
Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: every spirit that confesseth that 
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: and every spirit that 
confesseth not that Jesus Christ ts come in the fleshis not of God: 
and this is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should 
come; and even now already is it in the world.”’ 

This passage strikes at the very foundation of Christian Sci- 
ence. Christian Science denies as one of its fundamental 
postulates, the reality of matter, and the reality of the body, 
and of necessity the reality of the incarnation. Show them by 
this passage that the Bible declares that every spirit that con- 
fesses not Jesus Christ come in the flesh, is not of God, but is 
the spirit of antichrist. Christian Science also denies the 
doctrine of substitution. Of course many Christian Scientists 
are not aware of this fact, for it is the common practice in 
leading one into Christian Science, not to let him see at once, 
all that is involved init. Therefore take the one with whom 
you are dealing to such passages as the following: 

“For he hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we 
might be made the righteousness of God in him.’’ 2 Cor. 5: 21. 


“Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, beng made a 
curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth ona 
trees a Gales rss 

‘Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we, 


being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness: by whose stripes ye 
were healed.’ 1 Pet. 2:24. 





THE DELUDED ist 


“And almost all things are by the law purged with blood; and wzth- 
out shedding of blood is no remission.”” Heb. 9: 22. 

In these passages the doctrine of substitution is clearly 
brought out. 

The average Christian Scientist in defending his position, 
makes a great deal of the fact that the Christian Scientists 
have physical cures. Of this there can be no question. Many 
people are better physically because of Christian Science 
treatment, so it is neither necessary nor wise to deny the reality 
of all their cures. Admit the cure, and then show that the 
fact that one cures sickness proves nothing for the truth of the 
position he holds, or for his acceptance before God. Use for 
this purpose the following passages: 

‘‘Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied 
in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name 
done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I 
never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity.’’ Matt. 

BED, OB}. 
j hee then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall con- 
sume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness 
of his coming: even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan 
with all power and signs and lying wonders.’ 2 Thess. 2: 8, 9. 

“And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of 
light. Therefore it is no great thing if his ministers also be trans- 
formed as the ministers of righteousness; whose end shall be according 
to their works.’’ 2 Cor. 11: 14, 15. 


V. Followers of false prophets. 


New false prophets are constantly rising, and it 1s impos- 
sible to mention them all by name, furthermore they often- 
times disappear as rapidly as they appear, but practically the 
same method of treatment will serve to help. 

1. First show the deluded one Christ’s own warning that 
false Christs and false prophets would arise. For this pur- 
pose use Mark 13: 22, 23: 

‘For false Christs and false prophets shall rise, and shall shew signs 
and wonders, to seduce, if it were possible, even the elect. But take 
ye heed: behold, I have foretold you all things.’ 

Dwell upon the point that the fact that they heal the sick, and 
perform other wonders is no proof at all that they are not 


152 HOW TO WORK 


false prophets, that Christ distinctly foretold that the false 
Christs and the false prophets would do these things. 

2. Then give them the following five rules by which they 
can escape every snare of the false prophet. 

(1) The first rule is found in Jno. 7:17, @ will wholly sur- 
rendered to God. 

“Tf any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether 

it be of God, or whether I speak of myself.”’ 
Make this point very clear, for many of these people claim to 
have wholly surrendered their wills to God, but question them 
unsparingly on this point, and oftentimes you will find that 
the will is not surrendered. 

(2) The second rule is found in 2 Tim. 3:13-17. This 
rule is a careful study of the Word of God, and a thorough compar- 
ison of any one’s claims to be a prophet, or a Christ, or the Mes- 
senger of the Covenant, or John the Baptist, or anything of that 
sort, with the teachings of the Word of God. 'The followers of 
false prophets generally make a hobby of some few verses in 
the Bible, and do not study the book as a whole. 

(3) The third rule is found in James 1: 5-7, prayer to God 
for wisdom. 

“If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all 
men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. But let 
him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave 
of the sea driven with the wind and tossed. For let not that man think 
that he shall receive anything of the Lord.”’ 

Of course the prayer must be sincere, with a readiness to fol- 
low the leading of God. Many pray for guidance and still go 
on in delusion, but the prayer is not sincere. They ask for 
guidance, but do not utterly renounce their own wisdom and 
wait upon God for His wisdom. Very many have been led 
out of the error of following various false prophets when they 
in utter self-distrust have gone to God for light and guidance. 

(4) The fourth rule is found in Matt. 23: 8-10, eall no man 
master. 

“But be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your Master, even Christ; 

and all ye are brethren. And call no man your father upon the earth: 


for one is your Father, which is in heaven. Neither be ye called mas- 
ters: for one is your Master, even Christ.” 


Call no man Master, acknowledge no man as an absolute and 





THE DELUDED 153 


final authority, accept the authority of no one, and nothing 
but Christ and the Bible, in matters of faith and religion. It 
is well to dwell upon this point, for this is the very point at 
which many are led astray, the swallowing of some man 
whole, with all his arrant pretensions. The natural, selfish 
heart of man craves some man to do our thinking for us in 
matters of religion, and this makes men ready to swallow whole 
the teachings of some man. It is this that gives power to 
popery, priestcraft, Christian Science, Mormonism, and all 
similar delusions. 

(5) The fifth rule is found in Prov. 29:25, Be afraid of no 

man. 

‘“‘The fear of man bringeth a snare: but whoso putteth his trust in 
the Lord shall be safe.’’ 

Many a false prophet keeps his power over people through fear. 
While they do not more than half believe in him, they are 
_ afraid if they leave he will in some way bring sickness or some 
other curse upon them. Very likely the one with whom you 
are dealing will be in this very position. Show them how 
clearly they are in a wrong position, the very fact that they 
are afraid of the man proving this. Show the deluded man 
that the Holy Spirit is ‘‘not a spirit of fear, but of power, and 
of love, and of asound mind.’”’ If the deluded person insists 
- that the false prophet does his work in the name of Christ and 
succeeds, and therefore must be accepted of God, turn him to 
Matt. 7: 22, 23. This shows very clearly that one may even 
cast out devils in the name of the Lord, and yet be one whom 
He never knew. . 

It is well in dealing with those who are under the spell of 
a false prophet, to be able to show them what the marks of a 
false prophet are. The first and most common of these is a 
greed for money. To show this, use Titus 1:10, 11, and 2 
et: 2:3: 

“For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, specially 
they of the circumcision: whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert 
whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre’s 
sake.”’ 

“And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make 
merchandise of you: whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not, 
and their damnation slumbereth not.” 


154 HOW TO WORK 


Make it very clear if the pretended prophet is trying to get 


money from the people (as usually he very clearly is), that that 
in itself is a mark that he is a false prophet. A second mark 





of the false prophet is vaunting one’s self. To show the | 


deluded one this, use Jude 16 and 1 Cor. 13:4, R. V.: 


“These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts; 


and their mouth speaketh great swelling words, having men’s persons | 


in admiration because of advantage.”’ 
“Love suffereth long, and is kind; love envieth not; love vaunteth 
not itself, is not puffed up.’’ 


A third mark of the false prophet is the claim to an authority 
that Jesus Christ forbade any man ascribing to himself. To 
show this to some person who is in the snare of the false 
prophet, use Matt. 23:8, 12. A fourth mark of a false 
prophet, is a false application of Scripture either to himself, 
or to places with which he is connected. Thus for example, 
the Mormons take passages which apply to Israel, and apply 
them to their own Zion. When any place under the false 
prophet’s control is named for some Bible place, and Scrip- 
tural promises referring to the literal Bible place are applied 
to the place under the prophet’s control, just show the one 
who is being deceived by this sort of thing how. utterly 
unwarranted such an application is. Fifth, there is usually an 
untrue note somewhere in the doctrine taught by the false 
prophet. He may teach a good deal that is Biblical and true, 
but somewhere he betrays his Satanic origin. The points at 
which this false note of doctrine are most likely to be found, 
are on the doctrine of future punishment, the matter of the 
use of meats, or upon legalism of some form—the observation 
of the seventh day, the matter of tithes, or something of that 
sort. In the matter of future punishment, false prophets 
generally go off sooner or later into either annihilationism or 
restorationism or a combination of the two. 

After all the most important thing to do in dealing with one 
who is under a delusion, is to bring forward the fundamen- 
tal, saving truth of the Gospel, salvation through the atoning 
work and upon the single condition of faith in Jesus Christ. 
Oftentimes error, like typhoid fever, has to be left to take its 
course and work itself out. I know many men to-day who 


THE DELUDED 155 


are out in aclear Christian experience, who for a while were 
completely under the control of some of our modern false 
prophets, even thinking that all who did not agree with them 
were utterly wrong, and saying so in the most bitter terms; 
but in answer to prayer, and the study of the Word of God, 
God has led them out of the darkness into the light, 


CHAPTER XIV 


HOW TO DEAL WITH CHRISTIANS WHO NEED 
COUNSEL, REBUKE, ENCOURAGEMENT 
OR COMFORT 


It is often necessary to do personal work with those who 
are really Christians, but whose Christian experience for one 
cause or another is unsatisfactory. 


I. Christians who are neglecting the open confession of Christ. 
There are many who are professing Christians who are 
not making an open confession of Christ as they ought. The 
experience of such is of course always unsatisfactory. Noone 
can make satisfactory progress in the Christian life who is 
not confessing Christ openly before men. One of the best 
passages of Scripture to use with this class is Matt. 10: 32, 33: 
“Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I con- 
fess also before my Father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall 
deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in 
heaven.” 
The meaning and application of this verse is so plain as to 
need no comment. 

Another excellent passage to use is Rom. 10:9, 10: 

“Tf thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt 
believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou 
shalt be saved. For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; 
and wzth the mouth confession 7s made unto salvation.” 

According to this passage, our very salvation depends upon 
the confession of Jesus Christ with the mouth. There are 
many who say that they are Christians and who believe that 
they are saved, because in their hearts they believe in Jesus 
and have accepted Him asa Saviour. They will tell you that 
they do not regard a public confession of Christ as necessary. 
The passage just given will show them how utterly unscrip- 
tural is their position. A short time ago a man who called 
156 


THOSE WHO NEED COUNSEL 157 


himself a Christian, and who entertained the hope that he 
really was a child of God, but who lacked joy in his experi- 
ence, approached me with the question, ‘‘Do you think it is 
necessary that a man should publicly confess Christ in order 
to be saved?’’ I replied, ‘‘It is a matter of very little 
moment what I think is necessary, the great question is, what 
does God tell us in His own Word?’’ Then I gave him Rom. 
10:9, rotoread. ‘‘Now,’’ I said, ‘‘that is what God says.”’ 
The meaning and application of the passage were so plain, 
that the man had nothing further to say, but promised to 
make an open confession of Christ before the world. 
Another helpful passage to use is John 12: 42, 43: 
“Nevertheless among the chief rulers also many believed on him; 
but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should 
be put out of the synagogue: for they loved the praise of men more 
than the praise of God.”’ 
In many cases I have found that where these other pas- 
sages did not seem to lead to decisive action, Mark 8: 38 did: 


‘Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words in 
this adulterous and sinful generation; of him alsoshall the Son of man be 
ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy 
angels.’’ 


II. Christians who are neglecting the Bible. 

There are many to-day who make a profession of faith 
in Jesus Christ, and of whom doubtless many are saved, who 
are making little or no progress in the Christian life because 
of neglect of the Bible. A good passage to use with such is 
i Pet. 2:2: 

‘‘As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may 

grow thereby.”’ 
I was once calling upon a member of the church. I put to her 
the question, ‘‘How are you getting along in your Christian 
life?’ She replied, ‘‘I am not getting on at all; my Christian 
life is a disgrace to me, a disgrace to the church, and a dis- 
grace to Jesus Christ.” I then asked, ‘‘Are you studying the 
Word of God daily?’’ She replied that she was not. ‘‘No 
wonder then that your Christian experience is not satisfac- 
tory,’’ said I. A little baby was lying in a carriage close at 
hand. I pointed to the child and said, ‘‘Suppose that you fed 


158 HOW TO WORK 


this baby every two hours to-day, once every six hours 
to-morrow, not at all the next day, three or four times the 
next day, and then let her go two or three days without feed- 
ing at all, how do you think the baby would thrive?’’ She 
replied, ‘‘I do not think the baby would thrive at all, I think 
she would die.’’ ‘‘Well,’’ I said, ‘‘this is the exact way in 
which you are treating your soul.’’ This point is emphasized 
by the passage just given. 
Another passage to use with this class is Acts 20: 32: 


‘“‘And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his 
grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance 
among all them which are sanctified.’ 


Other helpful passages are: 


“Wherefore lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, 
and receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save 
your souls. But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiv- 
ing your own selves.’”’ James I: 21, 22. 

“But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, 
and being deceived. But continue thou in the things which thou hast 
learned and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned 
them; and that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which 
are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ 
Jesus. All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable 
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: 
that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good 
works,’’ 2 Tim. 3: 13-17. 

“And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, 
which is the word of God.’’ Eph. 6:17. 

“Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? By taking heed 
thereto according to thy word. 

“Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against 
thee. 

“The entrance of thy words giveth light; it giveth understanding unto 
the simple.’’ Ps. 119: 9, II, 130. 

“‘Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, 
nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful. 
But his delight isin the law of the LORD; and zz hzs law doth he mea- 
ttate day and night.” Ps. 1:1, 2. 


In the use of the last passage especially emphasize the second 
verse, ‘‘His delight is inthe law of the LORD; And in his 


law doth he meditate day and night.’’ In a similar way you 
can use Josh. 1: 8; 


THOSE WHO NEED COUNSEL 159 


“This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou 
shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do 
according to all that is written therein: for ¢#ez thou shalt make thy 
way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success.” 


A passage which is useful as emphasizing the need of 
daily searching the scriptures is Acts 17: 11: 

“These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they 
received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the scriptures 
dazly, whether those things were so.”’ 

In urging upon others the daily study of the Scriptures it 

is always well to give them a few simple directions as to how 
to study the Bible. 


III. Christians who are neglecting prayer. 

One of the commonest causes in our day of an unsatisfac- 
tory Christian experience, is neglect of prayer. A personal 
worker will often find those who complain that they are not 
making satisfactory progress in the Christian life. In sucha 
case the worker should always inquire whether they make a 
regular practice of prayer and to what extent. When it is 
found that prayer is being neglected, the following passages 
will be found useful: 

“Ye lust, and have not: ye kill, and desire to have, and cannot 
obtain: ye fight and war, yet ye have not, decause ye ask not.” 
James 4: 2. 

In using this passage, emphasize the seven closing words: 

“And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye 
shall find; knock, and it shail be opened unto you. For every one that 
asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh 
itshall be opened. If ason shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, 
will he give a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a ser- 
pent? or if he shall ask an egg, will he offer him a scorpion? If ye then, 
being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children: how much 
more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit zo them that ask 
him?” Vuke 11: 9-13. 

“Is any among you afflicted? Zet him fray. Is any merry? let him 
sing psalms. Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the 
church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name 
of the Lord: And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord 
shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven 
him. Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that 
ye may be healed. The effectual fervent prayer of arighteous man 
avatleth much. 


160 HOW TO WORK 


“Blias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed 
earnestly that it might not rain; and it rained not on the earth by the 
space of three years and six months, And he prayed again, and the 
heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit.”” James 5: 13-18. 

“And said unto them, Why sleep ye? rise and fray, lest ye enter 
into temptation.” Luke 22: 46. 


The last passage is especially helpful as emphasizing one of 
the most important purposes of prayer. Another exceedingly 
instructive passage along this line is Is. 40: 31: 

“But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they 


shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; 
and they shall walk, and not faint.”’ 


A passage which is useful as suggesting the need of regular 
seasons of prayer is Ps. 55:17: 


‘Evening, and morning, and at noon, will I pray, and cry aloud: and 
he shall hear my voice.’’ 


Other passages which are useful in dealing with people of 
this class are: 


‘“‘And in the morning, rising up a great while before day, he went 
out, and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed.’’ Mark 1: 35. 

“Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into 
his house; and his windows being open in his chamber toward Jerusa- 
lem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed, and gave 
thanks before his God, as he did aforetime.’’ Dan. 6: Io. 


‘“‘And when he had sent them away, he departed into a mountain to 
pray.”’ Mark 6: 46. 

‘‘And it came to pass in those days, that he went out into a mountain 
to pray, and continued all night in prayer to God.”’ Luke 6: 12. 

“Pray without ceasing.’ 1 Thess. 5: 17. 


IV. Christians who are leading careless lives. 


There are many whom one would hesitate to say are not 
Christians at all and are not saved, but whose lives are not 
out and out for Christ as they should be. In dealing with 
such, the following passages will be found particularly useful: 
2 Cor. 6:14-7:1; especially emphasize in these verses, the 
words, “‘Come ye out from among them, and be ye separate.” 


‘‘No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and 


love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye 
cannot serve God and mammon.”’ Matt. 6: 24. 


THOSE WHO NEED COUNSEL 161 


In the above passage, dwell upon and drive home the closing 
words, ‘‘Ye cannot serve God and mammon.”’ 


‘Love not the world, neither the things that are inthe world. If any 
man love the world, the love of the Father is notin him. For all that is 
in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride 
of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world passeth 
away, and the lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of God abideth 
forever.’’ 1 John 2: 15-17. 

“Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of 
the world ts enmity with God 2 whosoever therefore shall be a friend of 
the world is the enemy of God. 

“But he giveth more grace. Wherefore he saith, God resisteth the 
proud, but giveth grace unto the humble. Submit yourselves therefore 
to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee from you. Draw nigh to 
God, and he will draw nigh to you. Cleanse your hands, ye sinners; 
and purify your hearts, ye double minded.’”’ James 4: 4, 6-8. 

“Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall 
see the Lord.’’ Heb. 12: 14. 

“Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the 
end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of 
Jesus Christ; as obedient children, not fashioning yourselves according 
to the former lusts in your ignorance: but as he which hath called you is 
holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation; because it is written, 
Be ye holy; forI am holy. Andif ye call on the Father, who without 
respect of persons judgeth according to every man’s work, pass the time 
of your sojourning here in fear: forasmuch as ye know that ye were not 
redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain 
conversation received by tradition from your fathers; but with the 
precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot.”’ 
1 Peter 1: 13-10. : 

“For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God: 
and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not 
the gospel of God? And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall 
the ungodly and the sinner appear?’ 1 Peter 4:17, 18. 

“And that which fell among thorns are they, which, when they have 
heard, go forth, and are choked w7th cares and riches and pleasures of 
this life, and bring no fruit to perfection.’’ Luke 8: 14. 


In using the above passage, dwell upon the thought contained 
in the words, ‘‘choked with cares and riches and pleasures of 


this life.’’ 

‘And take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be over- 
charged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so 
that day come upon you unawares. For asa snare shall it come on all 
them that dwell on the face of the whole earth. Watch ye therefore, 
and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these 


162 HOW TO WORK 


things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man.”’ 


Luke 21: 34-36. 

“Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning; and ye 
yourselves like unto men that wait for their lord, when he will return 
from the wedding; that when he cometh and knocketh, they may open 
unto him immediately. Blessed are those servants, whom the lord when 
he cometh shall find watching; verily I say unto you, that he shall gird 
himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and 
serve them. And if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the 
third watch, and find them so, blessed are those servants.’’ Luke 
12: 35-38. 

“I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye 
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which 
is your reasonable service. And be not conformed to this world: but be 
ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what 
is that good, and acceptable, and perfect, will of God.’’ Rom. 12:1, 2 

“And he that doubteth is damned if he eat, because he eateth not of 
faith: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin.’”’ Rom. 14: 23. 

“TI have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept 
the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, 
which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day: and not 
to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.” 2 Tim. 
(Uli help 


V. Christians who are not working for Christ. 


A large proportion of the professing church to-day is doing 
little or nothing for the Master. The personal worker who 
shall succeed in getting other Christians to work will be 
accomplishing at least as much for Christ as the one who leads 
the unsaved to Him. The Bible abounds in passages which 
can be effectively used for this purpose. The following will 
be found useful: Mark 13: 34-37, emphasize the words ‘‘to 
every man his work;’’ Matt. 24: 44-51: Matt. 25: 14-30: A 
verse which is useful in showing idle Christians that every 
professed follower of Christ ought to be a witness for Him and 
a soul winner, is Acts 8:4: 


“Therefore they that were scattered abroad went everywhere preach- 
ing the word.”’ 


Eph 4: 14-16 is also useful: 


“That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and car- 
tied about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cun- 
ning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; but speaking the 
truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, 


THOSE WHO NEED COUNSEL 163 


even Christ: from whom the whole body fitly joined together and 
compacted dy that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual 
working in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body unto 
the edifying of itself in love.’’ 
In using this passage, point out the words, ‘‘that which every 
joint supplieth,” and explain their meaning. Other verses 
that will be found useful are Eph. 5: 14-21: 

“She hath done what she could.””’ Mark 14: 8. 

“Let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the error of 
his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.” 
James 5: 20. 

‘“‘And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; 
and they that turn many torighteousness as the stars for ever and ever.” 
Dans 12:3. 

“And, behold, Icome quickly; and my reward is with me, Zo gzve 
every man according as his work shall be.’” Rev. 22: 12. 


VI. Christians who are undergoing temptation. 


There come to all Christians, and especially to all young 
Christians, times of special temptation and trial. At such 
times they need and should have, the counsel and encourage- 
ment of other Christians. We should bear one another’s bur- 
dens, and so fulfill the law of Christ. (Gal. 6:2.) Hereisa 
large field of usefulness for the personal worker. The follow- 
ing passages will be found exceedingly useful in strengthening 
the brethren when under trial and temptation. 

“My brethren, count it all joy when ye fallinto divers temptations; 
knowing this, that the trying of your faith worketh patience. But let 
patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, want- 
ing nothing.’’ James I: 2-4. 

“Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for when he is tried, 
he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them 
that love him.’’ James r: 12. 

“Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring 
lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour: whom resist sted- 
fast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in 
your brethren that are in the world. But the God of all grace, who * 
hath called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have 
suffered a while, make you pe-zfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you.’’ 
1 Pet. 5: 8-10. 

(It is well when possible to use the R. V. of the last passage.) 


“There hath no temptation taken you but such as is common to man: 
but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye 


164 HOW TO WORK 


are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that 
ye may be able to bear it.’’ 1 Cor. 10: 13. 

‘“And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my 
strength is made perfect in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I 
rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon | 
me. Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in neces- 
sities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ’s sake: for when I am | 
weak, then am I strong.’’ 2 Cor. 12:9, Io. 

“Pray without ceasing.”” 1 Thess. 5:17. 

“T can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me.’”’ Phil. | 
4: 13. | 

“‘T have written unto you, fathers, because ye have known him that is | 
from the beginning. I have written unto you, young men, because ye 
are strong, and the word of God abideth in you, and ye have overcome | 
the wicked one.’’ 1 Jno. 2: 14. 

“Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? By taking heed 
thereto according to thy word.’”’ Ps. 119: 9. 

“He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he 
increaseth strength. Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the 
young men shall utterly fall: but they that wait upon the LORD shall 
renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they 
shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint.”’ Is. 
40: 29-31. 





VII. Christians who are undergoing persecution. 


Many professed Christians fail in the hour of persecu- 
tion who would have stood if they could have had a few words 
of counsel from some fellow Christian. The following pas- 


sages are useful in giving the needed word of counsel and 
encouragement: 


“‘Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for 
theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile 
you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you 
falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your 
reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets which were 
before you.’’ Matt. 5: 10-12. 

“Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to 
try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you: but rejoice, 
inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ’s sufferings; that, when his glory 
shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. If ye be 
reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of glory 
and of God resteth upon you: on their part he is evil spoken of, but on 
your part he is glorified.”” 1 Pet. 4: 12-14. 

“Yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed; but 
let him glorify God on this behalf.’”” 1 Pet. 4: 16. 


THOSE WHO NEED COUNSEL 165 


“For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for 
us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps: who did no 
sin, neither was guile found in his mouth: who, when he was reviled, 
reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed 
himself to him that judgeth righteously.”’ 1 Pet. 2: 21-23. 

“‘For it is better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for well doing, 
than for evil doing. For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just 
for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the 
flesh, but quickened by the Spirit.”” 1 Pet. 3:17, 18. 

“Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecu- 
tions?) 2) Dim.-3~ 12: 

“Confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to con- 
tinue in the faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter into 
the kingdom of God.’’ Acts 14: 22. 

‘‘And to him they agreed: and when they had called the apostles, and 
beaten them, they commanded that they should not speak in the name 
of Jesus, and let them go. And they departed from the presence of the 
council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his 
name. 

“And daily in the temple, and in every house, they ceased not to 
teach and preach Jesus Christ.” Acts 5: 40-42. 

‘‘Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about withso great a cloud 
of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so 
easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before 
us, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith; who for the joy 
that was set before him endured the cross, despising the shame, and is 
set down at the right hand of the throne of God. For consider him 
that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be 
wearied and faint in your minds. Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, 
striving against sin.’’ Heb. 12: 1-4. 

‘“‘Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer: behold, the devil 
shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried; and ye shall 
have tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death, and I will give 
thee a crown of life.’’ Rev. 2: 10. 

‘‘Fear not, little flock; forit is your Father’s good pleasure to give you 
the kingdom.’’ Luke 12: 32. 


VIII. Christians who are passing through affliction. 

When times of affliction come to Christians, especially to 
young Christians, a few words fitly spoken by a fellow Chris- 
tian are oftentimes of great help. Not infrequently they save 
the afflicted one from years of darkness and barrenness in 
their Christian experience. There are many to-day who are 
of little or no use in the church, who would have been of use 
if some wise worker had come to them in the hour of affliction 


166 HOW TO WORK 


and given them good counsel from God’s own Word. We 
should all be constantly on the lookout for opportunities of | 
this kind, and we will find them round about us almost every | 
day of our lives. No thoughts of our own can possibly be of | 
as much help in such an hour as the promises and encourage- 
ments of God’s Word. The following passages will be. 
found useful and sufficient, if wisely used in the power of the 
Holy Spirit: 

“And ye have forgotten the exhortation which speaketh unto you as 
unto children, My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor 
faint when thou art rebuked of him: for whom the Lord loveth he chas- 
teneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. If ye endure chasten- 
ing, God dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he whom the 
father chasteneth not? 

“Now no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, but griev- 
ous: nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteous- 
ness unto them which are exercised thereby.’’ Heb. 12: 5-7, 11. 

“To an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not 
away, reserved in heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God 
through faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time. 
Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season, if need be, ye are in 
heaviness through manifold temptations: that the trial of your faith, 
being much more precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried 
with fire, might be found unto praise and honour and glory at the appear- 
ing of Jesus Christ.”’ 1 Pet. 1: 4-7. 

‘‘Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that 
he may exalt you in due time: casting all your care upon him; for he 
careth for you.” 1 Pet. 5:6, 7. 

“God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. 
Therefore will not we fear, though the earth be removed, and though 
the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea; though the waters 
thereof roar and be troubled, though the mountains shake with the 
swelling thereof.’ Ps. 46: 1-3. 

“Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, J will 
fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort 
Mehmet 2Sc045 

*‘And call upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou 
shalt glorify me.’’ Ps. 50: 15. 

‘“*The righteous cry, and the LORD heareth, and delivereth them out 
of all their troubles.”? Ps. 34: 17 

“The LORD is my light and my salvation; WhomshallI fear? the 
LORD is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid? When 
the wicked, even mine enemies ana my foes,came upon me to eat up my 
flesh, they stumbled and fell. Though an host should encamp against 
me, my heart shall not fear: though war should rise against me, in 


THOSE WHO NEED COUNSEL 167 


this will I be confident. One thing have I desired of the LORD, that will 
I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the LORD all the days 
of my life, to behold the beauty of the LORD, and to enquire in his 
temple. For zz the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion: in 

_ the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me; he shall set me up upon a 
tock. And now shall mine head be lifted up above mine enemies round 
about me: therefore will I offer in his tabernacle sacrifices of joy; I 
will sing, yea, I will sing praises unto the Lord. 

“‘T had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the LORD 
in the land of the living. Wait onthe LORD: be of good courage, 
and he shall strengthen thine heart: wait, I say, onthe LORD.’ Ps. 
27 ai-O0I3 01a 

“‘Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will 
give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am 
meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls.’’ Matt. 
DL 205020. 

The one who is to use these passages should first read 

them over and over again with himself alone, and think of 
their relation to the specific trial of the one whom he proposes 


to help. 


IX. Christians who have lost loved ones. 

The ministry of comfort to those whose homes have been 
invaded by death is one of the most blessed of Christian min- 
istries. It is a ministry that is open to us all, but the 
attempts of many well-meaning persons in this direction, who 
try to comfort with their own fancies rather than with the sure 
Word of God, oftentimes do more harm than good. But the 
one who knows his Bible, and what it has to say upon the sub- 
ject of death and of the future, will be able to bind up many 
a broken heart. Jesus declared in the synagogue at Naza- 
reth, that God had anointed Him to heal the broken hearted, 
(Luke 4: 18), and every follower of Jesus should seek an 
anointing for the same blessed work. The Bible abounds in 
passages which are useful for this purpose, but the following 
are among those which experience proves to be most effective: 

“Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in 

me. In my Father’s house are many mansions: if it were not so, I 
would have told you. I goto preparea placefor you. And if I goand 
prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself; 


that where I am, there ye may be also. 
“Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world 


168 HOW TO WORK 


giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it 
be afraid.” Jno. 14: 1-3, 27. | 

“Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do thou knowest not now; | 
but thou shalt know hereafter.’’ Jno. 13:7. 

‘Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the | 
heathen, I will be exalted in the earth.’’ Ps. 46: ro. | 

“And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed are _ 
the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, | 
that they may rest from their labours; and their works do follow them.” — 
Rev. 14: 13. 

‘‘And he said, While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept; for I 
said, Who can tell whether GOD will be gracious to me, that the child 
may live? But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? Can I bring 
him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.” 
DQ Sehaals aOR ops ey. 

“But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning 
them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have 
no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so 
them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. For this we 
say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive and 
remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are 
asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, 
with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the 
dead in Christ shall rise first: then we which are alive and remain 
shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in 
the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one 
another with these words.’’ 1 Thess. 4: 13-18. 


(I have found this the most comforting of any single passage 
in the Word of God.) 


“Therefore we are always confident, knowing that, whilst we are at 
home in the body, we are absent from the Lord: (for we walk by faith, 
not by sight:) we are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent 
from the body, and to be present with the Lord.’”’ 2 Cor. 5: 6-8. 

“I am in astrait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to 
be with Christ; which is far better.’’ Phil. 1: 23. 

“So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption, it 
is raised in incorruption: it is sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory: it 
is sown in weakness, it is raised in power: it is sown a natural body, it 
is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there is a spir- 
itual body. \ 

‘‘And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear 
the image of the heavenly. 

‘“‘For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must 
put on immortality. 

“So when this corruptible shaN have put on incorruption, and this 
mortal shall have put on im.ni tality, then shall be brought to pass the 





THOSE WHO NEED COUNSEL 169 


saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, 
where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death 
is sin; and the strength of sin isthe law. But thanks be to God, which 
giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore, my 
beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the 
work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not in vain 
in the Lord.’’ 1 Cor. 15: 42-44, 45, 53, 54-58. 

The worker must make a study of each individual case, 
and decide which of the passages given above will be most 
helpful in the specific case. Sometimes it will be found well 
to use them all. They should not be merely read, but dwelt 
upon, and their meaning explained and applied, wherever 
necessary. In all the reading and the explanation and the 
application, we must depend upon the Holy Spirit for His 
wisdom and power. 


X. Christians who have not received the Holy Spirit. 

There are many professing Christians in our day who 
have not definitely received the Holy Spirit. They have not 
entered into the fulness of joy and peace and power that there 
is for usin Christ. They are practically in the same condi- 
tion that the disciples in Ephesus were in until Paul came and 
put tothem the question, ‘‘Have ye received the Holy Ghost?’’ 
(Acts 19:2) and the position that the believers in Samaria 
were in until Peter and John came down and “prayed for 
them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost: for as yet He 
was fallen upon none of them,’’ (Acts 8:15, 16). There are 
-many to-day who are inquiring what they must do that they 
may receive the Holy Ghost, and there are others that ought 
to be asking this question. The personal worker should 
know how to show any one who has not received the Holy 
Spirit, just what he must do that he may receive the Holy 
Spirit. The following are the steps that should be pointed 
out: 

1. The one who would receive the Holy Ghost must depend for 
his acceptance before God upon the finished work of Christ alone, 
and not upon anything he himself has done or can do. 

To make this point clear to the inquirer use Gal. 3: 2: 

“This only would I learn of you, Recezved ye the Spirit by the works 

of the law, or by the hearing of faith?” 


~ 


170 HOW TO WORK 


This passage is often interpreted to mean that we receive the 
Holy Spirit by simply believing that we are going to receive 
Him. This is not at all the meaning of the passage as found 
in the context. The Christians in Galatia had been told by 
certain false teachers that came in among them, that in order 
to be justified it was not enough to simply believe on Jesus 
Christ and His finished work, but in addition to this they must 
keep the Mosaic law regarding circumcision. Paul in the 

passage before us shows them the folly of this position by 
appealing to their own experience. He calls to mind the fact 
that they had received the Holy Ghost not by keeping the 
Mosaic law, but simply by the hearing of faith, that is by 
believing God’s testimony regarding Christ and His atoning 
work, and resting in that for pardon. 

The first step then, toward receiving the Holy Spirit, is 
to turn our eyes entirely away from ourselves, and anything 
we ever have done or can do, and fix them upon Jesus Christ, 
and His atoning work on the Cross, and depend upon that 
finished work of Christ for our pardon and acceptance before 
God. 

2. The one who would receive the Holy Ghost must put away 
all sin. 

To make this clear to the inquirer use Acts 2: 38: 

“Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of 
you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall 
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.” 

This passage makes it clear that in order to receive the Holy 
Ghost we must repent. Repentance is a change of mind 
about Christ and a change of mind about sin. It is a change 
first of all from a Christ-rejecting attitude of mind, to a 
Christ-accepting attitude of mind. This is involved in what 
has been already said regarding the first step, but there must 
also bea change of mind regarding sin; a change of mind from 
asin-loving and sin-indulging attitude of mind, to a sin-reject- 
ing attitude of mind, that is, we must renounce all sin. One 
of the commonest hindrances to the receiving of the Holy 
Spirit, is holding on to some sin. The worker should deal 
very faithfully at this point with the inquirer. Find out 
whether there is not some sin in the life that is not renounced. 


THOSE WHO NEED COUNSEL 171 


_ Find if there is not some sin in the past that has not been con- 
fessed and straightened out. Instruct the inquirer to go alone 
with God and ask God to search his heart, and to show him 
anything in his life that is displeasing to Him. If anything 
is thus brought to light, insist that it must be renounced. 
Tell the inquirer that every known sin must be given up. 
Dwell upon the fact that the Holy Spirit is the oly Spirit, 
and that He will not manifest Himself in His fulness in an 
unholy heart, that is in a heart which holds on to sin. 

3. Lhe one who would receive the Holy Spirit must surrender 

his will absolutely to the will of God. 

To show this use Acts 5: 32: 

*‘And we are his witnesses of these things; and so is also the Holy 
Ghost, whom God hath given Zo them that obey him.”’ 

This passage shows that God gives the Holy Spirit to them 
that obey Him. Show that the essential thing about obedi- 
ence is the attitude of the will, and that real obedience 
involves the absolute surrender of the will to God. Hold the 
inquirer to the necessity of such an absolute surrender to God. 
This is the point of difficulty in very many lives. Perhaps 
more people are kept out of the blessing of the conscious 
receiving of the Holy Spirit by alack of absolute surrender 
than by any other one thing. In many an instance the Holy 
Spirit is given at once in fulness as soon as one is led to an 
absolute surrender of the will to God. If one will not thus 
surrender, there is no use of trying to go further, God will 
accept no compromise at this point. 

4. The one who would receive the Holy Spirit should ask God 

Sor this definite gift. 

To show this to the inquirer use Luke 11: 13: 

“If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your chil- 
dren: how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit zo 
them that ask him?” 

This tells us plainly that God gives the Holy Spirit to them 
that ask Him. It can be illustrated by the use of Acts 2: 1-4, 
cf, Acts 1:14; Acts 4: 31 and Acts 8:15, 16: 


‘‘And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with 
one accord in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from 
heaven as of arushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where 


172 HOW TO WORK 


they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like 
as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were a// filled with 
the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit 
gave them utterance.’ Acts 2: 1-4. (Compare Acts 1: 14. “These 
all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, with the 
women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren.’’) 

“And when they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were 
assembled together; and they were a// filled with the Holy Ghost, and 
they spake the word of God with boldness.’’ Acts 4: 31. 

“Who, when they were come down, frayed for them, that they 
might receive the Holy Ghost: (for as yet he was fallen upon none of 
them: only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus).”” Acts 
Sears Los 


The inquirer should be led to at once definitely seek the filling 
with the Holy Spirit. It is well to pray with the inquirer then 
and there for this definite gift. 
5. The final stepin receiving the Holy Ghost ts simply faith. 
There are many who take all the steps mentioned thus 
far, and yet fail of the blessing simply because they do not 
believe. Mark 11: 24 can be used to make this clear: 


‘“‘Therefore I say unto you, What things soever ye desire, when ye 
pray, belzeve that ye recetve them, and ye shall have them.” 


The R. V. of this passage is particularly suggestive. 


“All things whatsoever ye pray and ask for, delzeve that ye have 
recetved them, and ye shall have them.”’ 
The inquirer should be instructed not to look to his feelings, but 
to the Word of God, and to believe that he has received whether 
he has any sensation or experience or not, simply because God 
has promised in His Word. In a very large proportion of 
cases, people receive the Holy Ghost simply by believing 
God’s Word, and that their prayer is heard, without any feel- 
ing; and afterwards what they believe they ‘‘have received,’’ 
they do actually obtain in personal experience as a conscious 
possession. Great help will be found in showing the inquirer 
how to receive by faith, in 1 Jno. 5: 14, 15: 
‘And this is the confidence that we have in him, that, zf we ask any- 
thing according to his will, he hearethus: andif we know that he hear 


us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we 
destred of him." 


Make it very clear to the inquirer by the use of this passage 


THOSE WHO NEED COUNSEL 173 


that when we ask anything according to the will of God, we 
know that He heareth us, because the passage says so, and 
when we know that He heareth us, we know that we have the 
petitions we have asked of Him, whether we feel it or not. 

Then show the inquirer that when we pray for the Holy 
Spirit we pray for something according to the will of God. 
The following passages make this clear: 


“If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your chil- 
dren: how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to 
them that ask him?’”’ Luke 11: 13. 

“‘Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of 
you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall 
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to 
your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our 
God shall call.’’ Acts 2: 38, 39. 

“And be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with 
the Spirit.” Eph. 5: 18. 

Then have the inquirer kneel down and definitely pray for the 
Holy Spirit. When he has offered this prayer, ask him if he 
has received what he sought. If he is not clear about it, open 
your Bible to 1 Jno. 5: 14, 15 and lay it before him and have 
him read it, and then ask him if he has asked for something 
according to God’s will, and when he says he has, ask him, 
‘*‘What then do you know?’’ and hold him to it until he says, 
“IT know that God has heard me.’’ Then have him read the 
15th verse and ask him, “‘If you know that God has heard 
you, what further do you know?’ Hold him to it until he 
says, ‘‘I know that I have the petition that I asked of Him.”’ 
Then ask him, ‘‘What do you know you have received?’ and 
hold him to it until, resting upon the simple naked promise of 
God’s Word, he can say, ‘“‘I know I have received the Holy 
Ghost.’’ Many are waiting for certain estatic experiences of 
which they have heard others speak. In dealing with an 
inquirer, do not deny the reality of these experiences, for they 
doubtless are real in many instances, but show the inquirer 
that there are no such experiences described in the Bible, that 
the manifestations of having received the Holy Spirit men- 
tioned in the Bible are a new joy and peace in Christ, 


“But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentle- 


174 HOW TO WORK 


ness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no 
law.’’ Gal. 5; 22, 23, 


a new and clearer knowledge of Christ, 
“But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from 


the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, 
he shall testify of me.’’ Jno. 15: 26, 


and especially new power in service for Christ, 


“‘And, being assembled together with them,°commanded them that 
they should -1ct depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the 
Father, which, saith he, ye have heard of me. For John truly baptized 
with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days 
hence, 

“But ye shall rececve power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon 
you: and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all 
Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.’’ Acts 
I:4, 5, 8. 

“And when they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were 
assembled together; and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and 
they spake the word of God with boldness. And the multitude of them 
that believed were of one heart and of one soul: neither said any of them 
that ought of the things which he possessed was his own; but they had 
allthings common. And wzth great power gave the apostles witness 
of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus: and great grace was upon them 
all.’”’ Acts 4: 31-33. 


Also make it clear to the inquirer that the manifestations that 
result from receiving the Holy Spirit, are to be expected not 
before we believe, but after we believe, after we take by sim- 
ple faith God’s Word. God’s way is not first experience 
and then faith, but first faith resting upon the naked Word of — 


God, and then experience; ‘‘Believe that ye have received, 
and ye shall have.’’ 


VI. Christians who do not have victory in their Christian life. 


There are many professed Christians, and doubtless many 
who are really saved people, whose lives seem to be lives of 
constant defeat and discouragement. In dealing with such a 
person seek to find out what is the cause of defeat. It will be 
found in one or more of the following points: 

1. Because they have not learned to rest absolutely in the finished 
work of Christ for pardon and for peace. 

The church is full of people who are looking to something 


THOSE WHO NEED COUNSEL E75 


that they themselves can do to find acceptance before God. 
No one can have a clear, satisfactory and victorious Christian 
experience who has not learned to rest entirely in the finished 
work of Christ for pardon. If this is found to be the cause 
of failure, use Is. 53:6, Gal. 3:13, 2 Cor. 5:21 and similar 
passages, to show that our sins are pardoned not on account 
of anything that we have done or can do, but on the account 
of what Jesus Christ did when He bore our sins in His own 
body on the Cross. 

Next show the inquirer that the pardon and peace thus 
purchased by the atoning blood of Christ, becomes ours on 
the simple condition of our believing on Christ. To show this, 
use the following passages: 


“Therefore being justified by fatth we have peace with God through 
our Lord Jesus Christ.’’ Rom. 5:1. 

‘But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the 
ungodly, hzs faith zs counted for righteousness.” Rom. 4:5. 

“But now the righteousness of God without the law is manifested, 
being witnessed by the law and the prophets; even the righteousness 
of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all them that 
believe: for there is no difference: for all have sinned, and come short 
of the glory of God; Jécing justified freely by his grace through the 
redemption that is in Christ Jesus: whom God hath set forth to be a 
propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for 
the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God; to 
declare, I say, at this time his righteousness: that he might be just, and 
the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus.’’ Rom. 3: 21-26. 

“‘And bz found in him, ot having mine own righteousness, which is 
of the law, dud that which ts through the fatth of Chrést, the righteous- 
ness which is of God by faith.’”’ Phil. 3:9. 


In the last passage the Revised version brings out the thought 
more clearly than the Authorized. 

2. Because they have not surrendered absolutely to the will of 
God, 

This is the cause of failure in a very large proportion of 
cases. If this is found to be the cause of failure in any 
specific case, use Acts 5: 32, and Rom. 6: 13, 19: 

‘‘Neither yield ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness 

unto sin: but yzeld yourselves unto God, as those that are alive from the 


dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God. 
“IT speak after the manner of men because of the infirmity of your 


176 HOW TO WORK 


flesh: for as ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness and 
to iniquity unto iniquity; even so now yield your members servants to 
righteousness unto holiness.’”” Rom. 6:13, 19. 


3. Because of neglect of the study of the Word. 

If this is the case, use 1 Pet. 2:2, Ps. 119: 11 and Eph. 
Geir 7: : 

“Thy word have I hidin mine heart, that I might not sin against 
thee.’? Ps, 119: 11. 

‘“‘And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, 
which is the word of God:’’ Eph. 6:17. 

4. Because of neglect of prayer. 

Where this is the case, use 1 Thess. 5:17, Luke 22: 40 

and Is. 40: 29-31: 

‘‘And when he was at the place, he said unto them, Pray that ye 
enter not into temptatzon.’’ Luke 22: 40. 

5. Because of failure to constantly confess Christ before men. 

The one who would lead a victorious Christian life, must 
be constantly witnessing for Christ. Make this very plain, 
and for this purpose use Matt. 10: 32, 33: 

“‘Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess 
also before my Father whichis in heaven. But whosoever shall deny 
me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in 
heaven.” 

6. Because of neglect to work for Christ. 

One who would lead a victorious life must be constantly 
at work for the Master. If the cause of failure is at this 
point, use Matt. 25: 29: 

“For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have 
abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that 
which he hath.’’ _ 

Explain its meaning by the context. The evident meaning 
of the passage is, that one who uses the talents that he has in 
the Master’s service will get more, but the one who neglects 
to use the talents he has will lose even those. 

7. Because they have not received the Holy Spirit. 

There are very many to-day who are leading lives of con- 
stant failure where they might be leading lives of constant 
victory, simply because they do not even so much as know 

* that itis the privilege of the individual believer to be filled 


THOSE WHO NEED COUNSEL 177 


with the Holy Spirit. If this is the case, use Eph, 5:18, the 
last half of the verse, and Gal. 5: 16, 22, 23: 

“This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust 
of the flesh. 

“But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentle- 
ness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no 
law.” 

Then show the inquirer how to receive the Holy Spirit 

as explained under the former heading. 


CHAPTER XV 


SOME HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR PERSONAL 
WORK 


A few general suggestions that will be helpful to the per- 
sonal worker remain to be made. 


I. As arule, choose persons to deal with of your own sex. 
There are, of course, exceptions to this rule. One should 
always be looking to the Holy Spirit for His guidance as to 
whom to approach, and He may lead us to one of the opposite 
sex, but unless there is clear guidance in the matter, it is 
quite generally agreed among those who have had much 
experience in Christian work that, on the whole, women 
usually do the most satisfactory work with women, and men 
with men; especially is this true of the young. It is always a 
bad sign when a young man is always looking for women to 
deal with, and a young woman looking for young men to deal 
with. Many exceedingly unfortunate complications have 
risen in actual life from young men trying to lead young 
women to Christ, and vice versa. Of course, an elderly, 
motherly woman will oftentimes do excellent work with a. 
young man or boy, and an elderly, fatherly man will some- 
times do good work with a young woman or girl. 


II. As a rule, choose persons to deal with of about your own 
age. A young man asarule can get hold of young men better 
than any one else can and a man of mature years can handle a 
man of his own age better than a young man, or better even 
than an old man. It is not wise usually for a young and inex- 
perienced person to approach one very much older and 
maturer and wiser than himself, on such an important subject 
as this. The older person naturally looks with a good deal of 
distrust, ifnot contempt, upon those much younger than him- 
self. There are, of course, exceptions even to this rule. Fre- 
quently a man who has gained wisdom by years, and who has 

178 


HINTS FOR PERSONAL WORK 179 


the confidence of people, can do excellent work with a young 
man or boy. Asarule people do the best work with people 
of their own class, educated men with educated men, business 
men with business men, workingmen with workingmen, women 
of position with women of similar position to themselves. 
There are many exceptions to this. Many a servant girl has 
been known to lead her mistress to Christ, and many a labor- 
ing man his employer. 


III. Whenever it is possible, deal with a person alone. No 
one likes to open his heart freely to another on the most per- 
sonal and sacred of all subjects, when there are others pres- 
ent. Many will from mere pride defend themselves in a false 
position when others are present, who would freely admit 
their error or sin or need if they were alone with you. It is 
far better for a single worker to deal with a single unconverted 
person, than for several workers to deal with an inquirer, or a 
single worker to deal with several inquirers. Nothing can be 
more unfortunate than for a number of workers to swarm 
around one poor individual who is trying to find the way of 
life. If such an individual is a person of any independence of 
character, he is very likely to feel that he is being hectored 
and bothered, and for that very reason take an attitude of 
opposition. If you have several to deal with, it is better if 
possible to take them one by one. Workers often find that 
they have made no headway while talking to several at once, 
but by taking the individuals off by themselves they soon suc- 
ceed in leading them one by one to Christ. Where two 
unsaved people are being dealt with at once, oftentimes each 
is afraid of the other, and they bolster one another up in their 
false position. 


IV. Let your reliance be wholly in the Spirit of God and in 
the Word of God. Have no confidence in yourself. One of the 
greatest hindrances to successful personal work is self-confi- 
dence. But while there should be no self-confidence, there 
should be boldness, boldness that comes from believing in the 
power of the Holy Ghost, and in the power of the Word of 
God. No matter with whom you are dealing, or how stubborn 
he may be, never forget that the Spirit of God and the Word 


180 HOW TO WORK 


of God have power to break the hardest heart. Be always 
looking to the Spirit to produce conviction of sin, and expect 
Him to do it, but let your whole dependence be in Him, and ~ 
in His Word alone. 


V. Do not content yourself with merely reading passages 
from the Bible, much less with merely quoting them, but have 
the one with whom you are dealing read the passages himself. 
In this way the truth finds an entrance into the heart through 
‘the eye as well as through the ear. It is remarkable how 
much deeper an impression the Word of God oftentimes 
makes when it is actually seen with the eyes, than it does 
when it is merely heard with the ears. Sometimes it is well to 
have a marked Bible, with the word that you wish especially 
to impress marked in some striking way so that it will catch 
the eye, and thus the mind and heart of the reader. 


VI. It is oftentimes well to use but a single passage of 
Scripture. One verse of Scripture iterated and reiterated will 
be burned into the memory and will haunt the one with whom 
you are dealing long after you have left them. I have known 
a passage to haunt a man for weeks and finally result in his 
conversion. Do everything in your power to drive it home 
and clinch it so that the one with whom you are dealing can- 
not forget it, but will hear it ring in his memory long after 
your voice has ceased, 

Dr. Ichabod Spencer tells in his ‘‘ Pastoral Sketches’’ of how 
he dealt with a young man who had many difficulties. Dr. 
Spencer kept continually quoting the passage, ‘‘Now is the 
accepted time, now is the day of salvation.’’ The young man 
tried to get Dr. Spencer off onto something else, but over and 
over again he kept saying the words, ‘‘Now is the accepted 
time, now is the day of salvation.’’ The young man returned 
the next day rejoicing in the Lord, and thanking Dr. Spencer 
that he had ‘‘hammered’’ him with that text. The words 
kept ringing in his ears during the night, and he could not 
rest until he had settled the matter by accepting Christ. 

It is a good thing when a person can point to some definite 
verse in the Word of God, and say, ‘‘I know on the authority 
of that verse that my sins are forgiven, and that I am a child 


HINTS FOR PERSONAL WORK 181 


of God.’’ Indeed it is well never to let a person go until they 
can point you definitely to the verse in God’s Word upon which 
they rest their hope of salvation. Be sure that they grasp it, 
so that if Satan comes to them when they are alone, and asks 
them how they know that they are saved, they can open their 
Bible to that verse, and put their finger upon it and defy Satan 
in all his wiles. 

There are times, however, when a powerful effect is pro- 
duced by piling up passages along some line until the mind is 
convinced and the heart conquered. Especially is this true in 
showing people their need of a Saviour, and showing them 
Jesus as the Saviour that they need. 


VII. Always hold the person with whom you are dealing to 
the main point of accepting Christ. If he wishes to discuss out- 
side questions, such as the claims of various denominations, 
or the mode of baptism, or theories of future punishment, or 
fine points about the higher criticism, or any other question 
than the central one of his need of a Saviour, and Christ the 
Saviour that he needs, tell him these questions are important 
to take up in their right place and time, but the time to settle 
them is after he has settled the fundamental question of 
accepting or rejecting Christ. Many a case has been lost by 
an inexperienced and foolish worker allowing himself to be 
involved in a discussion of some side issue which it is utter 
folly to discuss with an unregenerated person. 


VIII. Be courteous. Many well-meaning but indiscreet 
Christians by their rudeness and impertinence repel those 
whom they would win to Christ. It is quite possible to be at 
once perectly frank and perfectly courteous. You can point 
out to a man his awful sin and his need of a Saviour without 
insulting him. Your words may be very searching, while 
your manner is very gentle and winning, indeed the more 
gentle and winning your manner is, the deeper your words 
will go, for they will not stir up the opposition of those with 
whom you are dealing. Some workers approach those with 
whom they wish to work in such a manner that the latter at 
once assume the defensive, and clothe themselves with an 
armor that it is impossible to penetrate. 


ince 


182 HOW TO WORK 


IX. Avoid unwarranted familiarities with those with whom 
you deal. I have seen many workers lay their hands upon the 
shoulders of those with whom they are dealing, or even put 
their arms around them. Now there are cases in which that 
is proper and wise. If a man is dealing with an old wrecked 
and ruined drunkard who thinks he has not a friend in the 
world, it may be well to place your hand upon his shoulder, or 
over his shoulder, but one needs to be exceedingly cautious 
about these matters. A man of fine sensitiveness is repelled 
when a stranger takes any familiarities with him. This is 
even more true of a lady of good breeding. I have even seen 
a male worker so indiscreet as to lay his hand upon a lady’s 
shoulder. There is no place where good breeding counts for 
more than in personal work. 


X. Be dead in earnest. Only the earnest man can make 
the unsaved man feel the truth of God’s Word. It is well to 
let the psssage we would use with others first sink deep into 
our own souls. I know of a very successful worker who has 
for a long time used the one passage, ‘‘Prepare to meet thy 
God,’’ with every one with whom she has dealt. But that 
passage has taken such complete possession of her own heart 
and mind that she uses it with tremendous effect. A few 
passages that have thoroughly mastered us are much better 
than many passages that we have mastered from some text 
book. 

One of the great needs of the day is men and women who 
are thoroughly in earnest, who are completely possessed with 
the great fundamental truths of God’s Word. The reader of 
this book is advised to ponder upon his knees such of the pas- 
sages suggested in it as he decides to use, until he himself 
feels their power. We read of Paul that he ‘‘ceased not to 
warm every one night and day with tears.’’ (Acts 20: 31.) 
Genuine earnestness will go further than any skill learned in 
a training class or from the study of such a book as this. \ 


XI. Never lose your temper when trying to lead a soul to 
Christ. How many a case has been lost by the worker losing 
his temper. Some persons are purposely exasperating, but 
even such may be won by patient perseverance and gentleness; 


HINTS FOR PERSONAL WORK 183 


they certainly cannot be won if you lose your temper, nothing 
delights them more, or gives them more comfort in their sin. 
The more iritating they are in their words and actions, the 
more impressed they will be if you return their insults with 
kindness. Oftentimes the one who has been the most insuffer- 
able will break down in penitence. One of the most insulting 
men I ever met afterward became one of the most patient, 
persistent and effective of workers. 


XII. Never have a heated argument with one whom you 
would lead to Christ. Heated arguments always come from 
the flesh and not from the Spirit. (Gal. 5:20, 22, 23.) They 
arise from pride, and unwillingness to let the other person get 
the best of youin argument. if you care more about win- 
ning him to Christ than you do about winning your case, you 
will often let the other man think that he has the best of the 
argument, absolutely refusing to argue. If the one with 
whom you are talking has mistaken notions that must be 
removed before he can be led to Christ, show him his error 
quietly and pleasantly. If the error is not on an essential 
point, refuse to discuss it at all, and hold the person to the 
main question. 


XITI. Never interrupt any one else who is dealing with a 
soul. Too much emphasis cannot be laid upon this point. 
You may not think the other is doing the work in the wisest 
way, but if you can do any better, bide your time, and you 
will have the opportunity. Many an unskilled worker has had 
some one at the very point of decision, when some meddler, 
who thought he was wiser, has broken in and upset the work. 
Do not even stand by one who is talking to another and listen 
to what he is saying. Incalculable mischief may be done in 
this way. The thought of the one who is being dealt with is 
distracted, his heart is closed up, and a case that might have 
been won is lost. 

On the other hand, do not let others interrupt you. Of 
course, sometimes it is not possible to altogether prevent it, 
but stop the interruption just as soon as possible. Just a 
little word plainly but courteously spoken will usually prevent 
it, but at any cost insist upon being left alone. 


184 HOW TO WORK 


XIV. Don’t be in a hurry. One of the commonest and 
gravest faults in Christian work to-day is haste. We are too 
anxious for immediate results, and so we do superficial work. 
It is very noticeable how many of those with whom Christ 
dealt came out slowly; Nicodemus, Joseph, Peter, and even 
Paul (though the final step in his case seems very sudden) 
were cases in point. It was three days even after the personal 
appearance of Jesus to Paul on the way to Damascus, before 
the latter came out clearly into the light and openly confessed 
Christ. (Acts 22:16.) One man with whom slow but thorough 
work has been done, and who at last has been brought out 
clearly for Christ and who knows just where he stands and 
what to do, is better than a dozen with whom hasty work has 
been done, who think they have accepted Christ, when in 
reality they have not. It is often a wise policy to plant a 
truth in a man’s heart and leave it to work. The seed on 
rocky ground springs up quickly, but withers as quickly. 


XV. Get the person with whom you are dealing on his knees 
before God. This rule has exceptions. Sometimes it is not 
possible to get the person to kneel, and sometimes it is not 
wise; but itis wonderful how many difficulties disappear in 
prayer, and how readily stubborn people yield when they are 
brought into the very presence of God Himself. I remember 
talking with a young woman in an inquiry room for about two 
hours, and making no apparent headway, but when at last we 
knelt in prayer, in less than five minutes she was rejoicing in 
our Saviour. Sometimes it is well to have a few words of 
prayer before you deal with an individual at all, but of course 
this is not at all wise in many cases; however, in almost every 
case it is wise if the person is willing to pray, to have a few 
words of prayer before you close. If the way of life has been 
made perfectly clear to the inquirer, have him also lead in 
prayer. There are those who object to getting an unsaved 
person to pray, but there is clear Bible warrant for it. Cor- 
nelius was not asaved man. This is perfectly clear from Acts 
11:14, nevertheless he was sincerely seeking the light, and 
God sent him word that his prayers had come up for a memo- 
rial before Him. Now, any one who is honestly seeking light, 


HINTS FOR PERSONAL WORK 185 


even though he has not as yet that knowledge of Jesus that 
brings salvation, is in practically the same position as Cor- 
nelius, and one of the best things to do is to get that one to 
pray. Itis certainly right for a sinner seeking pardon through 
the atoning blood to pray. (Luke 18:13, 14.) Some may say, 
*‘One who has no faith has no right to pray.’’ But suchaone 
has faith, their prayer is the first evidence of that faith. 
(Rom. 10: 13, 14.) 


XVI. Whenever you seem to fail in any given case, go home 
and pray over it and study it to see why you failed. Never give 
up a case because of one failure. If you have been at a loss to 
know what Scripture to use, study this book to see the differ- 
ent classes we meet and how to deal with them, and find out 
where this person belongs and how to deal with him, and then 
go back if you can, and try again, In any case you will be 
better prepared for the next case of the same kind. The 
greatest success in this work comes through many apparent 
defeats. It will be well to frequently study these hints and 
suggestions, and see if your failure has come through neglect 
of them. But be sure to take to God in prayer the case in 
which you yourself have failed. 


XVII. Before parting with the one who has accepted Christ, 
be sure to give him definite instructions as to how to succeed in 
the Christian life. These instructions will be found at the 
close of Chapter V. It is well to give these instructions in 
some permanent form. For this purpose two tracts have 
been written by the author of this book, one called ‘‘The 
Christian Life Card,’’ and the other ‘‘How to Make a Success 
of the Christian Life.’’ Either of these can be secured from 
the Bible Institute Colportage Association, Chicago. 


XVIII. When you have led any one to Christ, follow him up 
and help him in the development of his Christian life. There is 
nothing sadder in Christian work to-day than the number who 
are led to Christ, and then neglected. Such are almost certain 
to get on very poorly. No greater mistake could be possible. 
The work of following up those who are converted is as impor- 
tant as the work of leading them to Christ, and as arule no 


J 


eek <! Ver, 
186 La Tr “HOW: TO. WORK 
ot 


| 
V/ | 
one can do it so well as the person who ‘has Debit ysed | in their 


conversion. ‘“LUP AS a 
All the methods of dealing in versa work, given in 


the foregoing chapters, will suggest texts and lines of thought 
for helpful sermons, 








BV3790 .163 
Torrey, R.A. (Reuben Archer), 1856-192 
Personal work. 


i 115651 


| 


| BV 

3790 115651 

| 763 | 

| Torrey, Reuben Archer 
Personal work 


BORROWER'S NAME 





| 


| = 


Torrey 
Personal work 





THEOLOGY LIBRARY 
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY AT CLAREMONT 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 


Re PRINTED IN U.S.A, 


an Cert ren 
cas 
ees Se a enn Na en a a eel a a ed 


Se ap ae NE a a OCT 
aa ep a peer 
Sa aa a eg Ne no 
reer errno a Senta tr aoe af net 
meses ter Ae a poe Sen matte not 08 tn 
Sr cca a Ne St Sonne 


ererres areemeaee 


armen erie ens 





