I15KAK 1 
flVERSITi 


PETER: 

FISHERMAN,   DISCIPLE,   APOSTLE 


F.  B.  MEYER'S 

Biblical  Expositions 

Neix)  Popular  Edition 
Thi  ItMernational  Leaders*  Library 
77  'volumes.     Each,  net  $1.00. 

**Mr.  Meyer  is  unsurpassed  in  recent  times  in 
hit  faculty  of  helpfully  and  interestingly  adapt- 
ing studies  of  Biblical  characters  to  modern 
needs.  His  work  does  not  consist  of  mere  pious 
moralizing,  but  it  is  the  product  of  a  man  evi- 
dently of  scholarly  habits  and  attainments,  and 
in  close  and  practical  touch  with  the  life  of  the 
people  of  the  day." — T/te  United  Presbyterian. 

OLD  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES 


Samuel  the  Prophet. 

Zechariah :  The  Prophet 

of  Hope. 
David :  Sbepberd,PsaIm> 

ist,  King. 

Jeremiah  :  Priest  and 
Prophet. 

Joshua,  and  the  Land  of 
Promise. 

Moses, the  Servant  of  God 


Abraham  ;  or,  The  Ob« 
dience  of  Faith. 

Elijah  and  the  Secret  of 
His  Power. 

Israel,  a  Prince  vrith  God. 

Joseph:  Beloved, Hated, 
Exalted. 

Christ  in  Isaiah.   Exposi- 
tions of  Isaiah  XL.-LV. 


NEW  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES 


Paul:  A  Servant  of  Jesus 
Christ. 

John  the  Baptist. 

The  Way  into  the  Ho- 
liest :  Expositions  of 
the  Epistle  to  the  He- 


The  Life  and  Light  of 
Men.  Expositions  of 
John  I.-XII. 

Love  unto  tbeUttermost. 
Expositions  of  John 
XIII. -XXI. 

Tried  by  Fire.  Exposi- 
tions in  the  First  Epis- 
tle to  Peter. 


"Orderly  in  plan,  cumulative  in  force  and 
{>owerful  in  the  spiritual  persuasiveness  with 
which  they  illustrate." — The  Congregationalist 


PETER: 


FISHERMAN,  DISCIPLE,  APOSTLE 


By 
F.  B.  MEYER,  D.D. 

Author  of  **Paul :  A  Servant  of  Jems  Christ ^^ 
**yergmiah  :  Priest  and  Prophet,  "  etc.,  etc. 


'^284A5 


New    York  Chicago, 

Fleming      H.      Revell      Corr^pany 

London  and  EiDiNB'irA'G » 


Copyright,  1920,  by 
FLEMING  H.  REVELL  COMPANY 


New  York:     158    Fifth    Avenue 

Chicago:  17  North  Wabash   Ave. 

,    London:    21    Paternoster    Square 

, . .  .  Edinburgh  :       75     Princes     Street 


1 


;^i'' 


FOREWORD 

PETER  comes  nearer  to  us  than  any  of  his 
brother  Apostles.  We  revere  James,  the 
brother  of  our  Lord,  for  his  austere  saintliness. 
We  strain  our  eyes  in  the  effort  to  follow  John  to  the 
serene  heights,  whither  his  eagle-wing  bore  him.  But 
Peter  is  so  human,  so  like  ourselves  in  his  downsittings 
and  uprisings,  so  compassed  with  infirmity,  that  we  are 
encouraged  to  hope  that  perhaps  the  Great  Potter 
may  be  able  to  make  something  even  of  our  common 
clay. 

When  walking  over  his  farmstead  with  a  friend 
we  came  on  a  field,  which  on  a  former  visit  appeared 
to  be  choked  with  thistles.  He  had  bought  it  at  a 
cheap  rate  because  of  its  derelict  condition.  But  it 
had  been  carefully  drained  and  enriched.  Much  care 
and  science  had  been  expended  on  it,  and  to  my 
friend's  surprise  a  rich  crop  of  clover  resulted.  The 
long-buried  seed  had  lain  starved  and  hopeless  in  the 
soil  till  the  rich  culture  had  called  it  into  evidence. 

It  needed  the  Saviour's  insight  to  discover  an  Apos- 
tle in  Simon  Bar-jona,  the  fisherman ;  and  the  Saviour's 
patient  culture  to  elicit  the  dormant  qualities  of  his 


vi  FOREWORD 

character,  which  speak  in  every  paragraph  of  his  Epis- 
tles, and  fitted  him  to  be  the  leader  of  the  Primitive 
Church.  But  if  the  Master  could  do  so  much  for  him, 
what  may  He  not  effect,  my;  reader,  for  thee  and  me  ? 

F.  B.  Meyer.; 


CONTENTS 

I.  Introductory i 

II.  Early  Days  in  the  Master's  College        9 


III.  The  Settlement  as  to  the  Supreme 

Control  .... 

IV.  A  Fisher  of  Men 

V.  Primer  Lessons 

VI.  The  Second  Primer    . 

VII.  To  Whom,  If  Not  to  Christ  ? 

VIII.  "  I  Give  Unto  Thee  the  Keys  " 

IX.  "  With  Him  on  the  Holy  Mount  " 

X.  "  For  Me  and  Thee  " 

XL  The  Shepherd  on  the  Watch    . 

XII.  The  Evening  of  the  Denial 

XIII.  "  Let  Not  Your  Heart  be  Troubled 

XIV.  ..."  And  Peter  " 

XV.  "  He  Was  Seen  of  Peter  " 

XVL  The  Renewed  Commission 

XVII.  A  Witness  of  the  Resurrection 

XVIIL  "In  the  Name" 

XIX.  "You  Builders" 

vii 


15 
23 
32 
40 

49 

57 
64 
72 
81 
89 

97 
105 

113 
121 
130 

143 
154 


viii  CONTENTS 

XX.  Peter's    Deepening   Experiences   of 

THE  Holy  Spirit     .         .        .         .163 

XXI.  The  Door  of  Faith  Unto  the  Gen- 

tiles        176 

XXII.  The  Breaking  OF  the  Yoke       .        .186 

XXIII.  **I  Will  Go  With  Thee  to  Prison"     199 

XXIV.  "My  Decease" 208 

XXV.  Life's  Afterglow      ....     220 


PETER:  FISHERMAN, 
DISCIPLE,  APOSTLE 

I 

INTRODUCTORY 
Matt.  iii.  1-12 ;  Mark  i.  1-8 ;  John  i.  35-42 

"  Where  is  the  lore  the  Baptist  taught, 
The  soul  unswerving  and  the  fearless  tongue? 

The  much  enduring  wisdom,  sought 
By  lonely  prayer  the  haunted  rocks  among? 
Who  counts  it  gain 
His  light  should  wane 
So  the  whole  world  to  Jesus  throng?" 

—Kehle. 

THE  contrast  between  the  method  of  the  Divine 
Worker  and  the  human  is  specially  apparent 
in  the  earliest  stages.  Man,  with  consider- 
able confidence  in  his  own  powers  of  initiation  and  ful- 
filment, cries :  "  Go  to,  let  us  build  a  tower  the  top  of 
which  shall  reach  to  heaven,  so  that  we  be  not  scattered 
abroad."  God  begins  in  secret,  and  works  curiously  in 
the  lowest  parts  of  the  earth.  He  calls  an  individual 
from  the  crowd,  trains  him  long  and  patiently,  and 
finally  makes  him  His  partner,  the  centre  of  a  new  unit, 
the  channel  through  which  He  pours  Himself  forth 
upon  the  world.  Man's  method,  more  often  than  not, 
ends  in  a  Babel  of  confusion ;  whilst  God's,  invariably, 


2  GOD'S  CHOSEN  PEOPLE 

is  consummated  in  the  city  of  the  Living  God,  the 
Jerusalem  which  descends  from  above. 

The  majority  of  those  who,  from  time  to  time,  have 
been  called  to  this  holy  service,  have  been  selected  from 
among  the  foolish,  weak,  and  despised  ranks  of  the 
human  family,  that  the  excellency  of  the  power  might 
be  of  God,  and  not  of  man.  There  have  been  thou- 
sands of  noble  exceptions ;  but,  as  a  rule,  not  many 
wise,  or  great,  or  noble  according  to  this  world's  esti- 
mate, have  been  called.  The  hole  of  the  pit  that  has 
yielded  God  His  materials  has  been  of  common  clay, 
and  the  rock  whence  His  stones  have  been  hewn  of 
very  ordinary  grain. 

It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  to  learn  that  the  leader 
of  the  apostolic  band  was  drawn  from  the  ranks  of 
very  ordinary  people,  and  that  the  story  of  his  life 
opens  in  the  obscure  village  of  Bethsaida,  at  the  north- 
west corner  of  the  Lake  of  Galilee.  The  unadorned 
and  simple  homes  of  its  fishermen  were  in  striking 
contrast  to  the  marble  palaces  of  the  neighbouring 
proud  city  of  Capernaum,  which  were  erected  by  the 
large  incursion  of  Roman  residents,  who  were  attracted 
to  the  locality  by  its  equable  climate  and  luxuriant  nat- 
ural beauty.  The  shore  was  lined  with  costly  palaces 
and  imposing  public  offices ;  the  roads  were  filled  with 
splendid  equipages ;  and  luxurious  gondolas  flashed  to 
and  fro  upon  the  lake. 

I.  The  Coming  of  the  Son  of  Zacharias. — The 
native  population  probably  held  aloof  from  the  man- 
ners and  habits  of  the  conquerors,  though  quite  ready 
to  take  advantage  of  their  wealthy  patronage  and  cus- 
tom. Under  their  breath  they  spoke  together  of  the 
great  days  of  Judas  Maccabseus  and  of  Judas  of  Gali- 
lee, before  whom  even  the  mighty  Roman  legions  had 
on  more  than  one  occasion  been  compelled  to  give  way. 
To  these  echoes  of  the  memorable  past  were  added  a 


THE  AWAKENING  CRY  3 

strange  anticipation  and  hope,  which  stirred  in  the 
breast  of  many,  that  the  hour  was  near  when  the  in- 
vader would  be  driven  beyond  the  waters  of  the  Great 
Sea,  and  the  kingdom  would  be  once  more  restored  to 
Israel.  Some  said  that  the  weeks  of  Daniel's  vision 
had  nearly  expired.  Some  told  that  the  aged  Simeon 
before  his  death  bore  witness  to  having  held  the  Lord's 
Messiah  in  his  arms.  Some  spoke  of  visions  of  angel- 
choirs,  and  said  that  portents  and  voices  had  been  stead- 
fastly borne  witness  to  by  creditable  witnesses.  "  The 
people  were  in  expectation  and  all  men  mused  in  their 
hearts." 

All  suddenly  the  land  was  startled  and  shaken  with 
the  rumour  that  God  had  visited  His  people.  A  com- 
pany of  pilgrims,  crossing  the  Jordan  by  the  fords  of 
Jericho,  had  been  arrested  by  a  strange  figure,  gaunt 
and  sinewy,  the  child  of  desert  solitudes,  who  had  ac- 
costed them  with  the  cry :  "  Repent,  for  the  Kingdom  of 
Heaven  is  at  hand."  When  released  from  the  spell  and 
able  to  proceed  to  Jerusalem,  they  could  talk  of  nothing 
else.  That  strange  figure,  half  Bedawin  and  half  pro- 
phetic! That  voice  which  rang  with  trumpet-note! 
That  evident  vision  of  the  Unseen  and  Eternal,  which 
illumined  his  face  with  unearthly  glory !  That  he  had 
no  lodging  but  a  cave !  That  his  food  consisted  of  lo- 
custs dipped  in  water  and  baked  on  the  hot  coals,  with 
wild  honey  to  make  them  palatable !  Without  wife  or 
child!  These  things  gripped  the  national  imagination 
and  thrilled  the  air,  already  charged  with  electricity. 
"The  people  that  sat  in  darkness  saw  a  great  light,"  and 
on  those  that  sat  in  the  shadow  of  death,  dawn  arose. 

The  tidings  spread  everywhere,  as  by  a  mysterious 
telepathy.  They  reached  the  mountain-villages  of  the 
Lebanon  to  the  north  and  the  sheepfolds  of  Bethlehem 
and  Hebron  to  the  south.  They  were  discussed  by 
priests  in  the  intervals  between  the  Temple-services, 
and  by  Rulers  in  their  council-chambers ;  by  business- 


4  THE  SPELL  OF  THE  BAPTIST 

men,  as  they  transacted  in  the  markets,  and  by  traders, 
as  they  sat  behind  their  stalls  in  the  bazaars.  Holy 
women,  waiting  at  the  wells  for  the  drawing  of  water, 
spake  often  one  to  another,  whilst  the  Lord  hearkened 
and  heard  and  wrote  thereof  in  His  Book  of  Remem- 
brance. The  little  children  were  told  to  reverence  the 
name  of  John,  the  son  of  Zacharias,  whose  parents  had 
passed  through  such  strange  experiences  at  his  birth. 

Then  the  whole  country  rose  en  masse.  It  was  the 
Sabbatic  year,  when  the  ploughmen  and  the  vine- 
dressers ceased  from  toil.  Men  had  plenty  of  leisure  to 
leave  their  homes  and  fields,  their  vineyards  and  or- 
chards. Through  a  land  carpeted  with  flowers  and 
exhaling  fragrance,  the  confluent  streams  of  people 
poured  down  the  Jordan  Valley  in  eager  crowds. 
"  There  went  out  to  him  Jerusalem  and  all  Judaea,  and 
all  the  region  round  about  Jordan."  Multitudes  were 
baptized  in  the  Jordan — confessing  their  sins;  among 
whom  we  may  surely  include  the  brothers  Andrew  and 
Peter,  and  their  life-long  companions,  James  and  John. 

IL  The  Baptist's  Influence  on  Peter. — Peter 
was  married,  but  marriage  among  the  Orientals  takes 
place  early.  He  was,  therefore,  still  in  the  prime  of 
his  manhood.  Strong,  vehement,  impulsive  and  self- 
assertive,  he  could  by  no  means  be  accounted  a  saint. 
Would  he  so  easily  have  taken  to  swearing,  when  the 
maid  accosted  him  in  the  hall  of  Caiaphas,  unless  he 
had  been  addicted  to  the  habit  in  early  life?  He  was 
doubtless  attentive  to  the  duties  and  formalities  of  his 
religion,  attended  the  Temple-feasts,  paid  his  dues,  and 
was  morally  respectable.  He  was  satisfied  that  he  was 
a  not  unworthy  son  of  Abraham.  We  are  reminded 
of  those  words  with  which  Paul  described  his  earlier 
life  as  a  son  of  the  synagogue — "  I  was  alive  without 
the  law  once." 

From  his  youth  he  was  an  ardent  patriot.     Like  all 


THE  THRESHING-FLOOR  5 

his  friends  and  companions,  he  was  prepared  to  sacri- 
fice everything  he  possessed  to  see  David's  race  once 
more  on  David's  throne.  When,  therefore,  he  and  the 
others  heard  the  tidings  of  the  Baptist's  appearance, 
they  hailed  them  as  heralding  the  new  era.  Might  not 
this  be  the  first  phase  of  the  kingdom  which  the  God 
of  Heaven  was  setting  up,  and  which  would  never  be 
destroyed,  and  whose  sovereignty  would  not  be  left  to 
another  people,  but  it  would  break  all  other  kingdoms 
in  pieces,  and  stand  for  ever? 

His  friends  shared  these  convictions  and  hopes. 
Taking  with  them  a  frail  canvas  tent  to  serve  as  a 
shelter,  and  a  bag  of  coins  for  the  supply  of  their  sim- 
ple needs,  Peter,  his  brother,  and  their  friends  bade 
good-bye  to  home  and  craft  and  "  went  forth  to  see." 
They  crossed  the  Jordan  by  the  fords  of  Bethabara 
and  joined  the  crowds  who  were  streaming  down  the 
Jordan  Valley  to  the  scene  of  the  Baptist's  ministry. 

It  must  have  seemed  the  prelude  to  the  Day  of  Judg- 
ment when  the  Baptist,  selecting  a  ledge  of  rock  for 
his  pulpit,  stood  forth  to  address  the  awestruck  throng, 
gathered  from  all  the  land  to  listen.  Clearly  enough, 
as  our  Lord  suggested,  he  was  no  reed  shaken  by  the 
wind  of  popular  favour.  He  was  neither  courtier  nor 
sycophant.  He  spoke  what  he  knew  and  testified  what 
he  had  seen.  There  had  never  arisen  a  greater  than 
John  amid  all  the  myriads  of  the  human  family.  He 
penetrated  the  hollow  pretensions  of  Pharisee  and 
Scribe :  compared  them  to  the  rock- vipers ;  threatened 
them  with  the  woodsman's  axe,  the  smelter's  furnace, 
and  the  harvester's  fan.  In  his  stern  outlook  there 
was  short  shrift  for  the  sinner  that  refused  to  repent. 
He  had  faith  that  God  vvould  yet  transform  the  stones 
of  the  desert  into  sons  of  Abraham.  Truly  he  was  a 
light  that  burned  as  well  as  shone ! 

Beneath  such  preaching,  Peter  must  have  been 
deeply    moved.     It    raked    his    soul.     Beneath    those 


6  "  WE  HAVE  FOUND  ! " 

words  sin  revived  and  he  died.  He  felt  then,  as  he 
confessed  afterwards,  that  he  was  "  a  sinful  man." 
Frequently,  as  in  after  years,  he  would  go  out  alone 
and  weep  bitterly,  and  when  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost 
he  saw  that  vast  crowd  of  Jews  pricked  to  the  heart 
and  crying  out  **  What  must  we  do  ?  "  he  knew  exactly 
the  agony  of  their  remorse.  Probably  he  was  baptized 
by  the  Baptist,  confessing  his  sins.  He  had  thus  been 
born  of  water,  as  afterwards  he  was  to  be  born  of  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

HI.  Peter's  First  Interview  with  the  Lord. — 
When  Jesus  was  baptized  he  may  have  been  present, 
but  as  yet  his  senses  were  not  anointed  to  behold  the 
open  heaven  or  discern  the  descending  dove.  Or  he 
may  have  been  paying  a  brief  visit  to  attend  to  neces- 
sary affairs  of  home  and  business.  Certainly  he  was 
out  of  the  way,  when,  on  two  successive  days,  the  Bap- 
tist designated  the  Saviour  as  the  Lamb  of  God.  But 
he  was  back  again  in  the  Jordan  Valley  on  the  morning 
following  the  day  of  his  brother's  memorable  interview 
with  the  One  whose  shoe-latchet  the  Baptist  confessed 
himself  unworthy  to  unloose. 

Andrew  and  John  had  spent  some  hours  in  His  holy 
company.  They  had  been  welcomed  to  His  dwelling, 
had  listened  with  rapt  attention  while  He  spake  of 
heavenly  things,  had  perhaps  listened  to  His  recital 
of  the  salient  features  of  the  Temptation  from  which 
He  had  just  emerged,  and  had  been  told  of  His  chosen 
method  for  winning  back  the  kingdom  by  patient 
sufferings  rather  than  armed  force.  As  they  listened 
their  hearts  had  burned  within  them.  They  knew, 
with  absolute  conviction,  that  they  had  found  the 
Messiah;  and  rejoiced  with  a  joy  exceeding  all  their 
experience. 

Leaving  Christ's  presence,  they  said  each  to  the 
other,  "  We  must  tell  Simon  of  all  this,  so  soon  as  we 


NOT  SIMON,  BUT  PETER  7 

can  find  him";  and,  as  was  befitting,  Andrew  found 
him  first  and  brought  him  to  Jesus,  saying,  "  We  have 
found  the  Messiah."  Brought  him,  as  though  it  was 
necessary  to  overcome  some  hesitation.  The  young 
colt  is  difficult  to  catch,  as  if  it  realizes  all  that  the 
first  lassoing  may  involve. 

Peter  was  immensely  impressed  by  that  interview. 
This  Teacher  was  so  complete  a  contrast  to  his  earlier 
master  John.  Perhaps  the  hardy  fisherman  may  have 
been  less  attracted  to  Him  than  to  the  sinewy  son  of 
the  desert.  He  may  not  have  been  immediately  sus- 
ceptible to  the  grace  and  truth,  and  gentleness  and 
purity,  the  humility  and  selflessness  of  the  Lamb  of 
God.  But  if  this  was  his  first  impression,  it  was  in- 
stantly succeeded  by  one  of  awe  and  wonder,  as  those 
searching  eyes  looked  into  the  depths  of  his  nature,  and 
Jesus  said,  "  Thou  shalt  be  called  Cephas  "  (the  Ara- 
mean  equivalent  for  the  Greek  Peter), 

This  is  our  Lord's  method  of  making  saints.  He 
speaks  of  things  that  are  not  as  though  they  were. 
When  the  heart  is  broken  and  contrite,  as  was  the  case 
with  Peter,  He  speaks  words  of  encouragement  and 
cheer.  He  imputes  righteousness  where  there  is  but 
the  smallest  germ  of  faith.  He  addresses  us,  not  as 
though  we  had  attained  or  were  already  perfect,  but 
as  following  on.  He  awakens  our  expectancy  by  in- 
dicating possibilities  of  which  we  never  supposed  our- 
selves to  be  capable.  Over  the  grave  of  our  hope.  He 
speaks  words  of  Resurrection  and  Life. 

"Ah,"  said  Peter  to  himself,  at  the  close  of  that 
interview,  "  He  little  realizes  how  fickle  and  wayward 
I  am;  now  hot  with  impulse,  then  cold  as  the  snows 
of  Lebanon.  And  yet  if  He  thought  me  capable  of 
becoming  rock,  and  evidently  He  does  think  so,  why 
should  I  not,  with  His  help,  resolve  to  attain  and  appre- 
hend that  for  which  I  have  been  apprehended  ?  " 

Thus  our  Saviour  deals  with  us  still.     He  tells  us 


8'  IMPUTED  AND  IMPARTED 

what  we  can  become  by  the  proper  development  of  our 
temperament  and  the  exercise  of  Divine  grace ;  and  as 
He  speaks  He  imparts  all  needed  help.  We  become 
possessed  with  the  Divine  ideal,  and  laid  hold  of  by 
Divine  strength;  and  thus  the  weakest  become  as 
David  and  David  as  the  Angel  of  the  Lord,  the  reed 
becomes  a  pillar  in  the  Temple,  the  stone  becomes  a 
rock,  and  the  chief  of  sinners  the  mightiest  of  saints. 
It  is  said  that  Michael  Angelo  saw  in  the  blocks  of 
marble,  which  others  had  refused,  the  forms  which  his 
genius  would  call  into  being;  so  in  very  unlikely  souls 
our  Lord  descries  qualities  of  unusual  strength  and 
beauty,  which  He  sets  Himself  to  elicit;  and  His  first 
act  often  is  to  reveal  the  fair  hidden  image  and  to 
impute  it.  He  saw  Peter  in  Simon,  Israel  in  Jacob, 
Paul  in  Saul — and  told  them  so ! 


II 

EARLY  DAYS  IN  THE  MASTER'S  COLLEGE 
John  i.  43-iii.  30 ;  Matt.  iv.  23-25 

"  What  Thou  hast  given  to  me,  Lord,  here  I  bring  Thee, 
Odour  and  light,  and  the  magic  of  gold, 
Feet  which  must  follow  Thee,  lips  which  must  sing  Thee, 
lyimbs  which  must  ache  for  Thee  ere  they  grow  old." 

— C.  Kingsley. 

THE  wonder  of  that  first  interview  with  the 
Lord  must  have  almost  dazed  the  mind  of 
Simon,  the  son  of  John.  The  Baptist's  min- 
istry had  already  stirred  his  soul  to  the  depths,  but  this 
fresh  and  gracious  Personality,  so  full  of  grace  and 
truth,  had  revealed  possibilities  for  his  manhood  which 
had  never  occurred  to  him.  It  seemed  incredible  that 
he  should  ever  become  known  as  the  Rock-man.  If 
angel  voices  had  called  to  him  from  out  of  heaven, 
or  the  bushes  had  begun  to  burn  with  fire,  he  could 
hardly  have  been  more  astonished.  That  he  could 
become  a  Man  of  Rock! 

Yet  a  childless  Abram  had  become  Abraham,  the 
father  of  a  countless  multitude;  and  Jacob,  the  subtle 
supplanter,  had  become  Israel  the  prince ;  and  Gideon, 
the  least  in  his  father's  house,  had  delivered  Israel 
from  the  Midianites.  But  the  incongruity  of  his  na- 
ture with  that  name  seemed  an  unbridged  chasm. 
When  a  similar  promise  was  made  to  his  great  ances- 
tor, he  fell  on  his  face  and  laughed ;  but  notwithstand- 

9 


10  TO  CANA  OF  GALILEE 

ing,  a  child's  laughter  was  heard  in  his  tent  and  a; 
child's  hand  was  thrust  into  his  aged  grasp.  Nothing 
was  impossible  with  God.  Already  Peter's  heart  had 
opened  to  Christ's  knock,  never  to  close  to  Him  again. 
His  soul  had  turned  to  Him  with  passionate  devotion. 
Let  those  who  remember  how  it  was  with  them  when 
they  first  met  Christ  bear  witness  if  there  is  aught  of 
exaggeration  in  this  statement.  They  who  have  once 
really  seen  His  face  can  never  rest  content  till  they  have 
apprehended  that  for  which  He  has  apprehended  them. 

Walks  and  Talks. — Whatever  may  have  been  the 
fisherman's  reverie,  he  was  soon  made  aware  that  Jesus 
was  minded  to  go  forth  into  Galilee,  and  he  resolved  to 
accompany  Him.  The  distance  to  Cana  from  Betha- 
bara  was  some  thirty  miles,  and  the  little  group  would 
start  on  their  way  in  the  beauty  of  early  morning.  Ap- 
parently they  had  hardly  left  the  scene  of  the  Baptist's 
ministry,  when  they  encountered  Philip,  and  the  fact 
that  it  is  expressly  recorded  that  he  was  a  native  of 
Bethsaida,  "  the  city  of  Andrew  and  Peter,"  suggests 
that  the  two  brethren  had  something  to  do  with  the 
Master's  discovery  of  him  and  his  immediate  response. 

This  first  journey  in  such  company  was  the  begin- 
ning of  many  similar  experiences,  until  that  further 
day  when  He  would  lead  them  out  as  far  as  Bethany 
and  be  parted  from  their  sight.  But  it  left  an  inefface- 
able impression;  for  as  these  newly-found  disciples 
walked  with  Him,  and  heard  Him  open  the  Scriptures, 
their  hearts  burned  within  them,  and  emotions  were 
aroused  too  tumultuous  for  words. 

When  they  came  within  sight  of  the  little  village  of 
Cana,  the  white  houses  of  which,  embowered  with 
verdure,  beckoned  to  them  as  they  climbed  the  slope 
from  the  rich  Esdraelon  plain,  Philip  seems  to  have 
hastened  forward  to  announce  his  discovery  to  a  de- 
vout friend  of  his — Nathanael.     Apparently  he  found 


THE  ASCETIC  TYPE  11 

him  pondering  the  story  of  the  ladder  that  Jacob  saw, 
when  he  slept  and  dreamed.  The  guileless  Israelite 
little  thought  that  the  ladder  was  to  be  literally  reared 
again  on  his  lawn,  that  the  angel-ministry  was  actually 
in  operation,  and  that  he  might  begin  to  climb  the  scale 
of  ascent  which  would  presently  land  him  in  the  Divine 
Presence-Chamber. 

Probably  our  Lord  and  His  disciples  remained  as 
guests  in  his  home,  and  Peter  was  introduced  to  a  new 
friend  destined  to  be  knit  with  him  in  a  life-long  com- 
panionship. But  it  was  at  the  marriage-feast  to  which 
they  were  all  invited  on  the  following  day  that  he 
drank  in  the  deepest  lessons  of  the  Master  to  Whom 
he  had  given  his  allegiance. 

At  first  he  must  have  been  greatly  startled.  Until 
he  had  come  under  the  influence  of  the  Baptist,  his 
highest  ideal  of  religion  had  been  the  Curator  of  the 
Synagogue,  the  Pharisee  with  his  phylacteries,  and  the 
Priests  who  officiated  in  the  Temple  ,*  but  their  incon- 
sistencies had  only  enhanced  the  commanding  splen- 
dour of  the  holiness  of  John.  Even  Herod  had  been 
compelled  to  confess  that  he  was  "  a  just  man  and  an 
holy."  Peter  and  the  rest  were  impressed  and  en- 
amoured with  a  type  of  holiness  that  seemed  so  taken 
up  with  God  as  to  be  independent  of  the  ordinary  ac- 
cessories of  human  life.  John's  rigid  asceticism,  that 
he  seemed  to  have  no  need  of  a  woman's  love  or  a  little 
child's  caress,  that  he  was  absorbed  in  face-to-face 
fellowship  with  God,  that  he  was  absolutely  fearless 
and  unyielding — these  qualities  enthralled  their  loyalty 
and  respect.  "  Ah,"  they  remarked  to  each  other,  at 
the  close  of  one  of  his  most  terrific  utterances,  "  he 
speaks  like  Elijah  or  Malachi  might  have  done;  but, 
after  all,  the  man  is  even  greater  than  his  words." 
When,  therefore,  John  introduced  them  to  Jesus,  as 
being  incomparably  greater  than  himself,  they  expected 
the  same  type  of  holiness,  in  its  awful,  lonely  splendour. 


12  A  NEW  TYPE  OF  HOLINESS 

The  Marriage  Feast  of  Cana. — But  Jesus  led  them 
to  a  village  festival,  where  a  group  of  simple  peasants, 
principally  drawn  from  the  vineyards  that  terraced  the 
adjoining  hills,  were  celebrating  a  wedding.  He  sat 
there  among  young  and  old,  the  life  of  the  party;  His 
face  beaming  with  joy,  His  words  adding  to  the  pleas- 
ure of  the  company.  His  presence  welcomed  by  the 
children  and  greeted  by  the  young  lads  and  girls.  This 
was  an  altogether  new  and  unexpected  type  of  holiness. 
Peter  and  the  rest  watched  it  closely,  as  they  reclined 
with  Jesus  at  the  feast.  What  would  the  Baptist  have 
done  ?  Would  he  approve  ?  Certainly  this  was  not  the 
religion  of  the  Synagogue  or  the  Temple !  But  as  they 
came  more  and  more  under  the  spell  of  their  wonderful 
Friend  and  Teacher,  they  became  more  profoundly 
convinced  that  this  was  the  religion  that  the  world  was 
waiting  for.  They  could  not  all  imitate  the  asceticism 
©f  the  Baptist  in  the  weird  loneliness  of  the  desert. 
Peter,  at  least,  was  already  married.  But  they  could 
all  follow  in  the  steps  of  their  new  Master  in  the  sweet 
amenities  of  the  home. 

And  Peter  learnt  many  things  beside.  That  though 
the  Lord  addressed  His  mother  with  perfect  respect, 
He  was  under  direction  from  a  higher  source.  That 
only  a  hint  of  need  was  necessary — He  would  know 
exactly  how  to  meet  it.  That  those  who  were  called 
to  cooperate  with  Him  must  always  give  Him  brim- 
full  obedience.  That  what  His  servants  drew  as  water 
w^ould  blush  beneath  His  word  into  the  wine  of  the 
Sacrament.  That  He  would  always  lead  from  good  to 
better,  from  better  to  better  still.  These  were  wonder- 
ful discoveries;  and  it  was  a  happy  group  that  left 
Cana  when  the  feast  was  over.  Jesus,  and  His  mother, 
and  His  brethren,  and  His  disciples  went  down  to  Ca- 
pernaum. Apparently  they  settled  that  their  home 
should  be  there ;  but  as  the  Jews'  Passover  was  at  hand, 
they  could  not  then  remain  many  days.    What  a  story 


PETER'S  EARLIEST  IMPRESSIONS       1 3 

the  brothers  had  to  tell  to  their  father,  and  Peter  to  his 
wife  and  her  mother!  Bethsaida  also  listened,  dis- 
cussed the  strange  novelty  of  their  transformation,  and 
wondered  greatly. 

Growing   Influence   of  the   Master. — Though 
probably  the  Master  and  His  disciples  travelled  with 
their  own  families  to  the  Feast,  they  met  again  in  the 
precincts  of  the  Holy  City.     Peter  and  the  rest  beheld 
with  wonder  their  gentle  and  lowly  Master  cleanse 
the  Temple  courts  as  though  girded  with  the  power 
of  an  Elijah.     They  witnessed  the   signs  that   con- 
vinced men  like  Nicodemus  that  God  was  with  Him. 
They  watched  the  rising  wrath  of  the  Jewish  mag- 
nates as  they  challenged  the  Nazarene's  authority  over 
the  holy  places.     They  pondered  His  affirmation  that 
He  would  build  the  Temple  in  three  days,  though  not 
until  He  was  risen  from  the  dead  did  they  understand 
that  cryptic  utterance.     Since  Peter,  in  his  subsequent 
address  in  the  house  of  Cornelius,  expressly  states 
that  God  preached  peace  by  Jesus  Christ  throughout 
all  Judaea,  we  may  fairly  infer  that  he  at  least  accom- 
panied the  Master  in  that  first  great  itinerary,  through 
the  very  regions  where  ^neas,  Tabitha,  and  Simon 
the  Tanner,  in  after  years,  greeted  him  again.     Prob- 
ably, also,  in  that  journey  Peter  and  his  friends  had 
their  last  interview  with  their  earliest  teacher,  who 
reminded  them  that  he  had  never  expected  to  be  other 
than  the  Bridegroom's  friend.     "  Do  not  grieve  for 
me,"  he  said  in  effect,  as  they  visited  him  and  remarked 
the  diminished  numbers  that  came  for  his  baptism : 
"  I  am  more  than  content.     My  joy  is  fulfilled.     I  am 
of  the  earth,  earthly,  and  I  speak  of  the  earth ;  He  has 
come  from  heaven  and  is  above  all." 

Nine  months  were  spent  thus.  Perhaps  Peter  paid 
occasional  brief  visits  home ;  but  he  returned  to  assist 
the  Master  in  the  baptism  of  those  who  confessed  and 


T4  THE  MASTER'S  COLLEGE 

forsook  their  sins ;  "  for  Jesus  Himself  baptized  not, 
but  His  disciples."  Then,  to  avoid  the  increasing 
suspicion  of  the  Pharisees,  the  Lord  and  His  disciples 
returned  through  Sychar  and  Samaria  to  Cana,  where 
apparently  the  party  broke  up.  He  returned  to  Naz- 
areth, whilst  they  made  for  their  several  homes.  This 
was  probably  necessitated  by  the  gathering  storm,  that 
broke  first  on  the  head  of  the  Baptist,  whom  Herod 
cast  into  the  dark  dungeons  of  the  grim  Castle  of 
Machaerus  across  the  Jordan. 

For  a  further  period  of  nine  months  our  Lord  seems 
to  have  been  unattended.  He  probably  was  in  constant 
touch  with  His  disciples  and  friends,  but  they  were  not 
openly  associated  with  Him.  He  was  quietly  prepar- 
ing them  for  the  great  future  which  awaited  them,  but 
was  as  yet  veiled  from  their  view.  Finally,  when  the 
fate  of  the  Baptist  was  sealed,  and  no  advantage  could 
be  gained  by  further  delay,  the  Master  went  forth 
alone,  throughout  all  Galilee,  "  teaching  in  their  syna- 
gogues, and  preaching  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom,  and 
healing  all  manner  of  sickness  and  all  manner  of  dis- 
ease among  the  people ;  and  His  fame  went  throughout 
all  Syria,  and  there  followed  Him  great  multitudes  of 
people  from  Galilee,  and  from  Decapolis,  and  from 
Jerusalem,  and  from  Judea,  and  from  beyond  Jordan." 

Peter  was  aware  of  this  mighty  movement,  and 
found  it  irksome  to  stay  with  his  boats  and  nets.  He 
dreamt  of  Christ  by  night,  and  watched  for  His  coming 
by  day.  Presently  the  morning  broke,  and  the  Master 
came  along  the  shore.  That  day  changed  the  entire 
current  of  his  career,  and  the  seed  sown  patiently 
through  months  of  quiet  intercourse  began  to  yield 
fruit,  first  the  blade.  ...  So  take  us  unto  Thy 
college  and  teach  us,  gracious  Lord,  we  humbly  beseech 
Thee! 


in 

THE  SETTLEMENT  AS  TO  THE  SUPREME 

CONTROL 

Mark  i.  14-20;  Luke  v.  i-ii 

"The  livelong  night  we've  toiled  in  vain. 
But  at  Thy  gracious  word, 
I  will  let  down  the  net  again : — 
Do  Thou  Thy  will,  O  Lord." 

—Keble. 

NINE  busy  months  had  passed.  Single- 
handed,  our  Lord  had  been  conducting  His 
mission  throughout  Galilee,  with  an  ever- 
increasing  popularity.  His  speed  was  quickened  by 
the  tidings  that  the  Baptist  had  been  "  delivered  up." 
Time  after  time,  as  He  returned  to  His  home  at  Ca- 
pernaum, where  His  friends  and  disciples  seem  now  to 
have  settled.  He  devoted  Himself  to  their  further  in- 
struction in  the  great  principles  on  which  His  life  was 
based,  and  to  their  preparation  for  the  decisive  moment 
when  He  should  bid  them  leave  all,  rise  up,  and  follow 
Him.     That  decisive  moment  came  thus : 

The  Scene. — It  was  the  early  morning  of  an  au- 
tumn day.  The  grey  waters  of  the  lake  were  beginning 
to  laugh  back  to  the  sun,  slowly  rising  from  behind  the 
eastern  hills.  The  deep  azure  of  the  sky,  the  exquisite 
foliage  of  the  oleanders,  the  autumn-tints  on  the  trees 
and  shrubs  that  came  down  almost  to  the  water's  brink, 

15 


i6  THE  BOAT-PULPIT 

the  changing  lights  on  the  hills,  the  white  glistening 
snows  of  the  mighty  Hermon,  which,  though  far  dis- 
tant, seemed  to  dominate  the  landscape  to  the  north, 
the  sob  of  the  brimming  water,  combined  to  make  a 
worthy  setting  for  the  supreme  event  in  the  lives  of  the 
four  fishermen  who  were  destined  to  influence  all  after- 
history. 

They  had  been  friends  from  boyhood.  They  were 
partners  in  their  fisher's  craft.  They  were  ardent  dis- 
ciples and  friends  of  Him  who  was  moving  the  whole 
country.  His  life,  deeds,  and  words  were  always  on 
their  lips,  as  they  floated  together  over  the  fishing- 
grounds,  while  the  stars  kept  vigil  overhead.  Probably 
they  had  been  speaking  of  Him,  as  they  drew  to  shore, 
after  a  night  of  fruitless  toil.  "  Would  they  be  seeing 
Him  soon  ?  " 

They  had  disembarked,  were  rinsing  out  their  seine- 
nets,  and  spreading  them  on  the  shore  to  dry,  when 
they  became  aware  of  the  approach  of  a  vast  crowd, 
which  were  thronging  and  pressing  upon  the  person  of 
their  beloved  Teacher  and  Friend.  In  a  moment  they 
had  forgotten  their  weariness  and  disappointment, 
their  hunger,  and  the  call  of  their  homes,  and  were 
on  the  alert  to  welcome  Him.  He  made  straight  for 
Peter's  boat  and  asked  that  it  might  be  moored  within 
one  of  the  rock-lined  inlets  that  indented  the  shore. 
There  He  sat  and  spoke  to  His  congregation,  many 
seated  on  the  blocks  of  basalt,  others  standing,  but  all 
rapt  and  wondering  at  the  gracious  words  that  pro- 
ceeded from  His  lips. 

It  may  have  been  Peter's  lot  to  steady  the  boat  by 
oar  or  boat-hook,  or  if  it  were  securely  fastened,  to  sit 
in  the  bottom  of  the  boat,  his  eyes  fastened  on  the 
Master's  face,  drinking  in  each  word.  Never  man 
spake  like  this  man.  He  taught  as  one  that  had  author- 
ity, and  not  as  the  scribes.  To  Peter  and  the  rest,  as 
they  afterwards  confessed,  these  were  the  words  of 


A  NEW  EXPERIENCE  17 

Eternal  life ;  and  deep  chords  in  their  hearts  must  have 
vibrated,  when  in  after  days  they  heard  in  the  Master's 
memorable  Highly  Priestly  prayer :  "  The  words  which 
Thou  hast  given  to  me,  I  have  given  them,  and  they 
have  received  them,  and  have  known  of  a  truth  that 
I  came  forth  from  Thee." 

The  Inexorable  Command. — When  our  Lord  is 
about  to  fashion  a  vessel  unto  honour,  meet  for  His 
use,  whether  it  be  of  gold  and  silver,  or  of  wood  and 
earth.  He  has  to  establish  His  absolute  authority  and 
right  to  command.  There  can  be  no  parleying  or 
argument,  no  hesitancy  or  holding  back.  Spirit,  soul, 
and  body  must  be  absolutely  submitted  to  Him,  at 
whatever  cost.  The  disciple  must  leave  all  and  follow 
Him.  Just  as  He  was  prepared  to  suffer  obediently 
even  unto  death,  so  He  requires  of  those  whom  He 
takes  into  the  sacred  circle  of  inward  companionship 
that  they  should  arm  themselves  with  the  same  mind, 
so  that  they  should  no  longer  live  the  rest  of  their  time 
to  the  will  of  the  flesh,  but  to  the  will  of  God. 

Probably  Peter  and  the  others  knew  this  generally. 
They  could  hardly  have  been  with  Him  so  long  without 
realizing  the  force  of  the  significant  words  uttered  by 
Mary  to  the  servants  at  Cana :  "  Whatsoever  He  saith 
unto  you,  do  it."  They  were  prepared  to  give  Him 
their  loyal  allegiance  in  the  realms  of  morals  and  duty ; 
but  it  was  altogether  startling  and  unexpected  when, 
invading  their  own  sphere.  He  assumed  their  own  pre- 
rogative, and  said  to  Peter :  "  Put  out  into  the  deep, 
and  let  down  your  nets  for  a  draught."  For  a  moment 
we  may  dare  to  assume  that  Peter's  obedience  faltered ; 
and  he  expressed  his  hesitation  in  the  reply :  "  Master, 
we  have  toiled  all  the  night,  and  taken  nothing." 

Peter  had  fished  these  waters  from  boyhood.  There 
was  nothing  in  the  craft  with  which  he  was  not  famil- 
iar. The  habits  of  the  fish;  the  hours  and  spots  most 


I8  "  AT  THY  COMMAND  " 

suitable  for  taking  them;  the  effect  of  climatic  condi- 
tions: in  all  he  was  proficient.  He  would  have  hotly 
resented  any  interference  on  the  part  of  other  fisher- 
men of  his  acquaintance;  and  now,  he  found  himself 
suddenly  confronted  with  a  bidding  which  was  contra- 
dicted by  his  experience,  by  the  universal  maxims  and 
practice  of  generations,  and  by  the  bitter  failure  of  the 
preceding  night,  which  had  left  him  jaded,  weary,  and 
out  of  heart. 

He  would  be  prepared  to  obey  the  slightest  precept 
that  came  from  the  Master's  lips;  but  how  could  one 
who  had  spent  his  days  in  the  carpenters'  workshop 
of  a  mountain  village  be  competent  to  take  command 
of  a  boat  and  direct  the  casting  of  a  net !  Was  he  to 
renounce  himself  in  this  also?  The  morning  was  no 
time  for  fishing :  the  glare  of  light  revealed  the  meshes 
of  the  nets,  and  the  fish  were  to  be  found,  not  in  the 
deep,  but  the  shallower  part  of  the  lake.  The  whole 
of  the  fisherfolk  that  might  see  his  boat  putting  out 
at  such  an  hour,  laden  with  nets,  and  evidently  pre- 
pared for  fishing,  would  laugh  and  count  him  crazy. 
Is  it  not  thus  with  all  who  have  been  greatly  used  by 
Christ?  There  is  no  escaping  the  test.  At  a  certain 
moment  in  our  experience,  often  long  after  we  have 
become  disciples,  the  Master  comes  on  board  the  ship 
of  our  life  and  assumes  supreme  control.  For  a  mo- 
ment or  an  hour  there  may  be  question  and  hesitation. 
We  have  been  wont  to  make  our  own  plans,  follow  our 
own  chart,  take  our  own  course,  and  be  masters  in  our 
own  craft ;  shall  we — may  we,  dare  we — hand  over  the 
entire  command  to  Christ  ?  To  what  point  may  He  not 
steer  us !  On  what  venture  may  He  not  engage  us !  At 
what  inhospitable  part  of  the  shore  may  He  not  land 
us !  Happy  are  we  if,  after  such  a  moment  of  hesita- 
tion we  reply :  "  Nevertheless,  at  Thy  command  I  will 
put  out  even  to  the  deep,  and  let  down  the  nets  for  a 
draught."    This  at  least  is  certain  beyond  doubt,  that 


YEA  AND  AMEN  19 

you  can  never  reckon  on  Christ's  co-partnership  and 
blessing  unless  you  are  prepared  to  sail  under  His  or- 
ders, and,  like  the  angels,  fulfil  His  commandments, 
hearkening  unto  the  voice  of  His  word. 

It  has  been  thus  all  down  the  ages.  While  the  ears 
of  the  majority  have  been  filled  with  the  hubbub  of 
the  street  and  the  babble  of  the  crowd;  while  the 
children  of  this  world  have  been  playing  in  the  market- 
places and  crying  to  their  fellows;  while  even  the 
seekers  after  truth  have  been  overawed  by  the  earth- 
quake or  the  strong  and  mighty  wind,  rending  the 
mountains,  the  quick  ear  of  the  disciple  has  detected 
the  thrilling  undertones  of  the  still  small  voice,  as 
Elijah  once  in  Horeb's  cave. 

Sometimes  others  can  interpret  that  voice  better  than 
we.  "  Eli  perceived  that  the  Lord  had  called  the 
child." 

Sometimes  it  pierces  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  soul 
and  spirit,  of  the  joints  and  marrow;  as  when  Gk)d 
bade  the  pariarch  to  offer  the  son  of  his  love  on 
Mount  Moriah. 

Sometimes  it  demands  of  us,  as  of  the  young  man, 
that  we  should  sell  all  that  we  have,  and  come  and 
follow  to  the  Cross. 

But  whenever  it  speaks,  it  may  be  detected  by  its 
constant  reiteration  of  one  note,  like  the  sounding  of  a 
bell  by  the  tide  far  out  from  shore.  It  is  never  "  Yea 
and  nay,"  but  always  "  Yea."  It  often  speaks  in  the 
teeth  of  ordinary  experience  and  convention,  and  asks 
us  to  leave  the  beach,  which  we  have  been  hugging  too 
long.  It  generally  offers  the  acid  test  to  our  faith 
and  exposes  us  to  the  ridicule  of  our  associates.  But 
it  is  endorsed  in  the  depths  of  our  soul  by  an  answering 
assent.  It  is  corroborated  by  circumstances.  God's 
providence  bears  witness  to  the  inner  voice.  To  dis- 
obey is  to  become  a  castaway.  To  yield  obedience  is 
to  enter  on  a  vast  and  lasting  inheritance. 


20  ON  THE  DEEP  WITH  CHRIST 

Christ  must  be  Master.  Rabbi  must  give  place  to 
Lord.  His  will  must  rule,  though  it  seems  to  contra- 
dict the  dearest  traditions  of  the  soul.  There  cannot 
be  two  captains  in  the  boat,  if  it  is  to  make  a  successful 
voyage  and  return  at  last  laden  to  the  water's  edge  with 
fish.  To-day  and  now,  let  that  question  be  decided! 
He  has  a  place  and  a  use  for  you,  but  you  must  sur- 
render yourself  to  His  disposal.  Refuse  to  be  bound 
by  customs,  circumstances,  or  the  conventions  of  the 
shore.  Make  Christ  Captain,  whilst  you  take  to  the 
oars!  At  His  bidding,  launch  out  into  the  deep,  and 
remember  that  yonder,  across  the  waters,  is  the  coast- 
line of  Eternity,  where  in  the  morning-dawn  the  Fire 
and  Provision  of  Divine  Preparation  await  the  obedi- 
ent soul,  and  the  unbroken  net  shall  be  dragged  to 
shore,  "  full  of  great  fishes,  one  hundred  and  fifty  and 
three." 

"  Sacrifice  and  offering  Thou  wouldst  not :  mine  ears 
hast  Thou  opened:  and  I  was  not  rebellious,  neither 
turned  I  away  back.  Lo,  I  come  to  do  Thy  will,  O 
my  God ;  yea,  Thy  Law  is  within  my  heart,  so  I  know 
that  I  shall  not  be  ashamed." 

Obedience  Leads  to  the  Deep. — Directly  the  Lord 
takes  control,  He  steers  towards  the  Deep.  We  no 
longer  coast  along  the  shallows,  but  begin  to  do  busi- 
ness in  great  waters.  "  They  that  go  down  to  the  sea 
in  ships,  that  do  business  in  deep  waters,  these  see 
the  works  of  the  Lord  and  His  wonders  in  the  deep." 
The  Deep  of  the  Eternal  Council-Chamber,  where  we 
were  chosen  in  Christ  before  the  world  began.  The 
Deep  of  the  Eternal  Love,  which  loved  us  when  we 
were  yet  sinners.  The  Deep  of  Fellowship  and  Unity 
with  God,  like  that  between  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
The  Deep  workings  of  Providence  which  underlie  all 
human  history.  The  Deep  Bliss  of  Eternity  into  which 
our  restless  souls  will  enter.    The  Spirit  searcheth  all 


«THE  PATHS  OF  THE  SEA"  21 

things,  even  the  deep  things  of  God,  and  He  will  reveal 
them  unto  those  that  love  Him. 

But  here  we  are  specially  concerned  with  the  Deep 
of  Divine  Partnership.  To  Peter's  surprise  the  boat, 
propelled  by  oar  or  sail,  had  passed  over  many  well- 
known  fishing  groimds,  and  had  kept  its  course  to  the 
midst  of  the  lake,  before  our  Lord  bade  them  let  down 
the  nets.  Immediately  all  hands  were  set  to  work,  and 
the  necessary  preparations  were  hardly  completed, 
when  it  was  evident  that  they  had  netted  a  great  shoal 
of  fish.  So  much  so  that  the  nets  were  strained  to 
breaking-point.  The  beads  of  perspiration  were  thick 
on  his  forehead,  and  his  muscles  stood  out  as  whip- 
cord, as  Peter  strove  to  cope  with  his  spoils.  His  boat 
was  lurching  dangerously,  and  he  made  urgent  signals 
for  his  partners,  who  apparently  had  put  out  in  expec- 
tation that  something  of  this  kind  would  take  place. 
And  they  came  and  filled  both  the  boats,  so  that  the 
gunwales  were  almost  level  with  the  water.  Then 
Peter  realized  for  the  first  time  what  partnership  with 
Christ  means,  and  how  absolute  obedience  on  our  part 
secures  absolute  cooperation  on  His.  Whilst  the 
fishers  were  letting  down  their  nets  the  Master  had 
been  issuing  His  mandate  to  the  shoals  of  fish,  which 
found  themselves  compelled  by  an  irresistible  impulse 
to  make  for  the  fishing-nets  awaiting  them.  Was  it  not 
predicted  in  the  eighth  Psalm  that  this  Son  of  Man 
should  have  dominion  "  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and 
whatsoever  passeth  through  the  paths  of  the  Deep  "  ? 

What  a  lesson  is  here  for  us  all !  We  know  only  too 
well  what  it  is  to  toil  through  long  dark  seasons  and 
take  nothing.  Again  and  again  we  have  returned  to 
shore  with  only  a  minnow  or  two.  But  directly  we 
enter  into  fellowship,  or  partnership,  with  the  Son  of 
God,  to  which  indeed  we  have  been  called,  we  discover 
that  all  we  have  to  do  is  to  have  washed  and  mended 
nets,  to  trust  the  Master  to  indicate  the  grounds  where 


22  LOOK  TO  THE  NETS! 

the  fish  lie,  and  to  believe  that  He  will  do  all  the  rest. 
We  may  reckon  absolutely  on  that  cooperation  of  God. 
The  Apostle  says  emphatically :  "  God  is  faithful, 
by  Whom  ye  have  been  called  into  partnership  with 
His  Son." 

On  the  Day  of  Pentecost  Peter  again  let  down  his 
net,  this  time  into  the  vast  excited  crowds,  and  again 
the  Lord  repeated  the  miracle  of  the  Galilean  lake,  and 
filled  his  net  with  three  thousand  souls.  In  the  house 
of  Cornelius  his  net  had  hardly  touched  the  water, 
when  the  shoal  filled  the  net.  "  As  I  began  to  speak 
.  .  .  the  Holy  Spirit  fell."  Surely  on  each  occasion 
the  Apostle  must  have  looked  into  the  face  of  Jesus 
with  a  happy  smile,  and  said :  "  Ah !  Lord,  here  is  the 
Lake  of  Galilee  over  again." 

This  experience  might  be  ours,  on  similar  conditions. 
If  it  is  not  so,  let  us  inquire  for  the  reason.  It  lies, 
not  with  the  Master,  but  with  ourselves,  our  obedience, 
or  our  nets.  If  our  nets  are  our  addresses,  sermons, 
or  methods,  we  must  make  and  mend  them  by  careful 
study  and  earnest  prayer.  The  meshes  must  be  so 
closely  articulated  that  no  fish  shall  get  through  them. 
No  pains  should  be  spared  so  to  present  the  Gospel 
as  that  our  hearers  may  be  without  excuse.  No  vague 
and  flimsy  presentation  of  eternal  truth  is  permissible. 
Mend  your  old  nets,  or  make  new  ones. 

Be  sure  also  that  they  are  clean.  Wash  out  the 
sand-grit  or  weed  that  may  have  accumulated. 
Especially  eliminate  self.  There  must  be  nothing  to 
attract  your  hearers  from  your  message  to  yourself; 
and  when  you  have  done  all,  dare  to  believe  that, 
though  your  Lord  is  now  seated  at  the  right  hand 
of  God,  He  is  still  working  with  His  servants  and 
confirming  their  word  by  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 


IV 

'A  FISHER  OF  MEN 
Luke  v.  S-ii 

"  I  know  not  what  I  am,  but  only  know 

I  have  had  glimpses  tongue  may  never  speak; 
No  more  I  balance  human  joy  and  woe, 
But  think  of  my  transgressions  and  am  weak." 

— Buchanan. 

THE  Master's  purpose  for  His  disciples  is  dis- 
closed in  the  words  recorded  by  Matthew 
and  Mark,  and  which  were  probably  ad- 
dressed to  them  on  the  shore,  when  they  had  again 
beached  their  boats :  "  Come  ye  after  Me,  and  I  will 
make  you  to  become  fishers  of  men."  We  can  combine 
this  form  of  the  summons  with  that  specially  addressed 
to  the  impulsive,  vehement,  warm-hearted  son  of  Jonas, 
and  which  is  recorded  in  Luke  v.  It  should  be  noticed 
that  here,  as  generally  in  the  Gospels,  our  Lord  ad- 
dresses him  by  the  more  intimate  name  of  Simon,  as 
though  Peter  were  reserved  till,  through  the  months  of 
discipline  which  awaited  him,  he  was  fitted  to  take  the 
foremost  place  among  his  fellow-apostles. 

The  summons  came  whilst  they  were  engaged  in 
their  usual  occupation.  David  was  summoned  from 
the  sheepfold  to  shepherd  the  chosen  race.  Paul 
was  called  from  making  the  goafs-hair  tents  to  teach 
the  Church  the  ephemeral  character  of  the  things  that 
are  seen,  in  view  of  the  House  not  made  with  hands, 
eternal  in  the  heavens.  The  eternal  springs  were 
revealed  to  the  woman  as  she  rested  her  pitcher  on  the 

23 


24  THE  GENTLE  ART 

embrasure  of  Jacob's  well.  It  was  quite  befitting,  there- 
fore, that  our  Lord  should  explain  to  His  fisher  friend 
the  momentous  and  glorious  ministry  that  awaited  him, 
through  the  calling  in  which  he  had  been  engaged  from 
boyhood,  and  which  had  so  many  points  of  resemblance 
with  the  work  of  winning  souls.  The  one  difference 
being  brought  out  in  the  Greek  word  translated  catch, 
and  which  should  be  expanded  to  read,  as  in  2  Tim.  ii. 
26,  "  Thou  shalt  catch,  in  order  to  keep  alive.'' 

In  every  subsequent  era  sincere  and  earnest  souls 
have  lingered  wistfully  over  these  words,  longing  to 
extract  from  them  the  precious  secret  of  successful 
soul-winning.  More  than  two  hundred  years  ago 
Thomas  Boston,  a  young  Scots  Minister,  made  this 
record  in  his  diary :  "  Reading  in  secret,  my  heart  was 
touched  with  these  words.  Thou  shalt  catch  men.  My 
soul  cried  out  for  their  accomplishing  in  me>  and  I  was 
very  desirous  to  know  how  I  might  follow  Christ,  so 
as  to  be  a  fisher  of  men;  and  for  my  own  instruction 
I  addressed  myself  to  the  consideration  of  that  point." 

It  would  be  tedious  to  enumerate  the  various  sugges- 
tions that  have  been  made  on  the  line  of  Boston's  trea- 
tise, which  was  entitled,  "A  Soliloquy  on  the  Art  of 
Man-fishing."  Many  a  godly  minister  with  a  perfectly- 
appointed  Church,  and  surrounded  by  a  devoted  people 
— the  boat,  the  company,  and  the  fishing-tackle  being 
all  of  the  best — has  watched,  almost  enviously,  the 
success  of  some  simple  evangelist,  who,  apart  from  all 
adventitious  aid,  has  lifted  netfuls  of  fish  from  the 
great  depths  of  human  life  into  his  creel.  One  expert 
fisherman  says :  "  Keep  yourself  out  of  sight."  An- 
other urges  that  the  bait  and  method  must  be  carefully 
adapted  to  the  habits  of  the  fish.  Yet  a  third  insists 
on  patience.  What  success  is  gained  by  scourging  the 
water!  All  are  good,  but  the  study  of  this  narrative 
may  bring  us  still  further  into  the  heart  of  the  matter 
and  the  mind  of  our  Lord. 


THE  DIVINE  STRANGE  CHOICE         25 

I.  Successful  Soul-winning  is  generally  based 
ON  A  Deep  Consciousness  of  Personal  Sinnership. 
— Many  instances  present  themselves  from  the  biog- 
raphies of  the  saints.  But  two  will  suffice.  The  untir- 
ing and  extraordinary  labours  of  the  great  Apostle  of 
the  Gentiles  laid  the  foundations  of  the  Gentile  Church, 
but  as  he  reviews  the  past  and  considers  his  natural 
condition,  he  does  not  hesitate  to  speak  of  himself  as 
the  chief  of  sinners  and  the  least  of  saints.  We  faint 
not,  he  says,  because  the  grace  of  God  displayed  its  ex- 
ceeding riches  in  our  redemption.  "  We  all  once  lived 
in  the  lusts  of  our  flesh,  fulfilling  the  desires  of  the 
flesh  and  of  the  mind,  and  were  by  nature  children  of 
wrath,  even  as  the  rest."  John  Bunyan's  review  of  his 
condition,  as  it  stood  revealed  in  the  light  of  God,  is 
typical  of  many  others,  who  shine  as  stars  in  the  firma- 
ment of  successful  soul- winning.  He  says :  "  I  was 
more  loathsome  in  mine  own  eyes  than  was  a  toad ;  and 
I  thought  I  was  so  in  God's  eyes  also.  I  could  have 
changed  my  heart  with  anyone.  I  thought  none  but  the 
devil  himself  could  equal  me  for  inward  wickedness 
and  pollution  of  mind.  I  was  both  a  burden  and  a 
terror  to  myself.  How  gladly  would  I  have  been  any- 
thing but  myself." 

Those  who  have  had  deep  experiences  of  the  exceed- 
ing sinfulness  of  sin  are  the  better  qualified  to  be  ten- 
der and  pitiful  to  such  as  are  sold  under  sin,  are  heap- 
ing up  for  themselves  agonies  of  remorse  against  the 
day  of  their  awakening,  are  causing  infinite  sorrow  to 
the  Saviour,  and  are  missing  the  great  purposes  for 
which  they  were  created.  "  Alas,  poor  souls !  "  they 
cry,  "  such  were  some  of  us."  The  ring-leaders  in  the 
devil's  army  make  great  soldiers  for  Christ.  Their 
knowledge  of  Satan's  stratagems  and  wiles  is  invalu- 
able. Reclaimed  poachers  are  notoriously  the  best 
game-keepers.  The  sinner  knows  the  bitterness  of  the 
wages  of  sin,  as  an  unfallen  angel  or  an  innocent  child 


^ 


26  "  A  SINFUL  MAN  " 

cannot.  Men  like  Augustine  or  Bunyan  have  learnt  by 
experience  the  subterfuges  and  evasions  of  conscience, 
the  horror  of  remorse,  the  yearning  for  help.  They  are 
familiar  with  the  holes  where  the  fish  lie,  and  the  best 
methods  of  reaching  them.  They  have  infinite  patience, 
as  the  Lord  had  patience  with  them.  They  bear  gently 
with  the  erring,  and  with  those  who  resent  their  ap- 
proach, because  they  themselves  have  been  compassed 
with  infirmity.  We  are  sometimes  tempted  to  say  with 
Augustine,  O  heata  culpa  (Oh,  blessed  fault !),  because 
the  knowledge  of  our  own  sinful  hearts  gives  us  the 
clue  to  all  other  hearts  oppressed  by  temptation.  We 
need  not  be  surprised,  therefore,  at  this  preparatory 
revelation  of  himself  given  to  Peter. 

He  and  the  rest  had  known  the  Lord  for  at  least 
eighteen  months,  but  were  unaware  of  His  true  majesty  * 
and  glory.  For  them  He  was  the  carpenter  of  Naza- 
reth, the  holy  man,  the  marvellous  teacher  and  wonder- 
worker. That  He  was,  like  the  Baptist,  a  chosen  serv- 
ant of  God  and  the  herald  of  a  new  era  was  their  com- 
mon conclusion.  Beyond  this  their  minds  had  not 
travelled.  They  regarded  Jesus  as  of  the  same  flesh 
and  blood  with  themselves,  felt  glad  to  be  honoured 
with  His  friendship,  and  were  pleased  in  return  to 
share  with  Him  their  slender  stores  or  humble  homes. 
It  never  occurred  to  them  that  they  were  in  daily  touch 
with  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  before  the  worlds  were 
made,  or  that  for  their  redemption  He  had  emptied 
Himself,  made  Himself  of  no  reputation,  and  assumed 
the  form  of  a  servant. 

Then  most  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  this  shaft  of 
His  essential  being  struck  into  their  ordinary  common- 
place, and  left  a  trail  of  supernatural  glor}\  For  a 
moment  Peter  was  dazzled,  almost  blinded.  He  could 
hardly  see  for  the  splendour  of  that  light;  but  as  he 
felt  the  tug  and  pull  of  the  bursting  net,  threatening  to 
break  beneath  its  sudden  burden,  he  realized  in  a  mo- 


THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  THE  SAINTS     27 

ment  that  his  Teacher  and  Friend  must  have  put  forth 
a  power  which  no  mortal  could  wield.  God  was  in  the 
place,  and  he  had  not  known  it.  How  dreadful  was 
that  place !  It  was  none  other  than  the  house  of  God 
and  the  gate  of  heaven ;  and  at  once  the  nakedness  and 
sinfulness  of  his  own  heart  were  laid  bare,  and  he 
cried :  "  I  am  a  sinful  man,  O  Lord."  Note  the  signifi- 
cant exchange !  When  the  boat  left  the  shore  it  was 
Master,  now,  as  this  revelation  has  broken  on  him,  it  is 
Lord.  Immediately  on  this  Jesus  said :  "  From  hence- 
forth thou  shalt  catch  men." 

There  is  a  striking  analogy  between  Peter's  experi- 
ence and  Job's.  The  suffering  patriarch  had  persist- 
ently and  successfully  maintained  his  integrity.  "  Till 
I  die  I  will  not  remove  mine  integrity  from  me.  My 
righteousness  will  I  hold  fast.  I  will  not  let  it  go.  My 
heart  shall  not  reproach  me  as  long  as  I  live."  Then 
into  his  life  God  let  fall  visions  of  the  Creation.  He 
recited  instance  after  instance  of  His  almighty  power, 
wisdom  and  skill.  As  Peter's  eyes  were  unveiled  that 
he  might  behold  Christ's  wonders  in  the  deep,  so  were 
Job's;  and  he  exclaimed,  as  the  divine  glory  shone 
upon  his  soul,  "  I  have  heard  of  Thee  by  the  hearing 
of  the  ear,  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  Thee,  wherefore  I 
abhor  myself  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes." 

Oh  agony  of  wavering  thought 

When  sinners  first  so  near  are  brought. 

"It  is  my  Maker! — dare  I  stay? 

My  Saviour! — dare  I  turn  away?" 

Whenever,  therefore,  this  experience  befalls,  it  may  be 
deemed  as  preparatory  to  new  success  in  soul-winning. 
Expect  to  hear  the  Lord  answer  your  confession  of 
lowly  sinnership  with  a  new  summons  to  take  your 
boat  and  net  for  a  draught.  And  this  experience  does 
and  will  befall,  not  once  or  twice,  but  many  times,  as 
we  approach  nearer  to  the  Alpine  snows  of  our  Lord's 


28         "  WHOM  HAVE  I  BUT  THEE  ! " 

unsullied  Holiness.  The  whole  progress  of  the  divine 
life  within  the  soul  is  characterized  by  confessions. 
We  are  always  being  led  to  detect  the  presence  of  sin 
and  evil  in  depths  and  motions,  which  once  seemed 
comparatively  harmless  and  innocent.  The  true  soul 
is  always  counting  its  righteousness  as  filthy  rages, 
and  confessing  that  it  has  not  yet  attained  nor  is  by 
any  means  perfect.  The  only  confession  that  befits 
us  is  that  we  are  following  after  to  apprehend  that  for 
which  we  were  apprehended  of  Christ  Jesus.  The 
higher  the  flight  of  the  soaring  eagle  the  deeper  its 
reflection  in  the  mountain-lake.  Do  not  be  afraid  to 
know  yourself  beneath  the  Spirit's  teaching,  it  is  all 
preparatory  to  a  new  departure  in  "  man-catching." 

n.  Failure  and  Sin  do  not  necessarily  exclude 
FROM  THE  Divine  Partnership  in  Soul-winning. — 
"  Depart  from  me,"  cried  the  conscience-stricken  dis- 
ciple. It  was  as  though  he  said :  "  I  will  bring  Thee, 
Lord,  to  the  spot  where  I  took  Thee  on  board  this 
morning;  and  when  I  have  landed  Thee,  Thou  must 
go  Thy  way  and  I  mine.  I  shall  ever  love  Thee  and 
think  of  Thee  as  I  float  under  these  skies  by  day  and 
night,  but  I  am  not  fit  to  keep  Thee  company."  And 
under  his  breath  he  may  have  whispered  to  himself: 
"  But  I  know  not  how  I  shall  live  without  Thee.  To 
whom  can  I  turn?  Thou  only  hast  the  words  of 
eternal  life." 

We  can  almost  see  him,  when  the  well  of  the  boat 
was  heaped  high  with  the  slippery  silver  cargo,  clam- 
bering across  from,  prow  and  stern  on  his  bare  feet, 
falling  at  Jesus'  knees  as  He  sat  near  the  tiller,  clasping 
them,  and  faltering  forth  these  words  with  the  heaving 
sobs  of  a  strong  man  torn  with  conflicting  emotions. 

It  was  as  though  our  King  Alfred,  when  wandering 
in  Sherwood  Forest,  disguised,  lost  to  his  followers, 
and  uncertain  as  to  the  path,  had  been  found  and  be- 


"  FEAR  NOT  !  "  29 

friended  by  a  kindly  woodsman,  who  had  regarded  him 
as  an  equal,  shared  with  him  his  bed  and  board  without 
detecting  his  royal  dignity,  and  finally  had  conveyed 
him  to  his  brave  retainers.  How  startled  he  would  be 
to  see  their  deferential  respect!  Suddenly  he  would 
awake  to  the  vast  chasm  intervening  between  himself 
and  his  ward,  and  approaching  with  many  apologies 
for  his  familiarity,  would  deferentially  propose  to  say 
good-bye  and  farewell  for  ever.  **  Our  paths,  sire, 
must  of  course  diverge  from  this  point !  You  to  your 
throne,  I  to  my  cottage ! " 

"  Nay,"  said  our  Lord  in  effect,  "  that  need  not  be. 
When  sin  is  repented  of,  abhorred,  and  confessed,  it 
need  not  debar  from  My  presence  or  service.  I  can  do 
with  sinful  men,  who  are  conscious  of  their  sinnership. 
No  sin  is  too  inveterate  but  that  I  can  cope  with  it, 
too  foul  but  that  I  can  cleanse.  Stay  with  Me,  I  will 
cleanse,  heal,  and  save  thee,  and  make  thee  the  instru- 
ment of  saving  thousands  of  sinners  like  thyself.'* 

It  is  impossible  to  exaggerate  the  comfort  that  these 
words  afford  to  those  who  would  fain  serve  Christ, 
though  conscious  of  their  profound  unworthiness.  "  I 
am  not  worthy  to  bear  the  message  of  salvation  to 
others,  because  I  am  such  a  sinful  man!  How  canst 
Thou  employ  me,  who  hast  hosts  of  unfallen  angels  at 
Thy  command  ?  How  darest  Thou  identify  Thyself  and 
Thy  holy  cause  with  me?  No,  it  cannot  be!  I  love 
Thee,  but  an  ever-widening  river  must  divide  us  as  we 
walk  on  either  bank.  I  shall  break  my  heart  that  I  have 
failed  Thee  so,  but  I  cannot  lift  up  my  face,  or  regain 
my  forfeited  place.  Let  me  stand  in  the  outer  circle 
and  see  Thee  now  and  again.  I  cannot  ask  for  more, 
for  Thou  knowest,  and  I  know,  and  every  lost  spirit 
knows,  that  I  am  a  sinful  man." 

But  Jesus  has  only  one  reply :  "  Fear  not,  from  hence- 
forth thou  shalt  catch  men."  "  Fear  not !  I  am  the 
Daysman  that  stands  as  thy  surety.     I  have  blotted 


30  "  HITHER,  FOLLOW  ! " 

out  thy  transgressions  as  a  cloud,  and  will  no  more 
remember  thy  sins.  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlast- 
ing love,  though  I  foresaw  all  this  and  more  also.  De- 
part from  Me !  It  is  unthinkable.  Thou  art  dearer  to 
Me  than  all  the  stars  in  their  galaxies.  I  have  obtained 
from  the  Father  that  thou  shouldst  be  with  Me  where 
I  am.  After  thou  hast  had  thy  Pentecost,  and  fulfilled 
thy  ministry  and  finished  thy  course,  thou  shalt  be  ac- 
counted worthy  to  stand  in  My  Presence-chamber,  that 
thou  mayest  behold  My  glory,  and  thou  shalt  share  it." 
"  Lord,  it  is  too  much ;  let  me  kiss  Thy  feet !  " 

III.      SOUL-WINNING,    TO   BE   SUCCESSFUL,    MUST   BE 

THE  Absorbing  Purpose  of  Our  Lives. — It  cannot 
be  one  interest  among  many.  The  Apostle  said  truly, 
"  One  thing  I  do."  "  They  left  all  and  followed  Him." 
We  can  imagine  that  after  this  moving  exchange  of 
words  Peter  returned  to  his  place  to  think  over  the 
marvel  of  the  life  that  now  opened  before  him.  And 
whilst  he  mused,  the  fire  burned.  What  else  was  worth 
living  for  ?  Surely  he  must  obey  this  mandate.  "  Come 
ye  after  me ! "    "  Hither,  follow !  " 

May  we  indulge  our  imagination  here?  The  boat 
responds  to  sail  or  oar,  and  makes  for  the  shore.  A 
friendly  fisherman  informs  his  wife  that  the  well-known 
boat  will  soon  be  "  in."  His  food  has  been  waiting  for 
him  since  early  dawn.  She  had  prepared  a  breakfast 
for  which  he  did  not  come.  She  hastens  to  the  shore 
and  stands  there  with  her  welcome,  all  the  gladder  be- 
cause she  descries  its  burden.  Her  husband  leaps  into 
the  shallow  water  and  lifts  Jesus  from  boat  to  beach. 
He  then  approaches  her  wistfully,  and  with  an  im- 
wonted  tenderness  that  startles  her,  "Can  you  spare  me 
for  a  little  ?  "  he  inquires.  "  The  Master  has  asked  me 
to  go  with  Him.  He  says  that  I  am  not  to  fear,  and 
that  He  will  provide  for  us.  He  has  promised  to  teach 
me  how  to  fish  for  men.     I  will  come  back  as  soon  as  I 


PARTNERSHIP  WITH  CHRIST  31 

have  learned  my  lesson  and  He  has  done  with  me. 
In  the  meanwhile  I  must  be  free  to  serve  Him.  Can 
you  spare  me  ?  " 

And  she  replies :  "  Husband,  go  with  Him.  Mother 
and  I  will  make  shift  somehow  till  you  get  back.  Stay 
with  Him  as  long  as  He  needs  you.  Mother  and  I 
were  saying  only  this  morning  that  you  have  been  a 
different  man  since  you  knew  Him." 

She  came  to  believe  also,  and  travelled  everywhere 
with  her  husband,  helping  him,  as  Paul  bears  witness 
(i  Cor.  ix.  5),  We  cannot  suppose  that  Peter  at  once 
entered  into  the  Master's  passion  for  the  souls  of  men. 
That  was  acquired  afterwards.  In  the  first  instance 
he  was  content  to  follow  Him,  to  listen  to  His  words, 
to  become  His  companion  and  helper.  But  it  could 
not  have  been  long  before  he  and  his  companions  began 
to  be  imbued  with  the  same  passion,  until  it  became  the 
master-motive  of  their  existence. 

So  it  will  be  with  ourselves.  As  we  walk  with  Christ, 
by  the  constant  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  we  shall  be 
conformed  to  His  image.  His  thoughts  and  yearnings 
will  be  transmitted  to  us  by  a  Divine  sympathy.  We 
shall  long  to  see  Him  honoured,  loved,  and  exalted. 
We  shall  desire  that  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  His 
soul  and  be  satisfied.  We  shall  become  identified  with 
His  interests,  and  with  no  backward  look  on  ourselves. 
The  Holy  Spirit  will  blow  these  sparks  into  a  flame,  and 
our  life  will  be  spent  as  that  of  Peter,  who  by  his  love 
for  Christ  was  qualified  to  feed  His  sheep  and  lambs. 

Let  us  ask  that  we  may  become  partners  with  Christ 
in  His  great  passion  for  men.  Let  us  bring  ourselves 
to  this  great  magnet  till  we  are  magnetized.  Oh  to 
be  a  living  flame  for  Jesus  Christ,  so  that  the  uttermost 
love  of  woman  may  be : — 

Faint  to  the  flame  with  which  our  breast  is  burning. 
Less  than  the  love  wherewith  we  ache  for  souls! 


V 

PRIMER  LESSONS 

Mark  i.  21-39 

"  Sorrow  is  hard  to  bear,  and  doubt  is  slow  to  clear ! 

Each  sufferer  says  his  say,  his  end  of  the  weal  and  woe ; 
But  God  has  a  few  of  us  whom  He  whispers  in  the  ear ; 
The  rest  may  reason  and  welcome;   'tis  we  musicians 
know ! " 

— Browning. 

THE  Ephesian  Church  was  reminded  by  the 
Apostle  of  having  been  taught  by  the  Lord 
Himself,  "as  the  truth  is  in  Jesus."  It  is 
therefore  of  extreme  interest  to  study  the  earliest 
lessons  with  which  our  Lord  commenced  to  prepare 
Peter  and  his  friends  for  their  life-work.  Every  one 
who  desires  to  be  a  soul-winner  should  sit  in  this  low- 
est form  in  the  Master's  school. 

The  First  Lesson  was  that  Association  with 
Himself  would  inevitably  involve  them  in  Spiri- 
tual WARFARE.^-It  befell  thus.  On  what  was  not  im- 
probably the  first  Sabbath  after  their  final  resolve  to 
identify  themselves  with  Jesus,  the  little  group  of  fisher- 
men, whose  action  was  widely  discussed  all  round  the 
lake,  giving  them  a  considerable  amount  of  notoriety, 
accompanied  Him  to  the  usual  synagogue  service. 
When  the  customary  exercises  were  concluded,  their 
Leader  and  Friend  was  invited  to  address  the  congrega- 
tion, and  as  He  proceeded  in  words  of  spirit  and  life  to 

32 


A  CRY  FROM  THE  ABYSS  33 

unfold  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom,  the  sharp  contrast 
between  His  address  and  the  dull  deliverances  of  the 
Scribes  to  which  they  were  accustomed  struck  them 
with  astonishment.  The  contrast  was  as  marked  as  be- 
tween the  sparkle  of  a  waterfall  and  the  stagnant  water 
of  a  pit.  "  He  taught  them  as  one  that  had  authority." 
Their  hearts  and  consciences  answered  back  with  an 
echoing  response. 

The  hush  of  the  enthralled  assembly  was  suddenly 
broken  by  the  cry  of  a  man's  voice.  It  seemed  as  though 
a  captive  and  unwilling  soul  was  made  the  organ  of 
an  alien  and  compelling  spirit.  "  Let  us  alone,"  was 
the  demand.  "  What  have  we  to  do  with  Thee,  Jesus 
of  Nazareth  ?  I  know  Thee  who  Thou  art."  This  un- 
clean spirit,  or  demon,  may  have  tenanted  that  man's 
body  and  mind  for  years,  unsuspected  by  his  most 
intimate  associates.  But  the  near  presence  of  the 
Divine  Holiness,  though  curtained  by  the  unrent  veil 
of  His  flesh,  extorted  an  involuntary  but  irresistible 
outcry.  An  inflamed  eye  may  cause  no  special  torture 
so  long  as  it  is  screened  from  daylight,  but  expose  it 
to  a  ray  of  meridian  sunshine,  and  the  anguish  is  too 
great  to  be  endured.  Ah !  what  will  the  unclean  soul 
do  when  suddenly  confronted  in  the  other  world  by 
a  glory  before  which  tmfallen  seraphim  veil  their  faces 
with  their  wings ! 

The  disturbance  caused  by  that  wailing  cry  from  the 
abyss  must  have  been  very  startling.  The  man  may, 
up  to  that  moment,  have  been  regarded  as  a  respectable 
member  of  society.  No  one  suspected  the  duality  of 
his  nature;  but  Peter  must  have  suddenly  realized 
that  the  type  of  character,  for  which  his  Master  stood, 
dominated  as  it  was  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  essentially 
holy,  must  discover,  arouse,  and  call  into  hostility 
the  whole  kingdom  of  evil  spirits,  which  Christ  after- 
wards described  as  the  gates  of  hell,  or  Hades.  The 
warfare  for  which  he  had  enlisted  was  not  against  flesh 


^ 


34        PRINCIPALITIES  OF  DARKNESS 

and  blood,  but  against  the  wicked  spirits  that  rule  the 
darkness  of  this  world. 

It  was  an  infinite  relief  to  know  that  his  Lord  was 
equal  to  the  emergency.  When  He  bade  the  unclean 
spirit  to  hold  his  peace  and  come  out  of  this  tormented 
nature,  it  could  do  no  other  than  obey,  though  he 
convulsed  his  victim  with  malignant  rage  and  cried 
again  with  a  loud  unearthly  voice.  The  disciples 
shared  in  the  general  amazement,  but  they  saw  clearly 
— and  our  Lord  was  thankful  that  they  realized — the 
necessity  of  a  new  apparatus  of  spiritual  equipment. 
The  weapons  of  their  warfare  would  have  to  be  spiri- 
tual, not  carnal,  or  they  would  not  be  mighty  enough  to 
pull  down  these  strongholds  or  emancipate  the  captives 
who  all  their  life-time  had  been  subject  to  bondage. 

The  scene  in  that  synagogue  gave  Peter  food  for 
profound  thought.  He  realized,  as  when  a  lightning 
flash  illumines  a  midnight  landscape,  that  there  was 
a  vast  underworld  of  evil  spirits — some  of  them  prob- 
ably fallen  angels,  and  some  wandering  stars  for  whom 
is  reserved  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever.  He 
realized  also  that  these  would  be  violently  perturbed,  if 
any  attempt  were  made  to  rescue  their  victims;  that 
they  had  had  some  previous  experience  of  the  Lord  in  a 
state  of  existence  known  only  to  them  and  Him ;  that 
they  were  constrained  to  bear  witness  to  His  superlative 
Holiness;  that  they  knew  it  must  destroy  them  when 
the  hour  was  struck  by  the  clock  of  destiny;  that, 
however  much  they  strove  against  it,  they  could  not 
resist  His  power;  and  that  their  one  delight  was  to 
deceive  and  torture  men. 

It  was  not  difficult  for  Peter  to  understand  the  effect 
produced  on  them  by  the  Lord's  Purity.  He  also 
had  cried,  only  a  few  hours  before,  "  Depart  from  me, 
for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  O  Lord.'*  But  all  his  fear  had 
passed,  since  he  had  yielded  his  will  to  obey  and  sub- 
mitted to  Christ's  undisputed  authority.     The  destruc- 


THE  FISHERMAN'S  HOME  35 

tion  which  the  demon  feared,  in  the  disciple's  case 
had  wrought  only  for  the  destruction  of  the  power  of 
sin.  The  presence  of  Jesus  for  him  and  his  brethren 
now  meant  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  Thus 
he  was  being  prepared  to  hear  the  Master  say :  "  Heal 
the  sick,  cleanse  the  lepers,  raise  the  dead,  cast  out 
demons.  .  .  .  Behold  I  give  you  power  to  tread  on 
serpents  and  scorpions,  and  over  all  the  power  of  the 
enemy,  and  nothing  shall  by  any  means  hurt  you." 

The  Second  Lesson  was  the  need  for  Gentleness 
IN  Ministry. — Peter  was  strong,  forceful,  vehement. 
His  voice  would  be  loud,  his  tread  heavy.  His  touch 
was  not  gentle  enough  for  straightening  bruised  reeds. 
A  considerable  amount  of  training  would  have  to  be 
expended  on  him  before  he  could  commend,  as  he  does 
in  his  epistles,  compassion,  piti fulness,  and  courtesy. 
It  was  necessary  for  him  to  taste  that  the  Lord  was 
gracious  and  to  become  clothed  with  that  meek  and 
quiet  spirit,  which  is  of  great  price  (i  Pet.  ii.  3; 
iii.  4,  8).  The  first  lesson  in  this  art  was  given  in  his 
own  home. 

After  the  amazing  scene  witnessed  in  the  synagogue 
the  Lord  accepted  the  invitation  of  Peter  and  Andrew 
to  come  to  the  home,  which  they  occupied  in  common, 
for  rest  and  refreshment.  James  and  John  were  in- 
cluded in  the  invitation.  Probably  some  suggestion  of 
this  had  been  made  previously,  and  the  women  of  the 
household  had  been  busily  occupied  in  preparing.  How- 
ever, when  the  guests  reached  the  door  of  the  fisher- 
men's home  Peter's  wife  was  on  the  outlook,  and  taking 
him  aside  hurriedly  whispered  that  her  mother  was 
down  with  "  a  great  fever."  She  was  lying  on  a  couch 
in  the  inner  chamber,  with  a  dangerously  high  tempera- 
ture. It  may  have  been  induced  by  her  excitement  to 
do  all  honour  to  their  Guest.  To  outward  appearance 
it  was  an  imfortunate  incident  to  occur  on  such  a  day ! 


36  A  WORLD  IN  TRAVAIL 

But  untoward  incidents,  in  the  hand  of  Christ,  become 
radiant  memories. 

"They  told  Him  of  her."  Luke  says  that  "they 
besought  Him  for  her."  But  next  to  the  marvel  of 
her  immediate  recovery,  so  that  she  was  able  to  take 
her  part  in  ministering,  they  wondered  at  the  tender 
gentleness  with  which  the  Master  touched  her  hand, 
took  her  by  the  hand,  and,  as  Peter  subsequently 
dictated  to  Mark,  raised  her  up.  How  little  he  realized 
that  in  after  years  he  would  do  the  same  for  a  lame 
man  on  the  Temple  steps,  and  for  the  beloved  Dorcas 
at  Joppa. 

The  world  needs  tenderness  as  well  as  strength. 
Probably  strength  is  never  perfected  until  it  is  tender. 
The  danger  of  modern  philanthropy  is  that  it  does 
everything  by  rule  and  measure,  in  precise  and  strict 
adherence  to  a  prescribed  code,  leaving  no  time  or 
energy  for  the  spontaneous  workings  of  Christly  tender- 
ness. It  is  needed  to  touch  the  bleared  eye  of  the  blind, 
the  seared  flesh  of  the  leper,  and  the  feverish  hand  of  a 
fever-stricken  mother.  Lives  are  blighted,  homes  are 
wrecked,  and  bright  young  hopes  withered,  for  want  of 
tenderness.  But  the  child's  hymn  addressed  to  Jesus 
as  the  tender  shepherd  is  exact  in  its  epithet.  He  takes 
the  lambs  in  His  arms  and  carries  them  in  His  bosom, 
and  gently  leads  those  that  are  with  young.  Rockmen 
must  combine  tenderness  and  strength. 

The  Third  Lesson  was  a  Glimpse  into  the 
Anguish  of  the  World. — It  had  for  long  lain  heavy 
on  the  Master's  heart,  and  was  a  constant  incentive  to 
the  forth-putting  of  the  saving  strength  of  His  right 
hand.  Nothing  less  could  sustain  His  disciples,  and 
especially  Peter,  in  all  future  trials  and  disappointments. 
It  was  therefore  arranged  that  the  fronts  should  be 
taken  off  the  households  of  this  one  city,  that  their  com- 
passion might  be  moved  by  the  vision  of  the  anguish  of 


DIVINE  PITIFULNESS  37 

a  single  community,  although  in  fair  and  prosperous 
surroundings.  All  that  were  diseased  and  possessed, 
together  with  their  agonized  friends,  were  gathered  at 
sunset  in  the  humble  street  where  Peter  lived.  He  could 
not  have  believed  that  so  vast  a  mass  of  misery  and  pain 
was  concealed  so  near  his  home;  but  it  was  easier  to 
pass  from  that  heart-breaking  spectacle  to  plumb  the 
fathomless  anguish  of  the  world.  The  veil,  which  never 
intercepts  the  view  from  God,  but  which  is  drawn  be- 
fore our  eyes  lest  life  should  be  insupportable,  was  lifted 
for  a  few  hours  on  that  Sabbath  evening  whilst  the  stars 
came  out  one  by  one  to  watch  sadly  in  heaven's  vault. 

The  world  is  not  all  bad  and  sorrowful.  Love, 
health,  family  life,  children's  laughter,  the  sweetness  of 
living,  must  be  valued  at  their  true  worth ;  but  behind 
doors  and  windows  there  is  a  heavy  makeweight  of 
pain ;  and  we  need  to  know  it,  that,  as  with  our  Lord, 
so  with  His  servants,  we  may  sigh,  as  we  look  up,  and 
say  Ephphatha. 

In  the  days  of  Esther  none  might  enter  the  Persian 
court  clothed  in  sackcloth.  That  is  where  kings  go 
wrong.  They  refuse  to  recognize  the  sorrow  and  suf- 
fering which  breed  discontent  and  revolt.  They  insist 
that  their  papers  shall  be  censored,  and  that  all  allusions 
to  the  sombre  aspects  of  life  shall  be  obliterated.  No 
over-blown  petals  on  their  lawns,  no  dead  birds  in  the 
woods,  no  lepers  on  the  streets  through  which  their 
chariot  passes.  "  Sing  songs,"  they  cry,  "  clash  cym- 
bals, on  with  the  dance,  let  mirth  be  unrestrained,  give 
us  unending  pleasures,  unsated  amusement."  So  they 
have  spoken,  but  foot  by  foot  their  throne  has  been 
compelled  to  give  place  to  the  ever-encroaching  tide. 

Not  thus  was  it  with  the  Lord.  Whether  it  was  a 
single  leper  or  a  crowd,  He  was  always  moved  with 
compassion  in  the  presence  of  human  need.  When 
Jesus  beheld  the  multitudes,  we  are  told,  He  was  moved 
with  compassion,  because  they  fainted  and  were  scat- 


38  THE  SECRET  OF  POWER 

tered  abroad.  We  must  needs  learn  this  lesson,  if  we 
would  win  souls.  The  first,  second,  and  third  pre- 
requisite for  life-work,  such  as  angels  did  for  Lot  and 
his  family  at  the  gates  of  Sodom,  is  to  be  filled  with  the 
merciful  compassion  that  filled  their  hearts.  The 
broken  heart  breaks  and  heals  hearts ! 

The  greatest  of  soul  winners  in  any  age  avowed  that 
he  travailed  in  birth  for  his  converts,  and  was  willing 
to  be  accursed  from  Christ  for  his  kinsmen  according 
to  the  flesh.  A  speculum  of  ice  may  focus  sunrays  to 
a  burning  point,  but  cold  hearts  are  not  used  of  God 
to  win  lost  souls.  He  preaches  best  who  loves  most. 
The  height  of  the  Nile  on  the  Nilometer  indicates  the 
extent  of  the  flood  over  the  arid  plains  of  Egypt  and 
the  subsequent  abundance  or  failure  of  the  harvest.  If 
we  are  content  to  labour  without  conversions,  we  need 
not  expect  any.  But  if  our  soul  breaketh  with  longing, 
or  we  can  cry  with  Rebekah,  "  Give  me  children  or  I 
die,"  the  answer  will  not  tarry  long.  Blessed  are  they 
that  hunger  and  thirst,  for  they  shall  be  satisfied.  Give 
us  Thy  tears,  O  Christ,  as  we  behold  the  city !  "  Oh 
that  mine  eyes  were  fountains  of  tears,  that  I  might 
weep  day  and  night  for  the  slain  of  the  daughter  of  my 
people ! " 

The  Fourth  Lesson  was  as  to  the  Source  of 
Power. — In  the  early  morning  the  household  sought 
for  their  beloved  and  honoured  guest,  but  the  chamber 
was  empty.  In  vain  they  searched  the  house.  Where 
was  He?  The  inquiry  and  search  become  general. 
"All  men  seek  for  Thee !  "  Perhaps  a  fisherman,  who 
had  returned  at  dawn  from  a  night's  fishing,  informed 
them  that  he  had  met  Him  on  the  path  that  led  to 
the  silent  hills  above  the  town.  Further  up  the  slope 
a  shepherd,  who  was  preparing  to  lead  his  flock  to  the 
upland  pastures,  would  indicate  the  sheltered  dimple 
of  the  hillside,  v/here  the  awe- struck  search-party  be- 


CHRIST'S  PRAYER-CLOSET  39 

held  the  Master's  kneeling  or  prostrate  form.  He 
had  risen  a  great  while  before  day  and  departed  into 
a  solitary  place,  where  He  prayed. 

He  could  cast  out  demons  and  heal  a  crowd  of  sick 
folk,  but  (speaking  after  the  manner  of  men)  he  was 
conscious  of  the  expenditure  of  spiritual  force.  "  He 
perceived  that  virtue  had  gone  out  of  Him."  His 
human  nature  required  to  be  re-charged.  Better  leave 
some  of  the  city-woe  unredressed  than  forfeit  that  re- 
charging. Peter  and  his  fellow  disciples  were  destined 
to  witness  that  spectacle  many  a  time  afterwards,  until 
one  day,  when  he  ceased  praying,  one  of  them  said: 
"  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 

Peter  never  forgot  his  Master's  prayer  habit,  and  he 
clearly  determined  to  follow  in  those  blessed  footsteps. 
Pentecost  came  to  him  and  the  rest  because  they  con- 
tinued with  one  accord  in  prayer  and  supplication. 
The  Sanhedrin  was  powerless  to  hurt  because  the  whole 
company  lifted  up  their  voice  to  God  with  one  accord. 
Prayer  opened  his  way  from  his  prison  cell  on  the  eve 
of  execution.  The  vision  of  the  Gentile  world,  cleansed 
and  sanctified,  was  given  as  he  prayed  on  the  roof  of 
the  tanner's  house. 

Brethren,  let  us  pray.  Sisters,  get  on  the  mountain- 
top  and  hold  us  up  by  your  prayers,  as  we  go  down 
into  the  valley  to  fight.  John  Wesley  tells  his  preachers 
that  their  prime  business  is  to  win  souls,  and  that  only 
through  unwearied  labour  and  perseverance  can  they 
be  free  from  the  blood  of  all  men,  and  he  ends  thus: 
"  Why  are  we  not  more  holy  ?  Why  do  we  not  live 
for  eternity  and  walk  with  God  all  the  day  long  ?  Do 
we  rise  at  four  or  five  in  the  morning  to  be  alone  with 
God  ?  Do  we  recommend  and  observe  the  five  o'clock 
hour  for  prayer  at  the  close  of  the  day  ?  Let  us  fulfil 
our  ministry." 


VI 

THE  SECOND  PRIMER 

Luke  iv.  1-13 ;  John  vi.  1-21 ;  Matthew  xiv.  22-23 

"  He  might  have  built  a  palace  at  a  word, 
Who  sometimes  had  not  where  to  lay  His  head, 
Time  was,  that  He  who  nourished  crowds  with  bread, 
Would  not  one  meal  unto  Himself  afford. 
Oh,  self-denying  love,  which  felt  alone 
For  needs  of  others — never  for  its  own! " 

— Trench. 

GOD'S  Power  in  Nature  awaits  the  use  of  any 
who  will  be  wise  and  humble  enough  to  study 
and  obey  the  necessary  conditions  of  its  opera- 
tion. The  difference  between  the  civilized  and  the 
savage  races  is  largely  that  the  former  have  learnt  to 
avail  themselves  of  the  primal  forces  that  hide  in  the 
flowing  current,  the  wind,  steam,  electricity,  or  finally 
the  ether;  whilst  the  latter  rely  entirely  on  their  agile 
or  muscular  limbs.  Machinery  is  simply  the  cunning 
contrivance  with  which  we  endeavour  to  obey  natural 
laws,  with  the  inevitable  result  that  the  force  behind 
them  shall  do  our  bidding.  And  there  is  no  respect  of 
persons.  Whatever  he  may  be,  rich  or  poor,  simple  or 
learned,  high-born  or  low-born,  the  son  of  a  pauper  or 
a  monarch,  he  who  desires  Nature's  cooperation  can 
secure  it,  if  he  is  prepared  to  pay  the  price  of  obedience 
to  her  inexorable  conditions. 

This  is  equally  true  of  the  operation  of  the  Divine 

40 


CONDITIONS  OF  SPIRITUAL  POWER    41 

Spirit.  He  is  prepared  to  cooperate  with  any  who  will 
faithfully  fulfil  His  conditions.  The  poor,  the  weak, 
the  despised,  the  nobodies  of  this  world,  can  command 
and  enjoy  the  greatest  manifestations  of  the  Divine 
energy  equally  with  the  cultured  and  refined.  A  tur- 
bine may  drive  a  small  sawmill  or  a  big  factory  of 
spindles.  Indeed,  the  simple  and  child-like  dispositions 
can  often  make  most  of  God,  because  they  are  most 
lowly  and  helpless  in  their  self-estimate.  Blessed  are 
the  poor  in  spirit,  for  they  are  rich  in  faith,  and  heirs  of 
the  Kingdom. 

It  is  therefore  very  necessary,  not  only  for  Apostles, 
but  for  us  all,  to  learn  the  conditions  on  which  spiritual 
power  operates;  and  these  are  clearly  set  forth  in  the 
threefold  temptation  through  which  our  Lord  passed 
at  the  opening  of  His  ministry.  Let  us  adopt  the  order 
of  the  Third  Gospel. 

1.  We  must  refuse  to  employ  Divine  Power  for 
selfish  uses.  Then  we  may  he  trusted  with  it  on  he- 
half  of  others,  and  God  will  see  to  our  needs. 

2.  True  Rulership  is  won,  not  hy  conflict  or  force  of 
arms,  hut  by  service,  sacrifice,  and  suffering  unto  death. 

3.  Divine  Power  is  granted,  never  for  purposes  of 
vainglory  of  ostentation,  hut  for  the  help  and  hlessing 
of  others. 

The  statement  of  these  three  principles  may  vary,  but 
their  essence  is  as  invariable  as  Newton's  law  of  motion. 
That  Peter,  the  man  of  vehement  force  and  energy, 
should  become  aware  of  them  was  especially  needful, 
because  in  after-days  he  was  to  give  witness  with  great 
spiritual  power  to  the  coming  and  glory  of  his  Master 
and  Lord.  By  an  evident  prearrangement  of  Divine 
Providence  they  were  all  compressed  into  experiences 
narrated  by  all  the  Evangelists,  but  especially  in  John  vi. 

L  Trusteeship  for  Others  depends  on  the  De- 
nial OF  Self. — At  the  given  time  and  place,  which  had 


42  CHRIST'S  BROKEN  REST 

probably  been  prearranged,  the  Apostles  gathered  back 
to  the  Master,  to  tell  Him  what  things  they  had  done 
and  taught.  They  needed  an  opportunity  to  discuss 
their  recent  experiences,  to  get  guidance  on  their  diffi- 
culties, and  to  share  their  joys.  Almost  immediately 
on  their  gathering  back  to  Him  the  news  reached  them 
that  John  the  Baptist — known,  honoured,  and  loved  by 
them  all — had  been  treacherously  murdered  by  the 
royal  command  in  the  dungeous  of  the  Castle  of  Ma- 
chserus,  on  the  edge  of  the  eastern  desert.  These 
rumours  were  confirmed  by  the  arrival  of  his  disciples, 
who  had  evidently  feared  the  worst,  had  requested,  not 
without  peril  to  themselves,  for  the  custody  of  the  be- 
loved remains,  had  buried  them,  and  now  had  come  to 
tell  Jesus.  It  was  clear  that  the  tide  of  opposition  was 
rising  against  the  new  movement.  Wisdom  suggested 
a  temporary  retirement  from  the  public  eye,  and  grief 
required  seclusion  in  order  to  recover  from  the  hurri- 
cane of  desolation.  It  had  quickly  darkened  the  entire 
outlook,  which  had  seemed  so  promising.  "And  He 
said  unto  them,  Come  ye  yourselves  apart  into  a  desert 
(i.  e.,  an  uninhabited)  place  and  rest  awhile:  for  there 
were  many  coming  and  going,  and  they  had  no  leisure 
so  much  as  to  eat." 

Entering  the  boat,  they  directed  its  course  to  the 
northeast  comer  of  the  lake,  where  the  shore  sloped 
up  from  the  beach  to  a  grassy  plain  of  considerable 
expanse,  and  this  in  turn  climbed  to  a  noble  forest  of 
oaks.  In  the  spacious  amplitude  of  that  sequestered 
spot  where  many  glades  and  glens,  where  tired  brains 
and  sad  hearts  could  be  recuperated.  The  people, 
however,  had  noticed  the  course  taken  by  the  boat, 
and,  hastening  in  a  vast  concourse  round  the  head  of 
the  lake,  presented  an  audience  which  appealed  to 
Christ  as  the  spectacle  of  a  harried  flock  of  sheep  would 
appeal  to  the  heart  of  a  true  shepherd. 

Immediately  our  Lord  subordinated  all  other  consid- 

\ 


"  HE  PLEASED  NOT  HIMSELF  "    43 

erations  to  the  necessity  of  meeting  the  infinite  need  of 
more  than  ten  thousand  people.  *'  He  was  moved  with 
compassion,  and  healed  their  sick."  ..."  He  began  to 
teach  them  many  things."  But  the  most  astounding 
experience  of  any  was  that  which  closed  the  day.  With 
five  barley-loaves  and  two  small  fishes,  which  Peter's 
brother,  Andrew,  had  discovered  in  the  wallet  of  a  small 
boy — who  with  great  pride  and  love  had  surrendered 
them,  and  whose  faith  perhaps  afforded  our  Lord  the 
human  element  which  He  always  required — Jesus  fed 
the  whole  vast  crowd.  "  They  did  all  eat,  and  were 
filled,  and  they  took  up  twelve  baskets  full  of  the  frag- 
ments and  of  the  fishes." 

Peter  and  the  rest  of  the  Apostles  must  have  been 
fairly  staggered  by  that  experience.  They  could  never 
forget  it.  Often,  in  after-days,  when  their  simple  story 
and  appeal  were  used  for  the  conversion  of  thousands, 
they  would  revert  to  this  counterpart  in  the  physical 
and  material  sphere.  At  the  moment,  however,  they 
were  confronted  by  the  extraordinary  contrast  between 
their  Master's  poverty  and  His  prodigal  hospitality. 
He  had  told  them  that  they  were  to  take  nothing  for 
their  journey,  save  a  staff  only.  What  was  the  good  of 
a  wallet,  when  there  was  no  bread  to  put  in  it  ?  They 
had  also  heard,  probably  from  His  own  lips,  the  story 
of  His  forty  days'  fast,  when  He  was  tempted  to  use 
His  power  as  the  Beloved  Son  to  turn  the  stones  of  the 
desert  into  bread.  But  evidently  all  the  time  He  had 
the  power  of  producing  bread.  Why  had  He  not  used 
it  for  His  own  need?  Why  had  He  not  given  them 
banquet  upon  banquet?  Why  did  He  sometimes  in 
the  early  morning  search  a  fig-tree  on  the  roadside  for 
a  chance  fig? 

It  seemed  a  strange  paradox,  but  the  paradox  con- 
tained at  its  heart  a  vital  truth.  God  will  trust  no  one 
with  His  power  who  will  use  it  for  his  own  satisfaction 
and  indulgence.    We  are  tested  in  the  wilderness  by 


44    NOT  THE  SWORD,  BUT  THE  CROSS 

lonely  hours,  by  long  abstinence  from  the  things  that 
others  crave  and  enjoy;  and  only  when  we  have  satis- 
factorily passed  the  test  does  God  allow  us  to  make  full 
use  of  that  power  for  the  salvation  and  enrichment  of 
others.  This  is  the  reason  for  the  wilderness  experi- 
ence, which  baffles  and  perplexes  us.  Is  God  angry 
with  us  ?  No !  Has  He  forgotten  to  be  gracious  ?  No ! 
Has  He  in  anger  shut  up  His  tender  mercies?  No! 
Why,  then,  this  desert  ?  He  is  testing  thee  before  He 
entrusts  thee  with  the  plenitude  of  His  power.  Mean- 
while angels  shall  minister  to  thee  at  the  end  of  thy 
forty  days. 

II.  RuLERSHip  DEPENDS  ON  Self-giving. — After 
the  meal  the  crowd  seems  to  have  been  swept  by  a  sud- 
den impulse  to  make  Jesus  their  leader  in  a  determined 
revolt  against  their  Roman  oppressors.  Here  was  a 
greater  than  Judas  Maccabseus !  The  movement  would 
be  eagerly  fostered  by  Judas  of  Kerioth  and  by  Simon 
the  Zealot.  They  had  been  waiting  for  this  hour,  and 
hoped  to  force  Christ's  hand.  But  He  would  have  none 
of  it.  He  had  already  fought  this  question  out  in  the 
wilderness,  when  the  devil  had  offered  Him  the  king- 
doms of  this  world  and  the  glory  of  them.  In  that  offer, 
as  our  Lord  indicated  in  His  interview  with  Pilate, 
there  was  an  implication  that  force  would  be  needed: 
"If  My  Kingdom  were  of  this  world,  then  would  My 
servants  fight."  He  swerved  not  by  a  hairbreadth  of 
deviation  from  that  great  position.  He  knew  only  too 
well  that  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  could  never  be- 
come His  by  force  of  arms,  but  at  the  price  of  agony 
and  bloody  sweat,  of  the  Cross  and  Passion,  and  of  the 
Death  on  Calvary. 

He  therefore  first  constrained  His  disciples  to  get 
into  the  boat,  and  put  forth  from  the  shore,  whilst  He 
sent  away  the  people,  with  ah  authority  that  they  could 
not  dispute.     Then,  retiring  to  the  mountain  solitudes. 


THE  SEA  HIS  PAVEMENT  45 

He  (speaking  after  the  manner  of  men)  resolved  that 
on  the  following  day  He  would  adopt  a  style  of  speech 
which  would  effecually  shatter  any  further  proposal  of 
a  carnal  and  worldly  kingdom. 

We  shall  have  a  further  opportunity  of  considering 
this  deliberate  change  in  His  policy;  it  is  enough  here 
to  note  how  exactly  the  Master  carried  out  the  original 
programme  formed  as  the  Son  of  man  on  the  threshold 
of  His  public  career.  What  significance  this  lesson  has 
for  us  all !  It  is  not  by  the  power  of  the  secular  arm, 
not  by  might  nor  by  power,  not  by  chariots  and  horse- 
men, not  by  the  warrior  host,  the  clash  of  steel,  the  vic- 
tory of  the  battle  or  the  forum,  that  the  Church  is  to 
win  her  victory ;  but  by  service  such  as  the  Moravians 
gave  to  lepers ;  by  sufferings  like  those  of  the  martyrs 
in  every  age,  not  least  in  our  own;  by  the  saciifice  of 
tears  and  blood — the  filling  up  of  that  which  is  behind 
of  the  sufferings  of  Christ — thus,  and  only  thus,  does 
the  Kingdom  come  and  is  the  Father's  will  done. 

III.  Divine  Power  must  never  be  used  for  Pur- 
poses OF  Vainglory  or  Display. — "  God  will  not  give 
His  glory  to  another."  "  That  no  flesh  should  glory 
in  His  presence."  It  is  supposed  by  some  that  our 
Lord  had  appointed  His  disciples  to  meet  Him  at  some 
well-known  part  of  the  coast,  and  that  this  made  them 
toil  so  hard  at  the  oar  when  presently  the  storm  hurled 
itself  down  upon  the  lake.  It  may  have  been  so,  but 
it  is  not  material  to  our  present  purpose.  It  is  enough 
that  He  saw  them  toiling  in  rowing,  and  about  the 
fourth  watch  of  the  night — i.  e.,  as  the  grey  dawn  began 
to  spread  through  the  stormy  scene — "  He  cometh  unto 
them,  walking  upon  the  sea."  He  used  the  water  as  the 
pavement  of  His  approach.  So  often  the  storms  that 
threaten  us  are  permitted  that  we  may  learn  to  appreci- 
ate more  truly  the  wonderful  resources  of  His  nature. 
When  we  take  a  course  which  His  finger  has  clearly  in- 


46      THE  CANKER  OF  THE  SELF-LIFE 

dicated  the  difficulties  we  encounter  do  not  prove  that 
we  are  wrong,  but  only  that  He  has  some  fresh  revela- 
tion to  make  of  Himself.  We  can  absolutely  trust  our 
Lord  to  take  all  the  risks  involved  in  our  liberal  obedi- 
ence to  His  will.    "  Storms  are  the  triumph  of  His  art." 

But  Peter  was  animated  by  the  spirit  of  adventure. 
It  was  not  in  him  to  remain  quietly  seated  with  all  the 
others  in  the  boat  till  the  Lord  entered  it.  They  might 
be  satisfied  with  that  quiescent  welcome,  but  he  felt 
that  such  an  occasion  called  for  some  special  departure 
on  his  part,  a  startling  manifestation  of  love  and  faith, 
a  conspicuous  deed  of  splendid  courage.  There  was  a 
touch  of  vainglory  and  ostentation  about  it,  of  which 
he  may  have  been  unaware,  though  the  Master  descried 
it.  When  therefore  Peter  asked  to  be  commanded  to 
come  to  Him  on  the  water,  our  Lord  simply  invited 
him  to  step  out.  He  stepped  forth,  but  his  faith  was 
imperfect,  and  he  began  to  sink. 

In  the  Lord's  grave  hour  of  temptation  it  had  been 
suggested  to  Him  that  He  should  cast  Himself  down 
from  the  Temple  portico  to  the  depths  of  the  valley, 
treading  the  air  as  Peter  now  attempted  to  tread  the 
water.  The  Tempter  had  added  the  suggestion  that 
angels  would  bear  Him  up  in  their  hands,  so  that  He 
should  alight  majestically  and  unhurt  in  the  valley  be- 
neath. He  had  refused  to  act  on  the  suggestion,  be- 
cause His  Father  had  not  so  bidden  Him.  But  there 
was  another  moment  afterwards  when  He  received 
from  the  Father  the  commandment  to  lay  down  His 
life,  to  breathe  His  soul  forth  in  death,  and  descend 
the  dark  valley  of  shadow.  As  soon  as  He  knew  this 
to  be  His  unmistakable  duty,  there  was  no  symptom  of 
hesitation ;  He  became  obedient  to  death,  even  the  death 
of  the  Cross.  And  the  everlasting  arms  of  the  Father 
bore  Him  down  in  His  descent,  that  thence  He  might 
ascend  far  above  all  heavens. 

There  might  come  times  in  after-life  when  in  like 


SINKING,  BUT  CAUGHT  47 

manner  the  clear  command  would  come  to  Peter  to 
step  out  of  the  boat  of  ordinary  experience  on  to  the 
storm- waves  of  persecution  and  martyrdom,  but  that 
hour  had  not  yet  come.  He  was  not  ripe  for  it  then, 
nor  afterwards  when  he  rehearsed  the  same  action 
with  the  same  result  in  the  hall  of  Caiaphas.  His 
motives,  which  were  now  full  of  vainglory  and  self- 
confidence,  must  become  purified  and  clear.  Then  it 
would  not  be  needful  to  await  the  command  to  step  out, 
because  his  duty  would  be  unmistakable. 

He  began  to  sink.  Though  a  good  swimmer,  he  did 
not  attempt  to  swim,  but  cried  for  help.  Immediately 
the  Lord's  hand  was  stretched  forth,  and  caught  him, 
and  they  went  together  to  the  boat.  No  rebuke  fell 
from  those  wise  and  gentle  lips,  except  the  question: 
"  Wherefore  didst  thou  douht?  "  Obviously,  one  rea- 
son for  his  failure  was  that  he  watched  the  turbulence 
of  the  elements  rather  than  the  face  and  presence  of 
his  Lord.  But  there  was  a  deeper  reason  for  the  fail- 
ure. His  faith  was  imperfect.  There  was  a  flaw  in  it. 
The  slightest  ingredient  of  self-hood  invalidates  faith's 
action,  as  Hawker's  courageous  effort  to  cross  the  At- 
lantic was  spoilt  by  the  collection  of  grains  of  silt  in  his 
filter.  If  you  cannot  avail  yourself  of  God's  promises, 
which  are  Yea  and  Amen  in  Christ,  be  absolutely  sure 
that  in  some  way  the  step  you  are  making,  and  which 
you  think  to  be  good  and  right,  is  likely  to  fail,  because, 
almost  unconsciously,  the  element  of  pride,  vainglory, 
boastfulness,  or  selfness  is  deteriorating  your  soul-life. 
Get  rid  of  it  by  the  incessant  reference  to  the  Cross. 
Mortify  your  soul-life,  with  its  weak  affections  and 
strong  desires.  Say,  with  no  bated  breath,  what  our 
Lord  said  under  similar  suggestions :  "  Get  thee  hence, 
Satan;  thou  savourest  the  things  of  men,  not  those  of 
God." 

Thus  Peter  learnt  the  third  lesson  of  his  Second 
Primer ;  and  it  was  with  the  undying  impression  of  that 


48   THE  HUMBLE  AND  CONTRITE  SPIRIT 

hour  that  he  wrote  in  after-days  the  notable  advice: 
"  Humble  yourselves  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God, 
that  He  may  exalt  you." 

"  Cleanse,  O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee,  the  thoughts  of 
our  hearts  by  the  inspiration  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit,  that 
we  may  perfectly  love  Thee,  and  worthily  magnify 
Thy  Holy  Name ! " 

"  I  have  but  Thee,  my  Father !  let  Thy  Spirit 
Be  with  me  still  to  comfort  and  uphold ; 
No  gate  of  pearl,  no  branch  of  palm  I  want. 
Nor  street  of  shining  gold." 

"Suffice  It  if — ^my  good  and  ill  unreckoned. 

And  both  forgiven  through  Thy  abounding  grace — 
I  find  myself  by  hands  familiar  beckened 
Unto  my  fitting  place." 

— Whittier. 


VII 

TO  WHOM,  IF  NOT  TO  CHRIST? 

John  vi. :  22-71 

"  I  watch  them  drift — the  youthful  aspirations ; 
Shores,  landmarks,  beacons  drift  alike! 
Yet  overhead  the  boundless  arch  of  heaven 
Still  fades  to  night,  still  blazes  into  day. 
But  Christ]  my  Christ!  Thou  wilt  not  drift  away!" 

— Kingsley  (altd.). 

WHEN  at  last  the  crowds  had  dispersed,  our 
Lord  crossed  the  greensward  to  the  edge  of 
the  mountains,  and  began  the  ascent.  His 
pulse  quickened  its  beat,  as  ours  does  when  we  climb. 
The  wild  creatures  darted  from  His  path,  not  knowing 
Him.  The  sun  descended  to  the  western  wave,  and  all 
the  land  was  hushed  and  still,  until  the  gathering  storm 
reverberated  through  the  funnels  of  the  mountains  and 
hurled  itself  on  the  lake.  Did  not  that  storm  portend 
an  even  greater  one,  which,  on  the  following  day,  was 
to  break  on  the  little  band,  who  even  then  were  fighting 
their  way  through  the  angry  water? 

A  crisis  was  upon  Him.  He  was  becoming  sur- 
rounded by  a  mixed  crowd,  who  only  desired  to  live  on 
His  bounty,  and  thought  to  exploit  Him  to  gratify  their 
wild  passions  for  independence  and  revenge.  He  must 
clearly  undeceive  them,  else  they  would  wreck  His 
great  purpose  of  redemption,  and  make  Him  the  tool 
of  a  political  party.     Immediate  steps  must  be  taken 

49 


so  THE  THINNING  AUDIENCE 

to  arrest  this  movement.  Not  a  day  could  be  lost. 
On  the  morrow  He  would  make  such  statements  of  the 
spiritual  nature  of  His  Kingdom  as  would  effectually 
quench  these  incendiary  sparks.  Therefore,  in  fellow- 
ship with  His  Father,  He  gathered  strength  to  disabuse 
His  followers  of  their  earth-bound  views.  His  mission 
was  not  to  give  meat  and  drink,  but  righteousness,  and 
peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  knew  quite  well 
how  much  it  would  cost,  but  there  was  no  alternative. 

The  following  morning,  on  the  farther  side,  witnessed 
a  renewal  of  the  excitement  of  the  preceding  evening, 
so  our  Lord  withdrew  into  the  comparative  seclusion 
of  the  synagogue,  and  delivered  that  marvellous  dis- 
course of  John  vi.,  which,  were  it  not  for  the  further 
disclosures  of  Calvary,  would  be  the  high  water-mark 
of  the  New  Testament.  And  it  changed  the  whole 
tenour  of  his  career. 

We  are  conscious  of  the  added  interest  which  char- 
acterizes the  report  of  a  speech,  when  successive  paren- 
theses record  its  reception  by  the  audience.  So  in  the 
Evangelist's  narrative  we  can  detect  the  effect  which 
our  Lord's  deeply  spiritual  words  had  on  the  crowded 
audience.  In  verse  41  they  murmured  at  Him.  In 
verse  52  they  strove  among  themselves.  In  verse  60 
many,  even  His  disciples,  confessed  aloud  that  His  say- 
ings were  hard  and  difficult  to  be  borne.  In  verse  66 
many  of  those  who  had  vowed  their  allegiance  re- 
nounced Him,  and  quietly  withdrew.  "  They  walked 
no  more  with  Him."  By  ones  and  twos,  and  then  by 
groups,  the  crowd  thinned  away.  First  in  order,  the 
hot-headed  politicians;  then  those  who  hoped  for  an- 
other meal ;  then  the  good-hearted  but  narrow-minded 
people  who  were  shocked  at  His  demand  that  they 
should  eat  His  flesh  and  drink  His  blood,  which,  even 
if  it  were  taken  spiritually,  arrogated  for  the  speaker 
the  claims  of  Deity.  Finally,  the  synagogue  was  en- 
tirely emptied,  except  for  the  little  group  of  aghast 


"TO  WHOM  SHALL  WE  GO?"  51 

Apostles  who  had  been  the  sorrowful  witnesses  of  the 
shattering  of  the  Master's  popularity  and  of  the  fabric 
of  their  private  ambitions.  It  was  then  that  He  looked 
round  on  them  and  put  the  pathetic  question,  "  Will 
ye  also  go  away  ?  "  which  drew  from  Peter  the  un- 
hesitating reply :  "  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go  ? 
Thou  hast  the  words  of  Eternal  Life,  and  we  have 
believed  and  know  that  Thou  art  the  Holy  One  of 
God." 

I.  The  Urgency  of  the  Question. — To  whom 
shall  we  go  ?  The  question  presses  on  us,  as  on  Peter. 
He  knew  something  of  the  ritualism  of  the  Pharisee 
and  the  dogmatic  negations  of  the  Sadducee,  of  the 
wild  mythologies  of  the  Greeks,  and  the  crass  material- 
ism of  the  Romans.  Perhaps  some  slight  knowledge 
of  the  mystic  speculations  of  the  Orient  had  floated  in 
on  the  shores  of  the  lake  with  the  merchandise  of  India 
or  China.  But  what  comfort  and  help  did  any  one  of 
these  various  systems,  traditions,  or  philosophies,  yield 
to  a  world  or  a  soul  weary  to  the  point  of  exhaustion 
and  sick  with  sin?  Peter  knew  that  the  soul  of  man 
must  go  somewhere.  It  must  needs  go  outside  itself 
for  living  water  and  satisfying  bread.  There  had 
awoke  within  his  soul  cravings  for  the  eternal,  the  in- 
finite, and  the  divine.  He  had  known  nothing  of  these 
in  earlier  days,  which  seemed  so  far  away,  before  the 
voice  of  the  Baptist  had  rung  out  its  clarion  appeal  and 
startled  his  slumbering  soul.  But  since  he  had  awoke 
to  the  realities  of  the  spiritual  world,  all  former  sources 
of  inspiration  and  instruction  had  failed  to  satisfy.  He 
was  henceforth  conscious  of  an  inward  cry  like  that  of 
the  Psalmist :"  My  heart  and  my  flesh  cry  out  for  the 
living  God."  That  cry,  as  Peter  knew  by  profound 
inner  experience,  could  be  answered  only  by  his  Lord. 
To  whom  else  could  he  go  ? 

To  whom  shall  we  go  at  this  time  of  world-weari- 


52      APART  FROM  CHRIST— DESPAIR  I 

ness  ?  Men  have  tried  every  system  of  human  govern- 
ment, every  phase  of  human  philosophy,  every  form  of 
religious  cult.  Like  a  restless  sleeper,  they  have  tossed 
restlessly  on  their  beds  and  beneath  their  coverlets :  but 
the  one  is  shorter  than  a  man  can  stretch  himself  on  it, 
and  the  other  narrower  than  a  man  can  wrap  himself  in 
it.  "  Many  there  be  which  say,  who  will  show  us  any 
good  ?  "  Suicide  is  said  to  be  on  the  increase.  Im- 
morality and  the  laxity  of  the  marriage  tie  suggest  the 
wane  of  love,  and  hope,  and  faith.  The  clouds  of  revo- 
lution and  searching  trial  are  hurrying  up  the  sky. 
Ancient  landmarks  are  being  swallowed  by  the  advanc- 
ing tides  of  change.  This  is  the  predicted  hour  of 
trial — "  the  hour  which  is  to  come  upon  the  whole  in- 
habited world,  to  try  them  that  dwell  upon  the  earth." 
To  whom  shall  we  go  ? 

To  whom  shall  we  go  when  our  souls  have  suddenly 
awoke  to  the  majesty  of  the  Eternal  Presences,  which 
are  hidden  by  the  glare  of  pleasure,  but  emerge  in  hours 
of  loneliness,  change,  sorrow,  and  loss? 

To  whom  shall  we  go  when  in  the  light  of  the  great 
white  throne  we  suddenly  find  that  snow-water  can 
never  cleanse  hearts  and  consciences,  on  which  sin  has 
laid  its  defiling  hand? 

To  whom  shall  we  go  when  one  by  one  the  lights 
which  we  have  trusted  die  out  in  the  sky,  and  neither 
sun  nor  stars  shine  for  many  days,  and  no  small  tem- 
pest lies  upon  the  distraught  soul,  which  hears  the 
breakers  dashing  on  an  unknown  shore? 

To  whom  shall  we  go  in  the  loneliness  of  age,  in  the 
pains  of  mortal  sickness,  in  the  hour  of  death,  in  the 
day  of  account,  amid  the  splendour  of  a  holiness  which 
angels  cannot  face,  and  a  purity  before  which  the 
heavens  are  not  clean? 

Peter  had  every  warrant  for  his  inquiry.  It  expresses 
the  agonized  cry  of  the  human,  when  the  divine  and 
eternal  have  broken  in  upon  its  insensate  stupor. 


SHUT  UP  TO  CHRIST!  53 

II.  The  Alternatives  to  Christ. — Let  us  under- 
stand clearly  what  we  want.  We  want  Life,  Eternal 
Life,  the  pulse  and  throb  within  our  systems  of  some- 
thing beyond  emotion,  affection,  intellect,  or  reason,  and 
which  shall  be  to  our  spirit  what  physical  life  is  in 
our  daily  experience.  "  'Tis  life,  of  which  our  souls 
are  scant." 

Jesus  awakens  mysterious  longings  in  our  souls. 
We  cry  and  fret,  as  a  child  that  awakes  suddenly  in  an 
empty  room  and  weeps.  Plato  said  that  these  were 
reminiscences  of  a  former  life,  when  the  soul  was  per- 
fect in  a  perfect  heaven.  Wordsworth  would  say  that 
they  are  glimpses  of  that  immortal  sea  which  brought 
us  hither.  We  are  indifferent  to  their  origin ;  we  only 
know  that  we  turn  from  the  vanities  of  the  world's 
satisfaction,  as  beasts  from  tainted  wells. 

Shall  we  go  to  the  sceptic?  He  will  deride  our  de- 
mands, as  the  phantasies  of  disordered  minds.  It  is 
as  though  one  were  to  assure  a  hungry  man  that  the 
sense  of  hunger  was  an  absurd  mistake. 

Shall  we  go  to  the  ritualist?  He  will  offer  us  rites, 
which,  though  fragrant  with  all  that  satisfies  our  sense 
of  beauty  or  gratifies  our  reverence  for  the  past,  are 
inadequate  to  quench  the  soul's  passion  for  the  living 
God  and  allay  the  fever  of  remorse. 

Shall  we  go  to  the  great  religions  of  the  East  ?  Has 
Confucius,  or  Buddha,  or  Mohammed,  or  the  ancient 
Vedas,  a  medicine  for  the  soul,  that  has  seen  in  Christ 
the  Holy  One  of  God,  and  in  whom  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
has  started  infinite  desires  for  assured  forgiveness,  for 
acceptance  with  God,  for  the  white  robes  of  purity, 
and  the  talisman  of  victory  over  inbred  corruption? 

Try  every  door !  Each  opens  on  despair ;  on  the  sea 
moaning  at  the  foot  of  the  cliffs.  You  hear  its  cease- 
less chafing,  you  can  just  descry  the  foam  of  the  re- 
morseless breakers.     But  it  is  night. 

There  is  no  satisfaction  but  in  Christ.     "  The  depth 


54         IN  ALL  THINGS  PRE-EMINENT 

saith,  It  is  not  in  me ;  and  the  sea  saith,  It  is  not  with 
me.  It  cannot  be  gotten  for  gold,  neither  shall  silver 
be  weighed  for  the  price  thereof.  It  is  hid  from  the 
eyes  of  all  living  and  kept  close  from  the  fowls  of  the 
air."  But  Jesus  said :  "  I  thank  Thee,  O  Father,  Lord 
of  heaven  and  earth,  that  Thou  didst  hide  these  things 
from  the  wise  and  understanding,  and  didst  reveal 
them  imto  babes.  Yea,  Father,  for  so  it  was  well- 
pleasing  in  Thy  sight." 

III.  The  Imperishable  Supremacy  of  Jesus. — 
His  teaching — or  "  words,"  as  Peter  put  it — are 
diametrically  opposed  to  the  bent  of  human  nature. 
They  were  opposed  to  the  Jewish  exclusiveness  on  the 
one  hand,  and  the  Gentile  culture  on  the  other,  j  But 
He  never  sought  to  gain  adherents  by  lowering  His 
claims.  He  made  no  concessions  to  the  passions  or 
prejudices  of  His  hearers.  Though  His  human  nature 
craved  for  sympathy  and  faith.  He  stood  as  a  rock 
in  unwavering  steadfastness  to  His  great  ideals.  What 
has  been  the  result?  This,  as  Napoleon  precisely 
stated  it :  "  Whilst  great  empires  created  by  human 
genius  have  sunk  in  ruins,  millions  have  died  for  Christ, 
and  millions  would  gladly  die  again."  And  what  are 
the  grounds  of  His  imperishable  supremacy  ? 

Though  All-Holy,  He  satisfactorily  deals  with  the 
grave  question  of  sin.  Sin  is  a  terrible  reality  to  the 
awakened  soul.  It  drives  the  fakir  to  horrible  self- 
torture.  It  has  covered  the  earth  in  every  age  with 
altars  and  priests.  It  has  extorted  from  the  saintliest 
books  of  bitter  confession.  It  has  been  the  energizing 
cause  of  religious  movements  that  have  moved  the 
world.  Men  have  ridiculed  its  introspections  and  ex- 
pressions as  "  the  mumps  and  measles  of  the  soul." 
They  have  sought  to  ignore  and  stifle  it.  They  have 
suggested  palliatives.  Jesus  alone  has  put  sin  away, 
has  satisfied  the  sense  of  justice  and  the  plea  for  mercy. 


TRANSCENDENT  BUT  IMMANENT      55 

and  has  supplied  from  His  Blood  and  Righteousness 
the  one  all-satisfying  answer  to  the  enquiry,  "  Can  God 
forgive  me  righteously." 

Though  Man  in  His  Incarnation,  He  communicates 
and  is  the  Bread  of  God.  Bread  furnishes  to  our 
digestions  the  influences  which  the  corn-plant  has 
absorbed  from  sun  and  earth,  from  the  kisses  of  the 
summer  and  the  dews  of  the  dawn,  from  the  mysterious 
actinic  rays  of  light  and  the  silent  brooding  of  the 
night.  Similarly,  our  Lord  brings  to  us  the  wealth  of 
the  Eternal  and  Infinite  God  in  such  a  manner  that  His 
words  of  life,  and  the  living  presence  of  the  Spirit  in 
our  hearts,  convey  to  our  receptive  natures  that  Eternal 
Life  which  was  with  the  Father  before  all  worlds,  and 
was  manifested  to  Peter  and  the  rest,  and  through 
them  to  the  world.  We  know  that  bread  nourishes  us. 
It  is  a  daily  experience.  No  amount  of  argument  or 
chemical  demonstration  could  make  us  more  sure  than 
we  are  by  habitual  practice.  So  with  our  Lord.  We 
know  and  are  sure,  because  we  have  handled,  tasted, 
and  felt. 

Though  there  is  mystery  in  His  words  which  repels 
the  superficial,  that  very  mystery  is  an  additional  reason 
for  our  faith.  They  go  away  because  they  do  not 
understand.  But  we  are  attracted  because,  though  we 
do  not  understand,  we  find  that  there  is  a  fitness  in 
the  mystery  of  our  own  profound  experience  being  met 
by  an  equal  mystery  in  Him.  A  Christ  whom  we  could 
absolutely  fathom,  measure,  diagnose,  weigh,  and 
analyze,  would  be  no  Christ  for  us.  We  are  sensible 
of  desires  for  joy  unspeakable,  peace  that  passeth  un- 
derstanding, and  love  that  passeth  knowledge ;  and  we 
find  Him  always  before  us.  Deep  calls  unto  deep. 
The  deep  of  our  nature  finds  a  response  in  the  deep  of 
His.  He  satisfies.  He  does  better  for  us  than  we  can 
ask  or  think.  For  brass  He  brings  gold,  and  for  iron 
silver,  and  for  wood  brass,  and  for  stones  iron.     He 


56  "THE  BREAD  OF  GOD" 

is  always  leading  to  fresh  fountains  of  water  of  life. 
Eye  hath  not  seen  nor  heart  conceived  what  He  has  in 
store  for  those  that  love.  Oh,  my  heart,  with  thy 
heights  and  depths,  and  insatiable  longings,  thou  hast 
found  more  than  thy  match  in  Jesus !  To  whom  else 
canst  thou  go  ? 

For  private  prayer,  it  is  an  admirable  custom  to  pass 
in  thought  through  the  spiritual  counterpart  of  the 
Tabernacle  or  Temple  of  old.  To  renew  our  consecra- 
tion at  the  Altar,  to  wash  in  the  Laver,  to  light  again 
our  love  at  the  burning  Lamps,  to  offer  our  inter- 
cessions at  the  golden  altar  of  incense — all  is  good; 
but  we  must  see  to  it  that  we  eat  of  "  the  bread  of 
God"  on  the  Table  of  Incarnation  before  we  enter 
with  boldness  into  the  Holiest  of  All  through  the  Blood 
of  Jesus. 


VIII 

•'I  GIVE  UNTO  THEE  THE  KEYS« 

Matt.  xvi.  13-20 

"A  poor  man  served  by  thee  shall  make  thee  rich; 
A  sick  man  helped  by  thee  shall  make  thee  strong; 
Thou  shalt  be  served  thyself  by  every  sense 
Of  service  which  thou  renderest." 

— B.  B.  Browning. 

FOR  two  years  and  a  half  our  Lord  had  lived 
amongst  His  Apostles.  Making  Himself  of  no 
reputation,  He  had  given  them  no  certain  clue 
to  His  dignity.  The  Prince  had  never  throv^n  aside  his 
incognito.  It  was  not  for  Him  to  blazon  forth  his  at- 
tributes, but  to  live  a  life,  the  like  of  which  had  never 
before  been  seen  by  human  eyes.  To  quote  the  words 
of  His  evangelist  and  friend,  who  more  than  any  other 
penetrated  beneath  the  Lord*s  grace  and  truth  to  their 
hidden  fountain — "  The  life  was  manifested,  and  we 
have  seen  it." 

Only  six  months  of  education  remained  before  He 
was  taken  from  them — a  period  during  which  His 
teaching  must  become  much  more  intensive;  and  as 
a  preliminary  it  was  necessary  to  ascertain  what  con- 
clusions they  had  arrived  at,  as  the  result  of  their 
observations  and  experiences.  If,  notwithstanding  His 
reticence,  they  had  discovered  His  intrinsic  glory,  **  the 
glory  of  the  Only-Begotten  of  the  Father,"  it  would 
serve  as  the  common  platform  from  which  to  ascend  to 
higher  revelations.  But  if,  on  the  contrary,  the  god  of 
this  world  had  succeeded  in  blinding  their  eyes  to  His 

57 


S8        "  WHO  IS  THIS  SON  OF  MAN  1 " 

glory  as  the  image  of  God,  it  would  be  clear  that  they 
could  not  serve  the  high  purpose  of  His  calling,  and 
that  He  must  go  elsewhere  for  the  heralds  of  His  Gos- 
pel and  the  foundation  stones  of  His  Church. 

In  order  to  secure  the  necessary  privacy  for  this  all- 
important  inquiry,  our  Lord  journeyed  to  the  extreme 
edge  of  the  northern  frontier  of  Palestine, where  Mount 
Hermon,  the  chief  Alp  of  the  Lebanon  range,  lifts  its 
mighty  mass  beyond  the  snow-line,  screening  off  the 
northern  blasts,  and  cooling  the  air,  so  that  the  dews 
of  Hermon  descended  on  the  mountains  of  Zion.  The 
Jordan  issues  from  one  of  the  cliffs  near  the  ancient 
town  of  Banias,  known  at  that  time  as  Caesarea  Phil- 
ippi — a  conjunction  of  the  names  of  the  Emperor  and 
the  local  ruling  kinglet.  There  the  little  band  found 
lodgings,  and  we  can  imagine  the  blessed  intercourse 
which  ensued  on  the  verdant  slopes  of  the  foot-hills,  or 
in  the  glens  and  glades  of  the  ancient  cedar-forests. 
These  were  the  worthy  setting  of  the  memorable  con- 
versation, which  more  than  any  of  our  Lord*s  dis- 
courses has  affected  the  life  of  Christendom. 

I.  The  Master's  Searching  Question. — "Whom 
do  men  say  that  I  the  Son  of  man  am?  "  The  answers 
were  various.  It  was  universally  acknowledged  that 
He  was  no  ordinary  man.  People  felt  that  a  Divine 
fire  was  burning  beneath  the  pure  porcelain  of  His 
nature.  But  their  views  were  as  various  as  the  speakers. 
Some,  with  Herod  at  their  head,  expressed  the  belief — 
not  without  a  shudder — that  the  Baptist  had  risen  from 
his  lonely  grave  beside  the  Castle  of  Machaerus.  Others 
said  that  Elijah,  whom  Malachi  had  taught  them  to 
expect,  had  come  to  them  in  the  "  day  of  the  Lord." 
Others  traced  a  resemblance  between  Jesus  and  one  of 
the  old  prophets.  Probably  our  Lord  was  not  specially 
disappointed  or  surprised  by  these  replies.  It  was  of 
small  importance  what  conclusions  had  been  arrived 


«  THE  SECRET  OF  THE  LORD  "  59 

at  in  the  Court  of  Public  Opinion.  He  knew  what 
was  in  man;  and  these  inquiries  were  only  intended 
to  lead  up  to  the  second  and  all-important  question: 
"  But  whom  say  ye  that  I  am  ?  " 

Speaking  after  the  manner  of  men,  his  heart  must 
have  stood  still  for  the  reply.  And  it  came  instantly, 
emphatically,  and  decisively  from  the  lips  of  Peter, 
always  the  spokesman  for  the  rest :  "  Thou  art  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God."  This  was  a  great 
advance  on  the  earlier  confession  of  John  vi,  as  it  ap- 
pears in  the  Revised  Version.  In  a  most  significant 
manner  it  combined  the  hope  of  the  Jew  for  the 
Anointed  One,  with  the  recognition  of  the  unique  and 
essential  nature  of  our  Lord,  as  the  Only-begotten  of 
the  Eternal  God.  It  filled  the  heart  of  Jesus  with 
ecstasy.  The  bluff  fisherman  had  been  taught  the 
secret  of  the  mystery  which  in  other  ages  had  not  been 
made  known  unto  the  sons  of  men,  as  it  was  now  to  be 
revealed  to  the  holy  Apostles  and  Prophets  by  the 
Spirit.  "  Blessed  art  thou,  Simon  Bar-Jona  (son  of 
Jonas  or  John),  for  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it 
unto  thee,  but  My  Father  which  is  in  heaven." 

These  words  sometimes  make  us  wistful.  Oh  for 
these  flashes  of  spiritual  intuition !  Oh  for  this  insight 
into  the  Divine  mysteries !  Oh  to  know  even  as  we  are 
known !  Hush,  soul !  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  still 
with  them  that  fear  Him."  The  Spirit  of  the  Father 
still  speaks  in  human  hearts  in  gentle  whispers,  as  once 
in  Horeb's  cave.  "  It  is  written  in  the  Prophets,  And 
they  shall  be  all  taught  of  God."  Every  man  there- 
fore that  Cometh  unto  Christ  hath  heard  and  hath 
learned  of  the  Father.  Even  we  may  receive,  not  the 
spirit  of  this  world,  but  the  Spirit  which  is  of  God, 
that  we  may  know  "  the  deep  things  of  God." 

II.  The  Foundation  of  the  Church. — Then  for 
the  first  time  our  Lord  spoke  of  His  Church.     Notice 


6o  "  THE  GATES  OF  HADES  " 

the  strong  possessive  pronoun  My.  As  yet  the  Qiurch 
— one,.undivided,  and  hidden — existed  only  in  the  coun- 
cils of  eternity.  The  future  tense,  "  I  will  build/' 
makes  it  clear  that  as  Eve  was  builded  out  of  Adam 
whilst  he  slept,  so  the  Church  was  presently  to  be  built 
from  the  death-wound,  and  the  sepulchre  entombment 
of  Emmanuel.  And  it  was  destined  to  be  His  bride, 
His  body,  His  fulfilment,  through  which  He  could 
manifest  the  complete  glory  of  His  nature.  My  Church ! 
From  eternity  Christ  loved  her.  By  His  blood  He  re- 
deemed her.  Through  His  Spirit  and  by  His  Word 
He  is  cleansing  her ;  and  one  day  He  will  present  her  to 
Himself  a  glorious  Church,  "  having  neither  spot,  nor 
wrinkle,  nor  any  such  thing."  As  the  good  steward, 
Eliezer,  brought  Isaac's  bride  from  a  far  country,  so 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  completing  the  Church  in  these  last 
days,  and  preparing  her  to  be  for  ever  with  the 
Lord. 

The  Church  is  the  special  object  of  hatred  to  the 
dark  underworld  of  fallen  spirits,  whom  our  Lord  re- 
fers to  as  "  the  gates  of  Hades."  Hades  is  the  nether 
unseen  world,  the  abode  of  the  wicked  spirits  that  rule 
the  darkness  of  this  world,  under  the  leadership  of 
"  the  Prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,"  who  rules  in  the 
hearts  of  the  disobedient.  The  gate,  in  Oriental  thought 
and  speech,  was  the  place  for  council,  judgment,  the 
connivance  of  stratagems  and  the  mustering  of  hostile 
forces.  Our  Lord  clearly  anticipated  the  long  and 
weary  conflict  that  would  be  inaugurated  against  His 
Church.  "And  the  dragon  was  wroth  with  the  woman, 
and  went  to  make  war  with  the  remnant  of  her  seed, 
which  keep  the  commandments  of  God,  and  have  the 
testimony  of  Jesus  Christ."  Yes,  and  the  Church  can 
only  overcome  *'by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,"  and  by 
"  the  word  of  her  testimony."  Her  children  love  not 
their  lives  unto  the  death ! 

Long  and  sore  the  conflict  may  be,  but  the  issue  is. 


BED-ROCK  6l 

not  doubtful.  "  They  shall  not  prevail/'  "  The  Lamb 
shall  overcome,  for  He  is  Lord  of  lords,  and  King  of 
kings,  and  they  that  are  with  Him  are  called,  and 
chosen,  and  faithful."  There  shall  break  ere  long  on 
the  ear  of  a  startled  world  the  voice  of  a  great  multi- 
tude, which  in  the  distance  shall  sound  like  the  voice  of 
waves  breaking  on  the  shore  in  a  summer  night,  but 
nearer  their  words  of  victory  shall  be  distinctly  audible, 
as  they  announce — first,  that  the  Church  has  emerged 
victorious ;  and,  second,  that  the  Marriage  of  the  Lamb 
has  come,  and  His  Bride  has  made  herself  ready.  The 
secret  of  the  Church's  prevalence  over  her  foes  consists 
in  her  foundation  doctrine.  Shall  we  not  rather  say, 
her  foundation  factf  Not  the  personality  of  an  im- 
pulsive and  fallible  man,  who  within  a  few  moments 
was  to  incur  the  sharpest  rebuke  ever  administered  by 
those  gentle  lips ;  but  the  Deity  of  our  Lord,  as  "  the 
Son  of  the  ever-living  God."  The  Greek  phrasing  of 
our  Lord's  reply  leaves  no  doubt  as  to  His  meaning. 
Two  Greek  words  are  here.  Petros,  Simon's  new  name, 
signifying  in  Greek,  as  Cephas  did  in  Syriac,  a  stone,  or 
bit  of  rock,  broken  or  hewn  from  its  parent  bed;  and 
Petra,  the  Rock-bed  itself.  Our  Lord  carefully  makes 
the  distinction.  If  He  had  intended  Peter  to  be  the 
foundation  of  the  Church,  He  would  naturally  have 
shaped  His  sentence  thus :  "  Thou  art  Peter,  and  on 
thee  I  will  build  My  Church."  But  carefully  selecting 
His  words.  He  said :  "  Thou  art  Peter,  a  stone,  a  frag- 
ment of  rock,  who  under  the  power  of  God's  Spirit  hast 
spoken  with  strength  and  certainty ;  but  I  cannot  build 
on  thee,  for  the  foundation  of  My  Church  I  must  turn 
from  Petros  to  Petra,  from  a  fragment  to  the  great 
truth,  which  for  the  moment  has  inspired  thee.  The 
truth  of  My  eternal  relationship  to  the  Father  is  the 
only  foundation,  against  which  the  waves  of  demon 
and  human  hatred  will  break  in  vain.  No  stone  shall 
give.     No  bastion  shall  even  rock." 


62      THE  OPENING  OF  PRISON-DOORS 

III.  The  Gift  of  the  Keys. — It  must  be  carefully 
noted  that  our  Lord  used  the  same  words  which  He 
addressed  to  Peter  also  to  individual  believers  in 
Matt.;xviii.  i8,  and  again  to  His  assembled  Apostles 
and  others  who  were  gathered  with  them  in  the  Upper 
Room  on  the  evening  of  the  Resurrection  Day.  See 
Luke  xxiv.  33,  and  John  xx.  22  and  23. 

In  the  light  afforded  by  these  references  we  may 
extend  the  significance  of  this  gift  of  the  keys  to  in- 
clude all  who  live  and  act  in  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  If  we  have  received  that  blessed  gift  of  the 
Comforter,  as  they  did  on  whom  the  Master  breathed 
that  Easter  evening,  we  also  may  wield  the  power  of 
the  keys.  Not  ours  the  prerogative  of  the  Apostles, 
but  only  the  humble  distinction  of  having  walked  to 
Emmaus,  first  with  broken  and  then  with  burning 
hearts ;  yet  even  such  may,  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit, 
be  entrusted  with  keys  that  shall  open  closed  doors,  and 
emancipate  prisoners  from  their  cells. 

Here,  for  instance,  is  a  broken-hearted  penitent  who 
thinks  that  her  sin  is  too  great  to  be  forgiven,  and 
some  Christian  sister  takes  as  her  key  our  Lord's  words 
to  such  in  Luke  vii.  or  John  viii.,  and  instantly  a  door 
is  opened  by  which  she  passes  into  the  Peace  of  God. 

Again,  there  may  be  a  man  who  thinks  that  he  is 
guilty  of  the  unpardonable  sin,  and  a  scribe,  who 
is  well  instructed  in  the  mysteries  of  the  Kingdom, 
takes  as  his  key  the  words  spoken  by  our  Lord  under 
similar  circumstances :  "All  sins  shall  be  forgiven  unto 
the  sons  of  men  " ;  and  making  a  distinction  between 
sins  and  the  condition  of  absolute  deadness  and  insensi- 
bility into  which  men  may  drift,  when  they  have  killed 
their  conscience,  so  that  it  no  more  remonstrates  or 
pleads,  he  opens  the  door  into  the  liberty  of  the  sons 
of  God. 

Again,  there  may  be  the  case  of  a  morbid  and  un- 
healthy conscience,  which  is  bound  by  scruples  and 


THE  QUEST  OF  THE  HOLY  GRAIL     63 

tormented  by  questions,  and  you  may  take  as  your  key 
Col.  ii.,  or  Gal.  iii.  and  iv.,  and  instantly  the  wards  of 
the  prison  lock  yield,  the  door  opens,  and  the  captive, 
like  Peter  touched  by  the  Angel,  passes  through  the 
gate  that  leads  out  into  the  City  of  the  Firstborn. 

This  is  the  secret  of  the  quest  of  the  blessed  life. 
Go  through  the  world  opening  prison-doors,  lifting 
heavy  burdens,  giving  light,  and  joy,  and  peace  to 
the  oppressed,  proclaiming  the  Lord's  Jubilee  year. 
Shut  doors  opening  out  on  the  dark  waters  of  despair. 
Unlock  and  open  those  that  face  towards  the  sunrise. 
For  this  is  work  that  angels  might  envy.  "  Receive 
ye  the  Holy  Ghost." 

The  Knights  of  Arthur's  Table  rode  forth  into  the 
wild  wastes  of  the  Kingdom  of  the  Beast,  intent  on 
righting  wrong,  and  succouring  the  oppressed.  Never 
a  day  without  its  gallant  deed.  We,  too,  are  dedicated 
to  similar  enterprise.  Let  us  not  hold  back  lest  we 
miss  the  vision  of  the  Holy  Grail !  We,  too,  possess 
the  Sword  of  the  Spirit  and  the  Keys  of  the  Kingdom ! 
We,  too,  may  catch  a  glimpse  of  the  holy  cup  of 
sacrifice ! 


IX 

**WITH  HIM  ON  THE  HOLY  MOUNT** 
Matt.  xvii.  1-9;  2  Pet.  i.  16-18 

"  If  ever  on  the  mount  with  THee 
I  seem  to  soar  in  vision  bright, 
With  thoughts  of  coming  agony, 

Stay  Thou  the  too  presumptuous  flight. 
Gently  along  the  vale  of  tears 

Lead  me  from  Hermon's  sunbright  steep, 
I<et  me  not  grudge  a  few  short  years 
With  Thee  toward  Heaven  to  work  and  weep." 

—Keble, 

ON  the  afternoon  of  the  last  day  of  our  Lord's 
sojourn  at  Caesarea  Philippi  He  proposed  to 
His  three  chief  Apostles  that  they  should  ac- 
company Him  for  a  season  of  retirement  to  the  upper 
slopes  of  Hermon.  Little  realizing  v^hat  av^aited  them, 
they  readily  consented,  and  accompanied  Him  to  a 
scene  which  left  an  ineffaceable  impression.  In  his 
last  days  Peter  referred  to  it  as  affording  the  outstand- 
ing evidence  of  his  Master's  Divine  nature  and  mission. 
For  him  it  was  "  the  Holy  Mount,"  where  he  and  the 
others  had  been  eye-witnesses  of  Christ's  majesty, 
when  He  received  from  the  Father  honour  and  glory. 
There  could  be  no  doubt  about  it.  They  had  not  fol- 
lowed nor  promulgated  cimningly  devised  fables ! 

I.    The  Accessories  of  the  Transfiguration. — 
The  place  was  clearly  Mount  Hermon.    The  previous 

64 


MOUNTAIN  ALTARS  65 

days  had  been  spent  at  its  foot.  Mount  Tabor,  which 
formerly  was  supposed  to  have  been  the  chosen  spot 
for  this  sublime  spectacle,  was  at  that  time  (so  later 
investigation  has  proved)  the  site  of  a  Roman  fort  and 
garrison,  which  would  have  been  totally  incongruous 
with  the  mystic  beauty  of  heavenly  glory.  And  the 
vivid  comparison,  in  Peter's  special  Gospel  of  Mark, 
between  the  Master's  appearance  and  the  snow,  is  an 
additional  confirmation  that  Mount  Hermon's  snow- 
capped heights  were  in  his  thought.  Here  only  in 
Palestine  is  there  the  permanent  presence  of  snow. 

The  time  was  almost  certainly  the  night.  Our  Lord 
was  accustomed  to  spend  nights  on  the  mountains, 
which  are  the  natural  altars  of  the  world.  The  over- 
powering sleep  that  mastered  the  Apostles,  until  the 
Transfiguration  Glory  was  on  the  point  of  passing,  also 
suggests  the  night  season.  This  conclusion  is  further 
corroborated  by  the  fact,  as  we  are  expressly  told,  that 
it  was  "  the  next  day  "  when  they  came  down  from  the 
hill  and  met  the  excited  crowd,  which  had  been  at- 
tracted by  the  poor  demon-possessed  boy  and  his  de- 
mented parents.  We  need  not  dwell  on  the  enhanced 
beauty  which  is  shed  on  the  entire  narrative  by  the 
reflection  that  the  background  of  the  night  afforded 
additional  beauty  and  lustre  to  the  radiant  glory  which 
enwrapt  the  Person  and  garments  of  the  Lord. 

It  is  noticeable  that  the  glory  passed  on  Him  as  He 
prayed.  In  the  case  of  Moses  the  glory  of  his  face  was 
due  to  its  absorption  of  the  Eternal  Light  on  which  he 
gazed.  It  was  a  giving  back  of  what  had  been  received. 
There  are  diamonds  which,  after  being  held  in  the 
sparkle  of  the  sun,  will  continue  to  coruscate  long  after 
they  have  been  transferred  to  a  darkened  chamber. 
Moses  had  spent  forty  days  and  nights  in  God's  pres- 
ence-chamber, and  the  light  before  which  Israel  shrank 
away  was  the  immediate  result  of  that  memorable  inter- 
view.   As  he  beheld  he  was  changed  into  the  same 


66  HEAVEN-SENT  COMFORTERS 

image.  But  in  the  case  of  our  Lord  the  glory  which 
the  disciples  beheld — which  streamed  through  His  gar- 
ments, so  that  His  ordinary  dress  became  shining,  ex- 
ceeding white  as  snow,  so  as  no  fuller  on  earth  could 
whiten — was  the  raying  forth  from  within  of  the  glory 
of  the  Only-begotten  of  the  Father.  It  is  not  improbable 
that,  whenever  He  was  alone  on  the  mountain  heights 
in  fellowship  with  His  Father,  He  laid  aside  His 
shrouding  disguise,  and  the  same  phenomenon  recurred, 
though  there  were  no  eye-witnesses  to  chronicle  it. 

In  this  connection  let  us  heed  the  earnest  beseeching 
admonition  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  who  had  only  heard 
of  the  Transfiguration  during  his  memorable  fortnight 
spent,  years  after,  with  Peter.  Let  us  be  transfigured 
by  the  renewing  of  our  minds;  then,  as  we  present 
our  bodies  as  a  holy  and  living  sacrifice  to  God,  they 
also  shall  be  transfigured — the  light  shall  shine  from 
within  and  prove  what  is  the  good  and  acceptable  and 
perfect  will  of  God. 

The  appearance  of  Moses  and  Elijah  added  greatly 
to  the  impressiveness  of  the  spectacle.  They  were  the 
representative  leaders  of  the  Hebrew  Theocracy. 
Moses  was  the  embodiment  of  the  Law,  Elijah  of  the 
Prophets.  In  both  cases  the  circumstances  of  their  re- 
moval from  the  scenes  of  earthly  ministry  had  been 
remarkable.  Moses  had  died  on  the  lonely  heights  of 
Pisgah  beneath  God's  kiss,  and  was  buried  by  His 
hands  in  an  unknown  grave.  Elijah  had  gone  home  in 
a  chariot  of  fire,  sent  for  his  convoy.  But  these  won- 
ders did  not  account  for  their  advent,  which  was  due  to 
the  special  encouragement  which  they  were  able  to 
afford  the  Redeemer  at  this  great  crisis. 

Only  a  few  days  before  our  Lord  had  unfolded,  with 
graphic  minuteness,  the  scenes  of  His  approaching 
death.  Immediately  Peter,  speaking  for  the  rest,  had 
sought  to  dissuade  Him.  "  Spare  Thyself,"  he  said ; 
"  this  shall  not  be  for  Thee."     They  were  not  able  to 


OUR  SAVIOUR'S  EXODUS  67 

understand  or  sympathize.  Love,  doubtless,  and  pas- 
sionate devotion  inspired  this  impulsive  soul  in  taking 
on  himself  to  rebuke  his  Lord.  But,  as  on  the  Mount 
afterwards,  so  then,  he  knew  not  what  he  said.  It  was 
necessary,  therefore,  that  redeemed  humanity  should 
furnish  two  of  its  strongest  and  noblest  ambassadors 
to  reinforce  and  strengthen  our  Lord,  upon  the  human 
side,  ere  He  set  His  face  steadfastly  to  go  up  to  Jeru- 
salem to  die.  He  was  acting  on  the  agreement  of  the 
Eternal  Council-chamber,  and  pursuing  the  course 
marked  out  before  the  foundation  of  the  world;  but, 
as  in  the  glades  of  Gethsemane  an  angel  was  sent  to 
strengthen  His  human  nature,  so  now  Moses  and 
Elijah  were  the  chosen  emissaries  of  the  Eternal 
World,  who  stood  on  His  right  and  left,  assuring  Him 
of  the  Father's  sustaining  help,  and  of  the  glory  which 
must  accrue  when  the  bitterness  of  death  had  passed. 

II.  The  Theme  of  the  Celestial  Visitants. — 
"  They  spake  of  the  decease  which  He  was  to  accom- 
plish at  Jerusalem."  The  Greek  word  is  "  exodus  " — 
a  term  which  struck  Peter's  imagination.  In  after 
years  he  employed  it  of  his  own  death.  "  I  must  put 
off  this  tabernacle,"  he  said,  "  even  as  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  hath  showed  me;  but  I  will  endeavour  after 
my  exodus  that  you  may  have  these  things  always  in 
remembrance." 

It  must  have  been  a  very  startling  rebuke  to  Peter 
and  his  companions.  To  them  the  death  of  the  Cross 
seemed  as  unthinkable  as  it  appeared  unnecessary. 
Certainly  He  who  had  saved  others  could  save  Himself 
from  such  incredible  shame  and  torture!  Surely  it 
must  never  take  place!  Neither  God  nor  man  could 
suffer  it !  Their  Lord  might  have  incurred  the  hatred 
of  their  religious  leaders,  but  there  need  be  no  collision 
between  Him  and  the  Roman  authorities,  and  these 
alone  could  impose  death  by  crucifixion. 


68  MOSES  AND  ELIJAH 

But  now,  to  their  surprise,  they  discovered  that 
Heaven  could  speak  of  nothing  else !  It  was  appar- 
ently the  one  subject  about  which  Moses  and  Elijah 
cared  to  speak.  Whatever  their  differences  in  charac- 
ter and  function,  they  were  in  absolute  agreement  on 
this  all-absorbing  topic.  As  soon  as  the  opportunity 
offered  of  intercourse  with  Jesus,  they  fell  to  talking 
on  it.  It  was  the  absorbing  theme  that  engrossed  the 
innumerable  company  of  angels  and  the  spirits  of  just 
men  made  perfect.  The  songs  of  the  celestial  harpers 
were  set  to  this  key-note,  and  the  angels  were  bending 
over  the  mystery  of  a  world's  redemption,  as  their 
Lord  drew  nearer  to  paying  its  price,  not  with  silver 
and  gold,  but  with  precious  blood,  as  of  a  lamb  without 
blemish  and  without  spot.  He  had  been  fore-ordained 
before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  but  was  now  about 
to  manifest  the  uttermost  of  Divine  Love,  in  the  last 
times  of  the  Hebrew  dispensation. 

Moses  would  speak  of  the  Passover  Lamb,  the  slay- 
ing of  which  preceded  the  Exodus  by  which  his  people 
passed  to  liberty,  and  would  assure  our  Lord  that  His 
death  would  mean  emancipation  and  victory,  when — 
on  the  shores  of  the  sea  of  glass,  its  placid  waters  red 
with  the  mingled  fire  of  the  Eternal  Sunrise — the 
ransomed  hosts  of  the  redeemed  would  sing  the  song 
of  Moses  and  the  Lamb. 

Elijah  would  remind  Him  that  the  spirit  of  prophecy 
was  the  testimony  of  Jesus,  and  that  it  was  written  in 
the  Prophets  and  the  Psalms  that  the  Christ  should 
suffer  and  should  enter  into  His  Glory.  He  would 
specially  quote  Isa.  liii.,  that  He  should  see  of  the 
travail  of  His  soul  and  be  satisfied,  and  that  by  His 
knowledge  He  should  justify  untold  myriads. 

Moses  would  testify  that  each  victim  which  had 
bled  on  the  altars  of  Israel  had  no  intrinsic  virtue  to 
put  away  sin;  and  that  if  He  were  now  to  fail, 
all  their  suffering  would  be   abortive,   and  that  the 


«  WORTHY  IS  THE  LAMB !  "  69 

redemption  which  the  saints  were  already  enjoying 
must  be  revoked. 

Elijah  would  assure  Him  that  on  the  other  side  of 
the  Jordan  of  death,  the  strong  waters  of  which  He 
would  cleave  as  He  passed,  the  chariot  of  the  Ascension 
cloud  awaited  Him.  He  might  have  said :  **  By  death 
Thou  wilt  abolish  death.  Thou  wilt  rob  death  of  its 
sting  and  the  grave  of  its  victory.  Thou  wilt  bring 
Life  and  Immortality  to  light.  The  waters  of  Jordan 
will  be  cut  off  for  ever,  and  all  Thy  redeemed  shall 
pass  over  on  dry  land." 

Clearly,  the  death  of  the  Cross,  which  our  Lord  saw 
awaiting  Him  on  the  sky-line,  is  the  theme  of  Eternity. 
At  first  the  holy  beings  celebrated  in  ceaseless  chant 
the  story  of  Creation :  "  Worthy  art  Thou,  our  Lord 
and  our.  God,  to  receive  glory  and  honour  and  power, 
for  Thou  didst  create  all  things."  But  this  was  latterly 
exchanged  for  the  yet  more  jubilant  outburst: 
"  Worthy  is  the  Lamb."  He  was  the  Lamb  slain  be- 
fore the  foundation  of  the  world.  The  effect  of  His 
death  was  destined  to  be  felt,  not  only  on  earth,  but  in 
reconciling  things  in  the  heavens.  Every  created  thing 
which  was  in  heaven  and  on  the  earth  and  under  the 
earth,  and  on  the  sea,  and  all  things  that  were  in  them, 
were  to  be  affected  by  it,  and  probably  brought  nearer 
the  heart  of  God.  Because  He  would  become  obedient 
to  the  death  of  the  Cross,  every  knee  would  bow  to 
Him,  and  every  tongue  confess  that  He  was  Lord,  to 
the  glory  of  God  the  Father.  He  would  obtain  the 
Name  that  was  above  every  name ;  would  put  down  all 
rule,  authority,  and  power;  and  would  win  the  subjec- 
tion of  all  things  to  Himself,  preparatory  to  handing  all 
to  the  Father,  that  He  might  be  All  in  all!  Can  we 
wonder  at  the  intense  interest  with  which  the  great 
cloud  of  witnesses  watched  the  Saviour,  as  (so  to 
speak)  He  stepped  into  the  stadium  to  run  the  last  lap 
in  the  great  race,  to  fight  the  last  fight  in  the  stupendous 


70  THE  SHEKINAH  CLOUD 

struggle?  The  battlements  of  the  Holy  City  were 
crowded  with  awestruck  crowds,  until  the  Ascension 
hour  called  them  to  follow  in  the  glad  procession  of  the 
Victor.  Without  controversy,  great  is  the  mystery  of 
Godliness.  He  was  manifest  in  the  flesh,  justified  in 
the  Spirit,  seen  of  angels,  preached  among  the  Gentiles, 
believed  on  in  the  world,  received  up  into  glory. 

HI.  The  Enfolding  Cloud. — Peter  had  made  a 
suggestion,  which  was  as  ill-considered  as  it  was  hasty. 
In  his  account  of  this  scene,  communicated  through 
Mark,  he  admits  that  he  knew  not  what  he  was  saying. 
It  was  a  preposterous  suggestion,  which  at  least  would 
make  the  Crucifixion  impossible,  that  our  Lord  should 
disregard  the  claims  of  a  lost  world,  and  spend  His 
remaining  years  in  a  tabernacle  on  the  mountain-side. 
According  to  Peter,  Moses  and  Elijah  were  also  to  be 
detained  from  their  blessed  residence  and  ministry  in 
the  Upper  Sanctuary.  To  think  of  these  six  living  in 
rapturous  fellowship  on  a  high  mountain-top,  instead 
of  coping  with  such  scenes  as  that  which  awaited  at 
the  mountain-foot !  Peter  had  much  to  learn  and  far 
to  travel  ere  he  could  write:  "  Who  His  own  self  bare 
our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree,  that  we,  being 
dead  to  sins,  might  live  unto  righteousness;  by  whose 
stripes  ye  were  healed." 

Whilst  he  was  speaking  thus  he  and  his  fellow 
Apostles  beheld  a  cloud  descending,  which  enveloped 
the  radiant  vision.  They  feared  as  they  saw  their  Mas- 
ter and  His  celestial  visitants  cut  off  from  them  and 
hidden  in  the  brightness  of  that  mist  of  glory.  "  Be- 
hold a  bright  cloud  overshadowed  them."  It  was  no 
ordinary  cloud,  but  was  probably  the  Shekinah-cloud 
that  led  the  wilderness  march,  that  filled  Solomon's 
Temple  on  its  dedication,  and  that  formed  the  Lord's 
Ascension  Chariot.  From  its  heart  the  voice  of  the 
Eternal  God  was  heard,  bearing  sublime  witness  to  the 


«  INSTEAD  OF  THE  JOY ! "  j\ 

Saviour  as  the  Beloved  Son,  and  demanding  homage 
from  all.  That  voice  was  heard  by  the  three  awe- 
struck Apostles,  and  surely  their  solemn  attestation  to 
this  remarkable  testimony  is  full  of  re-assurance  and 
confirmation. 

What  might  have  been!  As  the  sinless  Man,  the 
Second  Adam  need  not  have  died.  Had  the  first  Adam 
not  sinned,  he  would  probably  have  passed  to  God,  as 
those  will  who  are  alive  and  remain  to  the  Coming  of 
the  Lord.  So  with  Christ,  the  sinless  Man.  His  mor- 
tality might  have  been  swallowed  up  of  life.  He  need 
not  have  been  unclothed,  but  clothed  upon.  In  a  mo- 
ment, in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  He  might  have  passed 
with  Moses  and  Elijah,  through  the  open  door  of  Para- 
dise, to  become  the  Patron,  though  not  the  Redeemer, 
of  our  race.  Such  a  translation  might  have  been  pos- 
sible; but  if,  at  any  moment,  it  was  presented  to  His 
mind,  He  thrust  it  away,  as  He  did  when  Peter  sug- 
gested it,  with,  "  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan,  thou 
savourest  the  things  of  men."  For  the  joy  that  was 
set  before  Him — or  instead  of  the  joy  set  before  Him 
— He  turned  his  back  on  Paradise  for  Himself,  that 
He  might  open  Paradise  for  the  dying  thief  and  for  us. 
And  when  the  cloud  had  passed.  He  was  left  alone 
with  His  Apostles,  and  took  the  straight  road  to  Cal- 
vary. In  the  words  of  Isaiah,  He  set  His  face  like  a 
flint,  and  we  know  that  He  has  not  been  ashamed ! 


X 

"FOR  ME  AND  THEE" 
Matt.  xvii.  24-27 

•  Away  despair !  my  gracious  Lord  doth  hear. 
Though  winds  and  waves  assault  my  keel, 
He  doth  preserve  it ;  He  doth  steer, 

Ev'n  when  the  boat  seems  most  to  reel. 
Storms  are  the  triumph  of  His  art; 
Well  may  He  close  His  eyes,  but  not  His  heart" 

— Herbert. 

THE  Master  was  on  His  way  ascending  to 
Jerusalem.  Already  fifty  miles  from  Her- 
mon  had  been  traversed  on  this  southward 
journey;  and  Capernaum,  with  Peter's  home  as  the 
rest-house,  offered  a  convenient  halting-place.  But 
evidently  its  inhabitants  were  animated  by  a  very  dif- 
ferent spirit  from  that  of  the  earlier  days  of  His 
blessed  ministry.  The  streets  were  no  longer  crowded 
by  sick  folk  waiting  for  His  healing  touch ;  nor  was  the 
synagogue  open  to  His  ministry.  The  seeds  of  jeal- 
ousy and  suspicion  which  the  Pharisees  had  sown  with 
such  lavish  eagerness  had  produced  a  harvest  of  tares. 
The  atmosphere  was  laden  with  the  blight  of  mistrust. 
Faces  were  averted  that  used  to  smile. 

One  symptom  of  this  changed  attitude  presented  it- 
self almost  immediately  on  His  arrival.  The  collectors 
of  the  Temple  tax,  which  was  a  voluntary  levy  on  all 
Jews,  encountered  Peter  with  the  challenge,  "Doth 
not  your  Master  pay  the  half-shekel  ?  "    This  tax  was 

72 


THE  TRIBUTE  MONEY  73 

of  very  ancient  origin,  dating  from  the  days  of  Moses, 
and  supplied  the  funds  required  for  the  maintenance 
of  the  Temple  services.  It  was  a  voluntary  tax,  and 
must  therefore  be  distinguished  from  the  Roman  taxes, 
which  were  obligatory  on  Jew  and  Gentile  alike.  Re- 
ligious teachers,  such  as  Rabbis,  were  exempted  from 
the  payment  of  the  Temple  tax  by  general  consent ;  and 
the  universal  respect  which  was  paid  our  Lord  in  the 
earlier  days  of  His  ministry  gave  Him  complete  im- 
munity from  any  question  as  to  His  liability  to  pay  it. 
But  now  that  He  had  lost  caste  and  was  being  hunted 
down  by  Herod  and  the  rulers,  Peter,  as  His  repre- 
sentative, was  accosted  with  a  challenge  which  proved 
that  the  cordon  of  respect  and  reverence  which  had 
formerly  surrounded  Him  was  broken  down.  There 
may  have  been  a  further  insinuation  that  the  Lord  had 
veered  over  to  the  Sadducee  party,  who  were  extremely 
lax  about  the  whole  matter. 

Peter  said  at  once  that  his  Master  would  certainly 
pay  the  tribute;  but  when  he  reached  the  home  he 
learnt  that  Jesus  knew  all  about  the  demand,  for  he 
was  anticipated  in  his  story  by  the  question  whether  it 
was  customary  for  kings  to  demand  tribute  from  their 
sons.  Surely  the  hasty  promise  that  the  tribute  should 
be  paid  was  incompatible  with  the  confession  of  only  a 
few  days  before — "  the  Son  of  the  living  God." 

This  brief  conversation  made  it  clear  that  our  Lord 
had  noticed  the  change  in  the  treatment  that  He  might 
henceforth  expect ;  but  He  had  no  intention  of  stand- 
ing on  His  rights.  Since  no  principle  was  involved, 
He  would  not  contest  the  demand.  What  course  should 
be  adopted  must  be  settled  not  in  the  high  court  of 
conscience,  but  the  lower  one  of  expediency,  and  by 
the  effect  which  His  attitude  would  exert  on  the  most 
conservative  school  of  His  opponents.  They  would 
be  certain  to  catch  at  a  refusal  as  a  fresh  ground  for 
prejudicing  Him  and  His  teaching  before  the  people; 


74  CHRIST  AS  PAYMASTER 

and  a  fresh  stumbling-block  would  be  cast  in  their 
path.  Lest,  therefore,  the  most  scrupulous  conscience 
should  be  offended,  He  declared  that  He  was  willing  to 
meet  the  demand  for  them  both. 

A  profound  principle  is  involved  here,  which  calls 
for  our  careful  heed.  When  questions  arise  in  life, 
which  do  not  involve  principle  and  conscience,  we 
should  be  prepared  to  make  concessions  to  the  consci- 
entious scruples  of  those  whom  we  may  be  able  to  in- 
fluence for  good.  In  i  Cor.  ix.  the  Apostle  Paul  acted 
on  that  principle.  He  insisted  that  he  was  free  from 
many  things,  to  which  he  nevertheless  conformed,  for 
the  sake  of  maintaining  his  influence  on  some  whom 
he  desired  to  lead  afterwards  into  the  liberty  of  Christ. 
In  Christ  he  was  free  of  all,  but  for  Christ's  sake  he 
became  the  servant  of  all.  All  things,  he  said,  were 
lawful  to  him,  but  not  all  things  were  expedient,  be- 
cause they  failed  to  edify,  and  might  prove  a  stumbling- 
block  to  others.  "  Give  no  occasion  of  stumbling,  either 
to  Jews,  or  to  Gentiles,  or  to  the  Church  of  God ;  even 
as  I  pleased  all  men  in  all  things,  not  seeking  my  own 
profit,  but  the  profit  of  many,  that  they  may  be  saved." 

As  Christians  we  dare  not  make  payments  which  will 
conflict  with  conscience,  but  where  conscience  is  not 
concerned  we  must  be  ready  to  meet  any  legitimate 
demand  made  by  public  use  and  custom.  Asserting 
our  freedom,  we  must  not  give  needless  offence;  and 
in  this  our  Lord  will  never  fail  to  be  our  partner.  He 
is  ever  willing  to  become  surety  for  payments  made  in 
His  Name  and  for  the  sake  of  His  Gospel. 

I.  Christ  pays  the  Charges  for  His  Penniless 
Disciples. — At  His  bidding  Peter  had  left  all  to  follow 
Him.  Boats,  nets,  and  the  fish-market  were  forsaken. 
If  he  still  kept  his  boat,  it  was  only  to  assist  his  Master 
in  His  strenuous  life.  Months  had  passed  since  he  was 
seen  among  his  old  fisher  companions.    No  income, 


THE  TRANSFER  OF  RESPONSIBILITY    75 

therefore,  accrued  from  his  craft  for  the  upkeep  of  his 
home;  and  without  doubt  the  Master  arranged  that 
a  certain  amount  should  be  allocated  from  the  common 
purse  for  the  maintenance  of  that  home  and  its  in- 
mates. Whenever  you  give  yourself  absolutely  to 
Christ  and  His  service,  not  at  your  whim,  but  by  His 
direct  invitation,  you  may  reckon  absolutely  on  His 
thoughtful  provision ;  and  even  if  your  faith  should  give 
out,  He  will  remain  faithful,  for  He  cannot  deny  Him- 
self. 

The  two  women — Peter's  wife  and  her  mother — may 
have  viewed  this  arrangement  from  the  first  with  a  cer- 
tain amount  of  distrust,  and  during  the  absence  of  the 
whole  party  thirty  miles  to  the  north  their  faith  must 
have  been  put  to  the  test,  for  clearly,  on  Peter's  arrival 
home,  there  was  not  a  single  coin  left  to  meet  this  tax. 
They  had  expended  their  entire  store ;  and  Peter  must 
have  been  startled  by  the  glaring  contrast  between  the 
glory  of  the  Transfiguration  vision,  with  his  proposal 
for  three  tabernacles  there,  and  the  actual  exigencies 
of  his  own  humble  home.  We,  who  get  away  to  our 
Conventions  and  Retreats,  must  never  lose  sight  of  the 
loving  and  loyal  hearts  that  are  left  behind  "by  the 
stuff."  It  is  not  befitting  that  we  should  disport  our- 
selves on  the  slopes  of  Hermon,  unless  we  are  thought- 
ful and  careful  for  those  whom  we  have  left  in  the 
fisherman's  home. 

Peter  rightly  felt  that  this  burden  was  not  for  him- 
self to  carry  alone.  By  his  summons  to  leave  all,  his 
Master  had  clearly  made  Himself  liable  for  such  de- 
mands. There  could  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  issue,  though 
the  precise  manner  of  deliverance  was  not  apparent. 
It  was  an  immense  relief,  therefore,  to  find  himself 
forestalled  and  anticipated  before  he  could  relate  his 
case — Christ  knew  of  it  and  was  prepared  with  a  reply. 

Take  heart,  my  friend!  Before  you  call.  He  will 
answer,  and  while  you  are  yet  speaking  His  ready  help 


76    THE  SUPREMACY  OF  THE  SON  OF  MAN 

is  nigh.  He  knows  that  for  His  sake  you  have  re- 
nounced many  things  that  are  legitimate  for  others. 
They  have  not  been  called  to  your  life  of  consecration 
and  ^elf-denial.  For  Christ's  sake  you  have  renounced 
sources  of  income  about  which  other  Christian  persons 
have  no  scruples.  For  the  Gospel's  sake  you  have  re- 
nounced a  love  that,  however  pure  in  itself,  refused  to 
go  all  lengths  for  God.  For  the  sake  of  dying  multi- 
tudes in  the  far-off  lands  you  are  breaking  away  from 
old  moorings  and  launching  out  into  untried  scenes. 
Be  of  good  cheer !  Your  Master  is  not  unmindful.  In 
some  way  or  other  He  will  make  good.  Do  not  hesi- 
tate to  take  your  need  to  Him.  He  cannot  fail !  Every 
one  who  has  left  houses,  or  brethren,  or  sisters,  or 
father,  or  mother,  or  children,  or  lands  for  His  Name's 
sake  shall  receive  a  hundred-fold. 

With  what  awe  Peter  must  have  taken  his  disused 
fishing-line  from  the  nail  and  gone  forth  on  the  lake, 
wondering  where  to  cast  his  hook,  but  sure  that  through 
the  depths  some  fish  was  being  guided  through  "  the 
path  of  the  sea  "  towards  him.  According  to  its  wont, 
the  fish  had  caught  at  a  glittering  coin,  dropped  by  a 
passenger  or  a  child  over  a  boatside.  It  had  carried 
its  unwelcome  burden  till  able  to  disgorge  it  into  Peter's 
wondering  hands ;  and  then,  thrown  back  in  the  water, 
it  had  gone  on  its  way,  little  weening  how  it  had  served 
its  Creator's  purpose.  If  not  by  such  a  miracle,  yet 
somehow  the  Lord  will  ever  meet  the  need  of  His 
devoted  servants.  None  of  them  that  trust  in  Him 
shall  be  desolate.  He  has  but  to  open  His  hand,  and 
He  can  satisfy  the  desire  of  them  that  fear  Him.  The 
tax-gatherer  is  ever  at  our  door  with  his  demand,  but 
Jesus  will  be  equal  to  every  emergency. 

II.  Our  Master  links  Himself  to  a  Sinful  Man. 
— "  That  take  and  give  for  Me  and  thee."  It  should  be 
noted  that  the  fish  yielded  not  two  half-shekels,  but  one 


JOINT-HEIRS  WITH  CHRIST  77 

coin — the  stater — which  was  their  equivalent.  The 
conjunction  and  should  be  noted  also,  as  the  golden 
link  between  the  Saviour  and  His  weak  and  fallible  dis- 
ciple. This  surely  is  the  wonder  of  Eternity — that  He 
should  call  us  brethren,  that  He  should  identify  Him- 
self with  us  before  His  Father  and  the  holy  angels,  that 
He  should  request  that  we  should  be  with  Him  where 
He  is,  beholding  His  glory  and  included  in  His  eternal 
Kingdom.  Sometimes  it  seems  incredible,  but  it  was 
determined  by  the  counsels  of  God  before  the  first 
seraph  broke  into  song,  and  it  is  verified  by  the  experi- 
ence of  all  the  Christian  centuries. 

I  see  Him  exhausted  but  triumphant  when  the  forty 
days'  temptation  are  concluded,  when  the  Prince  of 
this  world  has  tried  all  his  lures  in  vain,  and  He  smiles 
radiantly,  promising  that  I  too  shall  tread  on  the  lion 
and  adder.  He  says,  "  This  is  for  Me  and  thee.'*  I 
see  Him  in  the  garden  glade,  as  He  drains  to  the  dregs 
the  cup  which  the  Father  puts  into  His  hands;  His 
voice  falters  with  the  extremity  of  His  grief,  but  He 
tells  me  that  He  has  overcome  not  for  Himself  alone, 
but  for  me.    He  says  again,  "  This  is  for  Me  and  thee/' 

I  see  Him  dying  yonder  on  the  Cross.  The  iron  has 
entered  His  soul.  The  mid-day  mid-night  has  just 
passed.  He  cries  like  a  conqueror,  "  It  is  finished," 
and  as  He  does  so.  He  catches  sight  of  me  bathed  in 
tears  of  anguish  at  its  foot,  and  assures  me  that  His 
obedience  unto  death  was  necessary  to  fulfil  the 
Father's  will;  but  it  is  also  for  my  redemption.  He 
says  yet  a  third  time,  "  This  is  for  Me  and  thee." 

I  see  Him  emerging  from  the  tomb  in  the  dawn  of 
the  third  day.  He  has  robbed  Death  of  its  sting  and 
the  Grave  of  its  victory.  I  hear  His  glad  announce- 
ment, "  I  am  He  that  liveth  and  was  dead,  and  behold 
I  am  alive  for  evermore  " ;  and  as  He  passes  along  the 
garden  path  He  assures  me  that  in  Him  I  also  am  risen. 
Again  He  says,  "  This  is  for  Me  and  thee." 


78  CHRIST'S  ALMONERS 

Finally,  I  stand  with  the  little  group  on  Olivet,  when 
He  is  parted  from  them,  and  a  radiant  chariot  cloud 
receives  Him  from  our  sight;  and  as  His  presence 
fades  on  my  mortal  vision.  His  voice  drops  from  above, 
saying,  "  I  go  to  receive  a  Kingdom ;  I  will  ask  the 
Father,  and  He  shall  give  Me  the  Holy  Spirit  in  His 
mighty  fulness  to  reside  for  ever  in  My  Divine  human 
nature,  and  I  will  impart  Him  to  thee  also  " ;  and  once 
more  He  says,  "  This  is  for  Me  and  thee." 

Thus  He  links  Himself  to  a  sinful  man,  and  who 
shall  separate  what  God  hath  joined  together?  Neither 
life  nor  death,  things  present  or  to  come,  can  snap  that 
link. 

in.  Christ  makes  Mortals  His  Almoners. — 
"  Take  and  give  for  Me  and  thee."  He  has  received 
gifts  for  men,  and  yearns  to  bestow  them;  but  for  this 
purpose  He  requires  almoners  to  distribute  to  the 
crowd,  as  of  old  His  Apostles  took  from  His  hands  the 
bread  and  fish,  and  gave  to  the  five  thousand  men,  to- 
gether with  women  and  children.  He  might  have  ad- 
dressed these  same  words  to  them :   "  Take  and  give." 

Is  not  this  the  law  of  Christ's  own  life?  Having 
received  of  the  Father  the  promise  of  the  Paraclete, 
He  shed  Him  forth  with  both  hands  on  the  waiting 
Church.  It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him  all  the  ful- 
ness should  dwell,  and  of  that  fulness  have  all  we  re- 
ceived, and  grace  upon  grace.  If  we  may  dare  put  it 
so,  our  Lord  has  received  His  inheritance  from  the 
Father,  and  has  given  it  all  away  to  us,  as  co-heirs  with 
Himself.  He  has  taken  and  given.  From  the  store- 
house of  eternity  He  has  received  the  First-born  share, 
in  ingots  of  gold,  but  has  changed  them  into  common 
coin,  that  we  in  turn  may  take  and  give.  "  Being  en- 
riched in  everything  unto  all  liberality,  which  worketh 
thanksgiving  to  God." 

The  flowers  are  always  taking  from  sunshine,  dew. 


TAKE!    TAKE!  79 

and  air  what  they  give  forth  in  colour,  fragrance,  and 
beauty.  In  the  carboniferous  age  the  gigantic  vegetable 
growths  took  out  of  the  unstinting  sun-power  the 
forces  that  coal  gives  back  in  our  hearths  and  furnaces. 
The  dumb  animals  are  ever  taking  from  the  herbage  of 
the  mountains  or  the  grass-lands  of  the  valleys  the 
nutriment,  which  they  impart  to  us  by  the  sacrifice  of 
life.  Great  scientists  are  constantly  engaged  in  studying 
how  to  get  more  help  from  the  mysterious  forces  which 
surround  us.  They  cut  cunning  channels  which  we  call 
machinery,  and  which  tap  the  great  rivers  of  energy  as 
they  flow  through  the  highways  of  the  Universe,  that 
ordinary  folk  may  talk  through  the  telephone,  speak 
down  rays  of  light,  and  fill  the  highways  with  their 
motors.     The  law  of  all  discovery  is  take  and  give. 

The  tragic  failure  of  innumerable  multitudes  is  that 
they  have  not  learned  to  take.  They  pray,  and  pray 
fervently,  but  they  have  not  acquired  the  art  of  taking 
or  receiving.  Our  Lord  said,  "  All  things  whatsoever 
ye  pray  and  ask  for,  believe  that  you  have  taken  them, 
you  shall  have  them."  And  the  Apostle  sent  to  the 
Roman  Christians  this  emphatic  message :  "  The  gift 
of  God  by  the  grace  of  the  one  man  has  abounded  to 
the  many  .  .  .  and  they  that  take  the  abundance  of 
grace  shall  reign  in  life."  The  Apostle  does  not  bid  us 
pray  for  the  abundance  of  grace,  but  calls  on  us  to  take 
it.  One  of  the  great  problems  in  the  art  of  prayer  is 
the  delimitation  of  the  frontiers  between  Importunity 
and  Taking. 

With  many  taking  is  a  lost  art.  They  pray,  but 
fail  to  take.  Herein  is  the  source  of  bitter  disappoint- 
ment. We  pray,  agonize,  and  strive,  but  often  fail  to 
see  that  the  cargo  has  already  been  delivered  on  the 
wharf,  and  is  in  the  depot,  waiting  to  be  claimed  and 
fetched  away.  Before  we  can  take  we  must  be  sure 
that  we  are  not  prompted  by  personal  ambition,  but 
are  acting  in  the  Name  (i.  e.,  according  to  the  Nature) 


8o  TO  ALL  BOUNTIFULNESS 

of  our  Lord,  and  are  standing  on  the  distinct  warrant 
of  a  promise.  When  these  conditions  are  fulfilled,  we 
hear  our  Father's  voice,  as  we  stand  in  His  holy  pres- 
ence, saying :  "  Child,  thou  art  ever  with  Me,  and  all 
that  I  have  is  thine;  take,  and  go  thy  way  to  give." 
We  may  not  feel  to  have  received.  Ours  is  the  reck- 
oning of  a  naked  faith  on  the  unfailing  faithfulness  of 
God.  We  go  forth  to  act  on  the  assurance  that  we 
have  received,  that  our  supplies  are  ample  and  inex- 
haustible, that  whatever  demands  may  knock  at  our 
door,  our  Master  will  adequately  meet  them  all. 

We  cannot  give  unless  we  have  learned  to  take; 
and  we  cannot  take  unless  we  are  prepared  to  give. 
If  we  endeavour  to  take  with  no  plan  or  intention  of 
giving,  we  shall  find  that  our  hand  falls  paralyzed  by 
our  side.  The  faithless  servant  who  received  the 
talent,  and  buried  it  for  his  own  use,  when  needed, 
forfeited  it. 

Let  us  go  forth  to  give.  There  are  aching  hearts, 
marred  lives,  dumb,  outstretched,  open  hands  on  all 
sides.  Let  us  be  channels  through  which  God  may 
answer  prayers,  and  almoners,  to  whom  He  shall  be 
able  to  make  all  grace  abound,  because  He  knows  that 
we  shall  abound  to  every  good  work.  He  will  feed  the 
stream  from  inexhaustible  fountains.  He  will  minister 
seed  for  sowing,  and  will  provide  bread  for  the  sower. 
His  Angels  shall  minister  to  us.  All  our  needs  will 
be  met  according  to  His  riches  in  glory.  Give,  and  it 
shall  be  given  to  you;  good  measure,  pressed  down, 
shaken  together,  and  running  over,  shall  Christ  give 
into  your  bosom,  for  with  what  measure  ye  mete. 
He  will  measure  to  you  again.  Wherefore  "  Take  and 
give." 


XI 

THE  SHEPHERD  ON  THE  WATCH 
Matt,  xviii.  1-22 ;  xix.  23-30 ;  xxi.  18-22 

"Thou  know'st  our  bitterness — our  joys  are  Thine — 
No  stranger  Thou  to  all  our  wanderings  wild: 
Nor  could  we  bear  to  think,  how  every  line 
Of  us,  Thy  darken'd  likeness  and  defiled, 
Stands  in  full  sunshine  of  Thy  piercing  eye, 

But  that  Thou  call'st  us  Brethren:  sweet  repose 
Is  in  that  word — the  I^ord  who  dwells  on  high 
Knows  all,  yet  loves  us  better  than  He  knows." 

—Kehle. 

IN  His  High-Priestly  prayer,  recorded  in  John  xvii. 
our  Lord,  speaking  specially  of  His  Apostles, 
said :  "  While  I  was  with  them  in  the  world  I 
kept  them  in  Thy  Name:  those  that  Thou  gavest  me 
I  have  kept,  and  none  of  them  is  lost,  but  the  son  of 
perdition."  In  this  allusion  to  His  keeping  we  have 
a  glimpse  into  the  cure  of  souls,  in  which  the  Master 
was  and  is  constantly  engaged.  He  was  no  hireling. 
When  He  saw  the  stealthy  approach  of  the  wolf,  so 
far  from  fleeing,  He  went  before  the  little  flock  (as  He 
called  the  Apostolic  band)  and  encountered  the  foe. 
He  knew  that  the  shepherd  would  be  smitten,  and  the 
sheep  scattered;  but  He  never  desisted  from  warning 
them  day  and  night  with  tears.  He  saw  that  Satan 
had  desired  to  sift  them  as  wheat  and  had  obtained  his 
desire,  and  He  had  specially  prayed  for  the  one  whose 
temperament  might  belie  him  into  momentary  denial, 

81 


82  CHRIST'S  TRAINING-SCHOOL 

but  whose  love  He  never  doubted,  and  whose  dement- 
ing agony  of  soul  He  foresaw. 

We  must  never  forget  that  our  Lord  dealt  with  His 
Apostles,  not  only  in  a  group,  but  as  individuals; 
not  in  the  abstract,  but  the  concrete;  that  He  studied 
their  idiosyncrasies,  and  administered  special  correc- 
tion or  instruction  as  each  required.  His  words,  there- 
fore, as  recorded  by  the  Evangelists,  had  probably  a 
special  reference  to  encourage  or  repress  some  trait  of 
character  which  He  had  noticed.  Each  of  that  inner 
circle  had  strong  personal  characteristics,  which  must 
be  studied  and  trained,  before  they  were  prepared  for 
the  special  work  which  awaited  them,  as  foundation 
stones  in  the  New  Jerusalem. 

It  would  appear  that  Judas  and  Peter  gave  Him  most 
concern.  The  one  because  his  nature  was  so  secretive 
and  subtle,  the  other  because  his  fervid  and  impulsive 
temperament  was  constantly  hurrying  him  into  extreme 
positions,  from  which  he  needed  to  be  extricated.  At 
one  moment  he  would  say,  "  Depart  from  me  " ;  at  the 
next  he  would  leave  all  to  follow.  Now  he  has  won 
the  high  encomium,  "  Blessed  art  thou " ;  and  again 
he  is  addressed  as  Satan.  In  the  same  breath,  "  Thou 
shalt  never  wash  my  feet,"  and  "  not  my  feet  only." 
Within  a  single  hour  he  is  ready  to  fight  for  the  Master, 
whom  he  passionately  loved,  and  denies  that  he  had 
ever  known  Him.  That  such  an  one  should  ultimately 
be  taught  stability  of  character,  enabling  him  to  lead 
the  Church  in  its  conflict  with  a  world-in-arms,  pre- 
sented a  serious  problem  to  his  Master  and  Friend. 
He  never  doubted  the  sincerity  of  his  affection,  but  was 
sorely  tried  by  its  fitful  and  impulsive  exhibitions. 

The  Case  of  Judas. — We  may  not  linger  over  the 
Lord's  watch  and  warning  in  the  case  of  Judas,  but 
many  of  His  sayings  must  have  been  suggested  by  the 
change  which  was  passing  over  the  once-promising 


THE  BOY  PARABLE  83 

young  man  from  Kerioth.  He  perceived  with  bitter 
sorrow  that  the  love  of  money  was  eating  out  his  soul, 
and  in  many  of  His  utterances  must  have  had  him  in 
mind.  "  A  man's  bitterest  foe  may  arise  from  his  own 
household."  "  No  disciple  of  Mine  should  provide 
gold,  silver,  or  brass  in  his  purse  for  personal  use." 
"  A  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  things 
that  he  possesses."  "  Dives  lifted  up  his  eyes,  being  in 
torments."  "  The  unfaithful  servant  was  cut  asunder, 
and  his  portion  was  appointed  among  the  unbelievers." 
"  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  Mammon,"  "  Comrade, 
stop  and  bethink  thee,  ere  it  is  too  late,  to  what  a  de- 
gree of  wickedness  and  ingratitude  thou  art  come." 
These  words  are  applicable  to  us  all,  but  they  had  spe- 
cial significance  for  Judas;  and  perhaps — speaking 
after  the  manner  of  men — they  were  elicited  by  the 
special  significance  of  his  alarming  deterioration. 

Similarly  we  may  trace  a  personal  reference  to 
Peter's  condition  of  soul  during  the  latter  months  of 
our  Lord's  earthly  ministry. 

The  Case  of  Peter. — There  were  several  particu- 
lars in  regard  to  which  he  needed  to  be  specially 
cautioned  and  strengthened: — 

(i)  In  the  Struggle  for  Pre-eminence.  Though 
Peter  is  not  specially  mentioned,  we  are  not  doing  him 
a  manifest  injustice  to  suppose  that  he  took  a  promi- 
nent part  in  the  hot  disputes  which  broke  out  from  time 
to  time,  especially  after  our  Lord's  award  of  the  keys, 
the  reference  to  the  significance  of  his  name,  and  his 
inclusion  with  two  others  in  that  memorable  Transfigu- 
ration scene.  The  probability  of  this  supposition  is 
confirmed  by  the  fact,  recorded  by  Mark,  writing  at 
Peter's  own  dictation,  that  when  our  Lord  reached  Ca- 
pernaum, on  His  return  from  Mount  Hermon,  on  en- 
tering "  the  house,"  which,  of  course,  was  Peter's,  He 
asked  them,  "  What  was  it  that  ye  disputed  among 


84    PETER'S  FATAL  SELF-CONFIDENCE 

yourselves  by  the  way  ? "  At  first  they  held  their 
peace,  for  by  the  way  they  had  disputed  among  them- 
selves who  should  be  the  greatest.  Then  He  sat  down, 
and  called  them  all  around  Him,  and  said :  "  The  only 
way  in  which  a  man  can  become  first  in  My  Kingdom 
is  by  being  last  of  all  and  servant  of  all."  Then  He 
took  a  child — tradition  says  that  it  was  one  of  Peter's 
own  children,  who  afterwards  became  the  Bishop  and 
Martyr  Ignatius — folded  the  happy  boy  in  His  arms,, 
and  said :  "  Whosoever  shall  receive  one  of  such  chil- 
dren in  My  Name  receiveth  Me." 

The  struggle  for  supremacy  broke  out  again,  when 
James  and  John  endeavoured  to  secure  a  verdict  in 
their  favour  by  getting  their  mother  to  ask  for  the 
right-hand  and  left-hand  places  in  the  Kingdom.  And 
on  the  eve  of  the  Betrayal  there  was  a  recurrence  of 
the  same  strife,  which  hindered  every  one  of  them 
from  volunteering,  in  the  absence  of  a  servant,  to  wash 
the  feet  of  the  rest,  though  the  ewer  and  towel,  pro- 
vided by  the  thoughtful  courtesy  of  the  host,  were 
there  ready  to  their  hand. 

Probably  this  ambition  for  the  foremost  place  led 
Peter  to  insist  that  though  all  the  others  failed  and  for- 
sook in  the  approaching  hour  of  trial,  certainly  he 
might  be  counted  on,  "  Although  all  shall  be  offended, 
yet  will  not  I.  Though  I  should  die  with  Thee,  yet  will 
I  not  deny  Thee."  And  he  meant  every  word  he  spoke. 
We  have  just  used  the  word  ambition;  but  there  were 
softening,  sweetening  ingredients  in  his  strenuous  affir- 
mations. There  were  present,  at  least,  a  passionate 
devotion,  a  resolve  that  no  hurt,  which  he  could  ward 
off,  should  touch  that  revered  body,  and  the  inner  con- 
sciousness that  it  would  be  easier  and  far  better  to  die 
with  Christ  than  live  without  Him. 

But  if  our  Lord's  warnings  as  to  the  peril  of  His 
Apostle  were  not  availing,  then  probably  nothing  could 
so  effectually  have  burnt  out  this  love  of  pre-eminence 


SEVENTY  TIMES  SEVEN  85 

as  the  denial  and  failure  of  the  betrayal  night.  We 
find  no  traces  of  the  old  spirit  in  the  subsequent  ref- 
erences to  our  Apostle.  He  takes,  indeed,  the  fore- 
most place  in  the  incidents  related  in  Acts  i.  and  ii. 
without  ostentation  or  affectation;  but  in  the  First 
Council  of  the  Church,  described  in  Acts  xv.,  the  pres- 
idency is  occupied  by  James,  whilst  Peter  contributes 
his  opinion,  as  one  amongst  the  rest.  Finally,  in  his 
First  Epistle,  he  exhorts  the  elders  on  the  ground,  not 
of  his  Apostolate,  but  of  being  himself  an  elder  and  an 
eyewitness  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ;  and,  surely,  it 
is  not  in  entire  forgetfulness  of  his  own  failure  that  he 
adds :  Feed  the  flock  of  God,  "  not  as  being  lords  over 
God's  heritage,  but  as  examples  to  the  flock." 

(2)  In  Respect  to  Forgiveness.  On  one  occasion, 
when  the  Lord  had  been  giving  instruction  on  the  duty 
of  forgiveness,  Peter  broke  in  with  the  inquiry,  "  Lord, 
how  oft  shall  my  brother  sin  against  me,  and  I  forgive 
him  ? ''  and  further  suggested  that  seven  times  was 
the  limit,  which  he  could  not  be  expected  to  exceed. 
Our  Lord  swept  away  the  suggestion  as  unthinkable. 
It  was  an  old  Jewish  notion,  which  must  be  utterly 
submerged  in  the  love  that  He  would  shed  abroad  on 
the  world.  Calvary  and  Pentecost  would  open  sluice- 
gates of  unlimited  mercy.  "  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  I 
say  not  unto  thee,  Until  seven  times,  but  until  seventy 
times  seven."  Then,  in  the  parable  of  the  unforgiving 
servant,  which  followed,  sin  against  a  fellow-man  was 
contrasted  with  the  enormity  of  sin  against  God;  and 
the  Divine  compassion,  which  releases  and  forgives 
debts  of  ten  thousand  talents,  was  described  in  glowing 
words,  though  the  Divine  Speaker  said  nothing  of  the 
cost  in  ransom  blood  which  He  would  soon  be  paying 
in  flowing  streams  from  His  own  heart. 

Our  Lord  knew,  though  Peter  had  no  inkling  of  it, 
that  an  hour  was  near  when  His  Apostle  would  find 
himself  guilty  of  a  ten-thousand-talent  sin,  compared 


86         "  THE  RICHES  OF  HIS  GRACE  " 

with  which  the  vilest  affront  ever  received  from  a  fel- 
low-mortal would  appear  to  be  but  as  an  hundred 
pence;  and  at  such  time  he  would  cling  to  the  hope 
suggested  by  this  parable,  as  a  drowning  man  to  the 
rope  thrown  out  for  his  rescue. 

May  we  not  imagine  Peter  hurrying  through  the 
streets,  on  which  the  grey  dawn  was  breaking  sadly, 
and  making  for  the  garden,  where  only  three  or  four 
hours  before  he  had  slept  whilst  his  Master  was  in 
agony.  How  could  he  have  said  those  terrible  words  ? 
That  he  had  failed  where  he  had  vowed  to  be  strong, 
and  had  added  oaths  and  cursings  which  had  not  soiled 
his  lips  for  many  years !  That  the  Master  had  heard 
all !  And  that  look !  What  could  he  say,  or  whither 
go?  Should  he  take  his  life?  Remorse  was  choking 
his  breath.  Then  there  stole  over  his  heart  the  words : 
"  I  say  not  unto  thee,  Until  seven  times,  but  until  sev- 
enty times  seven."  Did  my  Lord  expect  me  to  do  so 
much,  and  will  He  not  do  the  same  ?  And  did  He  not 
say  that  the  lord  of  the  servant  was  moved  with  com- 
passion, released  the  poor  debtor  at  his  feet,  and  for- 
gave a  debt  of  ten  thousand  talents  ?  Surely  He  must 
have  meant  me!  And  long  after  he  wrote:  **  Love  as 
brethren,  be  pitiful,  be  courteous,  not  rendering  evil 
for  evil,  but  contrariwise  blessing.  .  .  .  He  bare  our 
sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree.  .  .  .  Love  cover- 
eth  the  multitude  of  sins." 

(3)  In  the  Matter  of  Reward.  When  the  young 
man,  unable  to  pay  the  price  of  discipleship,  had  turned 
sorrowfully  away,  Peter  broke  in  on  the  Saviour's  dis- 
appointment with  the  question :  "  Lo !  we  have  left  all 
and  followed  Thee,  what  shall  we  have  therefore  ?  " 
Clearly  the  hope  of  reward  was  bulking  largely  on  his 
vision.  There  would  surely  be  a  conspicuously  hand- 
some return  for  the  sacrifices  and  privations  that  dis- 
cipleship had  involved,  to  say  nothing  of  those  to  which 
the  Master  frequently  alluded  as  imminent.     But  bar- 


"EXCEEDING  ABUNDANTLY"  Sy 

gain-making  after  this  fashion  was  clearly  inadmissible 
in  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  and  therefore  the  Parable 
of  the  Labourers  in  the  Vineyard  was  uttered  to  teach, 
in  unforgetable  imagery,  that  in  the  service  of  God  a 
spirit  of  trust  in  His  grace  must  exorcise  and  super- 
sede a  spirit  of  bargaining  and  barter. 

The  labourers  had  waited  in  the  market-place  from 
early  dawn.  It  was  through  no  fault  of  theirs  that  they 
were  not  on  the  hillside  among  the  vines.  "  No  man 
had  hired  them."  It  was  not  until  almost  sundown 
that  they  had  their  chance.  But  when,  after  one  brief 
hour  of  service,  they  came  to  be  paid,  they  received  a 
whole  day's  pay  for  that  brief  spell.  Their  reward 
was  reckoned  not  as  of  debt,  but  of  grace.  It  was  in 
happy  mood  that  these  short-time  men  made  for  their 
homes.  Their  women-folk  had  watched  them  stand- 
ing in  the  market-place  all  through  the  day,  and  had 
made  up  their  minds  to  pinch  and  scrape ;  but  here  was 
a  day's  wage  placed  in  their  hands.  Yes !  What  the 
owner  of  the  vineyard  had  been  heard  saying  to  one  of 
the  grumblers,  "  Is  thine  eye  evil,  because  I  am  good/* 
was  perfectly  true — he  was  good. 

It  was  as  if  our  Lord  had  said,  in  answer  to  Peter's 
question :  "  It  is  true  that  thou  camest  early  into  the 
vineyard.  Thou  wert  among  the  first.  Also,  thou  hast 
borne  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day,  and  more  also 
is  to  fall  to  thy  lot;  but  when  thou  hast  completed 
the  task,  thou  wilt  only  have  done  thy  duty,  and  thy 
reward  will  be  according  to  the  riches  of  God's  grace." 

This  also  in  coming  days  may  have  afforded  the 
broken-hearted  Apostle  some  comfort,  as  he  said  to 
himself :  "  It  is  true  that  I  was  among  the  first  to  obey 
the  Master's  summons,  but  I  have  forfeited  all  right  to 
reward,  even  if  once  I  cherished  some  hope  of  merit: 
I  am  not  worthy  to  be  called  an  Apostle;  I  take  my 
place  with  the  woman  who  was  a  sinner,  and  with 
Zaccheus  the  publican;  but  the  Master  said  that  the 


88  RECKON  ON  GOD! 

reward  was  not  determined  by  service,  but  by  grace.  It 
is  not  of  him  that  willeth  or  worketh,  but  of  God  that 
shows  mercy.  God  be  merciful  to  me  the  sinner,  and  in 
me  first  may  the  Master  show  forth  all  longsuffering." 

(4)  In  Regard  to  Faith.  As  they  passed  by  one 
morning  they  saw  a  withered  figtree  which  had  been 
cursed  with  barrenness  on  the  previous  day,  as  a  warn- 
ing to  the  Apostles  and  to  Israel.  And  Peter,  calling 
to  remembrance,  saith  unto  Jesus,  "  Rabbi,  behold,  the 
figtree  which  Thou  cursedst  is  withered  away."  And 
Jesus,  answering,  saith  unto  them,  "  Have  faith  in 
God."  A  better  rendering  of  that  remarkable  injunc- 
tion would  be.  Hold  on  to  God's  Faith ;  or.  Reckon  on 
God's  Faithfulness. 

We  lay  stress,  and  rightly  so,  on  Faith;  but  there 
are  days  in  human  life  when  our  faith  seems  about  to 
expire,  like  a  tiny  taper  in  a  storm  of  wind.  We  cry, 
"  Lord,  I  believe,  help  Thou  my  unbelief,  for  my  un- 
belief is  more  than  my  belief."  Our  faith  is  as  a  grain 
of  mustard  seed,  the  least  of  all  seeds,  whilst  our  diffi- 
culties block  our  path  like  a  mountain-range.  Even 
the  Saviour  Himself  feels  bound  to  interpose  a  prayer 
lest  our  faith  fail  utterly.  Then  it  is  a  source  of  infi- 
nite consolation  to  turn  our  thoughts  away  from  our 
faith  to  God's  Faithfulness,  to  hold  on  to  it,  to  reckon 
on  it,  and  to  cry :  "  If  we  believe  not,  He  abideth 
faithful;  He  cannot  deny  Himself." 

In  that  storm-burst  which  broke  on  Peter's  soul  on 
that  fateful  night,  with  what  comfort  must  he  have 
stayed  himself  on  these  precious  words :  "  Hold  on  to 
God's  Faith;  Reckon  on  God's  Faithfulness;  Dare  to 
believe  that  He  abideth  Faithful  and  is  not  Unrigh- 
teous to  forget."  His  own  faith  had  failed,  but  God's 
Faithfulness  was  like  the  great  mountains. 


XII 

THE  EVENING  OF  THE  DENIAL 

Matt.  xxvi.  17-20;  Mark  xiv.  12-17;  Luke  xxii. 
7-16;  John  xiii.  1-20 

"Nor  lack  I  friends  long-tried  and  near  and  dear, 
Whose  love  is  round  me  like  this  atmosphere. 
Warm,  soft,  and  golden.    For  such  gifts  to  me 
What  shall  I  render,  O  my  God,  to  Thee." 

—iVhittier. 

THE  mount  of  Olives,  during  the  Passover, 
was  covered  by  a  large  number  of  families, 
gathered  from  all  parts  of  the  country,  and 
from  many  lands.  Unable  to  find  accommodation  in 
the  overcrowded  city,  they  provided  for  themselves 
slight  booths  or  tents,  their  cattle  tethered  alongside, 
the  maidens  thronging  to  the  wells  with  their  pitchers, 
whilst  the  children  played  under  the  shadow  of  the 
ancient  olive-trees  or  visited  the  Holy  City  with  their 
parents  in  an  ecstasy  of  enjoyment. 

It  would  be  pleasant  to  think  that  our  Lord  was  the 
guest  of  the  dear  home  at  Bethany,  where  Lazarus  and 
his  sisters  loved  to  welcome  Him;  but  it  is  more  than 
likely  that,  after  the  supper  in  the  house  of  Simon  on 
the  evening  of  His  arrival,  He  deliberately  held  aloof, 
lest  His  friends  might  become  entangled  in  the  web, 
which  was  being  woven  about  Himself.  Already  the 
chief  priests  were  consulting  to  put  Lazarus  to  death, 
because  by  reason  of  him  many  of  the  Jews  believed 

89 


90  "  LOVED  TO  THE  END  " 

on  Jesus.  We  have  often  thought,  also,  that  if  He 
had  been  her  guest,  Martha,  the  careful  housewife, 
would  never  have  allowed  Him  to  leave  her  house  in 
the  early  morning  without  the  breakfast  which,  in 
default  of  her,  He  looked  for  beneath  the  thick  foliage 
of  a  wayside  tree.  "  The  foxes  have  holes,  the  birds 
of  the  air  nests,  but  the  Son  of  man  had  not  where  to 
lay  His  head." 

In  the  meanwhile  the  Passover  was  drawing  nigh, 
and  with  it  the  treachery  of  Judas,  the  denial  by  Peter, 
and  desertion  on  the  part  of  them  all.  It  is,  however, 
with  Peter's  share  in  the  happiness  of  the  last  evening 
of  Christ's  earthly  life  that  we  are  now  dealing.  Jesus 
knew  that  the  hour  had  come  when  He  should  depart 
out  of  this  world  to  the  Father.  He  knew  also  that 
He  had  come  from  God  and  went  to  God;  and  that 
the  Father  had  given  all  things  into  His  hand.  With 
this  knowledge  was  blended  an  over-brimming  love. 
"  Having  loved  His  own  which  were  in  the  world, 
He  loved  them  to  the  end  " — not  only  of  time,  but  of 
the  high-water  mark  of  love.  So  we  have  heard  the 
murmur  of  the  summer-ocean,  too  deep  for  sound  or 
foam,  when  it  has  reached  to  the  submerging  and 
floating  of  the  dark  lines  of  seaweed  which  lay  beyond 
the  reach  of  ordinary  tides. 

It  is  practically  certain,  therefore,  that  He  was  more 
concerned  for  "  His  own,"  and  especially  for  Peter, 
than  for  Himself.    Hence  the  following  precautions : — 

I.  He  provided  him  with  a  Friend. — The  price- 
less worth  of  friendship  was  a  matter  of  daily  experi- 
ence with  the  Lord.  He  made  no  secret  of  the  tender 
intimacy  which  knit  His  soul  with  that  of  the  disciple 
whom  He  loved,  and  who,  more  than  any  other,  has 
interpreted  to  the  world  the  secret  workings  of  His 
heart.  He  realized,  therefore,  how  much  a  Friend 
of  the  right  kind  would  mean  for  Peter  in  his  abandon- 


A  LIFE-LONG  FRIENDSHIP  91 

ment  to  the  black  current  of  a  remorse  which  threat- 
ened despair. 

Je'sus  could  trust  John  utterly.  The  ultimate  proof 
of  His  confidence  was  given  when,  from  the  Cross, 
He  committed  His  mother  to  the  filial  care  of  His 
beloved  friend.  Thus  He  knew  what  John  would  be 
to  Peter  in  the  hour  of  black  darkness,  and  therefore 
threw  them  together  in  His  last  sacred  commission. 
We  are  expressly  told  that  He  sent  Peter  and  John, 
saying,  "  Go  and  prepare  us  the  Passover,  that  we 
may  eat."  Thus  He  set  His  seal  on  their  old-time 
friendship. 

They  had  been  boys  together,  sitting  side  by  side 
in  the  Rabbi's  school,  wandering  in  search  of  boyish 
adventure  over  the  hills,  or  sharing  the  pleasures  and 
perils  of  the  fishing-fleet.  Together  they  had  grown 
to  manhood,  familiar  with  the  hardships  of  the  Roman 
occupation,  with  the  stories  passing  from  lip  to  lip  of 
recent  efforts  at  revolt,  and  with  the  hopes  and  expec- 
tations of  those  who  were  looking  for  the  Redemption 
of  Israel.  Together  they  had  left  their  homes  and 
nets,  first  to  give  enthralled  attention  to  the  Baptist, 
and  then  to  follow  Jesus.  Probably  from  the  first 
they  had  been  attracted  to  each  other  by  an  instinctive 
consciousness  that  each  supplied  what  the  other  lacked. 
It  is  more  than  probable  that  each  chose  the  other  as 
companion  when  the  twelve  were  sent  out  two  by  two. 

With  James,  the  brother  of  John,  they  had  shared 
as  partners  in  the  miraculous  draught  of  fishes;  had 
stood  side  by  side  w^hen  the  little  daughter  of  Jairus 
awoke  beneath  the  touch  and  summons  of  Jesus  from 
her  death-sleep.  They  had  shared  in  the  wonder  of 
the  Holy  Mount,  and  had  listened,  on  the  previous 
night,  to  the  Apocalyptic  unveiling  of  the  signs  of  the 
Advent  and  the  close  of  the  Age. 

Our  Lord  had  often  noticed  and  rejoiced  in  this 
congenial  comradeship.     He  knew  how  much  it  would 


92  FELLOWSHIP  IN  SERVICE 

mean  for  them  both  and  for  His  cause  when  His  out- 
ward presence  was  withdrawn.  He  therefore  took 
special  pains  to  cement  and  hallow  it  by  this  expression 
of  confidence. 

The  result  justified  His  fond  anticipations.  It  was 
to  John  that  Peter  naturally  turned,  when  the  storm 
was  expending  its  full  fury  on  his  soul.  Mary  of 
Magdala  found  them  together  on  Easter  morning.  To- 
gether they  ran  to  the  sepulchre.  Much  as  John  loved 
his  friend,  he  could  not  help  out-running  him,  because 
of  another  love  which  had  a  prior  claim,  but  he  made 
compensation  shortly  afterwards  by  refusing  to  take 
advantage  of  the  keener  sight  of  his  younger  eyes  that 
had  discerned  the  Lord  standing  on  the  shore  in  the 
morning  haze.  In  a  whisper  of  reverent  love  he  passed 
on  the  news  to  his  friend,  and  was  only  glad  to  know, 
as  he  saw  him  plunge  into  the  water  and  strike  swiftly 
to  the  shore,  that  he  had  secured  for  him  a  moment  of 
private  fellowship  and  a  further  assurance  of  forgive- 
ness from  those  gentle  lips. 

They  were  much  together  in  the  coming  days.  They 
went  together  to  the  Temple  at  the  hour  of  prayer. 
Peter  spoke  for  them  both  when  he  said  to  the  lame 
man,  **  Look  on  us."  They  stood  side  by  side  when 
arrested  by  the  Sanhedrim,  and  spent  a  memorable 
night  together  in  the  prison.  Together  they  returned 
to  their  own  company,  and  like  the  diverse  metals  of 
a  compensating  balance,  they  directed  the  policy  of 
the  infant  Church.  Events  separated  them  in  after 
years — John  to  Ephesus  and  Peter  to  Babylon,  but  that 
the  old  love  remained  is  evident,  if  the  slight  and  ten- 
der reference  which  John  makes  to  the  lapse  of  his 
friend  is  contrasted  with  the  explicit  and  circumstantial 
account  which  Peter  gives  in  the  Second  Gospel. 

It  is  not  good  that  man  should  be  alone,  especially 
in  hours  when  he  remembers  his  sins,  and  is  distracted 
with  the  inner  warfare.     The  Lord  anticipates  such 


THE  EVENING  OF  THE  PASSOVER  93 

need,  and  before  it  arises  provides  a  Jonathan  for 
David,  a  John  for  Peter,  a  Timothy  for  Paul,  a  Me- 
lanchthon  for  Luther,  a  Burns  for  Hudson  Taylor,  and 
a  Faithful  or  Hopeful  for  Christian. 

n.  He  Assured  him  of  a  Complete  Cleansing. — 
"  Clean  every  whit."  Not  improbably  Judas  had 
planned  to  capture  the  whole  party  at  the  Paschal 
Feast,  his  plan  was,  however,  anticipated  and  defeated 
by  Christ's  arrangement — probably  made  beforehand 
with  some  secret  disciple — that  the  meeting-place 
should  only  be  known  to  the  Apostles  when  they 
reached  the  city.  The  traitor  was  therefore  compelled 
to  postpone  the  final  scene  till  nightfall,  being  certain 
that  the  Master  would  spend  that  night,  as  previously, 
in  the  garden.  "  Judas,  also,  who  betrayed  Him,  knew 
the  place,  for  Jesus  ofttimes  resorted  thither  with  His 
disciples."  But  in  the  meanwhile  there  was  security 
for  one  brief  hour  of  holy  fellowship  and  farewell,  the 
more  especially  when  the  traitor  had  withdrawn. 

With  desire  He  had  desired  to  eat  that  supper  with 
the  chosen  band  before  He  suffered.  It  would  be  for 
His  own  comfort  and  strength,  and  for  theirs.  He 
therefore  committed  the  necessary  preparations  to  His 
two  devoted  friends,  sure  that  no  detail  would  be 
omitted  which  their  love  or  forethought  could  antici- 
pate. Deeply  impressed  with  the  increasing  gravity  of 
the  position,  they  secured  the  lamb,  brought  it  early  to 
the  priest  for  killing,  purchased  the  bitter  herbs,  Pass- 
over-cakes, and  skin  of  wine,  and  hastened  back  to  pre- 
pare the  humble  repast.  It  was  all  that  their  means 
permitted,  for  Judas  held  the  bag,  and  appropriated  a 
large  proportion  of  its  contents. 

The  city  was  too  preoccupied  and  crowded  to  notice 
the  famous  Teacher  and  His  companions  as  they  passed 
through  the  Kedron-gate  and  made  for  the  appointed 
meeting-place.     The  sky  was  already  darkening,  and 


94         "THE  FORM  OF  A  SERVANT" 

the  earlier  stars  were  beginning  to  appear.  Apparently 
the  embers  of  jealous  rivalry  were  still  smouldering, 
and  burst  into  a  flame  as  soon  as  the  large  upper  room, 
where  Peter  and  John  had  been  at  work  all  the  after- 
noon, was  reached.  The  walk  had  been  hot  and  dusty, 
and  all  would  have  been  thankful  for  the  customary 
ablutions,  common  to  every  Jewish  home.  In  this  case, 
however,  they  were  wanting.  Ewer,  basin,  and  towel 
were  provided,  but  no  servant  could  be  spared  from 
the  household  at  that  busy  season.  Would  no  Apostle 
perform  this  office  for  the  rest,  and  specially  for  the 
Lord?  Apparently  none  volunteered.  To  undertake 
menial  duty  would,  in  their  judgment,  be  equivalent 
to  signing  a  deed  of  abdication  from  the  throne  of 
power,  which  each  was  claiming.  There  was  also  the 
question  of  precedence  at  the  table  to  be  considered. 
Even  if  the  couch  on  the  Lord's  right  hand  were  con- 
ceded to  John,  who  should  be  on  His  left  ?  Ought  not 
Peter,  to  whom  all  were  indebted  for  his  efforts  to 
prepare  the  feast?  But  Judas  insisted,  as  treasurer, 
on  his  superior  claims.  The  atmosphere  was  charged 
with  feverish  passion,  and  the  peaceful  enjoyment  of 
the  feast,  on  which  Jesus  had  set  such  store,  was 
seriously  threatened.  To  arrest  further  discussion  the 
Lord  arose  from  the  supper  table,  laid  aside  His  outer 
garments,  girded  Himself  with  the  towel,  as  any  house- 
hold servant  might  have  done,  poured  water  into  the 
basin,  and  began  to  wash  His  disciples*  feet,  wiping 
them  carefully  with  the  towel. 

A  sudden  silence  must  have  befallen,  as  He  passed 
from  one  to  another  in  this  lowly  ministry,  until  He 
came  to  Peter,  who  had  been  watching  the  process 
with  shame  and  indignation.  "  Dost  Thou  wash  my 
feet  ?  "  he  exclaimed ;  "  my  feet  shall  never  be  washed 
by  Thee."  How  little  he  realized  that  a  still  more 
drastic  cleansing  must  soon  be  administered  by  those 
gentle  hands,  or  he  could  have  no  part  with  Jesus  in 


"  CLEAN,  EVERY  WHIT  "  95 

the  world-mission  of  Redemption !  "  If  I  wash  thee 
not,  thou  hast  no  part  with  Me ! "  Evidently  Peter 
caught  his  Master's  meaning.  The  outward  was  sym- 
bolic of  the  inward,  the  physical  of  the  spiritual ;  and 
he  replied :  "  Lord,  not  my  feet  only,  but  also  my 
hands  and  my  head." 

It  was  as  though  he  requested  that  his  soul-life 
might  there  and  then  receive  a  fresh  beginning,  and 
that  his  entire  being  might  be  replunged  into  the  foun- 
tain opened  for  sin  and  uncleanness.  "  Make  sure 
work  this  time,  my  Lord,  let  me  begin  again,  as  I  began 
at  the  first,  with  Thee  in  my  boat !  " 

"  No,"  said  Jesus  in  effect,  "  that  is  not  necessary. 
He  who  has  recently  bathed  does  not  require  entire 
immersion,  if  hands  or  feet  are  befouled.  It  is  suffi- 
cient for  the  soiled  member  to  be  cleansed,  and  the 
body  is  every  whit  clean.  When  My  disciples  fall  into 
sin,  there  is  no  necessity  for  them  to  commence  their 
religious  life  afresh.  It  is  enough  if  the  particular  sin, 
of  which  they  are  aware,  is  confessed  and  put  away. 
Whenever  that  confession  is  made  and  that  cleansing 
sought,  I  will  show  Myself  faithful  and  just  to  forgive 
the  sin  and  cleanse  from  all  unrighteousness." 

There  was  therefore  a  double  significance  in  our 
Lord's  lowly  act  of  feet-washing.  He  taught  the  roy- 
alty of  service,  and  also  that  sin  does  not  sever  the  re- 
generate soul  from  God.  If  we  are  overtaken  with  a 
fault,  it  is  not  required  that  we  go  back  again  to  the 
wicket-gate,  but  that  we  should  be  restored  and  led 
back  to  the  narrow  path.  The  disciple  is  still  a  dis- 
ciple; the  child  still  a  child.  There  must  be  confes- 
sion, and  there  will  be  instant  restoration.  "  Restore 
such  an  one  In  the  spirit  of  meekness,  considering  thy- 
self, lest  thou  also  be  tempted." 

Peter  must  have  been  greatly  comforted  by  this 
incident,  when  He  lay  under  the  shadow  of  his  great 
sin.     He  was  not  a  castaway.     He  had  not  forfeited 


96  THE  DAILY  CLEANSING 

his  part  in  the  Book  of  Life  or  in  the  Holy  City. 
There  was  no  need  for  him  to  begin  from  the  begin- 
ning. The  Lord  would  wash  his  soiled  feet,  and  he 
would  be  clean  every  whit.  God's  work  in  his  soul  had 
received  a  set-back,  but  it  had  not  ceased.  He  need 
not  enter  a  second  time  by  the  door  of  the  New  Birth ; 
but  he  must  turn  again,  and  from  his  failure  learn  to 
strengthen  his  brethren.  There  was  a  world  of  differ- 
ence between  the  apostasy  of  Judas  and  the  backsliding 
of  Peter ! 

What  a  wealth  of  comfort  has  been  ministered  by 
this  lowly  act  of  the  Saviour  to  those  whose  feet  have 
become  soiled  by  the  dust  of  earth's  highways!  He 
knew  that  He  had  come  from  God,  was  going  to  God, 
and  was  God ;  but  to  wash  the  feet  of  these  simple  men 
did  not  seem  incongruous  with  the  throne  to  which  He 
went.  And  now  that  He,  as  the  Lamb  slain,  is  on  the 
throne,  He  will  turn  aside  from  the  adoration  of  eter- 
nity, and  "  stay  His  ear  for  every  sigh  a  contrite 
suppliant  brings./' 


XIII 

"  LET  NOT  YOUR  HEART  BE  TROUBLED  " 

Matt.  xxvi.  21-25,  3i~35J  Luke  xx.  21-23; 
John  xiii.  21-38,  xiv.  i,  2 

"  Heart,  heart,  awake !    The  love  that  loveth  all 
Maketh  a  deeper  calm  than  Horeb's  cave: — 
God  in  thee — can  His  children's  folly  gall? 
lyove  may  be  hurt,  but  shall  not  love  be  brave?" 

— Mac  Donald. 

ON  the  appearance  of  the  first  three  stars,  a 
blast  from  the  silver  trumpets  of  the  temple 
gave  the  signal  for  the  Passover-supper  to 
begin  in  all  parts  of  the  city.  On  the  table  were  the 
bread,  wine,  water  and  herbs;  on  the  side-table  the 
roasted  lamb.  The  swinging  lamps  were  aglow  above, 
and  below,  around  the  table,  were  the  thirteen  couches. 
Everything  bespoke  the  preparation  of  the  two  Apos- 
tles. For  hundreds  of  years  the  same  customs  had 
been  followed,  the  same  explanations  given,  the  same 
psalms  sung,  the  same  blessings  and  thanksgivings  pro- 
nounced. But  the  Apostles  were  conscious  that  a 
heavy  cloud  was  upon  the  Master's  soul,  to  which  He 
presently  gave  the  clue  when  He  said :  "  Verily  I  say 
unto  you,  that  one  of  you  shall  betray  Me."  And 
again :  "  One  of  you  that  eateth  with  Me  shall  betray 
Me."  And  yet  again :  "  It  is  one  of  you  who  dippeth 
his  hand  with  Me  in  the  dish.  ...  It  were  better 
for  him  that  he  had  never  been  born." 

97 


98  "MASTER,  IS  IT  I?" 

Each  disciple,  except  Judas,  seems  to  have  suspected 
himself  more  than  any  of  his  fellows,  and  said  dis- 
trustfully: "Master,  is  it  I?"  But  Peter,  impatient 
of  the  uncertainty,  and  perhaps  anxious  to  be  sure  that 
he  at  least  was  not  intended,  made  a  secret  sign  to 
John  to  ascertain  to  whom  the  Lord  referred.  In  a 
whisper,  as  he  leant  back  on  the  Saviour's  bosom, 
John  asked  who  the  traitor  would  be.  Jesus  did  not 
wish  to  utter  his  name,  and  replied,  again,  in  an  under- 
tone, which  probably  only  Peter,  John,  and  Judas 
caught :  "  It  is  he  to  whom  I  shall  give  the  sop  when 
I  have  dipped  it."  Then  placing  some  bitter  herbs 
between  slices  of  bread.  He  dipped  the  morsel  into  a 
special  bowl  of  mixed  fruits  called  "  Charosheth,"  and 
passed  it  to  Judas.  The  traitor  then  knew  that  the 
Master  knew;  but  with  brazen  effrontery,  he  said: 
"  Master,  is  it  I  ? "  Under  His  breath  our  Lord  re- 
plied :  "  It  is  as  thou  hast  said  " ;  and  then  louder,  so 
that  every  one  around  the  table  heard  Him,  "  That 
thou  doest,  do  quickly." 

The  traitor  could  no  longer  bear  the  white  light  of 
Christ's  holy  presence.  Perhaps  remorse  had  already 
begun  to  gnaw  at  his  vitals.  Hastily  wrapping  his 
cloak  around  him,  he  went  out  into  the  night;  but  the 
revealing  words  had  been  spoken  so  gently  that  only 
Peter  and  John  were  in  the  secret.  Even  they  did  not 
suppose  that  matters  had  gone  so  far,  and  that  the 
thirty  pieces  of  silver — "  the  price  of  blood  " — were 
already  in  Judas's  purse.  So  well  had  he  played  his 
part,  that  the  rest  supposed  that  the  Lord  had  com- 
missioned him  to  buy  some  additional  article  for  the 
feast,  or  that  he  had  gone  out  to  make  some  offering 
to  the  poor. 

His  absence  was  a  great  relief  to  Jesus.  What  He 
must  have  suffered  for  all  those  later  months  from  the 
presence  of  Judas,  amongst  his  intimates,  can  only  be 
appreciated  by  such  as  can  say  with  the  Psalmist: 


THE  MASTER'S  INTERCESSION         99 

"Woe  is  me  that  I  sojourn  in  Mesech,  and  dwell  in 
the  tents  of  Kedar!  My  soul  hath  long  dwelt  with 
him  that  hateth  peace."  "  Therefore,  when  he  was 
gone  out,  Jesus  said.  .  .  /'  And  He  poured  forth  a 
volume  of  golden  speech  for  the  warning  and  comfort 
of  the  immediate  circle  of  "  His  own,"  and  through 
them  of  the  Universal  Church.  We  must  specially 
concentrate  on  the  words  addressed  to  Peter: — 

I.  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled  1"  "I 
HAVE  prayed  for  THEE." — In  after  years  Peter  com- 
pared the  Tempter  to  a  lion,  roaring  around  the  fold, 
and  seeking  an  tmguarded  opening  or  a  stray  sheep. 
As  he  wrote  the  words,  he  must  have  had  in  mind  the 
Master's  warning  to  them  all,  and  especially  himself: 
"  Simon,  Simon,  Satan  hath  sought  and  obtained  per- 
mission that  he  may  sift  all  of  you  as  wheat,  but  I 
have  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  faith  may  not  fail  in 
the  ordeal." 

There  is  no  fear  for  the  wheat,  when  the  husband- 
man, in  Oriental  fashion,  throws  up  the  grain  which  he 
has  threshed  against  the  evening  breeze.  Its  weight 
brings  it  back  to  the  floor,  and  only  the  chaff  disap- 
pears. It  is  a  distinct  advantage  to  be  rid  of  the  en- 
cumbering chaff,  as  it  is  for  the  Church  to  be  freed 
from  the  presence  of  those  who  are  not  truly  one  with 
it.  When  persecution  arises  because  of  the  Word,  and 
many  are  offended,  when  iniquity  abounds  and  the  love 
of  many  waxes  cold,  when  a  controversy  arises  like 
that  led  by  Athanasius  on  the  behalf  of  evangelical 
truth,  there  is  no  reasonable  ground  for  regret.  It  was 
good  for  Arius  to  leave  the  Church  in  the  fourth  cen- 
tury and  Judas  in  the  first. 

It  seems  more  than  probable  that  the  professing 
Church  of  to-day  is  on  the  edge  of  one  of  the  greatest 
hours  of  purgation  that  has  ever  been  experienced. 
The  tempest  will  roar  through  the  forests,  snapping 


lOO      THE  HATRED  OF  EVIL  SPIRITS 

off  all  boughs  not  vitally  connected  with  the  trunk.  A 
fire  will  be  lit  which  only  the  gold,  silver,  and  precious 
stones  can  outlast.  To  use  the  words  of  the  Baptist: 
*'  His  fan  is  in  His  hand,  and  He  will  thoroughly  purge 
His  floor."     But  do  not  fear  for  the  wheat  1 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  none  of  the  Apostles  were  lost 
save  Judas.  They  were  proved  to  be  wheat.  Though 
they  forsook  the  Master  at  first,  they  were  all  assem- 
bled in  the  Upper-room  on  the  Resurrection-night,  al- 
though the  doors  were  shut  for  fear  of  the  Jews.  They 
all  gathered  around  the  Master  on  the  Mount  of  As- 
cension. It  is  said  that  each,  excepting  John,  went  to 
Heaven  in  a  martyr's  chariot  of  fire.  And  the  name  of 
each  is  inscribed  on  the  Foimdations  of  the  Holy  City, 
the  Bride  of  the  Lamb. 

In  the  meanwhile  the  Saviour's  phrasing  is  full  of 
comfort.  Satan  has  to  obtain  permission  before  he 
sifts,  and  there  is  a  limit  beyond  which  he  may  not  go. 
"  God  is  faithful,"  says  the  Apostle,  "  who  will  not 
suffer  you  to  be  tempted  above  that  ye  are  able." 
Before  the  enemy  could  touch  Job's  property  or  flesh, 
he  must  needs  ask  and  obtain  permission,  and  in  each 
case  a  limit  was  imposed  beyond  which  he  might  not 
go.  It  would  almost  seem  as  though  a  facsimile  of 
Zachariah's  vision  of  the  desperate  condition  of  the 
Priesthood,  with  Satan  standing  to  resist,  were  pre- 
sented to  our  Saviour's  vision,  and  that  He,  as 
Intercessor  and  Friend,  interposed  with  the  remon- 
strance :  "  The  Lord,  who  hath  chosen  these,  rebuke 
thee;  they  shall  be  as  brands  plucked  from  the 
burning." 

The  virulent  hatred  of  wicked  spirits  that  infest  the 
Heavenlies — i.  e.,  the  regions  of  spiritual  existence — 
is  a  heavy  addition  to  the  difficulties  which  we  are 
called  to  encounter  in  our  earthly  pilgrimage  and 
warfare.  The  fight  with  Apollyon  in  the  Valley  of  the 
Shadow  of  Death  is  a  fearsome  but  inevitable  experi- 


MORE  THAN  CONQUERORS!  loi 

ence.  Hosts  of  unclean  and  evil  spirits  hover  around 
our  path  awaiting  the  favourable  moment  for  inveigling 
us  to  sin.  They  hate  us  because  evil  necessarily  hates 
goodness,  and  because  in  our  failure  they  can  cause 
grief  and  loss  to  the  Captain  of  our  Salvation.  But 
greater  is  He  that  is  for  us  than  all  that  be  against  us, 
and  the  Great  High  Priest,  who  is  pledged  to  present 
us  before  the  Father's  Presence  with  exceeding  joy, 
is  on  the  watch,  measuring  the  fiery  ordeal  to  our 
strength  and  praying  that  our  faith  may  not  fail.  Is 
it  not  well  that  we  have  been  tempted?  Temptation 
reveals  our  own  weakness  and  drives  us  in  penitence 
and  faith  to  Christ.  It  reveals  aspects  of  His  saving 
help  of  which  otherwise  we  should  be  ignorant.  We 
cannot  help  being  tempted.  There  is  no  sin  in  being 
attacked  by  the  Evil  One.  Our  Lord  Himself  suffered 
being  tempted.  We  cannot  but  be  aware  of  a  lower 
nature,  to  which  the  tempter  addresses  himself,  and 
which  is  very  sensitive  to  his  appeals.  But  we  can 
resist  steadfast  in  the  faith.  We  can  reckon  that  we 
are  dead  in  Christ  to  the  rule  and  behests  of  the  god 
of  this  world.  We  can  appropriate  the  opposite  grace 
in  Christ,  so  that  we  actually  gain  in  the  hour  of  trial 
and  become  more  than  conquerors.  From  evei*y  battle- 
field we  carry  off  the  spoil;  and  all  through  the  con- 
flict we  are  conscious  of  our  Saviour's  intercessions. 
"  Thanks  be  unto  God  which  giveth  the  Victory  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord !  " 

II.  " Let  not  your  hearts  be  troubled ! "  "I 
GO  TO  PREPARE  A  PLACE." — The  unfortunate  division 
of  chapters  in  A.  V.  has  hindered  the  full  appreciation 
of  Christ's  special  reference  in  the  memorable  words 
with  which  John  xiv  opens.  We  love  them,  learn  them, 
repeat  them  beside  the  dying,  and  write  them  on  our 
memorials ;  but  we  fail  to  connect  them  with  the  words 
immediately  preceding :  "  Peter  said  unto  Him,  Lord, 


102         ROOM  IN  HEAVEN  FOR  ALL 

why  cannot  I  follow  Thee  now?  I  will  lay  down  my 
life  for  Thy  sake.  Jesus  answered  him,  Wilt  thou  lay 
down  thy  life  for  My  sake  ?  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
thee,  The  cock  shall  not  crow  till  thou  hast  denied  Me 
thrice."  Then  He  said,  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troub- 
led. ...  In  my  Father's  House  are  many  man- 
sions.    .     .     .     I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you." 

Our  Lord's  ideal  of  the  Father's  House  is  briefly 
summarized  in  the  Parable  of  the  Two  Sons.  Its 
principal  windows  look  earthwards.  It  is  the  place 
where  broken  lives  are  received  to  be  remade  and 
refitted.  There  love  is  undisguised  and  prodigal  in 
its  welcome,  and  life  becomes  rhythmic  to  the  music 
of  eternity,  and  joy  has  no  bounds.  They  that  live 
there  are  ever  face  to  face  with  God,  and  all  that  He 
has  is  theirs.  Only  there  are  no  elder  brothers  to  stand 
without;  and  even  the  menial  servants  rejoice  with 
the  sons  and  daughters  as  they  are  gathered  home, 
one  by  one. 

There  also  are  "  many  mansions,"  which  suggest  not 
only  spaciousness,  but  room  for  each  character  and 
individual  to  develop  on  its  own  particular  lines.  The 
Apostles,  when  following  our  Lord,  were  overshadowed 
by  the  Boanerges;  there  was  the  constant  fret  of 
overcrowding,  and  the  possibilities  for  self-realization 
were  few.  But  there  each  of  the  redeemed  shall  be 
able  to  attain  to  a  full  development.  This  is  appar- 
ently taught  us  in  the  comparison  of  the  Apostles  to 
the  twelve  precious  stones  of  Rev.  xxi.,  each  of  which 
is  distinct  from  all  the  rest,  and  each  a  necessary  part 
of  the  foundations  of  the  New  Jerusalem.  As  the 
gardener  "  beds  out "  the  crowded  plants  of  his  hot- 
house, so  will  the  saints  have  room  to  be  themselves, 
and  each  will  have  love  enough,  joy  enough,  space 
enough,  opportunity  enough,  together  with  his  own 
share  of  the  Fulness  and  Service  of  Christ.  Peter  will 
still  be  Peter,  and  John  John.     Each  star  will  differ 


THE  PREPARED  PLACE  103 

from  all  the  rest.  There  will  be  many  mansions,  and 
no  need  to  scramble  or  contend  for  room. 

But  they  require  preparing,  as  Peter  and  John  were 
sent  to  prepare  for  the  Master's  coming,  with  the  rest. 
The  same  Greek  word  is  employed  in  each  case. 
"  Master,  where  shall  we  prepare  the  Passover  ? " — "  I 
go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you."  Our  Lord  desired  to 
eat  that  Passover,  but  how  much  more  to  eat  as  in 
Mark  xiv.  25  ?  In  the  meanwhile  He  is  as  busy  in  pre- 
paring as  Peter  and  John  were  all  that  afternoon.  As 
they  thought  for  Him,  so  He  is  thinking  for  us.  No 
Angel  could  do  for  us  what  He  can,  because  He  has 
lived  amongst  us  in  our  homes,  and  knows  exactly  what 
makes  Home.  Peter  on  the  Holy  Mount  proposed 
three  slight  booths,  but  that  is  an  everlasting  habitation. 
As  they  prepared  the  sacrificial  lamb,  in  memory  of  the 
Passover  in  Egypt,  there  will  be  yonder  in  the  midst 
of  the  Throne  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain.  He  will 
once  more  drink  of  the  new  wine  of  the  Feast,  once 
more  gird  himself  and  come  forth  to  serve,  once  more 
join  in  singing  Psalms  of  Rejoicing,  like  the  great  Hal- 
lel  which  always  mingled  with  and  closed  the  Feast. 

But  the  significance  of  our  Lord's  Promise  is  clearly 
defined  when  we  remember  that  He  had  predicted,  only 
a  few  minutes  before,  that  one  should  deny  and  all 
forsake.  "  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you  " — for  thee, 
my  beloved  John;  for  thee,  Peter,  when  the  memory 
of  thy  denial  shall  be  as  waters  that  pass  away;  for 
thee,  Thomas,  though  given  to  doubt  and  pessimism; 
for  thee,  Philip,  longing  to  be  shown  the  Father.  Not 
one  of  you  shall  be  overlooked,  not  one  shall  miss 
his  share.  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,  neither 
let  it  be  afraid."  Surely  we  may  take  courage,  if  only 
we  are  trusting  Him  for  His  justifying  grace.  In 
spite  of  our  sins  and  failures,  our  sorrows  and  tempta- 
tions. He  will  bring  us  through.  Whom  He  called, 
them  He  also  justified:  and  whom  He  justified,  them 


104  THE  PLAN  OF  OUR  LIVES 

He  also  glorified.  "  What  shall  we  then  say  to  these 
things?  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us?" 
"  I  know  whom  I  have  believed !  " 

HI.  " Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled ! "  "I 
WILL  receive  you  TO  MYSELF." — Again  the  idea  of  the 
afternoon  is  repeated.  When  the  two  Apostles  had 
finished  their  preparations,  they  went  to  the  cit3^-gate, 
or  the  end  of  the  street,  or  at  least  to  the  door-step,  to 
receive  their  expected  guests.  In  this  sense  our  Lord's 
words  must  be  understood,  and  they  are  confirmed  by 
the  fact  that  the  martyr  Stephen  saw  the  Son  of  Man 
standing  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  as  though  He  had 
risen  up  to  receive  and  welcome  him. 

It  was  as  though  the  Master  particularized  each  as 
He  spoke:  "James!  thou  wilt  be  the  first  of  the  noble 
army  of  martyrs.  Herod  will  slay  thee  with  the  sword, 
but  thou  shalt  have  a  royal  reception.  Thomas!  thou 
wilt  be  sawn  asunder,  but  I  will  receive  thee,  and  an 
abundant  entrance  will  be  given.  John!  thou  wilt 
linger  on  till  all  of  thy  generation  shall  have  passed 
away,  but  I  will  be  waiting  for  thee,  and  thou  shalt 
see  again  the  dear  faces  which  thou  hast  loved  and 
lost  awhile.  Peter!  thou  shalt  stretch  forth  thine 
hands  and  be  borne  to  a  cross,  but  as  My  Father  will 
receive  My  spirit  into  His  hands,  so  My  hands  shall 
receive  thine.  Each  of  you  will  find  Me  waiting  for 
him  on  the  doorstep  of  the  Father's  House." 

"  You  are  too  dear  for  Me  to  allow  you  to  be  misled 
by  false  illusions.  If  Immortality  and  Eternal  Life  had 
been  a  mirage  of  the  desert  or  a  fond  dream  of  the 
poet,  I  would  have  put  you  on  your  guard  against  be- 
ing deceived.  You  believe  that  you  are  sons  of  God, 
that  you  shall  enter  into  His  Presence,  that  you  shall 
sit  down  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob — continue  to 
believe.  If  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told  you.  Let 
not  your  heart  be  troubled,  neither  let  it  be  afraid !  " 


XIV 

,    .    s    "AND  PETER" 

Matt,  xxviii.  i-8;  Mark  xvi.  i-8;  Luke  xxiv.  i-8; 
John  xx.  i-io 

"The  storm  is  o'er — and  hark!  a  still  small  voice 
Steals  on  the  ear,  to  say,  Jehovah's  choice 
Is  ever  with  the  soft,  meek,  tender  soul; 
By  soft,  meek,  tender  ways  He  loves  to  draw 
The  sinner,  startled  by  his  ways  of  awe : 
Here  is  our  Lord,  and  not  where  thunders  roll." 

—Kehle. 

AN  ancient  tradition  closely  associates  Peter 
with  the  authorship  of  the  Second  Gospel, 
which,  whilst  bearing  the  name  of  Mark,  was 
probably  written  beneath  the  prompting  and  super- 
vision of  the  Apostle.  There  are  not  a  few  internal 
corroborations  of  this  view,  both  in  the  omissions  and 
additions  of  the  narrative  as  compared  with  that  of 
Matthew  or  Luke.  Graphic  touches  also  abound  which 
were  clearly  reminiscences  of  one  who  had  been  an 
eye-witness  of  that  wondrous  life.  In  the  forefront 
of  these,  these  two  words  may  be  cited.  Matthew 
records  the  angel's  words  to  the  women  thus :  "  Go 
quickly  and  tell  His  disciples,"  but  Mark  makes  the 
significant  addition,  "and  Peter"  With  the  others, 
those  words  might  be  obliterated  by  tides  of  time  and 
change,  but  they  were  engraven  on  the  rock  of  Peter's 
character  and  inlet  with  gold. 

In  the  Song  of  Solomon  three  traits  are  assigned  to 

105 


io6  LOVE,  STRONG  AS  DEATH 

a  perfect  love,  and  each  of  these  was  notably  present 
in  our  Lord's  remarkable  treatment  of  His  Apostle  and 
friend,  who  had  been  warned  thrice,  had  denied 
Him  thrice,  and  on  three  different  occasions  was 
restored. 

I.  Love  is  strong  as  Death. — Much  had  happened 
to  our  Lord  since  that  hour  in  the  Judgment  Hall 
when  He  turned  and  looked  upon  Peter.  He  had 
drained  to  the  dregs  the  cup  which  the  Father  gave 
Him  to  drink,  in  pursuance  of  an  agreement  into  which 
they  had  entered  before  time-cycles  commenced  to 
revolve. 

At  His  own  request  He  had  been  made  sin  for  man, 
that  God  might  be  just  and  the  justifier  of  them  who 
believed. 

He  had  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself 
amid  rending  rocks  and  sack-clothed  skies,  and  the 
hidden  face  of  the  Father's  love. 

He  had  bowed  His  head  in  death,  laying  down  His 
life  of  Himself,  and  by  death  had  destroyed  Him  that 
had  the  power  of  death. 

He  had  met  the  prince  of  this  world  in  the  very 
stronghold  of  his  power,  and  had  wrested  from  his 
grasp  the  keys  of  Hades  and  of  death. 

He  had  passed  through  the  mysterious  regions  of 
Hades,  referred  to  afterwards  as  "  the  lower  parts 
of  the  earth,"  and  had  proclaimed  His  finished  work 
to  the  spirits,  which  aforetime  were  disobedient. 

He  had  issued  from  His  grave,  leading  captivity 
captive,  and  robbing  death  of  its  sting  and  the  grave 
of  its  victory. 

The  tidings  were  already  speeding  to  the  farthest 
limits  of  the  Universe,  that  through  the  blood  of  His 
Cross,  the  very  heavens  had  been  brought  into  closer 
relationship  with  God.  Even  the  minstrelsy  of  the 
eternal  world  must  have  been  arrested  as  angels  desired 


THE  LOVE  THAT  WILL  NOT  LET  US  GO    107 

to  penetrate  to  the  heart  of  the  crowding  revelations 
of  that  hour. 

But  His  love  was  unimpaired.  There  was  no  change 
in  its  tenacity  or  direction.  His  delights  were  still 
with  the  sons  of  men.  Neither  death  nor  the  grave 
had  made  any  change  in  it;  any  more  than  they  can 
change  the  love  of  those  whom  we  have  loved  and 
lost  awhile.  Peter's  case  had  been  on  His  heart  when 
He  closed  His  eyes  in  death,  and  it  was  present  to  Him 
when  He  stopped  for  a  moment  to  speak  with  the 
angel  sentinel,  whom  He  charged  with  this  message. 

To  quote  again  the  words  of  the  Canticle — He  had 
set  Peter  as  a  seal  on  His  heart,  the  seat  of  love,  and 
on  His  arm,  the  seat  of  power.  He  had  carried  that 
seal  unbroken  through  the  crowding  incidents  which 
achieved  the  redemption  of  our  race;  and  the  first 
words  of  the  risen  Saviour  proved  that  His  love  is 
strong  as  death.  Having  loved  His  own,  who  were  in 
the  world,  He  loved  them  to  the  end.  His  love  is 
strong.  In  others  it  may  be  merely  emotional  and 
affectional,  expressing  itself  in  smiles,  or  tears,  or 
tendernesses,  and  largely  composed  of  sentiment;  but 
Christ's  love  is  strong  as  well  as  tender.  He  is  Im- 
mortal Love,  but  He  is  the  Strong  Son  of  God. 

What  death  and  the  grave  could  not  do,  the  lapse 
of  Time  and  the  glories  of  Heaven  have  not  done. 
He  loves  us  still,  as  He  loved  Peter  and  Mary,  John 
and  Thomas,  in  the  days  of  His  flesh.  Still,  He  breaks 
the  silence,  uttering  our  names,  understanding  our 
failures,  and  calling  us  back  from  the  far  country  into 
which  we  have  wandered.  Appropriating  but  revers- 
ing Peter's  words.  He  seems  to  say :  "  Though  all  men 
should  be  offended  because  of  thee,  yet  will  I  never 
be  offended." 

II.  Many  Waters  cannot  quench  Love. — Like 
Greek  fire,  Christ's  love  burns  under  water ;  for  surely  in 


io8  GETHSEMANE 

this  case,  as  in  myriads  of  others,  it  was  beset  by  floods 
of  ingratitude,  indifference,  waywardness,  denial,  and 
sin. 

Peter  had  failed  Him  in  the  Garden,  hut  He  sent  for 
him. — Descending  from  the  Upper  Room  to  the  street 
by  the  outer  staircase,  over  which  vine-leaves  may  have 
fluttered  in  the  moonlight,  Jesus  led  His  disciples  across 
the  Kedron,  and  up  the  lower  slopes  of  Olivet,  till  they 
reached  the  upland  lawns,  studded  by  olive  trees  and 
the  tents  of  the  pilgrims.  An  enclosure  there  had  appar- 
ently been  placed  at  His  disposal  by  the  owner,  to  which 
He  frequently  resorted.  His  disciples  had  ofttimes  en- 
tered its  precincts  in  His  company,  and  were  somewhat 
startled,  when  He  bade  eight  of  them  await  His  coming 
at  the  entrance,  whilst  three  only  were  invited  to  ad- 
vance farther  along  the  grassy  path,  chequered  by  alter- 
nate moonlight  and  shadow.  Even  they  were  presently 
stayed  and  urged  to  unite  in  watching  and  prayer, 
whilst  He  went  to  the  distance  of  a  stone-cast.  He  must 
tread  the  wine-press  alone,  and  of  the  people  none 
might  be  with  Him.  Not  even  the  beloved  John  could 
be  there  when  He  took  the  cup  from  His  Father's  hand. 

"  Watch  with  me,"  He  said,  as  He  left  them.  The 
request  was  prompted  by  His  humanity,  for  who  does 
not  know  the  priceless  value  of  sympathy  in  the  su- 
preme hours  of  life?  It  is  easier  to  make  springs  in 
the  valley  of  Baca,  if  we  are  surrounded  by  a  pilgrim- 
band.  Guinevere,  the  Queen,  was  comforted  by  the 
prattlings  of  the  little  maid  at  Glastonbury.  Foras- 
much as  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood, 
Jesus  Himself  likewise  took  part  in  the  same.  But  He 
knew  also  that  it  was  the  hour  of  the  Power  of  Dark- 
ness. The  winnowing  was  about  to  begin.  Already 
Judas  was  mustering  his  bands.  Only  as  they  were  en- 
cased in  the  whole  armour  of  God  could  the  disciples 
continue  to  stand  in  that  evil  day.  But  as  He  came 
three  times  to  see  how  they  fared,  they  failed  Him. 


NO  USE  FOR  THE  SWORD  109 

Their  eyes  were  heavy  with  sleep;  and,  finally,  an 
Angel  had  to  furnish  the  strengthening  which  man 
might  have  rendered,  but  failed.  Could  Peter  ever 
forget  the  pathos  of  the  Master's  remonstrance  which 
was  addressed  specially  to  himself — "  What,  could  ye 
not  watch  with  me  one  hour  ?  "  But  though  Peter  had 
failed  Him,  notwithstanding  all  his  protestations,  Jesus 
sent  for  him. 

Peter  misconceived  of  His  Spirit  and  Plan  and 
greatly  endangered  Him. — All  the  Apostles  misread  the 
situation.  They  had  no  doubt  that  Jesus  was  the  Son 
of  the  Highest  and  the  King  of  Israel.  To  the  last  they 
wrangled  for  the  highest  positions  in  the  Kingdom. 
They  were  not  altogether  surprised  at  the  approach  of 
the  armed  band,  which,  indeed,  Jesus  had  taught  them 
to  expect.  They  had  even  provided  against  such  an 
emergency  by  procuring  two  swords,  of  which  Peter 
had  one.  It  had  probably  been  arranged  that  if  the 
need  arose,  they  should  die  around  His  person,  though 
they  did  not  expect  that  this  would  be  necessary.  At 
the  supreme  moment  God  would  surely  interpose. 
Angel  hosts  would  appear  on  the  scene,  and  their  foes 
would  be  scattered  as  in  the  day  of  Midian. 

Though  Peter  quailed  before  the  servantmaid,  he 
was  not  craven-hearted.  He  would  have  fought  like 
a  lion,  if  the  Lord  had  permitted  it.  The  others,  when 
they  realized  the  situation,  asked  the  Master  to  give 
the  signal  for  smiting  with  the  sword;  and  Peter,  not 
waiting  for  the  Master's  word,  was  already  in  the  midst 
of  the  band  hacking  and  hewing.  He  struck  a  mighty 
blow  on  the  helmet  of  Malchus,  which  glanced  aside 
and  severed  his  right  ear.  It  was  well  meant,  but  it 
could  not  be  permitted.  The  use  of  force  would  pro- 
voke retaliation.  They  that  took  the  sword  would 
perish  by  the  sword.  The  dignity  of  the  Saviour's 
voluntary  surrender  would  be  impaired,  and  His  de- 
liberate acceptance  of  the  Cross  would  be  beclouded. 


no  THE  HOUR  OF  TRIAL 

The  Pharisees  would  be  only  too  glad  to  construe  their 
resistance  as  the  beginning  of  a  revolt  against  the 
Roman  occupation. 

Jesus  had  repeatedly  insisted  that  no  one  took  His 
life  from  Him,  but  that  He  laid  it  down  of  Himself.  By 
the  express  commandment  of  the  Father,  He  could  sur- 
render and  resume  it.  But  the  voluntary  element  in 
His  suffering  would  be  lost  sight  of  if  He  were  led  off 
after  an  unseemly  struggle.  He  therefore  interposed 
to  quell  the  rising  excitement,  held  back  His  followers, 
asked  permission  for  the  freeing  of  one  hand  that  He 
might  reach  as  far  as  the  wounded  man,  and  after  a 
brief  remonstrance  allowed  them  to  lead  Him  away  as 
a  lamb  to  the  slaughter.  This  prompt  action  saved  the 
situation,  which  Peter's  impulsive  act  had  created.  But 
the  energy  of  his  interposition  proved  the  more  abso- 
lutely how  entirely  Peter  and  the  rest  had  misconceived 
of  the  whole  situation.  But  notwithstanding  all,  and 
with  the  knowledge  that  his  misconceptions  were  still 
clinging  to  him,  Jesus  mentioned  Peter  specially,  and 
sent  this  special  summons  for  him  to  come. 

Peter  had  falsified  his  Vows  and  denied  Him  thrice 
with  Oaths — hut  He  sent  for  him. — The  band — their 
captive  in  the  midst — turned  back  to  the  city.  John 
first  recovered  from  the  panic-stricken  flight,  which 
had  carried  all  the  Apostles  from  their  Master's  side, 
and  seems  to  have  followed  closely  in  the  rear,  whilst 
Peter  followed  afar  off.  On  the  opening  of  the  great 
gates  of  Annas's  palace,  where  the  first  informal  trial 
for  extracting  further  evidence  was  held,  John  en- 
tered with  the  crowd;  but  not  discovering  Peter,  and 
sure  that  he  was  waiting  outside,  he  went  back  and 
spoke  to  the  maid,  who  kept  the  wicket-gate,  on  his 
friend's  behalf.  She  recognized  him  as  an  acquaint- 
ance of  the  High  Priest,  and  admitted  Peter,  scanning 
his  features  as  he  passed  under  the  oil-lamp,  which 
lighted  up  the  porch. 


STARTLED  INTO  DENIAL  in 

This  porch  led  to  a  quadrangle,  open  to  the  sky; 
and  as  the  night  was  cold,  the  servants  kindled  a  fire 
in  the  big  brazier,  which  shed  its  flickering  rays  on 
the  faces  of  the  motley  group  that  had  shared  in  the 
night's  adventure.  Roman  soldiers  and  Hebrew  police, 
the  servants  of  the  High  Priest  and  the  spies  and  in- 
formers that  were  waiting  to  give  evidence,  stood  and 
warmed  themselves.  John  had  gone  "  with  Jesus " 
into  the  Council  Chamber,  the  windows  of  which 
looked  out  on  the  quadrangle;  but  Peter  joined  the 
group  around  the  fire.  "  He  stood  and  warmed  him- 
self." He  had  lost  heart  and  hope.  That  his  Master 
had  so  evidently  refused  his  help  had  disconcerted  him, 
and  perhaps  had  created  a  veil  of  misunderstanding 
and  disappointment.  Still  he  wanted  to  see  the  end, 
and  he  thought  to  evade  discovery  by  joining  with  the 
rest,  as  though  one  of  themselves. 

The  portress,  who  had  admitted  him,  leaving  her 
post,  came  up  to  the  fire,  recognized  Peter,  and  rallied 
him  before  the  entire  circle  with  the  challenge :  "  This 
man  also  was  with  the  Galilean."  He  was  taken  un- 
awares, but  parried  the  attack  by  professing  that  he 
did  not  understand  what  she  meant — "  I  neither  know 
nor  understand  what  thou  sayest." 

Seizing  a  favourable  opportunity,  when  probably 
their  attention  was  drawn  in  another  direction,  he 
withdrew  towards  the  porch,  and  as  he  reached  it  a 
cock  crew  in  the  grey  dawn.  Whilst  there  he  was 
recognized  by  another  maid,  who  had  probably  heard 
the  words  of  her  fellow-servant  at  the  fire.  She  re- 
marked to  a  group  of  bystanders :  "  This  man  also  was 
with  Jesus  the  Nazarene."  Again  he  denied,  and  this 
time  with  an  oath — "  I  know  not  the  man."  At  the 
expiration  of  an  hour  he  was  back  again  at  the  fire, 
perhaps  with  the  intention,  made  in  his  own  strength, 
of  retrieving  the  situation.  He  would  vindicate  his 
Master,  even  though  he  did  not  identify  himself  with 


112       THE  HEART-BREAKING  LOOK 

His  cause!  But  when  he  opened  his  mouth,  his  in- 
ability as  a  Galilean  to  pronounce  the  Hebrew  gut- 
turals gave  the  lie  to  his  repeated  and  emphatic  dis- 
avowals of  any  attachment  to  Jesus.  One  and  another 
denounced  him ;  his  brogue  betrayed  him ;  and  the  kins- 
man of  Malchus  recognized  his  relative's  assailant. 
The  situation  was  extremely  threatening,  and  the  hap- 
less disciple  began  to  curse  and  to  swear,  saying,  "  I 
know  not  this  man  of  whom  ye  speak."  But  the  more 
boisterous  his  speech,  the  stronger  the  evidence  against 
himself. 

A  second  time,  while  he  was  yet  speaking,  a  cock 
crew,  and  Peter  remembered  the  words  that  Jesus  had 
spoken.  Jesus  also  had  heard,  for  the  second  time, 
the  same  sound,  and  had  heard  Peter's  strident  voice 
where  He  was  standing.  Then,  forgetting  His  own 
griefs.  He  turned  and  looked  at  Peter,  not  with  anger 
or  reproach,  but  remembering  and  reminding.  And 
yet  He  sent  for  him.  Many  waters  cannot  drown  His 
love!  We  too  may  fail  Him,  deny,  and  crucify  Him 
afresh.  But  when  our  heart  turns  back  in  an  agony  of 
grief  and  remorse.  He  will  renew  us  again  unto  repent- 
ance. "  Only  so  look  on  us,  when  we  fail  Thee,  blessed 
Lord,  that  we  too  may  be  recalled  from  our  relapse, 
and  broken-hearted  may  be  forgiven  and  restored ! " 


XV 

"HE  WAS  SEEN  OF  PETER" 
Luke  xxiv.  13-35 ;  i  Cor.  xv.  5 

"  When  brooding  o'er  remembered  sin 
The  heart  dies  down — O  mightest    then 

Come  ever  true,  come  ever  near, 

And  wake  the  slumbering  love  again, 

Spirit  of  God's  most  holy  fear." 

—Kehle. 

ONLY  they  who  have  suffered  keen  remorse,  as 
they  recall  some  real  or  fancied  lapse  from 
the  ideals  of  human  love  for  those  who  have 
crossed  the  River,  will  appreciate  the  anguish  with 
which  Peter  fled  from  the  hateful  scene  of  his  denial. 
That  last  look  of  tender,  pitying  love  haunted  him! 
Could  it  be  the  last  time  that  he  should  see  that  be- 
loved face,  or  hear  that  familiar  voice?  Would  he 
never  be  able  to  tell  out  his  anguish  and  receive  the 
assurance  of  forgiveness?  Was  this  the  end?  Could 
he  ever  be  happy  again?  Even  if  God  forgave  him, 
could  he  forgive  himself?  How  could  he  have  been 
entrapped  in  so  false  a  deed?  Why  had  he  not  kept 
away  from  the  fire,  or  definitely  left  the  scene  when 
first  he  was  recognized? 

Tradition  says  that  whenever,  in  coming  years,  he 
heard  a  cock  crow,  he  was  accustomed  to  fall  on  his 
knees  and  weep ;  and  that  he  was  accustomed  daily  to 
awaken  at  cock-crow  and  spend  in  prayer  the  fateful 

113 


114         THE  CRUCIFIXION  MORNING 

hour  in  which  he  failed  his  Lord.  Probably  neither 
of  these  is  a  correct  version  of  the  subsequent  expres- 
sion of  his  repentance.  It  is  more  likely  that  his  old 
strong,  boastful  spirit  received  its  death-wound,  that  he 
became  very  pitiful  and  tender  toward  the  fallen,  and 
that  he  came  to  believe,  as  never  before,  in  the  love  of 
the  Saviour,  the  coals  of  which  gave  so  vehement  a 
heat  as  to  melt  his  heart  into  a  fountain  of  tears.     It 

WAS  A  VERY  FLAME  OF  JeHOVAH. 

I.  The  Scene  of  his  Bitter  Sorrow  is  not  re- 
vealed.— Where  did  he  go  when  he  left  the  Palace 
of  Annas?  Surely  to  the  Garden,  that  he  might  lie 
full  length  on  the  very  spot  of  his  Master's  agony, 
and  wet  with  his  tears  the  sward  which  had  been  be- 
dewed by  the  sweat  of  blood.  And  when  the  sun 
was  up,  and  Jerusalem  began  to  stir,  he  would  make 
his  way  to  the  house  of  John,  where  he  knew  that  he 
would  be  secreted  even  from  the  prying  eyes  of  the 
others,  who  were  bewildered  with  the  events  that  had 
so  suddenly  swept  their  Master  from  their  midst,  and 
with  Him  all  their  hopes  for  this  world  and  the  next. 
At  least  they  had  this  to  be  thankful  for,  that  even  if 
they  had  forsaken  their  Lord,  yet  they  had  not  denied 
Him. 

The  morning  hours  passed  slowly  forward.  He 
could  hear  that  the  city  was  moved.  But  probably  only 
snatches  of  information  floated  through  the  open  win- 
dow. Now  Crucify  from  ten  thousand  throats,  and 
then  the  strange  word  Barabbas.  John  was  too  en- 
grossed with  all  that  was  happening  to  return,  and  no 
other  could  have  guessed  that  he  was  there. 

Presently,  about  noon,  there  were  heavy  steps  in 
the  doorway,  and  on  going  to  see  he  found  John  sup- 
porting, almost  carrying,  Mary,  the  Mother.  In  her 
agonized  face,  and  in  John's,  he  learnt  that  the  worst 
had  happened,  and  probably  forbore  to  question  them. 


THE  EMPTY  TOMB  115 

Maybe  neither  of  them  knew  at  that  tune  that  he  was 
carrying  a  heavier  load  than  they. 

From  his  first  Epistle  we  learn  that  Peter  was  an 
eyewitness  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  If,  as  is  prob- 
able, that  phrase  includes  the  sufferings  of  the  Cross, 
he  may  have  stolen  through  the  streets  over  which  the 
midday  gloom  was  beginning  to  gather,  that  he  might, 
even  from  a  distance  and  obscurely,  see  the  outlines  of 
the  Cross,  which  bore  the  One  whom  he  loved  with  all 
the  passion  of  a  strong  and  penitent  heart.  He  might 
not  tarry,  however,  for  John  probably  awaited  his 
return  to  care  for  Mary,  whilst  he  went  back  to  stand 
so  near  the  Cross  as  to  hear  the  last  dying  cry  which 
announced  a  finished  Redemption  and  the  committal 
of  the  Redeemer's  Spirit  to  the  Father. 

With  these  details  and  others  he  returned  home; 
and  in  the  weary  waiting-time  of  the  following  hours 
Peter  confided  all  the  tragic  story  of  his  fall.  Happy 
are  they  who  under  such  circumstances  have  such  a 
friend.  Happy  also  are  they  who,  remembering  their 
own  failures  and  weakness,  are  skilful  enough  to  bind 
up  broken  hearts.  "  If  a  man  be  overtaken  in  any 
trespass,  ye  which  are  spiritual  restore  such  an  one  in 
a  spirit  of  meekness,  looking  unto  thyself,  lest  thou 
also  be  tempted.  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,  and 
so  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ."  (^ 

II. — The  Fact  of  the  Resurrection  broke  on  him 
GRADUALLY. — Had  the  whole  wonder  and  glory  broken 
on  the  Apostles  suddenly,  it  would  have  overwhelmed 
and  dazed  them.  The  excess  of  light  would  have 
blinded  them.  It  was,  therefore,  wisely  ordered  that 
it  should  be  tempered,  and  made  "  by  divers  portions 
and  in  divers  manners." 

(i)  The  Tomb  was  Empty. — Early  on  Easter 
morning  Mary  of  Magdala,  breathless  with  haste,  broke 
in  on  the  sleepless  anguish  of  John's  home  with  her 


Ii6  MARY  OF  MAGDALA 

hastily-formed  impression  that  the  body  had  been  taken 
from  its  resting-place  by  unknown  hands.  "  They 
have  taken  away  the  Lord  out  of  the  tomb,  and  we — 
women  who  visited  the  spot  further  to  embalm  His 
body — know  not  where  they  have  laid  Him." 

Instantly  Peter  was  on  his  feet  and  hurried  forth, 
followed  by  John,  and  they  made  for  the  Garden  at 
the  top  of  their  speed.  On  reaching  the  tomb  first, 
because  younger  and  fleeter  of  foot,  John  contented 
himself  with  looking  in.  Sacred  awe,  reverence,  won- 
der, and  respect  for  ceremonial  custom  withheld  him. 
But  Peter,  regardless  of  all  restraint,  true  to  his  im- 
pulsive nature,  could  brook  no  delay,  but  went  straight- 
way into  the  chamber  whence  his  Master  had  gone 
forth  an  hour  or  two  before.  Clearly  it  had  not  been 
rifled  either  by  friend  or  foe.  The  careful  disposition 
of  the  clothes  made  that  hypothesis  impossible.  They 
had  fallen  together  so  naturally  as  though  the  body 
which  had  lain  within  their  folds  had  been  withdrawn 
without  removing  them,  and  the  head-cloth  was  care- 
fully folded  up,  as  only  deliberate  hands  would  fold  it. 
John  was  so  impressed  with  what  he  saw  that  he  al- 
most guessed  the  truth;  and  Peter  became  thoughtful 
and  wondering.  But  they  needed  further  confirma- 
tion, for  they  knew  not  the  Scripture  that  He  must  rise 
again  from  the  dead;  and  so  they  went  away  again 
to  their  own  home. 

(2)  The  Lord  appeared  to  Mary  Magdalene. — This 
was  the  next  stage  in  the  unveiling  of  the  great  wonder 
of  the  Lord's  Resurrection;  and  evidently  it  made  a 
profound  impression  on  Peter,  for  it  is  in  Mark's  Gos- 
pel that  we  are  told  that  when  Jesus  was  risen  early  on 
the  first  day  of  the  week  He  appeared  first  to  Mary 
Magdalene,  "  from  whom  He  had  cast  out  seven 
demons."  That  last  clause  probably  reveals  the  secret 
of  the  comfort  which  Christ's  interview  with  Mary 
brought  to  his  distraught  soul.     He  well  knew  the  story 


YES,  PETER!  117 

of  her  past,  from  which  the  Master  had  delivered  her ; 
and  he  reasoned  that  if  Jesus  had  revealed  Himself  to 
her,  had  spoken  her  name  in  the  old  tone  of  voice,  and 
had  commissioned  her  to  go  to  His  brethren  with  the 
message  of  Resurrection  and  Ascension,  there  was 
good  reason  to  believe  that  in  his  own  case  also,  though 
all  unworthy,  the  Lord  would  resume  His  old  intimacy 
and  comradeship. 

Mary  had  led  him  to  visit  the  empty  tomb,  and 
now,  as  she  came  a  second  time  to  the  house,  with 
the  further  tidings  of  her  own  experiences  with  Him, 
whom  she  took  to  be  the  gardener — a  surmise  which 
was  more  accurate  than  she  supposed — Peter's  hope 
took  a  great  leap  forward.  To  adopt  his  own  words 
in  after  years,  he  was  "  begotten  again  unto  a  living 
hope,"  and  he  was  prepared  for  the  yet  more  personal 
invitation,  which  was  even  then  upon  its  way.  The 
tenderness  of  that  message  could  be  relished  with  a 
more  delicate  appreciation,  because  it  was  not  the 
first  intimation  of  the  mighty  event  which  had  just 
transpired. 

(3)  The  Message  of  the  Women, — They  had  de- 
parted quickly  from  the  sepulchre,  and  ran  to  bring  His 
disciples  word;  but  they  were  arrested  by  the  appear- 
ance of  their  Lord,  who  met  them  saying,  "All  hail ! " 
They  took  hold  of  His  feet  and  worshipped  Him,  and 
He  repeated  the  Angel's  bidding,  saying,  "  Fear  not,  go 
tell  my  brethren."  All  this  delayed  them.  It  would 
appear  also  that,  whereas  Mary  had  gone  to  John  and 
Peter,  these  women  probably  made  for  the  other  eight 
Apostles,  who  were  gathered  in  the  Upper  Room ;  and 
as  the  Magdalene  evidently  hastened  from  the  two 
Apostles  to  the  eight,  so  the  women  hastened  from  the 
eight  to  the  two,  who  were  discussing  the  events  of 
the  morning,  and  even  the  Mother  had  staid  her  tears 
to  listen  with  wondering  expectancy. 

The  women  broke  in  on  them  like  a  ray  of  the  sun 


Ii8  THE  PRIVATE  INTERVIEW 

through  a  cloud-drift  in  a  murky  sky.  They  had  seen 
the  Lord!  He  had  spoken  to  them!  He  had  com- 
missioned them  to  bring  them  glad  tidings  of  great 
joy !  But  before  they  met  Him,  the  Angel  had  bidden 
them  inform  His  brethren  and  Peter  that  He  was  risen, 
and  was  preceding  them  into  Galilee,  where  they  should 
see  Him.  The  women  had  no  idea  of  the  relevancy 
of  those  words.  They  looked  on  Peter  as  foremost 
among  the  disciples,  and  it  seemed  quite  fitting  that 
he  should  be  specialized  by  the  Angel's  message ;  but 
to  Peter  the  mention  of  His  name  was  as  life  from  the 
dead.  Did  he  not  start  up  when  he  heard  the  women 
mention  it?  Did  he  not  question  them  severely,  to 
be  quite  sure  that  the  utterance  of  His  name  was  not 
an  invention  of  their  own  ?  Did  he  not  insist  on  their 
recalling  and  repeating  the  whole  wonderful  story, 
with  every  detail  of  light  and  shade?  And  when  they 
had  passed  on  to  tell  "  the  rest,"  did  he  not  quietly 
adore  the  love  that  would  not  let  him  go,  the  love  that 
bore  all  things,  believed  all  things,  hoped  all  things, 
endured  all  things,  and  that  never  failed,  until  it  had 
found  and  brought  back  the  sheep  that  had  gone 
astray  ? 

III.  Finally  the  Lord  appeared  to  him. — In  his 
enumeration  of  the  witnesses  of  our  Lord's  Resurrec- 
tion in  I  Cor.  xv.  Paul  records  that  "  He  was  seen  of 
Cephas  " ;  and  when  Cleopas  and  his  friend  entered  the 
Upper  Room  on  Easter  Eve  they  were  saluted  by  a 
chorus  of  glad  voices,  saying:  "  The  Lord  is  risen  in- 
deed, and  hath  appeared  unto  Simon."  That  is  all  we 
know.  Where  they  met,  and  when,  and  what  passed 
between  them — all  these  are  hidden  in  Christ's  heart 
and  Peter's.  Probably  they  will  never  be  disclosed, 
even  when  the  sea  gives  up  its  dead.  Nor  do  we  wish 
them  to  be  disclosed,  because  we  also  have  secrets  with 
Christ,  which  we  have  committed  to  His  safe  keeping, 


THE  VICTORY  OF  LOVE  119 

with  the  absolute  assurance  that  they  shall  never  be 
divulged,  even  in  that  world  where  they  know  even  as 
they  are  known. 

What  passed  in  that  interview  is  not  recorded,  but 
from  our  own  experience  we  can  fill  in  the  blank  page. 
We  know  that  there  must  have  been  bitter  tears,  broken 
words,  long  breaks  of  silence  when  speech  was  over- 
borne, assurances  that  the  penitent  did  really  love, 
whatever  might  be  argued  to  the  contrary  from  word 
or  act.  Did  he  quote  Psalm  li,  or  repeat  what  he  re- 
membered of  the  confession  of  the  Prodigal  Son  ?  But 
if  so,  was  he  not  stopped  before  he  had  gone  far  into 
either?  Did  he  not  hear  that  gentle  voice  calling  for 
the  best  robe,  the  ring,  the  feast,  the  music,  and  song? 
Yes,  we  know  all  that  passed.  We  have  gone  through 
it !  We,  too,  have  been  lifted  from  the  dust  and  made 
to  sit  at  the  King's  table,  though,  like  Mephibosheth, 
we  have  been  "  lame  in  both  our  feet." 

What  delicate  thoughtfulness  there  was  in  the 
Master's  arrangement  of  this  personal  interview  prior 
to  the  later  gathering  of  the  day,  when  He  revealed 
Himself  to  the  entire  company.  In  their  presence 
Peter  could  never  have  poured  out  his  soul,  or  made 
full  confession,  or  have  kissed  His  feet.  That  first 
hour  of  radiant  fellowship  cast  its  sheen  on  all  sub- 
sequent hours  of  that  memorable  day.  Having  washed 
in  the  laver  of  forgiveness,  he  had  boldness  to  enter 
into  the  Holiest ;  and  when  the  Lord  showed  His  hands 
and  side,  the  credentials  of  His  finished  work,  and 
breathed  on  them  the  zephyr-breath  of  Pentecost, 
Peter  was  able  to  appropriate  them  to  the  full. 

What  mortal  tongue  can  tell  or  pen  describe  the 
delicacy,  depth,  tenderness,  and  strength  of  the  love 
of  Jesus  ?  The  thought  has  sometimes  suggested  itself 
whether  it  was  not  worth  being  born  of  a  sinful  race 
to  have  had  the  opportunity  of  learning  what  the  for- 
giving grace  of  Jesus  is.     Charles  Kingsley  desired 


120  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE  OF  LOVE 

that  these  three  words  should  be  engraved  on  the 
tomb  which  held  the  mortal  remains  of  his  wife  and 
Inmseli—Amavimus,  Amamus,  Amabimus—WQ  loved, 
we  love,  we  shall  love.  But  the  love  of  Jesus  in 
its  past,  present,  or  future,  only  eternal  ages  will 

Yet' why  do  we  speak  of  tenses,  when  we  speak  of 
God's  Love?  It  is  eternal,  ageless,  timeless.  Before 
time  began,  and  when  time  has  ceased  to  be,  Love  is. 
We  may  compare  the  sun  with  the  glowworm  s  torch, 
but  each  has  had  its  beginning  and  will  have  its  close; 
whilst  the  Love  of  Jesus  has  neither  the  one  nor  the 
other.    Fear  not!    It  will  never  fail  thee! 


XVI 

THE  RENEWED  COMMISSION 

John  xxi 

"And  man's  forgiveness  may  be  true  and  sweet, — 
But  yet  he  stoops  to  give  it.    More  complete 
Is  Love  that  lays  Forgiveness  at  thy  feet, 
And  pleads  with  thee  to  raise  it  I    Only  Heaven 
Means  crowned,  not  vanquished,  when  it  says  '  Forgiven !  * " 

— A.  Procter. 

IT  IS  almost  certain  that  the  final  chapter  of  John's 
Gospel — which  has  been  described  as  a  postscript 
— was  appended  by  the  beloved  Apostle  as  a 
tribute  to  the  memory  of  his  friend,  who,  according  to 
universal  tradition,  had  sealed  his  long  and  glorious 
ministry  by  martyrdom — the  martyrdom  of  the  Cross. 
In  noble  loyalty  to  Peter's  memory,  he  desired  to  show 
how,  notwithstanding  the  three-fold  denial,  the  Lord 
had  Himself  replaced  the  keys  in  his  hand  and  returned 
his  sword.  The  Primitive  Church  had  already  recog- 
nized him  as  one  of  its  pillars;  but  the  story  of  his 
actual  rehabilitation  had  not  been  placed  on  the  canvas 
of  history.  Accordingly,  beneath  the  inspiration  of 
the  Divine  Remembrancer,  the  Apostle-Evangelist  set 
himself  to  paint  his  inimitable  scene,  the  exquisite 
naturalness  and  beauty  of  which  attest  its  authenticity. 
Is  there  one  of  us  who  has  not  been  entangled  in 
some  word  and  act  which,  if  taken  by  itself,  might  have 
been  interpreted  as  debarring  us  from  future  service 

121 


122     THE  ARCHITECT  OF  THE  CHURCH 

in  the  Flock  of  Christ?  But  we  knew  in  our  deepest 
soul  that  such  an  interpretation  would  have  been  abso- 
lutely erroneous  and  unjust,  since  we  were  conscious 
that  the  failure  was  an  exception,  not  the  rule ;  an  eddy 
or  cross-current  on  the  surface,  not  the  main  drift  of 
the  stream.  Of  course,  there  are  sudden  outbursts  of 
evil  which  reveal  an  inward  rottenness  of  long  dura- 
tion, as  the  fall  of  a  forest-tree  may  result  from  the 
prolonged  activity  of  the  borer-worm  at  its  heart.  We 
must  not  forget  to  make  that  admission ;  but  it  is  also 
true  that  under  strong  and  sudden  pressure  a  man  may 
be  betrayed  into  acts  and  words  which  belie  his  true 
self,  as  Peter's  oaths,  in  the  hall  of  Annas,  belied  his 
faithful  attachment  to  the  person  of  his  Lord. 

All  things  are  naked  and  open  to  the  eyes  of  Him 
with  whom  we  have  to  do.  Jesus  knew  that  the  Peter 
of  the  denial  was  not  the  real  Peter,  and  since  his 
future  leadership  depended  on  the  concurrence  of  his 
brethren,  He  skilfully  contrived  to  bring  about  a  revela- 
tion of  Peter's  innermost  soul,  that  the  effect  of  his  de- 
nial might  be  neutralized,  and  that  unquestionable  proof 
might  be  afforded  of  his  possession  of  the  qualities  re- 
quired for  the  leadership  of  the  Church.  The  great 
Architect  of  the  Church  knew  the  qualities  of  the  man 
who  was  to  be  the  Master-Builder,  and  took  care  to 
provide  the  platform  on  which  their  possession  by  Peter 
would  be  displayed.  The  unanimity  with  which  his 
leadership  was  agreed  to  proves  the  infinite  wisdom 
which  inspired  the  Lord's  action  when  they  met  for  the 
last  time  on  the  shores  of  the  Lake  of  Galilee. 

I.  The  Scene. — In  obedience  to  their  instructions, 
the  Apostles  returned  to  Galilee  and  to  the  Lake,  every 
headland  and  inlet  of  which  was  fragrant  with  hal- 
lowed associations.  Here  He  wrought  that  miracle! 
Yonder  He  was  sitting  when  He  spoke  those  words! 
Their  circumstances,  however,  were  entirely  different. 


A  FRUITLESS  NIGHT  OF  TOIL        123 

The  funds,  which  our  Lord  shared  with  them,  were 
no  longer  forthcoming;  and  as  the  time  of  their  next 
interview  was  unknown,  and  a  long  interval  might 
elapse  before  they  received  further  instructions,  they 
were  prepared  to  adopt  Peter's  proposal  to  resume 
their  former  craft.  Simon  Peter  said,  "  I  go  a-fishing." 
They  immediately  agreed  with  his  suggestion,  and  re- 
plied, "  We  also  come  with  thee/' 

The  evening  breeze  was  fragrant  with  the  myriad 
flowers  of  spring.  Meadows  and  mountain-pastures 
were  aglow  with  colour.  The  Lake  lay  dimpling  in  the 
warm  sunset.  Boats  and  nets  were  to  hand ;  and  with 
the  eager  alacrity  with  which  men  will  respond  to  the 
call  of  an  old-time  but  long-discarded  habit,  seven  of 
them  pushed  off  from  shore  in  one  of  the  larger  fishing- 
boats,  a  smaller  one  being  attached  to  the  stern,  and 
made  off  for  the  familiar  fishing-grounds.  Darkness 
stole  down  the  mountains,  the  lights  died  out  along  the 
shore,  heaven's  vault  revealed  its  starry  galaxies,  the 
silence  of  the  night  was  broken  only  by  the  letting- 
out  and  drawing-in  of  the  nets,  or  the  occasional  stroke 
of  the  oar;  but  when  the  grey  morning  began  to 
break — they  had  taken  nothing. 

The  disappointment  was  hard  to  bear.  But  those 
who  have  had  experience  of  God's  dealings  are  well 
aware  that  one  door  is  shut  that  another  may  be 
opened,  and  that  our  programme  is  arrested  in  a  cer- 
tain direction  because  God  has  provided  something 
wiser  and  better.  Had  the  fishers  been  successful  that 
night,  it  would  have  been  much  more  difficult  to  win 
them  back  to  a  life  of  dependence  on  their  Master's 
personal  care.  He  wished  them  to  understand  that 
their  livelihood  was  to  be  obtained,  not  by  plying  their 
fishing-craft,  but  by  fires  that  He  would  light  and  meals 
that  His  own  hands  would  prepare.  The  lesson  is  for 
us  all.  If  our  days  are  filled  with  consecrated  service, 
we  may  go  to  our  beds  and  sleep  in  peace.     "  It  is  vain 


124      THE  MASTER'S  PREPARATIONS 

to  rise  up  earl}^,  and  so  late  take  rest,  for  so  He  giveth 
to  His  beloved  in  sleep." 

They  failed  to  recognize  the  Figure  standing  on  the 
white,  sandy  shore,  enwrapped  in  the  golden  shimmer 
of  the  morning  mist.  Surely  He  was  some  early  fish- 
dealer  ;  and  the  two  inquiries  addressed  to  them  across 
the  quiet  water  failed  to  dissipate  their  mistake.  That 
fishermen,  returning  from  a  night  of  toil,  should  be 
asked  if  they  had  fish  to  sell,  or  that  directions  should 
be  given  for  catching  a  shoal  by  one  standing  on  the 
shore,  were  familiar  incidents.  But  John,  with  the 
unerring  instinct  of  love,  discerned  the  presence  of 
the  Lord,  and  in  a  whisper  passed  his  glad  discovery 
to  Peter.  None  of  the  others  could,  for  the  moment, 
have  understood  why  he  suddenly  caught  up  and 
wrapped  around  his  person  the  outer  coat,  which  he 
had  cast  aside  to  expedite  his  labours,  and  plunged  into 
the  water,  regardless  of  the  morning  chill.  Those  swift 
strokes,  however,  gave  him  a  brief  additional  oppor- 
tunity of  lonely  personal  intercourse  with  Jesus,  in 
which  to  renew  the  ecstasy  of  the  garden  interview. 

We  may  not  linger  on  the  tender,  almost  womanly, 
thoughtfulness  which  had  kindled  a  fire,  at  which 
exhausted  fishermen  might  chafe  their  limbs  and  dry 
their  clothes,  and  which  had  prepared  the  bread  and 
fish.  Nor  may  we  dwell  on  the  frugality  of  the  miracu- 
lous, which  bade  them  bring  of  the  fish  that  they  had 
caught.  It  is  enough  if  we  learn  from  the  entire  inci- 
dent that,  from  our  Lord's  Resurrection  and  onwards, 
the  seine-net  of  the  Gospel  must  be  cast  into  the  multi- 
tudinous waters  of  the  human  world,  that  the  Master's 
presence  and  direction  are  absolutely  essential  to  suc- 
cess, that  the  fisher's  needs  for  comfort  and  subsistence 
would  never  be  forgotten,  and  that  when  the  Master 
and  they  have  wrought  together  in  obtaining  the  har- 
vest of  the  sea,  He  will  welcome  them  as  they  near  the 
heavenly  shore  in  the  daybreak,  and  will  feast  with 


DEVOTION  TO  CHRIST  125 

them  and  they  with  Him.  None  of  them  will  then  ask. 
Who  art  Thou  ?  for  they  shall  know  it  is  the  Lord,  and 
there  shall  be  no  misunderstanding  or  division,  for 
the  sea  and  morning  mists  will  be  no  more,  and  the 
former  things  will  have  passed  away. 

The  outstanding  qualifications  for  religious  leader- 
ship are  three:  Passionate  Devotion  to  Christ,  Un- 
feigned Humility,  and  Indomitable  Courage.  In  each 
of  these  Peter  had  been  proved  deficient  by  the  in- 
cidents of  the  Betrayal-night.  But  they  were  latent 
in  his  soul,  as  clover-seed  in  an  ill-nourished  field,  and 
only  waited  for  favourable  circumstances  to  call  them 
forth.  These  circumstances  and  conditions  were 
furnished  by  the  Saviour's  loving  thoughtfulness. 

(i)  Passionate  Devotion  to  Christ. — Had  it  not  been 
for  the  Denial,  none  of  the  Apostolic  band  would  have 
questioned  Peter's  attitude  towards  the  Master.  The 
members  of  the  other  groups  must  often  have  longed 
for  the  ardour  of  the  Boanergic  group,  and  especially 
of  Simon  Peter.  But  a  shadow  of  grave  doubt  now 
overspread  the  sky,  and  as  they  spoke  together  they 
may  have  questioned,  with  all  seriousness,  the  strength 
and  steadfastness  of  his  devotion.  Our  Lord  realized 
this,  and  knew  that  before  He  entrusted  to  him  the 
tendance  of  His  sheep  and  lambs,  He  must  secure  a 
very  decisive  and  unquestionable  expression  of  the 
Love  which  He  at  least  recognized  as  a  dominant 
factor  in  His  Apostle's  character. 

When,  therefore,  breakfast  was  over,  Jesus  repeated 
the  same  question  thrice :  "  Lovest  thou  me  ? "  and 
in  each  case  addressed  him  as  Simon  Bar-Jona,  i.  e. 
Simon,  son  of  John.  "  We  read  of  one  of  the  Caliphs," 
says  Dr.  Trench,  "  who  gave  to  his  principal  officers 
an  honourable  surname  suggested  by  their  qualities. 
When  he  wished  to  show  his  dissatisfaction,  he  dropped 
it,  calling  them  by  their  own  names ;  this  caused  them 
great  alarm.     When  he  resumed  the  employment  of 


126      CHRIST'S  SILENT  VINDICATION 

the  surname,  it  was  a  sign  of  their  return  to  favour." 
This  helps  us  to  understand  why  our  Saviour  laid  this 
stress  on  His  servant's  earlier  name.  He  desired  to 
give  him  a  fresh  opportunity  of  acquiring  the  Rock- 
man  title. 

Love  to  Jesus  is  the  indispensable  qualification  of 
service.  Only  those  who  love  can  satisfy  the  require- 
ments of  Christ's  service.  Only  they  can  bear  the  fret 
and  strain  of  wayward  wills  and  faltering  resolve.  Love 
is  needed  for  the  gathering  of  tired  and  sick  lambs 
to  the  shepherd's  bosom,  for  the  weary  mothers  finding 
the  mountain-path  steep  and  difficult,  and  for  the 
straying  sheep,  possessed  by  an  incessant  tendency 
to  break  through  gaps,  or  wander  browsing  on  for- 
bidden pastures.  The  first,  second,  and  third  qualifica- 
tion of  the  true  Shepherd  is  Love.  Therefore  the 
Master  asked  persistently,  "  Dost  thou  love  Me  ?  "  And 
to  the  thrice-repeated  question  Peter  returned  the  same 
reply,  "  Thou  knowest  that  I  love  Thee,"  only  adding 
at  the  third  time :  "  Thou  knowest  it  not  only  with 
the  perfect  knowledge  of  God,  but  with  the  intuitive 
sympathy  of  man." 

If  we  may  so  state  it,  Peter  showed  great  dexterity 
in  using  our  Lord's  silence  to  secure  his  vindication. 
In  each  case  he  put  Christ  in  such  a  position  that  He 
must  have  broken  silence  had  it  not  been  so.  He 
could  not  have  held  His  peace,  if  He  had  entertained 
any  doubt  of  Peter's  passionate  attachment  to  His 
Person  and  devotion  to  His  service.  This  seems  to 
have  been  the  gist  of  Peter's  reply.  He  staked  every- 
thing on  his  Lord's  intimate  knowledge  of  the  thoughts 
and  intents  of  his  heart,  and  challenged  Him  to  refute 
his  threefold  avowal  of  love,  if  it  was  not  true  to  fact. 
In  after-days,  when  the  Apostles  discussed  this  remark- 
able incident,  they  must  have  acknowledged  that  they 
were  convinced,  not  only  by  Peter's  own  statements, 
but  because  the  Master,  when  He  was  appealed  to. 


PETER  TAKES  THE  XOW  SEAT       127 

tacitly  assented  that  they  were  true,  and,  by  immedi- 
ately repeating  His  commission,  endorsed  and  con- 
firmed them.  Clearly  the  Master  had  no  doubt  about 
His  servant's  loyalty,  or  He  would  never  have  entrusted 
him  with  responsibilities  so  arduous  and  important. 
There  is  much  comfort  here.  The  Lord  knows  all 
things.  The  tiny  lichen  on  the  stone,  the  limpet  on 
the  rock,  the  ephemerae  of  the  forest  glade!  All  are 
within  His  vision,  and  so  also  is  our  love,  though  often 
overgrown,  confused  in  utterance,  and  blushing  to  con- 
fess Him. 

(2)  Unfeigned  Humility. — Two  Greek  words  stand 
for  Love.  The  one  expresses  the  reverent  and  adoring 
Love  with  which  we  should  regard  the  Holy  God.  The 
other  expresses  love  in  its  more  human  and  aifectional 
aspect.  In  His  two  first  questions,  Jesus  asked  His 
Apostle  whether  he  loved  with  the  former  love.  This 
Peter  modestly  disclaimed.  "  Nay,"  said  he,  "  but  I 
love  Thee  with  the  ardour  of  personal  affection.'* 
Finally,  our  Lord  descended  to  his  level  and  asked 
if  indeed  he  loved  Him  thus,  eliciting  the  immediate 
response :  "  Assuredly,  and  whether  as  Son  of  God 
or  Son  of  man.  Thou  knowest  it  right  well." 

With  evident  reference  to  Peter's  boast  made  at 
the  Supper,  that  though  his  fellow-disciples  might 
desert  the  Master,  yet  he  never  would,  Jesus  asked 
him  if  he  loved  Him  more  than  the  rest.  But  all  his 
braggart  boastfulness  had  gone,  and  he,  by  his  silence 
and  his  grief,  confessed  that  he  dared  not  claim  any 
priority  in  love.  He  was  prepared  to  take  the  lowest 
seat,  and  own  himself  last  and  least.  In  this,  also, 
he  proved  that  he  was  worthy  for  the  foremost  place, 
because  he  was  willing  to  take  the  lowest.  If  only  he 
might  fill  some  lowly  office  he  would  be  content.  He 
had  become  as  a  little  child;  and  our  Lord  did  not 
hesitate,  with  the  hearty  assent  of  the  brethren  who 
stood  around,  to  take  him  by  the  hand  and  place  him 


128  HIS  HEROIC  COURAGE" 

in  the  old  foremost  position  which  he  seemed  to  nave^ 
forfeited  for  ever. 

(3)  Indomitable  Courage. — From  the  beginning  our: 
Lord  saw  the  Cross  standing  clear-cut  on  the  horizon 
before  Him.  Amid  all  the  excitement  of  His  earlj 
appearance.  He  told  Nicodemus  that  the  Son  of 
man  must  be  lifted  up.  Do  we  sufficiently  estimate 
His  courage  in  treading  resolutely  a  path  that  led  ever 
deeper  into  the  valley  of  death?  Not  for  a  moment 
would  we  depreciate  the  magnificent  courage  with 
which,  in  the  excitement  of  the  charge,  the  soldier 
flings  himself  on  the  foe,  foot  to  foot,  steel  to  steel. 
But  we  may  fairly  question  whether  it  will  bear  com- 
parison with  courage  of  that  other  quality  which,  with 
the  certain  knowledge  of  a  most  terrible  death  before 
it,  never  flinches,  never  loses  its  self -composure  or 
genial  kindliness,  but  continues  to  pursue  the  course 
which  will  inevitably  incur  that  fate,  the  anticipation 
of  which  freezes  the  blood. 

This  was  our  Lord's  experience.  "  I  have  a  baptism 
to  be  baptized  with,  and  how  am  I  straitened  till  it 
be  accomplished  ? "  Henceforth  it  was  to  be  Peter's 
also.  "  Thou  shalt  stretch  forth  thy  hands,  and  another 
shall  gird  thee,  and  carry  thee  whither  thou  wouldst 
not.  This,  He  said,  signifying  by  what  death  he 
should  glorify  God."  In  his  proud  self-confidence 
Peter  once  said :  "  Lord,  with  Thee  I  am  ready  to  go 
to  prison  and  to  death."  The  Saviour  replied :  **  Thou 
canst  not  follow  Me  now,  but  thou  shalt  follow  Me 
afterwards."  This  afterwards  had  now  dawned.  The 
disciple  was  not  to  be  above  his  Lord.  He  was  to 
follow  Him  to  prison  in  Acts  xii,  and  to  death  at  the 
end  of  all — the  death  of  the  Cross,  as  tradition  assures 
us,  and  this  prediction  suggests.  In  his  second  Epistle 
Peter  refers  to  these  words  of  Jesus :  "  I  Imow  that 
the  putting  off  of  my  Tabernacle  cometh  swiftly,  even 
as  our  Lord  Jesus  signified  unto  me."     Qearly  for 


THE  BEST  LOVE  LAST  129 

him  also  the  Cross  was  the  ultimate  goal ;  but  he  never 
swerved  from  the  chosen  path  of  service  because  of 
its  menace.  He  was  steadfast  and  unmovable,  always 
abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  For  the  joy  that 
was  set  before  him,  he  was  willing  to  endure  the  Cross, 
despising  the  shame,  and  for  him  also  there  was  laid 
up  a  crown  of  righteousness.  The  courage  that  could 
stand  that  strain  was  of  rare  and  splendid  quality, 
and  approved  his  fitness  for  leadership. 

By  evincing  his  ownership  of  these  three  qualities 
Peter  established  his  right  to  the  foremost  place  in 
the  glorious  company  of  the  Apostles,  and  he  nobly 
fulfilled  the  position,  as  we  shall  see.  He  would  have 
been  glad  if  John's  companionship  and  help  had  been 
granted  him,  and  this  yearning  for  his  fellowship 
inspired  the  question,  "  What  shall  this  man  do  ?  "  But 
other  work  awaited  the  beloved  Apostle,  and  would 
take  him  in  another  direction.  "  No,"  said  our  Lord, 
"  John  cannot  be  spared  to  you,  but  I  will  be  your 
all-sufficient  Helper  to  the  end."  What  that  companion- 
ship meant  for  Peter  is  made  clear  in  his  epistles,  es- 
pecially in  the  verse  which  tells  us  that  he  rose  to  the 
highest  form  of  love,  the  form  which  he  had  not  dared 
to  claim.  "  Whom  not  having  seen  ye  love,"  not  only 
with  the  love  of  passionate  affection,  but  with  that  of 
the  highest  quality — ^the  love  of  God  Himself. 


XVII 

A  WITNESS  OF  THE  RESURRECTION 

Acts  i.  1-26;  ii.  i-ii 

"  Then  robing  Him  in  viewless  air,  He  told 
His  secret  to  a  few  of  meanest  mould: 
They  in  their  turn  imparted 
The  gift  to  men  pure-hearted. 
While  the  brute  many  heard  His  mysteries  high, 
As  some  strange  fearful  tongue,  and  crouch'd  —they  knew 
not  why." 

— Newman. 

WITH  his  brethren  Peter  returned  from  the 
scene  of  the  Ascension  to  the  city  with  great 
joy.  Though  he  must  have  realized  that  the 
blessed  intercourse  of  the  last  six  weeks  was  now 
ended,  and  that  his  Master  had  definitely  gone  to  the 
Father,  yet  the  indubitable  evidence  of  His  great  power 
and  glory,  the  memory  of  those  hands  outstretched  in 
benediction  as  He  went,  the  assurance  that  they  were  to 
be  endued  with  the  power  of  the  Comforter  within  the 
next  few  days,  and  the  assurance  that  Jesus  when  He 
came  again,  as  He  certainly  must,  would  be  the  same 
unchangeable  Lord  and  Friend  as  they  had  known 
Him,  were  sufficient  to  lift  them  all  into  an  ecstasy  of 
joy  and  triumph,  which  exceeded  and  overflowed  their 
sense  of  deprivation.  It  was  even  as  He  had  said, 
their  Master  had  not  left  them  comfortless. 

Quite  naturally  they  returned  to  the  Upper  Room, 
hallowed  by  so  many  precious  associations.     It  may 

130 


NOT  A  CASTAWAY!  131 

have  been  part  of  the  house  of  the  mother  of  John 
Mark,  which  afterwards  became  the  gathering-place 
for  the  harried  Church;  and  probably  it  was  filled  to 
its  utmost  capacity  when  the  entire  group  of  Apostles, 
disciples,  holy  women,  and  the  brethren  of  the  Lord, 
were  assembled.  Peter  seemed  naturally  and  by  uni- 
versal consent  to  become  their  leader;  but  there  is 
no  sign  of  the  autocratic  power  with  which  some  would 
invest  him.  He  simply  acted  as  chairman  or  moderator 
for  the  time  being,  because  the  Lord  Himself,  though 
unseen,  was  recognized  by  them  all  as  still  literally 
present;  and  it  was  to  Him  that  the  choice  between 
the  two  candidates  for  the  Apostolate  was  referred. 
"  Do  thou.  Lord,  who  knowest  all  hearts,  show  which 
of  these  two  Thou  hast  chosen."  It  must  have  been 
with  intense  inward  emotion  that  Peter  compared  his 
own  position,  as  the  honoured  leader  of  the  assembly, 
with  the  lot  of  Judas,  whom  he  had  known  so  inti- 
mately. How  he  must  have  secretly  wondered  at  and 
adored  the  grace  which  had  saved  him  from  taking  his 
own  life  in  that  hour  of  awful  anguish,  when  he  too 
realized  that  he  had  failed  his  Lord  in  the  supreme 
crisis !  The  difference  between  the  two  men  lay  in  this 
that  the  one  acted  designedly  and  deliberately,  whilst 
the  other — to  use  the  words  of  another  Apostle — was 
overtaken  by  a  sudden  gush  of  temptation  against 
which  he  had  made  insufficient  preparation. 

The  one  particular  on  which  we  lay  stress  is  the 
definition  which  Peter  gave  of  the  special  work  which 
lay  before  them,  as  it  had  been  outlined  by  the  Lord 
during  the  previous  days.  They  were  to  be  witnesses 
to  the  fact  of  the  Resurrection  of  their  Lord.  His 
words  are  very  definite.  "  It  is  necessary,"  he  said, 
"  that  of  the  men  who  have  been  associated  with  us 
from  the  beginning  of  our  Lord's  ministry  in  the  days 
of  John  the  Baptist  until  now,  one  must  be  chosen 
to  become  with  us  a  witness  to  His  Resurrection." 


132    IMMORTALITY  AND  RESURRECTION 

When  their  Master  had  said  that  they  were  to  be  His 
witnesses,  Peter  perceived  that  the  one  outstanding 
fact  on  which  their  witness-bearing  must  be  concen- 
trated was  His  Resurrection,  that  carried  with  it  all 
the  rest  and  was  the  keystone  to  their  position. 

I.  The  Salient  Feature  of  Peter's  Life-work. — 
It  was  witness-bearing  to  the  Resurrection.  The  word 
translated  witness  is  fraught  with  solemn  and  sacred 
associations.  It  is  martyr.  So  many  of  the  early 
witnesses  sealed  their  testimony  with  their  blood,  that 
the  word  became  synonymous  with  the  yielding  up 
of  life  amid  the  horrors  of  fire  and  sword,  of  the  prison- 
cell  and  the  amphitheatre.  We  cannot  utter  the  word 
lightly.  It  is  significant  of  tears,  and  blood,  and 
death-agony,  and  the  light  reflected  from  the  face  of 
Jesus  on  the  death  pallor  of  upturned  faces. 

The  Resurrection  of  Jesus  is  not  primarily  to  be 
argued  for  as  a  doctrine;  it  rests  on  attestation  to  a 
fact.  It  is,  indeed,  a  gospel,  a  theology,  and  a  phil- 
osophy. It  was  the  fitting  consummation  of  the  work 
of  Jesus.  It  satisfies  the  heart,  answers  our  deepest 
longing,  and  harmonizes  with  the  silent  analogies  of 
nature.  It  is  consistent  with  the  anticipations  of  the 
Prophets,  which  have  been  since  the  world  began. 
But,  primarily,  it  is  an  historical  fact,  communicated 
and  vouched  for  by  a  sufficient  number  of  unimpeach- 
able witnesses. 

There  is  a  vast  difference,  therefore,  between  the 
arguments  on  which  Plato  and  others  based  their 
belief  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul  and  our  belief  in 
the  Resurrection  of  the  Christ.  That  the  soul  would 
live  after  this  brief  span  of  life,  like  as  the  bird  might 
flit  through  a  rudely-constructed  banqueting-hall, 
entering  from  out  the  stormy  darkness  at  the  one  end, 
and,  after  flying  through  the  lighted  chamber,  issuing 
forth  again  into  the  night,  that  there  must  be  a  judg- 


OUR  SAVIOUR'S  PENTECOST  133 

ment,  a  weighing,  a  readjustment  of  the  unequal  lots 
of  human  life — these  and  similar  processes  of  reason- 
ing established  the  strong  probability  of  life  hereafter, 
which  impressed  Egyptians,  Greeks,  and  Anglo-Saxons. 
But,  at  the  best,  it  was  only  a  probability.  In  the 
Resurrection  of  Jesus  men  were  confronted  with  a 
fact,  which  could  not  be  gainsayed,  in  that  the  resur- 
rected body  of  Jesus  was  "  seen  for  many  days  of  them 
that  came  up  with  Him  from  Galilee  to  Jerusalem, 
who  became  His  witnesses  to  the  people."  There  is 
a  clear  distinction,  therefore,  between  the  Platonic 
philosophy  which  argues  for  Immortality,  and  the 
Christian  faith  in  the  Resurrection,  which,  as  a  well- 
attested  fact,  has  brought  Life  and  Immortality  to 
light.  "  We  are  witnesses,"  said  Peter  and  the  others, 
"  that  the  God  of  our  fathers  hath  raised  up  Jesus, 
whom  ye  slew,  hanging  Him  on  a  tree."  This  was 
his  testimony  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost;  and  in  the 
house  of  Cornelius,  when  he  was  used  to  unlock  the 
door  of  faith  to  the  Gentiles,  he  said :  "  Him  God 
raised  up  on  the  third  day,  and  shewed  Him  openly; 
not  to  all  the  people,  but  unto  witnesses  chosen  by 
God,  even  to  us,  who  did  eat  and  drink  with  Him 
after  He  rose  from  the  dead." 

II.  Peter's  Equipment  for  his  Life-work. — 
Before  our  Lord  entered  on  His  ministry  He  was 
anointed  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  from  the  wilder- 
ness He  returned  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  into  Galilee. 
May  we  not  say  that  He  also  tarried  till  He  (so  far  as 
his  human  nature  required  it)  was  endued  with  power 
from  on  high?  That  was  our  Saviour's  Pentecost. 
What  was  true  of  the  head  must  be  also  true  of  the 
body.  The  sacred  oil  must  descend  to  the  hem  of 
the  garments  of  the  High  Priest.  If  He  was  the  Christ, 
i.  e.,  the  Anointed,  how  much  more  must  His  followers 
stoop   beneath    the    chrism    of    Pentecost,    that   they 


134  PATIENCE  PERFECTED 

might  truly  be  known  as  Christians,  i.  e.,  anointed 
ones! 

This  is  what  He  had  promised.  He  said :  "  I  go 
to  the  Father,  and  will  ask  of  Him,  on  your  behalf, 
and  He  will  give  you  another  Paraclete,  that  He  may 
abide  with  you  for  ever,  even  the  Spirit  of  Truth." 
Having,  therefore,  passed  through  the  heavens,  and 
taken  His  seat  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  He  did  not 
fail  of  His  sure  promise,  but  asked  and  received  of 
the  Father  into  His  Divine-human  nature,  that  fulness 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  had  been  His  in  His  pre- 
existent  glory,  but  which  now,  as  the  Head  of  the 
Church,  He  was  able  to  pour  forth  upon  all  who  were 
united  with  Him  by  a  living  faith. 

Day  after  day  they  waited,  sometimes  in  the  Upper 
Room,  but  perhaps  more  often,  as  Luke  tells  us,  in  the 
Temple,  worshipping  Christ,  blessing  God  with  great 
joy,  and  wondering  how  soon,  and  in  what  manner, 
the  promised  gift  of  power  would  be  bestowed.  How 
often  must  they  have  quoted  and  pondered  those 
parting  words — "  Ye  shall  receive  power  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  coming  upon  you."  But  they  all  continued 
together  in  prayer,  with  the  women,  and  Mary,  the 
blessed  mother,  and  His  brethren.  Each  day  they 
expected,  but  for  ten  days  patience  was  given  the 
opportunity  of  perfecting  her  work. 

It  was  the  first  day  of  the  week,  and  a  notable  day 
withal,  for  the  priests  in  the  special  Temple  service 
would  present  the  first  loaves  of  the  new  harvest  before 
God.  That  the  fulness  of  the  year  had  been  safely 
gathered  in  was  the  subject  of  universal  congratula- 
tion and  thankfulness.  The  city  was  crowded  with 
people  from  all  the  world.  It  was  a  time  of  house 
decoration,  festal  dresses,  jubilant  processions.  "  How 
great  was  His  goodness  and  how  great  His  beauty; 
corn  made  the  young  men  cheerful,  and  the  new  vintage 
the  maids."     It  was  the  early  morning,  the  embryo 


THE  GIFT  OF  TONGUES  13S 

Church  was  probably  assembled  in  one  of  the  courts 
or  precincts  of  the  vast  Temple  area.  They  were  all 
together  in  one  place,  when  there  was  a  sound  from 
Heaven,  as  of  the  rushing  of  a  mighty  wind,  which 
startled  the  entire  city;  and  there  appeared  what 
seemed  to  be  a  globe  of  fire,  which  broke  into  tongues 
as  of  flame,  that  rested  on  each  of  them.  Peter  looked 
on  John,  and  saw  the  expressive  symbol  on  his  bowed 
head,  little  realizing  that  the  same  sublime  event  had 
also  happened  to  himself.  Then  looking  around,  and 
seeing  each  similarly  crowned,  he  concluded  that  an 
equal  share  in  this  fiery  baptism  had  been  imparted 
to  him  also.  Perhaps  he  at  that  moment  remembered 
the  words  of  his  first  teacher :  "  There  cometh  One 
after  me,  who  is  mightier  than  I,  whose  sandals  I 
am  not  worthy  to  unloose.  He  shall  baptize  you  in  the 
Holy  Spirit  and  in  fire."  The  whole  company  were 
filled,  and  began  to  speak  with  other  tongues,  as  the 
Spirit  gave  them  utterance — Peter  with  the  rest. 

Meanwhile,  summoned  by  the  extraordinary  sound, 
which  evidently  emanated  from  the  Temple,  a  vast 
motley  crowd  gathered.  It  was  composed  of  Jews 
and  proselytes,  religious  men,  gathered  from  every 
part  of  the  known  world.  The  East,  as  far  as  Media, 
the  North  to  the  borders  of  the  Caspian,  the  West 
from  the  coast-lands  of  Egypt  and  Lybia,  and  Rome, 
the  world's  metropolis,  had  furnished  contingents.  As 
this  torrent  of  excited  and  questioning  multitudes 
poured  into  the  Temple  area,  they  were  accosted  by 
the  newly-anointed  disciples,  who,  with  an  assurance 
which  their  new  experience  had  given,  went  freely 
amongst  them,  attesting  the  risen  glory  of  Him  whom 
their  rulers  had  recently  rejected  and  nailed  to  the 
cross.  One  of  them  accosted  a  Jew  from  Greece,  and 
in  the  purest  Attic,  told  him  that  Christ  had  risen.  An- 
other met  a  Jew  who  had,  by  residence  in  Rome,  ac- 
quired the  right  of  citizenship,  and  told  the  story  of 


136  SPIRIT-FILLED  I 

Jesus  in  language  that  Cicero  or  Horace  could  not  have 
excelled.  A  third  encountered  a  group  which,  by  their 
dress,  had  evidently  hailed  from  Arabia,  and  poured 
into  their  astonished  ears  the  Gospel  story. 

Then  Peter  stood  up  and  began  to  speak.  His 
sermon  vv^as  little  else  than  the  citation  of  long  passages 
of  Scripture,  accompanied  by  brief  comments,  showing 
their  application  to  the  present  hour;  but  the  effect 
was  extraordinary.  As  this  Galilean  fisherman  began 
to  speak,  the  mob  suddenly  became  a  congregation, 
the  stormy  waves  of  tumultuous  emotion  dropped 
into  a  calm,  the  minds  of  the  audience  were  penetrated 
and  subdued  by  the  speaker's  fervid  eloquence,  and 
the  crowd  became  as  one  body,  swayed  and  inspired 
by  a  common  impulse.  Presently  the  silence  was 
broken  by  the  cry  as  of  a  man  who  was  mourning  for 
his  firstborn,  and  it  was  met  by  the  wailing  as  of  a 
woman  for  an  only  child.  The  hearers  were  convulsed 
in  tears,  and  sobs,  and  panic  of  soul,  and  from  the 
entire  congregation  the  entreaty  arose :  "  Men  and 
brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ?  '* 

That  anointing  or  infilling  came  to  Peter  at  least 
twice  afterwards,  for  the  Scripture  so  teaches,  but 
probably  it  came  again  and  again.  He  was  filled  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  and  a  second 
time  when  he  addressed  the  Court,  and  was  filled  again 
on  returning  with  John  from  the  presence  of  the 
Sanhedrim  to  their  own  company.  Why,  then,  should 
we  go  on  year  after  year  without  claiming  our  share 
in  this  Pentecostal  Power  ?  The  manufacturers  in  our 
cities  are  not  content  with  the  processes  and  machinery 
which  sufficed  for  their  fathers,  but  are  ever  press- 
ing forward  to  avail  themselves  of  every  fresh  inven- 
tion for  the  saving  of  waste  and  the  securing  each 
fresh  development  of  the  hidden  forces  of  Nature. 
First,  they  discarded  hand-power  for  steam ;  then  steam 
for  electricity,  and  now  electricity  for  the  ether.     They 


POSSESS  YOUR  POSSESSIONS!        137 

are  set  on  obtaining  the  highest  available  power  to 
drive  their  factories.  Ah,  why  do  we  fail  to  make  use 
of  that  vast  spiritual  dynamic  of  which  Pentecost  was 
the  specimen,  and  the  key  of  which  is  in  the  hands 
of  our  risen  Lord,  who  waits  to  open  that  which  no 
man  can  shut,  though  He  shuts  to  all  who  refuse  to  em- 
ploy the  one  pass-word  or  pass-key  of  Faith !  We 
are  not  straitened  in  God,  but  in  ourselves.  We  have 
not,  because  we  ask  not,  or  because  we  ask  amiss. 

The  promise  is  to  us,  to  our  children,  and  to  all 
that  are  far  off — this  is  the  special  phrase  by  which 
Gentile  believers  are  known — even  as  many  as  the 
Lord  our  God  shall  call.  Thus  the  blessing,  originally 
confined  to  Jews,  may  become  the  heritage  of  Gentiles 
also  who  believe  in  Christ.  They  also  may  receive 
the  Holy  Spirit  through  faith.  There  is  not  a  single 
believer  who  reads  this  page  who  may  not  claim  a 
share  in  the  Pentecostal  gift.  The  Spirit  may  be  in 
us,  regenerating  and  renewing  from  within,  as  Jesus 
was  born  of  Mary  through  the  Spirit;  but  it  is  neces- 
sary that  He  should  be  on  us  also,  as  He  descended  and 
remained  on  Jesus  in  His  Baptism,  if  we  are  to  fulfil 
our  ministry  to  mankind.  No  learning,  no  polished 
speech,  no  amount  of  Evangelical  teaching  short  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  can  avail  for  preaching  the  Gospel  to 
the  poor,  the  healing  of  the  broken-hearted,  the  deliver- 
ance of  the  captive,  and  the  recovering  of  sight  to  the 
blind.  We  must  learn  to  say  with  Jesus,  "  The  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  is  upon  Me,  and  He  hath  anointed  Me." 
Why  not  acknowledge  that  there  is  a  blessing  here, 
which  is  yours  by  right,  but  not  yours  by  possession? 
Why  not  confess  that  it  is  your  failure  and  fault  not 
to  have  claimed  it?  Why  not  search  out,  confess, 
and  be  delivered  from  the  sin  or  unbelief  that  has 
deprived  you  of  your  purchased  possession?  Why 
not  humbly  open  your  heart  to  the  entrance  of  that 
blessed  Spirit  who  changes  the  craven-hearted  into 


138       BEGOTTEN  TO  A  LIVING  HOPE 

courageous  confessors,  and  makes  the  weakest  mighty 
as  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  ? 

III.  The  Characteristics  of  Peter's  Life-work 
OF  Witnessing. — It  was  persistent.  On  the  day  of 
Pentecost  in  Acts  ii. ;  in  his  next  great  address,  on 
the  heaUng  of  the  lame  man  in  iii. ;  in  his  apology  be- 
fore the  rulers,  elders,  priests,  and  scribes  in  iv.  lo;  by 
the  great  power  with  which  he  gave  witness  to  the 
Resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  iv.  33 ;  in  his  second 
conflict  with  the  Council  in  v.  32 ;  in  the  answer  which 
he  gave  to  the  inquiries  of  Cornelius  and  his  friends 
in  X.  39-41 — Peter  was  constantly  and  consistently 
a  witness  to  the  same  outstanding  fact  that  though 
Jesus  was  crucified  through  weakness,  yet  He  was 
living  through  the  power  of  God. 

Thus,  when  many  years  had  passed,  and  he  was 
inditing  his  last  messages  to  the  strangers  scattered 
throughout  the  regions  represented  on  the  Temple 
plateau  when  the  Spirit  was  first  outpoured,  we  are 
not  surprised  to  find  him  saying  that  the  God  and 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  begotten  him 
and  others  unto  a  living  hope  by  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead,  and  also  that  emergence 
from  the  waters  of  baptism  was  a  symbol  of  the  rising 
of  the  body  of  Christ  from  the  grave  to  the  right  hand 
of  God,  angels,  authorities,  and  powers  being  made 
subject  unto  Him. 

It  was  steeped  in  Scripture  quotation.  We  have 
already  noticed  this  in  the  Pentecostal  sermon,  where 
out  of  twenty-two  verses  in  the  A.  V.,  twelve  are  taken 
up  with  quotations  from  the  Prophets  and  Psalms. 
We  meet  with  the  same  feature  in  the  next  chapter, 
where  he  refers  twice  to  the  predictions  of  the  holy 
Prophets,  that  it  behoved  the  Christ  to  suflFer,  and  to 
rise  from  the  dead  the  third  day.  It  seemed  as  though 
a  very  special  illumination  had  been  given  him  by  the 


IN  HIS  LIGHT,  WE  SEE  LIGHT        139 

Holy  Spirit  of  Inspiration,  that  he  might  understand 
the  Scriptures  and  perceive  the  relevance  to  Jesus  of 
all  things  written  in  the  Law  of  Moses,  the  Prophets, 
and  the  Psalms. 

This  is  always  the  case.  The  Spirit  bears  witness 
to  the  Word.  The  Testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  Spirit 
of  Prophecy.  When  the  God  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
communicates  to  the  soul  of  man  the  Spirit,  who  pro- 
ceeds from  the  Father  and  the  Son,  He  becomes  the 
Spirit  of  Wisdom  and  understanding  in  the  knowledge 
of  the  Scriptures,  and  they  become  as  a  field  of  the 
cloth  of  gold,  in  the  sheen  of  His  uprising;  or  as  the 
serried  range  of  the  Bernese  Oberland  at  dawn  and 
sunset.  Spirit  of  the  Risen  Lord,  open  our  eyes,  we 
beseech  Thee,  that  we  may  see  the  face  of  Christ  re- 
flected in  every  Scripture,  as  in  a  mirror,  now  darkly, 
but  which  one  day  we  shall  see  face  to  face ! 

//  grew  in  clearness  of  perception.  As  one  climbs 
a  mountain  the  view  extends.  Ravishing  glimpses  of 
other  solemn  heights,  of  wooded  slopes,  of  verdant 
pastures,  of  the  utmost  ocean-rim,  where  the  sunlight 
sparkles,  break  successively  on  the  eye.  Thus  it  is 
with  the  Spirit's  revelation  of  Jesus!  Peter  begins 
with  "  the  Man  of  Nazareth  approved  of  God."  Then 
"  Lord  and  Christ."  Then  "  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth." 
Then  "  His  Son  Jesus."  Then  the  "  Holy  One  and 
the  Just."  Then  the  extraordinary  sublimer  phrase  is 
piled  as  a  climax  and  top-stone  on  all  the  rest — "  the 
Prince  of  Life." 

Prince!  He  is  royal,  and  deserves  the  homage  of 
all  the  Hving.  Prince  of  Life!  There  is  a  world, 
beyond  the  range  of  sense,  where  all  live,  and  live 
unto  Him !  Prince  of  Life !  In  the  literal  rendering 
of  this  great  word  He  is  the  Author  and  Giver  of  Life, 
so  that  he  who  believes  In  Him,  though  he  has  died, 
yet  shall  he  live;  whilst  he  that  liveth  and  believeth 
in  Him  shall  never  die.    Prince  of  Life!    All  hail! 


I40    "  THE  LORD  WORKING  WITH  THEM  " 

Let  us  count  all  things  but  dross  that  we  may  win  the 
full-orbed  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God,  beneath  the 
tutelage  and  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Let  us  leave 
behind  us  all  we  have  known  of  Him,  and  press  on  to 
know  Him,  and  the  power  of  His  Resurrection.  Let 
us  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  Even  if  the 
Divine  Teacher  may  have  to  place  us  at  points  of 
suffering  or  deprivation  in  order  to  give  us  fresh  as- 
pects of  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God,  let  us  not 
complain,  for  the  heart  of  man  has  never  entered  into 
the  full  apprehension  of  Christ  unless  it  has  learnt  to 
be  conformed  to  Him  in  His  death.  The  merchant- 
man found  himself  well  repaid  when  he  carried  away 
the  pearl  of  great  price,  though  he  had  parted  with 
everything  to  get  it. 

It  was  based  on  present  experience.  It  is  remark- 
able that  in  Peter's  witness  to  the  Master's  Risen  Life 
he  does  not  refer  to  the  spectacle  of  the  empty  grave, 
the  ordered  clothes,  the  garden  interview,  the  vision 
of  His  hands  and  side,  the  breakfast  by  the  Lake,  or 
the  Ascension  from  Olivet.  He  says :  You  may  judge 
for  yourselves  by  this,  "  which  ye  now  see  and  hear." 
In  other  words,  he  felt  that  not  only  was  Jesus  on  the 
other  side  of  the  thin  veil,  which  hides  the  unseen 
world,  but  that  He  was  doing  things.  He  had  reached 
the  Father's  right  hand,  and  was  sending  the  Spirit, 
as  He  promised.  He  was  empowering  them  with 
boldness,  insight,  and  utterance.  He  was  working 
with  them,  and  confirming  their  words  with  signs  fol- 
lowing. He  was  making  lame  men  walk,  prison-doors 
open,  hard  hearts  to  break.  Jacob  could  hardly  have 
been  convinced,  if  his  sons  had  confined  themselves 
to  affirming  that  they  had  seen  Joseph  in  Egypt,  but 
when  they  brought  the  old  man  out  to  view  the  wagons 
that  Joseph  had  sent — wagons  of  Egyptian  manu- 
facture, oxen  such  as  only  Egypt  could  breed — the 


THE  LIVING  CHRIST  141 

patriarch  was  satisfied  and  exclaimed :  "  Joseph  is  yet 
aUve.  This  is  just  what  I  might  have  expected  of 
him.  I  will  go  and  see  him  before  I  die."  Peter 
said :  "  He  whom  ye  delivered  up  and  denied  in  the 
presence  of  Pilate,  is  alive,  of  this  we  all  are  witnesses, 
and  so  is  also  the  Holy  Spirit."  Thus  the  testimony 
of  those  early  witnesses  came  not  only  in  power,  but 
in  much  assurance.  When  they  affirmed  that  Jesus 
died  and  rose  and  lived,  the  Holy  Paraclete  corrobor- 
ated with  Plis  affirmation.  "  Yea,  saith  the  Spirit." 
He  stood  beside  them,  not  only  convincing  men  of  sin, 
righteousness  and  judgment,  but  showing  wonders  in 
heaven  above,  and  signs  in  the  earth  beneath ;  "  blood, 
and  fire,  and  vapour  of  smoke." 

Similarly  a  holy  life  will  corroborate  our  witness 
to  the  living  Christ.  If  contrary  to  our  former  habit 
we  seek  the  things  which  are  above;  if  we  manifestly 
derive  from  an  unseen  source  the  power  that  over- 
comes the  world;  if  our  joy  abounds  in  pain  and  sor- 
row, like  springs  of  fresh  water  amid  the  ocean;  if 
though  poor,  we  make  many  rich,  being  hated,  we  love, 
being  refused,  we  entreat,  being  crucified,  we  invoke 
forgiveness  on  the  agents  of  our  shame — we  prove 
that  Jesus  lives ;  like  Stephen  we  must  say :  "  Be- 
hold I  see  heaven  opened  and  the  Son  of  man  stand- 
ing"; and  the  angel-look  on  our  faces  must  corrobo- 
rate our  words. 

We  know  that  Jesus  suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate, 
was  crucified  and  buried,  but  the  sources  of  our  life 
do  not  spring  from  the  hole  dug  on  Calvary  to  receive 
His  cross.  We  are  not  called  to  live  always  in  the 
far-off  scenes  of  His  agony  and  death.  We  do  not 
need  the  aqueduct  of  the  unbroken  witness-bearing  of 
the  Church  to  conduct  to  us  the  blood  which  is  life 
indeed.  We  have  direct  and  immediate  fellowship 
with  the  Prince  of  Life.  The  life  that  left  His  heart 
a  moment  ago  is  now  beating  in  our  pulses.     The 


1 42  "  UNBUSHELLED  LIGHTS  " 

purposes  that  are  forming  in  His  thought  and  becom- 
ing energized  by  His  will  are  ours  also.  We  have  the 
mind  of  Christ.  The  prayers  which  He  is  offering 
beside  the  golden  altar  are  the  much  incense  which 
makes  our  own  intercessions  acceptable.  We  speak  of 
things  that  we  know,  and  testify  of  things  we  have  seen. 
That  which  we  have  seen,  and  handled,  in  our  own 
experience,  are  what  we  communicate. 

If  only  we,  who  profess  the  Name  of  Jesus,  would 
tarry  at  His  doors  until  He  gave  us  audience,  as  Esther 
did  in  the  palace  of  Ahasuerus,  we  should  go  to  men 
with  His  accent  on  our  tongues,  and  His  light  upon 
our  hearts,  and  they  would  be  compelled  to  admit 
that  such  witness  could  only  be  accounted  for  on  the 
hypothesis  that  within  the  veil  stood  One  whom  they 
knew  not. 

But  why  should  we  not?  We  are  called  to  stand 
within  the  Holy  Place.  Behind  us  the  remnants  of 
the  torn  veil,  and  before,  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face 
of  Jesus.  With  unveiled  face  we  are  called  upon  to 
behold  and  reflect  that  glory.  Let  us  not  abdicate 
from  our  high  privilege.  Let  us  not  allow  systems 
of  doctrine,  ritual,  or  service,  or  even  our  efforts  after 
a  sanctified  life,  to  come  between  us  and  the  direct 
vision  of  the  Risen  One.  Then  we  shall  issue  forth 
upon  the  world  bearing  such  evident  traces  of  a  life 
that  cannot  be  accounted  for,  that  those  who  know  us 
best  will  be  compelled  to  look  from  us  to  Him  who 
lives  for  evermore.  The  light  on  the  opaque  surface 
of  the  moon,  which  has  no  lustre  of  her  own,  attests 
beyond  contradiction  the  existence  of  the  sun,  though 
we  see  him  not;  and  as  we  live  in  conference  with 
Christ,  we  shall  be  witnesses  of  His  Resurrection,  and 
secure  the  co-witness  of  the  Yea  of  Pentecost. 


XVIII 

"IN  THE  NAME" 

Acts  iii.  i6 

0  strengthen  me,  that  while  I  stand 
Firm  on  the  Rock  and  strong  in  Thee, 

1  may  stretch  out  a  loving  hand 

To  wrestlers  with  the  troubled  sea." 

— F.  R.  Havergal. 


n 


H 


IS  Name  through  Faith  in  His  Name."  These 
two  are  inseparable.  The  Name,  i.  e.,  the 
Nature  of  Jesus,  may  be  poured  forth  as 
fragrance  on  the  air,  or  light  from  the  sun,  but  there 
must  be  an  appropriate  organ  of  sense  ready,  or  the  fra- 
grance will  be  wasted  and  the  light  unappreciated.  Be- 
fore perfect  soundness  can  be  imparted  to  any  bruised, 
lame,  or  helpless  soul,  there  must  be  the  energy  of  the 
Divine,  which  resides  in  Jesus,  and  the  receptivity  of 
the  Human,  which  is  the  necessary  condition  in  us.  No 
great  work  of  salvation  or  renewal  is  possible  apart 
from  the  clear  enunciation  of  preacher,  teacher,  or 
Christian  worker,  first  of  His  Name,  and  second,  of 
Faith  in  His  Name.  Not  the  Name  without  the  Faith, 
and  not  the  Faith  apart  from  the  Name,  but  the  Name 
and  Faith  in  the  Name. 

A  landscape  may  be  outspread  before  us,  from  the 
snow  mountains  on  the  horizon  to  the  blue  waters  of 
the  lake  at  our  feet,  but  there  must  also  be  a  healthy 
human  eye !  Truth  may  be  explained  with  lucidity  and 
eloquence,  but  of  what  service  will  expositors  be  apart 
from  the  intelligent  and  alert  mind?  Love  may  throb 
in  the  breast  of  the  mother,  but  alas !  if  there  be  no  re- 
sponse in  the  lad  or  girl  who  has  drifted  into  some  far 
country!  Always  there  should  be  the  Name  and  the 
organ  of  Faith  in  the  Name.     Beneath  the  teaching  of 

143 


144  THE  BEAUTIFUL  GATE 

the  Holy  Spirit  Peter  had  learnt  this  lesson  well,  and 
in  his  second  great  Pentecostal  sermon  he  announced 
and  bequeathed  the  eternal  truth  that  the  Nature  of  the 
Risen  Lord,  appropriated  of  a  living  Faith,  will  give 
perfect  soundness. 

I.  What  Peter  Saw. — ^The  Temple  was  enclosed 
in  three  marble  courts,  rising  in  successive  levels  from 
the  city  floor.  The  lowest  of  these  was  the  only  one 
open  to  Gentiles.  A  flight  of  steps  led  up  from  it  to 
the  second,  or  middle,  court,  beyond  which  women 
might  not  go.  Thence  another  flight  of  steps  ascended 
to  the  upper  level  on  which  were  the  altar  and  the 
sanctuary.  At  the  head  of  this  second  stairway,  which 
only  Jewish  men  might  ascend,  stood  the  Beautiful 
Gate,  which  opened  on  the  Temple  level.  It  was  made 
of  Corinthian  brass — an  amalgam  of  precious  metals 
formed  at  the  burning  of  Corinth — and  richly  overlaid 
with  plates  of  gold  and  silver,  which  in  the  sunrise 
shone  with  dazzling  glory.  The  Temple  entrance  faced 
the  East,  to  make  sun-worship  impossible,  and  there- 
fore this  magnificent  doorway,  fashioned  after  the 
semblance  of  a  vine,  was  the  first  to  catch  the  sunrise. 
It  was  so  massive  as  to  task  the  strength  of  twenty  men 
to  open  and  close  its  massive  leaves.  It  was  surely 
fitting  that  men  should  enter  the  Temple  of  God  by 
the  door  of  Beauty.  We  remember  that  the  Psalmist 
sang  of  "  the  beauties  of  holiness."  In  nature  God  ever 
expresses  Himself  in  forms  of  beauty.  Whether  it  be 
the  frosted  devices  that  Winter  imprints  upon  our 
window-panes,  or  the  platines  of  cirri  which  lie  on  the 
blue  meadows  of  the  sky  like  a  flock  of  resting  sheep — 
all  God's  handiwork  is  naturally  beautiful.  When  the 
Love  of  God  is  in  our  hearts,  it  will  express  itself  in 
exquisite  poetry,  in  richest  architecture,  and  in  music 
from  which  perhaps  angel-minstrelsy  may  get  the  theme 
•f  new  songs.     This  is  not  wrong,  so  long  as  we  do  not 


LAME  FROM  BIRTH  145 

allow  the  outward  and  sensuous  to  overwhelm  or  sub- 
merge the  devotion  of  the  spirit.  We  may  have  our 
Gate  Beautiful,  but  we  must  not  stay  there  wondering 
at  its  beauty.  If  we  do,  it  will  become  a  snare  and 
hurtful.  We  must  pass  through  the  outward  to  the  in- 
ward, through  the  sensuous  to  the  spiritual,  through  the 
emblem  to  the  reality.  Else  it  will  be'  better  that, 
like  the  early  Puritans,  we  should  carefully  abjure  the 
beautiful,  and  worship  in  the  barest  sanctuaries,  with 
nothing  to  vie  with  the  claims  of  the  All-Holy,  who 
dwells  not  in  places  made  with  hands. 

For  Beauty  alone  can  never  inspire  Life  or  Health ; 
and  there  was  an  evident  example  of  its  impotence — 
apart  from  the  Spirit  of  Life — in  the  presence  of  this 
unfortunate  man,  now  more  than  forty  years  of  age, 
who  from  his  birth  had  never  walked,  and  who  was  so 
poor  that  he  needed  to  live  on  charitable  doles,  to  ob- 
tain which  he  was  daily  carried  by  kindly  hands  from 
the  poor  slum  where  he  dwelt  to  that  spot  near  the 
Beautiful  Gate,  on  which  he  lay  year  after  year, 
begging  a  pittance  from  the  crowds  that  passed  him 
through  the  Gate  to  gain  the  Temple  plateau.  He  was 
evidently  a  well-known  figure  to  the  citizens  who  made 
constant  visits  to  the  sacred  shrine.  It  is  a  tribute  to 
the  power  of  religion  that  poor  people  gather  towards 
its  fires,  from  the  chill  indifference  of  the  world;  but 
we  must  see  to  it  that  we  do  not  rid  ourselves  of 
responsibility  for  them  by  a  passing  dole.  It  is  wiser 
far  to  consider  the  cause  of  distress  and  poverty,  and 
endeavour  to  remedy  it,  than  to  drop  a  meagre  coin 
into  the  outstretched  hand  and  pass  away.  It  is  not 
thus  that  we  act  as  our  brother's  keeper. 

As  in  company  with  his  friend  and  fellow-Apostle 
Peter  passed  up  the  Temple  steps  on  his  way  to  the 
afternoon  service,  he  beheld  the  glory  of  the  magnifi- 
cent structure  in  all  its  wealth,  and  his  eye  would  have 
been  attracted  by  the  splendour  of  the  gateway  through 


146  "THE  PRINCE  OF  LIFE" 

which  they  were  about  to  pass.  He  saw  also  the 
familiar  spectacle  of  this  lame  man  in  his  misery.  But 
he  saw  something  beside,  which  was  hidden  from  un- 
anointed  eyes.  Being  in  the  Spirit,  the  secrets  of  the 
spiritual  world  were  open  to  him,  and  he  beheld  that 
crippled  life  as  God  meant  it  to  be — whole,  sound, 
healthy,  vigorous,  full  of  the  music  of  perfected  hu- 
man vitality.  The  ideal  man  was  there  hovering  as  a 
beautiful  vision  above  the  travesty  that  lay  on  that  well- 
worn  mat.  The  man  who  was  presently  to  accom- 
pany them  into  the  Temple,  through  that  Beautiful 
Gate,  "  walking  and  leaping,  and  praising  God,"  was 
there  as  a  reality  in  the  spiritual  and  eternal  sphere, 
but  awaiting  realization  in  the  actual  experience  of  this 
material  time-sphere. 

He  saw  also  the  Prince  of  Life,  nearer  to  him  than 
breathing,  closer  than  hands  and  feet.  The  Lord  of 
the  Temple  was  beside  him,  ready  to  cooperate,  brim- 
ming with  the  power  of  an  indissoluble  life,  yearning 
to  communicate  the  strength  and  vigour  so  urgently 
needed  by  this  crippled  existence.  Here  was  weakness, 
there  immortal  life.  Here  despair,  there  resource  and 
hope.  Here  the  depression  of  prolonged  ill-health, 
there  the  radiance  of  the  dawn.  The  one  problem  was 
to  bring  these  two  together.  There  must  be  His  Name, 
but  something  more  was  necessary.  Faith  in  His 
Name  must  be  called  unto  operation  before  the  lame 
man  could  obtain  that  perfect  soundness,  resident  in 
the  Prince  of  Life. 

II.  What  Peter  Did. — The  instant  response  given 
by  the  lame  man  to  Peter's  use  of  "  the  Name  of 
Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth  "  suggests  that  it  was  the 
result  of  a  long  process  of  thought  which  had  evidently 
been  at  work  previously  in  the  heart  of  the  cripple. 

Without  doubt  he  was  perfectly  familiar  with  the 
person  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.     He  had  seen  Him  pass 


FAITH  TO  BE  HEALED  147 

up  those  stairs  scores  of  times.  But  He  had  no  form 
nor  comeliness,  no  appearance  of  affluent  wealth, 
nothing  to  encourage  the  hope  that  He  could  give 
him  an  alms.  The  appearance  of  our  Lord  must  have 
been  that  of  the  ranks  from  which  he  sprang.  When 
they  divided  His  clothes,  the  only  thing  that  seemed 
of  any  worth  to  the  soldiers  was  His  inner  tunic.  But 
of  late  strange  rumours  had  gathered  around  the 
Nazarene.  All  Jerusalem  knew  of  His  arrest,  trial, 
and  consignment  to  the  Cross.  The  preternatural 
darkness  that  veiled  His  anguish  and  the  earthquake 
which  had  synchronized  with  His  death  had  been  the 
subject  of  universal  comment.  The  cripple  himself  was 
lying  on  the  accustomed  spot  when  the  frenzied  priests 
and  Levites  rushed  out  of  the  Temple  Court  with  the 
tidings  that  the  veil  had  been  grasped  and  rent  from  top 
to  bottom,  as  by  unseen  hands.  The  story  of  the  empty 
tomb  and  of  the  mysterious  disappearance  on  the 
Mount  of  Olives  may  also  have  been  discussed  in  his 
hearing;  and  the  recent  marvel  of  the  Day  of  Pentecost 
and  its  result  had  been  matters  within  his  own  cogniz- 
ance, for  the  Temple  itself  had  witnessed  them.  He 
had  heard  the  people  talking  as  they  came  away  from 
Peter's  sermon;  and  the  baptism  of  3,000  converts  in 
the  great  Temple  reservoirs,  was  too  astounding  not  to 
have  come  to  his  ears.  Thoughts  of  this  kind  had  been 
floating  for  days  through  his  mind.  As  yet  they  had 
not  crystallized  into  resolve  or  action.  They  were 
waiting  for  some  additional  impulse  before  they  would 
precipitate  in  a  living  and  working  faith.  In  the  story 
of  the  Apostle  Paul  we  are  told  that  a  similar  case  to 
this  was  presented  to  him  at  Lystra.  There  also  was 
a  man,  lame  from  his  birth,  who  had  never  walked. 
The  same  heard  Paul's  address,  and  we  are  told  that  at 
its  close  the  Apostle  fixed  his  eyes  on  him — and  the 
same  Greek  word  is  used  there  as  here — and  saw  that 
he  had  faith  to  be  healed. 


148    BETTER  THAN  SILVER  OR  GOLD 

The  similarity  between  these  two  cases  is  too  remark- 
able to  be  passed  over,  and  we  may  infer  that,  led  by  a 
Divine  prompting,  the  Apostle  suddenly  realized,  by  a 
gleam  of  incipient  faith  on  the  cripple's  face,  that  he 
had  faith  unto  salvation,  and  by  his  voice  and  gesture 
called  it  into  expression.  In  an  instant  there  were  the 
blade,  the  ear,  and  the  full  corn  in  the  ear. 

One  of  our  Lord's  injunctions,  when  He  sent  the 
Apostles  forth  was:  Get  you  no  gold,  nor  silver,  nor 
brass  in  your  purses,  and  no  wallet  for  your  journey; 
and  though  that  marching-order  had  been  modified  on 
the  eve  of  His  death,  it  is  probable  that  it  was  still 
literally  fulfilled,  and  the  Apostles,  like  the  rest,  ate  at 
a  common  table,  provided  from  the  common  purse.  It 
was  literally  true  as  Peter  phrased  it :  "  Silver  and  gold 
have  I  none." 

There  are  four  classes  of  persons  in  the  world : 

1.  The  people  who  have  neither  silver  nor  gold  nor 
anything  else  to  give — these  are  the  drift-wood  on  the 
ocean. 

2.  The  people  who  have  silver  and  gold,  and  no 
moral  or  religious  property — these  are  the  paupers  of 
the  universe. 

3.  The  people  who  have  neither  silver  nor  gold,  but, 
like  Peter,  they  have  vision,  inspiration,  faith,  hope, 
and  love — these  are  the  rich-unto-God. 

4.  The  people  who  have  silver  and  gold,  and  withal 
the  things  which  are  honourable,  just,  pure,  lovely, 
and  of  good  report. 

The  Apostles  belonged  to  the  third  of  these  classes. 
They  were  poor,  yet  making  many  rich,  as  having  noth- 
ing, and  yet  possessing  the  key  to  the  Divine  treasuries. 
Silver  and  gold  they  had  none.  In  this,  as  the  Pope  re- 
minded Thomas  Aquinas,  his  fancied  successors  have 
widely  departed  from  his  example;  but  they  had,  as 
Aqttinas  reminded  the  Pope,  a  power  which  cannot  be 
passed  down  any  line  of  mystical  descent,  and  can  only 


THE  STRENGTH  OF  A  LIVING  FAITH    149 

be  received  as  the  direct  and  individual  gift  of  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

Wealth  is  not  the  standard  of  worth.  Mankind  has 
been  primarily  beholden  to  those  who  have  possessed 
little  of  this  world's  goods,  but  have  abounded  *'  in 
faith,  and  utterance,  and  knowledge,  and  in  all  earnest- 
ness, and  in  love."  Through  the  poverty  of  Christ  we 
have  been  enriched  with  all  spiritual  treasures  and  en- 
titled to  an  inheritance  that  fadeth  not  away.  There  are 
bags  in  the  heavens  that  wax  not  old,  and  treasures  in 
the  heavens  that  fail  not,  where  no  thief  draweth  nigh, 
neither  moth  destroyeth.  Yonder  a  little  girl  is  sobbing 
piteously  on  the  grave  of  her  mother !  I  am  touched, 
and  offer  her  a  gold  piece!  She  snatches  it  from  my 
hand,  flings  it  into  the  open  grave,  and  continues  to  sob 
convulsively !  What  more  can  I  do  ?  That  is  all  that 
I  had  to  give,  and  it  was  unavailing !  Presently  a  poor 
woman,  in  plain  and  shabby  clothes,  kisses  the  child, 
strokes  the  little  head,  presses  her  to  her  bosom,  and 
comforts  her  with  gentle  crooning !  See  the  eyes  droop 
in  sleep,  and  the  little  one  is  soothed  and  quieted !  That 
woman  had  neither  silver  nor  gold,  but  she  possessed 
what  was  infinitely  more  precious,  and  that  she  gave 
without  stint.  This  is  what  the  world  needs  to-day. 
Would  that  men  and  women  of  all  classes  in  society 
realized  it,  and  instead  of  the  giddy  race  for  wealth  and 
pleasure,  would  possess  themselves  of,  and  impart  to 
others,  treasures  compared  with  which  the  mines  of 
Croesus  offer  a  miser's  dole. 

In  the  present  case  Peter  communicated  the  inspira- 
tion of  his  own  strong  faith  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  He 
summoned  him  to  act  on  such  faith  as  he  had.  He 
called  on  things  that  apparently  were  not  as  though  they 
were.  He  mingled  a  drop  of  his  own  soul-tincture  into 
the  clouded  uncertainty  and  questioning  of  the  cripple's 
soul,  and  it  suddenly  crystallized  with  the  daring  act  of 
faith.     He  took  him  by  the  right  hand  and  raised  him 


I50  SIGNS  FOLLOWING 

up,  as  he  had  seen  his  Master  raise  up  his  wife's 
mother  years  before.  Immediately  the  man's  faith 
sprang  into  vigorous  exercise.  His  feet  and  ankle- 
bones  received  strength.  The  life  of  the  risen  Lord 
was  now  able  to  enter  his  anaemic  frame.  His  mortal 
body  was  quickened  by  the  entrance  and  accession  of 
the  life  of  the  Prince  of  Life,  who  was  working  to- 
gether with  His  Aposde,  given  on  the  Mount  of  Ascen- 
sion. "  He  sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  And 
they  went  forth,  and  preached  everywhere,  the  Lord 
working  with  them,  and  confirming  their  word  by  signs 
following."  As  for  the  cripple,  he  entered  with  them 
into  the  Temple,  from  which  his  congenital  deformity 
had  always  excluded  him,  according  to  Levitical  pre- 
cept, "  walking,  and  leaping,  and  praising  God ;  and 
all  the  people  saw  him  walking  and  praising  God :  and 
they  took  knowledge  of  him  that  it  was  he  which  sat 
for  alms  at  the  Beautiful  Gate  of  the  Temple,  and  they 
were  filled  with  wonder  and  amazement  at  that  which 
had  happened  unto  him." 

III.  How  Peter  Preached. — When  the  Temple 
service  concluded,  and  the  two  left  the  upper  court, 
descended  the  steps,  and  crossed  the  marble  pavement 
to  the  double  colonnade  called  Solomon's  Porch,  in 
which  our  Lord  used  to  teach,  and  where  the  infant 
Church  generally  gathered  in  those  early  days,  a  vast 
concourse  of  people  followed,  and  in  reply  to  the  buzz 
of  questioning  and  the  awestruck  wonder  of  the  crowd 
Peter  delivered  his  second  great  address. 

He  turned  the  thoughts  of  his  audience  from  John 
and  himself  to  their  Lord.  It  was  not  by  their  power 
or  holiness  that  the  man  stood  there  before  them 
whole,  but  by  the  act  of  Him  whom  they  had  denied 
in  the  presence  of  Pontius  Pilate,  overpowering  his 
ardent  wish  to  release  Him.  He  charged  them  with 
preferring  a  murderer  to  God's  Holy  and  Righteous 


THE  OBLITERATION  OF  SIN  151 

One.  He  insisted  that  the  evidence  of  Christ's  Resur- 
rection consisted  not  simply  in  the  witness  of  those 
who  had  been  in  His  company  after  He  had  left  the 
grave,  but  in  the  fact  of  the  miracle  wrought  on  the 
impotent  man,  which  was  evident  to  them  all.  He 
admitted  that  they  and  their  rulers  had  not  recognized 
the  Lord  of  Glory,  or  they  would  not  have  crucified 
Him;  and  from  that  point  he  branched  out  into  an 
eager  entreaty  that  they  would  repent  and  turn  again 
that  their  sins  might  be  blotted  out. 

It  is  very  interesting  to  obtain  this  side-light  on  the 
action  of  the  Jewish  rulers  and  the  Jewish  crowds. 
They  were  blinded  by  prejudice  and  wounded  pride. 
They  were  expecting  the  Messiah  to  come  in  Princely 
State,  and  never  dreamt  that  the  mean  garb  of  the  vil- 
lage carpenter  concealed  the  glories  of  Immanuel.  Such 
ignorance  did  not  excuse  their  crime,  but  palliated  it. 
It  left  them  within  the  zone  of  penitence  and  pardon. 
In  this  Peter  only  followed  the  example  of  Jesus,  who 
drew  a  distinction  between  the  servant  who  knew  and 
the  servant  who  knew  not  his  Lord's  will,  and  who, 
when  the  nails  first  pierced  His  tender  flesh,  cried, 
"  Father,  forgive  them,  they  know  not  what  they  do." 
There  is  clearly  a  difference  for  the  sins  of  presumption 
and  of  ignorance.  For  the  former  there  remaineth  no 
further  sacrifice  for  sin;  in  the  latter  we  may  count 
on  mercy,  if  only  like  Paul  we  turn  to  Him,  whom  we 
had  in  our  ignorance  repelled  and  crucified  afresh. 

Peter  assured  them  that  this  sin  might  be  blotted  out. 
The  Oriental  merchant  keeps  his  accounts  on  little 
tablets  of  wax.  On  these,  with  the  blunt  point  of  the 
stylus  or  pencil,  he  makes  the  indented  record  of  a 
debt,  and  when  it  is  paid,  with  the  blunt  end  of  his 
instrument  he  flattens  down  the  wax,  so  that  all  record 
of  the  debt  is  entirely  obliterated.  If  we  erase  a  debt 
from  our  account-book,  there  is  still  the  trace  of  it 
having  been  there,  but  on  the  v\rax  there  is  no  trace 


152  TIMES  OF  REFRESHING 

whatever.  The  handwriting  that  was  against  the 
debtor  is  entirely  blotted  out.  The  sin  is  blotted  out, 
as  Isaiah  puts  it,  as  completely  as  a  wreath  of  cloud 
is  blotted  from  the  summer  sky.  What  a  vision  Peter 
had  of  the  utterness  and  completeness  of  the  Divine 
forgiveness !  Once  he  had  hazarded  the  suggestion  that 
seven  times  was  the  limit  to  which  forgiveness  could  go. 
Now  he  has  entered  into  a  more  adequate  conception  of 
the  Love  of  God,  which  forgets  as  it  forgives,  and 
drops  our  sins  when  we  confess  into  the  fathomless 
depths  of  the  ocean  of  His  Love.  They  shall  no  more 
be  found  or  remembered  or  mentioned  for  ever. 

The  arguments  with  which  the  speaker  plied  his 
audience  were  very  tender  and  enticing.  He  said  that 
if  only  Israel  repented  of  their  sin  and  recognized 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  as  the  Holy  One  of  God,  times  of 
refreshing  would  come  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord, 
and  these  are  afterwards  defined  as  the  times  of  the 
restoration  of  all  things,  whereof  God  has  spoken  by 
the  mouth  of  His  holy  prophets.  Sweet  is  the  lay  of 
prophecy;  too  sweet  not  to  be  wronged  by  a  mere 
mortal  touch ! 

"  Six  thousand  years  of  sorrow  have  well-nigh  fulfilled 
Their  tardy  and  disastrous  course  over  a  sinful  world ; 
And  what   remains   of   this   tempestuous   state  of  human 

things 
Is  merely  as  the  working  of  the  sea  before  a  calm 
That  rocks  itself  to  rest.    For  He  whose  car  the  winds  are 
And  the  clouds  the  dust  that  waits  upon  His  sultry  march. 
Shall  visit  earth  in  mercy,  shall  descend;  and  what  sin's 

storms 
Have  blasted  and  defaced,  shall  with  a  smile  repair! 
Oh  scenes  surpassing  fable  and  yet  true!     Scenes  of  ac- 
complished bliss 
Which  who  can  see,  though  but  in  distant  prospect,  and 

not  feel 
His  soul  refreshed  by  foretaste  of  their  joy ! " 

Notice  the  two  sendings  of  the  Christ.  He  was  sent 
in  the  first  Advent  to  bless  His  people,  in  turning  them 


THE  ENERGY  OF  FAITH  153 

away  from  their  iniquities;  He  will  be  sent  a  second 
time  to  bring  on  the  Golden  Age,  to  set  up  His  King- 
dom, to  put  down  all  rule  and  authority  and  power, 
until  such  time  as  that  God  shall  be  AU-in-AU,  and  the 
eternal  timeless  era  of  blessedness  shall  be  inaugurated. 
What  radiant  visions  had  broken  upon  the  soul  of  this 
man  who  was  accounted  ignorant  and  unlearned  by  the 
religious  leaders  of  his  age,  but  to  whom,  according 
to  his  Master's  promise,  the  Holy  Spirit  was  showing 
things  to  come ! 

Ere  we  close  this  chapter  shall  we  not  apply  to  our- 
selves its  lessons?  May  not  we  be  included  amongst 
those  who  have  spent  many  years  just  outside  the  Gate 
of  the  Blessed  Life,  lame  and  needing  to  be  carried  by 
Pastors,  Teachers,  Helpers,  but  not  able  to  walk  and 
run  in  the  way  of  Christ's  commandments ;  hearing  the 
music  floating  through  the  gate,  but  not  able  to  join; 
living  a  Christian  life  at  second-hand,  or  perhaps  not 
having  commenced  it  ?  Let  all  such  dwell  on  the  Love, 
the  invitations,  the  salvation  offered  them  in  Jesus 
Christ.  Let  them  not  only  hear  His  Name,  let  them 
also  believe  in  that  Name,  so  shall  they  rise  to  the  full 
stature  of  the  perfect  life,  realize  the  Divine  ideal  that 
waits  within  their  reach,  and  go  on  their  way  walking, 
leaping,  and  praising  God ! 


XIX 

"  YOU  BUILDERS  "' 

Acts  iv.  1-37 

"  God  spake,  and  gave  us  the  Word  to  keep ; 
Bade  never  fold  the  hands,  nor  sleep 
'Mid  a  faithless  world ;  at  watch  and  ward, 
Till  Christ  at  the  end  relieve  our  guard. 
By  His  servant  Moses  the  watch  was  set, 
Though  near  upon  cock-crow,  we  keep  it  yet.** 

— Browning. 

PETER  was  still  addressing  the  hushed  crowd 
which  the  healing  of  the  crippled  man  had 
gathered.  The  sunset  of  the  Western  sky  was 
casting  long  shadows,  and  forming  a  gorgeous  back- 
ground to  the  Corinthian  columns  of  Solomon's  Porch. 
Suddenly  a  band  of  officials  moved  quickly  towards  the 
congregation,  threaded  its  way  through  the  densely- 
packed  mass  of  people,  and  forcibly  arrested  the  three 
men,  whose  presence  seemed  magnetic.  There  were 
priests,  who  detected  in  these  unordained  and  unrecog- 
nized laymen  serious  rivals.  There  were  Sadducees, 
the  unbelieving  sections  of  the  literary  class,  who  were 
disbelievers  in  the  world  of  Spirit,  and  in  the  doctrine 
of  a  life  after  death — a  sect  not  numerous,  but  wealthy, 
powerful,  and  holding  the  chief  offices  of  State.  There 
was  also  the  Captain  of  the  Temple,  with  his  band, 
charged  with  the  duty  of  maintaining  public  order. 

Probably  the  Sadducean  party  was  chiefly  respon- 
sible for  this  ill-timed  and  unpolitic  art.  Clearly  they 
had  special  reasons  for  resenting  the  teaching,  with 
which  for  days  past  the  Apostles  had  been  flooding 

154 


"PRISONERS  OF  THE  LORD"         155 

Jerusalem.  "  They  were  indignant  that  they  taught  the 
people  and  preached  through  Jesus  the  Resurrection  of 
the  dead."  If  the  story,  which  was  attested  by  Peter 
and  his  friends,  were  true,  Sadduceeism  was  ended.  It 
is  probable,  therefore,  that  this  arrest  was  instigated  by 
Annas  and  Caiaphas,  and  the  other  leaders  of  this 
powerful  party.  Before  Jerusalem  was  aware  of  what 
was  happening,  the  Apostles  and  the  healed  man  were 
clapped  in  prison,  and  messengers  were  hastening 
through  the  city  to  summon  the  members  of  the  Sanhe- 
drim to  meet  early  on  the  following  morning. 

That  night  must  have  been  to  the  imprisoned  trio 
one  of  tmspeakable  emotion.  This  was  the  treatment 
their  Master  had  taught  them  to  expect.  Clearly  they 
were  on  the  path  which  He  had  foreseen.  It  was  an 
opporttmity  also  of  redeeming  the  cowardly  desertioa 
of  the  betrayal-night.  Peter  remembered  that  he  had 
vowed  to  follow  Jesus  to  prison,  and  here  was  the 
chance  of  fulfilling  his  promise.  The  man,  whose 
healing  had  led  to  this  collision  with  the  rulers,  was 
taught  the  significance  of  these  happenings,  and  he 
joined  in  the  prayers  and  psalms  with  which  they 
beguiled  the  sleepless  hours.  As  to  the  morrow's 
trial,  they  had  no  anxiety,  nor  prepared  a  defence, 
for  the  words  spoken  three  years  before  came  freshly 
back  to  memory :  "  When  you  are  brought  before 
rulers  and  kings,  do  not  premeditate  what  ye  shall 
answer,  for  it  shall  be  given  you  in  that  same  hour. 
It  is  not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  Spirit  of  your  Father 
that  speaketh  in  you." 

The  Sanhedrim  was  the  most  venerable  and  authori- 
tative assembly  and  court  in  the  world.  It  represented 
the  seventy  elders  chosen  to  assist  Moses  in  his  admin- 
istration of  the  Exodus  march.  The  High  Priest  pre- 
sided, and  around  him  in  a  semicircle  sat  the  heads  of 
the  twenty-four  priestly  classes,  the  doctors  of  the  law, 
and  the  fathers  of  ancient  Jewish  families.    The  names 


156  "  IN  WHOSE  NAME  !  " 

©f  some  of  these  are  given,  such  as  the  crafty  Annas, 
the  unscrupulous  Caiaphas,  his  son-in-law,  the  cele- 
brated John  Ben  Zakkai,  and  Alexander,  the  wealthy- 
brother  of  the  learned  Philo.  It  was  the  same  body 
that  had  handed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  to  the  Roman  ex- 
ecutioners, and  now,  in  the  same  chamber,  they  were 
preparing,  by  one  supreme  effort,  to  stamp  out  the  Gali- 
lean heresy.  Note  their  procedure !  It  was  idle  to  ques- 
tion the  miracle — the  healed  man  was  standing  there  be- 
fore them.  They  could  not  deny  it.  It  was  perilous  to 
discuss  the  general  question  of  the  Resurrection,  be- 
cause on  this  matter  there  was  a  distinct  cleavage  be- 
tween the  Pharisees  and  the  Sadducees,  each  party  be- 
ing strongly  represented.  But  the  point  at  issue  was  as 
to  the  Source  of  his  healing.  "  In  whose  name  and  by 
what  power."  If  Peter  and  his  associates  had  ascribed 
the  miracle  to  the  mighty  power  of  Jehovah,  with  the 
stories  of  Elijah's  and  Elisha's  miracles  in  view,  noth- 
ing more  could  have  been  said.  But  if  it  were  at- 
tributed to  some  other  name,  the  Apostles  would  bring 
themselves  within  the  ancient  prescription  of  death  as 
sorcerers.  If  they  ascribed  it  to  Jesus,  they  would 
risk  the  infliction  of  the  death  that  had  already  been 
inflicted  on  Him.  But  Peter  was  entirely  oblivious  to 
all  questions  of  policy,  and  beneath  the  inspiration  of 
the  Divine  Spirit,  spoke  thus :  "  Rulers  of  the  people 
and  Elders,  you  question  us  about  the  deed  done  to  this 
cripple  and  ask  how  he  was  made  whole — we  take  this 
opportunity  of  saying  publicly  to  you  and  to  the  whole 
nation  that  it  was  wrought  through  the  Name  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Nazareth,  whom  ye  crucified,  but  whom  God 
raised  from  the  dead.  It  is  in  Him  that  this  man 
stands  before  you  whole.  You  builders  rejected  Him, 
Ibut  none  the  less  is  He  the  headstone  of  the  comer. 
Neither  is  there  salvation  by  any  other." 

I.    The  Rival  Builders. — The  reference  to  this 


A  PRECIOUS  CORNER-STONE         157 

rejected  headstone  recalls  an  ancient  tradition  woven 
into  the  structure  of  Psalm  cxviii — the  climax  of  the 
great  national  Hallel.  We  are  told  that  when  Solomoa 
built  his  famous  Temple,  all  the  masonry  was  per- 
formed at  a  distance,  so  that  there  were  neither  ham- 
mers, axe,  nor  any  tool  of  iron  heard  in  the  building 
during  its  erection.  One  day,  in  the  earlier  operations, 
a  huge  stone  was  delivered  from  the  quarry,  which  bore 
evidence,  in  its  unusual  shape,  that  considerable  care 
had  been  expended  on  it,  but  no  one  could  suggest  the 
precise  place  in  the  structure  it  was  intended  to  fill.  It 
was  put  aside  as  a  misfit,  and  lay  on  the  site  unrecog- 
nized and  useless.  The  winds  blew  over  it  scornfully, 
the  birds  chirped  and  perched  on  it  irreverently,  and 
most  people  forgot  it.  But  when  the  building  began  to 
emerge  above  ground,  and  a  corner  or  headstone  was 
needed  of  a  particular  shape,  in  the  builders'  dilemma 
some  one  remembered  the  rejected  stone,  which,  when  it 
was  placed  in  the  gap,  answered  the  need  with  perfect 
exactitude.  The  memory  of  this  incident  was,  there- 
fore, embalmed  in  the  words :  "  The  stone  which  the 
builders  refused,  the  same  is  become  the  Headstone  of 
the  corner." 

Isaiah  also  alludes  to  it :  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Be- 
hold, I  lay  in  Zion  a  stone,  a  tried  stone,  a  precious 
comer-stone,  and  a  sure  foundation,  in  which  if  a  man 
believeth  he  shall  not  make  haste."  Our  Lord  also 
directly  quoted  it  of  Himself,  when  He  clenched  the 
moral  of  His  Parable  concerning  the  Wicked  Hus- 
bandmen ;  and  in  after  years  the  Apostles  of  the  Gen- 
tiles referred  to  it  in  addressing  the  Ephesian  Church : 
"  Built  on  the  foundation  of  Apostles  and  Prophets, 
Jesus  Christ  Himself  being  the  chief  Corner-stone." 

The  position  accorded  to  that  Corner-stone  in  the 
national  structure  was  the  real  cause  of  divergence  in 
the  Assembly.  Two  ideals  confronted  each  other.  The 
one  group  of  builders  was  composed  of  that  brilliant 


158  THE  ONLY  SALVATION 

and  powerful  body  which  comprised  all  that  was  most 
illustrious  in  the  Hebrew  Commonwealth.  The  other 
group  was  represented  by  those  two  simple  "  unlearned 
and  ignorant "  men.  The  former  refused  the  Stone, 
and  covered  it  with  neglect.  The  other  made  it  the 
keystone  of  the  structure,  which  was  beginning  to  arise, 
and  has  since  spread  through  the  world. 

They  said  that  they  could  do  without  it.  They  had 
no  use  for  it.  Then  Peter  remembered  what  his  Mas- 
ter had  said,  that  if  a  man  refused  it,  he  would  fall  on 
it  and  be  broken ;  or  that  it  would  fall  on  him,  as  a  dis- 
lodged rock  might  fall  on  a  shepherd  tending  his  flock 
beneath,  and  grind  him  to  powder.  Therefore  he  in- 
sisted that  there  was  no  salvation  for  men  or  nations 
apart  from  Christ. 

Of  course,  his  primary  reference  was  to  the  healing 
of  the  impotent  man,  who  stood  there  saved  and  whole 
before  their  eyes.  But  there  was  more  in  his  thought. 
Was  it  not  clear  that  Israel  was  the  real  cripple,  after 
all?  Beneath  the  rude  Roman  power  the  nation  lay 
there  bound,  prostrate,  and  powerless.  It  was  crippled 
morally  and  spiritually.  The  burning  passion  of  proph- 
ets and  psalmists  had  died  down;  and  in  its  place 
were  these  warring  sectarians.  With  profound  insight 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  gave,  Peter  realized  that  they  had 
cast  aside  the  one  divinely-given  opportunity  of  re- 
habilitation and  safety.  If  only  the  Jewish  leaders  and 
builders  had  been  induced  to  acknowledge  his  Master 
and  Lord,  their  national  influence  would  have  revived, 
and  they  would  have  become  what  God  meant  them  to 
be,  the  religious  leaders  of  mankind.  There  was  no 
salvation  in  any  other. 

We  may  apply  this  nationally,  ecclesiastically,  and 
individually. 

Nationally. — If  a  nation  refuses  to  build  according 
to  the  great  truths  that  Jesus  taught,  exemplified,  and 
died  for,  it  is  not  destined  to  permanence,  but  must 


FOURSQUARE  WITH  CHRIST  159 

pass  as  all  the  great  empires  of  the  world — Assyrian, 
Babylonian,  Persian,  Grecian,  and  Roman — have 
passed,  and  become  as  the  dust  of  the  summer  thresh- 
ing-floor. The  only  hope  of  salvation  for  the  State 
is  to  be  built  foursquare  with  the  Gospel  of  the  Son 
of  man.  There  is  salvation  of  a  permanent  descrip- 
tion in  no  other  expedient. 

Ecclesiastically. — The  Church  which  substitutes  doc- 
trinal formularies,  the  pomp  and  splendour  of  high 
ritual,  or  priest-craft,  learning,  or  wealth,  for  a  vital 
contact  with  Jesus  Christ,  the  living  Saviour,  may 
enjoy  a  temporary  success  of  popularity ;  but  it  is  not 
destined  to  endure.  It  will  find  itself  unable  to  com- 
mand or  lead  in  the  march  of  the  human  race.  It  will 
be  left  behind  like  some  gigantic  vestige  of  the  Ice-Age 
in  the  congealed  floes  of  the  past.  The  only  salvation 
for  any  Church  is  in  Union  with  Jesus  Christ.  He  is 
never  stagnant,  but  ever  the  same,  living  for  evermore, 
and  leading  on  the  Ages  to  their  consummation  in  God, 
as  All-in-All. 

Individually. — We  all  build  from  our  childhood. 
Who  of  us  has  not  built  with  wooden  bricks  in  winter, 
and  sand- castles  on  the  sea-shore  in  summer?  When 
older  we  build  businesses,  stories,  tragedies,  poems, 
pictures,  systems  of  philosophy,  fortunes,  or  states- 
manships. Too  many  build  to  the  neglect  of  Christ. 
They  can  do  without  Him — so  they  say.  They  have 
no  need,  no  use  for  Him.  But  they  cannot  continue. 
For  a  while  they  flourish  and  grow  up,  but  the  wind 
passeth  over  them  and  they  are  gone,  and  the  place 
thereof  knoweth  them  no  more.  But  he  that  doeth 
the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever.  The  life  which  is 
foursquare  with  Christ  and  at  right  angles  with  His 
teaching  and  example  will  shine  as  the  stars  for  ever 
and  ever;  but  those  who  reject  or  neglect  Him  are 
like  the  chaff  which  the  wind  driveth  away. 

If  one  had  a  trumpet- voice,  one  would  cry,  "  Jesus 


i6o  CONSTRAINED  BY  LOVE 

Christ  alone  can  save."  By  His  agony  and  bloody 
sweat,  by  His  Cross  and  Passion,  by  His  glorious 
Resurrection  and  Ascension,  He  has  thrown  wide  the 
Gates  of  Salvation.  All  who  accept  Him  and  enter 
into  union  with  Him  become  as  Mount  Sion,  that  can- 
not be  moved,  but  abideth  for  ever.  Jesus  is  the  Rock. 
He  is  the  living  stone !  He  gives  eternal  life  and  un- 
changing stability!  Elsewhere  you  may  get  philos- 
ophy, moral  integrity,  virtue,  but  there  is  no  other 
name  given  under  heaven  and  among  men  whereby  we 
must  be  saved. 

n.  The  Irrepressibility  of  the  Christ  Life. — 
As  the  Sanhedrim  listened  to  these  words,  and  watched 
the  two  Apostles  closely,  they  were  irresistibly  re- 
minded of  Jesus.  They  were  animated  by  His  Spirit, 
and  spoke  as  He  had  done.  They  took  knowledge  of 
them  that  they  had  been  with  Jesus.  Not  only  had 
they  associated  with  and  absorbed  Him  during  the  three 
happy  years,  which  had  now  passed,  but  He  was 
living  in  their  hearts,  and  pouring  through  them  the 
spirit  of  His  own  glorious  existence  as  the  Prince  of 
Life. 

When  the  court  was  cleared,  with  a  view  to  private 
conference,  they  confessed  to  each  other  that  they 
dared  not  permit  these  men  to  continue  to  preach  and 
teach.  They  could  not  deny  the  miracle  or  disprove 
the  Resurrection,  but  they  must  take  thought  for 
themselves.  When  the  Apostles  were  recalled  they 
were  strictly  charged  not  to  speak  further  in  the  name 
of  Jesus.  Their  judges  would  have  been  glad  to  pun- 
ish them,  but  this  would  so  enrage  the  people  that  it 
could  not  be  entertained.  So  they  further  threatened 
them  and  let  them  go. 

But  they  might  equally  have  bidden  the  morning  light 
not  to  spread,  or  the  bursting  life  of  spring  to  restrain 
itself,  or  the  incoming  tide  to  turn  away  back  to  its 


JOY  AT  THE  FLOOD  i6i 

heart.  These  men  could  do  no  other  than  bear  witness 
to  the  things  that  they  had  heard  and  seen.  Even  if 
they  had  resolved  in  their  own  hearts  that  they  would 
speak  no  more  in  His  Name,  His  words  would  have 
been  as  a  fire  shut  up  in  their  bones,  and  they  would 
have  been  weary  of  forbearing  and  unable  to  restrain 
themselves.  Is  not  this  what  the  Apostle  meant  when 
he  said,  in  answer  to  the  remonstrances  and  arguments 
of  his  friends :  "  The  Love  of  Christ  constraineth  us  "  ? 
Oh  that  we  knew  more  of  these  irresistible  impulses, 
like  steam  generated  in  a  boiler  that  must  move 
machinery  or  shiver  the  containing  vessel!  Oh  for 
this  Divine  passion,  which  like  an  overflowing  stream 
catches  hold  of  the  logs,  lying  high  up  on  the  banks, 
and  hurries  them  downwards  to  the  ocean ! 

in.  The  Attestation  of  the  Holy  Spirit. — 
They  returned  to  their  own  company,  who  had  doubt- 
less spent  the  intervening  hours  in  prayer.  With  what 
welcomes  were  they  received!  How  intensely  their 
narrative  was  listened  to !  Then  what  an  outburst  of 
adoration  and  prayer!  Such  a  meeting  could  only  be 
held  subsequently  in  the  torchlight  of  the  catacombs, 
the  recesses  of  Alpine  caves,  or  on  the  moors  of  Scot- 
land in  the  days  of  Claverhouse,  when  similar  circum- 
stances threw  back  the  struggling  Churches  on  the  ever- 
lasting arms.  There  was  no  entreaty  that  God  would 
stay  the  persecutor  or  save  their  lives.  The  sole  re- 
quest was  that  they  might  have  power  to  give  an  un- 
faltering testimony,  and  that  God  would  stretch  out 
His  hand  to  heal,  so  that  wonders  and  signs  might  be 
wrought  in  the  Name  of  Jesus.  If  only  that  dear 
Name  could  be  magnified,  extolled,  and  revered,  they 
would  be  content  to  suffer  to  the  extreme  of  human 
anguish !  Let  Jesus  Christ  be  praised !  Let  Him  see 
of  the  travail  of  His  soul !  Worthy  was  the  Lamb  that 
was  slain  to  receive  honour,  and  glory,  and  blessing! 


i62    "  WHAT  MADE  THEE  TO  DIFFER  1 " 

Let  victory  be  granted  to  the  cause  of  the  Divine 
Saviour ! 

Can  we  wonder  at  Heaven's  response  ?  The  tremor 
of  it  shook  the  place,  as  before  on  the  day  of  Pentecost. 
There  was  a  second  infilling  of  the  Holy  Spirit;  not 
now  for  the  hundred  and  twenty  only,  but  for  them 
all.  The  evidence  of  it  was  in  the  Divine  Love,  which 
prompted  the  sharing  of  their  goods  and  secured  the 
forging  of  a  Divine  unity  of  sentiment. 

Peter  must  have  been  overwhelmed  as  he  saw  what 
had  transpired.  Well  enough  he  knew  that  it  was 
not  because  of  his  own  power  and  holiness  that 
such  results  had  been  secured.  In  the  splendour  of 
that  hour  the  blemishes  and  failures  of  his  past  must 
have  stood  out  in  their  native  deformity  and  evil. 
How  could  he  have  spoken  and  acted  as  he  did  ?  But 
how  passing  wonder  had  been  the  Lord's  forbearing 
grace!  What  could  he  say,  than  to  fall  on  his  face, 
sobbing  and  confessing,  "  Not  unto  me,  not  unto  me, 
but  to  Thy  Name  be  all  the  glory.  Thou  hast  re- 
deemed and  saved  me.  And  Thou  hast  magnified  Thy 
mercy  above  all  Thy  Name ! " 


XX 

PETER'S  DEEPENING  EXPERIENCES  OF 
THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

Acts  iv.  32 ;  v.  33 

"Be  still  and  strong, 
O  Man,  my  Brother !  hold  thy  sobbing  breath, 
And  keep  thy  soul's  large  window  pure  from  wrong ! 

That  so,  as  life's  appointment  issueth, 
Thy  vision  may  be  clear  to  watch  along 
The  sunset  consummation-lights  of  death ! " 

— B.  B.  Browning. 

ONE  of  the  greatest  affirmations  possible  to  man 
is  that  of  the  ancient  creed,  "  I  believe  in  the 
Holy  Ghost."  All  knowledge,  power,  suc- 
cess, and  victory  over  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil, 
depend  on  the  recognition  and  use  of  the  fellowship  or 
partnership  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  As  Peter  said  in  his 
great  Pentecostal  sermon — When  our  Lord  passed 
through  all  the  Heavens  to  the  right-hand  of  power. 
He  asked  the  Father  and  received  from  Him  the 
authority,  to  confer  upon  each  member  of  His  mystical 
body  the  infilling  and  anointing  by  the  Holy  Paraclete, 
as  He  had  Himself  received  it  at  His  Baptism.  As 
God  He  was  one  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Spirit ; 
but  when  He  assumed  our  nature,  He  was  conceived 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  infilled  and  anointed  by  Him,  and 
wrought  his  life-work  in  His  power  and  grace.  The 
Father  gave  not  the  Holy  Spirit  by  measure  to  His  Son, 
and  it  was  through  the  Eternal  Spirit  that  He  offered 
Himself  without  spot  to  God. 

163 


i64  HALF-FILLED  CUPS ! 

He  ascended  that  He  might  receive  and  bestow  gifts 
on  His  Church.  Of  His  fulness  may  all  we  receive, 
and  grace  upon  grace.  Indeed,  unto  every  one  of  us 
grace  has  been  given,  according  to  the  measure  of  the 
gift  of  Christ,  although  we  must  make  the  sad  con- 
fession that  we  have  failed  to  appropriate  our  respec- 
tive shares  in  the  Pentecostal  gift.  We  have  been 
satisfied  with  half-filled  cups,  when  the  river  of  God 
might  be  flowing  through  our  lives.  "  The  promise 
is  to  us  and  to  our  children,  even  to  as  many  as  the 
Lord  our  God  shall  call " ;  but  how  few  of  us  have 
accepted  the  enduement,  or  been  anointed  by  that 
sacred  chrism,  with  which  the  Father  inaugurated  the 
public  ministry  of  our  Saviour,  and  which  He  now 
waits  to  impart  to  the  humblest  and  weakest,  though 
they  be  but  as  the  skirts  of  His  robes. 

I.  Peter's  Previous  Experiences. — On  the  even- 
ing of  the  Resurrection  Day  the  Lord  had  breathed  on 
him  and  the  rest  as  they  gathered  in  the  Upper  Room. 
"  Then  said  Jesus  to  them  again,  Peace  be  unto  you : 
as  My  Father  hath  sent  Me,  even  so  send  I  you.  And 
when  He  had  said  this.  He  breathed  on  them,  and 
said,  *  Receive  ye  the  Holy  Spirit.' "  We  gather, 
therefore,  that  their  reception  of  the  Spirit  was  di- 
rectly intended  to  qualify  them  for  their  mission.  It 
was  a  distinct  equipment  for  service. 

For  ten  days  Peter  awaited  the  promise  of  the 
Father,  in  pursuance  of  the  Master's  command: 
"  Tarry  ye  in  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  until  ye  be  endued 
with  power  from  on  high.'* 

When  the  Day  of  Pentecost  was  fully  come,  he, 
like  the  rest,  was  filled  by  His  Advent,  and  began  to 
speak  as  the  Spirit  gave  him  utterance.  Thus  we 
learn  that  the  filling,  enduement,  and  anointing  are 
equivalent  terms,  and  are  all  associated  with  the 
service  we  are  called  upon  to  render.    We  may  have 


"STUMPS  INSTEAD  OF  HANDS"       165 

been  born  of  the  Spirit,  and  have  so  received  the  seed 
of  the  new  life,  but  we  must  also  be  anointed  by  the 
Spirit,  if  we  expect  to  be  fully  used  by  the  Master  in 
our  brief  mortal  life. 

When  our  Apostle  faced  the  Sanhedrim  on  the 
morning  after  the  miracle  on  the  cripple  at  the  Beauti- 
ful Gate,  we  are  told  that  on  arising  to  reply  to  his 
accusers,  he  was  again  suddenly  and  gloriously  filled 
with  the  Holy  Spirit,  proving  that  we  may  claim  suc- 
cessive and  repeated  infillings,  especially  when  over- 
taken by  an  hour  of  crisis. 

On  the  return  of  Peter  and  John  to  their  own  com- 
pany, the  place  where  they  were  assembled  was  shaken 
as  by  waves  of  holy  power.  They  were  all  filled  with 
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  spake  the  word  of  God  with  bold- 
ness. "  With  great  power  gave  the  Apostles  witness 
of  the  Resurrection."  Evidently  this  further  experi- 
ence of  the  incoming  tides  of  God  fell  also  to  Peter's 
lot  equally  with  the  whole  rejoicing  and  triumphant 
company.  Why  should  not  we  be  subject  to  these 
repeated  experiences?  We  have  not,  because  we  ask 
not,  and  because  we  fear  to  take  risks  for  Jesus  Christ ! 

Peter  had  also  had  repeated  evidences  of  the  con- 
victing power  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  "  When  they 
heard  this,  they  were  pricked  in  their  heart."  Of  this 
quality  in  the  blessed  Paraclete  we  have  many  con- 
spicuous modem  examples.  As  he  was  dying, 
Brainerd  said  to  his  brother:  "When  ministers  feel 
the  special  gracious  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
their  hearts,  it  wonderfully  assists  them  to  come  at 
the  consciences  of  men,  and  as  it  were  to  handle  them ; 
whereas  without  these,  whatever  reason  or  oratory 
we  may  employ,  we  do  but  make  use  of  stumps  instead 
of  hands."     So  Peter  had  discovered. 

But  further  experiences  were  to  be  granted  before 
he  and  his  fellow  Apostles  fully  explored  their  inherit- 
ance as  leaders  of  the  infant  Church.     They  were  to 


i66  LOVE  IN  EXERCISE 

be  taught  that  the  Divine  Spirit  had  to  do  with  the 
collective  Church  as  well  as  with  the  individual,  and 
that  He  is  the  President  of  the  Church  on  earth,  the 
Vicegerent  of  Christ,  the  Supreme  Guide  and  Teacher 
of  His  Body,  the  Co-witness  of  His  Resurrection,  the 
Superlative  Source  of  Eternal  Life. 

To  adopt  the  great  words  of  Archer  Butler — "  When 
Christ  ascended  to  the  Father  He  sent  forth  the  Spirit, 
who  should  be  His  Vicegerent  in  the  Church;  and  as 
long  as  the  Sovereign  reigns  in  Heaven,  His  Spiritual 
Viceroy  reigns  in  human  souls.  They  are  correspond- 
ent and  correlative  one  to  the  other.  *  If  I  go  not 
away,'  said  the  Saviour  before  He  ascended,  *  the  Spirit 
cannot  come.'  If  He  be  away,  then  the  Spirit  is  in  the 
Church.  The  absence  of  one  is  the  presence  of  the 
other ;  or  let  me  rather  say  that  there  is  no  absence,  no 
presence,  no  departure,  no  separation !  Christ  Himself 
is  one  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  with  Him  temples  in 
tke  heart  of  His  mystical  body." 

Our  Lord  may  have  revealed  this  great  mystery 
during  the  forty  days  in  which  He  instructed  His 
friends  in  the  things  concerning  the  Kingdom  of  God. 
But  their  practical  realization  was  gradually  unfolded 
to  Peter  and  the  rest,  as  Pentecost  receded  into  the 
background  of  their  memory.  The  experience  of 
Peter  in  this  matter  is  very  illuminating.  He  was 
led  step  by  step  into  the  full  apprehension  of  the 
Spirit's  association  with  the  Church. 

11.  The  Holy  Spirit's  Presidency  of  the  Church. 
— It  became  apparent  in  connection  with  the  finances 
of  the  Church.  The  multitude  of  them  that  believed 
were  of  one  heart  and  soul,  so  that  none  of  them 
claimed  any  of  his  possessions  as  his  own.  All  was 
held  as  a  common  property.  There  was  therefore  no 
poverty  or  clamant  need.  Those  who  were  possessors 
of  lands  or  houses  sold  them,  and  brought  the  whole 


CHRISTIANITY  NOT  COMMUNISM     167 

amount  that  had  been  realized  and  gave  it  to  the 
Apostles,  by  whom  distribution  was  made  to  every  one 
according  to  his  wants.  Out  of  this  fund  a  certain 
amount  would  be  laid  aside  for  the  rooms  and  meals 
which  they  had  in  common.  So  much  would  be  allotted 
for  the  maintenance  of  the  Apostles  and  their  fellow- 
workers.  Also  the  destitute,  sickly,  and  widowed 
would  be  relieved  according  to  their  requirements. 
This  practice  is  not  to  be  confused  with  Communism, 
because  the  latter  system  abolishes  all  property  by 
force,  imposes  a  compulsory  division  of  profits,  and 
compels  all  workers  to  place  their  possessions  and 
earnings  in  a  common  purse.  In  the  early  Christian 
practice,  while  a  field  remained  unsold,  it  was  still  the 
property  of  its  owners ;  and  when  it  was  sold,  the  pro- 
ceeds remained  absolutely  at  their  discretion.  This 
system  was  clearly  a  temporary  expedient  for  the  spe- 
cial circumstances  of  the  Jerusalem  Church,  and  the 
Apostles  made  no  attempt  to  institute  it  in  any  of  the 
Churches  formed  among  the  Gentiles. 

Many  members  of  the  Church,  like  the  good  Bar- 
nabas, made  great  sacrifices,  and  stood  proportionately 
high  in  the  esteem  of  their  fellow-believers ;  and  their 
desire  to  obtain  the  same  notoriety  without  paying  the 
same  price  for  it  led  Ananias  and  his  wife  to  act  their 
lie.  They  sold  some  land,  and  encouraged  the  belief 
that  they  had  brought  the  entire  amount  obtained  for 
it  to  place  at  the  Apostles'  disposal  for  the  common 
good.  There  was  no  obligation  on  them  to  sell  the 
land.  There  would  have  been  no  sin  in  bringing  part 
of  the  proceeds,  if  they  had  frankly  acknowledged  that 
it  was  only  a  part.  But  they  pretended  that  the  sum 
handed  to  the  community  was  the  entire  amount  of  the 
purchase-money.  Thus  they  gratified  their  love  of 
money  on  the  one  hand  and  their  vanity  on  the  other. 
It  was  an  acted  falsehood. 

We  will  not  stay  to  particularize  the  duplicates  of 


i68    THE  PERSONALITY  OF  THE  SPIRIT 

this  sin  in  modern  life.  We  are  all  tempted  to  appro- 
priate credit  for  more  earnestness,  prayerfulness,  and 
generosity  than  we  practise.  Thank  God,  there  is 
no  need  to  yield  to  this  insidious  temptation ;  but  who 
has  not  been  conscious  of  the  suggestion?  Thank 
God,  though  Satan  may  flash  the  suggestion  upon 
our  consciousness,  the  grace  of  the  indwelling  Spirit 
is  sufficient  to  keep  it  at  the  threshold,  and  prevent  it 
from  filling  the  heart.  "Why  hath  Satan  filled  thy 
heart.  .  .  ."  When  we  are  filled  with  the  Spirit, 
there  is  no  space  left  for  filling  by  Satan.  The  air  that 
fills  the  diving-bell  excludes  the  entrance  of  the  water 
into  which  it  presently  descends.  "  Walk  in  the  Spirit, 
and  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  flesh."  Ananias 
and  Sapphira  did  not  avail  themselves  of  His  grace. 
They  had  been  enlightened,  had  welcomed  the  heavenly 
gift,  had  been  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
had  tasted  the  good  word  of  God  and  the  powers  of 
the  new  era;  but  they  had  fallen  away,  and  become 
as  land,  which,  though  it  has  drunk  of  the  rain  that 
comes  off  upon  it,  bears  thorns  and  thistles,  and  is 
therefore  nigh  unto  a  curse.  That  curse  would  never 
have  befallen,  if  the  sin  had  been  confessed,  and  their 
crucifying  afresh  of  the  Son  of  God  arrested.  But  in 
the  absence  of  any  sign  of  compunction  in  either  of 
them,  their  sin  incurred  the  punishment  of  a  tragic 
death.  By  one  stroke  they  were  cut  off  from  member- 
ship with  the  Church,  lest  the  contagion  of  their  sin 
should  spread. 

We  will  now  concentrate  on  Peter's  illuminated  and 
illuminating  utterances :  "  Why  hath  Satan  filled  thine 
heart  to  lie  to  the  Holy  Spirit  ?"..."  How  is  it 
that  ye  have  agreed  together  to  tempt  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  ?  "  What  stronger  evidence  could  be  given 
of  the  Personality  or  Deity  of  the  Holy  Spirit?  It  is 
clearly  impossible  to  tempt  or  deceive  an  influence, 
emanation,  or  breath.     If  you  lie,  you  lie  to  a  Person. 


THE  THRONE  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT    169 

If  you  tempt,  you  tempt  a  Person.  The  charge  of 
either  implies  Personality  of  the  beings  concerned,  of 
the  Spirit  equally  as  of  Ananias  or  Sapphira.  But 
how  was  their  act  a  sin  against  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  ? 
Was  it  not  rather  committed  against  that  infant  so- 
ciety, and  notoriously  against  its  poor?  Undoubtedly 
it  was  a  mean-hearted  wrong  perpetrated  on  them ;  but 
it  was  so  flagrantly  a  sin  against  the  Spirit  that  the 
human  aspect  sank  into  comparative  insignificance. 
In  point  of  fact,  the  Church  differs  from  all  other 
assemblies  in  this,  that  it  is  the  Body  of  Christ  and  the 
seat  or  throne  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  this  made  their 
sin  so  flagrant. 

If  a  handful  of  people,  however  obscure,  gather  in 
the  Name  of  Christ  to  consider  and  further  the  inter- 
ests of  His  Kingdom,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  not  only  pres- 
ent, but  He  presides.  He  holds  court  as  the  Repre- 
sentative and  Vicegerent  of  Christ.  He  sees  to  it  that 
in  their  unanimity  after  united  prayer,  the  will  of 
Christ  is  reflected,  and  that  through  their  united  action 
it  is  done.  What  is  bound  or  loosed  on  earth  is  in 
harmony  with  what  is  bound  and  loosed  in  Heaven. 

The  Roman  Catholic  Church  makes  use  of  the  mys- 
terious word  "  See."  It  is  "  the  Holy  See  "  from  the 
first  syllable  of  the  Latin  word  sedere,  to  sit,  and  in 
reference  to  the  inspired  statement  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
on  the  day  of  Pentecost  sat  on  each  of  them.  Their 
inference  is  that  the  primitive  Church  was  the  seat 
or  throne  of  the  Paraclete,  that  when  Jesus  took  His 
seat  on  the  throne  at  the  Father's  right  hand,  the 
Holy  Spirit  descended  to  the  throne  of  the  Church, 
and  that  the  Apostate  Church  of  the  Seven  Hills  is 
the  lineal  descendant  of  that  Church.  We  are  pre- 
pared to  accept  the  two  first  of  these  propositions,  but 
not  the  last.  It  is  quite  true  that  when  our  Lord 
went  up  to  His  throne  in  the  Heavens,  the  Holy  Spirit 
came  down  to  His  in  the  Church.     It  is  quite  true  that 


170    SATAN'S  ATTEMPT  ON  THE  CHURCH 

the  Church  is  the  throne  from  which  the  Divine  Spirit 
issues  His  mandates,  and  through  which  He  exerts 
His  energy.  But  it  is  not  true  that  Rome  is  that 
throne  or  seat.  Nay,  verily,  but  wherever  a  group 
of  people  meet  in  the  Name  of  Jesus,  and  for  the  main- 
tenance of  the  holy  ordinances  which  He  enjoined, 
and  uniting  for  mutual  edification  and  for  the  purposes 
of  His  Kingdom,  there  you  have  the  divine  seat  and 
throne,  and  there  you  may  count  on  the  living  Presence 
of  the  Sevenfold  Spirit  of  the  Eternal.  "  Grace  to 
you  and  Peace  from  the  Seven  Spirits  which  are  be- 
fore His  throne  and  from  Jesus  Christ."  Happy  is 
that  Christian  community  which  understands  and 
realizes  this  blessed  fact,  as  it  was  perceived  and  real- 
ized by  Peter  and  the  rest  on  that  momentous  day, 
when  the  Serpent  threatened  to  enter  their  newly- 
planted  Paradise,  as  he  entered  and  destroyed  the 
Paradise  of  Eden. 

The  falsehood  on  which  these  two  sinners  against 
their  own  souls  agreed  was  sin  against  God  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  through  Him  against  the  Lord  Jesus;  and 
the  penalty  which  was  inflicted  was  due  to  His  own 
direct  action,  as  a  warning  for  all  after-time.  "  And 
great  fear  came  upon  the  whole  Church  and  upon  all 
those  that  heard  these  things."  Would  that  similar 
fear,  the  fear  born  of  reverent  love,  might  come  upon 
all  gatherings  of  God's  people !  There  would  be  more 
intensity  in  every  act  of  worship,  more  love  and  faith, 
more  of  the  adoration  and  humility  which  are  evident 
in  that  upper  sanctuary,  where  the  very  seraphim  veil 
their  faces  with  their  wings,  as  they  hymn  the  praise 
of  the  All-Holy.  Keep  thy  foot,  when  thou  enterest 
the  House  of  God,  if  the  Church  is  in  session,  for  God 
is  there  by  His  Spirit.  Worship  Him  in  spirit  and 
truth !  Refuse  to  harbour  anything  which  is  not  con- 
sistent with  His  Nature !  And  bring  with  thee  in  thine 
own  ardent  heart  some  contribution  to  the  solemn  and 


THE  SHADOW  OF  PETER  171 

blessed  atmosphere,  in  which  He  expands  His  tender- 
est  and  mightiest  energies.  Thus  when  we  meet  with 
the  Church,  let  us  do  so  under  the  searching  gaze  of 
its  President,  and  in  Him  draw  nigh  to  the  General 
Assembly  and  Church  of  the  firstborn,  whose  names 
are  written  in  Heaven,  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made 
perfect,  to  God  the  Judge  of  all,  and  to  Jesus  the 
Mediator  of  the  new  Covenant. 

III.  The  Co- Witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit. — The 
public  sentiment  of  Jerusalem  was  strongly  in  favour 
of  the  Church.  This  was  largely  accounted  for  by 
miraculous  works  of  healing  that  gathered  the  crowds 
around  the  Apostles,  as  formerly  to  the  Person  of  the 
Lord.  In  the  early  days  of  His  popularity  the  people 
pressed  to  touch  Him.  "  Wheresoever  He  entered, 
into  villages,  or  into  cities,  or  into  the  country,  they 
laid  the  sick  in  the  market-places,  and  besought  that 
they  might  touch  if  it  were  but  the  border  of  His  gar- 
ment ;  and  as  many  as  touched  Him  were  made  whole." 
Those  scenes  were  repeated  in  the  narrow  streets  of 
Jerusalem,  that  as  Peter  came  by  his  shadow  might 
be  cast  at  least  on  some  of  the  sick  who  were  laid  on 
beds  and  couches  along  his  pathway.  The  tidings 
of  the  marvellous  cures  which  were  effected  spread  to 
the  cities  and  towns  round  about  and  attracted  im- 
mense multitudes  to  see  and  hear  and  be  healed.  The 
country  rang  with  the  tidings  of  the  wondrous  cures 
wrought  in  the  Name  of  Jesus. 

For  a  time  the  Rulers  stood  rigidly  aloof.  "  Of  the 
rest,"  i.  e.  of  those  who  were  not  of  the  ranks  of  the 
common  people,  "  durst  no  man  join  himself  to  them." 
But  finally  the  smouldering  embers  of  their  jealousy 
burst  into  fire,  and  the  whole  Apostolic  band  was 
arrested  and  thrust  into  the  public  prison.  On  the 
following  morning,  when  the  Sanhedrim,  reinforced  by 
others  of  the  elders,  or  senate,  of  Israel,  met  to  ad- 


172  THE  CO-WITNESS  OF  THE  PARACLETE 

judge  the  matter,  the  prison  was  empty,  and  news  came 
that  their  prisoners  were  standing  in  the  Temple  and 
teaching  the  people.  Notwithstanding  the  miraculous 
character  of  their  liberation,  the  trial  was  proceeded 
with,  and  Peter,  as  spokesman  of  the  whole  body,  had 
another  opportunity  of  proclaiming  before  the  ruling 
classes  of  the  nation  the  Resurrection  and  Exaltation 
of  his  Lord. 

That  the  God  of  their  fathers  had  raised  up  Jesus 
whom  they  slew;  that  He  was  seated  at  His  right 
hand;  that  He  was  Prince  and  Saviour;  that  repent- 
ance and  remission  of  sin  were  offered  through  Him 
to  Israel — these  truths  had  been  voiced  in  that  august 
assembly  before;  but  there  was  a  new  emphasis  laid 
on  the  corroborating  witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  We 
are  witnesses  of  these  things ;  and  so  is  the  Holy  Spirit 
whom  God  hath  given  to  them  that  obey  Him." 

The  Master  had  promised  that  this  should  be  their 
experience.  "  When  the  Comforter  is  come,  whom  I 
will  send  unto  you  from  the  Father,  even  the  Spirit  of 
Truth  which  proceedeth  from  the  Father,  He  shall 
bear  witness  of  Me;  and  ye  also  shall  bear  witness, 
because  ye  have  been  with  Me  from  the  beginning." 
There  we  have  the  Saviour's  own  promise  that  the 
Church  may  count  on  the  corroborating  affirmations  of 
the  Spirit  of  Truth.  When  the  voice  is  heard  from 
Heaven,  proclaiming  the  blessedness  of  those  that 
have  died  in  Christ,  the  Spirit  utters  His  emphatic 
Amen  in  the  hearts  of  men.  In  the  story  of  Paul's  first 
missionary  campaign  we  are  told  that  the  Lord  bare 
witness  to  the  word  of  His  grace ;  and  in  the  opening 
chapters  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  we  learn  that 
God  bare  witness  to  the  earliest  Evangelists  of  the 
Cross  by  signs,  and  wonders,  and  gifts  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Always  the  Spirit  and  the  Bride  say.  Come. 
The  Bride  says  it  audibly,  "  Come,  Lord  Jesus,  come 
quickly."    The  Spirit  confirms  her  words  with  groan- 


THE  REVIVAL  AT  SAMARIA  173 

ings  that  cannot  be  uttered,  though  they  pervade  the 
soul. 

It  was  a  great  discovery  and  announcement  that 
Peter  made  that  day.  It  is  of  immense  and  trans- 
cendent importance  to  us  all !  Often  when  the  preacher 
or  teacher  is  most  appalled  with  the  obstinacy  and 
resistance  of  the  human  heart,  he  may  comfort  himself 
by  remembering  that  he  is  in  partnership  with  the 
Divine.  The  child's  finger  may  be  able  only  to  strike 
one  note  after  another  with  one  finger  on  the  piano 
keys,  but  who  will  break  his  heart  over  such  a  trifle, 
when  a  master  of  music  sits  beside  her  accompanying 
each  of  her  notes  with  magnificent  thrilling  chords,  and 
is  able  to  turn  even  her  mistakes  into  profounder 
harmonies?  We  must  never  allow  that  thought  of 
the  co-witness  of  the  Divine  Spirit  on  the  behalf  of 
the  truth  to  fade  from  our  minds.  Obviously  we  must 
see  to  it  that  we  utter  only  such  truths  as  He  will  find 
it  possible  to  corroborate.  As  Peter  put  it  in  this  ad- 
dress, it  is  when  we  announce  Jesus  as  dying,  rising, 
and  exalted,  as  Saviour  and  Prince,  as  the  Fountain 
and  Lord  of  Life,  that  we  may  count  most  surely  on 
the  Divine  Spirit  endorsing  and  attesting  the  truth, 
as  though  He  said :  "  It  is  so !  By  Me  He  offered 
Himself  without  spot  to  God.  I  was  there  when  He 
died.  His  blood  atones.  I  am  One  with  Him,  in  the 
stream  which  proceeds  from  the  throne  of  the  Lamb. 
We  are  one  both  in  its  current  and  its  source." 

IV.  The  Superlative  Superiority  of  the  Holy 
Spirit. — The  Evangelist  Philip  had  been  the  means 
of  a  marvellous  spiritual  revival  at  Samaria,  and  had 
there  encountered  in  Simon  a  crafty  and  ambitious 
man,  who  was  clearly  an  adept  in  the  occult  learning 
of  the  age  and  in  the  black  arts  of  sorcery  and  witch- 
craft. Miracles  were  wrought  by  his  collusion  with 
demon  influences,  which  in  our  own  time  have  revived 


174  "SIMONY" 

under  the  name  of  Spiritualism.  This  science  has 
been  defined  as  an  attempt  to  obtain  power  by  the 
aid  of  unknown  and  spiritual  agencies,  without  regard 
to  those  moral  and  religious  conditions  of  purity  and 
piety  under  which  alone  will  God  discover  Himself 
to  man.  As  in  Egypt  Jannes  and  Jambres  withstood 
Moses,  so  did  Simon  endeavour  to  counterfeit  the 
beneficent  achievements  of  Philip,  using  only  the  Name 
of  Jesus.  Forthwith  unclean  spirits  surrendered  their 
victims  with  loud  cries,  and  many  that  were  palsied 
and  lame  were  healed.  But  the  Evangelist  was  not 
content  with  these  manifestations  of  spiritual  power, 
he  preached  unto  them  the  Christ,  and  the  people  gave 
heed  with  one  accord  and  believed.  "  There  was  great 
joy  in  that  city!  ** 

Presently  a  demand  arose  for  further  help  than 
Philip  could  give,  and  the  Apostles,  who  had  remained 
in  Jerusalem,  notwithstanding  the  persecution,  which 
broke  out  after  Stephen's  death,  that  they  might  focus 
and  guide  the  entire  Christian  movement,  sent  Peter 
and  John  to  give  on  their  behalf  formal  recognition 
to  the  infant  Christian  Church  which  had  arisen  from 
the  gracious  work  of  this  Revival.  During  the  solemn 
act  which  sought  and  obtained  a  further  bestowal  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  there  seems  to  have  been  such  a  con- 
spicuous manifestation  of  spiritual  power  as  astounded 
the  beholders  and  specially  Simon.  With  amazement 
he  beheld  the  exaltation  that  transfigured  spirit,  soul 
and  body,  and  lifted  the  converts  into  unparalleled 
ecstasy.  H  only  he  could  obtain  the  talisman  of  a 
similar  power  it  would  be  worth  a  mine  of  gold ;  and 
so  he  hazarded  the  offer  which  has  for  ever  stamped 
his  name  with  the  infamy,  and  made  it,  as  Simony,  the 
brand  of  similar  proposals.  Turning  on  the  wretched 
and  misguided  man,  Peter  sternly  rebuked  him.  "  Thy 
silver  perish  with  thee,  because  thou  hast  thought 
that  the  Gift  of  God  may  be  obtained  by  money.    Thou 


STAND  IN  AWE  AND  SIN  NOT        175 

hast  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter;  for  thy  heart 
is  not  right  with  God."  But,  as  Peter  uttered  those 
terrible  words,  did  there  not  break  in  on  his  soul,  by 
force  of  contrast,  a  fresh  and  living  conception,  not 
only  of  the  superlative  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  but 
of  the  divine  purity  and  beauty  of  His  workmanship, 
and  of  the  absolute  necessity  that  the  character  of 
those  with  whom  He  cooperates  must  also  be  pure 
and  holy,  free  from  the  taint  of  greed,  and  able  to 
receive  His  blessed  help,  with  no  selfish  ambition,  but 
as  the  humble  and  cleansed  channels  and  instruments 
of  His  will  ?  "  Be  ye  clean  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the 
Lord!" 

The  lesson  of  Uzzah  in  the  Old  Testament  and  of 
Ananias  in  the  New  compels  one  to  self-examination 
lest  we  too  may  sin  against  the  awful  holiness  of  God. 
If  His  nature  is  Love,  and  comparable  to  fire,  we  must 
remember  that  fire  consumes.  Especially  in  prayer, 
though  we  know  that  He  is  our  Father,  let  us  ask 
for  grace  that  we  may  offer  acceptable  service,  with 
reverence  and  awe.  "  Take  off  the  shoes  from  off  thy 
feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  is  Holy 
Ground!" 


XXI 

THE  DOOR  OF  FAITH  UNTO  THE  GENTILES 

Acts  vi.  1-7;  viii.  14-25;  ix.  31- x.  16 

"  While  ye  sit  idle,  do  you  think 
The  Lord's  great  work  sits  idle  too? 
That  light  dare  not  o'erleap  the  brink 
Of  morn,  because  'tis  dark  with  you? 
Though  yet  your  valleys  skulk  in  night 
In  God's  ripe  fields  the  day  is  cried, 
And  reapers  with  their  sickles  bright 
Troop,  singing,   down  the  mountain-side." 

— Lowell. 

WE  Open  at  this  point  a  new  chapter  in  the 
history  of  the  unfolding  of  the  Divine  pur- 
pose for  our  race.  Let  us  take  the  shoes 
from  off  our  feet,  for  this  surely  is  holy  ground.  "  O 
the  depth  of  the  riches,  both  of  the  wisdom  and  the 
knowledge  of  God.  Who  hath  known  the  mind  of  the 
Lord  ?  or  who  hath  been  His  counsellor  ?  For  of  Him, 
and  through  Him,  and  to  Him  are  all  things." 

There  are  certain  facts  which  we  must  recapitulate 
as  we  seek  to  understand  the  mystery  or  secret,  which 
in  other  generations  was  not  made  known  unto  the 
sons  of  men,  as  it  has  now  been  revealed  by  the  Divine 
Spirit,  who  searcheth  all  things,  yea,  the  deep  things 
of  God. 

We  agree  that  the  Church  was  bom  on  the  day  of 
our  Lord's  Resurrection.  He  had  always  referred  to 
it  in  the  future  tense.  "  I  will  build  my  Church." 
When  He  descended,  to  use  the  Apostle's  words,  "  into 

176 


THE  STRICT  HEBREW  CASTE         177 

the  lower  parts  of  the  earth,"  He  laid  the  foundations 
on  which  the  glorious  edifice  arose  which  was  to  be 
builded  together — a  house  not  made  by  hands — as  a 
habitation  of  God  by  the  Spirit. 

We  agree  that  when  the  Saviour  ascended  to  His 
throne  in  the  Heavens,  the  Divine  Comforter,  as  His 
Executor,  descended  to  His  throne  or  seat  in  the 
Church,  to  become  its  Teacher,  Inspirer,  and  Guide. 
"  He  sat  upon  each  of  them."  God  is  still  resident 
among  men.  As  the  Lord  Jesus  was  incarnated  in 
"  that  holy  thing  "  which  was  born  of  the  Virgin,  so  the 
Holy  Spirit  became  incarnated  in  the  Church,  which  is 
His  Body,  the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all. 

We  agree  also  that  from  the  first  the  Divine  objec- 
tive was  to  include  in  the  one  Church,  not  Jews  alone, 
but  Gentiles  who  had  not  received  the  seal  and  sign  of 
the  Abrahamic  covenant,  but  had  entered  directly  from 
the  Gentile  world  by  the  simple  act  of  faith.  This  was 
God's  secret  purpose,  as  Paul  tells  us  in  the  closing 
paragraph  of  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  which  had 
been  hidden  from  before  times  eternal,  and  the  unfold- 
ing of  which  was  specially  entrusted  to  him,  as  to  one 
bom  out  of  due  time,  but  specially  honoured  to  be  the 
Apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  Until  the  reception  of  Cor- 
nelius into  the  Church,  the  idea  had  hardly  dawned  on 
the  Apostles  or  the  body  of  disciples  that  the  Gentiles 
should  be  fellow-heirs,  and  fellow-members  of  the 
body,  and  fellow-partakers  of  the  promise  of  Christ. 
Gentiles,  it  was  generally  supposed,  could  only  enter 
the  door  of  the  Christian  Church  by  first  becoming 
Jews.  The  Scripture  indeed  foresaw  that  God  would 
justify  the  Gentiles  by  faith,  and  by  faith  alone.  This 
Gospel  was  preached  beforehand  unto  Abraham,  in  the 
earliest  stages  of  his  career  as  the  father  of  them  that 
believe;  and  he  is  not  a  Jew  which  is  one  outwardly, 
but  he  is  a  Jew  which  is  one  inwardly,  and  circumcision 
is  that  of  the  heart,  in  the  spirit,  and  not  in  the  letter, 


178  "NOT  SO,  LORD!" 

whose  praise  is  not  of  men,  but  of  God.  When  our 
Lord  commissioned  His  Apostles  to  go  into  all  the 
world  and  make  disciples  from  all  the  nations,  they 
probably  supposed  that  the  rite  of  circumcision  would 
precede  their  administration  of  baptism.  It  was  only 
by  a  very  gradual  process  that  the  whole  truth  broke 
on  them  that  in  Christ  Jesus  there  is  neither  Jew  nor 
Greek,  circumcision  nor  uncircumcision,  bond  nor  free, 
male  nor  female,  but  all  are  one  in  Him. 

VVe  agree  that  it  was  befitting  that  he,  to  whom  the 
keys  of  the  Kingdom  were  committed,  and  who  had 
opened  the  door  of  Pentecostal  blessing  to  Jews,  should 
be  honoured  by  fulfilling  the  same  ministry  to  the  Gen- 
tiles also.  For  eight  years  with  his  fellow  Apostles 
Peter  had  confined  himself  to  the  consolidation  of  the 
Mother  Church,  he  was  now  to  learn  that  her  children 
would  be  gathered  equally  from  a  great  multitude, 
whom  none  could  number,  of  every  nation,  and  kin- 
dred, and  people,  and  tongue.  We  have,  therefore,  to 
consider  the  steps  by  which  he  was  led  forth  into  a 
larger  conception  of  the  Divine  purpose,  by  that  guid- 
ing cloud,  which  led  him  out  of  the  Jerusalem  of  bond- 
age to  an  outward  ordinance  into  the  Jerusalem  that  is 
above,  which  is  eternally  and  spiritually  free. 

Peter  was  a  strict  Jew.  He  was  inclined  to  view 
with  suspicion  even  the  Hellenist,  or  Greek- speaking, 
Jews,  who  were  scattered  throughout  the  Roman  Em- 
pire. And  he  knew  the  Gentiles,  only  as  he  had,  from 
boyhood,  beheld  the  glitter  of  their  civilization,  which 
transformed  the  Lake  of  Galilee  into  a  Roman  plea- 
sure-resort. He  was  intimately  acquainted  with  Roman 
officials,  collectors  of  revenue,  centurions  and  soldiers ; 
but  he  had  never  entered  a  Gentile  home,  had  never 
sat  at  a  Gentile  table,  and  had  never  transgressed  the 
rigid  prescriptions  of  the  Levitical  dietary.  He  shrank 
from  familiar  intercourse  with  Gentiles,  as  a  Brahmin 
in  India  to-day  with  a  Sudra.    Hence  his  exclamation. 


THE  RUFFLING  OF  THE  WATERS     179 

when  invited  to  eat  of  the  heterogeneous  contents  of 
the  great  sheet :  "  Not  so,  Lord,  for  I  have  never  eaten 
anything  that  was  common  or  unclean." 

The  Divine  Master  is  wilHng  to  take  infinite  pains 
with  us,  before  He  demands  the  ceding  of  our  wills  and 
the  taking  of  an  irrevocable  step.  He  causes  the  light 
of  His  illuminating  Spirit  to  fall  on  us,  before  calling 
us  to  strike  our  tents  for  a  march  into  the  unknown. 
The  reasonableness,  necessity,  and  urgency  of  some 
course  to  which  we  are  summoned,  are  unfolded,  "  line 
upon  line,  precept  upon  precept,  here  a  little  and  there 
a  little,  by  divers  portions  and  in  divers  manners." 

Let  us  watch  the  stages  of  the  process  in  the  present 
case. 

(i)  There  arose  a  murmuring  of  the  Grecian,  the 
Hellenist^  Jews  against  the  Hebrews.  The  Hellenist 
always  regarded  Jerusalem  and  the  Temple  with  fond 
and  reverent  affection.  Thither  he  turned  as  he  prayed. 
Thither  he  came  with  his  family,  as  often  as  the  cost 
permitted,  to  the  annual  festivals.  In  the  Holy  City 
he  desired  to  die,  and  in  its  precincts  be  buried.  A 
large  contingent  of  these  Jews  of  the  dispersion  were 
present  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  and  had  then,  as  in 
the  following  years,  identified  themselves  with  the 
Christian  community.  Many  of  them,  like  the  good 
Barnabas,  had  parted  with  their  possessions,  placing 
the  proceeds  in  the  common  stock,  and  their  poor  were 
in  the  habit  of  receiving  their  sustenance  from  the 
common  purse.  But  suddenly  the  calm  waters  of 
Peace  and  Love  became  ruffled  by  dissatisfaction  and 
heart-burning.  Their  widows  complained  that  undue 
partiality  was  shown  in  the  daily  distribution,  and  that 
home-born  women  fared  better  at  the  hand  of  the 
Apostolic  almoners  than  they  did. 

The  peril  of  a  serious  rent  in  the  seamless  robe  of 
the  Church  became  at  length  so  imminent  that  Peter 
and  his  brethren  were  compelled  to  take  action.     After 


i8o  THE  SEVEN  DEACONS 

anxious  consideration,  they  arrived  at  the  conclusion 
that  their  highest  vocation  was  to  prayer  and  the 
ministry  of  the  Word,  and  that  this  service  of  tables 
should  be  entrusted  to  seven  men  of  good  report,  full 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  wisdom.  They  advised  the 
Church,  therefore,  as  the  ultimate  authority,  that  they 
should  proceed  to  choose  that  number  from  amongst 
themselves.  "  Look  ye  out  therefore,  brethren,  from 
among  you  seven  men,  whom  we  may  appoint  over 
this  business,  but  we  will  continue  stedfastly  in  prayer 
and  in  the  ministry  of  the  Word." 

In  a  parenthesis  we  may  notice  the  importance  of 
this  action,  and  the  light  it  casts  on  the  precise  position 
that  Peter  occupied  in  the  primitive  Church.  If  he 
had  been  invested  with  the  authority  which  has  been 
attributed  to  him  by  those  who  have  specially  posed 
as  his  successors,  it  is  inconceivable  that  he  should 
have  left  this  momentous  decision  to  the  general  as- 
sembly of  believers.  Surely  he  would  have  acted  on  his 
own  authority,  and  with  the  acquiescence  of  his  fellow 
Apostles  would  have  appointed  these  seven  deacons. 
But  it  was  not  so.  The  Church  must  elect,  and  the 
Apostles,  by  prayer  and  the  laying  on  of  hands,  en- 
dorse their  choice. 

It  is  remarkable  that  they  were  all  Hellenist  Jews, 
with  the  exception  of  the  last,  who  was  a  Gentile  prose- 
lyte. The  unanimity  of  the  Church  in  this  solemn 
act  was  so  evidently  due  to  the  presence  and  direction 
of  the  Spirit,  whose  supreme  action  had  been  apparent 
in  the  case  of  Ananias  and  his  wife,  that  Peter  could 
say  nothing  to  the  contrary,  however  startling  to  his 
preconceptions  such  action  must  have  appeared. 

(2)  Then  came  the  great  arguments,  apology,  and 
martyrdom  of  Stephen.  In  the  familiar  intercourse 
that  ensued,  Peter  would  have  been  attracted  to  the 
eloquent  young  Hellenist,  whose  face  must  often  have 
shone  "  as  the  face  of  an  angel."     He  often  listened 


THE  IMPARTIAL  SPIRIT  l8i 

to  the  burning  words  with  which  Stephen  insisted  that 
throughout  their  history  the  chosen  people  had  resisted 
the  Divine  Spirit,  when  He  summoned  them  to  a  new 
advance.  The  note  of  a  trumpet-call  rang  through 
his  speech  in  private  conference  and  public  debate. 
And,  as  he  listened,  Peter  may  have  recalled  the  Mas- 
ter's words,  that  it  would  be  found  impossible  to  put 
the  new  wine  in  the  old  bottles.  Almost  unconsciously 
his  mind  must  have  been  prepared  for  a  more  gener- 
ous interpretation  of  his  Master's  purpose.  Already 
the  breath  of  a  new  age  fanned  his  cheek,  as  the  door 
was  being  slowly  opened  for  the  admission  of  the  Gen- 
tile world. 

(3)  The  mission  to  Samaria  followed.  Beneath 
Philip's  preaching  vast  numbers  of  Samaritans,  who 
had  for  long  been  held  under  the  spell  of  what  wx  now 
know  as  Spiritualism,  had  broken  away  from  Simon 
the  Sorcerer,  and  been  baptized  in  the  name  of  Jesus. 
This  movement  needed  to  be  regularized,  and  the 
Apostles,  who  had  dared  to  remain  in  Jerusalem,  de- 
spite Saul's  fiery  persecution,  determined  to  commis- 
sion Peter  and  John  to  visit  the  scene  of  revival,  and 
lead  the  new  converts  forward  into  the  full  enjoyment 
of  the  gifts  of  Pentecost.  The  heart  of  the  Church 
was  still  beating  strongly,  though  so  many  of  its  sons 
and  daughters  had  been  obliged  to  flee  for  their  lives. 

Here,  again,  Peter  used  the  keys  of  teaching,  prayer, 
and  the  imposition  of  hands,  with  the  result  that  the 
miracle  of  Pentecost  was  repeated.  "  They  received 
the  Holy  Ghost."  Though  the  special  rite  of  the 
Abrahamic  covenant  was  of  national  observance  among 
the  Samaritans,  they  were  regarded  as  a  mongrel  race. 
Their  name  was  employed  as  a  term  of  reproach. 
"  Thou  art  a  Samaritan !  "  A  good  deed  like  that  at- 
tributed to  the  Good  Samaritan  was  not  generally  ex- 
pected from  a  race  that  was  looked  upon  as  accursed. 
But,  to  the  obvious  astonishment  of  the  Apostles,  the 


1 82       PETER'S  NARRATIVE  TO  PAUL 

Holy  Spirit,  in  answer  to  their  prayer,  descended  on 
these  believing  Samaritans,  with  absolute  impartiality. 
Indeed,  Peter  was  so  impressed  with  what  he  saw  that 
he  could  do  no  other  than  keep  in  the  current  of  the 
Divine  purpose;  and  therefore  he  and  John,  in  their 
leisurely  return  to  Jerusalem,  preached  in  the  villages 
of  Samaria  through  which  they  passed.  Here,  again, 
was  a  further  unfolding  of  the  horizon  of  God's  pur- 
pose. 

(4)  But  the  process  was  still  further  accelerated  by 
the  conversion  of  Saul  of  Tarsus.  It  was  a  startling 
rumour  that  reached  Jerusalem,that  the  arch-persecutor 
of  the  Church  had  been  arrested  by  the  direct  interven- 
tion of  the  Lord,  and  had  become  His  humble  follower. 
But  as  the  further  tidings  filtered  in,  and  fuller  details 
were  furnished  of  this  wonderful  event,  they  learnt 
that  Saul  had  been  compelled  to  flee  from  Damascus 
and  had  gone  to  Arabia.  Some  time  elapsed,  and 
finally,  to  Peter's  surprise,  he  presented  himself  at  his 
humble  dwelling  in  Jerusalem,  and  took  up  his  abode 
there,  remaining  as  his  guest  for  fifteen  days.  We  are 
strongly  tempted  to  draw  aside  the  veil  and  consider 
the  converse  of  these  two  men,  so  different  in  age,  edu- 
cation, and  mental  outlook,  and  yet  so  closely  united  in 
Jesus  Christ.  Did  not  the  newly-constituted  Apostle, 
who  had  just  seen  the  Risen  Lord,  ask  his  new-found 
friend  to  take  him  through  the  scenes  associated  with 
the  Master's  closing  days?  Would  they  not  go  to- 
gether outside  the  city  wall  to  Gethsemane,  Calvary, 
and  Joseph's  Garden?  "There  He  lay  on  that  plot  of 
grass,  and  I  came  there  afterwards  at  dawn,  when  my 
heart  was  breaking."  "  It  was  on  this  spot  that  I 
drew  my  sword,  because  I  couldn't  endure  to  see  them 
binding  His  dear  hands  so  roughly."  "  Yes,  we  will 
go  to  Calvary."  "That's  where  His  cross  was  lifted 
up,  I  could  just  catch  the  outline,  as  I  stood  in  the 
distance,  but  it  was  very  dark."    "  I  couldn't  stay  to 


'^FAR  HENCE  TO  THE  GENTILES!"     183 

the  end,  because  the  mother  was  in  an  agony,  and  one 
of  us  had  to  be  with  her;  so  I  went  back  to  release 
John,  who  was  staying  with  her  till  I  returned." 
"  Now  come  to  the  grave."  "  They  laid  Him  there  on 
the  Friday  afternoon,  but  at  daybreak,  on  the  first  day 
of  the  week,  the  women  brought  a  message  that  He 
was  alive  and  wanted  to  see  me."  "  In  that  glade 
yonder  we  met,  but  I  can  never  tell  all  that  happened 
there.  It  is  locked  up  in  His  heart  and  mine."  Thus 
Peter  must  have  told  the  story,  whilst  Paul  listened 
with  rapt  interest. 

Thus  the  fortnight  passed,  when  suddenly  the 
younger  man  burst  in  on  Peter  with  a  strange  glory  on 
his  features,  as  though  he  had  seen,  as  Isaiah  did,  the 
Lord  high  and  lifted  up.  His  train  filling  the  Temple, 
whilst  the  seraphim,  in  a  burning  row,  stood  around 
with  their  ceaseless  ascription  of  holiness.  "  Brother," 
said  he,  "  what  do  you  think,  as  just  now  I  was  praying 
in  the  temple  I  seemed  to  lose  myself,  and  saw  the 
Lord,  and  He  said  to  me.  Make  haste,  and  get  thee 
quickly  out  of  Jerusalem,  because  they  will  not  receive 
of  thee  testimony  concerning  Me.  And  I  said.  Lord, 
they  know  that  I  imprisoned  and  beat  in  every  syna- 
gogue them  that  believed  on  Thee.  But  He  said  unto 
me.  Depart :  for  I  will  send  thee  forth  far  hence  to  the 
Gentiles.  You  see,  therefore,  I  have  no  alternative, 
and  must  be  gone." 

Peter  must  have  been  sorely  troubled  at  the  danger 
which  beset  his  new-found  friend,  and  took  instant 
steps  to  arrange  his  passage  out  of  the  danger-zone  for 
Csesarea,  and  ultimately  to  Tarsus.  When  he  was 
safely  away,  however,  those  parting  words  must  have 
rung  in  his  heart — Far  hence  to  the  Gentiles.  He  could 
not  challenge  those  words.  Clearly  they  were  spoken  by 
the  Master,  but  they  still  further  prepared  him  for  the 
fresh  demand  which  would  soon  be  made  on  himself. 

(5)  The  process  was  completed  at  Joppa.    After  the 


i84  A  REDEEMED  WORLD 

departure  of  Paul  the  Church  throughout  Judaea  and 
Samaria  had  peace,  and  walking  in  the  Paracletism  of 
the  Paraclete  was  multiplied.  Peter  took  advantage  of 
this  halcyon  period  to  make  an  itinerary  through  the 
smaller  congregations  that  were  scattered  throughout 
Judsea,  and  in  course  of  time  came  to  Lydda,  where,  as 
the  medium  for  the  health-giving  word  of  Christ,  he 
lifted  ^neas  from  his  eight-years'  paralysis.  Thence 
he  was  summoned  by  an  urgent  message  to  Joppa,  six 
and  a  half  miles  distant  on  the  rocky  seacoast,  to  the 
room  of  death,  where  the  beloved  Dorcas  lay.  His 
prayer  on  her  behalf  prevailed  with  God,  and  when  he 
gave  her  his  hand  she  arose  to  become  once  more  the 
gentle  friend  of  all  the  saints  and  widows  in  the  little 
town. 

There,  however,  his  work  seemed  finished.  Before 
him  lay  the  sea  of  the  Gentiles.  Its  restless  waters 
were  the  symbol  of  the  restless  fret  of  a  world  without 
Christ,  and  at  the  end  of  its  resources.  The  house  in 
which  he  lodged — the  house  of  Simon  the  tanner — had 
associations  with  death  and  its  accompanying  cere- 
monial pollution,  which  must  have  been  extremely 
distasteful  to  a  conscientious  Jew.  The  Jerusalem 
Church  had  become  so  diminished  by  persecution  and 
flight,  that  its  concerns  failed  to  afford  him  the  wide 
scope  and  sphere  to  which  for  eight  years  he  had  been 
accustomed.  What  was  to  be  the  next  step  in  the 
fulfilment  of  his  life-work?  Was  the  cloud  about  to 
move  forward?  Was  some  new  development  of  the 
Divine  pattern  at  hand  which  he  must  realize  for  him- 
self and  others? 

At  this  juncture,  one  noon,  when  the  blazing  sun- 
shine poured  down  on  the  burnished  mirror  of  the  sea, 
and  on  the  white  houses  of  the  little  town,  he  went  up 
to  the  housetop  for  prayer — prayer  probably  for 
further  light.  Whilst  they  prepared  the  midday  meal, 
he  fell  into  a  trance,  and  through  the  opened  heavens 


"  REST  IN  THE  LORD  ! "  185 

he  caught  the  vision  of  a  redeemed  world,  like  a  great 
white  sheet.  The  variety  of  its  contents — four-footed 
beasts,  creeping  things,  birds  clean  and  unclean,  star- 
tled him;  and  still  more  the  declaration  that  God  had 
cleansed  them  all,  that  the  old  Levitical  restrictions 
were  removed,  and  that  any  of  them  were  fit  for  food. 
Rise,  Peter,  slay  and  eat. 

Then,  whilst  he  was  much  perplexed  in  himself  as 
to  what  the  vision  which  he  had  seen  might  mean,  the 
knocking  at  the  gate,  the  voices  of  men,  that  rose  in 
the  noon-silence,  as  they  called  his  name,  together 
with  the  assurance  of  the  Spirit  that  there  was  no  need 
for  fear  or  hesitation — all  indicated  that  the  hour  of 
Destiny  had  struck,  that  a  new  epoch  was  inaugurated, 
and  that  he  was  to  lead  the  Church  into  the  greatest 
revolution  she  had  known  since  the  Ascension  of  her 
Lord. 

What  a  lesson  is  here  for  our  perplexed  and  anxious 
hearts!  We  find  it  so  difficult  to  wait  the  Lord's 
leisure.  Like  imprisoned  birds  we  beat  our  breasts 
against  the  wires  of  the  cage.  Though  we  pray,  we 
do  not  trust.  We  find  it  so  hard  to  obey  the  in- 
junction of  the  Psalmist  and  roll  our  care,  our  way, 
and  ourselves  on  God.  Let  us  be  silent  to  Him,  and 
believe  that  even  now  the  messengers  are  hastening 
along  the  road,  with  the  summons,  or  direction,  or 
help  we  need.  "  I  will  stand  upon  my  watch,  and 
set  me  upon  the  tower,  and  will  look  forth  to  see  what 
He  will  speak.  The  vision  is  yet  for  the  appointed 
time,  and  it  panteth  toward  the  end.  Though  it  tarry, 
wait  for  it,  because  it  will  surely  come.  The  just  shall 
live  by  his  faith." 


XXII 

THE  BREAKING  OF  THE  YOKE 
Acts  x.  17-  xi.  i8 

"Yet  he  who  at  the  sixth  hour  sought 
The  lone  house-top  to  pray, 
There  gained  a  sight  beyond  his  thougkt — 

The  dawn  of  Gentile  day. 
Then  reckon  not,  when  perils  lour, 

The  time  of  prayer  mis-spent; 
Nor  meanest  chance,  nor  place,  nor  hour 
Without  its  heavenward  bent." 

— Newman. 

WITHOUT  doubt  the  Levitical  system,  in  its 
strict  prohibition  of  certain  kinds  of  food, 
as  set  forth  in  Lev.  xi.,  placed  a  very  heavy 
yoke  on  the  neck  of  the  Hebrew  people.  In  fact, 
at  the  first  General  Council  of  the  Church  Peter 
described  it  as  a  yoke,  "  which  neither  they  nor  their 
fathers  had  been  able  to  bear."  It  was  obviously  in- 
tended to  secure  their  separateness  from  all  other  na- 
tions, so  that  they  might  become  a  peculiar  treasure,  a 
Kingdom  of  priests,  and  a  holy  nation,  specially  set 
apart  for  the  Divine  use.  A  middle  wall  of  partition 
was  erected  between  Jew  and  Gentile,  that  nothing 
might  dilute  or  impair  the  sacred  deposit  of  truth  com- 
mitted to  Abraham  and  his  seed.  But  hard  as  the  re- 
strictions were,  there  was  no  hesitation  in  their  main- 
tenance. In  the  fiery  persecution  of  the  Jews  by  Anti- 
ochus,  men  chose  rather  to  die  than  defile  themselves 
with  meats,  and  so  profane  the  holy  covenant.     The 

186 


"THE  NEW  AND  LIVING  WAY"       187 

refusal  to  eat  swine's  flesh  was  ranked  with  circum- 
cision and  Sabbath-observance  as  a  matter  for  which  a 
Jew  should  unhesitatingly  lay  down  his  life. 

As  the  result  of  these  food-prescriptions,  the  Gentile 
world  was  viewed  as  strangers  and  foreigners,  "  far 
off,"  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and 
strangers  to  the  covenants  of  promise.  They  were 
without  God  and  without  hope.  If  they  desired  to  be 
received  into  the  Palace  of  the  Great  King,  they  must 
travel  round  by  the  tents  of  Abraham  and  the  wilder- 
ness of  Sinai.  It  was  consonant  with  this  that  certain 
men  came  down  from  the  Mother  Church  to  the  earli- 
est Church  formed  exclusively  of  Gentiles,  saying — 
"  Except  ye  be  circumcised  after  the  manner  of  Moses, 
ye  cannot  be  saved." 

It  was  clearly  necessary  that  the  cancelling  of  Leviti- 
cal  distinctions  should  be  as  clearly  defined  as  their  im- 
position; and  therefore  Peter's  Vision,  the  embassy 
from  Cornelius,  and  the  manifest  corroboration  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  were  concentrated  in  this  remarkable 
episode.  Peter  and  Cornelius  were  brought  together, 
and  so  was  opened  the  new  and  living  way  which  the 
Lord  had  already  consecrated  through  His  flesh.  We 
Gentiles  have  been  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ, 
because  He  hath  reconciled  us  to  God  in  one  body  by 
the  Cross. 

The  Unveiling  of  the  Mystery  took  three  days. 

I.  C^sarea:  3.0  p.  M. — Cornelius  came  of  one  of 
the  noblest  of  Roman  families.  He  belonged  to  the 
same  stock  as  the  Scipios,  Sulla,  and  the  mother  of  the 
Gracchi.  "  No  name  was  more  honourable  at  Rome 
than  that  of  the  Cornelian  House.  An  earnest  seeker 
after  God,  he  had  grown  weary  of  the  polytheism, 
idolatry,  and  superstitions  of  his  age,  and  had  sought 
satisfaction  in  the  one  faith  that  presented  the  concep- 
tion of  the  Unity  and  Spirituality  of  God,  together  with 


1 88  DEEP  SOUL  EXERCISE 

a  strenuous  demand  for  purity,  righteousness,  and 
mercy.  Amid  widespread  atheism,  the  ceaseless  con- 
flict of  rival  schools,  and  the  foul  corruption  of  morals, 
the  severe  ideals  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  stood  as  a 
white  sunlit  peak  shooting  up  amid  the  profound  shad- 
ows of  departing  night;  and  large  numbers  of  the 
heathen  world  were  attracted.  "  Behold  darkness  shall 
cover  the  earth  and  gross  darkness  the  peoples :  but  the 
Lord  shall  arise  upon  thee,  and  His  glory  shall  be  seen 
upon  thee;  and  nations  shall  come  to  thy  light,  and 
kings  to  the  brightness  of  thy  rising." 

When  Cornelius  took  up  his  quarters  in  the  splendid 
city  which  Herod  had  created,  some  thirty  miles  to  the 
north  of  Joppa,  he  was  brought  into  yet  closer  contact 
with  the  religion  and  literature  of  the  Old  Testament. 
As  he  studied  them  he  became  increasingly  impressed, 
and  there  grew  up  within  his  soul  an  earnest  desire  for 
those  fuller  revelations  of  the  Divine,  to  which  seers 
and  prophets,  priests  and  kings,  had  incessantly  borne 
witness.  He  was  a  devout  man,  generous  in  his  gifts 
to  the  poor,  careful  to  maintain  religion  with  all  his 
household,  and  constant  in  prayer.  His  domestics  and 
his  orderly  regarded  him  as  "  a  just  man,"  and  he  was 
"  of  good  report  among  the  Jews."  Probably  he  was 
a  proselyte  of  the  "  Gate,"  and  carefully  observed  the 
prescribed  hours  of  daily  prayer.  But  with  all  this  he 
was  not  satisfied,  and  at  that  time  was  apparently 
passing  through  a  deep  exercise  of  soul.  He  was  seek- 
ing goodly  pearls,  but  had  not  found  the  one  Pearl  of 
great  price,  to  obtain  which  he  would  have  been  well 
satisfied  to  part  with  all. 

He  knew  that  he  was  ostracized  by  the  Jews — was 
it  his  duty  to  submit  to  their  initial  rite  and  be  received 
into  their  synagogue  as  one  of  themselves?  He  had 
heard  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  His  holy  life.  His  miracles. 
His  teaching — would  it  be  wise  to  enrol  himself  with 
His  followers?     Not  improbably  it  was  in  connection 


ANGEL  MINISTRY  189 

with  these  and  kindred  problems  that  he  set  apart  one 
quiet  day  to  ascertain  by  prayer  and  fasting  what  God's 
will  might  be.  He  had  offered  many  previous  prayers 
of  the  same  kind :  "  Thy  prayers  and  thine  alms  are 
gone  up  for  a  memorial  before  God."  But  this  prayer 
was  more  specific  and  urgent :  "  Cornelius,  thy  prayer 
is  heard."  He  had  reached  such  a  pitch  of  intensity 
that  his  soul  was  dissolved  in  one  passionate  cry  for 
help.  "I  .  .  .  prayer,"  said  the  Psalmist.  **  I 
will  not  let  Thee  go  unless  Thou  bless  me !  Tell  me,  I 
pray  Thee,  Thy  name.     And  He  blessed  him  there." 

Wrestling  I  will  not  let  Thee  go, 
Till  I  Thy  name  and  nature  know. 

Suddenly  an  angel  stood  beside  him.  His  messengers, 
in  recounting  the  incident  to  Peter,  described  him  as 
"  a  holy  angel."  Cornelius  himself  spoke  of  him  as 
"  a  man  in  bright  apparel."  The  Lord  is  good  to  them 
that  wait  for  Him,  to  the  soul  that  seeketh  Him.  He 
will  fulfil  the  desire  of  them  that  fear  Him.  He  that 
willeth  to  do  His  will  shall  know.  Let  us  follow  on 
to  know  the  Lord;  His  going  forth  is  sure  as  the 
morning.  At  first,  brave  soldier  as  he  was,  and  accus- 
tomed to  face  danger,  Cornelius  was  greatly  startled 
by  this  sudden  contact  with  the  spirit-world.  Recov- 
ering himself,  he  asked:  "What  is  it.  Lord?"  and 
was  told  that  his  prayer  for  light  and  guidance  would 
be  answered  through  the  instrumentality  of  one  Simon, 
surnamed  Peter,  who  was  lodging  at  a  tanner's  house 
in  Joppa,  abutting  on  the  shore. 

It  is  well  worth  our  notice  that  God  does  not  com- 
mission Angels  to  evangelize  the  world  or  instruct  His 
saints  in  the  mysteries  of  the  Kingdom.  There  is  a 
sense  in  which  He  taketh  not  hold  of  Angels,  but  of  the 
sons  of  men.  On  each  Lord's  Day  He  might  have 
opened  the  gates  of  Heaven  and  sent  bands  of  Angels 
to  instruct   and  inspire  us;  but  it  is  not  so.     The 


190  HUMAN  MESSENGERS 

treasure  is  placed  in  earthen  vessels.  Men  and  women, 
full  of  human  sin  and  frailty,  are  chosen  as  His  am- 
bassadors to  their  fellows.  "  Moreover  He  said  to  me, 
Son  of  man,  all  My  words  that  I  shall  speak  unto  thee 
receive  in  thine  heart,  and  hear  with  thine  ears;  and 
get  thee  to  the  children  of  thy  people  and  speak  unto 
them.'*  The  Angel  could  have  spoken  almost  all 
Peter's  sermon  and  more,  but  all  that  he  was  sent  to 
do  was  to  tell  Cornelius  to  send  for  the  fisherman — 
Apostle.  Not  for  Philip  the  evangelist,  though  he  was 
residing  in  the  same  city,  because  he  had  not  passed 
through  the  same  exercises  of  soul  or  had  reached  the 
same  point  of  vision  as  Peter.  Let  us  never  forget 
that  the  soul-discipline  through  which  we  may  be  pass- 
ing is  carefully  designed  to  make  us  meet  for  the 
Master's  use,  and  to  prepare  us  to  deliver  a  definite 
message  with  the  profound  sympathy  and  understand- 
ing of  personal  experience.  "  What  I  tell  you  in  dark- 
ness, that  speak  ye  in  light,  and  what  ye  hear  in  the 
ear,  that  proclaim  ye  upon  the  house-tops."  God  al- 
ways knows  where  to  find  His  chosen  instruments. 
Their  addresses  are  registered  in  Heaven. 

II. — Joppa:  12.0  Noon.  Cornelius  lost  no  time  in 
acting  on  the  vision.  As  soon  as  the  Angel  had 
stepped  back  behind  the  curtain  of  sense,  he  called 
for,  and  despatched  to  Joppa,  two  household  servants 
and  a  devout  soldier,  all  of  whom  sympathized  with 
his  religious  convictions.  They  were  able  to  cover 
part  of  the  distance  during  the  remaining  hours  of  the 
afternoon,  and  finished  their  journey  at  noon  on  the 
following  day. 

Peter,  as  we  have  seen,  was  just  emerging  from  an 
ecstasy  in  which  he  beheld  the  vision  of  a  redeemed 
world,  and  God  had  showed  him  that  he  should  not  call 
any  man  common  or  unclean.  He  naturally  realized 
that  if  the  distinction  between  clean  and  unclean  ani- 


VISIONS  AND  DUTIES  191 

mals  was  abolished,  the  abolition  of  the  distinction  be- 
tween Hebrew  and  Gentile  was  necessarily  implied. 
The  middle  partition  wall  had  been  demolished.  The 
grace  of  God  had  overflowed  the  dams  and  banks  by 
which  it  had  been  restrained.  Salvation  was  as  impar- 
tial as  the  dew  or  rain,  which  knows  no  delimitation  of 
frontier,  but  refreshes  with  equal  love  the  adjacent 
fields  of  just  and  unjust,  bond  and  free,  Samaritan, 
Gentile  and  Jew. 

In  personal  experience,  before  we  step  out  on  an 
unknown  path,  let  us  wait  for  our  visions  to  be  corrob- 
orated by  the  knocking  at  the  door  and  the  clear  bid- 
ding of  the  Spirit.  Peter  was  encouraged  and  assured 
by  the  concurrence  of  these  three.  "  While  Peter 
thought  on  the  vision,  the  Spirit  said  unto  him,  *  Be- 
hold, three  men  seek  thee.' "  In  connection  with  this 
conjunction  we  must  never  lose  sight  of  the  urgent 
need  of  uniting  Visions  and  Duties.  We  are  always 
standing  between  the  two.  Each  of  us  has  visions, 
clearer  or  duller,  in  sunlight  or  starlight,  bright  and 
beautiful,  or  clouded  and  obscure;  and  each  is  beset 
with  the  knock  and  appeal  of  our  fellows:  from  the 
sharp  knock  of  the  telegram  to  the  soft  tap  of  feeble 
age  or  tiny  childhood.  Not  the  vision  without  the  task, 
or  we  become  dreamers  and  visionaries.  Not  the  task 
without  the  yision,  or  we  become  as  dumb  driven  cattle. 
When  you  are  doubtful  whether  your  vision  is  from 
God,  wait  for  the  further  indication  of  His  will  through 
circumstance.  Listen  for  the  three  men  knocking  and 
calling  in  the  street  beneath.  And  when  you  have  been 
assured  to  this  extent,  wait  for  the  still  small  voice  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  saying,  "  Arise,  and  get  thee  down,  and 
go  with  them,  nothing  doubting,  for  I  have  sent  them." 

All  Peter's  doubts  vanished.  His  hesitation  was 
ended.  He  invited  the  three  men  into  the  house, 
shared  with  them  the  meal  which  had  been  preparing, 
lodged  them  for  the  night,  and  on  the  following  morn- 


192  CORNELIUS'S  WELCOME  TO  HIS  GUEST 

ing  started  with  them  on  the  journey  to  Csesarea.  They 
must  have  travelled  by  the  great  high  road  which 
skirted  the  shore  of  the  Mediterranean.  During  the 
afternoon,  whilst  the  messengers  were  resting,  Peter 
had  secured  the  companionship  of  six  believing  Jews, 
under  the  evident  impression  that  he  was  taking  a  step 
which  would  be  closely  scrutinized  by  the  Apostles  and 
leaders  at  Jerusalem.  The  journey  of  these  ten  men 
occupied  more  than  a  day,  and  it  was  on  the  morning 
of  the  third  day  from  Peter's  vision  that  the  party 
entered  Caesarea — the  city  of  marble  palaces,  and  seat 
of  Roman  Government.  How  incredulous  the  citizens 
would  have  been  if  they  had  been  informed  that  in  the 
coming  time  the  chief  interest  taken  in  their  proud 
city  would  arise  from  its  association  with  that  group  of 
travel-worn  pedestrians,  who  one  morning  in  a.  d.  43 
or  44  passed  through  the  city  gates,  and  wended  their 
way  to  the  Roman  barracks,  to  have  an  interview  with 
the  officer  in  command.  Only  a  few  ruins  attest  the 
site  of  Herod's  city,  whereas  the  visit  of  Peter  and  his 
companions  dated  the  beginning  of  a  movement  which 
has  affected  the  entire  world. 

C^sarea:  3.0  p.  M. — Cornelius  seems  to  have  been 
the  centre  of  a  religious  circle  of  relatives  and  near 
friends,  whom  he  had  informed  of  his  recent  experi- 
ences, and  had  invited  to  share  with  him  the  help  of 
which  the  Angel  had  given  the  assurance.  The  time 
for  the  return  of  his  messengers,  with  their  expected 
guest,  had  been  carefully  calculated,  and  at  the  ap- 
pointed hour  many  came  together.  In  the  words  of 
the  host,  they  were  all  present  in  the  sight  of  God  to 
hear  the  things  with  which  the  Lord  had  entrusted 
His  servant  on  their  behalf. 

When  it  was  announced  that  the  party  had  arrived, 
Cornelius  met  them  at  the  outer  gate,  and  with  instinc- 
tive reverence  and  courtesy  prostrated  himself  before 


THE  BREATH  OF  THE  SPIRIT         193 

the  man  who  had  been  commissioned  by  a  message 
from  the  Unseen.  Peter  instantly  stooped  to  raise  him, 
saying,  "  Stand  up ;  I  myself  also  am  a  man."  Well 
would  it  have  been  if  all  his  successors  had  imitated 
his  manly  simplicity  and  humility.  As  they  passed  to- 
gether to  the  assembly-room,  where  the  expectant  gath- 
ering awaited  them,  he  spoke  so  pleasantly  and  famil- 
iarly that  his  host  was  placed  entirely  at  his  ease,  and 
he  was  able  to  detail  the  marvellous  circumstances 
which  had  led  to  the  present  meeting.  At  the  close 
of  his  brief  address  he  added,  "  Thou  hast  done  well 
that  thou  art  come" — a  sentiment  in  which  many 
around  him  shared.  Then,  amid  the  awed  hush,  in  an 
atmosphere  charged  with  spiritual  emotion,  and  with 
the  consciousness  that  he  was  in  the  current  of  the 
Divine  purpose,  Peter  opened  his  mouth  and  spoke. 

His  address  fell  into  three  distinct  compartments. 
He  told  again  the  well-known  story  of  Jesus,  who, 
though  habited  in  the  guise  of  great  humility,  was  nev- 
ertheless Lord  of  all.  He  gave  his  emphatic  personal 
testimony  to  His  Resurrection  from  the  grave — "  We 
ate  and  drank  with  Him  after  He  rose  from  the  dead." 
Finally  he  proclaimed  the  forgiveness  and  remission  of 
sin  through  faith  in  His  Name.  Not  a  word  was  ut- 
tered about  circumcision.  There  was  no  suggestion 
that  they  must  pass  through  the  synagogue  to  the 
Church.  Neither  Abraham  nor  Moses  was  mentioned. 
The  one  condition  of  forgiveness  was  faith  in  Him, 
whom  the  Jews  slew,  hanging  Him  on  a  tree,  but  whom 
God  raised  from  the  dead.  The  offer  was  made  to 
men  of  every  nation,  wherever  they  feared  God  and 
wrought  righteousness;  whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  they 
were  welcome  to  close  with  God's  great  offer  of  for- 
giveness and  peace,  and  would  be  "  accepted  in  the 
Beloved." 

No  burst  of  eloquence  or  charm  of  speech  adorned 
this  simple  address.    Indeed,  Peter  had  only  begun  to 


194        THE  BLESSING  OF  ABRAHAM 

speak  when  an  indescribable  impression  swept  over  the 
audience,  as  the  summer  breeze  breathes  over  the  rus- 
thng  corn.  It  was  as  though  the  Spirit  of  God  were 
eager  to  get  at  once  to  work,  and  put  Peter  gently 
aside.  On  the  day  of  Pentecost  the  Apostle  had  time 
to  develop  his  argument  and  drive  home  his  appeal ;  but 
in  this  case  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  was  required. 
The  Holy  Spirit  fell  on  all  them  which  heard  the  word. 
There  was  no  startling  sound  from  Heaven,  and  no 
lambent  flame,  but  there  was  the  gift  of  tongues.  And 
the  six  brethren  who  had  accompanied  Peter  were 
amazed  as  they  heard  them  speaking  with  tongues  and 
magnifying  God. 

Whilst  Peter  witnessed  that  scene,  as  he  said  after- 
wards, it  reminded  him  of  Pentecost.  ''As  I  began 
to  speak  the  Holy  Spirit  fell  on  them,  even  as  on  us  at 
the  beginning;  and  I  remembered  the  word  of  the 
Lord  how  He  said,  John  indeed  baptized  with  water, 
but  ye  shall  be  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  God 
gave  unto  them  the  like  gift  as  He  did  also  unto  us, 
when  we  believed  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  There 
were  the  same  upturned  gaze,  the  same  enraptured 
look  into  the  face  of  Jesus,  the  same  desire  to  speak  of 
His  beauty,  the  same  consciousness  of  supernatural 
power.  The  whole  company,  which  before  had  been  a 
group  of  separate  units,  were  suddenly  welded  into  a 
Unity  and  became  a  Church. 

Is  not  this  scene  full  of  encouragement?  There  is 
doubtless  a  sense  in  which  the  Advent  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  first  to  the  Jews  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  and 
secondly  to  the  Gentiles  in  the  house  of  Cornelius,  can 
be  no  more  repeated  than  the  birth  and  nativity  of  our 
Lord;  but  there  is  another  sense  in  which  each  Gen- 
tile soul  may  experience  the  same  Divine  infilling. 
Through  Christ  Jesus  the  blessing  of  Abraham  has 
come  upon  the  Gentiles  so  "that  we  may  receive  the 
promise  of  the  Spirit  by  faith.*'    As  by  faith  we  receive 


FIVE  TESTS  OF  SPIRIT-FILLING       195 

tHe  saving  grace  of  Jesus,  so  by  faith  we  may  receive 
the  filling,  and  the  repeated  fillings,  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
But  such  faith  always  exists  in  union  with  an  entire 
surrender  of  the  will,  and  devout  fellowship  with  God 
through  Scripture.  Why  should  not  each  reader  study 
once  more  Gal.  III.,  and  at  verse  14  claim  his  inherit- 
ance? Are  we  not  joint-heirs  with  Christ?  There  may 
be  no  emotional  response,  but  the  reckoning  of  faith 
cannot  be  ashamed.  Would  that  every  minister  and 
teacher  were  so  filled,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  might  fall, 
as  soon  as  we  commenced  to  speak.  It  was  said  of 
Finney  that  on  one  occasion,  when  passing  through  a 
factory,  a  girl  made  an  approbrious  remark  about  him, 
which  he  overheard.  He  turned  to  look  at  her,  and  in- 
stantly she  cried  out  under  a  deep  conviction  of  sin, 
which  so  spread  among  the  workpeople,  that  the  whole 
place  became  a  Bochim  of  tears  and  prayers.  Foras- 
much as  God  gave  unto  them  the  like  gift  which  he  did 
unto  us.  Have  we  received  that  same  gift  ?  There  are 
five  tests  which  supply  an  infallible  answer.    If  so : — 

1.  The  Lord  Jesus  will  be  an  abiding  presence  in  our 
lives. 

2.  The  Prayer-life  will  become  increasingly  real. 

3.  The  Self-life  will  be  kept  on  the  Cross. 

4.  There  will  be  unmistakable  but  quiet  power  in 
service. 

5.  The  Spirit  of  Grace  and  Love  will  be  conspicu- 
ously present  in  our  behaviour  and  conversation. 
Have  we  received?  If  not,  why  not?  "  Let  him  that 
is  athirst  take  of  the  river  of  life  freely."  It  flows 
from  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb. 

In  the  case  of  Cornelius  and  his  friends,  the  Baptism 
by  the  Spirit  was  immediately  followed  by  baptism  in 
water.  The  inward  grace  was  ratified  by  the  outward 
act.  Following  the  rule  which  Paul  observed  after- 
wards, Peter  did  not  himself  baptize,  probably  to  guard 
against  the  impression  that  the  ordinance  derived  spe- 


196       THE  ENQUIRY  AT  JERUSALEM 

cial  sanctity  from  the  person  who  administered  it.  He 
left  it  therefore  to  the  six  brethren  from  Joppa  to 
complete  the  formal  acceptance  of  these  Gentile  dis- 
ciples into  the  Christian  Church.  Caesarea  to-day,  but 
Rome  presently ! 

IV.  The  Challenge  of  the  Mother  Church. — 
The  tidings  of  what  Peter  had  done  soon  reached  Jeru- 
salem, and  he  lost  no  time  in  returning  to  give  in  his 
personal  impression  and  reports.  Not  Jerusalem  only, 
but  the  brethren  throughout  Judaea  had  heard  that  the 
Gentiles  also  had  received  the  Word  of  God,  from 
which  we  may  infer  that  the  news  had  occasioned  vast 
excitement  and  probably  misunderstanding.  The  cir- 
cumstances which  had  led  the  leader  of  the  Church  to 
make  so  serious  an  innovation  on  recognized  custom 
and  procedure  required  careful  consideration  before 
they  could  recognize  his  act  or  welcome  the  new  con- 
verts. The  Evangelist  tells  us  that  when  Peter  was 
come  up  to  Jerusalem,  "  they  that  were  of  the  circum- 
cision" contended  with  him.  From  this  we  gather 
that  within  the  Church  there  was  already  forming  a 
strong  conservative  party,  which  afterwards  gave  much 
trouble,  and  insisted  with  obstinate  tenacity  that  the 
Gentile  must  submit  to  the  Jewish  rite  before  admis- 
sion to  their  ranks.  There  was  a  tone  of  arrogant  con- 
tempt in  their  reference  to  the  uncircumcised  men, 
with  whom  Peter  had  sat  down  to  eat. 

Our  Apostle  met  their  charges  by  a  careful  narration 
of  the  facts.  Had  he  been  invested  with  the  absolute 
authority,  with  which  the  apostate  Church  has  credited 
him,  he  would  never  have  allowed  his  brethren  to  call 
him  to  account,  would  never  have  pleaded  his  cause  at 
their  bar,  would  never  have  summoned  witnesses  to 
attest  his  truth.  He  would  have  carried  the  matter 
with  a  high  hand,  and  asserted  his  supreme  and  unas- 
sailable authority.     Instead  of  this  he  appealed  from 


THE  FIRST  CHURCH  COUNCIL        197 

men  and  from  himself  to  God.  The  descent  of  the 
Spirit,  identical  as  it  was  with  their  own  experience, 
was  the  Divine  vindication  of  his  action.  "  If  God 
gave  unto  them  the  like  gift  .  .  .  who  was  I,  that 
I  could  withstand  God  ? "  To  Gentiles  who  believed 
the  sealing  of  the  Spirit  had  been  given,  equally  as  to 
Jews  who  believed.  Faith,  altogether  apart  from  the 
presence  or  absence  of  any  rite,  had  been  the  sufficient 
condition  of  this  sealing.  Surely,  then,  neither  cir- 
cumcision availed  anything,  nor  uncircumcision,  but 
faith  working  by  love.  Nothing  more  could  be  said. 
"  When  they  heard  these  things  they  held  their  peace 
and  glorified  God,  saying,  Then  to  the  Gentiles  also 
hath  God  granted  repentance  unto  life." 

The  question,  however,  came  up  in  an  acuter  form 
at  the  First  Council  of  the  Church,  the  proceedings  of 
which  are  recorded  in  Acts  xv.  There  again  Peter  told 
his  wonderful  story  to  prove  that  God,  who  searches 
and  knows  all  hearts,  had  borne  witness  to  the  genuine- 
ness of  Cornelius's  faith  by  communicating  the  Holy 
Spirit  as  to  themselves  at  the  first.  He  at  least  made 
no  distinction  between  the  Hebrew  and  the  Gentile. 
It  was  sufficient  that  their  hearts  were  alike  cleansed 
by  faith.  Why  burden  them  with  the  intolerable  yoke 
of  rites  and  ordinances,  "  which  had  indeed  a  show  of 
wisdom  in  severity  to  the  body,  but  were  of  no  value 
against  the  indulgence  of  the  flesh "  ?  He  gave  it, 
therefore,  as  his  convinced  belief  that  Gentile  and  Jew 
alike  would  be  saved  by  faith  only,  through  the  grace 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  altogether  apart  from  the  pres- 
ence or  absence  of  any  rite. 

These  were  noble  words,  but  neither  they  nor  the 
decision  of  the  Council  availed  to  settle  the  strife  be- 
tween the  two  parties  that  rent  the  Church  with  their 
contentions.  Indeed,  the  conservative  view  became 
so  strong  that,  as  Paul  tells  us  in  Gal.  ii.,  Peter  quailed 
before  it,  and  even  the  amiable  Barnabas  was  led  away. 


198  PAUL'S  STRONG  REBUKE 

It  fell,  then,  to  Paul,  the  younger  man,  to  take  up  and 
defend  the  sentiments  which  the  elder  Apostle  had  so 
boldly  enunciated  years  before.  He  withstood  him 
to  the  face  because  he  was  to  be  blamed.  Strong 
measures  were  employed,  because  they  were  needed. 
If  his  later  relapse  had  remained  unchallenged,  Peter's 
example  and  influence  would  have  become,  not  a  rock 
of  foundation,  but  a  stone  of  offence,  which  would 
have  led  to  the  confusion  of  the  Gospel  and  the  over- 
throw of  weaklings  in  the  faith. 

We  may  be  thankful  for  the  unswerving  loyalty  with 
which  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles  contended  through- 
out his  harassed  career  for  a  principle  which  he  may 
have  learnt  from  Peter,  and  which  he  expressed  in  the 
noble  words  that  he  addressed  to  his  erring  friend: 
"  Though  we  are  Jews  by  birth  and  not  Gentile  sinners, 
we  know  that  it  is  not  through  obedience  to  law  that  a 
man  can  be  declared  free  from  guilt,  but  only  through 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  We  have  therefore  believed  in 
Christ  Jesus,  for  the  purpose  of  being  declared  free 
from  guilt,  through  faith  in  Christ,  and  not  through 
obedience  to  Law.  I  have  been  crucified  with  Christ, 
and  it  is  no  longer  I  that  live,  but  Christ  that  lives 
in  me." 


XXIII 

"I  WILL  GO  WITH  THEE  TO  PRISON- 

Acts  xii.  1-25 

"  How  oft  do  they  their  silver  bowers  leave, 
To  come  to  succour  us  that  succour  want! 
How  oft  do  they  with  golden  pinions  cleave 
The  fitting  skies,  like  flying  pursuivant. 
Against  foul  friends  to  aid  us  militant!" 

— Spenser. 

AGAIN  it  was  the  Passover.  "  Those  v^ere  the 
days  of  unleavened  bread."  Fourteen  years 
before  Peter  had  been  sent  with  John  to  pre- 
pare the  Passover  Feast  for  his  Lord,  and  as  the  Apos- 
tles were  gathered  around  the  table  he  had  avowed  his 
willingness  to  go  with  his  Master  even  to  prison.  Here 
he  was  nobly  fulfilling  his  vow.  At  that  Passover  also 
he  had  slept,  but  it  was  the  sleep  of  un  watch  fulness, 
of  self-confidence,  of  the  weakness  of  the  flesh.  He 
failed  to  watch  even  for  one  hour  with  Christ.  It  was 
the  sleep  of  the  sentry  at  his  post !  But  here  again  he 
slept,  but  it  was  the  sleep  of  absolute  confidence  in  the 
grace  of  Christ,  who  would  yet  deliver  him,  if  it  were 
His  will;  but  if  not,  would  enable  him  to  be  faithful 
unto  death.  Previously  he  had  slept  whilst  Jesus 
prayed;  now  as  he  slept,  not  only  did  the  great  High 
Priest  pray  that  his  faith  might  not  fail,  but  many 
were  gathered  together  in  Mary's  house,  and  were 
praying  for  him.  But  he  was  not  to  die.  On  that 
first  Easter  morning  an  Angel  of  the  Lord  descended 

199 


200  A  POLICY  OF  BLOOD 

from  Heaven,  and  came  and  rolled  away  the  stone  that 
closed  the  tomb  where  Jesus  had  been  ensepulchred, 
and  now  again  an  Angel  would  open  the  prison-doors 
on  an  Easter  morn. 

I.  "  The  Kings  of  the  Earth  set  Themselves." 
— "About  that  time  Herod  the  King  put  forth  his 
hands  to  afflict  certain  of  the  Church."  He  was  known 
as  Herod  Agrippa,  and  his  character  bore  the  infamous 
brand  of  the  Herod-stock.  By  unscrupulous  subservi- 
ence to  the  caprices  and  crimes  of  Roman  Emperors, 
and  a  lamb-like  guile  beneath  which  he  concealed  the 
passions  of  the  forest,  he  had  become  possessed  of  regal 
power  hardly  inferior  to  that  of  Herod  the  Great.  In 
order  to  ingratiate  himself  with  the  Jewish  leaders  he 
made  a  great  show  of  zeal  for  the  requirements  of  the 
Mosaic  ritual.  Josephus  tells  us  that  he  did  not  allow 
one  day  to  pass  without  its  appointed  sacrifice.  But 
his  further  steps  in  the  same  direction  were  taken  in 
the  blood  of  Christian  martyrs.  Hitherto  the  Sanhe- 
drists  had  not  ventured  openly  to  oppose  the  progress 
of  the  Church,  though  they  gnashed  their  teeth  against 
it  in  mortification  and  rage.  They  heartily  welcomed, 
therefore,  the  policy  of  persecution  and  extermination 
which  the  King  proposed.  They  even  winked  at  his 
exercise  of  the  prerogative  of  death,  which  they  had 
sacredly  reserved  within  their  own  jurisdiction.  Their 
hatred  of  Christ  was  gratified,  and  Herod's  position 
was  apparently  strengthened — were  not  these  results 
well  worth  the  spilling  of  Christian  blood? 

James,  one  of  the  Master's  innermost  circle,  was  the 
first  to  suffer.  He  had  been  surnamed  Boanerges,  and 
had  on  one  occasion  called  fire  from  Heaven.  May  not 
his  vehement  passion  for  righteousness  have  been  the 
reason  why  he  was  summarily  executed  by  Herod's 
sword?  Perhaps  he  stood  in  the  breach  against  the 
tyrant,  and  declared  the  fate  which  must  overtake  him. 


THE  CHARIOT  OF  FIRE  201 

if  he  continued  his  persecuting  policy — a  fate  which, 
as  this  chapter  tells  us,  did  actually  overtake  him. 
Did  he  remind  Herod  Agrippa  of  the  awful  death- 
scene  through  which  his  grandfather  had  passed  to  his 
account  ?  The  historian  does  not  gratify  our  curiosity. 
All  we  know  is  that  he  proved  himself  able  to  drink  of 
his  Master's  cup  and  be  baptized  with  His  baptism,  and 
that  in  a  chariot  of  fire  he  ascended  to  his  throne. 

Agrippa  saw  that  it  pleased  the  Jews,  and  he  was 
encouraged  to  strike  again,  but  harder;  and  this  time 
to  arrest  the  leader  of  the  hated  sect,  who  more  than 
once  had  defied  the  whole  strength  of  the  Sanhedrim. 
Peter  was  the  strongest  element  in  the  Christian  com- 
munity. The  precautions  taken  to  secure  him  suggests 
that  the  King  feared  lest  his  arrest  might  lead  to  an 
attempt  at  rescue,  and  also  that  his  advisers  and  abet- 
ters had  a  lively  memory  of  the  two  previous  occasions 
on  which  the  prison-doors  had  been  opened  for  the  re- 
lease of  this  same  man.  Like  Pharaoh,  like  Saul,  like 
Ahab,  like  Haman,  like  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  like 
Herod  the  Great,  like  Nero,  Herod  Agrippa  set  himself 
against  Jehovah  and  against  His  Christ.  A  body  of 
sixteen  soldiers  was  set  to  watch  and  hold  the  prisoner. 
Four  were  on  duty  for  three  hours,  and  were  then  re- 
lieved. Two  were  in  the  cell  with  him,  his  hands  fas- 
tened to  one  on  either  side.  A  third  stood  outside  the 
bolted  door,  whilst  a  fourth  was  posted  along  the  cor- 
ridor, which  led  to  the  great  iron  gate.  The  place  of 
confinement  was  probably  the  Castle  of  Antonia,  which 
was  situated  between  the  outer  and  middle  wall.  "  The 
wicked  plotteth  against  the  just,  and  gnasheth  upon 
him  with  his  teeth ;  the  Lord  shall  laugh  at  him,  for  He 
seeth  that  his  day  is  coming."  Already  Herod's  doom 
was  prepared,  and  the  Angel  who  was  to  release  Peter 
was  ready  to  smite  the  tyrant  oppressor  in  the  hour  of 
his  greatest  triumph.  When  the  people  were  shouting 
in  mad  adulation,  "  It  is  the  voice  of  a  god,  and  not  of 


202  UNCEASING  PRAYER 

a  man,"  immediately  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  smote  him, 
because  he  gave  not  God  the  glory :  and  he  was  carried 
from  the  theatre  to  his  palace,  a  dying  man.  For  five 
long  days  he  lay  in  excruciating  agony,  and  on  the 
sixth  of  August  expired,  unlamented.  As  Peter  said 
long  after,  "  The  Lord  knoweth  how  to  deliver  the 
godly  out  of  temptation,  and  to  keep  the  unrighteous 
under  punishment  unto  the  day  of  judgment." 

II.  The  Prayer  of  the  Church. — The  situation 
appeared  desperate,  so  far  as  human  judgment  was 
concerned.  If  Herod  succeeded  in  his  designs  against 
Peter,  what  could  the  rank  and  file  look  for  but  whole- 
sale massacre.  If  the  shepherd  cannot  stand  against 
the  lion,  what  must  the  sheep  expect?  But  there  is 
always  a  weapon  left  to  the  children  of  God.  With 
God  all  things  are  possible.  It  is  proverbial  that 
prayer  moves  the  arm  that  moves  the  world ;  but  would 
it  not  be  more  accurate  to  say  that  it  reaches  the 
Heart  of  Him  who  has  all  power  in  Heaven  and  on 
earth  ?  Peter  was  kept  in  prison  "  until  the  days  of 
unleavened  bread  had  passed  " ;  but  prayer  was  made 
without  ceasing  of  the  Church  unto  God  for  him. 
In  the  Greek,  the  word  rendered  without  ceasing  is 
used  to  describe  the  Lord's  supplications  in  Gethsem- 
ane,  when,  "  being  in  an  agony  He  prayed  the  more 
earnestly."  The  wrestlings  of  the  Church  on  behalf 
of  their  beloved  leader  were  only  to  be  compared  to 
the  strong  crying  and  tears  with  which  the  Saviour 
sought  the  Father's  help  in  His  supreme  hour. 

It  is  more  than  probable  that  Paul  and  Barnabas 
were  present  during  these  memorable  meetings.  They 
had  brought  gifts  of  money  for  the  relief  of  their  Ju- 
dsean  brethren ;  but  these  were  not  so  precious  as  their 
sympathy  and  fellowship.  To  be  fellow-helpers  in 
intercession,  to  blend  their  hearts  in  the  common  an- 
guish and  their  voices  in  the  common  intercession,  were 


THE  NIGHT  BEFORE  EXECUTION     203 

their  most  precious  contributions  to  the  dire  necessities 
of  the  Mother  Church.  Paul  could  not  forget  the 
fortnight  that  he  had  spent  with  Peter  years  before; 
and  Barnabas  would  remember  him  as  the  means  of 
his  own  knowledge  of  Jesus.  Could  he  ever  forget 
those  earlier  scenes,  when  the  memory  of  Pentecost 
was  fresh,  and  he  had  attracted  Peter's  loving  grati- 
tude, as  he  laid  the  price  of  his  estate  at  the  Apostle's 
feet? 

Day  after  day  passed,  and  the  seven  days  of  the 
Feast  had  expired.  On  the  morrow  Herod  would 
bring  his  prisoner  forth  to  a  mock  trial  and  then  a  cruel 
death.  As  yet  there  had  been  no  answering  voice  from 
Heaven.  The  Passover  moon  was  waning,  the  new 
day  was  climbing  up  the  sky.  We  are  informed  that 
Peter  was  not  missed  till  it  was  day,  i.  e.,  sunrise,  about 
six  o'clock.  Clearly  then  his  release  must  have  taken 
place  between  three  o'clock,  when  a  fresh  quarternion 
had  come  on  duty,  and  six  o'clock  when  they  were  re- 
lieved. Some  time  must  be  allowed  for  the  watch  and 
their  ward  to  become  drowsy  and  fall  into  a  sound 
sleep.  Therefore  it  may  have  been  about  five  o'clock 
in  the  April  dawn  that  the  light  shone  into  the  darkness 
of  the  cell,  and  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  stood  by  Plis 
servant's  side.  Until  that  moment,  within  we  will  say 
two  hours  of  the  fateful  hour,  the  Church  had  never 
ceased  its  agonized  pleadings  on  his  behalf  of  their 
chief  shepherd.  Again  the  Saviour  came  at  the  fourth 
watch  of  the  night.  Again  He  tarried  until  trembling 
faith  had  almost  expired.  Again  He  had  taught  the  old 
lesson  that,  "  men  ought  always  to  pray  and  not  to 
faint."  "  Be  patient,  therefore,  brethren,  until  the  com- 
ing of  the  Lord.  Behold  the  husbandman  waiteth  for 
the  precious  fruits  of  the  earth,  until  it  receive  the  latter 
as  well  as  the  early  rain.  Be  ye  also  patient ;  stablish 
your  hearts:  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand." 
**  He  that  cometh  will  come,  and  will  not  tarry." 


204  KEPT  IN  PERFECT  PEACE 

Meanwhile  He  was  answering  prayer  by  the  great 
peace  which  He  breathed  into  Peter's  soul.  He  was 
sleeping  between  two  soldiers,  bound  with  two  chains, 
and  guards  before  the  door  kept  the  prison.  So  his 
Master  slept  amid  the  storm  that  threatened  to  engulf 
boat  and  crew.  Peter's  words  in  after  days  may  be 
taken  as  revealing  the  secret  of  his  tranquillity.  He 
was  experiencing  the  blessedness  of  those  who  are 
reproached  for  the  name  of  Christ.  He  was  permitted 
to  be  a  partaker  of  Christ's  sufferings.  The  Spirit  of 
glory  and  of  God  was  resting  upon  him.  He  was  suf- 
fering according  to  the  will  of  God,  and  was  happy  to 
commit  his  soul  in  well-doing  unto  his  faithful  Creator. 
Perhaps,  also,  he  pillowed  his  heart  on  the  never-to- 
be-forgotten  words,  which  the  Lord  had  addressed  to 
him  on  the  shores  of  the  lake :  "  When  thou  art  old, 
thou  shalt  stretch  forth  thine  hands  and  another  shall 
carry  thee  whither  thou  wouldest  not."  But  he  was 
not  old.  His  power  was  yet  in  its  maturity;  and 
death  by  crucifixion  was  not  in  Herod's  power.  So 
he  rested  in  the  Lord,  and  waited  patiently  for  Him, 
and  his  mind  was  kept  in  perfect  peace.  Was  not  this 
a  part  at  least  of  God's  answer  to  the  protracted  inter- 
cessions of  the  Church? 

Pray  on,  O  Church  of  the  Redeemed!  Jehovah  is 
riding  on  the  heavens  to  thy  help !  He  is  in  the  midst 
of  thee,  thou  shalt  not  be  moved;  God  shall  help  thee 
at  the  dawn  of  the  morning;  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  with 
thee,  the  God  of  Jacob  is  thy  refuge.  There  is  a  river, 
the  streams  whereof  shall  make  thee  glad ! 

in.  The  Opening  of  the  Iron  Gate. — God's 
Angels  are  always  near  us.  They  are  sent  forth  to 
minister  to  us  who  sorely  need  their  succour.  Their 
pure  breasts  heave  with  sympathy  for  our  sorrows, 
and  expand  with  gladness  in  our  joys.  We  have  no 
need  to  summon  the  spirits  of  the  departed — even  if 


THAT  IRON  GATE !  205 

we  had  the  power  to  do  it,  which  we  have  not — so 
long  as  we  can  reckon  on  the  benign  and  strong  assist- 
ance of  these  pure  and  loving  ministers.  Except  in 
extreme  cases,  as  here,  they  do  not  manifest  themselves, 
but  they  are  with  us  always.  Our  Father  gives  them 
charge  concerning  us,  that  they  should  keep  us  in  all 
our  ways.  One  such  had  for  the  whole  seven  days  of 
his  imprisonment  been  watching  by  Peter's  side,  wait- 
ing for  the  precise  moment  fixed  for  action  by  the  Lord 
Himself.  Not  a  moment  sooner;  not  a  moment  later. 
When  it  arrived  he  cast  off  his  enshrouding  veil,  and 
instantly  a  mild  and  gentle  light  fell  on  the  sleeping 
group,  awaking  none  of  them.  He  had  to  smite  Peter 
on  his  side,  and  call  him  to  arise.  Naturally  enough  he 
arose,  hardly  aware  that  the  fetters  and  chains  had 
ceased  to  hold  him.  There  was  no  need,  however, 
for  feverish  haste.  When  the  Lord  goes  before  His 
servants  and  acts  as  their  rearward,  they  go  neither 
by  haste  nor  flight.  The  Apostle  seems  to  have  been 
dazed,  and  needed  constant  reminders  of  what  he 
should  do  in  tightening  his  girdle,  putting  on  his  san- 
dals, and  assuming  his  warm  outer  cloke.  In  answer 
to  the  Angel's  summons  to  follow  him,  he  passed 
through  the  door  of  the  cell  as  though  in  a  dream. 
"  He  wist  not  that  it  was  true  which  was  done  by  the 
Angel,  but  thought  he  saw  a  vision."  The  gleaming 
light  from  his  form  led  him  past  the  first  and  second 
sentries,  but  they  gave  no  sign  of  awakening.  "A  deep 
sleep  from  God  had  fallen  upon  them."  Did  he  ques- 
tion whether  that  mighty  iron  gate  would  open?  Did 
the  suggestion  occur  to  his  hazy  mind,  that  after  all 
they  might  be  arrested  by  that  impenetrable  and  in- 
superable barrier?  Was  he  overtaken  by  the  dread 
which  befell  the  women,  almost  on  that  day  fourteen 
years  before,  when  they  suddenly  said  to  each  other: 
"Who  shall  roll  us  away  the  stone  from  the  door  of  the 
sepulchre  ?  "     There  is  no  answer  to  these  inquiries. 


206  THE  GIRL'S  EXCITEMENT 

But  we  know  that  when  they  reached  this  last  barrier 
it  silently  opened  to  them  of  its  own  accord.  It  was 
swung  open  and  closed  again  by  strong  and  invincible 
hands.  The  morning  breath  was  in  Peter's  face,  as 
in  company  with  his  Angel  guide  he  passed  through 
one  street;  but  that  was  all,  and  it  was  enough,  for 
God  is  sparing  of  the  miraculous.  When  our  own 
judgment  is  adequate  for  our  tasks,  we  are  left  to  use 
it.  When,  therefore,  they  had  passed  through  one 
street,  the  Angel  left  him,  "  and  when  he  had  con- 
sidered the  thing  he  came  to  the  house  of  Mary,  where 
many  were  gathered  together  and  were  praying." 
Mary  was  sister  to  Barnabas  and  the  mother  of  John 
Mark.  There  had  been  no  sleep  in  that  home  that 
night.  Peter's  coming  martyrdom  was  on  every  heart ; 
and  perhaps  the  hope  of  his  deliverance  had  faded 
from  their  thought.  They  were  resigning  themselves 
to  what  seemed  to  be  the  Lord's  will,  and  only  asking 
that  he  might  be  strengthened  and  upheld  in  his  last 
hours.  This  may  explain  their  incredulity  when  Rhoda, 
the  servant-girl,  rushed  into  their  midst  with  the  an- 
nouncement that  Peter  was  standing  at  the  gate.  For 
precaution's  sake  she  had  asked  who  it  was  that  sought 
for  admittance  at  that  unusual  hour;  and  when  she 
heard  his  voice,  with  which  she  was  intimately  familiar, 
for  he  was  a  constant  visitor  there,  she  recognized  it 
instantly,  and  in  her  joy  actually  forgot  to  admit  him, 
so  he  continued  knocking.  This  might  have  awakened 
attention  and  imperilled  his  re-arrest,  but  there  seemed 
no  alternative,  and  he  could  only  trust  that  the  same 
loving  care  which  had  delivered  him  from  his  enemies 
would  now  introduce  him  to  his  friends. 

"  It  is  his  angel,"  they  said,  "  and  thou  art  mad." 
But  her  confident  affirmations  and  the  continued 
knocking  at  last  prevailed,  and  they  opened  the  door, 
to  find  that  it  was  even  as  the  girl  had  said.  "And 
when   they   had   opened,   they    saw   him   and    were 


CHRIST  LIBERATES  THE  IMPRISONED    207 

amazed."  It  was  like  the  Resurrection,  when  the 
Saviour,  on  the  Easter  night,  showed  the  disciples  His 
hands  and  His  feet,  and  they  disbelieved  for  joy  and 
wondered.  Peter  did  not  enter  the  house.  As  soon  as 
he  was  missed  by  his  guards,  search  would  probably  be 
instituted  in  the  homes  of  his  foremost  friends.  There 
must  be  no  presumption  on  his  part.  He  must  use  his 
own  wit  to  evade  his  foes.  Therefore,  with  a  few 
hurried  explanations  and  directions,  with  loving  greet- 
ings to  James  and  the  brethren,  he  departed  whilst  it 
was  yet  dark  and  went  to  another  place. 

We  are  all  liable  to  find  ourselves  in  prison — the 
prison  of  circumstances  from  which  we  cannot  extri- 
cate ourselves;  of  relationships  that  restrain  our  lib- 
erty; of  consequences  issuing  from  past  sins,  that 
threaten  us  with  the  silence  of  death.  We  sit  in  dark- 
ness, and  are  bound  in  affliction  and  iron.  But  let  us 
cry  unto  the  Lord  in  our  trouble,  let  us  ask  Him  to 
save  us  out  of  our  distresses.  Let  us  confess  our  sins 
and  turn  to  Him  for  help.  He  will  hear  our  cry  out  of 
the  lowest  dungeon  and  will  draw  near  unto  us  in  the 
day  when  we  call,  saying,  Fear  not.  He  will  plead  the 
causes  of  our  soul,  and  redeem  our  life.  He  will  send 
His  Angel  noiselessly  to  loose  our  chains  and  open  the 
prison-doors.  He  will  redeem  our  souls  from  going 
down  into  the  pit,  and  our  life  shall  behold  the  light. 
"  Oh  that  men  would  praise  the  Lord  for  His  goodness 
and  for  His  wonderful  works  to  the  children  of  men !  " 


XXIV 

"MY  DECEASE'* 

2  Peter  i.  I2~i6 

"For  thee  this  day  let  Paradise  fling  wide  its  portals, 
To  God  who  made  thee,  God  who  bought. 
And  God  whose  grace  thy  cleansing  wrought, 
That  hell  no  part  in  thee  should  claim. 
Go! — in  the  all-victorious  Name." 

— Bright. 

WHEN  the  great  issue  which  led  to  the  sum- 
moning of  the  First  Church  Council,  de- 
scribed in  Acts  XV.,  had  been  arrived  at, 
there  appears  to  have  been  a  further  agreement  as  to 
the  respective  spheres  of  influence  to  be  allotted  to  the 
leaders  of  the  Church.  It  was  obvious  that  "  the  Gos- 
pel of  the  uncircumcision  " — to  use  the  phrasing  of 
Galatians  ii.,  had  been  entrusted  by  the  Divine  Lord  to 
the  Apostle  Paul.  "  He  that  wrought  in  Peter  for  the 
Apostleship  of  the  circumcision,  was  mighty  in  me  also 
unto  the  Gentiles."  To  Paul,  therefore,  was  given  the 
vast  Roman  world  towards  the  West.  To  this  arrange- 
ment a  hearty  agreement  was  given  by  James,  the  Presi- 
dent of  the  Church,  Peter,  and  John.  They  gave  the 
right  hands  of  fellowship  to  Paul  and  Barnabas,  that 
they  should  go  unto  the  Gentiles,  whilst  they  gave  them- 
selves to  the  scattered  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel  that 
lay  Eastwards. 

I.    Peter's  Itinerant  Labours. — In  pursuance  of 
this  arrangement  we  find  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles 

208 


PETER'S  FIELD  OF  LABOUR  209 

visiting  Syria  and  the  seaboard  of  Asia  Minor,  passing 
thence  to  Greece  and  Rome.  It  was  in  his  heart  to 
cover  the  whole  Western  world  with  a  network  of 
evangelization.  "  Round  about  to  Illyricum  he  fully 
preached  the  Gospel  of  Christ,"  and  even  contemplated 
a  visit  to  Spain,  the  extreme  limit  of  the  empire  to- 
wards the  setting  sun. 

Peter,  on  the  other  hand,  if  we  may  make  inferences 
from  hints  in  his  epistles,  corroborated  by  the  state- 
ments of  ecclesiastical  tradition,  concentrated  his  la- 
bours on  the  vast  multitudes  of  Israelites  who  were 
scattered  throughout  the  Eastern  portion  of  the  Em- 
pire. It  will  be  remembered  that  representatives  of 
the  "  Diaspora,"  or  scattered  Jews,  are  specially  men- 
tioned in  Acts  ii.  as  forming  part  of  the  vast  wondering 
crowd  which  gathered  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  Parthia, 
Media,  Persia,  Mesopotamia,  Pontus  and  Cappadocia, 
Phrygia  and  Pamphylia,  had  sent  their  contingents; 
and  it  is  more  than  probable  that  these  very  districts 
were  embraced  in  the  wide  area  which  constituted  what 
we  may  describe  as  Peter's  diocese.  Unless  tradition 
is  very  much  mistaken,  the  last  sixteen  or  seventeen 
years  of  his  life  were  occupied  by  a  wide  system  of 
evangelistic  ministry.  Accompanied  by  his  devoted 
wife,  he  passed  from  place  to  place  with  such  remark- 
able success  that  there  was  a  widespread  turning  to 
God  from  idols,  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God,  and 
to  wait  for  His  Son  from  Heaven. 

Forty  years  after  his  death,  Pliny,  whom  Trajan  had 
appointed  Governor  of  part  of  the  region  superintended 
by  Peter,  described  in  a  State  paper  the  wonderful 
predominance  of  Christianity.  The  temples  dedicated 
to  Jupiter  and  Mars  were  deserted,  the  usual  sacrifices 
were  unoffered,  whilst  the  entire  population  frequented 
the  assemblies  of  "  the  pestilent  Christian  heresy." 
He  admits  the  purity  and  blamelessness  of  the  Chris- 
tian ideals  and  practice,  their  solemn  oaths  to  abstain 


2IO  HARVEST-FIELDS 

from  sin,  and  their  freedom  from  sins  of  violence. 
This  testimony  is  confirmed  by  others,  and  as  we  con- 
nect their  various  testimonies,  we  obtain  the  vision  of 
a  widespread  Christian  community  animated  by  pas- 
sionate devotion  to  Christ  and  to  the  spread  of  His 
Gospel  among  their  fellows.  "  It  is  incredible,"  writes 
one  of  the  historians  of  the  period,  "  with  what  alacrity 
these  poor  people  support  and  defend  their  cause. 
They  are  firmly  persuaded  that  one  day  they  will  en- 
joy eternal  life;  therefore  they  despise  death  with 
wonderful  courage,  and  offer  themselves  voluntarily 
to  punishment.  They  look  with  contempt  on  all  earthly 
treasures,  and  hold  everything  in  common."  Such  was 
the  harvest,  plentiful  and  rich,  that  resulted  from 
the  labours  of  Peter  and  his  fellow-workers  in  these 
prolific  fields. 

The  contention  that  he  wrought  mainly  in  the  East- 
ern part  of  the  empire  is  further  supported  by  the 
inscription  of  his  First  Episde.  He  addresses  the 
elect,  who  are  sojourners  of  the  Dispersion  in  Pontus, 
Galatia,  Cappadocia,  Asia  and  Bithynia,"  and  it  is  in- 
teresting to  notice  that  the  order  of  enumeration  is  that 
which  an  author  would  use  who  was  writing  in  the 
East  and  not  in  the  West.  The  enumeration  begins 
with  the  Easternmost  province,  proceeds  Westward, 
and  ends  with  the  most  distant  in  the  South. 

This  vast  area,  as  large  as  the  whole  of  France,  con- 
taining 500  cities  and  towns,  was  repeatedly  traversed 
by  the  Apostle,  but  it  is  clear  that  he  was  something 
more  than  an  itinerant  evangelist.  His  epistles  supply 
evidence  that  he  remained  long  enough  in  each  place 
to  build  healthy  Churches,  appoint  elders,  and  shep- 
herd!, according  to  the  Lord's  command,  both  lambs 
and  sheep.  The  tone  of  his  Epistles  is  so  affectionate 
and  intimate,  his  acquaintance  with  the  afflictions  and 
sufferings  through  which  they  were  passing  is  so  sym- 
pathetic, his  consciousness  that  the  putting  off  of  his 


SYMPTOMS  OF  SUCCESS  2H 

body  would  be  a  personal  grief  to  them  is  so  unaffected, 
that  we  realize  as  we  read  that  there  was  a  very  evident 
and  tender  personal  relationship  which  knit  him  to 
them,  and  them  to  him.  The  rendering  of  the  Revised 
version — though  not  the  marginal  note — suggests  also 
that  the  elect  sister,  who  was  in  Babylon,  was  his  wife, 
who  took  the  opportunity  of  sending  a  loving  salutation 
to  the  wives  and  daughters  whom  she  had  come  to 
know  and  love.  The  fact  also  that  the  epistle  is  ad- 
dressed, not  to  Churches,  but  to  the  elect  sojourners 
of  the  Dispersion,  supports  the  view  that  Peter  exer- 
cised a  very  distinct  pastoral  office,  which  could  only 
have  originated  in  a  prolonged  residence  in  the  main 
centres  of  population. 

It  must  not  be  supposed,  however,  that  he  addressed 
himself  only  to  Jews.  He  expressly  mentions  those 
who  had  not  been  a  people,  but  were  now  the  people 
of  God;  who  had  not  obtained  mercy,  but  had  now 
obtained  it.  It  has  been  inferred  from  his  warnings 
against  the  luxurious  plaiting  of  the  hair,  the  wearing 
of  gold,  and  the  putting  on  of  apparel,  that  the  new 
faith  had  attracted  some  of  the  wealthier  classes. 
Perhaps  also  his  desire  that,  when  called  upon,  be- 
lievers should  be  able  to  give  an  apology,  or  defence,  of 
their  hope,  indicates  that  some  amongst  them  were  of 
sufficient  culture  to  do  so  with  efficiency.  But  clearly 
there  was  a  vast  popular  movement  towards  Christi- 
anity which  filled  the  devotees  of  the  old  systems  of 
idolatry  with  dismay. 

There  are  references  to  Peter  in  the  First  Epistle  to 
Corinth  which  suggest  that  he  had  visited  that  impor- 
tant city,  through  which  the  commerce  poured  between 
Rome  and  Babylon,  on  account  of  its  central  position 
between  the  two  hemispheres.  "  I  am  of  Paul,  and  I 
of  Apollos,  and  I  of  Cephas  " ;  also,  "  Have  we  no  right 
to  lead  about  a  sister,  a  wife,  even  as  Cephas?  "  These 
may  simply  refer  to  the  strong  conservative  party  in 


212  BABYLON 

the  early  Church  which  ranged  itself  under  the  power- 
ful aegis  of  his  name,  as  contrasted  with  the  more  ad- 
vanced and  liberal  school  of  thought  led  by  Paul. 
But  it  is  not  imreasonable  to  accept  these  references  in 
their  most  literal  sense,  and  to  believe  that,  even  after 
the  unfortunate  incident  at  Antioch,  Peter,  in  Corinth, 
and  perhaps  elsewhere,  personally  cooperated  with 
and  supported  that  noble  Gospel-pioneer,  whom  in  his 
Second  Epistle  he  designates  as  his  "  beloved  brother  " 
Paul. 

II.  His  Final  Residence  in  Babylon. — In  its 
closing  sentence,  Peter  dates  his  First  Epistle  from 
Babylon,  and  there  is  no  valid  reason  for  doubting  that 
towards  the  end  of  his  life,  when  the  increasing  in- 
firmities of  age  placed  a  necessary  restraint  on  his 
labours,  he  made  his  home  in  that  ancient  and  historic 
city,  which  was  densely  peopled  by  Jews. 

When  Nebuchadnezzar  captured  Jerusalem  on  the 
first  occasion  he  transported  to  Babylon  "  the  chief 
men  and  all  the  men  of  might,  and  all  that  were  strong 
and  apt  for  war  " ;  and  a  few  years  afterwards,  when 
Zedekiah  had  revolted,  after  burning  the  house  of  God 
and  breaking  down  the  wall,  the  great  King  carried 
away  to  Babylon  all  who  had  escaped  the  sword. 
There  was  therefore  a  very  large  Jewish  population  in 
the  province  of  Babylonia,  and  they  were  treated  as 
free  colonists,  with  an  opportunity  of  thriving  and  en- 
riching themselves  and  the  nation,  which  they  were  not 
slow  to  embrace.  The  bands  that  followed  Ezra  and 
Nehemiah  to  their  desolated  city  and  denuded  lands 
were  a  comparatively  small  percentage  of  the  whole 
number  that  had  been  removed.  The  rich,  the  learned, 
and  the  high-born  seem  to  have  chosen  to  remain  in  the 
beautiful  land  of  Babylon,  with  its  mighty  rivers,  its 
luxuriant  vegetation,  its  delicious  climate.  "  The 
flower  of  the  nation  had  been  carried  into  exile,  and  it 


HIS  EPISTLES  213 

was  the  flower  of  the  nation  which  chose  to  remain  in 
the  land  to  which  they  had  been  deported." 

It  has  been  computed  that  the  number  of  Israelites 
in  Babylon  at  the  time  of  which  we  are  writing  could 
not  have  been  less  than  two  millions.  In  his  History 
of  the  Jews,  Dean  Milman  states  that  the  Babylonian 
settlement  was  so  numerous  and  flourishing,  that  Philo 
more  than  once  intimated  the  possibility  of  their  march- 
ing in  such  force  to  the  assistance  of  their  brethren  in 
Palestine  as  to  make  the  fate  of  war  with  Rome  very 
doubtful. 

These  Babylonian  Jews  were  extremely  loyal  to  the 
great  traditions  of  the  past.  They  have  been  described 
as  Hebrews  of  the  Hebrews.  They  forwarded  lavish 
contributions  annually  to  the  maintenance  of  the  Tem- 
ple services,  and  in  religious  matters  obeyed  the  man- 
dates of  the  Sanhedrim.  Despite  the  distance  and  the 
difficulties  of  travel  they  brought  their  children  to  wor- 
ship in  the  sacred  shrine.  It  was  toward  Jerusalem 
that  they  turned  when  they  prayed.  They  might  not 
hang  their  harps  upon  the  willows  of  Babylon,  but  their 
right  hand  must  lose  its  cunning  before  they  could  for- 
get the  city  of  their  fathers.  The  atmosphere,  there- 
fore, which  they  created  for  themselves  was  so  Jewish 
that  it  became  a  proverb — "  Whoever  dwells  in  Babylon 
is  as  though  he  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Israel." 

We  may,  therefore,  believe  that  the  brave  craft 
which  had  weathered  so  many  storms  found  in  this 
great  and  beautiful  city  a  haven  of  comparative  calm. 
It  was  there,  also,  that  the  chief  pastor  of  the  scattered 
flock  indited  the  First  Epistle,  which  was  distributed 
through  Silvanus,  or  Silas;  and  the  Second,  which 
may  be  regarded  as  his  final  testimony  to  the  truth  of 
the  Gospel,  for  which  he  was  prepared  to  die,  even  as 
the  Lord  had  foretold.  His  mention  of  Silas  is  most 
interesting,  for  we  know  that  he  had  been  the  close 
companion  and  associate  of  the  Apostle  Paul.     It  is 


214  THE  SECOND  GOSPEL 

a  fair  inference  that  he  had  been  sent  by  his  great 
leader  with  a  message  of  love  and  courage  to  Peter, 
amid  the  growing  weakness  of  age ;  and  that  he  brought 
with  him  a  collection  of  all  the  epistles  in  which  the 
Apostle  of  the  Gentiles  had  enshrined  his  profound 
thoughts  on  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ 
Jesus  his  Lord.  It  is  evident  from  the  closing  verses 
of  his  Second  Epistle  that  Peter  read  them  all,  and  had 
found  some  things  hard  to  be  understood ;  but  he  loved 
his  friend  and  brother  with  chivalrous  affection,  and 
acknowledged  thankfully  "  the  wisdom  which  had  been 
given  him." 

It  was  in  Babylon  also  that  he  collaborated  the  second 
Gospel  with  Mark,  "  my  son."  The  Fathers  of  the 
Church,  including  Tertullian,  Clement  and  Irenseus, 
agree  that  in  an  important  sense  Mark  was  the  "  inter- 
preter "  of  Peter,  and  we  cannot  refuse  "  the  widely 
spread,  consistent,  and  unbroken  conviction  of  the 
earlier  centuries  of  Church  history."  In  addition  to 
which  there  are  many  characteristics  in  the  Gospel  it- 
self which  harmonize  with  this  tradition.  Keen  ob- 
servers have  noticed  and  specialized  a  multitude  of 
graphic  touches  which  betray  the  observation  of  an  eye- 
witness and  participator  in  the  wondrous  events  of  the 
Saviour's  ministry.  The  pillow  in  the  boat,  the  green 
grass  of  the  Five  Thousand  Feast,  the  colt  tied  outside 
the  house,  the  taking  of  little  children  in  His  arms,  the 
mother-tongue  of  Talitha-cumi,  that  the  face  of  Peter 
was  towards  the  fire-light  when  he  was  detected,  and 
that  the  Resurrection  message  included  and  Peter — 
have  been  quoted  as  evidences  that  behind  Mark's  vivid 
pen  there  was  the  recollection  of  one  who  had  been 
an  eye-witness  of  the  Master's  majesty  and  beauty. 
It  must  have  been  beautiful  indeed  to  have  seen  Peter's 
face  shining  with  the  light  of  loving  memory  as,  with 
Mark  at  his  feet,  he  recounted  again  the  scenes  which 
had  revolutionized  his  life,  and  which  were  the  dawn 


THE  SCENE  OF  HIS  EXODUS         215 

of  a  fellowship  that,  maturing  through  the  years,  was 
soon  to  be  renewed  in  the  perfect  day. 

UL  The  Closing  Scene. — Much  controversy  has 
centred  around  the  question  whether  the  "  Babylon  " 
of  Peter's  Epistle  is  a  figurative  name  for  Rome.  It 
has  not  been  absolutely  settled,  but  from  what  we  have 
learnt  in  previous  pages  of  the  vast  Jewish  population 
of  Babylon,  and  of  many  incidental  confirmatory  evi- 
dences, there  seems  no  reason  for  refusing  to  admit 
that  the  Apostle  referred  to  the  literal  city  on  the  banks 
of  the  Euphrates.  We  know  that  his  chief  work  was 
among  Jews,  that  there  was  a  large  colony  of  Jews  in 
Mesopotamia,  that  the  five  districts  addressed  in  his 
Epistle  are  all  Eastern  ones,  and  that  their  order  sug- 
gests Babylon  as  the  point  of  view  from  which  the 
writer  regarded  them.  All  of  these  lead  to  the  one 
conclusion.  But  when  that  is  granted,  there  remain 
strong  grounds  for  the  belief  that  the  decease,  or  ex- 
odus, of  the  venerable  Apostle  took  place  at  Rome. 

Dean  Alford  quotes  the  following  sentence  from  one 
of  the  Early  Fathers,  Lactantius :  *'  Execrable  and 
noxious  tyrant  as  he  was,  Nero  determined  to  destroy 
the  heavenly  Church  and  to  abolish  righteousness ;  and 
becoming  the  persecutor  of  God's  servants,  he  crucified 
Peter  and  slew  Paul."  This  at  least  is  perfectly  con- 
sistent with  the  Lord's  prediction,  that  when  he  was  old 
he  would  be  carried  whither  he  would  not,  and  that  his 
hands  should  be  outstretched  in  death — a  remarkable 
expression  which  signified  the  kind  of  death  by  which 
he  would  be  called  upon  to  glorify  God. 

After  reducing  Rome  to  ashes  by  the  conflagration 
which  his  wanton  cruelty  had  kindled,  Nero  cringed 
before  the  passionate  resentment  of  his  subjects,  and 
in  his  endeavour  to  divert  it  from  himself,  lighted  on 
the  expedient  of  imputing  the  hideous  crime  to  the 
Christians,  whose  purity  was  a  perpetual  rebuke  to  his 


2i6  HIS  CRUCIFIXION 

outrageous  crimes.  The  scenes  of  blood  which  ensued 
are  too  horrible  to  narrate ;  but  in,  his  search  for  victims 
he  scoured  the  empire,  striking  first  and  hardest  the 
most  illustrious  and  well-known  Christian  leaders. 
Amongst  these  Paul  was  certainly  one,  and  Peter  was 
almost  certainly  another.  It  is  supposed  that  the 
warrant  for  his  arrest  was  given  at  the  commencement 
of  the  Neronian  persecution,  a.  d.  64;  but  the  journey 
from  Babylon  was  long,  and  it  might  well  have  fallen 
to  the  following  year  before  he  reached  Rome.  A  few 
years  after  Ignatius,  the  aged  Bishop  of  Antioch,  was 
brought  in  a  similar  manner.  He  complained  that  the 
soldiers  who  were  commissioned  to  conduct  him  to 
Rome  were  like  ten  leopards,  and  that  he  was  fighting 
with  wild  beasts  by  land  and  sea,  by  night  and  day. 
It  may  be  that  Peter  and  his  wife  were  subjected  to 
similar  experiences. 

What  befell  them  in  Rome  is  not  chronicled  by  in- 
spiration. Dionysius,  Bishop  of  Corinth  in  the  second 
century,  states  that  Peter  and  Paul  suffered  martyrdom 
at  the  same  time;  and  Jerome,  in  the  fourth  century, 
attests  that  he  was  crucified  and  crowned  with  martyr- 
dom, his  head  being  turned  earthwards  and  his  feet 
in  the  air,  because  he  held  that  he  was  unworthy  to  be 
crucified  as  his  Lord  was.  Apparently  this  was  not  an 
uncommon  practice  on  the  part  of  the  Roman  soldiery. 
Eusebius  testifies  that  several  martyrs  suffered  that 
cruel  form  of  death.  Such  was  the  manner  in  which 
he  put  off  his  tabernacle.  Such  was  the  decease  which 
he  accomplished  at  Rome.  By  such  an  exodus — for 
that  is  the  Greek  word — ^he  passed  out  from  this  world 
to  the  bosom  of  the  Redeemer,  whom  he  had  so 
ardently  loved.  "  Lord,"  he  said  on  one  occasion, 
"  why  cannot  I  follow  Thee  now  ?  "  and  the  Master  an- 
swered in  effect :  "  Not  now,  nor  here.  Thou  hast 
much  to  learn  and  do  ere  thy  warfare  is  accomplished 
or  thy  course  fulfilled,  but  thou  shalt  follow  Me  after- 


"QUOVADIS?"  217 

wards/*  That  word  was  now  fulfilled,  and  may  we  not 
realize  the  tender  sympathy  and  ministration  of  the 
Prince  of  sufferers  to  His  suffering  friend?  His  own 
crucifixion,  the  marks  of  which  were  printed  on  His 
hands  and  side,  must  have  made  Him  specially  eager  to 
mitigate  the  sufferings  of  that  hour,  so  far  as  possible. 
Certainly  He  awaited  His  servant  on  the  other  side  to 
give  him  an  abundant  and  triumphant  entrance  into  the 
Kingdom  and  glory  of  the  Father. 

A  legend  has  obtained  wide  currency  that,  acting  on 
the  persuasion  of  his  friends,  Peter  eluded  his  gaolers, 
escaped  the  prison,  and  was  hastening  along  the  Appian 
Way,  with  his  back  to  the  city,  when  Jesus  met  him. 
Instantly  recognizing  Him,  he  asked,  "  Lord,  whither 
goest  Thou  ?  " 

"  I  go  again  to  be  crucified,"  was  the  reply. 

"  Lord,  wast  Thou  not  crucified  once  for  all  ?  " 

"  Yes,  but  I  saw  thy  flight  from  death,  and  I  go  to 
be  crucified  in  thy  stead." 

"  Lord,  I  will  return  to  obey  Thy  command." 

"  Fear  not,  for  I  am  with  thee." 

The  Apostle  immediately  retraced  his  steps,  returned 
to  the  prison,  and  gave  himself  up  to  his  gaolers.  It 
is  obvious  that  the  legend  is  not  inconsistent  with  the 
quick  alternations  of  impulse  and  devotion,  of  which 
we  have  had  many  illustrations.  All  the  Evangelists 
agree  in  describing  the  strong  oscillations  of  Peter's 
character.  He  said,  "  Depart  from  me,  for  I  am  a  sin- 
ful man  " ;  and  "  forthwith  he  left  all  to  follow  Christ." 
He  said,  "Thou  shalt  never  wash  my  feet,"  and  di- 
rectly afterwards,  "Lord,  not  my  feet  only,  but  also 
my  hands  and  my  head."  He  said,  "  Not  so.  Lord," 
but  within  a  few  hours,  "  Can  any  forbid  water  that 
these  should  be  baptized ! "  The  legend  is  therefore  in 
precise  conformity  to  his  character ;  but  it  is  difficult  to 
believe  that  his  impulsiveness  had  not  been  finally 
mastered  by  the  dominant  indwelling  of  the  Spirit, 


2i8  HIS  STUDY  OF  PROPHECY 

And  yet,  and  yet,  we  have  had  such  repeated  experi- 
ences of  our  weakness  and  failure,  that  we  dare  not  say 
that  he  was  altogether  perfected.  We  know  that  it  is 
in  us  to  deny  our  Lord,  for  fear  of  a  servant-girl, 
when  we  are  young;  and  to  shrink  from  suffering  and 
martyrdom  when  we  are  old.  But  the  Love  that  loved 
us  when  we  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  fails  not ! 

There  is  another  ancient  legend,  which,  like  the 
other,  is  probably  mythical;  but  it  embalms  a  tender- 
ness which  is  characteristic  of  those  blessed  first  days. 
It  is  thus  recorded  by  Clement  of  Alexandria — "  They 
say  that  when  Peter  beheld  his  wife  led  out  to  death, 
he  rejoiced  at  her  calling  of  her  Lord  and  her  convey- 
ance to  her  heavenly  home ;  and  he  cried  out,  encour- 
agingly and  comfortingly,  addressing  her  by  name, 
*  Oh,  remember  thou  the  Lord ! '  Such  was  the  mar- 
riage of  that  blessed  pair,  and  their  perfect  agreement 
in  those  things  that  were  dearest  to  them." 

In  his  two  Pentecostal  sermons,  and  in  both  his 
epistles,  Peter  is  revealed  as  an  earnest  student  of 
prophecy.  It  has  been  said  of  him  that  in  no  char- 
acter in  Holy  Scripture  can  we  more  plainly  trace  the 
way  in  which  the  meaning  of  prophecy  gradually 
dawned  upon  the  understanding.  He  was  ever  grow- 
ing in  knowledge  as  well  as  grace.  Now  he  quotes 
Joel,  then  he  understands  the  rejection  of  the  Stone, 
presently  he  will  refer  to  the  times  of  restitution 
whereof  God  spoke  by  the  mouth  of  His  holy  prophets, 
which  have  been  since  the  world  began.  In  the  house- 
hold of  Cornelius  he  insists  that  to  Jesus  give  all  the 
prophets  witness.  In  his  latest  Epistle  he  stirs  up  our 
minds  that  we  may  remember  the  words  which  were 
spoken  before  by  the  holy  prophets.  He  realized  that 
much  of  their  predictions  had  been  fulfilled,  in  so  far 
as  they  had  testified  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  he 
knew  that  his  ministry  had  been  in  strict  accord  with 
them,  as  he  preached  the  Gospel  in  the  power  of  the 


HEAVEN  AT  LAST!  219 

Holy  Spirit  sent  forth  from  Heaven.  But  when  the 
full  radiancy  of  that  glory  broke  upon  his  spirit,  and 
the  day-star  which  had  long  shone  in  his  heart  was 
extinguished  in  the  full-orbed  splendour  of  God's 
Presence-Chamber,  and  as  he  remembered  his  former 
experience  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration,  we  can 
imagine  him  saying  again,  "  Lord,  it  is  good  for  me  to 
be  here."  There  was  no  need  to  build  a  slight  and 
evanescent  tabernacle,  for  he  was  in  the  Father's  house 
of  many  mansions ;  and  there  was  no  fear  of  the  vision 
fading,  or  of  the  faces  of  the  blessed  vanishing.  The 
long  night  of  fishing  was  over,  Jesus  had  come  down 
to  the  water's  edge  to  welcome  him.  He  had  come 
forth,  girded  to  serve  him.  The  fire  of  His  Love 
greeted  his  spirit  with  its  genial  glow.  His  wounds 
were  healed  with  the  leaves  of  the  tree  of  life;  his 
weariness  was  forgotten  as  the  Lord  kissed  his  wel- 
come. Then  dear  and  familiar  forms  began  to  gather 
around  him,  radiant  in  the  love-light  that  streamed 
from  the  Master's  presence;  and  none  of  them  asked 
Who  art  thou  ?  or  what  place  is  this  ?  For  they  knew 
that  it  was  the  Lord,  and  that  they  were  in  the  Home 
which  He  had  promised  to  prepare. 


XXV 

LIFE'S  AFTERGLOW! 

2  Peter  i.  15 

"  In  every  nobler  mood 
We  feel  the  orient  of  their  spirit  glow, — 
Part  of  our  life's  unalterable  good, 
Of  all  our  saintlier  aspiration." 

— LoweU. 

IN  his  Epistles  the  Apostle  stored  the  thoughts 
which  he  was  especially  anxious  should  be  asso- 
ciated with  his  memory,  and  we  must  needs 
linger  a  little  longer  to  consider  them;  and  they  may 
be  thus  enumerated: 

1.  Comfort  Amid  Trial. — The  Lord  had  specially 
commissioned  him  to  strengthen  his  brethren,  and 
indeed  they  were  passing  through  experiences  that 
specially  called  for  comfort  and  strength.  They  were 
reproached  for  the  Name  of  Christ.  They  were  called 
upon  to  suffer  as  Christians.  Their  enemies  spoke 
against  them  as  evil-doers,  and  falsely  maligned  their 
manner  of  life.  The  trials  to  their  faith,  patience, 
and  constancy  were  "  fiery."  They  resembled  the 
ordeal  of  scorching  flame.  In  fact,  they  were  called 
to  be  partakers  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  as  though 
their  path  lay,  as  His  had  done,  through  Gethsemane 
and  conducted  to  Calvary.  Arraignments  before  arro- 
gant and  pagan  judges,  the  loss  of  property,  the  in- 
fliction of  torture,  the  scattering  of  families,  cruel 
scourgings,  prolonged  imprisonment,  death  in  the 
arena  or  by  fire — these  were  their  experiences.    It 

220 


THE  SUFFERINGS  OF  CHRIST         221 

has  been  pointed  out  that  Peter  uses  the  Greek  equiva- 
lent for  the  word  employed  by  Tacitus  regarding 
Christians,  they  were  punished  as  "  evil-doers/' 

In  these  circumstances,  what  could  be  more  ex- 
hilarating than  the  Apostle's  repeated  reminder  of  the 
example  and  constancy  of  the  Saviour,  who  had  suf- 
fered for  them,  leaving  them  an  example  that  they 
should  follow  in  His  steps  ?  It  was  not  a  strange  thing 
that  had  happened  to  them.  Christ  had  once  suffered 
as  they  were  suffering,  and  they  had  every  reason  to 
be  proud  of  their  association  with  Him  in  His  supreme 
and  unapproachable  death.  "  Rejoice,"  he  said,  **  inas- 
much as  ye  are  partakers  of  Christ's  sufferings."  In 
this  he  revealed  the  secret  of  his  own  soul.  Before  his 
eyes  the  martyr's  death  was  always  present,  as  his 
Lord  had  told  him;  and  he  passed  on  to  others  the 
source  of  his  own  steadfastness  and  courage,  that 
Christ  who  had  suffered  for  him  would  be  near  to 
strengthen  and  uphold  him  as  he  trod  the  burning 
embers  with  his  bare  feet. 

XL  The  Sacrificial  Nature  of  the  Saviour's 
Death. — That  was  no  ordinary  death  before  which 
the  sun  veiled  his  face  and  the  rocks  rent  in  sympathy. 
It  was  the  death  of  the  Redeemer.  It  was  a  sacrifice, 
as  of  a  Lamb  without  blemish  or  spot.  The  Son  of 
God  had  borne  the  sins  of  men  in  His  own  body  on 
the  tree.  He  had  died,  the  Just  for  the  unjust,  to 
bring  them  to  God.  The  blood  shed  on  the  Cross 
was  "  precious "  blood.  Its  sprinkling  on  the  con- 
science brought  peace,  and  severed  the  soul  from  its 
vain  conversation  received  by  tradition  from  the  past. 
The  Apostle  had  been  brought  to  understand  that 
the  scene  he  witnessed,  amid  the  gloom  which  nearly 
hid  the  Cross,  was  in  pursuance  of  a  purpose  that  was 
preordained  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.  The 
element  of  sacrifice  had  always  been  present  in  the 


222        "AN  ABUNDANT  ENTRANCE" 

nature  of  God;  and  it  was  due  to  this  that  the  Al- 
mighty was  warranted  in  creating  beings  that  could 
sin.  But  thence  arose  the  demand  that  His  children 
should  be  holy  in  all  manner  of  life,  whilst  the  crime 
of  neglecting  the  love,  which  counted  no  cost  too  great, 
if  only  it  might  achieve  salvation,  was  proportionately 
enhanced.  If  judgment  began  with  the  house  of  God, 
what  would  be  the  end  of  those  who  obeyed  not  the 
Gospel  of  such  love,  of  such  infinite  value,  of  such 
unestimable  price? 

III.  The  Certainty  of  Future  Glory. — Those 
whom  Peter  addressed  were  reminded  that  they  had 
been  begotten  unto  a  living  hope  by  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead.  For  them  an  inheritance 
had  been  purchased  and  was  awaiting  them,  which 
was  incorruptible,  undefiled,  and  amaranthine.  For 
them  a  salvation  was  ready  to  be  revealed,  which 
would  cause  them  to  forget  their  heaviness  through 
manifold  trials.  Great  Grace  was  to  be  brought  unto 
them  at  the  glorious  unveiling  of  Jesus  Christ.  They 
had  been  partakers  of  Christ's  sufferings,  but  His 
Glory  would  certainly  be  revealed,  and  then  they 
would  be  glad  with  exceeding  joy,  and  would  receive 
a  crown  of  glory  that  could  not  fade  away.  They 
had  been  called  to  glory,  and  God  would  not  belie 
the  hopes  He  had  inspired.  On  the  contrary,  He 
would  minister  to  them  an  abundant,  i.  e.,  a  choral 
and  triumphant,  entrance  into  the  Kingdom  of  their 
Lord  and  Saviour.  The  day  would  dawn  after  the 
night  of  storm.  The  day-star  of  the  eternal  morning 
would  arise  and  usher  in  the  Day.  Though  the  heavens 
and  the  earth  should  be  dissolved  and  the  elements 
melt  with  fervent  heat,  they  might  confidently  reckon 
on  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth,  **  wherein 
dwelleth  righteousness."  Such  were  his  anticipations. 
If  Paul  may  be  termed  the  Apostle  of  Faith,  and  John 


CALL  TO  HOLINESS  223 

the  Apostle  of  Love,  surely  Peter  is  rightly  styled  the 
Apostle  of  Hope. 

IV.  The  Urgency  for  a  Holy  Life. — His  con- 
verts were  elect  through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit 
unto  obedience.  They  could  not  fashion  their  lives 
according  to  their  former  lusts,  committed  in  compara- 
tive ignorance.  He  who  had  called  them  was  holy, 
and  they  must  be  holy  also.  They  were  called  to  be  a 
chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  holy  nation,  a 
people  for  Christ's  own  possession ;  and  they  must  show 
forth  the  praises  of  Him  who  had  called  them  out  of 
darkness  into  His  marvellous  light.  By  their  good 
works  they  were  to  compel  the  Gentiles  to  glorify  God. 
The  time  past  had  been  more  than  sufficient  to  have 
walked  in  lusts,  revellings,  and  abominable  idolatries, 
and  now  they  must  reckon  that,  like  Noah,  they  had 
crossed  the  waters  of  the  deluge  of  death  into  the 
world  of  resurrection  and  life. 

Our  space  does  not  permit  of  our  dilating  on  all  the 
exhortations  to  holiness  which  are  found  in  these 
Epistles,  nor  to  indicate  the  qualities  of  Christian  char- 
acter on  which  the  Apostle  insists ;  but  we  may  specify 
the  one  grace  of  Humility  on  which  he  lays  special 
and  repeated  stress.  "  Be  ye  clothed  with  humility  ; 
for  God  resisteth  the  proud,  and  giveth  grace  unto  the 
humble."  How  different  are  these  injunctions  from 
the  old  proud,  boastful,  and  imperious  spirit,  which 
in  his  earlier  life  had  so  often  betrayed  him!  He 
was  no  longer  a  lord  over  God's  heritage,  but  "  an  ex- 
ample to  the  flock." 

In  this  connection,  also,  we  should  specially  study 
those  exquisite  passages  in  i  Peter  ii.  and  2  Peter  i. 
The  one  leading  us  from  the  foundation  of  the  Chris- 
tian character  in  the  living  stone  to  the  ministry  of  the 
believer  in  the  inner  Temple,  offering  up  spiritual 
sacrifices;  and  the  other  enumerating  the  graces  of  a 


224  DAY-STAR  AND  DAWN 

holy  life,  as  if  they  were  a  choir  of  blending  voices, 
faith  at  the  extreme  beginning  and  love  at  the  extreme 
end.  Thus  the  soul  of  the  believer  may  actually  be- 
come a  partaker  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  escape  the 
corruption  that  is  in  the  world  through  lust.  Thus  also 
shall  we  be  neither  barren  nor  unfruitful  in  the  knowl- 
edge of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  What  a  conception  is 
here  of  the  gallant  ship  having  battled  its  way  through 
storm  and  danger,  coming  into  harbour  with  flags  flying 
at  the  mast-head  and  greeted  by  welcoming  crowds ! 

V.  The  Nature  of  Death. — He  thought  and 
spoke  of  it  as  the  putting  off  of  the  tent  or  tabernacle, 
which  symbolized  the  pilgrim-character  of  his  earthly 
life,  that  he  might  enter  the  house  not  made  with  hands, 
his  permanent  dwelling-place,  eternal  in  the  heavens. 
He  said  that  it  was  a  decease,  or  exodus.  For  him 
death  was  not  a  condition,  but  a  passage.  It  was  no 
Bridge  of  Sighs  from  a  Palace  to  a  Dungeon,  but  one 
of  Smiles  and  Jubilation  from  a  cell  to  the  blaze  of  the 
Eternal  Day.  It  was  the  crossing  of  the  bar  that  lay 
between  the  limitations  of  the  harbour  and  the  broad 
ocean  expanse. 

He  humbly  hoped  that  he  and  those  whom  he  ad- 
dressed might  have  an  abundant  entrance  ministered 
unto  them  into  Christ's  eternal  Kingdom  and  glory. 
But  beyond  this  he  counted  on  the  inheritance  that 
was  reserved  in  Heaven  for  him,  and  that  he  would 
be  permitted  to  partake  of  the  Glory  to  be  revealed. 
But  all  was  summed  up  in  the  vision  of  that  dear 
face,  which  he  hoped  to  see  as  soon  as  he  had  crossed 
over.  Jesus  had  been  the  day-star  of  his  heart,  and 
Jesus  would  be  the  light  of  all  his  future,  in  the  City 
which  needs  neither  sun  nor  moon,  because  the  Lamb 
is  the  light  thereof. 

Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 


BIBLE  STUDY 


P,  ITHITfVELL    WILSON  Author  of  "  Th0  Christ 

■  W*  Forget'' 

The  Church  We  Forget 

A  Study  of  the  Life  and  Words  of  the  Early 
Christians.    8vo,  cloth,  net 

The  author  of  "The  Christ  We  Forget"  here  furnishes 
a  companion-picture  of  the  earliest  Christian  Church — of 
the  men  and  women,  of  like  feelings  with  ourselves,  who 
followed  Christ  and  fought  His  battles  in  the  Roman 
world  of  their  day.  "Here  again,"  says  Mr.  Wilson,  "my 
paint-box  is  the  Bible,  and  nothing  else — and  my  canvas 
is  a  page  which  he  who  runs  may  read." 

C.  ALPHONSO  SMITH,  Ph.D.,  LL.D. 

Head  of  the  Department  of  English  in  tha  U.  S,  Naval 
Academy,  AnnaPolts,  Md, 

Key-note  Studies  in  Key-note  Books 

of  the  Bible  i2mo,  cloth,  net 

The  sacred  books  dealt  with  are  Genesis,  Esther,  Job, 
Hosea,  John's  Gospel,  Romans,  Philippians,  Revelation. 
"No  series  of  lectures  yet  given  on  this  famous  founda- 
tion have  been  more  interesting  and  stimulating  than  these 
illuminating  studies  of  scriptural  books  by  a  layman  and 
library  expert." — Christian  Observer. 

GEORGE  D.  fVATSON,  P.P. 

God's  Fir^  Words 

Studies  in  Genesis,  Historic,  Prophetic  and  Ex- 
perimental.   l2mo,  cloth,  net 

Dr.  Watson  shows  how  God's  purposes  and  infinite 
wisdom,  His  plan  and  purpose  for  the  race.  His  unfailing 
love  and  faithfulness  are  first  unfolded  in  the  Book  of 
Genesis,  to  remain  unchanged  through  the  whole  canon  of 
Scripture.  Dr.  Watson's  new  work  will  furnish  unusual 
enlightment  to  every  gleaner  in  religious  fields,  who  will 
find  "God's  First  Words"  to  possess  great  value  and  profit. 

EVERETT  PEPPERRELL  WHEELER,  A.M. 

Author  of  Sixty  Years  of  American  Life"  etc. 

A  Lawyer's  Study  of  the  Bihle 

Its  Answer  to  the  Questions  of  To-day.  i2mo, 
cloth,  net 

Mr.  Wheeler's  main  proposition  is  that  the  Bible,  when 
wisely  studied,  rightly  understood  and  its  counsel  closely 
followed,  is  found  to  be  of  inestimable  value  as  a  guide  to 
daily  life  and  conduct.  To  this  end  Mr.  Wheeler  ex- 
amines its  teachings  as  they  relate  to  sociology,  labor  and 
capital,  socialism,  war,  fatalism,  prayer,  immortality.  A 
lucid,  helpful  book. 


LECTURES  AND  STUDIES 

EDfTIN  LINCOLN  HOUSE,   P.P. 

The  Drama  of  the  Face 

Studies  in  Applied  Psychology.  i2mo,  cloth, 
net 

A  practical  Christian  indication  of  the  principles  of 
modern  psychology.  Throughout  the  whole  discussion  Dr. 
House  keeps  in  view  the  fact  that  man  is  a  spirit — that 
the  laws  as  well  as  the  possibilities  of  the  spiritual  world 
are  real.  A  defence  of  the  position  that  to  live  richly 
and  strongly,  one  must  live  in  conformation  to  these  in- 
evitable, unalterable  laws. 

CHARLES  fTOOP,  P.  P.        Paster  of  the  Church  of  tht 
'  Covenant,  Washingion,  D.  C. 

The  Living  Christ  and  Some  Prob- 
lems of  To-day 

William  Belden  Noble  Lectures  at  Harvard 
University  1918.    i2mo,  cloth,  net 

"Of  a  timely  appearance.  It  is  admirably  calculated  to 
recall  men  out  of  the  pressure  of  material  urgencies,  out 
of  the  stresses  of  a  monstrous  devastation  to  a  simple 
fundamental  assurance  that,  despite  all,  God  is  still  in 
the  world." — Washington  Star. 

HIRAM  VANKIRK     Recttr  of  St.  Luke's,  Noroton,  Conn. 

The  Source-Book  for  the  Life  of 

Ghnst    A  New  Harmony  of  the  Gospels. 
8vo,  cloth,  net 

A  volume  presenting  the  chief  sources  for  a  study  of 
the  I/ife  of  Christ.  It  is  at  once  an  analysis,  a  synopsis, 
a  conspectus  of  sources,  a  harmony,  a  collation  of  refer- 
ences of  the  Four  Gospels.  It  contains  also  the  refer- 
ences made  by  St.  Paul,  Josephus  and  other  writers  to 
Gospel  events  which  are  of  historical  value.  The  text  em* 
ployed,  throughout,  is  the  American  Standard. 

FERPINANP  S.  SCHENCK,  P.P.,  LL.P. 

Professor  of  Preaching:  and  Sociology  in  the  Theological 
Seminary,  New  Brunswick,  N.  J. 

The  Apostles'  Creed  in  the  Twen- 
tieth Century 

i2mo,  cloth,  net 

"Dr.  Schenck  finds  in  the  Apostles'  Creed  the  basal 
truths  taught  by  the  apostles  and  their  successors  as  de- 
veloped in  their  writings.  Clause  by  clause  he  discussed 
them  with  clear  insight  and  balanced  comprehension,  loyal 
always  to  the  inspired  word.  It  is  a  good  book  for  these 
times  of  loose  thinking  and  departure  from  the  trutk  as 
it  is  in  Christ  Jesus." — The  Evangelical. 


SERMONS  AND  ADDRESSES 


LYNN  HAROLD  HOUGH,  D.  D.      President  of  North' 
•——^————^—^— ——————        wtstern  University 

"^         The  Productive  Beliefs 

Cole  Lectures.    i2mo,  cloth,  net 

Prof.  Hough  sets  himself  the  task  of  showing  what  sort  of 
religious  beliefs  there  are  which,  by  their  practical,  produc- 
tive results  will  justify  endorsement  and  adoption.  All  of 
his  conclusions  are  brought  sharply  and  firmly  into  the 
realm  of  human  experience,  and  form  a  spirited  apolo- 
getic for  a  reasonable  and  eminently  workable  body  of 
Christian  belief. 

K T.  REV.  CHARLES  FISKE,  D.  D.     Bishop  Coadjutor  of 

' Central  Ne-w  York 

The  Experiment  of  Faith 

A  Plea  for  Reality  in  Religion.    Net 

"The  answer  of  Christian  faith  to  some  of  the  spiritual 
problems  which  the  war  is  pressing.  A  vital  message  to 
the  man  outside  of  the  church  and  ninety-nine  out  of  a 
hundred  who  accept  the  orthodox  creed.  The  eternal 
truth  made  warm  and  living  for  us." — Living  Church. 

FREDERICK  F.    SHANNON      Pastor  Refotmed  Church 
•  on  the  Heights 

God's  Faith  in  Man 

i2mo,  cloth,  net 

"Seldom  can  the  abused  world  'brilliant'  be  correctly 
applied  to  a  living  preacher;  but  in  the  case  of  Dr.  Shan- 
non no  other  term  is  appropriate.  He  is  radiant  and  glit- 
tering and  surprising  and  illuminating.  His  sermons  can- 
not be  measured  by  the  ordinary  yardstick;  they  can 
hardly  be  criticized;  it  is  better  to  enjoy  them." — "The 
Biblical  World." 

E.  C.  DARGAN,  D.D, 

The  Hope  of  Glory 

l2mo,  cloth,  net 

"There  are  few  greater  preachers  in  America  than  Dr. 
Dargan.  Eloquent,  passionately  in  earnest,  with  an  al- 
most classical  style,  he  satisfies  both  the  thoughtful  and 
the  less  thoughtful  of  his  auditors.  This  volume  contains 
twelve  finely  wrought  sermons  from  this  master  of  homi- 
letics.  ^  By  all  means,  read  the  book." — Dr.  Curtis  Lee 
Laws,  in  The  Watchman-Examiner. 

J.    fF.   PORTER  Editor  Western  Rteorder 

Evangelistic  Sermons 

i2mo,  cloth,  net 

A  volume  of  sermons  by  the  editor  of  The  Western 
Recorder,  who  has  had  a  broad  experience  among  South- 
ern Baptists.  Many  will  look  forward  with  interest  to 
this  first  volume  of  his  discourses  which  have  met  with 
unusual  success. 


LATEST  BOOKS  ON  PROPHECY 


S,  D.  GORDON 

Quiet  Talks  on  the  Deeper  Meaning 
of  the  War 

And  its  relation  to  our  Lord's  Return,  net 

For  all  who  would  recognize  the  full  significance  of  thd 
great  world-cataclysm  and  what  connection  it  may  have 
with  unfulfilled  Prophecy,  Mr.  Gordon's  new  book  will  be 
found  of  remarkable  helpfulness.  It  is  really  S.  D.  Gor- 
don at  his  best! 

JAMES  M.  GRAY,  D.  D. 

A  Text  Book  on  Prophecy 

In  the  Light  of  the  Great  War.    Cloth,  net 

"Whatever  value  one  may  attach  to  the  prophetic  teach- 
ings, one  cannot  fail  to  be  interested  and  profited.  Dr. 
Gray  is  an  earnest  student  of  the  Holy  Word,  and  the 
judgments  and  conclusions  are  worthy  of  appreciative 
consideration." — United  Presbyterian. 

PHILIP  MAURO     Author  of"  The  Number  of  Man,"  eU, 

God*s  Present  Kingdom  Cloth,  net 

A  detailed  examination  of  the  founding,,  nature  and 
functions  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  based  upon  the  con- 
trolling facts  and  evidences  of  the  Scriptures.  A  rich 
storehouse  of  carefully-gleaned  material  on  these  subjects. 

^.  C.  GAEBELEIN 

The  Prophet  Ezekiel     cioth,net 

Mr.  Gaebelein  is  an  unswerving  believer  in  the  iner- 
rancy of  Holy  Scripture.  A  strong,  able  presentation  of 
what  an  earnest  and  able  expositor  deems  to  be  the  reve- 
lation of  God  to  Mankind  as  found  in  the  Old  Testament. 

REV,  CLINTON  C.  BELL 

Ten  Lessons  on  Our  Lord's  Return 

i2mo,  cloth,  net  ' 

"We  have  read  this  book  from  start  to  finish  with  real 
interest.  It  i?  very  instructive  and  stirs  one  to  do  his  best 
thinking  as  he  reads.  Dr.  W.  B.  Hinson  says  this  is  "a 
book  with  a  message." — Herald  of  Gospel  Liberty. 

I.  M.  HALDEMANy  D.D.  Author" Christian  Science  in 
■  the  Light  of  Holy  Scripture." 

Why  I  Preach  the  Second  Coming 

i2mo,  cloth,  net 

Dr.  Haldeman's  attitude  towards  and  views  concerning 
the  second  Advent  are  well  known.  Few  authors  or 
preachers  hold  a  more  enviable  position  as  Biblical  ex- 
positors. Through  the  medium  of  voice  and  pen  Dr. 
Haldeman  has  always  spoken  with  exceptional  emphasis 
and  conviction. 


FAITH  AND  IMMORTALITY 
HENRY  VAN  DYKE 

What  Peace  Means 

i2mo,  boards,  net 

Dr.  van  Dyke's  striking  booklet  might  have  been  fitly 
called  "Peace  and  Immortality,"  for  it  shows  us  a  dis- 
tinct connection  existing  between  the  peace  that  comes  as 
the  fruit  of  individual  sacrifice  and  the  peace  that  is  the 
promised  heritage  of  "the  faithful."  Another  of  those  un- 
mistakable brochure-gems,  familiarly  known  as  a  van  Dyke 
gift-book. 

MALCOLM  J.  MacLEOD,  P.P. 

Songs  in  the  Night 

l2mo,  cloth,  net 

"Satisfying,  cheering,  written  for  those  who  have  been 
forced  to  drink  of  the  bitter  waters  of  Marah;  for  those 
beset  with  doubt;  for  those  who  despair.  Studded  with 
choicely-chosen  illustration,  and  fitting  literary  allusion, 
each  chapter  has  a  message." — Christian  Work* 

E.  M.  MILLIGANy  P.P. 

Where  Are  the  Dead? 

l2mo,  cloth,  net 

A  faithful  guide  to  the  correct  understanding  of  Scrip- 
tural truth  as  taught  everywhere  in  the  Bible.  It  is  a 
careful  study  with  copious  references,  affording  _  true 
spiritual  consolation  to  those  "who  place  their  faith  in  di- 
vine revelation. 

BISHOP  EPWIN  P.  MOUZON 

Does  God  Care? 

An    answer    to    Certain    Questions    Touching 

Providence  and  Prayer.    i6mo,  cloth,  net 

In  a  concise  and  closely-reasoned  way,  Bishop  Mouzon 
meets  the  question  with  an  unflinching  affirmative,  pre- 
senting a  strong,  forceful  argument  for  the  benignity  of 
Divine  Providence  and  the  prevailing  power  of  prayer. 

J,  i^ATERSON^SMYTH  Tenth  Editicn 

The  Gospel  of  the  Hereafter 

Revised  and  Re-edited,  cloth,  net 

"A  dispassionate  study  of  immortality.  It  is  a  bold, 
honest,  heroic  book.  He  believes  and  can  reason  in  faith 
and  hope.  The  book  is  preeminently  worth  while.  It  is 
adapted  to  make  one  think,  feel  and  act."' — Watchman- 
Examiner. 


THE  PULPIT  AND  PEW 


G.  CAMPBELL  MORGAN,  P.P. 

The  Ministry  of  the  Word 

James  Sprunt  Lectures.     i2mo,  net 

The  great  English  teacher  and  preacher  first  deals  with 
the  fundamental  conception  held  concerning  the  two  great 
factors  in  his  title,  and  then  proceeds  to  examine  the 
Word  and  the  especial  expression  given  it  in  the  respective 
ministries  of  the  Prophet,  Apostle,  Evangelist,  Preacher 
and  Teacher.  He  then  reviews  the  changed  world  condi- 
tions, the  unchanged  obligations  of  the  messenger  of  God, 
the  preparation  for  the  ministry,  and  what  constitutes  the 
proper  exercise  of  the  vocation. 

A.  F.  McGARRAH  Author  of"Modtm  Church 

'  Matiagement,^*  etc. 

Practical  Inter-Church  Methods 

l2mo,  cloth,  net 

Interchurch  action  in  matters  relating  to  Evangelism, 
Missionary  Enterprise  and  Support,  Finance,  Advertising, 
Education,  Women's  Organizations,  are  dealt  with  by  a 
writer  who,  has  furnished  abundant  evidence  of  his  abil- 
ity to  deal  with  affairs  of  this  sort  with  a  note-worthy 
pertinency  that  is  based  on  sound,  first-hand  knowledge. 

ALFREP  fVILLIAMS  ANTHONY,  P.D, 

Executive  Secretary  Home  Missions  Ctuncil 

Conscience  and  Concessions 

How  May  the  Individual  Become  Related  to 
the  Many.     i2mo,  cloth,  net 

A  discussion  of  the  principles  of  federation  and  coopera- 
tion in  their  social,  religiou  and  political  aspects.  Dr. 
Anthony  also  reviews  the  place  and  province  of  conscience, 
and  the  guiding  principles  of  legitimate  compromise. 

F.  A.  AGAR,  P.D. 

The  Stewardship  of  Life 

A  Study  of  Responsibility.  i6mo,  cloth,  net 
"F.  A.  Agar  is  bright  as  a  dollar,  absolutely  fearless^ 
and  hits  hard,  manly  blows.  At  the  same  time  the  native, 
good-humored,  Irish  wit  that  goes  along  with  the  'thrash- 
ing' makes  the  'medicine'  good.  Perhaps  the  best  part  of 
Agar's  work  is  the  constructive  program  presented." — Ex- 
positor. 

Democracy  and  the  Church 

i6mo,  cloth,  net 

Dr.  Agar  addresses  himself  to  the  task  of  showing  that 
if  democracy  is  to  fill  the  world  with  justice,  peace  and 
progress,  the  Church  of  Christ  must  lead  the  way.  True 
Christianity  is,  and  since  its  inception  always  has  been, 
the  exponent  of  the  principles  of  real  democracy,  and  the 
only  hope  for  humanity's  problems  is  their  solution  by 
and  through  the  influence  and  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ. 


c^ 


3  1197  00356  55™ 


'ffi 


DATE  DUE 


APR  2  6 


\P?  0  4  7006 


M  a  6  198J 


JUlD^g  Wft 


14 


APR  i  I  B14 


APR 


M>R  2  1 


APR  L  s  r 


HP  )    ■^"Al 


MAR  29  2096 


Itf 


5t() 


^^Mjgp 


SIf  ?  6  200? 


*-H 


« 


11 'Rl 


JANlUdOACK  i8  20C3 


AUO  1  0  19 


iH 


«B    24 


27  200(1 


APR  1  9  ?nrt 


•^R  04  20)8 


«*"n-l!)|cO6  200li 


13^^^ 


M  U  *f' 


juinjjw 


MU 


MAY  17 


SEP  7 


jmLJ 


-)  ?noi. 


lO^ 


« 


Wc  O'm 


imt^ 


im- 


3m 


■AOl 


urn. 


hML 


DEMCO    38-297 


