Wmm 


P  4 6.20! 


FROM   THE   LIBRARY   OF 

REV.   LOUIS    FITZGERALD    BENSON,  D.  D. 

BEQUEATHED    BY   HIM   TO 

THE   LIBRARY  OF 

PRINCETON   THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 


S— *-. 


A 


Foim:    of  PoeMs  orsi  subjects 


devoVfaNal 


\J'<m&   /i^>/i  /  /u7t'<-  /ytt//irr  Arm  //r  *uvif/  rf  Mfi  . 


OF  Pfl/Af ; 


MISCELLANEOUS  4MBIMS9J 


I  N 


VERSE  and    PROS^ 


By    THEODOSIA.  . 

^y/        C&niue  Steel} 


An  Me.  E>V€el< 


"  One  labor  more  indulge,  then  deep  my  ftriin, 
'Till  haply  wak'd  by  Raphael's  golden  lyre, 
To  bear  a  part  in  everlalling  lays ; 
Tho'  far,  far  higher  fet,  in  aim,   I  truft, 
Symphonious  to  this  hufnble  prelude  here." 


Yovnc. 


BRISTOL; 

Printed  by  W.  Pine.    Sold  by  T.  Cadell,  T.  Mills, 
andT.    Evans; — and  by   J.  Buck  land,  Pater- 
noJlcr-Rozo,  and  J.  Johnson,  St.  PauVs  Church 
Yard)  London,  1780. 


MISCELLANEOUS    PIECES, 


1    W 


VERSE    and    PROSE, 


VOL.    Ill* 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


THE  mifcellaneous  pieces  which  compofe  the 
volume,  which  is  here  prefented  to  the  pub- 
lic, it  will  foon  be  perceived  by  the  intelligent 
reader,  are  the  produftions  of  the  fame  pious  and 
elegant  pen,  to  which  the  world  is  indebted  for 
the  two  former  volumes  of  Poems  on  Subjects 
chiefly  devotional ;  and  will  be  found  not  inferior 
in  merit  to  thofe  juftly  admired  compofitions. 
.Some  few  of  the  Hymns  have  already  appeared  in 
a  collection  adapted  to  public  worGlip,  and  have 
been  confidered  by  the  beft  judges  of  facred  poefy, 
as  no  inconfiderable  ornament  to  that  publication ; 
the  editors  of  which  are  under  great  obligations  to 
our  authorefs  for  many  of  thofe  truly  fublime 
compofures  which  adorned  her  former  volumes, 
and  were  thence  transferred  by  her  permiflion,  to 
their  colIeCHon.  The  other  pieces  which  confti- 
tute  the  prefent  volume,  are  fuch  as  were  never 
before  publiflied.  They  were  however  all  prepar- 
ed for  the  prefs,  and  in  the  form  and  order  in 
which  they  now  appear,  put  into  the  hands  of  the 
A  3  editor 


(     vi     ) 

editor  for  publication,  by  the  ingenious  authorefs 
herfelf,  fome  months  before  her  deceafe,  and  were 
intended,  as  the  expreflive  motto  intimates,  to  be 
her  laft  legacy  to  her  furviving  friends, 

"  One  labor  more  indulge,  then  fleep  my  ftrain, 
'Till  haply  wak'd  by  Raphael's  golden  lyre, 
To  bear  a  part  in  everlafting  lays ; 
Tho*  far,  far  higher  fet,  in  aim,  I  truft, 
Symphonious  to  this  humble  prelude  here." 

Young. 

It  may  poflibly  be  fome  gratification  to  thofe 
who  have  hitherto  been  ignorant  of  the  real  name 
and  charafter  of  the  pious  Theodofia,  whofe  writ- 
ings have  fo  often  cheered  their  hours  of  folitude, 
warmed  their  hearts  with  the  love  of  virtue,  and 
the  glow  of  friendship,  and  animated  their  devotions 
in  the  clofet  and  congregation  ;  to  be  informed  that 
fhe  was  known  to  her  more  intimate  friends  un* 
der  the  name  of  Mrs.  Anne  Steele.  Her  father 
was  a  Diflenting  Minifler,  a  man  of  primitive  pie- 
ty, the  firicleft  integrity  and  benevolence,  and  the 
nioll  amiable  fimplicity  of  manners.  He  was  for 
many  years  the  affeftionate  and  faithful  paftor  of 
an  affe&ionate  and  harmonious  congregation  at 
Broughton  in  Hampfhire,  where  he  lived  all  his 
days  greatly  beloved,  and  died  univerfally  lament- 
ed, 


(     vii     ) 

ed.  Mrs/Anne  Steele  his  eldeft  daughter,  difco- 
vered  in  eaily  life  her  love  of  the  inufes,  and  often 
entertained  her  friends  with  the  truly  poetical  and 
pious  productions  of  her  pen  :  But  it  was  not  wirh- 
out  extreme  reluftance  flie  was  prevailed  on  to 
fuhmit  any  of  them  to  the  public  eye.  This  new  edi- 
tion of  her  works,  accompanied  with  the  volume 
which  is  now  firft  offered  to  the  public,  would  have 
appeared  long  fince,  hadthehealth  of  ourTheodofia 
admitted  of  her  paying  that  attention  to  it  which 
was  neceffary.  But  it  was  her  infelicity,  as  it  has 
been  of  many  of  her  kindred  fpirits,  to  have  a  ca- 
pacious foaring  mind  inclofed  in  a  very  weak  and 
languid  body.  Her  health  was  never  firm,  but  the 
death  of  her  honoured  father,  to  whom  (he  was 
united  by  the  ftrongeft  ties  of  affectionate  duty  and 
gratitude,  gave  fuch  a  fhock  to  her  feeble  frame, 
that  (he  never  entirely  recovered  it,  though  fhe  fur- 
vived  him  fome  years. 

Her  flate  of  mind  upon  that  awful  occafion  will 
beft  be  conceived  of,  from  the  following  affecling  de- 
scription of  it  by  herfelf,  and  which,  with  the  per- 
mifllon  of  the  family,  I  am  at  liberty  to  prefent  to 
the  public. 

"  Still  bleeds  the  deep,    deep  wound  ! — Where  is 

the  friend 
To  pour  with  tender,  kind  indulgent  hand, 
The  lenient  balm  of  comfort  on  my  heart  ? 

A  4  Alas 


(•     viii     ) 

Alas,  that  friend  is  gone! — Ye  angels  fay 

(Who  bore  him  raptur'd  to  your  bleft  abodes) 

Can  ought  on  earth  compenfate  for  my  lofs  ! 

Ah,   no!  the  world  is  poor,   and  what  am  1  ? 

A  helplefs,  folitary  worm,  that  creeps 

Complaining  on  the  earth!  Yet  ev'n  to  worms 

The  care  of  heaven  extends,  and  can  I  doubt 

If  that  indulgent  care  extends  to  me  ? 

Father  of  mercies,  trembling  at  thy  feet, 

Give  me  to  vent  the  heart  oppreffing  grief, 

And  afk  for  comfort! — can  I  afk  in  vain 

Of  him  whofe  name  is  Love  ? — But  O  the  boon 

My  craving  wifhes  afk  is  large  indeed  ! 

Yet  lefs  will  leave  me  wretched — Gracious  God 

Give  me  to  fay  without  a  rifing  doubt, 

u  Thou  art  my  Father" — thy  paternal  love 

Alone  can  cheer  my  foul,  thy  kind  compaffion, 

Can  cafe  the  load  of  heart  oppreffing  grief. 

O  may  I  know  my  father  pities  me  ! 

And  if  he  pities  fure  he  will  fupport  : 

What  cannot  love  omnipotent  effeci  !— 

Ah  !  now  one  tender,    one  endearing  tie 

That  held  me  down  to  earth,  death  has  torn  off, 

And  with  it  rent  my  heart  firings — bid  me  come. 

To  thee  my  refuge ;  proftrate  at  thy  feet, 

O  bid  me  fay,  with  faith  and  humble  hope, 

Heal,  gracious  father,  heal  my  bleeding  heart  ! 

Thy  healing  hand  alone  can  bring  relief 

For  woes  like  mine;  can  bring  what  moftl  want, 

An  humble  refignation  to  thy  will, 

H  w 


(  *  ) 

How  hard  the  Ieflbn  !  (yet  it  mufl  be  learn'd) 
With  full  confent  to  fay  "  Thy  will  be  done." 

As  the  life  of  Theodofia  was  for  the  moll  part  a 
life  of  retirement  in  the  peaceful  village  where  (he 
began  and  ended  her  days,  it  cannot  be  expected  to 
furnifh  fuch  a  variety  of  incidents  as  arife  in  the 
hiftory  of  thofe  who  have  moved  in  circles  of 
greater  activity.  The  duties  of  friendfhip  and  re- 
ligion occupied  her  time,  and  the  pleafurcs  of  both 
conftituted  her  delight.  Her  heart  was,  "  apt  to 
feel"  too  often  to  a  degree  too  painful  for  her  own 
felicity,  but  always  with  the  moil;  tender  and  ge- 
nerous fympathies  for  her  friends.  Yet  united 
with  this  exquifite  fenfibility,  fhe  pofTefTed  a  na- 
tive cheerfulnefs  of  difpofition,  which  not  even 
the  uncommon  and  agonizing  pains  fhe  endured  in 
the  latter  part  of  her  life  could  deprive  her  of.  In 
every  fhort  interval  of  abated  fuffering,  fhe  would 
in  a  variety  of  ways,  as  well  as  by  her  enlivening 
converfation,  give  pleafure  to  all  around  her.  Her 
life  was  a  life  of  unaffected  humility,  warm  bene- 
volence, fincere  friendfhip  and  genuine  devotion. 
A  life,  which  it  is  not  eafy  truly  to  defcribe,  or 
faithfully  to  imitate. 

Having  been  confined   to  her   chamber  fome 
years  before  her  death,  fhe  had  long  waited  with 
chriftian  dignity  for  the  awful  hour  of  her  depar- 
ture.    She  often  fpoke,  not  merely  with  tranquili- 
ty 


(  X  ) 

ty  but  joy,  of  her  deceafe.  When  the  interefling 
hour  came,  fhe  welcomed  its  arrival,  and  though 
her  feeble  body  -was  excruciated  with  pain,  her 
mind  was  perfectly  ferene.  She  uttered  not  a  mur- 
muring word,  but  was  all  refignation,  peace  and 
holy  joy.  She  took  the  moll  affectionate  leave  of 
her  weeping  friends  around  her,  and  at  length,  the 
happy  moment  of  her  difmiflion  arriving,  fhe  clof- 
ed  her  eyes,  and  with  thefe  animating  words  on 
her  dying  lips,  "  I  know  that  my  Redeemer 
liveth,"  gently  fell  afleep  in  Jefus. 

Her  excellent  writings,  by  which  though  dead, 
(he  ftill  fpeaketh,  and  which  are  the  faithful  coun- 
terpart of  her  amiable  mind,  exhibit  to  us  the  fairefi 

piclure  of  the  original. The  following  lines  are 

infcribed  on  her  tomb. — 

Silent  the  lyre,  and  dumb  the  tuneful  tongue, 
That  fung  on  earth  her  great  Redeemer's  praife ; 
But  now  in  heaven  fhe  joins  the  angelic  fong, 
In  more  harmonious  more  exalted  lavs.     . 

I  (hall  only  add,  that  as  Theodofia  was  placed 
by  providence  in  a  flate  of  independence,  and  re- 
ligioufly  devoted  the  profits  arifing  from  the  fale 
of  the  former  edition  of  her  works,  to  the  pur- 
pofes  of  benevolence;  fo  the  profits  which  may 
arife  from  this  edition    are   appropriated  by  her 

furviving 


(  #  ) 

Surviving  relatives,  to  the  ufe  of  The  Bristol 
Education  Society.  An  inftitution  worthy 
of  fuch  patronage,  and  which  thinks  itfelf  ho- 
noured in  receiving  it. 

Bristol,  May  12,  CALEB    EVANS. 

1780. 


(  fi  ) 


C>&CZ&^&C5<K2%<^$<ZZ<$<2 


THE  infertion  of  the  following  lines  may  per- 
haps need  fome  apology,  as  they  are 
meerly  the  effufions  of  a  heart  deeply  penetrated 
withafenfe  of  its  own  lofs;  written  at  different 
times,  for  its  private  relief,  and  contain  nothing 
more  concerning  the  dear  deceafed  than  has  been 
already  faid  in  the  preceding  pages. — But  it  is  the 
laft,  the  only  expreffion  of  gratitude  and  affection, 
that  can  ever  be  paid  to  her  memory  by  one- 
whom  Che  fondly  loved,  and  who  in  lofing  her, 
has  loft  one  of  her  chief  fources  of  happinefs  in  this 
world ;  this  thought  alone  has  occafioned  their 
publication,  and  it  is  hoped  will  be  a  fufficient 
excufe  for  it  to  every  feeling  mind, 

O  for  a  gufh  of  foul-relieving  tears 
To  eafe  my  fwelling  heart!— Alas  in  vain 
I  look  around  for  comfort !  every  place 
Recalls  fome  circumftance  that  gives  to  grief 
A  keener  edge  ! — The  hour,   the  dreaded  hour 
My  foul  has  fhuddered  atfo  long,   is  come! 
Ah!  where  is  now  that  friend,  to  whom  my  heart 
In  every  part  diflrefs  was  wont  to  fly, 

While 


(    *#    ) 

While  the  dear  fufferer,  her  own  pains  forgot, 
Would  gently  footh  my  paffions  into  peace? 
Where  that  maternal  friend,  whofe  watchful  care, 
Whofe  fond,  affiduous  tendernefs  fuftain'd 
My  Lelplefs  childhood  ?  whofe  inftruftive  voice, 
(Sweet  as  the  fong  of  feraphs)  mildly  taught 
My  heedlefs  feet  the  facred  path  of  virtue; 
That  facred  path  of  pleafantnefs  and  peace 
She  long  had  trod.     And  {hall  I  never,  never 
Hear  that  lov'd  voice — that  venerable  form 
No  more  behold  ? — Now  on  one  fingle  thread, 
Hangs  all  my  defolated  foul's  fupport ; 
That  broken  too,  and  every  earthly  hope 
Sinks  in  eternal  night. 

But  has  the  forrowing  heart  no  other  refuge  P 
Methinks  I  hear  that  lov'd,  that  well-known  voice, 
Ev'n  from  the  grave,  direct  my  erring  mind 
Beyond  death's  dreary  realms  to  fairer  fcenes. 
Yes,  'tis  her  gentle  language — "  Seek  a  friend 
That  lives  forever." — Shall  I  not  obey 
Her  laft  command,  her  dying  admonition  ? 
(Compaffionate  Redeemer  1  lead  O  lead 
My  heart  to  thee  and  teach  it  to  repofe 
Its  hope,  its  truft,  its  all  on  thee  alone  I) 
O  let  me,  with  a  mifer's  care,  recall 
And  treafure  up  each  dear  inftruftive  fentence  I 
Still  let  me  dwell  on  her  infpiring  page, 
And  bathe  it  with  the  grateful  tears  of  love ! 

Tis 


(     xiv    ) 

Tis  all  I  now  have  left! — O  had  one  ray* 

Of  her  afcended  genius  beam'd  on  me  ! 

Then  had  this  trembling  hand,  by  grief  unnerv'd, 

Faithful  to  truth,  to  gratitude,  pourtray'd 

The  lovely  lineaments  of  her  fair  mind. 

Vain  with  ! — a  thoufand  fad  ideas  rife, 

Daily  and  hourly  rife,  a1  thoufand  afts 

Of  tendernds  too  flightly  felt  .before, 

Rum  o'er  my  foul  with  anguiih  ever  new. 

How  fhaH  I  learn  to  live  without  her  aid ! 

My  deareft  pleafurcs,  mymoftlov'd  employments 

She  taught  me  firft  to  relifh,    firft  awak'd 

The  wifh  for  knowledge — with  her  too  expir'd  ! 

Still,  ftill  to  her  indulgent  eye  was  (hewn 

The  artlefs  lay,  ftill  her  etherial  touch; 

Gave  life  and  beauty  to  the  languid  line, 

Its  deareft  meed  her  animating  fmile. 

Now  all  is  o'er — in  vain  that  artlefs  lay 

Hath  ventur'd  into  light,  in  vainT  hopM 

To  give  her  pleafure,  that  indulgent  eye, 

Is  clos'd  for  ever!  her  complacent  fmile 

Shall  animate  my  drooping  heart  no  more. 

Nature  be  calm — ye  ftreaming  tears  be  dry! 
Think  of  her  blifsand  check  this  felfifh  forrow. 
Torture  is  chang'd  to  tranfport>  faith  to  fight, 
And  hope  abforb'din  full  felicity. 
Ah  with  what  refignation,  what  compofure, 

Have 


(     xv     ) 

Have  I  beheld  her  fuffer  pains  unknown  f 
Anguifh  unfpeakable  ! — her  faith,  her  patience 
Still  unfubdu'd!  unquench'd  the  vivid  flame, 
Of  warm  benevolence  ! — to  others  woes, 
In  agony  attentive, — anxious  flill 
For  others  happinefs, — how  would  (he  Ilrive 
(Her  gentle  hand  all  tremulous  with  pain) 
To  pleafe  or  to  inftruS  ! — how  have  I  hung 
In  filent  forrow  o'er  her  painful  couch, 
And  wept  the  impotence  of  mortal  friendffrip  I 
While  feafon  after  feafon,  years  on  years, 
Revolv'J  in  vain ! — revolv'd  but  to  confute, 
The  flattering   dreams   of  hope,  while  added  fuf- 
ferings, 

But  bound  her  cloferto  this  bleeding  bofom. 

0  the  keen  pangs  of  parting  ! — Still  1  feel 
The  gentle  preffure  of  her  clay-cold  hand  ! 
Still  prefent  to  my  heart,  I  hear  her  voice! 

1  fee  that  fmile  by  dawning  heaven  impreft 
On  her  dear  countenance!   when  all  ferene, 
She  clos'd  her  willing  eyes — to  wake  in  heaven  ! 
O  could  I,  could  I  raife  my  languid  thoughts 

To  that  bright  world  of  glory  !  Could  I  view  her 
For  ever  reunited  to  that  friend, 
§o  lov'd,  and  fo  lamented  !  (the  deep  wound, 
The  lenient  hand  of  time  could  never  heal.) 

'"  Now 


(     xvi     ) 

u  Now  parting  pangs  (hall  rend  their  hearts   no 

more/' 
For  ever  prefent  with  a  fmiling  God ! 
For  ever  tuning  the  feraphic  lyre  ! 
There  only  fweeter  than  her  notes  below. 

Ah  whence  this  paufe  !  My  bleeding  heart  in  vain 
Attempts  to  (bar*  but  finks  to  earth  and  forrow. 
Dwells  on  the  pail*  and  fharpens  every  thought 
With  fruitlefs  felf-upbraidings. — O  the  chaos 
Of  wild  diftraSed  thought !  forgive  me  heaven  i 
Teach  me,   like  hcr^  to  fay,  "  Thy  will  be  done  !" 
"  If  happy  minds  Tegard  the  fcenes  below," 
(Soothing  idea!— By  thyfelf  infpir'd) 
Dear  fpotlefs  faint,  O  look  with  pity  down 
On  her  whom  thy  maternal  care  fuftain'd, 
And  thy  affe&ion  blefs'd  !  and  though  unfeen, 
Be  thou  my  guardian-angel  as  while  here! 
And  when  I  feel  a  wifh  for  virtue  life, 
Til  tell  my  heart  my  Theodofia  prompts  it. 
O  may  thy  precepts,  thy  example  guide 
My  fleps  through  life's  dark  maze  !  teach  me,  like 

thee, 
With  duteous  love  to  chear  a  father's  life! 
(A  father,  late  thy  all  as  well  as  mine  ;) 
That  one  dear  hope  alone  could  prompt  a  with 
To  linger  in  that  world  which  thou  hail  left. 
That  one  dear  hope  fulfill'd,  O  may  my  duft 

Repofa 


(     xvii     ) 

Repofe  with  thine,  and  (mercy  hear  the  prayer!) 
My  deathlefs  fpirit  freed,  for  ever  freed 
From  all  its  fins  and  frailties,  once  again 
Behold,  (ah  not  as  when  on  earth  opprefsM 
With  pungent  pain)  behold  my  Theodofia  ! 
My  Theodofia !  let  me,  let  me  flill 
Repeat  the  much-lov'd  name  !  Still  mud  her  image 
Dwell  in  my  heart  while  gratitude  exifts, 
Cherifh'd  with  life,  and  but  with  life  expire. 


XIX 


CONTENTS. 


MISCELLANEOUS    POEMS. 


Page 

ODE  to  fpring,  written  in  March         —  1 

The  Sickly  Mind                 —  8 

To  a  Flower                  —                  —  10 

The  Salutary  Difappointment             —  11 

The  Butterfiy                  —                  —  12 

Ode  to  Melancholy                  —                  —  13 

Ode  to  Hope                 —                 —  16 

To  Amira  on  the  death  of  her  fon         —  18 

Defiringto  love  Chrift  and  obey  him         —  19 

On  hearing  the  Funeral  Bell                  —  21 

True  happinefs                  —                  —  25 

Waiting  for  Morning                   —  26 

To  Amira  on  her  Mother's  illnefs          —  28 

The  Happy  Man                 — .                  —  30 

To  Philander                 — -                 —  32 

Support 


xx  CONTENTS. 

Page 
Support  in  Trouble  —  « —  34 

The  reftlefs  Mind  —  —  35 

On  receiving  a  Mourning  Ring  for  a  young 

Relative  —  —  37 

To  Amira  on  the  fudden  death  of  her  Mother      39 
Ode  on  a  rural  profpecl  in  June  —  42 

The  complaint  of  the  Mind  —  48 

To  Silvia  —  —50 

To  Silvia  penfive  —  —  52 

Written  in  a  painful  Illnefs         —  —         54 

Defiring  a  thankful  Devotion  to  God  —  56 
The  happinefs  of  the  Children  of  God  —  58 
A  reflection  on  hearing  the  Bell  at  the  inter- 
ment of  a  neighbour  —  6t 
Defiring  the  gracious  prefence  of  God.  •  63 
The  prefence  of  God,  the  only  comfort  in  af- 

fliclion  —  —  65 

Faith  and  Hope  in  divine  goodnefs,  encourag- 
ed by  paft  experience  — -  6j 
A  thought  of  life  and  death               —  68 
Defiring  a  firmer  affiance  in  God   under  af- 
flictions                          —              —  70 
Trufling  in  his  mercy  with  humble  fubmiffion 

and  hope  —  —  72 

Intreating  the  prefence  of  God  in  aflli&ion         73 
Acknowledging  his  goodnefs  in  fupporting  and 

reftoring  —  —  75 

Defirinq; 


CONTENTS.  xxi 

Page 
Defiring  to  praife  God  for  the  experience  of 

his  goodnefs                             —  77 

Penitence  and  Hope         —                  —  79 

Devoting  the  heart  to  Jefus          —         —  81 

The  love  of  Chriit  exciting  thankful  devotion  82 

On  recovery  from  licknefs         —               —  84 

Occafioned  by  hearing  a  friend  commend  my 

verfes  —  —  86 
To  Silvia  —  —  87 
Wilhing  for  real  pleafure  —  —  89 
To  Amira  —  —  91 
A  refleftionon  the  clofe  of  the  year,  occafion- 
ed by  hearing  the  bells  at  midnight  94 

Defiring  a  cheerful  refignation  to  the  divine 

will                          —                 —  96 

To  Silvia                   —                      —  97 

To  Emilia                 — -                  — «  99 

To  Silvia                 —             —             —  102 

Retirement                 —               —  103 

On  the  fudden  death  of  a  libertine         —  104 

To  my  Watch                  —                  —  106 

The  third  chapter  of  Daniel  paraphrafed  107 

Meffiah,  an  Ode              —                —  112 

The  Blind  Man's  Petition         —          —  118 

Reft  and  comfort  in  Chrift  alone          —  119 

On  the  Fifth  of  November             —  121 

On  a  day  of  prayer  for  fuccefs  in  war    *—  123 

Hymn 


xxii  CONTENTS. 

Page 
Hymn  for  a  day  of  public   thankfgiving  for 

peace                 —                 —  125 

To ',  on  the  death  of  her  father  127 

To  Myra                 —                      —  128 

To  an  Infant  three  weeks  old         —  129 

Breathing  after  God             — -              — •  130 

Filial  Submiffion              —                  — ■  132 

Humble  Truft             —-                 —  133 

Hymn  to  Jefus                 •—                 — -  134 

The  King  of  Saints                 — ■             —  136 

Hymn  for  the  Lord's  Day  Morning         —  138 

Happy  Poverty,  or  the  Poor  in  Spirit  bleffed  139 

The  neceffity  of  renewing  grace           —  141 

The  Pearl  of  great  price             —         —  142 

Mifcellaneous   Pieces    in  Prpfe. 

The  Journey  of  Life             —             —  147 

All  thy  works  praife  thee             —         —  156 

Human  Frailty                 —                 —  157 

Of  the  knowledge  of  ourfelves             —  160 

Humility                      —                    1 —  163 

Acquaintance  with  God  the  fupreme  good  165 

Content                  •—             — -               —  168 

True  Honour                  —                  —  170 

Friendfhip                  —                  —         —  174 
An  Evening  Refle&ion             — <            —180 

Abfence 


CONTENTS  xxiii 

Page 

Abrence  from  God                 — «             —  183 

The  evil  of  fin                 —                 —  185 

Breathing  after  God             ~             —  188 

Seeking  Reft               —                —  19 1 

God's  Omniprefence          —          — -  194 

Self-contradiftion                  —                  —  199 
Comfort  under  the  painful  fenfe  of  frailty,  in 

the  unchangeable  goodnefsof  God  202 

Longing  for  the  manifeftation  of  divine  love  205 

Weary  fouls  invited  to  reft         —         —  208 

Motives  to  divine  Meditation             —  213 

Thoughts  in  ficknefs,  and  on  recovery  2ijt 


<|^      ^         ^         ^         ^>         ^         $>         ^         ^         ^        ^     J> 


OCCASIONAL    POEMS, 


Ode  to  Spring,  written  in  March. 

I. 

QUEEN  of  feafons,  lovely  fpring, 
What  diftant  happy  clime  detains 

The  lingering  wheels  of  thy  refulgent  car  ? 
What  unknown  charm  detains  thee  far 
From  thefe  expefling,  mourning  plains  ? 
What  foft  inchantment  binds  thy  zephyr's  wing  ? 
Silent  on  the  leaflefs   tree 
Hangs  the  rural  mufes  lyre  ; 
Vol.  Ill,  B  Still 


C   *   ] 

Still  fhe  waits  in  vain  for  thee, 
Waits  till  thou  the  fong  infpire. 
The  field,  the  grove,  the  garden  mourn  thy  flay  : 
O  lovely  queen  of  feafons,  come  away  ! 

II. 

Gentle  zephyrs  wake  and  rife 
Spread  your  filken  wings,  and  bear 
On  her  bright  enamel'd  car, 
The  beauteous  nymph  to  our  defiring  eyes ! 
Come  beauteous  nymph  in  all  thy  charms  array 'd, 
And  blefs  the  field,  and  blefs  the  rural  fhade  ! 
Stern  winter  with  his  dreary  train 
At  thv  approach  fhall  leave  the  plain  ; 
And  nature  o'er  the  ruffet  mead 
Again  her  verdant  mantle  fpread  ; 
Thy  prefence  fhall  the  grove  infpire, 
And  bid  the  various,  artlefs  choir, 
Sweet  warbling  pour  the  gratulating  ftrain. 

III. 
Queen  of  feafons  come  away  I 
Time  invites,  and  nature  fues  ; 

Fancy  fpreads  her  wing  to  meet  thee, 
Fancy,  handmaid  of  the  mufe; 

Rural  mufe  that  waits  to  greet  thee : 


While 


C   3   3 

While  reclin'd  in  penfivc  guife, 
Silent  (lie  deplores  thy  flay, 
Oft  (he  lifts  her  longing  eyes, 
And  now  fhe  ruminates  the  long-neglected  lay. 

Fancy  never  waiting  long, 
Ever  active,  ever  young, 
Now  with  wild  ungovern'd  fire 
Snatches  quick  the  mufes  lyre, 
And  come  ye  powers  of  harmony  {he  cries; 
Come  bring  the  fong  to  hail  your  queen; 
Bid  every  tuneful  accent  rife; 
I  fee  afar  her  radiant  car  ; 
She  comes !  fhe  comes  to  blefs  the  rural  fcene  I 

V. 
O'er  yon  wide  extended  lawn, 
See  !  by  gentle  zephyrs  drawn, 
With  eafy  grace  her  glittering  chariot  glides : 
A  thoufandgems  refplendent  from  its  fides, 
Reflect  the  luftre  of  the  folar  ray  : 

Fair  treafure  of  the  vernal  morn, 
Which  bounteous  nature  bids  adorn 
With  pureft  elegance  the  rifing  day. 


B  2  Arid 


L   4  3 

VI. 

And  now  behold  the  beauteous  queen  ! 

Dreft  in  a  robe  of  lively  green 
That  cheers  the  gazing  eye: 

Green  is  the  ground,  but  o'er  it  fpread, 

Wrought  with  inimitable  fkill, 

Beyond  description's  boldeft  quill, 

By  nature's  animating  hand, 

A  various  rich  embroidery  glows ; 
And  though  the  work  no  real  error  knows, 
All  with  the  niceft  care  exaflly  plann'd; 
The  tints  in  feeming,  fweet  confufion  lie; 

Here  mines  the  purple,  there  the  red, 
Here  yellow,  fnowy  white,  and  azure's  lovely  die* 

VII. 

While  irregularly  gay, 

Fancy  thus  attun'd  the  lay, 
The  raufe  arofe  (with  brow  feverej 
In  all  her  dignity,  and  faid, 

Fancy,   {top  thy  wild  career, 

Behold,  impetuous,  heedlefs  maid : 
With  erring  hand  would'ft  thou  prefume 
*    The  laws  of  nature  to  controul  ? 
Dofl  thou  accufe  the  lingering  fpring, 
Who  canil  not  caufe  one  flower  to  bloom, 
Or  paint  one  fummer  infc£l's  wing  ? 

The 


C   5   3 

The  circling  fcafons  all  fulfill 
With  fteady  courfe,  his  fovereign  will, 
Whofe  awful  mandate  bade    them  roll, 
Whofe  orders  nature  hears  from  pole  to  pole, 

VIII. 

At  his  command,  returning  fpring 
Shall  pour  her  biefTings  o'er  the  plain: 
Till  then  thy  airy  flights  refhain, 
Nor  touch  my  darling  lyre  again 

Till  nature  bids  thee  fing. 
Then  fhall  the  fields  their  charms  refume, 
The  flowery  tribes  renew  their  bloom; 
Soft  warbling  from  the  fragrant  fpray, 
To  hail  the  lovely  vernal  day, 

Sweet  mufic  rife  from  birds  of  various  wing* 
Their  tribute  to  the  hand  divine, 
The  rural  fcenes  fhall  gladly  raife; 
And  nature's  every  voice  (hall  join 
The  hymn  of  undiffembled  praife. 
Then  fhall  my  long-negle&ed  lyre, 
(If  nature's  Lord  the  fong  infpire,) 

Awake  to  rapture  every  tuneful  firing. 


B  q  Written 


C     6     ] 

Written  in  May, 
After  a  feafonable  Shower  of  Rain. 

HOW  chang'd  the  face  of  nature  Chows, 
How  gay  the  rural  fcene  ! 
A  fairer  bloom  the  flowers  difclofe, 
The  meads  a  livelier  green. 

While  beauty  clothes  the  fertile  vale, 

And  blofToms  on  the  fpray, 
And  fragrance  breathes  in  every  gale, 

How  fweet  the  vernal  day! 

And  hark!  the  feather'd  warblers  fing! 

Tis  nature's  cheerful  voice  ; 
Soft  mufic  hails  the  lovely  fpring, 

And  woods  and  fields  rejoice. 

How  kind  the  influence  of  the  fkies! 

Thefe  fhowers,  with  bleflings  fraught, 
Bid  verdure,  beauty,  fragrance  rife, 

And  fix  the  roving  thought. 

O  let  my  wondering  heart  confefs, 

With  gratitude  and  love, 
The  bounteous  hand  that  deigns  to  blefs 

The  garden,  field,  and  grove. 

That 


C  7  3 

That  bounteous  hand  my  thoughts  adore, 

Beyond  expreflion  kind, 
Hath  fweeter,  nobler  gifts  in  flore, 

To  blefs  the  craving  mind. 

That  hand,  in  this  hard  heart  of  mine 
Can  make  each  virtue  live, 

And  kindly  fhowers  of  grace  divine 
Life,  beauty,  fragrance  give. 

O  God  of  nature,  God  of  grace, 
Thy  heavenly  gifts  impart ! 

And  bid  fweet  meditation  trace 

Spring  blooming  in  my  heart ! 

Infpir'd  to  praife  I  then  fhall  join 
Glad  nature's  cheerful  fong  : 

And  love  and  gratitude  divine 
Attune  my  joyful  tongue. 


B  4  The 


[    8    ] 

The  Sickly  Mind. 


WHERE  are  the  happy  moments  fled  ? 
Where  are  the  joys  that  once  were 
mine  ? 
When  meditation  kindly  fpread 
The  fweet  repaft, 
And  bade  me  tafte 
Of  mental  food,  varieties  divine  ? 
Refle&ion  thus  enquiring  fighs, 
But  hope  with  cheerful  air  replies, 
Again  thofe  happy  moments  may  be  thine  : 
Meditation  ever  kind, 
Still  invites  the  longing  mind  ; 
And  fee  !  Ihe  fpreads  her  banquet  full  in  view,, 
Such  food  the  fons  of  luxury  never  knew. 

Alas!  in  vain,  my  heart  replies, 
In  vain  her  rich  varieties  1 
A  languid,  a  diftemper'd  tafte  invite  ! 

Gentle  hope,  thy  friendly  power 
Sooths  in  vain  the  mournful  hour* 

Till 


C  9  3 

Till  thy  fair  filler  come  and  blefs  my  fights 
She  can  point  a  fovereign  cure 
For  cliforders  of  the  mind, 
Health,  vigor,  and  delight  (he  can  enfure 
From  that  bleft  hand  which  heal'd  the  lame  and 
blind. 

Come  radiant  faith,  and  guide  my  way! 
Hope,  on  thy  kind  arm  I  ftay, 
Lead,  O  lead  me  to  my  Lord! 

If  he  pronounce  the  healing  word, 

This  mental  languor  (hall  depart. 
And  health  and  vigor  animate  my  heart, 

Alas !  my  guide — how  dim  her  eye  ! 

How  feeble  my  fupporter's  arm  ! 

But  he  can  purge  the  mift  away, 

And  clear  the  intellectual  ray ; 
His  vital  word  this  fainting  heart  can  warm, 
And  bid  my  hope  be  ftrong,  and  teach  my  faith  to  fly, 

Great  Phyfician,  gracious  Lord, 
Speak  the  life-reftoring  word, 

My  drooping  powers  renew! 
Meditation  then  fhall  fpread, 
Not  in  vain,  the  various  feaft, 
All  her  fweets  the  mind  fhall  tafte, 

While 


C     10     ] 

While  ftil!  new  dainties  rife  to  view  ; 
(With  dainties  fuch  as  her's  are  angels  fed) 
Nor  can  the  facred  banquet  ever  cloy, 
Unlike  to  fenfual  food,  akin  to  heavenly  joy. 

To  a  Flower. 

EMBLEM  of  Aminta's  form, 
Bloflbm  elegant  and  fair, 
Young  Aminta  has  a  charm 
Flowers  like  thee  can  never  wear. 

In  her  mind  good  nature  blooms,.. 
Fairer  than  thy  fpotlefs  white  ; 
Flower  diffufing  fweet  perfumes 
While  it  glads  the  gazers  fight. 

Though  the  Lilly  and  the  Rofe 
Mix  their  beauties  in  her  face, 
This  with  fweeter  luftre  glows, 
Luftre  heightening  every  grace. 

Nor  be  this  alone  her  praife, 
While  the  mufe's  friendly  eye 
Many  a  fragrant  bud  furveys, 
Bud  where  latent  beauties  lie. 

O  may 


C    »    ] 

O  may  every  mental  grace 
Ripening  fair  its  bloom  difplay, 
More  than  emulate  her  face, 
Bloom  which  never  can  decay. 

The  Salutary  Disappointment. 

T  X  7ITH  anxious  thought  an  author  pi!M 
*   *      His  labour'd  volumes  high  and  fair, 
And  now  he  figh'd,  and  now  he  fmil'd, 
As  rul'd  alternate,  hope  and  care. 

At  length  confirm'd,  ereft  he  rofe, 
Forlo!  infpiring  pride  appears, 
With  all  her  fire  his  bofom  glows, 
While  the  bold  wifli  he  thus  declares. 

This  monument  fhall  bear  my  name 
In  fpite  of  time's  deflroying  hand, 
Thy  votary  hear,  aufpicious  fame, 
To  future  ages  let  it  (land  ! 

Old  time  was  polling  by  in  hafle, 
Not  complaifant  enough  to  ftay, 
His  wingjufl  touch'd  it  as  he  paft, 
In  duft  the  boafted  trophy  lay. 

The 


[   12   3 

The  author  fainted  at  the  fight, 
But  virtue  came  forgiving,  kind, 
When  pride  retreats  'tis  her  delight 
To  animate  the  drooping  mind. 

No  more,  miftaken  youth  (fhe  cries) 
No  more  invoke  deluding  fame, 
But  let  thy  nobler  wifhes  rife, 
Heaven  only  gives  a  deathlefs  name. 


^CI5#C^^CI5#C^#C^4*CZ^# 


The  Butterfly. 

PRETTY  vagrant  of  the  air, 
Emblem  of  the  thoughtlefs  fair: 
Near  akin  their  life  and  thine, 
Both  a  fleeting  fummer  fhine. 
Short  delight  your  charms  impart, 
Charms  to  catch  the  human  heart : 
Hearts  that  can  be  caught  with  fhow, 
The  virtuofo  or  the  beau. 
Thoughtlefs  nymphs  are  butterflies, 
Different  fpecies,  larger  fize  ; 
Strangers  both  to  needful  care, 
Fluttering,  roving  here  and  there; 

Bafking 


C    >3    ] 

Bafking  in  the  vernal  ray, 
Trifling  out  the  fummer's  clay : 
Summer's  day,  from  youth  to  age, 
Trifles  all  their  cares  engage : 
But  when  wintry  ftorms  arife, 
Beauty  fades,  and  pleafure  dies. 

Me  let  nobler  cares  employ, 
Cares  which  terminate  in  joy. 
Ere  the  fummer  funbeams  flee. 
Let  me,  like  the  frugal  bee, 
Well  improve  the  fmiling  hour, 
Gathering  fweets  from  every  flower. 

O  may  virtue's  charms  be  mine, 
Charms  that  fiill  increaling  fhine  ! 
Thefe  will  cheer  the  wintry  gloom, 
Thefe  will  laft  beyond  the  tomb. 


Ode  to  Melancholy. 


D 


AUGHTER  of  grave  reflection, gentle  power, 
Whofe  dictates  oft  improve  the  lonely  hour, 
Kind  melancholy  come! 
I  feek  thy  friendly  aid  ; 
Beneath  thy  hallow'd  {hade 

(Still 


[     14     3 

(Still,  unmolefted  gloom,) 
Gay  mirth's  amufing  trifles  difappear. 

Nor  art  thou  far  away, 

Witnefs  the  darting  tear 

That  trembles  in  my  eye ; 

Kind  melancholy  fay, 
Does  not  the  involuntary  figh 
Proclaim  thy  falutary  influence  near  ? 

Friend  to  virtue,  foe  to  pride, 
Come,  and  place  thee  near  my  fide, 
And  teach  my  heart  how  vain  are  all  the  toys 
Which  wear  the  fmiling  form  of  earthly  joys  ! 
Yonder  fee,  the  phantoms  rifing, 
In  alluring  colours  dreft! 
See  them  fleeting  from  the  view! 
See  deluded  crowds  purfue  lt 
Danger  braving,  toil  defpifing, 

Till,    at  length  they  catch — the  air! 
The  tempting  forms  that  fmil'd  fo  fair 
Elude  their  grafp,  and  leave  the  heart  unbleft. 

Gentle  melancholy,  fay, 
Didft  thou  never  foftly  ileal 
Into  th'  affemblies  of  the  gay, 
And  the  truth,  in  whifpers  tell  ? 
When  mirth  and  thoughilefs  pleafure  fmilingf 
Mufic's  charms  the  heart  beguiling, 
Unheeded  bore  the  midnight  hour  away. 

Dida 


[     *5    ] 

Didft  thou  not  whifper,  "  you  mull  die?"' 
Did  not  the  bofom  heave  a  figh, 

And  for  one  ferious  minute  banifh  mirth  ? 
That  minute,  were  enough  to  (how 
That  pleafure  terminates  in  woe, 

That  vain  are  all  the  boafted  joys  of  earth  ! 
But  mirth  intrudes  with  fatal  art 
To  feize  the  half-relenting  heart, 

And  ftifle  young  conviction  in  its  birth. 

Melancholy,  friendly  power, 
Oft  beneath  thy  awful  gloom, 
(Heart-arTecling  thoughts  infpiring) 
From  the  bufy  world  retiring, 
Let  me  fpend  the  folemn  hour! 
Let  me  meditate  the  tomb ! 
Meditate,  but  not  alone, 
Left  my  heart  (hould  fink  difmay'd; 
Let  religion  ever  near, 
(Sacred  guardian)  banifh  fear, 
Let  my  heart,  her  prefence  own, 
While  through  the  over-fpreading  fliads 
(Excluding  every  glimpfe  of  day) 
Her  fmiles  diffufe  a  cheering  ray, 
And  gild  the  dark,  cold  manfions  of  the  dead. 


Ode 


C   16  3 

Ode  to  Hope. 

FRIEND  of  the  fainting  mind,  whofe  kindly  ray, 
Soft  rifing  o'er  afflictions  dreary  fhade, 
Foretells  the  fweet  approach  of  day, 
And  cheers  the  weary  darkfome  way, 
And  bids  dejection  raife  her  languid  head, 

Celeflial  hope,  en  thy  propitious  fmile 

Calm  patience  waits,  by  thee  fuftain'd 
She  ne'er  repines,  though  often  pain'd  ; 
Untiring  through  life's  various  toil, 
She  knows  to  bear 
With  placid  air 
Cold  wintry  ftorms,  and  treads  down  thorny  care. 

Dear  faithful  friend,  thy  lenient  hand  allays 
The  pangs  of  grief,  and  fmooths  the  frowning  brow 
Of  rough  adverfity,  thy  voice  conveys 
Reviving  comfort  to  the  fons  of  woe  ; 

Thy  gentle  voice  rebukes  their  fears, 
The  figh,  fufpended,  liftening  dies, 
And  forrow  flays  her  flowing  tears 
While  happier  fcenes  in  diftant  profpeft  rife. 

Thou 


[     »7     ] 

Thou  lafr,  kind  folace  of  diftrefs, 
Whole  fmile  retains  a  power  to  blefs 
Though  every  friend  befides,  depart; 
Still  kind,  ftill  faithful  to  thy  truit, 
Thy  influence  hovers  o'er  the  panting  heart, 
While  reafon  lives  to  wake  defire, 
Till  life's  pale  trembling  lamp  expire, 
Till  the  pain'd,  prifon'd  mind  fhall  rife, 
And  drop  her  feeble  manfion  in  the  duff, 
To  claim  thy  promis'd  blifs  beyond  the  fkies. 

Ceieftial  hope,  fair  child  of  truth  divine  ! 
O  may  thy  heavenly  ray, 
Bright  harbinger  of  day, 
Still  on  my  heart  with  cheering  luflre  fhine  ! 

Through  each  dark  fcene,   each  mournful 

fhade, 
Till  I  no  more  fhall  need  thy  aid  ; 
Till  that  bright  hour,  when  to  my  raptui  'd  eyes 
(O  may  I  call  the  unknown  tranfport  mine  !) 
The  morning  of  immortal  day  fhall  rife, 
And  thou  to  perfeft  joy  thy  charge  refign. 


Vol-  III.  To 


C   «8   ] 

To  Amira  on  the  death  of  her  Son. 

ENOUGH  to  nature  and  to  grief  is  paid, 
Indulge  no  more  thefe  unavailing  tears; 
Not  all  your  comforts  in  the  grave  are  laid, 
Through  grief's  dark  fhade  a  lucid  ray  appears. 

A  rayof  heaven  fair  beaming  through  the  gloom  I 
Bids  fainting  hope  lift  up  her  languid  eyes; 
While  faith  direcls  her  view  beyond  the  tomb, 
To  thofe  bright  fcenes  where  joys  immortal  rife. 

Cleans'd,inthe  Saviour's  blood,  from  every  ftain, 
Think  with  what  tranfport  you  will  meet  above, 
(For  ever  free  from  fin  and  grief  and  pain) 
The  dear,  departed  objecl  of  your  love  ! 

Then,  though  your  bleeding  heart  its  lofs  deplore,- 
O  yet  be  each  repining  thought  fupprefr, 
That  fovereign  hand,  which  cannot  err,  adore, 
Here,  may  your  heart  with  full  affiance  reft. 

Indulgent  mercy  blends,  with  lenient  fkill, 
Sweet  cordials  with  the  bitter  cup  of  woe  : 
And  many  a  friend,  and  many  3.  comfort  ftill, 
Are  kindly  fpar'd-*1  cheer  your  flay  below. 

_  Your 


[     »9     ] 

Your  flay,  perhaps  for  high  important  ends, 
May  be  prolong'd  through  many  circling  years, 
A  blefling  to  your  partner,  children,  friends, 
And  future  comfort  pay  your  prefent  tears. 

May  humble  refignation  calm  your  bread, 
And  faith  enjoy,  with  heaven  illumin'd  eye, 
A  profpeel:  of  the  regions  of  the  bleft, 
Where  pleafures  bloom,  that  never,  never  die  ! 


Defiring  to  love  Christ  and  obey  him. 

If  ye  love  me%  keep  my  commandments. 

JESUS  my  Lord,  in  thy  dear  name  unite, 
All  that  my  heart  calls  great,    or  good,  or 
fweet ; 
Whate'er  infpires  with  wonder  or  delight, 
In  thee,  thou  faired  of  ten  thoufand,  meet. 

,  Do  I  not  love  thee  ?  ah  my  confeious  heart 
Nor  boldly  dares  affirm,  nor  can  deny; 
O  bidthefe  clouds  of  gloomy  fear  depart, 
With  one  bright  ray  from  thy  propitious  eye ! 

V 

C  2  Do 


[   20   ] 

Do  I  not  love  thee  ?  can  I  then  allow, 
Within  my  breaft  pretenders  to  thy  throne  ? 
O  take  my  homage,  at  thy  feet  I  bow  ! 
No  other  Lord  my  heart  defires  to  own. 

Take,  take  my  paffions  in  thy  fovereign  hand, 
Refine  and  mould  them  with  almighty  fkill ; 
Then  (hall  I  love  the  voice  of  thy  command, 
And  all  my  powers  rejoice  to  do  thy  will. 

Thy  love  infpires  theaftive  fons  of  light, 
With  fsvift-wing'd  zeal,  they  wait  upon  thy  word; 
O  let  that  love,  in  thefe  abodes  of  night, 
Bid  my  heart  glow  to  ferve  my  deareft  Lord! 

Come  love  divine,  my  languid  wifhesraife  ! 
With  heavenly  zeal  this  faint  cold  heart  inflame, 
To  join  with  angels  in  my  Saviour's  praife, 
Like  them,  obey  his  will,  adore  his  name  ! 

But  can  the  mind,  with  heavy  clay  oppreft, 
To  emulate  feraphic  ardour  rife  ? 
While  fin  pollutes  her  joys,  forbids  her  reft, 
How  can  the  join  the  worfhip  of  the  fkies  ? 

Yet  he  commands  to  love  and  to  obey, 
Whofe  hand  fuftains  thofe  happy  fpirits  ther   ; 
In  him,  my  foul,  who  is  thy  guide,  thy  ftay, 
In  him  confide,  to  him  commit  thy  care. 

Jefus 


C    *«    ] 

Jefus  my  Lord,  O  give  me  ftrength  divine! 
Then  fhall  my  powers  in  glad  obedience  move; 
Receive  the  heart  that  wifhes  to  be  thine, 
And  teach,  O teach  me  to  obey  and  love! 


On  hearing  the  Funeral  Bell, 

After  frequent  deaths  in  the  neighbourhood. 

AGAIN,  the  folemn  warning  flrikes  my  ear  ! 
The  folemn  warning  that  fo  oft  of  late 
Hath  bid  my  foul  be  ready!   fhall  the  call, 
Loud,  frequent,  preffing,  awful,  found  in  vain  ? 
Around  me,  death  felecls  his  fated  prey ; 
On  filent  wing,  commiffion'd,  fly  his  fhafts, 
Nor  ever  mifs  their  mark,  a  viclim  here 
By  age  enfeebled,  faintly  ftruggling,  falls 
An  eafy  conqueft  !  there  in  manhood's  prime, 
Transfix'd,  and  raging  with  the  venom'd  da/t, 
Another  groans,  ftrength  miniftering  to  pajri, 
Contending  long,  unequal  to  the  fight, 
At  length,  in  agonizing  pangs  expires  ! 
Another  here,  and  there  another  falls 
In  early  bloom,  the  ruthlefs  ftroke  at  once 

C  3  Cuts 


C   **   3 

Cuts  off  the  parent's  hope,  and  leaves  a  wound, 
Which  lenient  time,  flow  healing,  hardly  cures  ! 
Where,  next,  will  light  his  arrows  ?  vain  demand! 
That  awful  power,  who  points  them,  only  knows. 
Perhaps  fome  lov'd,  perhaps   fome  honour'd  life, 
Dear  as  my  own,  invites  his  prefent  aim  : 
How  will  my  bleeding  heart  outlive  the  ftroke, 
When  ev'n  the  apprehenfion  wounds  fo  deep  ? 
Yet,  this  anticipated  woe,  a  care 
Still  nearer,  more  important,  fuperfedes! 

s         O  let  me  afk  my  confcious,  trembling  heart, 
While  yet  the  folemn  queftion  may  avail, 
Canft  thou,  undaunted,  meet  the  King  of  terrors  ? 
In  his  commiffion,  for  this  night,  this  hour, 
My  name  may  be  contain'd — fuppofe  it  fpread 
Before  thy  view — rouze,  in  ft  ant  rouze  thy  powers 
To  meet,  with  fortitude,  the  potent  foe! 
Alas!    how  weak,  how  helplefs  !  foon  I  fall, 
The  infulting  victor  triumphs — no,  behold 
An  arm  fuperior,  ftretch'd  for  my  fupport ! 
O  death  where  is  thy  fting  ?  the  Lord  of  life, 
In  whom  I  truft,  can  difappoint  thy  power; 
Can  bid  my  foul  defy  thy  keeneft  dart, 
And  triumph  o'er  thy  terrors !  he  beftows 
(O  gift  immenfe!)  a  life  beyond  thy  reach, 
Eternal  life  !  reveal'd  by  truth  divine 

*/*      The  glorious  promife  (lands,  confirm'd  by  oath, 
The  awful  fanfiion  of  omnipotence  ! 

Here, 


C   23   ] 

Here,  then,  my  foul,  let  thy  enquiry  fix, 
Deliberate,  feiious,  ardent!  on  this  point, 
This  interefting  point,  depends  thy  all ! 
Is  death  difarm'd  for  thee?  is  life  begun? 
For  all  who  live  for  ever,  mult,  new  born 
Begin  to  breathe  that  life  divine  on  earth. 
O  thou,  whofe  potent  word,   from  nothing  rais'd 
Unnumber'd  worlds,  whofe  all -infpiring  breath 
Gives  life  to  nature  in  her  countlefs  forms ! 
Great  fource  of  life  divine  !  whofe  quickning  power 
Recalls  from  death's  domain,  the  heirs  of  blifs, 
Once,  heirs  of  woe,  a  new  created  race, 
Form'd  for  thy  praife,  to  life  immortal  form'd; 
Aflift  my  fearch  !   thy  piercing  eye  furveys 
The  clofc  receffes  of  my  inmoft  heart, 
And  marks  its  every  motion,    do  I  breathe 
Warm'd  by  thy  vital  ray  ?  are  thefe  defires, 
Which  nought  below  thy  favour  can  fufnce, 
A  proof  of  that  immortal  life  begun, 
Which  nought  below  omnipotence  can  give  ? 
Is  not  the  rifing  hope  which  cheers  my  foul, 
Sweet  beaming  through  the  gloomy  fears  of  death, 
The  dawn  of  life  ?  O  teach  my  trembling  heart 
To  trace  it  to  its  fource,   the  Saviour's  crofs  ! 
That  wondrous  crofs,  where  death  refign'd  his  arms, 
And  own'd  the  conqueror  God!   where  life  divine 
Breath'd  in  the  great  Redeemer's  dying  groans, 
And  pour'd  its  influence  from  his  bleeding  veins 
C  4  To 


C   *4    3 

To  quicken,  cleanfe,  illuminate,   and  raife 
To  immortality,  the  blind,  polluted, 
The  helplefs,  hopelefs,  wretched  prey  of  death  ! 
Stupendous  work  of  love,  almighty  love  ! 
Yes,    deareftLord,   from  thee  my  foul  derives 
Her  only  hope,  from  thee  thefe  faint  defires 
Which  thou  canft  raife,.  invigorate,  and  fill. 
O  teach  my  faith  on  ftronger  wing  to  rife 
To  thofe  bright  regions,  where  eternal  life 
In  full  perfection  glows,  and  bid  my  hope 
With  firmer  confidence  on  thee  recline, 
My  guardian,  my  defence  !  by  thee  fuflain'd, 
My  heart  {hall  meet,  ferene,  this  dreaded  foe, 
And  fmile  to  fee  his  harmlefs  arrows  fly. 
Secure  of  conquefl  in  my  Saviour's  might 
Secure  of  life  beyond  this  narrow  fpan  ! 
A  life  unbounded  as  the  glorious  hope 
Thy  love  infpires,  and  filPd  with  all  the  joy 
Thyblifsful  prefence  gives,  cemmenfurate 
The  life,  the  joy,  with  vaft  eternity. 


True 


[       *5       3 

True   Happine$s# 

CELESTIAL  content,  inexhauftible  treafure ! 
The  man  that  enjoys. thee  requires  no  addition  ; 
In  thee  he  poifeiles  wealth,   honour,  and  pieafure  : 

O  happy  condition  ! 

With  pity  he  looks  on  the  many,    purfuing 
The  trifles  of  earth  with  fiich  eager  attention, 
And  draining,  in  chafe  of  their  utter  undoing, 
Their  tortur'd  invention; 

Then  upward  on  faith's  friendly  pinion  he  rifes, 
With  rapture  the  glorious  reverfion  beholding  ; 
The  gates  to  that  blifs>  which  his  longing  heart  prizes 
(Tho'  diftant)  unfolding. 

On  inviolate  truth   while  his  hopes  are  depending, 
Nor  terrors  affright,  nor  afflictions  deprefshim; 
Affur'd,  tho'  to  death'sgloomy  manfions  fafl  tending 
His  God  will  ftill  blefs  him. 

Releas'd  from  the  forrows  of  time  his  glad  fpirit 
Shall  leave  its  weak  partner,  and  joyfully  foaring, 
The  promis'd  polfeflion  begin  to  inherit ; 

With  angels  adoring. 
He 


C   26  ] 

He  knows  that  his  body,  the  grave  now  detaining, 
In  Jefus'  bright  image  hereafter  arifing, 
Shall  furely  rejoin  him,  no  forrow  remaining, 

Corruption  defpifing. 

Then  with  heaven's  fair  armies  in  triumph  afcending 
Partake  of  delights  ever  new  and  abounding; 
Enraptur'd  before  the  bright  throne  lowly  bending 

Salvation  refounding. 


Waiting  for  Morning, 

Pfalm  xxx.  5. 

ONG  and  mournful  is  the  night, 
Mental  night  of  gloomy  fear : 
Source  of  comfort,  fource  of  light 
When,  O  when  wilt  thou  appear  ! 
Thy  beams  alone  can  bid  the  gloom  depart, 
And  fpread  celefliai  morning  o'er  my  heart. 


Morning 


[     27     ] 

Mpfning  of  that  glorious  day 
Which  the  bled  enjoy  above, 
Where  with  full  unclouded  ray 
Shines  thy  everlafting  love : 
Where  joy  triumphant  fills  the  bright  abode, 
O  happy  world  !  fair  paradife  of  God  ! 

Thither  if  the  heart  afpire, 

Shall  it,  Lord,  afpire  in  vain  ? 

Shall  the  breathings  of  defire 

Rife  with  unavailing  pain? 
O  thou  my  guide,  my  folace,  and  my  reft, 
In  this  fad  defart  fhall  I  rove  unbleft  ? 

Sure  the  Lord  of  life  is  near 
Though  a  cloud  his  face  conceal : 
Jefus,  when  wilt  thou  appear, 
When  thy  cheering  beams  reveal  ? 
When  fhall  thy  beams  of  foul-reviving  light 
Difpel  this  gloomy  cloud  this  mental  night  ? 

Not  in  vain  afpires  the  heart 
That  depends  on  thee  alone ; 
Light  and  joy  thou  wilt  impart, 
Radiant  dawn  of  blifs  unknown. 
Here  let  me  wait  beneath  thy  guardian  wing 
Til!  from  thy  fmile  celeftial  morning  fpring. 


To 


C   *8   3 

To  Amira  on  her  Mother's  illness. 


SAY,  dear  Amira,  while  this  bofom  (hares 
Your  load  of  grief,  and  heaves  the  filial  figh  ; 
Shall  Chriftians  fink  beneath  time's  tranfient  cares, 
And  fainting  hope  fcarce  lift  her  languid  eye  ? 

While  o'er  affliflion's  gloom,  a  deeper  night 
Dark  apprehenfion  fpreads,  and  woes  unborn 
Rife  vifionary  to  the  mental  fight, 
The  prefent  grief  we  feel,  the  future  mourn. 

Indulge,  forgive  the  filler  and  the  friend, 
Permit  refleftion  to  prefent  to  view 
The  fecret  caufe  that  thus  opprefs'd  we  bend, 
And  to  their  fource  thefe  tyrant  fears  purfue. 

Their  fource  is  unbelief,  a  foe  confefs'd, 
And  yet,  how  clofe  connected  with  the  heart, 
We  lodge  the  traitor  that  betrays  our  reft, 
And  ftabs  our  comforts  in  the  vital  part. 

What 


C  *9  ] 

What  is  the  Chriflian's  portion  ?  blifs  terrene, 
Health,  riches,  friends  ?  alas,  how  light  they  weigh ! 
Can  we,  contented  with  a  lot  fo  mean 
Pronounce  it  blifs  ?  frail  tenure  of  a  day  ! 

No,  fays  the  foul  whom  heaven-born  faith  infpires, 
Jehovah  is  the  portion  of  my  choice, 
In  him,  who  fills,  alone,  my  vaft  defires, 
Though  health,  wealth,  friends  forfake  me,  I  rejoice. 

The  blefTingsGod  hath  lent,  when  he  recalls 
Faith  bids  the  heart  with  full  confent  refign, 
Low  at  his  feet  the  heart  adoring  falls ! 
11  Lord,  'tis  enough,  I'm  bleft  while  thou  art  mine !,f 

Should  he  recall  fwe  tremble  at  the  thought) 
A  parent  honoured,  lov'd  :  Faith  lifts  her  eye; 
And,  "  See  ffhe  cries)  the  hour,  with  tranfport 

fraught, 
"  That  joins  your  fouls  in  blifs  beyond  the  fky !" 

The  forrow-fhaded  fcenes  that  rife  between, 
Time's  friendly  wing  will  quickly  bear  away; 
And  hope  with  placid  air  fhall  wait  ferene, 
While  faith  points  forward  to  eteinal  day. 

Then 


C  30  ] 

Then  join,  my  dear  Amlra,  join  your  friend, 
To  combat  unbeiief,  bis  aid  implore 
On  whofe  kind  arm  our  faith  and  hope  depend, 
Here  may  we  reft,  defire,  expect,  adore. 


The  Happy  Man, 
From  the  23d  Pfalm. 

HAPPY  the  man  of  heavenly  birth, 
Beyond  the  proudeft  boaft  of  earth. 
Whom  mercy  thus  fuftains  : 
To  fcenes  of  living  verdure  led, 
Plenty  and  peace  their  blefiings  fpread, 
And  not  a  thought  complains. 

Conducted  by  his  gracious  guide 

Where  flreams  of  fweet  refrefhment  glide, 

And  fed  with  food  divine; 
God  is  the  guardian  of  his  reft, 
Beneath  his  fmile,  ferenely  bleft, 

He  bids  his  foul  recline. 

Yet, 


L   31   3 

Yet,  fhould  his  feet  forgetful  ftray, 
His  guide  reftores,  and  points  the  way 

To  fafety,  life,  and  peace  ; 
Still  mindful  of  his  glorious  name, 
A  faithful  God   is  flill  the  fame, 

His  paths  are  righteoufnefs. 

Should  gloomy  (hades  the  path  o'erfpread, 
Dark  as  the  manfions  of  the  dead, 

His  heart  no  terrors  wound : 
His  heavenly  guardian  ever  near, 
Suftainshis  hope,  forbids  his  fear, 

And  comfort  fmiles  around. 

The  conftant  bounty  of  his  Lord, 
With  rich  provifion  fpreads  his  board, 

Amid  repining  foes : 
While  peace  and  gladnefs  on  his  head 
Their  fweeteft  odours  hourly  fhed, 

His  cup  with  blifs  o'erflows  : 

O  happy  portion  !  lot  divine  ! 
Thus  (hall  indulgent  goodnefs  fhine 

On  all  his  future  days; 
For  ever  near  his  guardian  God 
Shall  mercy  fix  his  bleft  abode, 

And  tune  his  foul  to  praife. 

To 


C   32   3 

^X^X^X-^  ^X^X^$X4X  -^-X^- 

To  Philander. 

WHILE  in  the  arms  of  death  your  Delia  fleeps 
And  o'er  her  afhes  fond  remembrance 
weeps ; 
In  tender  grief  let  friendfiiip  claim  a  (hare, 
Priendfhip,  that  fain  would  eafe  Philander's  care. 
But  fay,  is  this  the  whole  of  friendfhip's  lore, 
To  fympathize,  to  pity,  to  deplore  ? 
Be  her's  the  effort  (elfe  how  weakly  kindj 
To  cheer,  to  elevate  the  drooping  mind. 
And  weak  (unaided)  would  the  effort  prove  ; 
But  heaven-born  hope  aflifts  the  voice  of  love. 
See  my  Philander  o'er  your  Delia's  tomb 
Hope  fmiles  and  diffipates  the  dreary  gloom. 
Celeftial  comforter  !  me  points  your  eye 
To  life,  to  happinefs  beyond  the  iky. 
Attend  her  cheering  whifper  to  your  heart ! 
"  There  lives  your  once-lov'd  Delia's  nobler  part. 
"  Can  you  regret  that  from  the  fcenes  of  woe, 
M  The  long  affliclion  (he  fuftain'd  below, 
"  Heaven  call'd  her  fpirit  from  its  dark  abode 
"  To  the  bright  manfions  of  her  Saviour  God  ? 

«  Her 


[    33    ] 

88  Her  mortal  part,  beneath  his  watchful  eye, 

u  Secure  (though  mouldering  in  the  grave)  fliall  licr 

*«  Till  the  laft  trumpet's  animating  breath 

"  Pierce  through  the  boundlefs  monarchy  of  death  ; 

•■  Collect  each  atom  of  the  fleeping  duft 

"  And  in  immortal  vigour  raife  thejuft. 

11  The  body  then,  reftor'd,  renew'd,  refin'd, 

"  Shall  join  in  perfeft  blifs,  its  partner  mind  ; 

"  Array 'd  in  pure  etherial  radiance  rife, 

81  Mix  with  the  bright  aifembly  of  the  fkies  ; 

88  In  joys  unknown  to  thought  forever  prove 

86  The  boundlefs  bleflings  of  redeeming  love  ; 

88  And  every  tongue,  to  rapture  tun'd,  proclaim 

88  The  endlefs  glories  of  the  Saviour's  name. 

88  Then  fhall  Philander  and  his  Delia  join 

"  With  heaven's  immortal  choir,  the  fong  divine*— 

88  Look  forward  to  the  bright,  the  glorious  hour 

88  And  truftyour  Saviour's  mercy,  truth  and  power/' 

O  my  Philander,  may  the  blifsful  ray 
Which  points  our  wifhes  to  the  feats  of  day, 
Still  on  our  hearts  its  healing  luftre  fhed, 
Amid  the  gloomy  manfions  of  the  dead ! 
In  all  her  force  may  hope  celeftial  glow 
Till  heaven's  fair  dawn  beam  o'er  the  fhades  of  woe  ; 
Till  faith  (hall  with  feraphic  ardour  rife, 
And  claim  the  promis'd  glories  of  the  fkies; 
Till  that  illuftrious,  that  tranfporting  hour, 
When  death  for  ever  Ihajl  refign  his  power; 

Vol.  III.  D  When 


C    34    3 

When  joy  lhall  wipe  the  tear  from  every  eye 
And  faith  and  hope  in  perfeft  vifion  die. 


T 


Support  in  Trouble. 

^HOUGH  terrors  late  alarm'd  my  brealr, 
And  rais'd  a  threatening  tempeft  there, 
Yet,  Lord,  my  paflions  own  thy  hand, 
The  ftorm  fubfides  at  thy  command, 
And  now  my  calmer  thoughts  atteft 
Thy  well-try  *d  love,  thy  long  experienc'd  care. 

Faith,  fcarce  difcern'd  a  glimpfe  of  light, 
Hope  languifh'd  with  deje&ed  eye, 
Reafon,  (weak  emprefs  of  the  minJ) 
To  paffion  had  the  helm  confign'd, 
Loud  was  the  ftorm  and  dark  the  night, 
But  thy  fupporting,  guardian  hand  was  nigh. 

Almighty  Saviour,  gracious  Lord, 
Thou  only  refuge  of  my  foul, 
Thy  fovereign  voice  when  I  can  hear, 
I  gain  new  ftrength  to  combat  fear, 
Hope  refts  on  thy  unchanging  word, 
Thy  word  can  every  rifing  fear  controuK 

Hence 


C    35    3 

Hence,  guilty  diffidence  be  gone, 
With  all  thy  train  of  boding  fears  ; 
Let  faith  and  calm  expe&ance  wait, 
And  cheerful  hope,  with  eye  fedate, 
Look  up  and  watch  the  fmiling  dawn 
That  through  the  fable  veil  of  night  appears. 

That  fmiling  dawn  derives  its  ray 
From  the  full  fource  of  light  divine; 
O  fun  of  righteoufnefs,  impart 
Thy  healing  radiance  to  my  heart ! 
Increafing  till  celeftial  day 
Difpel  the  gloom,  and  joy  unclouded  fhine. 


The  restless  Mind. 

ACTIVE,  bufy,  reftlefs  mind 
That  canft  never  be  confin'd ; 
Whither,  whither  doft  thou  ftray  ? 
Seek  a  guide  that  knows  the  way 
To  the  fair,  the  happy  more, 
Which  thy  wing  would  fain  explore. 
Fancy  fees  the  angels  ftand 
Beckoning  on  the  diftant  land  : 

D  2  Gentle 


I   36   3 

Gentle  fpirits*,  can  you  guide 


i 


O'er  the  ocean  deep  and  wide,      *> 
Winds  impetuous,  feasuntry'd?  * 
Can  you  point  the  port  of  reft  ? 
Aid  a  ftranger  to  be  bleft  ? 
Vain  enquiry  ! — filent  all — 
Quite  regardlefs  of  my  calif 
Will  no  kind,  no  able  friend 
Hear,  on  whom  I  may  depend? 
Hear,  and  teach  this  reftlefs  mind 
How,  the  feats  of  blifs  to  find  ? 
Yes,  behold  that  friend  appears ! 
Friend  of  mortals,   Jefus  hears : 
Kindly  fmiling,  fee,  he  (lands ! 
See,  his  ftretch'd,  inviting  hands  ! 
Hark  !  he  wooes  thee  to  be  bleft ! 
Calls  thee  to  the  port  of  reft  ! 
He  can  teach  thee  to  explore, 
He  alone,  that  happy  more. 
Though  the  dull,  incumbent  air 
Frown  with  heavy  clouds  of  care  ; 
He  can  aid  and  point  thy  flight; 
Give  thee  ftrength,  and  give  thee  light. 
O'er  the  ocean,  deep,  and  wide, 
Winds  impetuous,  feas  untry'd, 
He  thy  paffage  can  fuftain ; 


Winds  and  waves  fhall  rage  in  Vain. 


Gracious 


C    37    1 

Gracious  Saviour,  guide  divine  ! 
To  thy  condufil  I  refign 
This  enquiring  reftlefs  mind; 
Happy,  if  her  Lord  is  kind  : 
Happy,  if  amid  her  way, 
Now  and  then  a  heavenly  ray 
Open  to  her  longing  eye 
That  fair  paradife  on  high, 
Whither  her  beft  wifhes  tend, 
Where  her  toils  and  cares  fhall  end. 


On  receiving  a  Mourning  Ring 
for  a  Young  Relative. 

THE  mournful  gift,  attentive,  while  I  view, 
My  cnce-lov'd  Nancy  rifes  to  my  thought ; 
The  figh  of  friendship,  to  her  memory  due, 
Breathes  from  my  heart,  with  tender  anguifh  fraught. 

Young,  blooming,  amiable,  lamented  maid  1 
When  life's  gay,  flattering  profpeft  open'd  fair  ; 
Down  funk  the  fcene  in  death's  cold  difmal  made, 
And  the  fond  parent  mourns  his  fruftrate  care. 

D  3  Ye  fad 


C   38   3 

Ye  fad  furvivors,  while  each  bleeding  heart 
Hangs  on  her  lov'd  idea,  may  you  know 
The  heaven-taught  leffon,  the  celeftial  art 
To  gather  bleffings  in  the  fhades  of  woe! 

Perhaps  the  awful  ftroke  may  feem  fevcre ; 
But  let  reflection  fpeak,  her  voice  attend  ! 
While  grief  fupplies  the  unavailing  tear, 
Reflection  points  our  own  approaching  end. 

That  end  approaching  is  our  chief  concern, 
Life's  moft  important  bufinefs  is,  to  die ; 
This  truth,  each  friend  expiring  bids  us  learn, 
Which,  while  we  mourn,  impels  a  deeper  figh. 

O  may  the  needful  figh  be  unfuppreft, 
Till  kind  refleclion  lead  the  reftlefs  heart 
To  that  bright  world  where  only,  life  is  bleft, 
And  conquer'd  death  refigns  his  fatal  dart ! 

To  life  immortal,  he  reveals  the  way 
Who  dying  triumph'd  over  nature's  foe : 
His  word,  if  we  receive,  believe,  obey, 
Fair  hope  (hall  bloom  amid  the  (hades  of  woe* 


Ye 


C    39    ] 

Ye  flattering  fcenes  of  earthly  blifs,  adieu  ! 
You  fmile,  and  promife,  but  deceive  the  mind  : 
Celeflial  hope  directs  our  upward  view 
Topleafures  real,  lading  and  refin'd. 


To  Amira  om  the  sudden  Death 
of  her  Mother, 

r  I  ^HOUGH  nature,  friendfhip,  filial  love  awake 
•*•       The  fprings  of  grief,  and  though  the  fudden 
(hock 
O'erpower'd  the  mind,  ( too  weak  to  meet  furprize!) 
At  length  my  dear  Amira,  be  our  griefs 
Reftrain'd,  obedient  to  the  voice  divine 
Which  calms  the  winds  and  feas,  that  fovereign  voice 
Which  bids  the  tempeft  of  the  mind — "  Be  frill/' 
Reflection  now  returning,  may  our  fouls 
Adore  fubmiflive  his  difpofing  hand, 
Who  gives  and  takes  our  comforts  as  he  pleafes, 
Still  wife  and  good  in  all.     O  let  our  hearts 
Complain  no  more,  for  through  the  cloud  of  woe 
Kind  mercy  fhines,  her  beams  difperfe  the  gloom, 
As  fun-beams  chafe  the  fragments  of  a  ftorm. 
Look  up,  Amira,  fee  the  father's  hand, 

D  4  Indulgent 


[     4o     J 

InduJgent,  tender,  in  the  flroke  we  mourn  ! 

Say,  could  the  awful  meflenger  appear 

In  a  more  gentle  form  ?  how  fofr  the  touch 

That  loofen'd  Nature's  bands,  diffolv'd  the  tie 

That  held  the  weary  fpirit,  prifon'd  long, 

In  a  frail,  ruin'd  tenement  below, 

And  bade  her  rife  to  liberty  and  jov  ! 

Say  do  we  mourn  the  friend,  the  parent  loft  ?— 

—Ah  no,  retract  the  word,  fhe  is  but  call'd, 

Before  us  call'd  to  her  celcftial  home, 

Thatblifsful  home,  fo  long,  fo  much  defir'd  ; 

And  hope  foft  whifpers  we  (hall  meet  her  there. 

Meet  her — but  how  ?  enfeebled,  bent  with  yeai  ■-. 

Worn  out  with  pains,  her  mental  powers  decay 'd 

And  loft  to  focial  joys  ?   though  hope,  and  truft, 

And  patient  refignation  fhone  ferene, 

The  chriftian's  pattern,  and  the  friend's  fupport : 

Their  work  fulfill'd,  thofe  graces  have  refign'd 

Their  feat  to  perfect  joy  andendlefs  praife. 

How  fliall  we  meet  her  in  the  Weil  abode  ? 

Urania,  come,  thy  faireft  colours  bring, 

Prefent  the  dear  departed  to  our  view 

Such  as  fhe  fhines  amid  the  hlifsful  choir. 

Let  youth  immortal,  dreft  in  heavenly  fmiles, 

And  winning  graces,  o'er  her  form  diffufe 

Its  lively  bloom  ;  while  dignity  and  love 

Sit  on  her  afpeft,  fuch  as  angels  wear ! 

But 


[     4*     J 

Bat  not  thy  nobleft  ftrokes,  thy  fweeteft  force, 

In  equal  colours  e'er  canreprefent 

A  foul  made  perfeft  in  the  realms  of  light, 

And  in  her  faviour's  lovely  image  drefl. 

Nor  can  thy  tints,  though  borrow'd  from  the  fky, 

Defcribe  the  vigorous  life,  the  aftive  joy 

Which  animates  a  citizen  of  heaven. 

Urania,  drop  thy  pencil,  take  the  lyre, 

Not  to  deplore  the  friend,   the  parent  loft  ; 

But  to  congratulate  the  faint  arriv'd, 

From  life's  long,  painful  voyage  fafe  arriv'd, 

And  crown'd,   triumphant,    on  the  blifsful  more, 

With  perfeft  pleafure,  and  eternal  peace. 

O  could  thy  lyre  but  faintly  emulate 

On  earth,  the  ftrains  which  her  rapt  ear  imbibes, 

Her  voice  melodious  joins;  the  notes  would  charm 

The  mournful  memory  of  her  lofs  to  reft, 

And  bid  defire,  and  faith,  and  hope  arife 

To  fhare  her  tranfports  in  that  world  of  joy. 

O  may  that  glorious,  happy  world  emit 

Its  fweet,   though  diftant  radiance  to  our  hearts, 

And  raife,  and  fix  our  hopes  and  wifhes  there  ! 

Has  not  the  dawn  of  that  eternal  day 

Which  God's  unclouded  fmile  diffufes  there, 

Sometimes,  Amira,  beam'd  a  cheering  ray 

On  thefe  darkfeenes?   and  (hall  that  dawn  be  loft 

To  fhine  no  more  ? — impoffible — as  foon 

The  fun  fhall  faint  amid  his  morning  way, 

And 


C  4*   ] 

And  leave  the  world  to  everlafting  night; 

That  grace  omnipotent,  that  ftedfaft  truth 

On  which,  below,  her  heaven-born  hope  reclin'd, 

Who  now  rejoices  in  that  hope  fulfill'd, 

Invites  our  humble  truft,  forbids  our  fear. 

May  the  fame  grace  that  led  her  fafely  through 

The  cares,   the  dangers,  and  the  pains  of  time, 

Preferve,  fupport,  and  guide  us  in  the  way, 

The  living  way  by  which  fhe  reach'd  the  fkies ! 

Then  (hall  we  join  with  her  the  heavenly  choir, 

Partake  the  biifs,  and  tune  the  raptur'd  fong 

To  Jefus,  who  prepares  a  manfion  there 

For  all  who  love  his  name,  and  truft  his  grace : 

To  Jefus,  who  from  death's  envenom'd  dart 

Extra&s  the  poifon,  fatal  now  no  more  : 

That  foe  to  nature  is  become  a  friend; 

He  at  his  Lord's  command,  unfolds  the  gate 

To  life,  and  liberty,  and  endlefs  joy. 


^^^^^^^^^^^^^^•^^^ 


Ode  on  a  rural  Prospect  in  June, 


A  Tie 


1. 

T  length  fhe  deigns,  (indulgent  power!) 
oblefs  the  folitary  hour: 

Divine 


C     43     ] 

Divine  Urania,  pleafing  gueft  ! 
My  paflions  own  thy  foft  controul ; 
Welcome  to  my  grateful  breaft, 
Sooth  my  every  care  to  reft; 
O  pour  thy  kindefl  influence  on  my  foul! 

II. 

Touch  the  fweet,  the  charming  lyref 
Tis  thine  to  harmonize  the  mind! 
Thou  canft  calm  delight  infpire  ; 
Exalted  pleafure,  joy  refin'd  ! 
Thy  lov'd  employ  thy  darling  theme 
My  panting  foul  afpires  to  try; 
To  fing  the  great  the  glofrous  name 
Who  gives  thee  all  thy  pleafing  art 
To  calm  to  animate  the  heart ; 
Creation's  lord,  and  fovereign  of  the  fky  ! 

Ill, 

But  aim  not,  my  ambitious  fong, 
To  rife  with  Milton,  or  with  Young, 

To  whom  Urania  brought  celeftial  fire; 

A  living  ray  from  heaven's  immortal  choir, 

That  darted  through  the  folid  veil  of  night ; 
Infpiring  ray,  that  bade  them  foar 
Where  mortals  never  rofe  before, 

While  nature  wonder'd  at  the  daring  flight. 


IV, 


C     44     ] 

VI. 

Unequal  to  fo  bold  a  choice, 

A  humbler,  fafer  lot  be  mine  ! 

Urania,  tune  my  trembling  voice 
To  fubje&s  left  exalted,  yet  divine  ! 

Thy  fofteft,  gentled  aid  impart, 

Teach,  O  teach  my  longing  heart 
To  trace  the  radiant  footfteps  of  the  God; 

To  the  mind's  enraptur'd  eyes 

Where  his  milder  glories  rife, 
O'er  nature's  ample  frame  dnTus'd  abroad! 

V. 

Nature,   o'er  her  ample  frame 
Shews  her  great  creator's  name 
Infcrib'd  in  characiTis  divine  ! 
Every  pianr,  and  every  flower 
Speak  his  -wifdom,  goodnefs,  power: 

With  fweet  attractive  luftre  how  they  thine ! 
Ye  beauteous  fcenes,  'tis  yours  to  (how 
The  hand  from  whence  your  bleffings  flow: 

To  wonder,  love,  adore,  and  praife  be  mine  ! 

VI. 
While  yonder  wide-extended  fields, 
With  eager  gaze  my  eye  furveys  ; 
The  fcene  a  thoufand  beauties  yields, 
A  thoufand  bleffings  claim  n>y  praife* 

O  J         4 

In 


C    45    ] 

In  nature's  lap,   fee,  plenty  pours, 
With  hand  profufe,   her  richefl  ftores! 
A  lively  green  arrays  the  fcene, 
Impearrd  with  foft*defcending  fhowers: 
Fair  vegetation  fmiles  around, 
By  kindly  rains  and  funfhine  fed ; 
The  fertile  vales,  with  beauty  crown'd, 
Nurfe,  with  indulgent  care,  the  future  bread; 

VII. 

Ye  diffident,  defponding  hearts, 
Who  forward  look  with  anxious  pain. 
See,   how  the  hand  of  providence  imparts 
Its  conftant  kindnefs  to  the  foodful  grain! 
And  {hall  the  power  that  bids  the  teeming  earth 
Produce  the  infant-blade,  that  bids  arife 
To  full  maturity,  the  tender  birth, 
Look  down  on  you  with  lefs  regardful  eyes  ? 

VIII. 
Hark!  how  the  birds  fweet-warbling  from  the  fpray5 
Enjoy  the  bounties  of  the  prefent  day: 

Their  future  food,  the  hedge  or  wood, 
Direfted  by  that  gracious  hand,  provides, 
Which  with  paternal  care  all  nature  guides. 


That 


[    46    ] 

That  gracious  hand,   to  day  adore, 
And  leave  to  heaven,  to-morrow's  care; 
Enjoy  the  prefent,  hope  for  more; 
The  power  who  hears  the  birds,  will  hear  your  pray  en 

IX. 

Ye  trembling  fouls,  with  fear  oppreft, 

On  whofe  enfeebled,  fainting  thought 

Hang  heavy  clouds,  with  forrow  fraught ; 
See,  fmiling  hope  appear,  (celeftial  gueft!) 

She  fpeaks,  her  gentle  voice  attend  ! 

•■  No  more  to  earth,  ye  mourners  bend, 
"  Raife  your  downcaft,  weeping  cyes9 
*'  See  what  cheerful  profpe&s  rife  ! 

"  The  corn  now  ripening  in  the  ear, 

"  Declares  a  plenteous  harveft  near. 
"  Long  has  expectant  toil,  with  patience  ftay'd! 
M  At  length  behold  expectant  toil  repaid  ! 

"  And  fnall  your  weary  fpirit  faint  ? 

"  Your  nobler  expectations  die  ? 

M  Let  patience  foften  your  complaint ! 
«c  Truft  in  his  word  who  rules  the  earth  and  fky : 
u  Thatfure,  that  never-failing  word  declares, 
"  That  thofe  fhall  reap  in  joy,  who  fow  in  tears." 

X. 

Kind  hope,  the  mourner's  faithful  friend, 

Thy  peace-infpiring  lore 
O  let  my  drooping  heart  attend, 

And  while  I  truft  adore  ! 

Adore 


I    47    ] 

Adore,  with  thankful  love,  the  hand  divine, 
That  bids  through  griefs  dark  (hade,  thy  comforts 
fhine! 

That  bids,  amid  this  vale  of  tears, 
Flowers  of  celeftial  fragrance  rife, 
That  guides,  defends,  fuftains,  and  cheers, 
And  points  to  fairer  fcenes  beyond  the  Ikies ! 

XL 

Lord  of  my  life !  to  thee  I  owe 
A  thoufand  gifts  enjoy'd  below, 

Of  providence  and  grace  : 
While  nature  in  her  various  forms, 
My  heart  enlivens*  raifes,  warms  ; 
Thy  hand,  O  bid  my  heart  with  rapture  trace! 
from  thy  kind  hand,  my  ever-gracious  Lord, 
Unnumber'd  bleffings  daily,  hourly  flow  ; 
To  crown  them  all,  does  not  thy  facred  word 
Bid  hope  celeftial  in  my  bofom  glow  ? 
What  more  have  I  to  wifli  ?  that  hope  divine, 
And  faith  (kind  feraph  I)  may  be  ever  nigh ! 
Beneath  their  influence  may  my  heart  refine, 
Till  the  fair  dawn  of  heavenly  day 
Diffufe  its  foul-attra&ing  ray, 
Difperfe  the  Ihades,  and  fix  my  longing  eye, 
On  fcenes  of  perfect  blifs  beyond  the  Iky. 


Ths 


E  48  3 

rIO!0!C44C'lOMC40lOt' 
The  Complaint  of  the  Mind. 

c 

WHY  is  the  heaven-defcended  mind 
(For  nobler  purpofes  defign'dj 
So  clofe  attach'd  to  frail  unthinking  clay  ? 
Fain  would  fhe  tafle  the  joys  of  light 
And  meditate  her  upward  flight; 
But  her  weak  partner  cannot  bear  the  day. 

If  now  and  then  a  ray  divine 
With  fweet  attractive  luftre  fliine, 

And  upward  tempt  her  half  expanded  wings  : 
The  pains  or  appetites  of  fenfe 
Retard  her  flight  with  fair  pretence, 

And  Chain  her  joylefs  down  to  trifling  things; 

How  blefl  the  unbodied  minds  above, 
Who  ftill  defire,  delight,  and  love, 

And  nought  impedes  the  work,  or  clouds  the  joy  I 
No  liftlefs  inattention  there, 
Nor  tempting  toy,  nor  gloomy  care ; 

Celeftial  pleafure  fmiies  without  alloy ! 

O  happy 


C    49    3 

O  happy  period  !  blifsful  day  ! 

(..Hope,  cheerful  hails  its  diflantray, 
Though  riling  tears  {land  trembling  in  her  eyes. 

When  this  grofs  heavy  clay  refin'd, 

A  fit  companion  for  the  mind, 
To  active,  joyful,  endlefs  life  (hall  rife  ! 

Jefus,  to  thee  alone  I  owe 

Each  cheering  glimpfe  of  heaven  below, 
And  thou  canft  bid  the  longing  mind  afcend  : 

Though  dull  mortality  impede, 

wShe  fpurns  the  weight  if  thou  but  lead ; 
On  thee  alone  her  flrength  and  hope  depend. 

O  fpeak  the  word !  her  joyful  wings 
Shall  leave  this  fcene  of  little  things 

For  the  fair  regions  of  immenfe  delight ! 
One  kind  alluring  word  of  thine 
Confirms  the  bright  reverfion  mine, 

And  faith  (hall  bid  adieu  to  earth  and  night. 


Vol.  Ill  E  To 


C   50   ] 

To     Silvia. 

T  T  7HILE  mufing  in  the  folitary  hour, 

*  *  My  Silvia  rifes  fair  to  fancy's  eye  : 
Soft,  foothing  melancholy,  penfive  power  ! 
Awakes  for  her  the  anxious  tender  figh. 

Ah  !  how  when  entering  on  a  world  of  fnares, 
Shall  innocence  preferve  the  artlefs  maid  ? 
Ah!  who  mall  guide,  through  life's  bewildering  caresf 
Her  fleps  in  fafety  to  fome  hallow'd  (hade  ? 

Paternal  love  with  ever-watchful  eye 

Shall  guard  from  cares,  if  near  her  cares  fhould  prefs; 

Shall  kindly  warn  of  every  danger  nigh, 

And  point  the  path  of  fafety  and  of  peace, 

Priendfhip,  for  Silvia,  {hall  collecl:  her  powers, 
And  o'er  the  fcene  diffufe  a  lucid  ray, 
Around  her  path  fhall  ftrew  the  fweeteft  flowers, 
And  bid  themufe  attune  her  fofteft  lay. 

Delufive 


C   5*    1 

Delufive  hope!  what  dangers  rife  unfeeti! 
What  unfufpe&ed  forrows  wait  around ! 
And  can  a  friend  or  parent  flep  between, 
When  the  wing'd  arrow  may  fo  quickly  wound  ? 

Alas !  not  friendfhip's  tendered,   kindeft   art 
Can  gild  affli&ion's  heart-opprefling  gloom  : 
Nor  can  paternal  love  repel  the  dart* 
If  death  (land  threatening  o'er  the  gaping  tomb. 

O  for  a  friend  whofe  life-infpiring  frr;!e 

Can  brighten  dark  affliction's  darkeft  hours; 

Eafe  every  pain,  and  foftcn  every  toil, 

And  fpread  new  life  through  nature's  fainting  powers  ? 

O  for  a  friend  whofe  alUfuiiaining  arm 
Can  make  the  heart  ferenely  view  the  tomb  : 
Can  death  of  all  his  dread  array  difarm, 
And  place  a  fmiling  angel  in  his  room  ! 

And  fee,  my  Silvia,  fee  that  friend  appears! 
And  hark!  he  calls  \  ou  to  his  guardian  arms  ! 
Jefus,  that  friend  indeed  !   for  ever  near, 
When  grief  approaches,  or  when  death  alarms. 

O  hear  his  voice  !  for  heaven  attends  the  found  I 
To  him  alone  devote  your  blooming  days: 
So  {hall  your  life  with  happinefs  be  crown'd, 
rSo  mail  you  join  with  angels  in  his  praife. 

E?  To 


[    5*     3 

To  Silvia  pensive. 


TELL  me,  Silvia,  why  the  figh 
Heaves  your  bofom,  why  the  tear 
Steals  unbidden  from  your  eye  ? 
Tell  me  what  you  wifh  or  fear  ? 

Providence  profufely  kind, 
Wherefoe'er  you  turn  your  eyes, 
Bids  you  with  a  grateful  mind 
View  a  thoufand  bleffings  rife. 

Round  you  affluence  fpreads  her  flores, 
Young  health  fparkles  in  your  eye, 
Tendereft,  kindeft  friends  are  yours, 
Tell  me,  Silvia,  why  you  figh  ? 

JTis,  perhaps,   fome  friendly  voice 
Softly  whifpers  to  your  mind, 
6t  Make  not  thefe  alone  your  choice 
"  Heaven  has  bleffings  more  refin'd. 

Thankful 


[    53    ] 

•'  Thankful  own  what  you  enjoy, 
M  But  a  changing  world  like  this, 
11  Where  a  thoufand  fears  annoy, 
"  Cannot  give  you  perfect  blifs. 

u  Per  feci  blifs  refides  above, 
"  Far  above  yon  azure  fky; 
11  Blifs  that  merits  all  your  love, 
4<  Merits  every  anxious  figh." 

What,  like  this,  has  earth  to  give  ? 
O  my  Silvia,    in  your  breaft 
Let  the  admonition  live, 
Nor  on  earth  defire  to  reft. 

When  yourbofom  breathes  a  figh, 
Or  your  eye  emits  a  tear, 
Let  your  wifhes  rife  on  high, 
Ardent  rife  to  blifs  fincere. 


E  3  Written 


C    54    3 

Written  in  a  painful  Illness. 

INDULGENT  father,  ever  gracious  God, 
Low  at  thy  feet  fubmiffive  I  adore 
Thy  chaftening  hand,  nor  murmur  at  the  rod  : 
Yet  thy  fupporting  arm,  I  mull  implore. 

Thou  holy,  wife,  and  kind,  O  bid  my  heart 
In  patient  filence  wait  thy  fovereign  will ! 
Sweet  confolation  let  thy  voice  impart, 
And  fay  to  every  anxious  thought  "  be  Hill." 

Say  to  my  heart,  that  oftenhath  prefer'd 
To  thy  kind  ear,  the  fupplicating  figh  ; 
*£  Be  comforted,  be  flrong,  thy  fuit  is  heard ; 
"  Behold  my  all-fufficient  grace  is  nigh  !" 

Oft  have  I  wifli'd  to  have  my  heart  refin'd 
By  cleanfing  grace  ;  defir'd,  and  long'd  to  Wear 
The  bright  refemblance  of  my  Saviour's  mind, 
His  gentle,  humble  virtues  copied  there. 


O 


may 


L    55    3 

O  may  the  rod  the  happy  end  promote 

To  humble,  cleanfe,  renew  this  heart  of  mine  ! 

And  may  thy  grace  affilt  me  to  devote 

Its  powers  to  thee  alone  for  they  are  thine  ! 

If  the  fhort  remnant  of  my  fleeting  time 
Be  near  it's  period ;  teach,  O  teach  my  foul 
On  faith's  fair  wing,  to  reach  that  blifsful  clime 
Where  time;i>  quick-circling  wheels  no  more  (hall 

roll! 

Opprefs'd  with  pain  my  feeble  powers  decay, 
The  fprings  of  life  wear  out,  the  vital  flame 
Seems  quivering  near  its  exit.     Is  the  day 
At  hand  which  fhall  diflblve  this  mortal  frame? 

If  this  frail  tottering  manfion  foon  fhould  fall, 
Art  thou,  my  foul,  prepar'd  to  take  thy  flight  ? 
Prepar'd,  at  thy  almighty  Father's  call, 
To  quit,  with  joy,  the  fcenes  of  mortal  night  ? 

Or  canft  thou  patient  fee  death's  threatening  dart, 
And  o'er  the  expe&ing  gr*ave  long-lingering  bend, 
To  drop  thy  dying  part..  3th  to  part, 

Wliile  yet  thy  hopes  and  wifhes  upward  tend  ? 

What  mean  thefe  queflions  ? — all  depends  on  thee 
My  Saviour  God :  fpeak  to  my  trembling  heart : 
E  4  Say 


L   56   ] 

Say  %t  thou  art  mine,"  that  word  is  life  to  me, 
And  I  can  fmile  at  death's  tremendous  dart ! 

Whether  he  threaten  long,  or  fudden  rend 
This  mortal  frame,  and  fet  my  fpirit  free  ; 
That  moment  let  thy  angel  guards  attend, 
And  bear  me  fafe  to  life,  to  heaven  and  thee. 


•K>^C5*C^*C5404?C5rK^4<D* 


Defiring  a  thankful  Devotion  to  God. 

MY  great  preferver,  to  thy  gracious  hand 
My  life,  my  fafety,  and  my  all  I  owe; 
New  gratitude  thy  favours  ftill  demand, 
Andftill  my  numerous  obligations  growt 

Oft  haft  thou  liften'd  to  my  humble  prayer, 
Oft,  at  my  cry,  unwearied  mercy  came  : 
O  be  thy  goodnefs,  thy  indulgent  care, 
My  conftant  refuge,  my  delightful  theme  ! 

When  warm'd  with  grateful  love  to  thee  my  Lord 
My  thoughts  begin  to  count  thy  favours  o'er, 
Theboundlefs  fum,  what  numbers  can  record? 
HoW  vain  the  attempt !  aiionifh'd  I  adore  ! 

Yet 


C    57     ] 

Yet  I  may  love  thee,  this  is  thy  command, 
Thy  kind  command,  O  make  me  all  thy  own! 
My  powers,  my  paflions,  Lord,  are  in  thy  hand, 
And  thou  canll  mould  them  for  thy  ufe  alone. 

This  worthiefs  heart,  to  thee  I  would  refign, 
Poor  as  it  is,  thy  fqvereign  hand  can  raife 
A  monument  to  thee,  enrich,  refine, 
And  there  infcribe  thy  mercies  and  thy  p raife. 

Thy  wonderous  praife,  not  all  creation's  tongues 
In  one  harmonious  concert,  can  difplay  ; 
Not  the  celeftial  choir's  enraptur'd  fongs, 
Through  vaft  eternity's  unbounded  dav. 

And  (hall  a  reptile  of  the  duft,  afpirc 
To  join  with  angels  in  their  high  employ  ? 
Lord,  at  thy  feet,  I  lay  my  trembling  lyre 
In  filent  awe,  yet  mix'd  with  humbje  joy. 

Yet,  if  thou  bid  me  try  the  heavenly  theme, 
Andblefs  me  with  thy  fmile,  my  lyre  again 
On  every  firing  mall  found  thy  glorious  name, 
Thy  fmile  (hail  animate  the  feeble  drain  ! 

If  thou  accept,  and  aid  my  wifh  to  praife, 
Then  (hall  my  heart  with  glad  devotion  bring 
(3ut  ah,  how  mean  thy  gift!)  her  fweeteft  lays 
To  thee,  my  gracious  God>  my  glorious  King. 

Ail 


C    58    ] 

All  I  enjoy,  and  all  I  hope  is  thine, 
Unworthinefs,   alone,  helongs  to  me  ; 
Infpire  me,  O  my  God,  with  love  divine, 
And  make  my  life,  a  hymn  of  praife  to  thee. 


^C^C4CMOl?C#tOiO|C4' 


The  Happinefs  of  the  Children  of  God. 

And  will  be  a  Father  unto  youy  and  ye  JJiall  be  my 
Jons   and   daughters  faith    the    Lord   Almighty. 
2   Cor.  vi.    18. 

EXTENSIVE  promife  !  O  what  hopes  divine, 
What  rich  delight,  the  gracious  words  im- 
part. ! 
My  father!  when  my  faith  can  call  thee  mine, 
A  ray  of  heaven  illuminates  my  heart. 

Lord,  if  thy  word  confirm  my  heavenly  birth, 
And  bid  me  fay  "  my  Father,"  then  I  live  ; 
Not  all  the  tendereft,  deareit  names  on  earth, 
Can  half  the  pleafiue,  half  the  tranfportgive. 

The 


C     59    ] 

The  Lord  Almighty  deigns  (amazing  thought!) 
To  call  us  children,  (once  the  heirs  of  woe  J 
Sweet  words  of  confolation,  richly  fraught 
With  all  the  blefTmgs  mercy  can  befiow. 

His  eye,  attentive  marks  his  childrens  way, 
He  guides  them  fafe  though  dangers  lurk  unfeen  : 
Though  furrow's  gloomy  clouds  oYrfhadc  the  day, 
Secure,  g;i  his  Almighty  arm  they  lean. 

«/    His  ear,  indulgent  to  their  feeble  prayer, 

Receives  each  rifing  wifh,  each  plaintive  figh  ; 

Hir,  kind,  companionate,  paternal  care 

Knows  all  their  wants,  and  will  thofe  wants  fupply. 

When  foes  unnumbei  'd  rife,  and  fear  alarms, 
His  conflant  love  immediate  fuccour  lends, 
Encircled  in  their  father's  guardian  arms, 
Foes  rife  in  vain,  omnipotence  defends. 

/    All  needful,  prefent  good,  his  hand  provides, 
But  what  their  future  portion  ?  Angels  tell, 
(For  mortal  language  fails,)  where  he  refides, 
What  bloomingjoys,  what  boundlefs  raptures  dwelt. 

But  not  the  natives  of  that  glorious  place, 
Not  all  the  blifs  refoundin^  fon^s  above, 
Can  e'er  difplay  the  riches  of  his  grace  ; 
Or  count  the  endiets  wonders  of  his  love. 

O  could 


[     6o     ] 

O  could  thofe  diftant  feats  of  joy  impart 
A  moment  of  their  blifs!   how  would  it  raife, 
How  would  it  animate  this  languid  heart, 
In  thefe  dark  regions,  to  begin  his  praife  ! 

Yet  from  his  word,  a  bright  enlivening  ray- 
Shines  on  my  heart,  while  all  my  powers  adore  ; 
Jefus,  whofe  wonderous  love  mark'd  out  the  way, 
Jefus,  the  heavenly  friend,  is  gone  before. 

Fair  manfions  in  his  father's  bleft  abode 

That  heavenly  friend  prepares,  and  joys  unknown 

By  him  prefented  to  their  Father  God, 

His  children  bow  before  the  eternal  throne. 

In  his  prevailing,  his  accepted  name, 
Father,  my  foul  adores  beneath  thy  feet ; 
Let  his  full  merits  plead  my  humble  claim, 
And  raife  my  hope  to  joy  divinely  fweet. 


A  reflection 


C   61   3 

A  reflection  on  hearing  the  Bell  at  the 
interment  of  a  neighbour. 

THAT  found  e'er  long  (hall  mark  the  folemn 
hour 
When  this  weak  frame,  inanimate  and  cold, 
By  fellow  mortals  borne,  (hall  be  confign'd 
To  its  dark  manfion  in  the  fiient  grave. 
Perhaps,  the  figh  of  tender  grief  (hall  heave, 
The  tear  of  friendfhip  flow  :  in  fable  clad, 
Perhaps  furviving  relatives  will  move 
In  flow  proceflion  to  the  houfe  of  death  ; 
While  fad  tefleflion  fpeaks  - "  Behold  your  home!5* 
But  what  avails  or  friendfhip's  tendered  tear, 
Or  forrow's  deepen1  groan,  or  fable  robes, 
Or  all  the  fad  folemnity  of  woe 
Which  grief,  or  cuflom  wafte  on  fenfelefs  clay  ? 
Where  will  my  fpirit  be  ? — O  ye  kind  few  ! 
Whofe  faithful  hearts  (hall  mourn  the  friend  you 

lov'd, 
Whofe  thoughts,  while  nature  prompts  the  tender 

Shall 


C   62   ] 

Shall  rife,  perhaps,  beyond  the  gloomy  fcene, 

By  cheerful  hope  invited,   and  purfue 

That  part  which  cannot  die — affift  me  now  ! 

Now  while  your  love  may  profit,  teach  my  heart 

All  that  your  brighter  hope  or  flronger  faith 

Hath  feen  or  tailed  of  the  joys  to  come  ! 

The  inevitable  hour  demands  it  all. 

Lead  me !  O  lead  me  to  that  fovereign  balm 

Tor  death's  keen  pang,  that  only  antidote 

Againftthe  mortal  poifon,  blood  divine  ! 

Lead  me — ah  no — that  dear,  almighty  friend, 

Whofe  bleeding  veins  pour'd  health  and  life  and  blife 

For  wretches  guilty,  perifliing,  undone, 

Alone  can  lead,  fupport,  and  cheer  my  foul ! 

Jefus,  my  Lord,  on  thee  my  all  depends, 

My  everlafting  all!  O  let  me  feel, 

In  that  dread  hour  when  earthly  comforts  fail, 

Thy  love,  fweet  cordial  to  my  fainting  heart ! 

Infufing  flrength  divine;  its  vital  force 

Shall  bid  me  rife  fuperior  in  the  conflict 

With  nature's  foe,  and  tune  my  quivering  lips 

To  holy  rapture!  let  thy  glorious  name, 

My  Lord,  my  Saviour,  dwell  upon  my  tongue ! 

While  guardian  angels  join  the  blifsful  theme, 

Till  my  glad  fpirit  quits  her  houfe  of  clay, 

And  rifes,  with  the  melTengers  of  heaven, 

To  join  the  bleft  affembly  which  thy  love 

Hath 


[     63     ] 

Hath  ranfom'd,  cleans'd,  and  rais'd  beyond  the  reach 
Of  fm  andd^ath,  intranfports  all  unknown 
To  frail  mortality  !  to  join  the  fong 
For  ever  new,  to  thy  almighty  love. 


^>^^.>^^>^^>^^>^^^><;^>^^>^^ 


Defiring  the  gracious  prefence  of  God. 

ALAS  !  my  heart  where  is  thy  abfent  God, 
Arife  and  fearch,  norlanguifh  hopelefs  here, 
See  o'er  creation's  frame  diffus'd  abroad, 
Kis  power,  his  wifdom  and  his  love  appear ! 

But  chiefly  of  his  facred  word  enquire, 
There  faith  and  hope  diviner  glories  trace, 
Seek  with  the  ardor  of  fincere  defire, 
For  nature's  father  is  the  God  of  grace. 

His  facred  word  invites  me  to  his  feet, 
Reveals  forgivenefs  rich  and  full  and  heef 
The  voice  of  mercy,    how  divinely  fweet! 
O  be  the  heavenly  accents  fpoke  to  me  ! 

God 


I  64  ] 

God  of  my  life,  thy  radiant  face  reveal ! 

For  thou  art  near  though  clouds  obftruft  my  fight 

Thy  voice  divine  can  every  cloud  difpe!, 

O  fpeak  and  give  me  comfort,  give  me  light  ! 

Thy  word  permits,  commands  to  feek  thy  face, 
Nor  {hall  the  humble  mourner  feek  in  vain  : 
Thou  wilt  reward  the  fearch,  thy  word  of  grace 
Inviolate  for  ever  muft  remain. 

Thy  word  of  grace — rich  treafure  of  delight ! 
(Olet  my  foul  recall  her  comforts  paft) 
Not  morn's  fair  dawn  is  dearer  to  the  fight! 
Nor  honey  fweeter  to  the  longing  talte. 

And  fhall  thofe  heavenly  fweets  no  more  be  mine? 
Return  ye,  blifsful  moments  to  my  heart  ! 
Difpel  the  cloud,  O  God  of  mercy,  fhine, 
And  life  and  peace  and  happinefs  impart ! 


The 


C   65   3 

The  prefence  of  God,  the  only  comfort 
in  affli&ion. 

IN  vain,  while  dark  affli&ion  fpreads 
Her  melancholy  gloom, 
Kind  providence  its  bleffings  fheds 
And  nature's  beauties  bloom. 

For  all  that  charms  the  tafte  or  fight 

My  heart  no  wifti  refpires  ; 
O  for  a  beam  of  heavenly  light 

When  earthly  hope  expires 

Thou  only  center  of  my  reft, 

Look  down  with  pitying  eye, 
While  with  protrafted  pain  oppreft 
I  breathe  the  plaintive  figh 

Thy  gracious  prefence,  O  my  God, 

My  every  wifh  contains, 
With  this,  beneath  affliftion's  load 

My  heart  no  more  complains. 

F  This 


C     66    ] 

This  can  my  every  care  controul, 

Gild  each  dark  fcene  with  light; 

This  is  the  funfhine  of  the  foul, 
Without  it    all  is  night. 

My-  Lord,  my  life,  O  cheer  my  heart 
With  thy   reviving  ray, 

And  bid  thefe  mournful  fhades  depart 
And  bring  the  dawn  of  day  ! 

O  happy  fcenes  of  pure  delight ! 

Where  thv  full  beams  impart 
Unclouded  beauty  to  the  light, 

And  rapture  to  the  heart. 

Her  part  in  thole  fair  realms  of  blifs 

fpirit  longs' to  know: 
My  wiflies  terminate  in  this, 
Nor  caa   they  reft  below. 

II  the  breathings  of  ray  heart 
Afpire  in  vain   to  thee? 
Confi  m  my  hope,  that  where  thou  art 
I  (hall  for  ever  be. 

Then  (hall  my  cheerful  fpirit  Gng 
The  darkfome  hours  away, 

And  rife  on  Faith's  expanded  wing 
To  everlafting  day. 


Faith 


C   67   ] 


Faith  and  Hope  in  divine  goodnefs, 
encouraged  by  paft  experience. 

Pfalm  xxiii;  6. 

LORD  while  my  thoughts  with  wonder  trace 
Thy  favours  paft  through  all  my  days; 
My  thankful  heart  adores  thy  grace, 
I  trufl  that  goodnefs  which  I  praife. 

Still  from  the  fame  eternal  fpring 
Thy  various,  conftant  bounties  flow  ; 
Beneath  the  fhelter  of  thy  wing 
I  view  ferene  the  fhades   of  woe. 

Ev'n  death's  tremendous  vale  appears 
No  more   in  gloomy  terrors  dreft ; 
Thy   fmile,  my   God,  forbids  my  fears 
While  on    thy  gracious  hand  I   reft. 

Through  the  dark  fcenes  of  mortal  care/ 
To  humble  faith's  enraptur'd   eye 
The   diftant    profpeft  opens   fair, 
Of  radiant  manfions  in  the  fky. 

F  2  Yes, 


C    68    ] 

Yes,  Lord,  in  thy   divine    abode 
My  foul  defires,  and  hopes  a  place, 
To   dwell  for  ever   near    my    God, 
And  view  unveil'd  thy  lovely  face. 

With   all  my  powers  renew'd,  refin'd, 
To  join   the   blifsful  choir  above; 
In   flrains  immortal,  unconfin'd 
To   celebrate  my  Saviour's  love. 


A  Thought  of  Life    and  Death. 


t 


H  E  cares  of  mortal  life,  how  vain  ! 
How  empty  every  joy! 


While  grief,  and  wearinefs,  and  pain 
The   fainting  mind  employ. 

But  O,  that  nobler  life  on  high, 
To  which  my  hopes  afpire ! 

Does  it  not  prompt  the  frequent  figh, 
And  wake  the  warm  dc&re  ? 


When 


.3 


C  %  ] 

When  now  and  then  a  heavenly  ray 
Attratls  ray  upward  view, 

Almoft  I  hail  the  approach  of  day, 
And  bid  the  world  adieu, 

Thofe  happy  realms  of  joy  and  peace 
Fain  would  my  heart  explore, 

Where  grief  and  pain  for  ever  ceafe, 
And  I  fhall  Cn  no  more. 

No  darknefs  there  (hall  cloud  the  eyes, 
No  languor  feize  the  frame; 

But  ever   aftive  vigor   rife 
To  feed   the  vital  flame. 

But  ah  !— a  dreary  vale  between 
Extends  its  awful  gloom  ; 

Fear  fpreads,  to  hide  the  diflant  fcene, 
The  horrors  of  the  tomb. 

The  thoughts  of  death's  envenom'd  dart, 
The  parting  pangs  I  fear, 

Alarm  this  timorous,  fainting  heart, 
And  ftill  it  lingers  here. 


O  for  the  eye  of  faith  divine, 


To  pierce  beyond  the  grave! 

To  fee  that  friend,  and  call  him  mine, 

Whofe  arm  is  ftrong  to  lave! 

F  3  That 


C   70   J 

That  friend  who  left  his  throne  above, 
Who  met  the  tyrant's  dart, 

And  (O,  amazing  power  of  love  !) 
Receiv'd  it  in  his  heart. 

Here  fix  my  foul,  for  life  is  here, 
Light  breaks  amid  the  gloom; 

Truft  in  the  Saviour's  love,  nor  fear 
The  horrors  of  the  tomb. 

I    Jefus,  in  thee  alone  I  truft, 
O  tell  me  I  am  thine! 
I  yield  this  mortal  frame  to  dull, 
Eternal  life  is  mine. 


oC^oC^oC^oC^o^^oC^o^^ioC^io^^q 


Defiring  a  firmer  affiance  in  God 
under  afflictions. 

TX  THY  is  my  heart  with  grief  oppreft  ? 

*   *      Can  all  the  pains  I  feel  or  fear, 
Make  thee,  my  foul,  forget  thy  reft, 
Fgrget  that  God,  thy  God  is  near  ? 

Haft 


C     7*     J 

Haft  thcu  not  often  calPd  the  Lord 
T.hy  refuge,  thy  almighty  friend  ? 
And  canft  thou  fear  to  truft  that  word 
On  which  thy  hopes  of  heaven  depend  ? 

Mortality's  unnumber'd   ills 

Are  all  beneath  his  fovereign  hand  ; 

Each  pain  which  this  frail  body  feejs 

Attends,  obedient,  his  command. 

• 

Lord,   form  my  temper  to  thy  will ! 
If  thou  my  faith  and  patience  prove, 
May  every  painful  flroke  fulfill 
Thy  purpofes  of  faithful  love. 

O  may  this  weak,  this  fainting  mind, 
A  father's  hand  adoring  fee; 
Confefs  thee  juii,  and  wife,  and  kind, 
And  truft  trfy  word  and  cleave  to  thee. 


F  4  Trulting 


C  7*   ] 

Trufting  in  his  mercy  with  humble 
fubmiffion  and  hope. 

INDULGENT  ftill  to  my  requeft, 
How  free  thy  tender  mercies  are  ! 
With  full  confent  my  thoughts  atteft, 
My  gracious  God,  thy  faithful  care. 

The  hand  that  holds  the  rod  I  fee  ; 
That  gentle  hand  I  mud  adore  ; 
That  goodnefs,  how  divinely  free, 
Which  my  expectant  hopes  implore  I 

Thy  hand  fuftains  me  left  I  faint, 
Or  at  the  needful  ftroke  repine  ; 
Thy  ear  attends  to  my  complaint ; 
The  tendered  pity,  Lord,  is  thine. 

And  can  my  heart  defire  in  vain, 
When  he  who  chaflens  bids  me  fue, 
That  every  forrow,  every  pain 
Be  bleft  to  teach,  reclaim,  renew  ? 

Oyet 


C    73     ] 

O  yet  fupport  thy  feeble  child, 
Till  thy  correcting  hand  remove! 
Be  all  thy  purpofes  fulfill'd, 
And  bid  me  fing  thy  fparing  love. 


4C^CC4C#C^C*Oi^ 


Intreating   the   prefence  of  God  in 
affii&ion. 

LOW  at  thy  gracious  feet  I  bend, 
My  God,  my  everlafting  friend, 
Permit  the  claim,  O  let  thy  ear 
My  humble  fuit  indulgent  hear ! 

No  earthly  good  my  wifh  infpires; 
Great  is  the  boon  my  foul  defircs, 
But  thou  haft  bid  me  feek  thy  face, 
Haft  bid  me  afk  thy  promis'd  grace. 

O  may  thy  favour  (blifs  divine  !) 
With  fuller,  clearer  radiance  {hine  ! 
Brighten  my  hopes,  difpel  my  fears, 
Till  not  a  cloud  of  grief  appears ! 

But 


C     74    ] 

But  O  my  heart,  reflect  with  fhame, 
Canft  thou  prefer  fo  bold  a  claim  ? 
Confcious  how  often  thou  haft  ftray'd, 
By  empty  vanities  betray'd. 

How  oft,  ungrateful  to  thy  God, 
Have  trifles  call'd  thy  thoughts  abroad ; 
Till  heavenly  pity  faw  thee  roam, 
And  bade  affliction  bring  thee  heme. 

And  when  the  fnares  of  earth  were  broke 
By  kind  affliction's  needful  ftroke, 
Haft  thou  not  own'd,  with  humble  pratfe, 
That  juft  and  right  are  all  his  ways? 

Yes,  gracious  God,  before  thy  throne 
My  vilenefs,  and  thy  love  I  own  ; 
O  let  that  love  with  beams  divine, 
Forgiving,  healing,  round  me  fhine  ! 

Whene'er,  ungrateful  to  my  God, 
This  heedlefs  heart  requires  the  rod, 
Thy  arm,  fupporting,  I  implore, 
The  hand  that  chaftens  can  reftore. 

O  may  the  kind  correction  prove 
A  fruit  of  thy  paternal  love  ! 
Wean  me  from  earth,  from  fin  refine, 
And  make  my  heart  entirely  thine  I 

Then 


y 


[    75    ] 

Then  fhall  my  thankful  powers  rejoice, 
And  wake  to  praife  this  feeble  voice  : 
While  mercy,  power,  and  truth  employ 
My  love,  my  wonder,  and  my  joy. 


*K^*0$<>ft»04< 


Acknowledging  his  goodnefs  in  fup- 
porting  and  reftoring. 

NOW  to  thy  heavenly  Father's  praife, 
My  heart  thy  tribute  bring: 
That  goodnefs  which  prolongs  my  days 
With  grateful  pleafure  ling. 

Ye  bumble  fouls,  who  love  the  Lord, 
Come  join  the  pleafing  theme  ; 

His  mercy,  power,  and  truth  record 
And  blefs  his  glorious  name. 

Whene'er  he  fends  afflicting  pains, 

His  mercy  holds  the  rod  ; 
His  powerful  word  the  heart  fuftains, 

And  fpeaks  a  faithful  God. 

A  faithful 


C  76  3 

A  faithful  God  is  ever  nigh 

When  humble  grief  implores ; 

His  ear  attends  each  plaintive  figh, 
He  pities  and  reftores. 

No  more  let  diffidence  prevail 

Our  comforts  to  deftroy  : 
His  tender  mercies  never  fail, 

Be  thefe  our  fweet  employ. 

Ah  !  how  unequal  to  the  theme 

Our  feeble  efforts  prove ! 
Ye  heavens  refound  his  glorious  name, 

While  we  adore  and  love. 

Yet  fain  my  grateful  foul  would  bring 

Her  tribute  to  thy  throne; 
Accept  the  wifh,  my  God,  my  King, 

To  make  thy  goodnefs  known ! 

O  be  the  life  thy  hand  reSores 

Devoted  to  thy  praife ! 
To  thee,  be  facred  all  my  powers, 

To  thee,  my  future  days  ! 

Thy  foul-enlivening  grace  impart, 

A  warmer  love  infpire ; 
And  teach  the  breathings  of  my  heart 

Dependance  and  defire, 

Defiring 


C    77    ] 

DeGring  to  praife  God  for  the  expe- 
rience of  his  goodnefs. 

Psalm  xxxvi.  7. 

rTPHE  loving  kindnefs  of  the  Lord, 
A     (Delightful  theme!)  demands  my  lays: 
Thou,  worthy  to  be  lov'd,  ador'd, 

0  teach  my  heart  to  fing  thy  praife  ! 

In  vain  my  heart  with  pleafure  tries, 
My  God,  to  count  thy  mercies  o'er  ; 
So  numerous  and  fo  bright  they  rife, 

1  gaze,  I  wonder,  I  adore! 

Yet,  all  the  powers  I  have  are  thine, 
For  thee,  thofe  powers  I  would  employ; 
And  dedicate  to  love  divine, 
With  humble  gratitude  and  joy. 

The  fweet  experience  of  thy  grace 
Which  animates  my  voice  to  fing ; 
Incites  my  foul  to  feek  thy  face, 
And  trull  the  fheher  of  thy  wing. 

Thy 


C     /3     ] 

Thy  guai dian  wing  alone  can  blefs : 
I  find  repofe  and  fafety  there ; 
The  kindeft  refuge  of  diftrefs 
A  fure  relief  in  every  care. 

O  let  the  wretched  fons  of  woe 
To  thee  apply,  on  thee  depend  : 
And  bid  the   drooping  mourners  know 
In  thee  a  never-failing  friend. 

Could  e'er  one  foul  in  deep  diftrefs 
That  fled  to  thee  for  refuge   fay, 
■*  Indulgent  mercy  would  not  blefs, 
"  And  jufrice  frown'd  my  hopes  away?" 

Ah  no,  a  thoufand,  thoufand  tongues 
Thy  love  and  truth,  adoring  own, 
And  offer  their  united  fongs 
With  grateful  joy  before  thy  throne. 

Not  e'en  thofe  happy  minds  can  trace, 
With  all  their  powers  renew'd,  refin'd, 
The  boundlefs  glories  of  thy  grace, 
O  thou  omnipotently  kind  ! 


Ah 


C    79    3 

All  how  (hall  thefe  poor  languid  powers, 
With  frail  mortality  opprefr, 
Difplay  the  grace  my  foul  adorcsj? 
How  fpeak  the  tranfports  of  the  blcft  ? 

Dear  Lord,  accept  my  heart's  defire, 

th  fhall  clofe  thefe  mortal  days ! 
id  me  join  the  heavenly  choir, 

And  fing  thy  everlafting  praife! 


i^Oi<^4-C>^C>KZ>^C>^0^0^ 


Penitence  and  Hope. 


DEAR  Saviour,  when  my  thoughts  recall 
The  wonders  of  thy  grace  ; 
Low  at  thy  feet  afham'd  I  fall, 

And  hide  this  wretched  face. 

Shall  love  like  thine  be  thus  repaid  ? 

Ah  vile,  ungrateful  heart ! 
By  earth's  low  cares  detain'd,  betray 'd, 

From  Jefus  to  depart. 

From 


[     8o     ] 

From  Jefus,  who  alone  can  give 

True  pleafure,  peace,  and  reft: 

When  abfent  from  my  Lord,  I  liv6 
Unfatisfy'd,  unblefr. 

But  he,  for  his  own  mercy's  fake, 
My  wandering  foul  reilores  : 

He  bids  the  mourning  heart  partake 
The  pardon  it  implores. 

O,  while  I  breathe  to  thee,  my  Lord, 

The  penitential   figh, 
Confirm  the  kind,  forgiving  word 

With  pity  in  thine  eye ! 

Then  {hall  the  mourner  at  thy  feet, 

Rejoice  to  feek  thy  face ; 
And  grateful  own  how  kind  !  how  fweet ! 

Thy  condefcending  grace. 


Devoting 


C     3i     ] 

Devoting  the   heart  to  Jesus. 

JESUS,  what  (hall  I  do  to  mow 
How  mu<:h  I  love  thy  glorious  name  ? 
Let  my  whole  heart  with  rapture  glow 
Thy  boundlefs  goodnefs  to  proclaim. 

Yes,  deareft  Lord,  my  heart  is  thine, 
Sacred  to  thee  be  all  its  powers! 
O  bid  me  give  to  love   divine 
The  little  remnant  of  my  hours ! 

Thou  narrow  heart,  ye  fleeting  hours, 
How  mean  the  tribute  you  can  raife  ! 
The  grace  my  thankful  foul  adores, 
Claims  an  eternity  of  praife  ! 

Lord,  if  a  diftant  glimpfe  of  thee 
Can  give  fuch  fweet,  fuch  rich  delight; 
What  muft  their  joy,  their  tranfport  be 
Who  dwell  for  ever  in  thy  fight? 

Cr  TO 


[    8*     ] 

To  that  bright  world  my  heart  afpires, 
Where  all  the  glories  of  thy  face 
Unveil'd,  fhall  fill  the  foul's  defnes, 
And  tune  the  fong  to  boundlefs  grace  ! 

O  teach  my  heart,  my  life,  my  voice 
To  celebrate  thy  wonderous  love ! 
Fulfil   my  hopes,  compleat  my  joys, 
And  bid  me  join  the  fongs  above. 


4'^4-><^><^>C^^><^>^^><^><'$' 


The  love  of  Christ  exciting  thankful 
devotion. 

O  DEARER  to  my  thankful  heart 
Than  all  the  circling  fun  furveys ! 
Thy  prefence  only  can  impart 
Light,  peace,  and  gladnefs  to  my  dayi# 

Beneath  thy  foul-reviving  ray, 
Ev'n  cold  affliction's  wintery  gloom 
Shall  brighten  into  vernal  day, 
And  hopes  and  joys  immortal  bloom. 

Vain 


C   83   ] 

Vain  world,  be  gone  with  all  thy  toys; 
I  have  no  room  for  trifles  here : 
My  heart  afpires  to  nobler  joys ; 
Thy  faireft  glories  difappear. 

Bright  realms  of  blifs,  where  Jefus  reigns, 
My  wifh,  my  care,  my  hope  invite: 
Where  raptur'd  feraphs  tune  their  drains 
To  themes  of  infinite  delight. 

See,  Lord,  thy  willing  fubjecT:  bows 
Adoring  low  before  thy  throne  : 
To  thee,  I  gladly  pay  my  vows  ; 
Thou  art  my  fovereign,  thou  alone. 

Smile  on  my  foul,  and  bid  me  ling, 
In  concert  with  the  choir  above, 
The  glories  of  my  Saviour  King, 
The  condefcenfions  of  his  love. 

Amazing  love  !  that  ftoop'd  fo  low, 
To  view  with  pity's  melting  eye 
A  wretch  deferving  endlefs  woe ! 
Amazing  love  ! — did  Jefus  die  ? — 

He  died,  to  raife  to  life  and  joy 
The  vile,  the  guilty,  the  undone, 
O  let  his  praife  my  hours  employ, 
Till  hours  no  more  their  circles  run ! 

G  a  He 


C   84   ] 

He  died  ! — ye  feraphs  tune  your  fongs, 
Refound,  refound  the  Saviour's  name  ; 
For  nought  below  immortal  tongues 
Can  ever  reach  the  wonderous  theme. 


•K>K>K>M040^^ 


On   recovery    from    sickness. 

ORD  of  my  life  to  thee  my  powers  belong, 
1  Thy  mercies  are  my  chief  my  dailing  theme; 
To  thee  be  firft  infcrib'd  the  votive  fong 
With  warmefl  gratitude,  with  love  fupreme; 
On  thee  my  life  and  all  its  powers  depend, 
My  gracious  guardian,  my  unchanging  friend. 

O  be  that  life,  which  thy  indulgent  hand 
Suftain'd  when  finking  to  the  fhades  of  death, 
Devoted  to  thy  praife,  whofe  kind  command 
Reftoresm)  wafting  ftrength  and  (hortening  breath. 
Be  my   remaining  hours  entirely  thine, 
My  flrength  and  breath  employ 'd  in  work  divine. 


L 


Yet 


C  85   ] 

Yet  next  to  heaven  to  friendfhip's  honour'd  name 
The  lay  which  grateful  love  infpires  is  due ; 
With  lenient  hand  fhe  nurs'd  the  vital  flame, 
When  faintly  glimmering  it  almoft  withdrew  : 
Heaven  fmil'd  indulgent  on  her  tender  care, 
Bled  were  her  efforts,  anfwer'd  was  her  prayer. 

The  lay  which  friendfhip  claims  heaven  will  approve, 

Since  firft  to  heaven  the  grateful  drains  afpire  ; 

Sacred  to  filial  and  fraternal  love, 

Be  the  next  labours  of  the  tuneful  lyre. 

O  may  the  love  that  animates  my  lay 

Procure  acceptance  for  the  thanks  I  pay. 

But  never  can  thefe  languid  notes  exprefs 
My  heart's  warm  wifhes  ardent  as  they  rife  ; 
Yet  he,  who  knows  their  meaning,  he  can  blefs ; 
Unmeafur'd  bounty  every  good  fupplies. 
O  be  the  friends  who  claim  my  grateful  love, 
A  bleffing  here,  compleatly  bleft  above. 


G  3  Occafioned 


[    86    ] 


Occafioned  by  hearing  a  friend  commend 
my  verfes. 

COULD  all  the  powers  of  eloquence  divine 
But  half  the  glories  of  my  Lord  difplay, 
How  I  mould  wifh  thofe  unknown  powers  were  mine 
To  animate  and  raife  the  votive  lay. 

O  could  I  rife,  one  happy  minute  rife! 
And  hear  the  mufic  of  the  blifsful  choir, 
Would  not  my  heaven-enraptur'd  mind  defpife 
The  fweeteft  notes  that  tune  this  feeble  lyre. 

Yet  is  the  fubjecl:  of  their  fong  the  fame, 
Not  angels  know  a  nobler  theme  than  mine; 
Thy  grace  Emmanuel,  blifs-infpiring  name  ! 
Awakes  the  ftrain  to  extafy  divine. 

That  grace,  which  fmiles  approving  on  their  lays, 
Bends  lower  ftill  and  kindly  deigns  to  own 
A  mortal's  wifhes  to  attempt  thy  praife, 
When  humble  love  prefenu  them  at  thy  throne. 

My 


C   8/   ] 

My  Lord,  my  life,  does  not  thy  love  infpire 
The  warmed  higheft  wifh  this  bofom  knows  ? 
O  let  that  love  employ  this  feeble  lyre 
Till  with  diviner  force  the  paflion  glows ! 

Till  (every  mortal  weaknefs  left  in  duft) 
Immortal  life  commences,  then  my  tongue 
To  thee,  dear  object  of  my  hope  and  trufr, 
With  heaven's  full  choir  (hall  tune  a  nobler  fong. 


To  Silvia. 


MY  lovely  Silvia,  while  in  blooming  youth 
Your  mental  powers  are   a&ive,  fprightly. 

Attend  the  voice  offriendfhip  and  of  truth, 
That  courts  your  notice  in  the  moral  lay.     I 

Thofe  active  powers  the  Lord  of  nature  gave 
To  reafon's  rule  by  choice  alone  confin'd, 
For  reafon's  empire  never  knew  a  flave  , 
Her  fway  is  gentle  and  her  laws  are  kind. 

G  4  Her 


[     88     ] 

Her  fubje&s  take  their  orders  from  her  eye, 
While  fhe  to  each  their  various  tafk  affigns ; 
And  now  o'er  nature's  ample  field  they  fly, 
A  field  far  richer  than  Peruvian  mines. 

Here  with  unweary'd  diligence  they  rove, 
Collecting  treafures  to  enrich  the  mind  : 
And  many  a  flower  and  plant  in  dale  or  grove, 
Of  virtues  rare  and  fadelefs  bloom  they  find. 

And  now  with  treafures  fraught  returning  home, 
Before  their  queen  difplay  the  fhining  fpoil, 
Arrang'd  in  beauteous  order  round  the  dome, 
Her  approbation  crowns  the  pleafing  toil. 

When  chill'd  by  time's  cold  hand,   thofe  fprightly 

powers 
Inclined  to  reft,  inactive,  ceafe  to  roam, 
Thofe  mental  (lores  fhall  cheer  the  wintery  hours, 
And  flowers  unfading  breathe  their  fweets  at  home. 

Extra&ing  food  amid  the  vernal  bloom, 
So  flies  the  induflrious  bee  around  the  vale, 
With  native  fldll  fhe  forms  the  waxen  comb, 
To  keep  for  wintery  days  the  rich  regale. 


Wifhing 


[     89     ] 

Wifliing  for  real   Pleasure. 

HOW  long,  forgetful  of  thy  heavenly  birth, 
Wilt  thou  my  foul  fo  fondly  cleave  to  earth  ? 
How  long  low-hovering  o'er  thefe  feats  of  pain, 
Wilt  thou  expe£t  felicity  in  vain  ? 
The  joys  of  time  could  never  be  defign'rl 
A  portion  worthy  of  the  immortal  mind. 
What  is  it  thus  detains  thefe  wretched  eyes,     -v 
Detains  my  heart  whene'er  it  feeks  to  rife,       C 
And  holds  back  half  mv  wifhes  from  the  ikies  ?  J 


When  foothing  fancy  paints,  with  mimic  art, 
Her  piftur'd  joys  to  catch  my  cheated  heart, 
So  fair,  fo  bright  the  varied  colours  glow, 
Almofl  they  can  difguife  the  blended  woe. 
But  foon  the  momentary  forms  decay, 
Steal  from  my  gaze,  and  vanifli  quite  away, 
Convinc'd  the  flattering  fcenes  are  empty  air, 
Beneath  my  thought  unworthy  of  my  care. 
Can  I  pronounce  the  gay  delufions  fair? 

Earth's 


[    9°    j 

Earth's  fdireft  pleafures  which  allure  my  fight, 
Are  but  the  fleeting  fhadows  of  delight ! 
Shall  airy  phantoms  thus  my  powers  employ, 
Powers  that  were  form'd  to  grafp  fub  flan  tial  joy  ? 
Shall  vanity  enflave  this  freeborn  mind, 
And  chains  of  fenfe  my  nobler  paffions  bind  ? 
Alas  in  vain  I  ftrive,   in  vain  I  figh,  n 

In  vain  my  fetter'd  thoughts  attempt  to  fly      > 
And  weakly  fluttering  mean  the  diftant  fky  !  J 

O  thou  whofe  eye  furveysmy  inmoft  heart, 
Thy  grace,  thy  all  prevailing  grace  impart, 
DifTolvethefe  chains  which  keep  my  foul  from  thee, 
And  bid  this  wretched  ftruggling  heart  be  free. 
O  come  thou  bright,  thou  everlafting  fair, 
Thou  only  worthy  object  of  my  care! 
Thy  dazling  beauties  to  my  view  difplay, 
And  earth  fhall  vanifh  at  the  blifsful  ray, 
Like  night's  dark  (hades  before  the  rifing  day. 


,  i 


Immortal  charms  fhall  all  my  powers  controul, 
And  fix  each  wandering  paflion  of  my  foul, 
Thy  love  the  facred  fource  of  endlefsjoy 
Shall  all  my  heart  and  all  my  thoughts  employ. 
Earth  would  be  heaven  in  fuch  a  flate  as  this, 
And  time  a  foretafte  of  eternal  blifs. 


L   91    ] 

But  all !  how  foon  the  charming  vifion  flies !  -> 

Stay  blefl  ideas,  teach  my  foul  to  rife,  > 

Nor  let  me  wifh  in  vain  for  heaven  below  the  fkies !  * 


^C>^C>KDi-i'04-C>^i<D#0-K^i- 


To  Amira. 

FRIENDSHIP  difdains  the  ftudied  forms  of 
fpeech, 
She  fpeaks  a  language  forms  can  never  teach. 
Let  friendship  to  Amira's  thought  impart 
The  grateful  joy  that  warms  a  filler's  heart, 
O  may  the  grateful  joy  afpire  in  praife, 
And  love  divine  the  facred  ardour  raife; 
To  him  whofe  ear  our  humble  prayer  attends, 
Whofe  mercy  fpares  Amira  to  her  friends  ! 
To  them  the  boon  indulgent  mercy  gives ; 
Not  for  herfelf  alone  Amira  lives. 

Long  be  your  life  preferv'd,  long  may  you  (hare 
\    Your  partner's  comforts,  and  partake  his  care  ! 

By  heaven  inftrufled,  may  you  know  to  raife 
)     Your  infant  offspring  to  their  maker's  praife  ! 
To  you  is  the  maternal  tafk  affign'd, 

To  form 


I    9*    3 

To  form  with  gentle  hand  the  tender  mind; 
To  plant  the  feeds  of  moral  goodnefs  there, 
To  watch,  to  cherifh  with  affiduous  care 
The  growth  of  every  virtue,  (pleafmg  toil !) 
On  the  kind  tafk  may  heaven  approving  fmile! 
That  fmile  alone  can  animate,  can  blefs, 
And  crown  your  labour  with  defir'd  fuccefs. 

To  me  hath  providence  aflign'd  a  part 
Which  claim  the  tendereft  pafhons  of  the  heart, 
Nolefs  than  yours :  to  footh  a  parent's  care 
In  life's  decline,  his  every  grief  to  fhare, 
By  every  acr.  of  cheerful  duty  prove 
Sincereft  gratitude  and  filial  love. 
O  long,  (propitious  to  my  ardent  prayer, "1 
To  me,  to  you  may  heaven  indulgent  fpare 
His  valued  life!  and  when  we  muft,  muft  part, 
Suftain  the  fad  furvivor's  fainting  heart! 
Before  the  mental  eye  may  he  difplay 
A  blifsfu]  profpeft  of  the  realms  of  day, 
Whofe  prefence  cheers  affliction's  deepen1  gloom, 
And  fheds  a  ray  of  glory  on  the  tomb ! 
While  faith  beholds  her  dying,  rifing  Lord, 
And  cheerful  hope  reclines  upon  his  word. 
O  he  that  word  confirm'd  to  you,  to  me, 
"  Where  Jefus  is,  there  (hall  his  fervants  be!" 
Then  fhall  our  thoughts  that  happy  world  explore, 
Where  we  fhall  meet  our  friendsto  part  no  more. 

Think 


[    93    3 

Think  not  thefe  lines  (my  dear  Amiraj  frai 
With  the  dark  boadings  of  dejecled  thought: 
Since  nought  but  profpecls  future  and  divine, 
Life's  toils  can  cheer,  its  pleafures  can  refine. 
Yet  heaven,  on  us,  fhines  with  indulgent  ray, 
And  with -peculiar  bleiTings  marks  cur  way. 
Why  are  our  fteps  by  fovereign  goodnefs  led, 
Far  from  the  thorny  wilds  where  many  tread  ? 
Nor  with  dark  care,  nor  pining  want  opprefr, 
Why  with  a  thoufand  comforts  are  we  bleft  ? 
Our  lives  protected  from  a  thoufand  woes  ? 
O  why  the  various  gifts  which  heaven  bellows  ? 
Its  various  gifts  mould  ftimulate,  fhould  raife 
To  afiive  duty,  to  obedient  praife. 
True  we  are  weak,   but  do  we  not  depend 
On  the  kind  arm  of  an  almighty  friend  ? 
That  arm  invigorates,  directs,  fu  (tains, 
And  gives  fweet  hope  to  foften  ail  our  pains: 
Sweet  hope,  that  whifpers  to  the  humble  mind, 
"  Look  up,  the  ever  wife,  the  ever  kind 
•■  Is  near  you  (till,  attentive  to  your  prayer, 
u  Proportions  every  trial,  every  care 
14  Tofuitthe  ftrength  he  gives,  he  will  impart 
<£  Celeftial  comforts,  to  fufrain  your  heart. 
fi  Behold!  difplay'd  to  faith's  expecting  eye, 
81  A  crown  referv'd  for  you  beyond  the  fey: 
si  Treafures  of  blifs  which  never  can  decay 
11  And  realms  refplendent  with  eternal  day." 


[    94    1 

If  faith  and  hope,  fix'd  on  the  word  divine, 
Pronounce  the  bright  reverfion  yours,  and  mine, 
O  my  Amira  this  is  blifs  below, 
The  higheft  blifs  which  mortals  here  can  know. 


A  Reflection  on  the  clofe  of  the  Year, 
Occafioned  by  hearing  the  bells  at  midnighu 

TS  this  a  theme  of  mirth?  who  can  rejoice 
-■*     That  time,  important  time  fo  fwiftly  flies; 
And  fcorn  reflection's  monitory  voice, 
The  friendly  power  that  wooes  us  to  be  wife  ? 

For  ever  ye  departed  months,  adieu  ! 
What  heart  that  knows  your  value  can  be  gay  ? 
What  heart  that  afks  reflection's  confcious  view* 
How  many  hours  fled  unimprov'd  away  ? 

Yet  oft  her  warning  voice,  e'er  yet  they  paft, 
Cry 'd, "  feize  the  precious  minutes  make  them  thine  i 
Ah  how  wilt  thou  account  for  fo  much  wafte 
Of  treafure  lent  for  purpofes  divine  ? 

O  let 


[     95     ] 

O  let  my  heart  her  needful  dictates  hear, 
To  her  the  folemn  midnight  hour  I  give, 
And  afk,  while  muling  on  the  finifh'd  year, 
How  I  have  fpentthe  time,  and  why  I  live  ? 

How  have  I  fpent  the  time  ?  reflection  fay? 
She  anfwers  "  walled  many  a  precious  hour, 
"  In  carelefs  indolence  loft  many  a  day, 
"  When  heaven  demanded  every  active  power. 

Why  do  I  live  ?  "  Paft  errors  to  deplore, 
M  Low  at  the  feet  of  fovereign  grace  to  bow, 
46  For  ftrength  divine  intreat  (while  I  adore,) 
"  To  dedicate  to  heaven  the  fleeting  now. 

Jefus,  to  thee,  to  thy  atoning  blood, 

To  thy  unfully'd  righteoufnefs  I  fly  : 

O  thou,  my  judge,  my  faviour,  and  my  God, 

Inftrucl  me  how  to  live  and  how  to  die. 


Defiring 


[    96    ] 


404>04^04>04<D&0#04< 


Defiring  a  cheerful  Resignation    to  the 
Divine  Will. 

"HY  breathes  my  anxious  heart  the  fre- 
quent figh  ? 

Why  from  my  weak  eye  drops  the  ready  tear? 
Is  it  to  mark  how  prefent  bleffings  fly  ? 
Is  it  that  griefs  to  come  awake  my  fear  ? 

O  may  I  Hill  with  thankful  heart  enjoy 
The  various  gifts  indulgent  heaven  beflows! 
Nor  let  ungrateful  diffidence  deftroy 
The  prefent  good  with  fears  of  future  woes. 

Nor  let  me  curious  afk  if  dark  or  fair 
My  future  hours,  but  in  the  hand  divine 
With  full  affiance  leave  my  every  care, 
Be  hope,  and  humble  refignation  mine. 

Celeilial  guefls  !  your  fmile  can  cheer  the  heart 
When  melancholy  fpreads  her  deepening  gloom  : 
O  come,  your  animating  power  impart, 
And  bidfweet  flowers  amid  the  defart  bloom. 

Yes, 


C    97     ] 

Yes,  here  and  there,  amid  the  dreary  wild, 
A  fpot  of  verdure  cheers  the  languid  eye: 
And  now  and  then,  a  fun-beam  warm  and  mild/ 
Sheds  its  kind  influence  from  a  clement  fky. 

My  God,  my  guide,  be  thou  for  ever  near, 
Support  my  fieps,  point  out  my  devious  way, 
Preferve  my  heart  from  every  anxious  fear, 
Gild  each  dark  fcene  with  thy  enlivening  ray. 

Be  earth's  quick  changing  fccnes  or  dark,  or  fair, 
On  thy  kind  arm,  O  bid  my  foul  recline: 
Be  heaven-bom  hope  (kind  antidote  of  care) 
And  humble  cheerful  refignation  mine. 


^C^C^^CD^C^^K^^C^^C^^O^ 


To  Silvia. 

COME  friendfhip,   with  thy  fweetly-pleafing 
power, 
Teach  me  to  calm  my  dear-lov'd  Silvia's  breaft  : 
Shed  thy  kind  influence  o'er  the  gloomy  hour, 
And  footh  her  every  anxious  care  to  reft. 

H  Tell 


E   98   3 

Tell  her  that  providence,  iromenfely  kind, 
Through  all  events  its  guardian  care  extends  °r 
Nor  can  a  real  grief  opprefs  her  mind 
But  ev'n  that  grief  unerring  wifdom  fends. 

Oft,  when  imaginary  woes  opprefs, 
A  dark  cloud  rifes,  and  we  {hrink  with  fear  ; 
Perhaps  that  very  cloud  is  meant  to  blefs, 
And  fhed  rich  comforts  on  the  coming  year. 

The  ways  of  providence,  how  kind!  how  wife! 
From-  feeming  ills  what  real  good  is  born  ! 
Nor  can  the  heart  its  bladings  fearn  to  prize- 
That,  gay  and  thoughtlefs,  never  knew  to  mourn. 

O  may  my  Silvia  raife  her  wifhes  high  ! 
With  warm  devotion  may  her  bofom  glowt 
/ant  for  unmingled  blifs  beyond  the  fky 
nd  thankful  own  the  gifts  enjoy'd  below  ?" 


Ta 


I    99     1 


)0°v 


To  Emilia. 

IF  native  fenfe,  and  unaffe&ed  eafe, 
Goodnature  and  benevolence  can  pleafe  j 
Emilia  claims,  without  the  help  of  art, 
Her  fhare  of  friendfhip  in  the  focial  heart. 
But  real  friendfhip  fhould  not,  mull  not  bear 
A  fault  dncenfur'd  in  a  mind  fo  fair  : 
Let  cenfure  in  her  gentleft  form  perfuade9 
Nor  frown  indignant  on  the  lovely  maid: 
And  let  Emilia  unofFended  hear, 
While  friendfhip  foftly  thus  accofls  her  ear. 
My  dear  Emilia,  would  you  always  know 
The  peaceful  joys  which  virtue  can  beftow  : 
Thofe  joys  from  grave  refle&ion  have  their  birth/ 
Begun  by  heaven,  nor  terminate  on  earth. 
Then  be  refleftion  cherifh'd  in  your  breaft, 
She  gives  you  courifel  needful  to  your  reft. 
When  gay  amufement  fpreads  her  net  for  hearts 
And  foftly  wooes  you  with  her  fyren  arts  ; 
Has  not  refleftion  whifper'd  ? — "  Ah  beware 
"  Fly,  fly  the  midnight  ball— mirth  revels  there, 
tt  2  "  With 


£       I0O 

<s  With  difiipation  and  her  idle  train  ; 

••  A  thoufand  follies  fluttering,  light  and  vain  : 

"  The  unmeaning  compliment,  the  ftudy'd  fmile, 

•*  The  fneer  of  malice,  the  fmooth  brow  of  guile, 

"  Mix  in  the  dance,  and  fhould  detraction  rude, 

"  Remorfelefs,  arm'd  with  venom'd  darts  intrude, 

"  (Vile  foe  to  virtue,  and  to  honeft  fame) 

"  Then  bleeds  fome  haplefs  virgin's  wounded  name. 

{<  Fly,  fly  the  danger,  and  with  me  retreat 

"  Where  innocence,  and  peace,  and  fafety  meet." 

And  did  the  friendly  monitor  in  vain 
Diffuade  Emilia  from  the  dangerous  fcene  ? 
Where  was  her  guardian  angel  ?  could  he  bear 
To  be  confin'd  in  fuch  polluted  air  ? 
Or  did  the  gentle  fpirit,  with  a  figh, 
Kefign  his  charge  and  feek  his  native  fky  ? 
Vain  queflions !  His  omnifcient  eye  was  there,. 
Who  irufted  time's  rich  talent  to  your  care  ; 
And  he  requires  improvement  at  your  hands, 
A  flrift  account  his  holy  law  demands. 
O,  fquander  not  the  precious  hours  away, 
No  more  in  fuch  amufements  clofe  a  day, 
As  will  not  bear  refle&ion's  fober  teft, 
Nor  add  calm  pleafure  to  your  nightly  reft. 

While  your  almighty  benefaflor  pours 
Hi?  various  bleflings  on  your  circling  hours ; 


C      101      ] 

.  all  the  gifts  his  bounteous  hands  impart 
He  claims  the  tribute  of  a  thankful  heart : 
^     O  be  your  fprightly  powers  your  blooming  days 
With  grateful  joy  devoted  to  his  praife. 

Think  in  that  awful,  that  tremendous  hour, 
When  earth's   alluring  toys  will  pleafe  no  more, 
When  trembling,  on  life's  utmoft  verge  you  tread, 
With  vafl  eternity  before  you  fpread  ; 
Think,  what  will  be  your  wifh,  your  ardent  prayer, 
And  make  it  now  your  firft,  your  conftant  care. 
To  that  almighty  Saviour  now  apply, 
On  whom  alone  you  fafely  can  rely  : 
Whofe  fmile  can  cheer  you  in  that  awful  fcene, 
And  make  the  boundlefs  profpeft  all  ferene. 

Let  not  my  dear  Emilia  call  fevere, 
The  friendly  diclates  of  a  heart  fincere  : 
A  heart  that  wifhes  real  blifs  for  you 
Beyond  this  narrow  world's  contracted  view. 
O  may  you,  taught  by  grace  divine,  afpirc 
(With  all  the  ardour  of  fincere  defire) 
To  that  bright  world,  where  pleafure  dwells  refin  a, 
To  charm,  to  fix,  to  fatisfy  the  mind; 
Till  joyful,  you  from  earth's  allurements  part, 
And  heaven  that  claims,  poffeffes  all  your  heart. 


«3  To 


[       102       J 

To  Silvia. 

HOW  faint  the  joy  the  blooming  feafon  yields, 
To  fpirits  worn  with  grief  and  nerves  unftrung! 
Yet  fweet  the  flowers,  yet  verdant  are  the  fields, 
As  when  thofe  flowers  and  fields  I  raptur'd  fung. 

Around  roe  nature  fpreads  her  charms  in  vain, 
Thofe  charms  no  more  my  languid  bread  infpire : 
In  vain  I  try  to  raife  one  cheerful  (train, 
No  found  of  joy  awakes  the  fiient  lyre. 

Come  Silvia,  come,  for  you  the  mufes  wait, 
Por  you  the  flowers  unfold  their  beauteous  dyes : 
O  come,  with  lively  youth  and  health  replete, 
And  bid  to  heaven  the  grateful  tranfport  rife. 

Methinksin  Silvia  I  revive  again, 

And  led  by  fancy's  magic  power,  I  ftray 

O'er  the  green  corn  field  and  the  flowery  plain, 

And  call  the  birds  to  join  the  artlefs  lay. 

( 

Yec 


C   io3   3 

Yes,  in  my  Silvia  I  again  enjoy 
Thofe  long-loft  pleafures  oft  with  fighs  deplor'd.: 
Come  then,  dear  maid,  re-fume  the  fweet  employs 
And  tune  the  votive  fong  to  nature's  bounteous  Lord. 


4^0#Oi^OI40^0K^ 


Retiremrnt. 

HAIL  peaceful  retirement,   thy  {hades  how 
ferene  ! 
With  thee  in  all  ages  the  wife  have  fought  pleafure, 
Meditation  and  converfe  the  fweet  varied  fcene 

Alternately  meafure. 

Here  freely  expatiate  the  rational  powers, 
Thy  aid,  O  divine  contemplation,  infpiring; 
While  wifdom  and  knowledge  unlock  their  bright 
{lores, 

The  mind  fiill  defiring. 

Ye  votaries  of  pleafure,  of  grandeur  and  fame, 
Leave  your  eager  purfuit  of  the  fhadows  before  ye  ; 
Seek  peaceful  retirement,  where  more  than  in  name 
Dwell  pleafure  and  glory. 

H  4  Tfe 


I     »°4    3 

?Tis  here,  when  content  from  the  feats  of  delight 
Pefcends,  to  give  mortals  a  blefl  prelibation 
Of  permanent  pleafure  and  joys  ever  bright, 

She  fixes  her  ftation. 

Sweet  gueft  of  retirement,  O  come  to  my  breafl! 
I  can  pity  the  minds  which  deluded  purfuing 
Their  phantoms  gay-fmiling,  refufe  to  be  blefl 

And  choofe  their  undoing* 


0N  THE  SUDDEN  DEATH  OF  A  LIBERTINE. 

AddrefTed  to  his  Friend. 

BY  lawlefs  pleafure  led,  whofefyren  fong 
Had  footh'd  to  reft  the  faithful  monitor 
That  would,  long  fince,  have  warn'd  them  to  beware, 
Lorenzo  and  his  gay  companion  ftray'd : 
Till  to  a  dangerous  eminence  they  rofe, 
Whofe  fatal  brow  o'erhangs  a  dark,  deep  gulph, 
"Where  tempeft  reigns,  and  night  eternal  frowns. 
Here  guilty  riot  drove  the  hours  along ; 
Refle&ion  banifh'd,  reafon's  dictates  fcorn'd  : 
Tho'  oft  the  voice  of  friendfhip  calFd,  return  ; 

And 


[     105     3 

And  oft  maternal  tendernefs  implorM  : 
In  vain  was  every  warning — plung'd  in  vice 
They  bade  defiance  to  the  cenfuring  world, 
And  boldly  dar'd  the  vengeance  of  the  fkies; 
Nor  dar'd  unpuniih'd  long — for  now  they  drew 
Too  near  the  dreadful  brink,  nor  dream'd  of  ought 
But  flowery  pleafures  ;  round  them  hung  a  cloud. 
Spread  by  fome  demon,  which  confin'd  their  view, 
And  hid  the  terrors  of  the  gulph  below. 
Here  as  they  laughing  flood,   fwift  flew  the  fhaft 
Of  awful  vengeance  ! — O  !  Lorenzo  fay  ? 
What  were  thy  thoughts  when  inftant  from  thy  fiJc, 
The  gay  companion  of  thy  guilty  hours 
Plung'd  headlong  in  the  unfathomable  deep  ?«— • 
And  art  thou  fpar'd  ?  and  will  aftonifhment 
And  terror  let  thee  afk,  ■•«  why  am  I  fpar'd  ? 
f*  Why  did  the  fatal  fhaft  that  pierc'd  my  friend 
*'  Not  reach  this  guilty  bofom  ?"  Mercy  fpread 
Her  fhield  before  thee — Hark !  fhe  calls — "  Retreat. 
•■  Retreat  this  inftant,  e'er  cornmifiion'd  flies 
M  A  fecond  arrow — heaven  may  not  vouchfafe 
P  Another  warning." — May  her  heavenly  voice, 
Lorenzo,  reach  thy  heart !  In  time  reflect 
While  time  is  lent,  and  humbly  deprecate 
The  awful  vengeance  of  offended  heaven  ! 
Fly  to  that  Saviour,  whofe  atoning  blood 
Alone  can  expiate  guilt,  whofe  bcundlefs  grace 

Alone 


C     *o6    3 

Alone  can  feal  ihy  pardon,  cleanfe,   renew 
Thy  wretched  heart,  and  guide  thy  erring  fleps 
Far  from  the  paths  of  danger,  where  too  long 
Thy  feet  have  firay'd,  and  point  the  narrow  way 
To  peace,  to  fafety,  to  eternal  life. 

To    my  Watch. 

LITTLE  Monitor,  by  thee 
Let  me  learn  what  I  fhould  be; 
Learn  the  round  of  life  to  fill, 
Ufeful   and  progrefllve  ftill. 
Thou  canft  gentle  hints  impart 
How  to  regulate  the  heart : 
When  I  wind  thee  up  at  night, 
Mark  each  fault,  and  fet  thee  right : 
Let  me  fearch  my  bofom  too, 
And  my  daily  thoughts  review  ; 
Mark  the  movements  of  my  mind, 
Nor  be  eafy  when  1   find 
Latent  errors  rife  to  view, 
11  all  be  regular  and  true. 

The 


C     *°7     ] 


&04^0i^O«0<£040<& 


The  third  chapter  of  Daniel  paraphrafecL 

WHERE  Babylon,  the  feat  of  empire,  fhone^ 
Proud  tyranny  had  fix'd  her  lawlefs  throne, 
The  cruel  power,  with  unrelenting  hand, 
Rul'd  o'er  a  race  of  Oaves,  an  abject  land  : 
Oppreffion  fill "d  the  arbitrary  reign, 
And  blind  idolatry  confirm'd  the  chain. 

The  prince,  who  late  in  a  furprizing  hour, 
Had  felt  conviction's  Itrong,  refiftlefs  power, 
Impell'd  by  confeience,  own'd  the  God  fupreme ; 
Confefs'd  his  hand,  almoft  ador'd  his  name; 
Retracing  all,  to  idol-gods  returns, 
Again  with  impious  zeal  his  bofom  burns. 
New  rites  his  wild  idolatry  demands, 
In  Duras  plain  a  golden  image  Hands: 
Wanton  in  wealth,  he  bids  the  idol  rife, 
And  with  its  monftrous  height  affront  the  Ikies. 
Affembled  here  in  all  the  pomp  of  ftate, 
Princes  and  peers  their  monarch's  pleafure  wait  : 
A  herald  now  with  founding  voice  proclaims, 
ff  Nations  of  various  tongues  of  various  names, 

"  Attend 


C     *o8     ] 

**  Attend  the  king's  decree,  which  thus  ordains, 
"  That  inftant,  when  you  hear  the  facred  (train* 
**  From  inflrumenrs  of  every  tuneful  found, 
%i  Adore  with  prollrate  homage  on  the  ground, 
*■  The  golden  image,  which  the  king's  command 
u  Ordains  the  God,  the  guardian  of  your  land. 
M  Whoever  the  royal  edi£i  difobeys, 
"  Or  to  perform  the  folemn  rite  delays, 
"  A  dreadful  doom  the  hsplefs  wretch  attends, 
**  His  life,  that  hour,  the  flaming  furnace  ends/' 
Now  founds  the  various  (train;  the  fclemn  call 
The  trembling  nations  hear,  and  proftrate  fall. 
Elate  with  pride  the  monarch  now  beheld 
His  will  obey'd,  the  impious  rite  fulfill'd  : 
When  lo  with  flattering  zeal  his  (laves  appear, 
And  lowly  bending  thus  accoft  his  ear; 
"  O  King,  for  ever  may  thy  throne  remain ! 
"  UnrivalFd  be  the  glories  of  thy  reign  ! 
"  Their  zeal  when  all  thy  faithful  people  fhow'd 
"  And  at  the  facred  call  adoring  bow'd  ; 
"  Three  haughty  Jews  whom  thy  indulgent  hand 
"  Hath  rais'd  to  rank  and  honours  in  the  land, 
u  Thy  bounty  have  ungratefully  abus'd, 
*'  And  jufi  obedience  to  thy  law  refus'd  : 
44  Proudly  refus'd  to  bend  the  flubborn  knee, 
"  And  bade  defiance  to  thy  gods  and  thee/' 

Rage, 


C   lo9  3 

Rage,  flahVd  vindictive  from  the  tyrant's  eyes! 

u  This  moment  bring  the  rebels  here,,  he  cries ; 

Swift  fly  the  guards,  their  duty  taught  by  fear, 

And  now  the  accufed  innocents  appear  : 

When  thus  the  king  the  boding  filence  broke, 

(Hisaw'd  attendants  trembling  as  he  fpoke) 

11  Say,  ye  perverfe,  rebellious  wretches  fay, 

"  My  will  do  you  prefume  to  difobey  ? 

V  You  knew  the  law,  the  penalty  you  heard ; 

,l  Your  fate  is  juft  fince  wilfully  you  err'd ; 

u  Nor  vainly  on  celeftial  aid  prefume  ; 

11  What  God  (hall  fave,  when  I  pronounce  your 
doom  ? 

The  men,  to  this  high  {train  of  impious  pride, 

Serene  in  confeious  innocence  reply 'd; 

u  At  no  defence,  at  no  excufe  we  aim, 

11  Our  truft,  O  king,  is  in  the  power  fupreme  : 

"  The  God,  the  awful  God  whom  we  adore 

u  We  know  can  fave  us  from  thy  tyrant  power* 

"  We  trull  he  will  :  but  mould  his  wife  command 

"  Ordain  our  death  by  thy  remorfelefs  hand ; 

"  A  firm  obedience  to  his  laws  we  vow, 

"  Nor  will  to  thy  detefted  idols  bow." 

To  madnefs  now  the  tyrant's  paflions  rife  : 

11  Seven  times  increafe  the  flame"  (he  furious  cries} 

r41  Soon  fhaH  the  traitors  meet  a  fate  fevere, 
$t  And  feel  that  vengeance  wbick  they  fcorn  to  fear4' 

Has 


..} 


[      **>     ] 

Hrs  hardy  foldiers  now  the  vi&ims  feize, 

(Strange  heart  that  fach  a  facrifice  could  pleafe  !) 

The  victims  bound  are  to  their  fate  convey'd, 

Plung'd  in  the  flames,  depriv'd  of  mortal  aid: 

Fierce  was  the  king,  and  fierce  the  raging  fire, 

The  foldiers  in  the  cruel  a£t  expire. 

In  view  the  tyrant  fate  to  feaft  his  eyes 

(Inhuman  pleafure  !  horrid  facrifice  !J 

When  fudden  flarting  from  his  feat,  he  cries, 

(Amazement  in  his  looks,  and  wild  difmay,-) 

'•  What  do  I  fee  ?  ye  peers,  ye  princes  lay! 

"  Were  not  three  criminals,  fome  moments  paft, 

M  With  feiters  bound,  in  yonder  furnace  cafl  ? 

"  'Tis  certain  fact,  O  king,  (the  courtiers  faidj 

•*  We  all  beheld  thy  royal  will  obey'd  :" 

When  thus  the  king,  (with  inward  anguifh  preft, 

For  full  conviction  now  his  heart  pofTefi) 

"  Amid  the  flames  they  walk,  unhurt  and  free, 

"  And  lo  a  fourth  of  form  divine  I  fee  ! 

64  Some  angel  makes  the  innocents  his  care, 

'*  Perhaps  their  deity  himfelf  is  there* 

The  humbled  monarch  now  renoune'd  his  pride 

And  near  advancing  to  the  furnace  cry'd 

'*  Come  forth,  ye  fervants  of  the  God  fupreme, 

u  Come  forth,  and  teach  me  to  adore  his  name/* 

Forth  came  the  prifoners  at  the  royal  word, 

Sav'd  by  the  power  they  truflcd  and  ador'd  : 

Not 


[    m   3 

Not  ev'n  their  cloatU  werefcorch'd,  norfing'd  therf 

hair, 
Serene  their  looks,  and  cheerful  was  their  air. 

The  ftrange  event  around  the  country  flew  ; 
The  concourfe,  {till  increafing,  round  them  drew, 
Peers,  princes,  people,  gazing,  wondering  fland, 
Compeird  to  witnefs  an  almighty  hand. 
An  aw'd  attention  bade  the  croud  be  flill, 
While  thus  the  King  aloud  declar'd  his  will: 
*  Ador'd  for  ever  be  his  wonderous  name  ! 
"  Who  fav'd  his  fervants  from  the  raging  flame ; 
"  His  angels  fent  (the  heavenly  form  I  fawj 
M  To  guard  thefe  bleft  obfervers  of  his  law  : 
<c  The  awful  power,  omnipotent  and  juft, 
11  Hath  well  rewarded  their  religious  truft. 
•*  Be  this  decree,  in  honour  to  their  God, 
"  Through  my  extenfive  empire  fent  abroad  : 
11  Whoever  dares  his  facred  name  prophane, 
•'  In  impious  folly  arrogantly  vain; 
"  Death  without  mercy  is  the  wretches  lot, 
u  His  houfe  a  dunghill  made,  his  name  forgot, 
"  This  miracle  which  (Irikes  each  wondering  breail 
M  And  which  a  thoufand  witneffes  atteft, 
"  Proclaims  the  God  fuperior  far  in  power 
"  To  all  the  deities  whom  we  adore. 

Here  ceas'd  the  king  :  yet  farther  to  atone 
The  cruel  act  his  impious  r3ge  had  done, 

The 


[       112       ] 

The  heaven-protected  youths  his  favour  fhar'd, 
Of  faithful  piety  the  jult  reward  : 
To  eminence  and  power  he  bade  them  rife, 
Rever'd  by  men,  as  favour *d  of  the  fkies. 


^C>^0#Oi<i:l<D^0^KD4^O^ 


Messiah,     an    Ode. 

From  the  35th  Chapter  of  Is  Ai  AH, 

I. 

MESSIAH  comes  !  glad  nature  hails 
Her  long-expe&ed  king : 
She  wakes  to  praife  her  every  tongue, 
Wakes  every  note  to  raife  the  fong, 
Joy,  univerfal  joy  prevails, 

Earth  blooms  with  fudden  fpring. 
Mefliah  comes!  the  hills  refound, 
The  wide-extended  vales  around, 
Mefliah  comes  !  in  tuneful  notes  reply. 
Attentive  echo  learns  his  name, 
Repeats  the  pleafurable  theme, 
And  bears  the  joyful  accents  to  the  fky. 

The 


C     ll3     1 

II. 

The  defart  through  her  vaft  domain, 

Hears,  and  wonders  at  the  flrain, 
The  flrain,  her  hard,  cold  bofom  warms ; 
She  fees,  and  wonders  at  her  new-born  charms  f 
While  indulgent  plenty  pours 
Gifts  profufe,  and  fruits,  and  flowers 
With  various  beauty  glow  : 
Pining  travellers  no  more 
With  weary  feet,  and  longing  eyes, 
Now  the  thorny  brake  explore, 
Or  the  fandy  wafle  in  vain  ; 
See,  the  bubbling  fountain  rife ! 
See,  the  copious  river  flow ! 
Adieu  thirft,  wearinefs,  and  pain, 
The  cheerlefs  defart  owns  Median's  reign. 
With  Lebanon's  tall  fhades  the  defart  vies, 
And  verdure  cloaths  the  grove,  and  decks  the  vale; 
Here  fragrant  Carmel's  flowery  beauties  rife, 
And  Sharon  breathes  the  aromatic  gale. 

III. 

Mefliah  comes  !  let  every  heart  be  glad, 
Let  founds  of  joy  be  heard  from  every  voice  ; 
With  power,  with  majefly,  with  glory  clad, 
He  comes  to  bid  the  fons  of  woe  rejoice. 

No  more  the  hopelefs  heart  fhall  languifli 
On  the  confines  of  defpair; 
I 


C     "4     ] 

No  more  be  heard  the  groan  of  anguifh, 
Or  be  felt  the  pang  of  care. 
Ye  fons  of  woe,  refign  your  load, 
Ye  trembling  hearts  be  ftrong ; 
Omnipotence 
Is  your  defence : 
Behold  your  King,  your  Saviour  God  ! 
He  comes,  with  vengeance  on  his  arm, 
In  vain  your  threatening  foes  alarm ; 
Forget  your  fear, 
Salvation  near 
Demands  the  grateful  fong  : 
His  arm  (hall  crufh  your  threatening  foes  to  duft, 
An  awful  recompenfe,  divinely  juft  ! 

IV. 

See,  the  eyelids  of  the  blind 

Open  to  the  heavenly  ray ! 

See  the  profpeft  bright  and  new 

Rife  to  the  aftonifh'd  view, 

Boundlefs  wonder  fills  the  mind, 

All  is  tranfport !  all  is  day  ! 
,The  haplefs  ear,  of  focial  biifs  unknowing, 
Receives  the  healing  mufic  of  his  voice  : 
Celeftial  harmony,  foft,  fweetly  flowing, 
Bids  charnrd  attention  liften  and  rejoice. 

See, 


E    «6    ] 

v. 

See,  the  helplefs  cripple  rife, 
Bounding  like  the  mountain  roe  f 
If  nature's  Lord 
Pronounce  the  word, 
New  ftrength,  that  word  fupplies  ; 
Life's  aflive  flame 
Informs  the  frame, 
And  bids  each  nerve  with  native  vigor  glow. 
The  tongue  that  never  could  reveal 
Heart-felt  woe,  or  pleafure  tell, 
Held  in  the  chains  of  mournful  filence  long; 
Now  burfts  the  chains  at  his  command, 
Aloud  proclaims  Mefliah's  hand,  , 
And  raptur'd  joins  the  univerfal  fong  ! 

VI. 

Join  the  univerfal  fong, 
Every  heart  and  every  tongue  ! 
Spread  all  your  wings,  ye  winds  and  b?ar 
The  bleft  glad  tidings  through  the  air, 

To  earth's  remoteil  plains: 
Let  every  mournful  fcene  be  gay. 
Let  every  gloomy  night  be  day  , 
Nature  raife  thy  various  choir, 
Wake  the  voice,  and  wake  the  iyre, 
To  extafy  attune  the  joyful  ftrains, 
Refound  Meffiah  comes  !  Mefliah  reigns ! 

I  2  Meffiah' 


[     n6    ] 

VII. 

Mcfliah  reigns,  the  Prince  of  peace! 

He  came  to  fave,  he  reigns  to  blefs  ! 

Fell  rage,  and  terror  now  {hall  ceafey 

And  amity,    and  love  divine 

With  wide-diffufive  luftre  mine  : 
Aufpicious  ^Era,  hail !  replete  with  joy  ! 

No  more  the  frighted  pilgrim  flies 

The  baleful  haunts  where  ferpents  rife, 
No  ferpents  now  his  trembling  fleps  annoy  : 
O'er  fcorching  fands  no  more  he  pants,  and  toils, 
Now  ccolftreams  murmur,  blooming  verdure  fmiies. 

VIII. 

No  more  the  furious  Lion  waits 

To  ruth  upon  his  helplefs  prey  : 

Danger  dies,  and  fear  retreats  ; 

ivleiiiah  (great  Protector)  guards  the  way. 

The  facred  way  Mefliah  fhews, 

Work  of  wifdom,    work  of  power  ! 
But  hence,   unhallow'd  feet,  begone, 
Baniflvd  all  Meffiah's  foes: 
Humble  travellers  alone, 
Who  the  King  of  Zion  own, 
Claim  his  protection,  and  his  grace  adore  : 
O'er  all  their  fteps  his  watchful  care  prefides; 
Nor  fobls  fhall  qyt,  for  heavenly  wifdom  guides. 

Here 


[    M7    3 

IX. 

Here  mall  the  ranfom'd  of  the  Lord 

Forget  their  former  care  ; 
And  while  they  fing,  with  fweet  accord 
In  heaven-taught  lays 
Mefliah's  praife ; 
From  his  kind  hand  a  thoufand  bleflings  (hare. 
His  hand  fhall  lead  them  to  the  courts  divine, 
Where  his  full  beams  of  love  for  ever  fhine, 
Nor  the  leaft  cloud  of  forrow  can  appear. 
Happy  ftate  !  where  not  a  figh 
Heaves  the  bofom,  nor  the  eye 
That  ufed  to  weep  fhall  ever  know  a  tear  ! 
Celeflial  joy  for  ever  fheds 
Her  balmy  odours  on  their  heads  ; 
Every  heart,  and  every  tongue 
Feels  the  blifs,  and  joins  the  fong, 
Immortal  rapture  tunes  the  heavenly  {train  : 
The  mind  expanding,  fill'd,  adoring, 
With  ever  new  delight  exploring 
The  boundlefs  glories  of  Mefliah's  reign. 


The 


[     »8     ] 


#Of04i04<>^OfK>^C>^0^ 


The    Blind  Man's    Petition. 

Luke  xviii.  38,  &c.  Jesus  thou    Son   of 
David  have  mercy  on  me,  &c. 

GREAT  Saviour,  born  of  David's  race* 
O  look,  with  pity  look  this  way  ! 
A  helplefs  wretch  implores  thy  grace, 
Implores  thy  mercy's  healing  ray ! 

Jefus,  thou  Lord  of  life  divine, 
To  whom  the  fons  of  woe  complain  : 
Is  not  unbounded  mercy  thine  ? 
And  can  I  afk,  and  afk  in  vain  ? 

Did  ever  fupplicating  figh 
In  vain  to  thee  its  grief  impart  ? 
Or  mournful   object  meet  thine  eye, 
That  did  not  move  thy  melting  heart  ? 

Around 


C    "9   3 

Around  thee  crowd  a  plaintive  throng, 
I  hear  their  importuning  cries ; 
And  now  from  every  thankful  tongue 
I  hear  the  glad  Hofannah  rife. 

O  look,  with  pity  look  on  me, 

Wrapt  in  the  mournful  fhades  of  night ! 

My  hope  depends  alone  on  thee, 

Speak  Lord,  thy  word  mall  give  me  light ! 

Tis  mercy,  mercy  I  implore ! 
Speak,  Lord,  thy  humble  fuppliant  raife ! 
Then  fhall  my  heart  thy  grace  adore ; 
Then  fhall  my  tongue  refound  thy  praife. 


^^^^^-^^^-^^^^^^^^^ 


Reft  and  Comfort  in  Christ   alone. 

TX  THERE  fhall  I  fly  but  to  thy  feet, 

*  *      My  Saviour,  my  almighty  friend  ? 
Dear  names,  beyond  expreffion  fweet! 
On  thefe  my  hopes  of  Blifs  depend. 

I  4  Where 


C      ISO      3 

"Where  fhall  I  reft  but  on  thy  grace, 
Thy  boundlefs  grace  divinely  free  ? 
On  earth  I  find  no  refting  place ; 
Dear  Saviour,  bid  me  come  to  thee ! 

Though  fin  detains  me  from  my  Lord, 
I  long,  I  languifli  to  be  bleft  : 
O  fpeak  one  foul  reviving  word, 
And  bid  me  come  to  thee,  my  refh 

When  I  this  wretched  heart  explore, 
Here  no  kind  fource  of  hope  appears  ; 
But  O  my  foul,  that  grace  adore, 
Free  grace,  which  triumphs  o'er  my  fears, 

Jefus,  from  thy  atoning  blood, 

My  only  confolation  flows ; 

Hope  beams  from  thee  my  Saviour  God, 

My  foul  no  other  refuge  knows. 


Oa 


121 


i040i<>K>fc^ 


On  the  Fifth  of  November. 

TO  thee,    Almighty  God,  we  bring 
The  humble  tribute  of  our  fongs : 
O  teach  cur  thankful  hearts  to  fing ! 
Or  praife  will  languifh  on  our  tongues. 

While  Britain  (favour'd  of  the  flcies) 
Recalls  the  wonders  God  hath  wrought  j 
Let  grateful  joy  adoring  rife, 
And  warm  to  rapture  every  thought. 

When  hell  and  Rome  combin'd  their  power9 
And  doom'd  thcfe  ifles  their  certain  prey ; 
Thy  hand  forbade  the  fatal  hour, 
Their  impious  plots  in  ruin  lay. 

Again  our  refllefs  cruel  foes 
Refum'd,  avow'd,  their  black  defign  ; 
Again  to  fave  us  God  arofe, 
And  Britain  own'd  the  hand  divine; 

Why, 


[       122       ] 

Why,  gracious  God,  is  Britain  fav'd  ? 
Why  bleft  with  liberty  and  light  ? 
Nor  by  fell  tyranny  enflav'd, 
Nor  loft  in  fuperftition's  night  ? 

Not  for  our  fakes,  we  confcious  own  ; 
A  wretched,  vile,  ungrateful  race  : 
'Tis  done  to  make  thy  glory  known ; 
To  fhew  the  wonders  of  thy  grace. 

The  wonders  of  thy  grace  compleat; 
Reform  this  wretched,   guilty  land! 
Let  thankful  love,  beneath  thy  feet, 
Confefs  thy  kind,  thy  guardian  hand  ! 

Let  every  age  adore  thy  name, 
While  nature's  circling  wheels  fhall  roll  I 
Thy  mercies  every  tongue  proclaim, 
And  found  thy  praife  from  pole  to  pole. 


Oa 


[     123     ] 


.K>K^^04-C>^01<^^04<^^ 


On  a  day  of  prayer  for  fuccefs  in  war. 

LORD,  how  {hall  wretched  finners  dare 
Look  up  to  thy  divine  abode  ? 
Or  offer  their  imperfeft  prayer 
Before  a  juft,  a  holy  God  ? 

Bright  terrors  guard  thy  awful  feat, 
And  dazling  glories  veil  thy  face ! 
Yet  mercy  calls  us  to  thy  feet, 
Thy  throne  is  ftill  a  throne  of  grace. 

O  may  our  fouls  thy  grace  adore, 
May  Jefus  plead  our  humble  claim ; 
While  thy  proteftion  we  implore, 
In  his  prevailing,  glorious  name. 

With  all  the  boafled  pomp  of  war 
In  vain  we  dare  the  hoftile  field  : 
In  vain,  unlefs  the  Lord  be  there  ; 
Thy  arm  alone  is  Britain's  fliield. 

Let 


C   124  3 

Let  paft  experience  of  thy  care 
Support  our  hope,  our  truft  invite* 
Again  attend  our  humble  prayer, 
Again  be  mercy  thy  delight! 

Our  arms  fucceed,  our  councils  guide, 
Let  thy  right  hand  our  caufe  maintain ; 
'Till  war's  deftru&ive  rage  fubfide, 
And  peace  refume  her  gentle  reign. 

O  when  fhall  time  the  period  bring 
When  raging  war  fhall  wafle  no  more  ; 
When  peace  fhall  ftretch  her  balmy  wing 
From  Europe's  coaft  to  India's  fhore  ? 

When  fhall  the  gofpel's  healing  ray 
(Kind  fource  of  amity  divine  I) 
Spread  o'er  the  world  celeflial  day  ? 
When  fhall  the  nations,  Lord,  be  thine  ? 


Hymn 


Hymn  for  a  day  of  public  thankfgiving 

for  PEACE. 

GREAT  God  infpire  each  heart  and  tongue 
Thy  wonderous  goodnefs  to  proclaim  ; 
And  bid  the  animating  fong 
Glow  with  devotion's  lively  flame. 
To  thee  let  favour'd  Britain  raife 
Her  fweeteft  notes  of  thankful  praife. 

But  where  fhall  we  begin  to  trace 

The  wonders  of  thy  hand  divine  ? 

In  every  feafon,  every  place 

How  numerous  and  how  bright  they  fhin'c. 

To  God  ye  favour'd  Britons  raife 

Your  fweeteft  notes  of  thankful  praife. 

Abroad,  protection  and  fuccefs 
Proclaim'd  that  Britain's  God  was  there ; 
At  home,  he  bade  fair  plenty  blefs, 
The  fruitful  fields  confefs'd  his  care; 
To  God  ye  favour'd  Britons  raife 
Your  fweet  notes  of  thankful  praife, 

Bm 


t    "6    ] 

But  yet  beneath  the  hoftile  fword 
Has  many  a  worthy  patriot  bled, 
And  many  a  mourning  heart  deplord 
A  friend,  a  fon,  a  brother  dead  ! 
The  fword  is  fheath'd — ye  Britons  raife 
To  God  your  fweeteft  notes  of  praife. 

The  horrors  of  the  fanguine  field 
Which  fadden'd  victory's  faireft  plume, 
To  fcenes  of  pleafure  now  mall  yield 
And  peace  her  gentle  reign  refume. 
To  God  ye  favour'd  Britons  raife 
Your  fweeteft  notes  of  thankful  praife, 

Kind  peace,  from  her  propitious  fmiles 
What  numerous,  various  bleflings  flow  ! 
Great  God,  to  thee  thefe  happy  ifles 
Unnumber'd  obligations  owe. 
To  thee  let  favour'd  Britain  raife 
Her  fweeteft  notes  of  thankful  praife. 

Crown,  gracious  God,  thy  gift  of  peace 
With  gifts  yet  nobler,  more  divine  ! 
O  let  thy  all-prevailing  grace 
Make  Britain  more  entirely  thine  ! 
Devotion  then  to  thee  fhall  raife 
Sublimer  notes  of  thankful  Draife, 


To 


[     127    ] 

To ,  on  the  death  of  her  father. 

rTPHOUGH  nature's  voice  you  mull  obey, 
■*"    Think,  while  your  fwelling  griefs  o'erflow, 
That  hand,  which  takes  your  joys  away, 
That  fovereign  hand  can  heal  your  %woe- 

And  while  your  mournful  thoughts  deplore 
The  father  gone,  remov'd  the  friend  ! 
With  heart  refign'd,  his  grace  adore, 
On  whom  your  nobler  hopes  depend. 

Does  he  not  bid  his  children  rife 

Through  death's  dark  (hades,  to  realms  of  light  ? 

Yet,  when  he  calls  them  to  the  fkies, 

Shall  fond  furvivors  mourn  their  flight? 

His  word  (here  let  your  foul  relyj 
Immortal  confolation  gives : 
Your  heavenly  Father  cannot  die, 
Jefus  the  friend,  for  ever  lives. 


C     "8     ] 

O  be  that  deareft  friend  your  truft, 
On  his  almighty  arm  recline ; 
He,  when  your  comforts  fink  in  dull, 
Can  give  you  bleflings  more  divine. 


4»^^>^4*>^^>^^^>^^>^^>^^.^ 


To  Myra. 

COULD  thefe  weak  nerves,  this  trembling 
hand  impart 
The  animated  wifh,  the  tender  figh 
That  pleafes  and  that  pains  this  throbbing  heart, 
Then  friendfhip's  form  fliould  meet  thy  mental  eye. 

Oh  train'd  to  virtue  in  affliction's  fchool, 

Long  fince  convinced  what  heaven  ordains  is  bed;' 

Still,  Hill  adhere  to  this  unerring  rule, 

Be  refignation  ft  ill  a  welcome  guefl. 

In  fullering  and  in  fentiment  allied 
What  boon  for  Myra  (hall  my  wifhes  crave  ? 
That  gracious  heaven  would  be  her  conflant  guide, 
In  grief  fupport  her  and  from  danger  fave  ! 

Oft 


C   129  ] 

Oft  through  the  gloomy  fhades  of  mortal  nigh«, 
O  may  my  friend  enjoy  a  cheering  ray 
(Sweet  emanation  of  fincere  delight  !) 
From  the  fair  regions  of  eternal  day. 

There  may  we  meet,  and  with  the  blifsful  choir 
To  love  divine  the  fong  triumphant  raife ! 
While  grateful  wonder  tunes  the  raptur'd  lyre 
To  boundlefspleafurc  and  immortal  praife. 


<3<2$<2$<Z>^ 


To  an  Infant  three  weeks  old, 


CAN  I  bid  thee,  lovely  ftranger, 
Welcome  to  a  world  of  care  ? 
Where  attends  thee  many  a  danger, 
Where  awaits  thee  many  a  fnare? 

Hence,  away,  ye  dark  furmizes, 
Hope  prefents  a  fairer  fcene ; 
Many  a  blooming  pleafure  rifes, 
Many  a  funbeam  fhines  ferene. 

K  O  may 


£    *3ft    1 

O  may  providence  defend  thee? 
Circled  in  its  guardian  arms, 
Dangers  may  in  vain  attend  thee, 
Safe  amid  furrounding  harms. 

Shall  1  wifh  the  world  carefling? 
With  thee  pleafure,  grandeur,  wealth  ? 
No — but  many  a  nobler  bleflihg; 
Wifdom,  virtue,  friendfhip,  health. 

May'ft  thou  know  the  gracious  donor, 
Early  know,  and  love  and  praife! 
Then  fhall  real  wealth  and  honour, 
Peace  and  pleafure  crown  thy  days. 


^><^^^><^><^!><^><4,><^ 


Breathing  after  God, 


WHERE  is  my  God  ?  does  he  retire 
Beyond  the  reach  of  humble  fighs  ? 
Are  thefe  weak  breathings  ofclefire 
Too  languid  to  afcend  the  fMes  ? 

Where 


C     »3*     ] 

Where  is  my  God  ?  can  he  be  mine 
And  yet  fo  long  conceal  his  face  ? 
And  mud  I  every  joy  refign 
Nor  hope  for  his  returning  grace  ? 

Hence  guilty  diffidence  depart, 
His  goodnefs  never  can  decline  f 
He  fees  this  weak  this  trembling  heart 
That  yctafpires  to  call  him  mine* 

He  hears  die  breathings  of  defire, 

The  weak  petition  if  fincere, 

Is  not  forbidden  to  afpire, 

And  hope  to  reach  his  gracious  tar. 

Look  up  my  foul  with  cheerful  eye, 
See  where  the  great  Redeemer  Hands, 
The  glorious  advocate  on  high, 
With  precious  incenfe  in  his  hands- 
He  fweetens  every  humble  groan, 
He  recommends  each  broken  prayer; 
Recline  thy  hope  on  him  alone, 
Whofe  power  and  love  forbid  defpair. 

Teach  my  weak  heart,  O  gracious  Lord, 
With  ftronger  faith  to  call  thee  mine, 
Bid  me  pronounce  the  blifsful  word, 
My  father  God  with  joy  divine. 

K  2  Filia; 


C    *3*    ] 

Filial  Submissions 

If  ye  endure  chajlening>  God  dealttk  with  you 
as  with  fons,  for  what  Jon  is  he  whom  the  Fa- 
ther chafleneth  not.     Heb.  xii,  7. 

AND  can  my  heart  afpire  fo  high, 
To  fay,  "  my  Father  God !" 
Lord  at  thy  feet  I  fain  would  lie, 
And  learn  to  kifs  the  rod. 

I  would  fubmit  to  all  thy  will, 

For  thou  art  good  and  wife ; 
Let  every  anxious  thought  be  Hill, 

Nor  one  faint  murmur  rife. 

Thy  love  can  cheer  the  darkfome  gloom, 

And  bid  me  wait  ferene  ; 
Till  hopes  and  joys  immortal  bloom, 

And  brighten  all  the  fcene. 

My 


C    *33    ] 

My  father — O  permit  my  heart, 
To  plead  her  humble  claim, 

And  afk  the  blifs  thofe  words  impart 
In  my  Redeemer's  name. 


*0|C*O!OK^O!0*0t 


Humble    Trust, 

WHY  fhould  rny  pining  fpirit  be 
So  long  a  ftranger  to  my  Lord, 
When  promifes  divinely  free, 
Invite  me  in  his  facred  word  ? 

Does  he  not  bid  the  weary  come, 
And  call  the  wretched  fons  of  grief, 
To  him  their  refuge  and  their  home, 
Their  heavenly  friend,  their  fure  relief? 

Yes  by  the  kindeft,  tendered  names* 
My  Lord  invites  my  humble  truft; 
My  diffidence  he  gently  blames, 
How  foft  the  cenfure  and  how  juft, 

K  3  This 


I   134 -] 

This  trembling  frame  worn  out  with  pains 
On  thee  my  guardian  God  depends; 
And  while  my  fainting  heart  complains, 
To  thee  the  plaintive  groan  afcends. 

Though  all  the  powers  of  nature  fail, 
And  life's  pale  trembling  lamp  decline ; 
Thy  grace  can  bid  my  faith  prevail, 
Can  give  me  fortitude  divine. 

That  grace  which  bids  my  hope  afpire 
Can  every  anxious  fear  remove, 
Can  give  me  all  my  foul's  defire, 
The  full  affurance  of  thy  love, 


#C>^><4<^#0#O^K>^0^0^ 


Hymn   to  Jesus. 


O  HALL  loyal  nations  hail  the  day,* 

O    That  crowns  their  king  with  loud  acclaim  ? 

And  fhall  not  faints  their  homage  pay, 

To  their  beloved  Saviour's  name  ? 

Ye  faints,  refound  in  joyful  ftrains, 

;  JefliSj,  the  King  of  glory  reigns ! 


The  coronaiion  of  king  George  III. 


Jefug 


£     '35     3 

Jefus  who  vanquihYd  all  your  foes, 
Who  came  to  fave,  who  reigns  to  blefs. 
From  him  your  every  comfort  flows, 
Life,  liberty,  and  joy,  and  peace. 
Refound,  refound  in  joyful  flrains, 
Jefus,  the  King  of  glory  reigns  ! 

Yes,  thou  art  worthy  dearefl  Lord, 
Ofuniverfal  endlefs  praife  ; 
With  every  power  to  be  ador'd, 
That  men  or  angels  e'er  can  raife. 
Let  heaven  and  earth  unite  their  {trains, 
Jefus,  the  King  of  glory  reigns  ! 

But  earth,  nor  heaven  can  e'er  proclaim, 

The  boundlefs  glories  of  their  king; 

Yet  mud  our  hearts  adore  his  name, 

Dear  name,  whence  all  our  bleflings  fpring  ! 

Refound,  refound  in  joyful  flrains, 

Jefus  the  King  of  glory  reigns  ! 

How  mean  the  tribute  mortals  pay, 

How  cold  the  heart,  how  faint  the  tongue; 

But  Lord  thy  coronation  day, 

Shall  tune  a  more  exalted  fong: 

Refounding  in  immortal  flrains, 

Jefus  the  King  of  glory  reigns  1 

K  4  Ke 


C     >3<5    3 

He  comes,  he  comes,  with  triumph  crown'd, 

In  dazzling  robes  of  light  array 'd, 

Faith  views  the  fplendor  dawning  round, 

Earth's  faireft  luftre  links  in  {hade. 

Refound,  refound  in  joyful  drains, 

Jefus  the  King  of  glory  reigns ! 


^|?C>^C>K>K^^C>iO:#0#0# 


The  King  of   Saints. 

COME,  ye  that  love  the  Savior's  name, 
And  joy  to  make  it  known: 
The  fovereign  of  your  hearts  proclaim, 
And  bow  before  his  throne. 

Behold  your  King,  your  Savior  crown'4 

With  glories  all  divine; 
And  tell  the  wondering  nations  round 

How  bright  thofe  glories  (hine. 

While  majefty's  effulgent  blaze 

Surrounds  his  awful -brow; 
E'en  angels  tremble  as  they  gaze, 

And  veil'd  adorinq;  bow. 


But 


[    *37    3 

But  love  attempers  every  ray, 
Love,  how  divinely  fweet ! 

That  ftoops  to  view  the  fons  of  clay, 
And  calls  them  to  his  feet  ! 

Infinite  power  and  boundlefs  grace, 

In  him  unite  their  rays : 
You  that  have  e'er  beheld  his  face, 

Can  you  forbear  his  praife  ? 

When  in  his  earthly  courts  we  view 
The  glories  of  our  King ; 

We  long  to  love  as  angels  do, 
And  wifli  like  them  to  fing. 

And  fhall  we  long  and  wifh  in  vain? 

Lord  teach  our  fongs  to  rife  ! 
Thy  love  can  animate  the  ftrain, 

And  bid  it  reach  the  fkies. 

O  happy  period  !  glorious  day! 

When  heaven  and  earth  (hall  raife. 
With  all  their  powers  the  raptur'd  lay, 

To  celebrate  thy  praife. 


HYMtf 


t    >38    3 


)OCO' 


Hymn  for  the  Lord's  Day  Morning, 

GREAT  God,  this  facred  day  of  thine, 
Demands  our  fouls  collected  powers  : 
May  we  employ  in  work  divine, 
Thefe  folemn,  thefe  devoted  hours  ! 
O  may  our  fouls  adoring  own, 
The  grace  which  calls  us  to  thy  throne  ! 

Hence,  ye  vain  cares  and  trifles  fly, 
Where  God  refides  appear  no  more, 
Omnifcient  God,  thy  piercing  eye, 
Can  every  fecret  thought  explore. 
O  may  thy  grace  our  hearts  refine, 
And  fix  our  thoughts  on  things  divine. 

The  word  oflife  difpens'd  to  day, 
Invites  us  to  a  heavenly  feaft  ; 
May  every  ear  the  call  obey, 
Be  every  heart  a  humble  guefl! 
O  bid  the  wretched  fons  of  need, 
On  foul-reviving  dainties  feed  ! 

Thy 


[     439    ] 

Thy  fpirit's  powerful  aid  impart, 
O  may  thv  word  with  life  divine, 
Engage  the  ear,  and  warm  the  heart; 
Then  ill  all  the  day  indeed  be  thine; 
Then  {hall  our  fouls  adoring  own, 
The  grace  which  calls  us  to  thy  throne. 


>K^l-Oi-^C>^04!#C>^C>i'C>^ 


Happy  Poverty,  or  the  Poor  in  Spirit 
bleffed. 

Matt,  v,  3. 

YE  humble  fouls  complain  no  more, 
Let  faith  furvey  your  future  flore. 
How  happy,  how  divinely  bleft, 
The  facred  words  of  truth  atteft. 

When  confeious  grief  laments  finccre, 
And  pours  the  penitential  tear; 
Hope  points  to  your  dejefled  cyest 
The  bright  reverfion  in  the  fkies. 


i* 


C     *4o     j 

In  vain  the  fons  of  wealth  and  pride, 
Defpife  your  lot,  your  hopes  deride  ; 
In  vain  they  boafl  their  little  ftores, 
Trifles  are  their's,  a  kingdom  yours. 

A  kingdom  of  immenfe  delight, 
Where  health,  and  peace,  and  joy  unite  ; 
Where  undeclining  pleafures  rife, 
And  every  wifh  hath  full  fupplies. 

A  kingdom  which  can  ne'er  decay, 
While  time  fweeps  earthly  thrones  away ; 
The  ftate  which  power  and  truth  fuftain, 
Unmov'd  for  ever  mud  remain  . 

There  (hall  your  eyes  with  rapture  view, 
The  glorious  friend  that  dy'd  for  you  ; 
That  dy'd  to  ranfom,  dy'd  to  raife 
To  crowns  of  joy,  and  fongs  of  praife. 

Jems,  to  thee  I  breathe  my  prayer, 
Reveal,  confirm  my  intereft  there ! 
Whate'er  my  humble  lot  below, 
This,  this  my  foul  de  fires  to  know ! 

O  let  me  hear  that  voice  divine, 
Pronounce  the  glorious  bieffing  mine  ! 
Enrolled  among  thy  happy  poor, 
My  largeft  wifhes  afk  no  rnore. 

The 


£  i4i   3 

The  neceffity  of  renewing  grace. 

HOW  helplefs,  guilty  nature  lies, 
Unconfcious  of  its  load  ! 
The  heart  unchang'd  can  never  rife, 
To  happinefs  and  God. 

The  will  perverfe,  the  paffions  blind, 

In  paths  of  ruin  flray  : 
Reafon  debas'd  can  never  find, 

The  fafe,  the  narrow  way. 

Can  ought  beneath  a  power  divine 

The  fiubborn  will  fubdue  ? 
?Tis  thine,  almighty  Savior,  thine 

To  form  the  heart  anew. 

'Tis  thine  the  paffions  to  recall, 
And  upwards  bid  them  rife  ; 

And  make  the  fcales  of  error  fall 
from  reafon's  darken'd  eyes. 


7H 


C  u*  3 

To  chafe  the  fhades  of  death  away, 

And  bid  the  finner  live  ! 
A  beam  of  heaven,  a  vital  ray 

TTis  thine  aione  to  give. 

O  change  thefe  wretched  hearts  of  ours, 

And  give  them  life  divine! 
Then  fhall  our  paffions  and  our  powers 

Almighty  Lord,  be  thine* 


^•X^X  $-X  ^X^X^X4X4;X4* 

The    Pearl  of    great   price,, 
Matt.  xiii.  46. 

YE  glittering  toys  cf  earth  adieu, 
A  nobler  choice   be  mine; 
A  real  prize  attracts  my  view, 
A  treafure  all  divine. 

Be  gone,  unworthy  of  my  cares, 

Ye  fpecious  balls  of  fenfe  ; 
Inefiimable  worth  appears-, 

The  pearl  of  price  immenfe. 


C     M3    3 

Jefus,  to  multitudes  unknown, 

O  name  divinely  fweet! 
Jefus,  in  thee,  in  thee  alone, 

Wealth,  honor,  pleafure  meet. 

Should  both  the  Indies  at  my  call, 

Their  boafted  ftores  refign, 
With  joy  I  would  renounce  them  all, 

For  leave  to  call  thee  mine. 

Should  earth's  vain  treafures  all  depart, 
Of  this  dear  gift  poffefs'd; 

I'd  clafp  it  to  my  joyful  heart, 
And  be  for  ever  blefs'd. 

Dear  fovereign  of  my  foul's  defires, 

Thy  love  is  blifs  divine  ; 
Accept  the  wifli  that  love  infpircs, 

And  bid  me  call  thee  mine. 


^^^^^2i$f^t^ 


Miscellaneous  Pieces 


IN       PROSE, 


<y^  f^f  >^i  nf  yr?  e*y  ^*>  P*f  «v^  fV  *V^  ***?  V1*  ^T 

MISCELLANEOUS     PIECES. 


joO°C 


The  Journey   of    Life. 

RUMINATING  one  evening  on  this  che- 
quered fcenc  of  mortal  life,  its  pains  and 
pleafures,  hopes  and  cares  ;  and  endeavouring  to 
reduce  my  thoughts  into  fome  kind  of  order,  it 
produced  the  following  reverie. 

I  fancied  myfelf  beginning  a  difficult  and  ha- 
zardous journey,  I  knew  not  at  fir  ft  from  whence 
I  came  nor  whither  I  was  going,  yet  though  igno- 
rant and  helplefs,  had  fome  little  fen fe  of  my  de- 
pendence on  the  fkill  of  feveral  perfons,  who  led 
me  by  turns  with  affeclionate  care :  I  had  only  a 
little  dubious  light,  like  the  fir  ft  faint  glimmerings 
of  approaching  morn  ;  but  as  daylight  by  degrees 
came  on  I  could  difcover  fome  thing  of  the  prof- 
ncd  before  me,  and  found  myfelf  at  the  foot  of  a 
L  2  very 


[     i48    ] 

tfery  high  mountain;  the  wide  extended  fcene  on 
the  right  and  left  as  far  as  my  eye  could  reach  pre- 
fented  an  endlefs  variety  of  objects. 

Finding  my  ftrength  increafe  and  with  it  a  grow- 
ing curiofity,  I  went  forward  till  I  came  to  a- 
iequeftered  fcene  of  fhady  groves  and  flowery 
vales,  through  which  foft  cryftal  ftreams  mean- 
dering ftrayed  and  gave  and  received  new  beauty  ; 
arrayed  in  robes  of  rural  innocence  and  fmiling 
with  contented  looks,  the  happy  natives  tuned 
their  artlefs  fongs,  and  all  the  enchanting  fcene 
was  harmony  and  peace  !  1  liflened  to  the  Tooth- 
ing Arams  with  rapture,  and  lain  I  would  have 
dwelt  in  thofe  delightful  groves !  but  a  monitory 
voice  reminded  me  that  I  was  on  a  journey  and 
that  this  attractive  place  was  not  my  home, 

I  then  turned  my  eyes  to  another  part  of  the 
profpeft,  and  beheld  lofty  buildings  magnificently 
furniflied,  crouded  ftreets  filled  with  hurry  and 
confufion,  refounding  with  a  thoufand  harfh  dif- 
cordant  notes ;  the  greater  part  of  the  inhabitants 
were  employed  in  inceffant  labour  of  various 
kinds,  and  feemed  to  have  very  little  relifh  of 
pleafuremore  than  the  animals  which  I  obferved 
fometimes  afiifted  them  in  their  work;  thefe' 
appeared  to  be  flaves  to  a  few  perfons  who 
fat  in  thofe  flately  domes  dreft  in  fplendid  gar- 
ments and  furrounded  with  all  the  pomp  of  lux- 
ury, 


C     *49     'J 

ury,  yet  on  many  of  their  faces  I  obferved  tlue 
marks  of  difcontent  and  care.  Tired  with  this 
difagreeable  fcene  my  eye  roved  farther  Hill,  and 
furveyed  huge  tracts  of  fandy  defarts,  uncultivated 
wilds,  and  thorny  labyrinths,  but  could  not  dif- 
cover  the  end  of  my  journey,  which  gave  me 
great  anxiety.  1  faw  before  me  a  variety  of  paths, 
fome  were  fmooth  and  verdant,  and  winding 
feemed  to  promife  an  eafy  afcent  to  the  top  of  the 
mountain  which  I  wiffied  to  reach,  others  ap- 
peared difficult  and  dangerous.  I  fhould  have 
been  at  a  lofs  to  know  the  right  path,  had  not  my 
conductors  (who  at  my  firft  fetting  out  led  me  and 
were  ftill  near)  put  into  my  hands  a  book,  in 
which  I  fcund  a  map  of  the  country  through 
which  I  was  travelling,  a  description  of  the  place 
to  which  I  was  going,  and  plain  inductions  con- 
cerning the  road  I  was  to  take:  this  book,  of  fo 
much  importance  to  my  fafety  and  comfort,  I 
was  informed  was  written  by  the  direction  of  a 
perfon  of  confummate  fkill  and  undoubted  vera- 
city, and  who  had  alfo  promifed  fuch  powerful 
protection  and  affiftance  to  thofe  travellers  who 
might  fincerely  defire  it,  as  fiiould  preferve  thern 
through  every  danger  and  enable  them  to  furmount 
every  difficulty. 

Defiring  to   follow  the  directions  of  this  book, 
and  imploring  the  protection  and  affiflance  of  its 

L3  Sr 


vfcl 


[     *5°    3 

gfceat  author,  I  chofe  a  narrow  path,  which  I 
was  allured  led  to  life,  another  name  for  the  land 
of  happinefs. 

>  Here  I  met  with  fome  agreeable  companions, 
whole  longer  acquaintance  with  the  facred  book, 
and  better  knowledge  of  the  road,  made  their 
converfation  not  only  entertaining  but  ufeful ;  of 
thefe  fome  purfued  their  way  with  cheerfulnefs 
and  alacrity,  others  were  timorous  and  fearful, 
ready  to  faint  under  difcouragements  and  terrified 
at  the  apprehenfions  of  danger.  Though  they 
were  all  travelling  to  the  fame  place,  and  pro- 
fe fifed  to  follow  the  fame  directions,  yet  by  reafon 
of  weaknefs  and  mifapprehenfion,  they  had  diffe- 
rent notions  concerning  fome  circumffances  in 
their  journey,  which  often  occafioned  difputes  a- 
inong  them,  and  interrupted  that  peace  and  har- 
mony which  it  was  their  mutual  intereft  to  main- 
tain. 

I  fometimes  looked  round  me  and  faw  the  roads 
on  either  fide  peopled  with  a  multitude  of  paflen- 
gers,  fome  hurrying  on,  feeking,  as  they  vainly 
imagined,  the  land  of  happinefs,  but  defpifing 
thole  unerring  directions  which  only  could  teach 
the  way  ;  and  fondly  believing  their  own  wild  con- 
jectures a  fufficient  guide,  they  contemned  thofe 
in  the  narrow  path,  as  a  company  of  precife  fools, 
fometimes   deriding,    or  if  they  happened  to  fee* 

any 


C     «*»     ] 

one  flumble,    laughing   aloud,    and  fometimcs 
endeavouring  to  feduce    them  to  their  own   party, 
gave  them   great  annoyance.     Another   company- 
no  lefs  miftaken  were   alfo'  defirous  of  happinefs, 
but  not  liking  the  journey  and  fancying  their  pre- 
fent  abode    with  improvements   might  be  made  a 
paradife,  were    bufily  employed  in  meafuring  the 
ground,  collecting   materials,  projecting    fchemes, 
and   drawing  plans,  which  ere    they   were   finifh- 
ed  were   rejected  for  new  ones:   thefe  were  quiet 
enough,  but  generally  appeared  difTatisfied.     As  to 
myfelf  I  met  with  many  difficulties,  occafioned  by 
thick  mifts  which  arofe  from  the  earth,   and  fome- 
times   almofl   obfeured    the  light   of  the   fun ;   in 
thefe  feafons  of  darknefs  I  went  flowly   on,    trem- 
bling    and  diffident,  ready  to  fear  I    fhould  never 
reach  the  abodes  of  happinefs !  but  as  rays  of  light 
now    and   then   broke  through  the  gloom,  it  was 
feldom  totally  dark,    and  my  book  often  afforded 
me  comfort  and  fupport  :    as   I  went  farther  the 
gloom  difpenfed  by  degrees,  and  the  cheering  fun* 
beams  infpired  new  life  and  vigour. 

In  the  earlier  part  of  my  journey,  I  wTas  delight- 
ed with  the  charms  of  rural  mafic,  and  learned  to 
imitate  the  foothing  Drains  ;  retaining  flill  my 
fondnefs  for  the  foft  amufement,  I  often  tuned  the 
jyre  to  complaining  notes  or  cheerful  airs,  accord- 
L  4  ing 


C   *52  3 

ing  to  my  different  fituation,  and  found  it  anagree« 
able  folace :  fometimes,  the  various  diftrefles  of 
my  fellow  travellers  awoke  the  friendly  firings  to 
fympathizing  forrow,  and  fometimes  the  fatal  er- 
rors of  thofe  deluded  mortals  who  were  purfuing, 
unconcerned,  the  way  to  the  region  of  mifery, 
drew  forth  the  melting  notes  of  pity  ! 

Now  and  then  in  a  happy  fhining  hour,  fired 
with  the  glorious  description  of  the  land  of  happi- 
nefs  contained  in  the  facred  book,  I  aimed  a  nobler 
fong,  and  my  thoughts,  winged  with  love  and  de- 
iire,  feemed  to  rife  above  mortality,  and  longed  to 
join  the  blifsful  natives  in  flrains  of  celeftial  har- 
mony ! — but  ah,  how  fhort  were  thefe  delightful 
feafons !  how  oft  my  weak  forgetful  heart  found 
caufe  to  mourn  its  frailty  !  a  few  flowers,  which 
grew  here  and  there  on  the  borders  of  the  road, 
often  drew  my  attention  ;  but  when  I  flopped  to 
view  and  admire  their  painted  beauties,  diverted 
with  the  trifling  employ,  my  thoughts  retained 
but  faintly  the  impreflion  of  my  journey's  end;  till 
entangled  in  the  thorns  which  were  interfperfed 
among  the  flowers,  I  became  fenfible  of  my  carelefs 
folly,  or  the  monitory  voice  beforementioned  rouz- 
ed  me  from  the  fatal  indolence.  And  oft  the  ra- 
diant lamp  of  day,  as  if  to  chide  my  mifimprove- 
inent  of  his  ufeful  beams,  wrapt  his  cheering  in- 
fluences 


C     *53     ] 

fluences  in  a  gloomy  cloud,  and  left  my  fleps 
confolate  and  (ad.  In  thefe  diflrefsful  hours  my 
heart  fought  comfort  in  the  facred  book,  implor- 
ing that  divine  flrength  which  it  encouraged  me  to 
afk  and  hope  for,  nor  did  I  afk  and  hope  in  vain; 
again  the  gloom  withdrew,  the  fun  appeared,  and 
with  his  vital  beams  revived  my  drooping  fpirits 
and  animated  my  feeble  fleps. 

Yet  other  difficulties  attended  my  journey,  cold 
piercing  blafis  and  chilling  (bowers,  pained  and 
opprelled  my  fhivering  frame,  but  when  the  florin 
abated  'the  funlhine  feemed  brighter  and  warmer 
than  before.  Sometimes  iiwi fible  enemies  attack- 
ed me,  againft  whofe  power  a!l  my  flrength  was 
weaknefs,  but  my  great  protector  difp  laved  before 
me  his  impenetrable  fhield,  and  my  baffled  foes 
retreated.  If  the  path  was  rough  my  feet  were  apt 
to  flumble,  but  my  kind  guardian  extended  his  af- 
fifling  hand  and  preferved  me  from  falling.  Yet 
amidft  my  various  discouragements,  when  I  look- 
ed round  me,  I  law  the  fufferings  of  many  of  my 
fellow  travellers  were  far  greater  than  mine,  which 
excited  fentiments  of  gratitude  for  myfelf  and  com- 
paiTion  for  them. 

Thus  exercifed    with  viciiTitudes,  I  reached   at 
length  the  fummit  of  the  mountain,  where  I  turn- 
ed 


C     *54     ] 

cd  myfelf  round  to  furvey  the  Heps  my  weary  Jeet 
had  meafured  ;  I  faw  nothing  in  the  retrofpefliou 
to  tempt  my  return,  but  much  to  make  me  humble 
in  myfelf,  and  thankful  to  my  gracious  preferver. 
I  now  turned  to  purfue  my  journey,  but  paufed  a 
little  to  confider  the  profpe£l  before  me,  and  found 
it  not  much  unlike  that  on  the  other  fide  the  moun- 
tain, this  remarkable  difference  indeed  there  was^ 
the  groves  and  flowery  vales  which  had  fo  charmed 
me  in  the  earlier  part  of  my  journey  now  appeared 
lefs  verdant  and  lively,  and  the  fcenes  of  pomp  and 
luxury,  and  the  din  of  bufy  crouded  ftreets,  feem- 
ed  fiill  more  diftafteful. 

I  yet  faw  multitudes  of  poor  miflaken  creatures 
in  the  road  to  mifery,  but  helplefs  pity  and  una- 
vailing wifhcs  were  all  I  could  give  them.  I  miff- 
ed many  whom  I  had  feen  in  my  journey,  fome 
in  the  narrow  path,  others  in  the  different  roads, 
who  had  been  fnatched  away  by  an  unfeen  hand, 
ere  they  had  reached  the  fummit :  I  now  looked 
forward  as  far  as  my  eye  could  reach,  to' try  if  I 
could  difcover  the  end  of  my  way,  but  a  thick 
cloud  terminated  the  view.  All  I  could  do  was 
to  confult  my  book,  in  which  I  had  often  read, 
that  before  I  could  enter  the  land  of  happinefs,  I 
muft  pafs  through  a  difmal  vale,  overfhadowed 
with  more  than  midnight  darknefs,  and  filled  with 

a  thou- 


C     ]55     ] 

a  thoufand  terrors;  but  that  the  powerful  and  gra- 
cious friend  whom  1  have  fo  often  mentioned, 
h.:d  bimfelf  pafled  through  it,  and  made  it  fafe  to 
thofe  who  trull  in  his  protection  ;  not  all  its  ter- 
rors can  hurt  them,  he  will  fufiain  their  fainting 
fpirits,  and  open  the  fhining  gates  of  happinefs  to 
receive  them,  and  they  fhall  dwell  for  ever  with 
him  in  fullnefs  of  joy. 

As  I  reviewed  thefe  fweet  afiurances,  hope 
warmed  my  bofom  and  caimed  my  rifing  fears,  my 
reverie  became  an  awful  reality,  and  I  concluded 
humbly  defiring  to  truft  the  reminder  of  my  jour- 
ney, whether  long  or  fhort,  painful  or  eafy.  to  the 
infinite  power  and  goodnefs  of  this  almighty  friend, 
and  to  enter  under  his  care,  in  his  due  time,  into 
die  land  of  immortal  happinefs.     Amen. 


All 


[     156     ] 


4-^^><^><^><^^><^><^><^><^ 


All   thy   works  praise  thee, 

THE  glory  of  God  is  the  end  of  the  creation. 
To  this  the  vegetable  and  the  animal  world 
in  their  various  orders  and  different  capacities  con- 
tribute, and  render  their  humble  praife  to  their 
almighty  author.  The  fun  and  moon,  and  all  thofe 
glittering  luminaries  which  deck  the  tracklefs  azure, 
proclaim  the  glorious  fource  of  light,  from  whence 
they  derive  their  luflre,  and  with  fervid  blaze, 
mild  beam,  or  twinkling  ray,  refleEt  their  maker's 
praife.  The  heavens  declare  the,-  glory  of  God, 
and  the  firmament  fheweth  his  handy  work.  The 
changing  feafons,  as  they  roll,  difplay  the  divine 
perfections,  and  the  {horter  revolutions  of  day  and 
night,  with  alternate  voice  repeat  the  conftant,  the 
univerfal  theme.  Day  unto  day  uttereth  fpeech, 
and  night  unto  night  fheweth  knowledge. 

But  man,  the  mafter-piece  of  this  lower  crea- 
tion, the  finifhing  ftroke  of  almighty  fkill,  man, 
diflinguifhed  with  the  godlike  faculty  of  reafon, 
arjd  endowed  with  fuperior  abilities  to  difplay  his 

Maker's 


[     *57     ] 

Maker's  praife,  alas,  how  fallen !  What  ruin  baa 
fin  occafioned!    the    loweft   reptile,  the  minuted 
infecl;  anfwer  the  end  of  their  creation  better  than 
man  !  humbling  thought — ah,  let  me  never  boaft 
of  a  diftinSion    fo  inverted,    a   capacity   fo  fadly 
mifimproved  !   How  is  this  foul  of  mine  ahnofl  un- 
confcious  of  its  divine  original,  and  thoughtlefs  of 
its    infinite   importance,    groveling   in   the   duft  ? 
Thefe  aclive   powers,  thefe  reftlefs  defires,  which 
were  implanted  in  my  frame,  to  contemplate  the 
perfections  of  my  almighty  Maker,  and  afpire  to 
the  enjoyment  of  his  favour,  how  are  they  funk  in 
a  ftupid  indolence  !  bufied  and  confufed  with  trifl- 
ing cares,  or  bewildered  in  the  chafe  of  empty 
vanities 


40#04<^45040>tiO^O^O^ 


Human   Frailty. 


HOW  mean  and  defpicable  a  character  is  that 
of  the  wretched  Carlos  ?  I  juftly  call  him 
wretched,  though  by  the  world  accounted  great 
and  noble,  for  real  greatnefs  and  true  nobility  are 

not 


C    158    ] 

not  the  gift  of  fortune  ;  it  is  not  birth,  eftate,  cr 
titles,  but  virtue  only  that  confers  true  honour  I 
'tis  this  adorns  the  char  after  with  real  brightness, 
andfaroutfhines  thofe  tinfel  trappings  which  dazzle 
vulgar  eyes.  Virtue  can  indeed  ennoble  thefe  ad- 
vantages, and  with  communicated  luflre  make  them 
truly  valuable.  But  a  man  whom  prqvidence  has 
placed  in  fo  high  a  rank,  capable  of  being  the 
friend  and  ornament  of  his  country,  and  an  exam- 
ple to  all  around  him  ;  to  fee  fuch  a  man  employ 
his  time  and  cares  in  child  i  ill  fports,  purfuing  and 
collecting  butterflies,  which  have  nothing  to  re- 
commend them  but  their  gaudy  colours,  excites  at 
once  my  pity  and  contempt ! 

And  yet  with  confeious  {hame  I  may  reflect,  that 
this  is  the  very  picture  of  my  conduct ! — I  am  a 
rational  being,  capable  of  thought  and  reflection  — 
I  have  a  foul  born  to  noble  purpofes  and  expecta- 
tions !  an  heir  of  immortality  !  made  to  glorify  my 
Maker,  and  blefl  with  the  advantages  of  reafon  and 
revelation  to  direct  me  in  my  duty,  to  teach  me 
how  to  afpire  to  the  enjoyment  of  his  favour  here, 
and  everlafting  happinefs  in  his  bJifsful  piefence 
above. 

But  ah,  how  thoughtlefs  and  negligent  am  I  of 
thefe  important,  thefe  eternal   concerns!  how  are 

my 


[     *59    ] 

my  cares  employed,  my  time  and  talents  wafled  in 
the  mean  purfuit  of  vanities  and  trifles,  as  worth- 
lefs  as  thofe  little  ftiining  infe&s! — How  weak, 
how  foolifh,  how  criminal  is  this  conduft ! — I 
argue  with  myfelf,  I  am  convinced,  I  complain, 
— but  what  can  I  do  ? — Could  all  the  power  of  rea- 
foning  and  force  of  argument  alter  the  difpofition 
of  Carlos  ?  Or  can  it  alter  mine  ? — No,  it  is  not 
human  power  that  can  effefl:  it, — the  work  requires 
fupernatural  flrength  !  Tis  only  the  almighty  in- 
fluences of  divine  grace  that  can  rouze  my  languid 
powers,  recall  my  wandering  thoughts,  and  en- 
gage my  whole  heart  in  the  arduous,  yet  delightful 
employment  for  which  this  foul  of  mine  was 
made  : 

To  thee  almighty,  all-gracious  Lord,  I  come  for 
help, — convince  me  more  fully  of  my  weaknefs,. 
my  folly,  and  my  guilt,  and  pity  and  forgive  me 
for  thy  mercy  fake  !  grant  me  wifdom  to  chufe, 
and  flrength  to  purfue  nobler  objecls!  let  the  im- 
portant concerns  of  thy  glory,  and  the  welfare  of 
my  immortal  foul  employ  my  thoughts,  my  time, 
and  all  my  powers,  with  warm  attention  and  fin- 
cere  delight, 

O  God  of  mercy,  thou  that  heareft  prayer ! 
Let  thefe  poor  breathings  reach  thy  gracious  ear, 

Weak. 


C    160   j 

Weak,  impotent,  and  blind,  to  thee  I  ffy,' 

O  may  thy  grace  my  every  want  fupply  ! 

Thy  powerful  grace,  which  only  can  impart 

Conviftion,  life,  and  vigor  to  my  heart. 

Illuminate  my  yet  beclouded  eyes ! 

Thefe  empty  trifles  teach  me  to  defpife  ! 

Let  nobler  cares,  my  time,  my  thoughts  employ, 

And  bid  my  fpirit  pant  for  real  joy  ! 

Be  thy  almighty  arm,  my  nrength,  my  guide, 

And  never  from  thy  precepts  let  me  Aide. 

Let  thy  kind  influence  make  my  future  days, 

A  life  of  pleafjre,  and  a  life  of  praife. 

O  raife  thefe  faint  defires  to  a  flame  of  facred 
ardour,  and  accept  them  in  Jefus  the  Mediator, 
the  Lord  our  righteoufnefs ! 


*0#C^i-C^4iC^#c^^CD#c^i'0# 


Of   the  Knowledge  of  Ourselves. 

THIS  fcience  is  abfolutely  necefiary  to  happU 
nefs,  both  in  the  moral  and  religious  life* 
—In  the  moral  life,  this  is  the  firfl:  flop  to  all 
other  knowledge,  as  it  fhews  us  our  ignorance 
and  want  of  acquirements,  awakens  our  defire  and 

quickens 


kens  our  diligence   in  the  purfuit  of  them,  it 
has   the    peculiar    advantage    of  mortifying  pride, 
that  dangerous   encroaching  enemy,  and  teaching 
the    lovely   virtue    of    humility.     The   more  we 
know    of  ourfelves,  the  lefs  room  we  find  for  va- 
nity   and    felf-applaufe;     and    humility,    the  wife 
Solomon  allures  U8,  is  the  neareft  way  to  honour, 
It  places  our  rrrerits,  cur  neceflities,  and  our  en- 
joyments   in   their  jail    and    proper    light,    from 
whence    proceeds    the    trued    tafle     of    pleafure, 
Thus    the  knowledge  of  ourfelves  leads  to  profit, 
pleafure    and    honour,   in  which  is  comprehended 
the  general  notion  of  happinefs.     'Tis  eflentiai  to 
the   being  of  the  religious  life,  for  we  mud  know 
our   native  mifery  before  we  can  begin  to  breathe 
after    fpiritual    happinefs;  the   more   we  know  of 
ourfelves,  the  more  clearly    we  perceive   there   h 
nothing  in  us  that  bears  the  leaft  proportion  to  our 
wants,  and  confequently,  that  every  degree  of  true 
fatisfaclion  mufl  come  from    a    higher  fpring  :  we 
mufl  be  convinced  of  our  extreme  weaknefs  and 
indigence  before  our  defires  can   arife   to    God, 
for  the  neceiTary  fupplies  of  ftrength  and  grace. — 
We  mufl:  be  fenfible  of  our  ignorance,  to  make  us 
feek  for  divine  inftrnSion  from  our  glorious  teacher, 
in  whom  are  hid  all  the  treafures  of  wifdom  and 
knowledge. 

M  O  may 


[     i6»    ] 

O  may  this  important  ftudy  be  my  daily  em- 
ploy !  teach  me  O  Lord  the  knowledge  of  myfelf, 
and  lead  me  to  thee  the  eternal  fource  of  true  fe- 
licity !  — 

Man  is  himfelf  a  little  world  of  wonders, 
An  ample  field  of  fcience,  though  the  ftudy 
Is  hard  and  difficult  :  yet,  ufeful  knowledge 
Attends  the  fearch  and  compenfaies  the  pains. 
Whene'er  I  contemplate  the  human  frame, 
What  caufe  of  admiration  do  I  find, 
To  fee  fuch  traces  of  almighty  wifdom, 
And  power  almighty  every  where  appear 
The  labour  of  a  God  ! — the  matter  piece 
Is  man  of  all  his  wonderous  works 
Below  the  fkies,  and  but  a  ftep  remov'd 
From  angels,  thofe  immortal  fons  of  light! 

But  ah,  what  caufe  for  deep  abafement  too  ! 
What  room  for  mourning  at  the  painful  thought. 
That  man  is* viler  than  the  bealts  that  perifh, 
Debas'd  by  fin,  accurfed  iTn  !   defpoil'd 
Of  all  his  glory  !   blotted  from  his  foul 
Thofe  characters  divine,  which  once  befpoke 
His  Maker's  glorious  image  there  impreft. 
O  may  redeeming  love,,  renewing  grace, 
Walli  the  foul  (lain  away  and  make  me  pure  ! 
Reftore  that  glorious  image  in  my  foul, 
And  nobler  honours  give  than  thofe  I  loft! 

Humility. 


C     *«*    I 


^O^OOIOIC^C^OIO^ 


Humility. 


n   T)  E  cloathed  with  humility. " — This  apt   and 
-U  beautiful  allufion  to  a  garment,  feems  pe- 
culiarly   fuited   to    imprefs    the  facred    leffon    on 
the  mind,    by  an   accommodation  abfolutely    ne- 
cefTary  to    the    comfort  of  life;  in    this  light   le: 
me   confider   the    heavenly  virtue    recommended, 
Should  I  not   be  afhamed    to    appear  in  company 
in  an  undrefs,  or   in  ragged   dirty  cloathing  ?  And 
have  I  not  much  more  reafon  to  blufh  when  I  difco- 
ver  a  negleclofthis  neceffary,  this  ornamental  robe  ? 
Would  the  mod  tattered,    dirty  cloaths  render  my 
perfon  fo  difagreeable,  as  the  appearance  of  pride 
ehdfelf-conceit  would  make  my  mind  contemptible 
ta  a  difcerning  eye  ?    How  then  muft  it  appear  to 
»he  aH-feeing  eye  of  a  holy  God  ! 

M  £  Here, 


[     i64    ] 

Here,  all  my  higheft  attainments,  ail  my  beft 
acquirements  are  in  themfelves  as  filthy  rags !  At- 
tainments did  I  fay  and  acquirements  ?  Alas  !  of 
myfelf  I  can  do  nothing,  I  have  nothing  to  boaft 
of!  and  if  my  proud  heart,  or  my  partial  friends 
can  difcover  any  thing  amiable,  is  not  the  fuppof- 
ed  excellence  the  unmerited  gift  of  my  almighty 
benefactor?  To  his  fervice,  reafon  tells  me  it 
fhould  be  entirely  dedicated,  and  his  word,  that  it 
mull  be  improved  ! — but  ah,  how  far  do  I  come 
fhort  ?  wretched,  ungrateful  creature  !  is  it  poiTi- 
ble  for  me  to  think  oi  this  and  find  any  place  for 
pride  ? — O  let  me  throw  it  from  me  with  more  ab- 
horrence than  I  wrould  a  garment  covered  with 
mire,  and  fly  to  the  great  Redeemer,  whofe  fpot- 
lefs  righteoufnefs  is  the  only  robe  in  which  I  dare 
appear  before  the  throne  of  God  ! — Gracious  God, 
who  wilt  with  the  moil  ineftimablegift  of  thy  love, 
freely  give  us  all  things  which  we  need,  O  give 
me  more  and  more  this  lovely  ornament  of  humi- 
lity !  enable  me  to  meditate  with  delightful  atten- 
tion on  the  infinitely  amiable  excellencies  of  my 
adorable  Saviour,  and  ardently  defire  to  be  more 
like  him  in  this  engaging  virtue !  O  how  bright 
it  Ihone  in  every  fcene  of  his  aftonifhing  abafe- 
ment  !  And  did  the  holy  Jefus,  the  Lord  of  Lords,, 
and  king  of  kings  condefcend  to  innumerable  in- 
fiances  of  benevolence  to  poor  finners!  did  he  even 

ftoop 


[  1%  ] 

floop  to  wafli  the  feet  of  his  difciples,  to  teach  them 
a  leffon  of  affectionate  humility  !  and  fhall  not  I, 
a  poor  finful  creature,  rejoice  to  be  able  to  admi- 
nifter  any  comfort  or  afliftance  to  the  meaneit  of 
his  fervants  ?  Transform  meblcfled  Saviour  into 
thy  own  lovely  image,  and  make  me  meek  and 
lowly ! 


Acquaintance  with  God  the  fupreme  good. 
Job  xxii.  and  21.    Pfalm  iv.  and  6. 

THERE  is  a  defire  implanted  in  the  human 
mind,  which  no  earthly  enjoyment  can  ever 
fatisfy,  a  reftlefs,  craving  wifh  for  fome  diftant 
bappinefs,  fome  good  unpofteil ! 

That  fomething  which  Dili  prompts  th' eternal  figh, 
.For  which  we  wifh  to  live,  and  dare  to  die.     Pope- 

All  mankind  purfue  it  under  different  forms,  but 
how  falfe   the   notions !  how   miftaken  the  appre- 
henfions  of  far  the  greatefl  part !   The  libertine  fol- 
lows it,  in  the  fhape  of  pleafure,  through  all  the 
M  3  crooked 


[     i66    ] 

crooked  labyrinths  of  vice,  and  Sacrifices  virtue  and 

its   celeftial   hopes  to    dreams  of  happinefs;    but 
wakes   to  real   woe,  and  all  the  racking  pangs  of 
confcious  guilt! — The  avaricious  man  with  incef- 
fant  toil  vainly   feeks  for  it  in  the    acquifition  of 
wealth,  and  devotes   his  time,  his  cares,  and  even 
his  foul  to  the  wretched  flavery  of  heaping  up  ufe- 
lefs  treafures,  ufelefs  to  the  immortal  mind,  which 
can  never  feed  on  mining  dull. — While  others,  no 
lefs  deceived   expeft  to  find  it   in  honours,  titles, 
or  popular  applaufe.     Honours  and  titles,  what  are 
they  but  empty  forms  of  painted  air?  The  bubble 
breaks,  and  all  the  gaudy  colours  vanifh  !  and  what 
is  applaufe?   a  fleeting  breath  of  wind,  a  mufical 
air  played  and  forgotten,  and  oft  it  breaks  abrupt- 
ly off,  or  finks  to  harfh  difcordant  notes  :  deluded 
mortals!  to  feek  fubftantial  blifs  in  empty  founds, 
while  they  are  perhaps  regardlefs  of  the  real  fatis- 
fa&ion,  which  flows  from  the  fecret  whifpers  of  a 
peaceful  confeience,    fprinkled   with  the  atonjng 
blood   of  Jefus!  Jefus,   by  whom  we,    who  were 
afar  off,   ar$  brought  nigh  to  God  !   we,  who  were 
enemies  are  reconciled  !    He,   with  his  dying  ago- 
nies  obtained  our  pardon,   and  reflored  us  to  the 
favour  of  God,  which   we  had  for  ever  forfeited  ! 
here  only  can  the  foul  find  reft,  here  only   is  that 
good  to  be  found,  which  every  where  elfe  is  fought 
in  vain! — the  favour  of  God!    'tis  this  irradiates 

the 


C   167   J 

the  celeftial  regions,  and  beams  immortal  Llifs  and 
joys  ineffable  on  all  the  fons  oflight.  The  hope  of 
this,  though  but  a  momentary  ray,  can  gild  the 
darkefl  fcenes  of  mortal  life,  and  prefent  a  glimpfe 
of  heaven  through  the  furrounding  gloom.  Ac- 
quaintance witli  God,  the  views  of  an  intereft  in 
him  as  our  father,  our  almighty  friend!  Glorious 
privilege !  fullnefs  of  blifs !  how  immenfe,  how 
unfpeakable  !  in  this  is  contained  every  thing  we 
can  want  or  defire  !  full  fatisfaclion  for  the  bound- 
lefs  wifhes  of  the  foul !  pleafures  unalloyed,  ho- 
nour unfading,  and  riches  incorruptible  and  ex- 
bauftlefs!  In  thy  favour  O  Lord  is  life,  and  thy 
loving  kindnefs  is  better  than  life. 

Let  others  flretch  their  arms  like  feas 

And  grafp  in  all  the  fliore, 
Grant  me  the  vifits  of  thy  face, 

And  I  defire  no  more! 

Watts, 


M4  Content 


C    168   ] 

Content. 

DAILY  experience  affords  ample  proof,  that 
there  is  no  fuch  thing  as  real  fatisfaclion  in 
any  earthly  enjoyments.  Pleafure,  happinefs.  what 
are  they  but  empty  names  ?  vifionary  forms  !  ro- 
mantic fcenes,  which  never  had  exiftence  but  in 
iancy  !  Of  thisreafon  and  reflection  fully  convince 
us,  and  fighing  we  confefs  the  melancholy  truth ! 
and  yet  (unaccountable  folly)  we  eagerly  purfue 
the  airy  fleeting  fhadows,  and  vex  ourfelves  that 
we  cannot  overtake  them  J 

Our  firft  parents  finned  and  loft  their  earthly 
paradife,  and  in  vain  do  their  wretched  pofterity 
feek  for  bowers  of  blifs !  no  fhades  of  fvveet  repofe 
and  undifturbed  tranquility  are  to  be  found  on  . 
earth  !  Let  us  then  (it  down  and  ferioufiy  enquire 
what  is  the  hrgheft  happinefs  mortals  can  enjoy  ? 
Be  gone  ambition,  nor  let  vanity  appear;  fame, 
wealth,  and  pleafure  hide  your  heads,  'tis  not  in 
-cur  united  power  to  be&ow.— It  is  content !  'tis 
this  alone  which  bears  a  true  refemblance  of  hap- 
pinefs 


-J 


C   169   ] 

ft  fo  often  fought,  fo  rarely  found! — How 
cafv,  how  cheerful,  and  how  bled  is  the  content- 
oi  man!  a  ftranger  to  the  bufy  cares  and  refllefs 
anxieties  of  the  ambitious,  the  covetous,  and  the 
gay;  pleafed  with  his  little  fhare  of  earthly  good, 
he  moves  calmly  on  in  the  fphere  affigned  by  pro- 
vidence, nor  minds  the  noify  buflle  round  him, 
nor  envies  all  the  gaudy  blaze  of  grandeur;  nor 
follows  the  tempting  gay  delufive  forms  of  plea- 
fure.  He  enjoys  a  little  heaven  below,  in  the 
hope  of  that  confummate  blifs  prepared  for  him  in 
the  manfions  of  glory:  blifs  which  will  for  ever 
fiourilh  in  immutable  perfection,  when  all  thofe 
glittering  appearances  are  vanifhed  and  forgotten,, 
Divine,  content !  ineflimable  bleffing!  How  {hall 
I  attain  the  enjoyment  of  fo  defirable  a  flate  ? 
Every  good  gift,  and  every  perfect  gift,  is  from 
above,  and  cometh  down  from  the  Father  of  lights, 
with  v,  horn  is  no  variableness,  neither  fhadow  of 
turning.  Gracious  God,  who  had  in  thy  facred 
word  encouraged  thy  poor  creatures  to  afk  thofe 
bleiTings  which  thy  unrneafured  gocdnefs  can  be- 
llow, give  me,  O  give  me  from  thy  exbau 
treafures  of  grace  in  Jefus  the  Redeemer,  that 
fwect  content,  that  inexpreffible  fatisfaclion  which 
flaws  from  the  hope  of  thy  favour,  and  the  delight- 
ful views  of  my  intereft  in  thy  everlailing  love 
ragh  him  !  Let  the  peace  of  God  which  paiTeth 

all 


E   i;°  ] 

all  underftanding  fill  my  heart  and  mind !  Then 
{hall  I  be  eafy  and  cheerful  in  the  diftributions  of 
thy  providence,  nor  fuffer  a  repining  thought  at 
the  want  of  leffer  comforts. 

Father  I  wait    thy  daily  will, 
Thou  (halt  divide  my  portion  ftill, 
Grant  me  on  earth  what  feems  thee  bed, 
'Till  death  and  heaven  reveal  the  reft. 

Watts. 


True  Honour. 

t;  Chriftian  is  the  higheft  ftile  of  man." 

OF  all  the  candidates  for  honour  which  appear 
on  the  great  theatre  of  the  world,  a  chrif- 
tian  has  the  higheft:  claim.  Are  men  of  eminent 
and  diftinguifhed  wifdom,  entitled  to  universal  ef- 
teem  ?  A  chriftian  is  wife  unto  falvation !  Are 
men  of  great  eftates  and  titles  accounted  honoura- 
ble? Chriftians  are  the  fons  of  God  !  they  are  en- 
titled  to  an  inheritance  incorruptible,  undefiled, 

and 


[  m  3 

and  which  fadeth  not  away ;  and  have  trcafures 
laid  up  for  them  in  heaven,  which  can  never  be 
exhaulted  ! — Is  the  favourite  of  a  kin£  envied  for 
the  honours  his  fovereign  bellows  ?  how  mean  his 
fjtuation  compared  with  a  favourite  of  the  king  of 
kings!  Nay,  what  are  kings  themfelves  arrayed  in 
all  their  Ihort-lived  blaze  of  earthly  glory,  compar- 
ed with  the  followers  of  Chrift,  who  fhall  live  and 
reign  with  him  for  ever  and  ever?  Howworthlefs 
v.re  all  the  laurels  acquired  by  the  mod  ambitious 
and  victorious  conqueror,  compared  with  the  palm 
bellowed  on  the  triumphant  chrillian  by  the  Cap- 
tain of  his  falvatioo,  through  whom  he  is  more 
than  a  conqueror  over  all  the  powers  of  earth  and 
hell  ? — A  chrifiian. — let  me  reflect — have  I  indeed 
a  claim  to  that  noble  appellation,  that  truly  ho- 
nourable title  ?  Do  I  walk  worthy  of  the  vocation 
wherewith  I  am  called  ? — What  is  it  to  be  a  chrif- 
tian  ?  To  love  Chrift  and  to  follow  him. — How 
am  I  to  love  him  ?  with  all  my  heart  and  foul  and 
ilrengih,  with  a  fervent,  a  conltant  and  fupreme 
Jove.  He  that  loveth  father  or  mother,  &c.  more 
than  me  is  not  worthy  of  me.  Confider,  O  my 
foul  thy  infinite  obligations!  confider  what  he  has 
done,  and  what  he   will  do   for  wretched,  guilty, 

loft,   miferable  finners. Reflect  on  thy  deferis, 

and  on  thy  hopes,  and  then   canft  thou  withhold 
thy  worthlefs  all,  thy  ardent  love,  from  this  adora- 
ble 


L    *7*    j 

tie  Saviour?  will  not  this  lead  thee  to  a  felicitous 
enquiry,  how  fhall  I  follow  him  ?  Attend  to  his 
own  words!  If  ye  love  me  keep  my  command- 
ments— and  a  new  commandment  I  give  unto  you 
that  ye  love  one  another,  as  I  have  loved  you, 
that  ye  alfo  love  one  another,  by  this  (hall  all  men 
know  that  ye  are  my  difciples  if  ye  have  love  one 
to  another. 

Glorious  and  delightful  teft  of  chriftianity  ! — 
gracious  Lord  enable  me  to  evidence  my  love  to 
thee,  by  my  affectionate  regard  for  all  thy  faithful 
followers,  and  my  tendereft  concern  for  the  wel- 
fare, of  even  the  meaneft  of  thofe  who  bear  thy 
facred  image ! 

If  I  can,  humbly  and  penitently  confeious  of  my 
own  frailty,  cheerfully  defire  in  my  great  redeem- 
er's flrength  to  obey  his  commands  which  are  not 
greivous;  (hall  I  not  alfo  earneilly  wifh  to  follow 
his  example  in  his  i  mi  table  excellencies  ?  O  let 
me  read  and  meditate  his  wondrous  life,  who  went 
about  doing  good,  till  I  find  my  heart  warmed 
with  his  love,  impreffed  with  his  lovely  image, 
?,nd  ardently  defiring  to  trace  the  footfteps  of  my 
Lord! — A  chriftian  fhould  think  and  fpeak  much 
of  Chi  id  and  his  love;  this  fhould  be  his  confrant 
fubjeft  of  meditation  and  converfe,  the  fweetnefs 
of  his  bleffings,  and  the  folace  of  his  care. — And 

do  I  call  myfelf  a  chriftian  ?  and  can  I  live  a  day 

at  a 


C     *73     3 

at  a  diftance  from  my  dear  redeemer,  and  be  content 
and  eafy  ?  No. — for  there  is  no  fatisfaclion  in  any 
thing  befides! — The  empty  trifles  which  divert  my 
thoughts  or  fill  up  my  converfation,  are  all  like  the 
prodigals's  hulks,  they  neither  pleafe  nor  nourifh. 

Aiife  O  my  foul,  leave  this  wretched  trafh,  and 

go  to  thy  father's  houfe  where  there  is  bread 
enough  and  to  fpare  ! — Were  I  to  fee  a  prince, 
heir  expectant  of  a  crown,  inftead  of  employing  his 
time  in  acquiring  and  cultivating  thofe  princely  vir- 
tues, which  are  fuitable  to  his  high  ftation,  and  prepa- 
rative to  his  future  royalty,  fpend  hours  and  days 
playing  with  pebbles  or  piddling  in  the  dirt, 
ihould  I  not  pronounce  him  unworthy  of  the 
dignity  for  which  he  was  defigned,  and  look  on 
him  with  an  eye  of  pity  and  contempt  ?  yet  this  is 
the  pifture  of  a  carelefs  chrifHan,  who  fpends  his 
time  in  foolifii  unprofitable  thoughts  or  idle  chat. 
— BlefTed  Jefus!  pity  my  weaknefs,  pardon  my 
guilty  my  inexcufable  folly,  fill  my  heart  with  thy 
love,  and  teach  me  to  think,  to  fpeak,  to  live, 
as  becomes  a  chriftian. 


Friendship. 


c  m  ] 

Friendship, 

TT'RIENDSHIP  has  been  oft  my  favorite  theme, 
X  and  afforded  many  a  pleafing  thought,  but 
hitherto  my  experience  of  this  bleffing  anfwers 
not  my  ideas,  perhaps  they  are  raifed  too  high,  or 
it  may  be,  this  is  too  near  akin  to  all  other  earthly 
pieafures  which  fly  our  wilhes  or  difappoint  our 
expectations. 

Let  me  then  raife  my  thoughts  from  earth  and 
confider  this  amiable  fubjeft  in  its  divine  perfec- 
tion, let  me  meditate  on  the  friendship  of  the 
blefTed  Jefus,  who  fays,  henceforth  I  call  you  not 
fervants  but  friends  &c.  wondrous  condefcenfion  ! 
delightful  afTurance!  infinitely  more  engaging  than 
the  deareft  ties  on  earth !  an  intereft  in  his  friend- 
fhip  how  defirable,  how  extenfive  the  bleiTing  I 
it  contains  every  thing  we  need  for  time  and  eter- 
nity. 

The  deareft  friend  on  earth  though  his  heart 
be  ours  and  his  will  ever  ready,  may  want  the 
power  to  afiift  us;    in   neceflhies,    dangers,  and 

diUrefTeG 


C     -75     3 

diftreiTes  we  can  have  no  more  than  his  tendereil 
concern,  his  fincereft  good  withes  :  we  difclofc 
our  griefs  with  unavailing  confidence,  while  friend- 
fhip  mourns  but  cannot  help  us.  But  Jefus  is  in- 
finitely powerful,  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth 
is  his,  he  is  able  as  well  as  willing  to  fave  to  the 
uttermoft  :  to  him  we  may  lay  open  all  our  hearts 
and  pour  out  our  fouls  without  referve;  to  him 
lament  our  frailties,  for  he  alone  can  corre£t 
them;  to  him  reveal  our  wants,  he  can  fupply 
them  all;  to  him  we  may  tell  our  forrows,  he 
can  and  will  remove  or  give  us  flrength  to  bear 
them;  to  him  we  may  recount  our  comforts  and 
our  joys,  for  he  is  the  fpring  from  whence  they 
flow;  he  only  can  continue  and  increafe  them. 

Our  friends  may  be  fo  far  diftant  in  our  greateft 
extremities,  that  we  may  be  deprived  even  of 
the  benefitof  their  kind  condolance  and  compani- 
onate fympathy,  beraufe  they  cannot  be  acquainted 
with  our  diftrefs:  but  Jefus  is  ever  near,  ever  rea- 
dy to  aflift  his  beloved  friends;  he  hears  every 
groan  and  pities  every  forrow,  he  is  touched  with 
a  feeling  of  their  infirmities,  and  his  divine  com- 
panion and  fympathizing  tendernefs  are  far  beyond 
all  that  mortal  friendfhip  ever  knew  !  Are  they  ex- 
pofed  to  want,  affliction,  and  diftrefs,  he  fhares  in 
all  their  fufferings;  and  to  exprefs  how  intimately 
his  affe&ion  is  united  to  them,  he  even  fpeaks  of 

thofe 


L   176  ] 

thofe  fufTerings  as  his  own ;  I  was  fick,  I  was  in 
prifon  &:c.  and  kind  offices  done  to  the  leaft  of 
thofe  whom  he  gracioufly  condefcends  to  cali  his 
brethren,  he  rewards  as  done  to  himfelf;  and  if 
he  hide  his  blifsful  face,  yet  ftill  they  dwell  upon 
his  heart,  and  in  his  own  belt  time  he  will  relieve 
them:  hisfovereign  hand  can  turn  afflictions  into 
bleffings,  and  grief  fhall  terminate  in  joy. 

His  own  foft   hand    fhall  wipe    the  tear 
From  every  weeping  eye.  Watts. 

In  ftraits  and  difficulties  if  we  applv  to  earthly 
friends  for  counfel,  and  receive  the  bell  advice 
they  are  capable  of  giving;  they  are  weak  fhort- 
lighted  creatures  like  ourfelves,  and  by  following 
their  directions,  we  may  be  led  into  irretrievable  er- 
rors and  misfortunes :  but  Jefus  the  heavenly  friend, 
is  infinite  in  wifdom  !  he  guides  Lis  favorites  by 
his  counfels,  the  unerring  dictates  of  his  facred 
word,  makes  their  way  plain  before  them,  by  the 
conftant  care  of  his  providence,  and  conducts 
them,  through  all  the  difficulties  and  embarrafs- 
ments  of  life,  to  eternal  fafetyand  happinefs. 

Human  nature  is  frail,  and  the  warmed,  fincer- 
eft  friendship  may  cool  and  change  to  indifference, 
and  though  friendfhip  is  ever  ready  to  put  the 
moil  favourable  conftruftion  on  the  behaviour,  to 

place 


C    *77   ] 

place  every  a&ion  in  its  faireft  light,  and  to  pity 
an  1  forgive  the  faults  it  cannot  mend,  yet  as  it 
cannot  know  the  heart  and  judges  only  by  words 
and  aclions,  th^fe  are  liable  to  mifunderftandings 
and  falfe  reprefenlations,  which  may  interrupt  its 
courfe,  and  perhaps  entirely  diffolve  thofe  ties, 
which  feemed  too  firm  for  time  and  chance  to 
loo  fen. 

But  if  the  love  of  Jefus  is  unchangeable,  he 
that  made  the  heart  knows  all  its  inmoft  recedes, 
and  cati  never  be  mifinformed,  can  never  miftake; 
if  there  is  a  principle  of  fincere  love  to  him, 
though  buried  amid  a  thoufand  imperfe&ions,  that 
}ove  himfelf  infpired,  he  approves,  and  will  re- 
ward. The  foul  once  his,  is  his  for  ever,  not  all 
the  powers  of  earth  or  hell,  not  things  prefent  nor 
things  to  come,  fhall  be  able  to  feparate  from  his 
everlafting  love. 

In  mortal  friendfhips,  the  fatisfaclion  a  generous 
mind  enjoys  in  obliging,  and  the  fentiments  of  a 
grateful  heart  in  being  obliged,  are  exceedingly 
agreeable ;  but  this  heavenly  friend  engages  our 
warmeft  our  everlafting  gratitude,  and  even  grati- 
tude is  fwallowed  up  in  wonder,  when  we  medi- 
tate the  immeafurable  extent  of  his  divine  benefi- 
cence, in  what  he  has  done,  is  Hill  doing,  and 
will  do  for  the  objects  of  his  love.  Of  enemies  and 
traitors,  he  has  made  friends  and  favourites!  for 
N  guilty 


E   v*  ] 

guilty,  loft,  undone  creatures,  defervlng  nothing 
but  never-ending  mifery  and  eternal  death,  he  has 
purchafed  pardon,  life  and  immortal  happinefs ; 
and  this  with  his  own  moft  precious  blood  !  It 
would  be  a  furprizing  effeft  of  friendlhip  for  a 
man  to  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friend;  but 
Jefus  freely  gave  his  life  for  fuch  as  were  his 
inveterate  enemies.  Stupendous  love  !  aftonifhing 
goodnefs ! — 

At  death,  earthly  friendfhips  are  diffolved,  with 
the  friend  our  comforts  die,  and  the  fatisfaftion  we 
enjoyed  in  their  fociety,  leaves  only  a  painful  re- 
membrance of  the  pleafures  we  have  loft. — But  Je- 
fus lives  for  ever !  lives  to  make  intercefiion  for 
his  friends  above,  to  communicate  conflant  fup- 
plies  of  grace  to  them  below,  to  guide  them  through 
all  the  fcenes  of  mortal  life,  to  guard  them  from 
every  danger,  to  ftrengthen  them  in  encountering 
their  laft  enemy,  crown  them  with  viftory,  and 
bring  them  fafe  to  bis  glorious  prefence,  to  live 
with  him  for  ever  and  ever.  Happy,  happy  fouls! 
who  have  an  intereft  in  this  all-fufficient,  this  ever- 
lafting  friend!  O  may  I  never  reft  fatisfied  till  I 
can  fay  with  a  humble,  yet  well-grounded  confi- 
dence, this  is  my  beloved,  this  is  my  friend! 
BlefTed  Jefus !    teach  me  to  know  thee  and  to  love 

thee 


C    *79    ] 

thee  more,  let  me  hear  the  voice  of  thy  facred  fpi- 
lit  whifpering  to  my  heart  that  thou  art  mine,  allure 
me  of  my  interefl  ia  thy  almighty,  thy  unchangea- 
ble love!  then  fliall  I  be  blefl  indeed. 

My  Lord,  my  Saviour,  my  almighty  friend, 
O  wilt  thou,  gracious,  own  the  humble  claim! 
And  let  thy  fpirit,  facred  evidence, 
Confirm  it  to  my  foul  with  power  divine ! 
Tell  me,  O  tell  me  thou  art  mine  indeed, 
And  fill  my  heart  with  gratitude  and  love  ! 
But  ah!  how  weak,  how  languishing  and  low 
My  firongefl  gratitude,  my  highefl  love. 
How  cold,  the  warmed  ardors  of  my  foul, 
For  bleflings  fo  divine  !  how  poor  a  gift 
This  vile  this  wretched  heart!  and  yet  'tis  all 
A  worthlefs  worm  can  offer,  mean  return  ! 
Nor  can  I  lender  this  without  thy  aid; 
O  help  me  to  furrender  all  my  heart, 
Its  powers  and  paflions,  to  thy  fovereign  love! 
Accept  it,  Lord,  and  make  it  thine  entire  ! 
Let  thy  abounding  grace  remove  my  guilt, 
Forgive  my  wanderings,  fix  me  thine  for  ever, 
In  bands  which  time  nor  death  have  power  to 
loofe ! 


N  2  An 


[    iSo  3 

An  Evening  Reflection, 

ANOTHER  day  is  gone,  never  to  return — 
the  hours  and  minutes  fled  away  for  ever — 
another  portion  of  time,  that  ineilimable  treafure 
fpent — but  how  ? — fad  reflection  replies  with  con- 
scious (hame,  fpent  alas,  unprofitably  !  wailed  in 
trifles !  what  have  I  done  this  day  to  anfwer  the~ 
<neat  ends  of  life,  promoting  the  glory  of  my 
Maker  and  my  foul's  eternal  Happinefs  ?  Ah ! 
how  can  1  anfwer  this  neceffary  this  important 
queilion  ?  Jul!  now  I  heard  a  man  wifh  the  future 
ipring  was  come,  inconfiderate  wifh!  How  fliort 
is  our  time  on  earth,  and  of  what  infinite  confe- 
quence  are  the  concerns  of  eternity,  which  depend, 
on  our  fleeting  moments ! — Another  was  for  wifh- 
ing  rather  the  pail  fpring  to  return  ;  this  though  it 
fpeaks  more  of  thought  and  reflection  is  no  lefs 
vain  !  Were  time  in  our  power,  were  it  poftible- 
for  us  to  recall  the  golden  hours,  the  invaluable 
treafure  we  have  iquandered  ;  fuch  is  the  frailty 
of  our  nature,    that   (without   tha  aids  of  divine 

grace 


C   181   3 

grace)  we  fliould  fpend  it  in  the  fame  thoughtleG; 
manner,  and  be  guilty  of  the  fame  inexcufable 
.prodigality  as  before. 

I  am   now  another  day  nearer  to  death,  that  aw- 
ful period  to  my  days  on  earth  !  that  clofing  fcene 
which  will  foon  put  [an  end  to  this  prefent  (late  of 
rexiftence,  and  fix  my  doom  for  ever ! — then  mud 
•I   appear  before   the  tremendous  bar   of  heaven! 
•before    the  awful  the  impartial  judge,    whofe  al- 
feeing  eye   is  witnefs  to  every  thought  and  word, 
and  aftion  of  my  life,  and  fearches  into  the  inmoft 
receffes  of  my  heart !  then  mult  I  give  an  account 
of  the  talents  entrufted  to   my   c^re,  the  time  and 
mercies  I  have  enjoyed  ! — Ah,  how  mall  I  appear  ? 
What  account  can  I  give  ?    In   myfelf  I  have  no- 
thing to  fay   but  guilty,  loft,  undone   for  ever! — - 
But  yet  there  is  hope,  time  and  mercies  are  yet 
lengthened  out ! — O  for  ftrength   and  grac^  from 
on  high,  to    enable  me    to  improve    the  precious 
remnant  as  I  ought ! — But  O  were  it  protrafted  to 
many  years,  and  were  it  pofiible  for  me  to  improve 
every  moment,  to  apply  all  my  powers  and  facul- 
ties with  conftant   and  unwearied  diligence  to  the 
arduous  work;  my  beft    obedience    could  never 
atone  for   paft   negligence,  or  procure    the  leafl: 
hope  of  pardon  and  acceptance! — I  would  depend 
alone  on  the  merits  and  righteoufnefs  of  a  crucified 
N  3  Redeemer^ 


C     18a     ] 

Redeemer;  my   bell  obedience  is  fall  of  fin,  and 
can  merit  nothing  but  everiafting  puniihment. 

But  I'll  retire  beneath  the  crofs, 

Saviour  at  thy  dear  feet  I  lie, 
And  the  keen  fword  that  juflice  drawsv 

Flaming  and  red,  (hall  pafs  me  by. 

Watts. 

Here  is  my  only  hope!  ftill  let  me  fly  to  this 
glorious  refuge,  for  here  is  life  and  fafety.  BlelT- 
ed  Jefus  to  thee  would  I  come,  and  plead  thy  gra- 
cious promife,  that  him  that  cometh  to  thee  thou 
wilt  in  no  wife  caft  out.  My  God,  my  Saviour, 
wafti  me  in  the  facred  fountain  of  thy  blood,  and 
cloath  me  in  the  fpotlefs  robe  of  thy  righteoufnefs ! 
Then  fhall  I  appear  before  thy  awful  bar  without 
trembling ; 

My  debts  all  cancelled  and  my  crimes  forgiven, 
My  judge  all  glorious  but  without  a  frown. 

My  God  my  Saviour,  O  let  me  not  repeat  in 
vain  this  awful,  this  delightful  fentence  !  confirpi 
it  to  my  foul  with  the  flrongeft  evidence,  the 
firmed,  fulleft  afiurancei  df  my  intereft  in  thee  ! 
That  at  thy  glorious  appearing,  I  may  lift  up  my 
head  with  joy,  and  hear  with  unfpeakable  tranf- 
port  jhy  gracious  words,  V  Come  ye  blefled  of  my 

Father 


[     i*3    3 

Father  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you,   be- 
fore the  foundation  of  the  world. "     ? 

O  may  I  often  meditate  on  this  dreadful,  blifs- 
ful  period!  and  may  it  influence  all  my  future 
hours!  Grant  me,  O  Lord,  the  conilant  aids  of 
thy  Spirit  and  grace  !  let  me  live  as  on  the  confines 
of  eternity,  and  improve  the  fhort  remainder  of 
my  fpan  of  life,  in  thy  flrength,  in  thy  fervice,  to 
thy  praife  !  guide  me  by  thy  counfels  and  after- 
wards receive  me  to  thy  glory. 


^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^•^ 


Absence   from   God. 

AND  canft  thou,  O  my  foul,  be  fatisfied  at 
fuch  a  mournful  diftance  from  the  fountain 
of  happinefs  ?  Where  are  thy  wifhes  and  thy 
hopes,  thofe  ardent  wifhes  and  pleafurable  hopes, 
which  in  thy  happier  moments  could  look  down, 
with  a  noble  contemnt,  on  the  vain  amufements  of 
fenfe,  as  unworthy  of  thy  notice;  and  fbail  thefe 
empty  trifles,  which  yet  thou  defpifeft,  enfnare 
thee  into  a  thoughtlefs  negligence  of  thy  eternal 
imereft?  Haft  thou  not  fought  the  favoui  of  God 
N  4  a? 


C    i*4   3 

as  thy  only  blifs,  thy  everlafting  all,  and  rejoiced 
in  the  delightful  hope  of  an  intereft  in  it  as  the 
dawning  of  immortal  day  ?  And  canft  thou  now 
fit  down  content  in  the  fhades  of  mortal  night  ? 
Recall  thofe  happy  feafons,  when  the  kind  inti- 
mations of  his  gracious  prefence  afforded  fuch  plea- 
fure  as  all  the  joys  of  earth  can  never  yield  !  and 
raifed  thy  wifhes  and  thy  hopes  to  that  blifsful 
world,  where  happy  fpirits  enjoy  the  full  beams 
of  his  favour,  without  an  interpofmg  cloud:  re- 
turn ye  fhining  moments,  return  and  blefs  my  un- 
fatisfied,  pining  heart  with  an  enlivening  ray  of 
heaven ! — Or  was  it  a  bright  delufion  which  footh- 
ed  my  fond  imagination  like  a  pleafing  dream,  and 
vanifhing  leaves  me  awake  and  miferable  ? — Tor- 
menting doubts  away — furely,  my  hopes,  my  com- 
forts muft  be  real,  for  were  they  not  built  on  the 
word  of  God,  the  promifes  of  a  God  that  cannot 
lie  ?  And  fhall  I  queftion  infinite  veracity? 

No,  'tis  myfelf,  my  fins  I  fear, 
Thefe  fprings  of  doubt  are  ever  near, 
Thefe  gloomy  clouds  which  rife  and  hide  his  lovely 
face. 

Wretched  heart !  to  wander  from  the  fource  of 
blifs,  till  the  cheering  beams  of  hope  are  almoft 
loft  in  the  gloom  of  fin,  and  darknefs,  wretched 
heart  indeed !  If  God  is  abfent  not  all  created  good 

:  .... 

can 


C   185   ] 

can  compcnfate  the  lofs — where  can  I  refl?  Were 
all  the  joys  of  ienfe  to  footh  me  with  their  foftefi 
blandiihments,  they  cannot  give  me  inward  peace 
—  thy  voice  alone,  O  God  of  mercy,  can  (peak 
confolation  to  my  foul,  thy  gracious  prefence,  the 
fenfible  influences  of  thy  favour  can  enliven  the 
mod  uncomfortable  fcenes  of  mortality,  and  fprcad 
celeflial  morning  through  affliction's  darkeit  night, 
but  abfent  from  thee,  the  brighteft  fcenes  of  earth- 
ly blifs  were  only  fplendid  mifery  ;  what  heart  can 
bear  the  thought  of  evcrlafting  banifhment  from 
thee,  horror  dwells  in  the  dreadful  apprehenfion  ! 
but  blefTed  be  infinite  mercy  there  is  hope,  hope 
fixed  on  the  merits  of  my  great  Redeemer,  through 
him  thy  abounding  grace  is  ready  to  receive  the 
penitent  wanderer  with  fmiles  of  divine  forgive- 
nefs  and  returning  favour. 


^Oi-O^^CDi-CD^C^^C^^C^^O^ 


The   evil  of   sin. 

TX7TIEN  I    reflect  on  the  Hate  of  innocence, 

*      happinefs    and  glory    of  man  at   his  firft 

creation  ;  furrounded  with  earthly  delights,  and  in 

the  full  enjoyment  of  his  Maker's  favour;    on  his 

fall 


[   186  ] 

fail  from  that  blifsful  ftate,  and  the  endlefs  train  ol 
miferies   in   which  all    his    wretched  defcendant* 
were    involved,  fharers  in  the   guilt,  their  blood 
tainted  with  the  dire  infection,  by  nature  blind  t 
their  own  felicity,  and   inclined  to  go  aflray  from 
God,  and  purfue  the  road   to    deftru&ion  ;  I  can- 
not but  pronounce  fin  the  greateft  evil,   the  fource 
of  pain  and  forrow,  and  the  caufe  of  temporal  and 
eternal  death.     But  never  does  my  heart  appear  fo 
vile  as  when  it  mourns   at   the  foot  of  my  Redee- 
mer's crofs,  never  does  fin  appear  fo   hateful,  fo 
deteftable,    as   when  I   meditate    his  dreadful  fuf- 
ferings,  'tis  here  I  fee  that  infinite  juftice  was  of- 
fended, and    infinite   punifhment   incurred,   fince 
nothing  but  an    infinite    fatisfaQion  could    atone. 
Not  all    the   glorious   angels  which   furround  the 
throne  of  God,   though  fhining  in  the  higheft  ex- 
cellence   of  created  purity,    could  have   paid   the 
dreadful  debt;    the   work    was  impoflible  to   any 
power  below  omnipotence.     The  eternal  Son   of 
God,   O  glorious  triumph    of  almighty  love !  en- 
thron'd  in  all  the  glories   of  the  deity,  left  his  fa- 
ther's bofom  for  thefe  abodes  of  fin  and  mifery,  and 
became  a  man    of  forrows    and  acquainted   with 
grief;    expofed  to  fhame,  contempt,    and  infamy, 
refigned  himfelf  to  the,moft  cruel  agonizing  tor- 
tures ;  and,  O  amazing  thought !    made   his  foul 
^n  offering  for  fin  ! — Dreadful  evil!  which  nothing 

left 


[     »«7     ] 

lefs  than  the    fufferihgs  of   the  Son   of  God  could 
expiate  !— And  fhall  I  allow  it  a  place  in  my  heart  ? 
• — Almighty  grace  forbid1 — But  alas!   fo  weak,   fo 
depraved  is  this  wretched  heart,  as  to  give  way  to 
the  definitive  in  fin  nations   oi  this  dangerous,  this 
fatal  enemy  !  The  flrongeff.  efforts  of  my  reafoning 
powers  can    make   but  a  feeble,    an  unavailing  re- 
finance, and   often    may   my    foul   complain,  the 
evil  which  I  would  not  that  60  I. — Who  fhall  de- 
liver me  from   the  body  of  this  death  ? — O  that  I 
could    fay    with  joyful    aflurance,    I    thank    God 
through  Jefus  Chrift  my   Lord  ! — Is  there   not,  O  . 
bleffed    Saviour,  infinite   efficacy  in   thy  precious 
blood,  to  cleanfe  as  well  as  to  atone  for  fin  ?  And 
wilt  thou   not  grant  the  poweiful  influences  of  thy 
holy  fpirit  to  purify  the  heart  that  defires  to  wear 
thy  facred  image,  and  to  ftrengthen  a  weak  ahelp- 
lefs  creature   that   fain  would    be   devoted  to   thy 
ferviee  ?  O  let  me   hear   thy    gracious  voice  fay- 
ing, u  I  will,   be   thou    clean, "    and   alluring  my 
foul  that  thou  will  ftrengthen,  and  help  and  uphold 
n:e  with  the  right  hand  of  thy  righteoufnefs  !  Shew 
me  my  intereft  in  thefe  kind  promifes,  and  enable 
me  to   look   up    with   humble  hope  and  fay,  that 
though    iniquities   prevail   againfi  me,    thou  wilt 
purge  my  tranfgrefiions  away  !  Nothing  is  too  hard 
for  omnipotence  to   efTeft,  nor  can  the   hope  he 

loft 


C    ^88   ] 

Jofl:  which  is  fixed   on  infinite  goodnefs  and  inva- 
riable truth. 


^04<^^04<>^0#Oi<i:^0^ 


Breathing   after  God. 

MY  God,  my  portion!  O  could  I  repeat  the 
blifsful  accents  with  facred  confidence, 
with  fweet  propriety  !  this  were  happinefs  indeed  ! 
happinefs,  which  nothing  e-lfe  can  give  !  all  the 
delights  of  fenfe  cannot  yield  one  hour  of  real 
fatisfa&ioR  ; — if  God  is  abfent,  what  is  the  whole 
world  but  a  fcene  of  poverty  and  darknefs  ? — His 
prefence  makes  a  paradife  below !  and  every  dif- 
tant  glimpfe  of  his  favour  is  a  beam  of  heavenl 
and  yet,  O  unaccountable  ftupidity  !  how  often 
do  I  wander  carelefs  in  this  gloomy  defarf,  amufing 
myfelf  with  reaching  after  every  painted  blolTom 
that  difplays  its  gaudy  colours  to  my  fight!  worth- 
lefs  flowers!  on  a  nearer  Tiew  they  lofe  their 
tempting  dyes,  and  ere  they  are  gathered  wither 
quite  away. — Torn  with  entangling  briars,  difap- 
pointed,  tired  and  unfatisfied,  I  find  I  am  loll. — I 
.have  wandered  from  my  God  the  only  centre  of  my 

blifsr* 


[     i»9    1 

blifs!—  to  him  I  would  return,  but  O  how  (hall  I 
find  him  ?  convinced  of  my  fatal  folly,  I  mourn 
his  abfence,  I  feek  him  but  I  find  him  not. — Yet 
let  me  feek  him  (till, — ftill  let  me  breathe  my  hum- 
ble fighs, — his  gracious  car  is  ever  open  to  the 
humble  fighs  of  the  complaining  mourner ;  his 
mercy  is  ever  on  the  wing  to  convey  the  fweet 
hope  of  pardon  to  the  repentant  finner.  O  may 
my  penitence  be  fincere  !  Gracious  God,  if  thefe 
remorfeful  fighs,  though  weak  and  languid,  are 
influenced  by  thy  facred  fpirit,  O  increafe  them 
to  ardent  longings  and  unfatisfied  defires,  and  an- 
fwer  them  with  the  fmiling  beams  of  divine  for- 
givnefs.  I  know,  I  acknowlege,  I  am  utterly  un- 
worthy of  the  leaft  kind  notice,  the  leaft  favourable 
regard  of  thine  awful  eye, — but  Jefus  is  worthy, 
and  he  has promifed that  whatfoeverwe  afk  the  Fa- 
ther in  his  name,  believing,  we  fhall  receive;  in  his 
bleffed  name,  I  would  humbly  afk  for  mercy  ? 
Lord  I  would  believe,  help  thou  my  unbeiieff 
— O  what  have  I  not  to  afk  ?  I  want  every  fpiri- 
tual  good  !  and  in  this  prevailing  name,  what  may 
I  not  afk?  thy  favour,  O  thou  eternal  fource  of 
good!  the  blifsful  views  of  my  intereft  in  the  Re- 
deemer and  in  thy  everlafling  love  through  him  ! 
This  is  the  comprehenfive,  the  infinite  bleffing  I 
want !  this  only  can  fatisfy  my  foul,  for  without 
this  I  am  miserable;  were  I  afTured  of  this  I  hope 

I  could 


[     *9°     3 

I  could  refign  temporal  blefTmgs,  and  be  content 
with  whatever  (hare  of  earthly  good  my  heavenly 
Father  fhould  allot  me,  for  thou  art  infinite  in 
wifdom  and  in  goodnefs  ! — But  this  bleffing  is  of 
everlafting  confequence  !  on  this  my  life,  my  all, 
my  prefent  comfort,  and  my  eternal  felicity  de- 
pend ! — ftill  let  me  plead  with  thee,  O  Lord, 
with  a  reftlefs  importunity,  and  refolve  not  to  let* 
thee  go,  except  thou  blefs  me!  For  Jefus  fake  a- 
lone  I  afk  the  important  boon,  the  firm,  the  full 
afTurance  of  my  intereft  in  thy  love  ! — O  let  the 
facred  witnefs  of  thy  fpirit  feal  my  title  to  this 
blifsful  inheritance  and  make  me  happy. 

Be  thou  my  portion,  here  I  reft, 
Of  all  my  utmoft  wifh  pofieft  ! 

And  O  let  my  wiflies  never  reft  below 
thee!  let  me  never  be  fatisfied  till  I  can  fay  affur- 
edly,  the  Lord  is  my  portion,  therefore  will  I 
hope  in  him. — Thou  wilt  never  difappoint  the 
hopes  of  thofe  who  truft  in  thee.  Thou  wilt  infi- 
nitely exceed  their  higheft  expectations,  and  fa- 
tisfy  the  boundlefs  defires  of  the  immortal  foul, 
with  boundlefs  pleafures  and  immortal  happinefs! 


Seeking 


C   i9*  3 


;#04<>K>K^04<340 


Seeking  Rest. 

ARISE  ye,  depart  hence,  for  this  is  not  your 
reft,  it  is  polluted."  Attend,  O  my  foul,  to 
the  heavenly  admonition  !  Convinced  as  thou  art 
that  unmingled  felicity  is  not  to  be  found  on  earth, 
that  there  is  nothing  here  to  reft  in  with  intire 
complacency  and  fatisfa&ion.  Why  mould  my 
thoughts  dwell  in  this  land  of  dreams  and  fhadows, 
amufed  with  trifles  too  mean  to  entertain  the  mind, 
and  purfuing  vanity  and  vexation  of  fpirit  ?  O  for 
the  powerful  influences  of  almighty  grace  ?  To 
raife  my  thoughts,  my  hopes,  my  heart  to  that 
blifsful  world. 

Where  pleafure  rolls  its  living  flood 

From  (in  and  drofs  refin'd, 
Frefh  fpringing  from  the  throne  of  God, 

And  fit  to  cheer  the  mind. 

Watts. 

The 


[    *$*   ] 

The  fwceteft  rills  of  earthly  pleafure  are  tinc- 
tured with  bittcrnefs  and  polluted  with  the  dregs  of 
mortal  care;  and  how  feldom  do  we  tafte  the 
itreams  of  celeftial  confojation,  which  flow  from 
the  eternal  fountain  of  perfect  happinefs,  to  cheer 
and  fupport  the  weary  pilgrim  in  his  journey  to 
the  heavenly  country.  As  the  hart  pantcth  after 
the  water-brooks,  fo  pants  the  thirfty  foul  after  the 
falutary  fprings  of  divine  comfort;  when  found, 
how  fweet,  but  ah  how  fhort  the  kind  refreshment  ! 
How  foon  is  the  reviving  fcene  changed  to  a  bar- 
ren defait,  a  drv  and  thirfty  land  where  no  water 
is!  Yet  the  blifsful  fource  of  facred  pleafure  is 
ever  full,  and  ever  free. — Alas,  "t is  fin,  accurfed 
fin,  that  feparates  between  God  and  the  foul,  and 
withholds  good  things  from  us!  Mow  eaGlv  is  the 
heart  enfnared  with  empty  vanities  or  funk  in 
t  hough  tie  fs  indolence,  ungrateful  heart!  Unhappy 
weaknefs! — Yet  in  the  moments  of  reflection  the 
fighing  heart  confefleS,  this  is  not  my  reft — Arife 
then,  O  my  foul  !  Awake  all  thy  powers  to  life  and 
activity,  and  with  an  ardour  worthy  of  the  glorious 
motives  which  fometimes  infpire  thy  wifhes,  pur- 
fue  thy  journey  to  the  region  of  happinefs,  the 
land  of  reft.  Alas  in  vain! — My  bell  efforts  how 
feeble  !  If  left  to  inyfelf,  I  am  weak,  helplefs  and 
miferable,  enemies  and  dangers  unround  my  fleps, 
and  fin  and  doubt  throw  a  veil  of  darknefs  over  my 

glimmering 


[     *93'    1 

glimmering  hope.  O  Cod  of  power  and  mercy, 
reft  ore  my  foul  and  lead  me  in  the  paths  of  righte- 
oufnefs  for  thy  names  fake!  Let  thy  fpiril  feal  to 
my  heart  the  bleft  affurance  !  Thy  Redeemer  is 
ftrong,  the  Lord  of  hofts  is  his  name,  then  fh all  I 
not  be  afraid  of  enemies  or  dangers.  Lift  up  the 
light  of  thy  countenance  upon  me,  the  reviving 
beams  of  pardon  and  reconciled  love;  and  the 
Ihades  of  guiTt  and  fear  fhall  difperfe.  Let  thy  al- 
mighty arm  fupport  me,  and  blefs  me  with  con- 
tinual fupplies  of  ftrengthening,  animating  grace 
then  {hall  I  walk  in  the  way  fafely,  and  my  foot 
ihall  not  Humble :  Let  me  not  {lumber  where  I 
cannot  reft,  nor  in  this  wildernefs  of  perils,  fuffer 
amufing  trifles  to  interrupt  my  journey  to  the  ce- 
leflial  Canaan ;  may  1  never  indulge  the  "delufive 
thought  of  feeking  tranquility  below,  but  convinc- 
ed that  the  world  affords  no  repofe  to  an  immortal 
fpirit,  O  letrne  feek,  and  find  reft  in  thee,  "  Her*5 
in  full  trull, 'hereafter  in  full  joy. " 


Vot.  HI,  6 


C    *94   ] 

God's  Omnipresence* 

THE  Lord  is  here!  awful  thought ! — thejufl  the 
holy  God,  who  cannot  endure  fin  in  his  fight, 
is  prefent!- — how  then  can  I  appear  before  him  air 
iinful  and  polluted  ?— -O  whither  (hall  I  fly  from 
his  prefence  ?  what  gloomy  cave,  what  impenetra- 
ble (hade  (hall  I  feek,  to  hide  me  from  his  glorious 
eye? — Vain  enquiry  ! 

One  Angle  glance,  one  piercing  ray, 
Would  kindle  darknefs  into  day.     Watts. 

Lord  thcu  knowefl  my  down-fitting  and  my  up- 
rifing,  thou  underiiandefl  my  thoughts  afar  off, 
thou  compaiTelt  my  path  and  my  lying  down,  and' 
art  acquainted  with  all  my  ways. 

Thou  fee'ft  my  heart  though  every  winding  mare, 
Each  lecret  rifing  thought  thine  eye  furveys. 

What  then  can  I  do,  but  fall  proflrate  in  the 
iufi  before  thee,  acknowledge  my  guilt  and 
hog    for     mercy  ?— But     oh  !    how    can  I  open 

my 


C     »95     ] 

By  polluted  lips  in  the  prefence  of  infinite  purity? 
what  argument  (hall  I  ufe?— I  deferve  nothing  at 
thy  hand  hut  immediate  punifliment,  irretrievable 
perdition  ! — Lord  I  humbly  plead  the  all-fufficient 
merits  and  righteoufnefs  of  Jefus  thy  beloved  fon  ! 
Jefus,  the  Mediator,  Redeemer  and  IntercefTor! 
I  fly  to  his  atoning  cleanfing  blood!  O  let  the 
powerful  influences  of  thy  holy  fpirit  apply  it, 
with  almighty  efficacy,  to  my  foul!  Let  thy  a- 
bounding  grace  remove  my  guilt,  and  purge  away 
my  every  deadly  llain  in  that  facred  fountain ! 
Waft  me  and  I  (hall  be  whiter  than  fnow  !  Then 
(hall  I  approach  thy  throne  with  humble  confix 
dence,  and  rejoice  in  the  delightful  thought,  that 
God,  my  God,   is  ever  prefent  with  me. 

Tremble  my  foul  with  awful  confeious  fear. 
The  Lord,    the  God  of  holinefs  is  here  ! 
Ye  fins  and  empty  vanities    depart, 
Too  long  alas  you  have  poiTeft  my  heart. 
Hence  to  eternal  diftance  fly, 
Nor  dare  the  lightnings  of  his  eve, 
Dreadfully  keen  they  pierce  the  foul 
And  every  thought  defcry. 
In  vain  I  bid  my  lurking  foes  be  gone, 
Lord,  'tis  thy  grace,  thy  mighty  grace  alone, 
Can  diive  them  hence  and  all  my  guilt  forgive, 
Q  fpeak  the  powerful  word  and  bid  me  live ! 
O  s  Lift 


[     *&    1 

Etfe  flows  amid  the  crimfon  tide 
Which  iffued  from  the  wounded  fiile 
Of  Jems  when  for  guilty  man, 

He  fufTcr'd  groan'd  and  died  ! 

O  let  it  flow  to  my  polluted  heart, 
And  life,   and  health,  and  purity,   impart ! 
The  facred  flood  fliall  wafii  my  fins  away, 
Thy  glories  then  fhall  mine  with  kindeft  rav,    ■ 
(Unmix'd  with  terrors)  round  my  tremhling  foul, 
And  fovereign  mercy  all  my  fears  controul. 
Then  mail  the  thought  infpire  delight, 
That  I  am  in  my  father's  fight, 
And  thy  bright  prefence  blefs  mine  eyes, 
With  beams  of  heavenly  light. 

Let  me  purfue  the  reviving  thought. — If  God  is 
rov  father,  my  reconciled  God  and  father,  through 
a  redeemer,  what  confolation  will  the  reflection 
afford,  that  he  is  ever  prefent  with  me? — What 
have  I  then  to  fear  or  wifh  ?  what  though  I  am 
farrounded  with  dangers,  the  Lord  is  here!  in  his 
gracious  prefence  is  fafety,  Beneath  his  kind  pro- 
tecting care,  no  danger'  c^m  approach  me.— 
Though  befet  with  enemies  on  evciv  fide,  and  fin 
and  hell  uriite  with  dreadlul  power,  and  threaten 
my  deftruftion ;  my  God  is  prefent!  and  greater 
is  he  that  is  wTith  me  than  they  which  are  again (( 
me.     His  almighty    arm  is   my    defence,    he  can 

cor* 


C    197    ] 

mfroul  their  utmofl  rage,  can  give  me  firengthto 
refift,  and  make  me  more  than  conqueror. 

One  beam  of  glory  from  his  radiant  face 
Can  drive  the  powers  of  darknefs  all  away. 

And  when  pain  and  ficknefs  aflault  this  feeble 
frame,  and  the  (hades  of  death  hang  black  and 
heavy  o'er  me,  O  my  God,  let  thy  kind  hand 
fupport  me,  let  thy  cheering  voice  fpeak  divine 
confolation  to  my  drooping  foul !  and  pain  and 
ficknefs  can  never  hurt  me:  let  thy  blifsful  fmiles 
irradiate  the  difmal  gloom,  and  all  its  terrors  (hall 
vanifh! — Blefs'd  with  thy  gracious  prefence  what 
have  I  to  wifli  ?  earth's  vain  allurements  lofe  their 
pharms,  nor  all  the  joys  it  can  bellow  are  worth 
one  faint  defire ! 

No  more  their  faded  luflre  ftrikes  the  fight 
Than  tapers  dying  in  meridian  light! 

Were  all  created  beauty  funk  in  darknefs,  and 
every  charm  of  nature,  every  delight  of  fenfe 
withdrawn  for  ever — blefl  with  thy  gracious  pre- 
fence I  fhould  not  mourn  their  lofs !  thy  gracious 
prefence  can  create  a  paradife  of  light  and  joy  a- 
mid  the  gloomy  defart ! 

{iliQuld  the  world  frown,  and  all  its  pleafures  fly, 
Should  every  earthly  comfort  difappear, 

O  3  And 


[     *9§    3 

And  all  the  charms  of  nature  fink  in  darknefs ! 

If  thou  art  with  me,  if  thou  art  my  God, 

Am  I  not  happy  ?   can  I  wifh  for  more  ? 

Thy  gracious  prefence  well  fupplies  the  lofs 

Of  earthly  blifs,  and  yields  fupcrior  joy 

To  all  that  univerfal  nature  boaiU ! 

My  God,  O  may  I  call  thee  mine  indeed ! 

And  may  the  humble  bieathings  of  my  foul 

Accepted  rife,  before  thy  throne  of  grace, 

In  his  dear  name,   his  all-fufficient  merits, 

Who  died,  and  rofe,  and  intercedes  above 

For  guilty  rebels  !  reconcil'd  in  him 

Smile  on  my  foul,  all  placid  and    ferene  ! 

O  let  thy  gracious  vifits  cheer  my  heart 

In  this  fad  wildernefs,  and  light  my  parage 

Through  the  laft  gloomy  fcene,  the  fhades  of  death ! 

Then  raife  me  to  thofe  bright  thofe  bleft  abodes, 

Where  thy  kind  prefence  with  unclouded  ray 

For  ever  £biiies !  full  joys  for  ever  fmile, 

And  pleafure  triumphs  in  immortal  bloom ! 


£el?. 


C     *99     ] 


^^4*^^^^^C^^><^><^><^ 


Self-contradiction. 

WHAT  ftrange  contrarieties  do  I  fkid  in  mv- 
felf,  how  uncertain  and  fluQuating  my 
thoughts  and  cares!  I  profefs  to  believe  in  unfeert 
realities;  to  look  forward  to  futurity,  and  hope 
eternal  happinefs  is  my  chief  purfuit ;  and  yet  how 
much  are  my  paflions  influenced  by  things  prefent 
to  my  fenfes  !  Unaccountable  weaknefs  that  fome- 
times  even  trifles  fhould  appear  momentous,  and 
affairs  of  the  utmoft  importance,  of  everlafting  con- 
fequence,  be  almoft  abfent  from  my  mind  !  Has 
not.  my  foul  afpired  to  the  favour  of  God  as  my  fu- 
preme  felicity,  my  prefent  hope,  my  everlafling 
portion  ?  And  yet  how  often  are  my  thoughts  rov- 
ing on  earth  as  if  I  expefted  fatisfaflion  here, 
though  I  am  fully  convinced  'tis  not  to  be  foundi 
- — How  am  I  filled  with  compun£:!on  for  little 
failures  (through  inadvertency)  in  my  conduct  to 
my  friends,  and  yet  how  feldom  do  I  mcurn,  with 
heartfelt  remorfe,  my  frequent  wanderings  from 
my  God  ! — How  infinite  the  difproportion  betwixt 
O  4  hirjp- 


£        2  O  O       ] 

almighty  friend,  my  only  fupport,  my 
eternal  refuge,  and  an  earthly  friend  frail  and  mu- 
table like  myfelf! — Should  not  the  leaft  deviation 
from  his  facred  laws  pain  my  heart  with  deeper 
furrow  than  heedlefsly  offending  again  ft  the  rules 
of  friendfhip  ?  I  love  my  friends,  and  efteem  their 
affe&ion  as  one  of  the  chief  bleflings  of  life,  which 
I  ought  to  do  every  thing  in  my  power  to  preferve; 
but  what  is  this  to  the  favour  of  God  ?  No  more 
than  momentary  life  toanendlefs  eternity  !  Graci- 
ous God,  wean  me  more  from  earth,  teach  me  a 
greater  indifference  to  every  thing  below  thee,  let 
an  i  mere  ft  in  thy  favour,  and  the  advancement  of 
thy  glory  be  my  fupreme,  my  ardent  wifh,  and  of- 
fending thee  the  molt  painful  grief  I  feel  J  Could 
I  attain  and  preferve  this  defirable  temper,  the 
troubles  of  this  vale  of  tears  wouldibe  iefs  grievous; 
troubles  I  muff  expecl,  for  wher 
who  is  hc€  ? — I  figh  at  the  mel 
and  nature  and  religion  teach  me  fympathy;  yet 
even  in  this  neceffary  exercife,  how  are  my 
thoughts  confined  to  fenfe  and  time  !  How  often 
do  I  find  my  heart  melting  at  theprefent  pains  and 
iorrows  of  my  fellow  creatures,  and  wifhing  to  re- 
lieve them,  and  yet  how  feldora  do  I  view  with 
mournful  pity  the  deplorable  condition  of  wretch- 
ed fouls  in  the  road  to  everlafiing  mifery  ?  Lord, 
i::ach  my  thoughts   to  dwell   on  this  affecting 


*rj|I  look  round  me, 
lelaTcholy  profpecl, 


C   2^    ] 

jecl,  awaken  my  tendered  companion  for  fuch  un- 
happy fouls  and  my  earned  defires  for  their  fal- 
vation  !  1  think  my  difpofition  grateful,  and  the 
kindnefs  of  my  fiiends  engages  my  affectionate 
efteem,  and  yet  how  cold  is  my  gratitude  to  my 
heavenly  benefaftor  !  Whofe  indulgent  goodnefs 
fuftains  my  life,  and  beflows  innumerable  bleflings, 
and  all  unmerited  !  I  wifh  to  make  fuitable  returns 
for  the  favours  I  receive  from  earthly  friends,  but 
how  feldom  do  I  enquire,  with  grateful  folicitude, 
what  /hall  I  render  to  the  Lord  for  all  his  benefits  ? 

Ten  thoufand  bleflings  from  above 

Encompafs  me  around, 
But  O  how  few  returns  of  love 

Has  my  Creator  found. 

Watts. 

Vain  were  the  attempt  to  recount  the  number- 
lefs  miflakes  and  inconfiftencies  of  this  frail  erring 
mind  :  Who  can  underftand  his  errors  ?  Grant  me, 
O  thou  eternal  fountain  of  good  !  cleanfing, 
ftrengthening  and  animating  grace  !  Revive  and 
maintain  in  my  heart,  the  defires  of  my  happier 
moments ;  convince  me  more  effectually  of  my 
weaknefs  ;  give  me  a  humble,  fenfible,  conftant 
dependence  on  thee,  and  form  me  forthyfelfto 
fhew  forth  thy  praife  ! 

Comfort 


£       202       J 


Comfort  under  the   painful  fenfe  of  frailty^ 
in  the  unchangeable  gaodnefs  of  God, 

HAPPY  is  it  for  man,  that  the  defigns  of  infi- 
nite mercy  are  not  influenced  by  thefe  frail, 
changing  hearts  of  ours.  How  frequent  our  wan- 
derings from  God  !  How  cold  and  indifferent  our 
hearts  to  his  worfjiip  and  our  own  comforts  !  How 
fhort  and  interrupted  our  few  feafons  of  lively  de- 
votion !  And  even  when  moll  fixed  and  fervent, 
too  foon  the  facred  ardour  declines,  and  our 
thoughts,  which  jufl  now  feemed  raifed  to  heaven 
in  delightful  contemplation,  fink  down  again  to 
earth  and  vanity.  Should  God  withdraw  the  kind 
nfluences  of  his  providence  and  grace,  when  our 
nconftant,  ungrateful  hearts  withdraw  from  him, 
what  would  become  of  us  ?  Soon  muft  we  fink  into 
the  horrors  of  eternal  night  !  But  his  goodnefs  is 
unchangeable,  his  thoughts  are  not  our  thoughts, 
nor  his  ways  our  ways.  When  our  backlliding 
hearts  turn  afide  from  him  into  paths  of  vanity, 
how  fweet  the  voice  of  forgiving  love !  How  kind 

the 


[     2°3     ] 

the  gracious  promifc,  which  invites  us  to  return 
unto  the  Lord,  and  afTures  us  that  he  will  have 
mercy  !  To  our  God  for  he  will  abundantly  par- 
don. Adorable  goodnefs  !  O  why  mould  our  unbe- 
lieving thoughts  hefitate  a  moment,  whether  we 
Jhould  cad  ourfelvcs  at  the  feet  of  infinite  good- 
nefs with  humble  hope,  though  in  the  deeped  a- 
bafement  in  the  fenfe  of  our  own  vilenefs. 

Were  we  to  meafare  the  extent  of  divine  mer- 
cy by  our  own  merits,  not  one  of  the  guilty  race 
of  Adam  could  look  up  with  the  lead  hope  of  fa- 
vour. When  I  confider  my  own  heart,  even  in 
its  bed  defires  and  firmed  refolves,  confeious  of 
my  extreme  weaknefs,  I  cannot  but  renounce 
every  thought  of  dependence  on  myfelf,  and  ac- 
knowledge that  I  am  wretched,  vile,  and  utterly 
unworthy  !  But  when  I  meditate  the  infinite  good- 
nefs of  God,  in  his  immutable  covenant  of  grace, 
through  a  blefled  Redeemer,  here  is  folid  fupport, 
this  is  the  rock  on  which  my  foul  defires  to  red. 

Here  is  fiim  footing,  all  is  fea  befide. 

Dr.  Young. 

This  will  defy  the  waves  of  fin  and  temptation, 
ind  keep  the  anchor  of  my  foul  fure  and  ftedfaft. 

I  hope 


C     *<M     J 

I  hope,  if  my  heart  deceive  me  not,  I  have  fled 
for  refuge  to  Jeftis  who  is  able  to  fave  ;  and  if  I 
Jiave,  his  own  words  affure  me,  he  will  in  no  wife 
.caft  me  out ;  whom  he  loveth,  he  loveth  to  the 
end.  Here  then  in  all  my  fears  and  dejections, 
under  the  painful  fenfe  of  my  weaknefs,  let  me 
-find  comfort  !  Enable  me,  O  Lord,  to  reft  with  a 
firmer  affiance  on  thy  abounding  grace,  thy  un- 
changeable love  in  Jefus  !  whofe  merits  are  infi- 
nite, and  whofe  prevailing  interceffion  fecures  my 
weak  trembling  faith,  that  it  fhall  not  totally  fail. 
O  let  the  powerful  influences  of  thy  promifed  com- 
forter, apply  to  my  heart  with  almighty  efficacy, 
the  atoning,  cleanfing  blood  of  Jefus  !  Difpel  thefe 
frequent  rifing  doubts,  and  fill  me  with  all  joy  in 
believing!  Teach  my  thoughts  to  dwell,  in  de- 
lightful contemplation,  on  thy  infinite  perfections, 
and  when  I  mourn  the  inconftancy  of  this  waver- 
ing, changing  heart,  let  me  find  relief  in  the  hope 
of  my  intereft  in  thy  unalterable  Jove,  and  bring 
me  at  laft  to  that  world  of  unchanging  blifs,  where 
fins  and  doubts  can  never  enter,  and  [arrow  and 
fighing  flee  away  ! 


ponging 


[     ?°5     1 


^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ 


Longijjff  for  the  manifeftations  of  divine 


JD 


love. 


J'T^WAS  a  bold,  though  pious  requefl  of  the 
JL  prophet — M  1  befeech  thee  (hew  me  thy 
glory!"  Yet  the  almighty  gracioufly  condefcended 
to  indulge  his  favoured  fervant  with  the  dazling 
view,  as  far  as  frail  mortality  could  bear. — Lord, 
wilt  thou  permit  a  worthlefs  creature,  unworthy 
the  name  of  the  meaneft  of  thy  fervants,  to  prefer 
the  fame  petition  ? — 1  befeech  thee  fhew  me  thy 
glory!  Not  in  thy  awful  attributes  of  omnipotence, 
Holinefs  and  juftice,  thefe  alone  unmixed  with  thy 
milder  glories,  would  dazzle  and  confound  my  fight, 
and  overwhelm  my  foul  with  dreadful  luftre  and 
unfufferable  brightnefs  ! — 'Tis  the  blifsful  view  of 
thy  love,  for  which  my  ardent  breathings  rife  j 
That  charming  attribute  which  foftensthy  tremend- 
ous glories,  and  without  diminifliing  their  fplend- 
our,  far  outfliines  them  all!  Shines  on  guilty 
wretched  man,  with  afpeft  all  ferene,  benevolent  and 
kind!  In  J^fus  !   mines  the  brightnefs  of  thy  glory, 

and 


[       206       ] 

and  the  exprefs  image  of  thy  perfon  !  Jefus  the  Sa- 
viour! Tranfporting  name!  Here  holinefs,  jufiice, 
power  and  wifdom,  unite  with  mingled  radiance  ; 
and  love,  fheds  fweeter  glories  o'er  them  all  ! — 
Almighty  love,  how  inexpreffible,  how  inconceiv- 
able are  thy  charms  !  My  thoughts  are  loft  in  the 
boundlefs  ocean,  without  beginning  and  without 
end! — Eternity  alone  can  meafure  its  infinite  ex- 
tent!— 

Kere  pardon,  life,  and  joys  divine, 

In  rich  effufion  flow  ! 
For  guilty  rebels  loll  in  fin, 

And  doom'd  to  endlefs  woe! 

Lord,  I  humbly  hope  I  have  feen  fome  dawning 
rays  of  thy  glorv,  and  experienced  fome  little  taftes 
of  thy  love!  And  I  would  not  lofe  the  cheering 
light,  nor  exchange  the  blifsful  relifh  for  all  the 
gratifications  of  fenfe,  for  the  higheft  pleafures  the 
world  can  beftow  !  I  would  not  barter  my  hope  of 
an  intereft  in  thee,  for  crowns  and  fcepters,  nor 
all  the  mining  treafures  of  the  eaft  ;  fading  perifh- 
i'ng  things!  How  worthlefs  all  and  vain  !  compar- 
ed  with  my  immortal  hopes  they  are  defpicabfdf 
trifles.-^-One  fmile  from  my  Redeemer's  face,  out- 
Ihines  the  brighteft  blaze  of  earthly  glory* 

Beneath 


t     207     ] 

Beneath  the  heavenly  radiance  of  his  eye, 
Earth  lofes  all  its  charms,  they  fade  and  die, 

O  the  endlefs  wonders,  the  unfearchable  glories 
of  redeeming  love  !  One  moment's  blifsful  view 
of  my  interefl  in  a  dying  Saviour,  is  infinitely  bet- 
ter than  all  the  joys  of  fenfe,  than  ages  employed 
in  earthly  pleafures  ! — O  could  I  clofc  my  eyes, 
my  ears,  and  all  the  avenues  to  my  heart,  and  (hue 
out  intruding  vanities  for  ever ! 

Then  mould  the  world  and  its  alluring  toys 

No  more  enfnare  my  eafy  yielding  heart : 

Vanifh  ye  unfubflantial  airy  forms, 

Delufive  fhadows,  cheat  mine  eyes  no  more 

With  painted  (hews  of  pleafure. 

Gne  ray  of  heaven,   bright  dawning  o'er  my  foul, 

Eclipfcs  all  your  vifionary  charms, 

And  points  to  happinefs  beyond  your  reach. 

But  ah  !  too  foon  I  fear  the  charming  glimpfe  of 
etherial  light  will  vanifh,  and  leave  my  foul  be- 
nighted, furrounded  with  gloomy  doubts,  groveling* 
in  the  duft  or  wandering  far  from  thee,  my  God, 
the  centre  of  immortal  joys,  in  the  mean  purfuit 
of  empty  vanities  and  fleeting  fhadows.  I  fear  my 
'    inconftant   heart,    too   eafily    enfnared   and 

dr* 


[     268     ] 

drawn  zway  with  every  trifle,  that  prefents  it/elf 
before  me  ;  forgive  the  boldnefs  of  a  finful  worm, 
let  me  repeat  my  requeft,  I  befeech  thee  fhew  me 
thy  glory!  Blefs  mine  eyes  with  more  delightful 
views  than  they  have  ever  yet  beheld !  Let  thy 
all-enlivening  beams.  O  fun  of  righteouinefs,  fhine 
on  my  foul  and  difpel  the  interpofmg  clouds  of  fm 
and  doubt  !  Shine  with  the  full  manifeftations  of 
thy  love  !  Engage  all  the  powers  and  pafiions  of  my 
heart !  and  bind  me  with  the  flrongeft  ties  of  gra- 
titude and  love  to  be  thine  for  ever. 


^Oi<^4^C>^04<i:-K^^O^O^ 


Weary  fouls  invited  to  reft. 

Come  Unto  me  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden 
and  I  will  give  you  rejl.     Matt.  xi.  28. 

REVIVING  found  !  who  is  the  kind  friend 
that  thus  in  the  hour  of  diftrefs  cheers  the 
.poor  fainting  finner  with  the  healing  voice  of  com- 
fort ?  May  his  word  be  depended  ori  ?  And  is  he 
able  to  make  good  the  important  promife  ?  Liflen 

again, 


[     2°9     ] 

again,  O  doubting  foul,  attend  the  companionate 
Saviour's  voice  !  JTis  I  that  fpeak  in  righteoufnefs 
mighty  to  fave." — Yes,  his  faithfulnefs  and  power 
are  unqueftionable  ;  but  is  it  poffible  that  he  fhould 
be  willing  to  fave  a  rebel  who  has  rejected  his  au- 
thority, turned  a  deaf  ear  to  his  gracious  calls,  and 
11  raved  far  from  him  in  paths  of  fin  and  vanity  ? 
Hearken  to  his  own  words!  "  The  fon  of  man 
came  to  feek  and  to  fave  that  which  was  loft." — 
Encouraging  affurance  to  a  heedlefs  wanderer  fen- 
fible  of  his  folly  !  But  can  it  extend  to  fuch  vile 
wretches  as  have  finned  with  a  high  hand,  and  by 
a  long  courfe  of  rebellion  declared,  we  will  not 
have  this  man  to  reign  over  us  ?  Yes,  even  fuch  as 
thefe  are  invited  to  come,  for  Jems  Chrift  came 
into  the  world  to  fave  finners,  of  whom  (fays  a  fa- 
voured fervant  of  his)  I  am  chief,  and  after  enu- 
merating his  acts  of  treafon  2nd  rebellion,  yet,  fays 
he,  I  obtained  mercy  !  How  ftrange,  how  amazing 
is  the  companion  of  this  tender-hearted  Saviour, 
when  a  poor  deluded  (inner  lias  roam'd  through  all 
thepieafures  of  fenfe,  in  the  vain  purfuit  of  fatisfac- 
tion,  tired  and  reftlefs,  panting  beneath  a  heavy 
load  of  guilt,  and  furrounded  with  darknefs  and 
terrors,  a  beam  fent  from  heaven  breaks  through 
the  difmal  gloom,  and  points  him  to  Jefus  Chrift, 
as  the  only  refuge,  the  only  reft  !  May  he  not 
reafonably  fear  that  if  in  thislaft  extremity,  he  ap- 
Vol,  III.  P  plies 


[    21°  ] 

plies  to  that  mercy  which  he  has  fo  long  abufecf,  he 
ihall   be  rejected  with  indignation  ? — No,  for  the 
bleffed  Redeemer  fays,  "  him  that  cometh  to  me  I 
will  in  no  wife  caft  out." — Come  then  weary  heavy 
laden  finner,  come   to  Jefus  and  he  will  give  thee 
reft. — Methinks  the  words    prefent  the  idea  of  a 
weary  traveller  who  has  gone  a  longjourney  over  a 
fandy   defert,  bending  beneath  a  heavy   burthen, 
fcorched  with    the  piercing    heat  of  the  fun,  and 
juft  ready  to   faint:  In  this  extremity,  O  how  de- 
firable  a  cool,  refrefhing  fnade  !     How   would  the 
fight  of  it,  though  at  a  diilance,  animate  his  fpirits, 
and  invigorate  his  feeble  fleps  to  reach  it! — Thus 
defirable,  thus  animating,  is  a  fight  of  Jefus  Chrift 
to  a  pooY  fenftble   finner,   groaning  beneath  a  hea- 
vy load  of  guilt,  and  fcorehed  with  terrible  appre- 
heniions  of  the  wrath  of  an   offended  God  !  How 
refrefhing  then  is  this  fhadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a 
weary  land!  How  fuitable,  how   feafonable  an  all- 
powerful  and   merciful  Saviour  to   them  that  are 
ready  to  perifh  !— But  the  reft  which  the  great  Re- 
deemer gives  is  not  only  refrefhment  but  fatisfac- 
tion  :  this  is  what  the  flattering  world  with  all  the 
allurements  it  difplays,  cannot  pretend   to  beftow. 
Say,  ye  deluded  votaries  of  pleafure,  riches  or  ho- 
nour, have  you  ever  found  fstisfa&ion  ?  No, — for 
whether   in   the  purfuit,  or  in   the    attainment   of 
ibeir  wifhes,  difappointment  ever  attends  them. — 

And 


C   211   ] 

And  fay,  ye  happy  fouls  who  have  fat  under  your 
Redeemer's  fhadow  with  great  delight,  have  you 
ever  found  any  enjoyment  in  your  former  attach- 
ments equal  to  a  moment's  hope  of  an  interefl  in 
his  favour  ? — No,  fays  a  fincere  lover  of  Jefus. 

Let  earth's  alluring  charms  combine, 
While  thou  art  near,  in  vain  they  call  ; 
One  fmile,  one  blifsful  fmile  of  thine 
My  deareflLord,  outweighs  them  all! 

Mr.  Herbert  reprefents  the  Creator  as  pouring  a 
variety  of  blelTings  on  man,  but  referving  reft,  that 
at  length  finding  no  fatisfaQion  in  creature  enjoy- 
ment?, wearinefs  might  bring  him  home  to  God 
the  center  of  his  reft. — 'Tis  not  in  the  nature  of 
earthly  good  to  yield  fatisfaclion:  The  mind,  whe- 
ther defiling  or  poftefling,  is  fiiil  reftlefs  and 
uneafy,  till  led  by  divine  grace  to  Jefus,  who  only- 
can  give  reft  to  the  weary — fo  Dr.  Young. 

Man's  fickly  foul,  tho'  turn'd  and  tofs'd  for  ever 
From  fide  to  fide,  can  reft  on  nought  but  thee; 
Here  in  full  truft,  hereafter  in  full  joy. 

This  reft  only  can   fuit  the  nature,  and    fill  the 

defires  of  an  immortal    foul,  it  is  not  only   prefent 

refrefhment,  and  true  fatisfaclion,  but  eternal  joy ! 

—How  would  it  embitter  the  pleafure  and  deftroy 

P  2  th<^ 


t   2i2   3 

die  repofe  of  a  weary  traveller  feated  in  a  cool  de- 
lightful fhade,  if  at  the  end  of  his  journey,  he  ex- 
pected nothing  but  pain  and  mifery ! — So  when  a 
poor  (Inner  is  brought  to  Jefus  Chriil  and  begins 
to  enjoy  refrefliment  and  fatisfaclion,  how  would 
it  alarm  and  terrify  his  foul,  and  embitter  all  his 
comfort,  to  know  that  there  was  a  poffibility  that 
he  might  at  laft  be  mut  cut  from  that  reft  which 
remains  for  the  people  of  God!  but  adored  be 
everlafting  love,  the  divine  veracity  is  engaged  for 
the  endlefs  happinefs  of  all  that  come  to  Jefus 
Chriil  !  He  who  is  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the 
life,  has  faid,  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life,  and 
they  (hall  never  perifh. — Eternal  life!  and  the 
hope  and  expectation  of  it  confirmed  to  the  believ- 
ing foul,  by  the  flrongeff,  and  mofl  inviolable  af- 
furances!  This  is  reft  indeed  !  who  would  not  come 
to  the  great  Redeemer  at  his  kind  invitation  to  re- 
ceive  a  bleding  fo  defirable,  fo  immenfe  !  Well 
may  the  happy  chriflian  who  has  tailed  that  the 
Lord  is  gracious,  fay,  return  unto  thy  reft  O  ray 
foul,  for  the  Lord  has  dealt  bountifully  with  thee  ! 
BleiTed  be  that  almighty  grace  which  has  convinc- 
ed me  of  my  wretched,  my  undone  condition,  and 
brought  me  to  Jefus  Chrift;  imparted  to  me  fome 
delightful  taftes  of  that  divine  refrefhment,  that 
ineffable  fatisfaclion,  which  he  only  can  beftow, 
and  encouraged  my  humble  hope   to  look  forward 

to 


[     2J3     ] 

to  that  glorious  reft,  that  ftateof  perfect  and  inva- 
riable felicity  which  he  has  prepared  for  them  that 
love  him  !  O  let  every  one  who  has  been  enabled 
to  obey  the  blciTed  Redeemer's  invitation,  and 
found  reft  in  him,  pity  the  deplorable  condition  of 
thofe  poor  deluded  wretched  fouls  who  are  ftiH 
roving,  refllcfs,  in  the  vain  purfuit  of  fatisfaclion 
where  they  can  never  find  it! — Convince  them  O 
merciful  Saviour  of  their  miferable  ftate,  difplay 
the  almighty  power  of  thy  refiftlefs  grace,  bring 
them  weary  and  heavy  laden  to  thee,  and  give 
them  reft. 


*C4'C4'OiCi'C4'C4C#C# 


Motives  to  Divine  Meditation. 


1X7HAT  have  I  to  do  with  this  vain  world  ? 
*  *  have  I  not  long  fince  renounced  it  as  in- 
capable of  making  me  happy,  and  therefore  un- 
worthy of  my  care  ?  and  yet  it  will  intrude  with 
-Us  vexatious  teazing  vanities  to  hinder,  or  at  leaf! 
to  interrupt  my  attention  to  awful  realities.  Again 
J  repeat,  vain  world  be  gone.  O  that  I  could  fhut 

P  3  my 

i 


[     2M  1 

my  heart  effectually  againft  thy  mifchievous  In- 
fluences!— The  fafhion  of  this  world  paffeih  away, 
its  amufements  fleet  before  me  in  quick  fucceiTioa 
on  the  wings  of  time,  and  foon  thefe  eyes  will 
clofe  upon  the  tranfient  fcene,  to  open  on  eternity. 
— Eternity — amazing  idea! — how  {hall  thefe active, 
thinking,  reafoning  faculties  which  are  now  fo 
often  bulled  with  trifles,  be  employed  through  the 
endlefs  duration?  The  facred  word  allures  me  that 
every  one  fhall  receive  for  the  things  done  in 
the  body  according  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether 
it  be  good  or  bad.  God  is  juft,  and  everlafting 
mifery  muft  be  the  portion  of  every  wretched  foul 
who  leaves  this  mortal  flage  unfanclified  and  unfor- 
given,then  will  the  powers  of  thought  and  refleftion  be 
employed  in  bitter  yet  unavailing  remorfe  and  un- 
utterable anguifh,  far  from  God  and  far  from  hope, 
in  the  difmal  regions  of  defpair,  where  the  worm 
dieth  not,  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched ! — dreadful 
eternity! — tremble  O  my  foul  and  fly  for  refuge 
to  Jefus  who  delivereth  from  the  wrath  to  come  ; 
in  him  is  fafety,  life,  and  blifs  for  ever — thanks 
be  to  God  for  his  unfpeakable  gift! — and  can  I, 
do  I  hope  for  an  interefl  in  this  almighty  Saviour  ? 
and  through  his  all-fufficient  merits  for  an  entrance 
into  the  manfions  of  glory  where  love  and  praife 
and  raptures  inconceivable  fhall  employ  the  active 

iovful 


C   "5   3 

Joyful  powers  of  every  happy  fpirit  through  the 
ever-circling  ages  of  eternity  !  blifsful  eternity  !— *- 
and  have  I  any  hope  of  joining  in  that  fweet  em- 
ploy, and  (hail  I  not  begin  it  here  ?  O  blefTed 
Redeemer  work  in  my  heart  by  thy  own  fpirit 
a  fincere  contrition  for  all  my  vile  offences  and 
ungrateful  wanderings'!  increafe  my  faith,  my 
hope,  my  love  and  joy,  and  fix  my  thoughts  in 
delightful  meditation  on  the  pains  thou  haft  fuf- 
fered,  and  the  happinefs  thou  haft  prepared  for 
ihem  that  love  thee  ! — and  what  heart  O  adorable 
Saviour  but  mull  love  thee  that  has  ever  enjoyed 
a  glimpfe  of  thy  infinite  excellence  with  hope  of 
an  intereft  in  thy  great  falvation  !— Can  I  reflect 
unmoved,  on  the  ftate  of  never-ending  mifery  my 
fins  deferve,  on  the  dreadful  pains  thou  haft  fuf- 
fered  to  redeem  loft  perifhing.finners  who  come  to 
.thee  as  their  only  refuge,  and  en  the  heaven  of 
leverlafting  joy  thou  haft  enfured  to  them  for  their 
glorious  inheritance  ?  can  I  meditate  on  thefe  ani- 
mating fubjecls  which  I  hope  have  fometimes 
warmed  my  heart,  and  not  wonder  at  my  frequent 
coldnefs! — Alas  how  frail  is  my  heart!  howfooliffo 
and  ungrateful  !  frail  and  foolifh  indeed,  to  be 
tempted  away  from  my  true  intereft,  my  only  hap- 
pinefs, by  empty  vanities! — and  O  what  vile  un- 
gratitude  to  be  forgetful  of  fuch  infinite  obligati- 
ons !—  Shall  admiring  angels  fearch  into  the  glori- 

P  4  GUS 


[     >i6    ] 

ous  wonders  of  redeeming  love  with  all  the  ardour 
of  intenfe  defire!  and  fhali  I  be  cold  to  its  fur- 
prizing  charms,  and  hardly  raife  a  languid  vvifh  to 
reach  the  immortal  theme!  Yet  angels  cannot 
tafle  the  fweets  of  pardon,  nor  feel  the  tranfporting 
joys  of  falvation  from  eternal  woe,  for  thofe  happy 
fpirits  have  never  finned. 

Ye  fons  of  harmony  who  ardent  tune 
To  boundlefs  joy  the  heaven  refounding  fong, 
O  could  I  hear  your  rapture  breathing  drains, 
How  would  my  kindling  powers  awake  to  praife 
And  join  with  extacy  the blifsful  theme  ; 
Earth's  flattering  trifles  then^fhould  tempt  in  vain, 
Nor  interrupt  my  fwect,  my  bleft  employ. 

But  O  my  great  Redeemer !  thou  only  canft  in- 
fpire  the  facred  flame,  thou  only  canft  teach  me 
the  celeftial  fong:  grant  me  the  kind  influences 
of  that  bleffed  fpirit  which  thy  gracious  promife 
encourages  me  to  afk,  difplay  before  me  the  a- 
mazing  wonders  of  thy  love,  give  me  the  aflured 
hope  of  pardon  and  falvation  through  thy  infinite 
merits,  teach  m£  to  begin  the  work  of  heaven  be- 
low,  and  bring  me  at  lafl  to  the  glorious  affembly 
of  the  ranfomed  of  the  Lord,  to  join  the  celeflial 
choir  in  flrains  of  harmony  and  praife  unknown 
below,  and  repeat  with  immortal  ardour,  blefling, 

honour 


C     217     ] 

honour,  glory,  and  power  unto  him  that  fitteth 
upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb  for  ever  and 
ever. 


^CZ^^CZ^^CZ^  fx"CZ^r^»CZ^^CZ^f:5;<3^» 


Thoughts  in  ficknefs,  and  on  recovery, 

OF  what  a  feeble  texture  is  this  mortal  taber- 
nacle! and  how  much  is  the  tenant  mind 
ft  hough  of  an  immortal  nature)  pained  and  de- 
prefled  by  its  wcaknefs,  and  hurt  by  the  ftorms 
which  fhake  the  tottering  frame  !  The  firft  attacks 
of  a  lever  have  fo  weakened  my  nerves  and  fpirits, 
that  every  fprightly  faculty,  and  almoft  every  cheer- 
ful thought  is  funk  in  a  ftupid  languor,  a  lifllefs 
inattention  even  to  common  things  overfpreads 
me,  converfation  is  taftclefs,  and  reading  and 
thinking  almoft  impracticable — but  alas,  this  is  not 
the  word !  the  bounties  of  providence,  and  the 
blefTings  of  grace  hardly  excite  a  grateful  thought, 
or  quicken  a  warm  defire — wretched  (late!  And 
can  I  know  it,  and  yet  not  be  afTecled  with  it  ?  Am 
J  enough  awake  to  feel  my  chains,  and  yet  not  wifh 

for 


[      218      ] 

for  liberty  ?  Let  me  try  to  rouze  myfelf  from  this 
lethargy  of  the  mind,  and  if  I  cannot  look  forward 
through  the  gloom  which  hangs  fo  heavy  on  my 
intellectual  fight,  let  me  look  back  and  try  to  reco- 
ver fome  little  remembrance  of  part  fcenes. — Shall 
the  immortal  fpirit  united  to  this  frail  difordered 
body,  be  fo  much  influenced  by  its  weaknefs,  as  if  it 
were  to  fink  with  it  into  the  common  earth?  Think 
O  my  foul,  hadft  thou  not  once  nobler  views  and 
brighter  hopes?  Couklft  thou  not  once,  confcious 
of  thy  great  original,  look  up  to  the  glorious  author 
of  thy  being  with  ardent  defires  after  the  enjoy- 
ment of  his  favour  as  the  only  good  that  could  fill 
thy  capacious  wifh  ?  Couldft  thou  not  at  fome  hap- 
py feafons  delight  in  the  contemplation  of  his  infi- 
nite perfections,  and  defire  to  know  him  more,  to 
love  him  more,  and  to  be  more  like  him  ? — How 
often  haft  thou  mourned  the  unhappy  influence  of 
earthly  vanities  that  have  drawn  thee  afide  from 
the  center  of  thy  beft  defires,  and  longed  to  caft 
thyfelf  at  the  feet  of  heavenly  mercy,  in  deep 
abafement  yet  with  humble  penitential  hope,  and 
wifhed  to  dwell  for  ever  beneath  the  attractive,  the 
conftraining  influences  of  pardoning  love.  Surely 
there  was  fomething  even  in  thofe  painful  fenfibi- 
lities  preferable,  far  preferable  to  this  death-like 
flupor. 

The 


C     219     ] 

The  Lord  lived],  and  blefled  be  my  rock,  b!elT- 
ed  be  the  Lord  who  hath  not  turned  away  my 
prayer,  nor  his  mercy  from  mc. — Adored,  for  ever 
adored  be  the  riches  of  divine  love  manifefled  in 
the  great  Redeemer,  who  is  able  to  favc  to  the  ut- 
termoft  all  that  come  unto  God  by  him,  through 
whom  I  hope  I  have  found  fweet  accefs  to  the 
throne  of  grace,  and  been  enabled  to  pour  my  hum- 
ble breathings  there. 

Whence  are  thefe  quickenings  after  fo  much  dead- 
nefs,  this  deep  abalement  in  the  fenfe  of  my  ex- 
ceeding vilenefs,  my  utter  unworthinefs,  mingled 
with  fuch  admiring  views  of  the  infinite  condef- 
cenfion  of  the  great  God,  the  almighty  power  of 
pardoning  grace,  and  O,  with  the  delightful  hope 
of  my  intereft  in  it!  Can  I  afcribe  the  happy  al- 
teration to  any  thing  below  the  influences  of  his 
own  fpirit  ?  O  for  the  continuance  of  thofe  divine 
influences  !  quickening,  cheering,  ftrengthening, 
and  purifying  my  heart.  My  heart,  alas  how  frail, 
how  apt  to  lofe  the  relifh  of  divine  enjoyments, 
and  grow  cold  ungrateful  and  remifs.  O  blefTed 
Redeemer  let  the  heavenly  comforter  abide  with 
me  for  ever  !  To  preferve  me  in  this  ftate  of  tual 
and  terqptation,  and  guide  me  fafe  to  the  kingdom 
of  thy  glory. — Infinite  grace,  that  lb  vile  a  fmner 
{hould  be  favoured  with  the  hope  of  a  dwelling 

there  ! 


[   22°   ] 

there!  My  Saviour  God  !  and  haft  thou  prepared 
a  place  for  me  in  the  manfions  of  light?  And  wilt 
thou  come  again  and  receive  me  to  thyfelf?  And 
lhall  I  rejoice  in  thy  blifsful  prefence  for  ever  ?  O 
confirm  the  glorious  hope  to  my  thankful,  yet  dill 
defiring  foul ! 

Then  faith  {hall  triumph  o'er  the  grave, 

And  trample  on  the  tombs, 
My  Jefus,  my  Redeemer  lives, 

My  God,  my  Saviour  comes. 

Watts. 

Amidthefe  delightful  hopes,  the  terrors  of  death 
difappear,  its  pains  are  fupportable,  and  the 
gloomy  vale  is  brightened  with  fome  reviving 
beams  from  the  regions  of  immortal  day  !  What 
evil  can  I  fear  if  thou  art  with  me?  Thy  fmile  is 
celeftial  comfort,  O  let  it  cheer  my  fainting  heart 
in  the  awful  hour  of  diffolution,  till  mortality  is 
(wallowed  up  in  life.  But  why  O  my  foul  thefe 
riling  doubts  ?  Shall  they  be  fufTered  to  cloud  thy 
dawning  happinefs,  and  caft  a  fhade  on  all  thy 
comforts  ?  Has  not  thy  Redeemer  faid,  fear  not 
little  flock,  for  it  is  your  father's  good  pleafure  to 
give  you  the  kingdom.  Were  any  thing  in  myfelf 
the  motive,  I  were  loft  indeed  ;  but  'tis  his  good 
pleafure,  his  fovereign  grace,  and  what  can  be  too 

great 


C       221       ] 

great  for  infinite  bounty  ?  My  vilenefs,  my  un- 
worthinefs  can  be  no  bar. — Almighty  grace,  and 
utter  unworthinefs!  Contemplate  O  my  foul  with 
delightful  wonder  the  aftonifhing  contrafl!  and 
fink  lower  dill  in  thy  own  eyes,  while  the  glories 
of  divine  mercy  are  exalted  above  all  thy  wonder 
and  thy  praife  ! — Whether  life  or  death  all  is  yours, 
and  ye  are  ChrifYs,  and  Chrift  is  God's  ;  what  ful- 
nefs,  what  immenfity  of  blifs  is  contained  in  the 
glorious  affurance!  And  am  I  (fo  vile,  fo  wretch- 
ed)  permitted  to  hope  an  intereft  in  it  ?  O  the 
heights,  the  depths,  the  unfearchable  wonders  of 
almighty  grace  !  Forgive  O  gracious  God,  forgive 
thefe  guilty  unbelieving  thoughts  which  would 
embitter  my  comforts,  and  rob  thee  of  the  humble 
tribute  which  my  grateful  heart  would  bring  to  the 
foDtflool  of  thy  throne  !  Rebuke  the  tempter,  and 
confirm  the  comforting  hope  which  thy  word  now 
affords,  that  the  God  of  peace  fliall  bruife  Satan 
under  my  feet  fhortly. 

Blefs  the  Lord  O  my  foul,  and  all  that  is  within 
me  blefs  his  holy  name.  Biefs  the  Lord  O  my 
foul,  and  forget  not  all  his  benefits.  But  O  how 
fliall  my  narrow  thoughts  and  narrower  words  re- 
count them  !  How  am  I  furrounded  with  mercies! 
Indulgent  goodnefs  has  blefTed  me  with  unnumber- 
ed favours,  both  temporal  and   fpiritual,  and  even 

this 


[       222       ] 

this  affliction,  may  I  not  call  it  a  blefling  from  the 
happy  effects,  which  I  hope  it  has  produced  ?  May 
I  not  efteem  it  a  paternal  correction  to  reprove  my 
ungrateful  coldnefs,  to  awaken  me  to  a  ftate  of 
fenfibility,  and  renew  the  relifh  of  thofe  important 
bleflings  which  have  been  almoft  neglected,  or  at 
beft  too  faintly  fought  ?  How  gentle  O  my  God 
were  the  ftrokes  of  thy  chaftifing  hand,  how  kind 
the  teachings  of  thy  word,  and  how  fweet  the  con- 
folations  of  thy  promifes  to  my  foul  !  O  may  thy 
goodnefs  dwell  upon  my  grateful  heart,  and  ani- 
mate all  my  powers  and  paflions  to  a  delightful  acti- 
vity in  thy  fervice  !  Return  unto  thy  reft  O  my 
foul,  for  the  Lord  hath  dealt  bountifully  with  thee, 
he  only  is  the  proper  center  of  my  left,  and  all  the 
enjoyments  of  nature  without  the  kind  influences 
of  his  grace  are  wearinefs  and  vanity.  Vainly  does 
the  roving  mind  expect  fatisfaction  among  the  plea- 
fures  of  fenfe  and  time. 

Creatures  without  a  God  can  yield  me  no  fupply. 

Watts. 
But  fweetened  with  the  hope  of  his  favour,  and 
enjoyed  as  bleflings  from  the  hand  of  an  indulgent 
father,  every  comfort  of  life  acquires  a  power  to 
entertain  and  pleafe.  O  how  inexcufable  the  folly 
of  my  pad  wanderings !  And  yet,  convinced  as  at 
prefent  I  hope  I  am  of  my  true  intereft,  fo  de- 
ceitful is  this  wretched  heart  that  I  fear  to  truft  it, 

I  fear 


[     223     ] 

I  fear  I  fhall  again  relapfe  into  cold  indifference 
and  vile  ingratitude.  Gracious  God,  maintain  in 
my  foul  this  neceffary  felf-diffidence,  infpire  me 
with  conftant  breathings  for  the  aids  of  thy  al- 
mighty graceand  an  entiredependanceon  thy  ftrength 
in  the  fenfe  of  my  own  weaknefs.  Let  thy  praife 
be  my  bufinefs  and  delight,  thy  favour  my  felicity 
here  and  my  portion  for  ever ! 

What  is  there  in   this  world   of  vanity  that  I 
fhould  wifh  to  flay  for  ?  how  frail  is  the  tenure  of 
earthlv  blifs,  how  unfatisfying  to  the  mind  which 
with     divine     ambition     looks    forward    to   im- 
mortal happinefs  !  The  deareft  comforts  of  life  are 
painfully  fweet.  O  that  I  could  enjoy  them   with 
thankfulnefs  unmingled  with   anxious  apprehenfi- 
ons  of  the  pangs  of  feparation  !   O  for  a  flronger 
faith,  for  brighter  views  of  the  invifible  glories  of 
the  upper  world !  glories  invifible  to  the   eye   of 
fenfe,  but  revealed  in  the  facred  word  to  the  be- 
lieving foul    O   for  a  more   affured   hope  of  my 
interefl  there !  then  how  fweet  were  the  expecta- 
tion of  meeting  the  friends  united  to  my  heart  by 
the  ties  of  nature,  friendfhip  and  piety,  in  the  re- 
gions of  immortal  love  and  unprecarious  felicity  I 
then  though  I  were  left  to  purfue  alone  my  pain- 
ful pilgrimage,  how  comforting  were  the  hope  that 
in  a  little  time  I  fhould  follow    them   to  my  fa- 
ther's  houfe— perhaps  I  may  go  before   them — 
whenever  I  am  called  O  may  the  meffenger  be 

welcome 


[  22i  3 

welcome  to  my  foul !  may  the  funics  of  my  Re- 
deemer rifing  o'er  the  gloomy  (hades  of  death,  difpel 
all  its  horrors  and  open  before  me  the  tranfporting 
profpeft  of  eternal  joy!  O  may  the  blifsful  fore- 
fades  of  heaven  prevail  over  the  agonies  of  nature, 
comfort  my  mourning  friends,  and  fvveeten  the 
parting  tear! — But  why  thefe  reflections  ?  my 
bufmefs  my  important  bufinefs  is  to  examine 
where  my  hope  is  fixed,  to  feek  earneftly  to  the 
God  of  grace  for  the  unerring  influences  of  his 
holy  fpirit  'to  guide  me  in  the  way  to  heaven, 
to  flrengthen  my  faith,  my  hope,  and  every  grace, 
to  make  me  fit  for  that  (late  of  fpot'efs  purity, 
and  then  receive  me  to  himfelf.  May  my  title  to 
the  inheritance  of  the  faints  in  light  be  f  ecu  red  to 
my  foul  through  the  infinite  merits  of  a  crucified 
exalted  Saviour,  and  let  time  and  circurrrftance  O 
gracious  God  be  refigned  to  thy  fovereign  difpo- 
fah — This  is  a  flate  of  probation,  perhaps  it  may 
pleafe  God  to  exercife  me  with  many  trials  before 
I  leave  this  mortal  ftagc,  hitherto  my  lot  has 
been  eafy  compared  with  that  of  many  of  my  fel- 
low chriflians,  and  why  ihould  I  expect  to  reach 
the  haven  and  efcape  the  dorms  of  trouble  which 
others  meet  with  ?  I  am  indeed  unable  to  fuflain 
them,  but  everlafling  ftrength  can  fupport  me. 
O  may  the  anchor  of  my  foil!  be  fure  and  fledfaft! 
Father  of  mercy  and  God  of  ail  comfort,  fay  ro  my 
ioul,  mygraceisfufficient  for  thee,  and  I  flial!  be 
The  End, 


il 


mi 


